古文：王彰，字文昭，郑人。
现代文：王彰，字文昭，郑人。
English: Wang Zhang, Zi Wen Zhao, Zheng Ren.

古文：洪武二十年举于乡，补国子生。
现代文：洪武二十年，获得乡荐，补为国子监生。
English: After twenty years of hard work, he was recommended by the township and became a provincial student.

古文：使山东平籴，以廉干称，擢吏科源士。
现代文：他出使山东平价收购粮食时，有廉洁能干的名声，因此被升为吏科源士。
English: When he was dispatched to Shandong to purchase grain at a fair price, he had a reputation for integrity and ability, so he was promoted to the rank of official scholar.

古文：逾年，革源士，改给事中，累迁山西左参政。
现代文：过了一年，改为给事中，累升为山西左参政。
English: After a year, he was transferred to the middle of the administration and was promoted to the Shanxi Left Party.

古文：永乐五年召为礼部侍郎。
现代文：永乐五年，他被召回任礼部侍郎。
English: In the fifth year of Yongle, he was called back to serve as an attendant of the ceremonial club.

古文：父丧，服除，改户部。
现代文：父亲去世，守孝期满后，他改到户部。
English: After his father's death and his term of filial piety expired, he was transferred to the household department.

古文：陕西大疫，奉使祀西岳。
现代文：陕西发生严重瘟疫，他奉命出使祭祀西岳。
English: When a serious plague broke out in Shaanxi, he was ordered to go on a mission to worship the West Mountain.

古文：新安民鬻子女偿赋。彰奏为蠲除，赎还所鬻。
现代文：新安百姓卖子女交纳赋税，王彰上奏免除当地赋税，并赎回所卖的子女。
English: The people of Xin'an sold their children to pay taxes, and Wang Zhang exempted them from local taxes and redeemed the children they sold.

古文：改右副都御史。
现代文：改任右副都御史。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：陕西佥事马英激肃州番为变，杀御史及都指挥。
现代文：陕西佥事马英激肃州番人为乱，杀死御史和都指挥。
English: Shaanxi anecdote Ma Ying incited the Suzhou State Guard to riot, killing the commander of the Imperial Palace and the capital.

古文：彰劾英，置极典。
现代文：王彰弹劾马英，处以极刑。
English: Wang Chang impeached Ma Ying and sentenced him to capital punishment.

古文：又劾御史陈孟旭受赇枉法、文献盗银课、及金吾指挥李严逐母不养，皆坐死。
现代文：他又弹劾御史陈孟旭受贿枉法、文献盗取银税、金吾指挥李严逐出母亲而不赡养，三人都被判死刑。
English: He also impeached the imperial historian Chen Mengxu for bribery, literature theft of silver tax, and the commander of Kingu, Li Yan, for expelling his mother and not supporting her. All three were sentenced to death.

古文：他所论劾甚众。
现代文：他所弹劾的其他人还很多。
English: There are many others he has impeached.

古文：十一年从帝北巡。
现代文：十一年，随从皇上北巡。
English: In the eleventh year, he accompanied the emperor on a tour of the north.

古文：彰有母年八十余矣，命归省，赐其母冠服金币。谕之曰： 君子居官不忘亲，居家不忘君。
现代文：王彰有已八十余岁的老母，皇上命他回去探视，并赐给他的母亲冠服和金币，对他说： 君子居官不忘亲，居家不忘君。
English: Wang Zhang has an eighty-plus-year-old mother. The emperor ordered him to go back and visit her, and gave his mother a crown robe and gold coins. He said to him, "A gentleman does not forget his relatives when he is in office, and he does not forget his family when he is at home."

古文：凡所过，民安否，吏贤不肖，悉以闻。 
现代文：凡所经过的地方，百姓是否安居，官吏是贤或不肖，你都要报告上来。 
English: Wherever you go, report back whether the people are living in peace and security, and whether the officials are wise or shady.

古文：彰还，奏事称旨。
现代文：王彰回来后，所奏的事很合皇上心意。
English: After Wang Akira's return, the events that transpired were very much in line with the Emperor's wishes.

古文：久之，进右都御史。
现代文：不久，他升为右都御史。
English: After a long time, he became the governor of Shidozu.

古文：十九年，帝遣廷臣二十六人巡抚天下，彰与给事中王励往河南。
现代文：十九年，皇帝派廷臣二十六人巡抚天下，王彰和给事中王励前往河南。
English: In the 19th year, the emperor sent 26 courtiers to supervise the world, and Wang Li went to Henan.

古文：终明世，大臣得抚乡土者，彰与叶春而已。
现代文：终明一代，大臣得巡抚本人乡土的，只有王彰和叶春。
English: In the late Ming Dynasty, only Wang Chang and Ye Chun were ministers who were allowed to govern their own hometowns.

古文：河南水灾，民多流亡，长吏不加恤。
现代文：河南发生水灾，百姓多流亡，当地长官不进行抚恤。
English: Floods occurred in Henan, many people fled, and local officials did not provide pensions.

古文：彰奏黜贪刻者百余人，罢不急之征十余事。招复流民，发廪振贷，多所全活。
现代文：王彰上奏废黜了一百余名贪婪刻薄的官员，停罢不紧迫的征敛等十多件事，招回流民，发放仓米赈济，使许多人活了下来。
English: At the report of Wang Zhang, more than a hundred greedy and mean officials were deposed, and more than a dozen things such as the suspension of non-urgent collection, the recruitment of displaced persons, and the distribution of granary rice relief, so that many people survived.

古文：还朝，命督饷北征。
现代文：回朝后，皇上命他督运粮饷北征。
English: After returning to the imperial court, the emperor ordered him to transport grain for the Northern Expedition.

古文：仁宗即位，河溢开封，命彰与都指挥李信往振恤。
现代文：仁宗即位后，黄河漫进开封城，命王彰与都指挥李信前往赈济和抚恤。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, the Yellow River flowed into Kaifeng City, and King Akira and the commander of the capital Li Xin went to Qianji and Fuxing.

古文：宣德元年五月，命彰自良乡抵南京巡抚军民。
现代文：宣德元年五月，命王彰从良乡到南京巡抚军民。
English: In May of the first year of the Xuande Emperor's reign, Myowang Chang went from Liangxiang to Nanjing to patrol the military and the people.

古文：寻以所言率常事，降敕切责，令详具利病以闻。
现代文：不久因他所提的都是平常之事，皇上颁敕令严厉责备他，令他详尽地论述当地的利病上报。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an imperial edict severely reprimanding him because what he had brought up was nothing out of the ordinary, and ordered him to give a detailed account of the local report.

古文：复谕侍臣曰： 两京相距数千里，驿使往来为扰，或遘水旱，小民失所，朝使还及御史巡历皆不以告，故遣彰往视。
现代文：皇上又对侍臣说： 两京相距数千里，通过驿路往来的使者频繁，有时遇到水旱之灾，朝廷使者回来或且御史出去巡历，都不告诉朝廷，所以这才派王彰前往巡视。
English: The emperor also said to his courtier: The two capitals are separated by thousands of miles, and envoys frequently pass through the Kushiro, sometimes encountering floods and droughts. The imperial envoys do not tell the imperial court when they come back or go on a tour, so this is why Wang Akira was sent to inspect.

古文：今所奏多细故。
现代文：现在他所上奏的多是细小的事情。
English: Right now, he's playing up the small stuff.

古文：大臣如此，朕复何望！
现代文：大臣如此，朕还指望谁？
English: If the minister is like this, who can I count on?

古文：卿等当悉朕意，君臣同体，勿有所疑。 
现代文：诸位爱卿都应该理解朕的心意，君臣同体，不要有所疑虑。 
English: All of you, lords and ladies, should understand my intention. You are all lords and ladies. Don't have any doubts.

古文：寻召还，命与都督山云巡山海至居庸诸关隘。
现代文：不久把王彰召回，命他与都督山云巡视山海关到居庸关各个关隘。
English: He soon called Wang Zhang back and ordered him and the governor, Shan Yun, to inspect the Shanhaiguan Customs to the Juyongguan checkpoints.

古文：逾二月还，奏将士擅离者，帝命逮治。
现代文：过了两个月他回来了，上奏有的将士擅自离开岗位，皇上命将他们逮捕治罪。
English: Two months later he returned, and some of the soldiers who had left their posts without permission were arrested and prosecuted by order of the emperor.

古文：遂命兵部三月一遣御史、给事中点阅。
现代文：皇上于是命兵部每隔三个月就派御史、给事中前去检查。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the military department to send the imperial historian every three months to inspect the situation.

古文：明年四月卒于官。
现代文：第二年四月王彰在任上去世。
English: In April of the following year, Wang Zhang died in office.

古文：彰严介自持，请托皆绝，然用法过刻。
现代文：王彰对自身要求极为严厉，从不搞请托、拉关系，但他执法过于苛刻。
English: Wang Zhang is extremely strict with his own requirements and never engages in a push-pull relationship, but he is too harsh in enforcing the law.

古文：其母屡以为言，不能改。
现代文：他的母亲多次说他，但他不能改。
English: His mother told him many times, but he couldn't change it.

古文：时刘观为左都御史。人谓 彰公而不恕，观私而不刻 云。
现代文：当时刘观为左都御史，人们都说王彰公而不恕，刘观私而不刻。
English: At that time, Liu Guan was the governor of the Left Capital. People said that Wang Changgong did not forgive, but Liu Guan did not forgive.

古文：魏源，字文渊，建昌县人。
现代文：魏源，字文渊，建昌县人。
English: Wei Yuan, also known as Wen Yuan, was from Jianchang County.

古文：永乐四年进士。除监察御史。
现代文：永乐四年，中进士，被授予监察御史。
English: Yongle four years, junior high school graduate, was awarded the supervision of history.

古文：辨松江知府黄子威诬。奏减浙东濒海渔课。
现代文：他辨明松江知府黄子威诬陷案，上奏减免浙东临海渔税。
English: He identified the false accusation case of Huang Ziwei in Songjiang Prefecture, and reported the reduction and exemption of the fishing tax on the eastern coast of Zhejiang.

古文：巡按陕西。西安大疫，疗活甚众。
现代文：他巡按陕西时，西安发生严重瘟疫，他治活了许多人。
English: When he visited Shaanxi, a serious plague occurred in Xi'an, and he cured and revived many people.

古文：奏言： 诸府仓粟积一千九十余万石，足支十年。
现代文：他上奏说： 各府粮仓积储粮食一千九十余万石，足可支用十年。
English: In his report, he said: The granaries of each prefecture have accumulated and stored grain worth more than 1.9 million koku, which can be used for ten years.

古文：今民疫妨农，请输钞代两税之半。 从之。
现代文：现在百姓遭受瘟疫，妨碍了农事，请允许交纳钱钞以代替一半的两税。 皇上听从了。
English: Now that the people are suffering from the plague, which has hindered agricultural activities, please allow me to pay money to replace half of the double tax. The emperor obeyed.

古文：凉州土寇将为变。亟请剿，乱遂息。
现代文：凉州土寇将要作乱，魏源亟请剿灭，贼乱遂被平息下去了。
English: The Turkish invaders of Liangzhou were about to start a riot, and Wei Yuan urgently requested that they be put down. The riot was eventually quelled.

古文：两遭丧，俱起复。
现代文：他两遭亲丧，不待守孝期满，便被召回任事。
English: He suffered two bereavements and had to wait until his term of filial piety was over before he was called back to duty.

古文：洪熙元年出为浙江按察副使。
现代文：洪熙元年，他出任浙江按察副使。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he served as the deputy envoy of Zhejiang Province.

古文：宣德三年召署刑部右侍郎。
现代文：宣德三年，把他召回任代理刑部右侍郎。
English: Three years after Xuan De's death, he was recalled to serve as the acting right-hand man of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：五年，河南旱荒，民多转徙。
现代文：五年，河南发生旱灾，百姓多流离失所。
English: Five years ago, a drought occurred in Henan, and many people were displaced.

古文：帝以源廉正有为，命为左布政使，俾驰驿之任。
现代文：皇上因魏源廉正有为，任命他为左布政使，让他乘驿车赶去赴任。
English: Due to Wei Yuan's integrity, the emperor appointed him as Zuo Bu's political envoy and let him take a carriage to go to his post.

古文：时侍郎许廓往抚辑，廷议又起丁忧布政使李昌祺原官。
现代文：当时侍郎许廓前往安抚，朝廷又建议起用在家守孝的布政使李昌祺，给他恢复原官。
English: At that time, chamberlain Xu Guo went to pacify, and the imperial court also suggested that the cloth political envoy Li Changyao, who was at home, be used to restore him to his original position.

古文：源与廓、昌祺发仓廪，免逋赋杂役，流民渐归。
现代文：魏源与许廓、李昌祺发放粮仓储粮，免除拖欠的赋税杂役，使流民又逐渐回来了。
English: Wei Yuan, Xu Guo and Li Changtao distributed grain storage in granaries and exempted tax delinquents, so that the displaced people gradually returned.

古文：雨亦旋降，岁大丰。
现代文：而这时雨也降下来了，当年获得大丰收。
English: At this time, the rain also fell, and a bumper harvest was obtained that year.

古文：居三年，召还，授刑部左侍郎。
现代文：三年后，他被召回，任为刑部左侍郎。
English: Three years later, he was recalled and appointed as the Left Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：明年，永丰民夏九旭等据大盘山为乱。帝以源江西人，命抚之，都督任礼帅兵随其后。
现代文：第二年，永丰百姓夏九旭等人占据大盘山作乱，皇上因魏源是江西人，命他前往招抚，都督任礼率兵跟在他的后面。
English: In the second year, Yongfeng people Xia Jiuxu and others occupied Dapanshan to make trouble. The emperor ordered him to go to Zhaofu because Wei Yuan was from Jiangxi, and the governor Renli led the soldiers to follow him.

古文：未至，官军擒九旭，因命二人采木四川，兼饬边务。
现代文：他们还没到，官军已擒获夏九旭，皇上便命两人到四川采木材，兼整治边务。
English: Before they arrived, the imperial army had already captured Xia Jiuxu, and the emperor ordered the two men to go to Sichuan to collect wood and rectify border affairs.

古文：英宗即位，进尚书。
现代文：英宗即位后，他升为尚书。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：正统二年五月命整饬大同、宣府诸边，许便宜行事。
现代文：正统二年五月，命他整治大同、宣府各边防，允许他相机行事。
English: In May of the second year of orthodoxy, he was ordered to rectify the border defenses of Datong and Xuanwu, and allowed him to act as a camera.

古文：源遣都督佥事李谦守独石，杨洪副之，劾万全卫指挥杜衡戍广西。
现代文：魏源派都督佥事李谦守独石，以杨洪为副，弹劾万全卫指挥杜衡，将他贬戍广西。
English: Wei Yuan sent Li Qian, the governor of Guangxi Province, to guard the city, with Yang Hong as his deputy, and impeached Du Heng, the commander of Wanquanwei, and banished him to Guangxi.

古文：明年奏大同总兵官谭广老，帝命黄真、杨洪充左右参将协镇，诸将肃然。
现代文：第二年，他上奏大同总兵官谭广年老，皇上命黄真、杨洪充任左右参将协助镇守，为此将领们肃然。
English: In the second year, he promoted the general officer of Datong, Tan Guang, to the position of senior general, and the emperor ordered Huang Zhen and Yang Hongzheng to be appointed as the left and right general officers to assist the town guard. The generals were stunned.

古文：按行天城、朔州诸险要，令将吏分守。设威远卫，增修开平、龙门城，自独石抵宣府，增置墩堠。
现代文：他巡行天城、朔州各险要地区，令将吏分别守卫；设威远卫，增修开平、龙门城，从独石到宣府，增设烽火台。
English: He went on a tour of Tiancheng and Shuozhou, each of which is a critical area, and ordered the officers to guard them separately. He set up Wei Yuanwei, Kaiping, Longmen City, from Dokushi to Xuanfu, and set up additional campfires.

古文：免屯军租一年，储火器为边备，诸依权贵避役者悉括归伍。
现代文：他还免除屯军一年的租税，储备火器以备边防之用，而那些倚仗权贵得以逃避兵役的人，魏源也全部把他们搜回充入部队。
English: He also exempted the garrison troops from paying taxes for one year, and stockpiled firearms for use in border defense. As for those who relied on the powerful to evade military service, Wei Yuan also rounded them all up and conscripted them into the army.

古文：寻以宣、大军务久弛，请召还巡抚佥都御史卢睿，而荐兵部侍郎于谦为镇守参赞。
现代文：不久因宣府、大同军务长期废弛，魏源请召回巡抚佥都御史卢春，而推荐兵部侍郎于谦为镇守参赞。
English: Soon, due to the long-term inefficiency of the Xuanfu and Datong military affairs, Wei Yuan requested the recall of the governor of the capital, Slu Chun, and recommended the military secretary Yu Qian as the town guard counselor.

古文：朝廷以谦方抚山西、河南，不听。
现代文：朝廷因于谦正巡抚山西、河南，不同意。
English: The imperial court did not agree because of the rise of the procurators of Shanxi and Henan.

古文：于是言官以临边擅易置大臣为源罪，合疏劾之。
现代文：于是言官以魏源巡边擅自更换大臣作为他的罪过，联合上书弹劾他。
English: As a result, the spokesmen accused Wei Yuanru of changing ministers without authorization, and jointly wrote a letter to impeach him.

古文：且言源为御史尝犯赃，乃冒领诰命。
现代文：他们还说魏源任御史时曾犯有贪污罪，却还冒领诰命。
English: They also said that Wei Yuan had been guilty of corruption when he was appointed imperial historian, but he also risked his life.

古文：帝以源有劳，置不问。
现代文：皇上因魏源有劳，不问。
English: The emperor did not question Wei Yuan's hard work.

古文：事竣还朝，与都御史陈智相詈于直庐。
现代文：他办完事后回朝，与都御史陈智在办公室里对骂。
English: After he finished his work, he went back to the Imperial Palace and scolded Metropolitan Chen Zhi in his office.

古文：智以闻，诏两责之。
现代文：陈智上报，皇上下诏责备二人。
English: Chen Zhi reported the matter, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to reprimand the two.

古文：岁旱，录上疑狱，且请推行于天下，报可。
现代文：当年闹干旱，魏源整理疑案上报，并请推行于天下。回报说可。
English: At that time, there was a drought, and Wei Yuan collated and reported the suspicious case, and requested that it be implemented throughout the world.

古文：旋坐决狱不当，与侍郎何文渊俱下狱。
现代文：旋即他犯判案不当之罪，与侍郎何文渊都被投进监狱。
English: He immediately committed the crime of improper judgment, and he and his servant He Wenyuan were both thrown into prison.

古文：得宥，复以上辽王贵烚罪状，不言其内乱事，与三司官皆系诏狱。
现代文：后来得到宽宥，又因上奏辽王朱贵火合的罪状时，不提到他内乱的事情，与三司官员都被关进监狱。
English: Later, he was pardoned, and because he did not mention Liao Wang Zhu Guihuang's civil disturbance when he was charged with inciting a riot, he and the officials of the three departments were put in prison.

古文：累月，释还职。
现代文：过了几个月，被释放复职。
English: A few months later, he was released and reinstated.

古文：源在刑部久，议狱多平恕。
现代文：魏源在刑部时间很长，对案件的判决多比较平恕。
English: Wei Yuan has been in the criminal department for a long time, and the judgment of the case is more forgiving.

古文：陕西佥事计资言，武臣杂犯等罪，予半俸，谪极边。
现代文：陕西佥事计资说，武臣所犯的杂犯等罪，应给予一半俸禄，贬戍极边之地。
English: Shaanxi Anzhi Jiuzhaiguan said that the misdemeanors and other crimes committed by vassals should be given half of the salary, which is the most extreme place.

古文：源以所言深刻，奏寝之。
现代文：魏源因他所说的过于严酷，上奏止住了这种做法。
English: Wei Yuan stopped this practice because he said it was too harsh.

古文：郎中林厚言禁刁讼、告讦及择理刑官、勘重囚务凭赃具四事，皆以源议得施行。
现代文：郎中林厚提出应禁止无理狡猾的诉讼、告发，以及选择理刑官、处理重犯务必凭赃物证据等四项建议，都因魏源的意见得以施行。
English: The four proposals put forward by his son-in-law, Lin Hou, including that unreasonable and cunning lawsuits and denunciations should be prohibited, and that evidence of stolen property must be used to select a criminal justice officer and to deal with repeat offenders, have all been implemented due to Wei Yuan's opinions.

古文：六年以足疾命朝朔望。八年致仕，卒。
现代文：六年，因他脚有病，皇上命他仅在初一和十五日朝见。八年，他退休。
English: In the sixth year, due to his foot disease, the emperor ordered him to only see the emperor on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month. In the eighth year, he retired.

古文：金濂，字宗瀚，山阳人。
现代文：去世。金濂，字宗瀚，山阳人。
English: He passed away. Jin Qi, Zi Zonghan, Shanyang people.

古文：永乐十六年进士，授御史。
现代文：永乐十六年，中进士，被授予御史。
English: In the 16th year of Yongle, he was promoted to junior high school, and was awarded the title of imperial historian.

古文：宣德初，巡按广东，廉能最。
现代文：宣德初年，他巡按广东，最为廉洁能干。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he toured Guangdong, the most honest and capable.

古文：改按江西、浙江。
现代文：后来改巡按江西、浙江。
English: Later, the tour was changed to Jiangxi and Zhejiang.

古文：捕巨盗不获，坐免。
现代文：因没能把大盗抓获，被免职。
English: He was relieved of his duties for failing to catch the thief.

古文：盗就执，乃复官。
现代文：盗贼就擒后，他才得复官。
English: He was only reinstated after the thieves were put to bed.

古文：尝言郡县吏贪浊，宜敕按察司、巡按御史察廉能者，如洪武间故事，遣使劳赉，则清浊分，循良劝。
现代文：他曾说郡县官员贪污，应敕令按察司、巡按御史考察廉洁能干的人，就如洪武年间的做法那样，再派使者去慰劳和奖赏，这样则官员清浊自分，守法而有治绩的官员也受到鼓励。
English: He once said that county and prefectural officials should be ordered to investigate corruption and send emissaries to console and reward those who are honest and competent, as was the case during the Hongwu era. In this way, officials would clean themselves up, and law-abiding and efficient officials would be encouraged.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇上嘉许采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：用荐迁陕西副使。
现代文：因受推荐他升为陕西副使。
English: Upon recommendation, he was promoted to deputy envoy to Shaanxi.

古文：正统元年上书请补卫所缺官，益宁夏守兵，设汉中镇守都指挥使，多议行。
现代文：正统元年，他上书请将各卫的缺官补上，增加宁夏守兵，设汉中镇守都指挥使。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he sent a letter to ask to make up for the lack of officers in each guard, increase the number of guards in Ningxia, and set up the commander of the town guards in Hanzhong.

古文：三年擢佥都御史，参赞宁夏军务。
现代文：这些建议多得讨论实行。三年，他升为佥都御史，参赞宁夏军务。
English: These proposals were discussed and implemented. Three years later, he was promoted to the post of the governor of Ningxia, and became the military adviser of Ningxia.

古文：濂有心计，善筹画，西陲晏然。
现代文：金濂有心计，善于筹划，西陲安然。
English: Jinju has a plan, is good at planning, and Xi'an is safe.

古文：宁夏旧有五渠，而鸣沙洲、七星汉、伯石灰三渠淤。
现代文：宁夏旧有五条水渠，而鸣沙洲七星、汉伯、石灰三渠已经淤塞。
English: Ningxia used to have five canals, but the three canals of Mingsha Chau, Qixing, Hanbo and Lime have been silted up.

古文：濂请浚之，溉芜田一千三百余顷。
现代文：金濂请疏通它们，可灌溉荒芜之田一千三百余顷。
English: Jinyu, please dredge them, which can irrigate more than 1300 hectares of barren fields.

古文：时诏富民输米助边，千石以上褒以玺书。
现代文：当时皇上下诏令富民输运粮食助边，运送一千石以上的可得玺书褒奖。
English: At that time, the emperor decreed that the rich people should help to transport grain, and the transportation of more than one thousand koku could win the award.

古文：濂言边地粟贵，请并旌不及额者，储由此充。
现代文：金濂说边防地区粮食很贵，请对达不到这个数目的人也进行表彰，边粮储备因此得到充实。
English: According to Kim Min, grain is very expensive in border areas. Please also commend those who do not reach this number, so that the border grain reserves can be replenished.

古文：六年诏佥都御史卢睿与濂更代。
现代文：六年，诏令佥都御史卢睿与金濂轮换守边。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor ordered Shidu Emperor Slu Rui and the Jin Dynasty to rotate the guards.

古文：明年，睿召还，濂复出镇。
现代文：第二年，卢睿被召回，金濂又出去镇守。
English: The next year, Lu Rui was recalled, and Jin Qi went out to guard the town.

古文：寻加右副都御史，与睿代者再。
现代文：不久进升他为右副都御史，再次与卢睿轮换守边。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of right-wing vice-governor of the capital, and he and Lu Rui once again rotated in and out of the position.

古文：八年秋拜刑部尚书，侍经筵。
现代文：八年秋他任为刑部尚书，侍奉讲经筵。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year, he was appointed to the Criminal Investigation Department, serving as a lecturer.

古文：十一年，安乡伯张安与弟争禄，诏逮治。
现代文：十一年，安乡伯张安与他的弟弟争俸禄，皇上下诏逮捕处治他们。
English: In the eleventh year of Anxiang, Zhang An and his younger brother quarreled over the salary, and the emperor issued an edict to arrest and punish them.

古文：法司与户部相诿，言官劾濂及户部尚书王佐，右都御史陈镒，侍郎丁铉、马昂，副都御史丁璿、程富等，俱下狱。
现代文：法司与户部相互推诿，言官弹劾金濂与户部尚书王佐，右都御史陈镒，侍郎丁铉、马昂，副都御史丁王睿、程富等人。
English: The Minister of Justice and the Head of the Household pushed and shoved each other, and the spokesman impeached Jin Zheng and the Head of the Household, Shang Shu Wang Zuo, the Right Metropolitan Chen Zheng, the attendants Ding Zheng, Ma'an, the Deputy Metropolitan Shi Ding Wang Rui, Cheng Fu and others.

古文：数日，释之。
现代文：他们都被投进监狱，过了几天才放了出来。
English: They were all thrown in jail and only released a few days later.

古文：福建贼邓茂七等为乱，都督刘聚、都御史张楷征之，不克。
现代文：福建贼邓茂七等人作乱，都督刘聚、都御史张阶去征讨，不胜。
English: The Fujian thief Deng Shouqi and others made a disturbance, the governor Liu Ju and the governor Zhang Ji went to fight, but they were defeated.

古文：十三年十一月大发兵，命宁阳侯陈懋等为将军往讨，以濂参军务。
现代文：十三年十一月，朝廷大发兵，命宁阳侯陈懋等人为将军前往征讨，用金濂参赞军务。
English: In November 13th, the imperial court dispatched a large number of troops, and ordered Ningyang marquis Chen Qi and others to go to the general to solicit, using Jin Qi as military affairs counselor.

古文：比至，御史丁瑄已大破贼。茂七死，余贼拥其兄子伯孙据九龙山，拒官军。
现代文：他们到达时，御史丁蠧已大破贼人，邓茂七死，其余的贼人拥戴他哥哥的儿子邓伯孙占据九龙山，抵抗官军。
English: By the time they arrived, the warlord Ding Xuan had defeated the bandits. Deng Maosheng died, and the rest of the bandits, including his brother's son, Deng Buxun, occupied Kowloon Hill and resisted the government army.

古文：濂与众谋，羸师诱之出，伏精兵，入其垒，遂擒伯孙。
现代文：金濂与众人商议，便用弱兵引诱他们出来，而埋伏的精兵便攻入他们的堡垒，于是擒住了邓伯孙。
English: In consultation with the people, Jin Xuan used weak soldiers to lure them out, while the ambushed elite soldiers broke into their fortress, and then captured Dunbsun.

古文：帝乃移楷讨浙寇，而留濂击平余贼未下者。
现代文：皇上于是调张阶去讨伐浙江之寇，而留下金濂扫平还没攻下的其余贼人。
English: Therefore, the emperor changed the order of battle to fight against the invaders from Zhejiang, leaving the rest of the robbers who had not yet been conquered by Jin Yong.

古文：会英宗北狩，兵事棘，召还。
现代文：正值英宗被俘，军事紧急，金濂被召回。
English: At the time of Emperor Yingzong's capture, there was a military emergency, and Jin Yong was recalled.

古文：言者交劾濂无功，景帝不问，加濂太子宾客，给二俸。
现代文：议论者纷纷弹劾金濂无功，景帝不问，加封他为太子宾客，支给二职俸禄。
English: Commentators have impeached Kim Byung-soo for his ineffectual efforts, but Emperor Gyeonggi did not ask, he was made a guest of the crown prince, and he was paid a second-class salary.

古文：寻改户部尚书，进太子太保。
现代文：不久他改任户部尚书，进封为太子太保。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Household Division of the Imperial Household Agency, and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：时四方用兵，需饷急，濂综核无遗，议上撙节便宜十六事，国用得无乏。
现代文：当时四方用兵，粮饷需要紧迫，金濂全面安排计划，提出十六项节减开支的建议上奏实行，国家用度得以不缺乏。
English: At that time, the four parties used troops, the need for grain and rice was urgent, the Jin Dynasty made a comprehensive arrangement plan, and put forward 16 suggestions for reducing expenses, which were submitted for implementation, so there was no shortage of national consumption.

古文：未几，上皇还。也先请遣使往来如初，帝坚意绝之。
现代文：不久，上皇回来了，也先请如先前派遣使者往来，皇上坚决拒绝。
English: Soon after, the Emperor returned and asked to send an envoy as before, but the Emperor firmly refused.

古文：濂再疏谏，不听。
现代文：金濂一再上疏劝谏，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to Kim Byung-soo's repeated attempts to dissuade him.

古文：初，帝即位，诏免景泰二年天下租十之三。
现代文：当初，皇上即位时，下诏免除景泰二年全国租税的十分之三。
English: At first, when the emperor ascended the throne, he issued an edict exempting Jingtao from three-tenths of the national tax in the second year.

古文：濂檄有司，但减米麦，其折收银布丝帛者征如故。
现代文：金濂传檄有关官员，只减征米麦，其他折收银两和布匹丝帛的照旧征收。
English: According to the relevant officials, only rice and wheat will be reduced, while other commodities such as cash, cloth and silk will still be levied.

古文：三年二月，学士江渊以为言，命部查理。
现代文：三年二月，学士江渊对皇上谈到此事，皇上命户部调查处理。
English: In February of the third year, the bachelor Jiang Yuan told the emperor about this matter, and the emperor ordered the household department to investigate and deal with it.

古文：濂内惭，抵无有。
现代文：金濂心中惭愧，抵赖说没有。
English: Ashamed in her heart, Kim Soo said no.

古文：给事中李侃等请诘天下有司违诏故。
现代文：给事中李侃等人请询问天下有关官员违反诏令的原因。
English: To Li Kan and others in the case, please inquire about the reasons why the relevant officials around the world violated the edict.

古文：濂恐事败，乃言： 银布丝帛，诏书未载，若概减免，国用何资？ 
现代文：金濂担心事情败露，便说： 银两布匹和丝帛，诏书上没写明，如果一概减免，国家用度怎够开支？ 
English: Worried that the matter would be exposed, Jin Zheng said, "Silver is like cloth and silk. The edict did not specify that if there is a general reduction and exemption, how can the national expenditure be sufficient?

古文：于是给事中御史劾濂失信于民，为国敛怨，且讦其阴事。
现代文：于是给事中和御史都弹劾金濂失信于民，使人民怨恨国家，并且还揭发了他的阴事。
English: As a result, both the emperor and empress were impeached for betraying the trust of the people, making the people resent the state, and also exposing his dirty deeds.

古文：帝欲宥之，而侃与御史王允力争，遂下都察院狱。
现代文：皇上想宽宥他，而李侃和御史王允极力反对，遂把他关进都察院监狱。
English: The emperor wanted to pardon him, but Li Kan and Goshi Wang Yun strongly objected, so they put him in the Duza Prison.

古文：越三日释之，削宫保，改工部。
现代文：过了三天把他放了出来，削去太子太保之衔，改到工部。
English: After three days, he was released, stripped of his title of Crown Prince, and transferred to the Ministry of Works.

古文：吏部尚书何文渊言理财非濂不可，乃复还户部。
现代文：吏部尚书何文渊说理财非金濂不可，于是又调他回户部。
English: Shangshu He Wenyuan of the Personnel Department said that financial management was not possible without money, so he was transferred back to the Household Department.

古文：濂上疏自理，遂乞骸骨，帝慰留之。
现代文：金濂上疏自述，顺便请求退休，皇上安慰挽留他。
English: The emperor consoled him by asking him to retire.

古文：东宫建，复宫保。
现代文：东宫太子建立后，恢复金濂太子太保之衔。
English: After the establishment of the Crown Prince of the East Palace, the title of the Crown Prince of Jinli was restored.

古文：寻复条上节军匠及僧道冗食共十事。
现代文：不久他又提出节减军匠和僧道人员过滥的食粮等十项建议上奏。
English: Soon after, he also proposed ten suggestions to reduce the excessive food consumption of soldiers and monks.

古文：永乐中乡荐，历山东左布政使，所至有惠政。
现代文：五年，他在任上去世。以军功追封他为沭阳伯，谥荣襄。金濂刚毅果断，有才干，但对待属下多暴怒。
English: Five years later, he died in office. He was posthumously awarded the title of "Fu Yang Bo" (阳伯) and "Fu Rong Xiang" (荣襄) for his military exploits. He was strong-willed and talented, but often treated his subordinates violently.

古文：正统六年入为工部侍郎，代吴中为尚书。归家十五年卒。罗通，字学古，吉水人。
现代文：在刑部时，他执法过严。到他任户部尚书时，正值用兵，国家财物短缺，颇采取厚敛的办法来保证供给。罗通，字学古，吉水人。
English: When he was in the Department of Justice, he was too strict in enforcing the law. When he was in the Department of Home Affairs, he was short of soldiers, the country was short of goods, and he took a rather restrained approach to ensure supply.

古文：永乐十年进士。
现代文：永乐十年，中进士。
English: Yongle ten years, junior high school graduate.

古文：授御史，巡按四川。
现代文：被任为御史，巡按四川。
English: He was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, and was in charge of patrolling Sichuan.

古文：都指挥郭赟与清军御史汪琳中交通为奸利，通劾奏，逮治之。
现代文：都指挥郭斌贝与清军御史汪淋中勾结为奸，罗通上奏弹劾，将他们逮捕治罪。
English: Guo Binbei, the commander of the capital, and Wang Shih, the commander of the Qing army, were in collusion, and Rotong impeached them and arrested them.

古文：三殿灾，偕同官何忠等极陈时政阙失。
现代文：三殿失火，他与同官何忠等人极力指出时政的失误。
English: The Third Palace caught fire, and he and his colleague He Zhong and others tried their best to point out the mistakes of the current government.

古文：忤旨，出为交阯清化知州。
现代文：因为违逆了皇上的心意，他被派出任交趾清化州知州。
English: Because he disobeyed the emperor's will, he was sent to Chizhou, Qinghai Province.

古文：宣德元年，黎利反，王通战败，擅传檄割清化迤南畀贼。
现代文：宣德元年，黎利造反，王通战败，擅自传檄割让清化州以南的各城给贼人。
English: In the first year of the Xuande Emperor, Lili rebelled, Wang Tong was defeated, and all the cities in the south of Qinghua Province were ceded to the thieves.

古文：贼方围清化，通与指挥打忠坚守，乘间破贼，杀伤甚众。
现代文：当时贼人正包围清化，罗通与指挥打忠坚守，乘隙击破贼人，杀伤很多。
English: At that time, the bandits were encircling Qinghua. Rotong and the commander Dato' Duzhong stood firm and used the opportunity to defeat the bandits, causing many casualties.

古文：贼将遁而檄至，通曰： 吾辈杀贼多，出城必无全理，与就缚，曷若尽忠死。 
现代文：贼将逃走后，而王通的檄书也送到了，罗通说 ：我们杀了很多贼人，如果出城肯定不能得到保全，与其就擒，不如尽忠而死。 
English: After the thieves had fled, and Wang Tong's letter had arrived, Rotong said, "We have killed many thieves. If it is certain that we cannot be saved if we leave the city, it would be better to die a faithful death than to sleep."

古文：乃与忠益固守。
现代文：于是与打忠便固守清化城。
English: As a result, he and Dazhong held fast to Chinghua City.

古文：贼久攻不下，令降将蔡福说降，通登陴大骂。
现代文：贼人久攻不下，便令降将蔡福去劝降，罗通登城大骂。
English: The thieves could not attack for a long time, so they ordered the subordinate general Cai Fu to persuade them to surrender, and Rotong went to the city to curse them.

古文：贼知城不可拔，引去。
现代文：贼人知道该城不可攻取，便引兵退走。
English: The thieves knew that the city was impregnable, so they withdrew.

古文：及还京，宣宗大奖劳之。
现代文：罗通回京后，宣宗对他大加奖励和慰劳。
English: After Rotong returned to Beijing, Emperor Xuanzong rewarded and comforted him greatly.

古文：改户部员外郎，出理宣府军饷。
现代文：他改任户部员外郎，出京办理宣府军饷。
English: He was reassigned as a member of the Household Division, and went to Kyoto to receive the military pension from the prefectural government.

古文：奏言： 朝议储饷开平，令每军运一石，又当以骑士护行，计所费率二石七斗而致一石。
现代文：他上奏说 ：朝廷把粮饷储存在开平，令每名士兵运一石，又应当以骑兵护行，这样一算，每运一石要花费二石七斗。
English: He reported as follows: The imperial court stored grain sacks in Kaiping, and ordered each soldier to transport one stone, and they should be escorted by cavalry. According to this calculation, each stone transported costs two stone and seven dowels.

古文：今军民多愿输米易盐，请捐旧例五分之二，则人自乐输，饷足而兵不疲。 
现代文：现在军民多愿意输运粮食到边塞以换盐，请减去旧法所运粮食的五分之二，交由军民输运，这样则人民乐意输运，粮饷充足而士兵又不至于疲惫。 
English: Now the military and the people are more willing to transport grain to the border fortress to exchange for salt. Please subtract two-fifths of the grain transported by the old law and let the military and the people transport it. In this way, the people are willing to transport, the grain is sufficient and the soldiers will not be tired.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：皇上批准了。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：正统初，迁兵部郎中，从尚书王骥整饬甘肃边务。
现代文：正统初年，罗通升为兵部郎中，随尚书王骥整饬甘肃边务。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Luo Tong was promoted to the middle of the military department, and followed Shang Shou Wang in the rectification of Gansu border affairs.

古文：从破敌于兀鲁乃还，以贪淫事为骥所觉。
现代文：他又随从大军在兀鲁乃击破敌人而还，因贪污淫乱之事被王骥察觉。
English: He also returned from defeating the enemy with a large army in Yalunai, but was discovered by Wang Yao for corruption and sexual misconduct.

古文：骥遣通奏边情，即疏通罪。
现代文：王骥派罗通上奏边防情况，遂即上疏报告罗通的罪行。
English: Wang Qi sent Luo Tong to report on the border defense situation, and then reported Luo Tong's crime to Shang Zuo.

古文：下狱，谪广西容山闸官。
现代文：罗通被投进监狱，贬任广西容山闸官。
English: Rotong was thrown into prison and demoted to the post of Guangxi Yongshan lock official.

古文：已，调东莞河泊所官。
现代文：后来，调任东莞河泊所官。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Dongguan River Parking Station.

古文：九年，都督佥事曹俭荐其有文武才，乞收用。
现代文：九年，都督佥事曹俭推荐罗通有文武之才，乞请收用他。
English: In the ninth year, the governor of the capital, Cao Jian, recommended that Luo Tong, who was talented in literature and military affairs, should be recruited.

古文：吏部执不可。
现代文：吏部反对。
English: The cadre department objected.

古文：景帝监国，以于谦、陈循荐，起兵部员外郎，守居庸关。
现代文：景帝监国时，因于谦、陈循的推荐，起用罗通为兵部员外郎，守居庸关。
English: When Emperor Jing was supervising the country, due to the recommendation of Qian and Chen Cun, Luo Tong was appointed as the foreign minister of the military department, and he was assigned to guard Yangguan.

古文：俄进郎中。
现代文：不久进升为郎中。
English: He was soon promoted to junior vassal.

古文：帝即位，进右副都御史。
现代文：皇上即位后，他进升为右副都御史。
English: After the Emperor's accession to the throne, he was promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：也先犯京师，别部攻居庸甚急。
现代文：也先侵犯京师，他的别部攻打居庸关很急。
English: He also invaded the capital division first, and his other division attacked Juyongguan very quickly.

古文：天大寒，通汲水灌城，水坚不得近。
现代文：天气非常冷，罗通取水灌入城墙，水结冰后非常坚固，敌人无法靠近。
English: The weather was very cold. Lotong took water and poured it into the city wall. The water froze and became very strong, so the enemy could not get close.

古文：七日遁走，追击破之。
现代文：七天之后敌人退走，罗通追击打败敌人。
English: After seven days, the enemy retreated, and Lotong chased and defeated the enemy.

古文：景泰元年召还。
现代文：景泰元年，他被召回。
English: In the first year of King Taejo, he was recalled.

古文：时杨洪督京营，命通参军务兼理院事。
现代文：当时杨洪提督京营部队，皇上命罗通参赞军务兼理都察院事务。
English: At that time, Yang Hong, the admiral of the Beijing battalion, was appointed by the emperor as Rotong, the military counselor and director of the affairs of the Imperial Procuratorate.

古文：言： 诸边报警，率由守将畏征调，饰诈以惑朝廷，遇贼数十辄称杀败数千。
现代文：他说 ：各边塞来报警，大多由于守将害怕征调，所以粉饰欺骗以迷惑朝廷。遇到数十个贼人，便声称杀败数千人。
English: He said: "All sides came to call the police, mostly because the guards were afraid of conscription, so they whitewashed and deceived to confuse the court. When they encountered dozens of thieves, they claimed to have killed thousands of people.

古文：向者德胜等门外不知斩馘几何，而获官者至六万六千余人。
现代文：先前的德胜门等城门外之战，不知道斩首到底有多少，而得到升官的有六万六千余人。
English: In previous battles outside the city gates, such as the Battle of Deshengmen, it is not known exactly how many were beheaded, but more than 66,000 people were promoted.

古文：辇下且然，何况塞外。
现代文：皇上车辇之下尚且如此，何况塞外。
English: This was still the case under the emperor's chariot, and even more so after his abdication.

古文：且韩信起自行伍，穰苴拔于寒微，宜博搜将士中如信、苴者，与议军事。
现代文：而且韩信出身于行伍，穰苴被提拔于寒微之中，应该在将士中广搜像韩信、穰苴这样的人，参与讨论军事。
English: Moreover, Han Xin was born in the army, and Zou was promoted in the army. It is necessary to widely search for people like Han Xin and Zou among the soldiers to participate in military discussions.

古文：若今腰玉珥貂，皆苟全性命保爵禄之人，憎贤忌才，能言而不能行，未足与议也。 
现代文：像现在那些腰缠玉带、头插貂尾的人，都是苟全性命保爵禄之辈，憎贤忌才，他们能说而不能干，不足以参与军事。 
English: Like those who now wear jade belts around their waists and have their heads and tails pierced, they are all members of the life-guarding peerage, they hate the virtuous, they can say but can't do, they are not enough to participate in the military.

古文：意盖诋谦与石亨辈。
现代文：这意思是攻击于谦和石亨等人。
English: This means attacking Yu Qian and Shi Heng and others.

古文：谦疏辨，言： 概责边报不实，果有警，不奏必致误事。
现代文：于谦上疏申辩，他说： 一概责备边报不实是不对的，如果真的有警报，不上奏必然误事。
English: Yu Qian made a brief defense, saying: It is not right to blame all sides for false reports. If there really is an alert, it would be a mistake not to sound the alarm.

古文：德胜门外官军升级，惟武清侯石亨功次册当先者万九千八百余人，及阵亡三千余人而已，安所得六万之多？
现代文：德胜门外官军得到升级的，只有武清侯石亨的立功簿上所记的当先抗敌的一万九千八百余人，以及阵亡的三千余人而已，哪来的六万多人那么多？
English: The foreign official army of Deshengmen was upgraded, but only the more than nineteen thousand eight hundred people who were the first to resist the enemy and the more than three thousand people who died in the battle were recorded in the record book of Wu Qing Hou Shiheng. Where did the more than sixty thousand people come from?

古文：通以为滥，宜将臣及亨等升爵削夺。
现代文：罗通夸大数字，是想削夺将臣和石亨等人的升赏和封爵。
English: Lotong exaggerated the figures in order to deprive Shogun and Shi Heng and others of their rewards and knighthoods.

古文：有如韩信、穰苴者，乞即命指荐，并罢臣营务，俾专治部事。 
现代文：如果有韩信、穰苴这样的人，即命他们推荐。并请罢免臣所管的军营事务，使臣专治兵部事务。 
English: If there are such people as Han Xin and Zou, then order them to recommend. And please dismiss the military camp affairs that the minister is in charge of, and let the envoy deal exclusively with the military affairs.

古文：疏下廷议。
现代文：皇上把该奏疏交大臣在朝廷上讨论。
English: The Emperor discussed this report with the Minister of Foreign Affairs at the Imperial Court.

古文：廷臣共言谦及石亨、杨洪实堪其任；又谓通志在灭贼，无他。
现代文：廷臣都说于谦和石亨、杨洪确实胜任本职事务，并说罗通此举是志在灭贼，没别的意思。
English: The courtiers all said that Yu Qian, Shi Heng and Yang Hong were indeed competent in their duties, and said that Luo Tong's move was aimed at eliminating thieves and had no other meaning.

古文：帝两解之。寻敕谦录功，不得如从前冒滥，盖因通言而发也。
现代文：皇上对双方都宽容了，不久敕令于谦登记功劳，说不得像先前那样出现冒领和滥给的现象，这大概是因为罗通的话而发的。
English: The emperor was tolerant of both sides, and soon ordered Yu Qian to register his merits, saying that there should not be the phenomenon of arrogance and abuse as before, which was probably caused by Lotong's words.

古文：给事中覃浩等言通本以知兵用，不宜理院事，乃解其兼职。
现代文：给事中覃浩等人说罗通本是因为懂得军事而被起用，不宜让他掌管都察院事务，于是皇上解除他的兼职。
English: The Emperor dismissed him from his part-time position, saying that Rotong had been appointed because of his knowledge of military affairs, and that it was not appropriate for him to be in charge of the affairs of the Duka.

古文：塞上军民多为寇所掠。
现代文：塞上军民多被敌寇所抢掠。
English: Most of the soldiers and civilians on the island were plundered by the enemy.

古文：通请榜诸边能自归者，军免戍守三年，民复徭役终身。
现代文：罗通请出榜通告各边塞能够自己回去的人，是士兵的免除戍守边疆三年，百姓则免除徭役终身。
English: Luotong, please announce the list of people who can go back to the border by themselves. The soldiers are exempted from guarding the border for three years, and the people are exempted from guarding the border for life.

古文：又请悬封爵重赏，募能擒斩也先、伯颜帖木儿、喜宁者。
现代文：他又请悬封爵和重赏，招募能擒获斩杀也先、伯颜帖木儿、喜宁的人。
English: He also asked for a knighthood and a heavy reward, and recruited people who could be killed first, such as Bo Yan Timur and Xi Ning.

古文：已，又言： 古之将帅务搜拔众才，如知山川形势者可使导军，能腾高越险者可使觇敌，能风角鸟占者可使备变。
现代文：后来，他又说： 古代的将帅都努力搜求各方面的人才，了解山川形势的人可以让他为部队带路，能够翻高越险的人可以让他去侦察敌情，能够卜凶问吉的人可以用他来应付突变情况。
English: Later, he said: "Ancient generals searched for talents in all aspects. Those who understood the situation of mountains and rivers could let him lead the way for the troops. Those who could climb high and cross the danger could let him investigate the enemy's situation. Those who could tell fortunes could use him to cope with sudden changes.

古文：今军中未见其人，乞敕廷臣各举所知，命总兵官杨洪、副将孙镗同臣考验。 
现代文：现军中不见用到这样的人，请敕令廷臣各推举他所了解的人才，命总兵官杨洪、副将孙镗同臣一起考察他们。 
English: There is no need for such a person in the current army, please order the imperial court to nominate the talents he knows, and order the chief petty officer Yang Hong and the deputy general Sun Ye to investigate them together with the minister.

古文：诏皆行之。
现代文：诏令全部实行。
English: All the royal decrees have been implemented.

古文：宣府有警，总兵官朱谦告急。
现代文：宣府有警报，总兵官朱谦告急。
English: Xuanfu had an alert, and the chief military officer Zhu Qian was in a hurry.

古文：廷推都督同知范广帅兵往，以通提督军务。
现代文：廷臣推举都督同知范广率兵前往，以罗通提督军务。
English: The courtiers elected the military governor, Tong Zhifan, to lead the troops, with Admiral Luo Tong in charge of military affairs.

古文：寇退，驻师怀来、宣府，以边储不敷，召还。
现代文：敌寇退走，官军驻扎在怀来、宣府，因边地储粮不够，皇上把他们召回。
English: The enemy corsairs retreated, and the government troops were stationed in Huailai and Xuanfu. Due to insufficient grain reserves on the border, the emperor called them back.

古文：六月，于谦以山西近寇，请遣大臣往镇，杨洪亦乞遣重臣从雁门关护饷大同。
现代文：六月，于谦因山西靠近敌人，请派大臣前往镇守，杨洪也请派重臣从雁门护送粮饷到大同。
English: In June, Yu Qian, who was close to the enemy in Shanxi, asked to send a minister to the town guard, and Yang Hong also asked to send a senior minister to escort grain to Datong from the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：帝以命通。通不欲行，请得与谦、洪俱。
现代文：皇上命罗通去，罗通不想去，请能与于谦、杨洪一起去。
English: The emperor ordered Luo Tong to go, but Luo Tong did not want to go. Please go with Yu Qian and Yang Hong.

古文：谦言国家多难，非臣子辞劳之日，奏乞躬往。
现代文：于谦说国家目前多难，不是做臣子的推辞劳苦的时候，上奏请亲自前往。
English: Yu Qian said that the country is currently facing many difficulties. If you are not a retiring minister, please go to the performance in person.

古文：帝不允，卒命通。
现代文：皇上不许，最后还是命罗通去。
English: The emperor did not allow it, but finally ordered Loton to go.

古文：通本谦所举，而每事牴牾，人由是不直通。
现代文：罗通本是于谦所推荐，而每事总是与于谦癥牾，人们因此认为罗通不正直。
English: Luo Tong was originally recommended by Yu Qian, and everything always conflicted with Yu Qian, so people thought Luo Tong was not honest.

古文：二年召还，仍赞军务。
现代文：二年，罗通被召回，仍任参赞军务。
English: Two years later, Rotun was recalled, still serving as Counsellor for Military Affairs.

古文：东宫改建，加太子少保。
现代文：东宫太子改换后，他被加封为太子太保。
English: After the crown prince of the East Palace was changed, he was added as the crown prince's bodyguard.

古文：上言： 贡使携马四万余匹，宜量增价酬之。
现代文：他上书说 ：朝贡使者带来四万多匹马，应量增价钱来酬报他们。
English: He wrote: The emissaries of the imperial tribute brought more than forty thousand horses, and they should be rewarded with an increase in price.

古文：价增则后来益众，此亦强中国弱外裔之一策。 
现代文：价钱增加了以后来的就更多，这也是强中国而弱外裔的一条策略。 
English: This is also a strategy of strengthening China and weakening foreigners.

古文：帝以所贡马率不堪用，若增价正堕贼计，寝通奏。
现代文：皇上因他们所贡的马匹都不堪用，如果增价则正中敌人之计，便压下了罗通的建议。
English: Since the horses they paid tribute to were useless, the emperor suppressed Loton's suggestion if the increase in price was a trick of the enemy.

古文：四年进右都御史，赞军务如故。
现代文：四年，进升他为右都御史，仍为参赞军务。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to the post of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and still served as Counsellor for Military Affairs.

古文：通好大言，遇人辄谈兵。
现代文：罗通喜欢吹牛，遇到人总是谈军事。
English: Rotong likes to brag and always talks about the military when he meets people.

古文：自陈杀贼功，求世袭武职，为给事中王竑所劾。
现代文：他自陈自己有杀敌之功，求世袭武职，被给事中王所弹劾。
English: He was impeached by the king for claiming to have killed the enemy and seeking to inherit the military post.

古文：帝释不罪。
现代文：皇上宽宥了他。
English: The emperor pardoned him.

古文：复辟，追念之，已卒。遣使谕祭，官其一子。
现代文：天顺初年，他自陈参预策划迎接圣驾，恐怕被石亨等人所掩盖，于是皇上授予他的两个儿子为所镇抚官。三年，他退休。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he had been planning to welcome the saint's arrival since Chen Sangpre, and was afraid that it would be covered up by Shiheng and others, so the emperor awarded his two sons as the town officials. Three years later, he retired.

古文：子黼，仕至广西按察使。张瑄，字廷玺，江浦人。
现代文：成化六年去世。皇上依例赐给祭葬。张瑄，字廷玺，江浦人。
English: Chenghua died six years ago. The emperor gave him a ceremonial funeral in accordance with tradition. Zhang Ye, also known as Ting Ye, was from Jiangpu.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：正统七年，中进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：授刑部主事，历郎中，有能声。
现代文：被授予刑部主事，历任郎中，有能干的名声。
English: He was awarded the post of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and has been a capable person in the past.

古文：景泰时，赐敕为吉安知府。
现代文：景泰初年，皇上赐给敕书任他为吉安府知府。
English: In the first year of King Gyeongtae, the emperor gave him a letter appointing him as the governor of Gyeongnam.

古文：俗尚巫，迎神无休日。
现代文：当地风俗崇尚巫神，每天都搞迎神活动。
English: Local customs advocate the god of magic, and there are activities to welcome the god every day.

古文：瑄遇诸途，设神水中。
现代文：张瑄在路上遇到这种活动，把神投进水中。
English: Zhang Jun encountered this activity on the road and threw the god into the water.

古文：俄遘危疾，父老皆言神为祟，请复之。
现代文：不久他患了危病，当地父老都说是神在作祟，请恢复迎神。
English: Soon after, he fell critically ill, and the local elders said that the gods were at work, and that he should please return to greet the gods.

古文：瑄怒，不许，疾亦愈。
现代文：张瑄大怒，不许，后来病也好了。
English: Zhang Yao was furious and refused to allow it. Later, he recovered from his illness.

古文：岁大饥，陈牒上官，不俟报，辄发廪振贷。
现代文：发生严重饥荒，他发文请示上级，不等回报，便先发仓米赈济。
English: In the event of a serious famine, he sent a letter to his superiors, and did not wait for a return, he first sent a warehouse of rice to help.

古文：居八年，用荐擢广东右布政使。
现代文：八年后，他受推荐升为广东右布政使。
English: Eight years later, he was recommended to be promoted to the post of Guangdong Right Branch Political Envoy.

古文：广西贼莫文章等越境陷连山，瑄击斩之。
现代文：广西贼莫文章等人越境攻陷连山，张瑄攻击斩杀了他。
English: Guangxi bandit Mo Xuan and others crossed the border to invade Lianshan, Zhang Ye attacked and killed him.

古文：又破阳山贼周公转、新兴贼邓李保等。
现代文：他又击破阳山贼周公转、新兴贼邓李保等人。
English: He also defeated the Yangshan thief Zhou Gongyuan, the emerging thief Deng Libao and others.

古文：既而大藤峡贼频陷属邑，瑄坐停俸。
现代文：后来大藤峡之贼接连攻陷他所管辖的县城，张瑄被停支俸禄。
English: Later, the thieves of Dafuji Gorge successively attacked the county seat under his jurisdiction, and Zhang Ye's salary was suspended.

古文：成化初，韩雍平贼，录瑄转饷劳，赐银币，给俸如初。
现代文：成化初年，韩雍讨平贼人，给张瑄记转运粮饷之功，皇上赐给他银币，重新支给俸禄。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Han Yong defeated the thieves and gave Zhang Xizhi the merit of transporting grain. The emperor gave him silver coins and re-paid his salary.

古文：瑄按行所部，督建预备仓六十二，修陂塘圩岸四千六百，增筑广州新会诸城垣一十二。民德瑄，惟恐其去。
现代文：张瑄巡视所辖地区，监督建了六十二座预备仓，修建陂塘圩堤四千六百处，增筑广州、新会等十二座城垣，百姓很感激他，惟恐他离去。
English: Zhang Jun inspected the areas under his jurisdiction, supervised the construction of sixty-two reserve warehouses, built 4,600 Qutang embankments, and added 12 city walls such as Guangzhou and Xinhui. The people were very grateful to him and feared that he would leave.

古文：既转左布政使，会满九载，当赴京，军民相率乞留。
现代文：他转为左布政使后，正值九年任满，应当赴京师，军民相继请求他留下。
English: After he was transferred to Zuo Bu's political envoy, he was about to complete his nine-year term and should go to Beijing. The military and the people successively asked him to stay.

古文：巡抚陈濂等为之请，乃仍故任。
现代文：巡抚陈濂等人也为他请求，于是仍让他任原职。
English: The governor Chen Qi and others also petitioned for him, so he was allowed to remain in his original post.

古文：八年始以右副都御史巡抚福建。
现代文：成化八年，他才以右副都御史之衔巡抚福建。
English: It was eight years before he became the governor of Fujian with the title of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：平贼林寿六、魏怀三等。
现代文：他讨平了林寿六、魏怀三等贼人。
English: He subdued three thieves, including Lin Shouliu and Wei Huai.

古文：福安、寿宁诸县邻江、浙，贼首叶旺、叶春等负险。
现代文：福安、寿宁等县邻近江西、浙江，贼首叶旺、叶春等人据险作乱。
English: Fu'an, Shuning and other counties adjacent to Jiangxi and Zhejiang, and the ringleaders Ye Wang, Ye Chun and others are making trouble.

古文：瑄捕诛之，余尽解散。
现代文：张瑄将他们抓获并诛杀，其他人全部解散。
English: Zhang Ye captured and killed them, and all the others disbanded.

古文：帝降敕劳之，改抚河南。
现代文：皇上颁敕书慰劳他，改巡抚河南。
English: The emperor gave him a letter of commendation, and he became the governor of Henan Province.

古文：议事入都，陈抚流民、振滞才十八事，所司多议行。
现代文：他因议事入京师，上书提出安抚流民、发现遗漏人才等十八项建议，有关部门多讨论实行。
English: As a result of the deliberation, he went to Beijing and submitted a letter to put forward eighteen suggestions such as appeasing the displaced people and finding missing talents, and the relevant departments discussed and implemented them.

古文：黄河水溢，瑄请振，且移王府禄米于他所，留应输榆林饷济荒，石取直八钱输榆林，民称便。
现代文：黄河水漫过堤坝，张瑄请赈济，并将王府的禄米移到别的地方，留下应输运到榆林的粮饷来赈济饥荒，每石取八文钱的价钱输运到榆林。百姓都说很方便。
English: The Yellow River water overflowed the dike, and Zhang Ye asked for aid, and moved the loam of the royal palace to another place, leaving grain to be transported to Yulin to relieve the famine, and transported to Yulin at a price of eight cents per stone. The people all said it was very convenient.

古文：还理院事。
现代文：他回京管理都察院事。
English: He returned to Kyoto to manage the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：寻迁南京刑部侍郎。
现代文：不久升为南京刑部侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：久之，进尚书。
现代文：后来，升为尚书。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：二十年，星变，被劾，帝弗问。
现代文：二十年，有星变，他被弹劾，皇上不问。
English: Twenty years later, there was a change in the stars, he was impeached, and the emperor did not question it.

古文：居三年，给事御史复劾之，遂落职。
现代文：过了三年，给事中和御史又弹劾他，遂被撤职。
English: Three years later, he was removed from his post after he was impeached again by the governor of Chuo and Miyoshi.

古文：孝宗立，复官，致仕。
现代文：孝宗即位后，他得复官。退休。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he was reinstated and retired.

古文：张鹏，字腾霄，涞水人。
现代文：张鹏，字腾霄，涞水人。
English: Zhang Peng, the word "Tengxiao," means "water sprite."

古文：景泰二年进士。
现代文：景泰二年，中进士。
English: Jing Tai, second year, junior high school graduate.

古文：授御史。
现代文：被授予御史。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：上疏言： 怀利事君，人臣所戒。
现代文：他上书说 ：为了私利去侍奉君王，是人臣所戒。
English: He wrote: "It is forbidden for a vassal to serve the sovereign for personal gain."

古文：比每遇圣节，或进羊马锦绮，交错殿廷。
现代文：现在每逢圣上生日，人们进献羊马锦绮，交错于殿廷之上。
English: Now, on the saint's birthday, people bring in offerings of sheep, horses and brocade, which are staggered above the royal court.

古文：自非贪贿，安有余财充进奉？
现代文：如果不是贪污受贿，怎么会有余财来进奉？
English: If it were not for corruption and bribery, how would there be any surplus money to invest?

古文：且陛下富有四海，岂借是足国哉？
现代文：况且陛下富有四海，怎么会借这些东西来足国呢？
English: Besides, His Majesty is rich beyond measure, so how could he borrow these things to set foot in the country?

古文：宜一切停罢，塞谄谀奔竞之途。 
现代文：宜停罢这一切，堵住阿谀奉承和奔走请托之途。 
English: It's time to stop all this, to stop the flattery and the begging.

古文：疏凡四事，帝颇采用。
现代文：他的奏疏共提了四项建议，皇上颇加以采用。
English: His report made a total of four suggestions, which the emperor readily adopted.

古文：出按大同、宣府，奏： 两镇军士敝衣菲食，病无药，死无棺。乞官给医药、棺槥，设义冢，俾飨历祭。死者蒙恩，则生者劝。 
现代文：出去巡按大同、宣府时，他上奏说 ：两镇的士兵敝衣蔬食，病了没药，死了没棺材，乞请国家拨给医药和棺材，设立义冢，使他们享受供祭，死者蒙恩，这样则生者会受到鼓舞。 
English: When he went out to patrol Datong and Xuanwu, he made a report: the soldiers in the two towns were deprived of clothing, vegetables and food, there was no medicine for the sick, and there was no coffin for the dead. He begged the state to allocate medicine and coffin, set up a donation box, so that they could enjoy the sacrifice, and the dead would be blessed, so that the living would be encouraged.

古文：帝立报可，且命诸边概行之。
现代文：皇上立即回报批准，并且命各边镇都实行。
English: The emperor immediately returned the approval, and the order was implemented in all border towns.

古文：奏停淮、扬征赋，给牛种。
现代文：他还上奏停征淮安、扬州的赋税，拨给耕牛和种子。
English: He also reported to suspend the collection of taxes in Huai'an and Yangzhou, and allocate them to farm cattle and seeds.

古文：天顺元年，同官杨瑄劾石亨、曹吉祥。
现代文：天顺元年，同官杨蠧弹劾石亨、曹吉祥。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, fellow official Yang Hui impeached Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang.

古文：鹏亦偕刘泰、魏瀚、康骥论劾。
现代文：张鹏也和刘泰、魏瀚、康骥一起弹劾。
English: Zhang Peng was also impeached along with Liu Tai, Wei Han and Kang Ye.

古文：俱得罪，下诏狱。
现代文：他们都得了罪，被投进诏狱。
English: They were all convicted and sent to Dacha Prison.

古文：诸御史多谪官，而鹏、瑄戍辽东。
现代文：御史们多被贬官，而张鹏、杨蠧被遣去戍守辽东。
English: Most of the imperial historians were demoted, while Zhang Peng and Yang Hui were sent to defend Liaodong.

古文：顷之赦免，复戍南丹。
现代文：不久被赦免，但又戍守南丹。
English: He was soon pardoned, but remained in Nantan.

古文：宪宗立，廷臣交荐，召复原官。
现代文：宪宗即位后，廷臣纷纷推荐他。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, courtiers recommended him one after another.

古文：寻超擢福建按察使。
现代文：皇上把他召回复官，不久超升他为福建按察使。
English: The emperor called him back to the post, and he was soon promoted to inspector general of Fujian Province.

古文：成化四年，以右佥都御史巡抚广西，剿蛮寇有功。
现代文：成化四年，他以右佥都御史的身份巡抚广西，剿蛮寇有功。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, he became the governor of Guangxi as the right-hand governor of the capital, and played a significant role in defeating the barbarian invaders.

古文：其冬罢巡抚官，命还理南京都察院事。
现代文：这年冬天撤消巡抚官，命他回去管理南京都察院事务。
English: In the winter of that year, the inspector was removed and ordered to return to manage the affairs of the Southern Kyoto Inspection Office.

古文：改督漕运，兼抚淮、扬四府。
现代文：后来改为总督漕运，兼巡抚淮安、扬州等四府。
English: Later, it was changed to Governor Cao Yun, and also the governor of Huai'an, Yangzhou and other four prefectures.

古文：寻解漕务，专理巡抚事。
现代文：不久他解去漕运职务，专管巡抚事务。
English: Soon after, he was relieved of his rowing duties and put in charge of overseer affairs.

古文：复还南院，进副都御史，巡抚宁夏。
现代文：他又回南都察院，进升为副都御史，巡抚宁夏。
English: He returned to the Southern Capital Inspection Office, and was promoted to vice-governor of the capital and governor of Ningxia.

古文：召还，历兵部左、右侍郎。
现代文：被召回后，历任兵部左、右侍郎。
English: After being recalled, the successors of the left and right attendants of the military department left.

古文：十八年代陈钺为兵部尚书。
现代文：十八年，他取代陈钺任兵部尚书。
English: In 18 years, he replaced Chen Xi as the secretary of the military department.

古文：守珠池宦官韦助乞往来高、肇、琼、廉，会守巡官捕寇。
现代文：守卫珠池的宦官韦助请求往来高州、肇庆、琼州、廉州，会同守巡官员捕寇。
English: Wei Su, the eunuch guarding Zhuqi, requested to travel to Gaozhou, Zhaoqing, Qiongzhou, and Lianzhou to catch the robbers together with the guard patrol officers.

古文：鹏执不可，帝竟许之。
现代文：张鹏反对，皇上竟答应了韦助的请求。
English: Zhang Peng objected, but the emperor agreed to Wei Shuo's request.

古文：南北印马，率遣勋臣、内侍，后以灾伤止遣御史。
现代文：南北方印马，都是派勋臣和宦官去，后来因为灾荒只派御史去。
English: In the north and south of Inma, it was always the court nobles and eunuchs who were sent there. Later, because of the disaster, only the emperor was sent there.

古文：是年，帝复欲遣内侍，鹏等执不可。帝勉从之，命俟后仍如故事。
现代文：这一年，皇上又想派宦官去，张鹏等人反对，皇上勉强听从了，命令等以后仍恢复旧例。
English: This year, the emperor wanted to send eunuchs again, Zhang Peng and others objected, the emperor reluctantly obeyed, and the old order was still restored after the order.

古文：镇守大同中官汪直言小王子将大举，请发京兵援。
现代文：镇守大同的宦官王直说小王子将大举入侵，请调发京兵增援。
English: Wang Zhi, the eunuch who guards Datong, said that the little prince would invade in a big way. Please send reinforcements from Beijing.

古文：鹏等言： 大同士马四万已足用，所请宜勿许。
现代文：张鹏等人说： 大同战士马匹四万，已足够用，他的请求不宜批准。
English: Zhang Peng and others said: Datong soldiers have 40,000 horses, which is enough, and his request should not be approved.

古文：且京军困营造，精力销沮，猝有急，何以作威厉气，请悉停其役。 
现代文：并且京军被土木工程所困，精力消损，万一仓卒有紧急情况，怎能用他们显威风和激励士气？请停罢京军所承担的劳役。 
English: Moreover, the Beijing troops are trapped by civil engineering projects, their energy is dissipated, and in the event of an emergency, how can they use them to show their authority and encourage morale? Please stop the labor service undertaken by the Beijing troops.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令说可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：寻加太子少保。
现代文：不久加封他为太子少保。
English: Soon after, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：鹏初为御史，刚直尚气节，有盛名。
现代文：张鹏初任御史时，刚正而尚气节，有盛名。
English: When Zhang Peng first served as imperial historian, he was known for his uprightness and integrity.

古文：后扬历中外，惟事安静。
现代文：后来历任中外官职，只追求政治安静，明哲保身。
English: Later, successive Chinese and foreign officials only pursued political tranquility and self-preservation.

古文：群小窃柄，阁臣万安、刘吉辈专营私，鹏循职而已，不能有所匡救。
现代文：小人们盗窃威权，内阁大臣万安、刘吉之辈专营私利，张鹏只是循职而已，不能有所匡正和补救。
English: Petty people steal authority. Cabinet ministers Wan An and Liu Ji specialize in self-interest. Zhang Peng is just doing his job. There can be no rectification or remedy.

古文：二十一年，星变，鹏偕僚属言： 传奉武职至八百余人，乞悉令闲住，非军功毋滥授。
现代文：二十一年，有星变，张鹏偕同他的属官上书说 ：传奉武职官员达八百余人，请令他们全部闲住，不是立有军功不要滥授官衔。
English: In the 21st year, there was a star change, Zhang Pengyao and his subordinate officers wrote a letter saying: there are more than 800 military officials, please let them all stay idle. If they do not have military merit, they should not abuse their official titles.

古文：四方镇守、监枪、守备内官，非正统间原设者，悉宜召还。 
现代文：四方的镇守、监枪、守备宦官，不是正统年间所设的，都应把他们召回。 
English: Town guards, prison guards, and guard eunuchs in the four directions, who were not established during the orthodox era, should all be recalled.

古文：廷臣亦交以请，下兵部复核。
现代文：廷臣也纷纷请求，皇上交兵部重新考察。
English: The courtiers also requested that the emperor send the military department back for a new inspection.

古文：鹏畏中官，不敢坚其议，帝遂尽留之。
现代文：张鹏害怕宦官，不敢坚持自己的意见，皇上于是把那些宦官全部留下了。
English: Zhang Peng was afraid of the eunuchs and dared not insist on his own opinion, so the emperor left all those eunuchs behind.

古文：时论皆咎鹏。
现代文：当时舆论都指责张鹏。
English: At that time, public opinion blamed Zhang Peng.

古文：奸民章瑾献珍宝，得为锦衣镇抚。
现代文：奸民章瑾献上珍宝，得任锦衣卫镇抚官。
English: The villain Zhang Ye presented a precious treasure and was appointed as the governor of JinRuiWeizhen.

古文：理刑缺，鹏所上不允。
现代文：理刑官出缺，张鹏所推荐的皇上不批准。
English: There was a vacancy for a magistrate, and the emperor did not approve of Zhang Peng's recommendation.

古文：知帝意属瑾，即推用焉。
现代文：他知道皇上看中章瑾，即推荐他。
English: He knew that the emperor was looking at Zhongzhang, so he recommended him.

古文：台谏劾大臣不职者多及鹏，鹏力求去，遂赐敕给驿以归。
现代文：台谏官员弹劾不称职的大臣时多提到张鹏，张鹏极力请求离去。皇上于是赐给敕书，发给驿车让他回去。
English: When impeaching incompetent ministers, Taiwanese officials often mentioned Zhang Peng. Zhang Peng strongly requested to leave. The emperor then gave him a letter and sent him a carriage to let him go back.

古文：弘治四年卒。谥懿简。
现代文：弘治四年，他去世，谥懿简。
English: In the fourth year of the Hongzhi era, he passed away.

