古文：种世衡所置青涧城，逼近虏境，守备单弱，刍粮俱乏。
现代文：原文种世衡所建的青涧城，非常靠近蕃族部落，守备的军力薄弱，粮草又缺乏。
English: The original Qingyu City, built by Shihang, was very close to the Yao tribe, with a weak defense force and a lack of grain and grass.

古文：世衡以官钱贷商旅，使致之，不问所出入。
现代文：种世衡于是用官钱借给商人，供他们至内地买粮谋利，完全不加以干涉。
English: Therefore, he used the government money to lend it to merchants so that they could buy grain from the mainland and make a profit, without interfering at all.

古文：未几，仓廪皆实。
现代文：不久，城里仓库的粮食都满了。
English: Soon, the grain warehouses in the city were full.

古文：又教吏民习射，虽僧道、妇人亦习之，以银为的，中的者辄与之。
现代文：种世衡又教官吏人民练习射箭，连僧侣、妇人都要练习，用银子作箭靶，射中的就给他。
English: He also taught officials to practice archery, and even monks and women had to practice, using silver as a target, and if they hit it, they would give it to him.

古文：既而中者益多，其银重轻如故，而的渐厚且小矣。
现代文：后来射中的人越来越多，就将箭靶改为厚而小，但银子的重量依旧。
English: Later, more and more people were shot, so the target was changed to thick and small, but the weight of the silver remained the same.

古文：或争徭役轻重，亦令射，射中者得优处。
现代文：有人为徭役的轻重而争执，也命令他们比赛射箭，射中的可以优先选择。
English: There was a dispute over the weight of the eunuchs, and they were also ordered to compete in archery, and the best shot could be chosen first.

古文：或有过失，亦令射，射中则免之。
现代文：有过失的人也命令他射箭，射中的可以不处罚。
English: The person at fault also ordered him to shoot arrows. If he shoots, he will not be punished.

古文：由是人人皆射，富强甲于延州。
现代文：从此人人都会射箭，人民生活的富裕程度和战力之强跃居整个延州第一。
English: Since then, everyone can shoot arrows, and the richness of the people's life and the strength of the war ranked first in the whole of Yanzhou.

古文：杨掞本书生，初从戎习骑射，每夜用青布藉地，乘生马跃，初不过三尺，次五尺，次至一丈，数闪跌不顾。孟珙尝用其法，称为 小子房 。按《宋史》，掞尝贷人万缗，游襄、汉间，人娼楼，箧垂尽。
现代文：宋朝人杨掞本是书生，后来跟戎人学习骑马射箭。每天晚上用青布铺在地上，骑着悍马跳跃。最初跳不过三尺，后来跳过五尺，最后甚至跳过一丈，屡次摔倒也不管。孟珙曾经采用他的方法，并称杨掞为 小子房 。按《宋史》记载，杨掞曾经向人借一万缗钱，浪荡于襄汉一带，在妓院里几乎把钱全数用光。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Yang Mi, originally a scholar, later learned horse riding and archery with the imperial soldiers. Every evening, he spread a blue cloth on the ground and jumped on a humvee. At first, he jumped no more than three feet, later he jumped five feet, and finally he even jumped one height, and he didn't care if he fell down several times. Mencius once used his method and called Yang Mi a brat. According to "Song History," Yang Mi once borrowed ten thousand baht from someone, wandered around Yanghan, and spent almost all of the money in a brothel.

古文：夜忽自呼曰： 来此何为？ 
现代文：有天夜晚忽然对自己说： 我干什么到这里来？ 
English: One night he suddenly said to himself: What have I come here for?

古文：辄弃去。
现代文：于是离开妓院。
English: So she left the brothel.

古文：已在军中，费官钱数万，贾似道核其数，孟珙以白金六百与偿，掞又费之，终日而饮。
现代文：后来在军中，又私自花费官钱数万缗。贾似道来审核官钱，孟珙为他偿还白金六百两，杨掞却又把它花光，整天饮酒作乐。
English: Later, when he was in the military, he spent tens of thousands of baht of official money. Jia Xiangdao came to audit the official money, Meng Yao repaid him 600 taels of platinum, but Yang Yao spent it all and spent the whole day drinking and having fun.

古文：似道欲杀之，掞曰： 汉祖以黄金四万斤付陈平，不问出入，如公琐琐，何以用豪杰？ 
现代文：贾似道想杀他，杨掞说： 汉高祖付给陈平黄金数万斤，而不问他花在何处。像您这样斤斤计较，怎么能任用豪杰！ 
English: Jia Xiangdao wanted to kill him, Yang Zhe said: Henkel paid Chen Ping tens of thousands of pounds of gold without asking him where he spent it. How can you appoint a hero like you?

古文：似道姑置之。盖奇士也!
现代文：贾似道听了，遂没有再加以追究，说起来，这杨掞也真是奇特之士。
English: After listening to Jia Li's explanation, he did not pursue the matter any further. In fact, this Yang Xuan was a truly extraordinary person.

古文：其参杜杲军幕，能出奇计，解安丰之围，惜乎不尽其用耳。
现代文：后来他担任杜杲的幕僚，献出奇计，解除安丰被围的困境，可惜不能完全施展他的才智。
English: Later, he served as Cuckoo's staff member, and presented a miraculous plan to relieve the plight of Anfeng being besieged. Unfortunately, he was not able to fully exert his talents.

