古文：知北游于玄水之上，登隐弅之丘，而适遭无为谓焉。
现代文：知向北游历来到玄水岸边，登上一个名叫隐弅的山丘，正好在那里遇上了无为谓。
English: He traveled northward to the shore of the Black Water and climbed a hill called the Hidden Hill, where he met the Useless.

古文：知谓无为谓曰： 予欲有问乎若：何思何虑则知道？
现代文：知对无为谓说： 我想向你请教一些问题：怎样思索、怎样考虑才能懂得道呢？
English: Knowledge says to ignorance: I would like to ask you some questions: How to think, how to consider in order to understand the Way?

古文：何处何服则安道？
现代文：如何居处、行事才符合于道？
English: How can one live and act in accordance with the Way?

古文：何从何道则得道？ 
现代文：采用何种方法才能获得道呢？ 
English: What is the way to attain the Way?

古文：三问而无为谓不答也。
现代文：问了好几次，无为谓都不回答。
English: I asked several times, but to no avail.

古文：非不答，不知答也。
现代文：不是不回答，而是他不知道要回答。
English: Not that he didn't answer, but that he didn't know how to answer.

古文：知不得问，反于白水之南，登狐阕之上，而睹狂屈焉。
现代文：知从无为谓那里得不到解答，便返回到白水的南岸，登上名叫狐阕的山丘，在那里见到了狂屈。
English: Knowing there was no answer to be had from nothing, he returned to the southern shore of the White Water and climbed a hill called Foxtail Hill, where he saw Crazy Horse.

古文：知以之言也问乎狂屈。狂屈曰： 唉！予知之，将语若，中欲言而忘其所欲言。 
现代文：知把先前的问话向狂屈提出请教，狂屈说： 唉，我知道怎样回答这些问题，我将告诉给你，可是心中正想说话却又忘记了那些想说的话 。
English: When he put the previous questions to the madman for advice, the madman said, "Alas, I know how to answer these questions, I will tell you, but in my heart I want to speak, but I have forgotten what I wanted to say."

古文：知不得问，反于帝宫，见黄帝而问焉。
现代文：知从狂屈那里也没有得到解答，便转回到黄帝的住所，见到黄帝向他再问。
English: Knowing that he did not get an answer from Crazy Qu, he returned to the residence of the Yellow Emperor to see him and ask him again.

古文：黄帝曰： 无思无虑始知道，无处无服始安道，无从无道始得道。 
现代文：黄帝说： 没有思索、没有考虑方才能够懂得道，没有安处、没有行动方才能够符合于道，没有依从、没有方法方才能够获得道。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "One can understand the Way without reflection or consideration; one can conform to the Way without a safe place or action; and one can obtain the Way without obedience or method.

古文：知问黄帝曰： 我与若知之，彼与彼不知也，其孰是邪？ 
现代文：知于是问黄帝： 我和你知道这些道理，无为谓和狂屈不知道这些道理，那么，谁是正确的呢？ 
English: Knowing this, he asked the Yellow Emperor, "I and you know these truths, but Wu Weizhe and Qiu Qu do not know these truths, so who is right?"

古文：黄帝曰： 彼无为谓真是也，狂屈似之，我与汝终不近也。
现代文：黄帝说： 那无为谓是真正正确的，狂屈接近于正确；我和你则始终未能接近于道。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "That which does not do anything is truly correct, and that which is madly crooked is close to being correct; but you and I have never been able to get close to the Way."

古文：夫知者不言，言者不知，故圣人行不言之教。
现代文：知道的人不说，说的人不知道，所以圣人施行的是不用言传的教育。
English: Those who know do not speak, and those who speak do not know. Therefore, sages carry out education without words.

古文：道不可致，德不可至。
现代文：道不可能靠言传来获得，德不可能靠谈话来达到。
English: Tao cannot be acquired by word of mouth, and virtue cannot be achieved through conversation.

古文：仁可为也，义可亏也，礼相伪也。
现代文：没有偏爱是可以有所作为的，讲求道义是可以亏损残缺的，而礼仪的推行只是相互虚伪欺诈。
English: No preference can make a difference, preaching morality can be incomplete, and the implementation of etiquette is just mutual hypocrisy and fraud.

古文：故曰： 失道而后德，失德而后仁，失仁而后义，失义而后礼。 
现代文：所以说， 失去了道而后能获得德，失去了德而后能获得仁，失去了仁而后能获得义，失去了义而后能获得礼。
English: Therefore, after losing the Tao, one can gain virtue; after losing virtue, one can gain benevolence; after losing benevolence, one can gain righteousness; after losing righteousness, one can gain propriety.

古文：礼者，道之华而乱之首也。
现代文：礼，乃是道的伪饰、乱的祸首 。
English: Propriety is the camouflage of virtue and the bane of disorder.

古文：故曰： 为道者日损，损之又损之，以至于无为。无为而无不为也。 
现代文：所以说， 体察道的人每天都得清除伪饰，清除而又再清除以至达到无为的境界，达到无所作为的境界也就没有什么可以作为的了。 
English: Therefore, a man of discernment must daily remove the disguise, remove and remove again until he reaches the realm of inaction, and when he reaches the realm of inaction, there is nothing that can be done.

古文：今已为物也，欲复归根，不亦难乎！
现代文：如今你已对外物有所作为，想要再返回根本，不是很困难吗！
English: Now that you have done something for others, isn't it very difficult to go back to basics?

古文：其易也其唯大人乎！生也死之徒，死也生之始，孰知其纪！
现代文：假如容易改变而回归根本，恐怕只有是得道的人啊！ 生是死的同类，死是生的开始，谁能知道它们的端绪！
English: If it were easy to change and return to the fundamentals, only those who have attained the Way would be able to do so. Life is the same as death, and death is the beginning of life. Who can know their beginnings?

古文：人之生，气之聚也。聚则为生，散则为死。
现代文：人的诞生，是气的聚合，气的聚合形成生命，气的离散便是死亡。
English: The birth of a person is the aggregation of qi, the aggregation of qi forms life, and the dispersion of qi is death.

古文：若死生为徒，吾又何患！
现代文：如果死与生是同类相属的，那么对于死亡我又忧患什么呢？
English: If death and life are of the same kind, then why should I worry about death?

古文：故万物一也。
现代文：所以，万物说到底是同一的。
English: Therefore, all things are ultimately the same.

古文：是其所美者为神奇，其所恶者为臭腐。臭腐复化为神奇，神奇复化为臭腐。
现代文：这样，把那些所谓美好的东西看作是神奇，把那些所谓讨厌的东西看作是臭腐，而臭腐的东西可以再转化为神奇，神奇的东西可以再转化为臭腐。
English: In this way, the so-called beautiful things are regarded as magical, and the so-called disgusting things are regarded as rotten, and the rotten things can be transformed into magical, and the magical things can be transformed into rotten.

古文：故曰： 通天下一气耳。 
现代文：所以说， 整个天下只不过同是气罢了 。
English: Therefore, the whole world is nothing but the same.

古文：圣人故贵一。 
现代文：圣人也因此看重万物同一的特点。
English: For this reason, sages also value the characteristic that all things are the same.

古文：知谓黄帝曰： 吾问无为谓，无为谓不应我，非不我应，不知应我也；吾问狂屈，狂屈中欲告我而不我告，非不我告，中欲告而忘之也；今予问乎若，若知之，奚故不近？ 
现代文：知又对黄帝说： 我问无为谓，无为谓不回答我，不是不回答我，是不知道回答我。我问狂屈，狂屈内心里正想告诉我却没有告诉我，不是不告诉我，是心里正想告诉我又忘掉了怎样告诉我。
English: Zhi also said to the Yellow Emperor: "There is no point in my asking, there is no point in not answering me, it's not that you don't answer me, it's that you don't know how to answer me. I asked Mad Qu, Mad Qu was trying to tell me in his heart but didn't tell me, it's not that he didn't tell me, it's that he was trying to tell me in his heart and forgot how to tell me."

古文：黄帝曰： 彼其真是也，以其不知也；此其似之也，以其忘之也；予与若终不近也，以其知之也。 狂屈闻之，以黄帝为知言。
现代文：现在我想再次请教你，你懂得我所提出的问题，为什么又说回答了我便不是接近于道呢？ 黄帝说： 无为谓是个真正懂得大道的人，之所以这样讲，正是因为他的无知；狂屈接近于懂得大道，因为他忘记了自己所知的内容；我和你终究和道不相干，之所以这样讲，是因为我们都认为自己明白那不可知的大道。 狂屈听到了黄帝所说的话后，认为黄帝只能算是知言，还不能算是懂得大道。
English: Now I'd like to ask you again: You understand the question I asked, so why did you say that I'm not close to the Way after I answered it? The Yellow Emperor said: There is no need to say that a person who truly understands the way is close to the Way precisely because of his ignorance; the madman is close to the Way because he has forgotten what he knows; you and I are ultimately irrelevant to the Way because we both think that we understand the unknowable way. After the madman heard what the Yellow Emperor said, he thought that the Yellow Emperor could only be regarded as a confidant, but could not be regarded as understanding the Way.

古文：天地有大美而不言，四时有明法而不议，万物有成理而不说。
现代文：天地最大的美德但却无法用言语表达，一年四季有明确的规律，然而它却从不议论，万物的变化具有现成的规律，然而它却不加解释。
English: The greatest virtue of heaven and earth cannot be expressed in words. The four seasons have a clear pattern, but it is never discussed. The changes of all things have a ready-made pattern, but it is not explained.

古文：圣人者，原天地之美而达万物之理。是故至人无为，大圣不作，观于天地之谓也。
现代文：圣哲的人，探究天地伟大的美而通晓万物生长的道理，所以 至人 顺应自然无所作为， 大圣 也不会妄加行动，这是说对于天地作了深入细致的观察。
English: The sages, who have explored the great beauty of heaven and earth and are familiar with the principle of the growth of all things, therefore, people conform to nature and do nothing, and the Great Sage will not act rashly. This means that they have made a deep and detailed observation of heaven and earth.

古文：今彼神明至精，与彼百化。物已死生方圆，莫知其根也。扁然而万物，自古以固存。
现代文：大道神明精妙，参与宇宙万物的各种变化；万物业已或死、或生、或方、或圆，却没有谁知晓变化的根本，一切都是那么自然而然地自古以来就自行存在。 六合 算是十分巨大的，却始终不能超出道的范围；秋天的毫毛算是最小的，也得仰赖于道方才能成就其细小的形体。
English: The Taoist God is subtle and subtle, participating in the various changes of all things in the universe; all things have been either dead, or alive, or square, or round, but no one knows the root of the change, everything is so natural and has existed on its own since ancient times. The hexagram is very huge, but it can never go beyond the scope of the Tao; the autumn millimeter is the smallest, and it has to rely on the Tao to achieve its tiny shape.

古文：六合为巨，未离其内；秋豪为小，待之成体；天下莫不沉浮，终身不故；阴阳四时运行，各得其序；惛然若亡而存；油然不形而神；万物畜而不知：此之谓本根，可以观于天矣！
现代文：宇宙万物无时不在发生变化，始终保持着变化的新姿，阴阳与四季不停地运行，各有自身的序列。大道是那么浑沌昧暗仿佛并不存在却又无处不在，生机盛旺、神妙莫测却又不留下具体的形象，万物被它养育却一点也未觉察。这就称作本根，可以用它来观察自然之道了。
English: Everything in the universe is changing all the time, always maintaining a new shape of change. Yin and yang and the four seasons are constantly running, each with its own sequence. The avenue is so chaotic and dark as if it does not exist but is everywhere, vigorous and mysterious but does not leave a specific image, everything is nurtured by it but is not at all aware of it. This is called the root, and it can be used to observe the way of nature.

古文：啮缺问道乎被衣，被衣曰： 若正汝形，一汝视，天和将至；摄汝知，一汝度，神将来舍。德将为汝美，道将为汝居。
现代文：啮缺问道于被衣，被衣说： 你要端正你的形体，集中你的视线，天然之和气就会前来；收敛你的智慧，专一你的思虑，神明就会来居留你心；德将表现你之美好，道将留在你的身上。
English: You should straighten your body, concentrate your sight, and the natural harmony will come; restrain your wisdom, concentrate your thoughts, and the gods will come to stay in your heart; virtue will show your beauty, and the Tao will remain in your body.

古文：汝瞳焉如新生之犊而无求其故。 
现代文：你无知而直视的样子就像初生的小牛犊，你不要去追究事物的缘由。 
English: You are ignorant and look straight ahead like a newborn calf, you do not want to investigate the cause of things.

古文：言未卒，啮缺睡寐。
现代文：话未说完，啮缺已经睡着了。
English: Before the words were out of his mouth, Zou Que had already fallen asleep.

古文：被衣大说，行歌而去之，曰： 形若槁骸，心若死灰，真其实知，不以故自持。媒媒晦晦，无心而不可与谋。彼何人哉！ 
现代文：被衣特别高兴，一边走一边唱歌而去，还说： 形体如同枯骨，心如同死灰，真正纯实之知，不坚持故见，懵懂暗昧，没有思想，不能和他计议谋划，他是个什么样人啊！ 
English: He was particularly pleased with the quilt, and as he walked he sang as he walked away, saying, "Body like dry bones, mind like dead ashes, truly pure knowledge, does not adhere to preconceptions, does not understand obscurity, has no thoughts, cannot discuss and plan with him, what kind of person is he!

古文：舜问乎丞： 道可得而有乎？ 
现代文：舜问丞说： 道可以获得和拥有吗？ 
English: Zou Qiancheng said: Can Tao be obtained and possessed?

古文：曰： 汝身非汝有也，汝何得有夫道！ 
现代文：回答说： 你的身体都不是你所拥有，你怎么能拥有道呢！ 
English: He answered, "You don't even own your body, so how can you own the Way?

古文：舜曰： 吾身非吾有也，孰有之哉？ 
现代文：舜说： 我的身体非我所有，归谁所有呢？ 
English: The centipede said, "I don't own my body, so who does?"

古文：曰： 是天地之委形也；生非汝有，是天地之委和也；性命非汝有，是天地之委顺也；子孙非汝有，是天地之委蜕也。
现代文：回答说： 是天地寄托给你一个形体；生命非你所有，是天地寄托给你和气；性命非你所有，是天地寄托给你顺应自然之属性；子孙非你所有，是天地寄托给你繁衍子孙的能力。
English: He replied: Heaven and earth have entrusted you with a body; life is not yours, heaven and earth have entrusted you with harmony; life is not yours, heaven and earth have entrusted you with the attribute of conforming to nature; descendants are not yours, heaven and earth have entrusted you with the ability to reproduce descendants.

古文：故行不知所往，处不知所持，食不知所味。
现代文：所以行时不知往哪里去，住时不知持守什么，吃东西不知味道。
English: So I don't know where to go when I travel, I don't know what to keep when I live, and I don't know what to eat.

古文：天地之强阳气也，又胡可得而有邪！ 
现代文：这一切都受强健运动之气所支配，又怎么能获得和拥有呢！ 
English: All of this is governed by the spirit of vigorous movement, and how can it be obtained and possessed?

古文：孔子问于老聃曰： 今日晏闲，敢问至道。 
现代文：孔子对老聃说： 今天安居闲暇，我冒昧地向你请教至道。 
English: Confucius said to Lao Zi, "Today, since I have the leisure to live in peace and quiet, I have the temerity to ask you for advice.

古文：老聃曰： 汝齐戒，疏瀹而心，澡雪而精神，掊击而知。
现代文：老聃说： 你先得斋戒静心，再疏通你的心灵，清扫你的精神，破除你的才智！
English: The old woman said, "First you must fast and meditate, and then you must unclog your mind, cleanse your spirit, and destroy your intellect!"

古文：夫道，窨然难言哉！
现代文：大道，真是深奥神妙难以言表啊！
English: The boulevard, it's really profound and magical beyond words!

古文：将为汝言其崖略：夫昭昭生于冥冥，有伦生于无形，精神生于道，形本生于精，而万物以形相生。
现代文：不过我将为你说个大概。 明亮的东西产生于昏暗，具有形体的东西产生于无形，精神产生于道，形质产生于精微之气。
English: But I will give you a general idea: the bright comes from the dark, the corporeal from the incorporeal, the spiritual from the Tao, and the subtle from the subtle.

古文：故九窍者胎生，八窍者卵生。
现代文：万物全都凭借形体而诞生，所以，具有九个孔窍的动物是胎生的，具有八个孔窍的动物是卵生的。
English: All things are born by virtue of the body, so that animals with nine orifices are viviparous, and those with eight orifices are oviparous.

古文：其来无迹，其往无崖，无门无房，四达之皇皇也。
现代文：它的来临没有踪迹，它的离去没有边界，不知从哪儿进出、在哪儿停留，通向广阔无垠的四面八方。
English: There is no trace of its coming, no boundary to its departure, no way of knowing where it came from, where it went, and where it stayed, leading to a vast expanse in all directions.

古文：邀于此者，四肢强，思虑恂达，耳目聪明。
现代文：遵循这种情况的人，四肢强健，思虑通达，耳目灵敏，运用心思不会劳顿，顺应外物不拘定规。
English: People who follow this way of life have strong limbs, are able to think, have sensitive eyes and ears, do not get tired of using their minds, and do not stick to the rules.

古文：其用心不劳，其应物无方，天不得不高，地不得不广，日月不得不行，万物不得不昌，此其道与！且夫博之不必知，辩之不必慧，圣人以断之矣！
现代文：天不从它那儿获得什么便不会高远，地不从那儿获得什么便不会广大，太阳和月亮不能从那儿获得什么便不会运行，万物不能从那儿获得什么便不会昌盛，这恐怕就是道啊！ 再说博读经典的人不一定懂得真正的道理，善于辩论的人不一定就格外聪明，圣人因而断然割弃上述种种做法。
English: Heaven would not be so high and far away if it did not obtain anything from it, the earth would not be so vast if it did not obtain anything from it, the sun and moon would not move if they did not obtain anything from it, and all things would not prosper if they did not obtain anything from it. This, I am afraid, is the way! Furthermore, people who are well-versed in the classics do not necessarily understand the true truth, and people who are good at debate are not necessarily particularly intelligent. Therefore, sages categorically renounce the above-mentioned practices.

古文：若夫益之而不加益，损之而不加损者，圣人之所保也。
现代文：至于增多了却不像是更加增加，减少了却不像是有所减少，那便是圣人所要持守的东西。
English: As for that which increases but does not seem to increase, and decreases but does not seem to decrease, that is for the sage to guard.

古文：渊渊乎其若海，魏魏乎其终则复始也。运量万物而不匮。
现代文：深邃莫测呀它像大海一样，高大神奇呀它没有终结也没有开始，万物的运动全在它的范围之内，而且从不曾缺少什么。
English: Deep and unfathomable, it is like the sea, high and wondrous, it has no end and no beginning, the movement of all things is within its scope, and it has never lacked anything.

古文：则君子之道，彼其外与！
现代文：那么，世俗君子所谈论的大道，恐怕都是些皮毛啊！
English: Well, I'm afraid that the high road that worldly gentlemen talk about is all a bunch of fluff!

古文：万物皆往资焉而不匮。此其道与！
现代文：万物全都从它那里获取生命的资助，而且从不匮乏，这恐怕就是道啊！
English: Everything gets its life support from it, and there is never a shortage of it, which is probably the way to go!

古文： 中国有人焉，非阴非阳，处于天地之间，直且为人，将反于宗。
现代文： 中原一带有人居住着，不偏于阴也不偏于阳，处在大地的中间，只不过姑且具备了人的形体罢了，而人终将返归他的本原。
English: The Central Plains are inhabited, neither leaning towards the yin nor the yang, they are in the middle of the earth, but they only have human form, and people will eventually return to their original state.

古文：自本观之，生者，喑噫物也。虽有寿夭，相去几何？
现代文：从道的观点来看，人的诞生，乃是气的聚合，虽然有长寿与短命，相差又有多少呢？
English: From the perspective of the Tao, the birth of a person is the aggregation of qi. Although there is long life and short life, how much difference is there?

古文：须臾之说也，奚足以为尧、桀之是非！
现代文：说起来只不过是俄顷之间，又哪里用得着区分唐尧和夏桀的是非呢！
English: It's just a difference of opinion, and there's no need to distinguish between the merits and demerits of Tang Jun and Xia Jun!

古文：果蓏有理，人伦虽难，所以相齿。
现代文：果树和瓜类各不相同却有共同的生长规律，人们的次第关系即使难以划分，也还可以用年龄大小相互为序。
English: Fruit trees and melons are different but have a common growth pattern. Even if it is difficult to divide people's gradual relationship, they can also be ordered by age.

古文：圣人遭之而不违，过之而不守。
现代文：圣人遇上这些事从不违拗，即使亲身过往也不会滞留。
English: The saint is never obstinate in the face of these things, even if he has personally passed by, he will not linger.

古文：调而应之，德也；偶而应之，道也。帝之所兴，王之所起也。
现代文：调和而顺应，这就是德；无心却适应，这就是道；而德与道便是帝业兴盛的凭藉，王侯兴起的规律。
English: To harmonize and conform, this is virtue; to have no intention but to adapt, this is the way; and virtue and the way are the basis for the prosperity of the empire, the law of the rise of princes.

古文： 人生天地之间，若白驹之过隙，忽然而已。注然勃然，莫不出焉；油然寥然，莫不入焉。
现代文： 人生活在天地之间的时日，如同白驹过隙一样短暂，刹那而已，生长啊兴起，无不由道而生发出来；变化啊消逝，也无不消亡于道体之中。
English: The time that a person lives between heaven and earth is as short as the gap between the egrets. It is only a moment. Growth and rise, all arise from the Tao; change and disappear, and all perish in the Tao body.

古文：已化而生，又化而死。生物哀之，人类悲之。
现代文：已经变化生出的，又变化而死去，生命为其同类之死而悲哀，人类为其亲人之死而伤悲。
English: That which is born of change dies of change; life mourns the death of its kind; man grieves the death of his kin.

古文：解其天韬，堕其天帙。
现代文：打开自然的枷锁吧，毁坏天然的桎梏，纷纭婉转。
English: Break the shackles of nature, break the bonds of nature, break the chains of nature.

古文：纷乎宛乎，魂魄将往，乃身从之。乃大归乎！
现代文：魂魄将往，身体也随之消亡；死亡就是最大的回归呀！
English: The soul passes on, the body dies with it; death is the greatest return!

古文：不形之形，形之不形，是人之所同知也，非将至之所务也，此众人之所同论也。
现代文：从没有形体到有形体，又从有形体变为没有形体，这是人所共知的常识；常识并不是求道之人所努力追寻的，那是人人明白并共同讨论的话题，那些达于道境的人并不爱议论，爱议论的人也就并没有达到道境。
English: From formless to formable, and from formable to formless, this is the common sense that is known to all. Common sense is not something that seekers strive to pursue. It is a topic that everyone understands and discusses. Those who have reached the state of enlightenment do not like to talk about it, and those who like to talk about it have not reached the state of enlightenment.

古文：彼至则不论，论则不至；明见无值，辩不若默；道不可闻，闻不若塞：此之谓大得。 
现代文：用聪明才智去追求大道恰恰遇不上大道，要想体悟大道，善辩不如沉默。道是不能闻知的，所以闻听不如不听，懂得这些就叫 大得 。 
English: To pursue the road with cleverness and wit is precisely not to meet the road. To understand the road, the argument is better than silence. The road cannot be heard, so it is better to hear than not to listen. To understand these is called great achievement.

古文：东郭子问于庄子曰： 所谓道，恶乎在？ 
现代文：东郭子向庄子请教说： 人们所说的道，究竟存在于什么地方呢？ 
English: Dong Guo Zi asked Zhuo Zi for advice and said, "Where does the Tao that people speak of actually exist?

古文：庄子曰： 无所不在。 
现代文：庄子说： 大道无所不在。 
English: Chuang Tzu said: "Boulevard is everywhere."

古文：东郭子曰： 期而后可。 
现代文：东郭子说： 一定要指出具体的地方才行。 
English: Dong Guo Zi said: It is necessary to point out the specific place.

古文：庄子曰： 在蝼蚁。 
现代文：庄子说： 在蝼蚁之中。 
English: Zhuangzi said, "Among the ants."

古文：曰： 何其下邪？ 
现代文：东郭子说： 为什么处在这样低下卑微的地方？ 
English: Dong Guo Zi said: "Why am I in such a low and humble place?

古文：曰： 在稊稗。 
现代文：庄子说： 在稻田的稗草里。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: In the rushes of the rice paddies.

古文：曰： 何其愈下邪？ 
现代文：东郭子说： 怎么越发低下了呢？ 
English: Dong Guo Zi said, "How did it get lower and lower?"

古文：曰： 在瓦甓。 
现代文：庄子说： 在瓦块砖头中。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: In the bricks and tiles.

古文：曰： 何其愈甚邪？ 曰： 在屎溺。 
现代文：东郭子说： 怎么越来越低下呢？ 庄子说： 在大小便里。 
English: Dong Guo Zi said, "Why is it getting lower and lower?" Zhuo Zi said, "In the urine and feces."

古文：东郭子不应。
现代文：东郭子听了后不再吭声。
English: Dong Guo Zi stopped crying after hearing this.

古文：庄子曰： 夫子之问也，固不及质。
现代文：庄子说： 先生提问题的方法，本来就没有触及问题的实质。
English: Zhuo Zi said: The way you asked the question did not touch the essence of the problem.

古文：正、获之问于监市履狶也， 每下愈况 。
现代文：就好像叫获的市场官正问他的助手，如何通过踩猪腿来检验猪的肥瘦一样，我只能告诉你，越往下踩越看得清楚。
English: I can only tell you that the further down you go, the clearer you can see, just as the market official who had been called in was asking his assistant how to check the fatness of a pig by stepping on its leg.

古文：汝唯莫必，无乎逃物。至道若是，大言亦然。周遍咸三者，异名同实，其指一也。
现代文：就好像周、遍、咸这三个词不可一样，名不同而实相同，它们所指称的事实都是一样的。
English: Just as the three words "Zhou," "Hen" and "Han" are the same, the names are different but the facts are the same, and the facts they refer to are the same.

古文：尝相与游乎无有之宫，同合而论，无所终穷乎！
现代文：让我们一道游历于什么也没有的地方，用混同合一的观点来加以讨论，宇宙万物的变化是没有穷尽的啊！
English: Let's travel together to a place where there is nothing, and discuss it from the perspective of confusion and unity. The changes of all things in the universe are inexhaustible!

古文：尝相与无为乎！
现代文：我们再顺应变化无为而处吧！
English: Let's just go along with the changes and do nothing!

古文：澹澹而静乎！
现代文：恬淡而又寂静啊！
English: Dim and silent!

古文：漠而清乎！
现代文：广漠而又清虚啊！
English: The vastness and emptiness of space!

古文：调而闲乎！
现代文：调谐而又安闲啊！
English: Well-tuned and relaxed!

古文：寥已吾志，无往焉而不知其所至，去而来不知其所止。吾往来焉而不知其所终，彷徨乎冯闳，大知入焉而不知其所穷。
现代文：我的心思早已虚空宁寂，不会前往何处也不知道应该去到哪里，离去以后随即归来也从不知道停留的所在，我已在人世来来往往却并不了解哪里是最后的归宿；放纵我的思想遨游在虚旷的境域，大智的人跟大道交融相契而从不了解它的终极。
English: My mind has long been empty and quiet, I do not go anywhere and do not know where to go, I return immediately after leaving and never know where to stay, I have come and gone in the world but often do not know where is the final destination; indulge my mind to wander in the vast territory of emptiness, the wise man blends with the road and never knows its ultimate.

古文：物物者与物无际，而物有际者，所谓物际者也。
现代文：造就万物的道跟万物本身并无界域之分，而事物之间的界线，就是所谓具体事物的差异；没有差异的区别，也就是表面存在差异而实质并非有什么区别。
English: There is no boundary between the way of creating all things and the things themselves, and the boundary between things is the difference of so-called concrete things; the difference without difference, that is, there is a difference on the surface but there is no difference in essence.

古文：不际之际，际之不际者也。谓盈虚衰杀，彼为盈虚非盈虚，彼为衰杀非衰杀，彼为本末非本末，彼为积散非积散也。 
现代文：人们所说的盈满、空虚、衰退、减损，认为是盈满或空虚而并非真正是盈满或空虚，认为是衰退或减损而并非真正是衰退或减损，认为是宗本或末节而并非真正是宗本或末节，认为是积聚或离散而并非真正是积聚或离散。 
English: When people speak of fullness, emptiness, decline, and diminution, they mean fullness or emptiness, but not really fullness or emptiness; decline or diminution, but not really decline or diminution; origin or ending, but not really origin or ending; accumulation or dispersion, but not really accumulation or dispersion.

古文：妸荷甘与神农同学于老龙吉。
现代文：妸荷甘跟神农一起跟着老龙吉学习。
English: Hao Hegang and Shennong studied with Lao Longji.

古文：神农隐几，阖户昼瞑。
现代文：神农大白天靠着几案、关着门睡觉。
English: During the day, Shennong would sleep with the door closed, leaning against several cases.

古文：妸荷甘日中奓户而入，曰： 老龙死矣！ 
现代文：中午时候，妸荷甘推门而入说： 老龙吉死了！ 
English: At noon, Bao Hegang pushed open the door and said: "Old Longji is dead!

古文：神农隐几拥杖而起，嚗然放杖而笑，曰： 天知予僻陋谩诞，故弃予而死。
现代文：神农抱着拐杖站起身来， 啪 的一声丢下拐杖而笑起来，说： 先生知道我见识短浅心志不专，所以抛下我而去。
English: Shennong stood up holding his crutch. He dropped his crutch with a thud and laughed, saying, "The teacher knew that I was short-sighted and not dedicated, so he left me.

古文：已矣，夫子无所发予之狂言而死矣夫！ 
现代文：完了，先生没有留下启发我的至言而死去了！ 
English: That's it, my teacher died without leaving a word to inspire me!

古文：弇堈吊闻之，曰： 夫体道者，天下之君子所系焉。
现代文：弇堈吊知道了这件事，说： 体悟大道的人，是天下君子所归依之人。
English: When Xuan Zheng learned of this, he said, "A person who understands the Great Way is a person to whom all the gentlemen in the world will turn."

古文：今于道，秋豪之端万分未得处一焉，而犹知藏其狂言而死，又况夫体道者乎！
现代文：如今老龙吉对于道，连秋毫之末的万分之一也未能得到，尚且懂得深藏他的谈吐而死去，又何况那些真正体悟大道的人呢！
English: Nowadays, Lao Longji has not been able to obtain even one ten-thousandth of the end-of-autumn harvest for the Tao, yet he knows how to deeply hide his talk and die, let alone those who truly understand the Tao!

古文：视之无形，听之无声，于人之论者，谓之冥冥，所以论道而非道也。 
现代文：大道看上去无形，听起来无声，对于人们所谈论的道，可以说是昏昧而又晦暗，可以加以谈论的所谓的 道 ，实际上并不是真正的道。 
English: The Great Way looks shapeless, sounds silent, and can be said to be dim and obscure for the way people talk about, and the so-called way that can be talked about is actually not the true way.

古文：于是泰清问乎无穷，曰： 子知道乎？ 
现代文：于是，泰清向无穷请教： 您知晓道吗？ 
English: So, Tai Qing turned to the infinite for advice: Do you know the Tao?

古文：无穷曰： 吾不知。 
现代文：无穷回答： 我不知道。 
English: Infinity answers: I don't know.

古文：又问乎无为，无为曰： 吾知道。 
现代文：又问无为。无为回答说： 我知晓道。 
English: He asked Job again, and Job answered, "I know the way."

古文：曰： 子之知道，亦有数乎？ 
现代文：泰清又问： 您知晓道，道也有名目吗？ 
English: Tai Qing also asked: Do you know the Tao, the Tao also has a name?

古文：曰： 有。 
现代文：无为说： 有的。 
English: And he said, I have.

古文：曰： 其数若何？ 
现代文：泰清说： 道的名目怎么样呢？ 
English: Tai Qing said: What is the name of the Tao?

古文：无为曰： 吾知道之可以贵、可以贱、可以约、可以散，此吾所以知道之数也。 
现代文：无为说： 我知道道可以处于尊贵，也可以处于卑贱，可以聚合，也可以离散，这就是我所了解的道的名数。 
English: Saying nothing, I know that the Tao can be exalted or debased, can be concentrated or dispersed, and this is the number of the Tao that I understand.

古文：泰清以之言也问乎无始，曰： 若是，则无穷之弗知与无为之知，孰是而孰非乎？ 
现代文：泰清用上述谈话去请教无始，说： 像这样，那么无穷的不知晓和无为的知晓，谁对谁错呢？ 
English: Tai Qing used the above conversation to ask for advice without beginning, saying: Like this, so endless not knowing and knowing without doing, who is right and who is wrong?

古文：无始曰： 不知深矣，知之浅矣；弗知内矣，知之外矣。 
现代文：无始说： 不知晓是深奥玄妙，知晓是浮泛浅薄；不知晓处于深奥玄妙之道的范围内，知晓却刚好与道相乖背。 
English: Beginningless said: Not knowing is profound and profound, knowing is superficial and superficial; not knowing is within the scope of the profound and profound way, but knowing is just the opposite of the way.

古文：于是泰清仰而叹曰： 弗知乃知乎，知乃不知乎！
现代文：于是泰清半中有所醒悟而叹息，说： 不知晓就是真正的知晓啊！
English: So Tai Qing half-way woke up and sighed, saying: Not knowing is the real knowing!

古文：孰知不知之知？ 
现代文：知晓就是真正的不知晓啊！
English: Knowing is really not knowing!

古文：无始曰： 道不可闻，闻而非也；道不可见，见而非也；道不可言，言而非也！
现代文：有谁懂得不知晓的知晓呢？ 无始说： 道不可能听到，听到的就不是道；道不可能看见，看见了就不是道；道不可以言传，言传的就不是道。
English: Who can know what he does not know? Without a beginning, they say: the way cannot be heard, and what is heard is not the way; the way cannot be seen, and what is seen is not the way; the way cannot be spoken, and what is spoken is not the way.

古文：知形形之不形乎！
现代文：要懂得有形之物之所以具有形体正是因为产生于无形的道啊！
English: It is necessary to understand that the reason why tangible things have a shape is precisely because they arise from an invisible path!

古文：道不当名。 
现代文：因此大道不可以称述。 
English: Therefore, the avenue cannot be described.

古文：无始曰： 有问道而应之者，不知道也；虽问道者，亦未闻道。
现代文：无始又说： 有人询问大道便随口回答的，乃是不知晓道。就是询问大道的人，也不曾了解过道。
English: He also said, "He who asks about the way, and answers carelessly, does not know the way; and he who asks about the way, does not know the way."

古文：道无问，问无应。
现代文：道无可询问，问了也无从回答。
English: There is no way to ask, and there is no way to answer.

古文：无问问之，是问穷也；无应应之，是无内也。
现代文：无可询问却一定要问，这是在询问空洞无形的东西；无从回答却勉强回答，这是说对大道并无了解。
English: To ask what cannot be asked but must be asked is to ask about something that is empty and intangible; to be unable to answer but to answer reluctantly is to have no understanding of the Way.

古文：以无内待问穷，若是者，外不观乎宇宙，内不知乎大初。是以不过乎昆仑，不游乎太虚。 
现代文：内心无所得却期望回答空洞无形的提问，像这样的人，对外不能观察广阔的宇宙，对内不能了解自身的本原，所以不能越过那高远的昆仑，也不能遨游于清虚宁寂的太虚之境。 
English: Such a person cannot observe the vast universe externally, and cannot understand his or her own origin internally. Therefore, he or she cannot cross the lofty Kunlun Mountains, nor can he or she travel to the land of emptiness where there is peace and tranquility.

古文：光曜问乎无有曰： 夫子有乎？
现代文：光曜问无有： 先生您到底是有呢？
English: Guangyou asked Wuye: Sir, do you really have a horse?

古文：其无有乎？ 
现代文：还是没有呢？ 
English: Or not?

古文：光曜不得问而孰视其状貌：窨然空然。
现代文：无有不回答。
English: No questions, no answers.

古文：终日视之而不见，听之而不闻，搏之而不得也。
现代文：光曜得不到回答，就仔细观察无有形貌，他一副隐晦空寂的样子，整天看他也看不见，整天听他也听不到，想摸他一摸，却怎么也摸不着。
English: If he doesn't get an answer, he carefully observes the formless figure. He has a vague and empty look. He can't see all day, and he can't hear all day. If you want to touch him, you can't touch him.

古文：光曜曰： 至矣，其孰能至此乎！
现代文：光曜感叹说： 他真是达到极致了，谁能达到这样高的境界啊！
English: Guangyou sighed and said: He really has reached the ultimate, who can reach such a high level!

古文：予能有无矣，而未能无无也。
现代文：像我，只说能达到了不能听也不能触摸，却未能达到一无所有的无无之境啊。
English: Like me, I can only say that I can reach the border of not being able to hear and not being able to touch, but I can't reach the border of having nothing.

古文：及为无有矣，何从至此哉！ 
现代文：如果能超越了有和无的境界，哪里会是我现在这个样子呢？ 
English: If I could transcend the realm of existence and non-existence, where would I be as I am now?

古文：大马之捶钩者，年八十矣，而不失豪芒。
现代文：楚国的大司马家有一位锻造剑的人，年纪虽然已经八十，却一点也不会出现差误。
English: There is a swordsmith in the Daisima family of Chu who, despite being eighty years old, never makes a mistake.

古文：大马曰： 子巧与！有道与？ 
现代文：大司马说： 你是特别灵巧呢，还是有什么门道呀？ 
English: Dasima said, "Are you particularly dexterous, or is there some other way?

古文：曰： 臣有守也。
现代文：锻制带钩的老人说： 我遵循着道。
English: The old man with the forged hook says: I follow the path.

古文：臣之年二十而好捶钩，于物无视也，非钩无察也。 
现代文：我二十岁时就喜好锻制带钩，对于其他外在的事物我什么也看不见，不是带钩就不会引起我的专注。
English: When I was twenty years old, I liked to forge hooks. I couldn't see anything about other external things, and if it wasn't for the hook, I wouldn't be able to focus.

古文：是用之者假不用者也，以长得其用，而况乎无不用者乎！
现代文：锻制带钩这是得用心专一的事，借助这一工作便不再分散自己的用心，而且锻制出的带钩得以长期使用，更何况对于那些无可用心之事啊！
English: Forging a hook requires a lot of concentration. With the help of this work, you will no longer be distracted, and the forged hook can be used for a long time, not to mention for those things that are not useful!

古文：物孰不资焉！
现代文：能够这样，外物有什么不会予以资助呢？ 
English: If it can be done, what foreign entity would not support it?

古文：冉求问于仲尼曰： 未有天地可知邪？ 
现代文：冉求向孔子请教： 天地产生以前的情况可以知道吗？ 
English: Ran Qiu asked Confucius for advice: Can we know the situation before the creation of heaven and earth?

古文：仲尼曰： 可。古犹今也。 
现代文：孔子说： 可以，古时候就像今天一样。 
English: Confucius said: Yes, in ancient times, just like today.

古文：冉求失问而退。明日复见，曰： 昔者吾问 未有天地可知乎？ 
现代文：冉求没有得到满意的回答便退出屋来，第二天再次见到孔子，说： 昨天我问 天地产生以前的情况可以知道吗？ 
English: Ran Kui did not get a satisfactory answer, so he left the room. The next day, he saw Confucius again and said, "Yesterday I asked, 'Can you tell me what happened before heaven and earth came into being?'

古文：夫子曰： 可。古犹今也。 
现代文：先生回答说： 可以，古时候就象今天一样。 
English: The teacher replied, "Yes, in ancient times, just as it is today."

古文：昔日吾昭然，今日吾昧然。敢问何谓也？ 
现代文：昨天我心里还很明白，今天就糊涂了，请问先生说的是什么意思呢？ 
English: Yesterday I was still very clear in my mind, but today I'm confused. What does Mr. Lin mean?

古文：仲尼曰： 昔之昭然也，神者先受之；今之昧然也，且又为不神者求邪！
现代文：孔子说： 昨天你心里明白，是因为心神先有所领悟；今天你糊涂了，是因为又拘滞于具体形象而有所疑问吧？
English: Confucius said: "Yesterday you understood in your heart, because your mind and spirit first had some understanding; today you are confused, because you are also stuck in a specific image and have doubts, right?

古文：无古无今，无始无终。
现代文：没有古就没有今，没有开始就没有终结。
English: There is no now without the past, and there is no end without a beginning.

古文：未有子孙而有孙子可乎？ 
现代文：不曾有子孙而存在子孙，可以吗？ 
English: Is it okay to have descendants when you never had them?

古文：冉求未对。
现代文：冉求没有回答。
English: Ran Qi did not answer.

古文：仲尼曰： 已矣，末应矣！
现代文：孔子说： 不用胡思乱想就对了，也不会乱问了！
English: Confucius said: Don't think about it, just do it, and don't ask questions!

古文：不以生生死，不以死死生。
现代文：不是因有了的新生者才产生了死亡，也不是因为有了死亡就会让死者死而复生。
English: It is not because there is a new birth that there is death, nor is it because there is death that there is a resurrection of the dead.

古文：死生有待邪？
现代文：难道死亡和新生是相互依赖的吗？
English: Do death and rebirth depend on each other?

古文：皆有所一体。有先天地生者物邪？
现代文：难道可能有什么先于天地就生成的事物吗？
English: Is it possible that something came into being before heaven and earth?

古文：物物者非物，物出不得先物也，犹其有物也。犹其有物也无已！
现代文：生成物的那个东西一定不是物自身，被创生的事物不可能先于生成它的事物，天地是最大之物，你还要在它之上找一个生成物，这就是你所提问题的根结。
English: The thing of the product must not be the thing itself, the created thing cannot precede the thing that created it, heaven and earth are the greatest things, and you have to find a product on top of it, which is the root of your question.

古文：圣人之爱人也终无已者，亦乃取于是者也。 
现代文：如果你不断地在生物者前面寻找新生物者，那是永无答案的。圣人热爱人类，也是没有止境的，那也是从这个自然之理中受到的启发。
English: If you are constantly looking for a new creature in front of the creature, there is never an answer. The sage loves mankind without end, and that is also inspired by this law of nature.

古文：颜渊问乎仲尼曰： 回尝闻诸夫子曰： 无有所将，无有所迎。 
现代文：只是爱就是了，不用问为什么。 颜渊问孔子说： 我曾听老师说过： 不要有所送，也不要有所迎。 
English: Yan Yuan asked Confucius, "I once heard a teacher say, 'Don't give something away, and don't welcome something.'

古文：回敢问其游。 
现代文：请问怎样才能使精神出入自如。 
English: Please tell me how to make the spirit flow freely.

古文：安与之相靡？
现代文：孔子说： 古时候的人，外表适应环境变化但内心世界却持守凝寂，现在的人，内心世界不能凝寂持守而外表又不能适应环境的变化。
English: Confucius said: In ancient times, people outwardly adapted to changes in the environment, but their inner world remained stagnant. In modern times, people's inner world cannot remain stagnant, and their outer world cannot adapt to changes in the environment.

古文：必与之莫多。狶韦氏之囿，黄帝之圃，有虞氏之宫，汤武之室。君子之人，若儒墨者师，故以是非相赍也，而况今之人乎！
现代文：随应外物变化的人，必定内心纯一凝寂而不离散游移。对于变化与不变化都能安然听任，安闲自得地跟外在环境相顺应，必定会与外物一道变化而不有所偏移。狶韦氏的园林，黄帝的园圃，虞舜的宫殿，汤武的宫室，游玩居住的地方越来越狭小而道德也越来越低下。即使被称之为君子的人，一旦他们以儒墨为师而陷入是非之中，也不得不相互攻击，何况现在的普通人呢！
English: People who respond to changes in external things must have a pure inner stillness and not wander discretely. They can safely accept change or no change, and they can comfortably adapt to the external environment. They must change with the external things without shifting. The gardens of the Wei clan, the gardens of the Yellow Emperor, the palace of the Yu Xi, the palace room of the Tang Wu, the places where they live and play are getting smaller and smaller, and morals are getting lower and lower. Even people who are called gentlemen, once they fall into the wrong with Confucianism as their teacher, have to attack each other, let alone ordinary people now!

古文：圣人处物不伤物。
现代文：圣人与物相处而不伤害物。
English: A saint gets along with things without harming them.

古文：不伤物者，物亦不能伤也。
现代文：不伤害物的人，物也不能伤害他。
English: He who does not hurt things cannot be hurt by them.

古文：唯无所伤者，为能与人相将迎。
现代文：只有无所伤害的人，才能与人相交往。
English: Only those who do no harm can get along with others.

古文：山林与，皋壤与，使我欣欣然而乐与！
现代文：山林啊，平原啊，都能使我欣然快乐！
English: Mountains, forests, plains, can all make me feel happy!

古文：乐未毕也，哀又继之。哀乐之来，吾不能御，其去弗能止。
现代文：快乐还没有完，悲哀就又接着来了，悲哀与快乐的到来，我不能抗拒，它们要离我而去，我也不能阻拦。
English: The happiness is not over yet, but the sadness follows. I can't resist the arrival of sadness and happiness. They want to leave me, and I can't stop them.

古文：悲夫，世人直为物逆旅耳！
现代文：多么可悲呀，世人只不过是为外物所带来的悲哀与欢乐所提供的旅馆罢了！
English: Alas, the world is but a hotel for the sorrows and joys of the world!

古文：夫知遇而不知所不遇，知能能而不能所不能。
现代文：他们只知自己所遭遇到的，却不知道自己还有很多艰难险阻是他所从来不曾遭遇到的；人只能做力所能及的事却不能做力所不能及的事。
English: They only know what has happened to them, but they do not know that they still have many difficulties and obstacles that they have never encountered; people can only do what they can do, but they cannot do what they cannot do.

古文：无知无能者，固人之所不免也。
现代文：有所不知有所不能，本来就是人所不能避免的。
English: If you don't know what you can't do, you can't avoid it.

古文：夫务免乎人之所不免者，岂不亦悲哉！
现代文：有些人非要强求人所不能免的，岂不是十分的可悲么？
English: Isn't it sad enough that some people insist on doing the inevitable?

古文：至言去言，至为去为。
现代文：大道之言不用言说，最好的做法是有所不为。
English: It goes without saying that the best course of action is to do nothing.

古文：齐知之，所知则浅矣！ 
现代文：想要让人们认识统一起来，那实在是既浅陋又无知的想法。 
English: It's really a shallow and ignorant idea to try to unify people.

