古文：窦凝妾严武盗妾缘翘马全节婢鲁思郾女鄂州小将金卮
现代文：窦凝妾严武盗妾绿翘马全节婢鲁思郾女鄂州小将金卮
English: Concubine Dou Jing, concubine Yan Wu, concubine thief, concubine green horse, all-section servant Lu Si, concubine Ezhou boy, concubine Jin Qi

古文：窦凝妾
现代文：窦凝妾
English: Doujing concubine

古文：唐开元二十五年，晋州刺史柳涣外孙女博陵崔氏，家于汴州。
现代文：唐玄宗开元二十五年，晋州刺史柳涣有个外孙女姓崔，家住博陵。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a granddaughter named Cui who lived in Boling.

古文：有扶风窦凝者，将聘焉，行媒备礼。
现代文：有个叫窦凝的人，家住汴州扶风。他想娶崔氏为妻，就托媒人，拿着厚礼去崔氏家求亲。
English: There was a man named Dou Rong, who lived in Fufeng, Luzhou. He wanted to marry Ms. Cui, so he asked a matchmaker to go to Ms. Cui's house with a gift to ask for her hand in marriage.

古文：而凝旧妾有孕，崔氏约遣妾后成礼。
现代文：而窦凝原来有一个小老婆现已身怀有孕，崔氏就提出了只有把他的小老婆打发走后才能成亲。
English: But Dou Rong originally had a little wife who is now pregnant, and Mr. Cui proposed that he could only get married after sending his little wife away.

古文：凝许之，遂与妾俱之宋州，扬舲下至车道口宿，妾是夕产二女，凝因其困羸毙之，实沙于腹，与女俱沈之。
现代文：窦凝同意了崔氏的要求。于是就带着他的小老婆一起去宋州，船到了车道口，天已黑了，就住在了这里。这天晚上他的小老婆就生下了二个女孩。
English: Dou Rong agreed to Mr. Cui's request. So he took his little wife to Songzhou. The boat arrived at the entrance of the lane, it was already dark, and he lived here. That night, his little wife gave birth to two girls.

古文：既而还汴，绐崔氏曰： 妾已遣去。 
现代文：窦凝趁着这女人疲惫不堪的时候，杀死了她，在死尸肚子里填上沙石连同刚生下的两个女孩，一起扔到了江里。
English: Dou Rong took advantage of the woman's exhaustion and killed her. He filled the dead body with sand and stones and threw it into the river together with the two newborn girls.

古文：遂择日结亲。后一十五年，崔氏产男女数人，男不育，女二人，各成长。
现代文：窦凝回到汴州以后，就欺骗崔氏说： 小妾已经叫我打发走了。 于是他们就选了一个吉庆的日子结了婚。婚后十五年间，崔氏生下了好几个孩子，但是所生的男孩都没有活，只有两个女孩活下来。
English: After Dou Rong returned to Zhangzhou, he deceived Cui Shizhen by saying, "My concubine has already sent me away," so they chose a auspicious day to get married. After fifteen years of marriage, Cui Shizhen gave birth to several children, but none of the boys were born alive, and only two girls survived.

古文：永泰二年四月，无何，几上有书一函，开见之，乃凝先府君之札也。
现代文：到了永泰二年四月的一天，忽然发现桌子上有一封书信，就拆开观看，却是他死去的父亲留下的手书，上面写着：你枉害人命的事已被发现，近在一个月内你就要出事。
English: One day in April of the second year of Yongtai, he suddenly found a letter on his desk. He opened it and looked at it, but it was a handwritten letter left by his dead father. It said: Your wrongful death has been discovered, and you will have an accident in about a month.

古文：言汝枉魂事发，近在暮月，宜疾理家事，长女可嫁汴州参军崔延，幼女嫁前开封尉李馹，并良偶也。
现代文：你应该赶紧处理好家中的事务。你的大女儿可嫁给汴州参军崔延，小女儿可嫁给前任开封尉李馹，这都是很好的姻缘。 
English: You should quickly deal with the affairs of your family. Your eldest daughter can marry Choi Yan, a member of the Zhangzhou Army, and your youngest daughter can marry Li Yan, a former Kaifeng lieutenant. These are all good marriages.

古文：凝不信，谓其妻曰： 此狐狸之变，不足征也。 
现代文：窦凝不相信，就对他的妻子说： 这都是狐狸精搞的鬼，不可信。 
English: Dou Rong didn't believe it, so he said to his wife: "This is all a trick of the fox spirit, I can't believe it."

古文：更旬日，又于室内见一书： 吾前已示汝危亡之兆，又何颠倒之甚也。 
现代文：又过了十天，他又在屋里发现一封信。拆开一看，上面写着：我前面已经提示你危亡的征兆，你为什么不听，却又糊涂的这么厉害。 
English: Ten days later, he found another letter in his room. When he opened it, he read: "I have already pointed out the signs of your impending death. Why didn't you listen, but you are still so confused.

古文：凝尚犹豫，明日，庭中复得一书，词言哀切，曰： 祸起旦夕。 
现代文：看信后，窦凝还是半信半疑。第二天，在院子里又发现了一封信，信中的音词就更悲哀恳切了。上面写着： 大祸马上就要来了。 
English: After reading the letter, Dou Rong still half-believed and half-doubted. The next day, another letter was found in the yard, and the tone of the letter was even more sad and earnest. It said: Disaster is coming soon.

古文：凝方仓惶，妻曰： 君自省如何？宜禳避之。 
现代文：这时窦凝才惊慌起来。崔氏说： 你自己好好想想，做了什么伤天害理的事，应赶紧祈求上天保祐，避开这场灾祸。 
English: At this time, Dou Rong only panicked. Mr. Cui said, "You should think about what you have done to offend heaven and reason. You should quickly pray to heaven for protection and avoid this disaster."

古文：凝虽秘之，而实心惮妾事。
现代文：窦凝虽然没有把害死小妾的事告诉崔氏，但自己心里却很恐惧。
English: Although Dou Rong did not tell Cui Rong about the death of his concubine, he was very afraid.

古文：五月十六日午时，人皆休息，忽闻扣门甚急。
现代文：到了五月十六日的中午，大家都在休息，急然听着有急促的敲门声，窦凝心中害怕，开门出去一看，原来是被害的小妾。
English: At noon on May 16th, everyone was resting, listening in haste to a hurried knock on the door. Dou concentrated on his fear, opened the door and looked out. It turned out to be the victim's concubine.

古文：凝心动，出候之，乃是所杀妾，盛妆饰，前拜凝曰： 别久安否？ 
现代文：她穿着很漂亮的衣服，上前下拜，对窦凝说： 分别很久了，你可好吗？ 
English: She was wearing a very beautiful dress, bowed forward and said to Dou Rong, "It's been a long time since we parted, how are you?

古文：凝大怖，疾走入内隐匿，其鬼随踵至庭，见崔氏。
现代文：窦凝一听，吓的急忙跑入了屋里躲藏了起来。那鬼跟着进屋去见崔氏，崔氏一见就惊讶的问道： 你是何人？ 
English: Hearing this, Dou Rong ran into the house in a panic and hid. The ghost followed him into the house to meet Cui, who was surprised and asked, "How many of you are there?"

古文：崔氏惊问之，乃敛容自叙曰： 某是窦十五郎妾。凝欲娶娘子时，杀妾于车道口，并二女同命。但妾无负凝，而凝枉杀妾，凝欲娶妻，某自屏迹，奈何忍害某性命，以至于此。
现代文：那鬼便收敛起恶容对崔氏叙述说： 我是窦十五郎的妾，窦凝要娶你的时候，把我和我的两个女儿一起害死在车道口，我从不没有辜负他，而他却白白地杀害了我，他为了娶妻，我可以离去，为什么忍心残害我的性命，到这个地步。
English: The ghost then restrained itself and made a grimace, saying to Mr. Cui: I am Dou Jufeng Lang's concubine. When Dou Jufeng wanted to marry you, he killed me and my two daughters at the entrance to the driveway. I never failed him, but he killed me for nothing. He wanted to marry my wife, so I could leave. Why did he have the heart to destroy my life to this extent?

古文：妾以贱品，十五余年，诉诸岳渎，怨气上达，闻于帝庭。上帝降鉴，许妾复仇，今来取凝，不干娘子，无惧也。 
现代文：我身份低贱，十五年来将此事告诉了五岳六神，未得处理，我的怨仇冲天，感动了上天，上天下旨许我复仇，所以我今天就来取窦凝的命，这事与你无关，你不要害怕。 
English: I am a lowly person. For fifteen years, I have told the matter to the five mountains and six gods, but I have not been able to deal with it. My grudge has reached the heavens, and I have touched the heavens. The heavens have ordered me to take revenge. That is why I have come to take Dou Rong's life today. This has nothing to do with you. Don't be afraid.

古文：崔氏悲惶请谢： 愿以功德赎罪，可乎？ 
现代文：崔氏听罢既悲伤又惶恐，连忙致谢说： 我愿意积功德来赎罪，可以吗？ 
English: Hearing this, Ms. Cui was both sad and frightened. She quickly thanked him and said, "I am willing to accumulate merits to atone for my sins. Is that okay?"

古文：鬼厉色曰： 凝以命还命足矣，何功德而当命也？
现代文：冤鬼严厉地说： 有窦凝一个人抵命就可以了，什么功德能与命相比呢？
English: The evil-doer said sternly, "If one has Dou Jing, it is enough to save one's life. What merit can be compared to life?

古文：臂杀娘子，岂以功德可计乎！ 
现代文：譬喻有人杀了你，难道可以用功德抵你的命吗？
English: For example, if someone kills you, can you use your merits to win your life?

古文：词不为屈，乃骂凝曰： 天纲不漏，何用狐伏鼠窜！ 
现代文：你的话不能使人信服。 冤鬼于是又骂窦凝说： 天网恢恢，疏而不漏，你又何必象狐狸似的躲起来，象老鼠一样的乱窜呢。 
English: Your words are not convincing. The evil spirit then scolded Dou Rong and said: The sky net is wide and does not miss, so why do you have to hide like a fox and scramble like a mouse.

古文：便升堂擒得凝，而啮咬掐捩，宛转楚毒，竟日而去，言曰： 汝未虑即死，且可受吾能事耳。 
现代文：说罢就到厅堂上把窦疑擒了过来，又是咬又是掐，又是啃又是撕，整整折磨了一天才离开了。临走时还说： 你不要担心马上会死，我要用尽我的能力，叫你受尽苦头。 
English: As soon as he had said this, he went to the hall and stabbed Dou Qi, and then bit him, and then stabbed him, and then stabbed him, and then tore him, and he tortured him for a whole day before he left. As he was leaving, he also said, "Don't worry that you will die right away, I will exhaust my ability to make you suffer."

古文：如是每日辄至，则啗嚼支体，其鬼或奇形异貌，变态非常，举家危惧，而计无从出，并搏二女，不堪其苦。
现代文：从此冤鬼每天必来，来后就啃咬他的支体。那鬼畸形怪貌，变化无常。弄的窦凝一家恐惧不安，而又无计可施。那鬼还去击打窦凝的两个儿女，使她们痛苦不堪。
English: From then on, the evil spirit would come every day, and after coming, it would bite his body. The ghost was deformed, strange-looking, and changeable. It made Dou Ge's family afraid and uneasy, but there was nothing they could do about it. The ghost also hit Dou Ge's two children, causing them unbearable pain.

古文：于时有僧昙亮，颇善持咒，凝请之。
现代文：在那时，有个和尚叫昙亮的，很会念咒。
English: At that time, there was a monk named Zhu Liang, who was very good at reciting mantras.

古文：置坛内阁，须臾鬼至，不敢升阶。僧让之曰： 鬼道不合干人，何至是耶！
现代文：窦凝就把他请来，在内阁设了一个法坛，不一会鬼果然来了，但却不敢上台阶，和尚责说： 你这鬼，不应干预人间的事情，你到这里做什么！
English: Dou Rong invited him to come and set up a legal forum in the cabinet. After a while, the ghost did indeed come, but he did not dare to go up the steps. The monk scolded: "You ghost, you should not interfere in human affairs, what are you doing here!"

古文：吾召金刚，坐见糜碎。 
现代文：我呼唤金刚来，立刻叫你化为齑粉。 
English: I summon King Kong to turn you into powder.

古文：鬼曰： 和尚事佛，心合平等，奈何掩义隐贼。且凝非理杀妾，妾岂干人乎？
现代文：厉鬼说： 和尚理应诵经念佛，心怀善良，平等处理，而你为什么要掩盖真理和正义隐匿恶贼，并且窦凝无理杀我，我今日来索命，怎么是干预人间事呢？
English: "Monks are supposed to chant the sutras and recite the Buddha's name, have a kind heart, and treat everyone equally, but why are you covering up the truth and justice, hiding the villains, and killing me without reason? I came here today to seek my life. How is that interfering in human affairs?

古文：上命照临，许妾仇凝，金刚岂私杀负冤者耶！ 
现代文：上天让我来，允许我报仇，难道金刚就允许偷偷杀死受冤屈的人？ 
English: Heaven let me come, allowed me to take revenge, is King Kong allowed to secretly kill the wronged person?

古文：言讫登阶，擒凝如初。
现代文：说完这厉鬼就登上台阶，象当初一样去抓拿窦凝。
English: After saying this, he climbed the steps and went to pick up Dou Rong as he did in the beginning.

古文：崔氏令僧潜求聘二女，鬼知而怒曰： 和尚为人作媒，得无怍乎！ 
现代文：崔氏叫和尚暗暗地请求把二个女儿聘走。鬼知道后就愤怒地对和尚说： 和尚给人做媒人，你不觉惭愧吗？ 
English: Mr. Cui secretly asked the monk to hire his two daughters away. When the ghost found out, it angrily said to the monk: Monk, are you not ashamed to be a matchmaker?

古文：僧惭而去。
现代文：和尚听后惭悔地走了。
English: After hearing this, the monk walked away in shame.

古文：后崔氏李氏聘女遁逃，而鬼不追，乃言曰： 吾长缚汝足，岂能远耶！ 
现代文：后来，崔氏和李氏两家把窦凝的两个女儿娶过去，就仓惶地逃走了。而鬼也不去追赶他们。却说： 我用长绳绑住你们的脚，难道你们还能逃得掉！ 
English: Later, the Cui and Li families married Dou Neng's two daughters and fled in panic. The ghosts did not chase them, but said, "I have tied your feet with a long rope, how can you still escape?"

古文：数年，二女皆卒。凝中鬼毒，发狂，自食支体，入水火，啗粪秽，肌肤焦烂，数年方死。
现代文：过了几年，两个女儿都死了，窦凝也中了鬼的毒害，得了疯病，自己吃自己的肢体，跳到水火里去还吃粪便。以致肌肤焦烂。几年后才死了。
English: After a few years, both daughters died, and Dou Rong was also poisoned by a ghost and became insane. He ate his own limbs, jumped into water and fire to eat excrement, and his skin became scorched. He only died a few years later.

古文：崔氏于东京出家，众共知之。
现代文：崔氏后来在东京出家做了尼姑。
English: Choi later became a nun in Tokyo.

古文：严武盗妾
现代文：窦凝的事很多人都知道。严武盗妾
English: Many people know about Dou Rong.

古文：唐西川节度使严武，少时仗气任侠。
现代文：唐朝时四川节度使严武，少年时仰仗意气，以侠义自任。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Sichuan festival was a martial one. As a young boy, he was full of chivalry.

古文：尝于京城，与一军使邻居，军使有室女，容色艳绝。严公因窥见之，乃赂其左右，诱至宅，月余，遂窃以逃，东出关，将匿于淮泗间。
现代文：曾在京城和一个军使是邻居，军使家里有一个未出嫁的女子，长得非常漂亮，严武偷偷地看见后，就用金钱贿赂，收买他身边的人把这个女子引诱到他的家里，一个多月后，就将这个女子偷偷地带走了。他们往东逃出了东关，就隐居在淮水泗水之间。
English: Once in Beijing, he was a neighbor of a military envoy. In the envoy's home, there was an unmarried woman who was very beautiful. After Yan Wu secretly saw her, he used money to bribe and bribe people around him to lure the woman to his home. After more than a month, he secretly took the woman away. They fled east out of Dongguan and lived in seclusion between Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：军使既觉，且穷其迹，亦讯其家人，乃暴于官司，亦以状上闻。
现代文：这时军使已经发觉，就跟踪他们紧追不舍。并询问了他家里人后，就向当地官府告发这件事，并写了呈状告到皇帝那里。
English: At this time, the military envoy had already discovered and followed them closely. After questioning his family, he reported the matter to the local government and wrote a petition to the emperor.

古文：有诏遣万年县捕贼官专往捕捉。
现代文：不久皇帝下诏万年县捕贼官专门去捕捉严武。
English: Soon after, the emperor decreed that the county's thief-catching officers should specifically go and catch Yan Wu.

古文：捕贼乘递，日行数驿，随路已得其踪矣。
现代文：捕贼官得令后，兼程赶路，一天可走好几个驿站，沿路已打听到了严武的行踪。严武从巩县。
English: After the thief-catching officer received the order, he hurried along the road, and he could walk several stations a day. Along the road, he had already inquired about Yanwu's whereabouts. Yanwu came from Gongxian.

古文：严武自巩县，方雇船而下，闻制使将至，惧不免，乃以酒饮军使之女，中夜乘其醉，解琵琶弦缢杀之，沈于河。
现代文：正要雇船南下，听说制使马上就要到了，害怕罪过难逃，就用酒把军使的女儿灌醉，乘着半夜时分，解下琵琶上的弦，把她勒死，然后沉到河底。
English: When he was about to hire a boat to sail south, he heard that the governor was about to arrive, and fearing that he would be caught, he got the governor's daughter drunk with wine, took her out in the middle of the night, loosened the strings on her lute, strangled her, and then sank to the bottom of the river.

古文：明日制使至，搜捕严公之船，无迹乃已。
现代文：第二天制使赶到了，把严武的船搜查遍了，也没有发现军使女儿的一点痕迹。只好作罢而归。
English: The next day, the naval attaché arrived, searched Yan Wu's ship thoroughly, and found no trace of the military attaché's daughter. He had no choice but to give up and return.

古文：严公后为剑南节度使，病甚，性本强，尤不信巫祝乏类，有云云者，必罪之。
现代文：后来严武做了剑南节度使。在任期间，他得了重病，因他的性格特别刚强，从来不信鬼神迷信的事，如有议论这方面事的人，他就要惩罚他们。
English: Later, Yan Wu became the Jian'nan Festival envoy. During his term of office, he fell seriously ill. Because of his particularly strong character, he never believed in the superstition of ghosts and gods. If there were people who talked about this, he would punish them.

古文：忽一日亭午，有道士至衙门，自云从峨眉山来，欲谒武。
现代文：忽然，有一天的正晌午时，有一个道士来到衙门前，自我介绍说： 我是从峨嵋山来的，要见严武。 
English: Suddenly, one day at noon, a Taoist came to the front of the gate, introduced himself and said: I am from Mount Emei, I want to see Yanwu.

古文：门者初不敢言，道士声厉，不得已，遂进白。
现代文：把门的人开始不敢说什么，后来道士声调十分严厉，把门的人才不得以地进衙向严武禀报了这件事。
English: At first, the person holding the door didn't dare to say anything. Later, the Taoist's tone was very stern, and the person holding the door had no choice but to report the matter to Yan Wuxuan.

古文：武亦异之，引入，见道士至阶呵叱，若与人论难者，良久方止。
现代文：严武也觉得奇怪，就叫人把道士引进了衙内。看见道士到台阶前，就大声责骂，好象和什么争论似的，很长时间才斥骂完。
English: Yan Wu also felt strange, so he asked someone to bring the Taoist into the cocoon. When he saw the Taoist in front of the steps, he scolded him loudly, as if arguing with him, and it took him a long time to finish the scolding.

古文：寒温毕，谓武曰： 公有疾，灾厄至重，冤家在侧，公何不自悔咎，以香火陈谢，奈何反固执如是。 
现代文：然后道士和严武相见，彼此寒暄过后，便对严武说： 你有病，大难就要降到头上了，现在你的冤家就在旁边，你为什么不忏悔自己的过错，摆上香火谢罪，为什么执迷不悟到这种地步。 
English: Then the Taoist and Yan Wu saw each other, and after exchanging greetings, they said to Yan Wu: You are sick, the great tribulation is about to fall on your head, now your enemies are right next to you, why don't you repent of your mistakes, put on incense and thank them for their sins, why are you so obsessed that you can't realize this?

古文：武怒不答。
现代文：严武听后十分愤怒，一言不发。
English: After listening to this, Yan Wu was very angry and did not say a word.

古文：道士又曰： 公试思之，曾有负心杀害人事否？ 
现代文：道士又道： 你好好想一想，曾经有没有违背良心杀人的事。 
English: The moralist also said: Think about it, have you ever killed someone against your conscience?

古文：武静思良久，曰： 无。 
现代文：严武想了很长时间，说： 没有这种事。 
English: Yan Wu thought for a long time and said: There is no such thing.

古文：道士曰： 适入至阶前，冤死者见某披诉。
现代文：道士说： 刚才我到台阶前，看见一个冤死的人，披头散发的向我哭诉。
English: The spiritualist said, "Just now, I came to the front of the steps and saw a man who died an unjust death, crying out to me from behind his head.

古文：某初谓山精木魅，与公为祟，遂加呵责。
现代文：我开始认为她是山里的精怪，树木变的鬼魅在这里做祟，所以就大声责骂她。
English: I began to think she was a mountain spirit, a tree-turned-spirit haunting the place, so I shouted at her.

古文：他云，上帝有命，为公所冤杀，已得请矣。
现代文：后来她说： 她有上帝的命令，是被你冤杀的，已经得到了允许复仇了。
English: Later she said: "She had God's order, she was killed by you unjustly, and she has been allowed to take revenge."

古文：安可言无也。 
现代文：你怎么可以说没有这种事呢？ 
English: How can you say there is no such thing?

古文：武不测，且复问曰： 其状若何？ 
现代文：严武没有想到道士知道得这样清楚，就又问道士说： 那个鬼长的什么样？ 
English: Yan Wu didn't expect the Taoist to know so clearly, so he asked the Taoist again, "What does that demon look like?"

古文：曰： 女人年才十六七，项上有物是一条，如乐器之弦。 
现代文：道士说： 那鬼是个女子，年纪有十六七岁，脖子上系着一条象乐器弦似的东西 。
English: The priest said, "That ghost is a woman, aged sixteen or seventeen, with what looks like a string from a musical instrument tied around her neck.

古文：武大悟，叩头于道士曰： 天师诚圣人矣。是也，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武严这才恍然大悟。赶紧给道士叩头，并对道士说： 天师你可真是圣人哪，是有这件事，我该怎么办呢？ 
English: Wu Yan suddenly realized this. He quickly bowed to the Taoist and said to the Taoist, "Teacher, you are truly a saint. If this is the case, what should I do?"

古文：道士曰： 他即欲面见公，公当自求之。 
现代文：道士说： 他现在想要和你见面，你就应当自己去求她。 
English: The moralist said, "He wants to meet you now, so you should go and ask her yourself."

古文：乃令洒扫堂中，撤去余物，焚香于内，乃舁武于堂门内，遣清心，具衫笏，留小僮一人侍侧。
现代文：于是就叫人清扫了厅堂，把没用的东西搬走，在堂上烧上香，把严武抬到厅堂里，清心静气，并预备了衣衫和笏板。仅留一个小僮在旁边侍奉。
English: So they had the hall swept, the useless things taken away, incense burned on the hall, Yan Wu carried into the hall, the spirit cleansed, and clothes and a cutting board prepared. Only a small ladle was left to serve at his side.

古文：堂广外东间，有一阁子，亦令洒扫垂帘，道士坐于堂外，含水喷噀。又以柳枝洒地却坐，瞑目叩齿。
现代文：堂门外，东边有一间小屋，也叫人清扫干净，并挂了个个门帘，道士在堂门外坐着，口里含着水，一面喷水，一面又用柳枝扫地，坐在那里，闭着眼，咬着牙。
English: Outside the door of the hall, on the east side, there was a small hut, which was also swept clean and hung with curtains. The Taoist priest sat outside the door of the hall, with water in his mouth, spraying water on one side and sweeping the ground with a willow branch on the other side. He sat there with his eyes closed and his teeth clenched.

古文：逡巡，阁子中有人吁嗟声，道士曰： 娘子可出。 
现代文：过了一会看见屋子里有影子恍动，并发出长吁短叹的声音。道士说： 娘子你可以出来了。 
English: After a while, he saw a shadow moving in the room and let out a long sigh. The priest said, "Daughter, you can come out."

古文：良久，见一女子被发，项上有琵琶弦，结于咽下，褰帘而至。及堂门，约发于后，向武拜。
现代文：过了很久，看见了一个女子披着头发，脖子上有一条琵琶弦系在咽喉下面，用手掀起帘子走了出来，到了堂门里，把头发整理了一下，披在脑后，面对严武下拜。
English: After a long time, I saw a woman wearing her hair, with a lute string around her neck tied under her throat. She lifted the curtain with her hand and walked out. She went to the door, straightened her hair, put it behind her head, and bowed to Yan Wu.

古文：武见惊惭甚，且掩其面。
现代文：严武一见，又是恐惧，又是忏悔，用手把脸捂住了。
English: At the first sight of Yan Wu, he was both afraid and repentant. He covered his face with his hand.

古文：女子曰： 公亦太忍，某从公，是某之失行，于公则无所负。
现代文：这时那女子说： 你也太残忍了，我跟着你逃走，就已经是很大的错误了，可我是对得起你的。
English: At this time, the woman said, "You are also too cruel. It was already a big mistake for me to run away with you, but I am worthy of you."

古文：公惧罪，弃某于他所即可，何忍见杀。 
现代文：你害怕有罪，把我丢弃在别的地方也就可以了，你又怎么忍心把我活活的勒死呢？ 
English: You're afraid of being guilty, so you can just dump me somewhere else. How can you bear to strangle me alive?

古文：武悔谢良久，兼欲厚以佛经纸缗祈免，道士亦恳为之请。女子曰： 不可。
现代文：并想用多念佛经、多烧纸钱的方法祈求免罪。道士也诚恳地为严武请求。女子说： 不行。
English: She also wanted to pray for forgiveness by reciting more Buddhist scriptures and burning more paper money. The Taoist priest also sincerely asked for strict discipline. The woman said, "No."

古文：某为公手杀，上诉于帝，仅三十年，今不可矣。期在明日日晚。 
现代文：我是被他亲手勒死的，已经向上帝申诉了这件事，只限期三十年，现在是不可以改变了，死期就在明天黄昏。 
English: I was strangled by his own hand, I have already complained to God about this, only for a period of thirty years, now it cannot be changed, the time of death is tomorrow evening.

古文：言毕却出，至阁子门，拂然而没，道士乃谢去。
现代文：说完就走了出去，到了小屋门口，轻轻的飘逸而去。道士也告辞离开了。
English: After saying this, he walked out, reached the door of the hut, and gently drifted away. The priest also left.

古文：严公遂处置家事，至其日黄昏而卒。
现代文：严武于是赶紧处理家中的事情，果然到了第二天黄昏时，严武就死了。
English: Yan Wu then hurriedly dealt with things at home, and sure enough, at dusk the next day, Yan Wu died.

古文：缘翘
现代文：缘翘
English: 缘翘

古文：唐西京咸宜观女道士鱼玄机，字幼微，长安里家女也。
现代文：唐朝西京有一个咸宜观，观里有个女道士叫鱼玄机，她的字叫幼微。是长安娼家女子。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Xian Yi Guan in Xijing. In the Guan, there was a female Taoist called Yu Xuan Ji, and her Chinese character was Ju Wei. She was a prostitute from Chang'an.

古文：色既倾国，思乃入神，喜读书属文，尤致意于一吟一咏。
现代文：长得美丽漂亮，是任何人所不能比的。人们一想到她就会被她迷住。她喜欢读书，善写文章，尤其是对吟诗答对，更是有特长。
English: She was beautiful beyond compare. People fell in love with her as soon as they thought of her. She loved to read and was good at writing, especially at chanting.

古文：破瓜之岁，志慕清虚。
现代文：到十六岁时，她一心想要出家修道。
English: By the time she was 16, her heart was set on becoming a nun.

古文：咸通初，遂从冠帔于咸宜，而风月赏玩之佳句，往往播于士林。
现代文：在咸通初年，就在咸宜观里，戴上了道帽，穿上了道服，做了一个女道士。
English: In the first year of Hamdong, she put on a hat and a robe and became a female Taoist in Hamgyi Valley.

古文：然蕙兰弱质，不能自持，复为豪侠所调，乃从游处焉。
现代文：她在临风赏月时写下的好诗句，常常流传在一些文人墨客之中，然而她象室内的花草一样，本质脆弱，往往不能把握自己，所以又常被一些豪强侠士所引诱。于是就跟着他一起生活游历。
English: The good poems she wrote when enjoying the moon in the wind are often circulated among some writers and artists. However, like the flowers and plants in the room, she is inherently fragile and often cannot control herself, so she is often seduced by some powerful knights. So she followed him to live and travel together.

古文：于是风流之士，争修饰以求狎。
现代文：于是一些风流的人，都想把自己打扮得漂漂亮亮，来求得和她亲近。
English: As a result, a number of glamorous people wanted to dress up to look beautiful in order to get close to her.

古文：或载酒诣之者，必鸣琴赋诗，间以谑浪，懵学辈自视缺然。
现代文：有的人拿着酒菜到她这里来饮酒作乐，一定要弹琴互相吟诗做对，有时也说一些嘲谑玩笑话，那些无才无识的人都自愧不如。她的诗句有： 绮陌春望远，瑶徽秋兴多； 还有 殷勤不得语，红泪一双流 。
English: Some people come to her with wine and vegetables to drink and make music. They must play the piano and chant poems to each other. Sometimes they also say some mocking jokes. Those who are untalented and ignorant should be ashamed of themselves. Her poems include: 陌春遠遠,徽秋兴多; and 殷勤不语,红泪一双流.

古文：其诗有 绮陌春望远，瑶徽秋兴多 ；又 殷勤不得语，红泪一双流； 又 焚香登玉坛，端简礼金阙； 又 云情自郁争同梦，仙貌长芳又胜花。 此数联为绝矣。
现代文：有 焚香登玉坛，端简礼金阙。 还有 云情自郁争同梦，仙貌长芳又胜花 ，这些诗句都非常绝妙。
English: There are incense ascending the jade altar, the end of the short gift gold ingot. There is also the cloud feeling from the depression to the same dream, the fairy appearance and the victory flower, these verses are very wonderful.

古文：一女僮曰缘翘，亦明慧有色。
现代文：她有一个女僮，名叫绿翘，也很聪明美丽。
English: She has a daughter named Green, who is also smart and beautiful.

古文：忽一日，机为邻院所邀，将行，诫翘曰： 无出，若有客，但云在某处。 
现代文：有一天，玄机被邻居请去做客，临走前，告诫绿翘说： 你不要出去，如果有客人来，就说我到邻居家里了。 
English: One day, Mysterious Machine was invited by a neighbor to be a guest. Before leaving, he cautioned Green Goose and said, "Don't go out. If a guest comes, just say I'm at the neighbor's house."

古文：机为女伴所留，迨暮方归院。缘翘迎门曰： 适某客来，知练师不在，不舍辔而去矣。 
现代文：玄机被女朋友留住，一直到晚上才回到了寺院，绿翘迎上门去说： 刚才有个某某客人来过，我告诉他你不在，他连马都没下就走了。 
English: The rascal was detained by his girlfriend and did not return to the temple until the evening. Green Goose greeted him at the door and said: Just now, a certain guest came. I told him you were not there, and he left without even getting off his horse.

古文：客乃机素相暱者，意翘与之私。及夜，张灯扃户，乃命翘入卧内讯之。
现代文：来的客人是玄机一向最亲近的，玄机怀疑绿翘和他有私情，当天夜里，点灯关门，就把绿翘叫到卧室里审问她有没有和来人私通。
English: The guest who came was always the closest to the mysterious machine. The mysterious machine suspected that Green was having an affair with him. That night, when the lights were turned on and the door was closed, it called Green into the bedroom to interrogate her about whether she was having an affair with the visitor.

古文：翘曰： 自执中盥数年，实自检御，不令有似是之过，致忤尊意。且某客至款扉，翘隔阖报云； 练师不在。 客无言策马而去。
现代文：绿翘说： 多年来，我只知道拿巾端水侍候你，每时每刻都注意检点自己的言行，防止一些杂思邪念，不曾有过象你说的那种事，我没有违逆过你的意思，并且来客只是在门外边，我是关着门告诉他，你不在院，来客没有说话就骑马走了。
English: Green Hornet said, "For many years, I have only known how to serve you with a towel and water. I have always been careful to control my words and deeds at all times, to prevent some evil thoughts. I have never done anything like what you said. I have never disobeyed your will, and the visitor is just outside the door. I told him behind closed doors that you were not in the hospital. The visitor rode away without a word.

古文：若云情爱，不蓄于胸襟有年矣，幸练师无疑。 
现代文：若说情爱的事，在我的心里从来就没有想过。请师父不要怀疑。 
English: When it comes to love, I have never thought about it in my heart. Please don't doubt Master.

古文：机愈怒，裸而笞百数，但言无之。
现代文：玄机听罢，更加愤怒了，命缘翘脱去衣服，拿着竹板狠狠地拷打起来，竟打了几百下，绿翘只是说没有这种事。
English: After listening to the riddle, she became even angrier. She stripped off her clothes, took a bamboo board and beat her severely. She actually beat her several hundred times. She just said that there was no such thing.

古文：既委顿，请杯水酹地曰： 练师欲求三清长生之道，而未能忘解珮荐枕之欢，反以沈猜，厚诬贞正，翘今必毙于毒手矣，无天则无所诉，若有，谁能抑我强魂？
现代文：绿翘被打得已经站不起来，就请求给一盆水，泼在了地上，说： 师父想要求得一化三清的长生不老之道，却又不能忘掉男女私情的欢乐，不仅自己这样做，反而还怀疑别人，诬陷我这个严守贞操的人，我今天一定要死在你的毒手下了。如果没有苍天，我就没有地方伸诉冤屈，如果有，谁能拦住我坚强的灵魂？
English: Having been beaten so badly that she could no longer stand up, she begged for a basin of water and was thrown to the ground, saying: "Master, you want to ask for the way of immortality, but you cannot forget the joy of love between a man and a woman. Not only do you do this yourself, but you also suspect others and frame me, a person who strictly observes chastity. Today, I must die at your poisonous hands. If there were no heaven, I would have no place to air my grievances. If there were, who could stop my strong soul?

古文：誓不蠢蠢于冥冥之中，纵尔淫佚。 
现代文：我发誓，绝不能糊里糊涂的做个阴朝地府的冤死鬼，一定要向上天告发你，决不任凭你放荡无羁，为所欲为。 
English: I swear, I must not be a misguided ghost of the underworld, I must report you to heaven, I will never let you run wild and do whatever you want.

古文：言讫，绝于地。
现代文：说完，就死在了地上。
English: After saying this, he died on the ground.

古文：机恐，乃坎后庭瘗之，自谓人无知者，时咸通戊子春正月也。
现代文：玄机骇怕，就在后院挖了个坑偷偷地把绿翘的尸体埋葬了。
English: Terrified by the mystery, he dug a hole in the backyard and secretly buried the body of the green-haired girl.

古文：有问翘者，则曰： 春雨霁逃矣。 
现代文：自己认为事情办得很秘密，没有人会知道。到了咸通戊子春正月，有人问起绿翘，玄机就说： 春雨过后逃跑了。 
English: He thought that things were very secretive and no one would know. When it was the first day of spring in Hamdong Wuzi, someone asked him about Lulu, and he said, "She ran away after the spring rain."

古文：客有宴于机室者，因溲于后庭，当瘗上，见青蝇数十集于地，驱去复来，详视之，如有血痕且腥。
现代文：一次，有客人在玄机的屋里饮酒取乐，客人因要小便，就到了后院，当走到埋绿翘的地方，就看见了许多绿豆蝇，密密地落在地上，客人把它们赶走了，可是很快的就又飞了回来。客人便仔细地看，发现地上好象有鲜血的痕迹，并且还带有腥臭的气味。
English: On one occasion, a guest was drinking and having fun in the room of a mysterious machine. The guest had to urinate, so he went to the backyard. When he went to the place where the green grass was buried, he saw a lot of mung bean flies, which landed on the ground closely. The guest chased them away, but they soon flew back. The guest then looked carefully and found that there seemed to be traces of blood on the ground, and it also had a foul smell.

古文：客既出，窃语其仆。仆归，复语其兄。
现代文：客人赶紧回去，把这件事偷偷地告诉了他的仆人，仆人回到家里，又将这件事告诉了他的哥哥。
English: The guest hurried back and secretly told his servant about it. The servant returned home and told his brother about it.

古文：其兄为府街卒，尝求全于机，机不顾，卒深衔之。
现代文：他的哥哥在官府里当小差事，曾经向玄机求借过金钱，而玄机没有借给他，这个差人因此忌恨玄机。
English: His brother worked as a small errand boy in the government office. He once asked to borrow money from Xuanqi, but Xuanqi didn't lend it to him, so the policeman hated Xuanqi.

古文：闻此，遽至观门觇伺，见偶语者，乃讶不睹缘翘之出入。
现代文：今天听说了这件事，就马上到咸宜观门口偷偷地查看。看见有人窃窃私语，奇怪为什么看不到绿翘出入。
English: When I heard about this today, I immediately went to the entrance of the Xianyi Observation Tower to take a sneak peek. I saw someone whispering, and wondered why I couldn't see the entrance and exit of the Green Hornet.

古文：街卒复呼数卒，携锸具，突入玄机院发之，而缘翘貌如生。
现代文：他就叫来了一些人，拿着挖土的工具，突然闯入玄机的后院，把绿翘的尸体挖了出来。
English: He called some people, took the digging tools, suddenly broke into the backyard of the blacksmith, and dug out the green-haired corpse.

古文：卒遂录玄机京兆，府吏诘之辞伏，而朝士多为言者。
现代文：绿翘的容貌还象活着一样。最后把玄机带到了京兆府，府吏审问此案，玄机全招认。在朝的官员们有许多人替玄机求请。
English: At the end, the crane brought the mystery to the Beijing-Shanghai prefecture. The prefectural officials interrogated the case, and the mystery was fully admitted. Many officials in the DPRK asked for the mystery.

古文：府乃表列上，至秋竟戮之。
现代文：府官无奈，只好把此案上奏给皇帝，到了秋天到底把玄机杀了。
English: Reluctantly, the prefect had no choice but to report the case to the emperor, and by the autumn he had killed the mystery man.

古文：在狱中亦有诗曰： 易求无价宝，难得有心郎。
现代文：玄机在狱中还写了诗： 易求无价宝，难得有心郎。
English: He also wrote a poem while in prison: It is easy to seek priceless treasures, but it is rare to have a heart.

古文：明月照幽隙，清风开短襟。 
现代文：明月照幽隙，清风开短襟。 
English: The bright moon shines through the gap, and the clear wind blows.

古文：此其美者也。马全节婢
现代文：这是她写的诗中最美的。马全节婢
English: This is the most beautiful poem she ever wrote.

古文：魏帅侍中马全节，尝有侍婢，偶不惬意，自击杀之。
现代文：魏帅侍中马全节。曾经有个侍奉他的婢女，由于偶然间不高兴，就把婢女给打死了。
English: Wei Shuai served the entire middle section of the horse. There was once a maid who served him, and because she was occasionally unhappy, she beat the maid to death.

古文：后累年，染重病，忽见其婢立于前。家人但讶全节之独语，如相问答。
现代文：过了几年后，马全节得了重病，忽然看见被打死的那个婢女站在他的面前，家里人都很惊讶地看见全节一个人在说话，就好象和人互相问答似的。
English: A few years later, Ma Quanzhong fell seriously ill. Suddenly, he saw the maid who had been beaten to death standing in front of him. His family was very surprised to see Quanzhong talking alone, as if he was asking and answering questions.

古文：初云： 尔来有何意？ 又云： 与尔钱财。 
现代文：开始说： 你来这里想干什么？ 又说： 给你钱财。 
English: He began by saying: What do you want to come here for? He also said: To give you money.

古文：复曰： 为尔造像书经。 
现代文：接着又说： 给你塑造泥像，书写经卷。 
English: And he said, To make thee a graven image and a book of life.

古文：哀祈移时，其亡婢不受，但索命而已。
现代文：苦苦的哀求了多时，那个被打死的婢女也不同意，只是要他偿命罢了。
English: After pleading for a long time, the servant girl who was beaten to death did not agree, but only wanted him to pay for her life.

古文：不旬日而卒。
现代文：最后马全节不过十天就死了。
English: In the end, the horse died after just ten days.

古文：鲁思郾女
现代文：鲁思郾女
English: Ruthie's Song

古文：内臣鲁思郾女，生十七年。
现代文：内臣鲁思郾有个女儿，才十七岁。
English: Ruthie, a courtier, has a daughter, only seventeen years old.

古文：一日临镜将妆，镜中忽见一妇人，披发徒跣，抱一婴儿，回顾则在其后，因恐惧顿仆，久之乃苏。
现代文：一天她对着镜子梳妆，忽然看见镜子中有一个妇人，披散着头发，光着脚，怀里还抱着一个小孩。她赶紧回过头去看，那个妇人就在她的身后。
English: One day she was putting on her make-up in front of the mirror and suddenly saw a woman in the mirror, her hair disheveled, her feet bare and a child in her arms. She quickly looked back and saw that the woman was right behind her.

古文：自是日日恒见。积久，其家人皆见之。
现代文：因为惊恐害怕，她一下子扑倒在地昏了过去，过了很长时间才苏醒过来。从这天以后，每天都常常看见那个妇人。
English: Terrified and scared, she immediately fell to the ground and fainted. It took her a long time to wake up. From that day on, she often saw the woman.

古文：思郾自问其故，答云： 己杨子县里民之女，往岁建昌县录事某以事至杨子，因聘己为侧室，君女即其正妻，岁余，生此子。
现代文：久而久之，她们全家的人也都能看见了。思郾问她来这里是什么原因，那妇人回答说： 我是杨子县乡里居民的女儿，几年前，建昌县录事某某，因事到杨子县来，把我娶做他的小老婆，你的女儿的前身就是他的正妻。过了一年多，我就生下了一个儿子。
English: After a while, their whole family could also see it. When I asked her why she came here, the woman replied: I am the daughter of a resident of Yangzi County. A few years ago, Jianchang County record so-and-so came to Yangzi County to marry me as his little wife. Your daughter's predecessor was his legal wife. After more than a year, I gave birth to a son.

古文：后录事出旁县，君女因投己于井，并此子，以石填之，诈其夫云逃去。
现代文：思郾听后，就派人急忙赶到建昌验证这件事。这时那个录事已经老了，但还活着。
English: After listening to Siyu, he sent someone to rush to Jianchang to verify the matter. At this time, the recording was old, but still alive.

古文：我方讼于所司，适会君女卒，今虽后身，固当偿命也。 
现代文：就叫人在妇人所说的那口井挖掘，果然找到了那个妇人和孩子的尸骨。
English: So they had a well dug in the place where the woman had said, and there they found the bones of the woman and the child.

古文：思郾使人驰至建昌验事，其录事老犹在，如言发井，果得骸骨。
现代文：这时思郾一家想方设法进行祭祀祈祷来免除灾祸，但都不见效。
English: At this time, the Shihong family tried every way to offer sacrifices and prayers to avoid the disaster, but to no avail.

古文：其家多方以禳之，皆不可。
现代文：后来这个女儿嫁给了褚家。
English: Later, this daughter married into the Zou family.

古文：其女后嫁褚氏，厉愈甚，旦夕惊悸，以至于卒。
现代文：但是那个妇人跟在她的身后越来越厉害了。使得她白天晚上惊恐害怕，最后就被吓死了。
English: But the woman behind her became more and more violent, causing her to be terrified day and night, until she was scared to death.

古文：鄂州小将
现代文：鄂州小将
English: Ezhou junior general

古文：鄂州小将某者，本田家子，既仕，欲结豪族，而谋其故妻。
现代文：鄂川小将某某人，本是个农家子弟，后来做了官，就想要结交那些豪门大族，因此要谋害原来的妻子。
English: Echuan young general so-and-so, originally a farmer's son, later became an official, wanted to make friends with those big families, so he wanted to murder his former wife.

古文：因相与归宁，杀之于路，弃尸江侧，并杀其同行婢。
现代文：借着回娘家看望她父母的机会，把妻子杀死在途中，把尸体扔到了江边。并把同行的一个婢女也杀了。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to return to his daughter's home to visit her parents, he killed his wife on the way and threw her body into the river. He also killed one of his companion's maids.

古文：已而奔告其家，号哭云： 为盗所杀。 
现代文：然后就急忙跑到妻子的家里，哭喊说着说： 我的妻子被强盗给杀死了。 
English: Then he ran quickly to his wife's house, crying and saying, "My wife has been killed by a robber."

古文：人不之疑也。
现代文：这样人们也就不怀疑他了。
English: That way, people won't suspect him.

古文：后数年，奉使至广陵，舍于逆旅。见一妇人卖花，酷类其所杀婢。
现代文：事情过了几年，他奉命去广陵，住在一个旅店里，看见一个妇人卖花，特别象他所杀的那个婢女。
English: A few years later, he was ordered to travel to Guangling, where he stayed in an inn and saw a woman selling flowers, much like the maid he had killed.

古文：既近，乃真是婢，见己亦再拜。
现代文：等走到近前一看，果真是所杀婢女。看见他，还给他拜了两拜。
English: And when she came near, she looked, and, behold, the damsel was dead: and when she saw him, she worshipped him two days.

古文：因问为人耶鬼耶，答云： 人也。
现代文：他惊恐的问那婢女： 你是人还是鬼？ 婢女答道： 我是人。
English: Terrified, he asked the maidservant, "Are you a man or a ghost?" The maidservant replied, "I am a man."

古文：往者为贼所击，幸而不死，既苏，得贾人船，寓载东下。
现代文：那时我们被强盗所杀，侥幸没有死，等我们苏醒过来，遇见了一个商人的船只，把我们装在船里往东边去了。
English: At that time we were killed by robbers, luckily we did not die, and when we came to our senses, we met a merchant's ship and loaded us into the boat and went to the east.

古文：今在此，与娘子卖花给食而已。 
现代文：现在在这里，我和娘子卖花维持生活。 
English: Now here, my daughter and I sell flowers to make a living.

古文：复问娘子何在，曰： 在近，可见之乎？ 
现代文：他又问： 娘子在哪里？ 婢女说： 就在附近。 他又说： 我可以见一见她吗？ 
English: And he said, Where is she? And she said, She is in the field: and he said, May I see her?

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：婢女说： 可以。 
English: A: Yes.

古文：即随之而去。一小曲中，指一贫舍曰： 此是也。 婢先入，顷之，其妻乃出，相见悲涕，各述艰苦。
现代文：不一会娘子就准备了酒食，又把他请进了内室，并给跟随他的人也都摆上酒菜，结果都喝的大醉。
English: Soon after, she prepared food and drink, invited him into the inner room, and set out food and drink for those who followed him. As a result, they all got very drunk.

古文：某亦忱然，莫之测也。
现代文：天黑了也不见他出来。
English: You wouldn't see him out after dark.

古文：俄而设食具酒，复延入内室，置饮食于从者，皆醉，日暮不出。从者稍前觇之，寂若无人，因直入室中，但见白骨一具，衣服毁裂，流血满地。
现代文：跟随他的人十分奇怪，就到近前偷偷地察看，里面一点声音也没有。于是就直走到内室里去，只看见一具白骨，衣服被撕碎了，流了满地的鲜血。
English: His followers were so puzzled that they peeped in, but there was no sound, and they went straight into the inner room, where they found only a white skeleton, torn clothes, and blood all over the floor.

古文：问其邻云： 此空宅久无居人矣。 
现代文：跟随他的人就打听那里的邻居，邻居告诉说： 这是一个空房子，很久就没有人居住了。 
English: His followers asked a neighbour about it, who told them: "It's an empty house, no one has lived there for a long time.

古文：金卮
现代文：金卮
English: Jinxuan

古文：蜀青石镇陈洪裕妻丁氏，因妒忌，打杀婢金卮，潜于本家埋瘗，仍牓通衢云： 婢金卮逃走。 
现代文：四川青石镇陈洪裕的妻子丁氏，因为妒忌，把一个叫金卮的婢女给打死了。偷偷地在家中的院里埋掉了，并在邻里间宣扬，说婢女金卮逃跑了。
English: Mr. Ding, the wife of Chen Hongyu in Qingshi Town, Sichuan Province, because of jealousy, beat a maid named Jin Qi to death, secretly buried her in the courtyard of the house, and spread the news among the neighbors that the maid, Jin Qi, had run away.

古文：经年，迁居夹江，因夏潦飘坏旧居渠岸，见死婢容质不变。
现代文：一年后，他们家搬到夹江，因夏天发大水把旧居所在的河岸冲坏了，露出了被打死的婢女的尸体，她的容貌和生前一样没有改变。
English: A year later, their family moved to Jiajiang River. Due to heavy water in the summer, the river bank where the old residence was located was washed away, revealing the body of the maid who was beaten to death. Her appearance remained unchanged.

古文：镇将具状报州，追勘款伏。
现代文：青石镇的人就把这件事写了呈状报到州里，州官马上追捕归案，丁氏伏罪。
English: The people of Qingshi Town reported the matter to the state, and the state officials immediately pursued the case, and Ding was found guilty.

古文：其婢尸一夕坏烂，遂置丁氏于法。
现代文：金卮的尸体当晚就腐烂了，于是州官就把丁氏绳之以法。
English: Mr. Jin's body had decomposed that night, so state officials brought Mr. Ding to justice.

