古文：古人酬和诗，必答其来意，非若今人为次韵所局也。
现代文：古人联称诗歌，必定要答其来意，不象当今的人在和时拘泥于原诗用韵的次序。
English: The ancients called a poem a couplet, and they must have meant what they said, unlike the people of today who stick to the order of the rhyme in the original poem.

古文：以《文选》所编何劭、张华、卢谌、刘琨、二陆、三谢诸人赠答，可知已。
现代文：从《文选》中所编的何劭、张华、卢谌、刘琨、二陆、三谢等人的赠答，就可清楚地看到这一点。
English: This can be clearly seen from the answers given by He Ying, Zhang Hua, Lu Wei, Liu Wei, Er Lu, San Xie and others in the "Selected Works."

古文：唐人尤多，不可具载。姑取杜集数篇，略纪于此。
现代文：唐人的例子尤其多，无法一一具载，这里姑且从杜甫集中选取几首，略纪于此。
English: In particular, there are many examples of Tang people, and it is impossible to record them all. Here, I will select a few poems from Du Fu's collection and briefly describe them here.

古文：高适寄杜公云： 愧尔东西南北人。 
现代文：高适寄给杜甫的诗说： 愧尔东西南北人。 
English: Gao Shi's poem sent to Du Fu said: "I am ashamed of the people of the East, West, North and South.

古文：杜则云： 东西南北更堪论。 
现代文：杜则说： 东西南北更堪论。 
English: Du Ze said, "The East, West, North and South are more worthy of discussion."

古文：高又有诗云： 草《玄》今已毕，此外更何言？ 
现代文：高又有诗说： 草《玄》今已毕，此外更何言？ 
English: Gao Zhuo said in a poem: "The grass "Xuan" is now over, what else can I say?

古文：杜则云： 草《玄》吾岂敢，赋或似相如。 
现代文：杜则说： 草《玄》吾岂敢，赋或似相如。 
English: Du Zexu said: "I wouldn't dare to do the same with "Xuan."

古文：严武寄杜云： 兴发会能驰骏马，终须重到使君滩。 
现代文：严武寄给杜甫的诗说： 兴发会能驰骏马，终须重到使君滩。 
English: The poem sent by Yan Wu to Du Fu said: If the Xingfa Association can ride a horse, it must eventually return to the Jijun Beach.

古文：杜则云： 枉沐旌麾出城府，草茅无径欲教锄。 
现代文：杜则回答： 枉沐旌麾出城府，草茅无径欲教锄。 
English: Du Zi replied: "If you leave the city, there is no way for you to teach me.

古文：杜公寄严诗云： 何路出巴山 ， 重岸细菊班，遥知簇鞍马，回首白云间。 
现代文：杜甫寄给严武的诗说： 何路出巴山  重岸细菊班，遥知簇鞍马，回首白云间。 
English: Du Fu's poem sent to Yan Wu said: What a way to go out of Bashan, heavy banks, fine chrysanthemums, distant knowledge, clustered saddle horses, looking back between white clouds.

古文：严答云： 卧向巴山落月时 ， 篱外黄花菊对谁，跂马望君非一度。 
现代文：严的答诗说： 卧向巴山落月时  篱外黄花菊对谁，跂马望君非一度。 
English: The strict answer poem said: Lying towards Mount Bashan, when the moon is setting, the yellow flowers outside the hedge will wreak havoc.

古文：杜送韦迢云： 洞庭无过雁，书疏莫相忘。 
现代文：杜甫送韦迢的诗说： 洞庭无过雁，书疏莫相忘。 
English: Du Fu's poem to Wei Wei said: "There are no geese in the cave garden, and we must not forget the books."

古文：迢云： 相忆无南雁，何时有报章？ 
现代文：韦迢的答诗说： 相忆无南雁，何时有报章？ 
English: Wei Wei's reply poem said: There is no memory of the wild goose, when will there be a newspaper?

古文：杜又云： 虽无南去雁，看取北来鱼。 
现代文：杜甫又说： 虽无南去雁，看取北来鱼。 
English: Du Fu also said: Although there is no south to go to the geese, to see the fish from the north.

古文：郭爱寄杜云： 春兴不知凡几首？ 
现代文：郭受寄给杜甫的诗说： 春兴不知凡几首？ 
English: Guo Jie sent a poem to Du Fu saying, "Chunxing doesn't know how many poems there are.

古文：杜答云： 药裹关心诗总废。 
现代文：杜答说： 药裹关心诗总废。 
English: Du Du replied, "Wrapped in medicine, concerned about poetry, it's a total waste.

古文：皆如钟磬在簴，叩之则应，往来反复，于是乎有余味矣。
现代文：这些诗都铿锵有力，如柑在钟磐之上，叩之则应，往来反复，因而余味无穷。
English: These poems are all powerful, like a mandarin orange on a bell rock, if you strike it, it will respond, and they go back and forth, so the aftertaste is endless.

