古文：起上章摄提格，尽旃蒙协洽，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。汉光武帝建武六年
English: It lasted for a total of six years. Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty ruled for six years

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之上建武六年春，正月，丙辰，以舂陵乡为章陵县，世世复徭役，比丰、沛。吴汉等拔朐，斩董宪、庞萌，江、淮、山东悉平。
现代文：春季，正月丙辰，东汉把舂陵乡改为章陵县，按照刘邦祖籍丰县和沛县的作法，世世代代免除赋税徭役。吴汉等攻下朐县，斩杀董宪、庞萌，长江、淮河、崤山以东全部平定。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the Eastern Han Dynasty changed Fuling Township to Zhangling County, according to the practice of Liu Bang's ancestral hometown of Feng County and Hepei County, and exempted from taxation and military service for generations. Wu Han and others conquered He County, killed Dong Xian and Pang Meng, and the Yangtze River, Huaihe River, and east of Lushan were all pacified.

古文：诸将还京师，置酒赏赐。
现代文：将领们返回洛阳，刘秀设酒宴赏赐。
English: The generals returned to Luoyang, and Liu Xiu held a banquet to reward them.

古文：帝积苦兵，间以隗嚣遣子内侍，公孙述远据边垂，乃谓诸将曰： 且当置此两子于度外耳。 
现代文：刘秀被多年的戎马生活所苦，因为隗嚣又派遣长子做人质，公孙述又在遥远的边陲，就对将领们说： 暂且应当把这两个人置之度外。 
English: Liu Xiu, who had suffered from the military life for many years, and who had sent his eldest son as a hostage because of the quarrel, and his grandson as a hostage in a faraway frontier, said to the generals: "We should put these two people aside for the time being."

古文：因休诸将于雒阳，分军士於河内，数腾书陇、蜀，告示祸福。
现代文：于是命将领们在洛阳休养，把军队调防到河内，多次向隗嚣、公孙述传送书信，告诉他们祸福利害。
English: As a result, the commanders-in-chief rested in Luoyang, transferred the army to Hanoi, and repeatedly sent letters to Ho Ran and Gong Sun Su to tell them about the harm and welfare.

古文：公孙述屡移书中国，自陈符命，冀以惑众。
现代文：公孙述屡次向中原地区发送文书，说自己有将当皇帝的天赐符命，想以此迷惑众人。
English: According to his grandson, he repeatedly sent documents to the Central Plains region, saying that he had a divine destiny to become emperor, in order to confuse everyone.

古文：帝与述书曰： 图谶言公孙，即宣帝也。
现代文：刘秀给公孙述写信说： 符命上说的 公孙 ，是指汉宣帝取代汉朝的人姓当涂，名高。
English: Liu Xiu wrote a letter to Gongsun Su and said, "Gongsun, which is said to be a sign of destiny, refers to the Han Emperor Xuan replacing the surnames of the Han Dynasty with Dangzhu, who was famous.

古文：代汉者姓当涂，其名高；君岂高之身邪！乃复以掌文为瑞，王莽何足效乎！
现代文：您难道是高本人吗？您又把掌纹 公孙帝 作为祥瑞，王莽怎么值得效法呢？
English: Are you Gao himself? You also regard Emperor Gongsun's palm print as auspicious. How can Wang Mang be worthy of emulation?

古文：君非吾贼臣乱子，仓卒时人皆欲为君事耳。
现代文：如今您不是我的乱臣贼子，只不过在仓猝之时，人人都想做君主罢了。
English: Now you are not my errant son, but in a hurry, everyone wants to be a monarch.

古文：君日月已逝，妻子弱小，当早为定计。
现代文：您已经年老，妻子儿女还小，应当早作决定。
English: You are old, your wife and children are young, you should have made a decision earlier.

古文：天下神器，不可力争，宜留三思！ 
现代文：天下帝王之位，不可以凭人力争得。您应当三思！ 
English: The throne of the emperor under heaven cannot be won by manpower. You should think twice!

古文：署曰： 公孙皇帝。 
现代文：信封上写的是 公孙皇帝 。
English: The envelope was addressed to Emperor Gongsun.

古文：述不答。
现代文：公孙述不予答复。
English: Gongsun did not reply.

古文：其骑都尉平陵荆邯说述曰： 汉高祖起于行陈之中，兵破身困者数矣；然军败复合，疮愈复战。
现代文：公孙述的骑都尉平陵人荆邯向公孙述建议： 汉高祖刘邦从军队中崛起，好几次兵败被困。然而溃败之后又重新聚合，养好了创伤再投入战斗。
English: Gongsun's cavalry captain, Pingling man Jing Qi, suggested to Gongsun: Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, rose from the army and was trapped in several military defeats. However, after the defeat, they regrouped, healed their wounds and then went into battle.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：前死而成功，愈于却就于灭亡也！
现代文：冒死前进反而获得成功，胜过后退归于灭亡。
English: It is better for a man to die advancing than to die retreating.

古文：隗嚣遭遇运会，割有雍州，兵强士附，威加山东；遇更始政乱，复失天下，众庶引领，四方瓦解，嚣不及此时推危乘胜以争天命，而退欲为西伯之事，尊师章句，宾友处士，偃武息戈，卑辞事汉，喟然自以文王复出也！
现代文：隗嚣遭逢时世的机运，占据雍州，军队强盛，士人归附他，威望传到崤山之东。遇到更始朝政治混乱，刘玄又失去天下，天下老百姓伸长脖子盼望太平，全国陷于土崩瓦解，隗嚣不趁此时除去危险赢得胜利，争得皇帝的宝座，而退却打算做周文王式的西方霸主。他尊崇并学习儒家经典，招揽宾客隐士，停止扩充和训练军队，低声下气地事奉汉朝，还感叹地以为自己是周文王再世。
English: When the political turmoil of the First Dynasty occurred, Liu Xuan lost the world again, the common people of the world craned their necks in hope for peace, and the country fell into a state of collapse. Instead of taking advantage of this time to remove the danger, win victory, and fight for the throne of the emperor, Yanran retreated and planned to become the western overlord of the Zhou Wen Wang style. He revered and studied Confucian classics, invited guest hermits, stopped expanding and training the army, humbly served the Han Dynasty, and thought that he was the reincarnation of King Zhou Wen.

古文：令汉帝释关、陇之忧，专精东伐，四分天下而有其三；发间使，召携贰，使西州豪桀咸居心于山东，则五分而有其四；若举兵天水，必至沮溃，天水既定，则九分而有其八。
现代文：使刘秀将对隗嚣的忧虑置之一边，专心倾注力量在东边征讨群雄，四分天下，刘秀占有三分。又派出秘密使节，招纳叛离的人，使西州一带英雄豪杰都心向崤山以东，于是五分天下，刘秀占有四分。如果向天水进攻，必定击溃隗嚣。天水平定以后，则九分天下，刘秀占有八分。
English: So Liu Xiu put his worries about the tumult to one side, and concentrated on pouring his strength into the east to recruit heroes. In the fourth quarter of the world, Liu Xiu accounted for three points. He also sent secret envoys to recruit traitors, so that the heroes and heroines around Xizhou were concentrated to the east of Lushan. Therefore, in the fifth quarter of the world, Liu Xiu accounted for four points. If he attacked Tianshui, he would certainly defeat the tumult. After the sky level was determined, it was nine points in the world, and Liu Xiu accounted for eight points.

古文：陛下以梁州之地，内奉万乘，外给三军，百姓愁困，不堪上命，将有王氏自溃之变矣！
现代文：陛下依靠梁州这块地方，对内要供奉皇帝，对外要供给军队。百姓愁苦困顿，不能忍受上面的驱使，将会发生王莽那种内部自己瓦解的变化。
English: His majesty relies on this area of Liangzhou. He needs to pay tribute to the emperor at home and supply the army to the outside world. The people are distressed and cannot bear the driving force from above. Wang Mang's kind of internal self-destruction will occur.

古文：臣之愚计，以为宜及天下之望未绝，豪桀尚可招诱，急以此时发国内精兵，令田戎据江陵，临江南之会，倚巫山之固，筑垒坚守，传檄吴、楚，长沙以南必随风而靡。令延岑出汉中，定三辅，天水、陇西拱手自服。
现代文：以我的愚见，应该趁着天下百姓要求太平的愿望没有断绝，英雄豪杰还可以招纳罗致，赶紧在此时，征调国内的精锐部队，命田戎占据江陵，面对长江的会合处，依靠巫山的险阻，修筑壁垒坚守；向吴、楚各地发布文书，长沙以南一定会望风归降；命延岑出兵汉中，平定三辅，天水、陇西会拱手自己臣服。
English: In my foolish opinion, we should take advantage of the fact that the world's people's desire for peace has not been broken. Hero heroes can also recruit Luo Zi. At this time, we should urgently recruit domestic elite troops, command Tian Rong to occupy Jiangling, face the meeting place of the Yangtze River, rely on Wushan's perilous obstacles, and build barriers to persist; issue documents to Wu and Chu regions, south of Changsha will surely hope for the wind to fall; command Yan Rong out of the soldiers, pacify San Su, Tianshui, and Shaanxi will surrender themselves.

古文：如此，海内震摇，冀有大利。 
现代文：这样一来，天下震撼，希望有最大的利益可图。 
English: In this way, the shaking of the sea is very beneficial to us.

古文：述以问群臣，博士吴柱曰： 武王伐殷，八百诸侯不期同辞，然犹还师以待天命。
现代文：公孙述以荆邯的话询问群臣，博士吴柱说： 周武王讨伐商王朝，八百个诸侯不约而同地表示赞成，然而仍退兵等待上天的旨意。
English: Gongsun recounted that he asked the group of ministers in the words of Jing Yao, and Dr. Wu Zhu said: King Zhou Wu fought against the merchant dynasty, and eight hundred princes unanimously expressed their approval, but still withdrew to wait for the will of heaven.

古文：未闻无左右之助。而欲出师千里之外者也。 
现代文：没有听说过没有周围邻国的协助，而打算出兵千里之外的事！ 
English: Haven't they heard of planning to send troops thousands of miles away without the assistance of surrounding neighboring countries!

古文：邯曰： 今东帝无尺十之柄，驱乌合之众，跨马陷敌，所向辄平，不亟乘时与之分功，而坐谈武王之说，是复效隗嚣欲为西伯也。 
现代文：荆邯说： 刘秀并没有一尺土地的凭藉，驱驰一群乌合之众，但跨上战马冲锋陷阵，所向无敌。不赶快抓住时机和刘秀分享功业，却坐在那里大谈周武王的主张，这是再次效法隗嚣想当周文王的做法。 
English: Jing Yao said: Liu Xiu did not have a foot of land to drive a group of rabble, but he was invincible when he charged into battle. He did not quickly seize the opportunity to share his work with Liu Xiu, but sat there and talked about the proposition of King Zhou Wu. This was another example of trying to be King Zhou Wen.

古文：述然邯言，欲悉发北军屯士及山东客兵，使延岑、田戎分出两道，与汉中诸将合兵并势。
现代文：公孙述同意荆邯的话，准备征发所有北军屯垦的士兵以及由崤山以东地区的人组成的客籍军队。命令延岑、田戎分两路出发，和汉中各将领的部队合并，共同进击。
English: Gongsun Su agreed with Jing Hui's words and prepared to conscript all the soldiers of the Northern Army and the guest army composed of people from the east of Lushan. He ordered Yan Hui and Tian Rong to set out in two directions, and merge with the troops of the generals of the Han Dynasty and advance together.

古文：蜀人及其弟光以为不宜空国千里之外，决成败于一举，固争之，述乃止。
现代文：可是蜀地人士和公孙述的弟弟公孙光认为，不应倾全国之力征战千里之外，以此一举决定成败。他们极力反对，公孙述才作罢。
English: However, the people of Shu and Gongsun's younger brother, Gongsun Guang, believed that the whole country should not be forced to fight thousands of miles away, thereby deciding success or failure in one fell swoop. They strenuously objected, and Gongsun had to stop.

古文：延岑、田戎亦数请兵立功，述终疑不听，唯公孙氏得任事。
现代文：延岑、田戎也多次请求带兵建立功绩，公孙述始终疑虑不接受，只有公孙氏家族的人能够掌权。
English: Yancheng and Tian Rong also repeatedly asked Gongsun to take soldiers to establish merit, but Gongsun always doubted and did not accept, and only people from Gongsun's family could take power.

古文：述废铜钱，置铁钱，货币不行，百姓苦之。
现代文：公孙述下诏令废除铜钱，铸铁钱，结果货币不通行，老百姓苦不堪言。
English: Gongsun recounted the edict to abolish copper money and cast iron money. As a result, money was not allowed to circulate, and the common people suffered greatly.

古文：为政苛细，察于小事，如为清水令时而已。
现代文：公孙述为政苛细，对于很小的事也要过问，就像当初做清水县令时那样。
English: Gongsun said that he is a strict politician, and he has to ask questions about small things, just as he did when he was the governor of Shimizu County.

古文：好改易郡县官名。
现代文：并喜欢改换郡县官名。
English: They also like to change the official names of counties.

古文：少尝为郎，习汉家故事，出入法驾，鸾旗旄骑。
现代文：他年轻时曾经出任过郎的官职，熟悉汉朝的旧典，称帝后出宫入宫都用法驾，以绣着鸾鸟的大旗、枪杆上挂着牦牛尾的骑士作前导。
English: When he was young, he had served as the official post of the son-in-law, was familiar with the old books of the Han Dynasty, and said that the empress used the law to enter and leave the palace, with a large flag embroidered with ostriches and a knight with a yakitori on the gun as a guide.

古文：又立其两子为王，食犍为、广汉各数县。
现代文：又封他的两个儿子为王，各以犍为、广汉两郡的几个县做食邑。
English: He also set up his two sons as kings, and appointed Shifu as the ruler of several counties in Guanghan.

古文：或谏曰： 成败未可知，戎士暴露而先王爱子，示无大志也！ 
现代文：有人向公孙述进谏： 成败还未可知，战士们暴露在沙场上，而先封自己的爱子为王，这表示没有远大的志向！ 
English: Someone told Gongsun: "Success or failure is still unknown. The soldiers are exposed on the battlefield, but they first made their beloved son king. This shows that they do not have lofty aspirations!"

古文：述不从，由此大臣皆怨。
现代文：公孙述不听规劝。从此大臣们全都怨恨。
English: He did not listen to the advice, and from then on, all the ministers were bitter.

古文：冯异自长安入朝，帝谓公卿曰： 是我起兵时主簿也，为吾披荆棘，定关中。 
现代文：冯异从长安到洛阳入朝晋见。刘秀对公卿说： 冯异是我当初起兵时的主簿，为我披荆斩棘，平定关中。 
English: From Chang'an to Luoyang, Feng Yiyi went to meet Emperor Jin. Liu Xiu said to the nobleman: Feng Yiyi was my main guide when I first joined the army. He cut thorns and briers for me and pacified Guanzhong.

古文：既罢，赐珍宝、钱帛，诏曰： 仓卒芜蒌亭豆粥，虖沱河麦饭，厚意久不报。 
现代文：晋见已毕，赏赐珍宝、钱、帛，颁下诏书说： 当初在仓猝之时，你在芜蒌亭进献豆粥，在滹沱河进献麦饭，深情厚意，长时间未能回报。 
English: At the end of the meeting, Jin bestowed treasures, money, and money, and issued an edict saying: At the beginning, when you were in a hurry, you offered bean porridge at Jingting and wheat rice at Luohe. You were very kind, and you could not return the favor for a long time.

古文：异稽首谢曰： 臣闻管仲谓桓公曰： 愿君无忘射钩，臣无忘槛车。 
现代文：冯异叩头拜谢说： 我听说管仲对齐桓公说： 愿君王不忘我射您带钩的事，我不忘被装入囚车的事。 
English: Feng Yiyi bowed his head and said, "I heard that Guan Zhong said to King Qi Huan, 'May the king not forget that I shot you with a hook, and may I not forget that I was loaded into a prison wagon.'

古文：齐国赖之。臣今亦愿国家无忘河北之难，小臣不敢忘巾车之恩。 
现代文：齐国依靠这两个人强盛起来，我今天也愿陛下勿忘河北的苦难，我不会忘记在巾车乡您对我的恩德。 
English: Qi Province relied on these two people to become strong. Today, I also wish His Majesty not to forget the suffering in Hebei. I will not forget your kindness to me in Zhanzhe Township.

古文：留十馀日，令与妻子还西。
现代文：冯异在洛阳逗留十余天，刘秀命他和妻子儿女西行返回任所。
English: Feng Yin stayed in Luoyang for more than ten days. Liu Xiu ordered him, his wife and children to go west and return to his post.

古文：申屠刚、杜林自隗嚣所来，帝皆拜侍御史。
现代文：申屠刚、杜林从隗嚣那里来到洛阳，刘秀任命二人当侍御史。
English: Shen Tuogang and Du Lin came to Luoyang from Yulin, and Liu Xiu appointed the two of them as attendants.

古文：以郑兴为太中大夫。
现代文：任命郑兴当太中大夫。
English: Appointed Zheng Xing as the First Vice-Admiral.

古文：三月，公孙述使田戎出江关，招其故众，欲以取荆州，不克。
现代文：三月，公孙述命田戎出江关，招集其旧部，准备夺取荆州。不能取胜。
English: In March, Gongsun Suermei sent Tian Rong out of Jiangguan to gather his old troops and prepare to capture Jingzhou. However, he could not win.

古文：帝乃诏隗嚣，欲从天水伐蜀。
现代文：刘秀于是给隗嚣下诏，打算让他从天水出兵攻打公孙述。
English: Liu Xiu then issued an edict to Yan Yan, intending to have him send troops from Tianshui to attack Gongsun Su.

古文：嚣上言： 白水险阻，栈阁败绝。
现代文：隗嚣上书说： 白水关险恶，难以通过，栈道残破断绝，无法利用。
English: The petition said: "The whitewater pass is dangerous and difficult to pass, and the footpath is broken and cannot be used.

古文：述性严酷，上下相患，须其罪恶孰著而攻之，此大呼响应之势也。 
现代文：公孙述性情严厉残暴，上下相互不信任，等到他的罪恶显露出来再攻打他，就能造成一呼而内外响应的形势。 
English: The public grandson described a stern and cruel disposition, mutual distrust between the upper and lower levels, and waiting until his sins were revealed and then attacking him could create a situation that would elicit a response from both inside and outside.

古文：帝知其终不为用，乃谋讨之。
现代文：刘秀知道隗嚣终不能被己所用，于是策划出兵讨伐他。
English: Liu Xiu knew that Yanran could not be used by him in the end, so he planned to send troops to fight him.

古文：夏，四月，丙子，上行幸长安，谒园陵；遣耿弇、盖延等七将军从陇道伐蜀，先使中郎将来歙奉玺书赐嚣谕旨。
现代文：夏季，四月丙子，刘秀前往长安，拜谒汉朝历代皇帝的陵墓。派遣耿、盖延等七位将军取道陇西征讨公孙述。刘秀先派中郎将来歙赐给隗嚣诏书，告诉他自己的意图。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Xiu went to Chang'an to visit the mausoleums of the emperors of the Han Dynasty. He sent seven generals, including Geng and Gai Yan, to the west of Shaanxi Province to collect information about his grandchildren. Liu Xiusen sent his middle son, who would later be given the imperial rescript, to tell him of his intentions.

古文：嚣复多设疑故，事久豫不决。
现代文：隗嚣又反复考虑，疑虑重重，很长时间不能决断。
English: After much agitation and repeated consideration, with many doubts, it took a long time to come to a decision.

古文：歙遂发愤质素嚣曰： 国家以君知臧否，晓废兴，故以手书畅意。
现代文：来歙生气地责备隗嚣说： 皇上认为您懂得善恶是非，通晓胜衰兴亡，所以亲自写信，充分表达自己的意愿。
English: Lai Yao angrily rebuked Xuan Rong and said, "The emperor thinks that you understand the right and wrong of good and evil, and are familiar with the rise and fall of victory and defeat, so he personally wrote a letter to fully express his wishes.

古文：足下推忠诚，既遣伯春委质，而反欲用佞惑之言，为族灭之计邪！ 
现代文：您推诚效忠，已经派您的儿子隗恂到洛阳做人质，却反而要听从小人的蛊惑之言，要做灭族的打算吗？ 
English: On the basis of your sincere loyalty, you have sent your son to Luoyang as a hostage, but on the contrary, you want to listen to the demagogic words of the villain and plan to exterminate the people?

古文：因欲前刺嚣。
现代文：于是准备向前刺杀隗嚣。
English: So they prepared to move forward with their assassination campaign.

古文：嚣起入，部勒兵将杀歙，歙徐杖节就车而去，嚣使牛邯将兵围守之。
现代文：隗嚣起身入内，召集部众要杀来歙。来歙从容地拿着符节登车离去。隗嚣让牛邯率兵把来歙的车团团围住。
English: Gong Han got up and went inside. He gathered the members of the club to kill Lai Xuan. Lai Xuan calmly boarded the car with the symbols and left. Gong Han let Niulong and his soldiers surround Lai Xuan's car group.

古文：嚣将王遵谏曰： 君叔虽单车远使，而陛下之外兄也，杀之无损于汉，而随以族灭。
现代文：隗嚣的部将王遵劝谏说： 来歙虽然是单独充任远方的使节，但他是刘秀的表哥。杀了他无损于汉朝，却会随之召来灭族之灾。
English: The tumultuous general Wang Zun advised Lu: Although Lu Yong was the sole envoy to a distant place, he was Liu Xiu's cousin. Killing him would not harm the Han Dynasty, but it would bring the disaster of extermination.

古文：昔宋执楚使，遂有析骸易子之祸。
现代文：从前，宋国捕杀楚国的使节，招来用人骨作木柴、易子而食的大祸。
English: Once upon a time, the Song Dynasty captured and killed the envoys of the Chu Kingdom, inviting the great disaster of using human bones for firewood and eating their children.

古文：小国犹不可辱，况于万乘之主，重以伯春之命哉！ 
现代文：对小国尚且不可以侮辱，何况对于万乘之尊的帝王。您要以隗恂的性命为重啊！ 
English: It is not permissible to insult a small country, let alone the Emperor of Manjusri. You should value the life of a baboon!

古文：歙为人有信义，言行不违，及往来游说，皆可按覆；西州士大夫皆信重之，多为其言，故得免而东归。
现代文：来歙为人讲信义，言行一致，往来游说，诚实可信，都可一一对证。西州的士大夫都信任、尊重他，很多人替他求情。
English: Xiuzhou's politicians and magistrates all trust and respect him, and many people intercede on his behalf.

古文：五月，己未，车驾至自长安。
现代文：所以能够免于死难，回到洛阳。五月己未，刘秀从长安回到洛阳。
English: Therefore, he was able to avoid death and return to Luoyang. Before May, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：隗嚣遂发兵反，使王元据陇坻，伐木塞道。
现代文：隗嚣于是起兵叛变。命王元防守陇坻，砍伐树木，堵塞道路。
English: He ordered Wang Yuan to defend the castle, cut down trees, and block the road.

古文：诸将因与嚣战，大败，各引兵下陇；嚣追之急，马武选精骑为后拒，杀数千人，诸军乃得还。
现代文：东汉将领们因此和隗嚣交战，被打得大败，各自率兵逃下陇山。隗嚣急速追赶，东汉将军马武挑选精锐骑兵断后，杀敌数千人，各路军队才得以返回。
English: As a result, the Eastern Han generals fought against the Huns and were soundly defeated. They each led their troops to escape down Shaoshan. The Huns quickly chased after the Huns. After the Eastern Han general Ma Wu selected the elite cavalry, he killed thousands of the enemy, and the various armies were able to return.

古文：六月辛卯，诏曰： 夫张官置吏，所以为民也。
现代文：六月辛卯，刘秀下诏说： 设置官吏，是替老百姓服务。
English: In June of Xinwu, Liu Xiu issued an edict saying: The establishment of officials is to serve the people.

古文：今百姓遭难，户口耗少，而县官吏职，所置尚繁。
现代文：而今百姓遭难，户口减少，而国家官吏的设置还很繁多。
English: But now the people are suffering, the number of hukou is decreasing, and there are still a lot of state officials.

古文：其令司隶、州牧各实所部，省减吏员，县国不足置长吏者并之。 
现代文：现令司隶、州牧各自在所辖范围核实实际需要，裁减官员。无论是县还是封国，不足以设置长吏的，予以合并。 
English: It is now ordered that the subordinates and the state pastors should verify the actual needs in their respective areas of jurisdiction and reduce the number of officials. Whether it is a county or a fiefdom, if it is not enough to set up officials, it should be merged.

古文：于是并省四百馀县，吏职减损，十置其一。
现代文：于是合并减少四百余个县，官吏的职位也减少了，十个官员，留任一个。
English: As a result, the merger reduced more than four hundred counties, and the positions of officials were also reduced. Ten officials were promoted, and one remained in office.

古文：九月，丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：九月丙寅晦，出现日食。
English: In late September, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：执金吾硃浮上疏曰： 昔尧、舜之盛，犹如三考；大汉之兴，亦累功效，吏皆积久，至长子孙。
现代文：执金吾朱浮给上书说： 从前，在尧、舜时的太平盛世，还每隔三年对官员进行考核。大汉王朝兴起，也是被功绩所带累，官吏在职的时间都很长，甚至传给长子长孙。
English: Executor Jinwu Zhufu said in his letter: In the past, during the peaceful and prosperous times of the Han and Qing dynasties, officials were evaluated every three years. The rise of the Han Dynasty was also burdened by merit, and officials were in office for a long time, even passed down to their eldest sons and grandsons.

古文：当时吏职，何能悉治，论议之徒，岂不喧哗！
现代文：当时的官吏办事，怎么能够治理得好，评论抨击的人，怎不喧哗？
English: How could the officials of that time govern well, and how could the critics not make a fuss?

古文：盖以为天地之功不可仓卒，艰难之业当累日也。
现代文：我认为，创建天地那样大的功业，不可能仓促完成；艰难的事业应当逐日积累，才能成功。
English: I thought that the merits of heaven and earth cannot be achieved in a hurry, and that hard work can only be accomplished when it takes a long time.

古文：而间者守宰数见换易，迎新相代，疲劳道路。
现代文：近来郡县长官频繁地被替换，迎新送旧，在路途上疲于奔波。
English: But recently, the number of defenders has seen a change of fortune, welcoming a new generation, and fatigue is running on the road.

古文：寻其视事日浅，未足昭见其职，既加严切，人不自保，迫于举劾，惧于刺讥，故争饰诈伪以希虚誉，斯所以致日月失行之应也。
现代文：探究起来，他们在任的时间很短，不足以明确显示他们的政绩就已遭到严厉的责备，官吏不能自保，为检举、弹劾所迫，又害怕讽刺讥笑，所以争着装扮自己，用欺诈伪装的手段求得虚浮的美名。这正是导致日月不能正常运行、出现日食的原因。
English: To explore, their time in office is very short, not enough to clearly show that their political performance has been severely criticized, officials cannot protect themselves, forced by prosecution and impeachment, and afraid of irony and ridicule, so they compete to dress themselves up and use fraudulent means to obtain a false reputation. This is precisely the reason why the sun and moon cannot operate normally and a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：夫物暴长者必夭折，功卒成者必亟坏。
现代文：生物突然暴长必定会夭折，功业一下子成功必定会很快衰败。
English: Creatures with sudden explosive growth are bound to die young, and those with sudden success are bound to decay quickly.

古文：如摧长久之业而造速成之功，非陛下之福也。
现代文：如果摧毁长久的大业，而求速成的功效，不是陛下的福分。
English: It is not His Majesty's good fortune to destroy a long-standing enterprise for the sake of a quick fix.

古文：愿陛下游意于经年之外，望治于一世之后，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：希望陛下高瞻远瞩，从长远考虑，直看到三十年之后，天下有幸！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will look ahead, think long-term, and see that thirty years from now, the world will be a better place!

古文：帝采其言，自是牧守易代颇简。
现代文：刘秀采纳朱浮的建议，从此以后，地方州牧太守更换的次数大为减少。
English: Liu Xiu adopted Zhu Fu's suggestion, and from then on, the number of times the local prefectural chief abbot was replaced was greatly reduced.

古文：十二月，壬辰，大司空宋弘免。
现代文：十二月壬辰，免去大司空宋弘的职务。
English: In December, Jintian relieved the position of Daishi Ku Songhong.

古文：癸巳，诏曰： 顷者师旅未解，用度不足，故行十一之税。
现代文：癸巳，刘秀下诏： 前些时战事不息，国家经费不足，所以按十分之一收税。
English: Suddenly, Liu Xiu issued an edict: In recent times, the war has not stopped, and the national funds are insufficient, so the tax will be collected at one-tenth.

古文：今粮储差积，其令郡国收见田租三十税一，如旧制。 
现代文：如今粮食储备增多，从现在起，各郡、各封国收取现有田地的田租，按三十分之一征税，恢复原来的制度。 
English: Today, grain reserves have increased. From now on, counties and fiefdoms will collect the field rent of existing fields and tax it at one-thirtieth, restoring the original system.

古文：诸将之下陇也，帝诏耿弇军漆，冯异军栒邑，祭遵军汧，吴汉等还屯长安。
现代文：东汉将领们兵败退下陇山之后，刘秀命耿在漆县驻屯，命冯异在邑驻屯，命祭遵在县驻屯，命吴汉等率军返回长安驻屯。
English: After the Eastern Han generals retreated from Lushan in defeat, Liu Xiu ordered Geng to stay in Urushi County, Feng Yi to stay in E, Meitai Zun to stay in the county, and Wu Han to stay in Chang'an.

古文：冯异引军未至栒邑，隗嚣乘胜使王元、行巡将二万馀人下陇，分遣巡取栒邑。
现代文：冯异率军还没到达邑，隗嚣乘胜派王元、行巡率领二万余人下陇山，分派行巡夺取邑。
English: Before Feng Yixing's army arrived at the town, Wang Yuan, the leader of the victorious faction, led a procession of more than 20,000 people down Lushan Mountain to seize the town.

古文：异即驰兵欲先据之，诸将曰： 虏兵盛而乘胜，不可与争锋，宜止军便地，徐思方略。 
现代文：冯异马上急行军挺进，要抢先占据邑。将领们说： 敌人强盛，又乘着胜利的锐气，不能和他们争锋。应停止行军，在有利的地点安营，慢慢图谋策划。 
English: Feng Yi's army immediately rushed forward to occupy the town ahead of time. The generals said: "The enemy is strong, and with the spirit of victory, we cannot fight with them. We should stop marching, camp in a favorable location, and slowly plot and plan.

古文：异曰： 虏兵临境，忸忄犬小利，遂欲深入；若得栒邑，三辅动摇。
现代文：冯异说： 敌军压境，是习惯于获取小利，因而打算深入。敌人如果取得邑，三辅就会动摇。
English: Feng Yin said: The enemy forces are accustomed to obtaining small profits, so they plan to go deeper. If the enemy obtains the county, the three auxiliary forces will be shaken.

古文：夫攻者不足，守者有馀。
现代文：采取攻势不足时，采取守势则有余。
English: When it is not enough to take the offensive, it is more than enough to take the defensive.

古文：今先据城，以逸待劳，非所以争也。 
现代文：我们抢先占据邑，是以逸待劳，不是和敌人决高下。 
English: We occupied the county ahead of the enemy, and we did so by working hard, not by competing with the enemy.

古文：潜往，闭城，偃旗鼓。
现代文：于是秘密进城，关闭城门，偃旗息鼓。
English: So he secretly entered the city, closed the gates, and called a halt.

古文：行巡不知，驰赴之。
现代文：行巡完全蒙在鼓里，急忙赶赴邑。
English: The procession, completely in the dark, hurried to the village.

古文：异乘其不意，卒击鼓、建旗而出。
现代文：冯异乘其不备，突然间战鼓齐鸣、旌旗招展，率军而出。
English: Feng Yixin took advantage of their unpreparedness, and suddenly the war drums were beating in unison, the flags were unfurled, and he led the army out.

古文：巡军惊乱奔走，追击，大破之。
现代文：行巡的军队惊慌散乱，四下奔逃。冯异追击，大破敌军。
English: The marching troops panicked and scattered, fleeing in all directions. Feng Yi chased and defeated the enemy army.

古文：祭遵亦破王元于汧。
现代文：祭遵也在县打败王元的军队。
English: Saizun is also in the process of defeating Wang Yuan.

古文：于是北地诸豪长耿定等悉畔隗嚣降。
现代文：于是北地郡诸豪强首领耿定等全都背叛隗嚣，投降东汉。
English: As a result, the powerful leaders of the Hokkien County, such as Geng Ding, all betrayed the clamor and surrendered to the Eastern Han.

古文：诏异进军义渠，击破卢芳将贾览、匈奴奥鞬日逐王，北地、上郡、安定皆降。
现代文：刘秀命令冯异进军义渠。冯异击败卢芳的将领贾览以及匈奴奥日逐王。北地郡、上郡、安定郡全部归降。
English: Liu Xiu ordered Feng Yixuan to march into Yichuan. Feng Yixuan defeated Lu Fang's general Jiaxian and the Xiongnu Emperor Ao Rong. Hebei County, Shang County, and Anding County all surrendered.

古文：窦融复遣其弟友上书曰： 臣幸得托先后末属，累世二千石，臣复假历将帅，守持一隅，故遣刘钧口陈肝胆，自以底里上露，长无纤介。
现代文：窦融又派弟弟窦友前往洛阳，向刘秀上书说： 我很幸运，能够成为先皇后亲属的后代，好几代都是二千石俸禄。我又暂任将帅，镇守一方。所以派遣刘钧，向您口头表达我的赤胆忠心，从内心深处对您没有丝毫隐瞒。
English: Dou Rong also sent his younger brother Dou You to Luoyang to write to Liu Xiu, saying, "I am very fortunate to be the descendant of the first queen's relatives, and for several generations I have received a stipend of 2,000 koku. I am also the temporary commander-in-chief, the town guard. Therefore, I sent Liu Ye to verbally express my loyalty to you, and I did not hide anything from you from the bottom of my heart.

古文：而玺书盛称蜀、汉二主三分鼎足之权，任嚣、尉佗之谋，窃自痛伤。
现代文：而您的诏书却称赞公孙述、隗嚣两位君主三分天下、形成鼎足之势的权力，提到任嚣、尉佗的谋划，我深感忧伤悲痛。
English: Your imperial edict, however, praised the progeny and descendants of the two monarchs as having won three-quarters of the world's power and having formed the strongest power. I was deeply saddened and pained when you mentioned the plans of Ren Ren and Guo Wei.

古文：臣融虽无识，犹知利害之际、顺逆之分。
现代文：我窦融虽然无知无识，但在利与害之际、顺与逆之间，岂能背叛真主旧主，去事奉奸恶、假冒的人！
English: In spite of my ignorance and lack of knowledge, in times of benefit and harm, between obedience and disobedience, how could I betray God, my former master, and serve the wicked and hypocrites!

古文：岂可背真旧之主，事奸伪之人；废忠贞之节，为倾覆之事；弃已成之基，求无冀之利。
现代文：岂能废弃忠贞的节操，去做颠覆国家的坏事！岂能抛弃已经成就的基础，去追求并无希望的利益！
English: Shall he forsake the Lord that is true, and serve a false god? Shall he forsake the law of faithfulness, and go about to overthrow kingdoms? Shall he forsake his inheritance, and seek after dishonest gain?

古文：此三者，虽问狂夫，犹知去就，而臣独何以用心！
现代文：就此三项，即使去问一个疯子，还知道如何决定，而我为什么偏偏会别有用心！
English: On these three points, even if you ask a madman, you still know how to decide, and why would I have ulterior motives!

古文：谨遣弟友诣阙，口陈至诚。 
现代文：谨派我的弟弟窦友前往，亲口陈述我的至诚。 
English: I would like to send my younger brother Douyou to go there and personally state my sincerity.

古文：友至高平，会隗嚣反，道不通，乃遣司马席封间道通书。
现代文：窦友走到高平县，正赶上隗嚣叛变，道路不通，于是派遣司马席封从小路把信带到洛阳。
English: Douyou walked to Gaoping County, just in time to catch the tumultuous mutiny, the road was impassable, so he sent Sima Xifeng to take the letter to Luoyang from the side road.

古文：帝复遣封，赐融、友书，所以尉藉之甚厚。
现代文：刘秀又派席封给窦融、窦友带信，安慰他们，感情深厚。
English: Liu Xiu also sent a sealed letter to Dou Rong and Dou You, consoling them with deep feelings.

古文：融乃与隗嚣书曰： 将军亲遇厄会之际，国家不利之时，守节不回，承事本朝。
现代文：窦融于是给隗嚣写信说： 当年，将军亲身遭遇艰难时世，国家蒙受不幸之际，能够坚守节操，义无返顾，效忠汉朝。
English: Dou Rong then wrote a letter to Gong Han, saying: In that year, when the general personally encountered difficult times and the country suffered misfortune, he was able to stick to the discipline, never looked back, and was loyal to the Han Dynasty.

古文：融等所以欣服高义，愿从役于将军者，良为此也！
现代文：我等所以钦佩您的高义，愿意听从您的役使，原因的确在此。
English: This is why we admire your high sense of justice and are willing to be of service to you.

古文：而忿悁之间，改节易图，委成功，造难就，百年累之，一朝毁之，岂不惜乎！
现代文：然而您在愤怒急躁之间，改变自己的节操和意图，舍弃已成之功，去开创难成之业。百年积累的成果，毁于一旦，难道不可惜吗？
English: However, in the midst of your anger and impatience, you change your principles and intentions, abandon what has already been accomplished, and create a difficult career. Isn't it a pity that the achievements accumulated over a hundred years are destroyed in one fell swoop?

古文：殆执事者贪功建谋，以至于此。
现代文：恐怕是在下面管事的人贪功，设计阴谋，以至成了现在这个样子。
English: I'm afraid that the people in charge below were greedy for power and scheming, which led to the current situation.

古文：当今西州地势局迫，民兵离散，易以辅人，难以自建。
现代文：当前西州地区地势狭窄局促，人民和军队分散，辅助别人是容易的，自己单独开创局面是艰难的。
English: The current Xizhou region is narrow and cramped, the people and the army are scattered, it is easy to assist others, but it is difficult to create a situation alone.

古文：计若失路不反，闻道犹迷，不南合子阳，则北入文伯耳。
现代文：假若迷途而不返，听到道理仍然迷惑，那么，不是向南投向公孙述，就是向北加入卢芳罢了。
English: If you lose your way and don't return, and it's still confusing to hear the truth, then either go south to tell your grandchildren, or go north to join Lu Fang.

古文：夫负虚交而易强御，恃远救而轻近敌，未见其利也。
现代文：依靠虚假的交情而轻视敌人的强悍，仗恃远方的援救而轻视眼前的敌人，看不到有什么好处。
English: Relying on false friendship while belittling the enemy's toughness, relying on distant rescue while belittling the immediate enemy, I can't see any benefits.

古文：自兵起以来，城郭皆为丘墟，生民转于沟壑。
现代文：自从战争发生以来，城市全变成废墟，百姓辗转于沟壑之间。
English: Since the war broke out, the city has been reduced to rubble, with people living in the gutters.

古文：幸赖天运少还，而将军复重其难，是使积疴不得遂瘳，幼孤将复流离，言之可为酸鼻。
现代文：幸运的是，天运稍有回转，可是将军又要重复当初的灾难。这是使旧病不能痊愈，幼童孤儿将再度流离失所，提起这些就可以使人悲痛酸鼻。
English: Fortunately, there is a slight turnaround in the fortunes of heaven, but the general will repeat the original disaster. This is to make the old disease incurable, the young children and orphans will be displaced again, and mentioning these can make people sad and sour.

古文：庸人且犹不忍，况仁者乎！
现代文：庸人还都不忍心，何况仁慈的人呢？
English: The mediocre have no patience, how much less the merciful?

古文：融闻为忠甚易，得宜实难。
现代文：我听说做忠诚的事很容易，但做得得当确实很难。
English: It is said that it is easy to be loyal, but it is very difficult to be loyal in the right way.

古文：忧人太过，以德取怨，知且以言获罪也！ 
现代文：替人担忧过分，就是以恩德换取怨恨。我知道我将因为上述这些话而获罪。 
English: To worry excessively about others is to exchange kindness for resentment. I know that I will be punished for these words.

古文：嚣不纳。
现代文：隗嚣不采纳。
English: We won't accept any hysteria.

古文：融乃与五郡太守共砥厉兵马，上疏请师期；帝深嘉美之。
现代文：窦融于是和五郡太守共同厉兵秣马，并向刘秀上书，请求指示出兵日期。
English: Therefore, Dou Rong and the five county governors jointly sent soldiers and sent a letter to Liu Xiu, requesting the date of dispatch.

古文：融即与诸郡守将兵入金城，击嚣党先零羌封何等，大破之。
现代文：刘秀深切嘉勉赞美窦融。窦融随即和各郡太守率军进入金城，攻击隗嚣同党先零羌首领封何等，大破羌军。
English: Liu Xiu deeply appreciated and praised Dou Rong. Dou Rong immediately led the army into Jincheng with the county governors, attacked the party leaders, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：因并河，扬威武，伺候车驾。
现代文：于是沿着黄河，显扬军威，恭侯圣驾。
English: So, they marched along the Yellow River, displaying their military might and paying homage to the saint.

古文：时大兵未进，融乃引还。
现代文：当时大军还未进发，窦融于是率军返回。
English: At that time, the large army had not yet advanced, so Dou Rong led the army back.

古文：帝以融信效著明，益嘉之，修理融父坟墓，祠以太牢，数驰轻使，致遗四方珍羞。
现代文：刘秀因为窦融很讲信义，清楚地表明了立场，更加嘉奖他。下令整修窦融父亲的坟墓，用牛羊猪各一祭祀，屡次派出轻装使者，送给窦融四方进贡的珍奇食物。
English: Liu Xiu praised Dou Rong even more because he was very faithful and clearly stated his position. He ordered the renovation of Dou Rong's father's grave, with one sacrifice for each of the cattle, sheep and pigs, and repeatedly sent light-weighted messengers to give Dou Rong the rare food from the four sides.

古文：梁统犹恐众心疑惑，乃使人刺杀张玄，遂与隗嚣绝，皆解所假将军印绶。
现代文：梁统仍然担心大家犹豫疑惑，便派人刺杀隗嚣的使者张玄，于是同隗嚣绝交。把隗嚣授予的将军印信绶带全都解下。
English: Liang Tong was still worried that everyone was hesitating and doubting, so he sent someone to assassinate Zhang Xuan, the envoy of Yan Yan, and then broke off diplomatic relations with Yan Yan. He removed all the general seal letters and ribbons awarded to Yan Yan.

古文：先是，马援闻隗嚣欲贰于汉，数以书责譬之，嚣得书增怒。
现代文：先前，马援听说隗嚣对汉朝怀有二心，准备独立，几次写信责备劝说他。隗嚣收到信后更加愤怒。
English: Earlier, Ma Yuan had heard that Gong Han had second thoughts about the Han Dynasty and was preparing for independence, and had written to Gong Han several times to reproach and persuade him. Gong Han was even more angry after receiving the letter.

古文：及嚣发兵反，援乃上书曰： 臣与隗嚣本实交友，初遣臣东，谓臣曰： 本欲为汉，愿足下往观之，于汝意可，即专心矣。 
现代文：等到隗嚣发兵反叛，马援于是给刘秀上书说： 我和隗嚣本是朋友，开始派我东来时，他对我说： 我本打算拥戴汉朝，请你前往洛阳观察，你认为可以，我就专心一意拥戴汉王朝。 
English: When Yanran sent troops to rebel, Ma Yuan then wrote to Liu Xiu saying: I am friends with Yanran. When he started to send me to the East, he said to me: I had planned to support the Han Dynasty. Please go to Luoyang to observe. If you think it is possible, I will concentrate on supporting the Han Dynasty.

古文：及臣还反，报以赤心，实欲导之于善，非敢谲以非义。
现代文：等我返回，真心诚意地以实汇报，确实想引导他从善，不敢用不义欺诈他。
English: Wait until I get back, report the disturbance with a pure heart, sincerely want to induce him to do good, and do not dare to instigate what he considers to be an unjust act.

古文：而嚣自挟奸心，盗憎主人，怨毒之情，遂归于臣。
现代文：可是隗嚣自怀奸恶之心，就像强盗憎恨主人，怨恨的感情，于是集中在我的身上。
English: But, like a robber hating his master, I concentrated my resentment on myself.

古文：臣欲不言，则无以上闻，愿听诣行在所，极陈灭嚣之术。 
现代文：我如果不说明，陛下就无法知道。我请求前往陛下所在之地，向您详尽地陈述消灭隗嚣的策略。 
English: Your Majesty cannot know unless I tell you. I request to go to your Majesty's place and explain to you in detail the strategy of eliminating the ruckus.

古文：帝乃召之。
现代文：刘秀于是召见马援。
English: Liu Xiu then summoned Ma Yuan.

古文：援具言谋画。
现代文：马援一五一十地提出作战方案。
English: Ma Yuan put forward a battle plan.

古文：帝因使援将突骑五千，往来游说嚣将高峻、任禹之属，下及羌豪，为陈祸福，以离嚣支党。
现代文：刘秀遂命马援率领骑兵突击队五千人，往来劝说隗嚣的将领高峻、任禹等，以及羌族的首领，为他们分析利害，以离间瓦解隗嚣部属。
English: Liu Xiu then led a cavalry assault team of five thousand men to the rescue, and went back and forth to persuade the turbulent generals Gao Jun and Ren Yu, as well as the leaders of the Yi people, to analyze the interests for them, and to disintegrate the turbulent subordinates.

古文：援又为书与嚣将杨广，使晓劝于嚣曰： 援窃见四海已定，兆民同情，而季孟闭拒背畔，为天下表的。
现代文：马援又写信给隗嚣的将领杨广，让他劝说隗嚣，信中说： 我看到四海之内已经平定，万民都有同感。可是隗嚣封闭边界，起兵反叛，成了天下众矢之的。
English: Ma Yuan also wrote to the turbulent general Yang Guang, asking him to persuade the turbulent, saying in the letter: I see that the four seas have been pacified, and all the people have the same feeling. However, the turbulent closed the border, started a rebellion, and became the target of the world.

古文：常惧海内切齿，思相屠裂，故遗书恋恋，以致恻隐之计。
现代文：我常害怕大家对隗嚣咬牙切齿，要争相扑杀，因此以眷恋之情给他写信，表达我的伤痛和忧虑。
English: She was often afraid of hatred towards him at home and wanted to kill him, so she wrote to him.

古文：乃闻季孟归罪于援，而纳王游翁谄邪之说，因自谓函谷以西，举足可定。
现代文：然而竟听说隗嚣把罪过都推到我身上，并采纳王元谄媚邪恶的意见，宣称函谷关以西，一抬脚就可以平定。
English: However, I actually heard that the ruffian pushed all the sins onto me, and adopted Wang Yuan's charming and evil opinion, claiming that west of Hakodate Pass, it can be settled as soon as you lift your foot.

古文：以今而观，竟何如邪！援间至河内，过存伯春，见其奴吉从西方还，说伯春小弟仲舒望见吉，欲问伯春无它否，竟不能言，晓夕号泣，宛转尘中。
现代文：从现在的局势来看，究竟怎样呢？ 我不久前曾到过河内，拜访慰问隗嚣的儿子隗恂。看见他的奴仆吉从西州回来，说隗恂的小弟弟隗仲舒看见吉，想问隗恂是否已遭意外，竟然说不出口，早晚哀号哭泣。
English: From the perspective of the current situation, what is it all about? Not long ago, I went to Hanoi to visit and offer condolences to the son of the tumultuous. Seeing his servant Ji returning from Xizhou, he said that his little brother  Zhongshu saw Ji and wanted to ask him if he had been in an accident, but he couldn't say anything, and he wailed and cried in the morning and evening.

古文：又说其家悲愁之状，不可言也。
现代文：又说到全家悲苦忧愁的情况，无法用言语表达。
English: It is impossible to say what the sad state of his family is.

古文：夫怨雠可刺不可毁，援闻之，不自知泣下也。
现代文：有怨仇可以指责，不可以用毁灭的手段报复，我听说这些事后，不知不觉流下眼泪。
English: There are grudges that can be blamed, and it is not possible to retaliate with destructive means. After hearing these things, I unknowingly shed tears.

古文：援素知季孟孝爱，曾、闵不过。
现代文：我一向了解隗嚣孝顺慈爱，曾参、闵子骞也比不过。
English: Ma Yuan, Su Zhizhong, Ren Ren and Xiao Ai, although they have participated in the competition, will not surpass him.

古文：夫孝于其亲，岂不慈于其子！
现代文：孝敬的父母，哪能不爱孩子！
English: Parents of filial piety, how can you not love your children!

古文：可有子抱三木而跳梁妄作，自同分羹之事乎！季孟平生自言所以拥兵众者，欲以保全父母之国而完坟墓也，又言苟厚士大夫而已。
现代文：可有儿子身戴刑具，而父亲飞扬跋扈、胡作非为，并想分一杯用儿子的肉做成肉羹这类事吗？ 隗嚣平时自己说，他所以拥有军队，是用来保全乡土和父母的坟墓，又说不过是为了厚待士大夫罢了。
English: Can there be such a thing as a son wearing a torture device, while his father flies around, commits crimes, and wants to divide a cup of meat from his son's flesh to make meat soup? He usually says that the reason he has an army is to preserve the countryside and the graves of his parents, and that it's just to treat the doctor kindly.

古文：而今所欲全者将破亡之，所欲完者将毁伤之，所欲厚者将反薄之。
现代文：可是现在，所要保全的乡土将要分裂丧失，所要保全的父母坟墓将被毁掉，所要等待的将反而要受到轻视。
English: But now, the countryside to be preserved will be divided and lost, the parents' graves to be preserved will be destroyed, and those who have to wait will be despised.

古文：季孟尝折愧子阳而不受其爵，今更共陆陆欲往附之，将难为颜乎！
现代文：隗嚣曾折辱公孙述而不接受他的爵位，今天却乖乖地去依附他，将有惭愧之色吧！
English: He once insulted his grandson Shu and did not accept his title, but today he obediently clings to him. He will be ashamed!

古文：若复责以重质，当安从得子主给是哉！
现代文：如果公孙述也要求用长子做人质，隗嚣又从何再得一个长子给他呢？
English: If Gongsun Shu wanted to send his son to Luoyang as a hostage, where would he get a son from?

古文：往时子阳独欲以王相待而春卿拒之，今者归老，更欲低头与小儿曹共槽枥而食，并肩侧身于怨家之朝乎！
现代文：从前，公孙述要单独封你为王，而你拒绝。现在你年纪老了，还要低着头和小孩子们挤一个食槽吃食，并着肩侧着身在怨恨的朝中作官吗？ 现在朝廷对你的期望很大，你应该请牛邯和各位前辈尊长共同劝说隗嚣。
English: Once upon a time, your great-grandson said that he wanted to make you king alone, but you refused. Now that you are old, do you still want to eat with your head bowed and squeeze a trough with small children, and stand shoulder to shoulder as an official in the resentful government? Now the court has great expectations of you, you should ask Niulong and your predecessors to persuade them.

古文：今国家待春卿意深，宜使牛孺卿与诸耆老大人共说季孟，若计画不从，真可引领去矣。前披舆地图，见天下郡国百有六所，奈何欲以区区二邦以当诸夏百有四乎！春卿事季孟，外有君臣之义，内有朋友之道。言君臣邪，固当谏争；语朋友邪，应有切磋。
现代文：如果说服不了他，确实应该离开他。前些天我观看地图，见天下有一百零六个郡和封国，怎么要用区区两个郡对抗中国的其余的一百零四个郡呢？你事奉隗嚣，从外部讲是君臣关系，从内部讲是朋友关系。说君臣呢，本应该直言进谏；说朋友呢，应该切磋协商。
English: If you can't convince him, you really should leave him. A few days ago, I was looking at a map and saw that there are 106 counties and provinces in the world. How can you use just two counties to oppose China's remaining 104 counties? You are acting like a bully. From the outside, it is a relationship between a prince and a vassal, and from the inside, it is a relationship between friends. When it comes to princes and vassals, you should have been forthright; when it comes to friends, you should have negotiated.

古文：岂有知其无成，而但萎腇咋舌，义手从族乎！
现代文：哪有知道他不能成功，却只是懦弱畏缩，咬着舌头，拱手跟他一起陷入灭族之灾的呢？
English: Who knows that he cannot succeed, but cowers in cowardice, bites his tongue, and throws in his lot with him in the scourge of extermination?

古文：及今成计，殊尚善也，过是，欲少味矣！
现代文：趁现在定下大计还是很好的，过了这一步，就不同了。
English: It's still a good idea to make a plan now, but after this step, it's different.

古文：且来君叔天下信士，朝廷重之，其意依依，常独为西州言。
现代文：况且，来歙是天下忠信之士，朝廷尊重他，他对隗嚣依依不舍，常独自为西州说话。
English: Moreover, Uncle Lai Jun is a believer in the world, the court respects him, he often speaks for Xizhou, and has a sense of attachment.

古文：援商朝廷，尤欲立信于此，必不负约。
现代文：我认为朝廷尤其要在这件事情上建立信誉，必不负约。
English: I suspect that the Imperial Court, especially if it wants to place its trust in this matter, will not renege on the agreement.

古文：援不得久留，愿急赐报。 
现代文：我不能久留，愿你急速给我回信。 
English: Ma'an won't stay long. I hope you'll write back soon.

古文：广竟不答。
现代文：杨广竟然不作答复。
English: Yang Guang did not reply at all.

古文：诸将每有疑议，更请呼援，咸敬重焉。
现代文：将领们每有疑惑争议，都向马援请教，对他十分敬重。
English: The generals consulted Ma Yuan whenever they had any doubts or disputes, and held him in high esteem.

古文：隗嚣上疏谢曰： 吏民闻大兵卒至，惊恐自救，臣嚣不能禁止。
现代文：隗嚣上书向刘秀请罪说： 官吏百姓听说大军突然到来，惊慌惧怕，只求自救，我不能禁止。
English: He wrote a letter to Liu Xiu pleading guilty, saying: "Officials and common people heard about the sudden arrival of the army, panicked and feared, and only asked for self-rescue. I can't forbid it.

古文：兵有大利，不敢废臣子之节，亲自追还。
现代文：我的部队虽然获得胜利，但我不敢废弃做臣子的节操，亲自把他们追回来。
English: Although my troops were victorious, I did not dare to abandon the discipline of a courtier and chase them back myself.

古文：昔虞舜事父，大杖则走，小杖则受，臣虽不敏，敢忘斯义！
现代文：过去虞舜侍奉父亲，如父亲用大棍子打就跑掉，如用小棍子打则承受。我虽然不聪明，怎敢忘此君臣大义！
English: In the past, the cedar served his father. If his father hit him with a big stick, he would run away, but if he hit him with a small stick, he would bear it. Although I am not smart, how dare I forget this great virtue of a ruler and a subject!

古文：今臣之事，在于本朝，赐死则死，加刑则刑；如更得洗心，死骨不朽。 
现代文：如今我在朝廷掌握之中，赐我死我就死，给我加刑我就受刑。如能再使我有机会洗面革心，我就是变成一堆死骨，也不会忘记。 
English: Now I am in the hands of the imperial court. If they give me death, I will die. If they increase my sentence, I will be punished. If they give me another chance to change my mind, I will turn into a pile of dead bones and will not forget.

古文：有司以嚣言慢，请诛其子。
现代文：主管部门认为隗嚣言语傲慢，请求杀他的儿子隗恂。
English: The authorities thought that his words were arrogant and asked him to kill his son.

古文：帝不忍，复使来歙至汧，赐嚣书曰： 昔柴将军云：陛下宽仁，诸侯虽有亡叛而后归，辄复位号，不诛也。 
现代文：刘秀不忍心，又派来歙到县送亲笔信给隗嚣，说： 从前，高祖的大将柴武说： 陛下宽厚仁爱，诸侯中虽有逃亡反叛的，以后归顺，就恢复爵位封号，不予诛杀。 
English: Liu Xiu could not bear it any longer, so he sent Gao to the county to send a letter in his own handwriting to Gao Ran, saying: Once upon a time, Gao Zu's general Chaowu said: Your Majesty is generous and benevolent, although there are fugitive rebels among the princes, after they have surrendered, they will restore their titles and titles, and will not be killed.

古文：今若束手，复遣恂弟归阙庭者，则爵禄获全，有浩大之福矣！
现代文：现在你如果能约束自己，再派隗恂的弟弟到朝廷来做人质，那你的爵位和俸禄都可保全，洪福齐天。
English: Now, if you can restrain yourself, and then send his younger brother to the imperial court as a hostage, then your title and salary can be preserved, Hong Fu Qi Tian.

古文：吾年垂四十，在兵中十岁，厌浮语虚辞。
现代文：我年近四十，在军旅中度过十年，厌恶花言巧语。
English: I'm almost forty years old, I've been in the army for ten years, and I hate those empty words.

古文：即不欲，勿报。 
现代文：如果你不愿意，不必答复。 
English: You don't have to answer if you don't want to.

古文：嚣知帝审其诈，遂遣使称臣于公孙述。
现代文：隗嚣知道刘秀已看穿他的欺骗术，于是派使者向公孙述称臣。
English: Yan Hanren knew that Liu Xiu had seen through his trickery, so he sent an envoy to his son-in-law to tell him.

古文：匈奴与卢芳为寇不息，帝令归德侯飒使匈奴以修旧好。
现代文：匈奴和卢芳不断侵扰，刘秀命归德侯刘飒出使匈奴，谋求恢复以前的良好关系。
English: The Xiongnu and Lu Fang constantly harassed each other, and Liu Xiu was ordered to return to Germany. Liu Bei sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to seek the restoration of the previous good relations.

古文：单于骄倨，虽遣使报命，而寇暴如故。
现代文：匈奴单于骄横傲慢，虽然也派使节到洛阳回报，但侵扰如故。
English: The Xiongnu acted out of arrogance. Although they sent envoys to Luoyang to reciprocate, the harassment continued.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之上建武七年春，三月，罢郡国轻车、骑士、材官，令还复民伍。
现代文：建武七年春季，三月，免去郡县、封国的轻车、骑士、材官，命他们回归为民。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Jianwu, in March, the light vehicles, knights, and officials of counties, counties, and provinces were exempted and ordered to return to the people.

古文：公孙述立隗嚣为朔宁王，遣兵往来，为之援势。
现代文：公孙述封隗嚣为朔宁王，让他派出军队往来造声势，作为援助。
English: Gongsun said that the crown prince was King Shuo Ning, and asked him to send troops to and from the capital to help.

古文：癸亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：癸亥晦，出现日食。
English: At the end of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：诏百僚各上封事，其上书者不得言圣，太中大夫郑兴上疏曰： 夫国无善政，则谪见日月。
现代文：刘秀诏命百官各自呈递密封奏章，奏章中不得有 圣 字。太中大夫郑兴上书说： 国家没有善政，上天的谴责就在太阳月亮上显现。
English: Liu Xiu Zhao ordered all officials to submit a sealed transcript, which must not contain any holy words. The Grand Vizier Zheng Xing wrote: The country does not have good governance, and the condemnation of heaven appears on the sun and moon.

古文：要在因人之心，择人处位。
现代文：关键在于顺应人心，用人得当。
English: The key is to follow people's hearts and employ people properly.

古文：今公卿大夫多举渔阳太守郭亻及可大司空者，而不以时定；道路流言，咸曰 朝廷欲用功臣 ，功臣用则人位谬矣。
现代文：现在公卿大夫多数推举渔阳太守郭，认为可以做大司空，而陛下不及时决定。道路上谣言四起，都说 朝廷打算任用功臣 ，但任用功臣就会人和职位不相配。
English: Now, most of the court nobles and doctors have nominated Yuyang Taishou Guo, believing that he can be the Grand Marshal, but His Majesty did not decide in time. On the road, rumors are everywhere, saying that the court intends to appoint a meritorious person, but the appointment of a meritorious person will not match the person and position.

古文：愿陛下屈己从众，以济群臣让善之功。
现代文：请求陛下委曲自己，听从大家的意见，以鼓励群臣谦让的美德。
English: I request His Majesty to be flexible and to listen to everyone's opinions in order to encourage the virtue of humility among his ministers.

古文：顷年日食每多在晦，先时而合，皆月行疾也。
现代文：近来，日食多发生在每月三十日，太阳和月亮提前重合，都是由于月亮运行快的缘故。
English: Recently, solar eclipses have mostly occurred on the 30th day of the month, and the sun and moon have coincided ahead of schedule, all due to the fast movement of the moon.

古文：日君象而月臣象；君亢急而臣下促迫，故月行疾。
现代文：太阳象征君主，月亮臣子。君主急促而臣子迫切，所以月亮运行得快。
English: The sun symbolizes the monarch, the moon the vassal. The monarch is in a hurry and the vassal is in a hurry, so the moon runs fast.

古文：今陛下高明而群臣惶促，宜留思柔克之政，垂意《洪范》之法。 
现代文：当今陛下高明而群臣遑急不安，应当考虑用柔和而行之有效的政治手段，请陛下留心《尚书·洪范》的做法。 
English: Today, when His Majesty is wise and his courtiers are anxious, he should consider the use of soft and effective political means, and ask His Majesty to pay attention to the practice of "Shang Shu Hong Fan."

古文：帝躬勤政事，颇伤严急，故兴奏及之。
现代文：刘秀亲自处理政事，往往过于严苛急迫，所以郑兴上书提及。
English: Liu Xiu personally handled political affairs and was often too harsh and urgent, so Zheng Xing was mentioned in the letter.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月壬午，刘秀实行大赦。
English: In the summer, at noon in April, Liu Xiu implemented an amnesty.

古文：五月，戊戌，以前将军李通为大司空。
现代文：五月戊戌，刘秀任命前将军李通做大司空。
English: In May, Liu Xiu appointed former general Li Tong as the chief of the Air Force.

古文：大司农江冯上言： 宜令司隶校尉督察三公。 
现代文：大司农江冯上书说： 应当命司隶校尉督察三公。 
English: Superintendent Nongjiang Feng said in the letter: It is necessary to order the superintendent to report to the lieutenant inspector.

古文：司空掾陈元上疏曰： 臣闻师臣者帝，宾臣者霸。
现代文：司空掾陈元上书说： 我听说把臣子当做老师的，是帝王；把臣子当做宾客的，是霸主。
English: "I have heard that the emperor is the one who treats his vassals as teachers, and the overlord is the one who treats his vassals as guests.

古文：故武王以太公为师，齐桓以夷吾为仲父，近则高帝优相国之礼，太宗假宰辅之权。
现代文：所以周武王以姜太公为老师，齐桓公以管仲为仲父。乃至近代，汉高祖对相国萧何的礼遇特别优待，汉文帝授予宰相申屠嘉生杀予夺的权力。
English: Therefore, King Zhou Wu took Jiang Taigong as his teacher, and King Qi Huan took Guanzhong as his matchmaker. Even in modern times, Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty gave special preferential treatment to Xiao He, his brother-in-law, and Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty granted Prime Minister Shen Tuo Jia Sheng the power to kill and seize.

古文：及亡新王莽，遭汉中衰，专操国柄以偷天下，况己自喻，不信群臣，夺公辅之任，损宰相之威，以刺举为明，徼讦为直，至乃陪仆告其君长，子弟变其父兄，罔密法峻，大臣无所措手足；然不能禁董忠之谋，身为世戮。
现代文：到王莽时，逢汉朝中衰，王莽专断，把持最高权力，窃国篡位。他以自己做比方，不信任群臣，剥夺三公的职权，降低宰相的威严，把揭发隐私当作高明，把攻击过失作为正直。以至于奴仆告发主人，儿子、弟弟告发父亲、哥哥。法网严密，刑法苛刻，使大臣无所措手足。然而仍不能禁止董忠的叛变，王莽自己也遭世人杀戮。
English: By the time of Wang Mang, the Han Dynasty was in decline, and Wang Mang was arbitrary, held supreme power, and usurped the throne. He used himself as an example, distrusted his ministers, deprived the three princes of their authority, lowered the majesty of the prime minister, and regarded the disclosure of privacy as cleverness and the attack on mistakes as honesty. So much so that the slaves reported their masters, and the sons and younger brothers reported their fathers and older brothers. The legal network was strict, and the criminal law was harsh, leaving the minister at a loss. However, it was still impossible to prohibit Dong Zhong's rebellion, and Wang Mang himself was killed by the world.

古文：方今四方尚扰，天下未一，百姓观听，咸张耳目。
现代文：现在四方仍然纷扰不安，天下没有统一，百姓全都睁大眼睛观看，竖起耳朵倾听。
English: At present, the four parties are still not pacified, the world is not unified enough, the people are watching, and their ears are wide open.

古文：陛下宜修文、武之圣典，袭祖宗之遗德，劳心下士，屈节待贤，诚不宜使有司察公辅之名。 
现代文：陛下应当研究、学习周文王、周武王时代的圣典，承袭祖先留下的美德，用心结交下面的有识之士，屈身对待贤能的人，实在不应派有关部门监视三公的名声。 
English: His Majesty should study and learn the holy scriptures of the era of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu, inherit the virtues left by his ancestors, make friends with the wise people below, and bow down to the virtuous people. In fact, he should not send relevant departments to monitor the reputation of the three princes.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：刘秀接受了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：酒泉太守竺曾以弟报怨杀人，自免去郡；窦融承制拜曾武锋将军，更以辛肜为酒泉太守。
现代文：酒泉太守竺曾，因自己的弟弟报仇杀人，自行辞职离郡。窦融代表皇帝，任命竺曾做武锋将军，改以辛肜为酒泉太守。
English: Jiuquan Dazhong, because of his brother's revenge killing, resigned on his own and left the county. Dou Rong, on behalf of the emperor, appointed Jiu Zeng as a martial general, and changed to Xin Zang as Jiuquan Dazhong.

古文：秋，隗嚣将步骑三万侵安定，至阴槃，冯异率诸将拒之；嚣又令别将下陇攻祭遵于汧。
现代文：秋季，隗嚣率领步、骑兵三万人侵犯安定，到达阴县，冯异率领诸将抵挡。隗嚣又命其他将领下陇山，在县攻打祭遵。
English: In the autumn, Gong Han led 30,000 cavalrymen to invade Yin County, and Feng Yixing led other generals to resist. Gong Han also ordered other generals to go to Shaoshan to attack the county.

古文：并无利而还。
现代文：都不能取胜，返回。
English: Can't win 'em all, go back.

古文：帝将自征隗嚣，先戒窦融师期，会遇雨，道断，且嚣兵已退，乃止。
现代文：刘秀准备亲自征讨隗嚣，先和窦融约定出兵日期。正赶上大雨，道路断绝，而且隗嚣的军队已经撤退，才停止进攻。
English: Liu Xiu was preparing to personally recruit troops to fight the rebels, and he first agreed with Dou Rong on the date of dispatching troops. It was just in time for the heavy rain, the roads were cut off, and the rebels' troops had already retreated, before they stopped the attack.

古文：帝令来歙以书招王遵，遵来降，拜太中大夫，封向义侯。
现代文：刘秀命来歙写信招降王遵，王遵前来投降。刘秀任命他当太中大夫，封向义侯。
English: Liu Xiu ordered him to write a letter to Wang Zun to invite him to surrender, and Wang Zun came to surrender. Liu Xiu appointed him as a doctor of the imperial court and sent him to Yiwu.

古文：冬，卢芳以事诛其五原太守李兴兄弟。
现代文：冬季，卢芳因事诛杀五原太守李兴兄弟。
English: In the winter, Lu Fang killed the brothers of Li Xing, the Fifth Dalai Lama, because of a quarrel.

古文：其朔方太守田飒、云中太守乔扈各举郡降，帝令领职如故。
现代文：朔方太守田飒、云中太守乔扈各自献郡投降。刘秀命他们照旧留任原官职。
English: Shuo Fang and Yunzhong surrendered their counties respectively. Liu Xiu ordered them to remain in their original posts.

古文：帝好图谶，与郑兴议郊祀事，曰： 吾欲以谶断之，何如？ 
现代文：刘秀喜好运用隐语或预言占验吉凶的图谶，和郑兴讨论到郊外祭祀的事，说： 我想用图谶来推断，怎么样？ 
English: Liu Xiu likes to use the hidden language or prophecy to predict the fortunes, and discussed with Zheng Xing the matter of suburban sacrifices, saying: I want to use the picture to deduce, how about it?

古文：对曰： 臣不为谶。 
现代文：郑兴回答： 我不从事预言。 
English: Zheng Xing replied: I do not engage in prophecy.

古文：帝怒曰： 卿不为谶，非之邪？ 
现代文：刘秀发怒说： 你不从事预言，是认为它不对吗？ 
English: Liu Xiu said angrily: You do not engage in prophecy, do you think it is wrong?

古文：兴惶恐曰： 臣于书有所未学，而无所非也。 
现代文：郑兴惶惧，说： 我未学过图谶之书，并没有认为它不对。 刘秀的怒气才消。
English: Zheng Xing said with trepidation: "The minister has not studied the book, but does not think it is wrong."

古文：帝意乃解。南阳太守杜诗政治清平，兴利除害，百姓便之。
现代文：南阳太守杜诗，为政清廉公正，兴利除害，百姓安逸无忧。
English: Nanyang Daju Du Shi, for politics clean, honest and fair, to eliminate harm, the people are comfortable and worry-free.

古文：又修治陂池，广拓土田，郡内比室殷足，时人方于召信臣。南阳为之语曰： 前有召父，后有杜母。 
现代文：杜诗又兴修水利，大量开垦荒地，南阳郡内家家户户殷实富足。当时的人们把他比作汉元帝时的召信臣，南阳流传着称颂他的歌谣： 从前有召父，现在有杜母。 
English: Du Shi also developed water conservancy, reclaimed a large amount of wasteland, and made every household in Nanyang County rich and prosperous. At that time, people compared him to the Han Emperor Yuan's summoned trusted vassals. Nanyang circulated a song praising him: Once there was a summoned father, now there is a summoned mother.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之上建武八年春，来歙将二千馀人伐山开道，从番须、回中径袭略阳，斩隗嚣守将金梁。嚣大惊曰： 何其神也！ 
现代文：建武八年春季，来歙率领两千余人伐山开路，从番须、回中径直袭击略阳县，斩隗嚣的守将金梁。隗嚣大为震惊，说： 怎么这么神速！ 
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Jianwu era, Laiwu led more than two thousand people to cut down the mountain and open the road, and attacked Liaoyang County directly from Fansu and Huizhong, defeating the guard of Laiwu, Jin Liang. Laiwu was greatly shocked and said: How is it so fast!

古文：帝闻得略阳，甚喜，曰： 略阳，嚣所依阻。心腹已坏，则制其支体易矣！ 
现代文：刘秀听说攻取略阳，非常高兴，说： 略阳是隗嚣所依据的屏障，心脏腹部已坏，那么制服他的肢体就容易了。 
English: Liu Xiu was very happy when he heard about the capture of Liaoyang, saying: Liaoyang is the barrier on which the hustle and bustle is based. His heart and abdomen are already bad, so it will be easy to subdue his limbs.

古文：吴汉等诸将闻歙据略阳，争驰赴之。
现代文：吴汉等将领听说来歙占据略阳，争着率军驱驰前往。
English: Wu Han and other generals heard that Luo had come to occupy Liaoyang and rushed to lead the army.

古文：上以为嚣失所恃，亡其要城，势必悉以精锐来攻；旷日久围而城不拔，士卒顿敝，乃可乘危而进，皆追汉等还。
现代文：刘秀认为，隗嚣失去所依据的险阻，丢掉了重要的城市，势必出动所有的精锐部队前来进攻，等到旷日持久，敌军包围城市而不能攻占城市，士兵困顿疲惫的时候，东汉军队才可以乘敌人之危挺进。于是，把吴汉等全都追回。
English: Liu Xiu believed that when the clamor had lost the dangerous obstacle on which it was based, and had lost an important city, it was inevitable that all the elite troops would be sent to attack. When it took a long time, when the enemy surrounded the city but could not capture the city, and when the soldiers were exhausted, the East Han army could take advantage of the enemy's danger to advance. Therefore, Wu Han and others were all recovered.

古文：隗嚣果使王元拒陇坻，行巡守番须口，王孟塞鸡头道，牛邯军瓦亭。
现代文：隗嚣果然派王元在陇坻抵御，派行巡把守番须口，派王孟堵住鸡头道，派牛邯在瓦亭驻屯。
English: Wang Yuan was indeed dispatched to defend against the ruffian, Wang Meng was dispatched to block the Chicken's Head Road, and the Cowherd was stationed in Watie.

古文：嚣自悉其大众数万人围略阳，公孙述遣将李育、田弇助之，斩山筑堤，激水灌城。
现代文：隗嚣亲自率领大军数万人包围略阳。公孙述派遣将领李育、田协助作战。他们挖山筑堤，企图放水灌城。
English: He personally led an army of tens of thousands to encircle Liaoyang. According to Gongsun, he dispatched generals Li Yu and Tian to assist in the battle. They dug mountains to build dikes and attempted to flood the city with water.

古文：来歙与将士固死坚守，矢尽，发屋断木以为兵。
现代文：来歙和将士们誓死坚守，箭射完了，就拆掉房屋把木头断开作为兵器。
English: The warriors of Laiwu swore to defend it to the death. After the arrows were shot, they tore down the houses and cut the wood to use as weapons.

古文：嚣尽锐攻之，累月不能下。
现代文：隗嚣用全部精锐部队攻城，几个月都不能攻下。
English: He aggressively used all his elite troops to attack the city, and was unable to capture it for several months.

古文：夏，闰四月，帝自将征隗嚣，光禄勋汝南郭宪谏曰： 东方初定，车驾未可远征。 
现代文：夏季，闰四月，刘秀亲自率军征伐隗嚣。光禄勋汝南人郭宪劝阻说： 东方刚刚平定，陛下不能远征。 
English: In the summer, leap April, Liu Xiu personally led the army to conquer the country. Guo Xian, a Guanglu Honored South Korean, dissuaded him, saying: The East has just been pacified, and His Majesty cannot go on an expedition.

古文：乃当车拔佩刀以断车靷。
现代文：于是挡住车，拔出佩刀，砍断引车前行的皮带。
English: So he blocked the car, pulled out his sword, and cut off the belt leading the car forward.

古文：帝不从，西至漆。
现代文：刘秀不听，西行至漆县。
English: Liu Xiu did not listen and went west to Urushi County.

古文：诸将多以王师之重，不宜远入险阻，计豫未决；帝召马援问之。
现代文：将领们多数都认为，皇上率领的军队重要，不宜远行深入到险恶、阻塞的地方。刘秀拿不定主意，召见马援询问意见。
English: Most of the generals believed that the army led by the emperor was important, and it was not appropriate to travel far and deep into a dangerous and obstructive place. Liu Xiu hesitated and summoned Ma Yuan to ask for advice.

古文：援因说隗嚣将帅有土崩之势，兵进有必破之状；又于帝前聚米为山谷，指画形势，开示众军所从道径，往来分析，昭然可晓。
现代文：马援于是说，隗嚣的将领们已有土崩瓦解之势，如果进军，就会有必破之状。他又在刘秀面前，用米聚成山谷，指出敌我双方的形势，展示大军进攻的路线，来回分析，十分清晰明白。
English: Ma Yuan then said that the tumultuous generals had the potential to collapse, and if they marched in, it would be inevitable. In front of Liu Xiu, he used rice to gather into a valley, pointed out the situation of both the enemy and us, showed the route of the large army's attack, and analyzed back and forth, very clear and clear.

古文：帝曰： 虏在吾目中矣！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 敌人的情况都在我的眼里了！ 
English: Liu Xiu said: The enemy's situation is all in my eyes!

古文：明旦，遂进军，至高平第一。
现代文：第二天一早，大军出发，抵达高平县第一城。
English: The next morning, the large army set out and arrived at the first city of Gaoping County.

古文：窦融率五郡太守及羌虏小月氏等步骑数万，辎重五千馀两，与大军会。
现代文：窦融率领五郡太守以及羌族、小月氏等步骑兵数万人、辎重车五千余辆，和刘秀的大军会合。
English: Dou Rong led the governors of the five counties, as well as tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry from the Yi and Xiao Yue clans, and more than 5,000 heavy vehicles, to join Liu Xiu's army.

古文：是时军旅草创，诸将朝会礼容多不肃，融先遣从事问会见仪适。
现代文：当时军队还处于草创时期，将领们朝拜皇帝的礼仪多不整肃。窦融先派从事请示朝见的恰当礼仪。
English: At that time, the army was still in the pioneering period, and the etiquette of the generals to pay homage to the emperor was not very clean. Dou Rongxian sent them to engage in the proper etiquette of requesting a meeting with the emperor.

古文：帝闻而善之，以宣告百僚，乃置酒高会，待融等以殊礼。遂共进军，数道上陇。
现代文：刘秀听后认为很好，宣告百官让他们效法。于是设置盛大的酒宴，用特别的尊贵礼仪招待窦融等。于是，联军共同进军，分成几路上陇山。
English: After hearing this, Liu Xiu thought it was a good idea and announced to the officials that they should follow suit. Therefore, a grand wine banquet was set up and Dou Rong was invited with special dignified etiquette. As a result, the allied forces marched together and divided into several routes to Lushan.

古文：使王遵以书招牛邯，下之，拜邯太中大夫。
现代文：刘秀命王遵写信招降牛邯。牛邯投降，刘秀任命他当太中大夫。
English: Liu Xiuxiu ordered Wang Zun to write a letter to recruit and surrender Niu Yao. Niu Yao surrendered, and Liu Xiuxiu appointed him as the chief physician.

古文：于是嚣大将十三人、属县十六、众十馀万皆降。
现代文：于是隗嚣的十三位大将、所属的十六个县、部众十余万人全部归降。
English: As a result, the tumultuous thirteen generals, the sixteen counties they belonged to, and more than one hundred thousand subordinates all surrendered.

古文：嚣将妻子奔西城，从杨广，而田弇、李育保上邽。
现代文：隗嚣带着妻子儿女逃往西城，投奔杨广。公孙述的将领田、李育退保上县。
English: Gong Han took his wife and children and fled to Xicheng and went to Yangguang. Li Yutian, the general who was described by his grandson, fled to Shangxian.

古文：略阳围解。
现代文：略阳县解围。
English: The siege of Liaoyang County is lifted.

古文：帝劳赐来歙，班坐绝席，在诸将之右，赐歙妻缣千匹。
现代文：刘秀慰劳、赏赐来歙，把席位单独设在将领们的上首，赐给来歙的妻子一千匹绢帛。
English: Liu Xiu consoled and rewarded Lai Ying, and set the seat at the head of the generals alone, and gave Lai Ying's wife a thousand horses.

古文：进幸上邽，诏告隗嚣曰： 若束手自诣，父子相见，保无佗也。
现代文：刘秀到达上，下诏给隗嚣说： 你如果放弃武力，自己前来投降，父子能够相见，保证没有其他事故。
English: When Liu Xiu arrived, he issued an edict to Yanran, saying, "If you give up the use of force and come to surrender, father and son will be able to see each other, and there will be no other accidents."

古文：若遂欲为黥布者，亦自任也。 
现代文：你如果要做黥布，也随你便。 
English: If you're going to be a doormat, do as you please.

古文：嚣终不降，于是诛其子恂。
现代文：隗嚣到底不肯投降。于是刘秀诛杀他的儿子隗恂。
English: He refused to surrender in the end, so Liu Xiuxuan killed his son.

古文：使吴汉、岑彭围西城，耿弇、盖延围上邽。
现代文：派吴汉、岑彭包围西城，派耿、盖延包围上。
English: Wu Han and Zi Peng were sent to encircle the West City, and Geng and Gai Yan were sent to encircle the East City.

古文：以四县封窦融为安丰侯，弟友为显亲侯，及五郡太守皆封列侯，遣西还所镇。
现代文：刘秀用四个县的土地封窦融为安丰侯，封窦融的弟弟窦友为显亲侯。五郡太守全封为列侯，命他们回到西方的任所。
English: Liu Xiu used the land of four counties to appoint Dou Rong as the prince of Anfeng, Dou You, Dou Rong's younger brother, as the prince of Xian, and the five county governors as princes, and ordered them to return to their posts in the west.

古文：融以久专方面，惧不自安，数上书求代。
现代文：窦融因长期在一个地方独揽大权，心里畏惧不自安，几次上书请以别人接替。
English: Dou Rong, because he has been monopolizing power in one place for a long time, is afraid and uneasy in his heart, and has written several times to ask someone else to succeed him.

古文：诏报曰： 吾与将军如左右手耳，数执谦退，何不晓人意！
现代文：刘秀下诏回答说： 我和将军的关系，就像左右手，你几次谦虚退让，怎么不明了我的心意？
English: Liu Xiu replied: My relationship with the general is like a right and left hand. You have humbly conceded several times. How did you not know my mind?

古文：勉循士民，无擅离部曲！ 
现代文：你要尽力安抚士人百姓，不要擅自离开自己的部曲。 
English: You should try your best to appease the scholars and the people, and do not leave your own section without permission.

古文：颍川盗贼群起，寇没属县，河东守兵亦叛，京师骚动。
现代文：颍川郡盗贼蜂起，攻陷本郡所属县城，河东郡的守军也叛变了，京都洛阳震动。
English: Thieves in Luochuan County rose up and captured the county seat belonging to the county. The defenders in Hedong County also mutinied. Kyoto and Luoyang were shaken.

古文：帝闻之曰： 吾悔不用郭子横之言。 
现代文：刘秀听到消息说： 我后悔没有听郭宪的话！ 
English: Upon hearing the news, Liu Xiu said: I regret not listening to Guo Xian!

古文：秋，八月，帝自上邽晨夜东驰，赐岑彭等书曰： 两城若下，便可将兵南击蜀虏。
现代文：秋季，八月，刘秀从上县日夜向东奔驰。他写信给岑彭等，说： 如果攻陷两城，就可率领军队向南攻打公孙述。
English: In the autumn, in August, Liu Xiu drove from Shangxian County to the east day and night. He wrote to Zhaopeng and others, saying: If the two cities are captured, he can lead the army to the south to attack Gongsunsu.

古文：人苦不知足，既平陇，复望蜀。
现代文：人被不知足所苦，已经平定了陇，又想得到蜀。
English: People are tormented by not knowing their feet, have already leveled the plow, and want to get the plow.

古文：每一发兵，头须为白！ 
现代文：每一次出兵，头发胡须都因此变白。 
English: Every time he goes to war, his hair and beard turn white.

古文：九月，乙卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月乙卯，刘秀回到洛阳皇宫。
English: In September, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：帝谓执金吾寇恂曰： 颍川迫近京师，当以时定。
现代文：刘秀对执金吾寇恂说： 颍川靠近洛阳，应当及时平定。
English: Liu Xiu said to the leader of the Jin-Wu-Kok, "Fengchuan is close to Luoyang, it should be pacified in time.

古文：惟念独卿能平之耳，从九卿复出以忧国可也！ 
现代文：我想到只有你能扫平盗贼。请你以九卿的身分，再次出征为国解忧！ 
English: I thought that only you can sweep away the thieves. Please, as the Nine Lords, go to war again to relieve the nation's worries!

古文：对曰： 颍川闻陛下有事陇、蜀，故狂狡乘间相诖误耳。
现代文：寇恂回答说： 颍川盗贼听说陛下远征陇、蜀，所以那些狂徒、狡诈之辈想乘机作乱。
English: The robber replied: "The thieves of the Min River heard that His Majesty was going on an expedition to Shao and Shu, so those madmen and cunning people wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：如闻乘舆南向，贼必惶怖归死，臣愿执锐前驱。 
现代文：如果他们听说陛下南行，一定吓得要死，我愿手持兵器充当前锋。 
English: If they hear that His Majesty is going south, they will be scared to death, and I would like to take the lead with weapons in hand.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：刘秀同意。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：庚申，车驾南征，颍川盗贼悉降。
现代文：庚申，刘秀南征，颍川盗贼全部投降。
English: Goshun, Liu Xuanzheng, and the thieves of Luchuan all surrendered.

古文：寇恂竟不拜郡，百姓遮道曰： 愿从陛下复借寇君一年。 
现代文：寇恂最终没有被任命为郡守。百姓在道路上挡住车驾的去路说： 愿陛下把寇君再借给我们一年。 
English: In the end, Kou Jun was not appointed as the county governor. The people blocked the way of the car on the road and said: May His Majesty lend us Kou Jun for another year.

古文：乃留恂长社，镇抚吏民，受纳馀降。
现代文：刘秀于是把寇恂留在长社县，命他镇慑安抚官民，收容投降的残余贼寇。
English: Liu Xiu then left the robber barons in Changshe County and ordered him to calm down and pacify the officials and the people, and to contain the remnants of the robber barons who had surrendered.

古文：东郡、济阴盗贼亦起，帝遣李通、王常击之。
现代文：东郡、济阴也有盗贼兴起，刘秀派遣李通、王常予以打击。
English: Thieves also emerged in Dong County and Jiyin. Liu Xiu dispatched Li Tong and Wang Chang to crack down on them.

古文：以东光侯耿纯尝为东郡太守，威信著于卫地，遣使拜太中大夫，使与大兵会东郡。
现代文：因东光侯耿纯曾经当过东郡太守，在卫地很有威信，刘秀派使者任命耿纯当太中大夫，让他和李通、王常率领的大军在东郡会合。
English: Because Geng Chun, the Prince of Eastern Guangxi, had once been the governor of Dong County and was highly respected in the Wei territory, Liu Xiu sent an envoy to appoint Geng Chun as the vice-governor of Dong County, so that he and the army led by Li Tong and Wang Chang could meet in Dong County.

古文：东郡闻纯入界，盗贼九千馀人皆诣纯降，大兵不战而还；玺书复以纯为东郡太守。
现代文：东郡人听说耿纯进入郡界，九千多名盗贼全都向耿纯投降，大军没有经过战斗就返回了。刘秀再度任命耿纯当东郡太守。
English: The people of Dong County heard that Geng Chun entered the county boundary, more than nine thousand thieves all surrendered to Geng Chun, and the army returned without fighting. Liu Xiu once again appointed Geng Chun as the governor of Dong County.

古文：戊寅，车驾还自颍川。
现代文：戊寅，刘秀从颍川返回洛阳。
English: Wu Yin and Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang from Luochuan.

古文：安丘侯张步将妻子逃奔临淮，与弟弘、蓝欲招其故众，乘船入海。
现代文：安丘侯张步带领妻子儿女逃往临淮，和弟弟张弘、张蓝打算招集旧部，乘船入海。
English: Anqiu marquis Zhang Bu led his wife and children to flee to Linhuai. He and his younger brothers Zhang Hong and Zhang Lan planned to summon the old guard and take a boat to the sea.

古文：琅邪太守陈俊追讨，斩之。
现代文：琅邪太守陈俊追击，将张步斩首。
English: The evil warlord Chen Jun chased and beheaded Zhang Bu.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，上行幸怀；十一月，乙丑，还雒阳。
现代文：冬季，十月丙午，刘秀前往怀城。十一月乙丑，刘秀返回洛阳。
English: In winter, on the afternoon of October 3, Liu Xiu went to Huai Cheng. In November, on the afternoon of November 2, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：杨广死，隗嚣穷困，其大将王捷别在戎丘，登城呼汉军曰： 为隗王城守者，皆必死，无二心。
现代文：杨广去世，隗嚣处于穷途末路。他的大将王捷另外在戎丘城驻扎，王捷登上城楼向汉军高喊： 替大王隗嚣守城的人，全都必死，但没有二心。
English: Yang Guang died, and Yan Han was at the end of his rope. His general Wang Jie was also stationed in Rongqiu City. Wang Jie climbed the city tower and shouted to the Chinese army: All those who defend the city for the great king Yan Han will die, but they have no second thoughts.

古文：愿诸军亟罢，请自杀以明之。 
现代文：请你们赶快停止进攻，我用自杀来表明我们的决心。 
English: Please stop the attack as soon as possible. I am committing suicide to show our determination.

古文：遂自刎死。
现代文：于是自刎而死。
English: He then hanged himself and died.

古文：初，帝敕吴汉曰： 诸郡甲卒但坐费粮食，若有逃亡，则沮败众心，宜悉罢之。 
现代文：当初，刘秀对吴汉下令说： 各郡来的士兵只坐着消耗粮食，如果有人逃亡，就会动摇军心，应当全部遣散。 
English: At first, Liu Xiu ordered Wu Han, "The soldiers from all counties only sit and consume grain. If anyone escapes, it will shake the morale of the army, and they should all be dismissed."

古文：汉等贪并力攻嚣，遂不能遣，粮食日少，吏士疲役，逃亡者多。
现代文：吴汉等贪图用众多的军队围攻隗嚣，因而未能遣散。粮食日渐减少，官兵疲惫，逃跑的人很多。
English: Wu Han and others were eager to besiege Ganren with a large number of troops, so they were unable to disband. Food was dwindling, officers and soldiers were exhausted, and many people were fleeing.

古文：岑彭壅谷水灌西城，城未没丈馀。
现代文：岑彭堵住谷水，把水灌进西城，水位离城头还有一丈多。
English: Zhaopeng blocked the valley water and poured the water into the west city. The water level is still more than a meter away from the city.

古文：会王元、行巡、周宗将蜀救兵五千馀人乘高卒至，鼓噪大呼曰： 百万之众方至！ 
现代文：这时，王元、行巡、周宗率领公孙述派的救兵五千余人，从高处突然到来，擂起战鼓大声呼喊： 百万大军来了！ 
English: At this time, Wang Yuan, Xing Jun and Zhou Zong led more than 5,000 rescuers from Gongsun Sui's faction, suddenly arrived from a high place, set up war drums and shouted loudly: A million-strong army is coming!

古文：汉军大惊，未及成陈，元等决围殊死战，遂得入城，迎嚣归冀。
现代文：东汉军队大惊失色，没有来得及布阵。王元等突破包围，殊死战斗，于是得以进入西城，接隗嚣回到冀县。
English: Wang Yuan and others broke through the encirclement and fought desperately, so they were able to enter the West City and return to Ji County.

古文：吴汉军食尽，乃烧辎重，引兵下陇，盖延、耿弇亦相随而退。
现代文：吴汉的军队粮食吃尽，就烧掉辎重装备，领兵下陇山。盖延、耿也相继撤退。
English: When Wu Han's army ran out of food, they burned their heavy equipment and led their soldiers down Lushan Mountain. Gai Yan and Geng also retreated one after another.

古文：嚣出兵尾击诸营，岑彭为后拒，诸将乃得全军东归；唯祭遵屯汧不退。
现代文：隗嚣出兵尾随攻打各部队。岑彭率军断后，将领们才得以全军东归。只有祭遵驻屯县没有撤退。
English: After the departure of the army led by Nie Peng, the generals were able to return the entire army to the east. Only Zai Zun stationed in Tunxian did not retreat.

古文：吴汉等复屯长安，岑彭还津乡。
现代文：吴汉等又驻屯长安，岑彭回到津乡。
English: Wu Han and others were also stationed in Chang'an, and Yao Peng returned to Tsu Township.

古文：于是安定、北地、天水、陇西复反为嚣。
现代文：于是安定、北地、天水、陇西又反被隗嚣占领。
English: As a result, the provinces of Ding'an, Beidi, Tianshui, and Shaanxi were occupied by the ruffians.

古文：校尉太原温序为嚣将苟宇所获，宇晓譬数四，欲降之。
现代文：校尉太原人温序被隗嚣的将领苟宇俘获，苟宇再三再四地劝说温序投降。
English: Lt. Col. Taiyuan was captured by the clamorous general, Gou Yu, who repeatedly tried to persuade him to surrender.

古文：序大怒，叱宇等曰： 虏何敢迫胁汉将！ 
现代文：温序大怒，呵斥苟宇等说： 你们这些匪徒怎么敢胁迫汉将！ 
English: Wenzhong was furious and shouted at Guo Yu, saying: "How dare you bandits coerce Han Zheng!

古文：因以节楇杀数人。
现代文：然后用手中符节击杀数人。
English: He killed several people with a knife.

古文：宇众争欲杀之，宇止之曰： 此义士，死节，可赐以剑。 
现代文：苟宇的左右争着要杀温序。苟宇制止说： 这是一位义士，以死来保全名节。可以赐他宝剑。 
English: Gou Yu's right and left sides were fighting to kill Onjo. Gou Yu stopped them and said, "This is a righteous man who died to preserve the festival. You can give him a sword."

古文：序受剑，衔须于口，顾左右曰： 既为贼所杀，无令须污土！ 
现代文：温序接受宝剑，把胡须衔到嘴里，对左右说： 既然被贼寇所杀，不要让胡须被土玷污。 
English: Warmly accepting the sword, he lifted his beard to his mouth and said to both sides, "Since you were killed by a bandit, don't let your beard be stained with dirt.

古文：遂伏剑而死。
现代文：于是用剑自杀。
English: With that, Rick killed himself with a sword.

古文：从事王忠持其丧归雒阳，诏赐以冢地，拜三子为郎。
现代文：从事王忠把他的尸首送回洛阳，刘秀下诏赐给他墓地，任命他的三个儿子为郎。
English: Wang Zhong sent his body back to Luoyang, Liu Xiu granted him a cemetery, and appointed his three sons as brothers.

古文：十二月，高句丽王遣使朝贡，帝复其王号。
现代文：十二月，高句丽王派使者朝贡，刘秀恢复了他的王号。
English: In December, the king of Goguryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute, and Liu Xiu resumed his title of king.

古文：是岁，大水。
现代文：这一年，发生水灾。
English: This year, there was a flood.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之上建武九年春，正月，颍阳成侯祭遵薨于军 诏冯异并将其营。
现代文：建武九年春季，正月，颍阳成侯祭遵在军中去世。刘秀下诏，命冯异接管他的军队。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Jianwu, in the first month, Shanyang Chenghou Festival Zun died in the army. Liu Xiu issued an edict, ordering Feng Yi to take over his army.

古文：遵为人，廉约小心，克己奉公，赏赐尽与士卒；约束严整，所在吏民不知有军。
现代文：祭遵为人廉洁、节俭，小心谨慎，克己奉公，所得赏赐全都分给士卒。他的军队纪律严明，所到之处，地方官民不知有大军屯驻。
English: As a man of integrity, thrift, caution, and self-denial, he distributed all the rewards to his soldiers. His army was well-disciplined, and wherever he went, local officials and citizens did not know that a large army was stationed.

古文：取士皆用儒术，对酒设乐，必雅歌投壶。
现代文：取用人才，全以儒家的思想方法为准则，在酒席宴上设乐，一定用儒家喜爱的雅歌，并有古老的投壶游戏。
English: All the talents are recruited according to the Confucian way of thinking, music is set up at the banquet, the favorite hymns of Confucianism are used, and there are ancient pot games.

古文：临终，遗戒薄葬；问以家事，终无所言。
现代文：临终时，祭遵嘱咐薄葬。当人问起家里的事情，他始终不说话。
English: At the time of his death, he was buried in accordance with his wishes. When asked about his family, he never spoke.

古文：帝愍悼之尤甚，遵丧至河南，车驾素服临之，望哭哀恸；还，幸城门，阅过丧车，涕泣不能已；丧礼成，复亲祠以太牢。
现代文：刘秀对祭遵去世异常哀痛。祭遵的棺木运到河南，刘秀穿着丧服亲临吊丧，望着棺木痛哭。回宫时，经过城门，看灵车经过，泪流满面不能克制。举行丧礼之后，又亲自用牛、羊、猪各一祭奠。
English: Liu Xiu was extremely grief-stricken by the death of Zhaozong. Zhaozong's coffin was transported to Henan, and Liu Xiu, wearing mourning clothes, attended the funeral in person, looking at the coffin and weeping bitterly. When he returned to the palace, he passed through the city gate and saw the hearse pass by, and he could not restrain his tears. After the funeral, he personally used a cow, a sheep, and a pig to pay tribute.

古文：诏大长秋、谒者、河南尹护丧事，大司农给费。
现代文：下诏令大长秋、谒者、河南尹共同主持丧事，由大司农负担费用。
English: Zhao Dajia, Changqiu, Zou Zhe and Henan Yin Guo attended the funeral, and the farmer was responsible for the expenses.

古文：至葬，车驾复临之；既葬，又临其坟，存见夫人、室家。
现代文：到下葬时，刘秀又亲到现场。下葬以后，又到墓前致哀，慰问祭遵夫人和全家。
English: When it was time for the funeral, Liu Xiu also visited the site. After the funeral, he also went to the grave to pay his respects, and the condolence ceremony was attended by Mrs. Zun and the whole family.

古文：其后朝会，帝每叹曰： 安得忧国奉公如祭征虏者乎！ 
现代文：以后在朝会时，刘秀往往叹息说： 我怎能得到像祭遵这样爱国奉公的人啊！ 
English: Later, at meetings with the imperial court, Liu Xiu would often sigh and say, "How can I get someone who is so patriotic and devoted to the service of the country like Saizong!"

古文：卫尉铫期曰： 陛下至仁，哀念祭遵不已，群臣各怀惭惧。 
现代文：卫尉铫期说： 陛下极其仁爱，哀悼祭遵不已，使群臣各自感到惭愧惶恐。 
English: The guard sergeant said, "Your Majesty is extremely benevolent, and has complied with the mourning ceremony without fail, which has made the courtiers feel ashamed and frightened.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：刘秀才停止念叨。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：隗嚣病且饿，餐糗Я，恚愤而卒。
现代文：隗嚣患病，又赶上饥荒，只能吃到黄豆干饭，愤恨而死。
English: Yan Han suffered from illness and famine. He could only eat dried soybeans and died of resentment.

古文：王元、周宗立嚣少子纯为王，总兵据冀。
现代文：王元、周宗拥立隗嚣的幼子隗纯为王，统兵据守冀县。
English: Wang Yuan and Zhou Zong supported the young son of the tumultuous Zou Chun as king, and the unified army defended Ji County.

古文：公孙述遣将赵匡、田弇助纯。
现代文：公孙述派遣将领赵匡、田协助隗纯。
English: Gongsun dispatched generals Zhao Kuang and Tian to assist Xizhun.

古文：帝使冯异击之。
现代文：刘秀派遣冯异攻击。
English: Liu Xiu sent Feng Yi to attack.

古文：公孙述遣其翼江王田戎、大司徒任满、南郡太守程泛将数万人下江关，击破冯骏等军，遂拔巫及夷道、夷陵，因据荆门、虎牙，横江水起浮桥、关楼，立赞柱以绝水道，结营跨山以塞陆路，拒汉兵。
现代文：公孙述派遣翼江王田戎、大司徒任满、南郡太守程率领数万人下江关，击败东汉将领冯骏等的军队，于是攻陷巫县和夷道、夷陵，随后占据荆门山、虎牙山。在长江上驾起浮桥，建筑关楼。把木柱集中在一起，竖立在江中阻断水道，跨山连接营垒堵塞陆路，以抗拒汉军。
English: According to Gongsun, he sent tens of thousands of people down the Yangtze River under the leadership of Wang Tian Rong, Da Sidi Renman, and Nan County Taizhu Cheng to defeat the armies of Eastern Han Dynasty generals such as Feng Qi, and then invaded Wuxian and Yiduo, Yiling, and then occupied Jingmen Mountain and Huya Mountain. He drove a floating bridge on the Yangtze River and built a gatehouse. He concentrated the wooden pillars and erected them in the river to block the waterway, and the cross-mountain connection camp blocked the land route to resist the Han army.

古文：夏，六月，丙戌，帝幸缑氏，登轘辕。
现代文：夏季，六月丙戌，刘秀到缑氏县，登上辕山。
English: In the summer, in June, Liu Xiu went to Jinshi County and climbed Mount Lushan.

古文：吴汉率王常等四将军兵五万馀人击卢芳将贾览、闵堪于高柳；匈奴救之，汉军不利。
现代文：吴汉率领王常等四位将军统领五万余人，在高柳县攻打卢芳部将贾览、闵堪。匈奴派兵救援，东汉军队不能取胜。
English: Wu Han, led by Wang Chang and four other generals, led more than 50,000 people to attack Lu Fang's general Jia Qiao and Xing Kan in Gaoliu County. The Xiongnu sent soldiers to rescue, and the East Han army could not win.

古文：于是匈奴转盛，钞暴日增。
现代文：于是匈奴气势变得强盛，烧杀掳掠日益严重。
English: As a result, the Huns became more powerful, and the burning, killing, and plundering became more and more serious.

古文：诏硃祜屯常山，王常屯涿郡，破奸将军侯进屯渔阳，以讨虏将军王霸为上谷太守，以备匈奴。
现代文：刘秀命朱祜驻屯常山郡、王常驻屯涿郡、破奸将军侯进驻屯渔阳郡，任命讨虏将军王霸当上谷郡太守，以防备匈奴。
English: Liu Xiu ordered Zhu Xi to stay in Changshan County, Wang to stay in Tunlu County, and the traitor General Hou Jin to stay in Yuyang County, and appointed the traitor General Wang Ba to be the governor of Shanggu County to prevent the Xiongnu.

古文：帝使来歙悉监护诸将屯长安，太中大夫马援为之副。
现代文：刘秀命来歙统帅驻屯长安的所有将领，太中大夫马援做他的副手。
English: Liu Xiu ordered all the generals stationed in the Chang'an garrison of the commander to come, and Dr. Ma Yuan to be his deputy.

古文：歙上书曰： 公孙述以陇西、天水为籓蔽，故得延命假息；今二郡平荡，则述智计穷矣。
现代文：来歙上书说： 公孙述把陇西、天水作为屏障，所以能够苟延残喘。现在这两郡如能平定，公孙述就无计可施了。
English: The letter of complaint said: Gongsun Su took Shaanxi and Tianshui as a barrier, so he could survive. Now if these two counties can be pacified, Gongsun Su will have nothing to do.

古文：宜益选兵马，储积资粮。
现代文：我们应当增派兵马，储备粮草。
English: Troops and horses should be better selected, and reserves of supplies and grain should be built up.

古文：今西州新破，兵人疲馑，若招以财谷，则其众可集。
现代文：现在西州刚刚破败，军民疲劳饥饿，如果用金钱粮食招引他们，那么当地军民就能够集结起来。
English: Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im

古文：臣知国家所给非一，用度不足，然有不得已也！ 
现代文：我知道国家所要供给的不止一支军队，经费不足，然而这样做也是不得已！ 
English: I know that the state has to supply more than one army, the funds are insufficient, but this is a last resort!

古文：帝然之。
现代文：刘秀表示赞同。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：于是诏于汧积谷六万斛。
现代文：于是下诏，在县储备六万斛粮食。
English: As a result, an edict was issued to stockpile 60,000 baht of grain in the county.

古文：秋，八月，来歙率冯异等五将军讨隗纯于天水。
现代文：秋季，八月，来歙率领冯异等五位将军在天水讨伐隗纯。
English: In the autumn, in August, five generals led by Feng Yixing and others came to Laiwu to fight Yizhong in Tianshui.

古文：骠骑将军杜茂与贾览战于繁畤，茂军败绩。
现代文：骠骑将军杜茂同贾览在繁县交战，杜茂的军队失败。
English: The cavalry generals Dumo and Jiaxiang clashed in Shiang County, and Dumo's army was defeated.

古文：诸羌自王莽末入居塞内，金城属县多为所有。
现代文：西羌各部落从王莽末年迁徙到边塞以内，金城郡所属各县多被占据。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's reign, the tribes of Xidi migrated to the border fortress, and most of the counties belonging to Jincheng County were occupied.

古文：隗嚣不能讨，因就慰纳，发其众与汉相拒。
现代文：隗嚣无力征讨，便就势慰问笼络，征调他们的部众和汉朝相对抗。
English: When they were unable to collect the money, they consoled and conscripted their subordinates to fight against the Han Dynasty.

古文：司徒掾班彪上言： 今凉州部皆有降羌，羌胡被发左衽，而与汉人杂处，习俗既异，言语不通，数为小吏黠人所见侵夺，穷恚无聊，故致反叛。
现代文：司徒掾班彪上书说： 现在凉州各地都有归降的羌人。羌族人披散着头发，衣服在左边开襟。他们和汉族人混杂生活在一起，风俗习惯既不同，语言也不通，经常被小官小吏、奸滑之人侵害掠夺，穷困愤懑，无所依赖，所以导致反抗。
English: "Nowadays, there are Han people who have surrendered in all parts of Liangzhou. The Han people wear their hair loose and their clothes open at the left side. They live mixed with the Han people. Their customs and habits are different, and they do not speak the same language. They are often robbed and plundered by petty officials and treacherous people. They are poor and angry and have nothing to rely on, which leads to resistance.

古文：夫蛮夷寇乱，皆为此也。
现代文：夷人和蛮人的叛乱，都是因为这个缘故。
English: This is the reason for the barbarian invasions and disturbances.

古文：旧制，益州部置蛮夷骑都尉，幽州部置领乌桓校尉，凉州部置护羌校尉，皆持节领护，治其怨结，岁时巡行，问所疾苦。
现代文：旧的制度规定，益州地区设置蛮夷骑都尉，幽州地区设置领乌桓校尉，凉州地区设置护羌校尉。都持符节，统辖守护当地，处理纷争，每年定时巡行各地，询问疾苦。
English: According to the old system, a barbarian cavalry captain is set up in Yizhou, a territorial Wuhuan captain is set up in Yuzhou, and a guardian captain is set up in Liangzhou. All of them hold rune festivals, supervise and guard the local area, deal with disputes, and regularly parade around the country every year to inquire about illnesses.

古文：又数遣使译，通导动静，使塞外羌夷为吏耳目，州郡因此可得警备。
现代文：并不断派出翻译，疏通关系，了解动静，让边塞之外的羌人夷人充当官吏耳目，州郡因此可以有所戒备。
English: and constantly sent interpreters to clear up the relationship and understand the situation, so that the people outside the border fortress could serve as the eyes and ears of the officials, and the prefectures could be alerted.

古文：今宜复如旧，以明威防。 
现代文：现在应恢复昔日制度，以示威严，加强防备。 
English: It is time to restore the previous system to show deterrence and prevention.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：刘秀接受班彪的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：以牛邯为护羌校尉。
现代文：任命牛邯当护羌校尉。
English: Niu Yao was appointed as the captain of the escort.

古文：盗杀阴贵人母邓氏及弟。
现代文：强盗杀害阴贵人的母亲邓氏和弟弟阴。
English: The robbers killed Mr. Yin's mother, Ms. Deng, and his brother, Mr. Yin.

古文：帝其伤之，封贵人弟就为宣恩侯，复召就兄侍中兴，欲封之，置印绶于前。
现代文：刘秀非常悲伤，封阴贵人的弟弟阴就为宣恩侯。又召见阴就的哥哥侍中阴兴，也要封侯，把印信绶带放到他面前。
English: Liu Xiu was very sad. The younger brother of Liu Xiu, Liu Yin, was to be proclaimed a prince, and his elder brother, Liu Zhongxing, who was summoned to see Liu Xiu, was also to be made a prince, and the stamped letter ribbon was placed in front of him.

古文：兴固让曰： 臣未有先登陷陈之功，而一家数人，并蒙爵士，令天下觖望，诚所不愿！ 
现代文：阴兴坚持推辞，说： 我没有冲锋陷阵的功劳，而一家人中，已有好几个人承蒙封爵赐土，使天下人不满，这确实是我不愿意的！ 
English: Yin Xing persisted in his refusal, saying: I did not have the merit of leading the charge, but several people in my family have been knighted and given land, making the world dissatisfied, which is really what I don't want!

古文：帝嘉之，不夺其志。
现代文：刘秀赞美他的举动，不强迫他改变想法。
English: Liu Xiu praised his actions and did not force him to change his mind.

古文：贵人问其故，兴曰： 夫外戚家苦不知谦退，嫁女欲配侯王，取妇眄睨公主，愚心实不安也。
现代文：阴贵人问阴兴为什么要这样做，阴兴说： 皇帝的外戚家往往被不知谦让退避所害。嫁女儿要配侯王，娶媳妇要打公主的主意，我心里实在不安。
English: Yin Xing said, "The emperor's maternal relatives are often harmed by not knowing how to be modest. The idea of marrying a daughter to match the prince, and marrying a daughter-in-law to beat the princess, I am really uneasy.

古文：富贵有极，人当知足，夸奢益为观听所讥。 
现代文：富贵有极限，人应当知足，夸耀奢侈会增加世人的指责。 
English: There is a limit to wealth. People should be content. Boasting of luxury will increase the world's criticism.

古文：贵人感其言，深自降挹，卒不为宗亲求位。
现代文：阴贵人为他的话所感动，深深地自我贬抑，始终不替亲属要求官爵。
English: Yin Guizhong was moved by his words, deeply self-deprecating, and never asked for a peerage for his relatives.

古文：帝召寇恂还，以渔阳太守郭亻及为颍川太守。
现代文：刘秀征召寇恂回洛阳，任命渔阳太守郭当颍川太守。
English: Liu Xiu conscripted Guo Gan back to Luoyang and appointed Guo Dangchuan as the governor of Yuyang.

古文：亻及招降山贼赵宏、召吴等数百人，皆遣归附农；因自劾专命，帝不以咎之。
现代文：郭招降山贼赵宏、召吴等数百人，全都遣送回乡务农，他因此弹劾自己擅自放回降贼，刘秀没有怪罪他。
English: Guo recruited hundreds of mountain bandits Zhao Hong, Zhao Wu and others, and sent them all back to the countryside to work in agriculture. He therefore impeached himself for arbitrarily sending back the bandits. Liu Xiu did not blame him.

古文：后宏、吴等党与闻亻及威信，远自江南，或从幽、冀，不期俱降，骆驿不绝。
现代文：后来，赵宏、召吴等人的同党听到郭的威望和信誉，从遥远的江南，或从幽州、冀州，不约而同都来投降，路途上络绎不绝。
English: Later, when Zhao Hong, Zhao Wu and other members of the same party heard of Guo's prestige and credibility, they all came from the far south of the Yangtze River, or from Yuzhou and Jizhou, to surrender.

古文：莎车王康卒，弟贤立，攻杀拘弥、西夜王，而使康两子王之。
现代文：莎车王康去世，弟弟贤继位，攻打诛杀拘弥国王、西夜国王，而让康的两个儿子分别担任两国国王。
English: After the death of King Kang, his younger brother Hyon succeeded to the throne. He attacked and killed King Chonmi and King Sayo, and his two sons became the kings of the two countries.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之上建武十年
现代文：建武十年
English: Ten years of Kenmu

古文：春，正月，吴汉复率捕虏将军王霸等四将军六万人出高柳击贾览，匈奴数千骑救之。连战于平城下，破走之。
现代文：春季，正月，吴汉又率领捕虏将军王霸等四位将军六万人出高柳县攻打贾览，匈奴数千名骑兵援救贾览，接连在平城附近交战。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Wu Han led another 60,000 captives, including four generals, including the general Wang Baoru, to attack Jiaxiang in Gaoliu County. Several thousand Hun cavalrymen came to Jiaxiang's rescue and fought one after another near Pingcheng.

古文：夏阳节侯冯异等与赵匡、田弇战且一年，皆斩之。
现代文：吴汉打败赶走匈奴骑兵。夏阳节侯冯异等同隗纯的将领赵匡、田交战将近一年，斩杀赵匡、田。
English: Wu Han defeated and drove away the Xiongnu cavalry. On the summer solstice, Hou Fengyi and his equally pure generals Zhao Kuang and Tian fought for nearly a year, and killed Zhao Kuang and Tian.

古文：隗纯未下，诸将欲且还休兵，异固持不动，共攻落门，未拔。
现代文：隗纯尚未被打败，东汉将领们想暂且返回休整部队，冯异坚决主张留下不动。于是共同攻打隗纯据守的落门，未能攻陷。
English: The Eastern Han generals wanted to temporarily return to the rest and recuperation force, while Feng Yi insisted on staying put. Therefore, they jointly attacked the fortified gate and failed to capture it.

古文：夏，异薨于军。
现代文：夏季，冯异在军中去世。
English: In the summer, Feng Yi died in the army.

古文：秋，八月，己亥，上幸长安。
现代文：秋季，八月己亥，刘秀到达长安。
English: Autumn, August Ji Hai, Liu Xiu arrived in Chang'an.

古文：初，隗嚣将安定高峻拥兵据高平第一，建威大将军耿弇等围之，一岁不拔。
现代文：最初，隗嚣的将领安定人高峻带领军队据守高平县第一城。建威大将军耿等包围该城，一年未能攻陷。
English: At first, the tumultuous general, Gao Jun, led the army to defend the first city of Gaoping County. General Jian Wei Geng and others surrounded the city and failed to capture it for a year.

古文：帝自将征之，寇恂谏曰： 长安道里居中，应接近便，安定、陇西必怀震惧；此从容一处，可以制四方也。
现代文：刘秀准备亲自征伐，寇恂劝告说： 长安的位置在洛阳和高平的中间，接应近便。陛下坐镇长安，安定、陇西之人必定心中震恐。这样，从容地呆在一处，就可以控制四方。
English: Liu Xiu was preparing to go on a campaign himself, and Guo Gan advised: "Chang'an is located in the middle of Luoyang and Gaoping, so it's convenient to be close by. Your Majesty is in Chang'an, which is stable, and people in Shaanxi must be terrified. In this way, if you stay in one place, you can control the four directions.

古文：今士马疲倦，方履险阻，非万乘之固也。
现代文：现在人困马乏，要到险阻的地方，对陛下是不安全的。
English: There are so few people now that it is not safe for His Majesty to go to dangerous places.

古文：前年颍川，可为至戒。 
现代文：去年颍川郡盗贼蜂起的往事，应当引以为大戒。 
English: Last year's uprising of thieves in Luochuan County should serve as a warning.

古文：帝不从，戊戌，进幸汧。
现代文：刘秀不听。
English: Liu Xiu did not listen.

古文：峻犹不下，帝遣寇恂往降之。
现代文：进军到县。高峻依然不降，刘秀派遣寇恂前往劝降。
English: Marching into the county, Gao Jun still refused to surrender, and Liu Xiu sent Gao Jun to persuade Gao Jun to surrender.

古文：恂奉玺书至第一，峻遣军师皇甫文出谒，辞礼不屈；恂怒，将诛之。
现代文：寇恂带着刘秀的诏书到达第一城，高峻派遣军师皇甫文出城拜见。皇甫文的言辞礼节毫不卑屈。寇恂大怒，准备诛杀。
English: Koryo arrived at the first city with Liu Xiu's edict, and Gaochun sent his military instructor, Emperor Fufu, out of the city to meet him. Emperor Fufu's words and etiquette were nothing short of abject. Koryo was furious and prepared to fight.

古文：诸将谏曰： 高峻精兵万人，率多强弩，西遮陇道，连年不下，今欲降之而反戮其使，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：将领们劝阻说： 高峻有精兵一万人，多半都是强弩射手，在西面堵塞陇道，连年不能攻下。现在准备招降高峻，却反而屠戮他的来使，恐怕不行吧？ 
English: The generals tried to dissuade him, saying, "Gao Jun has ten thousand elite soldiers, most of whom are strong crossbow archers, and they have been blocking the pass to the west, and they have not been able to capture it for years. Now they are preparing to recruit Gao Jun, but instead they are slaughtering his envoys. I'm afraid that won't work, will it?"

古文：恂不应，遂斩之，遣其副归告峻曰： 军师无礼，已戮之矣！欲降，急降；不欲，固守！ 
现代文：寇恂不答应，于是诛杀皇甫文。
English: He did not agree, so he killed Emperor Fuwen.

古文：峻惶恐，即日开城门降。
现代文：放他的副使回去。转告高峻说： 军师无礼，已经杀死了！
English: Let his vice-envoy go back. Tell Gao Jun to say: The drill sergeant was rude and has been killed!

古文：诸将皆贺，因曰： 敢问杀其使而降其城，何也？ 
现代文：要投降，赶快投降；不想投降，继续坚守！ 高峻惊慌恐惧，当天打开城门投降。将领们全都向寇恂祝贺，顺便问他： 请教您，杀了他的使节而又能使他献城投降，为什么呢？ 
English: At this time, the generals congratulated Kou Qi and asked: Why did Gao Jun request to abdicate after killing Gao Jun's envoy?

古文：恂曰： 皇甫文，峻之腹心，其所取计者也。
现代文：寇恂说： 皇甫文是高峻的心腹，是为高峻谋划的智囊。
English: Koro said, "Emperor Fuwen is a lofty person. All of his actions were planned by Emperor Fuwen.

古文：今来，辞意不屈，必无降心。
现代文：这次前来，言辞态度强硬，肯定没有归降的意思。
English: Now he's here, his words are unyielding, and he has no intention of backing down.

古文：全之则文得其计，杀之则峻亡其胆，是以降耳。 
现代文：如果保全他则皇甫文的计策得逞，杀掉他则使高峻丧胆，所以高峻投降。 
English: If he did not kill Emperor Fufu, then Emperor Fufu's stratagem would succeed; if he did kill Emperor Fufu, then Gao Jun lacked courage and had no choice but to surrender.

古文：诸将皆曰： 非所及也！ 
现代文：将领们全都叹服说： 您的智慧不是我们所能赶得上的！ 
English: The generals all sighed and said, "We can't match your wisdom!"

古文：冬，十月，来歙与诸将攻破落门，周宗、行巡、苟宇、赵恢等将隗纯降，王元奔蜀。
现代文：冬季，十月，来歙和将领们攻陷落门。周宗、行巡、苟宇、赵恢等献出隗纯投降。王元投奔公孙述。
English: In winter, in October, the generals of Laiwu attacked and captured the gate. Zhou Zong, Xingxuan, Guoyu, Zhao Huai and others surrendered. Wang Yuan defected to Gongsun.

古文：徙诸隗于京师以东。
现代文：刘秀把隗氏家族迁徙到洛阳以东。
English: Liu Xiu moved the Min family to the east of Luoyang.

古文：后隗纯与宾客亡入胡，至武威，捕得，诛之。
现代文：后来，隗纯和宾客们逃跑，企图投奔匈奴。逃到武威县，被捕获，处死。
English: Later, Gong Chun and his guests ran away and tried to join the Huns. They fled to Wuwei County, where they were caught and executed.

古文：先零羌与诸种寇金城、陇西，来歙率盖延等进击，大破之，斩首虏数千人。
现代文：先零羌部落和其他羌人部落侵犯金城、陇西。来歙率领盖延等出击，大败羌人，斩首及俘虏数千人。
English: First, the Zulu and other Xiongnu tribes invaded Jincheng and Shaanxi. The Xiongnu led by Gai Yan and others attacked, defeated the Xiongnu, beheaded and captured thousands of people.

古文：于是开仓禀以赈饥乏，陇右遂安，而凉州流通焉。
现代文：然后打开粮仓，赈救饥民，陇右于是安定，凉州的道路就打通了。
English: Then the granary was opened to help the starving people, the situation stabilized, and the road to Liangzhou was opened.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之上建武十一年
现代文：庚寅，刘秀回到洛阳。建武十一年
English: Geng Yin, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang. Jianwu eleven years later

古文：春，三月，己酉，帝幸南阳，还幸章陵；庚午，车驾还宫。
现代文：春季，三月己酉，刘秀到南阳。又到章陵。庚午，回到洛阳皇宫。
English: In the spring, in March, Liu Xiu went to Nanyang. He also went to Zhangling. In the afternoon, he returned to Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：岑彭屯津乡，数攻田戎等，不克。
现代文：岑彭驻屯津乡，几次攻打田戎等，不能取胜。
English: Yao Peng stationed in Tunjin Township, attacked Tian Rong several times, but could not win.

古文：帝遣吴汉率诛虏将军刘隆等三将，发荆州兵凡六万馀人、骑五千匹，与彭会荆门。
现代文：刘秀派遣吴汉率领诛虏将军刘隆等三位将领，征调荆州军队共六万余人、骑兵五千人，与岑彭在荆门会师。
English: Liu Xiu sent three generals, including Wu Han, who led the general Liu Long, to recruit and transfer a total of more than sixty thousand people and five thousand cavalry from the Jingzhou army to join the division with Yao Peng in Jingmen.

古文：彭装战船数十艘，吴汉以诸郡棹卒多费粮谷，欲罢之。
现代文：岑彭武装战船数千艘，吴汉因为各郡派来的水兵消耗粮食太多，打算遣散。
English: There are thousands of armed warships in Zhaopeng, and Wu Han intends to disband them because the sailors sent from various counties consume too much grain.

古文：彭以为蜀兵盛，不可遣，上书言状。
现代文：岑彭认为公孙述的兵力强盛，不能遣散，上书说明情况。
English: Yao Peng believed that the troops described by Gongsun were strong and could not be disbanded, and the letter explained the situation.

古文：帝报彭曰： 大司马习用步骑，不晓水战，荆门之事，一由征南公为重而已。 
现代文：刘秀答复岑彭说： 大司马习惯用步兵骑兵，不懂水战。荆门方面的事，全凭征南大将军岑彭作主。 
English: Liu Xiu replied to Yao Peng, saying: Da Sima is accustomed to using infantry and cavalry, and does not understand naval warfare. As for Jingmen, it was all under the command of General Yao Peng of the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：闰月，岑彭令军中募攻浮桥，先登者上赏。
现代文：闰三月。岑彭在军中招募攻击浮桥的战士，下令先登上浮桥的，给予上等奖赏。
English: In leap March, Kuang Peng recruited soldiers in the army to attack the pontoon, and ordered that those who boarded the pontoon first would be given a first-class reward.

古文：于是偏将军鲁奇应募而前，时东风狂急，鲁奇船逆流而上，直冲浮桥，而欑柱有反杷钩，奇船不得去。
现代文：于是偏将军鲁奇应募前行。当时东风刮得十分猛烈，鲁奇的船逆流而上，直冲浮桥。但密排在江中的木柱装有反拉的杷钩，钩住鲁奇的船，进退不能。
English: At that time, the east wind was blowing very violently, and Luchi's boat went upstream against the current and straight into the pontoon. However, the wooden pillars lined up in the middle of the river were equipped with counter-pulling hooks. Luchi's boat was hooked and could not retreat.

古文：奇等乘势殊死战，因飞炬焚之，风怒火盛，桥楼崩烧。
现代文：鲁奇等乘势作殊死战斗，便掷火炬焚烧浮桥。风狂火烈，桥楼烧毁崩塌。
English: Luqi and others took advantage of the situation to fight a desperate battle, and then threw a torch to burn the floating bridge. The wind was furious, and the bridge tower burned and collapsed.

古文：岑彭悉军顺风并进，所向无前，蜀兵大乱，溺死者数千人，斩任满，生获程汎，而田戎走保江州。
现代文：岑彭率领全军顺风并进，所向披靡。
English: Yao Peng led the whole army to advance with the wind, and was invincible.

古文：彭上刘隆为南郡太守；自率辅威将军臧宫、骁骑将军刘歆长驱入江关。
现代文：公孙述的军队大乱，落水淹死数千人。岑彭斩杀任满，活捉程；田戎逃跑，据守江州。岑彭奏请刘秀任命刘隆为南郡太守，自己率领辅威将军臧宫、骁骑将军刘歆，长驱直入江关。
English: According to Gongsun, the army was in turmoil, and thousands of people were drowned in the water. Zi Peng killed Ren Rong and captured him alive; Tian Rong fled and took control of Jiangzhou. Zi Peng So asked Liu Xiu to appoint Liu Long as the governor of Nan County, and he led the auxiliary general Wei Gong and the cavalry general Liu Wei and drove straight into Jiangguan.

古文：令军中无得虏掠，所过，百姓皆奉牛酒迎劳，彭复让不受。
现代文：下令军中，不得掳掠。军队所到之处，百姓们都奉献牛肉美酒迎接慰劳大军。岑彭一再推辞，不肯接受。
English: It was ordered that no one in the army should be captured. Wherever the army went, the people offered beef and wine to welcome the army of consolation. Nie Peng repeatedly declined and refused to accept.

古文：百姓大喜，争开门降。
现代文：百姓大喜，争着打开城门归降。
English: The people were overjoyed and fought to open the gates and surrender.

古文：诏彭守益州牧，所下郡辄行太守事，彭若出界，即以太守号付后将军。
现代文：刘秀下诏，任命岑彭代理益州牧；攻下某郡，则兼任某郡太守，岑彭如果离开某郡，就把太守的职位交付后面接防的将领。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict, appointing Zou Peng as acting governor of Yizhou; if a county was captured, he would also serve as the governor of a county. If Zou Peng left a county, he would hand over the position of governor to the general who was close behind.

古文：选官属守州中长吏。
现代文：岑彭挑选属官作为益州的代理行政官员。
English: Yao Peng selected subordinate officials as acting administrative officials of Yizhou.

古文：彭到江州，以其城固粮多，难卒拔，留冯骏守之；自引兵乘利直指垫江，攻破平曲，收其米数十万石。
现代文：岑彭抵达江州，因为江州城池坚固，粮食充足，难以很快攻陷，便留冯骏看守，自己乘胜直指垫江县，攻占平曲，获得稻米数十万石。
English: Zhou Peng arrived in Jiangzhou, because the city of Jiangzhou was strong and the grain was sufficient, and it was difficult to invade quickly, he left Feng Qi as a guard, and he took advantage of the victory to point directly at Jianjiang County, capture Pingqu, and obtain hundreds of thousands of kilos of rice.

古文：吴汉留夷陵，装露桡继进。
现代文：吴汉留在夷陵，乘坐只露桨楫的战船，继续前进。
English: Wu Han stayed in Yiling and rode on a paddle-wheeled warship to continue his journey.

古文：夏，先零羌寇临洮。
现代文：夏季，先零羌部落侵犯临洮。
English: In the summer, the Linyi tribe invaded Linyi.

古文：来歙荐马援为陇西太守，击先零羌，大破之。
现代文：来歙举荐马援当陇西太守。马援率军进击，大败先零羌部落。
English: He came to Handan to recommend Ma Yuan to be the governor of Western Handan. Ma Yuan led the army to attack, and the first to be defeated was the Handan tribe.

古文：公孙述以王元为将军，使与领军环安拒河池。
现代文：公孙述任命王元为将军，命他和领军环安在河池御敌。
English: According to Gongsun, he appointed Wang Yuan as a general and ordered him to lead the Huanan army against the enemy in Hechi.

古文：六月，来歙与盖延等进攻元、安，大破之，遂克下辨，乘胜遂进。
现代文：六月，来歙和盖延等进攻王元、环安，大败敌军。于是攻克下辨，乘胜前进。
English: In June, Laiwu and Gaiyan attacked Wangyuan and Huanan, defeating the enemy army. Therefore, they conquered Shiban and advanced with the victory.

古文：蜀人大惧，使刺客刺歙，未殊，驰召盖延。
现代文：蜀人十分恐慌，派刺客行刺来歙，来歙未死，命人紧急召来盖延。
English: The people of Shu were so afraid that they sent assassins to kill him, but before he died, they summoned Gai Yan.

古文：延见歙，因伏悲哀，不能仰视。
现代文：盖延看到来歙，伏地哀痛，不能抬头仰视。
English: When Gai Yan saw the approaching dragonfly, he fell down in sorrow, unable to look up.

古文：歙叱延曰： 虎牙何敢然！
现代文：来歙斥责盖延说： 你怎么敢这个样子！
English: "How dare General Houya do such a thing!

古文：今使者中刺客，无以报国，故呼巨卿，欲相属以军事，而反效儿女子涕泣乎！
现代文：现在我被刺客刺中，不能报效国家，所以叫你来，要把军事托付给你，你反而学小儿女那样哭吗！
English: Now I have been assassinated by an assassin and can no longer serve my country, so I have called you here, and you want to order me to serve in the military, but instead you follow the example of a child crying bitterly!

古文：刃虽在身，不能勒兵斩公邪？ 延收泪强起，受所诫。
现代文：刀虽然在我身上，我就不能用兵杀了你吗？ 盖延收住眼泪，勉强起身接受嘱托。
English: Although the sword is on my body, can't I use soldiers to kill you? Gai Yan held back tears and reluctantly got up to accept the commission.

古文：歙自书表曰： 臣夜人定后，为何人所贼伤，中臣要害。
现代文：来歙亲手书写奏章，说： 我在深夜时，不知被什么人刺伤，中了要害。
English: He wrote in his epitaph: "A minister was stabbed in the dead of night, I don't know by whom, and he was stabbed in the heart.

古文：臣不敢自惜，诚恨奉职不称，以为朝廷羞。
现代文：我不敢痛惜自己，深恨没有尽到职责，给朝廷带来羞辱。
English: The vassal did not dare to spare his own life. He only hated that he had not completed his duties, thinking that the imperial court would be ashamed.

古文：夫理国以得贤为本，太中大夫段襄，骨鯁可任，愿陛下裁察。
现代文：治理国家以能够任用贤才为根本，太中大夫段襄，正直刚强，可以重用，望陛下裁决明察。
English: To govern the country, it is fundamental to be able to appoint talents. Dr. Duan Xiang, the First Vice-Minister of the Central Military Commission, is honest and strong, and can be reused. I hope His Majesty will make a clear decision.

古文：又臣兄弟不肖，终恐被罪，陛下哀怜，数赐教督。 
现代文：此外我的兄弟不贤，最终恐会获罪，请陛下可怜他们，时常都诲监督。 
English: In addition, my brothers are not virtuous and may eventually be punished. I ask Your Majesty to have mercy on them and to supervise them at all times.

古文：投笔抽刃而绝。
现代文：写罢，扔掉笔，拔出凶器，气绝身亡。
English: Write it down, throw away the pen, pull out the weapon, and die.

古文：帝闻，大惊，省书揽涕。
现代文：刘秀听到消息，极为震惊，一面看奏章，一面流泪。
English: Liu Xiu was extremely shocked when he heard the news. He shed tears while reading the score.

古文：以扬武将军马成守中郎将代之。
现代文：任命扬武将军马成代理中郎将，接替来歙。
English: He appointed Yangwu General Ma Cheng as acting vice-commander to succeed him.

古文：歙丧还洛阳，乘舆缟素临吊、送葬。
现代文：来歙的灵车运回洛阳。刘秀乘车，身穿丧服，亲自吊丧、送葬。
English: The hearse was transported back to Luoyang. Liu Xiu rode in the hearse, dressed in mourning clothes, and attended the funeral in person.

古文：赵王良从帝送歙丧还，入夏城门，与中郎将张邯争道，叱邯旋车，又诘责门候，使前走数十步。
现代文：赵王刘良跟随刘秀为来歙送葬回来，进入夏城门，和中郎将张邯争夺道路，呵斥张邯掉转车头；又责骂守卫城门的门候，罚他往前走数十步。
English: Zhao Wang Liu Liang followed Liu Xiu to take Lai Yao back for burial, and entered the Xiacheng Gate. He and Zhong Lang fought over Zhang Yao on the road, shouting at Zhang Yao to turn the car around; he also scolded the guard at the gate, and ordered him to walk forward dozens of steps.

古文：司隶校尉鲍永劾奏： 良无籓臣礼，大不敬。 
现代文：司隶校尉鲍永弹劾刘良： 刘良不守藩臣的礼节，犯了大不敬之罪。 
English: Sergeant Major Bao Yong impeached Liu Liang: Liu Liang did not observe the etiquette of a minister of the domain and committed the crime of great disrespect.

古文：良尊戚贵重，而永劾之，朝廷肃然。
现代文：刘良是尊贵显要的皇族，而鲍永弹劾他，朝廷对鲍永肃然起敬。
English: Liu Liang was a distinguished member of the imperial family, and when Bao Yong impeached him, the imperial court revered Bao Yong.

古文：永辟扶风鲍恢为都官从事，恢亦抗直，不避强御。
现代文：鲍永任命扶风鲍恢当都官从事。鲍恢也刚正不屈，不畏强权显贵。
English: Bao Yong appointed Fufeng Bao Jiao as the official of the capital. Bao Jiao is also upright and unyielding, not afraid of power and dignity.

古文：帝常曰： 贵戚且敛手以避二鲍。 
现代文：刘秀常说： 皇亲贵戚姑且收敛，以避开二鲍。 
English: Liu Xiu Chang said: The imperial relatives and noble relatives should restrain themselves to avoid the two baos.

古文：永行县到霸陵，路经更始墓，下拜，哭尽哀而去，西至扶风，椎牛上苟谏冢。
现代文：鲍永到霸陵巡查，途经刘玄坟墓，下拜，哭泣尽哀才离开。向西到达扶风，杀牛祭奠苟谏的坟墓。
English: Bao Yong went to Baoling for inspection. He passed through Liu Xuan's tomb, bowed down, and wept with sorrow before leaving. He went west to the tomb of Fufeng, a cow-killing ritual.

古文：帝闻之，意不平，问公卿曰： 奉使如此，何如？ 
现代文：刘秀知道后，心里不痛快，问公卿说： 奉皇帝的使命，做这样的事，怎么样呢？ 
English: After knowing this, Liu Xiu was not happy and asked the nobleman, "What about doing such a thing on the emperor's mission?

古文：太中大夫张湛对曰： 仁者，行之宗；忠者，义之主也。
现代文：太中大夫张湛回答说： 仁，是行为的宗旨；忠，是道德的主宰。
English: Zhang Zhan, the Taizhong Doctor, replied: "Kindness is the purpose of behavior; loyalty is the master of morality.

古文：仁不遗旧，忠不忘君，行之高者也。 
现代文：仁者不忘故旧，忠者不忘君王，鲍永的行为是高尚的。 
English: It is a noble act to be kind to the old and loyal to the young.

古文：帝意乃释。
现代文：刘秀的不满才消除。
English: Only then did the emperor's anger subside.

古文：帝自将征公孙述；秋，七月，次长安。
现代文：刘秀将亲率大军征讨公孙述。秋季，七月，抵达长安。
English: Liu Xiu will lead an army of relatives to collect his grandchildren. In the autumn, in July, he arrived in Chang'an.

古文：公孙述使其将延岑、吕鲔、王元、公孙恢悉兵拒广汉及资中，又遣将侯丹率二万馀人拒黄石。
现代文：公孙述派将领延岑、吕鲔、王元、公孙恢调动所有的兵力，据守广汉和资中。又派将领侯丹率领二万余人据守黄石。
English: Gongsun Su sent generals Yan Kun, Lv Ying, Wang Yuan and Gongsun Hui to mobilize all the troops and defend Guanghan and Zhizhong. He also sent general Hou Dan and more than 20,000 people to defend Huangshi.

古文：岑彭使臧宫将降卒五万，从涪水上平曲，拒延岑，自分兵浮江下还江州，溯都江而上，袭击侯丹，大破之；因晨夜倍道兼行二千馀里，径拔武阳。
现代文：岑彭命臧宫率领归降士兵五万人，沿涪水而上到平曲，对抗延岑。岑彭自己率领军队从垫江乘船由长江而下返回江州，又逆都江而上，袭击侯丹，大破敌军。然后日夜兼程，急行军二千余里，径直攻陷武阳。
English: Gong Peng ordered Gong Gong Gong to lead fifty thousand soldiers who had returned from the battlefield to go up to Pingqu along the Surabaya River to fight against Yan'an. Gong Peng himself led the army from the Yangtze River by boat to return to Jiangzhou, and then went up the Dujiang River to attack Houdan and destroy the enemy army. Then, by day and night, the army marched more than two thousand miles and directly invaded Wuyang.

古文：使精骑驰击广都，去成都数十里，势若风雨，所至皆奔散。
现代文：又派出精锐骑兵，疾驰袭击广都，离成都数十里。攻势如暴风骤雨，兵锋所至，公孙述的军队全都奔逃四散。
English: He also dispatched elite cavalry to attack Quangdu at high speed, dozens of miles away from Chengdu. The offensive was like a storm, the soldiers arrived, and Gongsun Su's army all fled.

古文：初，述闻汉兵在平曲，故遣大兵逆之。
现代文：当初，公孙述听说东汉军队在平曲，所以派大军迎击。
English: At first, Gongsun Su heard that the Han soldiers were still fighting, so he sent a large army to resist.

古文：及彭至武阳，绕出延岑军后，蜀地震骇。
现代文：臧宫人多粮少，粮草等物资运输不继，投降的官兵都想逃散背叛，当地郡县城邑又重新屯聚堡垒自守，以观望成败输赢。
English: When Zhaopeng arrived at Wuyang and went around the back of Yan's army, Shu was shocked.

古文：述大惊，以杖击地曰： 是何神也！ 延岑盛兵于沅水。
现代文：臧宫想率军撤退，恐怕会引起大规模反叛。正巧，刘秀派谒者带兵到岑彭那里，有战马七百匹。
English: If Gong Gong wanted to withdraw with his army, it would probably cause a large-scale rebellion. Coincidentally, Liu Xiu sent Gong to bring troops to Gong Peng, including seven hundred horses.

古文：臧宫众多食少，转输不至，降者皆欲散畔郡邑，复更保聚，观望成败。
现代文：臧宫假传圣旨，全部收取充实自己。不分昼夜地进军，树起许多旗帜，登上山头擂鼓呐喊。
English: He marched day and night, set up many banners, climbed mountains, played drums and shouted.

古文：宫欲引还，恐为所反；会帝遣谒者将兵诣岑彭，有马七百匹，宫矫制取以自益，晨夜进兵，多张旗帜，登山鼓噪，右步左骑，挟船而引，呼声动山谷。
现代文：右岸是步兵，左岸是骑兵，护卫着战船推进，呼喊声震动山谷。
English: On the right bank are the infantry, on the left the cavalry, escorting the advancing warships, whose shouts shake the valley.

古文：岑不意汉军卒至，登山望之，大震恐；宫因纵击，大破之，斩首、溺死者万馀人，水为之浊。
现代文：延岑想不到东汉的军队会突然到来，登上山头眺望，大为震恐。臧宫趁机纵兵攻击，大败敌军，斩首、淹死的有一万余人，水流都因此变得混浊了。
English: Yan Xun could not imagine that the Eastern Han Dynasty's army would suddenly arrive, and he was very shocked when he climbed the mountain to look around. The Summer Palace took advantage of the opportunity to attack the enemy, defeated the enemy army, beheaded and drowned more than 10,000 people, and the water flow became turbid.

古文：延岑奔成都，其众悉降，尽获其兵马珍宝。
现代文：延岑逃奔成都，他的军队全都投降，臧宫夺得延岑所有的兵马珍宝。
English: Yan Xuan rushed back to Chengdu, all of his subordinates surrendered, and all of them captured Shu's precious soldiers and horses.

古文：自是乘胜追北，降者以十万数。
现代文：于是乘胜追击败兵，投降的公孙述军队数以十万计。
English: Since then, they have been pursuing victory, and as many as 100,000 Shu soldiers have surrendered.

古文：军至平阳乡，王元举众降。
现代文：大军抵达阳乡，王元率部众投降。
English: The large army arrived at Yangxiang, and Wang Yuan and his subordinates surrendered.

古文：帝与公孙述书，陈言祸福，示以丹青之信。
现代文：刘秀给公孙述写信，陈述利害祸福，表示坚决信守的承诺。
English: Liu Xiu wrote a letter to his son-in-law and grandson-in-law, stating the interests, misfortunes and blessings, and expressed his firm commitment.

古文：述省书叹息，以示所亲。
现代文：公孙述看信叹息，把它给亲信传阅。
English: The great-grandson sighed as he read the letter and passed it on to his relatives.

古文：太常常少、光禄勋张隆皆劝述降。
现代文：太常常少、光禄勋张隆全都劝公孙述投降。
English: All of Zhang Long's sons and grandsons were exhorted to surrender.

古文：述曰： 废兴，命也，岂有降天子哉！ 
现代文：公孙述说： 一废一兴，都是天命，岂有投降的天子呢？ 
English: Gongsun said, "Every failure and every success is the destiny of heaven. Is there a son of heaven who surrenders?

古文：左右莫敢复言。
现代文：左右不敢再说话。
English: Neither side dared to speak again.

古文：少、隆皆以忧死。
现代文：常少、张隆都因过度忧虑而死。
English: Chang Shao and Zhang Long both died from excessive worry.

古文：帝还自长安。
现代文：刘秀从长安返回洛阳。
English: Liu Xiu returns to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：冬，十月，公孙述使刺客诈为亡奴，降岑彭，夜，刺杀彭。
现代文：冬季，十月，公孙述派刺客谎称是逃亡的奴仆，归降岑彭，在夜间刺杀了岑彭。
English: In the winter, in October, Gongsun Sui's assassins falsely claimed to be escaped slaves, returned to Xingpeng, and assassinated Xingpeng at night.

古文：太中大夫监军郑兴领其营，以俟吴汉至而授之。
现代文：太中大夫、监军郑兴统领他的军队，等待吴汉率军赶到后移交。
English: Zheng Xing, Tai Zhong Dafu and supervisor of the army, led his army and waited for Wu Han and his army to arrive before handing over.

古文：彭持军整齐，秋毫无犯。
现代文：岑彭治军严格，秋毫无犯。
English: Yan Peng governed the army strictly, and there were no crimes committed in the autumn.

古文：邛谷王任贵闻彭威信，数千里遣使迎降；会彭已被害，帝尽以任贵所献赐彭妻子。
现代文：公孙述封的邛谷王任贵听说了岑彭的威望信誉，从几千里之外派使者来投降。正赶上岑彭已被杀害，刘秀把任贵所献的礼品全都赐予岑彭的妻子儿女。
English: Shibuya King Ren Gui, whose grandson was enthroned, heard about Zhaopeng's prestige and credibility and sent an envoy from thousands of miles away to surrender. Just as Zhaopeng was killed, Liu Xiu gave all the gifts that Ren Gui had offered to Zhaopeng's wife and children.

古文：蜀人为立庙祠之。
现代文：蜀郡人为岑彭立庙来祭祀他。
English: Shu County built a temple to worship him.

古文：马成等破河池，遂平武都。
现代文：东汉将军马成等攻陷河池，于是平定武都郡。
English: Eastern Han Dynasty general Ma Cheng and others invaded Hechi, thereby pacifying Wudu County.

古文：先零诸种羌数万人，屯聚寇钞，拒浩亹隘。
现代文：先零部落和其他羌人部落共计数万人，屯聚起来，进行侵扰掠夺，据守在浩隘。
English: A total of tens of thousands of members of the Xian Zero tribe and other Yao tribes gathered together to harass and plunder, and held out in Haoxian.

古文：成与马援深入讨击，大破之，徙降羌置天水、陇西、扶风。
现代文：马成和马援深入其地讨伐，大败羌人。把投降的羌人迁徙安置在天水、陇西、扶风。
English: Ma Cheng and Ma Yuan went deep into the country to fight, and defeated the Xiong people. The Xiong people who surrendered were resettled in Tianshui, Shaanxi and Fufeng.

古文：是时，朝臣以金城破羌之西，涂远多寇，议欲弃之。
现代文：这时，朝臣们认为，金城郡破羌县以西路途遥远，盗贼又多，主张放弃。
English: At this time, the courtier wanted to give up the idea of negotiating with Jincheng in the west of the ruined city, where the road was far and there were many robbers.

古文：马援上言： 破羌以西，城多完牢，易可依固。
现代文：马援上书说： 破羌县以西，城多坚固，易于固守。
English: Ma Yuan's petition said: "To the west of the broken county, the city is more solid and easy to hold on to.

古文：其田土肥壤，灌溉流通。
现代文：那里土地肥沃，灌溉方便。
English: The land there is fertile and easy to irrigate.

古文：如令羌在湟中，则为害不休，不可弃也。 
现代文：如果让羌人占有湟中地区，就会为害不止，不可以放弃。 
English: If you let a deaf person in the cocoon, it will do more harm than good, and you must not give up.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：刘秀同意。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：民归者三千馀口，援为置长吏，缮城郭，起坞候，开沟洫，劝以耕牧，郡中乐业。
现代文：老百姓回归的有三千余人。马援为他们设置官吏，修缮城郭，筑起坞堡亭候，开挖沟渠，鼓励耕田放牧，郡中人民安居乐业。
English: More than three thousand people were returned by the common people. Ma'an set up officials for them, repaired the castle, built a dock and a pavilion, dug ditches, encouraged farming and grazing, and the people in the county lived and worked in peace.

古文：又招抚塞外氏、羌，皆来降附，援奏复其侯王君长，帝悉从之。
现代文：马援又招抚塞外的氐人、羌人，使他们都来归附，并奏请刘秀恢复他们侯王首领称号。刘秀全都赞同。
English: In addition, Ma Yuan lured the Xiongnu and Xiongnu outside of Tibet, so that they all joined him, and petitioned Liu Xiu to restore their title of princes. Liu Xiu agreed with all of them.

古文：乃罢马成军。
现代文：于是命马成班师。
English: Withdraw Ma Chengjun.

古文：十二月，吴汉自夷陵将三万人溯江而上，伐公孙述。
现代文：十二月，吴汉从夷陵率领三万大军，逆长江而上，讨伐公孙述。
English: In December, Wu Han led a 30,000-strong army from Yiling up the Yangtze River to fight against Gongsun.

古文：郭亻及为并州牧，过京师，帝问以得失，亻及曰： 选补众职，当简天下贤俊，不宜专用南阳人。 
现代文：郭伋担任并州牧，经过京城洛阳，刘秀询问他为政的得失，郭伋说： 选拔补充各级官吏，应当从全国这个大范围选取贤能和俊杰，不应专用陛下的那些南阳郡同乡。 
English: Guo Wei served as the concurrent state pastor, and after passing through the capital Luoyang, Liu Xiu asked him about his political gains and losses. Guo Wei said: In selecting and supplementing officials at all levels, it is necessary to select talents and outstanding people from a wide range across the country, and it is not necessary to select only those who are from his hometown in Nanyang County.

古文：是时在位多乡曲故旧，故亻及言及之。
现代文：这时担任官职的很多都是刘秀的同乡或故旧，所以郭伋谈到这一点。
English: At this time, many of those who held official positions were Liu Xiu's countrymen or old-timers, so Guo Wei talked about this.

