古文：司马光吕公著司马光，字君实，陕州夏县人也。
现代文：司马光字君实，陕州夏县人。
English: Sima Guangzhi Junshi, from Xia County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：父池，天章阁待制。
现代文：父亲司马池，官至天章阁待制。
English: His father, Sima Chi, was a high-ranking official.

古文：光生七岁，凛然如成人，闻讲《左氏春秋》，爱之，退为家人讲，即了其大指。
现代文：司马光七岁时，凛然像成年人，听到人讲说《左氏春秋》，喜爱上了这部书，回去给家人讲解，就能讲述其中的大概要旨。
English: When Sima Guang was seven years old, he was like an adult. When he heard people talking about Zuo's Spring and Autumn, he fell in love with the book. When he went back to explain it to his family, he was able to describe the general gist of it.

古文：自是手不释书，至不知饥渴寒暑。
现代文：自此以后手不释卷，以至不知饥渴寒暑。
English: Since then, he has not been able to let go of the scroll, to the point that he is constantly hungry, thirsty, cold and hot.

古文：群儿戏于庭，一儿登瓮，足跌没水中，众皆弃去，光持石击瓮破之，水迸，儿得活。
现代文：一次，一群小孩在庭院中游戏玩耍，一个小孩登上瓮缸，失足落水被水淹没，大伙都逃弃而去，只有司马光搬起石头砸破瓮缸，缸水迸发流出，落水小孩因此得救。
English: On one occasion, a group of children were playing games in the courtyard. A child climbed onto the gourd, lost his footing, fell into the water and was flooded. Everyone fled. Only Sima Guang lifted a stone to break the gourd, the water burst out of the gourd, and the child who fell into the water was saved.

古文：其后京、洛间画以为图。
现代文：此后京城、洛阳间把这一故事画成图流传开来。
English: Since then, the story has been passed down in pictures between Beijing and Luoyang.

古文：仁宗宝元初，中进士甲科。
现代文：宋仁宗宝元初年，考中进士甲科，时年刚满二十岁。
English: In the first year of the Baoyuan Dynasty, Song Renzong was just 20 years old when he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：年甫冠，性不喜华靡，闻喜宴独不戴花，同列语之曰： 君赐不可违。 乃簪一枝。
现代文：他生性不爱华丽奢侈，闻喜宴上唯独他不戴红花，同伴们对他说： 君主的赏赐是不可以违背的。 于是他才插上了一枝花。
English: He was by nature averse to pomp and luxury, but at the feast he refused to wear the scarlet flower, and his companions said to him, "The gift of the sovereign is not to be denied," so he inserted a sprig of the flower.

古文：除奉礼郎，时池在杭，求签苏州判官事以便亲，许之。
现代文：司马光被任命为奉礼郎，当时司马池在杭州，于是司马光要求改任签苏州判官事以便侍亲，得到朝廷准许。
English: Sima Guang was appointed as a courtier. At that time, Sima Qi was in Hangzhou, so Sima Guang asked to be reassigned to the post of Suzhou magistrate in order to serve his relatives, which was approved by the imperial court.

古文：丁内外艰，执丧累年，毁瘠如礼。
现代文：遭逢母丧父丧，守丧多年，因过度悲伤，而使身体瘦弱，合乎礼仪。
English: After the death of his mother and the loss of his father, he mourned for many years. Due to excessive grief, his body was thin and weak, which was in line with etiquette.

古文：服除，签书武成军判官事，改大理评事，补国子直讲。
现代文：守丧期满后，任签书武成军判官事，改任大理评事，补任国子直讲。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed as the judge of the Signing of the Letter of Take Shingun, he was reappointed as the commentator of Dali, and he was reappointed as the straight talker of Kuniko.

古文：枢密副使庞籍荐为馆阁校勘，同知礼院。
现代文：枢密院副使庞籍推荐他为馆阁校勘，同知礼院。
English: The Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Pang Quek, recommended him as the curator of the pavilion.

古文：中官麦允言死，给卤簿。
现代文：宦官麦允言去世，朝廷给以仪仗队。
English: The eunuch Mak Yungon died, and the imperial court gave him an honor guard.

古文：光言： 繁缨以朝，孔子且犹不可。
现代文：司马光说 ：古时诸侯佩着辂马的带饰去朝见天子，孔子尚且认为不可。
English: Sima Guang said: In ancient times, princes would wear a horse sash to meet the emperor, but Confucius thought it was unacceptable.

古文：允言近习之臣，非有元勋大劳而赠以三公官，给一品卤簿，其视繁缨，不亦大乎。 夏竦赐谥文正，光言： 此谥之至美者，竦何人，可以当之？ 改文庄。
现代文：麦允言是帝王的亲信近臣，没有元勋那么大的功劳，而赠以三公的官职，给予一品官待遇的仪仗队，这与诸侯佩辂马带饰相比较不是大大超过规格吗？ 夏竦被赐给谥号 文正 ，司马光说： 这个谥号是最完美的，夏竦是什么人，怎么可以配得上它呢？ 改谥 文庄 。
English: Mak Yungon was the emperor's close confidant and courtier, but he did not have as much merit as Yuan Xun, and the guard of honor, which was given the official position of the three dukes and the treatment of a first-class official, did not greatly exceed the specifications compared to the princes wearing horse harnesses? Xia Yao was given the nickname Wen Zheng, Sima Guang said: This nickname is the most perfect, what kind of person is Xia Yao, how can he deserve it? He changed his surname to Wen Zhuang.

古文：加集贤校理。
现代文：司马光加官集贤校理。
English: Sima Guang plus Guan Ji Xian as the proofreader.

古文：从庞籍辟，通判并州。
现代文：应庞籍的征召，司马光任并州通判。
English: Upon Pang's call-up, Sima Guangren was appointed to the post and became the state's chief judge.

古文：麟州屈野河西多良田，夏人蚕食其地，为河东患。
现代文：麟州屈野河西有很多良田，西夏人蚕食这块地方，成为河东大患。
English: There are many good fields to the west of the Qunuo River in Linzhou. Western Xia people have encroached on this area and become a serious problem for the eastern part of the river.

古文：籍命光按视，光建： 筑二堡以制夏人，募民耕之，耕者众则籴贱，亦可渐纾河东贵籴远输之忧。 籍从其策；而麟将郭恩勇且狂，引兵夜渡河，不设备，没于敌，籍得罪去。
现代文：庞籍命令司马光前去按察巡视，司马光建议： 修筑两个城堡来控制西夏人，招募百姓耕种，耕种的人多，那么买进粮食的价格就会低，也可以渐渐解除河东高价买进粮食远距离运输的忧患。 庞籍同意了他的建议。但麟州将领郭恩勇猛而又狂妄，带领部队连夜渡过屈野河，却没有设防，结果被敌人消灭，庞籍因此获罪去职。
English: Pang Zi ordered Sima Guang to go ahead to inspect and inspect. Sima Guang suggested: Build two castles to control the Xixia people, recruit people to cultivate, more people to cultivate, then the price of buying grain will be low, and it can gradually relieve the worries of long-distance transportation of grain bought at high prices in Hedong. Pang Zi agreed with his suggestion. However, Linshou general Guo En was brave and arrogant. He led the troops to cross the Qunuo River overnight, but did not set up defenses. As a result, he was eliminated by the enemy. As a result, Pang Zi was convicted and dismissed.

古文：光三上书自引咎，不报。
现代文：司马光三次上书自责引咎，没有得到朝廷的答复。
English: Sima Guang wrote to the court three times to blame himself, but received no reply from the court.

古文：籍没，光升堂拜其妻如母，抚其子如昆弟，时人贤之。
现代文：庞籍死，司马光升堂拜其妻子好比自己的母亲，抚养他的儿子好像自己的兄弟，当时人们都认为他是个贤人。
English: When Pang died, Sima Guangsheng worshipped his wife as if she were his own mother and raised his son as if he were his own brother. At that time, people thought he was a wise man.

古文：改直秘阁、开封府推官。
现代文：改任直秘阁、开封府推官。
English: He was reappointed as the direct secretary of the cabinet, and became the governor of Kaifeng.

古文：交趾贡异兽，谓之麟，光言： 真伪不可知，使其真，非自至不足为瑞，愿还其献。 又奏赋以风。
现代文：交趾进贡异兽，叫作麒麟。司马光说： 是真是假是不可能知道的，即使是真的麒麟，不是它自己来的不足以作为祥瑞之兆，希望归还他们的贡物。 又献赋讽咏其事。
English: Sima Guang said: It is impossible to know whether it is true or not, even if it is a real unicorn, it is not enough for it to come by itself as a sign of auspiciousness, hoping to return their tribute.

古文：修起居注，判礼部。
现代文：任修起居注、判礼部。
English: Appointment to the Department of Precepts and Etiquette.

古文：有司奏日当食，故事食不满分，或京师不见，皆表贺。
现代文：官吏上奏应当有日食发生，按故事日食不满分，或者京师看不见，都上表称贺。
English: According to the official report, if there is a solar eclipse, according to the story, the eclipse is unsatisfactory, or the Beijing division cannot be seen, all the tables are congratulated.

古文：光言： 四方见、京师不见，此人君为阴邪所蔽；天下皆知而朝廷独不知，其为灾当益甚，不当贺。 从之。
现代文：司马光说： 各地能见到日食而京师却看不到，这是皇帝被阴险邪恶所遮蔽；天下都知道而唯独朝廷不知道，它所造成的灾害越来越严重，所以不应当庆贺。 
English: Sima Guang said, "Everywhere can see the solar eclipse, but the capital can't. This is because the emperor is covered by insidious evil. The whole world knows, but only the imperial court doesn't know. The disasters caused by it are getting more and more serious, so we shouldn't celebrate.

古文：同知谏院。
现代文：朝廷同意了这一意见。被任命为同知谏院。
English: The Imperial Court agreed with this opinion, and he was appointed to Tongzhiyuin.

古文：苏辙答制策切直，考官胡宿将黜之，光言： 辙有爱君忧国之心，不宜黜。 诏置末级。
现代文：苏辙对答皇帝的制书策问恳切直爽，主考官胡宿打算把他黜斥，司马光说： 苏辙有爱君忧国之心，不宜黜斥。 下诏把苏辙放在末等。
English: Su Rute's answer to the emperor's book-making question was earnest and straightforward. The chief examiner, Hu Shuku, planned to reject him. Sima Guang said: Su Rute has the heart of loving the emperor and worrying about the country, and it is not appropriate to reject him. The next edict put Su Rute in the last grade.

古文：仁宗始不豫，国嗣未立，天下寒心而莫敢言。
现代文：仁宗开始有病时，皇帝继承人没有立定，天下人寒心但不敢作声。
English: When Emperor Nanzong fell ill, the emperor's successor was not determined. People around the world were worried but did not dare to speak out.

古文：谏官范镇首发其议，光在并州闻而继之，且贻书劝镇以死争。
现代文：谏官范镇首先提出这个建议，司马光在并州听到后接着提出建议，并且写信勉励范镇以死相争。
English: The eunuch Fan Zhen first proposed this suggestion, and Sima Guang then proposed it after hearing about the annexation, and wrote a letter to encourage Fan Zhen to fight to the death.

古文：至是，复面言： 臣昔通判并州，所上三章，愿陛下果断力行。 帝沉思久之，曰： 得非欲选宗室为继嗣者乎？
现代文：到这时，司马光面陈皇帝说： 我过去任并州通判时，上呈了三个奏章，希望陛下果断切实实行。 仁宗沉思了很久，说： 莫非是想选择宗室作为继承人吗？
English: At this time, Emperor Sima Guangren Chen said, "When I was appointed as the judge of the merger of the two states, I submitted three reports, and I hope that Your Majesty will resolutely and effectively implement them."Ren Zong pondered for a long time and said, "Is it because you want to choose the family as the heir?

古文：此忠臣之言，但人不敢及耳。 光曰： 臣言此，自谓必死，不意陛下开纳。 帝曰： 此何害，古今皆有之。 光退未闻命，复上疏曰： 臣向者进说，意谓即行，今寂无所闻，此必有小人言陛下春秋鼎盛，何遽为不祥之事。
现代文：这是忠臣之言，只是人们不敢提及而已。 司马光说： 我说这事，自己认为必死无疑，想不到陛下如此开明并采纳。 
English: These are the words of a loyal subject, but people are afraid to mention them. Sima Guang said, "When I said this, I thought there was no doubt that I would die. I had no idea that His Majesty would be so open-minded and accept it.

古文：小人无远虑，特欲仓卒之际，援立其所厚善者耳。定策国老 ； 门生天子 之祸，可胜言哉？ 帝大感动曰： 送中书。 光见韩琦等曰： 诸公不及今定议，异日禁中夜半出寸纸，以某人为嗣，则天下莫敢违。 琦等拱手曰： 敢不尽力。 未几，诏英宗判宗正，辞不就，遂立为皇子，又称疾不入。
现代文：仁宗大为感动地说 ：把此疏送往中书省。 司马光见到韩琦等人说 ：诸公现在不及时决定皇位继承人这件事，将来禁宫中夜半传出寸纸片言，以某人为皇嗣，那么天下人不敢违抗。 韩琦等拱手说 ：不敢不尽力而为。 不久，诏命英宗判宗正，英宗谢辞不就任，于是立他为皇子，又称病不入宫。
English: Rinzong was greatly moved and said, "Send this message to the Ministry of Chinese Literature." Sima Guang saw Han Zang and others saying, "If the princes do not decide the heir to the throne in time now, in the future, in the middle of the night, a piece of paper will be sent from the Forbidden Palace, saying that someone is the heir, so the world will not dare to disobey." Han Zang and others said, "Don't dare not to do your best." Soon, the imperial edict ordered Ying Zong to be awarded the title of Zong Zheng, and Ying Zong did not accept the post, so he was appointed as the prince,

古文：光言： 皇子辞不赀之富，至于旬月，其贤于人远矣。
现代文：司马光说 ：皇子辞谢不可计量的富贵，竟至于十天一月之久，可见他的贤能远胜他人。
English: Sima Guang said, "The prince's gratitude is immeasurably rich, and as far as ten days and one month are concerned, it can be seen that his ability is far superior to others."

古文：然父召无诺，君命召不俟驾，愿以臣子大义责皇子，宜必入。 英宗遂受命。
现代文：然而父亲呼唤不及答应就要去做，君命呼唤不等待车驾，希望陛下用臣子大义责成皇子，说他应当而且必须入宫。 英宗于是接受了当皇子的诏命。
English: However, his father called for him to do it without waiting for him to agree, and the sovereign's order called for him not to wait for the chauffeur, and he hoped that his majesty would use the great virtue of a vassal to order the prince to say that he should and must enter the palace.

古文：衮国公主嫁李玮，不相能，诏出玮卫州，母杨归其兄璋，主入居禁中。
现代文：兖国公主嫁给了李玮，但两人合不来，下诏把李玮调出到卫州，他的母亲杨氏归其兄长李璋照顾，公主入居禁宫之中。
English: The princess of Shandong Province married Li Yan, but the two could not get along, and Li Yan was transferred to Weizhou. His mother, Yang, was taken care of by his brother, Li Yan, and the princess moved into the Forbidden City.

古文：光言： 陛下追念章懿太后，故使玮尚主。
现代文：司马光说： 陛下怀念章懿太后，所以让李玮匹配公主。
English: Sima Guang said: His Majesty misses the Empress Dowager Zhang Ye, so let Li Ye match the princess.

古文：今乃母子离析，家事流落，独无雨露之感乎？
现代文：如今李玮母子分离析别，家事穷困潦倒，难道皇上对他家已无顾念之心了吗？
English: Now that Lihong's mother and son have separated and parted, and the family is destitute, does the emperor have no concern for his family?

古文：玮既黜，主安得无罪？ 帝悟，降主沂国，待李氏恩不衰。
现代文：李玮已经遭黜斥，公主怎么会没有罪责呢？ 仁宗醒悟，降公主为沂国公主，对待李氏的恩泽不减。
English: Li Yan had already been rebuked, how could the princess have no guilt? Ren Zong woke up and demoted the princess to the princess of Shandong Province, treating the grace of the Li clan no less.

古文：进知制诰，固辞，改天章阁待制兼侍讲、知谏院。
现代文：升任知制诰，司马光坚决辞谢，改任天章阁待制兼侍讲、知谏院。
English: After he was promoted to the position of chizokuin, Sima Guang resolutely resigned and changed his position to chizokuin at Tianzhangge.

古文：时朝政颇姑息，胥史喧哗则逐中执法，辇官悖慢则退宰相，卫士凶逆而狱不穷治，军卒詈三司使而以为非犯阶级。
现代文：当时朝政很是姑息从事，胥史喧哗闹事就折中执法，近臣狂悖傲慢就贬退宰相，卫士凶狠忤逆而不穷加治理，军士责骂三司使而认为他们没有触犯等级制度。
English: At that time, the government of the dynasty was very lenient, the historical noisy riots were settled in law enforcement, the close vassals were arrogant and demeaned the prime minister, the guards were ferocious and did not govern, the sergeant scolded the three envoys and thought that they did not violate the hierarchy system.

古文：光言皆陵迟之渐，不可以不正。
现代文：司马光认为这些都是国家衰颓的开始，不可以不予纠正。
English: Sima Guang believes that these are the beginning of the country's decline, and must be corrected.

古文：充媛董氏薨，赠淑妃，辍朝成服，百官奉慰，定谥，行册礼，葬给卤簿。
现代文：充媛董氏去世，赠为淑妃，罢朝持服吊丧，官员们送柩下葬，决定谥号，实行封册之礼，出葬赐给仪仗队。
English: After the death of Ms. Mitsuhime Dong, she was presented as a consort, and the funeral was held in the presence of the emperor. The officials sent her to the funeral, decided on her posthumous name, performed the ceremony of sealing the record, and gave the funeral to the honor guard.

古文：光言： 董氏秩本微，病革方拜充媛。
现代文：司马光说： 董氏品秩本来微贱，临死时才拜为充媛。
English: Sima Guang said, "Dong's rank was originally low, and she only became a Mitsuhime when she was about to die.

古文：古者妇人无谥，近制惟皇后有之。
现代文：古代妇人没有谥号，近代制度也只有皇后才有。
English: In ancient times, women did not have surnames. In the modern system, only the empress has a surname.

古文：卤簿本以赏军功，未尝施于妇人。
现代文：仪仗队本是用来奖赏军功，不曾施给妇人。
English: The honor guard was originally used to reward military service, and was not given to women.

古文：唐平阳公主有举兵佐高祖定天下功，乃得给。
现代文：唐代平阳公主因有举兵辅佐唐高祖平定天下的功劳，才得以赐给仪仗队。
English: Princess Pingyang of the Tang Dynasty was only able to be given the honor guard because of her service in raising an army to help Emperor Gaozhu of Tang conquer the world.

古文：至韦庶人始令妃主葬日皆给鼓吹，非令典，不足法。 时有司定后宫封赠法，后与妃俱赠三代，光论： 妃不当与后同，袁盎引却慎夫人席，正为此耳。
现代文：到韦庶人时开始后妃、公主出葬那天都给予鼓乐，这不是完美的典章制度，不足以效法。 当时有司决定后宫封赐追赠的办法，皇后与妃子都追赠三代祖先，司马光说： 妃子不应与皇后同制，袁盎撤除慎夫人的席位，正是因为这个原因。
English: At that time, there was a division to decide on the method of posthumous grant of the harem seal, and both the empress and her daughter-in-law posthumously presented three generations of ancestors, Sima Guang said: The daughter-in-law should not be in the same system as the empress, and Yuan Ang removed Mrs. Shin's seat, precisely for this reason.

古文：天圣亲郊，太妃止赠二代，而况妃乎？ 
现代文：天圣亲临郊外祭祀，太妃只追赠二代，何况是妃子呢？ 
English: The heavenly saint's relatives come to the suburb to offer sacrifices, and the tofu is only given to the second generation, and what about the concubine?

古文：英宗立，遇疾，慈圣光献后同听政。
现代文：英宗即皇帝位，有病，慈圣光献皇后同朝听政。
English: Emperor Yingzong was ill, and Empress Dowager Cixing was listening to the government.

古文：光上疏曰： 昔章献明肃有保佑先帝之功，特以亲用外戚小人，负谤海内。
现代文：司马光上疏说 ：过去章献明肃皇太后有保佑先帝之功，只因亲用外戚小人，受到天下人的攻击。
English: Sima Guang Shangsuo said: In the past, Empress Dowager Zhang Xianming and Empress Dowager Sui had the merit of blessing the former emperor, but they were attacked by the people of the world because they used their relatives as villains.

古文：今摄政之际，大臣忠厚如王曾，清纯如张知白，刚正如鲁宗道，质直如薛奎者，当信用之；猥鄙如马季良，谗谄如罗崇勋者，当疏远之，则天下服。 帝疾愈，光料必有追隆本生事，即奏言： 汉宣帝为孝昭后，终不追尊卫太子、史皇孙；光武上继元帝，亦不追尊钜鹿、南顿君，此万世法也。 后诏两制集议濮王典礼，学士王珪等相视莫敢先，光独奋笔书曰： 为人后者为之子，不得顾私亲。
现代文：现在正是摄政之际，大臣中忠实厚道的如王曾，清正纯明的如张知白，刚果正直的如鲁宗道，朴质正直的如薛奎等人，应当信任重用；猥琐庸俗的如马季良，谗言谄媚的如罗崇勋等人，应当疏远他们，这样天下才会信服。 英宗病好后，司马光预料一定会有追赠隆遇亲生父母的事情发生，便上奏： 汉宣帝为孝昭帝的后代，最终不追尊卫太子、史皇孙；汉光武帝上继统元帝，也不追尊巨鹿、南顿君，这是万世永久的制度。 后来诏命两制集中讨论濮王应奉典礼之事，学士王王圭等人互相观望不敢首先发言，唯独司马光一人奋笔上书说： 为人后嗣的就是他的儿子，不应当顾忌私亲。
English: Now is the time of the regency, the loyal and virtuous ministers such as Wang Zeng, the pure and innocent such as Zhang Zhibai, the Congo honest such as Lu Zongdao, the simple and honest such as Xue Kui, etc. should be trusted and reused; the obscene and vulgar such as Ma Jiliang, the flattering and charming such as Luo Chongxun, etc. should be alienated from them, so that the world will be convinced. After Yingzong's illness, Sima Guang expected that there would definitely be a posthumous gift to his biological parents, and then played: Han Xuan Di is the offspring of Xiao

古文：王宜准封赠期亲尊属故事，称为皇伯，高官大国，极其尊荣。 议成，珪即命吏以其手稿为按。
现代文：濮王应当按照封赠期亲尊属的成例，称为皇伯，高官大国，极其尊荣。 议崇既定，王王圭立即命令吏员以司马光的手稿作为根据。
English: Wang Wang Gui immediately ordered the clerk to use Sima Guang's manuscript as a basis for the discussion.

古文：既上与大臣意殊，御史六人争之力，皆斥去。
现代文：此议上报后与当权大臣的意见不同，御史台据力以争，都被罢斥去职。
English: After this motion was reported, the opinion of the minister in power differed from the opinion of the Minister of History, and both were dismissed from their posts.

古文：光乞留之，不可，遂请与俱贬。
现代文：司马光请求留任他们，没有得到许可，于是司马光请求与他们一起贬官。
English: Sima Guang requested to retain them, but did not get permission, so Sima Guang requested to demote with them.

古文：初，西夏遣使致祭，延州指使高宜押伴，傲其使者，侮其国主，使者诉于朝。
现代文：开始，西夏派遣使者祭奠问候，延州指派高宜押送陪伴，高宜傲视使者，侮辱西夏国王，使者投诉于朝廷。
English: At the beginning, Western Xia sent an envoy to pay tribute and greetings, Yanzhou assigned Gao Yi to escort the escort, Gao Yi treated the envoy arrogantly, insulted the King of Western Xia, and the envoy complained to the imperial court.

古文：光与吕诲乞加宜罪，不从。
现代文：司马光与吕诲请求加罪于高宜，朝廷不同意他们的建议。
English: Sima Guang and Lu Yan requested to add a crime to Gaoyi, but the court did not agree with their suggestion.

古文：明年，夏人犯边，杀略吏士。
现代文：第二年，西夏人进犯边地，杀害官吏掠取土地。
English: In the second year, the Xixia people invaded the borderlands, killed officials and plundered land.

古文：赵滋为雄州，专以猛悍治边，光论其不可。
现代文：赵滋治雄州，专门以刚猛凶悍的办法治理边地，司马光认为这种做法不可取。
English: Zhao Zizhi governed Xiongzhou, specifically using a brutal and ferocious method to govern the border areas. Sima Guang believed that this approach was not advisable.

古文：至是，契丹之民捕鱼界河，伐柳白沟之南，朝廷以知雄州李中祐为不材，将代之。
现代文：到这时，契丹百姓在界河捕鱼，在白沟以南砍伐柳树，朝廷认为雄州知州李中没有才能，打算另外派人取代他。
English: By this time, the Khitan people were fishing in the Jiehe River and cutting down willows south of Baigou. The court believed that Xiongzhou Zhizhou Li had no talent and planned to send someone else to replace him.

古文：光谓： 国家当戎夷附顺时，好与之计较末节，及其桀骜，又从而姑息之。
现代文：司马光认为 ：国家正当戎夷民族归附之时，而喜欢同他们计较细微之事，等他们桀骜不驯服，却又依从姑息他们。
English: Sima Guang believes that: when the country justly conquers and annexes ethnic groups, it likes to take care of minor matters with them, and when they refuse to be tamed, they tolerate them.

古文：近者西祸生于高宜，北祸起于赵滋；时方贤此二人，故边臣皆以生事为能，渐不可长。
现代文：近来的西部祸害起于高宜，北边的祸害起于赵滋；当时正以这二人为贤，所以边地官吏都以生惹是非为能事，对此宜加疏导不可助长。
English: The recent western calamity originated in Gaoyi, and the northern calamity originated in Zhao Zi. At that time, these two people were regarded as wise men, so the border officials were all able to create trouble, and this could not be promoted by Yigao.

古文：宜敕边吏，疆场细故辄以矢刃相加者，罪之。 
现代文：应当敕令边地官吏，如果因为与疆界无关紧要的小事情动不动就以刀箭相加的，以罪论处。 
English: Border officials should be ordered to be punished with a crime if they do not hesitate to use the sword and arrow because of minor matters that are not important to the border.

古文：仁宗遗赐直百余万，光率同列三上章，谓： 国有大忧，中外窘乏，不可专用乾兴故事。
现代文：仁宗遗赐钱物价值一百余万，司马光带领同僚们多次上奏章，认为： 国家有大忧患，中外困窘贫乏，不可以专用乾兴故事。
English: Sima Guang led his colleagues to repeatedly read from the more than one million worth of money and goods bequeathed by Rinzong, and believed that: the country is in great distress, China and other countries are in distress and poverty, and it is not appropriate to devote special attention to dry and happy stories.

古文：若遗赐不可辞，宜许侍从上进金钱佐山陵。 不许。
现代文：如果遗赐不可以辞谢，应当允许侍从向上进献金钱以佐助山陵之用。 
English: If the bequest cannot be revoked, the attendant should be allowed to donate money for the purpose of supporting the mausoleum.

古文：光乃以所得珠为谏院公使钱，金以遣舅氏，义不藏于家。
现代文：朝廷没有允许。司马光于是用他所得的珠宝作为谏院的公使钱，把黄金赠送给舅氏，意思是家不藏财。
English: The court did not allow it. Sima Guang then used the jewels he obtained as the official money of the imperial court and presented the gold to his uncle, meaning that the family did not hide wealth.

古文：后还政，有司立式，凡后有所取用，当覆奏乃供。
现代文：皇太后还政，有关部门确立法式，规定凡是皇太后有所取用，应当审核详情，重行上奏才予供给。
English: After the Empress Dowager returned to power, the relevant departments confirmed the legislative form, stipulating that if the Empress Dowager has any use, the details should be reviewed and re-submitted before being supplied.

古文：光云： 当移所属使立供已，乃具数白后，以防矫伪。 
现代文：司马光说 ：应当把属于她的那部分划她使用，并开列数目告诉太后，以防矫诏伪造。 
English: Sima Guang said: The part that belongs to her should be used by her, and the number should be told to the empress dowager to prevent forgery.

古文：曹佾无功除使相，两府皆迁官。
现代文：曹佾无功而被任命为使相，中书省、枢密院两府都迁升官职。
English: Cao Pi was appointed envoy without merit, and both the Central Literature Department and the Privy Council were promoted to higher posts.

古文：光言： 陛下欲以慰母心，而迁除无名，则宿卫将帅、内侍小臣，必有觊望。 已而迁都知任守忠等官，光复争之，因论： 守忠大奸，陛下为皇子，非守忠意，沮坏大策，离间百端，赖先帝不听；及陛下嗣位，反覆交构，国之大贼。
现代文：司马光说 ：陛下想用此来安慰母后之心，但迁升任官没有名义，那么宿卫将帅、内侍小臣，一定会有非份的奢望。 不久升都知任守忠等人的官职，司马光再次争论，因而议论 ：任守忠是个大奸之人，陛下为皇子，不是任守忠的意思，相反他败坏大事，百端离间，幸好先帝没有听他的话；等陛下嗣立皇位，他又变化无常交相图谋，是国家的大奸贼。
English: Sima Guang said, "Your Majesty wanted to use this to comfort the heart of the Empress Dowager, but there is no name for the transfer and promotion of officials, so the night watchman, the captain, and the inner servant, will certainly have excessive expectations. Soon after ascending to the capital, he knew the official positions of Shou Zhong and others, Sima Guang argued again, and therefore argued: Ren Shou Zhong is a great traitor, Your Majesty is the prince, not the meaning of Ren Shou Zhong, on the contrary, he ruined the great event, the hundred ends are far apart, fortunately the first emperor did not listen to him; when Your Majesty succeeded to the throne, he

古文：乞斩于都市，以谢天下。 责守忠为节度副使，蕲州安置，天下快之。
现代文：请求把他斩首于都市，以谢天下。 责贬任守忠为节度副使，安置蕲州。天下为之大快。
English: They requested that he be beheaded in the city as a sign of gratitude to the world, and that Shou Zhong be appointed as the vice-envoy of the festival and resettled in Zhangzhou. The world reacted quickly.

古文：诏刺陕西义勇二十万，民情惊挠，而纪律疏略不可用。
现代文：下诏招陕西义勇二十万，民情惊骇扰乱，而义勇纪律散漫不可任用。
English: The next edict calls for 200,000 Shaanxi volunteers, the people are shocked and disturbed, and the volunteer discipline is scattered and cannot be appointed.

古文：光抗言其非，持白韩琦。
现代文：韩琦说： 我在这里，您不要有什么忧虑。 
English: Han Yu said: I am here, you don't have to worry about anything.

古文：琦曰： 兵贵先声，谅祚方桀骜，使骤闻益兵二十万，岂不震慑？ 光曰： 兵之贵先声，为无其实也，独可欺之于一日之间耳。
现代文：司马光说： 如果您长期在这个地方，当然可以放心；他日别人当权，用您现在的军队，用他们运粮戍边，不过是易于反掌的事而已。 
English: Sima Guang said: If you have been in this place for a long time, of course you can rest assured; the other day someone else will be in power, using your current army, using them to transport food and supplies, is just something that is easy to do.

古文：今吾虽益兵，实不可用，不过十日，彼将知其详，尚何惧？ 琦曰： 君但见庆历间乡兵刺为保捷，忧今复然，已降敕榜与民约，永不充军戍边矣。 光曰： 朝廷尝失信，民未敢以为然，虽光亦不能不疑也。 琦曰： 吾在此，君无忧。 光曰： 公长在此地，可也；异日他人当位，因公见兵，用之运粮戍边，反掌间事耳。 琦嘿然，而讫不为止。
现代文：韩琦默然无声，但终于没有停止增兵。不到十年，事情果真如司马光所料。
English: Han Kuo was silent, but finally did not stop the troop increase. Less than ten years later, things really turned out as Sima Guang expected.

古文：不十年，皆如光虑。王广渊除直集贤院，光论其奸邪不可近： 昔汉景帝重卫绾，周世宗薄张美。
现代文：王广渊被任命为直集贤院，司马光认为他奸妄邪恶不可亲近 ：过去汉景帝重用卫绾，周世宗薄待张美。
English: Wang Guangyuan was appointed to Zhishixi Xianyin, Sima Guang believed that he was treacherous and evil and should not be approached: in the past, Emperor Han Jing heavily used Wei Xuan, and Zhou Shizong treated Zhang Mei with contempt.

古文：广渊当仁宗之世，私自结于陛下，岂忠臣哉？
现代文：王广渊在仁宗时代，私自结交于陛下，难道是忠臣吗？
English: Was Wang Guangyuan a loyal subject when he personally befriended His Majesty in the era of Emperor Renzong?

古文：宜黜之以厉天下。 进龙图阁直学士。
现代文：应当加以贬斥以劝勉天下。 司马光升任龙图阁直学士。
English: It should be denounced in order to encourage the world. Sima Guang was promoted to the post of Longtuge Direct Bachelor.

古文：神宗即位，擢为翰林学士，光力辞。
现代文：神宗即皇帝位，提拔司马光为翰林学士，司马光极力辞谢。
English: Shenzong, that is, the emperor, promoted Sima Guang to be a scholar of Hanlin, and Sima Guang was very grateful.

古文：帝曰： 古之君子，或学而不文，或文而不学，惟董仲舒、扬雄兼之。
现代文：神宗说： 古代的君子，有的有学问而没有文采，有的有文采而没有学问，只有董仲舒、扬雄二者兼而有之。
English: Shenzong said: In ancient times, some gentlemen had learning but no literary talent, and some had literary talent but no learning. Only Dong Zhongshu and Yang Xiong had both.

古文：卿有文学，何辞为？ 对曰： 臣不能为四六。 帝曰： 如两汉制诏可也；且卿能进士取高第，而云不能四六，何邪？ 竟不获辞。
现代文：你有学问有文采，为什么要推辞呢？ 司马光回答说 ：我不能作四六句。 神宗说 ：四六句像两汉时的制书诏令那样就可以了；况且你能够取得进士高第，却说不能作四六句，为什么呢？ 终没有获准辞谢。
English: Sima Guang replied, "I can't make forty-six sentences." Shenzong said, "Forty-six sentences would be fine, like the edict of the Han Dynasty; moreover, you can get a scholarship to the University of Gaudi, but you say you can't make forty-six sentences, why? Finally, I wasn't allowed to say thank you."

古文：御史中丞王陶以论宰相不押班罢，光代之，光言： 陶由论宰相罢，则中丞不可复为。
现代文：御史中丞王陶因议论宰相不押班而罢职，司马光代理御史中丞，司马光说： 王陶由于议论宰相罢职，那么中丞之职不可再为。
English: Wang Tao, Vice-Minister of History, resigned because of the discussion about the prime minister not holding office. Sima Guang, acting Vice-Minister of History, said: Wang Tao, because of the discussion about the prime minister's resignation, then the position of Vice-Minister of History can no longer be held.

古文：臣愿俟既押班，然后就职。 许之。
现代文：我愿意等待宰相押班后，然后就任该职。 
English: I am willing to wait until after the prime minister's shift is over and then take up the post.

古文：遂上疏论修心之要三：曰仁，曰明，曰武；治国之要三：曰官人，曰信赏，曰必罚。
现代文：朝廷准许了他的请求。司马光于是上疏论修心的要旨有三条：叫仁义，叫明智，叫武略；治国的要旨有三条：叫善于用人，叫有功必赏，叫有罪必罚。
English: The imperial court granted his request. Sima Guang then went on a ramble about the three points of mind training: to be kind and righteous, to be wise, and to be tactful; and the three points of governing the country: to be good at employing people, to be rewarded for merit, and to be punished for guilt.

古文：其说甚备。
现代文：司马光的这一主张很完备。
English: Sima Guang's proposal is very complete.

古文：且曰： 臣获事三朝，皆以此六言献，平生力学所得，尽在是矣。 御药院内臣，国朝常用供奉官以下，至内殿崇班则出；近岁暗理官资，非祖宗本意。
现代文：司马光又说 ：我得以事奉三朝，都是以这六句话呈献，平生历学所得，全部都在这里头了。 御药院的内官近臣，宋朝常常用供奉官以下的人充当，升到内殿崇班职位就出任地方官；近年暗中理顺官阶，这不是祖宗的本意。
English: Sima Guang also said: I was able to serve three dynasties, all of which are presented in these six sentences, and all of my life's study of history is here. The Song Dynasty often used people below the level of offering officials to serve as the inner officials of the Imperial Pharmacy, and when they rose to the position of the inner court, they served as local officials; in recent years, they have secretly straightened out the official ranks, which is not the original intention of the ancestors.

古文：因论高居简奸邪，乞加远窜。
现代文：因而弹劾高居简奸妄邪恶，请求加以远远流放。
English: Therefore, they impeached Gaoju Jian for treachery and wickedness, and requested that he be exiled far away.

古文：章五上，帝为出居简，尽罢寄资者。
现代文：奏章五次呈上，神宗为了替高居简开脱，全部废除寄资官。
English: In order to absolve Gaoju Jian, Shenzong abolished the donation officer altogether.

古文：既而复留二人，光又力争之。
现代文：不久再留任二人，司马光又据理力争。
English: Soon, two people will remain in office, and Sima Guang will continue to argue.

古文：张方平参知政事，光论其不叶物望，帝不从。
现代文：张方平任参知政事，司马光认为他不负众望协调，神宗没有同意司马光的意见。
English: Zhang Fangping served as a co-premier and politician, Sima Guang believed that he lived up to the expectations of coordination, and Shenzong did not agree with Sima Guang's opinion.

古文：还光翰林兼侍读学士。
现代文：司马光还是担任翰林兼侍读学士。
English: Sima Guang is still working as a scholar and bachelor's student.

古文：光常患历代史繁，人主不能遍鉴，遂为《通志》八卷以献。
现代文：司马光常常担心由于历代史籍浩繁，皇帝不能全部阅览，于是写了《通志》八卷呈献英宗。
English: Sima Guang was often worried that the emperor could not read all the historical books due to the vast number of historical books, so he wrote eight volumes of "Tong Zhi" to present to Ying Zong.

古文：英宗悦之，命置局秘阁，续其书。
现代文：英宗很高兴，命令在秘阁设置机构，续修这部书。
English: Imjong was so pleased that he ordered an institution to be set up in the Secret Annex to update the book.

古文：至是，神宗名之曰《资治通鉴》，自制《序》授之，俾日进读。
现代文：到这时，神宗给此书命名为《资治通鉴》，并亲自给此书写了《序》，让司马光每天进读。
English: At this time, Shenzong named the book "Zizhi Tongjian" and personally wrote the "Introduction" to the book for Sima Guang to read every day.

古文：诏录颍邸直省官四人为阁门祗候，光曰： 国初草创，天步尚艰，故御极之初，必以左右旧人为腹心耳目，谓之随龙，非平日法也。
现代文：诏令录选颍王府直省官四人为门祗候，司马光说： 国初草创之时，国运还艰难，所以皇帝登位初期，必须用左右故旧之人作为亲信称作随龙，这不是一般的制度。
English: Sima Guang said: "At the time of the country's initial creation, the national movement was still difficult, so in the early days of the emperor's ascension to the throne, it was necessary to use the old-fashioned people on the left and right as confidants to be called "following the dragon." This is not a general system.

古文：阁门祗候在文臣为馆职，岂可使厮役为之。 
现代文：门祗候对文臣来说是馆阁职务，怎能让执劳役供使用的人担任呢？ 
English: Waiting at the gate is a cabinet post for a civil servant, so how can a person who works as a laborer be allowed to serve?

古文：西戎部将嵬名山欲以横山之众，取谅祚以降，诏边臣招纳其众。
现代文：西戎部将嵬名山打算以横山部众，捉住谅祚来降服，诏令边臣招纳横山部众。
English: The Western Military Command planned to conquer Meishan with the help of the people of the Southern Military Command, and ordered the border guards to recruit the people of the Southern Military Command.

古文：光上疏极论，以为： 名山之众，未必能制谅祚。
现代文：司马光上疏极论，认为： 嵬名山部众，未必能够制服谅祚。
English: Sima Guang on the theory of polarization, believes: "The famous mountain people may not be able to subdue the people.

古文：幸而胜之，灭一谅祚，生一谅祚，何利之有；若其不胜，必引众归我，不知何以待之。
现代文：即使侥幸取胜，灭掉了一个谅祚，又生出一个谅祚，有什么好处；如果不能取胜，嵬名山一定会带领部众归附于我，不知怎么对待他们。
English: Even if I were to win by a fluke, if I were to exterminate one bogey and produce another, what good would it do? If I fail to win, Yu Mingshan will surely lead his followers to me, and I don't know what to do with them.

古文：臣恐朝廷不独失信谅祚，又将失信于名山矣。
现代文：我恐朝廷不单失信于谅祚，又将会失信于嵬名山。
English: I'm afraid that the imperial court will not only lose its credibility in the Senkaku Islands, but will also lose its credibility in the Senkaku Islands.

古文：若名山余众尚多，还北不可，入南不受，穷无所归，必将突据边城以救其命。
现代文：如果嵬名山余部还很多，返归北地不能，而进入南方又不被接纳，穷途末路无处可归，必定将会突然占据边城来求活命。
English: If there are still a lot of remnants of the Renowned Mountains, it is impossible to return to the north, and it is not accepted to enter the south, and there is nowhere to return to, it will certainly suddenly occupy the border town to seek life.

古文：陛下不见侯景之事乎？ 上不听，遣将种谔发兵迎之，取绥州，费六十万，西方用兵，盖自此始矣。
现代文：陛下难道没有听说侯景叛乱的事例吗？ 神宗没有采纳他的意见，派遣将领种谔出兵迎接嵬名山，取得绥州，耗费钱财六十万，西边用兵，大概就从这里开始。
English: Hadn't His Majesty heard of the Houjing Rebellion? Shenzong didn't take his advice and dispatched the general and leader Zeng Yao to send troops to meet the Xiangmeishan Mountain and capture Zhangzhou, spending 600,000 yuan and deploying troops to the west, probably starting from here.

古文：百官上尊号，光当答诏，言： 先帝亲郊，不受尊号。
现代文：百官给神宗上尊号，司马光正当轮值答谢诏书，说： 先帝亲郊祭祀，不接受尊号。
English: Hundreds of officials gave Shinso the honorific title, and Sima Guang duly took his turn to thank them, saying: The former emperor was close to the suburbs and did not accept the honorific title.

古文：末年有献议者，谓国家与契丹往来通信，彼有尊号我独无，于是复以非时奉册。
现代文：先帝晚年有人进献建议，认为国家与契丹往来通信，契丹有尊号而我独独没有，于是决定在非常之时奉册行事。
English: In the late years of the former emperor, someone suggested that the country should correspond with the Khitan. The Khitan had an honorific title, but I did not, so I decided to act in an emergency.

古文：昔匈奴冒顿自称 天地所生日月所置匈奴大单于 ，不闻汉文帝复为大名以加之也。
现代文：过去匈奴冒顿自称 天地所生日月所置匈奴大单于 ，没有听说汉文帝也加以大名尊号。 
English: In the past, the Xiongnu took the liberty of claiming that the birthday month of Heaven and Earth was set by the Xiongnu Emperor, but it was not heard that Emperor Hanwen also gave it a great name.

古文：愿追述先帝本意，不受此名。 帝大悦，手诏奖光，使善为答辞，以示中外。
现代文：神宗非常高兴，亲手起草诏书夸奖司马光，让他好好写答谢辞，以示中外。
English: Shenzong was very happy. He personally drafted an edict praising Sima Guang, and asked him to write a thank-you speech to show his gratitude to China and the world.

古文：执政以河朔旱伤，国用不足，乞南郊勿赐金帛。
现代文：执政大臣以河朔地区遭受旱灾，国家财用不足，请求神宗南郊时不要赏赐黄金丝帛。
English: The ruling minister asked the southern suburb of Shenzong not to reward him with gold silk brocades, as the country's financial resources were insufficient due to the drought in the Hexuo region.

古文：诏学士议，光与王珪、王安石同见，光曰： 救灾节用，宜自贵近始，可听也。 安石曰： 常衮辞堂馔，时以为衮自知不能，当辞位不当辞禄。
现代文：诏命学士讨论，司马光与王皀、王安石同时进见，司马光说 ：救灾节用，应当从贵人近臣开始，陛下可以听取这个意见。 王安石说 ：常衮辞去官职俸禄，当时认为常自知无能，应当辞去职位但不应当辞去俸禄。
English: During the discussion on the imperial edict, Sima Guang, Wang Yao and Wang Anshi had the same opinion. Sima Guang said, "For the disaster relief day, it should start with the noblemen and courtiers. Your Majesty can listen to this opinion." Wang Anshi said, "Jang Yao resigned from his official position and salary. At that time, he thought that he knew he was incompetent and should resign from his position, but should not resign from his salary."

古文：且国用不足，非当世急务，所以不足者，以未得善理财者故也。 光曰： 善理财者，不过头会箕敛尔。 安石曰： 不然，善理财者，不加赋而国用足。 光曰： 天下安有此理？
现代文：况且国家财用不足，并非当世急务，国用之所以不足，是由于没有得到善于理财的人的缘故。 司马光说 ：善于理财的人，不过是苛征于民而已。 王安石说： 不是这样，善于理财的人，不加重赋税而使国家财用充足。 司马光说： 天下哪有这样的道理？
English: Moreover, the insufficient use of state funds is not an urgent matter of the day. The reason for the insufficient use of state funds is due to the lack of people who are good at financial management. Sima Guang said: People who are good at financial management are just hard on the people. Wang Anshi said: This is not the case. People who are good at financial management make sufficient use of state funds without increasing taxes. Sima Guang said: How can there be such a reason?

古文：天地所生财货百物，不在民，则在官，彼设法夺民，其害乃甚于加赋。
现代文：天地之间所生出来的财货百物，不是在老百姓手里，就在官府那里，要是想方设法掠夺民财，它的危害就比加重赋税有过之而无不及。
English: The wealth and goods created between heaven and earth are not in the hands of the people, but in the hands of the government. If the government tries to plunder the people's wealth, it will be more harmful than increasing taxes.

古文：此盖桑羊欺武帝之言，太史公书之以见其不明耳。 争议不已。
现代文：这大概是桑羊欺骗汉武帝的话，太史公把它写入史书足以见其不明而已。 二人争议不休。
English: This was probably the result of Mulberry Goat deceiving Emperor Hanwu, and the fact that Emperor Taishi wrote it down in the history books is enough to make it unclear.

古文：帝曰： 朕意与光同，然姑以不允答之。 会安石草诏，引常衮事责两府，两府不敢复辞。
现代文：神宗说 ：我的意见与司马光相同，但暂且以不予允准回答他。 适逢王安石起草诏书，援引常衮事例责问两府，两府不敢争辩。
English: Shenzong said, "My opinion is the same as Sima Guang's, but for the time being, I will answer him by not granting permission. Wang Anshi drafted an edict, citing the case of Changchun to question the two governments, and the two governments did not dare to argue.

古文：安石得政，行新法，光逆疏其利害。
现代文：王安石执政，颁行新法，司马光上书陈述新法的好处和害处。
English: Wang Anshi came to power, promulgated the new law, and Sima Guang wrote a letter stating the benefits and harms of the new law.

古文：迩英进读，至曹参代萧何事，帝曰： 汉常守萧何之法不变，可乎？ 对曰： 宁独汉也，使三代之君常守禹、汤、文、武之法，虽至今存可也。
现代文：司马光在迩英殿进读，读到曹参代替萧何的事时，神宗说 ：汉代永远遵守萧何的成法不变，可以吗？ 司马光回答说： 不仅汉代，假使三代之君永远遵守夏禹、商汤、周文王、周武王的制度，即使到今天存在仍然可以。
English: Sima Guang was studying at the Yuying Hall. When he read about Cao Zhan replacing Xiao He, Shen Zong said: Is it possible for the Han Dynasty to abide by the law of Xiao He forever? Sima Guang replied: Not only the Han Dynasty, but if the three generations of princes abide by the system of Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang forever, it is still possible to exist even today.

古文：汉武取高帝约束纷更，盗贼半天下；元帝改孝宣之政，汉业遂衰。
现代文：汉武帝对汉高帝的约束之法多有改动，于是盗贼满天下；汉元帝改变孝宣帝的政治，汉朝于是衰落。
English: Emperor Hanwu made many changes to Emperor Han Gao's law of restraint, so thieves filled the world; Emperor Han Yuan changed Emperor Xiao Xuan's politics, and the Han Dynasty fell.

古文：由此言之，祖宗之法不可变也。 吕惠卿言： 先王之法，有一年一变者， 正月始和，布法象魏 是也；有五年一变者，巡守考制度是也；有三十年一变者， 刑罚世轻世重 是也。
现代文：这样说来，祖宗的制度是不能改变的。 吕惠卿说： 先王制度，有一年一变的 ，正月天气开始暖和，在宫廷外门颁布法令 就是这样；有五年一变的，皇帝巡行境内考察制度就是这样；有三十年一变的 ，刑罚世轻世重 就是这样。
English: In this way, the ancestral system cannot be changed. Lu Huiqing said: The ancestral system, which changes every year, the weather began to warm in the first month, and decrees were issued at the outer gate of the palace, is like this; the system of the emperor's inspection tour within the territory, which changes every five years, is like this; the system of punishment, which changes every 30 years, is like this.

古文：光言非是，其意以风朝廷耳。 帝问光，光曰： 布法象魏，布旧法也。
现代文：司马光所说的不正确，他的意思是讽喻朝廷。 神宗询问司马光，司马光说： 在宫廷外门颁布法令，是颁布旧法。
English: What Sima Guang said was incorrect, he meant it as an allegory of the imperial court. Shenzong asked Sima Guang, and Sima Guang said: To promulgate a decree at the outer gate of the court is to promulgate the old law.

古文：诸侯变礼易乐者，王巡守则诛之，不自变也。刑新国用轻典，乱国用重典，是为世轻世重，非变也。
现代文：诸侯变易礼乐，天子一旦察觉就要诛杀他，这不是自我变化；刑法新建之国使用轻典，混乱之国使用重典，这就是世轻世重，不是改变。
English: It is not a self-change for the princes to change the liturgy, but for the Son of Heaven to fight and kill the emperor as soon as he notices it. It is not a change for the sake of change. It is not a change for the sake of change for the sake of change.

古文：且治天下譬如居室，敝则修之，非大坏不更造也。
现代文：况且治理天下就比如治理住宅，坏了就加以修整，不是严重毁坏就不重新建造。
English: Moreover, the governance of the world is like the governance of a house. If it is broken, it will be repaired. If it is not seriously damaged, it will not be rebuilt.

古文：公卿侍从皆在此，愿陛下问之。
现代文：公卿侍从百官都在这里，希望陛下问问他们。
English: All the nobles and officials are here. I hope His Majesty will ask them.

古文：三司使掌天下财，不才而黜可也，不可使执政侵其事。
现代文：三司使执掌天下财政，没有才能的可罢黜，不能让执政大臣侵占其事。
English: The three commissioners are in charge of the country's finances. They can be dismissed if they are not capable, and they cannot be usurped by the minister in power.

古文：今为制置三司条例司，何也？
现代文：现在设立制置三司条例司，是为什么呢？
English: Why is it necessary to set up a three-division regulation department now?

古文：宰相以道佐人主，安用例？
现代文：宰相以道义辅佐皇帝，是用什么例子？
English: What is the example of the prime minister supporting the emperor with morality and righteousness?

古文：苟用例，则胥吏矣。
现代文：如果引用例子，那么就是胥吏了。
English: If you quote an example, then it's the bailiffs.

古文：今为看详中书条例司，何也？ 惠卿不能对，则以他语诋光。
现代文：现在设立看详中书条例司，是为什么呢？ 吕惠卿不能回答，就用其他的话诋毁司马光。
English: Why is the Division of the Regulations on the Detailed Reading of Chinese Books being set up now? Lu Huixing could not answer, so he slandered Sima Guang with other words.

古文：帝曰： 相与论是非耳，何至是。 光曰： 平民举钱出息，尚能蚕食下户，况悬官督责之威乎！ 惠卿曰： 青苗法，愿取则与之，不愿不强也。 光曰： 愚民知取债之利，不知还债之害，非独县官不强，富民亦不强也。
现代文：神宗说： 互相辩论是非，何必到这种地步。 司马光说： 平民百姓出息借钱，尚且能够蚕食下户贫民，何况有县官督责的威仪呢！ 吕惠卿说： 青苗之法，愿意借取就贷给他，不愿意的并不强求。 司马光说 ：愚昧之民只知道借债的好处，不知道还债的害处，不单县官不强求，就是富有的百姓借贷也不强求。
English: Shenzong said: Why do we have to get to this point of debating each other's rights and wrongs. Sima Guang said: Ordinary people lend money at interest, yet they can encroach on the poor, not to mention the prestige of the county official's supervision! Lu Huiqing said: The law of young seedlings, if you are willing to borrow, lend it to him, if you are not willing, do not force it. Sima Guang said: Ignorant people only know the benefits of borrowing, do not know the harm of repaying debts, not only the county official does not force it, but also the rich people do not force it.

古文：昔太宗平河东，立籴法，时米斗十钱，民乐与官为市。
现代文：以前太宗平定河东，建立和籴法，当时一斗米十文钱，百姓喜欢同官府贸易。
English: In the past, Emperor Taizong pacified the eastern part of Hebei Province and established the law of conciliation. At that time, a barrel of rice was worth ten yuan, and the people liked to trade with the government.

古文：其后物贵而和籴不解，遂为河东世世患。
现代文：神宗说： 坐守仓库买进粮食怎么样？ 在座的众臣都起身，司马光说 ：不方便。 
English: Shinso said, "How about sitting in the warehouse to buy grain?" All the ministers in the room stood up, and Sima Guang said, "It's inconvenient."

古文：臣恐异日之青苗，亦犹是也。 帝曰： 坐仓籴米何如？ 坐者皆起，光曰： 不便。 惠卿曰： 籴米百万斛，则省东南之漕，以其钱供京师。 光曰： 东南钱荒而粒米狼戾，今不籴米而漕钱，弃其有余，取其所无，农末皆病矣！ 侍讲吴申起曰： 光言，至论也。 
现代文：吕惠卿说 ：买米百万石，那么可节省东南之地的漕运费用，可用这些钱供给京师。 司马光说 ：东南地区发生钱荒而谷米散乱，如今不和籴粮米而取漕运钱，弃其有余，取其所无，农商都会受到伤害！ 侍讲吴申站起来说 ：司马光的话，是深切中肯之论。 
English: Lu Huiqing said, "If you buy a million koku of rice, you can save the cost of transportation in southeastern China, and you can use this money to supply Beijing." Sima Guang said, "In southeastern China, there was a shortage of money, and the grain and rice were scattered. Now, instead of taking the money for transportation with the grain and rice, farmers and merchants will be harmed if they abandon what they have and take what they don't have!" Wu Shen, the assistant lecturer, stood up and said, "Sima Guang's words are deeply pertinent.

古文：它日留对，帝曰： 今天下汹汹者，孙叔敖所谓 国之有是，众之所恶 也。 光曰： 然。
现代文：一天，司马光被留下来对策，神宗说 ：现在天下喧扰纷乱，正是孙叔敖所说的 国家有此，众人所恶 那种情况。 司马光说 ：对。
English: One day, Sima Guang was left to deal with the situation. Shen Zong said, "Nowadays, the world is in turmoil. It is exactly the kind of situation that Sun Shuxuan said that the country is in, and it is bad for everyone." Sima Guang said, "Yes."

古文：陛下当论其是非。
现代文：陛下应当论断新法的是与非。
English: Your Majesty should judge the pros and cons of the new law.

古文：今条例司所为，独安石、韩绛、惠卿以为是耳，陛下岂能独与此三人共为天下邪？ 帝欲用光，访之安石。
现代文：现在制置三司条例司所做的，只有王安石、韩绛、吕惠卿认为是正确的，陛下难道能够单是与这三个人共治天下吗？ 神宗想任用司马光，去询问王安石。
English: Only Wang Anshi, Han Zheng and Lü Huiqing think that what the three regulations departments have done is correct. Can His Majesty rule the world with these three people alone? Shenzong wants to appoint Sima Guang to inquire about Wang Anshi.

古文：安石曰： 光外托劘上之名，内怀附之下实。
现代文：王安石说 ：司马光表面上借托向上直谏的名义，实际上内怀结附百姓之心。
English: Wang Anshi said: On the surface, Sima Guang was entrusted with the name of Shang Zhi Rong, but in reality, he had the hearts of the people.

古文：所言尽害政之事，所与尽害政之人，而欲置之左右，使与国论，此消长之大机也。
现代文：他所说的全是危害政治的事情，所相好的都是危害政治的人，而陛下打算把他置于左右重臣的位子上，让他参与国家大事，这是成败盛衰的关键。
English: All he says is harmful to politics, all his friends are people who are harmful to politics, and His Majesty intends to place him in the position of the right and left chief minister, and let him participate in national affairs, which is the key to success or failure.

古文：光才岂能害政，但在高位，则异论之人倚以为重。
现代文：司马光的才能怎能危害政治，但是一旦身处高位，那么持不同意见的人会倚以为重巴结他。
English: How can Sima Guang's talent endanger politics, but once he is in a high position, then people with different opinions will think that he is a stooge.

古文：韩信立汉赤帜，赵卒气夺，今用光，是与异论者立赤帜也。 
现代文：韩信打着汉的旗帜，赵军恐惧丧胆，现在任用司马光，这是给反对者树立旗帜。 
English: Han Xin fought under the banner of Han, Zhao Jun was afraid and discouraged, and now Sima Guang has been appointed, which is a banner for the opponents.

古文：安石以韩琦上疏，卧家求退。
现代文：王安石因为韩琦上疏陈论，在家休息请求退位。
English: Wang Anshi requested to abdicate while resting at home because of the controversy over Han Xuan.

古文：帝乃拜光枢密副使，光辞之曰： 陛下所以用臣，盖察其狂直，庶有补于国家。
现代文：神宗就任命司马光为枢密副使，司马光辞谢说： 陛下所以任用我，是由于看到我狂妄刚直，希望对国家有所补益。
English: Shenzong then appointed Sima Guang as a Privy Vice-Envoy. Sima Guang thanked him and said, "Your Majesty appointed me because you saw that I was arrogant and upright, and you hoped that I would be of some benefit to the country."

古文：若徒以禄位荣之，而不取其言，是以天官私非其人也。
现代文：如果仅仅是用禄位荣耀其身，而不采纳他的言论，这是用天官私待其身，我不是这样的人。
English: If you just use your position to glorify yourself, and do not adopt his words, this is using heavenly officials to treat yourself, I am not such a person.

古文：臣徒以禄位自荣，而不能救生民之患，是盗窃名器以私其身也。
现代文：如果我仅仅以禄位自我荣耀，而不能挽救百姓的忧患，这是盗窃名器来自私其身。
English: If I only use my position to glorify myself, but cannot save the people's sorrows, this is stealing a famous instrument from my own body.

古文：陛下诚能罢制置条例司，追还提举官，不行青苗、助役等法，虽不用臣，臣受赐多矣。
现代文：陛下果真能够废除制置三司条例司，追还提举官，不颁行青苗、助役等法，即使不任用我，那么我受到的赏赐已是很多了。
English: If His Majesty can indeed abolish the establishment of the three departments and the regulations of the three departments, restore the promotion of officials, and not issue laws such as young seedlings and assistants, even if he does not appoint me, then I have received a lot of rewards.

古文：今言青苗之害者，不过谓使者骚动州县，为今日之患耳。
现代文：现在说青苗法害处的人，不过是说使者骚扰动摇州县，成为今天的祸患而已。
English: Those who now say that the Young Seedlings Law is harmful are only saying that the messenger has harassed and shaken the county and has become today's scourge.

古文：而臣之所忧，乃在十年之外，非今日也。
现代文：但我所忧虑的，是在十年以后，不是今天。
English: But I'm worried about 10 years from now, not today.

古文：夫民之贫富，由勤惰不同，惰者常乏，故必资于人。
现代文：百姓的贫富，是由于勤劳、懒惰不同而造成的，懒惰的人常常贫困，所以必须向他人借贷。
English: The rich and poor of the people are caused by the difference between hard work and laziness. Lazy people are often poor, so they have to borrow from others.

古文：今出钱贷民而敛其息，富者不愿取，使者以多散为功，一切抑配。
现代文：现在官府出钱借贷给百姓而敛取利息，富裕的人不愿意领取，而使者以多散发作为功劳，一切强迫抑配。
English: At present, the government lends money to the people and collects interest, the rich people do not want to receive it, and the emissary takes the credit for distributing it, and all are forced to withhold it.

古文：恐其逋负，必令贫富相保，贫者无可偿，则散而之四方；富者不能去，必责使代偿数家之负。
现代文：而且又担心贷钱的人逃避负债，必定令穷人、富人相互担保，贫穷的人不能偿还，就会流散到四方；富人不能离去，必定督促使他人代还数家的负债。
English: Moreover, fearing that those who lend money will evade their debts, the poor and the rich must be made to guarantee each other. If the poor cannot repay, they will be scattered to the four directions; if the rich cannot leave, they must urge others to repay the debts of several families on their behalf.

古文：春算秋计，展转日滋，贫者既尽，富者亦贫。
现代文：春算秋计，转移不定日益严重，穷人既尽，富人也陷于贫困。
English: Spring and autumn, the transfer uncertainty is increasingly serious, the poor are exhausted, and the rich are also trapped in poverty.

古文：十年之外，百姓无复存者矣。
现代文：十年以后，百姓将没有生存的地方了。
English: Ten years from now, people will have nowhere to live.

古文：又尽散常平钱谷，专行青苗，它日若思复之，将何所取？
现代文：又全部散发了常平钱谷，专门实行青苗法，他日如果想恢复常平仓，将有什么所取呢？
English: And all of them have been distributed to the Changping money valley, specially implementing the seedling method. If you want to resume the Changping warehouse the next day, what will you take?

古文：富室既尽，常平已废，加之以师旅，因之以饥馑，民之羸者必委死沟壑，壮者必聚而为盗贼，此事之必至者也。 抗章至七八，帝使谓曰： 枢密，兵事也，官各有职，不当以他事为辞。 对曰： 臣未受命，则犹侍从也，于事无不可言者。 安石起视事，光乃得请，遂求去。
现代文：富室既然没有了，常平仓已经废除了，加之用兵打仗，接着而来的是饥馑灾荒，百姓中羸弱的必然听任其死于沟壑，强壮的必然相聚而成为盗贼，这是此事的必然发展趋势。 司马光上章极谏至七八次，神宗派人对他说： 枢密院，是执掌军事的，百官各有职守，不应当言及其他事情。 司马光回答说： 我没有受任此职，那么还是侍从官。对国家大事没有什么不可以说的。 王安石出来处理政事，司马光才得以请求，于是请求去职。
English: Since there is no longer a rich man's house, the stockade has been abolished, in addition to the use of soldiers to fight wars, famine and disaster followed. The weak among the people must be allowed to die in the ditch, and the strong must gather together and become thieves. This is the inevitable development trend of this matter. Sima Guang was stabbed up to seven or eight times in the last chapter. A man from the God Sect said to him: The Privy Council is in charge of the military, and all the officials have their duties, and should not talk about other things. Sima Guang replied: I have not been appointed to this post, so I am still an attendant. There

古文：以端明殿学士知永兴军。
现代文：司马光以端明殿学士知永兴军。
English: Sima Guang leads the Yongxing Army with the help of a scholar from the Ming Dynasty.

古文：宣抚使下令分义勇戍边，选诸军骁勇士，募市井恶少年为奇兵；调民造干糒，悉修城池楼橹，关辅骚然。
现代文：宣抚使下令分义勇戍守边地，挑选诸军中骁悍勇猛的兵士，招募街市中品行恶劣的少年作为骑兵；抽调民力制作干粮，全部修筑城池高台，使得关辅一带骚扰混乱。
English: The envoy ordered the division of volunteers to defend the border, to select the most powerful and brave soldiers from the armies, to recruit young boys with bad conduct in the streets as cavalry; to draw people to make dry grain, and to build all the castle hill, causing chaos in the Guanfu area.

古文：光极言： 公私困敝，不可举事，而京兆一路皆内郡，缮治非急。
现代文：司马光极谏说： 公私困乏，不可举事，而且京兆一路都是内郡，修缮城治不是急务。
English: Sima Guangji said: The public and private sectors are in a difficult situation, and it is impossible to do anything. Moreover, the Beijing-Shanghai-Tianjin-Hebei Expressway is all within the county, so it is not an urgent task to repair the city.

古文：宣抚之令，皆未敢从，若乏军兴，臣当任其责。 于是一路独得免。
现代文：宣抚使的命令，都不敢从命，如果缺乏财物以供军用，我当然要负责任。 由于这样京兆一路独得免乱。
English: I did not dare to obey the order of the imperial envoy, and if I lacked property to supply the military, I would of course be held responsible.

古文：徙知许州，趣入觐，不赴；请判西京御史台归洛，自是绝口不论事。
现代文：改任许州知州，朝廷催促司马光入京觐见，他没有前往；请求判西京御史台回洛阳，从这以后绝口不论国事。
English: He was reassigned to Xuzhou and Zhizhou, and the imperial court urged Sima Guang to come to Beijing for an audience, but he did not go; he requested that the governor of the Western Capital should be ordered to return to Luoyang, and from then on he never spoke about state affairs.

古文：而求言诏下，光读之感泣，欲嘿不忍，乃复陈六事，又移书责宰相吴充，事见《充传》。
现代文：但是言诏下达后，司马光读之感动流泪，想要沉默却不忍心，就再次陈述六事。又写信责备宰相吴充，事见《吴充传》。
English: However, after the edict was issued, Sima Guang read it and was moved to tears. He wanted to remain silent, but he could not bear it, so he again stated the six things. He also wrote a letter to Prime Minister Wu Chong, which can be seen in "Wu Chong Biography."

古文：葵天申为察访，妄作威福，河南尹、转运使敬事之如上官；尝朝谒应天院神御殿，府独为设一班，示不敢与抗。
现代文：蔡天申任察访使，妄自作威作福，河南尹、转运史像对待上司一样侍奉他；他曾朝拜应天院神御殿，官府单独为他设置一个班次等级，表示不敢与他抗衡。
English: Cai Tianshen was appointed as an inspector and envoy, arrogantly claiming to be a blessing, and Henan Yin and Transshipment History served him as if they were his superiors. He had worshiped at the God's Palace of Yingtian Temple, and the government set up a separate shift level for him, saying that they did not dare to compete with him.

古文：光顾谓台吏曰： 引蔡寺丞归本班。 吏即引天申立监竹木务官富赞善之下。
现代文：司马光回头对御史台胥吏说 ：领蔡寺丞回到他自己的班次上。 胥吏马上领蔡天申站在监竹木务官富赞善的后面。
English: Sima Guang turned around and said to the guard: "Take Cai Teraucho back to his own shift," and the guard immediately led Cai Tianshin to stand behind the prison's lumber officer, Fu Zanzen.

古文：天申窘沮，即日行。
现代文：蔡天申为难沮丧，当天就走了。
English: Frustrated, Cai Tianshin left the same day.

古文：元丰五年，忽得语涩疾，疑且死，豫作遗表置卧内，即有缓急，当以畀所善者上之。
现代文：元丰五年，司马光忽然得了语言迟钝的病，怀疑将要死去，预先写好遗表放在卧室内，倘若情势急迫，就把它交给关系好的人上呈。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanfeng, Sima Guang suddenly fell ill with a speech disorder. Suspecting that he was about to die, he wrote out a will in advance and placed it in his bedroom. If the situation was urgent, he would give it to a well-connected person.

古文：官制行，帝指御史大夫曰： 非司马光不可。 又将以为东宫师傅。
现代文：颁行新官制，神宗指着御史大夫这一官职说 ：非司马光不可。 又打算用他做东宫太子的老师。
English: When the new official system was introduced, Shinso pointed to the official position of goshi daifu and said that Sima Guang was indispensable, and that he planned to use him as a teacher for the crown prince of the Eastern Palace.

古文：蔡确曰： 国是方定，愿少迟之。 《资治通鉴》未就，帝尤重之，以为贤于荀悦《汉纪》，数促使终篇，赐以颍邸旧书二千四百卷。
现代文：蔡确说 ：国事刚定，希望稍稍迟一些时间。 《资治通鉴》没有完成，神宗对此事非常重视，认为该书胜过荀悦《汉纪》，多次催促司马光完篇，并赐给颍王府旧书二千四百卷。
English: Cai Ji said, "The state of affairs has just been decided, and I hope it will be a little later." "Capitalism General Study" has not been completed, and the Shenzong attaches great importance to this matter, believing that the book is better than Meiyu's "Hanji," urging Sima Guang to complete it many times, and giving 2400 volumes of old books to the Shao Wangfu.

古文：及书成，加资政殿学士。
现代文：等书写成，司马光加官资政殿学士。
English: After the book was written, Sima Guang was promoted to the post of government official and received a bachelor's degree.

古文：凡居洛阳十五年，天下以为真宰相，田夫野老皆号为司马相公，妇人孺子亦知其为君实也。
现代文：司马光一共在洛阳住了十五年，天下认为他是真宰相，老百姓都号称他为司马相公，连妇女小孩也知道他是司马君实。
English: Sima Guang lived in Luoyang for a total of fifteen years. The world thought he was the real prime minister. The common people all called him Sima Xianggong. Even women and children knew him as Sima Junshi.

古文：帝崩，赴阙临，卫士望见，皆以手加额曰： 此司马相公也。 所至，民遮道聚观，马至不得行，曰： 公无归洛，留相天子，活百姓。 哲宗幼冲，太皇太后临政，遣使问所当先，光谓： 开言路。 诏榜朝堂。
现代文：神宗逝世，司马光赴朝临丧，卫士望见他，都用手放在额头上说： 这是司马相公。 所到之处，百姓阻遏道路聚首围观，以至于马不得行进，百姓说 ：您不要返归洛阳，留下来辅助天子，救救百姓吧。 哲宗年幼，太皇太后临政，派遣使者问司马光什么事应该先行，司马光说： 广开言路。 诏令张榜于朝堂广求直言。
English: When Shenzong died, Sima Guang went to the Imperial Palace for the funeral. When the guards saw him, they all put their hands on their foreheads and said, "This is Sima Xiangguo." Wherever he went, the people blocked the roads and gathered around to watch, so that the horse could not march. The people said, "Don't return to Luoyang, stay to help the Son of Heaven and save the people." Tetsuzong, who was very young and the granddaughter of the Empress Dowager, sent an envoy to ask Sima Guang what should be done first. Sima Guang said, "Open the way to speak." He ordered Zhang Pang to

古文：而大臣有不悦者，设六语云： 若阴有所怀；犯非其分；或扇摇机事之重；或迎合已行之令；上以徼幸希进；下以眩惑流俗。
现代文：但大臣有不高兴的，筹划了六句话说： 诸如心怀奸诈；超越职责范围；或者扇摇鼓动机密的军国大事；或者迎合已经实行的法令；对上想凭侥幸升迁官职；对下想迷惑世俗。
English: But the minister was not happy and planned six things to say: such as being treacherous; exceeding the scope of duties; or fanning the drums of secret military affairs; or pandering to the laws that have been implemented; on the one hand, he wanted to be promoted by chance; on the other hand, he wanted to confuse the world.

古文：若此者，罚无赦。 后复命示光，光曰： 此非求谏，乃拒谏也。
现代文：像这几种，罚无赦。 太后又命出示给司马光看，司马光说： 这不是求谏，而是拒绝上谏。
English: The empress dowager then ordered Sima Guang to see it, and Sima Guang said, "This is not a request, but a refusal to wear the shackles."

古文：人臣惟不言，言则入六事矣。 乃具论其情，改诏行之，于是上封者以千数。
现代文：这样为人臣者只有不说话，否则一说话就列入这六事的范围了。 就详细论述这种情况，改诏实行，于是上书奏事的人数以千计。
English: The only way for such a courtier to be included in the scope of these six matters is to not speak, otherwise, he would be included in the scope of these six matters as soon as he spoke. Therefore, the situation was discussed in detail, the edict was amended and implemented, and the number of people who submitted written reports was in the thousands.

古文：起光知陈州，过阙，留为门下侍郎。
现代文：起用司马光为陈州知州，经过朝廷，留任门下侍郎。
English: He appointed Sima Guang as Chen Zhou Chizhou, and through the imperial court, he remained as a subordinate attendant.

古文：苏轼自登州召还，缘道人相聚号呼曰： 寄谢司马相公，毋去朝廷，厚自爱以活我。 是时天下之民，引领拭目以观新政，而议者犹谓 三年无改于父之道 ，但毛举细事，稍塞人言。
现代文：苏轼从登州被召回朝，沿路上的人相聚高呼说 ：委托您感谢司马相公，让他不要离开朝廷，深加自爱以救我们。 当时天下百姓，引颈拭目盼望刷新政治，但持论者还认为： 三年不要改变父皇的所作所为 ，只是粗略地革除琐碎细小的事情，稍稍堵塞人言。
English: Su Shi was recalled from Dangzhou to the North, and people along the road gathered and chanted: Entrust you to thank Sima Xiangguo, let him not leave the imperial court, deepen his self-love to save us. At that time, the people around the world were looking forward to refreshing politics, but the opinion holders also believed: Don't change the behavior of the father emperor for three years, just roughly remove trivial and small things, and slightly block people's speech.

古文：光曰： 先帝之法，其善者虽百世不可变也。
现代文：司马光说 ：先帝之法，好的即使是百世也不能改变。
English: Sima Guang said: The law of the former emperor is good, even if it cannot be changed for a hundred generations.

古文：若安石、惠卿所建，为天下害者，改之当如救焚拯溺。
现代文：像王安石、吕惠卿所制定的制度，成为天下祸害，改变它就像救焚救溺一样急迫。
English: The system established by Wang Anshi and Lyu Huiqing has become a scourge to the world, and changing it is as urgent as saving people from fire and drowning.

古文：况太皇太后以母改子，非子改父。 众议甫定。
现代文：况且太皇太后以母亲的身份改变儿子的法令制度，这不是儿子改变父亲的法令制度。 
English: Moreover, the empress dowager changed the son's legal system as a mother, which is not the son changing the father's legal system.

古文：遂罢保甲团教，不复置保马；废市易法，所储物皆鬻之，不取息，除民所欠钱；京东铁钱及茶盐之法，皆复其旧。
现代文：这样大家的意见才定下来。于是废除保甲团教，不再设置保马；废除市易法，把所储藏的物资都卖掉，不取息钱，免除所欠的钱物；京东铁钱及茶盐之法，都恢复其原有的制度。
English: Thus, the opinions of everyone were settled. Therefore, the Bao Jia League was abolished, and the Bao Ma was no longer set up; the market exchange law was abolished, and the stored materials were all sold, without interest, and the money and goods owed were exempted; the Jingdong Iron Money and Tea Salt Law were all restored to their original systems.

古文：或谓光曰： 熙、丰旧臣，多憸巧小人，他日有以父子义间上，则祸作矣。 光正色曰： 天若祚宗社，必无此事。 于是天下释然，曰： 此先帝本意也。 
现代文：有人对司马光说 ：熙宁、元丰旧臣，多是奸佞小人，他日有人用父子之义离间皇上，那么灾祸就发生了。 司马光正色说： 上天如果保佑宗庙社稷，肯定没有这样的事发生。 于是天下人放心了，说： 这是先帝的本意。 
English: Someone said to Sima Guang: Xining and Yuan Feng, the former ministers, were mostly traitors and villains. The other day, someone used the righteousness of the father and son to separate the emperor, and then the disaster occurred. Sima Guang Zhengsei said: If heaven blesses the family temple and shrine, such a thing will definitely not happen. So the world was relieved and said: This is the original intention of the former emperor.

古文：元祐元年复得疾，诏朝会再拜，勿舞蹈。
现代文：元元年，司马光再次得病，诏命他朝会时行再拜礼时，不舞蹈。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sima Guang fell ill again, and he was ordered not to dance during the morning assembly, nor during the worship service.

古文：时青苗、免役、将官之法犹在，而西戎之议未决。
现代文：当时青苗、免役、将官之法还存在，而西戎之议没有决定。
English: At that time, the laws of young seedlings, exemption from military service, and generals were still in existence, and the proposal of Xi Rong was not decided.

古文：光叹曰： 四患未除，吾死不瞑目矣。 折简与吕公著云： 光以身付医，以家事付愚子，惟国事未有所托，今以属公。 乃论免役五害，乞直降敕罢之。
现代文：司马光叹气说 ：这四患不除，我死不瞑目。 他写信给吕公著说： 我把身子托付给医药，把家事托付给儿子，只有国事未有所托，今天把它交给您。 于是论免役法的五大害处，请求径直降下诏书废除它。
English: Sima Guang sighed and said, "These four evils cannot be eliminated, I cannot die." He wrote a letter to Lü Gong saying, "I have entrusted my body to medicine, I have entrusted my family affairs to my son, but I have not entrusted the affairs of state, so I am handing it over to you today." He then discussed the five harms of the exemption from military service law, and requested that an imperial edict be issued to abolish it.

古文：诸将兵皆隶州县，军政委守令通决。
现代文：使诸将之兵都隶属各州县，军政事务委托太守、县令一起处理。
English: So that the soldiers of all generals are subordinated to each state and county, and the military and political affairs are entrusted to the governor and the county magistrate.

古文：废提举常平司，以其事归之转运、提点刑狱。
现代文：废除提举常平司，把所管事务归于转运使、提点刑狱管理。
English: Abolished the post of the commissary of justice, and assigned the affairs in charge to the commissary of transportation and the commissary of prison administration.

古文：边计以和戎为便。
现代文：边地之计以与西戎讲和为好。
English: It would be better to make peace with the West.

古文：谓监司多新进少年，务为刻急，令近臣于郡守中选举，而于通判中举转运判官。
现代文：说监司多为新进的年轻人务必会苛刻急于求成，令在郡守中选择举荐近臣，而在通判一级中荐举转运判官。
English: He said that the supervisors are mostly young people who are new to the county, and they will be in a hurry to achieve success. He ordered that the county governor should choose a close relative to be recommended, and the transportation judge should be recommended at the first level of the general adjudication.

古文：又立十科荐士法。
现代文：又建议立十科荐士办法。
English: It is also proposed to set up ten science advisers.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：这些都被朝廷接受。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：拜尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，免朝觐，许乘肩舆，三日一入省。
现代文：司马光被任命为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，免朝觐，准许乘坐轿子，三天到省中一次。
English: Sima Guang was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand man and attendant, exempted from the pilgrimage, allowed to ride in a palanquin, and went to the provincial middle school once every three days.

古文：光不敢当，曰： 不见君，不可以视事。 诏令子康扶入对，且曰： 毋拜。 遂罢青苗钱，复常平粜籴法。
现代文：司马光不敢承受，说： 不见君主，不能够办公治事。 诏令他的儿子司马康扶他入朝应对而说 ：不行拜礼。 于是废除青苗钱，恢复平常粜籴法。
English: Sima Guang could not bear it and said, "Without a monarch, it is impossible to run the government." He ordered his son Sima Kang to help him enter the imperial court, but Sima Kang replied, "No, we can't have a religious service," so he abolished the Young Seedlings Money and restored the ordinary tax.

古文：两宫虚己以听。
现代文：两宫虚位听任司马光去做。
English: The two palaces were vacated and left to Sima Guang to do.

古文：辽、夏使至，必问光起居，敕其边吏曰： 中国相司马矣，毋轻生事、开边隙。 光自见言行计从，欲以身徇社稷，躬亲庶务，不舍昼夜。
现代文：辽、西夏派使者来，必定询问司马光的身体起居情况，辽、西夏国君敕命其边吏说： 中国用司马为宰相，你们不要轻易制造事端，轻开边隙。 司马光自见言听计从，打算以身殉国，于是亲自处理各种事务，不舍昼夜。
English: Liao and Xixia sent an envoy to inquire about Sima Guang's physical condition. Liao and Xixia's sovereign decreed that his border officials should say: China uses Sima as prime minister, you should not easily create problems and open gaps. Sima Guang himself saw and heard, and planned to die for the country, so he personally dealt with various affairs, and did not give up day and night.

古文：宾客见其体羸，举诸葛亮食少事烦以为戒，光曰： 死生，命也。 为之益力。
现代文：宾客见他身体虚弱，列举诸葛亮食少事烦的例子作为劝戒，司马光说： 人的生与死，是命中注定的。 
English: When guests saw his frail body, they cited Zhuge Liang's example of eating less and worrying less as an admonition. Sima Guang said: A person's life and death are predetermined by fate.

古文：病革，不复自觉，谆谆如梦中语，然皆朝廷天下事也。
现代文：工作更加努力。病情危急，他已失去知觉，谆谆不倦像梦中呓语，但都是有关朝廷、天下的事情。
English: His condition is critical, he has lost consciousness, and his tireless work is like slang in a dream, but it is all about the imperial court and the world.

古文：是年九月薨，年六十八。
现代文：这年九月司马光去世，终年六十八岁。
English: Sima Guang died in September of that year, at the age of 68.

古文：太皇太后闻之恸，与帝即临其丧，明堂礼成不贺，赠太师、温国公，襚以一品礼服，赙银绢七千。
现代文：太皇太后听到这一消息非常哀痛，与哲宗立即亲临吊唁，明堂礼成都不予庆贺，赠太师、温国公。赠以一品礼服，赠送七千银子、绢帮办丧事。
English: The Empress Dowager was very sad to hear this news, and she and Tetsuzo immediately came to offer their condolences in person. Ming-tang Li Cheng did not celebrate, but presented the Grand Master and King Wen with a ceremonial robe, 7,000 silver coins, and a bunch of money to help with the funeral.

古文：诏户部侍郎赵瞻、内侍省押班冯宗道护其丧，归葬陕州。
现代文：诏令户部侍郎赵瞻、内侍省押班冯宗道护送灵柩，归葬陕州。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zhao Zhan, an attendant of the Household Department, and Feng Zongdao, an attendant of the Ministry of the Interior, to escort the coffin to be buried in Shaanxi.

古文：谥曰文正，赐碑曰 忠清粹德 。
现代文：谥号为文正，赐碑为《忠清粹德》。
English: His posthumous name was Wenzheng, and his memorial tablet was "Chungqing Zude."

古文：京师人罢市往吊，鬻衣以致奠，巷哭以过车。
现代文：京师人民罢市前往吊祭，卖衣祭奠，在里巷间相聚号哭护送灵车。
English: The people of Beijing went on strike to go to the hanging ceremony, sold clothes to pay tribute, and gathered in the alleys to cry and escort the hearse.

古文：及葬，哭者如哭其私亲。
现代文：及到下葬时，哭者就像痛哭自己的亲人一样。
English: By the time of the burial, the mourners are like weeping relatives.

古文：岭南封州父老，亦相率具祭，都中及四方皆画像以祀，饮食必祝。
现代文：岭南封州父老乡亲，也相率备办祭祀，都城中以及四方各地都绘其像以祀，吃饭时必须祝祷。
English: The parents and fellow villagers of Fuzhou, Lingnan, are also preparing for the sacrificial rites. In the capital city and all over the country, his image is painted and worshiped. It is necessary to pray when eating.

古文：光孝友忠信，恭俭正直，居处有法，动作有礼。
现代文：司马光孝友忠信，恭俭正直，安居有法度，任事有礼仪。
English: Sima Guang Xiaoyu is loyal, frugal and honest. He lives a peaceful life, abides by the law, and conducts his business with etiquette.

古文：在洛时，每往夏县展墓，必过其兄旦，旦年将八十，奉之如严父，保之如婴儿。
现代文：在洛阳时，每次前往夏县扫墓，一定去看问他的哥哥司马旦，司马旦年近八十，司马光像事奉严父般事奉他，像保护婴儿般保护他。
English: When he was in Luoyang, every time he went to Xia County to sweep the graves, he always went to see and ask his brother Sima Dan. Sima Dan was nearly eighty years old. Sima Guang served him like a strict father and protected him like a baby.

古文：自少至老，语未尝妄，自言： 吾无过人者，但平生所为，未尝有不可对人言者耳。 诚心自然，天下敬信，陕、洛间皆化其德，有不善，曰： 君实得无知之乎？ 
现代文：司马光从小到老，讲话从不乱言，他自己说 ：我没有过人之处，只是平生所做的，从没有不能对人说的事情。 诚心出于自然，于是天下人敬仰信服他，陕州、洛阳之间都为他的道德所感化，有什么事做得不好，就说 ：司马君实会不知道吗？ 
English: Sima Guang, from childhood to old age, never spoke nonsense, he said himself: I am not extraordinary, just what I have done in my life, there is never anything that can not be said to people. Sincerity is natural, so people around the world admire and believe him, between Shaanxi and Luoyang are influenced by his morality, if something is not done well, they say: Sima Jun will really not know?

古文：光于物澹然无所好，于学无所不通，惟不喜释、老，曰： 其微言不能出吾书，其诞吾不信也。 洛中有田三顷，丧妻，卖田以葬，恶衣菲食以终其身。
现代文：司马光对物质淡泊无所喜好，而对学问无所不精通，只是不喜好释、老之学，他说： 释、老的微言大义不能超出儒学，它们荒诞不经我不相信。 司马光在洛阳有田三百亩，妻子死时，卖掉田产来办丧事，他一直到死都是粗衣薄食。
English: Sima Guang had no preference for material frivolity, but was well-versed in all aspects of learning, but he did not like Xie and Lao's learning, he said: Xie and Lao's small words and great righteousness could not go beyond Confucianism, they were absurd and I did not believe them. Sima Guang had three hundred mu of farmland in Luoyang, and when his wife died, he sold the farmland to pay for the funeral, and he was poor until his death.

古文：绍圣初，御史周秩首论光诬谤先帝，尽废其法。
现代文：绍圣初年，御史周秩首论司马光诬蔑诽谤先帝，于是全部废除他们实行的法令。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Sima Guang, the first-ranked historian, slandered and defamed the former emperor, so all the decrees they implemented were abolished.

古文：章惇、蔡卞请发冢斫棺，帝不许，乃令夺赠谥，仆所立碑。
现代文：章、蔡卞奏请掘坟斫棺，哲宗不同意，于是命令削除他的赠官谥号，推倒所树立的石碑。
English: Zhang and Cai Bingxiao requested to dig a grave and bury the coffin, but Zhezong did not agree, so he ordered to remove his official title and demolish the stone monument.

古文：而惇言不已，追贬清远军节度副使，又贬崖州司户参军。
现代文：但章觉得不解恨，于是追贬司马光为清远军节度副史，又贬为崖州司户参军。
English: However, Zhang felt that he could not resolve the hatred, so he chased down and demoted Sima Guang to the deputy history of the Qingyuan Army, and also demoted him to the Jiaozhou Sido to join the army.

古文：徽宗立，复太子太保。
现代文：徽宗即位，复贬为太子太保。
English: Emperor Huizong ascended the throne and was reinstated as Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：蔡京擅政，复降正议大夫，京撰《奸党碑》，令郡国皆刻石。
现代文：蔡京专权擅政，又降为正义大夫。蔡京撰写《奸党碑》，令各州郡都刻石成碑。
English: Cai Jing monopolized political power and was relegated to the position of Doctor of Justice. Cai Jing wrote the "Monument to the Traitor Party," which was carved into stone monuments in every state and county.

古文：长安石工安民当镌字，辞曰： 民愚人，固不知立碑之意。
现代文：长安石工安民承担刻字任务，他推辞说： 我是愚蠢之人，本不知道立碑的用意。
English: Chang'an mason Anmin took on the engraving task, but he declined, saying: "I'm a stupid person, I didn't know the purpose of erecting the monument.

古文：但如司马相公者，海内称其正直，今谓之奸邪，民不忍刻也。 府官怒，欲加罪，泣曰： 被役不敢辞，乞免镌安民二字于石末，恐得罪于后世。 闻者愧之。
现代文：只是像司马相公这样的人，海内称赞他为人正直，现在说他奸邪，我是不忍心刻字。 长安府官吏大怒，打算加之以罪，安民哭着说： 徭役我不敢推辞，求求不要刻安民二字于石碑之末，恐怕得罪于后世。 
English: However, I can't bear to engrave the name of a man like Sima Xianggong, who was praised for his honesty at home, and who is now said to have committed treason. The officials of Chang'an prefecture were furious and wanted to add to his punishment. Anmin cried and said, "I can't refuse to be a guard, please don't engrave the name of Anmin at the end of the stone monument, I'm afraid it will offend future generations."

古文：然康不死，亦将不免于绍圣之祸矣。吕公著，字晦叔，幼嗜学，至忘寝食。
现代文：听见此话的人感到惭愧。靖康元年，恢复司马光的赠官谥号。建炎中，配飨哲宗庙庭。吕公著字晦叔，寿州人。从小嗜好学习，以至废寝忘食。
English: Those who heard this were ashamed. In the first year of the Jingkang era, Sima Guang's honorary title was restored. During the construction of the fire, the temple garden of the Zhezong family was built. Lu Gong wrote the word "Uncle" and was from Shoushou. He had a passion for learning since childhood, to the point of losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：父夷简器异之，曰： 他日必为公辅。 恩补奉礼郎，登进士第，召试馆职，不就。
现代文：父亲吕夷简对他器重惊异，说： 今后必定为王公辅臣。 恩补奉礼郎，登进士第，召试馆职，没有赴任。
English: His father, Lü Yizhen, was surprised at his talent and said, "In the future, he will definitely be Wang Gong's assistant minister.

古文：通判颍州，郡守欧阳修与为讲学之友。
现代文：为颍州通判，郡守欧阳修与他结为讲学之友。
English: He was a general magistrate of Zhangzhou, and the county governor Ouyang Xiu became a friend of his lectures.

古文：后修使契丹，契丹主问中国学行之士，首以公著对。
现代文：后来欧阳修出使契丹，契丹主询问中国学问德行之士，首先答以吕公著。
English: Later, Ouyang Xiu sent an envoy to Qidan. The Qidan master inquired about Chinese scholars and moralists, and first replied with a book by Lyu Gonglu.

古文：判吏部南曹，仁宗奖其恬退，赐五品服。
现代文：判吏部南曹，仁宗奖许他淡于名利，赐给五品官服。
English: Nancao of the Judiciary Department, who was awarded the Nanzong Award for being less famous than he was, was given a five-grade official uniform.

古文：除崇文院检讨、同判太常寺。
现代文：被任为崇文院检讨、同判太常寺。
English: He was appointed as a reviewer of the Suobun-in Temple and a peer reviewer of the Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：寿星观营真宗神御殿，公著言： 先帝已有三种御，而建立不已，殆非祀无丰昵之义。 进知制诰，三辞不拜。
现代文：寿星观营造真宗神御殿，吕公著说： 先帝已经有三神御殿，但不停地建立，岂不是祭祀没有丰厚父庙之义。 进官知制诰，三次辞谢不受君命。
English: Regarding the construction of the Imperial Palace of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of the True God of

古文：改天章阁待制兼侍读。
现代文：改任天章阁待制兼侍读。
English: He was reassigned to Tenjokaku as a trainee and a waiter.

古文：英宗亲政，加龙图阁直学士。
现代文：英宗亲政，加吕公著官龙图阁直学士。
English: Yingzong Jinsheng, the author of "Garyukong" and a graduate of Longtuge University.

古文：方议追崇濮王，或欲称皇伯考，公著曰： 此真宗所以称太祖，岂可施于王。 及下诏称亲，且班讳，又言： 称亲则有二父之嫌，王讳但可避于上前，不应与七庙同讳。 吕诲等坐论濮王去，公著言： 陛下即位以来，纳谏之风未彰，而屡绌言者，何以风示天下？ 不听。
现代文：正议论追崇濮王，有的打算称呼皇伯考，吕公著说： 这是真宗所以称呼太祖，怎么能施于王。 等到下诏称亲，而且分赐讳号，吕公著又说： 称亲则有二个父亲的嫌疑，王讳可以避于上前，不应与七庙同讳。 吕诲等人因论濮王离开朝廷，吕公著说： 陛下即皇位以来，纳谏之风没有彰扬，而且多次贬退谏官，何以风示天下？ 
English: There was a discussion on the topic of revering King Zhao, and some people intended to call the emperor Berkau. Lu Gong wrote: This is the True Sect, so how can you call the great-grandfather, how can you do this to the king. Wait until the next imperial edict praising the relative, and give him a nickname, Lu Gong also said: The relative is suspected of having two fathers, the relative can avoid coming forward, and should not be the same as the seven temples. Lu Ji and others left the court because of the discussion of King Zhao, Lu Gong wrote: Since His Majesty, that is, the throne, the style of praising the relative has not been promoted,

古文：遂乞补外，帝曰： 学士朕所重，其可以去朝廷？ 请不已，出知蔡州。
现代文：英宗没有听从他的意见。吕公著于是请求补外任，英宗说： 学士为朕所器重，怎么能够离开朝廷？ 吕公著不停地请求，出任蔡州知州。
English: Yingzong did not listen to his advice. Lyu Gongzhu then asked Tsang to fill the position. Yingzong said, "Bachelor is so important to me, how can I leave the imperial court?" Lyu Gongzhu kept asking to be appointed as Cai Zhou Zhizhou.

古文：神宗立，召为翰林学士、知通进银台司。
现代文：神宗即皇帝位，召吕公著为翰林学士、知通进银台司。
English: Shenzong, that is, the emperor, summoned Lyu Gongzhu to be a scholar of Hanlin and a scholar of Jintai.

古文：司马光以论事罢中丞，还经幄。
现代文：司马光因论事被解除御史中丞的职务，回到经幄。
English: Sima Guang was relieved of his duties as Imperial Historian and returned to Jing'an.

古文：公著封还其命曰： 光以举职赐罢，是为有言责者不得尽其言也。 诏以告直付阁门。
现代文：吕公著封还这个诏命说： 司马光因举职赐罢，这是为有言事职责的人不能尽其言。 诏令以告示直接付给门。
English: Lv Gong returned the imperial edict with a seal, saying: Sima Guang should be dismissed because of his position, this is because a person who has the duty of speech cannot fulfill his words. The imperial edict was sent directly to the door by notice.

古文：公著又言： 制命不由门下，则封驳之职，因臣而废。
现代文：吕公著又说： 制命不由门下省，那么封驳的职责，因我而废弃。
English: Lu Gong also said in his book: If it is not up to the subordinate ministry to issue orders, then the duty to seal them is abandoned because of me.

古文：愿理臣之罪，以正纪纲。 帝谕之曰： 所以徙光者，赖其劝学耳，非以言事故也。 公著请不已，竟解银台司。
现代文：希望治我的罪，以端正纪纲。 神宗示谕他说 ：之所以流放司马光的原因，是依赖他劝学而已，不是因为言事的缘故。 吕公著不停地请求，终于解除知通进银台司的职务。
English: He hoped to cure me of my sins by correcting the curriculum. The Shenzong instructed him, "The reason why Sima Guang was exiled was because he relied on him to persuade students, not because of what he said. Lv Gongde kept requesting, and finally relieved Zhitongjin of his duties as the director of the Bank of Taiwan.

古文：熙宁初，知开封府。
现代文：熙宁初年，吕公著知开封府。
English: In the first year of Xianning, Lv Gong wrote a book about opening a feudal government.

古文：时夏秋淫雨，京师地震。
现代文：当时夏秋久雨，京师发生地震。
English: At that time, the summer and autumn were rainy, and an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：公著上疏曰： 自昔人君遇灾者，或恐惧以致福，或简诬以致祸。
现代文：吕公著上疏说 ：过去人君遇灾，有的恐惧以致福，有的简诬以致祸。
English: In his book, Lyu Gong said: In the past, when people suffered disasters, some were blessed with fear, and some were cursed with misfortune.

古文：上以至诚待下，则下思尽诚以应之，上下至诚而变异不消者，未之有也。
现代文：陛下以至诚待臣下，那么臣下思虑尽诚以回报，上下至诚而变异不消失的，从来没有。
English: If your majesty treats your subjects with utmost sincerity, then your subjects will reciprocate with utmost sincerity. If your subjects treat you with utmost sincerity and the variation does not disappear, it will never happen.

古文：惟君人者去偏听独任之弊，而不主先入之语，则不为邪说所乱。
现代文：做人君主的只有除去偏听独任的弊端，而不被先入之语所蒙蔽，那么就不会被邪说所乱。
English: The only way to be a human monarch is to eliminate the drawbacks of listening to others, and not to be blinded by preconceived notions. Then you will not be confused by heresies.

古文：颜渊问为邦，孔子以远佞人为戒。
现代文：颜渊问为邦国之道，孔子答以疏远奸佞之人为戒。
English: Yan Yuan asked for the way of the state, Confucius replied by warning people to stay away from traitors.

古文：盖佞人惟恐不合于君，则其势易亲；正人惟恐不合于义，则其势易疏。
现代文：大概奸佞之人惟恐不顺合君意，那么其势必容易亲近，正直的人惟恐不符合大义，那么其势必容易疏远。
English: Probably, those who are treacherous are afraid of not conforming to the monarch's will, so they are bound to be easy to approach, and those who are honest are afraid of not conforming to the Great Righteousness, so they are bound to be easy to alienate.

古文：惟先格王正厥事，未有事正而世不治者也。 礼官用唐故事，请以五月御大庆殿受朝，因上尊号。
现代文：只有首先格王端正此事，没有事正而世不治理的。 礼官遵用唐代旧例，请求五月临御大庆殿接受朝拜，因而上尊号。
English: Only the first Ge Wang rectified the matter, there is no such thing as doing the right thing and not governing the world. The etiquette official followed the old Tang dynasty example and requested the May Linyi Daqing Palace to accept the worship, thus the name of the Supreme Dignity.

古文：公著曰： 陛下方度越汉、唐，追复三代，何必于阴长之日，为非礼之会，受无益之名？ 从之。
现代文：吕公著说： 陛下正超越汉、唐，追复三代，何必在阴盛的日子，为不符合礼义的朝会，接受无益的虚名？ 
English: Lyu Gong wrote: Your Majesty is surpassing the Han and Tang dynasties and restoring the three dynasties. Why should you, in the darkest days, accept a worthless false name for a royal meeting that is not in line with etiquette?

古文：二年，为御史中丞。
现代文：神宗采纳了他的意见。熙宁二年，任御史中丞。
English: Shinso adopted his opinion, and in the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed to the post of goshi chujo.

古文：时王安石方行青苗法，公著极言曰： 自古有为之君，未有失人心而能图治，亦未有能胁之以威、胜之以辩而能得人心者也。
现代文：当时王安石正颁行青苗法，吕公著急速上言说 ：自古以来有作为的君主，没有失去人心却能图治，也没有能胁之以威、胜之以辩却能得人心的。
English: At that time, Wang Anshi was promulgating the Law of the Young Seedlings, and Lu Gongjun wrote a hasty epitaph saying, "Since ancient times, there have been effective monarchs who have not lost the hearts of the people but have been able to govern, who have not been able to intimidate, and who have been able to win the hearts of the people by winning arguments."

古文：昔日之所谓贤者，今皆以此举为非，而生议者一切祗为流俗浮论，岂昔皆贤而今皆不肖乎？ 安石怒其深切。
现代文：过去所谓的那些贤能之人，现都认为青苗法为非，但发出议论的人把这一切诋毁为流俗浮论，难道过去都是贤能而现在都是不肖吗？ 王安石对他的深切之语感到愤慨。
English: The so-called virtuous people in the past now all think that the Young Seedlings Law is wrong, but the commentators have denigrated all of this as gossip. Were they all virtuous in the past, but now they are not? Wang Anshi felt indignant at his profound words.

古文：帝使举吕惠卿为御史，公著曰： 惠卿固有才，然奸邪不可用。 帝以语安石，安石益怒，诬以恶语，出知颍州。
现代文：神宗让他荐举吕惠卿为御史，吕公著说： 惠卿固然有才能，但奸邪不可以任用。 神宗把这话告诉王安石，王安石更加愤慨，诬陷吕公著恶语中伤，吕公著出任颍州知州。
English: Shenzong asked him to recommend Lyu Huiqing as his historian, and Lyu Gong wrote: "Huiqing is certainly talented, but he should not be appointed as a traitor." Shenzong told this to Wang Anshi, and Wang Anshi was even more indignant, slandering Lyu Gong with bad words, and Lyu Gong wrote that he should be appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：八年，彗星见，诏求直言。
现代文：熙宁八年，彗星出现，下诏求取直言。
English: In the eighth year of the Heian period, a comet appeared, and the emperor issued an edict demanding a direct answer.

古文：公著上疏曰： 陛下临朝愿治，为日已久，而左右前后，莫敢正言。
现代文：吕公著上疏说 ：陛下临朝希望治理国家，时日已经很久，但左右前后，没有人敢直言。
English: Lu Gong said in his essay: It has been a long time since His Majesty the Crown Prince hoped to govern the country, but no one dared to speak out.

古文：使陛下有欲治之心，而无致治之实，此任事之臣负陛下也。
现代文：致使陛下有想治理天下的雄心，但没有致治之实，这是任事大臣辜负了陛下。
English: It is the ministers-in-charge who have failed His Majesty, causing His Majesty to have the ambition to govern the world, but not the reality of governing.

古文：夫士之邪正、贤不肖，既素定矣。
现代文：大概士人的邪恶正直、贤能不肖，已经素定了。
English: Probably, the evil of honest and virtuous men has already been determined.

古文：今则不然，前日所举，以为天下之至贤；而后日逐之，以为天下至不肖。
现代文：现在则不是这样，前不久所荐举，认为是天下最贤能的人；但后来被贬逐，认为是天下最不肖的。
English: This is not the case now. Not long ago, he was recommended for promotion and considered to be the most capable person in the world; but later he was disparaged and considered to be the worst in the world.

古文：其于人材既反覆不常，则于政事亦乖戾不审矣。
现代文：其于人才既然反复无常，那么于政事也违背常理不加审慎了。
English: Since talent is capricious, it is also contrary to common sense not to be prudent in politics.

古文：古之为政，初不信于民者有之，若子产治郑，一年而人怨之，三年而人歌之。
现代文：古代为政，开始不为百姓所信服的有之，像子产治理郑国，一年后人们怨恨，三年后人们歌颂。
English: In ancient times, there was a government that was not believed by the people at first. It was like a child governing Zhengzhou. One year later, people resented it, and three years later, people praised it.

古文：陛下垂拱仰成，七年于此，然舆人之诵，亦未有异于前日，陛下独不察乎？ 
现代文：陛下垂衣拱手希望成功，于此七年，但众人的陈述，与以前相比也没有什么不同，陛下难道没有察觉吗？ 
English: Your Majesty has been hanging on for seven years, hoping for success, but the people's statements are no different from before. Hasn't Your Majesty noticed?

古文：起知河阳，召还，提举中太一宫，迁翰林学士承旨，改端明殿学士、知审官院。
现代文：起用为知河阳，召回朝廷，提举中太一宫，迁任翰林学士承旨，改任端明殿学士、知审官院。
English: He was appointed to Chihayang, recalled to the imperial court, promoted to Zhongtaichung, transferred to the Hanlin Academy to carry out the will of the emperor, and was appointed to the Duanming Palace Academy and the Chihon Academy.

古文：帝从容与论治道，遂及释、老，公著问曰： 尧、舜知此道乎？ 帝曰： 尧、舜岂不知？ 公著曰： 尧、舜虽如此，而惟以知人安民为难，所以为尧、舜也。 帝又言唐太宗能以权智御臣下。
现代文：神宗慢慢同吕公著谈论为治之道，于是涉及佛、老，吕公著问道： 尧、舜知道此道吗？ 神宗说： 尧、舜难道不知？ 吕公著说 ：尧、舜虽然知此，但惟独以知人安民为难事，所以成为尧、舜也。 神宗又说唐太宗能以权智驾御臣下。
English: Shenzong slowly talked with Lu Gongzhu about the way of governance, which involved Buddha and Lao. Lu Gongzhu asked, "Do you know this way?" Shenzong said, "Don't you know it?" Lu Gongzhu said, "Although you know this, you only care about the safety of the people, so you become a tyrant." Shenzong also said that Emperor Taizong could rule his subjects with power and wisdom.

古文：对曰： 太宗之德，以能屈己从谏尔。 帝善其言。
现代文：吕公著回答说： 唐太宗之德，以能屈己从谏而已。 
English: Lu Gong replied: The virtue of Tang Taizong is to be able to bow down and obey.

古文：未几，同知枢密院事。
现代文：神宗对他的话表示赞许。不久，为同知枢密院事。
English: Shinso praised his words, and he was soon appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：有欲复肉刑者，议取死囚试劓、刖，公著曰： 试之不死，则肉刑遂行矣。 乃止。
现代文：有人打算恢复肉刑，建议取死囚试验割掉鼻子、砍掉脚的酷刑，吕公著说： 如果试之不死，那么肉刑就会实行了。 于是停止。
English: Some people planned to resume corporal punishment, suggesting that death row prisoners should be tested with the torture of cutting off their noses and feet. Lv Gong wrote: "If the test does not result in death, then corporal punishment will be carried out." So it was stopped.

古文：夏人幽其主，将大举讨之。
现代文：西夏幽禁了其国王，朝廷将要大举征讨西夏。
English: Xixia has imprisoned its king, and the imperial court is going to enlist the help of Xixia in a big way.

古文：公著曰： 问罪之师，当先择帅，苟未得人，不如勿举。 及兵兴，秦、晋民力大困，大臣不敢言，公著数白其害。
现代文：吕公著说： 兴问罪之师，当首先选择主帅，如果没有合适的人，不如不兴。 等到兵兴，秦、晋民力大困，大臣们不敢说，吕公著多次报告兴兵的害处。
English: Lu Gongzhu said: "If you want to find a guilty person, you should first choose a coach. If there is no suitable person, it is better not to have a coach. Wait until the army is strong, the Qin and Jin peoples are in great difficulties, and the ministers dare not say. Lu Gongzhu repeatedly reported the harm of the army.

古文：元丰五年，以疾丐去位，除资政殿学士、定州安抚使。
现代文：元丰五年，吕公著因病乞求离开职位，被授予资政殿学士、定州安抚使。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanfeng, Lu Gongzhu was awarded the bachelor of the Palace of Capital Administration and the pacifying envoy of Dingzhou after he begged to leave the post due to illness.

古文：俄永乐城陷，帝临朝叹曰： 边民疲弊如此，独吕公著为朕言之耳。 徙扬州，加大学士。
现代文：不久永乐城陷落，神宗临朝叹息说： 边地百姓疲敝如此，只有吕公著向朕说过而已。 移居扬州，加大学士。
English: Soon after the fall of Yongle Castle, Shenzong Lintong sighed and said: "The people in the outlying areas are so tired, only Lyu Gongzhu told me about it." He moved to Yangzhou and became a Canadian university scholar.

古文：将立太子，帝谓辅臣，当以吕公著、司马光为师傅。
现代文：将要立太子，神宗对辅佐大臣说，应当以吕公著、司马光为师傅。
English: When the crown prince was to be established, Shinso said to the Vice-Minister of State that the book by Lyu Gong and Sima Guang should be used as a guide.

古文：哲宗即位，以侍读还朝。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，吕公著以侍读的身份返回朝廷。
English: Tetsuzong became emperor, and Lü Gongzong returned to the imperial court as an attendant.

古文：太皇太后遣使迎，问所欲言，公著曰： 先帝本意，以宽省民力为先。
现代文：太皇太后派使臣迎接，询问他所想要说的，吕公著说： 先帝本意，以宽省民力为先务。
English: The empress dowager sent an envoy to meet him and ask him what he wanted to say, and Lü Gong wrote: The former emperor originally intended to give priority to strengthening the province and the people.

古文：而建议者以变法侵民为务，与己异者一切斥去，故日久而弊愈深，法行而民愈困。
现代文：但建议的人以变法侵夺百姓为务，与自己意见不同的统统斥去，因此日久而弊端更深，新法颁行而百姓更加困苦。
English: However, the person who proposed the new law took it as his duty to change the law and encroach on the people, rejecting everyone who had a different opinion from his own. As a result, the new law has been in effect for a long time, and the drawbacks are deeper. The new law has been issued, and the people are more impoverished.

古文：诚得中正之士，讲求天下利病，协力而为之，宜不难矣。 至则上言曰： 人君初即位，当正始以示天下，修德以安百姓。
现代文：诚然能得公允正直之士，讲求天下利弊，同心协力而为之，应该不难。 到达朝廷就上言说 ：人君才即位，应该正始以示天下，修德以安百姓。
English: It is true that it should not be difficult to get fair and honest people, to talk about the world's advantages and disadvantages, and to work together to do it. When he arrived at the imperial court, he said: "Only a prince can ascend to the throne, and it is necessary to show the world from the very beginning, and to cultivate virtue and keep the people safe."

古文：修德之要，莫先于学。
现代文：修德的要旨，莫先于学习。
English: The essence of cultivating virtue does not precede study.

古文：学有缉熙于光明，则日新以底至治者，学之力也。
现代文：学有积渐至于光明，则天天更新以至于至治，这是学习的效力。
English: Learning is cumulative, and as for the light, it is updated every day so that it prevails. This is the effect of learning.

古文：谨昧死陈十事，曰畏天、爱民、修身、讲学、任贤、纳谏、薄敛、省刑、去奢、无逸。 又乞备置谏员，以开言路。
现代文：谨冒死陈述十事，曰畏天、爱民、修身、讲学、任贤、纳谏、薄敛、省刑、去奢、无逸。 又请求备置谏员，以开言路。
English: I would like to state ten things at the risk of my life, namely, fearing God, loving the people, cultivating the body, lecturing, appointing the wise, accepting discipline, restraining the weak, reducing punishment, eliminating extravagance, and avoiding evasion. I also request that you prepare a representative to open the way for me to speak.

古文：拜尚书左丞、门下侍郎。
现代文：被授予尚书左丞、门下侍郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Shoshu-zojo, or junior attendant.

古文：元祐元年，拜尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：元元年，吕公著被授予尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lu Gong was awarded the title of Shangshu Right Servant and the title of Zhongshu Servant.

古文：三省并建，中书独为取旨之地。
现代文：中书、门下、尚书三省一同建置，中书独为取旨之地。
English: The three provinces of Zhongshu, Menzhu and Shangshu were built together, and Zhongshu alone was the place to receive the will.

古文：乃请事于三省者，与执政同进呈，取旨而各行之。
现代文：吕公著就请求事于三省者，与执政大臣共同进呈，取旨而各自实行。
English: If Lyu Gong wrote a request to the three provinces, he would jointly submit it with the ruling minister, and then implement it independently.

古文：又执政官率数日一聚政事堂，事多决于其长，同列莫得预。
现代文：又执政官员通常几天在政事堂一聚，事情多由其长官决定，同事不得干预。
English: In addition, ruling officials usually gather in the government building for several days, and most of the matters are decided by their superiors. Colleagues are not allowed to interfere.

古文：至是，始命日集，遂为定制。
现代文：至此，才命每天集聚，于是成为定制。
English: At this point, talent gathered every day, so it became a custom.

古文：与司马光同心辅政，推本先帝之志，凡欲革而未暇与革而未定者，一一举行之。
现代文：吕公著与司马光同心辅政，推本先帝之志，凡是打算变革却没来得及予以变革以及已经变革而未形成定例的，一一全部实行。
English: Lv Gong and Sima Guang jointly supported the government and pushed forward the former emperor's will. All those who planned to change but did not have time to change, and those who have changed but have not formed a precedent, will be implemented one by one.

古文：民欢呼鼓舞，咸以为便。
现代文：百姓欢呼鼓舞，都以之为便。
English: The people cheered and cheered, and all took advantage of it.

古文：光薨，独当国，除吏皆一时之选。
现代文：司马光去世，吕公著独自当权，所任命的官吏都是当时的佼佼者。
English: Sima Guang died, and Lü Gongzhu took power alone. The officials he appointed were the best at the time.

古文：时科举罢词赋，专用王安石经义，且杂以释氏之说。
现代文：当时科举废除词赋，专用王安石的经义，而且杂以佛教的学说。
English: At that time, the imperial examination abolished the word fu, dedicated to the meaning of Wang Anshi, and mixed with the doctrine of Buddhism.

古文：凡士子自一语上，非新义不得用，学者至不诵正经，唯窃安石之书以干进，精熟者转上第，故科举益弊。
现代文：凡士子从一句话以上，非新义不能用，学习的人以至于不诵读正经，只窃取王安石之书以营谋官职地位，精熟的人转上第，因此科举越来越坏。
English: An ordinary person cannot use more than one sentence of non-new meaning, and those who study do not recite the sutras, but only steal Wang Anshi's books to seek official positions, and those who are skillful are promoted, so the imperial examinations are getting worse and worse.

古文：公著始令禁主司不得出题老、庄书，举子不得以申、韩、佛书为学，经义参用古今诸儒说，毋得专取王氏。
现代文：吕公著开始命令主管科举的部门不得以老、庄书中出题，应试科举的士人不得以申、韩、佛书为学，经义参用古今各家儒说，不得专取王氏。
English: Lv Gong ordered the departments in charge of the examination not to use old and famous books for questions, and the scholars who should take the examination should not use Shen, Han, and Buddhist books for learning, and should not use the ancient and modern Confucianism, and should not use the Wang family exclusively.

古文：复贤良方正科。
现代文：恢复贤良方正科。
English: Reinstate the virtuous Fang Zhengke.

古文：右司谏贾易以言事讦直诋大臣，将峻责，公著以为言，止罢知怀州。
现代文：右司谏贾易因言事攻击别人短处直接诋毁朝廷大臣，将要被严厉责罚，吕公著替他说话，只罢知怀州。
English: The Right Reverend Jia Yi will be severely punished for directly slandering the imperial court minister by attacking the shortcomings of others in words and deeds. Lu Gong wrote the speech for him and only knew about Huai Zhou.

古文：退谓同列曰： 谏官所论，得失未足言。
现代文：吕公著退朝对同事说： 谏官所议论，得失不足言。
English: Lyu Gong said to his colleagues after retiring from the imperial court: What eunuchs discuss is not enough to say.

古文：顾主上春秋方盛，虑异明有进谀说惑乱者，正赖左右争臣耳，不可豫使人主轻厌言者也。 众莫不叹服。
现代文：看主上正值壮年，担心今后有人进谀说惑乱，正是依赖左右诤臣，不可以使人主轻厌言事之人。 众人没有不叹服的。
English: Seeing that the Lord was in the prime of his life, he was worried that in the future there would be those who would say and do things that would lead to chaos. It was precisely those who depended on their right and left subordinates and who could not make the Lord despise their words and deeds. The people were not unconvinced.

古文：吐蕃首领鬼章青宜结久为洮、河患，闻朝廷弭兵省戍，阴与夏人合谋复取熙、岷。
现代文：吐蕃首领鬼章青宜结很久以来成为洮、河一带的祸患，听说朝廷息兵省戍，暗地与西夏人合谋再取熙、岷州。
English: The chief of Tubo, the ghost Zhang Qingyijie, has long been a scourge in the areas around the Yunnan and Hebei rivers. It is said that the imperial court suppressed the troops and secretly conspired with the Xixia people to re-capture Xi and Yunnan.

古文：公著白遣军器丞游师雄以便宜谕诸将，不逾月，生致于阙下。
现代文：吕公著报告派遣军器丞游师雄以方便谕求众将，不过一个月，活捉鬼章青宜结致于朝宫下。
English: Lv Gong wrote a report and dispatched the military commander Yu Shixiong to appeal to the generals with a convenient oracle. However, within a month, the live capture of the ghost Zhang Qingyi was concluded under the Imperial Palace.

古文：帝宴近臣于资善堂，出所书唐人诗分赐。
现代文：神宗在资善堂宴请亲近大臣，拿出所书写的唐人诗分赐给众人。
English: Shenzong invited close ministers to a banquet in Shizen Hall, and gave out the written Chinese poems to the crowd.

古文：公著乃集所讲书要语明白、切于治道者，凡百篇进之，以备游意翰墨，为圣学之助。
现代文：吕公著就聚集所讲书中要语明白、切合于治道的，共一百篇进献，以备神宗游意翰墨，作为圣学的帮助。
English: A total of one hundred articles were contributed by Lyu Gong to the book on the lectures given at the gathering, in which the essentials were clear and pertinent to the path of governance, in order to prepare the Shenzong Yuyi Hanmo, as an aid to sacred learning.

古文：三年四月，恳辞位，拜司空、同平章军国事。
现代文：元三年四月，恳请辞去职位，被授予司空、同平章军国事。
English: In April of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was asked to resign from his post and was awarded the title of Siku and Tongping Zhangjun.

古文：宋兴以来，宰相以三公平章重事者四人，而公著与父居其二，士艳其荣。
现代文：宋朝建立以来，宰相以三公平章重事者四人，而吕公著与他的父亲居其二，士人羡慕吕氏的荣耀。
English: Since the establishment of the Song Dynasty, there have been four chancellors with the title of "Three Fair Chapters," and Lv Gongzhu and his father are the second. Scholars are envious of Lv's glory.

古文：诏建第于东府之南，启北扉，以便执政会议。
现代文：诏令在东府南面建造府第，打开北门，以方便执政大臣聚会议事。
English: The edict ordered the construction of a government office in the south of Dongfu and the opening of the north gate to facilitate the meeting of the ruling ministers.

古文：凡三省、枢密院之职，皆得总理。
现代文：凡是三省、枢密院的职责，都得总理。
English: The Prime Minister is responsible for all the duties of the three provinces and the Privy Council.

古文：间日一朝，因至都堂，其出不以时，盖异礼也。
现代文：每隔一天一朝会，因到都堂，吕公著出不以时，这是特殊的恩典。
English: Every other day, there is a morning meeting. It is a special grace for Lyu Gong to be able to come to the Great Hall of the People.

古文：明年二月薨，年七十二。
现代文：第二年二月吕公著去世，终年七十二岁。
English: In February of the following year, Lü Gongzhu passed away at the age of seventy-two.

古文：太皇太后见辅臣泣曰： 邦国不幸，司马相公既亡，吕司空复逝。 痛闵久之。
现代文：太皇太后接见辅佐大臣哭泣说： 国家不幸，司马相公已死，吕司空又逝世。 
English: When the Empress Dowager met with the Vice-Minister of State, she wept and said, "It is unfortunate for the country that Sima Xianggong has died, and that Lu Xikong has also passed away.

古文：帝亦悲感，即诣其家临奠，赐金帛万。
现代文：痛惜怜悯了很长时间。神宗也悲痛感伤，就到吕家临幸祭奠，赐给金子布帛万计。
English: Shenzong was also sad and sentimental, so he went to Lyu's home to pay his respects and give him the gold cloth.

古文：赠太师、申国公，谥曰正献，御笔碑首曰 纯诚厚德 。
现代文：赠太师、申国公，谥号为 正献 ，亲自书写墓碑头曰《纯诚厚德》。
English: The present Grand Master, Emperor Shen, whose posthumous name was Zheng Xian, personally wrote the epitaph on the tomb, saying, "Pure, honest and virtuous."

古文：公著自少讲学，即以治心养性为本，平居无疾言遽色，于声利纷华，泊然无所好。
现代文：吕公著从年青时讲学，就以治心养性为本，平日居处时无疾言厉色，对于歌舞钱财荣耀，淡泊无所喜好。
English: Lv Gong, who has been lecturing since he was young, is based on the principle of cultivating a healthy mind and character. When he is at home on weekdays, he does not speak loudly, and he has no preference for singing, dancing, money, and glory.

古文：暑不挥扇，寒不亲火，简重清静，盖天禀然。
现代文：暑热不挥扇，寒冷不烤火，简重清静，大概是天生禀性使然。
English: Hot and hot do not wave a fan, cold does not bake a fire, simple, heavy and quiet, probably due to innate stubbornness.

古文：其识虑深敏，量闳而学粹，遇事善决，苟便于国，不以私利害动其心。
现代文：他的识见深切敏锐，气量宽宏而且学问精粹，遇事善于决断，如果对国家有利，不因私下的利害动摇其心。
English: His insight is keen and penetrating, he is broad-minded and scholarly, he is decisive, and if it is good for the country, he will not be swayed by personal interests.

古文：与人交，出于至诚，好德乐善，见士大夫以人物为意者，必问其所知与其所闻，参互考实，以达于上。
现代文：与人交往，出于至诚，好德乐善，见士大夫以人才为意的，必问其所知道的与所听到的，参互考语查实，以达闻于皇帝。
English: In dealing with people, out of sincerity, good morals and benevolence, if you see that a scholar-doctor is interested in talent, you must ask him what he knows and what he has heard, and refer to the cross-examination of language to verify, so as to be familiar with the emperor.

古文：每议政事，博取众善以为善，至所当守，则毅然不回夺。
现代文：每每议论政事，总是博取众人之长以为善，他自己认为应当信守的，则坚决按自己的意志办，从不改变自己的信念。
English: Whenever he discussed politics, he always took advantage of the goodwill of others. What he thought should be adhered to, he resolutely did according to his own will, and never changed his belief.

古文：神宗尝言其于人材不欺，如权衡之称物。尤能避远声迹，不以知人自处。
现代文：神宗曾经说他是真正的名副其实的人才。尤其能做到避远声迹，不以知人自处。
English: Shenzong once said that he is a real talent worthy of the name. In particular, he can avoid the sound track and does not know where to go.

古文：始与王安石善，安石兄事之，安石博辩骋辞，人莫敢与亢，公著独以精识约言服之。
现代文：起初，吕公著与王安石很好，王安石待之如兄长，王安石能言善辩，没有人与之抗衡，唯独吕公著能以精辟的见识和简洁的言语制服他。
English: At first, Lyu Gongzhu was on good terms with Wang Anshi. Wang Anshi treated him like an older brother. Wang Anshi could speak eloquently, and no one could compete with him. Only Lyu Gongzhu could subdue him with incisive insight and concise words.

古文：安石尝曰： 疵吝每不自胜，一诣长者，即废然而反，所谓使人之意消者，于晦叔见之。 又谓人曰： 晦叔为相，吾辈可以言仕矣。 后安石得志，意其必助己，而数用公议，列其过失，以故交情不终。
现代文：王安石曾说 ：疵吝每不自胜，一到长者面前，即废然而反，这就是说使人打消自己的念头，这一点在吕公著那儿体现得最充分。 又曾对人说 ：吕公著为相，吾辈可以谈论做官了。 后来王安石得志，受到重用，以为吕公著必定会帮助自己，但吕公著却数次公开上言，陈述他的过失，因此二人交情不终。
English: Wang Anshi once said: "Being stingy is not self-defeating. As soon as you get in front of the elders, you will be defeated, that is to say, it will make people dispel their own thoughts, which is most fully reflected in Lv Gongzhu." He also once said to people: "Lv Gongzhu is the face, my generation can talk about being an official." Later, Wang Anshi was inspired by the heavy use and thought that Lv Gongzhu would certainly help himself, but Lv Gongzhu has publicly criticized him several times and stated his faults, so the friendship between the two has not ended.

古文：于讲说尤精，语约而理尽。
现代文：吕公著尤其擅长演讲，语言精约而道理尽明。
English: Lyu Gongzhu is particularly good at speeches, the language is concise and the reason is clear.

古文：司马光曰： 每闻晦叔讲，便觉己语为烦。 其为名流所敬如此。
现代文：司马光说 ：每次听吕公著演讲，就觉得自己的语言太烦杂。 吕公著就是这样受到当时名流的敬重。
English: Sima Guang said: Every time I listen to a speech by Lyu Gong, I feel that my own language is too complicated.This is how Lyu Gong was respected by celebrities at the time.

古文：绍圣元年，章惇为相，以翟思、张商英、周秩居言路，论公著更熙、丰法度，削赠谥，毁所赐碑，再贬建武军节度副使、昌化军司户参军。
现代文：绍圣元年，章为相，任命翟思、张商英、周秩任言官，议论吕公著更变熙丰法度，削除他的赠谥，毁坏皇帝所赐碑，再贬谪为建武军节度副使、昌化军司户参军。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Zhang Weixing appointed Yu Si, Zhang Shangying, and Zhou Ritchie as spokesmen, discussed Lv Gong's more prosperous laws, removed his gift, destroyed the monument given by the emperor, and then demoted him to the deputy envoy of the Jianwu Army and the Changhua Army to join the army.

古文：徽宗立，追复太子太保。
现代文：徽宗即位，追复为太子太保。
English: Emperor Huizong ascended the throne and was reinstated as Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：蔡京擅政，复降左光禄大夫，入党籍，寻复银青光禄大夫。
现代文：蔡京擅政，又降为左光禄大夫，载入元党人籍，不久恢复为银青光禄大夫。
English: Cai Jing was good at politics, but he was demoted to the position of Zuo Guanglu Doctor, was listed as a former member of the Party, and was soon reinstated as Yin Qingguanglu Doctor.

古文：绍兴初，悉还赠谥。
现代文：绍兴初年，赠谥全部封还。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, all the gifts were returned.

古文：子希哲、希纯。
现代文：吕公著的儿子吕希哲、吕希纯。
English: Lu Xizhe and Lu Xizhen, the sons of Lu Gong.

