古文：毛澄，字宪清，昆山人。
现代文：毛澄，字宪清，江苏昆山人。
English: Mao Cheng, surnamed Xianqing, from Kunshan, Jiangsu.

古文：举弘治六年进士第一。授修撰。预修《会典》成，进右谕德，直讲东宫。
现代文：考中弘治六年第一名进士，授职修撰，参预编写《会典》成书后，升右谕德，在东宫任直讲。
English: In the sixth year of the middle school entrance examination, Hongzhi became the first to enter the university. He was assigned to write and participate in the preparation of the "Society Code." After the book was written, he was promoted to the right and became a lecturer at the East Palace.

古文：武宗为太子，以澄进讲明晰称之帝。帝大喜。方秋夜置宴，即徹以赐。
现代文：武宗当时还是太子，告诉孝宗说毛澄讲课明白易懂，孝宗大为高兴，秋夜正在举行宴席，当即就撤了宴席给毛澄作为赏赐。
English: At that time, Takemune was still the crown prince. He told Takamune that the lecture given by Maocho was easy to understand. Takemune was very pleased. A banquet was being held in the autumn evening. He immediately withdrew the banquet as a reward for Maocho.

古文：武宗立，进左庶子，直经筵。
现代文：武宗登基以后，升他做了左庶子，值勤于经筵前。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he became the left illegitimate son and was on duty in front of the throne.

古文：以母忧归。
现代文：后因为母亲去世回家守丧。
English: He returned home because of his mother's death.

古文：正德四年，刘瑾摘《会典》小疵贬诸纂修者秩，以澄为侍读。
现代文：正德四年，刘瑾摘取《会典》中的小毛病把参加编撰的人贬官，让毛澄当了侍读。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengde's reign, Liu Zhen picked out the minor faults in the "Code" and demoted the people who participated in the compilation, and let Mao Cheng serve as a reader.

古文：服阕还朝，进侍讲学士。再迁学士，掌院事，历礼部侍郎。
现代文：脱下丧服回朝后升为侍讲学士，又升为学士，掌管翰林院事务。还曾当过礼部侍郎。
English: After he took off his mourning clothes and returned to the imperial court, he was promoted to attendant lecturer and bachelor, in charge of the affairs of the Hanlin Academy. He also worked as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：十二年六月拜尚书。
现代文：十二年六月，任礼部尚书。
English: In June 2012, he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：其年八月朔，帝微行。澄率侍郎王瓒、顾清等疏请还宫。
现代文：那年八月初一，武宗便装外出游玩，毛澄率领侍郎王瓒、顾清等上书请武宗回宫。
English: On the first day of August of that year, Takemune went out to play in disguise, and Mochizumi, led by his attendants Wang Yao and Gu Qing, sent a letter asking Takemune to return to the palace.

古文：既又出居庸，幸宣府，久留不返。
现代文：后来又走出居庸关，到宣府去游玩，久留不回。
English: Later, he went out of Juyongguan and went to Xuanfu to play. He did not return for a long time.

古文：澄等频疏谏，悉不报。
现代文：毛澄等一次次上书谏劝，都不予答复。
English: Mao Cheng and others repeatedly sent letters and exhortations, but no reply was given.

古文：明年正月，驾旋，命百官戎服郊迎。澄等请用常服，不许。
现代文：第二年正月，返回到京城，传令让百官身穿军装到郊外迎接，毛澄等请用平时的官服，武宗不允许。
English: In the first month of the second year, after returning to the capital, a message was sent to hundreds of officials to wear military uniforms to the suburbs to welcome them. Mao Cheng and others were asked to wear their usual official uniforms, but Bu Zong was not allowed.

古文：七月，帝自称威武大将军朱寿，统六师巡边。遂幸宣府，抵大同，历山西至榆林。
现代文：七月，武宗自称威武大将军朱寿率领天子的部队巡守边防，到宣府去了，经过大同、山西到达榆林。
English: In July, Zhu Shou, a self-proclaimed mighty general, led Tianzi's troops to patrol the border, went to Xuanfu, and passed through Datong and Shanxi to Yulin.

古文：澄等屡疏驰谏。
现代文：毛澄等一次次飞章谏劝。
English: Mao Cheng and others repeatedly urged them.

古文：至十二月，复偕廷臣上疏曰： 去岁正月以来，銮舆数驾，不遑宁居。
现代文：到十二月份，又和朝中大臣们一起上书说： 自去年正月以来，陛下车马数次外出巡游，顾不上在宫中安静地住下来。
English: In December, together with the ministers of the DPRK and China, he wrote: "Since the first month of last year, His Majesty's carriage and horses have been out on several cruises, and it is not possible to live quietly in the palace.

古文：今兹之行，又已半岁。
现代文：这次外出，又已经半年了。
English: It's been half a year since this outing.

古文：宗庙、社稷享祀之礼并系摄行，万寿、正旦、冬至朝贺之仪悉从简略。
现代文：宗庙、社稷的祭祀典礼都是由人代为举行的，万寿节、元旦和冬至的朝贺礼仪都省略了。
English: The ritual ceremonies of the ancestral temple and the community hall were all held for generations, and the morning greeting ceremonies of the Manju Festival, New Year's Day and the winter solstice were omitted.

古文：腊朔省牲，阙而不行，遂二年矣。
现代文：腊月初一的冬，省略而不举行，就有两年了。
English: If the first day of the first month of winter is omitted and not held, it will be two years.

古文：岁律将周，郊禋已卜。
现代文：现在本年度即将结束，郊祀的日子已帮您占卜好了。
English: Now that this year is coming to an end, the days of suburban worship have already helped you with your divination.

古文：皇祖之训曰： 凡祀天地，精诚则感格，怠慢则祸生。 
现代文：皇祖的教导说： 凡是祭祀天地，精诚就可以感天动地，怠慢就会祸不单行。 
English: The emperor's ancestor taught: "Whenever sacrifices are made to heaven and earth, sincerity can move heaven and earth, while negligence will bring misfortune.

古文：今六龙遐骋，旋轸无日。
现代文：现在您乘车远游在外，不知哪天回程。
English: Now you are traveling far away by car, and you don't know when to return.

古文：万一冰雪阻违，道途梗塞，元正上日不及躬执玉帛于上帝前，陛下何以自安？
现代文：万一冰雪挡路，车马难行，元旦来不及亲自捧送玉帛到天帝面前，您心中怎么安稳得了？
English: In the unlikely event that ice and snow block the road, it is difficult to travel by car, and it is too late on New Year's Day to personally present the Jade Urn to the Emperor, how can you be stable in your heart?

古文：且边地荒寒，隆冬尤甚。
现代文：况且边境上荒凉、寒冷，冬天里尤其冷得厉害。
English: Moreover, it is desolate and cold on the border, and it is especially cold in winter.

古文：臣等处重城，食厚禄，仰思圣体劳顿，根本空虚，遥望清尘，忧心如醉。
现代文：我们这些大臣在京城里吃着厚味禄米，抬头想到陛下您在外身体劳累，根底空虚，遥望陛下，忧心如醉。
English: We, the ministers, are eating sticky rice in the capital, looking up and thinking of Your Majesty, exhausted on the outside, empty on the inside, looking at Your Majesty from afar, worried as if intoxicated.

古文：伏祈趣驾速还，躬亲稞享，宗社臣民幸甚。 
现代文：所以敬请打驾速回，亲自参加祭祀，这样国家、臣民都将幸运至极了。 
English: Therefore, I respectfully ask you to hurry back and personally participate in the ritual, so that the country and its subjects will be extremely lucky.

古文：不报。
现代文：武宗未予答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：十四年二月，驾甫还京，即谕礼部： 总督军务威武大将军、总兵官、太师、镇国公朱寿遣往两畿，瞻东岳，奉安圣像，祈福安民。 
现代文：十四年二月，武宗刚刚回到京城，就指示礼部说： 总督军务、威武大将军、总兵官、太师、镇国公朱寿将派到京城两畿，并往山东瞻仰东岳，祭祀孔圣人，为百姓祈求幸福。 
English: In February 14th, just after returning to Beijing, Emperor Wuzong instructed the Ceremonial Department: "Governor-General of the Military Affairs, General Weiwu, Commander-in-Chief of the Military, Grand Master, and Provincial Governor Zhu Shou will be sent to the two provinces of Beijing, and to Shandong to visit Dongyue, to offer sacrifices to the holy man Kong, and to pray for the happiness of the people."

古文：澄等骇愕，复偕廷臣上言： 陛下以天地之子，承祖宗之业，九州四海但知陛下有皇帝之号。
现代文：毛澄等大吃一惊，又和大臣们一起上书说 ：陛下是天地的儿子，继承祖宗的大业，四海九州只知道陛下有皇帝的称号。
English: Mao Cheng and others were taken aback, and together with the ministers, they wrote a letter saying: His Majesty is the son of heaven and earth, inheriting the great cause of his ancestors. The four seas and Kyushu only know that His Majesty has the title of emperor.

古文：今曰 总督军务、威武大将军、太师、镇国公 者，臣等莫知所指。
现代文：现在自称总督军务、威武大将军、太师、镇国公，我们不知道是什么意思。
English: Now they call themselves the Governor-General of Military Affairs, the Great General, the Grand Master, and the Prince of the Province. We don't know what they mean.

古文：夫出此旨者，陛下也。加此号者，陛下也。不知受此号者何人？
现代文：发布这道圣旨的是陛下，加这个称号的，也是陛下，不知道接受这个称号的该是谁？
English: It was His Majesty who issued this decree, and it was also His Majesty who added this title. I do not know who it was who accepted this title.

古文：如以皇储未建，欲遍告名山大川，用祈默相，则遣使走币，足将敬矣。
现代文：如果因为皇储还没有确定，想求告普天下的名山大川，用以祈求神灵暗中相助，那么派遣使臣携带玉帛前去，足够表示您的敬意了。
English: If, because the crown prince has not yet been determined, you want to appeal to the world's famous mountains and rivers to pray for the gods' secret help, then it is enough to send an envoy to carry the jade scepter forward to show your respect.

古文：何必躬奉神像，献宝香，如佛、老所为哉？ 
现代文：何必亲身捧着神像，献上香烛，像佛、老之徒那样干呢？ 
English: Why do you need to personally hold a god statue, offer incense, and act like a Buddha or an old monk?

古文：因历陈五不可。
现代文：进而一一陈述了五条不能那样做的理由。
English: He then went on to list five reasons why this should not be done.

古文：亦不报。
现代文：武宗也不予回答。
English: There was no answer to that either.

古文：宸濠反江西，帝南征示威武，驻跸留都者逾岁。
现代文：宸濠在江西造起反来，武宗亲自南征以显示军威，后来在南京住了一年多。
English: When the Kuomintang rebelled in Jiangxi, Emperor Wu personally marched south to show his military might, and later lived in Nanjing for more than a year.

古文：澄屡请回銮。
现代文：毛澄等一次又一次请他回北京。
English: Mao Cheng and others asked him again and again to go back to Beijing.

古文：及驾返通州，用江彬言，将即赐宸濠死。
现代文：等返回到通州时，武宗听从江彬的话，打算立即把宸濠赐死。
English: When he returned to Tongzhou, Wu Zong listened to Jiang Bin's words and planned to immediately put Zhai Zhuang to death.

古文：澄据汉庶人故事，请还京告郊庙，献俘行戮。
现代文：毛澄根据汉庶人的故事，请回到京城向郊庙告祭后，举行献俘仪式然后杀掉宸濠。
English: According to the story of the Han commoners, please return to the capital to offer sacrifices to the suburban temple, hold a dedication ceremony and then kill the dragonfly.

古文：不从。
现代文：武宗没听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：中官王堂镇浙江，请建生祠；西番阐化王使者乞额外赐茶九万斤。澄皆力争，不听。
现代文：宦官王堂镇守浙江，请为自己建立生祠，西番阐化王的使臣请额外赏赐他们九万斤茶叶，毛澄都竭力反对，武宗又不听。
English: The eunuch Wang Tong, who was in charge of Zhejiang, asked the emperor to build a new shrine for him, and the envoys of the Western Han Dynasty asked the emperor to reward them with an additional 90,000 kilos of tea leaves. Mao Cheng tried his best to oppose this, but Emperor Wu did not listen.

古文：王琼欲陷彭泽，澄独白其无罪。
现代文：王琼要陷害彭泽，只有毛澄说明彭泽没罪。
English: Wang Qiong wanted to frame Peng Ze, but only Mao Cheng said that Peng Ze was not guilty.

古文：武宗崩，澄偕大学士梁储、寿宁侯张鹤龄、驸马崔元、太监韦霦等迎世宗于安陆。
现代文：武宗逝世以后，毛澄和大学士梁储、寿宁侯张鹤龄、驸马崔元、太监韦霖等到安陆迎接世宗。
English: After the death of Emperor Wuzong, Mao Chenghe, university scholar Liang Zhu, Shuning prince Zhang Hering, Emperor Ma Cui Yuan, and eunuch Wei Lin went to Anlu to welcome Emperor Wuzong.

古文：既至，将谒见，有议用天子礼者。
现代文：到安陆后，即将进去拜见世宗，有人考虑用天子之礼觐见。
English: After arriving at the settlement, some people are considering using the rite of the son of heaven to see Sejong when they are about to enter.

古文：澄曰： 今即如此，后何以加？
现代文：毛澄说 ：现在就行大礼，往后怎么增加呢？
English: Mao Cheng said, "Let's make a big gift now, how can we increase it later?"

古文：岂劝进、辞让之礼当遂废乎？ 
现代文：莫不是群臣劝进、皇储辞让的礼节都该废除了吗？ 
English: Shouldn't the etiquette of courtiers persuading the crown prince to step forward and the crown prince's resignation be abolished?

古文：世宗践阼甫六日，有旨议兴献王主祀及尊称。
现代文：世宗登基才六天，就发布圣旨要大臣讨论兴献王的主祀和尊称。
English: It was only six days after the enthronement of King Sejong that he issued a sacred edict calling for ministers to discuss the offering of the king's main deity and honorific title.

古文：五月七日戊午，澄大会文武群臣，上议曰： 考汉成帝立定陶王为皇太子，立楚孝王孙景为定陶王，奉共王祀。
现代文：五月七日，毛澄大会文武群臣，递上决议说 ：据查证，汉成帝立定陶王为皇太子，立楚孝王的孙子刘景为定陶王，供奉共王的祭祀。
English: On May 7th, the civil and military ministers of the Mao Cheng General Assembly passed a resolution saying, "According to verification, Han Cheng Emperor established King Ding Tao as the crown prince, and Liu Jing, the grandson of King Chu Xiao, as King Ding Tao, and offered the sacrifice of the two kings.

古文：共王者，皇太子本生父也。
现代文：共王是皇太子的亲生父亲。
English: The king is the crown prince's biological father.

古文：时大司空师丹以为恩义备至。
现代文：当时大司空师丹认为这样做私恩、大义都得到了照顾。
English: At that time, Daishi Ku Shidan thought that by doing so, both his private and public interests were taken care of.

古文：今陛下入承大统，宜如定陶王故事，以益王第二子崇仁王厚炫继兴王后，袭兴王主祀事。
现代文：现在陛下入宫继承了王统，应该像定陶王的例子办，以益王第二个儿子崇仁王朱厚炫入继为兴王的后裔，接任兴王，主持兴王的祭祀。
English: Now that His Majesty has entered the palace and inherited the royal line, it should be done like the example of King Ding Tao, with the second son of King Yi, King Chongren, King Zhu Hou, succeeding as the descendant of King Xing, succeeding King Xing, and presiding over King Xing's sacrificial rites.

古文：又考宋濮安懿王之子入继仁宗后，是为英宗。
现代文：又据查证，宋濮安懿王的儿子入继仁宗做儿子，就是后来的英宗。
English: In addition, according to the verification, the son of King An of Song Dynasty succeeded to the throne as the son of Emperor Renzong, which was the later Emperor Yingzong.

古文：司马光谓濮王宜尊以高官大爵，称王伯而不名。
现代文：司马光认为应该以高官大爵尊崇濮王，称他王伯而不称其名。
English: Sima Guang believed that King Gong should be honored as a high-ranking grand duke, calling him "Wang Bo" without mentioning his name.

古文：范镇亦言： 陛下既考仁宗，若复以濮王为考，于义未当。 
现代文：范镇也说 ：陛下既然给仁宗做儿子，如果再把濮王称为父亲，在大义上说来不恰当。 
English: Fan Zhen also said, "Since His Majesty has given Rinzong a son, it would be inappropriate to call the king a father.

古文：乃立濮王园庙，以宗朴为濮国公奉濮王祀。
现代文：于是为濮王立了庙，以赵宗朴为濮国公，供奉濮王的祭祀。
English: As a result, a temple was built for King Gong, with Zhao Zongpu as the King of Gong, to offer sacrifices to King Gong.

古文：程颐之言曰： 为人后者，谓所后为父母，而谓所生为伯、叔父母，此生人之大伦也。
现代文：程颐有言道： 过继给人做儿子，就把人家称作父母，而把生身父母称作伯、叔父母，这是做人的大伦理准则。
English: Cheng Yao once said, "When you adopt someone as your son, you call them your parents, while you call your biological parents your uncles and aunts. This is the great ethical standard for being a human being."

古文：然所生之义，至尊至大，宜别立殊称。曰皇伯、叔父某国大王，则正统既明，而所生亦尊崇极矣。 
现代文：不过生养之恩也是再大不过的了，应该另立一个特殊的称号，如称为伯、叔父某国大王，这样既明确了王位的正统谱系，而亲生父亲也尊崇到了极点。 
English: However, the blessing of birth and upbringing cannot be overstated. A special title should be established, such as "uncle" or "uncle of a great king," which not only clarifies the legitimate line of succession to the throne, but also honors the biological father to the utmost.

古文：今兴献王于孝宗为弟，于陛下为本生父，与濮安懿王事正相等。
现代文：现在兴献王是孝宗的弟弟，是陛下的生父，和濮安懿王的事正是一样。
English: Now, King Heungseong is the younger brother of Emperor Xiaozong and the biological father of His Majesty, and the same is true of King Jianye.

古文：陛下宜称孝宗为皇考，改称兴献王为 皇叔父兴献大王 ，妃为 皇叔母兴献王妃 。
现代文：陛下应称孝宗为皇考，改称兴献王为 皇叔父兴献大王 ，王妃为 皇叔母兴献王妃 。
English: His Majesty should call Takamune the imperial examination, and change the title of King Heungseong to King Uncle Heungseong, and Queen Consort to Queen Consort Heungseong.

古文：凡祭告兴献王及上笺于妃，俱自称 侄皇帝 某，则正统、私亲，恩礼兼尽，可以为万世法。 
现代文：凡是祭告兴献王或上书信给王妃，都自称侄皇帝某某，这样正统、私亲，大礼、私恩都考虑到了，这可以作为千秋万代的法则。 
English: Anyone who makes an offering to the king or sends a letter to the empress claims to be the nephew of Emperor So-and-so. In this way, they have taken into account the principles of legitimacy, personal affinity, great gift, and personal favor, which can be used as a rule for thousands of generations.

古文：议上，帝怒曰： 父母可更易若是耶！ 
现代文：奏议递上后，世宗愤怒地说： 父母的称呼能改成这个样子吗？ 
English: After the motion was submitted, Sejong said angrily: Can the parents' name be changed to this?

古文：命再议。
现代文：下令重行议定。
English: It was agreed to reinstate the order.

古文：其月二十四日乙亥，澄复会廷臣上议曰： 《礼》为人后者为之子，自天子至庶人一也。
现代文：本月二十四日，毛澄又召集大臣们一起递上决议说 ：《礼》规定过继给人就是人家的儿子，上自天子下到百姓都是一个样。
English: On the 24th of this month, Mao Zheng also called together the ministers to submit a resolution saying: "The "Rite" stipulates that the person to be adopted is someone else's son, and it is the same for everyone from the emperor down to the common people.

古文：兴献王子惟陛下一人，既入继大统，奉祀宗庙，是以臣等前议欲令崇仁王厚炫主兴献王祀。
现代文：兴献王的儿子只您一个，既然入宫继承王位，供奉宗庙的祭祀，所以我们以前的决议就想让崇仁王厚炫供奉兴献王的祭祀。
English: You are the only son of King Heungseong, and since you have entered the palace to inherit the throne and offer the sacrifice of the ancestral temple, our previous resolution was to have King Chongin offer the sacrifice of King Heungseong.

古文：至于称号，陛下宜称为 皇叔父兴献大王 ，自称 侄皇帝 名。以宋程颐之说为可据也。
现代文：至于称号，陛下应该称兴献王为皇叔父兴国大王，自称侄皇帝名字，这有宋朝程颐的话可以作为根据。
English: As for the title, His Majesty should call Xingxian Wang the Emperor's uncle Xingguo Da Wang, and call himself the nephew of the Emperor's name, which can be based on the words of Song Dynasty Cheng Yu.

古文：本朝之制，皇帝于宗藩尊行，止称伯父、叔父，自称皇帝而不名。
现代文：按我朝的制度，皇帝对于宗室中的长辈，只称伯父、叔父，自称皇帝而不称名字。
English: According to the system of our dynasty, the emperor only calls the elders in the family uncle, uncle, and calls himself emperor without giving his name.

古文：今称兴献王为 皇叔父大王 ，又自称名，尊崇之典已至，臣等不敢复有所议。 
现代文：现在称兴献王为皇叔父大王，又自称名字，尊崇的礼数已达到了极点，我们不敢再有别的什么意见了。 
English: Now that we call King Heungcheon the Great King, and call ourselves by his name, the number of reverences has reached the extreme, and we dare not have any other opinions.

古文：因录程颐《代彭思永议濮王礼疏》进览。
现代文：进而又把程颐《代彭思永议濮王礼疏》抄一份呈交世宗阅读。
English: In addition, he presented a copy of Cheng Zheng's "On behalf of Peng Siyong and Wang Lixiao" to Shizong for reading.

古文：帝不从，命博考前代典礼，再议以闻。
现代文：世宗又不愿听从，命令他广泛地考察前代的典礼，再商定好了报上来。
English: However, Sejong did not want to listen, and ordered him to extensively study the ceremonies of the previous generation, and then come up with an agreement.

古文：澄乃复会廷臣上议曰： 臣等会议者再，请改称兴献王为叔父者，明大统之尊无二也。
现代文：毛澄于是又召集大臣们上书议论说 ：我们再三在一起讨论，所以请改称兴献王为叔父，是为了说明王位正统的尊号不能有两。
English: Mao Cheng then summoned the ministers to write a letter saying, "We have repeatedly discussed this together, so please change the title He Xianwang to uncle, in order to clarify that there cannot be two legitimate titles to the throne."

古文：然加 皇 字于 叔父 之上，则凡为陛下伯、叔诸父皆莫能与之齐矣。
现代文：如果在叔父之称呼前加个皇字，那么陛下的伯父、叔父们就没法子和献王平处了。
English: If you add the imperial prefix to the title of uncle, then your uncle and uncles will have no way to be equal to the king.

古文：加 大 字于 王 之上，则天下诸王皆莫得而并之矣。
现代文：在王前加个大字，天下其他的藩王就已经不能和献王相比了。
English: Add a capital letter in front of the king, and the other kings of the world can no longer be compared to the king.

古文：兴献王称号既定，则王妃称号亦随之，天下王妃亦无以同其尊矣。
现代文：兴献王的称号确定以后，王妃的称号就随着王，天底下的王妃们也无法和兴献王妃一样尊贵了。
English: After the title of Xingxian Wang is determined, the title of Wangfei will follow the king, and the queens under the heavens cannot be as honorable as Xingxian Wangfei.

古文：况陛下养以天下，所以乐其心，不违其志，岂一家一国之养可同日语哉。
现代文：况且陛下以天下赡养父母，用以使他们心中高兴，不违反他们的愿望，这哪里是一家或一国对父母的赡养可以相提并论的？
English: Besides, your majesty, who supports his parents with all the wealth in the world, to make them happy, and not against their wishes, is there any other family or country that can match the support of his parents?

古文：此孔子所谓事之以礼者。
现代文：这已经是孔子所说的对父母以礼侍候了。
English: This is already what Confucius said about serving one's parents with courtesy.

古文：其他推尊之说，称亲之议，似为非礼。
现代文：其他尊崇为皇帝的说法，直称父母的主张，似乎不合礼制。
English: Other expressions of reverence for the emperor, such as that of the parents, do not seem to conform to proper etiquette.

古文：推尊之非，莫详于魏明帝之诏。
现代文：尊崇为皇帝的错误，没有比魏明帝的诏书更错误的了。
English: There is no error more erroneous than the imperial edict issued by Emperor Wei Ming.

古文：称亲之非，莫详于宋程颐之议。
现代文：直称父母的错误，没有比宋朝程颐的议论更详细的了。
English: There is no more detailed discussion of the mistakes of the parents than that of the Song Dynasty.

古文：至当之礼，要不出于此。 
现代文：最恰当的典礼，大都要不超出这个样子了。 
English: The most appropriate ceremony, for the most part, does not go beyond this.

古文：并录上魏明帝诏书。
现代文：并把魏明帝的诏书也抄一份交了上去。
English: He also handed over a copy of Emperor Wei Mingdi's imperial edict.

古文：当是时，帝锐意欲推崇所生，而进士张璁复抗疏极言礼官之谬。
现代文：当时，世宗决心坚定地想要推崇自己的父母，而进士张璁又抗言上书极力陈说礼官的荒谬。
English: At that time, Shizong was determined to firmly want to promote his parents, and Zhang Ye, a young scholar, wrote a letter to protest the absurdity of the etiquette officer.

古文：帝心动，持澄等疏久不下。
现代文：世宗动了心，就把毛澄等人的上书压在手头，久不下发。
English: Sejong was so moved that he pressed the petition written by Mao Cheng and others into his hand and did not take it off for a long time.

古文：至八月庚辰朔，再命集议。
现代文：到了八月初一，又命令大臣们集中讨论。
English: On the first day of August, he ordered the ministers to concentrate on discussions.

古文：澄等乃复上议曰： 先王制礼，本乎人情。
现代文：毛澄等又上书议论说 ：古代先王制礼是根据人情而来的。
English: Mao Cheng and others also wrote to argue that the ancient pre-imperial system of etiquette was based on human feelings.

古文：武宗既无子嗣，又鲜兄弟，援立陛下于宪庙诸孙之中。
现代文：武宗既没有儿子，又没有兄弟，所以在宪庙的孙子们当中选择了陛下您。
English: Emperor Wuzong had neither a son nor a brother, so he chose Your Majesty from among the grandsons of the founder.

古文：是武宗以陛下为同堂之弟，考孝宗，母慈寿，无可疑矣，可复顾私亲哉？ 
现代文：这是武宗把您看作同堂兄弟，您应该以孝宗为父亲，以慈寿为母亲，没有什么可疑的。
English: There is nothing suspicious about the fact that Buson regards you as his cousin. You should have Takamune as your father and Toshihisa as your mother.

古文：疏入，帝不怿，复留中。
现代文：您怎么能又考虑自家的双亲呢？ 奏疏递进去，世宗不高兴，又留在宫中了。
English: How could you even think about your own parents? When the report was handed in, Shizong was not happy and stayed in the palace again.

古文：会给事中邢寰请议宪庙皇妃邵氏徽号，澄上言： 王妃诞生献王，实陛下所自出。
现代文：恰好给事中邢寰请讨论宪庙皇妃邵氏的称号，毛澄上书说： 王妃生下献王，实际上也是陛下在谱系中的来历。
English: Just in the middle of the matter, Mao Cheng wrote to discuss the title of Qianmiao's Empress Shao, saying: The empress gave birth to a king, which is actually the origin of His Majesty in the genealogy.

古文：但既承大统，则宜考孝宗，而母慈寿太后矣。
现代文：但是既然继承了宪宗传下来的王位，就应该以孝宗为父，以慈寿太后为母亲。
English: However, since he has inherited the throne passed down by Emperor Gensong, he should take Emperor Xiaozong as his father and Empress Dowager Cixu as his mother.

古文：孝宗于宪庙皇妃宜称皇太妃，则在陛下宜称太皇太妃。
现代文：孝宗对宪庙的皇妃应称皇太妃，那么对陛下说来您应该尊称她为太皇太妃。
English: If Emperor Xiaozong thinks that the empress of the Constitutional Temple should be called Empress Dowager, then you should respectfully call her Empress Dowager for His Majesty.

古文：如此，则彝伦既正，恩义亦笃。 
现代文：这样，家族中的伦序既已排正，您对父母的私情、大义又都够深厚了。 
English: In this way, the moral order in the family has already been put in order, and your personal feelings for your parents and your great righteousness are deep enough.

古文：疏入，报闻。
现代文：奏疏呈上，世宗这次回答说： 知道了。 
English: The report has been submitted, and the reply has been received.

古文：其月，帝以母妃将至，下礼官议其仪。
现代文：本月时世宗因为母妃将到，下令礼官讨论欢迎仪式。
English: This month, Sejong ordered the etiquette officials to discuss the welcome ceremony because his mother-in-law would be arriving.

古文：澄等请由崇文门入东安门，帝不可。
现代文：毛澄等请让王妃由崇文门进城再进东安门，世宗不同意。
English: Mao Cheng and others requested that Wangfei enter the city through the Chongwen Gate and then enter the Dongan Gate, but Shizong disagreed.

古文：乃议由正阳左门入大明东门，帝又不可。
现代文：他又提出由正阳左门进来再入大明东门，世宗又不同意。
English: He also proposed to enter from Zhengyang's left gate and then enter Daming's east gate, but Shizong disagreed.

古文：澄等执议如初。帝乃自定其仪，悉由中门入。
现代文：毛澄等坚持当初的意见不变，世宗竟自行确定了欢迎仪式，都从中门进来。
English: Mao Cheng and others insisted that their original opinions remain unchanged, but Shizong decided on his own to hold a welcoming ceremony, and they all entered through the middle gate.

古文：时尊崇礼犹未定，张璁复进《大礼或问》，帝益向之。
现代文：那时尊崇献王的礼数还没有确定，张璁又进呈《大礼或问》，世宗更加有意引用他。
English: At that time, the number of royal eulogies had not yet been determined, and Zhang Ye also submitted "The Great Eulogy or Question," which was even more intentionally quoted by Shizong.

古文：至九月末，乃下澄等前疏，更令博采舆论以闻。
现代文：到九月底，把毛澄等以前的奏疏发下来，又命令礼官广泛采纳意见，然后拿个提案上来。
English: By the end of September, he sent down all the previous reports, such as Mao Cheng's, and ordered the etiquette officer to widely adopt the opinions, and then come up with a proposal.

古文：澄等知势不可已，谋于内阁，加称兴王为 帝 ，妃为 后 ，而以皇太后懿旨行之。
现代文：毛澄等人料想势不得已，就和内阁大臣商议，加称兴王为帝，妃为后，用皇太后懿旨予以公布。
English: As a last resort, Mao Cheng and others discussed with the cabinet minister and added the title of Emperor and Empress, and announced it with the Empress Dowager's imperial decree.

古文：乃疏言： 臣等一得之愚，已尽于前议。
现代文：然后毛澄才上书说： 我们那一点愚蠢的见地，在以前的奏议中都已经说过。
English: Then Mao Chengcai wrote to say: Our stupid point of view has already been stated in previous petitions.

古文：兹欲仰慰圣心，使宜于今而不戾乎情，合乎古而无悖乎义，则有密勿股肱在。
现代文：现在使陛下您的心得到安慰，使大礼适用于现在而不违背情理，合于古礼又不失道理，那么有内阁的机要大臣在，请听取他们的意见。 
English: Now, sire, that your heart may be comforted, and that the great ceremony may be applied to the present, without offending reason, and that the ancient ceremony may not offend reason, if there are able ministers in the cabinet, please listen to their opinions.

古文：臣等有司，未敢擅任。 帝遂于十月二日庚辰，以慈寿皇太后旨加兴献王号曰 兴献帝 ，妃曰 兴国太后 ，皇妃邵氏亦尊为 皇太后 ，宣示中外。顾帝虽勉从廷议，意犹慊之。
现代文：世宗于是在十月二日以慈寿皇太后的旨意加兴献王封号为兴献帝，王妃为兴国太后，皇妃邵氏也尊为太皇太后，布告天下。但是世宗虽然勉强听从了大臣们的决议，内心仍然恼恨。
English: On October 2nd, Sejong announced to the world that, by the order of Empress Dowager Cixiu, the title of Xing Xing Wang Ho was changed to Xing Xing Emperor, the empress dowager to Xing Guo Empress Dowager, and the empress dowager to Shou Shi Empress Dowager. However, although Sejong reluctantly obeyed the decision of the ministers, he was still angry.

古文：十二月十一日己丑，复传谕加称皇帝。
现代文：十二月十一日又传下指示要加兴献王尊号为皇帝。
English: On December 11th, an order was issued to add the title of Emperor.

古文：内阁杨廷和等封还御批，澄抗疏力争，又偕九卿乔宇等合谏，帝皆不允。
现代文：内阁杨廷和等封还了皇上的亲笔批示，毛澄抗言上书反对，又和九卿乔宇等合力谏阻，世宗都不允准。
English: Yang Tinghe and other members of the cabinet returned the emperor's personal instructions, Mao Cheng protested and sent a letter of objection, and also joined forces with Jiuxing Qiao Yu and others to resist, but Shizong did not allow it.

古文：明年，嘉靖改元正月，清宁宫后三小宫灾。
现代文：第二年，嘉靖改元后正月里，清宁宫后边三个小宫遇灾。
English: The following year, in the first month after the reformation of the Yuan Dynasty in Jiajing, three small palaces behind the Qingning Palace were hit by a disaster.

古文：澄复以为言，会朝臣亦多谏者，事获止。
现代文：毛澄因此又说了一回，正好其他大臣中也有很多劝阻的，事情才暂时停下来。
English: As a result, Mao Cheng once again said that there were many dissuaders among the other ministers, and the matter was temporarily stopped.

古文：澄端亮有学行，论事侃侃不挠。
现代文：毛澄为人端正，诚信，很有学问、品行，议论事情侃侃而谈，不屈不挠。
English: Mao Cheng is an upright person, honest, very learned, moral, talks about things, and is unyielding.

古文：帝欲推尊所生，尝遣中官谕意，至长跪稽首。
现代文：世宗想推尊自己的亲生父亲，曾派遣宦官告诉他自己的意思，直至跪下来给他磕头。
English: Sejong wanted to honor his own father, so he sent a eunuch to tell him what he wanted, until he knelt down and gave him a steamed bun.

古文：澄骇愕，急扶之起。
现代文：毛澄大吃一惊，急忙扶他起来。
English: Mao Cheng was taken aback and hurried to help him up.

古文：其人曰： 上意也。
现代文：这个宦官说： 这是皇上的意思。
English: The eunuch said, "This is what the emperor meant."

古文：上言 人孰无父母，奈何使我不获伸 ，必祈公易议。 
现代文：皇上说 哪个人没有父母，干么让我不得意 ，请先生您一定改个主张。 
English: The emperor said, "If a person doesn't have parents, why am I not impressed? Please, sir, you must change your mind."

古文：因出囊金畀澄。
现代文：接着拿出一袋金子送他。
English: Then he took out a bag of gold and gave it to him.

古文：澄奋然曰： 老臣悖耄，不能隳典礼。独有一去，不与议已耳。 
现代文：毛澄感慨地说： 我老迈昏庸，但是不能把典礼给坏了，现在只有一走了之，不参加讨论就是了。 
English: Mao Cheng said with emotion: I'm old and feeble, but I can't ruin the ceremony. Now I just have to leave and not participate in the discussion.

古文：抗疏引疾至五六上，帝辄慰留不允。
现代文：他接着抗言上书五六次，称病告退，世宗一再安慰、挽留，不允许他退休。
English: He then wrote five or six times to protest, saying that he was ill and retiring, and Shizong repeatedly consoled and retained him and did not allow him to retire.

古文：二年二月疾甚，复力请，乃许之。
现代文：二年二月，病得厉害起来，又坚决要求，世宗才同意了。
English: In February of the following year, Sejong became violently ill and insisted, but Sejong agreed.

古文：舟至兴济而卒。
现代文：船走到兴济，他就病逝了。
English: When the ship reached Xingji, he fell ill and died.

古文：先是，论定策功，加澄太子太傅，荫锦衣世指挥同知，力辞不受。
现代文：在此之前，评定他拥立皇上的功劳，加升毛澄的官为太子太傅，荫封子孙为世袭锦衣指挥同知，他竭力推辞没有接受。
English: Prior to this, he had strenuously refused to accept the appraisal of his services in supporting the emperor, the promotion of Mao Cheng to the post of crown prince, and the appointment of the sons and grandsons of Yingfu as hereditary commanders of the imperial court.

古文：帝雅敬惮澄，虽数忤旨，而恩礼不衰。
现代文：世宗向来敬畏毛澄，虽然几次违忤他，但对毛澄的恩典、礼貌并没减少。
English: Shizong had always been in awe of Mao Cheng, and although he had disobeyed him several times, his grace and courtesy to Mao Cheng had not diminished.

古文：既得疾，遣医诊视，药物之赐时至。
现代文：毛澄得病后，世宗派太医给他诊看，赏赐他的药物不停地送来。
English: After Mao Cheng fell ill, Shijiazhuang Sect's Grand Physician gave him a medical examination, and rewarded him with a steady supply of medicine.

古文：其卒也，深悼惜之。
现代文：对他的死，也深表哀悼、惋惜。
English: We also express our deep condolences and regret for his death.

古文：赠少傅，谥文简。
现代文：追赠他为少傅，谥文简。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shōfu (lesser teacher) and the title of Shōwenjian.

古文：汪俊，字抑之，弋阳人。
现代文：汪俊，字抑之，江西弋阳人。
English: Wang Jun, also known as Jizhi, was from Shenyang, Jiangxi Province.

古文：父凤，进士，贵州参政。
现代文：父亲王凤进士出身，曾做过贵州参政。
English: His father, Wang Fengjin, was once a politician in Guizhou.

古文：俊举弘治六年会试第一，授庶吉士，进编修。
现代文：汪俊自己考中弘治六年会试第一名，初任庶吉士，升编修。
English: Wang Jun himself won the first place in the six-year examination of the Hongzhi Middle School Examination, and was appointed as the first-year associate professor, promoted to editor.

古文：正德中，与修《孝宗实录》，以不附刘瑾、焦芳，调南京工部员外郎。
现代文：正德年间，参加编写《孝宗实录》，因为不附合刘瑾、焦芳，被调到南京当工部员外郎。
English: During the Zhengde era, he participated in the compilation of "The True Record of the Filial Piety," but was transferred to Nanjing to work as a member of the engineering department because he did not agree with Liu Xuan and Jiao Fang.

古文：瑾、芳败，召复原官。
现代文：刘瑾、焦芳垮台后，他被召回北京，官复原职。
English: After the downfall of Liu Wei and Jiao Fang, he was recalled to Beijing and reinstated.

古文：累迁侍读学士，擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：几经升迁，做到了侍读学士，又升为礼部右侍郎。
English: After several promotions, he achieved a bachelor's degree in waitressing, and was promoted to the right hand man of the ceremonial department.

古文：嘉靖元年转吏部左侍郎。
现代文：嘉靖元年，他改当吏部左侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing era, he was transferred to the position of the Left Attendant of the Cadre Department.

古文：时议兴献王尊号，与尚书乔宇、毛澄辈力争。
现代文：当时正讨论兴献王的尊号，汪俊与尚书乔宇、毛澄等人极力谏争。
English: At that time, the honorific title of Xingxian Wang was being discussed, and Wang Jun competed vigorously with Shang Shujiao Yu, Mao Cheng and others.

古文：澄引疾去，代者罗钦顺不至，乃以俊为礼部尚书。
现代文：毛澄称病告退了，接任的罗钦顺没有来，于是世宗就让汪俊当了礼部尚书。
English: Mao Cheng said that he was ill and retired, and Luo Qinshun, who took over, did not come, so Shizong let Wang Jun be the head of the etiquette department.

古文：是时献王已加帝号矣，主事桂萼复请称皇考。
现代文：这时献王已经加过帝号了。主事桂萼又请求称献帝为皇考。
English: At this time, Emperor Xianwang had already been given the imperial title. The principal, Cui Cai, also requested that Emperor Xianwang be called the imperial examination.

古文：章下廷议。
现代文：他的奏疏被交给朝臣们商议。
English: His dossier was passed to courtiers for discussion.

古文：三年二月，俊集廷臣七十有三人上议曰： 祖训 兄终弟及 ，指同产言。
现代文：三年二月，汪俊召集七十三名大臣联名递上奏议说： 祖训 兄终弟及 ，是针对亲生兄弟来说的。
English: In February of the third year, Wang Jun called together seventy-three ministers to jointly submit a report, saying: "The ancestor training, "Brother is the last one to die," is for biological brothers.

古文：今陛下为武宗亲弟，自宜考孝宗明矣。
现代文：现在陛下以武宗亲弟弟的名份做了皇帝，自然就该以孝宗为父考了。
English: Now that His Majesty has become emperor in the name of the younger brother of Emperor Wuzong, it is only natural that he should take Emperor Xiaozong as his father.

古文：孰谓与人为后，而灭武宗之统也。
现代文：谁说陛下给孝宗当儿子就灭了武宗的谱系？
English: Who said that when His Majesty gave Takamune a son, he was wiping out the genealogy of Takemune?

古文：《仪礼》传曰： 为人后者，孰后？
现代文：《仪礼》的传说 ：继承别人的王位到底继承什么呢？
English: The legend of "The Rite": What does inheriting someone else's throne really mean?

古文：后大宗也。 
现代文：继承他的大宗的地位。 
English: He inherited his father's position as head of the family.

古文：汉宣起民间，犹嗣孝昭。
现代文：汉宣帝起自民间，还是当了孝昭的后裔。
English: Emperor Han Xuan started from the common people and became a descendant of Xiao Zhao.

古文：光武中兴，犹考孝元。
现代文：光武帝中兴汉朝后，还是把孝元称作皇考。
English: After Emperor Guangwu's rise to power in the Han Dynasty, Xiaoyuan was still referred to as the imperial examination.

古文：魏明帝诏皇后无子，择建支子，以继大宗。
现代文：魏明帝的诏书说皇后没有儿子，选择庶子立为太子，以便继承大宗的地位。
English: Emperor Wei Ming's edict said that the empress had no son, so she chose an illegitimate son to be crown prince in order to inherit the position of the head of the family.

古文：孰谓入继之主与为人后者异也。
现代文：谁说入继王位与过继做儿子不同呢？
English: Who says that succession to the throne is different from adoption as a son?

古文：宋范纯仁谓英宗亲受诏为子，与入继不同，盖言恩义尤笃，尤当不顾私亲，非以生前为子者乃为人后，身后入继者不为人后也。
现代文：宋朝范纯仁说英宗亲自接到仁宗的诏书收他做儿子，英宗跟入继王位的皇帝不一样，他的意思是讲仁宗对英宗的恩义格外深厚，英宗更应该不顾自家的亲情，不是说先皇帝生前收做儿子的才是他的儿子，身后入继他的王位的就不再是他的儿子了。
English: Fan Chunren of the Song Dynasty said that Yingzong personally received the edict from Emperor Renzong to adopt him as his son. Yingzong is not the same as the emperor who succeeds to the throne. He meant to say that Emperor Renzong's gratitude to Yingzong is extraordinarily profound. Moreover, Yingzong should disregard his own family's affection, not to say that the first emperor who adopted his son before his death is his son, and the one who succeeds to the throne after him is no longer his son.

古文：萼言 孝宗既有武宗为之子，安得复为立后。 
现代文：桂萼说 ：孝宗已经有武宗这个儿子了，怎么能再给他立个假子？ 
English: Katsura said: Takamune already has a son, Takemune, so how can you give him a dummy?

古文：臣等谓陛下自后武宗而上考孝宗，非为孝宗立后也。
现代文：我们认为陛下在武宗统绪之后自然就该尊孝宗为皇考，并不是在孝宗身后给他立什么假子。
English: We believe that His Majesty should have naturally revered Takamune as Emperor after the accession of Emperor Takemune, and not set up some kind of dummy behind Takamune.

古文：又言 武宗全神器授陛下，何忍不继其统。 
现代文：桂萼又说 ：武宗把整个天下传给陛下，怎么忍心不继承他的谱系呢？ 
English: Gui Caly also said, "Wu Zong passed down the whole world to His Majesty, how can you bear not to inherit his lineage?"

古文：臣等谓陛下既称武宗皇兄矣，岂必改孝宗称伯，乃为继其统乎？
现代文：我们认为陛下既经称武宗为皇兄，难道非把孝宗改称为伯才算是继承武宗的谱系吗？
English: We think that since His Majesty has called Emperor Wuzong the elder brother, shouldn't it be possible to call Emperor Xiaozong the elder brother to inherit Emperor Wuzong's lineage?

古文：又言 礼官执者不过前宋《濮议》 。
现代文：桂萼又说 礼官所认定的不过是北宋《濮议》中的道理 。
English: Gui Caly also said that what the etiquette official recognized was nothing more than the truth in the Northern Song Dynasty's "Discussion."

古文：臣等愚昧，所执实不出此。
现代文：我们这些人愚昧无知，所认定的道理着实不出乎《濮议》之外。
English: We are stupid and ignorant, and the truth we believe in is nothing more than what is written in the "Analects."

古文：盖宋程颐之议曰： 虽当专意于正统，岂得尽绝于私恩。
现代文：北宋程颐的奏议说 ：虽说应专心于王位正统一边，也不能完全不顾及父子亲情。
English: Northern Song Dynasty Cheng Xuan's petition said: Although we should concentrate on the unification of the throne, we cannot completely disregard the father-son relationship.

古文：故所继，主于大义；所生，存乎至情。
现代文：所以对于先皇帝的尊称，主要体现正统大义；对于亲生父的尊称，是为了成全父子间的骨肉之情。
English: Therefore, for the former emperor's honorific, it mainly reflects the orthodoxy; for the biological father's honorific, it is to fulfill the flesh-and-blood relationship between father and son.

古文：至于名称，统绪所系，若其无别，斯乱大伦。 
现代文：至于尊称的名号，关系着帝位的统绪和谱系，如果两者没有区别，就混淆了帝王家族的伦理。 
English: As for the honorific name, it is related to the imperial succession and lineage, and if there is no difference between the two, it will confuse the ethics of the imperial family.

古文：殆为今日发也。
现代文：这话差不多就是针对我们今天这事而说的了。
English: That's pretty much what he said about us today.

古文：谨集诸章奏，惟进士张璁、主事霍韬、给事中熊浃与萼议同，其他八十余疏二百五十余人，皆如臣等议。 
现代文：我认真地搜集了大家的奏议，只有进士张璁、主事霍韬、给事中熊浃与桂萼的意见相同，其他八十多篇奏疏，二百五十多人，都和我们的意见相一致。 
English: I have conscientiously collected everyone's suggestions. Only Zhang Jun, the principal, and Xiong Yao, the assistant, have the same opinions as Gui Caly, and the other more than 80 submissions, more than 250 people, are in line with our opinions.

古文：议上，留中。而特旨召桂萼、张璁、席书于南京。
现代文：他的奏议递上后，世宗压在宫中，而特别传旨从南京召桂萼、张璁、席书赴京。
English: After his petition was submitted, Shizong was in the palace, and a special order was sent from Nanjing to summon Katsura Calyx, Zhang Xuan, and Shishu to Beijing.

古文：越旬有五日，乃下谕曰： 朕奉承宗庙正统，大义岂敢有违。
现代文：过了十五天，才下达指示说： 朕入继大统，供奉宗庙祭祀，怎敢违背正统大义。
English: Fifteen days later, he issued a directive saying, "I have succeeded to the supreme leadership, and I offer sacrifices at the ancestral temple. How dare I violate the great principles of orthodoxy?"

古文：第本生至情，亦当兼尽。
现代文：但是对亲生父母的骨肉之情，也应当同时体现出来。
English: However, the feelings of the flesh and blood of the biological parents should also be reflected.

古文：其再集议以闻。 
现代文：希望你们再集中讨论一次，然后汇报上来。 
English: I hope you will have another concentrated discussion and then report back.

古文：俊不得已，乃集群臣请加 皇 字，以全徽称。
现代文：汪俊迫不得已，于是召集群臣商议，请给献帝加一个 皇 字，成全他的徽号。
English: Wang Jun was forced to do so, so he gathered a group of courtiers to discuss, and asked them to add an "Emperor" to Emperor Xian to complete his emblem.

古文：议上，复留十余日。
现代文：奏议递上后，又被压了十多天。
English: After the motion was submitted, it was suppressed for more than ten days.

古文：至三月朔，乃诏礼官，加称兴献帝为本 生皇考恭穆献皇帝 ，兴国太后为 本生母章圣皇太后 。择日祭告郊庙，颁诏天下。而别谕建室奉先殿侧，恭祀献皇。
现代文：到三月初一，世宗才给礼官发布诏令，加称兴献帝为本生皇考恭穆献皇帝，兴国太后为本生母章圣皇太后，让选择日期到郊庙祭告，并颁布诏书，通告天下，又另外指示在奉先殿一侧修建世室，以便恭敬地祭祀献皇。
English: It was not until the first day of March that Shizong issued an imperial decree to the etiquette officials, adding that Emperor Xingxian was the emperor to be presented and Empress Dowager Xingguo was the empress dowager to be presented, and that the date of the selection should be announced to the suburban temples, and issued an imperial decree to inform the world, and also instructed to build a seclusion room on the side of the front hall to respectfully offer sacrifices to the emperor.

古文：俊等复争曰： 陛下入奉大宗，不得祭小宗，亦犹小宗之不得祭大宗也。
现代文：汪俊等人又争论说： 陛下入宫继承了大宗，就不该祭祀小宗，也正如小宗不能祭祀大宗一样。
English: Wang Jun and others also argued that: His Majesty entered the palace and inherited a large trunk, so he should not sacrifice a small trunk, just as a small trunk cannot sacrifice a large trunk.

古文：昔兴献帝奉藩安陆，则不得祭宪宗。
现代文：过去兴献帝在安陆做藩王，就不能祭祀宪宗。
English: In the past, when Emperor Xingxian was the king of Anlu, it was not possible to worship the Jianzong.

古文：今陛下入继大统，亦不得祭兴献帝。
现代文：现在陛下入继大宗的谱系，也不能祭祀兴献帝了。
English: Now that His Majesty has succeeded to the great lineage, it is no longer possible to offer sacrifices to the emperor.

古文：是皆以礼抑情者也。
现代文：这都是应依据礼制约束情感的事。
English: This is all a matter of restraining emotions according to etiquette.

古文：然兴献帝不得迎养寿安皇太后于藩邸，陛下得迎兴国太后于大内，受天下之养，而尊祀兴献帝以天子之礼乐，则人子之情获自尽矣。
现代文：不过兴献帝不能把寿安皇太后迎到藩王府供养，陛下能把兴国太后接来宫中，受到整个天下的赡养，又用天子的礼乐来祭祀兴献帝，这样作为人子的孝心已经尽到了。
English: However, Emperor Heungseong was not able to welcome Empress Dowager Shouan to the palace to provide for her. His Majesty was able to bring Empress Dowager Heungguo to the palace to be supported by the whole world, and to use the music of the heavenly sons to worship Emperor Heungseong. In this way, as a son of man, his filial piety has been fulfilled.

古文：乃今圣心无穷，臣等敢不将顺，但于正统无嫌，乃为合礼。 
现代文：现在陛下的心竟然还不满足，我们不敢听从了。只有对正统大义无所嫌碍的事才能算是合乎礼制的。 
English: Now that His Majesty's heart is unsatisfied, we dare not obey. Only that which is not repugnant to orthodoxy can be considered proper.

古文：帝曰： 朕但欲奉先殿侧别建一室，以伸追慕之情耳。
现代文：世宗说 ：朕只是想在奉先殿一侧另外修建一间房子，用来表达我追念父皇的心情罢了。
English: Sejong said, "I just want to build another house on the side of the main hall to express my feelings of remembering my father."

古文：迎养藩邸，祖宗朝无此例，何容饰以为词。
现代文：迎接太后到藩王府赡养，祖宗哪一朝都没这个例子，怎么允许在言辞之间乱讲呢？
English: Welcoming the empress dowager to the royal palace of the clan for support, which ancestor did not have this example, how can it be allowed to speak incoherently between words?

古文：其令陈状。 
现代文：命令汪俊对此加以说明！ 
English: Order Wang Jun to explain this!

古文：俊具疏引罪。用严旨切责，而趣立庙益急。
现代文：汪俊写了奏疏引罪自责，然后世宗对他作了严厉批评。
English: Wang Jun wrote a self-condemnation, and then Shizong severely criticized him.

古文：俊等乃上议曰： 立庙大内，有干正统。
现代文：接着更加急切地催促修庙。汪俊等于是递上奏议说 ：在宫廷里为献皇帝立庙，有点冒犯正统。
English: Wang Jun then pressed for the temple to be repaired even more urgently. He was about to submit a report saying that it was a little offensive to the orthodox to build a temple for the emperor in the court.

古文：臣实愚昧，不敢奉诏。 
现代文：我实在愚昧无知，但还是不敢奉命。 
English: I'm really stupid and ignorant, but I still don't dare to follow orders.

古文：帝不纳，而令集廷臣大议。
现代文：世宗不肯听从，命令他召集朝中大臣们认真讨论。
English: Sejong refused to listen and ordered him to convene the ministers of North Korea and China for a serious discussion.

古文：俊等复上议曰： 谨按先朝奉慈别殿，盖孝宗皇帝为孝穆皇太后附葬初毕，神主无荐享之所而设也。
现代文：汪俊等又递上奏议说： 谨按先朝的奉慈别殿，是当时孝宗皇帝在孝穆皇太后刚刚附葬以后，因为神主没有荐享的地方才修建的。
English: Wang Jun and others also submitted a report, saying: According to the Feng Ci Farewell Hall of the previous dynasty, it was built by Emperor Xiaozong at that time just after the burial of Empress Dowager Xiao Mu, because there was no place recommended by God.

古文：当时议者，皆据周制特祀姜嫄而言。
现代文：当时提出这种主张的人都是根据周代礼制中姜女原的特别祭祀来立论的。
English: At that time, the people who put forward such a claim were all based on the special sacrifice of Jiang Ye Yuan in the Zhou Dynasty ritual system.

古文：至为本生立庙大内，则从古未闻。
现代文：至于为亲生父在宫廷中立庙，却是自古以来不曾有过的。
English: As for being the biological father in the palace neutral temple, it is unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：惟汉哀帝为定陶恭王立庙京师。
现代文：只有汉哀帝在京师为定陶恭王立了庙。
English: Only Emperor Han Ai built a temple for King Ding Tao and King Gong in Beijing.

古文：师丹以为不可，哀帝不听，卒遗后世之讥。
现代文：师丹认为不行，哀帝不听，最终受到后人的批评。
English: Shidan did not think it was possible, and Emperor Ai did not listen, and was eventually criticized by posterity.

古文：陛下有可以为尧、舜之资，臣等不敢导以衰世之事。
现代文：陛下有成为尧、舜的资质，我们做大臣的不敢用衰世的例子来引导您。
English: Your Majesty has the qualifications to become a king and queen. As ministers, we do not dare to lead you by the example of decline.

古文：请于安陆特建献帝百世不迁之庙，俟他日袭封兴王子孙世世献飨，陛下岁时遣官持节奉祀，亦足伸陛下无穷至情矣。 
现代文：请在安陆为献帝修造永不迁移的祠庙，等以后袭封为兴王的子孙世代供奉祭祀，陛下逢年过节派遣官员拿着符节前往祭奠，也就可以表达陛下无穷无尽的孝心了。 
English: Please build a never-moving ancestral temple for the emperor in Anlu, so that the descendants of King Heung can offer sacrifices for generations to come. Your Majesty can also express His Majesty's inexhaustible filial piety by sending officials to the festival with the festival every year.

古文：帝仍命遵前旨再议，俊遂抗疏乞休。
现代文：世宗还是命令遵照以前的诏书再行讨论，汪俊于是抗言上书请求退休。
English: King Sejong still ordered that the discussion be continued in accordance with the previous edict, and Wang Jun protested by writing a letter requesting retirement.

古文：再请益力，帝怒，责以肆慢，允其去。
现代文：第二次请求时态度更加坚定了，世宗恼了，批评他放肆、无礼，批准他退休还乡。
English: At the second request, the attitude was firmer. Shizong was annoyed, criticized him for being impudent and rude, and approved him to retire and return to his hometown.

古文：召席书未至，令吴一鹏署事。
现代文：召席书来接替他，席书没到，就让吴一鹏代理。
English: The invitation to the banquet was issued to replace him. When the invitation did not arrive, Wu Yipeng was asked to act as his deputy.

古文：《明伦大典》成，落俊职，卒于家。
现代文：后来《明伦大典》成书，就剥夺了汪俊的官职，他最后也就死在家里了。
English: Later, when the "Minglun Grand Text" was published, Wang Jun was deprived of his official position, and he eventually died at home.

古文：隆庆初，赠少保，谥文庄。
现代文：隆庆初年，朝廷追赠他为少保，谥文庄。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Shobo (Junior Protector).

古文：及席书、张璁等议行，犹持前说不变。
现代文：汪俊为人清白，在朝中做官光明磊落，正直刚强。
English: Wang Jun is an innocent person. He is a bright and honest official in the DPRK. He is honest and strong.

古文：转官左侍郎，为陈氵光劾罢，卒于家。
现代文：学术上宗法程、朱，和王守仁虽有好交情，但学问方面见解不同。
English: Academically, Shuzong Hodeng, Zhu, and Wang Shouren have a good friendship, but their views are different in terms of culture.

古文：吴一鹏，字南夫，长洲人。
现代文：学者称他为石潭先生。吴一鹏，字南夫，长洲人。
English: Scholars call him Mr. Shitan, Wu Yipeng, Nanfu, and Changzhou people.

古文：弘治六年进士。迁庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：弘治六年考中进士，选为庶吉士，授职编修。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher in the sixth year of the Koji Junior High School Examination, and was selected as a junior high school teacher.

古文：户部尚书周经以谗去，上疏乞留之。
现代文：户部尚书周经因谗言外调时，他上书皇帝请予留用。
English: When the head of the household, Shangshu Zhoujing, was transferred due to insults, he sent a letter to the emperor asking to be retained.

古文：正德初，进侍讲，充经筵讲官。
现代文：正德初年，晋职为侍讲，充任经筵讲官。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he was promoted to the post of assistant lecturer and served as a lecturer of economics.

古文：刘瑾出诸翰林为部曹，一鹏得南京刑部员外郎。迁礼部郎中。
现代文：刘瑾把翰林都外放为部曹时，一鹏被任命为南京刑部员外郎，又转任礼部郎中。
English: When Liu Bei transferred Han Lintao to be the department chief, Yipeng was appointed as the second-in-command of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department and the second-in-command of the Rectification Department.

古文：瑾诛，复为侍讲。进侍讲学士，历国子祭酒、太常卿。
现代文：刘瑾被杀后，重又做侍讲，又升为侍讲学士，历官国子祭酒、太常卿。
English: After Liu Bei was killed, he was re-appointed as an attendant lecturer, and was promoted to attendant lecturer bachelor. He was also appointed as the governor of the state, the son of the state, the sacrificial wine, and the great chancellor.

古文：并在南京。
现代文：任以上职位时都是在南京。
English: All of the above positions were held in Nanjing.

古文：母丧除，起故官。
现代文：回家为母亲守丧完毕，又被任命为原来的官职。
English: After returning home to attend his mother's funeral, he was reappointed to his previous post.

古文：世宗践阼，召拜礼部右侍郎。寻转左。
现代文：世宗即位后，召入朝廷做礼部右侍郎，不久转为左侍郎。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was called to the Imperial Court to serve as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and soon became the Left Attendant.

古文：数与尚书毛澄、汪俊力争 大礼 。
现代文：他曾经几番和尚书毛澄、汪俊一起争论 大礼 。
English: He had several times argued with the monks Shuchucheng and Wang Jun about the Great Rite.

古文：俊去国，一鹏署部事，而帝趣建献帝庙甚亟。
现代文：汪俊调出后，一鹏总领礼部的事务，世宗催促修建献帝庙，催得很紧。
English: After Wang Jun was transferred, Yipeng, the head of the ceremonial affairs department, urged Shizong to build a temple dedicated to the emperor.

古文：一鹏集廷臣上议曰： 前世入继之君，间有为本生立庙园陵及京师者。
现代文：一鹏召集朝廷里的大臣们上书议论说 ：前代入继为皇帝的，中间有为亲生父亲在京城立庙，修造园陵的。
English: Ipeng called together the ministers in the imperial court to write a letter and discuss: Among those who succeeded to the throne in the previous generation, there was one who built a temple and a garden for his own father in Beijing.

古文：第岁时遣官致祀，寻亦奏罢。
现代文：只是逢年过节派遣官员前去祭祀一番，不久也就停罢了。
English: However, every year, officials are dispatched to the temple for the festival, but they soon stop coming.

古文：然犹见非当时，取议后代。
现代文：但是已经为当时人们非议，且为后代讥讽。
English: But it was criticized at the time and ridiculed by later generations.

古文：若立庙大内而亲享之，从古以来未有也。
现代文：像修庙于皇宫并亲自祭祀的，自古以来，还没有过。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been anyone like him who built a temple in the imperial palace and offered sacrifices in person.

古文：臣等宁得罪陛下，不欲陛下失礼于天下后世。
现代文：我们宁愿得罪陛下，也不愿陛下违误礼制，为天下人和后世所议论。
English: We would rather offend His Majesty than have His Majesty violate the etiquette and be discussed by the world and future generations.

古文：今张璁、桂萼之言曰 继统公，立后私 。
现代文：现在张璁、桂萼的话说什么 继承王统是公事，无后立子是私事 。
English: Now Zhang Ye and Gui Cale are saying that succession to the throne is a public matter, and the absence of a successor is a private matter.

古文：又曰 统为重，嗣为轻 。
现代文：又说什么 王统之事重，后代之事轻 。
English: He also said that the matter of royal succession is important, but that of future generations is less important.

古文：窃惟正统所传之谓宗，故立宗所以继统，立嗣所以承宗，统之与宗初无轻重。
现代文：我们认为王位所传的对象称为宗，所以立宗用来继承王位，立子用来承宗，统和宗本来无轻重之分。
English: We believe that the object of succession to the throne is called the dynasty, so the dynasty is used to inherit the throne, the son is used to inherit the dynasty, and the dynasty and the dynasty are originally unimportant.

古文：况当我朝传子之世，而欲仿尧、舜传贤之例，拟非其伦。
现代文：况且时值我朝传位于子的现代，却想仿效尧、舜传位贤人的事例，想来不是这么回事。
English: Moreover, at the time, I was in the modern age of the son of the dynasty, but I wanted to emulate the example of the wise men of the  and, which is not the case.

古文：又谓 孝不在皇不皇，惟在考不考 ，遂欲改称孝宗为 皇伯考 。
现代文：又说 孝不在是否称为皇，只在是否称为考 ，因而想把孝宗皇帝改称为皇伯考。
English: He also said that he did not care whether he was called Emperor or not, but only whether he was called Emperor, so he wanted to change the name of Emperor Xiaozong to Emperor Bercow.

古文：臣等历稽前古，未有神主称 皇伯考 者。
现代文：我们检索古代史，没见过把已逝皇帝称为皇伯考的。
English: We have searched ancient history and have not seen anyone refer to the deceased emperor as Emperor Bercow.

古文：惟天子称诸王曰 伯叔父 则有之，非可加于宗庙也。
现代文：只有天子称呼王爷有伯父、叔父的叫法，也不是可用于宗庙的名号。
English: Only the heavenly son can call the prince uncle, and it is not a name that can be used for the ancestral temple.

古文：前此称本生皇考，实裁自圣心。
现代文：以前把生父称为本生皇考，这是出自陛下裁决。
English: It was His Majesty's decision to refer to his biological father as His Imperial Highness.

古文：乃谓臣等留一皇字以觇陛下，又谓 百皇字不足当父子之名 ，何肆言无忌至此。
现代文：而张璁等竟说是我们故意保留一个皇字，意在窥测陛下的意思，又说什么 一百个皇字也抵不得父子之名 ，怎么就这么胡说八道，肆无忌惮呢？
English: But Zhang Ye and others actually said that we deliberately kept one imperial character, intending to spy on the meaning of His Majesty, and also said that a hundred imperial characters could not stand up to the name of the father and son, how could they talk such nonsense, unscrupulously?

古文：乞速罢建室之议，立庙安陆，下璁、萼等法司按治。 
现代文：请皇上迅速停止建庙房的打算，为生父立庙于安陆，把张璁、桂萼等交给司法部门治罪。 
English: Please ask the emperor to quickly stop the plan to build a temple, to establish a temple for his father in Anlu, and to hand Zhang Xuan, Gui Caly, etc. over to the judicial department for criminal prosecution.

古文：帝报曰： 朕起亲藩，奉宗祀岂敢违越。
现代文：世宗批示说 ：我以藩王出为皇帝，祭祀自己的祖宗并不敢逾越礼制。
English: Shizong issued an order saying, "I have made the king of the domain the emperor, and I will not dare to overstep the etiquette when I offer sacrifices to my ancestors."

古文：但本生皇考寝园，远在安陆，于卿等安乎？
现代文：但是亲生父皇的陵园远在安陆，你们做大臣的能心安吗？
English: But the mausoleum of the emperor's biological father is far away in Anlu, can you, as ministers, be at peace?

古文：命下再四，尔等欺朕冲岁，党同执违，败父子之情，伤君臣之义。
现代文：我的命令已再三下达，你们竟然欺负我年轻，气味相投，勾结党羽，与我对抗，败坏我们父子间的情意，伤害朝廷君臣之间的大义。
English: My orders have been issued again and again, and you have bullied me, a young man with whom you have a good rapport, colluded with your party members to oppose me, damaged the relationship between our father and son, and harmed the great cause of justice between the imperial court and the princes and ministers.

古文：往且勿问，其奉先殿西室亟修葺，尽朕岁时追远之情。 
现代文：过去的不再追究了，奉先殿西室必须抓紧给我造起来，好让我逢年过节时表示我追悼怀念父祖的心情。 
English: The past will no longer be investigated, and the West Room of the Bong Son Hall must be built for me as soon as possible, so that I can express my feelings of mourning and remembering my father and grandfather at the time of the New Year.

古文：时嘉靖三年四月也。
现代文：当时是嘉靖三年四月里。
English: It was in April of the third year of Jiajing.

古文：顷之，一鹏极陈四方灾异，言： 自去年六月迄今二月，其间天鸣者三，地震者三十八，秋冬雷电雨雹十八，暴风、白气、地裂、山崩、产妖各一，民饥相食二。
现代文：不久，一鹏上书极力论说各地发生的灾异，说： 自去年六月到今年二月，中间三次发生天鸣，三十八次发生地震，秋冬两季有十八次雷电、大雨、冰雹，暴风、白气、地裂、山崩、妇产人妖各一次，人民饥馑，人吃人的事发生了两起。
English: Soon after, Yipeng wrote a letter in which he discussed the disasters that had occurred in various regions, saying: From June last year to February this year, there were three times of heavenly sound, thirty-eight times of earthquake, eighteen times of thunder and lightning, heavy rain, hail in autumn and winter, and one time each of storm, white gas, land crack, landslide, and women giving birth, and two times of famine and cannibalism.

古文：非常之变，倍于往时。
现代文：不同寻常的灾变，较过去成倍增加。
English: Unusual catastrophes, many times more than in the past.

古文：愿陛下率先群工，救疾苦，罢营缮，信大臣，纳忠谏，用回天意。 
现代文：我希望陛下率先示范，发动群众，解救病苦的百姓，停止修建各种工程，信任自己的大臣，采纳忠直的谏言，借此挽回老天爷的心意。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will take the lead in demonstrating, mobilizing the masses, rescuing the sick and suffering people, stopping the construction of various projects, trusting his ministers, and adopting loyal admonitions, thereby restoring God's will.

古文：帝优诏报之。
现代文：世宗善意地做了批示给他。
English: Emperor Taizong issued a euphemistically-worded edict in response.

古文：逾月，手敕名奉先殿西室为观德殿，遂命一鹏偕中官赖义、京山侯崔元迎献帝神主于安陆。
现代文：过了一个月，世宗亲自题名奉先殿西室为观德殿，命令一鹏偕同宦官赖义、京山侯崔元一起到安陆迎取献帝的牌位。
English: A month later, Shizong personally inscribed the name of the Western Room of the Ancestral Hall as the Guan De Hall, and ordered Ipeng Yu to go to Anlu with eunuchs Lai Yi and Jingshan Hou Cui Yuan to receive the card for offering the emperor.

古文：一鹏等复上言： 历考前史，并无自寝园迎主入大内者。
现代文：一鹏等再次上书说： 遍查前代史书，并没有把牌位从外间陵园里迎入皇宫中来的。
English: Ipeng et al. wrote again, saying: After thoroughly checking the history books of the previous generation, there was no place to welcome the plaques from the outside cemetery into the imperial palace.

古文：此天下后世观瞻所系，非细故也。
现代文：这是和天下、后世人们视听、模法有关系的大事，不是细微末节。
English: This is an important matter related to the world, future generations of people's audio-visual and modeling, not a minor detail.

古文：且安陆为恭穆启封之疆，神灵所恋，又陛下龙兴之地，王气所钟。故我太祖重中都，太宗重留都，皆以王业所基，永修世祀。
现代文：况且安陆是恭穆始封的疆土，是恭穆的神灵留恋的地方，又是陛下您发达起来的地方，王气聚集彼处，我们太祖皇帝重视中都，太宗皇帝重视留都，都是因为那里是王业成就的初址，应该世代祭祀、维修。
English: Moreover, Anlu is the territory where King Gongmu was first enthroned. It is the place where the deities of King Gongmu linger, and it is also the place where Your Majesty has developed. The royal spirit gathers there. Our great-grandfather emperors valued Zhongdu, and Emperor Taizong valued Remdu, all because it is the original site of the achievements of the king's career. It should be sacrificed and maintained for generations.

古文：伏乞陛下俯纳群言，改题神主，奉安故宫，为百世不迁。
现代文：恭请陛下听取大家的意见，改换牌位的题名，安放在原先的宫殿里供奉，明令世世代代不得迁移。
English: I respectfully ask His Majesty to listen to everyone's opinions, change the name of the plaque, place it in the original palace for worship, and make it clear that it must not be moved for generations.

古文：其观德殿中别设神位香几以慰孝思，则本生之情既隆，正统之义亦尽。 
现代文：观德殿里可以另设牌位、香案，用来安慰陛下的孝心。这样尊重亲生父祖的感情既可隆重地得到满足，重视王位正统的意思也明示无余。 
English: Another plaque and incense can be set up in the Kuangde Hall to comfort His Majesty's filial piety. In this way, the feelings of respecting one's own ancestors can be ceremoniously satisfied, and the meaning of valuing the legitimacy of the throne is also clearly expressed.

古文：奏入，不纳。一鹏乃行。
现代文：奏章交上后，未被采纳，一鹏只得执行。
English: After the report was submitted, it was not adopted, and Yipeng had to carry it out.

古文：虑使者为道途患，疏请禁约，帝善其言而戒饬之。
现代文：考虑到道路上使者容易烦难，又上书请指示禁约，世宗认为他说得对，所以奖饬、告诫了他一番。
English: Considering the fact that envoys on the road are easily annoyed and difficult, and that he had written to ask for instructions on the forbidden treaty, Shizong thought he was right, so he rewarded and admonished him.

古文：比还朝，则廷臣已伏阙哭争，朝事大变，而给事中陈氵光讠寿张尤甚。
现代文：等他还朝，朝廷里大臣们已经为这些在宫门前号哭、争论，朝廷里诸事都不同从前了，给事中陈尤其放肆。
English: By the time he was crowned, the ministers in the imperial court were already crying and arguing in front of the palace gate. Everything in the imperial court was different from before, and Chen was particularly presumptuous.

古文：一鹏抗疏曰： 大礼之议断自圣心，正统本生，昭然不紊。而氵光妄谓陛下诞生于孝宗没后三年，嗣位于武宗没后二月，无从授受，其说尤为不经。
现代文：一鹏大胆上书说 ：有关 大礼 的讨论已经皇上裁决，王位的正统，生父的尊号，道理已经十分明白，而陈胡说八道，以为陛下诞生于孝宗谢世以后三年，继位在武宗谢世以后两个月，没有受人传位的根据，这样的说法太荒谬了。
English: Ipeng boldly wrote, "The discussion about the grand gift has already been decided by the emperor. The legitimacy of the throne and the honorific title of the biological father have been fully understood. Chen is talking nonsense, saying that His Majesty was born three years after Xiaozong Xie and succeeded to the throne two months after Wuzong Xie, and that there is no basis for him to be passed on. Such a statement is too absurd.

古文：谨按《春秋》以受命为正始，故鲁隐公上无所承，内无所受，则不书即位。
现代文：细查《春秋》，受人传命才被视为正统，所以鲁隐公往上没有来历，往下不曾接到任命，就没有写他即位。
English: According to the detailed investigation of "Spring and Autumn," it is only regarded as orthodox to receive orders from others, so Lu Yinggu has no history upstream, and if he has not received an appointment downstream, his enthronement will not be written about.

古文：今陛下承武宗之遗诏，奉昭圣之懿旨，正合《春秋》之义。
现代文：现在陛下接到武宗皇帝的遗诏，遵奉昭圣皇后的传令即皇帝位，正好符合《春秋》的义理。
English: Now that His Majesty has received Emperor Wuzong's last will and testament, he has obeyed Empress Zhaosheng's command to become emperor, which is exactly in line with the meaning of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：而氵光谓孰从授受，是以陛下为不得正始也。
现代文：可是陈说陛下没有受人传位的根据，这等于说陛下的即位不是正统。
English: But to say that there is no basis for His Majesty's succession is tantamount to saying that His Majesty's accession is not legitimate.

古文：洸本小人，不痛加惩艾，无以杜效尤之渐。 
现代文：陈本是个小人，不严加惩办，就没法杜绝有人仿效的预兆。 
English: Chen Ben is a villain. Without severe punishment, there is no way to prevent the signs of imitation.

古文：不听。
现代文：可是皇帝没有听取他的意见。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：其年九月，一鹏以本官入内阁专典诰敕兼掌詹事府事。
现代文：那年九月，一鹏以原任官位进入内阁专职掌管起草皇帝的命令，并主管詹事府的公事。
English: In September of that year, Ipeng entered the cabinet as a full-time official in charge of drafting the emperor's orders, and was in charge of the public affairs of Zhan Prefecture.

古文：《武宗实录》成，进尚书，领职如故。寻以省墓归，还朝仍典诰敕。
现代文：《武宗实录》编成后，升为尚书，仍管理以前的事务，不久因回家上坟还乡，回朝后仍管起草皇帝的命令。
English: After compiling "Wuzong Shih Lu," he was promoted to Shang Shu, and still managed the previous affairs. Soon after returning home, he went to the grave and returned to his hometown. After returning to the imperial court, he still managed to draft the emperor's order.

古文：未几，出理部事。
现代文：没多少天，外放办理部级事务。
English: In just a few days, ministerial-level affairs will no longer be handled externally.

古文：前此典内阁诰敕者，皆需次柄政。
现代文：原来以前在内阁负责起草命令的人，都需要按顺序渐渐掌其事。
English: Formerly, those in the cabinet who were responsible for drafting orders were required to gradually take charge of things in sequence.

古文：而张璁、桂萼新用事，素衔一鹏异己，乃出为南京吏部尚书，加太子少保。
现代文：张璁、桂萼新近得势，他们一向嫉恨一鹏不附和他们，所以把他外放为南京吏部尚书，晋级太子少保。
English: Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale had recently gained power, and they had always been jealous that Ipeng did not follow them, so they sent him to Nanjing as the head of the personnel department, and promoted him to the position of the prince's younger brother.

古文：赠太子少保。濒殁，属诸子曰： 他日倘蒙易名典，勿犯我家讳。 乃避 文 ，谥恭靖。何孟春，字子元，郴州人。
现代文：朝廷依旧例发给他禄米。死后追赠太子太保，谥文端。他的儿子子孝，官也做到湖广参政。何孟春，字子元，湖南郴州人。
English: After his death, he was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his son, Zi Xiao, was also able to participate in politics in Hubei Province. He Mengchun, also known as Zi Yuan, was from Zhangzhou, Hunan Province.

古文：祖俊，云南按察司佥事。
现代文：祖父何俊，曾经做过云南按察司佥事。
English: His grandfather, He Jun, once served as the inspector general of Yunnan Province.

古文：父说，刑部郎中。
现代文：父亲何说，官至刑部郎中。
English: What did the father say? The official was a junior member of the criminal investigation department.

古文：孟春少游李东阳之门，学问该博。
现代文：孟春少年时代在李东阳门下求学，学问很广博。
English: Meng Chun studied under Li Dongyang when he was a boy, and his knowledge is very extensive.

古文：第弘治六年进士，授兵部主事。
现代文：考中弘治六年进士后，初任兵部主事。
English: After six years of entering the examination, he was appointed as the head of the military department.

古文：言官庞泮等下狱，疏救之。
现代文：谏官庞泮等被逮进监狱时，他曾经上书搭救他们。
English: When eunuchs such as Pang Yao were arrested and sent to prison, he once wrote a letter to save them.

古文：诏修万岁山毓秀亭、乾清宫西室，役军九千人，计费百余万。抗疏极谏。
现代文：孝宗诏令修建万岁山毓秀亭、乾清宫西室，役使九千名士卒，计算下来将用掉一百多万两银子，孟春又抗言上书极力劝阻。
English: Mengchun also wrote a letter of protest to strongly discourage the construction of the Long Live Shanshangxiu Pavilion and the West Room of the Qianqing Palace by order of the Emperor Xiaozong, which would require more than one million taels of silver to build and employ nine thousand people.

古文：清宁宫灾，陈八事，疏万余言。
现代文：清宁宫遇灾后，他借机上书陈述了八件事，奏疏长达一万多字。
English: After the Qingning Palace was hit by a disaster, he took the opportunity to write down eight things, which amounted to more than ten thousand words.

古文：进员外郎、郎中，出理陕西马政，条目毕张。
现代文：后来升为员外郎、郎中，奉命到陕西管理马政，结果各种规章制度都得到了实施。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of outside vassal and junior vassal, and was ordered to manage horse politics in Shaanxi Province. As a result, various rules and regulations were implemented.

古文：还，上厘弊五事，并劾抚臣不职。
现代文：回朝以后，又提出五条兴利除弊的意见，并且弹劾巡抚的失职行为。
English: After returning to the DPRK, he also put forward five opinions on the advantages and disadvantages, and impeached the superintendent for dereliction of duty.

古文：正德初，请厘正孔庙祀典，不果行。
现代文：正德初年，他上书要求改正孔庙祭祀的典礼，未能实际执行。
English: In the first year of Zhengde's reign, he submitted a letter requesting the revision of the Confucius Temple's sacrificial ceremony, but was unable to actually carry it out.

古文：出为河南参政，廉公有威。
现代文：后外调为河南参政，廉洁奉公，很有声威。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to Henan Province to participate in politics, and he has served the public with integrity and great prestige.

古文：擢太仆少卿，进为卿。
现代文：以后提为太仆少卿，又升为太仆卿。
English: Later, he was promoted to Taichu Shokei and then to Taichu Kei.

古文：驾幸宣府，驰疏谏。
现代文：武宗到宣府游玩时，他曾飞章劝谏。
English: When Wu Zong visited Xuanfu, he used to fly a banner to persuade them.

古文：寻以右副都御史巡抚云南。讨平十八寨叛蛮阿勿、阿寺等，奏设永昌府，增五长官司、五守御所。录功，荫一子，辞不受。
现代文：不久以右副都御史的名义巡抚云南，平定了十八寨造反的蛮人阿勿、阿寺等，奏准设立了永昌府，增设了五所长官司，五处防御所，登录战功，被荫封一子做官，但他推辞了，没有接受。
English: Soon, he became the governor of Yunnan in the name of the right vice-governor of the capital, and subdued the barbarians who rebelled in the 18 walled cities, such as Aba and Ata. He obtained permission to establish Yongchang Prefecture, added five chief magistrates and five defense stations, recorded his war achievements, and was appointed by the shadow of a son to be an official, but he declined and did not accept.

古文：世宗即位，迁南京兵部右侍郎，半道召为吏部右侍郎。
现代文：世宗即位后，他升为南京兵部右侍郎，半路上被召回来做了吏部右侍郎。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department. Halfway through his service, he was recalled to serve as the Right Attendant of the General Staff Department.

古文：会苏、松诸府旱潦相继，而江、淮北河水大溢，漂没田庐人畜无算。
现代文：时值苏、松各府旱涝相继，而江、淮以北河水泛滥，淹没土地、房屋、人口、牲畜，多得没法计算。
English: At that time, droughts and floods occurred one after another in the prefectures of Su and Song, while the northern rivers of Jiang and Huai were flooded, inundating land, houses, people, and livestock, too many to count.

古文：孟春仿汉魏相条奏八事，帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：孟春仿效汉朝的魏相上书列举了八条意见，世宗高兴地采纳了。
English: Meng Chun, following the example of Wei Xiang of the Han Dynasty, listed eight opinions in the letter, and Shizong happily adopted them.

古文：寻进左侍郎。
现代文：不久他升为左侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Zuijiro.

古文：尚书乔宇罢，代署部事。
现代文：尚书乔宇被免除后，他代理吏部的事务。
English: After Shang Shu Qiao Yu was exempted, he took over the affairs of the cadre department.

古文：先是， 大礼 议起。孟春在云南闻之，上疏言：
现代文：在此之前 ，大礼 的讨论开始后，孟春在云南听说，就递上一篇奏疏说：
English: Prior to this, after the discussion of the grand gift began, Meng Chun heard about it in Yunnan, and submitted a report saying:

古文：臣阅邸报，见进士屈儒奏中请尊圣父为 皇叔考兴献大王 ，圣母为 皇叔母兴献大王妃 。
现代文： 我阅读邸报，看到进士屈儒的奏议请尊崇圣父为 皇叔考兴献大王 ，圣母为 皇叔母兴献大王妃 。
English: I read the residence newspaper, and I saw the petition of the scholar Qu Rhu, asking everyone to venerate the Holy Father as the Emperor's uncle, and the Holy Mother as the Emperor's aunt.

古文：得旨下部，知犹未奉俞命也。
现代文：奏议经陛下批示下发礼部。方知尊号还没有经圣旨钦定下来。
English: The report was sent to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies by His Majesty's order. The name of Fangzizong has not yet been approved by the Emperor.

古文：臣惟前世帝王，自旁支入奉大统，推尊本生，得失之迹具载史册。
现代文：我思考前代的帝王从旁支入宫继承王位，他们推尊亲生父母的得失和事迹都记载在史书上。
English: I thought about the emperors of the previous generation who succeeded to the throne from the side of the palace, and the gains and losses and deeds of their respect for their own parents were recorded in the history books.

古文：宣帝不敢加号于史皇孙，光武不敢加号于南顿君，晋元帝不敢加号于恭王，抑情守礼。
现代文：汉宣帝不敢给史皇孙追加皇帝称号，光武帝不敢给南顿君追加皇帝称号，晋元帝不敢给恭王追加皇帝称号，他们都抑制私人情感而遵守礼制。
English: Emperor Han Xuan did not dare to give Emperor Shi the additional title of emperor, Emperor Guangwu did not dare to give Emperor Nantong the additional title of emperor, Emperor Jin Yuan did not dare to give Emperor Gong the additional title of emperor. They all restrained their private feelings and observed the etiquette.

古文：宋司马光所谓当时归美，后世颂圣者也。
现代文：这就是宋朝司马光所说当时天下人赞美，后世被颂扬为圣人的事迹。
English: This is what Song Dynasty Emperor Sima Guang said was praised by the whole world at that time, and later generations were praised as a saint.

古文：为人后者为之子，不敢复顾私亲。
现代文：汉哀帝、安帝、桓帝、灵帝就给自己的父亲、祖父追加了皇帝的尊号，破坏了礼义制度。
English: Emperor Han, Emperor An, Emperor Kuan and Emperor Ling gave their fathers and grandfathers the honorary title of emperor, destroying the system of etiquette.

古文：圣人制礼，尊无二上，若恭敬之心分于彼，则不得专于此故也。
现代文：这是司马光所说当时被人讥笑，后世也受到批评的事情。过继给人就是人家的儿子，就不敢再考虑自己的父母。圣人制礼，没有两个尊长，这是因为恭敬的心思如果分出一些到那边，就不能在这边专一的缘故。
English: This is what Sima Guang said, which was ridiculed at the time and criticized in later years. An adopted person is someone else's son, so they don't dare to think about their own parents. The saint system, there are no two elders, this is because the respectful mind can't be exclusive to this side if it devotes some to the other side.

古文：今者廷臣详议，事狱未决，岂非皇叔考之称有未当者乎？
现代文：现经大臣们详细讨论，事情还没有定下来，莫不是皇叔考的称号有什么不恰当吗？
English: Now that the ministers have discussed the matter in detail and the matter has not yet been settled, is there something inappropriate about the title of the imperial examination?

古文：抑臣愚亦不能无疑。
现代文：不过我虽愚蠢对此也不能无疑。
English: But stupid as I am, I cannot doubt it.

古文：《礼》，生曰 父母 ，死曰 考妣 ，有 世父母 、 叔父母 之文，而无世叔考、世叔妣之说。
现代文：《礼》说，在世时称为父母，下世后称为考妣，有世父母、叔父母的名称，却没有世叔考、世叔妣的说法。
English: "Li" said that they were called parents when they were alive, and they were called "Kao" after they died. There were names of parents and uncles, but there was no word for "uncle" or "uncle."

古文：今欲称兴献王为皇叔考，古典何据？
现代文：现在想把兴献王称为皇叔考，有什么古典可作为根据？
English: Now, if you want to call the King's Offering the King's Examination, what classics can you use as a basis?

古文：宋英宗时有请加濮王皇伯考者，宋敏求力斥其谬。
现代文：宋英宗时有人请给濮王加皇伯考的名号，宋敏求严厉指斥为荒谬。
English: At the time of Song Yingzong, someone asked to add the name of Emperor Berkow to the King of Song. Song Min sternly rebuked the request as absurd.

古文：然则皇叔考之称，岂可加于兴献王乎？
现代文：这样说来皇叔考的称号，难道能够加在兴献王身上吗？
English: In this way, can the title of "Crown Uncle Exam" be added to the "Celebration King"?

古文：即称皇叔父，于义亦未安也。
现代文：就是称皇叔父，按理讲也不大恰当。
English: Even calling him the emperor's uncle is not really appropriate.

古文：经书称伯父、叔父皆生时相呼，及其既殁，从无通亲属冠于爵位之上者。
现代文：经书上称呼伯父、叔父都是他们在世时别人唤他们用的。等到他们死后，从来没有人把亲属关系加在他们的爵位之上的。
English: In the scriptures, the terms "uncle" and "uncle" were used by others to address them when they were alive, but when they died, no one ever placed kinship above their rank.

古文：然则皇叔父之称，其可复加先朝已谥之亲王乎？
现代文：这样说来皇叔父的称号，难道可以再用到先朝已经加过谥号的亲王身上吗？
English: In this way, can the title of the emperor's uncle be used again on the body of the prince who has already been given a nickname by the previous dynasty?

古文：臣伏睹前诏，陛下称先皇帝为皇兄，诚于献王称皇叔，如宋王珪、司马光所云，亦已惬矣。
现代文：我看到陛下以前发布的诏书，陛下称先皇帝为皇兄，假使真的把献王称为皇叔，像宋朝王皀、司马光所说的那样，也就已经够满意了。
English: I have seen the imperial rescript issued by His Majesty before, in which His Majesty called the former emperor the emperor's elder brother, and if it is true that He called Emperor Xianwang the emperor's uncle, as was said by Wang Xi and Sima Guang of the Song Dynasty, then I am already satisfied.

古文：而议者或不然，何也？
现代文：可是有少数议论的人认为不对，什么原因呢？
English: But a vocal minority thinks it's wrong. Why?

古文：天下者，太祖之天下也。
现代文：天下是我们太祖皇帝打下的。
English: The whole country was conquered by our great-grandfather, the emperor.

古文：自太祖传至孝宗，孝宗传之先皇帝，特简陛下，授之大业。
现代文：自太祖传到孝宗，孝宗传给先皇帝，先皇帝又特地选择了陛下您，传给您祖宗的大业。
English: From the great-grandfather to the great-grandfather, from the great-grandfather to the great-grandfather, from the great-grandfather to the great-grandfather, from the great-grandfather to the great-grandfather, from the great-grandfather to the great-grandfather.

古文：献王虽陛下天性至亲，然而所以光临九重，富有四海，子子孙孙万世南面者，皆先皇帝之德，孝宗之所贻也。
现代文：献王虽然是陛下的天然至亲，然而陛下所以能够走入皇宫，拥有天下，子子孙孙千秋万代地做皇帝，这都是先皇帝的恩德，孝宗传下来的家业啊。
English: Although offering the king is His Majesty's natural closest relative, His Majesty is able to enter the Imperial Palace, possess the world, and have his children and grandchildren become emperors for thousands of generations. These are all the benefits of the first emperor, the family business passed down by the filial piety.

古文：臣故愿以汉宣、光武、晋元三帝为法，若非古之名，不正之号，非臣所愿于陛下也。
现代文：所以我希望您以汉宣、光武、晋元三帝作为榜样，如果提出什么古来没有过的名称或不恰当的尊号，那就不是我对于陛下所寄予的希望了。 
English: Therefore, I hope that you will follow the example of the three emperors Han Xuan, Guangwu, and Jin Yuan. If you propose any names that have not been used since ancient times or inappropriate honorifics, then that is not the hope I have for Your Majesty.

古文：及孟春官吏部，则已尊本生父母为 兴献帝 、 兴国太后 。继又改称 本生皇考恭穆献皇帝 、 本生圣母章圣皇太后 。
现代文：等到孟春来吏部做官的时候，世宗已经尊称自己的父母为兴献帝、兴国太后，继而又改称为本生皇考恭穆献皇帝、本生圣母章圣皇太后。
English: By the time Meng Chunlai came to be an official, Shizong had already honored his parents as Emperor Xingxian and Empress Dowager Xingguo, and then changed his name to Emperor Bensheng, and Empress Dowager Bensheng.

古文：孟春三上疏乞从初诏，皆不省。
现代文：孟春三次上书请按当初的诏书尊崇，世宗都不加考虑。
English: For the third time, Mengchun submitted a letter asking for respect in accordance with the original edict, disregarding the sejong.

古文：于是帝益入张璁、桂萼等言，复欲去本生二字。
现代文：此后世宗更加听信张璁、桂萼的话，又想去掉本生两个字。
English: After that, Shizong listened more attentively to the words of Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale, and wanted to get rid of the two characters of Bunsen.

古文：璁方盛气，列上礼官欺妄十三事，且斥为朋党。
现代文：张璁当时盛气凌人，上书列举礼官欺君之罪十三条，并且斥责大臣们是朋党。
English: At that time, Zhang Xuan was full of arrogance, listing the thirteen crimes of the etiquette official's deception, and scolded the ministers for being party cronies.

古文：孟春偕九卿秦金等具疏，略曰： 伊尹谓 有言逆于心，必求诸道。
现代文：孟春和九卿秦金等撰写了一篇奏疏，大略是说： 伊尹说过： 有人说话违背了自己的心思时，一定要向道义方面去寻求。
English: Meng Chun and Jiuqing Qin Jinlu and others wrote a report, roughly saying: Yi Yin said: When someone speaks contrary to his own thoughts, he must seek morality.

古文：有言逊于志，必求诸非道 。
现代文：有人说话迎合了自己的想法时，一定要向失道之处去核查。 
English: When someone speaks to suit your own ideas, be sure to check where you went wrong.

古文：迩者，大礼之议，邪正不同。
现代文：近来在关于 大礼 的争议中，大臣们所表现出来的邪恶和正直是不一样的。
English: In the recent controversy over the state banquet, ministers have shown a mixture of viciousness and honesty.

古文：若诸臣匡拂，累千万言，此所谓逆于心之言也，陛下亦尝求诸道否乎？
现代文：像大臣们为纠正错误而提出的不大好听的数千万言，这就是伊尹所谓的违背了自己心思的话，陛下是否曾经向道义方面推求过？
English: Did His Majesty ever appeal to the moral side, like the tens of millions of not-so-nice-sounding words proposed by ministers to correct mistakes, which is what Yi Yin called words that went against his own thoughts?

古文：一二小人，敢托将顺之说，招徕罢闲不学无耻之徒，荧惑圣听，此所谓逊于志之言也，陛下亦尝求诸非道否乎？
现代文：那么一两个小人，敢假托随顺主上孝心的名义，勾引一些不三不四、不学无术、厚颜无耻的人，迷惑陛下的理智，这就是伊尹所谓的迎合了自己想法的话，陛下是否向失道之处去核查过？
English: Then, one or two villains dare to pretend to follow the Lord in the name of filial piety, seduce some unscrupulous, uneducated, and impudent people, and confuse His Majesty's reason. This is what Yi Yin called pandering to his own thoughts. Has His Majesty checked where he went wrong?

古文：何彼言之易行，而此言之难入也。 
现代文：为什么那些人的话那么容易得逞，而这些人的话这么难采纳呢？ 
English: Why is it that the words of those people are so easy to succeed, while the words of these people are so difficult to accept?

古文：遂发十三难以辨折璁，疏入留中。
现代文：于是提出了十三条质问来反驳张璁。奏疏递交后被世宗压在了宫中。
English: Therefore, thirteen questions were raised to refute Zhang Xuan. After the report was handed over, he was suppressed by the emperor in the palace.

古文：其时詹事、翰林、给事、御史及六部诸司、大理、行人诸臣各具疏争，并留中不下，群情益汹汹。
现代文：当时詹事、翰林、给事中、御史及六部各司、大理、行人等许多大臣都写了谏章，都被压在宫中，未予批答，一时间群情激愤，不可遏制。
English: At that time, many ministers such as Zhan Zhi, Han Lin, Zhi Zhong, Gu Shi, and the six departments, Dali, Xingren, and so on all wrote the imperial rescript. They were all suppressed in the palace, and no reply was given. For a while, the crowd was enraged and could not be contained.

古文：会朝方罢，孟春倡言于众曰： 宪宗朝，百官哭文华门，争慈懿皇太后葬礼，宪宗从之，此国朝故事也。 
现代文：正好早朝刚结束，孟春就号召满朝大臣们说 ：宪宗皇帝在位时，百官曾在文华门哭谏，争论慈懿皇太后的葬礼，宪宗最后听从了他们的意见。
English: Right at the end of the early morning, Meng Chun called on the ministers of the Manchu Dynasty and said: When Emperor Xianzong was on the throne, hundreds of officials cried at the Wenhua Gate and argued about the funeral of Empress Dowager Cixi, and Emperor Xianzong finally listened to their opinions.

古文：修撰杨慎曰： 国家养士百五十年，仗节死义，正在今日。 
现代文：这是我们明朝的往事啊。 修撰杨慎说： 国家养士一百五十年，能不能仗节死义，就看我们今天的表现了。 
English: This is the past of our Ming Dynasty. Reverend Yang Sheng said: The country has been raising monks and nuns for one hundred and fifty years. Whether or not we can fight for justice depends on our performance today.

古文：编修王元正、给事中张翀等遂遮留群臣于金水桥南，谓今日有不力争者，必共击之。
现代文：编修王元正、给事中张罛等就把满朝大臣在金水桥南边拦住，说今天有哪个人不努力争取，大家就一起揍他。
English: Wang Yuanzheng, the editor, and Zhang Qiao, who was in charge of the matter, stopped the Manchu minister on the south side of Jinshui Bridge, saying that if someone did not work hard today, everyone would beat him together.

古文：孟春、金献民、徐文华复相号召。
现代文：孟春、金献民、徐文华又过来号召大家。
English: Meng Chun, Jin Xianmin, and Xu Wenhua came over to call on everyone.

古文：帝命司礼中官谕退，众皆曰： 必得俞旨乃敢退。 
现代文：于是九卿、翰林、给事中、御史、各司郎官，共计二百二十九人都在左顺门跪地请愿。世宗让司礼中官传命他们回去，大家都说： 一定要得到皇上的允准我们才敢回去。 
English: As a result, the nine nobles, Hanlin, Genshizhong, Goshi, and all the officials, a total of 229 people, knelt down at the ZuoShun Gate to petition. The Sejong asked the official to order them to go back, and everyone said: We must get the emperor's permission before we dare to go back.

古文：自辰至午，凡再传谕，犹跪伏不起。
现代文：他们从早上跪到中午，世宗两次传下指示，仍然跪在地下不肯起来。
English: They kneeled from morning until noon. Shizong sent instructions twice, but they still kneeled on the ground and refused to get up.

古文：帝大怒，遣锦衣先执为首者。
现代文：世宗这下大为恼火，就派遣锦衣过去先抓了几个带头的。
English: Sejong was very angry at this, so he sent Koi to catch a few leaders first.

古文：于是丰熙、张翀、余翱、余宽、黄待显、陶滋、相世芳、母德纯八人，并系诏狱。
现代文：于是丰熙、张罛、余翱、余宽、黄待显、陶滋、相世芳、毋德纯八个人一起被关进了皇家监狱。
English: As a result, Fengxi, Zhang Jun, Yu Jun, Yu Guang, Huang Zhixian, Tao Zi, Ao Shifang, and Bao Dejun, eight people, were put into the royal prison together.

古文：杨慎、王元正乃撼门大哭，众皆哭，声震阙廷。
现代文：杨慎、王元正于是敲打着宫门大声哭喊，大家也都哭了，哭声响震皇宫的深宅大院。
English: Yang Sheng and Wang Yuanzheng then knocked on the palace gate and cried loudly. Everyone also cried, and their cries shook the palace's Fukaya compound.

古文：帝益怒，命收系五品以下官若干人，而令孟春等待罪。
现代文：世宗更加恼怒了，就传令逮捕了若干名五品以下的官员，而让孟春等人等候治罪。
English: Sejong became even more angry and issued a summons to arrest a number of officials below the fifth grade, leaving Meng Chun and others to await punishment.

古文：翼日，编修王相等十八人俱杖死，熙等及慎、元正俱谪戍，始下孟春等前疏，责曰： 朕嗣承大统，祗奉宗庙，尊崇大礼，自出朕心。
现代文：第二天，编修王相等十八个人都被杖打而死，丰熙等人和杨慎、元正都被贬官或充军。世宗这才把孟春等人以前的奏疏发下来，批评他说： 我即皇帝位，供奉宗庙祭祀，尊崇亲生父母的大礼，是我自己决定的。
English: The next day, eighteen people, including the editor Wang Zong, were beaten to death with canes. Feng Xi and others, as well as Yang Sheng and Yuan Zheng, were all demoted or conscripted into the army. It was only then that Shizong sent Meng Chun and others down the previous path, criticizing him and saying: I am the emperor, I am the one who decided to offer the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple and honor the great gift of my own parents.

古文：孟春等毁君害政，变乱是非。
现代文：孟春等诋毁君主，败坏政事，颠倒是非，罪实在不小。
English: Meng Chun and others have slandered the monarch, corrupted political affairs, and reversed the rights and wrongs. The crime is not small.

古文：且张璁等所上十三条尚留中未发，安得先知？
现代文：而且张璁等递上来的十三条意见还留在我手中没发下来，他怎么先知道的？
English: Moreover, the thirteen opinions submitted by Zhang Jun and others still remain in my hands and have not been sent down. How did he know about it in the first place?

古文：其以实对。 
现代文：希望他老老实实回答我。 
English: I hope you'll answer honestly.

古文：于是孟春等具疏伏罪，言： 璁等所条者，于未进之日先以私稿示人，且有副本存通政司，故臣等知之。
现代文：于是孟春等上书认罪，说： 张璁等递上去的十三条，在没递上去的时候就先拿草稿给人看过，并且还有副本存放在通政司，所以我们知道它。
English: Therefore, Meng Chun et al. pleaded guilty in a letter, saying: The 13 articles submitted by Zhang Jun et al. were first shown to people in draft form when they were not submitted, and there was also a copy stored in the Department of Political Affairs, so we know it.

古文：臣等忝从大臣后，得与议礼之末。窃以璁等欺罔，故昌言论辨，以渎天听，罪应万死。
现代文：我们跟在满朝大臣的后边，能够在旁边参加讨论 大礼 ，私下里认力张璁等蒙骗陛下，所以说些话出来和他们辩论，冒犯了陛下您，罪应万死。
English: We followed behind the ministers of the Manchurian dynasty, and were able to participate in the discussion of the Great Gift, and privately admitted that Zhang Ye and others deceived His Majesty, so if we said something and argued with them, we offended Your Majesty and should be punished.

古文：惟望圣明加察，辨其孰正孰邪，则臣等虽死亦幸。 
现代文：只是我们希望陛下明察秋毫，辨别一下谁正直，谁邪恶，这样我们即使死了也会感到幸运。 
English: But we hope that Your Majesty will look into the matter and see who is honest and who is evil, so that we will feel lucky even if we die.

古文：帝怒不已，责孟春倡众逞忿，非大臣事君之道，法宜重治，姑从轻夺俸一月。
现代文：世宗恼怒不休，批评说孟春号召大家发泄不满，不是大臣侍奉君上的方式，本该从重法办，姑且从轻扣发一个月的俸禄。
English: Sejong was furious, criticizing that Meng Chun's call for everyone to vent their dissatisfaction was not the way for a minister to serve his lord, and that he should have handled the matter according to the law, not to mention withholding one month's salary.

古文：旋出为南京工部左侍郎。
现代文：不久被调出去做南京工部左侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the Nanjing Engineering Department as a left-hand man.

古文：故事，南部止侍郎一人，时已有右侍郎张琮，复以孟春为左，盖賸员也。
现代文：按照过去的惯例，南京各部只设一个侍郎，当时工部已经有右侍郎张琮了，又让孟春做左侍郎，实际上是冗员了。
English: According to the past practice, each department in Nanjing had only one chamberlain. At that time, the engineering department already had the right chamberlain Zhang Qi, and Meng Chun was made the left chamberlain. In fact, there were too many staff.

古文：孟春屡疏引疾，至六年春始得请。
现代文：孟春屡次上书称病告老，到六年春天，才得到批准。
English: Meng Chun repeatedly submitted a letter saying that he was too old to work, and it was not until the spring of the sixth year that he received approval.

古文：及《明伦大典》成，削其籍。
现代文：等到《明伦大典》编成以后，又剥夺了他的官籍。
English: After the compilation of the "Ming Lun Grand Text," he was deprived of his official status.

古文：久之，卒于家。
现代文：很久以后，他才死在家中。
English: Some time later, Chen Bozhi passed away at home.

古文：隆庆初，赠礼部尚书，谥文简。
现代文：隆庆初年，朝廷追赠他为礼部尚书，谥文简。
English: In the first year of Longqing, the imperial court posthumously presented him with a book of etiquette and etiquette.

古文：孟春所居有泉，用燕去来时盈涸得名，遂称 燕泉先生 云。
现代文：孟春的住处有一个泉，因为燕去水干、燕来水满而得名燕泉，他就被人称为燕泉先生。
English: There is a spring at Mengchun's place of residence. It is called Yanquan because the water is dry when the swallows go and full when they come. He is known as Mr. Yanquan.

古文：丰熙，字原学，鄞人，布政司庆孙也。
现代文：丰熙，字原学，浙江鄞县人，是布政司丰庆的孙子。
English: Fengxi, whose real name was Yuan Xue, was from Jixian County, Zhejiang Province. He was the grandson of Fengqing, the Secretary for Political Affairs.

古文：幼有异禀。尝大书壁间曰： 立志当以圣人为的。
现代文：他从小天赋过人，有一次曾在墙壁上写下大字说 ：立志应当以圣人为目标。
English: Gifted from an early age, he once scrawled on a wall: "A saint should be your goal."

古文：逊第一等事于人，非夫也。 
现代文：在最上等事上不如他人，就不是好男儿。 
English: He is not a good man who is not equal to others in the highest matters.

古文：年十六丧母，水浆不入口数日，居倚庐三年。
现代文：十六岁死了母亲，他痛苦得几天没喝一口水，后来又在守丧的房子里住了三年。
English: When his mother died when he was sixteen, he was so distressed that he didn't drink a sip of water for several days. Later, he lived in a house of mourning for three years.

古文：弘治十二年举殿试第二。孝宗奇其策，赐第一人袍带宠之。
现代文：弘治十二年，他考中殿试第二名，孝宗对他的策论很赞赏，就赐给他第一名的袍带以显示宠爱他。
English: In the twelfth year of Hongzhi, he took the second place in the middle school entrance examination. Xiaozong was very appreciative of his strategy, and gave him the first place gown belt to show his favor.

古文：授编修，进侍讲，迁右谕德。
现代文：初任编修，又升为侍讲、右谕德。
English: He was the first editor, and later promoted to the position of assistant lecturer and right-hand man.

古文：以不附刘瑾，出掌南京翰林院事。
现代文：后来因为不依附刘瑾，被调出去掌管南京翰林院的事务。
English: Later, because he did not adhere to Liu Bei, he was transferred out of the palace to take charge of the affairs of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：父丧阕，起故官。
现代文：中间为父亲守了三年丧，除丧后起复原任。
English: In the middle of the three-year mourning for his father, he was reinstated after the funeral.

古文：世宗即位，进翰林学士。
现代文：世宗即位后，他入朝当了翰林学士。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he entered the imperial court as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：兴献王 大礼 议起，熙偕礼官数力争。
现代文：兴献王 大礼 的争论开始后，他和礼仪官员一起几次上书争论。
English: He and the etiquette official argued several times in writing after the controversy over the extravagant gift began.

古文：及召张璁、桂萼为学士，方献夫为侍读学士，熙昌言于朝曰： 此冷褒、段犹流也，吾辈可与并列耶？ 
现代文：等世宗召张璁、桂萼当学士，方献夫做了侍读学士后，丰熙在朝中号召说： 这些人是冷褒、段犹一类货色，我们能够和他们搅在一块吗？ 
English: After calling Zhang Xuan and Gui Cai to be academicians, and Fang Xianfu to be an attendant academician, Feng Xi called out in the middle of the morning: These people are cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold, cold.

古文：抗疏请归，不允。
现代文：于是大家抗言上书请求罢官回家，世宗没有批准。
English: As a result, everyone protested and wrote a letter requesting the dismissal to go home, but Sejong did not approve.

古文：既而尊称礼定，卜日上恭穆献皇帝谥册。
现代文：后来兴献王的尊号确定下来，世宗让选定日子献上恭穆献皇帝的谥册。
English: Later, the honorary title of Xingxian Wang was determined, and Shizong let the selected day be presented with the syllabus of the tribute to the emperor.

古文：熙等疏谏曰： 大礼之议颁天下三年矣，乃以一二人妄言，欲去本生之称，专隆鞠育之报。
现代文：丰熙等又上书进谏说 ：兴献王尊称议定后颁布天下已经三年了，竟然因为那么一两个人胡说八道，就想拿下 本生 字样，专门推崇对养育之恩的报答。
English: Fengxi et al. also wrote to Jin Rong, saying: It has been three years since the dedication of Wang Rong was agreed upon and promulgated around the world, and because of one or two people's nonsense, they want to take down the words of Ben Sheng, and specifically promote the reward for the grace of education.

古文：臣等闻命，惊惶罔知攸措。
现代文：我们接到命令，简直吃惊得不知所措了。
English: When we received the order, we were completely taken aback.

古文：窃惟陛下为宗庙神人之主，必宗庙之礼加隆，斯继统之义不失。
现代文：我们认为陛下作为供奉宗庙神人的主人，只有尊崇宗庙的礼制，合法继承王位的道理才不会丢失。
English: We believe that His Majesty, as the owner of the deities enshrined in the ancestral temple, will not lose the right to legitimate succession to the throne unless he respects the ceremonial system of the ancestral temple.

古文：若乖先王之礼，贻后世之讥，岂不重累圣德哉。 
现代文：如果违背先王制定的礼制，给后人讥笑，岂不是严重损害了您的伟大德行！ 
English: If you violate the etiquette established by the former king and make fun of it to posterity, won't you seriously damage your great virtue?

古文：不得命，相率伏哭左顺门。
现代文：奏疏递进后没得到批示，就和大家一起到左顺门跪地哭谏。
English: When Song So-yeon came in and didn't get the order, he and everyone else went to the left door to kneel down and cry.

古文：遂下诏狱掠治，复杖之阙廷，遣戍。
现代文：于是很多人被逮入诏狱里拷问，又在宫门外被打了一顿大棍，分别派出去充军。
English: As a result, many people were arrested and tortured in the imperial prison, and they were beaten with a big stick outside the palace gate and sent out to join the army.

古文：熙得福建镇海卫。
现代文：丰熙被派到福建镇海卫去了。
English: Fengxi was sent to the town of Haiwei in Fujian Province.

古文：既璁等得志，乃相率请释谪戍诸臣罪，皆首及熙，帝不听。
现代文：张璁等人得志后，大臣中就很有些人一起请饶恕被贬官、充军的大臣们的罪过，首先就都提起了丰熙，世宗不听。
English: After Zhang Xuan and others were ordained, many of the ministers came together to ask forgiveness for the sins of the ministers who had been demoted and conscripted into the army. At first, they all brought up Fengxi, but Shizong would not listen.

古文：最后谨身殿灾，熙年且七十，给事中田濡复请矜宥，卒不听。
现代文：最后在谨身殿发生灾祸，丰熙也年近七十的时候，给事中田濡又一次请求宽恕丰熙，世宗终于不肯听从。
English: Finally, when a calamity occurred in the hall of honor, and Toyohi was nearly seventy years old, Nakata Nurei once again asked for Toyohi's forgiveness, and Shizong finally refused to listen.

古文：居十有三年，竟卒于戍所。
现代文：丰熙在镇海卫住了十三年，最后死在那里了。
English: Fengxi lived in Zhenhaiwei for thirteen years, and finally died there.

古文：隆庆初，赠官赐恤。
现代文：直到隆庆初年，穆宗才给丰熙追赠一官，对他家里赐予抚恤。
English: It was not until the first year of the Longqing that Mu Zong gave Fengxi a posthumous title and a pension to his family.

古文：子坊，字存礼。
现代文：他的儿子叫丰坊，字存礼。
English: His son's name is Fengfang.

古文：举乡试第一。嘉靖二年成进士。
现代文：考中乡试第一名后，在嘉靖二年，中了进士。
English: After taking the first place in the junior high school examination, he was promoted to the junior high school in the second year of Jiajing.

古文：出为南京吏部考功主事。寻谪通州同知。
现代文：当初外放到南京吏部任考功主事，不久贬为通州同知，然后又被罢官回乡。
English: At first, he was sent to Nanjing to serve as the head of the examination for meritorious service. Soon, he was demoted to Tongzhou Tongzhi, and then he was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：免归。坊博学工文，兼通书法，而性狂诞。
现代文：丰坊学问广博，善于写文章，兼通书法，但性情狂诞。
English: Fengfang has a wide range of knowledge, is good at writing articles, and is also proficient in calligraphy, but his temperament is crazy.

古文：熙既卒，家居贫乏，思效张璁、夏言片言取通显。十七年诣阙上书，言建明堂事，又言宜加献皇帝庙号称宗，从配上帝，世宗大悦。
现代文：丰熙死后，他在家里住着，经济拮据，想仿效张璁、夏言用几句美言谋取高官，就在十七年，赴京上书，谈论修建明堂的事，又说应给献皇帝加庙号、称宗，匹配上帝。
English: After Fengxi's death, he lived at home and was in financial straits. He wanted to emulate Zhang Xi and Xia Yan and use a few kind words to get a high-ranking official. In the 17th year, he went to Beijing to write a letter, talking about the construction of the Ming Hall, and saying that the emperor should be given a temple name, called Zong, and matched with God.

古文：未几，进号睿宗，配飨玄极殿。
现代文：世宗很高兴，不久就给献皇帝进封庙号为睿宗，配飨玄极殿。
English: Shizong was very pleased, and soon gave Emperor Xian the temple name Ruizong and the palace of Emperor Xuanzi.

古文：其议盖自坊始，人咸恶坊畔父云。
现代文：这个主张大概最早就是由丰坊提出的。当时人们都厌恶他这种背叛父亲的行为。
English: This idea was probably first proposed by Fengfang. At that time, people were disgusted by his betrayal of his father.

古文：明年复进《卿云雅诗》一章，诏付史馆。
现代文：第二年，丰坊又呈进《卿云雅诗》一章，世宗传令交史馆加以收存。
English: The next year, Fengfang submitted another chapter of "Qingyun Yashi," which Shizong ordered the History Museum to collect.

古文：待命久之，竟无所进擢，归家悒悒以卒。
现代文：丰坊等着任命等了很久，最后没有得到提拔，回家以后闷闷不乐地死掉了。
English: Fengfang waited for the appointment for a long time, and finally did not get the promotion. After returning home, he died in a sullen mood.

古文：晚岁改名道生。别为《十三经训诂》，类多穿凿语。
现代文：晚年他改名叫道生，别出一格地编了一部《十三经训诂》，其中有很多穿凿附会的话。
English: In his later years, he changed his name to Tao Sheng, and compiled a "Thirteen Sutra Precepts" in a unique way, many of which were engraved with the words of the association.

古文：或谓世所传《子贡诗传》，亦坊伪纂也。
现代文：有人认为世间所流传的《子贡诗传》，也是出自丰坊的伪作。
English: Some people think that the "Zigong Shi Chuan" that has been passed down to the world is also a forgery from Fengfang.

古文：徐文华，字用光，嘉定州人。
现代文：徐文华，字用光，四川嘉定州人。
English: Xu Wenhua, a native of Jiading, Sichuan.

古文：正德三年进士。授大理评事。擢监察御史，巡按贵州。
现代文：正德三年进士，初任大理评事，升监察御史，外出巡按贵州。
English: Zhengde was promoted to the rank of scholar in three years, and was appointed as the first Dali critic. He was promoted to inspector of history, and went out to patrol Guizhou.

古文：乖西苗阿杂等倡乱，偕巡抚魏英讨之，破寨六百三十。
现代文：乖西地方的苗民阿杂等人发起叛乱，文华和巡抚魏英讨伐他们，打下敌人六百三十个营寨。
English: The Miao people of Guxi Province, including Ah Zhe, launched a rebellion, and Wenhua and the governor Wei Ying fought against them, defeating 630 enemy camps.

古文：玺书奖劳。
现代文：武宗为此发布加盖玉玺的诏书，奖励、慰劳了他。
English: For this, Emperor Wuzong issued an imperial edict stamped with the imperial seal, rewarding and consoling him.

古文：江西副使胡世宁坐论宁王宸濠系诏狱，文华抗疏救曰： 世宁上为圣朝，下为宗室，竭诚发愤，言甫脱口，而祸患随之，亦可哀也。
现代文：江西副使胡世宁因为检举了宁王宸濠被逮进诏狱，文华抗言上书搭救他，说 ：世宁上为朝廷，下为宗室，竭尽忠诚，发愤直言，话刚出口，祸患就跟上他来，也真够悲哀的了。
English: The deputy envoy of Jiangxi Province, Hu Shining, was arrested and sent to the imperial prison for denouncing Ning Wangjun. Wenhua protested and wrote a letter to save him, saying: Shining is above the court and below the family, he is loyal to the best of his ability, angry and outspoken, and as soon as he speaks, the evil follows him. It is really sad.

古文：宁王威焰日以张，隐患日以甚。失今不戢，容有纪极。
现代文：宁王的气焰一天比一天嚣张，国家的隐患一天比一天可怕，现在不加制止，谁知道会达到什么样的程度。
English: Ning Wang's arrogance is becoming more and more arrogant day by day, and the hidden dangers of the country are becoming more and more terrible day by day. If left unchecked, who knows to what extent it will reach.

古文：顾又置世宁重法，杜天下之口，夺忠鲠之气，弱朝廷之势，启宗藩之心，招意外之变，皆自今日始矣。 
现代文：不料现在又用重法惩办世宁，堵天下人的嘴巴，夺忠直大臣的正气，削弱朝廷的威严，诱发宗室藩王造反作乱的心思，日后假如招来意外的事变，那就可以说是从现在开始的了。 
English: Unexpectedly, it is now using heavy-handed methods to punish the world, to gag the people of the world, to take away the righteous spirit of the loyal minister, to weaken the majesty of the imperial court, to induce the thoughts of the king of the clan to rebel and make trouble, and if it causes unexpected events in the future, it can be said to have started from now.

古文：不纳。
现代文：武宗没有听取他的意见。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：帝遣中官刘允迎佛乌斯藏，文华力谏。
现代文：武宗派宦官刘允到乌斯藏迎佛，文华极力谏阻，武宗没有理睬他。
English: Wu Sect sent eunuch Liu Yun to Wuzang to welcome the Buddha. Wenhua tried his best to resist, but Wu Sect ignored him.

古文：不报。马昂纳妊身女弟于帝，又疏谏曰： 中人之家不取再醮之妇。
现代文：后来马昂把自己有孕在身的妹妹进献给武宗，文华又上书进谏言说 ：中等人家都不肯娶再嫁的女人。
English: Later, Maeng dedicated his pregnant younger sister Jin to Wu Zong, and Wenhua wrote a letter to Jin saying, "Middle-class people do not want to marry a woman who remarries."

古文：陛下万乘至尊，乃有此举，返之于心则不安，宣之于口则不顺，传之天下后世则可丑。
现代文：陛下身为至高无上的天子，竟然肯干这种事？您扪心自问心中就不能安静，说出口来也就不顺，传给天下后世知道也觉可羞。
English: Your majesty, as the supreme son of heaven, how could you do such a thing? If you ask yourself, you cannot be quiet in your heart, it is not good to say it, and it is shameful to pass it on to future generations.

古文：谁为陛下进此者，罪可族也。
现代文：那替陛下进献这女人的人，罪恶大到可以诛灭全家了。
English: The man who brought this woman to your majesty is guilty of a crime that could destroy his entire family.

古文：万一防闲阔略，不幸有李园、吕不韦之徒乘间投隙，岂细故哉。
现代文：试想万一防备不严，不幸有李圜、吕不韦这样的人钻了空子，可不是小事！
English: Just imagine if the defense is not strict, unfortunately, people like Li Qian and Lv Bu Wei have drilled a hole, which is not a small matter!

古文：今昂兄弟子侄出入禁闼，陛下降绌等威，与之乱服杂坐，或同卧起，坏祖宗法，莫此为甚。
现代文：现在马昂一家兄弟、儿子、侄子出入禁宫，陛下降低自己的身份，跟他们乱穿着衣服坐在一堆，甚至在一处睡觉。
English: Now, as the Maon brothers, sons and nephews come and go from the Forbidden City, His Majesty lowers his status and sits in a pile of clothes with them, and even sleeps in the same place.

古文：马姬专宠于内，昂等弄权于外，祸机窃发，有不可胜言者。乞早诛以绝祸源。 
现代文：陛下破坏祖宗的家法，没有比这件事做得更厉害的了。马姬在宫内独自享受陛下的宠爱，马昂在外边玩弄权术，暗中滋长着的祸端简直不可尽言。请尽早斩掉马昂，断绝大祸根。 
English: Your majesty has not done anything more severe than this to destroy the family law of your ancestors. Maggie enjoys your majesty's favor alone in the palace, Maon plays power games outside, and the evil growing in the dark is simply inexpressible. Please cut off Maon as soon as possible and break the root of the great evil.

古文：亦不报。
现代文：武宗也没有作答。
English: There was no answer to that either.

古文：文华既数进直言，帝及诸近幸皆衔之。
现代文：文华在几次直言上书后，武宗和身边的宦官们都记恨他。
English: After Wenhua wrote several frank letters, Wu Zong and the eunuchs around him hated him.

古文：会文华条上宗庙礼仪，祧庙、禘祫、特享、出主、祔食，凡五事。考证经义，悉可施行。
现代文：后来碰到文华列举宗庙礼仪中祧庙、礻帝礻合、特享、出主、纎食共五件事上书，考证经义，所说的都可以施行。
English: Later, I came across an article in which Wenhua enumerated a total of five things in the etiquette of the ancestral temple: visiting the temple, meeting the emperor, enjoying special privileges, going to the temple, and eating food. According to the textual evidence, all of the above can be carried out.

古文：帝怒，责其出位妄言，章下所司。
现代文：但是武宗恼了，批评他越职上书，胡说八道，并把他的奏章发给有关部门评议。
English: But Wu Zong was annoyed, criticizing him for exceeding his duties and writing nonsense, and sent his report to the relevant departments for review.

古文：礼官暗于经术，又阿帝意，遂奏文华言非是。
现代文：礼部长官不懂得经术，又迎合武宗的意思，就奏称文华所说没有道理。
English: The Minister of Rites and Ceremonies, who did not understand the sutras and pandered to the wishes of Emperor Wuzong, said that what Wenhua had said was unreasonable.

古文：命下诏狱，黜为民。
现代文：武帝于是命令把文华逮入诏狱审讯，罢官为民。
English: Emperor Wu then ordered that Wenhua be taken to the imperial prison for interrogation, and dismissed from his post.

古文：时正德十一年十月也。
现代文：当时是正德十一年十月。
English: It was October of the eleventh year of Zhengde's reign.

古文：世宗即位，起故官，历河南按察副使。嘉靖二年举治行卓异，入为大理右少卿，寻转左。
现代文：世宗即位后，文华又得到起复，官复原任，经河南按察副使，在嘉靖二年被推举为政事、修身双优，然后应诏入朝做大理右少卿，不久转为左少卿。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Munhwa was restored to his former position. He was promoted to vice-envoy of Henan Province, and in the second year of the Jiajing Emperor, he was promoted to the position of political affairs and cultivation of virtue. He then entered the imperial court as the Dalian Right Minority Lord, and soon became the Left Minority Lord.

古文：时方议兴献帝 大礼 ，文华数偕诸大臣力争。
现代文：当时朝廷中正在讨论兴献帝的 大礼 ，文华几番和其他大臣们一起极力谏争。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing the grand gift of Emperor Xingxian, and Wenhua and several other ministers were struggling with it.

古文：明年七月复倡廷臣伏阙哭谏，坐停俸四月。
现代文：第二年七月，又号召大臣们在宫门外跪地哭谏，因此被扣发了四个月官俸。
English: In July of the following year, he called on his ministers to kneel and wail outside the palace gates, for which he was docked four months' salary.

古文：已，席书、张璁、桂萼、方献夫会廷臣大议，文华与汪伟、郑岳犹力争。
现代文：后来，席书、张璁、桂萼、方献夫召集大臣们讨论，文华与汪伟、郑岳还是极力反对。
English: Later, Seishu, Zhang Xuan, Gui Caly, and Fang Xianfu convened the ministers to discuss, but Wenhua, Wang Wei, and Zheng Yue still strongly opposed it.

古文：武定侯郭勋遽曰： 祖训如是，古礼如是，璁等言当。
现代文：武定侯郭勋就说： 祖训是这样子，古礼也是这样子，张璁等人说得对。
English: Wuding Hou Guoxun said: The ancestral teachings are like this, the ancient rituals are also like this, Zhang Ye and others are right.

古文：书曰大臣事君，当将顺其美。 
现代文：古书上讲了，大臣侍候君上，应当顺成他的好事。 
English: An ancient book says that when a minister serves his lord, he should do what is best for him.

古文：议乃定。
现代文：就这样形成了决议。
English: That's how the resolution came about.

古文：及改题庙主，文华谏曰： 孝宗有祖道焉，不可以伯考称。
现代文：等后来改题宗庙神主时，文华进谏说： 按道理孝宗是祖辈，不能称为伯考。
English: Later, when he changed the subject to the god of the ancestral temple, Wenhua Jinqi said: According to reason, Xiaozong is an ancestor, and cannot be called Berkao.

古文：武宗有父道焉，不可以兄称。
现代文：武宗是父辈，不能称为皇兄。
English: Emperor Wuzong is his father's generation, so he cannot be called the emperor's elder brother.

古文：不若直称曰 孝宗敬皇帝 、 武宗毅皇帝 ，犹两全无害也。 
现代文：不如干脆称为孝宗敬皇帝、武宗毅皇帝，还算是两全其美，不害正统。 
English: It would be better to simply call him Emperor Xiaozongjing or Emperor Wuzongyi. It is the best of both worlds and is not harmful to orthodoxy.

古文：疏入，命再夺俸。
现代文：奏疏递上后，世宗又一次让扣发了他的官俸。
English: After the report was submitted, Sejong once again had his salary withheld.

古文：六年秋，李福达狱起。
现代文：六年秋天，李福达一案再审。
English: In the autumn of 2006, Li Fuda's case was retried.

古文：主狱者璁、萼、献夫，以议礼故憾文华等，乃尽反狱词，下文华与诸法官狱。
现代文：主持再审的张璁、桂萼、方献夫，因为讨论 大礼 一事本来就恨文华这些人，于是把审讯记录全给颠倒过来，把文华和其他法官们关进了监狱。
English: The judges presiding over the retrial, Zhang Qian, Gui Qian and Fang Xianfu, hated Wenhua because of the discussion about the gift, so they turned the trial records upside down and put Wenhua and the other judges in prison.

古文：狱具，责文华阿附御史杀人，遣戍辽阳。
现代文：结案以后，文华被指责为徇私包庇御史杀人，充军辽阳。
English: After the case was closed, Wenhua was accused of covering up the murder of the emperor and joining the Liaoyang army.

古文：遇赦，卒于道。
现代文：后来碰上大赦，死在回乡的道路上了。
English: Later, he encountered an amnesty and died on his way back to his hometown.

古文：隆庆初，赠左佥都御史。
现代文：隆庆初年，朝廷追赠他为左佥都御史。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Zuoying Imperial Historian.

古文：自大学士毛纪、侍郎何孟春去位，诸大臣前争 大礼 者，或依违顺旨，文华顾坚守前议不变。
现代文：自从大学士毛纪、侍郎何孟春罢官后，以前争议 大礼 的大臣们有的就违心地顺从了世宗的意思，文华却坚持以前的意见不变。
English: Since the university scholar Mao Ji and chamberlain He Mengchun retired, some of the ministers who had previously disputed the grand gift have unintentionally obeyed the will of Shizong, but Wenhua has insisted that the previous opinions remain unchanged.

古文：其被谴不以罪，士论深惜之。
现代文：他无罪被充军边疆，当时的官僚士绅对他深感惋惜。
English: He was exiled to the frontier without charge, and the bureaucrats and gentry of the time felt very sorry for him.

