古文：蒋堂侍郎为淮南转运使日，属县例致贺冬至书，皆投书即还。
现代文：宋燕肃莲花漏蒋堂侍郎为淮南转运使时，每年冬至节日，所属各县照例送贺信表示祝贺，都是送信的人放下贺信即返回。
English: When the Song, Yan, Sui, Lotus Leak and Jiangtang attendants were transferred to Huainan, every winter solstice festival, the counties they belonged to sent congratulatory letters as usual. All the senders put down the congratulatory letters and returned.

古文：有一县令使人，独不肯去，须责回书；左右谕之皆不听，以至呵逐亦不去，曰： 宁得罪；不得书，不敢回邑。 
现代文：独有一位县令所派的人不肯随即离去，要求必须有转运使的回信；转运使身边的人劝他走，他都不听，以致呵斥驱逐也不走，还说： 宁可得罪，拿不到回信不敢回县里去。 
English: Only one person sent by the county magistrate refused to leave immediately, demanding a reply from the courier; the courier and those around him urged him to leave, but he did not listen, so much so that he yelled at them not to leave and said, "I'd rather be offended than not get a reply and dare not go back to the county."

古文：时苏子美在坐，颇骇怪，曰： 皂隶如此野很，其令可知。 
现代文：当时苏子美在座，甚为吃惊，觉得奇怪，就说： 这做仆从的都如此蛮横无理，那县令可想而知。 
English: Su Zimei, who was present at the time, was very surprised and found it strange, and said, "These servants are so arrogant and unreasonable. You can imagine what the county magistrate is like."

古文：蒋曰： 不然，令必健者，能使人不敢慢其命令如此。 
现代文：蒋说： 恐怕不是这样。这县令必是一位强干的人，能如此使人不敢怠慢他的命令。 
English: Jiang said, "I'm afraid that's not the case. The county magistrate must be a strong man who can make people not dare to disobey his orders.

古文：乃为一简答之，方去。
现代文：于是就写了一片纸作为答书，那吏人才离去。
English: So he wrote a piece of paper as an answer, and the official left.

古文：子美归吴中月余，得蒋书曰： 县令果健者。 
现代文：子美回到吴中一个多月，收到蒋的信说： 那县令果然是一位强干的人。 
English: Zimei returned to Wuzhong for more than a month and received a letter from Jiang saying: That county magistrate is indeed a strong man.

古文：遂为之延誉，后卒为名臣。
现代文：于是为他传播名誉，后来终于成为名臣。
English: So they spread the word about him, and he eventually became a famous minister.

古文：或云乃大章阁待制杜杞也。
现代文：或说这位县令就是后来的天章阁待制杜杞。
English: Or that this county magistrate was the later Tianzhangge Cuckoo.

古文：盛文肃为尚书右丞，知扬州，简重少所许可。
现代文：盛文肃以尚书右丞的身份为扬州知州，简静持重，对人少有称许。
English: Sheng Wenshu, as Yangzhou Zhizhou with the status of Shang Shuyuan, is simple and calm, and praises few people.

古文：时夏有章自建州司户参军授郑州推官，过扬州，文肃骤称其才雅，明日置酒召之。
现代文：其时夏有章自建州司户参军擢授郑州推官，路过扬州，文肃忽然称赏他有才能风度，第二天设宴招待他。
English: At that time, Xia Yuzhang from Jianzhou Sido joined the army and was promoted to the post of Zhengzhou commander. Passing through Yangzhou, Wenshu suddenly praised him for his talent and demeanor, and held a banquet to invite him the next day.

古文：人有谓有章日： 盛公未尝燕过客，甚器重者方召一饭。 
现代文：有人对有章说： 盛公还不曾宴请过路过的客人，他对极为器重的人才招待一顿饭。 
English: Someone said to Youzhang, "Sheng Gong has never given a banquet to a passing guest, but he has given a meal to a very important person.

古文：有章荷其意，别日为一诗谢之，至客次，先使人持诗以入。
现代文：有章承蒙盛公的情意，他日献上一诗去感谢他，到了旅店住下，先让人拿着他封好的诗笺送到盛公府上。
English: With the intention of honoring Meng Sheng, Zhang offered a poem to thank him on the same day. When he arrived at the hotel to stay, he first had someone take his sealed poem and send it to Sheng's house.

古文：公得诗不发封，即还之，使人谢有章曰： 度已衰老，无用此诗。 不復得见。
现代文：盛公得诗，没有开封就还给来人，并让人答谢有章说： 我盛度已衰老无用了，这诗已不敢承受再看到。 
English: Sheng Gong got the poem, returned it to the visitor without opening the envelope, and had the visitor thank him, saying: I am too old and useless, I can't bear to see this poem again.

古文：有章殊不意，往见通判刁绎，具言所以。
现代文：有章完全没有料到会这样，就去见通判刁绎，仔细说了事情的原委。
English: Some chapters did not expect this at all, so they went to see the judge for interpretation and carefully told the original committee about the matter.

古文：绎亦不谕其由，曰： 府公性多忤，诗中得无激触否？ 
现代文：刁绎也不明白其中的缘由，就说： 盛公性格多与人相抵触，你的诗中有无刺激触犯他的地方？ 
English: Although he did not understand the reason, he said: Sheng Gong's personality is often in conflict with people. Is there any stimulus in your poem that offends him?

古文：有章曰： 无，未曾发封。 
现代文：有章曰： 他原未曾开封。 
English: One chapter says: He never opened it.

古文：又曰： 无乃笔扎不严？ 
现代文：刁绎又说： 是不是你的字迹不工整？ 
English: Zou Yu also said, "Isn't your handwriting sloppy?"

古文：曰： 有章自书，极严谨。 
现代文：有章说： 是我亲自书写的，极为严谨。 
English: One chapter says: I wrote it myself, it is very rigorous.

古文：曰： 如此，必是将命者有所忤耳。 
现代文：刁绎说： 这样看来，那就一定是奉命给你办事的人惹着了盛公。 
English: Zou Yuanyuan said, "From this perspective, it must be the person who was ordered to do things for you who provoked Sheng Guo.

古文：乃往见文肃而问之： 夏有章今日献诗何如？ 
现代文：于是刁绎往见文肃而问他： 夏有章今天献的诗怎么样？ 
English: So he asked Xia Yuzhang, "How is the poem Xia Yuzhang presented today?"

古文：公曰： 不曾读，已还之。 
现代文：盛公说： 不曾看，已还给他。 
English: "I didn't see it, but it was given back to him," Mr. Sheng said.

古文：绎曰： 公始待有章甚厚，今乃不读其诗，何也？ 
现代文：刁绎说： 您先前对有章甚是厚待，现在却连他献的诗都不看，为什么呢？ 
English: Zou Yuanyuan said: You were very generous to You Zhang earlier, but now you don't even look at his poems. Why?

古文：公日： 始见其气韵清修，谓必远器。
现代文：盛公说： 开始见他气韵可嘉，似有清操，以为必是有远大抱负的人才。
English: Sheng Gong said: At first, I thought that he was a person with a good aura, and seemed to have a clear discipline. I thought that he must be a person with lofty ambitions.

古文：今封诗乃自称 新圃田从事 ，得一幕官，遂尔轻脱。
现代文：今天的诗封上竟然自称 新圃田从事 ，得一介幕职官，就如此轻脱！
English: On today's poem cover, he actually claims to be engaged in Shinpoda, and to have been an official of the shogunate, so light-hearted!

古文：君但观之，必止于此官，志已满矣。切记之，他日可验。 
现代文：您就等着看吧，这人一定就做到这点芝麻官，现在他已志得意满了。您切记着，他日会有明验。 
English: You just wait and see, this man will definitely achieve this sesame official, now he is full of pride. You remember, he will have enlightenment one day.

古文：贾文元时为参政，与有章有旧，乃荐为馆职。
现代文：贾文元当时为参知政事，与有章有故旧关系，因而荐举他为馆职。
English: At that time, Jia Wenyuan was a member of the prefectural government and had a long-standing relationship with Youzhang, so he recommended him for the post of librarian.

古文：有诏候到任一年召试，明年除馆阁校勘。御史发其旧事，遂寝夺，改差国子监主簿，仍带郑州推官。
现代文：皇上有旨，等他到任一年后再召试。第二年除授馆阁校勘，御史揭发他旧时的过犯，遂取消对他的任命，改命为国子监主簿，仍兼带郑州推官的职名。
English: The next year, when he was dismissed from the Cabinet of the Grand Council of the Grand Historians, his old misdemeanors were revealed, and his appointment was canceled, and he was appointed as the chief inspector of the National Children's Registry, still with the title of Zhengzhou magistrate.

古文：未几卒于京师。
现代文：没有多久，有章死于京师。
English: Not long after, Zhang died in Beijing.

古文：文肃阅人物多如此，不復挟他术。
现代文：文肃观察人物多像这样，并没有什么诀窍。
English: Many observers in Wenzhou are like this, and they don't have any know-how.

古文：林逋隐居杭州孤山，常畜两鹤，纵之则飞入云霄，盘旋久之，復入笼中。
现代文：林逋隐居杭州孤山，常养着两只鹤，放出笼子就飞入云霄，在天空长时间盘旋，再回到笼中。
English: Lin Qi lived in seclusion in Hangzhou Lone Mountain. He often kept two cranes. When he let them out of the cage, they would fly into the sky, hover in the sky for a long time, and then return to the cage.

古文：逋常泛小艇，游西湖诸寺。有客至逋所居，则一童子出应门，延客坐，为开笼纵鹤。
现代文：逋常常泛小舟游览西湖各寺院，有客人到逋的住处，就有一童子出来，在大门口接待客人坐下，为客人开笼放鹤。
English: Zou often takes a small boat to visit various temples in the West Lake. When guests come to Zou's residence, a boy comes out, welcomes the guests at the gate, sits down, and opens a cage to release a crane for the guests.

古文：良久，逋必棹小船而归。盖尝以鹤飞为验也。
现代文：过好大一阵子，逋一定会划着小船回来，看来他是经常以两鹤放飞为信号的。
English: After a long time, the cormorant will surely come back with a small boat. It seems that he often signals with two cranes flying.

古文：逋高逸倨傲，多所学，唯不能棋。常谓人曰： 逋世间事皆能之，唯不能担粪与着棋。 
现代文：逋清高闲逸，倨傲不群，多才多艺，唯独不能下棋，曾对人说： 我世间事都能做，只是不能担粪与着棋。 
English: Zou Qinghao leisurely, proud, versatile, but can not play chess, once said to people: I can do everything in the world, but I can not carry dung and play chess.

古文：庆历中，有近侍犯法，罪不至死，执政以其情重，请杀之；范希文独无言，退而谓同列曰： 诸公劝人主法外杀近臣，一时虽快意，不宜教手滑。 
现代文：庆历年间，有皇帝身边的侍从犯法，罪不至判死刑，执政大臣以其情节严重，请求杀了他。唯独范希文不说话，退朝后对同僚说： 诸公劝皇上在法律之外杀近臣，虽然一时痛快，但不宜教皇上杀人手滑。 
English: During the jubilee year, there was an attendant around the emperor who broke the law, and his crime did not lead to the death penalty. The ruling minister requested that he be killed because the circumstances were serious. However, Fan Xiwen did not speak, and after retiring from the court, he said to his colleagues: The princes advised the emperor to kill his close minister outside the law. Although it was a momentary pleasure, it was not appropriate for the pope to commit murder.

古文：诸公默然。
现代文：诸公都默然无语。
English: The princes were speechless.

