古文：地之所载，六合之间，四海之内，照之以日月，经之以星辰，纪之以四时，要之以太岁，神灵所生，其物异形，或夭或寿，唯圣人能通其道。
现代文：大地所承载的，包括上下四方之间的万物，在四海以内，有太阳和月亮照明，让星辰在天空中循行，用四季来表示季节的更替，用太岁星来矫正年度的变化，由神灵所产生的物体，它们的形状各不相同，寿命或长或短，只有圣明之人才能懂得其中的道理。
English: What the earth carries, including all things between the four directions, within the four seas, is illuminated by the sun and the moon, allowing the stars to follow in the sky, using the four seasons to indicate the change of seasons, using the Chinese zodiac to correct the changes of the year, the objects produced by the gods, their shapes are different, life is long or short, only the saints can understand the reason.

古文：海外自西南陬至东南陬者。
现代文：海外南经所记载的地方从西南角到东南角。
English: The places recorded by the Overseas Nanjing go from the southwest corner to the southeast corner.

古文：结匈国在其西南，其为人结匈。
现代文：结匈国在海外南经所记之地的西南面，那里的人都长着像鸡胸一样尖削凸出的胸脯。
English: Hungary lies to the south-west of the land described in the Southern Annals of the Bible, where people have pectoral fins that jut out like chicken breasts.

古文：南山在其东南。
现代文：南山在海外南经所记之地的东南面。
English: Nanshan is in the southeast of the land recorded in the Overseas Nanjing.

古文：自此山来，虫为蛇，蛇号为鱼。
现代文：从南山来的人，把虫叫做蛇，把蛇叫做鱼。
English: People from Nanshan call insects "snakes" and snakes "fish."

古文：一曰南山在结匈东南。
现代文：也有一种说法认为南山在结匈国的东南面。
English: There is also a saying that Nanshan is in the southeast of Hungary.

古文：比翼鸟在其东，其为鸟青、赤，两鸟比翼。一曰在南山东。
现代文：比翼鸟栖息在南山的东面，这种鸟有青色、红色间杂的羽毛，两只鸟各有一只翅膀，必须在一起才能飞翔。
English: This bird has blue and red mixed feathers. The two birds each have one wing and must fly together.

古文：羽民国在其东南，其为人长，身生羽。
现代文：也有一种说法认为比翼鸟在南山的东面。羽民国在比翼鸟之地的东南面，那里的人都长着长长的脑袋，全身长满羽毛。
English: There is also a saying that the pterodactyls are on the east side of the South Mountain. The Republic of Korea is on the southeast side of the land of the pterodactyls, where people have long heads and their whole bodies are full of feathers.

古文：一曰在比翼鸟东南，其为人长颊。
现代文：另一种说法认为羽民国在比翼鸟栖息之地的东南面，那里的人都长着一副长长的脸颊。
English: Another theory is that the Republic of Korea is in the southeast of the pterodactyl's habitat, where people have long cheeks.

古文：有神人二八，连臂，为帝司夜于此野。
现代文：有十六位神人，手臂连在一起，在这旷野中为天帝守夜。
English: Sixteen deities, arms linked, stand vigil for the emperor in this wilderness.

古文：在羽民东。其为小人颊赤肩。尽十六人。
现代文：这位神人在羽民国的东面，他们长着小小的脸颊，红色的肩膀，总共只有十六个人。
English: This divine being is in the eastern part of the Republic of Haba. They have small cheeks and red shoulders. There are only sixteen of them in total.

古文：毕方鸟在其东，青水西，其为鸟人面一脚。
现代文：毕方鸟在十六位神人的东面，在青水的西面。这种鸟长着一副人的面孔却只有一只脚。
English: To the east of the 16 deities, and to the west of the blue water, there is a bird with a human face, but only one leg.

古文：一曰在二八神东。
现代文：另一种说法认为毕方鸟在十六位神人的东面。
English: Another theory is that the Bi Fang Bird is to the east of the 16 gods.

古文：讙头国在其南，其为人人面有翼，鸟喙，方捕鱼。
现代文：讙头国在毕方鸟栖息之地的南面，那里的人都长着人的面孔，身上有翅膀，嘴像鸟嘴，正在用他们的嘴捕鱼。
English: Shantou country is in the south of the Bi Fang bird habitat, where people have human faces, wings on their bodies, mouths like bird beaks, and are using their mouths to catch fish.

古文：一曰在毕方东。
现代文：另一种说法认为讙头国在毕方鸟的东面。
English: Another view is that Shantou is to the east of Bifang.

古文：或曰讙朱国。
现代文：还有人认为讙头国就是讙朱国。
English: There are also people who think that Shantou is the same as Shizhu.

古文：厌火国在其国南，兽身黑色。
现代文：厌火国在讙头国的南面，那里的人都长着野兽一样的身子，浑身漆黑，口能吐火。
English: Fire-tolerant country is in the south of Shantou country, where people have the body of a beast, dark all over, and the mouth can spit fire.

古文：生火出其口中。一曰在讙朱东。
现代文：另一种说法认为厌火国在讙朱国的东面。
English: Another theory holds that the Fire-Averse Country is located to the east of the Shu Country.

古文：三株树在厌火北，生赤水上，其为树如柏，叶皆为珠。
现代文：三珠树在厌火国的北面，生长在赤水岸边，那里的树与普通的柏树相似，树叶都是珍珠。
English: The three-pearl tree grows in the north of the Fire Anxious Country, on the shore of the Red Water, where the trees are similar to ordinary cypresses, and the leaves are pearls.

古文：一曰其为树若彗。
现代文：另一种说法认为那里树的形状像扫帚星。
English: Another theory is that the trees there are shaped like broomsticks.

古文：三苗国在赤水东，其为人相随。一曰三毛国。
现代文：三苗国在赤水的东面，那里的人是一个跟着一个地行走。
English: Three seedlings of the country in the east of the Red Water Dragon, where people are walking one by one.

古文：臷国在其东，其为人黄，能操弓射蛇。
现代文：另一种说法认为三苗国就是三毛国。臷国在三苗国的东面，那里的人都是黄色皮肤，能操持弓箭射死蛇。
English: Another theory is that Sanmiao Country is Sanmao Country. Shantou Country is in the east of Sanmiao Country, where people are yellow-skinned and can shoot snakes with bows and arrows.

古文：一曰臷国在三毛东。
现代文：另一种说法认为盛国在三毛国的东面。
English: Another view is that Sheng is to the east of Sanmao.

古文：贯匈国在其东，其为人匈有窍。
现代文：贯匈国在臷国的东边，那里的人都是胸膛上穿个洞。
English: In the eastern part of the country, which runs through Hungary, people have a hole in their chest.

古文：一曰在臷国东。
现代文：另一种说法认为贯匈国在臷国的东面。
English: Another view is that Hungaria lies to the east of the Kingdom of Hungary.

古文：交胫国在其东，其为大交胫。
现代文：交胫国在贯匈国的东面，那里的人总是互相交叉着双腿双脚。
English: In the Land of the Cross, which lies to the east of Hungary, people always cross their legs with each other.

古文：一曰在穿匈东。
现代文：另一种说法认为交胫国在穿匈国的东面。
English: Another theory is that the neighbouring country lies to the east of Hungary.

古文：不死民在其东，其为人黑色，寿，不死。
现代文：不死民在交胫国的东面，那里人皮肤都是黑色，个个长生不死。
English: The undead live in the eastern part of the country, where everyone's skin is black and everyone is immortal.

古文：一曰在穿匈国东。
现代文：另一种说法认为不死民在穿匈国的东面。
English: Another theory is that the undead roam the eastern part of Hungary.

古文：歧舌国在其东。一曰在不死民东。
现代文：歧舌国在不死民的东面，那里的人都是舌根在前、舌尖伸向喉部。另一种说法认为歧舌国在不死民的东面。
English: Another view is that the Land of the Divided Tongue is to the east of the Undead, where people are tongue-tied, with the tip of the tongue extending to the throat.

古文：昆仑虚在其东，虚四方。
现代文：昆仑山在歧舌国的东面，山基呈四方形。
English: Mount Kunlun is located in the east of the country, and its base is square.

古文：一曰在歧舌东，为虚四方。
现代文：另一种说法认为昆仑山在歧舌国的东面，山基向四方延伸。
English: Another view is that Mount Kunlun is in the east of the country, and its base extends in all directions.

古文：羿与凿齿战于寿华之野，羿射杀之。
现代文：羿与凿齿在寿华的原野上交战，羿用箭射死了凿齿。
English: The badger and the chisel tooth fought on the plain of Shouhua. The badger shot the chisel tooth with an arrow.

古文：在昆仑虚东。
现代文：交战的地点位于昆仑虚的东边。
English: The site of the battle is located in the eastern part of Kunlun.

古文：羿持弓矢，凿齿持盾。一曰戈。
现代文：当时羿的手中拿着弓箭，凿齿的手中拿着盾牌，一说凿齿拿的是戈。
English: At that time, the crossbow was holding a bow and arrow, the chisel was holding a shield, and the chisel was holding a club.

古文：三首国在其东，其为人一身三首。
现代文：三首国在它的东面，那里的人都是一个身子三个头。
English: The Three-Headed Kingdom is to the east of it, and the people there have three heads on one body.

古文：周饶国在东，其为人短小，冠带。
现代文：周饶国在三首国的东面，那里的人都是身材矮小，人人戴帽束带。
English: Zhourao is in the east of the Three Kingdoms, where everyone is short and wears a cap and sash.

古文：一曰周饶国在三首东。
现代文：另一种说法认为周饶国在三首国的东面。
English: Another view is that Zhourao is to the east of the three headlands.

古文：长臂国在其东，捕鱼水中，两手保操一鱼。
现代文：长臂国在周饶国的东面，那里的人正在水中捕鱼，左右两只手各抓着一条鱼。
English: The country of the long arms is in the east of the country of Zhourao. The people there are fishing in the water, holding a fish in each hand.

古文：一曰在周饶东，捕鱼海中。
现代文：另一种说法认为长臂国在焦侥国的东面，那里的人是在大海中捕鱼的。
English: Another theory is that the country of the long arms is to the east of the country of Jiaohu, and the people there fished in the sea.

古文：狄山，帝尧葬于阳，帝喾葬于阴。
现代文：狄山，帝尧葬在这座山的阳面，帝喾葬在这座山的阴面。
English: Dizan, Emperor Qian was buried on the sunny side of this mountain, Emperor Qian was buried on the shady side of this mountain.

古文：爰有熊、罴、文虎、蜼、豹、离朱、视肉；吁咽、文王皆葬其所。
现代文：这座山中有熊、罴、有斑纹的虎、长尾猿、豹、离朱和视肉，吁咽和周文王也都葬在这里。
English: In this mountain, there are bears, baboons, striped tigers, long-tailed apes, leopards, Zhu Yizhong and Guozhuang, and King Zhouwen is also buried here.

古文：一曰汤山。
现代文：一说狄山也叫汤山。
English: It is said that Dizan is also called Tangshan.

古文：一曰爰有熊、罴、文虎、蜼、豹、离朱、鸱久、视肉、虖交。
现代文：一说这座山中有熊、罴、有斑纹的虎、长尾猿、豹、离朱、鸲、视肉和虖交。
English: They said that there were bears, baboons, striped tigers, long-tailed monkeys, leopards, ibises, jackals, lynxes and pythons in this mountain.

古文：其范林方三百里。
现代文：这一带有一片方圆三百里大小的范林。
English: In this area there is a grove of camphor trees three hundred miles in circumference.

古文：南祝融，兽身人面，乘两龙。
现代文：南方的祝融神，长着野兽的身子人的面孔，乘着两条龙。
English: The god of the south, Zhu Rong, has the body of a beast and the face of a man, and rides on two dragons.

