古文：起上章滩，尽昭阳大渊献，凡四年。
现代文：起上章滩，尽昭阳大渊献，一共四年。
English: It took a total of four years for Zhaoyang Dayuan to complete Zhaoyang Dayuan.

古文：高祖文皇帝中开皇二十年
现代文：隋文帝开皇二十年
English: Twenty years have passed since the Sui Dynasty was founded

古文：春，二月，熙州人李英林反。
现代文：春季，二月，熙州人李英林率众造反。
English: In the spring, in February, Li Yinglin, a native of Xizhou, led a rebellion.

古文：三月，辛卯，以扬州总管司马河内张衡为行军总管，帅步骑五万讨平之。
现代文：三月，辛卯，隋文帝任命扬州总管司马河内人张衡为行军总管，统帅步兵、骑兵共计五万人讨伐李英林，予以平定。
English: In March, Xinwu, the Sui Emperor appointed Zhang Heng, the Yangzhou general manager and Sima Hanoi native, as the general manager of the march, commanding a total of 50,000 infantry and cavalry to fight against Li Yinglin and subdue it.

古文：贺若弼复坐事下狱，上数之曰： 公有三太猛：嫉妒心太猛，自是、非人心太猛，无上心太猛。 
现代文：贺若弼又获罪而被捕入狱。隋文帝列举他的罪状说： 你有三个太过份：嫉妒心太过份；自以为是、贬抑别人太过份；目无尊上太过份。 
English: He Ruoqian was again found guilty and was sent to prison. Sui Wen Di listed his charges and said: You have three too much: jealousy is too much; self-righteousness and disparaging others is too much; arrogance is too much.

古文：既而释之。
现代文：但不久文帝就释放了他。
English: However, Emperor Wen soon released him.

古文：他日，上谓侍臣曰： 弼将伐陈，谓高颎曰： 陈叔宝可平也。不作高鸟尽、良弓藏邪？ 
现代文：一天，文帝对侍臣说： 贺若弼在即将讨伐陈国的时候，对高说： 陈叔宝一定要被平灭了，皇帝不就会做飞鸟灭绝、良弓收藏起来的事吗？ 
English: One day, Emperor Wen said to his courtiers: When He Ruoqian was about to attack the State of Chen, he said to Gao, "Chen Shubao must be wiped out, otherwise the emperor will exterminate flying birds and collect good bows."

古文：颎云 必不然。 
现代文：高说： 绝不会这样的。 
English: Gao said, "This will never happen."

古文：及平陈，遽索内史，又索仆射。
现代文：在平定陈国之后，贺若弼就急忙索要内史令，又索要仆射等官职。
English: After subduing Chen Guo, He Ruoqi hurriedly asked for the order of internal history, and also asked for official positions such as the deputy commander.

古文：我语颎曰： 功臣正宜授勋官，不可预朝政。 
现代文：我对高说： 功臣是应当授以勋官的，但是不能干预朝政。 
English: I said to Gao: A meritorious subject should be awarded with a decoration, but he cannot interfere with the imperial government.

古文：弼后语颎： 皇太子于己，出口入耳，无所不尽。
现代文：贺若弼后来对高说： 皇太子和我之间，无论什么机密，都无所不言，言无不尽。
English: He Ruoqi later said to Gao: Between the crown prince and me, no matter what secrets, there is nothing left unsaid, nothing left unsaid.

古文：公终久何必不得弼力，何脉脉邪！ 
现代文：您为什么不来依靠我的势力，何必不吐实呢？ 
English: Why don't you come to rely on my power, why don't you tell the truth?

古文：意图广陵，又图荆州，皆作乱之地，意终不改也。 
现代文：贺若弼早就想谋取广陵，还想谋取荆州，这两地都是适于作乱的地方。这个意图他一直没有改变。 
English: He has long wanted to seize Guangling and Jingzhou, both of which are suitable places for creating turmoil. He has not changed this intention.

古文：夏，四月，壬戌，突厥达头可汗犯塞，诏命晋王广、杨素出灵武道，汉王谅、史万岁出马邑道以击之。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬戌，突厥达头可汗率军侵犯隋帝国的边境。隋文帝颁下诏书，命令晋王杨广、大将杨素率兵出灵武道，汉王杨谅、大将史万岁率兵出马邑道，阻击突厥军队的入侵。
English: In the summer, in April, the Turkic leader Khan led his army to invade the border of the Sui Empire. The Sui Emperor issued an edict, ordering the Jin King Yang Guang and General Yang Su to lead their troops out of Lingwu, and the Han King Yang Qian and General Shi Wan Rong to lead their troops out of Ma'i, to block the invasion of the Turkic army.

古文：长孙晟帅降人为秦州行军总管，受晋王节度。
现代文：长孙晟统帅着归降的军队，被任命为秦州行军总管，受晋王杨广节制。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, commanded the army that surrendered, and was appointed the general manager of the Qin march. He was restrained by the Jin king, Yang Guang.

古文：晟以突厥饮泉，易可行毒，因取诸药毒水上流，突厥人畜饮之多死，于是大惊曰： 天雨恶水，其亡我乎！ 
现代文：长孙晟认为突厥人饮用泉水，可以在水中投毒，于是就在泉水上游投毒。突厥人与牲畜饮水后很多被毒死，他们大惊失措地说： 天降恶水，天要亡我们了！ 
English: The eldest grandson Yao thought that the Turks drank spring water and could poison the water, so he poisoned the upper reaches of the spring water. Many Turks and livestock were poisoned after drinking water. They said in great shock: The sky has fallen evil water, the sky is going to kill us!

古文：因夜遁。
现代文：于是连夜逃走。
English: So he fled overnight.

古文：晟追之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：长孙晟率军追杀，斩敌首级一千余。
English: The eldest grandson Zou led the army to chase and kill, killing more than a thousand of the enemy.

古文：史万岁出塞，至大斤山，与虏相遇。
现代文：史万岁率军出边塞，行至大斤山，与突厥军相遇。
English: Shi Wanling led the army out of the border fortress, went to Dajin Mountain, and met with the Turkish army.

古文：达头遣使问： 隋将为谁？ 
现代文：达头可汗派遣使者询问： 隋朝大将是哪位？ 
English: Dagou Khan sent an envoy to inquire: Who is the grand marshal of the Sui Dynasty?

古文：候骑报： 史万岁也。 
现代文：隋军候骑报道： 史万岁！ 
English: Sui Army waiting to ride reported: Long live Shi!

古文：突厥复问： 得非敦煌戍卒乎？ 候骑曰： 是也。 
现代文：使者又问： 莫不是当年威震敦煌的那个配军？ 候骑回答： 是的。 
English: The envoy also asked: Isn't it the same team that defeated Dunhuang back in the day? The rider replied: Yes.

古文：达头惧而引去。
现代文：达头可汗惧怕史万岁的威名引军退去。
English: The powerful khan feared that Shi Wanling's prestige would lead the army to retreat.

古文：万岁驰追百馀里，纵击，大破之，斩数千级；逐北，入碛数百里，虏远遁而还。
现代文：史万岁率军纵马飞驰追杀了一百多里，大破突厥军，斩敌首级几千余，并追击败兵，进入沙漠几百里，直到突厥军逃远了才还师。
English: Shi Wanlai led the army to chase the horse for more than a hundred miles, smashed the Turkish army, cut off more than a thousand enemy heads, and chased the defeated soldiers into the desert for several hundred miles, until the Turkish army fled far away before returning.

古文：诏遣长孙晟复还大利城，安抚新附。
现代文：文帝下诏书派遣长孙晟再返回大利城任职，安抚新归附的百姓。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to send his eldest son, Sun Yat-sen, back to Italy to reassure the newly annexed people.

古文：达头复遣其弟子俟利伐从碛东攻启民，上又发兵助启民守要路；俟利伐退走入碛。
现代文：不久，达头可汗又派他的侄子俟利伐从沙漠东面攻打启民可汗。隋文帝再次发兵协助启民可汗防守军事要道。俟利伐只得退入沙漠。
English: Not long after, Tatou Khan sent his nephew Qiliwa to attack Qimin Khan from the east of the desert. The Sui Emperor once again sent troops to help Qimin Khan defend the military road. Qiliwa had to retreat into the desert.

古文：启民上表陈谢曰： 大隋圣人可汗怜养百姓，如天无不覆，地无不载。
现代文：启民可汗向隋文帝上表陈谢说： 大隋圣人可汗怜惜百姓，您的恩德犹如天无不覆、地无不载一样。
English: Qimin Khan expressed his gratitude to the Sui Emperor, saying: Great Sui sage Khan, have mercy on the people. Your benevolence is like heaven and earth.

古文：染干如枯木更叶，枯骨更肉，千世万世，常为大隋典羊马也。 
现代文：染干得到您的恩惠，如枯树长出新叶，枯骨长出新肉一样，愿意千世万代崐，永远为大隋牧养牛马。 
English: Dyeing and drying to get your favor, like a dead tree grows new leaves, and a dead bone grows new meat, I am willing to work for thousands of generations, forever raising cattle and horses for the great Sui Mu.

古文：帝又遣赵仲卿为启民筑金河、定襄二城。
现代文：文帝又派遣赵仲卿为启民可汗修筑金河、定襄两座城池。
English: Emperor Wen also sent Zhao Zhongqing to build two castles, Jinhe and Dingxiang, for the Qimin Khan.

古文：秦孝王俊久疾，未能起，遣使奉表陈谢。
现代文：秦孝王杨俊久病而不能起，他派遣使者向隋文帝上表陈谢。
English: Qin Xiao Wang Yang Jun was ill for a long time and could not get up. He sent an envoy to Sui Emperor Wen to express his thanks.

古文：上谓其使者曰： 我戮力创兹大业，作训垂范，庶臣下守之。
现代文：文帝对他派来的使者说： 我竭尽全力创下此大业，制定了典章制度颁布下来作为人们遵守的准则，期望臣下都要遵守。
English: Emperor Wen said to the envoy sent by him: I have made every effort to create this great cause, and have formulated a system of regulations to be promulgated as a standard for people to abide by, and I expect my subjects to abide by it.

古文：汝为吾子，而欲败之，不知何以责汝！ 
现代文：你作为我的儿子反而要败坏它，我不知如何责罚你！ 
English: You, as my son, want to corrupt it, and I don't know how to punish you!

古文：俊惭怖，疾遂笃，乃复拜俊上柱国；六月，丁丑，俊薨。
现代文：杨俊既羞愧又恐惧，病势愈加沉重。于是文帝再次授杨俊为上柱国。六月，丁丑，秦孝王杨俊去世。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Yang Jun's illness became more and more serious. Therefore, Emperor Wen once again awarded Yang Jun the title of Shangzhu Guo. In June, Dingwu, Qin Xiaowang Yang Jun passed away.

古文：上哭之，数声而止。
现代文：文帝得讯哭了几声也就罢了。
English: It only took a few tears for Emperor Wen to get the message.

古文：俊所为侈丽之物，悉命焚之。
现代文：杨俊生前所制做的奢侈华丽的物品，文帝命令全部烧毁。
English: Emperor Wen ordered all the luxurious and ornate objects made by Yang Jun before his death to be burned.

古文：王府僚佐请立碑，上曰： 欲求名，一卷史书足矣，何用碑为！
现代文：王府内的官吏们请求为杨俊立碑，文帝说： 要是追求名节，一卷史书就足够了，何必用碑呢？
English: The officials in the royal palace requested to erect a monument for Yang Jun. Emperor Wen said, "If you are pursuing a famous festival, a history book is enough. Why do you need a monument?

古文：若子孙不能保家，徒与人作镇石耳！ 
现代文：若子孙们不能保持家业，碑岂不白白地给人家作镇石了吗！ 
English: If the children and grandchildren cannot maintain the family business, will the monument not be used in vain as a foundation stone for others?

古文：俊子浩，崔妃所生也；庶子曰湛。
现代文：杨俊的儿子杨浩是崔王妃所生，另一个儿子杨湛是妾所生。
English: Yang Jun's son Yang Hao was born to Princess Cui, and another son, Yang Zhan, was born to a concubine.

古文：群臣希旨，奏称： 汉之栗姬子荣、郭后子强皆随母废，今秦王二子，母皆有罪，不合承嗣。 
现代文：群臣为了迎合文帝的旨意，便奏请说： 汉代栗姬的儿子刘荣，郭皇后的儿子刘疆都因其母获罪而被废黜。如今杨俊两个儿子的母亲也都犯了罪，所以他们也不应该作为继承人。 
English: In order to cater to the will of Emperor Wen, the group of courtiers made a request: Liu Rong, the son of the Han Dynasty Li Ji, and Liu Jiang, the son of the Guo Empress, were both deposed because of their mother's crime. Now the mothers of Yang Jun's two sons have also committed a crime, so they should not be heirs.

古文：上从之，以秦国官为丧主。
现代文：文帝听从了他们的意见，以秦孝王封国内的官员为丧主主持祭祀。
English: Emperor Wen heeded their advice and appointed Qin Xiao Wangfeng, a domestic official, as the chief mourner to preside over the ceremony.

古文：初，上使太子勇参决军国政事，时有损益，上皆纳之。
现代文：当初，隋文帝让太子杨勇参与决策军国政事，他经常提出批评建议，文帝都采纳了。
English: At first, Emperor Wen of Sui let Prince Yang Yong participate in the decision-making of military and political affairs. He often made criticisms and suggestions, which Emperor Wen accepted.

古文：勇性宽厚，率意任情，无矫饰之行。
现代文：杨勇性情宽厚，直率热情，平易近人，无弄虚作假的品行。
English: Yang Yong has a generous disposition, straightforward enthusiasm, approachable, and no pretense.

古文：上性节俭，勇尝文饰蜀铠，上见而不悦，戒之曰： 自古帝王未有好奢侈而能久长者。汝为储后，当以俭约为先，乃能奉承宗庙。
现代文：文帝本性崇尚节俭，杨勇曾经在已经很精美华丽的蜀地出的铠甲上再加装饰，文帝看到后很不高兴，他告诫杨勇说： 自古以来帝王无一喜好奢侈而能长久的，你作为皇位继承人，应当以节俭为先，这样才能承继宗庙。
English: Emperor Wen advocated frugality by nature. Yang Yong once added decorations to the already exquisite and gorgeous armor from Shu. Emperor Wen was very unhappy when he saw it. He admonished Yang Yong, saying: Since ancient times, no emperor likes luxury and can last for a long time. As the heir to the throne, you should be frugal first, so that you can inherit the ancestral temple.

古文：吾昔日衣服，各留一物，时复观之以自警戒。
现代文：我过去的衣服，都各留一件，时常取出它们观看以告诫自己。
English: I keep one of each of my old clothes and take them out to look at them from time to time to remind myself.

古文：恐汝以今日皇太子之心忘昔时之事，故赐汝以我旧所带刀一枚，并菹酱一合，汝昔作上士时常所食也。
现代文：恐怕你已经以当今皇太子自居而忘却了过去的事情，因此我赐给你一把我旧时所佩带的刀，一盒你旧日为上士时常常吃的腌菜。
English: I'm afraid you've forgotten the past by pretending to be the crown prince today, so I'll give you a knife I used to carry, and a box of pickles you used to eat when you were a staff sergeant.

古文：若存记前事，应知我心。 
现代文：要是你还能记得以前的事，你就应该懂得我的良苦用心。 
English: If you can still remember the past, you should understand my good intentions.

古文：后遇冬至，百官皆诣勇，勇张乐受贺。
现代文：后来到了冬至，百官都去见杨勇，杨勇排列乐队接受百官的祝贺。
English: Later, at the winter solstice, all the dignitaries went to see Yang Yong, and Yang Yong arranged the band to accept the congratulations of the dignitaries.

古文：上知之，问朝臣曰： 近闻至日内外百官相帅朝东宫，此何礼也？ 
现代文：文帝知道了这件事，就问朝臣： 最近听说冬至那天朝廷内外百官都去朝见太子，这是什么礼法？ 
English: When Emperor Wen learned of this, he asked the courtier: I recently heard that on the day of the winter solstice, hundreds of officials from both inside and outside the court went to see the crown prince. What kind of etiquette is this?

古文：太常少卿辛亶对曰： 于东宫，乃贺也，不得言朝。 
现代文：太常少卿辛回答： 百官到东宫，是祝贺，不能说是朝见。 
English: Too often, Shaoqing Xin replied: The arrival of hundreds of officials to the East Palace is a congratulation, but it cannot be said to be a morning meeting.

古文：上曰： 贺者正可三数十人，随情各去，何乃有司征召，一时普集！
现代文：文帝说： 祝贺的人应该三五十人，随意各自去，为什么由有关部门召集，一时间百官都集中起来同去？
English: Wendi said, "There should be thirty to fifty people congratulating each other, and they can go as they please. Why should the relevant departments call them together, and all the officials gather at once and go together?

古文：太子法服设乐以待之，可乎？ 
现代文：太子身穿礼服奏乐来接待百官，能这样吗？ 
English: Can the crown prince wear a gown and play music to receive dignitaries?

古文：因下诏曰： 礼有等差，君臣不杂。
现代文：于是文帝下诏说： 礼法有等级差别，君臣之间不能混杂。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: There is a class difference in etiquette, and there must not be any mixing between monarchs and their subjects.

古文：皇太子虽居上嗣，义兼臣子，而诸方岳牧正冬朝贺，任土作贡，别上东宫；事非典则，宜悉停断！ 
现代文：皇太子虽然是皇帝的继承人，但从礼义上讲也是臣子，各地方长官在冬至节来朝贺，进献自己辖地的特产，但另外给皇太子上贡，这就不符合典章制度了，应该全部停止。 
English: Although the crown prince is the emperor's heir, he is also a courtier from the point of view of etiquette. Local governors come to congratulate the emperor on the winter solstice, presenting the special products of their jurisdiction, but also pay tribute to the crown prince. This is not in line with the award system, and should all be stopped.

古文：自是恩宠始衰，渐生猜阻。
现代文：从此，文帝对杨勇的恩宠开始衰落，渐渐有了猜疑和戒心。
English: From then on, Emperor Wen's favor for Yang Yong began to wane, and he gradually became suspicious and wary.

古文：勇多内宠，昭训云氏尤幸。
现代文：杨勇有很多姬妾，他对昭训云氏尤其宠爱。
English: Yang Yong had many concubines, and he was particularly fond of Zhao Xunyun.

古文：其妃元氏无宠，遇心疾，二日而薨，独孤后意有他故，其责望勇。
现代文：杨勇的妃子元氏不得宠，突然崐得了心疾，两天就死了。独孤皇后认为这里还有别的缘故，对杨勇很是责备。
English: Yang Yong's favorite concubine, Yuan Shi, suddenly developed a heart condition and died two days later. The lonely empress thought there was another reason for this, and was very critical of Yang Yong.

古文：自是云昭训专内政，生长宁王俨、平原王裕、安成王筠；高良娣生安平王嶷、襄城王恪；王良媛生高阳王该、建安王韶；成姬生颍川王煚；后宫生孝实、孝范。
现代文：此后，云昭训总揽东宫内的事务，她生了长宁王杨俨、平原王杨裕、安成王杨筠；高良娣生了安平王杨嶷、襄城王杨恪；王良媛生了高阳王杨该、建安王杨韶；成姬生了颍川王杨；其他的宫人生了杨孝实、杨孝范。
English: After that, Yun Zhaoxun was in charge of the affairs of the Eastern Court. She gave birth to Changning King Yang Jie, Pingyuan King Yang Yu, Ancheng King Yang Jie; Gao Liang Jie gave birth to Anping King Yang Jie, Xiangcheng King Yang Jie; Wang Liang Yuan gave birth to Gaoyang King Yang Jie, Jian'an King Yang Jie; Cheng Ji gave birth to Xichuan King Yang Jie; and other court members gave birth to Yang Xiaosi and Yang Xiao Fan.

古文：后弥不平，颇遣人伺察，求勇过恶。
现代文：独孤皇后更加不高兴，经常派人来窥伺探查，找杨勇的过失和罪过。
English: The lonely empress was even more unhappy. She often sent people to spy on Yang Yong and find his faults and sins.

古文：晋王广，弥自矫饰，唯与萧妃居处，后庭有子皆不育，后由是数称广贤。
现代文：晋王杨广了解这件事后就更加伪装自己，他只和萧妃住在一起，对后宫所生子女都不去抚育，独孤皇后因此多次称赞杨广有德行。
English: After learning about this, Yang Guang, the King of Jin, disguised himself even more. He only lived with Xiao Fei and did not raise any children born in the harem. Therefore, the lonely queen repeatedly praised Yang Guang for his virtue.

古文：大臣用事者，广皆倾心与交。
现代文：朝廷中执掌朝政的重臣，杨广都尽心竭力地与他们结交。
English: Yang Guangdu, the chief minister in charge of the government in the imperial court, tried his best to make friends with them.

古文：上及后每遣左右至广所，无贵贱，广必与萧妃迎门接引，为设美馔，申以厚礼；婢仆往来者，无不称其仁孝。
现代文：文帝和独孤皇后每次派身边的人到杨广的住处，无论来人的地位高低，杨广必定和萧妃一起在门口迎接，为来人摆设盛宴，并厚赠礼品。于是来往的奴婢仆人没有不称颂杨广为人仁爱贤孝的。
English: Every time Emperor Wen and the lonely empress sent people around to Yang Guang's residence, no matter how high or low the status of the visitors was, Yang Guang and Xiaofei would certainly meet them at the door, set up a feast for the visitors, and give them gifts. Therefore, the slaves and servants who came and went did not fail to praise Yang Guang as a benevolent and virtuous person.

古文：上与后尝幸其第，广悉屏匿美姬于别室，唯留老丑者，衣以缦彩，给事左右；屏帐改用缣素；故绝乐器之弦，不令拂去尘埃。
现代文：文帝与独孤皇后曾经驾临杨广的府第，杨广将他的美姬都藏到别的房间里，只留下年老貌丑之人身着没有文饰的衣服来服侍伺侯。房间里的屏帐都改用朴素的幔帐，断绝琴瑟丝弦，不让拂去上面的灰尘。
English: Emperor Wen and the lonely queen once arrived at Yang Guang's mansion. Yang Guang hid his beauty in another room, leaving only an old and ugly person wearing clothes without decoration to serve and wait. The screens in the room were replaced with simple curtains, cut off the silk strings of the piano, and did not allow the dust to be brushed off.

古文：上见之，以为不好声色，还宫，以语侍臣，意甚喜。
现代文：文帝看到这种情况，以为杨广不爱好声色，返回皇宫后，告诉侍臣这一情况。
English: When Emperor Wen saw this, he thought that Yang Guang did not like loud noises. After returning to the imperial palace, he told his courtiers about this situation.

古文：侍臣皆称庆，由是爱之特异诸子。
现代文：他感到非常高兴，侍臣们也都向文帝祝贺。从此，文帝喜爱杨广超出别的儿子。
English: He was very happy, and his courtiers also congratulated Emperor Wen. From then on, Emperor Wen loved Yang Guang more than any other son.

古文：上密令善相者来和遍视诸子，对曰： 晋王眉上双骨隆起，贵不可言。 
现代文：文帝命令善于看相的来和暗中把他的儿子们都看了一遍，来和回答： 晋王杨广眉上有双骨隆起，贵不可言。 
English: Emperor Wen ordered an expert in physiognomy to come and secretly look at his sons and answer: Jin King Yang Guang has a bony bump on his eyebrow, he is very precious.

古文：上又问上仪同三司韦鼎： 我诸儿谁得嗣位？ 
现代文：文帝又问上仪同三司韦鼎： 我这些儿子，哪个可以继承皇位？ 
English: Emperor Wen also asked Shang Yi and the three Wei Ding: My sons, which one can inherit the throne?

古文：对曰： 至尊、皇后所最爱者当与之，非臣敢预知也。 
现代文：韦鼎回答： 陛下和皇后最喜爱的儿子应当继承皇位，这不是我敢预知的。 
English: Wei Ding replied: Your Majesty and the Queen's favorite son should succeed to the throne, this is not something I dare to predict.

古文：上笑曰： 卿不肯显言邪！ 
现代文：文帝笑道： 你不肯明说呀！ 
English: Emperor Wen laughed and said, "You won't say it!

古文：晋王广美姿仪，性敏慧，沉深严重；好学，善属文；敬接朝士，礼极卑屈；由是声名籍甚，冠于诸王。
现代文：晋王杨广容貌俊美，举止优雅，性情聪颖机敏，性格深沉持重，喜好学习，擅长作文章，对朝中之士恭敬结交，待人非常礼貌谦卑，因此他的声誉很盛，高于文帝其他的儿子。
English: Yang Guang, the King of Jin, was handsome and beautiful, elegant in demeanor, intelligent and quick-witted, with a deep and dignified character, fond of learning, good at writing articles, respectful and friendly to the people of the dynasty, and very polite and humble in his treatment of others. Therefore, his reputation was very prosperous, higher than the other sons of Emperor Wen.

古文：广为扬州总管，入朝，将还镇，入宫辞后，伏地流涕，后亦泫然泣下。
现代文：杨广被任命为扬州总管，去朝见文帝，将要返回扬州，他进皇宫向独孤皇后辞行，跪在地上流泪，独孤皇后也潸然泪下。
English: Yang Guang was appointed governor of Yangzhou. He went to the imperial court to meet Emperor Wen and was about to return to Yangzhou. He went into the imperial palace to tender his resignation to the lonely queen. He knelt on the ground and shed tears. The lonely queen also burst into tears.

古文：广曰： 臣性识愚下，常守平生昆弟之意，不知何罪失爱东宫，恒蓄成怒，欲加屠陷。
现代文：杨广说： 我性情见识愚笨低下，常常顾念平时兄弟之间的感情，不知什么地方得罪了皇太子，他常常满怀怒气，想对我诬陷杀害。
English: Yang Guang said: My temperament is stupid and low, I often think about the feelings between brothers in peacetime, I don't know where I offended the crown prince, he is often full of anger and wants to frame me for murder.

古文：每恐谗谮生于投杼，鸩毒遇于杯勺，是用勤忧积念，惧履危亡。 
现代文：我常常恐惧谗言出于亲人之口、酒具食器中被投入毒药的事情发生，因此我非常忧虑，念念在心，忧惧遭到危亡的命运。 
English: I'm often afraid of gossip coming out of the mouths of my relatives, of poison being put into wine or food, so I'm very worried, I'm thinking about it in my heart, I'm worried about the fate of being endangered.

古文：后忿然曰： 睍地伐渐不可耐，我为之娶元氏女，竟不以夫妇礼待之。专宠阿云，使有如许豚犬。
现代文：独孤皇后气忿地说： 地伐越发让人无法忍受了。我给他娶了元氏的女儿，他竟然不以夫妇之礼对待元氏，却特别宠爱阿云，使元氏生下了这么多猪狗一般的儿子。
English: The lonely queen said angrily, "It's getting more and more unbearable. I married Mr. Yuan's daughter to him. He didn't treat Mr. Yuan as a husband and wife, but he especially loved Ah Yun, causing Mr. Yuan to give birth to so many pig-dog sons."

古文：前新妇遇毒而夭，我亦不能穷治，何故复于汝发如此意！
现代文：先前，儿媳妇元氏被毒害而死，我也不能特别地追究此事。为什么他对你又生出如此念头！
English: Previously, Mr. Yuan's daughter-in-law was poisoned to death, and I can't specifically investigate this matter. Why did he have such a thought about you again!

古文：我在尚尔，我死后，当鱼肉汝乎！
现代文：我还活着，他就如此！我死后，他就该残害你们了！
English: I'm alive, so is he! When I'm dead, he'll have to kill you!

古文：每思东宫竟无正嫡，至尊千秋万岁之后，遣汝等兄弟向阿云儿前再拜问讯，此是几许苦痛邪！ 
现代文：我每每想到东宫皇太子竟然没有正室，在你们皇父百年之后，让你们兄弟几个跪拜问候阿云儿，这是多么痛苦的事啊！ 
English: Every now and then I think of the Crown Prince of the Eastern Palace not having a legal wife, and how painful it must have been for your brothers to have to kneel and greet Ayun Er after your father had been dead for a hundred years!

古文：广又拜，呜咽不能止，后亦悲不自胜。
现代文：杨广又跪在地上，呜咽不止，独孤皇后也悲伤得不能自抑。
English: Yang Guang knelt on the ground again, sobbing more and more, and the lonely queen was too sad to control herself.

古文：自是后决意欲废勇立广矣。
现代文：从此独孤皇后下决心要废掉杨勇而立杨广为太子。
English: From then on, the lonely empress resolved to abolish Yang Yong and establish Yang Guang as the prince.

古文：广与安州总管宇文述素善，欲述近己，奏为寿州刺史。
现代文：杨广与安州总管宇文述素来要好，他想拉拢宇文述，于是奏请任命宇文述为寿州刺史。
English: Yang Guang has always been friendly with the head of Anzhou, Wu Wenshu. He wanted to woo Wu Wenshu, so he petitioned to appoint Wu Wenshu as the governor of Shoushou.

古文：广尤亲任总管司马张衡，衡为广画夺宗之策。
现代文：杨广尤其亲近信任总管司马张衡，张衡为杨广筹划谋取皇太子地位。
English: Yang Guang is particularly close to the chief trustee, Sima Zhang Heng, and Zhang Heng plans for Yang Guang to seek the position of crown prince.

古文：广问计于述，述曰： 皇太子失爱已久，令德不闻于天下。
现代文：杨广向宇文述请教计策，宇文述说： 皇太子失去皇帝的喜爱已经很久了，杨勇的德行不为天下人所了解。
English: Yang Guang asked Yu Wenshu about the strategy, and Yu Wenshu said: The crown prince has lost the emperor's favor for a long time, and Yang Yong's virtue is not known to the world.

古文：大王仁孝著称，才能盖世，数经将领，频有大功；主上之与内宫，咸所钟爱，四海之望，实归大王。
现代文：大王以仁孝著称，才能盖世，您几次被任命为统帅军队的将领，屡建大功；皇帝与皇后都对您非常钟爱，四海之内的声望，实际上已为大王所有。
English: The great king is famous for his benevolence and filial piety, which can only be achieved in the world. You have been appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army several times, and have repeatedly made great achievements. The emperor and the queen are very fond of you. The reputation within the four seas has actually been owned by the great king.

古文：然废立者国家大事，处人父子骨肉之间，诚未易谋也。
现代文：但是太子的废立是国家大事，而我处在你们父子骨肉之间，实在不好谋划。
English: But the dethronement of the crown prince is a national event, and I am between your father and son, so it's really hard to plan.

古文：然能移主上意者，唯杨素耳，素所与谋者唯其弟约。
现代文：然而能使皇帝改变主意的人只有杨素，能与杨素商量筹划的人只有他弟弟杨约。
English: However, the only person who could change the emperor's mind was Yang Su, and the only person who could discuss and plan with Yang Su was his brother Yang You.

古文：述雅知约，请朝京师，与约相见，共图之。 
现代文：我很了解杨约，请您派我去京师，与杨约相见，一起筹划这件事。 
English: I know Yangyou very well. Please send me to Beijing to meet with Yangyou and plan this together.

古文：广大悦，多赍金宝，资述入关。
现代文：杨广非常高兴，送给宇文述许多金宝，资助他入关进京。
English: Yang Guang was very happy and gave many gold and silver treasures to Yu Wenshu to help him enter Beijing.

古文：约时为大理少卿，素凡有所为，皆先筹于约而后行之。
现代文：杨约当时是大理少卿，杨素凡是要做什么事，都先和杨约商量后再做。
English: At that time, Yang Yao was Dali Shaoqing. Whenever Yang Su wanted to do something, he would first discuss it with Yang Yao before doing it.

古文：述请约，盛陈器玩，与之酣畅，因而共博，每阳不胜，所赍金宝尽输之约。
现代文：宇文述邀请杨约，陈设了许多玩物器皿，和他一起畅饮，一起赌博。每次宇文述都装作下输了，把杨广所送的金宝都输给了杨约。
English: Yu Wenshu invited Yang Yao, set up many toys and utensils, drank with him, and gambled with him. Every time, Yu Wenshu pretended to lose, and lost all the gold and treasure sent by Yang Guang to Yang Yao.

古文：约所得既多，稍以谢述。
现代文：杨约得到很多金宝，就向宇文述略表谢意。
English: Yang You got a lot of treasure, and expressed a little gratitude to Yu Wenshu.

古文：述因曰： 此晋王之赐，令述与公为欢乐耳。 
现代文：宇文述就说： 这些金宝是晋王杨广的赏赐，让我与你一起玩乐的。 
English: Yu Wenshu said: These golden treasures are the reward of the Jin King Yang Guang, let me have fun with you.

古文：约大惊曰： 何为尔？ 
现代文：杨约大吃一惊，说： 为什么？ 
English: Yangyou was taken aback and said, "Why?

古文：述因通广意，说之曰： 夫守正履道，固人臣之常致；反经合义，亦达者之令图。
现代文：宇文述就转达了杨广的意思，劝说杨约： 恪守常规固然是人臣的本份，但是违反常规以符合道义，也是明智之人的期望。
English: Yu Wenshu conveyed Yang Guang's meaning and persuaded Yang You: Adhering to the routine is certainly the duty of a vassal, but violating the routine to conform to morality is also the expectation of a wise person.

古文：自古贤人君子，莫不与时消息以避祸患。
现代文：自古的贤人君子，没有不关注世情以避免祸患的。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a wise man or gentleman who did not pay attention to the world situation to avoid the scourge.

古文：公之兄弟，功名盖世，当途用事有年矣，朝臣为足下家所屈辱者，可胜数哉！
现代文：你们兄弟功名盖世，执掌大权有多年了，朝臣中被您家侮辱的人数得清吗？
English: Your brothers are famous for their achievements and have been in power for many years. Do you know how many courtiers have been insulted by your family?

古文：又，储后以所欲不行，每切齿于执政；公虽自结于人主，而欲危公者固亦多矣！
现代文：还有，皇太子往往想做的事而不能做到，常常切齿痛恨当政的大臣；您虽然主动地结好于皇上，但是要危害您的人本来就很多啊！
English: Also, the crown prince often wants to do something but cannot do it, and often grinds his teeth and hates the minister in power; although you are actively better than the emperor, there are many people who want to harm you!

古文：主上一旦弃群臣，公亦何以取庇！
现代文：皇上一旦弃群臣而去，您又靠谁来庇护呢？
English: Once the Emperor abandons his courtiers, who will you rely on for protection?

古文：今皇太子失爱于皇后，主上素有废黜之心，此公所知也。
现代文：现在皇太子不为皇后所喜爱，皇上平素就有废黜皇太子的意思，这您是知道的。
English: Now, the crown prince is not liked by the queen, and the Lord has always had the idea of abolishing the throne, as you know.

古文：今若请立晋王，在贤兄之口耳。
现代文：现在要是请皇上立晋王杨广为太子，那就全凭您哥哥的嘴了。
English: If you ask for Prince Jin to be made crown prince, say only one thing to your brother.

古文：诚能因此时建大功，王必永铭骨髓，斯则去累卵之危，成太山之安也。 
现代文：要是真能在这时建立大功，晋王必定永远将这事铭记心中，这样您就可以去掉累卵之危，而地位象泰山一样的安全稳固了。 
English: If you can really establish a great achievement at this time, Jin Wang will always keep this in mind, so that you can get rid of the danger of being burdened with eggs, and your position will be as safe and stable as Mount Tai.

古文：约然之，因以白素。
现代文：杨约深以为然，就将此话告诉了杨素。
English: Yang Yoshen was convinced and told Yang Su this.

古文：素闻之，大喜，抚掌曰： 吾之智思，殊不及此，赖汝启予。 
现代文：杨素听了，非常高兴，拍着手说： 我的智慧思虑远远达不到这儿，全仗你启发了我。 
English: Yang Su listened, was very happy, clapped his hands and said: My wisdom and thoughts are far from here, you have inspired me all the way.

古文：约知其计行，复谓素曰： 今皇后之言，上无不用，宜因机会早自结托，则长保荣禄，传祚子孙。
现代文：杨约知道他的计策成功了，又对杨素说： 现在皇后的建议，皇帝无不采纳。应当趁机会早早自动结交依靠皇后，就会长久地保住荣华富贵，并传给子孙后代。
English: Yang You knew that his stratagem was successful, and he said to Yang Su, "Nowadays, the emperor accepts all of the empress's suggestions. He should take the opportunity to make friends with the empress early and rely on her, and he will keep his glory and wealth for a long time and pass it on to future generations."

古文：兄若迟疑，一旦有变，令太子用事，恐祸至无日矣！ 
现代文：兄长若是迟疑，一旦情况发生变化，太子执掌朝政，恐怕灾祸很快就要临头了！ 
English: If my brother hesitates, once the situation changes and the crown prince takes charge of the government, I'm afraid disaster will soon be at hand!

古文：素从之。
现代文：杨素听从了杨约的话。
English: Yang Su followed his advice.

古文：后数日，素入侍宴，微称 晋王孝悌恭俭，有类至尊 。
现代文：过了几天，杨素进入皇宫侍奉宴会，他婉转地说： 晋王杨广孝悌恭俭，象他父亲一样。 
English: A few days later, Yang Su entered the imperial palace to serve a banquet. He said in a roundabout way: Jin Wang Yang Guang is filial and frugal, just like his father.

古文：用此揣后意。
现代文：用此话来揣摩独孤皇后的意思。
English: Use this to figure out the meaning of the lonely queen.

古文：后泣曰： 公言是也！
现代文：独孤皇后流着泪说： 您的话说得对！
English: The lonely queen shed tears and said: Your words are right!

古文：吾儿大孝爱，每闻至尊及我遣内使到，必迎于境首；言及违离，未尝不泣。
现代文：我儿子阿非常孝敬友爱，每次听到皇上和我派宫内的使者去，必定亲自远迎；说到远离双亲，没有一次不落泪的。
English: My son Ah is very filial, respectful and friendly. Every time he hears that the emperor and I are sending an emissary to the palace, he must personally welcome them from afar. When it comes to being away from his parents, there is never a time when he does not shed tears.

古文：又其新妇亦大可怜，我使婢去，常与之同寝共食。岂若睍地伐与阿云对坐，终日酣宴，昵近小人，疑阻骨肉！
现代文：还有他的妻子也很令人怜爱，我派婢女去她那里，她常与婢女同寝共食，哪象地伐和阿云面对面地对坐崐，整天沉溺于酒宴，亲近小人，猜疑防备骨肉至亲！
English: And his wife is also very pitiful, I sent my maid to her, she often sleeps and eats with her maid, which is like sitting face to face with Ah Yun, indulging in wine feasts all day long, getting close to villains, suspecting and guarding relatives!

古文：我所以益怜阿者，常恐其潜杀之。 
现代文：所以我愈加爱怜阿，常常怕地伐将他暗害。 
English: That's why I love Rea all the more, and I'm always afraid that I'll kill him.

古文：素既知后意，因盛言太子不才。后遂遗素金，使赞上废立。
现代文：杨素已经了解了皇后的意思，因此就竭力地说太子杨勇不成器，于是皇后就给杨素财物，让他辅佐文帝进行废立太子之事。
English: Yang Su had already understood the queen's meaning, so he tried his best to say that Prince Yang Yong was not a good match, so the queen gave Yang Su property and let him assist Emperor Suwen in the matter of abolishing the crown prince.

古文：勇颇知其谋，忧惧，计无所出，使新丰人王辅贤造诸厌胜；又于后园作庶人村，室屋卑陋，勇时于中寝息，布衣草褥，冀以当之。
现代文：杨勇非常清楚这个阴谋，感到忧虑恐惧，但是想不出办法来。他让新丰人王辅贤制做了巫术诅咒之物，又在其府邸后园建造了一个平民村，村里的房屋低矮简陋，杨勇时常在其中睡觉休息，他身穿布衣，铺着草褥子，希望以此来避灾。
English: Yang Yong was very aware of this conspiracy, he was worried and afraid, but he couldn't think of a way out. He had the Xinfeng people's Wang Fuxian system make a witchcraft curse object, and built a civilian village in the backyard of his mansion. The houses in the village were low and simple, and Yang Yong often slept and rested in them. He was dressed in cloth and covered with straw, hoping to avoid disaster.

古文：上知勇不自安，在仁寿宫，使杨素观勇所为。
现代文：文帝知道杨勇为此不安，在仁寿宫派杨素去观察杨勇的行为。
English: Emperor Wen knew that Yang Yong was uneasy about this, and sent Yang Su to observe Yang Yong's behavior in Renshou Palace.

古文：素至东宫，偃息未入，勇束带待之，素故久不进，以激怒勇；勇衔之，形于言色。
现代文：杨素到了东宫，停住不进，杨勇换好衣服等待杨素进来，杨素故意很久不进门，以此激怒杨勇；杨勇怀恨杨素，并在言行上表现出来。
English: When Yang Su arrived at the East Palace, he could not enter, Yang Yong changed his clothes and waited for Yang Su to come in. Yang Su deliberately did not enter the door for a long time, in order to provoke Yang Yong; Yang Yong harbored hatred for Yang Su, and showed it in words and deeds.

古文：素还言： 勇怨望，恐有他变，愿深防察！ 
现代文：杨素回去报告： 杨勇怨恨，恐怕会发生变故。希望陛下多多防备观察。 
English: Yang Su went back to report: Yang Yong is resentful, I'm afraid there will be a change. I hope His Majesty will be more prepared to observe.

古文：上闻素谮毁，甚疑之。
现代文：文帝听了杨素的谗言和诋毁之词，对杨勇更加猜疑了。
English: Emperor Wen listened to Yang Su Rong's criticism and slander, and became even more suspicious of Yang Yong.

古文：后又遣人伺觇东宫，纤介事皆闻奏，因加诬饰以成其罪。
现代文：独孤皇后又派人暗中探察东宫，细碎琐事都上报给文帝，依据诬陷之词而构成杨勇的罪状。
English: The lonely empress also sent people to secretly explore the East Palace, and reported all the details to Emperor Wen, which constituted Yang Yong's crime based on the words of the frame-up.

古文：上遂疏忌勇，乃于玄武门达至德门量置候人，以伺动静，皆随事奏闻。
现代文：于是文帝就对杨勇疏远、猜忌，竟然在玄武门到至德门之间的路上，派人观察杨勇的动静，事无巨细都要随时上报。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen alienated Yang Yong and became suspicious of him. He even sent someone to observe Yang Yong's movements on the road between Xuanwu Gate and Demen Gate, and reported everything, no matter how small, at any time.

古文：又，东宫宿卫之人，侍官以上，名籍悉令属诸卫府，有勇健者咸屏去之。
现代文：另外，东宫值宿警卫侍官以上的，名册都令归属各个卫府管辖，勇猛矫健的人都要调走。
English: In addition, the roster of those on duty at the East Palace who were higher than the guard's attendant belonged to the jurisdiction of each guard, and those who were brave and vigorous had to be transferred away.

古文：出左卫率苏孝慈为淅州刺史，勇愈不悦。
现代文：左卫率苏孝慈被调出任命为淅州刺史，杨勇愈加不高兴。
English: The left guard, Su Xiaoji, was transferred out and appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, Yang Yong was more and more unhappy.

古文：太史令袁充言于上曰： 臣观天文，皇太子当废。 
现代文：太史令袁充对文帝说： 我观察天象，皇太子应当废黜。 
English: Emperor Taishi ordered Yuan Chong to say to Emperor Wen: I observe the celestial elephant, the crown prince should be dethroned.

古文：上曰： 玄象久见，群臣不敢言耳。 
现代文：文帝说： 玄象出现很久了，群臣不敢说啊。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "It's been a long time since the appearance of the mysterious elephant, and the ministers dare not speak about it.

古文：充，君正之子也。
现代文：袁充是袁君正的儿子。
English: Yuan Chong is the son of Yuan Junzheng.

古文：晋王广又令督王府军事姑臧段达私赂东宫幸臣姬威，令伺太子动静，密告杨素；于是内外喧谤，过失日闻。
现代文：晋王杨广又命令姑臧人督王府军事段达私下贿赂东宫受宠信的官吏姬威，让他暗中观察太子的动静，密报给杨素。于是朝廷内外到处是对杨勇的议论诽谤，天天可以听到杨勇的罪过。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, also ordered Gu Xun, the military commander of the royal palace, to privately bribe Ji Wei, a favored official of the East Palace, to secretly observe the movements of the prince and report to Yang Su. Therefore, Yang Yong was discussed and slandered everywhere inside and outside the court, and Yang Yong's sins could be heard every day.

古文：段达因胁姬威曰： 东宫过失，主上皆知之矣。
现代文：段达趁机威胁姬威说： 东宫的过失，皇上都知道了。
English: Duan Da took the opportunity to threaten Ji Wei and said: The fault of the East Palace, the emperor knows it.

古文：已奉密诏，定当废立；君能告之，则大富贵！ 
现代文：我已得到密诏，一定要废黜太子。你要是能告发杨勇的过失，就会大富大贵！ 
English: I have received a secret edict that the crown prince must be deposed. If you can expose Yang Yong's wrongdoings, you will become very rich!

古文：威许诺，即上书告之。
现代文：姬威答应了，随即就上书告发杨勇。
English: Jiwei agreed, and immediately wrote to Yang Yong.

古文：秋，九月，壬子，上至自仁寿宫。翌日，御大兴殿，谓侍臣曰： 我新还京师，应开怀欢乐；不知何意翻邑然愁苦！ 
现代文：秋季，九月，壬子，文帝从仁寿宫归来，第二天到大兴殿，他对侍臣说： 我刚返回京师，应该是开怀畅饮寻求欢乐，不知为什么变得抑郁愁闷？ 
English: In the autumn, in September, in Renzi, Emperor Wen returned from Renshou Palace and went to Daxing Palace the next day. He said to his courtiers, "I have just returned to Beijing. I should be drinking heartily and seeking joy. I don't know why I have become depressed and gloomy."

古文：吏部尚书牛弘对曰： 臣等不称职，故至尊忧劳。 
现代文：吏部尚书牛弘回答： 是臣等不称职，使陛下忧愁劳累。 
English: Niu Hong replied, "It is the incompetence of the courtiers that has made His Majesty so tired and worried."

古文：上既数闻谮毁，疑朝臣悉知之，故于众中发问，冀闻太子之过。
现代文：文帝已经多次听到对杨勇的诬陷诋毁，怀疑朝臣们都知道了，因此向朝臣们发问，希望听到太子的过失。
English: Emperor Wen had heard the slanderous accusations against Yang Yong many times, and suspected that the courtiers knew about it. Therefore, he asked the courtiers, hoping to hear the prince's fault.

古文：弘对既失旨，上因作色，谓东宫官属曰： 仁寿宫此去不远，而令我每还京师，严备仗卫，如入敌国。
现代文：牛弘的回答不合文帝的意思，于是文帝脸色一变，对东宫的官吏僚属说： 仁寿宫离这里不远，但是我每次返回京师都得严格准备仪仗保卫，就象进入敌国一样。
English: Ushihiro's answer did not correspond to Emperor Wen's meaning, so Emperor Wen changed his face and said to the officials of the East Palace: Renshou Palace is not far from here, but every time I return to Beijing, I have to strictly prepare for the ceremonial defense, just like entering an enemy country.

古文：我为下利，不解衣卧。昨夜欲近厕，故在后房恐有警急，还移就前殿，岂非尔辈欲坏我家国邪！ 
现代文：我因为拉肚子，不敢脱衣服睡觉，昨天夜里要上厕所，因为在后边的房间恐怕有紧急之事，就返回前殿居住。难道不是你们这些人要危害我的家国吗！ 
English: I dare not take off my clothes to sleep because I have a stomachache, I had to go to the toilet last night because I was afraid there was an emergency in the back room, so I returned to live in the front hall. Aren't you the ones who want to endanger my home country!

古文：于是执太子左庶子唐令则等数人付所司讯鞠；命杨素陈东宫事状以告近臣。
现代文：于是把太子左庶子唐令则等几个人抓起来交付有关部门进行审讯，命令杨素把东宫的情况告诉近臣。
English: As a result, several people, including Prince Zuo's illegitimate son Tang Ling Ze, were arrested and handed over to the relevant departments for interrogation, and Yang Su was ordered to tell his close vassals about the situation in the East Palace.

古文：素乃显言之曰： 臣奉敕向京，令皇太子检校刘居士余党。
现代文：于是杨素就公开地说： 我奉旨到京师，命令皇太子查核刘居士的余党。
English: So Yang Su publicly said: I have been ordered to go to Beijing and order the crown prince to investigate Liu Kuxi's remaining party.

古文：太子奉诏，作色奋厉，骨肉飞腾，语臣云： 居士党尽伏法，遣我何处穷讨！
现代文：太子接到诏书，脸色大变，表情非常愤怒，他对我说： 刘居士的余党都已伏法，让我到哪里去追究呢？
English: When the prince received the edict, his face changed dramatically, his expression was very angry, and he said to me: The rest of Liu Koji's party have all been arrested, where should I go to investigate?

古文：尔作右仆射，委寄不轻，自检校之，何关我事！ 
现代文：你作为右仆射，责任不轻，你自己去查核此事吧，关我什么事！ 
English: As your right-hand man, your responsibility is not light. Go check the matter out for yourself. It's none of my business!

古文：又云： 昔大事不遂，我先被诛，今作天子，竟乃令我不如诸弟，一事以上，不得自遂！ 
现代文：又说： 过去的禅让大事要是不顺利，我先得被杀，如今父亲作了天子，居然让我还不如几个弟弟，凡事都不能自作主张！ 
English: He also said, "In the past, if things didn't go well, I had to be killed first, but now that my father has become the Son of Heaven, I'm actually not as good as my younger brothers, and I can't do anything on my own!

古文：因长叹回视云： 我大觉身妨。  
现代文：他就长叹说： 我觉得太不自由了。  
English: He sighed and said, "I don't feel very free."

古文：上曰： 此儿不堪承嗣久矣，皇后恒劝我废之。我以布衣时所生，地复居长，望其渐改，隐忍至今。
现代文：文帝说： 这个儿子我很早就觉得不能够继承皇位了，皇后老劝我废黜他，我认为他是我作平民时生的，又是长子，希望他能够逐渐改正错误，我已克制忍耐到现在了。
English: Emperor Wen said, "I have long felt that this son would not be able to succeed to the throne. The empress has always urged me to depose him. I think that he was born when I was a commoner and is my eldest son. I hope that he can gradually correct his mistakes. I have restrained my patience until now.

古文：勇尝指皇后侍儿谓人曰： 是皆我物。 
现代文：杨勇曾经指着皇后的侍女对人说： 都是我的 。
English: Yang Yong once pointed to the queen's handmaidens and said, "They are all mine."

古文：此言几许异事！
现代文：这话说的是多么地奇怪。
English: How many different meanings this word has!

古文：其妇初亡，我深疑其遇毒，尝责之，勇即怼曰： 会杀元孝矩。 
现代文：他的妻子元妃刚死时，我很怀疑她是被毒死的，曾经责问过杨勇，他就怨恨地说： 应当杀掉元孝矩。 
English: When his wife, Yuanfei, had just died, I very much doubted that she had been poisoned. I once questioned Yang Yong, and he said resentfully, "You should kill Yuanxiao Rui."

古文：此欲害我而迁怒耳。
现代文：这是想要害我而迁怒他人。
English: This is an attempt to harm me and anger Genko Takanori.

古文：长宁初生，朕与皇后共抱养之，自怀彼此，连遣来索。
现代文：长宁王刚出生时，我和皇后一起抱来抚养他，杨勇却心中另有想法，连连派人索要。
English: When Changning Wang was just born, I held him together with the queen to raise him, but Yang Yong had other ideas in mind and sent people back and forth to claim him.

古文：且云定兴女，在外私合而生，想此由来，何必是其体胤！
现代文：况且云定兴的女儿，是云定兴在外面私合而生，想到她的出身来历，由何能说必定是他的子女呢？
English: Moreover, Yun Dingxing's daughter was born out of wedlock. Considering her background, how can it be said that she must be his child?

古文：昔晋太子取屠家女，其儿即好屠割。
现代文：以前晋太子娶了屠户的女儿，他的儿子就喜欢屠宰之事。
English: Once upon a time, the Crown Prince married the daughter of a butcher, and his son loved butchering.

古文：今倘非类，便乱宗祏。
现代文：如今他们不是咱们这一类人，会乱了宗祠。
English: Now they're not our kind of people, they'll mess up the ancestral shrine.

古文：我虽德惭尧、舜，终不以万姓付不肖子！
现代文：我虽然德行不及尧舜，但终归不能把天下百姓交付给品行不端的儿子！
English: Although I am not as virtuous as my father, in the end I cannot hand over the people of the world to my misbehaving son!

古文：我恒畏其加害，如防大敌；今欲废之以安天下！ 
现代文：我总担忧他会谋害我，对他就象防备大敌一样，现在我打算废掉他以安定天下。 
English: I always feared that he would plot against me, and treated him like an enemy. Now I'm planning to get rid of him in order to stabilize the world.

古文：左卫大将军五原公元旻谏曰： 废立大事，诏旨若行，后悔无及。
现代文：左卫大将军五原公元劝说文帝： 废立太子是大事，诏书若颁布实行了，后悔就来不及了。
English: General Zuo Wei in the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty persuaded Emperor Wen: Abolishing the position of crown prince is a big deal. If the edict is promulgated and implemented, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：谗言罔极，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：谗言说起来是无定准的，希望陛下再仔细调查这些事。 
English: There is no end to the criticism, and I hope His Majesty will take a closer look.

古文：上不应，命姬威悉陈太子罪恶。
现代文：文帝不听元的话，他命令姬威把太子的罪恶都讲出来。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen to Yuan's words, and he ordered Jiwei to expose the prince's sins.

古文：威对曰： 太子由来与臣语，唯意在骄奢，且云： 若有谏者，正当斩之，不杀百许人，自然永息。 
现代文：姬威回答： 太子向来对我讲话，意气极为骄横，还说： 要是有劝我的人，就该杀掉他。杀百把人，自然就永远清静了。 
English: Jiwei replied, "The prince has always spoken to me with great arrogance, saying, 'If there is someone who advises me, I should kill him. Kill a hundred people, and naturally there will be peace forever.'

古文：营起台殿，四时不辍。
现代文：太子又营建楼台宫殿，一年四季都不停止。
English: The prince also built a palace, which does not stop all year round.

古文：前苏孝慈解左卫率，太子奋髯扬肘曰： 大丈夫会当有一日，终不忘之，决当快意。 
现代文：先前苏孝慈被解除左卫率官职的时候，太子愤怒得胡子都翘起来了，他挥着胳膊说： 大丈夫终会有一天，不会忘记此事，一定要杀伐决断以求痛快！ 
English: Earlier, when Su Xiao Ci was relieved of his post as head of the Left Guard, the prince was so angry that his beard stood on end. He waved his arm and said, "There will be a day when my husband will not forget this matter. We must fight and be decisive in order to be happy!"

古文：又宫内所须，尚书多执法不与，辄怒曰： 仆射以下，吾会戮一二人，使知慢我之祸。 
现代文：另外，东宫内所索取的东西，尚书经常恪守制度不给，太子往往立即发怒，说： 仆射以下的人，我可以杀一、两个，让你们知道怠慢我的灾祸。 
English: In addition, Shoshu always adhered to the system and refused to give what was requested in the East Palace, and the prince often immediately became angry and said, "I can kill one or two people below the level of pukes, so that you know the evil of neglecting me.

古文：每云： 至尊恶我多侧庶，高纬、陈叔宝岂孽子乎！ 
现代文：太子常说： 皇父厌恶我有许多姬妾，北齐后主高纬、陈后主陈叔宝是庶子吗？ 
English: The prince often said, "The emperor's father dislikes me for having many concubines. Are Bei Qi's queen mother Gao Wei and Chen's queen mother Chen Shubao his illegitimate children?"

古文：尝令师姥卜吉凶，语臣云： 至尊忌在十八年，此期促矣。  
现代文：太子曾令女巫占卜吉凶，他对我说： 皇帝的忌期在开皇十八年，这个期限快到了。  
English: The crown prince once had a witch tell fortunes for him, and he said to me: The emperor's death date is in the eighteenth year of his reign, and this deadline is fast approaching.

古文：上泫然曰： 谁非父母生，乃至于此！
现代文：文帝流着泪说： 谁不是父母所生，他竟然这样！
English: With tears streaming down his face, Wendi said, "Whoever is not born from parents, he is like this!

古文：朕近览《齐书》，见高欢纵其儿子，不胜忿愤，安可效尤邪！ 
现代文：我近来翻阅《齐书》，看到高欢纵容他的儿子，就非常气忿。怎么能仿效这种人呢？ 
English: I recently reread the "Qi Shu" and was very angry to see Gao Huan indulge his son. How can I emulate such a person?

古文：于是禁勇及诸子，部分收其党与。
现代文：于是把杨勇和他的几个儿子都拘禁起来，并逮捕了他的部分党羽。
English: As a result, Yang Yong and several of his sons were detained, and some of his followers were arrested.

古文：杨素舞文巧诋，锻炼以成其狱。
现代文：杨素舞文弄墨，巧言诋毁，罗织罪名以构成下狱之罪。
English: Yang Su-mai's literary manipulation, clever words and slander, and fabrication of charges to constitute the crime of imprisonment.

古文：居数日，有司承素意，奏元旻常曲事于勇，情存附托，在仁寿宫，勇使所亲裴弘以书与旻，题云： 勿令人见 。
现代文：过了几天，有关部门的官员秉承杨素的意思，奏报文帝说元常常曲意迎逢杨勇，有阿谀结交之事。在仁寿宫，杨勇派他的亲信裴弘给元送信，信上写着 勿令人见 。
English: A few days later, officials of the relevant departments, adhering to Yang Su's intention, reported to Emperor Wen that Yuan often met Yang Yong and had a friendship with his grandmother. At the Renshou Palace, Yang Yong sent his close friend Pei Hong to Yuan with a letter saying "Don't let anyone see."

古文：上曰： 朕在仁寿宫，有纤介事，东宫必知，疾于驿马，怪之甚久，岂非此徒邪！ 
现代文：文帝说： 朕在仁寿宫，无论什么细微之事东宫必定知道，比驿马传信还快，我对此事感到奇怪已经很久了，难道不是这恶徒的缘故吗！ 
English: Emperor Wen said: I am in the palace of benevolence and longevity, no matter what minor things happen, the eastern palace must know, faster than a packhorse, I have been surprised by this for a long time, isn't it because of this villain!

古文：遣武士执旻于仗。
现代文：于是派武士从左卫仗将元抓了起来。
English: As a result, samurai were sent to capture Yuan from the left guard.

古文：右卫大将军元胄时当下直，不去，因奏曰： 臣向不下直者，为防元旻耳。 
现代文：右卫大将军元胃当时不应该值班了，但他没有离开，对文帝说： 我先前不下班的原因是为了防备元。 
English: At that time, General Yuan Gang of the Right Division should not have been on duty, but he did not leave and said to Emperor Wen: The reason why I did not leave work earlier was to prevent Yuan.

古文：上以旻及裴弘付狱。
现代文：文帝把元和裴弘都投入监狱。
English: Emperor Wen put both Yuan and Pei Hong in prison.

古文：先是，勇见老枯槐，问： 此堪何用？ 
现代文：当初，杨勇看见枯老的槐树，问道： 这树能做什么用？ 
English: At first, Yang Yong saw a withered old eucalyptus tree and asked: What can this tree be used for?

古文：或对曰： 古槐尤宜取火。 
现代文：有人回答： 古槐尤其适于作柴来取火。 
English: Someone answered: Ancient reeds are especially suitable for making firewood.

古文：时卫士皆佩火燧，勇命工造数千枚，欲以分赐左右；至是，获于库。
现代文：当时杨勇的卫士都带着火燧，杨勇命令工匠制做了几千枚火燧，打算分赐给身边的人；现在，库中的火燧都被收缴。
English: At that time, Yang Yong's guards all carried fire torches. Yang Yong ordered craftsmen to make thousands of fire torches, intending to give them to people around him; now, the fire torches in the library have all been confiscated.

古文：又药藏局贮艾数斛，索得之，大以为怪，以问姬威，威曰： 太子此意别有所在，至尊在仁寿宫，太子常饲马千匹，云： 径往守城门，自然饿死。  
现代文：另外，药藏局贮存着好几斛的艾绒，杨素收缴上来，感到很奇怪，就问姬威，姬威说： 太子此意另有用处。皇帝在仁寿宫，太子经常饲养着一千匹马，说： 要是直接守住城门，自然就会饿死。  
English: In addition, the Pharmacopoeia stored several piles of Ai Rong, Yang Su collected it, felt very strange, and asked Ji Wei. Ji Wei said: The prince has another use for this. The emperor in the Renshou Palace, the prince often kept a thousand horses, said: If you directly guard the city gate, you will naturally starve to death.

古文：素以威言诘勇，勇不服，曰： 窃闻公家马数万匹，勇忝备太子，马千匹，乃是反乎！ 
现代文：杨素以姬威的话来盘问杨勇，杨勇不服气，说： 我听说公家饲养的马有好几万匹，我作为太子，养一千匹马就是造反吗？ 
English: Yang Su used Ji Wei's words to cross-examine Yang Yong. Yang Yong was not convinced and said: I heard that there are tens of thousands of horses bred by public families. As a prince, is it rebellion to raise a thousand horses?

古文：素又发东宫服玩，似加琱饰者，悉陈之于庭，以示文武群官，为太子之罪。
现代文：杨素又找出东宫的服饰玩器，凡是有雕刻缕画装饰的器物都陈列在宫庭里，展示给文武群臣，作为太子的罪证。
English: Yang Su also found out the costume playthings of the East Palace. All the objects decorated with carved wreaths were displayed in the palace courtyard and shown to the civil and military courtiers as evidence of the prince's guilt.

古文：上及皇后迭遣使责问勇，勇不服。
现代文：文帝和独孤皇后屡次派人去责问杨勇，杨勇都不服气。
English: Emperor Wen and Empress Du Guo repeatedly sent people to question Yang Yong. Yang Yong was not convinced.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，上使人召勇，勇见使者，惊曰： 得无杀我邪？ 
现代文：冬季，十月，乙丑，文帝派人召来杨勇。杨勇见到使者，吃惊地说： 不是要杀我吧？ 
English: In winter, October, the second Ugly, Emperor Wen sent someone to summon Yang Yong. Yang Yong saw the messenger and said in surprise: Aren't you going to kill me?

古文：上戎服陈兵，御武德殿，集百官立于东面，诸亲立于西面，引勇及诸子列于殿庭，命内史侍郎薛道衡宣诏，废勇及其男、女为王、公主者，并为庶人。
现代文：文帝身着戎装，陈列军队，来到武德殿。召集来的百官立在殿东面，皇室宗亲立在殿西面，引着杨勇和他的几个儿子排列在武德殿的庭院里，文帝命令内史侍郎薛道衡宣读诏书，将杨勇和他封王封公主的子女都废为庶人。
English: Emperor Wen, dressed in military attire and displaying troops, came to the Wude Hall. The hundreds of officials assembled stood on the east side of the hall, the royal family relatives stood on the west side of the hall, and led Yang Yong and several of his sons lined up in the courtyard of the Wude Hall. Emperor Wen ordered the Inner History Attendant Xue Daoheng to read out the imperial decree, abolishing Yang Yong and his children who were crowned princes and princesses as commoners.

古文：勇再拜言曰： 臣当伏尸都市，为将来鉴戒；幸蒙哀怜，得全性命！ 
现代文：杨勇再三跪伏在地，说： 我应该被斩首于闹市以为后人的借鉴，幸而得到陛下的哀怜，我才得以保全性命！ 
English: Yang Yong repeatedly kneeled on the ground and said, "I should have been beheaded in the bustling city to serve as a reference for future generations. Fortunately, I received the mercy of His Majesty, and I was able to save my life!"

古文：言毕，泣下流襟，既而舞蹈而去，左右莫不闵默。
现代文：说完，眼泪流满了衣襟，随即跪拜行礼后离去。文帝身边的人没有不怜悯沉默的。
English: After saying this, tears streamed down his face, and he immediately kneeled down and left after performing a ritual. The people around Emperor Wen were silent out of pity.

古文：长宁王俨上表乞宿卫，辞情哀切；上览之闵然。
现代文：长宁王杨俨给文帝上表乞求允许他担当文帝的宿卫。
English: Changning King Yang Xuan begged Emperor Wen to allow him to play the role of Emperor Wen's bodyguard.

古文：杨素进曰： 伏望圣心同于螫手，不宜复留意。 
现代文：奏表中的文辞非常哀婉凄切，文帝看后感到很难过。杨素向文帝进言： 希望圣上对这件事应象蝮蛇螫手一样，不应再留此意。 
English: The words in the transcript were very sad and pathetic, and Emperor Wen felt very sad after reading it. Yang Su said to Emperor Wen: I hope that His Holiness should treat this matter like a boa constrictor, and should not dwell on it.

古文：己巳，诏： 元旻、唐令则及太子家令邹文腾、左卫率司马夏侯福、典膳监元淹、前吏部侍郎萧子宝、前主玺下士何竦并处斩，妻妾子孙皆没官。
现代文：己巳，文帝下诏书说： 元、唐令则和太子家令邹文腾、左卫率司马夏侯福、典膳监元淹、前吏部侍郎萧子宝、前主玺下士何竦一并斩首处死，他们的妻妾子孙都没入官府。
English: In fact, Emperor Wen's edict said: Yuan, Tangling, and the prince's family, Zou Wenten, the left guard leader, Ma Xia Houfu, the ceremonial supervisor, Yuan Ruan, the former staff sergeant, Xia Zibo, and the former master sergeant, He Junyi, were all beheaded, and their wives, concubines, children, and grandchildren were not allowed to enter the government office.

古文：车骑将军榆林阎毘、东郡公崔君绰、游骑尉沈福宝、瀛州术士章仇太翼，特免死，各杖一百，身及妻子、资财、田宅皆没官。
现代文：车骑将军榆林人阎毗、东郡公崔君绰、游骑尉沈福宝、瀛州术士章仇太翼，特赦免死，各受杖刑一百，本人及其妻子儿女，家产田宅都没入官府。
English: Chariot and cavalry general Yulin Ren Yan Pi, Dong County official Cui Junqiao, roving lieutenant Shen Fubao, and Zhangzhou sorcerer Zhang Cui Taiyi were all pardoned from death, and each received a hundred strokes of the cane. They, their wives and children, and their homes were all confiscated by the government.

古文：副作大匠高龙叉、率更令晋文建、通直散骑侍郎元衡皆处尽。 
现代文：副将作大匠高龙叉、率更令晋文建、通直散骑侍郎元衡都被判罪令其自尽。 
English: Vice-commander Gao Longfor, commander Jin Wenjian, and cavalryman Geng Hei were all convicted and ordered to commit suicide.

古文：于是集群官于广阳门外，宣诏戮之。
现代文：于是在广阳门外召集百官宣读诏书，将上述判死刑的人处死。
English: Therefore, hundreds of officials were summoned outside the Guangyang Gate to read out the edict, and the above-mentioned people sentenced to death were put to death.

古文：乃移勇于内史省，给五品料食。
现代文：把杨勇迁到内史省，给他五品官员的俸禄。
English: Yang Yong was handed over to the Internal History Office and treated as a fifth-grade official.

古文：赐杨素物三千段，元胄、杨约并千段，赏鞫勇之功也。
现代文：赐给杨素财物三千段，赐给元胃、杨约财物共一千段，作为审讯杨勇的功劳的奖赏。
English: Yang Su was given 3,000 pieces of property, and Yuan Gang and Yang You were given a total of 1,000 pieces of property, as a reward for the merits of interrogating Yang Yong.

古文：文林郎杨孝政上书谏曰： 皇太子为小人所误，宜加训诲，不宜废黜。 
现代文：文林郎杨孝政上书给文帝进谏： 皇太子是被小人教坏了，应该加强训诫教诲，不宜废黜。 
English: Wenlin's son, Yang Xiaozheng, sent a letter to Emperor Wen: The crown prince has been corrupted by a villain, and it is necessary to strengthen his discipline and teachings, and it is not appropriate to depose him.

古文：上怒，挞其胸。
现代文：文帝发怒，用鞭子抽打杨孝政的胸部。
English: In anger, Emperor Wen lashed Yang Xiaozheng's chest with a whip.

古文：初，云昭训父定兴，出入东宫无节，数进奇服异器以求悦媚；左庶子裴屡谏，勇不听。
现代文：当初云昭训的父亲云定兴出入东宫没有节制，他多次给杨勇进献奇异的服饰器物以求得杨勇的高兴和青眯；左庶子裴政屡次劝说，杨勇不听。
English: At the beginning, Yun Zhaoxun's father, Yun Dingxing, had no restraint in entering and leaving the East Palace. He repeatedly presented Yang Yong with strange clothing and utensils in order to gain Yang Yong's happiness and favor; his left illegitimate son, Pei Zheng, repeatedly persuaded Yang Yong not to listen.

古文：政谓定兴曰： 公所为不合法度。
现代文：裴政对云定兴说： 您的行为不符合法度。
English: Baizheng said to Yun Dingxing: Your behavior is not in accordance with the law.

古文：又，元妃暴薨，道路籍籍，此于太子，非令名也。
现代文：还有，元妃突然暴死，外面议论纷纷，这对于太子，不是好名声。
English: In addition, the sudden death of the former empress caused a lot of discussion outside, which is not a good reputation for the crown prince.

古文：公宜自引退，不然，将及祸。 
现代文：您最好自行引退，否则将会遭到灾祸。 
English: You'd better retire on your own, or you'll meet with disaster.

古文：定兴以告勇，勇益疏政，由是出为襄州总管。
现代文：云定兴将此话告诉了杨勇，杨勇越发疏远裴政，并因此把裴政调任为襄州总管。
English: Yun Dingxing told this to Yang Yong, who became more and more estranged from Pei Zheng, and thus transferred Pei Zheng to be the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：唐令则为勇所昵狎，每令以弦歌教内人，右庶子刘行本责之曰： 庶子当辅太子以正道，何有取媚于房帷之间哉！ 
现代文：唐令则被杨勇所亲近，杨勇常常命令唐令则教东宫的宫人丝弦歌舞，右庶子刘行本责备唐令则说： 庶子应当辅佐太子走正路。为什么要用声色歌舞来取媚于太子呢？ 
English: Yang Yong was close to the Tang Emperor. Yang Yong often ordered the Tang Emperor to teach the courtiers of the East Palace to sing and dance. Liu Xingbin, the right son-in-law, scolded the Tang Emperor, saying, "The son-in-law should help the crown prince to walk the right path. Why should the prince be flattered by singing and dancing?

古文：令则甚惭而不能改。
现代文：唐令则感到很惭愧却改不了。
English: On the other hand, I am very ashamed, but I can't correct it.

古文：时沛国刘臻、平原明克让、魏郡陆爽，并以文学为勇所亲；行本怒其不能调护，每谓三人曰： 卿等正解读书耳！ 
现代文：当时沛国人刘臻、平原人明克让、魏郡人陆爽都因为辞章修养而被杨勇所亲近。刘行本对这三个人对太子不能加以调教保护非常愤怒，他常对这三人讲： 你们只会读书！ 
English: At that time, Liu Zhen from Pei Province, Ming Kejan from the Plains, and Lu Shuang from Wei County were all approached by Yang Yong because of their self-cultivation. Liu Xingben was very angry with these three people for not being able to adjust and protect the prince. He often said to these three people: You can only read books!

古文：夏侯福尝于阁内与勇戏，福大笑，声闻于外。
现代文：夏侯福曾在房间里与杨勇开玩笑，夏侯福哈哈大笑，声音传到门外。
English: Xia Houfu once joked with Yang Yong in the room, Xia Houfu laughed loudly, and the sound was heard outside the door.

古文：行本闻之，待其出，数之曰： 殿下宽容，赐汝颜色。
现代文：刘行本听见，等夏侯福出来，责备他说： 太子殿下性情宽容，给你面子。
English: When Liu Xingben heard this, he waited for Xia Houfu to come out and scolded him, saying, "His Royal Highness the Crown Prince is tolerant and gives you face.

古文：汝何物小人，敢为亵慢！ 
现代文：你是什么小人物，敢做这样轻慢之事！ 
English: What a little man you are, daring to do such a trifling thing!

古文：因付执法者治之。
现代文：于是把夏侯福交执法人员治罪。
English: As a result, Xia Houfu was handed over to law enforcement officers to be punished.

古文：数日，勇为福致请，乃释之。
现代文：过了几天，杨勇替夏侯福讲情，才将他释放。
English: After a few days, Yang Yong pleaded for Xia Houfu and released him.

古文：勇尝得良马，欲令行本乘而观之，行本正色曰： 至尊置臣于庶子，欲令辅导殿下，非为殿下作弄臣也。 
现代文：杨勇曾得到良马，他想命令刘行本骑上马让他观看，刘行本正色道： 皇上任命我为右庶子，是要我辅佐教导殿下，而不是作殿下的戏弄之臣。 
English: Yang Yong had obtained a fine horse, and he wanted to order Liu Xingben to mount the horse and let him watch. Liu Xingben said solemnly, "The Emperor has appointed me as his right illegitimate son, and he wants me to assist and teach His Imperial Highness, not to be His Imperial Highness's teasing vassal.

古文：勇惭而止。
现代文：杨勇听后感到惭愧，才作罢。
English: Yang Yong felt ashamed after listening to it, so he stopped.

古文：及勇败，二人已卒，上叹曰： 向使裴政、刘行本在，勇不至此。 
现代文：到杨勇被废黜时，裴政、刘行本二人均已去世。文帝叹息道： 要是裴政、刘行本二人还在，杨勇不至于到这个地步。 
English: By the time Yang Yong was deposed, both Pei Zheng and Liu Xingpeng had passed away. Emperor Wen sighed: If Pei Zheng and Liu Xingpeng were still alive, Yang Yong would not have reached this stage.

古文：勇尝宴宫臣，唐令则自弹琵琶，歌《娬媚娘》。
现代文：杨勇曾宴请东宫的臣僚，唐令则亲自弹奏琵琶，唱《媚娘》。
English: Yang Yong once held a banquet for the Eastern Court's ministers, while the Tang Emperor himself played the lute and sang "Beautiful Maiden."

古文：洗马李纲起白勇曰： 令则身为宫卿，职当调护；乃于广座自比倡优，进淫声，秽视听。
现代文：洗马李纲起身对杨勇说： 唐令则身为宫卿，职责应是调教保护太子，他却在大庭广众之下自比娼妓优伶，进献靡靡之音，污浊视听。
English: Li Gang, the horse washer, stood up and said to Yang Yong, "Tangling is the head of the palace, and his duty is to discipline and protect the prince. However, in front of the public, he compares himself to a prostitute. He is a loudmouth, and he is a filthy person.

古文：事若上闻，令则罪在不测，岂不为殿下之累邪！臣请速治其罪！ 
现代文：这种事要是皇上知道了，唐令则的罪责就大了。这岂不是要连累殿下吗？我请您赶快将他治罪！ 
English: If the emperor knew about this, Tang Ling Zi's guilt would be great. Isn't this going to implicate his highness? I ask you to quickly punish him!

古文：勇曰： 我欲为乐耳，君勿多事！ 
现代文：杨勇说： 我想要快乐快乐，你不要多管闲事。 
English: Yang Yong said: I want to be happy, so don't meddle in my affairs.

古文：纲遂趋出。
现代文：于是李纲就赶快退出。
English: As a result, Li Gang quickly withdrew.

古文：及勇废，上召东宫官属切责之，皆惶惧无敢对者。纲独曰： 废立大事，今文武大臣皆知其不可，而莫肯发言，臣何敢畏死，不一为陛下别白言之乎！
现代文：等到杨勇被废黜，文帝召集东宫的臣僚严厉责备他们，大家都惶恐而无人敢于答话，只有李纲说： 太子的废立大事，如今文武大臣都知道这事不可更改了而不肯说话。我怎能因为怕死就不对陛下把对此事的不同看法讲清楚呢？
English: When Yang Yong was deposed, Emperor Wen called together the ministers of the East Palace and severely rebuked them. Everyone was terrified and no one dared to answer. Only Li Gang said, "The prince's dethronement is a major event, and now the ministers of culture and armed forces know that this matter cannot be changed and are unwilling to speak. How can I, for fear of death, not make my different views on this matter clear to Your Majesty?"

古文：太子性本中人，可与为善，可与为恶。
现代文：太子的性格本来就是个常人的性格，可以使之变好，也可以使之变坏。
English: The prince's character is basically that of an ordinary person, which can be made better or worse.

古文：向使陛下择正人辅之，足以嗣守鸿基。
现代文：从前要是陛下挑选正直的人辅佐太子，他足以继承皇统鸿业。
English: In the past, if His Majesty had chosen an honest person to assist the crown prince, he would have been able to succeed to the throne.

古文：今乃以唐令则为左庶子，邹文腾为家令，二人唯知以弦歌鹰犬娱悦太子，安得不至于是邪！
现代文：如今却用唐令则为左庶子，邹文腾为家崐令，这两个人只知道用声色犬马娱悦太子，哪能不到这个地步啊！
English: Nowadays, however, they use Tang Ling as the left illegitimate son, and Yu Wenten as the family regent. These two people only know how to entertain the prince with the sound and color of dogs and horses. How can they not reach this level!

古文：此乃陛下之过，非太子之罪也。 
现代文：这是陛下的过失，并不是太子的罪过。 
English: This is Your Majesty's fault, not the prince's.

古文：因伏地流涕呜咽。
现代文：于是跪在地上呜咽流泪。
English: So he knelt on the ground, sobbing and shedding tears.

古文：上惨然良久曰： 李纲责我，非为无理，然徒知其一，未知其二。
现代文：文帝神色惨然，过了半天才说： 李纲责备我，不是没有道理。但是你只知其一，不知其二。
English: Emperor Wen looked miserable, and after half a day said: Li Gang blamed me, not without reason. But you only know one thing, you don't know the other.

古文：我择汝为宫臣，而勇不亲任，虽更得正人，何益哉！ 
现代文：我挑选你为东宫臣僚，但杨勇不亲近信任你，就是换上正直的人又有什么用处呢？ 
English: I chose you as a minister of the East Palace, but Yang Yong does not trust you, so what is the use of replacing him with an honest person?

古文：对曰： 臣所以不被亲任者，良由奸臣在侧故也。陛下但斩令则、文腾，更选贤才以辅太子，安知臣之终见疏弃也！
现代文：李纲回答： 我所以不为杨勇亲近信任，确实是有佞人在太子身边的缘故，陛下只要将唐令则、邹文腾斩首，更换贤能才学之士辅佐太子，怎么会知道我最后会被疏远抛弃呢？
English: Li Gang replied: The reason why I don't trust Yang Yong is because there is someone close to the crown prince. If His Majesty were to decapitate Tang Ling Zi and Gong Wenten and replace the scholarly scholar Fu Zuo with the crown prince, how would He know that I would eventually be alienated and abandoned?

古文：自古废立冢嫡，鲜不倾危，愿陛下深留圣思，无贻后悔。 
现代文：自古废立嫡长子，国家很少有不发生倾覆危险的。希望陛下好好考虑，不要后悔啊。 
English: Since ancient times, the eldest son of the eldest son has been abolished, and the country is rarely without the danger of overturning. I hope that His Majesty will consider it well and not regret it.

古文：上不悦，罢朝，左右皆为之股栗。
现代文：文帝不高兴。退朝后，文帝身边的人都替李纲心惊胆战。
English: Emperor Wen was not happy. After the abdication, the people around Emperor Wen panicked for Li Gangxin.

古文：会尚书右丞缺，有司请人，上指纲曰： 此佳右丞也！ 
现代文：正好尚书右丞空缺，有关部门请求派人，文帝指着李纲说： 此人是很好的尚书右丞。 
English: Just as Shang Shuyuan was vacant, the relevant departments requested to send someone, and Emperor Wen pointed to Li Gang and said: This person is a very good Shang Shuyuan.

古文：即用之。
现代文：李纲马上就被任命。
English: Li Gang was immediately appointed.

古文：太平公史万岁还自大斤山，杨素害其功，言于上曰： 突厥本降，初不为寇，来塞上畜牧耳。 
现代文：太平公史万岁从大斤山回来。杨素嫉妒史万岁的功劳，对文帝说： 突厥人本来已经投降了，开始并不是来侵犯，只是来塞上放牧牲畜。 
English: Long live Taiping Gongshi returned from Dajinshan. Yang Su, jealous of the merits of Shi Wanling, said to Emperor Wen: The Turks had already surrendered, and did not come to invade at first, but only to herd livestock.

古文：遂寝之。
现代文：这件事就放下了。
English: The matter was dropped.

古文：万岁数抗表陈状，上未之悟。
现代文：史万岁几次上表陈述自己的功劳，文帝还是不醒悟。
English: Long live Shi, who several times presented his merits on the table, but Emperor Wen still did not wake up.

古文：上废太子，方穷东宫党与。
现代文：文帝废黜太子杨勇，正追究太子的党羽。
English: Emperor Wen deposed the crown prince Yang Yong, and is investigating the prince's followers.

古文：上问万岁所在，万岁实在朝堂，杨素曰： 万岁谒东宫矣！ 
现代文：文帝问史万岁在哪里，当时史万岁实际就在朝堂之上，杨素却说： 史万岁拜谒东宫去了！ 
English: Emperor Wen asked where Shi Wanli was. At that time, Shi Wanli was actually on top of the morning hall, but Yang Su said: Shi Wanli has gone to visit the East Palace!

古文：以激怒上。
现代文：以此来激怒文帝。
English: This was done to infuriate Emperor Wen.

古文：上谓为信然，令召万岁。时所将士在朝堂称冤者数百人，万岁谓之曰： 吾今日为汝极言于上，事当决矣。 
现代文：文帝听信了这话，命令将史万岁召来，当时史万岁部下的将士在朝堂声称冤屈的有好几百人，史万岁对他们说： 我今天为你们对皇帝把事情完全讲清楚，问题就会解决的。 
English: Emperor Wen believed this and ordered that Shi Wanli be summoned. At that time, there were several hundred soldiers of Shi Wanli's subordinates who claimed to have been wronged in the imperial court. Shi Wanli said to them, "Today, I will make things completely clear to the emperor for you, and the problem will be solved."

古文：既见上，言 将士有功，为朝廷所抑！ 
现代文：他见到文帝说： 将士有功却被朝廷压抑！ 
English: When he saw Emperor Wen, he said, "The generals have made great contributions, but they have been suppressed by the imperial court!"

古文：词气愤厉。上大怒，令左右Ξ杀之。
现代文：词措严厉，语气愤怒，文帝勃然大怒，命令身边的人把史万岁打死，随即就后悔了，但已经来不及了。
English: The wording was harsh and the tone was angry. Emperor Wen flew into a rage and ordered the people around him to beat Shi Wanlong to death. He immediately regretted it, but it was too late.

古文：既而追之，不及，因下诏陈其罪状，天下共冤惜之。
现代文：于是文帝颁诏陈述史万岁的罪状，天下的人都为史万岁感到冤枉可惜。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen issued an edict stating Shi Wanling's guilt, and people all over the world felt sorry for Shi Wanling.

古文：十一月，戊子，立晋王广为皇太子。
现代文：十一月，戊子，文帝立晋王杨广为皇太子。
English: In November, Emperor Wen of Wuzi made Yang Guang, King of Jin, the crown prince.

古文：天下地震，太子请降章服，宫官不称臣。
现代文：国内地震，太子杨广请求免穿礼服，东宫的臣僚对太子不自称臣。
English: Domestic earthquake, Prince Yang Guang requested to be exempted from wearing a ceremonial dress, and courtiers of the East Palace did not call themselves courtiers to the prince.

古文：十二月，戊午，诏从之。
现代文：十二月，戊午，文帝下诏采纳杨广的建议。
English: In the afternoon of December, Emperor Wen issued an edict to adopt Yang Guang's suggestion.

古文：以宇文述为左卫率。
现代文：杨广任命宇文述为左卫率。
English: Yang Guang appointed Yu Wenshu as the left guard.

古文：始，太子之谋夺宗也，洪州总管郭衍预焉，由是征衍为左监门率。
现代文：当初杨广策划夺取继承权时，洪州总管郭衍参与了这个阴谋，因此就把郭衍召来任命他为左监门率。
English: At the beginning, when Yang Guang was planning to seize the right of succession, Guo Yan, the head of Hongzhou, participated in this conspiracy, so he summoned Guo Yan to appoint him as the left guard.

古文：帝囚故太子勇于东宫，付太子广掌之。
现代文：文帝把前太子杨勇囚禁在东宫，交给太子杨广管束。
English: Emperor Wen imprisoned the former crown prince Yang Yong in the East Palace and handed him over to the crown prince Yang Guang.

古文：勇自以废非其罪，频请见上申冤，而广遏之不得闻。
现代文：杨勇认为自己没有犯下该被废黜的罪过，多次请求见文帝申明冤情，但杨广阻拦他，不让文帝知道。
English: Yang Yong believed that he had not committed the crime for which he should be deposed, and repeatedly requested to see Emperor Wen to express his grievances, but Yang Guang blocked him and did not let Emperor Wen know.

古文：勇于是升树大叫，声闻帝所，冀得引见。
现代文：于是杨勇就爬到树上大声喊叫，声音传到文帝的住所，他希望能得到文帝的接见。
English: So Yang Yong climbed up the tree and shouted loudly. The sound reached Emperor Wen's residence, and he hoped to be received by Emperor Wen.

古文：杨素因言勇情志昏乱，为癫鬼所著，不可复收。
现代文：杨素就说杨勇情志昏乱，有疯鬼附身，无法复原。
English: Yang Su said that Yang Yong was emotionally deranged, possessed by a madman and unable to recover.

古文：帝以为然，卒不得见。
现代文：文帝听了很相信，杨勇最终还是没有见到文帝。
English: Emperor Wen thought it was reasonable, and finally did not see it.

古文：初，帝之克陈也，天下皆以为将太平，监察御史房彦谦私谓所亲曰： 主上忌刻而苛酷，太子卑弱，诸王擅权，天下虽安，方忧危乱。 
现代文：当初文帝平灭陈国时，天下人都以为将要太平了。监察御史房彦谦私下对他亲近的人说： 皇帝性情猜忌严厉而又苛刻残忍，太子性情谦恭软弱，几个王据有大权，天下虽然安定了，又要忧虑危亡动乱之事。 
English: At the time of Emperor Wen's subjugation of Chen, the people of the world thought that there would be peace. The inspector-general of history, Fusahiko Ken, privately said to those close to him: The emperor's temperament is suspicious, stern and cruel, the prince's temperament is humble and weak, several kings have great power, although the world is stable, it is necessary to worry about the danger of turmoil.

古文：其子玄龄亦密言于彦谦曰： 主上本无功德，以诈取天下，诸子皆骄奢不仁，必自相诛夷，今虽承平，其亡可翘足待。 
现代文：他的儿子房玄龄也暗地对房彦谦说： 皇帝本来没什么功劳德行，以奸诈计谋取得天下，他的几个儿子都骄横奢侈不行仁义，必定会自相残杀。现在虽然太平了，但杨家天下的覆亡很快就会到来。 
English: His son, Fang Xuanling, also secretly said to Fang Yanqian: The emperor originally had little merit and virtue, and gained the world with treachery and trickery. His several sons are arrogant and extravagant, do not practice benevolence, and will certainly kill each other. Although it is peaceful now, the downfall of the Yang family will come soon.

古文：彦谦，法寿之玄孙也。
现代文：房彦谦是房法寿的玄孙。
English: Fusahiko is the great-great-grandson of Fusafusa.

古文：玄龄与杜果之兄孙如晦皆预选，吏部侍郎高孝基名知人，见玄龄，叹曰： 仆阅人多矣，未见如此郎者，异日必为伟器，恨不见其大成耳！ 见如晦，谓曰： 君有应变之才，必任栋梁之重。 
现代文：房玄龄和杜杲哥哥的孙子杜如晦都被吏部预选为候补官员。吏部侍郎高孝基有知人的名声。他见到房玄龄，叹息道： 我见的人也很多了，还没有见过这样的年轻人，以后必成大器，只可惜我不能见到他成大材了。 他见到杜如晦说： 您有随机应变的才能，一定会被委以栋梁重任的。 
English: Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao, the grandson of Du Yao's elder brother, were both preselected as alternate officials by the personnel department. Gao Xiaoji, the chamberlain of the personnel department, has a reputation as an acquaintance. When he saw Fang Xuanling, he sighed: I have seen a lot of people, I have not seen such a young man, he will become a great instrument in the future, but I am sorry that I can not see him become a great material. When he saw Du Rugao, he said: You have the ability to adapt, you will definitely be entrusted with important responsibilities.

古文：俱以子孙托之。
现代文：高孝基把子孙都托付给了他们。
English: Gao Xiaoji entrusted his children and grandchildren to them.

古文：帝晚年深信佛道鬼神，辛巳，始诏 有盗毁佛及天尊、岳、镇、海、渎神像者，以不道论；沙门毁佛像，道士毁天尊像者，以恶逆论。 
现代文：文帝晚年笃信佛、道、鬼神。辛巳，开始颁诏 有毁坏佛以及天尊、山岳、镇、海，渎神像的人，以不道罪惩处；僧尼毁坏佛像，道士毁坏天尊像的，以恶逆罪论处。 
English: In his later years, Emperor Wen firmly believed in Buddhism, Taoism, and ghosts and gods. Soon after, he began to issue an edict that those who destroyed Buddhas, heavenly statues, mountains, towns, and seas, as well as those who desecrated statues of gods, would be punished with the crime of immorality; those monks and nuns who destroyed Buddha statues, and those Taoists who destroyed statues of heavenly beings, would be punished with the crime of evil treason.

古文：是岁，征同州刺史蔡王智积入朝。
现代文：这一年，文帝征召同州刺史蔡王杨智积入朝。
English: In the same year, Emperor Wen summoned the same province's leading scholar, Cai Wang Yangzhi, to the imperial court.

古文：智积，帝之弟子也。性修谨，门无私谒，自奉简素，帝甚怜之。
现代文：杨智积是文帝的侄子，他性情和善谨慎，门下没有私自进见的人；他自奉俭朴，文帝很怜爱他。
English: Yang Zhizhi was the nephew of Emperor Wen. He was gentle and prudent, and there were no self-seekers under his tutelage. He was self-sacrificing and frugal, and Emperor Wen was very fond of him.

古文：智积有五男，止教读《论语》、《孝经》，不令交通宾客。
现代文：杨智积有五个儿子，只教他们读《论语》。他不让儿子们与宾客结交往来。
English: Yang Zhizhi has five sons, and he only teaches them to read the Analects. He does not allow his sons to mingle with the guests.

古文：或问其故，智积曰： 卿非知我者！ 
现代文：有人问其原因，杨智积说： 你不理解我！ 
English: When asked why, Yang Zhizhe said: "You don't understand me!

古文：其意盖恐诸子有才能以致祸也。
现代文：杨智积的用意是怕他的儿子有才能而招来灾祸。
English: Yang Zhizhe's intention was to fear that his son's talent would bring disaster.

古文：齐州行参军章武王伽送流囚李参等七十馀人诣京师，行至荥阳，哀其辛苦，悉呼谓曰： 卿辈自犯国刑，身婴缧绁，固其职也；重劳援卒，岂不愧心哉！ 
现代文：齐州行参军章武人王伽，押送判流刑的犯人李参等七十余人到京师，走到荥阳，王伽可怜犯人们辛苦，把他们都叫来说： 你们这些人犯了国法，身受枷锁之苦，固然是你们应得的惩处，但是使押送你们的人辛苦，你们心里不惭愧吗？ 
English: The military commander Wang Jia, who went to Chizhou to join the army, and the convict Li Jian, who escorted the convict sentenced to exile, and more than seventy people to Beijing Division, went to Shenyang. Wang Jia pitied the prisoners for their hard work and called them all to say: You people have violated the national law and suffered from the shackles. Of course, this is the punishment you deserve, but aren't you ashamed to make the people who escort you work hard?

古文：参等辞谢。
现代文：李参等人都谢罪。
English: Li San and the others all repented.

古文：伽乃悉脱其枷锁，停援卒，与约曰： 某日当至京师，如致前却，吾当为汝受死。 
现代文：于是王伽把他们身上的枷锁都解下，遣散押送犯人的兵卒，与李参等人约好： 某日应当到达京师，如果不能如期到达，我只好代你们受死。 
English: So Wang Jia loosened all the shackles on their bodies, dismissed the soldiers who were escorting the prisoners, and made an appointment with Li San and others: One day they should reach Beijing Division, and if they couldn't make it on time, I would have to die on your behalf.

古文：遂舍之而去。
现代文：说完就离开犯人们走了。
English: He abandoned them and walked away.

古文：流人感悦，如期而至，一无离叛。
现代文：犯人们感动欣悦，如期到达京师，没有一个人背约逃走。
English: Moved with joy, the criminals arrived in Beijing as scheduled, and none of them broke the agreement and fled.

古文：上闻而惊异，召见与语，称善久之。
现代文：文帝听到此事感到惊奇，就召见王伽谈话，不断地称赞他。
English: Emperor Wen was surprised to hear this and summoned Wang Jia for a talk, praising him constantly.

古文：于是悉召流人，令携负妻子俱入，赐宴于殿庭而赦之。
现代文：于是犯人们都被召见，并命令他们带着妻子儿女一起进宫，在殿堂赐宴并赦免了他们。
English: Then all the criminals were summoned, and they were ordered to bring their wives and children into the palace with them, and a banquet was given in the hall, and they were pardoned.

古文：因下诏曰： 凡在有生，含灵禀性，咸知善恶，并识是非。
现代文：文帝因此下诏说： 凡世上之人，都有灵悟的禀性，都懂得善恶，明晓是非。
English: Emperor Wen therefore decreed: All people in the world have the tenacity of enlightenment, all know good and evil, and know what is right and wrong.

古文：若临以至诚，明加劝导，则俗必从化，人皆迁善。
现代文：如果以至诚之心关怀他们，明加劝导，那么恶俗必定改变，人都会变得善良。
English: If you sincerely care for them and advise them, then the bad habits will surely change and people will become kind.

古文：往以海内乱离，德教废绝，吏无慈爱之心，民怀奸诈之意。
现代文：以前因为海内动乱流离，德教废驰湮没，官吏没有慈爱之心，百姓存有奸诈之意。
English: In the past, because of the domestic turmoil, people were displaced, moral education was abandoned, officials did not have a loving heart, and the people had a sense of treachery.

古文：朕思遵圣法，以德化民，而伽深识朕意，诚心宣导，参等感悟，自赴宪司：明是率土之人，非为难教。
现代文：朕想遵循先圣的办法，用德来感化子民。王伽非常理解朕的用意，诚心诚意地加以宣传教化；李参等人感化醒悟，自己赴往司法机关。这说明四海之内的百姓并不难以教化。
English: I want to follow the method of the first saint and use virtue to inspire the people. Wang Jia understood my intention very well and sincerely propagated and educated; Li San and others were inspired to wake up and go to the judicial organs. This shows that it is not difficult to educate the people in the four seas.

古文：若使官尽王伽之俦，民皆李参之辈，刑厝不用，其何远哉！ 
现代文：要是让官吏都成为王伽一类的人物。庶民都向李参等人学习，不用刑律的日子就不会远了！ 
English: If all government officials become like Wang Jia, and the common people learn from Li San and others, the day when there is no need for criminal law will not be far away!

古文：乃擢伽为雍令。
现代文：于是提拔王伽为雍县令。
English: As a result, Wang Jia was promoted to Yong County Commander.

古文：太史令袁充表称： 隋兴已后，昼日渐长，开皇元年，冬至之景长一丈二尺七寸二分；自尔渐短，至十七年，短于旧三寸七分。
现代文：太史令袁充上表称： 隋朝兴起之后，白昼渐渐变长，开皇元年冬至那天的影长是一丈二尺七寸二分。从那以后渐渐缩短。到开皇十七年，比过去短了三寸七分。
English: "After the rise of the Sui Dynasty, the length of the day gradually became longer. On the day of the winter solstice in the first year of the Emperor, the length of the shadow was 1.22 meters. Since then, it has gradually shortened. By the seventeenth year of the Emperor, it was 3.77 meters shorter than before.

古文：日去极近则景短而日长，去极远则景长而日短；行内道则去极近，行外道则去极远。
现代文：太阳离北极近则日影就短，白昼就长；离北极远则日影就长，白昼就短。太阳在黄道之北运行时就离北极星近，在黄道之南运行时就离北极崐星远。
English: When the sun is close to the North Pole, the shadow is short and the day is long; when it is far from the North Pole, the shadow is long and the day is short. When the sun is north of the zodiac, it is close to the North Star, and when it is south of the zodiac, it is far from the North Star.

古文：谨按《元命包》云： 日月出内道，璇玑得其常。 
现代文：据纬书《春秋元命包》记载： 明在黄道之北运行，季节则正常。 
English: According to the book of proverbs, "Spring, Autumn, and the Year of the Rat," the following is recorded: The Ming moves north of the ecliptic, and the seasons are normal.

古文：《京房别对》曰： 太平，日行上道；升平，行次道；霸代，行下道。 
现代文：《京房别对》记载： 太平之时，太阳在黄道之北运行；盛世之时，在黄道运行；乱世之时，在黄道之南运行。 
English: According to the record of "Be Right with the Capital": In times of peace, the sun moves in the north of the ecliptic; in times of prosperity, in the ecliptic; in times of chaos, in the south of the ecliptic.

古文：伏惟大隋启运，上感乾元，景短日长，振古希有。 
现代文：因为大隋启动了天运，感应了上天，所以日影缩短，白昼变长，这是自古少有的。 
English: Because the Great Sui Dynasty initiated the heavenly fortune and induced the heaven, the sun shadow was shortened and the day lengthened, which is rare since ancient times.

古文：上临朝，谓百官曰： 景长之庆，天之祐也。
现代文：文帝上朝对百官说： 影短日长的福庆是上天的护。
English: Emperor Wen said to hundreds of officials: "Fuqing, which is short-lived, is protected by heaven.

古文：今太子新立，当须改元，宜取日长之意以为年号。 
现代文：现在刚立太子，应当改年号，最好取日长之意作为年号。 
English: Now that he has become crown prince, he should change the era name. It would be best to use Nichinaga as the era name.

古文：是后百工作役，并加程课，以日长故也。
现代文：此后工匠们服役，都增加了工作量，是因为白昼延长的缘故。
English: Since then, craftsmen have increased their workload due to the lengthening of the day.

古文：丁匠苦之。
现代文：壮丁工匠们都苦于白昼延长。
English: The able-bodied craftsmen all suffer from the lengthening of the day.

古文：高祖文皇帝中仁寿元年春，正月，乙酉朔，赦天下，改元。
现代文：仁寿元年春季，正月，乙酉朔，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the first year of the Year of Mercy, the spring, the first month, the spring equinox, the general amnesty, and the change of the year.

古文：以尚书右仆射杨素为左仆射，纳言苏威为右仆射。
现代文：任命尚书右仆射杨素为左仆射，纳言苏威为右仆射。
English: He appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Yang Su as his left-hand man and Nagan Su Wei as his right-hand man.

古文：丁酉，徙河南王昭为晋王。
现代文：丁酉，改封河南王杨昭为晋王。
English: On the 13th, Henan Wang Zhao was renamed Jin Wang.

古文：突厥步迦可汗犯塞，败代州总管韩弘于恒安。
现代文：突厥的步迦可汗率兵侵犯边塞，在恒安击败代州总管韩弘。
English: At the behest of the Turks, Qakhan Khan led his troops to invade the border fortress, defeating Han Hong, the governor of Daizhou, in Heng'an.

古文：以晋王昭为内史令。
现代文：任命晋王杨昭为内史令。
English: Jin Wang Zhao was appointed as the Minister of the Interior.

古文：二月，乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，乙卯朔，出现日食。
English: In February, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏，五月，己丑，突厥男女九万口来降。
现代文：夏季，五月，己丑，有突厥男女九万人来归附。
English: In the summer, in May, there were 90,000 Turkic men and women who came to join the Turks.

古文：六月，乙卯，遣十六使巡省风俗。
现代文：六月，乙卯，文帝派遣十六名使者到各地巡视风俗。
English: In June, Emperor Wen sent 16 emissaries to various regions to inspect customs.

古文：乙丑，诏以天下学校生徒多而不精，唯简留国子学生七十人，太学、四门及州县学并废。
现代文：乙丑，文帝颁诏，认为天下学校的学生多而不精，经过选拔，只留国子监的学生七十人，太学、四门及各州、县的学校一并停办。
English: Second, Emperor Wen issued an edict, saying that the number of students in the world's schools was too large and not refined. After selection, only 70 students of the national kindergarten were left, and the schools in Taixu, Shimen and all states and counties were closed.

古文：前殿内将军河间刘炫上表切谏，不听。
现代文：殿内将军河间人刘炫呈上奏表恳切劝说，文帝不听。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen to the earnest persuasion of Liu Xuan, a member of the Imperial Household, who presented a petition to Emperor Wen.

古文：秋，七月，戊戌，改国子学为太学。
现代文：秋季，七月，改国子学为太学。
English: In the autumn, in July, Kuniko-gaku was changed to Tai-gaku.

古文：初，帝受周禅，恐民心未服，故多称符瑞以耀之，其伪造而献者，不可胜计。
现代文：当初，文帝受北周的禅让，他怕民心不服，因此就用很多符瑞现象来表明自己受禅是符合天意的。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wen was led to Zen by Northern Zhou. He was afraid that the people would not accept it, so he used many phenomena to show that his acceptance of Zen was in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：冬，十一月，己丑，有事于南郊，如封禅礼，板文备述前后符瑞以报谢云。
现代文：伪造符瑞进献的人多得数不过来。冬季，十一月，己丑，到京师南郊举行祭天典礼，所上版文详细叙述符瑞现象出现的前后情况以报谢上天。
English: In the winter, in November, in Jiugou, in the southern suburb of Beijing, a ceremony was held to thank the heavens. The above article describes in detail the circumstances before and after the appearance of the phenomenon of Fu Rui to thank the heavens.

古文：山獠作乱，以卫尉少卿洛阳卫文昇为资州刺史镇抚之。
现代文：山中的獠人造反，任命卫尉少卿洛阳人卫文为资州刺史，去镇压剿抚獠人。
English: The Xiongnu in the mountains staged a rebellion, and appointed the Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, Luo Yangren Weiwen, as the prefect of Zhizhou to suppress the Xiongnu.

古文：文昇名玄，以字行。
现代文：卫文名玄，通常以字来称呼他。
English: Wei Wenmei Xuan is usually referred to by his first name.

古文：初到官，獠方攻大牢镇，文昇单骑造其营，谓曰： 我是刺史，衔天子诏，安养汝等，勿惊惧也！ 
现代文：卫文刚到任，獠人正在进攻大牢镇，卫文一个人骑马来到獠人的营帐，说 我是刺史，奉天子诏命，安抚保护你们，不要惊慌恐惧。 
English: Just after Wei Wen took office, the Xiongnu were attacking Dajiao Town. Wei Wen rode alone to the camp of the Xiongnu and said, "I am Xiongshi. By the command of Heaven, I will pacify and protect you. Don't panic and be afraid."

古文：群獠莫敢动。
现代文：獠人们都不敢动了。
English: People didn't dare to move.

古文：于是说以利害，渠帅感悦，解兵而去，前后归附者十馀万口。
现代文：于是卫文向獠人陈说利害，獠人的首领被感化，撤兵离去。前后归附朝廷的獠人有十余万人。
English: As a result, Weiwen made representations to the Xiongnu, and the leaders of the Xiongnu were persuaded to withdraw. More than one hundred thousand Xiongnu people eventually joined the imperial court.

古文：帝大悦，赐缣二千匹。
现代文：文帝非常高兴，赏赐卫文细绢两千匹。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased and rewarded Wei Wen with two thousand horses.

古文：壬辰，以文昇为遂州总管。
现代文：壬辰，任命卫文为遂州总管。
English: Imjin, appointed Weiwen as the general manager of Suizhou.

古文：潮、成等五州獠反，高州酋长冯盎驰诣京师，请讨之。
现代文：潮州、成州等五个州的獠人造反，高州的酋长冯盎驰马到京师，请出兵去讨伐獠人。
English: Chaozhou, Chengdu and other five states of Yunnan staged a rebellion, and the chief of Gaozhou, Feng Ancima, went to Beijing to ask the emperor to send troops to fight the rebels.

古文：帝敕杨素与盎论贼形势，素叹曰： 不意蛮夷中有如是人！ 
现代文：文帝命令杨素和冯盎讨论獠人的情况。杨素感叹道： 没想到蛮夷中意有这样的人！ 
English: Emperor Wen ordered Yang Su and Feng Ung to discuss the situation of the Xiang people. Yang Su exclaimed: I didn't expect such a person from the barbarians!

古文：即遣盎发江、岭兵击之。
现代文：随即派冯盎率领江南、岭南等地的官军去进攻獠人。
English: He immediately sent Feng Ang to lead the government troops from the south of the Yangtze River and the south of the Lingnan Mountains to attack the Xingren.

古文：事平，除盎汉阳太守。
现代文：崐叛乱平息后，任命冯盎为汉阳太守。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, he appointed Feng Ang as the governor of Hanyang.

古文：诏以杨素为云州道行军元帅，长孙晟为受降使者，挟启民可汗北击步迦。
现代文：文帝下诏任命杨素为云州道行军元帅，长孙晟为受降使者，带领启民可汗向北进攻步迦可汗。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict appointing Yang Su as the marshal of the march on Yunnan Province, and the eldest grandson Zou as the envoy to accept the surrender, leading the Qimin Khan to attack the Buga Khan to the north.

古文：高祖文皇帝中仁寿二年
现代文：二年春季，三月，己亥，文帝驾临仁寿宫。
English: In the spring of the second year, in March, Emperor Wen came to Renshou Palace.

古文：春，三月，己亥，上幸仁寿宫。突厥思力俟斤等南渡河，掠启民男女六千口、杂畜二十馀万而去。杨素帅诸军追击，转战六十馀里，大破之，突厥北走。
现代文：突厥思力俟斤可汗等率众向南渡河掠走启民可汗部落的男女六千人，各种牲畜二十余万头。杨素统帅各路军队追击思力俟斤，转战六十余里，大破思力俟斤。
English: The Turkic Siliqin Khan and others led the crowd to Nandu River and carried away six thousand men and women of the Qimin Khan tribe, and more than 200,000 heads of various livestock. Yang Su, the commander of the various armies, pursued Siliqin, turned to war for more than sixty miles, and defeated Siliqin.

古文：素复进追，夜，及之，恐其越逸，令其骑稍后，亲引两骑并降突厥二人与虏并行，虏不之觉；候其顿舍未定，趣后骑掩击，大破之，悉得人畜以归启民。
现代文：突厥人向北逃走，杨素又继续追击，在夜里追上了突厥人。杨素恐怕突厥人逃跑，命令骑兵稍稍后退，亲自带领两名骑兵和两名投降的突厥人与突厥军队一起行进，突厥军没有察觉。杨素趁突厥人没有安置停当的时候，催促后面的隋军骑兵追击掩杀，大破突厥军队，将俘获的人、畜都给了启民可汗。
English: The Turks fled to the north, and Yang Su continued to pursue them, and caught up with the Turks in the night. Yang Su feared that the Turks would flee, ordered the cavalry to retreat a little, and personally led two cavalrymen and two surrendered Turks to march with the Turkish army. The Turkish army did not notice. Yang Su took advantage of the fact that the Turks had not settled and stopped, urged the Sui cavalry behind to chase and kill, broke the Turkish army, and gave the captured people and animals to the Qimin Khan.

古文：自是突厥远遁，碛南无复寇抄。
现代文：自此，突厥人远远地逃走，沙漠以南的地方不再有侵犯掠夺之事。
English: Since then, the Turks have fled far away, and south of the desert there is no longer anything to invade and plunder.

古文：素以功进子玄感柱国，赐玄纵爵淮南公。
现代文：杨素因为有功，文帝封他儿子杨玄感为柱国，赐给杨素另一个儿子杨玄纵淮南公的爵位。
English: Because of Yang Su's merits, Emperor Wen designated his son Yang Xuanxuan as a pillar state and gave Yang Su's other son Yang Xuanxuan the title of Duke of Huainan.

古文：兵部尚书柳述，庆之孙也，尚兰陵公主，怙宠使气，自杨素之属皆下之。
现代文：兵部尚书柳述是柳庆的孙子。他娶了兰陵公主。柳述依仗着文帝的宠信，飞扬跋扈，连杨素之辈都趋附他。
English: He married Princess Lanling. Relying on the patronage of Emperor Wen, Liu Su flew high, and even Yang Su's generation followed him.

古文：帝问符玺直长万年韦云起： 外间有不便事，可言之。 
现代文：文帝对符玺直长万年人韦云起说： 在外面有不便直说的事，在这里可以说。 
English: Wen Di said to Wei Yunqi, a long-term resident of Fuxi, "Outside, there are things that are inconvenient to say directly, but here you can say them.

古文：述时侍侧，云起奏曰： 柳述骄豪，未尝经事，兵机要重，非其所堪。
现代文：柳述当时正侍立在文帝身旁。韦云起奏文帝： 柳述为人骄傲强横，他没有经过什么大事，兵权机要的重任不是他所能担当得起来的。
English: At that time, Liu Susu was standing next to Emperor Wen. Wei Yunqi sent a message to Emperor Wen: Liu Susu is a proud and powerful person, he has not experienced any major events, and the important task of military power is not something he can handle.

古文：徒以主婿，遂居要职。
现代文：只是因为他是主上的女婿，才身居要职。
English: It is only because he is the Lord's son-in-law that he holds high office.

古文：臣恐物议以陛下为 官不择贤，专私所爱 ，斯亦不便之大者。 
现代文：我恐怕有人议论陛下 官不选择贤能之人，专选自己所宠信的人 ，这也是不利朝政的事。 
English: I'm afraid that some people are saying that His Majesty does not choose people of merit, but only people he likes and trusts, which is also not good for the government.

古文：帝甚然其言，顾谓述曰： 云起之言，汝药石也，可师友之。 
现代文：文帝认为韦云起的话很对，回头对柳述说： 云起的话是你的治病良药。你可以把他看作老师和朋友。 
English: Wen Di thought that Wei Yunqi's words were very right, and turned back to Liu Shu and said: Yunqi's words are your medicine. You can regard him as a teacher and friend.

古文：秋，七月，丙戌，诏内外官各举所知。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙戌，文帝下诏让朝廷内外的官员各自举荐自己了解的人。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Puyi and Emperor Wen issued an edict to let officials inside and outside the imperial court nominate people they knew.

古文：柳述举云起，除通事舍人。
现代文：柳述就举荐韦云起，文帝任命他为通事舍人。
English: Liu Shuling recommended Wei Yunqi, and Emperor Wen appointed him as secretary.

古文：益州总管蜀王秀，容貌瑰伟，有胆气，好武艺。
现代文：益州总管蜀王杨秀，容貌奇特雄伟，有胆量气魄，喜好武艺。
English: Shu Wang Yang Xiu, the governor of Yizhou, has a strange and majestic appearance, has courage and courage, and likes martial arts.

古文：帝每谓独孤后曰： 秀必以恶终，我在当无虑，至兄弟，必反矣。 
现代文：文帝常对独孤皇后说： 杨秀肯定会不得好死，我活着他还不会出什么问题，要是他兄弟当政，他一定会造反。 
English: Emperor Wen often said to the lonely empress: Yang Xiu will surely die a miserable death. If I am alive, he will not have any problems. If his brother is in power, he will definitely rebel.

古文：大将军刘哙之讨西爨也，帝令上开府仪同三司杨武通将兵继进。
现代文：大将军刘哙去讨伐西的时候，文帝命令上开府仪同三司杨武通率兵随后出发。
English: When the great general Liu Bei went to fight in the west, Emperor Wen ordered Kaifu Yi and the soldiers led by Yang Wutong of the Third Division to leave afterwards.

古文：秀以嬖人万智光为武通行军司马。
现代文：杨秀任命一个受他宠信的叫万智光的人作杨武通的行军司马。
English: Yang Xiu appointed a man named Wan Zhiguang, who was his favorite, as Yang Wutong's marching steed.

古文：帝以秀任非其人，谴责之，因谓群臣曰： 坏我法者，子孙也。
现代文：文帝认为杨秀任命的人不称职，就责备他，并对群臣说： 破坏我的法度的是我的子孙。
English: Emperor Wen thought that the person appointed by Yang Xiuhang was not up to the job, so he reproached him and said to his courtiers: "It is my children and grandchildren who are breaking my laws.

古文：譬如猛虎，物不能害，反为毛间虫所损食耳。 
现代文：就好比猛虎，别的动物不能伤害它，它反而被毛间虫损害、蚕食一样。 
English: Just like a fierce tiger, other animals cannot harm it, but it is harmed and eaten by caterpillars.

古文：遂分秀所统。
现代文：于是削减了杨秀统领的辖区。
English: As a result, Yang Xiu's jurisdiction was reduced.

古文：自长史元岩卒后，秀渐奢僭，造浑天仪，多捕山獠充宦者，车马被服，拟于乘舆。
现代文：自从长史元岩死后，杨秀渐渐变得奢侈僭越，他制做浑天仪，又多抓山中的獠人充作宦官，他的车马被服都以皇帝的标准制做。
English: Since the death of Changshi Yuanyan, Yang Xiu gradually became more extravagant. He made armadillos, captured more eunuchs in the mountains to act as eunuchs, and his chariots and horses were all made according to the emperor's standard.

古文：及太子勇以谗废，晋王广为太子，秀意甚不平。
现代文：太子杨勇因谗言被废黜后，晋王杨广被立为太子，杨秀为此忿忿不平。
English: After Prince Yang Yong was deposed for slander, the Jin king Yang Guang was made prince, and Yang Xiu was furious about this.

古文：太子恐秀终为后患，阴令杨素求其罪而谮之。
现代文：太子杨广怕杨秀终归是个祸患，就暗地命令杨素搜罗杨秀的罪状以诬陷诋毁他。
English: Prince Yang Guang, fearing that Yang Xiu might turn out to be a scourge, secretly ordered Yang Su to collect Yang Xiu's crimes and slander him with false accusations.

古文：上遂征秀，秀犹豫，欲谢病不行。
现代文：于是文帝就征召杨秀进京，杨秀犹豫，想以病为由推辞不动身。
English: So Emperor Wen conscripted Yang Xiu to go to Beijing. Yang Xiu hesitated and wanted to use his illness as an excuse not to go.

古文：总管司马源师谏，秀作色曰： 此自我家事，何预卿也！ 
现代文：总管司马源师劝他，杨秀变了脸色说： 这是我家的事，跟你有什么相干！ 
English: General Manager Sima Yuan advised him, Yang Xiu changed his face and said: This is my family's business, what does it have to do with you!

古文：师垂涕对曰： 师忝参府幕，敢不尽心！
现代文：源师流着泪说： 我被任命为大王府中的幕僚，怎敢不尽心竭力？
English: With tears streaming down his face, Genji said, "I have been appointed as a staff member in the Great King's palace. How dare I not do my best?"

古文：圣上有敕追王，以淹时月，今乃迁延未去。
现代文：皇上有敕命追究您，已经有很长时间了。
English: The Emperor has been pursuing you for a long time.

古文：百姓不识王心，倘生异议，内外疑骇，发雷霆之诏，降一介之使，王何以自明？
现代文：如今您仍然拖延不去，庶民百姓不了解大王的心意，如果产生了非议，朝廷内外猜疑骇惧，圣上颁下震怒的诏书，派来一名使者，大王又怎么自我申辩呢？
English: Now you are still procrastinating, the common people do not understand the mind of the great king. If there is criticism, suspicion and fear inside and outside the court, the emperor issues a furious edict and sends an envoy, how can the great king defend himself?

古文：愿王熟计之！ 
现代文：希望大王仔细考虑这件事！ 
English: I hope the king will consider this matter carefully!

古文：朝廷恐秀生变，戊子，以原州总管独子瓜楷为益州总管，驰传代之。
现代文：朝廷怕杨秀生变，戊子，任命原州总管独孤楷为益州总管，驿马驰至益州来替代杨秀。
English: The imperial court was afraid that Yang Xiusheng would change, so they appointed Yuanzhou's governor Du Guo Kai as Yizhou's governor, and Zou Ma rushed to Yizhou to replace Yang Xiu.

古文：楷至，秀犹未肯行；楷讽谕久之，乃就路。
现代文：独孤楷到了益州，杨秀还是不肯动身。独孤楷劝说开导他许久，杨秀才上路。
English: When the solitary monk arrived in Yizhou, Yang Xiu still refused to set off. It took the solitary monk a long time to persuade and enlighten him, and only then did Yang Xiu set out.

古文：楷察秀有悔色，因勒兵为备；秀行四十馀里，将还袭楷，觇知有备，乃止。
现代文：独孤楷觉察到杨秀有反悔之意，就率领军队作了准备。杨秀上路才四十余里，打算返回袭击独孤楷，他派人探知独孤楷已有准备才作罢。
English: Doko Kokai sensed Yang Xiu's remorse and led his troops to make preparations. Yang Xiu had just traveled more than forty miles and intended to return to attack Doko Kokai. He sent someone to find out if Doko Kokai had made preparations.

古文：八月，甲子，皇后独孤氏崩。
现代文：八月，甲子，皇后独孤氏去世。
English: In August, the Empress Doko died.

古文：太子对上及宫人哀恸绝气，若不胜丧者；其处私室，饮食言笑如平常。
现代文：太子杨广当着文帝和宫人的面悲痛欲绝，好象是不胜哀痛，而在自己府内饮食谈笑如同平常。
English: Prince Yang Guang was overcome with grief in front of Emperor Wen and the courtiers, as if he was overcome with grief, but in his own house, eating and talking was as usual.

古文：又，每朝令进二溢米，而私令外取肥肉脯鲊，置竹桶中，以蜡闭口，衣袱裹而纳之。
现代文：另外，杨广每天早上命令进米二溢，私下却命令取来肥肉、干肉、酿鱼肉，装在竹筒里以蜡封口，用衣帕包起来偷偷运入府内。
English: In addition, Yang Guang ordered rice to be brought in every morning, but secretly ordered fatty meat, dried meat, and brewed fish to be taken, sealed with wax in a bamboo tube, wrapped in a cloth and smuggled into the prefecture.

古文：著作郎王劭上言： 佛说： 人应生天上及生无量寿国之时，天佛放大光明，以香花妓乐来迎。 
现代文：著作郎王劭上书文帝说： 佛祖说：  人应运生在天上和生在无量寿国的时候，天佛会大放光明，以香花妓乐来迎接。 
English: The author of the book "Langwang" said: Buddha said: When people should be born in the sky and born in the country of unlimited longevity, the heavenly Buddha will shine brightly and welcome them with fragrant flowers and prostitutes.

古文：伏惟大行皇后福善祯符，备诸秘记，皆云是妙善菩萨。
现代文：大行皇后的福善征兆，在诸秘记中都有记载，都说皇后是妙善菩萨。
English: The auspicious signs of the empress Dowager are recorded in all the secret records, and they all say that the empress is a wonderful bodhisattva.

古文：臣谨案八月二十二日，仁寿官内再雨金银花；二十三日，大宝殿后夜有神光；二十四日卯时，永安宫北有自然种种音乐，震满虚空；至夜五更，奄然如寐，遂即升遐，与经文所说，事皆符验。 
现代文：我考察到八月二十二日，仁寿宫内再降下金银花；二十三日，大宝殿后夜里出现神光；二十四日卯时，永安宫北面出现自然种种音乐，声振虚空，到夜里五更时，皇后沉寂得如睡着一样，随即死去，这些与经文上所讲的，事事都应验了。 
English: I investigated until August 22nd, when honeysuckle flowers fell again in the Renshou Palace; on the 23rd, divine light appeared in the night behind the Great Treasure Hall; on the 24th, at dusk, various natural music appeared on the north side of the Yongan Palace, sounding and vibrating empty, and at five o'clock in the night, the empress was as silent as if she were asleep, and then died. These and the things mentioned in the scriptures have all come true.

古文：上览之悲喜。
现代文：文帝看后又悲又喜。
English: Emperor Wen was both sad and happy after watching it.

古文：九月，丙戌，上至自仁寿宫。
现代文：九月，丙戌，文帝从仁寿宫回来。
English: In September, Emperor Wen returned from Renshou Palace.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，以工部尚书杨达为纳言。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸丑，任命工部尚书杨达为纳言。
English: In the winter, in October, the ugly, the appointment of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce Shangshu Yangda as the prime minister.

古文：达，雄之弟也。
现代文：杨达是杨雄的弟弟。
English: Yang Da is the younger brother of Yang Xiong.

古文：闰月，甲申，诏杨素、苏威与吏部尚书牛弘等修定五礼。
现代文：闰月，甲申，文帝下诏命杨素、苏威和吏部尚书牛弘等人修定五礼。
English: In the leap month, Jia Shen, Emperor Wen issued an edict ordering Yang Su, Su Wei, and the official Shang Shuxiu Hong and others to amend the Five Rites.

古文：上令上仪同三司萧吉为皇后择葬地，得吉处，云： 卜年二千，卜世二百。 
现代文：文帝命令上仪同三司萧吉为独孤皇后选择葬地。萧吉选到一块吉地，说： 占卜年可以延续杨家基业二千年，占卜世可以延续皇统二百世。 
English: Emperor Wen ordered the high priest and the three emperors to choose a burial place for the lonely queen. Xiao Ji selected a good place and said: The divination year can extend the foundation of the Yang family for two thousand years, and the divination age can extend the imperial succession for two hundred generations.

古文：上曰： 吉凶由人，不在于地。
现代文：文帝说： 吉凶之事在于人不在于地。
English: The emperor said, "Good fortune lies in people, not in the land."

古文：高纬葬父，岂不卜乎！
现代文：北齐后主高纬埋葬他的父亲难道就没有占卜崐吗？
English: Didn't the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi have a divining rod when she buried her father at high latitude?

古文：俄而国亡。
现代文：但是北齐很快就亡国了。
English: However, Northern Qi was soon defeated.

古文：正如我家墓田，若云不吉，朕不当为天子；若云不凶，我弟不当战没。 
现代文：正如我家的墓地，如果说不吉，我就不应作天子，如果说不凶，我弟弟就不应战死。 
English: Just like our family cemetery, if it is not auspicious, I should not be a son of heaven; if it is not evil, my brother will not die in battle.

古文：然竟从吉言。
现代文：但最后文帝还是听从了萧吉的建议。
English: However, he still obeyed Xiao Ji's words.

古文：吉退，告族人萧平仲曰： 皇太子遣宇文左率深谢余云： 公前称我当为太子，竟有其验，终不忘也。
现代文：萧吉退朝后告诉族人萧平仲说： 皇太子杨广派宇文左率向我深表谢意说： 您从前说我会当太子，竟然得到了验证。我终归是不能忘记您的。
English: Xiao Jie told Xiao Pingzhong after his abdication, "Crown Prince Yang Guang sent Yu Wenzhuko to express his deep gratitude to me, saying, "You once said that I would be crown prince, and it was verified. I can't forget you after all."

古文：今卜山陵，务令我早立。我立之后，当以富贵相报。 
现代文：现在您占卜陵地，务必让我早些继承皇位，我作了皇帝后，一定以富贵来报答你。 
English: Now I am divining the mountains and the tombs. I must ascend the throne as soon as possible. After I ascend the throne, I will be rewarded with wealth.

古文：吾语之曰： 后四载，太子御天下。 
现代文：我对他说： 四年之后，太子应会君临天下。 
English: I said to him, "After four years, the crown prince should be able to rule the world."

古文：若太子得政，隋其亡乎！
现代文：其实要是太子得掌朝政，隋朝就要灭亡了！
English: In fact, if the prince were to take over the government, the Sui Dynasty would perish!

古文：吾前绐云 卜年二千 者，三十字也； 卜世二百 者，取世二传也。
现代文：我先前哄骗人说： 占卜可以延续二千年 ，是三十年的意思； 占卜可以延续二百世 是只传二世的意思。
English: Previously, I deceived people by saying: divination can last for two thousand years, which means thirty years; divination can last for two hundred generations, which means only two generations.

古文：汝其识之！ 
现代文：你记住这事。 
English: Remember it well!

古文：壬寅，葬文献皇后于太陵。
现代文：壬寅，将独孤皇后埋葬在太陵。
English: Ren Yin buried the lonely queen in the Great Mausoleum.

古文：诏以 杨素经营葬事，勤求吉地，论素此心，事极诚孝，岂与夫平戎定寇比其功业！
现代文：文帝下诏说： 杨素经手办理葬事，不辞劳苦地寻找吉地，就杨素的心意而言，对君父之事极为虔诚至孝，怎么能与平灭夷狄寇贼相提并论呢？
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: Yang Su handled funerals and worked hard to find auspicious places. As far as Yang Su's heart was concerned, he was extremely pious and filial to his father. How could he be compared to the one who wiped out the barbarians?

古文：可别封一子义康公，邑万户。 
现代文：应该另封他的一个儿子为义康公，食邑一万户。 
English: Another one of his sons should be named Yikang, which would feed ten thousand households.

古文：并赐田三十顷，绢万段，米万石，金珠绫锦称是。
现代文：并赐给杨素田地三十顷，绢一万段，米一万石，相应的金珠绫绵等等。
English: He also gave Yang Su thirty hectares of farmland, ten thousand reeds, ten thousand stones of rice, corresponding gold beads, and so on.

古文：蜀王秀至长安，上见之，不与语；明日，使使切让之。
现代文：蜀王杨秀到了长安，文帝见到他，不和他说话。第二天，派一个使者严厉责备他。
English: When Yang Xiu, the King of Shu, arrived in Chang'an, Emperor Wen saw him but did not speak to him. The next day, he sent an envoy to severely reprimand him.

古文：秀谢罪，太子诸王流涕庭谢。上曰： 顷者秦王糜费财物，我以父道训之。今秀蠹害生民，当以君道绳之。 
现代文：杨秀谢罪，太子杨广和其他的几个王都流泪谢罪，文帝说： 原先秦王杨俊浪费财物，我曾用父道来训斥他；现在杨秀残害百姓，我应该用为君之道来制裁他。 
English: Yang Xiu Xie sinned, Prince Yang Guang and several other kings shed tears to thank him, and Emperor Wen said: Originally, Qin King Yang Jun wasted wealth and property, I used my father's way to reprimand him; now Yang Xiu is harming the people, I should use the way of the king to sanction him.

古文：于是付执法者。
现代文：于是就把杨秀交付执法官员。
English: As a result, Yang Xiu was handed over to law enforcement officials.

古文：开府仪同三司庆整谏曰： 庶人勇既废，秦王已薨，陛下见子无多，何至如是！
现代文：开府仪同三司庆整劝文帝说： 庶人杨勇已被废黜，秦王已经死了，陛下的儿子现在不多了，何必这样？
English: Kaifu Yi and the three Qingzheng advised Emperor Wen to say: The commoner Yang Yong has been deposed, King Qin has died, His Majesty's sons are now few, why is this necessary?

古文：蜀王性甚耿介，今被重责，恐不自全。 
现代文：蜀王杨秀性格耿直独特，如今被重责，恐怕他难以保全。 
English: Shu Wang Yangxiu has a unique personality, and now he is under heavy responsibility. I am afraid it is difficult to keep him safe.

古文：上大怒，欲断其舌，因谓群臣曰： 当斩秀于市以谢百姓。 
现代文：文帝勃然大怒，要割掉庆整的舌头。接着他对群臣说： 应该把杨秀在闹市斩首向百姓谢罪。 
English: Emperor Wen flew into a rage and wanted to cut off Yang Xiu's tongue. He then said to his ministers: Yang Xiu should be beheaded in the city to apologize to the people.

古文：乃令杨素等推治之。
现代文：于是就命令杨素等人对杨秀追究治罪。
English: So he ordered Yang Su and others to investigate and punish Yang Xiu.

古文：太子阴作偶人，缚手钉心，枷锁杻械，书上及汉王姓名，仍云 请西岳慈父圣母神兵收杨坚、杨谅神魂，如此形状，勿令散荡。 
现代文：太子杨广暗中制做了偶人，捆住偶人的手脚，用针钉住偶人的心，将偶人上了枷锁，并写上文帝及汉王杨谅的姓名，还写上 请西岳慈父圣母收去杨坚、杨谅的神魂，就保持这样的形状，不要使它散开流失。 
English: Prince Yang Guang secretly made a doll person, tied the doll person's hands and feet, pinned the doll person's heart with a needle, put the doll person in chains, and wrote the names of the emperor and the Han king Yang Tong, and also wrote, "Please ask the Holy Mother of the West Yue Compassionate Father to collect the soul of Yang Jian and Yang Tong, and keep it in this shape, do not let it spread and drain away."

古文：密埋之华山下，杨素发之；又云秀妄述图谶，称京师妖异，造蜀地征祥；并作檄文，云 指期问罪 ，置秀集中，俱以闻奏。
现代文：秘密将偶人埋在华山下，杨素发掘出偶人，又控告杨秀说他胆大妄为记述图谶，称京师有妖异现象，制造蜀地的祥瑞现象；并做好了檄文，说 指日就可以问罪 。
English: He secretly buried the figurine under Huashan Mountain, and Yang Su unearthed the figurine. He also accused Yang Xiu of having the audacity to write about the figurine, saying that there was a strange phenomenon in Beijing and a auspicious phenomenon in Shu; and he also wrote a post-it note saying that he could be charged if he pointed to the sun.

古文：上曰： 天下宁有是邪！ 
现代文：将这些材料都收到杨秀的文集里，这些情况都奏报了文帝。文帝说： 天下哪有这样的人！ 
English: He received all these materials from Yang Xiu's anthology and reported the situation to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen said, "There is no such person in the world!"

古文：十二月，癸巳，废秀为庶人，幽之内侍省，不听与妻子相见，唯獠婢二人驱使，连坐者百馀人。
现代文：十二月，癸巳，将杨秀废为庶人，幽禁在内侍省，不许他与妻子儿女见面，只派两名獠人奴仆供他使用。
English: In December, Emperor Xizong abolished Yang Xiu as a commoner and confined him to the Ministry of the Interior. He was not allowed to meet with his wife and children and was only allowed to have two eunuch servants at his disposal.

古文：秀上表摧谢曰： 伏愿慈恩，赐垂矜愍，残息未尽之间，希与瓜子相见；请赐一穴，令骸骨有所。 
现代文：牵连获罪的人有百余名。杨秀上表文帝悲伤地谢罪： 希望圣上慈爱恩准，能够对我同情怜悯，在我残息未尽之时，希望能和我儿子杨瓜子相见。请赐给我一墓穴，让我的骸骨有个归所。 
English: There are more than a hundred people who have been implicated in the crime. Yang Xiujing expressed the emperor's sorrowful thanks for the sin: I hope that the Holy One, blessed be He, will have mercy on me, and I hope to meet my son Yang Guanzi when I am still alive. Please give me a grave, so that my bones have a home.

古文：瓜子，其爱子也。
现代文：杨瓜子是杨秀的爱子。
English: Yang Guanzi is the love child of Yang Xiu.

古文：上因下诏数其十罪，且曰： 我今不知杨坚、杨谅是汝何亲？ 
现代文：文帝就下诏列举杨秀的十条罪状，并说： 我不知道杨坚、杨谅是你的什么亲人。 
English: Emperor Wen listed the ten charges against Yang Xiu in the following edict, and said, "I don't know what kind of relatives Yang Jian and Yang Jun are to you.

古文：后乃听与其子同处。
现代文：但后来仍允许杨秀和他儿子在一起。
English: But he later allowed Yang Xiu to stay with his son.

古文：初，杨素尝以少谴敕送南台，命治书侍御史柳彧治之。
现代文：当初，杨素曾经因犯小过被敕命送到御史台，文帝命令治书侍御史柳将杨素治罪。
English: At the beginning, Yang Su was once sent to the imperial court for minor offenses, and Emperor Wen ordered Yang Su to be punished.

古文：素恃贵，坐彧床。
现代文：杨素依恃地位显贵，坐在柳的坐榻上。
English: Yang Su, who fancies himself as a favorite, sits on the seat of the willow branch.

古文：彧从外来见之，于阶下端笏整容谓素曰： 奉敕治公之罪！ 
现代文：柳从外面进来，在台阶下端举笏板，神色庄重地对杨素说： 我奉皇帝命令要治您的罪！ 
English: Liu came in from outside and held up a cutting board at the bottom of the steps. Looking solemn, he said to Yang Su, "I have been ordered by the emperor to punish your sin!"

古文：素遽下。
现代文：杨素急忙退下来。
English: Yang Su hurried down.

古文：彧据案而坐，立素于庭，辨诘事状。
现代文：柳手扶桌案而坐，让杨素站在庭堂上，辨别查问杨素的过失。
English: Liu sat with his hand on the table and let Yang Su stand on the courtyard to distinguish Yang Su's fault.

古文：素由是衔之。
现代文：杨素因此对柳怀恨在心。
English: As a result, Yang Su became jealous of Liu Yao.

古文：蜀王秀尝从彧求李文博所撰《治道集》，彧与之；秀遗彧奴婢十口。
现代文：蜀王杨秀曾经向柳要李文博撰写的《治道集》，柳给了杨秀；杨秀送给柳十名奴婢。
English: Yang Xiu, the King of Shu, once asked Liu for the "Ji Dao Shu" written by Li Wenbo. Liu gave it to Yang Xiu; Yang Xiu gave Liu ten slaves.

古文：及秀得罪，素奏彧以内臣交通诸侯，除名为民，配戍怀远镇。
现代文：到杨秀获罪，杨素便奏报文帝说柳作为内臣与诸侯结交往来，因此将柳除名为民，发配到怀远镇去戍边。
English: When Yang Xiu was found guilty, Yang Su sent a report to Emperor Wen saying that Liu, as a vassal, had come into contact with the princes. Therefore, Liu was removed from the name of the people and sent to Huaiyuan Town.

古文：帝使司农卿赵仲卿往益州穷案秀事，秀之宾客经过之处，仲卿必深文致法，州县长吏坐者太半。
现代文：文帝派司农卿赵仲卿到益州彻底追查杨秀的事情，杨秀宾客曾经到过的地方，赵仲卿必定苛刻地以法律条文追究并严厉治罪，那些州县长吏大半都受牵连而被定罪。
English: Emperor Wen sent the Secretary of Agriculture, Zhao Zhongqing, to Yizhou to thoroughly investigate the matter of Yang Xiu. Where Yang Xiu's guests had been, Zhao Zhongqing must be harshly prosecuted and severely punished by law. Most of those state and county officials were implicated and convicted.

古文：上以为能，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：文帝认为赵仲卿能干，赏赐他很丰厚的财物。
English: Emperor Wen believed that Zhao Zhongqing was capable and rewarded him with very rich wealth.

古文：久之，贝州长史裴肃遣使上书，称： 高颎以天挺良才，元勋佐命，为众所疾，以至废弃；愿陛下录其大功，忘其小过。
现代文：很久以后，贝州刺史裴肃派使者给文帝上书说： 高因有也天生的突出才能，又是开国元勋，佐命为大臣，受到人们的妒忌以至于被废黜不用。希望陛下记着高的大功，忘掉他的小过。
English: A long time later, Baizhou Governor Pei Su sent an envoy to Emperor Wen in a letter saying: Gao Ying also had a natural outstanding talent, was the founding father, was appointed as a minister, and was so envied by the people that he was deposed. I hope that His Majesty will remember Gao's great achievements and forget his small mistakes.

古文：又二庶人得罪已久，宁无革心！
现代文：再有，杨勇、杨秀两个庶人获罪已经很久了，难道他们没有洗心革面的心意吗？
English: Moreover, it has been a long time since Yang Yong and Yang Xiu, two commoners, were convicted. Don't they have the will to change their ways?

古文：愿陛下弘君父之慈，顾天性之义，各封小国，观其所为：若能迁善，渐更增益；如或不悛，贬削非晚。
现代文：希望陛下弘杨君父的慈爱，顾念父子天性之道，每人封个小国，观察其所做所为：如果能变好，就逐渐地改变其地位；如果仍然不悔改，贬位削爵也不晚。
English: I hope that His Majesty will carry forward the benevolence of Yang Kun's father, consider the way of father and son's nature, seal each person with a small country, and observe what they do: if they can become better, they will gradually change their status; if they still do not repent, it is not too late to demote them.

古文：今者自新之路永绝，愧悔之心莫见，岂不哀哉！ 
现代文：现在他们改过自新的路永远断绝，惭愧悔恨的心思不为人们所了解。这不是很悲哀吗？ 
English: Now their path to reform has been cut off forever, and their feelings of shame and remorse are not understood. Isn't that sad?

古文：书奏，上谓杨素曰： 裴肃忧我家事，此亦至诚也。 
现代文：奏表呈上去后，文帝对杨素说： 裴肃忧虑我的家事，这也是诚心诚意啊。 
English: After the report form was submitted, Emperor Wen said to Yang Su: Pei Su is worried about my family affairs, which is also a sincere intention.

古文：于是征肃入朝。
现代文：于是召裴肃来京师。
English: As a result, Pei Su was transferred to the imperial court.

古文：太子闻之，谓左庶子张衡曰： 使勇自新，欲何为也？ 
现代文：太子杨广听说此事，对左庶子张衡说： 让杨勇悔过自新，这要干什么？ 
English: When Prince Yang Guang heard about this, he said to Zhang Heng, his left-hand son-in-law, "Let Yang Yong repent and reform, what does this have to do with anything?

古文：衡曰： 观肃之意，欲令如吴太伯、汉东海王耳。 
现代文：张衡说： 我看裴肃的意思，是要让他象周代吴国的太伯、汉代的东海王一样。 
English: Zhang Heng said: I think Pei Su's meaning is to make him like the great-uncle of the State of Wu in the Zhou Dynasty and the king of the East Sea in the Han Dynasty.

古文：肃至，上面谕以勇不可复收之意而罢遣之。
现代文：裴肃到了京师，文帝当面告诉他杨勇有疯鬼附身无法复原的情况，自新之事只能作罢，让裴肃走了。
English: When Pei Su arrived in Beijing, Emperor Wen told him face-to-face that Yang Yong was possessed by a madman and could not be rehabilitated. He had no choice but to give up the idea of rehabilitation and let Pei Su go.

古文：肃，侠之子也。
现代文：裴肃是裴侠的儿子。
English: Pei Su is the son of Pei Xiang.

古文：杨素弟约及从父文思、文纪、族父忌并为尚书、列卿，诸子无汗马之劳，位至柱国、刺史；广营资产，自京师及诸方都会处，邸店、碾硙、便利田宅，不可胜数；家僮数千，后庭妓妾曳绮罗者以千数；第宅华侈，制拟宫禁；亲故吏布列清显。
现代文：杨素的弟弟杨约和叔父杨文思、杨文纪、同族的叔父杨忌都官居尚书、列卿，他们的儿子没有什么汗马功劳，却位居柱国、刺史；杨家广营资产，从京师到各地的都会，客店、磨坊、丰腴的田产和房宅不计其数，家中的奴仆有几千人，府内穿着华丽罗绮的歌妓姬妾有千人；宅第豪华奢侈，规制模仿皇宫禁城，亲戚朋友旧部下都官列显要之职。
English: Yang Su's younger brother Yang You and his uncles Yang Wensi, Yang Wenji, and his uncle Yang Hui, all of the same ethnicity, were high-ranking officials. Their sons, who did not have any great achievements, were ranked as pillars of the country and made history. The Yang family had extensive assets, from Beijing to cities all over the country. There were inns, mills, bountiful fields and houses. There were thousands of servants in the family, and there were thousands of concubines of courtesans in the government who were dressed in gorgeous petticoats. The houses were luxurious, the regulations imitated the Forbidden City of the Imperial Palace, and relatives

古文：既废一太子及一王，威权愈盛。
现代文：杨素已经废黜了一个太子和一个王，权势更加显赫。
English: Yang Su has already deposed a prince and a king, and his power is even more prominent.

古文：朝臣有违忤者，或至诛夷；有附会及亲戚，虽无才用，必加进擢，朝廷靡然，莫不畏附。
现代文：朝臣忤逆他们的，有人就被处死甚至夷灭全家；附会他们的人和他们的亲朋故旧，即使没有才能，也必定加官进爵。朝廷内外的人都屈服于杨家的势力，无人不畏附杨素。
English: When courtiers rebelled against them, some were put to death or even their entire families were destroyed; those who followed them and their relatives and friends, even if they had no talent, were certainly promoted to higher ranks. People both inside and outside the imperial court succumbed to the power of the Yang family, and no one dared to follow Yang Su.

古文：敢与素抗而不桡者，独柳彧及尚书右丞李纲、大理卿梁毘而已。
现代文：敢于与杨素对抗而不屈从的人，只有柳和尚书右丞李纲、大理卿梁毗而已。
English: The only people who dared to stand up to Yang Su without succumbing were Liu He Shang, Shujing Li Gang, and Daliqing Liang Pi.

古文：始，毘为西宁州刺史，凡十一年，蛮夷酋长皆以金多者为豪隽，递相攻夺，略无宁岁，毘患之。
现代文：当初，梁毗被任命为西宁州刺史，共十一年。西宁州的蛮夷酋长都以金子多的人为豪强，他们互相攻击掠夺，简直没有宁静的年月。
English: At first, Liang Pi was appointed as the chief historian of Xining State for a total of eleven years. The barbarian chiefs of Xining State were all strong with people with a lot of gold. They attacked and plundered each other, and there were hardly any peaceful years.

古文：后因诸酋长相帅以金遗毘，毘置金坐侧，对之恸哭，而谓之曰： 此物饥不可食，寒不可衣，汝等以此相灭，不可胜数，今将此来，欲杀我邪！ 
现代文：梁毗对此感到忧虑。后来因为各酋长竞相送梁毗金子，梁毗把金子放在坐椅旁，对着金子痛哭道崐： 金子这东西饥不能食，寒不能衣，你们为了它相互残害，争战之事多得数不过来。现在你们送金子来，是要杀我啊！ 
English: Liang Pi was worried about this. Later, as the chiefs competed to send Liang Pi gold, Liang Pi put the gold next to his chair and wept bitterly over the gold, saying: Gold is something that cannot be eaten when hungry, cannot be worn when cold, you have killed each other for it, and there are too many wars to count. Now you are sending gold to kill me!

古文：一无所纳。
现代文：他一点都没有接受。
English: He didn't take it well at all.

古文：于是蛮夷感悟，遂不相攻击。
现代文：于是那些蛮夷人都受感动而醒悟，不再互相攻掠了。
English: As a result, those barbarians were moved to wake up and no longer attacked and plundered each other.

古文：上闻而善之，征为大理卿，处法平允。
现代文：文帝听到后很高兴，任命梁毗为大理卿。梁毗执掌司法公平允正。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen was very pleased and appointed Liang Pi as Daliqing. Liang Pi was in charge of judicial fairness and rectitude.

古文：毘见杨素专权，恐为国患，乃上封事曰： 臣闻臣无有作威作福，其害于而家，凶于而国。窃见左仆射越国公素，幸遇愈重，权势日隆，搢绅之徒，属其视听。
现代文：梁毗看到杨素专擅权柄，恐怕他成为国家的祸患，就给文帝上了一封密表说： 我听说臣子没有一个不是因为作威作福而危害其家并祸患于国的，我看到左仆射越国公杨素越来越得到主上的宠信，他权势日见显赫，朝中官宦都是他的耳目。
English: When Liang Pi saw that Yang Su was exclusively wielding power, he feared that he would become a scourge to the country, so he sent a secret letter to Emperor Wen saying: I have heard that there is not a single courtier who does not endanger his family and bring disaster to the country because of his arrogance and arrogance. I see that Yang Su, the left-hand servant of the Duke of Yue, is getting more and more favored by the Lord. His power is becoming more and more prominent, and the officials in the court are his eyes and ears.

古文：忤旨者严霜夏零，阿旨者甘雨冬澍；荣枯由其脣吻，废兴候其指麾；所私皆非忠谠，所进咸是亲戚，子弟布列，兼州连县。
现代文：忤逆他的人便遭到似严冬的霜冻在酷夏降下似的打击，阿谀奉承他的人受到的照顾有如冬天降适时的雨露，每个人的荣辱都在于杨素的口唇，升迁贬谪都得听从他的指派；他所偏爱的人都不是忠心为国的人，他所推荐提拔的人都是他的亲戚；他的子弟势力遍布各州县。
English: Those who rebelled against him were hit like frost in winter falling in summer. Those who flattered him were taken care of like raindrops in winter falling at the right time. The honor and disgrace of everyone was in Yang Su's lips. Promotion and demotion had to follow his assignment. The people he favored were not loyal to the country. The people he recommended for promotion were his relatives. His children's power spread throughout the states and counties.

古文：天下无事，容息异图；四海有虞，必为祸始。
现代文：天下没有什么事，还可以容忍他有私图，要是国家有什么忧患，杨素一定是祸端。
English: There is nothing in the world that can tolerate his selfish plans. If there is any trouble in the country, Yang Su must be the cause.

古文：夫奸臣擅命，有渐而来，王莽资之于积年，桓玄基之于易世，而卒殄汉祀，终倾晋祚。
现代文：奸臣专擅权力这是由来已久的。王莽经营积累了多年，桓玄在皇位变动时打下了基础；终于王莽灭掉了西汉王朝，桓玄倾覆了东晋皇位。
English: This has a long history. Wang Mang accumulated many years of business, and Huan Xuan laid the foundation when the imperial throne was changed; finally, Wang Mang eliminated the Western Han Dynasty, and Huan Xuan overthrew the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：陛下若以素为阿衡，臣恐其心未必伊尹也。
现代文：陛下要是任命杨素为执掌朝政的大臣，我恐怕他的心未必能象殷商的伊尹一样。
English: If His Majesty appoints Yang Su as the minister in charge of the government, I am afraid that his heart may not be the same as that of Yi Yin.

古文：伏愿揆鉴古今，量为处置，俾洪基永固，率土幸甚！ 
现代文：希望陛下能考察借鉴古今之事，酌情处置。如果大隋的基业能够永远巩固，天下百姓就很幸运了！ 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty can study the things of the past and present and dispose of them as appropriate. If the foundation of the Great Sui Dynasty can be consolidated forever, the people of the world will be very lucky!

古文：书奏，上大怒，收毘系狱，亲诘之。
现代文：奏表送上去，文帝看后勃然大怒，把梁毗投入监狱，亲自审问他。
English: When Emperor Wen saw the report, he flew into a rage, threw Liang Pi into prison, and interrogated him in person.

古文：毘极言 素擅宠弄权，将领之处，杀戮无道。
现代文：梁毗恳切地说： 杨素依恃陛下的信任，任意使用权力，率领群下时，对人无缘无故地杀害。
English: Liang Pi earnestly said: Yang Su, relying on His Majesty's trust, arbitrarily used power and killed people without reason when leading the group.

古文：又太子、蜀王罪废之日，百僚无不震竦，唯素扬眉奋肘，喜见容色，利国家有事以为身幸。 
现代文：还有，太子杨勇、蜀王杨秀获罪被废黜的时候，朝中的文武百官无不震惊惶竦，只有杨素眉飞色舞，手舞足蹈，喜形于色，他视国家有难而以为自己的幸事。 
English: Moreover, when Prince Yang Yong and King Yang Xiu of Shu were deposed for crimes, all the civil and military officials in the imperial court were shocked and panicked. Only Yang Su's eyebrows danced, his hands and feet danced, and his face was radiant with joy. He regarded the country's difficulties as his own good fortune.

古文：上无以屈，乃释之。
现代文：文帝无法使梁毗屈服，就释放了他。
English: Emperor Wen could not force Liang Pi to submit, so he released him.

古文：其后上亦浸疏忌素，乃下敕曰： 仆射国之宰辅，不可躬亲细务，但三五日一向省，评论大事。 
现代文：此后，文帝也暗中疏远防忌杨素，他颁诏说： 仆射是国家的宰辅，不可事必躬亲，只要三、五天到省里去一次，评论审视一下大事即可。 
English: After that, Emperor Wen also secretly distanced himself from Yang Su. He issued an edict saying, "As the vice-premier of the country, it is not necessary for me to be close to you. You only need to go to the province once every three to five days to review and examine major events.

古文：外示优崇，实夺之权也。
现代文：表面上表示优待推崇杨素，实际上是夺下杨素的权力。
English: On the surface, it shows preferential treatment and respect for Yang Su, but in fact, it is to seize Yang Su's power.

古文：素由是终仁寿之末，不复通判省事。
现代文：自此直到仁寿末年，杨素不再完全经办省里的事务。
English: From then until the last years of his life, Yang Su no longer fully managed the affairs of the province.

古文：出杨约为伊州刺史。
现代文：文帝把杨约调任为伊州刺史。
English: Emperor Wen transferred Yang You to be the governor of Izhou.

古文：素既被疏，吏部尚书柳述益用事，摄兵部尚书，参掌机密；素由是恶之。
现代文：杨素既然被疏远，吏部尚书柳述的权力越来越大，并兼理兵部尚书，参预掌握军国机密。杨素因此就憎恶柳述。
English: Since Yang Su was alienated, the power of the cadre department of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of War.

古文：太子问于贺若弼曰： 杨素、韩擒虎、史万岁皆称良将，其优劣何如？ 
现代文：太子杨广问贺若弼： 杨素、韩擒虎、史万岁都称得上是良将，他们各自的优缺点如何？ 
English: Prince Yang Guang asked He Ruojun: Yang Su, Han Yuhu and Shi Wanling are all good generals. What are their respective strengths and weaknesses?

古文：弼曰： 杨素猛将，非谋将；韩擒虎斗将，非领将；史万岁骑将，非大将。 
现代文：贺若弼说： 杨素是猛将，不是善谋略的将领；韩擒虎是斗将，不是统帅全军的将领；史万岁是骑将，不是大将。 
English: He Ruoqi said: Yang Su is a fierce general, not a strategist; Han Xunhu is a fighting general, not a general commanding the whole army; Shi Wanlong is a cavalry general, not a general.

古文：太子曰： 然则大将谁也？ 
现代文：太子杨广问： 那么谁是大将呢？ 
English: Prince Yang Guang asked: Then who is the general?

古文：弼拜曰： 唯殿下所择！ 
现代文：贺若弼跪拜道： 只有殿下挑选的才是大将。 
English: Horaka kneeled and said, "Only the one selected by His Highness is the general."

古文：弼意自许也。
现代文：他的意思是说自己是大将。
English: He meant to say that he was a general.

古文：交州俚帅李佛子作乱，据越王故城，遣其兄子大权据龙编城，其别帅李普鼎据乌延城。
现代文：交州的俚人首领李佛子率众造反，占据了骆越王的故城，他派侄子李崐大权占据龙编城，他下属的另一个首领李普鼎占据乌延城。
English: Li Fuzi, the leader of the Zhang people in Jiaozhou, led a rebellion and occupied the ancient city of Luo Yue Wang. He sent his nephew Li Xuan Dajian to occupy Longyan City, and another leader under him, Li Puding, occupied Wuyan City.

古文：杨素荐瓜州刺史长安刘方有将帅之略，诏以方为交州道行军总管，统二十七营而进。
现代文：杨素推荐瓜州刺史长安人刘方，认为他有将帅的谋略，文帝下诏任命刘方为交州道行军总管，率领二十七营军队进发。
English: Yang Su recommended Liu Fang, a member of the Guazhou Jishi Chang'an, and believed that he had the strategy of a general. Emperor Wen issued an edict appointing Liu Fang as the general manager of the march on the Jiaozhou Road and led the 27th battalion of the army to march.

古文：方军令严肃，有犯必斩；然仁爱士卒，有疾病者亲临抚亲，士卒亦以此怀之。
现代文：刘方军令严明整肃，有违犯军令的人必被斩首；但是他对士兵仁慈爱护，士兵患病他亲自抚慰调养，士兵们也因此心里感念刘方。
English: Liu Fang gave strict orders to purify the army, and those who violated the orders would be beheaded; however, he was kind and loving to the soldiers, and he personally nursed and raised the soldiers when they were ill. The soldiers also felt sorry for Liu Fang in their hearts.

古文：至都隆岭，遇贼，击破之。
现代文：刘方军队到达都隆岭，遇到反叛的俚人，刘方率军将俚人击败。
English: Liu Fang's army arrived at Dulongling and encountered the rebellious Qiang people. Liu Fang led the army to defeat the Qiang people.

古文：进军临佛子营，先谕以祸福。
现代文：进军到李佛子的营地时，刘方先向李佛子陈述利害。
English: When marching into Li Fuzi's camp, Liu Fang first stated the stakes to Li Fuzi.

古文：佛子惧，请降，送之长安。
现代文：李佛子恐惧，请求投降。刘方将李佛子送到长安。
English: Li Fuzi was afraid and asked to surrender. Liu Fang sent Li Fuzi to Chang'an.

古文：高祖文皇帝中仁寿三年秋，八月，壬申，赐幽州总管燕荣死。荣性严酷，鞭挞左右，动至千数。
现代文：三年秋季，八月，壬申，文帝将幽州总管燕荣赐死。燕荣性情严酷，鞭笞身边的人往往到上千下。
English: In the autumn of the third year, in August, in Jinshin, Emperor Wen put Yan Rong, the governor of Yuzhou, to death. Yan Rong had a harsh disposition, and he often lashed those around him with thousands of lashes.

古文：尝见道次丛荆，以为堪作杖，命取之，辄以试人。
现代文：他曾经看到路旁长的一丛丛荆条，认为可以作杖，命人取来，立即就以人来试。
English: He once saw a long tangle of thorns on the side of the road and thought it could be used as a cane. He ordered someone to fetch it and immediately had someone try it.

古文：人或自陈无罪，荣曰： 后有罪，当免汝。 
现代文：有人说自己无罪，燕荣就说： 以后你有罪再免掉你受杖刑。 
English: If someone says that he is not guilty, Yan Rong will say: "In the future, if you are guilty, you will be exempted from receiving the cane."

古文：既而有犯，将杖之，人曰： 前日被杖，使君许以有罪宥之。 
现代文：不久这人有了过失，燕荣又要鞭打他，被打的人说： 上次被打，您答应以后有罪就宽恕我。 
English: Soon the man made a mistake, and Yan Rong wanted to whip him again. The beaten man said, "The last time I was beaten, you promised to forgive me if I was found guilty.

古文：荣曰： 无罪尚尔，况有罪邪！ 
现代文：燕荣说： 无罪尚且要打，何况有罪呢！ 
English: Yan Rong said, "If you are not guilty, you should be beaten, let alone if you are guilty!"

古文：杖之自若。
现代文：燕荣鞭打人却神情自若。
English: Yan Rong whips people with an air of self-confidence.

古文：观州长史元弘嗣迁幽州长史，惧为荣所辱，固辞。
现代文：观州长史元弘嗣调为幽州长史，他怕受到燕荣的侮辱，坚决推辞。
English: He was afraid of being insulted by Yan Rong and firmly refused.

古文：上敕荣曰： 弘嗣杖十已上罪，皆须奏闻。 
现代文：文帝就命令燕荣说： 元弘嗣凡犯打十杖以上的罪过，都必须上报给我。 
English: Emperor Wen ordered Yan Rong to say: Motohirotsugu, anyone who commits the crime of beating more than ten staffs must report to me.

古文：荣忿曰： 竖子何敢玩我！ 
现代文：燕荣气忿地说： 这小子怎敢耍弄我！ 
English: Yan Rong said angrily, "How dare this boy play tricks on me!

古文：于是遣弘嗣监纳仓粟，扬得一糠一秕，皆罚之。
现代文：于是他派元弘嗣监管收储粮食，风吹走一糠一秕，都要责罚元弘嗣。
English: As a result, he sent Motohirotsugu to supervise the collection and storage of grain. The wind blew away every stalk, and Motohirotsugu had to be punished.

古文：每笞虽不满十，然一日之中，或至三数。
现代文：每次鞭打数虽不满十，但一天有时要打好几次。
English: Although the number of lashes is less than ten each time, they are sometimes administered several times a day.

古文：如是历年，怨隙日构。荣遂收弘嗣付狱，禁绝其粮，弘嗣抽衣絮杂水咽之。
现代文：这样过了几年，燕荣与元弘嗣的矛盾日益加深，燕荣就把元弘嗣投入监狱，断绝元弘嗣的食粮，元弘嗣抽棉絮加上水咽下去。
English: After a few years of this, the conflict between Yan Rong and Motohirotsugu deepened day by day. Yan Rong put Motohirotsugu in prison, cut off Motohirotsugu's food, and Motohirotsugu swallowed cotton wool and water.

古文：其妻诣阙称冤，上遣使按验，奏荣暴虐，赃秽狼籍；征还，赐死。
现代文：元弘嗣的妻子到皇宫门口喊冤，文帝派人调查，使者回报燕荣为政暴虐，贪赃枉法，声名狼藉。文帝将燕荣召回，命他自尽。
English: Motohirotsugu's wife went to the gate of the Imperial Palace to complain, and Emperor Wen sent an envoy to investigate. The envoy reported that Yan Rong was a tyrant, corrupt, and had a bad reputation. Emperor Wen called Yan Rong back and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：元弘嗣代荣为政。
现代文：元弘嗣代替燕荣执政，他比燕荣还要酷虐。
English: Motohirotsugu replaced Yan Rong in power, and he was even more brutal than Yan Rong.

古文：酷又甚之。九月，壬戌，置常平官。
现代文：九月，壬戍，设置常平官。
English: In September, Jinyuan, the post of Changpingan was established.

古文：是岁，龙门王通诣阙献《太平十二策》，上不能用，罢归。
现代文：这年，龙门人王通到皇宫门前献上《太平十二策》，文帝未予采用，王通作罢返回。
English: In that year, the Longmen Wang Tong went to the front of the Imperial Palace to present the "Twelve Peaceful Measures," but Emperor Wen did not adopt it, and Wang Tong went on strike and returned.

古文：通遂教授于河、汾之间，弟子自远至者甚众，累征不起。
现代文：他就在河、汾一带教书，他的学生从远方来的人很多。朝廷多次征召他都不出来。
English: He taught in the Hebei and Handan regions, and many of his students came from far away. The imperial court summoned him many times, but he never came.

古文：杨素甚重之，劝之仕，通曰： 通有先人之弊庐足以蔽风雨，薄田足以具粥，读书谈道足以自乐。
现代文：杨素很器重王通，劝他作官，王通说： 我有祖先留下的破草房足以遮挡风雨，薄田足以使我喝上粥，读书论道足以自娱。
English: Yang Su was very fond of Wang Tong and advised him to become an official. Wang Tong said: I have a broken grass house left by my ancestors that is enough to shield me from the wind and rain, thin fields that are enough for me to drink porridge, and reading about Taoism that is enough to entertain myself.

古文：愿明公正身以治天下，使时和岁丰，通也受赐多矣，不愿仕也。 
现代文：希望明公端正自己的言行来治理天下，四时和谐，年年丰收，我也就受到许多恩赐了。我不愿意作官。 
English: I hope that I will govern the world in accordance with my words and deeds, that the four seasons will be harmonious, and that there will be a good harvest every year. I have also received many gifts. I don't want to be an official.

古文：或谮通于素曰： 彼实慢公，公何敬焉？ 
现代文：有人对杨素说王通的坏话： 他实在太怠慢您了，您为什么要尊敬他呢？ 
English: Some people said bad things about Wang Tong to Yang Su: He really neglected you too much, why should you respect him?

古文：素以问通，通曰： 使公可慢，则仆得矣；不可慢，则仆失矣：得失在仆，公何预焉！ 
现代文：杨素以此来问王通，王通说： 如果您可以被怠慢，那我就做对了；如果您不可以被怠慢，那我就做错了。得失都在我自己，您何必参与进来呢？ 
English: Yang Su asked Wang Tong about this. Wang Tong said: If you can be neglected, then I have done the right thing; if you can't be neglected, then I have done the wrong thing. The gains and losses are all my own, why do you have to get involved?

古文：素待之如初。
现代文：杨素对待他还象当初一样地尊重。
English: Yang Su treated him with the same respect as before.

古文：弟子贾琼问息谤，通曰： 无辩。 
现代文：王通的弟子贾琼问王通如何平息诽谤，王通说： 不去争辩。 
English: When Jia Qiong, a disciple of Wang Tong, asked Wang Tong how to quell the slander, Wang Tong said, "Don't argue.

古文：问止怨，曰： 不争。 
现代文：贾琼问如何制止往怨恨，王通说： 不去争论。 
English: When Jia Qiong asked how to stop the resentment, Wang Tong said: Don't argue.

古文：通尝称： 无赦之国，其刑必平；重敛之国，其财必削。 
现代文：王通曾声称： 没有罪过可赦免的国崐家，其刑法必定公允；横征暴敛的国家，其财力必定削弱。 
English: Wang Tong once claimed: If there is no crime that can be pardoned, the criminal law of the state must be fair; if there is no crime that can be pardoned, the criminal law of the state must be fair; if there is no crime that can be pardoned, the criminal law of the state must be fair; if there is no crime that can be pardoned, the criminal law of the state must be fair; if there is no crime that can be pardoned, the criminal law of the state must be fair; if there is no crime that can be pardoned, the criminal law of the state must be fair.

古文：又曰： 闻谤而怒者，谗之也；见誉而喜者，佞之媒也；绝去媒，谗佞远矣。 
现代文：又说： 听到诽谤就发怒的人容易中了进谗言者的圈套，听到称赞就高兴的人容易为阿谀奉承的人所利用。如果去掉这些毛病，谗言奸佞就会远离而去。 
English: He also said: People who are angry when they hear slander are easily trapped by gossips, and people who are happy when they hear praise are easily used by flatterers. If these problems are eliminated, gossips will go away.

古文：大业末，卒于家，门人谥曰文中子。
现代文：大业末年，王通在家去世，他的弟子追赠他为 文中子。 
English: At the end of his career, Wang Tong died at home, and his disciples posthumously awarded him the title of "Wen Zhongzi."

