古文：○高宗二二年春正月丙戌朔，帝在扬州。丁亥，录两河流亡吏士。
现代文：建炎二年春正月初一，高宗在扬州。初二，录用两河流亡吏士。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the second year of Jianyan, Gaozong was in Yangzhou. On the second day of the first month, he was hired as an official of the two rivers.

古文：沿河给流民官田、牛、种。
现代文：沿河地区贷给百姓官田、牛、种。
English: The areas along the river were leased to the people for farmland, cattle, and seeds.

古文：戊子，金人陷邓州，安抚刘汲死之。
现代文：初三，金军攻陷邓州，安抚刘汲战死。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded Dengzhou, and Liu Qi, the pacifier, died in battle.

古文：辛卯，置行在榷货务。
现代文：初六，设置行在榷货务。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, the company set up a delivery service.

古文：壬辰，金人犯东京，宗泽遣将击却之。
现代文：初七，金军侵犯东京，宗泽派遣将士打退金军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the gold army invaded Tokyo, and Sozawa dispatched soldiers to repel the gold army.

古文：癸巳，复明法新科。
现代文：初八，恢复明法新科。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the new year, the new subject of "Clear Law" was resumed.

古文：甲午，诣寿宁寺，谒祖宗神主。
现代文：初九，到寿宁寺朝拜祖宗神主。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I went to Suining Temple to worship the ancestor god.

古文：乙未，金人破永兴军，前河东经制副使傅亮以兵降，经略使唐重、副总管杨宗闵、提举军马陈迪、转运副使桑景询、判官曾谓、提点刑狱郭忠孝、经略司主管机宜文字王尚及其子建中俱死之。
现代文：初十，金军攻破永兴军，前河东经制副使傅亮率军投降，经略使唐重、副总管杨宗阂、提举军马陈迪、转运副使桑景询、判官曾谓、提点刑狱郭忠孝、经略司主管机宜文字王尚及其儿子王建中都战死。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Jin army defeated the Yongxing army. Fu Liang, the former deputy envoy of the Hedong Economic System, led the army to surrender. Tang Chong, the deputy general manager of the Economic Affairs Division, Yang Zongyao, Ma Chen Di, the deputy envoy of the Transportation Division, Guo Zhongxiao, the judge of the Zengye, and Wang Jianzhong, the director of the Economic Affairs Division, and Wang Shang and his son Wang Jianzhong all died in the battle.

古文：东平府兵马钤辖孔彦舟叛，渡淮犯黄州，守臣赵令拒之。
现代文：东平府兵马铃辖孔彦舟叛乱，渡过淮河，进犯黄州，守臣赵令阻止了他的进攻。
English: Dongping Prefecture's Terracotta Warriors and Horses of Ling led the Kong Yanzhou Rebellion, crossed the Huai River and attacked Huangzhou. His attack was stopped by the vassal Zhao Ling.

古文：丙申，诏：自今犯枉法自盗赃者，中书籍其姓名，罪至徒者，永不录用。
现代文：十一日，下诏：从今以后，枉法盗窃或贪赃的人，中书记下姓名，被处以徒刑的人，永不录用。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: From now on, people who commit theft or embezzlement in violation of the law, whose names are written in the middle register, and who have been sentenced to imprisonment will never be hired.

古文：金人陷均州，守臣杨彦明遁去。
现代文：金军攻陷均州，守臣杨彦明逃走。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Junzhou, and the guardian Yang Yanming fled.

古文：丁酉，金人陷房州。
现代文：十二日，金军攻陷房州。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese army captured Fangzhou.

古文：己亥，张遇焚真州。
现代文：十四日，张遇火烧真州。
English: On the 14th, Zhang met fire and burned Zhenzhou.

古文：秘阁修撰孙昭远为乱兵所害。
现代文：秘阁修撰孙昭远为乱兵杀害。
English: Sun Zhaoyuan, a secret compiler, was killed by rioters.

古文：庚子，遣主客员外郎谢亮为陕西抚谕使兼宣谕使，持诏赐夏国。
现代文：十五日，派遣主客员外郎谢亮为陕西抚谕使兼宣谕使，手持朝廷诏书赐给夏国。
English: On the 15th, the host and guest, Wei Lang Xie Liang, was sent to Shaanxi as the envoy and envoy, holding the imperial edict to Xia Guo.

古文：张遇陷镇江府，守臣钱伯言弃城走。
现代文：张遇攻陷镇江府，守臣钱伯言弃城逃走。
English: Zhang encountered the siege of Zhenjiang Prefecture, and his vassal Qian Bogong abandoned the city and fled.

古文：辛丑，内侍邵成章坐辄言人臣除名、南雄州编管。
现代文：十六日，内侍邵成章因议论大臣除名，南雄州编管。
English: On the 16th, Naishi waiter Shao Chengzhang was removed from the list for discussing the minister, and Nanxiong Prefecture was placed under administration.

古文：金人陷郑州，通判赵伯振死之。
现代文：金军攻陷郑州，通判赵伯振战死。
English: The Chinese army invaded Zhengzhou and sentenced Zhao Bozhen to death.

古文：癸卯，金帅窝里嗢陷潍州，又陷青州，寻弃去。
现代文：十八日，金军统帅窝里攻陷潍州，又攻陷青州，不久放弃。
English: On the 18th, the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army, Hou Liang, invaded Zhangzhou and Qingzhou, but soon gave up.

古文：丁未，诏谕流民、溃兵之为盗贼者，释其罪。
现代文：二十二日，下诏告谕流民、溃兵沦为盗贼的人，释放不追究罪行。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued to expatriates, and those who had been defeated and turned into thieves were released without being prosecuted.

古文：己酉，禁诸将引溃兵入蜀，置大散关使以审验之。
现代文：二十四日，禁止所有将领率领打了败仗的士兵进人蜀，设置大散关使仔细审查检验。
English: On the 24th, all generals and soldiers who had led a defeated battle were prohibited from entering Nanshu, and a large-scale inspection was set up for careful review and inspection.

古文：庚戌，遣考功员外郎傅雱为淮东京东西抚谕使。
现代文：二十五日，派遣考功员外郎傅稣为淮东、京东西抚谕使。
English: On the 25th, Gao Lang Fu Xi, an examiner, was dispatched as an envoy to Huadong and the eastern and western parts of Beijing.

古文：辛亥，王渊招降张遇，以所部万人隶韩世忠。
现代文：二十六日，王渊招降张遇，以所率领的一万军队隶属韩世忠。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yuan invited Zhang Rong to surrender, and the ten thousand troops he led were subordinated to Han Shizhong.

古文：改授显谟阁直学士孟忠厚为常德军承宣使。
现代文：改授显漠阁直学士孟忠厚为常德军承宣使。
English: Meng Zhonghou, the direct bachelor of Xianmo Pavilion, was awarded the title of the permanent envoy of the German army.

古文：诏凡后族毋任侍从官，著为令。
现代文：下诏：凡是帝王妻子家族的人，不许任侍从官，著录为法令。
English: The following edict was issued: Anyone who is a member of the imperial wife's family is not allowed to serve as an attendant, and the edict became law.

古文：金人焚邓州。
现代文：金军火烧邓州。
English: The Golden Army set fire to Dengzhou.

古文：是月，以中奉大夫刘豫知济南府。
现代文：这个月，任命中奉大夫刘豫为济南知府。
English: This month, Dr. Liu Yu, a Zhongfeng doctor, was appointed as the mayor of Jinan Prefecture.

古文：金人陷颍昌府，守臣孙默为所杀。
现代文：金军攻陷颖昌府，守臣孙默被金军杀死。
English: The Chinese army captured Yingchangfu, and the vassal Sun Mo was killed by the Chinese army.

古文：经制司僚属王择仁复永兴军。
现代文：经制司僚属王择仁收复永兴军。
English: The Secretary of the Economic System is Wang Qiren from the Yongxing Army.

古文：金人陷秦州，经略使李复降；又犯熙河，经略使张深遣兵马都监刘惟辅与战于新店，败之，斩其帅黑锋。
现代文：金军攻陷秦州，经略使李复投降；金军又侵犯熙河，经略使张深派遣兵马都监刘惟辅在新店与金军交战，打败金军，斩杀金军统帅黑锋。
English: The Chinese army invaded Qinzhou and forced Li Fu to surrender; the Chinese army also invaded Heihe and forced Zhang Sheng to send Liu Weiyu, the military governor of the capital, to fight the Chinese army in Xindian, defeat the Chinese army and kill the commander of the Chinese army, Heifeng.

古文：二月丙辰，金人再犯东京，宗泽遣统制阎中立等拒之，中立战死。
现代文：二月初二，金军又一次侵犯东京，宗泽派遣统制阎中立等人抵抗金军，阎中立战死。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：戊午，移耿南仲于临江军。
现代文：初四，耿南仲贬移到临江军。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Geng Nanzhong was demoted and transferred to the Linjiang Army.

古文：金人陷唐州。
现代文：金军攻陷唐州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Tangzhou.

古文：壬戌，安化军节度副使宇文虚中应诏使绝域，复中大夫，召赴行在。
现代文：初八，安化军节度副使宁文虚中应诏出使金朝，复中大夫，召赴行在。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Ning Wenqiu, the vice-envoy of the Anhua Army for the festival, sent an envoy to the Jin Dynasty in response to the edict, and Fu Zhongdafu was summoned to go there.

古文：癸亥，罢市易务。
现代文：初九，罢除市易务。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the municipal government was abolished.

古文：甲子，金人犯滑州，宗泽遣张捴救之，战死。
现代文：初十，金军侵犯滑州，宗泽派遣张伪救援滑州，张伪战死。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Chinese army invaded the city of Leshou. Soze dispatched Zhang Xuan to rescue Leshou. Zhang Xuan died in the battle.

古文：乙丑，泽遣判官范世延等表请帝还阙。
现代文：十一日，宗泽派遣判官范世延等人上表请求高宗回到开封。
English: On the 11th, Soze dispatched judge Fan Shiyan and others to petition Gao Zong to return to Kaifeng.

古文：河北贼杨进等诣泽降。
现代文：河北贼杨进等人投降宗泽。
English: Yang Jin, the Hebei thief, and others surrendered to Soze.

古文：丁卯，复延康、述古殿直学士为端明、枢密直学士。
现代文：十三日，恢复延康、述古殿直学士为端明、枢密直学士。
English: On the 13th, Yan Kang was restored, and the direct baccalaureate of the ancient hall was changed to the direct baccalaureate of the secret.

古文：辛未，诏自今犯枉法自盗赃罪至死者，籍其赀。
现代文：十七日，下诏：从今以后贪赃枉法、盗窃犯处以死刑的，没收他的家产。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: From now on, if a person is sentenced to death for corruption or theft, his family property will be confiscated.

古文：壬申，赦福州叛卒张员等。
现代文：十八日，赦免福州叛乱士卒张员等人的罪行。
English: On the 18th, he pardoned the crimes of the Fuzhou rebels, including Zhang and others.

古文：癸酉，金人陷蔡州，执守臣阎孝忠。
现代文：十九日，金军攻陷蔡州，活捉守臣阎孝忠。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese army invaded Caizhou and captured the vassal Yan Xiaotong alive.

古文：丙子，金人陷淮宁府，守臣向子韶死之。
现代文：二十二日，金军攻陷淮宁府，守臣向子韶战死。
English: On the 22nd, the Chinese army captured Huaining Prefecture, and the warden, Xiang Zixuan, died in battle.

古文：丁丑，遣王贶等充金国军前通问使。
现代文：二十三日，派遣王贩等人担任金军军前通问使。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Wang and others were dispatched to serve as envoys to the front of the Chinese army.

古文：戊寅，责降知镇江府赵子崧为单州团练副使、南雄州安置。
现代文：二十四日，镇江知府赵子裕被贬降为单州团练副使，南雄州安置。
English: On the 24th, Zhenjiang Prefecture Zhao Ziyu was demoted to the vice-envoy of single-state group training, and placed in Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：己卯，夺秘书正字胡珵官，送梧州编管。
现代文：二十五日，削夺秘书正字胡呈官职，送往梧州编管。
English: On the 25th, the secretary, Zheng Zi Hu Cheng, was stripped of his official position and sent to Wuzhou.

古文：朝奉大夫刘正彦应诏使绝域，授武德大夫、威州刺史，寻为御营右军副统制。
现代文：朝奉大夫刘正彦应诏出使极远的国家，授给武德大夫、威州刺史，不久为御营右军副统制。
English: In response to the edict, Liu Zhengyuan, the imperial envoy, dispatched an envoy to a faraway country, conferring the title of Wu Defu and Wizhou Shishi, and soon became the deputy commander of the right wing army.

古文：庚申，以王渊为向德军节度使。
现代文：庚申日，任命王渊为向德军节度使。
English: On Goshun's day, Wang Yuan was appointed as a special envoy to the German army.

古文：辛巳，武功大夫、和州防御使马扩奔真定五马山砦聚兵，得皇弟信王榛于民间，奉之总制诸砦。
现代文：二十七日，武功大夫、和州防御使马扩到真定五马山寨聚集民兵，在民间得到高宗的弟弟信王赵棒，推尊他总制各寨。
English: On the 27th, Dr. Wukong and the state defense made Ma Sheng to gather militiamen in the five-horse village of Zhending. The people received Gaozong's younger brother, Prince Zhao Zang, and respected him as the general of each village.

古文：壬午，诏京畿、京东西、河北、淮南路置振华军八万人。
现代文：二十八日，下诏京瓷、京东西、河北、淮南路，建置振华军八万人。
English: On the 28th, Kyocera, Beijing East-West, Hebei, and Huainan Roads were ordered to build 80,000 Zhenhua troops.

古文：是月，成都守臣卢法原修城成。
现代文：这个月，成都守臣卢法原修城成功。
English: This month, Chengdu Governor Lu Fahuan successfully completed the construction of the city.

古文：三月辛卯，金人陷中山府。
现代文：三月初七，金军攻陷中山府。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the Chinese army captured Zhongshan Prefecture.

古文：壬辰，诏诸路安抚使许便宜节制官吏。
现代文：初八，下诏各路安抚使允许不待上奏自行决断处治官吏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the magistrates decided to allow the pacification of all roads without waiting for the report.

古文：丁酉，初立《大小使臣呈试弓马出官格》，先阅试，然后奏补。
现代文：十三日，开始制定伏小使臣试弓马出官格，先进行比试，然后直奏补官。
English: On the thirteenth day, it began to formulate the archery test of the junior envoy, and first conducted the competition, and then performed the supplement.

古文：粘罕焚西京去。
现代文：粘罕焚烧西京后离去。
English: He left after the burning of Saikyo.

古文：庚子，河南统制官翟进复西京，宗泽奏进为京西北路安抚制置使。
现代文：十六日，河南统制官翟进收复西京，宗泽上奏请求任命翟进为京西北路安抚制置使。
English: On the 16th, the Henan governor, He Jin, recaptured West Beijing, and Soze petitioned for the appointment of He Jin as the Beijing Northwest Road pacification envoy.

古文：丙午，遥授尚书右仆射何为观文殿大学士，中书侍郎陈过庭为资政殿大学士，同知枢密院事聂昌为资政殿大学士，并主管宫观。
现代文：二十二日，遥授尚书右仆射何镐为观文殿大学士，中书侍郎陈过庭为资政殿大学士，同知枢密院事聂昌为资政殿大学士，并主管宫观。
English: On the 22nd, the right-hand man of the distant scholar, Sho Sho, became the scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, the attendant of the Chinese scholar, Chen Xingting, became the scholar of the Academy of the Ministry of State, and the same scholar, the secretary of the Privy Council, Yan Chang, became the scholar of the Academy of the Ministry of State, and was in charge of the Palace.

古文：时已卒于金，昌为人所杀，朝迁未之知。过庭亦在金军中。
现代文：当时何镐已经死于金朝，聂昌被人杀害，朝廷还不知道；陈过庭也在金军中。
English: At that time, He Ying had already died in the Jin Dynasty, and Yuchang had been killed, but the court did not know about it; Chen Yingjing was also in the Jin Army.

古文：丁未，罢内外权局官之不应法者。
现代文：二十三日，罢除朝廷内外暂时代理局官不符合法令的。
English: On the 23rd, the removal of the temporary acting officials in and out of the Imperial Court was not in accordance with the law.

古文：遣杨应诚为大金、高丽国信使。
现代文：派遣杨应诚为大金、高丽国信使。
English: Yang Yingcheng was sent as a messenger to Korea for a large sum of money.

古文：己酉，张员等复作乱，拥众突城出，命本路提点刑狱李芘讨捕之。
现代文：二十五日，张员又一次叛乱，率领部众突围出城，命令本路提点刑狱李花讨伐捕获。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Jian once again rebelled, led his followers to break out of the encirclement, and ordered this road to be taken to the Lihua Penal Prison.

古文：辛亥，以范琼权同主管侍卫步军司公事，屯真州。
现代文：二十七日，任命范琼暂代主管侍卫步军司公事，驻屯真州。
English: On the 27th, Fan Qiong was appointed as the interim head of the Civil Affairs Department of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, stationed in Zhenzhou.

古文：是月，金人陷凤翔府，守臣刘清臣弃城去；又犯泾原，经略使统制官曲端遣将拒战，败之，金兵走同、华。
现代文：这个月，金军攻陷凤翔府，守臣刘清臣弃城逃走；金军又侵犯径原，经略使统制官曲端派遣将士抵抗，击败金军，金兵逃到同州、华州。
English: This month, the Golden Army captured Fengxiangfu, and the guard Liu Qingcheng abandoned the city and fled. The Golden Army also invaded the Plain of Reeds, and the governor sent soldiers to resist, defeated the Golden Army, and the Golden Soldiers fled to Tongzhou and Huazhou.

古文：石壕尉李彦仙举兵复陕州。
现代文：石壕尉李彦仙率兵收复陕州。
English: Shiqiao Lieutenant Li Yanxian led the troops to recover Shaanxi.

古文：夏四月丙辰，诏文臣从官至牧守、武臣管军至遥郡，各举所知二人。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏文臣任官至牧守、武臣管军至遥郡，分别推举所知人才二名。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the next Emperor Wencheng appointed officials to the pastoral governor, and the military governor to Yao County, respectively, and elected two known talents.

古文：戊午，禁州县责邻保代输逃户税役。
现代文：初五，禁止州县责成邻保代输逃户税役。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it is forbidden for prefectures and counties to instruct neighbors to pay taxes on behalf of evaders.

古文：宗泽遣将赵世兴复滑州。
现代文：宗泽派将领赵世兴收复滑州。
English: Zhao Shixing, the general of the Munezawa faction, recaptured and retook Nanzhou.

古文：乙丑，翟进以兵袭金帅兀室于河南，兵败，其子亮死之。
现代文：十二日，翟进在河南率兵袭击金军统帅兀室，失败，他的儿子翟亮战死。
English: On the 12th, He Jin led troops in Henan to attack the antechamber of the commander-in-chief of the Golden Army. He failed, and his son, He Liang, died in the battle.

古文：进又率御营统制韩世忠、京城都巡检使丁进等兵战于文家寺，又败，世忠收余兵南归。
现代文：翟进又率领御营统制韩世忠、京城都巡检使丁进等部队在文家寺与金军作战，又失败，韩世忠搜集余兵南归。
English: He Jin also led troops such as Han Shizhong, commander of the imperial battalion, and Ding Jin, inspector of the capital city, to fight against the Golden Army in Wenjia Temple. They failed again, and Han Shizhong collected the remaining soldiers and returned to the south.

古文：兀室复入西京，寻弃去。
现代文：兀又侵人西京，不久放弃。
English: The Shogunate invaded Saikyo again, but soon gave up.

古文：陇右都护张严及金人战于五里坡，败绩，死之。
现代文：陇右都护张严与金军在五里坡交战，兵败战死。
English: Zhang Yan, the guardian of the Yunnan right-wing capital, fought with the Chinese army at Wulipo, and was defeated and killed.

古文：丁卯，金人入洺州。
现代文：十四日，金军侵人洛州。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army invaded Lozhou.

古文：壬辰，军贼孙琦焚随州。
现代文：壬辰日，军贼孙琦焚烧随州。
English: On Imjin Day, the war criminal Sun Yat-sen burned Suizhou.

古文：癸未，入唐州。
现代文：三十日，进人唐州。
English: On the 30th, it entered Tangzhou.

古文：信王榛遣马扩来奏事。
现代文：信王赵棒派遣马扩到扬州来奏事。
English: Prince Zhao Bo sent Ma Yan to Yangzhou to report the matter.

古文：是月，以榛为河外兵马都元帅，扩为元帅府马步军都总管。
现代文：这个月，任命赵棒为河外兵马都元帅，马扩为元帅府马步军都总管。
English: This month, Zhao Bang was appointed as the marshal of the soldiers and horses outside the river, and Ma Yan was appointed as the head of the marshal of the horse and foot army.

古文：五月乙酉，许景衡罢。
现代文：五月初二，许景衡罢职。
English: On the second day of May, Xu Jingheng resigned.

古文：孙琦犯德安府。
现代文：孙琦进犯德安府。
English: Sun Yat-sen invaded De'an.

古文：丙戌，命参酌元祐科举条制，立诗赋、经义分试法。
现代文：初三，命令参照元科举条制，确立诗赋、经义分试法。
English: In the third year of junior high school, it was ordered to establish a system of poems and a method of dividing them according to their meanings, with reference to the system of elementary subjects.

古文：戊子，以翰林学士朱胜非为尚书右丞。
现代文：初五，任命翰林学士朱胜非为尚书右承。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhu Shengfei, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as the successor of Shang Shuxu.

古文：辛卯，以金兵渡河，遣韩世忠、宗泽等逆战。
现代文：初八，因金军渡河，派遣韩世忠、宗泽等人抵抗金军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, as the Chinese army crossed the river, Han Shizhong, Soze and others were sent to resist the Chinese army.

古文：甲午，曲赦河北、陕西、京东路。
现代文：十一日，因特殊情况而赦免河北、陕西、京东路。
English: On the 11th, due to special circumstances, Hebei, Shaanxi and Jingdong Road were pardoned.

古文：福建转运判官谢如意执张员等六人，诛之。
现代文：福建转运判官谢如意捕杀张员等六人。
English: Fujian transshipment adjudicator Xie Ruyi caught and killed six people including Zhang.

古文：丙申，复命宇文虚中为资政殿大学士，充金国祈请使。
现代文：十三日，重新任命宁文虚中为资政殿大学士，担任金国祈请使。
English: On the 13th, Ning Wenxu was reappointed as a scholar of the University of the Palace of the Grand Vizier, and served as the envoy of the Golden State Prayer.

古文：贼靳赛寇光山县。
现代文：贼靳赛攻打光山县。
English: The bandits raided Gwangsan County.

古文：戊戌，河北制置使王彦部兵渡河，屯滑州之沙店。
现代文：十五日，河北制置使王彦率兵渡过黄河，驻屯在滑州的沙店。
English: On the 15th, the Hebei Provincial Government sent Wang Yan and his troops across the Yellow River and stationed them at Shaten in Luzhou.

古文：癸卯，张悫薨。
现代文：二十日，张意逝世。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Yi passed away.

古文：甲辰，金帅娄宿陷绛州。
现代文：二十一日，金军统帅娄宿攻陷绛州。
English: On the twenty-first day, the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army invaded Bozhou from Bozhou.

古文：丁未，复置两浙、福建提举市舶司。
现代文：二十四日，重新设置两浙、福建提举市舶司。
English: On the 24th, the shipping departments of Zhuhai, Zhejiang and Fujian were re-established.

古文：己酉，秀州卒徐明等作乱，执守臣朱芾，迎前守赵叔近复领州事。
现代文：二十六日，秀州士卒徐明等叛乱，捉获守臣朱莆，迎奉前任守臣赵叔近重新统管州事。
English: On the 26th, Xiu Zhou's vassal Xu Ming and others rebelled, captured the vassal Zhu Xi, and welcomed the former vassal Zhao Shucheng back to take charge of state affairs.

古文：命御营中军统制张俊讨之。
现代文：命令御营中军统制张俊讨伐。
English: He ordered Zhang Jun, commander of the Central Military Commission, to lead a crusade.

古文：癸丑，罢借诸路职田。
现代文：三十日，罢除借各路职田。
English: On the thirtieth day, all government-subsidized fields were abolished.

古文：六月乙卯，权罢邛州铸钱，增印钱引。
现代文：六月初二，暂时罢除邓州铸钱，增印钱引。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Dengzhou minted money was temporarily removed, and more money was printed.

古文：癸亥，建州卒叶浓等作乱，寇福州。
现代文：初十，建州士卒叶浓等叛乱，攻打福州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the rebels led by Ye Nang, a Jianzhou soldier, attacked Fuzhou.

古文：甲子，亲虑囚。
现代文：十一日，亲自讯察全国囚犯罪状。
English: On the 11th, he personally inspected the situation of prisoners across the country.

古文：乙丑，张俊至秀州，杀赵叔近，执徐明斩之。
现代文：十二日，张俊到秀州，杀死赵叔近，俘获徐明，杀死他。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Jun went to Xiuzhou, killed Zhao Shucheng, captured Xu Ming, and killed him.

古文：甲戌，叶浓陷福州。
现代文：二十一日，叶浓攻陷福州。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ye concentrated and invaded Fuzhou.

古文：丁丑，诏江、浙沿流州军练水军，造战舰。
现代文：二十四日，下诏江、浙沿江地区的州训练水军，制造战船。
English: On the 24th, the states along the Lower Zhaojiang River and the Zhejiang River trained naval forces and built warships.

古文：京畿、淮甸蝗。
现代文：京瓷、淮南出现蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues hit Kyocera and Huainan.

古文：是月，以知延安府王庶节制陕西六路军马，泾原经略使统制官曲端为节制司都统制。
现代文：这个月，任命延安知府王庶节制陕西六路军马，径原经略使统制官曲端为节制司都统制。
English: This month, Yan'an prefectural governor Wang Zhaozhong was appointed as the commander of the Sixth Route Army of Shaanxi Province, and Jianyuan Jingliao was appointed as the commander of the capital city.

古文：永兴军经略使郭琰逐王择仁，择仁奔兴元。
现代文：永兴军经略使郭淡驱逐王择仁，王择仁逃到兴元。
English: The Yongxing military governor ordered Guo Tan to expel Wang Ziren, and Wang Ziren fled to Xingyuan.

古文：秋七月甲申，叶浓入宁德县，复还建州，命张俊同两浙提点刑狱赵哲率兵讨之。
现代文：秋七月初二，叶浓进人宁德县，又回到建州，命令张俊同两浙提点刑狱赵哲率兵讨伐叶浓。
English: At the beginning of the second day of July in autumn, Ye Neng entered Ningde County and returned to Jianzhou. Zhang Jun ordered Zhao Zhe to lead soldiers to fight against Ye Neng.

古文：丙戌，诏吏部审量京官，非政和以后进书颂及直赴殿试人，乃听参选。
现代文：初四，下诏吏部考核审查京官，不是政和以后进书颂及直赴殿试的人，才允许到主管官府注授差遣。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the Beijing officials, who are not political and later those who enter the school and go directly to the palace for examination, are allowed to be sent to the competent government office for examination.

古文：宗泽薨。
现代文：宗泽逝世。
English: Sozawa passed away.

古文：丁亥，诏百官坐祭京、王黼拟授而废者，许自新复用。
现代文：初五，下诏：文武百官因蔡京、王敞奏拟差遣而废罢的人，允许改过自新，重新任用。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Those civil and military officials who had been dismissed due to Cai Jing and Wang Shibao's plan to dispatch them were allowed to reform and be reappointed.

古文：戊子，禁军中抉目刳心之刑。
现代文：初六，禁止军队中实行宛出眼睛、剖开心脏的刑罚。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, it is forbidden to carry out the punishment of cutting out the eyes and opening the heart in the army.

古文：壬辰，选江、浙州军正兵、土兵六之一赴行在。
现代文：初十，选择江、浙州军正兵、士兵六分之一前往行在。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, one-sixth of the regular soldiers and soldiers of the Jiang and Zhejiang armies chose to go there.

古文：乙未，以郭仲荀为京城副留守。
现代文：十三日，任命郭仲荀为京城副留守。
English: On the 13th, Guo Zhongyao was appointed deputy mayor of Beijing.

古文：戊戌，录内外诸军将士功。
现代文：十六日，记载收集朝廷内外各军将士功绩。
English: On the 16th, records were collected of the exploits of soldiers both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，以春霖、夏旱蝗，诏监司、郡守条上阙政，州郡灾甚者蠲田赋。
现代文：十九日，因为春季雨水不断、夏季出现早灾和蝗灾，诏令监司、郡守陈述朝政过失，遭灾严重的州郡免除田赋。
English: On the 19th, because of the continuous rain in the spring and the early disasters and locust plagues in the summer, the overseer and the county governor were ordered to report the fault of the imperial government, and the states and counties that suffered serious disasters were exempted from the field tax.

古文：甲辰，以降授北京留守杜充复枢密直学士，为开封尹、东京留守。
现代文：二十二日，因北京被金军攻陷，杜充被重新授为枢密直学士，担任开封府尹和东京留守。
English: On the 22nd, due to the fall of Beijing by the Golden Army, Du Chong was re-awarded the title of Privy Direct Bachelor and left for Tokyo as the leader of the Kaifeng government.

古文：八月甲寅，初铸御宝三。
现代文：八月初二，首次铸造三枚御宝。
English: On the second day of August, three imperial treasures were minted for the first time.

古文：甲戌，御集英殿策试礼部进士。
现代文：二十二日，到集英殿策试礼部奏名进士。
English: On the 22nd, he went to the Shueiden Hall to prepare for the audition.

古文：罢殿中侍御史马伸，寻责濮州。
现代文：罢除殿中侍御史马伸，不久被贬往攫州。
English: He dismissed the palace chamberlain Shima Shin, who was soon banished to Bozhou.

古文：河北、京东捉杀使李成叛。辛巳，犯宿州。
现代文：河北、京东捉杀使李成叛乱；二十九日，李成进犯宿州。
English: The capture and killing of Hebei and Jingdong made Li Cheng rebel; on the 29th, Li Cheng invaded Shuzhou.

古文：是月，二帝徙居韩州。
现代文：这个月，徽、钦二帝迁居韩州。
English: This month, Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin II moved to South Korea.

古文：九月甲申，丁进叛，复寇淮西。
现代文：九月初三，丁进叛乱，又攻打淮西。
English: On the third day of September, Dingjin rebelled and attacked Huaxi.

古文：庚寅，赐礼部进士李易以下四百五十一人及第、出身，特奏名进士皆许调官。
现代文：初九，赐礼部进士李易以下四百五十一人及第、出身，特奏名进士都允许调任官职。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, 451 cadets from the Ceremonial Division Li Yi and below, as well as cadets from the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd ranks were allowed to transfer to official posts.

古文：壬辰，召侍从所举褚宗谔等二十一人驿赴行在。
现代文：十一日，命令侍从所推举的褚宗愕等二十一人乘马车赶往行在。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered the attendants of the twenty-one people, including the elected Emperor Gongzong, to rush to the capital by carriage.

古文：癸巳，金人陷冀州，将官李政死之。
现代文：十二日，金军攻陷冀州，将官李政战死。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese army invaded Jizhou, and the general Li Zheng was killed in the battle.

古文：甲午，金人再犯永兴军，经略使郭琰弃城，退保义谷。
现代文：十三日金军又一次侵犯永兴军，经略使郭淡放弃永兴，退保义谷。
English: On the 13th, the Golden Army once again invaded the Yongxing Army, forcing Guo Tan to abandon Yongxing and retreat to Yigu.

古文：辛丑，陕西节制司兵官贺师范及金人战于八公原，败绩，死之。
现代文：二十日，陕西节制司兵官贺师范与金军在八公原交战，失败，战死。
English: On the 20th, He Shifan, a military officer of the Shaanxi Temperance Division, fought with the Jin Army in Hachongyuan, failed, and died in battle.

古文：丙午，复所减京官奉。
现代文：二十五日，恢复所减少的京官棒禄。
English: On the 25th, the reduced Beijing official bonus was restored.

古文：丁未，东京留守统制官薛广及金人战于相州，败死。
现代文：二十六日，东京留守统制官薛广与金军在相州交战，失败，战死。
English: On the 26th, Xue Guang, the commanding officer left in Tokyo, fought with the Chinese army in Xiangzhou, failed, and died in battle.

古文：己酉，郭三益薨。
现代文：二十八日，郭三益逝世。
English: On the 28th, Guo Samyip passed away.

古文：是秋，窝里嗢、挞懒破五马山砦，信王榛不知所终。
现代文：这年秋，窝里、挞懒攻破五马山寨，信王赵棒下落不明。
English: In the autumn of that year, Houli and Lazy broke through the Wuma cottage, and the whereabouts of Xinwang Zhao Bo are unknown.

古文：马扩军败于北京之清平。
现代文：马扩军在北京的清平失败。
English: Ma Zhanjun's army failed in Beijing's Qingping.

古文：冬十月甲寅，命扬州浚隍修城。
现代文：冬十月初三，命令扬州疏浚城壕。
English: On the third day of October in winter, Yangzhou was ordered to dredge the trenches.

古文：阅江、淮州郡水军。
现代文：检阅江、淮州郡水军。
English: The naval forces of Jiangsu Province and Huazhou County were inspected.

古文：杨应诚还自高丽。
现代文：杨应诚出使高丽回国。
English: Yang Yingcheng sent Goryeo back to China.

古文：戊午，遣刘光世讨李成。
现代文：初七，派遣刘光世讨伐李成。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Guangshi was dispatched to fight Li Cheng.

古文：壬戌，禁江、浙闭籴。
现代文：十一日，禁止江、浙地区实行闭来政策。
English: On the 11th, Jiangsu and Zhejiang regions were prohibited from implementing the closed-door policy.

古文：癸亥，粘罕围濮州，遣韩世忠、范琼领兵至东平、开德府，分道拒战，又命马扩援之。
现代文：十二日，粘罕围攻攫州，派遣韩世忠、范琼率兵到东平、开德府，分别进行抵抗，又命令马扩率兵救援攫州。
English: On the 12th, Mu Han besieged Bozhou, dispatched Han Shizhong and Fan Qiong to Dongping and Kaidefu respectively to resist, and ordered Ma Yan to rescue Bozhou.

古文：甲子，命孟忠厚奉隆祐太后幸杭州。
现代文：十三日，命令孟忠厚奉迎隆太后到杭州。
English: On the 13th, he ordered Meng Zhonghou to escort Empress Dowager Yinglong to Hangzhou.

古文：杨进复叛，攻汝、洛，命翟进击于鸣皋山，翟进战死。
现代文：杨进又叛乱，进攻汝、洛，命令翟进在鸣皋山阻击，翟进战死。
English: Yang Jin rebelled again, attacked Ru and Luo, ordered Xing Jin to block the attack at Mingtai Mountain, and Xing Jin died in the battle.

古文：丙子，罢吏部审量崇宁、大观以来滥赏，止令自陈。
现代文：二十五日，罢除吏部对崇宁、大观以来滥赏的清理审查，只命令有关人员自己陈述。
English: On the 25th, the cadre department was removed from the review of the excessive rewards since the removal of Chongning and Daguan, and only ordered the relevant personnel to make their own statements.

古文：是月，刘正彦击丁进，降之。
现代文：这个月，刘正彦击败杨进，杨进投降。
English: This month, Liu Masahiko defeated Yang Jin, and Yang Jin surrendered.

古文：十一月辛巳朔，提举嵩山崇福宫李纲责授单州团练副使、万安军安置。
现代文：十一月初一，提举篙山崇福宫李纲被贬为单州团练副使，万安军安置。
English: On the first day of November, Li Gang, who had been promoted to Lushan Chongfu Palace, was demoted to the vice-envoy of single-state regimental training and placed in the Wan'an Army.

古文：刘光世及李成战于新息县，成败走。
现代文：刘光世与李成在新息县交战，李成失败退走。
English: Liu Guangshi and Li Cheng fought in Xinxi County, and Li Cheng retreated in defeat.

古文：高丽国王王楷遣其臣尹彦颐入见。
现代文：高丽国王王楷派遣大臣尹彦颐朝见高宗。
English: The king of Goryeo, Wang Kai, sent his minister, Yin Yinjun, to see Gao Zong.

古文：金人围陕州，守臣李彦仙拒战，却之。
现代文：金军围攻陕州，守臣李彦仙率军抵抗，打退金军。
English: The Jin army besieged Shaanxi, and the guardian Li Yanxian led the resistance and beat back the Jin army.

古文：壬辰，金人陷延安府，权知府刘选、总管马忠皆遁，通判府事魏彦明死之。
现代文：十二日，金军攻陷延安府，暂代知府刘选、总管马忠都逃跑，通判府事魏彦明战死。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese army captured Yan'an Prefecture. Liu Xuan, the provisional governor, and Ma Zhong, the head of the administration, both fled. Wei Yanming, the chief magistrate, died in the battle.

古文：癸巳，赵哲大破叶浓于建州城下，浓遁而降，复谋为变，张俊禽斩之。
现代文：十三日，赵哲在建州城下大败叶浓，叶浓逃跑而投降，又想策划叛乱，张俊抓住他，把他杀了。
English: On the thirteenth day, Zhao Zhe defeated Ye Nong at the foot of Jianzhou Castle. Ye Nong fled and surrendered, and wanted to plan a rebellion. Zhang Jun caught him and killed him.

古文：乙未，金人陷濮州，执守臣杨粹中，又陷开德府，守臣王棣死之。
现代文：十五日，金军攻陷攫州，俘获守臣杨粹中；又攻陷开德府，守臣王棣死。
English: On the 15th, the Chinese army invaded Zhangzhou and captured the retainer Yang Qizhong; they also invaded Kidefu, and the retainer Wang Quan died.

古文：以魏行可充金国军前通问使。
现代文：任命魏行可担任金军军前通问使。
English: Wei Xing can be appointed as the envoy of the former military envoy of the Golden Army.

古文：庚子，诣寿宁寺朝飨祖宗神主。
现代文：二十日，到寿宁寺朝拜祭祀祖宗神主。
English: On the 20th, they went to Shuning-ji Temple to worship and offer sacrifices to the ancestral deity.

古文：壬寅，冬至，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，以太祖配，大赦。
现代文：二十二日，冬至，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，用宋太祖配享，赦免全国。
English: On the 22nd day, the winter solstice, the god Haotian was worshipped in the round mound, and the country was pardoned by Song Taizu.

古文：金人陷相州，守臣赵不试死之。
现代文：金军攻陷相州，守臣赵不试战死。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Sangju, and the guarding vassal Zhao Wei died in the battle.

古文：甲辰，陷德州，兵马都监赵叔皎死之。
现代文：二十四日，金军攻陷德州，兵马都监赵叔皎战死。
English: On the 24th, the Golden Army invaded Texas, and the commander of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Zhao Shuxuan, died in battle.

古文：庚戌，立士庶子弟习射补官法。
现代文：三十日，制定士庶子弟习射补官法。
English: On the 30th, a law was enacted to allow the illegitimate children of officials to become officials.

古文：是月，节制陕西军马王庶为都统制曲端所拘，夺其印。
现代文：这个月，节制陕西军马王庶为都统制曲端拘禁，夺取了他的官印。
English: This month, Ma Wangzhu, the commander of the Shaanxi Army, was detained by the central government and deprived of his official seal.

古文：四川茶马赵开罢官买卖茶，给引通商如政和法。
现代文：四少茶马提举赵开罢除官府买卖茶，发给商人茶引，通商像政和时实行的办法一样。
English: Four less tea martinis, Zhao expelled the government from the sale and purchase of tea, and issued tea guides to merchants. Trade is like politics and the methods implemented at the time.

古文：金人犯晋宁军，守臣徐徽言拒却之，知府州折可求以城降。
现代文：金军侵犯晋宁军，守臣徐徽言抵抗打退金军，府州知州折可求弃城降金。
English: The Jin army invaded the Jinning army, the guarding vassal Xu Huiyan resisted and drove back the Jin army, and Fuzhou and Zhizhou could ask for the surrender of the city.

古文：金人陷淄州。
现代文：金军攻陷淄州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：泾原兵马都监吴玠袭斩史斌。
现代文：径原兵马都监吴袭击斩杀史斌。
English: Diyuan Terracotta Warriors and Horses attacked and killed Shi Bin.

古文：滨州贼盖进陷棣州，守臣姜刚之死之。
现代文：滨州贼盖进攻陷棣州，守臣姜刚之战死。
English: Binzhou Thief attacked Zhangzhou, and the warden Jiang Gang was killed.

古文：京东贼李民诣行在请降，王渊歼其众，留民为将。
现代文：京东贼李民到行在请求归降，王渊歼灭他的部众，留李民为将官。
English: The Jingdong thief Li Min came to the line to request surrender, Wang Yuan annihilated his subordinates, leaving Li Min as a general.

古文：十二月乙卯，太后至杭州，扈从统制苗傅以其军八千人驻奉国寺。
现代文：十二月初五，太后到杭州，启从统制苗傅率他的军队八千人驻扎奉国寺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, the empress dowager went to Hangzhou, and eight thousand soldiers under the command of Qizong Miao Fu were stationed at Fengguo Temple.

古文：庚申，金人犯东平府，京东西路制置使权邦彦弃城去，又犯济南府，守臣刘豫以城降。
现代文：初十，金军侵犯东平府，京东西路制置使李邦彦弃城逃走；金军又侵犯济南府，守臣刘豫据城投降。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Chinese army invaded Dongping Prefecture, and the construction of the Beijing East-West Road caused Li Bangyan to abandon the city and flee. The Chinese army also invaded Jinan Prefecture, and the guardian Liu Yu surrendered to the city.

古文：甲子，金人陷大名府，提点刑狱郭永骂敌不屈，死之，转运判官裴亿降。又陷袭庆府。
现代文：十四日，金军攻陷大名府，提点刑狱郭永痛骂金军，誓不投降而死，转运判官裴亿降金；金军又攻陷袭庆府。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Damingfu. Guo Yong, who was sentenced to prison, cursed the Chinese army, swore not to surrender and died. The transportation judge reduced the fine by 500 million baht. The Chinese army also invaded and occupied Qingfu.

古文：乙丑，陷虢州。
现代文：十五日，金军攻陷貌州。
English: On the 15th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Maozhou.

古文：丙寅，初命修国史。
现代文：十六日，首次下命撰修国史。
English: On the 16th, he was ordered to write a national history for the first time.

古文：己巳，以黄潜善为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，汪伯彦右仆射兼中书侍郎，颜岐门下侍郎，朱胜非中书侍郎，兵部尚书卢益同知枢密院事。
现代文：十九日，任命黄潜善为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，汪伯彦为右仆射兼中书侍郎，颜岐为门下侍郎，朱胜非为中书侍郎，兵部尚书卢益为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 19th, Huang Qianzen was appointed as Sho Sho's left-hand servant and junior chamberlain, Wang Bohian as Sho's right-hand servant and junior chamberlain, Yan Qi as junior chamberlain, Zhu Shengfei as junior chamberlain, and Sho Luyi of the Military Department as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：辛未，金人犯青州。
现代文：二十一日，金军侵犯青州。
English: On the 21st, the Chinese army invaded Qingzhou.

古文：丁丑，特进致仕余深、金紫光禄大夫致仕薛昂并分司，进昌军、徽州居住。
现代文：二十七日，以特进身份退休的余深、以金紫光禄大夫身份退休的薛昂都遭谴责，被降官，被分别发配到进昌军、徽州居住。
English: On the 27th, Yu Sheng, who retired as a special advance, and Xue Ang, who retired as a doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, were both condemned, demoted, and sent to live in Jinchang Army and Huizhou respectively.

古文：耿南仲再责单州别驾，唐恪追落观文殿大学士。
现代文：耿南仲又被责降单州别驾，唐烙被追降为观文殿大学士。
English: Geng Nanzhong was also ordered to lower his rank to that of a non-resident of a single prefecture, and Tang Yao was demoted to the rank of a scholar of the Academy of Confucius.

古文：戊寅，以礼部侍郎张浚兼御营参赞军事，教习长兵。
现代文：二十八日，任命礼部侍郎张浚兼御营参赞军事，教练军队将官。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Zhang Jun, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, as well as the military counselor of the battalion and the general officer of the army.

古文：是冬，杜充决黄河，自泗入淮，以阻金兵。
现代文：这年冬，杜充决开黄河口子，使河水从泅水进人淮水，用来阻止金军。
English: In the winter of that year, Du Cheng opened the mouth of the Yellow River, causing the river water to flow from the Bohai River into the Huanghuai River, which was used to block the advance of the Golden Army.

古文：三年春正月庚辰朔，帝在扬州。
现代文：建炎三年春正月初一，高宗在扬州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Jianyan, Gaozong was in Yangzhou.

古文：以京西北路兵马钤辖翟兴为河南尹、京西北路安抚制置兼招讨使。
现代文：任命京西北路兵马铃辖翟兴为河南尹、京西北路安抚制置兼招讨使。
English: Zou Xing, commander of the Beijing Northwest Road Military Horse Ring, was appointed as Henan Yin and Beijing Northwest Road Pacification and Recruitment Envoy.

古文：京西贼贵仲正陷岳州。
现代文：京西贼贵仲正攻陷岳州。
English: The West Beijing bandit Guizhong is about to invade Yuezhou.

古文：甲申，以资政殿学士路允迪签书枢密院事。
现代文：初五，任命资政殿学士路允迪为签书枢密院事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Lu Yundi, a scholar of the House of Councillors, was appointed as a signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：丁亥，金人再陷青州，又陷潍州，焚城而去。
现代文：初八，金军又一次攻陷青州，又攻陷潍州，焚烧州城退走。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Chinese army once again invaded Qingzhou, invaded Zhangzhou, burned the city and retreated.

古文：京东安抚刘洪道入青州守之。
现代文：京东安抚刘洪道进人青州守护。
English: JD.com appeases Liu Hongdao and enters Qingzhou.

古文：己丑，奉安西京会圣宫累朝御容于寿宁寺。
现代文：初十，在寿宁寺恭敬安置西京会圣宫历朝神主。占城国来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the deity of the sacred palace of the Western Kyoto Association was respectfully placed in Shuning-ji Temple. The whole country came to pay tribute.

古文：占城国入贡。趣大金通问使李邺、周望、宋彦通、吴德休等往军前。
现代文：督促大金通问使李邺、周望、宋彦通、吴德休等人前往军事前线。
English: He urged Daikin Tsusho to send Li Qian, Zhou Wang, Song Yantong, Wu Dexiu and others to the military front.

古文：辛卯，陕州都统邵兴及金人战于潼关，败之。复虢州。
现代文：十二日，陕州都统邵兴与金军在撞关交战，打败金军，收复貌州。
English: On the 12th, Shaanxi capital Shao Xing clashed with the Chinese army, defeated the Chinese army, and recaptured Maozhou.

古文：乙未，杜充遣岳飞、桑仲讨其叛将张用于城南，其徒王善救之，官军败绩。
现代文：十六日，杜充派遣岳飞、桑仲在京城南征讨叛将张用，叛将同党王善救援，官军失败。
English: On the 16th, Duchong dispatched Yuefei and Sangzhong to recruit and use the rebel general Zhang in the south of Beijing. The rebel general and party member Wang Shan came to the rescue, and the government army failed.

古文：庚子，张用、王善寇淮宁府，守臣冯长宁却之。
现代文：二十一日，张用、王善攻打淮宁府，守臣冯长宁打退他们。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Yimou and Wang Shan attacked Huaining Prefecture, and the vassal Feng Changning repulsed them.

古文：诏：丙午，粘罕陷徐州，守臣王复及子倚死之，军校赵立结乡兵为兴复计。
现代文：下诏： 文武百官听说军情遣散家属回避战火，致使军心、民心动摇的人，处以流刑。 二十七日，粘罕攻陷徐州，守臣王复及其儿子王倚战死，军校赵立集结乡兵，以图恢复失地。
English: The following edict was issued: A hundred civil and military officials who heard of the military situation and dismissed their family members to avoid the war, causing the military and people's hearts to be shaken, were sentenced to exile.On the 27th, Kehan invaded Xuzhou, the guardian Wang Fu and his son Wang Yi died in battle, and the military school Zhao Li gathered villagers to try to recover the lost land.

古文：御营平寇左将军韩世忠军溃于沭阳，其将张遇死，世忠奔盐城。
现代文：御营平寇左将军韩世忠军队在沐阳溃败，他的部将张遇战死，韩世忠率军退奔盐城。
English: The army of General Han Shizhong, commander-in-chief of the Pingkou Left Army, was routed in Muyang. His subordinate Zhang was killed in the battle, and Han Shizhong led the army to retreat to Yancheng.

古文：金兵执淮阳守臣李宽，杀转运副使李跋，以骑兵三千取彭城，间道趣淮甸。
现代文：金军俘获淮阳守臣李宽，杀死转运副使李跋，用三千骑兵攻取彭城，抄小路赶往淮甸。
English: The Chinese army captured Huaiyang's vassal Li Guang, killed the deputy envoy for transit Li Batuo, captured Pengcheng with three thousand cavalry, and hurried to Huai Dian by taking back roads.

古文：戊申，至泗州。
现代文：二十九日，到泅州。
English: On the 29th, to Ganzhou.

古文：二月庚戌朔，始听士民从便避兵。
现代文：二月初一，开始允许军士和百姓伺机回避兵火。
English: On the first day of February, sergeants and civilians were allowed to wait for an opportunity to avoid the fighting.

古文：命刘正彦部兵卫皇子、六宫如杭州。
现代文：命令刘正彦率兵保卫皇子、六宫到杭州。
English: He ordered Liu Zhengyuan to lead the troops to defend the prince and the Sixth Court to Hangzhou.

古文：江、淮制置使刘光世阻淮拒金人，敌未至，自溃。
现代文：江、淮制置使刘光世在淮河一带阻截抵抗金军，金军未到自动溃败。
English: The construction of the Jiang and Huai Rivers allowed Liu Guangxi to block the resistance of the Chinese army in the Huai River area, and the Chinese army was not defeated automatically.

古文：金人犯楚州，守臣朱琳降。
现代文：金军进犯楚州，守臣朱琳投降。
English: The Chinese army invaded Chuzhou, and the vassal Zhu Lin surrendered.

古文：辛亥，金人陷天长军。
现代文：初二，金军攻陷天长军。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Golden Army captured the Tianchang Army.

古文：壬子，内侍邝询报金兵至，帝被甲驰幸镇江府。
现代文：初三，内侍邝询报告说金军到来，高宗披甲骑马到镇江府。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the chambermaid's inquiry reported that the Golden Army had arrived, and Gaozong rode to Zhenjiang Prefecture in armor.

古文：是日，金兵过杨子桥。
现代文：这天，金军跨扬子桥。
English: On this day, the Chinese army crossed the Yangtze River Bridge.

古文：癸丑，游骑至瓜洲，太常少卿季陵奉太庙神主行，金兵追之，失太祖神主。
现代文：初四，金军游骑到达瓜洲，太常少卿季陵抱着太庙神主赶路，金军追击，丢失了太祖神主。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Golden Army rode to Guazhou, and Shaoqing Jiling held the god of the temple in his arms and hurried on his way. The Golden Army chased him and lost the god of the ancestors.

古文：王渊请幸杭州。
现代文：王渊请高宗到杭州。
English: Wang Yuan invited Gao Zong to Hangzhou.

古文：命留朱胜非守镇江，以吏部尚书吕颐浩为资政殿大学士、江淮制置使，都巡检使刘光世为殿前都指挥使，充行在五军制置使，驻镇江府，控扼江口。主管马军司杨惟忠节制江东军马，驻江宁府。是夕，发镇江，次吕城镇。
现代文：命令朱胜非留下来保卫镇江；任命吏部尚书吕颐浩为资政殿大学士、江淮制置使；都巡检使刘光世为殿前都指挥使，担任行在五军制置使，驻扎镇江府，控扼长江口；主管马军司杨惟忠节制江东军马，驻扎江宁府，这天晚上，高宗从镇江出发，在吕城镇停留。
English: He ordered Zhu Shengfei to stay and defend the Zhenjiang River; appointed Shangshu Lv Yinghao, the head of the personnel department, as the vice-president of the State Council and the envoy of the Jianghuai Dynasty; Liu Guangshi, the inspector of the capital, as the commander of the envoy of the Five-Army Dynasty, stationed in Zhenjiang Prefecture and controlling the mouth of the Yangtze River; Yang Weizhong, the chief of the horse army, stationed in Jiangning Prefecture and stationed in the eastern part of the river. That evening, Gaozong set off from Zhenjiang River and stopped in Lv Town.

古文：金人入真州。
现代文：金军进人真州。
English: The Golden Army marches into Zhenzhou.

古文：甲寅，次常州。
现代文：初五，到达常州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I arrived in Changzhou.

古文：御营统制王亦谋据江宁，不克而遁。
现代文：御营统制王也策划占据江宁，没有攻取，逃跑。
English: The king of the imperial camp also planned to occupy Jiangning, but he did not capture it and fled.

古文：御营平寇前将军范琼自东平引兵至寿春，其部兵杀守臣邓绍密。
现代文：御营平寇前将军范琼从东平率军赶到寿春，他的部众杀死守臣邓绍密。
English: Former general Fan Qiong, commander of the Qing and Qing armies, led an army from Dongping to Shuchun, where his men killed the vassal Deng Shoumi.

古文：丙辰，次平江府。
现代文：初七，到达平江府。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, I arrived in Pingjiang.

古文：丁巳，金人犯泰州，守臣曾班以城降。
现代文：初八，金军侵犯泰州，守臣曾班据城投降。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the Chinese army invaded Taizhou, and the Shouwen Zengban surrendered the city.

古文：丁进纵兵剽掠，王渊诱诛之。
现代文：丁进纵兵劫掠，王渊诱杀丁进。
English: Ding Jin plundered, Wang Yuan booby-trapped Ding Jin.

古文：戊午，次吴江县，命朱胜非节制平江府、秀州控扼军马，礼部侍郎张浚副之。
现代文：初九，到达吴江县，命令朱胜非节制平江府、秀州控扼军马，礼部侍郎张浚为副职。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, he arrived in Wujiang County and ordered Zhu Sheng to suppress the unrest in Pingjiang Prefecture and Xiuzhou, and to control the troops and horses. Zhang Jun, the attendant of the ceremonial department, became his deputy.

古文：又命胜非兼御营副使。
现代文：又命令朱胜非兼御营副使。
English: He also ordered Zhu Shengfei to be the deputy envoy of the imperial army.

古文：留王渊守平江。
现代文：留王渊守卫平江。
English: Ruowangyuan guards the Pingjiang River.

古文：以忠训郎刘俊民为阁门祗候，赍书使金军。
现代文：任命忠训郎刘俊民为门合门抵候，持诏书出使金军。
English: He appointed Liu Junmin, a loyal disciple, to wait for him at the gate, and dispatched the Golden Army with an imperial edict.

古文：诏录用张邦昌亲属，仍命俊民持邦昌贻金人约和书稿以行。
现代文：下诏录用张邦昌家属和亲戚，还命令刘俊民带着张邦昌写给金朝的信和书稿前往。
English: He also ordered Liu Junmin to take Zhang Bangchang's letter and manuscript to the Kim dynasty with him.

古文：金人陷沧州，守臣刘锡弃城走。
现代文：金军攻陷沧州，守臣刘锡弃城逃走。
English: The Chinese army invaded Cangzhou, and Liu Xi, the guardian, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：己未，次秀州。
现代文：初十，到达秀州。
English: At the age of ten, he arrived in Xiuzhou.

古文：命吕颐浩往来经制长江，以龙图阁待制、知江州陈彦文为沿江措置使。
现代文：命令吕颐浩往来经制长江，任命龙图阁待制、江州知州陈彦文为沿江措置使。
English: He ordered Lv Yinghao to establish the Yangtze River, and appointed Long Tu Ge to be the governor and Jiangzhou Chizhou Chen Yanwen to be the governor.

古文：庚申，次崇德县。
现代文：十一日，到达崇德县。
English: On the 11th day, it arrived in Chongde County.

古文：吕颐浩从行，即拜同签书枢密院事、江淮两浙制置使，以兵二千还屯京口。
现代文：吕颐浩跟随前往，拜为同签书枢密院事、江淮两浙制置使，率二千人的部队还屯京口。
English: Lv Yinghao followed him to the capital, where he led a force of two thousand soldiers to the gates of Beijing to pay homage to the Privy Council and the Jianghuai Emperor, who had signed the same document, as well as to the two Zhejiang envoys.

古文：又命御营中军统制张俊以兵八千守吴江，吏部员外郎郑资之为沿江防托，监察御史林之平为沿海防托，募海舟守隘。
现代文：又命令御营中军统制张俊率军八千守卫吴江，吏部员外郎郑资之为沿江防托，监察御史林之平为沿海防托，招募海舟守卫要道。
English: He also ordered the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army, Zhang Jun, to lead an army of eight thousand to guard the Wujiang River, the member of the administrative department, Wai Lang, Zheng Zicheng, to guard along the river, to monitor the Shilin Plain for coastal defense, and to recruit sea boats to guard the important road.

古文：壬戌，驻跸杭州。
现代文：十三日，高宗暂居杭州。
English: On the 13th, Gao Zong temporarily stayed in Hangzhou.

古文：金人陷晋宁军，守臣徐徽言死之。
现代文：金军攻陷晋宁军，守臣徐徽言战死。
English: The Jin army was defeated by the Jinling army, and the retainer Xu Huigen was killed in the battle.

古文：癸亥，下诏罪己，求直言。
现代文：十四日，高宗下诏说自己有罪，访求直言。
English: On the 14th, Gao Zong issued an edict saying that he was guilty, and made a direct appeal.

古文：令有司具舟常、润，迎济衣冠、军民家属。省仪物、膳羞，出宫人之无职掌者。
现代文：命令有关部门在常州、润州准备船只，迎渡士宦和军民家属；减掉仪物和美食，除去宫人没有职掌的。
English: The relevant departments were ordered to prepare ships in Changzhou and Runzhou to welcome the scholars and the military and civilian families; to reduce the number of ceremonial objects and delicacies, and to remove the palace staff who had no official duties.

古文：乙丑，降德音；赦杂犯死罪以下囚，放还士大夫被窜斥者，惟李纲罪在不赦，更不放还。
现代文：十六日，降下恩诏文告，赦免杂犯、死罪以下的囚犯，召还被贬斥的士大夫，只有李纲的罪不能赦免，更不用说召还了。
English: On the 16th, an imperial edict was issued, pardoning minor criminals and prisoners with less than capital crimes, and recalling the demeaned magistrate. Only Li Gang's crime could not be pardoned, let alone recalled.

古文：盖用黄潜善计，罪纲以谢金人。
现代文：原来这是采纳了黄潜善的计谋，用处罚李纲来恭谢金军。
English: Originally, this was a trick of Huang Kuanzhen, using the punishment of Li Gang to congratulate the Jin Army.

古文：置江宁府榷货务都茶场。
现代文：设置江宁府榷货务都茶场。
English: Set up Jiangning prefecture's largest tea farm.

古文：丁卯，百官入见，应迪功郎以上并赴朝参。
现代文：十八日，文武百官人朝进见，应迪功郎以上的官员都上朝参见高宗。
English: On the 18th, hundreds of civil and military officials came to see the emperor. Officials above Ying Di Gong Lang all came to see the emperor, see Gaozong.

古文：戊辰，出米十万斛，即杭、秀、常、湖州、平江府损直以粜，济东北流寓之人。
现代文：十九日，拿出十万解米，在杭、秀、常、湖州和平江府降价出卖，接济东北流亡侨寓的民户。
English: On the 19th, they took out 100,000 ths. of rice and sold it at a reduced price in Hang, Xiu, Chang, Huzhou and Hepingjiang to help the private households of the North-Eastern Exile.

古文：金人焚扬州。
现代文：金军焚烧扬州。
English: The Chinese army burned Yangzhou.

古文：己巳，用御史中丞张澂言，罢黄潜善、汪伯彦，以户部尚书叶梦得为尚书左丞，澂为右丞。
现代文：二十日，采纳御史中承张膺的意见，罢除黄潜善、汪伯彦，任命户部尚书叶梦得为尚书左承，张膺为尚书右承。
English: On the 20th, he adopted the opinion of Zhang Xuan, a member of the Imperial Historians, and dismissed Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian, and appointed the head of the household, Shang Shuhe Mengde, as the left successor of Shang Shuhe, and Zhang Xuan as the right successor of Shang Shuhe.

古文：庚午，诏平江、镇江府、常、湖、杭、越州，具寓居京朝官已上姓名以备简拔。
现代文：二十一日，下诏平江、镇江府及常、湖、杭、越州，开列寓居这些地区京朝官以上官员姓名准备供朝廷任用参考。
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued for Pingjiang, Zhenjiang, Chang, Hubei, Hangzhou, and Yuezhou, listing the names of officials above the level of Beijing imperial officials residing in these regions for the reference of the imperial court.

古文：分命浙西监司等官，募土豪守千秋、垂脚、襄阳诸岭，以扼宣、常诸州险要。
现代文：分别命令浙西监司等官，招募土豪守卫千秋、垂脚、襄阳各山岭，便于控扼宣、常等州险要隘道。
English: He separately ordered the Western Zhejiang Supervision Division and other officials to recruit local heroes to guard the mountains of Qianqiu, Dangfu and Xiangyang, so as to facilitate the control of Xuanxuan, Changzhou and other dangerous passes.

古文：金人去扬州。
现代文：金军离开扬州。
English: The gold army left Yangzhou.

古文：辛未，诏御营使司唯掌行在五军，凡边防经制并归三省、枢密。
现代文：二十二日，下诏御营使司只掌管行在五军，凡是边防经制并归三省、枢密院主管。
English: On the twenty-second day of the following month, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial General Headquarters was only in charge of the five armies, and all border defense was under the control of the three provinces and the head of the Privy Council.

古文：金人过高邮军，守臣赵士瑗弃城走。
现代文：金军从高邮军经过，守臣赵士缓弃城逃走。
English: The gold army passed by Gaoyou's army, and the guardian Zhao Shi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：溃兵宋进犯泰州，守臣曾班遁。
现代文：溃兵宋进进犯泰州，守臣曾班逃跑。
English: The defeated Song Jin invaded Taizhou, and Shou Zeng Ben fled.

古文：壬申，罢军期司掊敛民财者。
现代文：二十三日，罢除军期司拮敛搜刮民财的人。
English: On the 23rd, dismissed the person who collected the people's wealth.

古文：吕颐浩遣将陈彦渡江袭金余兵，复扬州。
现代文：吕颐浩派遣将领陈彦渡江袭击金军余兵，收复扬州。
English: Lv Yinghao dispatched general Chen Yan to cross the river to attack the remaining soldiers of the Jin Army and recover Yangzhou.

古文：癸酉，靳赛犯通州。
现代文：二十四日，靳赛进犯通州。
English: On the 24th, Jisei invaded Tongzhou.

古文：韩世忠小校李在叛据高邮。
现代文：韩世忠军小校李在在高邮叛乱割据。
English: Han Shizhongjun Elementary School Li Zai in Gaoyou Rebellion.

古文：甲戌，黄潜善、汪伯彦并落职。
现代文：二十五日，黄潜善、汪伯彦一起被罢职。
English: On the 25th, Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian were dismissed together.

古文：乙亥，召朱胜非赴行在，留张浚驻平江。
现代文：二十六日，召朱胜非到行在朝廷，留下张浚驻守平江。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Shengfei was summoned to the imperial court, leaving Zhang Jun stationed in Pingjiang.

古文：赠陈东、欧阳澈承事郎，官有服亲一人，恤其家。
现代文：赠给陈东、欧阳澈承事郎官，任五服之内的亲属一人为官，抚恤他们的家庭。
English: It was presented to Chen Dong and Ouyang Chie as an official to take care of their families, with one relative from each of the five families serving as an official to support their families.

古文：召马伸赴行在，卒，赠直龙图阁。
现代文：召马伸到朝廷，马伸逝世，赠给直龙图阁的官职。
English: Ma Shin was summoned to the imperial court. Ma Shin died, and the official post was given to Zhaolong Tu Ge.

古文：丙子，诏士民直言时政得失。
现代文：二十七日，下诏士人和百姓直言不讳地陈述朝政得失。
English: On the 27th, the lower echelon officials and the common people bluntly stated the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：是月，以王庶为陕西节制使、知京兆府，节制司都统制曲端为鄜延经略使、知延安府。
现代文：这个月，任命王庶为陕西节制使、京兆府知府，节制司都统制曲端为延经略使、延安知府。
English: This month, Wang Shiao was appointed as the chief of the Shaanxi Bureau of Temperance and the prefectural governor of Beijing and Shandong Province, and the chief of the Bureau of Temperance and the prefectural governor of Yunnan Province was appointed as the special envoy of Yanjing and the prefectural governor of Yan'an Province.

古文：张用据确山，号。
现代文：张用割据确山，号称 张莽荡 。
English: Zhang used to live in Jiushan and was known as Zhang Menggang.

古文：三月己卯朔，日中有黑子。
现代文：三月初一，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On March 1st, a sunspot was spotted in the sun.

古文：庚辰，以朱胜非为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初二，任命朱胜非为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Zhu Shengfei was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man and the junior secretary.

古文：辛巳，叶梦得罢，以卢益为尚书左丞，未拜，复罢为资政殿学士。
现代文：初三，叶梦得罢职，任命卢益为尚书左承，没有到任，又罢为资政殿学士。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Ye Meng was dismissed from his post, and Lu Yi was appointed as his successor. However, he did not take up the post, and instead became an academician.

古文：御营都统制王渊同签书枢密院事，吕颐浩为江南东路安抚制置使、知江宁府。
现代文：御营都统制王渊为同签书枢密院事，吕颐浩为江南东路安抚制置使、江宁府知府。
English: Wang Yuan, the governor of the capital, was the privy councilor who signed the same letter, and Lv Yinghao was the governor of Jiangnan Donglu and the governor of Jiangning Prefecture.

古文：壬午，诏王渊免进呈书押本院文字。
现代文：初四，下诏王渊免去进呈签书枢密院文字。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Wang Yuan was excused from signing the Privy Council letter.

古文：扈从统制苗傅忿王渊骤得君，刘正彦怨招降剧盗而赏薄。
现代文：启从统制苗傅怨恨王渊过快地得到高宗信用，刘正彦怨限招降剧盗而得到的赏赐太少。
English: Miao Fu, a subordinate of Qi, resented Wang Yuan for gaining the trust of Gaozong too quickly, and Liu Zhengyan resented that he received too little reward for drastically lowering the recruitment limit.

古文：帝在扬州，阉宦用事恣横，诸将多疾之。
现代文：高宗在扬州，宦官专事骄横，很多将领嫉恨不满。
English: Gao Zong in Yangzhou, eunuchs are arrogant, many generals are jealous and dissatisfied.

古文：癸未，傅、正彦等叛，勒兵向阙，杀王渊及内侍康履以下百余人。
现代文：初五，苗傅、刘正彦举行叛乱，领兵攻向朝廷，杀死王渊及内侍康履以下一百多人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan rebelled and led an army to attack the imperial court, killing Wang Yuan and more than a hundred people under the palace attendant Kang Lu.

古文：帝登楼，以傅为庆远军承宣使、御营使司增统制，正彦渭州观察使、副都统制。
现代文：高宗登楼，任命苗傅为庆远军承宣使、御营使司都统制，刘正彦为渭州观察使、副都统制。
English: Gao Zong ascended the tower and appointed Miao Fu as the Qingyuan army's envoy to the capital, and Liu Zhengyan as the Bozhou observation envoy and deputy capital control.

古文：傅等迫帝逊位于皇子魏国公，请隆祐太后垂帘同听政。
现代文：苗傅等逼迫高宗让位给皇子魏国公，请求隆太后垂帘听政。
English: Miao Fu and others forced Gao Zong to give up the throne to the prince Wei Guogong, and asked the empress dowager Long Yu to listen to politics.

古文：是夕，帝移御显宁寺。
现代文：这天晚上，高宗迁移到显宁寺。
English: That evening, Gaozong moved to Shenning Temple.

古文：甲申，尊帝为睿圣仁孝皇帝，以显宁寺为睿圣宫，大赦。
现代文：初六，尊高宗为睿圣仁孝皇帝，以显宁寺为睿圣宫，赦免全国。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Zong Gaozong proclaimed himself as the wise and benevolent emperor, and Shenning Temple as the wise and benevolent palace, and pardoned the whole country.

古文：以张澂兼中书侍郎，韩世忠为御营使司提举一行事务，前军统制张俊为秦凤副总管，分其众隶诸军。
现代文：任命张膺兼中书侍郎，韩世忠为御营使司提举一行事务，前军统制张俊为秦凤路副总管，分散他的军队隶属各军。
English: He appointed Zhang Xuan to be the chancellor's secretary, Han Shizhong to be the envoy of the emperor, Zhang Jun, the former military commander, to be the deputy commander of Qinfeng Road, and his scattered troops were subordinated to each army.

古文：丁亥，以东京留守杜充为资政殿大学士、节制京东西路。
现代文：初九，任命东京留守杜充为资政殿大学士，节制京东西路。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month of the year, he appointed Du Cheng, who was staying in Tokyo, as a scholar of the University of the Palace of Capital and Government, and controlled the eastern and western roads of Beijing.

古文：殿前副都指挥使、东京副留守郭仲荀进昭化军节度使。
现代文：殿前副都指挥使、东京副留守郭仲荀进为昭化军节度使。
English: The deputy commander-in-chief in front of the palace and the deputy commander-in-residence in Tokyo, Guo Zhongyunjin, became the commander-in-chief of the Shōkawa army.

古文：分窜内侍蓝珪、高邈、张去为、张旦、曾择、陈永锡于岭南诸州。
现代文：分别贬窜内侍蓝盖、高邀、张去为、张旦、曾择、陈永锡到岭南各州。
English: The court ladies, Lan Gai, Gao Ying, Zhang Dewei, Zhang Dan, Zeng Zhao and Chen Yongxi, were sent to the southern provinces of Lingnan.

古文：择已行，傅追还，杀之。
现代文：曾择已动身前往，苗傅追回曾择，杀曾择。
English: Zeng Zheng has set out, Miao Fu has recovered Zeng Zheng and killed Zeng Zheng.

古文：吕颐浩至江宁。
现代文：吕颐浩到江宁。
English: Lv Yinghao to Jiangning.

古文：戊子，以端明殿学士王孝迪为中书侍郎、卢益为尚书左丞。
现代文：初十，任命端明殿学士王孝迪为中书侍郎、卢益为尚书左承。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he appointed Wang Xiaodi, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, as the attendant of the middle book, and Lu Yi as the successor of the left book.

古文：张俊部众八千至平江，张浚谕以决策起兵问罪，约吕颐浩、刘光世招韩世忠来会。
现代文：张俊部军八千人赶到平江，张浚表示已经决定兴兵问罪，邀约吕颐浩、刘光世召来韩世忠联合行动。
English: Eight thousand soldiers of Zhang Junbei's army rushed to Pingjiang. Zhang Junbei said that he had decided to arraign the soldiers and invite Lv Yinghao and Liu Guangshi to summon Han Shizhong for a joint action.

古文：己丑，改元明受。
现代文：十一日，改元明受。
English: On the 11th, the change of the era name became official.

古文：张浚奏乞睿圣皇帝亲总要务。
现代文：张浚上奏请求高宗亲自总理军国要务。
English: Zhang Jun requested that Gao Zong personally report to the Prime Minister on the military affairs of the country.

古文：庚寅，百官始朝睿圣宫，以苗傅为武当军节度使，刘正彦为武成军节度使，刘光世为太尉、淮南制置使，范琼为庆远军节度、湖北制置使，杨惟忠加少保，张浚为礼部尚书，及吕颐浩并赴行在。
现代文：十二日，文武百官才开始朝拜睿圣宫，任命苗傅为武当军节度使，刘正彦为武成军节度使，刘光世为太尉、淮南制置使，范琼为庆远军节度、湖北制置使，杨惟忠加少保，张浚为礼部尚书，与吕颐浩一起赶往行在。
English: On the 12th, hundreds of civil and military officials began to pay homage to the Ruisheng Palace, appointing Miao Fu as the festival envoy of the Wudang Army, Liu Zhengyan as the festival envoy of the Wucheng Army, Liu Guangshi as the first lieutenant, Huainan envoy, Fan Qiong as the festival envoy of the Qingyuan Army and Hubei envoy, Yang Weizhong as the junior envoy, Zhang Jun as the ceremonial secretary, and rushed to the palace with Lv Yinghao.

古文：傅等以御营中军统制吴湛主管步军司；黄潜善、汪伯彦并分司，衡、永州居住；王孝迪、卢益为大金国信使；进士黄大本、吴时敏为先期告请使。
现代文：苗傅任命御营中军统制吴湛主管步军司；黄潜善、汪伯彦遭到处罚贬降，衡州、永州居住；王孝迪、卢益为大金国信使；进士黄大本、吴时敏为先期告请使。
English: Miao Fu appointed Wu Zhan, who was in charge of controlling the troops in the middle of the camp, as the director of the Infantry Division; Huang Kuanzhan and Wang Bohian were punished and demoted, and lived in Hengzhou and Yongzhou; Wang Xiaodi and Lu Yi were the messengers of the great gold country; Huang Daben and Wu Shimin were the advance messengers.

古文：置行在都茶场。
现代文：设置行在都茶场。
English: The line was set up at the capital's tea house.

古文：吕颐浩奏请睿圣皇帝复大位。
现代文：吕颐浩奏请高宗复帝位。金军攻陷州。
English: Lv Yinghong invited Gao Zong to restore the imperial throne. The gold army invaded the state.

古文：金人陷鄜州。癸巳，张浚命节制司参议官辛道宗措置海舶，遣布衣冯番持书说傅、正彦。
现代文：十五日，张浚命令节制司参议官辛道宗措置海船，派遣布衣百姓冯播持书劝说苗傅、刘正彦。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Jun ordered the councillor of the Department of Restraint, Xin Daozong, to arrange a sea vessel and send the people in cloth, Feng Bo, to persuade Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan.

古文：甲午，有司请尊太后为太皇太后，不许。
现代文：十六日，有关部门请求尊太后为太皇太后，没有答应。
English: On the 16th, the relevant departments requested that the revered empress dowager become the great empress dowager, but she did not agree.

古文：吕颐浩率勤王兵万人发江宁。
现代文：吕颐浩率领勤王军一万人从江宁出发。
English: Lv Yinghao led the king's army of ten thousand from Jiangning.

古文：乙未，再贬黄潜善镇东军节度副使、英州安置。
现代文：十七日，黄潜善被再次贬为镇东军节度副使，英州安置。
English: On the 17th, Huang Kuanzhen was once again demoted to the vice-envoy of the Zhendong Army, and was resettled in Yingzhou.

古文：刘光世部兵会吕颐浩于丹阳。
现代文：刘光世率领军队在丹阳与吕颐浩会合。
English: Liu Guangze led the army to meet with Lv Yinghao in Danyang.

古文：丙申，韩世忠自盐城收散卒至平江，张俊假兵二千。
现代文：十八日，韩世忠从盐城收集散兵到平江，张俊借兵二千。
English: On the 18th, Han Shizhong collected the scattered soldiers from Yancheng to Pingjiang, and Zhang Jun borrowed two thousand soldiers.

古文：戊戌，赴行在。
现代文：二十日，他们赶到杭州。
English: On the 20th, they arrived in Hangzhou.

古文：辛丑，傅等以世忠为定国军节度使张俊为武宁军节度使、知凤翔府，张浚责黄州团练副使、郴州安置。
现代文：二十三日，苗傅等人任命韩世忠为定国军节度使，张俊为武宁军节度使、凤翔府知府，张浚责降为黄州团练副使，郴州安置。
English: On the 23rd, Miao Fu and others appointed Han Shizhong as the festival envoy of the Dingguo Army, Zhang Jun as the festival envoy of the Wu Ning Army and the prefect of Fengxiang Prefecture, Zhang Junchu was demoted to the deputy envoy of the Huangzhou Reunification and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：俊等皆不受。
现代文：张俊等人都没有接受。
English: Zhang Jun and others did not accept it.

古文：傅等遣军驻临平，拒勤王兵。
现代文：苗傅等派遣军队驻扎临平，抵抗勤王军。
English: Miao Fu and others sent troops to be stationed in Linping to resist the royalist army.

古文：壬寅，日中黑子没。
现代文：二十四日，太阳中黑子消失。
English: On the 24th, the sunspot disappeared.

古文：卢益罢。
现代文：卢益罢官。
English: Lu Yi was dismissed.

古文：吕颐浩至平江。
现代文：吕颐浩到达平江。
English: Lv Yinghao arrives in Pingjiang.

古文：水贼邵青入泗州。
现代文：水贼邵青进人泅州。
English: Water thief Shao Qing enters Luzhou.

古文：癸卯，太后诏：睿圣皇帝宜称皇太弟、天下兵马大元帅、康王，皇帝称皇太侄、监国。
现代文：二十五日，太后下诏：高宗皇帝应该称皇太弟、天下兵马大元帅、康王，魏国公称皇太侄、监国。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the empress dowager issued an edict: Emperor Gaozong should be called the emperor's younger brother, the world's grand marshal of soldiers and horses, and King Kang, and the State of Wei should be called the emperor's great nephew and supervisor of the country.

古文：赐傅、正彦铁券。
现代文：赐给苗、刘二人铁券。
English: Miao and Liu were given iron coupons.

古文：吕颐浩、张浚传檄中外讨傅、正彦，执黄大本下狱。
现代文：吕颐浩、张浚发布讨伐苗、刘的檄文，俘获黄大本下狱。
English: Lv Yinghao and Zhang Jun issued a statement condemning the felling of seedlings and the arrest of Liu, and Huang Dabong was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：乙巳，太后降旨睿圣皇帝处分兵马重事。
现代文：二十七日，太后下诏令睿圣皇帝处理兵马重事。
English: On the 27th, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict ordering Emperor Ruisheng to deal with the serious matter of the soldiers and horses.

古文：张俊率兵发平江，刘光世继之。
现代文：张俊率兵从平江出发，刘光世接着也出兵。
English: Zhang Jun and his soldiers set out from the Pingjiang River, followed by Liu Guangxi.

古文：丙午，张浚同知枢密院事，翰林学士李邴、御史中丞郑并同签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，张浚为同知枢密院事，翰林学士李丙队御史中承郑压并为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Jun became a member of the Tongzhi Privy Council, and Li Biao, a scholar of Hanlin University, became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：吕颐浩、张浚发平江。丁未，次吴江，奏乞建炎皇帝还即尊位。
现代文：吕颐浩、张浚从平江出发；二十九日，驻扎吴江，上奏请求高宗复位。
English: Lv Yinghao and Zhang Jun set out from Pingjiang; on the 29th, they were stationed in Wujiang and petitioned Gaozong to be reinstated.

古文：朱胜非召傅、正彦至都堂议复辟，傅等遂朝睿圣宫。
现代文：朱胜非召集苗傅、刘正彦到都堂商议高宗复位，苗傅等人于是朝拜睿圣宫。
English: Zhu Shengfei summoned Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan to Tudang to discuss Gao Zong's reinstatement, and Miao Fu and others then went to pay homage to Rui Shenggu.

古文：金人陷京东诸郡，刘洪道弃青州去。
现代文：金军攻陷京东各郡，刘洪道放弃青州逃跑。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied all counties in Jingdong, and Liu Hongdao abandoned Qingzhou and fled.

古文：挞懒以刘豫知东平府、节制河南州郡。
现代文：挞懒任命刘豫为东平知府，节制管理河南州郡。
English: He appointed Liu Yu as the governor of Dongping Prefecture, and moderately managed Henan Prefecture.

古文：赵立复徐州。
现代文：赵立收复徐州。
English: Zhao Li recovered Xuzhou.

古文：夏四月戊申朔，太后下诏还政，皇帝复大位。
现代文：夏四月初一，太后下诏还政，高宗复即皇帝位。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the empress dowager returned to power, and Gao Zongfu became emperor.

古文：帝还宫，与太后御前殿垂帘，诏尊太后为隆祐皇太后。
现代文：高宗还宫，与太后到前殿垂帘听政，诏令尊太后为隆皇太后。
English: Gao Zong returned to the palace, and went with the empress dowager to the front hall to listen to the government, and ordered the empress dowager to be the empress dowager.

古文：己酉，诏访求太祖神主。
现代文：初二，下诏寻找太祖神主。
English: On the second day of the new year, the emperor issued an edict to search for the great ancestor god.

古文：以苗傅为淮西制置使，刘正彦副之。
现代文：任命苗傅为淮西制置使，刘正彦为副使。
English: Appointed Miao Fu as the first envoy to the Huaixi Province, and Liu Zhengyan as the deputy envoy.

古文：庚戌，复纪年建炎。
现代文：初三，恢复建炎纪年。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Jianyuan era was restored.

古文：命张浚知枢密院事，苗傅、刘正彦并检校少保。
现代文：任命张浚为知枢密院事，苗傅、刘正彦为检校少保。
English: Zhang Jun was appointed as the secretary of Zhizhu Academy, and Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan were appointed as the junior guards of the inspection.

古文：吕颐浩、张浚军次临平，苗翊、马柔吉拒战不胜，傅、正彦引兵二千夜遁。
现代文：吕颐浩、张浚军队驻扎在临平，苗诩、马柔吉抵抗未获胜，苗傅、刘正彦率兵二千人夜里逃走。
English: Lv Yinghao and Zhang Jun's troops were stationed in Linping, Miao Wei and Ma Rongji did not win the resistance, Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan led two thousand soldiers to escape in the night.

古文：辛亥，皇太后撤帘。
现代文：初四，皇太后撤帘。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the Empress Dowager removed her veil.

古文：吕颐浩等入见。
现代文：吕颐浩等人人朝进见。
English: Lv Yinghao and the others all came to see me in the morning.

古文：傅犯富阳、新城二县，遣统制王德、乔仲福追击之。
现代文：苗傅进犯富阳、新城二县，派遣统制王德、乔仲福追击。
English: Miao Fu attacked Fuyang and the two counties of Xincheng, dispatching Wang De and Qiao Zhongfu to pursue.

古文：癸未，朱胜非、颜岐、王孝迪、张澂、路允迪俱罢。
现代文：癸未日，朱胜非、颜岐、王孝迪、张膺、路允迪都罢官。
English: On the following day, Zhu Shengfei, Yan Qi, Wang Xiaodi, Zhang Qi and Lu Yundi all resigned.

古文：以吕颐浩为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，李邴尚书右丞，郑签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命吕颐浩为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，李郁为尚书右承，郑压为签书枢密院事。
English: Appointed Lv Yinghao as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Li Yu as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Zheng Quan as the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：甲寅，以刘光世为太尉、御营副使，韩世忠为武胜军节度使、御前左军都统制，张俊为镇西军节度使、御前右军都统制，勤王所僚属将佐进官有差。
现代文：初七，任命刘光世为太尉、御营副使，韩世忠为武胜军节度使、御前左军都统制，张俊为镇西军节度使、御前右军都统制，参加勤王的僚属将佐都有不等的升官进爵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Liu Guangshi was appointed as the first lieutenant and the deputy envoy of the imperial camp, Han Shizhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the victorious army and the left army of the emperor, Zhang Jun was appointed as the festival envoy of the western army and the right army of the emperor, and his colleagues and subordinates who participated in the king's service were promoted to knighthood.

古文：主管殿前司王元、左言并责官，英、贺州安置。
现代文：主管殿前司王元、左言分别贬降为英州、贺州安置。
English: The former director of the palace, Wang Yuan, and the left speaker were demoted to Yingzhou and Hezhou, respectively.

古文：枢密都承旨马瑗停官、永州居住。
现代文：枢密都承旨马缓停官，永州居住。
English: Privy Councillor, lives in Yongzhou.

古文：吏部员外郎范仲熊、浙西安抚司主管机宜文字时希孟并除名，柳州、吉阳军编管。
现代文：吏部员外郎范仲熊、浙西安抚司主管机宜文字时希孟都除名，柳州、吉阳军编管。
English: Wai Lang Fan Zhong Xiong, a member of the General Staff Department, and Xi Jing Fu Shi, the head of the Zhejiang Peace-keeping Division, were removed from their posts, and Liuzhou and Jiyang troops were placed under the administration of the General Staff Department.

古文：斩中军统制吴湛、工部侍郎王世修于市。
现代文：中军统制吴湛、工部侍郎王世修在闹市斩首。
English: Wu Zhan, the commander of the Chinese army, and Wang Shixiu, the steward of the Ministry of Industry, beheaded in downtown.

古文：赠王渊开府仪同三司。
现代文：赠给王渊开府仪同三司。
English: Wang Yuan was presented with the ceremony of opening the capital and the three departments.

古文：乙卯，大赦。
现代文：初八，大赦。
English: Hatsuhachi, amnesty.

古文：举行仁宗法度，应嘉祐条制与今不同者，自官制役法外，赏格从重，条约从宽。
现代文：全面实施仁宗时期的法律制度，嘉条例制度与现今不同之处，除官制役法外，赏赐标准提高，条例约束放宽。
English: The legal system of the Rinzong period was fully implemented, and the differences between the Jiayu regulation system and the current one were, in addition to the official service law, the reward standard was improved, and the regulation restrictions were relaxed.

古文：罢上供不急之物。
现代文：罢除上供不急之物。
English: Eliminate items that are not urgent.

古文：元祐石刻党人官职、恩数追复未尽者，令其家自陈。
现代文：元石刻党人籍中官职、恩赏没有全部恢复的，命令他们的家庭自己向上陈述。
English: If the official posts and rewards are not fully restored among the former Sekiro Party members, order their families to report themselves.

古文：许中外直言。
现代文：允许朝廷内外官民直言进谏。
English: Allowing officials and people inside and outside the imperial court to speak their minds.

古文：丁巳，禁内侍交通主兵官及馈遗假贷、借役禁兵、干预朝政。
现代文：初十，禁止内侍勾结主管军事的官员以及贿赂借贷、役使禁兵、干预朝政。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, it was forbidden for the palace attendants to collude with the officials in charge of the military, as well as to bribe, borrow money, ban soldiers from serving, and interfere in the government.

古文：庚申，诏尚书左右仆射并带同中书门下平章事，改门下、中书侍郎为参知政事，省尚书左、右丞。
现代文：十三日，下诏尚书左右仆射并加带同中书门下平章事，改门下侍郎、中书侍郎为参知政事，精减尚书左右承。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, Shangshu's right and left attendants were removed, and Shangshu's right and left successors were added, along with Zhongshu's lower gate attendant and lower gate attendant, and Zhongshu's lower gate attendant and lower gate attendant were changed to attendants, and Shangshu's right and left successors were reduced.

古文：以李邴参知政事。
现代文：任命骊那为参知政事。
English: Jinnah was appointed as a co-governor.

古文：诏行在职事官各举所知，并省馆学、寺监等官。
现代文：诏令行在职事官分别推举所知人才，合并省除馆学、寺监等官。
English: According to the imperial edict, the incumbent officials shall separately nominate the talents they know, and the officials of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Supervisor of Temples and Monasteries shall be merged.

古文：苗傅犯衢州。
现代文：苗傅进犯瞥州。
English: Miao Fu invades Sheshou.

古文：癸亥，以给事中周望为江、浙制置使。
现代文：十六日，任命给事中周望为江浙制置使。
English: On the 16th, Zhou Wang was appointed as the chief envoy of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：丁卯，帝发杭州，留郑卫皇太后，以韩世忠为江、浙制置使，及刘光世追讨傅、正彦。
现代文：二十日，高宗从杭州出发，留下郑医护卫皇太后，任命韩世忠为江、浙制置使，与刘光世一起追击讨伐苗傅、刘正彦。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zong set off from Hangzhou, leaving Zheng He to escort the empress dowager, and appointed Han Shizhong as the envoy to Jiang and Zhejiang provinces, and together with Liu Guangxi to pursue the crusade against Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan.

古文：己巳，诏：傅、正彦、苗瑀、苗翊、张逵不赦，余党并原。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：苗傅、刘正彦、苗禹、苗诩、张连不予赦免，其他参与叛乱的都免罪。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Miao Fu, Liu Zhengyan, Miao Yu, Miao Wei, and Zhang Lian would not be pardoned, and others who participated in the rebellion would be exonerated.

古文：壬申，立子魏国公旉为皇太子。
现代文：二十五日，立儿子赵惠为皇太子。
English: On the 25th, he appointed his son Zhao Hui as crown prince.

古文：赦傅党王钧甫、马柔吉罪，许其自归。
现代文：赦免苗傅同党王钧甫、马柔吉罪，允许自己选择归属。
English: He pardoned Miao Fu and fellow Party members Wang Shufu and Ma Rongji, and allowed Miao Fu to choose his affiliation.

古文：丙子，范琼自光、蕲引兵屯洪州。
现代文：二十九日，范琼从光州、薪州率兵进屯洪州。
English: On the 29th, Fan Qiong led troops from Gwangju and Pyeongju to Tunhongju.

古文：是月，刘文舜寇濠州。
现代文：这个月，刘文舜攻打壕州。
English: This month, Liu Wenzhong attacked Hanzhou.

古文：西北贼薛庆袭据高邮军。
现代文：西北贼薛庆袭击占据高邮军。
English: Northwest thief Xue Qing attacked the occupying Gaoyou army.

古文：五月戊寅朔，帝次常州，以张浚为宣抚处置使，以川、陕、京西、湖南北路隶之，听便宜黜陟。
现代文：五月初一，高宗停留常州，任命张浚为宣抚处置使，川、陕、京西、湖南北路都归他管辖，全权处理这些地区官员的升降。
English: On the first day of May, Gaozong stopped in Changzhou and appointed Zhang Jun as the minister of propaganda and disposition. He was in charge of the Sichuan, Shaanxi, West Beijing, and North and South Hunan provinces, and had full authority to deal with the promotion and demotion of officials in these regions.

古文：庚辰，苗傅统领官张翼斩王钧甫、马柔吉降。
现代文：初三，苗傅统领官张翼斩杀王钧甫、马柔吉投降朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Ying, the commander-in-chief of Miaofu, killed Wang Xiufu and Ma Rongji and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，次镇江府，遣祭张悫、陈东墓，诏恤其家。
现代文：初四，到达镇江府，派人祭奠张意、陈东墓，下诏抚恤他们家庭。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he arrived at Zhenjiang Prefecture, sent people to pay tribute to Zhang Yi and Chen Dong's tombs, and sent a message to their families.

古文：癸未，以翰林学士滕康同签书枢密院事。
现代文：初六，任命翰林学士滕康同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Hanlin Scholar Teng Kang was appointed the co-signer of the Privy Council.

古文：乙酉，至江宁府，驻跸神霄宫，改府名建康。
现代文：初八，到江宁府，暂住神霄宫，改江宁府为建康府。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he went to Jiangningfu, temporarily lived in Shenshiao Palace, and changed Jiangningfu to Jiankangfu.

古文：起复朝散郎洪皓为大金通问使。
现代文：起用朝散郎洪皓为大金通问使。
English: He appointed Asosanro Hongyu as the chief envoy.

古文：丁亥，以徽猷阁直学士陈彦文提领水军，措置江、浙防托。
现代文：初十，任命徽酞阁直学士陈彦文提领水军，措置江浙防务。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Chen Yanwen, a direct bachelor of Huiyang, was appointed to lead the territorial navy and take measures for the defense of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：召蓝珪等速还朝。
现代文：召蓝压羞等人迅速回到朝廷。
English: Call blue pressure shy and others to quickly return to the imperial court.

古文：己丑，韩世忠追讨傅、正彦于浦城县，获正彦，傅遁走。
现代文：十二日，韩世忠追击讨伐苗傅、刘正彦到浦城县，俘获刘正彦，苗傅逃走。
English: On the 12th, Han Shizhong pursued the crusaders Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyi to Pucheng County, captured Liu Zhengyi, and Miao Fu fled.

古文：张浚抚谕薛庆于高邮，为庆所留。
现代文：张浚到高邮抚谕薛庆，为薛庆截留。
English: Zhang Jun went to the high-ranking postmaster Xue Qing and detained him.

古文：乙未，浚罢。
现代文：十八日，张浚罢官。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun was dismissed.

古文：以御营前军统制王燮为淮南招抚使。
现代文：任命御营前军统制巨燮为淮南招抚使。
English: He appointed the commanding giant of the former Imperial Japanese Army as the envoy of Huainan Province.

古文：己亥，复置中书门下省检正官，省左、右司郎中二员。
现代文：二十二日，重新设置中书门下省检正官，减掉左右司郎中二名。
English: On the 22nd, the provincial procuratorate under Zhongshumen was re-established, and two of the left and right sergeants were removed.

古文：苗傅裨将江池杀苗翊，降于周望。
现代文：苗傅副将江池杀死苗诩向周望投降。
English: Miao Fu's second-in-command Jiang Qi killed Miao Yao and surrendered to Zhou Wangxing.

古文：傅走建阳县，土豪詹标执之以献。
现代文：苗傅逃到建阳县，土豪詹标俘获献给朝廷。
English: Miao Fu fled to Jianyang County, and the local strongman Zhan Bo was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，张浚还自高邮。复命知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，张浚从高邮回来，又命令他为知枢密院事。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhang Jun returned from Gaoyou and ordered him to work for the Privy Council.

古文：是月，翟兴击杀杨进余党，复推其徒刘可拒官军。
现代文：这个月，翟兴击杀杨进余党，又推举他的部将刘可抵抗官军。
English: This month, Hao Xing killed Yang Jin Yu's party and promoted his subordinate Liu Ke to resist the official army.

古文：六月戊申朔，以东京留守杜充引兵赴行在，命兼宣抚处置副使，节制淮南、京东西路。
现代文：六月初一，因东京留守杜充率兵到杭州，任命他兼任宣抚处置副使，节制淮南、京东西路。
English: On the first day of June, Du Chong, who was away in Tokyo, led his troops to Hangzhou and appointed him as the vice-envoy of proclamation and disposition to control the eastern and western routes of Huainan and Beijing.

古文：己酉，以久雨，召郎官已上言阙政，吕颐浩请令实封以闻。
现代文：初二，因长期降雨，召郎官以上官员上书陈述朝政缺失，吕颐浩请求命令密封后报告朝廷。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, due to long-term rainfall, officials above the rank of courtier were summoned to submit a letter stating the lack of imperial government, and Lv Yinghao requested that the order be sealed and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：遂用司勋员外郎赵鼎言，罢王安石配享神宗庙庭，以司马光配。
现代文：又采用司勋员外郎赵鼎的意见，不用王安石配享神宗庙庭，改用司马光配享。
English: In addition, he adopted the opinion of Zhao Ding, his father-in-law, who was a member of the Department of Honors, and did not use Wang Anshi to enjoy the Shinshu Temple garden, but instead used Sima Guang to enjoy it.

古文：王善攻淮宁府不克，转寇宿州，统领王冠战败之。
现代文：王善攻打淮宁府没有成功，转而攻打宿州，统领王冠战败王善。
English: Wang Shan did not succeed in attacking Huaining. Instead, he attacked Suizhou and led the crown to defeat Wang Shan.

古文：甲寅，罢赏功司。
现代文：初七，罢除赏功司。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the reward for meritorious service was abolished.

古文：乙卯，命恤死事者家，且录其后。
现代文：初八，命令抚恤为国捐躯者家庭，并且录用他们的后代。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered that the families of those who died for the country be given a pension, and that their descendants be hired.

古文：升浙西安抚使康允之为制置使。
现代文：提升浙西安抚使康允之为制置使。
English: To elevate the Zhejiang and West China pacification envoy Kang Yun as the designated envoy.

古文：丙辰，刘光世招安苗傅将韩隽。
现代文：初九，刘光世招降苗傅部将韩隽。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Liu Guangxu recruited Han Xuan, a rising star in the kitchen department.

古文：戊午，命江、浙、淮南引塘泺、开畎浍，以阻金兵。
现代文：十一日，命令江、浙、淮南引塘栋水、开挖沟恤，阻止金兵南侵。
English: On the 11th day, he ordered Jiang, Zhejiang and Huainan to divert water from the pond and dig a trench to prevent Jin soldiers from invading the south.

古文：庚申，皇太后至建康府。
现代文：十三日，皇太后到建康府。
English: On the 13th, the Empress Dowager came to Jiankang.

古文：辛酉，以久阴，下诏以四失罪己：一曰昧经邦之大略，二曰昧戡难之远图，三曰无绥人之德，四曰失驭臣之柄。
现代文：十四日，因长期阴晦，下诏宣布自己失罪之处有四： 一是没有明确的治国安邦之道，二是没有消除内忧外患的长远打算，三是没有安抚百姓的大德，四是失去驾驭大臣的权柄。
English: On the 14th, due to the long-term gloom, he issued an edict declaring that he had failed in four areas: First, there was no clear way to govern the country, second, there was no long-term plan to eliminate internal and external troubles, third, there was no great virtue to appease the people, and fourth, he lost control of the power of the minister.

古文：仍榜朝堂，遍谕天下，使知朕悔过之意。
现代文：把它贴在朝堂，遍告全国，让全国都知道我的悔过愿望。 
English: I'll post it in the Imperial Palace and announce it to the whole country, so that the whole country knows about my desire to repent.

古文：以带御器械李质权同主管殿前司。
现代文：任命带御器械李质暂时代理主管殿前司。
English: Appointment of Li Jie as acting director of the palace for a temporary period of time.

古文：乙丑，以建康府路安抚使连南夫兼建康府、宣、徽、太平等州制置使。
现代文：十八日，任命建康府路安抚使连南夫兼建康府宣徽太平等州制置使。
English: On the 18th, the Jiankang Road Pacifying Envoy Lian Nanfu and the Jiankang Prefectural Emblem Taiyuan Provincial Construction Envoy were appointed.

古文：丁卯，右司谏袁植请诛黄潜善及失守者权邦彦等九人。
现代文：二十日，右司谏袁植请求诛杀黄潜善及失守者权邦彦等九人。
English: On the 20th, the right-hand man, Gong Yuan Zhi, requested that nine people, including Huang Kuanzhen and the lost defender, Quan Bangyan, be killed.

古文：诏：遂罢植知池州，以赵鼎为右司谏。
现代文：下诏： 我刚刚下诏说自己有过，应该引咎自责，难道可以把过失又全部推给臣下吗了于是罢袁植为池州知州，任命赵鼎为右司谏。
English: The next edict: I just issued an edict saying that I had done something wrong, and that I should blame myself, so can I blame all my mistakes on my vassals? So, Yuan Zhi was appointed as Chizhou's chizhou, and Zhao Ding was appointed as the right secretary.

古文：癸酉，置枢密院检详官。
现代文：二十六日，设置枢密院检详官。
English: On the 26th, a procurator of the Privy Council was set up.

古文：以右司郎中刘宁止为沿江措置副使。甲戌，移御行宫。
现代文：二十八日，下诏告谕朝廷内外： 因为距离抵抗金军秋季发动的攻势时间很近了，请求太后率领宗室奉迎神主到江表，文武百官官署不涉及军事和抗战的，跟随太后前往。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued to the imperial court and beyond: Because the time to resist the offensive launched by the Golden Army in the autumn is very close, the empress dowager was requested to lead the imperial family to pay homage to the deity to the river table, and the civil and military officials who are not involved in military and anti-war affairs should follow the empress dowager.

古文：乙亥，诏谕中外：金人陷磁州。
现代文：我与辅佐大臣、军事将领防御金军进攻，应接中原战事。官吏、士人和百姓家属南迁途中，有关部门不得禁止。 
English: I, together with the Vice-Minister of Defense and military generals, defended against the attack of the Golden Army and responded to the Central Plains War. The relevant departments must not prohibit officials, soldiers and the families of the people from moving south.

古文：是夏，贼贵仲正降。
现代文：金军攻陷磁州。这年夏季，贼贵仲正投降。
English: The Chinese army captured Magizhou. In the summer of this year, the thief Guizhong surrendered.

古文：秋七月戊寅，赠王复为资政殿学士。
现代文：秋七月初二，赠给王复为资政殿学士。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was presented to Wang Fuxiong as a scholar of the Palace of the Grand Vizier.

古文：己卯，亲虑囚。
现代文：初三，高宗亲自讯察囚犯罪状。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Gaozong personally inquired about the criminal status of prisoners.

古文：辛巳，苗傅、刘正彦伏诛。
现代文：初五，苗傅、刘正彦被处以死刑。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Miao Fu and Liu Masahiko were sentenced to death.

古文：癸未，进韩世忠检校少保、武胜昭庆军节度使、御营使司都统制。
现代文：初七，进升韩世忠为检校少保、武胜昭庆军节度使、御营使司都统制。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Han Shizhong was promoted to school inspector, and Wu Sheng, Zhao Qingjun, festival envoy, and imperial envoy to the capital.

古文：范琼自洪州入朝，以琼为御营使司提举一行事务，后军统制辛企宗为都统制。
现代文：范琼从洪州到朝廷，任命范琼为御营使司提举一行事务，后军统制辛企宗为都统制。
English: Fan Qiong went from Hongzhou to the imperial court, appointed Fan Qiong as the imperial envoy to raise a line of affairs, and then the military control system Xin Kezong as the capital control system.

古文：命学士院草夏国书、大金国表本付张浚。
现代文：命令学士院草拟夏国书、大金国表交付张浚。
English: He ordered the Academy to draft the Summer Constitution and the Grand Constitution to be delivered to Zhang Jun.

古文：甲申，诏以苗、刘之变，当轴大臣不能身卫社稷，朱胜非、颜岐、路允迪并落职，张澂衡州居住。
现代文：初八，下诏因苗、刘之变，当政大臣不能以身作则，护卫国家，朱胜非、颜岐、路允迪被除职，张膺贬往衡州居住。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, due to the change of Miao and Liu, the current minister of state could not lead by example and protect the country. Zhu Shengfei, Yanqi and Lu Yundi were removed from their posts, and Zhang Xuan was forced to live in Hengzhou.

古文：以知庐州胡舜陟为淮西制置使，知江州权邦彦兼本路制置使。
现代文：任命庐州知州胡舜陆为淮西制置使，江州知州权邦彦兼本路制置使。
English: He appointed Hu Binglu of Bozhou-Chizhou as the designated envoy of Huaixi Province, and Quan Bangyan of Bozhou-Chizhou as the designated envoy of Hebei Province.

古文：金人犯山东，安抚使刘洪道弃潍州遁，莱州守将张成举城降。
现代文：金军侵犯山东，安抚使刘洪道放弃潍州逃跑，莱州守将张成举城投降。
English: The Chinese army invaded Shandong, and appeasement caused Liu Hongdao to abandon Zhangzhou and flee, and the governor of Laizhou, Zhang Chenghuicheng, surrendered.

古文：丁亥，以范琼跋扈无状，收下大理狱，分其兵隶神武五军。
现代文：十一日，因范琼跋启无理，被逮捕下大理寺狱，分散他的军队隶归神武五军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fan Qiongbai was arrested and sent to Dali Temple Prison for being unreasonable, and his army was dispersed to join the Five Heavenly Armies.

古文：皇太子薨，谥元懿。
现代文：皇太子逝世，溢号元爵。
English: After the death of the crown prince, the title of grand duke was created.

古文：戊子，郑薨。
现代文：十二日，郑医逝世。
English: On the 12th, Dr. Zheng passed away.

古文：己丑，以资政殿大学士王綯参知政事，兵部尚书周望同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十三日，任命资政殿大学士王为参知政事，兵部尚书周望为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Wang Jizhi, a graduate of the University of the Palace of Senior Advisors, as a member of the Council of State, and Shang Shu Zhouwang of the Ministry of Military Affairs as a member of the Privy Council with the same signature.

古文：庚寅，仙井监乡贡进士李时雨上书，乞选立宗子系属人心，帝怒，斥还乡里。
现代文：十四日，仙井监乡贡进士李时雨上书，请求选择确立新的皇太子来安定人心。高宗发怒，斥责他归还乡里。
English: On the 14th, Li Shiyu, the inspector of the Xianjing Township and a tributary, sent a letter requesting the selection of a new crown prince to stabilize the hearts of the people. Gaozong became angry and rebuked him to return to the township.

古文：辛卯，升杭州为临安府。
现代文：十五日，升杭州为临安府。
English: On the 15th, Hangzhou was elevated to Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：壬辰，言者又论范琼逼迁徽宗及迎立张邦昌，琼辞伏，赐死，子弟皆流岭南。
现代文：十六日，又有人上书说范琼逼迁徽宗及迎立张邦昌，范琼供认不讳，被赐死，子弟都流放岭南。
English: On the 16th, another person wrote that Fan Qiong forced the relocation of Huizong and welcomed Zhang Bangchang. Fan Qiong confessed and was sentenced to death, and his children were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：刘洪道复青州，执金守向大猷。
现代文：刘洪道收复青州，俘获金军守将向大酞。
English: Liu Hongdao recaptured Qingzhou, and captured the Golden Army's commander Xiang Daxu.

古文：乙未，遣谢亮使夏国。
现代文：十九日，派遣谢亮出使夏国。
English: On the 19th, Xie Liang sent an envoy to Xia.

古文：丁酉，遣崔纵使金军前。
现代文：二十一日，派遣崔纵出使金军前营。
English: On the 21st, Cui Longzheng was dispatched to the front camp of the Chinese army.

古文：庚子，张浚发行在。
现代文：二十四日，张浚从行在出发。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Jun departed from Xingzhe.

古文：辛丑，王燮与靳赛遇，合战，败绩。
现代文：二十五日，王燮与靳赛相遇，两军交战，臼燮失败。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Wang Qian met with Xie Sai, and the two armies fought, with Xie losing.

古文：壬寅，命李邴、滕康权知三省、枢密院事，扈从太后如洪州，杨惟忠将兵万人以卫。
现代文：二十六日，命令李丙队滕康暂代知三省、枢密院事，启从太后到洪州，杨惟忠率兵一万人护卫。
English: On the 26th, he ordered Li Biao's team to send Teng Kang to Zhishan Province and the Privy Council on a temporary basis, and Yang Weizhong led 10,000 soldiers to escort him from the Empress Dowager to Hongzhou.

古文：以杜充同知枢密院事兼宣抚处置副使。
现代文：任命杜充为同知枢密院事兼宣抚处置副使。
English: Du Chong was appointed Tongzhi Privy Councillor and Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Disposition.

古文：乙巳，诏江西、闽、广、荆湖诸路团教峒丁、枪杖手。
现代文：二十九日，下诏江西、闽、广、荆湖各路教练酮丁、枪杖手。
English: On the 29th, the coaches of Jiangxi, Handan, Guangxi, and Jinghu were promoted.

古文：山东贼郭仲威陷淮阳军。
现代文：山东贼郭仲威攻陷淮阳军。
English: The Shandong thief Guo Zhongwei captured the Huaiyang Army.

古文：翟兴引兵入汝州，与贼王俊战，败之。
现代文：翟兴率军进人汝州与贼王俊交战，打败王俊。
English: Hao Xing led an army into Ruzhou and fought with the thief Wang Jun, defeating Wang Jun.

古文：八月己酉，移浙西安抚司于镇江府。
现代文：八月初三，浙西安抚司迁移到镇江府。
English: On the third day of the eighth lunar month, the Western Zhejiang Pacification Division moved to Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：庚戌，李邴罢。
现代文：初四，李郁罢官。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Li Yu was dismissed.

古文：壬子，以吏部尚书刘珏为端明殿学士、权同知三省、枢密院事。
现代文：初六，任命吏部尚书刘环为端明殿学士、权同知三省枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Liu Huan, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, was appointed as the academician of the Duanming Palace and the privy councillor of the three provinces of Guandong and Shandong.

古文：甲寅，王庶罢。
现代文：初八，王庶罢官。
English: Hatsuhachi, the second-in-command to the king, is dismissed.

古文：以徽猷阁直学士、知庆阳府王似为陕西节制使。
现代文：任命徽酞阁直学士、庆阳知府王似为陕西节制使。
English: He appointed Huiyang Guo Zhi Bao and Qingyang Zhifu Wang Lian as Shaanxi Temperance Envoys.

古文：刘文舜入舒州。
现代文：刘文舜进人舒州。
English: Liu Wenxuan entered Shuzhou.

古文：己未，太后发建康。
现代文：十三日，太后从建康出发。
English: On the 13th, the empress dowager set out from Jiankang.

古文：丁卯，遣杜时亮使金军前。
现代文：二十一日，派遣杜时亮出使金军前线军营。
English: On the 21st, the dispatch of Du Shih revealed the front-line military camp of the Chinese army.

古文：闰八月丁丑朔，以胡舜陟为沿江都制置使，集英殿修撰王羲叔副之。
现代文：闰八月初一，任命胡舜陆为沿江都制置使，集英殿修撰王羲叔为副使。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, Hu Yulun was appointed as the envoy for the construction of the riverside capital, and the deputy envoy was Shueiden Shusan Wang Xunshu.

古文：丁亥，辅逵掠涟水军，杀军使郝璘，率众降于王燮。
现代文：十一日，辅连攻掠涟水军，杀军使郝瞒，率众向王镬投降。
English: On the 11th day, the auxiliary company attacked and plundered the Yunnan navy, killing and hiding the soldiers, and led the people to surrender to Wang Yao.

古文：己丑，以吕颐浩守尚书左仆射，杜充守右仆射，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，任命吕颐浩为守尚书左仆射，杜充为守右仆射，并为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th, Lv Yinghao was appointed to guard Shang Shu's left minion, Du Chong was appointed to guard the right minion, and he was appointed to guard Shang Shu's middle minion.

古文：庚寅，起居郎胡寅上书言二十事，吕颐浩不悦，罢之。
现代文：十四日，起居郎胡寅上书陈述二十件事，吕颐浩不高兴，罢除了胡寅。
English: On the 14th, Kijiro Hu In submitted a letter stating 20 things. Lv Yinghao was not happy and dismissed Hu In.

古文：辛卯，命杜充兼江、淮宣抚使、守建康，前军统制王燮隶之，韩世忠为渐西置使守镇江，刘光世为江东宣抚使守太平、池州，并受充节制。
现代文：十五日，命令杜充兼江、淮宣抚使守卫建康，前军统制臼燮隶属杜充，韩世忠为浙西制置使守卫镇江，刘光世为江东宣抚使守卫太平州、池州，都接受杜充节制。
English: On the 15th, he ordered Du Chong and Huai to guard Jiankang, the former army commander Usuki to be subordinate to Du Chong, Han Shizhong to guard Zhenjiang, and Liu Guangzhe to guard Taiping and Chizhou. They all accepted Du Chong's restraint.

古文：丁酉，太后至洪州。
现代文：二十一日，太后到洪州。
English: On the 21st, the empress dowager arrived in Hongzhou.

古文：己亥，减福建、广南岁上供银三之一。
现代文：二十三日，减去福建、广南每年上供银三分之一。
English: On the 23rd, minus Fujian and Guangnan, the annual supply of silver will increase by one-third.

古文：诏制置使唯用兵听便宜，余事悉禁。
现代文：下诏制置使只有用兵可以不上奏，自己处理决断，其他事情一律禁止。
English: Under the edict, only the use of soldiers can not be played, and they can make their own decisions, and all other things are prohibited.

古文：壬寅，帝发建康，复还浙西，张俊、辛企宗以其军从。
现代文：二十六日，高宗从建康出发，又回到浙西，张俊、辛企宗率领军队跟随。
English: On the 26th, Gaozong set out from Jiankang and returned to western Zhejiang, followed by Zhang Jun and Xin Qizong leading the army.

古文：甲辰，次镇江府。
现代文：二十八日，到镇江府。
English: On the 28th, to Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：赐陈东家金。
现代文：赐给陈东家钱。
English: Give money to Chen Dongjia.

古文：张浚次襄阳，招官军、义兵分屯襄、郢、唐、邓，以程千秋、李允文节制。
现代文：张浚到襄阳，招官军、义兵分屯襄、呈阵、唐、邓州，任命程千秋、李允文节制。
English: Zhang Jun went to Xiangyang, recruited officials and volunteers, divided Xiangyang, Tang, and Dengzhou, and appointed Cheng Qianqiu and Li Yunwen as moderators.

古文：是月，知济南府宫仪及金人数战于密州，兵溃，仪及刘洪道俱奔淮南，守将李逵以密州降金。
现代文：这个月，济南知府宫仪与金军在密州多次交战，兵败，宫仪及刘洪道都逃向淮南，守将李连据密州投降金朝。
English: This month, the Jinan prefectural governor Gongyi and the Chinese army fought many times in Mizhou. Defeated, Gongyi and Liu Hongdao fled to Huainan, and the commander Li Lian surrendered to the Kim dynasty in Mizhou.

古文：靳赛诣刘光世降。
现代文：靳赛到刘光世军中投降。
English: Yu Sai surrendered to Liu Guangshi's army.

古文：九月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: In April, Bucha and Shishimuro captured Rokko and Fong Nishu.

古文：谍报金人治舟师，将由海道窥江、浙，遣韩世忠控守圌山、福山。
现代文：情报人员报告说金军训练水军，将要从海道窥视江、浙，派遣韩世忠控守山、福山。
English: Intelligence officers reported that the Golden Army was training naval forces, and that they would spy on Jiangsu and Zhejiang from the sea, and dispatch Han Shizhong to control and defend Shan and Fukuyama.

古文：辛亥，次平江府。
现代文：初六，到平江府。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, I went to Pingjiang.

古文：壬子，金人陷单州、兴仁府，遂陷南京，执守臣凌唐佐，降之。
现代文：初七，金军攻陷单州、兴仁府，于是攻陷南京，俘获守臣凌唐佐投降金朝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded Shanzhou and Xingrenfu, and then invaded Nanjing, captured the vassal Ling Tangzu and surrendered to the Kim dynasty.

古文：癸丑，以周望为两浙、荆湖等路宣抚使，总兵守平江。
现代文：初八，任命周望为两浙、荆湖等路宣抚使，领兵守卫平江。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhou Wang was appointed as the envoy of the two provinces of Zhejiang and Jinghu, and led the troops to guard the Pingjiang River.

古文：翰林学士张守同签书枢密院事。
现代文：翰林学士张守为同签书枢密院事。
English: Zhang Shou, a scholar of Hanlin, is the co-signer of the letter.

古文：命刘光世移屯江州。
现代文：命令刘光世驻屯江州。
English: ordered Liu Guangze to stay in Tunjiang Prefecture.

古文：丙辰，遣张邵等充金国军前通问使。
现代文：十一日，派遣张邵等人担任金军军前通问使。
English: On the 11th, Zhang Shao and others were dispatched to serve as envoys to inquire about the military situation of the Jin Army.

古文：金人陷沂州。
现代文：金军攻陷沂州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：却高丽入贡使。
现代文：斥退高丽人贡使。
English: Repelled the Koryo tributary.

古文：张浚承制罢知潭州辛炳，起复直龙图阁向子諲代之。
现代文：张浚接到朝廷命令，罢去潭州知州辛炳，起用直龙图阁向子代替他。
English: Zhang Jun received an order from the imperial court to dismiss Tanzhou Zhizhou Xinqian and replace him with Zhi Long Tu Ge Xiangzi.

古文：丁巳，蠲诸路青苗积欠钱。
现代文：十二日，免除各路拖欠的青苗钱。
English: On the 12th, all the roads were exempted from the arrears of seedling money.

古文：辛酉，知鼎州邢倞坐结耶律余睹，再责汝州团练副使、英州安置。
现代文：十六日，鼎州知州邢惊因勾结耶律余堵，再次责降为汝州团练副使，英州安置。
English: On the 16th, Dingzhou Zhizhou Shizhuang, because of collusion with Yelu Yu, was once again demoted to vice-envoy of Ruzhou Reunification and resettled in Yingzhou.

古文：癸亥，赐宿、泗州都大提举使李成军绢二万匹，成寻复叛。
现代文：十八日，赐给宿州、泅州都大提举使李成军二万匹绢，李成不久又叛乱。
English: On the eighteenth day, he gave a large tribute to Suizhou and Zhangzhou, which made Li Cheng's army of twenty thousand horses, and Li Cheng soon rebelled.

古文：己巳，以胡舜陟为两浙宣抚司参谋官，知镇江府陈邦光为沿江都制置使。
现代文：二十四日，任命胡舜陆为两浙宣抚司参谋官，镇江知府陈邦光为沿江都制置使。
English: On the 24th, Hu Binglu was appointed as the staff officer of the two Zhejiang Propaganda and Guidance Departments, and Chen Bangguang from Zhenjiang Prefecture was appointed as the envoy to the capital cities along the Yangtze River.

古文：庚午，以工部侍郎汤东野知平江府兼浙西制置使。
现代文：二十五日，任命工部侍郎汤东野为平江知府兼浙西制置使。
English: On the 25th, Tang Dongye, the Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, was appointed as the governor of Pingjiang Prefecture and the envoy of the Western Zhejiang Province.

古文：辛未，追复邹浩龙图阁待制。
现代文：二十六日，追复邹浩龙图阁待制。
English: On the 26th, the recovery of the Zou Haolong Pagoda was suspended.

古文：壬申夜，潭州禁卒作乱，谋窜不果，向子諲随招安之。
现代文：二十七日夜晚，潭州禁兵叛乱，策划逃窜没有得逞，向子很快招安了他们。
English: On the evening of the 27th, when the rebellion against the ban on military personnel in Tanzhou failed, Xiangzi quickly recruited them.

古文：甲戌，金帅娄宿犯长安，经略使郭琰弃城遁，河北贼郦琼围光州。
现代文：二十九日，金军统帅娄宿侵犯长安，经略使郭淡弃城逃跑，河北贼哪琼围攻光州。
English: On the 29th, the commander-in-chief of the Golden Army, Banshu, invaded Chang'an, and managed to make Guo Tan abandon the city and flee, and the Hebei thief, Neqiong, besieged Gwangju.

古文：冬十月丙子朔，诏按察官岁上所发擿赃吏姓名以为殿最。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏按察官每年按所上报揭露斥责贪官污吏姓名多少为评定考核好坏的依据。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the procurator-general issued the following edict to expose and reprimand corrupt officials according to the annual report. The names of corrupt officials are more or less the basis for assessing the quality of the assessment.

古文：庚辰，禁诸军擅入川、陕。
现代文：初五，禁止各军擅自进人川、陕。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, all troops were prohibited from entering Jinchuan and Shaanxi without permission.

古文：癸未，帝至杭州，复如浙东。
现代文：初八，高宗到杭州，又到浙东。
English: In the eighth grade, Gaozong went to Hangzhou, and then to East Zhejiang.

古文：庚寅，渡浙江。
现代文：十五日，渡过浙江。
English: On the 15th, it passed through Zhejiang.

古文：郭仲威诣周望降，望以仲威为本司统制。
现代文：郭仲威到周望军中投降，周望任仲威为本司统制。
English: Guo Zhongwei surrendered to Zhou Wang's army, and Zhou Wang appointed Zhongwei as the head of the department.

古文：辛卯，李成陷滁州，杀守臣向子伋。
现代文：十六日，李成攻陷滁州，杀死守臣向子极。
English: On the 16th, Li Cheng invaded Zhangzhou and killed Shoucheng Xiangzi.

古文：壬辰，帝至越州。
现代文：十七日，高宗到越州。
English: On the 17th, Gao Zong arrived in Yuezhou.

古文：癸巳，命提举广西峒丁李棫市马，邕州置牧养务。
现代文：十八日，命令提举广西酮丁龚域买马，在琶州设置牧养务。
English: On the 18th, the order was issued to promote Guangxi Ketong Dingyu to buy horses and set up herding in Pazhou.

古文：戊戌，初命东南八路岁收经制五项钱输行在。
现代文：二十三日，首次命令东南八路每年交纳经制五项钱输往行在。
English: On the 23rd, for the first time, the Southeast 8th Road was ordered to pay the prescribed five-item money to the bank every year.

古文：张浚治兵于兴元府。
现代文：张浚在兴元府治军。
English: Zhang Jun led the army in Xingyuanfu.

古文：金人陷寿春府。
现代文：金军攻陷寿春府。
English: The Chinese army captured Shuchunfu.

古文：庚子，陷黄州，守臣赵令死之。
现代文：二十五日，攻陷黄州，守臣赵令战死。
English: On the 25th, Huangzhou was invaded, and the warlord Zhao Ling died in the battle.

古文：辛丑，张浚以同主管川、陕茶马赵开为随军转运使，专总四川财赋。
现代文：二十六日，张浚任命同主管川陕茶马赵开为随军转运使，专门管理四川财赋。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Jun appointed Ma Zhao Kai, the same person in charge of Sichuan and Shaanxi tea, as the envoy to accompany the army and specially manage Sichuan's wealth.

古文：金人自黄州济江，刘光世引军遁，知江州韩梠弃城去。
现代文：金军从黄州渡江，刘光世率军退走，江州知州韩倡弃城逃走。
English: The Golden Army crossed the Yangtze River from Huangzhou, Liu Guangxi led the army to retreat, and Jiangzhou Chizhou Han Zhan abandoned the city and fled.

古文：金人自大冶县趋洪州。
现代文：金军从大冶县前往洪州。
English: The gold army marched from Daye County to Hongzhou.

古文：是月，京西贼刘满陷信阳军，杀守臣赵士负。
现代文：这个月，京西贼刘满攻陷信阳军，杀死守臣赵士负。
English: This month, Liu Man, a thief from the west of Beijing, captured the army of Xinyang and killed the guard Zhao Shizhu.

古文：盗入宿州，杀通判盛修已。
现代文：盗进人宿州，杀死通判盛修己。
English: He stole into Hitoyado and killed the chief judge, Mori Shuji.

古文：十一月乙巳朔，金人犯庐州，守臣李会以城降。
现代文：十一月初一，金军侵犯庐州，守臣李会据城投降。
English: On the first day of November, the Chinese army invaded Zhangzhou, and the vassal Li Huicheng surrendered.

古文：王善叛降金，金人执之。
现代文：王善叛降金朝，金军俘获了他。
English: Wang Zhen rebelled against the Kim dynasty and was captured by the Kim army.

古文：丁未，诏降杂犯死罪，释流以下囚，听李纲自便，追复宋齐愈官。
现代文：初三，下诏杂犯死罪减刑，释放流刑以下的囚犯，李纲得到自由，追复宋齐愈官职。
English: On the third day of the junior high school term, the death penalty was commuted for Zhaozhao and other criminals, and the prisoners who were not sentenced to exile were released. Li Gang was released, and Song Qiyu was reinstated.

古文：贵仲正犯荆南，兵马钤辖渠成与战，斩之。
现代文：贵仲正进犯荆南，兵马铃辖渠成率军抵抗，斩杀贵仲正。
English: Guizhong Zheng attacked Jingnan, and the soldiers and horses of the Jingnan army resisted and killed Guizhong Zheng.

古文：戊申，金帅兀犯和州，守臣李俦以城降，通判唐璟死之。
现代文：初四，金军统帅兀侵犯和州，守臣李侍据城投降，通判唐景战死。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the commander-in-chief of the Jin army, Zou, invaded He Prefecture, and the guarding vassal, Li Samizhong, surrendered, and Tang Jing was sentenced to death.

古文：己酉，张浚出行关、陕。
现代文：初五，张浚巡视关、陕。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhang Jun inspected Guan and Shaanxi.

古文：兀陷无为军，守臣李知几弃城走。
现代文：兀攻陷无为军，守臣李知几弃城逃走。
English: When the siege failed, the guarding vassal Li Zhijia abandoned the city and fled.

古文：壬子，太后退保虔州。
现代文：初八，太后退到虔州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Empress retreated to Kenzhou.

古文：江西制置使王子献弃洪州走。
现代文：江西制置使王子献放弃洪州逃走。
English: The establishment of Jiangxi Province made the prince give up Hongzhou and flee.

古文：丁巳，金人陷临江军，守臣吴将之遁。
现代文：十三日，金军攻陷临江军，守臣吴将之逃跑。
English: On the 13th, the Jin army invaded the Linjiang army, and the vassal Wu Shou fled.

古文：戊午，遣孙悟等充金国军前致书使。
现代文：十四日，派遣孙悟等担任金国军前致书使。
English: On the 14th, Sun Wugu and others were dispatched to serve as messengers to the front of the Chinese army.

古文：金人陷洪州，权知州李积中以城降。抚、袁二州守臣王仲山、王仲嶷皆降。
现代文：金军攻陷洪少，暂代知州事李积中据城投降；抚、袁二州守臣王仲山、王仲疑都投降。
English: The Chinese army invaded Hongxiao, and the provisional governor of Zhizhou, Li Jizhong, surrendered the city; Fuzhou, Yuan and two provincial governors, Wang Zhongshan and Wang Zhongyi, both surrendered.

古文：淮贼刘忠犯蕲州，韩世清逆战，破之。忠入舒州，杀通判孙知微。
现代文：淮贼刘忠进犯薪州，韩世忠抵抗打败他，刘忠进人舒州，杀死通判孙知微。
English: Liu Zhong invaded Zhouzhou, Han Shizhong resisted and defeated him, Liu Zhong invaded Shuzhou and killed Sun Zhiyu.

古文：庚申，金人陷真州，守臣向子忞弃城去。
现代文：十六日，金军攻陷真州，守臣向子弃城逃走。
English: On the 16th, the Chinese army invaded Zhenzhou, and Shou Zhen abandoned the city to his son and fled.

古文：辛酉，太后至吉州。
现代文：十七日，太后到吉州。
English: On the 17th, the empress dowager arrived in Jizhou.

古文：壬戌，金人犯建康府，陷溧水，县尉潘振死之。
现代文：十八日，金军侵犯建康府，攻陷漂水，县尉潘振战死。
English: On the 18th, the Chinese army invaded Jiankang Prefecture and captured Fushui. County Lieutenant Pan Zhen was killed in the battle.

古文：癸亥，金人陷太平州。
现代文：十九日，金军攻陷太平州。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese army captured Taiping.

古文：主管步军司闾勍自西京奉累朝御容至行在，诏奉安于天庆观，寻命勍节制淮西军马，以拒金人。
现代文：主管步军司哥就从西京崇奉历朝神主御容到行在，下诏恭敬安置在天庆观，不久命令哥葡节制淮西军马抵抗金军。
English: The commander-in-chief of the marching army, the elder brother, went from West Beijing to worship the deities of the past and present, and was respectfully placed in Tianqing, and soon ordered the elder brother to restrain the Huaixi army and resist the Jin army.

古文：甲子，杜充遣都统制陈淬、岳飞等及金人战于马家渡，王燮以军先遁，淬败绩，死之。
现代文：二十日，杜充派遣都统制陈淬、岳飞等与金军在马家渡交战，巨燮率军先逃跑，陈淬失利，战死。
English: On the 20th, Duchong dispatched the governor of the capital, Chen Yao, Yue Fei and others to fight with the gold army in Majiadu. The giant dragonfly led the army to flee first, Chen Yao lost and died in battle.

古文：乙丑，以检正诸房公事傅崧卿为浙东防遏使。
现代文：二十一日，任命检正诸房公事傅裕卿为浙东防遏使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Fu Yuqing, the inspector of all public buildings, was appointed as the Zhejiang East Prevention and Control Envoy.

古文：太后发吉州，次太和县。
现代文：太后从吉州出发，到太和县。
English: The empress dowager set out from Chizhou to Taihe County.

古文：护卫统制杜彦及后军杨世雄率众叛，犯永丰县，知县事赵训之死之。
现代文：护卫统制杜彦及后军杨世雄率军叛乱，进犯永丰县，知县事赵训之战死。
English: The escort leader Du Yan and the rear army Yang Shixiong led the army to rebel and attack Yongfeng County, leading to the death of the county magistrate Zhao Xun.

古文：金人至太和县，太后自万安陆行如虔州。
现代文：金军到太和县，太后从万安步行到虔州。
English: The gold army went to Taihe County, and the empress dowager walked from Wan'an to Kenzhou.

古文：丁卯，十诏回浙西迎敌。
现代文：二十三日，下诏回浙西迎击金军。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to western Zhejiang to meet the Chinese army.

古文：金人犯吉州，守臣杨渊弃城走，又陷六安军。
现代文：金军进犯吉州，守臣杨渊弃城逃走，又攻陷六安军。
English: The Jin army invaded Jizhou, and the retainer Yang Yuan abandoned the city and fled, and the Liuan army was defeated.

古文：己巳，帝发越州，次钱清镇。
现代文：二十五日，高宗从越州出发，到钱清镇。
English: On the 25th, Gaozong set out from Yuezhou to Qianqing Town.

古文：庚午，复还越州。
现代文：二十六日，又回到越州。
English: On the 26th, he returned to Yuezhou.

古文：以周望同知枢密院事，仍兼两浙宣抚使守平江，殿前都指挥使郭仲荀为副使守越州，右军都统制张俊为浙东制置使从行。
现代文：任命周望为同知枢密院事，继续担任两浙宣抚使守卫平江，殿前都指挥使郭仲荀为副使守卫越州，右军都统制张俊为浙东制置使跟随高宗同行。
English: Zhou Wang was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor, continued to serve as the leader of the two Zhejiang envoys to guard the Pingjiang River, commanded Guo Zhongya as the deputy envoy to guard Yuezhou, and Zhang Jun as the eastern Zhejiang envoy to follow Gao Zong.

古文：御史中丞范宗尹参知政事。
现代文：御史中承范宗尹参知政事。
English: In history, he succeeded Emperor Fanzong as Yin Sangzhi.

古文：辛未，兀入建康府，守臣陈邦光、户部尚书李棁迎拜，通判杨邦乂拒之。
现代文：二十七日，兀进人建康府，守臣陈邦光、户部尚书李迎接跪拜，通判杨邦拒绝迎拜。
English: On the 27th, people entered Jiankangfu, and the guardian Chen Bangguang and the head of the household, Shangshu Li, kneeled to welcome them. Yang Bang was sentenced to refuse to welcome them.

古文：癸酉，帝如明州。
现代文：二十九日，高宗到明州。
English: On the 29th, Gao Zong went to Mingzhou.

古文：金人犯建昌军，兵马监押蔡延世击却之。
现代文：金军侵犯建昌军，兵马监押蔡延世击退金军。
English: The Jin army invaded the Jianchang army, and the soldiers and horses led by Cai Yanshi repulsed the Jin army.

古文：甲戌，兀杀杨邦乂。韩世忠自镇江引兵之江阴军。
现代文：三十日，兀杀了杨邦韩世忠从镇江率兵退到江阴军。
English: On the 30th, he killed Yang Bang Han Shizhong and retreated from the Zhenjiang River to the Jiangyin Army.

古文：江、淮宣抚司溃卒李选攻陷镇江。
现代文：江、淮宣抚司溃兵李选攻陷镇江。
English: Jiang and Huai Xuanfushi defeated Li Xuan and captured Zhenjiang.

古文：淮丁兵马都监王宗望以濠州降于金。
现代文：淮西兵马都监王宗望据壕州投降金军。
English: Wang Zongwang, the superintendent of the Western Military Command in Huaixi Province, surrenders to the Golden Army in Hezhou.

古文：是月，张浚至秦州。
现代文：这个月，张浚到秦州。
English: This month, Zhang Jun went to Qinzhou.

古文：桑仲自唐州犯襄阳，京西制置使程千秋败走，仲遂据襄阳。
现代文：桑仲从唐州进犯襄阳，京西制置使程千秋败退，桑仲于是占据襄阳。
English: Kuangzhong invaded Yangyang from Tangzhou, but Cheng Qiqiu was defeated by the establishment of the Western Capital, so Kuangzhong occupied Yangyang.

古文：十二月乙亥朔，张浚承制废积石军。
现代文：十二月初一，张浚承朝廷命令废罢积石军。
English: On the first day of December, Zhang Juncheng was ordered by the imperial court to abolish the Stone Army.

古文：丙子，帝至明州。
现代文：初二，高宗到明州。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Gao Zong went to Mingzhou.

古文：丁丑，江、淮西抚司准备将戚方拥众叛，犯镇江府，杀守臣胡唐老。
现代文：初三，江、淮宣抚司准备戚方将率众叛乱，进犯镇江府，杀死守臣胡唐老。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Jiang and Huai Xuanfushi prepared a rebellion led by relatives, invaded Zhenjiang Prefecture, and killed the vassal Hu Tanglao.

古文：辛巳，金人陷常州，守臣周杞遣赤心队官刘晏击走之。
现代文：初七，攻陷常州，守臣刚巳派遣赤心队官刘晏击退他们。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Changzhou was invaded and conquered, and the Shushi Emperor Gangsi dispatched the commander of the Eksin Corps, Liu Ye, to repel them.

古文：金人陷广德军。杀守臣周烈。
现代文：金军攻陷广德军，杀死守臣周烈。
English: The Chinese army defeated the German army and killed the guarding officer Zhou Liang.

古文：刘光世引兵趋南康军。
现代文：刘光世率兵前往南康军。
English: Liu Guangshi led the troops to the South Korean army.

古文：壬午，定议航海避兵，禁卒张宝等惮行，谋乱，命吕颐浩等伏兵，执宝等十七人斩之。
现代文：初八，确定到海上逃避金军追击，禁兵士卒张宝等人畏惧策划叛乱，命令吕颐浩等设伏兵俘获张宝等十七人，将他们全部斩杀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was determined to escape the pursuit of the Golden Army by sea. The forbidden soldiers, Zhang Bao and others, were afraid of planning a rebellion, and ordered Lv Yinghao and others to set up an ambush to capture Zhang Bao and seventeen others and kill them all.

古文：甲申，张浚承制拜泾原经略使曲端为威武大将军、宣抚处置使司都统制。
现代文：初十，张浚承朝廷命令任命径原经略使曲端为威武大将军、宣抚处置使司都统制。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Zhang Juncong received an order from the imperial court to appoint Jianyuan Jingli to make Qu Duan a great general, and to announce the disposition of the capital.

古文：乙酉，兀犯临安府，守臣康允之弃城走，钱塘县令朱跸死之。
现代文：十一日，兀侵犯临安府，守臣康允之弃城逃走，钱塘县令朱哗战死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Liao invaded Lin'an, the guarding vassal Kang Yun abandoned the city and fled, and the commander of Qiantang County, Zhu Wulai, died in battle.

古文：己丑，帝乘楼船次定海县，给行在诸军雪寒钱。
现代文：十五日，高宗乘坐楼船到定海县，赐给行在各军雪寒钱。
English: On the 15th, Gaozong rode a houseboat to Dinghai County and gave money to all the troops marching in the snow.

古文：辛卯，留范宗尹、赵鼎于明州以候金使。
现代文：十七日，留下范宗尹、赵鼎在明州等候金朝使臣。
English: On the 17th, he left Fan Zongyin and Zhao Ding in Mingzhou to wait for the envoys of the Kim dynasty.

古文：癸巳，帝次昌国县。
现代文：十九日，高宗到昌国县。
English: On the 19th, Gao Zong went to Changguo County.

古文：乙未，杜彦犯潭州，杀通判孟彦卿、赵民彦。
现代文：二十一日，杜彦进犯潭州，杀死通判孟彦卿、赵民彦。
English: On the 21st, Du Yan went to Tanzhou and killed the judges Meng Yanqing and Zhao Minyan.

古文：金人屠洪州。
现代文：金军屠杀洪州。
English: The Chinese army massacred Hongzhou.

古文：戊戌，金人犯越州，安抚使李邺以城降，卫士唐琦袖巨石要击金帅琶八不克，死之。
现代文：二十四日，金军侵犯越州，安抚使李邺据城投降，卫士唐琦从袖子里取出巨石要击打金军统帅琶八的头没有获得成功，结果被杀死。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the gold army invaded Yuezhou, appeasing and forcing Li Yujing to surrender. The guard Tang Jun took out a boulder from his sleeve to hit the head of the gold army commander Pahat without success, and was killed as a result.

古文：郭仲荀弃军奔温州。
现代文：郭仲荀放弃部众逃奔温州。
English: Guo Zhongyao abandoned his followers and fled to Wenzhou.

古文：庚子，移幸温、台。
现代文：二十六日，高宗到温州、台州。
English: On the 26th, Gao Zong went to Wenzhou and Taizhou.

古文：癸卯，黄潜善卒于英州。
现代文：二十九日，黄潜善在英州去世。
English: On the 29th, Huang Qincheng passed away in Yingzhou.

古文：李成自滁州引兵之淮西。
现代文：李成从滁州率兵到淮西。
English: Li Cheng led an army from Zhangzhou to Huaxi.

