古文：周穆王时，西极之国有化人来，入水火，贯金石；反山川，移城邑；乘虚不坠，触实不硋。千变万化，不可穷极。
现代文：周穆王时，最西方的国家来了一个有幻化之术的人，他能进入水火之中，穿过金属岩石，能翻倒山河，移动城池；能够悬浮在空中不坠落，碰到实物不被阻碍，千变万化，无穷无尽。
English: In the time of King Zhou Mu, a man with the ability to hallucinate came to the westernmost country. He could enter water and fire, pass through metal and rock, overturn mountains and rivers, and move cities; he could float in the air without falling, and touch real objects without being hindered. He was ever-changing and endless.

古文：既已变物之形，又且易人之虑。
现代文：既能改变事物的形态，又能改变人们的思想。
English: It can not only change the form of things, but also change people's minds.

古文：穆王敬之若神，事之若君。推路寝以居之，引三牲以进之，选女乐以娱之。
现代文：穆王对他像天神一样的尊敬，侍奉他就像侍奉国君，把自己的寝宫让出来让他居住，用祭把神灵的膳食给他吃喝，选择美丽的女子乐队供他娱乐。
English: King Mu respected him as if he were a deity, and served him as if he were the king of the country. He let him live in his own bedchamber, gave him the food of the gods to eat and drink, and chose a beautiful girl band for his entertainment.

古文：化人以为王之宫室卑陋而不可处，王之厨馔腥蝼而不可飨，王之嫔御膻恶而不可亲。
现代文：可是这个幻化人却认为穆王的宫殿卑微简陋无法居住，穆王的膳食又腥又臭不可以享用，穆王的嫔妃又羶又丑不可以亲近。
English: However, this hallucinated person thinks that King Mu's palace is too humble and simple to live in, that King Mu's food is too greasy and smelly to enjoy, and that King Mu's concubine is too shy and ugly to get close to.

古文：穆王乃为之改筑。
现代文：于是穆王便为他另筑宫殿。
English: So King Mu built another palace for him.

古文：土木之功，赭垩之色，无遗巧焉。
现代文：土木建筑、雕梁画栋，以至于到了不能再巧妙的程度。
English: Civil engineering buildings, carved beams and painted buildings, to the extent that they can no longer be ingenious.

古文：五府为虚，而台始成。
现代文：穆王把府库的钱财全部耗尽，才把楼台建成。
English: King Mu used up all the money in the treasury before building the tower.

古文：其高千仞，临终南之上，号曰中天之台。简郑、卫之处子娥媌靡曼者，施芳泽，正蛾眉，设笄珥，衣阿锡，曳齐纨，粉白黛黑，佩玉环，杂芷若以满之，奏《承云》、《六莹》、《九韶》、《晨露》以乐之。
现代文：楼台高达八千尺，比终南山还要高，称作中天之台，挑选郑国和卫国美丽而苗条的女子，涂抹香膏，修饰娥眉，戴上首饰耳环，穿上东阿的轻软丝裙，腰系齐国的细致绢带，敷着莹白的蜜粉，染着清朗的黛眉，带着精美的玉环，佩着白芷、杜若各类香草，演奏《承云》、《六莹》、《九韶》、《晨露》等古曲来取悦化人。
English: The platform is as high as eight thousand feet, even higher than the last Nanshan, and is called the Mid-Heaven Platform. The beautiful and slender women of Zhengzhou and the motherland are selected, smeared with balm, decorated with eyebrows, put on jewelry earrings, put on the light silk skirt of Donga, the delicate ribbon at the waist of Qi Guo, covered with white honey powder, dyed with clear eyebrows, with exquisite jade rings, wearing various kinds of herbs such as egrets and rhododendrons, and playing ancient songs such as "Cheng Yun," "Liu Ying," "Jiu Ying" and

古文：月月献玉衣，旦旦荐玉食。
现代文：月月进献玉衣，天天供奉美食。
English: The yakitori is offered every month, and delicious food is offered every day.

古文：化人犹不舍然，不得已而临之。
现代文：化人仍然不觉满足，不得已才到中天之台居住。
English: The avatars were still not satisfied, and had no choice but to move to Zhongtian Terrace.

古文：居亡几何，谒王同游。
现代文：没住多久，他邀请穆王一同出去游玩。
English: Before long, he invited Mu Wang to go out to play with him.

古文：王执化人之袪，腾而上者，中天乃止。
现代文：穆王拉着他的衣袖，便腾云而上，飞到半空中才停下来。
English: Mu Wang tugged at his sleeve and soared into the sky, flying into mid-air before stopping.

古文：暨及化人之宫。
现代文：接着便到了幻化人的宫殿。
English: Then they went to the hallucinated man's palace.

古文：化人之宫，构以金银，络以珠玉；出云雨之上而不知下之据，望之若屯云焉。
现代文：幻化人的宫殿用金银建筑，以珠玉装饰，在白云与雷雨之上，不知道它下面以什么为依托，看上去好像是堆积在白云之中。
English: The palace of the hallucinated man, built of gold and silver and adorned with jewels, stands above the white clouds and thunderstorms. I don't know what it is supported by below, but it looks as if it is piled up in the white clouds.

古文：耳目所观听，鼻口所纳尝，皆非人间之有。
现代文：耳朵听到的，眼睛看到的，鼻子闻到的，口舌尝到的，都是人间所没有的东西。
English: What the ear hears, what the eye sees, what the nose smells, and what the tongue tastes are things that are not found on earth.

古文：王实以为清都、紫微、钧天、广乐，帝之所居。
现代文：穆王真以为到了清都、紫微、钧天、广乐这些天帝所居住的地方。
English: King Mu really thought that he had arrived at the place where the emperors of Qingdu, Ziwei, Shantian and Guangle lived.

古文：王俯而视之，其宫榭若累块积苏焉。
现代文：穆王低下头往地面上看去，见自己的宫殿楼台简直像累起来的土块和堆积的乱草。
English: Mu Wang lowered his head and looked down at the ground. He saw that his palace tower was just like a pile of soil and weeds.

古文：王自以居数十年不思其国也。
现代文：穆王自己觉得即使在这里住上几十年也不会想念自己的国家的。
English: Mu Wang himself feels that even if he lives here for decades, he will not miss his country.

古文：化人复谒王同游，所及之处，仰不见日月，俯不见河海。
现代文：幻化人又请穆王一同游玩。所到之处，抬头不见日月，低头看不见江河湖海。
English: The hallucinated person also invited Mu Wang to travel with him. Wherever he went, he could not see the sun and moon when he looked up, and he could not see the rivers and lakes when he looked down.

古文：光影所照，王目眩不能得视；音响所来，王耳乱不能得听。
现代文：光影照耀之处，穆王眼花缭乱无法逼视；音响回荡之源，穆王耳内杂扰无法听清。
English: Where light and shadow shine, Mu Wang's eyes are dazzled and cannot be forced to see; the source of sound reverberation, Mu Wang's ears cannot hear the interference.

古文：百骸六藏，悸而不凝。
现代文：百骸六脏，全都颤抖而不能平静。
English: Bodies everywhere, all shivering and unable to calm down.

古文：意迷精丧，请化人求还。
现代文：意志昏迷，精神丧失，于是请求幻化人带他回去。
English: He lost his will and spirit, so he asked the phantom to take him back.

古文：化人移之，王若殒虚焉。
现代文：幻化人推了一把，穆王好像跌落到了虚空之中。
English: The hallucinated man gave a push, and King Mu seemed to fall into the void.

古文：既寤，所坐犹向者之处，侍御犹向者之人。
现代文：醒来以后，还是坐在原来的地方，左右还是原来侍候他的人。
English: When he woke up, he was still sitting in the same place, surrounded by the same people who used to wait on him.

古文：视其前，则酒未清，肴未昲。
现代文：看看眼前的东西，那水酒是刚倒出来的，菜肴是刚烧好的。
English: Look at what's in front of you. The water and wine have just been poured, the dishes have just been cooked.

古文：王问所从来。
现代文：穆王问左右： 我刚才是从哪里来的？ 
English: Mu Wang asked: Where did I just come from?

古文：左右曰： 王默存耳。 
现代文：左右的人说： 大王不过是神游了一会。 
English: People on both sides said, "The great king was just lost in thought for a moment."

古文：由此穆王自失者三月而复。
现代文：从此，穆王茫然若失了三个月才复原。
English: From then on, Mu Wang was at a loss for three months before recovering.

古文：更问化人。化人曰： 吾与王神游也，形奚动哉？
现代文：穆王再问幻化人，幻化人说： 我与大王的精神出去游玩罢了，形体何尝移动过呢？
English: Mu Wang then asked the hallucinated person, and the hallucinated person said: I just went out to play with the spirit of the great king, how did the form ever move?

古文：且曩之所居，奚异王之宫？
现代文：而且先前居住的地方，又和大王自己的宫殿有什么不同？
English: And what is the difference between the place where he previously lived and the great king's own palace?

古文：曩之所游，奚异王之圃？王闲恒有，疑暂亡。
现代文：您在天上游玩的花园，与大王的花园有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between the garden you play in the sky and the garden of the great king?

古文：变化之极，徐疾之间，可尽模哉？ 
现代文：大王习惯了经常看到的东西，对暂时的变化感到怀疑。事物变化的极致，时光流逝的缓急，怎可能全部透彻把握呢？ 
English: Accustomed to seeing the same things over and over again, the emperor was suspicious of temporary changes. How could he possibly grasp the full extent of the changes in things and the urgency of the passage of time?

古文：王大悦。不恤国事，不乐臣妾，肆意远游。命驾八骏之乘，右服骅骝而左绿耳，右骖赤骥而左白，主车则造父为御，离离为右；次车之乘，右服渠黄而左逾轮，左骖盗骊而右山子，柏夭主车，参百为御，奔戎为右。
现代文：穆王听了十分高兴，从此不过问国家大事，不亲近大臣与嫔妃，毫无顾忌地到遥远的地方去游玩，他下令用天下最好的八种骏马来驾车，右边的服马叫骅骝，左边的服马叫绿耳，右边的骏马叫赤骥，左边的骖马叫白牺。穆王的马车由造父驾驭，泰丙为车右。随从的马车，右边的服马叫渠黄，左边的服马叫踰轮，左边的骖马叫盗骊，右边的骏马叫山子，由柏夭主车，参百驾驭，奔戎为车右。
English: King Mu was very pleased to hear this. From then on, he did not ask about national affairs, did not get close to ministers and concubines, and traveled to distant places without any scruples. He ordered to use the world's best eight kinds of horses to drive the car. The right-hand clothes horse is called the mule, the left-hand clothes horse is called the green ear, the right-hand clothes horse is called the red mule, and the left-hand clothes horse is called the white horse. King Mu's carriage is driven by the father, and the horse is the right-hand car. The follower's carriage, the right-hand clothes horse is called the

古文：驰驱千里，至于巨蒐氏之国。
现代文：驰驱了一千里，到了巨蒐氏的国家。
English: I drove a thousand miles to the country of the Giant Collector.

古文：巨蒐氏乃献白鹄之血以饮王，具牛马之湩以洗王之足，及二乘之人。
现代文：巨蒐氏于是献上白鹄的血液供穆王饮用，准备牛马的乳汁给穆王洗脚，并供奉所有乘车与驾车的人。
English: He then offered the blood of an egret for King Mu to drink, prepared the milk of a cow and a horse to wash King Mu's feet, and offered it to all passengers and drivers.

古文：已饮而行，遂宿于昆仑之阿，赤水之阳。
现代文：吃喝以后继续前进，又歇宿在崑山的弯曲处，赤水的北面。
English: After eating and drinking, we continued on our way and stopped at a bend in Lushan Mountain, north of Cheshui.

古文：别日升于昆仑之丘，以观黄帝之宫，而封之以诒后世。
现代文：第二天便登上了崑山巅，观览了黄帝的宫殿，并修缮整新，以传于后世。
English: The next day, he climbed to the top of Lushan Mountain, viewed the palace of the Yellow Emperor, and repaired and renovated it so that it could be passed down to future generations.

古文：遂宾于西王母，觞于瑶池之上。
现代文：随后又成西王母的贵宾，在瑶池上宴饮。
English: Later, they were honored guests of the Queen Mother of the West, feasting on cormorants on the lagoon.

古文：西王母为王谣，王和之，其辞哀焉。
现代文：西王母为穆王朗诵歌谣，穆王也跟着唱和，歌辞都很悲哀。
English: Xi Wangmo recited songs for Mu Wang, and Mu Wang also sang along. The lyrics were very sad.

古文：西观日之所入，一日行万里。
现代文：后来又观赏了太阳入山的情景，一天走了一万里。
English: Later, he watched the sun set over the mountains and walked 10,000 miles in one day.

古文：王乃叹曰： 於乎！
现代文：穆王于是叹道： 哎呀！
English: Mu Wang then sighed: Alas!

古文：予一人不盈于德而谐于乐，后世其追数吾过乎！ 
现代文：我不修养道德而只知道享乐，后世的人恐怕要谴责我的罪过了吧！ 
English: If I do not cultivate morality and only know pleasure, I am afraid that future generations will condemn my sins!

古文：穆王几神人哉！
现代文：穆王差不多就是神人啊！
English: King Mu is almost a godman!

古文：能穷当身之乐，犹百年乃徂，世以为登假焉。
现代文：在一生中享尽了快乐，仍然活了一百岁才去世，当时的人们都认为他登上仙境远去了。
English: He lived a happy life to the full and still lived to be a hundred years old before he died, and people at the time thought he had gone to a fairyland.

古文：老成子学幻于尹文先生，三年不告。
现代文：老成子向尹文先生学习幻化之术，过了三年也没有传授给他。
English: Old Cheng Zi learned the art of illusion from Mr. Yin Wen, but did not teach it to him for three years.

古文：老成子请其过而求退。
现代文：老成子请他指出自己错在哪里，并要求退学。
English: Old Cheng Zi asked him to point out where he was wrong and asked him to drop out of school.

古文：尹文先生揖而进之于室，屏左右而与之言曰： 昔老聃之徂西也，顾而告予曰：有生之气，有形之状，尽幻也。
现代文：尹文先生向他作揖，引他进入室内，叫左右的人离开房间后对他说： 过去老聃往西边去，回头告诉我说：一切有生机的气息，一切有形状的事物，都是虚幻的。
English: Mr. Yinwen beckoned to him, led him into the room, called the people around him to leave the room, and said to him: "Go to the west and turn around and tell me: Everything that has the breath of life, everything that has a shape, is illusory.

古文：造化之所始，阴阳之所变者，谓之生，谓之死。
现代文：天地万物的开始，阴阳之气的变化，就叫做生，叫做死。
English: The beginning of all things in heaven and earth, the changes of yin and yang, are called life and death.

古文：穷数达变，因形移易者，谓之化，谓之幻。
现代文：懂得这个规律而顺应这种变化，根据具体情形而推移变易的，叫做化，叫做幻。
English: Understanding this law and conforming to this change, which changes according to the specific situation, is called transmutation, and is called illusion.

古文：造物者其巧妙，其功深，固难穷难终。
现代文：创造万物的技巧微妙，功夫高深，本来就难以全部了解，难以完全把握。
English: The skill of creating all things is subtle, the effort is profound, and it is inherently difficult to fully understand and fully grasp.

古文：因形者其巧显，其功浅，故随起随灭。
现代文：根据具体情形变易的技巧明显，功夫低浅，所以随时发生，又随时消灭。
English: According to the specific situation, the changeable skills are obvious, and the effort is shallow, so it can occur at any time and be eliminated at any time.

古文：知幻化之不异生死也，始可与学幻矣。
现代文：懂得了幻化与生死没有什么不同，才可以学习幻化之术。
English: Only when you understand that hallucination is no different from life and death can you learn the art of hallucination.

古文：吾与汝亦幻也，奚须学哉？ 
现代文：我和你也在幻化着，为什么一定要再学呢？ 
English: You and I are also hallucinating, why do we have to study again?

古文：老成子归，用尹文先生之言深思三月，遂能存亡自在，憣校四时；冬起雷，夏造冰；飞者走，走者飞。
现代文：老成子回去后，根据尹先生的话深思了三个月，于是能自由自在地时隐时现，又能翻交四季，使冬天打雷，夏天结冰，使飞鸟在地上走，走兽在天上飞。
English: After the old Cheng Zi returned, according to Mr. Yin's words, he pondered for three months, so he could freely appear and disappear, and could turn the four seasons, make winter thunder, summer freeze, make birds walk on the ground, and beasts fly in the sky.

古文：终身不箸其术，故世莫传焉。
现代文：但终生没有把这些法术写成书，因而后世没有传下来。
English: However, he never wrote down these spells in a book, so they were not passed down to future generations.

古文：子列子曰： 善为化者，其道密庸，其功同人。
现代文：列子先生说： 善于幻化的人，他的道术隐秘而平常，他的功绩与一般人相同。
English: Mr. Reiko said: A person who is good at illusion, his Taoism is secret and ordinary, and his merits are the same as ordinary people.

古文：五帝之德，三王之功，未必尽智勇之力，或由化而成。孰测之哉？ 
现代文：五帝的德行，三王的功绩，不一定都是由智慧和勇力而来，也许是由幻化来完成的，谁能推测到呢？ 
English: The virtues of the Five Emperors and the exploits of the Three Kings did not necessarily come from wisdom and courage, but may have been accomplished through illusion. Who can guess?

古文：觉有八征，梦有六候。
现代文：觉醒时有八种状况，睡梦中有六种占验。
English: There are eight states during wakefulness and six states during sleep.

古文：奚谓八征？
现代文：什么叫做八种状况？
English: What are the eight conditions?

古文：一曰故，二曰为，三曰得，四曰丧，五曰哀，六曰乐，七曰生，八曰死。
现代文：一是事故，二是作为，三是获得，四是丧失，五是悲哀，六是欢乐，七是生存，八是死亡。
English: One is accident, two is action, three is gain, four is loss, five is sorrow, six is joy, seven is survival, and eight is death.

古文：此者八征，形所接也。
现代文：这就是八种状况，是形体与外界接触所产生的。
English: These are the eight states that result from the contact of the body with the outside world.

古文：奚谓六候？
现代文：什么叫做六种占验？
English: What are the six types of divination?

古文：一曰正梦，二曰蘁梦，三曰思梦，四曰寤梦，五曰喜梦，六曰惧梦。
现代文：一是因为日常生活而做梦，二是受到惊吓而做梦，三是心有所思而做梦，四是醒来依旧出神而做梦，五是喜乐欢愉而做梦，六是心生恐怖而做梦。
English: One is dreaming because of everyday life, the second is dreaming because of being frightened, the third is dreaming because of thinking, the fourth is dreaming because of waking up, the fifth is dreaming because of joy, and the sixth is dreaming because of fear.

古文：此六者，神所交也。
现代文：这六种预言，是精神与外界交感所产生的。
English: These six types of prophecies are the result of the interaction between the spirit and the outside world.

古文：不识感变之所起者，事至则惑其所由然；识感变之所起者，事至则知其所由然。
现代文：不了解感应变化的起源，事情一旦发生就会对它的由来感到迷惑；了解了感应变化的起源，事情一旦发生就能够明白它的由来。
English: If you don't know the origin of induced change, you will be puzzled about its origin once it happens; if you know the origin of induced change, you will be able to understand its origin once it happens.

古文：知其所由然，则无所怛。
现代文：理解了事情的由来就不会再惊忧恐惧了。
English: Once you understand where things come from, you won't be scared anymore.

古文：一体之盈虚消息，皆通于天地，应于物类。
现代文：人体的充盈或亏虚，消长或停息，都与天地相通，与外界事物相应。
English: The fullness or insufficiency of the human body, the consumption of growth or the cessation of interest, are all connected with heaven and earth, and correspond to external things.

古文：故阴气壮，则梦涉大水而恐惧；阳气壮，则梦涉大火而燔爇；阴阳俱壮，则梦生杀。
现代文：因此阴气旺盛，就会梦见涉足大水而感到恐惧；阳气旺盛，就会梦见徒步大火而被烧灼；阴阳之气都旺盛，就会梦见生死相杀。
English: Therefore, if the yin and yang are strong, you will dream of stepping into the big water and feel fear; if the yang is strong, you will dream of walking on fire and being burned; if the yin and yang are both strong, you will dream of life and death.

古文：甚饱则梦与，甚饥则梦取。
现代文：吃得过饱就会梦见付出给予，肚子饥饿就会梦见索取掠夺。
English: If you eat too much, you will dream of giving and giving; if you are hungry, you will dream of demanding and plundering.

古文：是以以浮虚为疾者，则梦扬；以沉实为疾者，则梦溺。
现代文：所以，脉象虚浮的病人会梦到自己飞扬，脉象沉实的病人会梦到自己溺水。
English: Therefore, a patient with a weak pulse will dream of flying, and a patient with a strong pulse will dream of drowning.

古文：藉带而寝，则梦蛇；飞鸟衔发，则梦飞。
现代文：压着衣带睡觉，就会梦见蛇；飞鸟来衔头发，就会梦见飞翔。
English: If you sleep with your clothes pressed against your belt, you will dream of snakes; if a bird pulls your hair, you will dream of flying.

古文：将阴梦火，将疾梦食。
现代文：气血要转为阴冷就会梦见烤火，即将生病的就会梦见进食。
English: If one's qi and blood are about to turn cold, one will dream of a fire, and if one is about to fall ill, one will dream of eating.

古文：饮酒者忧，歌舞者哭。
现代文：饮酒的人将要做忧愁的梦，欢歌纵舞的人将要做哭泣的梦。
English: Those who drink wine will dream sad dreams, and those who make merry will dream sad dreams.

古文：子列子曰： 神遇为梦，形接为事。
现代文：列子说： 精神与事物相遇就形成了梦，形体与万物交接就会产生事情。
English: Reiko said, "When the spirit meets an object, a dream is formed, and when a form meets an object, an event occurs."

古文：故昼想夜梦，神形所遇。
现代文：所以白天思虑与夜间做梦，都是精神与形体遇到某些事物的缘故。
English: So thinking during the day and dreaming at night are both caused by something that happens to the mind and body.

古文：故神凝者想梦自消。
现代文：因此精神凝结在一点上的人，空想与幻梦都会自然消失。
English: Therefore, for a person whose spirit is frozen at one point, fantasies and daydreams will naturally disappear.

古文：信觉不语，信梦不达，物化之往来者也。
现代文：真正的觉醒无须用言语表达，真正的梦幻无法以常情通晓，都只是万物自然交互变化的境地。
English: True awakening does not need to be expressed in words, and true dreams cannot be understood with common sense. They are just the state of natural interaction and change of all things.

古文：古之真人，其觉自忘，其寝不梦，几虚语哉？ 
现代文：古时候的真人，觉醒时忘却了自身的存在，睡眠时不受梦境的干扰，这难道是空话吗？ 
English: The real man of ancient times, who forgot his own existence when he woke up, and was not disturbed by dreams when he slept, is this just empty talk?

古文：西极之南隅有国焉，不知境界之所接，名古莽之国。
现代文：辽远的西方南部边隅有一个国家，不知道与哪些国家接壤，名叫古莽之国。
English: Far away in the southern corner of the west there is a country, I don't know with which countries it borders, called the country of ancient recklessness.

古文：阴阳之气所不交，故寒暑亡辨；日月之光所不照，故昼夜亡辨。
现代文：那里阴气和阳气不相交接，所以不分寒暑；太阳与月亮的光芒照耀不到，所以不分昼夜。
English: There, the yin and yang do not intersect, so there is no distinction between cold and heat; the sun and the moon do not shine, so there is no distinction between day and night.

古文：其民不食不衣而多眠。
现代文：那里的百姓不吃饭、不穿衣，睡眠很多。
English: The people there don't eat, don't wear clothes, and sleep a lot.

古文：五旬一觉，以梦中所为者实，觉之所见者妄。
现代文：五十天醒来一次，将梦中的所作所为当作真实，将醒时的所见所闻当作虚妄。
English: Waking up once every fifty days, he takes what he does in his dreams to be true, and what he sees and hears when he wakes up to be false.

古文：四海之齐，谓中央之国，跨河南北，越岱东西，万有馀里。
现代文：四海的中央有个中央之国，地跨黄河南北，横越泰山东西，方圆超过万里。
English: In the middle of the four seas, there is a central country that spans the Yellow River from north to south, and Mount Tai from east to west, with a circumference of more than ten thousand miles.

古文：其阴阳之审度，故一寒一暑；昏明之分察，故一昼一夜。
现代文：这里的阴阳二气的比例分明，所以一年有一寒一暑；昏暗与明亮的职分明确，所以一天中有一昼一夜。
English: Here, the proportion of yin and yang is clear, so there is a cold and a hot year; the dim and bright positions are clear, so there is one day and one night in a day.

古文：其民有智有愚。
现代文：这里的百姓有的聪明，有的愚昧。
English: Some of the people here are smart, some are stupid.

古文：万物滋殖，才艺多方。
现代文：万物滋养繁殖，才艺多种多样。
English: All things nourish and reproduce, and talents are diverse.

古文：有君臣相临，礼法相持。其所云为不可称计。
现代文：有君主与臣民的互相抉助，用礼仪与法律来共同维持，他们的言论与作为不可以数字统计。
English: Monarchs and their subjects mutually support each other, using etiquette and law to jointly maintain. Their words and actions cannot be counted in numbers.

古文：一觉一寐，以为觉之所为者实，梦之所见者妄。
现代文：每天一睡一醒，认为醒时的所作所为为真实，以梦中的所见所闻为虚妄。
English: He falls asleep and wakes up every day, thinking that what he does when he is awake is real, and that what he sees and hears in his dreams is false.

古文：东极之北隅有国，曰阜落之国。
现代文：辽远的东方北隅有一个国家，叫阜落之国。
English: In the far north of the Far East, there is a country called Fulao.

古文：其土气常燠，日月馀光之照，其土不生嘉苗。
现代文：那里的土地与气候常常干燥燥热，昼夜都有日月光芒照耀着大地。
English: The land and climate there are often dry and hot, and the sun and moon shine on the earth day and night.

古文：其民食草根木实，不知火食，性刚悍，强弱相藉，贵胜而不尚义；多驰步，少休息，常觉而不眠。
现代文：那里的土地不长庄稼，老百姓只能吃草根与树木的果实，并且不知道用火烧了以后再吃，性情刚强凶悍，强大的欺凌弱小的，崇尚胜利而不崇尚礼仪，多半时间奔忙走动，休息的时间少，经常醒着而不睡眠。
English: The land there does not grow crops, the common people can only eat the roots of grass and the fruits of trees, and do not know to eat again after burning with fire, the temperament is strong and fierce, the powerful bully the weak, advocate victory without advocating etiquette, most of the time rushing around, little time to rest, often awake without sleep.

古文：周之尹氏大治产，其下趣役者侵晨昏而弗息。
现代文：周朝有个姓尹的人大规模地经营产业，在他手下服役的人从清晨到黄昏都不得休息。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Yin who ran a large-scale industry, and those who served under him were not allowed to rest from early morning to dusk.

古文：有老役夫，筋力竭矣，而使之弥勤。昼则呻呼而即事，夜则昏惫而熟寐。
现代文：有个老役夫已经累得筋疲力尽了，仍然不停地被使唤，白天呻吟呼喊着干活，黑夜昏沉疲惫地熟睡。
English: There was an old servant, worn out with fatigue, who was still incessantly called upon, groaning and crying out for work by day, and sleeping soundly in the dark, exhausted.

古文：精神荒散，昔昔梦为国君。居人民之上，总一国之事。游燕宫观，恣意所欲，其乐无比。
现代文：由于精神恍惚散漫，夜夜梦见自己成为了一国之君，地位在百姓之上，总揽一国大事，在宫殿花园中游玩饮宴，想干什么就干什么，快乐无比。
English: As a result of mental distraction, he dreamed night and night that he had become the ruler of a country, his position was above the people, he always took care of a country's major events, he played banquets in the palace garden, he did whatever he wanted to do, and he was extremely happy.

古文：觉则复役。
现代文：醒来后继续服役。
English: He woke up and continued his service.

古文：人有慰喻其懃者，役夫曰： 人生百年，昼夜各分。
现代文：有人安慰他过于勤苦，老役夫说： 人一生活一百年，白天与黑夜各有一半。
English: Someone consoled him for being too diligent. The old servant said, "If you live for a hundred years, you will have half a day and half a night.

古文：吾昼为仆虏，苦则苦矣；夜为人君，其乐无比。
现代文：我白天做奴仆，苦是苦了，但黑夜做国君，则快乐无比。
English: If I am a slave during the day, I am miserable, but if I am a sovereign during the night, I am very happy.

古文：何所怨哉？ 
现代文：有什么可怨恨的呢？ 
English: What is there to hate?

古文：尹氏心营世事，虑钟家业，心形俱疲，夜亦昏惫而寐。昔昔梦为人仆，趋走作役，无不为也；数骂杖挞，无不至也。
现代文：姓尹的人成天钻营世事，思虑集中在家业上，心灵与形体都很疲劳，晚上也昏沉疲惫而睡，每天夜里梦见自己当了奴仆，奔走服役，什么活都干，挨骂挨打，什么罪都受。
English: The man surnamed Yin drills into the affairs of the world all day long, his thoughts are concentrated on his family business, his mind and body are very tired, and he sleeps drowsy and tired at night. Every night, he dreams of being a slave, rushing to serve, doing any work, being scolded and beaten, and suffering any sin.

古文：眠中啽呓呻呼，彻旦息焉。
现代文：睡眠中呻吟呼喊，一直到天亮才停止。
English: Moaning and shouting in his sleep, he didn't stop until dawn.

古文：尹氏病之，以访其友。
现代文：姓尹的以此为苦，便去询问他的朋友。
English: Suffering from this, Yin went to inquire about his friend.

古文：友曰： 若位足荣身，资财有馀，胜人远矣。
现代文：朋友说： 你的地位足以使你荣耀，你的财产用也用不完，超过别人很多很多了。
English: The friend said, "Your position is enough to make you glorious, and your property is more than enough. It is much, much more than others.

古文：夜梦为仆，苦逸之复，数之常也。
现代文：黑夜梦见做了奴仆，这一苦一乐的循环往复，是一般的自然规律。
English: The dark night dream of being a slave, this cycle of pain and pleasure, is a general law of nature.

古文：若欲觉梦兼之，岂可得邪？ 
现代文：你想在醒时与梦中都很快乐，怎么能得到呢？ 
English: If you want to be happy both when you are awake and in your dreams, how can you get there?

古文：尹氏闻其友言，宽其役夫之程，减己思虑之事，疾并少间。
现代文：姓尹的听了他朋友的话，便放宽了役夫所做的工程的期限，减少了自己苦心思虑的事情，他和役夫的苦也就都减轻了。
English: After listening to his friend's words, Mr. Yin relaxed the time limit for the work done by the porter and reduced the things he had to think about. Both his and the porter's suffering were alleviated.

古文：郑人有薪于野者，遇骇鹿，御而击之，毙之。
现代文：郑国有个樵夫在野外砍柴，遇上一头受惊的鹿，迎头追击，杀死了它。
English: A woodcutter in Zhengzhou was chopping wood in the field when he encountered a frightened deer, chased it head-on and killed it.

古文：恐人见之也，遽而藏诸隍中，覆之以蕉，不胜其喜。
现代文：他怕别人看见，连忙把死鹿藏在干涸的水沟里，盖上柴草，异常欢喜。
English: Afraid that others might see him, he quickly hid the dead deer in a dry ditch, covered it with firewood, and was overjoyed.

古文：俄而遗其所藏之处，遂以为梦焉。
现代文：没过多久，樵夫忘了藏鹿的地方，于是自以为做了一场梦而已。
English: Before long, the woodcutter forgot where he had hidden the deer and thought he was dreaming.

古文：顺途而咏其事。
现代文：沿途回家，嘴里嘟囔着这件事。
English: All the way home with this in my mouth.

古文：傍人有闻者，用其言而取之。
现代文：旁边有人听见，就按着他的话拿到了鹿。
English: Someone nearby heard him and took the deer according to his words.

古文：既归，告其室人曰： 向薪者梦得鹿而不知其处；吾今得之，彼直真梦矣。 
现代文：回家后，告诉妻子说： 刚才有个樵夫梦见自己得到一头鹿，但又不知道藏在哪里；我现在得到了它，他简直是做了个真实的梦啊。 
English: When he got home, he said to his wife: "Just now a woodcutter dreamed that he had got a stag, but did not know where to hide it; now that I have got it, he has had a real dream."

古文：室人曰： 若将是梦见薪者之得鹿邪？
现代文：妻子说： 你大概是梦见樵夫得到了鹿吧？
English: The wife said: You probably dreamed that the woodcutter got the deer, didn't you?

古文：讵有薪者邪？
现代文：真的有那个樵夫吗？
English: Did the widower really exist?

古文：今真得鹿，是若之梦真邪？ 
现代文：现在真的得到这头鹿，是你自己做了个真实的梦吧？ 
English: Now that you've actually got this deer, you've made a real dream of your own, haven't you?

古文：夫曰： 吾据得鹿，何用知彼梦我梦邪？ 
现代文：丈夫说： 我已经据此得到了鹿，何必再去追究是他做梦还是我做梦呢？ 
English: The husband said: I have already got the deer on this basis, why do I have to investigate whether he is dreaming or I am dreaming?

古文：薪者之归，不厌失鹿，其夜真梦藏之之处，又梦得之之主。
现代文：樵夫回到家，不甘心就这么丢失了鹿，当天夜里真的梦见藏鹿的地方，又梦见取走鹿的那个人。
English: When the woodcutter returned home, he couldn't bear to lose the deer. That night, he actually dreamed of the place where the deer was hidden, and of the person who took the deer.

古文：爽旦，案所梦而寻得之。
现代文：第二天清早，按照梦中情境，找到了得鹿的人。
English: Early the next morning, in accordance with the dream situation, I found the person who got the deer.

古文：遂讼而争之，归之士师。
现代文：于是两人为了鹿的归属争执起来，闹到了士师那里。
English: As a result, the two got into an argument over the ownership of the deer, and it ended up with the judge.

古文：士师曰： 若初真得鹿，妄谓之梦；真梦得鹿，妄谓之实。
现代文：士师说： 你最初真的得到了鹿，却胡说是梦；明明是在梦中得到了鹿，又胡说是现实。
English: The judge said: "You did get the deer initially, but it was a dream; you did get the deer in the dream, but it was a reality.

古文：彼真取若鹿，而与若争鹿。
现代文：他真的取走了你的鹿，你又和他争这只鹿。
English: He actually took your deer, and you fought him over the deer.

古文：室人又谓梦认人鹿，无人得鹿。
现代文：他妻子又说他是在梦中认为鹿是别人的，并没有什么人得到过这只鹿。
English: His wife also said that he thought the deer was someone else's in a dream, and no one had gotten the deer.

古文：今据有此鹿，请二分之。 
现代文：现在只有这只鹿，请你们平分了吧！ 
English: Now there is only this deer, so please divide it equally!

古文：以闻郑君。郑君曰： 嘻！
现代文：这事被郑国的国君知道了。国君说： 唉！
English: This became known to the sovereign of Zheng. The sovereign said: Alas!

古文：士师将复梦分人鹿乎？ 
现代文：这士师也是在梦中让他们分鹿的吧？ 
English: Was it in a dream that this teacher told them to separate the two?

古文：访之国相。
现代文：为此他询问宰相。
English: He asked the Prime Minister about this.

古文：国相曰： 梦与不梦，臣所不能辨也。
现代文：宰相说： 做梦与不做梦，这是我无法分辨的事情。
English: The prime minister said: "Whether to dream or not to dream, this is something I cannot distinguish.

古文：欲辨觉梦，唯黄帝、孔丘。
现代文：如果要分辨是醒还是梦，只有黄帝和孔丘能做到。
English: If you want to distinguish between waking and dreaming, only the Yellow Emperor and Confucius can do it.

古文：今亡黄帝、孔丘，孰辨之哉？
现代文：现在没有黄帝与孔丘，谁还能分辨呢？
English: Now that there is no Yellow Emperor and Confucius, who can tell the difference?

古文：且恂士师之言可也。 
现代文：姑且按照士师的裁决办吧。 
English: Let's just go with the judge's ruling.

古文：宋阳里华子中年病忘，朝取而夕忘，夕与而朝忘；在途则忘行，在室则忘坐；今不识先，后不识今。
现代文：宋国有个叫阳里华子的人，中年时患了健忘症，早晨拿的东西到晚上就忘了，晚上放下的东西到早晨就忘了；在路上忘记走路，在家里忘记坐下；不知道先后，不知道今古。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a man named Yang Lihua Zi. In middle age, he suffered from amnesia. He forgot what he picked up in the morning by the evening, and forgot what he put down at night by the morning. He forgot to walk on the road, and forgot to sit down at home. He did not know the order of things, and did not know the present time.

古文：阖室毒之。
现代文：全家都为他苦恼。
English: The whole family is worried sick about him.

古文：谒史而卜之，弗占；谒巫而祷之，弗禁；谒医而攻之，弗已。
现代文：请史官来占卜，不能灵验；请巫师来祈祷，没有效果；请医生来诊治，也不见好转。
English: If you ask a historian to tell fortunes, it won't work; if you ask a sorcerer to pray, it won't work; if you ask a doctor to treat you, it won't work.

古文：鲁有儒生自媒能治之，华子之妻子以居产之半请其方。
现代文：鲁国有个儒生自我推荐说能治好他的病，华子的妻子和儿女以家产的一半作为报酬，请他开药方。
English: There was a Confucian scholar in the State of Lu who recommended himself as someone who could cure his illness. Hua Zi's wife and children asked him to write a prescription in return for half of the family's property.

古文：儒生曰： 此固非卦兆之所占，非祈请之所祷，非药石之所攻。
现代文：儒生就说： 这种病本来就不是算卦龟卜所能占验，也不是祈祷请求所能生效，同样不是药物针灸所能诊治的。
English: Confucius said, "This kind of disease is not something that can be divined by means of divination, nor is it something that can be cured by means of prayer, nor is it something that can be diagnosed and cured by means of drug acupuncture.

古文：吾试化其心，变其虑，庶几其瘳乎！ 
现代文：我试试变化他的心灵，改变他的思想，差不多就能让他痊愈。 
English: If I try to change his heart, change his mind, I can almost heal him.

古文：于是试露之，而求衣；饥之，而求食；幽之，而求明。
现代文：于是试着脱掉他的衣服，感到冷他便去寻找衣服；不给他饭吃，感到饿他便去寻找食物；把他关在黑暗处，感到昏暗他便去寻找光明。
English: So try to take off his clothes, feel cold and he will go looking for clothes; do not give him food to eat, feel hungry and he will go looking for food; keep him in the dark, feel dim and he will go looking for light.

古文：儒生欣然告其子曰： 疾可已也。
现代文：儒生高兴地告诉他的儿子说： 病可以治好了。
English: The Confucian scholar happily told his son, "The illness can be cured.

古文：然吾之方密，传世不以告人。
现代文：但我的方法是保密的，世代相传不可让外人知晓。
English: But my method is confidential, passed down from generation to generation, and must not be known to outsiders.

古文：试屏左右，独与居室七日。 
现代文：请其他人回避一下，让我单独和他在室内待七天。 
English: Ask someone else to step aside and let me be alone with him indoors for seven days.

古文：从之。
现代文：大家按他的要求办了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：莫知其所施为也，而积年之疾一朝都除。
现代文：没有人知道儒生干了些什么，但华子多年积累起来的病居然彻底痊愈了。
English: No one knows what Ju Sheng has done, but Huazi's illness, which had accumulated over the years, has completely healed.

古文：华子既悟，乃大怒，黜妻罚子，操戈逐儒生。
现代文：华子清醒以后，便大发雷霆，斥骂妻子，惩罚儿子，并拿起戈矛驱逐儒生。
English: After Hua Zi was sober, he flew into a rage, scolded his wife, punished his son, and picked up a spear to expel the Confucian scholar.

古文：宋人执而问其以。
现代文：宋国人把他捉住并问他为什么这样做。
English: The Song people caught him and asked him why he did it.

古文：华子曰： 曩吾忘也，荡荡然不觉天地之有无。
现代文：华子说： 过去我健忘，脑子里空空荡荡不知道天地是有还是无。
English: Hua Zi said: In the past, I was forgetful, my mind was empty and I didn't know whether heaven and earth existed or not.

古文：今顿识既往，数十年来存亡、得失、哀乐、好恶，扰扰万绪起矣。
现代文：现在突然明白了过去的一切，数十年来的存亡、得失、哀乐、好恶，千头万绪纷纷扰扰全部出现了。
English: Now I suddenly understand everything in the past. The existence, gains and losses, joys and sorrows, likes and dislikes of decades have all appeared.

古文：吾恐将来之存亡、得失、哀乐、好恶之乱吾心如此也，须臾之忘，可复得乎？ 
现代文：我害怕将来的存亡、得失、哀乐、好恶还像这样扰乱我的心，再求片刻的忘却，还有可能吗？ 
English: I'm afraid of future survival, gain and loss, sorrow and joy, likes and dislikes, and still disturb my heart like this, and ask for a moment's oblivion, is it possible?

古文：子贡闻而怪之，以告孔子。
现代文：子贡听说后感到奇怪，把这事告诉了孔子。
English: Hearing this, Zigong was surprised and told this to Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 此非汝所及乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 这不是你所能理解的！ 
English: Confucius said: This is not something you can understand!

古文：顾谓颜回纪之。
现代文：回头叫颜回把此事记录下来。
English: He called Yan back and asked her to record the incident.

古文：秦人逢氏有子，少而惠，及壮而有迷罔之疾。
现代文：秦国的逢氏有个儿子，小时候很聪明，长大以后却得了精神错乱的疾病。
English: The Feng clan of Qin had a son who was very clever as a child, but grew up to have a mental illness.

古文：闻歌以为哭，视白以为黑，飨香以为朽，尝甘以为苦，行非以为是：意之所之，天地、四方，水火、寒暑，无不倒错者焉。
现代文：听到唱歌以为是哭泣，看到白色以为是黑色，闻到香气以为是臭气，尝到甜昧以为是苦味，做错了事却以为是正确。只要意识所到的地方，无论是天地、四方、水火、寒暑，没有不颠倒错乱的。
English: Hearing a song is thought to be crying, seeing white is thought to be black, smelling an aroma is thought to be stench, tasting sweetness is thought to be bitterness, doing a wrong thing is thought to be right. As long as the consciousness reaches the place, whether it is heaven and earth, the four directions, water and fire, or cold and heat, there is nothing that is not upside down and chaotic.

古文：杨氏告其父曰： 鲁之君子多术艺，将能已乎。
现代文：一个姓杨的人告诉这个孩子的父亲说： 鲁国的君子懂得多种道术技巧，或许能治好你孩子的病吧！
English: A man surnamed Yang told the child's father, "A gentleman from the country of Lu knows a variety of Taoist techniques, perhaps he can cure your child's illness!"

古文：汝奚不访焉？ 
现代文：你为么不去拜访呢？ 
English: Why don't you come visit?

古文：其父之鲁。过陈，遇老聃，因告其子之证。
现代文：孩子的父亲去了鲁国，当路过陈国时，碰到了老聃，便告诉他儿子的病症。
English: The child's father went to Lu. When he passed through Chen, he met Laozi, who told him about his son's illness.

古文：老聃曰： 汝庸知汝子之迷乎？
现代文：老聃说： 你又怎么知道你儿子的精神错乱呢？
English: The old woman said, "How do you know that your son is insane?"

古文：今天下之人皆惑于是非，昏于利害。同疾者多，固莫有觉者。
现代文：现在天下的人都分不清是非，被厉害关系弄得混乱糊涂，患这种病的人很多，没有人能察觉病症。
English: Nowadays, people all over the world can't tell right from wrong. They are confused by their terrible relationships. There are many people suffering from this disease, and no one can detect the disease.

古文：且一身之迷不足倾一家，一家之迷不足倾一乡，一乡之迷不足倾一国，一国之迷不足倾天下。
现代文：而且一个人迷糊并不能使一家倾覆，一家人迷糊并不能使一乡倾覆，一乡人迷糊并不能使一国倾覆，一国人迷糊并不能使天下倾覆。
English: Moreover, a confused person cannot overthrow a family, a confused family cannot overthrow a village, a confused village cannot overthrow a country, and a confused country cannot overthrow the world.

古文：天下尽迷，孰倾之哉？
现代文：天下人都迷糊，还有什么可倾覆的呢？
English: The whole world is confused. What else can be overturned?

古文：向使天下之人其心尽如汝子，汝则反迷矣。哀乐、声色、臭味、是非，孰能正之？
现代文：如果使天下人的心都像你儿子的话，那么你就反而是迷糊的人了，那哀乐、声色、气味、是非，又有谁能纠正呢？
English: If you were to make the hearts of all the people in the world like the heart of your son, then you would be a confused person, and who would be able to correct the music, the voice, the smell, and the right and wrong?

古文：且吾之言未必非迷，而况鲁之君子迷之邮者，焉能解人之迷哉？
现代文：我这些话未必不是迷糊的表现，更何况鲁国的君子们都是迷糊得最厉害的人，又怎么能解开别人的迷糊呢？
English: These words of mine may not necessarily be a manifestation of confusion, not to mention that the gentlemen of Lu are the most confused people, and how can they solve the confusion of others?

古文：荣汝之粮，不若遄归也。 
现代文：背上你的粮食，趁早回家去吧！ 
English: Put your food on your back and go home as soon as possible!

古文：燕人生于燕，长于楚，及老而还本国。
现代文：燕国有个人出生在燕国，生长在楚国，到老年才回本国去。
English: Individuals in Yan Province were born in Yan Province, grew up in Chu Province, and only returned to their home country when they were old.

古文：过晋国，同行者诳之，指城曰： 此燕国之城。 
现代文：路过晋国时，同行的人欺骗他，指着城墙说： 这是燕国的城墙。 
English: When passing through Jin Province, his companions lied to him, pointing to the city wall and saying, "This is the city wall of Yan Province."

古文：其人愀然变容。
现代文：那人凄怆地改变了面容。
English: The man's face changed dramatically.

古文：指社曰： 此若里之社。 
现代文：同行的人指着土地庙说： 这是你那个地方的土地庙。 
English: The people accompanying him pointed to the land temple and said: This is the land temple in your area.

古文：乃喟然而叹。
现代文：那人长叹了一声。
English: The man let out a long sigh.

古文：指舍曰： 此若先人之庐。 
现代文：同行的人指着房屋说： 这是你的先人的房屋。 
English: The people who were with him pointed to a house and said, "This is the house of your father."

古文：乃涓然而泣。
现代文：那人流着眼泪哭了起来。
English: The man burst into tears.

古文：指垄曰： 此若先人之冢。 
现代文：同行的人指着坟墓说： 这是你先人的墓地。 
English: Pointing to the grave, a companion said: "This is the cemetery of your ancestors."

古文：其人哭不自禁。
现代文：那人禁不住大哭起来。
English: The man burst into tears.

古文：同行者哑然大笑，曰： 予昔绐若，此晋国耳。 
现代文：同行的人失声大笑说： 我刚才是在欺骗你，这是晋国啊！ 
English: My companions burst out laughing and said: I was just deceiving you, this is Jin Province!

古文：其人大惭。
现代文：那人大为惭愧。
English: The man was mortified.

古文：及至燕，真见燕国之城社，真见先人之庐冢，悲心更微。
现代文：等到了燕国，真的见到了燕国的城墙和土地庙，真的见到先人的房屋和墓地时，悲伤的情绪反而减弱了。
English: When I got to Yan'an, and really saw Yan'an's city walls and land temples, and really saw the houses and cemeteries of my ancestors, the sad mood actually lessened.

