古文：文公在狄十二年，狐偃曰： 日，吾来此也，非以狄为荣，可以成事也。
现代文：晋公子重耳在狄住了十二年。狐偃说： 当初我们到这儿来，不是因为狄地安乐，而是可以成就大事。
English: Jin Gongzi lived in Didi for twelve years. The fox cub said: At first, we came here, not because of Didi's amusements, but because we could accomplish great things.

古文：吾曰： 奔而易达，困而有资，休以择利，可以戾也。 
现代文：我曾说过： 狄地出走时容易到达，窘迫中能得到资助，通过休整可以选择有利的时机，因此才居留下来。 
English: I once said: "Didi is easy to reach when you run away, you can get financial support when you are in trouble, and you can choose a favorable time by taking a break, so you can stay."

古文：今戾久矣，戾久将底。底著滞淫，谁能兴之？
现代文：现在已经居住很久了，住久了便会停止不前，停止不前再加苟且荒废，谁还能振作有为？
English: Now it has been living for a long time, and after living for a long time, it will stop moving forward. If it stops moving forward, it will be wasteful and wasteful. Who can still cheer up?

古文：盍速行乎！
现代文：为什么不赶快走呢！
English: Why don't you hurry up and leave!

古文：吾不适齐、楚，避其远也。
现代文：当初我们不到齐、楚两国去，是怕路途太远。
English: At first, we didn't go to Qi and Chu because we were afraid it would be too far.

古文：蓄力一纪，可以远矣。
现代文：如今养精蓄锐了十二年，可以远行了。
English: Now, after twelve years of hard work, I can travel far and wide.

古文：齐侯长矣，而欲亲晋。
现代文：齐桓公年纪大了，想亲近晋国。
English: Lord Qi Huan is old and wants to be closer to Jin.

古文：管仲殁矣，多谗在侧。谋而无正，衷而思始。
现代文：管仲去世后，桓公身边尽是些谗谄小人，谋划没有人来匡正，心里就会怀念当初的盛况。
English: After the death of Guanzhong, Kan Gong's entourage was full of petty villains. There was no one to rectify the situation, and he would miss the grandeur of the beginning.

古文：夫必追择前言，求善以终，餍迩逐远，远人入服，不为邮矣。
现代文：因此他必定会重新考虑采纳管仲的忠告，希望求得一个好结果。齐国与邻国既已相安无事，就会谋求和远方的诸侯搞好关系，我们远方的人去投奔，就不会有什么过错。
English: Therefore, he will surely reconsider accepting Guanzhong's advice, hoping to achieve a good result. As long as Qi and its neighbors are safe and sound, it will seek to establish good relations with distant princes. Those of us who are far away will not have any fault in running away.

古文：会其季年可也，兹可以亲。 
现代文：现在正值桓公的暮年，正是可以亲近他的好时机。 
English: Now is the twilight of Kancho, it is a good time to get close to him.

古文：皆以为然。
现代文：大家都觉得狐偃说得很对。
English: Everyone thought the fox cub was right.

古文：乃行，过五鹿，乞食于野人。
现代文：于是重耳一行便出发了。
English: So the group set out again.

古文：野人举块以与之，公子怒，将鞭之。子犯曰： 天赐也。
现代文：他们路过五鹿时，向田野里的农夫讨饭吃，农夫却把地里的泥土给他们，重耳很生气，想要鞭打他。狐偃说： 这是上天的赏赐啊。
English: When they passed the five deer, they begged for food from the farmer in the field, but the farmer gave them the soil from the field. He was very angry and wanted to whip him. The fox cub said: "This is a reward from heaven."

古文：民以土服，又何求焉！
现代文：民众献土表示顺服，对此我们还别有什么可求的呢？
English: What more could we ask for than for the people to lay down their lives in obedience?

古文：无事必象，十有二年，必获此土。
现代文：上天要成事必定先有某种征兆，再过十二年，我们一定会获得这片土地。
English: In order for God to do something, there must first be some kind of sign, and in another twelve years, we will definitely get this land.

古文：二三子志之。岁在寿星及鹑尾，其有此土乎！
现代文：你们诸位记住，当岁星运行到寿星和鹑尾时，这片土地将归属我国。
English: You should remember that this land will belong to our country when the Year Star moves to the Birthday Star and the Iris.

古文：天以命矣，复于寿星，必获诸侯。天之道也，由是始之。
现代文：天象已经这样预示了，岁星再次行经寿星时，我们一定能获得诸侯的拥戴，天道十二年一转，征兆就是由此开始的。
English: The celestial phenomenon has already foreshadowed this. When the year star passes through the birthday star again, we will surely be able to gain the support of the princes. The signs will begin once the twelve years have passed.

古文：有此，其以戊申乎！
现代文：获得这块土地，应当是在戊申这一天吧！
English: The acquisition of this piece of land should take place on this day in Boshin!

古文：所以申土也。 
现代文：因为戊属土，申是推广的意思。 
English: Because E belongs to the soil, "Shen" means to promote.

古文：再拜稽首，受而载之。
现代文：于是重耳再拜叩头，把泥土收下装在车上。
English: So he listened attentively, bowed his head again, collected the soil and loaded it onto the truck.

古文：遂适齐。
现代文：然后，他们一行人便往齐国去了。
English: Then, they all went to Qi Province.

