古文：母曰懿安皇太后郭氏。
现代文：穆宗，名恒，宪宗的第三个儿子。母亲是懿安皇太后郭氏。
English: Mu Zong, named Heng, was the third son of Xianzong. His mother was the Empress Dowager Guo of Yan'an.

古文：始封建安郡王，进封遂王，遥领彰义军节度使。
现代文：最初被封建安郡王，晋封为遂王，领受彰义军节度使职名。
English: He was originally the feudal An County King, was promoted to the Sui King, and received the title of the Zhangyi Army.

古文：元和七和，惠昭太子薨，左神策军中尉吐突承璀欲立澧王恽，而恽母贱不当立，乃立遂王为皇太子。
现代文：元和七年，皇太子李宁去世，左神策军中尉吐突承璀想立宪宗次子、澧王李恽为皇太子，但因李恽生母身份低贱不适合立嗣，于是宪宗立遂王李恒为皇太子。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the crown prince Li Ning died, and the lieutenant of Zuo Sheng Zaojun, Tu Tu Chuncheng, wanted to make the second son of the founder of the Confucianism, King Li Xi, the crown prince, but because the lowly status of Li Xi's birth mother was not suitable for the establishment of the heir, the founder of the Confucianism, King Li Heng, became the crown prince.

古文：十五年正月庚子，宪宗崩，陈弘志杀吐突承璀及澧王。
现代文：元和十五年正月二十七日，宪宗逝世，陈弘志杀了吐突承璀和澧王李恽。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, after the death of Emperor Xianzong, Chen Hongzhi killed Tu Tu Chengyu and King Li Yao.

古文：辛丑，遗诏皇太子即皇帝位于柩前，司空兼中书令韩弘摄冢宰。
现代文：二十八日，按宪宗遗诏：皇太子李恒在宪宗灵柩前登帝位，司空兼中书令韩弘兼任冢宰。
English: On the 28th, according to the last will and testament of Emperor Xianzong: Crown Prince Li Heng ascended the throne in front of Emperor Xianzong's coffin, and Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Em

古文：闰月丙午，皇太子即皇帝位于太极殿。
现代文：闰正月初三，皇太子李恒在太极登基。
English: On the third day of the first month of the leap year, Crown Prince Li Heng ascended the throne in Taiji.

古文：丁未，贬皇甫镈为崖州司户参军。
现代文：初四，将皇甫贬为崖州司户参军。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he joined the army, demoting his father-in-law to the position of Jiaozhou steward.

古文：戊申，始听政。
现代文：初五，穆宗开始处理国政。
English: On the 15th, he began to deal with government affairs.

古文：辛亥，御史中丞萧俛、中书舍人翰林学士段文昌为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初八，御史中丞萧亻免、中书舍人翰林学士段文昌任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the eighth year of junior high school, Xiao Yiming, the vice-president of the History Middle School, and Han Lin, the teacher of the Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School Middle School

古文：乙卯，尊母为皇太后。
现代文：十二日，穆宗尊奉母亲郭氏为皇太后。
English: On the 12th, Mu Zongxun was crowned empress dowager in honor of his mother, Guo.

古文：戊辰，京师地震。
现代文：二十五日，京城长安地震。
English: On the 25th, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：二月丁丑，大赦。
现代文：二月初五，施行大赦。
English: On the fifth day of February, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵，高年粟帛，二王后、三恪、文宣公、嗣王、公主、县主、武德配飨及第一等功臣家予一子官。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位；高龄老人赐给粟、帛；北周、隋朝王室的后代，商、周、汉三代王朝的后裔，文宣公孔子的后人，王爵的继承人，公主、诸王之女，附祭于高祖陵庙的大臣后人以及第一等功臣之家，各授予其一子官职。
English: The civil and military officials were given official ranks and titles; the elderly were given corns and thistles; the descendants of the royal families of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties, the descendants of the Shang, Zhou and Han dynasties, the descendants of Confucius, the heirs of the prince, the princesses, the daughters of the kings, the descendants of the ministers who were enshrined in the Mausoleum of Gao Zu, and the families of the first-class heroes, each awarded one official position to their son.

古文：放没掖庭者。
现代文：放还被埋没的妃嫔。
English: Return of the buried concubines.

古文：幸丹凤门观俳优。
现代文：同日，穆宗亲临丹凤门观看俳优表演。
English: On the same day, Mu Zong personally visited the Danfeng Gate to watch a haiku performance.

古文：丁亥，幸左神策军观角牴、倡戏。
现代文：十五日，至左神策军营观看角牛氐戏、倡优戏。
English: On the 15th, they went to the Zuo Shenze military camp to watch the Horned Bull puppet show and the Xuan You puppet show.

古文：乙未，吐蕃寇灵州。
现代文：二十三日，吐蕃军进犯灵州。
English: On the 23rd, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou.

古文：丙申，丹王逾薨。
现代文：二十四日，丹王李逾去世。
English: On the 24th, the king of the Dan Dynasty, Li You, passed away.

古文：三月乙巳，杜叔良及吐蕃战，败之。
现代文：三月初三，杜叔良与吐蕃军交战，打败吐军。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Du Shuliang fought with the Tubo army and defeated the Tubo army.

古文：戊辰，大风，雨雹。
现代文：二十六日，大风，降冰雹。
English: On the 26th, there was a strong wind and hail.

古文：辛未，杨清伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，安南反将杨清伏法处死。
English: On the 29th, Annan sentenced Yang Qingfu to death.

古文：五月庚申，葬圣神章武孝皇帝于景陵。六月丁丑，韩弘罢。
现代文：五月十九日，将宪宗安葬于景陵。六月初七，韩弘被免职。
English: On May 19, Han Zong was buried in Jingling Mausoleum. On June 7, Han Hong was dismissed from his post.

古文：七月丁卯，令狐楚罢。
现代文：七月二十七日，令狐楚被免职。
English: On July 27th, Ling Xuchu was relieved of his duties.

古文：八月乙酉，容管经略留后严公素及黄洞蛮战于神步，败之。
现代文：八月十六日，容管经略留后严公素在神步与黄洞蛮军作战，打败蛮军。
English: On August 16th, Yan Gongsu fought against the Huangdong barbarian army in Shenpu, defeating the barbarian army.

古文：戊戌，御史中丞崔植为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十九日，御史中丞崔植任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 29th, Goshi Chujo Choi Shikaku was appointed to the position of Chusho-sajiro (chancellor of the middle school) and Shitahira Shoji (head of the middle school) of the same school.

古文：九月辛丑，观竞渡、角牴于鱼藻宫，用乐。
现代文：九月初二，穆宗在鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡、角牛氐戏，奏乐。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Mu Zong watched the boat race, the horned ox play, and the music in the Fish Algae Palace.

古文：十月庚辰，王承宗卒。
现代文：十月十一日，王承宗去世。
English: On October 11, Wang Chengzong passed away.

古文：辛巳，成德军观察支使王承元以镇、赵、深、冀四州归于有司。
现代文：十二日，成德军观察使王承元将镇、赵、深、冀四州归于朝廷。
English: On the 12th, the observation of the German army made Wang Chengyuan return the towns, Zhao, Shen, and Hebei to the imperial court.

古文：癸未，吐蕃寇泾州，右神策军中尉梁守谦为左右神策、京西、京北行营都监以御之。
现代文：十四日，吐蕃军进犯泾州，右神策军中尉梁守谦任左右神策军、京西、京北行营都监以抵御吐军。
English: On the 14th, the Tubo army invaded Bozhou, and Lieutenant Liang Shouqian of the Right Divine Providence Army took charge of the Left and Right Divine Providence Army, and the West Beijing and North Beijing Campaigns to resist the Tubo army.

古文：丙戌，吐蕃遁。
现代文：十七日，吐蕃军撤退。
English: On the 17th, the Tubo army withdrew.

古文：十一月癸卯，赦镇、赵、深、冀四州死罪以下，赐成德军将士钱。
现代文：十一月初五，减免镇、赵、浑、冀四州死罪以下犯人的刑罚，赐给成德军将士钱财。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the sentences of the prisoners below the death penalty in the four states of Zhen, Zhao, Hun and Hebei were reduced and remitted, and the soldiers of the Chengde Army were given money and property.

古文：十二月庚辰，猎于城南。
现代文：十二月十二日，穆宗在京城南打猎。
English: On December 12, Mu Zong went hunting in the south of Beijing.

古文：壬午，击鞠于右神策军，遂猎于城西。
现代文：十四日，在右神策军击鞠，继而去城西打猎。
English: On the fourteenth day, he had a game of bowls with the troops of Ushin Choshu, and then went to the west of the city to hunt.

古文：甲申，猎于苑北。
现代文：十六日，在苑北打猎。
English: On the 16th, he went hunting in Yuanbei.

古文：长庆元年正月己亥，朝献于太清宫。庚子，朝享于太庙。
现代文：长庆元年正月初二，在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭礼的 朝献 祭祀。初三，祭祀太庙。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first year of the Chokei era, a morning offering ritual was held at the Taiqing Palace, in which the devotees were dressed up to enjoy the ritual.

古文：辛丑，有事于南郊。
现代文：初四，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, a festival is held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：大赦，改元，赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：施行大赦，改年号为 长庆 ，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: An amnesty was implemented, the name of the year was changed to Changqing, and civil and military officials were given official ranks, honors, and peerages.

古文：己未，有星孛于翼。
现代文：二十二日，在星官翼宿的群星间出现彗星。
English: On the 22nd, a comet appeared among the stars of the asteroid Ophiuchus.

古文：壬戌，萧俛罢。
现代文：二十五日，萧亻免被免职。
English: On the 25th, Xiao Yao was removed from his post.

古文：丁卯，有星孛于太徽。
现代文：三十日，在太微星群间出现彗星。
English: On the 30th, a comet appeared in the nebula between the faint star clusters.

古文：二月乙亥，观乐于麟德殿。
现代文：二月初八，穆宗在麟德殿观赏奏乐。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Mu Zong watched the concert in the Lin De Hall.

古文：丙子，观神策诸军杂伎。
现代文：初九，观赏神策军杂技表演。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, watch the Shinsaku Army acrobatic performance.

古文：己卯，刘枿以卢龙军八州归于有司。
现代文：十二日，刘总将卢龙军八州归于朝廷。
English: On the 12th, General Liu returned eight prefectures of the Lulong Army to the imperial court.

古文：壬午，段文昌罢。
现代文：十五日，段文昌被免职。
English: On the 15th, Duan Wenchang was removed from office.

古文：翰林学士、户部侍郎杜元颍同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士、户部侍郎杜元颖任同中书门下平章事。
English: Du Yuan Ying, a scholar of Hanlin and a chamberlain of the household, was appointed as a disciple of Shuhei Shoji in the same school.

古文：辛卯，击鞠于麟德殿。
现代文：二十四日，穆宗在麟德殿击鞠。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Mu Zong played a game of bowls in the Lin De Hall.

古文：三月庚戌，太白昼见。
现代文：三月十四日，白昼出现太白星。
English: On the 14th of March, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁巳，赦幽、涿、檀、顺、瀛、莫、营、平八州死罪以下，给复一年。
现代文：二十一日，对幽、涿、檀、顺、瀛、莫、营、平八州死罪以下囚犯施行赦免，免除八个州的徭役一年。
English: On the 21st, prisoners with capital crimes or less from eight prefectures, including You, Min, Dan, Shun, Min, Mo, Ying and Ping, were pardoned and exempted from forced labor for one year in eight prefectures.

古文：赐卢龙军士钱。
现代文：赐给卢龙军军士钱财。
English: He gave money to a sergeant of the Lulong Army.

古文：戊午，封弟憬为鄜王，悦琼王，恂沔王，怿婺王，愔茂王，怡光王，协淄王，憺衢王，忄充澶王；子湛为鄂王，涵江王，凑漳王，溶安王，瀍颍王。
现代文：二十二日，穆宗封其弟李憬为王，李悦为琼王，李恂为沔王，李怿为婺王，李忄音为茂王，李怡为光王，李协为淄王，李忄詹为衢王，李忄充为澶王；封其子李湛为鄂王，李涵为江王，李氵奏为漳王，李溶为安王，李鏶为颍王。
English: On the 22nd, Mu Zong appointed his younger brother Li Jing as king, Li Yue as king of Qiong, Li Jie as king of Qiong, Li Jie as king of Qiong, Li Jiong as king of Mao, Li Yi as king of Guang, Li Xie as king of Qiong, Li Jianzhan as king of Qiong, Li Jianzhong as king of Qiong; appointed his son Li Zhan as king of E, Li Han as king of Jiang, Li Jinso as king of Qiong, Li Rong as king of An, and Li Yao as king of Qiong.

古文：是月，徙封湛为景王。
现代文：本月，改封李湛为景王。
English: This month, Li Zhan was renamed as King of Scenery.

古文：五月丙辰，建王审薨。
现代文：五月二十一日，建王李审去世。
English: On May 21, Jian Wang Lisi passed away.

古文：六月，有彗星出于昂。
现代文：六月，在昴宿星团间出现彗星。
English: In June, a comet appeared between the Pleiades star cluster.

古文：辛未，吐蕃寇青塞烽，盐州刺史李文悦败之。
现代文：初七，吐蕃军进犯青塞烽，盐州刺史李文悦打败吐军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Tubo army invaded the Qinghai-Tibetan War, and Li Wenyue, the governor of Yanzhou Province, defeated the Tubo army.

古文：七月甲辰，幽州卢龙军都知兵马使硃克融囚其节度使张弘靖以反。
现代文：七月初十，幽州卢龙军都知兵马使朱克融囚禁其节度使张弘靖反叛。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the year, Zhu Ke Rong, the military commander of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, ordered Zhu Ke Rong to imprison Zhang Hongjing.

古文：壬子，群臣上尊号曰文武孝德皇帝。
现代文：十八日，群臣给穆宗加尊号为 文武孝德皇帝 。
English: On the 18th, the courtiers gave Mu Zong the honorary title of Emperor Wenwu Xiaode.

古文：大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and civil and military officials were granted official ranks, decorations, and peerages.

古文：壬戌，成德军大将王廷凑杀其节度使田弘正以反。
现代文：二十八日，成德军大将王廷凑杀其节度使田弘正反叛。
English: On the 28th, Wang Ting, the general of the Chengde Army, conspired to kill his regent to make Tian Hongzheng rebel.

古文：八月壬申，硃克融陷莫州。
现代文：八月初九，朱克融攻破莫州。
English: On the 9th day of August, Zhu Ke Rong broke through Mozhou.

古文：癸酉，王廷凑陷冀州，刺史王进岌死之。
现代文：初十，王廷凑攻破冀州，本州刺史王进岌死难。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Ting jointly attacked and defeated Jizhou, and Honshu stabbed Wang Jin to death.

古文：丙子，瀛州军乱，执其观察使卢士攻，叛附于硃克融。
现代文：十三日，瀛州军队骚乱，抓了其观察使卢士玫，叛附于朱克融。
English: On the 13th, the Zhangzhou army rioted, captured its observation envoy Lu Shimei, and rebelled against Zhu Ke Rong.

古文：王廷凑寇深州。
现代文：同日，王廷凑进犯深州。
English: On the same day, Wang Ting joined forces to invade Shenzhou.

古文：丁丑，魏博、横海、昭义、河东、义武兵讨王廷凑。
现代文：十四日，调用魏博、横海、昭义、河东、义武诸军兵力讨伐王廷凑。
English: On the 14th, Wei Bo, Henghai, Zhao Yi, Hedong, and Yiwu armies were summoned to fight against Wang Tingpiao.

古文：己丑，裴度为幽、镇招抚使。
现代文：二十六日，裴度任幽、镇招抚使。
English: On the 26th, Pei Du was appointed as You and Zhen Zhaofu Envoy.

古文：九月乙巳，相州军乱，杀其刺史邢濋。
现代文：九月十二日，相州军队骚乱，杀了刺史邢氵楚。
English: On September 12th, the Xiangzhou army rioted and killed Zhang Shizhong.

古文：十月丙寅，诸道盐铁转运使、刑部尚书王播为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月初三，诸道盐铁转运使、刑部尚书王播任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the beginning of October 3rd, he was appointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation in various provinces, and the head of the criminal department, Shang Shuxuan, was appointed as the secretary of the middle school, and the teacher of the middle school, Xia Ping, was appointed.

古文：裴度为镇州西面行营都招讨使。
现代文：裴度任镇州西面行营都招讨使。
English: Pei Du appointed the envoys to the west side of Zhenzhou.

古文：左领军卫大将军杜叔良为深州诸道行营节度使。
现代文：左领军卫大将军杜叔良任深州诸道行营节度使。
English: General Du Shuliang, the left-hand leader of the Great Guard, was appointed as the envoy of the Shenzhou Road Campaign.

古文：戊寅，王廷凑陷贝州。
现代文：十五日，王廷凑攻破贝州。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Ting made a concerted attack to break through Bozhou.

古文：己卯，易州刺史柳公济及硃克融战于白石，败之。
现代文：十六日，易州刺史柳公济在白石与朱克融作战，打败朱克融。
English: On the 16th, Yizhou Zhi Shi Liu Gongji fought with Zhu Ke Rong in Baishi and defeated Zhu Ke Rong.

古文：庚辰，横海军节度使乌重胤及王廷凑战于饶阳，败之。
现代文：十七日，横海军节度使乌重胤在饶阳与王廷凑作战，打败王廷凑。
English: On the 17th, during the naval festival, Wu Shigetian fought against Wang Tingpai in Raoyang and defeated Wang Tingpai.

古文：辛卯，灵武节度使李进诚及吐蕃战于大石山，败之。
现代文：二十八日，灵武节度使李进诚在大石山与吐蕃军交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 28th, the Lingwu Festival made Li Jinsheng fight with the Tubo Army in Dashi Mountain, defeating the Tubo Army.

古文：十一月甲午，裴度及王廷凑战于会星，败之。
现代文：十一月初一，裴度在会星与王廷凑作战，打败王廷凑。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Pei Du fought against Wang Tingpai at the meeting of the stars and defeated Wang Tingpai.

古文：丙申，硃克融寇定州，义武军节度使陈楚败之。
现代文：初三，朱克融进犯定州，义武军节度使陈楚打败朱克融。
English: On the third day of the first semester, Zhu Ke Rong invaded Dingzhou, and the volunteer army defeated Chen Chu.

古文：十二月庚午，杜叔良及王廷凑战于博野，败绩。
现代文：十二月初八，杜叔良在博野与王廷凑作战，大败。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, Du Shuliang fought against Wang Ting in Bono, and was soundly defeated.

古文：丁丑，陈楚及硃克融战于望都，败之，乙酉，赦硃克融。
现代文：十五日，陈楚在望都与朱克融作战，打败朱克融。二十三日，朝廷赦免朱克融。
English: On the 15th, Chen Chu fought with Zhu Ke Rong in Wangdu and defeated Zhu Ke Rong. On the 23rd, the court pardoned Zhu Ke Rong.

古文：己丑，陈楚及克融战于清源，败之。
现代文：二十七日，陈楚在清源与朱克融作战，打败朱克融。
English: On the 27th, Chen Chu fought Zhu Ke Rong in Qingyuan and defeated Zhu Ke Rong.

古文：二年正月庚子，魏博军溃于南宫。
现代文：长庆二年正月初八，魏博军在南宫溃败。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the second year of Changqing, the Wei Bo army was defeated in the South Palace.

古文：癸卯，魏博节度使田布自杀，兵马使史宪诚自称留后。
现代文：十一日，魏博节度使田布自杀，兵马使史宪诚自称留后。
English: On the 11th day of the Wei Bo Festival, Tian Bu committed suicide, and the soldiers and horses made Shi Xiancheng claim to stay behind.

古文：海州海冰。
现代文：同日，海州海水结冰。
English: On the same day, the seawater in Haizhou froze.

古文：二月甲子，赦王廷凑。
现代文：二月初二，朝廷赦免王廷凑。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the imperial court pardoned Wang Tingzhuo.

古文：辛巳，崔植罢。
现代文：十九日，崔植被免职。
English: On the 19th, Cui Shuhei was removed from office.

古文：工部侍郎元稹同中书门下平章事。
现代文：工部侍郎元稹任同中书门下平章事。
English: The attendant of the engineering department, Motohiro, was appointed to the same position as the junior high school teacher, Shimohei Shoji.

古文：戊子，昭义军节度使刘悟囚其监军使刘承偕。
现代文：二十六日，昭义军节度使刘悟囚禁其监军刘承亻皆。
English: On the 26th day of the Shouyi Army Festival, Liu Gou imprisoned his supervisors, Liu Chengyuan and others.

古文：三月乙巳，武宁军节度副使王智兴逐其节度使崔群。
现代文：三月十四日，武宁军节度副使王智兴驱逐其节度使崔群。
English: On March 14, Wang Zhixing, deputy commander of the Wu Ning Army, expelled his commander, Cui Qun.

古文：戊午，守司徒、淮南节度使裴度同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，代理司徒、淮南节度使裴度任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, acting for Szeto and Huainan Jietu, Pei Du was appointed to the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：王播罢。
现代文：王播被免职。
English: Wang Biao was removed from his post.

古文：四月辛酉朔，日有之。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of April, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬戌，成德军节度使牛元翼奔于京师，王廷凑陷深州。
现代文：初二，成德军节度使牛元翼逃往京城。王廷凑攻破深州。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the German army's retreat caused Niu Yuanyi to flee to the capital. Wang Ting made a concerted effort to break through Shenzhou.

古文：五月壬寅，邕州刺史李元宗叛，奔于黄洞蛮。
现代文：五月十二日，邕州刺史李元宗反叛，投奔黄洞蛮族。
English: On May 12, Li Yuanzong rebelled and defected to the Huangdong barbarians.

古文：六月癸亥，宣武军宿直将李臣则逐其节度使李愿，衙门都将李反。
现代文：六月初四，宣武军宿直将李则臣驱逐其节度使李愿，衙门都将李宀介反叛。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the commander of the Xuanwu army, Li Zexen, expelled the commander of the Xuanwu army, Li Xuan, and the gatekeepers all rebelled against Li Xuan.

古文：甲子，裴度、元稹罢。
现代文：初五，裴度、元稹被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Pei Du and Yuan Qi were removed from their posts.

古文：兵部尚书李逢吉为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部尚书李逢吉任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Hyobusho Shoshu Li Fengji served as an attendant to the disciple, and Shoshu Shoshu Shodan Shodan Shodan Shodan Shodan.

古文：乙丑，大风落太庙鸱尾。
现代文：初六，大风吹落太庙屋脊上祈避火灾的装饰鸱尾。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, a strong wind blew down the decorative dovetails on the roof of the Great Temple to pray for fire prevention.

古文：癸酉，吐蕃寇灵州，盐州刺史赵旰败之。
现代文：十四日，吐蕃军进犯灵州，盐州刺史赵旰打败吐军。
English: On the 14th, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou, and Zhao Wei, the governor of Yanzhou, defeated the Tubo army.

古文：七月丙申，宋王结薨。
现代文：七月初八，宋王李结去世。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month, Song King Li Jie passed away.

古文：戊申，李陷宋州。
现代文：二十日，李宀介攻破宋州。
English: On the 20th, Li Yingjie invaded Songzhou.

古文：丙辰，衮郓节度使曹华及李战于宋州，败之。
现代文：二十八日，兖郓节度使曹华在宋州与李宀介作战，打败李宀介。
English: On the 28th day of the month, Gong Jiedu sent Cao Hua to fight with Li Yingjie in Songzhou and defeated Li Yingjie.

古文：丁巳，忠武军节度使李光颜又败之于尉氏。
现代文：二十九日，忠武军节度使李光颜在尉氏再败李宀介。
English: On the 29th, the loyal military festival caused Li Guangyan to defeat Li Xizhe again.

古文：八月壬申，宣武军节度使韩充又败之于郭桥。
现代文：八月十四日，宣武军节度使韩充在郭桥再一次打败李宀介。
English: On August 14th, Han Chong defeated Li Ying Ke at Guoqiao once again.

古文：丙子，李伏诛。
现代文：十八日，李宀介伏法处死。
English: On the 18th, he was executed by hanging.

古文：癸未，诏瘗汴、宋、郑三州战亡者，禀其家三岁。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：埋葬汴、宋、郑三州的阵亡者，赐给其家属谷物三年。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: to bury the war dead from the three states of Min, Song and Zheng, and to give their families grain for three years.

古文：九月戊子，镇海军将王国清谋反，伏诛。
现代文：九月初一，镇海军将领王国清谋反，伏法处死。
English: On the first day of September, the town's naval commander, Kingdom Qing, plotted a rebellion and was executed.

古文：丙申，德州军乱，杀其刺史王稷。
现代文：初九，德州军队骚乱，杀了本州刺史王稷。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Texas army rioted and killed the Honshu thorn, Wang Yao.

古文：十月己卯，猎于咸阳。
现代文：十月二十二日，穆宗在咸阳打猎。
English: On October 22, Mu Zong went hunting in Xianyang.

古文：十一月庚午，皇太后幸华清宫。
现代文：十一月十四日，皇太后郭氏去华清宫。
English: On November 14, Empress Dowager Guo went to Huaqing Palace.

古文：癸酉，迎皇太后，遂猎于骊山。
现代文：十七日，穆宗赴华清宫迎接皇太后，接着在骊山打猎。
English: On the 17th, Mu Zong went to Huaqing Palace to meet the Empress Dowager, and then went hunting in Lushan.

古文：丙子，集王缃薨。
现代文：二十日，集王李缃去世。
English: On the 20th, Ji Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：十二月丁亥，不豫，放五坊鹰隼及供猎狐兔。
现代文：十二月初二，穆宗发病，放出五坊豢养的鹰隼及专供射猎的狐兔。
English: On the second day of December, when Mu Zong fell ill, he released five eagle cubs and a fox and rabbit specially bred for shooting.

古文：癸巳，立景王湛为皇太子。
现代文：初七，立景王李湛为皇太子。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month, Prince Licheng Wang Li Zhan became the crown prince.

古文：癸丑，降死罪以下，赐文武常参及州府长宫子为父后者勋两转，宗子诸亲一转。
现代文：二十七日，对死罪以下囚犯减刑，赐予定时上朝见君的常参文武官员及州府长官官位在其父以下者提升勋衔两级，宗子诸亲提勋衔一级。
English: On the 27th, the death penalty was commuted for prisoners below the death penalty, and the civil and military officers and prefectural governors who had seen the emperor at the time were awarded two levels of decoration if they were younger than their father, and one level of decoration if they were older than their father.

古文：是冬，无冰，草木萌。
现代文：本年冬季，无冰，草木萌生。
English: This winter, there is no ice, and plants are sprouting.

古文：三年三月壬戌，御史中丞牛僧孺为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：长庆三年三月初七，御史中丞牛僧孺任户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Gushi Chujo Niu Soan was appointed as the attendant of the household department, and Shumon Shimohei was appointed as the secretary of the same department.

古文：癸亥，淮南、浙东西、江西、宣歙旱，遣使宣抚，理系囚，察官吏。
现代文：初八，淮南、浙东、浙西、江南、宣歙旱灾，穆宗派使臣前往巡视、安抚灾民，审理在押罪犯的罪状，考察受灾地区的官吏。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, droughts hit Huainan, East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang, Jiangnan, and Xuanfan, and the envoys of the Mu Sect went to inspect and pacify the victims, try the criminals in custody, and inspect the officials in the affected areas.

古文：四月甲午，陆州獠反。
现代文：四月初十，陆州僚族反叛。
English: On the tenth day of the fourth month, the people of Luzhou rebelled.

古文：五月壬申，京师雨雹。
现代文：五月十八日，京城长安降落冰雹。
English: On May 18th, hailstones fell in Beijing's Chang'an District.

古文：七月丙寅，黄洞蛮陷钦州。
现代文：七月十四日，黄洞蛮军攻破钦州。
English: On July 14th, the Huangdong barbarian army broke through Qinzhou.

古文：九月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：十月己丑，杜元颖罢。
现代文：十月初八，杜元颖被免职。
English: On October 8, Du Yuanying was removed from office.

古文：辛卯，黄洞蛮寇安南。
现代文：初十，黄洞蛮军进犯安南。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Huangdong barbarian army invaded Annan.

古文：四年正月辛亥，降死罪以下，减流人一岁。
现代文：长庆四年正月初一，对死罪以下囚犯减刑，流放的犯人减刑一年。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Changqing, the sentence of prisoners with less than the death penalty was reduced, and the sentence of exiled prisoners was reduced by one year.

古文：赐文武官及宗子、贺正使阶、勋、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员及皇族子弟、贺正使官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: Civil and military officials and imperial family members, including He Zhengzhi, were given official ranks, decorations and peerages.

古文：诏百官言事。
现代文：诏令百官议政。
English: The imperial edict called for hundreds of officials to discuss politics.

古文：辛未，以皇太子权句当军国政事。
现代文：二十一日，委派皇太子李湛代行裁处军国政事。
English: On the 21st, the crown prince Li Zhan was appointed to act as the adjudicator of military and political affairs.

古文：壬申，皇帝崩于清思殿，年三十。
现代文：二十二日，穆宗在清思殿逝世，终年三十岁。
English: On the 22nd, Mu Zong passed away at the age of 30 at the Ching Si Temple.

古文：敬宗睿武昭愍孝皇帝讳湛，穆宗长子也。母曰恭僖皇太后王氏。始封鄂王，徙封景王。
现代文：敬宗，名湛，穆宗的长子。母亲是恭僖皇太后王氏。起初被封为鄂王，后改封为景王。
English: The eldest son of Keizong, Mingzhan, and Mu Zong. His mother was the Dowager Empress Dowager Wang. At first, he was given the title of King of E, but later he was given the title of King of Jing.

古文：长庆二年十二月，穆宗因击球暴得疾，不见群臣者三日。
现代文：长庆二年十二月，穆宗因击球突然得病，三日不见群臣。
English: In December of the second year of Changqing, Mu Zong suddenly fell ill due to batting, and did not see his ministers for three days.

古文：左仆射裴度三上疏，请立皇太子，而翰林学士、两省官相次皆以为言。
现代文：左仆射裴度三次进呈奏疏，请立皇太子，而翰林学士、中书、门下两省官员也相继依官职以此进言。
English: Zuo's servant, Sha Pei Du, made three speeches, asking for the crown prince to be appointed, while Hanlin Baozhang, Zhongshu, and the two provincial officials under him also made speeches in accordance with their official duties.

古文：居数日，穆宗疾少闲，宰相李逢吉请立景王为皇太子。
现代文：过了数日，穆宗病稍愈，宰相李逢吉请立景王李湛为皇太子。
English: A few days later, when Mu Zong's illness had somewhat recovered, Prime Minister Li Fengji invited King Jing Wang Li Zhan to become crown prince.

古文：四年正月，穆宗崩。
现代文：长庆四年正月，穆宗逝世。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Mu Zong passed away.

古文：癸酉，门下侍郎、平章事李逢吉摄冢宰。
现代文：二十三日，门下侍郎、平章事李逢吉兼冢宰。
English: On the 23rd, his subordinate waiter, Taira no Shoji, became Li Fengji and the head steward.

古文：丙子，皇太子即皇帝位于太极殿。二月辛巳，始听政。
现代文：二十六日，李湛在太极殿登基。二月初一，敬宗开始处理政事。
English: On the 26th, Li Zhan ascended the throne in the Taiji Hall. On the first day of February, Emperor Keizong began to deal with political affairs.

古文：癸未，尊母为皇太后，皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：初三，尊奉其母王氏为皇太后，皇太后郭氏为太皇太后。
English: On the third day of her junior year, she revered her mother, Wang, as empress dowager, and Guo, empress dowager, as empress dowager.

古文：辛卯，放掖庭内园没入者。
现代文：十一日，放还妃嫔居所内因家庭获罪收入的宫女奴婢。
English: On the 11th day, the palace maidservants and maidservants in the residence of the concubine were released because of the family's criminal income.

古文：丁未，击鞠于中和殿。
现代文：二十七日，敬宗在中和殿击鞠。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Keizong played a game of Jiu-Jitsu in Zhonghe Hall.

古文：戊申，击鞠于飞龙院。
现代文：二十八日，在飞龙院击鞠。
English: On the 28th, they played a game of bowls at Fei Long Yuan.

古文：黄洞蛮降。
现代文：同日，反叛的黄洞蛮军投降。
English: On the same day, the rebel Huangdong barbarian army surrendered.

古文：己酉，击鞠，用乐。
现代文：二十九日，敬宗击鞠奏乐。
English: On the 29th, Keizong played a game of marbles.

古文：三月壬子大赦。
现代文：三月初三，施行大赦。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：免京畿、河南青苗税，减宫禁经费、乘舆服膳，罢贡鹰犬。
现代文：免征京畿、河南道青苗税，减省宫廷经费、车马、服饰、膳食，取消进贡鹰犬。
English: The young seedlings of Gyeonggi Province and Henan Province were exempted from the tax, the palace funds, cars, horses, clothing, and meals were reduced, and the tribute eagle dog was canceled.

古文：元和以来，两河籓镇归地者予一子官。
现代文：元和年以来，两河蕃镇归属于朝廷者授予其一子官职。
English: Since the Yuan and He years, the people of Liangzhu Town of the two rivers, who belonged to the imperial court, granted their son an official post.

古文：庚午，太白经天。
现代文：二十一日，太白星行经天空。
English: On the twenty-first day, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：四月丙申，击鞠于清思殿。
现代文：四月十七日，敬宗在清思殿击鞠。
English: On the 17th of April, Keizong played a game of Jiu-Jitsu at the Seisiden Hall.

古文：梁坊匠张韶反，幸左神策军，韶伏诛。
现代文：染坊匠张韶反叛，敬宗来至神策军，张韶伏法处死。
English: Zhang Ye, a dyer, rebelled, and Keizong came to Shinsaka's army, and Zhang Ye was put to death.

古文：丁酉，还宫。
现代文：十八日，敬宗回宫。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Keizong returned to the palace.

古文：五月乙卯，吏部侍郎李程、户部侍郎判度支窦易直同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月初七，吏部侍郎李程、户部侍郎判度支窦易直任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month, Li Cheng, the secretary of the personnel department, and Guandu Shidou Yi, the secretary of the household department, were appointed to the same position as the junior high school students.

古文：六月庚辰，大风坏延喜、景风门。
现代文：六月初二，大风刮坏延喜门、景风门。
English: On the second day of June, heavy winds blew down Yanxi Gate and Jingfeng Gate.

古文：是夏，汉水溢。
现代文：夏季，汉水泛滥。
English: In summer, the Han River floods.

古文：八月丁亥，太白昼见。
现代文：八月十一日，白昼出现太白星。
English: On August 11, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁酉，中官季文德谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十一日，中官季文德谋反，伏法处死。
English: On the twenty-first day, Lieutenant Colonel Ji Wende plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：黄洞蛮寇安南。
现代文：同日，黄洞蛮军进犯安南。
English: On the same day, the Huangdong barbarian army invaded Annan.

古文：十一月戊午，环王及黄洞蛮陷陆州，刺史葛维死之。
现代文：十一月十三日，环王与黄洞蛮军攻破陆州，刺史葛维死难。
English: On November 13th, Huan Wang and the Yellow Cave barbarian army broke through Luzhou, stabbing Shi Gewei to death.

古文：庚申，葬睿圣文惠、孝皇帝于光陵。宝历元年正月己酉，朝献于太清宫。庚戌，朝享于太庙。
现代文：十五日，将穆宗安葬于光陵。宝历元年正月初五，在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 15th, Mu Zong was buried in the Guangling Mausoleum. On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Baoli era, a morning offering ceremony was held at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up to enjoy the offerings. On the 6th day of the 1st month, a ritual was held at the Grand Temple.

古文：辛亥，有事于南郊。
现代文：初七，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the third day of junior high school, a festival is held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：乙卯，牛僧孺罢。
现代文：十一日，牛僧孺被免职。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Niu Sangyu was removed from his post.

古文：四月癸巳，群臣上尊号曰文武大圣广孝皇帝。
现代文：四月二十日，群臣给敬宗加尊号为 文武大圣广孝皇帝 。
English: On April 20th, a group of courtiers conferred the honorific title of "Emperor Wenwu Daisheng Guangxiao" on Emperor Keizong.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：五月庚戌，观竞渡于鱼藻宫九月壬午，昭义军节度使刘悟卒，其子从谏自称留后。
现代文：五月初七，敬宗在鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡。九月十二日，昭义军节度使刘悟去世，其子刘从谏自称留后。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Emperor Keizong watched the boat race in the Fish Algae Palace. On September 12, the Shouyi Army Festival caused Liu Wou to die, and his son Liu Conglu claimed to stay behind.

古文：十一月丙申，封子普为晋王。
现代文：十一月二十七日，敬宗封其子李普为晋王。
English: On November 27th, Emperor Jingzong appointed his son Li Pu as Jin Wang.

古文：二年正月甲戌，发神策六军穿池于禁中。
现代文：宝历二年正月初六，调派神策六军在宫廷内凿池。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the second lunar month, the Sixth Division of the Divine Defense Force was dispatched to dig a pond in the palace.

古文：二月丁未，山南西道节度使裴度守司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月初九，山南西道节使裴度代理司空，任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, Shannan West Road Festival, Pei Du's deputy, Siku, was appointed as the deputy of Zhongshumen.

古文：三月戌寅，观竞渡于鱼藻宫。
现代文：三月十一日，敬宗在鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡。
English: On March 11th, Emperor Keizong watched a boat race at the Fish Algae Palace.

古文：四月戊戌，横海军节变使李全略卒，其子同捷反。
现代文：四月初一，横海军节度使李全略去世，其子李同捷反叛。
English: On the first day of April, during the naval festival, Li Quanliao died, and his son Li Tongjie rebelled.

古文：五月戊寅，观竞渡于鱼藻宫。
现代文：五月十一日，敬宗在鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡。
English: On May 11, Emperor Keizong watched a boat race at the Fish Algae Palace.

古文：庚辰，幽州卢龙军乱，杀其节度使硃克融，其子延嗣自称节度使。
现代文：十三日，幽州卢龙军骚乱，杀其节度使朱克融，其子朱延嗣自称节度使。
English: On the 13th, the Yuzhou Lulong Army rioted, killing its commander Zhu Ke Rong, and his son Zhu Yan Zi claimed to be the commander.

古文：六月辛酉，观渔于临碧池。
现代文：六月二十五日，敬宗在临碧池观看打鱼。
English: On June 25, Keizong watched a fish fight at Linbi Pond.

古文：甲子，观驴鞠、角牴于三殿。
现代文：二十八日，在三处宫殿观看驴鞠、角牛氐戏。
English: On the 28th, they watched the donkey jousting and the horned ox dance in three palaces.

古文：七月癸未，衡王绚薨。
现代文：七月十八日，衡王李绚去世。
English: Heng Wang Li Hua passed away on July 18.

古文：以氵美陂隶尚食，禁民渔。
现代文：同日，将陂隶属于掌管帝王膳食的尚食官管辖，禁止百姓在陂打鱼。
English: On the same day, the eel was subordinated to the jurisdiction of the Shang food official in charge of the emperor's diet, and the people were prohibited from beating fish in the eel.

古文：八月丙午，观竞渡于新池。
现代文：八月十一日，敬宗在新凿成的宫池观看舟船竞渡。
English: On August 11th, Keizong watched a boat race on the newly-hewn palace pond.

古文：九月甲戌，观百战于宣和殿，三日而罢。
现代文：九月初十，敬宗在宣和殿观看百戏表演，连续三日才作罢。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month of the year, Emperor Keizong watched a hundred plays in the Xuanhe Hall, and only gave up after three days.

古文：戊寅，幽州卢龙军兵马使李载义杀硃延嗣，自称留后。
现代文：十四日，幽州卢龙军兵马使李载义杀了朱延嗣，自称留后。
English: On the 14th, the soldiers and horses of the Yuzhou Lulong Army sent Li Zaiyi to kill Zhu Yanji, claiming to stay behind.

古文：壬午，李程罢。
现代文：十八日，李程被免职。
English: On the 18th, Li Cheng was dismissed.

古文：十一月甲申，李逢吉罢。
现代文：十一月二十一日，李逢吉被免职。
English: On November 21, Li Fengji was removed from his post.

古文：己丑，禁朝官、方镇置私白身。十二月，中官刘克明反。
现代文：二十六日，禁止朝官、方镇私自设立未经朝廷授予官职的僚属。十二月，中官刘克明反叛。
English: On the 26th, imperial officials and Fang Zhen were prohibited from setting up subordinates who had not been granted official positions by the imperial court. In December, Lieutenant Colonel Liu Keming rebelled.

古文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝讳昂，穆宗第二子也。
现代文：初八，敬宗逝世，年十八岁。文宗，名昂，穆宗的次子。
English: In his eighth year of junior high school, Keizong died at the age of 18. He was the second son of Wenzong, Miao, and Muzong.

古文：母曰贞献皇太后萧氏。
现代文：母亲是贞献皇太后萧氏。
English: His mother was Zhenxian Empress Dowager Xiao.

古文：始封江王。
现代文：起初被封为江王。
English: At first, he was given the title of "Kiang Wang."

古文：宝历二年十二月，敬宗崩，刘克明等矫诏以绛王悟句当军国事。
现代文：宝历二年十二月，敬宗逝世，刘克明等诈传伪诏以绛王李悟处理军国政务。
English: In December of the second year of the Baoli calendar, when Emperor Keizong passed away, Liu Keming and others falsified the imperial edict and used the puppet king Li Wugu to handle the military government affairs.

古文：壬寅，内枢密使王守澄、杨承和，神策护军中尉魏从简、梁守谦奉江王而立之，率神策六军、飞龙兵诛克明，杀绛王。
现代文：初九，内枢密使王守澄、杨承和，神策护军中尉魏从简、梁守谦奉立江王李昂，率领神策六军、飞龙兵诛戮刘克明，杀了绛王李悟。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Shoucheng and Yang Chenghe, inner privy council envoys, and Wei Congjian and Liang Shouqian, lieutenants of the divine protection army, pledged to establish the king of the river, Liang, and led the divine protection six army and the flying dragon soldiers to kill Liu Kemin, and killed the king of the dragon, Li Wou.

古文：乙巳，江王即皇帝位于宣政殿。
现代文：十二日，江王李昂在宣政殿登基。
English: On the 12th, Jiang Wang Liang ascended to the throne in Xuancheng Palace.

古文：戊申，始听政。
现代文：十五日，开始处理政务。
English: On the 15th, he began to deal with government affairs.

古文：尊母为皇太后。
现代文：尊奉母亲萧氏为皇太后。
English: She revered her mother, Zheng, as the empress dowager.

古文：庚戌，兵部侍郎、翰林学士韦处厚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，兵部侍郎、翰林学士韦处厚任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the seventeenth day, the attendants of the military department and the scholars of Hanlin and Wei were appointed as the attendants of the middle school and the students of the middle school were appointed.

古文：庚申，出宫人三千，省教坊乐工、翰林伎术冗员千二百七十人，纵五坊鹰犬，停贡纂组雕镂、金筐宝饰床榻。
现代文：二十七日，放出宫女三千人，裁减宫廷教坊乐工、翰林伎师术士冗员一千二百七十人，放掉五坊豢养的鹰犬，停止进贡赤色绶带、雕镂器物以及金筐宝饰的床榻。
English: On the 27th, 3,000 maids of honour were dismissed, 1,270 court musicians and court magicians were made redundant, five eagle dogs were released, and the payment of tribute in the form of red ribbons, carved and enameled objects, and beds adorned with golden baskets was stopped.

古文：大和元年二月乙巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：太和元年二月十三日，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On February 13, 2019, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：免京兆今岁夏税半。
现代文：免征京兆本年夏税的一半。
English: Half of this year's summer tax of Beijing and Shanghai will be exempted.

古文：赐九庙陪位者子孙二阶，立功将士阶、爵，始封诸王后予一子出身。
现代文：赐予九庙神主的陪位者子孙官阶二级，赐给立功将士官阶、爵位，开始实行封赐诸王的后代一子中吏部考试资历。
English: The descendants of the attendants of the priests of the nine temples were given the second level of official ranks, the non-commissioned officers and peerages were given to the meritorious generals, and the examination qualifications of the descendants of the kings were given.

古文：五月戊辰，罢宰臣奏事监搜。
现代文：五月初七，取消宰辅大臣奏事由御史搜查后方许进殿的制度。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the year, the system of being allowed to enter the hall after the vice-minister's report was cancelled.

古文：丙子，横海军节度使乌重胤讨李同捷。
现代文：十五日，横海军节度使乌重胤讨伐李同捷。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the naval festival brought Wu Chongyin to fight against Li Tongjie.

古文：六月癸巳，淮南节度副大使王播为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月初三，淮南节度副大使王播任尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, Wang Boryen, Vice-Ambassador of Huainan Festival, shook the left hand of Shang Shuxu and shook the right hand of Dong Zhong Shuxu.

古文：乙卯，以旱降京畿死罪以下。
现代文：二十五日，因旱灾对京畿内判死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On the 25th, prisoners sentenced to death or less in Gyeonggi Province had their sentences reduced due to the drought.

古文：七月癸酉，葬睿武昭愍孝皇帝于庄陵。十一月庚辰，横海军节度使李寰讨李同捷。
现代文：七月十三日，将敬宗葬于庄陵。十一月二十二日，横海军节度使李寰讨伐李同捷。
English: On July 13th, Emperor Jingzong was buried in the mausoleum. On November 22nd, during the naval festival, Emperor Li Yong sent Li Tongjie to the battlefield.

古文：十二月庚戌，王智兴为沧州行营招抚使。
现代文：十二月二十三日，王智兴任沧州行营招抚使。
English: On December 23, Wang Zhixing was appointed as the envoy of the Cangzhou Campaign.

古文：二年正月壬申，地震。
现代文：太和二年正月十五日，地震。
English: On the 15th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Taiwa era, an earthquake occurred.

古文：六月乙卯，晋王普薨。
现代文：六月初一，晋王李普去世。
English: On the first day of June, King Jin Li Pu passed away.

古文：己巳，大风拔木。
现代文：十五日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 15th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：乙亥，峰州刺史王升朝反，伏诛。
现代文：二十一日，峰州刺史王升朝反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Sheng of Fengzhou rebelled against the imperial court and was executed.

古文：是夏，河溢，坏隶州城；越州海溢。
现代文：夏季，黄河泛滥，冲坏棣州城；越州海潮泛滥。
English: In summer, the Yellow River floods and washes away the city of Zhangzhou; the Yuezhou tidal wave floods.

古文：七月辛丑，魏博节度使史宪诚及同捷战于平原，败之。
现代文：七月十七日，魏博节度使史宪诚在平原与李同捷作战，打败李同捷。
English: On July 17th, the Wei Bo Festival made Shi Xiancheng fight with Li Tongjie on the plain and defeat Li Tongjie.

古文：甲辰，有彗星出于右摄提。八月己巳，王廷凑反。
现代文：二十日，在右摄提三星间出现彗星。八月十六日，王廷凑反叛。
English: On the 20th, a comet appeared between the three stars on the right. On August 16th, Wang Tingpai rebelled.

古文：壬申，义武军节度使柳公济及廷凑战于新乐，败之。
现代文：十九日，义武军节度使柳公济在新乐与王廷凑作战，打败王廷凑。
English: On the 19th, the festival of the volunteer army made Liu Gongji fight with Wang Tingpai in Xinle, and defeated Wang Tingpai.

古文：己卯，刘从谏又败之于临城。
现代文：二十六日，在临城，刘从谏又打败王廷凑。
English: On the 26th, in Lincheng, Liu Congtao defeated Wang Tingqiao again.

古文：辛巳，史宪诚及李同捷战于平原，败之。
现代文：二十八日，史宪诚在平原与李同捷作战，打败李同捷。
English: On the 28th, Shi Xiancheng fought with Li Tongjie on the plain and defeated Li Tongjie.

古文：癸未，刘从谏及王廷凑战于昭庆，败之。
现代文：三十日，刘从谏在昭庆与王廷凑作战，打败王廷凑。
English: On the 30th, Liu Conglu fought with Wang Tingpai in Zhaoqing and defeated Wang Tingpai.

古文：九月癸卯，柳公济又败之于博野。
现代文：九月二十日，在博野，柳公济又打败王廷凑。
English: On September 20th, in Bono, Liu Gongji defeated Wang Tingqiao again.

古文：丁未，岳王绲薨。
现代文：二十四日，岳王李绲去世。
English: On the 24th, Yue Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：庚戌，安南军乱，逐其都护韩约。
现代文：二十七日，安南军队骚乱，驱逐了都护韩约。
English: On the 27th, Annan's troops rioted and drove out the Korean protectorate.

古文：十月庚申，史宪诚及李同捷战于平原，败之。
现代文：十月初八，史宪诚在平原与李同捷作战，打败李同捷。
English: On October 8, Shi Xiancheng fought with Li Tongjie on the plain and defeated Li Tongjie.

古文：丁卯，洋王忻薨。
现代文：十五日，洋王李忻去世。
English: On the 15th, Yang Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：癸酉，窦易直罢。
现代文：二十五日，窦易直被免职。
English: On the 25th, Dou Yizhi was removed from office.

古文：戊寅，史宪诚及李同捷战于平原，败之。
现代文：二十六日，史宪诚在平原与李同捷作战，打败李同捷。
English: On the 26th, Shi Xiancheng fought with Li Tongjie on the plain and defeated Li Tongjie.

古文：壬午，幽州卢龙军节度使李载义又败之于长芦。
现代文：三十日，幽州卢龙军节度使李载义又在长芦打败李同捷。
English: On the 30th, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival made Li Zaiyi defeat Li Tongjie in Changlu.

古文：十一月壬辰，给复隶州一年，禀战士创废者终身。
现代文：十一月初十，免除棣州徭役一年，受重伤致残的战士终身供给谷物。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the first month, he was exempted from the Luzhou conscription for one year, and the soldiers who were seriously injured and disabled were provided with cereals for life.

古文：甲辰，昭德寺火。
现代文：二十二日，昭德寺失火。
English: On the 22nd, Shodeki-ji Temple caught fire.

古文：十二月乙丑，魏博行营兵马使丌志沼反。
现代文：十二月十四日，魏博行营兵马使丌志沼反叛。
English: On December 14th, Wei Bo Xingying's soldiers and horses made Shishinuma rebel.

古文：壬申，韦处厚薨。
现代文：二十一日，韦处厚逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wei Shuchuang passed away.

古文：戊寅，兵部侍郎、翰林学士路隋为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，兵部侍郎、翰林学士路隋任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, the attendant of the military department and the scholar Hanlin Sui were appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the disciple of the middle school was He Ping.

古文：三年正月丁亥，宣武、河阳兵讨丌志沼。
现代文：太和三年正月初六，宣武、河阳兵讨伐丌志沼。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Taihe era, soldiers from Xuanwu and Heyang battled over Shishinuma.

古文：庚子，地沼奔于镇州。
现代文：十九日，丌志沼逃往镇州。
English: On the 19th, Shishinuma fled to Zhenzhou.

古文：三月乙酉，罢教坊日直乐工。
现代文：三月初五，取消教坊安排乐工值日演奏。
English: On the 5th of March, the music workshop was cancelled.

古文：乙巳，以太原兵马使傅毅为义武军节度使，义武军不受命，都知兵马使张璠自称节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任用太原兵马使傅毅为义武军节度使，义武军不接受命令，都知兵马使张自称节度使。
English: On the 25th, the Taiyuan military envoy Fu Yi was appointed as the volunteer army's festival envoy. The volunteer army did not accept the order, and all knew that the soldier and horse envoy Zhang claimed to be the festival envoy.

古文：戊申，以璠为义武军节度使。
现代文：二十八日，任命张为义武军节度使。
English: On the 28th, Zhang was appointed as the ceremonial envoy of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：四月戊辰，沧景节度使李祐克德州，李同捷降。
现代文：四月十九日，沧景节度使李攻下德州，李同捷投降。
English: On the 19th of April, the vicissitudes of the situation made Li conquer Texas, and Li Tongjie surrendered.

古文：乙亥，沧德宣慰使柏耆以同捷归于京师，杀之于将陵。
现代文：二十六日，沧德宣慰使柏耆将李同捷带回京城，在将陵杀了李同捷。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the vicissitudes of life and death made Baodi bring Li Tongjie back to Beijing, and killed Li Tongjie in the mausoleum.

古文：五月辛卯，给复沧、景、德、隶四州一年。
现代文：五月十三日，免除沧、景、德、棣四州徭役一年。
English: On May 13th, Cang, Jing, De, and Zou were exempted from serving as magistrates of the four states for one year.

古文：六月甲戌，魏博军乱，杀其节度使史宪诚，都知兵马使何进滔自称留后。
现代文：六月二十六日，魏博军队骚乱，杀了节度使史宪诚，都知兵马使何进滔自称留后。
English: On June 26th, the Wei Bo army rioted and killed the commander-in-chief, Shi Xiancheng, and the commander-in-chief, He Jinlong, who claimed to stay behind.

古文：八月辛亥，以相、卫、澶三州隶相卫节度使，进滔不受命。
现代文：八月初四，朝廷将相、卫、澶三州隶属于相卫节度使，何进滔不接受命令。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the imperial court subordinated the three states of Sangu, Wei and Qin to the Wei Festival Envoy, but He Jintao did not accept the order.

古文：辛酉，以旱免京畿九县今岁租。
现代文：十四日，因旱灾免去京畿九县本年租税。
English: On the 14th, due to the drought, Gyeonggi nine counties were exempted from this year's tax.

古文：壬申，赦王廷凑。
现代文：二十五日，赦免王廷凑。
English: On the 25th, Wang Tingpai was pardoned.

古文：甲戌，吏部侍郎李宗闵同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，吏部侍郎李宗闵任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Li Zongyu, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed to the same position as the disciple of the middle school.

古文：十月癸丑，仗内火。
现代文：十月初六，仪卫衙中失火。
English: On the 6th day of October, a fire broke out in Yiwei Middle School.

古文：十一月壬辰，朝献于太清宫。癸巳，朝享于太庙。
现代文：十一月十六日，文宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。十七日，祭祀太庙。
English: On November 16th, Emperor Wenzong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up to enjoy the offerings. On the 17th, a ceremony was held at the Grand Temple.

古文：甲午，有事于南郊。
现代文：十八日，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the 18th, a festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：诏毋献难成非常之物，焚丝布撩陵机杼。
现代文：下诏：不要进献难制成、难生成的异常之物，焚毁丝布缭绫织机。
English: The following edict was issued: Don't give in to abnormal things that are difficult to make and difficult to produce, and burn the silk loom.

古文：是月，云南蛮陷巂、邛二州。
现代文：本月，云南蛮攻破、邛二州。
English: This month, Yunnan defeated and defeated two states.

古文：十二月丁未，鄂岳、襄邓、忠武军伐云南蛮。
现代文：十二月初一，调遣鄂岳、襄邓、忠武军兵力讨伐云南蛮。
English: On the first day of December, the troops of E Yue, Xiang Deng and Zhongwu were dispatched to fight the Yunnan Barbarians.

古文：庚戌，云南蛮寇成都，右领军卫大将军董重质为左右神策及诸道行营西川都知兵马使以伐之。
现代文：初四，云南蛮军进犯成都，右领军卫大将军董重质任左右神策军及诸道行营西川都知兵马使前往讨伐。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Yunnan barbarian army invaded Chengdu, and the right-hand leader of the army, General of the Guards Dong Chongzhen, ordered the left- and right-hand troops of the Divine Providence Army and the soldiers and horses of the Nishikawa Tochi, who were marching in all directions, to go to the crusade.

古文：己未，云南蛮寇梓州。
现代文：十三日，云南蛮军进犯梓州。
English: On the 13th, the Yunnan barbarian army invaded Zizhou.

古文：壬戌，寇蜀州。
现代文：十六日，进犯蜀州。
English: On the 16th, it invaded Shuzhou.

古文：四年正月戊子，封子永为鲁王。
现代文：太和四年正月十三日，文宗封其子李永为鲁王。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 4th year of the Taihe era, Emperor Wenzong made his son Li Yong the King of Lu.

古文：辛卯，武昌军节度使牛僧孺为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十六日，武昌军节度使牛僧孺任兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 16th, the festival of Wuchang Army made Niu Xiangyu be appointed to the military department of Shangshu and the middle school of Shangshu.

古文：甲午，王播薨。
现代文：十九日，王播去世。
English: On the 19th, Wang Biao passed away.

古文：二月乙卯，兴元军乱，杀其节度使李绛。
现代文：二月初十，兴元军队骚乱，杀了节度使李绛。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, the Xingyuan army rioted and killed the military commander Li Xi.

古文：三月癸卯，禁京畿弋猎。
现代文：三月二十九日，禁止在京畿射猎。
English: On March 29, shooting was banned in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：四月丁未，奚寇边，李载义败之。
现代文：四月初三，奚族劫掠边境，李载义打败奚军。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, the Yao people plundered the border, and Li Zaiyi defeated the Yao army.

古文：六月丁未，裴度平章军国重事。
现代文：六月初五，裴度受任处理重大军国事务。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month, Pei Du was appointed to deal with major military affairs.

古文：是夏，舒州江溢。
现代文：夏季，舒州一带的长江泛滥。
English: In summer, the Yangtze River floods in the Shuzhou area.

古文：七月癸未，尚书右丞宋申锡同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月十一日，尚书右丞宋申锡任同中书门下平章事。
English: On July 11th, Song Shensi, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed as the second-in-command of Zhongshu.

古文：九月壬午，裴度罢。
现代文：九月十一日，裴度被免职。
English: On September 11, Baidu was removed from office.

古文：五年正月庚申，幽州卢龙军乱，逐其节度使李载义，杀莫州刺史张庆初，兵马使杨志诚自称留后。
现代文：太和五年正月二十一日，幽州卢龙军骚乱，驱逐其节度使李载义，杀了莫州刺史张庆初，兵马使杨志诚自称留后。
English: On the twenty-first day of the first month of the fifth year, the Yuzhou Lulong Army rioted, and the expulsion of its festival made Li Zaiyi, killed the Mozhou assassin Zhang Qingchu, and made Yang Zhicheng stay behind.

古文：三月庚子，贬宋申锡为太子右庶子。
现代文：三月初二，将宋申锡贬为太子右庶子。
English: On the second day of March, Song Shensi was relegated to the position of the prince's second son.

古文：癸卯，降封漳王凑为巢县公。
现代文：初五，将漳王李凑降封为巢县公。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he demoted Shao Wang Liqin to the post of county magistrate.

古文：六月甲午，梓州玄武江溢。
现代文：六月二十八日，梓州玄武江泛滥。
English: On June 28, the Xuanwu River overflowed in Zizhou.

古文：六年正月壬子，降死罪以下。
现代文：太和六年正月十八日，对死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On the 18th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Taiwa era, the sentences of prisoners with crimes punishable by death or less were reduced.

古文：二月，苏州地震，生白毛。
现代文：二月，苏州地震，地面长出白毛状物。
English: In February, after the Suzhou earthquake, white hairs appeared on the ground.

古文：五月庚申，给民疫死者棺，十岁以下不能自存者二月粮。
现代文：五月二十八日，给遭疫病死亡的百姓棺木，十岁以下不能独立生存的儿童每人给二月口粮。
English: On May 28, coffins were given to people who died of the epidemic, and children under the age of ten who could not survive independently were each given February rations.

古文：七月戊申，原王逵薨。
现代文：七月十八日，原王李逵去世。
English: On July 18th, the former King Lihong passed away.

古文：十一月甲子，立鲁王永为皇太子。
现代文：十一月甲子日，立鲁王李永为皇太子。
English: On November 1, Li Yong, the king of Lu, was crowned crown prince.

古文：十二月乙丑，牛僧孺罢。
现代文：十二月初七，牛僧孺被免职。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Niu Sangyu was removed from his post.

古文：己巳，珍王諴薨。
现代文：十一日，珍王李讠咸去世。
English: On the 11th day, Zhen Wang Lihong passed away.

古文：七年正月壬辰，罢吴、蜀冬贡茶。
现代文：太和七年正月初四，取消吴、蜀二地进贡冬茶。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the seventh year of the Taihe era, the tax on winter tea in Wu and Shu was abolished.

古文：二月丙戌，兵部尚书李德裕同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月二十八日，兵部尚书李德裕任同中书门下平章事。
English: On February 28th, Li Deyu, the head of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed to the same position as the head of the Ministry of Education.

古文：三月辛卯，幽州卢龙军节度使杨志诚执春衣使边奉鸾、送奚契丹使尹士恭。
现代文：三月初四，幽州卢龙军节度使杨志诚扣押朝廷派来的春衣使边奉鸾，送奚、契丹使尹士恭。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival made Yang Zhicheng seize the spring clothing envoy sent by the imperial court, Bian Bongye, Zengye, and the Khitan envoy, Yin Shigong.

古文：辛丑，和王绮薨。
现代文：十四日，和王李绮去世。
English: On the 14th, Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：六月甲戌，地震。
现代文：六月十八日，地震。
English: June 18th, an earthquake.

古文：乙亥，李宗闵罢。
现代文：十九日，李宗闵被免职。
English: On the 19th, Li Zongyao was removed from office.

古文：七月壬寅，尚书右仆射、诸道盐铁转运使王涯同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月十七日，尚书右仆射、诸道盐铁转运使王涯任同中书门下平章事。
English: On July 17th, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao, and the transfer of salt and iron from all directions made Wang Ya's appointment with Zhong Shumen fall flat.

古文：闰月乙卯，以旱避正殿，减膳，彻乐，出宫女千人，纵五坊鹰犬。
现代文：闰七月初一，文宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，停止奏乐，放出宫女千人，放掉五坊豢养的鹰犬。
English: On the first day of leap July, due to drought, Wenzong avoided the main hall, reduced meals, stopped playing music, released a thousand palace maids, and released five eagle dogs.

古文：八月庚寅，降死罪以下。
现代文：八月初七，对死罪以下的囚犯减刑。
English: On August 7th, prisoners with less than capital crimes will have their sentences commuted.

古文：赐文武及州府长官子为父后者勋两转。
现代文：赐予文武官员及州府长官职位在其父以下者勋衔两级。
English: Civil and military officials and prefectural governors who are younger than their fathers will be awarded two levels of decoration.

古文：十二月庚子，不豫。
现代文：十二月十八日，文宗生病。
English: On December 18, Wenzong fell ill.

古文：八年二月壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：太和八年二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the second month of the eighth year of the Taiwa era, the sun and the moon were new, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：庚寅，以疾愈，降死罪以下。
现代文：初九，文宗因病愈，对死罪以下的囚犯减刑。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wenzong, who had recovered from his illness, commuted the sentences of prisoners with crimes punishable by death or less.

古文：四月丙戌，诏笞罪毋鞭背。
现代文：四月初五，下诏书：用笞刑不要鞭打犯人背部。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month, the following edict was issued: Do not whip the prisoner's back with flogging.

古文：五月己巳，飞龙、神驹中厩火。
现代文：五月十九日，宫内马厩飞龙、神驹中厩失火。
English: On May 19th, the palace stables of Fei Long and the middle stables of Shen Yao caught fire.

古文：六月丙戌，莒王纾薨。
现代文：六月初七，莒王李纾去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the King of Wushu, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：七月辛酉，震定陵寝宫。
现代文：七月十二日，雷击定陵的寝宫。
English: On July 12th, lightning struck Dingling's palace.

古文：癸亥，郓王经薨。
现代文：十四日，郯王李经去世。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the Dragon King, Li Jing, passed away.

古文：九月辛亥，有彗星出于太微。
现代文：九月初三，在太微垣诸星间出现彗星。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, a comet appeared between the stars of Taiyukagaki.

古文：十月辛巳，幽州卢龙军大将史元忠逐其节度使杨志诚，自称权句当节度兵马。
现代文：十月初四，幽州卢龙军大将史元忠驱逐其节度使杨志诚，自称代行处理节度兵马。
English: On the 4th of October, General Shi Yuanzhong of the Yuzhou Lulong Army expelled his commander Yang Zhicheng, who claimed to be acting on behalf of the commander.

古文：庚寅，山南西道节度使李宗闵为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，山南西道节度使李宗闵任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th, the Shannan West Road Festival appointed Li Zongyu as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：甲午，李德裕罢。
现代文：十七日，李德裕被免职。
English: On the 17th, Li Deyu was dismissed.

古文：十一月癸丑，成德军节度使王廷凑卒，其子元逵自称权句当节度事。
现代文：十一月初七，成德军节度使王廷凑去世，其子王元逵自称代行处理节度事务。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the Chengde Army Festival caused the death of Wang Tingpai, and his son Wang Yuanjun claimed to handle the festival affairs on his behalf.

古文：丙子，莫州军乱，逐其刺史张惟泛。
现代文：三十日，莫州军队骚乱，驱逐其刺史张惟氵凡。
English: On the 30th, the Mozhou army rioted, expelling its leader Zhang Weixuan.

古文：十二月己卯，降京畿死罪以下。
现代文：十二月初三，对京畿死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the sentences of prisoners in Gyeonggi Province sentenced to death or less were commuted.

古文：九年正月癸亥，巢县公凑薨。
现代文：太和九年正月十七日，巢县公李凑去世。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the ninth year of the Taihe era, Gong Liqin of Chaoxian County passed away.

古文：三月辛亥，冀王絿薨。
现代文：二月辛亥日，冀王李纟求去世。
English: In February, on the day of the Xinhai Festival, the King of Hebei, Li Yongkui, passed away.

古文：乙卯，京师地震。
现代文：乙卯日，京城长安地震。
English: Suddenly, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：四月丙申，路隋罢。
现代文：四月二十一日，路隋被免职。
English: On April 21, Lu Sui was removed from his post.

古文：戊戌，浙江东道观察使贾餗为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，浙江东道观察使贾饣束任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd, the Zhejiang host observed that Jia Yingzhu was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：辛丑，大风拔木，落含元殿鸱尾，坏门观。
现代文：二十六日，大风拔起树木，刮落含元殿屋脊上祈求避免火灾的装饰鸱尾，损坏了门观。
English: On the 26th, high winds uprooted trees and tore down the decorative dovetails on the roof of the Hongyuan Hall, which were used to pray for the avoidance of fire, damaging the view of the gate.

古文：五月辛未，王涯为司空。
现代文：五月二十七日，王涯任司空。
English: On May 27th, Wang Ya was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：六月壬寅，贬李宗闵为明州刺史。
现代文：六月二十八日，将李宗闵贬为明州刺史。
English: On June 28th, Li Zongyao was relegated to a footnote in Ming history.

古文：七月辛亥，御史大夫李固言为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月初八，御史大夫李固言任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the year, the master historian, Li Guyan, was appointed as the junior attendant of the disciple and the junior disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：九月癸亥，杀陈弘志。
现代文：九月初八，杀陈弘志。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, Chen Hongzhi was killed.

古文：丁卯，李固言罢。
现代文：二十四日，李固言被免职。
English: On the 24th, Li Guogan was removed from his post.

古文：己巳，御史中丞舒元舆为刑部侍郎，翰林学士、兵部郎中李训为礼部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十六日，御史中丞舒元舆任刑部侍郎，翰林学士、兵部郎中李训任礼部侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Gishi Chujo Shu Yuanmou was appointed as the attendant of the criminal department, Hanlin Baccalaureate, Hyobusho Rongzhong Li Xun as the attendant of the ceremonial department, together with Chushomon Shimohei Shoji.

古文：十月辛巳，杀观军容使王守澄。
现代文：十月初九，杀观军容使王守澄。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the year, Wang Shoucheng was killed by the Kuomintang army.

古文：十一月乙巳，杀武宁军监军使王守涓。
现代文：十一月初四，杀武宁军监军使王守涓。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Wang Shouyi, the military inspector of Wu Ning, was killed.

古文：壬戌，李训及河东节度使王璠、邠宁节度使郭行馀、御史中丞李孝本、京兆少尹罗立言谋诛中官，不克，训奔于凤翔。
现代文：二十一日，李训与河东节度使王、宁节度使郭行余、御史中丞李孝本、京兆少尹罗立言密谋诛除得势的太监，未遂，李训逃往凤翔。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Li Xun and the king of the Hedong Sect, the king of the Ning Sect, Guo Xingyu, the Grand Historian Li Xiaobeng, and the Grand Historian Yin Luo conspired to remove the powerful eunuch, but failed. Li Xun fled to Fengxiang.

古文：甲子，尚书右仆射郑覃同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，尚书右仆射郑覃任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shao Zheng, was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：乙丑，权知户部侍郎李石同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十四日，权知户部侍郎李石任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 24th, Li Shiren, the attendant of the Household Department of the Guan Ji, was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：左神策军中尉仇士良杀王涯、贾餗、舒元舆、李孝本、罗立言、王璠、郭行馀、凤翔少尹魏逢。
现代文：左神策军中尉仇士良杀王涯、贾饣束、舒元舆、李孝本、罗立言、王、郭行余、凤翔少尹魏逢。
English: Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the Zuo Sheng Army killed Wang Ya, Jia Yingzhu, Shu Yuanwu, Li Xiaobeng, Luo Lijian, Wang, Guo Xingyu, Feng Xiangshao, and Yin Weifeng.

古文：戊辰，昼晦。
现代文：二十七日，白昼天昏地暗。
English: On the 27th, the day turned dark and gloomy.

古文：凤翔监军使张仲清杀其节度使郑注。
现代文：同日，凤翔监军使张仲清杀其节度使郑注。
English: On the same day, Fengxiang's military inspector Zhang Zhongqing killed his regent Zheng Zhu.

古文：己巳，仇士良杀右金吾卫大将军韩约。
现代文：二十八日，仇士良杀右金吾卫大将军韩约。
English: On the 28th, the enemy soldier Liang killed the great general Han Yu.

古文：十二月壬申，杀左金吾卫将军李贞素、翰林学士顾师邕。
现代文：十二月初一，杀左金吾卫将军李贞素、翰林学士顾师邕。
English: On the first day of December, he killed General Li Zhengsu and Hanlin Scholar Gu Shizhen.

古文：丁亥，降京师死罪以下。
现代文：十六日，对京城死罪以下犯人减刑。
English: On the 16th, the death penalty was commuted for those who committed capital crimes in Beijing.

古文：开成元年正月辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：开成元年正月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Kaisei, the sun and the moon were new, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：免太和五年以前逋负、京畿今岁税，赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：免去太和五年以前拖欠的租赋、京畿本年赋税，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: He exempted Tahe from paying rent arrears from five years ago and Gyeonggi from paying taxes this year, and gave civil and military officials higher ranks and peerages.

古文：二月乙亥，停献鸷鸟、畋犬。
现代文：二月初五，停止进献鸷鸟、猎犬。
English: On the fifth day of the second lunar month, the offering of ostriches and hunting dogs will be stopped.

古文：三月，京师地震。
现代文：三月，京城长安地震。
English: In March, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：四月辛卯，淄王协。
现代文：四月二十二日，淄王李协去世。
English: On April 22nd, Gong Wang Lixie passed away.

古文：薨甲午，山南西道节度使李固言为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十五日，山南西道节度使李固言任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 25th, the festival of Shannan West Road made Li Gugen serve as the attendant of the disciple and the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：七月，滹沱溢。
现代文：七月，滹沱河泛滥。
English: In July, the Li River flooded.

古文：乙亥，雨土。
现代文：初八，空中降土如雨。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, rain fell from the sky.

古文：十二月己未，溆王纵薨。
现代文：十二月二十四日，溆王李纵去世。
English: On December 24th, Gong Wang Lixong passed away.

古文：二年二月丙午，有彗星出于东方。
现代文：开成二年二月十二日，在东方出现彗星。
English: A comet appeared in the east on February 12 of the following year.

古文：己未，均王纬薨。
现代文：二十五日，均王李纬去世。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Junwang Liwei passed away.

古文：三月丙寅，以彗见减膳。
现代文：三月初三，文宗因彗星出现减少膳食。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Wenzong was forced to reduce his diet due to the appearance of the comet.

古文：壬申，素服避正殿，彻乐。
现代文：初九，文宗身穿白色素服避离正殿，停止奏乐。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Wenzong, wearing a white plain dress, left the main hall and stopped playing music.

古文：降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放罪以下罪犯免刑。
English: Prisoners sentenced to death will have their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to banishment or less will be pardoned.

古文：纵五坊鹰隼，禁京畿采捕。
现代文：放掉五坊豢养的鹰隼，禁止在京畿捕捉猎物。
English: Release the eagle owl raised in Wufang, and prohibit the capture of prey in Gyeonggi.

古文：四月戊戌，工部侍郎陈夷行同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月初五，工部侍郎陈夷行任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Chen Yixing, a chamberlain of the engineering department, was appointed as a scholar of the same school.

古文：乙卯，以旱避正殿。
现代文：二十三日，文宗因旱灾避离正殿。
English: On the 23rd, Wenzong was forced to evacuate the main hall due to drought.

古文：六月丙午，河阳军乱，逐其节度使李泳。
现代文：六月十四日，河阳军队骚乱，驱逐其节度使李泳。
English: On June 14th, the Heyang army rioted and expelled its commander Li Yong.

古文：己未，绵州獠反。
现代文：二十七日，绵州僚人反叛。
English: On the 27th, the people of Mianzhou rebelled.

古文：七月癸亥，党项羌寇振武。
现代文：七月初二，党项羌族军进犯振武。
English: On the second day of July, the Shan Nationalist Army attacked Zhenwu.

古文：八月庚戌，封兄子休复为梁王，执中襄王，言扬杞王，成美陈王。
现代文：八月十九日，文宗封其兄之子李休复为梁王，李执中为襄王，李言扬为杞王，李成美为陈王。
English: On August 19, Emperor Wenzong appointed his brother's son, Li Xiufu, as the Prince of Liang, Li Xizhong as the Prince of Xiang, Li Yanyang as the Prince of Zhai, and Li Chengmei as the Prince of Chen.

古文：癸丑，封子宗俭为蒋王。
现代文：二十二日，封其子李宗俭为蒋王。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed his son Li Zongjian as King Jiang.

古文：十月戊申，李固言罢。
现代文：十月十八日，李固言被免职。
English: On October 18, Li Guogan was removed from his post.

古文：十一月乙丑，京师地震。
现代文：十一月初五，京城长安地震。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：丁丑，有星陨于兴元。
现代文：十七日，有流星陨落在兴元。
English: On the 17th, a meteorite fell in Xingyuan.

古文：三年正月甲子，盗伤李石。
现代文：开成三年正月初五，刺客刺伤李石。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the third year, the assassin stabbed Li Shi.

古文：戊申，大风拔木。
现代文：戊申日，大风拔起树木。
English: On Boxing Day, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：诸道盐铁转运使、户部尚书杨嗣复，户部侍郎李珏：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：诸道盐铁转运使、户部尚书杨嗣复，户部侍郎李珏，一并任同中书门下平章事。
English: Yang Shifu, the envoy of salt and iron transportation in various provinces, and Shangshu of the household, and Li Yan, the attendant of the household, were also appointed as the subordinate officers of Zhongshumen.

古文：丙子，李石罢。
现代文：十七日，李石被免职。
English: On the 17th, Li Shi was removed from office.

古文：夏，汉水溢。
现代文：夏季，汉水泛滥。
English: In summer, the Han River floods.

古文：八月己亥，嘉王运薨。
现代文：八月十四日，嘉王李运去世。
English: On August 14, Jiawang Liyun passed away.

古文：十月乙酉，义武军节度使张璠卒，其子元益自称留后。
现代文：十月初一，义武军节度使张去世，其子张元益自称留后。
English: On the first day of October, the festival of the volunteer army caused Zhang to die, and his son Zhang Yuanyi said he would stay behind.

古文：庚子，皇太子薨。
现代文：十六日，皇太子李永去世。
English: On the 16th, Crown Prince Li Yong passed away.

古文：乙巳，有彗星出于轸。
现代文：二十一日，有彗星在轸宿四星间出现。
English: On the twenty-first day, a comet appeared between the four stars in the constellation of Pleiades.

古文：十一月壬戌，降死罪以下。
现代文：十一月初八，对死罪以下犯人减刑。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the sentence of prisoners with less than capital crimes will be reduced.

古文：四年正月癸酉，有彗星出于羽林。
现代文：开成四年正月二十日，在室宿天区的羽林军星官间有彗星出现。
English: On the 20th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Keisei, a comet appeared in the Muroshukuten district between the Uebayashi military stars.

古文：闰月丙午，出于卷舌。
现代文：闰正月二十三日，有彗星出现在卷舌星官六星间。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the leap year, a comet appeared among the six stars of the roll tongue constellation.

古文：五月丙申，郑覃、陈夷行罢。
现代文：五月十六日，郑覃、陈夷行被免职。
English: On May 16, Zheng Rong and Chen Yixing were dismissed from their posts.

古文：七月甲辰，太常卿崔郸同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月二十五日，太常卿崔郸任同中书门下平章事。
English: On July 25th, Cui Jian, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed to the position of the Second Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：八月辛亥，鄜王憬薨。
现代文：八月初二，王李憬去世。
English: On August 2nd, Wang Liguang passed away.

古文：十月丙寅，立陈王成美为皇太子。
现代文：十月十八日，文宗立陈王李成美为皇太子。
English: On October 18th, Emperor Wenzong made Chen Wang and Li Chengmei the crown princes.

古文：甲戌，地震。
现代文：二十六日，地震。
English: On the 26th, an earthquake.

古文：十一月己亥，降京畿死罪以下。
现代文：十一月二十一日，对京畿死罪以下的犯人减刑。
English: On November 21, Gyeonggi Province commuted the sentences of those convicted of crimes punishable by death or less.

古文：十二月乙卯，乾陵寝宫火。
现代文：十二月初七，乾陵寝宫失火。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, the Qianling sleeping palace caught fire.

古文：五年正月戊寅，不豫。
现代文：开成五年正月初一，文宗患病。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year, Wenzong fell ill.

古文：己卯，左右神策军护军中尉鱼弘志、仇士良立颍王瀍为皇太弟，权句当军国事，废皇太子成美为陈王。
现代文：初二，左右神策军护军中尉鱼弘志、仇士良拥立颍王李炎为皇太弟，代行处理军国事务，废黜皇太子李成美为陈王。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Guo Hongzhi, a lieutenant of the Shen Zhe Army, and Qiu Shiliang, a lieutenant of the Shen Zhe Army, supported the establishment of King Li Yan as the emperor's younger brother, acting to deal with military affairs, and deposed Crown Prince Li Chengmei as King Chen.

古文：庚辰，仇士良杀仙韶院副使尉迟璋。
现代文：初三，仇士良杀了仙韶院副使尉迟璋。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Qiu Shiliang killed the deputy envoy of Xian Ye Yuan.

古文：辛巳，皇帝崩于太和殿，年三十三。
现代文：初四，文宗在太和殿逝世，终年三十三岁。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Wenzong died in Taihe Hall, at the age of thirty-three.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝讳炎，穆宗第五子也。母曰宣懿皇太后韦氏。
现代文：武宗名炎，穆宗的第五个儿子。母亲是宣懿皇太后韦氏。
English: Wu Zong Mei Yan, the fifth son of Mu Zong. His mother was the Empress Dowager Wu Wei.

古文：始封颍王，累加开府仪同三司、检校吏部尚书。
现代文：武宗最初被封为颍王，官职渐升至开府仪同三司、检校吏部尚书。
English: At first, Wu Zong was given the title of the king of the eunuchs, and his official position gradually rose to the third secretary of the Kaifu Yi Tong and the inspector of the school.

古文：开成五年正月，文宗疾大渐，神策军护军中尉仇士良、鱼弘志矫诏废皇太子成美复为陈王，立颍王为皇太弟。
现代文：开成五年正月，文宗病危，神策军护军中尉仇士良、鱼弘志诈传伪诏废黜皇太子李成美仍为陈王，立颍王李炎为皇太弟。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Wenzong was critically ill, and Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang and Yu Hongzhi of the Shen Zhe Army and Guards made a fraudulent edict that the deposed Crown Prince Li Chengmei was still King Chen, and the deposed King Li Yan was the Emperor's younger brother.

古文：辛巳，即皇帝位干柩前。
现代文：初四，李炎在文宗灵柩前登帝位。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Li Yan ascended to the throne before the funeral of Emperor Wenzong.

古文：辛卯，杀陈王成美及安王溶、贤妃杨氏。
现代文：十四日，杀陈王李成美、安王李溶、贤妃杨氏。
English: On the 14th, they killed Chen Wang, Li Chengmei, An Wang, Li Rong, and Xianfei Yang.

古文：甲午，始听政。
现代文：十七日，武宗开始处理政事。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Takemune began to deal with political affairs.

古文：追尊母为皇太后。
现代文：追尊母亲韦氏为皇太后。
English: She succeeds her mother, Princess Wei, as empress dowager.

古文：二月乙卯，大赦。
现代文：二月初八，施行大赦。
English: On February 8th, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：庚申，有彗星出于室、壁。
现代文：十三日，在玄武七宿的营室、东壁二星官间出现彗星。
English: On the 13th, a comet appeared in the camp room of Genbu Shichijuku, between the two star officers on the east wall.

古文：四月甲子，大风拔木。
现代文：四月十八日，大风拔起树木。
English: On April 18, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：五月乙卯，杨嗣复罢。
现代文：五月初四，杨嗣复被免职。
English: On the 4th of May, Yang Sifu was removed from his post.

古文：诸道盐铁转运使、刑部尚书崔珙同中书门下平章事。
现代文：诸道盐铁转运使、刑部尚书崔珙任同中书门下平章事。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation in various provinces, and the director of the Penal Department, Choi Yeon-jin, was promoted to the position of vice-director of the Penal Department.

古文：壬寅，大风拔木。
现代文：二十七日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 27th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：六月丙寅，以旱避正殿，理囚，河北、河南、淮南、浙东、福建蝗疫州除其徭。
现代文：六月二十二日，武宗因旱灾避离正殿，讯察犯人的罪案，对河北、河南、淮南、浙东、福建等遭受蝗灾、疫病流行的各州免除其徭役。
English: On June 22, Emperor Wuzong was forced to leave the main hall due to drought. He investigated the crimes of the criminals and exempted Hebei, Henan, Huainan, East Zhejiang, Fujian and other provinces that were affected by locust plagues and epidemics.

古文：七月戊寅，大风拔木。
现代文：七月初四，大风拔起树木。
English: On the fourth of July, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：八月甲寅，雨，壬戌，葬元圣昭献孝皇帝于章陵。
现代文：八月十一日，降雨。十九日，将文宗安葬在章陵。
English: On August 11, it rained. On the 19th, he was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：内枢密使刘弘逸、薛季棱以兵杀仇士良，不克，伏诛。
现代文：内枢密使刘弘逸、薛季眣领兵杀仇士良，未成，被处死。
English: Liu Hongyi, a close envoy of the Inner Court, and Xue Jizhe, who led the troops to kill the enemy Shiliang, did not succeed and were executed.

古文：庚午，李珏罢。
现代文：二十七日，李珏被免职。
English: On the 27th, Li Wei was removed from office.

古文：九月丁丑，淮南节度副大使李德裕为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月初四，淮南节度副大使李德裕任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Li Deyu, Vice-Ambassador of Huainan Festival, was appointed as the attendant of the disciple and the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：十月癸卯，回鹘寇天德军。
现代文：十月初一，回鹘军进犯天德军。
English: On the first day of October, the Uighur army attacked the German army.

古文：十一月戊寅，有彗星出于东方。
现代文：十一月初六，在东方有彗星出现。
English: On the 6th of November, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：魏博节度使何进滔卒，其子重霸自称留后。
现代文：魏博节度使何进滔去世，其子何重霸自称留后。
English: Wei Bo Jiedu caused the death of He Jintao, and his son He Shouba claimed to be his successor.

古文：十二月，封子峻为杞王。
现代文：十二月，武宗封其子李峻为杞王。
English: In December, Emperor Wuzong appointed his son, Li Jun, as the new king.

古文：会昌元年正月己卯，朝献于太清宫。庚辰，朝享于太庙。
现代文：会昌元年正月初七，武宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭祀。初八，祭祀太庙。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Buzong held a morning offering ritual at the Taiqing Palace, in which the worshippers dressed up and enjoyed the offerings.

古文：辛巳，有事于南郊。
现代文：初九，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ruizong held a divine service in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：三月，御史大夫陈夷行为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月，御史大夫陈夷行任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In March, goshi daifu Chen Yixing was appointed as a subordinate attendant of the disciple, and a subordinate disciple of the same junior high school.

古文：七月，有彗星出于羽林。壬辰，汉水溢。
现代文：七月，在室宿的羽林军星官间有彗星出现。二十四日，汉水泛滥。
English: In July, a comet appeared among the officials of the Uhlin army in Murojuku. On the 24th, flooding occurred.

古文：九月癸巳，幽州卢龙军将陈行泰杀其节度使史元忠，自称知留务。
现代文：九月二十六日，幽州卢龙军将领陈行泰杀了节度使史元忠，自称掌管留后事务。
English: On September 26th, Chen Xingtai, the general of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, killed Shi Yuanzhong, the commander of the festival, and claimed to be in charge of the remaining affairs.

古文：闰月，幽州卢龙军将张绛杀行泰，自称主军务。
现代文：闰九月，幽州卢龙军将领张绛杀了陈行泰，自称主持军务。
English: In September, Zhang Xi, the general of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, killed Chen Xingtai, claiming to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：十月，幽州卢龙军逐绛，雄武军使张仲武入于幽州。
现代文：十月，幽州卢龙军驱逐了张绛，雄武军使张仲武进入幽州。
English: In October, the Yuzhou Lulong Army expelled Zhang Xuan, and the Xiongwu Army sent Zhang Zhongwu into Yuzhou.

古文：十一月壬寅，有彗星出于营室。
现代文：十一月初六，有彗星在营室的二星之间出现。
English: On the 6th of November, a comet appeared between two stars in the camp.

古文：辛亥，避正殿，减膳，理囚，罢兴作。
现代文：十五日，武宗避离正殿，减少膳食，讯察犯人罪案，取消土木营造。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Wuzong left the main hall, reduced the meals, investigated the crimes of the prisoners, and cancelled the civil engineering construction.

古文：癸亥，崔郓罢。
现代文：二十七日，崔郸被免职。
English: On the 27th, Cui Wei was removed from office.

古文：二年正月，宋、毫二州地震。
现代文：会昌二年正月，宋、亳二州地震。
English: In the first month of the second year of Huichang, the Song and Han states were hit by earthquakes.

古文：己亥，李德裕为司空。
现代文：初四，李德裕任司空。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Li Deyu was appointed as a space attendant.

古文：回鹘寇横水栅，略天德、振武军。
现代文：回鹘军进犯横水栅，强取天德军、振武军二地。
English: The Hui-Hao army attacked across the water barrier, forcing the German army and the Zhenwu army to retreat.

古文：二月丁丑，淮南节度副大使李绅为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月十二日，淮南节度副大使李绅任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On February 12, Li Sheng, Vice-Ambassador of Huainan Festival, was appointed as the Secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Vice-President of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：三月，回鹘寇云、朔。
现代文：三月，回鹘军进犯云、朔二州。
English: In March, the Uighur army invaded Yun and Shuo two states.

古文：四月丁亥，群臣上尊号曰仁圣文武至神大孝皇帝。
现代文：四月二十三日，群臣为武宗奉加尊号：仁圣文武至神大孝皇帝。
English: On April 23rd, a group of courtiers paid tribute to Emperor Wuzong, calling him "Ren Sheng, Wenwu, Jin Da Xiao Emperor."

古文：大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and civil and military officials were granted official ranks, decorations, and peerages.

古文：五月丙申，回鹘没斯降。
现代文：五月初二，回鹘的没斯投降。
English: On the second day of May, the Uighurs did not surrender.

古文：六月，陈夷行罢。
现代文：六月，陈夷行被免职。
English: In June, Chen Yixing was removed from his post.

古文：河东节度使刘沔及回鹘战于云州，败绩。
现代文：河东节度使刘沔在云州与回鹘军交战，大败。
English: The Hedong Festival brought Liu Bei into battle with the Uighur army in Yunnan, resulting in a crushing defeat.

古文：七月，幸左神策军阅武。
现代文：七月，武宗到左神策军检阅军队。
English: In July, Emperor Takemune went to Zuoshinsaku to inspect the troops.

古文：尚书右丞兼御史中丞李让夷为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：尚书右丞兼御史中丞李让夷任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Shang Shuxu Yu Rong and Mi Shi Zhong Rong Li Jang Yi were appointed as the attendants of Zhong Shuxu, and the disciple of Zhong Shuxu, Shimo Taira, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：岚州民田满川反，伏诛。
现代文：岚州平民田沔川反叛，被处死。
English: Civilians in Zhangzhou rebelled in Tianye River and were executed.

古文：回鹘可汗寇大同川。
现代文：回鹘可汗进犯大同川。
English: The Hui Khan attacked Datong River.

古文：九月，刘沔为回鹘南回招抚使，幽州卢龙军节度使张仲武为东面招抚使，右金吾卫大将军李思忠为河西党项都将西南面招讨使。
现代文：九月，刘沔任回鹘南面招抚使，幽州卢龙军节度使张仲武任东面招抚使，右金吾卫大将军李思忠任河西、党项都将西南面招讨使。
English: In September, Liu Xuan was appointed as the envoy to the south of Hubei, Zhang Zhongwu was appointed as the envoy to the east of Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival, and Li Sizhong was appointed as the envoy to the west of Hexi and the south-west of the party.

古文：十月丁卯，封子岘为益王，岐衮王。
现代文：十月初七，武宗封其子李岘为益王，李岐为兖王。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month, Emperor Wuzong appointed his son Li Qiye as the King of Yixing, and Li Qiye as the King of Qin.

古文：十一月，猎于白鹿原。
现代文：十一月，武宗在白鹿原打猎。
English: In November, Takemune went hunting in Shirokawara.

古文：十二月，封子峄为德王，嵯昌王。
现代文：十二月，武宗封其子李峄为德王，李嵯为昌王。
English: In December, Emperor Wuzong appointed his son Li Xi as the German king and Li Xi as the Chang king.

古文：癸未，京师地震。
现代文：二十四日，京城长安地震。
English: On the 24th, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：三年正月庚子，天德军行营副使石雄及回鹘战于杀胡山，败之。
现代文：会昌三年正月二十一日，天德军行营副使石雄在杀胡山与回鹘军交战，打败回军。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the third year of Huichang, Shi Xiong, the deputy commander of the Tiande Army, fought with the Uighur Army in Zhishan, defeating the Uighur Army.

古文：二月庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初二，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛未，崔珙罢。
现代文：十二日，崔珙被免职。
English: On the 12th, Cui Wei was removed from office.

古文：是春，大雨雪。
现代文：本年春季，降大雪。
English: Heavy snow fell in the spring of this year.

古文：四月乙丑，昭义军节度使刘从谏卒，其子稹自称留后。
现代文：四月十一日，昭义军节度使刘从谏去世，其子刘稹自称留后。
English: On April 11th, Liu Conglu died on the occasion of the Shouyi Army Festival, and his son Liu Jie claimed to be his successor.

古文：五月甲午，震，东都广运楼灾。
现代文：五月初六，炸雷，东都广运楼遭天火焚烧。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, the Dongdu Guangyun Building was set on fire by lightning.

古文：辛丑，成德军节度使王元逵为北面招讨泽潞使，魏博节度使何弘敬为东面招讨泽潞使，及河中节度使陈夷行、河阳节度使王茂元、刘沔以讨刘稹。
现代文：十三日，成德军节度使王元逵任北面招讨泽潞使，魏博节度使何弘敬任东面招讨泽潞使，以及河中节度使陈夷行，河阳节度使王茂元、刘沔领兵讨伐刘稹。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the Chengde Military Festival appointed Wang Yuanjun as the leader of the north side to invite the envoys from Zhejiang Province, the Weibo Festival appointed He Hongjing as the leader of the east side to invite the envoys from Zhejiang Province, the Mid-Hebei Festival appointed Chen Yixing as the leader of the east side to invite the envoys from Zhejiang Province, and the Mid-Hebei Festival appointed Wang Maoyuan as the leader of the west side to invite the envoys from Zhejiang Province, and the Mid-Hebei Festival appointed Wang Maoyuan as the leader of the west side to invite the envoys from Zhejiang Province

古文：戊申，翰林学士承旨、中书舍人崔铉为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十日，翰林学士承旨、中书舍人崔铉任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 20th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, the person in charge of the Chinese books, Cui Yao, was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese books, and the disciple of the Chinese books, Xiao Ping, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：武宁军节度使李彦佐为晋绛行营诸军节度招讨使。
现代文：武宁军节度使李彦佐任晋绛行营诸军节度招讨使。
English: The festival of the Wu-Ning army made Li Yanzu serve as the envoy to invite the troops to the festival.

古文：六月，西内神龙寺火。
现代文：六月，西内神龙寺失火。
English: In June, the West Inner Shingon Temple caught fire.

古文：辛酉，李德裕为司徒。
现代文：初四，李德裕任司徒。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Li Deyu became a student.

古文：是夏，作望仙观于禁中。七月庚子，免河东今岁秋税。
现代文：本年夏季，在宫内建造望仙观。七月十三日，免征河东本年秋税。
English: In the summer of this year, the Wangxian View was built in the palace. On July 13, this year's autumn tax in Hedong was exempted.

古文：九月辛卯，忠武军节度使王宰兼河阳行营攻讨使。
现代文：九月初五，忠武军节度使王宰兼河阳行营攻讨使。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Wang Zaiqian, the commander-in-chief of the Zhongwu army, went to Kheyang to attack the troops.

古文：丁未，以雨霖，理囚，免京兆府秋税。
现代文：二十一日，武宗因久雨不晴，讯察犯人罪案，免征京兆府秋税。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, Buson came to investigate the criminal case of the prisoner, and was exempted from the autumn tax of Beijing Shao Prefecture.

古文：十月己巳，晋绛行营节度使石雄及刘稹战于乌岭，败之。
现代文：十月十四日，晋绛行营节度使石雄在乌岭与刘稹作战，打败刘稹。
English: On October 14th, the festival of the Jin and Qin armies made Shi Xiong fight with Liu Bei in Wuling and defeat Liu Bei.

古文：壬午，日中月食太白。
现代文：二十七日，正午月食太白星。
English: On the 27th, at noon, the lunar eclipse was too white.

古文：是月，党项羌寇盐州。
现代文：本月，党项羌族军进犯盐州。
English: This month, the Shan Nationalist Army invaded Yanzhou.

古文：十一月，寇邠、宁。衮王岐为灵夏六道元帅、安抚党项大使，御史中丞李回副之。
现代文：十一月，羌军进犯、宁二州，兖王李岐任灵夏六道元帅、安抚党项大使，御史中丞李回任其副职。
English: In November, the Shan army invaded Ning Erzhou, and Li Qi, the king of Shan, was appointed as the marshal of Lingxia Six-District and the ambassador to pacify the party, and Li Zhongzheng, the military historian, was reappointed as his deputy.

古文：安南军乱，逐其经略使武浑。
现代文：安南军队骚乱，驱逐其经略使武浑。
English: Annan's army rioted, expelling its strategist Wu Hun.

古文：十二月丁巳，王宰克天井关。
现代文：十二月初三，王宰攻克天井关。
English: On the third day of December, Wang Zai conquered the ceiling pass.

古文：四年正月乙酉，河东将杨弁逐节度使李石。
现代文：会昌四年正月初一，河东将领杨弁驱逐其节度使李石。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Huichang, Yang Ben, the general of Hedong, expelled Li Shishi, his regent.

古文：二月甲寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of February, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛酉，杨弁仗诛。
现代文：初八，杨弁伏法处死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Yang Benfu was executed.

古文：三月，石雄兼冀氏行营攻讨使，晋州刺史李丕副之。
现代文：三月，石雄兼冀氏行营攻讨使，晋州刺史李丕任副使。
English: In March, Shi Xiong also served as the envoy to the JI's campaign, and the vice-envoy of the Jinzhou Jishi Li Yu.

古文：六月己未，中书、门下、御史台虑囚。
现代文：六月初七，中书省、门下省、御史台讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television of the People's Republic of China inspected and recorded the prisoners' charges.

古文：闰七月壬戌，李绅罢。
现代文：闰七月十一日，李绅被免职。
English: On July 11, Li Sheng was removed from his post.

古文：淮南节度副大使杜悰为尚书右仆射，兼中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：淮南节度副大使杜任尚书右仆射，兼任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Du Ren, Vice-Ambassador of Huainan Festival, acted as Shang Shu's right-hand man, concurrently serving as the attendant of the middle secretary and the subordinate of the middle secretary.

古文：丙子，昭义军将裴问及邢州刺中崔嘏以城降。
现代文：二十五日，昭义军将领裴问与邢州刺史崔嘏献城归降。
English: On the 25th, the general of the Shouyi Army, Pei Qian, and the governor of Zhangzhou, Shi Cui, surrendered the city.

古文：是月，洺州刺史王钊、磁州刺史安玉以城降。
现代文：本月，氵名州刺史王钊、磁州刺史安玉献城归降。
English: This month, Wang Qian, the governor of Renmei Prefecture, and An Yu, the governor of Magnetic Prefecture, surrendered the city.

古文：八月乙未，昭义军将郭谊杀刘稹以降。
现代文：八月十五日，昭义军将领郭谊杀刘稹归降。
English: On August 15th, the general of the Shouyi Army, Guo Liyi, led Liu Bei to surrender.

古文：戊戌，给复泽、潞、邢、洛、磁五州一岁，免太原、河阳及怀、陕、晋、降四州秋税。
现代文：十八日，免除泽、潞、邢、氵名、磁五州徭役一年，免征太原、河阳及怀、陕、晋、绛四州的秋税。
English: On the 18th, the five prefectures of Zhejiang, Fujian, Fujian, Fujian and Fujian were exempted from the autumn tax for one year, and the four prefectures of Taiyuan, Heyang, Huai, Shaanxi, Jin and Fujian were exempted from the autumn tax.

古文：戊申，李德裕为太尉。
现代文：二十八日，李德裕任太尉。
English: On the 28th, Li Deyu was promoted to first lieutenant.

古文：十月，猎于鄠县。
现代文：十月，武宗在县打猎。
English: In October, Emperor Wuzong went hunting in the county.

古文：十二月，猎于云阳。
现代文：十二月，到云阳打猎。
English: In December, I went hunting in Yunyang.

古文：五年正月己酉，群臣上尊号曰仁圣文武章天成功神德明道大孝皇帝。
现代文：会昌五年正月初一，群臣为武宗奉加尊号：仁圣文武章天成功神德明道大孝皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 5th year of Huichang, a group of courtiers paid homage to the Emperor Wu Zong: Ren Shengwen Wuzhang Tian Chenggong Shen Deming Da Xiao Emperor.

古文：是日，朝献于太清宫。庚戌，朝享于太庙。
现代文：同日，武宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。初二，祭祀太庙。
English: On the same day, Emperor Wuzong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up to enjoy the offerings.

古文：辛亥，有事于南郊。
现代文：初三，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the third day of junior high school, a festival is held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵，文宣公、二王、三恪予一子出身。
现代文：施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，授予文宣公孔子，北周、隋朝王室后代，商、周、汉王朝后裔的一个儿子吏部中选出身。
English: An amnesty was carried out, civil and military officials were given official ranks, honors, and peerages, and Confucius, the royal descendant of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties and a son of the descendants of the Shang, Zhou, and Han Dynasties, was awarded the title of Confucius.

古文：作仙台于南郊。
现代文：在长安南郊建造仙台。
English: Sendai is being built in the southern suburb of Chang'an.

古文：庚申，皇太后崩。
现代文：十二日，皇太后韦氏逝世。
English: On the 12th, Empress Dowager Hou Wei passed away.

古文：三月，旱。
现代文：三月，天旱。
English: In March, there was a drought.

古文：五月壬子，葬恭僖皇太后于光陵。
现代文：五月初六，将敬宗生母、恭僖皇太后王氏安葬于光陵。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, Keizong's birth mother, Queen Dowager Wang, was buried in the Guangling Mausoleum.

古文：壬戌，杜悰、崔铉罢。
现代文：十六日，杜、崔铉被免职。
English: On the 16th, Du and Cui Rong were removed from their posts.

古文：乙丑，户部侍郎李回为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十九日，户部侍郎李回任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 19th, Household Attendant Li returned to the post of Chushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushush

古文：六月甲申，作望仙楼于神策军。七月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初九，在神策军营地建造望仙楼。七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Wangxianlou was built in the camp of the Shenzhe Army. On the 1st day of the 7th month, the sun and the moon were new, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：是月，山南东道节度使郑肃校检尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：本月，山南东道节度使郑肃任检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: This month, Shannan, the host of the festival, made Zheng Su, who was in charge of the inspection of the school, write a letter to the right and write a letter to the left.

古文：八月壬午，大毁佛寺，复僧尼为民。
现代文：八月初七，大毁佛寺，让僧尼还俗。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Buddhist temples were destroyed and monks and nuns were forced to return to secular life.

古文：十月，作昭武庙于虎牢关。
现代文：十月，在虎牢关建造昭武庙。
English: In October, the Zhaowu Temple was built in Houguoguan.

古文：六年二月癸酉，以旱降死罪以下，免今岁夏税。
现代文：会昌六年二月初二，因旱灾，对死罪以下的犯人减刑，免征本年夏税。
English: On the second day of the second month of February in the sixth year of Huichang, due to drought, prisoners with less than capital crimes will have their sentences reduced and will be exempt from this year's summer tax.

古文：庚辰，夏绥银节度使米暨为东北道招讨党项使。
现代文：初九，夏、绥、银节度使米暨任东北道招讨党项使。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, in the summer, in the spring and in the autumn, he served as the envoy of the Northeast Invitation to the Party.

古文：三月壬戌，不豫。
现代文：三月二十一日，武宗患病。
English: On March 21, Takemune fell ill.

古文：左福策军护军中尉马元贽立光王怡为皇太叔，权句当军国政事。
现代文：左神策军护军中尉马元贽立光王李怡为皇太叔，暂行处理军国政事。
English: Zuoshensha's military escort lieutenant Ma Yuanjun appointed Guangwang Li Yi as the emperor's uncle to temporarily handle military and political affairs.

古文：甲子，皇帝崩于大明宫，年三十三。
现代文：二十三日，武宗在大明宫逝世，终年三十三岁。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Wuzong passed away at the age of 33.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝讳忱，宪宗第十三子也。
现代文：宣宗，名忱，宪宗的第十三个儿子。
English: Xuan Zong, the thirteenth son of Muzhen, the founder of Confucianism.

古文：母曰孝明皇太后郑氏。
现代文：母亲是孝明皇太后郑氏。
English: His mother was Xiaoming Empress Dowager Zheng.

古文：始封光王。
现代文：宣宗起初被封为光王。
English: At first, Xuanzong was given the title of "King of Light."

古文：性严重寡言，宫中或以为不惠。
现代文：性格严肃寡言。宫中有人认为他没有恩情。
English: He has a serious and reserved personality. Some people in the Imperial Court think he is ungrateful.

古文：会昌六年，武宗疾大渐，左神策军护军中尉马元贽立光王为皇太叔。
现代文：会昌六年，武宗病危，左神策军护军中尉马元贽立光王李忱为皇太叔。
English: Six years after Huichang, with Emperor Wuzong gravely ill, Ma Yuanjun, a lieutenant of the Left Divine Defense Force, appointed Guangwang Richen as the uncle of the emperor.

古文：三月甲子，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：三月二十三日，宣宗在武宗灵柩前登帝位。
English: On March 23rd, Emperor Xuanzong ascended the throne in front of Emperor Wuzong's coffin.

古文：四月乙亥，始听政。
现代文：四月初五，宣宗开始处理政事。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Emperor Xuanzong began to deal with political affairs.

古文：尊母为皇太后。
现代文：尊奉母亲郑氏为皇太后。
English: She revered her mother, Zheng, as the empress dowager.

古文：丙子，李德裕罢。
现代文：初六，李德裕被免职。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Li Deyu was dismissed.

古文：辛卯，李让夷为司空。
现代文：二十一日，李让夷任司空。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li Zhan'i was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：五月乙巳，大赦。
现代文：五月初五，施行大赦。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎白敏中同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎白敏中任同中书门下平章事。
English: Hanlin Baccalaureate Zong Zi, Hyobu Chamberlain Bai Min Zhong Ren, and Zhong Shumen Shimo Taira Zhang Ji.

古文：辛酉，封子温为郓王，渼雍王，泾雅王，滋夔王，沂庆王。
现代文：二十一日，宣宗封其子李温为郓王，李氵美为雍王，李泾为雅王，李滋为夔王，李沂为庆王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his son Li Wen as the King of Qi, Li Jimei as the King of Yong, Li Xi as the King of Ya, Li Zhi as the King of Qi, and Li Xi as the King of Qing.

古文：七月，李让夷罢。
现代文：七月，李让夷被免职。
English: In July, Li Jiangyi was removed from his post.

古文：八月辛未，大行宫火。
现代文：八月初二，大行宫失火。
English: On the second day of August, the Grand Prince's Palace caught fire.

古文：壬申，葬至道昭肃孝皇帝于端陵。
现代文：初三，将武宗葬在端陵。九月，郑肃被免职。
English: On the third day of the new year, Emperor Wu was buried in the Tang Mausoleum. In September, Zheng Su was dismissed from his post.

古文：九月，郑肃罢。兵部侍郎、判度支卢商为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部侍郎、判度支卢商任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: He was the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the attendant of the Judo branch of the Lu merchants, the attendant of the middle school, and the subordinate disciple of the middle school.

古文：云南蛮寇安南，经略使裴元裕败之。
现代文：云南蛮族军队进犯安南，经略使裴元裕打败云南蛮军。
English: The Yunnan barbarian army invaded Annan, and Pei Yuanyu defeated the Yunnan barbarian army.

古文：十二月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of December, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：大中元年正月壬子，朝献于太清宫。癸丑，朝享于太庙。
现代文：大中元年正月十五日，宣宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。十六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the first year of the Great Middle Ages, Emperor Xuanzong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up and enjoyed the offerings.

古文：甲寅，有事于南郊。
现代文：十七日，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the 17th, a festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：复左降官死者官爵，赐文武官阶、勋，父老帛，文宣王后及二王后、三恪予一子官。
现代文：恢复已故的被贬降级官员的官爵，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔，赐给老人布帛，授予文宣王孔子，北周、隋朝宗室及商、周、汉三代王朝的后代一个儿子官职。
English: The deceased officials who had been demoted and downgraded were restored to their official ranks, the civil and military officials were given official ranks and titles, the old man was given a cloth badge, and a son of King Confucius of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties and the descendants of the three dynasties of Shang, Zhou and Han was awarded an official position.

古文：二月癸未，以旱避正殿，减膳，理京师囚，罢太常孝坊习乐，损百官食，出宫女五百人，放五坊鹰犬，停飞龙马粟。
现代文：二月十七日，宣宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，讯察京都囚犯的罪案，取消太常寺教坊演习音乐，减少文武百官的俸禄，放出宫女五百人，放掉五坊豢养的鹰犬，停止供给飞龙马正粮做饲料。
English: On February 17th, due to the drought, Emperor Xuanzong evacuated the main hall, reduced the meals, began to investigate the crimes of Kyoto prisoners, cancelled the music of the Taizhong Temple classroom drill, reduced the salaries of civil and military officials, released five hundred palace maids, released five eagle dogs, and stopped supplying Feilongma grain to make feed.

古文：三月，卢商罢。
现代文：三月，卢商被免职。
English: In March, Lu Shang was removed from his post.

古文：刑部尚书、判度支崔元式为门下侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎韦琮为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：刑部尚书、判度支崔元式任门下侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎韦琮任中书侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Shosho Gyobu, Shitsudo Shitsuji Genshiki were appointed as junior attendants, Shosho Hanlin was appointed as junior attendant, Shosho Hotei Wei was appointed as junior attendant, together with Shosho Shimohei as junior attendant.

古文：闰月，大复佛寺。
现代文：闰三月，大肆恢复佛寺。
English: In March, Buddhist temples were restored in a big way.

古文：四月己酉，皇太后崩。
现代文：四月十五日，皇太后逝世。
English: On April 15, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：五月，张仲武及奚北部落战，败之。
现代文：五月，张仲武与奚族北部落交战，打败奚军。
English: In May, Zhang Zhongwu went to war with the northern part of the Yao people and defeated the Yao army.

古文：吐蕃、回鹘寇河西，河东节度使王宰伐之。
现代文：吐蕃、回鹘进犯河西，河东节度使王宰前往讨伐。
English: Tubo and Uluo invaded the west of the river, and the festival in the east of the river made Wang Zai go to the crusade.

古文：八月丙申，李回罢。
现代文：八月初三，李回被免职。
English: On August 3, Li Hui was removed from office.

古文：庚子，葬贞献皇太后于光陵。
现代文：初七，将贞献皇太后萧氏葬于光陵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Xiao buried Zhenxian, the empress dowager, in the Guangming Mausoleum.

古文：十二月戊午，贬太子少保李德裕为潮州司马。
现代文：十二月二十七日，将太子少保李德裕贬为潮州司马。
English: On December 27th, he demoted the crown prince, Shao Bao Li Deyu, to Chaozhou Sima.

古文：二年正月甲子，群臣上尊号曰圣敬文思和武光孝皇帝。
现代文：大中二年正月初三，群臣为宣宗奉加尊号为圣敬文思和武光孝皇帝。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of high school, a group of courtiers from the Xuanzong sect were given the honorifics of "Saint Venerable Wensi" and "Emperor Wu Guangxiao."

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：宗子房未仕者予一人出身，赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：诸皇族嫡长子一支后人中未做官的，授予其中一人中吏部试出身，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: Among the direct descendants of the eldest son of the imperial family who have not served as officials, one of them will be awarded the title of junior official, and will be given the official rank, honorary title, and peerage of a civil and military official.

古文：三月，封子泽为濮王。
现代文：三月，宣宗封其子李泽为濮王。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his son Li Ze as the King of Xing.

古文：五月己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：崔元式罢。
现代文：崔元式被免职。
English: Choi Won-sik was removed from his post.

古文：兵部侍郎、判度支周墀，刑部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使马植：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部侍郎、判度支周墀，刑部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使马植，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: He was the attendant of the military department, the judge of the justice department, the attendant of the criminal department, the salt and iron transport of all roads, the horse planting, and the addition of the Zhongshumen Shimohei chapter.

古文：己卯，太皇太后崩。
现代文：二十一日，懿安太皇太后郭氏逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Dowager Empress Dowager Guo died.

古文：七月己巳，续图功臣于凌烟阁。
现代文：七月十二日，在凌烟阁上续绘功臣像。
English: On July 12th, the portraits of heroes and heroines continued to be painted on Lingyakou.

古文：十一月壬午，葬懿安太皇太后于景陵。
现代文：十一月二十六日，将懿安太皇太后葬于景陵。
English: On November 26th, Empress Dowager Yan'an was buried in Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：贬韦琮为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：将韦琮贬为太子宾客，分管东都。
English: He relegated Wei Zheng to a prince's guest, in charge of the Eastern Capital.

古文：三年二月，吐蕃以秦原安乐三州、石门驿藏木峡制胜六盘石峡萧七关归于有司。
现代文：大中三年二月，吐蕃将秦、原、安乐三州，石门、驿藏、木峡、制胜、六盘、石峡、萧等七关归于朝廷。
English: In February of the third year of junior high school, Tubo transferred Qin, Yuan, Anle three prefectures, Shimen, Gozang, Muxia, Shengli, Liupan, Shixia, Xiao and other seven prefectures to the imperial court.

古文：三月，诏待制官与刑法官、谏官次对。
现代文：三月，宣宗下诏：待制官与刑法官、谏官依次应对询问。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict: magistrates, criminal judges, and eunuchs should answer questions in turn.

古文：马植罢。
现代文：马值被免职。
English: Ma was removed from his post.

古文：是春，陨霜杀桑。
现代文：本年春季，降霜使桑叶枯败。
English: In the spring of this year, frosts caused the mulberry leaves to wither.

古文：四月乙酉，周墀罢。
现代文：四月初一，周墀被免职。
English: On the first day of April, Zhou Qi was removed from office.

古文：御史大夫崔铉为中书侍郎，兵部侍郎、判户部事魏扶：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：御史大夫崔铉任中书侍郎，兵部侍郎、判户部事魏扶，一并任同中书门下平章事。
English: Goshi daifu Cui Yan served as chushushushijiro, hyobushijiro, and hanzhobushoji Wei Fu, and also served as chushimonshitaheishoji.

古文：癸巳，幽州卢龙军节度使张仲武卒，其子直方自称留后。
现代文：初九，幽州卢龙军节度使张仲武去世，其子张直方自称留后。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhang Zhongwu died at the festival of the Yuzhou Lu Long Army, and his son Zhang Naofang claimed to stay behind.

古文：五月。武宁军乱，逐其节度使李廓。
现代文：五月，武宁军骚乱，驱逐其节度使李廓。
English: In May, the Wu Ning Army rioted, and Li Kuo, the military governor, was ousted.

古文：十月辛巳，京师地震。
现代文：十月初一，京城长安地震。
English: On the first day of October, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：是月，振武及天德、灵武、盐夏二州地震。
现代文：本月，振武、天德、灵武诸军及盐、夏二州地震。
English: This month, the Zhenwu, Tiande and Lingwu earthquakes, as well as the Salt and Xia Erzhou earthquakes, have all occurred.

古文：吐蕃以维州归于有司。
现代文：吐蕃将维州归于朝廷。
English: Pu'er returned Wizhou to the imperial court.

古文：十一月己卯，封弟惕为彭王。
现代文：十一月二十九日，宣宗封其弟李惕为彭王。
English: On November 29th, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his younger brother Li Tie as King Peng.

古文：十二月，吐蕃以扶州归于有司。
现代文：十二月，吐蕃将扶州归于朝廷。
English: In December, Tubo returned Fuzhou to the imperial court.

古文：四年正月庚辰，大赦。
现代文：大中四年正月初一，施行大赦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of high school, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：四月壬申，以雨霖，诏京师、关辅理囚，蠲度支、盐铁、户部逋负。
现代文：四月二十四日，因久雨不住，宣宗下诏：京城及京城附近辖区审察囚犯的罪案，免除度支、盐铁、户部拖欠的赋税。
English: On April 24th, due to the persistent rain, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict: the capital city and the jurisdiction areas around the capital city would examine the crimes of prisoners, and exempt the tax arrears of subsistence expenditure, salt and iron, and households.

古文：六月戊申，魏扶薨。
现代文：六月初二，魏扶去世。
English: On June 2, Wei Fu passed away.

古文：户部尚书、判度支崔龟从同中书门下平章事。
现代文：户部尚书、判度支崔龟从任同中书门下平章事。
English: The head of the household, Shang Shu, and the judge, Zhi Du, and the tortoise, Cui Gui, were promoted from the position of Ren Tong to that of Zhong Shu.

古文：八月，幽州卢龙军乱，逐其节度使张直方，衙将张允伸自称留后。
现代文：八月，幽州卢龙军发生骚乱，驱逐其节度使张直方，衙将张允伸自称留后。
English: In August, a riot occurred in the Yuzhou Lulong Army. Zhang Naofang, the commander-in-chief of the Lulong Army, expelled Zhang Naofang, but Zhang Yunshen, the commander-in-chief of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, claimed to stay behind.

古文：十月辛未，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎令狐綯同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月二十七日，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎令狐任同中书门下平章事。
English: On October 27th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, and Hyobu Chamberlain Ling Juxin and Zhong Shumen Shimo Ping signed the document.

古文：十一月，党项羌寇邠、宁。
现代文：十一月，党项羌族军队进犯、宁二州。
English: In November, the Shan Nationalist Army invaded Ning Erzhou.

古文：十二月，凤翔节度使李安业、河东节度使李拭为招讨党项使。
现代文：十二月，凤翔节度使李安业、河东节度使李拭任招讨党项使。
English: In December, the Fengxiang Festival promoted Li Anye and the Hedong Festival promoted Li Wubi to the post of party envoy.

古文：五年三月，白敏中为司空，招讨南山、平夏党项行营兵马都统。
现代文：大中五年三月，白敏中任司空，招讨南山、平夏党项行营兵马都统。
English: In March of the fifth year of junior high school, Bai Min was appointed as the second-in-command, and invited Nanshan and Pingxia to go to the camp of soldiers and horses.

古文：四月，赦平夏党项羌。
现代文：四月，赦免平夏的党项羌人。
English: In April, he pardoned Pingxia's party cadres.

古文：辛未，给得灵盐夏三州、邠宁鄜坊等道三岁。
现代文：二十九日，免除灵、盐、夏三州，宁、坊等道徭役三年。
English: On the 29th, Ling, Shi, Xia, Sanshou, Ning, Fang and others were exempted from three years of roadblock duty.

古文：六月，封子润为鄂王。
现代文：六月，宣宗封其子李润为鄂王。
English: In June, Xuan Zong made his son Li Run the King of Hubei.

古文：八月乙巳，赦南山党项羌。
现代文：八月初六，赦免南山的党项羌人。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Nanshan's party cadres were pardoned.

古文：十月，沙州人张义潮以瓜、沙、伊、肃、鄯、甘、河、西、兰、岷、廓十一州归于有司。
现代文：十月，沙州人张义潮将瓜、沙、伊、肃、鄯、甘、河、西、兰、岷、廓十一州归于朝廷。
English: In October, Zhang Yichao, a native of Shazhou, transferred eleven prefectures to the imperial court, including Gua, Sha, Yi, Su, Qu, Gan, He, Xi, Lan, Qu and Gu.

古文：白敏中罢。
现代文：白敏中被免职。
English: Bai Min was dismissed from his post.

古文：戊辰，户部侍郎、判户部魏谟同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三十日，户部侍郎、判户部魏谟担任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 30th, Hubei waiter and Hubei magistrate Wei Mu took up the post of deputy secretary of the same school.

古文：十一月，崔龟从罢。
现代文：十一月，崔龟从被免职。
English: In November, Cui Jie was removed from his post.

古文：十二月，盗斫景陵门戟。
现代文：十二月，盗贼砍断景陵门前的立戟。
English: In December, thieves cut down the gatepost in front of the Jingling Tomb.

古文：是岁，湖南饥。
现代文：本年，湖南发生饥荒。
English: This year, famine occurred in Hunan.

古文：六年三月，有彗星出于觜、参。
现代文：大中六年三月，有彗星在觜宿、参宿二星官间出现。
English: In March of the sixth year of junior high school, a comet appeared between the two government offices of Shishuku and Sanjuku.

古文：七月，雍王渼薨。
现代文：七月，雍王李氵美去世。
English: In July, the Yong Wang Li Yanmei passed away.

古文：八月，礼部尚书、诸道盐铁转运使裴休同中书门下平章事。
现代文：八月，礼部尚书、诸道盐铁转运使裴休担任同中书门下平章事。
English: In August, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the Ministry of Salt and Iron Transportation assigned Pei Xiu to serve as the Vice Chancellor of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：九月，獠寇昌、资二州。
现代文：九月，僚族军队进犯昌、资二州。
English: In September, the allied troops invaded Chang and Zhizhou.

古文：十一月，封弟惴为隶王。
现代文：十一月，宣宗封其弟李惴为棣王。
English: In November, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his younger brother, Li Xi, as the King of Xuanwu.

古文：是岁，淮南饥。
现代文：本年，淮南发生饥荒。
English: This year, a famine occurred in Huainan.

古文：七年正月丙午，朝献于太清宫。丁未，朝享于太庙。
现代文：大中七年正月十五日，宣宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。十六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the seventh year of high school, Emperor Xuanzong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up and enjoyed the offerings.

古文：戊申，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：十七日，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On the 17th, in the southern suburbs of Beijing, an amnesty was carried out.

古文：八年正月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：大中八年正月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of high school, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：三月，以旱理囚。
现代文：三月，宣宗因旱灾讯察囚犯的罪案。
English: In March, because of the drought, Xuan Zong investigated the crimes of prisoners.

古文：九月，封子洽为怀王，汭昭王，汶康王。
现代文：九月，宣宗封其子李洽为怀王，李为昭王，李汶为康王。
English: In September, Emperor Xuanzong made his son Li Chaowang the king of Huai, Li Zhaowang the king of Zhao, and Li Wen the king of Kang.

古文：九年正月甲申，成德军节度使王元逵卒，其子绍鼎自称留后。
现代文：大中九年正月初四，成德军节度使王元逵去世，其子王绍鼎自称留后。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the ninth year of high school, the German Army Festival caused Wang Yuanzhang to die, and his son Wang Shao Ding claimed to stay behind.

古文：闰四月辛丑，禁岭外民鬻男女者。
现代文：闰四月二十三日，禁止岭外百姓贩卖男女人口。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th lunar month, the sale of male and female human beings by the people of Lingwai was prohibited.

古文：七月，以旱遣使巡抚淮南，减上供馈运，蠲逋租，发粟赈民。
现代文：七月，宣宗因旱灾派遣使臣巡视、安抚淮南，减少地方官府上交朝廷的赋税和馈赠财物的运送，免除拖欠的租税，发放粮食救济百姓。
English: In July, as a result of the drought, Xuanzong dispatched envoys to inspect and pacify Huainan, reduce the taxes and gifts of the local government submitted to the imperial court, exempt the tax arrears, and distribute grain relief to the people.

古文：丙辰，崔铉罢。
现代文：初九，崔铉被免职。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Cui Yao was removed from office.

古文：庚申，罢淮南宣歙浙西冬至、元日常贡，以代下户租税。
现代文：十三日，取消淮南、宣歙、浙西的冬至节、正月初一例常进贡，以它代替贫民应纳租税。
English: On the 13th, the winter solstice festival and the first day of the first month of the year in Huainan, Xuancheng and West Zhejiang were cancelled, and the poor should pay taxes instead.

古文：是月，浙西东道军乱，逐其观察使李讷。
现代文：本月，浙江东道军队骚乱，驱逐其观察使李讷。
English: This month, Zhejiang hosted an army riot, expelling its observation envoy Li Ne.

古文：十年正月丁巳，御史大夫郑朗为工部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：大中十年正月十三日，御史大夫郑朗任工部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 10th year of the junior high school, Zheng Lang, the master of history, was appointed as the secretary of the engineering department and the secretary of the junior high school.

古文：九月，封子灌为卫王。
现代文：九月，宣宗封其子李灌为卫王。
English: In September, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his son Li Guan as the King of Wei.

古文：十月戊子，裴休罢。
现代文：十月十八日，裴休被免职。
English: On October 18th, Pei Xiu was removed from office.

古文：十二月壬辰，户部侍郎、判户部崔慎由为工部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月二十三日，户部侍郎、判户部崔慎由任工部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On December 23rd, Choi Shin, a chamberlain and judge of the Household Division, was promoted to the position of Shosho of the Ministry of Works, and Shimon Shimotaira of the Ministry of Education.

古文：十一年二月辛巳，魏谟罢。
现代文：大中十一年二月十三日，魏谟被免职。
English: On February 13th, the 11th day of the 11th month, Weimar was dismissed.

古文：五月，容管军乱，逐其经略使王球。
现代文：五月，容管的军队发生骚乱，驱逐了经略使王球。
English: In May, a riot broke out in the army under his command, and he was expelled.

古文：七月庚子，兵部侍郎、判度支萧鄴同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月初五，兵部侍郎、判度支萧邺担任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the year, the attendant of the military department and the judge, Xiao Yao, took up the post of the lower level of the book gate of the same school.

古文：成德军节度副大使王绍鼎卒，其弟绍懿自称留后。
现代文：成德军节度副大使王绍鼎去世，其弟王绍懿自称留后。
English: Wang Shao Ding, Vice-Ambassador of the Chengdu German Military Festival, passed away, and his brother Wang Shao Jun said he would stay behind.

古文：八月，封子澭为广王。
现代文：八月，宣宗封其子李氵雍为广王。
English: In August, Emperor Xuanzong made his son, Li Bingyong, the Guangwang.

古文：九月乙未，有彗星出于房。
现代文：九月初一，有彗星在星官房宿四星间出现。
English: On the first day of September, a comet appeared between the four stars of the Pleiades.

古文：十月壬申，郑朗罢。
现代文：十月初八，郑朗被免职。
English: On October 8th, Zheng Lang was removed from office.

古文：十二年正月戊戌，户部侍郎、判度支刘彖同中书门下平章事。
现代文：大中十二年正月初五，户部侍郎、判度支刘蠪担任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the 12th year of the year of the high school, the attendant of the household department and the judge Liu Yao served as the secretary of the lower level of the middle school.

古文：二月，废穆宗忌日，停光陵朝拜及守陵宫人。
现代文：二月，废除穆宗的忌日，保留光陵的朝拜与守陵的宫女。
English: In February, the day of the death of Mu Zong was abolished, and the worship of the Guangling Mausoleum and the palace maids who guarded the tomb were retained.

古文：壬申，崔慎由罢。
现代文：初九，崔慎由被免职。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the new year, Cui Shinyu was removed from his post.

古文：闰月，自十月不雨，至于是月雨。
现代文：闰二月，自头年十月无雨，至本月才下雨。
English: In leap February, there has been no rain since October of the first year, and it has only rained this month.

古文：三月，盐州监军使杨玄价杀其刺史刘皋。
现代文：三月，盐州监军使杨玄价杀了本州刺史刘皋。
English: In March, Yang Xuanquan was ordered by the supervisor of the Yanzhou troops to kill Liu Yao, the head of the Yanzhou troops.

古文：四月庚子，岭南军乱，逐其节度使杨发。
现代文：四月初九，岭南军队发生骚乱，驱逐其节度使杨发。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, a riot occurred in the Lingnan army, and Yang Fa, the commander of the troops, was expelled.

古文：戊申，兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使夏侯孜同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使夏侯孜担任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, Xia Houzhe, the attendant of the military department and the envoy of the salt and iron transportation of various provinces, served as the deputy secretary of the book gate of the same school.

古文：五月丙寅，刘彖薨。
现代文：五月初六，刘蠪去世。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Liu Ye passed away.

古文：庚辰，湖南军乱，逐其观察使韩琮。
现代文：二十日，湖南军队骚乱，驱逐其观察使韩琮。
English: On the 20th, the Hunan army rioted, expelling its observation envoy Han Qi.

古文：六月丙申，江西都将毛鹤逐其观察使郑宪。
现代文：六月初六，江西都将毛鹤驱逐其观察使郑宪。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：辛亥，南蛮寇边。
现代文：二十一日，南蛮军进犯边境。
English: On the 21st, the South Vietnamese army invaded the border.

古文：七月，容州将来正反，伏诛。
现代文：七月，容州将领来正反叛，伏法处死。
English: In July, the Yongzhou generals led a full-scale rebellion and were put to death.

古文：八月，宣歙将康全泰逐其观察使郑薰，淮南节度使崔铉兼宣歙池观察处置使以讨之。
现代文：八月，宣歙将领康全泰驱逐其观察使郑薰，淮南节度使崔铉兼宣、歙、池观察处置使讨伐康全泰。
English: In August, Xuanzang general Kang Quan Tai expelled his observation envoy Zheng Huan, and the Huainan Festival made Cui Huan and Xuanzang, Zou and Chi observe and deal with the crusade against Kang Quan Tai.

古文：丁巳，太原地震。
现代文：二十九日，太原地震。
English: On the 29th, the Taiyuan earthquake occurred.

古文：十月，康全泰伏诛。
现代文：十月，康全泰伏法处死。
English: In October, Kang Quan-taifu was executed.

古文：十二月，毛鹤伏诛。
现代文：十二月，毛鹤伏法处死。
English: In December, Mao He was executed by hanging.

古文：甲寅，兵部侍郎、判户部蒋伸同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，兵部侍郎、判户部蒋伸任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Jiang Shinren, the attendant of the military department and the judge of the household department, and the schoolmaster of the middle school had a meeting.

古文：十三年正月戊午，大赦，蠲度支、户部逋负，放宫人。
现代文：大中十三年正月初一，施行大赦，免除度支、户部拖欠的赋税，放出宫女。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of junior high school, an amnesty was implemented, exempting the tax arrears of expenses and households, and releasing the courtesans.

古文：八月壬辰，左神策军护军中尉王宗实立郓王温为皇太子，权句当军国政事。
现代文：八月初九，左神策军护军中尉王忠实立郓王李温为皇太子，暂行处理军国政事。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the year, Wang Zhongsheng, a lieutenant of the Zuo Sheng Army, appointed Li Wen as the crown prince to temporarily deal with military and political affairs.

古文：癸巳，皇帝崩于咸宁殿，年五十。
现代文：初十，宣宗在咸宁殿逝世，终年五十岁。
English: At the age of ten, Emperor Xuanzong passed away at Xianning Palace at the age of fifty.

古文：谥曰圣武献文孝皇帝。
现代文：谥号是圣武献文孝皇帝。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Shenwu Xianwen.

古文：咸通十三年，加谥元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝。
现代文：懿宗咸通十三年，将宣宗的谥号增为 元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝 。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Xianzong's reign, Emperor Xuanzong's posthumous name was changed to Yuan Shenzhi Mingcheng Wu Xianwen Rui Zhi Zhang Ren Shencong Xingdao Da Xiao Emperor.

古文：赞曰：《春秋》之法，君弑而贼不讨，则深责其国，以为无臣子也。
现代文：评说：按《春秋》的褒贬准则，君主被乱臣逆子杀害而不公开谴责逆贼，就严厉地向这个国家问罪，认为它没有为臣为子之道。
English: Comment: According to the "Spring and Autumn" praise and blame standard, when the monarch was killed by a traitorous vassal without publicly condemning the traitor, he severely questioned the country, believing that it did not have the way of being a vassal.

古文：宪宗之弑，历三世而贼犹在。
现代文：宪宗被杀害，经历三任皇帝而谋杀宪宗的逆贼仍然安在。
English: Kenzong was killed, and the traitors who murdered Kenzong after three emperors are still alive.

古文：至于文宗，不能明弘志等罪恶，以正国之典刑，仅能杀之而已，是可叹也。
现代文：到了文宗，不能彰明陈弘志等逆贼的罪恶，按国家的常法治他们的罪，仅仅只是杀了他们而已，这实在是可叹。
English: As far as Wenzong is concerned, it is truly deplorable that the evil of the traitors such as Chen Hongzhi and others could not be made clear and that they were merely killed according to the usual laws of the state.

古文：穆、敬昏童失德，以其以位不久，故天下未至于败乱，而敬宗卒及其身，是岂有讨贼之志哉！
现代文：穆宗、敬宗昏昧无德，由于他们在位时间不长，因此尚未达到使天下败毁混乱的地步，但敬宗终于祸及自身，这哪里有声讨逆贼的意念呢？
English: Mu Zong and Keizong were dim-witted and without virtue. Since they had not been in power for long, they had not yet reached the point of bringing chaos and destruction to the world. However, the calamity of Keizong finally affected themselves. Where was the voice to condemn the traitors?

古文：文宗恭俭儒雅，出于天惟，尝读太宗《政要》，慨然恭之。
现代文：文宗的恭顺克己温文尔雅，出自禀性；曾阅读辑录太宗与魏征等大臣问答议政、施政举措等内容的《贞观政要》，慨叹仰慕贞观之治。
English: Wenzong's obedience, self-restraint, and mild manners came from his stubbornness; he had read "Zhenguan Zhengyao," a collection of questions and answers from ministers such as Taizong and Wei Zheng on politics and policy measures, and admired Zhenguan's rule.

古文：及即位，锐意于治，每延英对宰臣，率漏下十一刻。
现代文：到他登上帝位，专心一意治国，每在延英殿与宰辅大臣策问应对，通常都将近一个半时辰。
English: By the time he ascended to the throne and devoted himself to governing the country, he would usually spend nearly an hour and a half every time he had a question-and-answer session with the Vice-Minister at Yan Ying Dian.

古文：唐制，天子以只日视朝，乃命辍朝、放朝皆用双日。
现代文：唐朝制度规定：天子每逢单日临朝处理政务，而命令停止上朝听政，或遇酷暑、大雨雪免掉群臣入朝参见都用双日。
English: The Tang Dynasty system stipulates that whenever the emperor is in the imperial court for a single day to deal with government affairs, and orders to stop going to the imperial court to listen to politics, or in the case of extreme heat, heavy rain and snow to avoid the group of courtiers entering the imperial court, double days are used.

古文：凡除吏必召见访问，亲察其能否。
现代文：凡授予官职，文宗必定召见询问，亲自考察他是否有才能。
English: Whenever he conferred an official post, Wenzong would certainly summon him for questioning and personally examine whether he had talent or not.

古文：故太和之初，政事脩饬，号为清明。
现代文：因此太和初期，政事得到整顿，政治号称清明。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of the Taihe era, government affairs were rectified, and politics was said to be clean.

古文：然其仁而少断，承父兄之弊，宦官挠权，制之不得其术，故其终困以此。
现代文：但文宗为人仁厚而少决断，承接了父兄酿成的积弊，宦官又从中乱政枉法，他却禁制不得其法，所以终于因此而陷入困境。
English: However, Wenzong was a benevolent and indecisive person. He inherited the accumulated evils caused by his father and brother, and the eunuchs also made mischief from it. However, he could not restrain them, so he finally fell into a predicament.

古文：甘露之事，祸及忠良，不胜冤愤，饮恨而已。
现代文：太和九年十一月的 甘露之变 ，李训、郑注等诛除宦官的计谋败露，致使十余家大臣遭受诛族，祸及忠良，冤愤无尽，也只能抱恨含冤而已。
English: In November of the ninth year of King Taejo's reign, the plot to remove the eunuchs by Li Xun, Zheng Zhu and others failed, resulting in more than ten ministers being subjected to the eunuchs, the misfortune of the loyal and the good, the grievances are endless, and they can only hold grudges.

古文：由是言之，其能杀弘志，亦足伸其志也。
现代文：以此来说，文宗能杀掉陈弘志，也算伸展其心志了。
English: In this sense, if Wenzong could kill Chen Hongzhi, it would be an extension of his will.

古文：昔武丁得一傅说，为商高宗。
现代文：古时殷王武丁得到傅说一人，振兴国势由弱而强，他就是在位五十九年的商高宗。
English: In ancient times, King Wuding of Yin was said to be the only one who could revitalize the country from a weak to a strong position. He was Shang Gaozong, who reigned for 59 years.

古文：武宗用一李德裕，遂成其功烈。
现代文：唐武宗重用李德裕一人，终于成就了他的功业。
English: Tang Wuzong made heavy use of Li Deyu alone, and finally accomplished his work.

古文：然其奋然除去浮图之法甚锐，而躬受道家之箓，服药以求长年。
现代文：然而，他奋力除去佛教十分急切，却又亲自禀承道教秘文，祈求服药以获长生。
English: However, he was very eager to get rid of Buddhism, but he personally inherited the Taoist secret text and prayed to take medicine to gain eternal life.

古文：以此见其非明智之不惑者，特好恶有不同尔。
现代文：由此可见他并不是明智而不受蛊惑的人，只是所好所恶不同罢了。
English: From this we can see that he is not a wise man who does not succumb to seduction, but simply has different likes and dislikes.

古文：宣宗精于听断，而以察为明，无复仁恩之意。
现代文：宣宗精于据事决断，却以能辨察真伪为贤明，从而不再有仁爱恩德的情意。
English: Xuan Zong is good at making decisions based on facts, but it is wise to be able to distinguish between truth and falsehood, so there is no longer any benevolence.

古文：呜呼，自是而后，唐衰矣！
现代文：唉，从此以后，唐朝就衰落了！
English: Alas, from then on, the Tang Dynasty declined!

