古文：同光二年春正月庚子朔，帝御明堂殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：同光二年一月一日，庄宗到明堂殿接受朝贺，仪仗侍卫合于礼制。
English: On January 1st, the second year of his reign, Shōzō went to Myōdō-den to receive morning greetings, and the ceremonial guards joined in the ceremony.

古文：壬寅，南郊礼仪使、太常卿李燕进太庙登歌酌献乐舞名，懿祖室曰《昭德之舞》，献祖室曰《文明之舞》，太祖室曰《应天之舞》，昭宗室曰《永平之舞》。
现代文：三日，南郊礼仪使、太常卿李燕进上太庙登歌酌献乐舞的名字，懿祖庙室的叫昭德之舞，献祖庙室的叫文明之舞，太祖庙室的叫应天之舞，昭宗庙室的叫永平之舞。
English: On the third day, Li Yan, the ceremonial envoy of the Southern Suburbs and the Grand Master Li Yan, went to the Grand Temple to sing and drink the name of the dance. The dance in the ancestral temple room was called the Zhao De Dance, the dance in the ancestral temple room was called the Civilization Dance, the dance in the ancestral temple room was called the Ying Tian Dance, and the dance in the Zhaozong Temple room was called the Yongping Dance.

古文：甲辰，幽州上言，契丹入寇至瓦桥。
现代文：五日，幽州报告，契丹进犯到瓦桥。
English: On the fifth day, according to the Yuzhou report, the Khitan attacked the tile bridge.

古文：《契丹国志》：时契丹日益强盛，遣使就唐求幽州，以处卢文进。以天平军节度使李嗣源为北面行营都招讨使，陕州留后霍彦威为副，率军援幽州。
现代文：任天平军节度使李嗣源为北面行营都招讨使，陕州留后霍彦威为副使，率军队救援幽州。
English: The Tianping Army Festival made Li Siyuan invite envoys to the northern campaign, and after staying in Shaanxi, Huo Yanwei was the deputy envoy and led the army to rescue Yuzhou.

古文：己巳，故宣武军节度副使、权知军州事、检校太傅王瓚赠太子太师。
现代文：三十日，已故宣武军节度副使、权知军州事、检校太傅王瓒追赠为太子太师。
English: On the 30th, the late Wang Xi, Vice-Envoy of the Xuanwu Army for the Festival, Guanzhi Army for State Affairs, and Inspector of Schools, was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：诏改应顺门为永曜门，太平门为万春门，通政门为广政门，凤明门为韶和门，万春门为中兴门，解卸殿为端明殿。
现代文：八日，下诏改朝元殿仍为明堂殿，又改崇勋殿为中兴殿。十一日，下诏改应顺门为永曜门，改太平门为万春门，改通政门为广政门，改凤明门为韶和门，改万春门为中兴门，改解卸殿为端明殿。
English: On the eighth day, the edict changed the Chogen-den to the Myodo-den, and the Sojun-den to the Chuko-den. On the eleventh day, the edict changed the Shun-mon to the Yongyō-mon, the Taiping-mon to the Banzhun-mon, the Tsongchung-mon to the Kwangchung-mon, the Feng-myeong-mon to the Suwa-mon, the Banzhun-mon to the Chuko-mon, and the Discharge-mon to the Tana-myeong-den.

古文：是日，诏曰： 皇纲已正，紫禁方严，凡事内官，不合更居外地。
现代文：这一天，下诏说： 皇纲已经端正，皇宫已严整，凡朝内官吏，不应居住在外地。
English: On this day, the next imperial edict said: The imperial program has been rectified, the imperial palace has been tidied up, and all officials within the imperial court should not live outside the country.

古文：诏诸道应有内官，不计高低，并仰逐处并家口发遣赴阙，不得辄有停滞。 
现代文：诏令各道所有内官，不管职位高低，必须逐个连家属一起来到京城，不得随意停留。 
English: The edict ordered that all officials, regardless of rank, must come to the capital one by one with their families, and must not stay longer than necessary.

古文：伏自伪梁，不分轻重，并从官给，今后如非前件事例，请官中不给告敕，其内司大官侍卫将校转官，即不在此限。 
现代文：庄宗没登帝位时，宦官已有五百，到现在连同各道到京城的约有一千多人，都优待赏赐，衣服珍玩十分华丽奢侈，委托他们各种事务，当作心腹看待。唐朝时宦官任为朝内各部门使务，各镇监军，进出时都以皇帝名义号令，作威作福，唐昭宗因此亡国。
English: When Zhuangzong did not ascend to the throne, there were already five hundred eunuchs, and now there are more than a thousand people who have come to the capital together with the various provinces. They are all given preferential treatment, their clothes are rare and very gorgeous and luxurious, and they are entrusted with various affairs and regarded as confidants. During the Tang Dynasty, eunuchs were appointed as envoys of various departments within the court, supervisors of the troops in each town, and when entering and leaving, they were ordered in the name of the emperor, to be dignified and to do good. As a result, Tang Zhaozong was defeated.

古文：从之。壬子，蜀主王衍致书于帝，称有诈为天使，驰报收复汴州者，诏捕之，不获。癸丑，有司奏：郊祀前二日，迎祔高祖、太宗、懿祖、献祖、太祖神主于太庙。
现代文：到庄宗统治天下，应知以前事为鉴戒，一旦又复兴旧弊，议论的人都为之叹息。新罗王金朴英派使者朝贺。十二日，有关官员上奏： 郊祀的前两天，迎接高祖、太宗、懿祖、献祖、太祖的神主合祭于太庙。 
English: When Zhuangzong came to rule the world, he should have learned from the past, and once he revived the old evil, everyone who talked about it sighed. King Jinpuying of Silla sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor. On the 12th, the relevant officials announced: Two days before the suburb worship, the deities of Gaozu, Taizong, Zhezu, Xianzu, and Taizong will be celebrated together in the Great Temple.

古文：议者以中兴唐祚，不宜以追封之祖杂有国之君以为昭穆，自懿祖已下，宜别立庙于代州，如后汉南阳故事可也。
现代文：有议论认为既然是中兴唐朝，不应以追封的祖宗混杂在曾执国柄的祖宗之间按昭穆排列次序，从懿祖以下，应另外在代州建庙，就像后汉南阳的旧例那样。
English: Some people argue that since it is the Middle and High Tang Dynasties, it should not be mixed with the ancestors of the emperors who once ruled the country according to the order of Zhaomu, from the ancestor of the emperor to the next, it should be built in another temple in Daizhou, just like the old case of the post-Han Nanyang.

古文：幽州北面军前奏，契丹还塞，诏李嗣源班师。
现代文：幽州北面军前来报告，契丹回到塞外，诏令李嗣源回师。
English: The Yuzhou Hokumen Army came to report, the Khitan returned to outside of Serbia, and ordered Li Siyuan to return to his division.

古文：凤翔节度使、秦王李茂贞上表，请行籓臣之礼，帝优报之。
现代文：凤翔节度使、秦王李茂贞上书，请求向庄宗行藩臣之礼节，庄宗优待回报了他。
English: Fengxiang sent a letter to Li Maozhen, the Qin king's envoy to the festival, requesting that he show the etiquette of a vassal of the domain to Zhuangzong. Zhuangzong rewarded him with preferential treatment.

古文：甲寅，帝于中兴殿面赐郭崇韬铁券。
现代文：十三日，庄宗在中兴殿当面赐铁券给郭崇韬。
English: On the 13th, Zhuangzong gave Guo Chongyao an iron certificate in person at the Zhongxing Palace.

古文：有司上言： 皇太后到阙，皇帝合于银台门内奉迎。 
现代文：有关官员上奏： 皇太后到京城，皇帝应在银台门内迎接。 
English: The officials concerned made the following announcement: The Empress Dowager is coming to the capital, and the Emperor should meet her at the Ginza Gate.

古文：诏亲至怀州奉迎。
现代文：下诏亲自到怀州迎接。
English: The emperor himself came to Waizhou to welcome the young emperor.

古文：中书奏： 自二十三日后散斋内，车驾不合远出。 
现代文：中书上奏 ：从二十三日后的散斋期间，车驾不应远出。 
English: Annotation: From the 23rd day after the fasting period, you should not drive far.

古文：庚申，四方馆上言： 请今后除随驾将校，及外方进奉专使文武班三品以上官，可以内殿对见，其余并诣正衙，以申常礼。 
现代文：下诏改到河阳迎接。十四日，渤海国派使者进贡土产。幽州上奏，女为州山后十三寨百姓又复回新州。十七日，诏令盐铁、度支、户部一起委交给租庸使管辖。十九日，四方馆上奏 ：请今后除随驾将校、以及外方进奉专使文武班三品以上官员，可以在内殿与皇帝相见外，其余人都要到正衙，以施行正常礼规。 
English: On the 14th, the envoys from Bohai were sent to pay tribute to the local products. The Yuzhou envoys were presented, and the women from Shuzhoushan and Zhouzhanzhai returned to Xinzhou. On the 17th, the envoys from the Salt and Iron Industry, Water Resources and Rural Affairs, and Household Affairs Commissions were handed over to the jurisdiction of the Yeongjong envoys. On the 19th, the envoys from the Sifang Pavilion were presented: In the future, except for the accompanying officers, and the foreign envoys of the civil and military class of three or more products, please meet the emperor in the inner

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗批准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：车驾幸河阳，奉迎皇太后。
现代文：庄宗驾临河阳，迎接皇太后。
English: Zhuo Zong arrived in Koyang to meet the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛酉，帝侍皇太后至，文武百僚迎于上东门。
现代文：二十日，庄宗陪皇太后到，文武百官在上东门迎接。
English: On the 20th, Zhuozong accompanied the empress dowager to the East Gate, where he was greeted by hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：是日，河中府上言，稷山县割隶绛州。
现代文：这一天，河中府上奏，稷山县划归绛州管。
English: On this day, Heshan County was transferred to the administration of Ganzhou Province.

古文：以太仆卿李纾为宗正卿，以卫尉卿杨遘为太仆卿。西京昭应县华清宫道士张冲虚上言，天尊院枯桧重生枝叶。
现代文：西京昭应县华清宫道士张冲虚上奏说天尊院枯死的桧树重生枝叶。
English: Zhang Chongyue, a Taoist priest of the Huaqing Palace in West Beijing's Zhaoying County, said that the dead eucalyptus tree of the Temple of Heaven was reborn.

古文：乙丑，有司上言： 南郊朝享太庙，旧例亲王充亚献、终献行事。 
现代文：二十四日，有关官员上奏： 在南郊朝祭太庙，按旧例由亲王行亚献、终献的礼仪。 
English: On the 24th, the relevant officials announced: In the southern suburb of the Imperial Palace, according to the old custom, the prince will perform the ceremony of sub-offering and final offering.

古文：乃以皇子继岌为亚献，皇弟存纪为终献。
现代文：于是任皇子李继岌为亚献，任皇弟李存纪为终献。
English: As a result, the crown prince, Li Jizhe, was appointed as the second offering, and the crown prince's younger brother, Li Cunji, was appointed as the final offering.

古文：丙寅，帝赴明堂殿致斋。
现代文：二十五日，庄宗到明堂殿斋戒。
English: On the 25th, Zhuo Zong went to the Ming Hall to fast.

古文：丁卯，朝飨于太微宫。
现代文：二十六日，祭太庙，这一天到南郊。
English: On the 26th, the festival was held in the Great Temple, and on this day, it was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：戊辰，飨太庙，是日赴南郊。二月己巳朔，亲祀昊天上帝于圜丘，礼毕，宰臣率百官就次称贺，还御五凤楼。
现代文：二月一日，庄宗亲自在圜丘祭祀苍天上帝，礼仪结束，宰相率百官按次序称贺，还归五凤楼。
English: On February 1st, Zhuangzong personally sacrificed to the God of Heaven in Shaoqiu, the ceremony ended, the prime minister and hundreds of officials congratulated in order, and returned to Wufenglou.

古文：宣制： 大赦天下，应同光二年二月一日昧爽已前，所犯罪无轻重常赦所不原者，咸赦除之。
现代文：宣布文告： 大赦天下，凡在同光二年二月一日天亮以前，所犯罪行不论轻重以及按通常赦免仍不能宽恕的，都加以赦免。
English: Announcement: A general amnesty will be granted to anyone who, before the dawn of February 1 of the same year, commits a crime, no matter how serious, and who cannot be pardoned according to the usual amnesty.

古文：十恶五逆、屠牛铸钱、故意杀人、合造毒药、持杖行劫、官典犯赃，不在此限。
现代文：十恶五逆，屠牛铸钱，故意杀人，合造毒药，持仗抢劫，官员犯赃，不在此例。
English: The ten vices and five vices, cow slaughter for money, intentional homicide, concoction of poison, armed robbery, and official misconduct are not included in this case.

古文：应自来立功将校，各与转官，仍加赏给。
现代文：凡是以前立功将校，都与加官，再给以赏赐。
English: All officers who have made meritorious contributions in the past have been promoted and rewarded.

古文：文武常参官、节度、观察、防御、刺史、军主、都虞候、指挥使，父母亡殁者，并与追赠；在者各与加爵增封。
现代文：文武常参官、节度、观察、防御、刺史、军主、都虞候、指挥使，父母去世了的，都与追赠，父母还在的各与加爵进封。
English: The civil and military staff officers, commanders, observers, defenders, historians, generals, governors-general, and commanders-in-chief, whose parents had passed away, were given posthumous awards, and those whose parents were still alive were ennobled.

古文：诸籓镇各赐一子出身，仍封功臣名号。
现代文：各藩镇各赐一子出身，再封功臣名号。
English: Each domain and town was given one child, and the title of meritorious vassal was bestowed.

古文：留后、刺史，官高者加阶爵一级，官卑者加官一资。
现代文：留后、刺史官位高的加阶爵一级，官位低的加官一资。
English: After staying, he was promoted to the high official rank of Knight of the Order of the Bath, and to the low official rank of Vice-Admiral.

古文：应本朝内外臣僚，被硃氏杀害者，特与追赠。应诸州府不得令富室分外收贮见钱，禁工人熔钱为铜器，勿令商人载钱出境。
现代文：凡是本朝内外臣僚，被朱氏杀害的，特别予以追赠，凡诸州府不能让富人分外贮藏现钱，禁止工人熔化钱币铸造铜器，不让商人带钱出境。
English: All the domestic and foreign ministers of this dynasty who were killed by the Zhu clique will be specially pursued, and all the state governments will not allow the rich to store cash, prohibit workers from melting coins and casting copperware, and prevent merchants from taking money out of the country.

古文：近年已来，妇女服饰，异常宽博，倍费缣绫。
现代文：近年以来，妇女的衣服特别的宽大，太浪费缣绫布料。
English: In recent years, women's clothes have become particularly large and wasteful of fabric.

古文：有力之家，不计卑贱，悉衣锦绣，宜令所在纠察。
现代文：有钱人家，不管贵贱，都穿绵绣，应令所在官府纠察。
English: Rich people, no matter how high or low they are, all wear cotton embroidery, and should be ordered to picket the government office.

古文：应有百姓妇女，曾经俘掳他处为婢妾者，一任骨肉识认。
现代文：凡是百姓妇女，曾经被俘往别处做婢妾的，全都让家人识认。
English: All the peasant women who had been captured and taken to other places to work as slaves and concubines were identified by their families.

古文：男子曾被刺面者，给与凭据，放逐营生。
现代文：男子曾被刺面的，给与凭据，放回让自谋生路。
English: The man, who had been stabbed in the face, was given a certificate and allowed to earn his own living.

古文：召天下有能以书籍进纳者，各等第酬奖。
现代文：召天下能献进文章书籍的人，按等次奖赏。
English: Those who can donate articles and books will be rewarded according to their rank.

古文：仰有司速检勘天下户口正额，垦田实数，待凭条理，以息烦苛。 
现代文：要有关官员迅速检查天下户口正规数额，垦田实际数，整理出规范，以免烦琐苛细。 
English: Relevant officials should quickly check the formal amount of the world account, the actual number of fields, and sort out the norms, so as not to be tedious.

古文：是日，风景和暢，人胥悦服。
现代文：这一天，风光和畅，人心都悦服。
English: On this day, the scenery is serene and people are happy.

古文：议者云，五十年来无此盛礼。
现代文：有议论说，五十年来没这样盛大的礼仪。
English: Some argue that there hasn't been such a grand ceremony in fifty years.

古文：然自此权臣愎戾，伶官用事，吏人孔谦酷加赋敛，赦文之所原放，谦复刻剥不行，大失人心，始于此矣。
现代文：然而从此权臣刚愎暴戾，伶官干预朝政，官员孔谦残酷地增加赋敛，大赦令已赦免的，孔谦仍刻剥不止，大失人心就从这里开始了。
English: However, from that time on, powerful officials became violent, eunuchs interfered in court politics, official Kong Qian cruelly increased his austerity, and those who had been pardoned by the amnesty order, Kong Qian still continued to deprive them, and the great loss of heart began from here.

古文：庚午，租庸使孔谦奏： 诸道纲运客旅，多于私路苟免商税，请令所在关防严加捉搦。 
现代文：二日，租庸使孔谦上奏： 诸道运输客商，多走私路想逃免商税，请令所在关防严加捉拿。 
English: On the second day, the lessee made Kong Qian play: Merchants transporting passengers in all directions, if you want to escape the commercial tax through multiple smuggling routes, please order the local customs to strictly catch them.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗答应了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：《五代会要》：太常礼院奏： 李茂贞封册之命，宜准故襄州节度使赵匡凝之例施行。
现代文：五日，宰相豆卢革率百官给庄宗上尊号为昭文睿武至德光孝皇帝，共上了三次表章，庄宗才接受了。六日，下诏说： 汴州原来管辖开封、浚仪、封丘、雍丘、尉氏、陈留六县，伪朝割许州鄢陵、扶沟，陈州太康，郑州阳武、中牟，曹州考城等县划归给它。
English: On the 5th, Zhuangzong received the title of Emperor from Zhaowen Ruiwu to Deguangxiao from Zhuangzong, who was given the title by 100 officials led by Prime Minister Zhu Ruge on the 5th. On the 6th, the following edict was issued: Six counties of Kaifeng, Dongyi, Fengqiu, Yongqiu, Yi, and Chenliu were originally under the jurisdiction of Bozhou, but were assigned to it by the False Emperor, such as Xuzhou, Fuling, Fuguo, Chenzhou, Taikang, Zhengzhou, Yangwu, Zhongmou, and Caozhou.

古文：秦王受册，自备革辂一乘，载册犊车一乘，并本品卤簿鼓吹如仪。 
现代文：其中阳武、匡城、扶沟、考城四县，应令暂归汴州，其余的归还本部州。 十日，到李嗣源府第，作乐，尽欢而罢。
English: Among them, the four counties of Yangwu, Kuangcheng, Fuguo and Kaocheng were ordered to temporarily return to Bozhou, and the rest were returned to Motobu Prefecture.On the 10th, they went to Li Siyuan Prefecture to make music and have fun.

古文：从之。是日，帝幸左龙武军。
现代文：十一日，任河中节度使、冀王李继麟兼安邑、解县两池榷盐使。十三日，庄宗巡幸左龙武军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he was appointed as the envoy of the Central Government of Sichuan Province, the envoy of the King of Hebei Province, Li Jilin, and the envoy of the King of Anhui Province, and the envoy of the County Government of Zhejiang Province, and the envoy of the County Government of Zhejiang Province.

古文：癸未，宰臣豆卢革率百官上表，请立中宫。
现代文：十六日，宰相豆卢革率百官上表章，请立皇后。
English: On the 16th, Prime Minister Dou Luge led hundreds of officials to come to the table and ask for the appointment of an empress.

古文：制以魏国夫人刘氏为皇后，仍令所司择日备礼册命。
现代文：发布诏令以魏国夫人刘氏为皇后，仍令有关官员选择日期准备礼仪来册命。
English: The imperial edict was issued naming Liu, the empress dowager of Wei, as the empress, but the relevant officials were still ordered to choose a date to prepare the etiquette for recording the order.

古文：丁亥，以天平军节度使、蕃汉总管副使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、兼中书令李嗣源为检校太尉，依前天平军节度使，加实封百户，兼赐铁券；以前安国军节度副使、检校太保、左卫上将军李存乂为晋州节度使、检校太傅；以北京皇城留守、检校太保、左威卫上将军李存纪为邢州节度使，加检校太傅；以蕃汉马步都虞候兼东京马步军都指挥使、检校太保硃守殷为振武节度使，加检校太傅。
现代文：二十日，任天平军节度使、蕃汉总管副使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、兼中书令李嗣源为检校太尉，保留天平军节度使，加实封百户，兼赐铁券；任前安国军节度副使、检校太保、左卫上将军李存繧为晋州节度使、检校太傅；任北京皇城留守、检校太保、左威上将军李存纪为邢州节度使，加检校太傅；任蕃汉马步都虞候兼东京马步军都指挥使、检校太保朱守殷为振武节度使，加检校太傅。
English: On the 20th, Li Siyuan was appointed as the Tianping Army's chief of ceremonies, the deputy chief of the Shandong-Han general administration, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, the chief inspector of schools, and the vice-president of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Li Siyuan was appointed as the chief inspector of schools, retained the position of the Tianping Army's chief of ceremonies, reinforced the seals of hundreds of households, and awarded iron coupons; Li Cunxu, the former vice-commissioner of the An Guo Army's chief of ceremonies, chief inspector of schools, and senior general of the Left

古文：戊子，以前右龙武军都虞候、守左龙武大将军李绍奇为郑州防御使，以楚州防御使张继孙为汝州防御使。
现代文：二十一日，任前右龙武军都虞候、守左龙武大将军李绍奇为郑州防御使，任楚州防御使张继孙为汝州防御使。
English: On the 21st, Li Shaoqi, the former Right Dragon Military Commander and the former Left Dragon Military Commander, was appointed as the Zhengzhou defense envoy, and Zhang Jisun, the Chuzhou defense envoy, was appointed as the Ruzhou defense envoy.

古文：己丑，以振武军节度使、权安义留后、检校太傅、平章事李存霸为潞州节度使，以捧日都指挥使、郑州防御使李绍琛为陕州节度使，以成德军马步军都指挥使、右监门卫大将军毛璋为华州节度使。
现代文：二十二日，任振武军节度使、权安义留后、检校太傅、平章事李存霸为潞州节度使，任捧日都指挥使、郑州防御使李绍琛为陕州节度使，任成德军马步军都指挥使、右监门卫大将毛璋为华州节度使。
English: On the 22nd, Li Cunbao was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhenwu Army, and after Guan Anyi stayed, Li Cunbao was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhangzhou Army, Li Shaoqi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Hupo Army, Li Shaoqi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhengzhou Defense Army, Li Shaoqi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Shaanxi Army, Guan Anyi stayed, Li Cunbao was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guanzhou Army, Li Shaoqi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhengzhou Defense Army, Li

古文：壬辰，枢密使郭崇韬再上表，请退枢密之职，优诏不允。
现代文：二十五日，枢密使郭崇韬再次上表章，请辞退枢密一职，庄宗下诏不允。
English: On the 25th, the Privy Counsellor, Guo Chongyao, once again put on his badge and asked to resign from the post of Privy Counsellor, but Zhuangzong refused.

古文：丙午，以荆南节度使、守中书令、渤海王高季兴依前检校太师、兼尚书令，封南平王；以幽州节度行军司马李存贤依前检校太保，为幽州节度使。
现代文：二十六日，下诏说： 皇太后以母亲的风仪规范天下，把全体百姓看作儿子，应当另外建筑宫殿，标示名号，以期借称号更加显出尊严，应以长寿宫作为名字。 
English: On the 26th, the next imperial edict said: The empress dowager should use her mother's demeanor to standardize the world and regard all the people as her sons. She should build another palace and mark it with a name, in order to show more dignity by using the title. It should be named the Longevity Palace.

古文：中书门下上言： 近以诸州奏荐令录，颇乱规程，请今后节度使管三州已上，每年许奏管内官三人；如管三州已下，只奏两人。仍须课绩尤异，方得上闻。
现代文：枢密使郭崇韬奏献十五件有关时务便利的计策，庄宗好言表扬。二十七日，奚族君王李绍威、吐谷浑李绍鲁都进贡骆驼马匹。三月七日，镇州报告，契丹侵犯边塞，诏令李嗣源率领军队在邢州驻扎。八日，中书门下上奏说： 近来各州推荐上报的官员，有点乱了规矩，请今后节度使管三州以上的，每年准许推荐管区内三名官员，如管三州以下的，只许推荐二人，仍必须政绩优异，才能上报。
English: On the 27th, the king of the Yi people, Li Shaowei, and the ruler of Tuyuhun, Li Shauru, both paid tribute with camels and horses. On the 7th of March, Zhenzhou reported that the Khitan had invaded the border fortress, and ordered Li Siyuan to lead the army to be stationed in Zhangzhou. On the 8th, Zhuangzong made a report under the door of the Chinese book: Recently, the officials recommended by the states to report are a bit out of order. In the future, please be more restrained and allow the administration of more than three states to recommend three officials in the region every year. If the administration of three

古文：防御使止许奏一人，刺史无奏荐之例。 
现代文：防御使只许推荐一人，刺史没有推荐权。 
English: The defense is only allowed to recommend one person, and the stabbing history does not have the right to recommend.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗批准了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己酉，以太子少保李琪为刑部尚书
现代文：十一日，任太子少保李琪为刑部尚书。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ren Taizi Shao Bao Li Qi was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：从之。有司上言： 皇帝四月一日御文明殿，受册徽号，合服衮冕，御殿前一日，散斋于内殿。 
现代文：十二日，幽州报告说契丹侵犯新城。中书门下上奏： 州县官在任考核满意的，可以报名送交吏部备案，本道不可用代理官替代正式官。 庄宗批准了。有关官员上奏： 皇帝四月一日到文明殿，接受册封徽号，应穿衮冕礼服，御临殿前一天，在内殿散斋。 庄宗答应了。
English: On the 12th, Yuzhou reported that the Khitan had invaded Xincheng. Zhongshumen issued the following report: If the state and county officials in office are satisfied with the assessment, they can sign up and send it to the personnel department for record. In this way, it is not possible to use agents to replace official officials. Zhuangzong approved. Relevant officials issued a report: The emperor will go to the Civilization Hall on April 1st to accept the seal and emblem, and should wear a crown dress. The day before his arrival at the hall, he will break his fast in the inner hall. Zhuangzong agreed.

古文：从之。是日，李嗣源上表乞退兵权，诏不允。
现代文：这一天，李嗣源上书请求辞退兵权，下诏不允许。
English: On this day, Li Siyuan submitted a letter requesting the right to withdraw from the military, which was not allowed.

古文：是时伶人景进用事，阉官竞进，故重臣忧惧，拜章请退。
现代文：此时伶人景进掌权，宦官争权，所以重臣忧惧，上表章请退职。
English: At this time, the eunuchs were in power and the eunuchs were competing for power, so the senior vassals were worried. The head eunuch was asked to resign.

古文：癸丑，左谏议大夫窦专上言： 请废租庸使名目，事归三司。 
现代文：十五日，左谏议大夫窦专上奏说： 请废除租庸使这个官职，事务由三司管理。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Zuo Zhengyi's doctor Dou Zeng said: Please abolish the official position of rent-a-maid, and the affairs will be managed by three departments.

古文：疏奏不报。
现代文：奏疏没往上报告。
English: The omission was not reported.

古文：禁用铅锡钱。
现代文：十八日，禁止使用铅锡铸造的钱币。
English: On the 18th, the use of coins made of lead and tin was prohibited.

古文：丁巳，中书门下奏： 懿祖陵请以永兴为名，献祖陵请以长宁为名，太祖陵请以建极为名。 
现代文：十九日，中书门下上奏： 懿祖陵墓请称作永兴陵，献祖陵请称作长宁陵，太祖陵请称作建极陵。 
English: On the 19th, the following announcement was made at the entrance of the Chinese Academy of Letters: "Please call the Mausoleum of the Founding Fathers the Yongxing Mausoleum, the Mausoleum of the Ancestors the Changning Mausoleum, and the Mausoleum of the Forefathers the Jianji Mausoleum."

古文：诏在京诸道节度使、刺史、令各归本任。
现代文：庄宗批准了。南唐杨溥派使者进贡祭天用的礼品。
English: Zhuangzong approved. Southern Tang Yang Di sent an envoy to bring gifts for the tribute festival.

古文：丁丑，以前幽州节度使、内外蕃汉马步总管、检校太师、兼中书令李存审为宣武军节度使，余如故。
现代文：二十日，诏令凡南郊祭天行事官交付三铨考核，从优安置。二十一日，巡幸左龙武军，是因为任皇子李继岌代替张全义主持六军各禁卫事务的缘故。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict ordered the officials of the Southern Suburbs Festival to deliver the three-branch examination and be placed in a superior position. On the 21st, the tour of the Zalong armed forces was due to the fact that the prince Li Jide replaced Zhang Quanyi to preside over the six military defense affairs.

古文：己卯，帝御文明殿，册魏国夫人刘氏为皇后。
现代文：十一日，庄宗到文明殿，册封魏国夫人刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhuangzong went to the Hall of Civilization to crown the Empress of Wei, Lady Liu, as empress.

古文：庚辰，赐霍彦威姓，名曰绍真。
现代文：十二日，赐霍彦威姓李，名叫绍真。
English: On the 12th, he was given the surname Li and given the name Shaozhen.

古文：凤翔节度使、秦王李茂贞薨。
现代文：二十五日，凤翔节度使秦王李茂贞去世。
English: On the 25th, the Fengxiang Festival caused the death of Qin King Li Maozhen.

古文：丙申，潞州小校杨立据城叛，以李嗣源为招讨使，陕州留后李绍真为副，率师以讨之。
现代文：二十八日，潞州小校杨立占城叛乱，庄宗任李嗣源为招讨使，陕州留后李绍真为副将，率军队讨伐杨立。
English: On the 28th, Yang Li, a small school in Zhangzhou, staged a rebellion to occupy the city. Zhuang Zong appointed Li Siyuan as the envoy, and Li Shaozhen, who stayed in Shaanxi, became the vice-general and led the army to fight against Yang Li.

