古文：陈靖，字道卿，兴化军莆田人。
现代文：陈靖，字道卿，兴化军莆田县人。
English: Chen Jing, a member of the Xinghua Army from Putian County.

古文：好学，颇通古今。父仁壁，仕陈洪进为泉州别驾。
现代文：好学习，颇通古今，父亲陈仁壁，仕陈洪进，担任泉州别驾。
English: Good at studying, quite familiar with the past and the present, father Chen Renbi, teacher Chen Hongjin, served as the Quanzhou Distinguished Driver.

古文：洪进称臣，豪猾有负险为乱者，靖徒步谒转运使杨克巽，陈讨贼策。
现代文：陈洪进称臣，豪猾者有的依险作乱，陈靖步行拜谒转运使杨克巽，陈请讨伐贼寇的方策。
English: Chen Hongjin praised the minister, some daredevils rely on danger to make trouble, Chen Jing walked to pay homage to Yang Kejun, and asked him to fight against thieves and robbers.

古文：召还，授阳翟县主簿。
现代文：被召还，授予阳翟县主簿。
English: He was recalled and awarded the Yangshuo County Master Book.

古文：契丹犯边，王师数不利，靖遣从子上书，求入奏机略。
现代文：契丹进犯边境，北宋政府的军队多次处于不利，陈靖遣从子上书朝廷，请求入奏他的谋略。
English: The Khitan invaded the border, and the army of the Northern Song government was repeatedly at a disadvantage. Chen Jing sent a letter to the imperial court, requesting that his strategy be incorporated.

古文：诏就问之，上五策，曰：明赏罚；抚士众；持重示弱，待利而举；帅府许自辟士；而将帅得专制境外。
现代文：诏令随之询问此事，上奏五策，说：明令赏罚；安抚士众；持重示弱，等待机会举兵；允许将帅自找谋士幕僚；而将帅能够专制境外。
English: The imperial edict then inquired about the matter and listed five measures, saying: clearly reward and punish; appease the general public; hold back the weak and wait for the opportunity to raise an army; allow the general to find advisers and staff; and the general can be autocratic outside the country.

古文：太宗异之，改将作监丞，未几，为御史台推勘官。
现代文：宋太宗对他感到惊异，改任为将作监丞，不久，担任御史台推勘官。
English: Song Taizong was surprised by him, and he was reassigned to the position of vice-commissioner, and soon after, he served as an inspector of the Imperial Historical Research Station.

古文：时御试进士，多擢文先就者为高等，士皆习浮华，尚敏速。
现代文：当时，殿试进士，多选择文章先完成而送到的人为高等第，士大夫都因习浮华，崇尚敏捷快速。
English: At that time, the candidates for the palace examination were mostly selected from those who completed the essay first and sent it to the higher education institutions. The scholars were all flamboyant because of their studies, advocating agility and speed.

古文：靖请以文付考官第甲乙，俟唱名，或果知名士，即置上科。
现代文：陈靖请求把试文交付考官来决定甲、乙等级，等到唱名，有的果然是知名之士，即置于上科。
English: Chen Jing requested that the examination papers be submitted to the examiner to determine the A and B grades, and when the names were called, some were indeed well-known people, that is, they were placed in the upper division.

古文：丧父，起复秘书丞，直史馆，判三司开拆司。
现代文：为父服丧，后复起任秘书丞，直史馆，判三司开拆司。
English: After his father's funeral, he was reinstated as secretary of the Central History Museum, and the Third Division was established.

古文：淳化四年，使高丽还，提点在京百司，迁太常博士。
现代文：淳化四年，出使高丽而还，提点在京百司，迁升太常博士。
English: In the fourth year of the chunhua era, he was sent to Korea and returned, was promoted to the Beijing 100 Division, and was promoted to the position of Taichang Doctor.

古文：太宗务兴农事，诏有司议均田法，靖议曰： 法未易遽行也。
现代文：宋太宗务兴农事，诏令有司议行均田法，陈靖议论说： 法很难突然推行。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty tried to promote agriculture, and issued the edict to have officials discuss the implementation of the equal-field law. Chen Jing discussed it and said, "It is difficult to implement the law suddenly."

古文：宜先命大臣或三司使为租庸使，或兼屯田制置，仍择三司判官选通知民事者二人为之贰。
现代文：应该先命大臣或三司使担任租庸使，或兼任屯田制置使，仍诏令三司判官选用通晓民事的二个人担任副官。
English: If the Prime Minister or the three commissioners should serve as the Tenyo envoy, or concurrently as the Tondensei envoy, the magistrates of the three departments should still be ordered to select two people who are familiar with civil affairs to serve as adjutants.

古文：两京东西千里，检责荒地及逃民产籍之，募耕作，赐耕者室庐、牛犁、种食，不足则给以库钱。
现代文：东京、西京两地相隔千里，检查荒地及逃民田产籍之为官府所有，招募耕作，赏赐耕田的人房屋、耕牛、耙犁农具、粮食种籽，不足的则给以库钱。
English: Tokyo and Saikyo are separated by thousands of miles. The government inspects wasteland and land belonging to refugees to determine whether it is government-owned, recruits people to work the land, and rewards those who work the land with houses, oxen, farming tools, and grain seeds. Those who do not earn enough are given money from the treasury.

古文：别其课为十分，责州县劝课，给印纸书之。
现代文：别其租课为十分，责令州县地方官劝课农桑，给印纸写在上面。
English: If the rent of the class is not enough, order the state and county local officials to persuade the class farmers to write it on the printing paper.

古文：分殿最为三等：凡县管垦田，一岁得课三分，二岁六分，三岁九分，为下最；一岁四分，二岁七分，三岁至十分，为中最；一岁五分，未及三岁盈十分者，为上最。
现代文：划分高低等级为三等：凡县管垦田，一年得租课三分，二岁六分，三岁九分，为下等；一年四分，二年七分，三年达到十分，为中等；一年五分，没有三年达到十分的，为上等。
English: The division of high and low grades is the third grade: in all counties under the administration of Putian, one year's rent is three points, two years is six points, and three years is nine points, which is the lowest grade; one year is four points, two years is seven points, and three years is ten points, which is medium grade; one year is five points, and no three years is ten points, which is the highest grade.

古文：其最者，令佐免选或超资；殿者，即增选降资。
现代文：其最上一等者，守令、副官免选或超额发给奖资；最下一等者，就增选又降低奖资。
English: In the case of the highest rank, the guards and adjutants will be exempted from election or overpaid; in the case of the lowest rank, the award will be increased and the award will be reduced.

古文：每州通以诸县田为十分，视殿最行赏罚。
现代文：每州通以各个县田为十分，看其高低等级予以赏罚。
English: Each prefectural government considers each county's rice fields to be sufficient, and rewards and punishes them according to their high and low grades.

古文：候数岁，尽罢官屯田，悉用赋民，然后量人授田，度地均税，约井田之制，为定以法，颁行四方，不过如此矣。 太宗谓吕端曰： 朕欲复井田，顾未能也，靖此策合朕意。 乃召见，赐食遣之。他日，帝又语端。
现代文：于是召见陈靖，赏赐他吃饭后遣他回去。
English: So he summoned Chen Jing, rewarded him with a meal, and sent him home.

古文：曰： 靖说虽是，第田未必垦，课未必入，请下三司杂议。 于是诏盐铁使陈恕等各选判官二人与靖议，以靖为京西劝农使，命大理寺丞皇甫选、光禄寺丞何亮副之。
现代文：另有一天，宋太宗又对吕端说： 陈靖虽说的是对的，但府田不一定能开垦，租课不一定能收入，请令三司议论。 于是，诏令盐铁使陈恕等各选判官二人与陈靖议论，任命陈靖担任京西路劝田使，命大理寺丞皇甫选、光禄寺丞何亮为副官。
English: On another day, Song Taizong also said to Lü Duan, "Although what Chen Jing said is correct, but the fudian may not be able to open up, and the rent may not be able to earn income, please order the three departments to discuss." Therefore, the emperor ordered the salt iron to make Chen Zhou and two other judges discuss with Chen Jing, and appointed Chen Jing as the west road of Beijing to advise the field, and ordered the imperial election of Dali Temple and the deputy election of Guanglu Temple.

古文：选等言其功难成，帝犹谓不然。
现代文：皇甫选等说这个功劳难以取得，宋太宗还说不会这样。
English: Emperor Fu Xuan and others said that this merit was difficult to obtain, and Song Taizong also said that it would not be so.

古文：既而靖欲假缗钱二万试行之，陈恕等言： 钱一出，后不能偿，则民受害矣。 帝以群议终不同，始罢之，出靖知婺州，再迁尚书刑部员外郎。
现代文：此后，陈靖想借缗钱二万来试行这件事，陈恕等说： 钱一拿出，以后不能偿还，那么民众就会受害了。 太宗皇帝以各人的议论终不相同，于是才罢去不行，诏令陈靖出任婺州知州，又迁升为尚书刑部员外郎。
English: After that, Chen Jing wanted to borrow twenty thousand rupees to try the matter, Chen Shou and others said: Once the money is taken out, it can not be repaid in the future, then the people will suffer. Emperor Taizong said that everyone's argument is different, so it is not possible to leave, and ordered Chen Jing to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou, and he was promoted to the vice-minister of the criminal department of Shangshu.

古文：真宗即位，复列前所论劝农事，又言： 国家御戎西北，而仰食东南，东南食不足，则误国大计。
现代文：真宗即位以后，陈靖又论列从前所论劝农事，又说： 国家在西北防御戎敌，而仰食于东南的供给，东南食不足，则会延误国家的大计。
English: After Emperor Zhenzong ascended the throne, Chen Jing also discussed and listed the previously discussed and advised agricultural affairs, and said: The country defends and defeats the enemy in the northwest, but relies on the supply in the southeast, and the lack of food in the southeast will delay the country's overall plan.

古文：请自京东、西及河北诸州大行劝农之法，以殿最州县官吏，岁可省江、淮漕百余万。 复诏靖条上之，靖请刺史行春，县令劝耕，孝悌力田者赐爵，置五保以检察奸盗，籍游惰之民以供役作。
现代文：请在京东、京西及河北各州大行劝农的办法，以此来作为评价州县官吏的好坏等级，每年可节省江浙、两淮的漕粮百余万石。 又诏令陈靖条列奏上，陈靖请刺史参加行春耕之礼，要求县令劝勉耕种，讲求孝悌，努力耕作的人赏赐爵禄，置设五保以检举、监察盗贼，籍没游惰的民众以供给劳役、耕作。
English: Please encourage farmers in the provinces of East Beijing, West Beijing and Hebei, which will be used to evaluate the quality of state and county officials, and can save more than one million koku of grain in Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Hebei each year. In addition, Chen Jing ordered Chen Jingzhi to participate in the spring farming ceremony, asked the county to encourage farming, talk about filial piety, and reward those who work hard with a knighthood, set up five guarantees to report and monitor thieves, and provide idle people with labor and farming.

古文：又下三司议，皆不果行。
现代文：真宗皇帝又下令三司议论，最后都没有具体施行。
English: Emperor Jianzong also ordered the three departments to discuss the matter, but in the end there was no specific implementation.

古文：历度支判官，为京畿均田使，出为淮南转运副使兼发运司公事，徙江南转运使。
现代文：陈靖历任度支判官、京畿均田使，出任淮南转运副使兼发运司公事，迁升江南转运使。
English: Chen Jing was successively appointed as the chief judge, the Gyeonggi average field envoy, the deputy envoy of Huainan transshipment and the official of the transportation department, and was promoted to the south of the Yangtze River transshipment.

古文：极论前李氏横赋于民凡十七事，诏为罢其尤甚者。
现代文：特别奏论前任李氏横取民赋一共十七事，诏令他罢去其中特别厉害的。
English: The special report discussed a total of seventeen cases in which his predecessor, the Li clan, usurped the people's wealth, and ordered him to remove those that were particularly egregious.

古文：徙知谭州，历度支、盐铁判官。
现代文：迁徙任潭州知州，历任度支、盐铁判官。
English: He migrated to Tanzhou and Zhizhou, and successively held the posts of Dushan and Salt and Iron Judge.

古文：祀汾阴，为行在三司判官。
现代文：祀于汾阴，担任行在三司判官。
English: He was enshrined in Suyin and served as a judge in the Three Departments.

古文：又历京西、京东转运使，知泉、苏、越三州，累迁太常少卿，进太仆卿、集贤院学士，知建州，徙泉州，拜左谏诉大夫。
现代文：又历任京西、京东路转运使，先后任泉州、苏州、越州三州知州，多次迁任太常少卿，进升太仆卿、集贤院学士，担任建州知州，迁任泉州知州，拜为左谏议大夫。
English: He also successively served as the Beijing West Road and Beijing East Road transfer envoy, successively served as the Quanzhou, Suzhou and Yuezhou three-state chizhou, and was repeatedly transferred to the position of Taizhang Shaoqing, promoted to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing, served as the academician of Jixian Academy, served as the Jianzhou Chizhou, transferred to the position of Quanzhou Chizhou, and was appointed as the doctor of the left jujubei.

古文：初，民饥多杀耕牛食之，犯者皆配关中。逸奏： 民杀牛以活将死之命，与盗杀者异，若不禁之，又将废穑事。今岁少稔，请一切放还，复其业。 报可。未几，卒于官。吴遵路，字安道。父淑，见《文苑传》。
现代文：起初，陈靖与丁谓友善，丁谓被贬，他的党羽都被逐去，提点刑狱、侍御史王耿于是奏请陈靖因老患病，不适宜长期担任地方官吏，于是以秘书监致仕，在仕任而卒。陈靖平生多建树、筹划，而对于农事尤为详悉，曾取淳化、咸平年间以来所奏陈的表文谏章，编辑为《劝农奏议》，录载上之，然而其中的许多观点泥古不化，大多不可施行。吴遵路，字安道。父亲吴淑，见载于《文苑传》。
English: At first, Chen Jing and Ding were said to be friendly, but Ding was demoted, and his party members were all expelled, and he was sentenced to prison. The attendant, Shi Wang Geng, then asked Chen Jing to resign because he was too old and sick to serve as a local official for a long time, so he served as a secretary supervisor and died in office. Chen Jing was a prolific builder and planner in his lifetime, and he was particularly knowledgeable about agricultural affairs. He once took Chen's written speeches since the Junhua and Hamping years and edited them into "Suggestions to Farmers," which was recorded. However, many of his views are ancient and cannot be implemented. Wu

古文：第进士，累官至殿中丞，为秘阁校理。
现代文：中进士第，累任官至殿中丞，担任秘阁校理。
English: He was promoted to the rank of junior middle officer, and was successively promoted to the rank of junior middle officer, and served as secretary of the cabinet.

古文：章献太后称制，政事得失，下莫敢言。
现代文：章献太后临朝称制，国家的朝政得失，下面朝臣没有谁敢于议论。
English: Zhang Xian, the Empress Dowager, praised the system of the imperial court, the gains and losses of the country's imperial government, and none of the courtiers dared to discuss.

古文：遵路条奏十余事，语皆切直，忤太后意，出知常州。
现代文：吴遵路条奏陈请十多件事，语言都直爽而切中要害，违背太后的意思，出任常州知州。
English: Wu Zunlu played more than ten things, the language was straightforward and to the point, and he violated the will of the empress dowager and served as the chizhou of Changzhou.

古文：尝预市米吴中，以备岁俭，已而果大乏食，民赖以济，自他州流至者亦全十八九。
现代文：曾经预先在吴中一带买米，以防备歉收年岁，不久，果然大部分地方缺乏粮食，民众依赖这些买的米得以接济，从其他州县流徙来的人也依靠这些买的米而十有八九活下来。
English: In the past, rice was bought in advance in the Wuzhong area to prevent poor harvests. Soon, most places were short of grain, and the people relied on the rice they bought to get by. People who migrated from other counties also relied on the rice they bought, and most of them survived.

古文：累迁尚书司封员外郎，权开封府推官，改三司盐铁判官，加直史馆，为淮南转运副使。
现代文：累迁升为尚书司封员外郎，暂任开封府推官，改任三司盐铁判官，加直史馆，担任淮南转运副使。
English: He was successively promoted to Shang Shushi Fongjian Wai Rong, temporarily appointed as the deputy governor of Kaifeng, reassigned as the judge of the Third Division of Salt and Iron, added to the History Museum, and served as the deputy envoy of Huainan Transportation.

古文：会罢江、淮发运使，遂兼发运司事。
现代文：正逢罢免江浙、淮南路发运使，于是兼任发运司事。
English: At the same time, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Huainan Road dispatching agents were dismissed, so he also served as a dispatching secretary.

古文：尝于真楚泰州、高邮军置斗门十九，以畜泄水利。
现代文：曾经在真州、楚州、泰州、高邮军建置斗门十九座，以蓄泄洪水。
English: In the past, 19 floodgates were built in Zhenzhou, Chuzhou, Taizhou and Gaoyou to prevent floods.

古文：又广属郡常平仓储畜至二百万，以待凶岁。
现代文：又扩广本州县常平仓储备米达到二百万石，以防备凶年歉收。
English: It also expanded the rice reserves of Changping warehouse in Honshu County to reach 2 million koku to prevent poor harvest in bad years.

古文：凡所规画，后皆便之。
现代文：凡所规划、考虑到的事，后来都获得了便利。
English: Everything that was planned and taken into account was later facilitated.

古文：迁工部郎中，坐失按蕲州王蒙正故入部吏死罪，降知洪州。
现代文：吴遵路迁任工部郎中，因为没有发现蕲州王蒙正过去的部吏所犯下的死罪，被降职任洪州知州。
English: Wu Zunlu was transferred to the post of vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and was demoted to the post of Hongzhou Zhizhou because no capital crime was found to have been committed by the past officials of Zhangzhou Wang Mengzheng.

古文：徙广州，辞不行。
现代文：徙任广州知州，推辞而没有去。
English: He was assigned to Guangzhou and Chizhou, but he declined to go.

古文：是时发运司既复置使，乃以为发运使，未至，召修起居注。
现代文：这个时候发运司又恢复设置使官，于是任命他为发运使，没有到任，召他修撰起居注。
English: At this time, the Shipping Division resumed the establishment of envoys, and then appointed him as a shipping envoy, but he did not arrive at the post, and he was called to write a comment.

古文：元昊反，建请复民兵。
现代文：元昊叛反，奏请复建民兵。
English: Yuan Hao rebelled and requested the restoration of the militia.

古文：除天章阁待制、河东路计置粮草。
现代文：担任天章阁待制、河东路计置粮草。
English: He served as the Tianzhangge standby system, and the Hedong Road planned grain and grass.

古文：受诏料拣河东乡民可为兵者，诸路视以为法。
现代文：受诏负责挑选河东乡民可当兵的人，各路把他的这种方法当作基本法则去仿效。
English: He was entrusted with the responsibility of selecting the soldiers from the villagers of Hedong, and all roads followed his method as a basic rule.

古文：进兵部郎中、权知开封府，驭吏严肃，属县无追逮。
现代文：进任兵部郎中、暂任开封府知府。对待官吏严明，所辖县分没有需要追查的刑事犯罪。
English: He was appointed as a vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs and temporarily appointed as the governor of Kaifeng. He treated officials strictly, and there were no criminal offenses in the county under his jurisdiction that needed to be investigated.

古文：时宋庠、郑戩、叶清臣皆宰相吕夷简所不悦，遵路与三人雅相厚善，夷简忌之，出知宣州。
现代文：当时，宋庠、郑戬、叶清臣都是宰相吕夷简所不喜欢的人，吴遵路与他们三人雅趣相投，友谊深厚，吕夷简妒忌他，让他出任宣州知州。
English: At that time, Song Kun, Zheng Kun, and Ye Qingchen were all people disliked by the prime minister Lu Yijian. Wu Zunlu shared the same taste as the three of them and had a deep friendship. Lu Yijian was jealous of him and made him the governor of Xuanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：上《御戎要略》、《边防杂事》二十篇。
现代文：奏上《御戎要略》、《边防杂事》二十篇。
English: On the record, there are twenty articles of "Outline of Military Affairs" and "Border Defense Miscellaneous Matters."

古文：徙陕西都转运使，迁龙图阁直学士、知永兴军，被病犹决事不辍，手自作奏。
现代文：徙任陕西都转运使，迁升龙图阁直学士，担任永兴军知军，带病还处理公务，亲自上书奏事。
English: He was transferred to Shaanxi Province as a transfer envoy, was promoted to Longtu Pavilion as a direct bachelor, served as the leader of Yongxing Army, dealt with official duties when he was ill, and personally reported matters in writing.

古文：及卒，仁宗闻而悼之，诏遣官护丧还京师。
现代文：他死的时候，宋仁宗听说后为之悼念，诏令遣官护丧返还京师。
English: When he died, Song Renzong heard about it, mourned for him, and issued a decree to send officials to escort the funeral and return him to Beijing.

古文：遵路幼聪敏，既长，博学知大体。
现代文：吴遵路幼时聪明、敏捷，到长大后，博学广读，知书识大体。
English: When Wu Zunlu was young, he was smart and agile. When he grew up, he was well-read and had a general knowledge of books.

古文：母丧，庐墓蔬食终制。
现代文：母亲死后，在墓旁草屋服丧、素食，直到按礼制规定服完丧期。
English: After her mother's death, she mourned in a grass hut next to the grave and ate vegetarian food until the mourning period was over in accordance with the rules of etiquette.

古文：性夷雅慎重，寡言笑，善笔札。
现代文：性格坚毅、淡雅、慎重，很少言笑，善于写文章。
English: Her personality is resolute, elegant and cautious. She rarely laughs and is good at writing articles.

古文：愿讲求中制，裁为定式。 请诸道提点刑狱司置检法官，庶专平谳，使民不冤。
现代文：他治理政事简易，不被声威所左右，立朝敢于发表意见，无所阿谀、奉承的行为。
English: He governs political affairs simply, is not swayed by prestige, dares to express his opinions, and has nothing to do with flattery.

古文：乞于禁中建阁，绘功臣像，如汉云台、唐凌烟之制。
现代文：平素居家廉洁、俭朴，没有其他的嗜好，死后，家里没有什么值钱的物品，他的朋友范仲淹把自己的俸禄分些给他家人养家。
English: He always lived a clean and frugal life and had no other hobbies. After his death, there were no valuable items in his home. His friend Fan Zhongyan gave some of his salary to his family to support them.

古文：言多施行。以通议大夫致仕，退居襄阳，卒年八十四。程师孟，字公辟，吴人。
现代文：吴遵路的儿子吴瑛，担任尚书比部员外郎，没有等他年老就告老还乡了。程师孟，字公辟，吴县人。
English: Wu Zunlu's son Wu Ying, who served as the younger brother of Shang Shubi, returned to his hometown before he was too old. Cheng Shimen, also known as Gongbi, was from Wuxian.

古文：进士甲科。
现代文：中进士甲科。
English: Junior high school entrance examination, Division A.

古文：累知南康军、楚州，提点夔路刑狱。
现代文：历任南康军知军、楚州知州，提点夔州路刑狱。
English: Successive governors of Nankang Army and Chizhou Army of Chizhou Province and Chizhou Military Governor of Chuzhou Province have mentioned Bozhou Road Penitentiary.

古文：泸戎数犯渝州边，使者治所在万州，相去远，有警，率浃日乃至。
现代文：泸水一带西戎多次进犯渝州边地，使者治所在万州，相去很远，有敌警讯，率兵一整天才能到。
English: Around Surabaya, Xi'erong repeatedly invaded the border areas of Yuzhou. The envoy's base was in Wanzhou, which was very far away. When there was a signal from the enemy's police, it took the soldiers a whole day to get there.

古文：师孟奏徙于渝。
现代文：程师孟奏请迁路治到渝州。
English: Cheng Shi Meng Song asked Lu Zhi to move to Yuzhou.

古文：夔部无常平粟，建请置仓，适凶岁，振民不足，即矫发他储，不俟报。
现代文：夔州路部没有常平粟，奏请建常平仓。恰逢凶年歉收，赈济饥民不足，即下令调用其他的储备粮，不等向上报告。
English: The Luzhou Road Department did not have regular poppies, so it requested the construction of regular storehouses. Coinciding with the poor harvest of the year and the shortage of food for the hungry, it ordered the transfer of other reserve grains, and did not wait to report to the top.

古文：吏惧，白不可，师孟曰： 必俟报，俄者尽死矣。 竟发之。
现代文：官吏害怕，告诉他这样做不行。程师孟说： 一定要等待报告，挨饿的人就都饿死了。 最后还是开仓发粮。
English: The officials were afraid and told him that he could not do that. Cheng Shi Meng said: "We must wait for the report, starving people will starve to death. In the end, we opened the storehouse to distribute grain.

古文：徙河东路。
现代文：程师孟迁徙河东路担任官职。
English: Cheng Shi Meng migrated to Hedong Road to take up a government post.

古文：晋地多土山，旁接川谷，春夏大雨，水浊如黄河，俗谓之 天河 ，可溉灌。
现代文：晋地多土山，旁接河流山谷，春夏之间，大雨滂沱，水流混浊如黄河，俗谓之 天河 ，可灌溉。
English: There are many muddy mountains in Jin, rivers and valleys next to them. Between spring and summer, there are heavy rains, and the water flow is turbid like the Yellow River. It is commonly known as the Tianhe River, which can be irrigated.

古文：师孟劝民出钱开渠筑堰，淤良田万八千顷，裒其事为《水利图经》，颁之州县。
现代文：程师孟劝民出钱开渠筑堰，淤良田一万八千顷，辑录这些事写成《水利图经》，颁布于地方州县。
English: Cheng Shi Meng advised the people to pay money to open canals and build weirs, and 18,000 hectares of irrigated fields were created, and these things were recorded in the "Water Conservancy Chart" and promulgated in local prefectures.

古文：为度支判官。
现代文：担任度支判官。
English: He served as a magistrate judge.

古文：知洪州，积石为江堤，浚章沟，揭北闸，以节水升降，后无水患。
现代文：担任洪州知州，积石为江堤，疏浚章沟，开揭北闸，以节制水的升降，后来没有水患。
English: It served as the Hongzhou Zhizhou, the boulders were the river dike, the Zhanggou was dredged, and the North Gate was opened to control the rise and fall of water, and there was no flood later.

古文：判三司都磨勘司，接拌契丹使，萧惟辅曰： 白沟之地当两属，今南朝植柳数里，而以北人渔界河为罪，岂理也哉？ 师孟曰： 两朝当守誓约，涿郡有案牍可覆视，君舍文书，腾口说，讵欲生事耶？ 惟辅愧谢。
现代文：程师孟任判三司都磨勘司，接伴契丹使，萧惟辅说： 白沟之地属于宋、契丹相连地区，现在南朝植柳数里，而以契丹人在界河捕鱼为罪，难道有这样的道理吗？ 程师孟说 ：两朝都应当遵守誓约，涿郡有案牍条文可以供检查督察，你舍弃文书，凭口说，岂不是想生事吗？ 萧惟辅惭愧地辞谢而去。
English: Cheng Shi Meng appointed the three divisions of the capital city as surveyors, and accompanied the Khitan envoy, Xiao Wei Wei said: The land of Baigou belongs to the Song and Khitan connected areas, and now the Southern Dynasty has planted a few miles of willows, and the Khitan people are guilty of fishing in the Boundary River. Is there such a reason? Cheng Shi Meng said: Both dynasties should abide by the oath, and there is a case clause in Jixian County that can be inspected by the inspector. If you abandon the document and say it out loud, don't you want to cause trouble? Xiao Wei Wei Wei resigned with shame and left.

古文：出为江西转运使。
现代文：程师孟出任江西转运使。
English: Cheng Shi Meng served as the Jiangxi transit envoy.

古文：盗发袁州，州吏为耳目，久不获，师孟械吏数辈送狱，盗即成擒。
现代文：袁州发生了盗患，因本州的小吏充当他们的耳目，好久不能抓到他们，程师孟捉拿几个小吏审讯送狱后，盗贼即被擒获。
English: A theft occurred in Yuanzhou. Because the local officials acted as their eyes and ears, they could not catch them for a long time. After Cheng Shi Meng caught several officials and sent them to prison, the thieves were caught.

古文：加直昭文馆，知福州，筑子城，建学舍，治行最东南。
现代文：加直昭文馆，担任福州知州，修筑子城，建设学校，他的治理政事的政绩在东南各地最为显著。
English: He built the Zhao Zhaowen Museum, served as Fuzhou's chizhou, built the city of Zushi, and built a school. His achievements in the governance of political affairs are the most significant in the southeast.

古文：徙广州，州城为侬寇所毁，他日有警，民骇窜，方伯相踵至，皆言土疏恶不可筑。
现代文：迁徙广州，州城为侬族贼寇所毁，另有一天有警报，民众骇怕而逃窜，周围守令接踵而至，都说泥土疏恶而不可以修筑。
English: They migrated to Guangzhou. The provincial capital was destroyed by the Nong bandits. Another day, there was an alarm. The people were terrified and fled. The surrounding orders came one after another. They all said that the soil was bad and could not be built on.

古文：师孟在广六年，作西城，及交址陷邕管，闻广守备固，不敢东。
现代文：程师孟在广州六年，修建西城，到交趾攻陷邕管，听说广州防守甚为坚固，因此不敢再向东进。
English: Cheng Shi Meng had been in Guangzhou for six years, building the west city, and he had heard that the defense of Guangzhou was very strong, so he did not dare to go east again.

古文：时师孟已召还，朝廷念前功，以为给事中、集贤殿修撰，判都水监。
现代文：当时程师孟已被召还，朝廷念他的前功，授任他为给事中、集贤殿修撰，任判都水监。
English: At that time, Cheng Shi Meng had been recalled, and the imperial court honored his previous achievements by appointing him as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, a member of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, and a water inspector of the capital.

古文：贺契丹主生辰，至涿州，契丹命席，迎者正南向，涿州官西向，宋使价东向。
现代文：程师孟为贺契丹主生日诞辰，到涿州，契丹排列入席位置，迎客的人向正南而坐，涿州的官吏向西而坐，宋使向东而坐。
English: When Cheng Shimen went to Bozhou for the birthday of He Qidan, the Qidan line was included in the seating position, and the guests were seated facing south, the officials of Bozhou were seated facing west, and the Song envoys were seated facing east.

古文：师孟曰： 是卑我也。 不就列，自日昃争至暮，从者失色，师孟辞气益厉，叱傧者易之，于是更与迎者东西向。
现代文：不入席就座。从太阳偏西一直争至黄昏，跟随他的人为他担惊失色，程师孟语辞气概更加坚毅，叱责傧相改变安排，于是，改为要迎客的人坐西向东。
English: From the west of the sun until dusk, the people who followed him were worried about him and lost their color. Cheng Shi Meng's words were more resolute, and he scolded them to change the arrangement, so the people who wanted to welcome the guests sat west to east.

古文：明日，涿人钱于郊，疾驰过不顾，涿人移雄州以为言，坐罢归班。
现代文：第二天，涿人在郊野为他饯行，他疾驰而过，头也不回，涿人移居雄州以此为题进行议论，他因此被罢免归班。
English: The next day, he saw a man walking for him in the countryside. He sped past and did not look back. The man moved to Xiongzhou to discuss the issue. As a result, he was dismissed from his job.

古文：复起知越州、青州，遂致仕，以光禄大夫卒，年七十八。
现代文：重新起用后，他先后担任越州、青州知州，于是致仕，在光禄大夫任上去世，卒年七十八岁。
English: After being reappointed, he successively served as the governor of Yuezhou and the governor of Qingzhou and Zhizhou, and then resigned. He died at the age of 78 while serving as the Guanglu doctor.

古文：师孟累领剧镇，为政简而严，罪非死者不以属吏。
现代文：程师孟多次担任一些重要地区的官吏，为政简约、严格，罪行不重的人都不要下属去处置。
English: Cheng Shi Meng has served as an official in some important regions for many times. For the sake of simplicity and strictness, people with minor crimes should not be handled by subordinates.

古文：发隐擿伏如神，得豪恶不逞跌宕者必痛惩艾之，至剿绝乃已，所部肃然。
现代文：发现隐私，揭发隐藏的奸邪，都料事如神，对于豪强、恶霸、为非作歹的人一定严厉地惩罚他们，直至斩尽灭绝才罢休，所辖部属，恭敬肃然。
English: The discovery of privacy and the disclosure of hidden treachery are all like gods. For the strong, the bullies, and the wrongdoers, they must be severely punished until they are completely exterminated. The subordinates under their jurisdiction are respectful.

古文：洪、福、广、越为立生祠。
现代文：洪州、福州、广州、越州，都为他建立生祠。
English: Hongzhou, Fuzhou, Guangzhou and Yuezhou have all set up ancestral shrines for him.

