古文：起昭阳太渊献，尽玄黓涒滩，凡十年。
现代文：起，止，一共十年。
English: From start to finish, a total of ten years.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下神爵四年
现代文：汉宣帝神爵四年
English: Emperor Han Xuan's four-year reign

古文：春，二月，以凤皇、甘露降集京师，赦天下。
现代文：春季，二月，长安有凤凰飞集、甘露降落，因而大赦天下。
English: In the spring, in February, the phoenix flies to Chang'an, and the nectar falls, and thus the world is amnestied.

古文：颍川太守黄霸在郡前后八年，政事愈治；是时凤皇、神爵数集郡国，颍川尤多。
现代文：颍川太守黄霸在颍川郡前后八年，郡中事务治理得愈加出色。当时，凤凰、神雀多次飞集各郡国，其中以颍川郡最多。
English: During the eight years when Huang Ba, the governor of Luochuan, was in Luochuan County, the affairs of the county were managed more and more excellently. At that time, the phoenix and the sacred sparrow flew to the counties many times, of which Luochuan County had the most.

古文：夏，四月，诏曰： 颍川太守霸，宣布诏令，百姓乡化，孝子、弟弟、贞妇、顺孙日以众多，田者让畔，道不拾遗，养视鳏寡，赡助贫穷，狱或八年亡重罪囚，其赐爵关内侯、黄金百斤、秩中二千石。 
现代文：夏季，四月，汉宣帝颁布诏书说： 颍川太守黄霸，对各项诏令都明确宣示，大力推行，属下百姓向往礼义教化，孝顺父母的子女、相互友爱的兄弟、贞节的妇女、尊敬老人的孙子日益增多，田界相连的农民相互谦让，在路上遗失的东西无人贪心拾取，奉养照顾孤寡老人，帮助贫苦穷弱，有的监狱连续八年没有重罪囚犯。赐黄霸关内侯爵位，黄金一百斤和中二千石俸禄。 
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict, saying: "Shanchuan Taishou Huangba has clearly declared and vigorously implemented all the edicts of the edict, the people under him are yearning to be educated in etiquette and righteousness, the number of children who are filial to their parents, brothers who love each other, women who are chaste, and grandchildren who respect the elderly is increasing day by day, the farmers who are connected in the field are humble to each other, no one is greedy to pick up the things lost on the road, they are devoted to caring for the lonely elderly, helping the poor and the weak, and some prisons have

古文：而颍川孝、弟、有行义民、三老、力田皆以差赐爵及帛。
现代文：对颍川郡中孝顺、友爱和其他具有仁义品行的百姓，以及三老、力田等乡官，都分别赐予不等的爵位和财帛。
English: For the filial piety, friendship and other people with benevolence and righteousness in Luochuan County, as well as the three elders, the power fields and other township officials, they were awarded different ranks and wealth.

古文：后数月，征霸为太子太傅。
现代文：几个月后，汉宣帝又征调黄霸担任太子太傅。
English: A few months later, Emperor Han Xuan transferred Huang Ba to the post of crown prince.

古文：五月，匈奴单于遣弟呼留若王胜之来朝。
现代文：五月，匈奴单于派其弟呼留若王胜之前来朝见汉宣帝。
English: In May, the Xiongnu Emperor sent his younger brother, Huruwaka Wangsheng, to the imperial court.

古文：冬，十月，凤皇十一集杜陵。
现代文：冬季，十月，十一只凤凰飞集杜陵。
English: In winter, in October, eleven phoenixes fly to the tomb.

古文：河南太守东海严延年为治阴鸷酷烈，众人所谓当死者一朝出之，所谓当生者诡杀之，吏民莫能测其意深浅，战栗不敢犯禁。
现代文：河南太守严延年治理郡务阴狠酷烈，众人认为应处死罪的，被他突然释放；众人认为无死罪的，却被他无端处死。属吏、百姓谁都无法探知其心意如何，所以大家都战战兢兢，不敢违犯其禁令。
English: Henan Taishou Yan Yan's years of governance over the county affairs were gruesome and cruel. People thought that he should be sentenced to death, but he was suddenly released; people thought that he was not guilty of capital crime, but he was executed for no reason. Neither officials nor people could detect what his intentions were, so everyone was afraid and did not dare to violate his ban.

古文：冬月，传属县囚会论府上，流血数里，河南号曰 屠伯 。
现代文：每到冬季，严延年将所属各县的囚犯传到郡衙集中，进行审判，血流数里，所以河南郡百姓都称其为 屠夫长官 。
English: Every winter, Yan Yan transferred prisoners from all the counties he belonged to to the county magistrate for trial. The blood flowed for several miles, so the people of Henan County called him "Butcher Chief."

古文：延年素轻黄霸为人，及比郡为守，褒赏反在己前，心内不服。
现代文：严延年素来轻视黄霸的为人，及至在相邻的郡担任太守，见朝廷对黄霸的褒奖赏赐反倒超过自己，内心不服。
English: Yan Yan has always despised Huang Ba as a person, and even served as the governor of a neighboring county. Seeing the imperial court reward Huang Ba more than himself, he was deeply dissatisfied.

古文：河南界中又有蝗虫，府丞义出行蝗，还，见延年。
现代文：河南郡中出现蝗虫，名叫义的府丞出外巡视蝗灾，回来后，去见严延年。
English: Locusts appeared in Henan County. A prefectural official named Yi went out to inspect the locust infestation. After returning, he went to see Yan Yan.

古文：延年曰： 此蝗岂凤皇食邪？ 
现代文：严延年说： 这些蝗虫岂不正好是凤凰的食物吗？ 
English: Yan Yan Nian said: Aren't these locusts the food of phoenixes?

古文：义年老，颇悖，素畏延年，恐见中伤。
现代文：义年纪已老，有些糊涂，平时对严延年就很畏惧，生怕遭到严延年的中伤陷害。
English: Yiyi is old and somewhat confused. In normal times, he is very afraid of Yan Yan, for fear of being slandered and framed by Yan Yan.

古文：延年本尝与义俱为丞相史，实亲厚之，馈遗之甚厚。
现代文：本来，严延年曾与义一起当过丞相史，实际上对他很亲厚，这次又送给义非常丰厚的礼品。
English: Originally, Yan Yan Nian had been a prime minister with Yi Yi, and was actually very close to him. This time, he gave Yi Yi a very rich gift.

古文：义愈益恐，自筮，得死卦，忽忽不乐，取告至长安，上书言延年罪名十事；已拜奏，因饮药自杀，以明不欺。
现代文：但义却更加恐惧，自己占卦，得到 死卦 ，于是闷闷不乐，请假前往长安，上书控告严延年十大罪状。呈上奏章后，便喝毒药自杀，以表明自己不欺骗朝廷。
English: However, Yi was even more afraid. He made a guess and got a dead guess, so he was sullen and unhappy. He asked for leave to go to Chang'an and filed a complaint against Yan Yan on ten charges. After submitting the report, he drank poison and committed suicide to show that he would not deceive the court.

古文：事下御史丞按验，得其语言怨望、诽谤政治数事。
现代文：此事被交与御史丞调查核实，查出严延年有在言谈话语中对朝廷心怀怨恨，诽谤朝政等几桩罪名。
English: The matter was submitted to the Imperial Historian for investigation and verification, and Yan Yan Nian was found to have harbored resentment against the imperial court in his speeches and slandered the imperial government, among other charges.

古文：十一月，延年坐不道，弃市。
现代文：十一月，严延年以 大逆不道 的罪名被斩首示众。
English: In November, Yan Yan was publicly beheaded on charges of "high treason."

古文：初，延年母从东海来，欲从延年腊。
现代文：当初，严延年的母亲从东海郡来看儿子，打算跟随严延年一起进行腊祭。
English: At first, Yan Yan Nian's mother came from Donghai County to see her son, intending to follow Yan Yan Nian to the wax festival.

古文：到洛阳，适见报囚，母大惊，便止都亭，不肯入府。
现代文：到洛阳时，正遇到处决囚犯。他的母亲大吃一惊，便留在驿站中，不肯进府。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he was confronted with an executed prisoner. His mother was so shocked that she stayed in the station and refused to go in.

古文：延年出至都亭谒母，母闭阁不见。
现代文：严延年来到驿站谒见母亲，其母紧闭房门，不肯见他。
English: Yan Yan Nian went out of the city to Du Ting to visit his mother, but she disappeared behind closed doors.

古文：延年免冠顿首阁下，良久，母乃见之，因数责延年： 幸得备郡守，专治千里，不闻仁爱教化，有以全安愚民。顾乘刑罚，多刑杀人，欲以立威，岂为民父母意哉！ 
现代文：严延年摘下帽子，在门外崐叩头，过了很长时间，他的母亲才与他相见，并一再责备严延年说： 你有幸当了郡太守，独自管辖方圆一千里的地区，没听说你以仁爱教育、感化百姓，使百姓们得到安定和保全，反而利用刑罚，大量杀人，企图借此树立威严，这岂是作百姓父母官的本意？ 
English: Yan Yan Nian took off his hat and bowed his head outside the door. It took a long time for his mother to meet him, and she repeatedly reproached Yan Yan Nian, saying: You are fortunate to be the county governor and independently govern the area of a thousand miles. Haven't you heard that you educate and influence the people with benevolence and love, so that the people can be stable and safe. Instead, you use punishment and kill a large number of people in an attempt to establish majesty. Is this the original intention of being the people's parent official?

古文：延年服罪，重顿首谢，因自为母御归府舍。
现代文：严延年再次叩头，表示服罪，并亲自为母亲驾车回到住所。
English: Yan Yan Nian once again bowed his head, confessed his guilt, and personally drove his mother back to her residence.

古文：母毕正腊，谓延年曰： 天道神明，人不可独杀。
现代文：其母在腊祭完毕以后，对严延年说： 天道悠悠，神明在上，杀人的人必将被人所杀。
English: After the wax festival was over, his mother said to Yan Yan, "The way of heaven is long, the gods are above, and those who kill will surely be killed by others."

古文：我不意当老见壮子被刑戮也！
现代文：想不到我到了暮年，却将看到正当壮年的儿子遭受刑戮！
English: I never thought that in my old age I would have to witness the torture and killing of my grown-up son! I'm going!

古文：行矣，支汝东归，扫除墓地耳！ 
现代文：我要走了，离开你东归故乡，打扫墓地去了！ 
English: I'm leaving, I'm leaving you, I'm going back home, I'm going to clean the cemetery!

古文：遂去，归郡，见昆弟、宗人，复为言之。
现代文：于是离去了。回到东海郡，见到严延年的兄弟和族人，又把上面的话说给他们听。
English: Then he left. He returned to Donghaigun, met Yan Yan's brothers and relatives, and told them the above words.

古文：后岁馀，果败，东海莫不贤智其母。
现代文：一年多以后，严延年果然被杀，东海郡人无不赞叹其母的贤明、智慧。
English: More than a year later, Yan Yan Nian was indeed killed. The people of Donghai County all admired their mother's wisdom and wisdom.

古文：匈奴握衍朐鞮单于暴虐，好杀伐，国中不附。
现代文：匈奴握衍朐单于暴虐凶残，好杀人，全国上下都离心离德。
English: The Xiongnu were tyrannical, cruel, and good at killing. The whole country was alienated from Germany.

古文：及太子、左贤王数谗左地贵人，左地贵人皆怨。
现代文：太子、左贤王又多次诬陷东部地区的贵族，这些人都很怨恨他们。
English: There was also a crown prince, Zuoxian Wang, who repeatedly spoke ill of the left-hand nobles, and the left-hand nobles were very resentful.

古文：会乌桓击匈奴东边姑夕王，颇得人民，单于怒。
现代文：正在此时，乌桓派兵袭击居于匈奴东部边疆的姑夕王，获得大批人口，单于非常愤怒。
English: Just at this time, Wu Huan sent troops to attack the Huns living in the eastern border of the Huns, gaining a large number of people, just because they were very angry.

古文：姑夕王恐，即与乌禅幕及左地贵人共立稽侯犭册为呼韩邪单于，发左地兵四五万人，西击握衍朐鞮单于，至姑且水北。
现代文：姑夕王害怕单于降罪，便与乌禅幕及东部地区贵族一同拥立稽侯为呼韩邪单于，并征发东部地区军队四五万人，向西进攻握衍朐单于，直抵姑且水北岸。
English: Gu Xiu Wang was afraid, so he and Wu Shuoqi and the nobles on the left side together held the sword to call for Han Xizan Yu, and dispatched the army of the left side of forty-five thousand people to attack the west and attack the king of Yan Xizang, and reached the north side of the water.

古文：未战，握衍朐鞮单于兵败走，使人报其弟右贤王曰： 匈奴共攻我，若肯发兵助我乎？ 
现代文：还没有交战，握衍朐单于的军队已先行败逃，派人通知其弟右贤王说： 匈奴人一起攻击我，你愿意发兵帮助我吗？ 
English: Before the battle was fought, the army of the Thousand-Mile King Grip Yan fled in defeat. He sent a messenger to his brother, the Right-Handed King, to ask for help, saying, "New Bodies are attacking me together. Will you send soldiers to help me?"

古文：右贤王曰： 若不爱人，杀昆弟、诸贵人。各自死若处，无来污我！ 
现代文：右贤王说： 你不爱惜别人，屠杀兄弟和各位贵族，你就死在自己哪里吧，不要来玷污我！ 
English: King Ugyen said: If you do not care for others and slaughter your brothers and nobles, you can die where you are. Do not defile me!

古文：握衍朐鞮单于恚，自杀。
现代文：握衍朐单于感到愤恨，自杀而死。
English: He was so angry that he killed himself.

古文：左大且渠都隆奇亡之右贤王所，其民众尽降呼韩邪单于。
现代文：左大且渠都隆奇逃到右贤王住地，属下部众全部归降呼韩邪单于。
English: Zuo Da and Qu Du immediately fled to King Uxian, and all of his subordinates surrendered. Zun Yatian followed.

古文：呼韩邪单于归庭；数月，罢兵，使各归故地，乃收其兄呼屠吾斯在民间者，立为左谷蠡王，使人告右贤贵人，欲令杀右贤王，其冬，都隆奇与右贤王共立日逐王薄胥堂为屠耆单于，发兵数万人东袭呼韩邪单于，呼韩邪单于兵败走。
现代文：呼韩邪单于回到王庭。数月之后，遣散了军队，命令他们回到各自的地方，找到在民间的兄长呼屠吾斯，立为左谷蠡王，并派人煽动右贤王属下贵族，打算命其杀死右贤王。这年冬天，都隆奇与右贤王共同拥立日逐王薄胥堂为屠耆单于，发兵数万向东进攻呼韩邪单于，呼韩邪单于军队败逃。
English: A few months later, the army was dismissed and ordered to return to their respective places to find the brother of the common people, Houtougus, to become the king of Zuo Valley, and sent someone to incite the nobles under King Uxian, intending to order him to kill King Uxian. In the winter of this year, Du Longqi and King Uxian jointly set up the Sun King Bo Xitang for Tuo Xitang, and sent tens of thousands of troops to the east to attack Houtougus. Houtougus was defeated by the army and fled.

古文：屠耆单于还，以其长子都涂吾西为左谷蠡王，少子姑瞀楼头为右谷蠡王，留居单于庭。
现代文：屠耆单于返回本地，立其长子都涂吾西为左谷蠡王，小儿子姑瞀楼头为右谷蠡王，命二人留居单于王庭。
English: When Tu Youyou returned to his hometown, he set up his eldest son Tu Wuxi as the king of Zuo Valley, and his youngest son Gu Youlou as the king of Zuo Valley. The two of them lived alone in Wangting.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下五凤元年春，正月，上幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：五凤元年春季，正月，汉宣帝前往甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。
English: In the spring of the first year of Wu Feng, the first month of the year, Emperor Han Xuan went to Ganquan to worship Tenjin in Thailand.

古文：皇太子冠。
现代文：皇太子刘举行加冠典礼。
English: After the imperial edict and the court edict, the crown prince performed the coronation.

古文：秋，匈奴屠耆单于使先贤掸兄右奥鞬王，与乌藉都尉各二万骑屯东方，以备呼韩邪单于。
现代文：秋季，七月，匈奴屠耆单于派先贤掸的哥哥右奥王与乌藉都尉各率二万骑兵屯驻于东部地区，以防备呼韩邪单于。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Xiongnu Emperor Tu Youyou single-handedly dispatched the elder brother of the Xiongnu Emperor, King Uao, and the governor of Wuye with 20,000 cavalry stationed in the eastern region, in order to prevent the invasion of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是时西方呼揭王来与唯犁当户谋，共谗右贤王。言欲自立为单于。
现代文：此时，匈奴西部呼揭王前来与唯犁当户合谋，一起陷害右贤王，说他想自立为单于。
English: At this time, the western Huns summoned King Huo to come and conspire with the ruler of Wei, and together they framed King Uxian, saying that he wanted to be independent.

古文：屠耆单于杀右贤王父子，后知其冤，复杀唯犁当户。于是呼揭王恐，遂畔去，自立为呼揭单于。
现代文：屠耆单于杀死右贤王父子，后得知右贤王冤枉，便又将唯犁当户杀死，于是呼揭王心中害怕，叛逃而去，自立为呼揭单于。
English: Tu Youyou single-handedly killed Uxian Wang and his son, and after learning that Uxian Wang had wronged him, he killed Wei Xuan as well. As a result, King Huoqian was afraid in his heart, defected, and became independent as Uxian Wang.

古文：右奥鞬王闻之，即自立为车犁单于。
现代文：右奥王听说后，便自立为车犁单于。
English: Right after hearing about it, Okubo Wang became self-employed as a driver.

古文：乌藉都尉亦自立为乌藉单于。
现代文：乌藉都尉也自立为乌藉单于。
English: Captain Wu Rong also stood up for Wu Rong alone.

古文：凡五单于。
现代文：于是匈奴一共有了五位单于。
English: In this way, the Xiongnu had five separate states.

古文：屠耆单于自将兵东击车犁单于，使都隆奇击乌藉。
现代文：屠耆单于亲自率兵向东进攻车犁单崐于，派都隆奇率兵进攻乌藉单于。
English: Tu Youyou personally led the troops to the east to attack Chechen Youyou, and sent Du Longqi to attack Wu Rong You.

古文：乌藉、车犁皆败，西北走，与呼揭单于兵合为四万人。乌藉、呼揭皆去单于号，共并力尊辅车犁单于。
现代文：乌藉、车犁两单于战败，向西北方向退走，与呼揭单于合兵一处，共四万人，乌藉、呼揭都去掉单于称号，共同全力辅助车犁单于。
English: Wuzhong and Hujia alone lost the battle and retreated to the northwest, while Hujia and Wuzhong joined forces, with a total of 40,000 men. Wuzhong and Hujia were stripped of their titles and worked together to support Hujia and Wuzhong.

古文：屠耆单于闻之，使左大将、都尉将四万骑分屯东方，以备呼韩邪单于，自将四万骑西击车犁单于。
现代文：屠耆单于听说后，派左大将、都尉率领骑兵四万分别屯驻于东部，以防备呼韩邪单于，自己亲率骑兵四万向西进攻车犁单于。
English: When Tu Youyou heard of this, he dispatched General Zuo and Lieutenant Quan with 40,000 cavalry to be stationed in the east, in case of war with Han, and personally led 40,000 cavalry to the west to attack Cheju and Quan.

古文：车犁单于败，西北走。
现代文：车犁单于兵败，向西北方向退去。
English: The wagon train was defeated and retreated to the northwest.

古文：屠耆单于即引兵西南留闟敦地。
现代文：屠耆单于遂即率兵转向西南，留居敦地区。
English: As a result, Tu Youyou led his troops to the southwest and stayed in the Juidong area.

古文：汉议者多曰： 匈奴为害日久，可因其坏乱，举兵灭之。 
现代文：汉朝群臣议论匈奴的形势，多数人认为： 匈奴为害多年，可乘其衰败内乱的机会兴兵将其灭亡。 
English: A group of Han Dynasty courtiers discussed the situation of the Xiongnu, and most of them believed that: the Xiongnu had been causing harm for many years, and they could take the opportunity of their decline and civil unrest to raise an army to destroy them.

古文：诏问御史大夫萧望之，对曰： 《春秋》，晋士逾帅师侵齐，闻齐侯卒，引师而还，君子大其不伐丧，以为恩足以服孝子，谊足以动诸侯。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏向御史大夫萧望之询问，萧望之回答说： 《春秋》上记载，晋国士率兵征伐齐国，听说齐侯去世的消息，便率兵撤回。君子重视的是，不乘敌国丧乱的机会去进攻，认为恩足以使孝子心服，义足以使诸侯感动。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to inquire of the imperial historian Xiao Wangzhu, and Xiao Wangzhu replied: "It is recorded in the Spring and Autumn that the Jin soldiers led the army to conquer Qi, and when they heard the news of Qi Hou's death, they withdrew with their soldiers. A gentleman attaches importance to not taking the opportunity of the enemy country's turmoil to attack, believing that grace is enough to subdue the filial son, and righteousness is enough to move the princes.

古文：前单于慕化乡善，称弟，遣使请求和亲，海内欣然，夷狄莫不闻。
现代文：匈奴前任单于仰慕汉朝的礼仪教化，一心向善，自称是汉的小弟弟，派使臣请求和亲，使天下人感到欣慰，四方夷狄外族无不知晓。
English: The predecessors of the Xiongnu only admired the Han Dynasty's etiquette and enlightenment, aspired to do good, claimed to be Han's little brother, sent envoys to request peace, and made the world feel gratified. Foreigners from all over the world know about it.

古文：未终奉约，不幸为贼臣所杀；今而伐之，是乘乱而幸灾也，彼必奔走远遁。
现代文：不幸的是，尚未最后缔约，他已被奸臣所杀。如今若去征伐匈奴，是乘人之危，幸灾乐祸，他们肯定要向远方逃遁。
English: Unfortunately, before the final treaty was signed, he was killed by his treacherous vassals. Today, if you go to conquer the Huns, you are taking advantage of human danger, gloating, and they will certainly flee far away.

古文：不以义动兵，恐劳而无功。
现代文：我们兴此不义之师，恐怕会劳而无功。
English: If you don't fight for righteousness, I'm afraid your efforts will be in vain.

古文：宜遣使者吊问，辅其微弱，救其灾患。四夷闻之，咸贵中国之仁义。
现代文：应派使者前去吊丧慰问，并扶助他们于衰弱之中，为之解救灾患，四方外夷听说后，都会尊敬中国的仁义。
English: Envoys should be sent to offer condolences for the loss of life, and to help them in their weakness, to relieve the disaster. After hearing this, foreigners from all over the world will respect China's benevolence.

古文：如遂蒙恩得复其位，必称臣服从，此德之盛之。 
现代文：假如能使匈奴人因汉的恩德复位，必定会对我朝称臣服从，这才称得上是天子的盛德。 
English: If the Huns could be restored to power thanks to the benevolence of the Han Dynasty, they would certainly obey me as a vassal, which is the greatest virtue of the Son of Heaven.

古文：上从其议。
现代文：汉宣帝听从了萧望之的建议。
English: The Emperor followed his advice.

古文：冬，十有二月，乙酉朔，日有食之。韩延寿代萧望之为左冯翊。
现代文：冬季，十二月乙酉朔，出现日食。韩延寿代替萧望之担任左冯翊。
English: In winter, in December, a solar eclipse occurred. Han Yan Shou replaced Xiaowang as Zuo Feng Yao.

古文：望之闻延寿在东郡时放散官钱千馀万，使御史案之。延寿闻知，即部吏案校望之在冯翊时廪牺官钱放散百馀万。
现代文：萧望之听说韩延寿在东郡太守任上，曾发放官府之钱一千余万，便派御史前去调查，韩延寿听到消息，也派人调查萧望之在左冯翊任内发放属于廪牺令掌管的一百多万钱之事。
English: When Han Yan Shou heard that Han Yan Shou had distributed more than ten million yuan of government money when he was the governor of Dong County, he sent his secretary to investigate. When Han Yan Shou heard the news, he also sent someone to investigate the fact that Han Yan Shou had distributed more than one million yuan of government money during Zuo Feng Yu's tenure.

古文：望之自奏： 职在总领天下，闻事不敢不问，而为延寿所拘持。 
现代文：萧望之上奏说： 我的职责是总领天下监察事务，听到有人检举，就不敢不闻不问，却受到韩延寿的要挟。 
English: My duty is to monitor the whole country, and when I heard about it, I didn't dare not to investigate, but I was thwarted by the extension of my life.

古文：上由是不直延寿，各令穷竟所考。
现代文：汉宣帝因此认为韩延寿不对，命分别调查到底。
English: As a result, the emperor did not trust Han Yanju and sent people to investigate and clarify the facts.

古文：望之卒无事实。而望之遣御史案东郡者，得其试骑士日车服侍卫奢僭逾制；又取官铜物，候月食铸刀，效尚方事；及取官钱帛私假徭使吏；及治饰车甲三百万以上。
现代文：结果指控萧望之动用官钱一事并无事实根据，而萧望之派到东郡的御史却查出韩延寿在考试骑兵之日，奢侈豪华，超过规定；又动用官铜，仿照尚方铸造御用刀剑之法，等到月食时铸造刀剑；还动用官钱，私自雇用管理徭役的官吏；并加装自己车辆的防箭设施，花费在三百万钱以上。
English: As a result, there was no factual basis for the accusation that Xiao Wang used government money. However, the historian sent by Xiao Wang to Dong County found that Han Yanshou was extravagant and luxurious beyond the regulations on the day of the cavalry examination; he also used government copper to cast swords according to Shang Fang's method of casting official swords until the time of the lunar eclipse; he also used government money to privately hire officials to manage the eunuch; and he also installed arrow-proof facilities for his own vehicles, spending more than three million yuan.

古文：延寿竟坐狡猾不道，弃市。
现代文：韩延寿竟因此被指控犯有 狡猾不道 之罪，斩首示众。
English: As a result, Han Yanshou was accused of committing the crime of cunning and dishonesty, and his head was publicly beheaded.

古文：吏民数千人送到渭城，老小扶持车毂，争奏酒炙。
现代文：行刑时，官吏和百姓数千人送他到渭城，人们扶老携幼，攀住韩延寿的囚车车轮不放，争相进奉酒肉。
English: At the time of execution, thousands of officials and ordinary people sent him to Lucheng. People helped the old and the young, clung to the wheels of Han Yanshou's prisoner's cart, and vied with each other to serve him wine and meat.

古文：延寿不忍距逆，人人为饮，计饮酒石馀。使掾、史分谢送者： 远苦吏民，延寿死无所恨！ 
现代文：韩延寿不忍拒绝，一一饮用，共计喝酒一石有余，并让原属下官吏分别向前来送他的百姓致谢，说道： 辛苦各位远程相送，我死而无恨！ 
English: Han Yanshou could not bear to refuse, drinking one by one, drinking a total of more than a stone, and letting the original subordinate officials come forward separately to send his people to express their thanks, saying: "It is hard for you to send each other long-distance, I have no hatred!

古文：百姓莫不流涕。
现代文：百姓无不痛哭流涕。
English: There is no way for the people not to shed tears.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下五凤二年春，正月，上幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：五凤二年春季，正月，汉宣帝前往甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。
English: In the spring of the second year of Wu Feng, in the first month, Emperor Han Xuan went to Ganquan to worship Tenjin in Thailand.

古文：车骑将军韩增薨。
现代文：车骑将军韩增去世。
English: Cavalry General Han Zeng passed away.

古文：五月，将军许延寿为大司马、车骑大将军。
现代文：五月，将军许延寿被任命为大司马、车骑大将军。
English: In May, General Xu Yanshou was appointed as the grand general of horses and chariots.

古文：丞相丙吉年老，上重之。
现代文：丞相丙吉年事已高，汉宣帝很尊重他。
English: Emperor Han Xuan respected the aged Minister of War He Jijie.

古文：萧望之意常轻吉，上由是不悦。
现代文：萧望之常轻视丙吉，汉宣帝对此很不高兴。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was very displeased with this, as he often despised Bingji.

古文：丞相司直奏望之遇丞相礼节倨慢，又使吏买卖，私所附益凡十万三千，请逮捕系治。
现代文：丞相司直上奏弹劾萧望之，说他对丞相时傲慢无礼，又曾派属下官吏给自己家买卖东西，被派者私下贴钱共十万三千，请求将萧望之逮捕治罪。
English: The prime minister's secretary made a direct appeal to impeach Shouwang, saying that he was arrogant and rude when he was prime minister, and that he had sent subordinate officials to buy and sell things for his own family. Those who were sent privately paid a total of 103,000 yuan, requesting that Shouwang be arrested and punished.

古文：秋，八月，壬午，诏左迁望之为太子太傅；以太子太傅黄霸为御史大夫。
现代文：秋季，八月壬午，汉宣帝下诏将萧望之降为太子太傅，任命太子太傅黄霸为御史大夫。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of August, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to demote Xiaowang to the position of Prince Daifu, and appointed Prince Daifu Huangba to the position of Imperial Historian.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于遣其弟右谷蠡王等西袭屠耆单于屯兵，杀略万馀人。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于派其中弟右谷蠡王等向西进攻屠耆单于的军队，斩杀、掳掠一万余人。
English: The Xiongnu called on Han Yazan Yu to send his younger brother, Ugu Xuan Wang, and others westward to attack and slaughter Han Yazan Yu's army, killing and capturing more than ten thousand people.

古文：屠耆单于闻之，即自将六万骑击呼韩邪单于。
现代文：屠耆单于闻知后，立即亲自率领骑兵六万袭击呼韩邪单于。
English: As soon as Tu Youyou heard about this, he personally led 60,000 cavalrymen to attack Han Ye.

古文：屠耆单于兵败，自杀。
现代文：结果屠耆单于兵败自杀。
English: The two sides engaged in battle, and Tu Youyou single-handedly committed suicide in defeat.

古文：都隆奇乃与屠耆少子右谷蠡王姑瞀楼头亡归汉。
现代文：都隆奇便与屠耆单于的小儿子右谷蠡王姑瞀楼头逃到汉朝归降。
English: Du Longqi then fled to the Han Dynasty with the youngest son of Tu Youyou Shanyu, Ugu Xuan Wang Gu Xuan Lou Tou.

古文：车犁单于东降呼韩邪单于。
现代文：车犁单于向东归降呼韩邪单于。
English: The train is heading east, and the call is for Han and Ye to come down.

古文：冬，十一月，呼韩邪单于左大将乌厉屈与父呼累乌厉温敦皆见匈奴乱，率其众数万人降汉；封乌厉屈为新城侯，乌厉温敦为义阳侯。
现代文：冬季，十一月，呼韩邪单于属下左大将乌厉屈与其父呼累乌厉温敦见匈奴内乱不止，率领部众数万人归降汉朝。汉宣帝封乌厉屈为新城侯，乌厉温敦为义阳侯。
English: In the winter, in November, Han Yidan called upon his subordinate General of the Left, Wu Li Qu, and his father, Kulei Uli Windun, to see that the Hun civil strife continued, and led tens of thousands of people to return to the Han Dynasty. The Han Emperor proclaimed Uli Qu as the new mayor, and Uli Windun as the mayor of Yiyang.

古文：是时李陵子复立乌藉都尉为单于，呼韩邪单于捕斩之；遂复都单于庭，然众裁数万人。
现代文：此时，李陵之子又拥立乌藉都尉为单于，被呼韩邪单于捕杀。于是，呼韩邪单于重新定都单于王庭，但部众只有数万人。
English: At this time, Li Ling's son also set up Wu Rong's lieutenant as a single unit, and was called Han Ye's single unit to hunt and kill. As a result, the call for Han Ye's single unit was re-established in Wangting, but there were only tens of thousands of members.

古文：屠耆单于从弟休旬王自立为闰振单于，在西边；呼韩邪单于兄左贤王呼屠吾斯亦自立为郅支骨都侯单于，在东边。
现代文：屠耆单于的堂弟休旬王在匈奴西部边疆自立为闰振单于；呼韩邪单于的兄长左贤王呼屠吾斯也在东部边疆自立为郅支骨都侯单于。
English: In the western frontier of the Huns, Tu Youyou's cousin, King Huizhun, established himself as the crown prince of Tu Youyou; in the eastern frontier, Tu Youyou's brother, King Zuoxian, also established himself as the crown prince of Tu Youyou.

古文：光禄勋平通侯杨恽，廉洁无私；然伐其行能，又性刻害，好发人阴伏，由是多怨于朝廷。
现代文：光禄勋平通侯杨恽，廉洁无私，但爱夸耀自己的才干，为人尖刻，好揭人隐私，所以在朝中结怨很多。
English: Guanglu Xun Ping Tong Hou Yang Jue, is honest and selfless, but he likes to boast of his talent, is sharp, and is good at revealing people's privacy, so he has a lot of grudges in the DPRK and China.

古文：与太仆戴长乐相失。人有上书告长乐罪，长乐疑恽教人告之，亦上书告恽罪曰： 恽上书讼韩延寿，郎中丘常谓恽曰： 闻君侯讼韩冯翊，当得活乎？ 
现代文：杨恽与太仆戴长乐不合，有人上书控告戴长乐之罪，戴长乐怀疑是杨恽指使，便也上书控告杨恽说： 杨恽上书为韩延寿辩护，郎中丘常对杨恽说： 听说你为韩延寿辩解，能救他一命吗？ 
English: Yang Hui and his manservant Dai Changle did not get along. Someone wrote a letter accusing Dai Changle of the crime. Dai Changle suspected that Yang Hui was the instigator, so he also wrote a letter accusing Yang Hui, saying: Yang Hui wrote a letter to defend Han Yan Shou. Langzhong Yau often said to Yang Hui: I heard that you defended Han Yan Shou, can you save his life?

古文：恽曰： 事何容易，胫胫者未必全也！
现代文：杨恽说： 谈何容易！正直的人未必能保全！
English: Yang Wei said: How easy it is to talk about! Honest people may not be able to preserve!

古文：我不能自保，真人所谓 鼠不容穴，衔窭数 者也。 
现代文：我也不能自保，正如人们所说： 老鼠不为洞穴所容，只因它嘴里衔的东西太大。  
English: I can't protect myself either, as they say: A mouse is not tolerated in a cave, simply because the thing it is holding in its mouth is too big.

古文：又语长乐曰： 正月以来，天阴不雨，此《春秋》所记，夏侯君所言。  
现代文：又曾对我说： 正月以来，天气久阴不下雨，这类事，《春秋》上有过记载，夏侯胜也说到过。
English: Yang Jie also said to Dai Changle: Since the first month of the year, the weather has been cloudy and rainy for a long time. This kind of celestial phenomenon has been recorded in "Spring and Autumn," and Xia Hou Sheng Jie advised Changyi Wang.

古文：事下廷尉。
现代文：意味着将有臣下犯上作乱。  
English: The matter was referred to the Lieutenant of the Court.

古文：廷尉定国奏恽怨望，为訞恶言，大逆不道。
现代文：此事交给廷尉处理。廷尉于定国上奏参劾杨恽心怀怨望，恶言诽谤，大逆不道。
English: The matter was handed over to the imperial lieutenant to deal with. The imperial lieutenant sent a report to the court in Dingguo to impeach Yang Xuan for harboring grudges, slandering, and committing high treason.

古文：上不忍加诛，有诏皆免恽、长乐为庶人。
现代文：汉宣帝不忍心杀人，下诏将杨恽、戴长乐全都免官贬为平民。
English: Emperor Han Xuan could not bear to kill people, and issued an edict dismissing Yang Xuan and Dai Changle from their posts and demoting them to the status of commoners.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下五凤三年春，正月，癸卯，博阳定侯丙吉薨。
现代文：五凤三年春季，正月癸卯，博阳侯丙吉去世。
English: In the spring of the third year of Wufeng, in the first month of the year, Bo Yang Hou Bingji passed away.

古文：班固赞曰：古之制名，必由象类，远取诸物，近取诸身。
现代文：班固赞曰：古代确定一件事物的名称，必定从与此相类似的事物中得来，远的取之于其他事物，近的取之于自身。
English: Ban Guzan said: the name of a thing determined in ancient times must be obtained from similar things, far from other things, and close from itself.

古文：故《经》谓君为元首，臣为股肱，明其一体相待而成也。
现代文：所以在儒家经典中，将君王比喻为头颅，臣子比喻为大腿和手臂，表明君臣一体相辅相成的关系。
English: Therefore, in the Confucian classics, the king is likened to the head, and the vassal is likened to the thigh and arm, indicating that the relationship between the prince and the vassal is mutually complementary.

古文：是故君臣相配，古今常道，自然之势也。
现代文：所以君臣之间的密切配合，是古今的通常之理，自然之势。
English: Therefore, the mutual assistance between monarch and vassal has been a common practice from ancient times to the present. It is natural and inevitable.

古文：近观汉相，高祖开基，萧、曹为冠；孝宣中兴，丙、魏有声。
现代文：近观汉朝丞相，汉高祖开创基业，萧何、曹参政绩第一；汉宣帝中兴汉朝，丙吉、魏相最有声誉。
English: A close look at the prime ministers of the Han Dynasty, Han Gao Zu created the foundation, Xiao He and Cao San were the first in political achievements; Han Xuan Di was the founder of the Han Dynasty, and Bingji and Wei Xiang were the most reputable.

古文：是时黜陟有序，众职修理，公卿多称其位，海内兴于礼让。
现代文：当时，各级官员的降黜、升迁都有相应的标准，各类机构健全、适当，公卿大臣大都各称其职，礼让之风在国内兴起。
English: At that time, there were corresponding standards for the promotion and demotion of officials at all levels, all kinds of institutions were sound and appropriate, most of the noblemen and ministers had their own duties, and the etiquette of courtesy arose in the country.

古文：览其行事，岂虚虖哉！
现代文：观察他们的所作所为，就可知道他们的政绩、名誉崐，并非偶然所致。
English: Observing their behavior, we can see that their achievements and fame are not accidental.

古文：二月，壬辰，黄霸为丞相。
现代文：二月壬辰，黄霸被任命为丞相。
English: In February, Huang Ba was appointed as chancellor.

古文：霸材长于治民，及为丞相，功名损于治郡。
现代文：黄霸的才能主要在治理百姓，当了丞相以后，声誉比作郡守时有所下降。
English: Huang Ba's talent was mainly in governing the people. After he became the prime minister, his reputation declined compared to when he was the county governor.

古文：时京兆尹张敞舍鹖雀飞集丞相府，霸以为神雀，议欲以闻。
现代文：当时，京兆尹张敞家的雀飞集丞相府，黄霸以为是神雀，与人商议，准备奏闻汉宣帝。
English: At that time, Huang Ba, who thought that the finches flying in the collection of the prime minister's office of Jingzha Yin Zhang Zhang's family were divine finches, discussed with others and prepared to report to Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：敞奏霸曰： 窃见丞相请与中二千石、博士杂问郡、国上计长史、守丞为民兴利除害，成大化，条其对。
现代文：张敞上奏说： 我看到丞相要求与中二千石大臣及博士等一同向来京报告本年度工作情况的各郡、国长史、守丞询问为民兴利除害、推行教化的情况，让他们逐条回答。
English: Zhang Zhang said: I saw that the prime minister asked the counties, prefectural governors, and governors-general to report the work situation of this year to Beijing together with the junior and senior ministers and doctors, and to inquire about the situation of eliminating harm and promoting education for the benefit of the people, and let them answer one by one.

古文：有耕者让畔，男女异路，道不拾遗。及举孝子、贞妇者为一辈，先上殿；举而不知其人数者，次之；不为条教者在后。
现代文：有报告当地农民谦让田地界线，男女不走一条道，路不拾遗，以及能举出当地孝顺子孙、贞节妇女人数的，列为一等，先上殿；虽然举出，却不知其人数的，列为二等；说不出这方面政绩的，列在最后，向丞相叩头谢罪。
English: If there is a report that the local farmers are modestly letting the field boundaries, men and women do not go the same way, and the road is not picked up, and if they can cite the number of local filial children and grandchildren and chaste women, they will be listed as the first class and go to the hall first; if they are listed but do not know their number, they will be listed as the second class; if they cannot say the political achievements in this regard, they will be listed at the end, and bow to the prime minister.

古文：叩头谢丞相，虽口不言，而心欲其为之也。
现代文：丞相虽未明言，心中却是希望他们也能举出这方面的例子。
English: Although he did not say so explicitly, he hoped in his heart that they would also give examples in this regard.

古文：长史、守丞对时，臣敞舍有鹖雀飞止丞相府屋上，丞相以下见者数百人。
现代文：长史、守丞对答时，我家有一群雀飞到丞相府，落在屋顶上，自丞相以下，看到的有数百人。
English: When Choshi and Shoujo were answering questions, a flock of finches from my family flew to the prime minister's office and landed on the roof. From the prime minister down, there were hundreds of people watching.

古文：边吏多知鹖雀者，问之，皆阳不知。
现代文：那些从边地来的官吏，大多知道是雀，但丞相问他们，却都装作不知道。
English: Most of the officials knew the bird, but when the prime minister asked them, they all pretended not to know.

古文：丞相图议上奏曰： 臣问上计长史、守丞以兴化条，皇天报下神爵。 
现代文：丞相与人商议，准备上奏说： 我问各郡、国来京报告工作的长史、守丞各地的情况，都说礼义教化大兴，所以上天派下神雀以回报陛下的盛德。 
English: The prime minister consulted with others and prepared to deliver a report, saying: I asked the counties and the country about the long history of reporting work to Beijing, and the situation in all parts of Shoujo, and they all said that there was a great revival of etiquette and education, so the heavens sent a divine bird to repay His Majesty's virtue.

古文：后知从臣敞舍来，乃止。
现代文：后来得知是从我家飞来，方才停止。
English: After the event, he learned that the chaffinch came from his vassal Zhang Zhangjiajie, so he didn't play it.

古文：郡国吏窃笑丞相仁厚有知略，微信奇怪也。
现代文：各郡、国官吏都暗笑丞相虽然仁厚有智，但有些轻信奇闻怪事。
English: County and state officials are secretly ashamed to laugh at the minister, although he has a reputation for benevolence and wisdom, but he is self-righteous and makes a fuss.

古文：臣敞非敢毁丞相也，诚恐群臣莫白，而长史、守丞畏丞相指，归舍法令，各为私教，务相增加，浇淳散朴，并行伪貌，有名亡实，倾摇解怠，甚者为妖。
现代文：我并不是敢于诋毁丞相，只是怕群臣谁都不敢说明此事，而各郡、国长史、守丞又畏惧丞相指责，回去后废弃国家法令，人人执行自己的条令，竞相增多，使原本淳朴的风气变得日益浮薄，人人行为虚伪，有名无实，动摇懈怠，严重的甚至做邪恶之事。
English: I did not dare to defame the prime minister, but I was afraid that none of the ministers would dare to explain the matter, and the counties, the governor of the country, and the governor were afraid of the prime minister's accusation. After returning home, they abandoned the national laws and regulations, and everyone implemented their own rules and regulations. The number of competitors increased, making the original simple culture become increasingly fragile. Everyone behaved hypocritically, had no reputation, wavered and slackened, and even did serious and evil things.

古文：假令京师先行让畔、异路、道不拾遗，其实亡益廉贪、贞淫之行，而以伪先天下，固未可知也。
现代文：假如京师长安率先倡导农民互相谦让田地界线，男女不同走一路，道不拾遗等等，实际上对区分廉洁贪婪、贞节乱的行为并无益处，反倒以虚伪的政绩列为天下第一，这当然是不对的。
English: If Chang'an, the Beijing teacher, takes the lead in advocating that farmers should respect each other's field boundaries, that men and women should take a different path, and that the road should not be lost, and so on, in fact, it is not beneficial to distinguish between corruption, greed, and unchaste behavior, but rather to rank hypocritical political achievements as the first in the world. This is of course not right.

古文：即诸侯先行之，伪声轶于京师，非细事也。
现代文：即使是封国先这样作，以虚假政绩欺骗朝廷，也不是小事。
English: Even if it was a vassal state that did this first, deceiving the imperial court with false political achievements, it is no small matter.

古文：汉家承敝通变，造起律令，所以劝善禁奸，条贯详备，不可复加。
现代文：我大汉承接了秦朝的各种弊端，加以变通而制定法令，目的在于鼓励善行，禁止奸恶，条理详实周密，已不能再有增加。
English: Our great Han Dynasty eliminated all evils and established laws and regulations in order to persuade the people to be good, prevent theft and forbid adultery. Its provisions are detailed and cannot be added to or changed.

古文：宜令贵臣明饬长史、守丞，归告二千石，举三老、孝弟、力田、孝廉、廉吏，务得其人，郡皆以法令检式，毋得擅为条教；敢挟诈伪以奸名誉者，必先受戮，以正明好恶。 
现代文：所以我认为，应派地位尊贵的大臣明确指示各郡、国长史、守丞，回去转告各地二千石官员，在保举三老、孝弟、力田、孝廉及廉洁官吏时，务必选人得当，处理郡、国事务都应以国家法令为依据，不得擅自增加、修改。如有敢于靠弄虚作假来欺世盗名者，必须先受诛杀，用以明确显示朝廷的好恶。 
English: Therefore, I believe that a high-ranking minister should be sent to clearly instruct the counties, the president of the country, and the governor to go back and tell the 2,000-koku officials around the country that in the promotion of the three elders, filial brothers, power, filial piety, and incorruptible officials, it is imperative to choose the right people. The handling of county and national affairs should be based on national laws and regulations, and should not be increased or modified without authorization. If there is anyone who dares to deceive the world by cheating, he must first be beaten to death to clearly show the likes and dislikes of the imperial court.

古文：天子嘉纳敞言，召上计吏，使侍中临饬，如敞指意。
现代文：汉宣帝对张敞的建议极为赞赏，予以采纳，召集各地来京报告工作的官员，派侍中前往发布指示，如同张敞的建议。
English: Emperor Han Xuan greatly appreciated Zhang Chang's suggestion and adopted it. He summoned officials from all over the country to come to Beijing to report on the work, and sent attendants to issue instructions, just like Zhang Chang's suggestion.

古文：霸甚惭。
现代文：黄霸深感惭愧。
English: As a result, Huangba is very ashamed.

古文：又，乐陵侯史高以外属民侍中，贵重，霸荐高可太尉。
现代文：再有，乐陵侯史高依靠外戚的身分及对汉宣帝的旧时恩义，担任侍中，地位尊贵、显赫，黄霸推荐史高担任太尉。
English: In addition, Le Ling Hou Shigao relied on his status as a relative and his old-time gratitude to Emperor Han Xuan to serve as an attendant, a noble and prominent position. Huang Ba recommended Shigao to serve as a captain.

古文：天子使尚书召问霸： 太尉官罢久矣。
现代文：汉宣帝派尚书召见黄霸问道： 太尉一职早已撤销。
English: Emperor Han Xuan sent Shang Shu to summon Huang Ba, who asked: "The position of captain has already been revoked.

古文：夫宣明教化，通达幽隐，使狱无冤刑，邑无盗贼，君之职也。
现代文：你的职责是：宣明教化，让隐情上达，使国家无冤狱，城乡无盗贼。
English: And it is the duty of you, the prime minister, to enlighten and enlighten, to pass on secrets, so that there are no more unjust cases in prison, and no more thieves in the localities.

古文：将相之官，朕之任焉。
现代文：将相一类官员的任免是朕的任务。
English: I am the one who appoints officials at the ministerial level.

古文：侍中、乐陵侯高，帷幄近臣，朕之所自亲，君何越职而举之？ 
现代文：侍中、乐陵侯史高，是朕的亲近大臣崐，朕对他非常了解，你为何越权保举？ 
English: The chamberlain, Le Ling Hou Shigao, is my close minister, I know him very well, why did you overstep your authority?

古文：尚书令受丞相对，霸免冠谢罪，数日，乃决。
现代文：命尚书令听取黄霸的回答。黄霸摘下帽子谢罪。数日之后，汉宣帝才下令对此事不予追究。
English: He ordered Shang to listen to Huangba's answer. Huangba took off his hat to apologize. A few days later, Emperor Han Xuan ordered that the matter not be investigated.

古文：自是后不敢复有所请。
现代文：从此以后，黄霸再也不敢有所建议。
English: From then on, Huangba never dared to play for him again.

古文：然自汉兴，言治民吏，以霸为首。
现代文：然而，自汉朝建立以来。说到治理百姓的官吏，黄霸居第一位。
English: However, since the rise of the Han Dynasty, when it comes to the governance of local officials and people, Huangba is still the first.

古文：三月，上幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，汉宣帝巡游河东郡，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：减天下口钱；赦殊死以下。
现代文：下诏减少天下人头税，赦免天下死刑以下罪犯。
English: He decreed to reduce the national poll tax and grant amnesty to all criminals under the death penalty.

古文：六月，辛酉，以西河太守杜延年为御史大夫。
现代文：六月辛酉，汉宣帝任命西河太守杜延年为御史大夫。
English: At the end of June, Emperor Han Xuan appointed the governor of the Western River, Du Yanren, as the imperial historian.

古文：置西河、北地属国以处匈奴降者。
现代文：设置西河、北地属国，以安置归降汉朝的匈奴人。
English: Those who surrendered to the Xiongnu in the Western and Northern Provinces.

古文：广陵厉王胥使巫李女须祝诅上，求为天子。
现代文：广陵王刘胥让巫师李女须诅咒汉宣帝，求神灵保佑他自己作皇帝。
English: Liu Bei, the king of Guangling, asked the sorcerer Li Niushu to curse Emperor Han Xuan and ask the gods to bless him to become emperor.

古文：事觉，药杀巫及宫人二十馀人以绝口。
现代文：此事被人发觉，刘胥用毒药将巫师李女须以及宫女二十余人毒死，企图杀人灭口。
English: The matter was discovered by someone, and Liu Ye used poison to kill the sorcerer Li Niushu and more than 20 of his concubines in an attempt to cover up the murder.

古文：公卿请诛胥。
现代文：公卿大臣请求将刘胥处死。
English: The Minister of Justice requested that Liu Yao be put to death.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下五凤四年
现代文：五凤四年
English: Five phoenixes four years

古文：春，胥自杀。
现代文：春季，刘胥自杀。
English: In the spring, Liu Yao committed suicide.

古文：匈奴单于称臣，遣弟谷蠡王入侍。
现代文：匈奴单于向汉朝称臣，派其弟右谷蠡王到长安来充当人质。
English: The Huns singled him out as a respected vassal, and sent his younger brother, King Gu Xi, to serve in the imperial court.

古文：以边塞亡寇，减戍卒什二。
现代文：汉朝因边塞地区没有了外族入侵的战事，将屯戍兵卒减少十分之二。
English: Due to the fact that the border posts are not subject to intrusion, the number of incidents has been reduced by twenty percent.

古文：大司农中丞耿寿昌奏言： 岁数丰穰，谷贱，农人少利。
现代文：大司农中丞耿寿昌上奏说： 连续几年丰收，谷价低，农民获利少。
English: Senior Vice-Minister of Agriculture Geng Shuchang said: "For several consecutive years, the harvest has been good, grain prices are low, and farmers' profits are low.

古文：故事：岁漕关东谷四百万斛以给京师，用卒六万人。
现代文：按以往惯例，每年从函谷关以东地区运输粮食四百万斛以供应京师，需用运粮卒六万人。
English: According to past practice, four million bushels of grain are transported annually from the area east of the Hakodate Pass to supply the capital, with up to 60,000 people needing to be transported.

古文：宜籴三辅、弘农、河东、上党、太原郡谷，足供京师，可以省关东漕卒过半。 
现代文：应从三辅、弘农、河东、上党、太原等郡购买粮食，以供应京师，可以节省函谷关以东运粮卒一半以上。 
English: It should be bought into the valleys of Sanshu, Hongnong, Hedong, Shangdang and Taiyuan County, which are sufficient to supply the Beijing Division, and can save more than half of the Kanto Water Transport.

古文：上从其计。
现代文：汉宣帝接受了耿寿昌的建议。
English: Emperor Han Xuan accepted Geng Shuchang's suggestion.

古文：寿昌又白： 令边郡皆筑仓，以谷贱增其贾而籴，以利农，谷贵时减贾而粜，名曰常平仓。 
现代文：耿寿昌又禀告说： 命令沿边各郡一律修建粮仓，在粮价低时加价买进，粮价高时减价售出，名为 常平仓 。 
English: Geng Shuchang also said in his obituary: It was ordered to build grain silos in all counties along the border. When grain prices were low, grain was bought at a higher price, and when grain prices were high, it was sold at a lower price. It was called the Changping silo.

古文：民便之。
现代文：百姓因此受益。
English: The people find it convenient.

古文：上乃下诏赐寿昌爵关内侯。
现代文：汉宣帝于是下诏赐耿寿昌关内侯爵。
English: Emperor Han Xuan then issued an edict granting Geng Shuchang the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：夏，四月，辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月辛丑朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer, the month of April is gloomy, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：杨恽既失爵位，家居治产业，以财自娱。
现代文：杨恽失掉封爵、官位后，住在家里治理产业，用财富自我娱乐。
English: After Yang Wei lost his knighthood and official rank, he lived at home to manage the industry and amuse himself with wealth.

古文：其友人安定太守西河孙会宗与恽书，谏戒之，为言 大臣废退，当阖门惶惧，为可怜之意；不当治产业，通宾客，有称誉。 
现代文：杨恽的朋友安定太守西河人孙会宗写信劝戒他说： 大臣被罢黜贬谪之后，应当闭门在家，惶恐不安，以示可怜之意。不应治理产业，交结宾客，享有声誉。 
English: Yang Hui's friend, Sun Huizong, the governor of the West River, wrote a letter of admonition to him: "After a minister is deposed and humiliated, he should shut the door at home, be afraid and uneasy, to show pity. He should not govern industries, make friends with guests, and enjoy a reputation.

古文：恽，宰相子，有材能，少显朝廷，一朝以晻昧语言见废，内怀不服，报会宗书曰： 窃自思念，过已大矣，行已亏矣，常为农夫以没世矣，是故身率妻子，戮力耕桑，不意当复用此为讥议也！
现代文：杨恽为丞相杨敞之子，很有才干，年轻时就在朝廷中崭露头角，一时受到暖昧语言的中伤，遭到罢黜，内心不服，给孙会宗回信说： 我暗自思量，自己的崐过错已太大了，行为已有亏欠，将长久做一名农夫度过一生，所以率领妻子儿女，致力于农桑之事，想不到又因此受人讥评！
English: Yang Hui was the son of the prime minister Yang Zhan, very talented, he rose to prominence in the imperial court at a young age. He was slandered by warm and fuzzy language, he was ousted, he was not satisfied with his heart, he wrote back to Sun Huizong: I secretly thought to myself, my mistake was too big, my behavior was already deficient, I will spend my life as a farmer for a long time, so I led my wife and children and devoted myself to the matter of agricultural mulberry. Unexpectedly, I was criticized for it!

古文：夫人情所不能止者，圣人弗禁，故君、父至尊、亲，送其终也，有时而既。
现代文：人情所不能克制的事，连圣人都不加禁止。所以即使是至尊无上的君王，至亲无比的父亲，为他们送终，也有一定的时限。
English: Even saints are not forbidden to do what is beyond human control, so even the most exalted king, the most beloved father, has a certain time limit for sending them to death.

古文：臣之得罪，已三年矣，田家作苦，岁时伏腊，烹羊，炰羔，斗酒自劳，酒后耳热，仰天拊缶呼乌乌，其诗曰： 田彼南山，芜秽不治；种一顷豆，落而为萁。
现代文：我得罪皇上，已三年了，农家劳作辛苦，每年伏日、腊月，煮羊炖羔，用酒一斗，自我犒劳，酒后耳热，仰面朝天，敲着瓦盆，放声吟唱，诗中写道： 南山种田，荒芜杂乱，种一顷豆，落地成秧。
English: I have offended the emperor. It has been three years. The farmers have been working hard. Every year, they spend the day and the night cooking lamb and mutton. They use a barrel of wine to reward themselves for their hard work. After drinking, their ears are hot, their faces are upturned, they knock on earthenware pots, and they sing loudly. In the poem, they write: Nanshan farmland, desolate and chaotic. They plant one hectare of beans, and the beans fall to the ground.

古文：人生行乐耳，须富贵何时？ 
现代文：人生不过及时乐，等待富贵何时来！ 
English: Life is nothing but enjoying the moment, waiting for when wealth will come!

古文：诚淫荒无度，不知其不可也。 
现代文：就算是荒淫无度，我不知不可以如此。 
English: I don't know if it's appropriate, even if it's wild.

古文：又恽兄子安平侯谭谓恽曰： 侯罪薄，又有功，且复用！ 
现代文：再有，杨恽兄长的儿子安平侯杨谭对杨恽说： 你的罪并不大，又曾于国有功，将会再次被任用。 
English: In addition, Anping Hou Yang Tan, the son of Yang Hui's elder brother, said to Yang Hui: Your crime is not big, and you have made great contributions to the country. You will be reappointed.

古文：恽曰： 有功何益！
现代文：杨恽说： 有功又有什么用！
English: Yang Hui said, "What is the use of being meritorious?

古文：县官不足为尽力。 
现代文：不值得为皇上尽力！ 
English: The Emperor is not worth my best efforts.

古文：谭曰： 县官实然。
现代文：杨谭说： 皇上确实如此。
English: Yang Tan said, "The emperor is really like that.

古文：盖司隶、韩冯翊皆尽力吏也，俱坐事诛。 
现代文：司隶校尉盖宽饶、左冯翊韩延寿都是尽力的官吏，都因事被诛杀。 
English: Officer-in-charge Captain Ga Kuanrao and Left Wing Commander Han Yanju, both of whom were officials who tried their best, were beaten to death as a result.

古文：会有日食之变，驺马猥佐成上书告 恽骄奢，不悔过。
现代文：正巧出现日食，一个名叫成的马夫头上书控告杨恽说： 杨恽骄傲奢侈，不思悔过。
English: Just as the solar eclipse occurred, a groom named Cheng wrote a complaint against Yang Hui, saying: "Yang Hui is proud and extravagant, and has never repented.

古文：日食之咎，此人所致。 
现代文：这次出现日食，就是因为杨恽的关系。 
English: This time, the solar eclipse occurred because of Yang Xuan's relationship.

古文：章下廷尉，按验，得所予会宗书，帝见而恶之。
现代文：奏章交给廷尉，经过核查，发现了杨恽写给孙会宗的信，汉宣帝看了以后，对杨恽深恶痛绝。
English: He gave the score to the imperial lieutenant. After verification, a letter written by Yang Jie to Sun Huizong was found. After Emperor Han Xuan read it, he was deeply disgusted with Yang Jie.

古文：廷尉当恽大逆无道，要斩；妻子徙酒泉郡；谭坐免为庶人，诸在位与恽厚善者，未央卫尉韦玄成及孙会宗等，皆免官。
现代文：廷尉判处杨恽大逆不道之罪，腰斩；妻、儿放逐酒泉郡；杨谭受其牵连，也被贬为平民；几位与杨恽关系友善的在职官员，如未央卫尉韦玄成和孙会宗等，都被罢免官职。
English: The imperial lieutenant sentenced Yang Hui to be beheaded for the crime of high treason; his wife and children were banished to Jiuquan County; Yang Tan was implicated and reduced to a commoner; several officials who had friendly relations with Yang Hui, such as Wei Yang Wei Wei Wei and Sun Huizong, were all dismissed from their official positions.

古文：臣光曰：以孝宣之明，魏相、丙吉为丞相，于定国为廷尉，而赵、盖、韩、杨之死皆不厌众心，惜哉，其为善政之累大矣！
现代文：臣司马光曰：以汉宣帝的英明，加上魏相、丙吉当丞相，于定国当廷尉，而赵广汉、盖宽饶、韩延寿、杨恽的被杀都不能使众人心服，这实在是汉宣帝善政的最大污点！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: With the wisdom of Han Xuandi, together with Wei Xiang and Bingji as chancellor, Yu Dingguo as a court lieutenant, but the killing of Zhao Guanghan, Gai Guangrao, Han Yanshou and Yang Jie could not convince everyone. This is really the biggest stain on Han Xuandi's good governance!

古文：《周官》司寇之法，有议贤、议能。若广汉、延寿之治民，可不谓能乎！
现代文：《周官》上关于司寇职责的规定，有 议贤 、 议能 ，象赵广汉、韩延寿在治理百姓方面，能不说他们有才能吗！
English: "Zhou Guan" on the regulation of the duties of the Secretary of the Communist Party of China, there are 议贤, 议能, like Zhao Guanghan, Han Yanshou in the governance of the people, can we not say that they have talent!

古文：宽饶、恽之刚直，可不谓贤乎！
现代文：而盖宽饶、杨恽刚强正直，能不说他们贤明吗！
English: But Gai is broad-minded, Yang Xuan is strong and honest, can we not say that they are wise!

古文：然则虽有死罪，犹将宥之，况罪不足以死乎！
现代文：既然这样，那么即使真有死罪，仍应宽恕，何况罪不至死呢！
English: So then, even if there is a crime punishable by death, it is still to be forgiven, and what is more, the sin does not lead to death.

古文：扬子以韩冯翊之愬萧为臣之自失。
现代文：扬雄认为，韩延寿诽谤萧望之是自取其祸。
English: Yang Xiong believes that Han Yanshou's slander of depression is self-inflicted.

古文：夫所以使延寿犯上者，望之激之也。
现代文：但韩延寿之所以冒犯上官，则是因萧望之的逼迫。
English: However, the reason why Han Yanju offended the superior officer was due to the persecution of depression.

古文：上不之察，而延寿独蒙其辜，不亦甚哉！
现代文：汉宣帝不察究竟，使韩延寿独受其辜，不是太过分了吗！
English: Isn't it too much for Emperor Han Xuan to make Han Yanshou bear the brunt of the blame without looking into the matter?

古文：匈奴闰振单于率其众东击郅支单于。
现代文：匈奴闰振单于率领军队向东进攻郅支单于。
English: The Xiongnu Yue Zhen Shan Yu led the army to attack the east.

古文：郅支与战，杀之，并其兵；遂进攻呼韩邪。
现代文：郅支单于与其交战，杀死闰振单于，兼并了闰振单于的军队，于是进攻呼韩邪单于。
English: He fought against and killed Yue Zhen Shan Yu and annexed Yue Zhen Shan Yu's army, and then attacked Hunan and Yue Zhen Yu.

古文：呼韩邪兵败走，郅支都单于庭。
现代文：呼韩邪单于兵败退走，郅支单于建都单于王庭。
English: The call of Han and Yidan was defeated and retreated, and the call of Xizhi was defeated and retreated, and the call of Xizhi was defeated and retreated, and the call of Xizhi was defeated and retreated.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下甘露元年春，正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：甘露元年春季，正月，汉宣帝前往甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Kamloops, in the first month, Emperor Han Xuan went to Ganquan to worship Tenjin in Thailand.

古文：杨恽之诛也，公卿奏京兆尹张敞，恽之党友，不宜处位。
现代文：杨恽被杀之后，公卿上奏弹劾京兆尹张敞，说他是杨恽的朋党，不应再占据官位。
English: After Yang Hui was killed, the nobles petitioned for the impeachment of Jing Zhaoyun Zhang Cang, saying that he was a friend of Yang Hui and should no longer hold office.

古文：上惜敞材，独寝其奏，不下。
现代文：汉宣帝爱惜张敞的才干，特将奏章压下不发。
English: Emperor Han Xuan cherished Zhang Zanglu's talent, and he suppressed Zhang Zanglu's composition and did not publish it.

古文：敞使掾絮舜有所案验，舜私归其家曰： 五日京兆耳，安能复案事！ 
现代文：张敞派下属官员絮舜调查某事，絮舜私自回家，说道： 张敞这个京兆尹最多再干五天罢了，怎能再来查问！ 
English: Zhang Zhang sent subordinate officials to investigate a certain matter, and the officials went home and said: Zhang Zhang, this Jing Zhaoyun, can only work for another five days at most, how can he investigate again!

古文：敞闻舜语，即部吏收舜系狱，昼夜验治，竟致其死事。
现代文：张敞听说絮舜如此说他，立即派官吏将絮舜逮捕下狱，昼夜审崐讯，终于使他被定成死罪。
English: When Zhang Zhang heard that Xu Rong said this about him, he immediately sent officials to arrest Xu Rong and put him in prison. He was tried and interrogated day and night, and finally he was sentenced to death.

古文：舜当出死，敞使主簿持教告舜曰： 五日京兆竟何如？
现代文：絮舜被杀之前，张敞派主簿拿着他写的教，告诉絮舜： 我这个 五天京兆尹 究竟怎么样？
English: When Soochow was sentenced to death, Zhang Dabang sent a message to Soochow with his ledger, saying, "What happened to the five-day imperial edict?

古文：冬月已尽，延命乎？ 
现代文：冬季已经过去，想多活几天吗？ 
English: The winter months have passed. Don't you want to extend your life?

古文：乃弃舜市。
现代文：于是将絮舜斩首示众。
English: So he killed the carp in the market.

古文：会立春，行冤狱使者出，舜家载尸并编敞教，自言使者。
现代文：适逢立春，朝廷派出调查冤狱的使者，絮舜的家属抬着絮舜的尸体，将张敞写给絮舜的教联在辩冤状上，向使者控告张敞。
English: At the beginning of spring, the imperial court sent an envoy to investigate the unjust imprisonment. Su Shi's family members carried Su Shi's body and wrote a complaint to Su Shi's religious association, accusing Zhang Cang to the envoy.

古文：使者奏敞贼杀不辜。
现代文：使者上奏汉宣帝，称张敞残杀无辜。
English: The envoy appealed to Emperor Han Xuan, saying that Zhang Zhang had brutally killed innocent people.

古文：上欲令敞得自便，即先下敞前坐杨恽奏，免为庶人。
现代文：汉宣帝打算对张敞从轻发落，便先将以前弹劾张敞为杨恽朋党的奏章发下，将其免官，贬为平民。
English: Emperor Han Xuan intended to treat Zhang Zang lightly, so he first issued a proclamation to impeach Zhang Zang as a member of the Yang Kuo-peng Party, removed him from office, and reduced him to a commoner.

古文：敞诣阙上印绶，便从阙下亡命。
现代文：张敞到宫门前交还印绶，然后从宫门前逃走。
English: Zhang Zhang went to the palace gate to return the seal, and then fled from the palace gate.

古文：数月，京师吏民解驰，枹鼓数起，而翼州部中有大贼，天子思敞功效，使使者即家在所召敞。
现代文：数月之后，京师官吏百姓懈怠，多次敲响追捕盗贼的警鼓，冀州也出现巨盗。汉宣帝想起张敞为政的功效，派使臣前往张敞家征召张敞。
English: A few months later, officials and common people in Beijing slacked off, repeatedly sounding the alarm to chase the thieves, and huge thieves also appeared in Jizhou. Emperor Han Xuan recalled Zhang Zhang's effectiveness as a politician and sent an envoy to Zhang Zhang's home to recruit Zhang Zhang.

古文：敞身被重劾，及使者至，妻子家室皆泣，惶惧，而敞独笑曰： 吾身亡命为民，郡吏当就捕。
现代文：张敞身遭严厉弹劾，当朝廷使臣到来，其妻子、家属都吓哭了，只有张敞笑着说： 我是一个逃亡的平民，应由郡中派官员来逮捕我。
English: Zhang Zhang was severely impeached. When the court envoys arrived, his wife and family members were scared and cried. Only Zhang Zhang said with a smile: I am a fugitive civilian, officials should be sent from the county to arrest me.

古文：今使者来，此天子欲用我也。 
现代文：如今朝廷使臣到来，这是天子要起用我。 
English: Now the imperial envoys have arrived, and it is the Son of Heaven who wants to use me.

古文：装随使者，诣在公车上书曰： 臣前幸得备位列卿，待罪京兆，坐杀掾絮舜。
现代文：于是整治行装，随使臣前往公车府，上书汉宣帝说： 我先前有幸位列九卿，担任京兆尹，被指控杀死属员絮舜。
English: As a result, the rectification was carried out, and the envoy went to the bus station, and Han Xuan said in a letter to the emperor: I previously had the honor of being ranked ninth, served as Jing Zhaoyun, and was accused of killing my subordinate, Xu Xi.

古文：舜本臣敞素所厚吏，数蒙恩贷。
现代文：絮舜本是我平时厚待的官吏，曾几次加恩宽恕他的过失。
English: He was an official I usually treated well, and I forgave him for his mistakes several times.

古文：以臣有章劾当免，受记考事，便归卧家，谓臣五日京兆。背恩忘义，伤薄欲化。
现代文：他认为我受人弹劾，当会免官，所以我派他去查办事情，他竟然回家睡大觉，说我只能再当五天京兆尹，实在是忘恩负义，伤风败俗。
English: He thought that I would be impeached and removed from office, so I sent him to investigate the matter. He even went home to sleep, saying that I could only be Beijing Zhaoyun for five more days. It was really ungrateful and immoral.

古文：臣窃以舜无状，枉法以诛之。
现代文：我因他态度恶劣，便借法令以泄私愤，将他诛杀。
English: The vassal did not confess to the crime of Su Shi in private, and killed him with the help of the law.

古文：臣敞贼杀无辜，鞠狱故不直，虽伏明法，死无所恨！ 
现代文：我残杀无辜，判案故意不公，即使伏法，也死而无恨！ 
English: I slaughter the innocent, judge cases in a deliberately unfair manner, and even if I lie, I die without hatred!

古文：天子引见敞，拜为冀州刺史。
现代文：汉宣帝召见张敞，任命他为冀州刺史。
English: Tianzi summoned Zhang Zhangran and appointed him as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：敞到部，盗贼屏迹。
现代文：张敞到任后，盗贼敛迹不敢再出。
English: After Zhang Chang took office, the thieves did not dare to come out again.

古文：皇太子柔仁好儒，见上所用多文法吏，以刑绳下，尝侍燕从容言： 陛下持刑太深，宜用儒生。 
现代文：皇太子刘性格温柔仁厚，喜欢儒家经术，看到汉宣帝任用的官员大多为精通法令的人，依靠刑法控制臣下，曾在陪侍汉宣帝进餐的时候，从容进言说： 陛下过于依赖刑法，应重用儒生。 
English: Crown Prince Liu had a gentle and benevolent personality. He was fond of Confucian classics. When he saw that most of the officials appointed by Emperor Han Xuan were experts in laws and regulations, he relied on criminal law to control his vassals. When he was accompanying Emperor Han Xuan to dinner, he calmly said: Your Majesty relies too much on criminal law and should make greater use of Confucianism.

古文：帝作色曰： 汉家自有制度，本以霸王道杂之。奈何纯任德教，用周政乎！
现代文：汉宣帝生气地说： 我大汉自有大汉的制度，本来就是 王道 与 霸道 兼用，怎能像周朝那样，纯用所谓 礼义教化 呢！
English: Emperor Han Xuan said angrily: My system of the great man having his own great man is originally a combination of the royal way and the domineering way. How can it be purely using the so-called etiquette education like the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：且俗儒不达时宜，好是古非今，使人眩于名实，不知所守，何足委任！ 
现代文：况且俗儒不识时务，喜欢肯定古人古事，否定今人今事，使人分不清何为 名 ，何为 实 ，不知所守，怎能委以重任！ 
English: Moreover, the vulgar Confucian does not know the current affairs, likes to affirm the ancients and the ancients, deny the present and the present, and makes people unclear what is the name, what is the reality, do not know what to keep, how can they be entrusted with important tasks!

古文：乃叹曰： 乱我家者，太子也！ 
现代文：于是叹息道： 败坏我家基业的人将是太子！ 
English: Then he sighed, "If I mess up the Liu family's morning routine, it will be the crown prince!"

古文：臣光曰：王霸无异道。
现代文：臣司马光曰： 王道 与 霸道 ，并无实质的不同。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: There is no substantial difference between the royal road and the domineering road.

古文：昔三代之隆，礼乐、征伐自天子出，则谓之王。
现代文：过去，夏、商、周三代昌盛时，无论是制礼作乐，还是发动战争，都由天子决定，则称之为 王道 。
English: In the past, when the Xia, Shang and San dynasties were prosperous, whether it was to make music or to wage war, it was decided by the Son of Heaven, and it was called the royal road.

古文：天子微弱不能治诸侯，诸侯有能率其与国同讨不庭以尊王室者，则谓之霸。
现代文：天子微弱，不能控制诸侯时，诸侯中有能率领盟国共同征讨叛逆以尊奉王室的，则称之为 霸道 。
English: When the emperor was weak and unable to control the vassals, those vassals who were able to lead the allied countries to fight against the rebellion and honor the royal family were called "domineering."

古文：其所以行之也，皆本仁祖义，任贤使能，赏善罚恶，禁暴诛乱。
现代文：无论行 王道 还是 霸道 ，都以仁义为根据，任用贤能，奖赏善美，惩罚邪恶，禁绝凶残，诛除暴乱。
English: Regardless of whether it is the royal road or the domineering road, it is based on benevolence and righteousness, appoints wisdom and ability, rewards goodness and beauty, punishes evil, forbids cruelty, and eliminates riots.

古文：顾名位有尊卑，德泽有深浅，功业有巨细，政令有广狭耳，非若白黑、甘苦之相反也。
现代文：二者只不过于名位上有尊卑之分，德泽上有深浅之别，功业上有大小之差，政令上有广狭之异罢了，并非像黑白、甘苦那样截然相反。
English: The difference between the two is only that there is a difference in rank, a difference in virtue, a difference in merit, a difference in merit, and a difference in the breadth and depth of government decrees, but they are not as diametrically opposed as black and white and good and evil.

古文：汉之所以不能复三代之治者，由人主之不为，非先王之道不可复行于后世也。
现代文：汉朝之所以不能恢复夏、商、周三代那样的盛世，是因为君王没有去做，并不是古代圣王之道不能再行于后世。
English: The reason why the Han Dynasty could not restore the prosperity of the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties is because the kings did not do it. It is not that the way of the ancient holy kings can no longer be practiced in future generations.

古文：夫儒有君子，有小人。
现代文：在儒者中，有君子，也有小人。
English: Among the Confucians, there are gentlemen and villains.

古文：彼俗儒者，诚不足与为治也，独不可求真儒而用之乎？
现代文：像汉宣帝所说的那种 俗儒 ，当然不能同他们治理天下，但难道就不能访求 真儒 而任用吗！
English: As Emperor Han Xuan said, the kind of vulgar Confucianism, of course, cannot rule the world with them, but can't we ask a real Confucianism to be appointed?

古文：稷、契、皋陶、伯益、伊尹、周公、孔子，皆大儒也，使汉得而用之，功烈岂若是而止邪！
现代文：像后稷、契、皋陶、伯益、伊尹、周公、孔子，都是大儒，假如汉朝能得到他们而予以重用，汉朝的功业岂能只像现在这样！
English: Figures such as Hou Yi, Qi, Jintao, Bo Yi, Yi Yin, Zhou Gong, and Confucius were all great scholars. If the Han Dynasty had been able to obtain them and put them to good use, would the achievements of the Han Dynasty have been limited to what they are now?

古文：孝宣谓太子懦而不立，闇于治体，必乱我家，则可矣；乃曰王道不可行，儒者不可用，岂不过甚矣哉！
现代文：汉宣帝说太子懦弱不能自立，不懂得治国的方法，必然将败坏刘氏基业，这是可以的；可是说 王道 不可实行，儒者不可任用，岂不是太过分了！
English: It is all right for Emperor Han Xuan to say that the prince is too cowardly to stand up for himself, does not know how to govern the country, and will inevitably corrupt Liu's inheritance; but to say that the royal way cannot be practiced, and Confucians cannot be appointed, is not that going too far!

古文：殆非所以训示子孙，垂法将来者也。
现代文：不能以此来训示子孙，留给后人效法。
English: We cannot use this to teach our children and grandchildren, and leave it to future generations to follow suit.

古文：淮阳宪王好法律，聪达有材；王母张婕妤尤幸。
现代文：淮阳王刘钦喜欢研究法律，聪明通达，很有才干。其母张特别受汉宣帝宠爱。
English: Liu Qin, the king of Huaiyang, liked to study law. He was intelligent and accomplished. His mother Zhang was especially loved by Emperor Xuan of Han.

古文：上由是疏太子而爱淮阳宪王，数嗟叹宪王曰： 真我子也！ 
现代文：因此，汉宣帝疏远太子刘，疼爱淮阳王刘钦，曾几次赞叹刘钦说： 真是我的儿子！ 
English: Therefore, Emperor Han Xuan distanced himself from Prince Liu and loved Liu Qin, the King of Huaiyang. He praised Liu Qin several times and said, "He is really my son!"

古文：常有意欲立宪王，然用太子起于微细，上少依倚许氏，及即位而许后以杀死，故弗忍也。
现代文：曾有意要立刘钦为太子，但因刘生于自己微贱之时，那时自己曾靠刘的母亲许氏娘家照顾，而即位后，许皇后又被人害死，所以不忍心。
English: He had intended to make Liu Qin the crown prince, but because Liu was born when he was very lowly, he had to rely on Liu's mother, Queen Xu's daughter, to take care of him, and after he ascended the throne, Queen Xu was killed, so he couldn't bear it.

古文：久之，上拜韦玄成为淮阳中尉，以玄成尝让爵于兄，欲以感谕宪王。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，汉宣帝任命韦玄成为淮阳中尉，因韦玄成曾让爵位给其兄长，汉宣帝想以此感动、教育刘钦。
English: After a long period of time, Han Xuandi appointed Wei Xuan to be a lieutenant of Huaiyang. Because Wei Xuancheng had given the title to his brother, Han Xuandi wanted to impress and educate Liu Qin.

古文：由是太子遂安。
现代文：于是太子的地位才稳固了。
English: As a result, the position of the prince became stable.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于之败也，左伊秩訾王为呼韩邪计，劝令称臣入朝事汉，从汉求助，如此，匈奴乃定。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于被郅支单于打败之后，左伊秩訾王为呼韩邪单于出谋划策，劝他称臣归附汉朝，请求汉朝帮助，这样做了，才能平定匈奴内乱。
English: After the Xiongnu called Han Zidan was defeated by the Han Zidan, the Zuoying Chichibu King made a plan for the call of Han Zidan, persuaded him to declare his allegiance to the Han Dynasty, and requested the help of the Han Dynasty. This was done in order to quell the Xiongnu civil strife.

古文：呼韩邪问诸大臣，皆曰： 不可。
现代文：呼韩邪单于征求各位大臣的意见，都说： 不行。
English: After calling Han Zidan to solicit the opinions of various ministers, they all said: No.

古文：匈奴之俗，本上气力而下服役，以马上战斗为国，故有威名于百蛮。
现代文：我们匈奴的风俗，历来崇尚力量，耻于在下面服侍别人，靠马上征战建立国家，所以威名才传遍蛮夷各国。
English: The custom of our Huns has always been to praise bravery and strength, and to despise calling others to serve others, and to build their own country by fighting with people on war horses, so they have a high prestige among many minority peoples.

古文：战死，壮士所有也。
现代文：战死沙场，是壮士的本分。
English: To die on the battlefield is a heroic act.

古文：今兄弟争国，不在兄则在弟，虽死犹有威名，子孙常长诸国。
现代文：如今我们内部兄弟争国，不是哥哥得到，就是弟弟得到，即使战死，仍有威名，子孙永远统辖蛮夷各国。
English: Nowadays, our internal brothers fight for the country. Either the elder brother gets it, or the younger brother gets it. Even if they die in battle, they will still have a prestigious name, and their children and grandchildren will always rule barbarian countries.

古文：汉虽强，犹不能兼并匈奴。奈何乱先古之制，臣事于汉，卑辱先单于，为诸国所笑！
现代文：汉朝虽然强大，仍不能吞并匈奴，我们为何败坏先祖的制度，向汉朝称臣，使历代先王蒙受羞辱，被各国耻笑！
English: Although the Han Dynasty is powerful, it still cannot annex the Xiongnu. Why do we corrupt the system of our ancestors, offer allegiance to the Han Dynasty, and make the previous kings suffer humiliation and ridicule by all countries!

古文：虽如是而安，何以复长百蛮！ 
现代文：即使能因此而得到安定，又怎能再统辖蛮夷各国！ 
English: Even if stability could be achieved as a result of this, how could barbarian countries ever be brought under their control again!

古文：左伊秩訾曰： 不然，强弱有时。
现代文：左伊秩訾王说道： 不对，强弱之势，随时间的推移而改变。
English: Zuo Yi Chizhen Wang said: No, the strength and weakness of the situation changes with time.

古文：今汉方盛，乌孙城郭诸国皆为臣妾。
现代文：如今汉朝正当兴盛，乌孙等城邦国家都已向汉朝称臣。
English: Nowadays, the Han Dynasty is flourishing, and city-states such as Wusun have all declared their allegiance to the Han Dynasty.

古文：自且鞮侯单于以来，匈奴日削，不能取复，虽屈强于此，未尝一日安也。
现代文：我国自且侯单于以来，势力日益削减，不能恢复，尽管倔强至今，却未曾有一天安宁。
English: Since then, the Huns have been encroaching on our land day by day, but we have not been able to recover. Although we are still here, we have not had a single day of peace.

古文：今事汉则安存，不事则危亡，计何以过此！ 
现代文：而今，称臣于汉，则得以安全生存；如果不肯屈服，必陷于危亡境地。还有什么计策比这更好呢？ 
English: The current situation is: if we submit to the Han Dynasty, we will be able to survive in peace, otherwise we will perish. What other good strategy can surpass this!

古文：诸大人相难久之，呼韩邪从其计，引众南近塞，遣子右贤王铢娄渠堂入侍。
现代文：各位大臣不断对左伊秩訾王提出诘难，最后，呼韩邪单于终于接受了左伊秩訾王的建议，率众南下，向汉朝边塞靠近，派其子右贤王铢娄渠堂到长安做人质。
English: The ministers constantly put forward difficulties to Zuo Yi Chizhen Wang, and finally, Huan Han Yidan finally accepted the suggestion of Zuo Yi Chizhen Wang, led the people to the south, approached the Han Dynasty border fortress, and sent his son Uxian Wang Qianqutang to Chang'an to be a hostage.

古文：郅支单于亦遣子右大将驹于利受入侍。
现代文：郅支单于也派其子右大将驹于利受到长安做人质。
English: However, Emperor Xizang also sent his son, the Grand Marshal of the Right, Emperor Xizang Yuli, to serve Han Tianzi.

古文：二月，丁巳，乐成敬侯许延寿薨。
现代文：二月丁巳，乐成侯许延寿去世。
English: In February, Lesheng Hou Xu Yanru passed away.

古文：夏，四月，黄龙见新丰。
现代文：夏季，四月，在新丰发现黄龙。
English: In the summer, in April, a yellow dragon was found in Xinfeng.

古文：丙申，太上皇庙火；甲辰，孝文庙火；上素服五日。
现代文：丙申，太上皇祭庙失火；甲辰，汉文帝祭庙失火。汉宣帝素服五日。
English: Bishin, a fire broke out in the Emperor's temple; Jia Chen, a fire broke out in the Han Emperor's temple. Han Xuan Emperor did not appear for five days.

古文：乌孙狂王复尚楚主解忧，生一男鸱靡，不与主和，又暴恶失众。
现代文：乌孙狂王泥靡又娶楚公主刘解忧为妻，生下一子，取名鸱靡。狂王与公主关系不和睦，又暴戾凶恶，不得众人之心。
English: The Mad King's grandson, Mudai, married the princess of Chu, Liu Jiezhen, and had a son, who was named Mudai. The relationship between the Mad King and the princess was not amicable, but also violent and vicious, which made everyone's hearts melt.

古文：汉使卫司马魏和意、副侯任昌至乌孙。
现代文：汉朝派卫司马魏和意为使臣，卫侯任昌为副使来到乌孙。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Wei, Ma Wei, and He Yi as envoys, and Wei, Hou, and Renchang as deputy envoys to Wusun.

古文：公主言： 狂王为乌孙所患苦，易诛也。 
现代文：公主说： 狂王给乌孙带来灾患困苦，杀他很容易。 
English: The princess said, "The Mad King has brought disaster and hardship to the Uson, so it's easy to kill him.

古文：遂谋置酒，使士拔剑击之。
现代文：于是定计，设置酒宴，派武士拔剑刺杀狂王。
English: As a result, he made a plan, set up a banquet, and sent a samurai to assassinate the mad king with a drawn sword.

古文：剑旁下，狂王伤，上马驰去。
现代文：但剑锋刺偏，狂王受伤，上马奔驰而去。
English: The sword was not aimed, the mad king was wounded, and he mounted his horse and fled.

古文：其子细沈瘦会兵围和意、昌及公主于赤谷城。
现代文：狂王之子细沈瘦率兵将魏和意、任昌以及公主等包围在赤谷城中。
English: His son Bundu Shen Lean led the soldiers to surround Wei He Yi, Ren Chang, and Princess Diao Zang in Akaya Castle.

古文：数月，都护郑吉发诸国兵救之，乃解去。
现代文：数月之后，都护郑吉征调西域各国军队前来救援，围城之兵方才离去。
English: A few months later, Zheng Jie, the protector of the western region, conscripted soldiers from nearby countries to go to the rescue, bundled up and retreated.

古文：汉遣中郎将张遵持医药治狂王，赐金帛。因收和意、昌系琐，从尉犁槛车至长安，斩之。
现代文：汉朝派中郎将张遵携带医药来给狂王医治，并赏赐黄金丝帛；将魏和意、任昌锁拿，从尉犁用囚车押解到长安，处斩。
English: The Han Dynasty sent a middle-man to bring medicine to Zhang Zun to cure the mad king, and rewarded him with a golden silk scepter; Wei He Yi and Ren Chang Zhao were taken away from the middle-man in a prison van to Chang'an and executed.

古文：初，肥王翁归靡胡妇子乌就屠，狂王伤时，惊，与诸翎侯俱去，居北山中，扬言母家匈奴兵来，故众归之。
现代文：当初，乌孙肥王翁归靡与匈奴妻子生的儿子乌就屠，在狂王受伤时惊恐不崐安，与乌孙诸翎侯一齐逃走，藏在北方的山中，扬言其母亲娘家匈奴派兵前来，所以乌孙百姓纷纷归附于他。
English: At first, the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the wife of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the

古文：后遂袭杀狂王，自立为昆弥。
现代文：后乌就屠袭杀狂王，自立为王。
English: Later, he attacked and killed the Mad King and became Kunmi himself.

古文：是岁，汉遣破羌将军辛武贤将兵万五千人至敦煌，通渠积谷，欲以讨之。
现代文：这一年，汉朝派破羌将军辛武贤率兵一万五千来到敦煌，疏通河道，积聚粮食，准备征讨乌就屠。
English: In this year, the Han Dynasty sent the general Xin Wuxian to Dunhuang with 15,000 soldiers to clear the river, accumulate grain, and prepare for the conquest of Wuzhong.

古文：初，楚主侍者冯，能史书，习事，尝持汉节为公主使，城郭诸国敬信之，号曰冯夫人，为乌孙右大将妻。
现代文：当初，刘解忧的侍女冯能够撰写文书，了解汉朝与西域各国事务，所以曾携带汉朝符节为公主出使，各城邦国对她尊敬信任，称其为冯夫人。她是乌孙右大将的妻子。
English: At first, Liu Qiezhen's handmaiden Feng was able to write documents and understand the affairs of the Han Dynasty and Western countries, so she once carried Han Dynasty runes to be sent as an envoy for the princess. All city-states respected and trusted her and called her Mrs. Feng. She was the wife of General Wusun Yu.

古文：右大将与乌就屠相爱，都护郑吉使冯夫人说乌就屠，以汉兵方出，必见灭，不如降。
现代文：右大将与乌就屠是亲密朋友，所以都护郑吉派冯劝说乌就屠：汉朝军队即将出击，乌孙必将被汉军所灭，不如归降。
English: Udai Da is a close friend of Wuzhongtu, so Du Fu Zhengji sent Feng Ram to persuade Wuzhongtu: the Han Dynasty army is about to attack, Wuzhong will surely be destroyed by the Han Army, it is better to surrender.

古文：乌就屠恐，曰： 愿得小号以自处！ 
现代文：乌就屠感到恐慌，说道： 希望汉朝封我一个小王名号，使我得以安身。 
English: Wu Rongtu panicked and said, "I hope the Han Dynasty will give me the title of a minor king so that I can settle down."

古文：帝征冯夫人，自问状。遣谒者竺次、期门甘延寿为副，送冯夫人。冯夫人锦车持节，诏乌就屠诣长罗侯赤谷城，立元贵靡为大昆弥，乌就屠为小昆弥，皆赐印绶。
现代文：汉宣帝征召冯来京师，亲自询问乌孙情况，然后派冯乘坐锦车，携带皇帝符节作为正使，以谒者竺次、期门甘延寿为副使，护送冯来到乌孙，传达汉宣帝诏令，命乌就屠到赤谷城去见长罗侯常惠，立元贵靡为大昆弥，乌就屠为小昆弥，都赐予印信、绶带。
English: Emperor Xuan of Han summoned Feng Cang to Beijing and personally inquired about the situation of U Sun, then sent Feng Cang to take the brocade car and carry the emperor's symbols as the chief envoy, with the empress Dowager Gu Zi and the emperor's son Gan Yan Shou as the deputy envoys, escorted Feng Cang to U Sun, conveyed the imperial decree of Emperor Xuan of Han, ordered Wu Cang Tu to go to the city of Akaya to see the chancellor Luo Hou Chang Hui, appointed Liyuan Guimai as the great Kunya, and appointed Wu Cang Tu as the small Kunya, and gave him the

古文：破羌将军不出塞，还。
现代文：破羌将军辛武贤未曾出塞，即率兵撤回。
English: The defeated general, Xin Wuxian, had not yet left the city when he withdrew with his army.

古文：后乌就屠不尽归诸翎侯民众，汉复遣长罗侯将三校屯赤谷，因为分别其人民地界，大昆弥户六万馀，小昆弥户四万馀。
现代文：后乌就屠不肯将翎侯的部众全部归还，于是汉朝又派长罗侯常惠率领三位军校所属部队屯兵赤谷城，为乌孙划分人口和地界，大昆弥统辖六万余户，小昆弥统辖四万余户。
English: Hou Wu did not want to return all the subordinates and people of Wu Hou, so the Han Dynasty sent Luo Hou Chang Hui to lead three troops from the military school to Akaya City to divide the population and land boundaries for Wusun. Da Kun Mi controlled more than 60,000 households, and Xiao Kun Mi controlled more than 40,000 households.

古文：然众心皆附小昆弥。
现代文：然而，乌孙民众全都心向小昆弥。
English: However, the people of Wusun all have their hearts set on Xiao Kunyi.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下甘露二年春，正月，立皇子嚣为定陶王。诏赦天下，减民算三十。
现代文：甘露二年春季，正月，汉宣帝立皇子刘嚣为定陶王。汉宣帝颁布诏书，大赦天下，减少百姓的人头税三十钱。
English: In the spring and the first month of the second year of Kamloops, Emperor Han Xuan appointed Prince Liu Han as the king of Dingtao. Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to grant amnesty to the whole world and reduce the people's head tax by 30 yuan.

古文：珠厓郡反。
现代文：珠崖郡造反。
English: Rebellion in Zhuya County.

古文：夏，四月，遣护军都尉张禄将兵击之。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉宣帝派护军都尉张禄率兵镇压。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Han Xuan sent a military escort led by Lieutenant Zhang Lu to suppress the rebellion.

古文：杜延年以老病免。
现代文：杜延年因年老多病，被免除职务。
English: Due to his old age and illness, Du Yanneng was relieved of his duties.

古文：五月，己丑，廷尉于定国为御史大夫。
现代文：五月己丑，廷尉于定国被任命为御史大夫。
English: In May, he was disgraced, and in Tingguo he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：秋，九月，立皇子宇为东平王。
现代文：秋季，七月，汉宣帝立皇子刘宇为东平王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Han Xuan made Prince Liu Yu the King of Dongping.

古文：冬，十二月，上行幸萯阳宫、属玉观。
现代文：冬季，十二月，汉宣帝巡游阳宫、属玉观。
English: In winter, in December, Emperor Han Xuan was on a tour of the Yang Palace, belonging to the Jade Emperor.

古文：是岁，营平壮武侯赵充国薨。
现代文：这一年，营平侯赵充国去世。
English: In this year, Yingping marquis Zhao Chongguo passed away.

古文：先是，充国以老乞骸骨，赐安车、驷马、黄金，罢就第。
现代文：先前，赵充国因年老请求退休。汉宣帝赐给他安车、四匹马和黄金，解除他的职务，让他回家休养。
English: Previously, Zhao Chongguo had asked to retire due to old age. Emperor Han Xuan gave him a carriage, four horses and gold, relieved him of his duties, and let him go home to recuperate.

古文：朝廷每有四夷大议，常与参兵谋、问筹策焉。
现代文：每当朝廷有关于四方外夷的大事商议，赵充国仍参与议定战略，为朝廷顾问、筹划。
English: Whenever the imperial court had a major discussion about the four foreign invaders, Zhao Chongguo still participated in the agreed strategy, and was an adviser and planner for the imperial court.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于款五原塞，原奉国珍，朝三年正月。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于抵达五原边塞，表示愿奉献本国珍宝，于甘露三年正月来长安朝见汉宣帝。
English: The Xiongnu called Han Yidan on arriving at the Wuhuan border fortress, expressed his willingness to dedicate his precious treasure, and came to Chang'an in the first month of the third year of the Kamloops to see Han Xuan.

古文：诏有司议其仪。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏命主管官员商议朝见仪式。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict ordering the officials in charge to discuss the imperial audience ceremony.

古文：丞相、御史曰： 圣王之制，先京师而后诸夏，先诸夏而后夷狄。
现代文：丞相、御史大夫都说： 依古代圣王的制度，先京师而后诸侯，先诸侯而后夷狄。
English: Both the chancellor and the chief historian said: According to the system of the ancient holy kings, the capital came first, followed by the provinces, followed by the provinces, followed by the barbarians.

古文：匈奴单于朝贺，其礼仪宜如诸侯王，位次在下。 
现代文：匈奴单于前崐来朝贺，其礼仪应与诸侯王相同，位次排在诸侯王之后。 
English: The Xiongnu came to congratulate the emperor in the front row, and its etiquette should be the same as that of the princes, and its rank should be next to that of the princes.

古文：太子太傅萧望之以为： 单于非正朔所加，故称敌国，宜待以不臣之礼，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：太子太傅萧望之认为： 单于不奉汉朝正朔，本不是我国的臣属，所以称为匹敌之国，应不用臣属的礼仪对待他，使其位次在诸侯王之上。
English: Prince Taifu Shao Wangzhi thought: Just because he does not follow the Han Dynasty, he is not a subject of our country, so he is called a rival country. He should not be treated with the etiquette of a subject, so that his rank is higher than that of princes.

古文：外夷稽首称籓，中国让而不臣，此则羁縻之谊，谦亨之福也。《书》曰： 戎狄荒服， 言其来服荒忽亡常。
现代文：外夷向我国低头，自愿居于藩属地位；我国谦让，不以臣属之礼对待他，为的是笼络于他，显示我国的谦虚大度。《尚书》有言： 戎狄外族很难驯服 ，说明外夷的归附反复无常。
English: Foreigners bow to our country and voluntarily live in the status of the clan; our country is modest and does not treat him with the courtesy of a subject, in order to entrap him and show our country's modesty and generosity. "Shangshu" has a saying: Foreigners are difficult to tame, indicating the capriciousness of foreign annexation.

古文：如使匈奴后嗣卒有鸟窜鼠伏，阙于朝享，不为畔臣，万世之长策也。 
现代文：如果将来匈奴的后代子孙突然像飞鸟远窜、老鼠潜伏一般不再前来朝见进贡，也不算我国的背叛之臣，这才是万代的长远策略。 
English: If, in the future, the descendants and descendants of the Xiongnu suddenly become like birds flying far away and rats lurking, they will generally no longer come to the court to pay tribute, nor will they be regarded as our country's traitorous vassals. This is the long-term strategy of all generations.

古文：天子采之，下诏曰： 匈奴单于称北潘，朝正朔。
现代文：汉宣帝采纳了萧望之的意见，下诏说： 匈奴单于自称我国北方藩属，将于明年正月初一前来朝见。
English: Emperor Han Xuan accepted Xiaowanzhi's opinion and issued the following edict: The Xiongnu, who claimed to belong to the Northern Han Dynasty of China, would come to see the emperor on the first day of the first month of the next year.

古文：朕之不德，不能弘覆。
现代文：朕的恩德不够，不能受此隆重大礼。
English: My grace is not enough to receive this great honor.

古文：其以客礼待之，令单于位在诸侯王上，赞谒称臣而不名。 
现代文：应以国宾之礼相待，使单于的位次在诸侯王之上，拜谒时只称臣，不具名。 
English: He invited him with the etiquette of a guest, giving him a place above the princes and lords, bowing to him and calling him by his title when meeting him.

古文：荀悦论曰：《春秋》之义，王者无外，欲一于天下也。
现代文：荀悦论曰：按照《春秋》大义，君王不分内外，以表示要天下一统。
English: Yu Yuexuan said: According to the "Spring and Autumn" Great Righteousness, the monarch is indistinguishable from the inside and outside, in order to express the unification of the world.

古文：戎狄道理辽远，人迹介绝，故正朔不及，礼教不加，非尊之也，其势然也。
现代文：戎狄外族因相距遥远，人事隔绝，所以中国的 正朔 传不过去，中国的礼义教化不加之于他们身上，并非是尊重他们，而是形势所致，不得不然。
English: Because the foreign ethnic groups are far away from each other and isolated from each other, China's Zhengshao cannot be passed on to them, and China's etiquette and righteousness are not imposed on them. This is not out of respect for them, but is a result of the situation and is unavoidable.

古文：《诗》云： 自彼氐、羌，莫敢不来王。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 氐族、羌族全在内，谁敢不来朝天子。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Whoever dares not to come before the Son of Heaven, including the entire Yi people and the Qiang people."

古文：故要、荒之君必奉王贡。
现代文：所以距离极远的外族君主，也必向天子朝贡。
English: Therefore, foreign monarchs who are very far away must also pay tribute to the heavenly son.

古文：若不供职，则有辞让号令加焉，非敌国之谓也。
现代文：如不前来朝贡，则向其发出斥责和号令，不应称之为匹敌之国。
English: If you do not come to pay tribute, you will be reprimanded and ordered to leave, and you should not be called a rival country.

古文：望之欲待以不臣之礼，加之王公之上，僭度失序，以乱天常，非礼也！
现代文：萧望之打算不以臣属之礼相待，使其位居王公之上，是僭越制度，丧失秩序，扰乱天理纲常，违背了礼！
English: Xiao Wang's intention not to treat each other with the courtesy of a subject, and to place him above the prince, is a violation of the system, a loss of order, a disruption of the heavenly order, and a violation of etiquette!

古文：若以权时之宜，则异论矣。
现代文：但如果是一时的权宜之计，则又当别论。
English: But if it's a temporary stopgap measure, that's a different story.

古文：诏遣车骑都尉韩昌迎单于，发所过七郡二千骑为陈道上。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏派车骑都尉韩昌前去迎接单于，征调沿途七郡二千名骑兵陈列于道旁。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to send the cavalry captain, Han Chang, to meet the delegation. Along the way, 2,000 cavalrymen from seven counties were displayed on the roadside.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下甘露三年春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：甘露三年春季，正月，汉宣帝前往甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Kamloops, in the first month, Emperor Han Xuan went to Ganquan to worship Tenjin in Thailand.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝，赞谒称籓臣而不名。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于前来朝见，拜见汉宣帝时，自称藩臣而不称名字。
English: The Xiongnu summoned Han Yadsan to come to the imperial court, and when he met Emperor Han Xuan, he called himself a vassal without giving his name.

古文：赐以冠带、衣裳，黄金玺、盭绶，玉具剑、佩刀，弓一张，矢四发，棨戟十，安车一乘，鞍勒一具，马十五匹，黄金二十斤，钱二十万，衣被七十七袭，锦绣、绮縠、杂帛八千匹，絮六千斤。
现代文：汉宣帝赐给他冠带、官衣服，黄金印玺、绿色绶带，玉石装饰的宝剑、佩刀、一张弓、四十八支箭，十支有戟套的长戟，安车一辆，马鞍马辔一套，马十五匹，黄金二十斤，钱二十万，衣衫被褥七十一套，锦锈、绸缎、各种细绢八千匹，丝绵六千斤。
English: Emperor Han Xuan gave him a coronation sash, official robes, a gold seal, a green sash, a jade-decorated sword, a saber, a bow, forty-eight arrows, ten long saddles with bridles, a carriage, a saddle and bridle set, fifteen horses, twenty pounds of gold, two hundred thousand in money, seventy-one sets of clothes and bedding, eight thousand brocades, silk and satin, and six thousand pounds of silk.

古文：礼毕，使使者道单于先行宿长平。上自甘泉宿池阳宫。
现代文：朝会典礼结束后，汉宣帝派使臣带领单于先至长平阪住宿，自己也从甘泉前往池阳宫住宿。
English: After the morning meeting ceremony, Emperor Han Xuan sent an envoy to stay in Nagahirasaka, and he also went to stay in Chiyang Palace from Ganquan.

古文：上登长平阪，诏单于毋谒，其左右当户群臣皆得列观，及诸蛮夷君长、王、侯数万，咸迎于渭桥下，夹道陈。
现代文：汉宣帝登上长平阪，下诏命单于不必参拜，允许单于左右的大臣列队观瞻，蛮夷各国的国君，各诸侯王、列侯等数万人，全部来到渭桥下夹道迎接。
English: Emperor Han Xuan ascended to Changpingshan, and issued an edict that there was no need to visit, allowing only the ministers on the left and right to line up to watch. Tens of thousands of monarchs, princes and lords of all countries, all came to the foot of the bridge to meet.

古文：上登渭桥，咸称万岁。
现代文：汉宣帝登上渭桥，众人齐呼万岁。
English: The emperor boarded the Long Bridge, welcoming the crowd with a chorus of "Long live!

古文：单于就邸长安。
现代文：过后单于到长安居住。
English: After that, he went to live in Chang'an.

古文：置酒建章宫，飨赐单于，观以珍宝。
现代文：汉宣帝在建章宫设酒宴款待单于，请他观赏珍宝。
English: The emperor held a welcome banquet at the Jianzhang Palace, in order to sweep away the dust.

古文：二月，遣单于归国。
现代文：二月，送单于回国。
English: In February, the delivery order was sent back to China.

古文：单于自请 愿留居幕南光禄塞下；有急，保汉受降城。 
现代文：单于自己请求： 希望留居于大沙漠之南的光禄塞下，遇有紧急情况，退入汉受降城自保。 
English: I only ask myself: I hope to stay in the south of the great desert, under the light of the sun, and in case of emergency, retreat to the city of Han for self-protection.

古文：汉遣长乐卫尉、高昌侯董忠、车骑都尉韩昌将骑万六千，又发边郡士马以千数，送单于出朔方鸡鹿塞。
现代文：汉宣帝派长乐卫尉高昌侯董忠、车骑都尉韩昌率领骑兵一万六千，又征发边疆各郡数以千计的士兵、马匹，送单于出朔方郡鸡鹿塞。
English: Emperor Han Xuan sent 16,000 cavalry led by Changle Guards Lieutenant Gaochang Hou Dongzhong and Cavalry Captain Han Chang, and also conscripted and sent thousands of soldiers and horses from all counties in the frontier, and sent them to Jilu County, Zhishuo Fang County.

古文：诏忠等留卫单于，助诛不服，又转边谷米Я，前后三万四千斛，给赡其食。
现代文：下诏命董忠等留下保卫单于，帮助单于征讨不服其统治的匈奴人，又转运边疆的谷米干粮，前后共三万四千斛，供给匈奴人食用。
English: In the following edict, he ordered Dong Zhong and others to stay behind to defend Xuanwu, to help Xuanwu to recruit the Xiongnu people who did not submit to his rule, and to transport a total of 34,000 mu of grain and rice from the frontier to supply the Xiongnu people with food.

古文：先是，自乌孙以西至安息诸国近匈奴者，皆畏匈奴而轻汉，及呼韩邪单于朝汉后，咸尊汉矣。
现代文：以前，自乌孙以西直到安息，与匈奴接近的西域各国，全都畏惧匈奴，轻视汉朝；自呼韩邪单于至汉朝朝见后，则崐全部遵从汉朝号令了。
English: In the past, all the countries in the Western Regions that were close to the Xiongnu, from the west of the Wusun Dynasty to the Han Dynasty, were afraid of the Xiongnu and despised the Han Dynasty. When they saw the Han Dynasty, they all obeyed the orders of the Han Dynasty.

古文：上以戎狄宾服，思股肱之美，乃图画其人于麒麟阁，法其容貌，署其官爵、姓名。唯霍光不名，曰 大司马、大将军、博陆候，姓霍氏 。其次张安世、韩增、赵充国、魏相、丙吉、杜延年、刘德、梁丘贺、萧望之、苏武。凡十一人，皆有功德，知名当世，是以表而扬之，明著中兴辅佐，列于方叔、召虎、仲山甫焉。
现代文：汉宣帝因四方戎狄臣服，想到辅佐大臣的功劳，便命人在麒麟阁上，为他们绘制画像，描绘容貌，注明官爵、姓名，只有霍光不注名字，只写 大司马、大将军、博陆侯，姓霍氏 ，其次为张安世、韩增、赵充国、魏相、丙吉、杜延年、刘德、梁丘贺、萧望之、苏武，共十一人，他们都为国立过大功，闻名于当世，所以表彰他们，表明他们对中兴汉朝的辅佐之功可以媲美于古代的方叔、召虎、仲山甫。
English: Emperor Xuan of Han, thinking of the merits of the assistant ministers, ordered people to draw pictures for them on the Kirin Pavilion, depicting their faces, indicating their titles and names. Only Huo Guang did not write his name, but only wrote Da Sima, General, Bo Lu Hou, surnamed Huo, followed by Zhang Anshi, Han Zeng, Zhao Chongguo, Wei Xiang, Bingji, Du Yan Nian, Liu De, Liang Qiu He, Xiao Wangzhi, and Su Wu, a total of eleven people. They have all made great contributions to the state and are famous in the present world. Therefore, they should be commended to show that their

古文：凤皇集新蔡。
现代文：凤凰飞集新蔡县。
English: The phoenix flies to Xin Cai County.

古文：三月，己巳、建成安侯黄霸薨。
现代文：三月己巳，建成侯黄霸去世。
English: In March, Jiancheng Hou Huangba passed away.

古文：五月，甲午，于定国为丞相，封西平侯。
现代文：五月甲午，于定国被任命为丞相，封西平侯。
English: In the first half of May, he was appointed chancellor of the state of Dinggu, and was given the title of Xi Pinghou.

古文：太仆沛郡陈万年为御史大夫。
现代文：太仆沛郡人陈万年任御史大夫。
English: Chen Wan Nian, a man from Taupo County, has been appointed as a doctor of history.

古文：诏诸儒讲五经同异，萧望之等平奏其议，上帝称制临决焉。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏命儒家学者们讲述他们对五经的解释的相同和不同之处，由萧望之等公平上奏，再由汉宣帝亲自出席作出裁决。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict ordering the Confucian scholars to recount the similarities and differences of their interpretations of the Five Classics, which was fairly recited by Xiaowanzhi, and then personally attended by Emperor Han Xuan to make a ruling.

古文：乃立梁丘《易》、大、小夏侯《尚书》、《穀梁春秋》博士。
现代文：结果，决定以梁丘贺注解的《易经》、夏侯胜、夏侯建注解的《尚书》、梁赤注解的《春秋》作为标准本，分别设置博士。
English: As a result, it was decided to use "I Ching" annotated by Liang Qiuhe, "Shang Shu" annotated by Xia Hosheng, Xia Houjian, and "Chunqiu" annotated by Liang Chia as the standard text, and to set Ph.D. degrees separately.

古文：乌孙大昆弥元贵靡及鸱靡皆病死。公主上书言： 年老土思，愿得归骸骨，葬汉地！ 
现代文：乌孙大昆弥元贵靡及鸱靡全都病死，公主刘解忧上书汉宣帝说： 我年纪已老，思念故乡，希望能让我返回家乡，葬在汉朝的土地上！ 
English: Emperor Wusong, Emperor Kunmy, Emperors Yuan Gui and Xuan Gui all died of illness. Princess Liu Jiezhen wrote to Emperor Xuan of Han, "I am old and miss my hometown. I hope I can return to my hometown and be buried in the land of the Han Dynasty!"

古文：天子闵而迎之。
现代文：汉宣帝很觉可怜，派人将她接回汉朝。
English: Han Xuan Di felt very sorry and sent someone to take her back to the Han Dynasty.

古文：冬，至京师，待之一如公主之制。
现代文：冬季，刘解忧回到长安，接待她的礼仪与真正的公主一般无二。
English: In winter, Liu Xiezhen returned to Chang'an. The etiquette for receiving her was no different from that of a real princess.

古文：后二岁卒。
现代文：两年后死去。
English: He died two years later.

古文：元贵靡子星靡代为大昆弥，弱。
现代文：元贵靡的儿子星靡继位为乌孙大昆弥，但年纪尚小。
English: Xingmai, the son of the original noble Xingmai, succeeded to the throne as the great grandson of Kunming, but he was still young.

古文：冯夫人上书： 愿使乌孙，镇抚星靡。 
现代文：冯上书汉宣帝说： 我愿出使乌孙，镇抚星靡。 
English: Feng Shangshu Han Xuan Di said: I am willing to send out Wusun, Zhenfu Xingmai.

古文：汉遣之。
现代文：汉宣帝批准所请，派她出使乌孙。
English: Emperor Han Xuan approved the request and sent her to dispatch the grandson.

古文：都护韩宣奏乌孙大吏大禄、大监皆可赐以金印紫绶，以尊辅大昆弥。
现代文：都护韩宣奏称，乌孙的大禄、大监等大臣都可赐予黄金印信、紫色绶带，让他们尊重、辅佐大昆弥。
English: Han Xuanxu, the Metropolitan Protector, said that ministers such as the Grand Duke of Wusun and the Grand Supervisor could bestow gold seals and purple ribbons on them, so that they would respect and assist Da Kunya.

古文：汉许之。
现代文：汉宣帝批准所请。
English: The Han Dynasty agreed to the request of the Xiongnu.

古文：其后段会宗为都护，乃招还亡叛，安定之。
现代文：后来段会宗担任都护，帮助乌孙招回流亡叛逃在外的乌孙人，使乌孙安定下来。
English: Later, Duan Huizong served as the tutelary of the capital, and helped Wusun to bring back the Wusun people who had defected and fled abroad, so that Wusun could settle down.

古文：星靡死，子雌栗靡代立。
现代文：星靡死去，其子雌栗靡接替他成为乌孙大昆弥。
English: Hoshimichi died, and his son, Oshirimichi, succeeded him as the grandson of Daikunmi.

古文：皇太子所幸司马良娣病，且死，谓太子曰： 妾死非天命，乃诸娣妾、良人更祝诅杀我。 
现代文：皇太子刘所宠爱的司马良娣病重，临死前对太子说； 我死并不是因为寿数已尽，而是被其他妃妾轮番诅咒所杀。 
English: Sima Liangyao, the favorite of Crown Prince Liu, was seriously ill and said to the prince before his death; I did not die because my life was over, but was killed by the curse of other concubines.

古文：太子以为然。
现代文：太子认为她说得很对。
English: The prince thought she was right.

古文：及死，太子悲恚发病，忽忽不乐。
现代文：及至司马良娣死去，太子悲伤怨恨而生病，感到闷闷不乐。
English: When Sima Liangyao died, the prince fell ill with grief and resentment and felt depressed.

古文：帝乃令皇后择后宫家人子可以娱侍太子者，得元城王政君，送太子宫。
现代文：汉宣帝命皇后在后宫妃嫔的娘家女子中，挑选可以供太子娱乐和侍奉太子的女子，挑到元城人王政君，送入太子宫。
English: Emperor Han Xuan ordered the empress to select from the daughters of the concubines in the harem, women who could entertain and serve the prince, and chose Wang Zhengjun, a former city dweller, to be sent to the prince's womb.

古文：政君，故绣衣御史贺之孙女也，见于丙殿。壹幸，有身。
现代文：王政君是前绣衣御史王贺的孙女。太子在丙殿见到王政君，一经宠幸，便身怀有孕。
English: Wang Zhengjun is the granddaughter of the former Empress Wang He. When the prince saw Wang Zhengjun at the C Palace, he fell pregnant.

古文：是岁，生成帝于甲馆画堂，为世缊皇孙。
现代文：这一年，王政君在甲馆画堂生下汉成帝。
English: In this year, Wang Zhengjun gave birth to Hancheng Emperor in the Hall A Picture Gallery.

古文：帝爱之，自名曰骜，字大孙，常置左右。
现代文：因是嫡皇孙，汉宣帝非常疼爱他，亲自给他取名叫作刘骜，字大孙，常常将他带在身边。
English: As he was the legitimate grandson of the emperor, Emperor Han Xuan loved him very much and personally gave him the name of Liu Xuan, the eldest grandson, and often took him with him.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下甘露四年
现代文：甘露四年
English: Four years of nectar

古文：夏，广川王海阳坐禽兽行、贼杀不辜，废，徙房陵。
现代文：夏季，广川王刘海阳，因被指控行为如同禽兽，残杀无辜，废去王爵崐，迁徙到房陵县。
English: In the summer, Liu Haiyang, the king of Guangchuan, was accused of behaving like an animal and killing innocent people. He was stripped of his title and moved to Fangling County.

古文：冬，十月，丁卯，未央宫宣室阁火。
现代文：冬季，十月，未央宫宣室阁失火。
English: In the winter, in October, a fire broke out in the Xuanwu Pavilion of the Summer Palace.

古文：是岁，徙定陶王嚣为楚王。
现代文：这一年，汉宣帝将定陶王刘嚣改封为楚王。
English: In this year, Emperor Han Xuan changed the title of Ding Tao King Liu Han to King Chu.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪、郅支两单于俱遣使朝献，汉待呼韩邪使有加焉。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪、郅支两单于都派使臣前来朝贡汉朝，对待呼韩邪单于的使臣优于郅支单于的使臣。
English: The Xiongnu sent envoys to pay tribute to the Han Dynasty from both the Han Dynasty and the Song Dynasty, and treated the envoys from the Han Dynasty better than the envoys from the Song Dynasty.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝下黄龙元年
现代文：黄龙元年
English: Year of the Yellow Dragon

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝；二月，归国。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于前来朝见汉宣帝，二月回国。
English: The Xiongnu called Han Yidan to come to see Emperor Han Xuan in the morning, and he returned to China in February.

古文：始，郅支单于以为呼韩邪兵弱，降汉，不能复自还，即引其众西，欲攻定右地。
现代文：起初，郅支单于认为呼韩邪单于兵力单薄，归降了汉朝，不能再自己返回旧地，于是便率领部众向西方推进，打算攻占匈奴西部地区。
English: At first, Xuan Zhi Shan thought that calling Han Zi Shan was a sign of weak military strength. He had surrendered to the Han Dynasty and could no longer return to the old place on his own. Therefore, he led his troops to the west, intending to capture the western region of the Huns.

古文：又屠耆单于小弟本侍呼韩邪，亦亡之右地，收两兄馀兵，得数千人，自立为伊利目单于；道逢郅支，合战，郅支杀之，并其兵五万馀人。
现代文：此外，屠耆单于的小弟弟本为呼韩邪单于部下，也逃到西部地区，收集屠耆单于和闰振单于两位兄长的余部，共得数千人，自立为伊利目单于。路上遇到郅支单于，双方交战，郅支单于杀死伊利目单于，兼并其部下，共有五万余人。
English: In addition, Tu Youyou's younger brother, who was supposed to call Han Ye to his subordinates, also fled to the western region, collected Tu Youyou and Ru Ru Rui Youyou from the rest of the two brothers, totaling several thousand people, and became independent as Yili Me You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You

古文：郅支闻汉出兵谷助呼韩邪，即遂留居右地；自度力不能定匈奴，乃益西，近乌孙，欲与并力，遣使见小昆弥乌就屠。
现代文：郅支单于听说汉朝出兵出粮帮助呼韩邪单于，便留居在西部地区。他估计靠自己的力量不能控制整个匈奴，于是继续向西推进，靠近乌孙，想与乌孙联合力量，因而派使臣去见乌孙小昆弥乌就屠。
English: Upon hearing that the Han Dynasty had sent troops and grain to help Quan Han, Quanzhan stayed in the western region. He estimated that he could not control the entire Xiongnu on his own, so he continued to push westward, close to Wusun, and wanted to join forces with Wusun, so he sent an envoy to see Wusun Xiao Kunmiwu.

古文：乌就屠杀其使，发八千骑迎郅支。
现代文：乌就屠杀其使臣，派八千骑兵假意迎接郅支单于。
English: Ukraine massacred its envoys and sent eight thousand cavalrymen to meet Yan Zhidan.

古文：郅支觉其谋，勒兵逢击乌孙，破之；因北击乌揭、坚昆、丁令、并三国。
现代文：郅支单于识破了乌就屠的企图，率兵迎战，打败乌孙军队，遂即向北部的乌揭、坚昆、丁令发动进攻，吞并了这三个国家。
English: Zou Zhizan saw through the attempt of Uzumcu, led his troops to fight against and defeat the Uzun army, and then launched an attack on Uzumcu, Jiankun and Dingling in the north, annexing these three countries.

古文：数遣兵击乌孙，常胜之。
现代文：郅支单于多次派兵进攻乌孙，经常取得胜利。
English: Zou Zhizan repeatedly sent troops to attack the Wusun Kingdom, and often won.

古文：坚昆东去单于庭七千里，南去车师五千里，郅支留都之。
现代文：坚昆国东界距单于王庭七千里，南界至车师五千里，郅支单于留下来，建都于此。
English: Jiankun is seven thousand miles away from Wangting in the east, and five thousand miles away from Cheji in the south. Jiankun stayed there and built the capital there.

古文：三月，有星孛于王良、阁道，入紫微宫。
现代文：三月，有异星出现于王良星、阁道星座，进入紫微星座。
English: In March, a strange star appeared in the constellation of Wang Liang, and entered the constellation of Violet Weak.

古文：帝寝疾，选大臣可属者，引外属侍中乐陵侯史高、太子太傅萧望之、少傅周堪至禁中，拜高为大司马、车骑将军，望之为前将军、光禄勋，堪为光禄大夫，皆受遗诏辅政，领尚书事。
现代文：汉宣帝卧病在床，挑选可以嘱托后事的大臣，召外戚侍中乐陵侯史高、太子太傅萧望之、少傅周堪来到宫中，任命史高为大司马、车骑将军、萧望之为前将军、光禄勋，周堪为光禄大夫，共同接受遗诏，辅佐朝政，主管尚书事务。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was ill in bed. He selected the ministers who could be entrusted with the succession, summoned the foreign relatives of the attendants of Le Ling, Hou Shigao, Prince Taifu Shao Wangzhi, and Shao Fu Zhou Kan, came to the palace, appointed Shigao as the chief steward, the chariot and cavalry general, Shao Wangzhi as the former general, Guanglu Xun, and Zhou Kan as the doctor of Guanglu, jointly accepted the will, assisted the government, and was in charge of the book affairs.

古文：冬，十二月，甲戌，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：冬季，十二月甲戌，汉宣帝在未央宫驾崩。
English: In the winter, in December, Emperor Han Xuan passed away in Weiyang Palace.

古文：班固赞曰：孝宣之治，信赏必罚，综核名实。
现代文：班固赞曰：汉宣帝治理国家，有功必赏，有罪必罚，注重综合考核人事的名与实。
English: Ban Guzan said: Han Xuan Di began to govern the country, meritorious must be rewarded, guilty must be punished, pay attention to the comprehensive assessment of personnel's name and reality.

古文：政事、文学、法理之士，咸精其能。
现代文：主持政务的大臣、学者，以及执掌法令的官员，全都精通自己的本职。
English: The ministers in charge of government affairs, scholars, and officials in charge of laws and regulations are all proficient in their duties.

古文：至于技巧、工匠、器械，自元、成间鲜能及之。亦足以知吏称其职，民安其业也。
现代文：在技巧、工匠、器械方面，以后的汉元帝、汉成帝时，很少能与之相比，这也足以证明汉宣帝时确实做到了官吏各称其职，百姓各安其业。
English: In terms of skills, craftsmen, and equipment, the later Han Yuan and Han Cheng Dynasties can rarely be compared to it. This is also enough to prove that the Han Xuan Dynasties did indeed achieve the goal of officials calling their own duties, and the people doing their own business.

古文：遭值匈奴乖乱，推亡固存，信威北夷，单于慕义，稽首称籓。
现代文：遇到匈奴内乱，汉宣帝讨伐无道，扶助有道，以威严和信义震慑北方夷狄之国，匈奴单于仰慕汉朝仁义，俯首称臣，自居藩属地位。
English: Although they were harassed by the Xiongnu, they were able to call Han Zidan to come to the DPRK, Sui Zidan to Yuancheng, Shin Tianwei to Beiyi, and Shan Zidan to Muyi, bowing their heads and calling it a domain.

古文：功光祖宗，业垂后嗣，可谓中兴，侔德殷宗、周宣矣！
现代文：功勋光耀祖先，业绩永垂后世，实可称之为 中兴 ，其功德可与商高宗、周宣王相比！
English: Gongguang Zongzong, the inheritor, can be said to be the master of ZTE. His virtue is comparable to that of Yin Gaozong and Zhou Xuan Wang.

古文：癸巳，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：癸巳，皇太子刘即皇帝位，拜谒汉高祖祭庙，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: At that time, the crown prince Liu was the emperor, the Han Gaozu Temple was worshiped, the revered empress dowager was the great empress dowager, and the empress was the empress dowager.

