古文：阎宝，字琼美，郓州人。
现代文：阎宝，字琼美，郓州人。
English: Yan Bao, also known as Qiongmei, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：父佐，海州刺史。
现代文：父亲阎佐，任海州刺史。
English: His father, Yasasa, was appointed as the governor of Kaishu Province.

古文：宝少事硃瑾为牙将，瑾之失守于兗也，宝与瑾将胡规、康怀英归汴梁，皆擢任之。
现代文：阎宝年轻时在朱瑾手下当牙将，朱瑾失守兖州后，阎宝和朱瑾的将军胡规、康怀英投奔汴梁，都受到提拔。
English: When Yan Bao was young, he was a tooth general under Zhu Xi. After Zhu Xi lost control of Zhangzhou, both Yan Bao and Zhu Xi's generals, Hu Jian and Kang Huaiying, were promoted.

古文：自梁祖陈师河朔，争霸关西，宝与葛从周、丁会、贺德伦、李思安各为大将，统兵四出，所至立功，历洺、随、宿、郑四州刺史。
现代文：自从梁太祖在河朔用兵，到关西争霸，阎宝和葛从周、丁会、贺德伦、李思安都是大将，带兵四面出击，所到之地立功受奖，历任氵名、随、宿、郑四州刺史。
English: Since Liang Taizu used soldiers in Hexuo and fought for supremacy in Kansai, Yan Bao and Ge Zhou, Ding Hui, He Delun, and Li Sian were all generals. They led soldiers to attack in all directions, received awards for their achievements in the places they visited, and successively became famous, followed, stayed, and made history in Zhengzhou.

古文：天祐六年，梁祖以宝为邢洺节度使、检校太傅。
现代文：天祐六年，梁太祖任阎宝为邢氵名节度使、检校太傅。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Heaven, Liang Taizu appointed Yan Bao as the festival envoy and the inspector of the school.

古文：庄宗定魏博，十三年，攻相、卫、洺、磁，下之，宝独保邢州，城孤援绝。
现代文：唐庄宗平定魏博，天祐十三年，又进攻相、卫、氵名、磁等州，都被攻下了，只有阎宝独自保住邢州，孤城失去援助。
English: Tangzhuangzong subdued Weibo, and in the 13th year of Tianyu, he attacked the states of Xiang, Wei, Shennai, and Magnetism. All of them were conquered. Only Yan Bao was able to keep Shanzhou on his own, and Lucheng lost its aid.

古文：八月，宝以邢州降，庄宗嘉之，进位检校太尉、同平章事，遥领天平国节度使、东南面招讨等使，待以宾礼，位在诸将上，每有谋画，与之参决。
现代文：八月，阎宝献邢州投降，庄宗嘉奖了他，任检校太尉、同平章事，遥任天平军节度使、东南面招讨等使，以宾客之礼相待，地位在各将之上，每当有要事谋划，总与他一起商量决定。
English: In August, Yan Bao offered the surrender of Bozhou, and Zhuang Zong praised him. He was appointed as the inspecting officer, the same rank as the commander, and the distant envoy of the Tianping Army for the festival, the southeastern side of the invitation, and so on. He treated each other with the courtesy of a guest, and his position was above the generals. Whenever there was an important matter to plan, he always discussed and decided with him.

古文：契丹之寇幽州也，周德威危急，宝与李存审从明宗击契丹于幽州西北，解围而还。
现代文：契丹侵犯幽州时，周德威的情况危急，阎宝和李存审跟随明宗在幽州西北攻打契丹，解除幽州之围后回师。
English: When the Khitan invaded Yuzhou, Zhou Dewei was in a critical situation. Yan Bao and Li Cunxin followed Mingzong to attack the Khitan in the northwest of Yuzhou and lift the siege of Yuzhou.

古文：胡柳之役，诸军逗挠，汴军登无石山，其势甚盛。
现代文：胡柳一战，各军逗留不前，梁军登上无石山，军势很盛大。
English: In the First Battle of Huliu, all the armies lingered, Liang's army ascended Muxishan Mountain, and the army was very grand.

古文：庄宗望之，畏其不敌，且欲保营。
现代文：庄宗看了，担心抵挡不住，想保住营地。
English: Zhuang Zong saw it, worried that he could not resist, and wanted to keep the camp.

古文：宝进曰： 王深入敌境，偏师不利，王彦章骑军已入濮州，山下唯列步兵，向晚皆有归志。我尽锐击之，败走必矣。
现代文：阎宝进言说 ：您已深入敌境，偏师不利，敌军王彦章的骑兵已进入濮州，山下只剩下步兵，到晚上都有回营的想法，我们用精锐兵力攻击，敌人必然败走。
English: Yan Bao said, "You have already penetrated deep into the enemy territory, the division is unfavorable, the cavalry of the enemy Wang Yanzhang has entered Zhangzhou, and only the infantry are left at the foot of the mountain. By the evening, everyone has the idea of returning to the camp. We will attack with elite troops, and the enemy will inevitably be defeated.

古文：今若引退，必为所乘，我军未集，更闻贼胜，即不战而自溃也。
现代文：现在如果撤退，必然会被敌人乘势进攻，我军还没有集合，若再听说敌人胜了，就会不战而自己溃散。
English: If we retreat now, we will inevitably be attacked by the enemy taking advantage of the situation. Our army has not yet assembled, and if we hear that the enemy has won, it will disperse without a fight.

古文：凡决胜料情，情势已得，断在不疑。
现代文：凡是决定胜利要料定军势，决定作战要料定军情，情势已料定了，就应毫不迟疑的做出决断。
English: In order to determine victory, it is necessary to determine the military situation. In order to decide to fight, it is necessary to determine the military situation. Once the situation has been determined, there should be no hesitation in making a decision.

古文：今王之成败，在此一战，若不决胜，设使余众渡河，河朔非王有也，王其勉之！ 
现代文：现在大王您的成败就在这一战，如不决胜，假如使剩下的兵力渡过黄河，河朔一带就不归您所有了，您要努力而为呀。 
English: Now, Your Majesty, your success or failure lies in this battle. If you do not win a decisive victory, and if you allow the remaining troops to cross the Yellow River, you will not own the Heshuo area. You must work hard.

古文：庄宗闻之耸听，曰： 微公几失计。 
现代文：庄宗听了一惊，说： 没有您就几乎失去战机了。 
English: Zhuang Zong was surprised and said, "Without you, we almost lost the fighter plane."

古文：即引骑大噪，奋槊登山，大败汴人。
现代文：立即带骑兵大声呼喊，挥动长矛攻山，大败梁军。
English: He immediately led the cavalry to shout loudly, wave the lance to attack the mountain, and defeated Liang's army.

古文：十八年，张文礼杀王镕叛，宝帅师进讨。
现代文：天祐十八年，张文礼杀害王反叛，阎宝率领军队前去讨伐。
English: In the eighteenth year of Tianyu, Zhang Wenli killed the rebel king, and Yan Bao led the army to go on a crusade.

古文：八月，收赵州，进渡滹水，擒贼党张友顺以献。
现代文：八月，收复赵州，渡过滹水，抓获贼党张友顺。
English: In August, he recovered Zhaozhou, crossed Surabaya, and captured Zhang Youshun of the Kuomintang.

古文：九月，进逼真定，结营西南隅。掘堑栅以环之，决大悲寺漕渠以浸其郛。
现代文：九月，逼近真定，在西南隅扎营，挖沟环绕城墙，决开大悲寺漕渠中的水淹浸外城墙。
English: In September, approaching Jinding, they camped in the southwestern corner, dug a ditch around the city wall, and broke through the water in the canal of the Great Compassion Temple to flood the outer city wall.

古文：十九年正月，契丹三十万来援镇州，前锋至新乐，众心忧之。
现代文：十九年正月，契丹三十万人来救援镇州，前锋到了新乐，众人很忧虑。
English: In the first month of the 19th year, 300,000 Khitan came to the rescue of Zhenzhou, and the striker came to Xinle. Everyone was very worried.

古文：宝见庄宗，指陈方略，军情乃安。
现代文：阎宝见庄宗，陈述作战方略，军情才安定。
English: Yan Bao saw Zhuang Zong and stated the battle strategy, and the military situation was stable.

古文：敌退，加检校侍中。
现代文：敌人退走，加授检校侍中。
English: The enemy retreated, and he was promoted to middle school inspector.

古文：三月，城中饥，王处瑾之众出城求食，宝纵其出，伏兵截击之。
现代文：三月，城中饥荒，王处瑾的很多士兵出城找食物，阎宝放他们出来，埋伏士兵想截住他们。
English: In March, there was a famine in the city, and many soldiers from the king's entourage went out of the city to look for food. Yan Bao let them out, and the ambush soldiers wanted to intercept them.

古文：饥贼大至，诸军未集，为贼年乘；宝乃收军退保赵州，因惭愤成疾，疽发背而卒，时年六十。
现代文：饥饿的敌兵大量来到，而阎宝各军还没集合，被敌人乘势击散，阎宝便收拢军队退保赵州，因此羞惭忧愤，积成疾病，背上长痈疽而死，死时六十岁。
English: A large number of hungry enemy soldiers arrived, but Yan Bao's army had not yet assembled. The enemy took advantage of the situation and dispersed them. Yan Bao then gathered the army and withdrew to Zhao Prefecture. As a result, he was ashamed, worried, and angry. He developed a disease and died with gangrene on his back. He was sixty years old at the time of his death.

古文：同光初，追赠太师；晋天福中，追封太原郡王。
现代文：同光初年，追赠太师，晋天福年中，追封太原郡王。
English: In the first year of Tongguang, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and in the second year of Jintianfu, he was posthumously awarded the title of King of Taiyuan County.

