古文：张鹤鸣，字元平，颍州人。
现代文：张鹤鸣，字元平，颍州人。
English: Zhang Zhenming, Zhiyuan Ping, from Zhangzhou.

古文：中万历十四年会试，父病，驰归。
现代文：早在万历十四年会试已经中榜，因父亲生了病，马上返回家乡。
English: As early as the 14th year of Wanli, he was already in the middle of the examination. Because his father was ill, he immediately returned to his hometown.

古文：越六年，始成进士。
现代文：过了六年，才又考中进士。
English: It took him six years to pass the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：除历城知县，移南京兵部主事。累官陕西右参政，分巡临、巩，以才略闻。
现代文：初任历城知县，调为南京兵部主事，又做过陕西右参政，负责巡视临洮、巩昌二府。
English: He was first appointed to Licheng Zhixian, transferred to Nanjing as the head of the military department, and also served as a right-wing politician in Shaanxi, responsible for inspecting Linyi and Gongchang.

古文：再迁右佥都御史，巡抚贵州。
现代文：在任时都以有才略出了名。后来，鹤鸣又升为右佥都御史。担任贵州巡抚。
English: Both became famous for their talent when they were in office. Later, Tsurumin was promoted to the position of the Right Hand of the Emperor. He served as the governor of Guizhou.

古文：自杨应龙平后，销兵太多，苗仲所在为寇。
现代文：贵州自杨应龙被平定以后，官兵伤亡太多，苗仲到处作乱。
English: Since Yang Yinglong was subdued in Guizhou, there have been too many casualties among officers and soldiers, and Miao Zhong has made trouble everywhere.

古文：鹤鸣言： 仲贼乃粤西瑶种，流入黔中。
现代文：鹤鸣上书说： 苗仲这伙强盗是广东西部的瑶民，迁移到贵州来的。
English: "Miao Zhong and his band of robbers are Han people from the eastern and western parts of Guangxi, who migrated to Guizhou.

古文：自贵阳抵滇，人以三万计，砦以千四百七十计，分即为民，合即为盗。
现代文：自贵州直到云南，人数约三万，营寨约一千四百七十个，分散开来就是良民百姓，集结在一起就当强盗。
English: From Guizhou to Yunnan, the number of people is about thirty thousand, the camp is about fourteen hundred and seventy, the scattered people are good people, and when they are gathered together, they are robbers.

古文：又有红苗，环铜仁、石阡、思州、思南四郡，数几十万，而镇远、清平间，大江、小江、九股诸种，皆应龙遗孽，众万余。
现代文：还有红苗遍布在铜仁、石阡、思州、思南四郡，有几十万人，镇远、清平一带又有大江、小江、九股等各族人，他们都是应龙的余孽，人数也有一万多。
English: There are also hundreds of thousands of red seedlings all over the four counties of Tongren, Shijiazhuang, Shizhou and Sinan, and hundreds of thousands of people from various ethnic groups such as Dajiang, Xiaojiang and Jiuquan in the areas of Zhenyuan and Qingping. They are all the remnants of the dragon, and there are more than 10,000 people.

古文：臣部卒止万三千，何以御贼？ 
现代文：我所领的兵只有一万三千人，怎么能防御贼寇呢？ 
English: With only 13,000 soldiers under my command, how can I defend myself against bandits?

古文：因列上增兵增饷九议。
现代文：进而提出了增兵增饷九条意见。
English: It then put forward nine opinions on the increase of troops and armaments.

古文：合诸土兵剿洪边十二马头，大破红苗，追剿猱坪。贼首老蜡鸡据峰巅仰天窝，窝有九井，地平衍，容数千人，下通三道，各列三关，老蜡鸡僣王号。
现代文：此后，鹤鸣联合各地进剿洪边的十二马头，大败红苗贼，又到柔坪追剿，贼首老蜡鸡占据峰巅仰天窝，这片窝地有九个盆地，地势平坦、宽广，可以住下几千人，往山下有三条通道，分别设了三道关口。老蜡鸡擅自称了王。
English: Since then, the cranes have united the twelve horse heads from all over the country to enter the floodplain, defeated the red seedlings and thieves, and went to Ropeng to chase the thieves. The thief's head, the old wax chicken, occupied the peak of the peak. This nest has nine basins, the terrain is flat and wide, and can accommodate several thousand people. There are three channels to the bottom of the mountain, and three gates are set up separately. The old wax chicken arrogantly claimed to be the king.

古文：鹤鸣夺其关，老蜡鸡授首，抚降余众而还。
现代文：鹤鸣夺取了他的三道关，老蜡鸡被斩首，鹤鸣招安余众，收降了残余的贼兵，然后班师而回。
English: The crane song captured his three gates, the old wax chicken was beheaded, the crane song recruited the rest of the people, defeated the remnants of the thief soldiers, and then the team returned.

古文：寻发兵击平定广、威平、安笼诸贼，威名甚著。
现代文：不久鹤鸣又派兵平定了定广、威平、安笼等地的贼寇，威名大振。
English: Soon after, Tsurumin dispatched troops to subdue the bandits in Dingguang, Weiping, Ancai and other places, and gained a great reputation.

古文：迁兵部右侍郎，总督陕西三边军务。
现代文：朝廷提升他为兵部右侍郎，让他去总督陕西三边军务。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the right-hand man of the military department, and let him go to the military affairs of the three sides as the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：未上，转左侍郎，佐理部事。
现代文：尚未上任，又改为左侍郎，帮助料理兵部的事务。
English: He had not yet taken office, but was changed to the left-hand waiter to help with the affairs of the army.

古文：时兵事亟，兵部增设二侍郎，而鹤鸣与祁伯裕、王在晋并卧家园不赴。
现代文：当时军事情况紧急，兵部增设了两位侍郎，鹤鸣与祈伯裕、王在晋都闲住家园，没有去上任。
English: At that time, the military situation was urgent, and two attendants were added to the military department. Tsurumin and Kibo Yu, and Wang idled at home in Jindu and did not go to take office.

古文：至天启元年，辽阳破，兵事益亟。
现代文：到天启元年，辽阳失守，军事更加吃紧了。
English: By the first year of Tianqi, Liaoyang lost its defense, and the military was even more strained.

古文：右侍郎张经世督援师出关，部中遂无侍郎。
现代文：右侍郎张经世统率援兵开出山海关后，兵部里边没有侍郎了。
English: After the Right Attendant Zhang Jing Shitong led the reinforcements out of the Mountain Customs, there were no attendants left in the military department.

古文：言官请趣鹤鸣等，章数十上，帝乃克期令兵部马上督催，鹤鸣等始履任。
现代文：言官请熹宗催促鹤鸣等来上任，奏章递过几十次，熹宗才限期要兵部马上把他们督促过来。
English: The govt. official asked Yeongjong to hurry up and take office. After handing over the document dozens of times, Yeongjong set a deadline for the military department to hurry them up.

古文：至则论平苗功，进本部尚书，视侍郎事。
现代文：鹤鸣到任后朝廷评定他平息苗贼的功劳，把他提升为兵部尚书，办理侍郎的事务。
English: After Tsurumine took office, the imperial court evaluated his efforts to quell the seedlings thieves, and promoted him to be the secretary of the military department, handling the affairs of the chamberlain.

古文：尚书王象乾出督蓟、辽军务，鹤鸣遂代其位。
现代文：尚书王象乾出去总督蓟辽军务后，鹤鸣就接替了他的位置。
English: After Shangshu Wang Xiangqian left to serve as the military governor of Liaoning, Zhenming took over his position.

古文：给事中韦蕃请留象乾，出鹤鸣督师。
现代文：给事中韦蕃请求留下象乾，让鹤鸣出去指挥部队，触怒了熹宗，被贬出朝廷。
English: During the incident, Wei Wei requested to leave the elephant dry and let the crane go out to command the troops, which angered the emperor and was expelled from the imperial court.

古文：忤旨，谪外。时熊廷弼经略辽东，性刚负气，好谩骂，凌轹朝士。
现代文：当时熊廷弼任辽东经略，性格刚强，脾气很大，喜欢骂人，敢于欺负朝臣。
English: At that time, Xiong Tingyu served as Liaodong's strategist. He had a strong character, a great temper, liked to curse, and dared to bully courtiers.

古文：鹤鸣与相失，事多龃龉，独喜巡抚王化贞。
现代文：鹤鸣跟他不和睦，两个人事事顶撞。鹤鸣喜欢巡抚王化贞。
English: Crane Song and him are not on good terms, and the two of them clash over everything. Crane Song likes the inspector Wang Huazhen.

古文：化贞本庸才，好大言，鹤鸣主之，所奏请无不从，令无受廷弼节度。
现代文：化贞是个庸才，喜欢说大话。鹤鸣支持化贞，对他的奏请无不听从，让他不接受廷弼的管制。
English: Keshen is a mediocrity who likes to talk big. Crane Ming supports Keshen and listens to his every request, so that he does not accept the control of the imperial court.

古文：中外皆知经、抚不和，必误封疆，而鹤鸣信化贞愈笃，卒致疆事大坏。
现代文：朝廷内外都知道经略、巡抚不和，非坏边疆大事不可。鹤鸣却越来越深地信任化贞，最终使边疆大事坏得很惨。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, it was known that there was discord between the strategists and the governors, and that it was necessary to have a good borderland event. However, the cranes were more and more deeply trusting of Kazuchika, and eventually made the borderland event very bad.

古文：二年正月，廷议经、抚去留。
现代文：二年正月，朝廷讨论经略、巡抚的去留问题。
English: In the first month of the second year, the imperial court discussed the issue of the departure and stay of the strategist and the governor.

古文：给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞议以鹤鸣代廷弼，其他多言经、抚宜并任，鹤鸣独毅然主撤廷弼，专任化贞。
现代文：给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞主张让鹤鸣过去替下廷弼，其他人大多主张经略、巡抚仍应一同任用，只有鹤鸣毅然主张撤下廷弼，专用化贞一个人。
English: In the matter, Hui Shiyang and Zhou Chongrui advocated that Henming be allowed to replace the imperial regent, while most others advocated that the magistrate and the governor should still be appointed together. Only Henming resolutely advocated the removal of the imperial regent and the appointment of a special person to protect Zhen.

古文：议甫上，化贞已弃广宁遁。
现代文：他的奏议刚刚交上去，化贞已经抛弃广宁败逃了。
English: His petition had just been submitted, and Hua Zhen had already abandoned Guangning and fled.

古文：鹤鸣内惭，且惧罪，乃自请行边，诏加太子太保，赐蟒玉及尚方剑。
现代文：鹤鸣内心里感到惭愧，并且怕被治罪，所以自请去巡视边疆。熹宗下令给他加官太子太保，赐他蟒袍玉带及尚方宝剑。
English: Tsurumine felt ashamed in his heart and was afraid of being punished, so he invited himself to inspect the border. Emperor Taizong ordered him to be promoted to the position of crown prince, and gave him the imperial robe and the imperial sword.

古文：鹤鸣惮行，逗遛十七日，始抵山海关。
现代文：鹤鸣实际上害怕去巡边，逗留了十七天，才走到山海关。
English: In fact, Crane Song was afraid to go to the border patrol, and stayed for seventeen days before going to the Shanhaiguan.

古文：至则无所筹画，日下令捕间谍，厚啖蒙古炒花、宰赛诸部而已。
现代文：到任后又无所谋画，只是天天下令缉捕间谍，对蒙古炒花、宰赛诸部诱以重利而已。
English: After taking office, there was nothing to plan, but every day the country ordered the arrest of spies, and the Mongolian fried flowers and Zaisei departments were lured with heavy profits.

古文：初，广宁败书闻，廷臣集议兵事。
现代文：当初，广宁战败的消息传到朝廷里来，廷臣们集中讨论军事问题。
English: At first, the news of the defeat of Guangning spread to the imperial court, and courtiers concentrated on discussing military issues.

古文：鹤鸣盛气詈廷弼自解。
现代文：鹤鸣怒气冲冲地骂廷弼来为自己开脱。
English: The crane crows angrily and scolds the egret to exonerate itself.

古文：给事中刘弘化首论之，坐夺俸。
现代文：给事中刘弘化首先批评他，因此被扣了官俸。
English: Liu Honghua was the first to criticize him, and he was docked pay as a result.

古文：御史江秉谦、何荐可继劾，并贬官。
现代文：御史江秉谦、何荐可接着又弹劾他，两人都被贬了官。
English: He was impeached by Jiang Bingqian and He Bingqian, both of whom were demoted.

古文：廷臣益愤。御史谢文锦，给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞、萧良佐、侯震旸、熊德阳等交章极论，请用世宗戮丁汝夔、神宗逮石星故事，与化贞并按。
现代文：廷臣们这下更加气愤，御史谢文锦，给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞、萧良佐、侯震、熊德阳等纷纷上书激烈地批评鹤鸣，请熹宗按照世宗杀掉丁汝夔、神宗逮捕石星的旧例，把他和化贞一同办罪。
English: The courtiers were now even more furious. Gishi Chieh Bunjin, Hui Shiyang, Zhou Chaorui, Xiao Liang Zuo, Hou Zhen, Xiong Deyang, and others sent letters to criticize the crane song, asking Shanzong to kill Ding Ruxuan and Shenzong to arrest Shi Xing in accordance with the old example of Shizong, and to carry out the crime together with Hua Zhen.

古文：鹤鸣抵言廷弼偾疆事，由故大学士刘一燝、尚书周嘉谟党庇不令出关所致，因诋言者为一燝鹰犬。且曰： 祖宗故事，大司马不以封疆蒙功罪。 
现代文：鹤鸣到任后上书讲廷弼耽误边疆大事是由原大学士刘一火景、尚书周嘉谟包庇廷弼不让自己出关导致的，进而把言官指斥为一火景的鹰犬，并且说： 按照祖宗定下的老规矩，兵部尚书不因为边疆的战争胜负受赏或治罪。 
English: After taking office, Zhenming wrote a letter saying that the delay of the frontier affairs caused by the former university scholar Liu Yiguo and Shangshu Zhou Jia Mu, who protected the imperial eunuch and did not allow themselves to leave the customs, and then denounced the speech officer as a fiery eagle dog, and said: According to the old rules set by the ancestors, the military department Shangshu will not be rewarded or punished for the victory of the frontier war.

古文：于是朝瑞等复合疏劾之，御史周宗文亦列其八罪。
现代文：于是朝瑞等又联名上书弹劾他，御史周宗文也列举了他的八条罪状。
English: As a result, the Emperor and Empress jointly signed a letter to impeach him, and the Grand Historian Zhou Zongwen also listed his eight charges.

古文：帝不问。
现代文：熹宗不予追究。
English: Enzong will not be prosecuted.

古文：鹤鸣迁延数月，谢病归。
现代文：鹤鸣在那里磨蹭了几个月，称病回乡去了。
English: He lingered there for a few months and then returned to his hometown, saying he was ill.

古文：六年春，魏忠贤势大炽，起鹤鸣南京工部尚书。寻以安邦彦未灭，鹤鸣先有平苗功，改兵部尚书，总督贵州、四川、云南、湖广、广西军务，赐尚方剑。
现代文：六年春天，魏忠贤的势力极为强大，把鹤鸣起用为南京工部尚书，不久因为安邦彦还没有消灭掉，鹤鸣以前平定苗贼有功，就把他改官兵部尚书，总督贵州、四川、云南、湖广、广西军务，熹宗又赐了他尚方宝剑。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the influence of Wei Zhongxian was extremely strong. He used the crane to write a book for the Nanjing Engineering Department. Soon, because An Bangyan had not yet been eliminated and the crane had played a role in suppressing seedlings before, he changed him to a military officer, military governor of Guizhou, Sichuan, Yunnan, Hunan, Guangxi, and Shizong gave him a Shangfang sword.

古文：功未就，庄烈帝嗣位。给事中瞿式耜、胡永顺、万鹏以鹤鸣由忠贤进，连章击之。
现代文：鹤鸣这次尚未建什么功，庄烈帝即位了，给事中瞿式耜、胡永顺、万鹏因为他是通过忠贤晋用的，接连上书抨击他。
English: This time, Tsurumine did not accomplish anything, and Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne. Because he had been appointed by Emperor Taizong, he was criticized in successive letters by Shih Chieh, Hu Yongshun, and Wanpeng.

古文：鹤鸣求去，诏加太子太师，乘传归。
现代文：鹤鸣请求离职，庄烈帝传诏给他加官太子太保，让他乘驿站车马回乡去了。
English: Tsurumine requested to leave his post, and Emperor Zhuangde gave him the additional post of crown prince and grand tutor, and let him go back to his hometown by horse and carriage.

古文：崇祯八年，流贼陷颍州，执鹤鸣，例悬于树，骂贼死，年八十五。
现代文：崇祯八年，流贼打下颍州，抓住鹤鸣，把他头朝下吊在树上，鹤鸣骂着流贼被杀害了，终年八十五岁。
English: In the eighth year of Chongzhen, the bandits laid siege to Zhangzhou, seized Huanming and hung him upside down from a tree. Huanming cursed that the bandits had been killed, and lived to be 85 years old.

古文：凤翼善温体仁，独居位五载。
现代文：鹤鸣的弟弟鹤腾，字元汉，考中万历二十三年进士，当过云南副使。
English: Tsurumin's younger brother, Tsuruten, who goes by the name Yuanhan, was a 23rd-year junior high school student and a deputy envoy to Yunnan.

古文：其督师也，意图逭责，乃竟以畏法死。陈新甲，长寿人。
现代文：鹤腾人品纯洁，名声比他的哥哥好。颍州城被打下，他也骂不绝口地被杀害了。陈新甲，长寿人。
English: Hengteng was a man of pure character, and his reputation was better than that of his brother. When Zhangzhou City was defeated, he was also killed, and he never stopped cursing. Chen Xinjia lived a long life.

古文：万历时举于乡，为定州知州。
现代文：万历年间乡试中举，做了定州知州。
English: In the middle of the township examination in Wanli, Dingzhou Zhizhou was made.

古文：崇祯元年，入为刑部员外郎，进郎中。迁宁前兵备佥事。
现代文：崇祯元年进入朝中当上刑部员外郎，又升为郎中，调任宁前兵备佥事。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he entered the Imperial Court as the second son of a high-ranking member of the Criminal Investigation Department, and was promoted to second son, and transferred to the Ningyuan Military Preparation Corps.

古文：宁前，关外要地，新甲以才能著。
现代文：宁前是山海关外的重地，新甲在这里凭着自己的才干出了名。
English: Ningxian is an important area outside of Shanhaiguan, where Xinjia has made a name for itself with its talent.

古文：四年，大凌新城被围，援师云集，征缮悉倚赖焉。及城破，坐削籍。
现代文：四年，大凌新城被包围，援师云集，出战、修城等事全靠他处理。
English: In four years, Daling New Town was besieged, reinforcements gathered, and it was entirely up to him to go to war, rebuild the city, and so on.

古文：巡抚方一藻惜其才，请留之，未报。
现代文：城被打下后，新甲被罢了官。巡抚方一藻爱惜他的才干，上书请朝廷留用他，朝廷没有答复。
English: After the city was defeated, Xin Jia was removed from his post. The procuratorate did not spare his talent, and sent a letter to the court to retain him, but the court did not reply.

古文：监视中官马云程亦以为言，乃报可。
现代文：监视宦官马云程也对此上书讲了话，朝廷才答复说可以。
English: The monitoring eunuch Ma Yuncheng also spoke about this in a letter, and the imperial court only replied that it was possible.

古文：新甲言： 臣蒙使过之恩，由监视疏下，此心未白，清议随之，不敢受。 
现代文：新甲说： 我受到戴罪任职的恩典是因为监视宦官的奏疏才得以批复，我心里自觉羞辱，清议也会随着而来批评我。我不敢接受这个恩典。 
English: Xinjia said, "I was given the privilege of serving as a criminal because of the oversight of the eunuch's slackness, and I felt humiliated in my heart, and the judgment would come to criticize me. I dare not accept this grace.

古文：不许。
现代文：朝廷不许他推辞。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：寻进副使，仍莅宁远。
现代文：不久，新甲又升任副使，仍在宁远任职。
English: Soon after, Xinjia was promoted to vice-envoy and is still serving in Ningyuan.

古文：七年九月，擢右佥都御史，代焦源清巡抚宣府。
现代文：七年九月，朝廷提升新甲为右佥都御史，接替焦源清去巡抚宣府。
English: In September of the seventh year, the imperial court promoted Xinjia to the position of the right-hand governor of the capital, and he succeeded Jiao Yuanqing as the procurator of Xuanfu.

古文：新甲以戎备久弛，亲历塞垣，经前人足迹所不到，具得士马损耗、城堡倾颓、弓矢甲仗朽敝状。
现代文：因为军备长期以来放松了，新甲上任后亲自到边防墙堡去视察，走过前人足迹没到过的地方，全面掌握了兵马伤亡、城堡倒塌及弓箭等兵器的损坏情况。
English: Because armaments have been relaxed for a long time, after taking office, the new A personally went to the border wall fort to inspect, walked through the place where the footprints of the predecessors had not been, and comprehensively grasped the casualties of soldiers and horses, the collapse of the castle and the damage of weapons such as bows and arrows.

古文：屡疏请于朝，加整饬，边防赖之。
现代文：然后几经上书向朝廷请求，对这些加以整顿，边防因此有了保障。
English: Then, after several written requests to the imperial court, these were rectified, and the border defense was thus guaranteed.

古文：杨嗣昌为总督，与新甲共事，以是知其才。
现代文：杨嗣昌当时担任总督，跟新甲一起共事，由此了解到他的才干。
English: Yang Shichang was the governor at the time and worked with Xinjia, which made him aware of his talent.

古文：九年五月，内艰归。
现代文：九年五月，新甲母亲去世，他回家守丧去了。
English: In May of the ninth year, Xinjia's mother passed away, and he went home to mourn.

古文：十一年六月，宣大总督卢象升丁外艰，嗣昌方任中枢，荐新甲堪代。
现代文：十一年六月，宣大总督卢象升父亲去世了，嗣昌当时任兵部尚书，推荐说新甲可以接任。
English: In June of the eleventh year, Lu Xiangsheng, the governor of Xuanda, passed away. At that time, Zichang was still in charge of the military department, and it was recommended that the new A could take over.

古文：诏擢兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，夺情任之。
现代文：庄烈帝传下诏令提拔新甲为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，让他克制孝心出来任职。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang issued a decree to promote Xin Jia as the Right Attendant of the Military Department and the Right Attendant of the Capital, so that he would restrain his filial piety and come to serve.

古文：会大清兵深入内地，诏新甲受代，即督所部兵协御。
现代文：正好这时大清部队深入内地，朝廷诏令新甲过来接任，立即指挥部下的兵马协助御敌。
English: Just at this time, the Great Qing troops penetrated deep into the inland, and the imperial court issued an imperial edict ordering the new a to take over, and the soldiers and horses under the command immediately came to assist the enemy.

古文：未几，象升战殁，孙传庭代统其军，新甲与相倚仗，终不敢战。
现代文：不久，象升阵亡，孙传庭代领他的部队。新甲与传庭相互支持，但最终不敢出战。
English: Soon after, Xiang Sheng was killed in battle, and Sun Chuanting led his troops in his stead. Xinjia and Chuanting supported each other, but in the end they did not dare to go to war.

古文：明年春，畿辅解严。顺天巡按刘呈瑞劾其前后逗挠。
现代文：第二年春天，京郊解严，顺天巡按刘呈瑞弹劾新甲前前后后逗留不前，干扰作战的罪过。
English: In the spring of the second year, the suburbs of Beijing were released from the strictness, and Liu Chengrui went on a day-long inspection to impeach Xinjia for the crime of not moving forward and interfering with the war.

古文：新甲历陈功状，且言呈瑞挟仇，帝不问。
现代文：新甲一一列举自己的功绩，并且说呈瑞是挟私仇图报复。
English: Xinjia listed his achievements one by one, and said that Chen Rui was a vendetta.

古文：既赴镇，列上编队伍、严哨探、明训练、饬马政、练火器、禁侵渔诸事，报可。
现代文：庄烈帝没有追查这些。新甲开赴部队驻地后，上书讲了有关改编队伍、严加侦探、强化训练、整顿马政、演习火器、查禁贪占等事务，朝廷批复说可以。
English: Emperor Zhuang didn't follow up on these. After Xinjia marched to the garrison, he wrote a letter about the reorganization of the team, strict detectives, intensive training, rectification of horse politics, firearm exercises, prohibition of embezzlement and other matters, and the imperial court approved the reply.

古文：麾下卒夜哗，新甲请罪，亦不问。
现代文：他部下的士兵有一天夜里发生了哗变，新甲上书请罪，庄烈帝也不追究。
English: The soldiers under his command mutinied one night, and Emperor Zhuang did not investigate.

古文：给事中戴明说尝劾之，帝以轻议重臣，停其俸。
现代文：给事中戴明说曾经弹劾新甲，庄烈帝用随便评论重臣的名义，扣发了明说的官俸。
English: In the middle of the matter, Deming said that he had impeached Xin Jia. Zhuang Rongdi used the name of the senior minister to casually comment, and deducted the official salary.

古文：十三年正月，召代傅宗龙为兵部尚书。
现代文：十三年正月，朝廷召新甲入朝接替傅宗龙担任兵部尚书。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of the Heian period, the imperial court summoned Shinka into the imperial court to succeed Fu Zonglong as Hyobusho.

古文：自弘治初贾俊后，乙榜无至尚书者。
现代文：自弘治初年贾俊以后，举人没有做过尚书的。
English: Since the first year of Hongzhi, after Jia Jun, no one has done Shangshu.

古文：兵事方亟，诸大臣避中枢，故新甲得为之。
现代文：当时军事危急，大臣们都不愿当兵部尚书，所以新甲当上了。
English: At that time, the military was in a critical situation, and the ministers were not willing to be military secretaries, so the new a was put in charge.

古文：陛见毕，陈保邦十策，多廷臣所尝言。
现代文：朝见过后，新甲递上保卫邦国的十条办法，大多是廷臣曾经说到过的。
English: After the morning meeting, Xinjia submitted ten measures to defend the country, most of which were mentioned by courtiers.

古文：惟言天寿山后宜设总兵，徐州亦宜设重镇，通两京咽喉，南护凤陵，中防漕运，帝并采用之。
现代文：只是他讲到天寿山后边应当设置总兵，徐州也应设一重镇，开通两京咽喉，往南保护皇陵，中间防守漕运，庄烈帝都采纳了。
English: However, he said that a garrison should be set up at the back of Tianshou Mountain, and that Xuzhou should also set up a heavy town, open the throat of the two capitals, protect the imperial mausoleum to the south, and guard the transportation in the middle, which were all adopted by Emperor Zhuang.

古文：复陈枢政四要及兵事四失，帝即命饬行。
现代文：新甲又讲了兵部事务的四个要点及军事方面存在的四种失误，庄烈帝就命令他加以整顿。
English: Xinjia also talked about the four points of the military affairs and the four kinds of mistakes in the military, and Zhuo Liang ordered him to rectify them.

古文：十四年三月，贼陷雒阳、襄阳，福、襄二王被难，镌新甲三秩视事。
现代文：十四年三月，贼寇打下洛阳、襄阳，福王和襄王两位藩王遇害，庄烈帝让新甲贬官三级继续任职。
English: In March of the 14th year, the bandits attacked Luoyang and Xiangyang. King Fu and King Xiang were killed, and Emperor Zhuang allowed the newly demoted officials to continue to serve.

古文：旧制，府、州、县城郭失守者，长吏论死。
现代文：按照原先的规定，府、州、县城郭失守的，长吏要判处死刑。
English: According to the original regulations, if the prefectural, prefectural, or county seat is lost, the chief official shall be sentenced to death.

古文：宛平知县陈景建言村镇焚掠三所者，长吏当戍边。
现代文：宛平知县陈景建议说村镇被焚掠三处的，长吏也应当判处充军。
English: Chen Jing of Wanping County suggested that since three villages and towns were burned and plundered, the officials should also be sentenced to military conscription.

古文：新甲主其议，言： 有司能兼顾乡城，即与优叙。若四郊被寇，与失机并论。 
现代文：新甲同意他的意见，就上书说： 各级官员能兼顾城乡的，就给以记功；如果四面的郊区受到攻打，与贻误军机同罪。 
English: Xinjia agreed with his opinion and wrote: Officials at all levels should give credit to those who can balance urban and rural areas; if the suburbs on all sides are attacked, it is the same crime as delaying military aircraft.

古文：帝即从之。
现代文：庄烈帝听从了他。
English: Emperor Zhuang did as he was told.

古文：然是时中原皆盗，其法亦不能行也。
现代文：不过当时中原各地都是强盗，他的办法并不能完全执行下去。
English: However, at that time, robbers were everywhere in the Central Plains, and his plan could not be fully implemented.

古文：杨嗣昌卒于军中，新甲举丁启睿往代，议者尤其失人。
现代文：杨嗣昌死在军队里，新甲推荐丁启睿过去接任，议论的大臣都埋怨他用错了人。
English: Yang Shichang died in the army, the newly recommended Ding Qirui took over, and the controversial ministers all complained that he had used the wrong person.

古文：然傅宗龙、孙传庭并以微罪系狱，新甲于召对时称其才，退复上章力荐，两人获用，亦新甲力也。
现代文：不过傅宗龙、孙传庭当时都因为一点小罪被关在监狱里，新甲在召对时称赞他们的才干，退出来后又上书极力推荐。他们两个得到重新任用，都是靠新甲出的力。
English: However, Fu Zonglong and Sun Chuanting were both in prison at the time for a petty crime. New A praised their talents when they were summoned, and strongly recommended them in a letter after they withdrew. Both of them were reappointed by New A.

古文：寻论秋防功，复所镌秩。
现代文：不久评论边境上秋防的战功，新甲恢复了贬下的三级。
English: Soon commenting on the war exploits of the autumn defense on the border, Xinjia restored the downgraded three levels.

古文：时锦州被围久，声援断绝。
现代文：当时锦州被围困很多天了，外边的援兵断绝。
English: At that time, Jinzhou had been besieged for many days, and outside reinforcements were cut off.

古文：有卒逸出，传祖大寿语，请以车营逼，毋轻战。
现代文：有士兵从锦州逃出来，传祖大寿的话，请大部队用车营逼过去，但不要轻易开战。
English: Some soldiers have escaped from Jinzhou. According to the words of the great ancestor, please force the large army to use the car battalion, but do not start the war easily.

古文：总督洪承畴集兵数万援之，亦未敢决战。
现代文：总督洪承畴召集了几万部队过去增援，也没敢决战。
English: Governor Hong Chengzheng called up tens of thousands of troops for reinforcement, but did not dare to fight a decisive battle.

古文：帝召新甲问策，新甲请与阁臣及侍郎吴甡计之，因陈十可忧、十可议，而遣职方郎张若麒面商于承畴。
现代文：庄烈帝召新甲问解围的办法，新甲请让自己跟阁臣及侍郎吴生生商量后再说，然后讲了十可忧、十可议，又派职方郎张若麒过去和承畴当面协商。
English: Emperor Zhuangde summoned Xingjia to inquire about the solution to the siege. Xingjia asked Xingjia to consult with the cabinet ministers and the attendant Wu Shengsheng before speaking. Then he spoke about ten possible worries and ten possible discussions. He also sent the official Zhang Ruojuan to negotiate with the officials face to face.

古文：若麒未返，新甲请分四道夹攻，承畴以兵分力弱，意主持重以待。帝以为然，而新甲坚执前议。
现代文：若麒还没回来，新甲就请求让官军分四路夹攻。承畴认为兵力分散势力就会削弱，主张稳重一些，坐以待敌，庄烈帝认为承畴的意见是对的，可是新甲坚持自己以前的意见。
English: If Zheng did not return, Xinjia requested that the government army launch a four-pronged attack. Zhengjia believed that the dispersion of forces would weaken the forces, advocated a more stable position, and waited for the enemy. Zhuangde thought that Zhengjia's opinion was right, but Xinjia insisted on his previous opinion.

古文：若麒素狂躁，见诸军稍有斩获，谓围可立解，密奏上闻。
现代文：若麒这个人一向狂妄，看到部队稍有一些斩获，就认为可以立即解除包围。
English: If this person has always been arrogant, seeing that the troops have made a few gains, he thinks that the siege can be lifted immediately.

古文：新甲复贻书趣承畴，承畴激新甲言，又奉密敕，遂不敢主前议。
现代文：他用机密奏疏把这些讲给了庄烈帝。新甲又写信过去催促承畴出兵，承畴被新甲的话所感动，又接到皇上的秘密指示，就不敢再坚持原先的意见了。
English: He told this to Emperor Zhuang Rong in a confidential memo. Xin Jia also wrote a letter to urge Zhuang Zheng to send troops. Zhuang Zheng was moved by Xin Jia's words and received the emperor's secret instructions, so he did not dare to stick to his original opinion.

古文：若麒益趣诸将进兵。诸将以八月次松山，为我大清兵所破，大溃，士卒死亡数万人。
现代文：若麒加紧催促诸将进兵，诸将在八月里开到松山扎营，被我大清部队打败，大肆逃散，士卒死掉几万人。
English: If we had pressed the generals harder to march into the army, they would have marched to Matsuyama in August to set up camp. They were defeated by our Qing forces and fled en masse. Tens of thousands of soldiers died.

古文：若麒自海道遁还，言官请罪之，新甲力庇，复令出关监军。
现代文：若麒从海路逃回，谏官请治他的罪，新甲竭力庇护他，又让他到关外去监军。
English: If the eunuch fled back from the sea, the eunuch would plead guilty to his crime, and Xin Jia would do his best to protect him, and let him go outside the customs to supervise the troops.

古文：锦州围未解，承畴又被围于松山，帝深以为忧，新甲不能救。
现代文：锦州之围没解除，承畴又在松山被围，庄烈帝深以为忧，新甲也没办法解救。
English: The siege of Jinzhou had not been lifted, and Zhengzhou was again besieged in Matsuyama. Emperor Zhuang was deeply worried, and there was no way for Xinjia to rescue him.

古文：十五年二月，御史甘惟爃劾新甲寡谋误国，请速令举贤自代，不纳。
现代文：十五年二月，御史甘惟火荣弹劾新甲缺乏谋略，耽误国事，请马上要他举贤自代，庄烈帝没有听他。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, Emperor Gaozong of the Han Dynasty, who was furious at the impeachment of the new emperor for lack of strategy and delaying the affairs of state, asked him to immediately nominate his successor. Emperor Zhuang didn't listen to him.

古文：三月，松山、锦州相继失，若麒复自宁远遁还。
现代文：三月，松山、锦州相继失守，若麒又从宁远逃回。
English: In March, Matsuyama and Jinzhou were lost one after another, and Wakatsuki fled back from Ningyuan.

古文：言官劾若麒者，悉及新甲。
现代文：言官弹劾若麒的，都连及新甲。
English: If the magistrate impeaches him, he will be promoted to a higher rank.

古文：新甲屡乞罢，皆不从。
现代文：新甲屡次请求罢任，庄烈帝都不允许。
English: Xinjia repeatedly requested to resign, but Emperor Zhuang was not allowed to do so.

古文：新甲雅有才，晓边事，然不能持廉，所用多债帅。
现代文：新甲很有才干，晓习边事，但是不能以廉洁自持，所使用的都是他欠了人情债的军官。
English: New A is very talented and knows the ins and outs, but he can't bring himself to be honest, and he uses officers who owe him a debt of human kindness.

古文：深结中贵为援，与司礼王德化尤昵，故言路攻之不能入。
现代文：他和宫廷中的宦官深相结交，引以为援，其中与司礼王德化尤其亲近，所以言官批评他都不能使皇上入耳。
English: He and the eunuchs in the court had a deep friendship and drew on each other for support. He was particularly close to the priest Wang Dehua, so the spokesman could not get the emperor's ear by criticizing him.

古文：当是时，闯贼蹂躏河南，开封屡被围，他郡县失亡相踵，总督傅宗龙、汪乔年出关讨贼，先后陷殁，贼势愈张。
现代文：这个时候，闯贼蹂躏河南，开封屡次被围，其他府县也接连丢失。总督傅宗龙、汪乔年开出潼关讨贼，先后陷于贼手死掉了，贼兵的势头更加强大。
English: At this time, intruders ravaged Henan, Kaifeng was repeatedly besieged, and other prefectures and counties were also lost one after another. Governor Fu Zonglong and Wang Qiaoren opened Shaoguan to solicit thieves, and were successively trapped by the thieves and died. The momentum of the thieves was even stronger.

古文：言官劾新甲者，章至数十。新甲请罪章亦十余上，帝辄慰留。
现代文：言官弹劾新甲的奏章上过几十次，新甲自行请罪的奏章也上过十多次，庄烈帝总是慰留他。
English: The magistrate impeached Xin Jia dozens of times, and Xin Jia pleaded guilty more than ten times. Zhuang Rongdi always consoled him.

古文：初，新甲以南北交困，遣使与大清议和，私言于傅宗龙。
现代文：早先，新甲因为南北交困，派遣使者来与大清议和，背地里告诉过傅宗龙。
English: Earlier, Xinjia sent an envoy to discuss peace with the Great Qing Dynasty because of the troubled relations between the North and the South, and secretly told Fu Zonglong.

古文：宗龙出都日，以语大学士谢升。
现代文：宗龙离开京师时，把这事告诉了大学士谢升。
English: When Zonglong left the Beijing division, he told this to the university scholar Xie Sheng.

古文：升后见疆事大坏，述宗龙之言于帝。
现代文：谢升后来看到疆事大坏，就把宗龙的话讲给了庄烈帝。
English: Later, when Xie Sheng saw that the situation in the region was very bad, he told Zonglong's words to Zhuang Rongdi.

古文：帝召新甲诘责，新甲叩头谢罪。
现代文：庄烈帝召新甲过来质问，新甲叩头谢罪。
English: Solemn Emperor summoned New A to come and question him, and New A bowed his head in apology.

古文：升进曰： 倘肯议和，和亦可恃。 
现代文：谢升进言道： 那边如果肯议和，和也可以。 
English: Xie Sheng said: If that side is willing to discuss peace, peace is also possible.

古文：帝默然，寻谕新甲密图之，而外廷不知也。
现代文：庄烈帝默然不语。不久指示新甲秘密进行这件事，朝廷里边人们都不知道。
English: Zhuang Rong Di was silent. Soon, he instructed Xin Jia to secretly carry out this matter, and people inside the court did not know about it.

古文：已，言官谒升。升言： 上意主和，诸君幸勿多言。 
现代文：后来言官有一回去拜见谢升，谢升说： 皇上的意思是主张议和的，希望你们不要多话。 
English: Later, the spokesman went back to see Xie Sheng. Xie Sheng said, "The emperor means to advocate peace talks. I hope you don't talk too much."

古文：言官骇愕，交章劾升，升遂斥去。
现代文：言官一听大为吃惊，纷纷上书弹劾谢升，谢升于是被罢官而去。
English: Hearing this, the gov't officials were very surprised. They wrote to impeach Xie Sheng one after another. Xie Sheng was then removed from office and left.

古文：帝既以和议委新甲，手诏往返者数十，皆戒以勿泄。
现代文：庄烈帝在把议和一事交给新甲以后，和他手诏往返过几十次，都告诫他不要泄漏出去。
English: After Zhuo Ledei handed the matter over to Xin Jia, he went back and forth with him dozens of times, and warned him not to leak out.

古文：外廷渐知之，故屡疏争，然不得左验。
现代文：朝廷里人们渐渐知道了，所以屡屡上书争议，但是他们都没有掌握到证据。
English: People in the imperial court gradually became aware of this, which is why they repeatedly wrote letters to dispute it, but they did not have any evidence.

古文：一日，所遣职方郎马绍愉以密语报，新甲视之置几上。其家僮误以为塘报也，付之抄传，于是言路哗然。
现代文：有一天，新甲所派遣的职方郎马绍愉用秘密文函向新甲汇报，新甲看后放在茶几上，他的家僮误认为是塘报，就交人抄传下来。
English: One day, Ma Shao Yu, an official sent by Xinjia, used a secret letter to report to Xinjia. After Xinjia read it, he put it on the coffee table. His family mistook it for a telegram, and handed it down.

古文：给事中方士亮首论之，帝愠甚，留疏不下。
现代文：于是言路哗然，给事中方士亮首先举报他，庄烈帝恼火极了，把奏疏压在宫中不发下。
English: As a result, there was an uproar, and it was the Chinese scholar Liang who first reported the matter to him. Emperor Zhuang was extremely angry, and kept Song Zuo in the palace.

古文：已，降严旨，切责新甲，令自陈。
现代文：过后，颁发一道严厉的圣旨，严厉批评新甲，要他自我解释。
English: After that, a stern edict was issued, severely criticizing Xinjia and asking him to explain himself.

古文：新甲不引罪，反自诩其功，帝益怒。
现代文：新甲不但不引罪自责，反而还自吹自个的功劳，庄烈帝更恼怒了。
English: Xinjia not only did not blame himself, but also boasted of his own merits. Zhuang Rongyi was even more angry.

古文：至七月，给事中马嘉植复劾之，遂下狱。
现代文：到七月份，给事中马嘉植又弹劾他，新甲就被关进了监狱。
English: In July, he was impeached again by Ma Jiaxiong, and Xinjia was sent to prison.

古文：新甲从狱中上书乞宥，不许。
现代文：新甲从狱中上书请求宽恕，庄烈帝不答应。
English: Xin Jia wrote a letter from prison asking for forgiveness, but Emperor Zhuang refused.

古文：新甲知不免，遍行金内外。给事中廖国遴、杨枝起等营救于刑部侍郎徐石麒，拒不听。
现代文：新甲知道难免一死了，就在宫廷内外遍行贿赂，给事中廖国遴、杨枝起等向刑部侍郎徐石麒营救新甲，石麒拒不答应。
English: Knowing that Xin Jia would inevitably die, he bribed his way in and out of the court. In the middle of the matter, Liao Guoshuan, Yang Zhiqi, and others offered to rescue Xin Jia from the executioner Xu Shijuan, but Shijuan refused.

古文：大学士周延儒、陈演亦于帝前力救，且曰： 国法，敌兵不薄城不杀大司马。 
现代文：大学士周延儒、陈演也在庄烈帝面前极力论救，并且说： 按照国法，敌兵不打到城下来，不应当杀掉兵部尚书。 
English: College students Zhou Yanru and Chen Yuan also tried their best to save Zhuang Rong's life in front of Emperor Zhuang, and said: According to the national law, the enemy soldiers should not attack the city, and should not kill Heibu Shangshu.

古文：帝曰： 他且勿论，戮辱我亲藩七，不甚于薄城耶？ 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 别的不说，使我的七位亲王遇害、受辱，不比敌兵打到城下更严重吗？ 
English: Zhuo Ledei said, "If nothing else, isn't it more serious to have my seven princes killed and humiliated than to have enemy soldiers beaten to the outskirts of the city?"

古文：遂弃新甲于市。
现代文：接着就在街头把新甲给斩了。
English: He then beheaded Xin A in the street.

古文：新甲为杨嗣昌引用，其才品心术相似，军书旁午，裁答无滞。
现代文：新甲受到过杨嗣昌的引用，他们的才能、心术相似。在兵部期间，军书往来频繁，新甲马上可以裁答，从不拖延。
English: Xinjia was once quoted by Yang Shichang, and their talents and mental skills are similar. During their time in the military, military books were frequently exchanged, and Xinjia could answer questions immediately without delay.

古文：旁初甚倚之，晚特恶其泄机事，且彰主过，故杀之不疑。
现代文：庄烈帝起初很信任他，后来特别讨厌他泄漏机密，并且暴露了主上的缺点，因此毫不迟疑地杀掉了他。
English: Zhuge Liang trusted him at first, but later he hated him so much for leaking secrets and exposing his master's shortcomings that he killed him without hesitation.

古文：厥后给事中沈迅力诋其失，帝曰： 令尔作新甲，恐更不如。 
现代文：此后给事中沈迅极力抨击新甲的过失，庄烈帝说： 假使你是新甲，恐怕还不如他。 
English: After that, during the incident, Shen Xun strongly criticized Xin Jia's fault, Zhuo Ledei said: If you are Xin Jia, I am afraid you are not as good as him.

古文：迅惭而退。
现代文：沈迅惭愧地退了出来。
English: Shen Xun bowed out in shame.

古文：新甲初自阳和入都门，黄雾四塞，识者以为不祥，及是果应。
现代文：新甲当年从阳和门进入都城的时候，黄雾迷漫，知事者认为不吉祥，到这时果然应验了。
English: When Xinjia entered the capital from Yanghemen that year, the yellow fog was thick, and the governor thought it was not auspicious. At this time, it really came true.

