古文：少阴之为病，脉微细，但欲寐也。
现代文：少阴病的症候特征，是脉象微细，精神萎靡、神志迷糊欲睡。
English: The symptomatic features of Xiao Yin disease are fine pulse, weak spirit, drowsiness and drowsiness.

古文：少阴病，欲吐不吐，心烦，但欲寐，五六日，自利而渴者，属少阴也，虚故引水自救。
现代文：少阴病，想吐又吐不出，心中烦躁不安，精神萎靡不振，神志迷糊欲睡，到了五六天，出现腹泻而口渴的，是病在少阴，由于少阴阳气虚弱，不能蒸化津液，所以口渴。
English: Xiao Yin disease, want to vomit and can't vomit, the heart is restless, the spirit is sluggish, the mind is confused and wants to sleep. After five or six days, if there is diarrhea and thirst, the disease is in Xiao Yin. Because of the weakness of Xiao Yin Yang Qi, it can't evaporate the fluid, so it is thirsty.

古文：若小便色白者，少阴病形悉具。
现代文：如果小便清亮的，那么少阴病症就确定无疑。
English: If the urine is clear, then there is no doubt about the deficiency of yin.

古文：小便白者，以下焦虚有寒，不能制水，故令色白也。
现代文：这是因为小便清亮，是下焦虚寒、不能化气行水的确证。
English: This is because the urine is clear, which is a confirmation that the lower coke is cold and cannot be converted into gas and water.

古文：病人脉阴阳俱紧，反汗出者，亡阳也，此属少阴，法当咽痛，而复吐利。
现代文：寸关尺三部脉都沉紧，紧脉主寒，病人本应当无汗，却反而汗出的，是阳气外亡的征象，这属于少阴亡阳证，应当见到呕吐，腹泻、咽喉疼痛等症。
English: The three parts of the pulse are tight, and the main symptom is cold. The patient should not have sweated, but instead sweated, which is a sign of yang dying out. This is a sign of less yin and more yang. Vomiting, diarrhea, sore throat and other symptoms should be seen.

古文：少阴病，咳而下利谵语者，被火气劫故也，小便必难，以强责少阴汗也。少阴病，脉细沉数，病为在里，不可发汗。
现代文：少阴病，症见咳嗽、腹泻，如果出现谵语的，这是用火治法强迫发汗所导致的变证，病人小便一定难以解出。少阴病，脉象沉细数，是病在里，不能用发汗法治疗。
English: Xiao Yin disease, the symptoms are cough, diarrhea, if there is a slang, this is a deformation caused by forced sweating with fire treatment, the patient's urine must be difficult to solve. Xiao Yin disease, the pulse is a heavy fine number, is a disease in the belly, can not be treated by sweating.

古文：少阴病，脉微，不可发汗，亡阳故也。
现代文：少阴病，脉象微，为阳气虚弱，所以不能发汗。
English: Less yin disease, the pulse is weak, and the yang qi is weak, so you can't sweat.

古文：阳已虚，尺脉弱涩者，复不可下之。
现代文：系小肠经之原穴。有增液止渴，利胆退黄作用。
English: It is the original pit of the small intestine. It has the effect of increasing fluid, quenching thirst, and relieving gallstones.

古文：少阴病脉紧，至七八日，自下利，脉暴微，手足反温，脉紧反去者，为欲解也。
现代文：少阴病，脉象紧，到了七八天，出现腹泻，脉象忽然由紧转微弱，手足反而变温暖的，这是阳复阴去、疾病将要解除的征象。
English: Less yin disease, the pulse is tight, to seven or eight days, diarrhea appears, the pulse suddenly weakens from tightness, and the hands and feet become warm instead. This is a sign that the yang will return to the yin and the disease will be relieved.

古文：虽烦下利，必自愈。
现代文：此时虽然出现心烦、腹泻，势必会自行恢复。
English: At this time, although there is irritability and diarrhea, it is bound to recover on its own.

古文：少阴病，下利，若利自止，恶寒而蜷卧，手足温者，可治。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻，如果腹泻自行停止，手足转温暖的，虽见畏寒蜷曲而卧，也属于可治之证。
English: Minor Yin disease, diarrhea, if the diarrhea stops on its own, the hands and feet are warm, although the cold is curled up and lying, it is also a proof of curability.

古文：少阴病，恶寒而蜷，时自烦，欲去衣被者可治。
现代文：少阴病，怕冷而蜷卧，时而自觉心胸烦热，想减去衣被的，这是阳气来复之兆，其病可治。
English: Less yin sickness, curling up in fear of the cold, sometimes self-consciously feeling hot and bothered, wanting to remove the quilt, this is a sign of the yang returning, and the disease can be cured.

古文：少阴中风，脉阳微阴浮者，为欲愈。
现代文：少阴感受风邪，寸部脉微尺部脉浮的，是风邪已去、阳气回复之象，疾病将要痊愈。
English: If the minor yin feels a cold, and the minor pulse is weak, it is a sign that the cold has gone and the yang has returned, and the disease will be cured.

古文：少阴病欲解时，从子至寅上。
现代文：少阴病将要解除的时间，多在时至时之间。
English: The time when the disease will be relieved is mostly between now and then.

古文：少阴病，吐利，手足不逆冷，反发热者，不死。
现代文：少阴病，呕吐，腹泻，本应畏寒、手足冷，现手足不冷，反而发热的，示阳气尚在，不属死候。
English: Less yin sickness, vomiting, diarrhea, originally should be cold fear, cold hands and feet, but now the hands and feet are not cold, but feverish, indicating that the yang qi is still present, not a sign of death.

古文：脉不至者，灸少阴七壮。
现代文：如果脉搏一时不至的，可以急灸少阴经穴七个艾柱以通阳复脉。
English: If the pulse does not come for a while, you can quickly moxibustion the seven acupressure points of the meridians to open up the yang complex.

古文：少阴病，八九日，一身手足尽热者，以热在膀胱，必便血也。
现代文：少阴病八九日传里而发阳明病，故一身手足热。由于其人便血，知为热入血室，故谓热在膀胱也。
English: It is said that a minor Yin disease will become a Yang Ming disease in eight or nine days, so the whole body will have hot hands and feet. Because the person has blood in the stool, it is known as heat entering the blood chamber, so it is said that the heat is also in the bladder.

古文：少阴病，但厥无汗，而强发之，必动其血，未知从何道出，或从口鼻，或从目出，是名下厥上竭，为难治。
现代文：少阴病，仅见四肢厥冷和无汗，却强行发汗，势必伤经动血而引起出血，其出血部位难以预测，有的从鼻出，有的从眼睛出，这就叫做下厥上竭，是难治之证。
English: Less Yin disease, only to see the limbs cold and no sweat, but forced to sweat, it is bound to cause bleeding through blood circulation. The bleeding site is difficult to predict, some from the nose, some from the eyes, this is called hypovolemic exhaustion, which is difficult to cure.

古文：少阴病，恶寒身蜷而利，手足逆冷者，不治。
现代文：少阴病，怕冷身体蜷卧，腹泻，手足冰冷的，是不治之证。
English: Less Yin disease, afraid of cold body curled up, diarrhea, cold hands and feet, is incurable.

古文：少阴病，吐利，躁烦，四逆者死。
现代文：少阴病，呕吐，腹泻，神昏躁扰不宁的，属于死候。
English: Those with minor illness, vomiting, diarrhea, drowsiness, and restlessness are moribund.

古文：少阴病，下利止而头眩，时时自冒者死。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻停止而出现头昏目眩、时而昏晕的，属于死候。
English: Less Yin disease, diarrhea stopped and appeared dizzy, sometimes dizzy, is death.

古文：少阴病，四逆恶寒而身蜷，脉不至，不烦而躁者，死。
现代文：少阴病，四肢冰冷，怕冷而身体蜷卧，脉搏不来，心中不烦，手足躁扰不宁的，属于死候。
English: Those who are not seriously ill, whose extremities are cold, who are afraid of the cold and curl up in bed, whose pulse does not come, whose mind is not disturbed, and whose hands and feet are restless and restless, belong to death.

古文：少阴病，六七日，息高者，死。
现代文：少阴病，病延六七天，呼吸表浅，呼多吸少的，属于死候。
English: Less yin disease, the disease lasts for sixty-seven days, the respiratory surface is shallow, the exhalation is more and the inhalation is less, it is death.

古文：少阴病，脉微细沉，但欲卧，汗出不烦，自欲吐，至五六日，自利，复烦躁，不得卧寐者，死。
现代文：少阴病，脉微细沉，精神萎靡不振，总欲睡眠，汗出，心中不烦，想呕吐，到了五六天，又出现腹泻，并且烦躁不能安卧的，属于死候。
English: If you have minor yin and yang diseases, the pulse is slightly heavy, the spirit is sluggish, you always want to sleep, you sweat, you are not upset, you want to vomit, and after five or six days, you have diarrhea again, and you are restless and can't sleep, you are dying.

古文：少阴病，始得之，反发热，脉沉者，麻黄附子细辛汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，刚开始得病，既有发热等表证，又见脉沉的，是少阴阳虚兼太阳表证，用麻黄细辛附子汤主治。
English: Less yin disease, just beginning to get sick, both fever and other symptoms, but also see a heavy pulse, is less yin and yang and sun symptoms, mainly treated with ephedra spicy bean soup.

古文：麻黄附子细辛汤方
现代文：麻黄细辛附子汤方
English: Pomegranate and cumin soup with bean sprouts

古文：麻黄二两细辛二两附子一枚右三味，以水一斗，先煮麻黄，减二升，去上沫，内药，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：麻黄二两，去节细辛二两附子一枚，炮，去皮，破成八片以上三味药，用水一斗，先加入麻黄煎煮，煮去二升水分，除去上面的白沫，再加入其他药物，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一日服三次。
English: Two ephedra, finely chopped spice, two aconites, cannon, peeled, broken into eight or more pieces of shamisen, with a bucket of water, first add ephedra, boil it to remove two liters of water, remove the foam on top, then add other drugs, boil it to three liters, remove the drug residue, take one liter each time, take three times a day.

古文：少阴病，得之二三日，麻黄附子甘草汤，发微汗。
现代文：少阴病，得病二、三天，既有发热等表证，又有少阴阳虚证，用麻黄附子甘草汤温阳微汗解表。
English: Less yin disease, two or three days of illness, both with fever and other symptoms, and less yin and yang symptoms, with ephedra and licorice soup and mild sweat.

古文：以二三日无证，故微发汗也。
现代文：因为病才二三天，尚无吐、利等里证，所以用温阳微汗解表法。
English: Because the disease is only two or three days old, there is no evidence of vomiting, benefit, etc., so the table is solved with warm sun and light perspiration.

古文：麻黄附子甘草汤方
现代文：麻黄附子甘草汤
English: Licorice soup with ephedra and red pepper

古文：麻黄二两甘草二两附子一枚右三味，以水七升，先煮麻黄一两沸，去上沫，内诸药，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：麻黄二两，去节甘草二两，炙附子一枚，炮，去皮，破成八片以上三味药，用水七升，先加入麻黄煎煮一、二滚，除去上面的白沫，再加入其它药物，煎煮至三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一日服三次。
English: Two dashes of ephedra, two dashes of licorice, one piece of roasted aconite, cannon, peeled, broken into eight or more pieces of shamisen, seven liters of water, first add ephedra and boil for one or two rolls, remove the foam on top, then add other drugs, boil to three liters, remove the drug residue, take one liter each time, take three times a day.

古文：少阴病，得之二三日以上，心中烦，不得卧，黄连阿胶汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，得病二、三天以上，心中烦躁不安，不能够安眠的，用黄连阿胶汤主治。
English: If you have a minor illness, have been ill for more than two or three days, are irritable and restless, and cannot sleep peacefully, use Huanglian ejiao soup as the main treatment.

古文：黄连阿胶汤方
现代文：黄连阿胶汤方
English: Huang Lian Ajiao Soup Side Dish

古文：黄连四两黄芩一两芍药二两鸡子黄二枚阿胶三两右五味，以水五升，先煮三物，取二升，去滓，内胶烊尽，小冷，内鸡子黄，搅令相得，温服七合，日三服。
现代文：黄连四两黄芩二两芍药二两鸡蛋黄二枚阿胶三两，一为三条以上五味药，用水六升，先加入前三味药煎煮至二升，去掉药渣，再加入阿胶烊化溶尽，稍稍冷却，然后加入鸡蛋黄搅拌均匀即成。每次温服七合，一天服三次。
English: Huanglian four two yellow ginger two two yakitori medicine two two eggs Huanglian two pieces of ejiao three two, one for three or more five-flavor medicine, six liters of water, first add the first three-flavor medicine, boil to two liters, remove the residue, then add ejiao purified and dissolved, slightly cooled, and then add egg yolk and stirred evenly to form. Warmly serve seven at a time, and serve three times a day.

古文：少阴病，得之一二日，口中和，其背恶寒者，当灸之，附子汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，患病二、三天，口中不苦不燥不渴，病人背部怕冷的，当用艾灸灸少阴经穴，并用附子汤主治。
English: If you are suffering from a minor illness, have been ill for two or three days, your mouth is not bitter, not dry and not thirsty, and your back is afraid of the cold, you should use moxibustion and acupuncture on the minor meridian points, and use aconite soup as the main treatment.

古文：附子汤方
现代文：附子汤方
English: Part of the soup with green onions

古文：附子二枚茯苓三两人参二两白术四两芍药三两右五味，以水八升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：附子二枚，炮，去皮，破成八片茯苓三两人参二两白术四两芍药三两以上五味药，用水八升，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一日服三次。
English: Two aconites, cannon, peeled, broken into eight pieces of ginger three two ginseng two two white art four two ginger medicine three two more than five herbs, eight liters of water, boiled into three liters, remove the dregs, warm one liter each time, take three times a day.

古文：少阴病，身体痛，手足寒，骨节痛，脉沉者，附子汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，身体疼痛，骨关节疼痛，手足冷，脉象沉的，用附子汤主治。
English: Xiao Yin disease, body pain, bone and joint pain, cold hands and feet, heavy pulse, mainly treated with aconite soup.

古文：少阴病，下利便脓血者，桃花汤主之。
现代文：少阴虚寒证，腹泻，解脓血粘液便的，用桃花汤主治。
English: If you have minor cold symptoms, diarrhea, or loose stools with blood and mucus, use peach blossom soup as the main treatment.

古文：桃花汤方
现代文：桃花汤方
English: Peach Blossom Soup

古文：赤石脂一斤干姜一两粳米一斤右三味，以水七升，煮米令熟，去滓，温服七合，内赤石脂末，方寸匕，日三服。
现代文：赤石脂一斤，取一半入煎，另一半筛末冲服干姜一两粳米一斤以上三味药，加水七升煎煮，至米熟汤成，去掉药渣，每次取七合，加入赤石脂末一方寸匕温服，一日服三次。
English: Take half of a kilo of red stone grease and fry it, the other half of the sieve is used to wash dried ginger, one or two stalks of rice, more than a kilo of shamrock, add seven liters of water and boil it until the rice is cooked, remove the drug residue, take seven at a time, add the last one inch of red stone grease and warm it, and take it three times a day.

古文：若一服愈，余勿服。少阴病，二三日至四五日，腹痛，小便不利，下利不止便脓血者，桃花汤主之。
现代文：少阴虚寒证，得病二三天到四五天，腹中疼痛，小便不通畅，腹泻滑脱不尽，大便带脓血的，用桃花汤主治。
English: Minor Yin deficiency cold symptoms, get sick for two or three days to four or five days, abdominal pain, urination is not smooth, diarrhea is slippery, stool is bloody, use peach blossom soup to treat.

古文：少阴病，下痢便脓血者，可刺。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻，解脓血便，可用针刺法治疗。
English: Xiao Yin disease, diarrhea, bloody stool, can be treated with acupuncture.

古文：少阴病，吐利，手足厥冷，烦躁欲死者，吴茱萸汤主之。
现代文：少阴虚寒证，呕吐频剧，腹泻，手足发凉，烦躁不安、心中难受的，用吴茱萸汤主治。
English: For those with cold symptoms, frequent vomiting, diarrhea, cold hands and feet, restlessness, and discomfort in the heart, use wu jujube soup as the main treatment.

古文：少阴病，下痢，咽痛，胸满心烦者，猪肤汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻，咽喉疼痛，胸部满闷，心中烦躁不安的，是阴虚虚热上扰，用猪肤汤主治。
English: If you have minor yin sickness, diarrhea, sore throat, stuffy chest, and restless mind, you should treat it with pig skin soup.

古文：猪肤汤方
现代文：猪肤汤方
English: Pork skin soup

古文：猪肤一斤右一味，以水一斗，煮取五升，去滓，加白蜜一升，白粉五合，熬香，和相得，温分六服。
现代文：猪肤一斤以上一味药，加水一斗，煎煮至五升，去掉药渣，加入白蜂蜜一升，再将白米粉五合炒香，加入药汁中混匀即成，分六次温服。
English: Boil more than one kilo of pork skin, add a bucket of water, boil it to five liters, remove the residue, add one liter of white honey, then stir-fry the five-ingredient white rice powder, add it to the medicinal juice, mix and serve six times.

古文：少阴病，二三日咽痛者，可与甘草汤；不差者，与桔梗汤。
现代文：少阴病，得病二三天，咽喉疼痛的，可用甘草汤；如果服药后不见好的，用桔梗汤治疗。
English: If you have a minor illness, get sick for two or three days, and have a sore throat, you can use licorice soup; if you do not feel well after taking medicine, use orange peel soup for treatment.

古文：甘草汤方
现代文：甘草汤方
English: Licorice soup recipe

古文：甘草二两右一味，以水三升，煮取一升半，去滓，温服七合，日二服。
现代文：甘草二两以上一味药，用水三升，煎煮成一升半，去掉药渣，每次温服七合，一日服三次。
English: Take two or more pieces of liquorice to make a tincture, use three liters of water, boil it down to one and a half liters, remove the residue, take seven capsules each time, and take three times a day.

古文：桔梗汤方：
现代文：桔梗汤方
English: Bell pepper soup with cream

古文：桔梗一两甘草二两右二味，以水三升，煮取一升，去滓，分温再服。
现代文：桔梗一两甘草二两以上二味药，用水三升，煎煮成一升，去掉药渣，分二次温服。
English: One or two pieces of bell pepper, two or more pieces of licorice, three liters of water, decoction into one liter, remove the residue, divided into two times warm.

古文：少阴病，咽中伤生疮，不能语言，声不出者，苦酒汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，咽喉部受到创伤，发生破溃，发不出声音，不能讲话的，用苦酒汤主治。
English: Those with minor Yin disease, trauma to the larynx, rupture, no sound, unable to speak, should be treated with bitter wine soup.

古文：苦酒汤方
现代文：苦酒汤方
English: Bitter wine soup

古文：半夏十四枚鸡子一枚右二味，内半夏，著苦酒中，以鸡子壳，置刀环中，安火上，令三沸，去滓，少少含咽之，不差，更作三剂。
现代文：半夏用水洗，破成枣核大小，十四枚鸡蛋一个，将鸡蛋头部开一小孔，去掉蛋黄，把米醋加入其中以上二味药，把半夏加入装有米醋及蛋清的鸡蛋壳中，混匀，把鸡蛋壳置于刀环中，再放在火上煮二三开，去掉药渣，每次取小量含咽。如果服药后不愈，可以再作三剂药服用。
English: Wash half a cucumber with water, break it into the size of a date kernel, one egg of fourteen, open a small hole in the head of the egg, remove the yolk, add the rice vinegar to the above two medicines, add the half a cucumber to the egg shell containing rice vinegar and egg white, mix well, put the egg shell in the knife ring, and then boil it for two or three times on the fire, remove the drug residue, and take a small amount each time. If the medicine does not go away, you can take another three doses.

古文：少阴病咽中痛，半夏散及汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，咽喉中疼痛，可用半夏散或半夏汤主治。
English: Xiao Yin disease, pain in the throat, can be treated with Fenxia San or Fenxia Tang.

古文：半夏散及汤方
现代文：半夏散及汤方
English: Half summer sausage and soup side

古文：半夏桂枝甘草以上各等分以上三味，各别捣筛已，合治之，白饮和，服方寸匕，日三服。
现代文：半夏用水洗桂枝去皮甘草炙以上三味药，各取等分，分别捣细筛末后，混合制成散剂，用白米汤冲服一方寸匕，一日服三次。
English: In the middle of summer, wash cinnamon twigs with water, peel the licorice and roast the above three seasonings. Take equal parts of each. After separately beating and sifting, mix to make a bulk, and use white rice soup to wash one side of cinnamon, and take it three times a day.

古文：若不能散服者，以水一升，煎七沸，内散两方寸匕，更煎三沸，下火令小冷，少少咽之。
现代文：如果病人不能服散剂的，可以用水七升，煮七滚，加入上述散剂两方寸匕，再煮三滚，离火稍稍冷却，取少量药汁含咽。
English: If the patient can't take the powdered medicine, you can take seven liters of water, boil seven rolls, add the above-mentioned powdered medicine two square inches, then boil three rolls, cool slightly from the heat, and take a small amount of medicinal juice to swallow.

古文：少阴病，下利，白通汤主之。
现代文：半夏有毒，不应该作散剂服。少阴虚寒证，腹泻的，用白通汤主治。
English: It is poisonous in mid-summer and should not be used as a loose-fitting garment. If you have cold symptoms and diarrhea, use Baitong soup as the main treatment.

古文：白通汤方
现代文：白通汤方
English: Baitong Tangfang

古文：葱白四茎干姜一两附子一枚右三味，以水三升，煮取一升，去滓，分温再服。
现代文：葱白四根干姜一两附子一枚，生用，去皮，破成八片以上三味药，用水三升，煎煮成一升，去掉药渣，分两次温服。
English: Onion white, four dried ginger, one or two aconites, raw, peeled, broken into more than eight pieces of shamisen, three liters of water, boiled into one liter, remove the residue, divided into two warm.

古文：少阴病，下利脉微者，与白通汤；利不止，厥逆无脉，干呕烦者，白通汤加猪胆汁汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻，脉象微的，可用白通汤。如果服药后腹泻不停止，四肢冰冷，脉搏摸不到，干呕，心中烦躁不安的，是阴盛格阳所致，用白通加猪胆汁汤主治。
English: If the diarrhea does not stop after taking the medicine, the extremities are cold, the pulse can not be felt, retching, and the heart is restless, it is caused by Yin Sheng Geyang, and it is mainly treated with Baitong and pig bile soup.

古文：服汤，脉暴出者死，微续者生。白通加猪胆汁方
现代文：服药后，脉搏突然出现的，是阴液枯竭、孤阳外脱的征象，预后不良；服药后脉搏逐渐恢复的，是阴液未竭、阳气渐复的表现，预后较好。白通加猪胆汁汤方
English: After taking the medicine, if the pulse suddenly appears, it is a sign of yin fluid depletion and withdrawal from the sun, and the prognosis is poor; if the pulse gradually recovers after taking the medicine, it is a sign that the yin fluid has not been depleted and the yang qi has gradually returned, and the prognosis is better.

古文：葱白四茎干姜一两附子一枚人尿五合猪胆汁一合以上三味，以水三升，煮取一升，去滓，内胆汁、人尿，和令相得，分温再服，若无胆亦可用。
现代文：葱白四根干姜一两附子一枚，生用，去皮，破成八片人尿五合猪胆汁一合以上五味药，用水三升，先加入前三味药煎煮成一升，去掉药渣，再加入猪胆汁、人尿，混合即成，分两次温服。如果没有猪胆汁，也可使用。
English: Onion white, four dried ginger, one or two aconites, raw, peeled, broken into eight pieces of human urine, five mixed with pig bile, one mixed with more than five herbs, three liters of water, first add the first three herbs, boil to one liter, remove the dregs, then add pig bile and human urine, mix and serve in two portions. If there is no pig bile, it can also be used.

古文：少阴病，二三日不已，至四五日，腹痛，小便不利，四肢沉重疼痛，自下利者，此为有水气，其人或咳，或小便利，或下利，或呕者，真武汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，二三天没有好，到了四五天，出现腹中疼痛，小便不通畅，四肢沉重疼痛，自行腹泻的，这是肾阳虚弱，水气泛滥。病人还可出现咳嗽，或者小便通畅，或者腹泻更甚，或者呕吐等，用真武汤主治。
English: If you have a mild illness and do not feel better for two or three days, then by the fourth or fifth day, you may have pain in the abdomen, difficulty urinating, severe pain in the extremities, and self-induced diarrhea. This is caused by a weak kidney and an overflow of water and gas. The patient may also have a cough, or have trouble urinating, or have worse diarrhea, or vomit, etc. This should be treated with Zhenwu Tang.

古文：真武汤方
现代文：真武汤方
English: Zhenwu Tang Fang

古文：茯苓三两芍药三两生姜三两白术二两附子一枚右五味，以水八升，煮取三升，去滓，温服七合，日三服。
现代文：茯苓三两芍药三两白术二两生姜三两，切片附子一枚，炮，去皮，破成八片以上五味药，用水八升，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服七合，一日服三次。
English: Stew three two tablespoons of medicine three two white art two two ginger three two, slice an aconite one, cannon, peeled, broken into eight pieces of more than five herbs, use eight liters of water, boil into three liters, remove the residue, each time warm treatment seven, daily treatment three times.

古文：少阴病，下利清谷，里寒外热，手足厥逆，脉微欲绝，身反不恶寒，其人面赤色，或腹痛，或干呕，或咽痛，或利止，脉不出者，通脉四逆汤主之。
现代文：如果出现咳嗽的，原方加五味子半升、细辛一两、干姜一两；如果小便通畅的，去茯苓；如果腹泻较甚的，去芍药，加干姜二两；如果呕吐的，去附子，加生姜，补足上药量至半斤。少阴病，腹泻完谷不化，手足冰冷，脉象微弱似有若无，身上反而不怕冷，病人面部发红，或者腹中疼痛，或者咽喉疼痛，或者腹泻过度而停止，脉搏摸不到，这是内真寒外假热的阴盛格阳证，用通脉四逆汤主治。
English: If there is a cough, add half a liter of five-spice, one or two spicy spices, and one or two dried ginger to the original; if the urine is smooth, go to the diaphragm; if the diarrhea is severe, go to the laxative, add two or two dried ginger; if vomiting, go to the epiglottis, add ginger, and supplement the amount of medicine to half a pound. Less yin disease, diarrhea is not resolved, hands and feet are cold, pulse is weak and seems to be nothing, but the body is not afraid of cold, the patient's face is red, or abdominal pain, or sore throat, or

古文：通脉四逆汤方
现代文：通脉四逆汤方
English: Through the veins of four inverse tang sides

古文：甘草二两附子大者一枚干姜三两右三味，以水三升，煮取一升二合，去滓，分温再服。
现代文：甘草二两，炙附子大的一枚，生用，去皮，破成八片干姜三两，强壮的人可用四两以上三味药，用水三升，煎煮至一升二合，去掉药渣，分两次温服。
English: Two pairs of licorice, one large piece of roasted licorice, raw, peeled, broken into eight pieces of dried ginger, three pairs, strong people can use more than four pairs of shamisen, three liters of water, boiled to one liter and two, remove the residue, divided into two warm clothes.

古文：其脉即出者愈。
现代文：服药后病人脉搏马上出现的，可望痊愈。
English: The patient's pulse appeared immediately after taking the medicine, and he is expected to recover.

古文：面色赤者，加葱九茎。腹中痛者，去葱，加芍药二两。呕者，加生姜二两。咽痛者，去芍药，加桔梗一两。利止脉不出者，去桔梗，加人参二两。
现代文：如果出现面部发红的，加葱白九根；腹中疼痛的，去葱白，加芍药二两；呕吐的，加生姜二两；咽痛的，去芍药，加桔梗一两；腹泻过度而无物可泻、脉搏摸不到的，去桔梗，加人参二两。
English: If there is facial redness, add nine green onions; if there is pain in the abdomen, remove the green onions and add two ginger pills; if there is vomiting, add two ginger pills; if there is sore throat, remove the ginger pills and add one or two orange peels; if there is excessive diarrhea and there is nothing to relieve it and the pulse cannot be felt, remove the orange peels and add two or two ginseng.

古文：少阴病，四逆，其人或咳，或悸，或小便不利，或腹中痛，或泄利下重者，四逆散主之。
现代文：病症必须都与方相对应，才能服用。少阴病，四肢冷，病人或有咳嗽，或见心悸，或见小便不通畅，或见腹中疼痛、腹泻、下痢兼后重的，是肝郁气滞所致，用四逆散主治。
English: In order to be able to take it, the symptoms must all correspond to the side. Shao Yin disease, cold extremities, the patient has a cough, or has heart palpitations, or has difficulty urinating, or has abdominal pain, diarrhea, and diarrhea, is caused by liver depression, and is mainly treated with four inversions.

古文：四逆散方
现代文：四逆散方
English: Four inverse scatter squares

古文：甘草枳实柴胡芍药右四味，各十分，捣筛，白饮和，服方寸匕，日三服。
现代文：甘草炙枳实破开，用水浸泡，炙干柴胡芍药以上四味药，各用十分，捣细筛末，用白米汤调服一方寸匕，一日服三次。
English: Roasted liquorice cracked, soaked in water, roasted dried chaihooran medicine and above four-flavor medicine, each with ten, pounded fine sieve, mixed with white rice soup to serve one inch stew, served three times a day.

古文：咳者，加五味子、干姜各五分，并主下痢。悸者，加桂枝五分。小便不利者，加茯苓五分。腹中痛者，加附子一枚，炮令坼。泄利下重者，先以水五升，煮薤白三升，煮取三升，去滓，以散三方寸匕，内汤中，煮取一升半，分温再服。
现代文：如果咳嗽的，加五味子、干姜各五分，并主治腹泻；心悸的，加桂枝五分；小便不通畅的，加茯苓五分；腹中疼痛的，加附子一枚，炮至裂开；腹泻或下痢后重的，先用水五升，加入薤白三升，煎煮至三升，去掉药渣，再取四逆散三方寸匕加入药汁中，煮至一升半，分两次温服。
English: If you have a cough, add five parts of five miso and five parts of dried ginger to treat diarrhea; if you have palpitations, add five parts of cinnamon; if you have difficulty urinating, add five parts of ginger; if you have pain in the abdomen, add one piece of aconite until it bursts; if you have diarrhea or severe diarrhea, first use five liters of water, add three liters of ginger, boil it to three liters, remove the residue, then take four pieces of three-square-inch ginger and add it to the medicinal juice, boil it to one and a half liters, and divide it into two

古文：少阴病，下利六七日，咳而呕渴，心烦，不得眠者，猪苓汤主之。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻六七天，咳嗽，呕吐，口渴，小便不通畅，心中烦躁，不能安眠的，是阴虚水热互结，用猪苓汤主治。
English: If you have minor yin sickness, diarrhea for six or seven days, cough, vomiting, thirst, urination is not smooth, your heart is irritable, and you can't sleep peacefully, it is the combination of yin deficiency and water fever, which is mainly treated with pig stew soup.

古文：少阴病，得之二三日，口燥咽干者，急下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：少阴病，得了二三天，里实证具备而又见咽喉干燥的，应当急以攻下，用大承气汤。
English: If you are suffering from a minor illness for two or three days and have a positive result, but find that your throat is dry, you should urgently attack it and use Dasheng qi soup.

古文：少阴病，自利清水，色纯青，心下必痛，口干燥者，急下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻稀水，颜色青黑，脘腹疼痛，口干燥的，应当急以攻下，宜大承气汤。
English: Less Yin disease, diarrhea, thin water, color blue-black, abdominal pain, dry mouth, should be urgently attacked, it is advisable to take large Chengqi soup.

古文：少阴病，六七日，腹胀不大便者，急下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：少阴病，经过六七天，腹部胀满，大便不通的，应当急以攻下，用大承气汤。
English: If you have a minor illness, and after six or seven days, your abdomen is swollen and your stool does not pass, you should urgently attack it and use Dasheng qi soup.

古文：少阴病，脉沉者，急温之，宜四逆汤。
现代文：少阴虚寒证，脉见沉的，应当急用温法治疗，适宜用四逆汤。
English: Less yin and void cold symptoms, the pulse is heavy, should be treated urgently with the temperature method, it is suitable to use the four inversion soup.

古文：少阴病，饮食入口则吐，心中温温欲吐，复不能吐，始得之，手足寒，脉弦迟者，此胸中实，不可下也，当吐之。
现代文：少阴病，如果饮食进口就吐，心中蕴结不适，想呕吐却又吐不出，初得病时，即见四肢冷，脉象弦迟的，这是痰实阻塞胸中，不能攻下，应当用涌吐法治疗。
English: If you have a minor illness, if you vomit after eating, if you have discomfort in your heart, if you want to vomit but can't vomit, when you first get sick, you will see that your limbs are cold and your pulse is slow. This is phlegm blocking the chest and can't be captured. It should be treated with emesis.

古文：若膈上有寒饮，干呕者，不可吐也，急温之，宜四逆汤。
现代文：如果是肾阳虚弱、不能气化，寒饮停聚膈上，而致干呕的，不能用涌吐法，应当用温法治疗，可用四逆汤。
English: If the kidney yang is weak and cannot be vaporized, and the cold drink stagnates on the sputum, causing retching, it cannot be treated with the gushing method, it should be treated with the temperature method, and four reverse soups can be used.

古文：少阴病，下利，脉微涩，呕而汗出，必数更衣；反少者，当温其上灸之。
现代文：少阴病，腹泻，脉象微而涩，呕吐，汗出，为阳虚气陷兼阴血不足，势必出现大便频数，解出量反而少，应当用温灸法治疗，可灸头顶百会穴，以升阳举陷。
English: Less yin disease, diarrhea, the pulse is weak and astringent, vomiting, sweating, for the yang and yang qi depression and yin blood deficiency, it is bound to appear stool frequency, but the amount of discharge is small, it should be treated with the temperature moxibustion method, can moxibustion the top of the head hundreds of meeting points, with the rising sun lifting depression.

