古文：初十日，夜雨达旦。
现代文：初十日雨通宵达旦下个不停。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it rained all night long.

古文：初涉潇湘指今湖南境内，遂得身历此景，亦不以为恶。
现代文：初入潇湘江中，便得以身历此景，也不以为是坏事。
English: When I first entered Xiao Xiangjiang Middle School, I was able to experience this scene, and I didn't think it was a bad thing.

古文：上午，雨渐止。
现代文：上午，雨渐渐停下来。
English: In the morning, the rain gradually stopped.

古文：迨暮，客至，雨散始解维即船缆。
现代文：到傍晚，所等的同船乘客来到，雨散去，这才解开船缆开船。
English: In the late afternoon, the passengers who had been waiting for the ship arrived and the rain dissipated. Only then was the cable cut and the ship set sail.

古文：五里，泊于水府庙之下。
现代文：行五里，停泊在水府庙的下边。
English: After five miles, we anchored below the Suifu Temple.

古文：十一日五更复闻雨声，天明渐霁。
现代文：十一日五更时又听到雨声，天亮后雨渐渐停下来。
English: At 5 a.m. on the 11th day, the sound of rain was heard again. After dawn, the rain gradually stopped.

古文：二十五里，南上钩栏滩，衡南首滩也，江深流缩，势不甚汹涌。
现代文：行二十五里，往南上了钩栏滩，它是衡州府城南面湘江上的第一滩，到这里江流变深，水面变窄，水势不很汹涌。
English: Twenty-five miles to the south, I reached the hook-rail beach. It is the first beach on the Xiangjiang River south of Hengzhou City. At this point, the river becomes deeper, the water surface narrows, and the water is not very turbulent.

古文：转而西，又五里为东阳渡，其北岸为琉璃厂，乃桂府烧造之窑也。
现代文：折往西，又行五里为东阳渡，它的北岸为琉璃厂，是桂府烧造各种器皿的窑子。
English: Turning to the west, it is five miles to Dongyangdu, and its north bank is a glazing factory, a kiln for firing various vessels in Guifu.

古文：又西二十里为车江，或作汊江。其北数里外即云母山。
现代文：又往西行二十里为车江，它北面几里以外就是云母山。
English: Another twenty miles to the west is Chejiang, and a few miles north of it is Mica Mountain.

古文：乃折而东南行，十里为云集潭，有小山在东岸。
现代文：而后就折往东南，行十里为云集潭，有座小山在潭东岸上。
English: After that, I turned to the southeast and walked ten miles to Yunji Lake. There was a hill on the eastern shore of the lake.

古文：已复南转，十里为新塘站，旧有驿，今废。
现代文：随后又转往南，行十里为新塘站。又行六里，停泊在新塘站上游对岸。
English: Then it turned south again, traveling ten miles to Shintang Station. It traveled another six miles and anchored on the opposite bank upstream of Shintang Station.

古文：又六里，泊于新塘站上流之对涯。同舟者为衡郡艾行可、石瑶庭，艾为桂府礼生司仪、执事，而石本苏人，居此已三代矣。
现代文：同船的为衡州府的艾行可、石瑶庭，姓艾的是桂府祭祀时赞礼司仪的执事，而姓石的本是苏州府人，移居此地已经三代了。
English: On the same boat are Ai Xingke and Shi Bingting from Hengzhou. Ai is the deacon of the ceremony of the Kuei Festival, while Shi is originally from Suzhou and has been living here for three generations.

古文：其时日有余照，而其处止有谷舟二只，遂依之泊。
现代文：当时太阳还有余辉，而那地方只有两只载谷的船，于是靠拢上去停泊在一起。
English: At that time the sun was still shining, and there were only two boats carrying grain in the area, so they pulled up and moored together.

古文：已而，同上水者又五六舟，亦随泊焉。
现代文：不久后，同是向上游航行的船又有五六条，也跟着在那里停泊下来。
English: Soon after, five or six other boats, which were also sailing upstream, also anchored there.

古文：其涯上本无村落，余念石与前舱所搭徽人俱惯游江湖，而艾又本郡人，其行止余可无参与，乃听其泊。
现代文：停泊处的岸上本无村落，但我想姓石的与前舱中搭乘的徽州府人都惯游江湖，而姓艾的又是本府人，或走或停我可以不过问干预，于是听凭船只停泊下来。
English: There are no villages on the shore of the anchorage, but I think that the surnamed Shi Cang and the Huizhou people in the front cabin are used to traveling the rivers and lakes, while the surname Ai is from this prefecture. I can walk or stop without asking for intervention, so I let the ship dock.

古文：迨暮，月色颇明。
现代文：等到太阳落山后，天空中月色很明亮。
English: By the time the sun sets, the moon is bright in the sky.

古文：余念入春以来尚未见月，及入舟前晚，则潇湘夜雨，此夕则湘浦月明，两夕之间，各擅一胜，为之跃然。
现代文：我回想起入春以来还未见到月亮，到前天晚上登船，潇湘江下了一夜的雨，今夜却是湘江岸边明月照耀，两夜之间，各欣赏一种江上的优美夜景，于是心中不禁为此感到愉悦。
English: I recalled that I haven't seen the moon since the beginning of spring, and I boarded the boat the night before yesterday. It rained all night on the Xiangjiang River, but tonight the bright moon shines on the shore of the Xiangjiang River. During the two nights, I enjoyed a beautiful night view on the river, so I couldn't help but feel happy about it.

古文：已而忽闻岸上涯边有啼号声，若幼童，又若妇女，更余不止。
现代文：旋即忽然听到江岸边有啼哭声，像是幼童，又像是妇女，哭了一更多还未停，止。
English: Suddenly, I heard the sound of wailing on the riverbank. It sounded like a young child, or a woman, crying and crying, and it didn't stop.

古文：众舟寂然，皆不敢问。
现代文：众船中静悄悄的，都不敢随便询问。
English: They dared not ask the quiet ones in the crowd.

古文：余闻之不能寐，枕上方作诗怜之，有 箫管孤舟悲赤壁，琵琶两袖湿青衫 之句，又有 滩惊回雁天方一，月叫杜鹃更已三 等句。
现代文：我听着哭声不能安睡，便在枕头上作了一首诗表达怜悯之情，诗中有 孤单单的小船上竹箫吹起赤壁的悲歌，凄楚的琵琶声令人哭湿了青衫和两袖 这样的句子，又有 险滩惊起回雁正当一更天，月下杜鹃啼叫已过半夜时 等句子。
English: I couldn't sleep peacefully listening to the cries, so I composed a poem on my pillow to express my feelings of pity. The poem includes "On a lonely boat, the bamboo shoots blow up the tragic song of the red cliff, the terrible pipa sound makes the blue shirt and two sleeves wet with tears" and "The perilous beach wakes up the geese just one more day, the cuckoo calls after midnight under the moon" and other sentences.

古文：然亦止虑有诈局，俟怜而纳之，即有尾其后以挟诈者，不虞其为盗也。
现代文：然而我也只是考虑怕会有骗人的圈套，待船上的人可怜他而收纳、理会他时，便有尾随其后挟持诈骗的人到来，没有料想到他是盗贼。
English: However, I was only thinking about the possibility of a deceptive trap. While waiting for the people on the boat to take pity on him and take him in and take care of him, a person with a fraud came after him. I didn't expect him to be a thief.

古文：迨二鼓，静闻心不能忍，因小解涉水登岸，静闻戒律甚严，一吐一解，必俟登涯，不入于水。呼而诘之，则童子也，年十四五，尚未受全发，诡言出王阉之门，年甫十二，王善酗酒，操大杖，故欲走避。
现代文：到两更时，静闻心中不能抑制住怜悯的心情，于是乘涉水登岸小解的机会，招呼询间那啼哭的人，发现是个童子，年龄十四五岁，还没有留全发，欺诈说他是王宦官门卞的人，年纪才十二，因为王宦官善酗酒，常拿重棍责罚他，因此想逃跑。
English: At two o'clock, Jing Huan couldn't suppress the feeling of pity in his heart, so he took the opportunity to wade ashore and invite the crying man to the inquiry room. He found that he was a boy, aged fourteen or fifteen, who didn't have a full head of hair, and fraudulently said that he was Wang Yukan's doorman, only twelve years old, because Wang Yukan was good at drinking and often punished him with a heavy stick, so he wanted to escape.

古文：静闻劝其归，且厚抚之，彼竟卧涯侧。
现代文：静闻劝他回去，并且用好言抚慰他，而他竟然躺卧在岸边不动。
English: Quietly advising him to go back, and soothing him with kind words, he ended up lying motionless on the shore.

古文：比静闻登舟未久，则群盗喊杀入舟，火炬刀剑交丛而下。
现代文：等静闻登上船不久，就见一群盗贼喊叫着冲入船中，火把刀剑交错密集地落下。
English: Not long after Jing Huan boarded the ship, he saw a group of thieves shouting and rushing into the ship, with torches and swords falling in a staggered and dense manner.

古文：余时未寐，急从卧板下取匣中游资移之。
现代文：我当时还未睡，急忙从铺板下取出匣子中装着的旅费，转移到其他地方。
English: I was still awake at the time, and I hurriedly took out the box containing the travel expenses from under the floorboards and moved it to another place.

古文：越艾舱。欲从舟尾赴水，而舟尾贼方挥剑斫尾门，不得出，乃力掀篷隙，莽投之江中，复走卧处，觅衣披之。
现代文：我越过艾行可所在的那舱，想从船尾投入水中，而那里盗贼正挥剑砍着船尾的门，不能出去，于是用力掀起船篷，露出缝隙，莽撞地将匣子投到江中，又跑回睡卧处，找了衣服披在身上。
English: I went over to the cabin where Ai Xingke was staying and wanted to jump into the water from the stern, but the thieves there were swinging their swords at the door at the stern and couldn't get out, so I lifted the canopy by force, exposing a gap, and recklessly threw the box into the river. I ran back to my sleeping place and found clothes to put on my body.

古文：静闻、顾仆与艾、石主仆，或赤身，或拥被，俱逼聚一处。
现代文：静闻、顾仆和艾行可、石瑶庭以及他俩的仆人，或光着身，或裹着被子，都被逼到一起。
English: Jing Huan, Gu Min and Ai Xing Ke, Shijian Ting and their servants, either naked or wrapped in quilts, were all forced together.

古文：贼前从中舱，后破后门，前后刀戟乱戳，无不以赤体受之者。
现代文：船头的盗贼从中舱向后；船后的盗贼砍开船的后门往前，前后刀戟乱刺，船上的人无不是赤身露体地挨着。
English: The thieves at the bow of the ship cut from the middle cabin to the back; the thieves at the stern of the ship cut open the back door of the ship to the front, and stabbed the front and back with knives. The people on the ship were all naked next to each other.

古文：余念必为盗执，所持同 绸 衣不便，乃并弃之。
现代文：我想我必定要被盗贼抓住，所拿着的绸子衣服不便于行动，于是通通丢弃。
English: I thought I must be caught by the thieves, the silk clothes I was holding were not convenient for movement, so I threw them all away.

古文：各跪而请命，贼戳不已，遂一涌掀篷入水。
现代文：大家个个跪在盗贼前请求保全性命，盗贼却砍戳个不停，于是大家一涌而起，掀起船篷跳入水中。
English: Everyone knelt in front of the thief and begged for their lives, but the thief kept slashing and stabbing, so everyone rushed up, lifted the canopy and jumped into the water.

古文：入水余最后，足为竹纤所绊，竟同篷倒翻而下，首先及江底，耳鼻灌水一口，急踊而起。
现代文：我是最后一个入水，脚被竹船索绊着，竟然同船篷一起倒翻下去，头先触着江底，耳鼻都灌了水，才迅急向上浮起。
English: I was the last one into the water. My feet got caught in the bamboo ropes, so much so that I tumbled down with the canopy. My head hit the bottom of the river, my ears and nose filled with water, and then I quickly floated upwards.

古文：幸水浅止及腰，乃逆流行江中，得邻舟间避而至，遂跃入其中。
现代文：幸好水浅，只到腰部，于是逆流从江中走，见到一只邻船为避开盗贼开了过来，便跃入那船中。
English: Fortunately, the water was shallow, only up to the waist, so he went against the current from the river, saw a neighboring boat coming to avoid the thieves, and jumped into that boat.

古文：时水浸寒甚，邻客以舟人被盖余，而卧其舟，溯流而上三四里，泊于香炉山，盖已隔江矣。
现代文：当时水浸得我全身异常寒冷，那船上的一个乘客将船夫的被子盖在我身上，我便躺在船中。船逆流而上行了三四里，停泊在香炉山下，这里已经是湘江的另一岸了。
English: At that time, the water soaked my whole body and I was extremely cold. One of the passengers on that boat pulled the boatman's quilt over me, and I lay down in the boat. The boat traveled upstream for three or four miles and anchored at the foot of Mount Incense Burner, which is already the other side of the Xiangjiang River.

古文：还望所劫舟，火光赫然，群盗齐喊一声为号而去。
现代文：回身望去，那只被抢劫的船，火光大起，众盗贼齐声喊叫一声作为信号，就离去了。
English: Looking back, the robbed boat burst into flames, and the thieves left with a single shout as a signal.

古文：已而同泊诸舟俱移泊而来，有言南京相公身被四创者，余闻之暗笑其言之妄。
现代文：随即，先前一同停泊的各船都移到香炉山下来停泊，船中有人说南京的读书人身上被刺伤四处，我听了暗笑那人所说之话的虚妄。
English: Immediately, all the boats that had previously been moored together were moved to the bottom of Incense Burner Mountain for berthing. Someone on the boat said that the Nanjing reader had been stabbed all over his body. I listened with a secret laugh at the falsity of the man's words.

古文：且幸乱刃交戟之下，赤身其间，独一创不及，此实天幸。
现代文：幸运的是我赤身躲在乱刀棍剑下，竟没有被伤，这实在是天幸！
English: Fortunately, I was able to hide naked under the tangle of swords and clubs and was not injured, which is truly a blessing!

古文：惟静闻、顾奴不知其处，然亦以为一滚入水，得免虎口，资囊可无计矣。
现代文：只是不知道静闻、顾仆在何处，也以为他们一滚入水中，就能免于虎口，至于钱财就可不去计较了。
English: However, they did not know where Jing He and his servant were, and thought that if they rolled into the water, they would be safe from the tiger's mouth. As for money, they did not have to worry about it.

古文：但张侯宗琏所著《南程续记》一帙ì一套书，乃其手笔，其家珍藏二百余年，而一入余手，遂罹此厄，能不抚膺气愤痛苦！
现代文：只是张侯宗琏所著的一套《南程续记》，是他的手迹，他家珍藏了两百多年，而一到我手中，便遭此等厄运，怎能不痛惜！
English: However, a set of "Southern Journey Continued" written by Zhang Houzongyao is his handwriting, his family has treasured it for more than two hundred years, and once in my hands, I suffered such bad luck, how can I not regret it!

古文：其时舟人父子亦俱被戳，哀号于邻舟。
现代文：当时船夫父子俩也都被刺伤，在邻船上哀号着。
English: At that time, the boatmen, father and son, were also stabbed and wailed in the neighboring boat.

古文：他舟又有石瑶庭及艾仆与顾仆，俱为盗戳，赤身而来，与余同被卧，始知所谓被四创者，乃余仆也。
现代文：另一只船上又有石瑶庭、艾行可的仆人与顾仆，他们都被盗贼刺伤，光着身体来到我的船上，与我同盖一床被子躺卧，我这才知道所说的被弄伤四处的是我的仆人。
English: In the other boat there was a stone garden, and the servants and attendants of Ah Xing Ke, who had all been stabbed by the thieves, came to my boat naked and lay down with me on a bed of quilts, and only then did I know that it was my servant who was wounded everywhere.

古文：前舱五徽人俱木客，亦有二人在邻舟，其三人不知何处。
现代文：原所乘那只船前舱中的五个徽州府人都是做木活的，他们中也有两个在邻船上，其余三人不知在哪里。
English: The five people from Huizhou who were originally on the fore cabin of the boat were all woodworkers. Two of them were also on the neighboring boat, and the other three do not know where they are.

古文：而余舱尚不见静闻，后舱则艾行可与其友曾姓者，亦无问处。
现代文：而我那个舱中还不见静闻，后舱中则是艾行可与他的 个姓曾的朋友，也没有打听的地方。
English: But I haven't seen or heard anything in that compartment, and there's no place to ask Ai Xingke and his friend, surnamed Zeng, in the rear compartment.

古文：余时卧稠人中，顾仆呻吟甚，余念行囊虽焚劫无遗，而所投匣资或在江底可觅。
现代文：我当时躺在众人中，顾仆呻吟得很厉害，我心想行李袋虽然被焚烧抢劫得什么都不剩了，而投到江中的匣子装着的旅游费用或许在江底可以找到。
English: I was lying in the crowd, my companion moaning loudly, and I thought to myself that although the duffel bag had been burned and robbed, there was nothing left, and the travel expenses in the box thrown into the river could perhaps be found at the bottom of the river.

古文：但恐天明为见者取去，欲昧爽即行，而身无寸丝，何以就岸。
现代文：只恐怕天亮后被见到的人拿了去，想黎明就前往寻找，但身上无寸丝遮掩，何以上岸？
English: I'm just afraid that someone who was seen after dawn took it. If you want dawn, go and look for it, but there's nothing to hide on your body, why go ashore?

古文：是晚初月甚明，及盗至，已阴云四布，迨晓，雨复霏霏。
现代文：这天晚上，起初月亮很明，等盗贼来时，已经阴云四布，到天亮时，雨又霏霏地下了起来。
English: That night, the moon was bright at first, but by the time the thieves arrived, it was overcast. By dawn, the rain had begun to fall again.

古文：艾行可披发而行，遂至不救。
现代文：十二日邻船一个姓戴的客人，很同情我，从他身上分出内衣、单层裤子各一样给了我。
English: On the twelfth day, a guest from the next boat, whose surname was Dai, took pity on me and gave me his underwear and single-layer trousers.

古文：一物虽微，亦天也。遂以酬之，匆匆问其姓名而别。
现代文：我全身没有一件物品，摸摸发髻中还存有一个银耳挖，便用它来酬谢了他，然后匆匆间了他的姓名就告别了。
English: I had nothing with me, but I felt a silver earring in my hair, and I thanked him with it, and then hurriedly said goodbye to his name.

古文：时顾仆赤身无蔽，余乃以所畀裤与之，而自著其里衣，然仅及腰而止。
现代文：当时顾仆光着身没有一点衣物遮蔽，我便把姓戴的所给的裤子给了他，而自己穿着那件内衣，然而那内衣仅到腰间。
English: At that time, Ku's servant was bare-chested without any clothing covering him, so I gave him the trousers I had given him, while I was wearing the underwear, but the underwear only reached my waist.

古文：旁舟子又以衲破衣一幅畀予，用蔽其前，乃登涯。
现代文：旁边一只船的船夫又将一块补过补丁的布给了我，我用它遮着前面，就朝岸上登去。
English: The boatman of a nearby boat gave me another patched cloth, and I covered my face with it and went ashore.

古文：涯犹在湘之北东岸，乃循岸北行。
现代文：所登之处仍然在湘江的东北岸上，于是沿岸往北行。
English: The boarded place is still on the northeast bank of the Hunan River, so the coast is heading north.

古文：时同登者余及顾仆，石与艾仆并二徽客，共六人一行，俱若囚鬼。
现代文：当时一同登岸的有我和顾仆、石瑶庭和艾行可的仆人以及两个徽州府人，一行共六人，个个都像是囚犯鬼怪。
English: At that time, I went ashore with my servant, the servants of Shi Xianting and Ai Xingke, and two people from Huizhou Province. There were a total of six people, all of whom looked like prisoner ghosts.

古文：晓风砭骨，砂砾裂足，行不能前，止不能已。
现代文：拂晓的风寒冷刺骨，碎石子划破了脚板，往前不能走，想停下又不能。
English: The wind at dawn was bone-chillingly cold, and the pebbles had cut through the footboards, making it impossible to walk forward or to stop.

古文：四里，天渐明，望所焚劫舟在隔江，上下诸舟，见诸人形状，俱不肯渡，哀号再三，无有信者。
现代文：走了四里，天渐渐亮开，望见那只被焚烧抢劫的船在江对面，上上下下的众多船只，看到我们这一行人的形状，都不肯为我们摆渡，再三哀求哭喊，都没有相信的。
English: After walking for four miles, the sky gradually opened, and I saw the boat that had been burned and robbed across the river, and the many boats up and down, and saw the shape of our group of people, who refused to ferry for us, and repeatedly begged and cried, and did not believe.

古文：艾仆隔江呼其主，余隔江呼静闻，徽人亦呼其侣，各各相呼，无一能应。
现代文：艾行可的仆人隔着江呼叫他的主人，我隔着江呼喊静闻，徽州府人也呼喊着他们的同伴，众人各各相呼，没人一声应答。
English: Ai Xingke's servant shouted across the river to his master, I shouted across the river to listen quietly, Huizhou people also shouted to their companions, everyone shouted to each other, no one answered.

古文：已而闻有呼予者，予知为静闻也，心窃喜曰： 吾三人俱生矣。 亟欲与静闻遇。
现代文：旋即听到有喊我的，我知道是静闻，心中暗喜道： 我三人都还活着  于是急着想与静闻相会。
English: Immediately I heard someone calling me, I knew it was Jing Huan. I secretly rejoiced in my heart and said, "All three of us are still alive." I was anxious to meet Jing Huan.

古文：隔江土人以舟来渡余，及焚舟，望见静闻，益喜甚。
现代文：江对面的一个当地人将船划过来接我，到被焚毁的船边，望见了静闻，更加欢喜得不得了。
English: A local man on the other side of the river rowed his boat to pick me up, and when he reached the burned boat, he was even more overjoyed to see and hear it.

古文：于是入水而行，先觅所投竹匣。
现代文：我从那只船的残骸处入水而行，先寻找投入江中的竹匣子。
English: I waded into the water from the wreckage of the boat, first looking for the bamboo box that had been thrown into the river.

古文：静闻望而问其故，遥谓余曰： 匣在此，匣中之资已乌有矣。
现代文：静闻望见后问我为何如此，然后远远地对我说：  匣子在这里，但匣中的钱物已经没有了。
English: He asked me why I was like that, and then he said to me from a distance: "The box is here, but the money in the box is gone."

古文：手摹《禹碑》及《衡州统志》犹未沾濡也。 
现代文：你亲手临摹的禹碑》以及《衡州统志》还没有沾湿。 
English: Yu's Monument, which you copied with your own hands" and "Hengzhou Unification History" have not yet been drenched.

古文：及登岸，见静闻焚舟中衣被竹芨犹救数件，守之沙岸之侧，怜予寒，急脱身衣以衣予给我穿，复救得余一裤一袜，俱火伤水湿，乃益取焚余炽火以炙之。
现代文：等登上岸，见到静闻。他从被烧的船中还救得衣服、被子、竹书箱等几件物品，守在沙岸边。他怜惜我寒冷，急忙脱下身上的衣服给我穿上；又救得我的一条裤子一双袜子，都被火烧被水浸湿了，于是再取了些那船上仍燃烧得很旺的残火来烘烤被子、袜子。
English: He also saved clothes, a quilt, a bamboo bookcase and a few other items from the burned boat and kept them on the sandy shore. He took pity on my cold and quickly took off his clothes and put them on me; he also saved one of my pants and a pair of socks, all of which were burned and soaked with water, so he took some of the fire that was still burning on the boat to bake the quilt and socks.

古文：其时徽客五人俱在，艾氏四人，二友一仆虽伤亦在，独艾行可竟无踪迹。
现代文：到这时，徽州府的五个乘客都在了，艾行可一行四人中，他的两个友人和一个仆人虽受伤也在，唯独艾行可竟然无踪迹。
English: By this time, the five passengers from Huizhou were all gone. Of the four people in Ai Xingke's party, two of his friends and a servant were also injured, but Ai Xingke was the only one without a trace.

古文：其友、仆乞土人分舟沿流捱觅，余辈炙衣沙上，以候其音。
现代文：他的友人和仆人乞求当地人分别乘船沿江去一处一处挨着找寻，而我们在沙地上烘烤衣服，等候他的音讯。
English: His friends and servants begged the locals to take boats down the river to look for him one by one, while we baked clothes on the sand and waited for news of him.

古文：时饥甚，锅具焚没无余，静闻没水取得一铁铫小锅，复没水取湿米，先取干米数斗，俱为艾仆取去。
现代文：当时非常饥饿，但锅具或被烧毁或没入江中一样也不剩，静闻潜入水中捞到一个铁桃锅，然后再次潜入水中捞起些湿米，煮了粥分给各个遭难的人吃，而后才自己吃。
English: At that time, he was very hungry, but there were no pots and pans left, either burned or sunk into the river. He quietly dived into the water to fish out a peach casserole, then dived into the water again to fish out some wet rice, cooked porridge for each person in distress to eat, and then ate it himself.

古文：煮粥遍食诸难者，而后自食。迨下午，不得艾消息，徽人先附舟返衡，余同石、曾、艾仆亦得土人舟同还衡州。
现代文：直等到下午，没有得到艾行可的消息，徽州府的几个人先搭乘船只返回衡州城，随后我们三人同石瑶庭、姓曾的以及艾行可的仆人也找到一只当地人的船，返回衡州城。
English: Until the afternoon, there was no news of Ai Xingke. A few people from Huizhou first took a boat to return to Hengzhou City, and then the three of us, together with Shi Bingting, Zeng and Ai Xingke's servant, also found a local boat and returned to Hengzhou City.

古文：余意犹妄意艾先归也。
现代文：我还假设艾行可说不定先回城了。
English: I also assumed that Ai Xing may have returned to the city first.

古文：土舟颇大，而操者一人，虽顺流行，不能达二十余里，至汊江已薄暮。
现代文：我们所乘的那本地船很大，而驾船的只有一人，虽然是顺流下行，但不到二十儿里路，到汉江就已经是傍晚了。
English: The local boat we took was large, and there was only one person driving the boat. Although it was downstream, it was less than twenty miles away, and it was already evening when we reached the Han River.

古文：二十里至东阳渡，已深夜。
现代文：又行二十里到东阳渡，已是深夜。
English: After another twenty-mile journey to Dongyangdu, it was already late at night.

古文：时月色再阴，乘月行三十里，抵铁楼门，已五鼓矣。
现代文：当时月色更加明亮，乘月驶行三十里，抵达铁楼门，已经五更了。
English: At that time, the moon was much brighter. We drove thirty miles on the moon and arrived at the Iron Gate five hours late.

古文：艾使先返，问艾竟杳然也。
现代文：艾行可的仆人先返回桂府打探情况，结果艾行可竟然全无影踪、
English: Ai Xingke's servant first returned to Guifu to investigate the situation. As a result, Ai Xingke disappeared without a trace.

古文：先是，静闻见余辈赤身下水，彼念经芨在篷侧，遂留，舍命乞哀，贼为之置经。
现代文：先前，静闻见我等赤身跳入水中，他因想着佛经、书箱在船篷侧边，便留在了船上。他舍命乞求，盗贼才丢下经书。
English: Earlier, when Jing Huan saw us jumping naked into the water, he stayed on the boat because he was thinking about the Buddhist scriptures and the bookcase on the side of the boat's canopy. He begged for his life until the thief dropped the scriptures.

古文：此厢中有眉公与丽江木公叙稿，及弘辨、安仁诸书，与苍悟道顾东曙辈家书共数十通，又有张公宗琏所著《南程续记》，乃宣德初张侯特使广东时手书，其族人珍藏二百余年，予苦求得之。外以庄定山、陈白沙字裹之，亦置书中。
现代文：等破开我的竹箱，盗贼见箱中尽是书籍，就全部倾倒在船底上。静闻又向盗贼哀求，拾起来仍旧放在破箱中子盗贼也不禁止。接着盗贼又打开我的皮箱，见其中有块绸缎布料，便全部装在袋中抢走了。此箱中有陈眉公向丽江木公叙谈各事的信稿，以及他给弘辨、安仁的几封信件，还有苍梧道顾东曙等人的家信几十封。另外又有张公宗琏所著的《南程续记》，它是宣德初年张侯担负特别使命出使广东时亲自撰写的，他家族中的人将它珍藏了两百多年，我苦苦相求才得到它，书的外面用庄定山、陈白沙写的字幅裹着，也放在书信中间。
English: After ripping open my bamboo box, the thief saw that the box was full of books and dumped them all on the bottom of the boat. Quietly listening, he begged the thief to pick them up and still put them in the broken box, which the thief did not forbid. Then the thief opened my leather case again, saw that there was a piece of silk and satin cloth in it, and took them all in a bag. In this case, there is a letter from Chen Miegong to Lijiang Migong about various matters, as well as several letters from him to Hongban and Anren, and dozens of family letters from Cangwu Daogu Dongshu and others.

古文：静闻不及知，亦不暇乞，俱为携去，不知弃置何所，真可惜也。
现代文：静闻不知道这些，也无暇求讨回来，都被盗贼带了去，不知丢在何处，真可惜啊！
English: Jing Wen didn't know about this and didn't have time to ask for it back. The thieves took it all away and I don't know where they left it. What a shame!

古文：又取余皮挂厢，中有家藏《晴山帖》六本，铁针、锡瓶、陈用卿壶，俱重物，盗入手不开，亟取袋中。
现代文：盗贼又取了我的皮挂箱，箱中有我家私藏的公晴山帖》六本，以及铁针、锡瓶、陈用卿的壶等，都是些笨重的物件，盗贼拿到后没打开，赶忙装进袋子中。
English: The thieves also took my leather case. In the case, there were six copies of my family's private collection of "Kung Ching Mountain Scrolls," as well as iron needles, tin bottles, Chen Yingqing's pots, etc. They were all bulky objects. The thieves did not open them after they got them, but quickly put them in a bag.

古文：破予大笥ì竹器，取果饼俱投舡底，而曹能始《名胜志》三本、《云南志》四本及《游记》合刻十本，俱焚讫。
现代文：破开我的大筒，果饼都被抛到船底，而曹能始的《名胜志》三本、《云南志》四本以及游记》的合刻本十本，都被火烧掉。
English: After breaking my big jar, the fruit cakes were all thrown to the bottom of the boat, and three copies of Cao Nengshi's "Scenic Spots," four copies of "History of Yunnan" and ten copies of "Travels" were all burned by fire.

古文：其艾舱诸物，亦多焚弃。
现代文：艾行可舱中的各种物件，也大多被烧毁。
English: Most of the various objects in Ai Xingke's cabin were also burned.

古文：独石瑶庭一竹芨í书箱竟未开。
现代文：唯独石瑶庭的一个竹书箱盗贼竟然未打开。
English: However, a bamboo bookcase in the garden was left unopened by the thieves.

古文：贼濒行，辄放火后舱。
现代文：盗贼临走时，就在后舱放了火。
English: As the thieves were leaving, they set fire to the aft cabin.

古文：时静闻正留其侧，俟其去，即为扑灭，而余舱口亦火起，静闻复入江取水浇之。
现代文：当时静闻正好留在旁边，等盗贼一离开，就将火扑灭，但我所在那舱的舱口也起了火，静闻便又入江取水来浇火。
English: At that time, Jing Huan happened to be staying nearby, and as soon as the thieves left, she put out the fire, but the hatch of the cabin I was in also caught fire, and Jing Huan went into the river to get water to put out the fire.

古文：贼闻水声，以为有人也，及见静闻，戳两创而去，而火已不可救。
现代文：盗贼听到水声，以为有人来，等见到是静闻，就刺了他两下后离去，而火已经不可救。
English: The thief heard the sound of water and thought someone was coming. When he saw that it was silent, he stabbed him twice and left. The fire was out of control.

古文：时诸舟俱遥避，而两谷舟犹在，呼之，彼反移远。
现代文：当时众船都驶到远处躲避了，但两艘运谷子的船还在，静闻向他们呼喊，他们反而移向远处。
English: At that time, all the ships had sailed far away to avoid it, but the two ships carrying grain were still there. I heard shouts to them, but they moved far away.

古文：静闻乃入江取所堕篷作筏，亟携经芨并余烬余诸物，渡至谷舟；冒火再入取艾衣、被、书、米及石瑶庭竹芨，又置篷上，再渡谷舟；及第三次，则舟已沉矣。
现代文：于是静闻没入江中捞取落入水中的船篷作为筏子，赶紧将佛经、书箱以及我的火烧后残留的各样物品放入筏中，渡到谷船处；又冒火再到船上取了艾行可的衣服、被子、书箱、米以及石瑶庭的竹书箱，又放在船篷上，再次渡到谷船处；等第三次返回时，船已沉了。
English: Therefore, Jing Huan did not go into the river to retrieve the canopy that fell into the water as a raft. He quickly put the Buddhist scriptures, the bookcase and various items that remained after my fire into the raft and went to the valley boat. He also lit a fire and went to the boat to get Ai Xingke's clothes, quilts, bookcases, rice and the bamboo bookcase from the stone garden. He put it on the canopy and went to the valley boat again. By the time he returned for the third time, the boat had sunk.

古文：静闻从水底取得湿衣三、四件，仍渡谷舟，而谷乘黑暗匿衣等物，止存布衣布被而已。
现代文：静闻从水底捞起三四件湿衣服，仍渡回谷船处，而那谷船乘黑暗隐藏了我的绸子衣服等物品，只剩些布衣布被而已。
English: Quietly, I picked up three or four wet clothes from the bottom of the water, and still went back to the valley boat, and the valley boat used the darkness to hide my silk clothes and other items, leaving only some cloth clothes and quilts.

古文：静闻乃重移置沙上，谷舟亦开去。
现代文：于是静闻重新将它们移到沙滩上，谷船也随之开走。
English: So Jinghan moved them back onto the beach, and the barge drove away.

古文：及守余辈渡江，石与艾仆见所救物，悉各认去。
现代文：等我们渡过江到达静闻那里时，姓石的和艾行可的仆人见到救下的物件，尽都各自认领了去。
English: When we crossed the river and arrived at Jinghun, the servants surnamed Shi and Ai Xingke saw the rescued items and claimed them all.

古文：静闻因谓石曰： 悉是君物乎？ 
现代文：静闻于是对姓石的说： 全是你的东西吗？ 
English: Jing Huan then said to Shi: "Is everything yours?

古文：石遂大诟污损责难静闻，谓： 众人疑尔登涯引盗。
现代文：姓石的便大骂静闻，说： 众人怀疑是你登陆引来盗贼。
English: The man, surnamed Shi, then scolded Jingwen, saying, "People suspect that you landed here to lure the thieves.

古文：谓讯哭童也。汝真不良，欲掩我之箧。 
现代文：你实在是品性不良，想偷取我的箱子。 
English: You really have a bad character, trying to steal my suitcase.

古文：不知静闻为彼冒刃、冒寒、冒火、冒水，夺护此箧，以待主者，彼不为德，而后诟之。
现代文：他不知道静闻为了他冒刀剑、冒寒凉、冒火、冒水，并守护这箱子，以等待主人来领取，他不感谢别人的恩德，反倒辱骂。
English: He did not know that Jingwen had taken up the sword, braved the cold, the fire, and the water for him, and guarded the box to wait for the owner to come to collect it. He did not thank others for their kindness, but insulted them.

古文：盗犹怜僧，彼更胜盗哉矣，人之无良如此！
现代文：盗贼都还同情僧人，这家伙比盗贼更狠毒啊，无良心的人就是如此！
English: Thieves are also sympathetic to monks, this guy is more vicious than thieves, people without a conscience are like that!

古文：十三日，昧爽登涯，计无所之。
现代文：十三日黎明登岸，担心无处可投奔。
English: I got ashore at dawn on the 13th, worried that I had nowhere to go.

古文：思金祥甫为他乡故知，投之或可强留。
现代文：后心想金祥甫是他乡异地中相识并有交往的人，投奔他或许可以勉强停留。
English: In the back of his mind, he thought that Jin Xiangfu was someone he had met and interacted with in his hometown, and he might be able to stay there reluctantly.

古文：候铁楼门开，乃入。急趋祥甫寓，告以遇盗始末，祥甫怆悲愤然。
现代文：等铁楼门一开，就走进去，急忙奔到祥甫的寓所，将遇盗的前后情形告诉了他，祥甫显出悲伤的神态。
English: As soon as the iron gate opened, he walked in and hurried to Xiangfu's apartment to tell him the circumstances of the robbery. Xiangfu looked sad.

古文：初欲假借数十金于藩府，托祥甫担当，随托祥甫归家收还，而余辈仍了西方大愿。
现代文：我起初想向桂王府借几十两银子，托祥甫担保，同时托祥甫回老家时到我家中取了来还给桂王府，而我则用借得的费用仍可了却旅游西部地区的心愿。
English: At first, I wanted to borrow a few dozen taels of silver from King Gui's Mansion, entrusting Xiangfu to guarantee it. At the same time, when King Gui's Mansion returned to his hometown, Xiangfu took it to my home and returned it to King Gui's Mansion. However, I was able to use the borrowed money to travel in the western region.

古文：祥甫谓藩府无银可借，询余若归故乡，为别措以备衣装。
现代文：然而祥甫说桂王府没有银两可借，他征求我的意见，说若回故乡，他替我另外筹集钱币备办衣服行装。
English: However, Xiangfu said that Guiwangfu had no silver or gold to borrow, and he asked for my advice, saying that if he returned to his hometown, he would raise additional coins to prepare clothes for me.

古文：余念遇难辄返，觅资重来，妻孥必无放行之理，不欲变余去志，仍求祥甫曲济。祥甫唯唯。
现代文：我考虑到若遇难就返回家，找了费用重新再来，妻子儿女一定不会让我走，于是不愿改变我继续旅游的意志，依然恳求祥甫曲意周济我们，祥甫表示应允。
English: Considering that my wife and children would not let me go if I were to return home in the event of a disaster and find the money to come back again, I did not want to change my will to continue traveling. I still begged Xiangfu to help us, and Xiangfu agreed.

古文：十四、五日，俱在金寓。
现代文：十四、十五日两天都在金祥甫寓所中。
English: On the 14th and 15th, they were both at Jin Xiangfu's apartment.

古文：十六日，金为投揭内司，约二十二始会众议助。
现代文：十六日金祥甫为我们的事写了个启事送到内司。约好二十二日才会集众人商议救助。
English: On the 16th, Jin Xiangfu wrote a notice about our case and sent it to the Internal Affairs Division. It was about the 22nd that everyone gathered to discuss the rescue.

古文：初，祥甫谓已不能贷，欲遍求众内司共济，余颇难之。
现代文：起初，祥甫说他自己不能借贷，想到处去向众内司请求共同接济，我很感到为难。
English: At first, Xiangfu said that he couldn't borrow money, and I was embarrassed to think of going everywhere to appeal to all the magistrates for joint aid.

古文：静闻谓彼久欲置四十八愿斋僧田于常住，今得众济，即贷余为西游资。俟余归，照所济之数为彼置田于寺，仍以所施诸人名立石，极为两便。
现代文：静闻说他早想在常住的寺内购置一块四十八愿斋僧田，如今若得到众人救济，就将所得钱物借给我作为旅游西部地区的费用，等我回到家，按照所救济钱财的数目在寺庙中为他购置田亩，仍旧立一块碑，将各位施舍钱财者的名字刻在碑上，这样就两件事都解决了。
English: Jingwen said that he had long wanted to buy a piece of forty-eight vows monk's field in the temple where he usually lives. Now, if he gets people's relief, he will lend me the money and goods earned as the cost of traveling to the western region. When I get home, I will buy a mu of land for him in the temple according to the amount of the relief money, still erect a monument, and engrave the names of everyone who gives money and wealth on the monument. In this way, both things are solved.

古文：余不得已，听之。
现代文：我不得已，听从了他的意见。
English: I had no choice but to follow his advice.

古文：十七、八日，俱在余寓。
现代文：十七、十八日两天都在金祥甫的寓所中。
English: On the 17th and 18th, they were both at Jin Xiangfu's apartment.

古文：时余自顶至踵，无非金物，而顾仆犹蓬首赤足，衣不蔽体，只得株守金寓。
现代文：当时我从头到脚，穿戴的都是金祥甫给的衣物，而顾仆仍然蓬头赤脚，衣不蔽体，所以只得呆守在金祥甫的寓所里。
English: At that time, I was dressed from head to toe in clothes given to me by Jin Xiangfu, while Gu Min was still barefoot and naked, so I had to stay in Jin Xiangfu's apartment.

古文：自返衡以来，亦无晴霁之日，或雨或阴，泥泞异常，不敢动移一步。
现代文：从返回衡州城以来，也无晴朗的一天，或下雨或天阴，泥泞异常，不敢移动一步。
English: Since returning to Hengzhou City, there has not been a clear day, or rain or cloudy, muddy abnormal, dare not move a step.

古文：十九日，往看刘明宇，坐其楼头竟日。
现代文：十九日去看望刘明宇，在他楼上坐了一整天。
English: On the 19th, I went to visit Liu Mingyu and sat on his floor for a whole day.

古文：刘为衡故尚书刘尧诲养子，少负膂ǚ力，慷慨好义，尚书翁故倚重，今年已五十六，奉斋而不禁酒，闻余被难，即叩金寓余，欲为余缉盗。
现代文：刘明宇为衡州府籍原尚书刘尧海的养子，少年时就有很强的体力，慷慨好义，尚书老先生原先很偏爱器重他，如今他年纪已经五十六，吃素膳但不禁酒。他听说我遭了难，就到金祥甫的寓所拜访了我，想为我缉拿盗贼。
English: Liu Mingyu is the adopted son of Shangshu Liu Yinghai, originally from Hengzhou Prefecture. When he was young, he had strong physical strength and was generous and kind. Mr. Shangshu used to be very fond of him. Now he is fifty-six years old, he eats vegetarian food but does not drink alcohol. When he heard that I was in trouble, he visited me at Jin Xiangfu's apartment and wanted to catch the thief for me.

古文：余谢物已去矣，即得之，亦无可为西方资。
现代文：我感谢他的好意，说物件已经丢了，即便重新得到，也不可以作为旅游西部地区的费用。
English: I thanked him for his kindness, saying that the property had been lost, and even if I got it back, it could not be used as a fee for tourism in the western region.

古文：所惜者唯张侯《南程》一纪，乃其家藏二百余年物，而眉公辈所寄丽江诸书，在彼无用，在我难再遘ò遇耳。
现代文：可惜的只是张侯《南程续记》那套书，那是他家中珍藏了两百多年的一件宝物；而陈眉公等人要我带到丽江去的各封信件，对那些盗贼没有用，对于我却难以再拥有了。
English: The only thing I regret is Zhang Hou's "Southern Journey Continued" series of books, which is a treasure that has been treasured in his home for more than two hundred years; and the letters that Chen Meigong and others wanted me to take to Lijiang were useless to those thieves, but difficult for me to have again.

古文：刘乃立矢通 誓 神前，曰： 金不可复，必为公复此。 
现代文：刘明宇听后便在神位前立誓说： 就算金银不可重得，也一定为你找回这些书和信件。 
English: After listening to Liu Mingyu, he swore before the throne and said: Even if gold and silver cannot be repaid, I will definitely find these books and letters for you.

古文：余不得已，亦姑听之。
现代文：我不得已，也姑且听从他的。
English: I had no choice but to listen to him.

古文：二十日，晴霁，出步柴埠门外，由铁楼门入。
现代文：二十日天气晴朗，走出金祥甫的寓所，漫步到柴埠门外，从铁楼门进了城。
English: On the 20th, the weather was fine. I walked out of Jin Xiangfu's apartment, strolled outside the Chai Bu Gate, and entered the city through the Iron Gate.

古文：途中见折宝珠茶，花大瓣密，其红映日；又见折千叶绯桃，含苞甚大，皆桃花冲物也，拟往观之。
现代文：途中见被折下的宝珠茶，花大瓣密，红艳映日；又见到被折下的花瓣重叠排红的桃花，那欲开未开的花苞很大，它们都是桃花冲里的，我本来打算前去观赏花景。
English: On the way, I saw the folded treasure bead tea, the large petals of the flower were dense, and the reddish color reflected the sun; I also saw the folded petals overlapping the red peach blossoms, and the unopened flower buds were very large. They were all in the peach blossoms, and I originally planned to go to watch the flower scene.

古文：而前晚下午，忽七门早闭，盖因东安有大盗临城，祁阳亦有盗杀掠也。
现代文：然而前天下午，忽然早早地就关闭了七个城门，大概是因为东安县有大盗攻临县城，祁阳县境内也有盗烧杀抢掠的缘故。
English: However, the afternoon of the day before yesterday, seven city gates were suddenly closed early, probably because of the bandits in Dong'an County attacking the county seat, and the theft, burning, killing and looting in the territory of Fenyang County.

古文：余恐闭于城外，遂复入城，订明日同静闻往游焉。
现代文：我担心被关在城外，便又回城，约定第二天同静闻前往桃花冲游览。
English: I was worried that I would be locked out of the city, so I returned to the city and agreed to go on a tour of the peach blossoms with Jingwen the next day.

古文：二十一日，阴云复布，当午雨复霏霏，竟不能出游。
现代文：二十一日阴云又布满天空，正午时雨再次霏霏地下起来，我们竟不能出城到桃花冲去游览。
English: On the twenty-first day, the sky was overcast again, and the rain poured down again at noon. We couldn't even go out of the city to visit the peach blossoms.

古文：是日南门获盗七人，招党及百，刘为余投揭捕厅。
现代文：这天城南门抓到七个盗贼，招供出他们的同伙上百人，刘明宇为我的事投了封启事到捕厅。
English: On this day, seven thieves were caught in the south gate of the city, and hundreds of their accomplices confessed. Liu Mingyu sent a notice to the detention hall for my case.

古文：下午，刘以蕨芽为供饷余，并前在天母殿所尝葵菜，为素供二绝。
现代文：下午，刘明宇用族菜款待我，这蔗菜连同前些日子在天母殿品尝的葵菜，都是蔬菜中的两种独特菜肴。
English: In the afternoon, Liu Mingyu entertained me with ethnic dishes. This cane dish, together with the sunflower dish that I tasted in Tianmu Hall a few days ago, are two unique vegetable dishes.

古文：余忆王摩诘 松下清斋折露葵 ，及东坡 蕨芽初长小儿拳 ，尝念此二物，可与薄丝一种草本植物共成三绝，而余乡俱无。
现代文：我回忆起王摩洁 折取露中葵菜在松下做成素饭 ，以及苏东坡 蔗芽初长出如孩童的拳头 的诗句，曾想这两样东西，可以和茸丝合在一起成为三绝，然而我家乡一样都没有。
English: I recalled Wang Ma Jie's poem about turning sunflower greens from the dew into rice at Matsushita, and Su Dongpo's poem about sugar cane buds sprouting like a child's fist. I once thought that these two things could be combined with mushroom silk to become a trinity, but they are not the same in my hometown.

古文：及至衡，尝葵于天母殿，尝蕨于此，风味殊胜。
现代文：到衡州城后，在天母殿品尝了葵菜，在这里品尝了威菜，风味特别美。
English: After arriving in Hengzhou City, I tasted sunflower dishes at Tianmu Hall, and Wei dishes here. The flavor was particularly beautiful.

古文：盖葵松而脆，蕨滑而柔，各擅一胜也，是日午后，忽发风寒甚，中夜风吼，雨不止。
现代文：葵菜松脆，藏菜滑嫩，各有优点。这天午后，忽然起了风，十分寒冷，到半夜狂风吼叫，雨下个不停。
English: Sunflower greens are crunchy, Tibetan vegetables are slippery, and each has its own advantages. In the afternoon of this day, the wind suddenly picked up, it was very cold, and by midnight the wind was howling and it rained incessantly.

古文：二十二日，晨起，风止雨霁。
现代文：二十二日早晨起来，风止雨歇。
English: On the morning of the 22nd, the wind stopped and the rain stopped.

古文：上午，同静闻出瞻岳门，越草桥，过绿竹园。
现代文：上午，同静闻走出瞻岳门，越过草桥，从绿竹园经过。
English: In the morning, he and Jingwen walked out of the Junyue Gate, crossed the grass bridge, and passed through the Green Bamboo Garden.

古文：桃花历乱，柳色依然，不觉有去住之感。
现代文：桃花纷乱，柳色依然，心中不觉涌起离去和住留两种截然不同的感慨。
English: The peach blossoms are in full bloom, the willow is still there, and two very different feelings of leaving and staying are surging in my heart.

古文：入看瑞光不值，与其徒入桂花园，则宝珠盛开，花大如盘，殷红密瓣，万朵浮团翠之上，真一大观。
现代文：进入绿竹庵中去看望瑞光，但未遇到他，便与他的徒弟一道进了桂花园，园中宝珠茶花盛开，花朵大如盘碟，花色红中带黑，花瓣密集，千朵万朵浮在青绿色的圆状的树冠上，真是一个绚丽的景观。
English: He entered the Green Bamboo Hermitage to visit Rui Guang, but before he met him, he and his apprentice entered the Katsura Garden. In the garden, the pearl camellia was in full bloom, the flowers were as big as saucers, the flowers were red with black, the petals were dense, and thousands of flowers floated on the blue-green circular canopy. It was truly a gorgeous landscape.

古文：徜徉久之，不复知身在患难中也。
现代文：在园中忘怀地漫游了许久，不再感觉到身在患难中。
English: After wandering around the garden for a long time, I no longer felt that I was in trouble.

古文：望隔溪坞内，桃花竹色，相为映带，其中有阁临流，其巅有亭新构，阁乃前游所未入，亭乃昔时所未有缀。
现代文：举目望去，溪流对面的山坞内，鲜艳的桃花与青翠的竹子互相映衬，桃竹丛中有个台阁，濒临溪流，山顶新建有一个亭子，台阁是前些日子游览时没有进去过的，亭子那时候还没有建。
English: Looking up, in the dock on the opposite side of the stream, the bright peach blossoms and the green bamboo are juxtaposed with each other. There is a pavilion in the peach and bamboo bushes, near the stream. There is a newly built pavilion on the top of the mountain. The pavilion was not entered during the tour a few days ago, and the pavilion was not built at that time.

古文：急循级而入，感花事之芳菲，叹沧桑之倏忽。
现代文：急忙沿着石阶进入山坞内，看到眼前芳菲的花朵，不禁感叹人间世事有如花开花落，瞬间便会发生很大的变化。
English: Rushing along the stone steps into the dockyard, seeing the beautiful flowers in front of me, I can't help but lament that human affairs are like flowers blooming and falling, and great changes will occur in an instant.

古文：登山踞巅亭，南瞰湘流，西瞻落日，为之怃然。
现代文：登上山坐在亭子中，向南俯瞰滔滔湘流，往西远望西沉的太阳，顿觉怅然有失。
English: Climbing the mountain, sitting in the pavilion, overlooking the torrential Hunan River to the south, and looking westward at the setting sun, I suddenly felt lost.

古文：乃返过草桥，再登石鼓，由合江亭东下，濒江观二竖石。
现代文：于是往回越过草桥，再次登上石鼓山，从合江亭往东朝下走，到江边观看二竖石。
English: So I went back across the grass bridge, climbed Shigu Mountain again, and walked down from Hejiang Pavilion to the east, to the river to watch the two stalactites.

古文：乃二石柱，旁支以石，上镌对联，一曰： 临流欲下任公钓。 
现代文：它其实是两根石柱，旁边用石头支撑着；石柱上刻有一副对联，一联是： 临流欲下任公钓。 
English: It is actually two stone pillars, supported by a stone crane; there is a couplet engraved on the stone pillar. The couplet is: 临流欲下任公钓.

古文：一曰： 观水长吟孺子歌。 
现代文：另一联是： 观水常吟孺子歌。 
English: The other couplet is: 観水常吟子歌.

古文：非石鼓也。
现代文：不是石鼓。
English: Not a stone drum.

古文：两过此地，皆当落日，风景不殊，人事多错，能不兴怀！
现代文：两次经过此地，都是正当日落时候，风景没有变化，人事却多外错，怎能不触发我的情怀！
English: The two times I passed this place, it was right at sunset, the scenery didn't change, but the people were mostly wrong, how could I not trigger my feelings!

