古文：后主后主，讳叔宝，字元秀，小字黄奴，高宗嫡长子也。
现代文：后主名叔宝，字元秀，小名黄奴，是高宗的嫡长子。
English: Later, he was called Shubao, Zhiming Xiu, and Huang Niu. He was the eldest son of Gao Zong.

古文：梁承圣二年十一月戊寅生于江陵。
现代文：梁朝承圣二年十一月戊寅出生在江陵。
English: Wu Yin was born in Gangneung in November of the second year of the reign of Emperor Liang.

古文：明年，江陵陷，高宗迁关右，留后主于穰城。
现代文：次年，江陵沦陷，高宗被迁徙到关右，留下后主住在穣城。
English: The following year, after the fall of Gangneung, Gaozong was moved to Guanzhu, leaving his master to live in Lucheng.

古文：天嘉三年，归京师，立为安成王世子。
现代文：天嘉三年，后主回京城，被立为安成王世子。
English: Three years after Tianjia, the empress returned to Beijing and was appointed the successor of Ancheng Wang.

古文：天康元年，授宁远将军，置佐史。
现代文：玉尘元年，被授任为宁远将军，设置佐史。
English: In the first year of the Jade and Dust era, he was appointed as the general of Ningyuan and set up Sashi.

古文：光大二年，为太子中庶子，寻迁侍中，馀如故。
现代文：光大二年，担任太子中庶子，不久升为侍中，其余职位照旧。
English: In his second year of college, he served as the prince's middle child, and was soon promoted to chamberlain, with the rest of his positions remaining the same.

古文：太建元年正月甲午，立为皇太子。
现代文：太建元年正月甲午，被立为皇太子。
English: In the first half of the first month of the first year of the year, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：十四年正月甲寅，高宗崩。
现代文：十四年正月甲寅，高宗逝世。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Jiajing Emperor, Gaozong died.

古文：乙卯，始兴王叔陵作逆，伏诛。
现代文：乙卯，始兴王赵陵作乱，受死刑。
English: Second, Shi Xing Wang Zhaoling made a disturbance and was sentenced to death.

古文：丁巳，太子即皇帝位于太极前殿。
现代文：丁巳，太子在太极前殿登上皇帝位。
English: Soon after, the crown prince ascended to the throne in front of the Taiji Temple.

古文：诏曰： 上天降祸，大行皇帝奄弃万国，攀号擗踊，无所迨及。
现代文：诏令说： 上天降下祸殃，大行皇帝突然抛弃万国，人们拉着丧车捶胸顿足地号哭，不能挽回。
English: The edict said: "The heavens have brought down a calamity, Emperor Da Xing has suddenly abandoned the world, and the people are weeping and wailing, unable to turn back.

古文：朕以哀茕，嗣膺宝历，若涉巨川，罔知攸济，方赖群公，用匡寡薄。
现代文：我以哀伤孤独之身，继承皇位，如同过大江，不知如何渡过，正依赖各位公卿，来辅助我逭寡德薄能之人。
English: I, a sad and lonely man, have succeeded to the throne as if I were crossing a great river, and I do not know how to get across, and I am relying on you, the nobles, to assist me, a man of poor virtue and weak ability.

古文：思播遗德，覃被亿兆，凡厥遐迩，咸与惟新。
现代文：思虑传播先人的德行，遍及到百姓，凡是远近的人，都来参与革新。
English: Thoughtfully spread the virtues of the ancestors, spread to the people, and all those who are far and near come to participate in innovation.

古文：癸亥，以侍中、翊前将军、丹阳尹长沙王叔坚为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，右卫将军萧摩诃为车骑将军、南徐州刺史，镇西将军、荆州刺史樊毅进号征西将军，平南将军、豫州刺史任忠进号镇南将军，护军将军沈恪为特进、金紫光禄大夫，平西将军鲁广达进号安西将军，仁武将军、豊州刺史章大宝为中护军。乙丑，尊皇后为皇太后，宫曰弘范。丙寅，以冠军将军晋熙王叔文为宣惠将军、丹阳尹。丁卯，立弟叔重为始兴王，奉昭烈王祀，己巳，立妃沈氏为皇后。辛未，立皇弟叔俨为寻阳王，皇弟叔慎为岳阳王，皇弟叔达为义阳王，皇弟叔熊为巴山王，皇弟叔虞为武昌王。
现代文：可大赦天下。在位的文武官员和察举孝悌力田而为父亲后嗣者，都赐给爵位一级。孤老鳏寡不能养活自己的，赐给谷粟每人五斛、帛二匹。 癸亥，任命侍中、翊前将军、丹阳尹长沙王叔坚为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，右卫将军萧摩诃为车骑将军、南徐州刺史，镇西将军、荆州刺史矾錾进号为征西将军，平南将军、豫州刺史任忠进号为镇南将军，护军将军沈恪为特进、金紫光禄大夫，平西将军鲁广达进号为安西将军，仁武将军、丰业刺史童去宣为中护军。乙丑，尊崇皇后为皇太后，宫名为弘范。丙寅，任命冠军将军晋熙王叔文为宣惠将军、丹阳尹。丁卯，立弟弟叔重为始兴王，奉行昭烈王的祭祀。己巳，立妃子沈氏为皇后。辛未，立皇弟叔俨为寻阳王，皇弟叔慎为岳阳王，皇弟叔达为义阳王，皇弟叔熊为巴山王，皇弟叔虞为武昌王。
English: The reigning civil and military officials and the inheritors of the paternal heirs of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of

古文：壬申，侍中、中权将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳王伯山进号中权大将军，军师将军、尚书左仆射晋安王伯恭进号翊前将军、侍中，翊右将军、中领军庐陵王伯仁进号安前将军，镇南将军、江州刺史豫章王叔英进号征南将军，平南将军、湘州刺史建安王叔卿进号安南将军。
现代文：壬申，侍中、中权将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳王伯山进号为中权大将军，军师将军、尚书左仆射晋安王伯恭进号为翊前将军、侍中，翊右将军、中领军庐陵王伯仁进号为安前将军，镇南将军、江州刺史豫章王叔英进号为征南将军，平南将军、湘州刺史建安王叔卿进号为安南将军。
English: In Jinshin, the attendant, the general of the Central Powers, Kaifu Yi and the three departments of Jinyang, Wang Bishan, entered as the general of the Central Powers, the general of the military division, Shang Shuxu, the left servant of Jinsha, Wang Bokun, entered as the former general of Shandong, the attendant, the right general of Shandong, the leader of the central army, Wang Boryin, entered as the former general of An, the general of Zhenan, the general of Jiangzhou, the general of Yuzhang, Wang Shuying, entered as the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of Pingnan,

古文：以侍中、中书监、安右将军徐陵为左光禄大夫，领太子少傅。
现代文：任命侍中、中书监、安右将军徐陵为左光禄大夫，兼太子少傅。
English: He appointed Xu Ling, the Vice-Chamberlain, the Central Library Supervisor, and General An Yu, as the Doctor of the Left Hand and the Younger Brother of the Crown Prince.

古文：甲戌，设无珝大会于太极前殿。
现代文：甲戌，在太极前殿设立佛教法会。三月辛亥，韶令说： 亲自扶犁鼓励耕种。
English: In March of the Year of the Boar, the Emperor issued an edict saying, "Personally help the Boar to encourage farming."

古文：三月辛亥，诏曰： 躬推为劝，义显前经，力农见赏，事昭往诰。
现代文：道理明显载于从前的经典，努力耕作受到赏赐，事情昭著于往昔的训示。
English: The truth is clearly set out in the previous scriptures, hard work is rewarded, and the matter is clear in the previous instructions.

古文：斯乃国储是资，民命攸属，豊俭隆替，靡不由之。
现代文：这是国家储蓄的根本，民众性命的关键，丰歉兴衰，无不由于农业。
English: This is the foundation of national savings, the key to people's lives, and the rise and fall of rich and poor is all due to agriculture.

古文：夫入赋自古，输藁惟旧，沃饶贵于十金，硗确至于三易，腴脊既异，盈缩不同。
现代文：交纳赋税出自古代，翰纳刍藁实为旧制，肥沃土地一亩贵遇十两黄金，贫瘠土地竟至于三年轮流耕种一次，肥沃贫瘠有差异，丰收歉收不相同。
English: The payment of taxes dates back to ancient times, and the old system is still in effect. One mu of fertile land is worth ten times as much as gold, while barren land is cultivated once every three years. There are differences between fertile and barren land, as well as differences between good harvests and bad harvests.

古文：诈伪日兴，簿书岁改。
现代文：现在诈伪益兴起，簿籍每年改动。
English: Fraudulent profits are now on the rise, and the books are changed every year.

古文：稻田使者，著自西京，不实峻刑，闻诸东汉。
现代文：稻田使者，着录于西京，以不实的罪名而滥用严峻的刑法，在束汉时有所闻。
English: Rice field messenger, recorded in West Beijing, abused the severe criminal law with false charges, which was known in Han Dynasty.

古文：老农惧于祗应，俗吏因以侮文。
现代文：老农畏惧供奉，俗吏因此舞文弄墨。
English: The old farmers are afraid to make offerings, so the commoners dance and play with ink.

古文：辍耒成群，游手为伍，永言妨蠹，良可太息。
现代文：停止耕作者成群结伙，游手好闲者聚在一起，谈到妨碍农业的蠹害，实在值得叹息。
English: It is indeed a matter for lamentation that the hordes of cultivators should be stopped, the idlers should be stopped from gathering together, and the mischief-makers should be stopped from interfering with agriculture.

古文：今阳和在节，膏泽润下，宜展春耨，以望秋坻。
现代文：现在季节温和，及时雨滋润大地，应该开展春耕，来指望秋天的丰收。
English: Now that the season is mild and the timely rain moistens the earth, spring ploughing should be carried out to expect a bumper harvest in autumn.

古文：其有新辟塍畎，进垦蒿莱，广袤勿得度量，征租悉皆停免。
现代文：凡有新开辟的土埂水沟，垦植的蒿草荒地，面积不要丈量，全部免征租税。
English: All newly opened earthen ditches and wastelands planted with reeds and rushes are exempt from tax. The area is not to be measured.

古文：私业久废，咸许占作，公田荒纵，亦随肆勤。
现代文：私人田业长久荒废，都允许申报耕作，公田荒芜，也依其能力种植。
English: Private fields that have been abandoned for a long time are allowed to declare cultivation, and public fields that have been abandoned can be planted according to their ability.

古文：傥良守教耕，淳民载酒，有兹督课，议以赏擢。
现代文：倘若优良郡守教民耕作，淳朴民众举杯庆祝，有如此的督促成效，可商议赏赐擢升。
English: If a good county magistrate teaches the people how to farm, and the simple people raise a glass to celebrate, if there is such a supervision effect, the reward and promotion can be discussed.

古文：外可为格班下，称朕意焉。 
现代文：外府可制定条例颁发下去，以适合我的心意。 
English: Other prefectures may enact ordinances and issue them to suit my wishes.

古文：癸亥，诏曰： 夫体国经野，长世字氓，虽因革傥殊，驰张或异，至于旁求俊乂，爰逮侧微，用适和羹，是隆大厦，上智中主，咸由此术。
现代文：癸亥，诏令说： 治理国家，统御民众，虽然因袭改革有不同，松弛紧张有差异，至于广求英才，直到低微人士，来协和社会，兴盛国家，上等智慧的君主与中等能力的君主，都用这个办法。
English: The imperial edict said: "In governing the country and governing the people, although there are differences in reform, relaxation and tension, as far as seeking talents, even low-level people, promoting social harmony and a prosperous country, a superior wisdom monarch and a monarch with medium ability, all use this method.

古文：朕以寡薄，嗣膺景祚，虽哀疚在躬，情虑鋋舛，而宗社任重，黎庶务殷，无由自安拱默，敢忘康济，思所以登显髦彦，式备周行。
现代文：我以微薄的德才，继承大位，虽然哀伤病痛在身，思虑昏庸舛误，但是国家责任重大，百姓事务众多，没有办法自己安于拱手沉默，不敢忘记安民济众，总考虑怎样擢升英才，完备至美之道。
English: I inherited the throne with a meager amount of virtue. Although I am sad, sick and worried, my thoughts are confused. However, the country has great responsibilities and the people have many affairs. There is no way for me to be satisfied with silence. I dare not forget the safety of the people and the welfare of the people. I always consider how to promote talents and perfect the way of beauty.

古文：但空劳宵梦，屡勤史卜，五就莫来，八能不至。
现代文：衹是徒劳于夜晚睡梦中，屡次辛勤史官卜臣，五种归向者不前来，八种能人不到达。
English: It is in vain to sleep at night, and repeatedly toil as a historian. Five kinds of converts do not come forward, and eight kinds of able people do not arrive.

古文：是用申旦凝虑，丙夜损怀。
现代文：所以通宵达旦思虑，三更时耗费精力。
English: So the all-nighter is spent thinking, and the three-hour shift consumes energy.

古文：岂以食玉炊桂，无因自达？
现代文：难道是因米价柴价昂贵，没有途径上达?
English: Is it because the price of rice and the price of firewood are expensive, and there is no way to go up?

古文：将怀宝迷邦，咸思独善？
现代文：抑或是怀藏道德而不救国家的迷乱，都想独善其身?
English: Or is it a case of harbouring morals but not saving the country from confusion, wanting to look after one's own?

古文：应内外众官九品已上，可各荐一人，以会汇征之旨。
现代文：所有内外官员在九品以上者，可各自荐举一人，来合于广泛征集的旨意。
English: All officials at home and abroad who are above the ninth grade may each nominate one person to meet the intention of extensive recruitment.

古文：且取备实难，举长或易，小大之用，明言所施，勿得南箕北斗，名而非实。
现代文：而且求取完备者实为困难，推举有长处者或许容易，大小才能的用途，明白说明所可使用的地方，不能如南箕和北斗，有名而无实。
English: Moreover, it is difficult to find a complete person, and it may be easy to nominate a person with strengths. The use of talents of all sizes should be clearly explained, and the places where they can be used should not be famous and insubstantial, such as Nanlu and Beidou.

古文：其有负能仗气，摈压当时，著《宾戏》以自怜，草《客嘲》以慰志，人生一世，逢遇诚难，亦宜去此幽谷，翔兹天路，趋铜驼以观国，望金马而来庭，便当随彼方圆，饬之矩矱。 
现代文：如有身负才能依仗才气，在当代受压抑，撰作《宾戏》来怜惜自己的，编写《客嘲》来安慰志向的，虽然人生在世，受到知遇实在困难，也应离开这片幽深的山谷，奔翔在这入朝的道路上。趋向铜驰陌来观看国都，望着金马门而进入朝廷，便可根据他们的才干，依规则法度任用他们。 
English: If you have the ability to rely on talent, and you are oppressed in the contemporary world, write "Bingo" to feel sorry for yourself, write "Guest Mockery" to comfort the aspiring, although you are alive, you should leave this deep valley and fly on this road to the imperial court. If you tend to visit the capital of the country and look at the Golden Horse Gate to enter the imperial court, you can appoint them according to their talents and according to the rules and regulations.

古文：又诏曰： 昔睿后宰民，哲王御宇，虽德称汪濊，明能普烛，犹复纡己乞言，降情访道，高咨岳牧，下听舆台，故能政若神明，事无悔吝。
现代文：又下韶说： 从前英明君主统治民众，圣贤帝王控御天下，虽然仁德的声望如汪洋，圣明的才能普照天下，仍然屈身征求言论，降下心志寻访有道之人，上听诸侯之言，下听奴仆之论，所以能够政令如神明，事情没有后悔的。
English: He also said: In the past, wise monarchs ruled the people, and wise emperors controlled the world. Although the reputation of benevolence was soaring, and the talent of wisdom shone all over the world, they still bowed down to solicit opinions, lowered their minds to search for virtuous people, listened to the words of princes, and listened to the opinions of slaves, so they could rule like gods, and they did not regret the matter.

古文：朕纂承丕绪，思隆大业，常惧九重已邃，四聪未广，欲听昌言，不疲痺足，若逢廷折，无惮批鳞。
现代文：我继承大统，思虑振兴伟大的基业，时常畏惧皇宫深严，四方视听不广阔，想要听到正直的言论，不以腿脚肿痛为疲劳，如果遇到在朝廷上当众辩驳，不要畏惧触怒帝王。
English: I am the heir to the throne, I am thinking about revitalizing the great heritage, I am often afraid of the severity of the imperial palace, the four-way audio-visual is not broad, I want to hear honest speech, I do not take swollen legs and feet as fatigue, if I encounter public debate in the imperial court, do not be afraid of offending the emperor.

古文：而口柔之辞，傥闻于在位，腹诽之意，或隐于具僚，非所以弘理至公，缉熙帝载者也。
现代文：然而谄媚的言辞，时而从在位官员口中听到，心中诽谤的意向，可能隐藏于僚属中，逭不是弘扬大道一心为公，辅助帝王业绩的做法。
English: However, the flattering words, sometimes heard from the mouth of the incumbent officials, and the intention of slander in the heart, may be hidden in the colleagues, but it is not the practice of promoting the road of dedication to the public and assisting the performance of the emperor.

古文：内外卿士文武众司，若有智周政术，心练治体，救民俗之疾苦，辩禁网之疏密者，各进忠谠，无所隐讳。
现代文：内外公卿士大夫文武百官，如果有智慧遍知行政方略，心中熟悉治理体式，救助民众的疾苦，辨析法网的疏密者，各自献上忠实正直之言，不要隐瞒忌讳。
English: If you have the wisdom to know all the administrative strategies, are familiar with the governance style, help the people's sufferings, and distinguish the secrets of the legal network, then each of you should present your faithful and honest words, and do not hide your taboo.

古文：朕将虚己听受，择善而行，庶深鉴物情，匡我王度。 
现代文：我将虚心听取接受，选择好的而施行，希望深察民心，辅助国家法度。 
English: I will listen and accept with an open mind, choose the good and implement it, hope to deeply understand the people's will, and assist the national legislation.

古文：己巳，以侍中、尚书左仆射、新除翊前将军晋安王伯恭为安南将军、湘州刺史，新除翊左将军、永阳王伯智为尚书仆射，中护军章大宝为豊州刺史。
现代文：己巳，任命侍中、尚书左仆射、新任翊前将军晋安王为安南将军、扭业刺史，新任翊左将军、永阳王伯智为尚书仆射，中护军章大宝为丰州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed the chamberlains, Shang Shuxi Zuo Pu Xie, the newly appointed former general Jin An Wang as General Annan, Twisting Yip Shi, the newly appointed general Shuxi Zuo, Yongyang Wang Bo Zhi as Shang Shuxi Pu Xie, and Zhong Guo Junzhao Da Bao as Toyosu Pu Xie.

古文：夏四月丙申，立皇子永康公胤为皇太子，赐天下为父后者爵一级，王公已下赉帛各有差。
现代文：夏四月丙申，立皇子永康公陈胤为皇太子，赏赐天下为父亲后嗣者爵位每人一级，王公以下赐帛各有等级。
English: In April of the same year, Yongkang's son, Chen Yan, was appointed crown prince, and those who were the heirs of their father were each given a first-class title, and those below the prince were each given a grade.

古文：庚子，诏曰： 朕临御区宇，抚育黔黎，方欲康济浇薄，蠲省繁费，奢僭乖衷，实宜防断。
现代文：庚子，韶令说： 我统御天下，抚育百姓，正要整饬浮薄风俗，减省繁杂耗费，奢侈僭越有违道理，实在应防止禁断。
English: Geng Zi, the imperial edict said: I am the ruler of the world and the educator of the people. It is necessary to rectify the superficial customs and reduce the complex expenses. The more extravagant the extravagance, the more unreasonable it is. It is really necessary to prevent the ban.

古文：应镂金银薄及庶物化生土木人彩花之属，及布帛幅尺短狭轻疏者，并伤财废业，尤成蠹患。
现代文：所有镂刻的金银箔以及为祝梼做成的土木人彩花之类物品，和布帛宽度短小轻疏的，都损伤财物荒废产业，尤其成为蠹害。
English: All the engraved gold and silver foils, as well as items such as the civil engineer's flowers made for the congratulatory bowl, and the narrow width of the cloth bowl, all damage the property waste industry, and in particular become a harm.

古文：又僧尼道士，挟邪左道，不依经律，民间淫祀妖书诸珍怪事，详为条制，并皆禁绝。 
现代文：另外僧尼道士，挟持左道旁门，不依照佛经僧律，以及民间滥祀袄书各种稀奇古怪的事，都要详细制定条例，全都加以禁止。 
English: In addition, monks and nuns of Taoism, holding the left-hand side door, not following the Buddhist sutras and monastic rules, as well as all kinds of strange and eccentric things of folk indiscriminate worship, should formulate regulations in detail, and all of them should be prohibited.

古文：癸卯，诏曰： 中岁克定淮、泗，爰涉青、徐，彼土酋豪，并输罄诚款，分遣亲戚，以为质任。
现代文：癸卯，韶令说： 往年平定淮水、泅水地区，于是到达青州、徐州，那裹的首领豪杰，都献上诚心，分别派遣亲属，作为人质。
English: "In previous years, we pacified the regions of Huai Shui and Surabaya, and then arrived at Qingzhou and Xuzhou. The leaders of those regions, the heroes, offered their sincerity and sent their relatives as hostages.

古文：今旧土沦陷，复成异域，南北阻远，未得会同，念其分乖，殊有爱恋。
现代文：现在旧土沦陷，又成为外邦，南北阻隔遥远，不能会合，思虑他们的分离，很有爱恋的心意。
English: Now that the old country has fallen and become a foreign country again, the north and the south are far apart and cannot meet. They are thinking about their separation and are very much in love.

古文：夷狄吾民，斯事一也，何独讥禁，使彼离析？
现代文：夷狄和我们的民众，这种事是一样的，为什么独加稽察禁止，使他们分离?
English: It is the same for the Yiddish and our people, so why is it only forbidden to inspect them, to separate them?

古文：外可即检任子馆及东馆并带保任在外者，并赐衣粮，颁之酒食，遂其乡路，所之阻远，便发遣船仗卫送，必令安达。
现代文：外府可立即检查任子馆以及东馆所有在外任职者的人质，都赐予衣服粮食，发给他们酒食，使他们走上回乡之路，所到之处阻隔遥远，可调发船只兵仗护送，心定使他们安全抵达。
English: The foreign ministry can immediately check the status of all the hostages of the overseas officials of the Renzi Pavilion and the East Pavilion, give them clothes and food, give them wine and food, so that they can embark on the road back to their hometowns. Wherever they go, they are far away, and they can dispatch ships to escort them. They are determined to make them arrive safely.

古文：若已预仕宦及别有事义不欲去者，亦随其意。 
现代文：如果已入仕途和有另外缘由不想离去的，也依随他们的心意。 
English: If they have made a career and have other reasons for not wanting to leave, they should follow their heart.

古文：六月癸酉朔，以明威将军、通直散骑常侍孙瑒为中护军。
现代文：六月癸酉初一，任命明威将军、通直散骑常侍孙场为中护军。
English: On the first day of the sixth month, he appointed General Ming Wei and Tsundo Sanzhi, the attendant of Sun Yat-sen, as middle guards.

古文：秋七月辛未，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月辛未，大赦天下。
English: Autumn and July will be hard, but there will be a general amnesty.

古文：是月，江水色赤如血，自京师至于荆州。
现代文：这月，长江水颜色红如鲜血，从京城直到荆州。
English: This month, the Yangtze River was as red as blood from Beijing to Jingzhou.

古文：八月癸未夜，天有声如风水相击。
现代文：八月癸未夜晚，天空有声音如同风和水相撞击。
English: In the early evening of August, there was a sound in the sky like wind and water colliding.

古文：乙酉夜亦如之。
现代文：乙酉夜晚也如此。
English: The same goes for acetylene at night.

古文：丙戌，以使持节、都督缘江诸军事、安西将军鲁广达为安左将军。
现代文：丙戌，任命使持节、都督缘辽诸军事、安西将军叠庐达为安左将军。
English: He appointed the envoy Ji Jie, the military governor Yuan Liao, and the general of Anxi to become the general of Anzao.

古文：九月丙午，设无珝大会于太极殿，舍身及乘舆御服，大赦天下。
现代文：九月丙午，在塞极殿设立无碍大会，施舍自身和车辆服饰供奉佛祖，大赦天下。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of September, a non-obstructive assembly was set up at the Great Hall of the People, and people donated themselves and their vehicles and clothing to be offered to the Buddha.

古文：辛亥夜，天东北有声如虫飞，渐移西北。
现代文：辛亥夜晚，天空东北方有声音如虫子飞动，逐渐移向西北。
English: On the night of Xinhai, there was a sound in the northeastern sky like a bug flying, gradually moving to the northwest.

古文：乙卯，太白昼见。
现代文：乙卯，太白星白天出现。
English: Uh-oh, Taibai Star appears during the day.

古文：丙寅，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王叔坚为司空，征南将军、江州刺史豫章王叔英即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：丙寅，任命骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王叔坚为司空，征南将军、丝业刺史逮童工壶速就以本身官号开府仪同三司。
English: Hsin-Yin appointed the general of cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, Yangzhou Zishi Changsha Wang Shujian as Siku, and the general of southern conquest, silk industry Zishi Fang child laborer Huan-Hao with his own official title of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：至德元年春正月壬寅，诏曰： 朕以寡薄，嗣守鸿基，哀惸切虑，疹恙缠织，训俗少方，临下靡算，惧甚践冰，忄栗同驭朽。
现代文：至德元年春正月壬寅，韶令说： 我以微薄的德才，继承宏大的基业，哀伤孤苦深切思虑，疾病缠绕交织，训导世俗缺少方略，控御民众没有算度，恐惧太甚如踏薄冰，战栗如同腐朽的缰绳驾驭急奔的马车。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Heian period, the imperial edict said, "I have inherited a great heritage with a meager talent, I am sad and lonely, I am deeply thoughtful, I am entangled with diseases, I lack the strategy to discipline the world, I do not have the calculation to control the people, I am too afraid to tread on thin ice, and I tremble like a rotten bridle to drive a fast-moving carriage.

古文：而四气易流，三光遄至，缨绂列陛，玉帛充庭，具物匪新，节序疑旧，缅思前德，永慕昔辰，对轩闼而哽心，顾枿筵而慓气。
现代文：然而四时温热冷寒之气容易流逝，日月星辰疾速到来，高官布列台下，玉帛充满庭中，器物不是新的，节令好像是旧曰，追思先人德行，永远怀念往日时光，面对宫门而哽咽，顾望御座而抽泣。
English: However, at four o'clock, the warm, hot, cold and cold air passes easily, the sun, moon and stars arrive rapidly, high-ranking officials are on the stage, the jade bowl is full in the courtyard, the utensils are not new, the festival seems to be the old days, the ancestors' virtue is recalled, the past time is always missed, the palace gate is choked, and the throne is sobbed.

古文：思所以仰遵遗构，俯励薄躬，陶铸九流，休息百姓，用弘宽简，取叶阳和。
现代文：思虑上遵先人构思，下尽微薄的能力，陶冶九流百官，使百姓休养生息，来弘扬宽容简约的治道，协和春日阳气。
English: Thoughtfully follow the ideas of the predecessors, do the best with the meager ability, cultivate the nine streams and hundreds of officials, make the people rest and recuperate, and promote the tolerant and simple way of governance, harmony and spring yang qi.

古文：可大赦天下，改太建十五年为至德元年。 
现代文：可大赦天下，改太建十五年为至德元年。 
English: However, he was pardoned by the emperor and the 15th year of Taiken was changed to the 1st year of the German era.

古文：以征南将军、江州刺史、新除开府仪同三司豫章王叔英为中卫大将军，骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王叔坚为江州刺史，征东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史司马消难进号车骑将军，宣惠将军、丹阳尹晋熙王叔文为扬州刺史，镇南将军、南豫州刺史任忠为领军将军，安左将军鲁广达为平南将军、南豫州刺史，祠部尚书江总为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命征南将军、江州刺史、新任开府仪同三司豫章王叔英为中卫大将军，骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王叔坚为江州刺史，征束将军、开府仪同三司、束扬州刺史司马消难进号为车骑将军，宣惠将军、丹阳尹晋熙王叔文为扬州刺史，镇南将军、南豫州刺史任忠为领军将军，安左将军鲁广达为平南将军、南豫州刺史，祠部尚书江总为吏部尚书。
English: Appointed the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of Jiangzhou, the newly-appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary of the Yuzhang Wang Shuying as the general of the Central Guards, the general of the cavalry, the governor of the Southern Expedition and the third secretary, the governor of Yangzhou, the Changsha Wang Shu Jian as the governor of Jiangzhou, the general of the expedition, the governor of the Southern Expedition and the third secretary of the Yangzhou, the Ma Qian Nan Jin as the general of the chariot and cavalry, the Xuan Hui general, the Danyang Yin Jinxi Wang Shu Wen as the governor of Yangzhou, the Zhen

古文：癸卯，立皇子深为始安王。
现代文：癸卯，立皇子陈深为始安王。
English: At the same time, Prince Chen Sheng was established as the King of Shi'an.

古文：二月丁丑，以始兴王叔重为扬州刺史。
现代文：二月丁丑，任命始兴王叔重为扬州刺史。
English: In February, Ding Xi appointed Shi Xing Wang Shuzhong as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：夏四月戊辰，交州刺史李幼荣献驯象。
现代文：夏四月戊辰，交州刺史李幼荣献上驯服的大象。
English: In the summer of April, Li You Rong, the Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, presented a tame elephant.

古文：己丑，以前轻车将军、扬州刺史晋熙王叔文为江州刺史。
现代文：己丑，任命前轻车将军、扬州刺史晋熙王叔文为江州刺史。
English: He appointed the former general of light vehicles and Yangzhou chief historian Jinxi Wang Shuwen as the chief historian of Jiangsu.

古文：秋八月丁卯，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司长沙王叔坚为司空。
现代文：秋八月丁卯，任命骠骑将军、开府仪同三司长沙王叔坚为司空。
English: In the autumn and August of Dingwu, he appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the chief of the three departments, Sha Wang Shujian, as the secretary of the sky.

古文：九月丁巳，天东南有声如虫飞。
现代文：九月丁巳，天空东南有声音如虫子飞动。
English: In September, there was a sound like a bug flying in the southeastern sky.

古文：冬十月丁酉，立皇弟叔平为湘东王，叔敖为临贺王，叔宣为阳山王，叔穆为西阳王。
现代文：冬十月丁酉，立皇弟叔平为湘束王，叔敖为临贺王，叔宣为阳山王，叔穆为西阳王。
English: In the winter and October of Ding Xi, Zhu Ping, the younger brother of the founding emperor, became the king of Hunan, Zhu Xi became the king of Linhe, Zhu Xuan became the king of Yangshan, and Zhu Mu became the king of Xiyang.

古文：戊戌，侍中、安右将军、左光禄大夫、太子少傅徐陵卒。
现代文：戊戌，侍中、安右将军、左光禄大夫、太子少傅徐陵去世。
English: Wuzhen, Chamberlain, General An Yu, Doctor Zuo Guanglu, and Young Prince Fu Xuling passed away.

古文：癸丑，立皇弟叔俭为南安王，叔澄为南郡王，叔兴为沅陵王，叔韶为岳山王，叔纯为新兴王。
现代文：癸丑，立皇弟叔俭为南安王，叔澄为南郡王，叔兴为沅陵王，叔韶为岳山王，叔纯为新兴王。
English: According to Zhu Yuxiu, the younger brother of the founding emperor, Shu Jian, was the king of Nan'an, Shu Cheng was the king of Nan County, Shu Xing was the king of Fuling, Shu Wei was the king of Yue Mountain, and Shu Jun was the emerging king.

古文：十二月丙辰，头和国遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月丙辰，头和国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: At the stroke of midnight in December, the head of the country sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：司空长沙王叔坚有罪免。
现代文：司空垦重哇圭哩犯罪被免职。
English: Sikyong Gong Chongwah Guiry was removed from his post for committing a crime.

古文：戊午夜，天开自西北至东南，其内有青黄色，隆隆若雷声。
现代文：戊午夜晚，天空裂开从西北到东南，内部有青黄的颜色，轰隆隆如同雷声。
English: In the evening at noon, the sky split from northwest to southeast, with a bluish-yellow color inside, rumbling like thunder.

古文：二年春正月丁卯，分遣大使巡省风俗。
现代文：二年春正月丁卯，分别派遣大使巡视风尚习俗。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, the ambassador was sent to inspect the customs.

古文：平南将军、豫州刺史鲁广达进号安南将军。
现代文：平南将军、豫州刺史鲁广达进号为安南将军。
English: The name of the general of Binan Province and the general of Yuzhou Province is Annan.

古文：癸巳，大赦天下。
现代文：癸巳，大赦天下。
English: Now is the time for a general amnesty.

古文：夏五月戊子，以尚书仆射永阳王伯智为平东将军、东扬州刺史，轻车将军、江州刺史晋熙王叔文为信威将军、湘州刺史，仁威将军、扬州刺史始兴王叔重为江州刺史，信武将军、南琅邪彭城二郡太守南平王嶷为扬州刺史，吏部尚书江总为尚书仆射。
现代文：夏五月戊子，任命尚书仆射永阳王伯智为平东将军、东扬州刺史，轻车将军、江州刺史晋熙王查迭为信威将军、周丛刺史，仁威将军、握蚶刺史毖垒王查莲为红业刺史，信武将军、直至国茎继二郡太守壶垩王速盛为挝州刺史，吏部尚书江总为尚书仆射。
English: Xia May Wu Zi appointed Shang Shuxu's flunky Yongyang Wang Bo Zhi as the general of Pingdong, Dong Yang Zhou as the chief of staff, Liang Chuxu appointed Shang Shuxu's flunky Jin Xi Wang Cha Dui as the general of Xinwei, Zhou Cong as the chief of staff, Ren Wei appointed Shang Shuxu's flunky Wang Cha Lian as the chief of staff of Hongye, Nobutake appointed Shang Shuxu's flunky Yongyang Wang Bo Zhi as the general of Pingdong, Dong Yang Zhou as the general of Yang Zhou, Liang Chuxu appointed Shang Shuxu

古文：秋七月戊辰，以长沙王叔坚为侍中、镇左将军。
现代文：秋七月戊辰，任命长沙王叔坚为侍中、镇左将军。
English: In the autumn of July, Wang Shujian, the Prince of Changsha, was appointed as an attendant and general of Zhenza.

古文：壬午，太子加元服，在位文武赐帛各有差，孝悌力田为父后者各赐一级，鳏寡癃老不能自存者人谷五斛。
现代文：壬午，太子行加冠礼，对在位的文武官员赏赐布帛各有等级，孝悌力田成为父亲后嗣者各自赏赐爵位一级，鳏寡多病年老不能养活自己者每人获赐谷粟五斛。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the crown prince performed the crowning ceremony, and the reigning civil and military officials were each awarded a grade of cloth, and the filial sons and daughters who became the father's heirs were each awarded a first-class knighthood, and the widows and widowers who were sick and old and could not support themselves were each given five ears of corn.

古文：九月癸未，太白昼见。
现代文：九月癸未，太白星白天出现。
English: At the end of September, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：冬十月己酉，诏曰： 耕凿自足，乃曰淳风，贡赋之兴，其来尚矣。
现代文：冬十月己酉，诏令说： 耕种凿井自然丰足，可称淳朴风俗，贡赋的兴起，由来久逮。
English: In the winter of October, the imperial edict said: the cultivation of drilling wells is a natural abundance, can be called a simple custom, and the rise of tribute has a long history.

古文：盖由庚极务，不获已而行焉。
现代文：大概《由庚》中所述说的事务极多，不得已而实行。
English: Presumably, many of the matters described in "From Geng" have been carried out as a last resort.

古文：但法令滋章，奸盗多有，俗尚浇诈，政鲜惟良。
现代文：衹是法令繁多，奸人盗贼到处产生，风尚浮薄诈伪，治政少有优秀的。
English: However, there are many laws and regulations, swindlers and thieves are everywhere, the fashion is flimsy and fraudulent, and governance is rarely excellent.

古文：朕日旰夜分，矜一物之失所，泣辜罪己，愧三千之未措。
现代文：我每日忙到夜晚，为一人失去本业而哀怜，为过失哭泣加罪于自己，惭愧于刑律没有放置不用。
English: I am busy every day into the night, lamenting the loss of one's vocation, weeping for my faults and adding guilt to myself, ashamed for not abandoning my duties to the penal code.

古文：望订初下，使强廕兼出，如闻贫富均起，单弱重弊，斯岂振穷扇曷之意欤？
现代文：先行征收标准刚发布，使豪强荫户都交纳，但听说贫富平均起征，孤苦贫困的更加凋敝，造哪是赈济贫穷扇去暑热的本意呢?
English: The preliminary collection standard has just been released, so that the wealthy and powerful households will pay, but it is heard that the rich and poor will be levied equally, and the lonely and poor will be more withered. What is the intention of helping the poor fan the heat?

古文：是乃下吏箕敛之苛也。
现代文：这是下层官吏聚敛的苛政。
English: This is the tyranny of low-level bureaucrats.

古文：故云 百姓不足，君孰与足 。
现代文：所以说 百姓不充足，君主怎能充足 。
English: Wherefore it is said, If the people be not sufficient, how shall the prince be sufficient?

古文：自太建十四年望订租调逋未入者，并悉原除。
现代文：自太建十四年先行征收的租调拖欠未交纳的，全部免除。
English: The arrears of rent adjustment that have not been paid since the 14th year of Tai Jian, all of which were previously levied, are exempt.

古文：在事百僚，辩断庶务，必去取平允，无得便公害民，为己声绩，妨紊政道。 
现代文：在位的百官。决断各项事务，一定要去取公平合理，不能便于公家损害民众，为了自己的声望业绩，妨碍治政之道。 
English: In deciding on various matters, we must be fair and reasonable. We must not make it easy for public officials to harm the people, and obstruct the way of governance for the sake of their own reputation and performance.

古文：十一月丙寅，大赦天下。
现代文：十一月丙寅，大赦天下。
English: In November, Hsin-Yin was granted amnesty.

古文：壬申，盘盘国遣使献方物。
现代文：壬申，盘盘国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In Jinshin, many countries sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：戊寅，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：戊寅，百济国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Wuchin, Baekje dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：三年春正月戊午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年春正月戊午初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the third year of spring.

古文：庚午，以镇左将军长沙王叔坚即本号开府仪同三司，征西将军、荆州刺史樊毅为护军将军，守吏部尚书、领著作陆琼为吏部尚书，金紫光禄大夫袁敬加特进。
现代文：庚午，任命镇左将军星空巨王拯竖就以本身军号开府仪同三司，征西将军、翅刺史望堑为护军将军，代理吏部尚书、兼著作郎陆琼为吏部尚书，金紫光禄大夫重塑加授特进。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Zhenzuo General Xinglu Jiuwang Zhengqiao was appointed as the commander of the 3rd Division, with his own military title of Kaifu Yi Tong, General Xie Xi, and Wing Jian Shi Wangye as the garrison general, acting officer Shangshu, and author Lang Luqiong as the officer Shangshu, and Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu was reshaped as a doctor and given a special promotion.

古文：三月辛酉，前豊州刺史章大宝举兵反。
现代文：辛酉，前丰刺史童去宣起兵反叛。
English: Xin Zhen, the former Feng Zhi Shidong went to proclaim the rebellion of the soldiers.

古文：夏四月庚戌，豊州义军主陈景详斩大宝，传首京师。
现代文：夏四月庚戌，丰业起义军队首领速基登斩杀大实，传送首级到京城。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zang, the leader of the Toyo uprising army, Sokiden, decapitated Dashi and sent the head to Beijing.

古文：秋八月戊子夜，老人星见。
现代文：秋八月戊子夜晚，老人星出现。
English: In autumn and August, in the evening, the old man star appears.

古文：己酉，以左民尚书谢伷为吏部尚书。
现代文：己酉，任命左民尚书邀迪为吏部尚书。
English: He appointed Zuomin Shangshu and invited Di to be the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：九月甲戌，特进、金紫光禄大夫袁敬卒。
现代文：九月甲戌，特进、金紫光禄大夫袁敬去世。
English: In September, armour-plated, specially promoted and gold-plated doctor Yuan Jing passed away.

古文：冬十月己丑，丹丹国遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十月己丑，丹丹国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: As winter turned to October, Dandan sent an envoy to offer tribute to local special products.

古文：十一月己未，诏曰： 宣尼诞膺上哲，体资至圣，祖述宪章之典，并天地而合德，乐正雅颂之奥，与日月而偕明，垂后昆之训范，开生民之耳目。
现代文：十一月己未，韶令说： 宣尼禀受上等哲思，资质为最高圣人，效法遵循的典章，与天地同德，礼乐确定《雅》、《颂》的深奥道理，和日月齐明，给后人垂示范式，为民众打开耳目。
English: In November, the imperial edict said: "Xuan Nian was endowed with superior philosophy, qualified as the highest saint, emulated the rules to be followed, shared the same morality with heaven and earth, determined the profound principles of "Elegance" and "Ode" with the liturgy, and aligned with the sun and the moon, handed down a model to future generations, and opened the eyes and ears of the people.

古文：梁季湮微，灵寝忘处，鞠为茂草，三十馀年，敬仰如在，永惟忾息。
现代文：梁末湮灭衰微，忘记祭祀庙宇的处所，那裹生出茂密的野草，三十多年，敬仰的圣人如还在，会时常叹息。
English: If the venerated saint were still alive, he would often sigh for more than thirty years, as he withered and waned, forgetting the place of the sacrificial temple, where lush weeds sprouted.

古文：今《雅道》雍熙，《由庚》得所，断琴故履，零落不追，阅笥开书，无因循复。
现代文：现在《雅》道和乐，《由庚》得其所在，折断的琴，旧时的鞋，丧败不可追回，打开书箱翻板书籍查找，也无法恢复到从前。
English: Now "Ya" Taoism and Music, "Yu Geng" have found their place, the broken piano, the old shoes, the defeat can not be recovered, open the bookcase, flip the board, look for books, and can not be restored to the past.

古文：外可详之礼典，改筑旧庙，蕙房桂栋，咸使惟新，芳繁洁潦，以时飨奠。 
现代文：外府可详据礼典，改建旧庙，芳美的房舍栋梁，都使焕然一新，芬芳洁净，按时祭奠。 
English: According to the details of the ceremony, the reconstruction of the old temple and the aromatic house beams were all renewed, the fragrance was clean, and the memorial service was held on time.

古文：辛巳，舆驾幸长干寺，大赦天下。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝前往长干寺，大赦天下。
English: Soon after, the emperor went to Chogan-ji Temple and granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：十二月丙戌，太白昼见。
现代文：十二月丙戌，太白星白出现。
English: In December, Taibai Xingbai appeared.

古文：辛卯，皇太子出太学，讲《孝经》，戊戌，讲毕。
现代文：辛卯，皇太子到太学，讲授《孝经》，戊戌，讲授完毕。
English: Xinwu, the crown prince, came to Taigaku to give a lecture on "The Filial Piety Sutra." Wusong, the lecture is over.

古文：辛丑，释奠于先师，礼毕，设金石之乐，会宴王公卿士。
现代文：辛丑，祭奠先师，礼仪结束，设立音乐会，款待王公卿大夫。
English: Xin ugly, preacher, end of the ceremony, set up a concert, treat Wang Gongqing doctor.

古文：癸卯，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：癸卯，高丽国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: At the same time, Goryeo dispatched an envoy to offer tribute to the local specialty.

古文：是岁，萧岿死，子琮代立。
现代文：这一年，萧崭死去，儿子萧琮接替。
English: In the same year, Xiao Ming died and was succeeded by his son Xiao Yu.

古文：四年春正月甲寅，诏曰： 尧施谏鼓，禹拜昌言，求之异等，久著前徽，举以淹滞，复闻昔典，斯乃治道之深规，帝王之切务。
现代文：四年春正月甲寅，诏令说： 尧设立谏鼓，禹叩拜说真话者，寻求异等的人，早着于前代规范，推举埋没的人才，又闻知于往日典章，这是治道的深远规则，帝王的切要事务。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of spring, the imperial edict said: "It is best to set up a gong and drum, and worship the truth-teller, the seeker of the extraordinary, early in the previous generation of norms, to select the hidden talents, and to be known from the ancient ceremonies. This is a far-reaching rule of governance, and an important matter for the emperor.

古文：朕以寡昧，丕承鸿绪，未明虚己，日旰兴怀，万机多紊，四聪弗达，思闻蹇谔，采其谋计。
现代文：我以薄德弱才，继承宏大的统绪，未能作到虚己待人，日夜思虑，各项事务多有紊乱，四方视听不通畅，很想听到正直之言，采纳他们的计谋。
English: I am a weak and feeble person, inheriting a grand unison, unable to treat others in a hypocritical manner, thinking day and night, various affairs are disorderly, the four directions of audio-visual are not smooth, I would like to hear honest words and adopt their strategies.

古文：王公已下，各荐所知，旁询管库，爰及舆皁，一介有能，片言可用，朕亲加听览，伫于启沃。 
现代文：王公以下，各自推荐所知道的人，广泛征询管理库房的人，直到奴仆，一人有能力，片言可采用，我都将亲自听取，等候开导。 
English: From the prince on down, each of us will recommend someone we know, consult widely with those who manage the storeroom, and even with the servants, if one of them is capable and can use a few words, I will personally listen to them and wait for enlightenment.

古文：中权大将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳王伯山进号镇卫将军，中卫大将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英进号骠骑大将军，镇左将军、开府仪同三司长沙王叔坚进号中军大将军，安南将军晋安王伯恭进号镇右将军，翊右将军宜都王叔明进号安右将军。
现代文：中权大将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳王伯山进号为镇卫将军，中卫大将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英进号为骠骑大将军，镇左将军、开府仪同三司长沙王叔坚进号为中军大将军，安南将军晋安王伯恭进号为镇右将军，翊右将军宜都王叔明进号为安右将军。
English: General Zhongquan, General Kaifu and the Third Division of the Xinyang Wangboshan entered as General Zhenwei, General Zhongwei, General Kaifu and the Third Division of the Yuzhang Wangshuying entered as General Xingjie, General Zhenzuo, General Kaifu and the Third Division of the Changsha Wangshujian entered as General Zhongjun, General Annan entered as General Zhenyu, and General Zhenyu entered as General Anyu.

古文：二月丙戌，以镇右将军晋安王伯恭为特进。
现代文：丙戌，任命镇右将军置壁王伹茎为特进。
English: He appointed Zhenyu General Jibei Wangxu as a special envoy.

古文：丙申，立皇弟叔谟为巴东王，叔显为临江王，叔坦为新会王，叔隆为新宁王。
现代文：丙申，立皇弟圭邀为巴束王，童迩为堕丝王，拯担为堑盒王，圭咝为堑圣王。
English: According to Yi Shen, the founding brother Gui was invited to be the king of Ba Sok, Tong Yao was the king of the fallen silk, Zheng Dan was the king of the silk box, and Gui Yao was the king of the sacred silk.

古文：夏五月丁巳，立皇子庄为会稽王。
现代文：夏五月丁巳，立皇子陈庄为会稽王。
English: In the summer and May of the same year, the prince Chen Zhuang was appointed as the king of the association.

古文：秋九月甲午，舆驾幸玄武湖，肆舻舰阅武，宴群臣赋诗。
现代文：秋九月甲午，皇帝前往玄武湖，陈列战舰检阅军队，宴请群臣赋诗。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the ninth month of the autumn, the emperor went to Lake Xuanwu, displayed warships to review the army, and invited a group of courtiers to perform a poem.

古文：戊戌，以镇卫将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳王伯山为东扬州刺史，智武将军岳阳王叔慎为丹阳尹。
现代文：戊戌，任命镇卫将军、开府仪同三司整阳王伯山为束扬州刺史，智武将军昼旦旺查妪为旦屋尹。
English: Wuzhen, appointed General Zhenwei, Kaifu Yi and the three departments of rectification Wang Bishan as the shackles of Yangzhou Shishi, and General Zhiwu in the afternoon Wang Chao as Tanya Yin.

古文：丁未，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：丁未，亘渣厘派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Ding Wei and Wang Jiali sent emissaries to offer tribute to local special products.

古文：冬十月癸亥，尚书仆射江总为尚书令，吏部尚书谢伷为尚书仆射。
现代文：冬十月癸亥，尚书仆射江总担任尚书令，吏部尚书谢伯担任尚书仆射。
English: In winter and October, Shang Shubei Shajiang served as Shang Shurei, and Shang Shubei Xiebo served as Shang Shubei.

古文：十一月己卯，诏曰： 惟刑止暴，惟德成物，三才是资，百王不改。
现代文：十一月己卯，韶令说： 惟有刑罚可制止残暴，惟有德行可生成万物，依仗天地人，百代帝王不改变。
English: In November of the same year, the imperial edict said: "Only punishment can stop cruelty, only virtue can create all things, relying on heaven and earth, hundreds of emperors will not change.

古文：而世无抵角，时鲜犯鳞，渭桥惊马，弗闻廷争，桃林逸牛，未见其旨。
现代文：然而世上没有冒死之人，时代很少有犯颜直谏者，遭桥上惊动马匹，没有听到朝廷上的争辩，塑眯逃走了牛，没有见到遣方面的意旨。
English: However, there is no one in the world who dares to die, and there are very few people in the era who commit a brazen act. Horses were startled on the bridge, no arguments were heard in the court, the cows ran away, and there was no intention to send them.

古文：虽剽悍轻侮，理从钳棨，蠢愚杜默，宜肆矜弘，政乏良哉，明惭则哲，求诸刑措，安可得乎？
现代文：虽然剽悍劫掠轻率伤人，按道理应用刑，但对愚昧而且又不会说话的人，应加以同情宽容。政事缺乏良策，又惭愧没有知人善任的英明，要谋求不用刑罚而治，哪可得到呢?
English: Although the punishment should be applied according to reason, for those who are stupid and cannot speak, there should be sympathy and tolerance. In politics, there is a lack of good policy, and it is a shame that there is no wisdom to know who is responsible. If we seek to rule without punishment, where can we get it?

古文：是用属寤寐以轸怀，负黼扆而於邑。
现代文：所以夜相继而痛念，背靠斧形花纹的屏风而哽咽。
English: So night after night I think about it, and I am choked by the axe-shaped screen behind me.

古文：复兹合璧轮缺，连珠纬舛，黄钟献吕，和气始萌，玄英告中，履长在御，因时宥过，抑乃斯得。
现代文：加之日月合聚而轮廓阙失，五星如连珠而纬线舛误，黄钟献上阴律，和气开始萌生，冬季已到中间阶段，冬至在即，利用时机宽恕过失，或许得宜。
English: In addition, the sun and the moon are converging and the outline is lost, the five stars are like pearls and the latitude is erroneous, the yellow clock is presented with the yin and yang, and the harmony begins to germinate. Winter has reached the middle stage, and the winter solstice is imminent. It may be appropriate to use the opportunity to forgive mistakes.

古文：可大赦天下。 
现代文：可大赦天下。 
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：祯明元年春正月丙子，以安前将军衡阳王伯信进号镇前将军，安东将军、吴兴太守庐陵王伯仁为特进，智武将军、丹阳尹岳阳王叔慎为湘州刺史，仁武将军义阳王叔达为丹阳尹。
现代文：祯明元年春正月丙子，任命安前将军衡阳王自信进号为镇前将军，安东将军、吴兴太守庐陵王但仁为特进，智武将军、且盐尹旦旦旺扭值为渔业刺史，仁武将军羞垦旺童瞳为旦盐尹。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the former general of An, Hengyang Wang Jianjin, was appointed as the former general of the town, General Anton and Wu Xing Taizhong and Wang Danren as the special advance, General Zhiwu, and Yan Yin and Yan Wang as the fishery history, and General Yan Wu and Yan Wang Tong as Yan Yan and Yan Yin.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 柏皇、大庭，鼓淳和于曩日，姬王、嬴后，被浇风于末载，刑书已铸，善化匪融，礼义既乖，奸宄斯作。
现代文：戊寅，韶令说： 担皇、友庭，在往鼓动淳朴柔和的习俗，姬王、嬴后，在末年煽起浮薄的风尚，刑书已经铸造，善良的化育不能融洽，礼义既产生悖误，奸猾诡诈就出现了。
English: In Wu Yin, the imperial edict said: The emperor and the court of friends are promoting the simple and gentle customs, and the queen and the empress are stirring up the shallow customs in the last years. The punishment has been cast, the good breeding cannot be harmonized, the etiquette is not only wrong, but also treacherous and deceitful.

古文：何其淳朴不反，浮华竞扇者欤？
现代文：为什么淳朴习俗不能返回，浮华风尚竞相煽动呢?
English: Why can't simple customs return, and flashy fashions compete to incite it?

古文：朕居中御物，纳隍在眷，频恢天网，屡绝三边，元元黔庶，终罹五辟。
现代文：我位居宫中统御民众，眷念着出民众于水火之中，频繁放宽法网，屡次失去边境，广大百姓，还是遭至五刑。
English: I live in the palace to govern the people, and I remember that the people are in the midst of fire and water, the law is frequently relaxed, the border is repeatedly lost, and the broad masses of the people still suffer up to five punishments.

古文：盖乃康哉寡薄，抑焉法令滋章。
现代文：大概是饥荒使得我们寡弱微薄，遏制它们而使法令更加昭彰。
English: Famine, perhaps, has made us weak and feeble, and restraining them has made the law more conspicuous.

古文：是用当宁弗怡，矜此向隅之意。
现代文：所以处于帝位不喜悦，哀怜这种惠不及众的意向。
English: Therefore, he is not happy to be on the throne, and he pities this intention to be ahead of the crowd.

古文：今三元具序，万国朝辰，灵芝献于始阳，膏露凝于聿岁，从春施令，仰乾布德，思与九有，惟新七政。
现代文：现在一年之始，万国朝见，灵芝献于阳气初起时，甘露凝结于岁首，从春季施行法令，上承皇天广布恩德，思虑和普天之下，刷新七种政事。
English: Now, at the beginning of the year, the world is watching, Ganoderma lucidum is dedicated to the beginning of the yang, and nectar is condensed at the beginning of the year. From the spring, a decree will be issued to carry forward the emperor's vast virtue, thoughts and the whole world, and refresh the seven political affairs.

古文：可大赦天下，改至德五年为祯明元年。 
现代文：可大赦天下，改至德五年为桢明元年。 
English: However, he was pardoned by the emperor and his sentence was changed to five years in prison.

古文：乙未，地震。
现代文：乙未，发生地震。
English: In the morning, an earthquake occurred.

古文：癸卯，以镇前将军衡阳王伯信为镇南将军、西衡州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命镇前将军衡阳王伯信为镇南将军、西衡州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed the former general of the town, Hengyang Wang Bixin, as the general of Zhenan and the historian of West Hengzhou.

古文：二月丁未，以特进、镇右将军晋安王伯恭进号中卫将军，中书令建安王叔卿为中书监。
现代文：二月丁未，任命特进、镇右将军晋安王伯恭进号为中卫将军，中书令建安王叔卿为中书监。
English: In February of the same year, Jin An Wang Bokun Jin, the general of the special advance and the town right, was appointed as the general of the middle guard, and Jian An Wang Shuxing was appointed as the inspector of the middle school.

古文：丁卯，诏至德元年望订租调逋未入者，并原之。
现代文：丁卯，诏令拖欠未缴的至德元年先行征调的租调，全部免除。
English: Dingwu, all arrears of rent that have not been paid until the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：秋八月癸卯，老人星见。
现代文：秋八月癸卯，老人星出现。
English: In the autumn and August, the old man star appears.

古文：丁未，以车骑将军萧摩诃为骠骑将军。
现代文：丁未，任命车骑将军萧摩诃为骠骑将军。
English: Ding Wei appointed the chariot and cavalry general Xiao Maqun as the cavalry general.

古文：九月乙亥，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英为骠骑大将军。
现代文：九月乙亥，任命骠骑将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英为骠骑大将军。
English: In September of the 19th year of the Heian period, Wang Shuying, the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi and Wang Shuying, the third secretary of the Henan chapter, were appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：庚寅，萧琮所署尚书令、太傅安平王萧岩，中军将军、荆州刺史义兴王萧献，遣其都官尚书沈君公，诣荆州刺史陈纪请降。
现代文：庚寅，萧琮所委任的尚书令、太傅安平王萧岩，中军将军、荆州刺史义兴王萧珊，派遣他们的都官尚书沈君公，前往荆州刺史陈纪那裹请求投降。
English: Geng Yin, Shang Shuling, Taifu Anping Wang Xiao Yan, the general of the Chinese army, Jingzhou Jishi Yixing Wang Xiao Shan, and their governor Shang Shuling sent to Jingzhou Jishi Chen Jina Wrapped to request surrender.

古文：辛卯，岩等率文武男女十万馀口济江。
现代文：辛卯，萧岩等人率领文武官员男女老少十万多人渡过长江。
English: Xinwu, Xiao Yan and others led more than 100,000 men, women and children to cross the Yangtze River.

古文：甲午，大赦天下。
现代文：甲午，大赦天下。
English: At noon, there was a general amnesty.

古文：冬十一月乙亥，割扬州吴郡置吴州，割钱塘县为郡，属焉。
现代文：冬十一月乙亥，分割扬州的吴郡设置吴州，分割钱塘县为郡，隶属于吴州。
English: In the winter of November, Yi Hai, divided Yangzhou's W County to set up Wuzhou, divided Qiantang County into counties, affiliated to Wuzhou.

古文：丙子，以萧岩为平东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史，萧献为安东将军、吴州刺史。
现代文：丙子，任命萧岩为平东将军、开府仪同三司、束扬州刺史，萧真真为安束将军、吴州刺史。
English: He appointed Xiao Yan as the general of Pingdong, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary, Sok Yangzhou as the secretary, and Xiao Zhenzhen as the general of Ankoku and the secretary of Wuzhou.

古文：丁亥，以骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英兼司徒。
现代文：丁亥，任命骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英兼任司徒。
English: Dinghai, appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three officers of the imperial cavalry, Wang Shuying, to serve as officers.

古文：十二月丙辰，以前镇卫将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史鄱阳王伯山为镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司，前中卫将军晋安王伯恭为中卫将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：十二月丙辰，任命前镇卫将军、开府仪同三司、塞荡蛆刺史整垦旺迫山为镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司，前中卫将军置玄王值茎为中卫将军、右光禄大夫。
English: In December, the former Zhenwei general, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, the former Zhengwei general, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, were appointed as Zhenwei general, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, were appointed as Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, were appointed as Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general, and the former Zhongwei general

古文：二年春正月辛巳，立皇子恮为东阳王，恬为钱塘王。
现代文：二年春正月辛巳，立皇子陈佺为束阳王，陈恬为钱塘王。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, the prince Chen Xi was appointed as the King of Sokyang, and Chen Xi as the King of Qiantang.

古文：是月，遣散骑常侍周罗嵒帅兵屯峡口。
现代文：这月，派遣散骑常侍周罗喉率领兵士屯驻在峡口。
English: This month, Zhou Laogang, a knight errant, was dispatched to garrison soldiers at the mouth of the gorge.

古文：夏四月戊申，有群鼠无数，自蔡洲岸入石头渡淮，至于青塘两岸，数日死，随流出江。
现代文：夏四月戊申，有老鼠难以计数，从蔡洲岸边进入石头城渡过秦淮河，到达青塘两岸，几天后死去，随水流进入长江。
English: In the summer of April in Boshen, there were countless mice. They entered Stone Town from the shore of Caizhou, crossed the Qinhuai River, reached the banks of Qingtang, died a few days later, and entered the Yangtze River with the current.

古文：戊午，以左民尚书蔡徵为吏部尚书。
现代文：戊午，任命左民尚书蔡征为吏部尚书。
English: In the afternoon, Zuomin Shangshu Cai Zheng was appointed as the secretary of the Personnel Department.

古文：是月，郢州南浦水黑如墨。
现代文：逭月，郢州南浦的水黑如墨汁。
English: In August, the water in Nampo, Luzhou, was as black as ink.

古文：五月壬午，以安前将军庐陵王伯仁为特进。
现代文：五月壬午，任命安前将军庐陵王伯仁为特进。
English: On the morning of May 3, An appointed former general Gongling Wang Boren as a special envoy.

古文：甲午，东冶铸铁，有物赤色如数斗，自天坠熔所，有声隆隆如雷，铁飞出墙外，烧民家。
现代文：甲午，柬冶铸造铁器，有个红色物体几斗大，从天上坠落到熔铸的地方，有声音轰隆隆如同雷声，铁水飞出墙外烧坏民家房舍。
English: At one o'clock in the afternoon, a red object several feet in size fell from the sky onto the place where ironware was being cast. There was a rumbling sound like thunder, and molten iron flew out of the wall and burned down houses.

古文：六月戊戌，扶南国遣使献方物。
现代文：六月戊戌，扶南国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In June, Funan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：庚子，废皇太子胤为吴兴王，立军师将军、扬州刺史始安王深为皇太子。
现代文：庚子，废黜皇太子陈胤为吴兴王，立军师将军、握刺史始安王速理为皇太子。
English: Geng Zi, the deposed crown prince Chen Yan became King Wu Xing, General Lixun and the crown prince Shixian Wang Sui Li.

古文：辛丑，平南将军、江州刺史南平王嶷进号镇南将军；忠武将军、南徐州刺史永嘉王彦进号安北将军；会稽王庄为翊前将军、扬州刺史；宣惠将军、尚书令江总进号中权将军；云麾将军、太子詹事袁宪为尚书仆射；尚书仆射谢伷为特进；宁远将军、新除吏部尚书蔡徵进号安右将军。
现代文：辛丑，平南将军、辽州刺史尘垩王速塞进号为镇南将军；忠武将军、南徐州刺史永嘉王陈彦进号为安北将军；盒揎王速茎为翊前将军、荡赵刺史；宣惠将军、尚书令辽总进号为中权将军；云麾将军、太子詹事直塞为尚书仆射；尚书仆射谢迪为特进；宁远将军、新任吏部尚书蔡征进号为安右将军。
English: Xin Qiu, the general of Pingnan, Liaozhou, the general of Zhennan; Zhong Wu, the general of Zhongwu, the general of Nanxuzhou, the general of Yongjia, the general of Chen Yanjin, the general of Anbei; Huanqiu, the general of Qianqian, the general of Zhao; Xuan Hui, the general of Liaozhou, the general of Zhongquan; Yun Rong, the general of Yunnan, the general of Janzhi, the general of Zhangshu; Shangshu, the general of Zhangshu; Xie Di, the general of Anbei; Ningyuan,

古文：甲辰，以安右将军鲁广达为中领军。
现代文：甲辰，任命安右将军鲁广达为中领军。
English: Jia Chen appointed An Yu's general Lu Guangda as the central leader.

古文：丁巳，大风至自西北激涛水入石头城，淮渚暴益，漂没舟乘。
现代文：丁巳，大风自西北方向吹来刮起波涛进入石头城，淮渚暴涨溢出，船只随水漂走沉没。
English: Just then, a strong wind blew from the northwest, whipping up the waves into Stone Town. The waves surged and overflowed, and the boats drifted away with the water and sank.

古文：冬十月己亥，立皇子蕃为吴郡王。
现代文：冬十月己亥，立皇子速画为呈逛。
English: In winter and in October, the Imperial Prince's sketches are on display.

古文：辛丑，以度支尚书、领大著作姚察为吏部尚书。
现代文：辛丑，任命度支尚书、兼大著作拉塞为吏部尚书。
English: Xinwu, appointed Duozhi Shangshu, concurrently with the major work of Lase for the cadre of Shangshu.

古文：己酉，舆驾幸莫府山，大校猎。
现代文：己酉，皇帝前往墓庐山，大规模围猎。
English: The emperor went to the Tomb Mountain to conduct a large-scale hunting.

古文：十一月丁卯，诏曰： 夫议狱缓刑，皇王之所垂范，胜残去杀，仁人之所用心。
现代文：十一月丁卯，韶令说： 评议案情放缓用刑，是帝王留下的规范，感化残暴的人废除死刑，是仁人用心之事。
English: In November of Dingwu, the imperial edict said: "It is the standard left by the emperor to slow down the application of the death penalty, and it is the intention of the benevolent to influence the cruel people to abolish the death penalty.

古文：自画冠既息，刻吏斯起，法令滋章，手足无措。
现代文：自从以画冠为刑的刑罚停用，苛刻的官吏就出现了，法令不断增加，使人手足无措。
English: Since the suspension of the punishment of drawing a crown as a punishment, harsh officials have appeared, and the number of laws and regulations has continued to increase, leaving people helpless.

古文：朕君临区宇，属当浇末，轻重之典，在政未康，小大之情，兴言多愧。
现代文：我统御天下，遇上浮薄的末世之俗，量刑轻重的刑典，在施政上还未健全，大小的情形，谈起来多有愧意。
English: I rule the world, and I am confronted with the shallow customs of the last days, the heavy and light punishments of the Penal Code, which are not yet sound in terms of governance, and the size of the situation, which is rather shameful to talk about.

古文：眷兹狴犴，有轸哀矜，可克日于大政殿讯狱。 
现代文：念及这些关在牢狱中的人，哀怜同情，可定下时间在大政殿讯问案件。 
English: Thinking of these people in prison, with pity and sympathy, you can set a time to interrogate the case in the Great Hall of the People.

古文：壬申，以镇南将军、江州刺史南平王嶷为征西将军、郢州刺史，安北将军、南徐州刺史永嘉王彦为安南将军、江州刺史，军师将军南海王虔为安北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：壬申。任命镇南将军、江州刺史南平王陈嶷为征西将军、塑出刺史，安北将军、直徐州刺史永嘉王陈彦为安南将军、江州刺史，军师将军南海王陈虔为安北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: Jinshin. Appointed Zhennan General, Jiangzhou general Nanping Wang Chen Qi as the general of the Western Conquest, and created the general history, and Anbei General, Zhi Xuzhou general Yongjia Wang Chen Yan as the general of the Southern Conquest, and Jiangzhou general history, and the military division general Nanhai King Chen Qian as the general of the Northern Conquest, and South Xuzhou general history.

古文：丙子，立皇弟叔荣为新昌王，叔匡为太原王。
现代文：丙子，立皇弟叔荣为新昌王，叔匡为太原王。
English: Cun Zi, the younger brother of the founding king, Shurong, became the king of Xinchang, and Shukang became the king of Taiyuan.

古文：是月，隋遣晋王广众军来伐，自巴、蜀、沔、汉下流至广陵，数十道俱入，缘江镇戍，相继奏闻。
现代文：遣月，隋国派遣晋王杨广各军前来攻伐，从巴、蜀、沔、汉向下游直到广陵，几十路一起进入，缘长江的镇守据点，相继报告。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, Sui dispatched the armies of the Jin king Yang Guang to attack. From Ba, Shu, Min and Han down to Guangling, dozens of routes entered together, and the town-guarding strongholds on the edge of the Yangtze River were successively reported.

古文：时新除湘州刺史施文庆、中书舍人沈客卿掌机密用事，并抑而不言，故无备御。
现代文：当时新任湘州刺史施文庆、中书舍人沈客卿掌管机密文书当权任事，都压下来而不报告，所以没有戒备防御。
English: At that time, Shi Wenqing, the newly-appointed Xiangzhou chief historian, and Shen Keqing, the person in charge of the administration of confidential documents, both suppressed and did not report, so there was no alert defense.

古文：三年春正月乙丑朔，雾气四塞。
现代文：三年春正月乙丑初一，雾气充塞四方。
English: On the first day of the second month of the third year of the Spring Festival, the fog filled the four directions.

古文：是日，隋总管贺若弼自北道广陵济京口，总管韩擒虎趋横江，济采石，自南道将会弼军。
现代文：逭天，隋国总管贺若弼从北路广陵渡过京口，总管韩擒虎赶往横江，渡过采石，从南路将要会合贺若弼的军队。
English: On the same day, the head of the Sui State, He Ruoqi, crossed the Beijing-Jingkou Bridge from Guangling on the north road. The head of the Sui State, Han Shigu, rushed to the Hengjiang River and crossed the quarry. The army of He Ruoqi will meet from the south road.

古文：丙寅，采石戍主徐子建驰启告变。
现代文：丙寅，采石戍守头领徐子建奔驰报告变故。
English: Cui Yin, head of the quarry, Xu Zijian Benz, reported the change.

古文：丁卯，召公卿入议军旅。
现代文：丁卯，皇帝召集公卿入朝商议军事。
English: Dingwu, the emperor summoned court nobles to the court to discuss military affairs.

古文：戊辰，内外戒严，以骠骑将军萧摩诃、护军将军樊毅、中领军鲁广达并为都督，遣南豫州刺史樊猛帅舟师出白下，散骑常侍皋文奏将兵镇南豫州。
现代文：戊辰，内外戒严，任命骠骑将军萧摩诃、护军将军樊毅、中领军鲁广达都为都督，派遣南豫州刺史樊猛率领水军出兵到白下，散骑常侍皋文奏率领兵士镇守南豫州。
English: Wuchen, martial law at home and abroad, appointed the cavalry general Xiao Miao, the escort general Zou Yi, and the central leader of the army, Lu Guangda, as the governor, dispatched the navy to Baixia, led by the captain of the Southern Henan Province, and led the soldiers to guard the Southern Henan Province.

古文：庚午，贺若弼攻陷南徐州。
现代文：庚午，贺若弼攻克南徐州。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, He Ruoqi conquered the southern Xuzhou.

古文：辛未，韩擒虎又陷南豫州，文奏败还。
现代文：辛未，韩擒虎又攻克南豫州，文奏失败而回。
English: Soon after, Han Xunhu defeated Nan Yuzhou again, and Wen Zong failed to return.

古文：至是隋军南北道并进。
现代文：到遣时隋军南北路一同进军。
English: When they arrived, the Sui army marched north and south together.

古文：后主遣骠骑大将军、司徒豫章王叔英屯朝堂，萧摩诃屯乐游苑，樊毅屯耆阇寺，鲁广达屯白土冈，忠武将军孔范屯宝田寺。
现代文：后主派遣骠骑大将军、司徒豫章王叔英驻守朝堂，萧摩诃驻守乐游苑，樊毅驻守耆阁寺，鲁广达驻守白土冈，忠武将军孔范驻守宝田寺。
English: Later, the master dispatched the cavalry general, the tutor Yuanzhang Wang Shuhei to guard the imperial court, Xiao Miao to guard the Le Youyuan, Zou Yi to guard the Shingge Temple, Lu Guangda to guard the Baidu Hill, and the loyal general Kong Fan to guard the Baotian Temple.

古文：己卯，镇东大将军任忠自吴兴入赴，仍屯硃雀门。
现代文：己卯，镇东大将军任忠从吴兴入京赴难，随之驻守在朱雀门。
English: At the same time, Ren Zhong, the general of Zhendong University, went from Wu Xing to Beijing in a difficult situation, and then stationed at Suzakumen.

古文：辛巳，贺若弼进据钟山，顿白土冈之东南。
现代文：辛巳，贺若弼进军占据钟山，停留在白土冈的东南。
English: Soon after, Horakado marched to occupy Jongsan and stayed in the southeast of Baidoa.

古文：甲申，后主遣众军与弼合战，众军败绩。
现代文：甲申，后主派遣各军同贺若弼交战，各军大败。
English: After the Battle of Jiaxing, the emperor sent his armies to fight against He Ruoqi, and the armies were soundly defeated.

古文：弼乘胜至乐游苑，鲁广达犹督散兵力战，不能拒。
现代文：贺若弼乘胜到达乐游苑，鲁广达仍然督促散兵拼力作战，不能抗拒隋军。
English: He Ruoqi took advantage of the victory to arrive at Le Youyuan, Lu Guangda still urged the scattered soldiers to fight hard, unable to resist the Sui army.

古文：弼进攻宫城，烧北掖门。
现代文：贺若弼进军攻打宫城，焚烧北掖门。
English: Horakado marched to attack Miyagi and set fire to Kitakado.

古文：是时韩擒虎率众自新林至于石子冈，任忠出降于擒虎，仍引擒虎经硃雀航趣宫城，自南掖门而入。
现代文：这时韩擒虎率领部众从新林直到石子冈，任忠出城投降韩擒虎，随之带领韩擒虎经过朱雀航赶往宫城，从南掖门进入。
English: At this time, Han Xunhu led the troops from Xinlin to Shizigaoka, and Ren Zhong went out of the city to surrender to Han Xunhu, and then led Han Xunhu to rush to Miyagi through Suzaku Hang, and entered from South Gate.

古文：于是城内文武百司皆遁出，唯尚书仆射袁宪在殿内。
现代文：这时城内文武百官都逃出，惟有尚书仆射袁宪在殿内。
English: At this time, all the military and civilian officials in the city fled, except for Shang Shubei and Yuan Xian in the palace.

古文：尚书令江总、吏部尚书姚察、度支尚书袁权、前度支尚书王瑗、侍中王宽在省中。
现代文：尚书令江总、吏部尚书姚察、度支尚书袁权、前度支尚书王瑗、侍中王宽住在尚书省中。
English: Shang Shuling Jiang Zong, Li Bu Shang Shuling Yao Zha, Du Shuling Shang Shuling Yuan Quan, Former Du Shuling Shang Shuling Wang Yao, and Wang Guang lived in Shang Shuling.

古文：后主闻兵至，从宫人十馀出后堂景阳殿，将自投于井。袁宪侍侧，苦谏不从，后阁舍人夏侯公韵又以身蔽井，后主与争久之，方得入焉。
现代文：后主听说兵士到来，带着宫女十多人到后堂景阳殿，将要自己投入井中，塞宪在旁侍奉，苦苦规劝不听从，后合舍人夏侯公韵又用身体遮住井，后主和他相争很久，才得以入井。
English: Hearing of the arrival of the soldiers, the queen mother, accompanied by more than ten ladies-in-waiting, went to the back hall of the Jingyang Palace. She was about to throw herself into the well. Sai Xian, who was serving at her side, worked hard to dissuade her from doing so. Xia Hou Gongyun, the concubine, covered the well with her body. The queen mother fought with him for a long time before she was able to enter the well.

古文：及夜，为隋军所执。
现代文：等到夜晚，被隋军擒获。
English: At night, it was captured by the Sui army.

古文：丙戌，晋王广入据京城。
现代文：丙戌，晋王杨广进军占据京城。
English: At the same time, the Jin king Yang Guang marched into and occupied Beijing.

古文：三月己巳，后主与王公百司发自建鄴，入于长安。隋仁寿四年十一月壬子，薨于洛阳，时年五十二。
现代文：己巳，篷王和王公百官从谜出发，进入星空。尘递四年十一月壬子，厘圭在盗扰逝世，这年五十二岁。
English: Suddenly, the King of the Cloak and the King of the Hundred Officials set out from the riddle and entered the starry sky. In November of the fourth year, Ling Gui died in the intrusion, this year he was fifty-two years old.

古文：追赠大将军，封长城县公，谥曰炀，葬河南洛阳之芒山。
现代文：堕追赠篷王为大将军，封垦城县公，谧号为炀，安葬在河南洛阳的芒山。
English: The dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned and dethroned.

古文：史臣侍中郑国公魏徵曰：高祖拔起垅亩，有雄桀之姿。
现代文：史臣侍中郑国公魏征说：高祖出自于乡间，有英雄豪杰的资质。
English: Zheng Guogong Wei Zheng, an aide-de-camp of Shi Zhen, said: Gao Zu was born in the countryside and has the qualifications of a hero.

古文：始佐下籓，奋英奇之略，弭节南海，职思静乱。
现代文：开始辅佐藩镇，竭尽英明奇妙的谋略，在南海制止战事，思虑平定祸乱。
English: He began to assist the feudal lords and towns, and tried his best to stop the war in the South China Sea with wise and wonderful strategies, and tried to calm down the calamity.

古文：援旗北迈，义在勤王，扫侯景于既成，拯梁室于已坠。
现代文：举旗北进，意在为王事尽力，扫除侯景于其篡权已成之时，拯救梁室于其已经坠落之际。
English: Raising the flag and marching north, they intended to do their best for the king, to sweep away Hou Jing when his usurpation of power was complete, and to save Liang Shuxu when he had already fallen.

古文：天网绝而复续，国步屯而更康，百神有主，不失旧物。
现代文：天网断绝而再续，国运艰难而能安宁，百神有人祭祀，不失旧土故民。
English: Heaven's net breaks off and then continues, the national fortune is difficult but can be peaceful, hundreds of gods are worshiped, without losing the old people.

古文：魏王之延汉鼎祚，宋武之反晋乘舆，懋绩鸿勋，无以尚也。
现代文：魏王延续汉朝皇位，宋武帝恢复晋室统治，丰功伟业无法高遇台祖。
English: Wei Wang continued the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty, Song Emperor Wu restored the rule of the Jin Dynasty, and the great achievements could not meet the Taizhu.

古文：于时内难未弭，外邻勍敌，王琳作梗于上流，周、齐摇荡于江、汉，畏首畏尾，若存若亡，此之不图，遽移天历，虽皇灵有眷，何其速也？然志度弘远，怀抱豁如，或取士于仇雠，或擢才于亡命，掩其受金之过，宥其吠尧之罪，委以心腹爪牙，咸能得其死力，故乃决机百胜，成此三分，方诸鼎峙之雄，足以无惭权、备矣。
现代文：当时内难没有消除，外部邻接强敌，王琳在上游作乱，周、齐在长江、漠水地区出动，国家既畏首又畏尾，若存若亡，逭时不圃取，马上会转移天命，虽然皇天眷顾，是何等迅速然而高祖志向恢宏度量远大，胸怀开阔，有时从仇人中选取官吏，有时从逃亡人士中提拔人才，忽略他们收受黄金的过失，宽恕他们诋毁唐童的罪行，委任为心腹干将，都能得到他们拼命尽力，所以决断时机百战百胜，完成逭三分天下的功业，比起鼎立时的英雄，足以无愧于孙权、刘备了。
English: At that time, internal difficulties had not been eliminated, strong enemies were approaching from the outside, Wang Lin was in the upstream, Zhou and Qi were dispatched in the Yangtze River and desert areas, and the country was afraid of both the head and the tail. If they survived or died, they would not be able to take care of them, and they would immediately transfer the destiny of heaven. Although the emperor was favored by heaven, how quickly they were taken care of, but Gao Zu's ambition was far-reaching and broad-minded. Sometimes he selected officials from enemies, sometimes he promoted talents from fugitives. He ignored their mistakes of accepting gold, forgave their crimes of slandering

古文：世祖天姿睿哲，清明在躬，早预经纶，知民疾苦，思择令典，庶几至治。
现代文：世担天生聪慧明智，清廉贤明，早年参与筹划，知道民众的疾苦，思虑选择美好法典，几乎达到大治。
English: The world leader is naturally intelligent and wise, incorruptible and wise, participated in planning at an early age, knew the sufferings of the people, thoughtfully chose a beautiful code, and almost achieved great success.

古文：德刑并用，戡济艰虞，群凶授首，强邻震慑。
现代文：德行刑罚并用，度过艰难险阻，凶恶之徒被杀，强大的邻国震撼畏惧。
English: Virtue and punishment go hand in hand, hardships and dangers are overcome, evil-doers are killed, and powerful neighbors are shaken and frightened.

古文：虽忠厚之化未能及远，恭俭之风足以垂训，若不尚明察，则守文之良主也。
现代文：虽然忠厚的教化不能达到远方，恭敬俭约的风尚足以留传后人，如果不崇尚明察秋毫，就是保守基业的好君主。
English: Although faithful enlightenment cannot reach far away, the tradition of respect and frugality is enough to be passed down to future generations. If you do not respect and scrutinize, you are a good monarch who preserves the heritage.

古文：临川年长于成王，过微于太甲，宣帝有周公之亲，无伊尹之志，明避不复，桐宫遂往，欲加之罪，其无辞乎！
现代文：临川王年岁高于成王，过失少于太甲。宣帝有凰公一般的亲属关系，没有伊尹那样的志向，帝位不能恢复，于是前往桐宫，想给人加上罪名，难道找不到藉口吗!
English: King Linchuan is older than King Cheng and his faults are less than those of King Taiga. Emperor Xuan has the general kinship of a phoenix prince. Without the same ambition as Yi Yin, the imperial throne cannot be restored, so he went to Tongu and wanted to add a crime to someone. Couldn't he find an excuse?

古文：高宗爰自在田，雅量宏廓，登庸御极，民归其厚，惠以使下，宽以容众。
现代文：高宗自从在野，气量恢宏，登上皇位后，民众归附他的仁厚。以恩惠驱使百姓，以宽厚容纳众人。
English: Ever since Gao Zong was in the field, he was full of vigor. After he ascended the throne, the people attributed to his benevolence. He drove the people with grace and accommodated everyone with generosity.

古文：智勇争奋，师出有名，扬旆分麾，风行电扫，辟土千里，奄有淮、泗，战胜攻取之势，近古未之有也。
现代文：有智有勇的人争先恐后，出兵有正当名义，旌旗飘扬分兵行动，如风吹电扫，开拓疆域一千里，拥有淮、泗地区，战胜攻取的形势，为近代所没有。
English: People with wisdom and courage are scrambling, the deployment of troops has a legitimate name, the flag-flying operation of the division of troops is like the wind blowing the electric sweeper, the territory of a thousand miles is opened up, the Huai and Lu regions are possessed, and the situation of conquering and conquering is unprecedented in modern times.

古文：既而君侈民劳，将骄卒堕，帑藏空竭，折衄师徒，于是秦人方强，遂窥兵于江上矣。
现代文：随之君主奢侈民众辛劳，将领骄傲士卒懈怠，库存枯竭，损伤军队，这时秦人正强大，于是派兵到长江边。
English: As a result, the monarch was extravagant, the people worked hard, the generals were proud, the soldiers slacked off, the inventory was depleted, and the army was damaged. At this time, the Qin people were strong, so they sent troops to the Yangtze River.

古文：李克以为吴之先亡，由乎数战数胜，数战则民疲，数胜则主骄，以骄主御疲民，未有不亡者也。
现代文：李克以为吴国先灭亡，是由于他们多次交战多次取胜，多次交战则民众疲劳，多次取胜则君主骄傲，以骄傲的君主统治疲劳的民众，没有不灭亡的。
English: Li Ke thought that the reason why the State of Wu was the first to perish was because they had fought and won many times. If they fought and won many times, the people would be tired. If they won many times, the monarch would be proud. If the tired people were ruled by a proud monarch, there was no way they would not perish.

古文：信哉言乎！高宗始以宽大得人，终以骄侈致败，文、武之业，坠于兹矣。
现代文：这话是可信的高宗开始因宽大得人心，最终因骄傲奢侈导致失败，像文帝、武帝那样的业绩，因此坠落了。
English: It is credible that Gaozong initially won the hearts of the people due to his magnanimity, and eventually failed due to pride and extravagance. Like the performance of Emperor Wen and Emperor Wu, he fell as a result.

古文：后主生深宫之中，长妇人之手，既属邦国殄瘁，不知稼穑艰难。
现代文：后主出生在深宫之中，经妇人的手抚养大，遇到国家衰微，不知耕种的艰难。
English: Later, the master was born in the middle of a deep palace, raised by a woman's hand, encountered the decline of the country, and did not know the difficulties of farming.

古文：初惧阽危，屡有哀矜之诏，后稍安集，复扇淫侈之风。
现代文：起初畏惧危险，屡次发布哀怜的诏书，后来逐渐安宁，又煽动起奢侈的风尚。
English: At first, fearing danger, they repeatedly issued pathetic edicts, but later, as the situation gradually calmed down, they instigated a luxury lifestyle.

古文：宾礼诸公，唯寄情于文酒，昵近群小，皆委之以衡轴。
现代文：礼待公卿，衹是存心于文章酒食，亲近小人，都委托以朝中大权。
English: Treating courtiers with courtesy, indulging in wine and food, and getting close to villains are all entrusted to the supreme power of the dynasty.

古文：谋谟所及，遂无骨鲠之臣，权要所在，莫匪侵渔之吏。
现代文：所参与谋划的，于是没有鲠直的臣子，在当权职位的，无不是剥削民众的官吏。
English: As a result, there are no upright courtiers involved in the planning, and those in positions of power are nothing more than officials who exploit the people.

古文：政刑日紊，尸素盈朝，躭荒为长夜之饮，嬖宠同艳妻之孽。危亡弗恤，上下相蒙，众叛亲离，临机不寤，自投于井，冀以苟生，视其以此求全，抑亦民斯下矣。
现代文：政治刑罚益紊乱，尸位素餐的人充满朝廷，荒废政事作通宵的饮宴，呢爱宠臣如同美妻的盛饰，危亡不顾及，上下相蒙骗，众人背叛亲属离去，面临危难不省悟，白投于井中，希望苟且活命，看他如此寻求保全自己，或许也就是民众中的下等了。
English: Political punishments are more and more deranged, the imperial court is filled with people who eat a vegetarian diet, wasteful political affairs make an all-night banquet, and love of a favorite is like the adornment of a beautiful wife, regardless of danger and death, deceiving superiors and subordinates, people betray their relatives and leave, do not reflect in the face of danger, and throw themselves into the well, hoping to stay alive. Seeing him seek to preserve himself in this way, perhaps he is the lowest among the people.

古文：遐观列辟，纂武嗣兴，其始也皆欲齐明日月，合德天地，高视五帝，俯协三王，然而靡不有初，克终盖寡，其故何哉？
现代文：远观各帝王，继承帝位，开始都想和月齐明，德行合于天地，上看五帝，下协和于三王，然而无不有开始是如此的，保持到最终的大概就少了，原因是什么呢?
English: Looking at the emperors from afar and the succession of the imperial throne, at the beginning they all wanted to align with the moon, and the virtue was in harmony with heaven and earth. Looking at the five emperors, they were in harmony with the three kings. However, this was the case at the beginning, and it was less likely to be maintained until the end. What is the reason for this?

古文：并以中庸之才，怀可移之性，口存于仁义，心怵于嗜欲。
现代文：都是以中等的才能，怀着可改变的性情，口中念着仁义，心中受嗜欲的诱惑。
English: All of them were of average ability, with changeable dispositions, with benevolence on their lips and lust in their hearts.

古文：仁义利物而道远，嗜欲遂性而便身。
现代文：仁义利于人而路途远，嗜欲满足性情而便于自己。
English: Benevolence and righteousness are beneficial to people, but they are a long way away. Lust is to satisfy one's disposition, but it is convenient for oneself.

古文：便身不可久违，道远难以固志。
现代文：便于自己不可长久离开，路途远难以保持志向。
English: It is not easy to leave for a long time, and it is far from easy to maintain the aspiration.

古文：佞谄之伦，承颜候色，因其所好，以悦导之，若下坂以走丸，譬顺流而决壅。
现代文：奸邪谄媚的人，察颜观色，利用君主的喜好，用欢悦来诱导他，如同下坡时滚圆球，譬如顺水流而决堤。
English: The adulterer and the adulteress, observing the countenance, take advantage of the monarch's liking, using joy to induce him, like a round ball rolling downhill, such as breaking through the embankment with the current.

古文：非夫感灵辰象，降生明德，孰能遗其所乐，而以百姓为心哉？
现代文：不是感受月星辰，天生英明德行的君主，谁能抛下他们的欢乐，而把百姓的事作为自己的心思呢?
English: Is it not the princes who feel the moon and the stars, who are wise and virtuous by nature, who can leave their pleasures behind and take the affairs of the people as their own thoughts?

古文：此所以成、康、文、景千载而罕遇，癸、辛、幽、厉靡代而不有，毒被宗社，身婴戮辱，为天下笑，可不痛乎！古人有言，亡国之主，多有才艺，考之梁、陈及隋，信非虚论。
现代文：造就是之所以成王、康王、文帝、景帝这样的君主千年之中而很少遇到，帝癸、帝辛、幽王、厉王这样的昏君没有哪一代而没有，毒害波及国家，本人遭杀戮，为天下人耻笑，能不痛惜吗古人说过，亡国的君主，多有才华技艺，考察凿、速和堕周，的确不是假话。
English: This is the reason why kings such as King Cheng, King Kang, Emperor Wen, and Emperor Jing are rare in a thousand years. There has never been a generation of weak kings such as Emperor Zhao, Emperor Xin, Emperor Yu, and Emperor Li. The poison has affected the country, and the king himself has been killed. He is the laughingstock of the world. Can you not feel sorry for him? The ancients said that the monarchs of the lost country had many talents and skills, and it was not a lie to say that they were shrewd, quick, and peripatetic.

古文：然则不崇教义之本，偏尚淫丽之文，徒长浇伪之风，无救乱亡之祸矣。
现代文：那么不崇尚教化道义的根本，偏爱华丽的文章，徒然助长浮薄诈伪的风气，也就不能拯救混乱灭亡的祸患丁。
English: If one does not uphold the fundamental moral principles of enlightenment, if one prefers flashy articles, and if one vainly fosters a superficial and deceitful culture, then one will not be able to save oneself from the scourge of chaos and ruin.

古文：史臣曰：后主昔在储宫，早标令德，及南面继业，实允天人之望矣。
现代文：史臣曰：后主从前在东宫中，很早就显出美好的德行，等到登上帝位继承业绩，实在符合天神人民的期望。
English: Shichen said, "The empress dowager was once in the East Palace, and she showed wonderful virtues very early on. When she ascended the throne to inherit her achievements, she really met the expectations of the people of Tenjin.

古文：至于礼乐刑政，咸遵故典，加以深弘六艺，广辟四门，是以待诏之徒，争趋金马，稽古之秀，云集石渠。
现代文：至于礼乐刑政，都遵循从前的典章，加上深明六艺，大开四门，所以等待韶令的人，争相趋向金马，考察古事的人才，云集在石渠。
English: As for the etiquette, music and criminal justice, they all follow the previous regulations, and with the addition of deep understanding of the six arts, the four doors are wide open. Therefore, those who are waiting for the imperial edict are rushing to the golden horse, and the talents who are investigating ancient things are gathered in the stone channel.

古文：且梯山航海，朝贡者往往岁至矣。
现代文：而且登山渡海，朝贡的人往往每年到来。
English: Moreover, people who climb mountains and cross the sea to pay tribute often come every year.

古文：自魏正始、晋中朝以来，贵臣虽有识治者，皆以文学相处，罕关庶务，朝章大典，方参议焉。文案簿领，咸委小吏，浸以成俗，迄至于陈。
现代文：自从魏朝正始年间、西晋时期以来，大臣虽然有懂得治道的，都以文学相交往，很少涉及各项事务，朝廷章程重大法典，才参与商议，文书簿籍，都交给小官员，逐渐成为习俗，直到陈朝。
English: Since the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, since the Western Jin Dynasty, although the ministers knew how to govern, they all used literature to communicate with each other, and rarely involved in various affairs. Only the important codes of the Imperial Charter participated in the deliberation, and the books of documents were handed over to minor officials, which gradually became a custom until the Chen Dynasty.

古文：后主因循，未遑改革，故施文庆、沈客卿之徒，专掌军国要务，奸黠左道，以裒刻为功，自取身荣，不存国计。是以朝经堕废，祸生邻国。
现代文：篷王因袭，没来得及改变，所以施文庆、沈客卿之流，专门执掌军队国家的重要事务，奸猾狡诈使用旁门左道，以刻薄为功劳，谋取自身欢乐，不考虑国家大计，因此朝廷典章败坏，祸患生于邻国。
English: As a result of the attack, the King of the Cloak did not have time to change, so the Shi Wenqing and the Shen Keqing and the like were specially in charge of the important affairs of the army and the country, treacherously and cunningly using the side door and the left door, taking meanness as a merit, seeking their own joy, and not considering the national plan. Therefore, the imperial ceremony was corrupted, and the disaster was born in neighboring countries.

古文：斯亦运钟百六，鼎玉迁变，非唯人事不昌，盖天意然也。
现代文：这也是国运汇集到困厄时，皇位变迁，不仅仅是人事不昌盛，大概也是天意如此了。
English: This is also the time when the national fortune converges to the time of trouble, the change of the imperial throne, not only the personnel is not prosperous, it is probably also the will of heaven.

