古文：起旃蒙协洽，尽柔兆涒滩，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年
English: A total of two years

古文：太祖高皇帝上之上元年
现代文：汉高帝元年
English: In the first year of the Henkel Empire

古文：冬，十月，沛公至霸上。
现代文：冬季，十月，沛公刘邦率军抵达霸上。
English: In the winter, in October, Pei Gong Liu Bang led the army to reach the hegemony.

古文：秦王子婴素车、白马，系颈以组，封皇帝玺、符、节，降轵道旁。
现代文：秦王子婴乘素车、驾白马，颈上系着绳子以示自己该服罪自杀，手捧封好的皇帝玉玺和符节，伏在轵道亭旁向刘邦投降。
English: Prince Qin took a plain carriage and rode a white horse. He tied a rope around his neck to show that he should commit suicide. He held the sealed Emperor's Jade Scepter and the Rune Festival in his hand and surrendered to Liu Bang next to the Shandong Pavilion.

古文：诸将或言诛秦王。
现代文：众将领中有人主张杀掉秦王。
English: Some generals advocated killing King Qin.

古文：沛公曰： 始怀王遣我，固以能宽容。
现代文：刘邦说： 当初怀王之所以派我前来，原本就是因为认定我能宽容人。
English: Liu Bang said: Originally, the reason why King Huai sent me here was because he thought I could be tolerant.

古文：且人已降，杀之不祥。 
现代文：何况人家已经降服了，还要杀人家，如此做是不吉利的。 
English: Besides, people have already surrendered, and it is unlucky to kill people.

古文：乃以属吏。
现代文：于是便将秦王子婴交给了主管官员处置。
English: As a result, the child was handed over to the care of the school.

古文：贾谊论曰：秦以区区之地致万乘之权，招八州而朝同列，百有馀年，然后以六合为家，殽、函为宫。
现代文：贾谊论曰：秦国凭借一点点地盘发展到握有万乘大国的权势，控制冀、兖、青、徐、扬、荆、豫、梁八州，使与秦地位相等的六国诸侯来朝拜，经过了一百多年。然后以天下为家，以崤山、函谷关为宫。
English: According to Jia's theory, it took more than a hundred years for Qin to develop into a great power by virtue of its small territory, control the eight states of Hebei, Min, Qing, Xu, Yang, Jing, Yu and Liang, and make the princes of six countries equal in status to Qin come to pay homage. Then, it took the whole world as its home, with Lushan and Hakodate as its palaces.

古文：一夫作难而七庙堕，身死人手，为天下笑者，何也？
现代文：但是，一人发难便使七座宗庙被毁，自身终死于他人之手，令普天下的人讥笑，是因为什么呀？
English: But what is the reason why Chen Zang initiated an uprising, the seven-generation ancestral temple of the Qin Dynasty was destroyed, even the Qin Prince died in the hands of others, and was ridiculed by the world?

古文：仁义不施而攻守之势异也。
现代文：是由于不施仁义，且攻夺天下和守住江山的形势不同啊！
English: It is because they do not practice benevolence, and the situation of conquering the world and holding the country is different!

古文：沛公西入咸阳，诸将皆争走金帛财物之府分之。萧何独先入收秦丞相府图籍藏之，以此沛公得具知天下厄塞、户口多少、强弱之处。
现代文：刘邦领兵向西进入咸阳，众将领都争先恐后地奔往秦朝贮藏金帛财物的府库瓜分财宝，唯独萧何率先入宫取秦朝丞相府的地理图册、文书、户籍簿等档案收藏起来，刘邦借此全面了解了天下的山川要塞、户口的多少及财力物力强弱的分布。
English: Liu Bang led the troops westward into Xianyang, and all the generals rushed to the Qin Dynasty's treasury to divide the treasure. However, Xiao He was the first to enter the palace to collect the geographical maps, documents, household registration books and other archives of the Qin Dynasty's Prime Minister's Office. Liu Bang used this to fully understand the world's mountain and river fortresses, the number of hukou and the distribution of financial resources and material strength.

古文：沛公见秦宫室、帷帐、狗马、重宝、妇女以千数，意欲留居之。
现代文：刘邦看到秦王朝的宫室、帷帐、名种狗马、贵重宝器和宫女数以千计，便想留下来在皇宫中居住。
English: Liu Bang saw the palace rooms of the Qin Dynasty, the curtains, the famous stud dogs and horses, the precious treasures and thousands of princesses, and he wanted to stay and live in the palace.

古文：樊哙谏曰： 沛公欲有天下耶，将为富家翁耶？
现代文：樊哙劝谏说： 您是想拥有天下，还是只想作一个富翁啊？
English: Do you want to own the world, or do you just want to be a rich man?

古文：凡此奢丽之物，皆秦所以亡也，沛公何用焉！
现代文：这些奢侈华丽之物，都是招致秦朝覆灭的东西，您要它们有什么用呀！
English: These luxurious and ornate objects are the things that led to the downfall of the Qin Dynasty. What use do you want them to be?

古文：愿急还霸上，无留宫中！ 
现代文：望您尽快返回霸上，不要滞留在宫里！ 
English: We hope you will return to the castle as soon as possible, do not stay in the palace!

古文：沛公不听。
现代文：刘邦不听。
English: Liu Bang did not listen.

古文：张良曰： 秦为无道，故沛公得至此。
现代文：张良说： 秦朝因为不施行仁政，所以您才能够来到这里。
English: Zhang Liang said, "You can come here because the Qin Dynasty did not practice benevolent politics.

古文：夫为天下除残贼，宜缟素为资。
现代文：而为天下人铲除残民之贼，应如同丧服在身，把抚慰人民作为根本。
English: To rid the world of murderous tyranny, it should be based on honesty and simplicity.

古文：今始入秦，即安其乐，此所谓 助桀为虐 。
现代文：现在刚刚进入秦的都城，就要安享其乐，这即是人们所说的 助桀为虐 了。
English: Now that we have just entered the Qin capital, we must enjoy it peacefully. This is what people call "helping others to commit crimes."

古文：且忠言逆耳利于行，良药苦口利于病，愿沛公听樊哙言！ 
现代文：况且忠言逆耳利于行，良药苦口利于病，望您能听取樊哙的劝告！ 
English: What's more, it's better to listen to advice than to act on it. Good medicine is better than bad medicine. I hope you can listen to my advice!

古文：沛公乃还军霸上。
现代文：刘邦于是率军返回霸上。
English: It was only then that Pei Gong returned to his car and parked it on the highway.

古文：十一月，沛公悉召诸县父老、豪杰，谓曰： 父老苦秦苛法久矣！
现代文：十一月，刘邦将各县的父老和有声望的人全都召集起来，对他们说： 父老们遭受秦朝严刑苛法的苦累已经很久了！
English: In November, Liu Bang gathered all the elders and famous people in each county and said to them: "Our elders have been suffering from the Qin Dynasty's severe punishments and harsh laws for a long time!

古文：吾与诸侯约，先入关者王之，吾当王关中。
现代文：我与各路诸侯约定，先入关中的人为王。据此我就应该在关中称王了。
English: I agreed with the lords that whoever entered the gate first would be crowned king, and I should be crowned king of the gate.

古文：与父老约法三章耳：杀人者死，伤人及盗抵罪。
现代文：如今与父老们约法三章：杀人者处死，伤人者和抢劫者抵罪。
English: I now announce to you, fathers and grandfathers, that there are three articles in the decree: compensation for the life of a murderer, and the crime of wounding a person and robbery will be punished according to the circumstances.

古文：馀悉除去秦法，诸吏民皆案堵如故。
现代文：除此之外，秦朝的法律统统废除，众官吏和百姓都照旧安定不动。
English: In addition, all the laws of the Qin Dynasty were abolished, and all officials and people remained stable and unmoved.

古文：凡吾所以来，为父老除害，非有所侵暴，无恐。
现代文：我之所以到这里来，是为了替父老们除害，而不是来欺凌你们的，请你们不必害怕！
English: The reason why I came here is to remove the harm for my parents, not to bully you, please do not be afraid!

古文：且吾所以还军霸上，待诸侯至而定约束耳。 
现代文：况且我所以领兵回驻霸上，不过是为了等各路诸侯到来后订立一个约束大家行为的规章罢了。 
English: The reason why I returned to the military hegemony was to wait for the arrival of the princes to formulate a common statute.

古文：乃使人与秦吏行县、乡、邑，告谕之。
现代文：随即派人和秦朝的官吏一起巡行各县、乡、城镇，向人们讲明道理。
English: Subsequently, he sent people and officials of the Qin Dynasty to patrol the counties, townships, and towns to explain the truth to the people.

古文：秦民大喜。争持牛、羊、酒食献飨军士。
现代文：秦地的百姓都欢喜异常，争相拿着牛、羊、酒食来慰问款待刘邦的官兵。
English: The people of Qin were overjoyed, rushing to bring cattle, sheep, wine and food to comfort and entertain Liu Bang's officers and soldiers.

古文：沛公又让不受，曰： 仓粟多，非乏，不欲费民。 
现代文：刘邦又辞让不肯接受，说道： 仓库中的粮食还很多，并不缺乏，不想让百姓们破费。 
English: Liu Bang again refused to accept the concession, saying: There is still a lot of grain in the warehouse, there is no shortage, I don't want the people to go broke.

古文：民又益喜，唯恐沛公不为秦王。
现代文：百姓们于是更加高兴，唯恐刘邦不在秦地称王。
English: The people of Qin were even more impressed, deeply afraid that Pei Gong would not be the king of Guanzhong.

古文：项羽既定河北，率诸侯兵欲西入关。
现代文：项羽已经平定了黄河以北的地区，就想率领各路诸侯军向西进入关中。
English: Xiang Yu had already pacified the area north of the Yellow River, so he wanted to lead the vassal armies westward into Guanzhong.

古文：先是，诸侯吏卒、繇使、屯戍过秦中者，秦中吏卒遇之多无状。
现代文：在此之前，诸侯军中的官兵有的曾因服徭役或屯戍经过关中一带，秦地的官兵多无礼地对待他们。
English: Prior to this, some officers and soldiers in the armies of the princes had passed through the Guanzhong area due to military service or settlement, and the officers and soldiers in Qin treated them rudely.

古文：及章邯以秦军降诸侯，诸侯吏卒乘胜多奴虏使之，轻折辱秦吏卒。
现代文：待到章邯率秦军投降了诸侯军后，诸侯军的官兵便凭借胜势，把秦军官兵多当作奴隶和俘虏来使唤，随便侮辱秦军官兵。
English: After the Qin army led by Zhang Ye surrendered to the vassal army, the vassal officers and soldiers of the vassal army took advantage of the victory to use the Qin officers and soldiers as slaves and prisoners, and insulted the Qin officers and soldiers.

古文：秦吏卒多怨，窃言曰： 章将军等诈吾属降诸侯。今能入关破秦，大善；即不能，诸侯虏吾属而东，秦又尽诛吾父母妻子，奈何？ 
现代文：秦军官兵大多因此而生出怨恨的情绪，暗地里议论说： 章将军等人骗咱们投降诸侯军，如今若能攻入关中击灭秦朝，当是大好事；倘若不能，诸侯军将咱们掠持到东方去，而秦朝又尽杀咱们的父母妻子儿女，那可怎么办啊？ 
English: Most of the Qin officers and soldiers were resentful because of this, and secretly discussed: General Zhang and others deceived us into surrendering to the vassal army, now if we can invade Guanzhong and destroy the Qin Dynasty, it will be a great thing; if not, the vassal army will kidnap us to the East, and the Qin Dynasty will kill our parents, wives and children, then what?

古文：诸将微闻其计，以告项羽。
现代文：诸侯军的将领们暗中查听到了这些议论，即报告给项羽。
English: The generals of the vassal army secretly heard these arguments and reported them to Xiang Yu.

古文：项羽召黥布、蒲将军计曰： 秦吏卒尚众，其心不服，至关不听，事必危。
现代文：项羽于是召集黥布、蒲将军商量说： 目前军中秦朝的官兵还很多，他们内心并不顺服，如果到了函谷关不听从调遣，情势必会危急。
English: Xiang Yu then called together General Zibo and General Pu for consultation and said: At present, there are still many officers and soldiers of the Qin Dynasty in the army, and they are not obedient in their hearts. If they do not obey the deployment when they arrive at Hakodate Pass, the situation is bound to be critical.

古文：不如击杀之，而独与章邯、长史欣、都尉翳入秦。 
现代文：所以不如将他们除掉，而只和章邯、长史司马欣、都尉董翳等进入秦地。 
English: Therefore, it would be better to get rid of them and only let them enter Qin with Zhang Ye, Chief Secretary Sima Xin, Lieutenant Dong Ye and others.

古文：于是楚军夜击坑秦卒二十馀万人新安城南。或说沛公曰： 秦富十倍天下，地形强。
现代文：楚军便于夜晚在新安城南面袭击活埋了秦兵二十余万人。有人劝说刘邦道： 关中地区比天下其他地方要富足十倍，而且地势险要。
English: It was convenient for the Chu army to attack south of Xin'an City at night, burying more than 200,000 Qin soldiers alive. Someone persuaded Liu Bang to say: Guanzhong area is ten times richer than other places in the world, and the terrain is dangerous.

古文：闻项羽号章邯为雍王，王关中，今则来，沛公恐不得有此。
现代文：听说项羽封章邯为雍王，让他在关中称王。现在如果他来了，您恐怕就不能占据这个地方了。
English: I heard that Xiang Yu Feng Zhang Quan is the king of Yong, let him be the king of Guanzhong. Now if he comes, I'm afraid you can't occupy this place.

古文：可急使兵守函谷关，无内诸侯军；稍征关中兵以自益，距之。 
现代文：可以火速派兵把守函谷关，不让诸侯军进来，并逐步征召关中兵，以此增加自己的实力，抵御他们。 
English: You can quickly send soldiers to guard the Hakodate pass, not to let the vassal army come in, and gradually conscript soldiers from the pass, in order to increase your strength and resist them.

古文：沛公然其计，从之。
现代文：刘邦认为此计可行，就照着办了。
English: Pei Gong agreed with his plan and did as he was told.

古文：已而项羽至关，关门闭。
现代文：不久，项羽到达函谷关，但是关门紧闭。
English: Soon, Xiang Yu arrived at the Hanyu Pass, but the gate was closed.

古文：闻沛公已定关中，大怒，使黥布等攻破函谷关。
现代文：项羽听说刘邦已经平定了关中，勃然大怒，派黥布等人攻破了函谷关。
English: It is said that Pei Gong has already defeated Guanzhong, and he was so angry that he sent his followers to break through Hantou Guanzhong.

古文：十二月，项羽进至戏。
现代文：十二月，项羽进军至戏。
English: In December, Xiang Yu entered the stage.

古文：沛公左司马曹无伤使人言项羽曰： 沛公欲王关中，令子婴为相，珍宝尽有之。 
现代文：刘邦的左司马曹无伤派人告诉项羽说： 沛公想要在关中称王，任秦王子婴为相，奇珍异宝全都占有了。 
English: Liu Bang's left-hand man, Ma Cao Wuling, sent someone to tell Xiang Yu that: "Pei Gong wants to be crowned king in Guanzhong, appoint Prince Qin as his consort, and take possession of all the rare treasures.

古文：欲以求封。
现代文：企图借此求得项羽的封赏。
English: He's trying to get a reward for this.

古文：项羽大怒，飨士卒，期旦日击沛公军。
现代文：项羽闻言怒不可遏，就让士兵们饱餐一顿，打算次日攻打刘邦的军队。
English: When Xiang Yu heard this, he was furious and gave the soldiers a hearty meal, intending to attack Liu Bang's army the next day.

古文：当是时，项羽兵四十万，号百万，在新丰鸿门；沛公兵十万，号二十万，在霸上。
现代文：这时，项羽拥兵四十万，号称百万大军，驻扎在新丰县的鸿门；刘邦拥兵十万，号称二十万，驻军霸上。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu had four hundred thousand soldiers, known as a million-strong army, stationed at Hongmen in Xinfeng County; Liu Bang had one hundred thousand soldiers, known as two hundred thousand, stationed at Hegemony.

古文：范增说项羽曰： 沛公居山东时，贪财好色。
现代文：范增劝项羽说： 刘邦住在崤山之东时，贪财而又好色。
English: Fan Zeng advised Xiang Yu to say: When Liu Bang lived in the east of Lushan, he was greedy and lustful.

古文：今入关，财物无所取，妇女无所幸，此其志不在小。
现代文：现今入关，却不搜取财物，不宠幸女色，这表明他的志向不小哇。
English: Now that he is in prison, he does not collect money or belongings, and he does not get close to women. From this perspective, his aspirations are not small.

古文：吾令人望其气，皆为龙虎，成五采，此天子气也。
现代文：我曾命人观望他那边的云气，都显示出龙虎的形状，出现五彩，这是天子之气啊！
English: I asked people to look at the clouds above him. They were all in the shape of dragons and tigers and had many colors. This was the breath of the Son of Heaven.

古文：急击勿失！ 
现代文：宜赶快进攻他，不要错过了时机！ 
English: It is advisable to attack him quickly, do not miss the opportunity!

古文：楚左尹项伯者，项羽季父也，素善张良，乃夜驰之沛公军，私见张良，具告以事，欲呼与俱去，曰： 毋俱死也！ 张良曰： 臣为韩王送沛公。
现代文：楚国的左尹项伯是项羽的叔父，向来与张良要好，便连夜驰马到刘邦军中，私下里会见张良，将这些事情一五一十地对他说了，想要叫张良同他一起离开，说道： 可别跟刘邦一块儿死啊！ 
English: Zuo Yin Xiang Bo of Chu was Xiang Yu's uncle. He had always been friendly with Zhang Liang, so he rode all night to Liu Bang's army, met Zhang Liang in private, told him these things in detail, and wanted to ask Zhang Liang to leave with him, saying: But don't die with Liu Bang!

古文：沛公今有急，亡去不义，不可不语。 
现代文：张良说： 我为韩王伴送沛公，而今沛公遇有急难，我却逃走了，这是不义的行为，我不能不告诉他。 
English: Zhang Liang said: I escorted Pei Gong to accompany Han Wang, and now Pei Gong is in dire straits, but I escaped. This is an unjust act, I must tell him.

古文：良乃入，具告沛公。沛公大惊。
现代文：于是张良即进去将项伯的话全都讲述给了刘邦。刘邦大吃一惊。
English: So Zhang Liang went in and told Liu Bang all of Xiangbo's words. Liu Bang was taken aback.

古文：良曰： 料公士卒足以当项羽乎？ 
现代文：张良说： 您估计一下您的兵力足够抵挡项羽的吗？ 
English: Zhang Liang said: Can you estimate whether your troops are strong enough to resist Xiang Yu?

古文：沛公默然曰： 固不如也。
现代文：刘邦沉默了一会儿道： 的确是不如他呀。
English: Liu Bang was silent for a moment and said, "It's true that I'm not as good as him."

古文：且为之奈何？ 
现代文：这可该怎么办呢？ 
English: What is to be done about this?

古文：张良曰： 请往谓项伯，言沛公之不敢叛也。 
现代文：张良说： 请让我去告诉项伯，说您是绝不敢背叛项羽的。 
English: Zhang Liang said: Please let me go and tell Xiang Bo that you would never dare to betray Xiang Yu.

古文：沛公曰： 君安与项伯有故？ 
现代文：刘邦道： 您是怎么与项伯成为故交的啊？ 
English: Pei Gong said: How do you have a friendship with Xiang Bo?

古文：张良曰： 秦时与臣游，尝杀人，臣活之。
现代文：张良说： 在秦的时候，项伯与我有交往，他曾经杀过人，我救了他。
English: Zhang Liang said, "During Qin's time, Xiang Bo was in contact with me. He once killed someone, and I saved him.

古文：今事有急，故幸来告良。 
现代文：现在事情紧急，所以还幸亏他前来告我。 
English: Now it's critical, and it's good that he's here to tell me.

古文：沛公曰： 孰与君少长？ 
现代文：刘邦说： 你与他谁大谁小？ 
English: Liu Bang said: Who is older and who is younger than him?

古文：良曰： 长于臣。 
现代文：张良道： 他比我大。 
English: Zhang Liangdao: He is older than me.

古文：沛公曰： 君为我呼入，吾得兄事之。 
现代文：刘邦说： 您替我唤他进来，我将把他当作兄长来对待。 
English: Liu Bang said: You call him in for me, I will treat him as a brother.

古文：张良出，固要项伯；项伯即入见沛公。
现代文：张良于是出去，坚持邀项伯入内，项伯便进去与刘邦相见。
English: Zhang Liang then went out and insisted on inviting Xiang Bo inside. Xiang Bo then went inside to meet Liu Bang.

古文：沛公奉卮酒为寿，约为婚姻，曰： 吾入关，秋毫不敢有所近，籍吏民，封府库而待将军。
现代文：刘邦手捧酒杯向项伯敬酒祝福，并与他约定结为亲家，说： 我进入关中，连毫毛般微小的东西都不敢沾边，只是登记官民，封存府库，等待着项羽将军的到来。
English: Liu Bang held a wine glass in his hand and toasted to Xiang Bo, and made an agreement with him to become a relative, saying: "I entered Guanzhong. I did not dare to touch even the smallest things. I just registered officials and citizens, sealed the government treasury, and waited for the arrival of General Xiang Yu.

古文：所以遣将守关者，备他盗之出入与非常也。
现代文：之所以派将领把守函谷关，是为了防备有其他盗贼出入和有非常情况发生。
English: So he was sent to guard the gate in order to prevent other thieves from entering and leaving and accidents.

古文：日夜望将军至，岂敢反乎！
现代文：我日日夜夜盼望着将军驾临，哪里敢谋反啊！
English: Day and night I long for the arrival of the general, how dare I rebel!

古文：愿伯具言臣之不敢倍德也。 
现代文：望您能把我不敢忘恩负义的情况详尽地反映给项将军。 
English: I hope you can give General Xiang a detailed account of the circumstances of my not daring to be ungrateful.

古文：项伯许诺，谓沛公曰： 旦日不可不蚤自来谢。 
现代文：项伯答应了，对刘邦说： 你明日不可不早些来亲自向项王道歉啊。 刘邦说： 好吧。 
English: Xiang Bo agreed and said to Liu Bang, "You must come early tomorrow to apologize to Xiang Wang in person." Liu Bang said, "Okay."

古文：沛公曰： 诺。 于是项伯复夜去，至军中，具以沛公言报项羽，因言曰： 沛公不先破关中，公岂敢入乎！
现代文：项伯于是当夜就赶了回去，到达军营后，将刘邦的话一五一十地报告给项羽，并趁机道： 要不是刘邦先攻下关中，您又怎么敢进来呀？
English: Xiang Bo then rushed back that night. After arriving at the military camp, he reported Liu Bang's words to Xiang Yu, and took advantage of the opportunity: If Liu Bang did not capture Guanzhong first, how dare you come in?

古文：今人有大功而击之，不义也。
现代文：如今人家建立了大功却还要去攻打人家，是不义的。
English: Nowadays, it is unjust that people have made great achievements but still want to attack others.

古文：不如因善遇之。 
现代文：不如就因此好好地对待他。 
English: You might as well treat him well for that.

古文：项羽许诺。
现代文：项羽同意了。
English: Xiang Yu agreed.

古文：沛公旦日从百馀骑来见项羽鸿门，谢曰： 臣与将军戮力而攻秦，将军战河北，臣战河南。不自意能先入关破秦，得复见将军于此。
现代文：第二天，刘邦带领一百多骑随从人员到鸿门来见项羽，道歉说： 我与将军您合力攻秦，您在黄河以北作战，我在黄河以南战斗，没料到自己能先进入关中破秦，得以在这里与您重又相见。
English: The next day, Liu Bang led more than a hundred riding attendants to Honmen to meet Xiang Yu and apologized, saying: I and the general you joined forces to attack Qin, you fought north of the Yellow River, I fought south of the Yellow River, I did not expect that I could first enter Guanzhong to break Qin, so I could meet you again here.

古文：今者有小人之言，令将军与臣有隙。 
现代文：如今有小人之言搬弄是非，使您和我之间产生了隔阂。 
English: Now there are villains who play with words and create a rift between you and me.

古文：项羽曰： 此沛公左司马曹无伤言之，不然，籍何以生此！ 
现代文：项羽道： 这是您的左司马曹无伤散布的流言，不然的话，我何至于如此啊！ 
English: Xiang Yu said, "This is a rumor spread by your left-hand man, Ma Cao, who is unharmed. Otherwise, why would I do such a thing?"

古文：项羽因留沛公与饮。
现代文：项羽于是就留刘邦与他一起喝酒。
English: So Xiang Yu left Liu Bang to drink with him.

古文：范增数目项羽，举所佩玉玦以示之者三。项羽默然不应。
现代文：范增频频向项羽递眼色，并三次举起他所佩带的玉暗示项羽杀刘邦，项羽却只是默然不语，毫无反应。
English: Fan frequently winked at Xiang Yu, and three times held up the jade he was wearing to suggest that Xiang Yu kill Liu Bang, but Xiang Yu just remained silent and did not react.

古文：范增起，出，召项庄，谓曰： 君王为人不忍。若入前为寿，寿毕，以剑舞，因击沛公于坐，杀之。
现代文：范增便起身出去招呼项庄，对他说： 项王为人心慈手软，还是你进去上前给刘邦敬酒，敬完酒，你就请求表演舞剑，然后乘势在坐席上袭击刘邦，杀了他。
English: Fan Zeng then got up and went out to greet Xiang Zhuang. He said to him, "Xiang Wang is kind and gentle. You should go in and make a toast to Liu Bang. After the toast, you should ask for a sword dance performance, and then use your power to attack Liu Bang at the banquet and kill him."

古文：不者，若属皆且为所虏！ 
现代文：不然的话，你们这些人都将成为他的阶下囚了！ 
English: Otherwise, all of you will become his prisoners!

古文：庄则入为寿，寿毕，曰： 军中无以为乐，请以剑舞。 项羽曰： 诺。 
现代文：项庄即入内为刘邦祝酒，敬完酒后，项庄道： 军营中没有什么可用来取乐的，就请让我来为你们舞剑助兴吧。 项羽说： 好哇。 
English: As soon as he entered, Xiang Zhuang made a toast to Liu Bang. After the toast, Xiang Zhuang said, "There is nothing in the military camp that can be used for entertainment, so please let me help you enjoy the sword dance." Xiang Yu said, "Good."

古文：项庄拔剑起舞。
现代文：项庄于是拔剑起舞。
English: So Xiang Zhuang drew his sword and danced.

古文：项伯亦拔剑起舞，常以身翼蔽沛公，庄不得击。
现代文：项伯见状也起身拔剑起舞，并时时用身子遮护刘邦，使得项庄无法行刺。
English: Seeing the situation, Xiang Bo also got up, drew his sword and danced, and constantly shielded Liu Bang with his body, making Xiang Zhuang unable to stab.

古文：于是张良至军门见樊哙。
现代文：这时张良来到军门见樊哙。
English: At this time, Zhang Liang came to the military gate to see him.

古文：哙曰： 今日之事何如？ 
现代文：樊哙说： 今天的事情怎么样了？ 
English: Zou said, "How are things today?"

古文：良曰： 今项庄拔剑舞，其意常在沛公也。 
现代文：张良说： 现在项庄拔剑起舞，他的用意却常在沛公身上啊。 
English: Zhang Liang said: Now Xiang Zhuang draws his sword and dances, but his intention is often on Pei Gong.

古文：哙曰： 此迫矣，臣请入，与之同命！ 
现代文：樊哙道： 事情紧迫了崐，我请求进去，与他拼命！ 
English: Zou Dao: The situation is urgent, I beg you to go in and fight with him!

古文：哙即带剑拥盾入。
现代文：樊哙随即带剑持盾闯入军门。
English: He then broke into the gate with a sword and shield.

古文：军门卫士欲止不内，樊哙侧其盾以撞，卫士仆地。
现代文：军门的卫士想要阻止他进去，樊哙就侧过盾牌一撞，卫士扑倒在地。
English: When the guard at the gate tried to stop him from entering, the dragonfly sideswiped his shield and knocked him to the ground.

古文：遂入，披帷立，嗔目视项羽，头发上指，目眦尽裂。
现代文：樊哙于是入内，掀开帷帐站立在那里，怒目瞪着项羽，头发直竖，两边的眼角都睁裂开了。
English: So the stork went in, opened the curtains and stood there, glaring angrily at the collar feathers, her hair standing on end, the corners of her eyes open on both sides.

古文：项羽按剑而跽曰： 客何为者？ 
现代文：项羽手按剑，跪起身，说道： 来客是干什么的？ 
English: He knelt down and said, "What are the visitors here for?

古文：张良曰： 沛公之参乘樊哙也。 
现代文：张良说： 是沛公的陪乘卫士樊哙。 
English: Zhang Liang said: It was Peigong's escort and bodyguard.

古文：项羽曰： 壮士！
现代文：项羽道： 真是壮士啊！
English: The feather said: "Strong man!

古文：赐之卮酒！ 
现代文：赐给他一杯酒喝！ 
English: Give him a drink!

古文：则与斗卮酒。
现代文：左右的侍从即给了他一大杯酒。
English: Just give him a large glass of wine.

古文：哙拜谢，起，立而饮之。
现代文：樊哙拜谢后，起身站着一饮而尽。
English: After bowing and thanking, he stood up and finished his drink.

古文：项羽曰： 赐之彘肩！ 
现代文：项羽说： 再赐给他猪腿吃！ 
English: Cao Yu said, "Give him another pork leg to eat!"

古文：则与一生彘肩。
现代文：侍从们便又拿给他一条生猪腿。
English: The servants gave him another leg of pork.

古文：樊哙覆其盾于地，加彘肩其上，拔剑切而啖之。
现代文：樊哙将他的盾牌倒扣在地上，把猪腿放在上面，拔出剑来切切就大口地吃了。
English: The baboon put his shield upside down on the ground, put the pig's leg on top of it, pulled out his sword to cut it, and took a big bite.

古文：项羽曰： 壮士能复饮乎？ 
现代文：项羽说： 壮士，你还能再喝酒吗？ 
English: Cao Yu said: Hero, can you still drink?

古文：樊哙曰： 臣死且不避，卮酒安足辞！
现代文：樊哙道： 我连死都不逃避，一杯酒难道还值得我推辞吗！
English: He covered his shield with earth, put the pig's leg on his shield, and pulled out his sword to cut the meat to eat. King Xiang said, "Mighty man! Can you drink any more wine?" He said, "I'm not afraid of death. A glass of wine is worth refusing!"

古文：夫秦有虎狼之心，杀人如不能举，刑人如恐不胜；天下皆叛之。
现代文：秦王的心肠狠如虎狼，杀人唯恐杀不完，用刑惩罚人唯恐用不够，致使天下的人都起而反叛他。
English: King Qin's heart was as fierce as a tiger or a wolf. He could not stop killing unless he was afraid, and he could not punish people with punishment unless he was afraid. This caused people all over the world to rise up and rebel against him.

古文：怀王与诸将约曰： 先破秦入咸阳者，王之。 
现代文：怀王曾与各路将领约定说： 先打败秦军进入咸阳城的人，在关中为王。 
English: King Huai once made an agreement with all the generals: The first to defeat the Qin army and enter Xianyang City will be the king of Guanzhong.

古文：今沛公先破秦入咸阳，豪毛不敢有所近，还军霸上以待将军。
现代文：现在沛公最先击溃秦军，进入咸阳，毫毛般微小的东西都不敢染指，就率军返回霸上等待您的到来。
English: Now, Pei Gong is the first to defeat the Qin army and enter Xianyang. He does not dare to touch anything as small as a hair, so he leads the army back to the hegemony to wait for your arrival.

古文：劳苦而功高如此，未有封爵之赏，而听细人之说，欲诛有功之人，此亡秦之续耳，窃为将军不取也！ 
现代文：这样劳苦功高，您非但不给予封地、爵位的奖赏，还听信小人的谗言，要杀有功之人。这是在重蹈秦朝灭亡的覆辙呀，我私下认为您的这种做法是不可取的！ 
English: You are not only not giving rewards such as fiefs and peerages to those who have worked hard and made great achievements, but you are also listening to the slander of the villains and want to kill those who have made great achievements. This is repeating the mistakes of the fall of the Qin Dynasty. I privately think that this approach of yours is undesirable!

古文：项羽未有以应，曰： 坐！ 
现代文：项羽无话可答，就说： 坐吧。 
English: With nothing to say, she said, "Sit down."

古文：樊哙从良坐。
现代文：樊哙于是在张良的身边坐下了。
English: Zou sat down next to Zhang Liang.

古文：坐须臾，沛公起如厕，因招樊哙出。
现代文：坐了不一会儿，刘邦起身去上厕所，趁机招呼樊哙出来。
English: After sitting for a while, Pei Gong got up to go to the toilet and took the opportunity to call out.

古文：公曰： 今者出，未辞也，为之奈何？ 
现代文：刘邦说： 我现在出来，没有告辞，怎么办啊？ 
English: Liu Bang said, "I am coming out now, without a farewell, what should I do?"

古文：樊哙曰： 如今人方为刀俎，我方为鱼肉，何辞为！ 
现代文：樊哙道： 现在人家正好比是屠刀和砧板，我们则是鱼肉，如此还告什么辞哇！ 
English: Gongdao: Nowadays, people just compare butcher knives and cutting boards, while we are fish meat. How can we say goodbye like this!

古文：于是遂去。
现代文：于是就这么走了。
English: So he just left.

古文：鸿门去霸上四十里，沛公则置车骑，脱身独骑；樊哙、夏侯婴、靳强、纪信等四人持剑、盾步走，从骊山下道芷阳，间行趣霸上。
现代文：鸿门与霸上相距四十里，刘邦撇下车马，抽身独自骑马而行，樊哙、夏侯婴、靳强、纪信等四人手拿剑和盾牌，快步相随，经骊山下，取道芷阳，抄小路奔向霸上。
English: Hongmen is forty miles away from Bawang. Liu Bang abandons his chariot and horse, pulls himself up and rides alone. Zou, Xia Houying, Xiang Qiang, Ji Xin and four others, holding swords and shields in their hands, follow each other at a fast pace, passing under Bawang Mountain, taking the road to Bawang, and running towards Bawang.

古文：留张良使谢项羽，以白璧献羽，玉斗与亚父。
现代文：留下张良，让他向项羽辞谢，将白璧敬献给项羽，大玉杯给亚父范增。
English: Zhang Liang was left behind, and he was asked to thank Xiang Yu by offering the white gem to Xiang Yu and the large jade cup to his father Fan Zeng.

古文：沛公谓良曰： 从此道至吾军，不过二十里耳。
现代文：刘邦临行前对张良说： 从这条路到我们的军营，只不过二十里地。
English: Before leaving, Liu Bang said to Zhang Liang, "From this road to our military camp is only twenty miles.

古文：度我至军中，公乃入。 
现代文：您估计着我已经抵达军中时，再进去。 
English: You reckoned I'd be in the army by the time I got there.

古文：沛公已去，间至军中，张良入谢曰： 沛公不胜杯杓，不能辞，谨使臣良奉白璧一双，再拜献将军足下；玉斗一双，再拜奉亚父足下。 
现代文：刘邦已走，抄小道回到军营，张良方才进去告罪说： 沛公禁不起酒力，无法来告辞，谨派臣张良捧上白璧一双，以连拜两次的隆重礼节敬献给将军您；大玉杯一双，敬呈给亚父您。 
English: Liu Bang had already left and followed the footpath back to the military camp. Zhang Liang then entered and pleaded guilty, saying: "Pei Gong can't hold back his liquor and can't come to say goodbye. I have the honor to send my vassal Zhang Liang to hold up a pair of Bai Bi to pay tribute to you, the general, with the grand ceremony of bowing twice in succession; a pair of large jade cups to present to you, the second father.

古文：项羽曰： 沛公安在？ 
现代文：项羽说： 沛公现在哪里呀？ 
English: Cao Yu said: Where is Pei Gong now?

古文：良曰： 闻将军有意督过之，脱身独去，已至军矣。 
现代文：张良道： 他听说您有要责备他的意思，便抽身独自离去，现在已经回到军中了。 
English: Zhang Liang: He heard that you wanted to reproach him, so he withdrew and left on his own. He has now returned to the army.

古文：项羽则受璧，置之坐上。
现代文：项羽就接受了白璧，放到坐席上。
English: Cao Yu accepted the white bean paste and placed it on the seat.

古文：亚父受玉斗，置之地，拔剑撞而破之，曰： 唉！竖子不足与谋！
现代文：亚父范增接受玉杯后搁在地上，拔剑击碎了它们，说： 唉，这小子不值得与他共谋大业！
English: After receiving the jade cup, Father Fan Zeng placed it on the ground, drew his sword and smashed it, saying: "Alas, this boy is not worthy of conspiring with him for a great cause!

古文：夺将军天下者，必沛公也。
现代文：夺取项将军天下的人，必定是刘邦。
English: Liu Bang must be the one to conquer the world of General Xiang.

古文：吾属今为之虏矣！ 
现代文：我们这些人眼看着就要被他俘获了！ 
English: We are about to be captured before our very eyes!

古文：沛公至军，立诛杀曹无伤。
现代文：刘邦到达军中，立即杀掉了曹无伤。
English: Pei Gong returned to the army and immediately killed Cao Wuzhong.

古文：居数日，项羽引兵西，屠咸阳，杀秦降王子婴，烧秦宫室，火三月不灭。
现代文：隔了几天，项羽领兵西进，洗劫屠戮咸阳城，杀了已投降的秦王子婴，放火焚烧秦朝宫室，大火燃烧三个月不熄。
English: A few days later, Xiang Yu led his soldiers westward, ransacked and slaughtered Xianyang City, killed the surrendered Qin Prince Baby, set fire to the Qin Imperial Palace room, and the fire did not go out for three months.

古文：收其货宝、妇女而东。
现代文：随即搜取秦朝的金银财宝和妇女向东而去。
English: The gold, silver and treasures of the Qin Dynasty were immediately searched for, and the women headed east.

古文：秦民大失望。
现代文：秦地的百姓为此大失所望。
English: The people of Qin were greatly disappointed by this.

古文：韩生说项羽曰： 关中阻山带河，四塞之地，地肥饶，可都以霸。 
现代文：韩生劝说项羽道： 关中依恃山川河流为屏障，是四面都有险要可守的地方，土地肥沃，可以在此建都称霸。 
English: Han Sang persuaded Xiang Yu: Guanzhong is a place that is surrounded by mountains, rivers and streams. It is a place where there are dangers to be guarded on all sides. The land is fertile, and the capital can be built here to dominate.

古文：项羽见秦宫室皆已烧残破，又心思东归，曰： 富贵不归故乡，如衣绣夜行，谁知之者！ 
现代文：项羽却一方面看到秦王朝的宫室都已焚烧得残破不堪，一方面又惦记着返回东方的家乡，便说： 富贵了而不归故乡，就如同身穿绵绣华服在夜间行走，谁能看得到啊！ 
English: On the one hand, however, Xiang Yu saw that the palaces of the Qin Dynasty had been burned to ruins, and on the other hand, he thought about returning to his hometown in the East. He said: If you are rich and do not return to your hometown, it is like walking at night wearing embroidered clothes. Who can see it?

古文：韩生退曰： 人言楚人沐猴而冠耳，果然！ 
现代文：韩生退下去后说道： 人家说楚人像是猕猴戴上人的帽子，果然如此！ 
English: After Han Sang retreated, he said: People say that Chu Ren is like a macaque monkey wearing a human hat, and it's true!

古文：项羽闻之，烹韩生。
现代文：项羽听到这话后，即将韩生煮死。
English: After hearing this, she was about to boil Han Sheng to death.

古文：项羽使人致命怀王，怀王曰： 如约。 
现代文：项羽派人去回报请示楚怀王，怀王说： 照先前约定的办。 
English: Qiao Yu sent someone to return the request to King Chu Huai. King Huai said, "Do as previously agreed."

古文：项羽怒曰： 怀王者，吾家所立耳，非有功伐，何以得专主约！
现代文：项羽暴跳如雷，说： 怀王这个人是我们家扶立起来的，并非因为他建有什么功绩，怎么能够一个人作主定约呢！
English: They were furious and said, "This man, King Huai, was supported by our family, not because of any merit he had built. How can one person make the main contract?

古文：天下初发难时，假立诸侯后以伐秦。
现代文：全国起兵反秦伊始，暂时拥立过去各诸侯国国君的后裔为王，以利讨伐秦王朝。
English: At the beginning of the national uprising against the Qin Dynasty, the descendants of the sovereigns of various states were temporarily appointed as kings in order to fight the Qin Dynasty.

古文：然身被坚执锐首事，暴露于野三年，灭秦定天下者，皆将相诸君与籍之力也。
现代文：但是，身披坚固的铠甲、手持锐利的兵器首先起事，风餐露宿三年之久，终于灭亡秦朝平定天下，都是各位将相和我的力量啊！
English: However, dressed in sturdy armor and armed with sharp weapons, we were the first to rise up, camped for three years, and finally defeated the Qin Dynasty and pacified the world. All of you will be my strength!

古文：怀王虽无功，固当分其地而王之。 
现代文：不过怀王虽然没什么功劳，却还是应当分给他土地，尊他为王。 众将领都说： 是啊！ 
English: However, although King Huai did not have much merit, he should still be given land and honored as a king. The generals all said, "Yes!

古文：诸将皆曰： 善！ 春，正月，羽阳尊怀王为义帝，曰： 古之帝者，地方千里，必居上游。 
现代文：春季，正月，项羽便假意尊推怀王为义帝，说道： 古代的帝王辖地千里，却必定要居住在江河的上游地带。 
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Xiang Yu pretended to respect and promote Huai Wang as a righteous emperor, saying: The ancient emperors ruled over thousands of miles, but they must live in the upstream areas of rivers.

古文：乃徙义帝于江南，都郴。
现代文：于是就把义帝迁移到长江以南，定都在长沙郡的郴县。
English: So they moved Yidi to the south of the Yangtze River, and it is now located in Minxian County, Changsha County.

古文：二月，羽分天下王诸将。羽自立为西楚霸王，王梁、楚地九郡，都彭城。
现代文：二月，项羽划分天下土地，封各位将领作侯王，自立为西楚霸王，管辖原魏国和楚国的九个郡，建都彭城。
English: In February, Xiang Yu divided the world's land, made the feudal lords as princes, and established himself as the king of Western Chu, governing the nine counties of the former Wei and Chu states, and building the capital of Pengcheng.

古文：羽与范增疑沛公，而业已讲解，又恶负约，乃阴谋曰： 巴、蜀道险，秦之迁人皆居之。 
现代文：项羽与范增怀疑刘邦有夺取天下的野心，但双方已经讲和了，且又不愿意背上违约的罪名，于是就暗地里策划道： 巴、蜀两地道路艰险，秦朝所流放的人都居住在那里。 
English: Xiang Yu and Fan Zeng suspected that Liu Bang had the ambition to conquer the world, but the two sides had already made peace, and they did not want to be accused of breach of contract, so they secretly plotted: The roads in Ba and Shu are difficult, and the people exiled by the Qin Dynasty live there.

古文：乃曰： 巴、蜀亦关中地也。 
现代文：随即扬言： 巴郡、蜀郡也是关中的土地。 
English: So he said: Ba and Shu are also Guanzhong areas.

古文：故立沛公为汉王，王巴、蜀、汉中，都南郑。
现代文：由此立刘邦为汉王，统辖巴、蜀两地和汉中郡，建都南郑。
English: Therefore, Feng Pei Gong was the king of Han, called the king of Ba, Shu and Hanzhong, and built the capital of Nan Zheng.

古文：而三分关中，王秦降将，以距塞汉路。章邯为雍王，王咸阳以西，都废丘。长史欣者，故为栎阳狱掾，尝有德于项梁；都尉董翳者，本劝章邯降楚。故立欣为塞王，王咸阳以东，至河，都栎阳；立翳为翟王，王上郡，都高奴。
现代文：接着又把关中分割为雍、塞、翟三部分，将秦朝的降将封在那里作王，借以抵御阻挡刘邦：封章邯为雍王，管制咸阳以西地区，建都废丘；长史司马欣过去是栎阳县的狱掾，曾经对项梁有恩；而都尉董翳，本来劝过章邯归降楚军，因此便立司马欣为塞王，统领咸阳以东至黄河一带，建都栎阳；封董翳为翟王，领有上郡地区，建都高奴。
English: Next, Guanzhong was divided into three parts: Yong, Xie and Handan, and the Qin dynasty's demoted generals were made kings there to resist Liu Bang's attempts to block them: the king of Yong was named Zhang Ying, who controlled the area west of Xianyang and built the abandoned hill as the capital; the chief of staff, Sima Xin, used to be the warden of Handan County and had once been kind to Xiang Liang; and the captain of Dong Ying, who had previously persuaded Zhang Ying to return to the defeated Chu army, therefore appointed Sima Xin as the king of Handan, who ruled the area east of Xianyang

古文：项羽欲自取梁地，乃徙魏王豹为西魏王，王河东，都平阳。
现代文：项羽打算自已占有魏地，就改封魏王豹为西魏王，统辖河东郡，建都平阳。
English: Xiang Yu intended to occupy Wei territory himself, so he changed the title of Wei Wangpan to West Wei King, governed Hedong County, and built the capital Pingyang.

古文：瑕丘申阳者，张耳嬖臣也，先下河南郡，迎楚河上，故立申阳为河南王，都洛阳。
现代文：瑕丘县的申阳是张耳的宠臣，曾经率先攻下河南郡，在黄河边迎接楚军，所以立申阳为河南王，建都洛阳。
English: Shenyang in Keqiu County is Zhang Er's favorite subject. It was the first to conquer Henan County and meet the Chu army on the edge of the Yellow River. Therefore, Shenyang was established as the king of Henan and Luoyang was built as the capital.

古文：韩王成因故都，都阳翟。
现代文：韩王成仍居旧都，建都阳翟。
English: Han Wangcheng still regards the old capital city as the capital, and the construction of the capital city is not successful.

古文：赵将司马卬定河内，数有功，故立卬为殷王，王河内，都朝歌。
现代文：赵将司马平定了河内郡，屡立战功，因此封司马为殷王，管制河内地区，建都朝歌。
English: Zhao subdued Sima Ying in Hanoi and repeatedly made war exploits, so he sealed Sima Ying as the king of Yin, called the king in Hanoi, and built the capital of morning song.

古文：徙赵王歇为代王。赵相张耳素贤，又从入关，故立耳为常山王，王赵地，治襄国。
现代文：改封赵王歇为代王；赵国的相国张耳向来贤能，又跟随入关，故立张耳为常山王，统领赵地，建都襄国。
English: Zhao Wangxie was appointed as the acting king; Zhang Er, a relative of Zhao, had always been a virtuous man, and followed him into the customs. Therefore, Zhang Er was established as the king of Changshan, ruled Zhao, and built the capital of Xiang.

古文：当阳君黥布为楚将，常冠军，故立布为九江王，都六。
现代文：当阳君黥布为楚将，经常是勇冠三军，所以立黥布为九江王，建都六地。
English: When Yangjun Zengbu was the general of the Chu army, he often won the whole army. Therefore, Zengbu was named the king of the Jiujiang River, and the capital was built in six.

古文：番君吴芮率百越佐诸侯，又从入关，故立芮为衡山王，都邾。
现代文：番君吴芮率领百越部族之兵协助诸侯军，也随从进关，因此封吴芮为衡山王，建都邾县。
English: Guanjun Wu Gan led the soldiers of the Baiyue tribe to assist the vassal army, and also followed the customs. Therefore, Wu Gan was named the king of Hengshan and built the capital of Gan County.

古文：义帝柱国共敖将军击南郡，功多，因立敖为临江王，都江陵。
现代文：义帝怀王的柱国共敖领兵攻打南郡，功劳卓著，故封共敖为临江王，建都江陵。
English: The pillar country of Emperor Huai led the troops to attack Nan County, with outstanding achievements. Therefore, he was named the king of Linjiang and built the capital of Jiangling.

古文：徙燕王韩广为辽东王，都无终。
现代文：改封燕王韩广为辽东王，建都无终。
English: Han Guang, the king of Yan, was renamed the king of Liaodong, and the construction of the capital was never completed.

古文：燕将臧荼从楚救赵，因从入关，故立荼为燕王，都蓟。
现代文：燕将臧荼跟随楚军救援赵，随即跟着入关，由此立臧荼为燕王，建都蓟地。
English: Yan, the tea brewer, once followed the Chu army to save Zhao, and then followed the customs. Therefore, Yan was crowned the king of the tea brewers, and the capital was built in Yan.

古文：徙齐王田市为胶东王，都即墨。
现代文：改封齐王田为胶东王，建都即墨。
English: Qiwangdian was renamed Jiaodongwang, and the capital was built.

古文：齐将田都从楚救赵，因从入关，故立都为齐王，都临菑。
现代文：齐将田都随楚军救赵，即跟着进关，所以立田都为齐王，建都临淄。
English: Qi will Tiandu follow the Chu army to save Zhao, that is, follow the customs, so the establishment of Tiandu is the king of Qi, and the capital is Linyi.

古文：项羽方渡河救赵，田安下济北数城，引其兵降项羽，故立安为济北王，都博阳。
现代文：当项羽正要渡河救赵时，齐王田建的孙子田安攻下济北数城，率领他的军队投降项羽，因此封田安为济北王，建都崐博阳。
English: When Xiang Yu was about to cross the river to save Zhao, Tian An, the grandson of King Tian Jian of Qi, captured several cities in North Jeju and led his army to surrender to Xiang Yu. Therefore, Tian An became the king of North Jeju and built the capital in Boyang.

古文：田荣数负项梁，又不肯将兵从楚击秦，以故不封。
现代文：田荣曾多次背弃项梁，又不肯领兵跟随楚军攻秦，所以不封。
English: Tian Rong had turned his back on Xiang Liang many times, and refused to lead the troops to follow the Chu army to attack Qin, so he was not sealed.

古文：成安君陈馀弃将印去，不从入关，亦不封。
现代文：成安君陈馀抛弃将军的印信离去，不追随入关，也不封。
English: Cheng Anjun Chen Yu abandoned the general's seal letter and left. He did not follow the customs and did not seal it.

古文：客多说项羽曰： 张耳、陈馀，一体有功于赵，今耳为王，馀不可以不封。 
现代文：宾客中有多人劝说项羽道： 张耳、陈馀一样对赵有功，如今既封张耳为王，陈馀也就不可不封。 
English: Many of the guests tried to persuade Xiang Yu, saying, "Zhang Er and Chen Yu are equally as valuable to Zhao. Now that Zhang Er has been crowned king, Chen Yu must also be crowned."

古文：羽不得已，闻其在南皮，因环封之三县。
现代文：项羽不得已，听说陈馀正在南皮，就把南皮周围的三个县封给了他。
English: As a last resort, when he heard that Chen Yu was in Nanpi, he gave him the three county fiefs around Nanpi.

古文：番君将梅鋗功多，封十万户侯。
现代文：番君的部将梅功劳颇多，即封他为十万户侯。
English: Banzun's subordinate, Mei, received a lot of merit, and he was given the title of 100,000 households.

古文：汉王怒，欲攻项羽，周勃、灌婴、樊哙皆劝之。
现代文：汉王刘邦大怒，想要攻打项羽。周勃、灌婴、樊哙也都鼓动他打。
English: Liu Bang, the king of Han, was furious and wanted to attack Xiang Yu. Zhou Bo, Guan Yu, and Yao also encouraged him to fight.

古文：萧何谏曰： 虽王汉中之恶，不犹愈于死乎？ 
现代文：萧何规劝他说： 在汉中当王虽然不好，但不是比死还强些吗？ 
English: Xiao He advised him, "Although it is not good to be a king in the Han Dynasty, is it not better than death?"

古文：汉王曰： 何为乃死也？ 
现代文：汉王道： 哪里就至于死呀？ 
English: Han Wang said: Where does death come from?

古文：何曰： 今众弗如，百战百败，不死何为！
现代文：萧何说： 如今您兵众不如项羽，百战百败，不死又能怎么样呢！
English: Xiao He said, "Nowadays, your soldiers are not as good as Xiang Yu's. You have suffered countless defeats in battles. What can you do if you don't die?

古文：夫能诎于一人之下而信于万乘之上者，汤、武是也。
现代文：能够屈居于一人之下而伸展于万乘大国之上的，是商汤王和周武王。
English: Shang Tang Wang and Zhou Wu Wang are able to bow down to one person and extend above the great country of Manchuria.

古文：臣愿大王王汉中，养其民以致贤人，收用巴、蜀，还定三秦，天下可图也。 汉王曰： 善！ 
现代文：我希望大王您立足汉中，抚养百姓，招引贤才，收用巴、蜀二郡的资财，然后回师东进，平定雍、翟、塞三秦之地，如此天下可以夺取了。 汉王说： 好吧！ 
English: I hope that you, the great king, will base yourself in Han, raise the people, attract talents, collect the resources and wealth of Ba and Shu counties, and then go back to the east to settle the lands of Yong, Shun and Jie in Sanqin, so that the whole world can be captured.

古文：乃遂就国，以何为丞相。
现代文：于是就去到他的封地，任用萧何为丞相。
English: When Pei Gong arrived in Xianyang, all the generals rushed to the treasury to divide up the gold and valuables.

古文：汉王赐张良金百镒，珠二斗；良具以献项伯。
现代文：汉王赐给张良黄金百镒，珍珠两斗。张良把这些东西全都献给了项伯。
English: The Han king gave Zhang Liang a hundred ounces of gold and two barrels of pearls. Zhang Liang dedicated all these things to Xiang Bo.

古文：汉王亦因令良厚遗项伯，使尽请汉中地，项王许之。
现代文：汉王因此也命张良赠送厚礼给项伯，让项伯代他请求项羽将汉中地区全部封给刘邦，项羽答应了这一请求。
English: Therefore, the Han king also ordered Zhang Liang to present a gift to Xiang Bo, so that Xiang Bo asked Xiang Yu on his behalf to seal all the Hanzhong region to Liu Bang, and Xiang Yu agreed to this request.

古文：夏，四月，诸侯罢戏下兵，各就国。
现代文：夏季，四月，各路诸侯都离开主帅项羽，回各自的封国去。
English: In the summer, in April, all the lords left the commander Xiang Yu and returned to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：项王使卒三万人从汉王之国。
现代文：项羽即派三万士兵随从汉王刘邦前往他的封国。
English: Xiang Yu immediately sent thirty thousand soldiers to accompany Han King Liu Bang to his fief.

古文：楚与诸侯之慕从者数万人，从杜南入蚀中。
现代文：楚军与其他诸侯军中因仰慕而追随汉王的有好几万人，他们从杜县南面进入蚀中通道。
English: Tens of thousands of people from the Chu army and other vassal armies followed the Han king out of admiration. They entered the Eizhong passage from the south of Du County.

古文：张良送至褒中，汉王遣良归韩；良因说汉王烧绝所过栈道，以备诸侯盗兵，且示项羽无东意。
现代文：张良送行到褒中，汉王遣张良回韩王那里去。张良于是就劝说汉王烧断他们所经过的栈道，以防备诸侯的军队来犯，而且向项羽表示没有东还的意图。
English: Zhang Liang was sent away to Baozhong, and the Han king sent Zhang Liang back to the Han king. Zhang Liang then persuaded the Han king to burn down the causeway they had passed to prevent the princes' army from coming, and also expressed to Xiang Yu that he had no intention of going back.

古文：田荣闻项羽徙齐王市于胶东，而以田都为齐王，大怒。
现代文：田荣听说项羽改封齐王田到胶东，而立齐将田都为齐王，即怒火中烧。
English: Tian Rong was furious when he heard that Xiang Yu had changed his title from Qi Wang Tian to Jiaodong, and that Qi Shoudian had become Qi Wang.

古文：五月，荣发兵距击田都，都亡走楚。
现代文：五月，田荣出兵拦攻田都，田都逃往楚国。
English: In May, Tian Rong sent troops to block and attack Tian Du, and Tian Du fled to Chu.

古文：荣留齐王市，不令之胶东。
现代文：田荣就留下齐王田，不让他到胶东去。
English: Tian Rong left Qi Wang Tian and did not allow him to go to Jiaodong.

古文：市畏项羽，窃亡之国。
现代文：田惧怕项羽，便偷偷地逃向他的封国胶东。
English: Tian was afraid of Xiang Yu, so he secretly fled to his vassal, Jiaodong.

古文：荣怒，六月，追击杀市于即墨，自立为齐王。
现代文：田荣恼怒之极，即在六月追击到即墨杀了田，自立为齐王。
English: Tian Rong was so angry that he chased and killed Tian Rong in June, setting himself up as the king of Qi.

古文：是时，彭越在巨野，有众万馀人，无所属。
现代文：这时，彭越在钜野，拥有兵众一万多人，尚无归属。
English: At this time, Peng Yue was in the wilderness, with more than ten thousand soldiers and no affiliation.

古文：荣与越将军印，使击济北。
现代文：田荣就授给彭越将军官印，命他攻打济北王田安。
English: Tian Rong gave the official seal to General Peng Yue and ordered him to attack Jibei Wang Tian'an.

古文：秋，七月，越击杀济北王安。
现代文：秋季，七月，彭越击杀了济北王田安。
English: In the autumn, in July, Peng Yue killed Wang Tian'an of Jibei.

古文：荣遂并王三齐之地，又使越击楚。
现代文：田荣于是兼并了齐、济北、胶东三齐的土地，随即又让彭越攻打楚国。
English: Tian Rong then annexed the lands of Qi, Jibei and Jiaodong, and immediately let Peng Yue attack Chu.

古文：项王命萧公角将兵击越，越大破楚军。
现代文：项羽命萧公角率军迎击彭越，彭越大败楚军。
English: Xiang Yu ordered Xiao Gongkang to lead the army to meet Peng Yue, and Peng Yue defeated the Chu army.

古文：张耳之国，陈馀益怒曰： 张耳与馀，功等也。今张耳王，馀独侯，此项羽不平！ 
现代文：张耳去到封国，陈馀更加愤怒了，说道： 张耳与我功劳相等，现在张耳为王，我却只是个侯，这是项羽分封不公平！ 
English: Zhang Er went to the feudal state, Chen Yu became even more angry, saying: Zhang Er and I are equal in merit, now Zhang Er is the king, but I am only a marquis, this is an unfair division of Xiao Yu!

古文：乃阴使张同、夏说说齐王荣曰： 项羽为天下宰不平，尽王诸将善地，徙故王于丑地。
现代文：就暗中派遣张同、夏说去游说齐王田荣道： 项羽作为天下的主宰颇不公平，把好的地方全都分给了各将领，而把原来的诸侯国国王改封到坏的地方。
English: He secretly sent Zhang Tong and Xia Say to lobby Qi Wang Tian Rong: Xiang Yu, as the ruler of the world, was quite unfair. He gave all the good places to the generals, and changed the original kings of the principalities to bad places.

古文：今赵王乃北居代，馀以为不可。
现代文：现在赵王就往北住到代郡去了，我认为这是不行的。
English: Now Zhao Wang has gone north to live in Dayi County, which I don't think is a good idea.

古文：闻大王起兵，不听不义。愿大王资馀兵击常山，复赵王，请以赵为扞蔽！ 
现代文：听说大王您起兵抗争，不听从项羽的不道义的命令，因此希望您能资助我一些兵力去攻打常山，恢复赵王的王位，并请把赵国作为齐国的外卫藩屏！ 
English: I heard that you, the great king, raised an army to resist and disobeyed the immoral orders of Xiang Yu, so I hope you can support me with some troops to attack Changshan, restore the throne of King Zhao, and please use Zhao as the external defense screen of Qi!

古文：齐王许之，遣兵从陈馀。
现代文：齐王田荣同意了，即派兵跟随陈馀。
English: Qi Wang Tian Rong agreed and sent soldiers to follow Chen Yu.

古文：项王以张良从汉王，韩王成又无功，故不遣之国，与俱至彭城，废以为穰侯；已，又杀之。
现代文：项羽因为张良曾经追随汉王刘邦，且韩王韩成又毫无战功，所以就不让韩成到封国去，而是让他随自己一起到了彭城，把他废为穰侯，旋即又杀了他。
English: Xiang Yu, because Zhang Liang had once followed Han King Liu Bang, and Han King Han Cheng Yu had no war exploits, so he did not let Han Cheng go to the feudal state, but let him go to Pengcheng with him, deposed him as a vassal, and then killed him.

古文：初，淮阴人韩信，家贫，无行，不得推择为吏，又不能治生商贾，常从人寄食饮，人多厌之。
现代文：当初，淮阴人韩信，家境贫寒，没有好的德行，不能被推选去做官，又不会经商做买卖谋生，常常跟着别人吃闲饭，人们大都厌恶他。
English: At the beginning, Han Xin, a Huaiyin person, was from a poor family, had no good moral character, could not be elected as an official, could not make a living in business, and often ate idle food with others. Most people loathed him.

古文：信钓于城下，有漂母见信饥，饭信。
现代文：韩信曾经在城下钓鱼，有位在水边漂洗丝绵的老太太看到他饿了，就拿了饭给他吃。
English: Han Xin used to go fishing under the city. An old lady who was washing silky fish at the water's edge saw that he was hungry and gave him some rice to eat.

古文：信喜，谓漂母曰： 吾必有以重报母。 
现代文：韩信非常高兴，对那位老太太说： 我一定会重重地报答您老人家。 
English: Han Xin was very happy and said to the old lady, "I will surely repay your kindness in the future."

古文：母怒曰： 大丈夫不能自食，吾哀王孙而进食，岂望报乎！ 
现代文：老太太生气地说： 男子汉大丈夫不能自己养活自己！我不过是可怜你才给你饭吃，难道是希图有什么报答吗？ 
English: The eldest daughter said angrily: "It's okay, my husband can't feed himself, I feel sorry for you, this gentleman only gave you food to eat, is it because I want you to repay me?"

古文：淮阴屠中少年有侮信者曰： 若虽长大，好带刀剑，中情怯耳。 
现代文：淮阴县屠户中的青年里有人侮辱韩信道： 你虽然身材高大，好佩带刀剑，内心却是胆小如鼠的。 
English: A young man in a slaughterhouse in Huaiyin County insulted Han Xianglu: Although you are tall and good at carrying a sword, you are a coward at heart.

古文：因众辱之曰： 信能死，刺我；不能死，出我袴下！ 
现代文：并趁机当众羞辱他说： 韩信你要真的不怕死，就来刺我。若是怕死，就从我的胯下爬过去！ 
English: And he took the opportunity to publicly humiliate him, saying: Han Xin, if you are really not afraid of death, then stab me. If you are afraid of death, then crawl under my armpit!

古文：于是信孰视之，俛出袴下，蒲伏。
现代文：韩信于是仔细地打量了那青年一会儿，便俯下身子，从他的双腿间钻了过去，匍匐在地。
English: Han Xin then carefully looked at the young man for a moment, then bent down and drilled his way between his legs and fell to the ground.

古文：一市人皆笑信，以为怯。
现代文：满街市的人都嘲笑韩信，认为他胆小。
English: People all over the street make fun of Han Xin and think he is a coward.

古文：及项梁渡淮，信杖剑从之。居麾下，无所知名。
现代文：待到项梁渡过淮河北上，韩信持剑去投奔他，留在项梁部下，一直默默无闻。
English: When Xiang Liang crossed the Huai River to the north, Han Xin went to him with a sword, remained under Xiang Liang, and remained unknown.

古文：项梁败，又属项羽，羽以为郎中。
现代文：项梁失败后，韩信又归属项羽，项羽任他作了郎中。
English: Xiang Yu was defeated, Han Xin was subordinate to Xiang Yu, and Xiang Yu made him his henchman.

古文：数以策干羽，羽不用。
现代文：韩信曾多次向项羽献策以求重用，但项羽却不予采纳。
English: Han Xin had repeatedly proposed to Xiang Yu for reuse, but Xiang Yu was not adopted.

古文：汉王之入蜀，信亡楚归汉，未知名。
现代文：汉王刘邦进入蜀中，韩信又逃离楚军归顺了汉王，仍然不为人所知，只做了个接待宾客的小官。
English: Han King Liu Bang entered Shuzhong, and Han Xin fled the Chu army and submitted to the Han King. He is still not well known, and only served as a minor official to receive guests.

古文：为连敖，坐当斩。其辈十三人皆已斩，次至信，信乃仰视，适见滕公，曰： 上不欲就天下乎？
现代文：后来韩信犯了法，应判处斩刑，与他同案的十三个人都已遭斩首，轮到韩信时，韩信抬头仰望，刚好看见了滕公夏侯婴，便说道： 汉王难道不想得取天下吗？
English: Later, Han Xin broke the law and should be sentenced to beheading. Thirteen people who were involved in the same case with him had already been beheaded. When it was Han Xin's turn, Han Xin looked up and just happened to see Tengg Xia Hou Ying and said: Doesn't the King of Han want to take over the world?

古文：何为斩壮士？ 
现代文：为什么要斩杀壮士啊！ 
English: Why do you want to kill a brave man!

古文：滕公奇其言，壮其貌，释而不斩。与语，大说之，言于王。
现代文：滕公觉得他的话不同凡响，又见他外表威武雄壮，就释放了他而不处斩，并与他交谈，欢喜异常，随即将这情况奏报给了汉王。
English: Teng Gong thought his words were extraordinary, and saw his appearance as powerful and strong, so he released him and did not execute him. He talked with him and was overjoyed. He then reported the situation to the Han king.

古文：王拜以为治粟都尉，亦未之奇也。信数与萧何语，何奇之。
现代文：汉王于是授给韩信治粟都尉的官职，但还是没认为他有什么不寻常之处。韩信好几次与萧何谈话，萧何感觉他不同于常人。
English: The king of Han then gave Han Xin the official position of Lieutenant of Zhiguo, but still did not think there was anything unusual about him. Han Xin talked with Xiao He several times, and Xiao He felt that he was different from ordinary people.

古文：汉王至南郑，诸将及士卒皆歌讴思东归，多道亡者。
现代文：待汉王到达南郑时，众将领和士兵都唱歌思念东归故乡，许多人中途就逃跑了。
English: When Han Wang arrived in Nan Zheng, all the generals and soldiers were singing and thinking about returning to their hometowns, and many fled halfway.

古文：信度何等已数言王，王不我用，即亡去。
现代文：韩信估计萧何等人已经多次向汉王荐举过他，但汉王没有重用他，便也逃亡而去。
English: Han Xin estimated that Xiao He and others had repeatedly recommended him to the Han King, but the Han King did not make much use of him and fled.

古文：何闻信亡，不及以闻，自追之。
现代文：萧何听说韩信逃走了，没来得及向汉王报告，就亲自去追赶韩信。
English: When Xiao He heard that Han Xin had run away, he couldn't wait to report to Han Wang and chased after him himself.

古文：人有言王曰： 丞相何亡。 
现代文：有人告诉汉王说： 丞相萧何逃跑了。 
English: Someone told Han Wang, "Josho Xiao He has run away."

古文：王大怒，如失左右手。
现代文：汉王大发雷霆，仿佛失掉了左右手一般。
English: Han Wang flew into a rage, as if he had lost his right and left hands.

古文：居一二日，何来谒王。
现代文：过了一两天，萧何来拜谒汉王。
English: A day or two later, Xiao He came to pay homage to the King of Han.

古文：王且怒且喜，骂何曰： 若亡，何也？ 
现代文：汉王又怒又喜，骂萧何道： 你为什么逃跑呀？ 
English: Han Wang was both angry and pleased, scolding Xiao He: Why did you run away?

古文：何曰： 臣不敢亡也，臣追亡者耳。 
现代文：萧何说： 我不敢逃跑哇，我是去追赶逃跑的人啊。 
English: Xiao He said, "I don't dare to run away Wow, I'm going to chase after the person who ran away."

古文：王曰： 若所追者谁？ 
现代文：汉王说： 你追赶的人是谁呀？ 
English: Han Wang said: Who is the person you are chasing?

古文：何曰： 韩信也。 
现代文：萧何道： 是韩信。 
English: He replied, "It's Han Xin."

古文：王复骂曰： 诸将亡者以十数，公无所追。追信，诈也！ 
现代文：汉王又骂道： 将领们逃跑的已是数以十计，你都不去追找，说追韩信，纯粹是撒谎！ 
English: Han Wang also scolded, "There are already dozens of generals who have fled. You don't go after them. To say that you are going after Han Xin is a pure lie!"

古文：何曰： 诸将易得耳。
现代文：萧何说： 那些将领很容易得到。
English: Xiao He said: Those generals are easy to get.

古文：至如信者，国士无双。
现代文：至于像韩信这样崐的人，却是天下无双的杰出人才啊。
English: As for such an outstanding person as Han Xin, there is no second person in the world.

古文：王必欲长王汉中，无所事信，必欲争天下，非信无可与计事者。
现代文：大王您如果只想长久地在汉中称王，自然没有用得着韩信的地方；倘若您要争夺天下，除了韩信，就没有可与您图谋大业的人了。
English: Great King, if you only want to be a king in China for a long time, naturally you don't need Han Xin's place; if you want to compete for the world, except for Han Xin, there is no one with whom you can plan a great career.

古文：顾王策安所决耳。 
现代文：只看您作哪种抉择了！ 
English: But it's up to the king to decide.

古文：王曰： 吾亦欲东耳，安能郁郁久居此乎！ 
现代文：汉王说： 我也是想要东进的，怎么能够忧郁沉闷地老呆在这里呀！ 
English: Han Wang said: I also want to go east, how can I stay here gloomily and drearily!

古文：何曰： 计必欲东，能用信，信即留；不能用信，终亡耳。 
现代文：萧何道： 如果您决计向东发展，那么能任用韩信，韩信就会留下来，如若不能任用他，他终究还是要逃跑的。 
English: Xiao He said: If you are determined to develop eastward, then if you can appoint Han Xin, Han Xin will stay. If you can't appoint him, he will eventually run away.

古文：王曰： 吾为公以为将。 
现代文：汉王说： 那我就看在你的面子上任他作将军吧。 
English: King Han said, "I think it would be in your best interest to make him a general."

古文：何曰： 虽为将，信不留。 
现代文：萧何说： 就算是做将军，韩信也不会留下来的。 
English: Xiao He said: Even if he were to be made a general, Han Xin would still not stay.

古文：王曰： 以为大将。 
现代文：汉王道： 那就任他为大将军吧。 
English: Han Wang said, "Appoint him as grand general."

古文：何曰： 幸甚！ 
现代文：萧何说： 太好了。 
English: Xiao He said: That's great.

古文：于是王欲召信拜之。
现代文：于是汉王就想召见韩信授给他官职。
English: Therefore, Han Wang wanted to immediately summon Han Xin to announce his appointment.

古文：何曰： 王素慢无礼。今拜大将，如呼小儿，此乃信所以去也。
现代文：萧何说： 大王您向来傲慢无礼，现在要任命大将军了，却如同呼喝小孩儿一样，这便是韩信要离开的原因啊。
English: Xiao He said, "Your Majesty, you have always been arrogant and impolite. Now you are going to appoint a general, but you are crying like a child. This is why Han Xin is leaving."

古文：王必欲拜之，择良日，斋戒，设坛场，具礼，乃可耳。 
现代文：您如果要授给他官职，就请选择吉日，进行斋戒，设置拜将的坛台和广场，准备举行授职的完备仪式，这才行啊。 
English: The great king decided to appoint him, to choose a good time and a good day, to fast in person, to set up a high altar and a square, and to complete the etiquette.

古文：王许之。
现代文：汉王应允了萧何的请求。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：诸将皆喜，人人各自以为得大将。
现代文：众将领闻讯都很欢喜，人人各自以为自己会得到大将军的职务。
English: The generals were very happy to hear that they were going to be promoted to general. Everyone thought they were going to be a great general.

古文：至拜大将，乃韩信也，一军皆惊。
现代文：但等到任命大将军时，竟然是韩信，全军都惊讶不已。
English: When it came time to appoint a general, the whole army was surprised that it was Han Xin who was appointed.

古文：信拜礼毕，上坐。王曰： 丞相数言将军，将军何以教寡人计策？ 
现代文：授任韩信的仪式结束后，汉王就座，说道： 丞相屡次向我称道您，您将拿什么计策来开导我啊？ 
English: After the ceremony of appointing Han Xin, Han Wang took his seat and said: "The prime minister has repeatedly praised you to me, what strategy will you use to enlighten me?

古文：信辞谢，因问王曰： 今东乡争权天下，岂非项王耶？ 汉王曰： 然。 
现代文：韩信谦让了一番，就乘势问汉王道： 如今向东去争夺天下，您的对手难道不就是项羽吗？ 汉王说： 是啊。 
English: Han Xinqian conceded for the first time and took the opportunity to ask the King of Han: Now that you are going east to compete for the world, isn't your opponent Xiang Yu? The King of Han said: Yes.

古文：曰： 大王自料勇悍仁强孰与项王？ 
现代文：韩信道： 大王您自己估量一下，在勇敢、猛悍、仁爱、刚强等方面，与项羽比谁强呢？ 
English: Han Xin said, "Great King, please judge for yourself. In terms of bravery, ferocity, benevolence, and strength, who is better than Xiang Yu?"

古文：汉王默然良久，曰： 不如也。 
现代文：汉王沉默了许久，说： 我不如他。 
English: Han Wang was silent for a long time and said, "Not as good as Xiang Wang."

古文：信再拜贺曰： 惟信亦以为大王不如也。
现代文：韩信拜了两拜，赞许道： 我韩信也认为大王您在这些方面比不上他。
English: Han Xin bowed twice and said approvingly, "I, Han Xin, also think that you, the great king, are no match for him in these respects."

古文：然臣尝事之，请言项王之为人也。项王暗噁叱咤，千人皆废，然不能任属贤将，此特匹夫之勇耳。
现代文：不过我曾经事奉过项羽，就请让我来谈谈他的为人吧：项羽厉声怒斥呼喝时，上千的人都吓得不敢动一动，但是他却不能任用有德才的将领。这只不过是匹夫之勇罢了。
English: But I once served Xiang Yu, so please let me talk about him: when Xiang Yu shouted and shouted, thousands of people were too scared to move, but he couldn't appoint a virtuous general. It was just the courage of a peacock.

古文：项王见人，恭敬慈爱，言语呕呕，人有疾病，涕泣分食饮；至使人，有功当封爵者，印刓敝，忍不能予，此所谓妇人之仁也。
现代文：项羽待人，恭敬慈爱，言语温和，别人生了病，他会怜惜地流下泪来，把自己所吃的东西分给病人；但当所任用的人立了功，应该赏封爵位时，他却把刻好的印捏在手里，把玩得磨去了棱角还舍不得授给人家。这便是人们所说的妇人的仁慈啊。
English: She is kind, respectful, and tender-hearted. When someone is ill, she will shed tears of pity and share what she has eaten with the sick. But when the person she has appointed has done something worthy of a knighthood, she will hold the engraved seal in her hand and grind it to the very edges, not wanting to give it to anyone else. This is what people call a woman's kindness.

古文：项王虽霸天下而臣诸侯，不居关中而都彭城；背义帝之约，而以亲爱王诸侯，不平；逐其故主而王其将相，又迁逐义帝置江南；所过无不残灭，百姓不亲附，特劫于威强耳。
现代文：项羽虽然称霸天下而使诸侯臣服，但却不占据关中而是建都彭城；背弃义帝怀王的约定，把自己亲信偏爱的将领分封为王，诸侯忿忿不平；他还驱逐原来的诸侯国国王，而让诸侯国的将相为王，又把义帝迁移逐赶到江南；他的军队所经过的地方没有不遭残害毁灭的；老百姓都不愿亲近依附他，只不过是迫于他的威势勉强归顺罢了。
English: Although Xiang Yu claimed to rule the world and subjugate the princes, he did not occupy Guanzhong, but built the capital Pengcheng. He reneged on the agreement of Emperor Huai, and appointed his favorite generals as kings, which made the princes angry. He also expelled the former kings of the princes, and let the generals of the princes become kings, and drove the righteous emperor to the south of the Yangtze River. There was no place his army passed through that was not destroyed. The common people did not want to be close to him, but were forced to reluctantly submit to his power.

古文：名虽为霸，实失天下心，故其强易弱。
现代文：如此种种，使他名义上虽然还是霸主，实际上却已经失去了天下人的心，所以他的强盛是很容易转化为虚弱的。
English: All these things have caused him to lose the hearts of the people of the world, although he is still the hegemon in name, so his strength is easily transformed into weakness.

古文：今大王诚能反其道，任天下武勇，何所不诛！
现代文：现在大王您如果真的能反其道而行之，任用天下英勇善战的人才，那还有什么对手不能诛灭掉啊！
English: Now, great king, if you can really do the opposite, and appoint the world's bravest and most skillful people, then what rival can you not annihilate?

古文：以天下城邑封功臣，何所不服！
现代文：把天下的城邑封给有功之臣，那还有什么人会不心悦诚服的呢！
English: Using the world's cities and towns to award meritorious vassals, who wouldn't be impressed?

古文：以义兵从思东归之士，何所不散！
现代文：用正义的军事行动去顺从惦念东归故乡的将士们，那还有什么敌人打不垮、击不溃呀？
English: What kind of enemy can't be defeated by a righteous teacher who obeys the wishes of the returning soldiers?

古文：且三秦王为秦将，将秦子弟数岁矣，所杀亡不可胜计；又欺其众降诸侯，至新安，项王诈坑秦降卒二十馀万，唯独邯、欣、翳得脱。
现代文：况且分封在秦地的三个王都是过去秦朝的将领，他们率领秦朝的子弟作战已经有好几年了，被杀死和逃亡的多得数也数不清；而他们又欺骗自己的部下，投降了诸侯军，结果是抵达新安时，遭项羽诈骗而活埋的秦军降兵有二十多万人，唯独章邯、司马欣、董翳得以脱身不死。
English: Moreover, the three kings who were assigned in Qin were all generals of the Qin Dynasty in the past. They had been leading the sons and daughters of the Qin Dynasty in battle for several years, and the number of those who had been killed and fled was countless. However, they also deceived their subordinates and surrendered to the armies of the princes. As a result, when they arrived in Xin'an, there were more than 200,000 soldiers of the Qin Army who had been deceived and buried alive by Xiang Yu. Only Zhang Jun, Sima Xin, and Dong Jun were able to escape and not die.

古文：秦父兄怨此三人，痛入骨髓。
现代文：秦地的父老兄弟们怨恨这三个人，恨得痛彻骨髓。
English: The fathers and brothers of Qindi resented these three people, hated them to the marrow of their bones.

古文：今楚强以威王此三人，秦民莫爱也。
现代文：现今项羽倚仗自己的威势，强行把此三人封为王，秦地的百姓没有爱戴他们的。
English: Nowadays, King West Chu Baw, relying on his power, has forcibly made these three kings. The people of Qin will not love them.

古文：大王之入武关，秋毫无所害；除秦苛法，与秦民约法三章；秦民无不欲得大王王秦者。
现代文：大王您进崐入武关时，秋毫无犯，废除了秦朝的严刑苛法，与秦地的百姓约法三章，秦地的百姓没有不希望您在关中做王的。
English: Great King, when you entered Wuguan, you did not commit any crimes, abolished the harsh laws of the Qin Dynasty, and signed a three-chapter agreement with the people of Qin. The people of Qin did not want you to be king in Wuguan.

古文：于诸侯之约，大王当王关中，民咸知之；大王失职入汉中，秦民无不恨者。
现代文：而且按照原来与诸侯的约定，大王您理当在关中称王，这一点关中的百姓都知道。您失掉了应得的王位而去到汉中，对此秦地的百姓没有不怨恨的。
English: Moreover, according to the original agreement with the princes, you, the great king, should have been crowned in Guanzhong, and the people in Guanzhong know this. You lost your deserved throne and went to Hanzhong, which the people in Qin did not resent.

古文：今大王举而东，三秦可传檄而定也。 
现代文：如今大王您起兵向东，三秦之地只要发布一道征讨的文书就可以平定了。 
English: Now that the great king has launched an army to advance eastward, as long as there is a document, the three Qin fiefs can be leveled.

古文：于是汉王大喜，自以为得信晚，遂听信计，部署诸将所击。留萧何收巴、蜀租，给军粮食。
现代文：汉王于是大喜过望，自认为韩信这个人才得到得太迟了，随即就听从韩信的计策，部署众将领所要攻击的任务，留下萧何收取巴、蜀两郡的租税，为军队供给粮食。
English: Han Wang was overjoyed, thinking that Han Xin was too late to get this talent. He immediately listened to Han Xin's strategy, deployed the tasks that the generals wanted to attack, and left Xiao He to collect taxes from Ba and Shu counties and supply grain to the army.

古文：八月，汉王引兵从故道出，袭雍；雍王章邯迎击汉陈仓。雍兵败，还走；止，战好畤，又败，走废丘。
现代文：八月，汉王领兵从故道出来，袭击雍王章邯。章邯在陈仓迎击汉军，兵败逃跑；在好停下来与汉军再战，又被打败，逃往废丘。
English: In August, the leader of the Han army came out of the old road and attacked the Yong Wang Zhangye. Zhangye met the Chinese army in Chencang, was defeated and fled; he stopped in Hebei to fight the Chinese army again, was defeated again, and fled to the waste hill.

古文：汉王遂定雍地，东至咸阳，引兵围雍王于废丘，而遣诸将略地。
现代文：汉王随即平定了雍地，东进到咸阳，率军在废丘包围了雍王章邯，并派遣将领们去攻夺各地。
English: The Han king then levelled the Yangtze River, marched east to Xianyang, and led his army to surround the Yong Wang Zhangye in the waste hills, and sent his generals to conquer various regions.

古文：塞王欣、翟王翳皆降，以其地为渭南、河上、上郡。
现代文：塞王司马欣、翟王董翳都投降了，汉王便把他们的地盘设置为渭南、河上、上郡。
English: The Sai King Sima Xin and the Shao King Dong Ye both surrendered, and the Han King set up their territory as the southern, upstream, and upper counties.

古文：将军薛欧、王吸出武关，因王陵兵以迎太公、吕后。
现代文：又命将军薛欧、王吸领兵出武关，会合王陵的军队去迎接太公和吕后。
English: He also ordered the generals Xue Ou and Wang Sui to lead the troops out of Wuguan and gather the troops of the royal mausoleum to greet the Grand Duke and Empress Dowager Lyu.

古文：项王闻之，发兵距之阳夏，不得前。
现代文：项羽闻讯，出兵到阳夏阻拦，汉军于是无法前进。
English: When Xiang Yu heard the news, he sent troops to Yangxia to block it, so the Chinese army could not advance.

古文：王陵者，沛人也，先聚党数千人，居南阳，至是始以兵属汉。
现代文：王陵是沛人，早先曾聚集党徒几千人，住在南阳，至这时起带领他的部队归属了汉王。
English: Wang Ling was a great man. He had earlier gathered several thousand party members and lived in Nanyang. From that time on, he led his troops and belonged to the Han king.

古文：项王取陵母置军中，陵使至，则东乡坐陵母，欲以招陵。
现代文：项羽便把王陵的母亲抓到军中，王陵为此派出的使者来到项羽的军营后，项羽就让王陵的母亲面向东而坐，想要借此招降王陵。
English: Xiang Yu then captured Wang Ling's mother to the army. After the envoy sent by Wang Ling for this purpose came to Xiang Yu's military camp, Xiang Yu let Wang Ling's mother sit facing east, hoping to use this to recruit Wang Ling.

古文：陵母私送使者，泣曰： 愿为老妾语陵：善事汉王，汉王长者，终得天下，毋以老妾故持二心。
现代文：王陵母亲私下里为使者送行，老泪纵横地说： 望您替我对王陵说：好好地事奉汉王，汉王是宽厚大度的人，终将取得天下。不要因为我的缘故而对汉王怀有二心。
English: Wang Ling's mother privately saw the emissary off, and with tears streaming down her face, said, "I hope you will say to Wang Ling for me, 'Serve the Han king well. The Han king is a generous and magnanimous man, and he will eventually obtain the kingdom of heaven. Don't have second thoughts about the Han king because of me.'"

古文：妾以死送使者！ 
现代文：我则用一死来送使者您！ 
English: I, on the other hand, would die to send you an emissary!

古文：遂伏剑而死。
现代文：说罢就伏剑自杀了。
English: With that, Rick killed himself with a sword.

古文：项王怒。烹陵母。
现代文：项羽勃然大怒，即将王陵的母亲煮杀了。
English: He flew into a rage and killed Wang Ling's mother.

古文：项王以故吴令郑昌为韩王，以距汉。
现代文：项羽用过去的吴县县令郑昌做韩王，以抵抗汉军。
English: Xiang Yu used the past Wu County warlord Zheng Chang as the king of Korea to resist the Han army.

古文：张良遗项王书曰： 汉王失职，欲得关中，如约即止，不敢东。 
现代文：张良写信给项羽说： 汉王失去应得的封职，想要得到关中，一实现先前的约定就会停止作战，不敢东进了。 
English: Zhang Liang wrote a letter to Xiang Yu, saying: Han Wang lost his deserved appointment, and if he wanted to get Guanzhong, he would stop fighting as soon as the previous agreement was realized, and would not dare to enter the East.

古文：又以齐、梁反书遗项王曰： 齐欲与赵并灭楚。 
现代文：接着又把齐国田荣、梁地彭越反叛楚国的文书送给项王，说： 齐国想要同赵国一起灭掉楚国。 
English: Zhang Liang also sent Qi and Liang's message of rebellion to Xiang Wang, saying: Qi wants to join forces with Zhao to exterminate Chu.

古文：项王以此故无西意，而北击齐。
现代文：项羽于是因此无西进之意，而向北去攻打齐国。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu had no intention of advancing westward, but went north to attack Qi.

古文：燕王广不肯之辽东，臧荼击杀之，并其地。
现代文：燕王韩广不肯到辽东去作辽东王，臧荼就击杀了他，兼并了他的领地。
English: Han Guang, the king of Yan, refused to go to Liaodong to become the king of Liaodong, so Yan killed him and annexed his territory.

古文：是岁，以内史沛周苛为御史大夫。
现代文：这一年，汉王任用内史、沛人周苛为御史大夫。
English: In the same year, Emperor Han appointed Naishi Ryo and Peijin Zhou Kao as Imperial Historians.

古文：项王使趣义帝行，其群臣、左右稍稍叛之。
现代文：项羽派人催促义帝快到郴地去，义帝的群臣、近侍便逐渐背叛了义帝。
English: Cao Yu sent someone to urge Yidi to go to Handan soon, and Yidi's vassals and close attendants gradually betrayed Yidi.

古文：太祖高皇帝上之上二年
现代文：汉高帝二年
English: In the second year of Emperor Han

古文：冬，十月，项王密使九江、衡山、临江王击义帝，杀之江中。
现代文：冬季，十月，项羽秘密派遣九江王、衡山王、临江王去攻打义帝，在长江上杀死了他。
English: In the winter, in October, Xiang Yu secretly sent the King of Jiujiang, the King of Hengshan, and the King of Linjiang to attack Yiti, and killed him on the Yangtze River.

古文：陈馀悉三县兵，与齐兵共袭常山。
现代文：陈馀出动三县的全部兵力，与齐军合力袭击常山。
English: Chen Yu sent out all the troops of the three counties and attacked Changshan with the Qi army.

古文：常山王张耳败，走汉，谒汉王于废丘，汉王厚遇之。
现代文：常山王张耳兵败逃奔到汉，在废丘拜见汉王刘邦。
English: Changshan King Zhang Er defected and fled to Han, where he met Han King Liu Bang in a waste mound.

古文：陈馀迎赵王于代，复为赵王。
现代文：汉王很是优待他。陈馀到代地迎回了原来的赵崐王赵歇，恢复了他的王位。
English: The king of Han treated him very favorably. Chen Yu welcomed back the original King Zhao Xuan Zhao Xie and restored his throne.

古文：赵王德陈馀，立以为代王。
现代文：赵王因此对陈馀感恩戴德，立他为代王。
English: King Zhao was so grateful to Chen Yu that he made him acting king.

古文：陈馀为赵王弱，国初定，不之国，留傅赵王；而使夏说以相国守代。
现代文：陈馀考虑到赵王的力量尚弱小，国中局势又刚刚稳定，便不去自己的封国，留下来辅助赵王，而派夏说以相国的身分去镇守代国。
English: Chen Yu took into account that King Zhao's strength was still weak and the situation in the country had just stabilized, so he did not go to his own fief, but stayed to assist King Zhao, and sent Xia to defend the country on his behalf.

古文：张良自韩间行归汉，汉王以为成信侯。
现代文：张良从韩地抄小道回到汉王处，汉王封张良为成信侯。
English: Zhang Liang secretly came to the Han king from Korea, and the Han king appointed him as Chengxin marquis.

古文：良多病，未尝特将，常为画策臣，时时从汉王。
现代文：张良体弱多病，未曾独自领兵打仗，而是经常作为出谋划策的谋臣，时时跟随在汉王身边。
English: Zhang Liang was frail and often ill. He never led soldiers into battle on his own, but often acted as a strategist, always following the Han king's side.

古文：汉王如陕，镇抚关外父老。
现代文：汉王到陕县去，安抚关外的父老。
English: Han Wang arrived in Shaanxi to comfort Guan's parents.

古文：河南王申阳降，置河南郡。
现代文：河南王申阳投降了汉王，汉王设置了河南郡。
English: Shenyang, the king of Henan, fell to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty established Henan County here.

古文：汉王以韩襄王孙信为韩太尉，将兵略韩地。
现代文：汉王任用原韩襄王的孙子韩信为韩国太尉，领兵攻夺韩地。
English: King Han appointed Han Xin, the grandson of the original Han Xiang Wang, as a Korean lieutenant to lead the troops to invade Korea.

古文：信急击韩王昌于阳城，昌降。
现代文：韩信在阳城加紧攻打韩王昌，昌被迫投降。
English: Han Xin intensified his attack on Han Wang Chang in Yangcheng, and Chang was forced to surrender.

古文：十一月，立信为韩王，常将韩兵从汉王。
现代文：十一月，汉王立韩信为韩王；韩王信常常率韩国军队跟随着汉王。
English: In November, the Han king appointed Han Xin as Han king; Han Wangxin often led the Korean army to follow the Han king.

古文：汉王还都栎阳。
现代文：汉王返回都城栎阳。
English: Han Wang returned to the capital Shenyang.

古文：诸将拔陇西。
现代文：众将领们攻克了陇西。
English: The generals conquered Shaanxi Province.

古文：春，正月，项王北至城阳。
现代文：春季，正月，项羽往北抵达城阳。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Xiang Yu went north and arrived in Chengyang.

古文：齐王荣将兵会战，败，走平原，平原民杀之。
现代文：齐王田荣领兵与楚军会战，兵败后田荣逃到平原，平原的百姓把他杀了。
English: After the defeat, Tian Rong fled to the plain, and the people of the plain killed him.

古文：项王复立田假为齐王。
现代文：项羽于是又重立田假为齐王。
English: As a result, he re-established Tianfu as the king of Qi.

古文：遂北至北海，烧夷城郭、室屋，坑田荣降卒，系虏其老弱、妇女，所过多所残灭。
现代文：接着，项羽就北进至北海一带，焚烧、铲平城郭、房屋，活埋田荣的降兵，掳掠齐国的老弱、妇女，所经过的地方多遭破坏毁灭。
English: Next, Xiang Yu marched north to the area around the North Sea, burning and bulldozing city walls and houses, burying Tian Rong's soldiers alive, and abducting the old, weak, and women of Qi. Most of the places he passed through were destroyed.

古文：齐民相聚叛之。
现代文：齐国的百姓因此便纷纷聚集起来反叛项羽。
English: As a result, the people of Qi gathered in large numbers to rebel against Xiang Yu.

古文：汉将拔北地，虏雍王弟平。
现代文：汉王的将领攻陷北地，俘获了雍王章邯的弟弟章平。
English: The Han king's generals invaded the north and captured Yong Wang Zhangye's younger brother, Zhang Ping.

古文：三月，汉王自临晋渡河。
现代文：三月，汉王从临晋关渡过黄河。
English: In March, Han Wang crossed the Yellow River from Linjin Pass.

古文：魏王豹降，将兵从；下河内，虏殷王卬，置河内郡。
现代文：魏王魏豹投降，领兵追随汉王；汉军攻下河内，俘虏了殷王司马，设置河内郡。
English: The Wei king, Wei Piao, surrendered and led his troops to follow the Han king; the Han army captured Hanoi, captured Yin Wang Sima, and set up Hanoi County.

古文：初，阳武人陈平，家贫，好读书。
现代文：起初，阳武人陈平，家境贫寒，喜好读书。
English: At first, Yangwu person Chen Ping, from a poor family background, liked to read.

古文：里中社，平为宰，分肉食甚均。
现代文：乡里中祭祀土地神，陈平担当主持分配祭肉的人，将祭肉分得非常均匀。
English: The land deity is worshipped in the upper part of the storehouse where Chen Ping lives. Chen Ping is the person who presides over the meat cutting, and he distributes the sacrificial meat very evenly.

古文：父老曰： 善，陈孺子之为宰！ 
现代文：里中的父老们于是便说： 好哇，陈家的小子做主分祭肉的人了！ 
English: My father's fellow villagers said: Well, the children of the Chen family really know how to divide the sacrificial meat!

古文：平曰： 嗟乎，使平得宰天下，亦如是肉矣！ 
现代文：陈平却道： 唉呀，如果我能够主持天下，也会像分配这祭肉一样公平合理的！ 
English: Chen Ping said, "Alas, if I were to rule the world, I would be just like this piece of meat!

古文：及诸侯叛秦，平事魏王咎于临济，为太仆，说魏王，不听。
现代文：到诸侯国反叛秦朝时，陈平在临济事奉魏王魏咎，任太仆。他曾向魏王献策，但是魏王不听。
English: When the vassal states rebelled against the Qin Dynasty, Chen Ping served the Wei King Wei Wei in Linyi, and was appointed as his eunuch. He offered advice to the Wei King, but the Wei King did not listen.

古文：人或谗之，平亡去。
现代文：有的人就在魏王面前恶语中伤他，陈平于是逃离魏王而去。
English: Someone framed him, and Chen Ping fled.

古文：后事项羽，赐爵为卿。
现代文：后来陈平又为项羽做事，项羽赐封给他卿一级的爵位。
English: Later, Chen Ping worked for Xiang Yu again, and Xiang Yu gave him a first-class knighthood.

古文：殷王反楚，项羽使平击降之。
现代文：殷王司马反楚时，项羽即派陈平去攻打并降服了殷王。
English: When Yin Wang Sima rebelled, Xiang Yu sent Chen Ping to attack and subjugate Yin Wang.

古文：还，拜为都尉，赐金二十镒。
现代文：陈平领兵返回，项羽就授任他都尉之职，赏赐给他黄金二十镒。
English: When Chen Ping returned from leading the troops, Xiang Yu appointed him to the post of captain and rewarded him with twenty pieces of gold.

古文：居无何，汉王攻下殷。
现代文：过了不久，汉王攻占了殷地。
English: It didn't take long for the Han Dynasty to conquer the country again.

古文：项王怒，将诛定殷将吏。
现代文：项羽为此怒不可遏，准备杀掉那些参与平定殷地的将领和官吏。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu was furious and prepared to kill the generals and officials who had participated in the pacification of Yantai.

古文：平惧，乃封其金与印，使使归项王；而挺身间行，杖剑亡，渡河，归汉王于脩武，因魏无知求见汉王。
现代文：陈平很害怕，便把他所得的黄金和官印封裹好，派人送还崐给项羽；随即毅然持剑抄小路逃亡，渡过黄河，到武去投奔汉王，通过魏无知求见汉王。
English: Chen Ping was very afraid, so he wrapped up the gold and official seal he had obtained, and sent someone to return the scepter to Xiang Yu. He then resolutely took the sword to escape, crossed the Yellow River, went to Wuxi to join the Han king, and sought to see the Han king through Wei ignorance.

古文：汉王召入，赐食，遣罢就舍。
现代文：汉王于是召陈平进见，赐给他酒饭，然后就打发他到客舍中去歇息。
English: The Han king then summoned Chen Ping, gave him wine and rice, and then sent him to a guest house to rest.

古文：平曰： 臣为事来，所言不可以过今日。 
现代文：陈平说： 我是为要事来求见您的，所要说的不能够延迟过今日。 
English: Chen Ping said: I have to come in advance, what I have said cannot be delayed beyond today.

古文：于是汉王与语而说之。问曰： 子之居楚何官？ 曰： 为都尉。 
现代文：汉王即与他交谈，颇喜欢他的议论，便问道： 你在楚军中任的是什么官职呀？ 陈平说： 任都尉。 
English: Han Wang immediately conversed with him and was quite pleased with his discussion, so he asked: What official position did you hold in the Chu army? Chen Ping said: Captain.

古文：是日，即拜平为都尉，使为参乘，典护军。
现代文：刘邦当天就授陈平都尉之职，让他做自己的陪乘官，负责监督各部将领。
English: On the same day, Liu Bang gave Chen Ping the post of captain, and let him be his escort officer, responsible for supervising the generals of various departments.

古文：诸将尽讙曰： 大王一日得楚之亡卒，未知其高下，而即与同载，反使监护长者！ 
现代文：将领们因不服气都喧哗鼓噪起来，说： 大王您得到一名楚军的逃兵才一天，还不了解他本领的高低，就与他同乘一辆车子，且还反倒让他来监护我们这些有资历的老将！ 
English: Unconvinced, the generals began to make a lot of noise, saying, "Your Majesty, you have only had a deserter from the Chu army for one day. You don't know the level of his ability, so you're riding in a car with him, and on the contrary, you're letting him watch over us, these veterans with seniority!"

古文：汉王闻之，愈益幸平。
现代文：汉王听到这种种非议后，却更加宠爱陈平了。
English: When the Han king heard these arguments, he favored Chen Ping even more.

古文：汉王南渡平阴津，至洛阳新城。
现代文：汉王率军南下渡过平阴津，抵达洛阳新城。
English: Han Wang led the army southward across Pingyinjin and arrived at Luoyang New Town.

古文：三老董公遮说王曰： 臣闻 顺德者昌，逆德者亡 ； 兵出无名，事故不成 。
现代文：新城县的三老董公拦住汉王劝说道： 我听说 顺德者昌，逆德者亡 ； 师出无名，事情就不能成功 。
English: The three elders of Xincheng County, Dong Gong, stopped Han Wang from persuading him and said: I have heard that those who follow the German way are prosperous, and those who go against the German way are doomed; if the teacher is unknown, things cannot succeed.

古文：故曰： 明其为贼，敌乃可服。 
现代文：所以说： 点明要讨伐的人是乱臣贼子，敌人才可以被征服。 
English: Therefore, it is said that the enemy can only be defeated if the enemy's crimes are made public.

古文：项羽为无道，放杀其主，天下之贼也。
现代文：项羽行事大逆不道，放逐并杀害了他的君主义帝，实是令天下人痛恨的逆贼啊。
English: Xiang Yu has never been able to find a way out. He is a sinner who killed the Righteous Emperor.

古文：夫仁不以勇，义不以力，大王宜率三军之众为之素服，以告诸侯而伐之，则四海之内莫不仰德，此三王之举也。 
现代文：仁德之士不逞一时之勇，正义之军不拼一己之力。大王您应当率领三军将士为义帝穿上丧服，以此通告诸侯王，共同讨伐项羽。这样一来，四海之内没有人不仰慕您的德行的，这可是像夏、殷、周三王那样的行为啊！ 
English: People of benevolence do not dare the courage of the moment, and the army of justice does not fight for one's own strength. Great King, you should lead the three armies to put on the mourning clothes for the righteous emperor, so as to inform the princes and kings, and jointly fight against Xiang Yu. In this way, no one in the four seas does not admire your virtue, this is like the behavior of Xia, Yin, and Wednesday King!

古文：于是汉王为义帝发丧，袒而大哭，哀临三日，发使告诸侯曰： 天下共立义帝，北面事之。
现代文：汉王于是便为义帝发丧，裸露着左臂痛哭流涕，全体举哀三天，并派使者向各路诸侯通报说： 天下共同拥立义帝，对他北面称臣。
English: The Han king then mourned for Emperor Yidai, bared his left arm and wept bitterly, and everyone held a three-day mourning, and sent an envoy to all the princes to inform them that: The whole world will jointly support Emperor Yidai and praise him to the north.

古文：今项羽放杀义帝江南，大逆无道！
现代文：现在项羽却把义帝杀害在江南，纯属大逆不道！
English: Now, however, Xiang Yu has killed Yidi in the south of the Yangtze River, which is nothing short of high treason!

古文：寡人悉发关中兵，收三河士，南浮江、汉以下，愿从诸侯王击楚之杀义帝者！ 
现代文：我要出动关中的全部兵马，征收河南、河东、河内地区的士兵，乘船沿长江、汉水南下，愿意追随诸侯王去攻打楚国这个杀害义帝的逆贼！ 
English: I want to send out all the soldiers and horses in Guanzhong, collect soldiers from Henan, Hedong and Hanoi regions, and go south along the Yangtze River and Hanshui by boat. I am willing to follow the princes and kings to attack Chu, the traitor who killed the Righteous Emperor!

古文：使者至赵，陈馀曰： 汉杀张耳，乃从。 
现代文：汉王的使者到了赵国，陈馀说： 汉王如果能把张耳杀了，我就跟随汉王。 
English: When Han Wang's envoy arrived in Zhao, Chen Yu said, "If Han Wang can kill Zhang Er, I will follow Han Wang."

古文：于是汉王求人类张耳者斩之，持其头遗陈馀；馀乃遣兵助汉。
现代文：汉王于是就寻找到一个与张耳很相像的人，杀掉了他，拿他的头送给陈馀，陈馀便派兵援助汉军。
English: The Han king then found a man who resembled Zhang Er, killed him, and gave his head to Chen Yu. Chen Yu then sent troops to aid the Han army.

古文：田荣弟横收散卒，得数万人，起城阳，夏，四月，立荣子广为齐王，以拒楚。
现代文：田荣的弟弟田横四处收拢散兵游勇，得到几万人，即从城阳起兵反楚。夏季，四月，田横拥立田荣的儿子田广为齐王，抗拒楚军。
English: Tian Rong's younger brother, Tian Yang, gathered tens of thousands of scattered soldiers and gained tens of thousands of people, that is, anti-Chu troops from Chengyang. In the summer, in April, Tian Yang supported Tian Rong's son, Tian Guang, to resist the Chu army.

古文：项王因留，连战，未能下。
现代文：项羽为此留在齐地，与齐军接连作战，但没能攻下城阳。
English: Therefore, Xiang Yu stayed in Qi and fought with the Qi army one after another, but failed to capture Chengyang.

古文：虽闻汉东，既击齐，欲遂破之而后击汉，汉王以故得率诸侯兵凡五十六万人伐楚。
现代文：项羽虽然闻听汉王东进，可是既然已经在攻击齐国，就想待打败齐军后再去攻打汉王的军队。汉王因此得以统率各路诸侯军共约五十六万人讨伐楚国。
English: Although Xiang Yu had heard that the Han king was marching eastward, since he was already attacking Qi, he wanted to wait until the Qi army was defeated before attacking the Han king's army. As a result, the Han king was able to lead a total of about five hundred and sixty thousand vassals to fight against Chu.

古文：到外黄，彭越将其兵三万馀人归汉。
现代文：汉军抵达外黄时，彭越率领他的部队三万多人归顺了汉王。
English: When the Han army arrived in Waigaoqiao, Peng Yue led more than 30,000 of his troops to surrender to the Han king.

古文：汉王曰： 彭将军收魏地得十馀城，欲急立魏后。
现代文：汉王说： 彭将军您夺取了魏地的十多个城邑，想要尽快扶立原魏国国君的后代。
English: Han Wang said: General Peng, you have captured more than ten cities and towns in Wei, and you want to establish the descendants of the former Wei sovereign as soon as possible.

古文：今西魏王豹，真魏后。 
现代文：如今西魏王魏豹便是真正的魏国后裔呀。 
English: Today, the West Wei King Wei Pan is the true descendant of the State of Wei.

古文：乃拜彭越为魏相国，擅将其兵略定梁地。
现代文：随即任命彭越为魏国的相国，让他独自率领自己的部队去攻夺、平定梁地。
English: He immediately appointed Peng Yue as the partner country of Wei, and let him lead his troops to conquer and pacify Liangzi.

古文：汉王遂入城，收其货宝、美人，日置酒高会。
现代文：汉王接着就攻入彭城，搜罗财宝美女，天天设置酒宴，大会部将宾朋。
English: Han Wang then broke into Pengcheng, collected treasure and beautiful women, set up a wine banquet every day, and invited guests to the grand banquet.

古文：项王闻之，令诸将击齐，而自以精兵三万人南，从鲁出胡陵至萧。
现代文：项王听到这个消息，即命令众将领继续攻打齐国，自己则亲领精兵三万人南进，从鲁地出胡陵，抵达萧地。
English: Upon hearing this news, King Xiang ordered his generals to continue to attack Qi, while he himself led 30,000 elite soldiers southward, from Ludi to Huling and finally to Shoudi.

古文：晨，击汉军而东至彭城，日中，大破汉军。
现代文：清晨，楚军从萧地袭击汉军，向东直打到彭崐城，至中午时分，大败汉军。
English: In the early morning, the Chu army attacked the Chinese army from a desolate place, and fought eastward to Penghu City. By noon, they had defeated the Chinese army.

古文：汉军皆走，相随入穀、泗水，死者十馀万人。
现代文：汉军将士都纷纷奔逃，相跟着涌入水、泗水，死了十几万人。
English: Chinese soldiers fled in droves, followed by an influx of floodwaters, and more than 100,000 people died.

古文：汉卒皆南走山，楚又追击至灵壁东睢水上；汉军却，为楚所挤，卒十馀万人皆入睢水，水为之不流。
现代文：这时汉军士兵全往南向山里逃去。
English: At this time, all the Han soldiers fled south into the mountains.

古文：围汉王三匝。
现代文：楚军又穷追不舍，尾随到灵壁东面的瞧水边上。
English: The Chu army surrounded the Han king on three levels.

古文：会大风从西北起，折木，发屋，扬沙石，窈冥昼晦，逢迎楚军，大乱坏散，而汉王乃得与数十骑遁去。
现代文：汉军仓皇退却，被楚军挤迫，十多万士兵全部落入睢水，致使河水都阻塞得流不动了。楚军将汉王重重包围起来。这时恰巧大风从西北刮起，风势摧枯拉朽，墙倒屋塌，飞沙走石，地暗天昏，迎头卷向楚军，楚军被吹得阵脚大乱，零落奔逃。汉王因此才得以偕同几十骑人趁乱溜走。
English: The Han army retreated in disarray and was squeezed by the Chu army. More than a hundred thousand soldiers all fell into the river, causing the river to be blocked and unable to flow. The Chu army encircled the Han king. At this time, it happened that a strong wind blew from the northwest, the wind was blowing, the wall collapsed, the sand was flying, the ground was dark and gloomy, and it rolled head-on into the Chu army. The Chu army was blown into chaos and fled in disarray. Therefore, the Han king was able to slip away with dozens of riders.

古文：欲过沛收家室，而楚亦使人之沛取汉王家。
现代文：汉王想经过沛去接取家眷，而楚国也派人到沛去掳掠汉王的家眷。
English: Han Wang wanted to pass through Pei to pick up his family, and the State of Chu also sent people to Pei to abduct Han Wang's family.

古文：家皆亡，不与汉王相见。
现代文：家眷们于是都狼狈逃散，没能与汉王见面。
English: The family members then fled in disarray and were unable to meet with Han Wang.

古文：汉王道逢孝惠、鲁元公主，载以行。
现代文：汉王在途中遇到他的嫡长子后来的孝惠帝刘盈和长女鲁元公主，就用车载着他们一起走。
English: On the way, Han Wang met Liu Ying, his eldest son and the future Emperor Xiao Hui, and his eldest daughter, Princess Lu Yuan, and drove them together.

古文：楚骑追之，汉王急，推堕二子车下。
现代文：楚军骑兵疾追过来，汉王慌急，把两个孩子推下车去。
English: The Chu cavalry hurriedly chased after them, and Han Wang panicked and pushed the two children out of the car.

古文：滕公为太仆，常下收载之。如是者三，曰： 今虽急，不可以驱，奈何弃之！ 
现代文：滕公夏侯婴任掌管车马的太仆，他总要下车把两个孩子收载起来，这样做了三次，于是滕公说道： 现在尽管情势紧急，车子也不可赶得太快，怎么能抛下孩子啊！ 
English: Tenggong Xia, the lord's son, put his servant Zhuang in charge of the chariot and horses. He always had to get out of the car to pick up the two children. He did this three times, so Tenggong said: Now, despite the urgent situation, the car should not be too fast, how can you leave the children!

古文：故徐行。
现代文：所以就慢慢地行走。
English: So I walk slowly.

古文：汉王怒，欲斩之者十馀；滕公卒保护，脱二子。
现代文：汉王很是恼火，有十多次想杀掉滕公。这样，滕公终于保护着两个孩子脱离了险境。
English: Han Wang was very angry and wanted to kill Tenggong more than ten times. In this way, Tenggong finally protected the two children from danger.

古文：审食其从太公、吕后间行求汉王，不相遇，反遇楚军。
现代文：审食其随太公、吕后从小路寻找汉王，没遇见汉王，反而碰上了楚军。
English: After judging the food, they followed the emperor and Lv Hou to look for the Han king from a side road. They did not meet the Han king, but ran into the Chu army.

古文：楚军与归，项王常置军中为质。
现代文：楚军就将他们一起带回，项羽便经常把他们安置在军营中作人质。
English: The Chu army brought them back together, and Xiang Yu often placed them in military camps as hostages.

古文：是时，吕后兄周吕侯为汉将兵，居下邑。汉王间往从之，稍稍收其士卒。
现代文：此时，吕后的哥哥周吕侯为汉王领兵驻在下邑，汉王即走小路去投奔他，逐渐地收集到属下一些溃散的士兵。
English: At this time, Luguo's brother, Zhou Luhou, was stationed in the lower town as the leader of the Han King's army. The Han King took the back roads to join him, and gradually gathered some of his scattered soldiers.

古文：诸侯皆背汉，复与楚。
现代文：诸侯王于是又都背叛了汉王，重新去亲附楚王。
English: As a result, all the princes and kings betrayed the Han king and re-attached themselves to the king of Chu.

古文：塞王欣、翟王翳亡降楚。
现代文：塞王司马欣、翟王董翳也逃亡降楚。
English: King Sima Xin of Tibet and King Dong Xi of Shandong also fled and surrendered to Chu.

古文：田横进攻田假，假走楚，楚杀之。
现代文：田横进攻田假，田假逃到楚国。
English: Tianyou attacked Tianfu, and Tianfu fled to Chu.

古文：横遂复定三齐之地。
现代文：楚国杀掉了田假，田横于是重又平定了三齐的土地。
English: Chu killed off Tianfu and Tianyou, and the land of Sanqi was once again leveled.

古文：汉王问群臣曰： 吾欲捐关以东，等弃之，谁可与共功者？ 
现代文：汉王问群臣说： 我想舍弃函谷关以东地区作为封赏，你们看有谁可以与我共同建功立业呀？ 
English: Han Wang asked his courtiers, "I want to give up the area east of Han Valley Pass as a reward. Can you think of anyone who can work with me to build a career?"

古文：张良曰： 九江王布，楚枭将，与项王有隙；彭越与齐反梁地；此两人可急使。
现代文：张良道： 九江王黥布，是楚国的一员猛将，他同项王之间有些隔阂；另外彭越正联合齐王田荣在梁地起兵反楚。这两个人可以立即使用。
English: Zhang Liang said, "Kujiang Wang Zhibu is a fierce general of Chu, and there is some distance between him and this king. In addition, Peng Yue and Qi Wang Tian Rong are raising an army against Chu in Liangdi. These two men can be used immediately."

古文：而汉王之将，独韩信可属大事，当一面。
现代文：再就是汉王您的将领中，唯有韩信可以托付大事，独当一面。
English: In addition, among your generals, Han Xin is the only one who can be entrusted with important matters.

古文：即欲捐之，捐之此三人，则楚可破也！ 
现代文：如果您要把关东的地方作为赏地，赏给这三个人，楚国即可以打败了！ 
English: If you want to use the Kanto region as a prize, and give it to these three people, you can beat Chu!

古文：初，项王击齐，征兵九江，九江王布称病不在，遣将将军数千人行。
现代文：当初，项羽攻打齐国时，曾征调九江国的兵力，九江王黥布以生病为借口不亲自前往，而是派将领率军几千人去跟随项羽。
English: At first, when Xiang Yu attacked Qi, he had conscripted and transferred troops from Jiujiang. The King of Jiujiang, Yan Bu, used illness as an excuse not to go in person, but sent a general and several thousand soldiers to follow Xiang Yu.

古文：汉之破楚彭城，布又称病不佐楚。
现代文：汉军攻破楚国彭城时，黥布又托病不去援助楚军。
English: When the Han army broke through Pengcheng, Chu, Zibo again feigned illness to avoid aiding the Chu army.

古文：楚王由此怨布，娄使使者诮让，召布。
现代文：楚王项羽因此非常怨恨黥布，多次派使者去责备他，并要召见他。
English: As a result, King Xiang Yu of Chu was very resentful of Xiang Bu, and repeatedly sent emissaries to rebuke him and summon him.

古文：布愈恐，不敢往。
现代文：黥布愈加害怕，不敢前往。
English: He became more and more afraid and did not dare to go.

古文：项王方北忧齐、赵，西患汉，所与者独九江王；又多布材，欲亲用之，以故未之击。
现代文：项羽因正在为北方齐、赵两国和西面汉国的反楚势力担忧，而能够亲附的只有黥布一人，且又器重他的才能，打算亲近他加以重用，所以才没有攻打他。
English: Xiang Yu did not attack him because he was worried about the anti-Chu forces in Qi in the north, Zhao in the north and Han in the west, and only Zibo could be intimate with him, and he valued his talent and intended to get close to him and reuse it.

古文：汉王自下邑徙军砀，遂至虞，谓左右曰： 如彼等者，无足与计天下事！ 
现代文：汉王从下邑转移到砀地驻扎，随后到了虞，对身边的随行官员说： 像你们这样的人，没有够得上可以共商天下大事的！ 
English: Han Wang moved from Shimo-eup to be stationed in Handan, and then to Tsuru, and said to the accompanying officials around him: People like you are not enough to be able to discuss the world's major events!

古文：谒者随何进曰： 不审陛下所谓。 
现代文：谒者随何进言道： 不知陛下指的是什么？ 
English: "I don't understand what your majesty means," said the man in charge of delivering the fake news.

古文：汉王曰： 孰能为我使九江，令之发兵倍楚？
现代文：汉王说： 有谁能为我出使九江王那里，让他起兵叛楚？
English: Han Wang said, "Can anyone send an envoy to the King of Jiujiang for me, so that he can raise an army to rebel?"

古文：留项王数月，我之取天下可以百全。 
现代文：只须把项羽拖住几个月，我夺取天下就十分有把握了。 
English: I only have to hold back the feather for a few months, and I am quite sure of conquering the world.

古文：随何曰： 臣请使之！ 
现代文：随何便道： 我请求出使！ 
English: By all means: I request you to send an envoy!

古文：汉王使与二十人俱。
现代文：汉王就派他带领二十个人一同前往。
English: The king of Han sent him to lead twenty men to Mt.

古文：五月，汉王至荥阳，诸败军皆会，萧何亦发关中老弱未傅者悉诣荥阳，汉军复大振。
现代文：五月，汉王抵达荥阳，诸路兵败溃散的队伍都会合到那里，萧何也征发关中不列入服役名册的老老少少，把他们全部送往荥阳，汉军于是重又士气大振。
English: In May, Han Wang arrived in Poyang. The defeated and scattered troops from all directions would meet there. Xiao He also conscripted the old and young who were not included in the service roster, and sent them all to Poyang. The morale of the Chinese army was therefore heavy and strong.

古文：楚起于彭城，常乘胜逐北，与汉战荥阳南京、索间。
现代文：这时，楚军以彭城为据点，经常乘胜追逃逐败，与汉军在荥阳南面的京邑、索亭之间交战。
English: At this time, the Chu army used Pengcheng as a stronghold, often taking advantage of victory to chase and chase defeat, and fought with the Chinese army in the south of Fenyang between Beijing and Soeting.

古文：楚骑来众，汉王择军中可为骑将者，皆推故奉骑士重泉人李必、骆甲。
现代文：楚军来了许多骑兵，汉王于是就在军中挑选可以担当骑兵将领的人，大家都推举过去秦军的骑士重泉人李必、骆甲出任，汉王便打算授任他俩。
English: Many cavalrymen came from the Chu army, and the Han king then selected people in the army who could be cavalry generals. Everyone nominated Li Bi and Luo Jia, knights from the Qin army, to serve as cavalry generals, and the Han king planned to appoint them both.

古文：汉王欲拜之，必、甲曰： 臣故秦民，恐军不信；愿得大王左右善骑者傅之。 
现代文：李必、骆甲说： 我们原是秦朝的人，恐怕军中将士不信服我们，因此甘愿辅佐大王您身边善于骑射的将领。 
English: Li Bi and Luo Jia said, "We were originally from the Qin Dynasty. I'm afraid the lieutenant generals don't trust us, so I'm willing to assist the great king and the generals around you who are good at riding and shooting."

古文：乃拜灌婴为中大夫令，李必、骆甲为左右校尉，将骑兵击楚骑于荥阳东，大破之，楚以故不能过荥阳而西。
现代文：汉王便任命灌婴为中大夫，任用李必、骆甲为左右校尉，率骑兵在荥阳东面迎击楚军骑兵，大败楚军，楚军因此无法越过荥阳西进。
English: The Han king then appointed Gan Ying as the middle doctor, appointed Li Bi and Luo Jia as the left and right lieutenants, and led the cavalry to meet the Chu cavalry in the east of Fenyang, and defeated the Chu army. Therefore, the Chu army could not cross Fenyang to the west.

古文：汉王军荥阳，筑甬道属之河，以取敖仓粟。
现代文：汉王驻军荥阳，修筑甬道通向黄河，以靠它运取敖仓的粮食。
English: The Han king stationed his army in Fenyang and built a causeway leading to the Yellow River, which was used to transport grain from Kamakura.

古文：周勃、灌婴等言于汉王曰： 陈平虽美如冠玉，其中未必有也。
现代文：周勃、灌婴等人对汉王说： 陈平虽然外表俊美如装饰帽子的秀玉，但腹中却未必有什么真才实学。
English: Zhou Bo, Guan Ying and others said to Han Wang: Although Chen Pingru is as handsome as a top hat, there may not be any real talent in his belly.

古文：臣闻平居家时盗其嫂；事魏不容，亡归楚；不中，又亡归汉。
现代文：我们听说陈平在家时曾与他的嫂子私通；为魏王做事时因不能被容纳而逃走去投奔楚国；在楚依然得不到信用，就又逃奔来降汉。
English: We heard that Chen Ping had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law when he was at home; when he was working for the Wei King, he could not be accommodated and fled to the State of Chu; when he still could not gain trust in Chu, he fled again to the Han Dynasty.

古文：今日大王尊官之，令护军。
现代文：现在大王您却这么器重他，授给他很高的官职，命他来监督各部将领。
English: Now the great king has so valued him that he has made him a high-ranking official and appointed him as a bodyguard to supervise the army.

古文：臣闻平受诸将金，金多者得善处，金少者得恶处。
现代文：我们获悉陈平接受将领们送的金钱，金钱给得多的人就能得到较好的对待，金钱赠得少的人就会遭到极差的待遇。
English: We heard that Chen Ping accepted money from the generals. If he gave more money, he would get benefits, but if he gave less money, he would be in a bad situation.

古文：平，反覆乱臣也，愿王察之！ 
现代文：如此看来，陈平是个反复无常的乱臣贼子，望大王您明察！ 
English: From this point of view, Chen Ping is a capricious ruffian thief, Wang Daowang, you see!

古文：汉王疑之，召让魏无知。
现代文：汉王于是对陈平有了猜疑，即召他的引荐人魏无知前来责问。
English: The king of Han suspected Chen Ping and summoned Wei Jiao to interrogate him.

古文：无知曰： 臣所言者能也，陛下所问者行也。
现代文：魏无知说： 我推荐陈平时说的是他的才能，陛下现在所责问的是他的品行。
English: Wei Wuzhong said, "I recommended Chen to you for his talent, but what your majesty is questioning now is his character.

古文：今有尾生、孝己之行，而无益胜负之数，陛下何暇用之乎！
现代文：如今若有人虽具有尾生、孝已那样守信义、重孝顺的品行，却无对决定胜负命运有所补益的才能，陛下又哪会有什么闲心去使用他啊！
English: Nowadays, if there is someone who, although he has the character of loyalty, filial piety, and filial obedience, but does not have the talent to supplement the decision of victory or defeat, what would His Majesty have the idleness to use him!

古文：楚、汉相距，臣进奇谋之士，顾其计诚足以利国家不耳。盗嫂、受金，又何足疑乎！ 
现代文：现今楚汉抗衡，我荐举腹怀奇谋异计的人，只是考虑他的计策是否确实对国家有利，至于私通嫂子、收取贿赂，又有什么值得去怀疑的呢！ 
English: Nowadays, as opposed to Chu and Han, I recommend anyone who has the stomach for conjuring up strange schemes, just considering whether his strategy is indeed beneficial to the country. As for having an affair with his sister-in-law and taking bribes, what is there to doubt?

古文：汉王召让平曰： 先生事魏不中，事楚而去，今又从吾游，信者固多心乎！ 
现代文：汉王随即再召陈平来见，责问他说： 你事奉魏王意不相投，去事奉楚王而又离开，如今又来与我共事，守信义的人原本都是这样地三心二意吗？ 
English: The king of Han immediately summoned Chen Ping to see him again, and scolded him, saying, "You served the king of Wei, but your intentions did not match, you went to serve the king of Chu, but you left, and now you have come to work with me again. Are people who keep the faith always so half-hearted?

古文：平曰： 臣事魏王，魏王不能用臣说，故去；事项王，项王不能信人，其所任爱，非诸项，即妻之昆弟，虽有奇士不能用。
现代文：陈平说： 我事奉魏王，魏王不能采纳我的主张，所以我才离开他去为项羽服务。项羽不能信任使用人才，他所任用宠爱的人，不是项姓本家，就是他老婆的兄弟，即便是有奇谋的人他也不用。
English: Chen Ping said, "I served the Wei king. The Wei king could not accept my suggestion, so I left him to serve Xiang Yu. Xiang Yu could not be trusted to use talent. He appointed his favorite people, either Xiang's own family or his wife's brother. He did not even use people with strange plans.

古文：闻汉王能用人，故归大王。
现代文：我听说汉王能够用人，因此才来归附大王您。
English: I've heard that Han Wang can employ people, so I've come to report to you, the Great King.

古文：臣裸身来，不受金无以为资。
现代文：但我赤条条空手而来，不接受金钱就无法应付日常开销。
English: I come alone, I don't accept money, so there is no cost of doing business.

古文：诚臣计画有可采乎，愿大王用之；使无可用者，金具在，请封输官，得其骸骨。 
现代文：倘若我的计策确有值得采纳的地方，便望大王您采用它；假如毫无价值不堪使用，那么金钱还都在这里，请让我封存好送到官府中，并请求辞去官职。 
English: If, indeed, there is any merit in my scheme, may it please Your Majesty to adopt it; if it is worthless and useless, then the money is still here, let me seal it up and send it to the government, and ask for my resignation.

古文：汉王乃谢，厚赐，拜为护军中尉，尽护诸将。
现代文：汉王于是向陈平道歉，重重地赏赐他，授任他为护军中尉，监督全军所有的将领。
English: The Han king then apologized to Chen Ping and rewarded him generously, appointing him as a lieutenant of the escort to supervise all generals.

古文：诸将乃不敢复言。
现代文：众将领们便也不敢再说三道四的了。
English: The generals did not dare to say anything.

古文：魏王豹谒归视亲疾；至则绝河津，反为楚。
现代文：魏王魏豹拜谒汉王，请求返回魏地，探视双亲的病。他一到魏国就绝断黄河渡口，倒戈降楚。
English: The king of Wei, Wei panther, paid homage to the king of Han, and requested to return to Wei to visit his parents' illness. As soon as he arrived in Wei, he cut off the Yellow River ferry, defecting to Chu.

古文：六月，汉王还栎阳。
现代文：六月，汉王返回栎阳。
English: In June, Han Wang returned to Shenyang.

古文：壬午，立子盈为太子；赦罪人。
现代文：壬午，汉王立嫡长子刘盈为太子，大赦罪犯。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Han king made Liu Ying, his eldest son, the crown prince, and granted amnesty to criminals.

古文：汉兵引水灌废丘，废丘降，章邯自杀。
现代文：汉军引水灌淹废丘，废丘城守军投降，章邯自杀。
English: The Han army diverted water and flooded the waste hill, the defenders of the waste hill surrendered, and Zhang Ye committed suicide.

古文：尽定雍地，以为中地、北地、陇西郡。
现代文：汉军于是完全平定了雍地，设置了中地、北地、陇西等郡。
English: As a result, the Han army completely leveled the Yangtze River and set up the counties of Zhongdi, Beidi, and Shaanxi.

古文：关中大饥，米斛万钱，人相食。
现代文：关中发生大饥荒，一斛米卖到万钱，人们饿得自相残食。
English: At this time, Guanzhong was starving, glutinous rice was worth thousands of dollars, and people were eating each other.

古文：令民就食蜀、汉。
现代文：汉王便让关中的百姓到蜀、汉去谋生。
English: Arrangements were made for starving people to gather in the Shu and Han regions to cross the wasteland.

古文：初，秦之亡也，豪杰争取金玉，宣曲任氏独窖仓粟。
现代文：当初，秦朝灭亡的时候，豪强之士都争先恐后地夺取金玉等财宝，唯独宣曲任氏挖窖贮存粮食。
English: At first, when the Qin Dynasty fell, powerful people were scrambling to get hold of gold and other treasures, but only the Xuanqu Ren family dug a cellar to store grain.

古文：及楚、汉相距荥阳，民不得耕种，而豪杰金玉尽归任氏，任以此起，富者数世。
现代文：待到楚、汉在荥阳相持不下时，百姓无法耕种土地收获粮食，豪强们便把金玉全都给了任氏来交换粮食，任氏从此起家，数代富有。
English: When Chu and Han couldn't hold out in Fenyang, and the people couldn't farm the land to harvest grain, the heroes gave all the gold and jewels to Ren to exchange for grain. Ren became rich for several generations.

古文：秋，八月，汉王如荥阳，命萧何守关中，侍太子，为法令约束，立宗庙、社稷、宫室、县邑；事有不及奏决者，辄以便宜施行，上来，以闻。
现代文：秋季，八月，汉王前往荥阳，命萧何留守关中服侍太子。萧何着手制订法令规章，建立宗庙、社稷、宫室、县邑机构，遇事如来不及奏报汉王裁决，就酌情灵活处理，待汉王回来时再作汇报。
English: In the autumn, in August, Han Wang went to Fenyang, and Xiao He was left behind to serve the prince. Xiao He set about formulating laws and regulations, establishing ancestral temples, community centers, court chambers, and county-level institutions. In the event that it was too late to report Han Wang's ruling, he would deal with it flexibly as appropriate, and report back when Han Wang returned.

古文：计关中户口，转漕、调兵以给军，未尝乏绝。
现代文：他在关中还管理人口户籍，运输粮草，调拨士兵补给汉军兵员，从来没有缺乏、断绝过。
English: In Guanzhong, he also managed the household registration of the population, transported grain and grass, and dispatched soldiers to supply Chinese soldiers. He never lacked or cut off supplies.

古文：汉王使郦食其往说魏王豹，且召之。
现代文：汉王派郦食其去劝说魏王豹，并召他前来。
English: The Han king sent his eunuch to persuade the Wei king panther and called him to come.

古文：豹不听，曰： 汉王慢而侮人，骂詈诸侯、群臣如骂奴耳，吾不忍复见也。 
现代文：魏豹不听，说： 汉王为人傲慢无礼，好侮辱别人，责骂起诸侯、群臣来如同斥骂奴隶一般，我绝不愿意再去见他！ 
English: Wei Leopard did not listen and said, "The Han King is arrogant and impolite, he is good at insulting others, and scolding princes and ministers is like scolding slaves. I absolutely do not want to see him again!"

古文：于是汉王以韩信为左丞相，与灌婴、曹参俱击魏。
现代文：汉王于是就任命韩信为左丞相，与灌婴、曹参一起去攻打魏国。
English: The Han king then appointed Han Xin as the left minister of war, and he and Guan Yu and Cao San went to attack Wei.

古文：汉王问食其： 魏大将谁也？ 
现代文：汉王问郦食其道： 魏国的大将是谁呀？ 
English: The king of Han asked the eunuch: Who is the general of Wei?

古文：对曰： 柏直。 
现代文：郦食其回答说： 是柏直。 
English: His answer: "Bo Zhi."

古文：王曰： 是口尚乳臭，安能当韩信！
现代文：汉王道： 这是个乳臭未干的毛孩子，怎么能抵挡得了韩信！ 
English: Han Wang said: This is a wet-behind-the-ears child, how can you resist Han Xin!

古文：骑将谁也？ 
现代文：又问： 骑将是谁啊？ 
English: He also asked: Who will be the rider?

古文：曰： 冯敬。 
现代文：郦食其答： 是冯敬。 
English: He replied: It is Feng Jing.

古文：曰： 是秦将冯无择子也，虽贤，不能当灌婴。 
现代文：汉王说： 他是秦将冯无择的儿子，虽然贤能，却也无法抵抗灌婴。 
English: Han Wang said, "He is the son of Qin general Feng Wuzhuang. Although he is capable, he can't resist impregnating a child.

古文： 步卒将谁也？ 
现代文：接着再问道： 步兵的将领又是什么人呀？ 
English: Then he asked again: Who is the general of the infantry?

古文：曰： 项佗。 
现代文：郦食其说： 是项它。 
English: He said, "It's the item."

古文：曰： 不能当曹参。
现代文：汉王道： 这个人抵挡不了曹参。
English: Han Wang said, "He is no match for Cao San."

古文：吾无患矣！ 
现代文：如此我没有什么可担心的啦！ 
English: So I have nothing to worry about!

古文：韩信亦问郦生： 魏得无用周叔为大将乎？ 
现代文：韩信也问郦食其： 魏国不会用周叔作大将吗？ 
English: Han Xin also asked Zou Zhigu: Won't Wei use Uncle Zhou as a general?

古文：郦生曰： 柏直也。 
现代文：郦食其答道： 用的人确是柏直。 
English: The eavesdropper replied, "The person who used it is indeed Piao Zhi."

古文：信曰： 竖子耳。 
现代文：韩信于是说： 一个小子罢了！ 
English: Han Xin then said: It's just a kid!

古文：遂进兵。
现代文：随即进兵魏国。
English: As a result, Sima Qian led the army to Liaodong.

古文：魏王盛兵蒲坂以塞临晋。
现代文：魏王豹在蒲坂部署重兵以阻挡从临晋方面来的韩信军队。
English: Wei Wangbao deployed heavy troops in Pusan to block the Hanxin army coming from the direction of Linjin.

古文：信乃益为疑兵，陈船欲渡临晋，而伏兵从夏阳以木罂流军，袭安邑。
现代文：韩信便增设疑兵，排列出船只，好像要在临晋渡河发起进攻，而让埋伏的部队从夏阳乘坐大木瓮渡河，袭击安邑。
English: Han Xin then increased the number of suspected soldiers and lined up the ships, as if to launch an attack on the Linjin River, and let the ambushed troops cross the river from Xiayang on large rafts to attack Anyi.

古文：魏王豹惊，引兵迎信。
现代文：魏王豹大惊失色，连忙领兵迎战韩信。
English: Wei Wang Wei Leopard was greatly alarmed, and hurriedly led the troops to meet the whole value, and the whole value captured the Wei Leopard and leveled the dragonfly.

古文：九月，信击虏豹，传诣荥阳；悉定魏地，置河东、上党、太原郡。
现代文：九月，韩信进击俘获了魏豹，将他押解去荥阳，全部平定了魏地，设置了河东、上党、太原等郡。
English: In September, Han Xin invaded and captured Wei Leopard, and sent him to Fenyang. He completely pacified Wei, and set up counties such as Hedong, Shangdang, and Taiyuan.

古文：汉之败于彭城而西也，陈馀亦觉张耳不死，即背汉。
现代文：汉军在彭城兵败西撤时，陈馀也已察觉到张耳并没有死，便立即背叛了汉王。
English: When the Han army was defeated and retreating from Pengcheng, Chen Yu also noticed that Zhang Er was not dead, and immediately betrayed the Han king.

古文：韩信既定魏，使人请兵三万人，愿以北举燕、赵，东击齐，南绝楚粮道。
现代文：韩信已经平定了魏地，就派人向刘邦请求增兵三万人，愿用这些兵力北进去攻克燕、赵的领地，向东去攻打齐国，往南断绝楚军的粮道。
English: Han Xin had already pacified Wei, so he sent someone to Liu Bang to request an additional 30,000 soldiers. He was willing to use these troops to go north to conquer the territories of Yan and Zhao, to attack Qi in the east, and to cut off the food supply of the Chu army in the south.

古文：汉王许之，乃遣张耳与俱，引兵东，北击赵、代。
现代文：汉王准许了他的请求，并派张耳与他一起领兵东进，往北去攻打赵国和代国。
English: The king of Han granted his request and sent Zhang Er with him to lead the army eastward and attack Zhao and Degu to the north.

古文：后九月，信破代兵，禽夏说于阏与。
现代文：闰九月，崐韩信击垮代军，在阏与抓获了代国的相国夏说。
English: In September, Han Xin defeated the generals and captured the generals' brother, Guo Xia.

古文：信之下魏破代，汉辄使人收其精兵诣荥阳以距楚。
现代文：当韩信攻破魏、代两国后，汉王即派人调他的精锐部队去荥阳抵御楚军。
English: When Han Xin defeated Wei and Dai, the Han king sent his elite troops to Poyang to resist the Chu army.

