古文：鬬且廷见令尹子常，子常与之语，问蓄货聚马。
现代文：鬬且在朝廷见了令尹子常，子常和他谈话，询问怎样才能聚敛财宝和马匹。
English: He also met Ling Yin Zichang at the imperial court. Zichang talked with him and asked him how to collect treasure and horses.

古文：归以语其弟，曰： 楚其亡乎！
现代文：鬬且回家后告诉了他的弟弟，说： 楚国恐怕即将衰亡！
English: Then he went home and told his brother, saying, "I'm afraid the state of Chu is on the verge of collapse!

古文：不然，令尹其不免乎。
现代文：如果不这样，令尹恐怕不免于难。
English: If not, I'm afraid Ling Yin will be in trouble.

古文：吾见令尹，令尹问蓄聚积实，如饿豺狼焉，殆必亡者也。
现代文：我见到令尹，令尹询问怎样积聚财宝，像饥饿的豺狼一样，恐怕是一定要败亡的。
English: I saw Ling Yin, Ling Yin asked how to accumulate treasure, like a hungry jackal, I am afraid it is doomed to fail.

古文： 夫古者聚货不妨民衣食之利，聚马不害民之财用，国马足以行军，公马足以称赋，不是过也。
现代文： 古时候积聚财货不妨害百姓衣食的利益，聚敛马匹不损害百姓的财物，国家征收的马匹能满足行军所用，公卿的戎马能与兵赋的需要相称，不超过这个限度。
English: In ancient times, the accumulation of wealth and goods did not harm the interests of the people's clothing and food, the accumulation of horses did not harm the people's property, the horses collected by the state could meet the needs of the army, and the noblemen's war horses could be commensurate with the needs of the army, and did not exceed this limit.

古文：公货足以宾献，家货足以共用，不是过也。夫货、马邮则阙于民，民多阙则有离叛之心，将何以封矣。
现代文：公卿的财货足够馈赠贡献所用，大夫家的财货足够供给使用，不超过这个限度，财货与马匹过多百姓就会穷困，百姓穷困就会有背叛之心，又凭借什么来立国呢？
English: The wealth of the nobles is sufficient for gifts and contributions, and the wealth of the doctors is sufficient for supply and use. If this limit is not exceeded, the people will be impoverished if there are too many goods and horses, and the people will have a traitor's heart if they are impoverished. On what basis will the country be founded?

古文： 昔鬬子文三舍令尹，无一日之积，恤民之故也。
现代文： 以前鬬子文三次辞去令尹的职务，家里没有储存任何粮食，是因为体恤百姓。
English: Previously, Zang Ziwen resigned three times from the post of Ling Yin. The family did not store any grain because they felt sorry for the people.

古文：成王闻子文之朝不及夕也，于是乎每朝设脯一束、糗一筐，以羞子文。
现代文：楚成王听说子文吃了早饭就没有晚饭，因此每逢朝见时就准备一束肉干、一筐粮食，用来送给子文。
English: King Chu Cheng heard that if Zi Wen ate breakfast, there would be no dinner, so every morning he prepared a bunch of dried meat and a basket of grain to give to Zi Wen.

古文：至于今秩之。
现代文：直到现在已成为对待令尹的惯例。
English: Until now, it has become a common practice to treat Ling Yin.

古文：成王每出子文之禄，必逃，王止而后复。
现代文：成王每次颁下子文的俸禄，子文一定要逃避，等到成王不再这样做，他才回来任职。
English: Every time Cheng Wang awarded Ziwen's salary, Ziwen had to escape, and he would not return to his post until Cheng Wang stopped doing so.

古文：人谓子文曰： 人生求富，而子逃之，何也？ 
现代文：有人对子文说： 人活着都追求富贵，您却逃避它，是为什么呢？ 
English: Someone said to Ziwen: People pursue wealth all their lives, but you avoid it. Why is that?

古文：对曰： 夫从政者，以庇民也。
现代文：子文回答说： 从政的人，是保护人民的。
English: Zi Wen replied, "Those who are in politics are the protectors of the people.

古文：民多旷者，而我取富焉，是勤民以自封也，死无日矣。我逃死，非逃富也。 
现代文：民众贫困，而我富贵，这是劳苦了百姓而使自己富有，不知哪天就会遭遇祸患而死去。我是逃避死亡，不是逃避富贵。 
English: The people are poor, but I am rich. This is because I have made myself rich by working hard for the people. I do not know when I will encounter a disaster and die. I am escaping death, not escaping wealth.

古文：故庄王之世，灭若敖氏，唯子文之后在，至于今处郧，为楚良臣。
现代文：所以楚庄王在位的时候，灭掉了若敖氏家族，只有子文的后代还在，一直到现在还住在郧地，做楚国的良臣。
English: Therefore, when the king of Chu Zhuang was on the throne, he wiped out the Ruo family, and only the descendants of Ziwen are still alive, and they have been living in Shunde until now, as good ministers of the State of Chu.

古文：是不先恤民而后己之富乎？
现代文：这不是先体恤百姓然后自己才富有吗？
English: Isn't that being compassionate to the people first and then getting rich yourself?

古文： 今子常，先大夫之后也，而相楚君无令名于四方。
现代文： 现在子常，是先大夫的后代，辅佐楚国国君却在四方没有好名声。
English: Now, Tsuchitsune, a descendant of the former doctor, is an assistant to the king of Chu, but he does not have a good reputation in the four directions.

古文：民之羸馁，日已甚矣。
现代文：百姓忍饥挨饿，一天比一天严重。
English: The hunger of the people is getting worse day by day.

古文：四境盈垒，道殣相望，盗贼司目，民无所放。
现代文：四周边境布满了堡垒，路上饿死的人随处可见，盗贼张目窥伺，民众无所依靠。
English: The border is surrounded by fortresses, starving people can be seen everywhere on the road, thieves are watching, and the people have nothing to rely on.

古文：是之不恤，而蓄聚不厌，其速怨于民多矣。
现代文：他不去顾恤这些，反而聚敛不已，招致民众怨恨的太多了。
English: Instead of taking these things into consideration, he has rallied relentlessly, incurring too much resentment from the public.

古文：积货滋多，蓄怨滋厚，不亡何待。
现代文：积累的财货越多，蓄积的怨恨也就越深，不灭亡还等什么呢？
English: The more wealth and goods are accumulated, the deeper the accumulated resentment will be. What are we waiting for if we don't perish?

古文： 夫民心之愠也，若防大川焉，溃而所犯必大矣。
现代文： 对待百姓心中的愤怒，就像堤防大河一样，一旦崩溃了破坏一定很大。
English: Treat the anger in the hearts of the people like a river dike, once it collapses, the damage will be great.

古文：子常其能贤于成、灵乎？
现代文：子常的下场能比成王和灵王好吗？
English: Can Zizang's fate be compared to that of Chengwang and Lingwang?

古文：成不礼于穆，愿食熊蹯，不获而死。
现代文：成王对穆王无礼，临死时想吃熊掌，都没有得到就死了。
English: Cheng Wang was rude to Mu Wang. When he was about to die, he wanted to eat bear paws, but he didn't get them and died.

古文：灵不顾于民，一国弃之，如遗迹焉。
现代文：灵王不顾百姓死活，全国的人都抛弃了他，就像丢下脚印一样。
English: The spirit king did not care about the people's lives, and people all over the country abandoned him, just like leaving footprints.

古文：子常为政，而无礼不顾甚于成、灵，其独何力以待之！ 
现代文：子常执政，他对别人的无礼和不顾百姓死活，比成王、灵王还厉害，他独自一个人有什么力量来抵御呢？ 
English: The son is always in power. His rudeness to others and disregard for the people's lives and deaths are even more severe than those of the king and the king of spirits. What power does he alone have to resist?

古文：期年，乃有柏举之战，子常奔郑，昭王奔随。
现代文：一年以后，就发生了柏举之战，子常逃亡到了郑国，楚昭王逃到随国。
English: A year later, the Battle of Baijiu took place. Zichang fled to Zheng and Chu Zhao fled to Sui.

