古文：○硃宣弟瑾硃宣，宋州下邑人也。
现代文：朱宣是宋州下邑人。
English: Zhu Xuan is from Lower Songzhou.

古文：少从其父贩盐为盗，父抵法死，宣乃去事青州节度使王敬武为军校，敬武以隶其将曹全晟。
现代文：年轻时跟随他的父亲贩盐做盗贼，父亲犯法被处死，朱宣于是前往侍奉青州节度使王敬武任军校，王敬武让他隶属于他的将领曹全晟。
English: When he was young, he followed his father, a salt trader, to become a thief. His father was executed for breaking the law, so Zhu Xuan went to serve the Qingzhou Festival to make Wang Jingwu serve as a military school. Wang Jingwu made him subordinate to his general Cao Quanzhang.

古文：中和二年，敬武遣全晟入关与破黄巢。
现代文：中和二年，王敬武派曹全晟入关参与攻破黄巢。
English: In the second year of the Sino-Japanese War, Wang Jingwu sent Cao Quanzhang to participate in breaking through the Yellow Nest.

古文：还过郓州，郓州节度使薛崇卒，其将崔君预自称留后。
现代文：返回时经过郓州，郓州节度使薛崇死，他的将领崔君预自称留后。
English: When he returned, he passed through Zhangzhou. The Zhangzhou Festival caused the death of Xue Chong, and his general Cui Jun pretended to stay behind.

古文：全晟攻杀君预，遂据郓州。
现代文：曹全晟攻杀崔君预，于是占据郓州。
English: Cao Quanzhang attacked and killed Cui Junpu, and then occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：宣以战功，为郓州马步军都指挥使。
现代文：朱宣因战功。任郓州马步军都指挥使。
English: Zhu Xuan was awarded the title of Commander-in-Chief of the Bozhou Horse Cavalry.

古文：已而全晟死，军中推宣为留后，唐僖宗即拜宣天平军节度使。
现代文：不久曹全晟死，军中推举朱宣任留后，唐僖宗随即拜朱宣为天平军节度使。
English: Cao Quanzhang died soon after, and after Zhu Xuan was elected by the army to remain in office, Tang Xizong immediately asked Zhu Xuan to be the Tianping Army's festival envoy.

古文：梁太祖镇宣武，以兄事宣。
现代文：梁太祖镇守宣武，把朱宣当做哥哥对待。
English: Liang Taizu guarded Xuanzang and treated Zhu Xuan as his elder brother.

古文：太祖新就镇，兵力尚少，数为秦宗权所困，太祖乞兵于宣。
现代文：梁太祖刚到任时，兵力还少，多次被秦宗欐围困，梁太祖向朱宣求兵。
English: When Liang Taizu first came to office, the army was still small and was repeatedly besieged by Qin Zonglu. Liang Taizu appealed to Zhu Xuan for soldiers.

古文：宣与其弟瑾以兗、郓之兵救汴，大破蔡兵，走宗权。
现代文：朱宣和他的弟弟朱瑾率兖、鄣二州的军队救援汴州，大破蔡州军队，赶走秦宗权。
English: Zhu Xuan and his brother Zhu Xi led the two states' armies to rescue Zhangzhou, defeated Caizhou's army, and drove away Qin Zongquan.

古文：是时，太祖已袭取滑州，稍欲并吞诸镇，宣、瑾既还，乃驰檄兗、郓，言宣、瑾多诱宣武军卒亡以东，乃发兵收亡卒，因攻之，遂为敌国，苦战曹、濮间。
现代文：这时，梁太祖已经袭取滑州，逐渐打算吞并各镇，朱宣、朱瑾已经返回，就迅速传檄充、郸二州，称朱宣、朱瑾诱使很多宣武士兵向束逃亡，于是出兵收聚逃亡的士兵，趁机进攻他们，于是成为敌国，在曹、濮二州问苦战。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu had already attacked Leshou and gradually planned to annex all the towns. Zhu Xuan and Zhu Xi had already returned, so they quickly spread the rumor that Zhu Xuan and Zhu Xi had induced many soldiers of the Xuanwu army to flee to Shao. They then sent troops to gather the soldiers who had fled and took advantage of the opportunity to attack them. As a result, they became an enemy country and fought a hard battle in Cao and Shao.

古文：是时，梁又东攻徐州，西有蔡贼，北敌强晋，宣、瑾兄弟自相首尾，然卒为梁所灭。
现代文：适时，梁又向东面进攻徐州，西面有蔡州贼军，北面和强大的晋对峙，朱宣、朱瑾兄弟自己首尾相应，但最终被梁消灭了。
English: At the right time, Liang attacked Xuzhou to the east, the Caizhou thief army to the west, and the powerful Jin confronted to the north. Zhu Xuan and Zhu Xi brothers themselves responded accordingly, but were eventually eliminated by Liang.

古文：乾宁四年，宣败，走中都，为葛从周所执，斩于汴桥下。
现代文：干宁四年，朱宣被打败，逃跑到中都，被葛从周抓获，在汴桥下被斩杀。
English: After four years of hard work, Zhu Xuan was defeated, fled to Zhongdu, was captured by Ge from Zhou, and was beheaded under the bridge.

古文：瑾，宣从父弟也。
现代文：朱瑾是朱宣的叔伯弟弟。
English: Zhu Xi is Zhu Xuan's uncle and younger brother.

古文：从宣居郓州，补军校。
现代文：随朱宣住在郫州，补为军校。
English: With Zhu Xuan living in Ganzhou, it was supplemented as a military school.

古文：少倜傥，有大志，兗州节度使齐克让爱其为人，以女妻之。
现代文：年轻时风流倜傥，胸怀大志，充州节度使齐克让喜欢他的为人，把女儿嫁给他。
English: When he was young, he was a dashing young man with great ambitions. The Chengzhou Festival made Zeke like him and married his daughter to him.

古文：瑾行亲迎，乃选壮士为舆夫，伏兵器舆中。
现代文：朱瑾将要行亲迎之礼，于是挑选强壮的士兵扮做车夫，在车中藏匿兵器。
English: Zhu Xi is going to perform a welcome ceremony, so he chooses a strong soldier to act as a coachman and hide weapons in the car.

古文：夜至兗州，兵发，遂虏克让，自称留后。
现代文：晚上到达兖州，伏兵出击，俘虏齐克让，自称为留后。
English: Arrived at Zhangzhou in the evening, ambushed and taken prisoner by Zeke Zhang, who claimed to be his heir.

古文：僖宗即拜瑾泰宁军节度使。
现代文：唐僖宗就拜朱瑾为泰宁军节度使。
English: Tang Yanzong paid tribute to Zhu Xi as the chief envoy of the Taining Army.

古文：瑾与宣已破秦宗权于汴州，梁太祖责瑾诱宣武军卒以归，遣硃珍攻瑾，取曹州，又攻濮州，而太祖自攻郓。
现代文：朱瑾和朱宣在汴州攻破秦宗权后，梁太祖指责朱瑾诱使宣武士兵回去，派朱珍进攻朱瑾，攻取曹州，又进攻濮州，而梁太祖亲自进攻郫州。
English: After Zhu Xi and Zhu Xuan broke the Qin suzerainty in Zhangzhou, Liang Taizu accused Zhu Xi of enticing the soldiers of Xuanwu to go back and sent Zhu Zhen to attack Zhu Xi, capture Caozhou, and attack Zhangzhou, while Liang Taizu personally attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：瑾兄弟往来相救，凡十馀年，大小数十战，与太祖屡相胜败。
现代文：朱瑾兄弟互相往来救援，共十多年，大小几十次战斗，和梁太祖多次互有胜败。
English: Zhu Xi's brothers have been coming to each other's rescue for more than ten years. They have fought dozens of battles, and have won and lost against Liang Taizu many times.

古文：太祖得宣将贺瑰、何怀宝及瑾兄琼，乃将琼等至兗城下，告瑾曰： 汝兄败矣！
现代文：梁太祖抓获朱宣的将领贺瓖、何怀寅和朱瑾的哥哥朱琼，于是把朱琼等人带到兖州城下，告诉朱瑾说： 你的哥哥被打败了！
English: Liang Taizu captured Zhu Xuan's generals He Xuan, He Huaiyin, and Zhu Xun's brother Zhu Qiong. He then took Zhu Qiong and others to the outskirts of Zhangzhou City and told Zhu Qiong, "Your brother has been defeated!"

古文：今琼等已降，不如早自归。 
现代文：现在朱琼等人已经投降，不如尽早归附我们。 
English: Now that Zhu Qiong and others have surrendered, it is better to join us as soon as possible.

古文：瑾伪曰： 诺。 
现代文：朱瑾假装说： 好。 
English: Zhu Xi pretended to say: Good.

古文：乃遣牙将胡规持书币诣军门请降。
现代文：于是派牙将胡规拿着降书礼物到军门请求投降。
English: So he sent Hu Jian to the military gate with a surrender letter and a gift to request surrender.

古文：太祖大喜，至延寿门与瑾交语，瑾曰： 愿得琼送符印。 
现代文：梁太祖大喜，到延寿门和朱瑾交谈，朱瑾说： 希望能让朱琼送符书官印。 
English: Liang Taizu was overjoyed and went to talk to Zhu Xi at the Yeonsu Gate. Zhu Xi said, "I hope I can get Zhu Qiong to send me the official seal of the book."

古文：太祖信之，遣客将刘捍送琼往。
现代文：梁太祖相信了，派客将刘捍送朱琼前往。
English: Liang Taizu believed it and sent guests to escort Liu Han to Zhu Qiong.

古文：瑾伏壮士桥下，单骑迎琼，挥手语捍曰： 请琼独来！ 
现代文：朱瑾在桥下埋伏壮士，一人骑马迎接朱琼，挥手对刘捍说： 让朱琼独自来！ 
English: Zhu Xi ambushed Zhu Rong under the bridge, riding alone to meet Zhu Qiong, waving to Liu Han and saying: Let Zhu Qiong come alone!

古文：琼前，壮士擒之，遂闭门，责琼先降，斩之，掷其首城外。
现代文：朱琼前去，埋伏的壮士抓到他，于是关闭城门，指责朱琼首先投降，杀掉他，把他的头抛到城外。
English: Zhu Qiong went forward, the ambushed strongmen caught him, so they closed the gate, accused Zhu Qiong of surrendering first, killed him, and threw his head outside the city.

古文：太祖度不可下，乃留兵围之而去。
现代文：梁太祖估计不能玫下，于是留下军队包围他们而离去。
English: Liang Taizu estimated that he could not defeat them, so he left an army to surround them and left.

古文：瑾婴城自守，而与葛从周等战城下，瑾兵屡败，宣亦败于郓州，乃乞兵于晋，晋遣李承嗣、史俨等以骑兵五千救之。
现代文：朱瑾据城自守，而和葛从周等人在城下作战，朱瑾的军队多次被打败，朱宣也在郓州被打败，于是向晋求救兵，晋派李承嗣、史俨等人率领骑兵五千人救援他们。
English: Zhu Xi defended himself in the city, while Ge Cong Zhou and others fought under the city. Zhu Xi's army was defeated many times, and Zhu Xuan was also defeated in Zhangzhou, so he asked Jin for help. Jin sent Li Chengzhi, Shi Yan and others to lead five thousand cavalry to rescue them.

古文：太祖已破宣，乃急趋兗。
现代文：梁太祖攻破朱宣后，就紧急奔赴兖州。
English: After Liang Taizu defeated Zhu Xuan, he rushed to Ganzhou.

古文：瑾城中食尽，与承嗣等掠食丰、沛间，梁兵奄至，瑾将康怀英等以城降梁。
现代文：朱瑾城中粮食耗尽，和李承嗣等人在丰、沛一带掠夺粮食，梁军忽然到来，朱瑾的将领康怀英等人以城向梁投降。
English: The grain in Zhu Xi's city was exhausted, and Li Chengzhi and others looted grain in the Feng and Pei areas. Liang's army suddenly arrived, and Zhu Xi's general Kang Huaiying and others surrendered to Liang in the city.

古文：瑾等将麾下兵走沂州，沂州刺史尹处宾不纳。
现代文：朱瑾等人率领手下的士兵急奔沂州，沂州刺史尹处宾不接纳他们。
English: Zhu Xi and others led their soldiers to rush to Bozhou, but they were turned away by the Bozhou magistrate Yin Zhanbin.

古文：又走海州，梁兵急追之，乃奔于淮南。
现代文：又奔逃海州，梁军紧迫他们，于是逃奔到淮南。
English: They also ran away from Haizhou. Liang's army pressed them, so they fled to Huainan.

古文：杨行密闻瑾来，大喜，解其玉带赠之，表瑾领武宁军节度使，以为行军副使。
现代文：杨行密听说朱瑾前来，十分高兴，解下他的玉带送给朱瑾，表奏朱瑾领武宁军节度使，任命为行军副使。
English: When Yang Xingmi heard that Zhu Xi had come, he was very happy. He untied his jade belt and gave it to Zhu Xi, representing Zhu Xi as the commander of the Wu Ning Army and appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：其后，梁遣庞师古、葛从周等攻淮南，行密用瑾，大破梁兵于清口，斩师古。
现代文：后来，梁派庞师古、葛从周等人进攻淮南，杨行密任用朱瑾，在清口大败梁军，斩杀庞师古。
English: Later, Liang sent Pang Shigu, Ge Zhou and others to attack Huainan, Yang Xingmi appointed Zhu Xi, defeated Liang's army in Qingkou, and killed Pang Shigu.

古文：行密累表瑾东南诸道行营副都统、领平卢军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：杨行密多次上表奏朱瑾为东南诸道行营副都统、领平卢军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Yang Xingmi repeatedly presented Zhu Xi as the vice-governor of the Southeastern Provinces, the commander of the Pinglu Army and the commander of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：行密死，渥及隆演相继立，皆年少，徐温与其子知训专政，畏瑾，欲除之，瑾乃谋杀知训。
现代文：裼行密死后，杨渥和杨隆演相继登位，都年龄小，徐温和他的儿子徐知训专权，惧怕朱瑾，想要除掉他，朱瑾于是策划杀徐知训。
English: After the death of Min Xingmi, Yang Wou and Yang Longyan ascended to the throne one after another, both of whom were young. Xu Wen and his son Xu Zhixun monopolized power, feared Zhu Xi, and wanted to get rid of him. Zhu Xi then plotted to kill Xu Zhixun.

古文：尝以月旦遣爱妾候知训家，知训强通之，妾归自诉，瑾益不平。屡劝隆演诛徐氏，以去国患，隆演不能为。
现代文：曾在每月初一派爱妾到徐知训家问候，徐知训强迫和她私通，他的爱妾回来诉苦，朱瑾更加愤愤不平多次劝说杨隆演杀掉徐氏，以消除国家的祸患，杨隆演未能办到。
English: On the first day of every month, he sent his beloved concubine to greet Xu Zhitong's family. Xu Zhitong forced her to have sexual intercourse with him. His beloved concubine came back to complain. Zhu Xi was even more indignant and repeatedly persuaded Yang Longyan to kill Xu to eliminate the country's scourge. Yang Longyan could not do it.

古文：既而知训以泗州建静淮军，出瑾为节度使。
现代文：不久徐知训以泗州建立静淮军，任命朱瑾为节度使。
English: Soon after, Xu Zhixun established the Jinghuai Army in Bozhou and appointed Zhu Xi as the military governor.

古文：将行，召之夜饮。
现代文：快要出行时，召他晚上饮酒。
English: When you are about to travel, invite him to drink alcohol in the evening.

古文：明日，知训过瑾谢，延之升堂，出其妻陶氏，知训方拜，瑾以笏击踣之，伏兵自户突出，杀之。
现代文：第二天，徐知训到朱瑾家辞谢，朱瑾把他请进堂中，让妻子陶氏出来迎候，徐知训正下拜，朱瑾用笏板打倒他，伏兵从门内冲出，杀掉徐知训。
English: The next day, Xu Zhixun went to Zhu Xi's house to thank him for his resignation. Zhu Xi invited him into the hall and asked his wife Tao to come out to greet him. Xu Zhixun was bowing down, Zhu Xi knocked him down with a seesaw, and the ambush rushed out of the door to kill Xu Zhixun.

古文：初，瑾以二恶马击庭中，知训入而释马，使相踶呜，故外人莫闻其变。
现代文：开始，朱瑾把两匹烈马拴在庭中，徐知训进来后就放掉马，让它们相互踢咬嘶叫，因此外面没有人听到发生的事变。
English: At the beginning, Zhu Xi tethered two horses in the courtyard. After Xu Zhixun came in, he let go of the horses and let them kick and bite each other, so no one outside could hear what happened.

古文：瑾携其首驰示隆演曰： 今日为吴除患矣！ 
现代文：朱瑾提着徐知训的头飞奔到杨隆演处，给他看，说： 今天为昊除掉祸患了！ 
English: Zhu Rong, holding the head of Xu Zhixun, ran to Yang Long's performance place, showed it to him, and said: Today, we have eliminated the scourge for Hao!

古文：隆演曰： 此事非吾敢知！ 
现代文：杨隆演说： 这事不是我敢知道的！ 
English: Yang Long said in his speech: I don't dare to know about this!

古文：遽起入内。瑾忿然以首击柱，提剑而出，府门已阖，因逾垣，折其足。瑾顾路穷，大呼曰： 吾为万人去害，而以一身死之！ 
现代文：匆忙起身入内，朱瑾气愤地用徐知训的头撞击柱子，提着剑出去，府门已经关闭，于是越墙而出，折断了足朱瑾眼见无路可去，大声呼喊说： 我替众人除去祸害，而我自己一人为此而死！ 
English: Getting up in a hurry to go inside, Zhu Xi angrily hit the pillar with the head of Xu Zhixun, and went out with a sword. The gate was closed, so he went over the wall and broke his foot. Zhu Xi saw no way to go, and shouted loudly: I remove the scourge for everyone, and I am the only one to die for it!

古文：遂自刎。
现代文：于是自杀。
English: After saying this, he committed suicide.

古文：润州徐知诰闻乱，以兵趋广陵，族瑾家。
现代文：润州徐知诰听说变乱，率兵奔赴广陵，把朱瑾家灭族。
English: When Renzhou Xu Zhisheng heard of the rebellion, he rushed to Guangling with his soldiers to exterminate Zhu Xi's family.

古文：瑾妻陶氏临刑而泣，其妾曰： 何为泣乎？
现代文：朱瑾的妻子陶氏临刑时哭泣，他的妾说： 为什么哭呢？
English: Zhu Xi's wife, Ms. Dao, cried when she was about to be executed. His concubine said, "Why are you crying?

古文：今行见公矣！ 
现代文：今天将要见到丈夫了！ 
English: I'm going to meet my husband today!

古文：陶氏收泪，欣然就戮，闻者哀之。
现代文：陶氏收住眼泪，高兴地就刑，听谎此事的人都为她悲哀。
English: Ms. Dao held back her tears and went to her death with joy. Everyone who heard about the lie felt sad for her.

古文：瑾名重江淮，人畏之。
现代文：朱瑾名震长江、淮河一带，人们敬服他。
English: Zhu Xi is famous in the Yangtze River and Huaihe River areas, and people respect him.

古文：其死也，尸之广陵北门，路人私共瘗之。
现代文：他死之后，暴尸在广陵北门，过路的人私下共同掩埋了他。
English: After his death, his corpse was found in the north gate of Guangling, and passers-by secretly buried him together.

古文：是时，民多病疟，皆取其墓上土，以水服之，云病辄愈，更益新土，渐成高坟。
现代文：这时，老百姓多害疟疾，都取他坟墓上的土，用水服下，说病就好了，再加上新土，逐渐形成一个高坟。
English: At this time, the common people, who are more susceptible to malaria, all took the soil from his grave, soaked it with water, and said that the disease would be cured. Together with the new soil, they gradually formed a high grave.

古文：徐温等恶之，发其尸，投于雷公塘。
现代文：徐温等人十分憎恶，挖出他的尸体，投到雷公塘中。
English: Xu Wen and others were so disgusted that they dug up his body and threw it into Lei Gongtang.

古文：后温病，梦瑾挽弓射之。
现代文：后来徐温患病，梦见朱瑾拉弓射他。
English: Later, when Xu Wen fell ill, he dreamed that Zhu Xi pulled a bow and shot him.

古文：温惧，网其骨，葬塘侧，立祠其上。
现代文：徐温害怕，用网打捞朱瑾的尸骨，埋在塘侧，在上面修建祠堂。
English: Xu Wen was afraid, so he used a net to salvage Zhu Yao's bones, buried them on the side of the pond, and built an ancestral hall on top.

古文：初，瑾尝病疽，医者视之，色惧，瑾曰： 但理之，吾非以病死者。 
现代文：当初，朱瑾曾患瘴疽，医病的人看了，露出害怕的神色，朱瑾说： 只管治疗，我不是因病而死的人。 
English: At first, Zhu Xi had suffered from gangrene. The doctor looked at him with fear. Zhu Xi said, "Just treat me, I'm not the one who will die from the disease."

古文：于是果然。
现代文：到这时果然应验。
English: At this time, it was fulfilled.

古文：卒年五十二。
现代文：死时五十二岁。
English: He was fifty-two when he died.

古文：○王师范
现代文：王师范是青州人。
English: Wang Shifan is from Qingzhou.

古文：王师范，青州人也。其父敬武，为平卢军牙将。
现代文：父亲王敬武，任平卢军牙将。
English: His father, Wang Jingwu, was a general in the Pinglu Army.

古文：唐广明元年，无棣人洪霸郎为盗齐、棣间，平卢节度使安师儒遣敬武率兵击破之。
现代文：唐广明元年，无棣人洪霸郎在齐、棣二州间做盗贼，平卢节度使安师儒派王敬武率兵击破他。
English: In the first year of the Tang Guangming Dynasty, Hongbalang, a ruthless man, became a thief between the two states of Qi and Qi. Pinglu Jiedu ordered the Confucian Wang Jingwu to defeat him.

古文：敬武反，兵逐师儒，自称留后，都统王鐸承制拜敬武节度使。
现代文：王敬武回师驱逐安师儒，自称为留后，都统王铎承受制命拜王敬武焉节度使。
English: Wang Jingwu returned to his division to expel An Shiru, and declared himself to be staying behind. Du Tong Wang Yao received the order to bow to Wang Jingwu, and became the festival envoy.

古文：敬武卒，师范尚幼，其棣州刺史张蟾叛。
现代文：王敬武死，王师范年龄还小，他的棣州刺史张蟾反叛。
English: Wang Jingwu died, Wang Shifan was still young, and his son Zhang Ye rebelled.

古文：昭宗以为师范年少，其下不服从，乃拜太子少师崔安潜为平卢节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗认为王师范年轻，下面不服从，于是拜太子少师崔安潜任平卢节度使。
English: Tang Zhaozong thought that Wang Shifan was young and disobedient, so he asked the prince's apprentice, Cui An, to serve as an undercover envoy to the Pinglu Festival.

古文：师范不受代，蟾迎安潜入棣州。
现代文：工师范不接受替代，张蟾迎接崔安潜进入棣州。
English: The engineer did not accept the substitution, and Zhang Ye welcomed Cui Anxiong to enter Zhangzhou.

古文：师范遣其将卢洪攻蟾，洪以兵返袭青州，师范阳为好辞，遣人迎语洪曰： 吾幼未能任事，赖诸将共持之尔。
现代文：王师范派他的将领卢洪进攻张蟾，卢洪率兵回师袭击青州，王师范假装说好话，派人迎接，告诉卢洪说： 我年轻不能承担政事，依赖将领们共同扶持我罢了。
English: Wang Shifan sent his general Lu Hong to attack Zhangye, and Lu Hong led the troops back to attack Qingzhou. Wang Shifan pretended to say good words and sent someone to meet Lu Hong, telling him: "I am too young to undertake political affairs, I can only rely on the generals to jointly support me."

古文：不然，听公所为也。 
现代文：要不是这样，就随便你做什么了。 
English: If not, you can do whatever you want.

古文：洪以师范无能为，遽还，不为备。
现代文：卢洪认为王师范不能有什么作为，迅速返回，没有防备。
English: Lu Hong thought that Wang Shifan could not do anything, so he quickly returned, unprepared.

古文：师范伏兵于道，语其仆刘鄩曰： 洪来，为我斩之！
现代文：王师范在路上埋伏军队，告诉他的仆从剀郭说： 卢洪来时，替我杀掉他！
English: Wang Shifan ambushed the army on the road and told his servant Zeng Guo: "When Lu Hong comes, kill him for me!

古文：用尔为牙将。 
现代文：任用你做牙将。 
English: I'm appointing you as my dentist.

古文：明日，洪来，师范出迎，鄩于坐上斩之，伏兵发，尽杀其馀兵，乃急攻棣州，破张蟾，安潜奔归于京师。
现代文：第二天，卢洪前来，王师范出来迎接，刘郭在座上杀掉卢洪，伏兵出动，全部杀掉其余的士兵，于是急攻棣州，攻破张蟾，崔安潜逃奔回京师。
English: The next day, Lu Hong came, Wang Shifan came out to meet him, Liu Guo killed Lu Hong on the throne, sent out ambush soldiers, and killed all the remaining soldiers, so he suddenly attacked Zhangzhou, defeated Zhang Ye, and Cui An fled back to the Beijing Division.

古文：昭宗乃拜师范节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗于是拜王师范为节度使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty then made Wang Shifan the festival envoy.

古文：师范颇好儒学，聚书至万卷，为政有威爱。
现代文：玉盐范颇为喜好儒学，藏书达万卷。为政威严惠爱并重。
English: Yu Yan Fan is quite fond of Confucianism, with a collection of books amounting to ten thousand volumes. He places equal importance on political authority.

古文：梁太祖围昭宗于凤翔，宦官韩全诲等矫诏召诸镇兵以击梁。
现代文：梁太祖在凤翔包围唐昭宗，宦官韩全诲等人伪造皇帝的诏书召各镇军队攻打梁。
English: Liang Taizu besieged Tang Zhaozong in Fengxiang, and eunuch Han Zhengyi and others forged the emperor's edict to call on the town's army to attack Liang.

古文：诏至青州，师范泣曰： 诸镇有兵，所以籓捍天子，今天子危辱，而诸镇反以兵自卫；吾虽力不足，当成败以之。 
现代文：诏书到达青州，王师范哭泣着说： 各镇有军队，是用来捍卫天子的，如今天子危急受辱，而各镇反而用军队自卫；我即使力量不够，却应当以此决定成败。 
English: When the imperial edict arrived in Qingzhou, Wang Shifan wept and said: Every town has an army, which is used to defend the emperor. If the emperor is in danger and humiliated, every town will use the army to defend itself. Even if I don't have enough strength, I should use this to determine success or failure.

古文：乃遣使乞兵于杨行密。
现代文：于是派使臣向杨行密求兵。
English: Therefore, he sent envoys to Yang Xing to secretly solicit soldiers.

古文：是时，梁已东下兗、郓，师范乃遣刘鄩与其弟师鲁分攻兗、密诸州。
现代文：这时，梁已在东面攻克兖、郓二州，王师范于是派刘郡和他的弟弟王师鲁分别进攻兖、密各州。
English: At this time, Liang had already conquered the two states of Yunnan and Fujian in the east, so Wang Shifan sent Liu County and his brother Wang Shilu to attack the states of Fujian and Michigan respectively.

古文：遣张居厚以壮士二百为舆夫，伏兵舆中，西驰梁军，称师范使者聘梁，因欲劫杀太祖。
现代文：派张居厚率壮士二百人扮做车夫，在车中藏下武器，向西奔赴梁军，自称王师范的使臣出使梁，打算趁机劫持杀掉梁太祖。
English: Zhang Ju Hou sent 200 strong men to disguise themselves as coachmen, hid weapons in the car, and rushed west to Liang's army. The self-proclaimed envoy of Wang Shifan sent Liang, intending to take advantage of the opportunity to kidnap and kill Liang Taizu.

古文：居厚至华州东城，华州将娄敬思疑其有异，剖舆视之，见其兵。
现代文：张居厚到达华州束城，华州将领娄敬思怀疑他们有诈，剖开车子观看，看见武器。
English: Zhang Ju Hou arrived in Shu Cheng, Huazhou. The general of Huazhou, Zou Jing Si, suspected that they were cheating. He dissected the car and saw the weapons.

古文：居厚遂击杀敬思，以兵攻西城，不克而反。
现代文：张居厚于是杀掉娄敬思，率兵攻打西城，未能攻克而返回。
English: Zhang Ju Hou then killed Gong Jing Si and led his troops to attack the West City, but failed to conquer it and returned.

古文：刘鄩逐葛从周取兗州，而平卢诸州皆起兵攻梁。
现代文：刘郡驱逐葛从周攻取充州，而平卢各州都起兵进攻梁。
English: Liu County drove Ge from Zhou to capture Chengzhou, while all the states of Pinglu raised troops to attack Liang.

古文：其后，梁太祖自凤翔东还，遣硃友宁攻师范，友宁战死。
现代文：后来，梁太祖从凤翔回师向东，派朱友宁攻打王师范，朱友宁阵亡。
English: Later, Liang Taizu sent Zhu Youning from Fengxiang back to the east to attack Wang Shifan. Zhu Youning was killed in the battle.

古文：复遣杨师厚攻之，屯于临朐。
现代文：又派杨师厚攻打，屯驻在临朐。
English: He also sent Yang Shihou to attack and stationed in Linyi.

古文：师范以兵迫之，师厚阳为怯不敢出，间遣人阳言曰： 梁兵少，方乞兵于凤翔，今粮且绝，当还军。 
现代文：王师范率兵逼近他们，杨师厚假装胆怯不敢出战，秘密派人假称说： 梁军少，正向凤翔求兵，如今粮食快要吃完了，肯定要回师。 
English: Wang Shifan and his soldiers approached them, and Yang Shihou pretended to be afraid to go to war and secretly sent someone to say: Liang's army is small, he is asking Feng Xiang for soldiers, now the grain is almost finished, he must definitely return to the division.

古文：师范以为然，乃遣师鲁悉兵攻之，师厚拒而不战。
现代文：王师范信以为真，于是派王师鲁率领全部军队进攻，杨师厚拒守而不迎战。
English: Wang Shifanxin thought it was true, so he sent Wang Shilu to lead the entire army to attack, and Yang Shihou refused to defend and did not fight.

古文：师鲁兵却，师厚追击至圣王山，师鲁大败，遂傅其城，而梁别将刘重霸下其棣州，师范乃请降，太祖许之。
现代文：王师鲁退兵，杨师厚追击到圣王山，王师鲁大败，于是迫近城下，而梁别将刘重霸攻下棣州，王师范于是请求投降，梁太祖同意了。
English: Wang Shilu retreated, Yang Shihou pursued to the Sacred King Mountain, Wang Shilu was defeated, so he approached the city, and Liang Bei captured Liu Chongba in Zhangzhou. Wang Shifan then requested to surrender, and Liang Taizu agreed.

古文：师范素服乘驴诣太祖请罪，太祖待以客礼。
现代文：王师范穿着素色衣服骑着驴子到梁太祖那里请罪，梁太祖用客礼接待他。
English: Wang Shifan, wearing plain clothes and riding a donkey, went to appeal to Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu received him with courtesy.

古文：久之，表师范河阳节度使。
现代文：过了很久，表奏王师范为河阳节度使。
English: After a long time, Wang Shifan was appointed as the festival's envoy to Heyang.

古文：太祖即位，召为右金吾卫上将军，居于洛阳。
现代文：梁太祖登位，召为右金吾卫上将军，住在洛阳。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne and was called to be the Right King of Wei, living in Luoyang.

古文：太祖心欲诛之，未有以发。
现代文：梁太祖心里想杀掉他，没有机会动手。
English: Liang Taizu wanted to kill him in his heart, but he didn't have a chance.

古文：太祖诸子已封王，宴于宫中，友宁妻泣谓太祖曰： 陛下化家为国，诸子人人皆得封，而妾夫独以战死，奈何仇人犹在朝廷！ 
现代文：梁太祖的各个儿子都已封为王，在宫中设宴，朱友宁的妻子哭泣着对梁太祖说： 陛下把家变成国，儿子们个个都得以封王，而我的丈夫独自战死，怎么仇人还在朝廷中呢！ 
English: All of Liang Taizu's sons had been crowned as kings, and a banquet was held in the palace. Zhu Youning's wife, weeping, said to Liang Taizu, "Your Majesty has turned our family into a nation, and all of our sons have been crowned kings, but my husband died fighting alone. How is it that the enemy is still in the court?"

古文：太祖奋然戟手曰： 吾亦几忘此贼！ 
现代文：梁太祖猛然用食指中指指点着说： 我也几乎忘了这个贼人。 
English: Liang Taizu suddenly pointed with his index finger and middle finger and said: I almost forgot about this thief.

古文：乃遣人就洛阳族灭之。
现代文：于是派人到洛阳把王师范灭族。
English: So they sent someone to Luoyang to exterminate Wang Shifan.

古文：使者至，先掘坑于外，乃入告之。
现代文：使臣到达，先在外面挖坑，纔进去告诉王师范。
English: When the envoys arrived, they first dug a pit outside and went in to tell Wang Shifan.

古文：师范设席为具，与诸宗族饮酒，谓使者曰： 死，人之所不免，况有罪乎？
现代文：王师范摆设酒席，和宗族的人饮酒，对使臣说： 死是人人都不能避免的，何况有罪的人呢？
English: Wang Shifan set up a banquet and drank with his relatives. He said to the envoys: "Death is inevitable for everyone, let alone the guilty.

古文：然惧少长失序，下愧于先人。 
现代文：但害怕畏幼失去秩序，在地下愧对先人。 
English: But they are afraid of losing order, and they are ashamed of their ancestors.

古文：酒半，令少长以次起，就戮于坑所，闻者皆哀怜之。
现代文：饮酒过半，命令依照长幼的次序起身，在坑旁就刑，听说此事的人都哀怜他们。
English: After they had drunk more than half of the wine, they were ordered to get up in the order of the oldest to the youngest, and they were sentenced to death next to the pit. Everyone who heard about this felt sorry for them.

古文：同光三年，赠师范太尉。○李罕之
现代文：同光三年，赠王师范为太尉李罕之是陈州项城人。
English: In the same year, Wang Shifan was awarded the title of Lieutenant Li Han, a native of Chenzhou Xiangcheng.

古文：李罕之，陈州项城人也。
现代文：为人骁悍勇猛，气力胜过几个人。
English: He is strong and brave, and his strength is greater than that of a few men.

古文：为人骁勇，力兼数人。少学，读书不成，去为僧，以其无赖，所往皆不容。
现代文：年轻时求学，读书不成，去做和尚，因他强横无礼，所到的地方都不收他。
English: When he was young, he wanted to go to school, but he couldn't finish his studies. He wanted to become a monk, but because he was arrogant and rude, he was rejected everywhere he went.

古文：乃乞食酸枣市中，市中人皆不与，罕之掷器于地，裂其衣，又去为盗。
现代文：于是在酸枣街上讨饭，街上的人都不给他，李罕之把讨饭的器具扔在地上，撕裂衣服，又去做盗贼。
English: So he begged for food on Jujube Street, but the people on the street wouldn't give it to him. Li Hanzhi threw the begging utensil on the ground, tore his clothes, and became a thief.

古文：是时，黄巢起曹、濮，乃往依之。
现代文：这时，黄巢在曹、濮二州起事，李罕之于是去依附他。
English: At this time, Huang Chao rose up against Cao and Yan in the two states, and Li Han Zhi went to join him.

古文：巢北渡江，罕之与其麾下走淮南，自归于高骈，骈表光州刺史。
现代文：黄巢北渡长江，李罕之和他的部下逃跑到淮南，自愿归附高骈，高骈表奏他为光州刺史。
English: Huang Chao crossed the Yangtze River to the north, Li Han Zhi and his subordinates fled to Huainan, and voluntarily attached themselves to Gao Gan, who played the role of Gwangju's history.

古文：岁馀，秦宗权急攻光州，罕之不能守，还走项城，收其馀众，依诸葛爽于河阳，爽以罕之为怀州刺史。
现代文：一年多后，秦宗权猛攻光州，李罕之不能守，逃回项城，收拾他的残余人马，在河阳依附诸葛爽，诸葛爽任李罕之为怀州刺史。
English: More than a year later, Qin Zongquan stormed Gwangju, Li Hanru could not defend it, fled back to Xiangcheng, collected his remaining men and horses, and attached Zhuge Shuang in Heyang. Zhuge Shuang served as Li Hanru's scourge in Waizhou.

古文：巢已败走，爽降唐，僖宗拜爽东南面招讨使，以攻宗权，爽表罕之副使，以兵屯宋州，又表河南尹、东都留守。
现代文：黄巢败逃后，诸葛爽向唐投降，唐僖宗拜诸葛爽为东南面招讨使，让他攻打秦宗权，诸葛爽表奏李罕之为副使，率兵屯驻宋州，又表奏焉河南尹、柬都留守。
English: After Huang Chao was defeated and fled, Zhuge Shuang surrendered to the Tang Dynasty. Tang Xizong asked Zhuge Shuang to recruit envoys for the southeastern front and let him attack Qin Zongquan. Zhuge Shuang appointed Li Han as deputy envoy and stationed his troops in Songzhou. Zhuge Shuang also sent envoys to Henan Yin and Cambodia.

古文：秦宗权遣孙儒攻河南，罕之兵少，西走渑池，儒烧宫阙，剽掠而去。
现代文：秦宗权派孙儒进攻河南，李罕之兵少，向西逃到渑池，孙儒烧毁官殿，掳掠后离去。
English: Qin Zongquan sent Sun Ru to attack Henan. Li Han's army was small and fled westward to Dianchi. Sun Ru burned down the official palace, plundered it and then left.

古文：罕之壁渑池。
现代文：李罕之在渑池驻守。
English: Li Hanzhi was stationed in Zouchi.

古文：岁馀，诸葛爽死，其将刘经立爽子仲方。
现代文：一年多后，诸葛爽死，他的将领刘经拥立诸葛爽的儿子诸葛仲方。
English: More than a year later, Zhuge Shuang died, and his general Liu Jing supported Zhuge Shuang's son Zhuge Zhongfang.

古文：仲方年少，事皆任经，经虑罕之凶勇难制，以兵攻之，罕之返击走经。
现代文：诸葛仲方年龄小，事情都托付给刘经，刘经忧虑李罕之凶猛武勇难以控制，率兵攻打他，李罕之反击打跑刘经。
English: Zhuge Zhongfang was young, and everything was entrusted to Liu Jing. Liu Jing was worried that Li Han's ferocity and bravery were difficult to control. He led his troops to attack him, and Li Han's counterattack hit and ran Liu Jing.

古文：罕之追至巩县，陈舟于汜水，将渡河，经遣张言拒之河上，言反背经，与罕之合攻河阳，为经所败，退保怀州。
现代文：李罕之追到巩县，在汜水摆开战船，将要渡过黄河，刘经派张言在黄河拒守，张言反而背叛刘经，和李罕之合攻河阳，被刘经打败，退保怀州。
English: Li Hanzhi chased him to Gongxian County, launched a warship in Surabaya, and was about to cross the Yellow River. Liu Jing sent Zhangyan to refuse to defend the Yellow River, but Zhangyan betrayed Liu Jing. He and Li Hanzhi jointly attacked Heyang. Liu Jing defeated Zhangyan and withdrew to Huaizhou.

古文：已而孙儒陷河阳，仲方奔于梁。
现代文：不久孙儒攻陷河阳，诸葛仲方逃奔到梁。
English: Soon after, Sun Ru invaded and occupied Kheyang, while Zhuge Zhongfang fled to Liang.

古文：梁兵击走儒，罕之袭取河阳，言取河南，皆附于梁。
现代文：梁兵打跑孙儒，李罕之袭击攻取河阳，张言攻取河南，都归附梁。
English: Liang's soldiers fought and routed Sun Ru, Li Han's attacked and conquered Heyang, and Zhang Yan's conquered Henan, all of which belonged to Liang.

古文：罕之与言皆爽叛将，事已成，乃相与交臂为盟，誓同休戚不相忘。
现代文：李罕之和张言都是背叛诸葛爽的将领，事情已成，就相互拱手结盟，发誓休戚与共永不相忘。
English: Li Han Zhi and Zhang Yan were both generals who had betrayed Zhuge Shuang. Once the deed was done, they made an alliance with each other and swore to never forget each other.

古文：罕之御众无法，性苛暴，颇失士心。
现代文：李罕之驾御众人没有法度，性情苛刻暴躁，很不得人心。
English: Li Han's rule over the people was lawless, harsh and hot-tempered, and very unpopular.

古文：而言善治军旅，教民播殖，务为积聚。
现代文：而张言善于整治军队，教导百姓种植，尽力积聚财富。
English: Zhang Yan, on the other hand, was good at reorganizing the army, teaching the people to plant, and trying his best to accumulate wealth.

古文：罕之用兵，言尝供给其乏。
现代文：李罕之用兵打仗，张言曾补充他物资的不足。
English: Li Han used soldiers to fight the war, Zhang Yan used to supplement his lack of materials.

古文：罕之求取无已，言颇苦之，不能输，罕之召言军吏笞责之，言益不平。
现代文：李罕之求取没有限度，张言颇为苦恼，不能输送，李罕之召张言军中官吏鞭打责求，张言更加忿忿不平。
English: There is no limit to Li Han's request, Zhang Yan is quite distressed and cannot be transported, Li Han's call to Zhang Yan's military officials to whip and reprimand, Zhang Yan is even more angry.

古文：罕之悉兵攻晋、绛，言夜袭河阳，罕之奔晋。
现代文：李罕之率领全部军队攻打晋、绛二州，张言趁夜晚袭击河阳，李罕之逃奔到晋。
English: Li Hanzhi led the entire army to attack Jin and Shandong two states, Zhang Yan took advantage of the night to attack Kheyang, Li Hanzhi fled to Jin.

古文：晋表罕之泽州刺史，使李存孝以兵三万助罕之攻言。
现代文：晋表奏李罕之为泽州刺史，派李存孝率三万士兵协助李罕乏进攻张言。
English: Jin sent Li Cunxiao with 30,000 soldiers to help Li Hanbei attack Zhangyan.

古文：言求救于梁。
现代文：张言向梁求救。
English: Zhang Yan asked Liang for help.

古文：罕之败于沇河，乃归太原，李克用延之帐中。
现代文：李罕之在洗河被打败，于是回到太原，李克用把他请到营帐中。
English: Li Hanzhi was defeated at the Wash River, so he returned to Taiyuan. Li Ke used to invite him to the camp.

古文：罕之留其子颀事晋，乃之泽州，日以兵钞怀、孟间，啖人为食。
现代文：李罕之留下他的儿子李顺事奉晋，就回到泽州，每天派兵在怀、孟二州问掠夺，以人为食。
English: Li Hangzhi left his son Li Shun to serve Jin and returned to Zhezhou. He sent troops to Wai and Meng Erzhou every day to plunder and eat people.

古文：居民屯聚摩云山，罕之悉攻杀之，立栅其上，时人号曰李摩云。
现代文：城中居民屯聚在摩云山，李罕之全部攻杀他们，在上面修建营栅，当时人称做李摩云。
English: The residents of the city gathered in Moyun Mountain, and Li Han killed them all and built a camp gate on top of them. At that time, he was known as Li Moyun.

古文：是时，晋方徇地山东，颇倚罕之为捍蔽。
现代文：这时，晋正在攻取山东的土地，颇为倚仗李罕之作屏障。
English: At this time, Jin was conquering the land of Shandong, relying heavily on Li Han as a barrier.

古文：李茂贞等犯京师，克用以兵至渭北，僖宗以克用为邠州四面行营都统，表罕之为副。
现代文：李茂贞等人侵犯京师，李克用率兵到渭河以北，唐僖宗任李克用为郇州四面行营都统，表奏李罕之为副都统。
English: Li Maozhen and others encroached on the Beijing division, Li Ke used to lead the troops to the north of the Li River, Tang Yizong appointed Li Ke to be the commander of the four sides of Zhangzhou, and appointed Li Han as the deputy commander.

古文：破王行瑜，加检校太尉，食邑千户。
现代文：攻破王行瑜，加检校太尉，食邑一千户。
English: Breaking through Wang Xingyu, the additional inspection school captain, the food village of a thousand households.

古文：罕之自以功多于晋，私谓盖寓曰： 自吾脱身河阳，赖晋容我，未能有以报之；今行老矣，无能为也。
现代文：李罕之自认为对晋功劳大，私下对盖寓说： 自从我在河阳脱身，幸赖晋收容我，没能有什么报答晋的；现在我快老了，没有作为了。
English: Li Hanzhi thought that he had done a great service to Jin, and said to Gai Yue in private, "Since I escaped from Hayao, I'm glad that Jin took me in, but I haven't been able to repay him; now I'm getting old, and there's nothing I can do.

古文：若吾王见怜，与一小镇，使休兵养疾而后归老，幸也！ 
现代文：如果我王哀怜我，给我一个小镇，让我罢兵养病然后回家养老，多幸运啊！ 
English: If my king takes pity on me, gives me a small town, and lets me retire from the army to recover from my illness and then return home to retire, how lucky I am!

古文：寓为言之，克用不对。
现代文：盖寓替他上报，李克用不回答。
English: Gai sent a message for him, but Li Ke did not reply.

古文：佗日，诸镇择守将，未尝及罕之，罕之心益怏怏。
现代文：另一天，各镇挑选守将，未曾选到李罕之，李罕之心里更加怏怏不快。
English: On another day, each town selected a keeper, but Li Han was not chosen. Li Han's heart was even more unhappy.

古文：寓告克用，惧罕之有佗心，克用曰： 吾于罕之，岂惜一镇，然鹰鸟之性，饱则扬矣！ 
现代文：盖寓报告李克用，怕李罕之有二心，李克用说： 我对李罕之怎会吝惜一个镇，但是鹰乌的性格，吃饱就高飞了！ 
English: Li Ke used to say: "I don't know how Li Han can begrudge a town, but the character of Yingwu, when he's had enough to eat, he flies high!"

古文：光化元年，潞州薛志勤卒，罕之遽入潞州，使人启晋王曰： 志勤且死，新帅未至，所以然者，备佗盗耳！ 
现代文：光化元年，潞州薛志勤死，李罕之急速到潞州，派人向晋王陈述说： 薛志勤将要死了，新帅还没到，之所以这样做，不过是为了防备别的盗贼罢了！ 
English: In the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, Xue Zhiqin of Bozhou died. Li Hanzhi rushed to Bozhou and sent someone to Jin Wang to report: Xue Zhiqin is about to die, the new commander has not yet arrived, the reason for doing this is just to prevent other thieves!

古文：克用大怒，遣李嗣昭攻之。
现代文：李克用大怒，派李嗣昭攻打他。
English: With great anger, Li Ke sent Li Shizhao to attack him.

古文：罕之执晋守将马溉、伊镡等，遣子颢送于梁以乞兵。
现代文：李罕之捉住晋的守将马溉、伊坛等人，派儿子李颢押送到梁求兵。
English: Li Hanzhi captured Jin's guards, including Ma Rui and Yitan, and sent his son Li Xi to Liang to solicit soldiers.

古文：梁太祖遣丁会守潞州，以罕之为河阳节度使，行至怀州，以疾卒，年五十八。
现代文：梁太祖派丁会守潞州，任命李罕之为河阳节度使，走到怀州，因病而死，时年五十八岁。
English: Liang Taizu sent the Ding Association to guard Zhangzhou, appointed Li Han to be the festival envoy of Heyang, went to Huaizhou, and died of illness at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：罕之初背梁而归晋，晋王以罕之守泽州，罕之留其子颀与庄宗游，甚狎。
现代文：李罕之当初背叛梁而归附晋，晋王派李罕之守泽州，李罕之留下他的儿子李顽和唐庄宗游玩，十分亲近。
English: Li Hanzhi initially betrayed Liang and became a vassal of Jin. The King of Jin sent Li Hanzhi to guard Zezhou, and Li Hanzhi left his son Li Yu to visit Tangzhuangzong. They were very close.

古文：后罕之背晋以归梁，晋王怒，欲杀颀，庄宗与之骏马，使奔于梁。
现代文：后来李罕之背叛晋归附梁，晋王发怒，打算杀掉李顺，唐庄宗给他一匹骏马，让他逃奔到梁。
English: Later, Li Han's treachery made Jin surrender to Liang. The Jin king was furious and planned to kill Li Shun. Tang Zhuangzong gave him a fine horse and let him flee to Liang.

古文：太祖得颀父子大喜，使与友伦将兵以卫昭宗，故颀当太祖时，常掌禁兵。
现代文：梁太祖得到李顺父子十分高兴，让他和朱友伦率兵保卫唐昭宗，因此李顺在梁太祖时，时常掌管禁兵。
English: Liang Taizu was very happy to get Li Shun and his son, and let him and Zhu Youlun lead the troops to defend Tang Zhaozong. Therefore, Li Shun often controlled the forbidden soldiers when he was Liang Taizu.

古文：末帝诛友珪，颀与其谋，拜右羽林统军、澶州刺史。
现代文：梁末帝杀朱友珪，李颁参与策划，拜为右羽林统军、澶州刺史。
English: Emperor Liangmu killed Zhu Youyao, Li Zi participated in the planning, and worshiped as the leader of the Right Feather Forest United Army and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：事唐，历卫、衍二州刺史，累迁右领军卫上将军。
现代文：在唐做官，历任卫、衍二州刺史，屡经升迁为右领军卫上将军。
English: He served as an officer in the Tang Dynasty, and was successively appointed as Wei and Yan of the two states, and was repeatedly promoted to the right leader of the army, Wei Shang general.

古文：天福中卒，年七十，赠太尉。
现代文：天福年间死，时年七十岁，追赠太尉。
English: He died in the Tenpu era, at the age of seventy, and was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：○孟方立孟方立，邢州平乡人也。
现代文：孟方立是邢州平乡人。
English: Meng Fangli is from Pingxiang, Zhangzhou.

古文：少为军卒，以勇力选为队将。
现代文：年轻时当兵，因勇猛有力选焉队将。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier, and because of his bravery and strength, he was chosen to be a general.

古文：唐广明中，潞州节度使高浔攻诸葛爽于河阳，遣方立将兵出天井关为先锋。
现代文：唐广明年间，潞州节度使高浔在河阳攻打诸葛爽，派孟方立率兵出天井关任先锋。
English: During the Tang and Guangxi Dynasties, the Bozhou Festival made Gao Gan attack Zhuge Shuang in Heyang, and sent Meng Fang to lead the troops out of the ceiling to serve as the vanguard.

古文：浔为其将刘广所逐，广为乱军所杀。
现代文：高浔被他的将领刘广驱逐，刘广被乱军杀死。
English: Gao Gan was ousted by his general Liu Guang, who was killed by the rebels.

古文：方立闻乱，引兵自天井入据潞州，唐因以为昭义军节度使。
现代文：孟方立听说兵变，率兵从天井关攻入并占据潞州，唐于是任命他为昭义军节度使。
English: Meng Fangli heard of the mutiny and led the troops to break into and occupy Zhangzhou from the ceiling pass. The Tang then appointed him as the commander of the Shao Yi Army.

古文：昭义所节制泽、潞、邢、洺、磁五州，而治潞州。
现代文：昭义军管辖泽、潞、邢、沼、磁五个州，而治所在潞州。
English: The Shao Yi Army governed five prefectures, including Zhejiang, Shandong, Fujian, Fujian, Shandong, and Fujian, while the capital was in Zhangzhou.

古文：方立以谓潞州山川高险，而人俗劲悍，自刘积以来尝逐其帅；且己邢人也，因徙其军于邢州。
现代文：孟方立认为潞州山高水险，而且民俗强劲剽悍，自从刘稹以来常常驱逐其军帅；而且自己是邢州人，于是迁移昭义军洽所到邢州。
English: Meng Fangli believed that the Zhangzhou Mountains were high water risk, and the folk customs were strong and fierce. Since Liu Bei, he often expelled his military commander; and he was a native of Zhangzhou, so he moved the Shouyi Army Communication Center to Zhangzhou.

古文：而潞人怨方立之徙也，因以泽、潞二州归于晋。
现代文：而潞州人怨恨孟方立的迁移，就将泽、潞二州归附晋。
English: However, the people of Zhangzhou resented Meng Fangli's relocation, so they annexed Zhe and Zhangjiakou to Jin.

古文：晋遣李克修为泽潞节度使，方立以邢、洺、磁三州自为昭义军。
现代文：晋派李克修任泽潞节度使，孟方立以邢、沼、磁三州自立为昭义军。
English: The Jin Dynasty sent Li Kexiu to serve as the envoy to the Zeyu Festival, and the Meng faction established itself as the Shouyi Army with the three states of Quzhou, Numa, and Jianye.

古文：晋数遣李存孝等出兵以窥山东，三州之人俘掠殆尽，赤地数千里，无复耕桑者累年。
现代文：晋多次派李存孝等人出兵窥伺山东，邢、溶、磁三州的百姓差不多被俘掠干净，几千里不毛之地，多年来不再耕作蚕桑。
English: Jin sent Li Cunxiao and others to spy on Shandong many times. The people of the three states of Qi, Rong and Jie were almost completely captured and plundered. Thousands of miles of barren land were no longer cultivated with silkworms for many years.

古文：方立以孤城自守，求救于梁，梁方东事兗、郓，不能救也。
现代文：孟方立以孤城自守，向梁求救，梁正在柬面进攻充、郓二州，不能救援他。
English: The Meng faction defended itself as a lone city and appealed to Liang for help. Liang was in the process of attacking and occupying two provinces in Cambodia and was unable to rescue him.

古文：文德元年，方立乞兵于王镕以攻晋，镕许之。
现代文：文德元年，孟方立向王镕求兵攻打晋，王镕答应了。
English: In the first year of the Bunde era, Meng Fangli asked Wang Xi for troops to attack Jin, and Wang Xi agreed.

古文：方立乃遣其将奚忠信攻晋辽州，而镕以佗故不能出兵。
现代文：孟方立于是派他的将领奚忠信攻打晋的辽州，而王镕因别的原因不能出兵。
English: Meng Fangli then sent his general Zhai Zhongxin to attack Jin's Liaozhou, while Wang Xi could not send troops for other reasons.

古文：兵既失约，忠信大败，而晋兵乘胜攻之。
现代文：军队既已失约，奚忠信大败，而晋兵乘胜攻打他们。
English: The army had already broken the treaty, and Yan Zhongxin had suffered a crushing defeat. Jin soldiers took advantage of the victory to attack them.

古文：方立将石元佐者，善兵而多智，方立尝信用之。
现代文：孟方立的将领石元佐，善于用兵而足智多谋，孟方立曾信用他。
English: Meng Fangli's general, Shi Yuan Zuo, was good at using soldiers and resourceful. Meng Fangli once trusted him.

古文：忠信之败也，元佐为晋将安金俊所得，金俊厚遇之，问以攻邢之策，元佐曰： 方立善守而邢城坚，若攻之，必不得志。
现代文：奚忠信被打败后，石元佐被晋将安金俊捉住，安金俊待他很好，向他询问攻打邢州的策略，石元佐说： 孟方立善于据守而邢州城坚固，如果进攻，必定不能如愿。
English: After Zou Zhongxin was defeated, Shi Yuanzu was captured by the Jin general An Jinjun. An Jinjun treated him well and asked him about the strategy of attacking Zhangzhou. Shi Yuanzu said: Meng Fang is good at defending, but Zhangzhou is strong. If they attack, they will not succeed.

古文：宜急攻其磁州，方立来救，可以败也。 
现代文：应当猛攻他的磁州，孟方立前来救援，就可以打败他。 
English: We should storm his magnetic state, and if Meng Fangli comes to the rescue, we can defeat him.

古文：金俊以为然。
现代文：安金俊认为对。
English: Ahn Kim Joon is right.

古文：军于滏水之西，方立果帅兵来救，为金俊所败，驰入邢州，闭壁不复出。
现代文：驻军于滏水西面，孟方立果然率兵前来救援，被安金俊打败，奔入邢州，关闭城门不再出来。
English: Garrisoned in the west of Surabaya, Meng Fangli led the troops to come to the rescue, was defeated by An Jinjun, rushed into Zhangzhou, closed the gate and never came out.

古文：外无救兵，城中食且尽，方立夜出巡城，号令守者，守者皆不应，方立知不可，乃归饮鸩而卒。
现代文：外无援兵，城中粮食快要吃完，孟方立晚上出来巡视州城，向守城的士兵发令，守城的人都不响应，孟方立明白不行了，于是回去喝下毒酒死去。
English: There were no reinforcements from outside, and the grain in the city was about to run out. Meng Fangli went out in the evening to inspect the state capital and issue orders to the soldiers guarding the city. The people guarding the city did not respond. Meng Fangli understood that he could not do it, so he went back and drank poisoned wine and died.

古文：军中以其弟洺州刺史迁为留后，求救于梁。
现代文：军中推选他的弟弟沼州刺史孟迁任留后，向梁求救。
English: After his younger brother, Nuzhou Zhishi Meng, was elected to stay in the army, he turned to Liang for help.

古文：梁太祖遣王虔裕将骑兵三百助迁守，迁执虔裕降晋。
现代文：梁太祖派王虔裕率骑兵三百人协助孟迁守城，孟迁捉住壬虔裕向晋投降。
English: Liang Taizu sent Wang Qianyu and 300 cavalry to help Meng Qian defend the city. Meng Qian captured Ren Qianyu and surrendered to Jin.

古文：晋徙迁族于太原，以为汾州刺史，后以为泽潞节度使。
现代文：晋将孟迁的家族迁移到太原，任命他为汾州刺史，后来任泽潞节度使。
English: Jin moved Meng Qian's family to Taiyuan, appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou, and later appointed him as the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：天复元年，梁遣氏叔琮攻晋，出天井关，迁开门降，为梁兵乡道以攻太原，不克。
现代文：天复元年，梁派氏叔琮攻打晋，出天井关，孟迁开门投降，为梁兵引路攻打太原，没能攻克。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, the uncle of the Liang faction attacked Jin, went out of the gate, Meng Qian opened the door and surrendered, and led the way for Liang soldiers to attack Taiyuan, but failed to conquer.

古文：叔琮军还过潞，以迁归于梁，梁太祖恶其返覆，杀之。
现代文：氏叔琮的军队返回经过潞州，带着孟迁回到梁，梁太祖讨厌他反复无常，杀了他。
English: His uncle's army returned through Zhangzhou and brought Meng Qian back to Liang. Liang Taizu hated his capriciousness and killed him.

古文：○王珂王珂，河中人也。
现代文：王珂是河中人。
English: Wang Ke is from the middle of the river.

古文：其仲父重荣，以河中兵破黄巢，有功于唐，拜河中节度使。
现代文：他的叔父王重荣，率河中兵攻破黄巢，对唐有功劳，拜为河中节度使。
English: His uncle, Wang Chung Rong, led the soldiers in the middle of the river to break through the Yellow Nest, which was a great service to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：重荣无子，以其兄重简子珂为后。
现代文：王重荣没有儿子，把他的哥哥王重简的儿子王珂作为继嗣。
English: Wang Chong Rong had no son, so he made his brother Wang Chong Jian's son Wang Ke his heir.

古文：重荣卒，弟重盈立，重盈卒，军中乃以珂重荣子，立之。
现代文：王重荣死，弟弟王重盈继立，王重盈死，军中就因王珂是王重荣的养子，拥立他。
English: Wang Chong Rong died, and his brother Wang Chong Ying succeeded him. When Wang Chong Ying died, the army supported him because Wang Ke was Wang Chong Rong's adopted son.

古文：重盈子陕州节度使珙、绛州刺史瑶，与珂争立，珙、瑶以书与梁太祖，言珂故王氏苍头，小字忠兒，不应得立。
现代文：王重盈的儿子陕州节度使王珙、绛州刺史王瑶，和王珂争立，王珙、王瑶写书信给梁太祖，说王珂是过去王氏的奴隶，小字叫忠儿，不应继立。
English: Wang Chung Ying's son, Shaanxi Jiedu, made Wang Hui, Zhangzhou Jishi Wang Hui, and Wang Ke contend. Wang Hui and Wang Ke wrote a letter to Liang Taizu, saying that Wang Ke was a slave of the Wang clan in the past, and should not be allowed to succeed.

古文：珂亦求援于晋，晋人言之朝，昭宗以晋故，许之。
现代文：王珂也向晋求援，晋人向朝廷上报，唐昭宗由于晋的缘故，答应了。
English: Wang Ke also asked Jin for help, and Jin reported the matter to the imperial court. Tang Zhaozong agreed because of Jin.

古文：而珙、瑶亦西结王行瑜、韩建、李茂贞为援，行瑜等交章论列，昭宗报以重荣与晋于唐尝有大功，业许之，不可易。
现代文：而王珙、王瑶也在西面交结王行瑜、韩建、李茂贞做后援，王行瑜等人交相上奏章争辩，唐昭宗回答说王重荣和晋对唐曾有大功，业已答应，不能改变。
English: On the other hand, Wang Xi and Wang Xi also met with Wang Xingyu, Han Jian, and Li Maozhen in the west to provide support. Wang Xingyu and others argued over the meeting, and Tang Zhaozong replied that Wang Chongrong and Jin had made great contributions to Tang, and had already agreed and could not be changed.

古文：行瑜等怒，以兵犯京师，杀宰相李磎等而去。
现代文：王行瑜等人发怒，率兵进犯京师，杀死宰相李蹊等人而离去。
English: Wang Xingyu and others were so angry that they led their troops to attack the Beijing Division, killed the Prime Minister Li Xi and others, and left.

古文：珙、瑶连兵攻珂河中，珂求援于晋，晋兵西讨三镇，行下绛州，斩瑶而过，至于渭北，击破行瑜。
现代文：王珙、王瑶联合军队在河中攻打王珂，王珂向晋求援，晋兵往西征讨三镇，途中攻克绛州，杀掉王瑶而去，到达渭河北面，攻破王行瑜。
English: Wang Hui and Wang Hui's joint army attacked Wang Ke in the middle of the river. Wang Ke asked Jin for help. Jin soldiers went west to conquer three towns. On the way, they conquered Zhangzhou, killed Wang Hui and went to the north of the Wei River to defeat Wang Xingyu.

古文：昭宗卒以珂为河中节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗最终任王珂为河中节度使。
English: Tang Zhaozong eventually appointed Wang Ke as the envoy of the Mid-Heaven Festival.

古文：晋以女妻之，遣李嗣昭将兵助珂攻珙陕州。
现代文：晋王嫁女给王珂为妻，派李嗣昭率兵在陕州协助王珂攻打王珙。
English: The King of Jin married a daughter to Wang Ke and sent Li Shizhao and his soldiers to help Wang Ke attack Wang Xi in Shaanxi.

古文：珙为人惨刻，尝斩人掷其首于前，言笑自若，其下苦之。
现代文：王珙为人惨酷刻薄，曾杀人后把头扔到跟前，仍然谈笑自如，他的部下深感痛苦。
English: Wang Yao was a cruel and mean man. He used to throw his head forward after killing someone, but he still talked and laughed freely. His subordinates were deeply pained.

古文：偏将李璠因珙战败，杀珙，自称留后。
现代文：副将李墦趁王珙战败，杀掉王珙，自称留后。
English: Vice-commander Li Yan took advantage of Wang Yao's defeat, killed Wang Yao, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：是时，梁已下镇、定，将移兵西，而昭宗为刘季述所废，京师大乱。
现代文：这时，梁已攻克镇、定二州，将要移兵往西，而唐昭宗被刘季述废除，京师大乱。
English: At this time, Liang had already conquered the town and Ding Erzhou, and was about to move his troops to the west, while Tang Zhaozong was abolished by Liu Jishu, and the Great Schism occurred in Beijing.

古文：崔胤阴召梁以兵西，梁太祖以珂在河中，惧为患，乃顾张存敬、侯言，以一大绳与之，曰： 为我持缚珂来！ 
现代文：崔胤暗中召梁兵西来，梁太祖因王珂在河中，怕他成为后患，于是望着张存敬、侯言，把一根大绳子给他们，说： 替我把王珂绑来！ 
English: Cui Yin secretly summoned Liang's soldiers to the west. Liang's great-grandfather was worried that Wang Ke was in the river, so he looked at Zhang Cunqian and Hou Yan and gave them a big rope, saying, "Bind Wang Ke for me!"

古文：存敬等兵出含山，破晋、绛二州，遣何絪以兵守之，绝晋援。
现代文：张存敬等人率兵出含山，攻破晋、绛二州，派何捆卒兵把守，断绝晋的援助。
English: Zhang Cunjing and others led the troops out of the mountains, broke through the two states of Jin and Qin, sent several bundles of soldiers to guard, and cut off Jin's assistance.

古文：存敬围河中，珂告急于晋，晋以絪故不得前。
现代文：张存敬包围河中，王珂向晋告急，晋因何捆的缘故不能前进。
English: Zhang Cunjing surrounded the middle of the river, Wang Ke was in a hurry to Jin, and Jin could not advance because of some bundles.

古文：珂乃遣其妻以书告晋王曰： 贼势如此，朝夕乞食于梁矣！
现代文：王珂于是派他的妻子带信告诉晋王说： 贼军气势如此，我很快就要向梁讨食了！
English: Wang Ke then sent his wife with a letter to tell Jin Wang: "The bandit army is so powerful, I will soon have to beg for food from Liang Wu!"

古文：大人何忍而不救邪？ 
现代文：大人怎么忍心不救援呢？ 
English: How could an adult not come to the rescue?

古文：晋王报之曰： 梁兵为阻，众寡不敌，救之则并晋俱亡，不若与王郎自归朝廷。 
现代文：晋王回答说： 梁军设置屏障，寡不敌众，如果救你就连晋都要一起灭亡，你不如与王郎自己归附朝廷。 
English: The king of Jin replied: Liang's army has set up a barrier and is outnumbered. If you save him, even Jin will perish together. It would be better for you and Wang Lang to join the imperial court.

古文：珂乃为书与李茂贞曰： 天子初返正，诏籓镇无相侵以安王室。
现代文：王珂于是写信给李茂贞说： 天子刚刚拨乱反正，诏令藩镇不要相互侵犯以便安定王室。
English: Wang Ke then wrote a letter to Li Maozhen saying: "The Son of Heaven has just stirred up chaos and ordered the provinces and towns not to encroach on each other in order to stabilize the royal family.

古文：今硃公弃约以见攻，其势不止于弊邑；若弊邑朝亡，则西北诸镇非诸君所能守也！
现代文：现在朱公背约攻打我们，他的矛头不止对着我们，如果我们一朝灭亡了，那么西北各镇就不是各位所能坚守的！
English: Now Zhu Gongbei has agreed to attack us, his spearhead is not only against us, if we perish one day, then the towns in the northwest will not be able to hold out!

古文：愿与华州出兵潼关以为应。 
现代文：愿意与华州出兵潼关作为接应。 
English: He is willing to send troops to Guam in response to Washington's request.

古文：茂贞不报。
现代文：李茂贞不答复。
English: Li Maozhen did not reply.

古文：珂计穷，乃治舟于河，将归于京师。
现代文：王珂无计可施，于是在黄河造船，准备回到京师。
English: Wang Ke had no choice, so he built a ship on the Yellow River and prepared to return to Beijing.

古文：珂夜登城谕守陴者，守陴者皆不应。
现代文：至型晚上登城晓谕守城墙的人，守城墙的士兵都不理睬他。
English: When he went up in the evening to speak with the keepers of the wall, they paid him no attention.

古文：牙将刘训夜入珂寝白事，珂叱之曰： 兵欲反邪！ 
现代文：牙将刘训晚上到王珂卧室中报告事情，王珂呵斥他说： 军队要反叛了吗！ 
English: The commander Liu Xun went to Wang Ke's bedroom in the evening to report the situation. Wang Ke shouted at him, "Is the army going to rebel?"

古文：训乃解衣自索而入曰： 公苟怀疑，请先断臂！ 
现代文：刘训于是脱下衣服捆住自己纔进来说： 你如果有怀疑，就先斩断我的手臂！ 
English: Liu Xun then took off his clothes, tied himself up and said, "If you have any doubts, cut off my arm first!"

古文：珂曰： 事急矣！
现代文：王珂说： 事情危急了！
English: Wang Ke said: The situation is critical!

古文：计安出乎？ 
现代文：有什么办法呢？ 
English: What can be done?

古文：训曰： 公若携家夜济，人必争舟，一夫鸱张，大事即去。
现代文：刘训说： 你如果带着家人晚上渡河而逃，人们必定争抢渡船，一个人嚣张，大事就完了。
English: Liu Xun said: If you take your family to cross the river at night and escape, people will certainly compete for the ferry, one person will be arrogant, and the big event will be over.

古文：不若迟明以情谕军中，愿从者犹得其半。
现代文：不如到天亮时把实情给军队讲明，愿意跟从你的还有一半人。
English: By dawn, if you tell the army the truth, half of them will follow you.

古文：不然，且为款状以缓梁兵，徐图向背。 
现代文：如不这样，就姑且作投降之状来稳住梁军，慢慢考虑投靠谁。 
English: If not, it would be better to make a surrender to stabilize Liang's army and slowly consider who to support.

古文：珂以为然。
现代文：王珂认为行。
English: Wang Ke thought it was fine.

古文：梁太祖自同州降唐，即依重荣，以母王氏，故事重荣为舅。
现代文：梁太祖自从同州向唐投降后，就依附王重荣，因为母亲姓王，因此就把王重荣当舅舅对待。
English: Ever since Tongzhou surrendered to Tang, Liang Taizu clung to Wang Chung Rong. Because his mother's surname was Wang, he treated Wang Chung Rong as an uncle.

古文：珂乃登城呼存敬曰： 吾于梁王有家世之旧，兵当退舍，俟梁王来，吾将听命。 
现代文：王珂于是登城对张存敬呼喊说： 我和梁王有世家旧交，你们的军队应当退避三舍，等梁王来了，我将会遵命。 
English: Wang Ke then went to the city and shouted to Zhang Cunjing: "I have a long-standing friendship with King Liang. Your army should withdraw from everywhere. When King Liang comes, I will follow his orders."

古文：存敬乃退舍，使驰诣太祖于洛阳。
现代文：张存敬于是退兵，派人驰马到洛阳禀报梁太祖。
English: Zhang Cunjing then withdrew from the army and sent a man on horseback to Luoyang to inform Liang Taizu.

古文：太祖至河中，先之城东，哭于重荣之墓而后入。
现代文：梁太祖到河中，先到城束，在王重荣的墓旁哭泣后纔进城。
English: Liang Taizu went to the river, first to the castle, wept at the tomb of Wang Chung Rong and then entered the city.

古文：珂欲面缚牵羊以见太祖，太祖谓曰： 太师阿舅之恩何时可忘，郎君若以亡国之礼见，太师其谓我何？ 
现代文：王珂想反绑两手牵着羊进见梁太祖，梁太祖对他说： 太师阿舅的恩德何时能忘记，你如果以亡国的礼仪见我，太师会怎么说我呢？ 
English: Wang Ke wanted to tie his hands together and lead the sheep to see Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu said to him, "When will you forget the kindness of your uncle, if you see me with the etiquette of a dead country, what will your uncle say about me?"

古文：珂迎于路，握手嘘唏，乃徙珂于汴。
现代文：王珂在路上迎接梁太祖，握手哽咽不已，于是迁王珂到汴州。
English: Wang Ke met Liang Taizu on the road, shaking hands and choking, so Wang Ke moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖以珂晋婿也，疑其贰己，使珂西入觐，行至华州，使人杀之传舍。
现代文：梁太祖因王珂是晋王的女婿，怀疑他对自己有二心，派王珂西行觐见皇帝，到达华州时，派人在旅舍中把他杀了。
English: Because Wang Ke was the son-in-law of the King of Jin, Liang Taizu suspected that he had a grudge against him and sent Wang Ke Xi to meet the emperor. When he arrived in Huazhou, he sent someone to kill him in the inn.

古文：瓚，重盈之诸子也，梁太祖已执珂，自领河中节度使，以瓚为吏。
现代文：王瓒是王重盈的儿子，梁太祖捉住王珂后，自任河中节度使，以王瓒为吏。
English: Wang Yao was the son of Wang Shigeying. Liang Taizu captured Wang Ke, and appointed himself as the envoy to the River Festival, with Wang Yao as the official.

古文：瓚事梁，为诸卫大将军，泰宁、镇国军节度使。
现代文：王瓒在梁做官，任诸卫大将军，泰宁、镇国军节度使。
English: Wang Qian served as an official in Liang, and was appointed as the general of Zhuwei, and the commander of Taining and Zhenguo Army.

古文：末帝时，为开封尹。
现代文：梁末帝时，任开封尹。
English: During the reign of the last Emperor Liang, he was appointed as Kaifeng Yin.

古文：贞明五年，代贺瑰为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：贞明五年，代替贺瓖任北面行营招讨使。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenming, he replaced He Xuan as the envoy to the north.

古文：是时，晋已城德胜，瓚自黎阳渡河攻澶州，不克，退屯杨村，扼河上流，与晋人相持经年，大小百馀战，瓚卒无功，末帝遣戴思远代，瓚复为开封尹。
现代文：这时，晋已在德胜筑城，王瓒从黎阳渡过黄河攻打澶州，没能攻克，遐兵屯驻杨村，扼守黄河上流，和晋人相持一年多，大小一百多次战斗，王瓒最终无战功，梁末帝派戴思远替代他，王瓒又任开封尹。
English: At this time, Jin had built a city in De Sheng, Wang Xi had crossed the Yellow River from Liyang to attack Zhangzhou, but failed to conquer it. Yan soldiers were stationed in Yangcun, guarding the upper reaches of the Yellow River. They held out against the Jin people for more than a year and fought more than a hundred battles. Wang Xi ultimately did not have any military achievements. Emperor Liang sent Dai Siyuan to replace him, and Wang Xi was appointed as Kaifeng Yin.

古文：庄宗自郓入京师，末帝闻唐兵且至，日夜涕泣，不知所为，自持国宝，指其宫室谓瓚曰： 使吾保此者，系卿之画如何耳！ 
现代文：唐庄宗从郫州进入京师，梁末帝听说唐兵快要到了，日夜哭泣，不知所措，手持国宝，指着他的宫室对王瓒说： 让我保住这些东西，就看你的计谋怎样了！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Beijing from Zhangzhou. When Emperor Liang Mudu heard that the Tang soldiers were about to arrive, he cried day and night, at a loss for words. Holding the national treasure in his hand, he pointed to his palace and said to Wang Hui, "Let me keep these things, let's see what your plan is!"

古文：唐兵已过宛朐，瓚驱率市人登城拒守。
现代文：唐兵已经过了宛朐，王瓒驱使城中人登城守御。
English: The Tang soldiers had already passed Wanzhou, and Wang Yao drove the people in the city to go up to the city to guard it.

古文：唐兵攻封丘门，瓚开门迎降，伏地请死，庄宗劳而起之曰： 朕与卿家世婚姻，然人臣各为主耳，复何罪邪！ 
现代文：唐兵进攻封丘门，王瓒开门投降，伏在地上请求处死，唐庄宗慰劳他，扶起他说： 我和你家世代联姻，而臣子各自为自己主人罢了，又谈什么罪呢！ 
English: Tang soldiers attacked Fengqiu Gate. Wang Yao opened the gate and surrendered, prostrated himself on the ground and asked to be put to death. Tang Zhuozong consoled him and helped him up, saying, "I have been married to your family for generations, but the courtiers are only masters of themselves. What crime are you talking about?"

古文：因以为开封尹，迁宣武军节度使。
现代文：于是任命他为开封尹，迁宣武军节度使。
English: Therefore, he appointed him as Kaifeng Yin, Qian Xuan military commander.

古文：已而故梁臣赵岩、张汉杰等相次诛死，瓚以忧卒。赠太子太师。
现代文：不久过去梁的臣子赵岩、张汉杰等人相继被处死，王瓒忧虑而死，赠太子太师。
English: Not long after, Liang's vassals Zhao Yan, Zhang Hanjie and others were executed one after another, and Wang Xi died of anxiety and was given the title of crown prince.

古文：○赵犨
现代文：赵肇，祖先是青州人。
English: Zhao Zhao's ancestor was from Qingzhou.

古文：赵犨，其先青州人也。世为陈州牙将。
现代文：世代任陈州牙将。
English: Chen Zhou has been a dental surgeon for generations.

古文：犨幼与群兒戏道中，部分行伍，指顾如将帅，虽诸大兒皆听其节度，其父叔文见之，惊曰： 大吾门者，此兒也！ 
现代文：赵孽小时候和一群孩子在道路上游戏，部署军队，像将帅一样指挥，即使大孩子们都听从他的节制，他的父亲趟叔文见了，惊奇地说： 使我家光大的人，是这个孩子！ 
English: When Zhao Wei was a child, he was playing with a group of children on the road, deploying troops and commanding like a general, even though the older children all obeyed his restraint. When his father saw this, he said in surprise, "The person who has made my family great is this child!"

古文：及壮，善用弓剑，为人勇果，重气义，刺史闻其材，召置麾下。
现代文：到成年后，善于使用弓剑，为人勇猛果敢，看重义气，刺史听说他的才能，召他到军中。
English: When he became an adult, he was good at using a bow and sword, brave and courageous, and valued loyalty. Zushi heard of his talent and called him to the army.

古文：累迁忠武军马步军都虞候。
现代文：屡经升迁任忠武军马步军都虞候。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and appointed as the commander of the Loyalist Army and the Horse Guards.

古文：王仙芝寇河南，陷汝州，将犯东都，犨引兵击败之，仙芝乃南去。
现代文：王仙芝侵犯河南，攻陷汝州，将要侵犯束都，赵肇率兵打败他们，王仙芝于是向南离去。
English: Wang Xianzhi invaded Henan, captured Ruzhou, and was about to invade Sokdu. Zhao Zhaozhou led the troops to defeat them, and Wang Xianzhi then left for the south.

古文：已而黄巢起，所在州县，往往陷贼。
现代文：不久黄巢起兵，所在州县，往往陷入贼军手中。
English: Soon after Huang Chao started the war, his state and county often fell into the hands of the bandits.

古文：陈州豪杰数百人，相与诣忠武军，求得犨为刺史以自保，忠武军表犨陈州刺史。
现代文：陈州豪杰几百人，一起到忠武军，求赵肇做刺史以保护自己，忠武军表奏趟肇为陈州刺史。
English: Hundreds of Chenzhou heroes and heroines went to the loyal military together to ask Zhao Zhao to make a stabbing history to protect themselves. The loyal military played a trip to Zhao for Chenzhou stabbing history.

古文：已而巢陷长安，犨语诸将吏曰： 以吾计，巢若不为长安市人所诛，必驱其众东走，吾州适当其冲矣！ 
现代文：不久黄巢攻陷长安，趟辇对将吏们说： 按我的估计，黄巢如不被长安市人所杀，就必定会驱使众人束逃，我们州恰好在其要道上！ 
English: Not long after the Yellow Nest invaded Chang'an, Watanabe said to the generals: "According to my estimation, if the Yellow Nest is not killed by the people of Chang'an, it will certainly drive everyone to flee. Our state is right on its main road!"

古文：乃治城池为守备，迁民六十里内者皆入城中，选其子弟，配以兵甲，以其弟昶、珝为将。
现代文：于是整治城池以作防守准备，把六十里以内的百姓都迁移到城中，挑选他们的子弟，配给武器镗甲，任命他的弟弟赵昶、赵翊为将。
English: Therefore, he tidied up the city to prepare for defense, moved all the people within sixty miles to the city, selected their children, allocated weapons and armor, and appointed his brother Zhao Jun and Zhao Jun as generals.

古文：巢败，果东走，先遣孟楷据项城，昶击破之，执楷以归。
现代文：黄巢失败，果然束逃，先派孟楷占据项城，趟昶攻破项城，抓获孟楷归来。
English: Huang Chao failed, but he managed to escape. First, he sent Meng Kai to occupy Xiangcheng, and then he defeated Xiangcheng and captured Meng Kai.

古文：巢从后至，闻楷被执，大怒。
现代文：黄巢随后到，听说孟楷被俘，大怒。
English: Huang Chao arrived later and was furious when he heard that Meng Kai had been captured.

古文：既而秦宗权以蔡州附巢，巢势甚盛，乃悉众围犨，置舂磨，糜人之肉以为食。
现代文：不久秦宗权以蔡州蹄附黄巢，黄巢气势很盛，于是率领全部军队包围趟箪，设置舂臼石磨，磨烂人肉为食物。
English: Soon after, Qin Zongquan took Caizhou and attached it to Huang Chao. Huang Chao was very powerful, so he led all the troops to surround Wanzhou and set up a mortar mill to grind human flesh for food.

古文：陈人恐，犨语其下曰： 吾家三世陈将，必能保此。
现代文：陈州人恐慌，赵肇对他的部下说： 我家三代都是陈州将领，一定能保住这里。
English: The people of Chenzhou panicked, and Zhao Zhao said to his subordinates: My family has been the generals of Chenzhou for three generations, and we will surely be able to stay here.

古文：尔曹男子，当于死中求生，建功立业，未必不因此时。 
现代文：你们这些男子，应当在死中求生，建功立业，未必不在这个时候。 
English: You men ought to be living in death, making your mark, not necessarily at this time.

古文：陈人皆踊跃。
现代文：陈州人都踊跃振作起来。
English: The people of Chenzhou all cheered up.

古文：巢栅城北三里为八仙营，起宫阙，置百官，聚粮饷，欲以久弊之，其兵号二十万。
现代文：黄巢在城北三里修寨栅称八仙营，修建官室，设置百官，堆聚粮饷，打算长期围困他们，军队号称有二十万。
English: Huang Chao planned to besiege them for a long time by building a fortress called the Eight Immortals' Camp three miles north of the city, constructing an office, setting up a hundred officials, and piling up grain and straw. He claimed to have an army of two hundred thousand.

古文：陈人旧有巨弩数百，皆废坏，后生弩工皆不识其器。
现代文：陈州人过去有几百张大弩，都废壤了，年轻的弩工都不认识这些武器。
English: In the past, the people of Chenzhou had hundreds of large ploughs, but they have all been destroyed. Young ploughmen do not know these weapons.

古文：珝创意理之，弩矢激五百步，人马皆洞，以故巢不敢近。
现代文：趟堋设计修复它们，弩箭远射五百步，人马都被射穿，因此黄巢不敢逼近。
English: They are designed to be repaired with a trip hammer. The hammer arrow shoots five hundred paces away, and people and horses are shot through, so the yellow nest does not dare to approach.

古文：围凡三百日，犨食将尽，乃乞兵于梁。
现代文：包围三百天，趟肇粮食快要吃完，于是向梁求兵。
English: After three hundred days of siege, Waza Zhao was about to run out of grain, so he asked Liang for soldiers.

古文：梁太祖与李克用皆自将会陈，击败巢将黄鄴于西华。
现代文：梁太祖和李克用都亲自率兵会聚陈州，在西华打败黄巢的将领黄邺。
English: Liang Taizu and Li Kegui both personally led their armies to gather in Chenzhou to defeat the general of the Yellow Nest, Huang Qi, in West China.

古文：西华有积粟，巢恃以为饷，及鄴败，巢乃解围去。
现代文：西华有存粮，黄巢仗恃作为军饷，到黄邺被打败，黄巢纔解围离去。
English: West China had stored grain, and the Yellow Nest was used as a military base. When the Yellow Nest was defeated, the Yellow Nest was broken up and left.

古文：梁太祖入陈州，犨兄弟迎谒马首甚恭。
现代文：梁太祖进入陈州，趟肇兄弟在马前迎接拜见，十分恭敬。
English: When Liang Taizu entered Chenzhou, the Wanzhao brothers greeted him in front of the horse, very respectfully.

古文：然犨阴识太祖必成大事，乃降心屈迹，为自托之计。
现代文：但赵肇暗中明白梁太祖必成大事，于是俯首屈心，作依托于他的打算。
English: However, Zhao Zhaozhou knew in the dark that Liang Taizu would achieve great things, so he bowed his head and made a plan relying on him.

古文：以梁援己恩，为太祖立生祠，朝夕拜谒。
现代文：因为梁援救自己的恩德，为梁太祖修建祠庙，早晚参拜。
English: Because Liang saved his own dignity, he built an ancestral temple for Liang Taizu, and visited it in the morning and evening.

古文：以其子岩尚太祖女，是谓长乐公主。
现代文：让自己的儿子趟岩娶梁太祖的女儿，造就是长乐公主。
English: Let his son Wuyan marry the daughter of Liang Taizu, and create the Changle Princess.

古文：黄巢已去，秦宗权复乱淮西，陷旁二十馀州，而陈去蔡最近，犨兄弟力拒之，卒不能下。
现代文：黄巢离去后，秦宗权又在淮西作乱，攻陷周围二十多个州，而陈州距离蔡州最近，趟肇兄弟奋力抵御，最终不能攻下。
English: After the departure of Huang Chao, Qin Zongquan once again wreaked havoc in Huaxi, capturing more than twenty surrounding states, while Chenzhou was closest to Caizhou. The Wanzhao brothers fought hard to resist, but were ultimately unable to capture it.

古文：后巢、宗权皆败死，唐昭宗即以陈州为忠武军，拜犨节度使。
现代文：后来黄巢、秦宗权都战败而死，唐昭宗就以陈州为忠武军，拜赵箪为节度使。
English: Later, Huang Chao and Qin Zongquan were both defeated and died, and Tang Zhaozong took Chenzhou as a loyal army and Bai Zhaoqi as a festival envoy.

古文：犨已病，乃以位与其弟昶，后数月卒。
现代文：趟肇患病后，就让位给弟弟赵昶，几个月后死去。
English: After Tashi Zhao fell ill, he gave way to his brother Zhao Wei, who died a few months later.

古文：昶乘大寇新灭，乃休兵课农，事梁尤谨。
现代文：赵昶趁刚刚消灭大寇，于是休整士兵督促农桑，事奉梁尤其恭谨。
English: Zhao Wei took advantage of the fact that the bandits had just been wiped out, so the rested soldiers urged the farmers and mulberry trees to serve the beams with particular respect.

古文：梁兵攻战四方，昶馈輓供亿，未尝少懈。
现代文：梁兵四方攻战，赵昶运送粮饷，不曾稍稍懈怠。
English: Liang soldiers attacked from four directions, Zhao Wei transported grain and straw, and never slacked a bit.

古文：昶卒，珝代立。
现代文：趟昶死，趟堋代任。
English: Wabi-sabi dies, wabi-sabi takes over.

古文：珝颇知书，乃求邓艾故迹，决翟王陂溉民田。
现代文：趟堋颇为知书达理，于是寻求邓艾旧迹，疏决翟王陂灌溉民田。
English: Watanabe was quite knowledgeable, so he sought out Deng Ai's old sites and decided to irrigate the people's fields.

古文：兄弟居陈二十馀年，陈人大赖之。
现代文：兄弟俩在陈州二十多年，陈州人充分依赖他们。
English: The two brothers have been in Chenzhou for more than 20 years, and the people of Chenzhou fully rely on them.

古文：梁太祖已降韩建，取同、华，徙珝为同州留后。
现代文：梁太祖收降韩建后，攻取同、华二州，改趟堋任同州留后。
English: After Liang Taizu's defeat of Han Jian, he conquered Tong and Huan two states, and was assigned to stay in Tong.

古文：入唐，为右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：入唐，任右金吾卫上将军。
English: Entered Tang Dynasty and was appointed as the Supreme Commander of the Right Wing of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：岁馀，以疾免官归，卒于家，陈人为之罢市。
现代文：一年多后，因病罢官回家，死在家中，陈州人为他罢市。
English: More than a year later, he was discharged home due to illness and died at home. Chen Zhou went on a city strike for him.

古文：犨次子岩，梁末帝时为户部尚书、租庸使，与张汉杰、汉伦等居中用事。
现代文：趟孽的次子趟岩，梁末帝时任户部尚书、租庸使，和张汉杰、张汉伦等人在朝中专权。
English: The second son of Wai Yin, Wai Yan. At the time of the last emperor of the Liang Dynasty, the head of the household, Shang Shu, and the agent of the rent yong, and Zhang Hanjie, Zhang Hanlun and others had exclusive power in the middle of the court.

古文：梁自太祖以暴虐杀戮为事，而末帝为人特和柔恭谨，然性庸愚，以汉杰妇家，而岩婿也，故亲信之，大臣老将皆切齿，末帝独不悟，以至于亡。
现代文：梁从梁太祖开始以暴虐毅戮为业，而梁末帝为人特别温和恭谨，但性格庸懦愚蠢，因为张汉杰是妻子家的人，而赵岩是女婿，因此亲近信任他们，大臣老将都切齿愤恨，梁末帝偏不醒悟，以至于灭亡。
English: From the time of Liang Taizu, Liang's occupation was to be a tyrannical tyrant. Liang Mu Di was a particularly gentle and respectful person, but his character was cowardly and stupid. Because Zhang Hanjie was his wife's family member, and Zhao Yan was his son-in-law, he trusted them closely. The ministers and veterans were bitterly resentful. Liang Mu Di did not wake up and died.

古文：初，友珪杀太祖自立，以末帝为东都留守。
现代文：当初，朱友珪杀掉梁太祖自立，以梁末帝为束都留守。
English: At first, Zhu Youxuan killed Liang Taizu and became independent, with Liang Masti as his retainer.

古文：岩如东都，末帝与之饮酒，从容以诚款告之。
现代文：趟岩入束都，梁末帝和他饮酒，从容自如地对他坦诚相告。
English: Liang Masti drank with him every time he went to Sokdu. Liang Masti told him frankly and calmly.

古文：岩为末帝谋，遣人召杨师厚兵起事。
现代文：趟岩为梁末帝出谋，派人召杨师厚的军队起事。
English: Wai Yan plotted for Emperor Liang Matsu and sent someone to summon Yang Shih-chuo's army to rise up.

古文：岩还西都，卒与袁象先以禁兵诛友珪，取传国宝以授末帝。
现代文：趟岩返回西都，终于和袁象先率禁兵杀掉朱友珪，取来传国宝交给梁末帝。
English: Wading through the rocks, he returned to the western capital. Finally, he and Yuan Xiang led the forbidden soldiers to kill Zhu Youyao, took the national treasure and handed it over to Emperor Liang Mudu.

古文：末帝立，岩自以有功于梁，又尚公主，闻唐驸马杜悰位至将相，自奉甚丰，耻其不及。
现代文：梁末帝登位，赵岩自以为对梁有功，又娶公主为妻，听说唐驸马杜惊位至将相，俸禄十分丰厚，羞愧自己比不上。
English: When the last Emperor Liang ascended to the throne, Zhao Yan thought that he had done a great service to Liang, and married a princess. He heard that Tang Yimadu was promoted to the rank of general, and his salary was very rich. He was ashamed that he couldn't match it.

古文：乃占天下良田大宅，裒刻商旅，其门如市，租庸之物，半入其私，岩饮食必费万钱。
现代文：于是侵占天下良田大宅，盘剥商人旅客，门庭若市，租赋财物，一半归他自己，赵岩每次饮食必定花费上万钱。
English: As a result, he usurped the world's Ryota mansion, ripped off merchants and tourists, and rented property, half of which belonged to himself. Zhao Yan must have spent tens of thousands of dollars on each meal.

古文：故时，魏州牙兵骄，数为乱，罗绍威尽诛之。
现代文：过去，魏州牙兵骄横，多次作乱，罗绍威全部杀掉他们。
English: In the past, Wei Zhou's tooth soldiers were arrogant and made disturbances many times. Rossoway killed them all.

古文：太祖崩，杨师厚逐罗氏，据魏州，复置牙兵二千，末帝患之。
现代文：梁太祖死，杨师厚驱逐罗氏，占据魏州，又设置牙兵两干人，梁末帝担忧此事。
English: After the death of Liang Taizu, Yang Shihou expelled the Luo clan, occupied Weizhou, and set up two groups of tooth soldiers. Emperor Liang was worried about this.

古文：师厚死，岩与租庸判官邵赞议曰： 魏为唐患，百有馀年，自先帝时，尝切齿绍威，以其前恭而后倨。
现代文：杨师厚死，赵岩和租庸判官邵赞商议说： 魏州成为唐的祸患，一百多年了，自从先帝在时，就曾切齿愤恨罗绍威，因他先恭敬而后倨傲。
English: After the death of Yang Shih Hou, Zhao Yan and Zeng Yong judge Shao Zan discussed: "Weizhou has become the scourge of the Tang Dynasty for more than a hundred years. Since the time of the former emperor, he had been bitterly resentful of Rossowei, because he was first respectful and then proud.

古文：今先帝新弃天下，师厚复为陛下忧，所以然者，以魏地大而兵多也。
现代文：如今先帝刚死，杨师厚又成为陛下的忧患，之所以这样，是因为魏州地大兵多。
English: Now that the former emperor has just died, Yang Shihou has become a problem for His Majesty. The reason for this is that there are many soldiers in Weizhou.

古文：陛下不以此时制之，宁知后人不为师厚也？
现代文：陛下不藉这个时机控制魏州，怎知后人不成为杨师厚呢？
English: If your majesty does not take this opportunity to control Weizhou, how do you know that future generations will not become Yang Shihou?

古文：不若分相、魏为两镇，则无北顾之忧矣。 
现代文：不如分相、魏二州为两个镇，那就没有北颅的忧患了。 
English: If it were not for the separation of the two states into two towns, then there would be no worries for Beikun.

古文：末帝以为然，乃分相、澶、卫为昭德军。
现代文：梁末帝认为对，于是分相、澶、卫为昭德军。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai thought it was right, so he divided the army into three groups: the Second Division, the Third Division, and the Fourth Division.

古文：牙兵乱，以魏博降晋，梁由是尽失河北。
现代文：牙兵作乱，以魏博向晋投降，梁因此失去全部河北。
English: Liang lost all of Hebei after Wei Bo's soldiers mutinied and surrendered to Jin.

古文：是时，梁将刘鄩等与庄宗相距澶、魏之间，兵数败。
现代文：这时，梁将刘郭等人和唐庄宗在澶、魏间相对抗，军队多次被打败。
English: At this time, Liang put Liu Guo and others against Tang Zhuangzong in Wei and Wei, and the army was defeated many times.

古文：岩曰： 古之王者必郊祀天地，陛下即位犹未郊天，议者以为朝廷无异籓镇，如此何以威重天下？
现代文：赵岩说： 古代称王的人必定在郊外祭祀天地，陛下登位以来还没有在郊外祭天，议事的人认为朝廷和藩镇一样，像这样怎么能威重天下？
English: Zhao Yan said: In ancient times, those who claimed to be kings must have offered sacrifices to heaven and earth in the suburbs. Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has not offered sacrifices to heaven and earth in the suburbs. The deliberators think that the imperial court and the towns of the domain are the same. How can the world be dignified like this?

古文：今河北虽失，天下幸安，愿陛下力行之。 
现代文：如今虽然失去河北，天下幸好安定，希望陛下尽力施行。 
English: Today, although Hebei has been lost, the world is fortunately stable, and I hope that His Majesty will do his best.

古文：敬翔以为不可，曰： 今府库虚竭，箕敛供军，若行效禋，则必赏赉；是取虚名而受实弊也。 
现代文：敬翔认为不行，说： 如今府库空虚，竭力搜刮民财供给军队，如果行郊祀祭天大礼，就必须赏赐财物；这是博取虚名而遭受实际的危害。 
English: Respectful Xiang thought it was not possible, saying: Nowadays, the government treasury is empty, and they are trying their best to collect people's wealth to supply the army. If they perform the suburban worship and sacrifice, they must be rewarded with wealth; this is to gain a false reputation and suffer actual harm.

古文：末帝不听，乃备法驾幸西京，而庄宗取杨刘，或传： 晋兵入东都矣！ 
现代文：梁末帝不听，于是准备车驾到西京，而唐庄宗攻取杨刘，有人传言： 晋兵攻入束都了！ 
English: Emperor Liang did not listen, so he prepared to drive to Xijing, and Tangzhuangzong captured Yang Liu. There was a rumor: Jin soldiers invaded the Bundu!

古文：或曰： 扼汜水矣！ 
现代文：有人传言： 扼断汜水了！ 
English: Rumor has it that the water supply to Surabaya has been cut off!

古文：或曰： 下郓、濮矣！ 
现代文：有人传言： 攻下鄣、濮二州了！ 
English: There is a rumor going around that the two states of Yao and Handan have been conquered!

古文：京师大风拔木，末帝大惧，从官相顾而泣，末帝乃还东都，遂不果郊。
现代文：京师狂风拔起树木，梁末帝十分恐惧，随行的官吏相视而哭，梁末帝纔返回束都，于是没能在郊外祭天。
English: Beijing's fierce wind uprooted trees, Emperor Liang was very afraid, the accompanying officials looked at each other and cried, Emperor Liang returned to the capital, so he was unable to worship in the suburbs.

古文：镇州张文礼杀王镕，使人告梁曰： 臣已北召契丹，愿梁以兵万人出德、棣州，则晋兵惫矣。 
现代文：镇州张文礼杀王镕，派人告诉梁说： 我已北召契丹，希望梁率一万兵出德、棣二州，那么晋兵就疲惫了。 
English: Zhenzhou Zhang Wenli killed Wang Hui and sent someone to tell Liang Hui: I have summoned Khitan to the north, I hope Liang will lead ten thousand soldiers to leave Germany and conquer two states, then the Jin soldiers will be exhausted.

古文：敬翔以为然，岩与汉杰皆以为不可，乃止。
现代文：敬翔认为对，赵岩和张汉杰都认为不行，纔作罢。
English: Jing Xiang thinks it's right, Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie both think it's wrong, stop faking.

古文：其后黜王彦章用段凝，皆岩力也。
现代文：后来贬黜王彦章任用段凝，都是趟岩出的力。
English: Later, Wang Yanzhang appointed Duan Jie, all of which are the strength of the rock.

古文：庄宗兵将至汴，末帝惶惑不知所为，登建国楼以问群臣，或曰： 晋以孤军远来，势难持久，虽使入汴，不能守也。
现代文：唐庄宗的军队将到汴州，梁末帝惶恐迷乱不知所措，登上建国楼询问群臣，有人说： 晋率孤军远道而来，势必难以持久，即使让他们攻入汴梁，也不能坚守。
English: Tang Zhuangzong's army will go to Zhangzhou. Emperor Liang Matsuo is overwhelmed with fear and bewilderment. He ascends the Jianguo Building to inquire about his ministers. Someone said: "If Jin leads a lone army from afar, it is bound to be difficult to last. Even if they break into Zhangliang, they will not be able to hold on."

古文：宜幸洛阳，保险以召天下兵，徐图之，胜负未可知也。 
现代文：应当前往洛阳，据守险要，召集天下军队，慢慢谋取，胜负还不能肯定。 
English: It is necessary to go to Luoyang, according to the defense plan, call up the world's army, and slowly seek victory. The victory or defeat is not yet certain.

古文：末帝犹豫，岩曰： 势已如此，一下此楼，何人可保！ 
现代文：梁末帝犹豫不决，趟岩说： 形势已经如此，一旦走下这楼，谁人可保！ 
English: Liang Mudi hesitated, then said, "The situation is already like this. Once you go down from this floor, who will be safe?

古文：末帝卒死于楼上。
现代文：梁末帝最终死在楼上。
English: Liang Masti eventually died upstairs.

古文：当岩用事时，许州温韬尤曲事岩，岩因顾其左右曰： 吾常待韬厚，今以急投之，必不幸吾为利。 
现代文：当趟岩专权时，许州温韬特别曲意迎合赵岩，趟岩于是望着他左右的人说： 我常常待温韬很好，如今因为危急投靠他，他必定不会以我谋利。 
English: When he had exclusive power over the rock, Xu Zhou Wenqi catered to Zhao Yan in a special way. The rock then looked at the people around him and said: I often treat Wenqi very well. Now, because I rely on him in a critical situation, he will certainly not take advantage of me.

古文：乃走投韬，韬斩其首以献。
现代文：于是投奔温韬，温韬砍下他的头进献。
English: So he ran to Wen Xuan, and Wen Xuan cut off his head as an offering.

古文：庄宗已灭梁，岩素所善段凝奏请诛岩家属，乃族灭之。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁后，段凝历来和趟岩很好，上奏请求杀掉趟岩的家属，于是将趟岩家灭族。
English: After Tangzhuangzong annihilated Liang, Duan Geng has always been very good with Waiyan. At the beginning, he requested to kill Waiyan's family members, so he will go to Waiyan to exterminate the tribe.

古文：呜呼，祸福之理，岂可一哉！
现代文：唉，祸福的道理，哪能全一样呢！
English: Alas, the principles of misfortune and good fortune, how can they all be the same!

古文：君子小人之祸福异也。
现代文：君子小人的祸福就不同。
English: The fortune and misfortune of a gentleman and a villain are different.

古文：老子曰： 祸兮福所倚，福兮祸所伏。 
现代文：老子说： 祸啊是福倚藏的地方，福啊是祸潜伏的地方。 
English: Lao Tzu said: "Disaster is the place where good luck hides, and good luck is the place where evil lurks."

古文：后世之谈祸福者，皆以其言为至论也。
现代文：后世谈论祸福的人，都把他的话作为至理名言。
English: People in later generations who talk about the good and the bad have taken his words as the most reasonable words.

古文：夫为善而受福，焉得祸？
现代文：行善而得到福，哪里会有祸？
English: Where is the harm in doing good and being blessed?

古文：为恶而受祸，焉得福？
现代文：作恶而遭受祸，哪里会有福？
English: Where is there any blessing for him who does evil and suffers for it?

古文：惟君子之罹非祸者，未必不为福；小人求非福者，未尝不及祸，此自然之理也。始，犨自以先见之明，深结梁太祖，及其子孙皆享其禄利，自谓知所托矣，安知其族卒与梁俱灭也？
现代文：只有君子遭受意外的祸未必就不是福；小人寻求超越本分的福，未尝就不会碰上祸，这是自然而然的道理当初，趟击靠先见之明，和梁太祖深交，到他的子孙后代都享受梁的利禄，自以为深知所托，哪里知道他的家族最终和梁一同灭亡呢？
English: Only if a gentleman suffers an unexpected misfortune, it may not be a blessing; if a villain seeks a blessing beyond his duty, he will not encounter a disaster. This is a natural reason. At the beginning, he relied on foresight, was deeply acquainted with Liang Taizu, and his descendants enjoyed Liang's Liluo. He thought he knew what was entrusted to him. How did he know that his family would eventually perish with Liang?

古文：犨之求福于梁，盖老氏之所谓福也，非君子之所求也，不可戒哉！
现代文：赵肇向梁求福，是老氏所说的福，不是君子所要追求的福，能不引以为戒吗？
English: Zhao Zhao asked Liang for blessing, which is the blessing that Lao Shi said, but not the blessing that a gentleman should pursue. Can we not take this as a warning?

古文：○冯行袭冯行袭，字正臣，均州人也。
现代文：冯行袭字正臣，是均州人。
English: Feng Xingyi, also known as Zheng Sheng, was a native of Gyeongju.

古文：唐末，山南盗孙喜以众千人袭均州刺史吕烨，烨不能御。
现代文：唐末，山南盗贼孙喜率领一千人袭击均川刺史吕烽，吕烽不能抵御。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the Shannan thief Sun Xi led a thousand people to attack the Juncheon assassin Lv Ying, and Lv Ying could not resist.

古文：行袭为州校，乃阴选勇士伏江南，独乘小舟逆喜，告曰： 州人闻公至，皆欲归矣。
现代文：冯行袭任州军校，于是暗中挑选勇士埋伏在江南，独自乘小船迎接孙喜，告诉他说： 州中人听说你到了，都想归附你！
English: Feng Xing attacked the Renzhou Military Academy, so he secretly selected warriors to ambush in the south of the Yangtze River, and took a small boat to meet Sun Xi alone, telling him: People in the state heard that you had arrived, and they all wanted to join you!

古文：然知公兵多，民惧虏掠，恐其惊扰，请留兵江北，独与腹心数人从行，愿为前导，以慰安州民，事可立定。 
现代文：但知道你的军队多，老百姓害怕掳掠，恐怕他们惊扰，请求你把军队留在江北，独自和几个心腹前去，我愿做你们的前导，以安慰州中百姓，此事可以立即平定。 
English: However, knowing that you have a large number of troops, the common people are afraid of kidnapping and plunder, fearing that they will be disturbed. I ask you to leave the troops in the north of the river and go alone with a few close friends. I would like to be your guide to comfort the people in the middle of the state. This matter can be settled immediately.

古文：喜以为然，乃留其兵江北，独与行袭渡江。
现代文：孙喜信以为然，于是把他的军队留在江北，独自和冯行袭渡江。
English: Sun Xixin thought so, so he left his army in the north of the Yangtze River to cross the river alone with Feng Xinglu.

古文：军吏前谒，行袭击喜仆地，斩之，伏兵发，尽杀从行者。
现代文：军吏上前拜见，冯行袭把孙喜打倒在地，杀掉他，伏兵齐发，杀掉全部随行的人。
English: The military official came forward to meet him, Feng Xingyan knocked Sun Xi to the ground and killed him, and ambushed and killed all the people accompanying him.

古文：馀兵在江北，闻喜死，皆溃。
现代文：其余的士兵在江北，听说孙喜死，都溃散了。
English: When the rest of the soldiers in the north of the Yangtze River heard that Sun Xi had died, they all scattered.

古文：山南节度使刘巨容表行袭均州刺史。
现代文：山南节度使刘巨容表奏冯行袭为均州刺史。
English: The Shannan Festival made Liu Juroong perform the Fengxing attack as a stab at the history of Junzhou.

古文：是时，僖宗在蜀，诸镇贡献行在者皆道山南，盗贼多据州西长山以邀劫之，行袭尽破诸贼。
现代文：这时，唐僖宗在蜀，各个方镇向皇帝贡献财物的人都取道山南，盗贼常盘踞州西长山拦劫财物，冯行袭攻破全部盗贼。
English: At this time, Tang Xizong was in Shu, and people from all over the country who wanted to donate goods to the emperor took the road to Shannan. Thieves often tried to rob the goods in the West Changshan of Ganzhou, and Feng Xing attacked and defeated all the thieves.

古文：洋州葛佐辟行袭行军司马，使以兵镇谷口，通秦、蜀道，行袭由此知名。
现代文：洋州葛佐召冯行袭任行军司马，让他率兵镇守谷口，使秦、蜀道路畅通，冯行袭因此出名。
English: Yangzhou Geza called Feng Xingai to be the commander of the marching army, and let him lead the soldiers to guard the valley mouth, so that the Qin and Shu roads were smooth. Feng Xingai is famous for this.

古文：李茂贞兼领山南，遣子继臻守金州，行袭逐之，遂据金州。
现代文：李茂贞兼领山南节度使，派儿子李继臻守金州，冯行袭驱逐他，于是占据金州。
English: Li Maozhen also led the Shannan Festival envoy, sent his son Li Jizhen to defend Jinzhou, Feng Xing attacked and expelled him, and then occupied Jinzhou.

古文：昭宗乃以金州为戎昭军，拜行袭节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗就以金州为戎昭军，拜冯行袭为节度使。
English: Tang Zhaozong took Jinzhou as the army of Zhaozhou, and the Baifeng Campaign as the festival.

古文：昭宗在岐，梁太祖引兵而西，中尉韩全诲遣中官郄文晏等二十馀人召兵江淮，以拒太祖，行袭已附梁，乃尽杀文晏等。
现代文：唐昭宗在岐，梁太祖率兵西行，中尉韩全诲派宦官郄文晏等二十多人在江淮召兵，以抵御梁太祖，冯行袭已归附梁，于是全部杀掉郄文晏等人。
English: Tang Zhaozong was in Qi, Liang Taizu led the troops to the west, Lieutenant Han Quanzhang sent eunuch Wang Wenyi and more than 20 others to the Huai River to call up troops to resist Liang Taizu. Feng Xingyi had already joined Liang, so they all killed Wang Wenyi and others.

古文：太祖攻赵匡凝于襄阳，行袭遣子勖以舟兵会均、房，以功迁匡国军节度使。
现代文：梁太祖在襄阳攻打赵匡凝，冯行袭派儿子冯勖率水军在均、房二州会合，因功升任匡国军节度使。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Zhao Kuangning in Xiangyang, and Feng Xinghuai sent his son Feng Rong to lead the navy to meet in Zhunan and Fang Erzhou, and was promoted to the commander of the Kuangguo Army.

古文：行袭为人严酷少恩，而所至辄天幸，境旱有蝗，则飞鸟食之，岁凶，田中卤谷自生。
现代文：冯行袭为人严酷，缺少恩惠，而所到之地每每碰上好运，境内干旱有蝗灾，飞鸟就吃掉蝗虫；年成不好，田中就自己长出野稻谷。
English: Feng Xingyuan was a harsh man, lacking grace, but the places he visited always had good luck. There was a drought and locust plague in the country, and the birds ate the locusts. When the year was not good, Tanaka himself grew wild rice.

古文：唐衰，知梁必兴，尤尽心倾附事梁，官至司空，封长乐郡王，卒赠太傅，谥曰忠敬。
现代文：唐朝廷衰落，他知道梁必定兴盛，尤其尽心尽力事奉梁，官做到司空，封长乐郡王，死后赠太傅，谧号忠敬。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was in decline, he knew that Liang would certainly prosper. In particular, he devoted himself to serving Liang with all his heart and efforts. He was promoted to the official rank of Siku, crowned as the King of Changle County, and given the title of Taifu after his death. His posthumous name was Zhongjing.

