古文：徐凝以 瀑布界破青山 之句，东坡指为恶诗，故不为诗人所称说。
现代文：徐凝有 瀑布界破青山 的诗句，被苏东坡指摘为恶诗，因此不被诗人们所称道。
English: Su Dongpo pointed out that Xu Geng's poem "The Waterfall Breaks the Blue Mountain" was a bad poem, so it was not praised by poets.

古文：予家有凝集，观其余篇，亦自有佳处。
现代文：我家中有徐凝的诗集，看看他其它的诗篇，也自有佳妙的地方。
English: I have a collection of poems by Xu Rong in my home. If you look at his other poems, you will also find something wonderful.

古文：今漫纪数绝于此。
现代文：现在随意记下几首绝句在此。
English: Now feel free to jot down a few last words here.

古文：《汉宫曲》云： 水色帘前流玉霜，赵家飞燕侍昭阳。
现代文：《汉宫曲》写道： 水色帘前流玉霜，赵家飞燕侍昭阳。
English: "Han Gongqu" wrote: Jade frost flows in front of the water-colored curtain, Zhao Jiafei and Yan serve Zhao Yang.

古文：常中舞罢箫声绝，三十六宫秋夜长。 
现代文：掌中舞罢萧声绝，三十六宫秋夜长。 
English: The dance in the palm of one's hand fades away, and the autumn night of the 36th palace is long gone.

古文：《忆扬州》云： 萧娘脸下难胜泪，桃叶眉头是得愁。
现代文：《忆扬州》写道： 萧娘脸下难胜泪，桃叶眉头易得愁。
English: "Remembering Yangzhou" wrote: Xiao Niang's face is hard to shed tears, and her peach-leaf eyebrows are easy to worry about.

古文：天下三分明月夜，二分无赖是扬州。 
现代文：天下三分明月夜，二分无赖是扬州。 
English: The world is divided into three parts: the bright moon, the night, and Yangzhou.

古文：《相思林》云： 远客远游新过岭，每逢芳树问芳名。
现代文：《相思林》写道： 远客远游新过岭，每逢芳树问芳名。
English: "The Acacia Grove" wrote: The traveler travels far and wide across the new ridge, and each time the tree asks its name.

古文：长林遍是相思树，争遣愁人独自行。 
现代文：长林遍是相思树，争遣愁人独自行。 
English: The long forest is covered with acacia trees, and the lonely people walk alone.

古文：《玩花》云： 一树梨花春向暮，雪枝残处怨风来。
现代文：《玩花》写道： 一树梨花春向暮，雪枝残处怨风来。
English: "Playing with Flowers" writes: A pear tree blossoms from spring to autumn, and the remnants of snow branches complain about the wind.

古文：明朝渐校无多去，看到黄昏不欲回。 
现代文：明朝渐校无多去，看到黄昏不欲回。 
English: There's not much to do in the morning, and I don't want to go back in the evening.

古文：《将归江外辞韩侍郎》云： 一生所遇唯元白，天下无人重布衣。
现代文：《将归江外辞韩侍郎》云： 一生所遇唯元白，天下无人重布衣。
English: "Will return to the outside of the river, Han Zhi Rong" cloud: I have only met Yuan Bai in my life, and no one in the world has a heavy coat.

古文：欲别朱门泪先尽，白头游子白身归。 
现代文：欲别朱门泪先尽，白头游于自身归。 
English: Don't let Zhu Men's tears run out first, let him swim back to himself.

古文：皆有情致，宜其见知于微之、乐天也。
现代文：这些诗都很有情趣雅致，可见徐凝受到元稹、白居易的知遇是有道理的。
English: These poems are very tasteful and elegant. It can be seen that it is reasonable for Xu Geng to be well received by Yuan Qi and Bai Juyi.

古文：但俗子妄作乐天诗，缪为赏激，以起东坡之诮耳。
现代文：只是世间俗子妄自仿作白居易的诗，不加辨别地加以激赏，因为遭到苏东坡的责备罢了。
English: It's just that the world's vulgarians imitated Bai Juyi's poems and praised them indiscriminately, because they were rebuked by Su Dongpo.

