古文：昭阳大荒落，一年。
现代文：昭阳大荒落，一年。
English: Shoyang was devastated for a year.

古文：太祖文皇帝下之下元嘉三十年
现代文：宋文帝元嘉三十年
English: Emperor Songwen Yuanjia's 30th anniversary

古文：春，正月，戊寅，以南谯王义宣为司徒、扬州刺史。
现代文：春季正月，戊寅，刘宋文帝任命南谯王刘义宣为司徒、扬州刺史。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Wu Yin and Liu Songwen appointed Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, as the tutor of Yangzhou.

古文：萧道成等帅氐、羌攻魏武都，魏高平镇将苟莫于将突骑二千救之。
现代文：左军中兵参军萧道成等人率领氐、羌各部落进攻北魏的武都。北魏驻守高平的镇将苟莫于率领骁勇骑兵二千人救援武都。
English: Xiao Daocheng, a member of the Left Army, and others led the  and  tribes to attack the Northern Wei capital. The town of Northern Wei stationed in Gaoping would not be able to rescue the capital with 2,000 brave cavalrymen.

古文：道成等引还南郑。
现代文：萧道成等人率兵退回到南郑。
English: Xiao Daocheng and others retreated to Nan Zheng.

古文：壬午，以征北将军始兴王濬为荆州刺史。
现代文：壬午，文帝任命征北将军、始兴王刘浚为荆州刺史。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Emperor Wen appointed Liu Jun, the general of the Northern Expedition and the first king of Xingxing, as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：帝怒未解，故濬久留京口；既除荆州，乃听入朝。
现代文：文帝对刘浚的怒气一直未消，所以刘浚长时间被留在京口。直到任命他做荆州刺史，才允许他进京朝见。
English: Emperor Wen's anger toward Liu Jun remained unquenched, so Liu Jun was kept in Beijing for a long time. He was not allowed to visit Beijing until he was appointed as the official historian of Jingzhou.

古文：戊子，诏江州刺史武陵王骏统诸军讨西阳蛮，军于五洲。
现代文：戊子，文帝诏令江州刺史、武陵王刘骏统率各路大军，讨伐西阳蛮。刘骏率军进驻五洲。
English: Wu Zi and Emperor Wen issued an edict to Jiangzhou Zhishi and Wuling King Liu Bei to lead the armies of all directions to fight against Xiyang. Liu Bei led the army to Wuzhou.

古文：严道育之亡命也，上分遣使者搜捕甚急。
现代文：女巫严道育逃走之后，文帝派出人马，到各地严加搜捕，形势很紧迫。
English: After the sorceress escaped through strict education, Emperor Wen sent people and horses to all parts of the country to search for her. The situation was very urgent.

古文：道育变服为尼，匿于东宫，又随始兴王濬至京口。或出止民张旿家。
现代文：严道育把自己打扮成尼姑的样子，一直躲藏在太子宫内，后来又随始兴王刘浚到了京口，有时，她也出入当地居民张家里。
English: Yan Daoyu disguised herself as a nun and hid in the prince's womb. Later, she accompanied Prince Liu to Beijing. Sometimes, she also went in and out of local resident Zhang's home.

古文：濬入朝，复载还东宫，欲与俱往江陵。
现代文：刘浚进京朝见文帝，又把她偷偷带回到了太子宫，打算携她一道前往江陵。
English: Liu Jun went to Beijing in the morning to see Emperor Wen, and secretly brought her back to the imperial palace, intending to take her with him to Jiangling.

古文：丁巳，上临轩，濬入受拜。
现代文：丁巳，文帝升殿，刘浚入殿，接受荆州刺史之职。
English: Ding Si, Wen Di ascended to the throne, Liu Jun entered the throne, and accepted the post of Jingzhou assassin.

古文：是日，有告道育在张旿家者，上遣掩捕，得其二婢，云道育随征北还都。
现代文：当天，有人向朝廷告发严道育藏在张家，文帝派人突然前去搜捕，抓到了严道育的两个婢女，供说严道育已经跟着征北将军刘浚回到了京都。
English: On the same day, someone reported to the imperial court that Yan Daoyu was hiding in Zhang's house, and Emperor Wen sent someone to make a sudden search and arrest. They caught two of Yan Daoyu's maidservants, who confessed that Yan Daoyu had returned to Kyoto with the Northern Expeditionary Force General Liu Jun.

古文：上谓濬与太子劭已斥遣道育，而闻其犹与往来，惆怅惋骇，乃命京口送二婢，须至检覆，乃治劭、濬之罪。
现代文：文帝一直认为刘浚和太子刘劭已经赶走了严道育，现在忽然听说他仍然和严道育秘密来往，不禁大为惊异叹惋，非常伤心。他命令京口官府把两个婢女押送到京师，等到调查完后，再决定如何定刘劭和刘浚的罪过。
English: Emperor Wen had always believed that Liu Jun and Prince Liu Ye had driven away Yan Daoyu, but now he suddenly heard that he was still secretly in contact with Yan Daoyu, he couldn't help but be very surprised and sad. He ordered the Beijing government to escort the two maidservants to Beijing, and wait until the investigation was over before deciding how to determine the guilt of Liu Jun and Liu Ye.

古文：潘淑妃抱濬泣曰： 汝前祝诅事发，犹冀能刻意思愆；何意更藏严道育！
现代文：潘淑妃抱住刘浚，哭着说： 你上次与严道育一起进行巫咒蛊惑的事情败露，当时我还希望你能仔细反省自己的过失，哪里想到你还把严道育窝藏起来了！
English: Pan Shufei hugged Liu Jun and said in tears: The last time you and Yan Daoyu carried out a spell together, it was revealed. At that time, I also hoped that you would carefully reflect on your mistakes. Who would have thought that you were still hiding Yan Daoyu?

古文：上怒甚，我叩头乞恩不能解，今何用生为！
现代文：皇上气得不得了，尽管我跪下叩头乞求他开恩，都不能使他平息愤怒，现在这样，我活着还有什么用呢？
English: The Emperor was furious, and although I knelt down and prostrated myself before him, begging for his forgiveness, he was unable to quell his anger. What was the use of my life now?

古文：可送药来，当先自取尽，不忍见汝祸败也。 
现代文：你可以先把毒药给我送来，我该先行一步自杀，因为我实在不忍心看见你自己闯祸，弄得身败名裂啊。 
English: You can send me the poison first, I should kill myself first, because I really can't bear to see you get into trouble and ruin your reputation.

古文：濬奋衣起曰： 天下事寻自当判，愿小宽虑，必不上累！ 
现代文：刘浚听完，立刻挣脱开母亲，跳起来说： 天下大事都要靠自己来解决裁断，我希望您能稍放宽心，我肯定不会连累您。 
English: After listening, Liu Jun immediately broke away from his mother, jumped up and said: The world's major events must be resolved by themselves. I hope you can relax a little, I will certainly not burden you.

古文：己未，魏京兆王杜元宝坐谋反诛；建宁王崇及其子济南王丽皆为元宝所引，赐死。
现代文：己未，北魏京兆王杜元宝因谋反，被斩。建宁王拓跋崇和他的儿子济南王拓跋丽，都受杜元宝事件的牵连，被赐自杀。
English: Not long after, the Northern Wei Jingzhao King Du Yuanbao was beheaded for plotting a rebellion. Jianning King Tuobaozong and his son Jinan King Tuobaoli, both implicated in the Du Yuanbao incident, were sentenced to suicide.

古文：帝欲废太子劭，赐始兴王濬死，先与侍中王僧绰谋之；使僧绰寻汉魏以来废太子、诸王典故，送尚书仆射徐湛之及吏部尚书江湛。
现代文：文帝打算废黜太子刘劭，并要赐始兴王刘浚自杀，事先和侍中王僧绰商议。文帝让王僧绰查找汉魏以来废黜太子、诸亲王的事例，分别送给尚书仆射徐湛之和吏部尚书江湛。
English: Emperor Wen planned to depose Prince Liu Bei, and wanted to give Prince Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun to commit suicide, and discussed it in advance with the attendant Wang Monk Cao. Emperor Wen asked Wang Monk Cao to look up the cases of dethroning princes and princes since the Han and Wei Dynasties, and sent it to Shang Shu's servant Sha Xu Zhan and the official Shang Shu's subordinate Shang Shu Jiang Zhan.

古文：武陵王骏素无宠，故屡出外籓，不得留建康；南平王铄、建平王宏皆为帝所爱。
现代文：武陵王刘骏平时得不到宠爱，他总是到外地藩镇做官，而不能留在建康任职。南平王刘铄、建平王刘宏二人都受文帝的宠爱。
English: Wuling King Liu Bei was not favored in peacetime. He always went to other provinces and towns to work as an official, but could not stay in Jiankang. Nanping King Liu Bei and Jianping King Liu Hong were both favored by Emperor Wen.

古文：铄妃，江湛之妹；随王诞妃，徐湛之之女也。
现代文：刘铄的妃子是江湛的妹妹，随王刘诞的妃子是徐湛之的女儿。
English: Liu Yao's concubine was Jiang Zhan's sister, and the concubine of Wang Liu's birth was Xu Zhan's daughter.

古文：湛劝帝立铄，湛之意欲立诞。
现代文：江湛鼓动文帝立刘铄为太子，徐湛之则想立刘诞为太子。
English: Jiang Zhan encouraged Emperor Wen to make Liu Xuan the crown prince, while Xu Zhan wanted to make Liu Xuan the crown prince.

古文：僧绰曰： 建立之事，仰由圣怀。
现代文：王僧绰说： 封立太子这件事，应由陛下作主决定。
English: Wang Sengchao said, "The matter of crowning a prince should be decided by His Majesty.

古文：臣谓唯宜速断，不可稽缓。 当断不断，反受其乱。 
现代文：我以为应该立即决断，不能再等待拖延了。 当断不断，反受其乱。 
English: I thought I should make a decision right away, I couldn't wait any longer to procrastinate.

古文：愿以义割恩，略小不忍；不尔，便应坦怀如初，无烦疑论。
现代文：但愿陛下您能用国家大义去割舍您的骨肉亲情，不要在小事上不忍。不然您就应该像当初那样以父情对待儿子，不再不厌其烦地怀疑谈论这些事。
English: I hope, Your Majesty, that you can use the great cause of the country to give up your flesh-and-blood relatives, and do not be impatient in small matters. Otherwise, you should treat your son with fatherly feelings as you did at the beginning, and no longer talk about these things with suspicion.

古文：事机虽密，易致宣广，不可使难生虎表，取笑千载。 帝曰： 卿可谓能断大事。
现代文：决定重新封立太子一事虽然是在极保密的情况下进行的，最终也还是容易泄漏出去，不应该让灾难发生在您的意料之外，而被后世所耻笑。 文帝说： 你真可以说是能够决断大事的人。
English: Although the decision to reinstate the crown prince was made under extremely confidential circumstances, it was still easy to leak out in the end. You should not let the disaster happen unexpectedly and be ridiculed by future generations. Emperor Wen said: You can really be said to be a person who can decide big things.

古文：然此事至重，不可不殷勤三思。
现代文：可是，这件事事关重大，不能不非常小心谨慎，三思而后行。
English: However, this is a very important matter, and we must be very cautious and think twice before proceeding.

古文：且彭城始亡。人将谓我无复慈爱之道。 
现代文：而且，彭城王刘义康刚刚去世，我这样做，别人将会说我是不再有慈爱之心的人了。 
English: Moreover, Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, has just passed away. If I do this, others will say that I am no longer a compassionate person.

古文：僧绰曰： 臣恐千载之后，言陛下唯能裁弟，不能裁儿。 
现代文：王僧绰说： 我恐怕千年以后，人们会说陛下您只能制裁弟弟，而不能制裁儿子。 
English: "I am afraid that a thousand years from now, people will say, 'Your Majesty, you can only discipline your younger brother, but not your son,'" Wang Xizhao said.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：文帝沉默无语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：江湛同侍坐，出阁，谓僧绰曰： 卿向言将不太伤切直！ 
现代文：当时，江湛也一同陪座，出了宫门后，他对王僧绰说： 你刚才说的那些话，恐怕过于直切些了！ 
English: At that time, Jiang Zhan was also present, and after leaving the palace gate, he said to Wang Monchu: Those words you just said, I'm afraid, are too direct!

古文：僧绰曰： 弟亦恨君不直！ 
现代文：王僧绰回答说： 我也很遗憾你太不直切了。 
English: Wang Xizhao replied, "I'm also very sorry that you are so dishonest.

古文：铄自寿阳入朝，既至，失旨。
现代文：刘铄从寿阳回朝，到京之后，很令文帝失望。
English: After Liu Bei returned to Beijing from Shouyang, Emperor Wen was very disappointed.

古文：帝欲立宏，嫌其非次，是以议久不决。
现代文：文帝打算封立刘宏为太子，可是，他又担心不符合长幼次序，因而，商议许久也决定不下来。
English: Emperor Wen planned to make Liu Hong the crown prince, but he was worried that it would not be in accordance with the order of the eldest son and the youngest son. Therefore, after much deliberation, it was decided not to do so.

古文：每夜与湛之屏人语，或连日累夕。
现代文：每天夜里，文帝都要跟徐湛之秘密商谈，有时甚至是整天整夜。
English: Every night, Emperor Wen would have secret talks with Emperor Xu, sometimes even all day and all night.

古文：常使湛之自秉烛，绕壁检行，虑有窃听者。
现代文：文帝还经常让徐湛之亲自举着蜡烛，绕着墙壁进行检查，唯恐有人窃听。
English: Emperor Wen also often asked Xu Zhanzhi to personally hold a candle and walk around the walls to check, lest someone eavesdrop.

古文：帝以其谋告潘淑妃，淑妃以告濬，濬驰报劭。
现代文：文帝把这一计划告诉了潘淑妃。潘淑妃告诉了刘浚，刘浚骑马飞奔去告诉了刘劭。
English: Emperor Wen told this plan to Pan Shufei. Pan Shufei told it to Liu Jun, and Liu Jun told it to Liu Ye as they were galloping on horseback.

古文：劭乃密与腹心队主陈叔儿、斋帅张超之等谋为逆。
现代文：刘劭于是立刻和他的心腹、队主陈叔儿及斋帅张超之等人谋划制造叛乱。
English: As a result, Liu Wei immediately plotted with his henchmen, team leader Chen Shu'er and commander Zhang Chaozhi, and others to create a rebellion.

古文：初，帝以宗室强盛，虑有内难，特加东宫兵，使与羽林相若，至有实甲万人。
现代文：当初，文帝认为皇室力量强大，唯恐内部发生变难，因此，他特别加强了东宫的兵力，让东宫的兵力和羽林军的兵力差不多，实际兵力达到了一万人。
English: At first, Emperor Wen believed that the imperial family was powerful and feared internal difficulties. Therefore, he strengthened the strength of the East Palace in particular, so that the strength of the East Palace was similar to that of the Yulin Army, and the actual strength reached ten thousand.

古文：劭性黠而刚猛，帝深倚之。
现代文：刘劭性情狡猾而又刚强勇猛，文帝一直深深地依赖着他。
English: Liu Bei was cunning, strong and brave. Emperor Wen had always been deeply dependent on him.

古文：及将作乱，每夜飨将士，或亲自行酒。
现代文：刘劭将要反叛时，每天夜里都要设宴犒劳东宫卫队的将士们，有时甚至亲自前来敬酒。
English: When Liu Bei was about to rebel, he would hold a banquet every night to reward the soldiers of the Eastern Palace Guard, and sometimes he would even come to make a toast.

古文：王僧绰密以启闻，会严道育婢将至，癸亥夜，劭诈为帝诏云： 鲁秀谋反，汝可平明守阙，帅众入。 
现代文：王僧绰听说后，秘密报告给了文帝。
English: After Wang Zengchao heard about it, he gave the secret report to Emperor Wen.

古文：因使张超之等集素所畜养兵士二千馀人，皆被甲；召内外幢队主副，豫加部勒，云有所讨。
现代文：这时正赶上严道育的两个婢女就要被押到朝廷。癸亥夜晚，刘劭伪造了文帝的诏书说： 鲁秀图谋反叛，命令你清晨守住宫门，率领众兵入宫。 
English: At this time, Yan Daoyu's two maidservants were about to be taken to the imperial court. That night, Liu Bei forged Emperor Wen's edict saying, "Lu Xiu is plotting a rebellion and orders you to guard the palace gate in the morning and lead the troops into the palace."

古文：夜，呼前中庶子右军长史萧斌、左卫率袁叔、中舍人殷仲素、左积弩将军王正见并入宫。
现代文：刘劭又命令张超之等集合起平时特别豢养的士卒二千多人，让他们全副武装。接着，刘劭又召集内外巡逻队的正副队长，事先加以安排布置声称有紧急征讨。这天深夜，刘劭传唤前中庶子右军长史萧斌、左卫率袁淑、中舍人殷仲素和左积弩将军王正见，一同进入东宫。
English: Liu Bei also ordered Zhang Chaozhi and others to assemble more than two thousand soldiers who were specially trained in peacetime, so that they were fully armed. Next, Liu Bei also convened the captains and vice-captains of the patrols at home and abroad, arranged the layout in advance, and claimed that there was an emergency conscription. Late that night, Liu Bei summoned the former middle son of the right army commander Shi Xiaobin, the left guard leader Yuan Shu, the middle son of Yin Zhongsu, and the left jade general Wang Zhengmi, and entered the East Palace together.

古文：劭流涕谓曰： 主上信谗，将见罪废。
现代文：刘劭涕泪横流，崐对他们说： 主上听信别人的谗言，要把我治罪废黜。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Liu Yuxuan said to them: "The Lord has listened to the criticism of others and wants to punish and dethrone me.

古文：内省无过，不能受枉。
现代文：我自己反省并没有什么过失，不能被别人冤枉了。
English: I didn't do anything wrong in my self-reflection, how can I be wronged by this.

古文：明旦当行大事，望相与戮力。 
现代文：明天一早，我就该做出一件大事，希望你们和我共同努力。 
English: Tomorrow morning, I should make a big thing, I hope you and I work together.

古文：因起，遍拜之。
现代文：说完，刘劭就从座位上站了起来，向在座各位下拜。
English: Having said that, Liu Ye stood up from his seat and bowed to everyone present.

古文：众惊愕，莫能对。
现代文：大家听后都极为惊愕震憾，没有谁敢于回答。
English: Everyone was extremely surprised and shocked after hearing this, and no one dared to answer.

古文：久之，淑、斌皆曰： 自古无此，愿加善思！ 
现代文：袁淑和萧斌都说： 自古以来都没有过这样的事情，希望再好好考虑考虑。 
English: Yuan Shuk and Xiao Bin both said: Nothing like this has happened since ancient times. I hope you will think about it carefully.

古文：劭怒，变色。
现代文：刘劭听后不禁勃然大怒，板起面孔。
English: After listening to Liu Ye, he couldn't help but fly into a rage, and his face turned pale.

古文：斌惧，与众俱曰： 当竭身奉命。 
现代文：萧斌一看，感到害怕，就和其他人一起说： 我们自当竭尽全力执行您的命令。 
English: When Xiao Bin saw this, he felt scared and said with the others, "We should do our best to carry out your order."

古文：淑叱之曰： 卿便谓殿下真有是邪？
现代文：袁淑听后，叱责他们说： 你们以为殿下是真要这样吗？
English: Yuan Shuko scolded him, "You're supposed to be His Highness, is this really happening?

古文：殿下幼尝患风，或是疾动耳。 
现代文：殿下小时候曾经得过疯病，大概是疯病发作了。 
English: When he was a child, His Royal Highness suffered from a bout of mania.

古文：劭愈怒，因眄淑曰： 事当克不？ 
现代文：刘劭听后更是怒不可遏，斜着眼睛看着袁淑说： 我的事能不能办成？ 
English: After listening to this, Liu Ye became even more furious. He looked at Yuan Shu with slanted eyes and said, "Can I accomplish my task?

古文：淑曰： 居不疑之地，何患不克！
现代文：袁淑回答说： 你现在处在绝对不会被人怀疑的地位，怎么能做不到呢！
English: Yuan Shu replied: You are now in a position where you will never be suspected, how can you not do it!

古文：但恐既克之后，不为天地所容，大祸亦旋至耳。
现代文：只是担心你在做成之后，不会被天地所容，大祸也会马上随之而来。
English: I'm just worried that after you're done, you won't be tolerated by heaven and earth, and disaster will follow immediately.

古文：假有此谋，犹将可息。 
现代文：假使真有这种打算还可以收回。 
English: Even if there is such an intention, it can still be withdrawn.

古文：左右引淑出，曰： 此何事，而云可罢乎！ 
现代文：左右之人把袁淑拉出去说： 这是什么事，怎么可以说半途而废呢？ 
English: People on both sides pulled Ms. Yuan out and said, "What is this, how can you give up halfway?

古文：淑还省，绕床行，至四更乃寝。
现代文：袁淑从太子刘劭那里回来后，反复琢磨。绕着床铺来回走动，直到四更才上床睡觉。
English: After Yuan Shu came back from Prince Liu Bei, she pondered over and over again. She walked around the bed and did not go to bed until four o'clock.

古文：甲子，宫门未开，劭以硃衣加戎服上，乘画轮车，与萧斌同载，卫从如常入朝之仪。
现代文：甲子，皇宫宫门还未打开，刘劭身穿朝服，内穿戎装，乘坐画轮车，与萧斌一同乘坐，侍卫随从们和平时入朝朝见的样子一样。
English: In the first place, the palace gate of the imperial palace has not yet opened, Liu Ye is wearing a court dress, wearing a military uniform inside, riding a cartwheel, riding with Xiao Bin, and the attendants are in the same way as they are in peacetime.

古文：呼袁淑甚急，淑眠不起，劭停车奉化门催之相续。
现代文：刘劭派人急急忙忙地去叫袁淑，袁淑此时正在沉沉入睡，不肯起床，刘劭将车停在奉化门帝，不断派人前去催促。
English: Liu Ye sent someone to call Yuan Shu in a hurry. Yuan Shu was now fast asleep and refused to get up. Liu Ye parked the car in Fenghuamendi and kept sending people to urge her.

古文：淑徐起，至车后；劭使登车，又辞不上，劭命左右杀之。
现代文：袁淑慢腾腾地起床了，来到刘劭乘坐的车的后边，刘劭让他登上车，袁淑又推辞不肯上去，刘劭命令左右斩了袁淑。
English: Yuan Shuxu slowly got up and came to the back of the car Liu Yao was riding in. Liu Yao let him board the car, Yuan Shuxu refused to go, and Liu Yao ordered Yuan Shuxu to be beheaded.

古文：守门开，从万春门入。
现代文：宫门打开，刘劭从万春门进去。
English: The palace gate opened, and Liu Ye entered through the Banchun Gate.

古文：旧制，东宫队不得入城。
现代文：按照以往的宫廷制度，太子宫卫队是不能进入宫城的。
English: According to the previous palace system, the Prince's and Princess's palace guards were not allowed to enter Miyagi.

古文：劭以伪诏示门卫曰： 受敕，有所收讨。 
现代文：刘劭为此就把自己伪造的皇帝诏令拿给守卫看，说： 我奉皇帝旨令，要进宫讨伐叛逆。 
English: For this reason, Liu Ye showed his forged imperial edict to the guards and said, "I have been ordered by the emperor to enter the palace to fight against the rebels."

古文：令后队速来。
现代文：又催促后面的队伍赶快前来。
English: He also urged the group behind him to come quickly.

古文：张超之等数十人驰入云龙门及斋阁，拔刀径上合殿。
现代文：张超之等几十人从云龙门跑进了斋阁，拔出佩刀直接来到合殿。
English: Zhang Chaozhi and dozens of others ran from the Cloud Dragon Gate into the pavilion, pulled out their swords and went directly to the hall.

古文：帝其夜与徐湛之屏人语至旦，烛犹未灭，门阶户席直卫兵尚寝未起。
现代文：文帝那天夜里和徐湛之屏退旁人秘密商谈直到第二天早上，蜡烛还没有熄灭，门前、台阶、窗外值班的卫士还在睡觉没有起床。
English: That night, Emperor Wen held secret talks with Xu Zhan's attendants until the next morning. The candle had not yet been extinguished, and the guards on duty in front of the door, the steps, and outside the window were still sleeping and did not get up.

古文：帝见超之入，举几捍之，五指皆落，遂弑之。
现代文：文帝看见张超之进来了，立刻举起身旁的小几来抵挡，五个手指全部被砍掉了，于是，张超之就把文帝杀了。
English: Emperor Wen saw Zhang Chaozhi come in and immediately raised the small pair of hands next to him to resist. All five fingers were cut off, so Zhang Chaozhi killed Emperor Wen.

古文：湛之惊起，趣北户，未及开，兵人杀之。
现代文：徐湛之大吃一惊，起身向北窗奔去，还没有打开北窗，士卒们就杀了他。
English: Caught by surprise, Xu Zhanzhi got up and ran to the north window. The soldiers killed him before he could open the window.

古文：劭进至合殿中阁，闻帝已殂，出坐东堂，萧斌执刀侍直，呼中书舍人顾嘏，嘏震惧，不时出，既至，问曰： 欲共见废，何不早启？ 
现代文：刘劭走到合殿中屋，听说文帝已死，立刻出来登临东堂。萧斌持刀站在一旁侍卫。刘劭传唤中书舍人顾嘏，顾嘏大为震惊，吓得没有按时到，他来到刘劭面前，刘劭问他说： 皇上想把我们一齐废了，你为什么不早点儿来告诉我 。
English: Liu Bei walked to the middle room of the hall, heard that Emperor Wen was dead, and immediately went out to the East Hall. Xiao Bin stood guard with a knife. Liu Bei summoned Gu Yao, a scholar from the Middle School. Gu Yao was very shocked and did not arrive on time. He came to Liu Bei. Liu Bei asked him, "The emperor wants to abolish us all, why didn't you come to tell me earlier?"

古文：嘏未及答，即于前斩之。
现代文：顾嘏还没来得及回答，刘劭就上前斩了他。
English: Gu Yao didn't have time to answer, but Liu Yao stepped forward and cut him down.

古文：江湛直上省，闻喧噪声，叹曰： 不用王僧绰言，以至于此！ 
现代文：江湛此时正在上省值班，听到外面一片喧哗嘈杂声，就叹息着说道： 不听王僧绰的话，事情才落到了这种地步。 
English: At this time, Jiang Zhan was on duty at the provincial capital, and when he heard a lot of noise and commotion outside, he sighed and said, "If I hadn't listened to Wang Zengchao, things would have come to this.

古文：乃匿傍小屋中，劭遣兵就杀之。
现代文：他藏到了旁边的一间小屋里，刘劭派兵前来搜查，将他立刻斩了。
English: He hid in a nearby hut, and Liu Bei sent soldiers to search for him, who immediately beheaded him.

古文：宿卫旧将罗训、徐罕皆望风屈附。
现代文：皇宫卫队原来的将领罗训、徐罕见状，都望风归降。
English: The original generals of the imperial palace guard, Luo Xun and Xu Rongjian, both hoped for the wind to fall.

古文：左细仗主、广威将军吴兴卜天与不暇被甲，执刀持弓，疾呼左右出战。
现代文：左细仗主、广威将军吴兴人卜天与来不及披上铠甲，就一手拿刀一手持弓，大声呼唤左右人出来迎战。
English: General Wu Xingren of Guangwei, the commander of the left wing, put on armor as soon as he could, holding a sword in one hand and a bow in the other, and loudly called for people on both sides to come out to fight.

古文：徐罕曰： 殿下入，汝欲何为！ 
现代文：徐罕说： 殿下入宫，你想要做什么？ 
English: Xu Han said: Your highness, what do you want to do when you enter the palace?

古文：天与骂曰： 殿下常来，云何于今乃作此语！
现代文：卜天与大声骂他说： 殿下常常入宫，你为何今天才说这种话？
English: Bu Tianhe loudly scolded him, "Your highness often enters the palace, why did you only say such a thing today?

古文：只汝是贼！ 
现代文：你就是逆贼！ 
English: You are a traitor!

古文：手射劭于东堂。几中之。
现代文：接着，卜天与手持弓箭，在东堂一箭射向刘劭，几乎射中刘劭。
English: Next, Bu Tian, armed with a bow and arrow, shot an arrow at Liu Yao in the East Hall, almost hitting Liu Yao.

古文：劭党击之，断臂而死。队将张泓之、硃道钦、陈满与天与俱战死。
现代文：刘劭党羽群起而攻之，卜天与被砍断手臂身亡，皇宫宿卫中将士张泓之、朱道钦、陈满等人和卜天与一起战死。
English: Liu Bei's followers rose up en masse to attack him, and Bu Tian died with his arm cut off. The palace's bodyguards, lieutenant generals Zhang Xizhi, Zhu Daoqin, Chen Man, and others died together with Bu Tian.

古文：左卫将军尹弘惶怖通启，求受处分。
现代文：左卫将军尹弘惊惶恐怖，赶快晋见刘劭，请求处罚。
English: The left guard general, Yin Hong, panicked and terrified, hurriedly went to see Liu Bei to request punishment.

古文：劭使人从东阁入，杀潘淑妃及太祖亲信左右数十人，急召始兴王使帅众屯中堂。
现代文：刘劭又派人从东阁门闯入后宫，杀了潘淑妃以及文帝生前的亲信左右共计几十人。同时，又紧急传召崐始兴王刘浚前来，让他率领手下士卒屯扎中堂。
English: Liu Bei also sent people to break into the harem from the East Gate, killing a total of dozens of people around Pan Shu Fei and the close friends of Emperor Wen. At the same time, he urgently summoned Liu Jun, the King of Shixing, to come and let him lead his corporals to occupy the middle of the hall.

古文：濬时在西州，府舍人硃法瑜告濬曰： 台内喧噪，宫门皆闭，道上传太子反，未测祸变所至。 
现代文：此时，刘浚正在西州，府舍人朱法瑜飞奔前来告诉刘浚说： 宫内人声喧哗得很，宫门紧紧关着，路上传说太子谋反，还不知灾祸变化的结果如何。 
English: At this time, Liu Jun was in Xizhou, and Zhu Fayu, the governor's concubine, came running to tell Liu Jun that: The people in the palace were very noisy, the palace gate was tightly closed, there was a legend on the road that the prince was plotting a rebellion, and I still don't know what the result of the disaster was.

古文：濬阳惊曰： 今当奈何？ 
现代文：刘浚听后，假装大吃一惊，说： 现在我们应该怎么办？ 
English: After listening to Liu Jun, he pretended to be stunned and said: What should we do now?

古文：法瑜劝入据石头。
现代文：朱法瑜鼓动刘浚回去占据石头。
English: Zhu Fayu encouraged Liu Jun to go back and occupy the stone.

古文：濬未得劭信，不知事之济不，骚扰不知所为。
现代文：刘浚没有得到刘劭的消息，不知道事变成功与否，所以，情绪烦乱，不知干什么是好。
English: Liu Jun did not get the news from Liu Ye, and did not know whether the incident was successful or not. Therefore, he was upset and did not know what to do.

古文：将军王庆曰： 今宫内有变，未知主上安危，凡在臣子，当投袂赴难；凭城自守，非臣节也。 
现代文：将军王庆说： 现在，宫内发生变化，还不知主上安危与否，凡是身为臣属和儿子的，都应当起来义无返顾地前去救难。
English: General Wang Qing said, "Nowadays, changes have taken place within the imperial court, and we still don't know whether our lord is safe or not. All those who are subjects and sons should rise up and go to the rescue without hesitation."

古文：濬不听，乃从南门出，径向石头，文武从者千馀人。
现代文：如果只是把守自己的城池，不是为人臣所应有的气节。 刘浚没有听他的话，就从南门出去，一直奔向石头，文武官员一千多人跟着他。
English: Liu Jun did not listen to him, and went out of the south gate, running all the way to the stone, followed by more than a thousand civil and military officials.

古文：时南平王铄戍石头，兵十亦千馀人。
现代文：此时，南平王刘铄正戍守石头，士卒也有一千多。
English: At this time, the Nanping King Liu Ye was guarding the stone, and there were more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：俄而劭遣张超之驰马召濬，濬屏人问状，即戎服乘马而去。
现代文：不一会儿，刘劭派张超之骑马赶到，召唤刘浚回朝，刘浚屏退左右向张超之详细寻问了这件事的前后经过，然后就全副武装骑马而去。
English: Soon after, Liu Ye sent Zhang Chaozhi to arrive on horseback, summoning Liu Jun back to the morning. Liu Junping retreated to the right and left to ask Zhang Chaozhi about the details of the incident, and then rode away fully armed.

古文：硃法瑜固止濬，濬不从；出中门，王庆又谏曰： 太子反逆，天下怨愤。
现代文：朱法瑜极力阻止刘浚，刘浚不听。等他来到中门，王庆又劝谏他说： 太子反叛，天下人怨恨愤怒。
English: Zhu Fayu tried his best to stop Liu Jun, but Liu Jun did not listen. When he came to the middle gate, Wang Qing also advised him to say: The prince rebelled, the world resented and angry.

古文：明公但当坚闭城门，坐食积粟，不过三日，凶党自离。
现代文：明公你应该紧闭城门不出，坐吃积储的粮食，不超过三天，反叛的党徒自然会土崩瓦解。
English: Ming Gong, you should close the gate tightly and not go out, sit and eat the stored grain, no more than three days, the rebel party members will naturally collapse.

古文：公情事如此，今岂宜去！ 
现代文：此事如此明了，你怎么还去呢？ 
English: The matter is so clear, how can you still go?

古文：濬曰： 皇太子令，敢有复言者斩！ 
现代文：刘浚说： 皇太子的命令，有人胆敢再劝阻，定斩不饶！ 
English: Liu Jun said: The order of the crown prince, if anyone dares to dissuade him, will not be forgiven!

古文：既入，见劭，劭谓濬曰： 潘淑妃遂为乱兵所害。 
现代文：刘浚入宫拜见刘劭，刘劭告诉他说： 潘淑妃已被乱兵所害。 
English: Liu Jun went to the palace to see Liu Ye. Liu Ye told him: "Pan Shufei has been victimized by the rampaging soldiers.

古文：濬曰： 此是下情由来所愿。 
现代文：刘浚说： 这正是我一直盼望的事。 
English: Liu Jun said, "This is exactly what I have been looking forward to.

古文：劭诈以太祖诏召大将军义恭、尚书令何尚之入，拘于内；并召百官，至者才数十人。
现代文：刘劭假称文帝的诏令，征召大将军刘义恭、尚书令何尚之入宫，将二人囚禁在宫内。同时，又召集文武百官，但来的人才几十人。
English: Pretending to be Emperor Wen's edict, Liu Bei summoned the generals Liu Yigong and Shang Shuling to enter the palace and imprisoned the two in the palace. At the same time, he also summoned hundreds of civil and military officials, but only a few dozen came.

古文：劭遽即位；下诏曰： 徐湛之、江湛弑逆无状，吾勒兵入殿，已无所及，号惋崩衄，肝心破裂。
现代文：刘劭马上继承帝位，颁布诏令，说： 徐湛之、江湛二人图谋反叛，逆弑皇上。我率领士卒入殿，已经来不及，只能悲号痛哭，心肝欲裂。
English: Liu Bei immediately succeeded to the imperial throne and issued a decree, saying: Xu Zhanzhi and Jiang Zhan are plotting to rebel against the emperor. It is too late for me to lead the soldiers into the hall, I can only weep bitterly and my heart is broken.

古文：今罪人斯得，元凶克珍，可大赦，改元太初。 
现代文：而今，罪恶之徒已被杀，元凶也被消灭，所以实行大赦，改年号为太初。 
English: But now, the criminals have been killed and the culprits have been eliminated, so an amnesty has been implemented and the year has been changed to Taifu.

古文：即位毕，亟称疾还永福省，不敢临丧；以白刃自守，夜则列灯以防左右。
现代文：刘劭登基即位后，立即宣称自己有病，回到了永福省。他不敢亲自主持父亲的葬礼。他只是手持佩刀自己守护，夜里则点得灯火通明，以防备左右有人谋害它。
English: After Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he immediately announced that he was ill and returned to Yongfu Province. He did not dare to personally preside over his father's funeral. He just guarded himself with a sword, and at night he lit the lights brightly in case someone around him plotted to kill him.

古文：以萧斌为尚书仆射、领军将军，以何尚之为司空，前右卫率檀和之戍石头，征虏将军营道侯义綦镇京口。
现代文：刘劭任命萧斌为尚书仆射、领军将军，何尚之为司空；命前右卫率檀和之镇守石头，征虏将军、营道侯刘义綦镇守京口。
English: Liu Bei appointed Xiao Bin as Shang Shuxu's subordinate and the leading general, and He Shang Xing as his deputy; before his death, the right guard led the town of Danghe to guard the stone, and the general of conscription and the camp road lord Liu Yixin guarded the capital.

古文：义綦，义庆之弟也。
现代文：刘义綦是刘义庆的弟弟。
English: Liu Yixuan is Liu Yiquing's younger brother.

古文：乙丑，悉收先给诸处兵还武库，杀江、徐亲党尚书左丞荀赤松、右丞臧凝之等。
现代文：乙丑，刘劭将以前发放各处的兵器全都收缴，放入武器仓库。刘劭诛杀江湛、徐湛之的亲属党羽尚书左丞荀赤松、右丞臧凝之等人。
English: Second, Liu Bei collected all the weapons previously distributed everywhere and put them into a weapons warehouse. Liu Bei killed Jiang Zhan, Xu Zhan Zhi's relatives, Party member Shang Shuzhong (左丞) Akamatsu, (右丞凝之) and others.

古文：凝之。焘之孙也。
现代文：臧凝之是臧焘的孙子。
English: Kagero is the grandson of Kagero.

古文：以殷仲素为黄门侍郎，王正见为左军将军，张超之、陈叔儿等皆拜官、赏赐有差。
现代文：刘劭又任命殷仲素为黄门侍郎，王正见为左军将军。张超之、陈叔儿也都按照他们的贡献大小，分别封了官职，赏赐了东西。
English: Liu Bei also appointed Yin Zhongsu as the Yellow Gate Attendant, and Wang Zhengmi as the General of the Left Army. Zhang Chaozhi and Uncle Chen were also given official positions and rewards according to their contribution.

古文：辅国将军鲁秀在建康，劭谓秀曰： 徐湛之常欲相危，我已为卿除之矣。 
现代文：辅国将军鲁秀这时正在建康，刘劭对鲁秀说： 徐湛之过去经常想害你，如今，我已经为你除掉了这一祸害。 
English: At that time, Lu Xiu, the general of the auxiliary state, was in the process of improving his health. Liu Ye said to Lu Xiu: Xu Zhanzhi often wanted to harm you in the past, and now, I have eliminated this scourge for you.

古文：使秀与屯骑校尉庞秀之对掌军队。
现代文：然后，他命令鲁秀和屯骑校尉庞秀之一起掌握左右军队。
English: Let Lu Xiu and the cavalry captain Pang Xiu Zhi jointly take charge of the army.

古文：劭不知王僧绰之谋，以僧绰为吏部尚书，司徒左长史何偃为侍中。
现代文：刘劭不知道王僧绰也参与了废立的密谋，任命王僧绰为吏部尚书，司徒左长史何偃为侍中。
English: Liu Bei did not know that Wang Sochao was also involved in the conspiracy to overthrow the government, and appointed Wang Sochao as the secretary of the personnel department, and Siu Zuo Changshi He Jun as the chamberlain.

古文：武陵王骏屯五洲，沈庆之自巴水来，咨受军略。
现代文：武陵王刘骏屯驻五洲，沈庆之从巴水前来请教军事方略。
English: Wuling King Liu Bei was stationed in Wuzhou, and Shen Qingzhi came from Pashui to learn military strategy.

古文：三月，乙亥，典签董元嗣自建康至五洲，具言太子杀逆，骏使元嗣以告僚佐。
现代文：三月，乙亥，典签董元嗣从建康来到五洲，将太子刘劭反叛杀害父亲的事全都告诉给了刘骏和沈庆之，刘骏让董元嗣把这一消息告诉手下文武僚属。
English: In March, the Year of the Ox, the legendary Dong Yuan Ci came from Jiankang to Wuzhou, and told Liu Bei and Shen Qingzhi all about the rebellion of Prince Liu Bei and the murder of his father. Liu Bei asked Dong Yuan Ci to tell this news to his subordinates.

古文：沈庆之密谓腹心曰： 萧斌妇人，其馀将帅，皆易与耳。
现代文：沈庆之偷偷对他的心腹说： 萧斌像个妇道人家。其他将帅都很容易对付。
English: Shen Qingzhi secretly said to his confidant: Xiao Bin is like a womanizer. Other generals are easy to deal with.

古文：东宫同恶，不过三十人；此外屈逼，必不为用。
现代文：东宫中死心踏地地与刘劭一同作恶的人，超不过三十个，除此而外都是被逼迫暂时屈从的，决不会为他效死力。
English: In the East Palace, there are no more than thirty people who are determined to do evil with Liu Bei. Apart from this, they are all persecuted and temporarily subdued. They will never do their best for him.

古文：今辅顺讨逆，不忧不济也。 
现代文：如今，我们辅佐顺应天下人心的人前去讨伐叛逆之贼，不用担心不会成功。 
English: Now he is helping Shun fight against the rebels, but he may not succeed.

古文：壬午，魏尊保太后为皇太后，追赠祖考，官爵兄弟，皆如外戚。
现代文：壬午，北魏国主尊自己的乳母保太后常氏为皇太后，并追赠常氏的祖父、父亲，对常氏的兄弟们也都加官进爵，跟外戚一样。
English: At that time, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty honored his nanny, Empress Dowager Bao Chang, as empress dowager. She also posthumously bestowed the title of empress dowager on Chang's grandfather and father. Chang's brothers were also promoted to officials and knighted, just like their maternal relatives.

古文：太子劭分浙江五郡为会州，省扬州，立司隶校尉，以其妃父殷冲为司隶校尉。
现代文：太子刘劭把浙江东部的五郡分出，设立会州，撤掉扬州，另外设立司隶校尉。命妃子殷氏的父亲殷冲为司隶校尉。
English: Prince Liu Bei separated the five counties in the eastern part of Zhejiang, set up Huizhou, removed Yangzhou, and set up Sili school captain. Yin Chong, the father of Yin, was Sili school captain.

古文：冲，融之曾孙也。
现代文：殷冲是殷融的曾孙。
English: Yin Chong is the great-grandson of Yin Rong.

古文：以大将军义恭为太保，荆州刺史南谯王义宣为太尉，始兴王濬为骠骑将军，雍州刺史臧质为丹阳尹，会稽太守随王诞为会州刺史。
现代文：刘劭又任命大将军刘义恭为太保，任命荆州刺史南谯王刘义宣为太尉，任命始兴王刘浚为骠骑将军，任命雍州刺史臧质为丹杨尹，任命会稽太守随王刘诞为会州刺史。
English: Liu Bei also appointed the general Liu Yigong as the grand marshal, appointed Liu Yixuan, the king of southern Jing Province, as the first lieutenant, appointed Liu Jun, the king of Shixing Province, as the general of cavalry, appointed Deng Yangyin, the prince of Yong Province, as the general of cavalry, and appointed the comptroller-general as the comptroller-general of Jing Province.

古文：劭料检文帝巾箱及江湛家书疏，得王僧绰所启飨士并前代故事，甲申，收僧绰，杀之。
现代文：刘劭整理检查文帝装机密文件档案的箱子以及江湛家的奏疏和信件，查到了王僧绰曾呈报给文帝的关于犒劳勇士和前代废黜太子、诸王的材料。甲申逮捕王僧绰，并将其斩首。
English: Liu Bei sorted out and inspected the boxes containing the confidential document archives of Emperor Wen, as well as the records and letters of Jiang Zhan's family, and found the materials about the hard-working warriors and the former dethroned prince and kings that Wang Sochao had reported to Emperor Wen. Jiashen arrested Wang Sochao and beheaded him.

古文：僧绰弟僧虔为司徒左西属，所亲咸劝之逃，僧虔泣曰： 吾兄奉国以忠贞，抚我以慈爱，今日之事，苦不见及耳；若得同归九泉，犹羽化也。 
现代文：王僧绰的弟弟王僧虔为司徒左西属，他的亲近僚属们都劝他赶快逃走，王僧虔哭着说： 我哥哥以自己的忠贞报效国家，以慈爱之心将我抚养成人，今天发生的事，我怕的是它不波及我。如果我能得以和他一同回到九泉之下，那也就好像飞升成仙了一样。 
English: Wang Zengqi, the younger brother of Wang Zengqi, was a disciple of St. Zuoxi, and his close colleagues and followers all advised him to flee as soon as possible. Wang Zengqi cried and said: My brother rewarded the country with his loyalty, and raised me to adulthood with a loving heart. What happened today, I am afraid that it will not affect me. If I can return with him to the bottom of the well, it will be like flying into a fairy.

古文：劭因诬北第诸王侯，云与僧绰谋反，杀长沙悼王瑾、瑾弟临川哀王烨、桂阳孝侯觊、新渝怀侯玠，皆劭素所恶也。
现代文：刘劭乘机诬陷住在台城以北的各王爵、侯爵，说他们和王僧绰一块儿参与图谋反叛的阴谋，杀死了长沙悼王刘瑾、刘瑾的弟弟临川哀王刘烨、桂阳孝侯刘觊和新渝怀侯刘，因为这些人都是刘劭平时最厌恶的人。
English: Liu Bei took the opportunity to frame the dukes and marquesses who lived north of Taicheng, saying that they had participated in the conspiracy to plot rebellion together with Wang Sengkuo, and killed the mourning king of Changsha Liu Bei, Liu Bei's brother Linchuan King Liu Bei, Guiyang Prince Liu Bei, and Xinwu Prince Liu Bei, because these people were the most hated by Liu Bei in peacetime.

古文：瑾义欣之子；义华，义庆之子；玠，义庆之弟子也。
现代文：刘瑾是刘义欣的儿子，刘烨是刘义庆的儿子，刘觊和刘都是刘义庆的侄儿。
English: Liu Kun is the son of Liu Yixin, Liu Kun is the son of Liu Yiquing, and both Liu Kun and Liu are the nephews of Liu Yiquing.

古文：劭密与沈庆之手书，令杀武陵王骏。
现代文：刘劭给沈庆之写了一封密信，命令他杀了武陵王刘骏。
English: Liu Bei wrote a secret letter to Shen Qingzhi, ordering him to kill Liu Bei, the King of Wuling.

古文：庆之求见王，王惧，辞以疾。
现代文：沈庆之前来请求晋见刘骏，刘骏极为害怕，就以生病为借口拒绝和他见面。
English: Shen Qing had come to ask Jin to see Liu Yao before, but Liu Yao was extremely afraid and refused to meet him on the pretext of illness.

古文：庆之突入，以劭书示王，王泣求入内与母诀，庆之曰： 下官受先帝厚恩，今日之事，唯力是视；殿下何见疑之深！ 
现代文：沈庆之却突然闯了进来，把刘劭的信拿给刘骏看，刘骏看后，哭着请求沈庆之允许他到内室跟自己的母亲诀别。沈庆之说： 我承受先帝的厚恩，今天的事情，我会尽我全部的力量。殿下您为什么对我有如此重的疑心呢？ 
English: However, Shen Qingzhi suddenly burst in and showed Liu Bei the letter. After Liu Bei read it, he cried and begged Shen Qingzhi to allow him to go to the inner room to say goodbye to his mother. Shen Qingzhi said, "I have inherited the benevolence of the former emperor, and I will do my best in today's matter. Your Highness, why do you have such a heavy suspicion of me?

古文：王起再拜曰： 家国安危，皆在将军。 
现代文：刘骏听后，起来两次叩谢，说： 个人和国家的安危，全在将军你。 
English: After listening to Liu Wei, he stood up and clapped his thanks twice, saying: The safety of individuals and the country all depends on you, the general.

古文：庆之即命内外勒兵。
现代文：沈庆之听后，就下令全部文武百官收拾武器，进入临战状态。
English: After listening to Shen Qingzhi, he ordered all civil and military officials to pack up their weapons and enter a state of war.

古文：府主簿颜竣曰： 今四方未知义师之举，劭据有天府，若首尾不相应，此危道也。
现代文：王府内的主簿颜竣说： 如今，四面八方并不知道我们这支仁义大军即将举义，刘劭占据着建康京城，如果我们起义后首尾不能相互接应，可是一条危险的路啊。
English: Yan Shun, the chief clerk of the Wangfu, said, "Nowadays, people in all directions do not know that our great army of benevolence and righteousness is about to rise up, and Liu Bei is occupying Jiankang Capital. If we cannot meet each other halfway after the uprising, it is a dangerous road.

古文：宜待诸镇协谋，然后举事。 
现代文：我看，应该等到各路将帅来到此后，共同谋划，然后再一起举兵起事也不晚。 
English: In my opinion, we should wait until the generals have arrived and then plan together, and then it will not be too late to raise an army together.

古文：庆之厉声曰： 今举大事，而黄头小儿皆得参预，何得不败！
现代文：沈庆之厉声说道： 如今我们正是做大事的时候，连黄毛小子也都可以参与谋划，刘劭怎么能不被打败？
English: Shen Qingzhi said in a strong voice: Now is the time for us to do big things. Even the yellow-haired boy can participate in the planning. How can Liu Bei not be defeated?

古文：宜斩以徇众！ 
现代文：应该斩了他示众。
English: He should be publicly beheaded.

古文：王令竣拜谢庆之，庆之曰： 君但当知笔札事耳！ 
现代文：崐 刘骏赶忙命令颜竣向沈庆之赔罪道歉。沈庆之说： 你只要负责撰写公文一类的事情。 
English: Liu Ye hurriedly ordered Yan Shun to apologize to Shen Qingzhi. Shen Qingzhi said: You only need to be responsible for things like writing official documents.

古文：于是专委庆之处分。
现代文：于是，刘骏就把军务交给沈庆之全权处理。
English: As a result, Liu Bei handed over the military affairs to Shen Qingzhuo.

古文：旬日之间，内外整办，人以为神兵。
现代文：十天之内，沈庆之就把军队内外事务整办好了，人们都称这支军队为神兵。
English: Within ten days, Shen Qingzhi organized the internal and external affairs of the army, and people called this army the divine soldiers.

古文：竣，延之之子也。
现代文：颜竣是颜延之的儿子。
English: Yan Shun is the son of Yan Yan.

古文：庚寅，武陵王戒严誓众。以沈庆之领府司马；襄阳太守柳元景、随郡太守宗悫为咨议参军，领中兵；江夏内史硃修之行平东将军；记室参军颜设为咨议参军，领录事，兼总内外；以咨议参军刘延孙为长史、寻阳太守，行留府事。
现代文：庚寅，武陵王刘骏下令戒严誓师，任命沈庆之兼任府司马，襄阳太守柳元景、随郡太守宗悫为谘议参军，统领中军，江夏内史朱之代理平东将军，记室参军颜竣为谘议参军、领录事并兼理内外全局，谘议参军刘延孙为长史、寻阳太守并兼行留府事。
English: Geng Yin and Wuling King Liu Yi ordered martial law oaths, appointed Shen Qingzhi as the prefectural governor, Yangyang Governor Liu Yuanjing and Su County Governor Zongyi as advisory members of the army, General Pingdong as the commander of the Chinese army, General Zhu as the acting commander of Jiangxia Inner Shih, Yan Jun as the advisory member of the army, the leader of the record and the overall situation at home and abroad, Liu Yansun as the long-term member of the advisory army, and Huanyang Governor and the stay-at-home affairs.

古文：延孙，道产之子也。
现代文：刘延孙是刘道产的儿子。
English: Liu Yansun is the son of Liu Daozhong.

古文：南谯王义宣及臧质皆不受劭命，与司州刺史鲁爽同举兵以应骏。
现代文：南谯王刘义宣、雍州刺史臧质都不接受刘劭的委任命令，而同司州刺史鲁爽一起举兵起义，响应刘骏。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, and Shixi, the governor of Yongzhou, did not accept Liu Xuan's appointment order, and together with Shixi, the governor of Shizhou, they raised an army to revolt in response to Liu Xuan.

古文：质、爽俱诣江陵见义宣，且遣使劝进于王。
现代文：臧质、鲁爽全都来到江陵晋见刘义宣，并且又派人前去鼓动刘骏，劝他早日登基称帝。
English: Yan Quixie and Lu Shuang all came to Jiangling Jin to see Liu Yixuan, and they also sent people to encourage Liu Bei and persuade him to ascend to the throne as soon as possible.

古文：辛卯，臧质子敦等在建康者闻质举兵，皆逃亡。
现代文：辛卯，臧质在建康的儿子臧敦等人听到父亲臧质举兵起义的消息，都逃走了。
English: Xinwu, Jiankang's son Zhaodong, and others fled when they heard the news of their father Zhaodong's uprising.

古文：劭欲相慰悦，下诏曰： 臧质，国戚勋臣，方赞翼京辇，而子弟波迸，良可怪叹。
现代文：刘劭仍打算安慰、取悦于他们，颁发诏令说： 臧质是皇亲国戚有功之臣，正要振翼帮助我一同治理京师，他的子弟们却要四外逃散，这真令人奇怪、叹惜啊。
English: Liu Bei still intended to comfort and please them, and issued a royal edict saying: "It is really strange and regrettable that Gongye is a relative of the emperor and a meritorious subject, and he is about to help me govern Beijing together, but his sons want to run away.

古文：可遣宣譬令还，咸复本位。 
现代文：可以派人转达我的意思，让他们回来，全都官复原位。 
English: I can send someone to tell them what I want, have them come back, and have them all reinstated.

古文：劭寻录得敦，使大将军义恭行训杖三十，厚给赐之。
现代文：不久，刘劭抓到了臧敦，命令大将军刘义恭打他三十大棍以示教训，然后再厚厚赏赐他。
English: Soon after, Liu Shao found Yu Dong and ordered General Liu Yigong to beat him with 30 sticks.

古文：癸巳，劭葬太祖于长宁陵，谥曰景皇帝，庙号中宗。
现代文：癸巳，刘劭把文帝安葬在长宁陵，谥号为景皇帝，庙号为中宗。
English: Later, Liu Bei buried Emperor Wen in Changning Mausoleum. His posthumous name was Emperor Jing, and his temple name was Zhongzong.

古文：乙未，武陵王发西阳；丁酉，至寻阳。
现代文：乙未，武陵王刘骏从西阳出发。丁酉，到达寻阳。
English: In the 18th century, Wuling King Liu Bei set out from Xiyang. Ding Bei arrived at Xianyang.

古文：庚子，王命颜竣移檄四方，使共讨劭。
现代文：庚子，刘骏命令颜竣向四方发布讨伐檄文，让他们共同讨伐刘劭。
English: Geng Zi and Liu Bei ordered Yan Shun to issue a crusade proclamation to the four sides, and let them jointly crusade against Liu Bei.

古文：州郡承檄，翕然响应。
现代文：各州郡接到檄文，全都起来响应。
English: All the states and counties received the message and all rose to respond.

古文：南谯王义宣遣臧质引兵诣寻阳，与骏同下，留鲁爽于江陵。
现代文：南谯王刘义宣派臧质率领军队前往寻阳，和刘骏会师后一同东下，只留下鲁爽在江陵镇守。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanlu, sent Xie Jie to lead the army to Xiangyang, and he and Liu Yixuan went east together after the division, leaving only Lu Shuang to defend Jiangling Town.

古文：劭以兗、冀二州刺史萧思话为徐、兗二州刺史，起张永为青州刺史。
现代文：刘劭任命兖、冀二州的刺史萧思话为徐、兖二州刺史，起用张永为青州刺史。
English: Liu Bei appointed Xiao Siwei as the governor of the two prefectures of Anhui and Hebei, and appointed Zhang Yong as the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：思话自历城引部曲还平城，起兵以应寻阳；建武将军垣护之在历城，亦帅所领赴之。
现代文：萧思话从历城率领自己的部曲回到了平城，起兵响应寻阳武陵王刘骏。建武将军垣护之此时正在历城，也率领自己的军队赶到那里。
English: Xiao Siwei led his troops from Licheng back to Pingcheng, and raised an army in response to the search for the Yang Wuling King Liu Bei. At this time, General Jianwu was in Licheng, and he also led his army there.

古文：南谯王义宣版张永为冀州刺史。
现代文：南谯王刘义宣任命张永为冀州刺史。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, appointed Zhang Yong as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：永遣司马崔勋之等将兵赴义宣。
现代文：张永派遣司马崔勋之等人率领军队同刘义宣会师。
English: Zhang Yong sent Sima Cui Xun and others to lead the army to join forces with Liu Yixuan.

古文：义宣虑萧思话与永不释前憾，自为书与思话，使长史张畅为书与永，劝使相与坦怀。
现代文：刘义宣担心萧思话同张永之间解不开以前的怨气，就亲自给萧思话写了一封信，又命令长史张畅给张永也写了一封信，劝他们二人能够坦诚相待，通力合作。
English: Liu Yixuan was worried that the previous grudge between Xiao Sizhe and Zhang Yong could not be resolved, so he personally wrote a letter to Xiao Sizhe, and ordered Changshi Zhang Chang to also write a letter to Zhang Yong, urging them both to be honest with each other and cooperate fully.

古文：随王诞将受劭命，参军事沈正说司马顾琛曰： 国家此祸，开辟未闻。
现代文：随王刘诞将要接受刘劭的任命，参军事沈正游说司马顾琛说： 国家这次灾祸，自开天辟地以来还没有听说过。
English: With the birth of Wang Liu, who will be appointed by Liu Bei, Shen Zheng, a member of the military, lobbied Sima Gu, saying: This national disaster has not been heard of since the beginning of time.

古文：今以江东骁锐之众，唱大义于天下，其谁不响应！
现代文：现在，指挥长江以东骁勇精锐的军队，倡导国家的大义向全国发出号召，又有谁能不去响应呢？
English: Now, commanding the brave and elite army east of the Yangtze River, advocating the country's great cause and issuing a call to the whole country, who can not but respond?

古文：岂可使殿下北面凶逆，受其伪宠乎！ 
现代文：我们怎么可以让殿下面向北方叩拜凶恶叛逆之人，接受他的虚假的宠信呢！ 
English: How can we let His Royal Highness face north to kowtow to a vicious renegade and accept his false patronage!

古文：琛曰： 江东忘战日久，虽逆顺不同，然强弱亦异，当须四方有义举者，然后应之，不为晚也。 
现代文：顾琛说： 长江以崐东之地忘记了战争已经很长时间了，虽然顺从与叛逆是不一样的，但强弱大小也是不同的，所以，我们等到四方都有人起义讨伐后再起来响应也不算晚。 
English: Gu Wei said: It has been a long time since the land east of the Yangtze River forgot the war. Although obedience and rebellion are not the same, strength and weakness are also different. Therefore, it is not too late for us to wait until there is an uprising on all sides before responding.

古文：正曰： 天下未尝有无父无君之国，宁可自安仇耻而责义于馀方乎！
现代文：沈正说： 天下还未曾有过无父无君的国家，我们怎么可以自己安于眼前大仇大耻的现状，而把这起义的职责推给别人？
English: Shen Zheng said: There has never been a country without a father or ruler. How can we be satisfied with the current situation of great hatred and shame, and push the duty of this uprising to others?

古文：今正以弑逆冤丑，义不同天，举兵之日，岂求必全邪！
现代文：如今，正是由于弑父叛逆，酿成沉冤惨事，在道义上讲是不共戴天的，仗义起兵之日，岂能乞求一定准备周全！
English: Today, precisely because of the father's treason, it has led to a grievous tragedy, and morally speaking, it is unpardonable. On the day of the military uprising, can we not ask for thorough preparations?

古文：冯衍有言： 大汉之贵臣，将不如荆、齐之贱士乎！ 
现代文：冯衍曾说过： 大汉王朝的尊贵高官，难道都不如楚国、齐国的卑贱的读书人吗！ 
English: Feng Yan once said: Aren't the distinguished dignitaries of the Han Dynasty better than the lowly readers of Chu and Qi?

古文：况殿下义兼臣子，事实国家者哉！ 
现代文：何况殿下不仅仅是臣属，而且还是儿子，对他来说，国家和个人都是一回事呀。 
English: Besides, His Royal Highness is not only a subject, but also a son. For him, the country and the individual are one and the same.

古文：琛乃与正共入说诞，诞从之。
现代文：于是，顾琛就和沈正一起进府，劝说刘诞，刘诞接受了他们的建议。
English: As a result, Gu Hao and Shen Zheng went to the government together to persuade Liu Xizhao, who accepted their suggestion.

古文：正，田子之兄子也。
现代文：沈正就是沈田子哥哥的儿子。
English: Shen Zheng is the son of Shen Tianzi's older brother.

古文：劭自谓素习武事，语朝士曰： 卿等但助我理文书，勿措意戎旅；若有寇难，吾自当之，但恐贼虏不敢动耳。 
现代文：刘劭自认为自己从小就熟悉军事，对朝廷文武官员们说： 你们只要帮助我整理文件书信就可以了，不必担心战场上的情况。如果有什么贼寇前来发难，我自己就能抵挡得了。只是怕贼寇们不敢有所举动罢了。 
English: Liu Bei thought that he had been familiar with military affairs since childhood, and said to the officials of the imperial court: "You just need to help me sort out the documents and letters, and you don't have to worry about the situation on the battlefield. If any bandits come to attack, I can resist them myself. I'm just afraid that the bandits won't dare to do anything."

古文：及闻四方兵起，始忧惧，戒严，悉召下番将吏，迁淮南岸居民于北岸，尽聚诸王及大臣于城内，移江夏王义恭处尚书下舍，分义恭诸子处侍中下省。
现代文：听到四方起兵讨伐时，才开始忧虑害怕起来。他下令实行戒严，将正在休假的将士全都召集起来，把秦淮河南岸的百姓全都迁到秦淮河北岸居住，而把所有王和大臣全都聚集在建康城里。强迫江夏王刘义恭住在尚书下舍，把刘义恭的几个儿子分别软禁在侍中下省处。
English: He ordered the imposition of martial law, called up all the soldiers who were on leave, moved all the people on the south bank of the Qinhuai River to live on the north bank of the Qinhuai River, and gathered all the kings and ministers in Jiankang City. He forced Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, to live in the lower house of Shangshu, and put several of Liu Yigong's sons under house arrest in different provinces.

古文：夏，四月，癸卯朔，柳元景统宁朔将军薛安都等十二军发湓口，司空中兵参军徐遗宝以荆州之众继之。
现代文：夏季四月，癸卯朔，柳元景统领宁朔将军薛安都等十二路兵马，从湓口出发，司空中兵参军徐遗宝率领荆州军队在后面相接。
English: In the summer of April, twelve soldiers and horses, including the general Xue Andu, the commander of Ningshuo, the general Xu Yushuo, and Liu Yuanjing, the commander of Ningshuo, set out from Hekou, and the Jingzhou army led by the airman Xu Yibao, who joined the army, joined behind.

古文：丁未，武陵王发寻阳，沈庆之总中军以从。
现代文：丁未，武陵王刘骏从寻阳发兵，沈庆之总领中军随在左右。
English: Ding Wei, the king of Wuling, Liu Bei, sent troops from Xuanyang, and the Chinese army led by the general of Shenqing followed on the right and left.

古文：劭立妃殷氏为皇后。
现代文：刘劭封立王妃殷氏为皇后。
English: Liu Bei crowned Princess Yin as empress.

古文：庚戌，武陵王檄书至建康，劭以示太常颜延之曰： 彼谁笔也？ 
现代文：庚戌，武陵王刘骏的声讨檄文传到建康，刘劭拿给太常颜延之说： 它是出自谁的手笔？ 
English: Geng Zheng, the voice of Wuling King Liu Zhen, passed down to Jiankang. Liu Zhen said to Taizang Yan Yan: Whose handwriting is it?

古文：延之曰： 竣之笔也。 
现代文：颜延之看后说： 这是颜竣写的。 
English: Yan Yanzhi said: It was Yan Shun's handwriting.

古文：劭曰： 言辞何至于是！ 
现代文：刘劭又说： 言语词句为什么到了这种令人难堪的地步？ 
English: Liu Wei also said: Why have words and sentences reached such an embarrassing level?

古文：延之曰： 竣尚不顾老臣，安能顾陛下！ 
现代文：颜延之回答说： 颜竣连老臣我的安危与否都不考虑了，哪里还能顾虑陛下您呢？ 
English: Yan Yan replied, "Yan Yan didn't even think about my safety. How could he be worried about you, Your Majesty?"

古文：劭怒稍解。
现代文：刘劭的怒气稍稍平息了些。
English: Liu Yao's anger calmed down a little.

古文：悉拘武陵王子于侍中下省，南谯王义宣子于太仓空舍。
现代文：刘劭把武陵王刘骏在建康的儿子全都抓起来囚禁在侍中下省，把南谯王刘义宣的儿子都关在太仓空屋子内。
English: Liu Bei arrested all the sons of Liu Bei in Jiankang, the king of Wuling, and imprisoned them in the province of Zhizhong, while the sons of Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxi, were locked up in an empty house in Taicang.

古文：劭欲尽杀三镇士民家口，江夏王义恭、何尚之皆曰： 凡举大事者不顾家；且多是驱逼，今忽诛其室累，正足坚彼意耳。 
现代文：刘劭还打算把雍、荆、江三州将士们留居在京城的家属全都杀死，江夏王刘义恭和何尚之都说： 凡是图谋大事的人，都不会顾念自己的家，而且很多人又是出于无奈而这样做的，如果现在突然把他们的家属亲人全都杀了，这正好坚定了他们的斗志。 
English: Liu Bei also planned to kill all the family members of the soldiers from the three states of Yong, Jing, and Jiang who were staying in Beijing. Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, and He Shangzhi both said, "Anyone who plans great things will not think about his own home, and many people do this out of helplessness. If they suddenly kill all their family members and relatives now, this will just strengthen their fighting spirit."

古文：劭以为然，乃下书一无所问。
现代文：刘劭认为他们说得对，就下书说不再追究家属。
English: Liu Wei thought they were right, so he wrote a letter saying that he would no longer investigate the family members.

古文：劭疑朝廷旧臣皆不为己用，乃厚抚鲁秀及右军参军王罗汉，悉以军事委之；以萧斌为谋主，殷冲掌文符。
现代文：刘劭怀疑朝廷内旧日大臣们都不愿意效忠自己，于是，他就特别厚待鲁秀崐和右军参军王罗汉，并把军事重任全都交付给这二人。又让萧斌作主要谋划者，殷冲掌管府内文告兵符。
English: Liu Bei suspected that the old-day ministers in the imperial court were not willing to be loyal to him. Therefore, he treated Lu Xiuqi and Luo Han, the right-wing military leader, with special kindness, and entrusted all the important military tasks to these two. He also let Xiao Bin be the main planner, and Yin Chong was in charge of the official document of the declaration of war.

古文：萧斌劝劭勒水军自上决战，不尔则保据梁山。
现代文：萧斌劝刘劭亲自率领水军西上迎战，不然就据守梁山。
English: Xiao Bin advised Liu Bei to personally lead the naval force westward to meet the battle, otherwise he would have to defend Liangshan.

古文：江夏王义恭以南军仓猝，船舫陋小，不利水战，乃进策曰： 贼骏小年未习军旅，远来疲弊，宜以逸待之。
现代文：大将军江夏王刘义恭认为南边来的讨伐军队起兵仓猝，所使用的船只简陋狭小，不利于水上作战，进献计策说： 逆贼刘骏年纪小，不熟悉军事情况，远道而来，将士们都已疲惫不堪，应该以逸待劳。
English: General Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, thought that the crusading army from the south was in a hurry, and the ships used were simple and small, which was not conducive to water combat. He proposed a strategy and said: The traitor Liu Ye is young, is not familiar with the military situation, and has come a long way. The soldiers are exhausted, and should work hard.

古文：今远出梁山，则京都空弱，东军乘虚，或能为患。
现代文：现在，如果我们远去梁山迎战，京师就空虚无兵，东边的叛军就会乘虚而入，这样有可能出现祸患。
English: Now, if we go far away to Liangshan to fight, the Beijing division will be empty and there will be no soldiers, and the rebel army in the east will take advantage of the situation, so there may be a disaster.

古文：若分力两赴，则兵散势离。不如养锐待期，坐而观衅。
现代文：假如兵分两路，分别迎战，又会分散兵力，势力孤单，不如养精蓄锐，等待叛军前来，坐在这里寻找机会。
English: If the soldiers are divided into two groups and face the battle separately, the troops will be dispersed, and the forces will be alone. It is better to keep your energy and sharpness, wait for the rebels to come, and sit here to look for opportunities.

古文：割弃南岸，栅断石头，此先朝旧法，不忧贼不破也。 
现代文：还可以放弃秦淮河以南的地区，用木栅围起石头城，这也是过去对付外来入侵的老办法，不用担心贼寇不会被打败。 
English: You can also abandon the area south of the Qinhuai River and surround the stone city with wooden fences. This is also an old way to deal with foreign invasion in the past. Don't worry, the bandits will not be defeated.

古文：劭善之。
现代文：刘劭听后表示赞同。
English: After listening, Liu Ye expressed his approval.

古文：斌厉色曰： 南中郎二十年少，能建如此大事，岂复可量！
现代文：而萧斌却声严厉色地说： 南中郎刘骏是个二十岁的少年，却能领导如此大的行动，我们怎能小看他？
English: But Xiao Bin said sternly, "Minamichung Lang Liu Ye is a twenty-year-old boy, but he can lead such a big action, how can we look down on him?

古文：三方同恶，势据上流；沈庆之甚练军事，柳元景、宗悫屡尝立功。形势如此，实非小敌。
现代文：三州同时作乱，而且占据着上流有利地形。沈庆之在军事方面非常练达，而柳元景、宗悫也曾屡次建立战功，目前情形是这样，他们实在不是一股不堪一击的小敌。
English: Shen Qingzhu was very experienced in military affairs, while Liu Yuanjing and Zonglu had repeatedly established their war exploits. The current situation is such that they are really not a weak enemy.

古文：唯宜及人情未离，尚可决力一战；端坐台城，何由得久！
现代文：唯一的办法就是趁军心没有分崩离析，进行一次拚死决战。如果稳坐在台城等着，怎能够长久存活呢？
English: The only way is to take advantage of the fact that the military spirit has not fallen apart and carry out a decisive battle. If you sit in Taicheng and wait, how can you survive for a long time?

古文：今主，咸无战意，岂非天也！ 
现代文：如今，主上和宰相都没有打仗的决心，难道这不是天意吗？ 
English: Today, neither the Lord nor the Prime Minister have the resolve to go to war. Is this not God's will?

古文：邵不听。
现代文：刘劭没有听从。
English: Liu Ye did not obey.

古文：或劝劭保石头城，劭曰： 昔人所以固石头城者，俟诸侯勤王耳。
现代文：有人劝刘劭保住石头城。刘劭说： 过去人们之所以能够固守石头城，是因为能够等待其他援军前来援助。
English: Some people advised Liu Wei to hold on to Stone Town. Liu Wei said: In the past, people were able to hold on to Stone Town because they could wait for other reinforcements to come and help.

古文：我若守此，谁当见救！
现代文：我固守石头城，有谁能前来援救呢？
English: I cling to the city of stone. Who will come to my rescue?

古文：唯应力战决之；不然，不克。 
现代文：所以，我们只有全力与敌人决一死战，不然，就不会取胜。 
English: Therefore, we have no choice but to fight the enemy to the death with all our strength. Otherwise, we will not win.

古文：日日自出行军，慰劳将士，亲督都水治船舰。
现代文：刘劭每天都亲自来到军营慰劳将士们，亲自督促都水制造船只。
English: Liu Wei personally came to the military camp every day to comfort the soldiers, and personally urged the capital to build ships.

古文：壬子，焚淮南岸室屋、淮内船舫，悉驱民家渡水北。
现代文：壬子，刘劭放火烧毁了秦淮河南岸所有的房屋建筑和秦淮河上的游船画舫，把这里的老百姓赶到了秦淮河以北。
English: In Jinsi, Liu Hui set fire to all the houses and buildings on the south bank of the Qinhuai River and the boat on the Qinhuai River, and drove the people here to the north of the Qinhuai River.

古文：立子伟之为皇太子。
现代文：刘劭立皇子刘伟之为太子。
English: Liu Weiwei, the son of Prince Liu Weiwei, became the crown prince.

古文：以始兴王濬妃父褚湛之为丹阳尹。
现代文：任命始兴王刘浚的岳父褚湛之为丹杨尹。
English: The father-in-law of Shixing Wang Liu Jun, Zou Zhan, was appointed as the crown prince of Danyangyin.

古文：湛之，裕之之兄子也。
现代文：褚湛之就是褚裕之的侄子。
English: Gong Zhan Zhi is the nephew of Gong Yu Zhi.

古文：濬为侍中、中书监、司徒、录尚书六条事，加南平王铄开府仪同三司，以南兗州刺史建平王宏为江州刺史。
现代文：任命刘浚为侍中、中书监、司徒和录尚书六条事，加授南平王刘铄为开府仪同三司，任命南兖州刺中建平王刘宏为江州刺史。
English: Liu Jun was appointed as the attendant, the Chinese book supervisor, the tutor and the recorder of the six things, and the king of Nanping, Liu Wei, was appointed as the keeper of ceremonies and the three departments, and the king of Jianping, Liu Hong, was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：太尉司马宠秀之自石头先众南奔，人情由是大震。
现代文：太尉司马庞秀之从石头城逃走，南去投奔讨伐军，刘劭军中人心大为震惊。
English: Captain Sima Pang Xiuzhi fled from Stone Town and went south to join the crusader army. The hearts of Liu Bei's army were greatly shocked.

古文：以营道侯义綦为湘州刺史，檀和之为雍州刺史。
现代文：刘劭又任命营道侯刘义綦为湘州刺史，檀和之为雍州刺史。
English: Liu Hui also appointed Liu Yixuan, a military commander, as the historian of Hunan Province, and Dang He as the historian of Yongzhou Province.

古文：癸丑，武陵王军于鹊头。
现代文：癸丑，武陵王刘骏在鹊头屯兵。
English: Ugliness, Wuling King Liu Bei's troops in Shantou.

古文：宣城太守王僧达得武陵王檄，未知所从。
现代文：宣城太守王僧达收到武陵王刘骏的声讨檄文后，不知道自己应该跟随谁好。
English: After Wang Songda, the dean of Xuancheng, received the letter from Liu Xuan, the king of Wuling, he didn't know who to follow.

古文：客说之曰： 方今衅逆滔天，古今未有。
现代文：他的一位门客劝他说： 如今，叛逆弑父之贼罪恶滔天，古今未曾有过。
English: One of his disciples said to him, "Nowadays, the crime of the traitor and father-stealer is so great that it has never been seen before.

古文：为君计，莫若承义师之檄，移告傍郡。
现代文：为你自己的未来着想，你不如接受讨逆军队的檄文，同时，将此檄文转告给邻近各郡。
English: For the sake of your own future, you might as well accept the rebel army's ultimatum and, at the same time, convey this ultimatum to the neighboring counties.

古文：苟在有心，谁不响应！
现代文：假若良心还在，谁能不响应呢？
English: Who could fail to respond, if his conscience still existed?

古文：此上策也。
现代文：这才是上策。
English: That's the best way.

古文：如其不能，可躬帅向义之徒，详择水陆之便，致身南归，亦其次也。 
现代文：如果办不到，还可以自己率领归附正义的人，仔细选择水路和陆路的交通便道，全身而退，逃往南方，这也不失为中策。 
English: If this is not possible, you can also lead the righteous person by yourself, carefully choose the waterway and the land route, withdraw completely and flee to the south, which is also a good strategy.

古文：僧达乃自侯道南奔，逢武陵王于鹊头。王即以为长史。
现代文：于是，王僧达选择了中策，从捷便的小路向南方逃奔，在鹊头正遇上了武陵王刘骏，刘骏任命他为长史。
English: As a result, Wang Songda chose the middle way and fled from the convenient path to the south. In Shantou, he met Liu Yao, the king of Wuling, who appointed him as Long History.

古文：僧达，弘之子也。
现代文：王僧达是王弘的儿子。
English: Wang Sonta is Wang Hong's son.

古文：王初发寻阳，沈庆之谓人曰： 王僧达必来赴义。 
现代文：刘骏刚刚从寻阳出发时，沈庆之就曾对人说： 王僧达一前来响应我们的大义之举。 
English: When Liu Bei had just set out from the search for the sun, Shen Qingzhi once said to the people: Wang Sengda immediately came forward to respond to our great act of righteousness.

古文：人问其故，庆之曰： 吾见其在先帝前议论开张，执意明决；以此言之，其至必也。 
现代文：别人问这是为什么，沈庆之回答说： 我曾经看见他在先帝面前发表议论，阐述己见，头脑很清楚，志向很坚决。
English: When others asked why this was, Shen Qingzhi replied: I once saw him make a speech in front of the former emperor, expound his own views, his mind was very clear, and his ambition was very resolute.

古文：柳元景以舟舰不坚，惮于水战，乃倍道兼行，丙辰，至江宁步上，使薛安帅铁骑曜兵于淮上，移书朝士，为陈逆顺。
现代文：由此来推断，王僧达前来响应是一定的。 柳元景知道船舰不坚固，所以害怕同刘劭的船队在江上作战，于是，他日夜兼程，以加倍速度前进。丙辰，到达江宁，江边码头，派薛安都率领铁甲骑兵在秦淮河畔炫耀兵威，又给朝廷官员们写信，分析陈述叛逆与讨逆之间的区别和大义。
English: From this, it can be inferred that the response of Wang Songda is certain. Liu Yuanjing knew that the ship was not strong, so he was afraid to fight with Liu Xuan's fleet on the river, so he traveled day and night and doubled his speed. When he arrived at the riverside dock in Jiangning, he sent Xue Andu to lead the cavalry on the banks of the Qinhuai River to show off his military power. He also wrote to the court officials to analyze and explain the difference between rebellion and subversion and the great righteousness.

古文：劭加吴兴太守汝南周峤冠军将军。
现代文：刘劭加授吴兴太守汝南人周峤为冠军将军。
English: Liu Kun awarded Wu Xingtao, the governor of the south of the Yunnan Province, and Zhou Jun, the champion general.

古文：随王诞檄亦至，峤素恇怯，回惑不知所从；府司马丘珍孙杀之，举郡应诞。
现代文：就在此时，随王刘诞的声讨檄文也到了，周峤平时就胆怯无能，慌惑惊恐之中，不知道该跟谁走好。府中司马丘珍孙趁势杀了周峤，举郡响应刘诞。
English: At this time, with the voice of Wang Liu Xing, the letter of protest also arrived. Zhou Xing was usually timid and incompetent, panicked and frightened, and did not know who to go with. The prefectural secretary Maqiu Jinsun took advantage of the situation to kill Zhou Xing, and the whole county responded to Liu Xing.

古文：戊午，武陵王至南洲，降者相属；乙未，军于溧洲。
现代文：戊午，武陵王刘骏抵达南洲，前来归降的人络绎不绝。己未，军队又到溧洲驻扎。
English: In the afternoon, Wuling King Liu Bei arrived in Nanzhou, and the people who came to surrender were endless. Before long, the army was stationed in Ganzhou.

古文：王自发寻阳，有疾，不能见将佐，唯颜竣出入卧内，拥王于膝，亲视起居。
现代文：武陵王刘骏从寻阳出发时，就因为身患疾病而不能接见各位将领辅佐，只有颜竣一人可以出入刘骏的卧室，照顾刘骏，他把刘骏抱在自己的膝上，亲自料理刘骏的生活起居。
English: When Liu Bei, the king of Wuling, set out from Xuanyang, he was unable to receive the generals and assistants due to his illness. Only Yan Jun could enter and leave Liu Bei's bedroom to take care of Liu Bei. He held Liu Bei on his lap and personally took care of Liu Bei's daily life.

古文：疾屡危笃，不任咨禀，竣皆专决。
现代文：刘骏病情几次加重，无法接受请示听取报告，所有这一切都由颜竣独自决断。
English: Liu Yao's condition worsened several times, and she was unable to accept the request to listen to the report. All of this was decided by Yan Xun alone.

古文：军政之外，间以文教书檄，应接遐迩，昏晓临哭，若出一人。
现代文：除了军事政治大事外，还要处理公文、信件，并亲自接待安排远近前来归附的人士，在黄昏和拂晓，每天两次他代替刘骏到文帝灵前致哀恸哭，就好像是真的刘骏一样。
English: In addition to military and political events, he also had to deal with official documents and letters, and personally received and arranged for people from near and far to come to join him. At dusk and dawn, twice a day, he went to Wendi Ling to mourn and weep in place of Liu Ye, as if he were the real Liu Ye.

古文：如是累旬，自舟中甲士亦不知王之危疾也。
现代文：这样做了有几十天，就是船舰上的全副武装的士兵们都不知道刘骏病重。
English: After doing this for dozens of days, even the heavily armed soldiers on the ship did not know that Liu Wei was seriously ill.

古文：癸亥，柳元景潜至新亭，依山为垒。
现代文：癸亥，柳元景秘密出兵，来到新亭，紧靠着山麓筑起营垒。
English: Yan Hai and Liu Yuanjing secretly dispatched troops, came to Xinting, and built a camp close to the foot of the mountain.

古文：新降者皆劝元景速进，元景曰： 不然。
现代文：新归降的人们都劝柳元景火速进攻，柳元景说： 不能这样。
English: The newly surrendered people all advised Liu Yuanjing to attack quickly. Liu Yuanjing said, "This cannot be done."

古文：理顺难恃，同恶相济，轻进无防，实启寇心。 
现代文：情理顺达不一定可以依靠，共同作恶的人也往往可以一起渡过难关。如果我们草率进攻，没有防备，一旦失败，反而会激发贼人的野心。 
English: Rationality can not necessarily be relied on, and people who commit evil together can often get through difficulties together. If we attack hastily and without preparation, once we fail, it will stimulate the ambition of thieves.

古文：元景营未立，劭龙骧将军詹叔儿觇知之，劝劭出战，劭不许。
现代文：柳元景的营垒还没有建好，刘劭的部下龙骧将军詹叔儿窥视到了柳元景军中的情况，于是，他劝说刘劭出兵迎战，刘劭没有答应。
English: Liu Yuanjing's camp had not yet been built, and Liu Bei's subordinate, Longjing General Zhan Shuer, peeped into the situation in Liu Yuanjing's army. Therefore, he persuaded Liu Bei to send troops to fight, but Liu Bei did not agree.

古文：甲子，劭使萧斌统步军，褚湛之统水军，与鲁秀、王罗汉、刘简之等精兵合万人，攻新亭垒，劭自登硃雀门督战。
现代文：甲子，刘劭才派萧斌率领陆军出去作战，又命令褚湛之统领水兵，与鲁秀、王罗汉、刘简之率领精锐兵士共计上万人，一齐进攻新亭的营垒，刘劭自己亲自登上朱雀门督战。
English: First, Liu Bei sent Xiao Bin to lead the army to go out to fight, and ordered the leading sailors of Jintan, and the elite soldiers led by Lu Xiu, Wang Rohan, and Liu Jian, totaling tens of thousands of people, to attack the camp of Xinting together. Liu Bei himself personally boarded the Suzak Gate.

古文：元景宿令军中曰： 鼓繁气易衰，叫数力易竭；但衔枚疾战，一听吾鼓声。 
现代文：柳元景命令军中将士说： 战鼓擂得过多，声势就容易衰退，呐喊助威时间太久，力量就容易枯竭。你们只管不动声色，竭尽全力作战，只听我的鼓声进攻。 
English: Liu Yuanjing ordered the lieutenant generals to say: If the war drums beat too much, the momentum will easily fade, and if the cheering is too long, the strength will easily be exhausted. You just have to keep quiet, do your best to fight, and only listen to my drumming attack.

古文：劭将士怀劭重赏，皆殊死战。
现代文：刘劭的将士都贪图刘劭许下的重赏，都殊死作战。
English: Liu Bei's soldiers were all greedy for the rewards promised by Liu Bei, and fought to the death.

古文：元景水陆受敌，意气弥强，麾下勇士，悉遣出斗，左右唯留数人宣传。
现代文：柳元景虽然水路、陆路都被敌人围困，但其手下的将士却是斗志高昂，越战越强，他大旗下的勇士，全都被派出来投入战斗，左右只留下几个人，用来传达号令。
English: Although Liu Yuanqing was besieged by the enemy by land and sea, the soldiers under his command were highly motivated, and the stronger they were in the Vietnam War, all the warriors under his banner were sent out to fight, leaving only a few people on the left and right to convey orders.

古文：劭兵势垂克，鲁秀击退鼓，劭众遽止。
现代文：刘劭军队马上就要大获全胜，鲁秀击鼓撤退，刘劭的将士立即停止了作战。
English: Liu Bei's army was about to win a complete victory. Lu Xiu beat the drum and retreated. Liu Bei's soldiers immediately stopped fighting.

古文：元景乃开垒鼓噪以乘之，劭众大溃，坠淮死者甚多。
现代文：柳元景却趁此打开了营垒大门，战鼓齐鸣，乘胜进攻，刘劭军队霎时崩溃败退，掉到秦淮河里淹死的人很多。
English: However, Liu Yuanjing took advantage of this to open the gate of the camp, the war drums were beating in unison, the attack was successful, Liu Bei's army collapsed and retreated, and many people fell into the Qinhuai River and drowned.

古文：劭更帅馀众，自来攻垒，元景复大破之，所杀伤过于前战，士卒争赴死马涧，涧为之溢；劭手斩退者，不能禁。
现代文：刘劭于是重新率领剩下的将士，亲自前来攻打柳元景的营垒，柳元景率兵再次大破刘劭，杀死杀伤士卒超过了前次，刘劭手下的将十们争先恐后地投身死马涧，涧水溢出了河道。刘劭亲手诛杀后退逃命的士卒，可还是阻止不了。
English: Liu Bei then re-led the remaining soldiers and personally came to attack Liu Yuanjing's camp. Liu Yuanjing's soldiers once again defeated Liu Bei, killing and wounding more soldiers than the previous time. Ten of Liu Bei's soldiers rushed to the dead horse, and the water overflowed the river. Liu Bei could not stop the soldiers who killed themselves and fled for their lives.

古文：刘简之死，萧斌被创，劭仅以身免，走还宫。
现代文：最后，刘简之战死，萧斌身受重伤，刘劭仅仅免于一死，逃回到了宫内。
English: In the end, Liu Jian died in the battle, Xiao Bin was seriously injured, Liu Yao only escaped death and fled back to the palace.

古文：鲁秀、褚湛之、檀和之皆南奔。
现代文：鲁秀、褚湛之和檀和之一齐南下，投奔声讨刘劭的军队。
English: Lu Xiu, Zou Zhan and one of his generals went south to join Liu Bei's army.

古文：丙寅，武陵王至江宁。
现代文：丙寅，武陵王刘骏抵达江宁。
English: Cui Yin and Wuling King Liu Ye arrived in Jiangning.

古文：丁卯，江夏王义恭单骑南奔；劭杀义恭十二子。
现代文：丁卯，江夏王刘义恭单枪匹马，南下投奔声讨刘劭的大军。
English: Dingwu, the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, single-handedly rushed south to defeat Liu Bei's army.

古文：劭、濬忧迫无计，以辇迎蒋侯神像置宫中，稽颡乞恩，拜为大司马，封钟山王；拜苏侯神为骠骑将军。
现代文：于是，就用皇帝专用的辇车，把蒋侯庙的神像迎接到宫内供奉，向神像叩头，乞求神灵给予恩典，并拜蒋侯为大司马，封蒋侯为钟山王。又拜苏侯神为骠骑将军。
English: As a result, they used the emperor's special carriage to welcome the statue of the god of the Jiang Hou Temple to the palace for worship, kowtowing to the statue of the god, begging the gods to give grace, and worshiping Jiang Hou as the great steed, Jiang Hou as the king of Zhongshan, and Su Hou as the general of the cavalry.

古文：以濬为南徐州刺史，与南平王铄并录尚书事。
现代文：刘劭任命刘浚为南徐州刺史，命崐令他和南平王刘铄一同主管尚书事务。
English: Liu Ye appointed Liu Jun as the governor of South Xuzhou, and ordered him and Nanping King Liu Ye to be in charge of Shangshu affairs.

古文：戊辰，武陵王军于新亭，大将军义恭上表劝进。
现代文：戊辰，武陵王刘骏驻军新亭，大将军刘义恭上表，劝说刘骏登基即位。
English: Wang Chen, Wuling King Liu Ye stationed in Xingting, and General Liu Yigong went to the table to persuade Liu Ye to ascend to the throne.

古文：散骑侍郎徐爱在殿中诳劭，云自追义恭，遂归武陵王。
现代文：散骑侍郎徐爰在宫内骗刘劭说，自己要去追击刘义恭。于是徐爰去投奔了武陵王刘骏。
English: In the palace, the horseback-riding attendant Xu Xi lied to Liu Bei, saying that he was going to pursue Liu Yigong. So Xu Xi went to join Liu Bei, the king of Wuling.

古文：时王军府草创，不晓朝章；爰素所谙练。
现代文：这时，武陵王府内军事总部草草成立，大家还都不知道朝廷的法令规章。
English: At this time, the military headquarters in Wuling Wangfu was hastily established, and everyone still did not know the laws and regulations of the imperial court.

古文：乃以爰兼太常丞，撰即位仪注。
现代文：这却是徐爰平时最熟悉的事，就让徐爰兼任太常丞，拟定安排皇帝即位时需要的礼仪。
English: However, this was the most familiar thing to Xu Xi, so he asked Xu Xi to concurrently serve as Tai Changzheng to work out the necessary etiquette for the emperor's enthronement.

古文：乙巳，王即皇帝位，大赦。文武赐爵一等，从军者二等。
现代文：己巳，武陵王刘骏即皇帝位，实行大赦，文武官员赐爵一等，随从讨伐的升二等。
English: At that time, Wuling King Liu Bei, that is, the emperor, implemented an amnesty, and civil and military officials were awarded the first grade, and those who followed the crusade were promoted to the second grade.

古文：改谥大行皇帝曰文，庙号太祖。
现代文：同时，将刘劭加给父亲的谥号撤掉，改称文皇帝，庙号为太祖。
English: At the same time, Liu Ye removed his father's title and changed his name to Emperor Wen, and his temple name to Taizu.

古文：以大将军义恭为太尉、录尚书六条事、南徐州刺史。
现代文：刘骏又任命大将军刘义恭为太尉、录尚书六条事、南徐州刺史。
English: Liu Bei also appointed the general Liu Yigong as the first lieutenant, recorded six things, and wrote a history of South Xuzhou.

古文：是日，劭亦临轩拜太子伟之，大赦，唯刘骏、义恭、义宣、诞不在原例。
现代文：这一天，刘劭也来到金殿平台，封皇子刘伟之为太子，实行大赦，只有刘骏、刘义恭、刘义宣和刘诞不在赦令之列。
English: On this day, Liu Ye also came to the platform of the Golden Hall to crown the prince Liu Wei as the crown prince and implement the amnesty. Only Liu Ye, Liu Yigong, Liu Yixuan and Liu Xie were not included in the amnesty.

古文：庚子，以南谯王义宣为中书监、丞相、录尚书六条事、扬州刺史，随王诞为卫将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，藏质为东骑将军，开府仪同三司、江州刺史，沈庆之为领军将军，萧思话为尚书左仆射。
现代文：庚子，刘骏任命南谯王刘义宣为中书监、丞相、录尚书六条事、扬州刺史，随王刘诞为卫将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，臧质为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，沈庆之为领军将军，萧思话为尚书左仆射。
English: Geng Zi and Liu Bei appointed Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, as the chief librarian and chancellor of the imperial court, recorded the six matters of Shangshu, wrote the history of Yangzhou, followed by Wang Liu Xing as the general of Wei, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, wrote the history of Jingzhou, Gongye as the general of chariot and cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, wrote the history of Jiangzhou, Shen Qing as the leading general, and Xiao Siwei as the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：壬申，以王僧达为右仆射，柳元景为侍中、左卫将军，宗悫为右卫将军，张畅为吏部尚书，刘延孙、颜竣并为侍中。
现代文：壬申，又任命王僧达为右仆射，柳元景为侍中、左卫将军，宗悫为右卫将军，张畅为吏部尚书，刘延孙和颜竣同为侍中。
English: Jinshin also appointed Wang Sonta as the Right Footman, Liu Yuanjing as the Junior Chamberlain and General of the Left Guards, Zonglu as the General of the Right Guards, Zhang Chang as the Secretary of the General Staff, and Liu Yansun and Yan Shundong as Junior Chamberlains.

古文：五月，癸酉朔，臧质以雍州兵二万至新亭。
现代文：五月，癸酉朔，臧质率领雍州将士二万人，抵达新亭。
English: In May, at the dawn of the new year, Gong Zi led 20,000 soldiers from Yongzhou and arrived at Xinting.

古文：豫州刺史刘遵考遣其将夏侯献之帅步骑五千军于瓜步。
现代文：豫州刺史刘遵考派将领夏侯献之率领步、骑兵五千人，驻扎在瓜步。
English: Liu Zunkao, the governor of Yuzhou, sent the general Xia Hou Xian to lead the march, with five thousand cavalry stationed in Guapu.

古文：先是，世祖遣宁朔将军顾彬之将兵东入，受随王诞节度。
现代文：以前，刘骏曾派宁朔将军顾彬之率领军队从东边进入，接受随王刘诞的管辖和调遣。
English: Previously, Liu Bei had sent Ningshuo General Gu Binzhi to lead the army from the east to accept the jurisdiction and dispatch of King Liu Xizhao.

古文：诞遣参军刘季之将兵与彬之俱向建康，诞自顿西陵，为之后继。
现代文：刘诞派参军刘季之率领军队与顾彬之的军队一同前往建康。刘诞自己率兵驻守西陵，作为后继部队。
English: Liu Xizhi sent troops to join the army Liu Jiamu led the army and went to Jiankang together with Gu Binzhi's army. Liu Xizhi himself led the troops stationed in Xiling as a follow-up force.

古文：劭遣殿中将军燕钦等拒之，相遇于曲阿奔牛塘，钦等大败。
现代文：刘劭派殿中将军燕钦等率兵抵抗，两军在曲阿奔牛塘相遇，燕钦等大败。
English: Liu Bei sent the palace general Yan Qin and other soldiers to resist, and the two armies met at Quabeng Cow Pond, where Yan Qin and others were soundly defeated.

古文：劭于是缘淮树栅以自守，又决破岗、方山埭以绝东军。
现代文：刘劭于是沿着秦淮河竖立栅栏，以此自卫，又挖开破岗、方山埭的河堤，以断绝从东边进攻的军队。
English: Liu Bei then erected a fence along the Qinhuai River as a means of self-defense, and he also dug up the broken embankment and the river dike to cut off the attacking army from the east.

古文：时男丁既尽，召妇女供役。
现代文：此时，青壮年男子已经全都征尽，就征召妇女充当使役。
English: By this time, all the able-bodied young men had been conscripted, so women were called up to serve as enlisted personnel.

古文：甲戌，鲁秀等募勇士攻大航，克之。
现代文：甲戌，鲁秀等人招募敢死的勇士去进攻大航，大获全胜。
English: Jiu Jiao, Lu Xiu and others recruited warriors who were willing to die to attack Taihang and won a complete victory.

古文：王罗汉闻官军已渡，即放仗降，缘渚幢队以次奔散，器仗鼓盖充塞路衢。
现代文：这天夜里，刘劭关闭台城六门，紧紧防守。又在门内挖掘了壕沟、立起栅栏。
English: That night, Liu Ye closed the six gates of Taicheng and guarded them tightly. He also dug a trench inside the gate and erected a fence.

古文：是夜，劭闭守六门，于门内凿堑立栅；城中沸乱，丹阳尹尹弘等文武将吏争逾城出降。
现代文：京城内部一片混乱，丹杨尹尹弘等文武将士们都争先恐后地跳出城墙，向声讨军投降。
English: There was chaos inside the capital. Danyang, Yin, Yinhong and other literary and military commanders were all scrambling to jump out of the city walls and surrender to the army.

古文：劭烧辇及兗冕服于宫庭。
现代文：刘劭在宫中焚烧了辇车以及加冕时的冠帽衣裳。
English: Liu Bei burned the imperial carriage in the palace, as well as the coronation robes.

古文：萧斌宣令所统，皆使解甲，自石头戴白幡来降；诏斩斌于军门。
现代文：萧斌命令他所统率的部队全体将士放下武器，脱下战服，从石头城顶着白旗前来投降。刘骏下诏，命令在军门外将萧斌斩首。
English: Xiao Bin ordered all the soldiers under his command to lay down their weapons, take off their uniforms, and come from the Stone City with a white flag to surrender. Liu Yu issued an edict and ordered Xiao Bin to be beheaded outside the military gate.

古文：濬劝劭载宝货逃入海，劭以人情离散，不果行。
现代文：刘浚劝说刘劭带着金银财宝逃向大海，刘劭认为众叛亲离，没有走成。
English: Liu Jun persuaded Liu Hui to flee to the sea with gold, silver and treasure. Liu Hui believed that the crowd had turned against their relatives and had not succeeded.

古文：乙亥，辅国将军硃修之克东府，丙子，诸军克台城，各由诸门入会于殿庭，获王正见，斩之。
现代文：乙亥，辅国将军朱之攻克刘劭所据守的东府。丙子，各路大军又攻克了台城，之后，又分别从各门涌进，在殿前会师，抓获了王正见，斩了他。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Zhu Zhi, the general of the auxiliary state, conquered the eastern capital defended by Liu Xuan. In the third year of the Heian period, the armies of all directions conquered Taicheng, and after that, they poured in separately from each gate, gathered in front of the palace, captured Wang Zhengdi, and beheaded him.

古文：张超之走至合殿御床之所。为军士所杀，刳肠割心，诸将脔其肉，生啖之。
现代文：张超之匆匆逃到合殿皇帝御床的地方，被军中将士所杀，挖了他的心，掏了他的肠子，各路将士争着割下他的肉，生吞活剥了他。
English: Zhang Chaozhi hurriedly fled to the place of the emperor's bed, and was killed by the lieutenant generals. They dug up his heart and pulled out his intestines. All the generals fought to cut off his flesh and eat him alive.

古文：建平等七王号哭俱出。
现代文：建平王等七王从被囚禁的地方号哭着逃了出来。
English: King Jianping and the other seven emperors fled crying from the place where they were imprisoned.

古文：劭穿西垣，入武库井中，队副高禽执之。劭曰： 天子何在？ 
现代文：刘劭挖通西墙，自己藏到了武器仓库的井里，被卫士队队副高禽抓住，刘劭问他说： 天子在哪里？ 
English: Liu Bei dug through the western wall and hid himself in the well of the weapons warehouse. He was caught by the deputy high bird of the guards team. Liu Bei asked him: Where is the Son of Heaven?

古文：禽曰： 近在新亭。 
现代文：高禽说： 就在附近的新亭。 
English: Gao Jiao said: It is in the nearby Xinting.

古文：至殿前，臧质见之恸哭，劭曰： 天地所不覆载，丈人何为见器？ 
现代文：高禽将刘劭押送到金銮殿前，臧质看见刘劭，不禁失声恸哭，刘劭说： 这是天地不容，老人家为何哭呢？ 
English: Gao Jiao escorted Liu Yao to the front of the Jinyuan Palace. When Yan Qi saw Liu Yao, he couldn't help but break into tears. Liu Yao said, "This is unacceptable. Why would an old man cry?"

古文：又谓质曰： 可得为启乞远徙不？ 
现代文：又对臧质说： 我刘劭能不能请求流放到远方边疆之地？ 
English: He also said to Liu Xiao: Can I, Liu Xiao, request to be exiled to a faraway frontier?

古文：质曰： 主上近在航南，自当有处分。 
现代文：臧质说： 主上如今就近在大航的南边，他自己自会对你裁决。 
English: The eunuch said, "The Lord is now in the southern part of Taihang, and he will judge you.

古文：缚劭于马上，防送军门。
现代文：于是，就把刘劭捆绑在马上，护送到了军营大门。
English: Tie up Liu Shao immediately and send him to the military gate.

古文：时不见传国玺，以问劭，劭曰： 在严道育处。 
现代文：当时，找不到传国玉玺，就问刘劭，刘劭说： 玉玺在严道育处。 
English: At that time, when he couldn't find the legendary Jade Dragonfly, he asked Liu Yao. Liu Yao said, "The Jade Dragonfly is in the strict education department."

古文：就取，得之。
现代文：立刻派人到严道育处去拿，果然拿到玉玺。
English: He immediately sent someone to the Yan Dao Education Office to get it, and he was able to get it.

古文：斩劭及四子于牙下。
现代文：刘骏下令在牙旗下将刘劭和他的四个儿子全部斩首。
English: Liu Bei ordered that Liu Bei and his four sons all be beheaded under the banner of Fang.

古文：濬帅左右数十人挟南平王铄南走，遇江夏王义恭于越城。濬下马曰： 南中郎今何所作？ 
现代文：刘浚带领随从几十人挟持着南平王刘铄向南逃去，走到越城时遇到了江夏王刘义恭，刘浚翻身下马，说： 南中郎刘骏现在在做什么？ 
English: Liu Jun, accompanied by dozens of people, escapes to the south with the Nanping King Liu Ye. When he reaches Yuecheng, he meets the Jiangxia King Liu Yigong. Liu Jun turns around and dismounts, saying: "What is the Southern Middle Lord Liu Ye doing now?"

古文：义恭曰： 上已君临万国。 
现代文：刘义恭回答说： 皇上现在已君临万国。 
English: Liu Yigong replied, "The Emperor has now become the ruler of all nations.

古文：又曰： 虎头来得无晚乎？ 
现代文：刘浚又问： 虎头我来得不晚吗？ 
English: Liu Jun also asked: Isn't Hu Tou a little late to come today?

古文：义恭曰： 殊当恨晚。 
现代文：刘义恭回答说： 实在遗憾的是太晚了。 
English: Liu Yigong said, "Unfortunately, it's too late.

古文：又曰： 故当不死邪？ 
现代文：刘浚又问： 我该不会被判死罪吧？ 
English: Liu Jun also asked: Shouldn't I be sentenced to death?

古文：义恭曰： 可诣行阙请罪。 
现代文：刘义恭回答说： 你可以回到行宫，请求处罚。 
English: Yoshitaka replied, "You can go to the emperor and ask for forgiveness."

古文：又曰： 未审犹疑赐一职自效不？ 义恭又曰： 此未可量。 
现代文：刘浚又问： 不知道皇上还能不能赐给我一个官职，让我为他效忠尽力？ 刘义恭回答说： 这不好估计。 
English: Liu Jun also asked: I don't know if the emperor can still give me an official post, so that I can do my best to be loyal to him? Liu Yigong replied: It's hard to estimate.

古文：勒与俱归，于道斩之，及其三子。
现代文：于是，刘义恭就带着刘浚一起从越城往京师返，走到中途就把他斩了，同时也斩了跟着他的三个儿子。
English: As a result, Liu Yigong took Liu Jun with him from Yuecheng to Beijing and back, and when he reached the halfway point, he beheaded him, as well as his three sons who were with him.

古文：劭、濬父子首并枭于大航，暴尸于市。
现代文：刘劭和刘浚父子的头都被砍下来悬挂在大航，他们的尸体也被拖到集市上曝尸示众。
English: The heads of both Liu Hui and Liu Jun, father and son, were cut off and hung in Dahuang, and their bodies were dragged to the bazaar for public display.

古文：劭妃殷氏及劭、濬诸女、妾媵，皆赐死于狱。
现代文：刘劭的妃子殷氏以及刘劭、刘浚所有的女儿、姬妾也都在监狱里被命令自杀。
English: Liu Bei's concubine Yin, as well as all of Liu Bei's and Liu Jun's daughters and concubines, were also ordered to commit suicide in prison.

古文：污潴劭所居斋。
现代文：在刘劭的住处挖了一个大土坑，里面灌满了污水。
English: A large pit was dug at Liu Yao's residence, and it was filled with sewage.

古文：殷氏且死，谓狱丞江恪曰： 汝家骨肉相残，何以枉杀无罪人？ 
现代文：刘劭的妃子殷氏在自杀之前，曾对狱丞江恪说： 他们刘家亲骨肉之间相互残杀，为什么也要杀了我这个没有犯罪的人？ 
English: Before Liu Yao's wife's son, Yin, committed suicide, he once said to the prison warden, Jiang Ke: They Liu family members killed each other, why do they want to kill me, a person who has not committed a crime?

古文：恪曰： 受拜皇后，非罪而何？ 
现代文：江恪说： 你被立为皇后，这不是罪过又是什么呢？ 
English: Jiang Ke said: You are worshipped as the empress, but what is your crime?

古文：殷氏曰： 此权时耳，当以鹦鹉为后。 
现代文：殷氏说： 我为皇后只不过是暂时的罢了，马上就该封王鹦鹉为皇后了。 
English: Yin said, "I am only a temporary queen. The king parrot should be crowned queen immediately."

古文：褚湛之之南奔也，濬即与褚妃离绝，故免于诛。
现代文：褚湛之投降刘骏大军后，刘浚就同正室褚妃断绝了关系，所以，这次褚妃得以不死。
English: After Zhang Zhan's surrender of Liu Bei's army, Liu Jun broke off relations with his lawful wife, Empress Dowager Cixi, so this time, Empress Dowager Cixi was able to survive.

古文：严道育、王鹦鹉并都街鞭杀，焚尸，扬灰于江。
现代文：严道育、王鹦鹉全都被押到街上，用皮鞭抽打至死，又焚烧了她们的尸体，烧后的骨灰被扔到长江里去。
English: Yan Daoyu and Wang Jiaotong were all taken to the street, beaten to death with whips, and their bodies were burned, and the ashes were thrown into the Yangtze River.

古文：殷冲、尹弘、王罗汉及淮南太守沈璞皆伏诛。
现代文：殷冲、尹弘、王罗汉以及淮南太守沈璞也全被诛杀。
English: Yin Chong, Yin Hong, Wang Luohan, and Huainan Governor Shen Qi were all killed.

古文：庚辰，解严，辛巳，帝如东府，百官请罪，诏释之。
现代文：庚辰，建康解除戒严。辛巳，刘骏前往东府，文武百官公别向刘骏请求治罪，刘骏下诏不再追究。
English: Geng Chen, Jiankang lifted the martial law. Soon after, Liu Hui went to Dongfu. Hundreds of civil and military officials asked Liu Hui to punish the crime, but Liu Hui said that it would not be investigated.

古文：甲申，尊帝母路淑媛为皇太后。
现代文：甲申，刘骏尊封母亲路淑媛为皇太后。
English: Jia Sheng, Liu Bei's mother, Lu Shuyuan, became the empress dowager.

古文：太后，丹阳人也。
现代文：路太后是丹杨人。
English: Empress Dowager Lu is a Danyang person.

古文：乙酉，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：乙酉，封立妃子王氏为皇后。
English: On the 14th, the Wang clan was established as the empress.

古文：后父偃，导之玄孙也。
现代文：王皇后的父亲王偃是王导的玄孙。
English: The queen's father, Wang Yao, is Wang Dao's great-great-grandson.

古文：戊子，以柳元景为雍州刺史。
现代文：戊子，刘骏任命柳元景为雍州刺史。
English: Wu Zi and Liu Bei appointed Liu Yuanjing as the first governor of Yongzhou.

古文：辛卯，追赠袁淑为太尉，谥忠宪公；徐湛之为司空，谥忠烈公；江湛为开府仪同三司，谥忠简公；王僧绰为金紫光禄大夫，谥简侯。
现代文：辛卯，追赠袁淑为太尉，谥号为忠宪公；追赠徐湛之为司空，谥号为忠烈公；追赠江湛为开府仪同三司，谥号为忠简公；追赠王僧绰为金紫光崐禄大夫，谥号为简侯。
English: Xin Wu posthumously gave Yuan Shu the title of Tai Li, with the posthumous title of Zhong Xian Gong; Xu Zhan posthumously gave him the title of Siku, with the posthumous title of Zhong Li Gong; Jiang Zhan posthumously gave him the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, with the posthumous title of Zhong Jian Gong; Wang Soqiao posthumously gave him the title of Jin Ziguang Yiluo Daifu, with the posthumous title of Jian Hou.

古文：壬辰，以太尉义恭为扬、南徐二州刺史，进位太傅，领大司马。
现代文：壬辰，任命太尉刘义恭为扬、南徐二州刺史，并晋升为太傅，兼领大司马。
English: In Imjin, he appointed Lieutenant Liu Yigong as Yang, and Nan Xu as Erzhou, and promoted him to Taifu, and concurrently promoted him to Daishima.

古文：初，劭以尚书令何尚之为司空、领尚书令，子征北长史偃为侍中，父子并居权要。
现代文：当初，刘劭曾提升尚书令何尚之为司空、领尚书令，提升何尚之的儿子征北长史何偃为侍中，父子居于要位。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei had promoted Shang Shuling's son, He Shang, to the position of secretary, and promoted his son, Zhengbei Changshi, to the position of chamberlain. Both father and son were in important positions.

古文：及劭败，尚之左右皆散，自洗黄阁。
现代文：刘劭被击败，何尚之的左右人员也都四处逃散，何尚之只好自己动手清洗黄阁。
English: Liu Bei was defeated, and He Shangzhi's right and left personnel also fled everywhere. He Shangzhi had to clean the Yellow Pavilion by himself.

古文：殷冲等既诛，人为之寒心。
现代文：殷冲等人被诛杀以后，大家都替何尚之担忧。
English: After Yin Chong and others were beaten to death, everyone was worried about something.

古文：帝以尚之、偃素有令誉，且居劭朝用智将迎，时有全脱，故特免之，复以尚之为尚书令，偃为大司马长史，任遇无改。
现代文：刘骏认为何尚之和何偃一直都有很好的名声，而且在刘劭朝中都能用智慧准备迎接讨逆大军，经常救助他人免于大祸，因此，刘骏决定特别赦免了何氏父子。同时，恢复何尚之原来的尚书令职务，何偃仍为大司马长史，二人的地位待遇都没有改变。
English: Liu Bei believed that He Shangzhi and He Qian had always had a good reputation, and that in Liu Bei's dynasty, they could use wisdom to prepare for the counter-revolutionary army and often save others from disaster. Therefore, Liu Bei decided to specially pardon He's father and son. At the same time, He Shangzhi's original post of Shangzhi was restored, and He Qian was still the chief secretary of Ma Changshi. The status and treatment of the two people have not changed.

古文：甲午，帝谒初宁、长宁陵。追赠卜天与益州刺史，谥壮侯，与袁叔等四家，长给禀禄。
现代文：甲午，刘骏祭拜初宁、长宁二陵，追赠卜天与为益州刺史，谥号为壮侯，加上袁淑等共计四家，由朝廷长期支付他们后代的俸禄。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month of the year, Liu Bei paid homage to the two mausoleums of Chuning and Changning, followed by the posthumous gifts of Bu Tian and Wei Yizhou, surnamed Zhuang Hou, together with Yuan Shu and others, a total of four families, and their descendants' salaries were paid by the imperial court for a long time.

古文：张泓之等各赠郡守。
现代文：张泓之等人各个都被追赠为郡守。
English: Zhang Xizhi and others were all posthumously made county governors.

古文：戊戌，以南平王铄为司空，建平王宏为尚书左仆射，萧思话为中书令、丹阳尹。
现代文：戊戌，刘骏任命南平王刘铄为司空，任命建平王刘宏为尚书左仆射，萧思话为中书令和丹杨尹。
English: Wuzhong, Liu Bei appointed Nanping King Liu Bei as the Secretary of the Air Force, appointed Jianping King Liu Hong as the Secretary of the Air Force, and appointed Xiao Siwei as the Secretary of the Air Force and Danyang Yin.

古文：六月，丙午，帝还宫。
现代文：六月，丙午，刘骏返回宫内。
English: In the afternoon of the third day of the sixth month, Liu Ye returned to the palace.

古文：初，帝之讨西阳蛮也，臧质使柳元景将兵会之。
现代文：当初，刘骏奉命前去讨伐西阳蛮人的时候，雍州刺史臧质派遣柳元景率领军队前往与他的大军汇合。
English: At the beginning, when Liu Bei was ordered to go to fight the Xiyang barbarians, the Yongzhou Emperor sent Liu Yuanjing to lead the army to join his army.

古文：及质起兵，欲奉南谯王义宣为主，潜使元景帅所领西还，元景即以质书呈帝，语其信曰： 臧冠军当是未知殿下义举耳。
现代文：臧质起兵反抗刘劭，打算拥戴南谯王刘义宣为皇帝时，又偷偷派人让柳元景率领自己的军队赶快向西返回，柳元景把臧质的密信呈报给了刘骏，并告诉那个送信的人说： 臧冠军将军一定是还不知道武陵王殿下的大义之举。
English: When Yan Xie raised an army to oppose Liu Bei and planned to make Liu Yixuan, the king of Southern Wei, emperor, he secretly sent someone to ask Liu Yuanjing to lead his army back to the west as soon as possible. Liu Yuanjing reported Yan Xie's secret letter to Liu Bei and told the sender that: "Champion General Yan must not yet know the great act of righteousness of His Royal Highness King Wuling.

古文：方应伐逆，不容西还。 
现代文：现在应当讨伐叛逆之人，不容许我撤退回师。 
English: Now is the time to fight the rebels and not allow me to retreat back to my division.

古文：质以此恨之。
现代文：臧质因此对柳元景非常痛恨。
English: That's why gluten hates him so much.

古文：及元景为雍州，质虑其为荆、江后患，建议元景当为爪牙，不宜远出。
现代文：到了朝廷任命柳元景为雍州刺史的时候，臧质十分担心柳元景将来会成为荆州和江州的后患，因此，他向刘骏建议，说柳元景是朝廷的得力帮手，不应该让他远离京师，而应留在朝廷。
English: By the time the court appointed Liu Yuanjing as Yongzhou's chief historian, Gongye was very worried that Liu Yuanjing would become the successor of Jingzhou and Jiangzhou in the future. Therefore, he suggested to Liu Bei that Liu Yuanjing was a powerful helper of the court, and he should not let him stay away from the Beijing division, but should stay at the court.

古文：帝重违其言，戊申，以元景为护军将军，领石头戍事。
现代文：刘骏就改变自己的决定，戊申，改任柳元景为护军将军，兼任石头戍事。
English: Liu Bei changed his mind and appointed Wu Shen as Liu Yuanjing's escort general, and concurrently as the leader of the Stone Anecdote.

古文：己酉，以司州刺史鲁爽为南豫州刺史。
现代文：己酉，刘宋任命司州刺史鲁爽为南豫州刺史。
English: At the same time, Liu Song appointed Lu Shuang, the governor of Sizhou Province, as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：庚戌，以卫军司马徐遗宝为兗州刺史。
现代文：庚戌，任命卫军司马徐遗宝为兖州刺史。
English: Geng Hui appointed Ma Xu Yibao, the Secretary of the Central Military Commission, as the official historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：庚申，诏有司论功行赏，封颜竣等为公、侯。
现代文：庚申，刘骏颁布诏令，命令有关部门按照将士们功劳的大小，分别给予赏赐。加封颜竣等一批人为公爵和侯爵。
English: Goshun and Liu Bei issued a decree, ordering the relevant departments to reward the soldiers separately according to the size of their merits. A group of people such as dukes and marquesses were awarded.

古文：辛未，徙南谯王义宣为南郡王，随王诞为竟陵王，立义宣次子宜阳侯恺为南谯王。
现代文：辛未，改封南谯王刘义宣为南郡王，改封随王刘诞为竟陵王，封刘义宣的次子宜阳侯刘恺为南谯王。
English: Xinwei changed the title of Liu Yixuan, the King of Nanxun, to the King of Nan County, changed the title of Wang Liu to the King of Jinling after he was born, and changed the title of Liu Yixuan's second son, the Prince of Yiyang, to the King of Nanxun.

古文：闰月，壬申，以领军将军沈庆之为南兗州刺史，镇盱眙。
现代文：闰六月，壬申，任命领军将军沈庆之为南兖州刺史，镇守盱眙。
English: In June, Jinshin appointed the leading general, Shen Qingwei, as the governor of Nanlu County and the town guard.

古文：癸酉，以柳元景为领军将军。
现代文：癸酉，任命柳元景为领军将军。
English: , appointed Liu Yuanjing as the leading general.

古文：乙亥，魏太皇太后赫连氏殂。
现代文：乙亥，北魏国的太皇太后赫连氏去世。
English: Yihai, the Great Empress Dowager of Northern Wei, died.

古文：丞相义宣固辞内任及子恺王爵。
现代文：丞相刘义宣坚决辞让自己在朝廷所担任的职务以及他儿子刘恺所封的崐王爵爵位。
English: The prime minister Liu Yixuan resolutely resigned from his post in the imperial court and the title of Duke of Zhao given to his son Liu Bei.

古文：甲午，更以义宣为荆、湘二州刺史，恺为宜阳县王，将佐以下并加赏秩。
现代文：甲午，刘宋改任刘义宣为荆、湘二州刺史，刘恺为宜阳县王，对将佐以下的大小官员们一律加以赏赐。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Liu Song was renamed Liu Yixuan as Jing, the history of the two states of Hunan, and Liu Ye as the king of Yiyang County, and all officials below the rank of general were rewarded.

古文：以竟陵王诞为扬州刺史。
现代文：任命竟陵王刘诞为扬州刺史。
English: The appointment of Liu Xuan, the king of mausoleums, as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：秋，七月，辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季七月，辛酉朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the autumn month of July.

古文：甲寅，诏求直言。
现代文：甲寅，刘骏颁下诏令，要求文武官员畅所欲言，对朝廷内政进行评说。
English: Emperor Jia and Liu Bei issued an edict, requiring civil and military officials to speak freely and comment on the internal affairs of the imperial court.

古文：辛酉，诏省细作并尚方雕文涂饰；贵戚竞利，悉皆禁绝。
现代文：辛酉，再一次下诏，裁减细作署，并入尚方署；宫廷雕刻和装饰，皇亲贵戚竟相贪利，一律加以禁绝。
English: Hsin-tao once again issued an edict to reduce the fine arts department and merge it into the Shangfang department; all court carvings and decorations, and the greed of the emperor's relatives and relatives, were banned.

古文：中军录事参军周朗上疏，以为： 毒之在体，必割其缓处。
现代文：中军录事参军周朗给刘骏上书，认为： 如果毒素在身体内，就一定要从看似不要紧的时候下刀子。
English: Zhou Lang, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, wrote a letter to Liu Wei, saying: If the toxin is in the body, it is necessary to get rid of the knife when it does not seem to matter.

古文：历下、泗间，不足戍守。
现代文：如今，历下和泗水之间，用不着派重兵戍守。
English: Nowadays, there is no need to send heavy troops to guard the border between Lixia and Surabaya.

古文：议者必以为胡衰不足避，而不知我之病甚于胡矣。
现代文：谈论国事的人都认定胡虏已经衰退，我们不用回避害怕他们，但他们却不知道我们国家的弊病比胡虏要严重得多。
English: Those who talk about state affairs believe that the Khuriks have declined and that we should not be afraid of them, but they do not know that the ills of our country are much more serious than the Khuriks.

古文：今空守孤城，徒费财役。
现代文：现在，我们空守这么一座孤城，这不过是白白浪费财力物力和人力。
English: Now, we are guarding such an isolated city, which is just a waste of money, materials and manpower.

古文：使虏但发轻骑三千，更互出入，春来犯麦，秋至侵禾，水陆漕输，居然复绝；于贼不劳而边已困，不至二年，卒散民尽，可跷足而待也。
现代文：假使胡虏派出三千轻骑兵，对我们边境轮番进行攻击和骚扰，春天的时候，他们前来践踏我们的麦苗；秋天的时候，他们前来掠夺我们收割好的粮食，我们的水路和陆路两方面的运输漕米，也会被他们两次切断，这么做，胡虏一点不感到劳累，而我们的边境却已困苦不堪，不出二年时间，我们边境的戍边士卒就会四散逃光，老百姓也会搬家逃走，这是踮起脚跟就可以等来的。
English: If the Khuriks sent three thousand light cavalrymen to attack and harass our border in turns, in the spring, they would come to trample on our wheat seedlings; in the autumn, they would come to plunder our harvested grain, and our waterway and land transportation of rice would be cut off by them twice. By doing so, the Khuriks would not feel tired at all, but our border is already distressed. In less than two years, our border guards would be scattered and fled, and the common people would move away. This is something that can be waited for by standing on one's toes.

古文：今人知不以羊追狼、蟹捕鼠，而令重车弱卒与肥与悍胡相逐，其不能济固宜矣。
现代文：当今之世，人人都知道不可以羊追狼，不可以蟹捕鼠，可我们却恰恰是在让那些笨重的战车和衰弱不堪的士卒同肥壮的战马和强悍的胡虏追逐厮杀，这样做是不行的，这本是情理之中的事。
English: In today's world, everyone knows that sheep cannot chase wolves, and crabs cannot catch mice, but we are letting those bulky chariots and emaciated soldiers chase and kill with fat horses and strong horses. It is not possible to do so, it is a matter of reason.

古文：又，三年之丧，天下之达丧；汉氏节其臣则可矣，薄其子则乱也。
现代文：而且，三年丧礼，是遍及天下的大丧，当年，汉王朝命令臣下节制丧期，这是可以的，但假如让当儿子的节制丧期，就乱了礼数。
English: Moreover, a three-year funeral is a great mourning all over the world. In that year, the Han Dynasty ordered the vassals to restrain the mourning period, which is possible, but if you let your son restrain the mourning period, you will mess up the number of ceremonies.

古文：凡法有变于古而刻于情，则莫能顺焉；至乎败于礼而安于身，必遽而奉之。
现代文：大凡对古代之法有所改变而薄于人情，没有一个是能够顺利进行的。可是，对于败坏礼教，使自己安逸舒服地活着的事，却肯定马上就去接受和执行。
English: If there are any changes to the ancient laws that are less than humane, none of them can be carried out smoothly. However, for the things that corrupt etiquette and make you live comfortably, you must immediately accept and implement them.

古文：今陛下以大孝始基，宜反斯谬。
现代文：如今，陛下您是以天下大孝作为基础开始您的事业的，这就更应该一反这种改变三年之丧的错误。
English: Today, Your Majesty, you have begun your career on the basis of the world's greatest filial piety, which is all the more reason to reverse this mistake of changing the three-year mourning period.

古文：又，举天下以奉一君，何患不给？
现代文：另外，拿普天之下的财富来侍奉一个君主，哪里用得着担心会供应不上？
English: Besides, with all the wealth in the world to serve a monarch, who needs to worry about running out of supplies?

古文：一体炫金，不及百两，一岁美衣，不过数袭；而必收宝连椟，集服累笥，目岂常视，身未时亲，是椟带宝、笥著衣也，何糜蠹之剧，惑鄙之甚邪！
现代文：即使是一身的黄金装饰，这也用不上一百两。
English: Even if it is decorated with gold, it does not need a hundred and two.

古文：且细作始并，以为俭节；而市造华怪，即传于民。
现代文：而且，细作署刚刚和尚方合并，这是为了实行勤俭节约。可是，市上所制造的华丽奇巧的东西，已经传到了老百姓中间。
English: Moreover, the Fine Arts Administration has just merged with the Monk's side, which is to practice thrift and economy. However, the gorgeous and ingenious things made on the market have spread to the common people.

古文：如此，则迁也，非罢也。
现代文：这些华丽奇巧的东西只是从宫廷传到了民间，转移了地方，却并没有把它消灭。
English: This encourages people to imitate luxury rather than promote thrift.

古文：凡阙庶民，制度日侈，见车马不辩贵贱，视冠服不知尊卑。
现代文：民间百姓的生活习俗一天天奢靡起来，从他们乘坐的车马上看，不能分辨出地位的高低贵贱，从他们所戴的帽子、所穿的衣服上不能了解他们职位的尊卑。
English: The living habits of the common people are becoming more and more extravagant day by day. Judging from the cars and horses they ride, it is impossible to distinguish the level of their status. From the hats they wear and the clothes they wear, it is impossible to understand the dignity of their position.

古文：尚方今造一物，小民明已睥睨；宫中朝制一衣，庶家晚已裁学。
现代文：尚方署如果今天制造了一崐个小小的器物，那么民间第二天就能知道它的制作方法；宫内如果在早晨缝制了一件衣服，老百姓家里晚上就能知道怎么裁剪。
English: If the Shangfang Department made a small utensil today, then the people would know how to make it the next day; if the palace sewed a piece of clothing in the morning, the people at home would know how to cut it in the evening.

古文：侈丽之源，实先宫阃。
现代文：民间奢侈华丽的源头，实在是最早出现在皇宫之中。
English: The source of the extravagance and splendour of the people actually first appeared in the imperial palace.

古文：又，设官者宜官称事立，人称官置。
现代文：再者，朝廷设立官位，官位应当和管理的事务相称，任职官员应当和官位相称。
English: Furthermore, when the Imperial Court establishes an official position, the official position should be commensurate with the affairs to be managed, and the officials to be appointed should be commensurate with the official position.

古文：王侯识未堪务，不应强仕。
现代文：如果王爷、侯爵们的才能不能胜任某一职位，就不应该强迫他们做官。
English: Princes and marquesses should not be forced into office if their talents are not suited to the position.

古文：且帝子未官，人谁谓贱？
现代文：况且，皇帝的儿子即使不做官又有谁能说他低贱呢？
English: Besides, even if the emperor's son is not an official, who can say that he is lowly?

古文：但宜详置宾友，茂择正人，亦何必列长史、参军、别架从事，然后为贵哉！
现代文：只是应该仔细地为他们设置属官，选择正直、有才能的人，何必一定要具有长史、参军、别驾从事这些官职，尔后才能算是尊贵的人呢？
English: However, it is necessary to carefully set up subordinate officials for them, select honest and talented people, why do they have to have a long history, join the army, and do not have to engage in these official positions before they can be regarded as honorable people?

古文：又，俗好以毁沈人，不知察其所以致毁；以誉进人，不知测其所以致誉。
现代文：另外，如今的风气是人们喜欢诽谤人而埋没人的才能，而却不去详查被诽谤者所以被诽谤的原因；人们喜欢根据赞誉的话去提升某人，而不去详查被赞誉者所以被赞誉的原因。
English: Moreover, it is the fashion of the day to slander a man and bury his talent, without inquiring into the reasons why the slandered man was slandered; to promote a man on the basis of praise, without inquiring into the reasons why the praised man was praised.

古文：毁徒皆鄙，则宜擢其毁者；誉党悉庸，则宜退其誉者。
现代文：如果诽谤者是一个卑鄙无耻之徒，那么，朝廷就应该提升被他诽谤的人。如果赞誉者都是一些平庸无能之辈，那么，朝廷就应该辞退被他们赞誉的人。
English: If the slanderer is a vile scoundrel, the court should promote the slandered; if the praisers are mediocre incompetents, the court should dismiss the praised.

古文：如此，则毁誉不妄，善恶分矣。
现代文：这样一来，无论是诽谤或赞誉，都不致于是虚妄错误的，善与恶也就很分明了。
English: These actions invert the roles of defamation and praise.

古文：凡无世不有言事，无时不有下令。
现代文：大体上说，没有一个时代没有直言上书的事，也没有一个时代没有询问下情、征求直言上书的事。
English: Generally speaking, there has never been a time when there was no such thing as candid writing, and there has never been a time when there was no such thing as inquiring about the circumstances and soliciting candid writing.

古文：然升平不至，昏危相继，何哉？
现代文：可是，如果太平盛世并没有出现，而昏暗危险却相继来临，那是什么原因呢？
English: But if peace and prosperity do not appear, and dark dangers come one after another, what is the reason?

古文：设令之本非实故也。 书奏，忤旨，自解去职。
现代文：最根本的原因可能就是，征求直言上书并不是出于真心 。周朗把奏章呈报给刘骏，完全不合刘骏的心意，所以他自行辞职回家了。
English: The most fundamental reason may be that the request for an open letter was not sincere. Zhou Lang submitted the score to Liu Wei, which was completely against Liu Wei's wishes, so he resigned on his own and went home.

古文：朗，峤之弟也。
现代文：周朗是周峤的弟弟。
English: Zhou Lang is Zhou Ye's younger brother.

古文：侍中谢庄上言： 诏云： 贵戚竞利，悉皆禁绝。 
现代文：侍中谢庄上书说： 陛下诏书说： 皇亲国戚竞相争利，一律加以禁绝 。
English: Xie Zhuang, an aide-de-camp, wrote: "Your majesty's imperial edict said: All competition between the emperor's relatives and relatives of the country for profits shall be prohibited.

古文：此实允惬民听。
现代文：这实在是满足了老百姓的愿望。
English: This is really to meet the aspirations of the people.

古文：若有犯违，则应依制裁纠；若废法申恩，便为明诏既下而声实乘爽也。
现代文：假如有人违反了这一规定，就应该按照法律制裁他。如果不按照法律去制裁，而只是强调皇室的宽大厚恩，那就表明诏令虽然已经颁下来，而名声和实际不相符合。
English: If someone violates this rule, he should be punished in accordance with the law. If he is not punished in accordance with the law, but only emphasizes the generosity of the royal family, it shows that although the edict has been issued, the reputation does not match the reality.

古文：臣愚谓大臣在禄位者，尤不宜与民争利。
现代文：臣冒昧地认为，有俸禄有地位的大臣，更不应该同老百姓争夺小利。
English: The minister had the temerity to believe that a minister with a salary and a position should not compete for small profits with the common people.

古文：不审可得在此诏不？ 
现代文：我的这点意见，不知道是否符合诏令的本意。 
English: I don't know if this opinion of mine is in line with the original intention of the edict.

古文：庄，弘微之子也。
现代文：谢庄是谢弘微的儿子。
English: Xie Zhuang is the son of Xie Hongwei.

古文：上多变易太祖之制，郡县以三周为满，宋之善政，于是乎衰。
现代文：乙丑，北魏濮阳王闾若文和征西大将军、永昌王拓跋仁，图谋反叛，拓跋仁在长安被赐自杀，闾若文被斩首。
English: Second Ugly, Northern Wei Shiyang King Shijowen and Western Conquest General, Yongchang King Tuoba Ren, plotted to rebel, Tuoba Ren was given suicide in Chang'an, and Shijowen was beheaded.

古文：乙丑，魏濮阳王闾若文、征西大将军永昌王仁皆坐谋叛，仁赐死于长安，若文伏诛。南平穆王铄素负才能，意当轻上；又为太子劭所任，出降最晚。上潜使人毒之，己巳，铄卒，赠司徒，以商臣之谥谥之。
现代文：刘宋南平穆王刘铄对自己的才华能力一向很自负，所以平时在言谈举止之间多少有点轻视刘骏，他又曾接受刘劭的任命，是最后一个出来投降的。于是，刘骏偷偷派人向刘铄下毒。己巳，刘铄去世。刘骏下诏，追赠他为司徒，并用楚国太子商臣的谥号作为刘铄的谥号。
English: Liu Songnanping Mu King Liu Ye had always been very conceited about his talent and ability, so he usually despised Liu Ye a little in his speech and behavior. He had also accepted Liu Ye's appointment and was the last to surrender. Therefore, Liu Ye secretly sent someone to poison Liu Ye. Liu Ye died. Liu Ye issued a decree to posthumously award him as a disciple, and used the nickname of the Prince of Chu and the merchant as Liu Ye's nickname.

古文：南海太守萧简据广州反。
现代文：刘宋南海太守萧简占据广州城反叛。
English: Liu Song, the governor of the South China Sea, Xiao Jian, occupied Guangzhou City and rebelled.

古文：简，斌之弟也。
现代文：萧简是萧斌的弟弟。
English: Xiao Jian is Xiao Bin's younger brother.

古文：诏新南海太守南昌邓琬、始兴太守沈法系讨之。
现代文：刘骏颁下诏令，任命新任南海太守、南昌人邓琬和始兴太守沈法系一齐出兵前去讨伐。
English: Liu Bei issued an imperial decree, appointing a new Nankai governor, and the Nanchang people, Deng Wei and the Shixing governor, Shen Lokei, sent troops to fight.

古文：法系，庆之之从弟也。
现代文：沈法系是沈庆之的堂弟。
English: Shen Fa is the cousin of Shen Qingzhi.

古文：简诳其众曰： 台军是贼劭所遣。 
现代文：萧简欺骗他手下的人说： 朝廷来的军队，是叛贼刘劭派遣来的。 
English: Xiao Jian deceived his subordinates and said: The army from the imperial court was sent by the traitor Liu Bei.

古文：众信之，为之固守。
现代文：他手下的人相信了萧简的谎言，所以为他卖命固守广州城池。
English: The people under his command believed Xiao Jian's lies, so they worked hard to hold Guangzhou Castle for him.

古文：琬先至，止为一攻道；法系至，曰： 宜四面并攻；若守一道，何时可拔！ 
现代文：邓琬率兵首先到达，只作一面攻击。随后，沈法系赶到，说： 我们应该从四方同时进攻，如果只是从一面攻战，什么时候才能攻下来呢 ？
English: Deng Xuan and his soldiers arrived first and only attacked one side. Then Shen Fa arrived and said, "We should attack from four directions at the same time. If we only attack from one side, when will we be able to attack?"

古文：琬不从。
现代文：邓琬没有接受沈法系的建议。
English: Deng Wei did not accept the suggestion of Shen Fa.

古文：法系曰： 更相申五十日。 
现代文：沈法系说： 我们再把约定进攻期限延长五十天。 
English: Shen Lokei said: We will extend the agreed time limit for the attack for another fifty days.

古文：日尽又不克，乃从之。八道俱攻，一日即破之。
现代文：五十天的期限到了，他们仍然没有攻下广州，邓琬这才接受沈法系的建议，军队从八路同时围攻，只一天的功夫就攻克了广州城。
English: When the fifty-day deadline arrived, they still hadn't captured Guangzhou. It was only then that Deng Wei accepted Shen Fa's suggestion. The army besieged the city from eight directions at the same time, and conquered Guangzhou City in just one day.

古文：九月，丁卯，斩简，广州平。
现代文：九月，丁卯，将萧简斩首，广州叛乱全部平息。
English: In September, Dingwu beheaded Xiao Jianrong, and the Guangzhou rebellion was completely quelled.

古文：法系封府库付琬而还。
现代文：沈法系查封了广州城内的仓库，把它交付给邓琬，自崐己率领军队返回。
English: Shen Fa sealed the warehouse in the city of Guangzhou, handed it over to Deng Yao, and returned with his army.

古文：冬，十一月，丙午，以左军将军鲁秀为司州刺史。
现代文：冬季是一月，丙午，刘宋任命左军将军鲁秀为司州刺史。
English: In the winter of January, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Liu Song appointed Lu Xiu, the general of the Left Army, as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：辛酉，魏主如信都、中山。
现代文：辛酉，北魏国主前往信都、中山。
English: Xin Xi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Xindu and Zhongshan.

古文：十二月，癸未，以将置东宫，省太子率更令等官，中庶子等各减旧员之半。
现代文：十二月，癸未，刘宋因为将要设置东宫，撤销太子率更令等官职，中庶子等官职按旧编制减少一半。
English: In December, because Liu Song was about to set up the East Palace, he revoked the prince ratio and increased the number of official positions, and reduced the number of official positions such as the middle child by half according to the old system.

古文：甲午，魏主还平城。
现代文：甲午，北魏国主返回平城。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the Northern Wei sovereign returned to Pingcheng.

