古文：起昭阳作噩，尽旃蒙大渊献，凡三年。
现代文：起昭阳作噩，尽旃蒙大渊献，凡三年。
English: a total of three years. Wei Ji eight years, Wei Shao Ling five years, Li Gong Ji Ping five years.

古文：炀皇帝中大业九年
现代文：隋炀帝大业九年。
English: The Sui Dynasty lasted for nine years.

古文：春，正月，丁丑，诏征天下兵集涿郡。
现代文：春季，正月，丁丑，炀帝下诏征召天下之兵在涿郡集结，开始招募平民为骁果。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Wu issued an edict calling for soldiers from all over the world to gather in Yuxian, and began to recruit civilians as soldiers.

古文：始募民为骁果，修辽东古城以贮军粮。
现代文：修辽东古城以贮备军粮。
English: Liaodong Ancient City was rebuilt to store military supplies.

古文：灵武贼帅白瑜娑劫掠牧马，北连突厥，陇右多被其患，谓之 奴贼 。
现代文：灵武的贼帅白瑜娑劫掠牧马，北联突厥，陇右地区多受到白瑜娑的侵扰，人们称之为 奴贼 。
English: The powerful thief Bai Yuqi robbed and plundered the wranglers, the Northern Alliance Turks, and the right-hand area was mostly disturbed by Bai Yuqi. People called him "slave thief."

古文：戊戌，赦天下。
现代文：戊戌，大赦天下。
English: Wuzhen, amnesty to the world.

古文：己亥，命刑部尚书卫文升等辅代王侑留守西京。
现代文：己亥，炀帝命令刑部尚书卫文升等人辅佐代王杨侑留守西京。
English: At the same time, Emperor Qian ordered the criminal department's Shang Shouwei, Wensheng and others to stay in West Beijing as assistants to King Sadao Yang Hui.

古文：二月，壬午，诏： 宇文述以兵粮不继，遂陷王师；乃军吏失于支料，非述之罪，宜复其官爵。 
现代文：二月，壬午，炀帝下诏说： 宇文述因为兵粮没有接济上，因此我军被打败，这是军吏犯了军资供应不足的过失，不是宇文述的罪过。应该恢复他的官职爵位。 
English: In February, at noon, Emperor Gao issued an edict saying, "Uwenshu was defeated because he didn't supply soldiers with grain. This was the fault of the military officials who didn't supply enough funds, not the fault of Uwenshu. He should be reinstated to his official rank."

古文：寻又加开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久，炀帝又加升他为开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuan was promoted to the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：帝谓侍臣曰： 高丽小虏，侮慢上国；今拔海移山，犹望克果，况此虏乎！ 
现代文：炀帝对侍臣说： 高丽这个小虏，竟敢侮慢我隋朝上国，如今就是拔海移山，也是可以办到的，何况这个小虏呢！ 
English: Emperor Gao said to his courtiers, "Goryeo, this petty tyrant, dared to humiliate me, the Sui Dynasty, when I ascended to the throne. Today, it is possible to move mountains by sea. What's more, this petty tyrant!

古文：乃复议伐高丽。
现代文：于是又商议出兵征伐高丽。
English: As a result, they discussed sending troops to invade Korea.

古文：左光禄大夫郭荣谏曰： 戎狄失礼，臣下之事；千钧之弩，不为鼷鼠发机，奈何亲辱万乘以敌小寇乎！ 
现代文：左光禄大夫郭荣劝道： 戎狄之国无礼，是臣子应该处理的事情，千钧之弩，不会为小老鼠而发射，陛下何必亲自征讨这样的小小敌寇呢？ 
English: Zuo Guanglu's doctor, Guo Rong, advised, "It is a matter for a courtier to deal with the impoliteness of the country's military, and a thousand bullets will not be fired for a small mouse. Why does His Majesty need to personally collect such a small enemy?

古文：帝不听。
现代文：炀帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：三月，丙子，济阴孟海公起为盗，保据周桥，众至数万，见人称引书史，辄杀之。
现代文：三月，丙子，济阴人孟海公起事为盗，据守周桥，孟海公拥有部众几万人，他见到有引用书、史的人就杀掉。
English: In March, Meng Haigong, a native of Jilin, rebelled and committed theft. He was in charge of the Zhou Bridge. Meng Haigong owned tens of thousands of people. When he saw people with citation books and histories, he killed them.

古文：丁丑，发丁男十万城大兴。
现代文：丁丑，炀帝下诏征发男丁十万人筑大兴城。
English: On the third day of the new year, 100,000 men were conscripted to build Daxing City.

古文：戊寅，帝幸辽东，命民部尚书樊子盖等辅越王侗留守东都。
现代文：戊寅，炀帝驾临辽东，他命令民部尚书樊子盖等人辅佐越王杨侗留守东都。
English: When Emperor Wu arrived in East Liaoning, he ordered the Ministry of Civil Affairs to write to Yang Ziguai and others to assist Yang Jia, the king of Sahu, to remain in the eastern capital.

古文：时所在盗起，齐郡王薄、孟让、北海郭方预、清河张金称、平原郝孝德、河间格谦、勃海孙宣雅，各聚众攻剽，多者十馀万，少者数万人，山东苦之。
现代文：当时盗贼到处蜂起：齐郡人王薄、孟让，北海人郭方预，清河人张金称，平原人郝孝德，河间人格谦，勃海人孙宣雅分别聚众攻城抢劫，他们多的达十余万人，少的有几万人。崤山以东的地方深受其害。
English: At that time, thieves rose up everywhere: Wang Bo and Meng Zhan from Qi County, Guo Fangyuan from the North Sea, Zhang Jin from the Qing River, Yu Xiaodong from the Plains, Khema Zhengyi and Sun Xuanya from the Bohai Sea gathered separately to attack and rob the city. There were more than 100,000 people and less than tens of thousands. The places east of Lushan suffered greatly.

古文：天下承平日久，人不习兵，郡县吏每与贼战，望风沮败。
现代文：天下太平的时间一长，人们都不习惯打仗了，郡县的官吏每次与盗贼交战，都望风溃败。
English: After a long period of peace, people are not used to fighting. Every time the county officials fight with the thieves, they expect to be defeated.

古文：唯齐郡丞閺乡张须陀得士众心，勇决善战，将郡兵击王薄于泰山下。
现代文：只有齐郡郡丞乡人张须陀很得士众之心，他为人勇敢果断善战，率领郡兵在泰山下进攻王薄。
English: Only Zhang Suda, the county magistrate of Qi County and a villager, won the hearts of the soldiers. He was brave, decisive and good at fighting, and led the county soldiers to attack Wang Bo at the foot of Mount Tai.

古文：薄恃其骤胜，不设备；须陀掩击，大破之。
现代文：王薄依仗自己突然取得的胜利，就不作防备。张须陀率兵掩杀攻击，大破王薄之众。
English: Relying on his sudden victory, Wang Bo did not take precautions. Zhang Suda led the troops to cover up the attack and defeated Wang Bo's troops.

古文：薄收馀兵北渡河，须陀追击于临邑，又破之。
现代文：王薄收集残部向北渡河，张须陀在临邑追击王薄，又击败了崐他。
English: Wang Bo collected the remnants and crossed the river to the north. Zhang Suda chased Wang Bo in Linyi and defeated him.

古文：薄北连孙宣雅、郝孝德等十馀万攻章丘，须陀帅步骑二万击之，贼众大败。
现代文：王薄联合北边的孙宣雅、郝孝德等部十余万人进攻章丘，张须陀率领步、骑兵两万人进击，王薄等部被打得大败。
English: Wang Bo, together with Sun Xuanya and Zou Xiaode in the north, led more than one hundred thousand people to attack Zhang Qiu, Zhang Suda led the way, and twenty thousand cavalrymen attacked. Wang Bo and other departments were defeated.

古文：贼帅裴长才等众二万掩至城下，大掠。
现代文：贼帅裴长才等人率众二万人掩杀到城下，大肆掠夺。
English: The leader of the thieves, Pei Changcai, and others led 20,000 people to hide under the city and plundered it.

古文：须陀未暇集兵，帅五骑与战，贼竞赴之，围百馀重，身中数创，勇气弥厉。会城中兵至，贼稍退却。须陀督众击之，长才等败走。
现代文：张须陀来不及集结军队，只带领五名骑兵与贼众交战。贼人竞相前来交战。张须陀被包围百余重，受伤几处，但他仍勇气百倍迎战，正好城里官军赶到，贼人才稍稍退却，张须陀督促士卒攻击，裴长才等人败走。
English: Zhang Suda did not have enough time to gather an army, so he led only five horsemen to fight the bandits. The bandits raced to fight. Zhang Suda was surrounded by more than a hundred people and was injured in several places, but he still had a hundred times more courage to fight. Just as the government troops arrived in the city, the bandits retreated slightly, Zhang Suda urged the soldiers to attack, and Pei Changcai and others were defeated.

古文：庚子，郭方预等合军攻陷北海，大掠而去。
现代文：庚子，郭方预等各部联合攻陷北海，大肆掠夺后离去。
English: Geng Zi, Guo Fang and other prefectures jointly invaded the North Sea, plundered extensively and then left.

古文：须陀谓民属曰： 贼恃其强，谓我不能救。吾今速行，破之必矣！ 
现代文：张须陀对官吏僚属们说： 贼人依仗势力强盛，以为我不能救援北海，我现在迅速进兵，一定会击败贼军。 
English: Zhang Suda said to his officials and subordinates: "The bandits rely on the strength of the strong, thinking that I can not rescue the North Sea, I will quickly enter the army, I will definitely defeat the bandits.

古文：乃简精兵倍道进击，大破之，斩数万级，前后获贼辎重不可胜计。
现代文：于是他挑选精兵兼程进击，大破贼军，斩获首级数万，前后缴获贼人的辎重不可胜数。
English: Therefore, he selected the elite soldiers to advance at the same time, smashed the bandit army, and captured tens of thousands of bandits. The number of bandits captured before and after was countless.

古文：历城罗士信，年十四，从须陀击贼于潍水上。
现代文：历城人罗士信，十四岁，他跟随张须陀在潍水进攻贼人。
English: Luo Shixin, a 14-year-old from Licheng, followed Zhang Suda to attack thieves in Surabaya.

古文：贼始布陈，士信驰至陈前，刺杀数人，斩一人首，掷空中，以槊盛之，揭以略陈；贼徒愕眙，莫敢近。
现代文：贼人刚开始布阵，罗士信驰马到阵前，刺杀数人，斩下一人的首级抛到空中，用长矛接住，他挑着首级在阵前巡走，贼众惊得目瞪口呆，不敢靠近罗士信。
English: The bandits had just begun to set up a battle line. Luo Shixin rode to the front of the battle line, stabbed and killed several people, cut off one person's head and threw it into the air, catching it with a spear. He picked up the head and walked around the front of the battle line. The bandits were stunned and did not dare to approach Luo Shixin.

古文：须陀因引兵奋击，贼众大溃。士信逐北，每杀一人，劓其鼻怀之，还，以验杀贼之数；须陀叹赏，引置左右。
现代文：张须陀趁机率兵奋力进攻，贼众大败溃逃，罗士信追击败军，他每杀一人，就割下鼻子揣在怀里，返回后，来检验杀贼的数目。张须陀感叹赞赏，他让罗士信随侍身旁。
English: Zhang Suta took advantage of the opportunity to attack the soldiers, the thieves were defeated and fled, and Luo Shixin chased the defeated army. For every person he killed, he cut off his nose and carried it in his arms. After returning, he checked the number of thieves killed. Zhang Suta sighed with appreciation, and he let Luo Shixin accompany him.

古文：每战，须陀先登，士信为副。
现代文：每次打仗，张须陀身先士卒，罗士信紧随其后。
English: In every war, Zhang Suda was the first, followed by Luo Shixin.

古文：帝遣使慰谕，并画须陀、士信战陈之状而观之。
现代文：炀帝派遣使者来慰问，并画下张须陀、罗士信战斗的场面来观看。
English: Emperor Qian sent an envoy to offer condolences, and drew a scene of the battle between Zhang Suda and Luo Shixin to watch.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，车驾渡辽。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚午，炀帝的车驾渡过辽水。
English: In the summer, in April, in the late afternoon, Emperor Zou's car drove across Liao Shui.

古文：壬申，遣宇文述与上大将军杨义臣趣平壤。
现代文：壬申，炀帝派遣宇文述和上大将军杨义臣率军进军平壤。
English: In Jinshin, Emperor Gong dispatched Yu Wenshu and Supreme Commander Yang Yixin to lead an army into Pyongyang.

古文：左光禄大夫王仁恭出扶馀道。仁恭进军至新城，高丽兵数万拒战，仁恭帅劲骑一千击破之，高丽婴城固守。
现代文：左光禄大夫王仁恭率军出扶余道，王仁恭进军到达新城，高丽军队几万人阻击隋军，王仁恭率领劲骑一千名击败高丽军，高丽军队闭城固守。
English: Zuo Guanglu's doctor Wang Renyong led the army out of Fuyu Road, Wang Renyong marched to the new city, tens of thousands of Goryeo troops blocked the Sui army, Wang Renyong led a thousand strong to defeat the Goryeo army, and the Goryeo army closed the city.

古文：帝命诸将攻辽东，听以便宜从事。
现代文：炀帝命令诸将进攻辽东，允许诸将可相机从事。
English: Emperor Qian ordered the generals to attack Liaodong and allowed them to do so with cameras.

古文：飞楼、橦、云梯、地道四面俱进，昼夜不息，而高丽应变拒之，二十馀日不拔，主客死者甚众。
现代文：隋军用飞楼？云梯、地道，从城池四面昼夜不停地进攻，但高丽守军随机应变抗击隋军，隋军攻城二十余天还未攻克，双方都有大批人员阵亡。
English: The Sui military attacked non-stop, day and night, from all four sides of the city, using flying towers, ladders, and tunnels. However, the defenders of Goryeo fought against the Sui army at random, and the Sui army did not conquer the city for more than 20 days. A large number of people on both sides were killed.

古文：冲梯竿长十五丈，骁果吴兴沈光升其端，临城与高丽战，短兵接，杀十数人，高丽竞击之而坠；未及地，适遇竿有垂纟亘，光接而复上。帝望见，壮之，即拜朝散大夫，恒置左右。
现代文：隋军所用的冲梯竿长十五丈，骁果吴兴人沈光爬到冲梯顶端，面对城墙与高丽士兵交战。双方短兵相接，沈光杀死高丽士兵十余人，高丽士兵竞相攻击沈光，沈光从冲梯上掉下来，还没掉到地上，正好冲梯的竿上有垂下的绳索，沈光抓住绳子又向上爬，炀帝望见这种场面，感到沈光的行为极为英勇，就任命他为朝散大夫，常让他随侍左右。
English: The rushing ladder used by the Sui army was fifteen meters long. Shen Guang, a Wu Xing man, climbed to the top of the rushing ladder and faced the city wall to fight with the Korean soldiers. The two sides were close to each other. Shen Guang killed more than ten Korean soldiers. Korean soldiers competed to attack Shen Guang. Shen Guang fell from the rushing ladder before falling to the ground. There was a dangling rope on the pole of the rushing ladder. Shen Guang grabbed the rope and climbed up. Emperor Gong saw this scene and felt that Shen Guang's behavior was extremely heroic. He appointed him as a Choshan doctor and often let him follow the attendants around.

古文：礼部尚书杨玄感，骁勇，便骑射，好读书，喜宾客，海内知名之士多与之游；与薄山公李密善。
现代文：礼部尚书杨玄感，骁勇善战，骑射娴熟，爱读书，喜欢结交宾客，海内很多知名之士都与他来往。他与蒲山公李密交情很好，李密是李弼的曾孙。
English: He had a keen sense of etiquette, was brave in battle, skilled in riding and shooting, loved reading, and liked to make friends with guests. Many well-known people in China had dealings with him. He had a close relationship with Busan Gong Li, who was the great-grandson of Li Xi.

古文：密，弼之曾孙也，少有才略，志气雄远，轻财好士，为左亲侍。
现代文：他年轻时就胸有才略，志气抱负远大，轻财好结交名士，官职为左亲侍。
English: When he was young, he was talented, ambitious, easy to make friends with famous people, and his official position was left-hand attendant.

古文：帝见之，谓宇文述曰： 向者左仗下黑色小儿，瞻视异常，勿令宿卫！ 
现代文：炀帝见到李密，对宇文述说： 过去在左翊卫的那个黑皮肤的小孩，相貌非常，不要让他宿卫！ 
English: When Emperor Zou saw Li Mi, he said to Yu Wen: "That dark-skinned child who used to be the left guard is very good-looking. Don't let him be the second guard!"

古文：述乃讽密使称病自免，密遂屏人事，专务读书。
现代文：宇文述就暗示李密称病自请免除宿卫。于是李密就屏绝了应酬来往，专心读书。
English: Yu Wen's description implied that Li Mi called in sick and asked to be exempted from the guards. So Li Mi cut off the entertainment and concentrated on reading.

古文：尝乘黄牛读《汉书》，杨素遇而异之，因召至家，与语，大悦，谓其子玄感等曰： 李密识度如此，汝等不及也！ 
现代文：他曾在乘坐牛车时读《汉书》，恰好杨素遇到，认为他非同崐一般，就把李密召到自己家中和他交谈，杨素非常高兴，对他儿子杨玄感说： 李密有如此的见识气度，你们都不如他！ 
English: He used to read "Chinese Classics" while riding in a cattle car. Yang Su, who happened to meet him, thought that he was not an ordinary peer and called Li Mi to his home to talk to him. Yang Su was very happy and said to his son Yang Xuanxuan: Li Mi has such insight, you are not as good as him!

古文：由是玄感与为深交。
现代文：因此，杨玄感和李密结为深交。
English: As a result, Yang Xuanxuan and Li Mitong became close friends.

古文：时或侮之，密曰： 人言当指实，宁可面谀！
现代文：有时杨玄感侮弄李密，李密对杨玄感说： 人应该说实话，怎么能当面阿庾奉承？
English: Sometimes Yang Xuan sensed that Li Mi was mocking him. Li Mi said to Yang Xuan sens: People should tell the truth, how can you flatter someone in person?

古文：若决机两陈之间，暗呜咄嗟，使敌人震慑，密不如公；驱策天下贤俊，各申其用，公不如密：岂可以阶级稍崇而轻天下士大夫邪！ 
现代文：要是在两军阵前交战，大怒喝喊，使敌人震惊慑服，我不如您；要是指挥天下贤士俊杰各自施展才能，您不如我。怎么可以因为您地位较高就轻慢天下的士大夫呢！ 
English: If I were to fight in front of two armies, shout in anger, and make the enemy tremble, I would not be as good as you; if I were to command the world's sages to display their talents, you would not be as good as me. How can you despise the world's shidafu because of your higher status?

古文：玄感笑而服之。
现代文：杨玄感笑了，很是佩服李密。
English: Yang Xuan smiled and admired Li Mi.

古文：素恃功骄倨，朝宴之际，或失臣礼。
现代文：杨素依恃自己有功，骄横倨傲，在朝宴上有时就有失作臣子的礼节，炀帝心中怀恨但不说。
English: Yang Su clung to his own merits, arrogant and proud. At the morning banquet, he sometimes lacked the etiquette of a courtier. Emperor Xuan harbored resentment in his heart, but did not speak of it.

古文：帝心衔而不言，素亦觉之。及素薨，帝谓近臣曰： 使素不死，终当夷族。 
现代文：杨素也觉察出来了。等杨素去世，炀帝对身旁的侍臣说： 假使杨素不死，最终也得被诛灭九族。 
English: Yang Su also became aware of this. After Yang Su's death, Emperor Gao said to his attendants: "If Yang Su does not die, the Nine Tribes will eventually be annihilated.

古文：玄感颇知之，且自以累世贵显，在朝文武多父之故吏，见朝政日紊，而帝多猜忌，内不自安，乃与诸弟潜谋作乱。
现代文：杨玄感很清楚这一点，而且他自认为自己是累世显贵，朝廷中的文武大臣很多人都是他父亲过去的部下，他看到朝政日益混乱，炀帝对他又很猜忌，心里感到非常不安，就和他的几个弟弟暗地策划谋反。
English: Yang Xuanxuan was well aware of this, and he thought of himself as a long-serving dignitary. Many of the ministers of literature and military affairs in the imperial court were his father's former subordinates. He saw that the imperial government was becoming increasingly chaotic, and Emperor Xuan was very suspicious of him. He felt very uneasy, so he and his several younger brothers secretly plotted a rebellion.

古文：帝方事征伐，玄感自言： 世荷国恩，愿为将领。 
现代文：炀帝正在准备征伐高丽，杨玄感请求说： 我家世世代代蒙受国恩，愿作征伐高丽的将领。 
English: Emperor Yongle was preparing to invade Korea. Yang Xuanxuan pleaded: "My family has been favored by the state for generations, and I am willing to be the general to invade Korea.

古文：帝喜曰： 将门必有将，相门必有相，固不虚也！ 
现代文：炀帝高兴地说： 将门必出将，相门必出相，果然不假。 
English: Emperor Xuan said happily, "A general must be a general, and a pharaoh must be a pharaoh, so it's not fake."

古文：由是宠遇日隆，颇预朝政。
现代文：因此对杨玄感的宠信日重。他越来越多地参预朝政。
English: As a result, Yang Xuanxuan's popularity is growing. He is increasingly participating in pre-imperial politics.

古文：帝伐高丽，命玄感于黎阳督运，遂与虎贲郎将王仲伯、汲郡赞治赵怀义等谋，故逗遛漕运，不时进发，欲令渡辽诸军乏食；帝遣使者促之，玄感扬言水路多盗，不可前后而发。
现代文：炀帝征伐高丽，他命令杨玄感在黎阳督运军资。杨玄感就和虎贲郎将王仲伯、汲郡赞治赵怀义等人策划商议，故意迟滞漕运，不按时发运军资，想让渡过辽河的各路隋军缺乏军粮，炀帝派遣使者催促杨玄感，杨玄感声称水路有很多盗贼，不能先后按时发运。
English: Emperor Gong ordered Yang Xuanquan to transport military supplies in Liyang. Yang Xuanquan discussed the plan with Wang Zhongbo and Zhao Huaiyi of Zanji in Gu County, and deliberately delayed the transportation of military supplies. He wanted to make the Sui army across the Liao River lack military supplies. Emperor Gong sent an envoy to urge Yang Xuanquan. Yang Xuanquan claimed that there were many thieves on the waterway and could not ship on time.

古文：玄感弟虎贲郎将玄纵，鹰扬郎将万石，并从幸辽东，玄感潜遣人召之，二人皆亡还。
现代文：杨玄感的弟弟虎贲郎将杨玄纵、鹰扬郎将杨万石，都跟随炀帝到了辽东，杨玄感暗地派人召他们回来。二人都暗地逃回。
English: Yang Xuanquan's younger brother, Tigahai Lang, accompanied Yang Xuanlong, and Yingying Lang, accompanied Yang Wanshi, to Liaodong. Yang Xuanquan secretly sent someone to call them back. Both of them secretly fled back.

古文：万石至高阳，为监事许华所执，斩于涿郡。
现代文：杨万石跑到高阳，被监事许华抓住在涿郡处死。
English: Yang Wanshi ran to Gaoyang, was caught by supervisor Xu Hua, and was executed in Handan County.

古文：时右骁卫大将军来护儿以舟师自东莱将入海趣平壤，玄感遣家奴伪为使者从东方来，诈称护儿反。六月，乙巳，玄感入黎阳，闭城，大索男夫，取帆布为牟、甲，署官属，皆准开皇之旧。移书傍郡，以讨护儿为名，各令发兵会于仓所。
现代文：当时，右骁卫大将军来护儿率领水军从东莱将要入海进兵平壤，杨玄感派家奴伪装成东方来的使者，诈称来护儿谋反，六月，乙巳，杨玄感进入黎阳，关闭城门，大肆索要男夫，用帆布制成头盔铠甲，任命官员僚佐，都按隋文帝开皇年间的旧制，他向附近各郡发送文书，以讨伐来护儿为名，命令各郡发兵在黎阳仓集结。
English: At that time, Yang Xuanquan sent a family slave disguised as an emissary from the East, falsely claiming to be a rebel. In June, Yang Xuanquan entered Liyang, closed the city gate, demanded a man, made a helmet and armor with canvas, and appointed officials and assistants, all according to the old system during the reign of Emperor Sui Wen. He sent documents to the nearby counties, in the name of fighting to protect the children, and ordered the counties to send troops to assemble in Liyang.

古文：郡县官有干用者，玄感皆以运粮追集之，以赵怀义为卫州刺史，东光尉元务本为黎州刺史，河内郡主簿唐祎为怀州刺史。
现代文：杨玄感以运粮的名义将郡县官吏中有才干的人召集在一起。他任命赵怀义为卫州刺史，东光县尉元务本为黎州刺史，河内郡主簿唐为怀州刺史。
English: In the name of transporting grain, Yang Xuanxuan gathered together talented people from county and county officials. He appointed Zhao Huaiyi as the governor of Weizhou, Dongguang County Lieutenant Yuan Rongben as the governor of Lishu, and Hanoi County Governor Tang as the governor of Huai.

古文：治书侍御史游元，督运在黎阳，玄感谓曰： 独夫肆虐，陷身绝域，此天亡之时也。
现代文：治书侍御史游元在黎阳督运军粮，杨玄感对他说： 独夫逞肆暴虐，使自己陷于绝远之地，这是上天要灭亡他的时候呵。
English: Yang Xuanxuan, who was in charge of transporting military supplies in Liyang, said to his attendant, Shi Youyuan: "If a single man dares to be violent and gets himself trapped in a remote place, this is the time when heaven will destroy him."

古文：我今亲帅义兵以诛无道，卿意如何？ 
现代文：如今我亲率义兵诛来无道之君，您意下如何？ 
English: Now that I have personally led the volunteer soldiers to come to Mudao no kimi, what do you think?

古文：元正色曰： 尊公荷国宠灵，近古无比。公之弟兄，青紫交映，当谓竭诚尽节上答鸿恩。岂意坟土未干，亲图反噬！
现代文：游元正色道： 您父亲受国家的宠信恩遇，近世无比，您弟兄几个都位居高官显爵，正应该对国家竭诚尽节，上报鸿恩，怎想到您父亲坟土未干，您就亲自策划谋反！
English: You Yuan Zhengxue said: Your father was favored and trusted by the state, which is unparalleled in modern times. Several of your brothers are high-ranking officials and nobles. They should have devoted themselves to the country and reported their great favor. How could you think that your father's grave was not dry, and you personally planned to rebel!

古文：仆有死而己，不敢闻命！ 
现代文：我只有一死而已，不能从命！ 
English: I only have one death, I can't die!

古文：玄感怒而囚之，屡胁以兵，不能屈，乃杀之。
现代文：杨玄感发怒将游元关押起来，屡次以兵器威胁他，但不能使游元屈服，就将他杀害。
English: Yang Xuanxuan angrily detained Youyuan and repeatedly threatened him with a weapon, but could not make Youyuan give in and killed him.

古文：元，明根之孙也。
现代文：游元是游明根的孙子。
English: Yu Yuan is the grandson of Yu Minggen.

古文：玄感选运夫少壮者得五千馀人，丹杨、宣城篙梢三千馀人，刑三牲誓众，且谕之曰： 主上无道，不以百姓为念，天下骚扰，死辽东者以万计。今与君等起兵，以救兆民之弊，何如？ 
现代文：杨玄感挑选输送军粮的民夫中身强力壮者五千余人，丹阳、宣城的船夫三千余人，杀三牲誓师。他还对这些人说： 皇帝无道，不体恤百姓，使天下受到骚扰，死在辽东的人数以万计，现在我与你们起兵以拯救百姓于水火，怎么样？ 
English: Yang Xuanxuan selected more than 5,000 strong and able-bodied men from the people who transported military food, and more than 3,000 boatmen from Danyang and Xuancheng to kill the three oath-breakers. He also said to these people: The emperor has no manners, does not sympathize with the people, has caused the world to be harassed, and the number of people who have died in Liaodong is in the tens of thousands. Now, how about I raise an army with you to save the people from water and fire?

古文：众皆踊跃称万岁。
现代文：大家都踊跃高呼万岁。
English: Everyone cheered and shouted "long live."

古文：乃勒兵部分。
现代文：于是杨玄感统率部署军队。
English: As a result, Yang Xuanxuan led the deployment of troops.

古文：唐祎自玄感所逃归河内。
现代文：唐从杨玄感的军中逃回河内。
English: Tang fled back to Hanoi from Yang Xuanquan's army.

古文：先是玄感阴遣家僮至长安，召李密及弟玄挺赴黎阳。
现代文：当初，杨玄感暗地派家奴到长安，召李密和他弟弟杨玄挺到黎阳来。
English: At first, Yang Xuanxuan secretly sent his servant to Chang'an to summon Li Mi and his brother Yang Xuan to come to Liyang.

古文：及举兵，密适至，玄感大喜，以为谋主，谓密曰： 子常以济物为己任，今其时矣！
现代文：及杨玄感起兵时李密正好赶到，杨玄感大为高兴。他让李密作自己的谋主，对李密讲： 你常常以拯救百姓为己任，现在是时候了！
English: When Li Mi arrived just in time for Yang Xuanquan to raise an army, Yang Xuanquan was overjoyed. He let Li Mi be his advisor and said to Li Mi: You have often taken it upon yourself to save the people. Now is the time!

古文：计将安出？ 
现代文：我们的策略将如何呢？ 
English: Where will the solutions come from?

古文：密曰： 天子出征，远在辽外，去幽州犹隔千里。南有巨海，北有强胡，中间一道，理极艰危。
现代文：李密说： 天子出征，远在辽外，就是距幽州也还有千里之遥，南面有大海，北面有强大的胡人，中间夹着一条道，按理来说是极其险恶的。
English: Li Mi said: "The Son of Heaven is away on a campaign, far away from Liao, even from Yuzhou, there are still thousands of miles away. To the south there is the sea, to the north there are powerful Hu people, and in the middle there is a road, which is extremely dangerous.

古文：公拥兵出其不意，长驱入蓟，据临渝之险，扼其咽喉。归路既绝，高丽闻之，必蹑其后。
现代文：您率兵出其不意，长驱入蓟，据守临渝关的险要，扼住这条路的咽喉，征伐高丽的隋军归路便被切断，高丽人知道了，必然追踪于隋军之后。
English: You and your soldiers took them by surprise, drove them into the Yangtze River, guarded the vital point of Lin-Yu Pass, and choked the throat of this road. The return route of the Sui army that conquered Goryeo was cut off. When the Goryeo people found out, they inevitably followed the Sui army.

古文：不过旬月，资粮皆尽，其众不降则溃，可不战而擒，此上计也。 
现代文：不出一个月，隋军的军资粮秣都消耗殆尽，隋军不是投降就是溃散，皇帝就可以不战而擒了。这是上计。 
English: In less than a month, the Sui army's military resources, food and supplies were all exhausted. The Sui army would either surrender or be dispersed, and the emperor could die without a fight. This was the plan.

古文：玄感曰： 更言其次。 
现代文：杨玄感说： 再说说其次的策略。 
English: Yang Xuanxuan said: Let's talk about the strategy again.

古文：密曰： 关中四塞，天府之国，虽有卫文升，不足为意。今帅众鼓行而西，经城勿攻，直取长安。收其豪杰，抚其士民，据险而守之。天子虽还，失其根本，可徐图也。 
现代文：李密说： 关中之地四面都有要塞屏障，是天府之国，虽然有卫文升，但他不足为虑，如今您统帅部众向西击鼓进军，经过城池不要攻取，直取长安，招收长安的豪杰之士，抚慰长安的士民，凭借险要据守长安，天子虽然从高丽返回，但失掉了根本之地，我们就可以慢慢进取了。
English: Li Mi said: Guanzhong has fortress barriers on all four sides. It is the country of Tianfu. Although there is Wei Wensheng, he is not worried. Now your commanding officers march to the west with drums. Don't attack through the city, take Chang'an directly, recruit the heroes of Chang'an, comfort the citizens of Chang'an, and defend Chang'an with the help of vital resources. Although Tianzi returned from Korea, but lost the fundamental place, we can slowly advance.

古文：玄感曰： 更言其次。 
现代文：杨玄感说： 再说说再次的策略。 
English: Yang Xuanxuan said: Let's talk about the strategy again.

古文：密曰： 简精锐，昼夜倍道，袭取东都，以号令四方。
现代文：李密说： 挑选精锐士卒，昼夜兼程，袭取东都，借以号令四方。
English: Li Mi said: "Select elite soldiers, travel day and night, attack the eastern capital, and use it as a signal to march in all directions.

古文：但恐唐祎告之，先己固守。若引兵攻之，百日不克，天下之兵四面而至，非仆所知也。 
现代文：但恐怕唐告诉了东都守备，东都事先进行了固守的准备，要是率兵进攻东都，百日内攻城不下，全国各地的军队四面八方地到来，其结果就不是我所能预料的了。 杨玄感说： 不对。
English: But I'm afraid that Tang told Dongdu to be on the alert, and Dongdu made preparations in advance to hold fast. If he led an army to attack Dongdu, and the city could not be besieged within 100 days, and armies from all over the country came from all directions, the result would not be what I could have expected. Yang Xuanxuan said, "That's not right."

古文：玄感曰： 不然，今百官家口并在东都，若先取之，足以动其心。
现代文：如今文武百官的家属都在东都，要是先攻取东都，就足以扰乱百官们的心。
English: Nowadays, the families of all civil and military officials are in Dongdu. If Dongdu is conquered first, it will be enough to disturb the hearts of all officials.

古文：且经城不拔，何以示威！
现代文：而且，如果经过城池却不攻取，怎能显示我军的威风？
English: Moreover, if you pass through the city but do not attack, how can you show the prestige of our army?

古文：公之下计，乃上策也。 
现代文：你的下策，正是我的上策。 
English: Your next move is my best move.

古文：遂引兵向洛阳，遣杨玄挺将骁勇千人为前锋，先取河内。
现代文：于是杨玄感率兵向洛阳进发，他派杨玄挺率领骁勇之士一千人为前锋，先攻取河内。
English: As a result, Yang Xuanxuan led his troops to Luoyang, and he sent Yang Xuan Ting to lead a thousand brave men to be the forwards and capture Hanoi first.

古文：唐祎据城拒守，玄挺无所获。
现代文：唐凭借城池拒守，杨玄挺攻城不克。
English: Tang refused to defend the city by virtue of the city, and Yang Xuan attacked the city.

古文：祎又使人告东都越王侗与樊子盖等勒兵为备，修武民相帅守临清关。
现代文：唐又派人通知留守东都的越王杨侗和樊子盖率军防备。修武县的百姓纷纷据守临请关。
English: The Tang also sent someone to tell the remaining troops of the Eastern Capital, Yue Wang, Yang Xuan and Zang Zi Gui, to be on the alert. The people of Shouwu County all rushed to defend the pass.

古文：玄感不得度，乃于汲郡南渡河，从之者如市。
现代文：杨玄感无法过关，就从汲郡向南渡河，投奔杨玄感的人多得就象市场上一样。
English: Yang Xuanquan couldn't pass the border, so he crossed the river from Qiu County to the south. The number of people who rushed to Yang Xuanquan was as large as the market.

古文：使弟积善将兵三千自偃师南缘洛水西入，玄挺自白司马坂逾邙山南入，玄感将三千馀人随其后，相去十里许，自称大军。
现代文：杨玄感派他弟弟杨积善率兵三千从偃师以南沿着洛水从西面进军；杨玄挺从白司马坂越过邙山从南面进军；杨玄感率领三千余人跟随其后，相隔约十余里，自称大军。
English: Yang Xuan Kan sent his brother, Yang Jizhen, with 3,000 soldiers to march from the south to the west along the Luoshui River; Yang Xuan Ting marched from Baishima Slope across the Lushan Mountain from the south; Yang Xuan Kan led more than 3,000 people to follow him, separated by about ten miles, claiming to be a large army.

古文：其兵皆执单刀柳楯，无弓矢甲胄。
现代文：杨玄感的士兵都手执单刀柳，没有弓箭甲胄。
English: Yang Xuanxuan's soldiers all carry single-edged swords and no bows and arrows.

古文：东都遣河南令达奚善意将精兵五千人拒积善，将作监、河南赞治裴弘策将八千人拒玄挺。
现代文：东都方面派遣河南令达奚善意率领精兵五千人抵抗杨积善崐。将作临及河南赞治裴弘策率领八千人抵抗杨玄挺。
English: Dongdu dispatched Henan commander Dajun Zhengyi to lead five thousand soldiers to resist Yang Jizhen, and Henan commander Zanzhi Pei Hongzhe to lead eight thousand soldiers to resist Yang Xuntian.

古文：善意渡洛南，营于汉王寺；明日，积善兵至，不战自溃，铠仗皆为积善所取。
现代文：达奚善意渡地洛水，在洛水南汉王寺扎营。第二天，杨积善兵到，达奚善意的军队不战自溃，铠甲武器都被杨积善的军队缴获。
English: On the second day, Yang Jizhen's soldiers arrived, and Dadu's well-meaning army self-destructed without a fight, and all armored weapons were captured by Yang Jizhen's army.

古文：弘策出至白司马坂，一战，败走，弃铠仗者太半，玄挺亦不追。
现代文：裴弘策率军到达白司马坂，与杨玄挺的军队一交战就败走，抛弃了大部分铠甲武器。杨玄挺也不追击，裴弘策退兵三四里，收集散兵，重新列阵等待杨军。
English: Bae Hongtae led his army to Baishima Slope, and was defeated in a battle with Yang Xuan Ting's army, abandoning most of his armored weapons. Yang Xuan Ting did not pursue, and Bae Hongtae retreated three or four miles, collected scattered soldiers, and re-formed to wait for Yang's army.

古文：弘策退三四里，收散兵，复结陈以待之；玄挺徐至，坐息良久，忽起击之，弘策又败，如是五战。
现代文：杨玄挺率军慢慢到来，士兵们坐下来休息了很久，突然起来进攻隋军，裴弘策又败退，就这样双方交战五次。
English: Yang Xuan Ting led the army slowly arrived, the soldiers sat down and rested for a long time, suddenly rose to attack the Sui army, Pei Hongze was defeated and retreated, so the two sides fought five times.

古文：丙辰，玄挺直抵太阳门，弘策将士馀骑驰入宫城，自馀无一人返者，皆归于玄感。
现代文：丙辰，杨玄挺直抵太阳门，裴弘策只带着十余名骑兵驰马逃入宫城，此外再没有一人返回，全部归降了杨玄感。
English: Bing Chen and Yang Xuan marched straight to the Gate of the Sun, while Pei Hongtao fled to Miyagi on horseback with only a dozen or so cavalrymen. No one else returned, and all of them surrendered to Yang Xuan.

古文：玄感屯上春门，每誓众曰： 我身为上柱国，家累钜万金，至于富贵，无所求也。今不顾灭族者，但为天下解倒悬之急耳！ 
现代文：杨玄感在上春门屯兵，他每次誓师时都说： 我身为上柱国，累积的家资巨万，我对于富贵无所求，现在冒着来族的风险，只是要拯救天下的百姓于水火之中啊！ 
English: Yang Xuanxuan was stationed at Shangchun Gate. Every time he took the oath, he said, "I am a pillar country, and I have accumulated a huge amount of family wealth. I have no desire for wealth. Now I am risking the risk of coming to China, but I just want to save the people of the world from water and fire!"

古文：众皆悦。
现代文：大家都高兴。
English: Everyone is happy.

古文：父老争献牛酒，子弟诣军门请自效者，日以千数。
现代文：父老们争相献上牛、酒，子弟们到杨玄感军营门口请求效力的每天有上千人。
English: Fathers and grandfathers compete to offer cattle and wine, and thousands of children come to the gate of Yang Xuanquan's military camp every day to ask for help.

古文：内史舍人韦福嗣，洸之兄子也，从军出拒玄感。
现代文：内史舍人韦福嗣是韦的侄子。他从军抵抗杨玄感，被杨玄感俘获。
English: Wei's nephew, Wei Fuzhi, who was a deserter in history, joined the army to resist Yang Xuanxuan and was captured by Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：为玄感所获；玄感厚礼之，使与其党胡师耽共掌文翰。
现代文：杨玄感对他优礼相待，让他和自己的亲信胡师耽共同掌管公文信札。
English: Yang Xuanxuan treated him with courtesy and let him and his close confidant Hu Shitan jointly manage the official letter board.

古文：玄感令福嗣为书遗樊子盖，数帝罪恶，云： 今欲废昏立明，愿勿拘小礼，自贻伊戚。 
现代文：杨玄感让韦福嗣给樊子盖写信，历数炀帝的罪恶。信中说： 如今我打算废黜昏君拥立明君，希望您不要拘泥于小的礼法，自找烦恼。 
English: Yang Xuanxuan asked Wei Fuxi to write a letter to Zizi Gai, recounting the sins of Emperor Xuan. The letter said: Now I plan to dethrone Dim Jun and support Ming Jun. I hope you don't stick to small etiquette and find troubles.

古文：樊子盖新自外籓入为京官，东都旧官多慢之，至于部分军事，未甚承禀。
现代文：樊子盖是刚从外地调入东都作京官的。东都旧有的很多官吏对他都很轻慢，在军事部署方面，也很少向樊子盖汇报请示。
English: Zou Zigei had just been transferred from another place to Dongdu to work as a Beijing official. Many of Dongdu's former officials were very rude to him, and rarely reported to Zou Zigei for instructions in terms of military deployment.

古文：裴弘策与子盖同班，前出讨贼失利，子盖更使出战，不肯行，子盖命引出斩之以徇。
现代文：裴弘策和樊子盖是同一班次的官员，前番出战讨伐杨玄感失利，樊子盖又派裴弘策出战，裴弘策不肯出行，樊子盖就命令将裴弘策押出去斩首示众。
English: Pei Hongze and Zou Zigei were officials of the same shift. The former went to fight against Yang Xuanquan and lost. Zou Zigei also sent Pei Hongze to fight. Pei Hongze refused to travel, and Zou Zigei ordered Pei Hongze to be pushed out and beheaded.

古文：国子祭酒河东杨汪，小有不恭，子盖又将斩之；汪顿首流血，乃得免。
现代文：国子监祭酒河东人杨汪，对樊子盖稍有不恭敬，樊子盖又要杀掉杨汪，杨汪叩头流血，才得以免死。
English: Yang Wang, a man from the eastern part of the Yangtze River, who was the national overseer of the festival, was a little disrespectful to the lame man, and the lame man wanted to kill Yang Wang, and Yang Wang bowed his head and bled blood before he could avoid death.

古文：于是将吏震肃，无敢仰视，令行禁止。
现代文：于是东都的将领官吏都震惊肃敬，不敢仰视樊子盖，樊子盖在东都是令行禁止。
English: As a result, the generals and officials in Dongdu were shocked and awe-struck, and did not dare to look up at the braided lid. Braided lids are prohibited in Dongdu.

古文：玄感尽锐攻城，子盖随方拒守，玄感不能克。
现代文：杨玄感使用全部精兵攻城，樊子盖根据军情率兵坚守杨玄感无法攻克城池。
English: Yang Xuanxuan used all his best soldiers to attack the city, and Zizi Gui insisted on his soldiers according to military intelligence. Yang Xuanxuan could not conquer the city.

古文：然达官子弟应募从军者，闻弘策死，皆不敢入城。
现代文：但是达官子弟应募从军的人，听到裴弘策被处死，都不敢进城。
English: However, when the sons and sons of high-ranking officials who were recruited to join the army heard that Pei Hongze had been executed, they did not dare to enter the city.

古文：韩擒虎子世咢、观王雄子恭道、虞世基子柔、来护儿子渊、裴蕴子爽、大理卿郑善果子俨、周罗睺子仲等四十馀人皆降于玄感，玄感悉以亲要重任委之。
现代文：韩擒虎的儿子韩世、观王杨雄的儿子杨恭道、虞世基的儿子虞柔、来护儿的儿子来渊、裴蕴的儿子裴爽、大理卿郑善果的儿子郑俨、周罗的儿子周仲等四十余人都归降了杨玄感，杨玄感将亲信要任的职位都授予了他们。
English: More than forty people, including Han Shih, the son of Han Xunhu; Yang Gongdao, the son of Guan Wang Yangxiong; Yu Rong, the son of Yu Shiji; Lai Yuan, the son of Lai Wou Er; Pei Shuang, the son of Pei Yun; Zheng Yao, the son of Daliqing Zheng Zengguo; and Zhou Zhong, the son of Zhou Luo, all surrendered to Yang Xuanquan, and Yang Xuanquan assigned important positions to them.

古文：善果，译之兄子也。
现代文：郑善果是郑译的侄子。
English: Zheng Zhenguo is the nephew of Zheng Yue.

古文：玄感收兵得五万馀人，发五千守慈磵道，五千守伊阙道，遣韩世咢将三千人围荥阳，顾觉将五千人取虎牢。虎牢降，以觉为郑州刺史，镇虎牢。
现代文：杨玄感招集得到五万余名士兵。他分兵五千把守慈道，五千人把守伊阙道，派韩世率三千人包围荥阳。派顾觉率五千人攻取虎牢，虎牢隋军投降，杨玄感任命顾觉为郑州刺史，镇守虎牢。
English: Yang Xuanquan called up more than 50,000 soldiers. He divided his troops into five thousand to guard the Cici Road, five thousand to guard the Yili Road, and sent Han Shih and three thousand to encircle Shenyang. He sent Gu Jue and five thousand to capture the Tiger's Stronghold, the Tiger's Stronghold. The Sui Army surrendered, and Yang Xuanquan appointed Gu Jue as the historian of Zhengzhou and the town guard of the Tiger's Stronghold.

古文：代王侑使刑部尚书卫文升帅兵四万救东都，文升至华阴，掘杨素冢，焚其骸骨，示士卒以必死，遂鼓行出崤、渑，直趋东都城北。
现代文：代王杨侑派刑部尚书卫文升统兵四万救援东都。卫文升到了华阴，挖掘杨素的坟墓，焚烧了杨素的骸骨，向士卒们表明自己必死的决心。于是卫文升率军击鼓进军，出崤谷、渑池，直奔东都城北。
English: On behalf of the king, Yang Pi sent the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shu, Wei Wen Sheng, and 40,000 soldiers to rescue Dongdu. Wei Wen Sheng went to Huayin, dug Yang Su's grave, burned Yang Su's skeleton, and showed the soldiers that he was determined to die. So Wei Wen Sheng led the army to march into the drums, out of Shugu and Dianchi, and straight to the north of Dongdu.

古文：玄感逆拒之；文升且战且行，屯于金谷。
现代文：杨玄感迎击卫文升，卫文升率军且战且走，在金谷驻扎军队。
English: Yang Xuanxuan met Wei Wensheng, and Wei Wensheng led the army to fight and go, and stationed the army in Jingu.

古文：辽东城久不拔，帝遣造布囊百馀万口，满贮土，欲积为鱼梁大道，阔三十步，高与城齐，使战士登而攻之。
现代文：辽东城许久攻取不下，炀帝派人制做一百余万个布袋，每个布袋装满土，打算用布袋堆积成一条宽三十步、与城墙同样高的象鱼脊梁一样的坡道，让士兵们登道攻城。
English: Liaodong City could not be captured for a long time. Emperor Gao sent more than one million cloth bags, each filled with soil, to be made into cloth bags. He planned to use the cloth bags to pile up into a slope that was 30 steps wide and as high as the city wall, like the backbone of an elephant fish, so that soldiers could attack the city.

古文：又作八轮楼车，高出于城，夹鱼梁道，欲俯射城内，指期将攻，城内危蹙。
现代文：他又命人制做八轮楼车，楼车高于城墙，设置在鱼梁道两旁，打算向下射杀城内的人。
English: He also ordered the construction of an eight-wheeled chariot. The chariot was higher than the city wall and placed on both sides of Yu Liang Road, intending to shoot down at people in the city.

古文：会杨玄感反书至，帝大惧，引纳言苏威入帐中，谓曰： 此儿聪明，得无为患？ 
现代文：隋军很快就要攻城了，城内已危在旦夕，恰好报告杨玄感谋反的公文到了，炀帝大为惊恐，他让纳言苏威进入帐中，说： 这个孩子很聪明，恐怕要成为祸患了。 
English: The Sui army was soon about to attack the city, and the city was already in danger. The official document reporting Yang Xuan's rebellion arrived just in time. Emperor Qian was greatly alarmed. He had Najan Suwei enter the ledger and said: This child is very clever, and I'm afraid he's going to become a scourge.

古文：威曰： 夫识是非，审成败，乃谓之聪明，玄感粗疏，必无所虑。但恐因此浸成乱阶耳。 
现代文：苏威说： 能辨别是非、判断成败的人才可以说是聪明。杨玄感为人粗疏，不必为他谋反而忧患，但是，只怕因此而逐渐成为动乱的来由。 
English: Su Wei said: Those who can distinguish between right and wrong and judge success and failure can be said to be smart. Yang Xuan feels that he is a rough person, and there is no need to worry about him. However, I am afraid that this will gradually become the cause of unrest.

古文：帝又闻达官子弟皆在玄感所，益忧之。
现代文：炀帝又听说达官的子弟都在杨玄感那里，越加忧虑。
English: Emperor Yao also heard that all the sons of high-ranking officials were at Yang Xuanxuan's place, which made him even more worried.

古文：兵部侍郎斛斯政素与玄感善，玄感之反，政与之通谋，玄纵兄弟亡归，政潜遣之。
现代文：兵部侍郎斛斯政平时就和杨玄感交情很好，杨玄感谋反，斛斯政曾与他一起谋划，杨玄纵兄弟逃回内地是斛斯政暗地送他们回去的。
English: The attendant of the military department, Xizheng, had a good relationship with Yang Xuanxuan in peacetime. Yang Xuanxuan was a rebel, Xizheng had planned with him, and it was Xizheng who secretly sent Yang Xuanxuan's brothers back to the mainland.

古文：帝将穷治玄纵等党与，政内不自安，戊辰，亡奔高丽。
现代文：炀帝要追究查办杨玄纵等党羽，斛斯政内心极为恐惧不安，戊辰，他逃跑投奔了高丽。
English: Emperor Xizong wanted to investigate and prosecute Yang Xuanlong and other party members. Emperor Xizong was extremely fearful and insecure. Emperor Wu fled to Goryeo.

古文：庚午，夜二更，帝密召诸将，使引军还，军资、器械、攻具，积如丘山，营垒、帐幕、案堵不动，皆弃之而去。
现代文：庚午，夜里二更时分，炀帝秘密召集诸将，让他们率军撤退。所有的军资器械、攻城之具堆积如山，营垒、帐幕，都原地不动，遗弃而去。
English: At the stroke of midnight, Emperor Gong secretly summoned his generals and asked them to lead the army to retreat. All the military equipment and siege tools were piled up like a mountain, and the camp and tents were left untouched and abandoned.

古文：众心忷惧，无复部分，诸道分散。
现代文：隋军人人惊惶恐惧，军队部署已乱，各路兵马分离涣散。
English: Everyone in the Sui army was panicked and afraid, the army deployment was chaotic, and the soldiers and horses were separated and scattered.

古文：高丽即时觉之，然不敢出，但于城内鼓噪。
现代文：高丽方面对这种情况很快就觉察到了，但是不敢出去，只是在城内击鼓呐喊。
English: The Goryeo side quickly noticed this situation, but did not dare to go out, only beating drums and shouting in the city.

古文：至来日午时，方渐出外，四远觇侦，犹疑隋军诈之。
现代文：到第二天中午时高丽方面才渐渐地派兵出城，四处远近地侦察，仍然怀疑隋军撤退是假的。
English: It was not until noon the next day that the Koryo side gradually sent troops out of the city, scouting around far and near, still suspecting that the Sui army's retreat was fake.

古文：经二日，乃出数千兵追蹑，畏隋军之众，不敢逼，常相去八九十里，将至辽水，知御营毕渡，乃敢逼后军。时后军犹数万人，高丽随而抄击，最后羸弱数千人为所杀略。
现代文：过了两天，才出动几千名士兵在隋军后面追踪，但仍然畏惧隋军人多，不敢逼近，两军常常相隔八、九十里。快到辽水时，高丽人得知炀帝车驾已经渡过了辽水，才敢逼近隋军后部，当时隋军后部还有几万人，高丽军队就包抄袭击隋军，最后有几千名隋军老弱士兵被杀死。
English: It took two days before the Koryo sent out several thousand soldiers to follow behind the Sui army, but they were still afraid of the many Sui soldiers and did not dare to approach. The two armies were often separated by eighty or ninety miles. When they were about to reach Liaoshui, the Goryeo people learned that Emperor Gong's chariot had already crossed Liaoshui, and they dared to approach the rear of the Sui army. At that time, there were still tens of thousands of people in the rear of the Sui army. The Goryeo army encircled and attacked the Sui army, and finally several thousand old and weak soldiers of the Sui

古文：初，帝再征高丽，复问太史令庚质曰： 今段何如？ 
现代文：当初，炀帝准备再次征伐高丽时，曾再次问太史令庾质： 这次情况会怎样？ 
English: At first, when Emperor Gong was preparing to invade Korea again, he once again asked Emperor Taishi: What will the situation be like this time?

古文：对曰： 臣实愚迷，犹执前见，陛下若亲动万乘，劳费实多。 
现代文：庾质回答： 我实在是愚钝迷惘，但还是坚持以前的看法，陛下要是亲自率军征伐，劳费实在太多。 
English: He replied: I am really stupid and confused, but I still adhere to the previous view that if His Majesty personally led the army to conquer, the labor cost is too much.

古文：帝怒曰： 我自行犹不克，直遣人去，安得有功！ 
现代文：炀帝发怒道： 我亲自征伐尚且没能取胜，只派别人去，难道会成功？ 
English: Emperor Zou was furious and said, "I myself have led a crusade and have not been able to win, so I'll just send someone else. Will it be successful?

古文：及还，谓质曰： 卿前不欲我行，当为此耳。
现代文：等炀帝从高丽回来，他对庾质说： 你以前不想让我去，就是为了动乱的缘故吧。
English: When Emperor Gong returned from Goryeo, he said to Gongye: You didn't want me to go before, because of the turmoil.

古文：玄感其有成乎？ 
现代文：杨玄感能够成功吗？ 
English: Can Yang Xuanxuan Succeed?

古文：质曰： 玄感地势虽隆，素非人望，因百姓之劳，冀幸成功。今天下一家，未易可动。 
现代文：庾质回答： 杨玄感的地位势力虽然很高很强大，但他平时没有声望，他想凭借百姓的劳苦，希望侥幸成功，如今天下一统，不是容易动摇的。 
English: Gongye replied: Although Yang Xuanxuan's status and power are very high and powerful, he usually has no reputation. He wants to rely on the hard work of the people and hope for a fluke success. It is not easy to shake it, as it is today.

古文：帝遣虎贲郎将陈棱攻元务本于黎阳，又遣左翊卫大将军宇文述、左候卫将军屈突通乘传发兵以讨玄感。
现代文：炀帝派遣虎贲郎将陈棱去黎阳进攻元务本，又派遣左翊卫大将军宇文述、右候卫将军屈突通乘驿站的传车发兵讨伐杨玄感。
English: Emperor Qian sent Tigahiro to Chen Ren to Liyang to attack the Yuan capital, and also sent the left guard general U Wenshu and the right guard general Qu Jutong to dispatch troops to fight Yang Xuanquan.

古文：来护儿至东莱，闻玄感围东都，召诸将议旋军救之。
现代文：来护儿率军到达东莱，闻知杨玄感围困东都，他召集诸将商议回师救援东都。
English: He arrived in Donglai at the head of an army led by his son-in-law. Hearing that Yang Xuanxuan was besieging Dongdu, he called the generals together to discuss how to rescue Dongdu.

古文：诸将咸以无敕，不宜擅还，固执不从，护儿厉声曰： 洛阳被围，心腹之疾；高丽逆命，犹疥癣耳。
现代文：诸将都认为没有皇帝的敕命，不宜擅自回师，都固执地不服从来护儿的命令。来护儿厉声说道： 洛阳被包围，是心腹之患，高丽抗拒王命不过是疥癣之疾。
English: The generals all believed that without the emperor's command, it was not appropriate to return to the emperor without permission, and they stubbornly disobeyed the order of the former tutor. The tutor said sharply: Luoyang is surrounded, it is a disease of the heart, and Goryeo's resistance to the king's order is just a disease of the stomach.

古文：公家之事，知无不为，专擅在吾，不关诸人，有沮议者，军法从事！ 
现代文：国家的事知道了就不能不崐去做。我来承担专擅权力的罪名，不关别人的事。有阻拦商议回师之事的人要军法从事！ 
English: Once you know the state's business, you can't help but do it. I'll take on the charge of being an expert in power, which is no one else's business. People who obstruct consultation and consultation should be dealt with by military law!

古文：即日回军。
现代文：来护儿即日回师。
English: The child came to the nursery and went back to school the same day.

古文：令子弘、整驰驿奏闻。
现代文：他命令儿子来弘、来整驰马传报上奏炀帝，炀帝当时回到涿郡，已经下令让来护儿救援东都。
English: He ordered his son to come to Hong Kong, to come to straighten out the horse, and to play Emperor Gong on the telegram. Emperor Gong was back in Gong County at the time, and had already ordered his son to come to the rescue of Dongdu.

古文：帝时还至涿郡，已敕护儿救东都，见弘、整，甚悦，赐护儿玺书曰： 公旋师之时，是朕敕公之日，君臣意合，远同符契。 
现代文：他见到来弘、来整，非常高兴，赏赐给来护儿的玺书中说： 您回师之时，就是我下令让您回师之日，君臣意见相吻合，非常默契。 
English: He was very happy to see the arrival of Hong and Lai Jie, and said in the letter of commendation given to Lai Jie: When you return to the teacher, that is the day I ordered you to return to the teacher, the opinions of the monarchs and ministers coincide, very tacit understanding.

古文：先是，右武候大将军李子雄坐事除名，令从军自效，从来护儿在东莱，帝疑之，诏锁子雄至行在所。子雄杀使者，逃奔玄感。
现代文：先前，右武候大将军李子雄因获罪被除名，现受命在军队中效力，他跟随来护儿在东莱，炀帝怀疑他，下诏命令将他上枷锁送到皇帝行营，李子雄杀死使者，逃走，去投奔杨玄感。
English: Previously, Yu Wuhuang general Li Zixiong was expelled for his crime, and now he was ordered to serve in the army. He followed his guardian in Donglai. Emperor Zhao suspected him and ordered him to be sent to the emperor's camp in shackles. Li Zixiong killed the messenger, fled, and went to Yang Xuanxin.

古文：卫文升以步骑二万渡瀍水，与玄感战，玄感屡破之。
现代文：卫文升率领步、骑兵两万人渡过水，与杨玄感军交战。
English: Wei Wen Sheng led the march, 20,000 cavalry crossed the water, and fought with Yang Xuanquan's army.

古文：玄感每战，身先士卒，所向摧陷，又善抚悦其下，皆乐为致死，由是每战多捷，众益盛，至十万人。
现代文：杨玄感屡次击败卫文升，每次作战杨玄感都身先士卒，所向披靡。他还善于安抚部下，因此大家都愿意为他效命，所以每次作战大都能取胜。杨玄感部众愈来愈多，达十万人。
English: Yang Xuanxuan repeatedly defeated Wei Wensheng. In every battle, Yang Xuanxuan led the troops and was invincible. He was also good at appeasing his subordinates, so everyone was willing to serve him, so he could win every battle. The number of Yang Xuanxuan's troops increased more and more, reaching 100,000 people.

古文：文升众寡不敌，死伤太半且尽，乃更进屯邙山之阳，与玄感决战，一日十馀合。
现代文：卫文升寡不敌众，部下死伤大半，军力将近耗竭，于是他率军进驻邙山的南面，与杨玄感决战。
English: Wei Wen was outnumbered, most of his subordinates were killed or wounded, and his army was almost exhausted. So he led his army to the south of Shaoshan and fought a decisive battle with Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：会杨玄挺中流矢死，玄感军乃稍却。
现代文：一天之内双方交锋十余次，恰巧杨玄挺被流箭射死，杨玄感的军队才稍稍退却。
English: Within a day, the two sides clashed more than ten times. It just so happened that Yang Xuan Ting was shot dead by a stray arrow, and Yang Xuan Xuan's army only retreated slightly.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，馀杭民刘元进起兵以应玄感。
现代文：秋季，十月，癸未，余杭人刘元进起兵响应杨玄感。
English: In the autumn, in October, before the New Year, Liu Yuanjin, a Hangzhou resident, raised an army in response to Yang Xuan's feeling.

古文：元进手长尺馀，臂垂过膝，自以相表非常，阴有异志。
现代文：刘元进手长一尺有余，手臂垂下来超过膝盖，他自认为自己相貌非同寻常，暗中另有图谋。
English: Liu Yuanjin is more than a foot long, his arms hang down over his knees, he thinks he is unusual in appearance, and secretly has other plans.

古文：会帝再发三吴征高丽，三吴兵皆相谓曰： 往岁天下全盛，吾辈父兄征高丽者犹太半不返；今已罢弊，复为此行，吾属无遗类矣！ 
现代文：正逢炀帝再次征发三吴之兵去征伐高丽，三吴之兵都互相说： 往年国家处于全盛时期，我们父兄中出征高丽的人还大半没有回来，如今国家已经疲惫，又要被征召去打仗，我们的这辈人就要灭绝了！ 
English: It was just at the time when Emperor Gong sent the three Wu soldiers to conquer Goryeo again. The three Wu soldiers all said to each other: In previous years, the country was in its heyday. Most of our fathers and brothers who went to fight in Goryeo have not yet returned. Now the country is exhausted and they have to be conscripted to fight again. Our generation is about to be exterminated!

古文：由是多亡命。
现代文：因此很多人都逃亡。
English: As a result, many people have fled.

古文：郡县捕之急，闻元进举兵，亡命者云集，旬月间，众至数万。
现代文：郡县官吏捕捉逃亡的人非常急迫，逃亡的人闻知刘元进起兵，都聚集到他的麾下，一个月内，刘元进部众达几万人。
English: The county officials were very anxious to catch the fugitives. When the fugitives heard that Liu Yuanjin had raised an army, they all gathered under his command. Within a month, Liu Yuanjin's troops numbered tens of thousands.

古文：始，杨玄感至东都，自谓天下响应，功在朝夕。得韦福嗣，委以心膂，不复专任李密。
现代文：当初，杨玄感到达东都，自以为天下会响应，他得到韦福嗣后，就视之为心腹，不再完全信任李密了。
English: At first, Yang Xuan felt that he had reached the East, and thought that the world would respond. After he got Wei Fu, he regarded him as a confidant, and no longer fully trusted Li Mi.

古文：福嗣每画策，皆持两端；密揣知其意，谓玄感曰： 福嗣元非同盟，实怀观望；明公初起大事而奸人在侧，听其是非，必为所误，请斩之！ 
现代文：韦福嗣每次筹划计谋，都模棱两可，李密揣测到韦福嗣的心意，就对杨玄感说： 韦福嗣原本不是我们的同盟，实际上他还心存观望，您刚开始做大事就有奸人在身旁，听从他的是非评断，必然被他耽误，请将韦福嗣杀掉！ 
English: Wei Fuxi's every planning and scheme was ambiguous. Li Mi guessed Wei Fuxi's intention and said to Yang Xuanxin: Wei Fuxi was not originally our ally, in fact, he was still waiting and watching. As soon as you start doing big things, there will be a traitor next to you. If you listen to his judgment of right and wrong, you will inevitably be delayed by him. Please kill Wei Fuxi!

古文：玄感曰： 何至于此！ 
现代文：杨玄感说： 哪至于如此！ 
English: Yang Xuanxuan said: As for that!

古文：密退，谓所亲曰： 楚公好反而不欲胜，吾属今为虏矣！ 
现代文：李密退下来，对他的亲信说： 楚公为人喜欢谋反却不打算取胜，我们如今都将是人家的俘虏了！ 
English: Li Mi retreated and said to his cronies: Chu Gong likes to rebel but does not intend to win, we will all be prisoners of others now!

古文：李子雄劝玄感速称尊号，玄感以问密，密曰： 昔陈胜自欲称王，张耳谏而被外；魏武将求九锡，荀彧止而见诛。
现代文：李子雄劝杨玄感赶快称帝，杨玄感征求李密的意见，李密说： 从前陈胜打算自己称王，张耳规劝却被排斥在外，魏武帝曹操打算谋求加赐九锡，荀劝他却被诛杀。
English: Li Zixiong advised Yang Xuanquan to quickly proclaim himself emperor, Yang Xuanquan solicited Li Mi's opinion, Li Mi said: In the past, Chen Sheng planned to proclaim himself king, Zhang Ercai advised him but was excluded, Weiwu Emperor Cao Cao intended to seek to bestow Jiuxi, Zou advised him but was killed.

古文：今者密欲正言，还恐追踪二子；阿谀顺意，又非密之本图。
现代文：如今我打算直言规劝，却恐怕落得张耳、荀二人的下场。但是阿谀奉承迎逢上意，又不是我的本意。
English: Now I'm going to speak out and try to persuade, but I'm afraid I'll end up with a deaf ear and a deaf ear. But flattery is not my intention.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：兵起以来，虽复频捷，至于郡县，未有从者；东都守御尚强，天下救兵益至，公当挺身力战，早定关中，乃亟欲自尊，何示人不广也！ 
现代文：自从我们起兵以来，虽然屡次取胜，但郡县一级的官员却无人响应。东都的防卫力量还很强大，全国各地的援军到的越来越多，您应当挺身奋力作战，早早平定关中，可您却急于称帝，为什么让人看到您那么狭隘呢？ 
English: Since we raised the army, although we have repeatedly won, there has been no response from county-level officials. Dongdu's defense force is still very strong, and reinforcements from all over the country are arriving more and more. You should stand up and fight hard to calm down the situation early, but you are eager to praise the emperor. Why let people see you are so narrow-minded?

古文：玄感笑而止。
现代文：杨玄感听后笑了，称帝之事就作罢。
English: Yang Xuanxuan smiled and stopped the suggestion of praising the emperor.

古文：屈突通引兵屯河阳，宇文述继之，玄感问计于李子雄，子雄曰： 通晓习兵事，若一得渡河，则胜负难决，不如分兵拒之。
现代文：屈突通率军驻扎在河阳，宇文述率军跟随其后。杨玄感向李子雄问计，李子雄说： 屈突通精通军事，一旦他们渡过河来，那就胜负难分了，我们不如分兵抗击。
English: The army led by Qu Jutong was stationed in Heyang, followed by the army led by Yu Wenzhuang. Yang Xuanxuan asked Li Zixiong about the strategy, and Li Zixiong said: Qu Jutong is proficient in military affairs, once they cross the river, it will be difficult to tell the difference between victory and defeat, we might as well split the army and fight.

古文：通不能济，则樊、卫失援。 
现代文：屈突通不能渡河，那么樊子盖、卫文升就会失去援助。 
English: If Qu Jutong cannot cross the river, then Zizi Gai and Wei Wensheng will lose assistance.

古文：玄感然之，将拒通；樊子盖知其谋，数击其营，玄感不得往。通济河，军于破陵。
现代文：杨玄感认为这个意见很对，就准备抗击屈突通。樊子盖知道了杨玄感的意图，几次进攻杨玄感的营垒使杨玄感无法去阻击屈突通，屈突通率军渡河，在破陵驻军。
English: Yang Xuanquan thought that this opinion was right, and prepared to fight Qu Xu Tong. Zizi Gai knew Yang Xuanquan's intention, and several attacks on Yang Xuanquan's camp made Yang Xuanquan unable to stop Qu Xu Tong. Qu Xu Tong led the army across the river and stationed troops in the ruined mausoleum.

古文：玄感分为二军，西抗文升，东拒通。
现代文：杨玄感把军队分为两部分，西面抵抗卫文升，东面阻击屈突通。
English: Yang Xuanxuan divided the army into two parts, the west side resisted Wei Wen Sheng, and the east side resisted Qu Xu Tong.

古文：子盖复出兵大战，玄感军屡败，与其党谋之，李子雄曰： 东都援军益至，我军数败，不可久留，不如直入关中，开永丰仓以振贫乏，三辅可指麾而定，据有府库，东面而争天下，亦霸王之业也。 
现代文：樊子盖又出兵大战，杨玄感军队屡次被击败。杨玄感与党羽们谋划此事，李子雄说： 救援东都的军队到的越来越多，我军几次被打败，不可久留此地，不如直入关中，打开永丰仓赈济贫苦百姓，三辅之地就可以挥手而定了，我们据有府库，向东争夺天下，这也可以成就霸王之业。 
English: Yang Xuanquan's army was defeated many times. Yang Xuanquan and his followers planned the event. Li Zixiong said: "More and more armies have come to the rescue of Dongdu. Our army has been defeated several times. It is not possible to stay here for a long time. It is better to go straight to Guanzhong, open Yongfeng Cang and help the poor people. The land of Sanfu can be determined with a wave of the hand. We have the prefectural treasury and compete for the world to the east. This can also achieve the cause of hegemony.

古文：李密曰： 弘化留守元弘嗣握强兵在陇右，可声言其反，遣使迎公，因此入关，可以绐众。 
现代文：李密说： 弘化留守元弘嗣在陇右掌握着强兵，我们可以扬言他谋反，派遣使者迎接您，咱们借此机会入关，就可以欺骗众人了。 
English: Li Mi said, "Honghua's retainer, Yuan Hongzhi, has a strong army at his disposal. We can threaten him with plotting a rebellion and send an envoy to meet you. If we take this opportunity to enter the customs, we can deceive everyone."

古文：会华阴诸杨请为向导，壬辰，玄感解东都围，引兵西趣潼关，宣言： 我已破东都，取关西矣！ 
现代文：正巧华阴杨家的族人请求作向导，壬辰，杨玄感解除了对东都的包围，率军向西逼进潼关，他声称： 我已经攻破了东都，现在去攻取关西了！ 
English: It so happened that a member of the Huaying Yang family requested to be a guide. At the same time, Yang Xuanxuan lifted the siege of Dongdu and led the army westward into Shaoguan. He claimed: "I have broken through Dongdu, now I am going to attack Kansai!"

古文：宇文述等诸军蹑之。
现代文：宇文述等各路军队跟随其后。
English: The army of Yu Wenshu and others chased after them.

古文：至弘农宫，父老遮说玄感曰： 宫城空虚，又多积粟，攻之易下。 
现代文：杨玄感到达弘农宫，父老们挡住道路劝杨玄感说： 弘农宫城空虚，又有很多积存的粮食，很容易攻下。 
English: When he arrived at the Hongnong Palace, local elders stopped him and said, "Miyagi is empty, and there is a lot of grain, so it's easy to capture."

古文：玄感以为然。
现代文：杨玄感认为这话很对。
English: Yang Xuanxuan thinks this is very right.

古文：弘农太守蔡王智积谓官属曰： 玄感闻大军将至，欲西图关中，若成其计，则难克也；当以计縻之，使不得进，不出一旬，可以成擒。 
现代文：弘农太守蔡王杨智积对官员僚属们说： 杨玄感听说朝廷大军将到，他打算向西谋取关中，要是他这个计划成功了，就很难把他打败了，我们应当用计牵制住他，让他无法进军，不出十天，就可以将他抓住。 
English: Cai Wang Yang Zhizhe, the eunuch of Hongnong, said to the officials: Yang Xuan sensed that the imperial army was about to arrive, and he planned to go west to find Guanzhong. If he succeeded in this plan, it would be difficult to defeat him. We should use strategies to restrain him, so that he could not march into the army, and we could catch him within ten days.

古文：及玄感军至城下，智积登陴詈之；玄感怒，留攻之。
现代文：当杨玄感兵临城下，杨智积便登上城上的女垣大骂杨玄感。
English: When Yang Xuanquan's soldiers were approaching the city, Yang Zhizhi climbed onto the city wall to curse Yang Xuanquan.

古文：李密谏曰： 公今诈众西入，军事贵速，况乃追兵将至，安可稽留！
现代文：杨玄感勃然大怒，就停止前进，率军攻城。李密劝说： 您如今蒙骗众人向西进军，兵贵神速，何况追兵将到，怎能在此地停留耽误。
English: Yang Xuanxuan flew into a rage and halted his advance, leading his army to attack the city. Li Mi persuaded him: You have deceived everyone into marching westward, your soldiers are so fast, and the pursuers are coming, how can you stay here and delay?

古文：若前不得据关，退无所守，大众一散，何以自全！ 
现代文：要是向前不能占据潼关，退后无地可守，大众一散，凭什么保全自己？ 
English: If you can't occupy the pass when moving forward, and you can't protect yourself when moving backward, and the public is scattered, how can you protect yourself?

古文：玄感不从，遂攻之，烧其城门，智积于内益火，玄感兵不得入。三日不拔，乃引而西。
现代文：杨玄感不听李密的劝告，就率军攻城，他放火烧弘农城的城门，杨智积从城内向外放更大的火，杨玄感的士兵无法进城，三天仍未攻下城池，杨玄感就率军向西而去。
English: Yang Xuanquan did not listen to Li Mi's advice and led his army to attack the city. He set fire to the gate of Hongnongcheng. Yang Zhizhi let out more fire from inside the city. Yang Xuanquan's soldiers were unable to enter the city and had not captured the city for three days. Yang Xuanquan led his army to the west.

古文：至閺乡，宇文述、卫文昇、来护儿、屈突通等军追及于皇天原。
现代文：当他到达乡，宇文述、卫文升、来护儿、屈突通等各路军队在皇天原追上了他。
English: When he arrived at the township, the various armies of Uwenshu, Wei Wensheng, Lai Fuerer, and Qu Jutong caught up with him in the Emperor's Plain.

古文：玄感上槃豆，布陈亘五十里，且战且行，玄感一日三败。
现代文：杨玄感率军登上豆，摆开战阵，连绵五十里，且战且走，杨玄感一天之内三次被击败。
English: Yang Xuanquan led the army to board the bean, set up a battle line, continuous fifty miles, and fight and go, Yang Xuanquan was defeated three times in one day.

古文：八月，壬寅，玄感陈于董杜原，诸军击之，玄感大败，独与十馀骑奔上洛。
现代文：八月，壬寅，杨玄感在董杜原列阵，各路官军一起进攻杨玄感，杨玄感大败，仅率十余骑逃往上洛。
English: In August, Renzhin and Yang Xuanquan were lined up in Dongduyuan. All the government troops attacked Yang Xuanquan together. Yang Xuanquan was defeated and fled to Shangluo with only a dozen horsemen.

古文：追骑至，玄感叱之，皆反走。
现代文：追击的骑兵追上了杨玄感，杨玄感喝斥追兵，这些人都转身退去。
English: The pursuing cavalry caught up with Yang Xuanquan. Yang Xuanquan shouted at the pursuing soldiers, and they all turned around and retreated.

古文：至葭芦戍，独与弟积善徒步走，自度不免，谓积善曰： 我不能受人戮辱，汝可杀我！ 
现代文：杨玄感到了葭芦戍，仅和他弟弟杨积善徙步行走，他自知不能幸免，就对杨积善说： 我不能忍受别人的侮辱，你杀了我吧！ 
English: Yang Xuan felt the gourd, and only walked with his brother Yang Jishan. He knew that he could not be spared, so he said to Yang Jishan: "I can't bear the insults of others. You should kill me!"

古文：积善抽刀斫杀之，因自刺，不死，为追兵所执，与玄感首俱送行在所。
现代文：杨积善抽刀将杨玄感杀死，又用刀自杀，但未死，被追兵抓住，将他和杨玄感的首级一并送炀帝的行营。
English: Yang Jishan drew a knife to kill Yang Xuanquan, and then committed suicide with a knife, but he did not die, he was caught by the pursuing soldiers, and he and Yang Xuanquan's head were sent to the camp of Emperor Xuan together.

古文：磔玄感尸于东都市，三日，复脔而焚之。
现代文：炀帝将杨玄感的尸首处以车裂之刑，在东都闹市陈尸三天，又将尸首剁碎焚烧。
English: Emperor Xuan punished Yang Xuanquan's corpse with the punishment of splitting the body into three parts. The corpse was kept in Dongdu bustling city for three days, and then the corpse was chopped up and burned.

古文：玄感弟玄奖为义阳太守，将赴玄感，为郡丞周旋玉所杀；仁行为朝请大夫，伏诛于长安。
现代文：杨玄感的弟弟杨玄奖是义阳太守，他要去投奔杨玄感，被郡丞周旋玉杀死；杨仁行崐是朝请大夫，在长安被处死。
English: Yang Xuanquan's younger brother, Yang Xuan Rong, was the governor of Yiyang. He wanted to go to Yang Xuanquan and was killed by the county magistrate, Zhou Xuanyu; Yang Rongxing, who wanted to become a doctor, was executed in Chang'an.

古文：玄感之围东都也，梁郡民韩相国举兵应之，玄感以为河南道元帅，旬月间众十馀万，攻剽郡县；至襄城，闻玄感败，众稍散，为吏所获，传首东都。
现代文：杨玄感围困东都时，梁郡人韩相国举兵响应。杨玄感任命他为河南道元帅，一月之内韩相国就招集部众十余万人，他率兵攻掠郡县，兵到襄城时，闻知杨玄感兵败，部众开始涣散，韩相国被官府抓获处死，首级被送到东都。
English: When Yang Xuanquan besieged Dongdu, Liang County's Han Xiangguo raised an army in response. Yang Xuanquan appointed him as the marshal of Henan Province. Within a month, Han Xiangguo gathered more than 100,000 people. He led the army to attack and plunder counties. When the soldiers arrived in Xiangcheng, they learned that Yang Xuanquan had been defeated. The troops began to disperse. Han Xiangguo was arrested and executed by the government, and his head was sent to Dongdu.

古文：帝以元弘嗣，斛斯政之亲也，留守弘化郡，遣卫尉少卿李渊驰往执之，因代为留守，关右十三郡兵皆受征发。
现代文：炀帝因为元弘嗣是斛斯政的亲戚，留守在弘化郡，他就派卫尉少卿李渊驰马到弘化将元弘嗣关押起来，李渊因此代替元弘嗣为留守，关西十三郡的军队都受李渊的调遣。
English: Because Yuan Hirotsugu was a relative of Emperor Xizong and stayed behind in Hongwu County, Emperor Xizong sent Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards Li Yuan to Hongwu to arrest Yuan Hirotsugu. As a result, Li Yuan stayed behind in place of Yuan Hirotsugu, and the armies of the thirteen counties in Kansai were all dispatched by Li Yuan.

古文：渊御众宽简，人多附之。
现代文：李渊对待部下宽厚容忍，大家多去归附他。
English: Li Yuan treated his subordinates with leniency and tolerance, and they mostly followed him.

古文：帝以渊相表奇异，又名应图谶，忌之。
现代文：炀帝认为李渊相貌奇异，名字又与图谶相映合，就对他很猜忌。
English: Emperor Yao thought that Li Yuan's appearance was strange, and his name was the same as that of Tu Yao, so he was very suspicious of him.

古文：未几，征诣行在所，渊遇疾未谒，其甥王氏在后宫，帝问曰： 汝舅来何迟？ 
现代文：不久，炀帝征召李渊到他的行在，李渊患病未去应召谒见，李渊的外甥女王氏是炀帝的妃嫔，炀帝问王氏： 你舅舅为什么迟到？ 
English: Soon after, Emperor Gong summoned Li Yuan to his presence. Li Yuan was ill and did not go to meet him. Li Yuan's nephew, the Queen, was Emperor Gong's concubine. Emperor Gong asked Wang: Why is your uncle late?

古文：王氏以疾对，帝曰： 可得死否？ 
现代文：王氏回答说李渊病了，炀帝问： 能死吗？ 
English: Wang replied that he had an illness, and Emperor Qian said: Is it possible to die from illness?

古文：渊闻之，惧，因纵酒纳赂以自晦。
现代文：李渊知道了这件事很害怕，于是就酗酒受贿来伪装自己。
English: Li Yuan was very scared when he found out about this, so he drank heavily and took bribes to disguise himself.

古文：癸卯，吴郡硃燮、晋陵管崇聚众寇掠江左。
现代文：癸卯，吴郡人朱燮、晋陵人管崇聚众在江左一带抢掠。
English: Meanwhile, Zhu Xi, a resident of Wu County, and Guan Chong, a resident of Jinling, gathered together to loot in the area to the left of the river.

古文：燮本还俗道人，涉猎经史，颇知兵法，形容眇小，为昆山县博士，与数十学生起兵，民苦役者赴之如归。
现代文：朱燮本来是还俗的和尚，他涉猎经史，很懂得兵法。他个子很小，是昆山县的博士。他和几十名学生起兵后，那些苦于官府赋役的百姓都去投奔他。
English: Originally, Zhu Xi was a monk who returned to the secular world. He dabbled in the history of scripture and knew a lot about military tactics. He was very small and was a doctor in Kunshan County. After he and dozens of students took up arms, the people who were suffering from the government forced labor all went to him.

古文：崇长大，美姿容，志气倜傥，隐居常熟，自言有王者相，故群盗相与奉之。
现代文：管崇身材高大，相貌英俊，抱负不凡，他在常熟隐居，自称有王者之相，因此群盗都尊奉他。
English: Guanzhong was tall, handsome and ambitious. He lived in seclusion in Changshu and claimed to have the appearance of a king, so the bandits all worshipped him.

古文：时帝在涿郡，命虎牙郎将赵六儿将兵万人屯杨子，分为五营以备南贼。
现代文：当时炀帝在涿郡，他命令虎牙郎将赵六儿率兵一万人在扬子驻军，分为五营以防备南面的刘元进和管崇、朱燮等人。
English: At that time, Emperor Yao was in Ya County. He ordered Hu Ya Lang to garrison 10,000 soldiers led by Zhao Liuer in Yangtze and divide them into five battalions to guard against Liu Yuanjin, Guanzhong and Zhu Xi in the south.

古文：崇遣其将陆顗渡江，夜，袭六儿，破其两营，收其器械军资而去，众益盛，至十万。
现代文：管崇派遣部将陆渡江，袭击赵六儿，攻破他的两个营垒，缴获官军的军资器械而去。管崇的势力越发强盛，部众达十万人。
English: Guanzhong dispatched the general Lu Dujiang to attack Zhao Liuer, broke through his two camps, seized the military equipment of the government army and left. The power of Guanzhong became more and more powerful, and the number of members reached one hundred thousand.

古文：辛酉，司农卿云阳赵元淑坐杨玄感党伏诛。
现代文：辛酉，司农卿云阳人赵元淑因是杨玄感的党羽而获罪被杀。
English: Xin Wei, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, and Zhao Yuanshu, a native of Yunyang, were convicted and killed because they were the followers of Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：帝使大理卿郑善果、御史大夫裴蕴、刑部侍郎骨仪、与留守樊子盖推玄感党与。
现代文：炀帝派大理卿郑善果、御史大夫裴蕴、刑部侍郎骨仪与东都留守樊子盖追究杨玄感的党羽。
English: Emperor Qian sent Daliqing Zheng Zengguo, Goshi doctor Pei Yun, criminal department attendant Bone Yi, and Dongdu left-behind Shanzi Gui to investigate Yang Xuanquan's party.

古文：仪，本天竺胡人也。
现代文：骨仪本是天竺地区的胡人。
English: The skeleton was originally from the Hu people in the Tianzhu region.

古文：帝谓蕴曰： 玄感一呼而从者十万，益知天下人不欲多，多即相聚为盗耳。
现代文：炀帝对裴蕴说： 杨玄感振臂一呼就有十万人响应，我越发知道天下的人不必多，人一多就相聚为盗。
English: Emperor Zou said to Pei Yun: Yang Xuan sensed that if he raised his arm, there would be 100,000 people responding to his call. The more I know that there is no need for more people in the world, the more people will gather to steal.

古文：不尽加诛，无以惩后。 
现代文：若不把这些人完全杀干净，就不能惩戒后人。 
English: If we don't kill these people completely, we won't be able to discipline future generations.

古文：子盖性既残酷，蕴复受此旨，由是峻法治之，所杀三万馀人，皆籍没其家，枉死者太半，流徙者六千馀人。
现代文：樊子盖性情本来就残忍，裴蕴又秉承了炀帝的这个旨意，因此，用严刑惩治杨玄感的党羽，处死了三万余人，他们的家产全部被官府没收。其中冤死的人占大半，流放发配边地的有六千余人。
English: Zizigai's nature was inherently cruel, and Pei Yun also adhered to this will of Emperor Gong. Therefore, he severely punished Yang Xuanxuan's party members, executed more than 30,000 people, and confiscated all of their family property. Most of them died unjustly, and more than 6,000 people were exiled to the border.

古文：玄感之围东都也，开仓赈给百姓。凡受米者，皆坑之于都城之南。
现代文：杨玄感围困东都时曾开仓赈济百姓，凡是接受过赈济粮米的百姓都被坑杀在东都城南。
English: When Yang Xuanquan besieged Dongdu, he opened a warehouse to provide relief to the people. All the people who received the relief grain were killed in the south of Dongdu.

古文：玄感所善文士会稽虞绰、琅邪王胄俱坐徙边，绰、胄亡命，捕得，诛之。
现代文：与杨玄感有交情的文士会稽人虞绰、琅邪人王胄都获罪发配边地。虞绰、王胄逃亡，后被官府抓住处死。
English: The scribes who had a friendship with Yang Xuanxuan, the inspector Yu Qiao and the villain Wang Yao, were both sentenced to death. Yu Qiao and Wang Yao fled, and were later caught and executed by the government.

古文：帝善属文，不欲人出其右。
现代文：炀帝擅长于文辞，不喜欢别人超过他。
English: Emperor Xuan excelled at rhetoric and did not like others to surpass him.

古文：薛道衡死，帝曰： 更能作 空梁落燕泥 否！ 
现代文：薛道衡被赐死，炀帝说： 还能写 空梁落燕泥 吗？ 
English: When Xue Daoheng was sentenced to death, Emperor Qian said: Can I still write about the empty beam falling into the mud?

古文：王胄死，帝诵其佳句曰：  庭草无人随意绿， 复能作此语邪！ 
现代文：王胄被处死，炀帝吟诵王胄的佳句：  庭草无人随意绿 ，还能写出这样的句子吗？ 
English: When Wang Yao was executed, Emperor Qian recited Wang Yao's famous sentence: "No one can make the grass in the garden turn green at will. How can one write such a sentence?"

古文：帝自负才学，每骄天下之士，尝谓侍臣曰： 天下皆谓朕承藉绪馀而有四海，设令朕与士大夫高选，亦当为天子矣。 
现代文：炀帝对自己的才学非常自负，他往往看不起天崐下的文士，他曾对侍臣说： 天下人都认为我继承先帝的遗业才君临天下，其实就是让我和士大夫比才学，我也该作天子。 
English: Emperor Qian was very conceited about his learning ability. He often looked down on the scribes under the emperor. He once said to a courtier: "People around the world think that I inherited the legacy of the former emperor to rule the world. In fact, it is for me and the scholar to learn, and I should also be the son of heaven."

古文：帝从容谓秘书郎虞世南曰： 我性不喜人谏，若位望通显而谏以求名者，弥所不耐。
现代文：炀帝曾从容地对秘书郎虞世南说： 我生性不喜欢别人进谏，如果是达官显贵想进谏以求名，我更不能容忍他。
English: Emperor Zou once calmly said to his secretary, Lang Yu Shennan, "My nature does not like others to be promoted, and if a high-ranking dignitary wants to be promoted in order to make a name for himself, I cannot tolerate him.

古文：至于卑贱之士，虽少宽假，然卒不置之地上。
现代文：如果是卑贱士人，我还可以宽容些，但决不让他有出头之日，你记住吧！ 
English: If it's a lowly commoner, I can still be tolerant, but I will never let him have his day of glory, remember that!

古文：汝其知之！ 世南，世基之弟也。
现代文：虞世南是虞世基的弟弟。
English: Yu Shennan is the younger brother of Yu Shiji.

古文：帝使裴矩安集陇右，因之会宁，存问曷萨那可汗部落，遣阙达度设寇掠吐谷浑以自富，还而奏状，帝大赏之。
现代文：炀帝派裴矩安抚陇右一带。裴矩到了会宁，慰问曷萨那可汗部落，派遣阙度设劫掠吐谷浑而使自己富有，裴矩回来向炀帝奏报情况，炀帝重重赏赐了裴矩。
English: Emperor Xuan sent Pei Mom to pacify the right bank of the Yangtze River. When Pei Mom arrived in Huaning, he offered condolences to the Naxian Khan tribe, and sent his troops to plunder the Yangtze River to enrich himself. When Pei Mom returned, he reported the situation to Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan rewarded Pei Mom many times.

古文：九月，己卯，东海民彭孝才起为盗，有众数万。
现代文：九月，己卯，东海人彭孝才聚众为盗，拥有部众数万人。
English: In September, Peng Xiaocai, a native of the East China Sea, gathered tens of thousands of people to commit theft.

古文：甲午，车驾至上谷，以供费不给，免太守虞荷等官。
现代文：甲午，炀帝车驾到达上谷，因为供给接济不上，炀帝就免去了太守虞荷等人的官职。
English: At one o'clock in the afternoon, Emperor Gao arrived in Shanggu by car. Since he was unable to provide financial support, Emperor Gao removed Yu He and other officials from their official positions.

古文：闰月，己巳，幸博陵。
现代文：闰月，己己，炀帝到达博陵。
English: The intercalary month, the self, and the emperor arrived at Boling.

古文：冬，十月，丁丑，贼帅吕明星围东郡，虎贲郎将费青奴击破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁丑，贼帅吕明星包围了东郡，虎贲郎将费青奴将吕明星击败。
English: In winter, in October, Ding Yuxiu, the thief-champion Lv Xing surrounded Dong County, and Tigger Lang defeated Fei Xiongnu and Lv Xing.

古文：刘元进帅其众将渡江，会杨玄感败，硃燮、管崇迎元进，推以为主，据吴郡，称天子，燮、崇俱为尚书仆射，署置百官，毘陵、东阳、会稽、建安豪杰多执长吏以应之。
现代文：刘元进率部众正准备渡江时，恰逢杨玄感兵败，朱燮、管崇共同迎接刘元进，推举他为盟主。刘元进占据吴郡，自称天子，朱燮、管崇都被任命为尚书仆射。刘元进并任命百官，毗陵、东阳、会稽、建安的很多豪杰之士都把地方官吏抓起来响应刘元进。
English: When Liu Yuanjin's troops were preparing to cross the river, Yang Xuan sensed defeat. Zhu Xi and Guan Chong jointly greeted Liu Yuanjin and elected him as the commander. Liu Yuanjin occupied Wu County, claiming to be the son of heaven. Zhu Xi and Guan Chong were both appointed as Shang Shu's subordinates. Liu Yuanjin also appointed hundreds of officials, and many heroes from Binling, Dongyang, Caijing and Jian'an arrested local officials in response to Liu Yuanjin.

古文：帝遣左屯卫大将军代人吐万绪、光禄大夫下邽鱼俱罗将兵讨之。
现代文：炀帝派遣左屯卫大将军代郡人吐万绪、光禄大夫下人鱼俱罗率兵前往讨伐刘元进。
English: Emperor Qian sent General Zuotunwei to fight Liu Yuanjin on behalf of the county people, and the Mermaid Club under Dr. Guanglu led the troops to fight Liu Yuanjin.

古文：十一月，己酉，右候卫将军冯孝慈讨张金称于清河，孝慈败死。
现代文：十一月，己酉，右候卫将军冯孝慈在清河讨伐张金称，冯孝慈兵败身亡。
English: In November, Zhang Jin said that Feng Xiao Ci, the general of the Right Guard, was defeated and killed in Qinghe.

古文：杨玄感之西也，韦福嗣亡诣东都归首，是时如其比者皆不问。
现代文：杨玄感向西进军时，韦福嗣就逃到东都投案自首，当时自首的人都不追究。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan marched westward, Wei Fuzhi fled to Dongdu to surrender. At that time, those who surrendered were not investigated.

古文：樊子盖收玄感文簿，得其书草，封以呈帝；帝命执送行在。
现代文：樊子盖收缴了杨玄感的文件档案，得到韦福嗣起草的给樊子盖的信件，就封好呈送给炀帝。炀帝命令将韦福嗣押起来送到自己的行宫。
English: Emperor Zizigai confiscated Yang Xuanquan's documents and archives, and when Emperor Zizigai received Wei Fuxi's letter to Emperor Zizigai, he sealed it and presented it to Emperor Zhao. Emperor Zhao ordered Wei Fuxi to be arrested and taken to his imperial palace.

古文：李密亡命，为人所获，亦送东都。
现代文：李密逃亡，被人抓住，也送到东都。
English: Li Mi fled, was caught, and was also sent to Dongdu.

古文：樊子盖锁送福嗣、密及杨积善、王仲伯等十馀人诣高阳，密与王仲伯等窃谋亡去，悉使出其所赍金以示使者曰： 吾等死日，此金并留付公，幸用相瘗，其馀即皆报德。 
现代文：樊子盖将韦福嗣、李密及杨积善、王仲伯等十余人上了枷锁，押送到高阳。李密与王仲伯等人暗中策划逃跑，他们拿出所有的金子给使者看，说： 我们死的时候，这些金子都留给您，请您用来埋葬我们，其余的都给您以报答恩德。 
English: Li Mi and Wang Zhongbo secretly plotted to escape. They took out all the gold and showed it to the envoy, saying, "When we die, all this gold will be left to you. Please use it to bury us. The rest will be given to you as a reward for your kindness."

古文：使者利其金，许诺，防禁渐弛。
现代文：使者贪图金子，就答应了。
English: The envoy, greedy for gold, agreed.

古文：密请通市酒食，每宴饮，喧哗竟夕，使者不以为意。
现代文：对李密等人的看守渐渐松懈，李密请人买来洒食，每次宴饮，都要喧哗吵闹一夜，使者不以为意。
English: The guards of Li Mi and others gradually slackened. Li Mi invited people to buy food sprinkles, and every banquet had to be noisy and noisy overnight. The envoy was not impressed.

古文：行至魏郡石梁驿，饮防守者皆醉，穿墙而逸。密呼韦福嗣同去，福嗣曰： 我无罪，天子不过一面责我耳。 
现代文：走到魏郡石梁驿，李密等人把看守的人都灌醉，凿穿墙壁逃跑，李密叫韦福嗣一同逃走崐，韦福嗣说： 我没罪，天子不过是当面责骂我罢了。 
English: When they got to Shiliangye, Wei County, Li Mi and the others got the guards drunk and cut through the walls to escape. Li Mi asked Wei Fuzhi to escape with them. Wei Fuzhi said, "I'm not guilty. God just scolded me to my face."

古文：至高阳，帝以书草示福嗣，收付大理。
现代文：到了高阳，炀帝将韦福嗣起草的杨玄感致樊子盖的信给韦福嗣看，并将他交付大理寺。
English: When he arrived in Gaoyang, Emperor Zi showed Wei Fu Xi the letter from Yang Xuanquan to Zizi Gui drafted by Wei Fu Xi, and handed it over to Dali Temple.

古文：宇文述奏： 凶逆之徒，臣下所当同疾，若不为重法，无以肃将来。 
现代文：宇文述奏道： 凶恶叛逆之徒，作臣子的都应该痛恨，若不将这种人处以重刑，就不能警戒后人。 
English: Uwen recited, "Violent and traitorous people, as well as courtiers, should all be hated. If such people are not punished severely, it will not be possible to warn future generations.

古文：帝曰： 听公所为。 
现代文：炀帝说： 任你处置。 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "It's up to you.

古文：十二月，甲申，述就野外，缚诸应刑者于格上，以车轮括其颈，使文武九品以上皆持兵斫射，乱发矢如胃毛，支体糜碎，犹在车轮中。
现代文：十二月，甲申，在野外，宇文述把那些受刑的人绑在木格上，用车轮括住受刑者的脖子，让九品以上的文武官员都手持兵器砍杀射击。射在受刑者身上的乱箭如同刺猬毛一样，受刑者肢体破碎，仍然括在车轮里。
English: In December, in Jiaxing, in the field, Yu Wenshu tied those who were tortured to the wooden grate, used the wheels to encircle the necks of the prisoners, and let more than nine civil and military officials armed with weapons slash and shoot. The arrows shot at the prisoners were like thorns, and the prisoners' limbs were broken and still encircled in the wheels.

古文：积善、福嗣仍加车裂，皆焚而扬之。
现代文：杨积善和韦福嗣仍要处以车裂之刑，处死后将尸体焚化扬灰。
English: Yang Jizhen and Wei Fuzhi are still to be sentenced to be broken into pieces, and their bodies will be burned to ashes after they are executed.

古文：积善自言手杀玄感，冀得免死。
现代文：杨积善说亲手杀死了杨玄感，期望自己能免死。
English: Yang Jizan said that he killed Yang Xuanquan with his own hands, hoping that he could avoid death.

古文：帝曰： 然则枭类耳！ 
现代文：炀帝说： 他不过是枭一类的动物罢了！ 
English: Emperor Zou said, "He is just an animal like a centipede!"

古文：因更其姓曰枭氏。
现代文：就将杨积善的姓改为枭氏。
English: Yang Jizhen's family name was changed to Gong.

古文：唐县人宋子贤，善幻术，能变佛形，自称弥勒出世，远近信惑，遂谋因无遮大会举兵袭乘舆；事泄，伏诛，并诛党与千馀家。
现代文：唐县人宋子贤，擅长幻术，他能变幻出佛形，自称是弥勒出世。远近的人都相信他并为之迷惑。于是宋子贤就策划趁着举行无遮大会时举兵袭击炀帝的车驾，事情泄露了，宋子贤被处死。
English: Song Zixian, a man from Tang County, was good at magic. He could transform himself into a Buddha and claimed to be Maitreya. People near and far believed in him and were bewitched by him. So Song Zixian planned to take advantage of the open-air conference to raise an army to attack Emperor Xuan's chariot. The affair leaked out, and Song Zixian was executed.

古文：扶风桑门向海明亦自称弥勒出世，人有归心者，辄获吉梦，由是三辅人翕然奉之，因举兵反，众至数万。
现代文：他的党羽一千余家一并被处死。扶风的僧人向海明也自称是弥勒出世，凡是有归附之心的人就可做吉梦。因此三辅一带的人都一致信奉他。于是，向海明举兵造反，部众达数万人。
English: More than a thousand members of his party were executed. The monk Fu Feng also claimed to be Maitreya to Haiming, and anyone who had a heart of belonging could have a good dream. Therefore, people in the Sanfu area all believed in him. Therefore, tens of thousands of people rebelled against Haiming.

古文：丁亥，海明自称皇帝，改元白乌。
现代文：丁亥，向海明自称皇帝，改年号为白乌。
English: Dinghai, Xiang Haiming self-proclaimed emperor, changed his name to Bai Wu.

古文：诏太仆卿杨义臣击破之。
现代文：炀帝下诏命太仆卿杨义臣讨伐并将向海明平灭。
English: Emperor Qian issued an imperial edict ordering Yang Yichen, the Great Servant of the Emperor, to attack and subdue Xiang Haiming.

古文：帝召卫文升、樊子盖诣行在；慰劳之，赏赐极厚，遣还所任。
现代文：炀帝召卫文升、樊子盖到他的行在，对他们加以慰劳，赏赐极为丰厚，然后让他们返回自己的任所。
English: Emperor Qian summoned Wei Wensheng and Zizi Ge to his presence, consoled them, rewarded them very richly, and then let them return to their posts.

古文：刘元进攻丹杨，吐万绪济江击破之，元进解围去，绪进屯曲阿。
现代文：刘元进率兵进攻丹阳，吐万绪率兵渡江将刘元进击败，于是刘元进解围而去，吐万绪进军驻在曲阿。
English: Liu Yuanjin led an army to attack Danyang, and Tu Mansuu led an army to cross the river to defeat Liu Yuanjin. As a result, Liu Yuanjin broke the siege and left, and Tu Mansuu marched into Qu'ao.

古文：元进结栅拒绪，相持百馀日；绪击之，贼众大溃，死者以万数。
现代文：刘元进把木栅栏连接在一起来抗拒吐万绪，双方相持百余日；吐万绪发起进攻，刘元进的部众大乱溃散，死者数以万计。
English: Liu Yuanjin connected the wooden fence together to resist the Tuwanxu, and the two sides held each other for more than a hundred days; Tuwanxu launched an attack, Liu Yuanjin's followers dispersed in disorder, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：元进挺身夜遁，保其垒。
现代文：刘元进奋勇突围，在夜间逃走，据守在营垒中。
English: Liu Yuanjin bravely broke through the encirclement, fled at night, and stayed in the camp.

古文：硃燮、管崇等屯毘陵，连营百馀里，绪乘胜进击，复破之。
现代文：朱燮、管崇等人率部众驻在毗陵，军营连接起来有百余里。吐万绪乘胜进击，又将朱燮、刘元进等人击败。
English: Zhu Xi, Guan Chong and others led the troops stationed in Feiling, and the military camps were connected by more than 100 miles. Tuwansu advanced with victory, and defeated Zhu Xi, Liu Yuanjin and others.

古文：贼退保黄山，绪围之，元进、燮仅以身免，于陈斩崇及其将卒五个馀人，收其子女三万馀口，进解会稽围。
现代文：朱、刘等人率部众退保黄山，吐万绪将黄山包围，刘元进、朱燮只身逃脱，官军在阵前杀死管崇及其将卒五千余人，俘获其子女三万余人，进而解除了对会稽的围困。
English: Zhu, Liu and others led the troops to withdraw from the defense of Huangshan Mountain, and Tu Wanxu encircled Huangshan Mountain. Liu Yuanjin and Zhu Xi escaped alone. The government army killed more than 5,000 of Guanzhong and his soldiers before the battle, and captured more than 30,000 of his children, thus lifting the siege on the auditorium.

古文：鱼俱罗与绪偕行，战无不捷，然百姓从乱者如归市，贼败而复聚，其势益盛。
现代文：鱼俱罗与吐万绪一起行动，战无不胜，但是百姓响应造反的人越来越多，多得就象散了市一样。
English: The Fish Club and Tu Wanxu acted together and were invincible, but the people responded to the rebellion with more and more people, so many that it was as if the city had been dispersed.

古文：元进退据建安，帝令绪进讨，绪以士卒疲弊，请息甲待来春，帝不悦。俱罗亦以贼非岁月可平，诸子在洛京，潜遣家仆迎之；帝怒。
现代文：贼人溃散后又聚集在一起，声势越发浩大。刘元进退守建安，炀帝命令吐万绪进军讨伐，吐万绪认为士卒已经疲惫不堪，请求停止用兵，到来年春天再战，炀帝不高兴，鱼俱罗也认为盗贼不是一年半载就可以平定的，他的儿子都在东都洛阳，他们暗地派家奴来接鱼俱罗，炀帝知道了发怒。
English: After the thieves dispersed, they gathered again, and their voices became louder and louder. Liu Yuanjin retreated to defend Jian'an. Emperor Qian ordered Tu Wanxu to march in the crusade. Tu Wanxu thought that the soldiers were exhausted and asked to stop using soldiers and fight again in the spring of the next year. Emperor Qian was not happy. The fish club also thought that the thieves could be pacified in less than a year and a half. His sons were all in Luoyang, the eastern capital. They secretly sent their slaves to pick up the fish club. Emperor Qian was angry.

古文：有司希旨，奏绪怯懦，俱罗败衄，俱罗坐斩，征绪诣行在，绪忧愤，道卒。
现代文：有关部门的官员迎逢炀帝的旨意，上奏说吐万绪怯懦，鱼俱罗吃了败仗。鱼俱罗因此获罪被杀，炀帝征召吐万绪到他的行在来，吐万绪忧惧郁愤，在路上就去世了。
English: The officials of the relevant departments met the emperor's will, and reported that Tu Wanxu was cowardly, and the fish club was defeated. The fish club was convicted and killed as a result. The emperor summoned Tu Wanxu to his place, and Tu Wanxu was worried and angry, and died on the way.

古文：帝更遣江都丞王世充发淮南兵数万人讨元进。
现代文：炀帝改派江都郡丞王世充征发淮南兵几万人讨伐刘元进。
English: Emperor Qian sent Wang Shicheng, the governor of Jiangdu County, to recruit and dispatch tens of thousands of Huainan soldiers to fight Liu Yuanjin.

古文：世充渡江，频战皆捷，元进、燮败死于吴，其馀众或降或散。
现代文：王世充率军渡江，多次与刘元进交战都取得了胜利。刘元进、朱燮在吴县兵败身亡，其余的部崐众或是投降或是溃散。
English: Wang Shichong led the army across the Yangtze River and won many battles with Liu Yuanjin. Liu Yuanjin and Zhu Xi were defeated and killed in Wuxian, and the rest of the troops either surrendered or dispersed.

古文：世充召先降者于通玄寺瑞像前焚香为誓，约降者不杀。
现代文：王世充召来先投降的人在通玄寺的佛象前焚香为誓，约定降者不杀。
English: Wang Shichong summoned those who came to surrender first to burn incense in front of the Buddhist elephant of Tongyuan Temple and swear not to kill those who agreed to surrender.

古文：散者始欲入海为盗，闻之，旬月之间，归首略尽，世充悉坑之于黄亭涧，死者三万馀人。
现代文：刘元进溃散部众开始想入海为盗，听到这个消息，一个月内，基本都投降了王世充。王世充把这些人全都坑杀在黄亭涧，死者达三万余人。
English: Liu Yuanjin's scattered followers began to want to go to sea to steal. Upon hearing this news, within a month, they basically surrendered to Wang Shichong. Wang Shichong killed all these people in Huang Tingyu, with more than 30,000 dead.

古文：由是馀党复相聚为盗，官军不能讨，以至隋亡。
现代文：因此，其余的人又相聚为盗，官军无法讨伐，直至隋帝国灭亡。
English: Therefore, the rest of the people gathered together to steal, and the government army was unable to fight until the Sui Empire was destroyed.

古文：帝以世充有将帅才，益加宠任。
现代文：炀帝认为王世充有将帅之才，对他越发宠信。
English: Emperor Yao believed that Wang Shih had the talent to be a great general, and sent him more and more favors.

古文：是岁，诏为盗者籍没其家。
现代文：这一年炀帝下诏凡作盗贼的人其家属财产都要被官府没收。
English: In this year, Emperor Xuan decreed that all thieves and their family members would have their property confiscated by the government.

古文：时群盗所在皆满，群县官因之各专威福，生杀任情矣。
现代文：当时到处都是盗贼，郡县官吏因此各自作威作福，任意地对百姓生杀予夺。
English: At that time, there were thieves everywhere, so county and prefectural officials each took advantage of the situation to arbitrarily take the lives of the people.

古文：章丘杜伏威与临济辅公祏为刎颈交，俱亡命为群盗。
现代文：章兵人杜伏威与临济人辅公是生死之交，他们都亡命为盗。
English: Du Fuwei, a decorated soldier, and Fu Gong, a man from Linji, were friends for life and death. They both committed theft.

古文：伏威年十六，每出则居前，入则殿后，由是其徒推以为帅。
现代文：杜伏威十六岁，每次行动都走在前面，撤退则走在最后，因此被徒众推举为统帅。
English: Sixteen-year-old Defoe, who was the first to act and the last to retreat, was chosen by the crowd to be the general.

古文：下邳苗海潮亦聚众为盗，伏威使公祏谓之曰： 今我与君同苦隋政，各举大义，力分势弱，常恐被擒。若合为一，则足以敌隋矣。
现代文：下邳人苗海潮也聚众为盗，杜伏威派辅公对苗海潮说： 如今我和您都是不堪忍受隋朝的苛政，各举义旗，但力量分散，势单刀薄，常常恐惧被擒获，若是我们合二为一，那么就足以与隋朝为敌了。
English: Miao Haichao, a citizen of Liaoning Province, also gathered a crowd to commit theft. Du Fuwei sent Fu Gong to Miao Haichao and said, "Nowadays, I and you are both unable to endure the harsh government of the Sui Dynasty. Each of us raises a banner of righteousness, but our strength is scattered, our potential is weak, and we are often afraid of being captured. If we are united as one, then it will be enough to be enemies with the Sui Dynasty."

古文：君能为主，吾当敬从，自揆不堪，宜来听命；不则一战以决雌雄。 
现代文：要是您能作主帅，我理当恭敬从命，要是您估计自己不能作主帅，最好前来听命，否则我们就打一仗以决雌雄。 
English: If you can be a manager, I should respectfully obey your orders. If you think you can't be a manager, you'd better come and obey your orders, otherwise we'll fight to the death.

古文：海潮惧，即帅其众降之。
现代文：苗海潮恐惧，就率领部众归降了杜伏威。
English: Afraid of the Miao tidal wave, he led his troops to surrender to Du Fu Wei.

古文：伏威转掠淮南，自称将军，江都留守遣校尉宋颢讨之，伏威与战，阳为不胜，引颢众入葭苇中，因从上风纵火，颢众皆烧死。
现代文：杜威率众在淮南一带转战掠夺，自称将军。江都留守派校尉宋颢率兵讨伐杜伏威。杜伏威与宋颢交战，佯装战败，将宋颢率领的官军引入芦苇丛中，于是顺风势放火，官军都被烧死。
English: Du Wei led the crowd to fight and plunder in the Huainan area, claiming to be a general. Jiangdu left the capital and sent Lieutenant Colonel Song Jun to lead the troops to fight Du Fu Wei. Du Fu Wei fought with Song Jun, pretended to be defeated, led the government army led by Song Jun into the reed bushes, and then set fire to the wind, and the government army was all burned to death.

古文：海陵贼帅赵破陈以伏威兵少，轻之，召与并力；伏威使公祏严兵居外，自与左右十人赍牛酒入谒，于座杀破陈，并其众。
现代文：海陵贼帅赵破陈认为杜伏威兵少而看不起他。赵破陈召杜伏威来，想兼并他。杜伏威让辅公率兵在外严阵以待，自己和亲信十余人带着牛、酒进入营帐谒见赵破陈，在座位上将赵破陈杀死，兼并了他的部众。
English: The commander of the tomb robbers, Zhao Bachen, thought that Du Fu Wei had few soldiers and looked down on him. Zhao Bachen called Du Fu Wei to come and wanted to annex him. Du Fu Wei had Fu Gong and his soldiers wait outside the camp. He and more than ten confidants brought cattle and wine into the camp tent to see Zhao Bachen, killed Zhao Bachen on the seat, and annexed his subordinates.

古文：炀皇帝中大业十年
现代文：十年
English: 10 years

古文：春，二月，辛未，诏百僚议伐高丽，数日，无敢言者。
现代文：春季，二月，辛未，炀帝下诏命文武百官商议出兵征伐高丽之事。一连几天，没有敢说话的人。
English: In the spring, in February, in Xinwei, Emperor Gao issued an edict ordering all military officials to discuss the matter of sending troops to conquer Korea. For several days, there was no one who dared to speak.

古文：戊子，诏复征天下兵，百道俱进。
现代文：戊子，炀帝下诏再次征发全国军队，分百路并进。
English: In response, Emperor Gao once again issued an edict to conscript the entire national army, and they marched forward in hundreds of lines.

古文：丁酉，扶风贼帅唐弼立李弘芝为天子，有众十万，自称唐王。
现代文：丁酉，扶风的贼帅唐弼拥立李弘芝为天子，拥有部众十万人，他自称唐王。
English: Ding Xuan, the thief-champion of Tang Xuan, who supported Li Hongzhi as the son of heaven, owned hundreds of thousands of followers, and he called himself the King of Tang.

古文：三月，壬子，帝行幸涿郡，士卒在道，亡者相继。
现代文：三月，壬子，炀帝出行到涿郡，路途中士兵不断逃亡。
English: In March, Emperor Jianzi traveled to Jixian County, and the soldiers kept fleeing on the way.

古文：癸亥，至临渝宫，祃祭黄帝，斩叛军者以衅鼓，亡者亦不止。
现代文：癸亥，炀帝到达临渝宫，在野外祭祀黄帝，斩杀叛逃的士兵并将死者的血涂在鼓上，但逃亡仍然不止。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Emperor Wu arrived at the Linwu Palace, where he offered sacrifices to the Yellow Emperor in the open air, beheaded defecting soldiers and smeared the blood of the dead on a drum, but he still did not stop fleeing.

古文：夏，四月，榆林太守成纪董纯与彭城贼帅张大虎战于昌虑，大破之，斩首万馀级。
现代文：夏季，四月，榆林太守成纪人董纯与彭城贼帅张大虎在昌虑交战，董纯大败张大虎，斩首万余级。
English: In the summer, in April, Dong Chun, an accomplished scholar of Yulin, fought with Zhang Daguo, a famous thief of Pengcheng, in Changxian. Dong Chun defeated Zhang Daguo and beheaded him.

古文：甲午，车驾至北平。
现代文：甲午，炀帝车驾到达北平。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Xing Di drove to Peiping.

古文：五月，庚申，延安贼帅刘迦论自称皇王，建元大世，有众十万，与稽胡相表里为寇。
现代文：五月，庚申，延安贼帅刘迦论自称皇王，建年号为大世，拥有部众十万人。他与稽胡部落里应外合侵掠地方。
English: In May, Goshun, the Yan'an thief Liu Jia, the self-proclaimed emperor, founded the year as the Great World, with hundreds of thousands of followers. He invaded and plundered the country in cooperation with the Jihu tribe.

古文：诏以左骁卫大将军屈突通为关内讨捕大使，发兵击之，战于上郡，斩迦论并将卒万馀级，虏男女数万口而还。
现代文：炀帝下诏任命左骁卫大崐将军屈突通为关内讨捕大使，发兵进击刘迦论。两军在上群交战，屈突通斩获刘迦论及其部众的首级万余，俘获男女几万人返回。
English: Emperor Gao issued an imperial edict appointing Zuo Wei Daqi General Qu Jutong as the ambassador to Guanai to fight against the arrest, and sent troops to attack Liu Jia Tong. The two armies fought in the upper group, and Qu Jutong captured more than 10,000 heads of Liu Jia Tong and his subordinates, and captured tens of thousands of men and women to return.

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，车驾次怀远镇。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸丑，炀帝车驾临时停留于怀远镇。
English: In autumn, in July, the Ugly Duckling and the Ugly Duckling temporarily stayed in Huaiyuan Town.

古文：时天下已乱，所征兵多失期不至，高丽亦困弊。
现代文：当时天下已乱，所征发的士兵很多过了期限还未来，高丽国也困顿疲惫，来护儿率军到达毕奢城，高丽发兵迎战。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, many of the conscripted soldiers had passed the deadline and were yet to come, and Goryeo was also exhausted. He came to escort and lead the army to Bijangseong, and Goryeo sent troops to meet the war.

古文：来护儿至毕奢城，高丽举兵逆战，护儿击破之，将趣平壤，高丽王元惧，甲子，遣使乞降，囚送斛斯政。
现代文：来护儿将高丽军队打败，将要逼近平壤。高丽王高元恐惧，甲子，派遣使者来乞求投降，并把斛斯政关在囚车里押送而来。
English: The Goryeo King Gao Yuan, fearing defeat, sent an envoy to beg for surrender and escorted Gose Jangguan in a prison van.

古文：帝大悦，遣使持节召护儿还。
现代文：炀帝大为高兴，他派遣使者持节召来护儿返回。
English: Emperor Qian was very pleased, and he sent an envoy to summon the nurse to return.

古文：护儿集众曰： 大军三出，未能平贼，此还不可复来。劳而无功，吾窃耻之。
现代文：来护儿召集部下说： 大军三次出征，未能平定高丽，这次回去就再也不能来了，劳而无功，我感到耻辱。
English: He called his subordinates together and said, "Our army has gone to war three times and failed to pacify Korea. This time, we can't come back. All our efforts have been in vain. I feel humiliated."

古文：今高丽实困，以此众击之，不日可克。
现代文：如今高丽确实已经疲惫不堪，以我们这么多的军队去讨伐高丽，不日可胜。
English: Now Koryo is really exhausted, and with so many of our troops going to fight Koryo, there is no time to lose.

古文：吾欲进兵径围平壤，聚高元，献捷而归，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：我打算进兵直接包围平壤，俘获高元，凯旋而归不是很好吗？ 
English: I'm planning to enter the army to directly encircle Pyongyang, capture Gao Yuan, and make a triumphant return. Wouldn't that be great?

古文：答表请行，不肯奉诏。
现代文：于是来护儿上表炀帝请求出征，不肯奉诏返回。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao requested to go to war and refused to return.

古文：长吏崔君肃固争，护儿不可，曰： 贼势破矣，独以相任，自足办之。
现代文：长史崔君肃力争奉旨班师，来护儿不答应，说： 高丽已经支持不住了，皇帝完全相信任用我，我完全可以自行决定此事。
English: The eldest, Choi Jun, tried hard to be appointed as a tutor, but the tutor did not agree, saying: Goryeo can no longer support me, the emperor fully believes in appointing me, and I can completely decide this matter on my own.

古文：吾在阃外，事当专决，宁得高元还而获谴，舍此成功，所不能矣！ 
现代文：我在朝廷之外，有事应该自己决断，我宁可俘获高元返回而受到责罚，但放弃这次成功的机会，我办不到！ 
English: Outside the imperial court, I should make my own decisions. I would rather be punished for capturing and returning Gao Yuan, but I can't give up this chance to succeed!

古文：君肃告众曰： 若从元帅违拒诏书，必当闻奏，皆应获罪。 
现代文：崔君肃告诉大家： 要是跟从元帅违抗皇帝的诏命，必定被人上奏皇帝，我们都得获罪。 
English: Cui Junsu told everyone: If you follow the marshal and defy the emperor's edict, you will certainly be reported to the emperor, and we will all be punished.

古文：诸将惧，俱请还，乃始奉诏。
现代文：诸将恐惧，都要求返回。来护儿才接受诏命班师。
English: All the generals were afraid and asked to return. They had to be nursed back to health before they could receive the imperial command.

古文：八月，己巳，帝自怀远镇班师。
现代文：八月，己巳，炀帝从怀远镇班师回朝。
English: In August, Emperor Xizong returned to China from Huaiyuan Town.

古文：邯郸贼帅杨公卿帅其党八千人抄驾后第八队，得飞黄上厩马四十二匹而去。
现代文：邯郸贼帅杨公卿率领部众八千人抢劫车驾后面的第八队，抢走飞黄上厩的马四十二匹而去。
English: Thief-in-chief Yang Gongqing led a group of eight thousand people to rob the eighth team behind the car, snatching forty-two horses from the Huang Shang stable and leaving.

古文：冬，十月，丁卯，上至东都；己丑，还西京。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁卯，炀帝到达东都；己丑，炀帝返回西京。
English: In winter, October, Dingwu, Emperor Jian reached Dongdu; he was ugly, Emperor Jian returned to West Beijing.

古文：以高丽使者及斛斯政告太庙；仍征高丽王元入朝，元竟不至。
现代文：他以高丽的使者及斛斯政祭告太庙，仍然征召高丽王高元入朝觐见，高元意然不来。
English: He announced to the imperial temple that he was the envoy of Goryeo and the state priest of Gose, but still summoned Goryeo King Gao Yuan to the imperial court for an audience, but Gao Yuan did not come.

古文：敕将帅严装，更图后举，竟不果行。
现代文：于是炀帝下令将帅们准备行装，打算再次大举进攻，但最后未能成行。
English: So Emperor Xuan ordered the commanders to prepare to march, intending to attack again in a big way, but in the end they were unable to do so.

古文：初，开皇之末，国家殷盛，朝野皆以高丽为意，刘炫独以为不可，作《抚夷论》以刺之，至是，其言始验。
现代文：当初，开皇末年，国家殷实强盛，朝野上下都认为可以征伐高丽，唯独刘炫认为不可。他写了《抚夷论》来批评征高丽的论调，到这时，他的话应验了。
English: At first, in the last years of the emperor's reign, the country was prosperous and strong, and the government and the people all thought that the conquest of Korea was possible, but Liu Xuan thought it was impossible. He wrote "Fuyi Theory" to criticize the argument of conquering Korea, and at that time, his words came true.

古文：十一月，丙申，杀斛斯政于金光门外，如杨积善之法，仍烹其肉，使百官啖之，佞者或啖之至饱，收其馀骨，焚而扬之。
现代文：十一月，丙申，炀帝将斛斯政在金光门外处死，按照处死杨积善的办法来处死斛斯政，并且把他的肉煮了，让百官们吃，有的奸佞之人还吃了个饱。之后，将斛斯政的骨骸收在一起，焚化后扬掉。
English: In November, according to the legend, Emperor Xizong put Emperor Gaozong to death outside the Jinguang Gate, and executed Emperor Gaozong according to the method of executing Yang Jizan, and boiled his flesh for the officials to eat, and some of the traitors also ate a lot. After that, Emperor Gaozong put Emperor Gaozong's bones together, incinerated them, and then hung them up.

古文：乙巳，有事于南郊，上不斋于次。
现代文：乙巳，在西京南郊举行祭祀活动。
English: At this moment, a religious service is being held in the southern suburb of West Beijing.

古文：诘朝，备法驾，至即行礼。
现代文：炀帝没在斋宫斋戒。早晨，炀帝摆设法驾，到南郊行祭礼。
English: Emperor Puyi did not fast in the temple. In the morning, Emperor Puyi decided to drive to the southern suburbs for the festival.

古文：是日，大风。上独献上帝，三公分献五帝。
现代文：这一天刮起大风，炀帝单独向上天献祭，三公分别向五帝献祭。
English: On this day, a strong wind blew, and Emperor Zou alone offered sacrifices to heaven, while the three princes separately offered sacrifices to the five emperors.

古文：礼毕，御马疾驱而归。
现代文：祭礼完毕，炀帝车驾迅速驰返皇宫。
English: After the ceremony, Emperor Zou drove back to the palace.

古文：乙卯，离石胡刘苗王反，自称天子，众至数万；将军潘长文讨之，不克。
现代文：乙卯，离石郡的胡人刘苗王率众造反，他自称天子，拥有部众几万人，将军潘长文率兵讨伐刘苗王，但未能获胜。
English: Second, Liu Miao Wang, a Hu person from Shishi County, led the rebellion. He claimed to be the son of heaven and had tens of thousands of followers. General Pan Changwen led the troops to fight against Liu Miao Wang, but failed to win.

古文：汲郡贼帅王德仁拥众数万，保林虑山为盗。
现代文：汲郡贼帅王德仁拥有部众几万人，在林虑山据守为盗。
English: Wang Deren, the thief-in-chief of Gu County, owned tens of thousands of people and was a thief in Linxi Mountain.

古文：帝将如东都，太史令庚质谏曰： 比岁伐辽，民实劳弊，陛下宜镇抚关内，使百姓尽力农桑，三五年间，四海稍丰实，然后巡省，于事为宜。 
现代文：炀帝要去东都，太史令庾质劝道： 连年征伐辽东，百姓实在是困苦疲惫之极。陛下应该安定安抚关内，让百姓尽力于农桑，三、五年内，国家逐渐充实富裕了，然后再到各地巡视，这样做才合适。 
English: Emperor Xizong wanted to go to Dongdu, and Emperor Taishi ordered Xizong to advise: "The people of Liaodong have been under siege for years, and they are really exhausted. Your Majesty should stabilize and pacify Guanzhong, and let the people do their best in agriculture. In three to five years, the country will gradually become rich and prosperous, and then go on a tour around the country. This is the right thing to do."

古文：帝不悦。质辞疾不从，帝怒，下质狱，竟死狱中。
现代文：炀帝听后不高兴，于是庾质托病不跟随炀帝出行。炀帝发怒，将庾质关进监狱，庾质竟死在监狱里。
English: Emperor Yao was not happy after hearing this, so Yao Jie feigned illness and did not travel with Emperor Yao. Emperor Yao became angry and put Yao Jie in prison, and Yao Jie died in prison.

古文：十二月，壬申，帝如东都，赦天下；戊子，入东都。
现代文：十二月，壬申，炀帝到达东都，大赦天下；戊子，他进入东都。
English: In December, in Jinshin, Emperor Gao arrived in Dongdu and pardoned the whole world; Emperor Wu, he entered Dongdu.

古文：东海贼帅彭孝才转掠沂水，彭城留守董纯讨擒之。
现代文：东海的贼帅彭孝才辗转抢掠沂水。彭城留守董纯率兵讨伐并抓住了彭孝才。
English: Peng Xiao Cai, the thief in the East China Sea, went around and plundered the waters of the East China Sea. Dong Chun, who stayed behind in Pengcheng, led the troops to fight and captured Peng Xiao Cai.

古文：纯战虽屡捷，而盗贼日滋，或谮纯怯懦；帝怒，锁纯诣东都，诛之。
现代文：董纯虽然屡战屡胜，但是盗贼却日益增多。有人诬陷董纯怯懦，炀帝发怒，命人将董纯上了枷锁押到东都处死。
English: Although Dong Chun won many battles, the number of thieves increased day by day. Some people accused Dong Chun of cowardice, and Emperor Qian became angry and ordered someone to put Dong Chun in chains and send him to Dongdu to be executed.

古文：孟让自长白山寇掠诸郡，至盱眙，众十馀万，据都梁宫，阻淮为固。
现代文：孟让从长白山抢掠各郡，他到了盱眙，拥有部众十余万人，占据了都梁宫，以淮水为坚固的屏障。
English: Meng Zhan plundered counties from Changbai Mountain. He arrived in Handan with more than one hundred thousand people, occupied the capital Liang Palace, and used Huai Shui as a solid barrier.

古文：江都丞王世充将兵拒之，为五栅以塞险要，羸形示弱。
现代文：江都郡丞王世充率兵抗击孟让，他用五道栅栏阻塞险要之处，装出羸弱的样子。
English: Wang Shichong, the county magistrate of Jiangsu, led the troops to fight against Meng Zhan. He blocked the critical points with five fences and pretended to be weak.

古文：让笑曰： 世充文法小吏，安能将兵！
现代文：孟让笑道： 王世充是个文法小吏，怎么能带兵呢？
English: Meng Zhan laughed: Wang Shichong is a grammar minor, how can he lead an army?

古文：吾今生缚取，鼓行入江都耳！ 
现代文：今天我要生擒王世充，大张旗鼓地进入江都城！ 
English: Today, I'm going to enter Jiangdu City with great fanfare!

古文：时民皆结堡自固，野无所掠，贼众渐馁，乃少留兵，围五栅，分人于南方抄掠；世充伺其懈，纵兵出击，大破之，让以数十骑遁去，斩首万馀级。
现代文：当时百姓都筑堡垒以自卫，野外没有什么可供抢掠的东西了，孟让的部众渐渐挨饿，于是孟让就留下少量兵力，围住五道栅栏，分兵到南面进行抢掠。王世充趁对方松懈，挥军出击，大破孟让，孟让仅带着几个骑逃走，王世充斩获首级一万余。
English: At that time, the people were all building fortresses for self-defense, and there was nothing left in the field for Mengzhang to loot. Mengzhang's followers were gradually starving, so Mengzhang left a small number of troops, surrounded five fences, and sent troops to the south to loot. Wang Shichong took advantage of the other side's laxity, waved the army to attack, broke Mengzhang, Mengzhang fled with only a few horses, and Wang Shichong won more than 10,000 first-class.

古文：齐郡贼帅左孝友众十万屯蹲狗山，郡丞张须陀列营逼之，孝友窘迫出降。
现代文：齐郡贼帅左孝友率部众十万人屯守在蹲狗山。齐郡郡丞张须陀扎下军营进逼蹲狗山，左孝友走投无路，只得投降。
English: Zuo Xiaoyou, the chief thief of Qi County, led a detachment of 100,000 people to stay in Squatting Dog Mountain. Zhang Sudo, the county magistrate of Qi County, entered the military camp and forced Zuo Xiaoyou to stay in Squatting Dog Mountain. Zuo Xiaoyou had no choice but to surrender.

古文：须陀威振东夏，以功迁齐郡通守，领河南道十二郡黜陟讨捕大使。
现代文：张须陀威振东夏，因为有功升迁为齐郡通守，兼任河南道十二郡黜陟讨捕大使。
English: Zhang Sudawei was promoted to the governor of Qi County and also served as the ambassador of the 12 counties of Henan Province.

古文：涿郡贼帅卢明月众十馀万军祝阿，须陀将万人邀之。相持十馀日，粮尽，将退，谓将士曰： 贼见吾退，必悉众来追，若以千人袭据其营，可有大利。此诚危事，谁能往者？ 
现代文：涿郡贼帅卢明月率部众十余万人在祝阿县驻军，张须陀率领一万名士兵截击卢明月，双方相持十余日，官军粮食要吃完了，将要撤退时张须陀对将士们说： 贼人看见我们后退，一定率全部人马来追击，要是以一千人袭击并占据贼人的营地，就可以取得大胜，这确实是危险的事，谁能前往？ 
English: Lu Mingyue, the bandit commander of Qian County, led more than a hundred thousand people in Zhua County. Zhang Suta led ten thousand soldiers to intercept Lu Mingyue. The two sides held each other for more than ten days. The official army was about to run out of food. When they were about to retreat, Zhang Suta said to the soldiers: When the bandits saw us retreat, all the men and horses must pursue. If a thousand people attack and occupy the bandit's camp, they can win a great victory. This is indeed a dangerous thing. Who can go?

古文：众莫对，唯罗士信及历城秦叔宝请行。
现代文：众人不敢答话。只有罗士信和历城人秦叔宝请求前往。
English: No one dared to answer. Only Luo Shixin and Qin Shubao from Licheng asked to go.

古文：于是须陀委栅而遁，使二人分将千兵伏葭苇中，明月悉众追之。
现代文：于是张须陀遗弃营栅退走，派罗士信和秦叔宝每人率兵一千人埋伏在芦苇丛中。
English: As a result, Zhang Suda abandoned the camp and retreated, sending Luo Shixin and Qin Shubao, each with a thousand soldiers, to lie in wait in the reeds.

古文：士信、叔宝驰至其栅，栅门闭，二人超升其楼，各杀数人，营中大乱；二人斩关以纳外兵，因纵火焚其三十馀栅，烟焰涨天。
现代文：卢明月集中全部人马追击张须陀，罗士信、秦叔宝率兵驰马到卢明月的营寨外，营门紧闭，二人爬过栅栏上到寨楼，各自杀死了几个人，卢明月营中大乱。二人斩杀把守营门的士兵让外面的官军士兵进来，并趁势纵火烧毁了卢明月的三十多个营栅，火焰冲天。
English: Lu Mingyue concentrated all the men and horses to pursue Zhang Suda, and Luo Shixin and Qin Shubao led the soldiers to the outside of Lu Mingyue's camp. The camp gate was closed, and the two climbed over the fence to the walled town, and each killed several people. There was a great disturbance in Lu Mingyue's camp. The two killed the soldiers guarding the camp gate to let the government soldiers outside come in, and took advantage of the situation to set fire to more than thirty camp gates of Lu Mingyue, and the flames soared to the sky.

古文：明月奔还，须陀回军奋击，大破之，明月以数百骑遁去，所俘斩无算。
现代文：卢明月迅速驰返营地，张须陀回军奋力进攻，大破卢明月。卢明月率领几百名骑兵逃走，卢明月的部众被军俘获杀死无数。
English: Lu Mingyue quickly rushed back to the camp, and Zhang Suda's returning army attacked vigorously and defeated Lu Mingyue. Lu Mingyue led several hundred cavalrymen to escape, and countless of Lu Mingyue's subordinates were captured and killed by the army.

古文：叔宝名琼，以字行。
现代文：秦叔宝名琼，一般都称呼他的字。
English: Qin Shubao's name is Qiong, and he is usually referred to by his nickname.

古文：炀皇帝中大业十一年
现代文：十一年
English: Eleven years

古文：春，正月，增秘书省官百二十员，并以学士补之。
现代文：春季，正月，炀帝增加秘书省的官员一百二十名，并以学士补充秘书省的官员。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Qian increased the number of officials of the Secretary Province by one hundred and twenty, and supplemented the officials of the Secretary Province with bachelors.

古文：帝好读书著述，自为扬州总管，置正府学士至百人，常令修撰，以至为帝，前后近二十载，修撰未尝暂停；自经术、文章、兵、农、地理、医、卜、释、道乃至蒱博、鹰狗，皆为新书，无不精洽，共成三十一部，万七千馀卷。
现代文：炀帝喜好读书写作，他任扬州总管时设置的王府学士达百人。他经常命令这些人进行修撰工作，直到他登上帝位，前后近二十年，修撰工作从未停止过。从经术、文章、兵、农、地理、医、卜、释、道以至赌博、鹰狗等都编撰有新书，无不精深广博，共编成书三十一部，一万七千余卷。
English: Emperor Qian liked to read and write. When he was the governor of Yangzhou, he set up a hundred royal academicians. He often ordered these people to write, until he ascended to the throne. For nearly twenty years, the writing work never stopped. From the scriptures, articles, soldiers, agriculture, geography, medicine, divination, interpretation, Taoism, to gambling and eagle dogs, new books have been compiled, all of which are profound and extensive, and have been compiled into 31 books, more than 17,000 volumes.

古文：初，西京嘉则殿有书三十七万卷，帝命秘书监柳顾言等诠次，除其复重猥杂，得正御本三万七千馀卷，纳于东都修文殿。
现代文：当初，西京嘉则殿有书三十七万卷，炀帝命令秘书监柳顾言等人对这些书进行选择和编次，剔除其中重复和猥杂的书籍，整理出正御本三万七千余卷，收藏在东都的修文殿。
English: At the beginning, there were 370,000 volumes of books in the West Jing Jia Zetian Hall. Emperor Zhou ordered the secretary Guan Liu Guyan and others to select and arrange these books, remove duplicates and obscene books, sort out more than 37,000 authentic volumes, and collect them in the East Jing Jia Zetian Hall.

古文：又写五十副本，简为三品，分置西京、东都宫、省、官府，其正御书皆装剪华净，宝轴锦褾。
现代文：又抄写了五十部副本，选为三等，分别存放在西京、东都的宫内，省署、和官府中。正本书都装帧精美豪华，玉石为轴，锦缎为端。
English: He also copied fifty copies, selected for the third class, which were stored in the palace of the West Capital, the East Capital, the provincial office, and the government office. The original books are beautifully and luxuriously framed, with jade as the axis and brocade as the end.

古文：于观文殿前为书室十四间，窗户床褥厨幔，咸极珍丽，每三间开方户，垂锦幔，上有二飞仙，户外地中施机发。
现代文：炀帝在观文殿前设十四间书室，书室的窗户、床褥、厨幔，都极为珍贵华丽。每三间书室开一个双扇门，垂下锦质的幔帐，上面有两个飞翔的仙人，户外的地面上设置机关。
English: Emperor Xizong set up fourteen libraries in front of the Guanwen Hall. The windows, beds, and kitchen utensils of the libraries are extremely precious and gorgeous. A double door opens in each of the three libraries, a brocade curtain hangs down, there are two flying fairies on top, and an organ is set up on the ground outside.

古文：帝幸书室，有宫人执香炉，前行践机，则飞仙下，收幔而上，户扉及厨扉皆自启，帝出，则垂闭复故。
现代文：炀帝驾临书室时，有宫人手捧香炉，走在前面踏踩机关，飞仙就会下来将幔帐卷上去，窗扉和厨扉都自动打开；炀帝离开书室，则窗扉厨扉及幔帐又垂下关闭如故。
English: When Emperor Xuan came to the study, there were courtiers holding incense burners in their hands, and when they walked in front of them and stepped on the apparatus, the Flying Immortal would come down and roll up the ledger, and the window and kitchen doors would open automatically; when Emperor Xuan left the study, the window, kitchen door and ledger would hang down and close as before.

古文：帝以户口逃亡，盗贼繁多，二月，庚午，诏民悉城居，田随近给。
现代文：炀帝因为户口逃亡，盗贼繁多，二月，庚午，下诏命令百姓都迁入城内居住，田地就近分给。
English: In February, at noon, Emperor Shun issued an edict ordering the common people to move into the city to live, and the fields were allotted to them.

古文：郡县驿亭村坞皆筑城。
现代文：郡县、驿亭、村坞都修筑城堡。
English: Counties, counties, pavilions, and docks are all building castles.

古文：上谷贼帅王须拔自称漫天王，国号燕；贼帅魏刀儿自称历山飞：众各十馀万，北连突阙，南寇燕、赵。
现代文：上谷的贼帅王须拔自称漫天王，定国号为燕。贼帅魏刀儿自称历山飞，他们各自拥有部众十余万人，在北方勾结突阙，在南方抢掠侵犯燕赵之地。
English: Wang Suba, the Thief-in-Chief of Shanggu, claimed to be the King of Heaven, and his country name was Yan. The Thief-in-Chief Wei Cutter claimed to be Leshan Fei, and each of them had more than one hundred thousand followers. In the north, they conspired to invade Yan Zhao, and in the south, they plundered and invaded Yan Zhao's land.

古文：初，高祖梦洪水没都城，意恶之，故迁都大兴。
现代文：当初，文帝梦见洪水湮没了都城，心里厌恶旧都城，所以迁都大兴。
English: At first, Emperor Wen dreamed that the flood had destroyed the capital city, and he loathed the old capital city in his heart, so he was very enthusiastic about moving the capital.

古文：申明公李穆薨，孙筠袭爵。
现代文：申明公李穆去世，他的孙子李筠承袭了申明公的爵位。
English: Shenming Gong Li Mu passed away, and his grandson Li Xi inherited Shenming Gong's title.

古文：叔父浑忿其吝啬，使兄子善衡贼杀之，而证其从父弟瞿昙，使之偿死。
现代文：他的叔父李浑对李筠的吝啬很是气忿，就派其兄子李善衡杀害了李筠，却说他的堂侄李瞿昙干的，让他抵命。
English: His uncle, Li Hun, was very angry at Li Lan's stinginess, so he sent his brother, Li Shanheng, to kill Li Lan, but he said that his cousin, Li Yan, had done it, and let him die.

古文：浑谓其妻兄左卫率宇文述曰： 若得绍封，当岁奉国赋之半。 
现代文：李浑对他的妻兄左卫率宇文述说： 如果我能承袭申明公的爵位，我就每年奉送您一半的国赋。 
English: Li Hun said to his brother-in-law Zuo Wei Zuo Wen, "If I can inherit the title of Shenming Prince, I will give you half of the national endowment every year."

古文：述为之言于太子，奏高祖，以浑为穆嗣。
现代文：宇文述就替李浑在太子面前说情，并上奏文帝，文帝就让李浑继承了李穆的爵位。
English: Yu Wenshu interceded on behalf of Li Hun in front of the prince, and appealed to Emperor Wen, who allowed Li Hun to inherit Li Mu's title.

古文：二岁之后，不复以国赋与述，述大恨之。
现代文：两年以后，李浑就不再给宇文述国赋了。宇文述非常恨李浑。
English: Two years later, Li Hun no longer gave the country to Uwenshu. Uwenshu hated Li Hun very much.

古文：帝即位，浑累官至右骁卫大将军，改封郕公，帝以其门族强盛，忌之。
现代文：炀帝即位，李浑屡次升迁作到右骁卫大将军，改封为公。炀帝因为李浑家族门第强盛，对他很猜忌。
English: When Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, Li Hun was repeatedly promoted to General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and his title was changed to Prince. Emperor Xuan was very suspicious of him because the Li Hun family was powerful.

古文：会有方士安伽陀言 李氏当为天子 ，劝帝尽诛海内凡李姓者。
现代文：正好有方士安伽说： 李氏当为天子 ，他劝说炀帝杀尽天下姓李的人。
English: Just at that time, there was a fortune-teller, Anga, who said, "The Li clan should be regarded as the son of heaven," and he persuaded Emperor Zhao to kill all people with the surname Li.

古文：浑从子将作监敏，小名洪儿，帝疑其名应谶，常面告之，冀其引决。
现代文：李浑的侄子将作监李敏，小名洪儿。炀帝怀疑这个名字正好应验了谶语，曾当面告诉李敏这件事，希望李敏能自杀。
English: Li Hun's nephew will be Li Min, whose nickname is Hong Er. Emperor Qian suspected that this name just fulfilled the slang, and told Li Min about it in person, hoping that Li Min would commit suicide.

古文：敏大惧，数与浑及善衡屏人私语；述谮之于帝，仍遣虎贲郎将河东裴会基表告浑反。
现代文：李敏大为恐惧，他几次与李浑及李善衡避开他人私下交谈。宇文述在炀帝面前说李浑的坏话，还让虎贲郎将河东人裴仁基上表告发李浑要谋反。
English: Li Min was very afraid, and he had several private conversations with Li Hun and Li Shanheng, avoiding others. Wu Wen said that he spoke ill of Li Hun in front of Emperor Xuan, and also asked Tigahiro to put Pei Renji, a person from the east of the river, on the table to tell Li Hun to rebel.

古文：帝收浑等家，遣尚书左丞元文都、御史大夫裴蕴杂治之，案问数日，不得反状，以实奏闻。
现代文：炀帝将李浑等各家关进监狱，派尚书左丞元文都、御史大夫裴蕴一起治李浑的罪。他们审问了几天，搞不出李浑要谋反的罪状，就据实上报炀帝。
English: Emperor Xuan put Li Hun and other members of his family in prison, and sent Shangshu Zuojo, Yuan Wentu, and Goshi Daifu Pei Yun to punish Li Hun. After several days of interrogation, they could not find any evidence that Li Hun was plotting a rebellion, so they reported the matter to Emperor Xuan.

古文：帝更遣述穷治之，述诱教敏妻宇文氏为表，诬告浑谋因渡辽，与其家子弟为将领者共袭取御营，立敏为天子。
现代文：炀帝改派宇文述尽力追究李浑的罪状，宇文述诱教李敏的妻子宇文氏上表诬告李浑策划趁着隋军渡辽河时崐，与家里子弟中作将领的一起袭取御营，然后拥立李敏为天子。
English: Emperor Gao sent Wu Wenshu to investigate Li Hun's crimes. Wu Wenshu coaxed Li Min's wife, Wu Wenshu, to falsely accuse Li Hun of plotting to take advantage of the Sui army crossing the Liao River, to attack the imperial camp with the generals of the family, and then to establish Li Min as the son of heaven.

古文：述持入，奏之，帝泣曰： 吾宗社几倾，赖公获全耳。 
现代文：宇文述拿着这个诬告状入见并奏报给炀帝，炀帝流泪说： 我的宗庙社稷几乎被倾覆，全靠您才得以保全呵。 
English: Yu Wenshu took this false accusation into consideration and reported it to Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao shed tears and said: My ancestral temple was almost overthrown, and it was all thanks to you that it was saved.

古文：三月，丁酉，杀浑、敏、善衡及宗族三十二人，自三从以上皆徙边徼。
现代文：三月，丁酉，炀帝把李浑、李敏、李善衡及其宗族三十二人处死，三族之内的亲属，都流放到边远地区。
English: In March, Emperor Ding Rong of Wei executed Li Hun, Li Min, Li Shan Heng and thirty-two members of their clans, and exiled the relatives of the three clans to remote areas.

古文：后数月，敏妻亦鸩死。
现代文：几个月后，李敏的妻子也被毒死。
English: A few months later, Li Min's wife was also poisoned.

古文：有二孔雀自西苑飞集宝城朝堂前，亲卫校尉高德儒等十馀人见之，奏以为鸾。时孔雀已飞去，无可得验，于是百僚称贺。
现代文：有两只孔雀从西苑一起飞到宝城朝堂前面，亲卫校尉高德儒等十余人看见了孔雀，就奏报炀帝说看见了鸾鸟，这时孔雀已经飞走了，无法验证，于是百官们都向炀帝祝贺。
English: Two peacocks flew together from the West Courtyard to the front of the Treasure City Hall. More than ten people, including Lieutenant Gao De Rong of the Imperial Guard, saw the peacocks and reported to Emperor Xian that they had seen an ostrich. At this time, the peacocks had already flown away and could not be verified, so the officials all congratulated Emperor Xian.

古文：诏以德儒诚心冥会，肇见嘉祥，擢拜朝散大夫，赐物百段，馀人皆赐束帛；仍于其地造仪鸾殿。
现代文：炀帝下诏说，因为高德儒心地虔诚与祥瑞自然吻合，所以才能看见祥瑞征兆，因此，提升他为朝散大夫，赏赐他物品百段，其余的人都赐帛一束，还在孔雀停留的地方营建仪鸾殿。
English: Emperor Qian decreed that because Gao De's piety and Xiang Rui naturally coincided with each other, it was only possible to see the signs of Xiang Rui. Therefore, he promoted him as a doctor of the morning sun, rewarded him with a hundred pieces of goods, and the rest of the people were given a bunch of peacocks. He also built a ceremonial hall where the peacock stayed.

古文：己酉，帝行幸太原；夏，四月，幸汾阳宫避暑。宫城迫隘，百官士卒布散山谷间，结草为营而居之。
现代文：己酉，炀帝巡幸太原；夏季，四月，炀帝到汾阳宫避暑，由于宫城地方窄小，百官、士卒们都分散在山谷间用草搭成营帐居住。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xizong went to the Poyang Palace to spend the summer. Since the Miyagi region is small, hundreds of officials and soldiers were living in tents made of grass scattered among the valleys.

古文：以卫尉少卿李渊为山西、河东抚慰大使，承制黜陟选补郡县文武官，仍发河东兵讨捕群盗。
现代文：炀帝任命卫尉少卿李渊为山西、河东抚慰大使，奉命承担郡县选补的文武官员的升迁贬退的职责，还负责征发河东之兵讨伐群盗。
English: Emperor Qian appointed Lieutenant Li Yuan as the Shanxi and Hedong Consolation Ambassador. He was ordered to assume the duties of promoting and demoting the civil and military officials selected by counties and counties, and was also responsible for conscripting soldiers from Hedong to fight against bandits.

古文：渊行至龙门，击贱帅母端儿，破之。
现代文：李渊率军行进到龙门，进攻贼帅毋端儿并将他打败。
English: Li Yuan and his army marched to Longmen, attacked the thief and defeated him.

古文：秋，八月，乙丑，帝巡北塞。
现代文：秋季，八月，乙丑，炀帝巡游北塞。
English: In autumn, in August, the second ugliness, the emperor parade in the North.

古文：初，裴矩以突厥始毕可汗部众渐盛，献策分其势，欲以宗女嫁弟叱吉设，拜为南面可汗；叱吉不敢受，始毕闻而渐怨。
现代文：当初，裴矩认为突厥始毕可汗部众逐渐强盛，就向炀帝献策分散突厥始毕可汗的势力。炀帝打算以宗室女嫁给始毕的弟弟叱吉设，并封他为南面可汗，叱吉设不敢接受册封。
English: At first, Pei Neng believed that the Turkic Chibi-Khan faction was becoming increasingly powerful, so he proposed a plan to Emperor Zhao to disperse the power of the Turkic Chibi-Khan. Emperor Zhao planned to marry Chibi's younger brother, Shuo Jishe, to his sister-in-law and make him the Southern Khan, but Shuo Jishe did not dare to accept the offer.

古文：突厥之臣史蜀胡悉多谋略，为始毕所宠任，矩诈与为互市，诱至马邑下，杀之。
现代文：始毕知道了此事就对隋朝逐渐产生了怨恨。突厥的大臣史蜀胡悉善于谋略，受到始毕可汗的宠信。裴矩诈称与史蜀胡悉做买卖，将史蜀胡悉诱骗到马邑，将他杀害。
English: When Shi Bi learned of this, he gradually developed a grudge against the Sui Dynasty. Shi Shu Hu Siyi, a Turkic minister, was good at strategizing and was favored by Shi Bi Khan. Baikang fraudulently claimed to do business with Shi Shu Hu Siyi, lured Shi Shu Hu Siyi to Mayu, and killed him.

古文：遣使诏始毕曰： 史蜀胡悉叛可汗来降，我已相为斩之。 
现代文：然后派使者向始毕宣布诏命说： 史蜀胡悉背叛可汗来投降，我已经帮您将他处死。 
English: Then he sent an envoy to Zhibi to announce the edict, saying: "Shu Husi betrayed the khan to surrender, I have helped you to put him to death.

古文：始毕知其状，由是不朝。
现代文：始毕知道了这个情况，从此就不再入朝。
English: When the emperor learned of this, he never again entered the imperial court.

古文：戊辰，始毕帅骑数十万谋袭乘舆，义成公主先遣使者告变。
现代文：戊辰，始毕可汗率领几十万名骑兵策划袭击炀帝的车驾。义成公主先派遣使者向炀帝报告发生了变故。
English: At that time, Khan Bi led hundreds of thousands of cavalrymen to plan an attack on Emperor Gong's chariot. Princess Yicheng first sent an envoy to Emperor Gong to report the incident.

古文：壬申，车驾驰入雁门，齐王暕以后军保崞县。
现代文：壬申，炀帝的车驾迅速驰入雁门城，齐王杨率领后军进驻了崞县。
English: In Jinshin, Emperor Qian's car drove quickly into the Wild Goose Gate City, and King Yang of Qi led the rearguard into Jixian.

古文：癸酉，突厥围雁门，上下惶怖，撤民屋为守御之具，城中兵民十五万口，食仅可支二旬，雁门四十一城，突厥克其三十九，唯雁门、崞不下。突厥急攻雁门，矢及御前；上大惧，抱赵王杲而泣，目尽肿。
现代文：癸酉，突厥军队包围了雁门郡，隋军上下惊惧恐怖，拆毁民房用作守卫城池的材料，城中有军、民十五万人，粮食仅够供应二十天。雁门郡的四十一座城池，突厥军队已经攻破了其中的三十九座，只有雁门、崞县没被攻下，突厥军队急攻雁门，箭都射到了炀帝面前，炀帝大为恐惧，抱着赵王杨杲哭泣，眼睛都哭肿了。
English: Suddenly, the Turkish army encircled Yanmen County. The Sui army was terrified and demolished houses to use as materials to guard the city. There were 150,000 soldiers and civilians in the city, and the grain supply was only enough for twenty days. Of the forty-one cities in Yanmen County, the Turkish army had broken through thirty-nine of them. Only Yanmen and Shixian were not captured. The Turkish army attacked Yanmen in a hurry, and the arrows were shot in front of Emperor Zhao. Emperor Zhao was very afraid, and he hugged Zhao Wang Yangyao and wept. His eyes were swollen with tears.

古文：左卫大将军宇文述劝帝简精锐数千骑溃围而出，纳言苏威曰： 城守则我有馀力，轻骑乃彼之所长，陛下万乘之主，岂宜轻动！ 
现代文：左卫大将军宇文述劝说炀帝选挑选几千名精锐骑兵突围出去，纳言苏威说： 据守城池我方还有余力，而轻骑则是对方的长处，陛下是万乘之主，怎么可以轻易行动？ 
English: General Zuo Wei Yuwen recounted persuading Emperor Gaozong to select several thousand elite cavalry to break out of the encirclement. Nagan Su Wei said: According to the castle, we still have spare capacity, while light riding is the other side's strength. His Majesty is the Lord of Ten Thousand Cavalrymen, how can he act easily?

古文：民部尚书樊子盖曰： 陛下乘危徼幸，一朝狼狈，悔之何及！
现代文：民部尚书樊了盖说： 陛下在危境中侥幸保全，一旦处于狼狈的境地，则追悔莫及！
English: The Ministry of People's Affairs wrote: Your Majesty was lucky to be saved in a dangerous situation, and once you are in a difficult situation, there is nothing to regret!

古文：不若据坚城以挫其锐，坐征四方兵使入援。
现代文：不如坚守城池挫败敌军的锐气，据守在城中，征召全国各地兵马前来救援。
English: It is better to hold on to the castle and frustrate the enemy's spirit, stay in the city, and conscript soldiers and horses from all over the country to come to the rescue.

古文：陛下亲抚循士卒，谕以不复征辽，厚为勋格，必人人自奋，何忧不济！ 
现代文：陛下亲自抚慰士卒，宣布不再征伐辽东，重赏爵位，必定会人人奋勇争先，何愁不能成功！ 
English: His Majesty personally consoled the soldiers, announced that he would no longer invade Liaodong, and rewarded the knighthood. Everyone will surely strive to be the first, and they can't fail!

古文：内史侍郎萧瑀以为： 突厥之俗，可贺敦预知军谋；且义成公主以帝女嫁外夷，必恃大国之援。
现代文：内史侍郎萧认为 按突厥的习俗，可汗的妻子可以参与军机，况且义成公主是以皇帝女儿的身份嫁给处夷的，她肯定要依恃大国为后援。
English: According to the customs of the Turks, the wife of the khan can participate in the military aircraft. Moreover, Princess Yicheng was married to Duyi as the emperor's daughter. She must rely on the great powers for support.

古文：若使一介告之，借使无益，庸有何损。
现代文：如果派一个使者通知公主，即便没有什么效果，又有什么损害呢？
English: If sending a messenger to inform the princess had no effect, what harm would it do?

古文：又，将士之意，恐陛下既免突厥之患，还事高丽，若发明诏，谕以赦高丽、专讨突厥，则众心皆安，人自为战矣。 
现代文：另外，将士们的心里，是怕陛下在免除了突厥的祸患后又去征伐高丽，陛下如果明确下诏，宣布赦免高丽的罪过，专事征伐突厥，那么大家心中安定，就会人自为战了。 
English: In addition, in the minds of the generals, they were afraid that His Majesty would invade Korea again after he had eliminated the evil of the Turks. If His Majesty issued a clear edict to pardon the sins of Korea and focus on invading the Turks, then everyone would have peace of mind and would be able to fight for themselves.

古文：瑀，皇后之弟也。
现代文：萧是萧皇后的弟弟。
English: Xiao is the younger brother of Queen Xiao.

古文：虞世基亦劝帝重为赏格，下诏停辽东之役。帝从之。
现代文：虞世基也劝炀帝重重悬赏，下诏停止征伐辽东的兵役，炀帝只好采纳了这些意见。
English: Yu Shiji also advised Emperor Gong to repeatedly offer rewards and issue an edict to stop the military service of conquering Liaodong. Emperor Gong had no choice but to accept these opinions.

古文：帝亲巡将士，谓之曰： 努力击贼，苟能保全，凡在行陈，勿忧富贵，必不使有司弄刀笔破汝勋劳。 
现代文：炀帝亲自巡视军队，他对将士们说： 你们要努力打击敌军，如果这次能够保全的话，凡是参加战斗的人都不愁没有富贵，一定不允许有关部门的官吏耍弄刀笔吞没你们的功劳。 
English: Emperor Xuan personally inspected the troops and said to the soldiers: "You must work hard to fight the enemy forces. If you can save them this time, everyone who takes part in the battle will be rich and noble. Officials of the relevant departments must not be allowed to play with knives and pens to swallow up your merits."

古文：乃下令： 守城有功者，无官直除六品，赐物百段；有官以次增益。 
现代文：于是他下令： 守城有功的人，没有官职的直接授予六品官职，赏赐物品百段；已有官职的人级别和赏赐依次增长。 
English: So he ordered: For those who have contributed to the defense of the city, those who do not have official positions will be directly awarded six official positions and rewarded with 100 items; those who already have official positions will have their ranks and rewards increased in turn.

古文：使者慰劳，相望于道，于是众皆踊跃，昼夜拒战，死伤甚众。
现代文：他派出慰问将士的使者络绎不绝。于是大家都踊跃杀敌，昼夜抗击突厥人，伤亡很重。
English: He sent out an endless stream of emissaries to offer condolences to the soldiers. As a result, everyone enthusiastically killed the enemy, fought the Turks day and night, and suffered heavy casualties.

古文：甲申，诏天下募兵，守令竞来赴难。
现代文：甲申，炀帝下诏招募天下之士，郡守县令都竞相应召赴难。
English: Emperor Jiaxun issued an edict to recruit the world's heroes, and county governors and county magistrates all competed to be called to the battlefield.

古文：李渊之子世民，年十六，应募隶屯卫将军云定兴，说定兴多赍旗鼓为疑兵，曰： 始毕敢举兵围天子，必谓我仓猝不能赴援故也。
现代文：李渊的儿子李世民十六岁应募从军，隶属于屯卫将军云定兴的部下。他劝云定兴多携带旗帜军鼓作为疑兵，说： 始毕可汗敢于举兵围困天子，必定以为我方仓促无法救援，我们最好在白天展开旌旗几十里连绵不断，夜里则金鼓相闻。
English: Li Yuan's son, Li Shimin, at the age of sixteen, was recruited to join the army and belonged to the subordinates of Tunwei General Yun Dingxing. He advised Yun Dingxing to carry more flags and drums as suspected soldiers, saying: Shi Bi Khan dared to raise an army to besiege Tianzi, and must have thought that we could not rescue him in a hurry. We had better unfurl the banner for dozens of miles in the daytime, and at night the golden drums were heard.

古文：不然，彼众我寡，若悉军来战，必不能支。 
现代文：敌人一定以为我方大批援军到来，就会望风而逃。否则，敌众我寡，如果对方全军来战，我军必定无法支持。 
English: The enemy must have thought that if a large number of reinforcements arrived from our side, they would look to the wind and run away. Otherwise, the enemy was outnumbered, and if the entire opposing army came to fight, our army would certainly not be able to support it.

古文：定兴从之。
现代文：云定兴采纳了李世民的建议。
English: Yun Dingxing obeyed this stratagem.

古文：帝遣间使求救于义成公主，公主遣使告始毕云： 北边有急。 
现代文：炀帝暗中派使者向义成公主求救，公主派人告诉始毕说： 北部边境告急。 
English: Emperor Qian secretly sent an envoy to Princess Yicheng to ask for help. The princess sent someone to tell Zhi Bi, "There is an emergency on the northern border.

古文：东都及诸郡援兵亦至忻口；九月，甲辰，始毕解围去。帝使人出侦，山谷皆空，无胡马，乃遣二千骑追蹑，至马邑，得突厥老弱二千馀人而还。
现代文：这时东都和各郡的援兵也都到达忻口。九月，甲辰，始毕可汗解围退走，炀帝派人出去侦察，山谷空无一人，没有空厥军队，才派出两千名骑兵在后面追踪突厥军队，隋兵追到马邑，俘获突厥老弱两千人返回。
English: At this time, reinforcements from Dongdu and various counties also arrived at Hekou. In September, Ji Chen, when the Khan began to lift the siege and retreat, Emperor Zhao sent people out to reconnoiter. The valley was empty and there was no air force, so he sent two thousand cavalry to track the Turkish army behind. The Sui soldiers chased them to Mayi, captured two thousand old and weak Turks and returned.

古文：丁未，车驾还至太原。苏威言于帝曰： 今盗贼不息，士马疲弊，愿陛下亟还西京，深根固本，为社稷计。 
现代文：丁未，炀帝返回太原，苏威对炀帝说： 如今盗贼不息，士卒疲惫，希望陛下速返西京，巩固根本是国家的长久之计。 
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Xuan returned to Taiyuan, Su Wei said to Emperor Xuan: Nowadays, the thieves are incessant, the soldiers are tired, I hope His Majesty will return to Xijing as soon as possible, consolidation is the country's long-term strategy.

古文：帝初然之。宇文述曰： 从官妻子多在东都，宜便道向洛阳，自潼关而入。 
现代文：炀帝开始认为这个意见很好，宇文述说： 跟从车驾的官员家属大都在东都，最好就便道到洛阳去，从潼关进入。 
English: Emperor Yao began to think that this was a good idea. Yu Wen said: Most of the officials' families who followed the car were in Dongdu. It would be better to go to Luoyang and enter from Shaoguan.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝采纳了这个建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：冬，十月，壬戌，帝至东都，顾眄街衢，谓侍臣曰： 犹大有人在。 
现代文：冬季，十月，壬戍，炀帝到达东都。他斜着眼看看街道上的人，崐对侍臣说： 还是大有人在。 
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Gong reached Dongdu. He squinted at the people on the street and said to his aide: There are still a lot of people here.

古文：意谓向日平杨玄感，杀人尚少故也。
现代文：他的意思是说过去平定杨玄感的叛乱时杀人还少。
English: He meant to say that there were fewer killings in the past when Yang Xuanxuan's rebellion was quelled.

古文：苏威追论勋格太重，宜加斟酌，樊子盖固请，以为不宜失信，帝曰： 公欲收物情邪！ 
现代文：苏威提到悬赏规格太重，应该再斟酌考虑。樊子盖恳切请求遵守先前的许诺，认为不应失信于将士。炀帝说： 你打算收买人心吗？ 
English: Su Wei mentioned that the reward specifications were too heavy and should be reconsidered. Zong Zi Gai earnestly requested to abide by the previous promises and believed that they should not betray the soldiers. Emperor Zou said: Do you plan to buy people's hearts?

古文：子盖惧，不敢对。
现代文：樊了盖害怕了，不敢再答话。
English: When he had closed the lid, he was afraid and did not dare to answer.

古文：帝性吝官赏，初平杨玄感，应授勋者多，乃更置戎秩：建节尉为正六品，次奋武、宣惠、绥德、怀仁、秉义、奉诚、立信等尉，递降一阶。
现代文：炀帝生性吝惜官爵赏赐，当初平定杨玄感时，应该论功授勋的人很多，他就改变军队的职位级别：规定建节尉为正六品，以下依次是奋武、宣惠、绥德、怀仁、秉义、奉诚、立信等尉，依次降低一级。
English: Emperor Qianxuan was naturally stingy with the awarding of titles and ranks. At the beginning of the suppression of Yang Xuanxuan, there were many people who should be awarded for their merits. He changed the position level of the army: it was stipulated that Jian Jiejun would be given the rank of Senior Sixth Rank, and the following would be the ranks of Tengwu, Xuan Hui, Xuan De, Huairen, Bingyi, Bongcheng, and Lixin, which were successively reduced by one level.

古文：将士守雁门者万七千人，至是，得勋者才千五百人，皆准平玄感勋，一战得第一勋者进一阶，其先无戎秩者止得立信尉，三战得第一勋者至秉义尉，其在行陈而无勋者四战进一阶，亦无赐。
现代文：参加保卫雁门的将士有一万七千人，可是得到勋位的才有一千五百人，都是比照平定杨玄感时行赏的标准，打一仗得第一功的人晋升一级，此前没有军职的人仅授予立信尉的职位；打三次仗得第一功的人只作到秉义尉；那些虽在战场但未立功的人打四次仗晋升一级，也不赏赐物品。
English: There were 17,000 soldiers who participated in the defense of the Wild Goose Gate, but only 1,500 received the order. All of them were based on the standard of awarding when Yang Xuanxuan was defeated. Those who won the first merit in one battle were promoted to the first level. Those who did not have a military post before were only awarded the position of Lieutenant Lixin; those who won the first merit in three battles were only made to Lieutenant Bingyi; those who were in the battlefield but did not make merit were promoted to the first level in four battles and were not awarded items.

古文：会仍议伐高丽，由是将士无不愤怨。
现代文：正好炀帝又商议攻伐高丽，因此将士们无不愤怒怨恨。
English: It just so happened that Emperor Gong also discussed attacking Korea, so the generals were filled with anger and resentment.

古文：初，萧瑀以外戚有才行，尝事帝于东宫，累迁至内史侍郎，委以机务。
现代文：当初，萧因为是外戚，又有才干德行，曾经在炀帝为太子时作他的僚臣，他屡次升迁作到内史侍郎，被委以机要重任。
English: At first, because Xiao was a maternal relative, he was talented and virtuous, and he had been a vassal of Emperor Xuan when he was the crown prince. He was repeatedly promoted to the position of an attendant of history, and was entrusted with important tasks.

古文：瑀性刚鲠，数言事忤旨，帝渐疏之。
现代文：萧性格刚强耿直，几次谈论事情违背了炀帝的旨意，炀帝就逐渐疏远了他。
English: Xiao's character was strong and upright, and several times he talked about things contrary to the emperor's will, and the emperor gradually distanced himself from him.

古文：及雁门围解，帝谓群臣曰： 突厥狂悖，势何能为！
现代文：雁门之围已解，炀帝对群臣说： 突厥狂妄逆悖，他们能怎么样！
English: The siege of the Wild Goose Gate had been lifted, and Emperor Zhao said to his courtiers: "The Turks are insolent and rebellious, what can they do!

古文：少时未散，萧瑀遽相恐动，情不可恕！ 
现代文：突厥人一会儿不散，萧就恐慌动摇，实不能宽恕！ 
English: The Turks did not disperse for a moment, but suddenly panicked and wavered, which really cannot be forgiven!

古文：出为河池郡守，即日遣之。
现代文：于是调萧出京，任为河池郡守，当天出发。
English: As a result, Xiao was transferred out of Beijing and appointed governor of Hechi County, departing the same day.

古文：候卫将军杨子崇从帝在汾阳宫，知突厥必为寇，屡请早还京师，帝不纳，及解围，帝怒曰： 子崇怯懦，惊动众心，不可居爪牙之官。 
现代文：候卫将军杨子崇跟随炀帝在汾阳宫，他知道突厥人必定要来侵犯，几次请求炀帝早日返回京师，炀帝发怒说： 杨子崇怯懦，惊扰动摇众心，不能让他身为武臣。 
English: Yang Zizong, the general-in-waiting of the imperial guard, followed the Emperor Shun in the Poyang Palace. He knew that the Turks were bound to invade. He asked the Emperor Shun several times to return to Beijing as soon as possible. The Emperor Shun said angrily, "Yang Zizong is a coward. He has shocked and shaken the hearts of the people. He cannot be allowed to be a warrior.

古文：出为离石郡守。
现代文：于是炀帝将杨子崇调出任命为离石郡守。
English: As a result, Emperor Yao transferred Yang Zi Chong and appointed him as the governor of Lishi County.

古文：子崇，高祖之族弟也。
现代文：杨子崇是文帝的族弟。
English: Yang Zizong is the younger brother of Emperor Wen.

古文：杨玄感之乱，龙舟水殿皆为所焚，诏江都更造，凡数千艘，制度仍大于旧者。
现代文：杨玄感叛乱时，龙舟水殿都被他烧毁，于是炀帝下诏江都再造龙舟水殿，共几千艘，规制比原来的还大。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, he burned down all the dragon boat water halls, so Emperor Zhao rebuilt the dragon boat water halls, a total of several thousand, and the regulation was even larger than the original.

古文：壬申，卢明月帅众十万寇陈、汝。
现代文：壬申，卢明月率部众十万人进犯陈州、汝州。
English: In Jinshin, Lu Mingyue led hundreds of thousands of people to invade Chenzhou and Ruzhou.

古文：东海李子通，有勇力，先依长白山贼帅左才相，群盗皆残忍，而子通独宽仁，由是人多归之，未半岁，有众万人。
现代文：东海人李子通，有勇有力，他先依附长白山贼帅左才相，群盗都很残忍，只有李子通宽厚仁慈，于是很多人都去归附他。不到半年，李子通就拥有部众一万人。
English: Li Zi Tong, a man from the East China Sea, was brave and powerful. He first attached himself to Changbai Mountain. The thief was handsome and talented. The group of thieves were all cruel. Only Li Zi Tong was generous and kind. Therefore, many people went to attach themselves to him. In less than half a year, Li Zi Tong had ten thousand followers.

古文：才相忌之，子通引去，渡淮，与杜伏威合。
现代文：左才相猜忌李子通，李子通就离开他，率众渡过淮河，与杜伏威汇合。
English: Left alone, Li Zi Tong hesitated. Li Zi Tong left him and led the crowd across the Huai River to join Du Fu Wei.

古文：伏威选军中壮士养为假子，凡三十馀人，济阴王雄诞、临济阚稜为之冠。
现代文：杜伏威挑选军中的壮士收为养子，共有三十余人，济阴人王雄诞、临济人阚棱是养子中最突出的。
English: Du Fuwei selected the strong men in the army as adopted sons, with a total of more than 30 people. The most prominent adopted sons were Wang Yuanzhixing from Jilin Province and Zhenren from Linji Province.

古文：既而李子通谋杀伏威，遣兵袭之。伏威被重创坠马，雄诞负之逃葭苇中，收散兵复振。
现代文：不久李子通策划刺杀杜伏威，他派兵袭击杜伏威，杜伏威受重伤落马，王雄诞背着杜伏威逃到芦苇丛中，收集溃散的部众重振军威。
English: Soon, Li Zhitong plotted to assassinate Du Fu Wei. He sent troops to attack Du Fu Wei. Du Fu Wei was seriously injured and fell from his horse. Wang Xiong Zi fled to the reed bushes with Du Fu Wei on his back to gather the scattered troops and restore military power.

古文：将军来整击伏威，破之；其将西门君仪之妻王氏，勇而多力，负伏威以逃，雄诞帅壮士十馀人卫之，与隋兵力战，由是得免。
现代文：将军来整率官军袭击杜伏威，将杜伏威击败，杜伏威的部将西门君仪的妻子王氏勇敢有力，她背着杜伏威逃走，王雄诞率领壮士十余人保护着杜伏威，与隋军奋力作战，因此才得以逃脱。
English: The general came to lead the official army to attack Duvoir and defeated Duvoir. The wife of Duvoir's subordinate Simon Junyi, Wang, was brave and powerful. She fled with Duvoir on her back. Wang Yuxi led more than ten strong men to protect Duvoir and fought hard against the Sui army, so he was able to escape.

古文：来整又击李子通，破之，子通帅其馀众奔海陵，复收兵得二万人，自称将军。
现代文：来整又进攻李子通并将他击败。李子通率领剩余的部众奔往海陵，又招得士卒二万人，自称将军。
English: To rectify the situation, he attacked and defeated Li Zhitong. Li Zhitong led the remaining troops to rush to Hailing, recruited another 20,000 soldiers, and called himself a general.

古文：城父硃粲始为县佐史，从军，遂亡命聚众为盗，谓之 可达寒贼 ，自称迦楼罗王，众至十馀万，引兵转掠荆、沔及山南郡县，所过噍类无遗。
现代文：城父人朱粲，开始是个县佐史，后来他参加了军队，就逃亡聚众为盗，人们称之为 可达寒贼 ，朱粲自称迦楼罗王，拥有部众达十万人。他率兵在荆州、沔阳转战抢掠，一直到终南山南一带的郡县。朱粲所部经过之处即无人烟。
English: Zhu Xi, the city's founding father, started out as a county official. Later, he joined the army and fled to gather people to commit theft. People called him the Koda Khan thief. Zhu Xi called himself the King of Garo, and had a retinue of up to 100,000 people. He led his soldiers to fight and plunder in Jingzhou and Shenyang, all the way to the counties and counties around the southern part of Mount Nanshan. Wherever Zhu Xi's retinue passed, there was no one there.

古文：十二月，庚寅，诏民部尚书樊子盖发关中兵数万击绛贼敬盘陀等。
现代文：十二月，庚寅，炀帝下诏命令民部尚书樊子盖征发关中士兵几万名进击绛郡贼人敬盘陀等人。
English: In December, Emperor Go-In issued an imperial edict ordering the Ministry of Civil Affairs to collect tens of thousands of soldiers from Guanzhong and send them to attack the Thieves of Shixian County.

古文：子盖不分臧否，自汾水之北，村坞尽焚之，贼有降者皆坑之。
现代文：樊子盖不问清红皂白，自汾水以北，村坞都被烧毁，前来投降的贼人全被坑杀。
English: Since the north of Surabaya, the village dock has been burned, and all the thieves who came to surrender were killed.

古文：百姓怨愤，益相聚为盗。
现代文：百姓怨恨愤怒，越来越多的人相聚为盗。
English: The people are resentful and angry, and more and more people are getting together to steal.

古文：诏以李渊代之。有降者，渊引置左右，由是贼众多降，前后数万人，馀党散入它郡。
现代文：炀帝下诏用李渊替换樊了盖，再有投降的贼人，李渊就将投降者安置在自己身旁，因此有很多贼人投降，投降的人前后共有几万，其余的贼盗流散到别的郡去了。
English: Emperor Qian issued an edict to replace the cover with Li Yuan. If there were any more thieves who surrendered, Li Yuan would place them next to him. As a result, many thieves surrendered. There were tens of thousands of people who surrendered, and the rest of the thieves dispersed to other counties.

