古文：五行四《五行传》曰： 简宗庙，不祷祠，废祭祀，逆天时，则水不润下。 
现代文：《五行传》说： 轻慢宗庙，不祷神求福，废弃祭祀上天和祖宗的礼仪，不顺从天时，那就会出现水不润下的现象。 
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" says: If you neglect your ancestral temple, do not pray to God to seek blessings, abandon the ritual of sacrificing to heaven and ancestors, and do not obey the heavenly time, then there will be a phenomenon of water not getting wet.

古文：谓水失其性而为灾也。
现代文：这是指水失去其本性而成为灾异。
English: This refers to water losing its natural state and becoming unnatural.

古文：又曰： 听之不聪，是谓不谋。
现代文：又说： 耳听不灵敏，这就叫做不商量。
English: He also said: If the ear is not sensitive to hearing, this is called non-discussion.

古文：厥咎急，厥罚恆寒，厥极贫。
现代文：它带来的灾害是褊急，给它的惩罚是恒寒，给它的忧患是极贫。
English: The calamity it brings is haste, the punishment it inflicts is cold, and the sorrow it brings is extreme poverty.

古文：时则有鼓妖，时则有鱼孽，时则有豕祸，时则有耳疴，时则有黑眚、黑祥。
现代文：有时出现不祥的怪声，有时出现鱼孽，有时出现猪怪异而带来灾祸，有时出现耳痫，有时出现黑眚、黑祥。
English: Sometimes there are ominous strange noises, sometimes there are fish sins, sometimes there are pigs that are strange and bring disaster, sometimes there are ear epilepsy, sometimes there are black flies, black evil.

古文：惟火沴水。 
现代文：火克水。 
English: It's fire and water.

古文：鱼孽，刘歆传以为介虫之孽，谓蝗属也。
现代文：鱼孽，刘歆解释，认为是甲虫之孽，指蝗一类带来的灾害。
English: Fish iniquity, Liu Wei explained, is considered to be the iniquity of beetles, referring to the disasters brought about by locusts.

古文：水不润下：魏文帝黄初四年六月，大雨霖，伊、洛溢至津阳城门，漂数千家，流杀人。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年六月，大雨连绵，伊、洛两条河的水暴涨到津阳城门，冲毁了数千家房屋，淹死了人。
English: In June of the fourth year of Emperor Wen of Wei and the first year of Emperor Huang, there was continuous heavy rain, and the water of the Yi and Luo rivers surged to the city gate of Tsuyang, destroying thousands of houses and drowning people.

古文：初，帝即位，自鄴迁洛，营造宫室，而不起宗庙，太祖神主犹在鄴。
现代文：原先，文帝刚刚即位的时候，把都城从邺迁到了洛阳，营造宫室，可是却没有建立宗庙，太祖的神主还在邺。
English: Originally, when Emperor Wen had just ascended the throne, he moved the capital from Handan to Luoyang to build a palace, but he did not build a family temple. The god of the great ancestor was still in Handan.

古文：尝于建始殿飨祭如家人之礼，终黄初不复还鄴，而圆丘、方泽、南北郊、社、稷等神位，未有定所。
现代文：文帝曾经在建主过摆设祭品祭祀左担，可是礼仪却如同普通人家祭祖，太祖在整个黄初年间也没有再返回邺，而圆丘、方泽、南北郊、社、稷等神位，都还没有确定的位置。
English: Emperor Wen once set up a sacrificial offering for the left shoulder of the founder, but the etiquette was like that of ordinary people's ancestors. The great-grandfather did not return to the capital for the entire first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, and the deities of the round mound, Fangze, the northern and southern suburbs, the shrine, and the capital have not yet been determined.

古文：此简宗庙，废祭祀之罚也。
现代文：大霖雨是对文帝轻慢宗庙、废弃祭祀上天和祖宗的罪遇的惩罚。
English: The downpour of rain was the punishment for Emperor Wen's neglect of the ancestral temple and abandonment of sacrifices to the gods and ancestors.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 颛事者知，诛罚绝理，厥灾水。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 独断专行，虚妄失实，诛罚不依常理，它的灾害是水患。
English: Jingfang "I Chuan" said: Arbitrary, false and untrue, punishment does not follow common sense, its disaster is flood.

古文：其水也，雨杀人已陨霜，大风天黄。
现代文：水患来自大雨，淹死人后天降霜，起大风，天变黄。
English: Floods are caused by heavy rain. The day after a person drowns, frost sets in, a strong wind blows, and the sky turns yellow.

古文：饥而不损，兹谓泰。
现代文：遭受饥荒而不知谦退，造就叫做骄纵。
English: To hunger and not be satisfied is pride.

古文：厥灾水杀人。
现代文：它带来的灾祸是水患，水要淹死人。
English: Its plagues are floods; the waters are a flood of death.

古文：避遏有德，兹谓狂。
现代文：远离有德之人，阻遏贤路，这就叫做傲慢。
English: It is called arrogance to stay away from virtuous people and obstruct the path of virtue.

古文：厥灾水，水流杀人也；已水则地生虫。
现代文：它带来的灾害是水患，水要淹死人；水退之后地上会出现虫害。
English: The disaster it brings is flooding, the water will drown people; after the water recedes, insect pests will appear on the ground.

古文：归狱不解，兹谓追非。
现代文：把罪过推诿给无罪的平民无休无止，造就叫做坚持错误不肯改过。
English: The endless shifting of guilt to innocent civilians is called "persisting in the wrong" and "refusing to change."

古文：厥水寒杀人。
现代文：它带来的灾祸是水患又寒冷异常，要冻死人。
English: The disasters it brings are floods and unusually cold weather, leading to deaths from the cold.

古文：追诛不解，兹谓不理。
现代文：追溯以前的罪责却不宽松，造就叫做不通事理。
English: It is not easy to trace the culpability back to the past, and it is called irrationality.

古文：厥水五谷不收。
现代文：其水患造成五谷不收。
English: The floods caused the failure of the grain harvest.

古文：大败不解，兹谓皆阴。
现代文：遇上大的祸事不知道禳解，造就叫做皆阴。
English: The relentless pursuit of a defeated enemy is called "total defeat."

古文：厥水流入国邑，陨霜杀谷。 
现代文：其水患是水流入国都，同时降霜冻死谷物。 
English: The flooding was caused by water flowing into the national capital, while frosts froze grain.

古文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，茶陵县鸿水溢出，流漂二百余家；十三年秋，丹阳故鄣等县又鸿水溢。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，茶陵县洪水泛滥，冲毁二百余家房屋；赤乌十三年秋，丹阳故鄣等县又有洪水泛滥。
English: In the summer of the eighth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, flooding occurred in Chaling County, destroying more than two hundred houses; in the autumn of the thirteenth year of Wu's reign, flooding occurred in Danyang Old Town and other counties.

古文：案权称帝三十年，竟不于建业创七庙，但有父坚一庙，远在长沙，而郊禋礼礼阙。
现代文：据考查，孙权称帝三十年，竟然不在建业创建七庙，衹设其父孙坚一庙，而且远在长沙，而祭天的郊里之礼皆不完备。
English: According to the investigation, Sun Quan, who claimed to be emperor for 30 years, actually did not build seven temples, but set up a temple for his father, Sun Jian, and it was far away in Changsha, while the suburban rites of worship were incomplete.

古文：嘉禾初，群臣奏宜效祀，又弗许。
现代文：嘉禾初年，群臣上奏，说是应当举行祭祀天地的郊祀之礼，孙权又不答应。
English: In the first year of Jiahe, a group of courtiers petitioned Sun Quan to hold a suburb festival to worship heaven and earth, but Sun Quan did not agree.

古文：末年虽一南郊，而北郊遂无闻焉。
现代文：孙权在位之末年，虽然在南郊进行了一次祭天之礼，而北郊祭祀最终还是没有听说。
English: At the end of the year, although a rally was held in the southern suburbs, the northern suburbs never heard about it.

古文：且三江、五湖、衡、霍、会稽，皆吴、楚之望，亦不见秩，反礼罗阳妖神，以求福助。
现代文：况且三江、五湖、衡山、霍山、会稽山，都是吴、楚著名的山川之望，孙权也从不进行祭祀，反而礼祀罗阳妖神，以求降福和保佑。
English: Moreover, the Sanjiang River, the Five Lakes, Hengshan Mountain, Huoshan Mountain, and Huiqi Mountain are all famous mountain and river views of Wu and Chu. Sun Quan also never performed sacrifices, but worshiped Luoyang Demon in order to seek blessings and blessings.

古文：天意若曰，权简宗庙，不祷祠，废祭祀，示此罚，欲其感悟也。
现代文：上天的意思像是在说，孙权简慢宗庙，不祷神求福，废弃祭祀上天和祖宗的礼仪，所以降下这灾害以示惩罚，想要使孙权感悟。
English: Heaven's intention seemed to be saying that Sun Quan had neglected his ancestral temple, did not pray to God for blessings, and abandoned the ritual of sacrificing to Heaven and his ancestors, so he brought down this disaster to show his punishment and to make Sun Quan understand.

古文：太元元年，又有大风涌水之异。
现代文：太元元年，又出现大风、喷泉暴涌的妖异。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, there was also the strange phenomenon of high winds and gushing fountains.

古文：是冬，权南郊，疑是鉴咎征乎？
现代文：造年冬天，孙权在南郊祭天。恐怕这是见到灾异征兆知道鉴戒吧。
English: In the winter of the first year, Sun Quan held a festival in the southern suburbs. I'm afraid this is a sign of disaster.

古文：还而寝疾。明年四月，薨。
现代文：孙权祭天返回后就患病，第二年四月，孙权逝世。
English: After returning from the festival, Sun Quan fell ill and died in April of the following year.

古文：一曰，权时信纳谮诉，虽陆议勋重，子和储贰，犹不得其终。
现代文：另一种说法，当时孙权听信接纳谗言和诬告，即使有功且居于高位的陆议，身为太子的亲子孙和，尚且不能始终保住自己。
English: Another way of saying this is that at that time, Sun Quan listened to and accepted criticisms and false accusations. Even if there were meritorious and high-ranking Lu Ji, as the prince's children and grandchildren, he still could not always keep himself safe.

古文：与汉安帝听谗、免杨震、废太子同事也。
现代文：陆议愤恚而卒，太子屘被废黜后害死。这和选塞童听信谗言、免去握雳官爵废黜太子是同类的事。
English: This is the same kind of thing as the election of Jie Tong to listen to the advice of others, and the ousting of the crown prince from the position of grand marshal.

古文：且赤乌中无年不用兵，百姓愁怨。
现代文：况且赤乌年间没有一年不出兵打仗，百姓愁苦怨恨。
English: Moreover, there was not a single year during the Red-and-White Uprising when there were no soldiers. The people were sad and angry.

古文：八年秋，将军马茂等又图逆云。
现代文：壶昼八年秋，将军区芦等人又图谋叛逆。
English: At noon on the 8th day of the 8th year in the autumn, Lu and others in the general area again plotted to rebel.

古文：魏明帝景初元年九月，淫雨过常，冀、兗、徐、豫四州水出，没溺杀人，漂失财产。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年九月，久雨超过平常年份，冀、兖、徐、辽四州河水泛滥，淹死百姓，冲走财物。
English: In September of the first year of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the rains were longer than usual, and the rivers in the four prefectures of Hebei, Shandong, Xu and Liaoning flooded, drowning people and washing away property.

古文：帝自初即位，便淫奢极欲，多占幼女，或夺士妻，崇饰宫室，妨害农战，触情恣欲，至是弥甚。
现代文：明帝从即位之初，就奢侈无度，尽情享受，他占有很多幼女，时或夺取士入之妻，修饰宫室，妨害农耕和作战。
English: From the beginning of his reign, Emperor Ming was extravagant and enjoyed himself to the full. He had many young daughters, sometimes captured the wives of nobles, decorated the palace, and interfered with farming and warfare.

古文：号令逆时，饥不损役，此水不润下之应也。
现代文：明帝纵情恣欲，到这时更严重，发布政令往往违背时令，发生饥荒也不减少劳役。这是水不润下的应验。
English: Emperor Ming indulged in extravagant desires, and it was even more serious at this time. The issuance of decrees often violated the season, and the occurrence of famine did not reduce labor service. This was the fulfillment of water and mud.

古文：吴孙亮五凤元年夏，大水。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤元年夏，发生大水灾。
English: Wu Sunliang Wufeng was born in the summer of the first year of the year.

古文：亮即位四年，乃立权庙；又终吴世，不上祖宗之号，不修严父之礼，昭穆之数有阙。
现代文：孙亮即位四年，才建立逊权庙，而直到吴国灭亡，孙亮始终不给祖宗加封尊号，不行崇敬父辈的礼仪，宗法、敬祖的礼数有欠缺。
English: It took Sun Liang four years after his accession to the throne to establish the Sun Quan Temple, and until the fall of the State of Wu, Sun Liang never gave his ancestors the title of honor, did not perform the etiquette of revering his parents, and lacked the number of rituals of the patriarchal law and reverence for the ancestors.

古文：亮及休、皓又并废二郊，不秩群神。
现代文：孙亮以及孙休、孙皓又废弃在南北郊祭天地的礼仪，不祭祀众神。
English: Sun Liang, Sun Xiu and Sun Yat-sen also abolished the festivals of the two suburbs in the north and south, and the gods were no longer worshipped according to their ranks.

古文：此简宗庙，不祭祀之罚也。
现代文：大水灾是对怠慢宗庙，不行祭祀之惩罚。
English: The great flood was a punishment for neglecting the ancestral temple and not performing the rituals.

古文：又是时，孙峻专政，阴胜阳之应乎。
现代文：况且在当时，孙峻专权，发大水恐怕又是阴胜阳的应验吧。
English: Moreover, at that time, Sun Jun had the exclusive right to issue large amounts of water, which was probably the fulfillment of yin and yang.

古文：吴孙休永安四年五月，大雨，水泉涌溢。
现代文：吴孙休永安四年五月，下大雨，河水泛滥，泉水喷涌。
English: In May of the fourth year of the reign of Wu Sun Xiu Yong'an, it rained heavily, rivers flooded, and springs gushed.

古文：昔岁作浦里塘，功费无数，而田不可成，士卒死叛，或自贼杀，百姓愁怨，阴气盛也。
现代文：上一年修造浦里塘，人力财力耗费无数，而造田却不能成功，士卒有的死，有的叛逃，有的自相残杀，百姓愁苦怨恨，这是阴气盛的缘故。
English: In previous years, the construction of Bailitang, labor costs countless, but the field can not be completed, soldiers died in rebellion, or fratricide, the people are sad and angry, it is gloomy.

古文：休又专任张布，退盛冲等，吴人贼之之应也。
现代文：孙休又宠任张布，让张布专权，贬退盛冲等人，吴人又杀死张布。
English: Sun Xiu also favored Zhang Bu, let Zhang Bu have exclusive power, demoted Sheng Chong and others, and the Wu people killed Zhang Bu.

古文：吴孙休永安五年八月壬午，大雨震电，水泉涌溢。
现代文：造就是河水泛滥、泉水喷涌的应验。吴孙休永安五年八月壬午曰，下大雨，又有雷电，河水泛滥，泉水喷涌。
English: Creation is the fulfillment of river flooding and spring water gushing. On the afternoon of August 3rd in the fifth year of the reign of Wu Sun Xiu Yong'an, there was heavy rain, thunder and lightning, river flooding and spring water gushing.

古文：晋武帝泰始四年九月，青、徐、兗、豫四州大水。七年六月，大雨霖，河、洛、伊、沁皆溢，杀二百余人。
现代文：晋武帝泰始四年九月，青、徐、兗、豫四州发生大水灾；泰始七年六月，天降大霖雨，河、洛、伊、沁等河水都泛滥，淹死二百余人。
English: In September of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a major flood occurred in Qing, Xu, Min and Hen states; in June of the 7th year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, heavy rain fell from the sky, and rivers such as Luo, Yi and Fen all flooded, drowning more than 200 people.

古文：帝即尊位，不加三后祖宗之号。泰始二年，又除明堂南郊五帝坐，同称昊天上帝，一位而已。
现代文：武帝登上帝位，不给三位祖宗加尊号，泰始二年，又除去明堂南郊五帝神位，五帝同称昊天上帝，祇设一个神位而已。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne of God, and did not give the three ancestors the title of honor. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the five gods of the southern suburb of the Ming Hall were removed. The five gods were called Haotian God, and only one god was set up.

古文：又省先后配地之礼。
现代文：又省去先王配祀地祇之礼。
English: It also omits the former king's ritual thanksgiving.

古文：此简宗庙，废祭祀之罚，与汉成帝同事。
现代文：大水灾是对简慢宗庙、废弃祭祀的惩罚，这和汉成帝之事相同。
English: The great flood was a punishment for the dilapidation of the ancestral temple and the abandonment of sacrificial rites, which was the same as what happened to Emperor Han.

古文：一曰，昔岁及此年，药兰泥、白虎文秦凉杀刺史胡烈、牵弘，遣田璋讨泥。
现代文：另一种说法，上一年和遣一年，药兰泥、白虎文秦、凉攻杀刺史胡烈、牵弘，朝廷派田璋进讨泥。
English: Another way of saying it is that in the previous year and the following year, the Imperial Court sent Tian Yujin to collect the mud from the Medicinal Orchids, the White Tiger, Qin Dynasty, Liang Zhaozhi, and Zhu Hong.

古文：又司马望以大众次淮北御孙皓。
现代文：又司马望率领大军驻扎在淮北抵御孙皓。
English: In addition, Sima Wang led a large army stationed in Huaibei to resist Sun Yat-sen.

古文：内外兵役，西州饥乱，百姓愁怨，阴气盛也。
现代文：内外兵役不断。西州又出现饥荒动乱，百姓愁苦怨恨，这都是阴气盛的表现。
English: Military service continues at home and abroad. Famine and turmoil have appeared in Xizhou, and the people are sad and resentful. These are all signs of gloom.

古文：咸宁初，始上祖宗号，太熙初，还复五帝位。
现代文：咸宁初年，才给祖宗司马懿等人上尊号，太熙初年，才恢复五帝的神位。
English: It was not until the first year of Xianning that the ancestors of Sima Yu and others were given the title of honor, and it was not until the first year of Taixi that the five emperors were restored to the divine throne.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年九月，徐州水。二年七月癸亥，河南魏郡暴水，杀百余人；八月，荆州郡国五大水。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年九月，途丛发生水灾；威空二年七月癸亥日，河南魏郡突发水灾，淹死一百余人；八月，荆州所属郡国五处发生大水灾。
English: In September of the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a flood occurred in Tongcong; in July of the second year of Wei Kuan, a sudden flood occurred in Wei County of Henan Province, drowning more than one hundred people; in August, a major flood occurred in five counties of Jingzhou.

古文：去年采择良家子女，露面入殿，帝亲简阅，务在姿色，不访德行。
现代文：前一年选送良家女子入宫，露出面孔上殿，由亘游亲自审看挑选，衹注重姿色，不问德行。
English: In the previous year, a woman from a good family was selected to enter the palace, her face was exposed, and she was personally selected by Watayu, who paid attention to her appearance and did not care about her virtue.

古文：有蔽匿者，以不敬论。
现代文：有藏匿女儿的人，按不敬朝廷判罪。
English: A man who hid his daughter was found guilty of disrespecting the court.

古文：搢绅愁怨，天下非之。
现代文：措绅愁苦怨恨，天下人都指责这种做法。
English: The whole world has condemned this practice.

古文：阴盛之应也。
现代文：水灾就是阴盛的应验。
English: The flood is the fulfillment of the gloom.

古文：咸宁三年六月，益、梁二州郡国八暴水，杀三百余人；七月，荆州大水；九月，始平郡大水；十月，青、徐、兗、豫、荆、益、梁七州又水。
现代文：咸宁三年六月，益、銮二州所属郡国有八处突发水灾，淹死三百余人；七月，荆州发生大水灾；九月，始平郡发生大水灾；十月，青、徐、兖、豫、荆、益、梁七州又发生水灾。
English: In June of the third year of Xianning, there were eight sudden floods in counties belonging to the two states of Yixing and Shandong, drowning more than 300 people; in July, a major flood occurred in Jingzhou; in September, a major flood occurred in Shihping County; in October, floods occurred in seven states of Qing, Xu, Handan, Yu, Jing, Yixing and Liang.

古文：是时贾充等用事日盛，而正人疏外者多。
现代文：当时贾充等掌握朝政，权势曰盛，而忠直大臣被疏远而出京的人很多。
English: At that time, Jia Chong and others controlled the imperial government, and the power was said to be prosperous, while Minister Zhong Zhi was alienated and there were many people who went to Beijing.

古文：咸宁四年七月，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、扬郡国二十大水。
现代文：咸宁四年七月，司、冀、兖、豫、荆、扬等州所属郡国二十处发生大水灾。
English: In July of the fourth year of Xianning, major floods occurred in 20 counties and provinces belonging to the states of Si, Hebei, Shandong, Henan, Jing and Yang.

古文：晋武帝太康二年六月，泰山、江夏大水。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年六月，泰山、江夏发生大水灾。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, a great flood occurred in Mount Taishan and Jiangxia.

古文：泰山流三百家，杀六千余人；江夏亦杀人。
现代文：泰山洪水冲毁三百家房屋，淹死六千余人；辽夏也淹死了人。
English: The floods in Mount Tai destroyed 300 houses and drowned more than 6,000 people; the floods in Liao Xia also drowned people.

古文：是时平吴后，王浚为元功，而诋劾妄加；荀、贾为无谋，而并蒙重赏。
现代文：当时平定吴后，王浚是大功臣，但诋毁之辞、弹劾的奏书却随意加在他身上；苟勖、贾充毫无谋划之力，却都受到重赏。
English: At that time, Wang Jian was a great hero for pacifying Wu Hou, but slanderous words and impeachment report were arbitrarily imposed on him; Guo Jun and Jia Chong had no ability to plan, but they were rewarded.

古文：收吴姬五千，纳之后宫。
现代文：逮童又收罗昱迩女子五千，置于后宫。
English: The arresting officer took in another five thousand women from Luoyang and placed them in the harem.

古文：此其应也。
现代文：造就是大水灾的应验。
English: This is a good sign.

古文：太康四年七月，司、豫、徐、兗、荆、扬郡国二十大水，伤秋稼，坏屋室，有死者。
现代文：太康四年七月，司、逸、涂、查、趔、握等州所属郡国二十处发生大水灾，伤害了秋天的庄稼，房屋崩塌，有人被淹死。
English: In July of the 4th year of Taikang, major floods occurred in 20 counties and provinces belonging to states such as Si, Yat, Tu, Cha, Min, and Min, damaging autumn crops, collapsing houses, and drowning people.

古文：太康六年三月，青、凉、幽、冀郡国十五大水。
现代文：太康六年三月，直、远、幽，冀等州所属郡国十五处发生大水灾。
English: In March of the sixth year of the Taikang era, major floods occurred in 15 counties in the states of Zhi, Yuan, Yu and Jie.

古文：太康七年九月，西方安定等郡国八大水。
现代文：太康七年九月，西方塞宣等郡国八处发生大水灾。
English: In September of the 7th year of Taikang, a major flood occurred in eight counties in the west of Xiexuan and other counties.

古文：太康八年六月，郡国八大水。
现代文：太康八年六月，郡国共有八处发生大水灾。
English: In June of the eighth year of Taikang, a total of eight major floods occurred in the county.

古文：晋惠帝元康二年，有水灾。
现代文：晋惠帝元康二年，有水灾。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jingu's reign, there was a flood.

古文：元康五年五月，颍川、淮南大水；六月，城阳、东莞大水杀人；荆、扬、徐、兗、豫五州又大水。
现代文：元康五年五月，颍川、淮南发生大水灾；六月，城阳、东莞发生大水灾，淹死了人；荆、扬、徐、兗、豫五州又发生大水灾。
English: In May of the fifth year of the Yuan Kang, major floods occurred in Luochuan and Huainan; in June, major floods occurred in Chengyang and Dongguan, drowning people; and major floods occurred in the five provinces of Jing, Yang, Xu, Handan and Henan.

古文：是时帝即位已五载，犹未郊祀，烝尝亦多不身亲近。
现代文：当时惠帝即位已经五年，还未进行郊祀，祭祀也多不亲身近前。
English: At that time, it had been five years since Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, and there had not yet been a suburban religious service, nor had there been a religious service in the vicinity.

古文：简宗庙，废祭祀之罚也。
现代文：水灾是对简慢宗庙、废弃祭祀礼仪的惩罚。
English: The flood was a punishment for neglecting the temple and abandoning the ritual.

古文：班固曰： 王者即位，必郊祀天地，望秩山川。
现代文：班固说： 为君王的人即位，一定要郊祀天地，望祭山川。
English: Bangu said, "When a king ascends the throne, it is necessary to worship heaven and earth in the suburbs, and to make offerings to mountains and rivers.

古文：若乃不敬鬼神，政令违逆，则雾水暴至，百川逆溢，坏乡邑，溺人民，水不润下也。 
现代文：假如不敬鬼神，政令违逆天意，那么就会突然出现泉水喷涌，河水逆流，四处泛滥，冲毁村庄，淹死人民，这是水不润下的表现。 
English: If there is no reverence for ghosts and gods, and government decrees go against the will of heaven, then there will suddenly be springs gushing, rivers flowing against the current, flooding everywhere, destroying villages, and drowning people. This is a manifestation of water not being moist.

古文：元康六年五月，荆、扬二州大水。
现代文：元康六年五月，荆、扬二州发生大水灾。
English: In May of the sixth year of the Yuan Kang, a major flood occurred in two prefectures, Jing and Yang.

古文：按董仲舒说，水者，阴气盛也。
现代文：据董仲舒的说法，发生水灾是因为阴气盛。
English: According to Dong Zhongshu, the floods occurred because of the gloomy weather.

古文：是时贾后乱朝，宠树贾、郭。
现代文：当时贾后乱政，培植宠信贾、郭。
English: At that time, Jia Guo was in political turmoil, and fostered favorites Jia and Guo.

古文：女主专政之应也。
现代文：大水灾就是买后独揽朝政的应验。
English: The great flood is the fulfillment of the policy of buying and monopolizing the imperial court.

古文：元康八年五月，金墉城井水溢。
现代文：元康八年五月，金墉城井水外溢。
English: In May of the eighth year of the Yuan Kang, water overflowed from the well of Jinli Castle.

古文：汉成帝时有此妖，班固以为王莽之象。
现代文：汉成帝时也曾出现这种妖异，蠹因认为是王莽篡位的征兆。
English: This strange phenomenon also occurred during the reign of Emperor Han Shing, which was considered to be a sign of Wang Mang's usurpation.

古文：及赵伦篡位，即此应也。
现代文：趟王司马伦篡位，就是井水外溢的应验。
English: Wang Simarun's usurpation is the fulfillment of the overflow of well water.

古文：伦废帝于此城，井溢所在，又天意乎！
现代文：司马伦废黜塞帝之后，把塞童囚禁在金掳继，那正是井水外溢的地方，这恐怕又是天意吧。
English: After Smalen dethroned Seti, he imprisoned Setong in Jinzhuizhi, which is the place where the well water overflowed. I'm afraid this was God's will.

古文：元康八年九月，荆、扬、徐、兗、冀五州大水。
现代文：元康八年九月，荆、扬、徐、兖、冀五州发生大水灾。
English: In September of the eighth year of the Yuan Kang, a major flood occurred in the five prefectures of Jing, Yang, Xu, Handan and Hebei.

古文：是时贾后暴戾滋甚，韩谧骄猜弥扇，卒害太子，旋亦祸灭。
现代文：当时贾后暴戾酷虐变本加厉，韩谧骄横猜疑也更加厉害，最终谋害了太子，不久他二人也遇祸被杀。
English: At that time, Jia Hou's brutality and cruelty intensified, and Han Xuan's arrogance and suspicion also became more severe. Eventually, he plotted to kill the prince, and soon the two of them were also killed in an accident.

古文：元康九年四月，宫中井水沸溢。
现代文：元康九年四月，宫中井水翻滚溢出。
English: In April of the ninth year of the Yuan Kang, the water in the palace well overflowed.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年七月，南阳、东海大水。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年七月，南阳、东海发生大水灾。
English: In July of the first year of the Yongning reign of Emperor Jinhui, a great flood occurred in Nanyang and the East China Sea.

古文：是时，齐王冏秉政专恣。
现代文：当时齐王司马同独掌朝政，恣意妄为。
English: At that time, Qi Wang Sima was in sole charge of the imperial government and acted arbitrarily.

古文：阴盛之应。
现代文：水灾是阴盛的应验。
English: The flood is the fulfillment of the gloom.

古文：晋惠帝太安元年七月，兗、豫、徐、冀四州水。
现代文：晋惠帝太安元年七月，兗、豫、徐、冀四州发生水灾。
English: In July of the first year of the Emperor Taian's reign, floods occurred in the four prefectures of Min, Yu, Xu and Hebei.

古文：时将相力政，无尊主心。
现代文：当时将相凭藉武力施行暴政，全无尊重君王之心。
English: It was a time when tyranny was imposed by force, and there was no respect for the king.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年四月，江东大水。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年四月，江东发生大水灾。
English: In April of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao and Emperor Huai Yongjia, a great flood occurred in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：是时，王导等潜怀翼戴之计。
现代文：当时王婆等人暗中怀有拥戴元帝之心。
English: At that time, Wang Bao and others secretly harbored the heart of supporting Yuan Di.

古文：阴气盛也。
现代文：水灾是阴气盛的应验。
English: The hailstorms are caused by the gloomy weather.

古文：晋元帝太兴三年六月，大水。
现代文：晋元帝太兴三年六月，发生大水灾。
English: In June of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时王敦内怀不臣，傲很作威，后终夷灭。
现代文：当时王堑不甘为臣，心怀篡逆之心，倨傲狠毒，作威作福。最终被荡乎诛灭。
English: At that time, Wang Yao was not willing to be a vassal, he harbored a heart of usurpation, arrogance, and malice, and he tried to make himself look good. In the end, he was completely annihilated.

古文：大兴四年七月，大水。
现代文：大兴四年七月，发生大水灾。
English: In July of the 4th year of Daxing, a major flood occurred.

古文：明年有石头之败。
现代文：第二年，朝廷军队在石头战败。
English: The following year, the imperial army was defeated at Stone Mountain.

古文：晋元帝永昌二年五月，荆州及丹阳、宣城、吴兴、寿春大水。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年五月，荆州以及丹阳、宣城、吴兴、寿春等处发生大水灾。
English: In May of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, a major flood occurred in Jingzhou, as well as Danyang, Xuancheng, Wuxing, Shuchun and other places.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年五月，丹阳、宣城、吴兴、寿阳大水。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年五月，丹阳、宣城、吴兴、寿阳发生大水灾。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, great floods occurred in Danyang, Xuancheng, Wuxing and Shouyang.

古文：是时王敦疾害忠良，威权震主，寻亦诛灭。
现代文：当时王敦妒嫉陷害忠良大臣。威势和权力都压倒皇上。
English: At that time, Wang Dun was jealous and set up the loyal minister. The prestige and power overwhelmed the emperor.

古文：晋成帝咸和元年五月，大水。
现代文：不久他就被诛减。晋成帝咸和元年五月，发生大水灾。
English: He was soon demoted. In May of the first year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, a major flood occurred.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，母后称制，庾亮以元舅民望，决事禁中。
现代文：当时继位君主幼小，母后临朝听政，庾亮凭藉大舅的身份和在百姓中的声望，在宫中决断朝廷大事。
English: At that time, the succeeding monarch was young, and his mother, the Empress Dowager, listened to the government, and decided the important matters of the imperial court in the palace by virtue of his status as an elder brother and his reputation among the people.

古文：阴胜阳也。
现代文：水灾是对阴胜阳现象的惩戒。
English: Floods are a punishment for the phenomenon of yin winning over yang.

古文：咸和二年五月戊子，京都大水。
现代文：咸和二年五月戊子曰，京城发生大水灾。
English: In May of the second year of the Heian period, Boshi said that a major flood occurred in Kyoto.

古文：是冬，苏峻称兵，都邑涂炭。
现代文：当年冬天，苏峻举兵反叛，京城生灵涂炭。
English: In the winter of that year, Su Jun raised an army to rebel, and the lives of the capital were charred.

古文：咸和四年七月，丹阳、宣城、吴兴、会稽大水。
现代文：咸和四年七月，丹阳、宣城、吴兴、会稽发生大水灾。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Heian period, major floods occurred in Danyang, Xuancheng, Wuxing and Hefei.

古文：是冬，郭默作乱，荆、豫共讨之，半岁乃定。
现代文：当年冬天，郭默发动叛乱，荆州、豫州合兵攻讨他，半年之后才乎定叛乱。
English: In the winter of that year, Guo Mo launched a rebellion, Jingzhou and Yuzhou joined forces to attack him, and it was not until half a year later that Guo Mo launched a rebellion.

古文：咸和七年五月，大水。
现代文：咸和七年五月，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the seventh year of the Hamato era, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时帝未亲务，政在大臣。
现代文：当时成帝还没有亲自处理政事，朝政由大臣掌握。
English: At that time, Emperor Cheng did not personally handle political affairs, and the government was controlled by ministers.

古文：阴胜阳也。
现代文：水灾是对阴胜阳现象的惩戒。
English: Floods are a punishment for the phenomenon of yin winning over yang.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年八月，长沙、武陵大水。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年八月，长沙、武陵发生大水灾。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, a great flood occurred in Changsha and Wuling.

古文：是年三月，石虎掠骑至历阳，四月，围襄阳。
现代文：当年三月，石虎手下抢掠骑兵前进到历阳，四月，石虎围攻襄阳。
English: In March of that year, Shihu's robber cavalry advanced to Liyang, and in April, Shihu besieged Xiangyang.

古文：于是加王导大司马，集徒旅；又使赵胤、路永、刘仕、王允之、陈光五将军，各帅众戍卫。
现代文：朝廷于是加封王遵为大司马，调集军队；又派赵胤、路永、刘仕、王立之、陆光五位将军，各人率领军队去戍守要冲，保卫京城。
English: The imperial court then appointed Wang Zun as the grand steward and mobilized the army; it also sent five generals, Zhao Tan, Lu Yong, Liu Shi, Wang Lizhi, and Lu Guang, each of whom led an army to defend the capital.

古文：百姓愁怨。
现代文：百姓愁苦怨恨。
English: The people are bitter and resentful.

古文：阴气盛也。
现代文：水灾是对阴气炽盛现象的惩戒。
English: The hailstorms are caused by the gloomy weather.

古文：晋穆帝永和四年五月，大水。
现代文：晋穆帝永和四年五月，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the 4th year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, a major flood occurred.

古文：是时幼主冲弱，母后临朝；又将相大臣，各争权政。
现代文：当时继位君主年纪幼小，母后临朝听政，将相大臣，各自争权夺利。
English: At that time, the heir to the throne was very young. His mother, the Empress Dowager, was a government official, and he was a minister, and they were competing for power and profit.

古文：与咸和初同事也。
现代文：造和咸和初年的事相同。
English: It was the same with Zozo and Hamato and the first year.

古文：永和五年五月，大水。
现代文：永和五年五月，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the fifth year of the Yonghe era, a major flood occurred.

古文：永和六年五月，大水。
现代文：永和六年五月，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the sixth year of the Yonghe era, a major flood occurred.

古文：永和七年七月甲辰夜，涛水入石头，死者数百人。
现代文：永和七年七月甲辰日晚上，江水涌入石头城淹死数百人。
English: On the evening of the first day of the seventh month of the seventh year of the Heian period, the river water poured into Stone Town and drowned hundreds of people.

古文：去年，殷浩以私忿废蔡谟，遐迩非之。
现代文：前一年，里造因为私人恩怨罢免蔡谨官职，远近的人都指责这件事。
English: The previous year, Ri Zou had removed Cai Ji from office because of a personal grudge. People near and far blamed him for this.

古文：又幼主在上，而殷、桓交恶，选徒聚甲，各崇私权。
现代文：又年幼的君王在位，而殷造、但温互相憎恨仇视，各自选用党徒，聚集士兵，扩大自己的权势。
English: There were also young kings on the throne, but Yan Zong and Dan Wen hated and envied each other, and each of them selected party members, gathered soldiers, and expanded their power.

古文：阴胜阳之应也。
现代文：水灾是对阴胜阳的惩戒。
English: The flood is the fulfillment of yin and yang.

古文：一说涛入石头，江右以为兵占。
现代文：另一种说法，江水涌入石头城，江右人认为是战争的征兆。
English: Another theory is that the river water poured into Stone Town, which Jiang Yu believed to be a sign of war.

古文：是后殷浩、桓温、谢尚、荀羡连年征伐。
现代文：以后殷浩、桓温、谢尚、荀羡连年征伐不断。
English: Since then, Yin Hao, Kuan Wen, Xie Shang, and Zou En have continued to march year after year.

古文：晋穆帝升平二年五月，大水。
现代文：晋穆帝升平二年五月，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Jinmu's enthronement, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时桓温权制朝廷，征伐是专。
现代文：当时桓温把持朝政，擅行征伐。
English: At that time, Kan-on was in charge of the imperial government and went on a crusade without permission.

古文：升平五年四月，大水。
现代文：升平五年四月，发生大水灾。
English: In April of the same year, a major flood occurred.

古文：晋海西太和六年六月，京都大水，平地数尺，侵及太庙。
现代文：晋海西太和六年六月，京都发生大水灾，平地有数尺深的水，水势侵及太庙。
English: In June of the 6th year of the Jin Dynasty, a great flood occurred in Kyoto. The water was several feet deep on the flat land, and the water threatened to invade the Imperial Temple.

古文：硃雀大航缆断，三艘流入大江。
现代文：浮桥朱雀大垃的缆绳断裂，有三艘船漂入大江。
English: The cable of the Suzaku big ship broke, and three ships flowed into the big river.

古文：丹阳、晋陵、吴国、吴兴、临海五郡又大水，稻稼荡没，黎庶饥馑。
现代文：丹阳、晋陵、吴国、吴兴、临海等五郡又发生大水灾，稻及其他庄稼都被淹没毁坏，百姓遭受饥荒。
English: Five counties, including Danyang, Jinling, Wuguo, Wuxing and Linhai, suffered another major flood. Rice and other crops were flooded and destroyed, and the people suffered from famine.

古文：初四年，桓温北伐败绩，十丧其九；五年，又征淮南，逾岁乃克。
现代文：起初，还在左扭四年的时候，桓温北伐大败，出征军队丧失了十分之九；太和五年，又出征淮南，经过一年多的作战才将进直攻克。
English: At the beginning, when it was still four years after the left turn, the Northern Expedition of Huanwen suffered a crushing defeat, and nine-tenths of the expeditionary army was lost; in the fifth year of the Taihe Dynasty, they also went to Huainan, and it took more than a year of fighting before they were able to make a direct attack.

古文：百姓愁怨之应也。
现代文：水灾是百姓愁苦怨恨的应验。
English: The great flood is the fulfillment of the people's grief and resentment.

古文：晋简文帝咸安元年十二月壬午，涛水入石头。
现代文：晋简文帝咸安元年十二月壬午，江水涌入石头城。
English: On the morning of December in the first year of Jin, Emperor Jianwen and Emperor Haman's reign, the river water poured into Stone Town.

古文：明年，妖贼卢竦率其属数百人入殿，略取武库三库甲仗，游击将军毛安之讨灭之。
现代文：第二年，妖贼卢竦率领他的数百部属进入朝堂，抢走武库中三个库房的锁甲和武器。游击将军王毛安攻讨卢竦，把他诛灭。
English: The following year, the thief Lu Xun led hundreds of his followers into the imperial court and robbed the armour and weapons from three warehouses in the arsenal. The guerrilla general Wang Mao'an attacked Lu Xun and annihilated him.

古文：晋孝武帝太元三年六月，大水。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元三年六月，发生大水灾。
English: In June of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时孝武幼弱，政在将相。
现代文：当时孝武帝年纪幼小，朝政由将相掌握。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu was very young, and the imperial government was controlled by the generals.

古文：太元五年，大水。
现代文：太元五年，发生大水灾。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiyuan era, a great flood occurred.

古文：去年氐贼攻没襄阳，又向广陵。
现代文：前一年，氐贼攻陷塞堡，又直趋庐壁。
English: The year before, the bandits had attacked and captured the fortress of Saiburg, and they were heading straight for the wall.

古文：于是逼徙江、淮民悉令南渡，三州失业，道馑相望。
现代文：于是朝廷逼令江、淮百姓迁徙，要他们全部南渡，三州百姓丢弃家业，道路上饿死的尸首一个接着一个。
English: As a result, the imperial court forced the people of Jiang and Huai to migrate, asking them all to go to the south, the people of the three states to abandon their family businesses, and the corpses of those who died of starvation on the road one after another.

古文：谢玄虽破句难等，自后征戍不已。
现代文：谢玄虽然击败句难等人，但从此以后，征戍年年不停。
English: Although Xie Xuan beat the others, but from then on, the expropriation continued year after year.

古文：百姓愁怨之应也。
现代文：大水灾是百姓愁苦怨恨的应验。
English: The great flood is the fulfillment of the people's grief and resentment.

古文：太元六年六月，荆、江扬三州大水。
现代文：太元六年六月，荆、江、扬三州发生大水灾。
English: In June of the sixth year of the Taiyuan era, a major flood occurred in the three states of Jing, Jiang and Yang.

古文：太元十年夏，大水。
现代文：太元十年夏，发生大水灾。
English: In the summer of the 10th year of the Taiyuan era, a major flood occurred.

古文：初八年，破苻坚，自后有事中州，役无已岁。
现代文：在此之前，太元八年，朝廷军队击败苻坚，自此以后年年对中州用兵，征役没有一年停止。
English: Prior to this, in the 8th year of the Taiyuan era, the imperial army defeated Shujian. Since then, soldiers have been used against Zhongzhou every year, and conscription has not stopped for a year.

古文：兵民愁怨之应也。
现代文：水灾足兵士、百姓愁苦怨恨的应验。
English: The flood is the fulfillment of the soldiers and the people's grief and resentment.

古文：太元十三年十二月，涛水入石头。
现代文：太元十三年十二月，江水涌入石头城。
English: In December of the 13th year of the Taiyuan, the river water poured into Stone Town.

古文：明年，丁零、鲜卑寇扰司、兗镇戍，西、北疲于奔命。
现代文：第二年，丁零、鲜卑进犯侵扰司州、兖州，朝廷派兵戍守，西、北疲于奔命。
English: In the second year, Ding Zi and Xianbei invaded Shizhou and Zhangzhou, and the imperial court sent soldiers to guard them. The west and the north were exhausted from running for their lives.

古文：太元十五年七月，兗州大水。
现代文：太元十五年七月，兖州发生大水灾。
English: In July of the 15th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, a major flood occurred in Zhangzhou.

古文：是时缘河纷争，征戍勤悴。
现代文：当时沿黄河战争不断，征戍士兵十分劳苦。
English: At that time, the war continued along the Yellow River, and the conscript soldiers worked very hard.

古文：太元十七年六月甲寅，涛水入石头，毁大航，漂船舫，有死者；京口西浦，亦涛入杀人。
现代文：太元十七年六月甲寅曰，江水涌入石头城，冲毁大航浮桥，冲走搭桥的船，淹死了人；京口西浦，也因潮水涌入而死了人。
English: In June of the 17th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Jia Yin said that the river water poured into the Stone City, washed away the Dahang floating bridge, washed away the boat that built the bridge, and drowned people; Jingkou Xipu, also died due to the influx of tide.

古文：永嘉郡潮水涌起，近海四县人民多死。
现代文：永嘉郡潮水涌上岸，近海四县百姓多数被淹死。
English: The tide surged ashore in Yongjia County, and most of the people in four counties along the coast were drowned.

古文：后四年帝崩，而王恭再攻京师。
现代文：后四年孝武帝去世，而王恭两次进攻京城。
English: In the last four years, Emperor Xiaowu died, and Wang Gong attacked the capital twice.

古文：京师亦发大众以御之。
现代文：朝廷也在京城征发士兵抵御王恭。
English: The imperial court also conscripted soldiers in the capital to defend against Wang Gong.

古文：太元十九年七月，荆州、彭城大水伤稼。
现代文：太元十九年七月，荆州、彭城发生大水灾，损坏了庄稼。
English: In July of the 19th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, a major flood occurred in Jingzhou and Pengcheng, damaging crops.

古文：太元二十年，荆州、彭城大水。
现代文：太元二十年，荆州、彭城发生大水灾。
English: In the 20th year of the Taiyuan era, a major flood occurred in Jingzhou and Pengcheng.

古文：太元二十一年五月癸卯，大水。
现代文：太元二十一年五月癸卯日，发生大水灾。
English: On May 21st, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时政事多弊，兆庶非之。
现代文：当时政事多弊病，百姓都指责当政者。
English: At this time, there were many ills in the government, and the people opposed it.

古文：晋安帝隆安三年五月，荆州大水。
现代文：晋安帝隆安三年五月，荆州发生大水灾前一年殷仲堪发兵进逼京城。
English: In May of the third year of the reign of Emperor Ande Longan, a year before the great flood occurred in Jingzhou, Yin Zhongkan sent troops to force Beijing.

古文：去年，殷仲堪举兵向京都；是年春，又杀郗恢。
现代文：这年春天，殷仲堪又杀害郗恢。水灾是阴盛欺凌阳的应验。
English: In the spring of this year, Yin Zhongkan also killed Zou Wei. The flood was the fulfillment of Yin Sheng's bullying of Yang.

古文：阴盛作威之应也。
现代文：殷仲堪不久也兵败而死。
English: Soon after, Yin Zhongkan was also defeated and died.

古文：仲堪寻亦败亡。隆安五年五月，大水。是时司马元显作威陵上，又桓玄擅西夏，孙恩乱东国。
现代文：隆安五年五月，发生大水灾，当时司马元显作威作福，欺凌君王，又桓玄独占西夏，孙恩在柬部叛乱。
English: In May of the 5th year of Longan, a great flood occurred. At that time, Sima Yuanxian led a rebellion, bullying the king, monopolizing Western Xia, and Sun En rebelled in Cambodia.

古文：阴胜阳之应也。
现代文：水灾正是阴胜阳的应验。
English: The flood is the fulfillment of yin and yang.

古文：晋安帝元兴二年十二月，桓玄篡位。
现代文：晋安帝元兴二年十二月，桓玄篡位。
English: In December of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, Emperor Huan Xuan usurped the throne.

古文：其明年二月庚寅夜，涛水入石头。
现代文：第二年二月庚寅日晚上，江水涌入石头城。
English: On the night of February 2nd, the raging water rushed into the stone.

古文：是时贡使商旅，方舟万计，漂败流断，骸胔相望。
现代文：当时进贡使者、来往商旅，乘坐的船只有几万艘，全被冲毁，死者的尸骸一具连着一具。
English: At that time, there were only tens of thousands of boats used by tribute envoys and traveling merchants. They were all washed away, and the bodies of the dead were piled one on top of the other.

古文：江右虽有涛变，未有若斯之甚。
现代文：晋迁都江左之后虽然潮水也曾带来灾变，但没有一次灾害有这样严重。
English: Although tides have also brought disaster after the relocation of the capital to the left bank of the Yangtze River, none of the disasters have been as serious as this.

古文：三月，义军克京都，玄败走，遂夷灭。
现代文：三月，义军攻克京城，桓玄败逃，最终被消灭。
English: In March, the rebel army conquered the capital, and Huan Xuan fled in defeat and was eventually eliminated.

古文：元兴三年二月己丑朔夜，涛水入石头，漂没杀人，大航流败。
现代文：元兴三年二月己丑日夜晚，这天是初一，江水涌入石头城，冲走淹死了人，浮桥大航被冲坏。
English: On the night of February Fool's Day in the third year of Genxing, which was the first day of the year, the river water poured into Stone Town, washed away and drowned people, and the floating bridge was washed away.

古文：晋安帝义熙元年十二月己未，涛水入石头。
现代文：晋安帝义熙元年十二月己末日，江水涌入石头城。
English: On the last day of December in the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinnan and Emperor Yixi, the river flooded Stone Town.

古文：义熙二年十二月己未夜，涛水入石头。
现代文：义熙二年十二月己末日夜晚，辽水涌入石头撼。
English: On the night of the last day of December in the second year of Yixi, Liao Shui poured into the stone.

古文：明年，骆球父环潜结桓胤、殷仲文等谋作乱，刘稚亦谋反，凡所诛灭数十家。
现代文：第二年，骆球和他父亲暗中勾结桓胤、殷仲桓胤、殷仲等人图谋发动叛乱，刘稚也图谋反叛，为这事被诛灭的共有数十家。
English: In the second year, Luo Guan's father Luo Huan secretly colluded with Huan Tan and Yin Zhongwen and others to plan a riot, and Liu Zhi and others also planned a rebellion. In total, dozens of families were killed.

古文：义熙三年五月丙午，大水。
现代文：义熙三年五月丙午，发生大水灾。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month of the third year of Yixi, a major flood occurred.

古文：义熙四年十二月戊寅，涛水入石头。
现代文：义熙四年十二月戊寅曰，江水涌入石头城。
English: In December of the 4th year of Yixi, Wu Yin said that the river water poured into the stone city.

古文：明年，王旅北讨鲜卑。
现代文：第二年，朝廷大军北讨鲜卑。
English: In the following year, the imperial army marched north to defeat the invaders.

古文：义熙六年五月丁巳，大水。
现代文：义熙六年五月丁巳曰，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a great flood occurred.

古文：乙丑，卢循至蔡洲。
现代文：乙丑日，卢循叛军到蔡洲。
English: Second Ugly, Lu Xun arrived in Caizhou.

古文：义熙八年六月，大水。
现代文：义熙八年六月，发生大水灾。
English: In June of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a great flood occurred.

古文：义熙九年五月辛巳，大水。
现代文：义熙九年五月辛巳日，发生大水灾。
English: In May of the 9th year of Yixi, a great flood occurred.

古文：义熙十年五月丁丑，大水；戊寅，西明门地穿涌水出，毁门扉及限；七月乙丑，淮北灾风大水杀人。
现代文：义熙十年五月丁丑日，发生大水灾；戊寅曰，西明门地面出现孔洞，水从中涌出，毁坏了门扉和门槛；七月乙丑日，淮北发生风灾，又发生大水灾，死了人。
English: In May of the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a great flood occurred on Dingwu Day; Wu Yin said that a hole appeared on the ground of Ximing Gate, and water gushed out from it, destroying the doors and thresholds; in July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a windstorm occurred in Huaibei, another great flood occurred, and people died.

古文：义熙十一年七月丙戌，大水，淹渍太庙，百官赴救。
现代文：义熙十一年七月丙戌曰，发生大水灾，太庙被淹，百官赶去抢救。
English: In July of the eleventh year of Yixi, there was a great flood, the Great Temple was flooded, and hundreds of officials rushed to the rescue.

古文：明年，王旅北讨关、河。
现代文：第二年，朝廷大军北讨飓、回。
English: In the following year, the imperial army marched north to fight against the Hurricanes.

古文：宋文帝元嘉五年六月，京邑大水。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉五年六月，京城发生大水灾。
English: In June of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, a great flood occurred in Beijing.

古文：七年，右将军到彦之率师入河。
现代文：元嘉七年，右将军到彦之率领军队挺进黄河。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the right general Zuihong led the army into the Yellow River.

古文：元嘉十一年五月，京邑大水。
现代文：元嘉十一年五月，京城发生大水灾。
English: In May of the 11th year of Yuan Jia, a major flood occurred in Beijing.

古文：十三年，司空檀道济诛。
现代文：元嘉十三年，司空檀道济被处死。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yuan Jia, Sikuotang Doji was executed.

古文：元嘉十二年六月，丹阳、淮南、吴、吴兴、义兴五郡大水，京邑乘船。
现代文：元嘉十二年六月，丹阳、淮南、吴、吴兴、义兴五郡发生大水灾，京城裹水深得要乘船行走。
English: In June of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia, a major flood occurred in the five counties of Danyang, Huainan, Wu, Wuxing and Yixing, and the capital was so deep in water that it was necessary to travel by boat.

古文：元嘉十八年五月，江水泛溢，没居民，害苗稼。
现代文：元嘉十八年五月，辽水泛滥，淹没百姓，损害庄稼。
English: In May of the 18th year of Yuan Jia, Liao Shui flooded, drowning the people and damaging the crops.

古文：明年，右军将军裴方明率雍、梁之众伐仇池。
现代文：第二年，右军将军裴方明率领雍、梁二州的军队讨伐仇池。
English: In the second year, General Pei Fangming of the Right Army led the armies of Yong and Liang two states to fight against Qiu Chi.

古文：元嘉十九年、二十年，东诸郡大水。
现代文：元嘉十九年、二十年，东部诸郡发生大水灾。
English: In the 19th and 20th years of the Yuan Jia, the eastern counties suffered a major flood.

古文：元嘉二十九年五月，京邑大水。
现代文：元嘉二十九年五月，京城发生大水灾。
English: In May of the 29th year of Yuan Jia, a major flood occurred in Beijing.

古文：孝武帝孝建元年八月，会稽大水，平地八尺。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年八月，会稽发生大水灾，平地水深八尺。
English: In August of the year of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, a great flood occurred in Hefei, and the water level was eight feet deep.

古文：后二年，虏寇青、冀州，遣羽林军卒讨伐。
现代文：后二年，索虏进犯青、冀二州，朝廷派羽林军前往讨伐。
English: In the following two years, the Sorbs invaded the states of Jizhou and Qingdao, and the imperial court sent the Ulin Army to fight them.

古文：孝武帝大明元年五月，吴兴、义兴大水。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年五月，吴兴、义兴发生大水灾。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, a great flood occurred in Wuxing and Yixing.

古文：大明四年八月，雍州大水。
现代文：大明四年八月，雍州发生大水灾。
English: In August of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, a major flood occurred in Yongzhou.

古文：大明四年，南徐、南兗州大水。
现代文：大明四年，南徐、南兗州发生大水灾。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, a major flood occurred in Nanxu and Nanxizhou.

古文：后废帝元徽元年六月，寿阳大水。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年六月，寿阳发生大水灾。
English: In June of the year of the former emperor Yuan Hui, a great flood occurred in Shouyang.

古文：顺帝升明元年七月，雍州大水，甚于关羽樊城时。
现代文：顺帝升明元年七月，雍州发生大水灾，水势比关羽在樊城时还大。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, a major flood occurred in Yongzhou. The water potential was greater than that of Guan Yu's time in Lucheng.

古文：升明二年二月，于潜翼异山一夕五十二处水出，流漂居民。
现代文：升明二年二月，于潜翼异山一个晚上突然有五十二处涌出水来，冲走淹没当地居民。
English: In February of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, fifty-two places of water suddenly gushed out in one night, washing away and flooding the local residents.

古文：七月丙午朔，涛水入石头，居民皆漂没。
现代文：七月丙午曰初一，江水涌入石头城，当地居民都被淹没冲走。
English: On the afternoon of July 3rd, the first day of the new year, the river water poured into Stone Town, and the local residents were flooded and washed away.

古文：恆寒：庶征之恆寒，刘歆以为 大雨雪、及未当雨雪而雨雪、及大雨雹、陨霜杀菽草，皆常寒之罚也 。
现代文：众多征候中的恒寒，刘歆认为是 下大雪、在不该下雪的季节却下雪以及下大冰雹、降霜冻死豆苗和作物，这都是恒寒的惩戒 。
English: Among the many symptoms of the cold snap, Liu Wei believes that heavy snowfall, snowfall in the season when it should not snow, heavy hail, frost and frozen bean seedlings and crops are all punishments of the cold snap.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 有德遭险，兹谓逆命。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 有德之人遭逢凶险，造就叫做逆命。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: A virtuous person is in peril, and it is called a reversal of fortune.

古文：厥异寒。
现代文：其妖异是寒。
English: The strange thing is the cold.

古文：诛罚过深，当燠而寒，尽六日，亦为雹。
现代文：诛罚过于严苛，应当暖和却寒冷，六天而止，也会下冰苞。
English: The punishment for murder is too severe. When it should be hot, it is cold. For six whole days, there is also hail.

古文：害正不诛，兹谓养贼。
现代文：危害正道的人不诛除，这就叫做养贼。
English: If you don't expel those who endanger the righteous path, it's called raising thieves.

古文：寒七十二日，杀飞禽。
现代文：要寒七十二日，冻死飞禽。
English: It will be cold for 72 days, and the birds will freeze to death.

古文：道人始去，兹谓伤。
现代文：有道之人开始离去，这就叫做伤。
English: The virtuous people began to leave, and this is called a wound.

古文：其寒物无霜而死，涌水出。
现代文：天寒，万物无霜却冻死，泉涌而出。
English: The sky is cold, everything is frost-free but freezes to death, and springs gush forth.

古文：战不量敌，兹谓辱命。
现代文：作战却不估量敌手，造就叫做辱命。
English: To fight without evaluating your opponent is a disgrace.

古文：其寒虽雨物不茂。 
现代文：天寒，即使下雨，但万物生长却不繁茂。 
English: The weather is cold, even if it rains, everything grows but nothing flourishes.

古文：吴孙权嘉禾三年九月朔，陨霜伤谷。
现代文：吴孙权嘉禾三年九月初一，降霜损伤谷物。
English: On the first day of September in the third year of Wu Sun Quan Jia He, frost damage to cereals.

古文：按刘向说： 诛罚不由君出，在臣下之象也 。
现代文：据刘向说，降霜伤谷，是 诛罚之令不出自君王而出于臣下，朝政在臣下手中的征象 。
English: According to Liu Xiang, the reduction of frostbite valley is a sign that the order of punishment does not come from the monarch but from the vassal, and the court is in the hands of the vassal.

古文：是时校事吕壹专作威福，与汉元帝时石显用事陨霜同应。
现代文：当时校事吕壹窃弄权柄，一味作威作福，这和汉元帝时石显专权而上天降霜是同样的征象。
English: At that time, the school official Lü Yi was stealing power, and he was always trying to make himself look good. This is the same phenomenon as when the Han Emperor Shi Xian had absolute power, and the sky was covered with frost.

古文：班固书九月二日，陈寿言朔，皆明未可以伤谷也。
现代文：班固记载汉元帝时降霜事写的是九月二日，陈寿记载孙权时降霜事说是九月初一，都是为了表明九月初之霜不能够损害谷物。
English: According to the records, it was September 2nd, but Chen Shou said it was the first day of the new year, both of which indicated that it was not possible to harm the grain.

古文：壹后亦伏诛。
现代文：吕壹后来也因罪被诛。
English: Lu Yi was later also executed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 兴兵妄诛，兹谓亡法。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 调动军队，随意诛杀，造就叫做目无法度。
English: Jingfang "I Chuan" said: Mobilizing the army, killing at will, creating is called blind.

古文：厥灾霜，夏杀五谷，冬杀麦。
现代文：其灾异是降霜，夏天降霜冻死五谷，冬天冻死麦子。
English: Its natural disaster is frost. In summer, frost kills corn, and in winter, it kills wheat.

古文：诛不原情，兹谓不仁。
现代文：随意诛杀，不根据情事宽宥，造就叫做不仁。
English: Fighting and killing at will, not forgiving according to the circumstances, creating is called unkindness.

古文：其霜夏先大雷风，冬先雨，乃陨霜，有芒角。
现代文：出现降霜的妖异，夏天先鸣雷起大风才降霜，冬天先下雨再降霜，霜有芒角。
English: There is a strange phenomenon of frost falling. In summer, it takes thunder and high winds before frost falls. In winter, it takes rain before frost falls. The frost has horns.

古文：贤圣遭害，其霜附木不下地。
现代文：贤圣遭害，霜附在树上不下地。
English: The saints and sages were killed, and the frost clung to the trees and did not come down to the ground.

古文：佞人依刑，兹谓私贼。
现代文：佞人把持刑法，造就叫私下残害百姓。
English: Criminals are in control of the criminal law, creating and ordering people to commit crimes in secret.

古文：其霜在草根土隙间。
现代文：霜降在草根土壤的隙缝间。
English: The frost falls in crevices between the grass roots of the soil.

古文：不教而诛，兹谓虐。
现代文：不教而诛，造就叫做虐。
English: If you don't teach, you don't learn. If you do, it's called abuse.

古文：其霜反在草下。 
现代文：霜反降在草下。 
English: The frost has settled under the grass.

古文：嘉禾四年七月，雨雹，又陨霜。
现代文：嘉禾四年七月，下冰雹，又降霜。
English: In July of the fourth year of Jiahe, hail fell, and frost fell again.

古文：案刘向说： 雹者阴胁阳 。
现代文：据刘向说， 下冰雹，是因为阴胁阳 。
English: According to Liu Xiang, hailstorms are caused by the interplay of yin and yang.

古文：是时吕壹作威用事，诋毁重臣，排陷无辜。
现代文：当时吕壹作威作福，窃弄权柄，诋毁朝廷重臣，排挤陷害无辜之人。
English: At that time, Lü Yi was arrogant and self-serving, stealing power, slandering high-ranking court officials, and ousting and framing innocent people.

古文：自太子登以下，咸患毒之，而壹反获封侯宠异。
现代文：从太子孙登以下，人人都害怕他、痛恨他，而吕壹反而得到特别的恩宠，获得封侯的荣耀。
English: From the Prince's grandson Deng Zheng to the next, everyone feared him and hated him, while Lü Yi, on the other hand, received special grace and the glory of being crowned prince.

古文：与《春秋》公子遂专任，雨雹同应也。
现代文：这和《春秋》中记载的公子遂受到信用而专权，上天降下冰雹以惩戒是同样的应验。
English: This is the same fulfillment as that recorded in "Spring and Autumn," in which the prince was trusted and given exclusive power, and the heavens rained down hailstones to punish him.

古文：汉安帝信谗，多杀无辜，亦雨雹。
现代文：汉安帝听信谗言，杀了很多无辜之人，也出现下冰雹的现象。
English: Han Andi listened to the advice, killed a lot of innocent people, and was also a hailstorm.

古文：董仲舒曰 凡雹皆为有所胁，行专一之政 故也。
现代文：董仲舒说 大凡下冰雹，都是因为受到胁迫，有入推行政令独断独行 的缘故。
English: Dong Zhongshu said that the large hailstorms were caused by coercion and the arbitrary implementation of the executive order.

古文：吴孙权赤乌四年正月，大雪，平地深三尺，鸟兽死者太半。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌四年正月，下大雪，平地雪深三尺，大半乌兽被冻死。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, there was a heavy snowfall. The snow on the flat ground was three feet deep, and most of the animals froze to death.

古文：是年夏，全琮等四将军攻略淮南、襄阳，战死者千余人。
现代文：这年夏天，全琮等四位将军攻打淮南、襄阳，战死者有一千余人。
English: In the summer of that year, four generals including Quanzhang conquered Jinshan, Shishan, and more than a thousand people died in the battle.

古文：其后权以谗邪，数责让陆议，议愤恚致卒。
现代文：以后还挞因为听信谗言邪说，多次责备陆议，陆议愤恚而死。
English: Later, he also died because he repeatedly rebuked Lu Wei and was angry with Lu Wei for listening to false and evil words.

古文：与汉景、武大雪同事也。
现代文：这和汉景帝、汉武帝时下大雪的事情相同。
English: This is the same as the heavy snowfall during the reigns of Emperor Han Jing and Emperor Han Wu.

古文：赤乌十一年四月，雨雹。
现代文：赤乌十一年四月，下冰雹。
English: In April of the 11th year of Akau, hail fell.

古文：是时权听谗，将危太子。
现代文：当时彊护听信谗言，将要伤害太子。
English: At this time, Sun Quan listened to the advice and was about to endanger the prince.

古文：其后硃据、屈晃以迕意黜辱，陈象以忠谏族诛，而太子终废。
现代文：以后朱据、屈晃因为触迕孙护之意遭受屈辱被贬，陈象因为进谏忠言而全族被诛，而太子最终被废黜。
English: Later, Zhu Zheng and Qu Ao were humiliated and demoted for offending the grandson's guardianship, Chen Xiang's whole family was ousted because he was a loyal adviser, and the prince was eventually deposed.

古文：此有德遭险，诛罚过深之应也。
现代文：冰雹是有德之人遭受凶险、诛罚过于严苛的惩戒。
English: This is a sign that virtuous people are in grave danger, and the punishment of killing is in grave danger.

古文：晋武帝泰始六年冬，大雪。
现代文：晋武帝泰始六年冬，下大雪。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, there was heavy snowfall.

古文：泰始七年十二月，大雪。
现代文：泰始七年十二月，下大雪。
English: In December of the first year of the Taisho era, there was heavy snowfall.

古文：明年。有步阐、杨肇之败，死伤甚众。
现代文：第二年，步阐、杨肇战败，死伤的人很多。
English: In the second year, Bu Xuan and Yang Zhao were defeated, and many people were killed and injured.

古文：泰始九年四月辛未，陨霜。
现代文：泰始九年四月辛末日，降霜。
English: In April of the ninth year of Taishi, it was the last day of the heat wave, and the frost was falling.

古文：是时贾充亲党比周用事。
现代文：当时贾充及其亲属徒众，结党营私。
English: At that time, Jia Chong and his relatives gathered together and formed a party.

古文：与鲁定公、汉元帝时陨霜同应也。
现代文：这和鲁定公、汉元帝时降霜是同样的惩戒。
English: This is the same kind of punishment as when frosts fell during the reigns of Emperor Luding and Emperor Han Yuan.

古文：晋武帝咸宁三年八月，平原、安平、上党、秦郡霜害三豆。
现代文：晋武帝威宁三年八月，平原、安平、上党、秦郡降霜，损伤三豆。
English: In August of the third year of Emperor Jinwu's reign in Weining, frosts fell in Pingyuan, Anping, Shangdang and Qin County, damaging three beans.

古文：咸宁三年八月，河间暴风寒冰，郡国五陨霜伤谷。
现代文：威宁三年八月，河间突起大风，天寒冷而结冰，郡国有五处降霜，伤害谷物。
English: In August of the third year of Wening, a gale arose in the middle of the river, the weather was cold and icy, and there were five frosts in the county, which damaged the grain.

古文：是后大举征吴，马隆又帅精勇讨凉州。
现代文：此后朝廷大举征讨呈，屋隆又率领精勇部队进讨凉州。
English: After that, there was a large-scale campaign to conquer Wu, and Malong led the elite troops to conquer Liangzhou.

古文：咸宁五年五月丁亥，钜鹿、魏郡雨雹伤禾、麦；辛卯，雁门雨雹伤秋稼＃咸宁五年六月庚戌，汲郡、广平、陈留、荥阳雨雹；丙辰，又雨雹，损伤秋麦千三百余顷，坏屋百三十余间；癸亥，安定雨雹；七月丙申，魏郡又雨雹；闰月壬子，新兴又雨雹；八月庚子，河东、弘农又雨雹，兼伤秋稼三豆。
现代文：威宁五年五月丁亥曰，钜鹿、魏郡下冰雹，伤害禾、麦；辛卯曰，雁门下冰雹伤害秋季的庄稼。威宁五年六月庚戌曰，汲郡、广平、陈留、茔阳下冰雹；丙辰曰，又下冰雹，损伤一千三百余顷秋麦，砸坏一百三十余间房屋；癸亥日，安定下冰雹；七月丙申曰，魏郡又下冰雹；闰月壬子曰，新兴又下冰雹；八月庚子曰，河东、弘农又下冰雹，同时伤害秋季的庄稼和三豆。
English: In May of the fifth year of Wening, Ding Hai said that the hailstorms in Lugu and Wei counties damaged the wheat and wheat; Xin Wu said that the hailstorms under the Wild Goose Gate damaged the autumn crops. In June of the fifth year of Wening, Geng Yao said that the hailstorms in Gu County, Guangping, Chenlu and Shenyang; Gucheng said that the hailstorms damaged more than 1,300 hectares of autumn wheat and destroyed more than 130 houses; Hun Hai day, stable hailstorms; July Bishen said that the hailstorms in Wei County; leap month Ren Zi said that the hailstorm

古文：晋武帝太康元年三月，河东、高平霜雹，伤桑、麦；四月，河南、河内、河东、魏郡、弘农雨雹，伤麦、豆；五月，东平、平阳、上党、雁门、济南雨雹，伤禾、麦、三豆。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年三月，河东、高平降霜、下冰雹，损伤桑、麦；四月，河南、河内、河东、魏郡、弘农下冰雹，伤害麦、豆；五月，东平、平阳、上党、雁门、济南又下冰雹，伤害禾、麦、三豆。
English: In March of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of Jin Dynasty, frost and hail damage mulberry and wheat in Hedong and Gaoping; in April, hail damage wheat and beans in Henan, Hanoi, Hedong, Wei County and Hongnong; in May, hail damage wheat, wheat and three beans in Dongping, Pingyang, Shangdang, Ganmen and Jinan.

古文：太康元年四月庚午，畿内县二及东平范阳县雨雹；癸酉，畿内县五又雨雹。
现代文：太康元年四月庚午日，京畿之内两个县以及束平范阳县下冰雹；癸酉日，京畿之内又有五个县下冰雹。
English: On the morning of the second day of April in the first year of Taikang, hailstorms hit two counties in Gyeonggi Province and Fanyang County in Sokpyeong; on the afternoon of the third day, hailstorms hit five more counties in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：是时王浚有大功，而权戚互加陷抑，帝从容不断。
现代文：当时王浚立下大功，但权臣外戚一个接一个地对他诬陷贬抑，武帝优柔寡断。
English: At that time, Wang Jun made a great achievement, but the relatives of the powerful vassals slandered and belittled him one after another, and Emperor Wu was indecisive.

古文：阴胁阳之应也。
现代文：下冰雹就是阴胁阳的应验。
English: The hailstorm is the fulfillment of yin and yang.

古文：太康二年二月辛酉，殒霜于济南、琅邪，伤麦；壬申，琅邪雨雪伤麦；三月甲午，河东陨霜害桑。
现代文：太康二年二月辛酉曰，在济南、琅邪降霜，损伤麦子；壬申日，琅邪下雪损伤麦子；三月甲午日，河东降霜，冻伤桑树。
English: In February of the second year of Taikang, Xinlu day, in Jinan, the hailstorm caused frost damage to wheat; in Jinshin day, the hailstorm caused snow damage to wheat; in the afternoon of March 1st, in Hedong, frost damage to mulberry trees.

古文：太康二年五月丙戌，城阳、章武、琅邪伤麦；庚寅，河东、乐安、东平、济阴、弘农、濮阳、齐国、顿丘、魏郡、河内、汲郡、上党雨雹，伤禾稼。
现代文：太康二年五月丙戌日，城阳、章武、琅邪等处麦子受到损伤；庚寅，河东、乐安、东平、济阴、弘农、濮阳、齐国、顿丘、魏郡、河内、汲郡、上党下冰雹，伤害禾稼。
English: On May 2nd, Taikang Year 2, the wheat was damaged in Chengyang, Zhangwu, and Shiji; the hailstorms in Goyang, Hedong, Le'an, Dongping, Jiyin, Hongnong, Shenyang, Qi, Dongqiu, Wei County, Hanoi, Gu County, and Shangdang damaged the crops.

古文：太康二年六月，郡国十六雨雹。
现代文：太康二年六月，十六个郡国下冰雹。
English: In June of the second year of Taikang, 16 counties were hit by hail.

古文：太康三年十二月，大雪。
现代文：太康三年十二月，下大雪。
English: In December of the third year of Taikang, it snowed heavily.

古文：太康五年七月乙卯，中山、东平雨雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：太康五年七月乙卯日，生旦、墓垩下冰雹，伤害秋季的庄稼。
English: On July 1st of the 5th year of Taikang, on the day of his birth, a hailstorm hit the tomb, damaging the autumn crops.

古文：太康五年七月甲辰，中山雨雹；九月，南安大雪折木。
现代文：太康五年七月甲辰曰，中山下冰雹；九月，南安下大雪，摧折树木。
English: In the first hour of July in the fifth year of Taikang, there was a hailstorm in Zhongshan; in September, there was a heavy snowfall in Nan'an, which broke trees.

古文：太康六年二月，东海霜伤桑、麦。
现代文：太康六年二月，东海降霜，伤害桑、麦。
English: In February of the sixth year of Taikang, the East Sea froze, hurting mulberry and wheat.

古文：太康六年三月戊辰，齐郡临菑、长广不其等四县，乐安梁邹等八县，琅邪临沂等八县，河间易城等六县，高阳北新城等四县，陨霜伤桑、麦。
现代文：太康六年三月戊辰曰，齐郡临菑、长广不其等四县，乐安梁邹等八县，琅邪临沂等八县，河间易城等六县，高阳北新城等四县，都降霜，伤害了桑、麦。
English: In March of the sixth year of Taikang, four counties, including Linyi and Changguangbushi in Qi County, eight counties, including Le'anliangyu in Le'anliangbushi, eight counties, including Shiyan in Linyi, six counties, including Yicheng in Hebei, and four counties, including Beixincheng in Gaoyang, were hit by frost, which damaged mulberry and wheat.

古文：太康六年六月，荥阳、汲郡、雁门雨雹。
现代文：太康六年六月，荥阳、汲郡、雁门下冰雹。
English: In June of the sixth year of Taikang, there were hailstorms in Fenyang, Gu County, and Yanmen.

古文：太康八年四月，齐国、天水二郡陨霜；十二月，大雪。
现代文：太康八年四月，齐国、天水二郡降霜。十二月，下大雪。
English: In April of the eighth year of Taikang, frost fell in Qi Province and Tianshui County. In December, it snowed heavily.

古文：太康九年正月，京都大风雨雹，发屋拔木；四月，陇西陨霜。
现代文：太康九年正月，京城刮大风，下冰雹，吹塌房屋，树木被连根拔起；四月，陇西降霜。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Taikang, the capital city was hit by high winds and hailstorms, houses were blown down, and trees were uprooted; in April, frost fell in western Shaanxi.

古文：太康十年四月，郡国八陨霜。
现代文：太康十年四月，八个郡国降霜。
English: In April of the 10th year of Taikang, frosts fell in eight counties.

古文：晋惠帝元康二年八月，沛及汤阴雨雹。
现代文：晋惠帝元康二年八月，沛及汤阴下冰雹。
English: In August of the second year of Emperor Jingu's reign, it was cloudy and rainy.

古文：元康三年四月，荥阳雨雹；弘农湖、华阴又雨雹，深三尺。
现代文：元康三年四月，荣阳下冰雹；弘农湖、华阴又下冰雹，冰雹在地上堆积有三尺厚。
English: In April of the third year of the Yuan Kang, Rongyang was covered with hail; Hongnong Lake and Huayin were also covered with hail, and the hail was three feet thick on the ground.

古文：是时贾后凶淫专恣，与《春秋》鲁桓夫人同事。
现代文：当时贾后凶残放荡、专横且肆意行事，这和《春秋》中记载的鲁桓公夫人事情相同。
English: At that time, Empress Jia was viciously debauched, domineering and acting wantonly, which is the same as what happened to Lu Huan's wife recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：阴气盛也。
现代文：下冰雹是因为阴气盛。
English: The hailstorms are caused by the gloomy weather.

古文：元康五年六月，东海雨雹，深五寸；十二月，丹阳雨雹。
现代文：元康五年六月，东海下冰雹，冰雹堆积有五元康五年十二月，丹阳下冰雹。
English: In June of the 5th year of the Kang Dynasty, there was hail under the East Sea, and hailstones piled up. In December of the 5th year of the Kang Dynasty, there was hail under the Danyang.

古文：元康五年十二月，丹阳建业大雪。
现代文：元康五年十二月，丹阳建业下大雪。
English: In December of the fifth year of the Yuan Kang, Danyang Jianye was hit by heavy snow.

古文：元康六年三月，东海陨霜杀桑、麦。
现代文：元康六年三月，东海降霜，冻死桑、麦。
English: In March of the sixth year of the Yuan Kang, the East Sea froze, and mulberry and wheat froze to death.

古文：元康七年五月，鲁国雨雹；七月，秦、雍二州陨霜杀稼。
现代文：元康七年五月，鲁国下冰雹；七月，秦、雍二州降霜，冻死庄稼。
English: In May of the seventh year of the Yuan Kang, hail fell in the State of Lu; in July, frost fell in the two states of Qin and Yong, and crops froze to death.

古文：元康九年三月旬有八日，河南、荥阳、颍川陨霜伤禾；五月，雨雹。
现代文：元康九年三月中有十八天，河南、荥阳、颍川降霜，冻伤禾；五月，下冰雹。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Yuan Kang, there were 18 days in which frosts fell in Henan, Shenyang and Luochuan, causing frostbite; in May, hailstorms.

古文：是时贾后凶躁滋甚，是冬遂废愍怀。
现代文：当时贾后凶残暴躁更加严重，遣年冬天竟然废黜愍怀太子。
English: At that time, Jia Hou's ferocious temper was even more serious. In the winter of the Year of the Dragon, she even dethroned the crown prince.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年七月，襄城雨雹。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年七月，襄城下冰雹。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinhui of Yongning, there was a hailstorm in Xiangcheng.

古文：是时齐王冏专政。
现代文：当时变王司马同独揽朝政。
English: At that time, Qi Wang and Sima Tong monopolized the imperial government.

古文：十月，襄城、河南、高平、平阳风雹，折木伤稼。
现代文：十月，襄城、河南、高平、平阳等地刮大风，下冰雹，吹折树木，冻伤庄稼。
English: In October, Yangcheng, Henan, Gaoping, Pingyang and other places were hit by strong winds, hailstorms, blown trees, frostbite crops.

古文：晋惠帝光熙元年闰八月甲申朔，霰雪。
现代文：晋惠帝光熙元年闰八月甲申，遣天是初一，天降霰雪。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Guangxi's reign, the leap month of August was Jiaxun, the first day of the lunar calendar, and the sky was covered with snow.

古文：刘向曰： 盛阳雨水汤热，阴气胁之，则转而为雹。
现代文：刘向说： 盛阳下雨就像热水那样热，阴气胁迫它，就转变为冰雹。
English: Liu Xiang said: "When the sun is high, rain is as hot as hot water. If the gloomy weather forces it, it turns into hail.

古文：盛阴雨雪凝滞，阳气薄之，则散而为霰。 
现代文：盛阴雨水就凝聚为雪，阳气胁迫它，就发散为霰雪。 
English: When there is a strong wind and rain, the rainwater condenses into snow, and when it is forced by the yang wind, it disperses into sleet.

古文：今雪非其时，此听不聪之应也。
现代文：现在不是下雪的时令却下雪，这是耳听不灵敏的应验。
English: Now is not the time for snow, but it is snowing. This is the result of an insensitive ear.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年十二月冬，雪平地三尺。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年十二月，隆冬时节，下雪，平地积雪三尺深。
English: In December of the first year of Jinxiao Huai Di Yongjia, in the middle of winter, it snowed, and the snow on the flat was three feet deep.

古文：永嘉七年十月庚午，大雪。
现代文：永嘉七年十月庚午日，下大雪。
English: On the afternoon of October 7th in Yongjia, it snowed heavily.

古文：晋愍帝建兴元年十一月戊午，会稽大雨震电。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴元年十一月戊午，会稽下大雨、疾雷、下冰雹。
English: In the afternoon of November in the year of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, there will be heavy rain, lightning and hail.

古文：己巳夜，赤气曜于西北。是夕，大雨震电。
现代文：己巳日夜晚，赤气在西北方闪耀，当晚，下大雨、出现迅雷闪电。
English: On the evening of the same day, red gas shone in the northwest. That evening, heavy rain and lightning occurred.

古文：庚午，大雪。
现代文：庚午，下大雪。
English: In the late afternoon, it snowed heavily.

古文：案刘向说， 雷以二月出，八月入 。
现代文：据型也说， 雷在二月开始出现，八月收敛 。
English: According to the type also said, lightning began to appear in February, August convergence.

古文：此月雷电者，阳不闭藏也。
现代文：这个月出现迅雷闪电，是因为阳气没有闭藏。
English: This month's lightning is due to the yang not being blocked.

古文：既发泄而明日便大雪，皆失节之异也。
现代文：阳气发泄之后第二天就大雪，这都是不合时令的妖异。
English: It snowed heavily the day after the eruption, and everything was out of control.

古文：是时刘载僭号平阳，李雄称制于蜀，九州幅裂，西京孤微。
现代文：当时塑载在乎腥僭称帝号，奎雄在蜀自称为帝，九州分裂，西京力量孤弱。
English: At that time, Shuxiao was called the imperial name, Kuixiong called himself the emperor in Shu, Kyushu was divided, and the power of West Beijing was weak.

古文：为君失时之象。
现代文：雷电是身为君主却失去时运的征兆。
English: Thunder and lightning are signs that the monarch is out of time.

古文：晋元帝太兴二年三月丁未，成都风雹杀人。
现代文：晋元帝太兴二年二月丁未，成都刮风、下冰雹，死了人。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinguan of Taixing, the wind blew and hail fell in Chengdu, and people died.

古文：太兴三年三月，海盐郡雨雹。
现代文：太兴三年三月，海盐郡下冰雹。
English: In March of the third year of Taixing, Haiyan County was hit by a hailstorm.

古文：是时王敦陵上。
现代文：当时王敦欺凌君主。
English: At that time, Wang Dun bullied the monarch.

古文：晋元帝永昌二年十二月，幽、冀、并三州大雪。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年十二月，幽、冀、并三州下大雪。
English: In December of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, there was heavy snowfall in Yu, Hebei, and Sanzhou.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年十二月，幽、冀、并州大雪。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年十二月，幽、冀、并三州下大雪。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, there was heavy snowfall in Yu, Hebei, and Sanzhou.

古文：太宁二年四月庚子，京都大雨雹，燕雀死。
现代文：太宁二年四月庚子曰，京城下大冰雹，燕雀等小乌被砸死。
English: In April of the second year of Taining, Geng Zi said that large hailstones under the capital, small birds such as sparrows were killed.

古文：太宁三年三月丁丑，雨雹；癸巳，陨霜；四月，大雨雹。
现代文：太宁三年三月丁丑曰，下冰雹；癸巳日，降霜；四月，下大冰雹。
English: In March of the third year of Taining, Dingwuxi, there was hail; in September, there was frost; in April, there was heavy hail.

古文：是年帝崩，寻有苏峻之乱。
现代文：当年明帝崩，不久就发生苏峻叛乱。
English: When the Ming Emperor died, the Suzun Rebellion broke out soon after.

古文：晋成帝咸和六年三月癸未，雨雹。
现代文：晋成帝咸和六年三月癸末日，下冰雹。
English: On the last day of March in the sixth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, hail fell.

古文：是时帝幼弱，政在大臣。
现代文：当时成帝幼小，朝政由大臣掌握。
English: At that time, Emperor Cheng was still a child, and the imperial government was controlled by ministers.

古文：咸和九年八月，成都雪。
现代文：咸和九年八月，成都下雪。
English: It snowed in Chengdu in August of the ninth year of the Heian period.

古文：其日李雄死。
现代文：下雪那天李雄死。
English: Li Xiong died on the snowy day.

古文：晋成帝咸康二年正月丁巳，皇后见于太庙。
现代文：晋成帝咸康二年正月丁巳日，皇后在太庙敬神。
English: On the first day of the second year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, Emperor Hamkang, the empress worshipped at the Imperial Temple.

古文：其夕雨雹。
现代文：当晚就下冰雹。
English: Hail fell that night.

古文：晋康帝建元元年八月，大雪。
现代文：晋康帝建元元年八月，下大雪。
English: In August of the year of Emperor Jianyuan, it snowed heavily.

古文：是时政在将相，阴气盛也。
现代文：当时朝政由将相掌握，阴气盛。
English: At that time, the government of the dynasty was in the hands of the generals, and the atmosphere was gloomy.

古文：与《春秋》鲁昭公时季孙宿专政同事。
现代文：这和《春秋》所载鲁昭公时季孙宿独揽朝政事情相同。
English: This is the same as Lu Zhaogong's "Spring and Autumn" when Sun Quan occupied the throne.

古文：刘向曰： 凡雨，阴也，雪又雨之阴也。
现代文：刘向说： 凡下雨，是阴气的作用，下雪，又是雨受到阴气的作用。
English: Liu Xiang said: Whenever it rains, it is the effect of yin qi, and when it snows, it is the effect of yin qi.

古文：出非其时，迫近象也。 
现代文：在不该下雪的时令却出现雪，这是阴气胁迫阳气的征兆。 
English: The appearance is not in a normal season, but is a sign of persecution.

古文：晋穆帝永和三年八月，冀方大雪，人马多冻死。
现代文：晋穆帝永和三年八月，中原地区下大雪，冻死的人马很多。
English: In August of the same year, heavy snow fell in the Central Plains, and many people froze to death.

古文：永和五年六月，临漳暴风震霆，雨雹大如升。
现代文：永和五年六月，临漳刮暴风，霹雳轰鸣，下冰雹，雹子像升那样大。
English: In June of the fifth year of the Yonghe era, Linfen was hit by a storm, with thunderous hail, hailstones, and hailstones as large as cranes.

古文：永和十年五月，凉州雪。
现代文：永和十年五月，凉州下雪。
English: In May of the 10th year of the Yonghe era, it snowed in Liangzhou.

古文：明年八月，桴罕护军张瓘帅宗混等攻灭张祚，更立张曜灵弟玄靓。
现代文：第二年八月，袍罕护军张罐率宋混等人攻杀张祚，改立张曜灵之弟张玄靓。
English: In August of the following year, Zhang Can, led by Song Jian, attacked and killed Zhang Xuan, who was replaced by Zhang Xuan's younger brother, Zhang Youling.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 夏雨雪，戒臣为乱。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 夏天下雪，要防备臣下作乱。 
English: Saiya's "I Chuan" said: Snowfall in summer is a warning that there will be a rebellion of vassals.

古文：永和十一年四月壬申朔，雪；十二月戊午，雷；己未，雷。
现代文：永和十一年四月壬申，初一，下雪；十二月戊午曰，打雷；己未，又打雷。
English: In April of the eleventh year of Yonghe, Jinshin, the first day of the new year, it snowed; in December, the afternoon of the first day of the new year, it thundered; and when it was over, it thundered again.

古文：是时帝幼，母后称制，政在大臣。
现代文：当时穆帝年幼，母后临朝听政，朝政由大臣掌握。
English: At that time, Mu Di was young, and his mother, Hou Lin, listened to the government, and the government was controlled by the minister.

古文：晋穆帝升平二年正月，大雪。
现代文：晋穆帝升平二年正月，下大雪。
English: In the first month of the second year after the enthronement of Emperor Jinmu, it snowed heavily.

古文：晋孝武帝太元二年四月己酉，雨雹；十二月，大雪。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元二年四月己酉曰，下冰雹；十二月，下大雪。
English: Emperor Jinxiaowu said that in April of the second year of the Taiyuan Emperor, there was hail; in December, there was heavy snow.

古文：是时帝幼弱，政在将相。
现代文：当时孝武帝幼小，朝政由将相掌握。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowu was still a child, and the imperial government was controlled by the generals.

古文：太元十二年四月己丑，雨雹。
现代文：太元十二年四月己丑，下冰雹。
English: In April of the twelfth year of the Taiyuan Emperor, the weather was bad and hail fell.

古文：是时有事中州，兵役连岁。
现代文：当时出兵中州作战，兵役连年不断。
English: At that time, soldiers were sent to fight in Zhongzhou, and military service continued year after year.

古文：太元二十年五月癸卯，上虞雨雹。
现代文：太元二十年五月癸卯，上虞下冰雹。
English: In May of the 20th year of the Taigen era, there were thunderstorms and hailstorms.

古文：太元二十一年四月丁亥，雨雹。
现代文：太元二十一年四月丁亥曰，下冰雹。
English: On the 21st of April in the year of the boar, there was a hailstorm.

古文：是时张夫人专幸，及帝暴崩，兆庶尤之。太元二十一年十二月，连雪二十三日。
现代文：当时张夫人受到专宠，到孝武帝突然驾崩的时候，天下人都指责张大人太元二十一年十二月，接连二十三天下雪。
English: At that time, Mrs. Zhang was especially favored, and when Emperor Xiaowu died suddenly, the whole world blamed Zhang for the 23 consecutive days of snow in December 21st.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，冢宰专政。
现代文：当时即位君主年幼，宰相独揽朝政。
English: At this time, the monarch who succeeded to the throne was young, and the prime minister dictated the government.

古文：晋安帝隆安二年三月乙卯，雨雹。
现代文：晋安帝隆安二年三月乙卯日，下冰雹。
English: On the second day of the third month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jian of An, there was a hailstorm.

古文：是秋，王恭、殷仲堪入伐，终皆诛。
现代文：这年秋天，王恭、殷仲堪欺侮君王，发兵进攻京城，最终二人都被诛灭。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Qiong and Yin Zhong, who were able to bully the king, sent troops to attack the capital, and eventually both of them were annihilated.

古文：晋安帝元兴二年十二月，酷寒过甚。
现代文：晋安帝元兴二年十二月，严寒异乎寻常。
English: In December of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, it was unusually cold.

古文：是时桓玄篡位，政事烦苛，是其应也。
现代文：当时桓玄篡位，政令严苛繁杂，严寒就是逭事的应验。
English: At that time, Emperor Kanzen usurped the throne, the government decrees were strict and complicated, and the cold weather was the fulfillment of the anecdote.

古文：晋氏失在舒缓，玄则反之。
现代文：晋氏朝政的失误在于过于舒缓，桓玄就和晋氏实行相反的措施。
English: The mistake of the Jin dynasty's government was that it was too lenient, and Kuan Xuan implemented the opposite measures to the Jin dynasty.

古文：刘向曰： 周衰无寒岁，秦灭无燠年。 
现代文：刘向说： 周朝衰败时没有寒冷的年份，秦朝覆灭时没有暖和的年份。 
English: Liu Xiang said: There was no cold year when the Zhou Dynasty fell, and there was no warm year when the Qin Dynasty fell.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：讲的就是这类情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：元兴三年正月甲申，霰雪，又雷。
现代文：元兴三年正月甲申，下霰雪，又打雷。
English: In the first month of the third year of Genxing, Jiaxing, it snowed and thundered.

古文：雷霰不应同日，失节之应也。
现代文：打雷下霰雪不应当在同一天，雷霰同日出现，是对违礼行为的惩戒。
English: Thundersnow should not occur on the same day as thunderstorms, and thunderstorms should not occur on the same day, which is a disciplinary action for violations.

古文：二月，义兵起，玄败。
现代文：二月，义军起兵，桓玄失败。
English: In February, the rebel army raised an army, and Kuan Xuan was defeated.

古文：元兴三年四月丙午，江陵雨雹。
现代文：元兴三年四月丙午曰，江陵下冰雹。
English: On the afternoon of April 3rd, Gangneung was covered in hail.

古文：是时安帝蒙尘。
现代文：当时安帝遭受屈辱，逃离京城。
English: At that time, Emperor An suffered humiliation and fled the capital.

古文：晋安帝义熙元年四月壬申，雨雹。
现代文：晋安帝义熙元年四月壬申，下冰雹。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Jian of the Andean Dynasty, it was raining in Jinshin.

古文：是时四方未一，钲鼓日戒。
现代文：当时四方尚未统一，战事天天发生。
English: At that time, the four sides had not yet been unified, and fighting occurred on a daily basis.

古文：义熙五年三月己亥，雪深数寸。
现代文：义熙五年三月己亥，下雪，积雪数寸深。
English: In March of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, it snowed, and the snow was several inches deep.

古文：义熙五年五月癸巳，溧阳雨雹；九月己丑，广陵雨雹。
现代文：义熙五年五月癸巳日，溧阳下冰雹；九月己丑，广陵下冰雹。
English: In May of the 5th year of Yixi, there was a hailstorm in the afternoon; in September, there was a hailstorm in the morning.

古文：明年，卢循至蔡洲。
现代文：第二年，卢循叛兵进逼蔡洲。
English: The following year, Lu Xun went to the tomb.

古文：义熙五年九月己丑，广陵雨雹。
现代文：义熙五年九月己丑日，广陵下冰雹。
English: It was an ugly day in September in the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, and there was a hailstorm in Guangling.

古文：义熙六年正月丙寅，雪，又雷。
现代文：义熙六年正月丙寅曰，下雪，又打雷。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Cui Yin said that it would snow and thunder again.

古文：义熙六年五月壬申，雨雹。
现代文：义熙六年五月壬申曰，下冰雹。
English: In May of the sixth year of the reign of Yixi, Jinshin said, "It's raining hail."

古文：义熙八年四月辛未朔，雨雹；六月癸亥，雨雹，大风发屋。
现代文：义熙八年四月辛末日，初一，下冰雹；六月癸亥日，下冰雹，大风毁坏房屋。
English: In April of the eighth year of Yixi, the last day of Xin, the first day of the first month, hailstorms; in June, the day of the Year of the Pig, hailstorms, and high winds destroyed houses.

古文：是秋，诛刘籓等。
现代文：这年秋天，诛杀刘藩等人。
English: In the autumn of that year, the killing of Liu Han and others began.

古文：义熙十年四月辛卯，雨雹。
现代文：义熙十年四月辛卯日，下冰雹。
English: In April of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, it was a bitterly cold day with hail.

古文：宋文帝元嘉九年春，京都雨雹，溧阳、盱眙尤甚，伤牛马，杀禽兽。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉九年春，京城下冰雹，溧阳、盱眙冰雹特别大，砸伤牛马，砸死禽兽。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Songwen Yuanjia, there was a hailstorm in Beijing, and the hailstorms in Shenyang and Handan were particularly large, injuring cattle and horses and killing animals.

古文：元嘉十八年三月，雨雹。
现代文：元嘉十八年三月，下冰雹。
English: In March of the 18th year of the Yuan Jia, there was a hailstorm.

古文：二十五虏寇青州。
现代文：二十五虏进犯青州。
English: Twenty-five soldiers invaded Qingzhou.

古文：元嘉二十五年正月，积雪冰寒。
现代文：元嘉二十五年正月，连连下雪，结冰，天寒。
English: In the first month of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, it snowed, iced and was cold.

古文：元嘉二十九年五月，盱眙雨雹，大如鸡卵。
现代文：元嘉二十九年五月，盱眙下冰雹，冰雹像鶸蛋那样大。
English: In May of the 29th year of Yuan Jia, hailstones sprouted under the eaves. The hailstones were as big as quail's eggs.

古文：三十年，国家祸乱，兵革大起。
现代文：元嘉三十年，国家发生祸乱，战火四起。
English: In the 30th year of the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, the country was plagued by calamity and war broke out on four occasions.

古文：孝武帝大明元年十二月庚寅，大雪，平地二尺余。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年十二月庚寅日，下大雪，平地积雪二尺余深。
English: On the day of Emperor Xiaowu in December of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, heavy snow fell, and the snow on the flat ground was more than two feet deep.

古文：明年，虏侵冀州，遣羽林军北讨。
现代文：第二年，北敌侵入冀州，朝廷派羽林军北进讨伐。
English: The following year, the northern enemy invaded Jizhou, and the imperial court sent the Ulin Army north to fight.

古文：明帝泰始五年四月壬辰，京邑雨雹。
现代文：明帝泰始五年四月壬辰曰，京城下冰雹。
English: In April of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, there was a hailstorm in Beijing.

古文：后废帝元徽三年五月乙卯，京邑雨雹。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年五月乙卯日，京城下冰雹。
English: After the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui in May of the third year, the capital was covered in hail.

古文：雷震：魏明帝景初中，洛阳城东桥、洛水浮桥桓楹，同日三处俱震；寻又震西城上候风木飞乌。
现代文：魏明帝景初年间，洛阳城东桥、洛水浮桥上的华表和楹柱，三处同一天遭雷击；不久西城上候风木上飞乌又遭雷击。
English: In the early years of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, three places on the East Bridge of Luoyang City and the Luoshui Floating Bridge were struck by lightning on the same day. Shortly after, the West City was also struck by lightning.

古文：时劳役大起，帝寻晏驾。
现代文：当时大兴劳役，明帝不久后驾崩。
English: At that time, Daxing was a laborer, and Emperor Ming died soon after.

古文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，震宫门柱；又击南津大桥桓楹。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，宫门柱受雷击；南津大桥华表和楹柱又遭雷击。
English: In the summer of the eighth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the gate pillar of the palace was struck by lightning; the flower table and pillar of the Nanjin Bridge were also struck by lightning.

古文：孙亮建兴元年十二月朔，大风震电；是月又雷雨。
现代文：孙亮建兴元年十二月初一，刮大风，迅雷闪电；这月又出现雷雨。
English: On the first day of December in the first year of Sun Liang Jianxing, there was a strong wind, thunder and lightning; this month there was another thunderstorm.

古文：义同前说。
现代文：原因同前面的事说法相同。
English: The reason is the same as the previous statement.

古文：亮终废。
现代文：孙亮最终被废黜。
English: Sun Liang was eventually deposed.

古文：晋武帝太康六年十二月甲申朔，淮南郡震电。
现代文：晋逮帝太康六年十二月甲申曰，初一，淮南郡迅雷闪电。
English: In December of the sixth year of Emperor Taikang's reign, on the first day of the year, there was a thunderbolt in Huainan County.

古文：太康七年十二月己亥，毗陵雷电，南沙司盐都尉戴亮以闻。
现代文：太康七年十二月己亥曰，毗陵出现雷鸣电闪，南沙司盐都尉越袁把遣事上奏朝廷。
English: In December of the 7th year of Taikang's reign, thunder and lightning occurred in Binling, and Yue Yuan, the salt captain of Nansha, sent a report to the imperial court.

古文：太康十年十二月癸卯，庐江、建安雷电大雨。
现代文：太康十年十二月癸卯，庐江、建安雷鸣电闪，又下大雨。
English: In December of the 10th year of Taikang, the Lijiang River and Jianan River thundered and lightning flashed, and it rained heavily.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年六月癸卯，震崇阳陵标西南五百步，标破为七十片。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年六月癸卯日，雷击崇阳陵墓表西南五百步的地方，墓表破成七十片。
English: On the last day of June in the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang, lightning struck 500 meters southwest of the tombstone of the Chongyang Mausoleum, breaking the tombstone into 70 pieces.

古文：是时贾后陷害鼎辅，宠树私戚。
现代文：当时买后陷害三公大臣，宠信培植自家戚属。
English: At that time, he bought and framed three ministers of state, and cultivated his own relatives.

古文：与汉桓帝时震宪陵寝同事也。
现代文：这和汉桓帝时雷击宪陵寝屋事情相同。
English: This is the same thing that happened when lightning struck the bedchamber of the Mausoleum of Emperor Han Huan.

古文：后终诛灭。
现代文：买后最终被诛灭。
English: He was eventually beaten to death after the purchase.

古文：晋惠帝永兴二年十月丁丑，雷电。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年十月丁丑曰，雷鸣闪电。
English: In October of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, Ding Jiu said that thunder and lightning would occur.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉四年十月，震电。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉四年十月，迅雷闪电。
English: In October of the fourth year of Emperor Jianhuai's reign, lightning struck.

古文：晋元帝永昌二年七月丙子朔，雷震太极殿柱。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年七月丙子，初一，雷击太极殿柱。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, lightning struck the pillar of the Taiji Hall.

古文：永昌二年十一月，会稽、吴郡雨震电。
现代文：永昌二年十一月，会稽、吴郡下雨又迅雷闪电。
English: In November of the second year of Yongchang, it rained and thundered in Wuxi County.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年七月丙子朔，震太极殿柱。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年七月丙子，初一，雷击太极殿柱。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming Dynasties, lightning struck the pillar of the Taiji Hall.

古文：晋成帝咸和元年十月己巳，会稽郡大雨震电。
现代文：晋成帝咸和元年十月己巳日，会稽郡下大雨，并有迅雷闪电。
English: On the day of the enthronement of Emperor Xianhe in October of the first year of the Heian period, it rained heavily in Heji County, and there were thunder and lightning.

古文：咸和三年六月辛卯，临海大雷，破郡府内小屋柱十枚，杀人。
现代文：咸和三年六月辛卯曰，临海出现大雷，雷击破郡府内十根小屋柱，死了人。
English: In June of the third year of Xianhe, Xinwu said that there was a large thunder in the coastal area. The lightning broke ten pillars of huts in the county seat, and people died.

古文：咸和三年九月二日立冬，会稽震电。
现代文：咸和三年九月二日立冬，会稽出现疾雷闪电。
English: On September 2nd, the 3rd year of Haman and the beginning of winter, lightning and thunder will occur.

古文：咸和四年十二月，吴郡、会稽震电。
现代文：咸和四年十二月，吴郡、会稽出现疾雷闪电。
English: In December of the 4th year of the Heian period, lightning and lightning occurred in Wu County.

古文：咸和四年十二月，丹阳震电。
现代文：咸和四年十二月，丹阳疾雷闪电。
English: In December of the fourth year of the Xianhe era, Danyang was struck by lightning.

古文：晋穆帝永和七年十月壬午，雷雨、震电。
现代文：晋穆帝永和七年十月壬午日，出现雷雨、疾雷闪电。
English: In October of the seventh year of Emperor Jinmu's reign, there was a thunderstorm and lightning.

古文：晋穆帝升平元年十一月庚戌，雷；乙丑，又雷。
现代文：晋穆帝升平元年十一月庚戌，打雷；乙丑日，又打雷。
English: In November of the first year after the elevation of Emperor Jinmu, there was a thunderstorm. On the day of the second lunar month, there was another thunderstorm.

古文：升平五年十月庚午，雷发东南。
现代文：升平五年十月庚午日，雷声从东南发出。
English: On the afternoon of October 6th, the 5th year of the Heian period, thunder was heard from the southeast.

古文：晋孝武帝太元五年六月甲寅，雷震含章殿四柱。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元五年六月甲寅曰，雷击含章殿四根屋柱。
English: According to Emperor Jinxiao Wu in June of the fifth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, lightning struck the four pillars of the hall.

古文：太元五年十二月，雷声在南方。
现代文：太元五年十二月，在南方响起雷声。
English: In December of the same year, thunder was heard in the south.

古文：太元十四年七月甲寅，震宣阳门西柱。
现代文：太元十四年七月甲寅日，雷击宣阳门西柱。
English: In July of the 14th year of Taiyuan, lightning struck the west pillar of Xuanyang Gate.

古文：晋安帝隆安二年九月壬辰，雨雷。
现代文：晋安帝隆安二年九月壬辰曰，下雨，打雷。
English: It rained and thundered on the second day of the ninth month of the second year of the reign of Emperor An of Jin.

古文：晋安帝元兴三年，永安皇后至自巴陵。
现代文：晋安帝元兴三年，永安皇后从巴陵来到京城。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, Empress Yongan came to Beijing from Baling.

古文：将设仪导入宫，天雷，震人马各一俱殪。
现代文：将要为她设仪仗导引入宫，突然打雷，雷击倒一人一马，全死了。
English: They were about to set up a guard of honour to escort her into the palace, when suddenly there was a thunderclap. The thunderclap knocked down one man and one horse, and they all died.

古文：晋安帝义熙四年十一月辛卯朔，西北疾风；癸丑，雷。
现代文：晋安帝义熙四年十一月卒卯日，初一，西北突起疾风；癸丑曰，打雷。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Emperor Jian of An and Emperor Yixi of Jin, a gale blew from the northwest, and thunder was heard.

古文：义熙五年六月丙寅，震太庙，破东鸱尾，彻壁柱。
现代文：义熙五年六月丙寅，雷击太庙，击破束边的鸱尾，击穿壁柱。
English: In June of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, lightning struck the Great Temple, breaking the appendix of the cords and breaking through the wall pillar.

古文：义熙六年正月丙寅，雷；丁卯，又雪。
现代文：义熙六年正月丙寅，打雷又下雪。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, thunder and snow fell.

古文：义熙六年十二月壬辰，大雷。
现代文：义熙六年十二月壬辰曰，出现大雷。
English: In December of the sixth year of Yixi Dynasty, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：义熙九年十一月甲戌，雷；乙亥，又雷。
现代文：义熙九年十一月甲戌曰，打雷；乙亥。又打雷
English: In November of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, there was thunder in Jiaxing, thunder in Yihai, and thunder again.

古文：宋文帝元嘉四年十一月癸丑，雷。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉四年十一月癸丑日，打雷。
English: Emperor Song Wen of the Yuan Dynasty in the 4th year of the Jiajing Dynasty in November of the Year of the Ox, thunder.

古文：元嘉五年六月丙寅，震太庙，破东鸱尾，彻壁柱。
现代文：元嘉五年六月丙寅曰，雷击太庙，击破束边的屋脊装饰，击穿壁柱。
English: In June of the fifth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, lightning struck the Great Temple, breaking the roof decoration of the bundles and breaking through the wall pillars.

古文：元嘉六年正月丙寅，雷且雪。
现代文：元嘉六年正月丙寅日，打雷而又下雪。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Yuan Jia, it thundered and snowed.

古文：元嘉七年十月丙子，雷。
现代文：元嘉七年十月丙子日，打雷。
English: In October of the seventh year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, on the third day of the third month, there was thunder.

古文：元嘉八年十二月庚辰，雷。
现代文：元嘉八年十二月庚辰日，打雷。
English: In December of the eighth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the day of Geng Chen, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：元嘉九年十一月甲戌，雷且雪。
现代文：元嘉九年十一月甲戌日，打雷而又下雪。
English: On Jiaxing Day in November of the ninth year of the Yuan Jia, it thundered and snowed.

古文：元嘉十四年，震初宁陵口标，四破至地。
现代文：元嘉十四年，雷击初宁陵墓道的墓表，墓表破成四块倒在地上。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, lightning struck the tombstone of the Chuning Mausoleum Cemetery Road, and the tombstone broke into four pieces and fell to the ground.

古文：十七年，废大将军彭城王义康。
现代文：元嘉十七年，文帝废黜大将军彭城王刘义康。
English: In the seventeenth year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Wen deposed the general Pengcheng Liu Yikang.

古文：骨肉相害，自此始也。
现代文：骨肉互相残害，从此开始。
English: Flesh and bone mutilate each other, and it starts from here.

古文：前废帝景和元年九月甲午，雷震。
现代文：前废帝景和元年九月甲午日，雷震。
English: On the afternoon of September 1st, the year of the former Emperor Jing and the first year of the year, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：明帝泰始二年九月辛巳，雷震。
现代文：明帝泰始二年九月辛巳日，雷震。
English: In September of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：泰始四年十月辛卯，雷震。
现代文：泰始四年十月辛卯曰，雷震。
English: In October of the 4th year of the Taisho era, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：泰始四年十一月癸卯朔，雷震。
现代文：泰始四年十一月癸卯曰，初一，雷震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Tai Dynasty, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：泰始五年十一月乙巳，雷震。
现代文：泰始五年十一月乙巳日，雷震。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Taisho era, on November 21st, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：泰始六年十一月庚午，雷。
现代文：泰始六年十一月庚午曰，打雷。
English: On the afternoon of November 6th, lightning struck.

古文：后废帝元徽三年九月戊戌，雷。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年九月戊戌曰，打雷。
English: After the abdication of Emperor Yuanhui in September of the third year, the thunder began.

古文：元徽三年九月丁未，雷。
现代文：元徽三年九月丁末日，打雷。
English: At the end of September in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was thunder.

古文：元徽三年九月戊午，雷震。
现代文：元徽三年九月戊午日，雷震。
English: On the afternoon of September 3rd, Yuanhui year, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：元徽三年十月辛未，雷；甲戌，又雷。
现代文：元徽三年十月辛末日，打雷；甲戌曰，又打雷。
English: At the end of October in the third year of the Yuanhui Dynasty, thunder was heard in Xin; thunder was heard in Jiaxing.

古文：从帝升明三年二月二十四日丙申，震建阳门。
现代文：顺帝升明三年二月二十四日，丙申，雷击建阳门。
English: On February 24th, the third year of Emperor Shun's ascent to the throne, lightning struck the Jianyang Gate in Bishen.

古文：鼓妖：晋惠帝元康九年三月，有声若牛，出许昌城。
现代文：晋惠帝元康九年三月，有如同牛叫的声音从许昌城传出。
English: In March of the ninth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, a sound like a cow's lowing was heard from Xu Changcheng.

古文：十二月，废太子，幽于许宫。
现代文：十二月，惠帝废黜太子，把他幽禁在许宫。
English: In December, Emperor Hui deposed the crown prince and imprisoned him in Xu Palace.

古文：按《春秋》晋文公柩有声如牛，刘向以为鼓妖。
现代文：按《春秋》记载晋文公棺柩中传出像牛叫的声音，刘向认为是鼓妖。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn" records, a sound like a cow was heard in the coffin of Jinwen Gong, and Liu Xiang thought it was a drum demon.

古文：其说曰： 声如此，怒象也。
现代文：他解说道： 声音像这样，是有怒气的表现。
English: He explained: "A sound like that is a sign of anger.

古文：将有急怒之谋，以生兵甲之祸。 
现代文：预示将有突然动怒的谋划，萌生战争之祸。 
English: Foreshadowing plans of sudden anger, and the woes of war to come.

古文：此其类也。
现代文：这事和《春秋》中的事同属一类。
English: This is the same kind of thing that happened in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：明年，贾后遣黄门孙虑杀太子，击以药杵，声闻于外。
现代文：第二年，贾后派黄门孙虑杀太子，孙虑用药杵击杀太子，声音在外面都能听到。
English: In the second year, Empress Jia sent the Yellow Gate Sun Xian to kill the prince. Sun Xian used a medicine hammer to kill the prince, and the sound could be heard outside.

古文：苏峻在历阳，外营将军鼓自鸣，如人弄鼓者。
现代文：苏峻在历阳时，外营将军鼓自己响起来，像是有人在击打鼓。
English: When Su Jun was in Liyang, the foreign general's drum sounded by itself, as if someone were beating the drum.

古文：峻手自斫之，曰： 我乡土时有此，则城空矣。 
现代文：苏峻亲手砍碎鼓，说： 我在家乡时有时遇到这种现象，城中就会被掳掠一空。 
English: Su Jun chopped the broken drum with his own hands and said, "When I was in my hometown, I sometimes encountered this phenomenon, and the city would be completely plundered.

古文：俄而作乱夷灭。
现代文：不久苏峻叛乱而被诛灭。
English: Soon after, the Sushun rebellion was crushed.

古文：此听不聪之罚，鼓妖先作也。
现代文：这是耳听不灵敏之罪罚，鼓妖先出现以示征兆。
English: This is the punishment for not being able to hear well. The drum demon appears first as a sign.

古文：石虎末，洛阳城西北九里石牛在青石趺上，忽鸣唤，声闻四十里。
现代文：洛阳城西北九里处，有条石牛在青石底座上，石虎在位的末年，石牛突然呜叫起来，声音传到四十里远的地方。
English: Nine miles northwest of Luoyang City, there is a stone ox on a blue stone base. At the end of the stone tiger's reign, the stone ox suddenly moaned, and the sound was heard forty miles away.

古文：晋孝武太元十五年三月己酉朔，东北有声如雷。
现代文：石虎派人打落石牛的两耳和尾巴，用铁钉钉住石牛的四只脚。晋孝武帝太元十五年三月己酉曰。初一。东北方发出声音，如同雷鸣。
English: The stone tiger sent people to knock down the two ears and tail of the stone ox, and nailed the four feet of the stone ox with iron nails. Emperor Jin Xiaowu said in March 15th, the first day of the first lunar month, that the northeastern part of the country emitted a sound like thunder.

古文：案刘向说以为： 雷当托于云，犹君托于臣。 
现代文：查考刘向的说法，刘向认为： 雷应当依赖云，如同君依赖臣。 
English: Examine Liu Xiang's statement, Liu Xiang believes: Lei should rely on the cloud, just as you rely on your subordinates.

古文：无云而雷，此君不恤下，下民将叛之象也。
现代文：没有云却有雷鸣，这是君主不体恤臣民，臣民将要反叛的征兆。
English: There is no cloud, but there is thunder. This is a sign that the monarch is not sympathetic to his subjects, and that his subjects are about to rebel.

古文：及帝崩而天下渐乱，孙恩、桓玄交陵京邑。
现代文：到孝武帝驾崩后，天下渐渐陷入混乱，孙恩、桓玄交替欺凌朝廷。
English: By the time of the death of Xiaowu Tong, the world was in turmoil, and Sun En and Huan Xuan successively invaded the capital.

古文：吴兴长城县夏架山有石鼓，长丈余，面径三尺所，下有盘石为足，鸣则声如金鼓，三吴有兵。
现代文：吴兴长城县夏架山有石鼓，石鼓有一丈余长，鼓面直径三尺左右，下面有磐石作它的底座，石鼓响起来如同金鼓之声，就预示三吴有战事。
English: There is a stone drum in Xiajia Mountain, Wuxing Great Wall County. The stone drum has an extra length, the drum face is about three feet in diameter, and the rock below is its base. The stone drum sounds like the sound of a golden drum, which indicates that there is a war in Sanwu.

古文：晋安帝隆安中大鸣，后有孙灵秀之乱。
现代文：晋安帝隆安年问，石鼓突然发出很大响声，后来就出现了孙灵秀的叛乱。
English: When Emperor Yongan of the Jin Dynasty asked for peace, the stone drum suddenly made a loud noise. Later, Sun Lingxiu's rebellion occurred.

古文：鱼孽：魏齐王嘉平四年五月，有二鱼集于武库屋上。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平四年五月，有两条鱼停留在武库屋顶上。
English: In May of Wei Qi Wang Jiaping's fourth year, two fish stayed on the roof of the arsenal.

古文：此鱼孽也。
现代文：这是鱼孽。
English: It's fish poop.

古文：王肃曰： 鱼生于渊，而亢于屋，介鳞之物，失其所也。
现代文：王肃说： 鱼生活在水中，现在却高居在屋顶上，有鳞甲的生物，失去了它本应生活的地方。
English: Wang Su said: "The fish lives in the water, but now it is living high on the roof. The scaly creature has lost the place where it should live.

古文：边将其殆有弃甲之变乎。 
现代文：边关的将领恐怕将有丢弃盔甲的灾变吧。 
English: I'm afraid the generals at the border will have to abandon their armour.

古文：后果有东关之败。
现代文：后来果然出现丁东关兵败之事。
English: Later, there was indeed a defeat at Dongguan.

古文：干宝又以为高贵乡公兵祸之应。
现代文：干童又认为这是高贵乡公遭受兵祸的应验。
English: Wang Lian also believed that it was a sign of the disaster of the nobles and soldiers in the noble town.

古文：二说皆与班固旨同。
现代文：遣两人的说法都和班固的意思相同。
English: Both statements are the same.

古文：晋武帝太康中，有鲤鱼二见武库屋上。
现代文：晋武帝太康年间，有两条鲤鱼出现在武库屋顶上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taikang, two eels appeared on the roof of the arsenal.

古文：干宝曰： 武库兵府，鱼有鳞甲，亦兵类也。
现代文：工宣说： 武库是兵器的仓库，鱼有鳞甲，也属于兵一类。
English: Gong Xuan said: The arsenal is a warehouse of weapons, fish have scales and armor, and also belong to the first category of soldiers.

古文：鱼既极阴，屋上太阳，鱼见屋上，象至阴以兵革之祸干太阳也。 
现代文：鱼是极阴的生物，屋顶上是最阳的地方，鱼在屋上出现，预示极阴的事物用兵革之类的灾祸干犯最阳的事物。 
English: The fish is the extreme shade, the sun is on the roof, and the fish appears on the roof, symbolizing the extreme shade encroaching on the sun with the scourge of war.

古文：至惠帝初，诛杨骏，废太后，矢交馆阁。
现代文：到惠帝初年，诛杀扰坠，废黜太后，屡屡杀害朝廷大臣。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hui, the empress dowager was killed and deposed, and bows and arrows were exchanged in the pavilion.

古文：元康末，贾后谤杀太子，寻亦诛废。
现代文：元康末年，置后毁谤杀害太子，不久自己也被废黜诛杀。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, he killed the crown prince after buying and framing him, and was soon dethroned.

古文：十年间，母后之难再兴，是其应也。
现代文：十年之间，事关朝廷母后的祸乱两次出现，就是鲤鱼上屋的应验。
English: In the span of ten years, the calamity of the imperial mother appeared twice, which is the fulfillment of the eel shack.

古文：自是祸乱构矣。
现代文：从此祸乱的形势就形成了。
English: Since then, a disastrous situation has developed.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 鱼去水，飞入道路，兵且作。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 鱼离开水，飞上道路，战争祸乱就将要出现。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Demon" said: "When the fish leaves the water and flies onto the road, the scourge of war will appear."

古文：蝗虫：魏文帝黄初三年七月，冀州大蝗，民饥。
现代文：魏文帝黄初三年七月，冀州出现大批蝗虫，百姓遭受饥荒。
English: In July of the third year of Emperor Wen of Wei and Huang, a large number of locusts appeared in Jizhou, and the people suffered from famine.

古文：案蔡邕说： 蝗者，在上贪苛之所致也。 
现代文：据墓鱼说： 蝗灾，是位居高位的人贪婪苛刻招致的。 
English: According to the grave fish: The locust plague was caused by the greed and harshness of people in high places.

古文：是时孙权归从，帝因其有西陵之役，举大众袭之，权遂背叛。
现代文：当时孙权归附，文帝因为还护发动西陵之战，于是派大军袭击孙权，逐权于是背叛。
English: At that time, Sun Quan was annexed, and Emperor Wen sent a large army to attack Sun Quan because Sun Quan had launched the Battle of Xiling. Therefore, Sun Quan was ousted and betrayed.

古文：晋武帝泰始十年六月，蝗。
现代文：晋武帝泰始十年六月，出现蝗虫。
English: In June of the first decade of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, locusts appeared.

古文：是时荀、贾任政，疾害公直。
现代文：当时苞勖、贾充掌握朝政，嫉恨陷害那些公正忠直的大臣。
English: At that time, Zhai and Jia were in control of the imperial government, and they envied and framed those just and loyal ministers.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年五月，大蝗，自幽、并、司、冀至于秦、雍，草木牛马毛鬣皆尽。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年五月，出现大批蝗虫，从幽州、并州、司州、冀州直到秦州、雍州，草木牛马野兽都死尽。
English: In May of the 4th year of Jin Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, a large number of locusts appeared. From Yuzhou, Bianzhou, Shizhou, Jizhou to Qinzhou and Yongzhou, plants, cattle, horses and beasts all died.

古文：是时天下兵乱，渔猎生民，存亡所系，唯司马越、苟晞而已，而竞为暴刻，经略无章。
现代文：当时天下发生战乱，百姓遭受掠夺，朝廷的安危存亡，衹寄托在司马越、苟晞身上而已，而他们竞相执行残暴刻毒的政令，管理国家却毫无谋略计划。
English: At that time, there were wars all over the world, the people were plundered, and the safety and survival of the imperial court was entrusted to Sima Yue and Guo Gan. However, they competed to implement cruel and harsh decrees, but there was no strategic plan to manage the country.

古文：晋愍帝建兴四年六月，大蝗。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴四年六月，出现大批蝗虫。
English: In June of the fourth year of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, a large number of locusts appeared.

古文：去岁胡寇频攻北地、冯翊，暐允等悉众御之。
现代文：前一年，胡寇频频进攻北地、冯翊，曲允等人率领全军抵御胡寇。
English: In the previous year, the Huko frequently attacked the North, and Feng Li, Qu Yun and others led the whole army to resist the Huko.

古文：是时又御刘曜，为曜所破，西京遂溃。
现代文：这一年又抵御刘曜入侵的军队，被刘曜击败，西京于是崩溃。
English: In the same year, the army that resisted Liu You's invasion was defeated by Liu You, and Xijing then collapsed.

古文：晋元帝太兴元年六月，兰陵合乡蝗，害禾稼。
现代文：晋元帝太兴元年六月，兰陵合乡出现蝗虫，危害庄稼。
English: In June of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin Dynasty, locusts appeared in Lanling Township, endangering crops.

古文：乙未，东莞蝗虫纵广三百里，害苗稼。
现代文：乙未，东莞蝗虫在纵横三百里的地域裹大肆活动，危害庄稼。
English: In the past, there were locusts in Dongguan for three hundred miles in length and breadth, harming crops.

古文：太兴元年七月，东海、彭城、下邳、临淮四郡蝗虫害禾、豆。
现代文：太兴元年七月，东海、彭城、下邳、临淮四郡蝗虫危害禾、豆。
English: In July of the first year of Taixing, locusts in the four counties of Donghai, Pengcheng, Xiamen, and Linhuai caused damage to grain and beans.

古文：太兴元年八月，冀、青、徐三州蝗食生草尽，至于二年。是时中州沦丧，暴乱滋甚。
现代文：太兴元年八月，冀、青、徐三州蝗虫把新生之草都吃光，直到太兴二年当时中州沦陷，天下骚动暴乱特别厉害。
English: In August of the first year of Taixing, locusts from the three prefectures of Hebei, Qing and Hsu ate up all the new grass, until the fall of Zhongzhou in the second year of Taixing, when the world was particularly violent.

古文：太兴二年五月，淮陵、临淮、淮南、安丰、庐江诸郡蝗食秋麦。
现代文：太兴二年五月，淮陵、临淮、淮南、安丰、庐江诸郡蝗虫吃秋麦。
English: In May of the second year of Taixing, locusts ate autumn barley in Huairing, Linhuai, Huainan, Anfeng and Minjiang counties.

古文：太兴三年五月癸丑，徐州及扬州江西诸郡蝗，吴民多饿死。
现代文：太兴三年五月癸丑日，徐州及扬州、江西各郡出现蝗虫，吴地百姓饿死很多。
English: On the Day of the Ugly Goat in May of the third year of Taixing, locusts appeared in Xuzhou, Yangzhou and Jiangxi counties, and many people in Wudi died of starvation.

古文：去年，王敦并领荆州，苛暴之衅，自此兴矣。
现代文：前一年，王敦以大将军领荆州刺史，暴虐的祸乱，从此开始。
English: The previous year, Wang Dun led Jingzhou's history as a general, and the tyrannical calamity began.

古文：又是年初，徐州刺史蔡豹帅众伐周抚。
现代文：又，这年年初，徐州刺史蔡豹率军攻伐周抚。
English: In addition, at the beginning of this year, the Xuzhou Jishi Cai Leopard led the army to attack Zhou Fu.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十五年八月，兗州蝗。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十五年八月，兖州出现蝗虫。
English: In August of the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, locusts appeared in Zhangzhou.

古文：是时丁零寇兗、豫，鲜卑逼河南，征戍不已。
现代文：当时丁零进犯兖州、豫州，鲜卑进逼河南，军队戍守，征战不停。
English: At that time, Ding Zi marched into Bozhou and Yuzhou, and Xianbei marched into and forced Henan, and the army was garrisoned, and the war was incessant.

古文：太元十六年五月，飞蝗从南来，集堂邑县界，害苗稼。
现代文：太元十六年五月，蝗群从南方飞来，聚集在堂邑县境内，危害庄稼。
English: In May of the 16th year of the Taiyuan, locusts flew from the south and gathered in the territory of Dongyi County, endangering crops.

古文：是年春，发取江州兵营甲士二千人家口六七千人，配护军及东宫，后寻散亡殆尽；又边将连有征杀。
现代文：这年春天，朝廷调发江州兵营二千名甲士及他们的家属六七干人，配属护军及束宫，后来不久，这些人差不多全逃光了，又边将连年有征战。
English: In the spring of that year, the imperial court transferred 2,000 soldiers from the Jiangzhou barracks and 67 members of their families, who were assigned to escort and escort the palace. Soon after, almost all of these people fled, and the generals were conscripted year after year.

古文：豕祸：吴孙皓宝鼎元年，野豕入右司马丁奉营。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年，野猪跑进右大司马丁奉的军营。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Sun Rong of Baoding, a wild boar ran into the military camp of the Right Senior General Martin Fong.

古文：此豕祸也。
现代文：这是猪祸。
English: This is a pig disaster.

古文：后奉见遣攻谷阳，无功反，皓怒，斩其导军。
现代文：后来丁奉被派去攻打谷阳，没有战果而返回，孙皓发怒，把军队向导斩首。
English: Later, Ding Feng was sent to attack Guyang, but returned without any results. Sun Yat-sen became angry and beheaded the army guide.

古文：及举大众北出，奉及万彧等相谓曰： 若至华里，不得不各自还也。 
现代文：到孙皓命大军北进的时候，丁奉和万或等人相互说： 假如大军到了华里，我们不得不各自率军返回。 
English: When it came time to send the large army north, Ding Bong, Wan Rong and the others said to each other, "If we reach Huali, we will have to return separately."

古文：此谋泄，奉时虽已死，皓追讨谷阳事，杀其子温，家属皆远徙。
现代文：这暗中的谋划后来泄露出去，孙皓追究攻打谷阳时的事情，当时丁奉虽然已死，孙皓仍把丁奉之子丁温杀死，丁温的家属全往边远地方迁徙。
English: This secret plan later leaked out, and Sun Yat-sen investigated the events of the attack on Guyang. At that time, although Ding Bong was dead, Sun Yat-sen still killed Ding Bong's son Ding Wen, and Ding Wen's family members all migrated to remote areas.

古文：豕祸之应也。
现代文：这是猪祸的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment of the pig plague.

古文：龚遂曰： 山野之兽，来入宫室，宫室将空。 又其象也。
现代文：龚遂说： 山野中的野兽，进入房屋，房屋将空无一人 逭又是猪祸的征兆。
English: And he said, The beast that was in the field is come into the house, and the house is empty; and the swine are fled.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉中，寿春城内有豕生两头而不活。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉年间，寿春城内有只猪生下来就有两个头，但没活下来。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongjia, a pig was born with two heads in Shuchun City, but it did not survive.

古文：周馥取而观之。
现代文：周馥把死去的两头猪拿来仔细看。
English: Zhou Ye took the two dead pigs to take a closer look.

古文：时通数者窃谓曰： 夫豕，北方之畜，胡、狄象也。
现代文：当时懂得术数的人私下说： 猪是性属北方的牲畜，是胡、狄的象征。
English: At that time, people who knew the magic number said in private: The pig is a northern animal, a symbol of Hu and Di.

古文：两头者，无上也。
现代文：两头，是指心目中没有君上。
English: Two ends, no top.

古文：生而死，不遂也。
现代文：出生后就死了，预示事情不能成功。
English: You can't be born and die.

古文：天意若曰，勿生专利之谋，将自致倾覆也。 
现代文：天意像是在说，不要萌生专谋私利之心，萌生这种私心将会导致自己失败覆灭。 
English: Providence seems to be saying, do not germinate the heart of selfishness, the germination of this selfishness will lead to their own failure.

古文：周馥不悟，遂欲迎天子，令诸侯，俄为元帝所败。
现代文：周馥不能领悟这一点，竟然想迎天子迁都，以便号令诸侯，不久就被元帝击败。
English: Zhou Di could not understand this, and he even wanted to move the capital in order to make an appeal to the princes, but he was soon defeated by Yuan Di.

古文：是其应也。
现代文：造就是两个头的猪出生而死之事的应验。
English: This is exactly the fulfillment of the demon.

古文：石勒亦寻渡淮，百姓死者十八九。
现代文：石勒不久也率军渡淮，被杀死的百姓占十分之八九。
English: Soon after, Shi Le also led the troops to Huai, and the civilians killed accounted for 89% of the total.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年，有豕生八足。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年，有只猪生下来有八只脚。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, a pig was born with eight legs.

古文：听不聪之罚也。
现代文：这是耳听不灵敏而出现的妖孽。
English: This is the evil that comes from an insensitive ear.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 凡妖作，各象其类。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 凡是妖孽出现，都象征它们的同类事物。
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" says, "Whenever there are evil spirits, they all symbolize the same kind of things.

古文：足多者，所任邪也。 
现代文：足多，是预示着任用的人中有奸邪。 
English: The fact that there are so many of them indicates that some of the appointees are corrupt.

古文：是后有刘隗之变。
现代文：遣以后出现刘隗的变乱。
English: After that, there was a change in Liu Ye.

古文：晋成帝咸和六年六月，钱塘民家豭豕生两子，皆人面，如胡人状，其身犹豕。
现代文：晋成帝咸和六年六月，叁递一百姓家有头公猪生下两头小猪，小猪都有张人脸，像胡人的样子，身子还是猪身。
English: In June of the sixth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, a boar in a local family gave birth to two piglets. The piglets all had a human face, resembling a goose, but their bodies were still those of pigs.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 豕生人头豕身者，邑且乱亡。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 猪假如生出来长着人头猪身，这座城邑将要遭受战乱而沦亡。 
English: Kyobo "Ikimon" said: If a pig is born with a human head and a pig's body, this town will suffer from war and fall.

古文：此豭豕而产，异之甚者也。
现代文：这是公猪生出人头猪身的怪物，是妖异中最为厉害的。
English: This is a boar giving birth to a monster in the shape of a pig with a human head, and it is the most powerful of the monsters.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十年四月，京都有豕，一头二身八足。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十年四月，京城有只一头二身八只脚的猪。
English: In April of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, there was a pig with two bodies and eight legs in Beijing.

古文：十三年，京都民家豕产子，一头二身八足。
现代文：太元十三年，京城有百姓家猪生下小猪，也是一头二身八只脚。
English: In the 13th year of the Taiyuan era, a peasant pig in Beijing gave birth to a piglet, also with two bodies and eight legs.

古文：并与建武同妖也。
现代文：这都和建武年间的事是同样的妖异。
English: All of this is just as strange as what happened during the Jianwu era.

古文：是后宰相沈酗，不恤朝政，近习用事，渐乱国纲，至于大坏也。
现代文：这以后宰相嗜酒无度，不关心朝政，大权落在宠臣手中，国家法纪逐渐乱，最后导致国家衰败。
English: After that, the prime minister drank too much, did not care about the government, the power fell into the hands of his favorite, the country's laws and regulations gradually became disordered, and finally led to the country's decline.

古文：黑眚黑祥：晋孝怀帝永嘉五年十二月，黑气四塞。近黑祥也。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉五年十二月，黑气到处弥漫。这接近于黑祥。
English: In December of the 5th year of the Jinxiao Emperor Huai Yongjia, the black atmosphere pervaded everywhere. This is close to the black Xiang.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十六年三月，幸京口。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十六年三月，驾幸京口。
English: In March 26th, Song Emperor Yuanjia passed through the gates of Beijing.

古文：有黑气暴起，占有兵。
现代文：有黑气突然升起，这预示着将有战事。
English: There is a sudden rise of darkness, which indicates that there will be war.

古文：明年，虏南寇至瓜步，饮马于江。
现代文：第二年，索虏南侵至瓜步，饮马于江。
English: In the second year, Soryu invaded Guapu from the south and defeated Ma in the river.

古文：火沴水：晋武帝太康五年六月，任城、鲁国池水皆赤如血。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年六月，任城、鲁国护城河中的水都变得赤红如血。
English: In June of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the water in the moats of Rencheng and Lugu became as red as blood.

古文：案刘向说，近火沴水也。
现代文：据刘向的说法，这近于火渗水的妖异。
English: According to Liu Xiang, this is close to the phenomenon of fire seeping water.

古文：听之不聪之罚也。
现代文：这是耳听不灵敏的妖孽。
English: It is the witchcraft of the deaf.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 淫于色，贤人潜，国家危，厥异水流赤。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 沉溺于女色，贤人潜藏，国家危险，其妖异是水变成赤红。 
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: "Being addicted to women's beauty, sages lurking, and the country in danger, the strange thing is that the water turns red."

古文：晋穆帝升平三年二月，凉州城东池中有火；四年四月，姑臧泽水中又有火。
现代文：晋穆帝升平三年二月，凉州城东护城河中出现火；升干四年四月，姑臧泽水中又出现火。
English: In February of the third year of Emperor Jinmu's enthronement, a fire broke out in the moat east of the city of Liangzhou; in April of the fourth year of Emperor Jinmu's enthronement, another fire broke out in the water of Guye Lake.

古文：此火沴水之妖也。
现代文：这是火沴水的妖异。
English: This is the magic of fire and water.

古文：明年，张天锡杀中护军张邕。
现代文：第二年，张天锡杀死中护军张邕。
English: In the second year, Zhang Tianxi killed the middle guard Zhang Ye.

古文：邕，执政臣也。
现代文：张邕是执政大臣。
English: Zhang Ye is the ruling minister.

古文：晋安帝元兴二年十月，钱塘临平湖水赤。
现代文：晋安帝元兴二年十月，钱塘临平湖湖水变赤。
English: In October of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, the water of Qiantang Lake near Pinghu Lake turned red.

古文：桓玄讽吴郡使言开除，以为己瑞。俄而玄败。
现代文：桓玄暗中向吴郡长官传送自己的意思，要他们向朝廷上言，报告临平湖变得开豁清朗，把逭事作为自己的祥瑞不久桓玄就败亡了。
English: Kuan Xuan secretly conveyed his intention to the governor of Wu County, asking them to appeal to the imperial court, report that Linping Lake had become open and clear, and take the anecdote as his good luck, and soon Kuan Xuan was defeated.

