古文：二十有一年春，王正月，公如晋。
现代文：二十一年春季，周历正月，襄公去到晋国。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Xiang Gong went to Jin Province.

古文：邾庶其以漆、闾丘来奔。
现代文：邾国的庶其带着漆地和闾丘逃亡来鲁国。
English: The son-in-law of Shikoku fled to Shikoku, taking Urushi lacquerware and Shizukuoka with him.

古文：夏，公至自晋。
现代文：夏季，襄公从晋国回来。
English: In the summer, Akihiro came back from Jin Province.

古文：秋，晋栾盈出奔楚。
现代文：秋季，晋国的栾盈逃到楚国。
English: In the autumn, Jin's Zou Ying fled to Chu.

古文：九月庚戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月庚戌初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：曹伯来朝。
现代文：曹伯来鲁国朝见。
English: Cao Bo came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子于商任。
现代文：襄公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子在商任会见。
English: Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Qi, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Zheng, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi and Prince Zizi in Shangren.

古文：二十一年春，公如晋，拜师及取邾田也。
现代文：二十一年春季，鲁襄公到晋国，这是为了拜谢出兵和取得邾国的土田。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, Lu Xianggong went to Jin Province, this was in order to thank the troops and acquire the soil of the country.

古文：邾庶其以漆、闾丘来奔。季武子以公姑姊妻之，皆有赐于其从者。
现代文：邾国的庶其带着漆地和闾丘逃亡前来，季武子把鲁襄公的姑母嫁给他作妻子，对他的随从都有赏赐。
English: The son-in-law of Min Guo came to escape with lacquer and maple hills. Ji Wuzi married the aunt of Lu Xianggong to him as his wife, and his followers were rewarded.

古文：于是鲁多盗。
现代文：当时鲁国的盗贼很多。
English: At that time, there were many thieves in Russia.

古文：季孙谓臧武仲曰： 子盍诘盗？ 
现代文：季武子对臧武仲说： 您为什么不禁止盗贼？ 
English: Ji Takeko said to Hao Wuzhong: Why don't you ban thieves?

古文：武仲曰： 不可诘也，纥又不能。 
现代文：臧武仲说： 盗贼不可以禁止，纥又没有能力。 
English: Hao Wuzhong said, "Thieves cannot be banned, and baboons have no ability.

古文：季孙曰： 我有四封，而诘其盗，何故不可？
现代文：季武子说： 我国有四面的边境，用来禁止盗贼，为什么不可以？
English: Jiwuko said: Our country has a four-sided border, used to prohibit thieves, why not?

古文：子为司寇，将盗是务去，若之何不能？ 
现代文：您做司寇，应当从事于禁止盗贼，为什么不能？ 
English: As a steward, you should be engaged in prohibiting thieves, why can't you?

古文：武仲曰： 子召外盗而大礼焉，何以止吾盗？
现代文：武仲说： 您把外边的盗贼叫来而大大地给予礼遇，怎么能禁止国内的盗贼？
English: Wuzhong said, "You invite thieves from outside and give them great courtesy, how can you ban domestic thieves?

古文：子为正卿而来外盗，使纥去之，将何以能？
现代文：您做正卿，反而使外边的盗贼进来，让纥禁止国内的盗贼，怎么能够办到？
English: How can you, as the righteous emperor, allow the thieves from outside to come in, and forbid the thieves from within?

古文：庶其窃邑于邾以来，子以姬氏妻之，而与之邑，其从者皆有赐焉。
现代文：庶其在邾国偷盗了城邑而前来，您把姬氏作为他的妻子，还给了他城邑，他的随从人员都得到赏赐。
English: You took Himeji as your wife, and gave him back his towns, and all his attendants were rewarded.

古文：若大盗，礼焉以君之姑姊与其大邑，其次皂牧舆马，其小者衣裳剑带，是赏盗也。
现代文：如果用国君的姑母和他的大城邑对盗表示尊敬，其次的用皂牧车马，再小的给衣服佩剑带子，这是赏赐盗贼。
English: If you pay respect to a thief with the crown prince's aunt and his great city, secondly with a soap cart horse, and then with a small sword belt for clothing, this is a reward for thieves.

古文：赏而去之，其或难焉。
现代文：赏赐了而要去掉他，恐怕困难吧。
English: I'm afraid it will be difficult to get rid of him now that he's been rewarded.

古文：纥也闻之，在上位者，洒濯其心，壹以待人，轨度其信，可明征也，而后可以治人。
现代文：纥听说过，在上位的人要洗涤他的心，专一地以诚待人，使它合于法度而且使人们相信，可以明确地验证，然后才能治理人。
English: You have heard that a superior must purify his heart, treat people with sincerity, make it conform to the law and make people believe that it can be clearly verified before he can govern people.

古文：夫上之所为，民之归也。
现代文：上面的所作所为，是百姓的归依。
English: The above actions are the result of the people's conversion.

古文：上所不为而民或为之，是以加刑罚焉，而莫敢不惩。
现代文：上面所不做的，百姓有人做了，因此加以惩罚就没有人敢于不警戒。
English: What is not done above, the people have done, and therefore no one dares not be vigilant in punishing them.

古文：若上之所为而民亦为之，乃其所也，又可禁乎？
现代文：如果上面的所作所为百姓也照样做了，这是势所必然，又能够禁止吗？
English: If the people did the same as the above, is it inevitable and can it be prohibited?

古文：《夏书》曰： 念兹在兹，释兹在兹，名言兹在兹，允出兹在兹，惟帝念功。 
现代文：《夏书》说： 想要干的就是这个，想舍去不干的就是这个，所要号令的就是这个，诚信所在的就是这个，只有天帝才能记下这功劳。 
English: "Summer Book" said: "This is what you want to do, this is what you don't want to do, this is what you want to command, this is where your integrity lies, and only the Heavenly Emperor can record this achievement."

古文：将谓由己壹也。
现代文：大约说的是要由自身来体现言行一致。
English: It's more or less saying that you have to be consistent in word and deed.

古文：信由己壹，而后功可念也。 
现代文：诚信是由于自己的言行一致，然后才可以谈建立功劳。 
English: Honesty is due to their words and deeds consistent, and then we can talk about the establishment of merit.

古文：庶其非卿也，以地来，虽贱必书，重地也。
现代文：庶其不是卿，他带着土地来鲁国，虽然身份低贱，《春秋》必定要加以记载，这是为了重视土地。
English: He was not a lord, he came to Lu with land, although his status was low, "Spring and Autumn" must be recorded, this is to attach importance to the land.

古文：齐侯使庆佐为大夫，复讨公子牙之党，执公子买于句渎之丘。公子鉏来奔。
现代文：齐庄公派庆佐做大夫，再次讨伐公子牙的亲族，在句渎之丘抓了公子买。
English: Qizhuang Gong sent Qingza to be a doctor, and once again fought the relatives of the boy's teeth, and caught the boy in the hill of corruption.

古文：叔孙还奔燕。
现代文：公子鉏逃亡前来。叔孙还逃亡到燕国。
English: His son-in-law came to escape. His uncle and grandson also fled to Yan's country.

古文：夏，楚子庚卒，楚子使薳子冯为令尹。
现代文：夏季，楚国的子庚死。楚康王派薳子冯做令尹，薳子冯与申叔豫商议。
English: In the summer, Zi Geng of the State of Chu died. The King of Chu Kang sent Zongzi Feng to do Yin's bidding, Zongzi Feng and Shen Shuyuan to negotiate.

古文：访于申叔豫，叔豫曰： 国多宠而王弱，国不可为也。 
现代文：申叔豫说： 国家宠臣很多而君王又年轻，国家的事情不能办好。 
English: Shen Shuyuan said: There are many favorite subjects of the state and the monarch is young, so the affairs of the state cannot be done well.

古文：遂以疾辞。
现代文：于是薳子冯就用有病来推辞不干。
English: As a result, Zangzi Feng used his illness as an excuse to resign.

古文：方暑，阙地下冰而床焉。
现代文：当时正好是大热天，挖地，放上冰然后安置床。
English: It happened to be a very hot day, so we dug up the ground, put ice on it and placed the bed.

古文：重茧衣裘，鲜食而寝。
现代文：薳子冯身穿新棉衣，又穿上皮袍，少吃东西而睡在床上。
English: Feng Zizi, wearing a new cotton dress and a leather robe, ate less and slept on the bed.

古文：楚子使医视之，复曰： 瘠则甚矣！而血气未动。 
现代文：楚康王派医生去诊视，回来报告说： 瘦弱到极点了，但血气还正常。 
English: Chu Kang Wang sent a doctor to examine her, and he came back with a report: "She is extremely thin and weak, but her blood gas is still normal."

古文：乃使子南为令尹。
现代文：于是楚王就派子南做令尹。
English: As a result, King Chu sent his son Nan to do the same.

古文：栾桓子娶于范宣子，生怀子。
现代文：栾桓子娶范宣子的女儿做妻子，生了怀子。
English: Zou Han Zi married Fan Xuan Zi's daughter and had a son.

古文：范鞅以其亡也，怨栾氏，故与栾盈为公族大夫而不相能。
现代文：范鞅由于他一度逃亡，怨恨栾氏，所以和栾盈一起做公族大夫而不能很好相处。
English: Because he once ran away and resented the Shun clan, Fan Shun couldn't get along very well with Yu Ying as they were both doctors of the nobility.

古文：桓子卒，栾祁与其老州宾通，几亡室矣。
现代文：栾桓子死，栾祁和他的家臣头子州宾私通，州宾几乎侵占了全部家产。
English: After the death of Zou Han Zi, Zou and his vassal, the head of the family, Zhou Bin, became involved in illicit dealings. Zhou Bin took over almost all of the family's property.

古文：怀子患之。
现代文：怀子担心这件事。
English: Kaiko is worried about this.

古文：祁惧其讨也，愬诸宣子曰： 盈将为乱，以范氏为死桓主而专政矣，曰： 吾父逐鞅也，不怒而以宠报之，又与吾同官而专之，吾父死而益富。
现代文：栾祁害怕怀子讨伐，向范宣子毁谤说： 盈将要发动叛乱，认为范氏弄死了桓子而在晋国专权，说： 我的父亲赶走范鞅，范鞅回国，不对他表示愤怒反而用宠信来报答他，又和我担任同样的官职，而使他得以独断专权。我的父亲死后范氏更加富有。
English: He was afraid of Huai Zi's crusade and slandered Fan Xuan Zi, saying, "Ying will start a rebellion, thinking that Fan has killed Huan Zi and is now in absolute power in Jin." He said, "My father drove out Fan Zi, Fan Zi returned to China, and instead of expressing anger at him, he rewarded him with a favor letter. He also held the same official position as me, which enabled him to dictate absolute power. After my father's death, Fan Zi became even richer.

古文：死吾父而专于国，有死而已！吾蔑从之矣。 
现代文：弄死我父亲而在国内专政，我只有死路一条，也不能跟从他了。 
English: If my father were to be killed and a dictatorship established in our country, I would have no choice but to die, and I could not follow him.

古文：其谋如是，惧害于主，吾不敢不言。 
现代文：他的计划就是这样，我怕会伤害您，不敢不说。 
English: That's his plan. I'm afraid I'm going to hurt you if I don't tell you.

古文：范鞅为之征。
现代文：范鞅为她作证。
English: Fan Qi testified on her behalf.

古文：怀子好施，士多归之。
现代文：怀子喜好施舍，很多的士都归附他。
English: Huai Zi likes to give alms, so many taxis belong to him.

古文：宣子畏其多士也，信之。
现代文：宣子害怕他人多，相信了栾祁的话。
English: Nobuko was more afraid of other people, and believed Minoru's words.

古文：怀子为下卿，宣子使城著而遂逐之。
现代文：怀子当时做下卿，宣子派他在著地筑城并且由此赶走了他。
English: At that time, Kaishi was the next lord, and Nobuko sent him to build a city on the site and thus drove him away.

古文：秋，栾盈出奔楚。
现代文：秋季，栾盈逃亡到楚国。
English: In autumn, Zou Ying fled to Chu.

古文：宣子杀箕遗、黄渊、嘉父、司空靖、邴豫、董叔、邴师、申书、羊舌虎、叔罴，囚伯华、叔向、籍偃。
现代文：宣子杀了箕遗、黄渊、嘉父、司空靖、邴豫、董叔、邴师、申书、羊舌虎、叔罴，同时囚禁了伯华、叔向、籍偃。
English: Xuan Zi killed Zou Ye, Huang Yuan, Ji Ji, Zi Kuo Jing, Zou Yu, Dong Uncle, Zi Shi, Shen Shu, Sheep Tongue Tiger, and Uncle Yao, while imprisoning Bo Hua, Uncle Xiang, and Zi Yao.

古文：人谓叔向曰： 子离于罪，其为不知乎？ 
现代文：有人对叔向说： 您得到了罪过，恐怕是不聪明吧！ 
English: Someone said to my uncle: You have committed a sin, I'm afraid it's not wise!

古文：叔向曰： 与其死亡若何？
现代文：叔向说： 比起死去和逃亡来怎么样？
English: My uncle said to me, "What's the difference between dying and running away?

古文：《诗》曰： 优哉游哉，聊以卒岁。 
现代文：《诗》说， 悠闲啊多么逍遥自在，聊且这样来度过岁月 ，这才是聪明啊。 
English: "Poetry" says, leisurely ah, how free and easy, talk and spend the years like this, this is clever.

古文：知也。 乐王鲋见叔向曰： 吾为子请！ 
现代文：乐王鲋去见叔向，说： 我为您去请求免罪。 
English: Le Wangyao went to see his uncle Xiang and said, "I'm going to plead for your exoneration."

古文：叔向弗应。
现代文：叔向不回答。
English: My uncle didn't answer.

古文：出，不拜。
现代文：乐王鲋退出，叔向不拜送。
English: Le Wangyao withdraws, but his uncle does not send him away.

古文：其人皆咎叔向。
现代文：叔向的手下人都责备叔向。
English: Unxiang's subordinates all blamed Unxiang.

古文：叔向曰： 必祁大夫。 
现代文：叔向说： 一定要祁大夫才行。 
English: My uncle said, "You must go to the doctor."

古文：室老闻之曰： 乐王鲋言于君无不行，求赦吾子，吾子不许。
现代文：家臣头子听到了，说： 乐王鲋对国君说的话，没有不被采纳的，他想请求赦免您，您又不答应。
English: The head vassal heard this and said, "There was nothing that Le Wang Ye said to the sovereign that was not accepted. He wanted to ask for your pardon, but you did not agree.

古文：祁大夫所不能也，而曰 必由之 ，何也？ 
现代文：这是祁大夫所做不到的，但您说一定要由他去办，这是为什么？ 
English: This is something that Dr. Zou cannot do, but you said that he must do it. Why is that?

古文：叔向曰： 乐王鲋，从君者也，何能行？
现代文：叔向说： 乐王鲋，是一切都顺从国君的人，怎么能行？
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Le Wangyao, you are a person who obeys the sovereign in everything. How can you do that?

古文：祁大夫外举不弃仇，内举不失亲，其独遗我乎？
现代文：祁大夫举拔宗族外的人不放弃仇人，举拔宗族内的人不失掉亲人，难道只会留下我吗？
English: Dr. Zou, if people outside the clan do not give up their enemies, and if people within the clan do not lose their relatives, will only I be left behind?

古文：《诗》曰： 有觉德行，四国顺之。 
现代文：《诗》说： 有正直的德行，使四方的国家归顺。 
English: "Poetry" says: "The virtue of uprightness brings the four quarters of the earth into submission."

古文：夫子，觉者也。 
现代文：他老人家是正直的人啊。 
English: He's an honest old man.

古文：晋侯问叔向之罪于乐王鲋，对曰： 不弃其亲，其有焉。 
现代文：晋平公向乐王鲋询问叔向的罪过，乐王鲋回答说： 叔向不丢弃他的亲人，他可能是同谋的。 
English: Jinping Gong asked Le Wangtao about his uncle's crime. Le Wangtao replied, "Uncle Xiang does not abandon his relatives. He may be an accomplice."

古文：于是祁奚老矣，闻之，乘驲而见宣子，曰： 《诗》曰： 惠我无疆，子孙保之。 
现代文：当时祁奚已经告老回家，听说这情况，坐上快车而去拜见范宣子，说： 《诗》说 赐给我们无边的恩惠，子子孙孙永远保持它。 
English: At that time, Zou had already reached old age and was returning home. Hearing of this, he got on an express train and went to visit Fan Xuanzi, saying: "The poem says, 'Give us boundless grace, and our children and grandchildren will keep it forever.'

古文：《书》曰： 圣有谟勋，明征定保。 
现代文：《书》说： 智慧的人有谋略训海，应当相信保护。 
English: The "Book" says: "Wise people have a strategy to train the sea, and should believe in protection.

古文：夫谋而鲜过，惠训不倦者，叔向有焉，社稷之固也。
现代文：说到谋划而少有过错，教育别人而不知疲倦的，叔向是这样的，他是国家的柱石。
English: When it comes to planning and rarely making mistakes, educating others tirelessly, Uncle Xiang is like this, he is the pillar of the country.

古文：犹将十世宥之，以劝能者。
现代文：即使他的十代子孙有过错还要赦免，用这样来勉励有能力的人。
English: Even if ten generations of his descendants are at fault, they should be pardoned, so as to encourage those who are capable.

古文：今壹不免其身，以弃社稷，不亦惑乎？
现代文：现在一旦自身不免于祸而死，放弃国家，这不也会使人困惑吗？
English: Now, if one does not save oneself from the disaster and dies, and abandons the country, won't this also confuse people?

古文：鲧殛而禹兴。伊尹放大甲而相之，卒无怨色。管、蔡为戮，周公右王。
现代文：鲧被诛戮而禹兴起；伊尹放逐太甲又做了他的宰相，太甲始终没有怨色；管叔、蔡叔被诛戮，周公仍然辅佐成王。
English: Yan was killed and Yu arose; Yi Yin banished Taiga and made him his prime minister, Taiga never complained; Guan Uncle and Cai Uncle were killed, and Zhou Gong still assisted Cheng Wang.

古文：若之何其以虎也弃社稷？子为善，谁敢不勉。
现代文：为什么叔向要为了叔虎而被杀？您做了好事，谁敢不努力？
English: Why does Uncle Xiang want to be killed for the sake of Uncle Tiger? You have done a good deed, who would dare not to work hard?

古文：多杀何为？ 
现代文：多杀人作什么？ 
English: What does multiple homicide mean?

古文：宣子说，与之乘，以言诸公而免之。
现代文：宣子高兴了，和祁奚共坐一辆车子，向晋平公劝说而赦免了叔向。
English: Nobuko was pleased, and they both rode in the same car. She persuaded Jin Ping and pardoned her uncle.

古文：不见叔向而归。叔向亦不告免焉而朝。
现代文：祁奚不去见叔向就回去了，叔向也不向祁奚报告他已得赦，而就去朝见晋平公。
English: He did not go back to see his uncle, and his uncle did not tell him that he had been pardoned. Instead, he went to the court of Emperor Jinpyeong.

古文：初，叔向之母妬叔虎之母美而不使。其子皆谏其母。
现代文：当初，叔向的母亲嫉妒叔虎的母亲美丽，而不让她陪丈夫睡觉，儿了们都劝谏母亲。
English: At first, Uncle Xiang's mother was jealous of Uncle Tiger's mother's beauty, and would not let her sleep with her husband. The children all advised their mother not to sleep with him.

古文：其母曰： 深山大泽，实生龙蛇。
现代文：叔向的母亲说： 深山大泽之中，确实会生长龙蛇。
English: Uncle Xiang's mother said: "In the deep mountains and lakes, dragons and snakes will indeed grow.

古文：彼美，余惧其生龙蛇以祸女。女，敝族也。国多大宠，不仁人间之，不亦难乎？
现代文：她美丽，我害怕她生下龙蛇来祸害你们，你们，是衰败的家族，国内受到宠信的大官很多，坏人又从中挑拨，不也是很难处了吗？
English: She's beautiful, I'm afraid she'll give birth to a dragon and a snake to harm you. You're a family in decline. There are many beloved dignitaries in this country, and bad people pick on them. Isn't that also a difficult problem?

古文：余何爱焉！ 
现代文：我自己有什么可爱惜的？ 
English: What do I like and dislike about myself?

古文：使往视寝，生叔虎。美而有勇力，栾怀子嬖之，故羊舌氏之族及于难。
现代文：就让叔虎的母亲去陪侍丈夫睡觉，生了叔虎，美丽并有勇力，栾怀子宠爱他，所以羊舌氏这一家族遭到祸难。
English: So he asked the mother of the tigress to sleep with her husband, and she gave birth to a beautiful and brave tigress, who was loved by her son, so the family of the Sheep Tongue family suffered a calamity.

古文：栾盈过于周，周西鄙掠之。
现代文：栾盈经过成周，周朝西部边境的人，劫掠他的财物。
English: After Zhou, the western border people of Zhou Dynasty plundered his property.

古文：辞于行人，曰： 天子陪臣盈，得罪于王之守臣，将逃罪。
现代文：栾盈向周室使者申诉说： 天子的陪臣盈，得罪了天子的守土的臣，打算逃避惩罚。
English: Hao Ying complained to the emissary of the Zhou court, saying, "Heaven's son's attendant, Ying, has offended Heaven's son's retainer, and intends to evade punishment.

古文：罪重于郊甸，无所伏窜，敢布其死。昔陪臣书能输力于王室，王施惠焉。
现代文：又重新在天子的郊外得罪，没有地方可以逃了，谨冒死上言：从前陪臣书能为王室效力，天子施给了恩惠。
English: I have sinned again in the outskirts of the heavenly son, there is no place to escape, I dare to say: in the past, the vassal book could work for the royal family, and the heavenly son gave favor.

古文：其子黡，不能保任其父之劳。
现代文：他的儿子黡不能保住他父亲的辛劳。
English: His son can't keep up with his father's workload.

古文：大君若不弃书之力，亡臣犹有所逃。
现代文：天王如果不丢弃书的努力，逃亡在外的陪臣还有地方可以逃。
English: If the emperor does not abandon the efforts of the book, there is still a place for the fleeing vassal to escape.

古文：若弃书之力，而思黡之罪，臣戮馀也，将归死于尉氏，不敢还矣。
现代文：如果丢弃书的努力，而想到黡的罪过，那么陪臣本来就是刑戮余生的人，就将要回国死在尉氏那里，不敢再回来了。
English: If you discard the efforts of the book and think about the sins of the eunuch, then the vassal, who is the one who will be punished for the rest of his life, will return home to die with the lord and will not dare to come back.

古文：敢布四体，唯大君命焉！ 
现代文：谨敢直言不讳，后果怎么样，唯有听天子命令了。 
English: Dare to be outspoken, no matter what the consequences are, you only have to follow God's orders.

古文：王曰： 尤而效之，其又甚焉！ 
现代文：周灵王说： 有了过错而去学它，过错更大了。 
English: Zhou Lingwang said, "If you make a mistake and learn from it, the mistake is even bigger."

古文：使司徒禁掠栾氏者，归所取焉。使候出诸辕。
现代文：于是，周灵王让司徒禁止那些掠夺栾氏的人，所掠取的东西都归还，派迎送宾客的人把栾盈送出轘辕山。
English: As a result, King Zhou Ling asked the magistrate to ban those who plundered the Shao clan, to return everything that had been plundered, and to send someone to welcome the guests to send Zou Ying out of Shaoshan.

古文：冬，曹武公来朝，始见也。
现代文：冬季，曹武公前来朝见，这是第一次朝见鲁襄公。
English: In winter, Cao Wu Gong came to see him in the morning, which was the first time to see Lu Xiang Gong in the morning.

古文：会于商任，锢栾氏也。齐侯、卫侯不敬。
现代文：鲁襄公和晋平公、齐庄公、宋平公、卫殇公、郑简公、曹武公、莒子、邾子在商任会见，这是为了禁锢栾盈。齐庄公、卫殇公表现得不恭敬。
English: Lu Xiang met with Jinping, Qizhuang, Songping, Weizhong, Zheng Jian, Cao Wu, Zangzi and Zangzi at Shangren in order to ban Xinying. Qizhuang and Weizhong showed no respect.

古文：叔向曰： 二君者，必不免。
现代文：叔向说： 这两位国君必然不免于祸难。
English: Uncle Xiang said: These two sovereigns are bound to meet with misfortune.

古文：会朝，礼之经也。礼，政之舆也。政，身之守也。
现代文：会见和朝见，这是礼仪的常规；礼仪，是政事的车子；政事，是身体的寄托。
English: Meetings and audiences are the norm of etiquette; etiquette is the vehicle of politics; politics is the sustenance of the body.

古文：怠礼失政，失政不立，是以乱也。 
现代文：轻慢礼仪，政事会有失误；政事失误，就难于立身处世，因此就会发生动乱。 
English: If the etiquette is careless, the government will make mistakes; if the government makes mistakes, it will be difficult to stand up in the world, so there will be turmoil.

古文：知起、中行喜、州绰、邢蒯出奔齐，皆栾氏之党也。
现代文：知起、中行喜、州绰、邢蒯逃亡到齐国，他们都是栾氏的亲族。
English: Jiqi, Zhongxingxi, Zhuchao, and Zou fled to Qi Province. They were all relatives of the Zou clan.

古文：乐王鲋谓范宣子曰： 盍反州绰、邢蒯？
现代文：乐王鲋对范宣子说： 为什么不让州绰、邢蒯回来？
English: "Why don't you let Shuzhou Zhuo and Zhuo return?" said the king of music to Fan Xuanzi.

古文：勇士也。 
现代文：他们是勇士啊。 
English: They are warriors.

古文：宣子曰： 彼栾氏之勇也，余何获焉？ 
现代文：宣子说： 他们是栾氏的勇士，我能得到什么？ 
English: Nobuko said, "They are warriors of the Min clan. What can I get?"

古文：王鲋曰： 子为彼栾氏，乃亦子之勇也。 
现代文：乐王鲋说： 您如果做他们的栾氏，那就是您的勇士了。 
English: Le Wang Yao said, "If you are their master, then you are their champion."

古文：齐庄公朝，指殖绰、郭最曰： 是寡人之雄也。 
现代文：齐庄公上朝，指着殖绰、郭最说： 这是我的雄鸡。 
English: When the Duke of Qizhuang ascended the throne, he pointed to the rooster and said, "This is my rooster."

古文：州绰曰： 君以为雄，谁敢不雄？
现代文：州绰说： 君王认为他们是雄鸡，谁敢不认为是雄鸡？
English: "The king thinks they are roosters, who would not think they are roosters?

古文：然臣不敏，平阴之役，先二子鸣。 
现代文：然而下臣不才，在平阴这次战役中，比他们二位可是先打鸣。 
English: However, the vassals were not able to do so, and in this battle, they were beaten by the two of them.

古文：庄公为勇爵。殖绰、郭最欲与焉。
现代文：齐庄公设置勇士的爵位，殖绰、郭最想要参加。
English: The lord of Qizhuang set up the knighthood of warriors, and Shuangqiao and Guo most wanted to participate.

古文：州绰曰： 东闾之役，臣左骖迫还于门中，识其枚数。其可以与于此乎？ 
现代文：州绰说： 东闾这次战役，下臣的左骖马被逼迫，盘旋城门里不能前进，记下了门上铜钉的数字，是不是可以在这里有一份呢？ 
English: Guo Zuo said: In this battle of Dongcheng, the subordinate's left steed was chased, circled the city gate and could not advance, and wrote down the number of the bronze nail on the door. Is it possible to have a copy here?

古文：公曰： 子为晋君也。 
现代文：齐庄公说： 您是为的晋君啊。 
English: Qizhuang Gong said: You are a benevolent Jinjun.

古文：对曰： 臣为隶新。然二子者，譬于禽兽，臣食其肉而寝处其皮矣。 
现代文：州绰回答说： 臣下是初来的臣，然而这两位，如果用禽兽作比方，臣下已经吃了他们的肉而睡在他们的皮上了。 
English: The statesman replied, "A vassal is a vassal for the first time, but these two, to use an animal analogy, the vassal has eaten their flesh and slept on their skin.

