古文：十有七年春，齐人、徐人伐英氏。
现代文：十七年春季，齐国、徐国一起攻打英氏。
English: In the spring of 17th, Qi and Xu attacked Ying together.

古文：夏，灭项。
现代文：夏季，鲁国灭掉项国。
English: In the summer, Lu wiped out Xiang.

古文：秋，夫人姜氏会齐侯于卞。
现代文：秋季，僖公夫人姜氏在卞地会见齐桓公。
English: In the autumn, Jiang, the wife of the Duke of Zhai, met with the Duke of Qi in Zhai.

古文：九月，公至自会。
现代文：九月，僖公到达。
English: In September, Ji Ji returned to Shan State.

古文：冬十有二月乙亥，齐侯小白卒。
现代文：冬季十二月乙亥日，齐桓公去世。
English: In the winter of December, on the day of the Year of the Boar, Prince Qi Huan passed away.

古文：十七年春，齐人为徐伐英氏，以报娄林之役也。
现代文：十七年春季，齐国人为徐国攻打英氏，以报复前二年楚击败徐于娄林那一次战役。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the people of Qi attacked the Ying clan on behalf of the State of Xu, in retaliation for the first battle in which Chu defeated Xu in Yulin two years before.

古文：夏，晋大子圉为质于秦，秦归河东而妻之。
现代文：夏季，晋国的太子圉在秦国作人质，秦国把河东土地归还晋国并把女儿嫁给圉。
English: In the summer, the prince of Jin, Zou, was held hostage in Qin. Qin returned the land of Hedong to Jin and married his daughter to Zou.

古文：惠公之在梁也，梁伯妻之。
现代文：晋惠公在梁国的时候，梁伯把女儿嫁给他。
English: When Jin Huigong was in Liang Province, Liang Bo married his daughter to him.

古文：梁嬴孕过期，卜招父与其子卜之。其子曰： 将生一男一女。 
现代文：梁嬴怀孕，过了预产期。卜招父和他的儿子占卜，他的儿子说： 将要生一男一女。 
English: Liang Yao was pregnant and past her due date. The fortuneteller and his son divined, and his son said, "There will be a boy and a girl."

古文：招曰： 然。
现代文：卜招父说： 对。
English: Bu Zhaofeng said, "That's right.

古文：男为人臣，女为人妾。 
现代文：男的做别人的奴仆，女的做别人的奴婢。 
English: Men are the servants of others, women are the slaves of others.

古文：故名男曰圉，女曰妾。
现代文：所以把男的叫做圉，女的取名叫做妾。
English: That's why a man's name is  and a woman's name is concubine.

古文：及子圉西质，妾为宦女焉。
现代文：等到子圉到西方作人质，妾就在秦国作了侍女。
English: When Zixuan went to the West as a hostage, the concubine became a maid in Qin.

古文：师灭项。
现代文：鲁国军队灭亡项国。
English: The defeat of the Russian army resulted in the death of Xiangguo.

古文：淮之会，公有诸侯之事未归，而取项。
现代文：在淮地的会见，僖公正有和各国诸侯相会的大事，没有回国，鲁军就占取了项国。
English: At the meeting in Huaiji, he justly had an important meeting with the princes of various countries. Without returning home, the Russian army occupied Xiangguo.

古文：齐人以为讨而止公。秋，声姜以公故，会齐侯于卞。九月，公至。
现代文：齐国人认为这是由僖公下令进攻，因此把僖公拘留，不让他回国。秋季，声姜由于僖公的缘故，在卞地会见齐桓公。九月，僖公到达。
English: The people of Qi believed that this was an attack ordered by Zeng Gong, so they detained Zeng Gong and did not allow him to return to China. In the autumn, Shen Jiang met with Qi Huan Gong in Zengdi because of Zeng Gong. In September, Zeng Gong arrived.

古文：书曰： 至自会。 犹有诸侯之事焉，且讳之也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 至自会 ，这是由于国家大事还没有处理完，而且不愿说出被拘留这件事。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded that the reason for the self-congratulation was that the national affairs had not yet been dealt with, and they did not want to talk about the detention.

古文：齐侯之夫人三：王姬，徐嬴，蔡姬，皆无子。
现代文：齐桓公的三位夫人，王姬、徐嬴、蔡姬，都没有儿子。
English: None of the three wives of Prince Qi Huan, Wang Ji, Xu Xi, and Cai Ji, had sons.

古文：齐侯好内，多内宠，内嬖如夫人者六人：长卫姬生武孟。少卫姬生惠公，郑姬生孝公，葛嬴生昭公，密姬生懿公，宋华子生公子雍。
现代文：齐桓公喜欢女色，宠爱的姬妾不少，宫内受宠的女人待遇如同夫人一样的有六人：大卫姬，生了武孟；小卫姬，生了惠公；郑姬，生了孝公；葛嬴，生了昭公；密姬，生了懿公；宋华子，生了公子雍。
English: King Qi Huan liked women, he had many favorite concubines, and there were six women who were treated like wives in the palace: David Hie, who gave birth to Wu Meng; Xiao Wei Hie, who gave birth to Hui Gong; Zheng Hie, who gave birth to Xiaogong; Ge Ying, who gave birth to Zhaogong; Mi Hie, who gave birth to Zhaogong; Song Huazi, who gave birth to Gongzi Yong.

古文：公与管仲属孝公于宋襄公，以为大子。
现代文：桓公和管仲把孝公托付给宋襄公，以他为太子。
English: Prince Kan and Guanzhong entrusted Prince Xiaogong to Prince Song Xiang and made him the crown prince.

古文：雍巫有宠于卫共姬，因寺人貂以荐羞于公，亦有宠，公许之立武孟。
现代文：雍巫受到卫共姬的宠信，由于寺人貂的关系把美味的食品进献给齐桓公，又受到齐桓公的宠信。齐桓公答应他们立武孟为继承人。
English: Yongwu was favored by Wei Gongji, and because of the relationship between the temple people and the monks, he presented delicious food to King Qihuang, and was also favored by King Qihuang. King Qihuang promised them to make Wu Meng the heir.

古文：管仲卒，五公子皆求立。
现代文：管仲死，五个公子都谋求立为嗣君。
English: After the death of Guanzhong, the five princes all demanded to be crown prince.

古文：冬十月乙亥，齐桓公卒。
现代文：冬季，十月初七日，齐桓公死。
English: In the winter of October, on the day of the second boar, King Qi Huan died.

古文：易牙入，与寺人貂因内宠以杀群吏，而立公子无亏。
现代文：易牙进宫，和寺人貂依靠那些内宠的权贵而杀死一批官吏，立公子无亏为国君。
English: When Iga entered the palace, he and the temple people killed a group of officials by relying on those who were favored by the nobility, and the prince was established as the sovereign.

古文：孝公奔宋。
现代文：孝公逃亡到宋国。
English: Xiaogong fled to Song.

古文：十二月乙亥赴，辛巳夜殡。
现代文：十二月初八日，发出讣告。
English: An obituary notice was issued on the 8th day of the 12th month.

