古文：魏武少时，尝与袁绍好为游侠，观人新婚，因潜入主人园中，夜叫呼云： 有偷儿贼！ 
现代文：魏武帝曹操年轻时，和袁绍两人常常喜欢做游侠。有一次他们去看别人的婚礼，乘机偷偷进入主人的园子里，到半夜大喊大叫： 有小偷！ 
English: When Wei Emperor Cao Cao was young, he and Yuan Shao often liked to be ranger. Once they went to see someone else's wedding, took the opportunity to sneak into the owner's garden, and in the middle of the night shouted: There is a thief!

古文：青庐中人皆出观，魏武乃入，抽刃劫新妇与绍还出，失道，坠枳棘中，绍不能得动，复大叫云： 偷儿在此！ 
现代文：青庐里面的人，都跑出来察看，曹操便进去，拔出刀来抢劫新娘子。接着和袁绍迅速跑出来，中途迷了路，陷入了荆棘丛中，袁绍动不了。曹操又大喊： 小偷在这里！ 
English: All the people in Qingyao ran out to investigate, and Cao Cao went in and pulled out a knife to rob the bride. Then he and Yuan Shao quickly ran out, lost their way halfway, and got stuck in the thorns. Yuan Shao couldn't move. Cao Cao shouted again, "The thief is here!"

古文：绍遑迫自掷出，遂以俱免。
现代文：袁绍惊恐着急，自己竭力跳了出来，两人终于得以逃脱。
English: Terrified and anxious, Yuan Shao jumped out himself, and the two were finally able to escape.

古文：魏武行役，失汲道，军皆渴，乃令曰： 前有大梅林，饶子，甘酸，可以解渴。 
现代文：魏武帝曹操率部远行军，找不到取水的路，全军都很口渴。于是便传令说： 前面有大片的梅树林子，梅子很多，味道甜酸，可以解渴。 
English: Emperor Cao Cao and his army were marching far away and could not find a way to get water. The whole army was very thirsty. So he sent a message saying: There is a large plum grove ahead, there are many plums, the taste is sweet and sour, it can quench thirst.

古文：士卒闻之，口皆出水，乘此得及前源。
现代文：士兵听了这番话，口水都流出来了。利用这个办法得以赶到下一片水源地。
English: Hearing this, the soldier's mouth was watering, and he used this method to get to the next water source.

古文：魏武常言： 人欲危己，己辄心动。 
现代文：魏武帝曾经说过： 如果有人要害我，我立刻就心跳。 
English: Emperor Wei Wudi once said: If someone wants to harm me, my heart will beat immediately.

古文：因语所亲小人曰： 汝怀刃密来我侧，我必说心动。
现代文：于是授意他身边的侍从说： 你揣着刀隐蔽地来到我的身边，我一定说心跳。
English: So he ordered the attendants around him to say: "If you come to me secretly with a knife, I will definitely say heartbeat."

古文：执汝使行刑，汝但勿言其使，无他，当厚相报！ 
现代文：我叫人逮捕你去执行刑罚，你只要不说出是我指使，没事儿，到时一定重重酬报你。 
English: I'll have someone arrest you to carry out the punishment. As long as you don't say I ordered it, it's fine. I'll reward you handsomely when the time comes.

古文：执者信焉，不以为惧，遂斩之。
现代文：那个侍从相信了他的话，不觉得害怕，终于被杀了。
English: The servant believed him, was not afraid, and was killed.

古文：此人至死不知也。
现代文：这个人到死也不醒悟啊。
English: This man will never wake up until the day he dies.

古文：左右以为实，谋逆者挫气矣。
现代文：手下的人认为这是真的，谋反者丧气了。
English: His men believed it to be true, and the plotters were disheartened.

古文：魏武常云： 我眠中不可妄近，近便斫人，亦不自觉，左右宜深慎此！ 
现代文：魏武帝曹操曾经说过： 我睡觉时不可随便靠近我，一靠近，我就杀人，自己也不知道。身边的人应该十分小心这点。 
English: Emperor Cao Cao once said: "When I sleep, do not come near me. If you come near me, I will kill you without even knowing it. People around you should be very careful about this."

古文：后阳眠，所幸一人窃以被覆之，因便斫杀。
现代文：有一天，曹操假装睡熟了，有个亲信偷偷地拿条被子给他盖上，曹操趁机把他杀死了。
English: One day, Cao Cao pretended to be fast asleep. A close friend secretly took a quilt to cover him, and Cao Cao took the opportunity to kill him.

古文：自尔每眠，左右莫敢近者。
现代文：从此以后，每次睡觉的时候，身边的人没有谁敢靠近他。
English: From then on, no one dared to get close to him when he was sleeping.

古文：袁绍年少时，曾遣人夜以剑掷魏武，少下，不箸。
现代文：袁绍年轻时候，曾经派人在夜里投剑刺曹操，稍微偏低了一些，没有刺中。
English: When Yuan Shao was young, he once sent someone to stab Cao Cao with a sword in the middle of the night.

古文：魏武揆之，其后来必高，因帖卧床上。
现代文：曹操考虑一下，第二次投来的剑一定偏高，就紧贴床躺着。
English: Cao Cao thought about it, the second time the sword was thrown, it must have been too high, so he lay close to the bed.

古文：剑至果高。
现代文：剑投来果然偏高了。
English: The throwing of the sword was indeed too high.

古文：王大将军既为逆，顿军姑孰。
现代文：大将军王敦已经发动叛乱，把军队驻扎在姑孰。
English: Senior General Wang Dun has already launched a rebellion and stationed his troops in Gushan.

古文：晋明帝以英武之才，犹相猜惮，乃箸戎服，骑巴賨马，赍一金马鞭，阴察军形势。
现代文：晋明帝纵有文才武略，也还疑惧他，于是就穿上军装，骑着良马，拿着一条金马鞭，去暗中察看王敦军队的情况。
English: Emperor Jinming, despite his literary talent, was also suspicious of him, so he put on a military uniform, rode a good horse, and carried a golden whip to secretly inspect the situation of Wang Dun's army.

古文：未至十余里，有一客姥，居店卖食。帝过愒之，谓姥曰： 王敦举兵图逆，猜害忠良，朝廷骇惧，社稷是忧。
现代文：离王敦的军营还差十多里，有一外乡老妇在店里卖小吃，晋明帝经过那里停下来休息，对她说： 王敦起兵图谋叛乱，猜忌并且陷害忠臣良将，朝廷惊恐，我担心国家的命运，所以早晚辛劳，来侦察王敦的动向。
English: More than ten miles away from Wang Dun's military camp, there was an old woman from a foreign village selling snacks in a shop. Emperor Jinming stopped there to rest and said to her: Wang Dun raised an army to plot a rebellion, suspected and framed a loyal general, the court was alarmed, I was worried about the fate of the country, so I worked hard in the morning and evening to investigate Wang Dun's movements.

古文：故劬劳晨夕，用相觇察，恐形迹危露，或致狼狈。
现代文：恐怕行动败露，可能陷于困境。我被追击的时候，希望老人家为我隐瞒行踪。 
English: I was afraid that the operation would be exposed and I might get into trouble. When I was chased, I hoped that the old man would hide my whereabouts.

古文：追迫之日，姥其匿之。 
现代文：于是把马鞭送给这位外乡老妇就离开，沿着王敦的营区走了一圈就出来了。
English: So he gave the whip to the old woman from out of town and left. He walked around Wang Dun's camp and came out.

古文：便与客姥马鞭而去。
现代文：王敦的士兵发现了，说： 这不是普通人啊！ 
English: Wang Dun's soldiers found out and said, "This is no ordinary person!

古文：行敦营匝而出，军士觉，曰： 此非常人也！ 
现代文：王敦躺在床上，忽然心跳，说： 这一定是黄胡子的鲜卑奴来了！ 
English: Wang Dun was lying in bed when his heart suddenly started to beat. He said, "It must be the yellow-bearded villain!"

古文：敦卧心动，曰： 此必黄须鲜卑奴来！ 
现代文：下令骑兵去追赶他，可是已经相距很远了。
English: He ordered his cavalry to pursue him, but they were already far behind.

古文：命骑追之，已觉多许里，追士因问向姥： 不见一黄须人骑马度此邪？ 
现代文：追击的士兵就问刚才那位老妇； 没有看见一个黄胡子的人骑马从这里经过吗？ 
English: The pursuing soldiers asked the old woman: "Didn't you see a man with a yellow beard riding past here?"

古文：姥曰： 去已久矣，不可复及。 
现代文：老妇说： 已经走了很久了，再也追不上了。 
English: The old woman said, "It's been a long time, I can't catch up with him.

古文：于是骑人息意而反。
现代文：于是骑兵打消了追赶的念头就回去了。
English: So the cavalry gave up the idea of chasing and went back.

古文：王右军年减十岁时，大将军甚爱之，恒置帐中眠。
现代文：右军将军王羲之不满十岁的时候，大将军王敦很喜爱他，常常安排他在自己的床帐中睡觉。
English: When the right-wing general Wang Xizhi was less than ten years old, the general Wang Dun liked him very much and often arranged for him to sleep in his own bed.

古文：大将军尝先出，右军犹未起。
现代文：有一次王敦先出帐，王羲之还没有起床。
English: On one occasion, Wang Dun checked out first, but Wang Xizhi hadn't gotten up yet.

古文：须臾，钱凤入，屏人论事，都忘右军在帐中，便言逆节之谋。
现代文：一会儿，钱凤进来，屏退手下的人，商议事情，一点也没想起羲之还在床上，就说起叛乱的计划。
English: After a while, Qian Feng came in, screened his subordinates, and discussed the matter. Without thinking at all that Yu Zhi was still in bed, he talked about the plan of rebellion.

古文：右军觉，既闻所论，知无活理，乃剔吐污头面被褥，诈孰眠。
现代文：王羲之醒来，已经听到了他们的谈论，就知道没法活命了，于是抠出口水，把头脸和被褥都弄脏了，假装睡得很熟。
English: When Wang Xizhi woke up and heard them talking, he knew he couldn't go on living. So he drank water, soiled his face and bedding, and pretended to be fast asleep.

古文：敦论事造半，方意右军未起，相与大惊曰： 不得不除之！ 
现代文：王敦商量事情到中途，才想起王羲之还没有起床，彼此十分惊慌，说： 不得不把他杀了。 
English: When Wang Dun was in the middle of discussing the matter, he remembered that Wang Xizhi had not yet got up. They were very alarmed and said, "We had to kill him."

古文：及开帐，乃见吐唾从横，信其实孰眠，于是得全。
现代文：等到掀开帐子，才看见他吐得到处都是，就相信他真的睡得很熟，于是才保住了命。
English: It wasn't until he opened the blinds and saw that he had vomited everywhere that he believed he was actually fast asleep and saved his life.

古文：于时称其有智。
现代文：当时人们都称赞他有智谋。
English: At the time, people praised him for his cleverness.

古文：陶公自上流来，赴苏峻之难，令诛庾公。谓必戮庾，可以谢峻。
现代文：陶侃从荆州赶来平定苏峻的叛乱，下令惩办庾亮，认为一定要杀庾亮，才可以拒绝苏峻的要求，使他退兵。
English: Tao Kan arrived from Jingzhou to quell Su Jun's rebellion and ordered the punishment of Gong Liang. He believed that it was necessary to kill Gong Liang in order to refuse Su Jun's request and make him leave the army.

古文：庾欲奔窜，则不可；欲会，恐见执，进退无计。
现代文：庾亮想要逃亡，却不行；想要去见陶侃，又恐怕被逮捕，进退两难。
English: Hao Liang wants to escape, but he can't; he wants to see Tao Kan, but he's afraid of being arrested, he's caught in a dilemma.

古文：温公劝庾诣陶，曰： 卿但遥拜，必无它。我为卿保之。 
现代文：温峤劝庾亮去拜会陶侃，说： 你只要远远就向他下拜行礼，一走没事儿，我给你担保。 
English: Wen Xuan advised Yao Liang to visit Tao Kan, saying, "As long as you are far away, you can bow down to him. Once you leave, there will be no problem. I will give you a guarantee."

古文：庾从温言诣陶。
现代文：庾亮采纳了温峤的意见去拜访陶侃，一到就行了个大礼。
English: Hao Liang took Wen Qi's advice to visit Tao Kan, and made a big gift as soon as he arrived.

古文：至，便拜。陶自起止之，曰： 庾元规何缘拜陶士行？ 
现代文：陶侃亲自站起来不让他行礼，说： 庾元规为什么要拜我陶士行？ 
English: Tao Kan himself stood up and did not allow him to salute, saying: "Why should Xuan Gui bow to me Taoist line?

古文：毕，又降就下坐。陶又自要起同坐。
现代文：庾亮行完大礼，又退下来坐在下座；陶侃又亲自请他起来和自己一道就座。
English: After the grand salute, Zou Liang stepped back and sat down on the next seat; Tao Kan personally invited him to get up and sit down with him.

古文：坐定，庾乃引咎责躬，深相逊谢。陶不觉释然。
现代文：坐好了，庾亮于是把罪过承担过来，严格要求自己，狠狠地自责，而且表示谢罪，陶侃不知不觉心平气和了。
English: After he was seated, Yao Liang took the blame on himself, strictly demanded of himself, severely blamed himself, and expressed his thanks for his sin. Tao Qian unconsciously calmed down.

古文：温公丧妇，从姑刘氏，家值乱离散，唯有一女，甚有姿慧，姑以属公觅婚。
现代文：温峤的妻子去世了。他的堂房姑母刘氏一家人碰上战乱，辗转离散，只剩下一个女儿在身边了，女儿很漂亮又很聪明，堂姑母托温峤给找个女婿。
English: Wen Wei's wife passed away. His great-aunt Liu's family was caught up in the war and scattered. Only one daughter was left. She was very beautiful and smart. His great-aunt To Wen Wei was looking for a son-in-law.

古文：公密有自婚意，答云： 佳婿难得，但如峤比云何？ 
现代文：温峤私下里有意自己娶她，就回答说： 称心如意的女婿不容易找到，只有像我这样的，不知道行不行？ 
English: Wen Wei secretly wanted to marry her himself, so he replied: "It's not easy to find a son-in-law who is to one's liking. It's only people like me who don't know if it's possible.

古文：姑云： 丧败之余，乞粗存活，便足慰吾余年，何敢希汝比？ 
现代文：姑母说： 经过战乱活下来的人，只求马马虎虎保住条命，我晚年就深感安慰了，哪里还敢希望找一个像你这么好的女婿。 
English: My aunt said: People who have survived the war only ask for their lives to be spared. In my later years, I feel deeply comforted. Who would dare to hope for a son-in-law as good as you?

古文：却后少日，公报姑云： 已觅得婚处，门地粗可，婿身名宦，尽不减峤。 
现代文：过了没几天，温峤回复姑母说： 已经找到一户人家，门第还过得去，女婿本人名声、官位全都不比我差。 
English: A few days later, Wen Wei replied to her aunt, "I have already found a family, and my son-in-law's name and official position are no worse than mine.

古文：因下玉镜台一枚。
现代文：于是送上一个玉镜台做聘礼。
English: So he gave her a jade mirror stand as a betrothal gift.

古文：姑大喜。
现代文：姑母非常高兴。
English: My aunt was very happy.

古文：既婚，交礼，女以手披纱扇，抚掌大笑曰： 我固疑是老奴，果如所卜！ 
现代文：等到结婚，行了交拜礼以后，新娘用手拨开纱扇，拍手大笑说： 我本来就疑心是你这个老家伙，果然不出所料。 
English: When the wedding was over, after the ceremony, the bride opened the veil fan with her hand, clapped her hands, and said with a loud laugh, "I had my suspicions about you being an old man, but it turned out to be true.

古文：玉镜台，是公为刘越石长史，北征刘聪所得。
现代文：玉镜台是温峤在刘琨手下做长史，率军讨伐刘聪时所得。
English: The jade mirror stand was obtained by Wen Qi when he led the army to fight against Liu Cong after a long history under Liu Bei.

古文：诸葛令女，庾氏妇，既寡，誓云： 不复重出！ 
现代文：尚书令诸葛恢的女儿是庾亮的儿媳妇，守寡后，发誓绝不改嫁。
English: Shang Shuling Zhuge Wei's daughter is a brilliant daughter-in-law. After being widowed, she swore never to remarry.

古文：此女性甚正强，无有登车理。
现代文：这个女子本性很正派、刚强，没有可能改嫁。
English: This woman's nature is very decent, strong, and there is no possibility of remarriage.

古文：恢既许江思玄婚，乃移家近之。初，诳女云： 宜徙。 
现代文：但诸葛恢又把她许给了江虨，于是把家搬到江家附近，起初他欺骗女儿说： 应该搬到这里来。 
English: But Zhuge again promised her to Jiang Chen, so he moved his home near Jiang's home. At first, he deceived his daughter and said, "You should move here."

古文：于是家人一时去，独留女在后。
现代文：后来家里人一下都走了，只把她留在后面。
English: Later, all the family members left at once, leaving her behind.

古文：比其觉，已不复得出。
现代文：等她省悟过来，已经再也出不去了。
English: When she came to her senses, she could no longer go out.

古文：江郎莫来，女哭詈弥甚，积日渐歇。
现代文：江思玄晚上进来，她哭骂得更加厉害，过了好些天才渐渐平静下来。
English: Jiang Shixuan came in the evening, she cried and cursed even more, and gradually calmed down after several days.

古文：江虨暝入宿，恒在对床上。
现代文：江思玄天黑时来往宿，总是睡在对面床上。
English: Jiang Sigen comes and goes from his lodging when it is dark, and always sleeps on the opposite side of the bed.

古文：后观其意转帖，虨乃诈厌，良久不悟，声气转急。
现代文：后来看她的心情更加平静了，江思玄就假装做恶梦，很久都醒不过来，叫声和呼吸更加急促。
English: Later, when her mood calmed down, Jiang Shixuan pretended to have a nightmare and could not wake up for a long time. Her cries and breathing became more rapid.

古文：女乃呼婢云： 唤江郎觉！ 
现代文：她于是招呼侍女说： 快把江郎叫醒！ 
English: She then called her maid and said, "Wake up Jiang Lang!"

古文：江于是跃来就之曰： 我自是天下男子，厌，何预卿事而见唤邪？
现代文：江思玄于是跳起来到她床上去，说： 我堂堂男子汉，做噩梦关你什么事，为什么把我叫醒呢？
English: Jiang Shixuan then jumped up onto her bed and said, "I'm a real man, what's it to you if I have nightmares? Why did you wake me up?

古文：既尔相关，不得不与人语。 
现代文：既然我们彼此相关，从此以后，你就该和我说话。 
English: Since we are related, you should talk to me from now on.

古文：女默然而惭，情义遂笃。
现代文：她默不作声，感到羞愧，从此两人的情义才深厚起来。
English: She kept silent, feeling ashamed, and from then on, the two of them were deeply in love.

古文：愍度道人始欲过江，与一伧道人为侣，谋曰： 用旧义在江东，恐不办得食。 
现代文：憋度和尚起初想过江到江南，邀一个中州和尚做伴，两人商量说： 在江南宣讲旧教义，恐怕难以糊口。 
English: At first, Sheng Duoduo and Shang wanted to go to the south of the Yangtze River, and invited a middle-ranking state official and Shang Duoduo to accompany him. The two discussed and said, "I am afraid that it is difficult to make a living by preaching the old doctrine in the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：便共立 心无义 。
现代文：就一道创立心无义。
English: It doesn't make sense to start a company together.

古文：既而此道人不成渡，愍度果讲义积年。
现代文：事后，这个和尚没有去成，愍度和尚果然在江南宣讲了多年的心无义。
English: After the fact, this monk did not go to Chengdu, and indeed, he preached nonsense for many years in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：后有伧人来，先道人寄语云： 为我致意愍度，无义那可立？
现代文：后来有个中州人过江来，先前那个和尚请他传话说： 请替我问候愍度，告诉他，心无义怎么可以成立呢！
English: Later, a man from Chuzhou came across the river. The monk had asked him to send a message saying, "Please give my regards to Xingdu, and tell him, how can it be true that one's heart is without meaning?"

古文：治此计，权救饥尔！无为遂负如来也。 
现代文：当初想出这个办法，只是姑且用来度过饥寒罢了，不要最终违背了如来佛呀！ 
English: When I first came up with this idea, I just wanted to use it to get through the cold and hunger. I didn't want to go against the Buddha!

古文：王文度弟阿智，恶乃不翅，当年长而无人与婚。
现代文：王文度的弟弟王虔之，非常顽劣，年纪很大了都没有人愿意与他结亲。
English: Wang Wenduo's younger brother, Wang Qianzhi, was very bad, and no one wanted to marry him when he was very old.

古文：孙兴公有一女，亦僻错，又无嫁娶理。因诣文度，求见阿智。
现代文：孙兴公有一个女儿，性格也很怪僻、不近情理，又没有办法嫁出去；他便去拜访文度，要求见见王坦之。
English: Sun Xinggong had a daughter, who was also very eccentric and unreasonable, and had no way to get married. He went to visit Wenda and asked to see Wang Tan.

古文：既见，便阳言： 此定可，殊不如人所传，那得至今未有婚处？
现代文：见面后，便假意说： 这孩子一定可以，完全不像别人传的那样糟，怎么会至今还没成亲？
English: After they met, they said, hypothetically: This child must be able, completely not as bad as others say, how come he hasn't gotten married yet?

古文：我有一女，乃不恶，但吾寒士，不宜与卿计，欲令阿智娶之。 
现代文：我有个女儿，也还不坏，只是我家贫寒，本不应和你商量，但我想让阿智娶她。 
English: I have a daughter, and she's not bad, but my family is poor, and I shouldn't have discussed it with you, but I want Achi to marry her.

古文：文度欣然而启蓝田云： 兴公向来，忽言欲与阿智婚。 
现代文：王坦之很高兴地告诉父亲蓝田侯王述说： 兴公刚才来过，忽然说起要和阿智结亲。 
English: Wang Tanzhi was very happy to tell his father, the lord of Lantian, Wang Shu, that: Xing Gong had just arrived and suddenly said that he wanted to marry Achi.

古文：蓝田惊喜。
现代文：王述又惊奇又高兴。
English: Wang Shu was both surprised and pleased.

古文：既成婚，女之顽嚚，欲过阿智。
现代文：结婚以后，女方的愚蠢、顽固，快要超过阿智。
English: After marriage, a woman's stupidity and stubbornness will soon surpass that of a wise man.

古文：方知兴公之诈。
现代文：这才知道孙兴公的狡诈。
English: That's when we learned of Sun Xinggong's cunning.

古文：范玄平为人，好用智数，而有时以多数失会。
现代文：范玄平为人处世爱用权术，可是有时因为多用权术而坐失良机。
English: Fan Xuanping is a person who likes to use power to deal with the world, but sometimes he misses a good opportunity because of the multiple use of power.

古文：尝失官居东阳，桓大司马在南州，故往投之。
现代文：他曾经失掉官职住在东阳郡，由于大司马桓温在姑孰，便特意前去投奔他。
English: He once lost his official position and lived in Dongyang County. Since the chief magistrate Ma Huanwen was in Gushan, he deliberately went to join him.

古文：桓时方欲招起屈滞，以倾朝廷；且玄平在京，素亦有誉，桓谓远来投己，喜跃非常。
现代文：桓温当时正想招揽起用不得志的人才，以胜过朝廷。再说范玄平在京都，一向也很有声誉，桓温认为他是远道来投奔自己，格外高兴、激动。
English: At that time, Kuan-Wen was trying to recruit unsolicited talent to outdo the imperial court. In addition, Fan Xuanping had always had a good reputation in Kyoto. Kuan-Wen thought he had come a long way to join him, and was particularly happy and excited.

古文：比入至庭，倾身引望，语笑欢甚。
现代文：等到他进入院内，便侧身伸长脖子远望，说说笑笑，高兴得很。
English: When he entered the hospital, he stretched his neck sideways and gazed into the distance, chatting and laughing, very happy.

古文：顾谓袁虎曰： 范公且可作太常卿。 
现代文：还回头对袁虎说： 范公暂且可以任太常卿。 
English: He also turned back to Yuan Hu and said: Fan Gong can be appointed as Tai Changqing for the time being.

古文：范裁坐，桓便谢其远来意。
现代文：范玄平刚刚坐下，桓温就感谢他远道而来的好意。
English: Fan Xuanping had just sat down when Kanwen thanked him for his kindness.

古文：范虽实投桓，而恐以趋时损名，乃曰： 虽怀朝宗，会有亡儿瘗在此，故来省视。 
现代文：范玄平虽然确实是来投奔桓温，可是又怕人家说他趋炎附势，有损名声，便说： 我虽然有心拜见长官，也正巧我有个儿子葬在这里，特意前来看望一下。 
English: Although Fan Xuanping did indeed come to invest in Huanwen, he was afraid that people would say that he was inflaming the situation and tarnishing his reputation, so he said: Although I have the heart to visit the chief, it just so happens that I have a son buried here, so I specifically came to take a look.

古文：桓怅然失望，向之虚伫，一时都尽。
现代文：桓温听了，无精打采，大失所望，刚才那种虚心期待之情，顷刻之间全都完了。
English: Kanen listened, listless, greatly disappointed. The feelings of humble expectation that he had just felt were all gone in an instant.

古文：谢遏年少时，好箸紫罗香囊，垂覆手。
现代文：谢遏年少时，喜欢佩戴紫罗香囊，让它垂挂下来覆盖在手上。
English: When she was young, Xie Jian liked to wear a violet sachet and let it hang down and cover her hands.

古文：太傅患之，而不欲伤其意，乃谲与赌，得即烧之。
现代文：太傅谢安为这事很担忧，却又不忍心伤他的心。
English: Taifu Xie An was very worried about this, but she couldn't bear to break his heart.

