古文：黄帝在明堂，雷公侍坐，黄帝曰：夫子所通书受事众多矣，试言得失之意，所以得之，所以失之。
现代文：黄帝坐在明堂，雷公侍坐于旁。黄帝说：先生所通晓的医书和所从事的医疗工作，已经是很多的了，你试谈谈对医疗上的成功与失败的看法，为什么能成功，为什么会失败。
English: Huang Di was sitting in the Ming Hall, and Lei Gongsheng was sitting next to him. Huang Di said, "There are already a lot of medical books that you are familiar with and medical work that you are engaged in. Try to talk about your views on medical success and failure, why you can succeed and why you fail."

古文：雷公对曰：循经受业，皆言十全，其时有过失者，请闻其事解也。
现代文：雷公说：我遵循医经学习医术，书上都说可以得到十全的效果，但在医疗中有时还是有过失的，请问这应该怎样解释呢？
English: Lei Gong said: I follow the medical theory to learn medicine. The book says that I can get perfect results, but sometimes I make mistakes in medical treatment. How should I explain this?

古文：帝曰：子年少，智未及邪，将言以杂合耶？
现代文：黄帝说：这是由于年岁轻智力不足，考虑不及呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "This is due to my young age and lack of intelligence. I can't think about it."

古文：夫经脉十二，络脉三百六十五，此皆人之所明知，工之所循用也。
现代文：还是对众人的学说缺乏分析呢？经脉有十二，络脉有三百六十五，这是人们所知道的，也是医生所遵循应用的。
English: Or is there a lack of analysis of the teachings of the people? There are twelve meridians and three hundred and sixty-five veins, which are known to people and followed and applied by doctors.

古文：所以不十全者，精神不专，志意不理，外内相失，故时疑殆。
现代文：治病所以不能收到十全的疗效，是由于精神不能专一，志意不够条理，不能将外在的脉证与内在的病情综合一起分析，所以时常发生疑惑和危殆。
English: The reason why we cannot receive complete curative effect in the treatment of diseases is that the spirit cannot be single-minded, the will is not organized enough, and the external pulse can not be analyzed together with the internal disease, so doubts and danger often occur.

古文：诊不知阴阳逆从之理，此治之一失矣。
现代文：诊病不知阴阳逆从的道理，这是治病失败的第一个原因。
English: Diagnosis does not know the principle of yin and yang, which is the first reason for treatment failure.

古文：受师不卒，妄作杂术，谬言为道，更名自功，妄用砭石，后遗身咎，此治之二失也。
现代文：随师学习没有卒业，学术未精，乱用杂术，以错误为真理，变易其说，而自以为功，乱施砭石，给自己遗留下过错，这是治病失败的第二个原因。
English: The second reason for the failure of medical treatment is the following: following the teacher's study without graduation, academic sophistication, abuse of miscellaneous skills, taking mistakes as the truth, changing it, and taking credit for it, misplacing the stone, and leaving mistakes for oneself.

古文：不适贫富贵贱之居，坐之薄厚，形之寒温，不适饮食之宜，不别人之勇怯，不知比类，足以自乱，不足以自明，此治之三失也。
现代文：治病不能适宜于病人的贫富贵贱生活特点、居处环境的好坏、形体的寒温，不能适合饮食之所宜，不区别个性的勇怯，不知道用比类异同的方法进行分析，这种作法，只能扰乱自己的思想，不足以自明，这是治病失败的第三个原因。
English: The third reason for the failure of treatment is that the treatment cannot be suited to the characteristics of the patient's rich and poor life, the quality of the living environment, the coldness of the body, the appropriateness of the diet, the courage of not distinguishing the personality, and the failure to analyze with the method of comparing similarities and differences. This approach can only disturb one's own thoughts and is not self-evident.

古文：诊病不问其始，忧患饮食之失节，起居之过度，或伤于毒，不先言此，卒持寸口，何病能中，妄言作名，为所穷，此治之四失也。
现代文：诊病时不问病人开始发病的情况，及是否曾有过忧患等精神上的刺激，饮食是否失于节制，生活起居是否超越正常规律，或者是否曾伤于毒，如果诊病时不首先问清楚这些情况，便仓促去诊视寸口。怎能诊中病情，只能是乱言病名，使病为这种粗律治疗的作风所困，这是治病失败的第四个原因。
English: At the time of diagnosis, patients are not asked about the onset of the disease, and whether they have had mental stimuli such as anxiety, whether their diet is out of control, whether their lifestyle is beyond the normal law, or whether they have been injured by poison. If they do not first ask about these conditions at the time of diagnosis, they will rush to the clinic. How can the disease be diagnosed, it can only be the name of the disease, and the disease is trapped by this rough treatment style, which is the fourth reason for the failure of treatment.

古文：是以世人之语者，驰千里之外，不明尺寸之论，诊无人事。
现代文：所以社会上的一些医生，虽学道于千里之外，但却不明白尺寸的道理，诊治疾病，不知参考人事。
English: Therefore, some doctors in society, although they have studied thousands of miles away, do not understand the principle of size, diagnose and treat diseases, and do not know how to refer to personnel.

古文：治数之道，从容之葆，坐持寸口，诊不中五脉，百病所起，始以自怨，遗师其咎。
现代文：更不知诊病之道应以能作到比类从容为最宝贵的道理，只知诊察寸口。这种作法，既诊不中五脏之脉，更不知疾病的起因，开始埋怨自己的学术不精，继而归罪于老师传授不明。
English: Moreover, they do not know that the most valuable principle for diagnosing diseases is to be able to make comparisons calmly, but only know how to diagnose and inspect the mouth. This practice, once diagnosed, does not know the veins of the five internal organs, and does not know the cause of the disease, began to complain about their academic incompetence, and then blamed on the teacher's unclear teaching.

古文：是故治不能循理，弃术于市，妄治时愈，愚心自得。
现代文：所以治病如果不能遵循医理，必为群众所不信任，乱治中偶然治愈疾病，不知是侥幸，反自鸣得意。啊！
English: Therefore, if the treatment of disease cannot follow the principles of medicine, it will be distrusted by the masses. If a disease is cured by accident during a chaotic treatment, it is no doubt a fluke, but it is self-satisfied. Ah!

古文：呜呼！窈窈冥冥，熟知其道？
现代文：医道之精微深奥，有谁能彻底了解其中的道理？
English: Medical science is subtle and profound. Who can fully understand its principles?

古文：道之大者，拟于天地，配于四海，汝不知道之谕，受以明为晦。
现代文：医道之大，可以比拟于天地，配于四海，你若不能通晓道之教谕，则所接受之道理，虽很明白，必反成暗晦不明。
English: The greatness of the medical path can be compared to the heavens and the earth, and it is worthy of the four seas. If you cannot understand the teachings of the path, then the reason you accept, although it is very clear, will turn into obscurity.

