古文：陈义郎达奚珣华阳李尉段秀实马奉忠郓卒乐生宋申锡蜀营典
现代文：陈义郎达奚珣华阳李尉段秀实马奉忠郓卒乐生宋申锡蜀营典
English: Chen Yirong, Dajian, Huayang, Li Fei, Duan, Xiushi, Ma Bongzhong, Zou, Le Sheng, Song Sheng, Xishu, Ying Dian

古文：陈义郎
现代文：陈义郎
English: Chen Yiro

古文：陈义郎，父彝爽，与周茂方皆东洛福昌人。
现代文：陈义郎的父亲彝爽与周茂方都是东洛福昌人。
English: Chen Yiro's father, Hao Shuang, and Zhou Maofang are both from Dongluo Fuchang.

古文：同于三乡习业，彝爽擢第，归娶郭愔女，茂方名竟不就，唯与彝爽交结相誓。
现代文：一同在三乡读书，后来彝爽考中，回家娶了郭愔的女儿。茂方终于没有考上，只与彝爽盟誓结为兄弟。
English: They went to school together in Sanxiang, and later, in the middle of Gong Shuang's exam, he went home and married Guo Yao's daughter. In the end, Mobang did not pass the exam, and only pledged to be brothers with Gong Shuang.

古文：唐天宝中，彝爽调集，受蓬州仪陇令。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，彝爽被调用，受官蓬州仪陇县令。
English: During the Tianbao period of the Tang Dynasty, Gao Shuang was summoned and received the order of Pengzhou Yili County.

古文：其母恋旧居，不从子之官。
现代文：他的母亲留恋故乡旧居，不愿随儿子到官府去，收拾了几天行李。
English: His mother was nostalgic for her hometown and old house, and did not want to accompany her son to the government office, so she packed her bags for a few days.

古文：行李有日，郭氏以自织染缣一匹，裁衣欲上其姑，误为交刀伤指，血沾衣上。
现代文：郭氏用自己织染的一匹双丝绸绢，裁了一件衣服敬送给婆婆，不小心被剪刀弄伤了手指，血沾到衣服上了。
English: Mr. Guo used a pair of silk cocoons woven and dyed by himself to cut a dress to give to his mother-in-law. He accidentally injured his finger with scissors, and blood stained the dress.

古文：启姑曰： 新妇七八年温清晨昏，今将随夫之官，远违左右，不胜咽恋。
现代文：她就告诉婆婆说： 新媳妇这七八年来早晚冷热让你操心照看，现在就要随丈夫到官所去了，远离你的身边，特别牵挂留念。
English: She told her mother-in-law: "For the past seven or eight years, the new daughter-in-law has let you take care of her in hot and cold weather, and now she has to go with her husband to the government office, far away from your side. I am particularly concerned about her.

古文：然手自成此衫子，上有剪刀误伤血痕，不能浣去，大家见之。即不忘息妇。 
现代文：然而我亲手作了这件衣衫，上面有不小心被剪刀伤了手指的血痕，洗不掉了，留下以后作个纪念，大家看见它，也就会想起媳妇。 
English: However, I made this shirt with my own hands. There are bloodstains on it from my fingers, which were accidentally injured by scissors. I can't wash it off, so I'll keep it as a souvenir. When people see it, they will also think of my daughter-in-law.

古文：其姑亦哭。
现代文：婆婆听后也哭了。
English: My mother-in-law also cried after hearing this.

古文：彝爽固请茂方同行。
现代文：彝爽坚决请茂方与他同去。
English: Gao Shuang resolutely invited Mobo to go with him.

古文：其子义郎，才二岁，茂方见之，甚于骨肉。
现代文：彝爽的儿子义郎才两岁，茂方见了他比自己的孩子还亲。
English: His son, Yiro, is only two years old, but he is closer to him than his own children.

古文：及去仪陇五百余里，磴石临险，巴江浩渺，攀萝游览，茂方忽生异志，命仆夫等先行，为吾邮亭具馔。二人徐步，自牵马行，忽于山路斗拔之所，抽金鎚击彝爽，碎颡，挤之于浚湍之中，佯号哭云： 某内逼，北回，见马惊践长官殂矣，今将何之？ 
现代文：等到距仪陇有五百多里时，登山涉险，巴江广阔无边，他们只好一路跋涉、攀登，一路游览。这时茂方忽然想出个坏主意，他让家仆和马夫等在前面先走，给他们先在邮亭那里准备好饭菜，只有他和彝爽二人在后面自己牵着马慢慢走，当走到一处非常陡峭的山崖边时，茂方忽然抽出金锤打彝爽，把额头都打碎了，然后又把他推到湍急的江水里。他还假装哭着说： 我去大便，回头看见马受惊，把长官踹到山崖下去死了，现在可怎么办啊？ 
English: When they were more than five hundred miles away from Jiayuguan, they had to trek, climb, and explore all the way. At this time, Maofang suddenly came up with a bad idea. He asked his servants and groomsmen to go ahead and prepare meals for them at the post office. Only he and Hao Shuang walked slowly with their horses. When they reached the edge of a very steep cliff, Maofang suddenly pulled out a gold hammer and hit Hao Shuang, breaking his forehead, and then pushed him into the rushing river. He also pretended to cry and said, "I went to defecate. When I looked back, I saw that my horse was

古文：一夜会丧，爽妻及仆御致酒感恸，茂方曰： 事既如此，如之何？
现代文：一夜之间大家都很悲痛哀丧，爽妻和仆人马夫们也向他敬酒感到悲伤。这时茂方说： 事情已经到了这个地步，我们怎么办？
English: Overnight, everyone was very sad, and his wife and servants, the grooms, were also sad to toast him. At this time, Mobo said: Things have come to this point, what should we do?

古文：况天下四方人一无知者，吾便权与夫人乘名之官，且利一政俸禄，逮可归北。 
现代文：人死不能复活，况且天下四方再也没有别人知道这件事。我就权且和夫人冒名去上任，先赚他十年的俸禄，有了钱我们就可以回到北方的家。 
English: People can't be resurrected after death, and besides, no one else in the world knows about this. My husband and I pretended to take office and earn his ten-year salary first. Once we have the money, we can return to our home in the north.

古文：即与发哀，仆御等皆悬厚利，妻不知本末，乃从其计。
现代文：说到这儿，他又哀痛了一阵，仆人马夫都答应给予重赏，爽的妻子又不知这件事的真相，就听了茂方的话上任去了。
English: At this point, he grieved for a while. The servants, Mafu, all promised to give him a reward, and his wife, who did not know the truth of the matter, listened to Shigeru and took up the post.

古文：到任，安帖其仆。
现代文：到任以后，茂方先安顿了仆人等。
English: After taking office, Mobo first installed servants and so on.

古文：一年已后，谓郭曰： 吾志已成，誓无相背。 
现代文：一年以后，他才对郭愔的女儿说： 我的志向已经成功，但我发誓，今后决不背叛你。 
English: A year later, he said to Guo Yao's daughter: My ambition has been successful, but I swear that I will never betray you in the future.

古文：郭氏藏恨，未有所施，茂方防虞甚切。
现代文：郭氏只好把这深仇大恨埋在心里，没有采取什么行动。茂方还是小心谨慎严加防备的。
English: Mr. Guo had to bury this deep hatred in his heart and did not take any action. Mobo was still careful and cautious.

古文：秩满，移官，家于遂州长江，又一选，授遂州曹掾。
现代文：在任期满，调到别处作官，定居在遂州长江。又一次选官，授予遂州曹椽。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was transferred to another place to work as an official and settled in Suizhou Changjiang. Once again, he was elected as an official and awarded the Suizhou Cao Wei.

古文：居无何，已十七年，子长十九岁矣，茂方谓必无人知，教子经业，既而欲成，遂州秩满，挈其子应举。
现代文：这样匆匆过了十七年，义郎也长到十九岁了。茂方心里想一定没有人知道，就教义郎读书，义郎学得很好。在遂州又届满，就趁这个机会带着义郎进京应举。
English: Seventeen years passed in such a hurry, and Yiro also grew to be nineteen years old. Shigehata thought that no one would know, so he taught Yiro to read, and Yiro learned very well. After completing his studies in Suizhou, he took advantage of this opportunity to take Yiro to Beijing to study.

古文：是年东都举选，茂方取北路，令子取南路，茂方意令觇故园之存没。
现代文：这一年在东都选拔举人，茂方走北路，让义郎走南路。茂方的用意是让义郎看看过去的庄园还有没有了。
English: This year, a selection was held in Dongdu, with Mobo taking the north road and Yiro taking the south road. Mobo's intention was to let Yiro see if there was anything left of the former manor.

古文：涂次三乡，有鬻饭媪留食，再三瞻瞩。
现代文：义郎在路途上经过三乡，有一个卖饭的老太太留他吃饭，再三地上下打量他。
English: Yiro passed through three townships on his way. An old lady selling rice kept him for dinner and repeatedly looked him up and down.

古文：食讫，将酬其直，媪曰： 不然，吾怜子似吾孙姿状。 
现代文：吃完饭就要给饭钱。这老太太说： 不用给钱了，我爱你的相貌像我的孙子一样。 
English: The old lady said, "You don't have to pay, I love your face like my grandson.

古文：因启衣箧，出郭氏所留血污衫子以遗，泣而送之。
现代文：说着就打开衣箱，拿出郭氏所留下来的那件有血痕的衣衫作赠品，一边哭一边送给他。
English: Saying this, she opened the suitcase, took out the blood-stained shirt that Guo had left behind as a gift, and gave it to him while crying.

古文：其子秘于囊，亦不知其由，与父之本末。
现代文：义郎秘密地收到行囊里，但不知这其中的缘由和他父亲的前后事情。
English: Yiro secretly receives a backpack, but does not know the reason for this and the circumstances surrounding his father.

古文：明年下第，归长江，其母忽见血迹衫子，惊问其故，子具以三乡媪所对。
现代文：第二年没有考中，回到长江。他的母亲忽然发现了那件血迹的衣衫，吃惊地问这是那儿来的。
English: The following year, he failed the middle school entrance examination and returned to the Yangtze River. His mother suddenly found the blood-stained shirt and, surprised, asked where it had come from.

古文：及问年状，即其姑也，因大泣。引子于静室，具言之： 此非汝父，汝父为此人所害，吾久欲言，虑汝之幼，吾妇人，谋有不臧，则汝亡父之冤，无复雪矣，非惜死也。
现代文：义郎就把在三乡遇到一个老太太的事告诉了他母亲，等他母亲问那老太太的年龄相貌，就知道是她的婆婆，因此大哭一场，然后拉着义郎到一个静僻的屋子里，她把前前后后一切事情都告诉了儿子，又说： 现在的父亲不是你的亲生父亲，你父亲就是被他害死的，我早就想对你说，考虑你太小，我又是一个妇道人家，如果考虑不周，那么你死了的父亲的冤枉，就没办法昭雪了。并不是我怕死呀。
English: Yiro told his mother about the encounter with an old lady in Misato. When his mother asked the age and appearance of the old lady, she knew it was her mother-in-law, so she burst into tears. Then she dragged Yiro to a secluded room. She told her son everything that had happened before and after, and said: The current father is not your biological father, your father was killed by him. I have long wanted to tell you, considering you are too young, and I am a woman. If you do not consider it carefully, then there is no way to clear up the injustice of your dead father. It is not that I am afraid of death.

古文：今此吾手留血襦还，乃天意乎？ 
现代文：现在我的儿子亲手带着被血染的衣服回家，这不是天意吗？ 
English: Now my son is coming home with blood-stained clothes on his hands. Isn't that God's will?

古文：其子密砺霜刃，候茂方寝，乃断吭，仍挈其首诣官。
现代文：义郎暗中磨了一把快刀，等到茂方睡着了，就切断他的喉咙，还提着他的头到官府里告状。
English: Yiro secretly sharpened a sword, and when Mobo fell asleep, he cut his throat and took his head to the government office to file a complaint.

古文：连帅义之，免罪，即侍母东归。
现代文：连帅认为他是个讲父子之义的孩子，免除他的罪过，让他侍奉母亲东归三乡。
English: Lian Shuai thought that he was a child who spoke of the righteousness of his father and son, absolved him of his sins, and let him serve his mother.

古文：其姑尚存，且叙契阔，取衫子验之，歔欷对泣，郭氏养姑三年而终。
现代文：回到家后见婆婆还活着，他们说起过去的事，拿出衫子来对证，哽咽着对哭起来。郭氏供养婆婆，三年后婆婆去世了。
English: After returning home and seeing that her mother-in-law was still alive, they talked about the past, took out a shirt to testify, choked and cried. Guo provided for her mother-in-law, and three years later her mother-in-law died.

古文：达奚珣
现代文：达奚珣
English: Dadao

古文：唐肃宗收复两都，崔器为三司使，性刻乐祸，阴忍寡恩。
现代文：唐肃宗皇帝收复两都后，崔器任三司使。他性情苛毒，幸灾乐祸，又阴险残忍很少施恩于人。
English: After Emperor Suizong of Tang recovered the two capitals, Cui Jie was appointed as the third envoy. He had a harsh temperament, gloated over misfortune, and was insidiously cruel and rarely showed kindness to others.

古文：希旨深文，奏陷贼官据合处死。
现代文：他还能根据皇上的意图给予发挥。他上奏皇帝说： 凡是沦陷在贼寇中的官员都应该处死。 
English: He could also play according to the emperor's intention. He appealed to the emperor and said: All officials who fall into the hands of bandits should be put to death.

古文：李岘执之曰： 夫事有首从，情有轻重，若一概处死，恐非含弘之义。
现代文：李岘和他争议说： 凡事应该看他是首犯还是协从，情节也要看轻重，如果一概处死，恐怕没有一点儿宽宏大量的仁义可讲。
English: Li Yan disputed with him, saying: Everything should depend on whether he is the first offender or an accomplice, and the circumstances should also depend on the seriousness. If all of them are executed, I am afraid there is not a bit of magnanimity and benevolence to speak of.

古文：昔者明王用刑，歼厥渠魁，协以罔理。
现代文：过去开明的皇帝用刑罚就是处掉罪魁祸首，胁从的不加审办。
English: In the past, enlightened emperors used to punish the culprits by executing them without trial.

古文：况河北残寇，今尚未平，苟容漏网，适开自新之路。
现代文：况且现在河北一带的残寇还没有平息。暂时让他漏网，最好给他们开一条悔过自新的出路。
English: Moreover, the remaining bandits around Hebei have not yet calmed down. Let him slip through the net for the time being, and it is best to open a way out for them to repent and reform.

古文：若尽行诛，是坚叛逆之心。 
现代文：如果全部诛杀，是坚定了叛贼的反叛心理。 
English: If they are all killed, it will strengthen the traitor's rebelliousness.

古文：守文之吏，不识大体，累日方从岘奏，陈希烈已下，定六等科罪。
现代文：舞文弄墨的文官，不能认识大局，过了很长时间才采纳了李岘的主张。陈希烈之下的人都定为六等罪犯。
English: It took a long time for the bureaucrats, who were not able to see the big picture, to accept Li Qiye's proposal. The people under Chen Xili were all designated as sixth-class criminals.

古文：吕湮骤荐器为吏部侍郎御史大夫，器病脚肿，月余渐亟。
现代文：吕湮马上推荐崔器为吏部侍郎御史大夫。后来崔器得了病，脚肿，一个多月以后渐渐重了。
English: Lv Ying immediately recommended Cui Jie as the secretary of the personnel department. Later, Cui Jie got sick, his foot swelled, and after more than a month, it gradually became heavy.

古文：瞑目即见达奚珣，但口称： 叩头大尹，不自由。 
现代文：他闭上眼睛就看见达奚珣，只是喊： 给大尹磕头，不是我自己作主的。 
English: When he closed his eyes, he saw Daju, but he only shouted: "I'm not the one to give Daju the head, it's not up to me."

古文：左右问之，良久答曰： 达奚尹诉冤，我求之如此。 
现代文：身边的人问他，很久才回答说： 达奚府尹来诉冤，我这样哀求他。 
English: The people around him asked him, and it took him a long time to answer: "Dadu Fu Yin came to appeal for justice, and I implored him in this way.

古文：经三月。不止而死。
现代文：经过三个月，这种事也没停止，然后死了。
English: After three months, it didn't stop, and then he died.

古文：华阳李尉
现代文：华阳李尉
English: Lieutenant Huayang Li

古文：唐天宝后，有张某为剑南节度史。
现代文：唐朝天宝后期，有一个姓张的人任剑南节度使。
English: In the late Tianbao period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a person surnamed Zhang who was appointed as the chief envoy of the Jiannan Festival.

古文：中元日，令郭下诸寺，盛其陈列，以纵士女游观。
现代文：元宵节那天，他下令给城内各个寺院，要把寺院妆扮得盛大隆重，任凭那些善男信女去游览。
English: On the day of the Lantern Festival, he ordered all the temples in the city to dress up grandly and solemnly, and let those good men and women go sightseeing.

古文：有华阳李尉者，妻貌甚美，闻于蜀人，张亦知之。
现代文：有个华阳人李尉，他的妻子非常美丽，真有闭月羞花之貌，在蜀地的人都听说过。
English: There is a Huayang man, Li Fei, whose wife is very beautiful. She really has the appearance of a shy flower. People in Shu have heard of her.

古文：及诸寺严设，倾城皆至，其从事及州县官家人看者，所由必白于张。
现代文：张节度使也知道这些传闻。等到各寺院布置好了，全城的人都出来了，那些从事以及州官县官的家属们来看的也不少。
English: Zhang Jiedu also knew about these rumors. By the time the temples were arranged, the whole city had come out, and the families of those who were engaged in the work as well as the families of prefectural and county officials also came to see.

古文：唯李尉之妻不至，异之，令人潜问其邻，果以貌美不出。
现代文：凡是有这样的人来看，手下人一定去报告张某，只有李尉的妻子没去。张某很奇怪。派人暗中打听他的邻居，果然是因为太漂亮了才不出门。
English: Whenever such a person came to visit, his subordinates would certainly go to report Zhang Mou, but only Lieutenant Li's wife did not go. Zhang Mou was very strange. He sent someone to secretly inquire about his neighbor, and it turned out that he did not go out because she was too beautiful.

古文：张乃令于开元寺选一大院，遣蜀之众工绝巧者，极其妙思，作一铺木人音声，关戾在内，丝竹皆备，令百姓士庶，恣观三日，云： 三日满，即将进内殿。 
现代文：张某就下令在开元寺选择一个大院。派蜀地非常灵巧的工匠，尽全力想巧妙的办法，演一场木偶戏。人关在幕布后面，各种乐器齐备，让全城百姓土庶等人观看三天。并且宣称：三天期满，就将进内殿。
English: Zhang ordered to choose a large courtyard in Kaiyuan Temple. He sent a very skillful craftsman from Shu to do his best to think of a clever way to perform a puppet show. People were locked behind a curtain, all kinds of musical instruments were prepared, so that the city's common people and others could watch for three days. And declared: After three days, they would enter the inner hall.

古文：百里车舆阗噎。
现代文：这样一来，百里以内车马都阻塞了道路。
English: As a result, cars and horses within a hundred miles blocked the road.

古文：两日，李君之妻亦不来。
现代文：已经两天了，李尉的妻子也没来。
English: It's been two days, and Lieutenant Li's wife still hasn't come.

古文：三日欲夜人散，李妻乘兜子从婢一人而至，将出宅，人已奔走启于张矣。
现代文：第三天天要黑了人们都散去，李尉妻乘一便轿带一个婢女来了。她刚出家门，有人已经奔跑到张某那儿报信了。
English: After dark on the third day, everyone dispersed. Li Yizhong's wife arrived in a sedan with a maid. She had just left the house when someone ran to report to Zhang.

古文：张乃易其衣服先往，于院内一脱空佛中坐，觇觑之。
现代文：张某就马上换衣服先到了寺院。在寺院里一座脱空了的佛像里坐着窥视。
English: Zhang immediately changed his clothes and went to the temple first. He sat and peered into a hollowed-out Buddha statue in the temple.

古文：须臾至，先令探屋内都无人，乃下。
现代文：不一会儿李尉妻就到了，她先让婢女看看屋内没有人，才下了轿。
English: Li's wife arrived soon after. She first let her maid see that there was no one in the house before getting out of the car.

古文：张见之，乃神仙之人，非代所有。
现代文：张某一看，真是神仙下凡，并不是世上能有的。
English: Looking at Zhang Guodu, he is truly a supernatural being, something that cannot be found anywhere else in the world.

古文：及归，潜求李尉之家来往者浮图尼及女巫，更致意焉。
现代文：等到他回来，就暗中求那些经常到李尉家的和尚尼姑和女巫，一再表示敬意。
English: When he returned, he secretly asked the monks, nuns and witches who often came to Li Fei's home to pay their respects again and again.

古文：李尉妻皆惊而拒之。
现代文：李尉的妻子每次都吃惊地拒绝了。
English: Surprised, Li's wife refused each time.

古文：会李尉以推事受赃，为其仆所发，张乃令能吏深文按之，奏杖六十，流于岭徼，死于道。
现代文：正赶上李尉因审理案子接受贿赂，被他的仆人揭发了，张某就令能写的官吏更严重地发挥了案情，上奏后责杖六十，流放到岭南边界。后来李尉死在道上。
English: Just in time for Li Fei to receive bribes for the trial of the case, which was exposed by his servant Mao, Zhang ordered the official who could write to play the case more seriously, and after the report, he was reprimanded and exiled to the southern border of Lingnan. Later, Li Fei died on the road.

古文：张乃厚赂李尉之母，强取之，适李尉愚而陋，其妻每有庸奴之恨，遂肯。
现代文：这时张某就多多贿赂李尉的母亲，强行娶了李尉的妻子。恰巧因为李尉愚笨又孤陋，他的妻子经常抱怨自己好比他的佣人和奴才，于是就同意了。
English: At this time, Zhang bribed Lieutenant Li's mother and forcibly married Lieutenant Li's wife. Coincidentally, because Lieutenant Li was stupid and ugly, his wife often complained that she was like his servant and slave, so she agreed.

古文：置于州，张宠敬无与伦此。
现代文：张某把她接到州府，宠爱恭敬简直无与伦比。
English: Zhang Mou took her to the state capital, and her love and respect were unparalleled.

古文：然自此后，亦常仿佛见李尉在于其侧，令术士禳谢，竟不能止。
现代文：然而从这以后，张某也经常仿佛看见李尉在他的身边。他让道士设坛祈祷还是不能终止。
English: However, since then, Zhang often seems to see Li Li at his side. He still can't stop the Taoist from setting up the altar to pray.

古文：岁余，李之妻亦卒。
现代文：一年多后，李尉妻去世了。
English: More than a year later, Li Ye's wife passed away.

古文：数年，张疾病，见李尉之状，亦甚分明。
现代文：几年以后，张某也得了病，看见李尉的形体容貌也更加清楚。
English: A few years later, Zhang also got sick, and he saw Li's appearance more clearly.

古文：忽一日，睹李尉之妻，宛如平生，张惊前问之，李妻曰： 某感公恩深，恩有所报。
现代文：忽然有一天，他见李尉的妻子，就像活着的时候一样。张某很吃惊，就上前去问她。李尉妻说： 我感谢您的深恩，想要报答您。
English: Suddenly one day, he saw Lieutenant Li's wife, just like when he was alive. Zhang was very surprised and went to ask her. Lieutenant Li's wife said: I thank you for your deep gratitude and want to repay you.

古文：李某已上诉于帝，期在此岁，然公亦有人救拔。但过得兹年，必无虞矣。
现代文：李尉已经到天帝那里告了您，你死的期限就在这一年，然后您也有人拯救，只要过了今年，就没有什么顾虑了。
English: Lieutenant Li has already reported you to the Heavenly Emperor. The deadline for your death is this year, and then someone will save you. As long as this year has passed, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：彼已来迎，公若不出，必不敢升公之堂，慎不可下。 
现代文：他已经来找您了，您若是不出去，他一定不敢上您的屋子里，要谨慎，千万不要走出屋子。 
English: He has come looking for you. If you don't go out, he won't dare to come into your house. Be careful and never leave the house.

古文：言毕而去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: Sister Hu finished speaking and left.

古文：其时华山道士符箓极高，与张结坛场于宅内，言亦略同。
现代文：那时华山有个道士画的符很灵验，给张某在宅内设了坛场，说法和李尉妻大致相同。
English: At that time, Huashan had a very effective Taoist painting, and set up an altar for Zhang in the house. The saying is roughly the same as Li Ye's wife.

古文：张数月不敢降阶，李妻亦同来，皆教以严慎之道。
现代文：张某几个月不敢下台阶一步。李尉妻也常来，都告诉谨慎小心的办法。
English: Zhang did not dare to take a step down the stairs for several months. Li Ye's wife also often came and told everyone to be careful.

古文：又一日黄昏时，堂下东厢有丛竹，张见一红衫子袖，于竹侧招己者，以其李妻之来也。都忘前所戒，便下阶，奔往赴之。
现代文：有一天黄昏，张某看见在堂下东厢房的竹丛里有一支红衫子衣袖，在竹丛边上招呼自己，张某以为是李尉妻来了，把以前李妻和道士的告诫全都忘了，下了台阶奔跑过去。
English: One day at dusk, Zhang saw a red shirt sleeve in the bamboo bushes in the east wing of the hall. He hailed himself on the edge of the bamboo bushes. Zhang thought it was Li Ye's wife coming. He forgot all the previous warnings from Li Ye's wife and the Taoist priest, and ran down the steps.

古文：左右随后叫呼，止之不得，至则见李尉衣妇人衣，拽张于林下，殴击良久，云： 此贼若不著红衫子招，肯下阶耶？ 
现代文：他身边的人跟在他后面喊他也阻止不住。到了竹林，看见李尉穿着女人的衣服，把张某拽到竹林里，欧打了很长时间，并且说： 你这个贼人，我若不穿红衫子招呼你，你肯下台阶吗？ 
English: When he arrived at the bamboo grove, he saw Lieutenant Li dressed in women's clothes, dragging Zhang into the bamboo grove. Ou fought him for a long time and said, "You thief, if I don't wear a red shirt to greet you, will you come down the steps?"

古文：乃执之出门去。
现代文：一边说着一边把张某带出门去。
English: While talking, he took Zhang out of the door.

古文：左右如醉，及醒，见张仆于林下矣，眼鼻皆血，唯心上暖，扶至堂而卒矣。
现代文：张某身边的仆役等都好像醉了一样。等到他们醒了，见张某倒在竹林下，眼睛和鼻子都淌着血，只有心口还是暖的，把他扶到屋里时就死了。
English: The servants and others around Zhang seemed to be drunk. When they woke up, they saw Zhang collapsed under the bamboo grove, his eyes and nose were dripping with blood, only his heart was still warm. When they helped him into the house, he was dead.

古文：段秀实
现代文：段秀实
English: Duan Shusi

古文：唐朱泚败，奔泾州，京师副元师李晟，收复宫阙。
现代文：后唐时，朱泚失败了，往泾州逃奔。京师的副元师李晟收复了王宫。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Zhu Xi failed and fled to Zhangzhou. Li Xi, the vice-master of the Beijing division, recovered the royal palace.

古文：朱泚既败走，收残兵士，才余一二百人。
现代文：朱泚败逃后，收拾残兵败将，总共才剩下一二百人了。
English: After Zhu Xi's defeat and escape, he had to gather up the defeated soldiers. In total, there were only one or two hundred people left.

古文：忽昏迷，不辨南北，因问路于田父。田父曰： 岂非朱太尉耶？ 
现代文：在逃跑的路上忽然昏迷，分不清方向了，因此他就向一个种田的老人问路。那老人说： 你不是朱太尉吗？ 
English: On the way to escape, he suddenly fell into a coma and couldn't tell the direction, so he asked an old farmer for directions. The old man said, "Aren't you Zhu Taifeng?"

古文：伪宰相源休止之曰： 汉皇帝。 
现代文：伪宰相源休连忙阻止说： 这是汉朝皇帝。 
English: The pseudo-prime minister, Yuan Hui, hurried to stop him, saying, "This is the emperor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：田父曰： 天地不长凶恶，蛇鼠不为龙虎，天网恢恢，去将何适？ 
现代文：种田老人说： 天地不助长凶恶，蛇和鼠不会成为蛟龙。天网殊而大，你到什么地方去才好呢？ 
English: The old farmer said, "Heaven and earth do not foster evil. Snakes and mice do not become dragons. The sky net is extremely large. Where should you go?

古文：泚怒，欲杀之，俄而亡其所在。
现代文：朱泚很生气，想要杀了他，不一会儿那老人不知到那去了。
English: Zhu Rong was very angry and wanted to kill him. Soon, the old man disappeared.

古文：及去泾州百余里，泚于马上，忽叩头连称 乞命 ，手足纷纭，若有拒捍，因之坠马，良久却苏。
现代文：等到他们离泾州还有一百多里的时候，朱泚在马上忽然叩头口里连声喊 饶命 ，手和脚也乱踢乱舞，好像和谁打架，这样就坠落下马。很久才苏醒过来。
English: When they were still more than a hundred miles away from Zhangzhou, Zhu Xi suddenly bowed his head and shouted, "Spare my life," and his hands and feet also danced wildly, as if he were fighting with someone, and he fell off his horse. It took him a long time to wake up.

古文：左右问其故，曰： 见段司农。 
现代文：身边的人问他怎么回事。他说： 看见段司农了。 
English: People around him asked him what was going on. He said: "I saw Duan Sinu.

古文：寻被韩旻枭斩。
现代文：不久，朱泚被韩旻斩首。
English: Soon after, Zhu Xi was beheaded by Han Xi.

古文：马奉忠
现代文：马奉忠
English: Ma Fengzhong

古文：唐元和四年，宪宗伐王承宗，中尉吐突承璀获恒阳生口马奉忠等三十人，驰诣阙。
现代文：唐元和四年，宪宗讨伐王承宗。中尉吐突承璀抓获了恒阳俘虏马奉忠等三十人。
English: In the first and fourth years of the Tang Dynasty, Jianzong fought against Wang Chengzong. Lieutenant Tutu Chengyu captured thirty people including the Hengyang captive Ma Fengzhong.

古文：宪宗令斩之于东市西坡资圣寺侧。
现代文：日夜兼程押到京城。宪宗命令在东市西坡资圣寺旁处斩。
English: Day and night, the procession made its way to the capital. Kenzong gave the order to behead them in the vicinity of the Zu Sheng Temple in Xipo, Dongshi.

古文：斩毕，胜业坊王忠宪者，属羽林军，弟忠弁，行营为恒阳所杀。
现代文：斩完了。胜业坊有个王忠宪，隶属羽林军，他的弟弟忠弁在军队里被恒阳军杀了。
English: There was a Wang Zhongxian in Shengyefang, who belonged to the Ulin Army, and his brother Zhongben was killed in the army by the Hengyang Army.

古文：忠宪含弟之仇，闻恒阳生口至，乃佩刃往视之。敕斩毕，忠宪乃剖其心，兼两肉，归而食之。
现代文：忠宪抱着弟的冤仇，听说恒阳的俘虏到了。就带着刀去看，等斩完，忠宪就挖了一颗心，还有两块臂肉，回来吃了。
English: Holding his brother's grudge, Zhongxian heard that Hengyang's captives had arrived. He took his sword to see, and when he was finished, he dug out a heart and two pieces of arm meat, and came back to eat.

古文：至夜，有紫衣人扣门，忠宪出见。
现代文：到了晚上，有一个紫衣人敲门，忠宪出来见了面。
English: In the evening, a man in purple knocked on the door, and Zhong Xuan came out to meet him.

古文：自云 马奉忠 ，忠宪与坐。
现代文：那人自己介绍说叫马奉忠。忠宪就和他坐下来并问他来干什么。
English: The man introduced himself as Ma Bongzhong. He sat down with him and asked him what he was doing.

古文：问所须，答何以苦剖我心，割我肉。 
现代文：马奉忠回答说： 你为什么那么狠挖了我的心，割了我的肉？ 
English: Ma Fengzhong replied, "Why did you dig so hard into my heart and cut my flesh?

古文：忠宪曰： 汝非鬼耶？ 
现代文：忠宪说： 你不是鬼吗？ 
English: Zhongxian said, "Aren't you a ghost?"

古文：对曰： 是。 
现代文：回答说： 是。 
English: "Yes," he replied.

古文：忠宪云： 我弟为汝逆贼所杀，我乃不反兵之仇，以直报怨，汝何怪也？ 
现代文：忠宪说： 我的弟弟被你们那些叛贼杀了，我怎么能不报那一刀之仇，用来抵偿我的怨恨。你为什么怪罪我？ 
English: Zhongxian said, "My brother was killed by those traitors of yours. How can I not avenge his death and use it to satisfy my grudge? Why do you blame me?"

古文：奉忠曰： 我恒阳寇是国贼，我以死谢国矣。汝弟为恒阳所杀，则罪在恒阳帅。我不杀汝弟，汝何妄报吾？
现代文：马奉忠说： 我和恒阳的人是国家的敌人，我已经用死来向国家道歉了，你的弟弟是被恒阳人杀的，那么罪过就是恒阳主帅的，我并没有杀你的弟弟，你为什么找我报仇？
English: Ma Fengzhong said: I and the people of Hengyang are enemies of the state. I have already apologized to the country with my death. Your brother was killed by the people of Hengyang, so the fault is that of the Hengyang coach. I did not kill your brother. Why are you seeking revenge on me?

古文：子不闻父子之罪，尚不相及，而汝妄报众仇，则汝仇极多矣。
现代文：你没听说过 儿子不管父亲的罪过 这句话吗？父子的罪过都连不到一起，然而你胡乱地报大家的仇，那么你的仇就太多了。
English: Have you never heard the saying, "The sins of the father are visited upon the son, and the sins of the son are visited upon the father"? The sins of the father and the son cannot be put together, but if you take revenge on all of them indiscriminately, then your revenge will be too much.

古文：须还吾心，还吾，则怨可释矣。 
现代文：你必须还我的心，还我的臂肉。如果这样，我们之间的怨恨就可以解开了。 
English: You must return my heart and my arm. If you do so, the grudge between us can be resolved.

古文：忠宪如失，理云： 与汝万钱可乎？ 
现代文：忠宪知道自己错了，还和他理论说： 我赔偿一万钱可以吗？ 
English: Knowing that he was wrong, Zhongxian reasoned with him, "Can I pay ten thousand yuan in compensation?

古文：答曰： 还我无冤，然亦贳公岁月可矣。 
现代文：马奉忠回答说： 还我的心肉就没什么冤仇，然而可以宽限你几个月。 
English: Ma Fengzhong replied, "If you return my heart and flesh, there will be no grudge, but I can give you a few months' grace.

古文：言毕遂灭，忠宪乃设酒馔纸钱万贯于资圣寺前送之，经年，忠宪两渐瘦，又言语倒错惑乱，如失心人，更三岁而卒。
现代文：说完就不见了。忠宪就在资圣寺准备了酒菜和上万贯纸钱相送。经过一年，忠宪的两臂渐渐瘦下去，还加上说话颠三倒四，糊涂神志混乱，好象没有心的人。又过了三年死了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared. At the Zu Sheng Temple, Zhong Xian prepared wine and vegetables and sent a large amount of paper money. After a year, Zhong Xian's arms gradually became thin, and his speech became erratic and confused, as if he had no heart. He died three years later.

古文：则知志于报仇者，亦须详而后报之。
现代文：从这件事上就知道了有想报仇的人，一定要详细了解情况然后再报仇。
English: From this incident, we know that there are people who want to take revenge. They must understand the situation in detail and then take revenge.

古文：郓卒
现代文：郓卒
English: 卒

古文：唐元和末，王师讨平郓。
现代文：唐朝元和末年，国家派兵讨伐平定了郓地的叛乱，在汴梁军队里有个士兵吃了郓兵的肉。
English: In the first and last years of the Tang Dynasty, the state sent troops to fight and quell the rebellion in Handan. A soldier in Handan's army ate the meat of a soldier from Handan.

古文：汴卒有食郓士之肉者，数岁暴疾，梦其所食卒曰： 我无宿憾，既已杀之，又食其肉，何不仁也！
现代文：几年以后突然得了病，梦到被他吃了肉那个兵说： 我们没有什么旧冤仇，既然你已经把我杀了，又吃我的肉，多么不仁义啊！
English: A few years later, the soldier suddenly fell ill and dreamt that he had eaten the meat. He said, "We have no old grudge against each other. Since you have killed me and eaten my meat, how uncharitable!"

古文：我已诉于上帝矣，当还我肉，我亦食之，征债足矣。 
现代文：这样我们就谁也不欠谁的了。 汴军那个兵醒后浑身大汗。
English: That way, we don't owe anything to anyone. That soldier from the Han army woke up and was sweating profusely.

古文：汴卒惊觉流汗，及晓，疼楚宛转，视其身唯皮与骨，如人腊，一夕毙矣。
现代文：等到天亮，他翻来覆去地疼痛难忍。再看他的身体，只剩下皮和骨头了，好象是个腊人。一天就死了。
English: By dawn, he was tossing and turning in excruciating pain. Looking at his body again, all that was left was skin and bones, like a lizard. He died the same day.

古文：乐生
现代文：乐生
English: Le Sheng

古文：唐中丞杜式方，为桂州观察使，会西原山贼反叛，奉诏讨捕。
现代文：唐朝的中丞杜式方任桂州观察使，正遇上西源一带有贼寇占山造反。杜式方奉诏讨伐捕捉。
English: Du Shikifang, a chancellor of the Tang Dynasty, was appointed as an observation envoy to Guizhou when he encountered a rebellion in Xiyuan with thieves and robbers occupying the mountain. Du Shikifang was ordered to fight and capture them.

古文：续令郎中裴某，承命招抚，及过桂州，式方遣押衙乐某，并副将二人当直。
现代文：后来皇上又派一个姓裴的郎中带着皇帝的命令招抚贼寇。等他们经过桂州的时候，式方派了一个姓乐的押衙和两个副将相随。
English: Later, the emperor sent a retainer surnamed Pei with the emperor's order to appease the bandits. When they passed through Guizhou, Shikifang sent an escort surnamed Le and two vice-commanders to follow.

古文：至宾州，裴命乐生与副将二人，至贼中传诏命，并以书遗其贼帅，诏令归复。
现代文：到了宾州，裴郎中命令乐生和副将二人到贼营中传达皇上的诏令，并且给贼帅写了一封信，招抚他们归顺朝廷。
English: When they arrived in Pennsylvania, Pei Lang ordered Le Sheng and his second-in-command to convey the emperor's edict to the bandits' camp, and wrote a letter to the bandits' commander, coaxing them to submit to the imperial court.

古文：乐生素儒士也，有心义。
现代文：乐生一直是个读书人，讲仁义。
English: Le Sheng has always been a reader, and speaks of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：既至，贼帅黄少卿大喜，留燕数日。
现代文：他们到了贼营以后，贼帅黄少卿很高兴，留他们住了几天。
English: After they arrived at the thieves' camp, the handsome thief Huang Shaoqing was very happy and let them stay for a few days.

古文：悦乐生之佩刀，恳请与之，少卿以小婢二人酬其直。
现代文：他很喜欢乐生的佩刀，恳切地希望乐生送给他，少卿用两名年轻婢女酬谢，就算抵佩刀的价值。
English: He was very fond of Leshan's sword, and earnestly hoped that Leshan would give it to him, and the young lord rewarded him with two young maidservants, even though they were worth the price of the sword.

古文：既复命，副将与生不相得，遂告于裴云： 乐某以官军虚实露于贼帅，昵之，故赠女口。 
现代文：回来复命后，副将和乐生合不来，就对裴郎中报告说： 姓乐的把军事秘密都泄露给贼帅了。贼帅很亲近他，所以赠给他两个年轻女子。 
English: After returning and being relieved of duty, the vice-general and Le could not get along, so he reported to Pei Lang: Le had leaked military secrets to the Thief-in-Chief. The Thief-in-Chief was very close to him, so he gave him two young women.

古文：裴大怒，遣人搜检，果得。
现代文：裴听后很生气，派人去搜查，果然搜到二女。
English: After hearing this, Pei was very angry and sent someone to search. They found the two girls.

古文：乐生具言本末，云： 某此刀价直数万，意颇宝惜，以方奉使，贼帅求之，不得不与，彼归其直，二口之价，尚未及半，某有何过！ 
现代文：乐生就把事情的前后经过说了。并且说： 我的刀价值几万钱，我心里把它当成宝物那样爱惜，因为我正奉使命，贼帅求我送给他，我是不得不给，他还给我的价值还不到那刀的价值的一半，我有什么过错？ 
English: And he said: My sword is worth tens of thousands of money, I cherish it in my heart as if it were a treasure, because I am on a mission, the thief asked me to give it to him, I had to give it, he gave me back less than half the value of the knife, what is my fault?

古文：生使气者，辞色颇厉，裴君愈怒，乃禁于宾州狱。以书与式方，并牒诬为大过，请必杀之。
现代文：乐生因为生气，说话的措词也很生硬严厉。裴郎中更气愤，就把他囚禁在宾州监狱，给式方写了一封信，并在公文中诬陷乐生犯了大罪，请式方一定要杀他。
English: Pei Rongzhong was even more angry, so he imprisoned him in a Pennsylvania prison, wrote a letter to Shikifang, and framed Le Sheng for a serious crime in the official document, asking Shikifang to kill him.

古文：式方以远镇，制使言其下受赂于贼，方将诛剪，不得不置之于法，然亦心知其冤。
现代文：式方因为是远镇，皇上的特使说他的部下受了时候贼寇的贿赂，并要求诛杀，他也不得不按法律办。但是式方心里是明白乐生冤枉。
English: Because Shikifang is a distant town, the emperor's special envoy said that his subordinates were bribed by thieves and robbers at the time and asked to fight and kill. He also had to do it according to the law. But Shikifang knew in his heart that he had been wronged.

古文：乐生亦有状具言，式方遂令持牒追之，面约其使曰： 彼欲逃避，汝慎勿禁，兼以吾意语之。 使者至，传式方意，乐生曰： 我无罪，宁死；若逃亡，是有罪也。 
现代文：乐生回到桂州，式方就召乐生来，问他的情况。
English: When Le Sheng returned to Guizhou, Shikifang summoned Le Sheng and asked him about his situation.

古文：既至，式方乃召入，问之，生具述根本，式方乃此制使书牒示之曰： 今日之事，非不知公之冤，然无路以相救矣，如何？ 
现代文：乐生就把前后经过详细地陈述一遍。式方就把特使的公文给他看，然后说： 现在看这件事，我并不是不知道你的冤枉，然而没有办法救你呀。怎么办？ 
English: Le Sheng gave a detailed account of what had happened before and after. Shikifang showed him the envoy's official document and then said, "Looking at this matter now, it's not that I don't know about your wrongdoing, but there's no way to save you. What should I do?

古文：遂令推讯，乐生问推者曰： 中丞意如何？ 
现代文：于是就下令审讯。乐生问审讯的人： 中丞的意思怎么样？ 
English: So he ordered an interrogation. Le Sheng asked the interrogator: What is the meaning of Zhongzheng?

古文：曰： 中丞以制使之意，押衙不得免矣。 
现代文：回答说： 中丞按照特使的意见，你的死罪是免不了了。 
English: He replied: "Nakajo, according to the opinion of the special envoy, your capital crime is unavoidable.

古文：曰： 中丞意如此，某以奚诉！ 
现代文：乐生说： 中丞的意见也是这样，我还申诉什么。 
English: Le Sheng said: This is also the opinion of Zhong Rong, what else can I complain about.

古文：遂索笔通款，言受贼帅赃物之状。
现代文：就让他拿来笔按照条文说自己怎样接受了贼帅的赃物等情况。
English: Let him take a pen and follow the rules to say how he received the stolen goods from the thief.

古文：式方颇甚悯恻，将刑，引入曰： 知公至屈，有何事相托？ 生曰： 无之。 
现代文：式方很怜悯他为他惋惜。将要处决了，式方让人把他领来说： 我知道你太冤屈了，还有什么事托付给我吗？ 乐生说： 没有。 
English: The shikigata felt very sorry for him and felt sorry for him. The execution was about to be carried out, so the shikigata had someone take him and say: I know you are very aggrieved, is there anything else you would like to entrust to me? Le Sheng said: No.

古文：式方曰： 公有男否？ 
现代文：式方说： 你有男孩没有？ 
English: Shikigata said, "Do you have a boy?"

古文：曰： 一人。 
现代文：乐生说： 有一个。 
English: Le Sheng said: There is one.

古文： 何职？ 
现代文： 谋什么职务？ 
English: For what position?

古文：曰： 得衙前虞侯足矣。 
现代文：说： 能当个衙前的虞侯就满足了。 
English: He said, "I am satisfied with being a preeminent magistrate.

古文：式方便授牒，兼赠钱百千文，用为葬具。
现代文：式方就写了公文并赠给百千文钱用来买埋葬用品。
English: Shikikata wrote an official document and presented a hundred thousand money to buy burial supplies.

古文：又问所欲，曰： 某自诬死，必无逃逸，请去桎梏，沐浴，见妻子，嘱付家事。 
现代文：又问他还有什么要求。乐生说： 我是自己诬陷死的，一定不会逃跑，请求去掉刑具，让我洗个澡，见妻子和儿子一面，再嘱咐一下家里的后事。 
English: He also asked him what other demands he had. Le Sheng said, "I framed my own death, I will not run away. I ask you to remove the torture equipment, let me take a bath, let me see my wife and son, and then tell me about my family."

古文：公皆许。
现代文：式方都同意了。
English: All parties agreed.

古文：至时，式方乃登州南门，令引出，与之诀别。
现代文：到了斩首那天，式方登上州城的南门，令人领乐生出来，和乐生作永别。
English: On the day of the beheading, the Shikifang boarded the south gate of the state capital, brought out Le Sheng, and bid him farewell.

古文：乐生沐浴中栉，楼前拜启曰： 某今死矣，虽死不已。 
现代文：乐生洗了澡，梳好了头，在城楼前拜告说： 我今天死了，虽然死了也不能算完。 
English: Le Sheng took a shower, combed his hair, and prostrated himself in front of the city tower, saying, "I died today. Even though I'm dead, I can't be counted out.

古文：式方曰： 子怨我乎？ 
现代文：式方说： 你埋怨我吗？ 
English: Shikata said, "Are you complaining about me?

古文：曰： 无，中丞为制使所迫耳。 
现代文：乐生说： 不，中丞你是被特使逼迫罢了。 
English: "No, Nakajo, you are just being persecuted by the special envoy," he said.

古文：式方洒泣，遂令领至球场内，厚致酒馔。
现代文：式方流出了眼泪。让人把他领到一个圆场里，准备了丰盛的饭菜。
English: Shikifo burst into tears. Someone led him to a round hall and prepared a sumptuous meal.

古文：餐讫，召妻子别，问曰： 买得棺未？
现代文：吃完了，他就招呼妻子和儿子分别。问他： 买了棺材了吗？
English: When he had finished eating, he separated his wife from his son and asked, "Did you buy a coffin?"

古文：可速买，兼取纸一千张，笔十管，置棺中。
现代文：赶快买，再拿一千张纸和十支笔放到棺材里。
English: Hurry up and buy it, then take another thousand pieces of paper and ten pens and put them in the coffin.

古文：吾死，当上诉于帝前。 
现代文：我死以后，要到天帝面前去诉冤。 
English: After my death, I will go before the Heavenly Emperor to appeal for justice.

古文：问监刑者曰： 今何时？ 
现代文：又问监刑的人： 现在什么时辰？ 
English: And he asked them of the prison, What time is it?

古文：曰： 日中。 
现代文：回答说： 中午。 
English: He replied, "At noon."

古文：生曰： 吾日中死，至黄昏时，便往宾州，取副将某乙。
现代文：乐生说： 我中午死，到黄昏的时候就去宾州，要副将的命。
English: "I'll die at noon, and in the evening I'll go to Pennsylvania and ask for the adjutant's life," he said.

古文：及明年四月，杀制使裴郎中。 
现代文：到明年四月，我要杀制使裴郎中。
English: By next April, I want to kill the system and make Pei Lang middle.

古文：举头见执捉者一人，乃虞侯所由，乐曾摄都虞侯，语之： 汝是我故吏，我今分死矣，尔慎忽折吾颈，若如此，我亦死即当杀汝。 
现代文：抬头看见行刑的一个人，原来是虞侯手下的人，乐生曾当过都虞侯，就对他说： 你是我的老部下，我现在该死了，你要小心不要把我的脖颈弄折了，假如弄折了，我死了也要把你杀死。 
English: A man who looked up and saw the execution, who turned out to be a member of the governor's staff, told him, "You are my old subordinate. I should be dead by now. You should be careful not to break my neck. If you do, I will kill you when I die."

古文：所由至此时，亦不暇听信，遂以常法，拉其头杀之，然后笞，笞毕，拽之于外。
现代文：那老部下在这时候也没工夫听他的话。于是就用平常的办法，拉着他的头杀了他。然后才验身，验身完把他拽到门外。
English: The old man did not have time to listen to him at this time. So he used the usual method, pulled his head and killed him. Then he checked himself, and after checking himself, he pulled him out of the door.

古文：拉者忽惊蹶，面仆于地死矣。
现代文：那老部下忽然惊倒，面朝下仆倒在地上死了。
English: The old man suddenly collapsed, fell face down on the ground and died.

古文：数日，宾州报，副将以其日黄昏，暴心痛疼。制者裴君，以明年四月卒。
现代文：几天以后，宾州来报告，副将在那天黄昏，突然心痛死去，姓裴的制使在第二年四月死了。
English: A few days later, Penn State came to report that the vice-chancellor had died suddenly of a broken heart at dusk that day. The vice-chancellor, surnamed Pei, died in April of the following year.

古文：其年十月，式方方于球场宴敕使次，饮酒正洽，忽举首瞪目曰： 乐某，汝今何来也？
现代文：那年十月，式方在圆场中宴请敕使回来。酒正喝得高兴，忽然抬头瞪着眼睛说： 乐生，你怎么现在来了？
English: In October of that year, Shikifang was holding a banquet in the courtyard to invite the envoys back. He was happily drinking wine when he suddenly looked up, stared into his eyes, and said, "Le Sheng, why are you here now?

古文：我亦无过。 
现代文：我也没有罪过。 
English: I'm not guilty either.

古文：索酒沥地祝之，良久又曰： 我知汝屈，而竟杀汝，亦我之罪。 
现代文：要些酒洒在地上给乐生祝愿。过了很长时间又说： 我知道你冤屈，然而我毕竟杀了你，这也是我的罪过。 
English: He asked for some wine to sprinkle on the ground to wish for a happy life. After a long time, he said, "I know you are wronged, but I still killed you, which is also my sin."

古文：遂暗不语，舁到州，及夜而殒。
现代文：然后就哑口不能说话了，抬到州府，到了晚上就死了。
English: Then he became mute, couldn't speak, was carried to the state capital, and died in the evening.

古文：至今桂州城南门，乐生死所，方圆丈余，竟无草生。
现代文：到现在桂州的南城门乐生死的地方。有一个方圆一丈多的地方，竟然没长出草。
English: To the place where Nanchengmenle in Guizhou now lives and dies. There is a place that is more than a square meter, but no grass has grown.

古文：后有从事于桂者，视之信然。
现代文：后来有到桂办事的人，看了以后都相信了。
English: Later, there were people who went to Katsura to do business, and they all believed it after seeing it.

古文：自古冤死者亦多，乐生一何神异也。
现代文：从古到今冤死的人很多，为什么这个乐生这么神奇呢。
English: From ancient times to the present, there have been many people who have died unjustly, so why is this happy life so magical?

古文：宋申锡
现代文：宋申锡
English: Song Shenxi

古文：唐丞朝宋申锡，初为宰相，恩渥甚重，申锡亦颇以致升平为己任。
现代文：唐朝的丞相宋申锡，刚作宰相，受皇恩厚重，申锡很有为国家治理成太平世界为己任的抱负。
English: Song Shensi, the chancellor of the Tang Dynasty, had just become the prime minister and was greatly favored by the emperor. Shensi had a great ambition to govern the country and make the world peaceful.

古文：时郑注交通纵放，以擅威柄，欲除去之。
现代文：那时郑注上下交结放纵，擅用权势。
English: At that time, Zheng Zhu indulged in sexual intercourse and abuse of power.

古文：乃以友人王璠为京兆尹，密与之约，令察注不法，将献其状，擒于京兆府，杖杀之。
现代文：申锡想除掉他，就和朋友京兆尹王璠密约，让他注意观察郑注的不法事情，报告给皇上，在京兆府把郑注擒住，用木棍打死。
English: Shen Xi wanted to get rid of him, so he made a secret agreement with his friend, Emperor Jingzhao, to have him observe Zhengzhu's illegal activities, report them to the emperor, and then choke Zhengzhu and beat him to death with a wooden stick in the capital.

古文：既约定，璠翻覆小人也，以注方为中贵所爱，因欲亲厚之，乃尽以申锡之谋语焉。
现代文：就这样约定了，但王璠是翻来覆去说了不算的小人，因为郑注当时被内臣所信任，因此想要靠近他，就把申锡的计划全都告诉了郑注。
English: This is how the agreement was made, but Wang Yao is a scoundrel who said it over and over again, because Zheng Shou was trusted by his vassal at the time, so if he wanted to get close to him, he told Zheng Shou all of Shin Xi's plans.

古文：注因报知右军，不旬日，乃伪作申锡之罪状，令人告之云： 以文字结于诸王，图谋不轨，以衣物金宝奇玉为质。 且令人仿其手疏，皆至逼似。
现代文：郑注就报告给了右军。不到十天的时间，就伪造了申锡的罪状，让人报告给皇上，说他给各王侯写信，图谋不轨，并用衣物奇珍异宝作抵押，还让人模仿申锡的笔迹写了上疏，直到模仿得不差分毫，终于诬陷成功。
English: Zheng Zhu reported it to the Right Army. In less than ten days, Quan forged the charges against Shen Xi and had someone report to the emperor, saying that he had written letters to various princes, plotted to commit crimes, and used rare and precious clothing as collateral. He also had someone imitate Shen Xi's handwriting to write Shang So, until the imitation was exactly the same, and finally the frame-up was successful.

古文：狱成于内，公卿众庶无不知其冤也。三事已降，迭入论之，方得谪为开州司马。
现代文：不论公卿还是百姓没有不知道申锡是冤枉的，但审理的公文已下，朝臣们都相继去给予理论说情，才得到贬为开州司马的处分。
English: Neither the nobles nor the common people did not know that Shen Xi was wronged, but the official document of the trial had been issued, and the courtiers all went to give the theory of intercession one after another, only to be reduced to the punishment of Kaizhou Sima.

古文：至任数月，不胜其愤而卒。
现代文：到任只有几个月，由于特别悲愤而死。
English: He had only been in office for a few months when he died of extreme grief and anger.

古文：明年，有恩诏，令归葬京城。
现代文：第二年，有恩诏下达，令其可以归葬京城。
English: The following year, a decree was issued allowing him to be buried in Kyoto.

古文：至大和元年春，其夫人亭午于堂前假寐次，见申锡从中门入，不觉惊起。申锡以手招之，乃下阶，曰： 且来，有少事，要令君见。 
现代文：到大和元年春天，申锡的夫人中午在堂前刚刚睡着，看到申锡从中门进来，不觉惊坐起来，见申锡用手招她，她就走下台阶，申锡说： 快来，我有点事，要让你看点东西。 
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yamato era, Shen Xi's wife had just fallen asleep in front of the hall at noon. Seeing Shen Xi enter through the middle door, she suddenly sat up. Seeing Shen Xi beckoning her with his hand, she walked down the steps. Shen Xi said, "Come quickly, I have something to tell you. I want you to look at something."

古文：便引出城，似至浐水北去数里，到一墟开，见一大坑，坑边有小竹笼及小板匣者数枚，皆有封记。申锡乃提一示夫人曰： 此是那贼。 
现代文：说着就领她出城，好像到了浐水以北几里的荒村，见到一个大坑，坑边有好多个小竹笼和小板匣，上面都有名签标记，申锡就提起一个给夫人看看说： 这就是那个贼。 
English: Saying this, he led her out of the city, as if he had arrived at a deserted village a few miles north of Surabaya, and saw a large pit. At the edge of the pit, there were many small bamboo cages and small boxes, all marked with name tags. Shen Xi held one up for his wife to see and said, "This is the thief."

古文：因愤怒叱吒，问曰： 是谁？ 
现代文：接着就愤恨地大骂。夫人问： 是谁？ 
English: Then he cursed angrily. My wife asked, "Who is it?"

古文：曰： 王璠也，我得请于上帝矣。 
现代文：申锡说： 王璠。我已经请求见到了天帝。 
English: Shen Xi said: Wang Yao, I have already requested to see the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：复诘其余，曰： 即自知。 
现代文：夫人又问其余的人。申锡说： 很快就会知道。 
English: My wife asked the others. Shen Xi said, "I'll know soon."

古文：言讫，拂然而醒，遍身流汗，当时言于家人及亲属，且以笔记于衣箱中。
现代文：说完后夫人一下子就醒了，遍身流着汗。当时就告诉了家人和亲属，并且用笔记下来放到衣箱里。
English: After she finished, she woke up in a sweat and immediately told her family and relatives, taking notes and putting them in her suitcase.

古文：至其年十一月，璠果以事腰斩于市，同受戮者数人，皆同坎埋于城外，乃知宋公之神灵为不诬矣。
现代文：到了那年十一月，王璠果然犯了事被腰斩在刑场，同时被杀的还有几个人，都一同埋在城外。这才知道宋公的神灵不假啊。
English: In November of that year, Wang Yao did indeed commit a crime and was beheaded at the place of execution, while several other people were killed at the same time and buried together outside the city. Only then did he know that Song Gong's spirit was not false.

古文：蜀营典
现代文：蜀营典
English: Shu Ying Dian

古文：唐蜀将尹偃，营有卒，晚点后数刻不至，偃将责之。卒被酒，自理声高，偃怒，杖数十，几至死。
现代文：唐朝蜀将尹偃的营中有个兵士，晚上点名过了几刻钟也没有到，尹偃准备责罚他，但他喝了酒，自以为有理说话声音很高。尹偃很生气，打了他几十杖，差点儿打死。
English: There was a soldier in the battalion of the Tang Dynasty Shu general, Yin Xi, who did not arrive for several hours after the roll call in the evening. Yin Xi was going to punish him, but he drank wine and spoke loudly, thinking he was being reasonable. Yin Xi was very angry and beat him with dozens of canes, nearly killing him.

古文：卒弟为营典，性友爱，不平偃。
现代文：这个士兵的弟弟在军营里当营典。
English: The soldier's younger brother was a cadet in the battalion.

古文：乃以刀剺肌，作杀尹两字，以墨涅之。
现代文：秉性重兄友弟恭，对尹偃的做法不满，就用刀划破肌肉划了 杀尹 两个字，用墨染黑。
English: Yudhikyong, the eldest brother, was dissatisfied with Yin Yao's actions, so he scratched his muscles with a knife, wrote "Kill Yin" and dyed it black with ink.

古文：偃阴知，乃以他事杖杀典，及大和中，南蛮入寇，偃领众数万，保邛偃关。
现代文：尹偃暗中知道了这件事，就借口别的事杀了营典。等到了大和年间，南蛮入侵。尹偃率领几万军队保卫邛偃关。
English: Yin Xuan secretly knew about this and killed the general on the pretext of something else. During the Yamato period, Nanban invaded. Yin Xuan led tens of thousands of troops to defend Shaoguan.

古文：偃膂力绝人，常戏左右，以棘节杖击其胫，随击筋胀拥肿。
现代文：尹偃的膂力超人，常常戏弄身边的人，用棘刺或带节的木棍打他们的脚脖子，打完立刻就筋胀肉肿。
English: Yin Qi's superhuman strength, he often teases people around him, hitting their ankles with thorns or wooden sticks with knots, and immediately ending up with swollen muscles.

古文：恃其力，悉众出关，逐蛮数里。
现代文：凭借他的力气，率领全军出邛偃关追逐蛮兵。
English: Relying on his strength, he led the whole army out of Shaoguan to chase the barbarians.

古文：蛮伏发，夹攻之，大败马倒，中数十枪而死。
现代文：追出几里以后，蛮兵的埋伏突然出现，两下夹攻，把尹偃打得大败，马也倒了，身上中了几十枪死了。
English: After several miles of chasing, the ambush of the barbarians suddenly appeared, and they attacked twice, defeating Yin Qi. The horse also fell down and was shot dozens of times and died.

古文：初出关时，忽见所杀典，拥黄案，大如毂，在前引，心甚恶之，问左右，咸无见者，竟死于阵。
现代文：他刚出关时忽然看见了被他杀死的营典，抱着一个象车轮那么大的黄色案卷，在他前边引路。尹偃心里很讨厌他，问身边的人看见没有，都说没看见。
English: When he was just leaving the detention center, he suddenly saw the battalion commander he had killed, holding a yellow case file as big as a car wheel, leading the way in front of him. Yin Yao hated him in his heart. When he asked people around him if they had seen him, they all said they hadn't.

