古文：起旃蒙赤奋若，尽柔兆摄提格，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：高祖武皇帝十五大同十一年
现代文：梁武帝大同十一年
English: Emperor Liangwu's 11th year of reign

古文：春，正月，丙申，东魏遣兼散骑常侍李奖来聘。
现代文：春季，正月，丙申，东魏派兼任散骑常侍的李奖到梁朝聘问。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Yi Shen, the Eastern Wei faction and also the free-riding attendant of the Li Prize, went to the Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：东魏仪同尔硃文畅与丞相司马任胄、都督郑仲礼等，谋因正月望夜观打簇戏作乱，杀丞相欢，奉文畅为主。事泄，皆死。
现代文：东魏仪同尔朱文畅和丞相司马任胄，都督郑仲礼等人，打算趁正月十五的晚上观看打簇戏的机会谋反叛乱，杀掉丞相高欢，推奉文畅为主上；事情泄露以后，他们全被处死。
English: Zhu Wenchang, the leader of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, along with the prime minister, Sima Renju, and the governor, Zheng Zhongli, planned to take advantage of the opportunity to watch a play on the evening of the fifteenth day of the first month to plot a counter-rebellion, kill the prime minister, Gao Huan, and promote Wenchang; after the matter was leaked, they were all executed.

古文：文畅，荣之子也；其姊，敬宗之后，及仲礼姊大车，皆为欢妾，有宠，故其兄弟皆不坐。
现代文：文畅是尔朱荣的儿子；他的姐姐原来是敬宗的皇后，现在与郑仲礼的姐姐大车都是高欢的妾。她们受到高欢的宠爱，所以她们的兄弟都没有受牵连。
English: Wen Chang is the son of Er Zhu Rong; his sister was originally the queen of Keizong, and now she and Zheng Zhongli's sister Dacha are the concubines of Gao Huan. They are favored by Gao Huan, so their brothers are not involved.

古文：欢上书言： 并州，军器所聚，动须女功，请置宫以处配没之口；又纳吐谷浑之女以招怀之。 
现代文：高欢向孝静帝上书说： 并州是聚集了众多军需武器的地方，随时都需要妇女工作。请您设置宫室来安置被分配到当地籍没的女人，再请陛下纳吐谷浑的女子入宫，以便招降吐谷浑国，对它实施怀柔政策。 
English: Gao Huan wrote to Emperor Xiaojing, "Andzhou is a place where a large number of munitions and weapons are gathered, and women are needed to work at any time. Please set up a palace room to accommodate the women who are assigned to the local nationality, and then invite His Majesty's women from Natuqihun to enter the palace in order to recruit and subjugate the country of Natuqihun and implement a policy of conciliation towards it.

古文：丁未，置晋阳宫。
现代文：丁未，东魏设置了晋阳宫。
English: Ding Wei, the Eastern Wei Dynasty set up the Jinyang Palace.

古文：二月，庚申，东魏主纳吐谷浑可汗从妹为容华。
现代文：二月，庚申，东魏孝静帝纳吐谷浑可汗的堂妹为妾，封她为容华。
English: In February, Gao Sheng, the cousin of the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing's granddaughter Tu Gu Hun Khan, became a concubine, and she was named Yonghua.

古文：魏丞相泰遣酒泉胡安诺槃陀始通使于突厥。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰派酒泉的胡安诺陀开始出使突厥，并与之沟通。
English: The Western Wei chancellor Umentai dispatched Juan Noldo of Jiuquan to begin to send envoys to the Turks and communicate with them.

古文：突厥本西方小国，姓阿史那氏，世居金山之阳，为柔然铁工。
现代文：突厥原本是西方的小国，以阿史那氏为姓，世世代代居住在金山的南面，为柔然国充当打铁工。
English: Turku was originally a small country in the west, named after the Ashina clan, who lived in the south of the Golden Mountain for generations and worked as ironworkers for Juran.

古文：至其酋长土门，始强大，颇侵魏西边。
现代文：到了酋长土门统治时期，突厥才开始强大起来。它多次侵犯西魏西部边疆。
English: It was not until the reign of the chieftain Tu Men that the Turks began to become powerful. It repeatedly invaded the western border of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：安诺槃陀至，其国人皆喜曰： 大国使者至，吾国其将兴矣！ 
现代文：安诺陀来到突厥，突厥人都高兴地说： 大国的使者一来，我们国家就要兴盛了。 
English: When Annotas came to the Turks, the Turks said with joy: "When the envoy of a great power comes, our country will prosper."

古文：三月，乙未，东魏丞相欢入朝于鄴，百官迎于紫陌。
现代文：三月，乙未，东魏丞相高欢到邺都朝拜国主，文武百官在紫陌迎候他。
English: In March, the Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan went to Shidu to pay homage to the lord of the country, and hundreds of civil and military officials greeted him in Zimo.

古文：欢握崔暹手而劳之曰： 往日朝廷岂无法官，莫肯纠劾。
现代文：高欢握着崔暹的手慰劳他说： 以前朝廷里不是没有法官，但却没人能举报弹劾。
English: Gao Huan held the hand of Cui Siam to comfort him and said, "Previously, there were not no judges in the imperial court, but no one could report the impeachment.

古文：中尉尽心徇国，不避豪强，遂使远迩肃清。
现代文：中尉你尽心尽力报效国家，不畏强暴，才使天下四方平安无事。
English: Lieutenant, you do your best to serve the country, and you are not afraid of violence, so you can make the world safe and sound.

古文：冲锋陷阵，大有其人；当官正色，今始见之。
现代文：为国家的利益而冲锋陷阵大有人在；做官做得正派，这样的人我今天才见到。
English: There are many people who are rushing into battle for the benefit of the country; officials are doing a decent job, and I have only seen such people today.

古文：富贵乃中尉自取，高欢父子无以相报。 
现代文：今天的荣华富贵是中尉你自己取得的，我们高欢父子俩没有什么能相报的。 
English: Today's prosperity and wealth is achieved by the lieutenant himself, and there is nothing that we, Gao Huan's father and son, can reciprocate.

古文：赐暹良马。
现代文：于是，赏赐给崔暹一匹好马。
English: As a result, a good horse was given to Cui Siam.

古文：暹拜，马惊走，欢亲拥之，授以辔。
现代文：崔暹连忙叩谢，不料马惊跑起来，高欢便亲自拦住它，拉过马头，把辔头交给崔暹。
English: Cui Siam Lien hastily thanked him, but the horse suddenly started to run, and Gao Huan himself stopped it, pulled over the horse's head, and handed the steer to Cui Siam.

古文：东魏主宴于华林园，使欢择朝廷公直者劝之酒；欢降阶跪曰： 唯暹一人可劝，并请以臣所射赐物千段赐之。 
现代文：东魏孝静帝在华林园设宴，让高欢在朝廷中选择一位正直的官员向他劝酒。高欢退下一级台阶跪着说： 只有崔暹可以向您劝酒。同时，请您把我射箭所得赏赐的千段绢帛转赐给他。 
English: Emperor Xiaojing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty held a banquet in the Hualing Garden, and asked Gao Huan to choose an honest official in the court to persuade him to drink. Gao Huan retreated down the first step and kneeled down and said: Only Cui Siam can persuade you to drink. At the same time, please give him the thousand points I was awarded for archery.

古文：高澄退，谓暹曰： 我尚畏羡，何况馀人！ 
现代文：高澄从朝廷上退下之后对崔暹说： 我尚且对您非常敬畏，羡慕，何况其他人呢？ 
English: After Gao Cheng stepped down from the imperial court, he said to Cui Siam: I still have great awe and admiration for you. What about others?

古文：然暹中怀颇挟巧诈。
现代文：然而崔暹内心却很奸诈。
English: However, inside, Choi Siam is very deceitful.

古文：初，魏高阳王斌有庶妹玉仪，不为其家所齿，为孙腾妓，腾又弃之；高澄遇诸涂，悦而纳之，遂有殊宠，封琅邪公主。
现代文：当初，西魏高阳王元斌有一个庶出的妹妹玉仪，在元斌家里是个微不足道的人，做了孙腾的歌舞妓，后来孙腾又抛弃了她。高崐澄在路上遇到了她，很喜爱她，便收她为妾，备受高澄宠爱，被封为琅邪公主。
English: At first, the Western Wei Gaoyang King Yuan Bin had an illegitimate sister, Yu Yi, who was an insignificant person in the Yuan Bin family. She became Sun Teng's song and dance prostitute, and later Sun Teng abandoned her. Gao Yucheng met her on the road, loved her very much, and took her as a concubine. She was much loved by Gao Yucheng and was named the Evil Princess.

古文：澄谓崔季舒曰： 崔暹必造直谏，我亦有以待之。 
现代文：高澄对崔季舒说： 崔暹一定会对我直言相谏，但是我也有办法对付他。 
English: Gao Zheng said to Cui Jishu: Cui Siam will certainly be frank with me, but I also have a way to deal with him.

古文：及暹咨事，澄不复假以颜色。
现代文：等到崔暹向他请示事情，高澄不再对他和颜悦色。
English: When Cui Siam asked him for instructions, Gao Cheng was no longer amiable to him.

古文：居三日，暹怀刺坠之于前。澄问： 何用此为？ 
现代文：三天之后，崔暹怀里揣着名帖来见高澄，高澄问： 你何必带着名帖见我？ 
English: Three days later, Cui Siam came to see Gao Cheng with a famous letter in her arms. Gao Cheng asked: Why do you need to bring a famous letter to see me?

古文：暹悚然曰： 未得通公主。 
现代文：崔暹胆怯地说： 因为我还没有进见过公主。 
English: Cui Siam said timidly, "Because I haven't seen the princess yet."

古文：澄大悦，把暹臂，入见之。
现代文：高澄非常高兴，拉着崔暹的胳膊，把他带入室内与公主相见。
English: Gao Cheng was very happy. He took Cui Siam by the arm and led him into the room to meet the princess.

古文：季舒语人曰： 崔暹常忿吾佞，在大将军前，每言叔父可杀；及其自作，乃过于吾。 
现代文：事后，崔季舒对别人说： 崔暹恨我奸佞，他每次在大将军面前时都说他的叔父应该被杀掉。而他自己的所作所为，却早已超过我了。 
English: Afterwards, Cui Jishu said to others: "Cui Siam hated me for being a traitor. Every time he was in front of the general, he said that his uncle should be killed. But his own actions have already surpassed me.

古文：夏，五月，甲辰，东魏大赦。
现代文：夏季，五月，甲辰，东魏大赦天下。
English: Summer, May, Jia Chen, Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏王盟卒。
现代文：西魏的王盟去世。
English: Wang Meng of the Western Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：晋氏以来，文章竞为浮华，魏丞相泰欲革其弊。
现代文：从晋朝以来，天下文章竞相以词藻繁富相夸，西魏丞相宇文泰想革除这一不良风气。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, the world's articles have been competing with each other to praise the richness of words and phrases. Western Wei chancellor Uwentai wanted to get rid of this bad tradition.

古文：六月，丁巳，魏主飨太庙。
现代文：六月，丁巳，西魏文帝到太庙祭祖。
English: In June, Emperor Wenzong of the Western Wei Dynasty visited the temple to offer sacrifices to the ancestors.

古文：泰命大行台度支尚书、领著作苏绰作《大诰》，宣示群臣，戒以政事；仍命 自今文章皆依此体。 
现代文：宇文泰命令大行台度支尚书、领著作苏绰写了一篇《大诰》，宣读给文武大臣们听，劝诫大臣们勤于政事，西魏还下命令： 从今以后，文章都要按照这种方式来写。 
English: Wu Wentai ordered Da Xingtaidou to support Shangshu and lead the work of Su Qiao to write a "great sermon," read to the ministers of literature and armed forces, and exhorted the ministers to be diligent in politics. West Wei also ordered: From now on, articles should be written in this way.

古文：上遣交州刺史杨瞟讨李贲，以陈霸先为司马；命定州刺史萧勃会瞟于西江。勃知军士惮远役，因诡说留瞟。
现代文：梁武帝派遣交州刺史杨讨伐李贲，并让陈霸先担任司马；命令定州刺史萧勃领兵与杨的军队在西江会合，萧勃知道军中将士害怕远征打仗，就花言巧语劝说杨原地停止不前。
English: Emperor Liangwu dispatched the Jiaozhou general Shi Yang to fight against Li Xi, and let Chen Ba first serve as Sima; ordered the Jiaozhou general Shi Xiao Bo to lead the troops and Yang's army to meet in the West River. Xiao Bo knew that the lieutenant generals were afraid of the expedition to fight, so he persuaded Yang to stop in place.

古文：瞟集诸将问计，霸先曰： 交趾叛换，罪由宗室，遂使溷乱数州，逋诛累岁。
现代文：杨召集各位将领寻问计策，陈霸先说： 交趾郡的反叛，其罪责在于宗室，因而使许多州混乱不堪，随意捕人杀戮多年。
English: Yang called the generals together to discuss strategies. Chen Baizhen said, "The rebellion in Jiaozi County is the fault of the family, which has caused chaos in many counties, and people have been arbitrarily arrested and killed for many years.

古文：定州欲偷安目前，不顾大计。
现代文：现在定州刺史只想苟且偷安于眼前，还顾不上有什么大的打算。
English: Now, the history of Dingzhou embroidery only wants to stay in front of the eyes, and there is no big plan.

古文：节下奉辞伐罪，当死生以之。岂可逗挠不进，长寇沮众也！ 
现代文：现在您奉皇上之命讨伐有罪之人，应当生死不顾，全力以赴，怎么可以逗留不进，长敌人志气而灭自己威风呢！ 
English: Now that you have been ordered by the emperor to fight against the guilty, you should go all out, regardless of life and death. How can you stay stagnant, embolden the enemy, and destroy your own prestige?

古文：遂勒兵先发。
现代文：于是，陈霸先率自己的部队首先出发。
English: As a result, Chen Badu led his troops to set out first.

古文：瞟以霸先为前锋。
现代文：杨让陈霸先做先锋。
English: Yang let Chen Ba lead the way.

古文：至交州，贲帅众三万拒之，败于硃鸢，又败于苏历江口。
现代文：到了交州，李贲率领三万军队抵抗，在朱鸢被打败。后来又在苏历江口被打败。
English: When he arrived at Jiaozhou, he led 30,000 troops to resist and was defeated at Zhuye. Later, he was defeated again at the mouth of the Suri River.

古文：贲奔嘉宁城，诸军进围之。
现代文：李贲逃往嘉宁城，各路军队将他围住。
English: Li Gan fled to Jianing City, where he was surrounded by troops from all sides.

古文：勃，昺之子也。
现代文：萧勃，是萧的儿子。
English: Xiao Bo is Xiao's son.

古文：魏与柔然头兵可汗谋连兵伐东魏，丞相欢患之，遣行台郎中杜弼使于柔然，为世子澄求婚。
现代文：西魏与柔然国头兵可汗密谋联合起兵讨伐东魏，东魏丞相高欢为此事很担心，便派行台郎中杜弼出使柔然国，替他的长子高澄求婚。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty and Khan, the head soldier of Juran State, conspired to jointly raise an army to fight against the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Gao Ran, the Prime Minister of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, was very worried about this matter, so he sent Gaotai Langzhong Dujuan, an envoy from Juran State, to propose marriage for his eldest son Gao Cheng.

古文：头兵曰： 高王自娶则可。 
现代文：头兵可汗对使者说： 高丞相如果为自己娶亲就可以。 
English: The head soldier, Khan, said to the envoy: "Major-General, if you want to get married, go ahead.

古文：欢犹豫未决。
现代文：高欢犹豫不决。
English: Gao Huan hesitated.

古文：娄妃曰： 国家大计，愿勿疑也。 
现代文：娄妃对他说： 这是国家大事，希望您不要犹豫。 
English: Empress Dowager Cixi said to him, "This is a national event. I hope you will not hesitate."

古文：世子澄、尉景亦劝之。
现代文：长子高澄与尉景也劝他。
English: His eldest son, Takasumi, and his second-in-command, Jogei, also advised him to leave.

古文：欢乃遣镇南将军慕容俨聘之，号曰蠕蠕公主。
现代文：高欢于是派遣镇南将军慕容俨前往柔然国去定亲，称柔然王的女儿为蠕蠕公主。
English: Gao Huan then sent the Zhenan general Murong Yao to the country of Juran to establish a relationship, calling the daughter of King Juran the Princess Creep Creep.

古文：秋，八月，欢亲迎于下馆。
现代文：秋季，八月，高欢亲自在下馆迎接蠕蠕公主。
English: In the autumn, in August, Gao Huan met Princess Wormwood in person at the Lower Pavilion.

古文：公主至，娄妃避正室以处之；欢跪而拜谢，妃曰： 彼将觉之，愿绝勿顾。 
现代文：公主来到了东魏，娄妃将自己居住的正室让给蠕蠕公主住；高欢向娄妃跪拜感谢她，娄妃说： 公主会发现我们的关系，希望你和我断绝来往，不要再来看我。 
English: When the princess came to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Empress Dowager Cui gave her rightful residence to Princess Cui Cui to live in; Gao Huan knelt down to thank Empress Dowager Cui, and Empress Dowager Cui said, "The princess will find out about our relationship, and I hope that you will break off contact with me and not come to see me again."

古文：头兵使其弟秃突佳来送女，且报聘；仍戒曰： 待见外孙乃归。 
现代文：头兵可汗派他的弟弟秃突佳前来护送他的女儿，并且作为对东魏的回访。他又告诫公主说： 等到看见外孙之后你再回来。 
English: The head soldier, Khan, sent his younger brother, Balduchka, to escort his daughter, and as a return visit to Eastern Wei, he warned the princess, "Wait until you see your grandchild before you come back."

古文：公主性严毅，终身不肯华言。
现代文：公主性格严肃刚毅，终身不肯说汉语。
English: The princess had a serious and strong character and refused to speak Chinese for the rest of her life.

古文：欢尝病，不得往，秃突佳怨恚，欢舆疾就之。
现代文：高欢有一次病了，不能前往她的住处，秃突佳很有怨气，高欢便立即抱病登车去公主那里。
English: Gao Huan was once ill and could not go to her residence. Bald Dujia was very resentful, and Gao Huan immediately boarded the train to go to the princess.

古文：冬，十月，乙未，诏有罪者复听入赎。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙未，梁朝颁下诏书：重新允许有罪的人交钱赎罪。
English: In the winter, in October, in the second year of Wei, the Liang Dynasty issued an edict: to allow the guilty to pay money to atone for their sins.

古文：东魏遣中书舍人尉瑾来聘。
现代文：东魏派中书舍人尉瑾来梁朝聘问。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the middle-ranking official of the school came to Liang Dynasty to ask for an appointment.

古文：乙未，东魏丞相欢请释邙山俘囚桎梏，配以民间寡妇。
现代文：乙未，东魏丞相高欢请求释放邙山的战俘，把民间的寡妇许配给他们。
English: In the second half of the 19th century, Gao Huan, the Eastern Wei chancellor, requested the release of prisoners of war from Lushan and promised them the widows of the common people.

古文：十二月，东魏以侯景为司徒，中书令韩轨为司空；戊子，以孙腾录尚书事。
现代文：十二月，东魏任命侯景为司徒，任命中书令韩轨为司空，戊子，任命孙腾为录尚书事。
English: In December, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Hou Jing as a scholar, appointed Han Rail as a scholar and Wu Zi as a scholar, and appointed Sun Teng as a scholar.

古文：魏筑圜丘于城南。
现代文：西魏在长安城南面建造了一个祭天的圆丘。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty built a round mound in the south of Chang'an City.

古文：散骑常侍贺琛启陈四事：其一以为 今北边稽服，正是生聚教议之时，而天下户口减落，关外弥甚。
现代文：散骑常侍贺琛向梁武帝启奏了四件事：其一，认为 现在北方的东魏已经降服，该是让百姓繁衍后代，积蓄物资，对他们实行教育训导的时候了，而天下的户口却减少了，关外户口减少得更厉害。
English: Hisao, a samurai who rode around a lot, explained four things to Emperor Liangwu: First, he thought that now that the Northern Eastern Wei Dynasty had surrendered, it was time for the people to breed offspring, accumulate materials, and educate and train them. However, the number of household registrations around the world had decreased, and the number of household registrations outside Guanzhong had decreased even more.

古文：郡不堪州之控总，县不堪郡之裒削，更相呼扰，惟事征敛。民不堪命，各务流移，此岂非牧守之过欤！
现代文：郡不堪忍受州的催逼，县不堪忍受郡的搜刮，千方百计地互相骚扰，只知道横征暴敛，百姓不堪重压，各家纷纷流离失所，这难道不是州郡长官的过错吗？
English: The county can't bear the state's urging, the county can't bear the county's scrounging, harassing each other in every possible way, only to know that the levies are violent, the people can't bear the heavy pressure, and each family has been displaced. Isn't this the fault of the state and county governor?

古文：东境户口空虚，皆由使命繁数，穷幽极远，无不皆至，每有一使，所属搔扰，驽困邑宰，则拱手听其渔猎，桀黠长吏，又因之重为贪残，纵有廉平，郡犹掣肘。
现代文：东部地区户口空虚，都是由于国家政令太繁多引起的，即使是偏僻边远的地方，也无所不至。每次来一位使者，所属地区便受到骚扰，那些无能的地方官员，就只好拱手听命，让他们渔猎搜刮，强暴狡诈的地方长官，又趁机更加贪婪地剥削。纵然遇到廉洁正直的官员，郡守还要加以阻挠。
English: Empty hukou in the eastern region are all caused by too many government decrees, even in remote areas. Every time an envoy comes, the region is harassed, and those incompetent local officials have no choice but to obey orders, let them fish and scrape, rape cunning local governors, and take advantage of the opportunity to exploit more greedily. Even if they encounter honest officials, county governors will still obstruct them.

古文：如此，虽年降复业之诏，屡下蠲赋之恩，而民不得反其居也。 
现代文：象这样，朝廷尽管年年降旨要人民恢复生产，多次下令免除赋税，但百姓却不能回到他们原来的住所。 
English: As such, despite the fact that the imperial court issued decrees to the people to resume production year after year, and repeatedly ordered tax exemptions, the people could not return to their original homes.

古文：其二以为 今天下守宰所以贪残，良由风俗侈靡使之然也。
现代文：其二，认为 当今天下官吏之所以贪婪、残暴，确实是由于奢侈靡烂的风俗造成的。
English: Secondly, it is believed that the greed and brutality of today's lower-ranking officials are indeed caused by extravagant customs.

古文：今之燕喜，相竞夸豪，积果如丘陵，列肴同绮绣，露台之产，不周一燕之资，而宾主之间，裁取满腹，未及下堂，已同臭腐。
现代文：当今，在喜庆饮酒的日子里，人们竟相攀比奢华；果品堆积得如同小山，美味佳肴摆在席上如同美丽的刺绣一样，百两黄金，还不够一次酒宴所用的钱。来宾与主人所需要的只是吃饱，没等到走下殿堂，那些食物就当成腐烂发臭的东西抛弃掉。
English: Nowadays, in the days of festive drinking, people compete with each other in luxury; fruit is piled up like a hill, delicious dishes are placed on the table like beautiful embroidery, a hundred and two gold is not enough money for a banquet. All that guests and hosts need is to eat their fill, and before they go down the hall, those foods are discarded as something rotten and smelly.

古文：又，畜妓之夫，无有等秩，为吏牧民者，致赀巨亿，罢归之日，不支数年，率皆尽于燕饮之物、歌谣之具。
现代文：再者，无论什么等级，都蓄养妓女。而当官统治百姓的人，得到了巨大的财富，他们离职回家之后，这些银两也维持不了几年，全都用在操办饮酒、歌舞的花销中了。
English: Moreover, no matter what level, prostitutes are kept. And the officials who rule the people have gained enormous wealth. After they leave office and return home, these silver and gold cannot be maintained for several years. They are all used in the operation of drinking, singing and dancing expenses.

古文：所费事等丘山，为欢止在俄顷，乃更追恨向所取之少；如复傅翼，增其搏噬，一何悖哉！
现代文：他们所破费的东西象小山一样多，而寻欢作乐只在一时，于是他们更加悔恨以往在做官时向百姓索取得少了；如果能重新做官的话，他们便加倍地攫取、吞噬百姓的财物。
English: They spend as much as a small mountain, and seek pleasure only for a moment, so they are more regretful that they have obtained less from the people in the past when they were officials; if they can be officials again, they will seize and devour the people's property twice as much.

古文：其馀淫侈，著之凡百，习以成俗，日见滋甚。欲使人守廉白，安可得邪！
现代文：这是多么违背道义啊！其余淫侈之事，数不胜数，这种习惯渐渐成了风气，而且日渐滋长，一天比一天严重，要想使人们恪守廉正清白，怎么能办到呢？
English: How immoral this is! The rest of the lascivious things are innumerable. This habit has gradually become a custom, and it is growing day by day, becoming more and more serious day by day. How can it be done to make people adhere to integrity and innocence?

古文：诚宜严为禁制，导以节俭，纠奏浮华，变其耳目。
现代文：真应该严格制定禁止的措施，用节俭来引导人们，纠崐正虚浮不实的弊端，使其耳目一新。
English: It is really necessary to strictly formulate prohibitive measures, use frugality to guide people, and correct the malpractices that are false and unreal, so that they can be refreshed.

古文：夫失节之嗟，亦民所自患，正耻不能及群，故勉强而为之；苟以淳素为先，足正雕流之弊矣。 
现代文：对官吏失去节制的感叹，也是人们自己忧虑的，我正羞愧于不能使大家有这样的认识，所以要勉强去做，如果能以正直清白为前导，足能纠正那些凋残失节的弊病 。
English: I am ashamed that I cannot make everyone understand this, so I have to do it reluctantly. If I can use honesty and innocence as a guide, it will be enough to correct those withered and out-of-touch ills.

古文：其三以为 陛下忧念四海，不惮勤劳，至于百司，莫不奏事。
现代文：其三，认为 陛下您忧国忧民，挂念天下，不畏辛劳，以至于各部门都直接向您奏事。
English: Thirdly, I believe that Your Majesty is concerned about the country and the people, is concerned about the world, and is not afraid of hard work, so that all departments report directly to you.

古文：但斗筲之人，既得伏奏帷扆，便欲诡竞求进，不论国之大体，心存明恕；惟务吹毛求疵，擘肌分理，以深刻为能，以绳逐为务。
现代文：但是那些才短识浅气量狭小的人，既能靠近您，向您启奏，便想骗得您的信任，争相飞黄腾达，而不顾国家大局，不能心存宽恕，只一味地吹毛求疵，擘肌分理，过分苛细，以严酷为能干，把纠举别人过错并且呵斥驱逐人看成是自己的任务。
English: But those who are short-sighted, shallow-minded and narrow-minded, even if they can get close to you and play to you, want to deceive your trust, compete to become famous, regardless of the overall situation of the country, cannot have forgiveness in their hearts, just nitpick, cut and paste, are too harsh, are capable of being harsh, and regard it as their task to find fault with others and expel people.

古文：迹虽似于奉公，事更成其威福，犯罪者多，巧避滋甚，长弊增奸，实由于此。
现代文：他们的作为，表面上虽然似乎在奉公办事，实际上是更实现了他的作威作福。结果使犯罪者增多，用巧妙办法逃避罪责的人也很多，滋长了弊病，增加了邪恶，实际上就因为这个原因啊！
English: Their actions, although on the surface they appear to be in the service of the public, are in fact more the realization of his authority and blessing. As a result, the number of criminals has increased, and there are also many people who use ingenious methods to evade culpability. In fact, it is for this reason that maladies have grown and evil has increased.

古文：诚愿责其公平之效，黜其谗慝之心，则下安上谧，无徼幸之患矣。 
现代文：我真诚地希望能达到公平的效果，革除奸佞小人妄进谗言的邪恶念头，那样，全国上下就会安定，就没有侥幸心理带来的忧患了。 
English: I sincerely hope to achieve a fair result and eliminate the evil thoughts of the traitors and villains, so that the whole country will be stable and there will be no worries brought about by luck.

古文：其四以为 今天下无事，而犹日不暇给，宜省事、息费，事省则民养，费息则财聚。
现代文：其四，认为 现在天下太平无事，但仍没有一点空闲时间，应该马上精简事务，节省掉一些花费。
English: Fourthly, they think that the world is peaceful now, but they still don't have any free time. They should immediately streamline their affairs and save some money.

古文：应内省职掌各检所部：凡京师治、署、邸、肆及国容、戎备，四方屯、传、邸治，有所宜除，除之，有所宜减，减之；兴造有非急者，征求有可缓者，皆宜停省，以息费休民。
现代文：减少了事务，百姓就能修养生息，节省一些开销，国家就可以聚集资财。各机构应该自己对照职责范围，分别检查下属部门：凡是京师的官府、衙门、官邸、市肆以及朝廷仪仗、武事装备，地方上的屯戍、驿传、地方官衙等，有应该革除的，就要革除它，有应该削减的，就要削减掉它。兴建的工程有不急需的，征收的赋税劳役有可以暂缓的，都应该停止减省，以节约开销，让百姓得到休息。
English: By reducing the number of affairs, the people will be able to improve their livelihoods, save some expenses, and the country will be able to accumulate wealth. Each institution should check the scope of responsibilities on its own and separately check the subordinate departments: all the government offices, government gates, official residences, municipal offices of the Beijing Division, as well as the ceremonial battles of the imperial court, martial arts equipment, local settlements, imperial edicts, local government officials and so on. If there is anything that should be eliminated, it should be eliminated, and if there is anything that should be reduced, it should be reduced. If there are construction projects that are not urgently needed, and if there are taxes and labor

古文：故畜其财者，所以大用之也；养其民者，所以大役之也。
现代文：因此，储蓄财货是为了能有大的作为，让人民休养生息是为了能让他们服大役。
English: Therefore, the purpose of saving money and goods is to be able to do great things, and the purpose of allowing people to recuperate and live is to allow them to perform great services.

古文：若言小事不足害财，则终年不息矣；以小役不足妨民，则终年不止矣。
现代文：如果说小事不足以破费多少钱财，就任意花费的话，那就终年不会停止了。
English: If it is said that small things do not cost much money, then the expenditure will continue all year round; if it is believed that small labor will not hinder the people, then the labor will not stop all year round.

古文：如此，则难可以语富强而图远大矣。 启奏，上大怒，召主书于前，口授敕书以责琛。
现代文：如果认为小的劳役不会妨碍百姓的话，那就会终年有劳役，百姓没有休息的时候了。
English: If it is thought that small labor service will not hinder the people, then there will be labor service all year round, and the people will have no time to rest.

古文：大指以为： 朕有天下四十馀年，公车谠言，日关听览，所陈之事，与卿不异，每苦倥偬，更增惛惑。
现代文：像这样，就很难谈到国富民强，并且图谋远大的事业了。 贺琛启奏之后，梁武帝勃然大怒，把主书召到面前，口授敕书指责贺琛。大致内容是： 我有江山已四十多年，每天都耳闻目睹许多从公车官署中转来的臣民直言不讳的上书，他们所陈述的事情，与你所说的没有什么不同。我常常苦于时间仓促，现在你的奏折更增添了我的糊涂和迷惑不解。
English: In this way, it is difficult to talk about the country's prosperity and the people's strength, and to plan for a great cause. After the opening of the Hezhen concert, Emperor Liangwu was furious, summoned the main writer to the front, and dictated a letter to blame Hezhen. The general content is: I have been in the country for more than forty years, and every day I have heard and witnessed many outspoken letters from subjects transferred from the bus authority. The things they stated are no different from what you said. I often suffer from time haste, and now your report has added to my confusion and puzzlement.

古文：卿不宜自同阘茸，止取名字，宣之行路，言 我能上事，恨朝廷之不用 。
现代文：你不该把自己和才能低下的软弱之人混同在一起，只是图个虚名，向行路之人炫耀说： 我可以向皇帝上书陈述意见。遗憾的是朝廷不采纳。 
English: Thou shalt not confound thyself with the weak and feeble of low estate, but shalt make thyself a byword among the travelers, saying, I am able to go unto the emperor, and make my petition, but it shall not be accepted.

古文：何不分别显言：某刺史横暴，某太守贪残，尚书、兰台某人奸猾，使者渔猎，并何姓名？
现代文：为什么不分别明着说：某位刺史横征暴敛，某位太守贪婪残酷，某位尚书、兰台奸诈虚滑；渔猎百姓的皇差姓什么叫什么？
English: Why not separately and clearly say: a certain member of the imperial guard is greedy and cruel, a certain member of the imperial history commission is violent, a certain member of the imperial guard is greedy and cruel, a certain member of the imperial literature commission is treacherous and slippery; what is the name of the imperial messenger who hunts and fishes for the people?

古文：取与者谁？
现代文：从谁那里夺取？给了谁？
English: Who did they take it from? Who did they give it to?

古文：明言其事，得以诛黜，更择材良。
现代文：如果你能明白地指出这些，我就能杀掉、罢免他们，再选择好的人才。
English: If you can clearly point this out, I can kill them, dismiss them, and then choose the best talent.

古文：又，士民饮食过差，若加严禁，密房曲屋，云何可知？
现代文：还有，官吏百姓的饮食豪华过度，如果加以严格禁止，他们在密室里，你又怎么知道呢？
English: Moreover, the food and drink of officials and commoners is so luxurious that if it is strictly prohibited, how will you know that they are in a secret room?

古文：倘家家搜检，恐益增苛扰。
现代文：倘若挨家挨户搜查，恐怕更增加了对百姓的骚扰。
English: If house-to-house searches are carried out, I am afraid that the harassment of the people will increase.

古文：若指朝廷，我无此事。
现代文：如果你指的是朝廷中生活奢侈，我是没有这种情况的。
English: If you mean living the high life at court, I didn't have that.

古文：昔之牲牢，久不宰杀，朝中会同，菜蔬而已；若复减此，必有《蟋蟀》之讥。
现代文：崐以前饲养的祭祀用的牲畜，很久没有宰杀了。朝廷如有朝会，也只是吃一些蔬菜罢了。如果再削减这些蔬菜，一定会被讥讽为是《经·蟋蟀》所讽刺的晋僖公那样的人。
English: The sacrificial animals that were previously raised had not been slaughtered for a long time. If the imperial court had a court meeting, it would just eat some vegetables. If these vegetables were cut down any further, they would certainly be ridiculed as people like Jin Yigong, who was satirized in "Ching Yi."

古文：若以为功德事者，皆是园中之物，变一瓜为数十种，治一菜为数十味；以变故多，何损于事！
现代文：如果你认为供佛、事佛奢侈，那些供品都是园子里的东西，把一种瓜改为几十个品种，把一种菜做成几十种味道。只因为变着花样做才有了许多菜肴，对事物又有什么损害呢？
English: If you think that it is extravagant to make offerings to the Buddha, or to have anything to do with the Buddha, those offerings are all things from the garden. If you change one kind of melon into dozens of varieties, and make one kind of dish into dozens of flavors, and only because you change the patterns do you have many dishes, then what is the harm to things?

古文： 我自非公宴，不食国家之食，多历年所；乃至宫人，亦不食国家之食。
现代文：我如果不是公宴，从不吃国家的酒食，已有很多年了。甚至宫中的人，也不吃国家的粮食。
English: If it were not a state banquet, I would never eat the state's food and drink, and I have not done so for many years. Even people in the palace do not eat the state's grain.

古文：凡所营造，不关材官及以国匠，皆资雇借以成其事。
现代文：凡是营造的建筑，都与材官和国匠无关，都是用钱雇人来完成的。
English: All the buildings that have been built have nothing to do with the materials officer or the national craftsman. They are all built by employing people with money.

古文：勇怯不同，贪廉各用，亦非朝廷为之傅翼。
现代文：官员们有勇敢的，也有胆怯的，有贪婪的也有廉正的，也不是朝廷为他们增添了羽翼。
English: Officials can be brave or cowardly, greedy or honest, and it is not the court that gives them wings.

古文：卿以朝廷为悖，乃自甘之，当思致悖所以！
现代文：你认为朝廷是有错误的，于是就自以为是。
English: You think that the imperial court is wrong, so you are self-righteous.

古文：卿云 宜导之以节俭 ，朕绝房室三十馀年，至于居处不过一床之地，雕饰之物不入于宫；受生不饮酒，不好音声，所以朝中曲宴，未尝奏乐，此群贤之所见也。
现代文：你应该想一想导致错误的原因！你说：应该以节俭引导百姓，我已经三十多年没有房事，至于居住，不过只有能放下一张床的地方，宫中没有雕梁画柱；我平生不爱饮酒，不喜好声色。因此，朝廷中设宴，不曾演奏过乐曲，这些都是诸位贤臣们所看到的。
English: You should think about what led to the mistake! You said: the people should be guided by frugality. I have not had a house for more than thirty years. As for living, there is only a place where I can put down a bed, and there are no carved beams and pillars in the palace. I have never liked drinking, and I do not like loud noises. Therefore, I have never played music at a banquet in the court. These are all things that your wise men have seen.

古文：朕三更出治事，随事多少，事少午前得竟，事多日昃方食，日常一食，若昼若夜；昔要腹过于十围，今之瘦削裁二尺馀，旧带犹存，非为妄说。
现代文：我三更便起，治理国家大事，处理政务的时间依据国家事务的多少来定，事务不多时，中午之前就能把它们处理完，事务繁忙时太阳偏西时才能吃饭，常常每天只吃一顿饭，既象在过白天，又象在过黑夜。往日，我的腰和腹超过了十围，现在瘦得才只有二尺多点，我以前围的腰带还保存着，不是乱说。
English: I get up at 3:00 a.m. to manage state affairs, and the time to handle government affairs is determined by the number of state affairs. When there are not many affairs, I can finish them before noon. When there are busy affairs, I can only eat when the sun is westward. I often eat only one meal a day, both during the day and at night. In the past, my waist and stomach were more than ten times my height, but now I am only a little more than two feet thin. The belt I used to wear is still there, I am not joking.

古文：为谁为之？
现代文：这是为了谁工作？
English: Who is this for?

古文：救物故也。
现代文：是为了拯救万民的缘故。
English: It is for the sake of saving all things.

古文： 卿又曰 百司莫不奏事，诡竞求进 ，今不使外人呈事，谁尸其任！
现代文：你又说： 官员们没有不凡事都向您禀奏的，一些人用尽伎俩想升官。 要是从今不让外人奏报事情，那么谁来担负这个责任呢？
English: You also said: "Officials did not report all the extraordinary things to you, some people used all the tricks to get promoted.If from now on outsiders are not allowed to report things, then who will take on this responsibility?

古文：专委之人，云何可得？
现代文：委托管理国事的专人，怎么能够得到呢？
English: How can you get someone who can be specially appointed?

古文：古人云： 专听生奸，独任成乱。 
现代文：古人说： 只听一方面的话就会出现奸佞小人，专任一人必定要出祸乱。
English: The ancients said: If you only listen to one side of the story, a villain will appear. If you only listen to one side of the story, a calamity will surely occur.

古文：二世之委赵高，元后之付王莽，呼鹿为马，又可法欤？
现代文：秦二世把国家大事委托给了赵高，元后把一切托付给了王莽，结果赵高指鹿为马，颠倒是非，又怎么能效法他们呢！
English: Qin II entrusted state affairs to Zhao Gao, and the Yuan Dynasty entrusted everything to Wang Mang. As a result, Zhao Gao regarded deer as horses and reversed right and wrong. How could he follow their example?

古文：卿云 吹毛求疵 ，复是何人？ 擘肌分理 ，复是何事？
现代文：你说： 吹毛求疵 ，又是指谁？ 擘肌分理 ，又是指哪件事？
English: You say, "Picky-picky, who does it refer to? Picky-picky, what does it refer to?"

古文：治、署、邸、肆等，何者宜除？何者宜减？
现代文：官府、衙门、官邸、市肆等等，哪个应该革除，哪些该削减？
English: Government offices, government offices, government residences, municipal offices, etc. Which should be eliminated and which should be reduced?

古文：何处兴造非急？
现代文：哪些地方兴建的工程不急？
English: In which areas are construction projects not urgent?

古文：何处征求可缓？
现代文：哪些征收的赋税可以迟缓？
English: Which imposed taxes can be delayed?

古文：各出其事，具以奏闻！
现代文：你要分别举出具体事实，详细启奏给我听！
English: You must separately cite specific facts and give me a detailed explanation!

古文：富国强兵之术，息民省役之宜，并宜具列！若不具列，则是欺罔朝廷。
现代文：用什么办法使国家富裕，军队强大，应该如何让百姓休养生息，减除劳役，这些都该具体地列出，如果不具体地一一列出，那你就是蒙蔽欺骗朝廷。
English: What methods should be used to make the country rich and the army strong, how should the people be allowed to rest and recuperate, and how should labor service be reduced, all of these should be specifically listed. If they are not specifically listed one by one, then you are misleading and deceiving the imperial court.

古文：伫闻重奏，当复省览，付之尚书，班下海内，庶惟新之美，复见今日。 
现代文：朕正在准备侧耳细听你按上述要求重新奏报，届时自当认真阅读，并把你的高见批转给尚书省，正式向全国颁布，只希望除旧布新的善政美德，能因此而出现在今世。 
English: I am preparing to listen attentively to your re-submission of the report in accordance with the above requirements. At that time, you should read it carefully and transfer your high opinion to the Ministry of Education and Culture and officially promulgate it to the whole country. I only hope that the virtue of good governance, which has been removed from the old cloth and replaced with a new one, can therefore appear in this world.

古文：琛但谢过而已，不敢复言。
现代文：贺琛只是向梁武帝谢了罪，不敢再说什么。
English: He Xuan only thanked Emperor Liangwu for his crime and did not dare to say anything else.

古文：上为孝教慈恭俭，博学能文，阴阳、卜筮、骑射、声律、草隶、围棋，无不精妙。
现代文：梁武帝为人很守孝道，待人慈悲，彬彬有礼，生活又节俭。他博学多才，善写文章，对阴阳、卜筮、骑射、声律、草、围棋无所不精。
English: Emperor Liangwu was a very filial, compassionate, courteous and frugal person. He was a polymath and a good writer. He was an expert in yin and yang, divination, archery, singing, grass and Go.

古文：勤于政务，冬月四更竟，即起视事，执笔触寒，手为皴裂。
现代文：他对国家事务很勤勉，冬天，四更一过，他就起来工作。由于天气严寒，握笔的手都粗糙得裂口子了。
English: He was very diligent in the affairs of state, and in winter, as soon as the four moons had passed, he would get up to work. Because of the cold weather, his hands holding the pen were rough and cracked.

古文：自天监中用释氏法，长斋断鱼肉，日止一食，惟菜羹，粝饭而已，或遇事繁，日移中则嗽口以过。
现代文：自从天监年间信仰释迦牟尼的佛教以来，长期斋戒吃素食，不再吃鱼肉。每天只吃一顿饭，也只不过是些菜羹，粗米饭罢了。有时遇到事务繁多，太阳移过头顶了，就漱一漱口算吃过饭了。
English: Since believing in Shakyamuni's Buddhism during the celestial prison, he has been fasting for a long time, eating vegetarian food and no longer eating fish and meat. He only eats one meal a day, which is just some vegetable soup and coarse rice. Sometimes, when he has a lot of things to do and the sun has moved over his head, he has to rinse his mouth once to be sure he has eaten.

古文：身衣布衣，木绵皁帐，一冠三载，一衾二年，后宫贵妃以下，衣不曳地。
现代文：他身穿布衣，用的是木棉织的黑色帐子。一顶帽子戴三年，被子盖二年才换一床。后宫里贵妃以下，不穿拖地的衣裙。
English: He is dressed in cloth, with a black curtain woven of cotton. He wears a hat for three years, and a quilt cover for two years before changing a bed. In the harem, no one under the rank of noblewoman wears a dress that drags the ground.

古文：性不饮酒，非宗庙祭祀、大飨宴及诸法事，未尝作乐。
现代文：他生性不喝酒，如果不是在宗庙举行祭祀，或是办大宴席以及进行其他的拜佛等活动，就不奏乐。
English: He does not drink alcohol by nature, and does not play music unless he is holding a religious service at his ancestral temple, or holding a large banquet, or performing other activities such as worshiping Buddha.

古文：虽居暗室，恒理衣冠，小坐盛暑，未尝褰袒。
现代文：尽管他居住在幽暗的房子中，却一直衣冠楚楚，坐在宫中便座上，在酷暑的日子里，也没有袒胸露怀。
English: Although he lived in a gloomy house, he was always well-dressed, sitting on a palace toilet seat, and in the heat of the day, he did not bare his chest.

古文：对内竖小臣，如遇大宾。
现代文：对待宫中太监小臣，象对待尊贵的宾客一样。
English: Treat the eunuch's vassals in the palace as if they were honored guests.

古文：然优假士人太过，牧守多浸渔百姓，使者干扰郡县。
现代文：但是宽待士大夫太过分，牧守大多渔猎百姓，皇帝的使臣又干扰郡县。
English: However, the doctor's lenient treatment was too much, the herdsmen mostly hunted and fished for the people, and the emperor's envoys interfered with the counties.

古文：又好亲任小人，颇复苛察。
现代文：梁武帝本人又爱亲近任用奸诈的小人，很失之于苛刻挑剔。
English: Emperor Liangwu himself also liked to appoint close and treacherous villains, and was very picky.

古文：多造塔庙，公私费损。
现代文：他还兴建了许多塔和庙，使公家和私人都破费损耗。
English: He also built many pagodas and temples, which cost both the public and private sectors dearly.

古文：江南久安，风俗奢靡。故琛启及之。
现代文：江南一带长期安定，形成了生活奢侈的风俗，所以贺琛在奏折中提到了此事。
English: The south of the Yangtze River has been stable for a long time, forming a custom of luxury life, so He Yu mentioned this matter in his report.

古文：上恶其触实，故怒。
现代文：武帝不喜欢他触及事实，所以大为恼怒。
English: Emperor Wu did not like the fact that he touched on the truth, so he was very angry.

古文：臣光曰：梁高祖之不终也，宜哉！
现代文：臣司马光曰：梁武帝不得善终，是应该的。
English: Vassal Sima Guang said: Emperor Liangwu must have a good death, it is right.

古文：夫人主听纳之失，在于丛脞；人臣献替之病，在于烦碎。
现代文：国君之所以在听取意见，接纳进谏方面出现过失，就是因为只注意了琐碎细小的事情而没有雄才大略。大臣进谏时所犯的毛病，也在于烦琐。
English: The reason why the sovereign is negligent in listening to opinions and accepting advice is because he only paid attention to trivial and small things and did not have a master plan. The problem committed by the minister when advising is also tedious.

古文：是以明主守要道以御万机之本，忠臣陈大体以格君心之非。故身不劳而收功远，言至约而为益大也。
现代文：因此贤明的君主要抓住最主要的问题以驾驭万事的根本，忠心的大臣要陈述大的方针政策来劝阻君主想得不对的地方，所以作为君主不需亲自动手操劳，就能取得大的功效，作为大臣说得简明扼要便收到很大的效益。
English: Therefore, a wise prince should grasp the most important issues to control the fundamentals of all things, and a loyal minister should state the great principles and policies to dissuade the monarch from thinking wrongly. Therefore, as a monarch, you can achieve great results without having to work on your own, and as a minister, you will receive great benefits if you speak concisely.

古文：观夫贺琛之谏亦未至于切直，而高祖已赫然震怒，护其所短，矜其所长；诘贪暴之主名，问劳费之条目，困以难对之状，责以必穷之辞。
现代文：纵观贺琛的进谏，可以说还未达到直言极谏的地步，而梁武帝却已经勃然大怒，袒护自己的短处，夸耀自己的长处。质问贺琛贪婪暴虐的官吏名字，追问徭役过重、费用铺张的具体项目，用难以回答的问题来困扰他，用无法对答的言辞来责备他。
English: Looking at He Xuan's progress, it can be said that he has not yet reached the point of bluntness, but Emperor Liangwu has already become furious, defending his shortcomings and boasting of his strengths. He questioned the names of He Xuan's greedy and tyrannical officials, inquired about the overworked and expensive specific projects, troubled him with difficult to answer questions, and reproached him with unanswerable words.

古文：自以蔬食之俭为盛德，日昃之勤为至治，君道已备，无复可加，群臣箴规，举不足听。
现代文：梁武帝自认为每顿饭只吃蔬菜的节俭作风是极大的美德，忙到太阳偏西才吃饭这种勤勉的工作态度是最好的治国办法，为君之道他已具备，再没有什么需要增加的了，对于大臣的规劝，认为全不值得去听取。
English: Emperor Liangwu himself thought that the frugal style of eating only vegetables at every meal was a great virtue, and that this diligent work attitude was the best way to govern the country. He already had the way of the king, and there was nothing more that needed to be added. For the minister's persuasion, he thought it was not worth listening to.

古文：如此，则自馀切直之言过于琛者，谁敢进哉！
现代文：象这样，那么其余比贺琛的进谏更恳切、直率、激烈的话，谁还敢去对他说呢！
English: As such, who would dare to say anything more earnest, forthright, and fierce than He Yao's last words?

古文：由是奸佞居前而不见，大谋颠错而不知，名辱身危，覆邦绝祀，为千古所闵笑，岂不哀哉！
现代文：因此，奸佞小人在眼前也视而不见，重大决策颠倒错误也不知道，声名受辱，自身危亡，国家颠覆，祭祀断绝，被千古人怜悯讥笑，难道不很悲哀吗？
English: Therefore, isn't it very sad that the traitorous villain also turns a blind eye in front of his eyes, doesn't know about the reversal of major decision-making, the disgrace of fame, the danger of his own death, the subversion of the country, the severance of sacrifice, and the pity and ridicule of the ancients?

古文：上敦尚文雅，疏简刑法，自公卿大臣，咸不以鞫狱为意。
现代文：梁武帝真心崇尚文章礼乐，对刑法则疏远忽视。从公卿大臣以下，都不重视审判刑案。
English: Emperor Liangwu wholeheartedly advocated literature and music, but ignored the criminal law. From the court nobles to the ministers, they did not attach importance to the trial of criminal cases.

古文：奸吏招权弄法，货赂成市，枉滥者多。
现代文：奸佞的官吏便擅权弄法，受贿赂的东西多得象市场出售的商品一样，无辜受害扩大冤狱的事很多。
English: Corrupt officials have the power to manipulate the law, bribes are as plentiful as goods sold in the market, and there are many cases of innocent victims being unjustly imprisoned.

古文：大率二岁刑已上岁至五千人；徙居作者具五任，其无任者著升械；若疾病，权解之，是后囚徒或有优、剧。
现代文：大约被判二年以上刑罚的人每年多达五千；判罚劳役的人各自运用技巧服役劳作，那些没有一技之长的人就要被套上枷锁；如果有人病了，就暂时为他解开枷锁，这以后，囚徒中有能力行贿的人借此得到优待，没有能力行贿的人就会加剧痛苦。
English: The number of people sentenced to more than two years of criminal punishment is as high as 5,000 every year; those sentenced to forced labor each use their skills to serve and work, and those who do not have a skill are put in shackles; if someone is sick, temporarily release him from the shackles, after which those prisoners who are able to pay bribes will receive preferential treatment, and those who are not able to pay bribes will increase their suffering.

古文：时王侯子弟，多骄淫不法。
现代文：当时，王公贵族的子弟，大多骄奢淫逸，不遵守法规。
English: At that time, the sons of princes and aristocrats were mostly arrogant, lascivious, and did not abide by laws and regulations.

古文：上年老，厌于万几。又专精佛戒，每断重罪，则终日不怿；或谋反逆，事觉，亦泣而宥之。
现代文：武帝年纪已老，满足于处理日常的各种事务，又专心研究佛教戒律，每次裁决了重大罪犯，就一天不高兴，有人密谋反叛朝廷，事情被发觉后，他也哭泣悲伤一番并且原谅了这个人。
English: Emperor Wu was an old man, who was satisfied with dealing with everyday affairs, and also devoted himself to studying Buddhist precepts. Every time he adjudicated a major criminal, he was unhappy for a day. Someone plotted to rebel against the imperial court. After the matter was discovered, he also cried with sadness and forgave this person.

古文：由是王侯益横，或白昼杀人于都街，或暮夜公行剽掠，有罪亡命者，匿于王家，有司不敢搜捕。
现代文：由于这样，王公贵族们更加专横。有人在都城街道于光天化日之下把人杀死，有人在夜晚时分公开抢劫，有罪在身的逃命之人，藏在王侯家中，有关官吏不敢前去搜捕。
English: As a result, the princes and nobles became more despotic. Some killed people in broad daylight in the streets of the capital, some robbed openly at night, and those who were guilty of fleeing for their lives hid in the princes' homes, and the relevant officials did not dare to go and search for them.

古文：上深知其弊，而溺于慈爱，不能禁也。
现代文：梁武帝深深知道这些弊端，由于沉溺于慈悲仁爱，也不能禁止这些现象。
English: Emperor Liangwu was deeply aware of these drawbacks, and because he indulged in mercy and benevolence, he could not prohibit these phenomena.

古文：魏东阳王荣为瓜州刺史，与其婿邓彦偕行。
现代文：西魏东阳王元荣任瓜州刺史，与他的女婿邓彦一同前往瓜州。
English: Wang Yuan Rong, the Dongyang Emperor of the Western Wei Dynasty, was appointed as Guazhou scribe and went to Guazhou with his son-in-law Deng Yan.

古文：荣卒，瓜州首望表荣子康为刺史，彦杀康而夺其位。
现代文：元荣死后，瓜州最有威望的大姓人家上表请求让元荣的儿子元康做刺史。邓彦于是杀掉了元康，篡夺了这个职位。
English: After Yuan Rong's death, Guazhou's most prestigious family petitioned to have Yuan Rong's son, Yuan Kang, appointed as sashishi. Deng Yan then killed Yuan Kang and usurped the position.

古文：魏不能讨，因以彦为刺史，屡征不至，又南通吐谷浑。
现代文：西魏无力讨伐他，便任命邓彦为瓜州刺史。但多次征召他，他都不来，又与南面的吐谷浑勾结。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty was powerless to fight him, so they appointed Deng Yan as the Guazhou chief historian. However, he was called up several times, but he did not come, and he colluded with the southern Tuyugun.

古文：丞相泰以道远难于动众，欲以计取之，以给事黄门侍郎申徽为河西大使，密令图彦。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰因为离瓜州路途遥远，很难兴师动众地讨伐他，便想用智谋征服邓彦。他派给事黄门侍郎申徽担任河西大使，密令申徽算计邓彦。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, because of the distance from Guazhou and the difficulty of mobilizing the army to fight against him, wanted to use wisdom to conquer Deng Yan. He sent Shen Hui, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, to serve as the ambassador of Hexi, and secretly ordered Shen Hui to calculate Deng Yan.

古文：徽以五十骑行，既至，止于宾馆；彦见徽单使，不以为疑。
现代文：申徽带领五十名骑兵前往瓜州，来到了瓜州后，就住在宾馆里了。邓彦见申徽没带什么随从，没有怀疑他。
English: Shen Hui led fifty cavalrymen to Guazhou. After arriving in Guazhou, he stayed in a hotel. When Deng Yan saw that Shen Hui did not bring any followers, he did not suspect him.

古文：徽遣人微劝彦归朝，彦不从；徽又使赞成其留计，彦信之，遂来至馆。
现代文：申徽派人暗中劝说邓彦归顺朝廷，邓彦不听从劝告，申徽又派人表示赞成邓彦留在瓜州的计策。邓彦听信了这些话，于是崐来到申徽住的宾馆。
English: Shenhui sent people to secretly persuade Dengyan to submit to the imperial court, but Dengyan did not listen to the advice. Shenhui also sent people to express their approval of Dengyan's plan to stay in Guazhou. Dengyan believed these words, so he came to the hotel where Shenhui was staying.

古文：徽先与州主簿敦煌令狐整等密谋，执彦于坐，责而缚之；因宣诏慰谕吏民，且云 大军续至 ，城中无敢动者，遂送彦于长安。
现代文：申徽事先已与瓜州的主簿敦煌人令狐整等密谋策划好了，在座位上捉住了邓彦，把他捆绑了起来；接着就宣读诏书安抚百姓和官吏，并且说： 大批人马随后就要来到。 瓜州城里没有敢乱动的。于是，申徽便把邓彦押送到了长安。
English: Shen Hui had already plotted in advance with Guazhou's chief bookkeeper, Dunhuang Renling Jixi, and others. He caught Deng Yan on the seat and tied him up; then he read out an edict to pacify the people and officials, and said: A large number of people and horses will come later. Guazhou city did not dare to move. Therefore, Shen Hui escorted Deng Yan to Chang'an.

古文：泰以徽为都官尚书。
现代文：宇文泰任命申徽为都官尚书。
English: Yu Wentai appointed Shen Hui as the city government official Shang Shu.

古文：高祖武皇帝十五中大同元年
现代文：中大同元年
English: The first year of the junior high school

古文：春，正月，癸丑，杨瞟等克嘉宁城，李贲奔新昌獠中，诸军顿于江口。
现代文：春季，正月，癸丑，杨等人攻克了嘉宁城，李贲逃奔新昌的獠人地区，各路人马便停留在江口。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Zou Yuxi, Yang and others conquered Jianing City, Li Wei fled to the Xingren area of Xinchang, and people from all walks of life stayed in Jiangkou.

古文：二月，魏以义州刺史史宁为凉州刺史。
现代文：二月，西魏任命义州刺史史宁为凉州刺史，前任刺史宇文仲和依然占据着凉州，不接受新刺史的取代。
English: In February, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed the governor of Yizhou, Shi Ning, as the governor of Liangzhou. The previous governor, Yu Wenzhonghe, still occupied Liangzhou and did not accept the replacement of the new governor.

古文：前刺史宇文仲和据州，不受代，瓜州民张保杀刺史成庆以应之，晋昌民吕兴杀太守郭肆，以郡应保。
现代文：瓜州人张保也杀掉了瓜州刺史成庆来与宇文仲和呼应。晋昌郡人吕兴杀掉了太守郭肆，以此来响应张保。
English: Zhang Bao, a Guazhou native, also killed Guazhou assassin Wang Chengqing in response to Yu Wenzhong. Lv Xing, a Jinchang County native, responded to Zhang Bao by killing Guozhu Guozhu.

古文：丞相泰遣太子太保独孤信、开府仪同三司怡峰与史宁讨之。
现代文：丞相宇文泰派遣太子太保独孤信、开府仪同三司怡峰和史宁一同讨伐叛逆。
English: The chancellor, Umentai, dispatched the prince, Taibo Dokokushin, and Kaifu Yi, together with the three ministers, Yi Feng and Shi Ning, to fight against the rebels.

古文：三月，乙巳，大赦。
现代文：三月，乙己，梁朝大赦天下。
English: In March, Liang Chao was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：庚戌，上幸同泰寺，遂停寺省，讲《三慧经》。
现代文：庚戌，梁武帝临幸同泰寺，就住在寺里的临时官署中，讲读《三慧经》。
English: When Emperor Kangxi and Emperor Liangwu visited Tongtai Temple, he stayed in the temporary government office in the temple and read the "Three Wisdoms."

古文：夏，四月，丙戌，解讲，大赦，改元。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙戌，梁武帝讲经结束，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: In the summer, in April, the Emperor Liangwu's lecture ended, an amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed.

古文：是夜，同泰寺浮图灾，上曰： 此魔也，宜广为法事。 
现代文：这天夜里，同泰寺的塔起火，梁武帝说： 这是魔鬼造成的，应该大规模地做一些佛事活动。 
English: That night, the pagoda of Dongtai Temple caught fire. Emperor Liang Wudi said, "This was caused by the devil. We should carry out large-scale Buddhist activities."

古文：群臣皆称善。
现代文：文武大臣们都说好。
English: The ministers of education and armed forces are all in favour.

古文：乃下诏曰： 道高魔盛，行善鄣生。当穷兹土木，倍增往日。 
现代文：于是，梁武帝下诏说： 道高魔盛，行善发生障碍，应该大兴土木，建造规模要超过以往。 
English: As a result, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict saying: "Dao Gao is prosperous, if there are obstacles to doing good, it is necessary to carry out large-scale construction, and the scale of construction should exceed that of the past."

古文：遂起十二层浮图；将成，值侯景乱而止。
现代文：于是便开始起造一座高十二层的佛塔；将要建成之时，正赶上侯景叛乱，便中止修建了。
English: As a result, construction of a twelve-storey pagoda began; when it was about to be completed, it was just in time for the Houjing Rebellion, and construction was suspended.

古文：魏史宁晓谕凉州吏民，率皆归附，独宇文仲和据城不下。
现代文：西魏史宁慰问安抚凉州的百姓和官吏，全州吏民都归顺了他，唯有宇文仲和占据着凉州城不肯投降。
English: Western Wei Shining's condolences pacified the people and officials of Liangzhou. The officials and people of the whole state surrendered to him. Only Uwen Zhonghe, who occupied the city of Liangzhou, refused to surrender.

古文：五月，独孤信使诸将夜攻其东北，自帅壮士袭其西南。迟明，克之，遂擒仲和。
现代文：五月，独孤信派遣将领们在夜晚攻打城的东北角，自己统率壮士袭击城的西南角，黎明时分，攻克了凉州城。擒获了宇文仲和。
English: In May, Du Guoxin dispatched generals to attack the northeast corner of the city at night, and he led the strong men to attack the southwest corner of the city. At dawn, he conquered Liangzhou City. He captured Yuwen Zhonghe.

古文：初，张保欲杀州主簿令狐整，以其人望，恐失众心，虽外相敬，内甚忌之。
现代文：当初，张保想要杀掉瓜州主簿令狐整，因令狐整很有声望，杀掉他会失去民心，所以张保尽管表面上尊敬令狐整，但在内心却非常忌恨他。
English: At first, Zhang Bao wanted to kill Guazhou's chief bookkeeper, Ling Fuxin, because Ling Fuxin was very famous. If he killed him, he would lose the hearts of the people. Therefore, although Zhang Bao respected Ling Fuxin on the surface, he hated him very much in his heart.

古文：整阳为亲附，因使人说保曰： 今东军渐逼凉州，彼势孤危，恐不能敌，宜急分精锐以救之。
现代文：令狐整假装亲近，依附于张保，便派人劝张保说： 现在独孤信的军队正在渐渐逼近凉州，凉州的形势孤立无援，十分危险，恐怕不能抵挡住独孤信的军队。
English: Ling Fuxi pretended to be close and attached to Zhang Bao, and then sent someone to persuade Zhang Bao to say: Now the army of the sole believer is gradually approaching Liangzhou. The situation in Liangzhou is isolated and very dangerous, and I am afraid that I cannot resist the army of the sole believer.

古文：然成败在于将领，令狐延保，兼资文武，使将兵以往，蔑不济矣。 
现代文：应该赶快分派一些精锐部队援救凉州。但是，成功或失败的关键在于将领的能力。令狐整是个文武兼备的人才，如果派他率领军队前往凉州，没有不成的事。 
English: Some elite troops should be quickly dispatched to rescue Liangzhou. However, the key to success or failure lies in the ability of the general. Ling Fucheng is a talented person who is both literate and armed. If he is sent to lead the army to Liangzhou, nothing will be impossible.

古文：保从之。
现代文：张保采纳了令狐整的建议。
English: Zhang Bao accepted Ling Fuxin's suggestion.

古文：整行及玉门，召豪杰述保罪状，驰还袭之。
现代文：令狐整带领军队行军到了玉门，他召集起英雄豪杰，历数张保的罪状，带领骑兵返回瓜州袭击张保。
English: Ling Xuchang led the army to march to Yumen. He called up heroes and heroes, recorded Zhang Bao's crimes, and led the cavalry back to Guazhou to attack Zhang Bao.

古文：先克晋昌，斩吕兴；进击瓜州，州人素信服整，皆弃保来降，保奔吐谷浑。
现代文：他先攻克了晋昌，斩除了吕兴。然后攻打瓜州，当地人平素都信服令狐整，因此都叛离张保，向令狐整投降。张保逃往吐谷浑。
English: He first conquered Jinchang and eliminated Luexing. Then he attacked Guazhou. The local people were always convinced by Ling Fuxin, so they all betrayed Zhang Bao and surrendered to Ling Fuxin. Zhang Bao fled to Tuyugun.

古文：众议推整为刺史，整曰： 吾属以张保逆乱，恐阖州之人俱陷不义，故相与讨诛之；今复见推，是效尤也。 
现代文：大家商议后，一致推举令狐整担任瓜州刺史。令狐整对大家说： 我们因崐为张保叛逆作战，恐怕使全瓜州人都陷入了不义的境地，所以才共同讨伐他。今天我又被大家推举为瓜州刺史，这是明知错误而加以仿效，会罪上加罪啊。 
English: After everyone's deliberation, it was unanimously voted that Fuxin Zhengyi should serve as the Guazhou stabbing history. Ling Fuxin Zhengyi said to everyone: Because we fought for Zhang Bao's rebellion, I am afraid that the whole Guazhou people fell into an unjust situation, so we fought him together. Today, I was again voted by everyone as the Guazhou stabbing history. This is knowing the mistake and imitating it, which will add to the crime.

古文：乃推魏所遣使波斯者张道义行州事，具以状闻。
现代文：于是，他便推举西魏派来出使波斯的张道义暂且主持瓜州的日常事务，并将情况上报朝廷。
English: As a result, he appointed Zhang Daoyi, who was sent by the Western Wei Dynasty to dispatch an envoy from Persia, to temporarily preside over the daily affairs of Guazhou and report the situation to the imperial court.

古文：丞相泰以申徽为瓜州刺史，召整为寿昌太守，封襄武男。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰让申徽担任瓜州刺史，召令狐整担任寿昌太守，加封为襄武男。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Yu Wentei, appointed Shen Hui as the Guazhou chief historian, summoned Fuxing to serve as the governor of Shuchang, and promoted him to the rank of Xiangwuang.

古文：整帅宗族乡里三千馀人入朝，从泰征讨，累迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
现代文：令狐整率领他的宗族、同乡共三千多人进京入朝，跟随宇文泰征讨叛逆，他逐步升官为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，又加官侍中。
English: Ling Xuchang led a total of more than 3,000 members of his family and fellow villagers to enter Beijing and the imperial court, and followed Yu Wentai to fight against the rebellion. He was gradually promoted to the general of the cavalry, the three divisions of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and the junior officer.

古文：六月，庚子，东魏以司徒侯景为河南大将军、大行台。
现代文：六月，庚子，东魏任命司徒侯景为河南大将军和大行台。
English: In June, Geng Zi and the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Siu Hou Jing as the Henan Grand General and Da Hong Tai.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，东魏遣散骑常侍元廓来聘。
现代文：秋季七月，壬寅，东魏派散骑常侍元廓来到梁朝聘问。
English: In the autumn of July, Ren Yin, the Eastern Wei faction's cavalry aide-de-camp, came to the Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：甲子，诏： 犯罪非大逆，父母、祖父母不坐。 
现代文：甲子，梁武帝颁布诏书： 罪犯如果不犯有大逆不道的罪行，他的父母以及祖父母不被连坐。 
English: Emperor Liangwu issued an edict: If a criminal did not commit a crime of high treason, his parents and grandparents would not be allowed to sit together.

古文：先是，江东唯建康及三吴、荆、郢、江、湘、梁、益用钱，其馀州郡杂以谷帛，交、广专以金银为货。
现代文：在此以前，长江之南只有建康及三吴、荆州、郢州、江州、湘州、梁州、益州等地使用货币。其他的州和郡杂用谷物或帛等实物交换。交、广两地专门使用金银作为货币。
English: Prior to this, only Jiankang, Sam Wu, Jingzhou, Quzhou, Jiangzhou, Hunan, Liangzhou, and Yizhou in the south of the Yangtze River used currency. Other states and counties exchanged grain or straw in kind. Jiaxing and Guangxi exclusively used gold and silver as currency.

古文：上自铸五铢及女钱，二品并行，禁诸古钱。
现代文：梁武帝自己铸造了五铢钱和女钱，让这两种货币一起在市场流通，并且禁止使用各种古代货币。
English: Emperor Liangwu minted both the men's and women's money by himself, allowing the two currencies to circulate together in the market, and forbade the use of various ancient currencies.

古文：普通中，更铸铁钱。
现代文：普通年间，又铸造了铁钱。
English: In ordinary years, iron money was again minted.

古文：由是民私铸者多，物价腾踊，交易者至以车载钱，不复计数。
现代文：从此民间私下里铸造货币的人很多，造成物价沸腾猛涨。做买卖的人竟至于用车来拉钱，而不再逐个算计。
English: Since then, there have been many people privately minting money, causing prices to skyrocket. Traders even use cars to withdraw money, rather than calculating it one by one.

古文：又自破岭以东，八十为百，名曰 东钱 ；江、郢以上，七十为百，名曰： 西钱 ；建康以九十为百，名曰 长钱 。
现代文：还有，从破岭往东，每八十文折合一百文，人们称它为 东钱 。江州、郢州以西每七十文折合一百文，被称为 西钱 。建康地区每九十文折合一百文，被称为 长钱 。
English: In addition, from the east of Hualing, every eighty-cents is equivalent to one hundred-cents, and people call it Dongchen. From the west of Jiangzhou and Zhangzhou, every seventy-cents is equivalent to one hundred-cents, and is called Xiqian. In the Jiankang area, every ninety-cents is equivalent to one hundred-cents, and is called Changchen.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 朝四暮三，众狙皆喜，名实未亏而喜怒为用。
现代文：丙寅，梁武帝颁布诏书说： 朝四暮三，众猴便都高兴，名称不同而实际意思一样，但喜怒却不同。
English: Hsin-Yin, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict saying: At four in the morning and three in the evening, all monkeys are happy. The names are different but the actual meaning is the same, but the joy and anger are different.

古文：顷闻外间多用九陌钱，陌减则物贵，陌足则物贱，非物有贵贱，乃心有颠倒。
现代文：近来我听说外界大多用九陌钱，这样钱减少了，那么物价就会昂贵，钱充足了，物价就会低贱。并不是东西本身有贵有贱，而是人们的思想颠来倒去。
English: Recently, I heard that most people in the outside world use nine strange money. If the money is reduced, then the price will be expensive. If the money is sufficient, the price will be low. It is not that the thing itself is expensive or cheap, but people's thoughts are upside down.

古文：至于远方，日更滋甚，徒乱王制，无益民财。
现代文：说到边远地区，那里货币混乱的状况更是一天比一天厉害。这只能扰乱国家的制度，不会使百姓的财富增多。
English: When it comes to the outlying regions, the situation of currency chaos there is getting worse day by day. This can only disrupt the country's system and will not increase the wealth of the people.

古文：自今可通用足陌钱！
现代文：从今以后，应该在全国通用足陌钱。
English: From now on, it should be used nationwide.

古文：令书行后，百日为期，若犹有犯，男子谪运，女子质作，并同三年。 
现代文：颁布命令的文书发出以后，以一百天为期限，在百日之外如果还有人违犯这一制度，就要服三年劳役。男子被罚到边远地区搬运东西，女子要以身抵押服劳役。 
English: After the implementation of the decree, the deadline is 100 days. If there are still violations, the man will be sentenced to transportation, and the woman will be sentenced to labor service, both for three years.

古文：诏下而人不从，钱陌益少；至于季年，遂以三十五为百云。
现代文：诏书颁布下去之后，百姓却不按这种制度去做。钱陌变得更少了。到了末年竟以三十五文算做一百文了。
English: After the imperial edict was promulgated, the people did not follow this system. The amount of money in circulation became less and less. By the end of the year, the amount of money in circulation was reduced from thirty-five to one hundred.

古文：上年高，诸子心不相下，互相猜忌。邵陵王纶为丹杨尹，湘东王绎在江州，武陵王纪在益州，皆权侔人主；太子纲恶之，常选精兵以卫东宫。
现代文：梁武帝年事已高，他的儿子们彼此互不相服，邵陵王萧纶任丹杨尹，湘东王萧绎任江州刺史，武陵王萧纪任益州刺史，他们的权力都跟皇帝一般；太子萧纲很忌恨他们，常常挑选一些精锐军队来保卫东宫。
English: Emperor Liangwu was already very old, and his sons were no match for each other. Shao Ling Wang Xiaoyan was appointed as the governor of Danyangyin, Hunan Dong Wang Xiaoyan was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, and Wuling King Xiaoji was appointed as the governor of Yizhou. Their power was the same as that of the emperor; Prince Xiaogang hated them very much, and often selected some elite troops to defend the East Palace.

古文：八月，以纶为南徐州刺史。
现代文：八月，梁武帝任命萧纶担任南徐州刺史。
English: In August, Emperor Liangwu appointed Xiao Qi as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：东魏丞相欢如鄴。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢前往邺城。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan went to Lucheng.

古文：高澄迁洛阳《石经》五十二碑于鄴。
现代文：他的儿子高澄将洛阳五十二块刻有《石经》的石碑迁到了邺城。
English: His son, Gao Cheng, moved the 52 stone tablets inscribed with the "Stone Sutra" from Luoyang to Handan.

古文：魏徙并州刺史王思政为荆州刺史，使之举诸将可代镇玉壁者。
现代文：西魏调并州刺史王思政担任荆州刺史，并让他从诸将中推举一位可以代替自己镇守并州州治玉壁的将领。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty transferred Wang Sizheng to serve as the governor of Jing Province, and asked him to nominate a general from among the generals who could replace him as the governor of Jing Province.

古文：思政举晋州刺史韦孝宽，丞相泰从之。
现代文：王思政推举了晋州刺史韦孝宽，丞相宇文泰采纳了他的意见。
English: Wang Sizheng recommended the Jinzhou magistrate Shi Wei Xiaokang, and the prime minister, Yu Wentai, adopted his opinion.

古文：东魏丞相欢悉举山东之众，将伐魏；癸巳，自鄴会兵于晋阳；九月，至玉壁，围之。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢率领崤山以东的全部兵马将要讨伐西魏。崐癸巳，高欢便带兵从邺城出发，到晋阳与其他将领会师。九月，到达了玉壁，将玉壁包围起来。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan led all the soldiers and horses east of Lushan to fight against the Western Wei. At this time, Gao Huan led the soldiers from Lucheng to Jinyang to meet with other generals. In September, they reached the Jade Wall and surrounded the Jade Wall.

古文：以挑西师，西师不出。
现代文：他们向西魏的军队挑战，西魏的军队却不出来应战。
English: They challenged the West Wei army, but the West Wei army did not come out to fight.

古文：李贲复帅众二万自獠中出屯典澈湖，大造船舰，充塞湖中。
现代文：李贲又率领两万人马从獠人居住区出发，把军队屯集在典澈湖一带。他在那里建造了大量战船，充满了整个典澈湖。
English: In addition, Li Qiye led 20,000 men and horses to set out from the area inhabited by the Qiang people and concentrated the army in the area of Dianche Lake, where he built a large number of warships and filled the entire Dianche Lake.

古文：众军惮之，顿湖口，不敢进。
现代文：进攻李贲的各路军队都害怕他的战船，便停在了典澈湖口，不敢进入湖内。
English: All the armies that attacked Li Gan were afraid of his warship, so they stopped at the mouth of Dianche Lake and did not dare to enter the lake.

古文：陈霸先谓诸将曰： 我师已老，将士疲劳；且孤军无援，入人心腹，若一战不捷，岂望生全！
现代文：陈霸先对将领们说： 我军出征时间已经很长了，将士们疲惫不堪，况且我孤军无援，进入敌人的心脏地区，如果第一战打不胜的话，怎能指望活着回来！
English: Chen Baxi first said to the generals: Our army has been on the march for a long time, the soldiers are exhausted, moreover, I am alone and helpless, entering the enemy's heartland, if the first battle is not victorious, how can I expect to come back alive!

古文：今藉其屡奔，人情未固，夷、獠乌合，易为摧殄。正当共出百死，决力取之；无故停留，时事去矣！ 
现代文：现在我们应该趁着他多次失利，人心没有稳定，而夷、獠都是些乌合之众，很容易被摧毁消灭，正应当共同出生入死，竭尽全力打败李贲。如果无缘无故地停留在湖口，机会就要失去了！ 
English: Now we should take advantage of his many defeats, people's hearts are not stable, and the Yi and the Ya are all a rabble, it is easy to be destroyed and eliminated, we should be born and die together, and do our best to defeat Li Ya. If you stay in Hukou for no reason, the opportunity will be lost!

古文：诸将皆默然莫应。
现代文：将领们听完陈霸先的话，都默默无语，没有响应。
English: After listening to Chen Baxian's words, the generals were speechless and did not respond.

古文：是夜，江水暴起七丈，注湖中。
现代文：这天夜里，江水暴涨了七丈高，流到了典澈湖中。
English: On this night, the river water surged seven feet high and flowed into the lake.

古文：霸先勒所部兵乘流先进，众军鼓噪俱前；贲众大溃，窜入屈獠洞中。
现代文：陈霸先率领他的军队顺流先进入湖中，众多人马在鼓声中一起呐喊冲杀。李贲的军队被打得惨败，逃进了屈獠洞里。
English: Chen Baxian led his army downstream into the lake first, and many men and horses shouted together in the drums. Li Qian's army was defeated and fled into the Quyu Cave.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，以前东扬州刺史岳阳王詧为雍州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，己亥，梁朝任命前东扬州刺史岳阳王萧为雍州刺史。
English: In winter, October, Ji Hai, the Liang Dynasty appointed the former East Yangzhou chief historian Yueyang Wang Xiao as the chief historian of Yongzhou.

古文：上舍詧兄弟而立太子纲，内常愧之，宠亚诸子。
现代文：梁武帝没有选择萧他们几个兄弟，而立太子萧纲作为接班人，他在内心里觉得愧对萧，他对萧的宠爱仅次于对他的其他几个儿子。
English: Emperor Liangwu did not choose any of Xiao's brothers, but chose the crown prince Xiao Gang as his successor. In his heart, he felt ashamed of Xiao, and his love for Xiao was second only to that for his other sons.

古文：以会稽人物殷阜，故用詧兄弟迭为东扬州以慰其心。
现代文：由于会稽这一地区人口稠密，物产丰富，所以梁武帝让萧他们几个兄弟轮流担任东阳州刺史，用此来安抚他们。
English: Since this region was densely populated and rich in products, Emperor Liang Wu allowed Xiao and several of his brothers to take turns as the governor of Dongyang Prefecture to appease them.

古文：詧兄弟亦内怀不平。
现代文：萧几兄弟在心里也感到忿忿不平。
English: The Xiao brothers also felt resentment in their hearts.

古文：詧以上衰老，朝多秕政，遂蓄聚货财，折节下士，招募勇敢，左右至数千人。
现代文：萧认为，皇帝人已经衰老，朝廷的政治中有许多毛病，于是，他便开始储备物资和财产，屈己下人，礼贤下士，在天下招募勇敢善战的人，他身边的人已达到几千人。
English: Xiao believed that the emperor had become senile and that there were many problems in the politics of the imperial court. Therefore, he began to stockpile materials and property, give in to his subordinates, and recruit brave and warlike people around the world. The number of people around him has reached several thousand.

古文：以襄阳形胜之地，梁业所基，遇乱可以图大功。
现代文：因为襄阳的地理优势很大，它是梁朝大业的根基，梁武帝就是从襄阳起兵才夺取天下的，所以如果遇到天下大乱，就可以在此图谋大业。
English: Because the geographical advantage of Xiangyang is very large, it is the foundation of the great cause of the Liang Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wudi started from Xiangyang to conquer the world, so if there is a world turmoil, he can plan a great cause here.

古文：乃克己为政，抚循士民，数施恩惠，延纳规谏，所部称治。
现代文：于是，萧便严格要求自己，抚慰、顺应百姓与官员们的心理，多次对他们实施恩惠，广泛听取大家的规劝和意见，他所管辖的地区被治理得井井有条。
English: As a result, Xiao strictly required himself to soothe and conform to the psychology of the people and officials, repeatedly granted them favors, and widely listened to everyone's persuasions and opinions. The areas under his jurisdiction were governed in an orderly manner.

古文：东魏丞相欢攻玉壁，昼夜不息，魏韦孝宽随机拒之。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢的军队日夜不停地进攻玉壁，西魏的韦孝宽随机应变崐地抵抗东魏的进攻。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan's army attacked the Jade Wall day and night, while the Western Wei Wei Xiaokang bravely resisted the Eastern Wei attack.

古文：城中无水，汲于汾，欢使移汾，一夕而毕。
现代文：玉壁城中没有水源，城中的人要从汾河汲水，高欢于是派人在汾河上游把水决开，使汾河水远离玉壁城，他们在一个晚上便完成了这一移汾工程。
English: There is no water source in Yubi Castle, and the people in the city have to draw water from the Lugu River. Gao Huan then sent people upstream of the Lugu River to break the water, so that the water of the Lugu River would be far away from Yubi Castle. They completed this relocation project in one night.

古文：欢于城南起土山，欲乘之以入。
现代文：高欢在玉壁城的南面堆起了一座土山，想利用这座土山攻进城里。
English: Gao Huan piled up a mound of earth on the south side of the Jade Walled City and wanted to use this mound of earth to invade the city.

古文：城上先有二楼，孝宽缚木接之，令常高于土山以御之。
现代文：玉壁城上原来就有两座城楼，韦孝宽让人把木头绑在楼上接高，让它的高度常常高于东魏堆的土山，以抵御东魏的进攻。
English: Originally, there were two towers on the Jade Walled City. Wei Xiaokuan had people tie wood to the upper floors to make it higher, so that its height was often higher than the earthen mounds of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, in order to resist the attack of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：欢使告之曰： 虽尔缚楼至天，我当穿地取尔。 
现代文：高欢见到这种情况，便派人告诉韦孝宽说： 即使你把木头绑在楼上，使楼高到天上，我还会凿地洞攻克你。 
English: When Gao Huan saw this, he sent someone to tell Wei Xiaokuan: "Even if you tie wood to a building and make it so tall that it reaches the sky, I will still cut a hole in the ground to defeat you.

古文：乃凿地为十道，又用术士李业兴 孤虚法 ，聚攻其北。
现代文：于是，高欢便派人掘地，挖了十条地道，又采用术士李业兴的 孤虚法 ，调集人马，一齐进攻玉壁城北面。
English: As a result, Gao Huan sent people to excavate the land, dug ten tunnels, and used the sorcerer Li Ye Xing's "solitary method" to mobilize people and horses to attack the north side of the Jade Walled City.

古文：北，天险也。
现代文：城的北面，是山高谷深的非常险要的地方。
English: The north side of the city is a very dangerous place, deep in the mountains and valleys.

古文：孝宽掘长堑，邀其地道，选战士屯堑上。
现代文：韦孝宽叫人挖了一条长长的大沟，以此长沟来阻截高欢挖的地道。
English: Wei Xiaokuan ordered someone to dig a long trench to cut off the tunnel dug by Gao Huan.

古文：每穿至堑，战士辄擒杀之。又于堑外积柴贮火，敌有在地道内者，塞柴投火，以皮排吹之，一鼓皆焦烂。
现代文：他挑选了精兵良将驻守在大沟上面，每当有敌人穿过地道来到大沟里，战士们便都能把他们抓住或杀掉。韦孝宽又叫人在沟的外面堆积了许多木柴，贮备了一些火种，一旦地道里有敌人，便把柴草塞入地道，把火种投掷进去，并用皮排吹火。一经鼓风吹火，地道里的敌人全部被烧得焦头烂额。
English: He selected good soldiers to be stationed above the ditch, and whenever an enemy came through the ditch into the ditch, the soldiers could catch or kill them. Wei Xiaohuan also had people pile up a lot of firewood outside the ditch and store some kindling. Once there was an enemy in the ditch, they stuffed the firewood into the ditch, threw the kindling into it, and blew fire with a leather rod. Once the wind blew the fire, all the enemies in the ditch were burned to a crisp.

古文：敌以攻车撞城，车之所及，莫不摧毁，无能御者。
现代文：敌人又用一种坚固的攻城战车撞击城墙。战车所到之处，没有不被摧毁撞坏的，西魏没有一种武器可以抵挡它。
English: The enemy also rammed the city wall with a strong siege chariot. Wherever the chariot went, there was nothing that could not be destroyed and knocked down, and there was no weapon in the West Wei Dynasty that could resist it.

古文：孝宽缝布为幔，随其所向张之，布既悬空，车不能坏。
现代文：韦孝宽便把布匹缝制成一条很大的幔帐，顺着攻车撞城的方向张开它，因为布是悬在空中的，攻车无法撞坏它。
English: Wei Xiaokuan then sewed the cloth into a large curtain, and opened it along the direction of the attack on the city, because the cloth was suspended in the air, and the attack could not break it.

古文：敌又缚松、麻于竿，灌油加火以烧布，并欲焚楼。
现代文：敌军又把松枝和麻干之类的易燃物品绑在车前的一根长竿上，又在其中灌油，点起火，用来烧毁韦孝宽的幔帐，并且还想烧毁城楼。
English: The enemy also tied flammable materials such as pine branches and hemp twigs to a long pole in front of the car, poured oil into it, and lit a fire to burn Wei Xiaokuan's account, and also wanted to burn the city tower.

古文：孝宽作长钩，利其刃，火竿将至，以钩遥割之，松、麻俱落。
现代文：韦孝宽便让人制造了一种很长的钩，并把它的刀刃磨得很锋利，等火竿快要到时，用长钩远远地切断它，附着在火竿上的松枝和麻干便都纷纷坠落。
English: Wei Xiaokuan then had someone make a very long hook, and sharpened its blade very sharply. When the fire stick was about to arrive, he used a long hook to cut it far away, and the pine branches and twigs attached to the fire stick fell one after another.

古文：敌又于城四面穿地为二十道，其中施梁柱，纵火烧之。
现代文：敌人又在玉壁城墙下四面八方挖了二十条地道，并在地道中用木柱支撑地上的城墙，然后放火烧掉这些木柱。
English: The enemy also dug twenty tunnels in all directions under the walls of the Jade Walled City, and supported the walls on the ground with wooden pillars in the tunnels, and then set fire to these wooden pillars.

古文：柱折，城崩。
现代文：于是城墙坍塌了。
English: And the wall fell down.

古文：孝宽随崩处竖木栅以扞之，敌不得入。
现代文：韦孝宽在城墙坍塌的地方坚起一些木栅栏来保卫玉壁城，敌人无法攻进城去。
English: Wei Xiaokuan erected some wooden fences in the place where the city wall collapsed to defend the Jade Walled City, and the enemy was unable to enter the city.

古文：城外尽攻击之术，而城中守御有馀。
现代文：在城外，东魏攻打玉壁城的方法已经用尽，而在城内，韦孝宽抵御敌人的办法还绰绰有余。
English: Outside the city, the methods of the Eastern Wei Dynasty to attack the Jade Walled City have been exhausted, while inside the city, Wei Xiaokuan has more than enough methods to resist the enemy.

古文：孝宽又夺据其土山。
现代文：他又从高欢手里夺占了那座堆起的土山。
English: He also seized the mound of earth from Gao Huan.

古文：欢无如之何，乃使仓曹参军祖珽说之曰： 君独守孤城，而西方无救，恐终不能全，何不降也？ 
现代文：高欢不知道怎么办好，就派仓曹参军祖劝说韦孝宽： 您独自一个人守卫这座孤城，西面又没有救兵，恐怕最终也不能保全它。为什么不投降呢？ 
English: Gao Huan didn't know what to do, so he sent Cang Cao, a military ancestor, to persuade Wei Xiaokuan: You are the only one guarding this lonely city, and there are no rescuers in the west, so I'm afraid you won't be able to save it in the end. Why not surrender?

古文：孝宽报曰： 我城池严固，兵食有馀。攻者自劳，守者常逸，岂有旬朔之间已须救援！
现代文：韦孝宽回答他说： 我的城池坚固无比，士兵和粮食都富富有余，进攻的人是白白辛苦，而守城的人却以逸待劳，哪有一个月之内就已需别人援助的。
English: Wei Xiaokuan replied to him, "My castle is very strong, and my soldiers and provisions are more than enough. The attackers have worked hard for nothing, while the defenders have toiled for nothing. Within a month, they would have needed help from others.

古文：适忧尔众有不返之危。
现代文：我倒是担心你们这么多人有回不去的危险。
English: I do worry that so many of you are in danger of not coming back.

古文：孝宽关西男子，必不为降将军也！ 
现代文：我韦孝宽是个关西男子汉，一定不会做投降的将军的！ 
English: I, Wei Xiaokuan, am a man from Kansai, and I will never be a general who surrenders!

古文：珽复谓城中人曰： 韦城主受彼荣禄，或复可尔；自外军民，何事相随入汤火中！ 
现代文：祖又对城里的人说： 韦孝宽享受着西魏的荣华富贵和功名利禄，倒还可以这样做，但其余的士兵和百姓，为什么还要跟他一起赴汤蹈火呢？ 
English: The ancestor also said to the people in the city: Wei Xiaokuan can still enjoy the glory, wealth and fame of the West Wei Dynasty, but why should the rest of the soldiers and people go through the fire with him?

古文：乃射募格于城中云： 能斩城主降者，拜太尉，封开国郡公，赏帛万匹。 
现代文：于是，便向城里射去赏悬捉拿韦孝宽所定的报酬数额，上面写道： 凡是能斩杀韦孝宽而投降的人，就拜他为太尉，并且加封他为开国郡公，赏赐万匹绢帛。 
English: As a result, he shot into the city to reward the amount of reward set for the capture of Wei Xiaokuan. It was written: Anyone who could kill Wei Xiaokuan and surrender would worship him as a captain, and seal him as the founder of the county, and reward him with ten thousand horses.

古文：孝宽手题书背，返射城外云： 能斩高欢者准此。 
现代文：韦孝宽便在它的背面提笔写字射回城外，上写： 能杀掉高欢的人，也能得到同样奖赏。 
English: Wei Xiaokuan then took a pen to write on the back of it and shot it back outside the city, writing: Those who can kill Gaohuan can also get the same reward.

古文：珽，莹之子也。
现代文：祖是祖莹的儿子。
English: Zu is the son of Zu Ying.

古文：东魏苦攻凡五十日，士卒战及病死者七万人，共为一冢。
现代文：东魏的军队对玉壁城苦苦攻打了五十天，战死以及病死的士兵总共达到七万人，全都埋在一个大坟墓里。
English: The Eastern Wei army fought against the Jade Walled City for fifty days. A total of seventy thousand soldiers died in battle or from disease, and they were all buried in a large grave.

古文：欢智力皆困，因而发疾。
现代文：高欢的智谋用尽了，也未攻下玉壁城，又气又急，因此得了疾病。
English: Gao Huan's wits were exhausted, and he failed to capture the Jade Walled City. He was angry and anxious, so he got sick.

古文：有星坠欢营中，士卒惊惧。
现代文：这时，有颗流星坠落在高欢的军营中，东魏的士兵们都很惊怕。
English: At this time, a meteor fell on the military camp, which was in high spirits, and the soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty were very frightened.

古文：十一月，庚子，解围去。
现代文：十一月，庚子，东魏军队解除了围攻，离开了这里。
English: In November, the Eastern Wei troops lifted the siege and left here.

古文：先是，欢别使侯景将兵趣齐子岭，魏建州刺史杨檦镇车箱，恐其寇邵郡，帅骑御之。
现代文：原先，高欢曾另外派遣侯景率领军队进兵齐子岭。西魏建州刺史扬正在镇守车厢这个地方。
English: Originally, Gao Huan had sent another army led by Hou Jing to march into Qi Ziling. West Wei Jianzhou Jian Shi Yang was guarding this place.

古文：景闻檦至，斫木断路六十馀里，犹惊而不安，遂还河阳。
现代文：他听到东魏向齐子岭进军的消息之后，害怕东魏侵犯邵郡，就率领骑兵前去抵御东魏军队。侯景听说杨来到，就让人砍了许多树木堆在路上，阻断了六十多里道路，仍惴惴不安，于是便回到了河阳。
English: After he heard the news that the Eastern Wei Dynasty was marching to Qi Ziling, he was afraid that the Eastern Wei Dynasty would invade Shao County, so he led the cavalry to resist the Eastern Wei Army. When Hou Jing heard that Yang was coming, he had people cut down many trees and pile them on the road, blocking more than sixty miles of road. He was still uneasy, so he returned to Heyang.

古文：庚戌，欢使段韶从太原公洋镇鄴。
现代文：庚戌，东魏丞相高欢派遣段韶跟从太原公高洋镇守邺城。
English: Geng Zheng, the Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan dispatched Duan Zheng to follow the Taiyuan Duke Gao Yang to defend the city.

古文：辛亥，征世子澄会晋阳。
现代文：辛亥，高欢召长子高澄到晋阳相会。
English: In Xinhai, Gao Huan called his eldest son Gao Cheng to meet him in Jinyang.

古文：魏以韦孝宽为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵建忠公。
现代文：西魏任命韦孝宽为骠骑大将军，开府仪同三司，并晋升爵位为建忠公。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Wei Xiaokuan as the cavalry general, the head of the three departments, and promoted the knighthood to Jian Zhongguo.

古文：时人以王思政为知人。
现代文：当时人们都认为王思政很能识人。
English: At that time, people thought that Wang Sizheng was very discerning.

古文：十二月，己卯，欢以无功，表解都督中外诸军，东魏主许之。
现代文：十二月，己卯，高欢认为此次出征没有取得战绩，就上书要求解除都督中外诸军的职务，东魏孝静帝同意了他的请求。
English: In December, Gao Huan, who believed that this expedition had not achieved any results, sent a letter requesting the dismissal of the governor of the Chinese and foreign armies. Emperor Xiaojing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty agreed to his request.

古文：欢之自玉壁归也，军中讹言韦孝宽以定功弩射杀丞相；魏人闻之，因下令曰： 劲弩一发，凶身自陨。 
现代文：高欢从玉壁回到东魏之后，他的军中传言说韦孝宽用定功弩射杀了丞相高欢。西魏的人听到这一传言后，便颁布命令说： 强劲的弩一射，元凶自己就死了。 
English: After Gao Huan returned from Yubi to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, there was a rumor in his army that Wei Xiaokuan had shot the prime minister Gao Huan with a crossbow. After hearing this rumor, the people of the Western Wei Dynasty issued an order saying: A strong crossbow shot, the culprit himself died.

古文：欢闻之，勉坐见诸贵，使斛律金作《敕勒歌》，欢自和之，哀感流涕。
现代文：高欢听到了这些话，勉强坐起来召见权贵们，他让斛律金作了一首《敕勒歌》，高欢自己也跟着乐曲和唱，悲哀之感油然而生，不禁痛哭流涕。
English: Hearing these words, Gao Huan reluctantly sat up and summoned the dignitaries. He asked Gong Li Jin to compose a "Song of Gong Le," and Gao Huan himself also followed the music and sang. A feeling of sadness arose, and he could not help but weep bitterly.

古文：魏大行台度支尚书、司农卿苏绰，性忠俭，常以丧乱未平为己任，荐贤拔能，纪纲庶政；丞相泰推心任之，人莫能间。
现代文：西魏大行台度支尚书、司农卿苏绰，秉性忠厚俭朴。他常常把消除人民的死丧祸乱当做是自己的责任，每天处理许多国家大事。丞相宇文泰对他推心置腹，非常信任，没有人能离间他们的关系。
English: He was a loyal and frugal person. He often regarded it as his responsibility to eliminate the death and calamity of the people, and dealt with many national events every day. Prime Minister Yu Wentei put his heart and soul into him and trusted him very much. No one could break their relationship.

古文：或出游，常预署空纸以授绰；有须处分，随事施行，及还，启知而已。
现代文：有时宇文泰外出，常常预先把一些签上名的空白纸交给苏绰。如果有必须要安排的事，可以根据情况加以处理，等宇文泰回来之后，苏绰告知宇文泰就行了。
English: Sometimes Uwentai goes out, and he often gives Su Qiao some blank paper signed with his name in advance. If there is something that must be arranged, it can be dealt with according to the situation. When Uwentai comes back, Su Qiao will inform Uwentai.

古文：绰常谓 为国之道，当爱人如慈父，训人如严师。 每与公卿论议，自昼达夜，事无巨细，若指诸掌，积劳成疾而卒。
现代文：他对王公大臣们说： 苏尚书一生廉洁谦让。我想按照他平素的志向办理他的后事，只怕众多吏民不理解我的用意。
English: He said to the princes and ministers: Su Shangshu was honest and humble all his life. I want to manage his afterlife according to his ordinary aspirations, but I am afraid that many officials and people will not understand my intention.

古文：泰深痛惜之，谓公卿曰： 苏尚书平生廉让，吾欲全其素志，恐悠悠之徒有所未达；如厚加赠谥，又乖宿昔相知之心；何为而可？ 
现代文：如果对他厚加追赠，又违背了我们以往的相知之心。
English: If we were to pursue him, it would go against the spirit of our past friendship.

古文：尚书令史麻瑶越次进曰： 俭约，所以彰其美也。 
现代文：该怎么办才好呢？ 尚书令史麻瑶越次序先进言说： 节俭办理他的后事，便是表彰苏尚书美德的最好办法。 
English: What should I do? Shang Shuling said, "The best way to commend Su Shang Shuling's virtue is to be frugal in handling his legacy.

古文：泰从之。
现代文：宇文泰采纳了麻瑶的意见。
English: Simatai obeyed him.

古文：归葬武功，载以布车一乘，泰与群公步送出同州郭外。
现代文：用一辆白色丧车载着苏绰的遗体，送回老家武功安葬，宇文泰和大臣们步行护送灵车走出同州城外。
English: A white funeral car was used to carry Su Qiao's body back to his hometown of Wugong for burial, and Yu Wentai and the ministers escorted the hearse on foot out of the city of Tongzhou.

古文：泰于车后酹酒言曰： 尚书平生为事，妻子兄弟所不知者，吾皆知之。
现代文：宇文泰在灵车后面把酒洒向大地，他悲恸地说： 尚书一生做的事，你的妻儿、兄弟不知道的，我都知道。
English: Uwentai spilled wine on the ground behind the hearse. He said sadly, "I know everything that Shangshu did in his life that your wife, children, and brothers don't know.

古文：唯尔知吾心，吾知尔志，方欲共定天下，遽舍吾去，奈何！ 
现代文：这世上只有你最了解我的心意，也只有我了解你的志向，我正要与你一同平定天下，你却这么快就离开我而去，这如何是好！ 
English: In this world, you are the only one who understands my heart, and I am the only one who understands your aspirations. I was about to level the world with you, but you left me so quickly. How is that good?

古文：因举声恸哭，不觉卮落于手。
现代文：于是便放声痛哭起来，不知不觉中，酒杯从手上滑落到地上。
English: So she burst into tears. Unconsciously, the wine glass slipped from her hand to the ground.

古文：东魏司徒、河南大将军、大行台侯景，右足偏短，弓马非其长，而多谋算。
现代文：东魏司徒、河南大将军、大行台侯景，右脚比左脚短，所以，骑马射箭对他来说并不擅长，但是他足智多谋。
English: Eastern Wei's Stut, Henan's great general, and Da Xiangtai's Hou Jing all had shorter right feet than left feet, so they were not good at horse riding and archery, but they were resourceful.

古文：诸将高敖曹、彭乐等皆勇冠一时，景常轻之，曰： 此属皆如豕突，势何所至！ 
现代文：高敖曹、彭乐等将领都是当时最勇猛的，侯景常常很轻视他们，对人说： 这些人就象受惊的猪一样横冲直撞，流窜侵扰，能撞到哪里去呢！ 
English: Generals such as Gao Bing Cao and Peng Le were the bravest generals at that time. Hou Jing often despised them, saying to people: "These people are like frightened pigs, running amok and disturbing others. Where can they go?"

古文：景尝言于丞相欢： 愿得兵三万，横行天下，要须济江缚取萧衍老公、以为太平寺主。 
现代文：侯景曾对丞相高欢说： 我愿意率领三万人马，横扫天下，应当渡过长江把萧衍那老头子绑来，让他做太平寺的寺主。 
English: Hou Jing once said to the chancellor Gao Huan: I am willing to lead thirty thousand horses and sweep the world. I should cross the Yangtze River to tie up the old man Xiao Yan and make him the head of the Taiping Temple.

古文：欢使将兵十万，专制河南，杖任若己之半体。
现代文：高欢派他带领十万兵马，全权管理黄河以南地区，对他的依靠、任用，就好象他是自己的半个身体一样。
English: Gao Huan sent him to lead a hundred thousand soldiers and horses, with full authority to manage the area south of the Yellow River, relying on him and appointing him, as if he were his own half of the body.

古文：景素轻高澄，尝谓司马子如曰： 高王在，吾不敢有异；王没，吾不能与鲜卑小儿共事！ 
现代文：侯景一贯轻视高澄，他曾对司马子如说： 高王在世的时候，我不敢存有异心。如果高王去世了，我不能与那个鲜卑小子共事！ 
English: Hou Jing had always despised Gao Cheng. He once said to Sima Zihuang: "When Gao Wang was alive, I didn't dare to have a different heart. If Gao Wang passed away, I couldn't work with that despicable boy!"

古文：子如掩其口。
现代文：司马子如赶快捂住了侯景的嘴。
English: Sima Ziru quickly covered Hou Jing's mouth.

古文：及欢疾笃，澄诈为欢书以召景。
现代文：到了高欢已病入膏肓的时候，高澄便假借高欢的名义写了一封书信召侯景前来。
English: When Gao Huan was terminally ill, Gao Cheng wrote a letter in the name of Gao Huan to summon Hou Jing.

古文：先是，景与欢约曰： 今握兵在远，人易为诈，所赐书皆请加微点。 
现代文：以前，侯景曾与高欢有过约定，他对高欢说： 现在我在远处掌握着军队，人们很容易从中搞鬼。以后凡是您赐给我的书信都请您加一个小黑点。 
English: In the past, Hou Jing had an agreement with Gao Huan. He said to Gao Huan, "Now that I command an army in the distance, it is easy for people to play tricks on me. In the future, please add a small black dot to all the letters you give me."

古文：欢从之。
现代文：高欢同意了侯景的要求。
English: Gao Huan agreed to Hou Jing's request.

古文：景得书无点，辞不至；又闻欢疾笃，用其行台郎颍川王伟计，遂拥兵自固。
现代文：现在，侯景拿到了高欢的书信后，信上却没有黑点，便推托没有去。后来他又听说高欢的病情已经很严重了，就采纳了他的行崐台郎颍川人王伟的计谋，聚集军队，巩固自己的势力。
English: Now, after Hou Jing got Gao Huan's letter, there was no black spot on the letter, so he did not go. Later, when he heard that Gao Huan's condition was very serious, he adopted the strategy of his traveling warrior Wang Wei, a native of the Fen River, to gather troops and consolidate his power.

古文：欢谓澄曰： 我虽病，汝面更有馀忧，何也？ 
现代文：高欢问高澄： 虽然是我病了，可你的脸上却有另外的忧虑，这是为什么？ 
English: Gao Huan asked Gao Cheng: Although I am sick, you have other worries on your face. Why is that?

古文：澄未及对，欢曰： 岂非忧侯景叛邪？ 
现代文：没等到高澄回答，高欢又说： 莫不是担心侯景要反叛？ 高澄回答说： 是的。 
English: Before Gao Cheng could answer, Gao Huan also said, "Aren't you worried that Hou Jing will rebel?" Gao Cheng replied, "Yes."

古文：对曰： 然。 欢曰： 景专制河南，十四年矣，常有飞扬跋扈之志，顾我能畜养，非汝所能驾御也。
现代文：高欢又说： 侯景专制河南已有十四年了，他一直飞扬跋扈，有夺取天下的志向。只有我能驾御他，你很难驾御他。
English: Gao Huan also said, "Houjing has been the dictator of Henan for fourteen years. He has always been flying high and has the ambition to conquer the world. Only I can control him, it is difficult for you to control him.

古文：今四方未定，勿遽发哀。
现代文：现在，天下还没有安定，如果我死了，你不要马上发丧。
English: Right now, the world is not stable. If I die, don't go into mourning right away.

古文：库狄干鲜卑老公，斛律金敕勒老公，并性遒直，终不负汝。
现代文：库狄干这位鲜卑老人，斛律金这位敕勒老人，他们俩都是性格耿直、强劲有力的人，终不会对你负心的。
English: Kudikan, the humble old man, and Baolujin, the powerful old man, both of them are straightforward, strong and powerful people, and they will not betray you in the end.

古文：可硃浑道元、刘丰生，远来投我，必无异心。
现代文：可朱浑道元、刘丰生他们俩远道前来投奔我，也一定没有背离我们的心意。
English: But Zhu Hun Dogen and Liu Fengsheng, both of whom came a long way to join me, must not have deviated from our intentions.

古文：潘相乐本作道人，心和厚，汝兄弟当得其力。
现代文：潘相乐原来是个道人，心地和善厚道，你们兄弟几个人会得到他的帮助的。
English: Pan Xiangle was originally a Taoist, kind-hearted and good-natured, and several of you brothers will be helped by him.

古文：韩轨少戆，宜宽借之。
现代文：韩轨有点耿直愚鲁，你们应宽容待他。
English: Han Rong is a bit of a fool. You should treat him with tolerance.

古文：彭乐心腹难得，宜防护之。
现代文：彭乐的内心很难推测，应该提防他。
English: It's hard to guess what's in Peng Le's heart, so you should beware of him.

古文：堪敌侯景者，唯有慕容绍宗，我故不贵之，留以遗汝。 
现代文：所有人中，能够与侯景对抗的，只有慕容绍宗一人。我故意不让他得到富贵，就是要把他留下给你。 
English: Of all of them, only Murong Shaosong is able to stand up to Hou Jing. I purposely didn't let him get rich and famous, so that I could leave him to you.

古文：又曰： 段孝先忠亮仁厚，智勇兼备，亲戚之中，唯有此子，军旅大事，宜共筹之。 
现代文：高欢接着又说： 段孝先这个人忠实、正直、坦白、仁慈、厚道，既有勇又有谋，在所有内外亲属中，只有这个人，军机大事要和他一起商量。 
English: Gao Huan went on to say: Duan Xiao Xian, this person is loyal, honest, candid, kind, and benevolent. He is courageous and resourceful. Among all the relatives at home and abroad, he is the only one with whom we should discuss military matters.

古文：又曰： 邙山之战，吾不用陈元康之言，留患遗汝，死不瞑目！ 
现代文：高欢又说道： 邙山战役时，我没有采纳陈元康的忠告，给你留下了隐患，我死不瞑目。 
English: Gao Huan also said, "During the Lushan Campaign, I did not take Chen Yuankang's advice and left you with hidden dangers. I am determined to succeed."

古文：相乐，广宁人也。
现代文：潘相乐是广宁人。
English: Pan Xiangle is from Guangning.

