古文：刘因刘因，字梦吉，保定容城人。
现代文：刘因字梦吉，保定容城人，世代为儒生。
English: Liu Yingzha Mengji, Baoding Rongcheng people, generations of Confucianism.

古文：甫弱冠，才器超迈，日阅方册，思得如古人者友之，作《希圣解》。
现代文：刘因天资过人，三岁就能识字读书，过目不忘，一天能记诵千百言。六岁能写诗，七岁能撰文，落笔成章，其才惊人。刚二十岁时，每日阅读经典，仰慕古代圣贤，因做《希圣解》。
English: Because of his extraordinary talent, Liu was able to read and write at the age of three, and he could memorize and recite thousands of words a day. At the age of six, he was able to write poetry, and at the age of seven, he was able to write an article and complete a chapter, which was amazing. At the age of twenty, he read the classics every day, and admired the ancient sages, because he was "Heshenge."

古文：国子司业砚弥坚教授真定，因从之游，同舍生皆莫能及。初为经学，究训诂疏释之说，辄叹曰： 圣人精义，殆不止此。 
现代文：国子司业砚弥坚为真定教授，刘因常与他往来。起初研究经学及其训诂疏释之说，常叹息道： 圣人学术的精华不止于此。 
English: At first, he studied the study of scripture and its exegesis, but he often lamented, "The essence of sage scholarship is more than this."

古文：家居教授，师道尊严。弟子造其门者，随材器教之，皆有成就。
现代文：刘因早年父母双亡，对继母孝敬，因家贫，在翰林待制杨恕的资助下才办完祖父和父亲的丧事。刘因性情正直，不随便与人交结，家虽甚贫，但非正当财富则一概不取。在家开馆教学，对于来求学弟子，因材施教，皆学有成就。
English: Due to the death of his parents at an early age, Liu was very respectful to his stepmother, and due to the poverty of his family, he was able to complete the funeral of his grandfather and father with the support of Hanlin Bisei Yang Shu. Liu, due to his honest nature, does not socialize with people casually. Although his family is very poor, he does not take any unjustified wealth. Teaching at home, for students who come to study and teach according to their abilities, they all have academic achievements.

古文：公卿过保定者众，闻因名，往往来谒，因多逊避，不与相见，不知者或以为傲，弗恤也。
现代文：凡公卿路过保定，闻刘因之名，前来拜见，刘因多谦逊回避，不了解的人以为他高傲，他也不去计较。
English: When nobles pass through Baoding and hear Liu Ying's name, they come to see him. Liu Ying is very humble and evasive. People who don't know him think he is arrogant, but he doesn't care.

古文：尝爱诸葛孔明静以修身之语，表所居曰 静修 。
现代文：他很欣赏诸葛孔明 静以修身 的名言，把他的住所名之为 静修 。
English: He appreciated Zhuge Kongming's famous saying of "calmly cultivating oneself" and named his residence "calmly cultivating oneself."

古文：不忽木以因学行荐于朝，至元十九年，有诏征因，擢承德郎、右赞善大夫。
现代文：不忽木知刘因才学人品均优，举荐于朝廷，至元十九年，令召刘因入朝，升为承德郎、右资善大夫。
English: Liu was recommended by the imperial court, and in the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu was summoned to the imperial court and promoted to Chengde Lang and Ushizhen Doctor.

古文：初，裕皇建学宫中，命赞善王恂教近侍子弟，恂卒，乃命因继之。
现代文：裕皇在宫中建学，原命资善王恂教授宫内侍卫们的子弟。王恂死后，命刘因继任其职。
English: Emperor Hirohito established a school in the palace, and originally appointed the gifted professor Wang Xi, the son of the palace guards. After Wang Xi's death, he appointed Liu Yin to succeed him.

古文：未几，以母疾辞归。明年，丁内艰。
现代文：不久，刘因因母病辞归，第二年母亲去世，守丧于家。
English: Soon after, Liu resigned due to his mother's illness. The following year, his mother passed away, and he was bereaved at home.

古文：二十八年，诏复遣使者，以集贤学士、嘉议大夫征因，以疾固辞，且上书宰相曰：
现代文：至元二十八年，朝廷遣使召刘因为集贤学士、嘉议大夫。刘因因病辞谢，并上书宰相，说明其辞不奉召的原因，大意是：
English: In 28th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court sent an envoy to summon Liu Zhengyuan, a scholar and commended doctor. Liu Zhengyuan resigned due to illness, and sent a letter to the prime minister, explaining the reason for his resignation not to be summoned, to the effect of:

古文：因自幼读书，接闻大人君子之余论，虽他无所得，至如君臣之义，自谓见之甚明。
现代文： 刘因自幼读书，深明君臣之义，国人之所以能安居乐业，都是皇上所赐。因此凡我生民，或出劳力，或尽智能，各自报效皇上。
English: Because Liu has been studying since childhood, he is well aware of the righteousness of kings and subjects. The reason why the Chinese people can live and work in peace and contentment is given by the emperor. Therefore, all of our people, either by labor or by wisdom, each serve the emperor.

古文：但或者得之传闻，不求其实，止于纵迹之近似者观之，是以有高人隐士之目，惟阁下亦知因之未尝以此自居也。向者先储皇以赞善之命来召，即与使者俱行，再奉旨令教学，亦即时应命。
现代文：这是万古不变的必然之理。 刘因生年四十三岁，未曾有尺寸之功以报答国家养育成长之恩德。今皇上再三召征，我怎敢不从，而贪高尚之名，负国家知遇之恩，违背圣人之教。我刘因自幼来，从来不敢有高傲之心，这是阁下也知道的。 从前皇太子召我为资善，当即奉召与使者前往；再奉旨令我教学，我也立即应命。
English: This is the eternal and immutable law of inevitability. Liu, who was born at the age of forty-three, has never made a great contribution to repay the kindness of the country's nurturing and growth. The current emperor has repeatedly called for conscription, how dare I not obey, but the name of greed and nobility, the grace of the country's wisdom, and the teachings of the saints. I Liu, because I came from a young age, never dared to have a proud heart, which is also known to you. Once the crown prince called me to be a good friend, and I was immediately called to go with the envoy; I was then ordered to teach, and I immediately

古文：后以老母中风，请还家省视，不幸弥留，竟遭忧制，遂不复出，初岂有意于不仕邪？
现代文：以后确因老母中风，请假还家省视。母亲不幸去世，我不能不居家服丧，并非有意不出任。
English: Later, due to my mother's stroke, I took a leave of absence and returned home. Unfortunately, my mother passed away, and I could not attend the funeral at home. It was not my intention to resign.

古文：今圣天子选用贤良，一新时政，虽前日隐晦之人，亦将出而仕矣，况因平昔非隐晦者邪！况加以不次之宠，处之以优崇之地邪！
现代文：今圣上选用贤良，革新政治，那些隐居之人都出来效力，何况我刘因并非隐居之人。但身患疾病，不能奉命，心与愿违，只有惶恐待罪。
English: Now that the saint has chosen the virtuous and the good, and reformed politics, all those who have been in seclusion have come out to work. What's more, I, Liu, am not a recluse. However, I am suffering from an illness, I cannot follow orders, my heart is contrary to my wishes, and I am only afraid of being punished.

古文：因素有羸疾，自去年丧子，忧患之余，继以痁疟，历夏及秋，后虽平复，然精神气血，已非旧矣。
现代文： 因素来体弱多病，自去年丧子，伤心未已，从夏到秋，又患疟疾。后来病虽治愈，但精神气血已非往日可比。
English: Due to various factors, she was frail and sickly. Since losing her son last year, she was still sad. From summer to autumn, she also suffered from malaria. Although she was cured later, her spirit was no longer comparable to that of the past.

古文：因实疏远微贱之臣，与帷幄诸公不同，其进与退，若非难处之事，惟阁下始终成就之。
现代文：不料今年五月二十八日，疟疾复发，至七月初二日，腹痛如刺，下血不止。八月二十一日，朝廷遣使持皇上诏令而至，我扶病拜接圣旨，且暂留使者，候病势稍退，即与使者同行。但迁延至今，仍医治无效，只得请使臣先行，待病退后再奉诏赴京。望阁下怜悯原谅。 书上，朝廷亦不强迫。
English: Unexpectedly, from May 28 this year, the malaria relapsed, and by the beginning of July 2nd, the abdominal pain was like a thorn, and the bleeding continued. On August 21st, the Imperial Court sent an envoy with the Emperor's edict to come. I nursed the illness and bowed to the Holy Will, and temporarily left the envoy. When the illness receded a little, I went with the envoy. However, the treatment was still ineffective, so I had to ask the envoy to go to Beijing first, wait for the illness to recede, and then send the edict. I hope your Excellency will have mercy and forgive me. In

古文：书上，朝廷不强致，帝闻之，亦曰： 古有所谓不召之臣，其斯人之徒欤！ 三十年夏四月十有六日卒，年四十五。
现代文：至元三十年四月十六日病卒，年四十五岁。
English: He died of illness on April 16, 1630, at the age of 45.

古文：则其志不欲遗世而独往也明矣，亦将从周公、孔子之后，为往圣继绝学，为来世开太平者邪！ 
现代文：无子。
English: No children.

古文：论者以为知言。因所著有《四书精要》三十卷，诗五卷，号《丁亥集》，因所自选。
现代文：延年间，赠翰林学士、资善大夫、上护军，追封容城郡公，谥 文靖 。欧阳玄赞叹刘因是 继承周公、孔子的学说，为来世开太平者 。刘因著述有《四书精要》三十卷；诗五卷，题为《丁亥集》，皆刘因自选。
English: During the Yan years, he bestowed Hanlin Baccalaureate, Zhisheng Doctor, Shanggong Army, and chased away Yongcheng County Governor, Zou Wenjing. Ouyang Xuan praised Liu for being the inheritor of the teachings of Zhou Gong and Confucius, and for creating peace in the afterlife. Liu has 30 volumes of "Four Essential Books" and five volumes of poems, entitled "Dinghai Collection," all of which are self-selected by Liu.

古文：又有文集十余卷，及《小学四书语录》，皆门生故友所录，惟《易系辞说》，乃因病中亲笔云。
现代文：又有文集十余卷及《小学四书语录》，皆门生故友所录。惟《易系辞说》是他在病中亲笔写成。
English: In addition, there are more than ten volumes of collections of essays and "Quotations from the Four Primary Schools," all of which were written by his former students and friends. However, "Quotations from the I Ching" was written by his own hand during his illness.

古文：吴澄吴澄，字幼清，抚州崇仁人。
现代文：吴澄字幼清，抚州崇仁人。
English: Wu Cheng Zi Yu Qing, Fuzhou Chong Ren Ren.

古文：高祖晔，初居咸口里，当华盖、临川二山间，望气者徐觉言其地当出异人。
现代文：自幼聪敏，三岁能诵读古诗，五岁每日受课千余言，读书通宵达旦。母亲怕他勤奋过度，不让他多读。
English: He has been intelligent since childhood. At the age of three, he could recite ancient poems. At the age of five, he received more than a thousand words of lessons every day and could stay up all night reading. His mother was afraid that he was too diligent and did not let him read more.

古文：九岁，从群子弟试乡校，每中前列。
现代文：澄候母亲就寝后，又燃灯读书。九岁与其他子弟参加乡校考试，吴澄总是名列前茅。
English: After waiting for his mother to go to bed, he lit a lamp and went to school. At the age of nine, he and his other children took part in the village school examinations, and Wu Cheng always came out on top.

古文：既长，于《经》、《传》皆习通之，知用力圣贤之学，尝举进士不中。
现代文：长大成人之后，学习经、传，致力于圣贤之学。曾参加进士考试，未中。
English: After he became an adult, he studied the classics and transmission, and devoted himself to the study of saints and sages. He took part in the entrance examination, but did not pass.

古文：至元十三年，民初附，盗贼所在蜂起，乐安郑松，招澄居布水谷，乃著《孝经章句》，校定《易》、《书》、《诗》、《春秋》、《仪礼》及大、小《戴记》。侍御史程钜夫，奉诏求贤江南，起澄至京师。未几，以母老辞归。
现代文：乐安郑松邀他避居于布水谷。吴澄在那里著《孝经章句》，并校定《易》、《书》、《诗》、《春秋》、《仪礼》及《大戴记》、《小戴记》。侍御史程钜夫奉诏至江南求贤，吴澄被荐选至京师，但不久因母病辞归。
English: Le'an Zheng Song invited him to live in Bu Shui Valley. Wu Cheng wrote "Chapter of Filial Piety" there, and revised "Easy," "Book," "Poem," "Spring and Autumn," "Rite" and "Diary of Dai" and "Diary of Xiao Dai." The attendant Shi Cheng Yu went to the south of the Yangtze River to seek virtue, and Wu Cheng was recommended to be selected as a Beijing teacher, but soon resigned due to his mother's illness.

古文：钜夫请置澄所著书于国子监，以资学者，朝廷命有司即其家录上。元贞初，游龙兴，按察司经历郝文迎至郡学，日听讲论，录其问答，凡数千言。
现代文：钜夫奏请将吴澄所著各书置于国子监，以供诸生学习。元贞初年，吴澄游学于龙兴时，按察司经历郝文迎他于郡学，每日听他讲经论史，记录其问答凡数千言。
English: The woodcutter requested that all the books written by Wu Cheng be placed under the supervision of the state so that they could be studied by all. In the first year of Yuan Zhen, when Wu Cheng traveled to study in Longxing, the inspector welcomed him to the county school, listened to his daily lectures on scripture and history, and recorded his questions and answers, which were thousands of words.

古文：行省掾元明善以文学自负，尝问澄《易》、《诗》、《书》、《春秋》奥义，叹曰： 与吴先生言，如探渊海。 
现代文：行省官员元明善，常以文学自负，但听了吴澄讲解《易》、《诗》、《书》、《春秋》诸经典的含义之后，不禁赞叹道： 同吴先生谈论学问，如同探索大海一般，深不可测。 
English: The provincial official, Yuan Mingshan, is often conceited about literature, but after listening to Wu Cheng's explanation of the meaning of "Yi," "Poetry," "Book" and "Spring and Autumn" classics, he couldn't help but praise: Talking about learning with Mr. Wu is like exploring the sea, it's unfathomable.

古文：遂执子弟礼终其身。
现代文：遂终身拜吴澄为师。
English: He became a lifelong disciple of Wu Cheng.

古文：有司敦劝，久之乃至，而代者已至官，澄即日南归。
现代文：左丞董士选把吴澄请到家中，亲自敬茶奉饭，极力向朝廷推荐，说他道德文章都优于常人。朝廷擢引他为应奉翰林文字，当地官府多次敦请，方去赴任，但不久辞职南归。
English: Zuo Zheng invited Wu Cheng to his home, personally served tea and rice, and strongly recommended him to the imperial court, saying that his moral articles were superior to those of ordinary people. The imperial court promoted him to serve Hanlin characters, and the local government repeatedly urged him to go to work, but he soon resigned and returned to the south.

古文：未几，除江西儒学副提举，居三月，以疾去官。
现代文：以后又任命他为江西儒学副提举，到职仅三个月，又因病离去。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Jiangxi Confucianism vice-premier. He was in office for only three months, and then left due to illness.

古文：至大元年，召为国子监丞。
现代文：至大元年，朝廷召他为国子监丞。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, the Imperial Court appointed him as Kokushi Jojo.

古文：先是，许文正公衡为祭酒，始以《朱子小学》等书授弟子，久之，渐失其旧。
现代文：在此之前，许文正公衡为国子监祭酒，以《朱子小学》等书教授国子生。吴澄到任后，每日清晨向学生授课。
English: Prior to this, Xu Wenzheng Gongheng was the governor of Guozi, teaching Guozi students with books such as "Zhuzi Primary School." After Wu Cheng took office, he gave lessons to students every morning.

古文：澄至，旦燃烛堂上，诸生以次受业，日昃，退燕居之室，执经问难者，接踵而至。
现代文：在下午休息期间，来向他请求解答《经》书中疑难者，接踵而至。澄根据学生的才能，反复讲解，循循善诱，直到深夜。
English: During the afternoon break, those who came to ask him to answer the difficult questions in the "Ching" book came one after another. According to the talents of the students, he repeatedly explained and guided them until late at night.

古文：澄各因其材质，反覆训诱之，每至夜分，虽寒暑不易也。皇庆元年，升司业，用程纯公《学校奏疏》、胡文定公《六学教法》、朱文公《学校贡举私议》，约之为教法四条：一曰经学，二曰行实，三曰文艺，四曰治事，未及行。
现代文：无论寒暑都是如此。皇庆元年，升吴澄为司业，以程纯公《学校奏疏》、胡文定公《六学教法》、朱文公《学校贡举私议》为教材。教学分为四科：一曰经学，二曰行实，三曰文艺，四曰治事。但这套教学计划未能实施。
English: This was the case regardless of whether it was hot or cold. In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Sheng Wucheng was appointed as the director of studies, with Cheng Chunggong's "School Records," Hu Wending's "Six Learning Teaching Methods" and Zhu Wengong's "School Tribute Private Discussion" as teaching materials. Teaching was divided into four subjects: one day of scripture study, two days of practice, three days of literature and art, and four days of governance. However, this teaching plan was not implemented.

古文：又尝为学者言： 朱子于道问学之功居多，而陆子静以尊德性为主。
现代文：他常对学生说 ：朱子主要是在探求天理中得到学问，而陆子则以静心修养德性为主。
English: He often said to his students: Zhu Zi mainly obtained knowledge by exploring the principles of nature, while Lu Zi mainly cultivated virtue through meditation.

古文：问学不本于德性，则其敝必偏于言语训释之末，故学必以德性为本，庶几得之。 
现代文：如果求学不以德性修养为本，则必然偏重于语言文字，舍本逐末。若以德性修养为本，那就可望获得许多知识。 
English: If learning is not based on the cultivation of virtue, then the emphasis will inevitably be on language and writing, and the foundation will be gradually abandoned. If it is based on the cultivation of virtue, then it is expected to gain a lot of knowledge.

古文：议者遂以澄为陆氏之学，非许氏尊信朱子本意，然亦莫知朱、陆之为何如也。
现代文：所以有人认为吴澄属于陆象山学派，违背许衡尊信朱子之本意。然而，这些议论者也并不知陆、朱之学是什么。
English: Therefore, some people think that Wu Cheng belongs to the Lu Xiangshan school, which is contrary to the original intention of Xu Heng and Zhu Xi. However, these commentators do not know what Lu and Zhu's school is.

古文：澄一夕谢去，诸生有不谒告而从之南者。
现代文：吴澄辞司业之职而去，从学诸生中，有人不告假也随先生南行。
English: Wu Cheng resigned from the post of superintendent and went away. Among the students, some went south with him without notice.

古文：俄拜集贤直学士，特授奉议大夫，俾乘驿至京师，次真州，疾作，不果行。
现代文：不久，朝廷又召澄为集贤直学士，特授奉议大夫，催促迅速回京。但行至真州，因病不能继续前往。
English: Soon after, the Imperial Court also summoned him to serve as a Jixian Zhi Bao, and specially conferred him with the title of Bongye Doctor, urging him to return to Beijing quickly. However, he went to Zhenzhou, but was unable to continue his journey due to illness.

古文：英宗即位，超迁翰林学士，进阶太中大夫。
现代文：英宗即位，越级提升吴澄为翰林学士，进阶太中大夫。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, and Wu Cheng was promoted to Hanlin Scholar and advanced to Taizhong Doctor.

古文：时澄已有去志，会修《英宗实录》，命总其事。
现代文：至治三年英宗驾崩，泰定帝即位，设经筵，首命吴澄与平章政事张王圭、国子祭酒邓文原为讲官。朝廷修纂《英宗实录》，命吴澄主持其事。
English: Three years after Emperor Yingzong's death, Emperor Taiding ascended to the throne and set up the Grand Historian's Office. The first person to be appointed was Wu Cheng, followed by Zhang Wang Gui, the political secretary of Pingzhang, and Deng Wen, the imperial son's sacrificial wine, who was originally a lecturer. The imperial court compiled the "Yingzong Record" and ordered Wu Cheng to preside over it.

古文：居数月，《实录》成，未上，即移疾不出。
现代文：数月后《实录》修成，尚未进呈，澄称病请求还归故里。
English: A few months later, the "solid record" was completed, but it has not yet been submitted, and the request for clarification of the disease has returned to its hometown.

古文：中书左丞许师敬奉旨赐宴国史院，仍致朝廷勉留之意，宴罢，即出城登舟去。
现代文：中书左丞许师敬，奉旨赐宴于国史院，向吴澄表示朝廷挽留之意，吴澄坚持不肯，宴罢立即出城乘舟南下。
English: Censer Zuojo Xu Shijian, by order, gave a banquet at the National Academy of History, and expressed to Wu Cheng the intention of the imperial court to stay, but Wu Cheng insisted that he would not, and immediately left the city and went south by boat.

古文：中书闻之，遣官驿追，不及而还，言于帝曰： 吴澄，国之名儒，朝之旧德，今请老而归，不忍重劳之，宜有所褒异。 
现代文：中书闻讯，派官员追赶，终未追上，回朝奏告皇帝说： 吴澄是我朝名儒，德高望重的老臣。今告老还乡，朝廷亦不忍使他过于操劳，应该嘉奖才是。 
English: After hearing the news, he sent officials to catch up with him, but they could not catch up with him. He sent a report back to the emperor, saying, "Wu Cheng is a famous scholar of my dynasty and a highly respected elder statesman. Now that he has returned to his hometown, the imperial court cannot bear to make him work too hard. He should be commended."

古文：诏加资善大夫，仍以金织文绮二及钞五千贯赐之。
现代文：于是，诏令加吴澄为资善大夫，赐金织文绮二件及钞五千贯。
English: As a result, the emperor appointed Wu Cheng as a good doctor, and gave him two gold-woven monograms and 5,000 yuan in banknotes.

古文：澄身若不胜衣，正坐拱手，气融神迈，答问亹亹，使人涣若冰释。
现代文：吴澄诲人不倦，对于别人提出的疑难，总是不厌其烦地进行解答，直到明白为止。
English: Wu Chengchao is tireless. For the doubts raised by others, he always takes the trouble to answer them until they are clear.

古文：然则可以终无所归哉！ 
现代文：他对于中国古代文化的继承与发展，有自己系统的见解，认为从伏羲、黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、周公、孔、颜、曾、孟、周敦颐、二程、张载直到朱熹，是一脉相承，以后还要继承发展。
English: He has his own systematic views on the inheritance and development of ancient Chinese culture. He believes that from Fuxi, Huangdi, Zhai, Zhou, Yu, Tang, Wen, Wu, Zhou Gong, Kong, Yan, Zeng, Meng, Zhou Dun Dun, Ercheng, Zhang Zai to Zhu Xi, it is a lineage, and it will be inherited and developed in the future.

古文：其早以斯文自任如此。
现代文：他自青年时代就以继承传统文化为己任。
English: Since his youth, he has been committed to inheriting traditional culture.

古文：故出登朝署，退归于家，与郡邑之所经由，士大夫皆迎请执业，而四方之士不惮数千里，蹑屩负笈来学山中者，常不下千数百人。
现代文：无论入朝为官还是隐退归家，凡所经过的郡县，其士大夫们都争着请他去教育子弟。四方之士不远千里，跋山涉水，来向他求学者，常不下千百人。
English: Regardless of whether he entered the imperial court to become an official or retired to his home, in all the counties and counties he passed through, his teachers and doctors were all vying to invite him to educate their children. People from all over the country would travel thousands of miles, climb mountains and wade through water to ask him for scholars, often no less than a thousand people.

古文：少暇即著书，至将终，犹不置也。
现代文：平时稍有闲暇，即著书立说，直到生命最后一刻方才搁笔。
English: In ordinary times, he had a little leisure, that is, he wrote and wrote until the last moment of his life.

古文：于《易》、《春秋》、《礼记》，各有纂言，尽破传注穿凿，以发其蕴，条归纪叙，精明简洁，卓然成一家言。
现代文：对于《易》、《春秋》、《礼记》都有自己的解释，破除以前注释中穿凿附会的陋习，阐发书中深奥的道理，条理分明，文笔简洁，见识高超，成为一家之言。
English: For "Yi," "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals," they all have their own explanations, eliminating the bad habit of adding comments in previous commentaries, explaining the profound principles in the book, clear organization, concise writing, excellent insight, and becoming a household word.

古文：作《学基》、《学统》二篇，使人知学之本与为学之序，尤有得于邵子之学。
现代文：著有《学基》、《学统》二篇，使学者明了做学问之要本所在，懂得求学的途径，循序渐进。
English: He is the author of two books, "The Foundations of Learning" and "The Pedigree of Learning," so that scholars can understand the essentials of learning, understand the ways of learning, and gradually progress.

古文：校定《皇极经世书》，又校正《老子》、《庄子》、《太玄经》、《乐律》，及《八阵图》、郭璞《葬书》。
现代文：他的学术思想，尤得益于邵雍的学说。他还校订了《皇极经世书》、《老子》、《庄子》、《太玄经》、《乐律》以及《八阵图》和郭璞的《葬书》。
English: His academic thought, in particular, benefited from the teachings of Shao Yong. He also revised the "Imperial Classic of the World," "Lao Zi," "Zhuang Zi," "Tao Xuan Jing," "Music Law" as well as the "Eight Diagrams" and Guo Yu's "Funeral Book."

古文：初，澄所居草屋数间，程钜夫题曰草庐，故学者称之为草庐先生。
现代文：吴澄故居有草房数间，程钜夫为之题名为 草庐 ，因此学者称吴澄为 草庐先生 。
English: Wu Cheng's former residence had several grass-covered rooms, which were given the name "Grass Garden" by Cheng Yufu. Therefore, scholars call Wu Cheng "Mr. Grass Garden."

古文：天历三年，朝廷以澄耆老，特命次子京为抚州教授，以便奉养。
现代文：天历三年，朝廷因吴澄年事已高，特任命其次子吴京为抚州教授，以便就近奉养。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, the imperial court, due to Wu Cheng's advanced age, specially appointed his second son Wu Jing as a professor in Fuzhou, so that he could be raised nearby.

古文：赠江西行省左丞、上护军，追封临川郡公，谥文正。
现代文：朝廷赠为江西行省左丞、上护军，追封临川郡公，谥 文正 。
English: The imperial court presented Jiangxi Province to Zuo Zensheng and Shang Rongjun, posthumously awarded Linchuan County to Gong Wenzheng.

