古文：今之常言，有 文 有 笔 ，以为无韵者 笔 也，有韵者 文 也。
现代文：如今人们常说，文章有 文 和 笔 两种；他们认为不讲究音节的是 笔 ，讲究音节的是 文 。
English: Nowadays, people often say that there are two kinds of articles: writing and pen; they think that the pen is not concerned with syllables, but the writing is concerned with syllables.

古文：夫文以足言，理兼《诗》、《书》，别目两名，自近代耳。
现代文：文本来是补充和修饰语言的，按理说可以包含《诗经》、《尚书》两方面的作品；至于分成 文  笔 两种，是从晋代开始的。
English: Texts were originally used to supplement and embellish the language, and it is reasonable to say that they can include both the "Book of Songs" and the "Book of Songs." As for the division into two kinds of writings, it began in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：颜延年以为∶ 笔之为体，言之文也；经典则言而非笔，传记则笔而非言。 
现代文：颜延之以为： 笔 这种体裁，是有文采的 言 ；儒家经书是 言 而不是 笔 ，而传注乃是 笔 不是 言 。
English: Yan Yanzhi thought that: the genre of the pen is a witty speech; the Confucian scripture is a speech but not a pen, and the commentary is a pen but not a speech.

古文：请夺彼矛，还攻其楯矣。
现代文：其实颜延年的说法有些自相矛盾，即请借用他的矛，来还攻他的盾。
English: In fact, Yan Yan Nian's statement is somewhat self-contradictory, that is, please borrow his spear to attack his shield.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：《易》之《文言》，岂非言文？
现代文：《周易》中的《文言》，难道不是很有文采的 言 吗？
English: Isn't the "Letter" in "Zhou Yi" a very literary speech?

古文：若笔为言文，不得云经典非笔矣。
现代文：假如 笔 是有文采的 言 ，那就不能说有文采的经书不是 笔 了。
English: If a pen is a literary word, then it cannot be said that a literary scripture is not a pen.

古文：将以立论，未见其论立也。
现代文：颜延年想建立新的论点，可是我看他的论点还不能建立起来。
English: Yan Yan Nian wants to establish a new argument, but I don't think his argument can be established.

古文：予以为∶发口为言，属翰曰笔，常道曰经，述经曰传。
现代文：我认为：口头说的叫做 言 ，书面写的叫做 笔 ；说明永久性道理的叫做 经 ，解释经书的叫做 传 。
English: I hold that what is said orally is called discourse, and what is written down is called a pen; what explains eternal truths is called scripture, and what explains scriptures is called tradition.

古文：经传之体，出言入笔，笔为言使，可强可弱。
现代文：经书和传记的体裁，就显然不应属于 言 而应属于 笔 了；用笔写来代替口说，文采可多可少。
English: It is clear that the genre of scripture and biography should not belong to speech, but to the pen; writing with a pen instead of speaking can be more or less literary.

古文：《六经》以典奥为不刊，非以言笔为优劣也。
现代文：儒家经典以其内容深刻而不可磨灭，并不是以颜延年所谓无文采的 言 和有文采的 笔 来定其高下的。
English: The Confucian classics are indelible for their profound content, and it is not Yan Yanren's so-called witless words and witty pen that determine their superiority.

古文：昔陆氏《文赋》，号为曲尽，然泛论纤悉，而实体未该。
现代文：从前陆机的《文赋》，据说谈得很详细；但是里边多讲琐碎的问题，却没有抓住要点。
English: It is said that the "Wenfu" of the forerunner was very detailed; however, it talked more about trivial issues, but did not grasp the main points.

古文：故知九变之贯匪穷，知言之选难备矣。
现代文：可见事物的变化是无穷的，而真正懂得写作的人却较少。
English: It can be seen that the changes in things are endless, but there are fewer people who really know how to write.

古文：凡精虑造文，各竞新丽，多欲练辞，莫肯研术。
现代文：凡是一切精心思虑创作文章的，都努力争取新奇华丽，更多地要求言辞简练，而不去钻研写作的方法。
English: Those who have carefully thought out every detail of creating articles strive for novelty and splendor, and require more concise words, rather than delving into the method of writing.

古文：落落之玉，或乱乎石；碌碌之石，时似乎玉。
现代文：譬如在成堆的玉中，不免有些和石块相类；在稀有的石头中，偶然也有像玉的。
English: For example, among piles of jade, some inevitably resemble stones; among rare stones, there are also jade-like ones by chance.

古文：精者要约，匮者亦鲜；博者该赡，芜者亦繁；辩者昭晰，浅者亦露；奥者复隐，诡者亦曲。
现代文：同样，讲究精练的人创作起来文章比较简洁；可是文思贫乏的人，篇幅也多短小。学识渊博的人内容写得完备详尽，常常下笔千言；但是文风杂乱的人，也写得非常冗长。善于雄辩的人写得明白清晰；不过学识浅薄的人，辞句也极显露。思想深刻的人，写出来有时难懂；可是故作怪僻的人，也能写得迂回曲折。
English: In the same way, a man of refinement produces a more concise composition; but a man of poverty of thought produces a shorter one. A man of learning produces a complete and detailed composition, and often writes a thousand words; but a man of confusion produces a very long one. A man of eloquence produces a clear and lucid composition; but a man of little learning produces a very confused one. A man of deep thought produces a sometimes difficult composition; but a man of eccentricity produces a meandering one.

古文：或义华而声悴，或理拙而文泽。
现代文：有的文章意义丰富，而声调音节显得较差；有的文章事理拙劣，而文句却很润泽。
English: Some articles are rich in meaning, but the tone and syllables are poor; some articles are poorly reasoned, but the words are very glossy.

古文：知夫调钟未易，张琴实难。
现代文：正如音乐一样，敲钟弹琴都不容易。
English: Just like music, it's not easy to ring a bell and play the piano.

古文：伶人告和，不必尽窕瓠之中；动角挥羽，何必穷初终之韵；魏文比篇章于音乐，盖有征矣。
现代文：一个乐师要演奏得音调和谐，不必大小乐器都会掌握；要能运用乐器，发挥作用，何须兼通一切曲调？曹丕把写作比作音乐，是有根据的，因为都要求掌握法则。
English: For a musician to play a harmonious tone, it is not necessary to master both large and small musical instruments; if you want to be able to use musical instruments and play a role, why do you need to know all the tunes? Cao Wei's comparison of writing to music is well-founded, because both require mastering the rules.

古文：夫不截盘根，无以验利器；不剖文奥，无以辨通才。
现代文：如果不能截断弯曲的树根，那就无法考验刀锯是否锋利；同样，如果不能分析深刻的写作道理，也就不能看出作者是否有妙才。
English: If you can't cut a crooked root, you can't test the sharpness of a hacksaw; likewise, if you can't analyze the profound principles of writing, you can't see whether the author is a genius.

古文：才之能通，必资晓术，自非圆鉴区域，大判条例，岂能控引情源，制胜文苑哉！
现代文：要使文才妙用无碍，就必须依靠通晓写作方法。若非全面考察各种体裁，普遍明确各种法则，怎能掌握思想情感的来龙去脉，在文坛上获得成功呢？
English: In order for literary talent to be useful, it is necessary to rely on a thorough knowledge of writing methods. If we do not comprehensively examine various genres and generally clarify various rules, how can we grasp the ins and outs of thoughts and emotions and succeed in the literary world?

古文：是以执术驭篇，似善弈之穷数；弃术任心，如博塞之邀遇。
现代文：因此通过掌握技巧来驾驭文章写作，就像善于下棋的人精通棋术；抛开技巧凭感觉下棋，就像赌博偶然碰运气。
English: Therefore, mastering article writing by mastering skills is like a good chess player is proficient in chess; playing chess by feeling without skills is like gambling by chance.

古文：故博塞之文，借巧傥来，虽前驱有功，而后援难继。
现代文：所以像赌博那样写作，凭借不可靠的巧合得来，虽然文章前面这样做有功效，可是后面部分却难以继续。
English: So you write like a gambler, relying on unreliable coincidences, and while the first part of the essay works, the second part is hard to follow.

古文：少既无以相接，多亦不知所删，乃多少之并惑，何妍蚩之能制乎！
现代文：内容写少了不知如何填充，写多了也不知如何删减，这样不管内容写得多还是少都会迷惑，怎么才能把握写作好坏呢？
English: I don't know how to fill in if I write less content, and I don't know how to delete if I write more, so no matter how much or little content is written, it will be confusing. How can I grasp the quality of writing?

古文：若夫善弈之文，则术有恒数，按部整伍，以待情会，因时顺机，动不失正。
现代文：至于像善于下棋般写作，那技巧常有一定法则，按部就班等待情思被酝酿成熟，因其时宜，顺其时机，使文章写作总不会脱离正轨。
English: As for writing like being good at playing chess, that skill often has a certain law, step by step waiting for feelings to be brewed, because of its timeliness, according to its timing, so that the writing of the article will never deviate from the right track.

古文：数逢其极，机入其巧，则义味腾跃而生，辞气丛杂而至。
现代文：如果技巧运用得好，时机又掌握得巧妙，那么文章义理韵味便腾跃涌现出来，文采气势便蜂拥到来。
English: If the technique is used well and the timing is mastered skillfully, then the sense and charm of the article will emerge and the literary momentum will swarm.

古文：视之则锦绘，听之则丝簧，味之则甘腴，佩之则芬芳，断章之功，于斯盛矣。
现代文：这样的文章看起来文采好像织锦彩绘，听上去节律好像合奏丝簧，品评起来味道好像甘美佳肴，佩玩起来气味好像芬芳兰桂：写作所能达到的效果，到这样算是很好了。
English: Such an article looks like a brocade painting, the rhythm sounds like an ensemble of silk springs, the taste tastes like a sweet dish, and the smell smells like a fragrant cilantro: the effect that writing can achieve is so good.

古文：夫骥足虽骏，纆牵忌长，以万分一累，且废千里。
现代文：千里马虽快，但缰绳却不能太长；缰绳过长不过是万分之一的小缺点罢了，尚且也妨碍到马的千里之行。
English: Although the pony is fast, the bridle should not be too long; the bridle being too long is only a small shortcoming out of ten thousand, but it also hinders the horse's journey of a thousand miles.

古文：况文体多术，共相弥纶，一物携贰，莫不解体。
现代文：更何况文章各种体裁的写作方法是多种多样的，各方面都要密切配合；如果其中一点达不到协调，整篇文章都要受影响。
English: What's more, the writing methods of various genres of articles are diverse, and all aspects must be closely coordinated; if one of them is not coordinated, the entire article will be affected.

古文：所以列在一篇，备总情变，譬三十之辐，共成一毂，虽未足观，亦鄙夫之见也。
现代文：所以集中在本篇，全面考虑文学创作的种种不同情况，要像三十条车辐一样，必须配合在一个车毂里。这里谈得虽很肤浅，也算我的一得之愚吧。总结：
English: Therefore, concentrating on this article, comprehensively considering the various different situations of literary creation, like thirty spokes, must be coordinated in a hub. Although the discussion here is very superficial, it is also my stupidity. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶文场笔苑，有术有门。
现代文：在创作领域里，方法是多种多样的。
English: In the creative field, there are many different methods.

古文：务先大体，鉴必穷源。
现代文：必须首先注意总体，彻底认清基本写作原理；
English: Must first pay attention to the overall, thoroughly understand the basic principles of writing;

古文：乘一总万，举要治繁。
现代文：这样就能根据基本原理来掌握各种技巧，抓住要点来驾驭一切。
English: In this way, you can master all kinds of techniques according to the basic principles, and grasp the key points to control everything.

古文：思无定契，理有恒存。
现代文：文思虽没有一定的规则，写作的基本原理却是有定的。
English: Although there are no definite rules for writing, the basic principles of writing are definite.

