古文：◎文苑五
现代文：梅尧臣字圣俞，宋宣州宣城人。
English: Mei Xuan Sheng, Song Xuan Zhou Xuan Chengren.

古文：工为诗，以深远古淡为意，间出奇巧，初未为人所知。
现代文：是侍读学士梅询的侄子，在诗作方面造诣极深。他的诗，有一种深远而淡泊的意境，并常于平淡中显现匠心独运的奇巧。起初很长一段时间，他的诗才没有被人们发现。
English: He was the nephew of Ma Ying-an, a scholar in attendance, and was extremely accomplished in poetry. His poems have a profound and light mood, and often show the ingenuity of the artist in the plainness. At first, his poems were not discovered for a long time.

古文：用询阴为河南主簿，钱惟演留守西京，特嗟赏之，为忘年交，引与酬倡，一府尽倾。
现代文：后来，梅尧臣以父荫而入官，为河南主簿。当时留守西京的钱惟演发现并惊叹他的才华，与他结成了忘年之交，并相互吟诗酬唱，抒发情感。
English: Later, Mei Yuxin entered the government in his father's shadow and became the leader of Henan Province. Qian Ye, who was staying in West Beijing at the time, discovered and marveled at his talent, formed a friendship with him that would last for years to come, and they sang poems to each other to express their feelings.

古文：欧阳修与为诗友，自以为不及。
现代文：欧阳修也与梅尧臣结为诗友，并自谦不如梅尧臣的写诗才能。
English: Ouyang Xiu also became a poet friend with Mei Xuancheng, and was not as good as Mei Xuancheng in writing poetry.

古文：尧臣益刻厉，精思苦学，繇是知名于时。
现代文：梅尧臣因受到知名前辈的夸奖与鼓励愈发兢兢业业，潜心苦读，终于在宋代文坛上名声大振。
English: As a result of the praise and encouragement received from well-known predecessors, Mei Xuancheng became more and more diligent in his work and studied hard, and finally became famous in the Song Dynasty literary world.

古文：宋兴，以诗名家为世所传如尧臣者，盖少也。尝语人曰： 凡诗，意新语工，得前人所未道者，斯为善矣。
现代文：自宋以来，像梅尧臣那样，专以诗才之名流芳后世的人实不为多。梅尧臣曾对人说 ：大凡做诗，要注意立意新颖，语言考究，发前人所未发，感前人所未感。
English: Since the Song Dynasty, there have not been many people in later generations who have been famous for their poetic talent, like Mei Xianchen. Mei Xianchen once said to people: When making poems, pay attention to fresh ideas, exquisite language, unprecedented hair, and unprecedented feeling.

古文：必能状难写之景如在目前，含不尽之意见于言外，然后为至也。 世以为知言。
现代文：而且，能自如驾驭难写之景，使之活灵活现，栩栩如生，能使读者感受到诗句之外深远而美妙的意境。只有这样的诗才能称得上是上乘之作。 
English: Moreover, only such a poem can be said to be a superior work, which can freely control the difficult to write scene, make it vivid and lifelike, and make the reader feel the far-reaching and wonderful artistic conception beyond the poem.

古文：历德兴县令，知建德、襄城县，监湖州税，签书忠武、镇安判官，监永丰仓。
现代文：后世都以为梅尧臣的这些观点十分精辟与精彩。梅尧臣曾先后做过德兴县令，建德、襄城知县，监湖州税，签书忠武、镇安判官，监永丰仓等地方官。
English: Later generations thought that these views of Mei Xuancheng were very incisive and wonderful. Mei Xuancheng had successively served as the governor of Dexing County, Jiande County, Xiangcheng County, the supervisor of Huzhou tax, the signer of Zhongwu, the judge of Zhen'an, the supervisor of Yongfeng Cang and other local officials.

古文：大臣屡荐宜在馆阁，召试，赐进士出身，为国子监直讲，累迁尚书都官员外郎。预修《唐书》，成，未奏而卒，录其子一人。
现代文：大臣们屡次举荐梅尧臣任馆阁之职，因而梅尧臣得以受皇帝召试，并被赐进士出身。随后升为国子监直讲，累迁尚书都官员外郎，曾参与修撰《唐书》的工作，可惜书成之后，还没有来得及奏呈皇上，梅尧臣就辞世了。
English: The ministers repeatedly recommended that Mei Sun-sin be appointed to the cabinet, so Mei Sun-sin was able to be called by the emperor and was given a scholarship. Later, he was promoted to the direct speech of the state overseer, the son of an official who had moved to the capital, and participated in the work of compiling the "Tang Shu." Unfortunately, after the book was completed, Mei Sun-sin died before he could present it to the emperor.

古文：宝元、嘉祐中，仁宗有事郊庙，尧臣预祭，辄献歌诗，又尝上书言兵。
现代文：皇帝为了酬答他的功绩，特将他的一个儿子起用为官。宝元、嘉年间，梅尧臣随宋仁宗参加郊庙祭典，并献上赞美诗，还曾向皇帝上书谈振军备战之事。
English: In order to reward his merits, the emperor specially appointed one of his sons, Rama, as an official. During the Baoyuan and Jia years, Mei Xianchen attended the suburban temple festival with Song Renzong, and presented a hymn. He also wrote to the emperor about the armament war.

古文：注《孙子》十三篇，撰《唐载记》二十六卷、《毛诗小传》二十卷、《宛陵集》四十卷。
现代文：梅尧臣为《孙子十三篇》做过注，撰有《唐载记》二十六卷、《毛诗小传》二十卷、《宛陵集》四十卷。
English: Mei Jianchen made notes for the "Thirteen Stories of the Grandson" and wrote twenty-six volumes of "Tang Zhai Ji," twenty volumes of "Mao Shi Xiao Bian" and forty volumes of "Wang Ling Shu."

古文：年二十七始发愤为学，岁余举进士，又举茂才异等，皆不中。
现代文：梅尧臣家庭清贫，他自己喜欢饮酒。名贤及士大夫多与之交往甚密，并常常是带着酒到其家与之共饮。梅尧臣十分健谈，且无所畏惧。嬉笑怒骂之情皆寄寓于诗中，晚年尤其如此。
English: Mei Sun-sin's family was poor, and he himself liked to drink alcohol. Many famous sages and scholars were in close contact with him, and often brought alcohol to his home to drink with him. Mei Sun-sin was very talkative and fearless. Laughing and swearing are all in the poem, especially in his later years.

古文：悉焚常所为文，闭户益读书，遂通《六经》、百家之说，下笔顷刻数千言。
现代文：有人曾得到过西南偏远地区少数民族一件布衣，发现布衣上绣织有梅尧臣的诗句，可见梅尧臣在当时的名声是何等之大了。苏洵字明允，宋眉州眉山人。
English: Someone once received a piece of cloth clothing from a minority in a remote area of southwest China, and found that the cloth clothing was embroidered with a poem by Mei Xuancheng, which shows how great Mei Xuancheng's reputation was at the time. Su Xuan Zi Ming Yun, from Meishan, Song Meizhou.

古文：至和、嘉祐间，与其二子轼、辙皆至京师，翰林学士欧阳修上其所著书二十二篇，既出，士大夫争传之，一时学者竞效苏氏为文章。
现代文：他二十七岁的时候开始发愤学习，但在参加进士及特殊才学的考测中，都没有如愿以偿，于是苏洵将自己以前的文章全部焚烧，关门闭户苦读诗书，终于精通六经及百家之说，达到了读书破万卷、下笔如有神的境地。至和、嘉年间，苏洵和他的两个儿子苏轼、苏辙一同来到京师，翰林学士欧阳修将他们父子三人所做的二十二篇文章上呈给朝廷，朝廷将这些文章刊印出来之后，士大夫们争相传阅，一时间，学者们写文章都仿效苏氏文风。
English: When he was twenty-seven years old, he began to study furiously, but he did not get what he wanted in the examinations for entering scholars and special talents, so Su Shi burned all his previous articles, closed the door and studied poetry books, and finally mastered the Six Classics and the Sayings of the Hundred Schools, reaching a state of reading more than ten thousand volumes and writing like a god. In the years of He and Ji, Su Shi and his two sons, Su Shi and Su Gut, came to Beijing together. Hanlin Scholar Ouyang Xiu presented the twenty-two articles made by their father and son to the court. After the court published these articles, scholars read them one after another. For

古文：所著《权书》、《衡论》、《机策》，文多不可悉录，录其《心术》、《远虑》二篇。
现代文：苏洵著有《权书》、《衡论》、《机策》等文。因其文章太多，不可能一一抄录，现将其《心术》、《远虑》二篇文章摘抄于此。
English: Su Shi is the author of "The Book of Rights," "The Theory of Balance," "The Mechanism," and other articles. Because there are too many articles, it is impossible to transcribe them one by one. Here are excerpts from two of his articles, "The Art of Mind" and "Foresight."

古文：《心术》曰：
现代文：《心术篇》说：
English: "The Art of Mind" says:

古文：为将之道，当先治心，太山覆于前而色不变，麋鹿兴于左而目不瞬，然后可以待敌。
现代文：做将帅之道，应当首先正心。即使泰山倾覆于眼前也不变脸色，麋鹿出现在身旁也不眨眼睛。
English: To be a general, one should first have a righteous heart. Even if Mount Tai topples over in front of one's eyes, one's face does not change color, and if an elk appears next to one, one does not blink an eye.

古文：凡兵上义，不义虽利不动。
现代文：只有这样才能胸有成竹镇定自若地对付敌人。
English: Only in this way can we deal with the enemy with composure and self-confidence.

古文：夫惟义可以怒士，士以义怒，可与百战。
现代文：对于士兵要使之有正义感，没有正义感的士兵，即使以利相诱惑恐怕也不好指挥。
English: For soldiers to have a sense of justice, soldiers without a sense of justice, even if they are tempted by interest, may not be easy to command.

古文：凡战之道，未战养其财，将战养其力，既战养其气，既胜养其心。
现代文：只有正义之气可以激励士兵，也只有士兵的正义之气被激发出来之后，才可以跟随将领打好一次又一次的战斗。
English: Only the spirit of justice can inspire soldiers to fight, and only after the soldiers' spirit of justice is inspired, can they follow the general to fight well again and again.

古文：谨烽燧，严斥堠，使耕者无所顾忌，所以养其财，丰犒而优游之，所以养其力。
现代文：凡要进行一场战争，必须做到战争之前注意养财，搞好物质准备工作；即将开战的时候要注意养力；战争开始后要注意养气；战争胜利之后，要注意养心。
English: Whoever wants to wage a war must do the following: before the war, pay attention to raising wealth and do a good job of material preparation; when the war is about to begin, pay attention to nourishing strength; after the war begins, pay attention to nourishing energy; after the war is won, pay attention to nourishing the heart.

古文：小胜益急，小挫益厉，所以养其气。用人不尽其所为，所以养其心。故士当蓄其怒、怀其欲而不尽。怒不尽则有余勇，欲不尽则有余贪，故虽并天下而士不厌兵，此黄帝所以七十战而兵不殆也。
现代文：具体说来，所谓养财，就是要谨慎地燃起报警的烽烟，注意派士兵侦察摸清敌人的底细，使老百姓无所害怕，无所惊慌，从而安心种田，发展生产，准备财力；所谓养力，就是要丰厚犒赏士兵，使之养精蓄锐，无精神负担；所谓养气，就是要使士兵胜不骄，败不馁，始终保持旺盛的斗志；所谓养心，就是用人不尽其所为，以保其有一个正常的心理态势。总之，要让士兵蓄有怒气，怀有欲望，并且不让这种怒气发泄干净，不让这种欲望得到完全满足。因为有怒气就会有勇气，怒气不尽则勇气不尽。有欲望就会有贪念，欲望不尽则贪念不止。这样一来，即使天下统一了，士兵也不会厌恶战争，这就是为什么黄帝发动七十场战争而士兵始终毫不懈怠的原因所在。
English: Specifically, the so-called wealth-raising is to cautiously ignite the smoke of the alarm, pay attention to send soldiers to investigate and find out the details of the enemy, so that the people have nothing to fear, nothing to panic, so that they can grow fields, develop production, and prepare financial resources; the so-called strength-raising is to richly reward soldiers, so that they can keep their energy sharp and have no mental burden; the so-called spirit-raising is to make soldiers not arrogant, not defeated, and always maintain a strong fighting spirit; the so-called heart-raising is to use people to do their best to ensure that they have a normal psychological state. In short, let soldiers

古文：凡将欲智而严，凡士欲愚。
现代文：将帅要有智谋和威严，士兵就不要太聪明了，使之愚钝一些为好。
English: Generals should be wise and dignified, soldiers should not be too clever, it is better to make them stupid.

古文：智则不可测，严则不可犯，故士皆委己而听命，夫安得不愚？
现代文：因为将帅有智谋就可使士兵感到不可捉摸，深不可测；有威严就使士兵不敢违抗命令；士兵愚钝，就会老老实实地听命于将帅，就会效忠将帅而不怕死。
English: Because the commander-in-chief can make the soldiers feel elusive and unfathomable if he has wisdom and strategy; if he has majesty, the soldiers will not dare to disobey orders; if the soldiers are stupid, they will honestly obey the commander-in-chief's orders, and will be loyal to the commander-in-chief without fear of death.

古文：夫惟士愚而后可与之皆死。
现代文：大凡调兵遣将，必须做到知敌之主，知敌之将，然后可以冒险发奇兵。
English: A great general must know the enemy and know the enemy's general, and then he can risk sending a miracle soldier.

古文：凡兵之动，知敌之主，知敌之将，而后可以动于崄。
现代文：三国时，魏将邓艾越过悬崖峭壁突然攻击蜀军，如果不是蜀主刘禅的无能，则邓艾的百万之师可以轻而易举地被击破。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Wei sent Deng Ai over the cliff to suddenly attack the Shu army. If it wasn't for the incompetence of the Shu lord Liu Zhen, Deng Ai's Million Division could have been easily defeated.

古文：邓艾缒兵于穴中，非刘禅之庸，则百万之师可以坐缚，彼固有所侮而动也。故古之贤将，能以兵尝敌，而又以敌自尝，故去就可以决。
现代文：邓艾之所以敢这样出奇兵，就是因为他了解刘禅的无能。所以说，古之贤将不仅能以自己的士兵向敌人挑战，而且能通过对其将帅情况的分析试探而摸清敌军的底细，这样就可以做出正确的决断了。
English: The reason why Deng Ai dared to make such a surprise attack was because he understood the incompetence of Liu Zen. Therefore, the ancient sage will not only be able to challenge the enemy with his own soldiers, but also be able to find out the details of the enemy army by analyzing and probing the situation of his commander, so that he can make the right decision.

古文：凡主将之道，知理而后可以举兵，知势而后可以加兵，知节而后可以用兵。
现代文：作为主帅，应该是知理而后可以举兵，知势而后可以加兵，知节而后可以用兵。
English: As a coach, he should be able to raise an army after understanding reason, can increase an army after understanding power, and can use an army after understanding discipline.

古文：知理则不屈，知势则不沮，知节则不穷。见小利不动，见小患不迁，小利小患不足以辱吾技也，夫然后有以支大利大患。
现代文：所谓知理即是知道战争的意义和目的，只有这样，主帅才能不屈不挠；所谓知势即是知道战争的形势，只有这样，主帅才能胸有成竹，不至于沮丧；所谓知节即是知道掌握战争的节奏及用兵的节度，只有这样，主帅才能伸缩进退自如。主帅应不为小利所动心，不为小患而不安，因为小利小患足以玷辱我军的技艺与本领。要把心思用在处理大利大患方面。
English: The so-called wisdom is to know the meaning and purpose of the war, only in this way can the commander-in-chief be indomitable; the so-called wisdom is to know the situation of the war, only in this way can the commander-in-chief be confident and not depressed; the so-called wisdom is to know how to master the rhythm of the war and the use of troops, only in this way can the commander-in-chief flexibly advance and retreat. The commander-in-chief should not be moved by small profits and not be worried about small troubles, because small profits and small troubles are enough to disgrace the skills and abilities of our army. We should use our minds to deal

古文：夫惟养技而自爱者无敌于天下，故一忍可以支百勇，一静可以制百动。
现代文：只有深怀技艺与本领而又自爱的人才能无敌于天下。所以说，一忍可以应付百勇，一静可以制服百动。
English: Only a person with profound skills and abilities and self-love can be invincible in the world. Therefore, one patience can cope with a hundred courage, and one calm can subdue a hundred movements.

古文：兵有长短，敌我一也。敢问： 吾之所长，吾出而用之，彼将不与吾校；吾之所短，吾敛而置之，彼将强与吾角。
现代文：军队总有长处和短处，这在敌我双方都是一样的道理，试问： 我之所长，我拿出来运用，敌人当然不敢与我较量；而我之所短，我收起来不用，敌人也会硬与我争斗，怎么办呢？ 
English: An army always has its strengths and weaknesses, and this is the same for both the enemy and us. Let's ask: What should I do if I take out my strengths and use them, but the enemy, of course, does not dare to compete with me? And what should I do if I put away my weaknesses and do not use them, but the enemy will fight me hard?

古文：奈何？ 曰： 吾之所短，吾抗而暴之，使之疑而却；吾之所长，吾阴而养之，使之狎而堕其中。
现代文：答曰： 虽然我有所短，但我如果表现出顽强抗暴的精神，敌人就会怀疑而退却。而对于我之所长，应悄然加以掩蔽，敌人就会因轻视而陷入我之圈套中。
English: Answer: Although I am short, if I show a tenacious and rebellious spirit, the enemy will be suspicious and retreat. As for my strengths, they should be quietly covered up, and the enemy will fall into my trap due to contempt.

古文：此用长短之术也。 
现代文：此长短之术也。
English: This is also a long and short technique.

古文：善用兵者使之无所顾，有所恃。
现代文：善于用兵的将领，要使士兵无所顾忌而有所依恃。
English: Generals who are good at using soldiers should make soldiers have something to cling to without any scruples.

古文：无所顾则知死之不足惜，有所恃则知不至于必败。
现代文：士兵无所顾忌才会不怕一死，有所依恃才会对战争充满信心。
English: Only when soldiers have no scruples will they not be afraid of death, and only when they have confidence will they be full of confidence in war.

古文：尺箠当猛虎，奋呼而操击，徒手遇蜥蜴，变色而却步，人之情也，知此者可以将矣。
现代文：比如说，如果我们手中拿着短短的一截棒棰，遇到凶猛的老虎时，大家都会呼喊着一起围攻老虎，而如果我们空手无依恃时，即使遇上小小的壁虎也会畏而却步，此乃人之常情，知此者方可为将。
English: For example, if we hold a short piece of rod and hoe in our hands and encounter a ferocious tiger, everyone will shout together to besiege the tiger, and if we are empty-handed, even if we encounter a small gecko, we will be afraid and shy away. This is human nature, and those who know this can be the winners.

古文：袒裼而按剑，则乌获不敢逼；冠胄衣甲据兵而寝，则童子弯弓杀之矣。
现代文：即使穿内衣睡觉，但只要你以手按剑，取时刻警惕的态势，则强者也不敢逼近你；相反，即便你穿甲戴盔地靠在武器上入眠而不警惕，那么孩童也可举弓将你射杀。
English: Even if you sleep in your underwear, as long as you hold a sword in your hand and keep a vigilant attitude, the strong will not dare to approach you; on the contrary, even if you sleep in armor and helmet, leaning on the weapon without being alert, then the child can raise the bow and shoot you.

古文：故善用兵者以形固，夫能以形固，则力有余矣。《远虑》曰：
现代文：所以说善于用兵的人要始终保持一种凛然不可侵犯的姿态，只有这样，你才能显示出一种无穷无尽的力量。《远虑篇》说：
English: Therefore, a person who is good at using soldiers should always maintain an invulnerable posture. Only in this way can you show an inexhaustible power. "Foresight" says:

古文：圣人之道，有经、有权、有机，是以有民、有群臣而又有腹心之臣。
现代文：作为一个圣人，他应该懂得经略之策，精通权术之道，深悟心机之要。拥有黎民，拥有群臣并拥有腹心之臣。
English: As a sage, he should know the strategy, be proficient in the way of power, and deeply understand the essence of the heart. Own the people, have a group of ministers and have a confidant minister.

古文：曰经者，天下之民举知之可也；曰权者，民不可得而知矣，群臣知之可也；曰机者，虽群臣亦不得而知之矣，腹心之臣知之可也。
现代文：经略之策，可让天下黎民人人知晓，权术之道，不可让黎民知道但可让群臣知道，而对于心中之机要，则只能让个别心腹之臣知道。
English: The strategy of strategy can be known by all the people in the world. The strategy of power cannot be known by the people, but it can be known by the ministers. As for the strategy of the heart, it can only be known by individual ministers.

古文：夫使圣人无权，则无以成天下之务，无机，则无以济万世之功，然皆非天下之民所宜知；而机者又群臣所不得闻，群臣不得闻，则谁与议？
现代文：如果圣人不懂运用权力，就不可能办好国家的事务；如果圣人没有心机，就不可能成就万世之功业。这些道理都是不便让天下之民知道的。心机既然不可外泄于群臣，那么皇帝与谁商议定夺呢？
English: If a sage does not know how to use power, it is impossible to run the affairs of the country well; if a sage does not have the heart, it is impossible to accomplish the work of all ages. These principles are inconvenient for the people of the world to know. Since the heart cannot be revealed to the courtiers, with whom did the emperor negotiate?

古文：不议不济，然则所谓腹心之臣者，不可一日无也。
现代文：显然是心腹之臣，所以说，心腹之臣对于皇帝来说不可一日没有。
English: He was obviously a trusted vassal, so for the emperor, a trusted vassal was a must-have.

古文：后世见三代取天下以仁义，而守之以礼乐也，则曰 圣人无机 。夫取天下与守天下，无机不能。顾三代圣人之机，不若后世之诈，故后世不得见。
现代文：后世认为夏、商、周三代以仁义夺取天下，以礼乐守护天下，不免盲目得出 圣人无机 的结论，但是我仍然认为，圣人如果无心机，是不能夺天下与守天下的，只不过三代圣人之心机不如后世圣人心机之诡诈，所以后世之人往往不易轻易发觉。
English: Later generations believed that Xia, Shang, and the three succeeding dynasties conquered the world with benevolence and righteousness, and protected the world with ritual music, and inevitably blindly came to the conclusion that saints are inorganic. However, I still believe that if a saint does not have a heart, he cannot conquer the world and protect the world. However, the heart of the three generations of saints is not as cunning as the heart of the saints of later generations, so people in later generations are often not easy to detect.

古文：其有机也，是以有腹心之臣。禹有益，汤有伊尹，武王有太公望，是三臣者，闻天下之所不闻，知群臣之所不知。
现代文：有心机，必须要有心腹之臣，禹有益，汤有伊尹，武王有太公望，这三个心腹之臣都能闻天下之所不闻，知群臣之所不知。
English: One must have a loyal vassal with a good heart. Yu is beneficial, Tang has Yi Yin, and King Wu has Taigongbo. These three loyal vassals can hear what the world does not hear and know what the vassals do not know.

古文：禹与汤武倡其机于上，而三臣者和之于下，以成万世之功。
现代文：所以说，禹、汤、武王之心机与三个心腹之臣相应和才成就了万世之功业。
English: Therefore, Yu, Tang, King Wu's heart machine and the three subordinate vassals were able to accomplish the work of all ages.

古文：下而至于桓、文，有管仲、狐偃为之谋主，阖庐有伍员，勾践有范蠡、大夫种。
现代文：三代以下的齐桓公、晋文公分别有管仲和狐偃为之谋划；此外，吴王阖闾拥有伍子胥，越王勾践拥有范蠡、文种。
English: The three generations of Qi Kuan Gong and Jin Wen Gong were planned by Guanzhong and Fuxi respectively; in addition, Wu Wangqi had Wu Zi Gong, and Yue Wangcuo had Fan Gong and Wen Zhuang.

古文：高祖之起也，大将任韩信、黥布、彭越，裨将任曹参、樊哙、滕公、灌婴，游说诸侯任郦生、陆贾、枞公，至于奇机密谋，君臣所不与者，唯留侯、酂侯二人。
现代文：刘邦在夺天下与守天下的过程中，先后任用过韩信、黥布、彭越、曹参、樊哙、滕公、灌婴、郦生、陆贾、枞公等，然而只让心腹之臣留侯与赞阝侯二人参与奇机密谋。
English: In the process of conquering the world and protecting the world, Liu Bang successively appointed Han Xin, Zibo, Peng Yue, Cao Zhan, Luo, Tenggong, Guanzhong, Xing Sheng, Lu Jia, Xing Gong, etc. However, he only allowed two of his vassals, Liu Hou and Zang Yuhou, to participate in the secret plot.

古文：唐太宗之臣多奇才，而委之深、任之密者，亦不过曰房、杜。
现代文：唐太宗的臣子多奇才，然而委之深、任之重者也不过是房玄龄和杜建德二人。
English: Tang Taizong's vassals were all prodigies. However, only Fong Xuanling and Du Jiande were appointed to important positions.

古文：夫君子为善之心与小人为恶之心一也，君子有机以成其善，小人有机以成其恶。
现代文：君子为善之心与小人为恶之心都是一种必然的存在。君子有心机可以成就善业，小人有心机可以造就恶业。
English: The heart of a gentleman for good and the heart of a small man for evil are both a necessary existence. A gentleman has the heart to achieve good karma, and a small man has the heart to create evil karma.

古文：有机也，虽恶亦或济，无机也，虽善亦不克，是故腹心之臣不可以一日无也。
现代文：如果有心机，即使是恶业也可达成；如果无心机，虽然是善业恐怕也难以完成。所以说心腹之臣不可一日没有。
English: If there is a chance, even evil karma can be achieved; if there is no chance, although it is a good karma, it may be difficult to complete. Therefore, a subordinate should not be absent for a day.

古文：司马氏，魏之贼也，有贾充之徒为之腹心之臣以济，陈胜、吴广，秦民之汤、武也，无腹心之臣以不克。
现代文：司马氏可以说是魏之叛臣贼子，然而他有贾充之徒作为自己的心腹之臣，竟也达成恶业。反观陈胜、吴广，他们可称得上是秦时的英雄，但最终为什么没有成就大业呢？
English: Sima clan can be said to be the traitorous son of Wei, but he had Jia Chong's followers as his vassals, and even achieved evil karma. On the other hand, Chen Sheng and Wu Guang, they can be called the heroes of Qin Dynasty, but in the end, why did they not achieve the great cause?

古文：何则？无腹心之臣，无机也，有机而泄也。
现代文：这就是因为他们没有心腹之臣没有心机，即使有心机也外泄了。
English: That's because they don't have a confidant, they don't have a plan, and even if they do, it's leaked.

古文：夫无机与有机而泄者，譬如虎豹食人而不知设陷阱，设陷阱而不知以物覆其上者也。
现代文：无心机与有心机而外泄，就好比虎豹想吃人而不知道设陷阱，或者是设了陷阱而不知道做好伪装一样。
English: It is like a panther trying to eat a human without knowing how to set a trap, or setting a trap without knowing how to disguise it.

古文：或曰： 机者，创业之君所假以济耳，守成之世，其奚事机而安用夫腹心之臣？ 呜呼！
现代文：有人会说： 所谓心机，只有创业之君才借助于它，作为守成之世，君子有什么必要把事情搞得那么神秘，有什么必要信用心腹之臣呢？ 
English: Some people will say: The so-called heart machine, only the prince of entrepreneurship can take advantage of it. As the world of protection, what is the need for a gentleman to make things so mysterious, what is the need to trust a subordinate?

古文：守成之世，能遂熙然如太古之世矣乎？
现代文：这真是一种可悲可叹的论调，试问，我们现今的守成之世能与太古之世相比吗？
English: This is really a sad and lamentable argument. Let me ask you, can our current world of self-preservation be compared to the ancient world?

古文：未也，吾未见机之可去也。
现代文：不能，这就说明心机不可不用。
English: It can't, which means that the heart machine must be used.

古文：且夫天下之变，常伏于安，田文所谓 子少国危，大臣未附 ，当是之时，而无腹心之臣，可为寒心哉！
现代文：况且天下之变常陷伏于所谓太平盛世，就像田文所说： 子少国危，大臣未附。 这种景况没有心腹之臣难道不叫人寒心吗？
English: Moreover, the changes in the world are often trapped in the so-called peace and prosperity, just as Tianwen said: Children are few, the country is in danger, and ministers are not attached.

古文：昔者高祖之末，天下既定矣，而又以周勃遗孝惠、孝文；武帝之末，天下既治矣，而又以霍光遗孝昭、孝宣。
现代文：过去，汉高祖临终前天下本已安定，然而刘邦仍嘱咐周勃辅佐孝惠帝、孝文帝。汉武帝临终前，天下本已大治，但他也吩咐霍光做孝昭帝和孝宣帝的心腹之臣。
English: In the past, before the death of Emperor Gaozu, the world was already stable, but Liu Bang still ordered Zhou Bo to assist Emperor Xiaowei and Emperor Xiaowen. Before the death of Emperor Han, the world was already stable, but he also ordered Huo Guang to be the vassal of Emperor Xiaozhao and Emperor Xuan.

古文：盖天下虽有泰山之势，而圣人常以累卵为心，故虽守成之世，而腹心之臣不可去也。
现代文：纵然天下有泰山不倒之稳势，圣人也常有累卵之忧心。由此可看出，守成之世，圣人不可不要心腹之臣。《左传》说 ：百官总己以听于宰相。 
English: Even though the world has the stability of Mount Tai, sages often have the anxiety of being overburdened. From this it can be seen that in the world of protection, sages cannot do without their subordinates. "Zo Yuan" said: A hundred officials always listen to the prime minister.

古文：《传》曰： 百官总己以听于冢宰。 彼冢宰者，非腹心之臣，天子安能举天下之事委之，三年不置疑于其间邪？
现代文：宰相如果不是腹心之臣，天子怎能把天下大事委托给他管理，而且三年不对他产生怀疑呢？《左传》还说： 五载一巡狩。 
English: If the Prime Minister is not a trusted vassal, how can the Son of Heaven entrust him with the management of the world's major events, and not have doubts about him for three years? "Zhuan" also said: Five years of hunting.

古文：又曰： 五载一巡狩。 彼无腹心之臣，五载一出，捐千里之畿，而谁与守邪？
现代文：如果天子无心腹之臣，在他五年一度的例行出巡时，怎能放心抛开千里之外的京城。又要谁来为他守护京城呢？
English: If the Son of Heaven does not have a willing vassal, how can he safely leave the capital, thousands of miles away, during his routine five-year tour? And who will guard the capital for him?

古文：今夫一家之中必有宗老，一介之士必有密友，以开心胸，以济缓急，奈何天子而无腹心之臣乎？
现代文：现在一家中必有宗老，一介寒士必有密友，借以开启心胸，接济缓急。为什么作为天子就不该有腹心之臣呢？
English: Nowadays, a family must have a patriarch, and a cold-hearted person must have a close friend to open his heart and receive help. Why shouldn't a son of heaven have a trusted vassal?

古文：近世之君抗然于上，而使宰相眇然于下，上下不接，而其志不通矣。
现代文：近世的一些君王威然高高在上，而使宰相渺然听命于下。君臣之间界线分明，上下之间没有沟通。
English: In recent times, some monarchs have been so high and mighty that they have made the prime minister obey their orders. There is a clear boundary between the monarch and the ministers, and there is no communication between the upper and lower levels.

古文：臣视君如天之辽然而不可亲，而君亦如天之视人，泊然无爱之之心也。
现代文：臣视君仿佛有天上的星星那么遥远而不得亲近，君主也像在天上俯视臣子，泊然无抚爱之心。
English: The vassal regards the prince as if the stars in the sky are so far away and cannot be approached, and the sovereign also looks down on the vassal as if in the sky, but there is no caressing of the heart.

古文：是以社稷之忧，彼不以为忧，君忧不辱，君辱不死。
现代文：这就容易造成这样一种状况：国家有忧，臣子不以为忧；君主有忧，臣子不感到屈辱；君主受到污辱，臣子不去为君主而死。
English: This can easily lead to the following situation: the country is worried, but the vassal does not feel worried; the monarch is worried, but the vassal does not feel humiliated; the monarch is insulted, but the vassal does not want to die for the monarch.

古文：一人誉之则用之，一人毁之则舍之。
现代文：另外，近世君主用人没有自己的尺度，有一个人说某人好就马上任用他，而有一个人说某人不好就马上割舍他。
English: In addition, modern monarchs do not have their own standards for employing people. One person says that if someone is good, he will immediately appoint him, while another person says that if someone is not good, he will immediately dismiss him.

古文：宰相避嫌畏讥且不暇，何暇尽心以忧社稷？
现代文：在这种氛围下，作为宰相，他避嫌畏讥都来不及，哪里还有时间专心以国事为忧呢？
English: In this atmosphere, as prime minister, it is too late for him to avoid suspicion and ridicule. Where is the time to concentrate on national affairs?

古文：数迁数易，视相府如传舍。
现代文：外降无常，信疑不定，使宰相视宰相之府如传舍。
English: External descent is fickle, trust is uncertain, so that the prime minister sees the prime minister's house as a place of transmission.

古文：百官泛泛于下，而天子惸惸于上，一旦有卒然之忧，吾未见其不颠沛而殒越也。
现代文：百官泛泛于下而天子高高在上，一旦有紧急之忧，君臣莫不颠沛流离甚至遭杀身之祸。
English: A hundred officials are ubiquitous below and the Son of Heaven is high above. If there is an emergency, the monarchs and ministers will be displaced and even killed.

古文：圣人之任腹心之臣也，尊之如父师，爱之如兄弟，执手入卧内，同起居寝食，知无不言，言无不尽。百人誉之不加密，百人毁之不加疏，尊其爵，厚其禄，重其权，而后可与议天下之机，虑天下之变。
现代文：所以我认为，圣人之任用心腹之臣，要尊之如父师，爱之如兄弟，相互之间无猜疑和禁忌，同起居寝食，知无不言，言无不尽，百人夸奖他我是这样，百人诋毁他我也是这样，仍使他有高贵的爵位，有优厚的俸禄，有十足的权力，然后与他共同商议国家机密大事，共同考虑应付天下之事变。
English: Therefore, I think that the duty of a saint is to be a loyal subject, to be respected as a father and a teacher, to be loved as a brother, to have no suspicions and taboos between each other, to live together, to sleep and eat together, to know everything, to say everything, to be praised by a hundred people, to be slandered by a hundred people, to still have a noble title, to have a generous salary, to have full power, and then to discuss state secrets with him, to jointly consider how to deal with world events.

古文：宰相韩琦见其书，善之，奏于朝，召试舍人院，辞疾不至，遂除秘书省校书郎。
现代文：宰相韩琦看到苏洵的文章后十分赞赏，并将此文章奏报到朝廷，苏洵因此被召试舍人院，但他以有病为由没有到任。于是又被任命为秘书省校书郎。
English: After seeing Su Shi's article, Prime Minister Han Zheng was very appreciative and reported the article to the imperial court. Su Shi was therefore summoned to a nursing home, but he did not arrive on the grounds that he was ill. He was then appointed secretary and provincial school librarian.

古文：会太常修纂建隆以来礼书，乃以为霸州文安县主簿，与陈州项城令姚辟同修礼书，为《太常因革礼》一百卷。书成，方奏未报，卒。
现代文：当时正赶上太常修撰建隆以来的礼书，故以苏洵为霸州文安县主簿，与陈州项城令姚辟一起用修礼书，并撰成《太常因革礼》一百卷，可惜书成之后，刚刚上奏而没有得到回音，苏询就去世了。
English: At that time, he was catching up with Taizhong Xiu in writing the book of honor since Jianlong, so he used Su Shi as the main book of Bazhou Wen'an County, and used the book of honor together with Chen Zhou Xiangcheng and Yao Pi, and compiled a hundred volumes of "Taizhong because of the Revolution." Unfortunately, after the book was completed, he just played it and did not get a reply, and Su Xuan died.

古文：伯虎仕于四方，每数年一归，不过旬日复去。后卒于家，有子二人。
现代文：皇帝特意赐绸、银二百给他家里，但其子苏轼辞退了所赐之钱，只求赠官，因此皇帝特赠苏洵为光禄寺丞，并敕令有关部门用船将苏洵的遗体运回四川。苏洵有文集二十卷、《谥法》三卷。
English: The emperor specially gave 200 silk and silver to his family, but his son Su Shi declined the money given and only asked for a gift of officials. Therefore, the emperor specially presented Su Shi as the president of the Guanglu Temple, and ordered the relevant departments to transport Su Shi's body back to Sichuan by ship. Su Shi had 20 volumes of anthologies and three volumes of "The Law of the Dragon."

古文：文同，字与可，梓州梓潼人，汉文翁之后，蜀人犹以 石室 名其家。
现代文：文同字与可，梓州梓潼人，是汉代文翁的后裔，四川人仍以 石室 称其家。
English: The people of Zizhou Zizhong are the descendants of the Han Dynasty writers, and the people of Sichuan still call Shishimuro their home.

古文：同方口秀眉，以学名世，操韵高洁，自号笑笑先生。
现代文：文同方口秀眉，以学问著称于世，操行风度高雅纯洁，自号为笑笑先生。
English: Wen Tong Fangkou Xiu Mei, known in the world for his learning, has an elegant and pure demeanor, and calls himself Mr. Smile.

古文：善诗、文、篆、隶、行、草、飞白。
现代文：他擅长诗歌、文章、篆书、隶书、行书、草书和一种笔画中丝丝露白的飞白书法。
English: He excels at poetry, prose, calligraphy, cursive, cursive, and a type of flying white calligraphy that is barely visible in the brushstrokes.

古文：文彦博守成都，奇之，致书同曰： 与可襟韵洒落，如晴云秋月，尘埃不到。 司马光、苏轼尤敬重之。
现代文：文彦博任成都太守时，对他感到惊奇，写信给他说 ：与可兄襟怀坦荡，风韵洒落，有如晴云秋月，一尘不染。 司马光、苏轼尤其敬重文同。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi, Chengdu's chief magistrate, was surprised by him and wrote to him, saying, "With my brother, I can be open-hearted, with a lively demeanor, like a cloudless moon, spotless.

古文：轼，同之从表弟也。
现代文：苏轼是文同的从表弟。
English: Su Shi is the second cousin of Wen Tong.

古文：同又善画竹，初不自贵重，四方之人持缣素请者，足相蹑于门。
现代文：文同又善于画竹，他画的竹，开始自己不知道宝贵，后来四方的人都拿着丝绸来请他画竹，人们的足迹不绝于其门。
English: Wen Tong was also good at painting bamboo. At first, he did not know that the bamboo he painted was precious. Later, people from all over the world took silk to ask him to paint bamboo. People's footprints are constantly at his door.

古文：同厌之，投缣于地，骂曰： 吾将以为袜。 好事者传之以为口实。
现代文：文同非常讨厌这种情况，气愤地将丝绸丢在地上，骂道 ：我将要把这些都做成袜子在地上踩。 好事的人就把他这句话传播作为一种口实。
English: Wen Tong hated this situation so much that he angrily threw the silk on the ground and cursed, "I'm going to make these into socks and trample them on the ground." Good people spread his words as an excuse.

古文：初举进士，稍迁太常博士、集贤校理，知陵州，又知洋州。
现代文：文同起初考中进士的时候，逐渐迁升为太常博士、集贤校理，又知陵州，后知洋州。
English: At the beginning of the junior high school entrance examination, Wen Tong was gradually promoted to Taizhong Doctor, Shixian Schoolmaster, also known as Lingzhou, and later known as Yangzhou.

古文：元丰初，知湖州，明年，至陈州宛丘驿，忽留不行，沐浴衣冠，正坐而卒。
现代文：宋神宗元丰初年，他知湖州，第二年，他到陈州宛丘驿，忽然留住不走了，自己洗完澡，穿好衣服，戴上帽子，端端正正地坐在那里停止了呼吸。
English: In the first year of Song Shenzong Yuanfeng, he went to Huzhou. In the second year, he went to Chenzhou Wanqiu, but suddenly he couldn't leave. He took a shower, got dressed, put on a hat, and sat there in a proper manner and stopped breathing.

古文：崔公度尝与同同为馆职，见同京南，殊无言，及将别，但云： 明日复来乎？
现代文：崔公度曾经和文同一起同任过馆职，在京都南面遇见了文同，两人都没有说话，等到将要分别，文同只是说 ：明天你还来吗？
English: Cui Gongduo had once held the post of librarian together with Wen Tong. They met Wen Tong in the south of Kyoto. Neither of them spoke. When they were about to part, Wen Tong just said, "Are you still coming tomorrow?"

古文：与子话。 公度意以 话 为 画 ，明日再往，同曰： 与公话。 则左右顾，恐有听者。
现代文：崔公度把 话 听成了 画 ，以为文同要给他画。第二天再往，文同对他说： 我要与你话。 说完左右查看，好像怕有人听到的样子。
English: Cui Gongdu took the words as a picture and thought that Wen Tong wanted to draw for him. The next day, Wen Tong said to him, "I want to talk to you." After he finished speaking, he looked around as if he was afraid someone would overhear.

古文：公度方知同将有言，非画也。
现代文：崔公度方才恍然大悟，知道文同将要对他有话说，并不是要给他画。
English: Cui Gongdu suddenly realized that Wen Tong was going to talk to him, not to draw for him.

古文：同曰： 吾闻人不妄语者，舌可过鼻。 即吐其舌，三叠之如饼状，引之至眉间，公度大惊。
现代文：文同说： 我听到人们传说人如果平时不乱说一句话，他的舌头伸出来可以超过鼻子，你看我的舌头怎样。 于是就吐出舌头，把他的舌头折成三叠像烙的饼一样，又引伸它抵到眉间，崔公度当时大为惊奇。
English: Wen Tong said: I heard people say that if a person does not say a word out of order, his tongue can extend beyond the nose. Look how my tongue is. So he spat out his tongue, folded his tongue into three stacks like a baked cake, and stretched it to reach his eyebrows. Cui Gongdu was very surprised at the time.

古文：及京中传同死，公度乃悟所见非生者。
现代文：及到京中听说文同已经死了，崔公度才知道他所见到的文同并不是活着的文同。
English: When he arrived in Beijing and heard that Wen Tong had died, Cui Gongdu knew that the Wen Tong he saw was not the living Wen Tong.

古文：有《丹渊集》四十卷行于世。
现代文：文同虽然死了，但他写的《丹渊集》四十卷却流传于世。
English: Although he is dead, the forty volumes of "Tanyuan Collection" written by him have been passed down to the world.

