古文：苏秦为赵合从，说齐宣王曰： 齐南有太山，东有琅邪，西有清河，北有渤海，此所谓四塞之国也。
现代文：苏秦为赵国合纵的事去游说齐宣王道： 齐国南有泰山，东有琅邪山，西有清河，北有渤海，正是有四面要塞的金城汤池之国。
English: Su Qin lobbied Qi Xuan Wang for the unification of Zhao: Qi has Mount Tai in the south, Mount Qi in the east, the Qinghe River in the west, and the Bohai Sea in the north. It is a country with four fortresses.

古文：齐地方二千里，带甲数十万，粟如丘山。
现代文：齐国土地方圆两千里，有几十万兵力，粮食堆积如山。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of soldiers and mountains of grain within a 2,000-mile radius of Qi's territory.

古文：齐车之良，五家之兵，疾如锥矢，战如雷电，解如风雨，即有军役，未尝倍太山、绝清河、涉渤海也。
现代文：齐国战车精良，又有五国军队的支援，作战集结就像射出的箭一样快，战斗起来像闪电一般的凶猛，解散撤退时像风收雨住一样快捷；即使发生对外战争，敌军也从没有越过过泰山，渡过清河，跨过渤海。
English: Qi's chariots are excellent, and they are supported by the armies of five countries. The combat assembly is as fast as the arrows shot, the battle is as fierce as lightning, and the dissolution and retreat are as quick as the wind and rain; even if there is a foreign war, the enemy army has never crossed Mount Tai, crossed the Qinghe River, and crossed the Bohai Sea.

古文：临淄之中七万户，臣窃度之，下户三男子，三七二十一万，不待发于远县，而临淄之卒，固以二十一万矣。
现代文：首都临淄有七万户人家，平均每户有三名壮士，三七就是二十一万人，根本不必征调远方的兵力，光是临淄一城就可以组成二十一万人的大军。
English: The capital Linyi has 70,000 households, with an average of three able-bodied people per household, and 37 is 210,000 people. There is no need to conscript soldiers from far away, and Linyi alone can form an army of 210,000 people.

古文：临淄甚富而实，其民无不吹竽、鼓瑟、击筑、弹琴、斗鸡、走犬、六博、踘者；临淄之途，车辇击，人肩摩，连衽成帷，举袂成幕，挥汗成雨；家敦而富，志高而扬。
现代文：临淄人民非常富庶，平常人都会吹竽、鼓瑟、击筑、弹琴、斗鸡、赛狗、赌博、踢球，可见临淄人民的生活多么讲究。临淄的街道上车水马龙、车轴相接、摩肩接踵，把衣襟连起来可成帷帐，把衣袖举起来可成幔幕，擦一把汗可以形成雨。家家生活都非常富裕，人人志气极为高昂。
English: The people of Linfen are very affluent. Ordinary people can play the bagpipes, drums, drums, construction, piano, cockfighting, greyhound racing, gambling, and football. This shows how particular the people of Linfen are about their lives. The streets of Linfen are full of traffic jams, axles abreast, and shoulders abreast. The lapels of clothes can be connected to form a curtain, the sleeves can be lifted to form a screen, and a puff of sweat can form rain. Every family is very affluent, and everyone's spirit is extremely high.

古文：夫以大王之贤与齐之强，天下不能当。
现代文：凭大王的贤明和齐国的富强，天下诸侯都不敢跟齐国对抗。
English: With the wisdom of the great king and the wealth and strength of Qi, all the princes in the world would not dare to oppose Qi.

古文：今乃西面事秦，窃为大王羞之。
现代文：不料如今齐国竟然往西去作秦国的附庸，臣私下实在为大王感到羞愧。
English: Unexpectedly, Qi went west to become a vassal of Qin. Privately, the vassal was ashamed of the great king.

古文： 且夫韩、魏之所以畏秦者，以与秦接界也。
现代文： 更何况韩、魏两国之所以畏惧秦国，是因为他们跟秦国接壤。
English: What's more, the reason why Han and Wei feared Qin was because they shared a border with Qin.

古文：兵出而相当，不至十日，而战胜存亡之机决矣。
现代文：秦国发动军队攻打韩、魏，用不了十天的时间，战争胜败国家存亡的命运就已经决定了。
English: Qin launched an army to attack Han and Wei, and it took less than ten days for the fate of the country's survival to be decided.

古文：韩、魏战而胜秦，则兵半折，四境不守；战而不胜，以亡随其后。
现代文：如果韩、魏两国能够战胜秦军，那么韩、魏两国的军队必然要损失一半，四面的边境也就无法防守；如果韩、魏两国的军队战败了，那么接下来就是灭亡了。
English: If Han and Wei were able to defeat the Qin army, then the armies of Han and Wei would inevitably lose half of their strength, and the four-sided border could not be defended; if the armies of Han and Wei were defeated, then the next step would be their demise.

古文：是故韩、魏之所以重与秦战而轻为之臣也。
现代文：这样一来，韩、魏两国就不敢轻易地和秦国开战，而是轻易地向秦国称臣了。
English: As a result, Han and Wei countries did not dare to fight against Qin easily, but easily declared their allegiance to Qin.

古文：今秦攻齐则不然，倍韩、魏之地，至闱阳晋之道，径亢父之险，车不得方轨，马不得并行，百人守险，千人不能过也。
现代文：现在秦假如攻打齐国，情形就有所不同，因为在秦国的背后有韩、魏扯秦的后腿，同时秦军必然经过卫地阳晋的要道和亢父的险阻，在那里车马都不能并行，只要有个人守住天险即使人也无法通过。
English: Now, if Qin attacks Qi, the situation will be different, because behind Qin there are Han and Wei pulling Qin's hind legs. At the same time, Qin's army will inevitably pass through the important roads of Wei, Yang and Jin and the dangerous obstacles of Xuanfu, where cars and horses can not be parallel, as long as there are people guarding the natural hazards, even people can not pass.

古文：秦虽欲深入，则狼顾，恐韩、魏之议其后也。
现代文：秦国虽然想发兵深入，但是又必须顾及到后方，惟恐韩、魏从后偷袭。
English: Although Qin wanted to send troops deep into the country, they had to consider the rear, fearing that Han and Wei would attack from behind.

古文：是古恫疑虚猲，高跃而不敢进，则秦不能害齐，亦已明矣。
现代文：所以秦兵只是虚张声势威胁向齐出兵，实际上却犹疑不定不敢进攻，可见秦国不能攻齐已经很明显。
English: Therefore, the Qin soldiers were only bluffing and threatening to send troops to the Qi, but in fact they hesitated and did not dare to attack. It can be seen that it is already clear that Qin cannot attack Qi.

古文：夫不深料秦之不奈我何也，而欲西面事秦，是群臣之计过也。
现代文：大王不仔细估量秦国并不敢对齐国如何，反倒想要往西给秦国当附庸国，这就是群臣在谋划上的错误。
English: The great king did not carefully assess the state of Qin and did not dare to align the country, but instead wanted to go west to be a vassal state of Qin. This was the mistake of the ministers in planning.

古文：今无臣事秦之名，而有强国之实，臣固愿大王之少留计。 
现代文：现在齐国并无臣事秦国的名分，而是具有强国的实力，但愿大王多加考虑！ 
English: At present, Qi is not a subject of Qin, but has the strength of a powerful country. I hope the king will give it more consideration!

古文：齐王曰： 寡人不敏，今主君以赵王之教诏之，敬奉社稷以从。 
现代文：齐宣王说： 寡人不聪敏，今天你拿赵王的诏命赐教，我愿敬奉国家听从你的计策。 
English: King Qi Xuan said, "Some people aren't smart. Today, you're teaching me about King Zhao's edict. I'm willing to serve the country and follow your strategy."

