古文：宋子曰：首山之采，肇自轩辕，源流远矣哉。
现代文：宋先生说：相传上古黄帝时代已经开始在首山采铜铸鼎，可见冶铸的历史真是渊源已久了。
English: Mr. Song said: According to legend, the era of the ancient Yellow Emperor had already begun to mine copper in Shoushan, and it can be seen that the history of metallurgy has a long history.

古文：九牧贡金，用襄禹鼎，从此火金功用日异而月新矣。
现代文：自从全国各地都进贡金属铜给夏禹铸成象征天下大权的九个大鼎以来，冶铸技术也就日新月异地发展起来了。
English: Since all over the country paid tribute metal copper to Xia Yu to cast nine large tripods symbolizing the power of the world, metallurgical casting technology has also developed rapidly.

古文：夫金之生也，以土为母，及其成形而效用于世也，母模子肖，亦犹是焉。
现代文：金属本是从泥土中产生出来的，当它被铸造成器物来供人使用时，它的形状又跟泥土造的母模一个样。这正是所谓 以土为母 ， 母模子肖 。
English: The metal was originally produced from the soil, and when it was cast into objects for human use, its shape was the same as that of the mother mold made from the soil. This is the so-called mother of the soil, the mother mold.

古文：精粗巨细之间，但见钝者司舂，利者司垦，薄其身以媒合水火而百姓繁，虚其腹以振荡空灵而八音起。
现代文：铸件之中有精有粗，有大有小，作用各不相同。君且看：钝拙的可以用来舂东西，锋利的可以用来耕地，薄壁的可以用来烧水煮食而使民间百姓人丁兴旺，空腔的可以用来振荡空气而使声波振荡，美妙的乐章得以悠然响起。
English: Among the castings, there are fine and coarse, large and small, with different functions. Just look: the blunt one can be used to pick up things, the sharp one can be used to cultivate the land, the thin-walled one can be used to boil water for cooking and make the common people prosperous, and the hollow one can be used to oscillate the air and make the sound waves oscillate, allowing the wonderful music to sound leisurely.

古文：愿者肖仙梵之身，而尘凡有至象。巧者夺上清之魄，而海宇遍流泉，即屈指唱筹，岂能悉数！
现代文：善良虔诚的信徒们模拟仙界神佛之形态为人间造出了精致逼真的偶像，心灵手巧的工匠抓住天上月亮的隐约轮廓而造出了天下到处流通的钱币。诸如此类，任凭人们屈指头、唱筹码，又哪里能够说得完呢？
English: Good-hearted and pious believers have created exquisite and lifelike idols for people by imitating the forms of gods and Buddhas in the spirit world, and ingenious craftsmen have grasped the faint outline of the moon in the sky and created coins that circulate everywhere in the world. Such things, let people point fingers and sing chips, where can it end?

古文：要之，人力不至于此。
现代文：简而言之，这些东西纯靠人力是办不到的。鼎
English: In short, these things cannot be done by manpower alone.

古文：○鼎凡铸鼎，唐虞以前不可考。唯禹铸九鼎，则因九州贡赋壤则已成，入贡方物岁例已定，疏浚河道已通，禹贡业已成书。
现代文：铸鼎的历史在尧舜以前就已无法考证了，至于传说夏禹铸造九鼎，那是因为当时九州根据各地现有条件和生产能力而缴纳赋税的条例已经颁布，各地每年进贡的物产和品种已经有了具体规定，河道也已经疏通，《禹贡》这部书已经写成了。
English: As for the legend of Xia Yu's casting of the Nine Treasures, it is because at that time, the Kyushu regulations on paying taxes according to the existing conditions and production capacity of various regions had been promulgated, the products and varieties of the annual tribute from various regions had been specified, the river had been cleared, and the book "Yugong" had been written.

古文：恐后世人君增赋重敛，后代侯国冒贡奇淫，后日治水之人不由其道，故铸之于鼎。不如书籍之易去，使有所遵守，不可移易，此九鼎所为铸也。
现代文：但是由于恐怕后世的帝王增加赋税来敛取百姓财物，各地诸侯用一些由奇技淫巧做出来的东西冒充贡品，以及后来治水的人也不再按照原来的一套办法，于是，夏禹把这一切都铸刻在鼎上，令规也就不会像书籍那样容易丢失了，使后人有所遵守而不能任意更改，这就是当时夏禹铸造九鼎的原因。
English: However, fearing that the emperors of later generations would increase taxes to collect people's property, the local lords used some things made by magic tricks to pretend to be tributes, and later the water control people no longer followed the original set of methods, so Xia Yu casted all of this on the tripod, and the rules and regulations would not be lost as easily as the books, so that later generations could abide by them and not change them arbitrarily. This was the reason why Xia Yu cast the nine tripods at that time.

古文：年代久远，末学寡闻，如珠、暨鱼、狐狸、织皮之类皆其刻画于鼎上者，或漫灭改形未可知，陋者遂以为怪物。
现代文：经过了许多年代，刻在鼎上的画像，如蚌珠、暨鱼、狐狸、毛织物以及兽皮之类，也可能因为锈蚀而变了样，学问不深和见识浅薄的人就以为这是怪物。
English: After many years, the images engraved on the crown, such as pearls, fish, foxes, woolen fabrics and animal skins, may also be changed due to corrosion, and people with little knowledge and understanding think it is a monster.

古文：故《春秋传》有使知神奸、不逢魑魅之说也。
现代文：因此，《左传》中才有禹铸鼎是为了使百姓懂得识别妖魔鬼怪而避免受到妖魔伤害的说法。
English: Therefore, in "The Legend of Zuo," it is said that Yu Jiding was created in order to enable the people to know how to identify demons and avoid being harmed by demons.

古文：此鼎入秦始亡。而春秋时郜大鼎、莒二方鼎，皆其列国自造，即有刻画必失禹贡初旨。
现代文：这些鼎到了秦朝时就绝迹了，而春秋时期郜国的大鼎和莒国的两个方鼎，都是诸侯国铸造的，即使有一些刻画，也必定不合于《禹贡》的原意，只不过名为古旧之物罢了。
English: These tripods became extinct by the time of the Qin Dynasty, while the large tripod and the two square tripods of the Spring and Autumn Period were cast by the feudal states. Even if there are some depictions, they are certainly not in line with the original meaning of "Yugong," but they are just old things.

古文：此但存名为古物，后世图籍繁多，百倍上古，亦不复铸鼎，特并志之。
现代文：后世的图书已经多了好几百倍，就不必再铸鼎了，这里特地提一下。
English: Since the number of books in later generations has increased several hundredfold, it is no longer necessary to create a masterpiece. I would like to make a special mention here.

古文：○钟
现代文：钟
English: Bells

古文：凡钟为金乐之首，其声一宣，大者闻十里，小者亦及里之余。
现代文：在所有用金属制成的乐器中，钟排在最重要的位置。钟声大作时，最远十里之外都可以听到，而少说也能传出一里多。
English: Of all the musical instruments made of metal, the glockenspiel is the most important. When the bell is in full swing, it can be heard up to ten miles away, and at the very least it can travel more than a mile.

古文：故君视朝、官出署必用以集众，而乡饮酒礼必用以和歌，梵宫仙殿必用以明摄谒者之城，幽起鬼神之敬。
现代文：所以，无论是皇帝临朝听政还是官府升堂审案，都一定会依靠鸣钟来聚集众人。地方上举行各种官方宴会时，也多会用到编钟来伴奏。寺庙则也需要用钟声来打动阳世间朝拜者们的诚心，唤起对阴间鬼神的敬意。
English: Therefore, whether the emperor is in the imperial court to listen to the government or the government is in the court to hear the case, they will certainly rely on the ringing of bells to gather people. When various official banquets are held in local areas, bells are often used to accompany. Temples also need to use bells to impress the sincerity of worshipers in the world and evoke respect for ghosts and gods in the underworld.

古文：凡铸钟高者铜质，下者铁质。
现代文：铸钟的原料，以铜为上等好材料，以铁为下等材料。
English: The raw materials for casting bells are copper, which is a superior material, and iron, which is an inferior material.

古文：今北极朝钟则纯用响铜，每口共费铜四万七千斤、锡四千斤、金五十两、银一百二十两于内。成器亦重二万斤，身高一丈一尺五寸，双龙蒲牢高二尺七寸，口径八尺，则今朝钟之制也。
现代文：现在朝廷上所悬挂的朝钟完全是用响铜铸成的，每口钟总共花费铜四万七千斤、锡四千斤、黄金五十两、银一百二十两，铸成以后重达两万斤，身高一丈一尺五寸，上面的双龙蒲牢图像高二尺七寸，直径八尺。这就是当今朝钟的规格。
English: The morning bell now hanging in the imperial court is made entirely of ringing copper. Each bell costs a total of 47,000 kg of copper, 4,000 kg of tin, 52 kg of gold and 122 kg of silver. After casting, it weighs up to 20,000 kg. It is one foot and five inches tall, and the above image of the Double Dragon Temple is two feet and seven inches high and eight feet in diameter. This is the specification of today's morning bell.

古文：凡造万钧钟与铸鼎法同，掘坑深丈几尺，燥筑其中如房舍，埏泥作模骨，用石灰、三和土筑，不使有丝毫隙拆。
现代文：铸造万斤以上的大朝钟之类的钟和铸鼎的方法是相同的。先挖出一个一丈多深的坑，使坑内保持干燥，并把它构筑得好像房舍一样。将石灰、细砂和黏土塑造调和成的土作为内模的塑型材料，内模要求做得没有丝毫的裂缝。
English: The method of casting a bell such as a large morning bell weighing more than 10,000 kg is the same as the method of casting a crane. First, a deep pit is dug, the inside of the pit is kept dry, and it is constructed like a house. Lime, fine sand and clay are molded into a harmonized soil as the molding material for the inner mold. The inner mold is required to be made without the slightest crack.

古文：干燥之后以牛油、黄蜡附其上数寸。
现代文：内模干燥以后，用牛油加黄蜡在上面涂抹达几寸厚。
English: After the inner mold is dry, use butter and yellow wax to smear cream on it up to a few inches thick.

古文：油蜡分两：油居什八，蜡居什二，其上高蔽抵晴雨。
现代文：油和蜡的比例是：牛油约占十分之八，黄蜡占十分之二。在钟模型的顶上搭建一个高棚用以防日晒雨淋。
English: The ratio of oil to wax is: butter accounts for about eight out of ten, and yellow wax accounts for two out of ten.A high shed is built on top of the clock model to protect it from the sun and rain.

古文：油蜡墁定，然后雕镂书文、物象，丝发成就。
现代文：油蜡层涂好并用墁刀荡平整后，就可以在上面精雕细刻上各种所需的文字和图案，再用舂碎和筛选过的极细的泥粉和炭末，调成糊状，逐层涂铺在油蜡上约有几寸厚。
English: After the wax layer is coated and flattened with a scythe, it is possible to finely carve all kinds of required text and patterns on it, and then use the finely chopped and sifted peat powder and carbon powder to make a paste and apply it to the wax layer by layer about a few inches thick.

古文：然后舂筛绝细土与炭末为泥，涂墁以渐而加厚至数寸，使其内外透体干坚，外施火力炙化其中油蜡，从口上孔隙熔流净尽，则其中空处即钟鼎托体之区也。
现代文：等到外模的里外都自然干透坚固后，便在上面用慢火烤炙，使里面的油蜡溶化而从模型的开口处流干净。这时，内外模之间的空腔就成了将来钟、鼎成型的地方了。每流出一斤油蜡后空出的空间，就要注入十斤的铜以作为填充。
English: After waiting until both the inside and outside of the mold are naturally dry and firm, the top is baked with a slow fire to melt the wax inside and make it flow cleanly from the opening of the model. At this time, the cavity between the inner and outer molds becomes the place for the clock and the tripod. For every pound of wax that flows out, ten pounds of copper must be injected to fill the space.

古文：凡油蜡一斤虚位，填铜十斤。
现代文：所以，如果塑模时用去十斤油蜡，就需要准备一百斤铜来铸造。
English: Therefore, if ten catties of oil wax are used for molding, it is necessary to prepare one hundred catties of copper for casting.

古文：塑油时尽油十斤，则备铜百斤以俟之。中既空净，则议熔铜。
现代文：内外模之间的油蜡已经流净后，就该准备将铜熔掉。当模里的油蜡完全流干净时，就应准备把铜熔掉。
English: After the oil wax between the inner and outer molds has flowed cleanly, it should be prepared to melt the copper. When the oil wax in the mold is completely clean, it should be prepared to melt the copper.

古文：凡火铜至万钧，非手足所能驱使。四面筑炉，四面泥作槽道，其道上口承接炉中，下口斜低以就钟鼎入铜孔，槽傍一齐红炭织围。
现代文：熔掉一万斤的铜并非仅靠人力就可以完成，应该在钟模的四周架上熔炉，并且做出槽道，使槽道的上端与熔炉的出口相接合，再将槽道的下端设置为低斜状，并与钟鼎的灌铜孔相连接。在槽道的两边，要用烧红的炭火将其围绕起来以便保温。
English: Melting ten thousand kilos of copper is not something that can be done by human effort alone. A furnace should be built on the perimeter frame of the bell mould, and a channel should be made so that the upper end of the channel is connected to the outlet of the furnace, and the lower end of the channel is set to a low slope and connected to the copper filling hole of the bell. On both sides of the channel, it should be surrounded with red-hot charcoal to keep it warm.

古文：洪炉熔化时，决开槽梗，一齐如水横流，从槽道中枧注而下，钟鼎成矣。
现代文：等炉子里的铜熔化之后，便可把事先用泥堵塞住的出口打开，这时铜溶液就会像流水一样沿着槽道往下，一直灌进模子里。钟、鼎就铸造成了。
English: After the copper in the furnace is melted, the outlet that was previously blocked with mud can be opened. At this time, the copper solution will flow down the channel like running water and will be poured into the mold. The bell and the tripod are then cast.

古文：凡万钧铁钟与炉、釜，其法皆同，而塑法则由人省啬也。
现代文：若要铸造一万斤重的铁钟和香炉、大锅，其方法也与上面介绍的相同，不过具体模型的制造可以根据不同的条件和要求，做出适当的调整。
English: If you want to cast a 10,000-pound iron bell and incense burner, cauldron, the method is the same as that described above, but the manufacture of a specific model can be adjusted according to different conditions and requirements.

古文：若千斤以内者则不须如此劳费，但多捏十数锅炉。
现代文：至于铸造千斤以内的钟，就不必这么费劲了，只要制造十来个小炉子就行了。
English: As for casting a bell weighing less than a kilo, there is no need to go to such lengths, just make a dozen or so small furnaces.

古文：炉形如箕，铁条作骨，附泥做就。
现代文：这种炉膛的形状像个箕子，用铁条当骨架，用泥塑造成。
English: This hearth is shaped like a rake, with iron bars as a skeleton, molded from mud.

古文：其下先以铁片圈筒直透作两孔，以受杠穿。
现代文：炉体下部的两侧要穿两个孔，并垫上两根圆筒状的铁片以便于将抬杠穿过。
English: Two holes should be drilled on both sides of the lower part of the furnace body, and two cylindrical iron sheets should be placed to facilitate the lifting bar to pass through.

古文：其炉垫于土墩之上，各炉一齐鼓鞲熔化。
现代文：这些炉子都平放在土墩上，所有的炉子都一起鼓风熔铜。
English: These furnaces were all laid flat on the mound, and all the furnaces blew together to melt the copper.

古文：化后以两杠穿炉下，轻者两人，重者数人抬起，倾注模底孔中。
现代文：铜熔化以后，就用两根杠穿过炉底，轻的两个人，重的几个人，一起抬起炉子，把铜熔液倾注进模孔中。
English: After the copper is melted, two rods are used to pass through the bottom of the furnace. Two light people and several heavy people lift the furnace together and pour the molten copper into the mold hole.

古文：甲炉既倾，乙炉疾继之，丙炉又疾继之，其中自然粘合。
现代文：甲炉刚刚倾注完了，乙炉也跟着迅速倾注，丙炉再跟着倾注，这样，模子里的铜就会自然黏合。
English: Furnace A has just finished pouring, furnace B is also pouring quickly, and furnace C is pouring again. In this way, the copper in the mold will naturally bond.

古文：若相承迂缓，则先入之质欲冻，后者不粘，衅所由生也。
现代文：如果各炉倾注互相承接太慢，那些先注入的铜熔液都将近冷凝了，就难以和后注入的铜熔液互相黏合而出现夹缝。
English: If the furnaces pour and receive each other too slowly, the copper melt injected first will be nearly condensed, and it will be difficult to bond with the copper melt injected later, resulting in cracks.

古文：凡铁钟模不重费油蜡者，先埏土作外模，剖破两边形或为两截，以子口串合，翻刻书文于其上。
现代文：大体而言，铸造铁钟的模子不需要耗费太多的油蜡，方法是：先用黏土制成剖成左右两半的或是上、下两截的外模，并在剖面边上制成有接合的子母口，然后将文字和图案反刻在外模的内壁上。
English: Generally speaking, the mold for casting an iron clock does not need to consume too much oil wax. The method is: first, the outer mold is made of clay and cut into the left and right halves or the upper and lower two sections, and a sub-mother joint is made on the edge of the section, and then the text and pattern are engraved on the inner wall of the outer mold.

古文：内模缩小分寸，空其中体，精美而就。
现代文：内模要缩小一定的尺寸，以使内外模之间留有一定的空间，这要经过精密的计算来确定。
English: The inner mould should be reduced in size to leave a certain amount of space between the inner and outer moulds. This should be determined through precise calculations.

古文：外模刻文后以牛油滑之，使他日器无粘，然后盖上，泥合其缝而受铸焉。
现代文：外模刻好文字和图案以后，还要用牛油涂滑它，以免以后浇铸时铸件粘模。然后把内、外模组合起来，并用泥浆把内外模的接口缝封好，便可以进行浇铸了。
English: After the text and pattern are engraved on the outer mold, it is necessary to lubricate it with butter to avoid sticking the casting during casting. Then the inner and outer molds are combined, and the interface of the inner and outer molds is sealed with mud, and then casting can be performed.

古文：巨磬、云板，法皆仿此。
现代文：巨磬和云板的铸法与此相类似。
English: The casting method of the giant dragonfly and the cloud plate is similar to this.

古文：○釜
现代文：釜
English: Kettle

古文：凡釜储水受火，日用司命系焉。
现代文：铁锅是用来烧水、煮饭的，人们在日常生活中都离不开它。
English: An iron pot is used to boil water and cook rice. People cannot live without it in their daily lives.

古文：铸用生铁或废铸铁器为质。
现代文：铸造铁锅时，应使用生铁或废弃的铸铁器具作原料。
English: When casting iron pots, pig iron or waste cast iron utensils should be used as raw materials.

古文：大小无定式，常用者径口二尺为率，厚约二分。小者径口半之，厚薄不减。
现代文：锅的大小通常没有固定的规格，常用的铁锅直径在二尺左右，厚约二分，小一些的直径约为一尺，而厚度则是一样的。
English: The size of the pot usually has no fixed specifications, the commonly used iron pot has a diameter of about two feet and a thickness of about two minutes, the smaller one has a diameter of about one foot, and the thickness is the same.

古文：其模内外为两层，先塑其内，俟久日干燥，合釜形分寸于上，然后塑外层盖模。
现代文：铸铁锅所用的模型也分为内、外两层，首先要制作内模，等其干燥后，再根据锅的实际尺寸，另外造出外层的盖模。
English: The model used for cast iron pots is also divided into inner and outer two layers. First, the inner mold must be made. After it dries, the outer cover mold is made according to the actual size of the pot.

古文：此塑匠最精，差之毫厘则无用。
现代文：这个外模的尺寸应做得非常精确，如果稍微差一点，模也就没有用了。
English: The dimensions of this mold should be very precise, and if they are slightly off, the mold is useless.

古文：模既成就干燥，然后泥捏冶炉，其中如釜，受生铁于中，其炉背透管通风，炉面捏嘴出铁。
现代文：模已塑好并干燥以后，用泥捏造熔铁炉，炉膛要像个锅，用来装生铁和废铁原料。炉背接一条可以通到风箱的管，炉的前面捏一个出铁嘴。
English: After the mold has been shaped and dried, the molten iron furnace is fabricated with mud. The furnace should be like a pot, used to hold pig iron and scrap iron raw materials. A pipe that can be connected to the bellows is connected to the back of the furnace, and a nozzle is pinched out of the front of the furnace.

古文：一炉所化约十釜、二十釜之料。
现代文：每一炉所熔化的铁水大约可浇铸十到二十口锅。
English: The molten iron water from each furnace can cast about ten to twenty pots.

古文：铁化如水，以泥固纯铁柄杓从嘴受注。
现代文：生铁熔化成铁水以后，用镶嵌着泥的带手柄的铁勺子从出铁嘴接盛铁水，一勺子铁水大约可以浇铸一口铁锅。
English: After the pig iron is melted into molten iron, the molten iron spoon with a handle inlaid with mud is used to pour the molten iron from the nozzle. One spoonful of molten iron can be used to cast an iron pot.

古文：一杓约一釜之料，倾注模底孔内，不俟冷定即揭开盖模，看视罅绽未周之处。此时釜身尚通红未黑，有不到处即浇少许于上补完，打湿草片按平，若无痕迹。
现代文：将铁水倾注到模子里，不必等到它冷下来就揭开外模，查看有没有裂缝。这时锅身还是通红的，如果发现有些地方铁水浇的不足时，马上补浇少量的铁水，并用湿草片按平，不让锅留下修补过的痕迹。
English: Pour the molten iron into the mold, do not wait until it cools down to open the mold to see if there are any cracks. At this time, the pot body is still reddish, if it is found that there is a shortage of molten iron in some places, immediately add a small amount of molten iron, and use wet grass to flatten it, so that the pot does not leave traces of repair.

古文：凡生铁初铸釜，补绽者甚多，唯废破釜铁熔铸，则无复隙漏。
现代文：生铁初次铸锅时，需要这样补浇的地方较多，只有用废铁锅回炉熔铸的，才不会有隙漏。
English: When pig iron is cast for the first time, there are more places that require such topping up. Only if the waste iron pot is returned to the furnace for casting, there will be no gap.

古文：凡釜既成后，试法以轻杖敲之，响声如木者佳，声有差响则铁质未熟之故，他日易为损坏。
现代文：铁锅铸成以后，辨别它的好坏的方法是用小木棒敲击它。如果敲出的声音像敲木头的时候那样沉实，说明这就是一口好锅；如果有其他杂音，就说明铁水的含碳量没处理好造成铁质未熟或者是铁水中杂质没有清除干净，这种锅将来就容易损坏。
English: After the iron pot is cast, the best way to tell whether it is good or bad is to knock on it with a small wooden stick. If the sound is as solid as when knocking on wood, it means that this is a good pot; if there are other noises, it means that the carbon content of the molten iron has not been treated well, causing the iron to be immature or the impurities in the molten iron have not been removed cleanly, and the pot will be easily damaged in the future.

古文：海内丛林大处，铸有千僧锅者，煮糜受米二石，此真痴物也。
现代文：国内有的大寺庙里，铸有一种 千僧锅 ，可以煮两石米的粥，这真是一个笨重的家什。
English: In some large temples in China, there is a kind of thousand monk pot, which can cook porridge of two stone meters, which is really a cumbersome utensil.

古文：○像
现代文：像
English: Image:

古文：凡铸仙佛铜像，塑法与朝钟同。
现代文：铸造仙佛铜像，塑模方法与朝钟一样。
English: A bronze statue of a celestial Buddha is cast. The moulding method is the same as for a morning bell.

古文：但钟鼎不可接，而像则数接为之，故写时为力甚易，但接模之法分寸最精云。
现代文：但是钟、鼎不能接铸，而仙佛铜像却可以分铸后再接合铸造，所以在浇注方面是比较容易的。不过，这种接模工艺对精确度的要求却是最高的。
English: However, the bell and the tripod cannot be cast, but the bronze statue of the Buddha can be cast separately and then cast together, so it is relatively easy in terms of casting. However, this joining process requires the highest accuracy.

古文：○炮
现代文：炮
English: Artillery

古文：凡铸炮，西洋、红夷、佛郎机等用熟铜造，信炮、短提铳等用生熟铜兼半造，襄阳、盏口、大将军、二将军等用铁造。
现代文：大体说来，荷兰和比利时等国铸炮用的是熟铜，信炮和短枪等用的是生、熟铜各一半，襄阳炮、盏口炮、大将军炮乃至二将军炮等则用的是铁。镜
English: Generally speaking, cannons from countries such as the Netherlands and Belgium are made of cast and finished copper, guns and short guns are made of half raw and half finished copper, and Xiangyang guns, quiver guns, large generals and even second generals are made of iron.

古文：○镜凡铸镜，模用灰沙，铜用锡和。
现代文：铸镜的模子是用糠灰加细沙做成的，镜本身的材料是铜与锡的合金。
English: The mould of the cast mirror is made of eucalyptus ash mixed with fine sand, while the mirror itself is made of an alloy of copper and tin.

古文：《考工记》亦云： 金锡相半，渭之鉴、燧之剂。 
现代文：《考工记》中有云： 金和锡各一半的合金，是适用于铸镜的合金配比。 
English: There is a saying in "Kaohong Ji": An alloy of half gold and half tin is an alloy ratio suitable for casting mirrors.

古文：开面成光，则水银附体而成，非铜有光明如许也。
现代文：镜面能够反光，那是由于镀上了一层水银的结果，而不是铜本身能这样光亮。
English: The mirror is reflective because it is coated with a layer of mercury, not because the copper itself is so bright.

古文：唐开元宫中镜尽以白银与铜等分铸成，每口值银数两者以此故。
现代文：唐朝开元年间宫中所用的镜子，都是用白银和铜各半配比在一起铸成的，所以每面镜子价达几两银子。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the mirrors used in the palace were all made of silver and copper, so each mirror cost several silver coins.

古文：朱砂斑点乃金银精华发现。
现代文：铸件上有些像朱砂一样的红斑点，那是其中夹杂着的金银发出来的。
English: There are some red spots on the casting, like cinnabar, which are caused by the gold and silver mixed in it.

古文：我朝宣炉亦缘某库偶灾，金银杂铜锡化作一团，命以铸炉。
现代文：明朝宣炉的铸造，是由于当时某库偶然发生火灾，里面的金银夹杂着铜、锡都熔成一团，官府便下令用它来铸造香炉。
English: The incense burner of the Ming Dynasty was cast due to an accidental fire in a warehouse at that time. The gold and silver mixed with copper and tin melted into a ball, and the government ordered to use it to cast incense burners.

古文：唐镜、宣炉皆朝廷盛世物云。
现代文：唐镜和宣炉都是王朝昌盛时代的产物。钱
English: Both the Tang mirror and the Xuan furnace are products of the prosperous era of the dynasty.

古文：○钱凡铸铜为钱以利民用，一面刊国号通宝四字，工部分司主之。
现代文：将铜铸造成钱币，是为了便于民间贸易的流通和使用。铜钱的一面印有 某某通宝 四个字，这项工作是由工部属下的专门机构掌管的。
English: In order to facilitate the circulation and use of non-governmental trade, copper coins are minted into coins. The four characters "某某通宝" are printed on one side of the copper coin. This work is managed by a special agency under the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

古文：凡钱通利者，以十文抵银一分值。
现代文：通行的铜钱十文抵得上白银一分的价值。
English: Ten coppers in circulation were worth one silver cent.

古文：其大钱当五、当十，其弊便于私铸，反以害民，故中外行而辄不行也。
现代文：一个大钱的面值相当于普通铜钱的五倍或者十倍，发行这种大钱的弊病是容易导致私人铸钱，反而会坑害了百姓，所以，中央和地方都在发行过一阵儿大钱之后，很快就停止发行了。
English: The face value of a large amount of money is equivalent to five times or ten times that of ordinary copper money. The drawback of issuing such a large amount of money is that it is easy to lead to private money minting, but it will harm the people. Therefore, both the central and local governments issued a large amount of money for a while, and then quickly stopped issuing it.

古文：凡铸钱每十斤，红铜居六七，倭铅居三四，此等分大略。
现代文：铸造十斤铜钱，需要用六七斤红铜和三四斤锌，这是粗略的比例。
English: To cast a ten-kilo copper coin, it is necessary to use six or seven kilos of red copper and three or four kilos of zinc. This is a rough ratio.

古文：倭铅每见烈火必耗四分之一。
现代文：锌每经过高温加热一次就要耗损四分之一。
English: Every time zinc is heated to a high temperature, a quarter of it is lost.

古文：我朝行用钱高色者，唯北京宝源局黄钱与广东高州炉青钱，其价一文敌南直江、浙等二文。
现代文：我朝通用的铜钱，成色最好的是北京宝源局铸造的黄钱和广东高州铸造的青钱，这两种钱每一文相当于南京操江局和浙江铸造局铸造的铜钱二文。
English: The copper coins commonly used in our country are the gold coins minted by the Beijing Baoyuan Bureau and the blue coins minted by the Guangdong Gaozhou Bureau. Each of these two coins is equivalent to two copper coins minted by the Nanjing Jiaojiang Bureau and the Zhejiang Foundry Bureau.

古文：黄钱又分二等，四火铜所铸曰金背钱，二火铜所铸曰火漆钱。
现代文：黄钱又分为两等：用四火铜铸造的叫做 金背钱 ，用二火铜铸的叫做 火漆钱 。
English: Gold coins are also divided into two classes: those cast with four-flame copper are called gold-backed coins, and those cast with two-flame copper are called fire-painted coins.

古文：凡铸钱熔铜之罐，以绝细土末和炭末为之。
现代文：铸钱时用来熔铜的坩埚，所选用的是最细的泥粉，最好是由打碎的干土砖与炭粉混合后做成。
English: The ingots used to melt copper during the minting of money were selected from the finest clay powder, preferably made from crushed dry earth bricks mixed with charcoal powder.

古文：罐料十两，土居七而炭居三，以炭灰性暖，佐土使易化物也。
现代文：北京地区所用的熔铜坩埚中还加入有牛蹄甲，不知道那有什么作用。制造坩埚材料的比例是，每十两原料中，七两为泥粉，炭粉则占三两。这是因为炭粉有隔热、保温的作用，将其与泥粉互相配合后，会使铜更易于熔化。
English: Tungsten carbide is also added to the molten copper crucible used in the Beijing area, but it is not known what effect it has. The ratio of the materials used to make the crucible is that out of every ten raw materials, seven are mud powder and three are carbon powder. This is because the carbon powder has the effect of heat insulation and heat preservation, and when it is combined with the mud powder, it will make the copper easier to melt.

古文：罐长八寸，口径二寸五分。
现代文：坩埚的长度有八寸，直径为二寸五分。
English: The length of the cocoon is eight inches, and the diameter is two inches and five minutes.

古文：一罐约载铜、铅十斤，铜先入化，然后投铅，洪沪扇合，倾入模内。
现代文：一个坩埚大约可装进十斤的铜和锌。冶炼时，首先要把铜熔掉，之后再加锌，然后鼓风使它们化在一起，最后便可倒进钱币的模子内。
English: A single ingot can hold about ten kilos of copper and zinc. During smelting, the copper is first melted down, then zinc is added, and then the air is blown to fuse them together. Finally, they can be poured into a coin mold.

古文：凡铸钱模以木四条为空匡。土炭末筛令极细，填实匡中，微洒杉木炭灰或柳木炭灰于其面上，或熏模则用松香与清油，然后以母百文或字或背布置其上。
现代文：铸钱所用的模具，是用四根木条构成空框，用筛选过的非常细的泥粉和炭粉混合后填实空框，面上要再撒上少量的杉木或柳木炭灰，或者用燃烧松香和菜籽油的混合烟熏过。然后把成百枚用锡雕成的母钱按有字的正面或者按无字的背面铺排在框面上。
English: The mould used to cast the money is made of four wooden strips of rubber to form an empty frame. The empty frame is filled with a mixture of very fine sifted peat and charcoal powder. The surface is then sprinkled with a small amount of cedar or willow charcoal ash, or smoked with a mixture of burnt rosin and rapeseed oil. Then, hundreds of mother coins carved from tin are laid out on the frame surface according to the worded front or according to the wordless back.

古文：又用一匡如前法填实合盖之。
现代文：又用一个填实泥粉和炭粉的木框如上述方法合盖上去，就构成了钱的底、面两框模。
English: A wooden frame filled with clay powder and carbon powder is used to form the bottom and top of the two-frame mold.

古文：既合之后，已成面、背两匡，随手覆转，则母钱尽落后匡之上。
现代文：接着，随手把它翻转过来，揭开前框，全部母钱就脱落在后框上面了。
English: Then I flipped it over and opened the front, and all the money fell out on the back.

古文：又用一匡填实，合上后匡，如是转覆，只合十余匡，然后以绳捆定。
现代文：再用另一个填实了的木框合盖在后框上，照样翻转，就这样反复做成十几套框模，最后把它们叠合在一起用绳索捆绑固定。
English: He then used another filled wooden frame to close the lid on the back frame, flipped it over as before, and in this way repeatedly made more than a dozen sets of frame molds, and finally stacked them together and tied them with ropes.

古文：其木匡上弦原留入铜眼孔，铸工用鹰嘴钳，洪炉提出熔罐，一人以别钳扶抬罐底相助，逐一倾入孔中。
现代文：木框的边缘上原来留有灌注铜液的口子，铸工用鹰嘴钳把熔铜坩埚从炉里提出来，另一个人用钳托着坩埚的底部，共同把熔铜液注入模子中。
English: On the edge of the wooden frame, there used to be an opening for pouring the molten copper liquid. The foundryman used a pickaxe to lift the molten copper out of the furnace, while another person supported the bottom of the pickaxe with a shovel, and together they injected the molten copper liquid into the mold.

古文：冷定解绳开匡，则磊落百丈，如花果附枝。
现代文：冷却之后，解下绳索打开框模。这时，只见密密麻麻的成百个铜钱就像累累果实结在树枝上一样。
English: After cooling, the ropes are untied and the mold is opened. At this time, hundreds of coins can be seen densely packed like fruit on a tree branch.

古文：模中原印空梗，走铜如树枝样，挟出逐一摘断，以待磨钅差成钱。
现代文：因为模中原来的铜水通路也已经凝结成树枝状的铜条网络了，把它夹出来将钱逐个摘下，以便于磨锉加工。
English: Because the original copper-water passage in the mold has also condensed into a branch-like network of copper strips, it is clipped out and the money is removed one by one for grinding.

古文：凡钱先错边沿，以竹木条直贯数百文受钅差，后钅差平面则逐一为之。
现代文：先锉铜钱的边沿，方法是用竹条或木条穿上几百个铜钱一起锉。然后逐个锉平铜钱表面不规整的地方。
English: First, the edges of the copper money are rubbed, by rubbing hundreds of copper money together with bamboo or wooden strips. Then, the irregularities on the surface of the copper money are smoothed out one by one.

古文：凡钱高低以铅多寡分，其厚重与薄削，则昭然易见。
现代文：铜钱质量的高低，是以锌的含量多少来辨别区分，至于从外在质量看铸钱成品，轻重与厚薄，那是显而易见的。
English: The quality of copper money is distinguished by the amount of zinc. As for the external quality of the finished coin, the weight and thickness are obvious.

古文：铅贱铜贵，私铸者至对半为之，以之掷阶石上，声如木石者，此低钱也。
现代文：由于锌价值低贱而铜价值更贵，私铸铜币的人甚至用铜、锌对半开来铸铜钱。将这种钱掷在石阶上，发出像木头或石块落地的声响，表明成色很低。
English: Because the value of zinc is low and the value of copper is more expensive, people who minted copper coins illegally even used copper and zinc to make copper money. Throwing this kind of money on the stone steps and making a sound like wood or stone falling to the ground indicates that the quality is very low.

古文：若高钱铜九铅一，则掷地作金声矣。
现代文：如果是成色高质量好的铜钱，铜与锌的比例当是九比一，把它掷在地上，会发出铿锵的金属声。
English: If it is a high-quality copper coin, the ratio of copper to zinc should be nine to one. If it is thrown on the ground, it will emit a crackling metallic sound.

古文：凡将成器废铜铸钱者，每火十耗其一。盖铅质先走，其铜色渐高，胜于新铜初化者。
现代文：用废铜器来铸造铜钱，每熔化一次就会损耗十分之一，因为其中的锌会挥发掉一些，铜的含量逐渐提高，所以铸造出来的铜钱的成色就会比新铜第一次铸成的铜钱要高。
English: Copper coins are cast using scrap copperware, and every time they are melted, one-tenth of the copper is lost. Because some of the zinc will evaporate, the copper content will gradually increase, so the color of the cast copper coins will be higher than that of the new copper coins.

古文：若琉球诸国银钱，其模即凿锲铁钳头上，银化之时入锅夹取，淬于冷水之中，即落一钱其内。
现代文：琉球一带铸造的银币，模子就刻在铁钳头上，当银熔化了的时候，将钳子头伸进坩埚里夹取银液后，提出来往冷水之中一淬，一块银币就落在水里了。
English: For silver coins minted in the Ryukyu area, the pattern is engraved on the head of the anvil. When the silver has melted, the head of the anvil is inserted into the crucible to catch the silver liquid, and then it is lifted out into the cold water for a while, and a piece of silver coin falls into the water.

古文：图并具后。○附：铁钱
现代文：附：铁钱
English: Attached: iron money

古文：铁质贱甚，从古无铸钱。
现代文：铁这种金属价值很低，自古以来几乎不用在铸钱方面。
English: Iron, a metal of very low value, has hardly been used in the minting of money since ancient times.

古文：起于唐藩镇魏博诸地，铜货不通，始冶为之，盖斯须之计也。
现代文：铁钱起源于作为唐朝藩镇之一的魏博镇地区，由于当时藩镇割据，铜没有办法运输，不得不用铁来铸钱，这只是权宜之计。
English: Iron money originated in the Weibo Town area, which was one of the Tang Dynasty towns. Since the towns were divided at that time, copper could not be transported, so they had to use iron to mint money. This was only a stopgap measure.

古文：皇家盛时则冶银为豆，杂伯衰时则铸铁为钱。
现代文：在唐代皇家兴盛之时，曾经用白银铸成豆子来玩耍取乐，而到了后来藩镇割据而国家衰落时，就连低贱的铁也只好拿去铸钱了！
English: In the Tang Dynasty, when the royal family was flourishing, they used silver to cast beans to play and have fun. Later, when the feudal towns were divided and the country declined, even cheap iron had to be used to cast money!

古文：并志博物者感慨。
现代文：就一起记在这里以表示博物广识者的感慨吧。
English: Let's write it down here together to express the feelings of those who are knowledgeable about natural history.

