古文：十有一年春，楚子伐麇。
现代文：十一年春季，楚穆王攻打麇国。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, King Chumu attacked Shandong.

古文：夏，叔彭生会晋郤缺于承筐。秋，曹伯来朝。
现代文：夏季，叔仲惠伯在承筐会见晋国郤缺。秋季，曹文公前来朝见。
English: In the summer, Uncle Zhong Huibao met with the Emperor of Jin in the basket. In the autumn, Cao Wen Gong came to see him in the morning.

古文：公子遂如宋。
现代文：公子遂到宋国。
English: So he went to the Song Dynasty.

古文：狄侵齐。
现代文：狄国侵入宋国。
English: Di invaded Song.

古文：冬十月甲午，叔孙得臣败狄于鹹。
现代文：冬季十月甲午日，叔孙得臣在鹹地将狄人打败。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of October in winter, Uncle Sun Detsen defeated Di Ren in Shunde.

古文：十一年春，楚子伐麇，成大心败麇师于防渚。
现代文：十一年春季，楚穆王攻打麇国。成大心在防渚打败麇军。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, King Chumu attacked Min. Cheng Daxin led his troops to defeat the Min army at Fangzhu.

古文：潘崇复伐麇，至于锡穴。
现代文：潘崇再次攻打麇国，到达锡穴。
English: Pan Chong attacked Shandong again and reached Xixian.

古文：夏，叔仲惠伯会晋郤缺于承筐，谋诸侯之从于楚者。
现代文：夏季，叔仲惠伯在承筐会见晋国郤缺，这是为了商量对付追随楚国的诸侯。
English: In the summer, Shuzhong Huibo met with the governor of Jin Province in Heihe, in order to discuss how to deal with the princes of Chu.

古文：秋，曹文公来朝，即位而来见也。
现代文：秋季，曹文公前来朝见，这是由于他刚即位而来朝见的。
English: In autumn, Cao Wengong came to see the emperor, because he had just ascended the throne.

古文：襄仲聘于宋，且言司城荡意诸而复之，因贺楚师之不害也。
现代文：襄仲到宋国聘问，同时又替司城荡意诸说话而让他回国。这次聘问并且为了祝贺宋军没有遭到楚军兵害。
English: Xiangzhong went to Song for an interview, and at the same time, he spoke for Sicheng and let him return to China. This interview was also to congratulate the Song Army for not being harmed by the Chu Army.

古文：鄋瞒侵齐。遂伐我。
现代文：鄋瞒侵袭齐国，并因此攻打我国。
English: He invaded Qi secretly and attacked our country as a result.

古文：公卜使叔孙得臣追之，吉。
现代文：文公占了一个卦，卜派遣叔孙得臣追赶敌人，吉利。
English: Wen Gong occupied a gua, Bu dispatched his uncles and grandsons to chase the enemy, good luck.

古文：侯叔夏御庄叔，绵房甥为右，富父终甥驷乘。
现代文：侯叔夏驾御叔孙得臣的战车，绵房甥作为车右，富父终甥作为驷乘。
English: Hou Shuxia drove the chariot of his great-uncle and great-grandson, Mian Fang's nephew drove the right side of the chariot, and his rich father's great-nephew drove the left.

古文：冬十月甲午，败狄于鹹，获长狄侨如。
现代文：冬季，十月初三日，在咸地打败狄人，俘虏了长狄侨如。
English: In winter, on the third day of early October, they defeated the Di people in the salt land and captured the elder Di Xiaoru.

古文：富父终甥摏其喉，以戈杀之，埋其首于子驹之门，以命宣伯。
现代文：富父终甥用戈抵住他的咽喉，杀死了他，把他的脑袋埋在子驹之门下边。就把宣伯名叫侨如。
English: The rich father's nephew finally held him down by the throat with a club, killed him, and buried his head under the gate of Ziyang. He called Xuanbo Qiao Ru.

古文：初，宋武公之世，鄋瞒伐宋，司徒皇父帅师御之，耏班御皇父充石，公子穀甥为右，司寇牛父驷乘，以败狄于长丘，获长狄缘斯，皇父之二子死焉。
现代文：当初，在宋武公时代，鄋瞒进攻宋国，司徒皇父带兵抵御。耏班驾御皇父充石的战车，公子穀甥为车右，司寇牛父作驷乘，在长丘打败狄人，俘虏了长狄缘斯。
English: At the beginning, in the era of Song Wukong, Zou Xie attacked Song, and Emperor Shitou's father led the troops to resist. Zou Pan drove his father's stone-filled chariot, his son and nephew were on the right side of the chariot, and his son and nephew were on the left side of the chariot, and Scor Bull's father was on the right side of the chariot, and defeated Di Ren in Changqiu and captured Chang Di Yangs.

古文：宋公于是以门赏耏班，使食其征，谓之耏门。
现代文：皇父的两个儿子战死，宋公因此就把城门赏给耏班，让他征收城门税，把城门称为耏门。
English: The two sons of the emperor's father died in battle, so Song Gong awarded the city gate to Gongban, let him collect the city gate tax, and called the city gate the gate.

古文：晋之灭路也，获侨如之弟焚如。
现代文：晋国灭亡潞国的时候，俘虏了侨如的弟弟焚如。
English: At the time of the fall of the Jin Dynasty and the fall of the Qiang Dynasty, Qiao Ru's younger brother, Tu Rong, was captured.

古文：齐襄公之二年，鄋瞒伐齐，齐王子成父获其弟荣如，埋其首于周首之北门。
现代文：齐襄公二年，鄋瞒进攻齐国，齐国的王子成父俘虏了侨如的弟弟荣如，把他的脑袋埋在周首的北门下边。
English: In the second year of Prince Qixiang's reign, he secretly attacked the State of Qi. The prince who became the father of the State of Qi captured Guozhu's younger brother, Rongru, and buried his head under the north gate of the Zhou capital.

古文：卫人获其季弟简如。鄋瞒由是遂亡。
现代文：卫国人又俘虏了侨如的弟弟简如，鄋瞒由此就被灭亡。
English: The defenders of the country also captured Jianru, the younger brother of Guozhongru, and Guozhong was destroyed.

古文：郕大子朱儒自安于夫钟，国人弗徇。
现代文：郕国的太子朱儒自己安逸地居住在夫钟，国内的人们不肯顺服他。
English: Zhu Ru, the prince of Shandong, lived comfortably in Fuzhong. People in the country refused to obey him.

