古文：王磐王磐，字文炳，广平永年人，世业农，岁得麦万石，乡人号万石王家。
现代文：王磐，字文炳，广平永年人，世代务农，每年收麦万石，乡人称 万石王家 。
English: Wang Pan, a man of Guangping, has been farming for generations. He harvests thousands of koku of wheat every year. The villagers call him the King of Ten Thousand Koku.

古文：父禧，金末入财佐军兴，补进义副尉。
现代文：父王禧，金末出钱帮助军饷，因而授官为进义副尉。
English: His father, Wang Xiyu, paid money to help the soldiers, so he was awarded the position of Jin Yi Vice-Lieutenant.

古文：国兵破永年，将屠其城，禧复罄家赀以助军费，众赖以免。
现代文：蒙古军破永年，要屠杀全城百姓，禧将全部家财去帮助蒙军作为军费，使永年百姓免遭大难。
English: The Mongolian army has invaded Yongnian and is about to massacre the entire population of the city. Xie gives all of his family's wealth to help the Mongolian army as military expenses, so that the Yongnian people can be saved from a great disaster.

古文：金人迁汴，乃举家南渡河，居汝之鲁山。
现代文：金人迁都汴梁，禧全家南渡黄河，定居于汝州鲁山。
English: Jinren moved the capital to Jialiang, and the whole family went to the south of the Yellow River and settled in Luzhan, Ruzhou.

古文：磐年方冠，从麻九畴学于郾城，客居贫甚，日作糜一器，画为朝暮食。
现代文：磐年方二十岁，在郾城拜麻九畴为师。因是流落异乡，非常贫困，每天做粥一钵为一日饮食。
English: Iwanengfang was 20 years old. He studied under Baima Jiujiao in Handan City. Because he was from a foreign country, he was very poor. He had to make a bowl of porridge every day as his daily diet.

古文：年二十六，擢正大四年经义进士第，授归德府录事判官，不赴。
现代文：二十六岁，考中金哀宗正大四年经义进士，授归德府录事判官，没去就职。
English: At the age of twenty-six, he was awarded the title of "Yi Jin Shi" (義进士) in the fourth year of Jin Aizong Senior High School. He was also awarded the title of "Tefu Record Judge," but he did not take up the post.

古文：自是大肆力于经史百氏，文辞宏放，浩无涯涘。
现代文：从此以后大力研究经史百家学说，其文辞宏伟豪放，浩大得无边无际。
English: Since then, he has vigorously studied the teachings of hundreds of schools of history. His words are magnificent and bold, and his vastness is boundless.

古文：及河南被兵，磐避难，转入淮、襄间。
现代文：蒙军进入河南，磐为避难而转入淮襄之间。
English: The Mongolian army entered Henan, and Ban took refuge in Huaixiang.

古文：宋荆湖制置司素知其名，辟为议事官。
现代文：宋荆湖制置司素闻其名，委任为议事官。
English: Song Jinghu, Secretary of the State Council, heard of his name and appointed him as a deliberation officer.

古文：丙申，襄阳兵变，乃北归，至洛西，会杨惟中被旨招集儒士，得磐，深礼遇之，遂寓河内。
现代文：太宗八年，襄阳兵变，王磐又北归至洛阳西，恰逢杨惟中奉旨招揽儒士，遇磐，以厚礼对待，王磐因住于河内。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, there was a mutiny in Xiangyang, and Wang Bang returned north to the west of Luoyang. This coincided with Yang Weizhong's order to recruit Confucianists. When he met Wang Bang, he treated him with courtesy, since Wang Bang lived in Hanoi.

古文：东平总管严实兴学养士，迎磐为师，受业者常数百人，后多为名士。
现代文：东平总管严实兴学养士，迎请磐为师。从他学习的常数百人，这些人后来多成名士。
English: Yan Shixing, the general manager of Dongping, was a student of nursing, and he invited Ban to be his teacher. Hundreds of people learned from him, and many of these people later became famous.

古文：及璮谋不轨，磐觉之，脱身至济南，得驿马驰去，入京师，因侍臣以闻。世祖即日召见，嘉其诚节，抚劳甚厚。
现代文：中统元年，拜磐为益都等路宣抚副使，不久因病免职。李王素来敬重王磐，聘请他去，磐也爱好青州风土民情，买田于氵弭河之上，其庐舍题名曰 鹿庵 ，有终老于此的打算。
English: In the first year of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Baibang was appointed as the vice-envoy of proclamation and pacification for the benefit of the capital and other areas, but he was soon removed from his post due to illness. Li Wang had always respected Wang Bang and hired him to go. I also loved Qingzhou's customs and people, bought a field on the Li River, and his house was named Lu'an, with the intention of living here forever.

古文：璮据济南，大军讨之，帝命磐参议行省事。
现代文：李王阴谋不轨，磐发觉后跑到济南，后转入京师。世祖闻知立即召见，嘉奖其忠诚不贰。李王占据济南，朝廷派大军征讨，世祖命磐参议行省事。
English: King Li's plot went awry, and after Iwan discovered it, he ran to Jinan and later transferred to the Beijing division. The ancestor Wenshi was immediately summoned and commended for his loyalty. King Li occupied Jinan, the court sent a large army to investigate, and the ancestor appointed Iwan as a councillor to conduct the affairs of the province.

古文：璮平，遂挈妻子至东平。
现代文：磐在平定李王之后，携妻子至东平。
English: After subduing King Li, Iwa and his wife went to Dongping.

古文：召拜翰林直学士，同修国史。
现代文：朝廷召入朝拜为翰林直学士、同修国史。
English: He was called by the imperial court to the imperial court as a scholar of Hanlin and a student of national history.

古文：有赵清者，发其罪，既具伏矣，适初置监司，其妻惧无以灭口，召家人饮酒至醉，以利啖之，使夜杀清，清逃获免，乃尽杀其父母妻子。
现代文：出任真定、顺德等路宣慰使时，衡水县达鲁花赤忙兀，贪赃枉法，横行霸道，该县百姓深受其苦。有人叫赵清者，揭发了忙兀的罪行。忙兀派人夜间谋杀赵清，清逃走免遭祸难，而其父母妻子被杀。
English: When he was appointed as the consoler of Zhending, Shunde and other roads, the people of Hengshui County were deeply affected by the greed, abuse and tyranny of Daruhua. Someone called Zhao Qing exposed the crime of Busy. Busy sent people to murder Zhao Qing at night, Qing fled from the disaster, and his parents and wife were killed.

古文：清诉诸官，权要蔽忙兀，不为理，又欲反其具狱。
现代文：清向官府控告，权贵袒护忙兀，不受理赵清的控告，反将清陷入狱中。
English: Qing complained to the government, but the authorities were too busy to protect him and did not accept Zhao Qing's complaint. Instead, Qing was thrown into prison.

古文：磐竟奏置诸法，籍其家赀，以半给清。
现代文：磐闻知，将忙兀依法处置，没收其家产，以一半给赵清。
English: I heard that Busan will be disposed of in accordance with the law, confiscate his family property, and give half of it to Zhao Qing.

古文：郡有西域大贾，称贷取息，有不时偿者，辄置狱于家，拘系榜掠。
现代文：郡内有西域大商，放债取息，有不能按时偿还者，私设公堂，拘禁拷打。
English: In the county, there are big merchants from the western region, who lend money to collect interest, and those who cannot repay on time, set up a private court, and are detained and tortured.

古文：其人且恃势干官府，直来坐听事，指麾自若。
现代文：该商人恃势干预官府，竟来座厅议事，指挥自若。
English: The businessman, who had lost his influence and was interfering with the government, actually came to the council chamber for a discussion, acting as a self-assured leader.

古文：磐大怒，叱左右捽下，箠之数十。时府治寓城上，即挤诸城下，几死，郡人称快。
现代文：磐闻知大怒，令左右将他拿下，施以杖刑，又把他从城上摔到城下，几乎死去，郡人称快。
English: Iwatsucho was furious, ordered his men to take him down and beat him with a cane. They also threw him from the top of the castle to the bottom of the castle. He almost died, but the people of the county were happy.

古文：未几，蝗起真定，朝廷遣使者督捕，役夫四万人，以为不足，欲牒邻道助之。
现代文：真定发生蝗灾，朝廷遣使督促捕捉，动用民夫四万人，还认为不够，欲通知邻道来帮助捕捉。
English: Locust plagues are certain to occur. The imperial court has dispatched inspectors to urge the capture of locusts, and has mobilized 40,000 people. It also considers this to be insufficient, and wants to notify neighboring provinces to help with the capture.

古文：磐曰： 四万人多矣，何烦他郡！ 
现代文：磐认为四万已多了，何必再烦扰他郡。
English: Iwa thinks that 40,000 has already been exceeded, so why bother him any more.

古文：使者怒，责磐状，期三日尽捕蝗，磐不为动，亲率役夫走田间，设方法督捕之，三日而蝗尽灭，使者惊以为神。
现代文：使臣大怒，斥责王磐，限三日内捕尽蝗虫。王磐不理他，亲率役夫到田间去观察，设法捕捉，三天内蝗虫灭尽，使臣大惊，以为他是神仙。
English: The envoy was furious, rebuked Wang Bang, and gave him three days to catch all the locusts. Wang Bang ignored him, and the envoy went to the fields with his father-in-law to observe and try to catch the locusts. The locusts were destroyed in three days, and the envoy was shocked, thinking that he was a god.

古文：复入翰林为学士，入谒宰相，首言： 方今害民之吏，转运司为甚，至税人白骨，宜罢去之，以苏民力。 
现代文：又召回朝为翰林学士，进见宰相时，首先提出： 当今害民之官，以转运司最厉害，以至于敲骨吸髓，应废除以减轻人民负担。 
English: He also recalled Chao as a scholar of Hanlin, and when he went to see the prime minister, he first proposed: Today's officials who harm the people, such as the Transportation Department, are the most powerful, so much so that they break the bones and suck the marrow, and should be abolished to reduce the burden on the people.

古文：由是运司遂罢。
现代文：从此废除了转运司。
English: Since then, the Transportation Division has been abolished.

古文：阿合马讽大臣，请合中书、尚书两省为一，拜右丞相安童为三公，阴欲夺其政柄。
现代文：阿合马暗示一些大臣，奏请将中书、尚书两省合而为一，拜右丞相安童为三公，实际上是想暗夺他的权力。
English: Ahama hinted that some ministers were actually trying to usurp his power by requesting that the two provinces of Zhongshu and Shangshu be merged into one, and that the minister of justice, Ando, be made the third minister.

古文：有诏会议，磐言： 合两省为一，而以右丞相总之，实便，不然，则宜仍旧，三公既不预政事，则不宜虚设。 
现代文：诏令朝臣讨论此事，王磐认为 ：合两省为一，由右丞相总领，是方便些，否则就保持不变。三公既不参预政事，则不宜虚设。 
English: The emperor ordered the courtiers to discuss the matter, and Wang Pan thought that it would be more convenient to combine the two provinces into one, with the minister of the right as the leader, otherwise it would remain unchanged. If the three princes did not participate in the pre-election political affairs, it would not be appropriate to set it up.

古文：其议遂沮。
现代文：合并中书尚书两省之事也就不采行了。
English: The merger of the two provinces of Zhongshu and Shangshu will not be implemented.

古文：迁太常少卿，乞致仕，不允。
现代文：调磐为太常少卿，他请求辞官，不允。
English: He was promoted to the position of Taijo Shokei and asked to resign, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：时宫阙未建，朝仪未立，凡遇称贺，臣庶杂至帐殿前，执法者患其喧扰，不能禁。
现代文：这时，宫廷尚未建立，朝拜仪礼尚未制定，凡朝贺，大小臣僚杂至帐殿之前，喧扰不堪。
English: At this time, the imperial court had not yet been established, and the ritual of worship had not yet been established. Before the morning greetings, when ministers of all ranks came to the main hall, the noise was unbearable.

古文：磐上疏曰： 按旧制：天子宫门，不应入而入者，谓之阑入。阑入之罪，由第一门至第三门，轻重有差。
现代文：磐上疏道： 按旧制，天子宫门，不应入而入者谓之 阑入 ，阑入之罪，由第一门至第三门，轻重不同。
English: Banjosho-dori Street: According to the old system, those who should not enter the gate of the heavenly womb are said to have broken in. The crime of breaking in varies in severity from the first gate to the third gate.

古文：宜令宣徽院，籍两省而下百官姓名，各依班序，听通事舍人传呼赞引，然后进。
现代文：宜令宣徽院，登记两省以下的百官姓名，各依次序听通事舍人传呼前引，然后进见。
English: It is appropriate to order Xuanhuiyuan to register the names of 100 officials from the two provinces and below, and each of them should listen to the call of the caller in order, and then come forward.

古文：其越次者，殿中司纠察定罚，不应入而入者，准阑入罪，庶朝廷之礼，渐可整肃。 
现代文：凡超越次序者，殿中司纠察惩罚；不应入而入者，按 阑入 罪惩处，这样朝廷的礼节就可严整而肃穆。 
English: Anyone who oversteps the order will be punished by the palace steward; those who should not enter will be punished according to the crime of breaking in, so that the etiquette of the imperial court can be strict and solemn.

古文：于是仪制始定。
现代文：世祖采纳。从此，朝仪制度订立下来。
English: It was adopted by the founder of the dynasty. From then on, the imperial ceremony system was established.

古文：曲阜孔子庙，历代给民百户，以供洒扫，复其家，至是，尚书省以括户之故，尽收为民，磐言： 林庙户百家，岁赋钞不过六百贯，仅比一六品官终年俸耳。
现代文：曲阜孔子庙，历代都拨赐民一百户来洒扫，不服别的劳役。现在，尚书省通过清查户口把孔庙的民户收为一般平民。王磐上书道 ：林庙户百家每岁交纳赋钞不过六百贯，仅相当于一个六品官一年的俸禄而已。
English: In Qufu Confucius Temple, all generations have allocated 100 households to sweep and sweep, and do not accept other labor services. Now, the Ministry of Education and Culture has collected the households of the Confucius Temple as ordinary civilians through the household registration. Wang Banjang calligraphy: The hundred households of the Lin Temple pay only 600 yuan each year, which is only equivalent to one year's salary of a six-grade official.

古文：圣朝疆宇万里，财赋岁亿万计，岂爱一六品官俸，不以待孔子哉？
现代文：圣朝疆土万里，财赋每年亿万计，岂在乎这一六品官的俸禄而不侍奉孔子。
English: The Holy Empire is thousands of miles away, and the wealth amounts to hundreds of millions every year. How could he care about the salary of a six-ranked official and not serve Confucius?

古文：且于府库所益无多，其损国体甚大。 
现代文：而且，收此六百贯，对于府库所增不多，而对国体损伤甚大。 
English: Moreover, the collection of this 600 yuan will not increase much for the prefectural treasury, but it will cause great damage to the National Games.

古文：时论韪之。
现代文：时论都认为王磐的话有理。
English: All historians agree that Wang Bang's words are reasonable.

古文：帝以天下狱囚滋多，敕诸路自死罪以下，纵遣归家，期秋八月，悉来京师听决。
现代文：世祖因天下囚禁于狱中的人日益增多，令诸路自死罪以下，都暂释归家，到了八月都来京师听从裁决。
English: Due to the increasing number of people who were imprisoned in the world, the patriarch temporarily released all those who were under the death penalty and returned home. In August, they all came to Beijing to listen to the ruling.

古文：囚如期至，帝恻然怜之，尽原其罪。
现代文：到期这些罪犯都来了，世祖怜悯他们，都释免了他们的罪行。
English: When the time came, all these criminals came, and the patriarch took pity on them and absolved them of their crimes.

古文：他日，命词臣作诏，戒喻天下，皆不称旨意，磐独以纵囚之意命辞，帝喜曰： 此朕所欲言而不能者，卿乃能为朕言之。 
现代文：有天，皇帝命文学侍臣制作诏书，以此事来教育天下。所起草的诏令世祖都不满意，只有王磐依据皇上释放囚徒的用意来草拟的诏令，世祖看了大喜道： 这些才是朕所要说而未说出来的话，卿代我说了。 嘉奖不已。
English: One day, the emperor ordered his literary courtiers to produce an edict to educate the world about this matter. The emperor's ancestors were not satisfied with the drafted edict. Only Wang Yan drafted the edict according to the emperor's intention to release the prisoners. The emperor's ancestors looked at Dai Xi and said: These are the words I wanted to say but did not say, I said it on behalf of my lord. The praise was endless.

古文：嘉奖不已，取酒赐之。
现代文：磐再次请求辞官，不允。
English: Iwa once again asked to be relieved of his duties, but was not allowed.

古文：再乞致仕，不允。国子祭酒许衡将告归，帝遣近臣问磐，磐言： 衡素廉介，意其所以求退者，得非生员数少，坐縻廪禄，有所不安耶？
现代文：国子祭酒许衡将辞官回乡，世祖派近侍臣去征询王磐的意见，王磐认为： 衡素来廉洁，其所以要求辞退，莫非是因生员少，他感到自己是徒费廪禄，内心不安？
English: The king's son, Xu Heng, will return to his hometown after the ceremony. The ancestor sent a number of close attendants to solicit Wang Bang's opinion. Wang Bang believes that: Heng has always been incorruptible, so he asked to resign. Was it because of the small number of students, he felt that he was wasting his time, and his heart was uneasy?

古文：宜增益生员，使之施教，则庶几人材有成，衡之受禄亦可少安矣。 
现代文：应增加生员，任他施教，这样可望培养出人材，衡受禄内心也可稍稍安心些。 
English: It is necessary to increase the number of students and allow them to teach, in this way it is expected to train human resources, and it is also possible to feel a little more at ease in the heart.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令按王磐的意见办。
English: He complied.

古文：磐移疾家居，帝遣使存问，赐以名药。
现代文：磐因病归家，世祖遣使问候，赐名药。
English: Iwakuni returns home due to illness. The patriarch sends his greetings and bestows a famous medicine.

古文：磐尝于会集议事之际，数言： 前代用人，二十从政，七十致仕，所以资其材力，闵其衰老，养其廉耻之心也。
现代文：磐曾在议事会上多次说过 ：前代用人，二十从政，七十告退，这是因为要用人之才而又怜悯其衰老，养其廉耻之心。
English: Iwa had said many times at the council meeting: the previous generation of retainers, twenty years in politics, seventy years retired, this is because you have to use people's talents and pity their aging, nurture their shamelessness.

古文：今入仕者不限年，而老病者不能退，彼既不自知耻，朝廷亦不以为非，甚不可也。 
现代文：今做官者不限年纪，而老病者又不退，他们自己不知廉耻，朝廷也不认为这样是不对的，甚是不可。 
English: There is no age limit for those who become officials nowadays, and those who are old and sick do not retire. They themselves are shameless, and the imperial court does not consider this to be wrong, let alone unacceptable.

古文：至是，以疾，请断月俸毋给，自秋及春，坚乞致仕。
现代文：他要求在病中停止他的俸禄。从秋到春，坚持请求辞退。
English: He asked for his salary to be stopped while he was ill. From autumn to spring, he kept asking to be fired.

古文：帝遣使慰谕之曰： 卿年虽老，非任剧务，何以辞为。 
现代文：世祖遣使安慰他说： 卿年虽老，但并无繁重政务，为何要辞官？ 
English: The patriarch sent an emissary to comfort him, saying, "Though you are old, you have not done any heavy government work. Why do you want to resign?

古文：仍诏禄之终身，并还所断月俸。
现代文：诏令给王磐终身俸禄，并补发所停发的月俸。
English: The edict gave Wang Ban a lifetime salary, and the monthly salary suspended by the supplementary pay office.

古文：磐不得已，复起。
现代文：磐不得已，只得再上朝理政。
English: Iwa had no choice but to return to the government.

古文：时方伐宋，凡帷幄谋议，有所未决，即遣使问之，磐所敷陈，每称上意。
现代文：这时正在伐宋，凡筹划议论之事不能决定者，立即遣使去征求王磐的意见。磐的陈奏也往往符合皇上的旨意。
English: At this time, the Song was being sung, and anyone who could not decide on the matter of planning and discussion was immediately sent to seek the opinion of Wang Ban. Wang Ban's performance was also often in line with the emperor's will.

古文：帝将用兵日本，问以便宜，磐言： 今方伐宋，当用吾全力，庶可一举取之。若复分力东夷，恐旷日持久，功卒难成。
现代文：世祖准备征伐日本，问王磐意见如何。磐陈奏道 ：现在正在伐宋，应以全力一举取胜，若再分兵于东夷，恐相持日久，难以成功。
English: The patriarch was preparing to invade Japan, and asked Wang Bang what he thought.Bang Chen replied, "Right now we are invading Song, and we should do everything in our power to win. If we were to divide our forces again in Dongyi, I'm afraid it would take a long time and it would be difficult to succeed."

古文：俟宋灭，徐图之未晚也。 
现代文：等灭宋之后，再征日本不晚。 
English: After the destruction of the Song Dynasty, it was not too late to re-subjugate Japan.

古文：江南既下，磐上疏，大略言： 禁戢军士，选择官吏，赏功罚罪，推广恩信，所以抚安新附，销弭寇盗。 
现代文：江南平定之后，磐又上疏，其大略是 ：约束军士不准滥杀，选择官吏，赏功罚罪，推广朝廷恩惠，安抚新归附百姓，消除寇盗。 
English: After the quelling of the Southern Yangtze River, the situation was stable again. The general outline of the plan was as follows: to restrain soldiers from indiscriminate killing, to select officials, to reward merits and punish crimes, to promote the favors of the imperial court, to pacify the newly annexed people, and to eliminate banditry.

古文：其言要切，皆见施行。
现代文：这些都是当前紧要的事，都逐一施行。
English: These are all urgent matters at the moment, and they will be implemented one by one.

古文：朝议汰冗官，权近私以按察司不便，欲并省之。
现代文：朝廷打算淘汰冗官，一些有权有势的近侍之臣，感到按察司于他们不利，倡议裁撤。
English: The imperial court intended to weed out superfluous officials, and some powerful courtiers, feeling that the inspectors were unfavorable to them, proposed abolishing them.

古文：磐奏疏曰： 各路州郡，去京师遥远，贪官污吏，侵害小民，无所控告，惟赖按察司为之申理。
现代文：王磐陈奏说 ：各路州郡距京师遥远，贪官污吏侵害百姓，无处控告，唯依靠按察司为他们申诉。
English: Wang Ban Chen Soo said: each road and county is far away from Beijing, corrupt officials infringe on the people, there is no place to complain, only rely on the inspector to appeal for them.

古文：若指为冗官，一例罢去，则小民冤死而无所诉矣。
现代文：若把按察使指为冗官，一概裁减，则小民冤死而无处申诉了。
English: If the inspectors are referred to as redundant officials and are all reduced, then the common people will die unjustly and have nowhere to appeal.

古文：若曰京师有御史台纠察四方之事，是大不然。
现代文：若让京师御史台去纠察四方之事，这是很不对的。
English: It would be very wrong to allow the Beijing History Channel to picket the four parties.

古文：夫御史台纠察朝廷百官、京畿州县，尚有弗及，况能周遍外路千百城之事乎？
现代文：御史台纠察朝廷百官、京畿州县，尚有不到之处，怎能完全纠察外省千百城之事？
English: It is not enough for the History Channel to picket hundreds of officials of the imperial court and counties in Gyeonggi Province. How can it completely picket hundreds of cities in other provinces?

古文：若欲并入运司，运司专以营利增课为职，与管民官常分彼此，岂暇顾细民之冤抑哉？ 
现代文：若欲并入运司，运司是专以营利收赋税为职，与管民官常常分为彼此，岂能有功夫顾及小民之冤情？ 
English: If it wants to merge with the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, the Ministry of Transportation and Communications is exclusively responsible for profit and tax collection, and is often separated from the people's government. Will it be able to work hard to take into account the grievances of the people?

古文：由是按察司得不罢。
现代文：因此各地按察司未被废除。
English: As a result, the local inspectorates have not been abolished.

古文：朝廷录平宋功，迁至宰相执政者二十余人，因议更定官制，磐奏疏曰： 历代制度，有官品，有爵号，有职位，官爵所以示荣宠，职位所以委事权。
现代文：朝廷记录平宋之功，升至宰相执政者二十余人。有人提出改定官制，磐上疏说： 历代制度是：有官品，有爵号，有职位。官爵是表示所受的荣耀恩宠，职位是要委以权力。
English: The imperial court records the achievements of the Ping and Song dynasties, and there are more than 20 people who have been promoted to the position of prime minister. Some people have proposed to change the official system, and Iwakami Sho said: The system of past generations is: there are official products, there are titles, and there are positions. The title of official is an expression of the glory and grace received, and the position is to delegate power.

古文：臣下有功有劳，随其大小，酬以官爵，有才有能，称其所堪，处以职位，此人君御下之术也。
现代文：臣下有功有劳，随其大小而给以官爵；有才有能，按其才能授其职位。这就是皇上驾御臣下之方式方法。
English: If a vassal is meritorious, he will be given a title of nobility according to his size; if he is talented, he will be given a position according to his talent. This is how the emperor leads his vassals.

古文：臣以为有功者，宜加迁散官，或赐五等爵号，如汉、唐封侯之制可也，不宜任以职位。 
现代文：臣认为，有功者加升散官，或赐五等爵号，如汉、唐封侯之制即可，不宜任其他职位。 
English: The minister believed that meritorious persons should be promoted to lower ranks, or given the title of the fifth class, such as the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, and should not be appointed to other positions.

古文：日本之役，师行有期，磐入谏曰： 日本小夷，海道险远，胜之则不武，不胜则损威，臣以为勿伐便。 
现代文：征讨日本，大军即将出发，磐入朝谏阻说 ：日本小夷，海道既远且险，胜并不表现我们武功之盛，不胜则损害国威。臣以为不去征伐为好。 
English: A great army was about to set out to conquer Japan, but the Emperor Iwaniri opposed it, saying, "Japan is a small country, and the sea route is long and dangerous. A victory would not show our military prowess, but a defeat would damage our national prestige. I thought it would be better not to go on the conquest."

古文：后阅内府珍玩，有碧玉宝枕，因出赐之。
现代文：世祖大怒，认为这话不该说，是别有用心。磐回答说： 臣赤心为国，才敢于直言，如果有他心，为何从叛乱之地，冒着万死危险来归向朝廷？
English: The patriarch flew into a rage, thinking that this should not be said, that it was an ulterior motive. Iwa replied: Only a vassal with a pure heart for the country would dare to speak out. If he had a pure heart, why did he risk death and destruction to return to the imperial court from the land of rebellion?

古文：磐以年老，累乞骸骨。
现代文：今臣已八十，况无子无嗣，若存有他心又是为了谁？ 
English: Now the minister is eighty years old, and he has no son or heir. If he has a heart, who is it for?

古文：丞相和礼霍孙为言，诏允其请，进资德大夫，致仕，仍给半俸终身。
现代文：第二天，世祖遣侍臣和颜悦色地去慰抚，使磐无忧惧，又赐碧玉宝枕。磐因年老，多次请求退休还乡。丞相和礼霍孙也帮他请求，终于允准，晋升为资德大夫而离职，仍给终身半俸禄。
English: The next day, the ancestor sent a courtier to comfort him in a friendly manner, so that Iwa was not worried, and also gave him a jasper pillow. Iwa, due to his old age, repeatedly asked to retire and return to his hometown. The prime minister and Rehosun also asked for his help, and finally granted permission to be promoted to the doctor of finance and economics and leave his job, still giving him a lifetime half-salary.

古文：皇太子闻其去，召入宫，赐食，慰问良久。
现代文：皇太子听说磐告老还乡，召请他入宫赐宴饯别。
English: When the crown prince heard that Ipwang had returned to his hometown, he invited him to the palace for a farewell banquet.

古文：行之日，公卿百官，皆设宴以饯。
现代文：启程之日，公卿百官为他设宴饯行。
English: On the day of his departure, hundreds of court nobles and officials held a banquet for him.

古文：明日，皇太子赐宴圣安寺，公卿百官出送丽泽门外，缙绅以为荣。磐无子，命其婿著作郎李稚宾为东平判官，以便养。
现代文：第二天，皇太子又赐宴圣安寺，公卿百官送于丽泽门外。磐无子，命其婿著作郎李稚宾为东平判官，以便就近奉养。
English: The next day, the crown prince also gave a banquet at the St. Ann's Temple, and the nobles and officials were sent outside the gate of the Ritz. Iwa no Miko ordered his son-in-law, the author and writer, Li Zhi Bin, to be the Dongping judge, so that he could be close to him.

古文：每大臣燕见，帝数问磐起居状，始终眷顾不衰。
现代文：世祖常向大臣询问磐生活情况，始终眷恋不已。
English: The ancestor often asked the minister about Iwa's life, and he was always attached to her.

古文：磐资性刚方，闲居不妄言笑，每奏对，必以正，不肯阿意承顺，帝尝以古直称之，虽权幸侧目，弗愿也。
现代文：磐禀性刚强，平时不妄言笑，每奏对皇帝，言辞正直，不肯阿谀奉承，世祖称赞他为人耿直，虽权臣和受皇帝宠爱的人对他怒目而视，他也不屑一顾。
English: He was strong and tough. He did not speak or laugh inappropriately. He spoke honestly to the emperor every time he played, and refused to be flattered. The patriarch praised him for being an upright person. Although powerful ministers and those who were favored by the emperor glared at him, he did not disdain them.

古文：阿合马方得权，致重币求文于碑，磐拒弗与。
现代文：阿合马正掌权之时，以重金求写篇歌颂自己的碑文，他坚决拒绝。
English: When Ahama was in power, he asked for a large sum of money to write an inscription praising himself, but he firmly refused.

古文：所荐宋瑽、雷膺、魏初、徐琰、胡祗遹、孟祺、李谦，后皆为名臣。
现代文：所荐举的宋、雷膺、魏初、徐琰，胡祗、孟祺、李谦，后来都是名臣。
English: Song, Lei Yu, Wei Chu, Xu Xi, Hu Yao, Meng Yao, and Li Qian, who were recommended for promotion, later became famous ministers.

古文：鹗始生，有大鸟止于庭，乡先生张奫曰： 鹗也。是儿其有大名乎！ 因名之。
现代文：享年九十二岁而卒。赠端贞雅亮佐治功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司，追封氵名国公，谥 文忠 。王鹗，字百一，曹州东明人，曾祖名成，祖父名立，父名琛。初生时有大鸟停庭院内，因名鹗。
English: He passed away at the age of ninety-two. He bestowed the title of 名国公, 文忠, to 端貞雅亮佐治功臣, Taifu, Kaifu Yi, and Sansei, and posthumously conferred the title of 名国公, 文忠. Wang Yao, the hundred-and-first, was from Dongming, Caozhou. His great-great-grandfather was named Cheng, his grandfather was named Li, and his father was named Yao. When he was born, there was a large bird in the courtyard, which was named after him.

古文：幼聪悟，日诵千余言，长工词赋。
现代文：自幼聪敏，能每天背诵诗文千余言，长大长于词赋。
English: Since childhood, he has been intelligent and can recite more than a thousand words of poetry every day. He is taller than his words.

古文：金正大元年，中进士第一甲第一人出身，授应奉翰林文字。
现代文：金哀宗正大元年，科举中进士第一甲第一名，授应奉翰林文字。
English: In the first year of Jin Ye Zong Zheng University, he won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination, and was awarded the Bong Hanlin script.

古文：六年，授归德府判官，行亳州城父令。
现代文：六年授归德府判官，行亳州城父令。
English: In six years, he was awarded the title of magistrate of Dezhou, and carried out the order of the father of the city of Dezhou.

古文：七年，改同知申州事，行蔡州汝阳令，丁母忧。
现代文：七年，改任同知申州事，行蔡州汝阳令，此时因母亲去世回家守丧。
English: In the seventh year, he was reassigned to Tongzhi Shengzhou, acting Caizhou Ruyang, at which time he went home to mourn his mother's death.

古文：天兴二年，金主迁蔡，诏尚书省移书恒山公武仙进兵。
现代文：天兴二年，金朝皇帝迁都蔡州后召见，授任尚书省右司都事，后升为左右司郎中。
English: In the second year of Tianxing, after the emperor of the Kim dynasty moved the capital to Caizhou, he was summoned and appointed as the right secretary of the capital of Shangshu Province, and later promoted to the middle of the left and right secretary.

古文：金主览书，问谁为之，右丞完颜仲德曰： 前翰林应奉王鹗也。 
现代文：三年蔡州为蒙古军所陷，王鹗被俘，将被杀，万户张柔闻其名而救出。安置于保州。
English: Three years ago, Caizhou fell to the Mongolian army. Wang Yao was captured and will be killed. Wanyu Zhang Rong heard his name and rescued him. He was resettled in Bozhou.

古文：曰： 朕即位时状元耶？ 召见，惜擢用之晚，起复，授尚书省右司都事，升左右司郎中。
现代文：蒙古乃马真皇后三年，当时世祖尚未即位，访求名士，遣使聘请王鹗至王府，每日为世祖讲解《孝经》、《书经》、《易经》及齐家治国之道，讲述古今事物之变化，如此一年有余。
English: Mongolia was ruled by Empress Ma Zhen for three years. At that time, the founder of the dynasty had not yet ascended the throne. She visited famous people and sent an envoy to invite Wang Xuan to the royal palace. Wang Xuan explained the "Book of Filial Piety," the "Book of Books," the "Book of Changes" and the Qi family's way of governing the country to the founder every day, and talked about the changes in things from ancient times to the present. This went on for more than a year.

古文：三年，蔡陷，将被杀，万户张柔闻其名，救之，辇归，馆于保州。
现代文：请求还乡，世祖留他居大都，并赐宅一所。中统元年，世祖即位，授王鹗为翰林学士承旨，皇帝的诰命和朝廷典章制度，都由他裁定。至元元年，加资善大夫，上章建议修纂《实录》及附修《辽史》、《金史》。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, when the patriarch ascended to the throne, he appointed Wang Qian as a scholar of Hanlin, and the emperor's death sentence and the system of imperial awards were all decided by him. In the first year of the first year, he was appointed as a good doctor, and the last chapter suggested the revision of "True Record" and the supplement of "Liao History" and "Gold History."

古文：皆从之，始立翰林学士院，鹗遂荐李冶、李昶、王磐、徐世隆、高鸣为学士。
现代文：又建议设立翰林学士院，并推荐李冶、李昶、王磐、徐世隆、高鸣等为翰林院学士。
English: He also proposed the establishment of the Hanlin Academy, and recommended Li Ye, Li Jun, Wang Ban, Xu Shilong, Gao Ming and others to be the academicians of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：复奏立十道提举学校官。
现代文：还奏请设立十道提举学校官。
English: He also called for the establishment of a ten-way nomination system for school officials.

古文：有言事者，谓宰执非其人，诏儒臣廷议可任宰相者。
现代文：世祖召集儒臣讨论推荐宰相人选。奸臣阿合马企图乘机夺取相位，有些大臣也从旁助力。
English: The founder of Confucianism summoned his ministers to discuss the recommendation of a candidate for prime minister. The treacherous minister Ahama tried to seize the opportunity to seize the position, and some ministers also helped.

古文：鸣每以敢言被上知，尝入内，值大风雪，帝谓御史大夫塔察儿曰： 高学士年老，后有大政，就问可也。 
现代文：众人知其不当，但谁也不敢说话，只有王鹗起来反对，奸臣之谋为他中止。至元五年请求辞官，世祖命有关机构仍每年给他俸禄，遇有大事还是遣人去询问。至元十年卒，年八十四岁，谥 文康 。
English: Everyone knew it was improper, but no one dared to speak out. Only Wang Xuan stood up and objected, and the treacherous minister's plot was stopped for him. In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he requested to resign from the post, and the relevant institutions still gave him a salary every year, but in the event of a major event, they would send someone to inquire. In the tenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, at the age of 84, he died.

古文：赐太官酒肉慰劳之，其见敬礼如此。九年，迁吏礼部尚书。十一年，病卒，年六十六，有文集五十卷。
现代文：鹗性情开朗，其文章不雕饰，常说： 学者应该以弄清哲理为先，讲究章句那是一般书生的事，不是我学习的目的。 著有《论语集义》一卷、《汝南遗事》二卷、诗文四十卷，题名《应物集》。
English: He had a cheerful disposition, and his articles were unadorned. He often said, "Scholars should first clarify the philosophy, and pay attention to the chapters. That is a matter for ordinary students, not the purpose of my study." He was the author of one volume of "On the Meaning of Words," two volumes of "Southern Relics," and forty volumes of poetry, entitled "Collection of Objects."

古文：既至，问河南居官者孰贤，对曰： 险夷一节，惟完颜仲德。 又问完颜合答及蒲瓦何如，对曰： 二人将略短少，任之不疑，此金所以亡也。 
现代文：李冶，字仁卿，真定栾城人。金朝时考中进士，调任高陵县主簿，未到任又改知钧州，金哀宗天兴元年，钧州城陷，冶改装北渡黄河，流落于忻、崞之间，住在一间简陋的房子里读书，别人不堪忍受，而他还觉得很宽敞。世祖即位之前就闻知李冶贤能，遣使召至，问河南金朝诸臣谁人较贤，李冶举完颜仲德，世祖问完颜合答与蒲瓦二人如何，李冶说： 此二人缺乏将帅之谋略，而金任用不疑，故此亡国。 
English: Li Ye, nicknamed "Renqing" and "Zhending," was a native of Shicheng. He was promoted to a scholar in the middle school entrance examination during the reign of the Jin Dynasty, and was assigned to be the chief accountant of Gaoling County. Before taking office, he was transferred to Shizhou. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Shizhou fell, and Ye was forced to move to Beidu on the Yellow River. He lived between Shizhen and Shizhen. He lived in a simple house for studying, which was unbearable for others, but he thought it was very spacious. Before his father-in-law ascended the throne

古文：又问魏徵、曹彬何如，对曰： 徵忠言谠论，知无不言，以唐诤臣观之，徵为第一。
现代文：又问唐朝魏征与宋朝的曹彬如何，李冶说： 征忠心直言，知无不言，唐朝的谏臣数他第一。
English: When asked about Wei Zheng of the Tang Dynasty and Cao Bin of the Song Dynasty, Li Ye said: Zheng Zheng was a loyal and outspoken person. He knew everything and said nothing. He had the largest number of subordinates in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：彬伐江南，未尝妄杀一人，拟之方叔、召虎可也。汉之韩、彭、卫、霍，在所不论。 
现代文：彬伐江南不妄杀一人，可与方叔、召虎相比，汉代之韩信、彭越、卫青、霍去病等则不在话下。 
English: Bin Va Jiangnan did not wantonly kill one person, which can be compared with Fang Shizhu and Zhaohu, while Han Xin, Peng Yue, Wei Qing, Huo Qian and so on in the Han Dynasty are out of the question.

古文：又问 今之臣有如魏徵者乎？ 
现代文：又问 ：今之臣者有像魏征的吗？ 
English: Another question: Are there any present-day ministers like Wei Zheng?

古文：对曰： 今以侧媚成风，欲求魏徵之贤，实难其人。 
现代文：答曰： 现在讨好取宠成风，难找到像魏征这样的人。 
English: A: It's hard to find someone like Wei Zheng now that it's so popular to curry favor.

古文：又问今之人材贤否，对曰： 天下未尝乏材，求则得之，舍则失之，理势然耳。
现代文：又问 ：当今有贤才否？ 对曰： 天下本不乏贤才，求则得之，舍则失之。
English: Another question: Are there any geniuses today? Answer: There is no shortage of geniuses in the world. If you ask for it, you will get it, if you don't, you will lose it.

古文：今儒生有如魏璠、王鹗、李献卿、兰光庭、赵复、郝经、王博文辈，皆有用之材，又皆贤王所尝聘问者，举而用之，何所不可，但恐用之不尽耳。
现代文：今儒生中如魏、王鹗、李献卿、兰光庭、赵复、郝经、王博文辈皆是有用之材，贤王也曾聘过。任用他们有何不可，只怕是不能让他们尽其才能。
English: Among today's Confucian scholars, such as Wei, Wang Xuan, Li Xianqing, Lan Guangting, Zhao Fu, Xing Jing, and Wang Bowen, are all useful people, and Xianwang has also hired them. There is no reason why they should not be appointed, but they may not be able to make the best use of their talents.

古文：且为治之道，不过立法度、正纪纲而已。
现代文：四海之广，又岂只此数人，大王诚心广求，将集聚于朝廷。 
English: The breadth of the four seas, and only these few people, sincerely sought by the great king, will gather at the imperial court.

古文：纪纲者，上下相维持；法度者，赏罚示惩劝，今则大官小吏，下至编氓，皆自纵恣，以私害公，是无法度也。
现代文：世祖问何以治天下，李冶对曰： 治天下说难难如登天，说易易如反掌。有制度则治，讲求实际则治，重用君子黜退小人则治，像这样岂不易如反掌，反之则难如登天。
English: When the founder of the world asked how to rule the world, Li Ye replied: "Ruling the world is as difficult as ascending to heaven, and as easy as saying it is easy. If you have a system, you should rule, if you are practical, you should rule, if you are a gentleman, you should rule, and if you are a villain, you should rule. Isn't it as easy as climbing to heaven, and if not, it is as difficult as ascending to heaven.

古文：有功者未必得赏，有罪者未必被罚，甚则有功者或反受辱，有罪者或反获宠，是无法度也。
现代文：治国之道在于建立法律制度和整顿纲纪两条，纲纪维系君臣关系，法律分别赏罚。如今上至大小官吏下至平民百姓，皆为所欲为，以私害公，这就是无法度。有功者不仅不赏反而受辱，有罪者不仅未罚反而受宠，是无法度。
English: The way to govern the country lies in the establishment of a legal system and the rectification of the two principles of discipline. Discipline maintains the relationship between the monarch and the subjects, and the law rewards and punishes separately. Nowadays, officials of all ranks and levels, as well as ordinary people, all do as they please and harm the public with their private lives. This is intolerable. Those who are meritorious are not only not rewarded but humiliated, and those who are guilty are not only not punished but favored. This is intolerable.

古文：法度废，纪纲坏，天下不变乱，已为幸矣。 
现代文：法度纲纪被破坏，天下不乱就是万幸了。 
English: If the legal system and discipline are destroyed, it will be a blessing if there is no chaos in the world.

古文：又问昨地震何如，对曰： 天裂为阳不足，地震为阴有余。
现代文：又问地震是什么原因，李冶回答说： 天裂是因为阳不足，地震是因为阴有余。
English: When asked what the cause of the earthquake was, Li Ye replied: The crack in the sky was caused by a lack of yang, and the earthquake was caused by an excess of yin.

古文：夫地道，阴也，阴太盛，则变常。
现代文：地属阴，阴盛就会不正常。
English: If the earth is yin, the yin-sheng will be abnormal.

古文：今之地震，或奸邪在侧，或女谒盛行，或谗慝交至，或刑罚失中，或征伐骤举，五者必有一于此矣。
现代文：今发生地震或是由于有奸邪在君王身边，或是宫中妇女专权，或是有谗言邪恶，或刑罚不当，或是突然要进行征伐，五者必居其一。
English: If an earthquake were to occur now, it would be due to treachery in the king's entourage, or the exclusive power of women in the palace, or malicious gossip, or improper punishment, or the sudden need for a military expedition.

古文：夫天之爱君，如爱其子，故示此为警之耳。
现代文：上天爱君王如爱其子，所以以地震来示警。
English: Heaven loves a king as it loves its son, so it sends an earthquake as a warning.

古文：苟能辨奸邪，去女谒，屏谗慝，省刑罚，慎征讨，上当天心，下协人意，则可转咎为休矣。 
现代文：若能辨奸邪，不使妇女专权，屏弃谗言邪恶，减轻刑罚，不随意用兵，上副天心，下合民意。则可转祸为福。 
English: If you can discern the evil of adultery, do not give women the monopoly of power, reject the evil of slander, lessen the punishment, do not use soldiers at will, uphold the heart of heaven, and conform to the will of the people, then you can turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：世祖嘉纳之。
现代文：世祖甚是称赞并采纳。
English: The patriarch highly praised it and adopted it.

古文：冶晚家元氏，买田封龙山下，学徒益众。
现代文：冶晚年居家于元氏，在封龙山下开馆讲学，学徒日多。
English: In his later years, Ye lived with the Yuan family and opened a lecture hall at the foot of Fenglong Mountain, attracting more and more apprentices.

古文：及世祖即位，复聘之，欲处以清要，冶以老病，恳求还山。
现代文：世祖即位后欲重用他，冶以老病退求还山。
English: After the ancestor ascended the throne, he wanted to reuse him, but he returned to the mountain because of an old illness.

古文：至元二年，再以学士召，就职期月，复以老病辞去，卒于家，年八十八。
现代文：至元二年，又召他为学士，就职仅一月又因病辞去，卒于家，年八十八岁。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was also appointed as a bachelor, and he resigned due to illness only one month after taking office. He died at home at the age of eighty-eight.

古文：所著有《敬斋文集》四十卷，《壁书藂削》十二卷，《泛说》四十卷，《古今黈》四十卷，《测圆海镜》十二卷，《益古衍段》三十卷。
现代文：著有《敬斋文集》四十卷、《壁书聚艹削》十二卷、《泛说》四十卷、《古今黄主》四十卷、《测园海镜》十二卷、《益古衍段》三十卷。
English: He is the author of "A Collection of Homage to Saitama" with forty volumes, "Wall Scroll Collection" with twelve volumes, "General History" with forty volumes, "Ancient and Modern History" with forty volumes, "Seaside Mirror" with twelve volumes, and "Yikoku Yandan" with thirty volumes.

古文：徐世隆，字威卿，陈州西华人。
现代文：徐世隆，字威卿，陈州西华人。
English: Xu Shilong, Zi Weiqing, a Western Chinese from Chenzhou.

古文：弱冠，登金正大四年进士第，辟为县令。
现代文：二十岁中金正大四年进士，朝廷任命他做县令。
English: At the age of twenty, Kim Jong-il entered the priesthood at the age of four, and the imperial court appointed him as a county magistrate.

古文：其父戒世隆曰： 汝年少，学未至，毋急仕进，更当读书，多识往事，以益智识，俟三十入官，未晚也。 世隆遂辞官，益笃于学。
现代文：其父告诫他说： 你还年少，所学不多，不忙去为官，应再多读书，增加知识，三十岁为官不晚。 世隆便辞官而更加努力学习。
English: His father admonished him: You are still young, you have not learned much, you are not too busy to become an official, you should read more and increase your knowledge, it is not too late to become an official at the age of thirty.

古文：岁壬辰，父殁。癸巳，世隆奉母北渡河，严实招致东平幕府，俾掌书记。
现代文：金天兴元年，父亲去世，第二年同母亲北渡黄河，严实招他到东平为书记官。
English: In the first year of Jin Tianxing's reign, his father passed away. The next year, he and his mother traveled north to the Yellow River, and he was invited to Dongping as a registrar.

古文：世隆劝实收养寒素，一时名士多归之。
现代文：世隆劝严实收养贫困书生，因而许多名士都投奔而来。
English: Shilong advised Yan Si to adopt poor students, so many celebrities came to visit him.

古文：宪宗即位，以为拘榷燕京路课税官，世隆固辞。
现代文：宪宗即位，召他去做管理燕京路课税官，世隆坚决拒绝。
English: When Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne, he called him to manage the Yanjing Road tax collector, but Shilong resolutely refused.

古文：壬子，世祖在潜邸，召见于日月山，时方图征云南，以问世隆，对曰： 孟子有言： 不嗜杀人者能一之。 
现代文：世祖即位前于宪宗二年，在日月山召见世隆，询问有关征讨云南的事，世隆说： 孟子说过 不杀人的君王能统一天下 。
English: Two years before the enthronement of King Gensong, King Sejong summoned Shilong to the Sun Moon Mountain to inquire about the conquest of Yunnan. Shilong said: Mencius said that a king who does not kill people can unify the country.

古文：夫君人者，不嗜杀人，天下可定，况蕞尔之西南夷乎！ 世祖曰： 诚如卿言，吾事济矣。 
现代文：君王不杀人能统一天下，何况小小西南一隅之地。 中统元年，被提升为燕京等路宣抚使。
English: A king who does not kill people can unify the country, not to mention a small corner of the southwest. In the first year of unification, he was promoted to Yanjing and other roads.

古文：实时得金太常登歌乐，世祖遣使取之观，世隆典领以行。
现代文：这时中书省令各路饲养禁卫军的瘦马数万匹，为世隆所拒绝。前任宣抚使亏欠清沧应征盐课，世隆对此进行清查，使盐课有余，朝廷赐他白银三十铤。
English: At this time, the Central Ministry of Education ordered all provinces to raise tens of thousands of thin horses for the imperial guard, which Shilong refused. The previous procurator made Qingcang pay the salt tax. Shilong investigated this and made the salt tax more than enough, and the court gave him thirty pieces of silver.

古文：既见，世祖欲留之，世隆以母老辞。
现代文：二年，调职顺天府，该地正闹荒灾，世隆开仓放粮，使众多百姓免于死亡。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to Shuntianfu, which was ravaged by natural disasters. Shilong opened warehouses to release grain, saving many people from death.

古文：实子忠济，以世隆为东平行台经历，于是益赞忠济兴学养士。
现代文：三年，朝廷废宣抚司，回到东平。其后世祖任命他为太常卿兼提举东平路学校事。
English: Three years later, he returned to Dongping after being dismissed from the post of Imperial Procurator. Later, the patriarch appointed him as Tai Changqing and promoted him to the post of Dongping Road School.

古文：中统元年，擢燕京等路宣抚使，世隆以新民善俗为务。
现代文：四年，世祖询问他关于中国古代尧、舜、禹、汤如何为圣王的道理，世隆将《书经》中有关帝王的事加以讲解，著成书进呈皇帝，世祖大喜，命翰林承旨安藏译为蒙文进呈御览。
English: In the fourth year, the patriarch asked him about how the ancient Chinese emperors Shun, Quan, Yu and Tang were holy kings. Shilong explained the things about the emperors in the "Book of Books" and submitted the book to the emperor. The patriarch was overjoyed and ordered Hanlin to translate the book into Mongolian and submit it to the emperor.

古文：从之。七年，迁吏部尚书，世隆以铨选无可守之法，为撰《选曹八议》。
现代文：至元元年，调任世隆为翰林侍讲学士，兼太常卿，朝廷大政都先征求他的意见后而再行，凡皇帝诏令和宫中典册都出自世隆之手。还协助朝廷兴建太庙，迎奉祖宗神位。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to Shilong as Hanlin's attendant, lecturer and scholar, and concurrently the Grand Master of the Imperial Court. The imperial edicts and the palace manuals were all from Shilong's hand. He also assisted the imperial court in building the Great Temple and welcoming the ancestor's god.

古文：九年，乞补外，佩虎符，为东昌路总管。
现代文：不久又兼任户部侍郎，受皇帝之命参预设立中书省等国家最高机构，确定内外官制。
English: Not long after, he also served as an attendant of the Household Department, and was ordered by the emperor to participate in the establishment of the Ministry of Literature and other national supreme institutions, and to determine the internal and external official system.

古文：至郡，专务以德率下，不事鞭箠，吏不忍欺，民亦化服，期年而政成，郡人颂之。
现代文：至元七年，任吏部尚书，鉴于当时选任官吏无一定制度，因而著《选曹八议》一文。至元九年，任东昌路总管，注重提倡道德，以理服人，不专靠刑罚，仅仅一年该郡政治清明，人民称颂。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he wrote a book on the appointment of officials, and in view of the fact that there was no certain system for the election of officials at that time, he wrote an article on "Selection of Eight Opinions." In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he served as the general manager of Dongchang Road, focusing on promoting morality, persuading people with reason, not relying solely on punishment. In just one year, the county's politics were clear, and the people praised it.

古文：十四年，起为山东提刑按察使。
现代文：至元十四年，提升为山东提刑按察使。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Shandong Criminal Investigation Commissioner.

古文：时有妖言狱，所司逮捕凡数百人，世隆剖析诖误者十八九，悉纵遣之。
现代文：当时有妖言惑众，衙门逮捕了数百人，世隆加以甄别，误捕者十之八九，皆予释放。
English: At that time, there was demonic talk to mislead the public. The court arrested hundreds of people, Shilong screened them, and nine out of ten of those arrested by mistake were released.

古文：十五年，移淮东。
现代文：十五年调淮东。
English: Fifteen years later, it was moved to Huadong.

古文：宋将许琼家童告琼匿官库财，有司系其妻孥征之。
现代文：世祖准备征讨日本，世隆上疏劝止。十七年召为翰林学士，辞不就任；又召为集贤学士，仍以称病为由，不就任。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was called to be a scholar of Hanlin, but he did not take the post; he was also called to be a scholar of Jixian, but he did not take the post on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：世隆曰： 琼所匿者，故宋之物，岂得与今盗官财者同论耶？ 
现代文：世隆身材魁伟，胸襟广阔，乐观慈祥，熟悉前代历朝制度，尤其精通法律，善于断决冤案。
English: Shilong is tall, broad-minded, optimistic and benevolent. He is familiar with the previous dynastic system, especially with the law, and is good at adjudicating grievances.

古文：同僚不从，世隆独抗章辩明，行台是之，释不问。
现代文：二十二年安童为宰相，奏请任用世隆，世隆再以年老多病而辞。至元二十二年卒，享年八十岁，著有《瀛洲集》百卷及文集若干卷。
English: In 1922, Ando was appointed prime minister and petitioned for the appointment of Shiro, but Shiro resigned due to old age and illness. He died in 1922 at the age of 80. He was the author of 100 volumes of "Shukushu shu" and several volumes of anthologies.

古文：会征日本，世隆上疏谏止，语颇剀切，当路者不即以闻。
现代文：阎复，字子靖，祖籍平阳和州，祖父名衍，曾在金朝为官。
English: Yan Fu, also known as Zi Jing, was born in Pingyang and Hanzhou. His grandfather, named Yan, was an official in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：岁己未，始掌书记于行台，擢御史掾。至元八年，用王磐荐，为翰林应奉，以才选充会同馆副使，兼接伴使。
现代文：至元八年，为会同馆副使兼接伴使。
English: In 1861, he became the vice-envoy and accompanying envoy for the association.

古文：扈驾上京，赋应制诗二篇，寓规讽意，世祖顾和礼霍孙曰： 有才如此，何可不用！ 十二年，升翰林修撰。
现代文：十二年升任翰林修撰。
English: In 2012, he was promoted to the post of Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：十四年，出佥河北河南道提刑按察司事，阶奉训大夫。
现代文：十四年以奉训大夫官阶出任佥河北河南道提刑按察司事。
English: For 14 years, he served as the deputy inspector of the Penal Correction Department of Henan Province, Heibei Province, with the rank of a doctor-in-training.

古文：十六年，入为翰林直学士，以州郡校官多不职，建议定铨选之法。
现代文：十六年回朝任翰林直学士，有鉴于州郡官吏不称职，建议制定选拔官吏之法。
English: In view of the incompetence of the state and county officials, it is recommended to formulate a new law for the selection of officials.

古文：十九年，升侍讲学士，明年，改集贤侍讲学士，同领会同馆事。
现代文：十九年升侍讲学士。二十年改为集贤侍讲学士并兼管会同馆事务。
English: He was promoted to assistant lecturer in 19 years, and in 20 years he was promoted to associate lecturer and also managed the affairs of the association.

古文：二十三年，升翰林学士。
现代文：至元二十三年升翰林院学士。
English: He was promoted to be a bachelor of Hanlin Academy in 1923.

古文：帝屡召至榻前，面谕诏旨，具草以进，帝称善。
现代文：世祖屡次召至榻前口述圣旨，由阎复草拟成文。
English: The patriarch was repeatedly summoned to his bedside to recite the sacred will, which was drafted by Yan Fu.

古文：二十八年，尚书省罢，复立中书省。
现代文：二十八年废尚书省，再立中书省，欲以阎复执政。
English: In 1928, he abolished the Ministry of Literature and Literature, and re-established the Ministry of Literature and Literature, intending to return to power with Yan.

古文：复屡谢不足胜任，帝谓侍臣曰： 书生识义理，存谦让，是也，勿强。 
现代文：复认为自己不足胜任，多次推辞，世祖对侍臣说 ：阎复知书达理，有谦让之心，不必勉强。 
English: Fufu thought that he was not competent enough, and repeatedly declined. The ancestor said to his attendant: Yan Fufu is knowledgeable and reasonable, has a humble heart, and does not need to be forced.

古文：御史台改提刑按察司为肃政廉访司，首命复为浙西道肃政廉访使。
现代文：御史台把提刑按察司改为肃政廉访司，首先任命阎复为浙西道肃政廉访使。
English: The State Administration of History changed the name of the Criminal Investigation Department to the Political Corruption Investigation Department, and first appointed Yan Fu as the Political Corruption Investigation Envoy of West Zhejiang Province.

古文：先是，奸臣桑哥当国，尝有旨命翰林撰《桑哥辅政碑》，桑哥既败，诏有司踣其碑，复等亦坐是免官。
现代文：奸臣桑哥误国被处理，阎复因撰写过《桑哥辅政碑》受牵连亦被免官。三十一年成宗即位，召阎复入朝，授任集贤学士，官阶为正议大夫。
English: His traitorous vassal, Sango, was dealt with for misrepresenting the country, and Yan Fu was removed from his post because he was implicated for having written "Sango Auxiliary Monument." In 31 A.D., Emperor Chengzong ascended to the throne, and Yan Fu was invited to join the imperial court. He was awarded the title of Shixian Baccalaureate, and his official rank was that of Zhengli Doctor.

古文：三十一年，成宗即位，以旧臣召入朝，赐重锦、玉环、白金，除集贤学士，阶正议大夫。
现代文：元贞元年，阎复上疏建议京师建立 宣圣 庙学，以雅乐祭祀孔子，恢复曲阜孔墓守冢户为单独户籍，不并入民籍。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Zhen, Yan Fu Shang Su suggested that the Beijing division should establish the "Xuan Sheng Miao Gu" and worship Confucius with classical music, and restore Qufu, the guardian of Confucius's tomb, as a separate household registration, not to be incorporated into the civil register.

古文：元贞元年，上疏言： 京师宜首建宣圣庙学，定用释奠雅乐。 
现代文：这些意见均被采纳。其后又奏请朝廷赐护守孔墓者二十八户，祭祀田五千亩。元贞三年彗星出现，阎复因此建议制定法令，颁布对宗室亲王的分封与赠予，增加官员俸禄，调任内外官吏等。
English: These opinions were all adopted. Subsequently, he also petitioned the Imperial Court to grant protection to the twenty-eight families who guarded Kong's tomb, as well as five thousand mu of sacrificial land. When the comet appeared three years after the death of Yuan Zhen, Yan Fu therefore proposed the enactment of a decree, the promulgation of the allocation of fiefs and gifts to the prince of the family, the increase of officials' salaries, the transfer of internal and external officials, etc.

古文：江南公田租重，宜减，以贷贫民。 
现代文：还建议对地方官吏不施杖刑，减轻江南公田的重租。这些建议多被采纳施行。
English: It also recommended that local officials should not be punished with the cane, and that the heavy rent of public land in the south of the Yangtze River should be reduced. Most of these recommendations have been adopted and implemented.

古文：后多采用。大德元年，仍迁翰林学士。二年，诏赐楮币万贯。
现代文：大德元年，又调任翰林学士，次年赐他楮币万贯。
English: In the first year of the Great German Era, he was transferred to the post of Hanlin Baccalaureate, and the following year he was given a large sum of money.

古文：四年，帝召至榻前，密谕之曰： 中书庶务繁重，左相难其人，卿为朕举所知。 
现代文：四年成宗召至榻前，让他举荐中书省左丞相人选。
English: Four years later, he summoned Chengzong to his bedside and asked him to recommend a candidate for the position of Vice-Minister of the Left of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：复以哈剌哈孙对，帝大喜，即遣使召入，相之；复亦拜翰林学士承旨，阶正奉大夫。
现代文：阎复推荐哈剌哈孙。成宗大喜，即召拜哈剌哈孙为相，拜阎复为翰林学士承旨，官阶正奉大夫。
English: Yan Fu recommended Hachihasun. Chengzong was so pleased that he summoned Hachihasun as his consort, and Hachihasun became a scholar of Hanlin, with the official rank of doctor.

古文：十一年春，武宗践祚，复首陈三事，曰 惜名器，明赏罚，择人材 ，言皆剀切。
现代文：大德十一年武宗即位，阎复首先向皇帝进呈三点意见 ：朝廷器物和爵位不能轻易与人，赏罚要分明，人材任用要选择。 
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne in the eleventh year of the Taide era, Yan Fu first presented three points to the emperor: Imperial treasures and titles should not be easily transferred, rewards and punishments should be clear, and personnel appointments should be selected.

古文：时仁宗居东宫，赐以重锦，俾公卿祖道都门外。
现代文：武宗进升其官阶为荣禄大夫，授平章政事之职。
English: Wu Zong was promoted to the official rank of honorary doctor, and was awarded the title of political affairs.

古文：及即位，遣使召复，复以病辞。
现代文：阎复推辞不受，请求辞官返故里。仁宗即位后召他为官，又推辞不就任。
English: Unable to accept Yan Fu's resignation, he asked to return to his hometown. After Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, he was called to office, but he refused to take office.

古文：皇庆元年三月卒，年七十七，谥文康。
现代文：皇庆元年三月卒，年七十七岁，谥 文康 。
English: He died in March of the first year of the Emperor's reign, at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：有《静轩集》五十卷。
现代文：著有《静轩集》五十卷。
English: He is the author of the 50-volume "Jingxuan Collection."

