古文：二十有二年春，齐侯伐莒。
现代文：二十二年春季，齐侯攻打莒国。
English: In the spring of 1922, Qi Hou attacked and conquered Yunnan.

古文：宋华亥、向宁、华定自宋南里出奔楚。
现代文：宋国的华亥、向宁、华定从宋国的南里逃到楚国。
English: Hua Hai, Xiang Ning and Huading of Song fled from Nanli of Song to Chu.

古文：大蒐于昌间。
现代文：鲁国在昌间这个地方举行大规模阅兵活动。
English: Russia held a large-scale military parade in Changma.

古文：夏四月乙丑，天王崩。
现代文：夏季四月乙丑日，周天王去世。
English: On April Fool's Day in the summer, Zhou Tianwang passed away.

古文：六月，叔鞅如京师，葬景王。
现代文：六月，叔鞅去到京师，安葬周景王。
English: In June, Zhu Xi went to Beijing to attend the funeral of Zhou Jingwang.

古文：王室乱。
现代文：周王室发生动乱。
English: The Zhou royal family was in turmoil.

古文：刘子、单子以王猛居于皇。
现代文：刘献公和单穆公带着王猛住在皇这个地方。
English: Liu Xian Gong and Shan Mu Gong took Wang Mengru to live in this place.

古文：秋，刘子、单子以王猛入于王城。
现代文：秋季，刘献公和单穆公带着王猛进入王城。
English: In autumn, Liu Xian Gong and Shan Mu Gong took Wang Meng into the royal city.

古文：冬十月，王子猛卒。
现代文：冬季十月，王子猛去世。
English: In the winter of October, Prince died suddenly.

古文：十有二月癸酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月癸酉初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：二十二年春，王二月甲子，齐北郭启帅师伐莒。
现代文：二十二年春季，周王朝历法的二月十六日，齐国的北郭启领兵进攻莒国。
English: In the spring of 22 A.D., on February 16th of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Qi's Bei Guoqi led an army to attack Shandong.

古文：莒子将战，苑羊牧之谏曰： 齐帅贱，其求不多，不如下之。大国不可怒也。 
现代文：莒子将要迎战，苑羊牧之劝谏说： 齐国的元帅地位低下，他的要求不多，不如向他低头，大国是不能激怒的。 
English: Xun Zi was about to go to war, and Yuan Yang Mu Zhi advised him, "The marshal of Qi has a low status, and his demands are not many. It is better to bow to him. Great nations cannot be provoked to anger."

古文：弗听。败齐师于寿馀。
现代文：莒子不听，在寿馀打败了齐军。
English: Xunzi did not listen and defeated the Qi army in Shouyu.

古文：齐侯伐莒，莒子行成。
现代文：齐景公又亲自领兵进攻莒国，莒子求和。
English: Lord Qi Jing personally led an army to attack Shanzhou, and Shanzhou sued for peace.

古文：司马竈如莒涖盟。莒子如齐涖盟，盟于稷门之外。
现代文：司马灶到莒国参加结盟，莒子到齐国参加结盟，在稷门外边盟誓。
English: Sima Zhao went to Shan State to join the alliance, Zizi went to Qi State to join the alliance, and swore outside the gate.

古文：莒于是乎大恶其君。
现代文：莒国人因此而大大地讨厌他们的国君。
English: As a result, Koreans intensely disliked their ruler.

古文：楚薳越使告于宋曰： 寡君闻君有不令之臣为君忧，无宁以为宗羞，寡君请受而戮之。 
现代文：楚国的薳越派人告诉宋国说： 寡君听说君王有不好的臣下使君王忧虑，恐怕成为宗庙的羞耻，寡君请求接受下来加以诛戮。 
English: An envoy from Chu's Min Yue sent a message to Song, saying: "You have heard that the king has bad vassals, which worries the king. I'm afraid it will be a shame for the ancestral temple. I beg you to accept it and kill them."

古文：对曰： 孤不佞，不能媚于父兄，以为君忧，拜命之辱。
现代文：宋元公回答说： 孤没有才能，不能取得父兄的欢心，因此成为君王的忧虑，承蒙君王下达命令。
English: Song Yuan replied, "A lonely person has no talent and cannot win the favor of his father and brother. Therefore, he becomes the concern of the king and receives orders from the king.

古文：抑君臣日战，君曰余必臣是助，亦唯命。人有言曰， 唯乱门之无过 。
现代文：君臣之间每天作战，如果君王说： 我一定帮助臣下 ，也只能唯命是听，人们有话说： 不要经过动乱人家的门口。 
English: There are battles between lords and vassals every day. If the king says, "I will definitely help my vassal," he can only obey orders. People have a saying: "Don't go through the door of a turbulent person's house."

古文：君若惠保敝邑，无亢不衷，以奖乱人，孤之望也。
现代文：君王如果赐恩保护敝邑，不去保护不忠，以奖励作乱的人，这是孤的愿望，请君王考虑一下。 
English: It is a lonely wish if the king grants protection to the county, but does not protect the disloyalty and rewards the troublemakers. Please consider it.

古文：唯君图之！ 楚人患之。诸侯之戍谋曰： 若华氏知困而致死，楚耻无功而疾战，非吾利也。不如出之，以为楚功，其亦无能为也已。救宋而除其害，又何求？ 
现代文：楚国人担心这件事，诸侯派往宋国戌守的将领商量说： 如果华氏感到没有前途而拼命战斗，楚国由于不见功效而很快出兵作战，这于我们不利，不如让他们出去，以成就楚国的功绩，华氏也不能有所作为了，救援了宋国而除掉了他们的祸害，还有什么要求呢？ 
English: The people of Chu were worried about this matter, and the generals sent by the princes to Song to defend the city discussed and said: "If the Fawas feel that there is no future and fight desperately, and Chu soon sends troops to fight because they are ineffective, which is not good for us, it is better to let them go out to achieve the merits of Chu, and the Fawas can not make a difference, rescue the Song and eliminate their scourge, what else is required?

古文：乃固请出之。宋人从之。
现代文：于是坚决请求放出华氏，宋国人听从了。
English: So he made a firm request to release Mr. Hua, and the Song people complied.

古文：己巳，宋华亥、向宁、华定、华、华登、皇奄伤、省臧、士平出奔楚。
现代文：二月二十一日，宋国的华亥、向宁、华定、华貙、华登、皇奄伤、省臧、士平逃亡楚国。
English: On February 21, Hua Hai, Xiangning, Huading, Huajing, Huaden, Guanzhong, and Shiping of Song fled to Chu.

古文：宋公使公孙忌为大司马，边卬为大司徒，乐祁为司城，仲幾为左师，乐大心为右师，乐輓为大司寇，以靖国人。
现代文：宋元公派公孙忌做大司马，边卬做大司徒，乐祁做司城，仲几做左师，乐大心做右师，乐輓做大司寇，以便用来安定国内的人们。
English: Song and Yuan Dynasties sent Gongsun Boi to be the grand secretary, Bentham to be the grand secretary, Le Kun to be the grand secretary, Zhong Guo to be the left secretary, Le Daxin to be the right secretary, and Le Kun to be the grand secretary, in order to stabilize the people in the country.

古文：王子朝、宾起有宠于景王。王与宾孟说之，欲主之。
现代文：王子朝、宾起受到周景王的宠信，景王和宾起喜爱王子朝，要立王子朝为太子。
English: The Prince Dynasty and Pengqi were favored by King Zhou Jing. King Jing and Pengqi loved the Prince Dynasty and wanted to make the Prince Dynasty the crown prince.

古文：刘献公之庶子伯蚠事单穆公，恶宾孟之为人也，愿杀之。
现代文：刘献公的庶子伯蚠事奉单穆公，讨厌宾起的为人，愿意杀掉他。
English: Liu Xianguo's son-in-law, Bo Xuan, was a person who disliked Peng Zi and was willing to kill him.

古文：又恶王子朝之言，以为乱，愿去之。
现代文：又讨厌王子朝的话，认为违背了礼制，愿意除掉他。
English: He also hated the prince's words, thought they violated etiquette, and was willing to get rid of him.

古文：宾孟適郊，见雄鸡自断其尾。
现代文：有一次宾起走到郊外，看到雄鸡自己弄断自己的尾巴。
English: On one occasion, a guest walked out into the countryside and saw a rooster break its own tail.

古文：问之，侍者曰： 自惮其牺也。 
现代文：他问为什么，侍者说： 这是它自己害怕作牺牲。 
English: When he asked why, the waiter said, "It's because it's afraid of sacrificing itself."

古文：遽归告王，且曰： 鸡其惮为人用乎，人异于是。
现代文：宾起赶快回来报告景王，而且说： 鸡大概是害怕被人利用吧！
English: At the appointed time, he hurried back to report to King Jing and said, "The chicken is probably afraid of being taken advantage of!"

古文：牺者，实用人，人牺实难，己牺何害。 
现代文：人就和这不一样，牺牲，是被人使用的，被人利用确实困难，被自己利用还有什么妨碍？ 
English: People are different from this. Sacrifice, being used by others, being used by others is really difficult. What is the obstacle to being used by oneself?

古文：王弗应。
现代文：景王不回答。
English: King Gyeongbokgung did not respond.

古文：夏四月，王田北山，使公卿皆从，将杀单子、刘子。
现代文：夏季，四月，景王在北山打猎，让公卿们都跟着，准备杀掉单子、刘子。
English: In the summer, in April, King Jing went hunting in the northern mountains, and had the nobles follow him, ready to kill off Shan Zi and Liu Zi.

古文：王有心疾，乙丑，崩于荣锜氏。
现代文：景王有心脏病，十八日，死在荣锜氏那里。
English: Jing Wang had a heart attack and died on the 18th at Rong Yao's place.

古文：戊辰，刘子挚卒，无子，单子立刘蚠。
现代文：二十二日，刘子挚死了，没有嫡子，单子立了刘蚠。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Zixin died, without a legitimate son, and Liu Yao was appointed.

古文：五月庚辰，见王，遂攻宾起，杀之。
现代文：五月初四日，刘蚠进见周悼王，就乘势攻打宾起。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the year, Liu Yujin saw Zhou Wei Wang and took advantage of the situation to attack him.

古文：盟群王子于单氏。
现代文：杀死了他，和王子们在单氏那里结盟。
English: They killed him and allied themselves with the princes at Tan.

古文：晋之取鼓也，既献，而反鼓子焉，又叛于鲜虞。
现代文：晋国占取鼓地的时候，在宗庙里进献战利品以后就让鼓子回国。鼓子回去又背叛晋国归属鲜虞。
English: When Jin occupied the land of the drums, after presenting the spoils of war in the ancestral temple, he let the drums return to the country. There was a high risk that the drums would return and betray the belonging of Jin.

古文：六月，荀吴略东阳，使师伪籴者，负甲以息于昔阳之门外，遂袭鼓灭之。以鼓子鸢鞮归，使涉佗守之。
现代文：六月，荀吴巡视东阳，派军队伪装籴米的人，背着皮甲在昔阳城门外休息，就乘机侵袭鼓国，灭亡了它，带着鼓子鸢鞮回去，派涉佗镇守鼓地。
English: In June, Gong Wu inspected Dongyang and sent troops disguised as glutinous rice people to rest outside the city gate of Xiyang with their leather armor on their backs. They took the opportunity to invade the drum country and destroyed it. They went back with the drums and sent the town of Zhan to guard the drums.

古文：丁巳，葬景王。
现代文：六月十一日，安葬周景王。
English: On June 11, Zhou Jingwang was buried.

古文：王子朝因旧官百工之丧职秩者，与灵、景之族以作乱。
现代文：王子朝依仗旧官和百工中失去官职的人和灵王、景王的族人而发动叛乱。
English: The prince's court relied on the old officials and those who lost their official positions among the hundred laborers and the clansmen of King Ling and King Jing to launch a rebellion.

古文：帅郊、要、饯之甲，以逐刘子。
现代文：王子朝率领郊地、要地、饯地的甲士以驱逐刘子。
English: The Prince Dynasty led the warriors from the suburbs, important places and rural areas to expel Liu Zi.

古文：壬戌，刘子奔扬。单子逆悼王于庄宫以归。王子还夜取王以如庄宫。
现代文：十六日，刘子逃亡到扬地，单子在庄宫迎接悼王回到自己家里，王子还在夜里又把悼王带到庄宫。
English: On the 16th day, Liu Zi fled to Yangdi, and Shan Zi welcomed the mourning king back to his home in the Zhuang Palace. The prince also took the mourning king to the Zhuang Palace in the night.

古文：癸亥，单子出。王子还与召庄公谋，曰： 不杀单旗，不捷。
现代文：十七日，单子出奔，王子还和召庄公谋划，说： 不杀死单旗，不能算胜利。
English: On the seventeenth day, Shanqi ran away. The prince also plotted with Zhao Zhuang, saying: "If you don't kill Shanqi, you can't count it as a victory."

古文：与之重盟，必来。
现代文：和他再次结盟，他必定会来。
English: Ally with him again and he will surely come.

古文：背盟而克者多矣。 
现代文：违背盟约而战胜敌人的事情是很多的。 
English: There are many reasons for defeating the enemy in violation of the covenant.

古文：从之。
现代文：召庄公听从了他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：樊顷子曰： 非言也，必不克。 
现代文：樊顷子说： 这不成话，必然不能战胜敌人。 
English: Zou Hao Zi said, "This is not the end of the story, it is inevitable that we cannot defeat the enemy."

古文：遂奉王以追单子。及领，大盟而复，杀挚荒以说。刘子如刘。
现代文：于是王子还就事奉悼王追赶单子，到达崿岭，大张旗鼓地结盟后一起回去，杀死了挚荒以向单子解释，刘子到刘地去。
English: So the prince also served as the mourning king to catch up with Liu Zi, arrived in Jialing, made a grand alliance and went back together, killed Zhiyao to explain to Liu Zi, and Liu Zi went to Liu Di.

古文：单子亡，乙丑，奔于平畤。
现代文：单子逃亡，十九日，逃亡到平畤。
English: On the 19th, he fled to Pingyao.

古文：群王子追之。单子杀还、姑、发、弱、鬷、延、定、稠，子朝奔京。
现代文：王子们追赶他，单子杀了还、姑、发、弱、鬷、延、定、稠，王子朝逃亡到京地。
English: The princes chased after him and killed his aunt, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law

古文：丙寅，伐之。
现代文：二十日，单子攻打京地。
English: On the 20th, the order was given to attack Kyoto.

古文：京人奔山，刘子入于王城。
现代文：京地人逃亡到山里，刘子进入王城。
English: The people of Kyoto fled to the mountains, and Liu Zi entered the royal city.

古文：辛未，巩简公败绩于京。
现代文：二十五日，巩简公在京地大败。
English: On the 25th, Gong Jian Gong suffered a crushing defeat in Beijing.

古文：乙亥，甘平公亦败焉。
现代文：二十九日，甘平公也在那里战败。
English: On the 29th, Lord Ganping was also defeated there.

古文：叔鞅至自京师，言王室之乱也。闵马父曰： 子朝必不克，其所与者，天所废也。 
现代文：叔鞅从京师回来，说起王室的动乱，闵马父说： 王子朝必定不能得胜，他所亲附的人，都是上天所废弃的。 
English: When Uncle Yao returned from Beijing, he spoke about the turmoil in the royal family, and Father Yao Ma said: A prince's dynasty cannot win, and those who are close to him are abandoned by heaven.

古文：单子欲告急于晋，秋七月戊寅，以王如平畤，遂如圃车，次于皇。
现代文：单子想要向晋国报告紧急情况。秋季，七月初三日，带着周悼王去到平畤，于是又到了圃车，住在皇地。
English: Shan Zi wanted to report an emergency to Jin. In the autumn, on the third day of the first month of July, he went to Pingyao with Zhou Wei Wang, and then went to Fucheng and lived in the imperial land.

古文：刘子如刘。单子使王子处守于王城，盟百工于平宫。
现代文：刘子到刘地去，单子派王子处在王城守卫，和百工在平宫结盟。
English: Liu Zi went to Liu Di, Shan Zi sent princes to guard the royal city, and made an alliance with Baigong in Pinggu.

古文：辛卯，鄩肸伐皇，大败，获鄩肸。
现代文：十六日，鄩肸攻打皇地，大败，被俘。
English: On the 16th, he attacked the imperial territory, suffered a great defeat, and was captured.

古文：壬辰，焚诸王城之市。
现代文：十七日，把鄩肸在王城的市上烧死。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month he burned the donkey in the open square of the royal city.

古文：八月辛酉，司徒醜以王师败绩于前城，百工叛。
现代文：八月十六日，司徒丑带领周天子的军队在前城大败，百工叛变。
English: On the 16th of August, Shitou led Zhou Tianzi's army to a crushing defeat in Qiancheng, and the hundred workers mutinied.

古文：己巳，伐单氏之宫，败焉。
现代文：二十四日，攻打单氏的住宅，被打败。
English: On the 24th, they attacked Mr. Shan's house and were defeated.

古文：庚午，反伐之。
现代文：二十五日，单氏进攻。
English: On the 25th, the Shan attacked.

古文：辛未，伐东圉。
现代文：二十六日，进攻东圉。
English: On the 26th, the attack on Dongtao began.

古文：冬十月丁巳，晋籍谈、荀跞帅九州之戎及焦、瑕、温、原之师，以纳王于王城。
现代文：冬季，十月十三日，晋国的籍谈、荀跞率领九州的戎人和焦地、瑕地、温地、原地的军队，把周悼王送回王城。
English: In the winter, on October 13th, Zhou Wei Wang, a native of Jin Province, led the soldiers from Kyushu and the troops from Jiaodi, Guodi, Huandi and the original place to send Zhou Wei Wang back to the royal city.

古文：庚申，单子、刘蚠以王师败绩于郊，前城人败陆浑于社。
现代文：十六日，单子、刘蚠率领周天子的军队在郊地作战大败，前城人在社地打败陆浑。
English: On the 16th, the troops of Shan Zi and Liu Ye led by Zhou Tian Zi were defeated in the suburbs, and the former townspeople defeated Lu Hun in Shaji.

古文：十一月乙酉，王子猛卒，不成丧也。
现代文：十一月十二日，王子猛死。《春秋》不记载 崩 ，是由于没有举行天子丧葬礼的缘故。
English: On November 12th, the prince died suddenly. "Spring and Autumn" did not record his death, due to the fact that there was no funeral.

古文：己丑，敬王即位，馆于子旅氏。
现代文：十六日，周敬王即位，住在子旅氏家里。
English: On the 16th, King Zhou Jing ascended to the throne and lived in the family of the Zi Lai clan.

古文：十二月庚戌，晋籍谈、荀跞、贾辛、司马督帅师军于阴，于侯氏，于溪泉，次于社。
现代文：十二月初七日，晋国的籍谈、荀跞、贾辛、司马督领兵分别驻扎在阴地、侯氏、溪泉和住在社地。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the year, the leaders of the troops from Jin Province, including Zhuan, Zou, Jiaxin, and Sima Du, were stationed in Yin Di, Hou Di, Xiquan, and Shaji, respectively.

古文：王师军于氾，于解，次于任人。
现代文：周天子的军队驻扎在汜地、解地、任人。
English: Zhou Tianzi's army was stationed in Xuan Di, Xie Di and Ren Ren Ren.

古文：闰月，晋箕遗、乐徵、右行诡济师，取前城，军其东南。王师军于京楚。
现代文：闰十二月，晋国的箕遗、乐征、右行诡带领部队渡河占取前城，驻扎在前城的东南，周天子的军队驻扎在京楚。
English: In the intercalary December, Jin Guo led the troops to cross the river and occupy Qiancheng, stationed in the southeast of Qiancheng. Zhou Tianzi's army was stationed in Jingchu.

古文：辛丑，伐京，毁其西南。
现代文：二十九日，攻打京地，破坏了京地的西南部。
English: On the 29th, they attacked Kyoto and destroyed the southwestern part of Kyoto.

