古文：子崧字伯山，燕懿王后五世孙。
现代文：子崧字伯山，是燕懿王五世孙。
English: Zibo Ziboshan is the fifth generation grandson of the King of the Terns.

古文：登崇宁五年进士第。
现代文：考中崇宁五年进士。
English: In the middle school entrance examination, Chongning was promoted to a scholar in the fifth year.

古文：宣和间，官至宗正少卿，除徽猷阁直学士、知淮宁府。
现代文：宣和年间，官至宗正少卿，授任徽猷阁直学士、知淮宁府。
English: During the years of the declaration of peace, the official Zong Zheng Shaoqing was awarded the title of Huiqiao Gao Zhizhong and the title of Huainingfu.

古文：汴京失守，起兵勤王，道阻未得进。
现代文：汴京失守，起兵勤王，因道路阻塞不得前进。
English: The defense of Beijing was lost, and the army was called out, but could not advance because of the road blockage.

古文：闻张邦昌僣位，以书白康王：宜遣师邀金人河上，迎请两宫，问罪僣逆，若议渡江，恐误大计。
现代文：听说张邦昌僭位，写书信给康王说： 应当派遣部队在黄河上邀击金兵，迎请两宫，向僭位叛逆问罪，如果打算渡过长江，恐怕耽误大计。 
English: Hearing that Zhang Bangchang had been dethroned, he wrote a letter to Kang Wang saying, "We should send troops to invite the golden soldiers on the Yellow River, welcome the two palaces, and ask the dethroned emperor for treason. If you plan to cross the Yangtze River, I am afraid you will delay the plan."

古文：遂与知颍昌府何志同等盟，传檄中外。
现代文：于是与知颍昌府何志同等联盟，传檄中外。
English: As a result, it entered into an equal alliance with He Zhi of Changfu, Chifeng, and spread to China and abroad.

古文：已而闻金人退，引兵襄邑，遣范埙、徐文中诣济州，请王进兵南京，且言： 国家之制，无视王在外者，主上特付大王以元帅之权，此殆天意。
现代文：不久听说金人退兵，子崧就带领部队到襄邑，派遣范埙、徐文中到济州，请康王进兵南京，并且说： 国家制度，没有亲王在外面的，皇上特意付给你元帅之权，这是天意。
English: Soon after hearing that the Jin people had withdrawn from the war, Zi Yan led the troops to Xiangyue, sent Fan Qi and Xu Wenzhong to Jeju, and invited Kang Wang to march into Nanjing, and said: "In the national system, there is no prince outside. The emperor specially gave you the right to be a marshal. This is the will of heaven.

古文：亟宜承制号召四方豪杰，则中原可传檄而定。 王命子崧充大元帅府参议官、东南道都总管。
现代文：应当马上承制号令四方豪杰，则中原可以传檄而定。 康王命令子崧充任大元帅府参议官、东南道都总管。
English: It should immediately receive the order of the four great heroes, then the Central Plains can be determined by the order. King Kang ordered his son to serve as the grand marshal of the senate and the head of the southeastern capital.

古文：邦昌家在庐州，子崧檄通守赵令儦几察之，且请捕诛其母子，以绝奸心。
现代文：张邦昌的家在庐州，子崧传令通守赵令监察其家，并且请求捕杀张邦昌的母亲和儿子，以绝奸心。
English: Zhang Bangchang's home is in Zhangzhou. Zixuan ordered Zhao Ling to monitor his home, and requested that Zhang Bangchang's mother and son be killed for treason.

古文：又言： 自围城以来，朝命隔绝，乞下诸路，凡有事宜，并取大元帅府裁决，伪檄毋辄行。
现代文：又说： 自从金兵围攻京城以来，朝廷命令隔绝，乞求下令诸路，凡有事宜，都由大元帅府裁决，伪檄不得乱行。
English: He also said: Since the siege of the capital by the Jin soldiers, the imperial court has ordered the isolation of all roads, begging for orders. All matters are decided by the Grand Marshal's Office, and false orders must not be allowed to run wild.

古文：宣抚使范讷逗挠营私，所宜加罪。
现代文：宣抚使范讷阻挠政令营求私利，应当加罪。
English: Proclaiming that Fan Ne's obstruction of government orders was for personal gain should be an additional crime.

古文：宜蠲被兵州县租，经理淮南、荆、浙形势之地，毋为群盗所据。 
现代文：应当免去遭受兵火州县的租税，经理淮南、荆、浙形险势阻之地，不被群盗占据。 
English: It should be exempted from the tax of Hefei Prefecture, and the managers of Huainan, Jing and Zhejiang should not be occupied by the bandits.

古文：檄止诸路毋受邦昌伪赦，移书责邦昌曰： 人臣当见危致命，今议者籍籍，谓劫请倾危之计实由阁下，不然，金人何坚拒孙傅之请，而卒归于阁下也。
现代文：檄令阻止各地接受张邦昌伪令，寄书信责斥张邦昌说： 人臣应当见危受命，现在议论纷纷，说劫请皇上倾危国家之计实出于阁下，不然，金人为什么坚决拒绝孙傅的请求，而最终归政于阁下呢？
English: He issued an order to prevent various regions from accepting Zhang Bangchang's fake order, and sent a letter to rebuke Zhang Bangchang, saying: "Civil servants should see danger and receive orders. Now there is a lot of discussion, saying that the plan to kidnap the emperor to endanger the country was actually made by you. Otherwise, why did the Jin people resolutely refuse Sun Fu's request, and finally return to your government?

古文：敌既远去，宜速反正，若少迟疑，则天下共诛逆节，虽悔无及矣。 又遗书王时雍曰： 诸公相与亡人之国，方且以为佐命功臣，不知平日所学何事。 
现代文：敌人既然远走，应当迅速反正，如果稍有迟疑，则天下共诛逆犯，到那时虽然后悔也来不及啊！ 又寄信给王时雍说 ：诸公互相勾结灭亡别人的国家，而且还自以为佐命功臣，不知你们平日所学是什么？ 
English: Since the enemy is far away, it should be done quickly anyway. If there is a little hesitation, then the whole world will conspire to commit treason, although by then it will be too late to regret it! He also sent a letter to Wang Shiyong saying: Princes collude with each other to destroy other people's countries, but they also think they are heroes, I don't know what you have learned in your daily lives?

古文：会邦昌遣使迎王次第白子崧，子崧即贻王书曰： 似闻谓以京师残破，不可复入，止欲即位军中，便图迁徙，臣窃惑焉。
现代文：正遇张邦昌派遣使者迎接康王，就告诉子崧，子崧立即写信给康王说： 听说因为京师残破，不可再入，只打算在军中即位，便于迁徙，我深感疑惑。
English: When Zhang Bangchang was about to send an envoy to meet King Kang, he told his son-in-law. The son-in-law immediately wrote to King Kang saying, "I have heard that because the imperial capital is in ruins, it is not possible to re-enter. I only plan to ascend the throne in the army, which will make it easier to move. I am deeply puzzled."

古文：夫欲致中兴，当谨举措，宜先谒宗庙，觐母后，明正诛赏，降霈四方。
现代文：如果打算致力中兴事业，应当举动严谨，应当先谒拜宗庙，朝见母后，明正赏罚，施恩四方。
English: If you intend to devote yourself to the ZTE cause, you should act strictly, you should first worship the ancestral temple, see your mother in the morning, reward and punish openly, and extend grace to all sides.

古文：若京师果不可都，然后徐议所向。 
现代文：如果京城不可作为都城，然后慢慢计议到何方。 
English: If the capital city cannot be used as the capital city, then slowly consider where to go from there.

古文：遂传檄京师，奏于隆祐太后曰： 诸路先闻二圣北迁，易姓改国，恐间有假讨逆之名，以窃据州郡者。
现代文：于是传檄京师，向隆太后奏说： 各地先听说二位圣上迁往北边，易姓改国，恐怕中间有人假借讨逆为名，窃据州县。
English: So, he sent a message to the Empress Dowager Long, saying, "All over the country, people first heard that the two saints had moved to the north and changed their surnames. I'm afraid that someone in the middle has stolen their names and moved to a different prefecture.

古文：乞速下明诏，谕四方以迎立康王之意，庶几人心慰安，奸宄自消矣。 寻以所部兵会济州。
现代文：乞求迅速下诏，向四方宣谕迎立康王的意向，才可以令人心安慰，奸宄自然消亡。 不久带领所属部队会兵济州。
English: Only by imploring the emperor to issue an edict quickly and proclaiming to the four quarters of the country the intention to welcome King Kangzom can one's heart be comforted, and the traitors will naturally die out. Soon, he will lead his troops to Jeju.

古文：康王即位，子崧请放诸路常平积欠钱，又言： 台谏为人主耳目，近年用非其人，率取旨言事。
现代文：康王即位，子崧请求免除各地常平积欠钱，又说： 台谏官应当是皇帝的耳目，近年用人不当，大率取旨言事而已。
English: When King Kang ascended to the throne, his son-in-law requested that all regions be exempted from the constant accumulation of arrears. He also said, "Taiwan's eunuchs should be the eyes and ears of the emperor. In recent years, they have been employing people improperly, and they have been taking things too far.

古文：请尊旧制，听学士、中丞互举。
现代文：请遵照旧制，听任学士、中丞互相举察。
English: Please follow the old system and let the bachelor and junior high school students investigate each other.

古文：范祖禹、常安民、上官均先朝言事尽忠，请录其子。 帝皆可其奏。
现代文：范祖禹、常安民、上官均在先朝任职言事尽忠，请录用他们的儿子。 
English: Fan Zuyu, Chang Anmin, and Shangguan were all loyal to the previous government, so please hire their sons.

古文：因建三屯之议：一屯澶渊，一屯河中、陕、华，一屯青、郓间，以张声势。
现代文：皇帝都同意采纳他的建议。于是提出三处驻兵的建议：一处驻在澶渊，一处驻在河中、陕、华，一处驻在青州、郓州之间，声张军势。
English: All the emperors agreed to accept his suggestion, so he proposed three garrisons: one in Shanyuan, one in Hezhong, Shaanxi, and Huai, and one between Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, so as to enhance the military situation.

古文：万一敌骑南侵，则三道并进，可成大功。
现代文：万一敌人骑兵南侵，则三路大军并进，可成大功。
English: In the unlikely event that the enemy cavalry invades the south, the three-way army marches side by side, which can be a great achievement.

古文：除延康殿学士、知镇江府、两浙路兵马钤辖。
现代文：朝廷授任子崧为延康殿学士、知镇江府、两浙路兵马钤辖。
English: The imperial court appointed Zibo as a scholar of Yan Kang Palace, and Zhenjiang Prefecture and two Zhejiang provinces were under the jurisdiction of the Terracotta Army.

古文：上章论王时雍、徐秉哲、吴开、莫俦、范琼、胡思、王绍、王及之、颜博文、余大均等逼迁上皇，取太子，辱六宫，捕宗室，窃禁物，都人指为国贼。
现代文：子崧上章论奏王时雍、徐秉哲、吴千干、莫俦、范琼、胡思、王绍、王及之、颜博文、余大均等人逼太上皇北迁，逼取太子，玷辱六宫，捕杀宗室，窃取宫中禁物，京城人都认为他们是国贼。
English: In the last chapter of the Zizhi, Wang Shiyong, Xu Bingzhe, Wu Qigang, Mo Wei, Fan Qiong, Hu Si, Wang Shao, Wang Ji Zhi, Yan Bo Wen, Yu Da Jun and others forced the emperor to move to the north, forced the prince, defiled the Sixth Palace, killed the family, and stole the forbidden things in the palace. People in Beijing thought they were traitors.

古文：伏望肆诸市朝，以为臣子之戒。
现代文：希望把他们诛杀弃市，作为臣子的训戒。
English: It was hoped that they would be killed and thrown out of the city as a warning to their vassals.

古文：时滑州两经残破，子崧荐傅亮可任。
现代文：当时滑州两次遭战火残破，子崧推荐傅亮可以任用。
English: At that time, the city of Slanting was twice ravaged by war, and Zibo recommended that Fu Liang could be appointed.

古文：除亮滑州通判，黄潜善沮之，命遂寝。
现代文：任命傅亮为滑州判官，黄潜善阻止此事，任命才没有发出。
English: The appointment of Fu Liang as a judge of Luzhou was blocked by Huang Qianshan, and the appointment was not issued.

古文：贼赵万犯镇江，子崧遣将击万于丹徒，调乡兵乘城为备。
现代文：贼赵万侵犯镇江，子崧派遣将领在丹徒阻击赵万，调遣乡兵登城防备。
English: The thief Zhao Wan invaded Zhenjiang. Zibo dispatched generals to block Zhao Wan in Dantu and dispatched local soldiers to the city for defense.

古文：顷之，官军败归，乡兵惊溃，子崧率亲兵保焦山寺，贼据镇江。
现代文：不久，官军败归，乡兵惊骇溃散，子崧率领亲兵守卫焦山寺，贼众占据镇江。
English: Soon after, the government army was defeated and returned home, the local soldiers were terrified and dispersed, and Zixuan led his own soldiers to guard Jiaoshan Temple, and the bandits occupied Zhenjiang.

古文：初，昌陵复土，司天监苗昌裔谓人曰： 太祖后当再有天下。 子崧习闻其说，靖康末起兵，檄文颇涉不逊。
现代文：当初，昌陵恢复封地，司天监苗昌裔对人说： 太祖的后代应当重新统治天下。 子崧听见这个传闻，靖康末年起兵时，檄文言辞有所不逊。
English: At first, when the fiefdom of Changling was restored, Siyuan Miao of Changling said to the people: The descendants of the great-grandfather should rule the world again. Zixuan heard this rumor, and when the army started at the end of Jingkang, Ziwen's words were not bad.

古文：淳熙中，谥忠靖。
现代文：子崧与御营统制辛道宗有仇，道宗找到这篇檄文，上呈皇上。
English: Zixuan had a grudge against Xin Daozong, the commander of the imperial army. When Daozong found this letter, he presented it to the emperor.

古文：子不流，历临安、绍兴帅，治有声。士〈亻褭〉字立之，郇康孝王仲御第四子。
现代文：朝廷诏令御史前去查问此案，得知真情后，皇帝震怒，不想暴示他的罪错，以前些时候擅自弃城论罪，降为单州团练副使，谪居南雄州。绍兴二年赦免他的罪，复官任集英殿修撰，而子崧已经死在贬所。士砫字立之，是郇康孝王仲御的第四个儿子。
English: After learning the truth, the emperor was furious and did not want to expose his guilt. He had previously abandoned the city without authorization, was reduced to a vice-envoy for training in a single province, and lived in Nanxiong Prefecture. He was pardoned in Shaoxing in the second year, and was reinstated as Shuei Dian Shuxian, but Zi Xuan had already died in the detention center. Shi Zi Zhizhi was the fourth son of Zi Kang Xiao Wang Zhong Gu.

古文：有大志，好学，善属文。
现代文：有大志，好学，擅长写文章。
English: Ambitious, eager to learn, good at writing articles.

古文：初补右班殿直，累迁忠州防御使、郑州观察使，由宁远军承宣使转权同知大宗正事。
现代文：开始补官任右班殿直，历迁忠州防御使、郑州观察使，由宁远军承宣使转任权同知大宗正事。
English: At the beginning, the second-in-command was appointed as the right-hand officer, and the Chungju Defense Envoy and the Zhengzhou Observation Envoy were transferred, and the right to transfer the envoy was assumed by the Ningyuan Army.

古文：时康王建大元帅府，士〈亻褭〉请于孟太后，乞命帅府得承制便宜行事，又请奉王承大统，太后从之，王遂即位。
现代文：当时康王建立大元帅府，士砫向孟太后请求，乞命帅府得以承诏见机行事，又请求让康王继承皇位，太后听从他的建议，康王于是即皇帝位。
English: At that time, King Kang established the Grand Marshal's Office. Shi Yan asked the Empress Dowager Meng for permission, so that the Grand Marshal's Office could act as it saw fit. He also asked for King Kang to succeed to the throne. The Empress Dowager listened to his suggestion, and King Kang became the emperor.

古文：除光山军节度使，扈跸南幸。
现代文：授任士砫为光山军节度使，护卫皇帝到南方。
English: He was awarded the title of Shijie as the envoy of the Kuan Shan Army and escorted the emperor to the south.

古文：黄潜善等用事，士〈亻褭〉论其误国，潜善斥之，出知南外宗正事。
现代文：黄潜善等人专政，士砫责论他误国，潜善把他斥逐出朝，任南外宗正事。
English: Huang Xuan Zhen and others ruled the country, and the judges accused him of betraying the country. Xuan Zhen expelled him from the court and appointed Nan Gaozong as his regent.

古文：会苗傅、刘正彦作乱，士〈亻褭〉易服入杭，以蜡书遗张浚，趣其勤王；复遗吕颐浩书，勉其与浚同济国难。
现代文：到苗傅、刘正彦乱政，士砫便服到杭州，用蜡封书寄给张浚，劝促他起兵勤王；又写信给吕颐浩，勉励他与张浚共同救济国难。
English: When Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan made a mess of the government, Shi Yan went to Hangzhou and sent a wax-sealed letter to Zhang Jun, urging him to fight for the king; he also wrote a letter to Lü Binghao, encouraging him and Zhang Jun to jointly relieve the national distress.

古文：苗傅等怒浚，浚坐谪。
现代文：苗傅等人厌恶张浚，张浚因此被贬。
English: Miao Fu and others disliked Zhang Jun, and Zhang Jun was consequently demoted.

古文：复遗浚书，谓朝廷无他意，俾贼勿疑耳。
现代文：士砫又写信给张浚，说朝廷并无他意，只不过让贼人不疑罢了。
English: Shi Yan also wrote to Zhang Junmao, saying that the imperial court had no ulterior motives, but just wanted to make the thieves suspicious.

古文：事平，加检校少保，除同知大宗正事。
现代文：事态平息后，加官检校少保，授任同知大宗正事。
English: After the situation calmed down, he was promoted to inspector and junior security guard, and was assigned to the same position as his friend.

古文：丁母忧，起复，除知大宗正事。
现代文：士砫遭母丧，守丧未满三年，被朝廷重新起用，授任知大宗正事。
English: After his mother's death, Shih Shun, who had been mourning for less than three years, was reappointed by the imperial court and given the post of Chida Shosei.

古文：请序位安定郡王下，从之。
现代文：士砫请求把自己的班位放在安宁郡王下面，朝廷予以同意。
English: Shisheng requested that his position be placed below that of the king of Anning County, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：累乞祠，不许。
现代文：历次请求祭祀，朝廷不许。
English: The Imperial Court did not allow him to perform the ritual, despite his repeated requests.

古文：以定策功，诏其子不议改文秩，不怞易环卫官。
现代文：因为定策有功，诏令他的儿子不议改为文官，不忄由改任环卫官。
English: Because of the success of the decision-making, the emperor ordered his son to be changed to a civil servant without discussion, and he was appointed to the post of environmental protection officer.

古文：加士〈亻褭〉检校少师。
现代文：加士砫检校少师。
English: Ga Shijian, a junior high school teacher.

古文：寻加开府仪同三司，判大宗正事。
现代文：不久加官为开府仪同三司、判大宗正事。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Kaifu giri and Sanji, and judged many important cases.

古文：入觐，劝帝留意恤民。
现代文：士砫入见皇帝，劝皇帝留意怜悯百姓。
English: He went to see the emperor and urged the emperor to pay attention to and have mercy on the people.

古文：金人既归河南、陕西地，命士〈亻褭〉谒陵寝，遂入柏城，披历榛莽，随宜葺治，礼毕而还。
现代文：金人归还河南、陕西之地，朝廷命令士砫朝拜陵寝，于是进入柏城，整理荒草，就势修葺；仪礼完后回朝。
English: When the Jin people returned the lands of Henan and Shaanxi, the imperial court ordered the scholars to pay homage to the mausoleum, so they entered Baicheng, tidied up the weeds, and repaired the situation; after the ceremony, they returned to the imperial court.

古文：特封齐安郡王，以旌其劳。
现代文：特地封他为齐安郡王，以表扬他的功劳。
English: He was specially named the King of Qian County in recognition of his achievements.

古文：寻权主奉濮安懿王祠事。
现代文：不久授权主持濮安懿王的祭祀。
English: He was soon authorized to preside over the sacrificial rites of King Anzong.

古文：军兴，罢宗室赐予，至有丧不能敛者，士〈亻褭〉以闻。
现代文：战争兴起，朝廷罢免给宗室的赏赐，有的家庭甚至不能藏殓死者，士砫将这个情况禀告皇上。
English: When the war broke out, the Imperial Court revoked the award given to the family of the deceased, and some families could not even bury their dead. The scholar-officials reported this situation to the Emperor.

古文：诏緦麻、袒免亲任环卫官而身亡者，赐钱有差。
现代文：诏令凡衣缌麻、袒免亲任环卫官而死者，按等赐给钱财。
English: The edict ordered that all those who died without being appointed as environmental protection officers should be given money and property according to their rank.

古文：士〈亻褭〉数言事，忤秦桧。
现代文：士砫多次议论朝政，忤逆秦桧。
English: Shi Yan repeatedly discussed the politics of the dynasty, and he opposed the Qin Dynasty.

古文：及岳飞被诬，士〈亻褭〉力辨曰： 中原未靖，祸及忠义，是忘二圣不欲复中原也。
现代文：到岳飞被诬时，士砫竭力为之辩护说： 中原未能平定，而祸及忠义之臣，这是忘记二圣不打算恢复中原啊！
English: When Yuefei was falsely accused, Shi Yan tried his best to defend him, saying: The Central Plains could not be pacified, and woe to the loyal vassal, this is to forget that the two saints did not intend to restore the Central Plains!

古文：臣以百口保飞无他。 桧大怒，讽言者论士〈亻褭〉交通飞，踪迹诡秘，事切圣躬，遂夺官。
现代文：我极力保护岳飞并无他意。 秦桧大怒，示意言官论斥士砫与岳飞勾结，行踪诡秘，事情关系到皇上，于是削夺他的官职。
English: I had no other intention than to protect Yuefei as much as possible. Qin Yu was furious and indicated that the officials should discuss and condemn the collusion between Shi Yu and Yuefei, the whereabouts were mysterious, and the matter was related to the emperor, so he took away his official position.

古文：中丞万俟离复希旨连击之。
现代文：中丞万俟又按秦桧的旨意连连攻击他。
English: In accordance with Qin Yu's wishes, the middle-ranked general Wan Xuan attacked him repeatedly.

古文：谪居于建，凡十二年而薨，年七十。
现代文：朝廷把士砫贬到建地居住，过十二年后去世，终年七十岁。
English: The imperial court relegated Shi Yan to live on a piece of land, and he died twelve years later, at the age of seventy.

古文：帝哀之，赠太傅，追封循王。
现代文：皇帝哀悯他，追赠太傅，追封循王。
English: The emperor took pity on him, posthumously awarded him the title of taifu, and posthumously awarded him the title of xuwang.

古文：六子皆进官二阶。
现代文：六个儿子都升官二级。
English: All six sons were promoted to the second grade.

古文：长子不凡，方苗傅之乱，刲股纳蜡书，持告张浚，以功转两官，易文资。
现代文：他的长子不凡，在苗傅作乱时，挖大腿藏蜡书，拿去送给张浚，因功转任两官，改为文官。
English: His eldest son was extraordinary. When Miao Fu caused a disturbance, he dug up his thigh to hide a wax book and took it to Zhang Jun. He was transferred to two posts and became a civil servant.

古文：从赵哲收复建州，杀叶浓，以功赐爵二级。
现代文：跟从赵哲收复建州，杀死叶浓，因功赐爵二级。
English: He followed Zhao Zhe to recover and rebuild the state, killed Ye Nong, and was awarded a second-class knighthood for his service.

