古文：十有五年春，王正月，吴子夷末卒。
现代文：十五年春季，周历正月，吴子夷末去世。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Wu Ziyi passed away.

古文：二月癸酉，有事于武宫。
现代文：二月癸酉日，昭公在鲁武宫庙举行祭祀活动。
English: On the third day of February, Shoko held a religious service at the temple of the Imperial Palace in Luwu.

古文：籥入，叔弓卒，去乐卒事。
现代文：在演奏籥的人进入时，叔弓突然去世，取消了乐曲演奏，完成祭祀。
English: When the person playing the gong entered, Shukyu suddenly died, cancelling the music performance and completing the ritual.

古文：夏，蔡朝吴出奔郑。
现代文：夏季，蔡国的朝吴逃到郑国。
English: In the summer, Chao Wu of Cai fled to Zheng.

古文：六月丁巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月丁巳初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋，晋荀吴帅师伐鲜虞。
现代文：秋季，晋国的荀吴率领军队攻打鲜虞。
English: In the autumn, Shao Wu of Jin led an army to attack Xiangyu.

古文：冬，公如晋。
现代文：冬季，昭公去到晋国。
English: In winter, Lu Wen Gong went to Jin Province.

古文：十五年春，将禘于武公，戒百官。梓慎曰： 禘之日，其有咎乎。
现代文：十五年春季，将要对武公举行大的祭祀，告诫百官斋戒，梓慎说： 大的祭祀那一天恐怕会有灾祸吧！
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, a great sacrifice was to be held for Wukong, and all the officials were to fast. Zi Shen said, "I'm afraid there will be a disaster on the day of the great sacrifice!"

古文：吾见赤黑之祲，非祭祥也，丧氛也。
现代文：我看到了红黑色的妖气，这不是祭祀的祥瑞，是丧事的气氛。
English: I saw the red and black evil spirits. This was not the auspiciousness of a ritual, but the atmosphere of a funeral.

古文：其在涖事乎？ 
现代文：恐怕会应在主持祭祀者的身上吧！ 
English: I'm afraid it will fall on the shoulders of those who presided over the sacrifices!

古文：二月癸酉，禘，叔弓涖事，籥入而卒，去乐卒事，礼也。
现代文：二月十五日，举行大的祭祀。叔弓主持祭祀，在奏籥的人进入时，突然死亡。撤去音乐，把祭祀进行完毕，这是合于礼的。
English: On the 15th of February, a large religious service was held. Uncle Yumi presided over the service, but suddenly died when the musicians entered. It was proper to remove the music and complete the service.

古文：楚费无极害朝吴之在蔡也，欲去之。乃谓之曰： 王唯信子，故处子于蔡。
现代文：楚国的费无极嫉妒朝吴在蔡国，想要除去他，于是，就对朝吴说： 君王唯独相信您，所以把您安置在蔡国。
English: Fei of Chu was extremely jealous of Chao Wu in Cai and wanted to get rid of him, so he said to Chao Wu: Only the king believes in you, so he has placed you in Cai.

古文：子亦长矣，而在下位，辱。
现代文：您的年纪也不小了，可是地位低下，这是耻辱。
English: Your age is not small, but low status, this is a disgrace.

古文：必求之，吾助子请。 
现代文：一定要求得上位，我帮助您申请。 
English: I'll help you with your application.

古文：又谓其上之人曰： 王唯信吴，故处诸蔡，二三子莫之如也。而在其上，不亦难乎？
现代文：又对位在朝吴之上的人说： 君王唯独相信朝吴，所以把他安置在蔡国，您几位比不上他，而在他上面，不也很难吗？
English: He also said to those who were above him, "The king only believes in Chaowu, so it is difficult to place him in Cai Guo. Some of you are not as good as him, but you are above him, isn't it?

古文：弗图，必及于难。 
现代文：不加考虑，必然遭到祸难。 
English: Without consideration, we are bound to suffer calamity.

古文：夏，蔡人逐朝吴。朝吴出奔郑。
现代文：夏季，蔡国人赶走了朝吴，朝吴逃亡到郑国。
English: In the summer, the Cai people drove out the Chaowu, and the Chaowu fled to Zheng.

古文：王怒曰： 余唯信吴，故寘诸蔡。
现代文：楚平王发怒，说： 我唯独相信朝吴，所以把他安置在蔡国。
English: King Chuping was furious and said, "I only trust the Emperor Wu, so I placed him in Cai Guo.

古文：且微吴，吾不及此。
现代文：而且如果没有朝吴，我到不了今天的地步。
English: And I wouldn't be where I am today if it wasn't for Chow Woo.

古文：女何故去之？ 
现代文：你为什么去掉他？ 
English: Why did you get rid of him?

古文：无极对曰： 臣岂不欲吴？
现代文：费无极回答说： 下臣难道不想要朝吴？
English: He replied with great difficulty, "Don't you subordinates want to become Emperor Wu?

古文：然而前知其为人之异也。吴在蔡，蔡必速飞。
现代文：然而早知道他有别的念头，朝吴在蔡国，蔡国必然很快飞走。
English: However, I already knew that he had other ideas, as Wu was in Cai Guo, and Cai Guo was bound to fly away soon.

古文：去吴，所以翦其翼也。 
现代文：去掉朝吴，这就是剪除蔡国的翅膀。 
English: To get rid of the Emperor Wu is to clip the wings of Cai Guo.

古文：六月乙丑，王大子寿卒。
现代文：六月初九日，王太子寿死了。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Wang Taizi passed away.

古文：秋八月戊寅，王穆后崩。
现代文：秋季，八月二十二日，王穆后去世。
English: In the autumn, on August 22nd, Wang Mu Huan passed away.

古文：晋荀吴帅师伐鲜虞，围鼓。
现代文：晋国荀吴领兵进攻鲜虞，包围鼓国。
English: The Jin and Wu armies are on the verge of attacking and encircling Gumi.

古文：鼓人或请以城叛，穆子弗许。左右曰： 师徒不勤，而可以获城，何故不为？ 
现代文：鼓国有人请求带着城邑里面的人叛变，荀吴不答应，左右的随从说： 军人不辛劳而可以得到城邑，为什么不干？ 
English: In the Drum Kingdom, someone requested to take the people in the towns to rebel. Gong Wu did not agree, and his followers said, "A soldier can get a town without much effort, why not do it?"

古文：穆子曰： 吾闻诸叔向曰： 好恶不愆，民知所適，事无不济。 
现代文：荀吴说： 我听到叔向说： 喜好、厌恶都不过分，百姓知道行动的方向，事情就没有不成功的。 
English: Zou Wu said, "I heard my uncle say, 'The likes and dislikes are not excessive. The people know the direction of action, and things will not be unsuccessful.

古文：或以吾城叛，吾所甚恶也。
现代文：有人带着我们的城邑叛变，这是我们所最厌恶的。
English: What we hate the most is that someone is taking our cities and turning them against us.

古文：人以城来，吾独何好焉。
现代文：别人带着城邑前来，我们为什么独独喜欢这样呢？
English: Other people come with cities, why do we like it so much?

古文：赏所甚恶，若所好何？
现代文：奖赏我们所最厌恶的，对所喜欢的又怎么办？
English: Rewarding what we dislike the most, what about what we like?

古文：若其弗赏，是失信也，何以庇民？
现代文：如果不加奖赏，这就是失信，又用什么保护百姓？
English: If there is no reward, this is a breach of trust, and what will be used to protect the people?

古文：力能则进，否则退，量力而行。
现代文：力量达得到就进攻，否则就撤退，量力而行。
English: When strength is reached, attack; otherwise, retreat and do what you can.

古文：吾不可以欲城而迩奸，所丧滋多。 
现代文：我们不可以想要得到城邑而接近奸邪，这样所丧失的会更多。 
English: We can't get close to the evil by trying to get the city, we'll lose more.

古文：使鼓人杀叛人而缮守备。
现代文：于是让鼓国人杀了叛徒而修缮防御设备。
English: So he ordered the local people to kill the traitors and repair the defenses.

古文：围鼓三月，鼓人或请降，使其民见，曰： 犹有食色，姑修而城。 
现代文：包围鼓国三个月，鼓国有人请求投降。穆子让鼓国人进见，说： 看你们的脸色还好，姑且去修缮你们的城墙。 
English: They besieged Drum for three months, and some people in Drum asked to surrender. Mu Zi let the people of Drum see what was going on and said, "You look fine, let me repair your city walls."

古文：军吏曰： 获城而弗取，勤民而顿兵，何以事君？ 
现代文：军吏说： 得到城邑而不占取，辛劳百姓而损毁武器，用什么事奉国君？ 
English: The military officer said, "If you gain towns without occupying them, and if you wear out the people and destroy their weapons, with what will you serve the sovereign?

古文：穆子曰： 吾以事君也。
现代文：穆子说： 我用这样的做法来事奉国君。
English: Muzi said: I use this practice to serve the sovereign.

古文：获一邑而教民怠，将焉用邑？
现代文：得到一个城邑而教百姓懈怠，这个城邑又哪里用得着？
English: If you get a town and teach the people to slack off, what good is the town?

古文：邑以贾怠，不如完旧。
现代文：得到城邑而买来懈怠，不如保持一贯的勤快。
English: It is better to be diligent than to buy slack when you get a promotion.

古文：贾怠无卒，弃旧不祥。
现代文：买来懈怠，没有好结果。丢掉一贯的勤快，不吉祥。
English: Buy slack, no good results. Throw away consistent diligence, not auspicious.

古文：鼓人能事其君，我亦能事吾君。
现代文：鼓国人能够事奉他们的国君，我也能够事奉我们的国君。
English: If the people of Goma can serve their king, I can serve our king.

古文：率义不爽，好恶不愆，城可获而民知义所，有死命而无二心，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：合理就不出差错，喜好、厌恶都不过分，城邑可以得到而百姓懂得道义之所在，肯拼命而没有二心，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Reasonable does not go wrong, likes and dislikes are not excessive, cities can be obtained and the people know where morality lies, if you are desperate and have no second thoughts, is it not also possible?

古文：鼓人告食竭力尽，而后取之。
现代文：鼓国人报告粮食吃完、力量用尽，然后占取了它。
English: The Goma people reported that they had run out of food, exhausted their strength, and then occupied it.

古文：克鼓而反，不戮一人，以鼓子鸢鞮归。
现代文：穆子攻下鼓国回国，不杀一个人，将鼓子鸢鞮带回国。
English: Mu Zi conquered the drum country and returned to China. He did not kill a single person, but brought the drum cymbals back to China.

古文：冬，公如晋，平丘之会故也。
现代文：冬季，鲁昭公到晋国去，这是由于平丘那次盟会的缘故。
English: In winter, Lu Zhaogong went to Jin Province. This was because of the alliance meeting in Pingqiu.

古文：十二月，晋荀跞如周，葬穆后，籍谈为介。
现代文：十二月，晋国的荀跞到成周去。安葬穆后，籍谈作为副使。
English: In December, the empress of Jin arrived in Cheng Zhou. After the funeral of Mu, he was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：既葬除丧，以文伯宴，樽以鲁壶。
现代文：安葬完毕，除去丧服。周景王和荀跞饮宴，把鲁国进贡的壶作为酒杯。
English: After the burial, the funeral clothes were removed. King Zhou Jing and his concubines held a banquet, and used the pot of tribute from Lu as a wine cup.

古文：王曰： 伯氏，诸侯皆有以镇抚王室，晋独无有，何也？ 
现代文：周景王说： 伯父，诸侯都有礼器进贡王室，唯独晋国没有，为什么？ 
English: Zhou Jingwang said, "Uncle, the princes all have the ceremonial instruments to pay tribute to the royal family, but the Jin Dynasty did not. Why?

古文：文伯揖籍谈，对曰： 诸侯之封也，皆受明器于王室，以镇抚其社稷，故能荐彝器于王。
现代文：荀跞向籍谈作揖请他回答。籍谈回答说： 诸侯受封的时候，都从王室接受了明德之器，来镇抚国家，所以能把彝器进献给天子。
English: "When the princes were crowned, they all received the Ming and De ware from the royal family to pacify the country, so they could offer the Ming and De ware to the Son of Heaven.

古文：晋居深山，戎狄之与邻，而远于王室。王灵不及，拜戎不暇，其何以献器？ 
现代文：晋国处在深山，戎狄和我们相邻，而远离王室，天子的威信不能达到，顺服戎人还来不及，怎么能进献彝器？ 
English: Jin Province is located deep in the mountains, the army is next to us, but far away from the royal family, the prestige of the son of heaven cannot be achieved, the obedience of the army is too late, how can we enter the sacrificial vessel?

古文：王曰： 叔氏，而忘诸乎？
现代文：周景王说： 叔父，你忘了吧！
English: Zhou Jingwang said: Uncle, forget it!

古文：叔父唐叔，成王之母弟也，其反无分乎？
现代文：叔父唐叔，是成王的同胞兄弟，难道反而没有分得赏赐吗？
English: Uncle Tang, who is Cheng Wang's compatriot and brother, did not receive a reward?

古文：密须之鼓，与其大路，文所以大蒐也。
现代文：密须的名鼓和它的大辂车，是文王所用来检阅军队的。
English: The well-known drum with its large gong car was used by King Wen to review the troops.

古文：阙巩之甲，武所以克商也。
现代文：阙巩的铠甲，是武王用来攻克商朝的。
English: Gonggong's armor was used by King Wu to conquer the Shang Dynasty.

古文：唐叔受之以处参虚，匡有戎狄。
现代文：唐叔接受了，用来居住在晋国的地域上，境内有着戎人和狄人。
English: Uncle Tang accepted, and used to live in the area of Jin Province, where there were Yong people and Di people.

古文：其后襄之二路，钺秬鬯，彤弓虎贲，文公受之，以有南阳之田，抚征东夏，非分而何？
现代文：这以后襄王所赐的大辂、戎辂之车，斧钺、黑黍酿造的香酒，红色的弓、勇士，文公接受了，保有南阳的土田，安抚和征伐东边各国，这不是分得的赏赐还是什么？
English: After this, the king gave the king the great scepter, the chariot of the army, the axe, the wine brewed by the black pheasant, the red bow, the warrior, and the prince accepted, kept the soil of the south, pacified and conquered the eastern countries, is this not a reward or what?

古文：夫有勋而不废，有绩而载，奉之以土田，抚之以彝器，旌之以车服，明之以文章，子孙不忘，所谓福也。
现代文：有了功勋而不废弃，有了功劳而记载在策书上，用土田来奉养他，用彝器来安抚他，用车服来表彰他，用旌旗来显耀他，子子孙孙不要忘记，这就是所谓福。
English: If you have merits, you should not discard them. If you have merits, you should record them in the policy book. If you use the soil to nurture him, the plough to appease him, the car to commend him, and the banner to show him off, do not forget your children and grandchildren. This is the so-called blessing.

古文：福祚之不登叔父，焉在？
现代文：这种福佑不记住，叔父的心哪里去了呢？
English: If you don't remember this blessing, where did your uncle's heart go?

古文：且昔而高祖孙伯黡，司晋之典籍，以为大政，故曰籍氏。
现代文：而且从前你的高祖孙伯黡掌管晋国典籍，以主持国家大事，所以称为籍氏。
English: Moreover, once upon a time, your great-great-great-great-grandson, Hoki, was in charge of the Jin national classics to preside over national events, so he was called Kazuo.

古文：及辛有之二子董之，晋于是乎有董史。
现代文：等到辛有的第二个儿子董到了晋国，在这时就有了董氏的史官。
English: By the time Xin Yi's second son, Dong, arrived in Jin, there was already a Dong historian.

古文：女，司典之后也。何故忘之？ 
现代文：你是司典的后氏，为什么忘了呢？ 
English: You are the secretary Hou, why did you forget?

古文：籍谈不能对。
现代文：籍谈回答不出。
English: I can't answer that.

古文：宾出，王曰： 籍父其无后乎！
现代文：客人退出去以后，周景王说： 籍谈的后代恐怕不能享有禄位了吧！
English: After the guests had left, Zhou Tianzi said: "I'm afraid that the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants!

古文：数典而忘其祖。 
现代文：举出了典故却忘记了祖宗。 
English: The descendant of a world-renowned author has forgotten his ancestor.

古文：籍谈归，以告叔向。
现代文：籍谈回国后，把这些情况告诉叔向。
English: After returning to China, I told my uncle about these circumstances.

古文：叔向曰： 王其不终乎。
现代文：叔向说： 天子恐怕不得善终吧！
English: Uncle Xiang said: I'm afraid the child of heaven will not have a happy ending!

古文：吾闻之，所乐必卒焉。
现代文：我听说： 喜欢什么，必然死在这上面。 
English: I've heard: If you like something, you'll die on it.

古文：今王乐忧，若卒以忧，不可谓终。
现代文：现在天子把忧虑当成欢乐，如果因为忧虑致死，就不能说是善终。
English: Now the Son of Heaven takes pleasure in sorrow, and if he finally dies of sorrow, it will not be a good end.

古文：王一岁而有三年之丧二焉，于是乎以丧宾宴，又求彝器，乐忧甚矣，且非礼也。
现代文：天子一年中有了两次三年之丧，在这个时候和吊丧的宾客饮宴，又要求彝器，把忧虑当成欢乐也太过分了，而且不合于礼。
English: The Son of Heaven had two three-year funerals in one year. At this time, he had a banquet with the mourners and asked for utensils. It was too much and not proper to take worry as joy.

古文：彝器之来，嘉功之由，非由丧也。
现代文：彝器的到来，由于嘉奖功勋，不是由于丧事。
English: The arrival of the crockery is due to the award of merit, not due to the funeral.

古文：三年之丧，虽贵遂服，礼也。
现代文：三年的丧礼，虽然贵为天子，服丧仍得满期，这是礼。
English: The three-year mourning period should be observed even if you are a son of heaven. This is the etiquette.

古文：王虽弗遂，宴乐以早，亦非礼也。
现代文：现在天子即使不能服丧满期，饮宴奏乐也太早了，也是不合于礼的。
English: Now, even if the heavenly son cannot complete the mourning period, the banquet music is too early, and it is not proper.

古文：礼，王之大经也。
现代文：礼，是天子奉行的重要规则。
English: Courtesy is an important rule that the Son of Heaven follows.

古文：一动而失二礼，无大经矣。
现代文：一次举动而失去了两种礼，这就没有重要规则了。
English: If you lose two salutes in one move, there's no important rule.

古文：言以考典，典以志经，忘经而多言举典，将焉用之？ 
现代文：言语用来考核典籍，典籍用来记载纲常。忘记了纲常而言语很多，举出了典故，又有什么用？ 
English: Words are used to evaluate classics, and classics are used to record the syllabus. If you forget the syllabus, there are a lot of words, and you bring up allusions, what is the use?

