古文：德宗上
现代文：德宗本纪
English: Deshong Hongji

古文：德宗神武孝文皇帝讳适，代宗长子，母曰睿真皇后沈氏。
现代文：德宗神武孝文皇帝名适，代宗长子，母亲是睿真皇后沈氏。
English: Emperor Dezong Shenwu Xiaowen was the eldest son of Emperor Dezong, and his mother was Empress Ruizhen of the Shen Dynasty.

古文：天宝元年四月癸巳，生于长安大内之东宫。
现代文：天宝元年四月十九日，出生在长安皇宫之东宫。
English: He was born in the East Palace of the Chang'an Imperial Palace on April 19, 1861.

古文：其年十二月，拜特进，封奉节郡王。
现代文：这年十二月，授予特进，封为奉节郡王。
English: In December of that year, he was awarded a special promotion and named the county king of Fengjie.

古文：代宗即位之年五月，以上为天下兵马元帅，改封鲁王。
现代文：代宗即皇帝位的这年五月，以李适为天下兵马元帅，改封为鲁王。
English: In May of that year, when the emperor was enthroned, Li Shih was made the marshal of the world's armies and horses, and his title was changed to King Lu.

古文：八月，改封雍王。
现代文：八月，改封为雍王。
English: In August, he was renamed Yong Wang.

古文：时史朝义据东都，十月，遣上会诸军于陕州，大举讨贼。
现代文：当时史朝义占据东都，十月，派遣李适会合各军在陕州，大举讨伐贼人。
English: At that time, Shih Chao Yi occupied the eastern capital. In October, he sent Li Shikai to gather all the armies in Shaanxi to fight the thieves in a big way.

古文：十一月，破贼于洛阳，进收东都，河南平定。
现代文：十一月，在洛阳攻破贼人，进军收复了东都，河南平定。
English: In November, they defeated the bandits in Luoyang, marched into and recaptured Dongdu, and pacified Henan.

古文：朝义走河北。
现代文：史朝义逃往河北，分头命令诸将追击他。
English: Shi Chaoyi fled to Hebei and ordered his generals to pursue him.

古文：分命诸将追之，俄而贼将怀仙斩朝义首以献，河北平。
现代文：不久，贼将李怀仙斩史朝义之首级献给了朝廷，河北平定。
English: Soon after, the thief presented the head of Li Huaixian, the head of the head of the historical dynasty, to the imperial court, and Hebei was pacified.

古文：以元帅功拜尚书令，食实封二千户，与郭子仪等八人图形凌烟阁。
现代文：因为李适是元帅的功劳，授予他尚书令，食实际封户二千户，与郭子仪等八人画了图像挂在凌烟阁上。
English: Because Li Shih is the merit of the marshal, he was awarded the Shang Shuling, the food actually sealed two thousand households, and eight people such as Guo Ziyi painted the image and hung it on the Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：广德二年二月，立为皇太子。
现代文：广德二年二月，立为皇太子。
English: In February of the second year of Guangde, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：大历十四年五月辛酉，代宗崩。
现代文：大历十四年五月二十一日，代宗去世。
English: On May 21 of the 14th year of the lunar calendar, Daizong passed away.

古文：癸亥，即位于太极殿。
现代文：二十三日，李适在太极殿即皇帝位。
English: On the 23rd, Li Shih was enthroned as emperor in the Taiji Hall.

古文：闰月壬申，贬中书舍人崔祐甫为河南少尹。
现代文：闰五月三日，皇上贬中书舍人崔佑甫为河南少尹。
English: On the third day of leap May, the emperor demoted Choi Youfu, a scholar, to Henan Shao Yin.

古文：甲戌，贬门下侍郎、平章事常衮为潮州刺史。
现代文：五日，皇上贬门下侍郎、平章事常衮为潮州刺史。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor demoted a subordinate attendant, Taira no Sho, to the position of Choshu sashimi.

古文：召崔祐甫为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：召崔佑甫为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: He summoned Cui Youfu to be his personal attendant, and made him the second-highest-ranking official in the school.

古文：丙子，诏诸州府、新罗、渤海岁贡鹰鹞皆停。
现代文：七日，皇上诏令各州府、新罗、渤海每年进贡的鹰、鹞子都停止进贡。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the state capitals, Silla, and Bohai to stop the annual tribute of eagles and pigeons.

古文：戊寅，诏山南枇杷、江南柑橘，岁一贡以供宗庙，余贡皆停。
现代文：九日，皇上诏令山南枇杷、江南柑橘，每年进贡一次以供给宗庙，其余进贡都停止。
English: On the 9th day of the month, the emperor issued an edict that the tributes of Shannan mandarin oranges and Jiangnan mandarin oranges should be provided to the ancestral temple once a year, and all other tributes should be stopped.

古文：庚寅，以兵部尚书路嗣恭为东都留守，以常州刺史萧复为潭州刺史、湖南团练观察使。
现代文：十一日，以兵部尚书路嗣恭为东都留守，以常州刺史萧复为潭州刺史、湖南团练观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shangshu Lu and Sikyong from the Military Department stayed behind in Dongdu, and Xiaofu from the Changzhou Military History Department stayed behind in Tanzhou and Hunan to observe the regimental drill.

古文：辛巳，罢邕府岁贡奴婢。
现代文：十二日，撤销邕府每年进贡的奴婢。
English: On the 12th, the annual tribute of slaves and maids was cancelled.

古文：癸未，改括州为处州，括苍县为丽水县。
现代文：十四日，改括州为处州，改括苍县为丽水县。
English: On the 14th, Guanzhou was changed to Wanzhou, and Cang County was changed to Lishui County.

古文：停梨园使及伶官之冗食者三百人，留者皆隶太常。
现代文：裁撤梨园使及戏子之类吃闲饭的三百人，留下来的隶属于太常寺。
English: Three hundred people, such as the lily garden envoy and the actor, who were eating idle meals, were abolished, and those who remained were affiliated with Taiji Temple.

古文：剑南岁贡春酒十斛，罢之。
现代文：剑南每年进贡春酒十斛，加以撤销。
English: In Jian'nan, the annual tax on spring wine was raised to 10 baht, and then abolished.

古文：甲申，以司徒、兼中书令、河中尹、灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护充关内河东副元帅、朔方节度、关内支度盐池六城水运大使、押诸蕃部落、管内及河阳等道观察使、上柱国、汾阳郡王、山陵使、食实封一千九百户郭子仪可加号尚父，守太尉，余官如故，加实封通前二千户，月给一千五百人粮、马二百匹草料。
现代文：十五日，以司徒、兼中书令、河中尹、灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护充任关内、河东副元帅、朔方节度、关内支度盐池六城水运大使、押诸蕃部落、管辖区内及河阳等道观察使、上柱国、汾阳郡王、山陵使、食实际封户一千九百户郭子仪可以加号为尚父，兼理太尉事，其余官职如原来一样，加实封连先前的一共二千户，每月供给一千五百人粮食，二百匹马的草料。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the water transport ambassadors of the six cities of Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, and Yanchi, the observation envoys of the Zhuye Tribe, the jurisdiction area, and the Heyang and other provinces, the Shangzhuang Kingdom, the King of the Guanzhong County, the Mountain Envoys, and the food supply envoys of the nineteen hundred households of Guo Ziyi could be added as the father and the lieutenant. The remaining official positions were the same as before. A total of two thousand households were added, and one thousand five hundred people were provided with grain

古文：以朔方都虞候李怀光为河中尹，邠、宁、庆、晋、绛、慈、显等州节度观察使；以朔方右留后常谦光灵州大都督，西受降城、定远军、天德、盐、夏、丰节度等使；以朔方左留后、单于副都护浑璘为单于大都护，振武军、东中二受降城、镇北及绥、银、麟、胜等军州节度营田使。
现代文：以朔方都虞候李怀光为河中尹，宁、庆、晋、绛、慈、隰等州节度观察使；以朔方右留后常谦光兼任灵州大都督、西受降城、定远军、天德、盐、夏、丰等地节度使；以朔方左留后、单于副都护浑王咸为单于大都护，振武军、东中二受降城、镇北及绥、银、麟、胜等军州节度使、营田使。
English: Li Huaguang, the governor of Shuo, was appointed as the observer of the state festivals of Yin, Ning, Qing, Jin, Jie, Cixi, and He; Chang Qianguang, the governor of Shuo, was appointed as the observer of the state festivals of Lingzhou, Xihu, Dingyuan, Tiantai, Yan, Xia, and Feng; Hun Wangxian, the vice-governor of Shuo, was appointed as the observer of the state festivals of Dadu, Zhenwu, Dongzhong, Nizhu, Zhenbei, and the military state festivals of Gan, Yin, Lin, Sheng, and Feng.

古文：丙戌，诏禁天下不得贡珍禽异兽，银器勿以金饰。
现代文：十七日，诏令禁止天下不得进贡珍禽异兽，银器不要用黄金装饰。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict prohibited the world from paying tribute to rare birds and animals, and silverware should not be decorated with gold.

古文：丁亥，诏文单国所献舞象三十二，令放荆山之阳，五坊鹰犬皆放之，出宫女百余人。
现代文：十八日，诏令文单国所贡献跳舞大象三十二只，命令将宫廷五坊的鹰犬全部放掉，把一百多宫女全部放出宫去，让她们归家。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor issued an edict to release the thirty-two dancing elephants contributed by Wenzhong, and ordered that all the eagle dogs in the five courtyards of the palace be released, and that all the more than one hundred maids of honor be released to the palace, so that they could return home.

古文：己丑，以右羽林大将军吴希光检校散骑常侍、兼御史中丞，充渭北鄜坊丹延都团练观察使。
现代文：二十日，以右羽林大将军吴希光任检校散骑常侍、兼御史中丞，充任渭北、坊、丹、延都团练观察使。
English: On the 20th, with Wu Xiguang, General Wu Yulin, he was appointed as the attendant of the inspection of the school and the junior secretary of the history, and served as the observation envoy of the group training in Beibei, Fang, Dan and Yandu.

古文：辛卯，以河阳三城镇遏使马燧检校工部尚书，兼太原尹、御史大夫、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：二十二日，以河阳三城镇遏使马燧任检校工部尚书、兼太原尹、御史大夫、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the 22nd, with the help of the three towns in Hebei and Hebei, Ma Jun was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department.

古文：壬辰，以河东节度留后鲍防为京畿观察使；陈州刺史李芃检校太常少卿，为河阳三城镇遏使。
现代文：二十三日，以河东节度留后鲍防为京畿观察使；陈州刺史李艹凡为检校太常少卿，为河阳三城镇遏使。
English: On the 23rd, Bao Bao, who stayed behind for the festival in Hedong, was the Gyeonggi observation envoy; Li Yufan, a historian from Chenzhou, was the junior minister of the Taechang school inspection, and the chief envoy of the three towns in Heyang.

古文：癸巳，以寿州刺史杜亚为江西观察使。
现代文：二十四日，以寿州刺史杜亚为江西观察使。
English: On the 24th, the Jiangxi Observation Mission was sent to Shoushou.

古文：甲午，册太尉子仪。
现代文：二十五日，册封郭子仪为太尉。
English: On the 25th, Guo Ziyi was made a first lieutenant.

古文：自开元以来，册礼多废，天宝中杨国忠册司空，至是行子仪之册。
现代文：从开元以来，册封之礼仪大多废弃，天宝中杨国忠册封为司空，至此才行册封郭子仪的仪礼。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, most of the etiquette for being canonized has been abandoned. Yang Guozhong of Tianbao was canonized as the Empress Dowager, and only then did the ceremony of canonizing Guo Zi Yi take place.

古文：以江西观察使杜亚为陕州长史，充转运使。
现代文：以江西观察使杜亚为陕州长史，并充任转运使。
English: With the observation of Jiangxi, Duya became the governor of Shaanxi Province, and served as the transfer envoy.

古文：丙申，诏兵部侍郎黎干害若豺狼，特进刘忠翼掩义隐贼，并除名长流。
现代文：二十二日，皇上诏令，兵部侍郎黎干危害国家像豺狼，特进刘忠翼不顾仁义包庇贼人，都除去名籍流放到边远之处。
English: On the 22nd, by imperial edict, Li Gang, the attendant of the military department, who endangered the country like a jackal, and Liu Zhongyi, the special envoy, who sheltered the thieves regardless of benevolence and righteousness, were all removed and exiled to remote places.

古文：既行，俱赐死。
现代文：已经走了，又都赐他们自杀。
English: They've gone and they've all killed themselves.

古文：丁酉，以京畿观察使鲍防为福州刺史、福建都团练观察使。
现代文：二十八日，以京畿观察使鲍防为福州刺史、福建都团练观察使。
English: On the 28th, Bao Bao, the Gyeonggi Observation Envoy, was appointed as the Fuzhou Historian and the Fujian Capital Rehearsal Observation Envoy.

古文：以户部侍郎、判度支韩滉为太常卿，吏部尚书刘晏判度支盐铁转运等使。
现代文：以户部侍郎、兼任度支使韩为太常卿，吏部尚书刘晏兼任度支使、盐铁使、转运使。
English: Han, who was a steward of the household department and concurrently served as the imperial envoy, became the grand chancellor, while Liu Xi, the secretary of the personnel department, also served as the imperial envoy, the envoy of salt and iron, and the envoy of transportation.

古文：初，晏与滉分掌天下财赋，至是晏都领之。
现代文：当初，刘晏与韩分别掌管天下财赋，到此由刘晏一人总管。
English: At first, Liu Wei and Han separately controlled the world's wealth, and now Liu Wei is the only person in charge.

古文：六月己亥朔，御丹凤楼，大赦天下，罪无轻重，咸赦除之。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，皇上驾到丹凤楼，大赦天下，不论罪恶轻重，都加以赦免。
English: The first day of June is the New Year's Day, the emperor drove to the Danfeng Building, and pardoned the whole world, regardless of the severity of the crime.

古文：内外文武三品已上赐爵一级，四品已下加一阶，致仕官同见任，百姓为户者赐古爵一级。
现代文：内外文武三品以上官员赐爵一级，四品以下加一阶，辞官不做的同现任职官一样待遇。
English: Foreign and domestic civil and military officials with three or more pins will be given a first-class knighthood, and those with four or fewer pins will be given an additional first-class rank. The same treatment as the current officials will be given to those who do not have a title.

古文：加李正己司徒、太子太傅，崔宁、李勉本官同平章事。
现代文：加给李正己司徒、太子太傅的职衔，加给崔宁、李勉本官以外同平章事职衔。
English: Li Zhenggi was given the titles of Sifu and Prince Taifu, and Cui Ning and Li Mian were given the titles of Tong Pingzhangji in addition to their own titles.

古文：使人疑惑，中书门下与详定官决，取堪久长行用者编入格条。自今更不得奏置寺观及度人。
现代文：各州刺史、定时入朝之官，父亲在世还没有官者，酌量情况给予五品辞职官的待遇。父亲死后，给予追赠。
English: In the case of an official of each prefecture who has made history and entered the imperial court at a certain time, and whose father was not yet an official when he was alive, he will be given the treatment of a five-star resigning official. After his father's death, he will be given a posthumous gift.

古文：庚子，封元子育为宣王，次子谟为舒王，谌为通王，谅为虔王，详为肃王，并加开府仪同三司。
现代文：二日，封大儿子李诵为宣王，次子谟为舒王，谌为通王，谅为虔王，详为肃王，都封给开府仪同三司的职衔。
English: On the second day, the eldest son, Li Chao, was named the King of Xuan, the second son, Moo, the King of Shu, the third son, Hao, the King of Tong, the fourth son, Tong, the King of Qian, and the last son, Su, were all given the titles of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：乙巳，封皇弟乃为益王，迅为随王。
现代文：七日，封皇弟为益王，迅为随王。
English: On the seventh day, the younger brother of the emperor was named King Yi, and Xun was named King Sui.

古文：丙午，举先天故事，非供奉侍卫之官，自文武六品已上清望官，每日二人更直待制，以备顾问，乃以延英南药院故地为廨。
现代文：八日，按照先天年间旧例，不是供奉侍卫的官，从文武六品以上的台省侍御官，每天两人轮流值班等候诏令，以备顾问，仍旧以延英南药院旧地为官署。
English: On the 8th, in accordance with the old practice of the day before yesterday, instead of the officials who served as attendants, the Taiwanese attendants from the provinces of Wenwu and Liuping and above, two people took turns on duty every day to wait for the imperial edict, to prepare advisers, and still used the old place of Yanying South Pharmacy as the government office.

古文：癸丑，诏皇族五服等已上居四方者，家一人赴山陵，县次给食。
现代文：十五日，皇上诏令，属于皇族五服以内而家居住在四面八方的，家中应有一人到陵墓去，各县依次供给食物。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the emperor decreed that if a person belonged to the imperial family and lived in any of the five provinces, one person in the family should go to the mausoleum, and each county should provide food in turn.

古文：己未，扬州每年贡端午日江心所铸镜，幽州贡麝香，皆罢之。
现代文：二十一日，扬州每年端午日进贡的在江心所铸造的镜子，幽州进贡的麝香，都免除不要进献。
English: On the 21st, Yangzhou's annual Dragon Boat Festival tribute, the mirror cast in the center of the river, and Yuzhou's tribute of musk are all exempt from donation.

古文：辛酉，罢宣歙池、鄂岳沔二都团练观察使。陕虢都防御使，以其地分隶诸道。
现代文：二十三日，撤销宣歙池、鄂岳沔两个都团练观察使，撤销陕虢都防御使，以他们所辖之地分别隶属于各道。
English: On the 23rd, the Xuanjianchi and the Houguei were both revoked as the observation force for regimental training, and the Shaanxi and Yunnan were revoked as the defense force, and they were subordinated to each province according to the areas under their jurisdiction.

古文：复置东都京畿观察使，以御史中丞为之。
现代文：重又设置东都京畿观察使，以御史中丞担任。
English: In addition, the Dongdu Gyeonggi Observation Envoy was set up, with Goshi Chujo assuming the post.

古文：壬戌，处州刺史王缙、湖州刺史第五琦皆为太子宾客，睦州刺史李揆为国子祭酒，并留司东都。
现代文：二十四日，处州刺史王缙、湖州刺史第五琦都任太子宾客，睦州刺史李揆任国子祭酒，并且留下主管东都。
English: On the 24th, Wenzhou's chief brewer Wang Wei and Huzhou's fifth chief brewer Ruo Wei were both guests of the crown prince, while Mianzhou's chief brewer Li Wei was in charge of the national son's sacrificial wine, and remained in charge of Dongdu.

古文：中官邵光超送淮西旌节，李希烈遗缣七百匹，事发，杖六十，配流。
现代文：太监邵光超送旌旗仪仗到淮西，淮西节度留后李希烈送给邵光超绸缎七百匹，事情发作，将邵光超打了六十杖，发配充军。
English: The eunuch Shao Guangchao sent the ceremonial banner to Huaxi, and after the Huaxi Festival, Li Xilei gave Shao Guangchao seven hundred super silk cocoons. When the incident occurred, he beat Shao Guangchao with sixty canes and dispatched reinforcements.

古文：由是中官不敢受赂。
现代文：从此太监不敢接受贿赂。
English: From then on, eunuchs dared not accept bribes.

古文：癸亥，诏中书门下、御史台五品已上，诸司三品已上长官，各举可任刺史县令者一人，中书门下量才进拟，有犯坐举主。
现代文：二十五日，诏令中书门下、御史台五品以上官员，各司三品以上长官，各个推荐可以担任刺史、县令者一名，中书省门下省衡量才干提拔拟定官职。
English: On the 25th, the edict issued by the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education and the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of Culture and the People's Commissariat of Education stipulated that the officials of the People's Commissariat of Education and the People's Commissariat of Culture and the People's Commissariat of Culture and the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of Education and the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of Culture and the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of Culture and the People's Commissariat of

古文：秋七月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of autumn in July is the New Year's Day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：礼仪使、吏部尚书颜真卿奏： 列圣谥号，文字繁多，请以初谥为定。 
现代文：礼仪使、吏部尚书颜真卿上奏道： 列圣谥号，文字繁多，请求以开始的谥号为定准。 
English: The etiquette envoy, the clerk, Shang Shuxuan Zhenqing, recited the following: "There are many names of saints, and the request is based on the first name.

古文：兵部侍郎袁傪议云： 陵庙玉册已刻，不可轻改。 
现代文：兵部侍郎袁亻参议道： 先皇陵庙玉册已经刻好，谥号不可轻易改动。 
English: Yuan Qi, the attendant of the Military Department, said in his speech: The imperial tombstone of the former emperor's mausoleum has already been engraved, and the imperial seal cannot be easily changed.

古文：罢。
现代文：颜真卿上奏作罢论。
English: Yan Zhenqing gave a speech on the topic.

古文：傪妄奏，不知玉册皆刻初谥而已。
现代文：其实袁亻参妄自上奏，他不知玉册都刻的是最初的谥号罢了。
English: As a matter of fact, Yuan Shanshan played from the top, he did not know that the jade book was engraved with the original nickname.

古文：庚午，诏：邕州所奏金坑，诚为润国，语人以利，非朕素怀。
现代文：三日，皇上下诏曰： 邕州所奏金坑一事，确实有利于国，对人们谈求利，不是朕素来所希望的。
English: On the third day, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "The matter of the gold mine in Zhangzhou is indeed beneficial to the country, and it is not what I have always hoped for to talk to people about seeking profits.

古文：其坑任人开采，官不得禁。
现代文：那些金坑任人们开采，官府不得禁止。 
English: People are allowed to mine those gold pits, but the government can't ban it.

古文：辛未，以吏部侍郎房宗偃为御史中丞、东都畿观察使。
现代文：四日，以吏部侍郎房宗偃为御史中丞、东都畿观察使。
English: On the 4th, Fusasone Munezaki, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History and the East Gyeongsang Province Observer.

古文：罢右银台门客省岁给廪料万二千斛。
现代文：撤销右银台门客省使每年供给的米粮一万二千斛。
English: Cancellation of the annual supply of 12,000 baht of rice grain by the Department of Economic Affairs.

古文：自永泰已来，或四方奏计未遣者，或上书言事忤旨者，及蕃客未报者，常数百人，于客省给食，横费已甚，故罢之。
现代文：从永泰年以来，有四方前来上奏献计没有遣送的人，有上书说事情违背皇上旨意的人，以及吐蕃来人没有回报者，由客省使供给米粮，浪费太厉害，所以撤销这笔开销。
English: Since the Yongtai era, there have been four parties who have come to report the donation of people who have not been sent, people who have written to say that the matter is contrary to the emperor's will, and people who have not returned from Tubo. The guest province has provided rice. The waste is too great, so the expenditure has been cancelled.

古文：壬申，毁元载、马璘、刘忠翼之第，以其雄侈逾制也。
现代文：五日，毁掉元载、马瞞、刘忠翼的府第，因为这些府第雄伟奢侈超越了皇家的规定。
English: On the fifth day, they destroyed the mansions of Yuan Zhao, Ma Xie and Liu Zhongyi, because these mansions of majestic luxury exceeded the royal regulations.

古文：癸酉，减宫中服御常贡者千数。
现代文：六日，减少宫中衣服车马及常规上贡的物品上千类。
English: On the 6th, thousands of items of clothing, chariots, horses and regular tributes in the palace were reduced.

古文：丁丑，复置厩马随仗于月华门外。
现代文：再次设置厩马随仪仗在月华门外。
English: Again, stables and horses were set up outside the Yuehua Gate for the ceremonial battle.

古文：己卯，诏王公卿士不得与民争利，诸节度观察使于扬州置回易邸，并罢之。
现代文：十二日，诏令王公卿士人不能与民众争利，各节度使、观察使在扬州设置交易买卖的官邸，都全部撤销。
English: On the 12th, Wang Gongqing decreed that officials could not compete with the people for profits, and all official residences set up in Yangzhou for trading and trading by various departments and observers were all revoked.

古文：庚辰，诏鸿胪寺，蕃客入京，各服本国之服。
现代文：十三日，皇上诏令鸿胪寺，吐蕃使者入京，各人穿本国之服装。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the emissaries from Hongye Temple and Tujie to come to Beijing, and each of them was to wear the clothing of his country.

古文：罢商州岁贡离胶。
现代文：撤销商州每年进贡的禾离胶。
English: Each year, the state collects a fee from the resellers.

古文：辛卯，罢天下榷酒。
现代文：二十四日，撤销天下酒类专卖。
English: On the 24th, the national liquor monopoly was revoked.

古文：丁酉，诏国用未给。其宣王已下开府俸料皆罢给。
现代文：三十日，皇上诏令，国家用度未能全部供给，宣王及其以下的开府的官俸及以外的食料钱全部停止供给。
English: On the 30th, the emperor issued an imperial edict, saying that the state could not supply all of the expenses, and that the supply of salaries and other food money to the emperor and his subordinates was completely stopped.

古文：八月甲辰，以门下侍郎、平章事崔祐甫为中书侍郎、平章事，以道州司马同正杨炎为门下侍郎、平章事，以怀州刺史乔琳为御史大夫、同平章事、京畿观察使。
现代文：八月七日，以门下侍郎、平章事崔甫为中书侍郎、平章事。以道州司马同正杨炎为门下侍郎、平章事，以怀州刺史乔琳为御史大夫、同平章事、京畿观察使。
English: On August 7th, Cui Fu, the junior chamberlain and Taira no Shoji, was appointed as the junior secretary and Taira no Shoji, Doushu Sima, the junior chamberlain and Taira no Shoji, Yang Yan, the junior chamberlain and Taira no Shoji, was appointed as the junior secretary and Taira no Shoji, and Huai Zhi Qiaolin was appointed as the senior secretary and Taira no Shoji, and Gyeonggi Observer.

古文：乙巳，遣太常少卿韦伦使吐蕃，以蕃俘五百人还之，修好也。
现代文：八日，派遣太常少卿韦伦出使吐蕃，把吐蕃俘虏五百人送还吐蕃，表示与吐蕃修好。
English: On the 8th, Wei Lun, the Tai Chang Shaoqing, sent an envoy to Tubo to return 500 Tubo prisoners to Tubo, indicating that he had made peace with Tubo.

古文：癸亥，诏人死亡于外以棺柩还城者勿禁。
现代文：二十六日，皇上诏令，死亡在外的人棺木回到京城不要禁止。
English: On the 26th, the emperor decreed that the coffins of those who died outside should not be banned from returning to the capital.

古文：九月甲戌，以淮西节度为淮宁军。
现代文：九月七日，以淮西节度使为淮宁军。
English: On September 7th, the Huai-Ning army marched to the West Huai-Xi Festival.

古文：辛巳，以检校刑部尚书白孝德为太子少傅。
现代文：十四日，以检校刑部尚书白孝德为太子少傅。
English: On the 14th, the prince's young tutor was Shangshu Bai Xiaode from the school inspection and punishment department.

古文：丙戌，秘书少监邵说为吏部侍郎，给事中刘乃为兵部侍郎，中书舍人令狐峘为礼部侍郎。
现代文：十九日，秘书少监邵说为吏部侍郎，给事中刘为兵部侍郎，中书舍人令狐山亘为礼部侍郎。
English: On the 19th, Secretary and Junior Supervisor Shao said that he was the secretary of the personnel department, Liu was the secretary of the military department, and the secretary of the middle school was the secretary of the ceremonial department.

古文：冬十月丁酉朔，吐蕃合南蛮之众号二十万，三道寇茂州、扶、文、黎、雅等州，连陷郡邑。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日，吐蕃会合南蛮部众号称二十万，从三路入侵茂州、扶州、交州、黎州、雅州，连续攻陷了州郡城镇。
English: In winter, October 1st was the New Year's Day. The Southern Barbarian Division of the Tubo Association claimed 200,000 men, invaded Maozhou, Fuzhou, Jiaozhou, Leshou, and Yazhou from three directions, and successively captured towns in Zhoushu County.

古文：发兵四千助蜀，大破之。
现代文：皇上发兵四千人帮助蜀郡，大破敌军。
English: The emperor sent four thousand soldiers to help Shu County and defeated the enemy army.

古文：己酉，葬代宗于元陵。
现代文：十三日，在元陵安葬代宗。
English: On the 13th, Daizong was buried in the original mausoleum.

古文：戊午，九成宫贡立兽炭炉，襄州贡种蔗蒻之工，皆罢之。
现代文：二十二日，九成宫进贡站立着野兽装饰的烧炭炉子，襄州进贡会种植甘蔗、香草的工人，都加以免除。
English: On the 22nd, the tributary of Jiu Chenggong stood with a charcoal stove decorated with beasts, and the workers of sugar cane and vanilla planting in Yangzhou Tributary Association were exempted.

古文：散官豢猪三千头给贫民。
现代文：闲散官员养猪三千头给贫民。
English: Idle officials raise 3,000 pigs for the poor.

古文：十一月辛未，以鸿胪卿贾耽为梁州刺史、山南西道节度观察使。
现代文：十一月五日，以鸿胪卿贾耽为梁州刺史、山南西道节度观察使。
English: On November 5th, Hongyuqing Jia Tan was appointed as the official historian of Liangzhou and the observer of the festival of Shannan West Road.

古文：丁丑，以陕州长史杜亚为河中尹、河中晋绛慈隰都防御观察使。
现代文：十一日，以陕州长史杜亚为河中尹、河中晋、绛、慈、隰防都御观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the governor of Shaanxi Province, Shduya, was appointed as the observation envoy of the central government of Hechu Yin, Hechu Jin, Yao, Ci and Xie.

古文：壬午，御史大夫、平章事乔琳为工部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：十六日，御史大夫、平章事乔琳为工部尚书，罢免知政事。
English: On the 16th, Dr. Mishi and Jolin Pingzhang were removed from their posts as vice-ministers of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：加剑南西川节度观察度支营田等使、检校司空、平章事、成都尹崔宁兼御史大夫、京畿观察使。
现代文：加给剑南西川节度使、观察使、度支使、营田使、检校司空、平章事、成都尹崔宁兼任御史大夫、京畿观察使的职衔。
English: In addition, he was given the titles of Jianan Nishikawa Setsudo envoy, Observation envoy, Doshi envoy, Yingtan envoy, Kengakusei Ku, Pingzhangji, Chengdu Yin Cui Ning concurrently serving as goshi taifu, and Gyeonggi Observation envoy.

古文：癸巳，加崔宁兼灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护、朔方节度等使、出镇坊州。以荆南节度使、检校礼部尚书、兼江陵尹、御史大夫张延赏检校兵部尚书兼成都尹、御史大夫、剑南西川节度度支营田观察等使。以朔方节度虞候杜希全为灵州留后；以鄜州刺史张光晟单于振武军使、东中二受降城绥银鄜胜等军州留后；延州刺史李建为鄜坊庆延留后。
现代文：二十七日，加给崔宁兼任灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护、朔方节度使的职衔，出镇坊州；以荆南节度使、检校礼部尚书、兼江陵尹、御史大夫张延赏为检校兵部尚书兼成都尹、御史大夫、剑南西川节度使、度支使、营田使、观察使；以朔方节度虞候杜希全为灵州留后；以州刺史张光晟为单于振武军使、东中二受降城、绥、银？胜等军州留后；延州刺史李建为、坊、丹、延四州留后。
English: On the 27th, Cui Ning was given the titles of Lingzhou Grand Governor, Zhenbei Grand Protector, and Shuo Festival Envoy, and left the town of Fangzhou; Jing Nan Festival Envoy, School Inspection and Ceremonial Department Shang Shu, Jiangling Yin, Military Historian Zhang Yanbo as School Inspection and Military Department Shang Shu, Chengdu Yin, Military Historian, Jianan Xichuan Festival Envoy, Degree Support Envoy, Yingtian Envoy, and Observation Envoy; Shuo Festival Envoy Du Xiquan was left in Lingzhou; Zhang Guangyao was awarded as the Military Envoy to Zhenwu, Dongzhong II was awarded as

古文：杨炎素恶崔宁，虽授以三镇，仍署此三人为留后，夺宁之权也，人皆愤之。
现代文：杨炎素来厌恶崔宁，虽然授予崔宁三镇的职衔，仍然用这三人作为节度留后的官职，这是夺取崔宁的权力，人们都对此事愤愤不平。
English: Yang Yan had always disliked Cui Ning. Although he awarded Cui Ning the title of Three Towns, he still used these three people as officials after the festival. This was to seize Cui Ning's power, and people were indignant about this.

古文：十二月己亥，南选使可以专达，勿复以御史临之。
现代文：十二月三日，南选使可以专门将科选举事向皇上报告，不再用御史监督。
English: On December 3, Nan Xuan Zi was allowed to report the election to the emperor, and no longer needed imperial supervision.

古文：乙卯，制：宣王某可立为皇太子。
现代文：十九日，皇上下诏：宣王李诵可立为皇太子。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: proclaiming that Prince Li Xie could become crown prince.

古文：丙寅晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三十日，有日蚀。
English: On the 30th, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：诏元日朝会不得奏祥瑞事。
现代文：皇上诏令，元旦这天早朝不得上奏吉祥的事。
English: According to the Emperor's edict, no auspicious events are to be reported in the early morning of New Year's Day.

古文：建中元年春正月丁卯朔，御含元殿，政元建中，群臣上尊号曰圣神文武皇帝。
现代文：建中元年春正月一日是朔日，皇上驾到含元殿。改元为建中，群臣奉上尊号曰圣神文武皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Jianzhong, the emperor arrived at the Hall of Han Yuan. The era was changed to Jianzhong, and the ministers were given the honorific title of "Holy Spirit, Emperor Wenwu."

古文：己巳，上朝太清宫。
现代文：三日，皇上朝拜太清宫。
English: On the third day, the emperor paid homage to the Taiqing Palace.

古文：庚午，谒太庙。
现代文：四日，拜谒太庙。
English: On the fourth day, they worshipped at the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛未，有事于郊丘。是日还宫，御丹凤门，大赦天下。
现代文：五日，在郊外祭天，当天回宫，驾到丹凤门，大赦天下。
English: On the fifth day, they held a festival in the suburbs, and on the same day, they returned to the palace, drove to the Danfeng Gate, and pardoned the world.

古文：己巳，福建观察使鲍防、湖南观察使萧复让宪官，从之。
现代文：从天下大乱以来，征税名目太多，今后除两种税收外，擅自收一点钱，即以贪赃犯法论处。福建观察使鲍防、湖南观察使萧复让出御史官职，皇上同意了。
English: Since the Great Turmoil, there have been too many items of taxation. In the future, in addition to the two types of taxes, collecting a little money without authorization will be punished as a crime of corruption. The Fujian Observer asked Bao Bao and the Hunan Observer asked Xiao Fu to give up the post of imperial historian, and the emperor agreed.

古文：自兵兴已来，方镇重任必兼台省长官，以至外府僚佐，亦带台省衔。
现代文：从打仗以来，方镇重任必定兼任御史台和中书省门下省长官，以至于外府官吏也兼带御史台和中书省门下省职衔。
English: Since the war, Fang Zhengrong must have concurrently served as the governor of Goshidai and the governor of Zhongshu Province, so much so that officials from other provinces also have the title of Goshidai and the governor of Zhongshu Province.

古文：至是除韩滉苏州刺史，杜亚河中少尹，而领都团练观察使，不带台省兼官。
现代文：至此，除了韩任苏州刺史，杜亚任河中少尹，而且兼任都团练观察使外，都不兼任御史台和中书省、门下省长官。
English: So far, in addition to Han as the Suzhou Provincial Historian, Duya as the Hechong Shao Yin, and concurrently serving as a regimental training observer, they do not concurrently serve as the Provincial Historian and the Provincial Governor of the People's Republic of China.

古文：自是诸道非节度而兼宪官者皆让。
现代文：从此，各道不是节度使而兼任御史官者都让出官衔。
English: From then on, those who were not the festival envoys but also served as imperial historians in each province had to give up their official titles.

古文：甲午，诏： 东都河南江淮山南东道等转运租庸青苗盐铁等使、尚书左仆射晏，顷以兵车未息，权立使名，久勤元老，集我庶务，悉心瘁力，垂二十年，朕以征税多门，乡邑凋耗，听于群议，思有变更，将置时和之理，宜复有司之制。
现代文：二十八日，皇上诏曰： 东都、河南、江淮、山南东道转运使、租庸使、青苗使、盐铁使、尚书左仆射刘晏，近来兵战不息，权且立一个名义，长久使元老辛劳，让元老大量搞财政庶务，过分劳累，已经心力交瘁，近二十年了。朕认为多种门类的征税，乡镇消耗凋敝，听到群众议论，想要有所变革，将设置符合时代特征的办法。应恢复有关衙门机构。
English: On the 28th, the emperor's edict said: Dongdu, Henan, Jianghuai, Shannan host transshipment envoys, rent yong envoys, young seedlings envoys, salt and iron envoys, Shangshu left minion Liu Wei, recently soldiers have been fighting incessantly, the authority has established a name, the elders have been working hard for a long time, and the elders have been engaged in a large number of financial general affairs. They are overworked and have been exhausted for nearly 20 years. I think that the taxation of various categories, the consumption of townships and towns, and the hearing of the masses, if there is

古文：晏所领使宜停，天下钱谷委金部、仓部，中书门下拣两司郎官，准格式调掌。 
现代文：刘晏担任的各使应该撤销，天下钱、谷委任金部、仓部，中书、门下挑选两司郎官，按国家标准掌管。 
English: The envoys held by Liu Wei should be revoked. The central government should appoint the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Finance.

古文：是月，浚丰州陵阳渠。二月丙申，遣黜陟使一十一人分行天下。
现代文：二月一日，皇上派遣黜陟使十一人分行天下。
English: On February 1, the emperor dispatched eleven emissaries to the world.

古文：癸卯，以户部郎中韩洄为谏议大夫，以泾原节度使段秀实为司农卿。
现代文：八日，以户部郎中韩洄为谏议大夫，以泾原节度使段秀实为司农卿。
English: On the 8th, Han Zheng, the head of the Household Department, was appointed as the chief adviser, and Duan Hsiu-sheng, the chief secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：己酉，贬尚书左仆射刘晏为忠州刺史。
现代文：十四日，贬尚书左仆射刘晏为忠州刺史。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Liu Ye, became the first person to write a history of Chungju.

古文：癸丑，昭义军节度留后李抱真为本道节度使。
现代文：十八日，昭义军节度留后李抱真任本道节度使。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Li Baozhen was appointed as the envoy of the festival of the Shao Yi Army.

古文：甲寅，贬史馆修撰、礼部侍郎令狐峘郴州司马，右补阙柳冕巴州司户。
现代文：十九日，贬史馆修撰、礼部侍郎令狐山亘为郴州司马，贬右补阙柳冕为巴州司户。
English: On the 19th, the revisionist of the History Museum and the attendant of the Ceremonial Department were demoted, and the Fox Mountain Wataru was demoted to the Sima of Bozhou, and the right-hand man of the Bozhou Sifu was demoted to the Liu Guan of Bozhou.

古文：日本国朝贡。
现代文：日本国来朝贡。
English: Japan came to pay tribute.

古文：癸亥，硃泚兼四镇北庭行军、泾原节度使。
现代文：二十八日，朱氵此兼任四镇、北庭行军、泾原节度使。
English: On the 28th, Zhu Xi also served as the envoy of the Four Towns, the North Yard March, and the Yuyuan Festival.

古文：三月丙寅，礼仪使奏东都太庙阙木主，请造。
现代文：三月一日，礼仪使上奏说东都太庙缺木制牌位，请求制造。
English: On March 1st, the etiquette envoy reported that Dongdu Taimiao was short of wooden plaques and requested that they be made.

古文：诏下议之，不决。
现代文：皇上诏令议定，但不能决断。
English: The Emperor's edict was agreed upon, but could not be carried out.

古文：庚午，监察御史张著以法冠弹中丞严郢浚陵阳渠匿诏不行，消郢官，著赐绯鱼。
现代文：五日，监察御史张著凭借御史身份弹劾中丞严郢疏通陵阳渠，隐瞒皇上诏令不推行，削除了严郢官职，赐给张著带绯鱼袋。
English: On the fifth day, the inspector of the Imperial Historian Zhang, by virtue of his status as the Imperial Historian, impeached the middle senator Yan Xuan for the dredging of the Lingyang Canal, concealed that the Emperor's edict was not implemented, removed Yan Xuan's official position, and gave Zhang a bag of eels.

古文：辛未，左散骑常侍、翰林学士张涉放归田里。
现代文：六日，左散骑常侍、翰林学士张涉罢官放回乡里。
English: On the sixth day, Zhang Zibo, the left rider, and Hanlin, the scholar, were sent back to the village.

古文：甲戌，以前司农卿庾准为江陵尹、兼御史中丞、荆南节度使。
现代文：九日，以前任司农卿庾准为江陵尹、兼御史中丞、荆南节度使。
English: On the 9th, the former Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Zou Zhen, was replaced by Jiang Ling Yin, concurrently the Vice-Minister of History, and Jing Nan, the Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：癸巳，以谏议大夫韩洄为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：二十八日，以谏议大夫韩洄为户部侍郎兼任度支使。
English: On the 28th, Han Min, a doctor of the Imperial Court of Justice, was appointed as a household attendant and a special envoy.

古文：时将贬刘晏，罢使名，归尚书省本司。
现代文：当时将要贬刘晏官职，罢免使的名义，而后将使归尚书省本司管理。
English: At that time, Liu Ye was to be demoted from his official position and removed from his position as envoy, and then he would be transferred to the management of the book department of the Ministry of Culture.

古文：今又命洄判度支，令金部郎中杜佑权勾当江淮水陆运使，一如刘晏、韩滉之则，盖杨炎之排晏也。
现代文：现在又任命韩洄兼任度支使，又命令金部郎中杜佑暂代办理江淮水陆运使，完全和刘晏、韩一样兼任，这正是杨炎排斥刘晏啊！
English: Now, he has also appointed Han Kuo to serve concurrently as the chief envoy, and ordered Jin Bo Langzhong Du You to temporarily handle the land and water transportation of the Jianghuai River, fully concurrently with Liu Kuo and Han, which is exactly Yang Yan's exclusion of Liu Kuo!

古文：夏四月乙未朔，泾原裨将刘文喜据城叛。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日，泾原裨将刘文喜占据城池造反。
English: The first day of April in summer is the new year's day, and Liu Wenxi occupied the city and rebelled.

古文：己亥，地震。
现代文：五日，发生地震。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, there was an earthquake.

古文：辛未，命江西观察使崔昭册命回纥可汗。
现代文：七日，命江西观察使崔昭册封回纥可汗。
English: On the seventh day, Jiangxi observation ordered Cui Zhaochuan to seal the return of the Khan.

古文：戊申，以福建观察使鲍防为洪州刺史、江西团练观察使。
现代文：十四日，以福建观察使鲍防为洪州刺史、江西团练观察使。
English: On the 14th, Bao Fang, the Fujian observation envoy, was appointed as the observer of Hongzhou and the observation envoy of Jiangxi regimental drill.

古文：癸丑，上诞日，不纳中外之贡，唯李正己、田悦各献缣三万匹，诏付度支。
现代文：十九日，皇上寿诞之日，不接纳中外之贡品，惟有李正己、田悦各人献上双丝细绢三万匹，皇上诏令交付度支使使用。
English: On the 19th, the day of the emperor's birthday, tributes from home and abroad were not accepted, except that Li Zhengji and Tian Yue each presented 30,000 double-silk fine reeds, which the emperor ordered to be delivered to the imperial envoy for use.

古文：妃父王景先、驸马高怡献金铜像，上曰： 有何功德？
现代文：妃父王景先、驸马高怡奉献金铜像，皇上道： 朕有什么功德？
English: The gold and bronze statue was dedicated by the queen's father, King Jingxian, and his horse, Gao Yi. The empress said, "What are my merits?

古文：非吾所为。 
现代文：不是我所应有。 
English: Not what I should be.

古文：退还之。
现代文：退还给他们。
English: Give it back to them.

古文：壬戌，以衡州刺史、嗣曹王皋为潭州刺史、湖南团练观察使，御史中丞元全柔为杭州刺史。
现代文：二十八日，以衡州刺史、嗣曹王李皋为潭州刺史、湖南团练观察使，御史中丞元全柔为杭州刺史。
English: On the 28th, Hengzhou's chief historian, the heir of Cao Wang, Li Jun, was appointed as the chief historian of Tanzhou, Hunan's regimental training observation envoy, and the chief historian, Zhongzheng Yuanquan, was appointed as the chief historian of Hangzhou.

古文：五月甲子朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：戊辰，以太常少卿韦伦为太常卿，复使吐蕃。
现代文：五日，以太常少卿韦伦为太常卿，再次出使吐蕃。
English: On the fifth day, Wei Lun, the Tai Chang Shaoqing, was promoted to Tai Changqing and sent to Tujia again.

古文：己卯，右金吾卫大将军李通为黔州刺史、黔中经略招讨观察盐铁等使。潮州刺史常衮为福建观察使。
现代文：十六日，右金吾大将军李通为黔州刺史、黔中经略使、招讨使、观察使、盐铁使，潮州刺史常衮为福建观察使。
English: On the 16th, Li Tong, the general of the Right Kingu, was appointed as the inspector of Bozhou, the delegate of Bozhong, the envoy of invitation, the envoy of observation, and the envoy of salt and iron, and the inspector of Chaozhou, the envoy of Fujian.

古文：泾州将刘光国杀刘文喜降，泾州平。
现代文：泾州将刘光国杀刘文喜来投降，泾州平定。
English: Bozhou surrendered after Liu Guangguo killed Liu Wenxi, and Bozhou was pacified.

古文：六月甲午朔，中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事崔祐甫卒。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事崔甫去世。
English: The first day of June was the New Year's Day. Cui Fu, the attendant and disciple of Zhongshu, passed away.

古文：辛丑，筑奉天城。
现代文：八日，建筑奉天城。
English: On the 8th, the construction of Feng Tiancheng started.

古文：加试殿中监刘海宾兼御史中丞封兵平郡王。
现代文：加给试用殿中监刘海宾兼任御史中丞的职衔，封为乐平郡王。
English: Liu Haibin, the probationary palace middle supervisor, was also given the title of goshi chujo, and was named the king of Leping County.

古文：海宾泾州将，赏杀刘文喜也。
现代文：刘海宾是泾州将领，赏赐他是因为他杀刘文喜。
English: Liu Haibin is the general of Zhangzhou. He was rewarded because he killed Liu Wenxi.

古文：乙卯，京兆尹源休使回纥，册武义成功可汗。
现代文：二十二日，京兆尹源休出使回纥，册封武义成功可汗。
English: On the 22nd, Jing Zhao and Yin Yuan sent an envoy to return the favor, and Wuyi was awarded the title of "Successful Khan."

古文：秋七月丁丑，罢内出盂兰盆，不命僧为内道场。
现代文：秋七月十五日，撤销宫内做盂兰盆会，不命令僧人在宫内做道场，也不布施斋饭、金钱。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Bon festival was cancelled, monks were not ordered to make a dojo in the palace, nor were they given food or money.

古文：壬申，以鸿胪寺左右威远营隶金吾。
现代文：十日，以鸿胪寺左右威远营隶属金吾营禁卫军。
English: On the 10th, with Hongluo Temple on the left and right, Weiyuan Battalion was subordinated to Kingu Battalion of the Imperial Guard.

古文：己丑恶，忠州刺史刘晏赐自尽。
现代文：二十七日，皇上赐忠州刺史刘晏自尽。
English: On the 27th day, Emperor Taizhou gave the order to Liu Ye, the governor of Taizhou, to commit suicide.

古文：八月甲午，振武军使张光晟杀领蕃回纥首领突董统等千人，收驼马千余、缯锦十万匹。
现代文：八月三日，振武军使张光晟杀了领蕃回纥首领突董统等一千人，收缴驼、马一千多只，绸缎十万匹。
English: On August 3, the Zhenwu army sent Zhang Guangyi to kill 1,000 people, including Tu Dongtong, the leader of Tuyuyu, and seized more than 1,000 camels and horses and 100,000 silks and yarns.

古文：乃征光晟归朝，以彭令芳代之。
现代文：于是征调张光晟归朝，用彭令芳代替他。
English: As a result, Zhang Guangyao was transferred to the imperial court and replaced by Peng Lingfang.

古文：乙未，河中晋、绛观察使杜亚为睦州刺史。
现代文：四日，河中、晋、绛观察使杜亚为睦州刺史。
English: On the fourth day, the observation of Kawakuchu, Jin and Hao made Duya write a history of Mutsu.

古文：丁未，加硃泚中书令，余官使并如故。
现代文：十六日，加给朱氵此中书令的职衔，其余官职同原来一样。
English: On the 16th, Zhu Xi was given the title of this middle-ranking official, and the rest of the official positions were the same as before.

古文：以舒王谟为泾原节度大使，尚书右丞孟皞为泾州刺史、知留后。
现代文：以舒王谟为泾源节度大使，尚书右丞孟白皋为泾州刺史、主持留后工作。
English: With Shu Wang Moo as the ambassador of the Lianyuan Festival, Shang Shuyuan Meng Baiyao as the historian of Lianzhou and presided over the post-residence work.

古文：东僰乌蛮守来朝贡。
现代文：东覺乌蛮守将前来朝贡。
English: The governor of Eastern Kyaku will come to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，遥尊上母沈氏曰皇太后。
现代文：二十六日，遥尊在远处的母亲沈氏为皇太后。
English: On the 26th, his distant mother, Shen, became empress dowager.

古文：戊午，以吏部尚书颜真卿为太子少师，依前礼仪使。
现代文：二十九日，以吏部尚书颜真卿为太子少师，仍依照先前任礼仪使。
English: On the 29th, the Prince's Young Master was appointed to the Ministry of Personnel, Shangshu Yan Zhenqing, who continued to serve as a ceremonial envoy as before.

古文：改封嗣舒王藻为嗣郢王。
现代文：改封嗣舒王藻为嗣郢王。
English: He changed the title of the heir of Shu Wangmao to the heir of Shao Wangmao.

古文：九月戊辰，判度支韩洄奏请于商州红崖冶洛源监置十炉铸钱。江淮七监每铸一千费二千文，请皆罢，从之。
现代文：九月七日，兼任度支使韩洄上奏在商州红崖冶、洛源监设置十个火炉铸造钱，江淮有七个监，每铸一千钱要耗费二千文，朝臣请求都撤销，皇上同意了。
English: On September 7th, Han Xuan Shangso, who also served as the imperial envoy, set up ten furnaces to mint money in Hongya Ye and Luo Yuan Guan in Shangzhou. Jianghuai has seven guan, and it costs two thousand yuan to mint one thousand yuan. The courtier's requests were all withdrawn, and the emperor agreed.

古文：己卯，雷。
现代文：十八日，打雷。
English: On the 18th, there was thunder.

古文：冬十月甲午，贬尚书左丞薛邕为连山尉，坐赃也。
现代文：冬十月四日，贬尚书左丞薛邕为连山尉，因为犯了贪污之罪。
English: On the 4th of October in winter, Xue Yao, the left-hand man of Shangshu, was demoted to the rank of Lianshan lieutenant, because he had committed the crime of corruption.

古文：乙巳，太子少傅、昌化郡王白孝德卒。庚寅，以睦王述为奉迎皇太后使，工部尚书乔琳为副。
现代文：十五日，太子少傅、昌化郡王白孝德去世，以睦王述为奉迎皇太后的使者，工部尚书乔琳为副使。
English: On the fifteenth day, Prince Shoufu and Changhua County King Bai Xiaode passed away, with Prince Mutsu as the emissary to welcome the empress dowager, and Shangshu Jolin of the Ministry of Industry as the deputy envoy.

古文：十一月辛酉朔，朝集使及贡使见于宣政殿，兵兴已来，四方州府不上计、内外不朝会者二十有五年，至此始复旧制。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，朝集使及贡使在宣政殿朝见皇上。战争以来，四方州府官员都不上京向皇上报告人口、钱粮、盗贼、诉讼等情况，内外官员不朝见君主二十五年了，到现在才开始恢复旧有制度。
English: Since the war, officials from all four prefectures have not gone to Beijing to report to the emperor on the situation of population, money and grain, thieves, lawsuits, etc. It has been 25 years since officials at home and abroad have not met with the monarch, and only now are they beginning to restore the old system.

古文：州府朝集者一百七十三人，诏每令分番二人待诏。
现代文：州府朝见皇帝、拜见宰相者一百七十三人，诏令每次让两人轮流等待皇上诏令。
English: There were one hundred and seventy-three people who visited the emperor and the prime minister in the prefectural capital, and the imperial edict required two people to wait for the imperial edict in turn.

古文：乙丑，赠敬晖等五王官，又赠张九龄司徒，钟绍京太子太傅。
现代文：五日，赠给已故世的敬晖等五王官衔，又赠给已故张九龄以司徒的职衔，赠给钟绍京太子太傅的职衔。
English: On the fifth day, the official titles of the five kings, such as the deceased Jing Xi, were presented to the deceased, and the official title of the scholar was presented to the deceased Zhang Jiuling, and the official title of Zhong Shao, the Prince of Beijing, was presented.

古文：戊寅，诸王有官者初令出阁就班。
现代文：十八日，诸王有官职者开始命令他们出去就职。
English: On the 18th, officials began to order them to go out and take up their duties.

古文：又出嫁岳阳等一十县主，皆在诸王院久而未适人者，上悉命以礼出降。十二月辛卯，韦伦使回，与吐蕃宰相论钦明思等五十五人同至，献方物，修好也。
现代文：另外又让诸王之女岳阳县主等十一位公主出嫁，皇上命令按照礼仪下嫁。十二月一日，韦伦出使回纥，与吐蕃宰相论钦明思等五十五人同时回到朝廷，献上土特产，前来修和友好。
English: In addition, eleven princesses, including the daughter of kings and the head of Yueyang County, were allowed to marry, and the emperor ordered them to marry according to the etiquette. On December 1, Wei Lun returned to the imperial court with 55 people, including the prime minister of Tubo, Ong Chin Ming Si, to offer local products and come to make peace and friendship.

古文：丁酉，令详定国初以来将相功臣房玄龄等一百八十七人，据功绩分为三等。
现代文：七日，皇上命令详细拟定建国初期以来将相功臣房玄龄等一百八十七人，根据他们的功绩分为三等。
English: On the 7th, the emperor issued an order to make a detailed plan to divide the 187 meritorious subjects, such as Fong Xuanling, into three classes according to their achievements since the early days of the founding of the country.

古文：是岁，户部计帐，户总三百八万五千七十有六，赋入一千三百五万六千七十贯，盐利不在此限。
现代文：这年，户部计账，户数总计三百零八万五千零七十六户，赋税收入一千三百零五万六千零七十贯，盐利不在这个范围以内。
English: In this year, according to the accounts of the Household Department, the total number of households was 3,085,076, and the tax revenue was 1,350,670.

古文：二年春正月庚申朔。
现代文：建中二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the second year of Jianzhong is the New Year's Day.

古文：戊辰，成德军节度、恆定等州观察使、司空、兼太子太傅、同中书门下平章事、恆州刺史、陇西郡王李宝臣卒。
现代文：九日，成德军节度使、恒州、定州观察使、司空、兼太子太傅、同中书门下平章事、恒州刺史、陇西郡王李宝臣去世。
English: On the 9th, Chengde Military Festival Envoy, Hengzhou, Dingzhou Observation Envoy, Siku, Kan Dazhi Taifu, Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Pingzhangji, Hengzhou Zhishi, and Shaanxi County King Li Baochen passed away.

古文：丙子，以汴宋滑亳陈颍泗节度观察使、检校带领部尚书、同平章事李勉为永平军节度、汴滑陈等州观察等使；以兵部尚书、东都留守路嗣恭为郑汝陕河阳三城节度、东畿观察等使；以宋州刺史刘洽为宋亳颍节度使。
现代文：十七日，以汴、宋、滑、亳、陈、颍、泗等州节度使、观察使、检校吏部尚书、同平章事李勉为永平军节度使、汴州、滑州、陈州观察使；以兵部尚书、东都留守路嗣恭为郑、汝、陕、河阳三城节度使、东畿观察使；以宋州刺史刘洽为宋州、亳州、颍州节度使。
English: On the 17th, the Yongping Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's observation envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeongpyeong Army's festival envoy, the Yeong

古文：以郑州隶永平军。
现代文：把郑州隶属于永平军。
English: He subordinated Zhengzhou to the Yongping Army.

古文：自去年十月无雪，至甲申方雨雪。
现代文：从去年十月没下雪，直到这个月二十五日才下雪。
English: It didn't snow from last October until the 25th of this month.

古文：丁亥，检校户部尚书张献恭为东都留守。以河南尹赵惠伯为河中尹、河中晋绛慈显都防御观察使，以前郑州刺史于颀为河南尹。
现代文：二十八日，检校户部尚书张献恭为东都留守，以河南尹赵惠伯为河中尹、河中、晋、绛、慈、隰等地都防御使、观察使，以前任郑州刺史于颀为河南尹。
English: On the 28th, Shangshu Zhang Xianqiong, the head of the inspection department of the school, stayed behind in Dongdu, with Henan Yin Zhao Huibo as the defense envoy and observation envoy in Hezhong Yin, Hezhong, Jin, Shun, Cixi, Shun and other places. Previously, Zhengzhou Shishi Yu Yu was the Henan Yin.

古文：二月乙未，以御史中丞卢杞为御史大夫、京畿观察使，以桂管观察使李昌巙为江陵尹、兼御史大夫、荆南节度等使。以前荆南节度使庾准为左丞。
现代文：二月六日，以御史中丞卢杞为御史大夫、京畿观察使，以桂管观察使李昌为江陵尹、兼御史大夫、荆南节度使，以前任荆南节度使庾准为左丞。
English: On February 6, Lu Wei, the Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History and Gyeonggi Observation Envoy, Li Chang, the Vice-Minister of History and Jingnan Festival Envoy, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History and Gyeonggi Observation Envoy, and the Vice-Minister of History and Jingnan Festival Envoy was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left.

古文：甲辰，以容州刺史卢岳为桂州防御观察使。
现代文：十五日，以容州刺史卢岳为桂州防御使、观察使。
English: On the 15th, the defense and observation envoys of Guizhou were sent to Yongzhou Jishilouyue.

古文：乙巳，以门下侍郎杨炎为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，以御史大夫卢杞为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十六日，以门下侍郎杨炎为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，以御史大夫卢杞为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 16th, Yang Yan, a servant of the disciple, was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the same middle school, and Lu Wei, the master of history, was appointed as the junior secretary of the disciple and the junior secretary of the same middle school.

古文：丙午，以宋亳节度为宣武军。
现代文：十七日，以宋、亳节度为宣武军。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Song and Jiu dynasties were proclaimed as the military.

古文：丁未，以御史中丞袁高为京畿观察使。
现代文：十八日，以御史中丞袁高为京畿观察使。
English: On the 18th, Yuan Gao was appointed as the Gyeonggi Observer.

古文：乙卯，振武军乱，杀其帅彭令芳、监军刘惠光。
现代文：二十六日，振武军大乱，杀了他们的大帅彭令芳和监军刘惠光。
English: On the 26th, the Zhenwu army rioted and killed their general, Peng Lingfang, and their supervisor, Liu Huiguang.

古文：三月庚申朔，筑汴州城。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，建筑汴州城墙。
English: The first day of March is the New Year's Day, and the construction of the Zhangzhou city wall is in full swing.

古文：初，大历中李正己有淄、青、齐、海、登、莱、沂、密、德、棣、曹、濮、徐、兗、郓十五州之地，李宝臣有恆、定、易、赵、深、冀、沧七州之地，田承嗣有魏、博、相、卫、洺、贝、澶七州之地，梁崇义有襄、邓、均、房、复、郢六州之地，各聚兵数万。
现代文：当初，在大历中期，李正己占有淄、青、齐、海、登、莱、沂、密、德、棣、曹、濮、徐、兖、郓等十五州之地；李宝臣占有恒、定、易、赵、深、冀、沧等七州之地；田承嗣占有魏、博、相、卫？贝、澶等七州之地；梁崇义占有襄、邓、均、房、复、郢等六州之地，各人聚集军队数万人。
English: At the beginning, in the middle of the great calendar, Li Zhengyi occupied the lands of fifteen prefectures, including Gu, Qing, Qi, Hai, Deng, Lai, Jiao, Mi, De, Jiao, Cao, Jiao, Xu, Jiao and Jiao; Li Baochen occupied the lands of seven prefectures, including Heng, Ding, Yi, Zhao, Sheng, Ji and Cang; Tian Chengzhi occupied the lands of seven prefectures, including Wei, Bo, Xiang, Wei, Bei and Jiao; Liang Chongyi occupied the lands of six prefectures, including Xiang, Deng, Jun, Fang, Fu and J

古文：始因叛乱得位，虽朝廷宠待加恩，心犹疑贰，皆连衡盘结以自固。
现代文：开始时凭借叛乱得到职位，虽然朝廷优宠厚待施加恩德，内心还是猜疑而有异心，都横向联合盘踞以求巩固自己的势力。
English: At the beginning, they gained positions by virtue of rebellion, and although the imperial court treated them with favor and mercy, they still had suspicion and dissent in their hearts, and they all united horizontally in order to consolidate their power.

古文：朝廷增一城，浚一池，便飞语有辞，而诸盗完城缮甲，略无宁日。
现代文：朝廷每增加一个城，疏浚一个护城河，便流言蜚语，振振有词，认为将对他们不利，于是这些强盗叛贼便修建城墙，补充铠甲，完全没有安宁的日子。
English: Every time the imperial court added a city and dredged a moat, there were rumors and rumors that it would be unfavorable to them, so these robbers and traitors built city walls, added armor, and there was no peace at all.

古文：至是田悦初禀命，刘文喜殄除，群凶震惧。
现代文：到了田承嗣的儿子田悦开始接受王命，叛贼刘文喜被消灭之时，所有凶贼都震惊恐惧。
English: When Tian Chengzhi's son Tian Yue began to accept the king's order, and the traitor Liu Wenxi was eliminated, all the thieves were shocked and afraid.

古文：又奏计者还，都无赐与，既归，皆构怨言。
现代文：另外这些节度使派遣到朝廷上奏章提要求的奏计者回归叛贼处，就都发怨言，结下仇恨。
English: In addition, these restrictions caused the petitioners who had been sent to the imperial court to submit their demands to return to the traitors, and they all complained and bred hatred.

古文：先是汴州以城隘不容众，请广之。
现代文：当初因为汴州城太小容纳不了众多的人，请求扩大城池。
English: At first, because Zhangzhou City was too small to accommodate a large number of people, it was requested to expand the city.

古文：至是筑城，正己、田悦移兵于境为备，故诏分汴、宋、滑为三节度，移京西防秋兵九万二千人以镇关东。
现代文：因此这时修筑城墙，而李正己、田悦马上将军队移到边境来防备唐军，所以皇上诏令分汴州、宋州、滑州为三个节度使，调京西防秋之兵九万二千人以镇关东。
English: Therefore, the city wall was built at this time, and Li Zhengji and Tian Yue immediately moved their troops to the border to guard against the Tang army. Therefore, the emperor issued an imperial edict to divide Bozhou, Songzhou and Nanzhou into three festival envoys, and transferred 92,000 soldiers of the Beijing West Defense Autumn to the town of Guandong.

古文：又于郾城置溵州。
现代文：又在郾城设置氵殷州。
English: He also set up the Jinyang Prefecture in Lucheng.

古文：辛巳，以汾州刺史王翃为振武军使、东中二受降城镇北绥银麟胜等州留后。
现代文：二十三日，以汾州刺史王罖为振武军使、东中二受降城、镇北、绥、银、麟、胜等州留后。
English: On the 23rd, the envoy of the Zhenwu army was sent to Zhangzhou Sisi Wangye, and the East Middle Two were left behind in Zhangcheng, Zhenbei, Meng, Yin, Lin, Sheng and other provinces.

古文：以万年令崔汉衡为殿中少监，使吐蕃。
现代文：以万年令崔汉衡为殿中少监，出使吐蕃。
English: He appointed Cui Hanheng as the junior superintendent of the palace for ten thousand years and sent him to Tibet.

古文：夏四月己酉朔，省沔州。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日，撤销沔州。
English: Summer April 1 is the New Year's Day, the withdrawal of Ganzhou.

古文：庚寅，襄州梁崇义兼同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二日，襄州节度使梁崇义兼任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the second day, the Xiangzhou Festival made Liang Chongyi concurrently serve as the deputy secretary of the same school.

古文：己亥，省燕州、顺化州。
现代文：十一日，撤销燕州、顺化州。
English: On the 11th, Yanzhou and Hue were revoked.

古文：乙卯，并平琴州为党州。
现代文：二十七日，合并平琴州为党州。
English: On the 27th, Pingqin County was merged into Party County.

古文：丁巳，贬礼部侍郎于召桂州刺史，御史中丞袁高韶州长史。
现代文：二十九日，贬礼部侍郎于召为桂州刺史，贬御史中丞袁高为韶州长史。
English: On the 29th, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed as the governor of Guizhou, and the vice-governor of Guizhou, Yuan Gao, was appointed as the governor of Guizhou.

古文：五月丙寅，以军兴十一而税。
现代文：五月八日，由于打仗的原因只征收十分之一的税。
English: On May 8th, because of the war, only one-tenth of the tax was collected.

古文：己巳，以淮宁军节度使李希烈充汉南北诸道都知兵马招抚处置等使，封南平王。
现代文：十一日，以淮宁军节度使李希烈充任汉南、北各道都知兵马招抚使、处置使，封南平王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Xili was appointed as the envoy for the recruitment and disposition of soldiers and horses in Hannan and the northern provinces, and was named the king of Nanping.

古文：庚寅，以浙江西道为镇海军。加苏州刺史韩滉检校礼部尚书、润州刺史，充镇海军节度使、浙江东西道观察等使。
现代文：六月三日，以浙江西道为镇海军，加苏州刺史韩以检校礼部尚书的职衔、润州刺史的职衔，充任镇海军节度使、浙江东、西两道观察使。
English: On June 3, with Zhejiang West Road as the town navy, and with the title of inspector of school etiquette, and the title of inspector of Renzhou, he served as the town navy festival envoy, and the observation envoy of Zhejiang East and West.

古文：以御史中丞一员为理匭使，谏议大夫一员知匭使；给事中、中书舍人为监考使。
现代文：以御史中丞一名为理匦使，谏议大夫一名主持匦使事，给事中、中书舍人为监考使。
English: A member of the Imperial Historian's Office served as the chief examiner, a member of the Council of Experts presided over the examination, and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy supervised the examination.

古文：辛丑，尚父、中书令、汾旭郡王郭子仪薨。
现代文：十四日，尚父、中书令、汾阳郡王郭子仪去世。
English: On the 14th, Guo Ziyi, the King of Shenyang County, died.

古文：丙午，以检校秘书少监郑叔则为御史中丞、东都畿观察使。
现代文：十九日，以检校秘书少监郑叔则为御史中丞、东都畿观察使。
English: On the 19th, the junior superintendent Zheng Shu, the secretary of the inspection of the school, became the vice-president of history and the observer of East Gyeongsangbuk-do.

古文：壬子，以怀郑、河阳节度副使李芃为河阳三城、怀州节度使，仍割东畿五县隶焉。
现代文：二十五日，以怀、郑、河阳节度副使李艹凡为河阳三城、怀州节度使，仍然割东畿五县隶属他。
English: On the 25th, Li Yifan, the deputy delegate of Huaiyang, Zheng and Heyang, was the delegate of the three cities of Huaiyang and the delegate of Huaizhou, and the five counties of East Kivu were still subordinate to him.

古文：秋七月戊子朔，诏曰： 二庭四镇，统任西夏五十七蕃、十姓部落，国朝以来，相奉率职。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，皇上下诏道： 二庭、四镇，统领西夏五十七个蕃国，十姓部落，都顺服而遵奉职守。
English: The first day of autumn and July was the New Year's Day, and the emperor issued the following edict: Two courts, four towns, fifty-seven counties and ten tribes in Western Xia, all obeyed and fulfilled their duties.

古文：自关、陇失守，东西阻绝，忠义之徒，泣血相守，慎固封略，奉遵礼教，皆侯伯守将交修共理之所致也。
现代文：自从关、陇失守，东西两面断绝，忠义的人，流着眼泪、淌着鲜血固守城池，谨慎小心地固守封疆，奉循礼教，这都是侯伯、守将们共同修理奉职所致。
English: Since the loss of Guan and Zou, and the severance of the two sides of the East and West, the loyal people have kept the city with tears and blood, carefully and cautiously kept the closed territory, and followed the etiquette. This is all due to the joint repair and duty of Hou Bo and the guards.

古文：伊西、北庭节度观察使李元忠可北庭大都护，四镇节度留后郭昕可安西大都护、四镇节度观察使。 
现代文：伊西、北庭节度使、观察使李元忠可以任北庭大都护，四镇节度留后郭昕可任安西大都护、四镇节度使、观察使。 
English: Yi Yuanzhong can be appointed as the guardian of the capital of the Northern Court, and Guo Wei can be appointed as the guardian of the capital of Anxi, the guardian of the four towns, and the guardian of the four towns.

古文：自河、陇陷虏，伊西、北庭为蕃戎所隔，间者李嗣业、荔非元礼、孙志直、马璘辈皆遥领其节度使名。
现代文：自从河、陇被敌虏所攻陷，伊西、北庭被吐蕃军队所阻隔，近来李嗣业、荔非元礼、孙志直、马瞞等人都挂着节度使之名。
English: Since He and Handan were conquered by the enemy, and Issi and Beiting were blocked by the Tubo army, recently, Li Shigeye, Li Fei Yuanli, Sun Zhizhi, Ma Xie and others have hung the festival to make it famous.

古文：初，李元忠、郭昕为伊西北庭留后，隔绝之后，不知存亡，至是遣使历回纥诸蕃入奏，方知音信，上嘉之。
现代文：当初，李元忠、郭昕为伊西、北庭留后，隔绝之后，不知存亡，至此派遣使者到回纥等所有蕃国然后入朝庭回奏，才知音信，皇上加以嘉许。
English: At first, after Li Yuanzhong and Guo Gan stayed in Issi and the Northern Court, after being isolated, they did not know whether they would survive or not. At this time, they sent emissaries to all the countries including Huizhou and then entered the Imperial Court to play back, only to know the news and be commended by the Emperor.

古文：其伊西、北庭将士叙官，仍超七资。
现代文：那些伊西、北庭将士议定官职，仍旧超越提拔使用。
English: Those Isi and Hokutei generals who have accepted official posts are still beyond promotion and use.

古文：庚申，以中书侍郎、平章事杨炎为左仆射，以前永平军节度使张镒为中书待郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三日，以中书侍郎、平章事杨炎为左仆射，以前任永平军节度使张镒为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the third day, Yang Yan, the Chushushushisajiro and Taira Shoji, was appointed as the left-hand man, and Zhang Xi, the former Yongping Army commander, was appointed as the Chushushisajiro and Taira Shoji.

古文：司空、淮阳郡王侯希逸卒，丁丑，以河中尹关播为给事中，同州刺史李承为河中尹、晋绛都防御观察使。
现代文：司空、淮阳郡王侯希逸去世。二十日，以河中尹关播为给事中，同州刺史李承为河中尹、晋绛都防御使、观察使。
English: Wang Hou Xiyi of Siku and Huaiyang County passed away. On the 20th, Yin Guanhan of Huzhong was appointed as the presenter, and Li Cheng of the same state was appointed as the defense envoy and observation envoy of Yin in Huzhong and Jinshan.

古文：辛巳，以邠宁节度使李怀光兼灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护、朔方节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以宁节度使李怀光兼任灵州大都督、单于、镇北大都护、朔方节度使。
English: On the 24th, the Ning Festival made Li Huaguang concurrently serve as Lingzhou Grand Governor, Shan Yu, Zhenbei Grand Protector, and Shuo Fang Festival envoy.

古文：以鄜坊、丹延观察留后李建徽为坊州刺史、鄜坊丹延都团练观察使。
现代文：以、坊、丹、延观察留后李建徽为坊州刺史？坊、丹、延都团练使、观察使。
English: After staying at the observation posts of Fong, Fang, Dan and Yan, Li Jianhui became the training and observation envoy of Fang, Fang, Fang, Dan and Yan.

古文：壬午，以幽州陇右节度使、中书令硃泚为太尉。
现代文：二十五日，以幽州、陇右节度使、中书令朱氵此为太尉。
English: On the 25th, Zhu Xi was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant with the titles of Yuzhou, Zou Yu Jiedu Envoy, and Zhongshu Ling.

古文：田悦攻寇临洺，守将张伾城守。
现代文：田悦侵略进攻临氵名，守将张亻丕据城守住。
English: Tian Yue invaded and attacked Linyi, and Zhang Ye, the castle's keeper, defended the castle.

古文：八月辛卯，平卢淄青节度观察使、司徒、太子太保、同中书门下平章事李正己卒。
现代文：八月五日，平卢、淄青节度观察使、司徒、太子太保、同中书门下平章事李正己去世。
English: On August 5th, Pinglu, Jiaqing Festival Observation Envoy, Szeto, Prince Taibo, and Li Zhengyi, a disciple of the same school, passed away.

古文：庚戌，以中书舍人卫晏为御史中丞、京畿观察使。
现代文：二十四日，以中书舍人卫晏为御史中丞、京畿观察使。
English: On the 24th, Chusho Shoshenin Weihai was appointed as the Goshi Chujo and the Gyeonggi Observer.

古文：壬子，淮宁军节度使李希烈攻襄阳，诛梁崇义，斩其同恶三十余人。
现代文：二十六日，淮宁军节度使李希烈攻打襄阳，杀了梁崇义，斩了与他同在一起作恶的三十多人。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the Huainin army sent Li Xili to attack Xiangyang, killed Liang Chongyi, and beheaded more than 30 people who had committed evil with him.

古文：九月辛酉，以易州刺史张孝忠为恆州刺史，充成德军节度观察使。
现代文：九月六日，以易州刺史张孝忠为恒州刺史，充任成德军节度使、观察使。
English: On September 6th, Zhang Xiaozhong, the military historian of Yizhou Province, was appointed as the military historian of Hengzhou Province, and served as the German army's military historian and observation envoy.

古文：壬戌，加李希烈同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七日，加给李希烈同中书门下平章事的职衔。
English: On the seventh day, he gave Li Xile the title of the next level official of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：癸亥，兵部尚书、翼国公路嗣恭卒。
现代文：八日，兵部尚书、翼国公路嗣恭去世。
English: On the 8th, Hyobusho Shoshu and Tsugyong of Yingguo Highway passed away.

古文：甲子，以晋绛观察使李承为襄州刺史、山南东道节度观察等使。
现代文：九日，以晋绛观察使李承为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使、观察使。
English: On the 9th, Li Cheng was appointed as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, the host of the Shannan Festival, and the observation envoy.

古文：戊辰，以杭州刺史元全柔为黔中经略招讨观察等使。
现代文：十三日，以杭州刺史元全柔为黔中经略使、招讨使、观察使。
English: On the 13th, with Hangzhou Zhishi Yuan Quan Rong as the middle-ranking envoy, the envoy and the observation envoy.

古文：冬十月乙酉，尚书左仆射杨炎贬崖州司马，寻赐死。
现代文：冬十月十日，尚书左仆射杨炎贬崖州司马，不久赐杨炎自杀。
English: On the 10th day of winter in October, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man shot Yang Yan and felled Jiaozhou Sima. Soon after, Yang Yan committed suicide.

古文：戊申，加宣武军节度使刘洽御史大夫。
现代文：二十三日，加宣武军节度使刘洽御史大夫的职衔。
English: On the 23rd, the Jiaxuan Armed Forces Festival conferred on Liu the title of Grand Historian.

古文：徐州刺史李洧弃其帅李纳，以州来降。
现代文：徐州刺史李洧抛弃他的元帅李纳，率州归降。
English: Xuzhou assassin Li Xi abandoned his field marshal Li Na and led the state to surrender.

古文：十一月辛未，宣武节度刘洽与神策将曲环大破李纳之众于徐州。
现代文：十一月七日，宣武军节度使刘洽与神策将曲环在徐州大破李纳部众。
English: On November 7th, the Xuanwu Army Festival made Liu Cai and Shen Zhe break the Li Na group in Xuzhou.

古文：己巳，诏： 成德军节度都知兵马使、恆州刺史、袭陇西郡王李惟岳，以其父宝臣有忠劳于王室，惟岳隳坠父业，蔑弃国恩，缞绖之中，擅掌戎务。外结凶党，益固奸谋，不孝不忠，宜肆原野。
现代文：十五日，皇上下诏道： 成德军节度使、都知兵马使、恒州刺史、袭封陇西郡王等职务的李惟岳，因为他的父亲李宝臣对王朝有功，所以让李惟岳承继父亲的职衔。但惟岳抛弃了父亲忠于国家的大业，蔑视抛弃国恩，戴孝之时，擅自掌握军务，在外面勾结凶党，加强奸诈阴谋，不忠不孝，应该抛弃在原野。
English: On the 15th, the emperor issued the following edict: Li Wei Yue, who held the positions of the German military festival envoy, the Tudor soldiers and horses envoy, the Hengzhou historian, and the crown prince of Shaanxi County, because his father, Li Baochen, had made contributions to the dynasty, Li Wei Yue was allowed to succeed his father's title. However, when Wei Yue abandoned his father's great cause of loyalty to the country, disdained to abandon the national grace, and abandoned the filial piety, he took control of military affairs without authorization, colluded with the evil party outside, strengthened the treacherous conspiracy, and was disloyal

古文：削尔在身官爵。 
现代文：现在削除李惟岳在身的官职爵位。 
English: Now remove Li Weiyue's current official title.

古文：乙亥，贬户部侍郎、判度支韩洄蜀州刺史，以江淮转运使、度支郎中杜佑代判度支、户部事。
现代文：二十一日，贬户部侍郎、兼任度支使的韩洄为蜀州刺史，以江淮转运使、度支郎中杜佑代理兼管度支、户部事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Han Wei, who was concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently conc

古文：丁丑，以陕州长史李齐为河中尹，充河中晋绛防御观察使；以商州刺史姚明扬为陕州长史、本州防御、陆运使；以权盐铁使、户部郎中包佶充江淮水陆运使。
现代文：二十三日，以陕州长史李齐为河中尹，充任河中、晋、绛防御使、观察使；以商州刺史姚明鰎为陕州刺史、本州防御使、陆运使；以暂代盐铁使、户部郎中包佶充任江淮水陆运使。
English: On the 23rd, the governor of Shaanxi Province, Shi Li Qi, was appointed as the defense envoy and observation envoy of Hechong, Jin and Handan; the governor of Shangzhou Province, Shi Yao Mingqi, was appointed as the defense envoy of Shaanxi Province, the defense envoy of Honshu Province and the land transport envoy; the temporary salt and iron envoy and the head of the household, Langzhong Baoqi, was appointed as the land transport envoy of Jianghuai Water.

古文：李纳将海州刺史王涉以州降。
现代文：李纳的部将海州刺史王涉率州郡归降。
English: Li Na's troops led by Haizhou Shishi Wang led the county to surrender.

古文：十二月庚寅，河中节度使马燧检校左仆射，泽潞节度使李抱真检校兵部尚书，赏破田悦之功也。
现代文：十二月六日，河中节度使马燧任检校左仆射，泽、潞节度使李抱真任检校兵部尚书，这是赏赐他攻破田悦的功劳。
English: On December 6th, the Kechong Festival made Ma Jun the inspector of the school, and Zhe and Zou Festival made Li Baozhen the inspector of the school, which was a reward for his achievement in defeating Tian Yue.

古文：丙申，太子宾客王缙卒。
现代文：十二日，太子宾客王缙去世。
English: On the 12th, the prince's guest, Wang Xi, passed away.

古文：三年春正月乙卯朔。
现代文：建中三年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the third year of Jianzhong is the New Year's Day.

古文：丙寅，幽州节度使硃滔、张孝忠破李惟岳之兵于束鹿。
现代文：十二日，幽州节度使朱滔、张孝忠在束鹿攻破李惟岳的军队。
English: On the 12th, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Tao and Zhang Xiaotong defeat Li Wei Yue's army in Shuxia.

古文：辛未，诏供御及太子诸王常膳有司宜减省之，于是宰臣上言，减堂厨百官月俸，请三分省一以助军，从之。
现代文：十七日，皇上诏令，供给皇帝御膳食及太子诸王一般膳食，有关官员应该减省一些。于是宰辅大臣上奏道，请减少政事堂公膳厨房官员及百官每月的薪俸，请省下三分之一来帮助军用，皇上采纳了这个建议。
English: On the 17th, the emperor decreed that the imperial meals and the general meals of the princes and kings should be provided to the emperor, and the relevant officials should save some money. Therefore, the Vice-Minister appealed to the emperor, asking him to reduce the monthly salary of the government kitchen officials and the hundred officials, and to save one-third to help the military. The emperor accepted this suggestion.

古文：庚辰，追封皇叔僖为宋王，赠皇弟选荆王。
现代文：二十六日，追封皇叔李僖为宋王，追赠皇弟选为荆王。
English: On the 26th, the emperor's uncle Li Xi was posthumously named the King of Song, and the emperor's younger brother was posthumously selected as the King of Jing.

古文：闰月丙申，以文宣王三十七代孙齐贤为兗州司功，袭文宣公。
现代文：闰正月十三日，以文宣王三十七代孙齐贤为兖州司功，袭位为文宣公。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the leap year, Sun Qixian, the 37th generation of King Wenxuan, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and succeeded to the throne of King Wenxuan.

古文：辛丑，复置具员簿。甲辰，成德军兵马使王武俊杀李惟岳，传首京师。庚戌，马燧、李芃破田悦兵于洹水，进攻魏州。
现代文：二十一日，成德军兵马使王武俊杀李惟岳，把他的首级传到京师。二十七日，马燧、李抱真、李艹凡在洹水大破田悦军，王师进攻魏州。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Chengde soldiers and horses sent Wang Wujun to kill Li Weiyue, and sent his head to the Beijing division. On the twenty-seventh day, Ma Jun, Li Baozhen, and Li Xifan defeated Tian Yue's army in Surabaya, and Wang's division attacked Weizhou.

古文：二月戊午，惟岳将定州刺史杨政义以州降。
现代文：二月五日，李惟岳之将、定州刺史杨政义率州归降。
English: On February 5th, Li Wei Yue's general, Yang Zhengyi, the governor of Dingzhou, led the state to surrender.

古文：加硃滔检校司徒，以张孝忠检校兵部尚书、易定沧三州节度使，以检校太子宾客王武俊检校秘书监、恆州刺史、恆冀都团练观察使，康日知为赵州刺史、深赵都团练观察使。
现代文：加给朱滔检校司徒的职衔，以张孝忠为检校兵部尚书、易、定、沧三州节度使，以检校太子宾客王武俊为检校秘书监、恒州刺史、恒、冀二州都团练使、观察使，康日知为赵州刺史、深、赵都团练使、观察使。
English: Zhu Tao was given the title of inspector of the school, Zhang Xiaozhong was appointed as the inspector of the three states of Shangshu, Yi, Ding and Cang in the inspection of the school, Wang Wujun, the inspector of the school, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and the two states of Hengzhou, Hengdu and Hebei were appointed as the inspectors of the school, and Kang Rongzhi was appointed as the inspector of Zhao, Sheng and Zhao.

古文：三月丁亥，赠故卫尉卿颜杲卿司徒，故常山太守袁履谦左散骑常侍，故许州长史庞坚右散骑常侍，故巩县主簿蒋清礼部侍郎。
现代文：三月五日，追赠已故卫尉卿颜杲卿为司徒的职衔，追赠已故常山太守袁履谦左散骑常侍的职衔，追赠已故许州长史庞坚右散骑常侍的职衔，追赠已故巩县主簿蒋清礼部侍郎的职衔。
English: On March 5, the posthumous award of the title of the late Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, Yan Xuan, the posthumous award of the title of the late Governor of Changshan, Yuan Lucheng, the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the posthumous award of the

古文：赠故骁卫将军、代国公安金藏兵部尚书，授其子承恩庐州长史。
现代文：追赠已故骁卫将军、代国公安金藏兵部尚书的职衔，授予他的儿子安承恩为庐州长史。
English: He posthumously bestowed the title of the late General Xie Wei, acting on behalf of the State Public Security Department of the People's Republic of China, and awarded his son An Cheng'en as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：乙未，以徐州刺史李洧为徐、沂、海团练观察使。
现代文：十三日，以徐州刺史李洧为徐、沂、海三州团练使、观察使。
English: On the 13th, with Xuzhou Zhishi Li Yao as Xu, Yao and Hai, the three states sent a group of training envoys and observers.

古文：戊戌，田悦、洺州刺史田昂以城降。
现代文：十六日，田悦的氵名州刺史田昂率城归降。
English: On the 16th, Tian Yue's subordinate, Tian Ao, led the city to surrender.

古文：以岭南节度使张伯仪检校兵部尚书，兼江陵尹、御史大夫、荆南节度等使；以容管经略使元琇为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：以岭南节度使张伯仪为检校兵部尚书，兼江陵尹、御史大夫、荆南节度使。以容管经略使元为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: In Lingnan Festival, Zhang Bo Yi was appointed as the chief inspector of the military inspection department, and Jiangling Yin, the chief historian, and Jingnan Festival were also appointed as the chief inspectors.

古文：丙午，贬京兆尹卢惎抚州长史。
现代文：二十四日，贬京兆尹卢为抚州长史。
English: On the 24th, the dethronement of Jingzhao Yinlu became the history of Fuzhou governorship.

古文：夏四月，李纳守德州将李士真、守棣州将李长卿皆以城降。
现代文：夏四月，李纳的驻守德州的将领李士真、守棣州的将领李长卿都率城池归降。
English: In the summer of April, Li Shizhen, Li Na's general stationed in Texas, and Li Changqing, Li Na's general stationed in Quzhou, both led the city to surrender.

古文：庚申，先陷蕃僧尼将士八百人自吐蕃而还。
现代文：八日，先前陷落在吐蕃中的僧、尼及将士八百人从吐蕃回国。
English: On the 8th, 800 monks, nuns and soldiers who had been trapped in Tujia returned to China from Tujia.

古文：壬戌，封硃滔为通义郡王。
现代文：十日，封朱滔为通义郡王。
English: On the 10th, Zhu Tao was crowned the king of Tongyi County.

古文：硃滔、王武俊与田悦合从而为叛。
现代文：朱滔、王武俊与田悦聚集起来叛乱。
English: Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun and Tian Yue gathered to rebel.

古文：太常博士韦都宾、陈京以军兴庸调不给，请借京城富商钱，大率每商留万贯，余并入官，不一二十大商，则国用济矣。
现代文：太常博士韦都宾、陈京因为战争人力物力不能供给，请求借京城富商之钱，大抵每位商人留一万贯，其余全都入官府，不过一二十个大商人，那国家用度就筹足了。
English: Too often, Dr. Wei Dubin and Chen Jing, unable to supply manpower and material resources because of the war, asked to borrow the money of rich merchants in Beijing. Most of the time, each merchant kept ten thousand yuan, and the rest all went to the government, but if there were ten or twenty big businessmen, the country would have enough money.

古文：判度支杜佑曰： 今诸道用兵，月费度支钱一百余万贯，若获五百万贯，才可支给数月。 
现代文：兼度支使杜佑道 ：现在各道用兵打仗，每月耗费度支钱一百多万贯，假若获得五百万贯，才可以支给数月。 
English: Du Youdao, also a supporting envoy, said, "Currently, each province is using soldiers to fight. It costs more than one million Korean won to spend money every month. If you get five million Korean won, you can only spend it for a few months.

古文：甲子，诏京兆尹、长安万年令大索京畿富商，刑法严峻，长安令薛苹荷校乘车，于坊市搜索，人不胜鞭笞，乃至自缢。
现代文：十二日，皇上诏令京兆尹、长安令、万年令大肆勒索京畿富裕商人，用严厉的刑法逼迫缴纳，长安令薛苹乘着车子拿着枷锁，在街坊市场搜索富商，富商们经不住鞭打，以至于上吊自杀。
English: On the 12th, the emperor issued the edicts of Jing Zhaoyun, Chang'an, and Wan Nian to extort wealthy merchants in Gyeonggi Province, using severe criminal laws to force them to pay. Chang'an ordered Xue Ping to take a car with shackles and search for wealthy merchants in the neighborhood market. The wealthy merchants could not withstand the whipping, so they hanged themselves.

古文：京师嚣然，如被盗贼。
现代文：京师一片喧哗，像遇到盗贼抢劫一样。
English: There was an uproar in the capital, as if there had been a robbery by thieves.

古文：搜括既毕，计其所得才八十万贯，少尹韦禛又取僦柜质库法拷索之，才及二百万。
现代文：搜刮完毕，计算所得钱财只八十万贯，少尹韦礻真又严刑拷打逼迫索取保管金钱库里的人，这样也才到达二百万。
English: After the search was over, the amount of money and property obtained was calculated to be only 800,000 kroner, and it was only after Shao Yin Weizhen severely tortured and coerced the person who requested the custody of the money vault that the amount reached two million.

古文：丁丑，彭王傅徐浩卒，赠太子少师。
现代文：二十五日，彭王傅徐浩去世，赠予太子少师。
English: On the 25th, Peng Wangfu Xu Hao passed away and presented the crown prince with a young teacher.

古文：戊寅，以中书侍郎、平章事张镒兼凤翔尹、陇右节度使，以代硃泚。
现代文：二十六日，以中书侍郎、平章事张镒兼任凤翔尹、陇右节度使，以代替朱氵此。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Xi was replaced by Zhongshu Zhi Rong and Ping Zhang Ji, who also served as Feng Xiang Yin and Zou Yu Jiedu, respectively.

古文：加泚实封五百户，赐窦氏名园、泾水上腴田及锦彩金银器，以安其意，时滔叛故也。
现代文：加给朱氵此实际封户五百户，赐给他有名的窦氏花园、泾水上的肥沃良田以及金银彩绸缎，以安定朱氵此的心意，因为朱滔当时造反的缘故。
English: In order to stabilize Zhu Tao's state of mind, 500 households were actually fenced off, and he was given the famous Dou Garden, fertile fields on the floodplain, and gold and silver colored silk cocoons, because Zhu Tao was in revolt at the time.

古文：壬午，贬御史大夫严郢为费州长史，杖杀左巡使、殿中侍御史郑詹。
现代文：三十日，贬御史大夫严郢为费州长史，用棍杖打死左巡使、殿中侍御史郑詹。
English: On the 30th, the deposed Imperial Historian Dr. Yanzhang became the Governor of Fei Province, and killed the Left Inspector and the palace attendant Zheng Zhan with a club.

古文：郢岁余卒。
现代文：严郢一年多后死去。
English: Yan Xun died more than a year later.

古文：五月丙戌，增两税、盐榷钱，两税每贯增二百，盐每斗增一百。
现代文：五月四日，增加两税和盐的专卖钱，两税是每贯钱增加二百文，盐每斗增加一百文。
English: On May 4th, the two taxes and the salt monopoly money were increased. The two taxes were an increase of two hundred monies for each cone of money and an increase of one hundred monies for each bucket of salt.

古文：丁亥，贬太子詹事邵说归州刺史，卒于贬所。
现代文：五日，贬太子詹事邵说为归州刺史，死在被贬的处所。
English: On the fifth day, the deposed prince Zhan Zhi Shao said that he was returning to the state and died at the place where he was deposed.

古文：辛卯，诏朔方节度使李怀光率神策及朔方军东讨。
现代文：九日，诏令朔方节度李怀光率神策禁卫军及朔方军往东边去讨伐。
English: On the 9th, Emperor Zhao ordered the Shuo side commander Li Huiguang to lead the Shenke Imperial Guard Army and the Shuo side army to go to the east to fight.

古文：丙申，诏： 故伊西北庭节度使杨休明、故河西节度使周鼎、故西州刺史李琇璋、故瓜州刺史张铣等，寄崇方镇，时属殷忧，固守西陲，以抗期戎虏。殁身异域，多历岁年，以迨于兹，旅榇方旋，诚深追悼，宜加宠赠，以贲幽泉。
现代文：十四日，皇上诏令曰： 已故伊西、北庭节度使杨休明、已故河西节度使周鼎、已故西州刺史李璋、已故瓜州刺史张铣等，以边防重镇寄托他们，当时国家忧患，他们坚固地守住了西面边疆，以抗击西戎强虏，牺牲在异域他乡，经历了很多年，直到现在，棺木才得以归来，确实令人深深悼念追思，应该对他们加以厚赠，以光辉黄泉。
English: On the 14th, the emperor's edict said: "The late Issi, the Beiting Festival, the late Yang Xuming, the late Hexi Festival, the late Zhou Ding, the late Xizhou Scholar Li Qian, the late Guazhou Scholar Zhang Qian, etc. were entrusted with the border defense stronghold. At that time, the country was in distress. They firmly defended the western border, resisted the Xirong stronghold, sacrificed in a foreign country, and experienced many years. Until now, the coffin has been able to return. It is indeed a deeply sad memory. They should be given a generous gift, with the glory of the Yingqu

古文：休明可赠司徒，鼎赠太保，琇璋赠户部尚书，铣赠兵部侍郎。 
现代文：杨休明可以赠为司徒，周鼎可赠为太保，李璋可赠为户部尚书，张铣赠兵部侍郎。 
English: Yang Xiuming can be given as a tutor, Zhou Ding can be given as a palace guard, Li Xi can be given as a household secretary, and Zhang Xi can be given as a servant of the military department.

古文：皆陇右牧守，至德已来陷吐蕃而殁故，至是西蕃通和，方得归葬也。
现代文：他们都是陇右的刺史牧守，从至德年以来陷入吐蕃而死去，直到现在与西吐蕃结成友好，方才能够归葬。
English: All of them were right-hand shepherds of Sashih, who fell into the Tuyun River and died, and it is only now that they have formed a friendship with the West Tuyun that they can be buried.

古文：丁酉，加河东节度使、检校左仆射马燧同平章事，泽潞李抱真检校右仆射，河阳李芃检校兵部尚书，神策营招讨使李晟右散骑常侍，赏破田悦功也。
现代文：十五日，加给河东节度使、检校左仆射马燧同平章事的职衔，加给泽、潞李抱真检校右仆射的职衔，加给河阳李艹凡检校兵部尚书的职衔，加给神策营招讨使李晟右散骑常侍的职衔，都是赏赐攻破田悦的功劳。
English: On the 15th, the titles of "Hedong Festival Envoy," "Checking School Left Servant" and "Checking School Right Servant" were added, the titles of "Zhe" and "Li Baozhen" were added, the title of "Heyang Li Baofan" was added, and the title of "Shangshu" was added to the title of "Shenzhen Camp Inviting Li Baozhen" and "Li Baozhen" was added. All of these were rewards for the merits of defeating Tian Yue.

古文：乙巳，贬户部侍郎、判度支杜佑为苏州刺史，以中书舍人赵赞为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：二十三日，贬户部侍郎、兼任度支使杜佑为苏州刺史，以中书舍人赵赞为户部侍郎，兼任度支使。
English: On the 23rd, Du You, who had been demoted from the post of household attendant and concurrently appointed to the post of imperial envoy, became the official historian of Suzhou, and Zhao Zan, a scholar of Chinese classics, became the household attendant and concurrently appointed to the post of imperial envoy.

古文：辛亥，易定节度赐名义武军。
现代文：二十九日，易定节度的军队赐名为义武军。
English: On the 29th, the troops of the Yi Ding Festival were given the name of the Volunteer Army.

古文：六月丁巳，尚书左丞庾准卒。
现代文：六月六日，尚书左丞庾准去世。
English: On June 6th, Shangshu Zuojiao passed away.

古文：甲子，京师地震。
现代文：十三日，京师发生地震。
English: On the 13th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：以左散骑常侍李涵为入回纥吊祭使，京兆少尹源休为光禄卿。
现代文：以左散骑常侍李涵为入回纥吊祭使，以京兆少尹源休为光禄卿。
English: The left rider Li Han, a regular attendant of the imperial court, is depicted as an envoy to the imperial banquet, and the left rider Yin Yuanju, a minor of the imperial court, is depicted as a member of the imperial family.

古文：戊寅，以前衢州刺史赵涓为尚书左丞，右庶子柳载为右丞。
现代文：十七日，以前任衢州刺史赵涓为尚书左丞，右庶子柳载为尚书右丞。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Jian, the former secretary of Zhangzhou, became the second-in-command, and his son-in-law, Liu Jie, became the third-in-command.

古文：辛未，硃滔、王武俊兵救田悦，至魏州北。
现代文：二十日，叛贼朱滔、王武俊发兵援救田悦，到了魏州北面。
English: On the 20th, the traitors Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun sent troops to rescue Tian Yue and arrived in the north of Weizhou.

古文：是日李怀光兵亦至，马燧、抱真、李芃等盛军容迓怀光。
现代文：这天，朔方节度使李怀光的朔方军及神策兵也赶到，马燧、李抱真、李艹凡等人摆开盛大雄壮的军容迎接李怀光。
English: On this day, Li Huai Guang's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo's Shuo

古文：硃滔等虑其掩袭，遽出兵，怀光与之接战于连箧山之西，王师不利，各还营垒。
现代文：朱滔等人耽忧李怀光等人乘他不备偷袭，急速出兵，李怀光之军战斗不利，双方军队各回营垒。
English: Zhu Tao and others were worried that Li Huai Guang and others would take advantage of his unprepared sneak attack and quickly dispatch troops. Li Huai Guang's army was not good at fighting, and the two armies went back to their barracks.

古文：贼乃壅河决水，绝我粮道。
现代文：贼人于是堵塞黄河，挖决水道，断绝我运粮的道路。
English: Thieves then blocked the Yellow River, dug up water channels, and cut off my grain transportation route.

古文：秋七月甲申，以前振武军使王翃为京兆尹，以兵部郎中杨真为御史中丞、京畿观察使。
现代文：秋七月三日，以前任振武军使王罖为京兆尹，以兵部郎中杨真为御史中丞、京畿观察使。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the former Zhenwu military envoy Wang Xi became Jing Zhaoyun, and Yang Zhen, the son of the Minister of Military Affairs, became the Vice-Minister of History and the Gyeonggi Observer.

古文：以括率商户，人情不安，癸巳，诏除已收纳入库外，一切停，已贮纳者仍明置簿历，各给文牒，后准元数却还。
现代文：因为搜刮商户，人心不安。十二日，皇上下诏，除了已经收纳进入国库以外，一切搜刮行为停止，已经收纳贮入国库者仍旧清楚明白地记录在簿，各人给予文书为凭证，以后按文书所记原数退还。
English: On the 12th, the emperor issued an imperial edict that, with the exception of goods that had already been deposited in the national treasury, all acts of robbery were to cease. Those that had been deposited and stored in the national treasury were still to be clearly recorded in a book, and each person was to be given a document as proof, after which the original amount recorded in the document was to be returned.

古文：甲午，以前同州刺史萧复为兵部侍郎。
现代文：十三日，以前任同州刺史萧复为兵部侍郎。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Fu, who had previously served as the governor of Tongzhou, was appointed as the attendant of the military department.

古文：庚子，马燧、李怀光、李抱真、李芃等四节度兵退保魏桥。
现代文：十九日，马燧、李怀光、李抱真、李艹凡等四节度使的军队退保魏桥。
English: On the 19th, Ma Jun, Li Huaguang, Li Bozhen, Li Yifan and other four-divisioned troops withdrew from Weiqiao.

古文：硃滔、王武俊、田悦之众亦屯于魏桥东南，与官军隔河对垒。
现代文：朱滔、王武俊、田悦之部众也屯扎在魏桥东南，与官军隔河对垒。
English: Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun and Tian Yue's followers also camped in the southeast of Weiqiao, facing the government army across the river.

古文：自五月不雨，甲辰始雨。
现代文：从五月不下雨，到这月二十三日才下雨。
English: It doesn't rain from May until the 23rd of the month.

古文：宣武节度李勉为检校司徒，怀宁李希烈检校司空，邠宁李怀光同平章事，李芃封开阳郡王。
现代文：宣武节度使李勉任检校司徒，怀宁李希烈任检校司空，宁节度使李怀光任同平章事，李艹凡封为开阳郡王。
English: The Xuanwu Festival made Li Yan the inspector of the school, the Huaining Festival made Li Xili the inspector of the school, the Ning Festival made Li Huai Guang the inspector of the school, and the Li Yifan Festival made Li Yifan the king of Kaiyang County.

古文：八月丁未，初分置汴东西水陆运两税盐铁事，从户部侍郎、判度支赵赞奏也。
现代文：八月七日，开始分设汴东、汴西水运、陆运两税盐铁事，这是听从了户部侍郎、兼任度支使赵赞上奏的意见。
English: On August 7th, the two taxes of salt and iron for water transportation and land transportation in eastern and western Shandong were separated. This was in accordance with the opinion of Zhao Zan, the head of the household and the chief envoy.

古文：戊午，太子宾客第五琦卒于位，辛酉，以泾原节度留后姚令言为泾原节度使。
现代文：八日，太子宾客第五琦在任职时去世。十一日，以泾原节度留后姚令言为泾原节度使。
English: On the 8th, the 5th Prince Guest passed away while in office. On the 11th, Yao Lingyan, who stayed behind to attend the original festival, became the chief celebrant of the original festival.

古文：戊辰，以江淮盐铁使、太常少卿包佶为汴东水陆运两税盐铁使。
现代文：十八日，以江淮盐铁使、太常少卿包佶为汴东水运陆运两税盐铁使。
English: On the 18th, Jianghuai Salt and Iron Envoy and Taichang Shaoqing Baojun were appointed as the two-tax salt and iron envoy of the East Fujian Water Transport and Land Transport.

古文：己巳，加剑南西川节度使张延赏检校吏部尚书。
现代文：十九日，加给剑南、西川节度使张延赏检校吏部尚书的职衔。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Yan, the chief of the Jiannan and Xichuan festivals, was awarded the title of the official of the inspection department of the school.

古文：甲戌，以大理少卿崔纵为汴西水陆运两税盐铁使。
现代文：二十四日，以大理少卿崔纵为汴西水运陆运两税盐铁使。
English: On the 24th, Dali Shaoqing Cui Zheng was appointed as the Shaanxi Water Transport, Land Transport, Two-Tax Salt and Iron Envoy.

古文：丁丑，以礼仪使、太子少师颜真卿为太子太师。
现代文：二十七日，以礼仪使、太子少师颜真卿为太子太师。
English: On the 27th, Yan Zhenqing, the etiquette envoy and the prince's junior teacher, became the prince's senior teacher.

古文：庚辰，徐、海、沂都团练使李洧卒。江淮讹言有毛人捕人，食其心，人情大恐。
现代文：三十日，徐、海、沂等州都团练使李洧去世，江淮谣传有穿狗皮铁爪的毛人捕人，吃人心，人们大为恐惧。
English: On the 30th, Xu, Hai, Zou and other prefectures made a group practice to make Li Yao die, and the Jianghuai rumor spread that there was a hairy man wearing a dog's skin and iron claws to catch people, eating people's hearts, and people were very afraid.

古文：九月丁亥，以李洧部将高承宗为徐州刺史、徐海沂都团练使。
现代文：九月七日，以李洧之部将高承宗为徐州刺史、兼任徐、海、沂三州都团练使。
English: On September 7th, Gao Chengzong was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou by the Ministry of Li Xi, and also served as the training envoy of the three states of Xu, Hai and Qi.

古文：判度支赵赞上言，请为两都、江陵、成都、铩汴、苏、洪等州署常平轻重本钱。上至百万贯，下至十万贯，收贮斛斗匹段丝麻，候贵则下价出卖，贱则加估收籴，权轻重以利民。从之。
现代文：兼任度支使赵赞上书，请求为西都、江陵、成都、扬、汴、苏等州设置常平官署，以本钱调剂市场物价贵贱，本钱多可存一百万贯，少到十万贯，还收存粮食、绸缎、丝麻，当物价昂贵时则用低价买出，当物价太贱时就加价收购、权衡轻重以有利于民，皇上听从了他的意见。
English: Zhao Zan, who also served as the imperial envoy, submitted a letter requesting the establishment of the Changping Government Office for Xidu, Jiangling, Chengdu, Yang, Handan, Su and other prefectures, and the use of capital to adjust the high and low prices in the market. Capital can be saved up to one million yuan, and less than one hundred thousand yuan. Grain, silk and flax are also stored. When prices are high, they are bought out at a low price, and when prices are too low, they are bought at a higher price. The emperor listened to his opinion.

古文：赞乃于诸道津要置吏税商货，每贯税二十文，竹木茶漆皆什一税一，以充常平之本。
现代文：赵赞于是在各道要路口设置官员征收商人货物的税，每贯钱收税二十文，竹、木、茶、漆都按十分之一抽税，以充实常平官署的本钱。
English: Zhao Zan therefore set up officials at major intersections to collect taxes on merchants' goods, collecting 20 mon for each money, and taxing bamboo, wood, tea, and lacquer at one-tenth, in order to replenish the capital of the Changping government office.

古文：己亥夜，有猛兽入宜阳里，伤二人，诘朝获之。
现代文：十九日夜，有猛兽闯入宣阳里，咬伤二人，早晨才抓获猛兽。
English: On the night of the 19th, a ferocious beast broke into Xuanyang, biting two people. The beast was only captured in the morning.

古文：冬十月辛亥，以湖南观察使嗣曹王皋为洪州刺史、江西节度使。
现代文：冬十月二日，以湖南观察使嗣曹王李皋为洪州刺史、江西节度使。
English: On October 2 in winter, Cao Wang Lijun, the heir of Cao Wang, the Hunan observation envoy, was appointed as the secretary of Hongzhou and Jiangxi festival.

古文：丙辰，以吏部侍郎关播为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：七日，以吏部侍郎关播为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the seventh day, he was promoted to chusho-sajiro (chancellor's secretary) and dohei-shoji (chancellor's secretary) with the rank of ribe-sajiro (administrator's secretary).

古文：都官员外郎樊泽使吐蕃回，与蕃相尚结赞约来年正月望日会盟清水。
现代文：都官员外郎樊泽出使吐蕃返回，与吐蕃相国尚结赞约好第二年正月十五日在清水缔结友好同盟。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year, Gairo Shibusawa, an official of the capital, sent an envoy to Tubo to return, and made an agreement with Tubo to conclude a friendly alliance in Shimizu.

古文：丙子，肃王详薨。
现代文：二十七日，肃王李祥去世。
English: On the 27th, Su Wang Li Zhe passed away.

古文：十一月己卯，以山南西道节度使贾耽检校工部尚书、兼襄州刺史、御史大夫、山南东道节度使，以兴凤团练使严震为梁州刺史、山南西道节度使。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，以山南西道节度使贾耽为检校工部尚书、兼任襄州刺史、御史大夫、山南东道节度使，以兴凤团练使严震为梁州刺史、山南西道节度使。
English: November 1 is the New Year's Day, with the festival of Shannan West Road, Jia Tan was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and also served as the inspector of Xiangzhou, the inspector of history, the inspector of history, and the host festival of Shannan. With the training of the Xingfeng group, Yan Zhen was appointed as the inspector of Liangzhou and the inspector of the festival of Shannan West Road.

古文：甲午，以前山南东道节度使李承为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：十六日，以前任山南东道节度使李承为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the 16th, Li Cheng, the former host of the Shannan Festival, was appointed as the Tanzhou Historian and Hunan Observation Envoy.

古文：是月，硃滔、田悦、王武俊于魏县军垒各相推奖，僭称王号。
现代文：这月，朱滔、田悦、王武俊在魏县军营以内互相推崇，互相标榜，都超越本分擅自称王。
English: This month, Zhu Tao, Tian Yue and Wang Wujun promoted and advertised each other within the Wei County Military Camp, and all of them claimed to be kings beyond their duties.

古文：滔称大冀王，武俊称赵王，悦称魏王。
现代文：朱滔号称大冀王，王武俊号称赵王，田悦号称魏王。
English: Zhu Tao called himself the King of Taiji, Wang Wujun called himself the King of Zhao, Tian Yue called himself the King of Wei.

古文：又劝李纳称齐王。
现代文：他们又劝李纳号称为齐王。
English: They also advised Li Na to be called Qi Wang.

古文：僭署官名如国初亲王行台之制。
现代文：他们称王后任命官员职衔像建国初期亲王和军事行台的典章制度。
English: They say the queen appoints officials with titles resembling those of princes and military officers in the early days of the country's founding.

古文：丁丑，李希烈自称天下都元帅、太尉、建兴王，与硃滔等四盗胶固为逆。
现代文：十二月十九日，怀宁节度使、检校司空李希烈自称为天下都元帅、太尉，建兴王，与朱滔等四个盗贼紧密勾结，巩固地盘，一起成为叛逆。
English: On December 19th, Huaining Festival envoy and school inspector Li Xilei called himself the world's marshal, captain, Jianxing Wang, and worked closely with Zhu Tao and other four thieves to consolidate the site and become a rebel together.

古文：四年春正月戊寅朔。
现代文：建中四年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the fourth year of Jianzhong is New Year's Day.

古文：丁亥，凤翔节度使张镒与吐蕃宰相尚结赞同盟于清水。
现代文：十日，凤翔节度使张镒与吐蕃宰相尚结赞在清水缔结同盟。
English: On the 10th, the Fengxiang Festival made Zhang Ye and the Prime Minister of Tubo, Shang Jizan, conclude an alliance in Shimizu.

古文：庚寅，李希烈陷汝州，执州将李元平而去，东都震骇。
现代文：十三日，李希烈攻陷汝州，活捉汝州守将李元平而去，东都震惊。
English: On the 13th, Li Xilai invaded Ruzhou and captured the Ruzhou garrison commander Li Yuanping alive. Dongdu was shocked.

古文：甲午，遣颜真卿宣慰李希烈军。
现代文：十七日，皇上派遣太子太师颜真卿安抚李希烈的军队。
English: On the 17th, the emperor sent Yan Zhenqing, the crown prince and grand master, to pacify Li Xilai's army.

古文：戊戌，以龙武大将军哥舒曜为东都畿汝节度使，率凤翔、邠宁、泾原等军，东讨希烈。
现代文：二十一日，以龙武大将军哥舒曜为东都畿、汝州节度使，率领凤翔、宁、泾原等地军队，往东去讨伐李希烈。
English: On the twenty-first day, with Longwu Da's general Brother Shu You as the festival envoy of East Dugi and Ruzhou, he led the armies of Fengxiang, Ning, and Yingyuan to go east to fight Li Xili.

古文：丙午，福建观察使常衮卒。
现代文：二十九日，福建观察使常衮去世。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the leader of Fujian observation died.

古文：二月戊申，于河阳三城置河阳军节度。
现代文：二月一日，在河阳三城设置河阳军节度。
English: On February 1, a military festival was held in the three cities of Hayao.

古文：乙卯，哥舒曜收汝州。
现代文：八日，哥舒曜收复汝州。
English: On the 8th, Brother Shu won back Ruzhou.

古文：丁丑，以工部侍郎蒋镇充礼仪使。
现代文：三十日，以工部侍郎蒋镇充任礼仪使。
English: On the 30th, Jiang Zhen, an attendant of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：三月己卯，复置沔州。
现代文：三月二日，重又设置沔州。
English: On March 2, Zhangzhou was reinstated.

古文：癸未，以左散骑常侍孟皞为福建都团练观察使。
现代文：六日，以左散骑常侍孟白皋为福建都团练观察使。
English: On the 6th, Meng Baiyao, a left-handed riding attendant, was sent to observe the training of the Fujian Capital Team.

古文：辛卯，嗣曹王皋击李希烈将陈质之众，败之，收复黄州。
现代文：十四日，嗣曹王李皋击败李希烈的将军陈质的部众，收复了黄州。
English: On the 14th, the heir to Cao Wang, Li Xi, defeated Li Xilai's general Chen Qi's subordinates and recovered Huangzhou.

古文：丁酉，荆南张伯仪与贼战，败绩。
现代文：二十日，荆南节度使张伯仪与贼战，张伯仪大败，崩溃。
English: On the 20th, the Jingnan Festival caused Zhang Bo Yi to fight against the bandits, and Zhang Bo Yi was defeated and collapsed.

古文：嗣曹王收复蕲州。
现代文：嗣曹王李皋收复蕲州。
English: Cao Wang's heir, Li Xi, recaptured Ganzhou.

古文：夏四月庚申，以永平宣武河阳等军节度都统、检校司待、平章事李勉为淮西招讨使，襄阳帅贾耽、江西嗣曹王等为之副。
现代文：夏四月十四日，以永平、宣武、河阳等军节度都统、检校司徒、平章事李勉为淮西招讨使，襄阳帅贾耽、江西嗣曹王等人为副。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, Yongping, Xuanwu, Heyang and other military units, including Zhidu, Guanqiao, and Pingzhang, were invited to Huaxi by Li Mian, and Yangyang's Shuai Jia Tan and Jiangxi's Hei Cao Wang were the deputies.

古文：甲子，京师地震，生黄白毛，长尺余。
现代文：十八日，京师地震，生长出黄毛白毛，长一尺多。
English: On the 18th day of the month, there was an earthquake in Beijing, and yellow and white hairs sprouted, growing more than a foot long.

古文：丙子，哥舒曜进军至颍桥，大震雷，人死者十之三四，乃退保襄城。
现代文：三十日，哥舒曜进军至颍桥，打了一个大震雷，人们被雷震死十分之三四，于是哥舒曜退保襄城。
English: On the 30th, Brother Shu You marched to Qianqiao, struck a large thunderbolt, people were killed by thunderbolt three-fourths, so Brother Shu You retreated to Xiangcheng.

古文：五月辛巳夜，京师地震。
现代文：五月五日夜，京师地震。
English: On the evening of May 5th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：乙酉，颍王璬薨。
现代文：九日，颍王王敫去世。
English: On the 9th, the king of the dragonflies, Wang Zong, passed away.

古文：乙巳，滑、濮二州黄河清。
现代文：二十九日，滑州、濮州二州的黄河水很清。
English: On the 29th, the water of the Yellow River in the two prefectures of Luzhou and Ganzhou was very clear.

古文：滑州马生角。
现代文：滑州有马生角。
English: There is Ma Sheng Kok in Nanzhou.

古文：六月庚戌，初税屋间架、除陌钱。
现代文：六月五日，开始设置屋间架及除陌钱两种苛捐杂税。
English: On June 5th, the installation of stalls and the removal of foreign money, two kinds of heavy taxes and fees, began.

古文：时马燧、李怀光、李抱真、李芃屯魏县，李晟屯易定，李勉、陈少游、哥舒曜屯怀汝间，神策诸军皆临贼境。
现代文：当时马燧、李怀光、李抱真、李艹凡军屯扎在魏县，李晟屯扎在易、定二州，李勉、陈少游、哥舒曜屯扎在怀、汝州之间，神策军各军都已面临贼境前线。
English: At that time, Ma Jun, Li Huai Guang, Li Bu Zhen, and Li Shufan's armies were encamped in Wei County, Li Shufan's armies were encamped in Yi County and Ding County, and Li Mian, Chen Shao You, and Guo Shuyuan's armies were encamped between Huai and Ruzhou. All the armies of the Shen Zhe Army were already facing the front line of the enemy's territory.

古文：凡诸道之军出境，仰给于度支，谓之食出界粮，月费钱一百三十万贯，判度支赵赞巧法聚敛，终不能给。
现代文：凡是各道之军出边境，靠度支供给，叫做出界粮，每月耗费钱一百三十万贯，兼任度支使赵赞巧立名目，设法聚敛，终究不能供给。
English: All the armies of various provinces went out of the border and relied on the tributary to support and supply, and were asked to produce grain. They spent 1.3 million yuan per month. Zhao Zanchiao, who was also the tributary, set up a name and tried to collect, but ultimately could not supply.

古文：至是又税屋，所由吏秉笔持算，入人庐舍而抄计，峻法绳之，愁叹之声，遍于天下。
现代文：至此赵赞又巧立抽盖房屋的税，由管辖的官吏拿笔计算，进入人们房中抄表计算，严刑峻法，愁苦哀叹之声，遍布天下。
English: At this point, Zhao Zan cleverly deducted the tax on the house, and the officials in charge took a pen to calculate, and entered people's houses to read the meter, and the severe punishment and the voice of sorrow and lamentation spread all over the world.

古文：秋七月甲申，以国子祭酒李揆为礼部侍郎，复其爵。
现代文：秋七月九日，以国子祭酒李揆为礼部侍郎，恢复他的爵位。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he was restored to his peerage as the attendant of the ceremonial department with the sake of the Kuniko Festival, Riho.

古文：甲午，以揆为左仆射、兼御史大夫，为入吐蕃会盟使。
现代文：十九日，以李揆为左仆射、兼御史大夫，为入吐蕃会盟的使者。
English: On the 19th, Li Qiye was appointed as the left-hand man of the shooters, as well as the chief historian, and as the emissary of the Tuyuhun League.

古文：八月丁未，李希烈率众三万攻哥舒曜于襄城。
现代文：八月二日，李希烈率三万叛军在襄城攻击哥舒曜。
English: On August 2nd, Li Xili led 30,000 rebels to attack Xiangcheng.

古文：湖南观察使李承卒。
现代文：湖南观察使李承去世。
English: Hunan observation caused the death of Li Cheng.

古文：九月戊寅，龙见于汝州之城濠。
现代文：九月四日，在汝州城壕沟池中有龙出现。
English: On September 4th, a dragon appeared in the ditch of Ruzhou Trench.

古文：丙戌，李勉将唐汉臣、刘德信丧师于扈涧，汴军自此不振，东都危急。
现代文：十二日，李勉的大将唐汉臣、刘德信在扈涧全军覆没，汴州军从此一蹶不振，东都危急。
English: On the 12th, the general Tang Hanshen and Liu Dexin of Li Tsun, the whole army in Handan, were wiped out. The Handan army has been in a slump ever since, and Dongdu is in a critical situation.

古文：冬十月丙午，诏泾原节度使姚令言率泾原之师救哥舒曜。
现代文：冬十月二日，皇上诏令泾原节度使姚令言率泾原的军队援救哥舒曜。
English: In winter, on October 2, the emperor issued the Imperial Edict of Suwon, ordering Yao Lingyan to lead Suwon's army to rescue his brother Shu You.

古文：丁未，泾原军出京城，至浐水，倒戈谋叛，姚令言不能禁。
现代文：三日，泾原军开出京城，到了氵产水，倒戈叛变，姚令言无法制止。
English: On the third day, the Yuyuan army drove out of the capital, and when they reached the Yingzhou water, they rebelled, and Yao Lingyan could not stop them.

古文：上令载缯彩二车，遣晋王往慰谕之，乱兵已陈于丹凤阙下，促神策军拒之。无一人至者。
现代文：皇上命令装载绸缎丝织品两车，派遣晋王前往慰问说服他们，乱兵已在丹凤阙下扎阵，皇上督促神策禁卫军抗拒他们，竟没有一个抗拒。
English: The emperor ordered two carloads of silk and satin to be loaded, and sent the king of Jin to offer his condolences and convince them that the rebels had formed a line of battle under the command of Dan Feng. The emperor urged the divine protection force to resist them, but there was no resistance.

古文：与太子诸王妃主百余人出苑北门，右龙武军使令狐建方教射于军中，闻难，聚射士得四百人扈从。
现代文：皇上与太子、诸王、妃子、公主一百多人出皇宫花园北门，右龙武军使令狐建正在军中教士兵射箭，听说皇上遇难，马上聚集弓箭手四百人护驾跟从。
English: More than a hundred people, including the emperor, princes, kings, concubines, and princesses, came out of the north gate of the palace garden. The right dragon military envoy Ling Xujian was teaching soldiers in the army how to shoot arrows. When he heard that the emperor had been killed, he immediately gathered four hundred archers to escort him.

古文：其夕至咸阳，饭数匕而过。
现代文：当晚到了咸阳，只吃了几勺饭便匆匆起程。
English: When I arrived in Xianyang that evening, I only ate a few spoonfuls of rice before I hurriedly set off.

古文：戊申，至奉天。
现代文：四日，皇上到了奉天。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor arrived in Mukden.

古文：己酉，元帅都虞候浑瑊以子弟家属至，乃以瑊为行在都虞候，神策军使白志贞为行在都知兵马使，以令狐建为中军鼓角使，金吾将军侯仲庄为奉天防城使。
现代文：五日，元帅都虞候浑王咸率子弟家属到来，皇上于是以珲王咸为行在都虞候，神策军使白志贞为行在都知兵马使，以令狐建为中军鼓角使，金吾将军侯仲庄为奉天防城使。
English: On the fifth day, Marshal Dugu Hun Wangxian arrived with his son's family. The emperor then sent Hun Wangxian to Dugu, the Shinsaku army sent Bai Zhizhen to the Tochi soldiers and horses, Ling Jijian to the Chinese army, and Kingu General Hou Zhongzhuang to the defense of the city.

古文：乱兵既剽京城，屯于白华，乃于晋昌里迎硃泚为帅，称太尉，居含元殿。
现代文：叛乱之兵既然已经抢掠京城，屯扎在白华，于是在晋昌里迎接朱氵此为元帅，号称为太尉，居住在仓元殿。
English: Since the rebel soldiers had already plundered the capital and were encamped in Baihua, they met Zhu Xi, a marshal with the title of captain, who lived in Cangyuan Palace, in Jinchang.

古文：上以奉天隘，欲幸凤翔，壬子，凤翔军乱，杀节度使张镒，乃止。
现代文：皇上认为奉天狭窄小，想要到凤翔。八日，凤翔军叛乱，叛军将节度使张镒被杀以后，叛乱才停止。
English: The emperor thought that Fengtian was too small and wanted to go to Fengxiang. On the 8th, the Fengxiang army rebelled, and the rebellion only stopped after the rebels killed Zhang Xuan.

古文：癸丑，李希烈陷襄城，哥舒曜走洛阳。
现代文：九日，李希烈攻陷襄城，哥舒曜奔逃到洛阳。
English: On the 9th, Li Xilai captured Xiangcheng, and his brother Shuyang fled to Luoyang.

古文：乙卯，赐检校司空崔宁薨。
现代文：十一日，皇上赐检校司空崔宁自尽。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor ordered the inspector of schools, Kuo Cui Ning, to commit suicide.

古文：丁巳，以吏部尚书萧复，刑部侍郎刘从一、谏议大夫姜公辅并以本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，以吏部尚书萧复、刑部侍郎刘从一、谏议大夫姜公辅都以本官又兼任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th, Xiaofu Shangshu of the Personnel Department, Liu Congyi of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Jiang Gongfu of the Deliberation Department all served as their own officials and concurrently served as junior high school students.

古文：邠宁节度韩游瑰与论惟明率兵三千至，才入奉天，贼军亦至，乃出拒之，王师不利。
现代文：宁节度使韩游瑰与论惟明率兵三千人到，刚刚进入奉天，贼军也追到，于是三千兵出城拒敌，王师战败。
English: During the Ning Festival, Han Yu-kui and Onwu Weiming arrived with 3,000 soldiers. As soon as they entered Mukden, the rebel army also chased them. As a result, 3,000 soldiers left the city to resist the enemy, and Wang Shih was defeated.

古文：贼乘胜攻门，自卯至午，杀伤殆半，会有草车在门外，浑瑊令焚之，贼众遂退。
现代文：贼人乘胜攻打城门，从五时到七时攻打，一直攻打到十一时至十三时，杀死杀伤将近一半，恰巧有装草车在城门外，浑王咸令军士烧草车，大火烧起，贼兵才退走。
English: The thieves took advantage of their victory to attack the city gate. They attacked from five to seven o'clock, and continued to attack until eleven to thirteen o'clock, killing and injuring nearly half. It just so happened that there was a grass wagon outside the city gate. Hun Wangxian ordered the sergeant to burn the grass wagon. A fire broke out, and the thieves retreated.

古文：癸巳，泚贼三面攻城，浑瑊力战御之，方退。大将吕希倩死之。
现代文：二十日，朱氵此贼兵三面攻城，浑王咸指挥军队奋力作战抵御，贼人才退走，大将吕希倩战死。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Xi's bandits attacked the city from three sides. Hun Wang Xian commanded the army to fight hard to resist, the bandits retreated, and General Lü Xi'an died in the battle.

古文：贼自丁未攻城，至己巳二十余日，矢石不绝。
现代文：贼兵从三日开始攻城，到二十五日共攻打了二十几天，弓箭石头攻打不止。
English: The robber soldiers began to attack the city on the third day, and by the twenty-fifth day they had been attacking for twenty days in total, attacking with bows and arrows and stones.

古文：十一月乙亥，以陇右节度判官、陇州留后、殿中侍御史韦皋为陇州刺史、兼御史大夫、奉义军节度使。
现代文：十一月三日，以陇右节度判官、陇州留后、殿中侍御史韦皋为陇州刺史、兼御史大夫、奉义军节度使。
English: On November 3rd, after staying in Zhangzhou as the judge of the right-hand festival, the attendant of the hall, Shi Weiqi, was the secretary of Zhangzhou, also the secretary of history, and the secretary of the festival of the volunteer army.

古文：灵武留后杜希全、盐州刺史戴休颜、夏州刺史时常春合兵六千来援，至漠谷，为贼所败而退。
现代文：灵武留后杜希全、盐州刺史戴休颜、夏州刺史时常春聚集兵士六千人前来援助，到了漠谷，被贼兵击败而退走。
English: After Lingwu left, Du Xiquan, Yanzhou Zishi Dai Xiuyan, and Xiazhou Zishi gathered six thousand soldiers in the spring to come to their aid. They arrived at the valley, were defeated by the bandits, and retreated.

古文：贼由是攻城愈急，矢石雨下，薨伤者众，人心危蹙，上与浑瑊对泣。
现代文：贼兵于是攻城愈加紧急，弓箭、石头如雨下，死亡受伤的人很多，人心恐慌、危急，皇上与浑王咸相对流泪。
English: As a result, the siege of the city by the robber soldiers became more and more urgent. Bows and arrows and stones rained down, many people were killed and injured, people were panicked and in danger, and the emperor and Hun Wangxian shed tears.

古文：硃泚据干陵作乐，下瞰城中，词多侮慢。
现代文：朱氵此占据乾陵作乐，登高下视城中，言词大多怠慢带有侮辱性。
English: Zhu Xi thus occupied the Qianling to make music, climbing up and down to see the city, and his words were mostly negligent and insulting.

古文：戊子，贼造云桥，攻东北隅，兵仗不能及，城中忧恐，相顾失色。
现代文：十五日，贼人造了天桥，攻打东北角，兵器打不着天桥，城中人忧虑恐惧，互相对望着都吓得变了脸色。
English: On the fifteenth day, the thieves built a flyover, attacked the northeast corner, weapons could not hit the flyover, and people in the city were worried and afraid, looking at each other and turning pale with fear.

古文：浑瑊预为地道，及云桥傅城，脚陷不得进，瑊命焚之，风回焰转，桥焚而贼退。
现代文：浑王咸于是预先挖好地道，等到天桥靠近城墙，但脚陷入地道而不能前进，浑王咸命令士兵焚烧，风吹火焰回转，天桥被烧毁而后贼兵败退。
English: King Ham ordered the soldiers to burn the bridge, the wind blew the flames back and forth, the bridge was burned and the bandits retreated.

古文：朔方节度李怀光遣兵马使张韶奉表，言大军将至，乃令舁韶巡城，叫呼欢声动地，贼不之测，疑惧缓攻。
现代文：朔方节度使李怀光派遣兵马使张韶奉上表章，说大军将到，于是命令张韶巡城，欢呼声震天动地，贼兵不知真假，怀疑恐惧，暂缓进攻。
English: Shuo Fang sent soldiers and horses to Zhang Xuan, saying that a large army would arrive, so he ordered Zhang Xuan to patrol the city. The cheers were earth-shattering. The thief soldiers did not know whether it was true or not, they were suspicious and afraid, and suspended the attack.

古文：癸巳，怀光军次醴泉，是夜贼解围而去。
现代文：二十日，李怀光军队驻扎在醴泉，当夜贼人解围而去。
English: On the 20th, Li Huaiguang's army was stationed in Jiuquan. That night, the bandits broke the siege and left.

古文：神策将李晟自定州率师赴难，军于渭桥。
现代文：神策军将李晟在定州率军奔赴皇上行宫靖难，驻扎在渭桥。
English: In Dingzhou, Li Qiye, commander of the Divine Providence Army, led the army to the Emperor's palace in Jingnan, and was stationed in Qianqiao.

古文：甲午，以商州都虞候王仙鹤权商州防御使。
现代文：二十一日，以商州都虞候王仙鹤暂代商州防御使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Cenghe was appointed as the provisional defense envoy of Shangzhou.

古文：十二月壬戌，贬门下侍郎、平章事卢杞为新州司马，贬行在都知兵马使白志贞为恩州司马，户部侍郎、判度支赵赞为播州司马。
现代文：十二月十九日，贬门下侍郎、平章事卢杞为新州司马，贬行在都知兵马使白志贞为恩州司马，贬户部侍郎兼度支使赵赞为播州司马。
English: On December 19th, Lu Yao, a subordinate attendant and member of the Taira clan, was demoted to the position of Sima of Xinzhou, Bai Zhizhen was demoted to the position of Sima of Enzhou, and Zhao Zan, an attendant and member of the household department, was demoted to the position of Sima of Banzhou.

古文：癸亥，以京兆少尹裴腆判度支。
现代文：二十日，以京兆尹裴腆代理度支使。
English: On the 20th, with Jing Zhao, Yin Peiqi acting as the chief envoy.

古文：甲子，以湖南观察留后赵憬为湖南观察使。
现代文：二十一日，以湖南观察留后赵憬为湖南观察使。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Jing, who stayed behind to observe Hunan, became the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：乙丑，以祠部员外郎陆贽为考功郎中，金部员外郎吴通微为职方郎中，翰林学士并如故。
现代文：二十二日，以祠部员外郎陆贽为考功郎中，金部员外郎吴通微为职方郎中，翰林学士的职务依旧如前。
English: On the 22nd, with the ancestral hall member Wai Lang Lu Wei as the meritorious scholar, and the gold member Wai Lang Wu Tong Wei as the professional scholar, the duties of the Hanlin scholar are still the same as before.

古文：以侍御史吴通玄为起居舍人，充翰林学士。
现代文：以侍御史吴通玄为起居舍人，充任翰林学士。
English: Wu Tongxuan, an attendant to the Emperor Wu Tongxuan, was appointed as the resident scholar and served as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：己巳，以河中尹李齐运为宗正卿。
现代文：二十六日，以河中尹李齐运为宗正卿。
English: On the 26th, it was announced that Yin Li Qiyun, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, had been appointed as Zong Zhengqing.

古文：庚午，李希烈陷汴州。
现代文：二十七日，李希烈攻陷汴州。
English: On the 27th, Li Xilai invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：以右庶子崔纵为京兆尹。
现代文：以右庶子崔纵为京兆尹。
English: He is shown with his right illegitimate son Cui Zheng as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：癸酉，以中书侍郎、平章事关播为刑部尚书，司封郎中杜黄裳为给事中。
现代文：三十日，以中书侍郎、平章事关播为刑部尚书，司封郎中杜黄裳为给事中。
English: On the 30th, Shosho, the secretary, and Taira, the secretary, were appointed as the head of the criminal investigation department, and Du Huang, the secretary, as the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：硃反易天常，盗窃名器，暴犯陵寝，所不忍言，获罪祖宗，朕不敢赦。
现代文：命令给事中孔巢父到淄青安抚，命令华州刺史董晋往河北安抚。兴元元年春正月一日是朔日，皇上在奉天行宫接受朝贺。诏曰：改建中五年为兴元元年，大赦天下。朱氵此背叛朝廷，盗窃皇帝名分，侵犯先帝陵墓，对朕的祖先犯下过错，朕不敢赦免。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first century, the emperor received the morning greetings at the Feng Tian Xing Palace. The edict said: "The five years of reconstruction will be the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year

古文：除泚外，并从原宥。
现代文：除朱氵此以外，都可以加以宽恕。
English: Except for Zhu Xi, all of them can be pardoned.

古文：应赴奉天并进收京城将士，并赐名 奉天定难功臣 ，身有过犯，减罪三等，子孙过犯，减罪二等。
现代文：应该到奉天收集京城将士，并赐名 奉天定难功臣 ，本身有过错的，减罪三等，子孙有过错或犯罪的，减罪二等。
English: They should go to Bongtian to collect the soldiers of the capital, and give them the name of Bongtian Dingan Gongchong. If they are at fault, their crime will be reduced to the third class, and if their descendants are at fault or commit a crime, their crime will be reduced to the second class.

古文：先税除陌、间架等钱，竹木茶漆等税，并停。
现代文：先前的除陌税、盖房子的间架税、竹、木、茶、漆等税，一并停止。
English: The previous taxes such as the tax for removing foreign objects, the tax for erecting a mezzanine, and the taxes for bamboo, wood, tea, and lacquer have all been stopped.

古文：奉天升为赤县。
现代文：奉天县升为赤县。
English: Bontian County was upgraded to Aka County.

古文：分命朝臣诸道宣谕。
现代文：又分头命令朝廷大臣到各道宣告说明。
English: He also separately ordered the ministers of the Imperial Court to go to each province to announce and explain.

古文：丙戌，以吏部侍郎萧复为门下侍郎、同平章事，以吏部侍郎卢翰为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：以奉天行营都团练使杨惠元任检校工部尚书。十四日，以吏部侍郎萧复为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 14th, Xiao Fu, a chamberlain of the cadre department, was appointed as a subordinate chamberlain and given the same rank.

古文：戊子，命宰臣萧复往山南、荆南、湖南、江西、鄂岳、浙江东西、福建等道宣慰。
现代文：十六日，命令宰辅大臣肖复前往山南、荆南、湖南、江西、鄂岳、浙江东、浙江西、福建等道安抚。
English: On the 16th, he ordered the Vice-Minister Xiao Fu to go to Shannan, Jingnan, Hunan, Jiangxi, Etu, East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang, Fujian and other provinces to pacify.

古文：己丑，以京兆尹裴腆为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：十七日，以京兆尹裴腆为户部侍郎、兼任度支使。
English: On the 17th, Jingzhao Yin Peiqi was appointed as the household attendant and concurrently as the imperial envoy.

古文：丙申，以山南东道行军司马樊泽为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使；以浑瑊为行在都知兵马使；以前赵州观察使康日知兼同州刺史，充奉诚军节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以山南东道行军司马樊泽为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使；以浑王咸为行在都知兵马使；以前任赵州观察使康日知兼任同州刺史，充任奉诚军节度使。
English: On the 24th, with Shannan as the host, Sima Heze, the commander of the marching troops, served as the historian of Xiangzhou and the festival envoy of Shannan; with Hun Wanghan as the envoy of the marching troops in Tochi; the former observer of Zhao Province, Kang Ruchi, also served as the historian of the same province and served as the festival envoy of the Fengcheng Army.

古文：辛丑，诏六军各置统军一员，秩从二品；左右常侍各加一员；太子宾客加四员。
现代文：二十九日，诏令大军各个设置统军一员，官的品级为从二品；左右常侍各加一员；太子宾客加四员。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict ordered the army to each set up a member of the unified army, and the official's grade was two grades; the left and right attendants each added one member; the prince's guests added four members.

古文：二月戊寅，诏故司农卿张掖王段秀实赠太尉，谥曰忠烈，赐实封五百户。赠滑州兵马使贾隐林左仆射，以滑州刺史李澄兼汴州刺史、汴滑节度使。
现代文：二月七日，诏令赠已经去世的司农卿张掖王段秀实为太尉，谥号为忠烈，赐给实际封户五百户；赠已故滑州兵马使贾隐林以左仆射；以滑州刺史李澄兼任汴州刺史、汴滑节度使。
English: On February 7th, the imperial edict presented the deceased Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Zhang Xuan, Wang Duan Husi, with the title of First Lieutenant, and the posthumous name of Zhong Rong, and granted 500 households to be actually fenced; presented the late Jia Yinglin, the military envoy of the State of Nanyang, with the title of Left Footman; and appointed Li Cheng, the Military Historian of the State of Nanyang, as the Military Historian of the State of Nanyang and the Military Historian of the State of Nanyang.

古文：是日，李晟自咸阳移兵东渭桥，避怀光也。
现代文：这天李晟从咸阳将军队转移到东渭桥，是为了避开李怀光。
English: On this day, Li Hui moved his army from Xianyang to Dongluo Bridge in order to avoid Li Huaiguang.

古文：晟以怀光反状已明，请上幸蜀。
现代文：李晟因为李怀光反叛的情况已经清楚了，请求皇上驾到蜀郡以回避。
English: Because the situation of Li Huai Guang's rebellion had become clear, Li Hong asked the emperor to drive to Shu County to avoid it.

古文：王武俊效顺，加中书门下平章事，兼幽州节度使，令讨硃滔。
现代文：王武俊表示效忠顺从朝廷，皇上加给他中书门下平章事的职衔，兼幽州节度使，令他讨伐朱滔。
English: Wang Wujun expressed his allegiance and obedience to the imperial court, and the emperor gave him the title of the second-ranking official of the Chinese Academy of Letters, as well as the Yuzhou Festival envoy, and ordered him to fight Zhu Tao.

古文：吐蕃遣使来朝，请以兵助国讨逆，乃令御史大夫于颀入蕃宣谕之。
现代文：吐蕃派遣使者前来朝见，请求以军队帮助国家讨伐叛逆，皇上于是命令御史大夫入吐蕃安抚他们。
English: Tubo sent an envoy to the imperial court, asking for troops to help the country fight the rebellion. The emperor then ordered the chief historian to come to Tubo to pacify them.

古文：甲子，加李怀光太尉，仍赐铁券，赦三死罪。
现代文：二十三日，皇上加李怀光太尉的职衔，仍旧赐给他以特权免死的铁券，赦免他三大死罪。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor gave him the title of Lieutenant Li Huaguang, and still gave him the privilege of being exempted from death, and pardoned his three capital crimes.

古文：怀光怒曰： 凡人臣反逆，乃赐铁券，今赐怀光，是反必矣！ 
现代文：李怀光愤怒道： 凡是臣下叛逆，就赐给铁券，现在赐给怀光铁券，这说明我反叛是肯定的了！ 
English: Li Huaguang said angrily, "Whenever a subject rebels, he is given an iron certificate, and now I am being given an iron certificate. This shows that my rebellion is certain!

古文：乃投之于地。
现代文：于是将铁券扔在地上。
English: He then threw the ticket on the ground.

古文：上命翰林学士陆贽晓谕之。
现代文：皇上命翰林学士去加以说明。
English: The emperor ordered the scholar Hanlin to go and explain.

古文：是日人心恐骇。
现代文：这天人心惊慌。
English: The man panicked.

古文：怀光夺杨惠元、李建徽所将兵，惠元被害。
现代文：李怀光夺了杨惠元、李建微所率兵马，杨惠元被杀。
English: Li Huaguang captured Yang Huigen and the soldiers and horses led by Li Jianwei, and Yang Huigen was killed.

古文：丁卯，车驾幸梁州，留戴休颜守奉天，以御史中丞齐映为沿路置顿使。
现代文：二十六日，皇上车驾到梁州，留下戴休颜镇守奉天，以御史中丞齐映为沿路置顿使，负责安置安顿。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the imperial car drove to Liangzhou, leaving Dai Xiuyan, the town guard of Fengtian, and setting up envoys along the road with Mishi Zhongzheng and Qi Ying, who were responsible for the resettlement.

古文：李晟大集兵赋，以收复为己任。
现代文：李晟大集军队、赋税，以收复国家为自己的重任。
English: Li Hongda set up an army, levied taxes, and took the recovery of the country as his most important task.

古文：李怀光患之，移军泾阳，连硃泚，欲同灭晟。
现代文：李怀光以此为忧患，移动军队到泾阳，联结朱氵此，想要共同消灭李晟。
English: Li Huaguang took this as a cause for concern and moved his army to Fenyang to link up with Zhu Xi, with the intention of jointly eliminating Li Xi.

古文：晟卑词厚意，致书谕之，冀其感悟，怀光颇增愧惧。
现代文：李晟送了一封书信给他，语言低三下四，意思诚愿深厚，希望他感动悔悟，李怀光很惭愧畏惧。
English: Li Yao sent him a letter. The language was simple, the intention was sincere, and the hope was that he would be moved to repent. Li Huaiguang was ashamed and afraid.

古文：三月甲申，以秘书监崔汉衡为上都留守，右散骑常侍于颀为京兆尹。
现代文：三月十三日，以秘书监崔汉衡为上都留守，右散骑常侍于颀为京兆尹。
English: On March 13th, Secretary Supervisor Cui Hanheng stayed at Shangdu, and the Right Cavalryman, who often attended the imperial banquet, was Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：是日，怀光烧营，走归河中。
现代文：这天，李怀光烧了营盘，逃到了河中。
English: On this day, Li Huaiguang burned the camp tray and fled to the river.

古文：其将孟涉、段威勇等千人奔归李晟。
现代文：李怀光的部将孟涉、段威勇等千人奔逃归附了李晟。
English: Li Huaguang's subordinates, such as Meng Zhan and Duan Weiyong, fled by the thousands to join Li Rong.

古文：丙戌，以前饶州刺史杜佑为广州刺史、岭南节度使，加神策节度使李晟兼京畿渭北鄜坊丹延节度观察使。
现代文：十五日，以前任饶州刺史杜佑为广州刺史、岭南节度使，加给神策节度使李晟兼任京畿、渭北、坊、丹延节度使、观察使。
English: On the 15th, Du You, the former Raozhou chief historian, was appointed as the Guangzhou chief historian and Lingnan festival envoy, and Li Jie, the chief historian of Shenke festival, also served as the Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang, Fang and Danyan festival envoy and observation envoy.

古文：庚寅，车驾次城固。
现代文：十九日，皇上车驾驻扎在城固。
English: On the 19th, the imperial car was stationed in Chenggu.

古文：唐安公主薨，上爱女，悼惜之甚。
现代文：唐安公主去世，皇上很爱女儿，痛惜哀悼得厉害。
English: Princess Tang'an passed away. The emperor loved his daughter very much and mourned her terribly.

古文：壬申，至梁州。
现代文：二十一日，皇上到达梁州。
English: On the 21st, the emperor arrived in Liangzhou.

古文：丁丑，宣武节度使刘洽加册平章事。
现代文：二十六日，宣武节度使刘洽加给同平章事职衔。
English: On the 26th, the Xuanwu Festival made Liu Cai give Tongping the official title.

古文：己亥，以行在都知兵马使浑瑊检校左仆射、同平章事、灵州大都督，充朔方节度使、邠宁振武永平奉天行营副元帅。
现代文：二十八日，以行在都知兵马使浑王咸任检校左仆射、同平章事、灵州大都督，充任朔方节度使、宁、振武、永平、奉天行营副元帅。
English: On the 28th, Hun Wang Xian, who served as the military commander of the troops and horses in Tochi, was appointed as the inspector of the school, Zuo Fuxia, Tongping Zhangji, and the grand governor of Lingshou, and was appointed as the deputy marshal of the camp of Shuo Fang, Ning, Zhenwu, Yongping, and Feng Tian Xing.

古文：是日，诏授李怀光太子太保，其余官职并罢。
现代文：这天，皇上诏令授予李怀光太子太保的加官职衔，其余官职全部罢免。
English: On this day, the Emperor's edict granted Li Huai Guang the additional official title of the Prince's bodyguard, and all other official positions were removed.

古文：泾州乱，牙将田希鉴杀其帅冯河清，自称留后。
现代文：泾州大乱，牙将田希鉴杀他的大帅冯河清，自称为泾州留后。
English: During the Zhangzhou Rebellion, Tian Xijian, the commander of the Fang Army, killed his general Feng Heqing, who claimed to be a retainer of Zhangzhou.

古文：四月辛丑朔。
现代文：四月一日是朔日。
English: April 1 is New Year's Day.

古文：时将士未给春衣，上犹夹服，汉中早热，左右请御暑服，上曰： 将士未易冬服，独御春衫可乎！ 
现代文：当时将士未发春季衣服，皇上还穿着夹衣。汉中很早就暑热，左右侍从的人请皇上穿暑天衣服，皇上道 ：将士还穿着冬天的服装，我独自一人穿春天的长衫那可以吗？ 
English: At that time, the generals were not issued with spring clothes, and the emperor was still wearing a jacket. It was very hot early in the Han Dynasty, and the attendants on both sides asked the emperor to wear summer clothes. The emperor said, "The generals are still wearing winter clothes, and I am wearing a spring shirt all by myself. Is that okay?"

古文：俄而贡物继至，先给诸军而始御之。
现代文：不久，进贡的物资陆续到达，先给各军换了春天的服装而后皇上才开始穿春服。
English: Soon, the materials of tribute arrived one after another. First, the armies changed their spring clothing, and then the emperor began to wear spring clothes.

古文：壬寅，诏奉天随从将士并赐号 元从功臣。 
现代文：二日，皇上诏令，奉天随从皇上平叛的将士都赐号为 元从功臣 。
English: On the second day, the emperor issued a decree, and all the soldiers who followed the emperor and rebelled were given the title of "victorious soldiers."

古文：以邠宁兵马使韩游瑰为邠宁节度伎。
现代文：以宁兵马使韩游瑰为宁节度使。
English: With Ning soldiers and horses, the Korean tour is the Ning festival.

古文：尚书左丞赵涓卒。
现代文：尚书左丞赵涓去世。
English: Shang Shuzhao Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：己巳，以陕虢防遏使唐朝臣为河中尹、河中同晋绛节度使，御史大夫李齐运兼京兆尹。
现代文：五日，以陕虢防遏使唐朝臣为河中尹、河中、同、晋、绛节度使，御史大夫李齐运兼任京兆尹。
English: On the fifth day of the month of Shaanxi, with the help of Shaanxi and Fujian, the Tang courtier was appointed as the envoy of Kechu Yin, Kechu, Tong, Jin and Xing, and the imperial historian Li Qiyun also served as the envoy of Jing Zhao Yin.

古文：魏博行军司马田绪杀其帅田悦，诏赠悦太尉，以绪为魏州长史、魏博节度观察使。
现代文：魏博行军司马田绪杀其大帅田悦，皇上诏令赠田悦以太尉职衔，以田绪为魏州长史、魏博节度使、观察使。
English: Ma Tianxu, the Wei Bo marching army secretary, killed his general, Tian Yue, and the emperor gave Tian Yue the title of ether lieutenant, with Tian Xu as the governor of Wei, the Wei Bo festival envoy, and the observation envoy.

古文：甲子，入蕃使、左仆射李揆卒于凤州。
现代文：十四日，以谏议大夫平章事姜公辅为左庶子，加给剑南节度使贾耽为工部尚书。二十四日，入吐蕃的使者、左仆射李揆在凤州去世。
English: On the 14th, Jiang Gongfu, the son-in-law of Pingzhang Jie, was named the left son, and Jia Tan, the son-in-law of Jian Nan Jie, was named the minister of the Ministry of Industry. On the 24th, the emissary and left servant of Jia Li Jun, who went to Tubo, died in Fengzhou.

古文：乙丑，浑瑊与吐蕃将论莽罗之众破贼将韩旻之众于武功，斩首万级。
现代文：二十五日，浑王咸与吐蕃将领论莽罗的部众联合在武功大破贼将韩的军队，斩敌首级一万个。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Hun Wang Ham and his subordinates, led by the general Tu Han, united in martial arts to smash the Korean army and cut off the heads of ten thousand enemies.

古文：丙寅，加李纳平章事。
现代文：二十六日，加给李纳平章事的职衔。
English: On the 26th, he was given the title of Li Naping.

古文：丁卯，义王玭薨。
现代文：二十七日，义王李笿去世。
English: On the 27th, the King of Righteousness, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：五月，淮南节度使陈少游加检校司徒，东川节度使李叔明太子太傅，镇海军韩滉检校右仆射。
现代文：五月，淮南节度使陈少游加检校司徒的职衔，东川节度使李叔明加太子太傅的职衔，镇海军节度使韩加检校右仆射的职衔。
English: In May, the Huainan Festival gave Chen Shaoyou the title of inspector of schools, the Dongchuan Festival gave Li Shuming the title of crown prince, and the Town Navy Festival gave Han Jia the title of inspector of schools.

古文：癸酉，泾王侹薨。
现代文：三日，泾王李亻廷去世。
English: On the third day, the King of Gongs, Li Yueting, passed away.

古文：徐沂海团练使高承宗卒，以其子明应知徐州事。
现代文：徐、沂、海三州团练使高承宗去世，以他的儿子高明应主持徐州事。
English: Gao Chengzong died as a result of the tri-state group training of Xu, Lu and Hai, and his son Gao Ming should preside over the affairs of Xuzhou.

古文：丙子，李抱真、王武俊破硃滔于经城东南，斩首三万级，擒伪相硃良祐、李俊以献。
现代文：六日，李抱真、王武俊在经城东南打破朱滔之军，斩叛军首级三万个，活捉叛军伪相国朱良佑、李俊献给朝廷。
English: On the 6th day, Li Po Zhen and Wang Wujun defeated Zhu Tao's army in the southeast of the city, killed the first 30,000 rebels, and captured the rebels, Zhu Liang You and Li Jun, alive and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：硃滔遁归幽州。
现代文：朱滔逃奔回幽州。
English: Zhu Tao fled back to Yuzhou.

古文：癸未，岳州李兼、黔南元全柔、桂管卢岳加御史大夫，岳加中丞。
现代文：十三日，岳州李兼、黔南元全柔加御史大夫衔，桂管卢岳加御史中丞衔。
English: On the 13th, Yuezhou Li Jian and Yanan Yuan Quanzhong were promoted to the rank of magistrate, and Gui Guan Lu Yue was promoted to the rank of junior secretary.

古文：庚寅，李纳上章禀命，乃赠李正己太尉。
现代文：二十日，李纳上奏章，请求接受王命，于是赠其父李正己以太尉衔。
English: On the 20th, Li Na played the sheng and requested to accept the king's order, so he gave his father Li Zhengyi the rank of ether lieutenant.

古文：壬辰，商州尚可孤破贼于蓝田。
现代文：二十二日，商州尚可孤在蓝田攻破贼兵。
English: On the 22nd, Shangzhou was still able to defeat the bandits in Lantian.

古文：乙未，安西四镇节度使郭昕、北庭都护李元忠加左右仆射。
现代文：二十五日，安西四镇节度使郭昕、北庭都护李元忠加左右仆射职衔。
English: On the 25th, the Anxi Four Towns Festival promoted Guo Jie and Beiting Capital Guard Li Yuanzhong to the rank of left and right guards.

古文：是夜，李晟自渭北移军于光泰门外。
现代文：这夜，李晟从渭北转移军队到光泰门外。
English: That night, Li Gan transferred troops from northern Shandong to outside the Guangtai Gate.

古文：贼来薄，我军争夺击，大败之，蹙入光泰门，斩馘数千计，贼党恸哭而入白华。
现代文：贼人奔来将靠近，我军争先奋力打击，大败敌军，把敌人逼入光泰门，斩杀敌头颅以数千来计算，贼党惊慌痛哭逃入白华。
English: The bandits will be approaching, our army will fight hard to strike first, defeat the enemy army, force the enemy into Guangtai Gate, kill the enemy's head by thousands, and the bandits will panic and cry and flee into Baihua.

古文：戊辰，列陈于光泰门外。
现代文：二十八日，王军列阵势在光泰门外。
English: On the 28th, the king's army lined up outside the Guangtaimen Gate.

古文：遣骑将史万顷往神麚村，开苑墙二百余步，贼树栅当之。
现代文：派遣骑兵将领史万顷前往神颭村，冲开苑墙二百余步，贼人用树竖起栅栏来抵挡王师。
English: Sending the cavalry general Shi Wanhao to Shenshan Village, he broke through the garden wall by more than two hundred paces, and the thieves erected a fence with trees to resist Wang Shi.

古文：我军争栅，云合电击，与贼血战，贼党大败，追击至白华，硃泚、姚令言率众万余遁去。
现代文：我军争先冲上树栅栏，像云一般会合，像雷电一般快速打击，与贼人血战，贼党大败，追击直到白华，朱氵此、姚令言率领一万多人逃走。
English: Our army rushed to the tree fence, gathered like a cloud, struck quickly like lightning, fought a bloody battle with the thieves, defeated the thieves, and pursued them until Baihua. Zhu Xi and Yao Lingyan led more than 10,000 people to escape.

古文：晟收复京城。
现代文：李晟收复了京城。
English: Li Hong recovered the capital city.

古文：是日，浑瑊与戴休颜亦破贼三千于咸阳，韩游瑰追硃泚于经州。
现代文：这天，浑王咸与戴休颜也在咸阳打破贼兵三四千人，韩游瑰追赶朱氵此一直追到泾州。
English: On this day, Hun Wang Xian and Dai Xiuyan also defeated three or four thousand thieves in Xianyang, and Han Yu Qui chased Zhu Xuan all the way to Zhangzhou.

古文：六月庚子朔，升恆州为大都督府。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，升恒州为大都督府。
English: June 1 is the New Year's Day, and Shengheng Prefecture is the capital.

古文：癸卯，赠神策兵马使杨惠元右仆射。
现代文：四日，赠神策军兵马使杨惠元右仆射职衔。
English: On the 4th, Yang Hui Yuan, the military commander of the Shen Zhe Army, was awarded the title of Right Footman.

古文：是日，李晟上《收京城露布》，上览之，涕下沾襟。
现代文：这天，李晟奉上《收京城露布》的檄文，皇上看完泪下如雨，沾湿了衣襟。
English: On this day, Li Qiye presented a copy of "The Collection of the Imperial Robe" to the emperor. After reading it, the emperor was in tears and his shirt collar was wet.

古文：泾州田希鉴斩姚令言，幽州军士韩旻于彭原斩硃泚，并传首至行在。
现代文：泾州将领田希鉴斩了叛将姚令言，幽州军士韩在彭原斩了朱氵此，都传送首级到皇帝临时驻地。
English: Tian Xijian, the general of Zhangzhou, beheaded the traitor Yao Lingyan, and Han, the sergeant of Yuzhou, beheaded Zhu Xi in Pengyuan, and both of them sent their heads to the emperor's temporary residence.

古文：乙巳，遣吏部侍郎班宏入京宣谕。
现代文：六日，派遣吏部侍郎班宏入京传布解说胜利消息。
English: On the 6th, Ban Hong, the attendant of the cadre department, was sent to Beijing to spread the news of the victory.

古文：己酉，加李晟司徒、兼中书令，实封一千户；骆元光、尚可孤加检校左右仆射，皆实封五百户。
现代文：十日，加给李晟司徒、兼中书令的职衔，给实际封户一千户；骆元光、尚可孤加左右仆射的职衔，都给实际封户五百户。
English: On the 10th, the official titles of Li Yanshi and the concurrent middle-ranking official were added to the actual closure of one thousand households; the official titles of Luo Yuanguang and Shang Can alone were added to the actual closure of five hundred households.

古文：以泾州将田希鉴为泾州刺史、泾原节度使。
现代文：以泾州将田希鉴为泾州刺史、泾原节度使。
English: Tian Xijian, the governor of Bozhou, was appointed as the Bozhou chief historian and the Bozhou provincial governor.

古文：癸丑，诏以梁州为兴元府，南郑县为赤畿，官名品制视京兆、河南，百姓给复二年，见任官员加两阶，耆老与版授，南郑县令赐绯。
现代文：十四日，皇上诏令以梁州为兴元府，南郑县为赤畿，官名品级制定以京兆、河南为标准，百姓免除徭役二年，现在任职官员加两阶，六十岁以上老人给予空职衔，南郑县令赐他穿绯红色官服。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor's edict designated Liangzhou as Xingyuanfu and South Zheng County as Chakugui, and the official title and rank of officials were set according to the standards of Jingzhao and Henan. The people were exempted from military service for two years, and the currently serving officials were given two ranks. The elderly over the age of 60 were given vacant positions, and the order of South Zheng County granted him to wear a scarlet official uniform.

古文：加兴元尹严震检校右仆射，赐实封一百户。
现代文：加兴元尹严震检校右仆射的职衔，赐给他实际封户一百户。
English: He gave him the title of the right-hand man of the school inspector, and gave him the actual closure of one hundred households.

古文：加浑瑊待中，实封八百户；韩游瑰检校左仆射，实封四百户；戴休颜检校右仆射，实封二百户。
现代文：加给浑王咸侍中职衔，实封八百户；加韩游瑰检校左仆射职衔，实封四百户，加戴休颜检校右仆射的职衔，实封二百户。
English: Eight hundred households were sealed with the middle-ranking title of Hunwang Hamzang; four hundred households were sealed with the middle-ranking title of Hanyou Zuoxing School Zuofusha; and two hundred households were sealed with the middle-ranking title of Xiuyan Inspection School Zuofusha.

古文：考功郎中、知制诰陆贽，司封郎中、知刺诰吉中孚，并为谏议大夫；水部员外郎顾少连为礼部郎中：并依前充翰林学士。
现代文：考功郎中、知制诰陆贽，司封郎中、知制诰吉中孚，都任谏议大夫；水部员外郎顾少连为礼部郎中，都依以前充任翰林学士。
English: Gao Gong Rongzhong, Zhisheng Gong Lujuan, Shifeng Rongzhong and Zhisheng Gongji Rongfu were all appointed as the chairman of the meeting; Gu Shorian, a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, was a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and they were all appointed as scholars of Hanlin according to the past.

古文：行在左右厢兵马使令狐建、时常春并加散骑常侍。
现代文：行在左右厢兵马使令狐建、时常春都给予散骑常侍的职衔。
English: The soldiers and horses on the left and right side of the carriage were given the title of fox, and the stragglers were always given the title of stragglers.

古文：丙辰，斩伪相李忠臣，籍没其家。
现代文：十七日，斩伪相国李忠臣，没收他的全部家财入官。
English: On the seventeenth day, Li Zhongcheng, the forger of the country, confiscated all of his family's wealth and entered the government.

古文：李晟奏受贼伪署同恶抵法之家，所没财物、牛马、奴婢，请以赏军士。从之。
现代文：李晟上奏，接受贼人伪官共同作恶而犯法之家，所抄家没收的财物、牛马、奴婢，请将这些赏给军士，皇上听从了。
English: Li Qian played the first tune, accepting the thieves and false officials who committed crimes together and broke the law. The confiscated property, cattle, horses, slaves and maids, please reward these to the sergeant. The emperor obeyed.

古文：戊午，车驾还京，发兴元，是日大雨，及入斜谷，晴霁，从官将士欢然以为天助。
现代文：十九日，皇上车驾进入斜谷，天气晴朗，随从官员将士非常愉快，认为这是上天的帮助。
English: On the 19th, the emperor drove into the valley, the weather was fine, and the officials and soldiers accompanying him were very happy, thinking that this was God's help.

古文：秋七月丙子，车驾次凤翔府，诏放管内今年秋税；耆寿侍老八十已上，各与版授刺史，赐紫，其余版授上佐，赐绯；府、县置顿官，考满日放选。
现代文：秋七月七日，皇上车驾驻扎在凤翔府。诏令免除管辖区内今年秋天的税收。八十岁以上的老年人，各人授予刺史的职衔，赐他们穿紫色官服，其余八十以下者授予上等辅佐官职衔，赐他们穿绯红色官服；府、县设置安顿他们的官员，考核完后放他们担任职衔。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor's carriage was stationed in Fengxiangfu. The imperial edict exempted the taxes of this autumn in the jurisdiction area. The elderly over the age of eighty were each awarded the title of stabbing history and were given purple official uniforms, and the remaining ones under the age of eighty were awarded the title of senior assistant officer and were given scarlet official uniforms; the prefecture and county set up their officials, and after the assessment, they were allowed to hold the title.

古文：受伪署官乔琳、蒋镇、张光晟、李通、蒋钅监伏诛。
现代文：受了叛贼伪官的乔琳、蒋镇、张光晟、李通、蒋钅监判死刑。
English: The traitors and impostors Jolin, Jiang Zhen, Zhang Guangyao, Li Tong and Jiang Yao were sentenced to death.

古文：硃泚害郡王、王子、王孙七十七人于马璘宅，丁丑，令所司具凶礼收殓于净域寺。
现代文：朱氵此残害杀死郡王、王子、王孙七十七人在马瞞旧住宅。八日，命令有关官员，具备被凶杀者的礼仪收殓他们的尸体到净域寺。
English: On the 8th, Zhu Xi ordered the relevant officials to have the etiquette of the murdered to collect their bodies to the Pure Land Temple.

古文：庚辰，诏：
现代文：十一日，皇上下诏曰：
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor issued the following edict:

古文：李怀光往因职任，颇著干能，朕嗣之初，首加拔擢，托为心膂，授以节旄。
现代文： 李怀光往年因为任职，颇称能干，朕继帝位之初，首先加以提拔，依为腹心，授予节旄，委以重任。
English: In previous years, Li Huaguang was known to be very capable because of his position. At the beginning of his succession to the throne, he was promoted first, and he was awarded the title of "guardian" and entrusted with important duties.

古文：顷岁河朔不宁，俾令征讨，任兼将相，恩极丘山。
现代文：近年河朔大乱，便命他率师征讨，职兼将相，任务重大，恩比山高。
English: In recent years, when there was a big riot in Hexuo, he was ordered to lead the division to investigate, and he also served as the commander-in-chief. The task was very important, and he was taller than Mount Enbi.

古文：及硃泚猖狂，扰乱京邑，怀光回军赴难，宗社再宁，保佑朕躬，厥功甚茂。
现代文：等到朱氵此叛乱，扰乱京师，李怀光率军返回，奔赴国难，宗社国家，两次安定，保护朕身，功劳甚大。
English: Wait until Zhu Xi's rebellion disturbs the Beijing division, Li Huiguang will return with his army, rush to the national disaster, live in the country, stabilize twice, protect our body, and have great merit.

古文：故元帅、河中之权，太尉、中书之秩，仍加实封，爰及宗亲，人臣之荣，孰可为比？
现代文：所以虽然有元帅、河中节度之大权，有太尉、中书令之俸禄，仍旧加以实封，可以追上皇室宗亲，臣下的荣宠，谁可以与李怀光相比？
English: Therefore, although there is the great power of the marshal, the river in the middle of the festival, there is the salary of the captain and the secretary, it is still sealed, it can catch up with the royal family and the honor of the subjects, who can compare with Li Huaguang?

古文：非朕于怀光不厚，岂朕报怀光不崇！
现代文：不是朕对李怀光恩情不厚，难道报答他的荣宠不崇高！
English: It's not that I'm ungrateful for Li Huaguang's kindness. Isn't it noble to repay his honor and favor?

古文：贼寇未除，猜嫌已构，受硃泚奸凶之说，听张佋罔惑之言，曾不沈思，遂生疑阻，交通逆孽，残害忠良。
现代文：但贼寇未除，猜忌已经构成，接受了朱氵此奸凶的谗言，听取了张亻召蛊惑人心的言辞，根本不加深思，于是就产生了疑虑异心，勾结逆贼，残害忠良。
English: However, before the bandit was eliminated, the suspicion had already been formed. They accepted the insults of Zhu Xi, the traitor, and listened to the words of Zhang Ye, the demagogue. They did not think deeply at all. As a result, they had doubts and alienation, colluded with the traitor, and harmed the loyal.

古文：朕志在推诚，事皆掩覆，礼遇转厚，委任益隆。
现代文：朕意在推心置腹，事情都加以掩盖，礼遇反而更深厚，委任也越加重大。
English: I tried to be discreet, to hide everything, but the courtesy became more profound, and the appointment more important.

古文：怀光都不改图，愈深不轨。
现代文：然而李怀光不思悔改自新，反而加紧图谋不轨。
English: However, Li Huaguang did not think of repenting and reforming, but on the contrary, he stepped up his evil plot.

古文：敕书慰问将士，怀光并不令宣；三军咸欲收城，怀光并不令出。
现代文：朕下命令慰问将士，然而李怀光并不让宣告；三军都想要收复城池，但李怀光却不发出击的命令。
English: I gave the order to offer condolences to the soldiers, but Li Huaiguang did not allow the announcement; all three armies wanted to recover the city, but Li Huaiguang did not give the order to attack.

古文：自云已共硃泚定约，不能更事国家。
现代文：自称已与朱氵此定约，不能再事奉朝廷。
English: He claimed that he had made this agreement with Zhu Xi and could no longer serve the imperial court.

古文：朕以眇身，获承鸿业，务全大计，移幸山南，仓皇之间，备历危险。
现代文：朕凭借微末之身，继承大位，务求保全国家，移驾到山南，仓促之间，经历了各种险难。
English: By virtue of my small stature, I inherited the throne, and in order to preserve the country, I moved to Shannan, and in a hurry, I experienced various dangers and difficulties.

古文：据其罪状，情实难容，然以解围奉天，其功不细，昨又遣男璀谢罪，请束身归朝，朕悯其知过之心，念其赴难之效，以功赎罪，务在优恩。
现代文：依据李怀光的罪状，情理实难宽容，然而由于他解了奉天之围，其功甚大，昨天又派遣儿子李璀前来请罪，请求捆绑自己归附朝廷领罪。朕怜悯他知过必改之心，念他奔赴国难的功劳，以功赎罪，务求特别宽恩。
English: According to Li Haiguang's criminal record, it is difficult to be tolerant. However, since he lifted the siege of Feng Tian, his contribution was very great. Yesterday, he sent his son Li Wei to come to plead guilty, requesting to bind himself to the court to accept the crime. I pity him for knowing that he must change his heart, remember his contribution to the national tragedy, atone for his sin with his contribution, and seek special clemency.

古文：今遣给事中孔巢父赍先授怀光太子太保敕牒，往河中宣谕，三日内便与怀光同赴上都，如欲家口同行，亦听怀光自便。
现代文：现在派遣给事中孔巢父手捧先前授予李怀光太子太保的文书，前往河中传布宣告，三天以内便与李怀光同时奔赴上都，如想要家眷同行，也听凭李怀光自便。
English: Now, he sent his father Kong Chao, who was in the middle of the matter, to hold the document previously granted to Li Huai Guang as the Prince's bodyguard, and went to the river to spread the announcement. Within three days, he and Li Huai Guang would go to Shangdu at the same time. If you want to accompany your family, you can also rely on Li Huai Guang.

古文：朕必能保全终始，宠待如初。
现代文：朕一定能保全终始，宠幸宽待如当初一样。
English: I will definitely be able to keep it safe from beginning to end, and I will be treated as I was in the beginning.

古文：朔方将士，尝立大功，子仪再收京城，咸是此军之效，昨远从河朔，赴难奉天，逆贼畏威，望风奔遁，永言劳绩，朕不暂忘。
现代文：朔方将士，曾建立大功，郭子仪两次收复京城，都是朔方军效力的结果，昨日远远地从河朔前来，前往奉天奔赴国难，叛贼害怕朔方军的威望，望风而逃，长久的功劳，朕不会短时就忘记的。
English: The soldiers of the Shuo side, who have made great achievements, and Guo Ziyi, who has twice recaptured Beijing, are all the results of the effectiveness of the Shuo side army. Yesterday, they came from far away from Hexuo and went to Feng Tian to go to the national calamity. The traitors were afraid of the prestige of the Shuo side army and fled in the hope of the wind. I will not forget the long-term achievements in a short time.

古文：将士各竭忠谋，中遭迫协，朕每念及，痛心自咎。
现代文：将士们各人竭尽忠心和谋略，中间遭到胁迫，朕每次想到这里，痛心自责。
English: Every time I think about it, I beat myself up bitterly.

古文：此者君臣阻隔，只为怀光一人，怀光既请入朝，尚扌舍其罪，况诸将士并是功臣，各宜坦然，勿更忧虑。
现代文：近来君臣相隔，只因为李怀光一人，怀光既然请求入朝归顺，尚且宽恕他的罪过，何况诸位将士都是功臣，各人应该胸怀坦然，不要再生忧虑。
English: Recently, the monarch and the minister have been separated, only because of Li Huaguang alone. Since Huaguang has requested to submit to the imperial court, he has forgiven his sins. Moreover, all the soldiers are meritorious soldiers. Everyone should be calm and not worry.

古文：先赐官封，一切如旧。
现代文：先前赐予的官职爵位，一切照旧不变。 
English: The official titles previously awarded remain unchanged.

古文：壬午，至自兴元。
现代文：十三日，皇上从兴元到来。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Dezong returned to Beijing from Xingyuan.

古文：时浑瑊、韩游瑰、戴休颜以其众扈从，李晟、骆元光、尚可孤以其众奉迎，步骑十余万，旌旗连亘数十里，都民僧道，欢呼感泣。
现代文：当时浑王咸、韩游瑰、戴休颜率他们的部众扈驾跟从，李晟、骆元光、尚可孤率其部众奉迎，步兵、骑兵十多万，旌旗连绵数十里，所有民众、僧、道，欢呼万岁，感动流泪。
English: At that time, Hun Wang Xian, Han Yu Qui and Dai Xiuyan led their subordinates to follow, Li Qian, Luo Yuan Guang and Shang Ke alone led their subordinates to welcome, more than 100,000 infantry and cavalry, and the banner stretched for dozens of miles. All the people, monks and Taoists cheered and shed tears.

古文：李晟见于三桥，自陈收城迟晚之咎，伏地请罪，上慰劳遣之。
现代文：李晟在三桥拜见皇上，自己陈述收复京城迟缓较晚的罪责，爬伏在地，叩头请罪，皇上慰劳他让他起来。
English: Li Qiye met the emperor at Sanqiao. He stated that he was to blame for the delay in reclaiming the capital. He crawled to the ground, bowed his head and pleaded for forgiveness. The emperor consoled him and let him get up.

古文：丁亥，河中宣慰使孔巢父、中官啖守盈并为怀光所害。
现代文：十八日，河中宣慰使孔巢父、中官啖守盈都被李怀光杀害。
English: On the 18th, the father of Kong Chao and the vice-governor Hao Shouying were both killed by Li Huaguang.

古文：辛卯，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驾到丹凤楼，大赦天下。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor drove to the Danfeng Building and pardoned the world.

古文：赐李晟永崇里第，女乐八人。
现代文：赐给李晟永崇里的府第，歌舞女子八人。
English: Eight singing and dancing girls were given the prefectural title of Li Yingyong.

古文：甲午，命宰臣诸将送晟入新赐第。教坊乐，京兆府供帐食馔，鼓吹导从，京城以为荣观。
现代文：二十五日，皇上命令宰辅大臣及诸将送李晟进入皇上所赐的府第，教坊音乐，京兆府供给帐幕食品，乐队仪仗队在前引导，京城以此作为荣耀的观瞻。
English: On the 25th, the emperor ordered the Vice-Minister and the generals to send Li Xi into the palace given by the emperor, the music of the classroom, the food of the tent provided by the Beijing Zhao Prefecture, the honor guard of the orchestra led in front, and the capital as a glorious view.

古文：八月辛丑，诏所司为赠太尉段秀实树碑立庙。
现代文：八月二日，皇上诏令有关官员替赠予太尉的段秀实树碑建立庙宇。
English: On August 2, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering officials to build a temple in place of the monument to Duan Xiu Si that was given to the captain.

古文：淄青节度使承前带陆海运、押新罗渤海两蕃等使，宜令李纳兼之。
现代文：淄青节度使承继先前带管陆运、海运、押送新罗、渤海两处蕃地等使节，应该让李纳兼任。
English: Following the previous envoys who took charge of land transportation, sea transportation, and escorting Silla and the Bohai Sea, Li Na should be allowed to serve concurrently.

古文：癸卯，加司徒、中书令、合川郡王李晟兼凤翔尹，充凤翔陇右节度等使、泾原四镇北庭行营兵马副元帅，改封西平郡王。河东保宁军节度使、太原尹、北都留守、检校司徒、平章事、北平郡王马燧为奉诚军晋绛慈隰节度行营兵马副元帅；以灵盐节度使、侍中、兼灵州大都督、楼烦郡王浑瑊为河中尹、晋绛节度使、河中同陕虢等州及管内行营兵马副元帅，改封咸宁郡王。
现代文：四日，加给司徒、中书令、合川郡王李晟兼凤翔尹、充任凤翔节度使、陇右节度使、泾原、四镇、北庭行营兵马副元帅，改封为西平郡王；河东保宁军节度使、太原尹、北都留守、检校司徒、平章事、北平郡王马燧为奉诚军、晋、绛、慈、隰节度行营兵马副元帅；以灵盐节度使、侍中、兼灵州大都督、楼烦郡王浑王咸为河中尹、晋绛节度使、河中、同、陕、虢等州及管内行营兵马副元帅，改封为咸宁郡王。
English: On the fourth day of the month, the following titles were added to Sito, Chushirei, the king of Hechuan County, Li Qian and Feng Xiangyin, and he was appointed as the deputy marshal of Fengxiang Festival, the deputy marshal of Shiyu Festival, the deputy marshal of Shihara, Shizhen and Beiting Campaign, and was renamed as the king of Xiping County; the deputy marshal of Hedong-Boryeong Military Festival, the deputy marshal of Taiyuan and Beitou Military Festival, the deputy marshal of Jingcheng Military Festival, the deputy marshal of Pingzhang Military Festival, the deputy marshal

古文：时方命瑊与马燧各出师讨怀光故也。
现代文：当时正命令浑王咸与马燧各个出军讨伐李怀光，所以才这样分封。
English: At that time, he was ordering Hun Wang Xian and Ma Jun to go out to fight against Li Huaguang, which is why they were divided in this way.

古文：甲辰，以金吾大将军杜希全为灵州大都督、西受降城天德军灵盐相夏节度营田等使；以同绛节度使唐朝臣为鄜坊丹延等州节度使；以保义军节度使、凤翔尹李楚琳为金吾大将军；以奉义军节度使、陇州刺史韦皋为左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：五日，以金吾大将军杜希全为灵州大都督、两受降城、天德军、灵、盐、丰、夏节度使、营田使；以同绛节度使唐朝臣为、坊、丹、延等州节度使；以保义军节度使、凤翔尹李楚琳为金吾大将军；以奉义军节度使、陇州刺史韦皋为左金吾卫大将军。
English: On the 5th, General Du Xichuan of Kingu was appointed as the Grand Governor of Lingshou, General Du Zhucheng of Zhucheng, General Tian Degu, General Ling, General Shi, General Feng, General Xia Jie and General Ying Tian; General Tong Tong Tong was appointed as the Governor of Tang, General Fang, General Dan and General Yan were appointed as the Governor of Lingshou; General Feng Xiang Yin Li Chu Lin was appointed as the Governor of Baoying; General Zuo Kingu Wei was appointed as the Governor of Fengyi and General Shi Wei was appointed as the Governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊申，以奉天行营节度戴休颜为左龙武统军。
现代文：九日，以奉天行营节度使戴休颜为左龙武统军。
English: On the 9th, Dai Xiuyan was chosen as the leader of the Left Dragon Military Unification Army.

古文：己酉，以延王玢、随王迅、西平长公主薨，废朝。
现代文：十日，由于延王玢、随王迅、西平长公主去世，皇上罢朝不上。
English: On the 10th, due to the death of Yan Wangtao, Sui Wang Xun, and Xiping the eldest princess, the emperor did not go to the court.

古文：己未，前湖州刺史袁高为给事中。
现代文：二十日，前任湖州刺史袁高为给事中。
English: On the 20th, Yuan Gao, the former governor of Huzhou, was placed under investigation.

古文：九月庚午，宗正卿李琬卒。
现代文：九月二日，宗正卿李琬去世。
English: On September 2nd, Zong Zhengqing Li Xi passed away.

古文：赐浑瑊大宁里第，并女乐五人，诏宰臣诸将赐乐馈赠如送李晟入第故事。
现代文：皇上赐给浑王咸大宁里府第以及歌舞女子五人，诏令宰相大臣诸将馈赠物品，赐给音乐队仪仗队像李晟进入永崇里新府第一样。
English: The emperor gave Hunwang Hamdan Ningli Prefecture and five singing and dancing girls, ordered the prime minister to give gifts to the ministers, and gave the honor guard to the music team like Li Qian entering Yongzhongli New Prefecture for the first time.

古文：壬午，赠故右仆射致仕李涵太子太保。
现代文：十四日，赠给已经辞职的右仆射李涵为太子太保。
English: On the 14th, he presented his right-hand man, who had already resigned, with the title of Crown Prince.

古文：乙亥，王武俊加检校司徒，李抱真检校司空，并赐实封五百户，赏破硃滔之功也。
现代文：十五日，王武俊加检校司徒的职衔，李抱真加检校司空的职衔，都赐给实际封户五百户，赏赐他们攻破朱滔的功劳。
English: On the 15th, Wang Wujun was awarded the title of inspector of the school, and Li Bozhen was awarded the empty title of inspector of the school, both of which were given to the 500 households that were actually sealed, rewarding them for their efforts to break through Zhu Tao.

古文：甲申，以前岭南节度使元琇为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：十六日，以前任岭南节度使元为户部侍郎、兼任度支使。
English: On the 16th, the former Lingnan Festival envoy became the household attendant and concurrently the envoy.

古文：丁亥，上顾谓宰臣曰： 今大盗虽除，时犹多难，宜广延纳，以达下情。
现代文：十九日，皇上环视着对宰相们说： 现在大贼虽然除去了，国家还是多难，应该广泛延揽容纳人才，以使下情能够上达。
English: On the 19th, the emperor looked around and said to the prime ministers: Although the big thieves have now been eliminated, the country is still very difficult. It should widely recruit and accommodate talents so that the situation can be improved.

古文：近日谏官都无论奏，自今每正衙及延英坐日常令朝臣三两人奏时政得失，庶有弘益也。 
现代文：近日谏官完全没有奏章议论朝政，从今天起每次在宣政殿召见大臣或在延英殿坐朝之日，常常要令两三个朝廷大臣当面上奏朝廷得失，也许可以有所广益。 
English: In recent days, eunuchs have not written anything at all to discuss the politics of the Imperial Court. From now on, every time a minister is summoned to the Palace of Proclamation or sits in the morning at the Palace of Yan Ying, two or three ministers of the Imperial Court will often be asked to report the gains and losses of the Imperial Court in person, which may be of great benefit.

古文：是秋，螟蝗蔽野，草木无遗。
现代文：这年秋天，蝗虫铺天盖地，草木全部吃光了。
English: This autumn, locusts covered the sky and ate up all the plants.

古文：冬十月乙丑，马燧收绛州。
现代文：冬十月二十七日，马燧收复了绛州。
English: In winter, on October 27th, Ma Wei recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，令中官窦文场、王希迁监左右神策军都知兵马使。
现代文：三十日，命令太监窦文场、王希迁监左右神策军都知兵马使。
English: On the 30th, he ordered the eunuchs Dou Wenchang and Wang Xi to relocate the overseers of the left and right divine policy armies to the capital.

古文：闰月庚午，诏： 朕临御万方，失于君道，兵革不息，于今五年。
现代文：闰十月三日，皇上诏令曰： 朕统治国家，治国无方，战争不停，至今已有五年。
English: On October 3rd, the Emperor issued a decree saying: "I have been ruling the country for five years. There is no way to govern the country, and the war has not stopped.

古文：闵众庶之劳，悔征伐之事。
现代文：朕怜悯百姓之劳苦，后悔征伐叛军之事。
English: I sympathize with the hardships of the people and regret that the rebel army was defeated.

古文：而李希烈蔑义弃德，反道虐人。
现代文：然而李希烈蔑视仁义抛弃道德，反人道而虐害人民。
English: However, Li Xili despised benevolence, abandoned morality, and abused the people against humanity.

古文：朕哀彼生灵，陷于涂炭。
现代文：朕同情生灵，陷至涂炭，只要能够生存拯救万物，朕不惜自身的委屈。
English: I sympathize with the living beings, trapped in the charcoal, as long as I can survive and save all things, I will not spare my own grievances.

古文：敬存拯物，不惮屈身，故于岁首特布新令，赦其殊死，待以至诚。使臣才及于郊圻，巨猾已闻其僭窃。酷烈滋甚，吞噬无厌。
现代文：所以在年初，特别发布新的命令，赦免李希烈的死罪，以至诚相待，皇上派遣的使臣才刚刚到达都邑的边界，已经听说大贼李希烈僭号称王，残酷暴烈越来越厉害，吞吃占领没有满足。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of the year, a new order was specially issued to pardon Li Xilai's capital crime, and to treat each other with utmost sincerity. The envoys sent by the emperor had just arrived at the border of the capital. They had already heard that the great thief Li Xilai had proclaimed himself king. The cruelty and violence were becoming more and more severe. They were not satisfied with the occupation.

古文：将相大臣，咸怀愤激，继陈章疏，固请讨除。
现代文：朝廷将相大臣，都胸怀愤慨，不断上奏章，坚决请求讨伐除去奸贼。
English: With indignation in their hearts, the imperial court, the prime minister, and the ministers of state kept sending petitions, resolutely requesting that the traitors be eliminated.

古文：朕以所行天诛，本去人害，兵戈既接，玉石难分。
现代文：朕以为所行讨伐是执行上天的诛伐，本来是要消灭奸贼，但兵戈战争爆发，玉石难分，好人奸贼都会受累。
English: I thought that the crusade was the execution of God's crusade. Originally, it was to eliminate the traitors, but the war broke out, the jade was inseparable, and good people and traitors would be affected.

古文：言念勋臣，横遭胁制，虽思改革，厥路无由。受污终身，衔冤没代，沦胥以逞，诚可痛伤。
现代文：又想到一些功臣，横遭胁迫即使想要改过，可是没有门路，终身接受侮辱，含着冤屈一代一代传下去，相互连累而受苦难以此来作为快乐，确实令人痛心。
English: I also thought of some heroes and heroines who were coerced, and even if they wanted to make amends, there was no way. They received insults for life, passed down from generation to generation with grievances, and suffered from each other. It was really distressing.

古文：岂孽自一夫，而毒流万姓，为人父母，宁不愧怀！
现代文：哪里知道一人作孽，却毒害万民，作为人民的父母，朕难道不惭愧感怀？
English: How do you know that one person commits evil and poisons all the people? As a parent of the people, am I not ashamed to feel concerned?

古文：宜令诸道节度使明行晓谕，罪止元凶，胁制之徒，一切不问。 
现代文：应该命令各道节度使明白晓谕，惩罚罪犯，罪恶只在元凶首恶，被胁从的人，一律不问。 
English: Each sect should be ordered to make clear and punish the criminals. The crime should only be committed by the culprits, and those who are coerced should not be questioned.

古文：唐朝臣奏收永乐县。
现代文：唐朝臣上奏说收复了永乐县。
English: A Tang courtier reported that Yongle County had been recovered.

古文：癸酉，以右龙武大将军李观为泾州刺史、泾原节度使。
现代文：五日，以右龙武大将军李观为泾州刺史、泾原节度使。
English: On the fifth day, the right dragon general Li Guan was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Zhangyuan.

古文：乙亥，诏宋亳、淄青、泽潞、河东、恆冀、幽、易定、魏博等八节度，螟蝗为害，蒸民饥馑，每节度赐米五万石，河阳、东畿各赐三万石，所司般运，于楚州分付。
现代文：七日，皇上诏令宋、亳、淄青、泽潞、河东、恒冀、幽、易定、魏博等八个节度地区，蝗虫为害，黎民百姓无粮无菜，每个节度地区赐米五万石，河阳、东畿各赐给三万石，有关部门搬运，到楚州分头交付。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the eight festival regions of Song, Min, Jiaqing, Zeyu, Hedong, Hengji, Yu, Yiding, and Weibo, saying that the locusts were harmful, and the people of Li had no grain or vegetables. Each festival region was given 50,000 koku of rice, and Heyang and Donggi were each given 30,000 koku. The relevant departments transported the rice and delivered it separately to Chuzhou.

古文：丁丑，李晟至泾州，诛节度使田希鉴，罪其杀冯河清也。
现代文：九日，李晟到泾州，杀了节度使田希鉴，因他杀了冯河清。
English: On the 9th, Li Zhe went to Zhangzhou and killed the commander of the festival, Tian Xijian, because he had killed Feng Heqing.

古文：戊子，希烈将李澄以滑州归国。
现代文：二十日，李希烈的将领李澄率滑州归附朝廷。
English: On the 20th, Li Shili's general, Li Cheng, led the march to annex Nanzhou to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，以李澄为汴州刺史、汴滑节度使，封武威郡王。
现代文：二十六日，以李澄为汴州刺史、汴滑节度使，封武威郡王。
English: On the 26th, Li Cheng was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou and the chief envoy of the Shengde Festival, and he was named the king of Wuwei County.

古文：神策行营节度使、检校尚书右仆射、冯翊郡王尚可孤卒。
现代文：神策行营节度使、检校尚书右仆射、冯翊郡王尚可孤去世。
English: Shen Zhaojing, the commander of the festival, the inspector of the school, Shang Shu, the right-hand man, and the king of Fengye County, Shang Keqiu, passed away.

古文：十一月癸卯，宋亳节度使刘洽与曲环破希烈之众于陈州，俘斩三万级，生擒贼将翟崇晖以献。
现代文：十一月六日，宋亳节度使刘洽与曲环在陈州大破李希烈之部众，俘虏和斩杀了三万人，活捉贼将翟崇晖来贡献。
English: On November 6th, the Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's

古文：戊午，刘洽大破希烈之众，擒其伪相郑贲等五人以献。
现代文：二十一日，刘洽大破李希烈的部众，活捉李希烈的伪相国郑贲等五人献给朝廷。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Chaozhong defeated Li Xilai's followers, captured Li Xilai's false consort Guo Zhengjun alive, and presented five people to the imperial court.

古文：希烈遁归蔡州，汴州平。
现代文：李希烈逃归蔡州，汴州平定。
English: Li Xili fled to Caizhou, and Zhangzhou was pacified.

古文：乙丑，宰相萧复三上章乞罢免，许之。
现代文：二十八日，宰相萧复三次上奏章请求罢免，皇上同意了他辞职。
English: On the 28th, Prime Minister Xiao Fu submitted his resignation to the emperor for the third time. The emperor agreed to his resignation.

古文：十二月乙亥，淮南节度使、检校司空、平章事陈少游卒。
现代文：十二月八日，淮南节度使、检校司空、平章事陈少游去世。
English: On December 8th, Chen Shaoyou, the envoy of Huainan Festival, the inspector of the school, and Ping Zhang died.

古文：赠萧定太子太师。
现代文：赠给萧定太子太师职衔。
English: He bestowed the title of Grand Master on Prince Xiao Ding.

古文：以寿州刺史张建封为濠寿都团练使。
现代文：以寿州刺史张建封为濠寿都团练使。
English: Zhang Jianfeng, the famous poet of Shoushu, was appointed as the training envoy of the Shudu Troupe.

古文：庚辰，以刑部侍郎杜亚为扬州长史、淮南节度使，戊子，以吏部郎中崔造为给事中。
现代文：十三日，以刑部侍郎杜亚为扬州长史、淮南节度使。二十一日，以吏部郎中崔造为给事中。
English: On the 13th, Yang Guozhi and Huainan Jiedu Envoy were led by Duya, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and on the 21st, Cui Zuo, the assistant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was in charge of the case.

古文：辛卯，以谏议大夫陆贽为中书舍人，依前翰林学士。
现代文：二十四日，以谏议大夫陆贽为中书舍人，依前仍任翰林学士。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Lu Wei, a doctor of Chinese medicine, was appointed as the dean of the school of Chinese medicine. He still holds the post of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：诏翰林学士朝服班序，宜同诸司官知制诰例。
现代文：诏令翰林学士穿的朝服和排班序列，应该与各司官的知制诰同列。
English: According to the edict, the imperial robes worn by the scholars of Hanlin and the order of the shift should be the same as that of the officials.

古文：贞元元年正月丁酉朔，御含元殿受朝贺，礼毕，宣制大赦天下，改元贞元。
现代文：贞元元年正月一日是朔日，皇上到含元殿受朝贺，礼毕，宣告命令大赦天下，改元为贞元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor went to the Hanyuan Hall to receive morning greetings, bowed, and announced the order to pardon the world and change the era to the Zhengyuan era.

古文：戊戌，大风雪，寒。
现代文：二日，刮大风下雪，十分寒冷。
English: On the second day, it was blowing a gale and snowing. It was very cold.

古文：去秋螟蝗，冬旱，至是雪，寒甚，民饥冻死者踣于路。
现代文：去年秋天蝗虫灾害，冬天干旱，到这时又下雪，非常寒冷，人民饿死的、冻死的很多。
English: Last autumn there were locust plagues, the winter was dry, and then it snowed again. It was very cold, and many people died of starvation or frostbite.

古文：丁未，以饶州刺史卢为福州刺史、福建允察使。
现代文：十一日，以饶州刺史卢为福州刺史、福建观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Raozhou Jinshulu was appointed as Fuzhou Jinshi and Fujian Observer.

古文：癸丑，始闻太子太师、鲁郡公颜真卿为希烈所害，追赠司徒，废朝五日，谥曰文忠，乃特授男頵、硕等官。
现代文：十七日，听说太子太师、鲁郡公颜真卿被李希烈所害，皇上追赠他为司徒，停止上朝五天，给予谥号曰文忠。仍旧特别授予他的儿子颜君页等人官职。
English: On the 17th, it was learned that the Prince and Grand Master of Lu County, Yan Zhengying, had been victimized by Li Xilai. The emperor posthumously granted him the title of tutor, suspended his accession to the throne for five days, and gave him the nickname Wen Zhong. He still specially awarded his son Yan Junzhi and others with official positions.

古文：壬戌，以吉州长史卢杞为澧州别驾，寻卒。
现代文：二十六日，以吉州长史卢杞为澧州别驾，不久去世。
English: On the 26th, the governor of Jiji, Sluang, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and he died soon after.

古文：二月丙寅朔，遣工部尚书贾耽、侍郎刘太真分往东都、两河宣慰。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，派遣工部尚书贾耽、侍郎刘太真分别往东都、两河安抚。
English: On February 1, the New Year's Day, the Ministry of Industry dispatched Shangshu Jia Tan and Liu Taizhen to the Dongdu and the two rivers respectively.

古文：河南、河北饥，米斗千钱。
现代文：河南、河北荒年，米一斗一千文钱。
English: In the barren years of Henan and Hebei, a barrel of rice fetched 1,000 yuan.

古文：癸未，李抱真、严震来朝。
现代文：十八日，李抱真、严震前来朝见。
English: On the 18th, Li Bozhen and Yan Zhen came to see him in the morning.

古文：寒食节，上与诸将击鞠于内殿。
现代文：寒食节，皇上与诸将在内殿踢皮球。
English: During the Cold Food Festival, the Emperor and Empress will kick a leather ball around in the inner hall.

古文：丙戌，以检校秘书监金良相为检校太尉、使持节、大都督、鸡林州刺史、宁海军使，袭封新罗王。
现代文：二十一日，以检校秘书监金良相为检校太尉、使持节、大都督、鸡林川刺史、宁海军使，袭位封为新罗王。
English: On the 21st, Jin Liangxiang, the inspector of the inspection of the school and the secretary of the inspection of the school, was appointed as the inspector of the school, the envoy of the festival, the grand governor, the chicken river, and the Ning naval envoy. He was crowned as the king of Silla.

古文：辛卯，大雨。
现代文：二十六日，下大雪。
English: On the 26th, it snowed heavily.

古文：三月丙申朔，以蜀州刺史韩洄为兵部侍郎，以汴东水陆运等使、左庶子包佶为刑部侍郎。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，以蜀州刺史韩洄为兵部侍郎，以汴东水陆运使、左庶子包佶为刑部侍郎。
English: The first day of March was the New Year's Day, with Han Zhao, the governor of Shuzhou, serving as the secretary of the military department, and Zhao Dongshui, the land and water transport minister, and Bao Zhao, his left-hand son, serving as the secretary of the criminal department.

古文：辛丑，户部侍郎、判度支元琇兼诸道水陆运使。
现代文：六日，户部侍郎、兼任度支使元兼任各道水运使和陆运使。
English: On the 6th, the former Household Attendant and Concurrent Provincial Chief of Staff assumed the position of both Water Transport Commissioner and Land Transport Commissioner.

古文：丁未，李希烈陷南阳，杀守将黄金岳。
现代文：十二日，李希烈攻陷南阳，杀了守将黄金岳。
English: On the twelfth day, Li Xilei invaded Nanyang and killed the commander of the garrison, Huang Rong Yue.

古文：甲寅，诏宰臣宣谕御史，今后上封弹奏，人自陈论，不得群署章疏。
现代文：十九日，皇上诏令宰相们宣告御史，今后上封章奏事或弹劾，人人自己陈述，不得集体签署上奏章。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the prime ministers to declare the imperial edict that in the future, everyone should make their own statement on the issue or impeachment of the imperial edict, and should not collectively sign the imperial edict.

古文：戊午，宣武帅刘洽检校司空；以汴滑节度使李澄普滑州刺史，充郑滑节度使。
现代文：二十三日，宣武帅刘洽任检校司空；以汴滑节度李澄为滑州刺史，充任郑、滑节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Cai, the commander of the Xuanwu army, was appointed as the inspector of the school; and Li Cheng, the governor of Guizhou, was appointed as the governor of Guizhou, and served as the governor of Zheng and Guizhou.

古文：加李纳司空。
现代文：加给李纳以司空衔。
English: Li Na was given the rank of flight attendant.

古文：夏四月乙丑朔，普王谊改封舒王。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日，普王李谊改封为舒王。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Pu Wang Liyi changed his title to Shu Wang.

古文：癸酉，鄂岳观察使李谦为洪州刺史、西都团练观察使。
现代文：九日，鄂岳观察使李谦为洪州刺史、江西都团练观察使。
English: On the 9th, Li Qian's observation of Mt. E made him an observer of Hongzhou's history-making and Jiangxi's regimental drill.

古文：江陵度支院失火，烧租赋钱谷百余万。
现代文：十三日，以江西节度使嗣曹王皋为江陵尹、荆南节度使。十五日，改滑州永平军名字曰 义成军 。
English: On the 13th, the successor Cao Wangtao was appointed as the Jiangling Yin and Jingnan Festival envoy on the occasion of the Jiangxi Festival. On the 15th, the name of the Yongping Army was changed to the Yicheng Army.

古文：时关东大饥，赋调不入，由是国用益窘。
现代文：江陵度支使院内失火，烧了租税钱谷一百多万。当时关东大灾荒，赋税不能收入，从此国家用度越发困难。
English: A fire broke out in the Gangneung Provincial Taxation Office, burning more than one million tax money. At that time, the Kanto region was hit by a severe drought, and tax revenue was not available. From then on, it became increasingly difficult for the state to spend tax money.

古文：关中饥民蒸蝗虫而食之。
现代文：关中闹荒的民众蒸蝗虫来吃。
English: Locusts are steamed and eaten by the rioting people in Guanzhong.

古文：汴帅刘洽赐名玄佐。
现代文：汴帅刘洽赐名玄佐。
English: General Liu Cai bestowed the title of Grand Marshal on him.

古文：五月癸卯，分命朝臣祷群神以祈雨。
现代文：五月九日，分头命朝廷大臣祈祷各种神灵以求雨。
English: On May 9th, the governor ordered the minister of the imperial court to pray to various gods for rain.

古文：蝗自海而至，飞蔽天，每下则草木及畜毛无复孑遗。
现代文：蝗虫从海边飞来，飞得遮蔽了天空，每次飞下地来，则草木及牲畜的毛就全部吃光，没有一点剩余。
English: The locusts come from the sea and cover the sky. Every time they come down to the ground, they eat all the grass and animal hair, leaving nothing behind.

古文：谷价腾踊。
现代文：谷价飞涨。
English: Grain prices are soaring.

古文：辛酉，以河阳都知兵马使雍希颜为河阳怀都团练使。
现代文：二十七日，以河阳都知兵马使雍希颜为河阳、怀州都团练使。
English: On the 27th, Yang Xiyan was sent to the capital of Huayang and the capital of Huai Zhou as a training envoy.

古文：六月丙子，以兵部侍郎韩洄为京兆尹。
现代文：六月十三日，以兵部侍郎韩洄为京兆尹。
English: On June 13th, Han Zheng, a waiter of the military department, was cast as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：辛巳，刘玄佐兼汴州史。
现代文：十八日，刘玄佐兼任汴州刺史。
English: On the 18th, Liu Xuanzu also served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬午，以工部尚书贾耽兼御史大夫、东都留守、都畿汝州防御刺使，以汴州刺史薛珏为河南尹。
现代文：十九日，以工部尚书贾耽兼任御史大夫、东都留守、都畿汝州防御使，以汴州刺史薛珏为河南尹。
English: On the 19th, Shang Shuxia Jia Tan of the Ministry of Industry was appointed as the chief historian, Dongdu was left behind, Dugi Ruzhou was appointed as the defense envoy, and Xue Qi of Zhangzhou was appointed as the Henan Yin.

古文：辛卯，以左金吾卫大将军韦皋检校户部尚书，兼成都尹、御史大夫、剑南西川节度观察使。
现代文：二十八日，以左金吾卫大将军韦皋任检校户部尚书，兼成都尹、御史大夫、剑南西川节度观察使。
English: On the 28th, Wei Wei, a general of the Left King Wu Wei, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of the school, and Chengdu Yin, the inspector of the history department, and Jianan Nishikawa festival observation envoy.

古文：以国子祭酒董晋为左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：以国子祭酒董晋为左金吾卫大将军。
English: Dong Jin, the national son's sacrificial drink, is depicted as the Great General of the Left Kingu Wei.

古文：幽州硃滔卒，赠司徒。
现代文：幽州朱滔去世，赠予司徒衔。
English: After the death of Yuzhou Zhu Tao, he was given the title of Shitong.

古文：秋七月甲午朔，河东节度使马燧自河中行营来朝。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，河东节度使马燧从河中行营前来朝见。
English: The first day of autumn in July is the New Year's Day, and the Hedong Festival makes the horse-drawn carriage come from the middle of the river to see the morning.

古文：庚子，大风拔树。
现代文：七日，大风拔起了树木。
English: On the seventh day, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：辛丑，以左散骑常侍李泌为陕州长史、陕虢都防御观察陆运使。
现代文：八日，以左散骑常侍李泌为陕州长史、陕虢都防御使、观察使、陆运使。
English: On the 8th, Li Xiu, the left horseman, was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi Province, the defense envoy, the observation envoy and the land transportation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：丙午，以镇海军、浙江东西道节度使韩滉检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、江淮转运使，以河南尹薛珏为河南水陆运使。
现代文：十三日，以镇海军、浙江东道、浙江西道节度使韩任检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、江淮转运使；以河南尹薛珏为河南水运使、陆运使。
English: On the 13th, with the town navy, the Zhejiang host, and the Zhejiang West Road Festival, Han Ren inspected the school, Shang Shuxu Zuopu shooting, Tongping Zhangji, and the Jianghuai transfer envoy; with Henan Yin Xueyun as the Henan water transport envoy and land transport envoy.

古文：戊申，马燧还行营。
现代文：十五日，马燧返回行营。
English: On the 15th, Ma Wei returned to the camp.

古文：辛亥，加检校工部尚书王士真为德棣都团练观察使。
现代文：十八日，加检校工部尚书王士真为德棣都团练观察使。
English: On the 18th, Shangshu Wang Shizhen from the inspection and inspection school's engineering department acted as an observation envoy for the team's training.

古文：壬子，以前涿州刺史、兼御史中丞刘怦为幽州长史、御史大夫、幽州卢龙节度副大使，兼知节度管理度支营田观察、押奚契丹经略卢龙等军使。
现代文：十九日，以前任涿州刺史、兼御史中丞刘怦为幽州长史、御史大夫、幽州、卢龙节度副大使，兼任主持节度管理使、度支使、营田使、观察使、押奚、契丹、经略、卢龙等军使。
English: On the 19th, Liu Wei, who previously served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou and also the vice-president of the history, became the vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history, vice-president of the history

古文：丁巳，以左散骑常侍柳浑为兵部侍郎。
现代文：二十四日，以左散骑常侍柳浑为兵部侍郎。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the left horseback rider and regular attendant, Liu Hun, was appointed as the attendant of the military department.

古文：除诸军将士外，应食粮人诸色用度，本司本使长官商量减罢，以救凶荒。
现代文：二十七日，以谏议大夫高参为中书舍人。关中蝗虫把草木都吃光了，干旱太严重，灞水将要枯竭，井大多没有水。
English: On the 27th, Dr. Gao San, a Chinese medicine doctor, was chosen as the person to deliver the books. The locusts in Guanzhong had eaten up all the plants and trees. The drought was so severe that the irrigation water was about to run out, and most of the wells had no water.

古文：俟岁丰登，即令复旧。 甲子，李怀光大将尉圭以焦篱堡降。
现代文：有关部门计算度支部门的钱、谷物，仅仅只能维持七十天。八月二日，李怀光的大将尉王圭率焦篱堡归降。
English: The relevant department calculated that the money and grain of the branch department could only last for seventy days.On August 2, Li Huaiguang's captain Wang Gui led the surrender of Jiaojie Fort.

古文：丁卯，怀光将徐庭光以长春宫兵六千人降。
现代文：五日，李怀光部将徐庭光率长春宫守兵六千人归降。
English: On the fifth day, Li Huaiguang's department surrendered 6,000 Changchun Palace guardsmen led by Xu Tingguang.

古文：甲戌，朔方大将牛名俊斩李怀光，傅首阙下。
现代文：十二日，朔方大将牛名俊斩了李怀光，把李怀光的首级传送到朝廷。
English: On the 12th, General Shuo Fang and General Niu Mingjun beheaded Li Huaiguang and sent the head of Li Huaiguang to the imperial court.

古文：马燧收复河中。
现代文：马燧收复河中。
English: The horse and buggy were recovered in the river.

古文：丁丑，始雨。
现代文：十五日，开始下雨。
English: On the 15th, it started to rain.

古文：己卯，诏： 朕诚信未著，抚御失宜，致使功臣陷于诛戮，谓之克敌，能不愧心！
现代文：十七日，皇上下诏曰 ：朕的诚信还不显明，安抚驾御臣下不得当，致使功臣陷于被诛杀，这叫做克敌致胜，朕难道能够不愧于心。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "My sincerity is not yet apparent. It is not proper to placate your vassal, causing the meritorious vassal to be killed. This is called defeating the enemy and achieving victory. Can I really be worthy of my heart?"

古文：然以怀光一家，在法无舍；念其昔居将相，尝寄腹心。罪虽挂于刑书，功已藏于王府。
现代文：然而因为李怀光一家，受法而无赦，但思念过去李怀光身居将相，朕曾寄托为心腹，他的罪状虽然记载在刑法上，但功劳已经藏在王府。
English: However, because Li Huaiguang and his family have been punished by the law, there is no pardon. However, I miss the past when Li Huaiguang was a general and I had him as a confidant. Although his crimes were recorded in the criminal law, his merits have been hidden in the royal palace.

古文：以干纪之迹，固合灭身；以赴难之勋，所宜有后。
现代文：由于他冒犯法纪的行为，本应将他消灭；凭借他奔赴国难的功勋，应该留有后人。
English: Because of his act of offending the legal discipline, he should have been eliminated; by virtue of his contribution to the national tragedy, he should have left posterity.

古文：宜以怀光男一人为嗣，赐庄宅各一区。
现代文：应该以李怀光儿子一人为后嗣，赐给庄园住宅一区。
English: Li Huaiguang's son should be the sole heir and be given the first section of the manor house.

古文：仍还怀光尸首，任其收葬。
现代文：仍然还给李怀光的尸体，任其家属收尸埋葬。
English: They still returned Li Huaiguang's body to his family for burial.

古文：怀光妻、诸兒女递送澧州，委李皋逐便安置，使得存立。
现代文：李怀光的妻子、各位儿女，解送到澧州，委任李皋逐个安置，使他们得以保存立足。
English: Li Huaiguang's wife and children were deported to Zhangzhou, and Li Yao was appointed to resettle them one by one, so that they could maintain a foothold.

古文：其出嫁女、诸亲并释放。
现代文：他的出嫁的女儿，所有亲人一律都释放。
English: His daughter, who is getting married, and all his relatives have been released.

古文：陷贼将士，一切并与洗雪。
现代文：陷入贼中的将士，一切都给予洗雪。
English: For soldiers caught up in the thievery, everything is given a wash of snow.

古文：河中、绛百姓，给复一年。
现代文：河中、绛州的百姓，免除徭役一年。
English: The people of Hechu and Ganzhou are exempted from corvee service for one year.

古文：北平王马燧、咸宁王浑瑊并与一子五品正员官。
现代文：北平王马燧、咸宁王浑王咸都给予他一个儿子五品正员官职。
English: The king of Beiping, Ma Jun, and the king of Xianning, Hun Wang Xian, both gave one of his sons a five-rank official post.

古文：燧可侍中，瑊可检校司空。
现代文：马燧可以任侍中，浑王咸可以任检校司空。
English: Ma Jun can serve as an attendant, and Hun Wang Xian can serve as a school inspector.

古文：骆元光、韩游瑰、唐朝臣各赐实封二百户，与一子六品正员官。
现代文：骆元光、韩游瑰、唐朝臣各人赐给实封二百户，给予一个儿子六品正员官。
English: Luo Yuanguang, Han Yuqui, and Tang courtier each gave two hundred households real estate, and gave one son six official posts.

古文：昨河中行营将士，共赐二十万端匹以充宴赏，放归本道。 
现代文：昨日河中行营将士，共赐给四十万端匹以充实宴会赏赐，放归回本道。 
English: A total of 400,000 horses were given to the soldiers who went camping in the river yesterday as a reward for a fulfilling banquet, and they were allowed to return to their original path.

古文：新除中书侍郎、平章事张延赏为尚书左仆射。
现代文：新任命的中书侍郎、平章事张延赏为尚书左仆射。
English: The newly-appointed Chusho waiter, Taira no Shosho, was rewarded with the title of Shosho's right-hand man.

古文：时宰相刘从一病，诏征延赏。
现代文：当时宰相刘从一患病，皇上下诏征召张延赏。
English: At that time, Premier Liu Zongyi fell ill, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to conscript Zhang Yanbo.

古文：李晟与延赏有隙，自凤翔上表论之。
现代文：李晟与张延赏有矛盾，从凤翔上表章论述张延赏不可任宰相。
English: Li Xi and Zhang Yanbo had a conflict, and the above chapter from Feng Xiang discussed that Zhang Yanbo could not be appointed as prime minister.

古文：延赏罢镇西川还，行至兴元，改授左仆射。
现代文：张延赏罢免了西川镇守职务回来，走到兴元，改授为左仆射。
English: Zhang Yanbo was removed from the post of town guard of Xichuan and returned to Xingyuan, where he was reclassified as a left-handed gunner.

古文：戊子，前河阳节度使、检校尚书左仆射、开阳郡王李芃卒。
现代文：二十六日，前河阳节度使、检校尚书左仆射、开阳郡王李艹凡去世。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Li Yifan, the former Kheyang Festival envoy, school inspector Shangshu Zuopu, and the king of Kheyang County, passed away.

古文：乙巳，上御正殿，策贤良方正、能直言极谏等三科举人。
现代文：九月七日，幽州节度使刘怦患病。请求以儿子刘济暂代主持幽州军事，皇上听从了。十一日，以牛名俊为丹州刺史。十三日，皇上驾到正殿，出策论考试贤良、方正、能直言极谏等三科的举人。
English: On September 7, the Yuzhou Festival made Liu Ye sick. He asked his son Liu Zi to temporarily preside over the Yuzhou military, and the emperor obeyed. On the 11th day, Niu Mingjun was appointed as the history of Danzhou. On the 13th day, the emperor drove to the main hall and set out to select people in three disciplines, including the examination of policy, virtuous, upright, and able to speak frankly.

古文：辛亥，宰相刘从一以疾辞任，授户部尚书。
现代文：十九日，宰相刘从一因病辞职，皇上授予户部尚书。
English: On the 19th, Prime Minister Liu resigned from his post due to illness, and the emperor awarded him the post of household secretary.

古文：庚申刘从一卒。
现代文：二十八日，刘从一去世。
English: On the 28th, Liu passed away.

古文：幽州节度使刘怦卒。
现代文：幽州节度使刘怦去世。
English: The Yuzhou Festival caused the death of Liu Xuan.

古文：辛巳，以权知幽州卢龙军府事刘济为幽州长史、兼御史大夫、幽州卢龙节度观察、押奚契丹两蕃等使。
现代文：以暂代主持幽州、卢龙军府事刘济为幽州长史、兼御史大夫、幽州、卢龙节度使、观察使、监管奚、契丹两个蕃地的节度使。
English: Liu Ji, who temporarily presided over Yuzhou and Lulong Military Prefecture, was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the governor of Lulong, the

古文：丙戌，浑瑊自河中来朝。
现代文：浑王咸从河中前来朝见。
English: King Ham of Hun came from the river to see the morning.

古文：十一月癸巳朔，山南严震来朝。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，山南严震前来朝见。
English: November 1st is the New Year's Day, Shannan earthquake came to see the morning.

古文：癸卯，上亲祀昊天上帝于圆丘。
现代文：十一日，皇上亲自在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝。
English: On the eleventh day, the Emperor himself went to the round mound to offer sacrifices to the God of Heaven.

古文：时河中浑瑊、泽潞李抱真、山南严震、同华骆元光、邠宁韩游瑰、鄜坊唐朝臣、奉诚康日知等大将侍祠。
现代文：当时河中浑王咸、泽潞李抱真、山南严震、同华骆元光、宁韩游瑰、坊唐朝臣、奉诚康日知等大将在祠堂侍候。
English: At that time, great generals such as Hun Wang Xian, Ze Yu Li Po Zhen, Shannan Yan Zhen, Tonghua Luo Yuan Guang, Ning Han Yu Gui, Bo Tang Ason, and Bong Cheng Kang Nichi waited in the ancestral hall.

古文：郊坛毕，还宫，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：皇上在郊坛上祭毕，回宫，驾到丹凤楼，大赦天下。
English: After the emperor was sacrificed on the altar in the suburbs, he returned to the palace, drove to the Danfeng Building, and pardoned the world.

古文：丁丑，诏文武常参官共赐钱七百万贯，以岁凶谷贵，衣冠窘乏故也。
现代文：诏令文武固定朝见皇帝的官员共赐钱七百万贯，因为荒年谷价昂贵，衣冠缺乏的原因。
English: Emperor Wenwu fixed the amount of money given by officials to the emperor at the imperial court at seven million yuan, because the price of grain was expensive in the barren years, which was the reason for the shortage of clothing and crowns.

古文：十二月戊辰，诏延英视事日，令常参官七人引对，陈时政得失。
现代文：十二月七日，皇上诏令，在延英殿办理朝政大事的那一天，命令定时入朝参见之官七人当面询问对答，陈述朝政得失。
English: On December 7th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering seven officials to enter the court regularly to ask questions and answer questions in person, and to report on the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：自是群官互进，有不达理道者，因多诋讦，不适事宜，上亦优容遣之。
现代文：从此，所有官员都上朝对答，有些陈述不大通达道理，因为中间有些是诋毁和揭发隐私的话，在说明事理上不大适宜，皇上也不怪罪。
English: From then on, all officials went to the imperial court to answer questions. Some of the statements were not very reasonable, because some of them were slanderous and revealed private information. It was not appropriate to explain the matter, and the emperor did not blame.

古文：二年春正月壬辰朔，以岁饥罢元会，礼也。
现代文：贞元二年正月一日是朔日，因为是荒年撤销元旦接见群臣的会，这是符合礼制的。
English: The first day of the first month of the second year of the Jeongwon era is the New Year's Day, because the New Year's Day meeting to receive the ministers was canceled in the year of famine, which is in line with the etiquette.

古文：丙申，诏以民饥，御膳之费减半，宫人月共粮米都一千五百石，飞龙马减半料；台郎御史与兼官出为畿赤令。
现代文：五日，皇上诏令，由于人民闹饥荒，皇上的膳食费用减少一半，宫人每月所供给的粮米总计一千五百石，皇宫里的飞龙马减少一半食料；尚书郎、御史及兼官都调出去任最高一等的赤县县令和畿县县令。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor decreed that, due to the people's famine, the emperor's meal expenses would be reduced by half, the grain and rice supplied by the palace people would total 1,500 koku per month, and the flying dragon horse in the imperial palace would reduce the food by half; Shang Shuro, Goshi and the officials were transferred to the highest-ranking Akagata and Kii prefectures.

古文：庚子，大雪，平地尺馀。
现代文：九日，下大雪，平地下了一尺多深的雪。
English: On the 9th, it snowed heavily, with snow more than a foot deep on the ground.

古文：壬寅，以散骑常侍刘滋、给事中崔造、中书舍人齐映并守本官，同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，以散骑常侍刘滋、给事中崔造、中书舍人齐映都兼任高官，即同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Zhi, the equestrian attendant, Cui Zou, the secretary, and Qi Ying, the secretary, were all appointed as high-ranking officials, that is, they were promoted to the same level as the secretary.

古文：门下侍郎、平章事卢翰为太子宾客。
现代文：门下侍郎、平章事卢翰为太子宾客。
English: His manservant, Taira Shoji Lukhan, is the prince's guest.

古文：丁未，以礼部侍郎鲍防为京兆尹，京兆尹韩洄为刑部侍郎，国子祭酒包佶知礼部贡举。
现代文：十三日，以礼部侍郎鲍防为京兆尹，京兆尹韩洄为刑部侍郎。国子祭酒包佶主持礼部科举考试。
English: On the 13th, Bao Bao, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed as the Keijo-yin, and Keijo-yin Hanju was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Punishments. The Kuniko-sai Sake Cup Holder presided over the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：以江陵少尹李复为容州刺史、本管经略使。
现代文：以江陵少尹李复为容州刺史，本管辖区内经略使。
English: With Jiangling Shao Yin Li Fu as the history of Rongzhou, this jurisdiction has been slightly affected.

古文：癸丑，御史大夫崔纵为吏部侍郎。
现代文：二十二日，以御史大夫崔纵为吏部侍郎。
English: On the 22nd, Choi Jong, the chief historian, was promoted to the position of secretary of the personnel department.

古文：谏议大夫、知制诰、翰林学士吉中孚为户部侍郎、判度支两税，元琇判诸道盐铁、榷酒。
现代文：谏议大夫、知制诰、翰林学士吉中孚为户部侍郎、兼任较低职务的度支使、两税使，元兼任较低官职即各道盐铁使、榷酒使。
English: Ji Zhongfu, who rose to the ranks of 议大夫, 知制, and 漢林学士, was a steward of the household department, and also served as a lower-ranking 度支使, a two-tax envoy, and also served as a lower-ranking official, that is, a salt and iron envoy for each province, and a wine envoy.

古文：诏宰相齐映判兵部，李勉判刑部，刘滋判吏部、礼部，崔造判户部、工部。
现代文：诏令宰相齐映兼任较低官职的兵部尚书，李勉兼任较低官职的刑部尚书，刘滋兼任较低官职的吏部和礼部尚书，崔造兼任较低官职的户部、工部尚书。
English: The edict ordered the prime minister, Qi Ying, to concurrently serve as a lower-ranking official in the Ministry of Military Affairs, Li Mian to concurrently serve as a lower-ranking official in the Ministry of Criminal Justice, Liu Zhi to concurrently serve as a lower-ranking official in the Ministry of Personnel and the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Cui Zuo to concurrently serve as a lower-ranking official in the Ministry of Household and the Ministry of Industry.

古文：甲寅，诏天下两税钱物，委本道观察使、刺史差人送上都；其先置诸道水陆转运使及度支巡院、江淮转运等使并停。
现代文：二十三日，皇上诏令天下将两税钱物，委任本道观察使、刺史差人送到上都。其他先前设置的各道水陆转运使及度支巡院使、江淮转运使等职都予以撤销。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the whole country to send the two-tax money to Shangdu, appointing the local observation envoy and the police officer to send the history to Shangdu. Other previously set up water and land transfer envoys and Doushi inspection envoys, Jianghuai transfer envoys and other positions were revoked.

古文：时崔造专政，改易钱谷，职事多隳败；造寻以忧病归第。
现代文：当时宰相崔造专制朝政，改变钱、谷粮的税收，赋税大多被破坏；崔造不久由于担忧害怕而归府第。
English: At that time, the prime minister, Cui Zuo, established an autocratic government, changed the taxes on money and grain, and most of the taxes were destroyed; Cui Zuo soon returned to the capital out of fear.

古文：二月癸亥，山南樊泽奏破希烈将杜文朝之众五千，擒文朝以献。
现代文：二月三日，山南樊泽上奏攻破李希烈的将领杜文朝之部众五千人，活捉杜文朝献给朝廷。
English: On February 3, Shannan Heze Shangso defeated 5,000 soldiers of Li Xili's general Duwen Dynasty, captured Duwen Dynasty alive and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，鹿入含元殿，卫士执之。
现代文：五日，鹿跑入含元殿，卫士将鹿捉住。
English: On the fifth day, the deer ran into the Hall of Han Yuan, and the guards caught the deer.

古文：甲戌，户部侍郎元琇为尚书左丞，京兆少尹李竦为户部侍郎、判盐铁榷酒。
现代文：十四日，户部侍郎元为尚书右丞，京兆少尹李竦为户部侍郎，兼任较低职务的盐铁榷酒使。
English: On the 14th, the head waiter of the household was Shang Shujing, and the head waiter of the household was Jing Zhao Shao Yin Lijun, who also served as a lower-ranking official of the Salt and Iron Brewing Company.

古文：三月壬寅，滑州李澄奏破希烈之众于郑州。
现代文：三月十三日，滑州李澄上奏曰在郑州攻破李希烈的部众。
English: On March 13th, Li Cheng from Slanting Province announced that he had defeated Li Xili's followers in Zhengzhou.

古文：乙巳，以司农卿李模为黔中观察使。
现代文：十六日，以司农卿李模为黔中观察使。
English: On the 16th, Li Miao, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, was appointed as the middle-level observer.

古文：四月丙寅，淮西李希烈为其牙将陈仙奇所，并诛其妻子，仙奇以淮西归顺。
现代文：四月七日，淮西叛贼李希烈被他的牙将陈仙奇用毒酒杀死，并且杀了他的妻儿，陈仙奇率淮西归顺。
English: On April 7, Huaxi renegade Li Xilai killed Chen Xianqi with poisoned wine with his fangs, and also killed his wife and child. Chen Xianqi led Huaxi to surrender.

古文：戊辰，以前黔中观察使元全柔为湖南观察使。
现代文：九日，以前任黔中观察使元全柔为湖南观察使。
English: On the 9th, Yuan Quanzhuo, the former middle school observation envoy, became the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：辛巳，陕州观察使李泌奏卢氏山冶出瑟瑟，请禁以充贡奉。
现代文：二十二日，陕州观察使李泌上奏说，卢氏山冶炼出了瑟瑟这珠宝，请求禁止出卖以充实进贡皇上。
English: On the 22nd, Li Xulong, the Shaanxi observation envoy, made a report saying that Mount Lu had smelted out these jewels and requested a ban on selling them in order to enrich the tribute to the emperor.

古文：上曰： 瑟瑟不产中土，有则与民共之，任人采取。 
现代文：皇上道 ：瑟瑟这珠宝不出产在中土，就与人民共同享有，可任人采取。 
English: The emperor said, "If these jewels are not produced in China, they will be shared with the people and can be taken by anyone.

古文：甲申，诏以淮西牙将陈仙奇为蔡州刺史、淮西节度使，都统刘玄佐、李澄、曲环、李皋、贾耽、张建封各与一子正员官，赏平淮、蔡功也。
现代文：二十五日，诏令以淮西牙将陈仙奇为蔡州刺史、淮西节度使，都统刘玄佐、李澄、曲环、李皋、贾耽、张建封各给予一个儿子的正员的官职，这是奖赏他们平定淮、蔡的功劳。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict named Chen Xianqi as the chief historian of Caizhou and the festival envoy of Caizhou, and appointed Liu Xuanzuo, Li Cheng, Qu Huan, Li Yu, Jia Tan, and Zhang Jianfeng as the official members of Caizhou and Caizhou respectively. This was a reward for their efforts to pacify Huai and Cai.

古文：丁未，以剑南东川节度使李叔明为太子太傅，以东川兵马使王叔邕梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
现代文：以剑南东川节度使李叔明为太子太傅，以东川兵马使王叔邕为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
English: Jiannan Dongchuan Sect sent Li Shuming as the Prince Taifu, and Dongchuan Terracotta Warriors and Horses sent Wang Shuxuan as the Azusa Sashishi and Jiannan Dongchuan Sect envoy.

古文：五月丙申，自癸巳大雨至于兹日，饥民俟夏麦将登，又此霖澍，人心甚恐，米复千钱。
现代文：五月八日，从五日大雨到今天八日，饥荒的百姓等待夏麦将收，又遇到这次大雨，人心恐慌，怕麦收受损，大米一斗又卖到一千钱。
English: On May 8th, from the five-day heavy rain to today's eighth day, the hungry people waited for the summer wheat harvest, and when they encountered this heavy rain, people panicked, fearing that the wheat harvest would be damaged, and rice was sold for a thousand dollars a bucket.

古文：丁酉，以伊西北庭节度留后杨袭古为北庭大都护、伊西北庭节度度支营田瀚海等使。
现代文：九日，以伊西、北庭节度留后杨袭古为北庭大都护、伊西、北庭节度使、度支使、营田使、瀚海使。
English: On the 9th, after staying in Issi and Beiting for the festival, Yang Heigu became the Beiting Daduo, Issi and Beiting festival envoy, Doushi envoy, Yingtan envoy, and Hanhai envoy.

古文：己亥，百僚请上复常膳；是时民久饥困，食新麦过多，死者甚众。
现代文：十一日，百官请皇上恢复正常膳食，不要减少一半。这时由于民众长久饥饿困乏，吃新麦子过多，死的人很多。
English: On the eleventh day, the centurion asked the emperor to restore the normal diet, not to reduce it by half. At this time, due to the people's long-term hunger and fatigue, they ate too much new wheat, and many people died.

古文：伊西北庭节度使李元忠卒，赠司空。
现代文：伊西、北庭节度使李元忠去世，赠予司空衔。
English: Yi Yuanzhong passed away at the Issi and Beiting festivals, and was given the title of the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛酉，大风雨，街陌水深数尺，人有溺死者。
现代文：十三日，刮大风下大雨，街道水深数尺，有淹死的人。
English: On the 13th, there was a strong wind and heavy rain, and the streets were several feet deep in water. Some people drowned.

古文：癸未，横海军使、沧州刺史程日华卒，以其子怀直权知军州事。
现代文：十五日，横海军使、沧州刺史程日华去世，用他的儿子程怀直暂时代理主持横海军、沧州事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the envoy of the Chinese Navy, the Cangzhou admiral Cheng Ronghua passed away, and his son Cheng Huai Zhi temporarily presided over the affairs of the Chinese Navy and Cangzhou.

古文：秋七月戊子，黔中观察使理所复在黔州。
现代文：秋七月一日，黔中观察使治所又重新设在黔州。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the observation and treatment center was re-established in Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，以开州别驾白志贞为果州刺史。
现代文：四日，以开州别驾白志贞为果州刺史。
English: On the fourth day, Bai Zhizhen, who was born in Kaizhou, was selected as the winner of the history of Guozhou.

古文：乙未，福建观察卢惎卒。
现代文：八日，福建观察使卢去世。
English: On the 8th, Fujian Observer reported that Lu passed away.

古文：己酉，以虔王谅为申光、随、蔡节度大使，以淮西兵马使吴少诚为蔡州刺史、知节度留后，加东都留守贾耽东都畿唐、汝、邓都防御观察使，以陇右行营节度使曲环为陈许节度使。
现代文：二十二日，以虔王李谅为申、光、随、蔡四州节度大使，以淮西兵马使吴少诚为蔡州刺史、主持节度留后，加东都留守贾耽东都畿、唐、汝，邓都防御观察使，以陇右行营节度使曲环为陈、许节度使。
English: On the 22nd, with Qian Wang Lijun as the ambassador of Shen, Guang, Su and Cai for the four-state festival, with Wu Shaocheng of the Huaxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses as the historian of Cai and presiding over the festival, with Jia Tan Dong Dugi, Tang, You and Dangdu Defense Observation Envoys for Katong, and with Qu Huan of the Shao Yu Camp Festival as the Chen and Xu festival envoys.

古文：戊午，以鄜坊节度唐朝臣为单于大都护、振武绥银节度使，右金吾大将军论惟明为鄜州刺史、鄜坊都防御观察使。
现代文：八月二日，以坊节度使唐朝臣为单于大都护、振武、绥银节度使，右金吾大将军论惟明为州刺史、坊都防御使、观察使。
English: On August 2nd, the Ifang Festival made the Tang courtier the sole envoy to the Dadu Protection, Zhenwu, and Jianyin Festivals, and the Right Kingu General On the other hand, he was clearly the state historian, the defense envoy to the capital, and the observation envoy.

古文：己巳，以金吾大将军董晋为尚书右丞。
现代文：十三日，以金吾大将军董晋为尚书右丞。
English: On the 13th, Kingu's grand general, Dong Jin, was appointed as his right-hand man.

古文：庚辰，右散骑常侍蒋沇卒。
现代文：二十四日，右散骑常侍蒋氵允去世。
English: On the 24th, Chiang Kai-shek's right-hand man Chiang Kai-shek passed away.

古文：丙戌，吐蕃寇泾、陇、邠、宁，诸镇守闭壁自固，京师戒严。
现代文：三十日，吐蕃入侵泾、陇？宁，所有镇守将领都关闭营垒固守自己，京师戒严。
English: On the 30th, Tubo invaded Shandong and Shandong-Ningxia, and all the garrison generals closed their camps to defend themselves, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：遣河中节度骆元光镇咸阳。
现代文：皇上派遣河中节度使骆元光镇守咸阳。
English: The emperor dispatched Kechu Seito to bring Luo Yuanguang to defend Xianyang.

古文：九月，诏： 左右金吾及十六卫将军，故事皆择勋臣，出镇方隅，入居侍从。
现代文：九月，皇上下诏曰： 左右金吾大将军及十六卫将军，过去的先例都是选择功勋之臣，出去便镇守一方，入朝就侍卫皇上。
English: In September, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "General Kingu and General Jurokui are on the left and right. In the past, the precedents were to select meritorious vassals, who would go out to guard the town and enter the court to guard the emperor.

古文：自天宝艰难之后，卫兵虽然废阙，将军品秩尤高。
现代文：自从天宝战争艰难之后，卫兵虽然残缺不全，然而将军官品却很高。
English: Since the hard times after the Tianbao War, although the guards are incomplete, the officers are of high quality.

古文：此诚文武勋臣出入转迁之地，宜增禄秩，以示优崇。
现代文：这个职务确实是文武功勋之臣出入升迁的地方，应该增加俸禄提高官职品位，以表示特别优厚。
English: This post is indeed a place for promotion and promotion of meritorious civil and military servants, and the salary should be increased to improve the quality of the post, so as to show that it is particularly generous.

古文：并宜加给料钱及随身粮课，仍举故事，置武班朝参，其廊下食亦宜加给。
现代文：并且应该增加官俸以外的料钱以及随身给予的粮食赋税，仍按过去的典章制度，设置武将班列朝参，散朝后赐给百官廊下食物也应该增加供给。
English: In addition, there should be an increase in material money other than the official salary, as well as the tax on the grain given with the person, still according to the previous award system, the establishment of the military commander's squad to attend the morning, and the food given to the hundred officials after the morning should also increase the supply.

古文：其十六卫各置上将军一人，秩从二品；左右金吾上将军，俸料次于六统军支给。
现代文：十六卫各设置上将军一人，官阶是从二品；左右金吾上将军，薪俸以外的料钱仅仅次于六统军来支付供给。
English: Each of the Sixteen Guards had one general at the top, and the ranks were from the second grade up; the left and right kings were generals at the top, and the money other than salaries was only second to the Sixth United Front to pay for supplies.

古文：欲求致理，必藉兼才，文武递迁，不全限隔。
现代文：想要求得治理好朝廷，必定要借助于文武兼有之才，文臣武将的递转升迁，不加以完全的限制。
English: If you want to demand good governance of the imperial court, you must rely on the talent of both literature and martial arts, the gradual promotion of scholars and generals, without complete restriction.

古文：自今内外文武缺官，于文武班中量才望相参叙用。
现代文：从今，内外文武缺官，在文武班列中根据才干，互相参照考校录用。
English: From now on, when there is a vacancy for an officer in the internal and external civil and military affairs, they will be recruited from the civil and military affairs squads according to their abilities, with mutual reference to the examination schools.

古文：仍依故事，于本卫量置卫兵。
现代文：仍旧依照先例，在本卫衡量设置卫兵。
English: Guards will continue to be stationed at the base in accordance with precedent.

古文：所司条件以闻。 
现代文：有关部门把条件报告给朕知道。 
English: The relevant departments have reported the conditions to us.

古文：丁酉，义成军节度、郑滑观察等使、检校尚书左仆射、滑州刺史、武威郡王李澄卒。
现代文：十一日，义成军节度使、郑、滑观察使、检校尚书左仆射、滑州刺史、武威郡王李澄去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Yicheng Army's festival envoy, Zheng, the Nanning observation envoy, the school inspector Shangshu Zuopu shot, the Nanning governor, and the Wuwei County king Li Cheng passed away.

古文：以东都畿、唐、邓、汝等防御观察使贾耽检校尚书右仆射，兼滑州刺史、义成军节度、郑滑等州观察使。
现代文：以东都畿、唐、邓、汝等防御使、观察使贾耽任检校尚书右仆射，兼滑州刺史、义成军节度使、郑、滑等州观察使。
English: Jia Tan served as the defense envoy and observation envoy of Dongduk, Tang, Deng, and Ru, as well as the inspector of schools, Shangshu, Yu, and Jia, and also served as the governor of Nanning, the military governor of Yicheng, and the state observation envoy of Zheng and Nanning.

古文：戊戌，以吏部侍郎崔纵检校礼部尚书、东都留守、东都畿唐邓汝防御观察使。
现代文：十二日，以吏部侍郎崔纵任检校礼部尚书、东都留守、东都畿、唐、邓、汝州防御使、观察使。
English: On the 12th, with the attendant of the personnel department, Cui Zhongren, he was appointed as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the etiquette department, the inspector of Dongdu, the inspector of Dongdu, the inspector of the defense and the inspector of the defense and observation of Dongdu, Tang, Deng and Ruzhou.

古文：己亥，敕左右卫上将军、大将军并于卫内宿。
现代文：十三日，命令左右卫上将军、大将军都在官衙内住宿。
English: On the 13th, the left and right guards were ordered to stay in the officers' quarters.

古文：乙巳，吐蕃寇好畤，京师戒严。
现代文：十四日，吐蕃入侵好田寺，京师戒严。
English: On the 14th, Tu Wei invaded Kota-ji Temple, and martial law was declared in Kyoto.

古文：李晟部将王佖击吐蕃于汧阳城，败其中军。
现代文：李晟部将王亻必在汗干阳城攻击吐蕃，打败了他们的中军。
English: Li Xibe led Wang Bingbi to attack the Tuoba in Khan Ganyang City, defeating their Chinese army.

古文：辛亥，寇凤翔，李晟出师御之，一夕而退。
现代文：二十日，吐蕃入侵凤翔，李晟出兵抵御他们，只一晚上吐蕃便退兵了。
English: On the 20th, Tubo invaded Fengxiang. Li Tong sent troops to defend against them, but Tubo retreated in one night.

古文：冬十月壬午，奏关内、河中，河南等道秋夏两税、青苗等钱，悉折纳粟麦，兼加估收籴以便民，从之。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，有关部门上奏，关内、河中、河南等道秋税、夏税两税钱及青苗税钱，全部折算成粟、麦来收纳，而且估价收购粮食以方便民众，皇上同意了。
English: On the 26th day of October in winter, the relevant departments reported that the autumn tax, summer tax and seedling tax of Guanai, Henan and other provinces should all be converted into millet and wheat for collection, and the grain should be purchased at an estimated price for the convenience of the people. The emperor agreed.

古文：是月，李晟破吐蕃摧沙堡。
现代文：这月，李晟攻破吐蕃摧沙堡。
English: This month, Li Yu broke through the Tu Yu sand castle.

古文：十一月甲午，册淑妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：十一月八日，皇上册封淑妃王氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th of November, the emperor made Princess Sukui the empress.

古文：乙未，两浙节度使韩滉来朝。
现代文：九日，两浙节度使韩前来朝见。
English: On the 9th, the two Zhe festivals made Han come to see the morning.

古文：丁酉，册皇后王氏。是日后崩，谥曰昭德。
现代文：十一日，册封皇后王氏；这天皇后去世，谥号为昭德。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Empress Wang was enthroned; this empress passed away, and her posthumous name was Zhao De.

古文：辛丑，吐蕃陷盐州。
现代文：十五日，吐蕃攻陷盐州。
English: On the 16th, the Tubo army broke through Yanzhou.

古文：壬寅，刘玄佐、曲环、鄂岳卢玄卿并来朝。
现代文：十六日，刘玄佐、曲环、鄂岳卢玄卿都来朝见。
English: On the 16th, Liu Xuanzuo, Qu Huan, and E Yue Lu Xuanqing all came to see the emperor.

古文：十二月丁巳，以韩滉兼度支、诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：十二月二日，以韩兼任度支使，各道盐铁转运使。
English: On December 2nd, Han was appointed as the vice-envoy, and the salt and iron transshipment envoys of each province were appointed.

古文：吐蕃陷夏州，又陷银州。
现代文：吐蕃攻陷夏州，又攻陷银州。
English: Tubo invaded Xiazhou and invaded Yinzhou.

古文：庚申，以给事中、同平章事崔造为右庶子。
现代文：五日，以给事中、同平章事崔造为右庶子。
English: On the fifth day, the middle child, Tongping Zhangji Cui Zong, was born as the right child.

古文：贬尚书右丞、度支元琇为雷州司户，为韩滉诬奏，人以为非罪，谏官屡论之。
现代文：贬尚书右丞、度支使元为雷州司户，因为被韩诬告有罪，人们认为他无罪，谏官多次为他陈述辩解。
English: Shang Shuyuan and Du Shiyuan were demoted to Leizhou Sido, because they were falsely accused of guilt by Han, people thought he was innocent, and eunuchs repeatedly defended him.

古文：辛未，凤翔李晟来朝。
现代文：十月六日，凤翔李晟前来朝拜。
English: On October 6th, Fengxiang Lijun came to worship.

古文：壬申，京城畿内榷酒，每斗榷钱一百五十文，蠲酒户差役，从度支奏也。
现代文：二十七日，京城内、京城附近酒类官卖，每斗酒卖一百五十文钱，免去造酒户的官府差役，这是听从度支使的上奏请求。
English: On the 27th, liquor was officially sold in and around the capital, with a price of 150 mon per barrel, and liquor makers were exempted from government service. This was in response to the request of the imperial envoy.

古文：三年春正月丙戌朔。
现代文：贞元三年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the third year of the Zhengyuan is the new year's day.

古文：壬寅，以左仆射张延赏同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，以左仆射张延赏任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhang Yanbo, a left-hand servant, was awarded the prize of being allowed to write a letter to the emperor.

古文：乙巳，礼部侍郎薛播卒。
现代文：二十日，礼部侍郎薛播去世。
English: On the 20th, Xue Biao, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, passed away.

古文：辛亥，以户部侍郎李竦为鄂岳观察使。
现代文：二十六日，以户部侍郎李竦为鄂岳观察使。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he appointed the head waiter of the household department, Li Jun, as the observation envoy of Mount Etu.

古文：壬子，以兵部侍郎柳浑同中书门下平章事；刘滋守本官，罢知政事；中书舍人、平章事齐映贬夔州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，以兵部侍郎柳浑任同中书门下平章事；刘滋仍然担任散骑侍郎，罢免知政事；中书舍人、平章事齐映贬为夔州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Liu Hun, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the second secretary of the middle school; Liu Shih, still serving as a horseback riding attendant, was dismissed from the post of chancellor; the second secretary of the middle school and the second secretary of the middle school were relegated to the post of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊寅，度支盐铁转运使、镇海军节度、浙江东西道观察等使、检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、晋国公韩滉卒，赠太傅。
现代文：二月二十三日，度支使、盐铁转运使、镇海军节度使、浙江东道、西道观察使、检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、晋国公韩去世，赠予太尉衔。
English: On February 23rd, the envoys of the State Council, the Salt and Iron Transportation Commission, the Town and Navy Festival, the Zhejiang Host, the West Road Observation Commission, the inspection of the school of Zuopuzha, the book gate of the same school, and Jin Guoguanghan passed away, and he was awarded the rank of captain.

古文：以果州刺史白志贞为润州刺史、兼御史大夫、浙西观察使，宣州刺史皇甫政为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
现代文：以果州刺史白志贞为润州刺史、兼御史大夫、浙西观察使，宣州刺史皇甫政为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
English: Baizhizhen, a historian from Guozhou, served as a historian from Renzhou, concurrently serving as a doctor of history and an observer from western Zhejiang, while Emperor Fuzheng, a historian from Xuanzhou, served as a historian from Yuezhou and an observer from eastern Zhejiang.

古文：三月庚寅，诏今年朝集使宜停。
现代文：三月六日，皇上诏令今年朝集使应该撤销。
English: On March 6, the emperor decreed that this year's imperial envoy should be revoked.

古文：丙午，凤翔陇右元帅副兵马使吴诜为福建观察使，凤翔都虞候邢君牙为凤翔尹、本府团练使。
现代文：二十二日，凤翔、陇右元帅副兵马使吴诜为福建观察使，凤翔都虞候邢君牙为凤翔尹、本府团练使。
English: On the 22nd, Feng Xiang and Vice-Marshal Zou Yu sent Wu Hao as the Fujian observation envoy, and Feng Xiang, Du Yu, Zou Junya as the Feng Xiang Yin and the local regimental training envoy.

古文：丁未，制凤翔陇右泾原四镇北庭管内兵马副元帅、凤翔陇右道节度使、奉天靖难功臣、司徒兼中书令、凤翔尹、上柱国、西平郡王、食实封一千五百户李晟可太尉兼中书令。
现代文：二十三日，皇上下令，令凤翔、陇右、泾原、四镇、北庭管内兵马副元帅、凤翔、陇右节度使、奉天靖难功臣、司徒兼中书令、凤翔尹、上柱国、西平郡王、食实封一千五百户李晟可任太尉兼中书令。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued orders to Feng Xiang, Xiang Yu, Xiang Yuan, Si Zhen, Bei Ting as deputy marshal of the army and cavalry, to Feng Xiang, Xiang Yu as delegate of the festival, to Feng Tianjing as meritorious subject, to Feng Xiang Yin, Shangzhu Guo, Xiping Guo, and to 1,500 households in Zhishifu as lieutenant and senior secretary.

古文：庚戌，以晟甥元帅兵马使王佖为右威卫上将军。
现代文：二十六日，以李晟外甥元帅兵马使王亻必为右威卫上将军。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, with Li Wei's nephew, Marshal Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Wang Weiwei was promoted to General of the Right Division of Wei.

古文：辛亥，河东马燧来朝。
现代文：二十七日，河东马燧前来朝见。
English: On the 27th, Hedong Maqi came to see the emperor.

古文：时蕃相尚结赞使大将论颊热卑辞厚意告马燧，请两国同盟和好，上疑其不诚，不允，故燧自将论颊热入朝，盛言蕃相请盟，可以保信。
现代文：当时吐蕃宰相尚结赞派大将论颊热用卑下言辞以深厚情意告诉马燧，请求两国同盟友好，皇上怀疑他不诚心，不同意，所以马燧亲自率领论颊热入朝，极力说吐蕃请求结为同盟，可以保证讲信用。
English: At that time, the prime minister of Tubo, Shang Jie Zan, sent the general Tong Jian to tell Ma Jie with deep feelings, requesting the alliance and friendship between the two countries. The emperor suspected that he was not sincere and did not agree. Therefore, Ma Jie personally led Tong Jian to the DPRK, and insisted that Tubo's request to form an alliance could ensure good faith.

古文：上乃从之，许盟于平凉。
现代文：皇上听从了，答应吐蕃在平凉定同盟。
English: The emperor obeyed and promised to make an alliance with Tubo in Pingliang.

古文：夏四月庚申，诏： 蕃寇虽退，疆理犹虞，安边之策，必有良算，宜令常参官各陈边事，随所见封进以闻。 
现代文：夏四月六日，皇上诏令： 吐蕃入寇虽然败退，边疆还是令人忧虑、安定边疆的策略，必有良谋计策，应该命令常时朝见之官各人陈述边疆之事，随时所见封奏章使朕听闻。 
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor issued a decree: Although the invasion of Tibet by the invaders has been defeated, the frontier is still worrying, and the strategy of stabilizing the frontier must have a good plan and strategy. It is necessary to order the officials who see the emperor at all times to report on the frontier, and to listen to what they see at any time.

古文：入蕃使崔翰奏于蕃中诱问给役者，求蕃国人马真数，云凡五万九千余人，马八万六千匹，可战者仅三万人，余悉老幼。
现代文：进入吐蕃使者崔翰在吐蕃地区引诱询问差役的人，求得吐蕃国人马真正数字，云：总计五万九千余人，马八万六千匹，可以作战的仅仅三万人，其余都是老人小孩。
English: The envoy Cui Han, who entered Tubo, lured and interrogated officials in the Tubo area to find out the true number of Tubo people and horses, the cloud: a total of more than fifty-nine thousand people, eighty-six thousand horses, only thirty thousand people who can fight, the rest are old people and children.

古文：庚午，御麟德殿，试《定难乐曲》，马燧所献。
现代文：十六日，皇上驾到麟德殿，试用马燧所献《定难乐曲》。
English: On the 16th, the emperor drove to the Linde Palace to try out the "Fixing Difficult Music" presented by Ma Xuan.

古文：五月丁亥，以侍中浑瑊为吐蕃清水会盟使，兵部尚书崔汉衡副之；瑊与骆元光率师二万往会盟所。
现代文：五月四日，以侍中浑王咸为吐蕃清水会盟使，兵部尚书崔汉衡为副；浑王咸与骆元光率军队二万前往到定盟处所相会。
English: On May 4th, with the attendant Hun Wang Xian as the first envoy of the Tuyun Clear Water Association, and the military secretary Cui Hanheng as the deputy; Hun Wang Xian and Luo Yuan's army of twenty thousand went to meet at the location of the alliance.

古文：丁酉，以左丞暢悦为湖南观察使。
现代文：十四日，以左丞畅悦为湖南观察使。
English: On the 14th, Changyue Zuo was appointed as the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：戊戌，左右神策、左右龙武各加将军一员。
现代文：十五日，左右神策军、左右龙武军各加将军一名。
English: On the fifteenth day, one general each from the Left and Right Divisions and the Left and Right Armies of the Dragon Army.

古文：丙午，以岭南节度使杜佑为尚书右丞，以容管经略使李复为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：二十三日，以岭南节度使杜佑为尚书右丞，以容管经略使李复为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 23rd, with the Lingnan Festival, Du You was appointed as Shang Shu Rongzheng, and with the Kangguan Jingli, Li Fu was appointed as Guangzhou Shishi and Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：蕃相尚结赞请改会盟之所于原州之土梨树，神策将马有麟奏： 土梨地多险厄，恐蕃军隐伏；不如平凉川，其地坦平，又近泾州。 
现代文：吐蕃相国尚结赞请求改变会盟的处所到原州之土梨树，神策将马有麟上奏： 土梨地方很多险要，恐怕吐蕃军埋伏，不如平凉川，土地平坦，又靠近泾州。 
English: Tubo's neighboring country, Shang Jie Zhan, requested that the location of the alliance be changed to the soil pear tree in Wonju, and Ma Yuling made a brilliant plan: There are many dangerous places in Tonju, and I am afraid that the Tubo army will ambush, not as good as Pingliang River, the land is flat, and it is close to Ganzhou.

古文：乃改盟于平凉川。
现代文：于是改变定盟地点到平凉川。
English: As a result, the location of the alliance was changed to Pingliang River.

古文：十月，东都、河南、江陵、汴州、扬州大水，漂民庐舍。
现代文：这一月，东都、河南、江陵、汴州、扬州大水，冲漂走了人民房屋。
English: This month, floods in Dongdu, Henan, Jiangling, Zhangzhou and Yangzhou swept away people's houses.

古文：闰月乙卯，以国子司业裴胄为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：闰五月三日，以国子司业裴胄为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the third day of the leap month of May, the Secretary of the State Council, Ye Pei Jun, was appointed as the historian of Tanzhou and the observation envoy of Hunan.

古文：戊午，陕虢李泌献瑞麦，一茎五穗。
现代文：六日，陕虢李泌贡献吉祥之麦，一根茎五个穗。
English: On the sixth day, Shaanxi Lixu contributed auspicious wheat, one stem sprouted five ears.

古文：庚申，诏省州县官员，上州留上佐、录事、参军、司户、司士各一员，中州上佐、录事、参军、司户、司兵各一员，下州上佐、录事、司户各一员，京兆河南两府司录、判司及四赤丞、簿、尉量留一半，诸赤畿县留令、丞、尉各一员。
现代文：八日，皇上诏令削减州县官员，上等州留高级辅佐、录事、参军、司户、司兵各一名；下等州留上佐、录事、司户各一名，京兆、河南两府司录、判司及四个赤丞、四个赤簿、四个赤尉根据数量留一半，各赤畿、赤县留令、丞、尉各一名。
English: On the 8th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to reduce the number of prefectural and county officials, with the higher-ranking prefectural officials to retain one senior assistant, record keeper, conscript, steward, and sergeant; the lower-ranking prefectural officials to retain one senior assistant, record keeper, and steward; the prefectural officials to retain one Keizhao, two Henan prefectures' record keeper, judge, and four red joeys, four red books, and four red lieutenants to retain half of their number; and each of the prefectural officials to retain one akagii, red county official, joe, and

古文：时宰相张延赏请减官收俸料以助军讨吐蕃故也。
现代文：这是由于当时宰相张延赏请求减少官员，收取他们的俸料钱以助军队讨伐吐蕃的原因。
English: This was due to the then Prime Minister Zhang Yanbo's request to reduce the number of officials and collect their salary money to help the army fight against the Tibetan rebels.

古文：壬戌，日有黑晕，自辰及申方散。
现代文：十日，太阳有黑色圈，从上午七点到九点直到下午十五点到十七点才散去。
English: On the 10th, the sun has a black circle, from seven to nine o'clock in the morning until fifteen to seventeen o'clock in the afternoon.

古文：癸亥，以荆南节度使、检校户部尚书、嗣曹王皋为襄州刺史、山南东道节度、襄邓郢安随唐等州观察使，以山南东道节度使樊泽为江陵尹、荆南节度使。
现代文：十一日，以荆南节度使、检校户部尚书、嗣曹王皋为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使、襄、邓、郢、安、随、唐等州观察使，以山南东道节度使樊泽为江陵尹、荆南节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, with Jingnan as the festival envoy, Shangshu, the head of the inspection department of the school, and Cao Wangtao, the heir of Cao Wangtao, as the history of Xiangzhou, with Shannan as the host of the festival, with Xiang, Deng, Shao, An, Sui, Tang and other states as the observation envoys, with Shannan as the host of the festival, with Heze as the Jiangling Yin, and Jingnan as the festival envoy.

古文：辛未，侍中浑瑊与吐蕃宰相尚结赞同盟于平凉，为蕃兵所劫，瑊狼狈遁而获免，崔汉衡已下将吏陷没者六十余人。
现代文：十九日，侍中浑王咸与吐蕃宰相尚结赞在平凉结盟时，被吐蕃兵所劫持，浑王咸狼狈而逃才脱险，从兵部尚书崔汉衡以下的将吏陷于贼手者六十多人。
English: On the 19th, when Hun Wang Ham, a chamberlain, and the prime minister of Tubo, Shang Jizan, made an alliance in Pingliang, they were kidnapped by Tubo soldiers. Hun Wang Ham panicked and escaped. More than 60 officers from the military department, including Shang Shu Cui Han Heng, were trapped by the thieves.

古文：癸酉，遣使赍书以让结赞，蕃界不受。
现代文：二十一日，派遣使者拿书信去谴责尚结赞，吐蕃边界不接受汉使者。
English: On the twenty-first day, an envoy was sent with a letter to condemn Shang Jizan, and the Han envoys were not accepted at the border of Tibet.

古文：戊寅，枉矢坠于虚危。辛巳，以少府监卢岳为陕虢观察使。
现代文：二十九日，以少府监卢岳为陕虢观察使。
English: On the 29th, Lu Yue, the minor prefectural supervisor, was appointed as the Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：是月，太白昼见，凡四十余日。六月丙戌，以检校司徒、侍中马燧为司徒兼侍中，以赞吐蕃之盟失策而罢兵柄也。以陕虢观察使李泌为中书侍郎、平章事，以左龙武将军李自良为检校工部尚书、太原尹、河东节度使。乙巳，浙西观察使白志贞卒。
现代文：这一月，以检校司徒、侍中马燧为司徒兼侍中，因他倡议与吐蕃定盟的失策所以罢免他的兵权。以陕虢观察使李泌为中书侍郎、平章事，以左龙武将军李自良为检校工部尚书、太原尹、河东节度使。二十四日，浙西观察使白志贞去世。
English: In this month, Ma Jun, the inspector of the school and the attendant, was appointed as the inspector and the attendant, and his military power was dismissed because of the failure of his initiative to form an alliance with Tubo. Li Xiu, the inspector of Shaanxi Province, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and Ping Zhangji, the inspector of the middle school, and Li Ziliang, the general of Zalongwu, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and Shang Shu, Taiyuan Yin and Hedong Jiedu, the inspector of the school. On the 24th, Bai Zhizhen, the inspector of

古文：是月，吐蕃驱盐、夏二州居民，焚其州城而去。
现代文：这月，吐蕃驱赶走了盐、夏二州居民，焚烧了二州城池而去。
English: This month, Tubo drove away the residents of the two states of salt and summer, and burned the cities and villages of the two states.

古文：七月甲寅，浑瑊自盟所来，素服待罪，释之。
现代文：七月三日，浑王咸从定盟的处所而来，身穿白色素服准备受处罚，皇上释放了他。
English: On July 3rd, Hun Wang Xian came from the location of the alliance, dressed in a white plainclothes to be punished, and the emperor released him.

古文：乙卯，诏： 朕顷缘兴师备边，资用不给，遂权议减官，以务集事。
现代文：四日，皇上下诏曰： 朕近来由于发动军队防备边疆，物资用度不足，于是暂时议定减少官员，以务必完成边防大任。
English: On the 4th, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: "Recently, due to the fact that we have mobilized troops to guard the border, the amount of materials used is insufficient, so we have temporarily agreed to reduce the number of officials in order to complete the border defense mission.

古文：近闻授官者皆已随牒之任，扶老携幼，尽室而行。
现代文：近来听说授予官职者已经随着任命文书上任，扶老携幼，全家启程。
English: Recently, I heard that those who have been granted official positions have taken office with the appointment documents, helping the elderly with their children, and the whole family has set off.

古文：俸禄未请，归还无所，衣冠之弊，流寓何依？
现代文：薪俸没有得到，归还则无所依靠，衣冠文人，何处可以寄托安身？
English: If you don't get your salary, you can't rely on it being returned. As a writer, where can you put your trust?

古文：其先敕所减官员，并宜仍旧。 
现代文：现在我命令，先前命令所减的官员，都官复原职。 
English: Now I order that the officials who were reduced by the previous order, the metropolitan officials, be reinstated.

古文：初既减员，内外咨怨张延赏。李泌初入相，乃讽官论之，乃下此诏。
现代文：当初既已实行减员，朝廷内外都怨恨张延赏，李泌刚刚入朝为宰相，乃暗示谏官议论陈述此事，皇上这才下这个诏书。
English: At first, since the reduction of personnel had already been implemented, both inside and outside the imperial court resented Zhang Yanbo, and Li Xiu had just entered the court as prime minister, suggesting that the eunuchs discuss and state the matter, the emperor only issued this edict.

古文：丙辰，平凉陷蕃官员崔汉衡已下各与一子正员官。
现代文：五日，在平凉陷入吐蕃的官员，从兵部尚书崔汉衡以下各赐给他们的一个儿子以正员官。
English: On the fifth day, the officials who had fallen into the cold in Tubo were each given a son as a full-fledged officer from the following military department, Shangshu Cui Hanheng.

古文：以左羽林大将军韩潭为夏州刺史、夏绥银等州节度使。
现代文：以左羽林大将军韩潭为夏州刺史、夏、绥、银等州节度使。
English: With General Han Tan of Zuo Yulin as the envoy of Xia Zhi Shi, Xia, Handan, Yin and other states.

古文：壬申，赐骆元光姓曰李元谅。
现代文：二十一日，赐骆元光姓曰李元凉。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, he was given the surname Li Yuanliang.

古文：尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事张延赏薨，赠太保。
现代文：尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事张延赏去世，赠给太保衔。
English: Shangshu Zuofu shot, with the middle of the book under the door of the chapter Zhang Yanbo died, presented to the title of Tai Bao.

古文：癸酉，复置吏部小选。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：八月辛巳朔，日有蚀之。丁亥，陷蕃兵部尚书崔汉衡得还。己丑，以兵部侍郎、平章事柳浑为散骑常侍，罢知政事。
现代文：七日，陷落在吐蕃的兵部尚书崔汉衡得以返回。九日，以兵部侍郎、平章事柳浑为散骑常侍，罢免知政事。
English: On the seventh day, Cui Hanheng, a military attaché who had been trapped in Tubo, was able to return, and on the ninth day, the military attaché, Taira no Shoji Ryuhun, was appointed as a roving aide-de-camp and removed from his position as chancellor.

古文：壬申，以给事中王纬为润州刺史、浙西观察使，常州刺史刘赞为宣州刺史、宣歙池观察使。
现代文：十二日，以给事中王纬为润州刺史、浙西观察使，常州刺史刘赞为宣州刺史、宣、歙、池观察使。
English: On the 12th, Wang Wei of Zhongzheng was appointed as the surveyor of Runzhou and the surveyor of West Zhejiang, and Liu Zan of Changzhou was appointed as the surveyor of Xuanzhou, and the surveyor of Xuan, Yao and Chi.

古文：戊戌，贬前门下侍郎、平章事萧复为太子左庶子，饶州安置，坐宗人位、佩、儒、偲、鼎等连郜国长公主奸蛊事也。
现代文：十八日，贬门下侍郎、同平章事萧复为太子左庶子，到饶州安置，因为他干了与宗族人位、佩、儒、亻思、鼎等勾结郑国长公主的奸诈邪恶的犯法之事。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Fu, the second-in-line to the throne, was demoted from his position as a footman to the prince's second son, and was relocated to Raozhou, because he had colluded with family members, Pei, Zhu, Jisi, Ding, and others to commit the treacherous and evil illegal act of Princess Zheng Guochuan.

古文：戊辰，吐蕃犯寒，诸军戒严。
现代文：吐蕃侵犯边界，京师各军戒严。
English: When Tubo violated the border, the Beijing division put all the troops under martial law.

古文：九月丁巳，吐蕃大掠汧阳、吴山、华亭界民庶，徙于安化峡西。
现代文：九月七日，吐蕃大肆掠夺汗干阳、吴山、华亭边界民众，民众迁徙到安化峡西避难。
English: On September 7, Tubo plundered the people of Khan Ganyang, Wushan and Huating on the border, and the people migrated to the west of Anhua Gorge for refuge.

古文：庚申，左庶子崔造卒。
现代文：十日，左庶子崔造去世。
English: On the 10th, Choi Soo, Choi's second son, passed away.

古文：癸亥，回纥可汗遣使合阙将军请婚于我，许以咸安公主降之。
现代文：十三日，回纥可汗派遣使者合阙将军向唐王朝求婚，皇上答应以咸安公主下嫁给回纥可汗。
English: On the 13th, the Uighur Khan sent an emissary to the Tang Dynasty to propose marriage, and the Emperor promised to marry the Uighur Khan to Princess Haman.

古文：丙寅，吐蕃陷华亭，又陷泾州之连云堡。
现代文：十六日，吐蕃攻陷华亭，又攻陷泾州之连云堡。
English: On the 16th, the Tulagi attacked and captured Huating, and also attacked the Lianyungang Fort in Bozhou.

古文：甲戌，吐蕃退，俘掠邠、泾、陇等州民户殆尽。
现代文：二十四日，吐蕃退兵，俘虏掠夺州、泾州、陇州的民众几乎全部抢光。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the soldiers of Tubo retreated, and the captives plundered almost all of the people in Shuzhou, Ganzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：自是蕃寇常至泾、陇。
现代文：从此以后，吐蕃贼兵常常到达泾州、陇州掠夺。
English: Since then, the Thief Army of Tubo has often reached and plundered Ganzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：冬十月，吐蕃修原州城，屯据之。
现代文：冬十月，吐蕃修建原州城，屯扎占据。
English: In the winter of October, Tu Wei built Wonju City and occupied Tunza.

古文：丁亥，太子太傅李叔明卒。
现代文：七日，太子太傅李叔明去世。
English: On the seventh day, the prince's grandfather Li Shuming passed away.

古文：丙戌，神策将魏循上言： 射生将韩钦绪等十余人与资敬寺妖僧李广弘同谋不轨，广弘自言当为人主，约十月十日大举，已署置将相名目。 
现代文：六日，神策将魏循上书说 ：射生将韩钦绪等十余人与资敬寺妖僧李广弘同谋犯法，李广弘自称应当成为皇帝，约定十月十日大举造反，已经任命大将、宰相等名目。 
English: On the 6th, Shen Zhe sent a letter to Wei Xuan, saying: "Shooting Han Qingsu and more than ten other people conspired with the demon priest Li Guanghong of Zijing Temple to violate the law. Li Guanghong claimed that he should become emperor, agreed to revolt on October 10th, and has appointed names such as general and prime minister.

古文：诏捕劾之，连坐死者百余人；钦绪游瑰之子，特赦之。
现代文：皇上诏令逮捕审问，犯法并牵连在内一起被杀的有一百多人；韩钦绪，韩游瑰的儿子，特别加以赦免。
English: The emperor issued a decree to arrest and interrogate more than a hundred people who had broken the law and were implicated in the killing; Han Qinxu, the son of Han Youkui, was specially pardoned.

古文：是月，复降鱼书停刺史务。
现代文：这月，皇上发下铜鱼符，并附以文书，停止了刺史务的职务。
English: This month, the emperor issued a bronze fish charm, and attached a document to stop the duties of the historian.

古文：十一月丁丑，以湖南观察使赵憬为给事中。
现代文：十一月二十七日，以湖南观察使赵憬为给事中。
English: On November 27th, Zhao Jing, an observer from Hunan Province, was assigned to the case.

古文：是夜，京师地震者三，鸟巢散落。
现代文：这一夜，京师三次地震，鸟巢也震得散落。
English: That night, there were three earthquakes in Beijing, and the birds' nests were shaken and scattered.

古文：壬申，禁商人不得以口马兵械市于党项。
现代文：二十二日，禁止商人不得以刀刃、马匹、兵器器械在党项市场上买卖。
English: On the 22nd, merchants were prohibited from buying and selling blades, horses, and weapons in the party market.

古文：辛丑，鄜坊节度使论惟明卒。
现代文：坊节度使论惟明去世。
English: Fang Jiedu's envoy, Nian Wo Ming, passed away.

古文：是岁，作玄英观于大明宫北垣。
现代文：这一年，在大明宫北面低墙处建造玄英观。
English: In the same year, the Xuanying Temple was built at the low wall on the north side of the Daming Palace.

