古文：穆王将征犬戎，祭公谋父谏曰： 不可。
现代文：周穆王将去征讨犬戎，祭公谋父劝阻说： 不能这样做。
English: King Mu was preparing to attack Injun Rong, but his father, the priest and counsellor, advised him not to.

古文：先王耀德不观兵。
现代文：先王以道德昭示天下而不炫耀武力。
English: The former king showed the world morality without showing off force.

古文：夫兵戢而时动，动则威，观则玩，玩则无震。
现代文：平时敛藏军队而在适当的时候动用，这样一动用就会使人畏惧；炫耀武力就会滥用，滥用便失去了威慑作用无法使人畏惧。
English: In normal times, the military accumulates strength, and only mobilizes when necessary. Once it is mobilized, it has power. If it only shows off force, it will be careless, and no one will be afraid of carelessness.

古文：是故周文公之《颂》曰： 载戢干戈，载櫜弓矢。我求懿德，肆于时夏，允王保之。 
现代文：所以周公的《诗经·周颂·时迈》说： 收起干戈，藏好弓箭，我只求让美德遍及全国而发扬光大，相信我王定能长保封疆。 
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong's "Shijing, Zhouxiang, Shimei" said: "Close the crossbow, hide the bow and arrow, I only ask that virtue be spread throughout the country and flourish. I believe that I, Wang Ding, will be able to keep the country safe."

古文：先王之于民也，懋正其德而厚其性，阜其财求而利其器用，明利害之乡，以文修之，使务利而避害，怀德而畏威，故能保世以滋大。
现代文：先王对于百姓，鼓励他们端正德性和敦厚品行，广开财路以满足需求，使他们有称心的器物使用，指明厉害的方向，依靠礼法来教育他们，使他们能趋利避害、感怀君王的恩德而畏惧君王的威严。所以能保证周王室世代相承，日益壮大。
English: For the people, the late king encouraged them to be upright and virtuous, opened up a wide range of financial channels to meet their needs, enabled them to be satisfied with the use of utensils, pointed out the direction of power, and relied on etiquette to educate them, so that they could seek benefits and avoid harm, feel the grace of the king and fear the majesty of the king. Therefore, it can ensure the succession of the Zhou royal family for generations and grow stronger and stronger.

古文： 昔我先王世后稷，以服事虞、夏。
现代文： 从前我们的先王世代担任农官而尽心为虞、夏做事。
English: In the past, our forefather generations worked as agricultural officials and devoted themselves to work in the summer.

古文：及夏之衰也，弃稷不务，我先王不窋用失其官，而自窜于戎、狄之间，不敢怠业，时序其德，纂修其绪，修其训典，朝夕恪勤，守以敦笃，奉以忠信，奕世载德，不忝前人。
现代文：到夏朝衰落时废去了农官而置农事于不顾，我们的先王不窋因此而失去官职，只好跑到与戎狄接邻的地方居住下来，但他不敢荒废祖业，常常砥砺自己的德行，继承祖先的业绩，维护他们的教导和典则，时刻勤勉有加，以敦厚自守，以忠信自奉，在立德立业上比前人做得更出色。
English: By the time of the decline of the Xia Dynasty, the agricultural officials were abolished and the agricultural affairs were disregarded. Our forefather Wang Fuxi lost his official position as a result and had to go and live in a place adjacent to Yongdi. However, he did not dare to waste his ancestral heritage. He often honed his own virtues, inherited the achievements of his ancestors, maintained their teachings and rules, was diligent at all times, protected himself with courage, and served himself with loyalty. He did a better job than his predecessors in establishing virtue.

古文：至于武王，昭前之光明而加之以慈和，事神保民，莫弗欣喜。
现代文：到了武王时，继续发扬光大先人光明磊落的德行并又增以仁慈和善，敬奉神灵、保护百姓，神人无不欢欣喜悦。
English: When he came to King Wu, he continued to carry forward the honorable virtues of his illustrious predecessors and increased his kindness and goodness, worshipping the gods and protecting the people. The gods were delighted.

古文：商王帝辛，大恶于民。庶民不忍，欣戴武王，以致戎于商牧。
现代文：而商王帝辛则为民众深恶痛绝，百姓无法忍受他的残暴统治，都乐于拥戴武王，武王才出兵商郊牧野。
English: However, the mercantile king, Emperor Taishin, was deeply hated by the people. The people could not tolerate his brutal rule and were happy to support King Wu. It was only after King Wu sent troops to Makino, a merchant suburb.

古文：是先王非务武也，勤恤民隐而除其害也。
现代文：可见先王并非崇尚武力，只是体恤百姓的忧患而除去他们的祸害。
English: It can be seen that the former king did not advocate the use of force, but sympathized with the sorrows of the people and removed their scourge.

古文： 夫先王之制，邦内甸服，邦外侯服，侯、卫宾服，蛮、夷要服，戎、狄荒服。
现代文： 先王的制度规定：在王畿内的是甸服，在王畿外的是侯服，侯服之外的是宾服，夷蛮地区是要服，戎狄地区是荒服。
English: The Ancestor's system stipulated that: in Wangji, it was called Dianfu; outside Wangji, it was called Houfu; outside Houfu, it was called Binfu; in barbarian regions, it was called Guofu; and in Yongdi regions, it was called Arafu.

古文：甸服者祭，侯服者祀，宾服者享，要服者贡，荒服者王。
现代文：属甸服的供日祭，属侯服的供月祀，属宾服的供时享，属要服的供岁贡，属荒服的则有朝见天子的义务。
English: It is the festival of offering the sun that belongs to Tienfu, the worship of the moon that belongs to Houfu, the enjoyment of time that belongs to Bingfu, the tribute of the year that belongs to Yaofu, and the obligation to see the Son of Heaven that belongs to Arafu.

古文：日祭、月祀、时享、岁贡、终王，先王之训也。
现代文：这每天一次的祭、每月一次的祀、每季一次的享、每年一次的贡和一生一次的朝见天子之礼都是先王定下的规诫。
English: This once-a-day festival, once-a-month worship, once-a-quarter feast, once-a-year tribute, and once-in-a-lifetime gift of seeing the Son of God in the morning were all commandments set down by the former king.

古文：有不祭则修意，有不祀则修言，有不享则修文，有不贡则修名，有不王则修德，序成而有不至则修刑。
现代文：如果甸服有不履行日祭义务的，天子就应内省自己的思想；侯服有不履行月祀义务的，天子就要检查自己的号令；宾服有不履行时享义务的，天子就要检查法律规章；要服有不履行岁贡义务的，天子就要检查名号尊卑；荒服有不履行朝见天子义务的，天子就要内省自己的德行，依次做了上述的内省检查后如还有不履行义务的才可以依法处置。
English: If tianfu does not fulfill the obligation of daily sacrifice, the heavenly son should introspect on his own thoughts; if houfu does not fulfill the obligation of monthly worship, the heavenly son should check his orders; if the guest does not fulfill the obligation of time enjoyment, the heavenly son should check the laws and regulations; if tianfu does not fulfill the obligation of year tribute, the heavenly son should check the name of honor and inferiority; if wanfu does not fulfill the obligation of meeting the heavenly son, the heavenly son should introspect on his own virtues. After doing the above-mentioned introspective inspection, if there is any failure to fulfill the obligation, it can be dealt with according to

古文：于是乎有刑不祭，伐不祀，征不享，让不贡，告不王。于是乎有刑罚之辟，有攻伐之兵，有征讨之备，有威让之令，有文告之辞。
现代文：因此，才有惩罚不祭、攻伐不祀、征讨不享、谴责不贡、告谕不朝的各种措施，才有惩罚的刑法、攻伐的军队、征讨的武备、谴责的严令、晓谕的文辞。
English: Therefore, there are various measures to punish not to sacrifice, to attack not to worship, to collect not to enjoy, to condemn not to pay tribute, and to announce not to the government. There are criminal laws to punish, armies to attack, weapons to collect, strict orders to condemn, and words to announce.

古文：布令陈辞而又不至，则增修于德而无勤民于远，是以近无不听，远无不服。
现代文：如果颁布了法令、文告后还有不履行义务的，那就再一次内省自己的德行而不轻易劳民远征。正因为如此，近处的诸侯才没有不听从的，远处的诸王也没有不信服的。
English: If after the promulgation of decrees and proclamations there are still people who do not fulfill their obligations, then they should once again introspect on their own virtue and not easily labor and people expedition. It is for this reason that there are no princes in the vicinity who do not obey, and there are no kings in the distance who are not convinced.

古文： 今自大毕、伯士之终也，犬戎氏以其职来王。天子曰： 予必以不享征之，且观之兵。 
现代文： 如今，自从大毕、伯士去世以后，犬戎的君长一直按照荒服的职责来朝见，而天子却说 我将以不享的罪名去讨伐他们 ，并以此向他们炫耀武力。
English: Now, since the death of the Great Elder and the Great Man, the kings and queens of the Dog Tribe have been coming to the Imperial Court in accordance with their duties, but the Son of Heaven has said that I will go to fight them on charges that they do not deserve, and in this way show off my power to them.

古文：其无乃废先王之训而王几顿乎！
现代文：这难道不是废弃先王的遗训而使王业败坏吗？
English: Isn't this abandoning the legacy of the former king and corrupting the royal cause?

古文：吾闻夫犬戎树惇，帅旧德，而守终纯固，其有以御我矣！ 
现代文：我听说犬戎性情敦厚纯朴，能遵守先人的德行而专一不变，他们是有能力抵御我们的。 
English: I've heard that dogs have a strong and simple nature, and can abide by the virtues of their ancestors and remain steadfast. They have the ability to resist us.

古文：王不听，遂征之，得四白狼，四白鹿以归。自是荒服者不至。
现代文：周穆王不听劝告，去征讨犬戎，结果只得到了犬戎进贡的四只白狼、四只白鹿回来，从此荒服地区的诸侯再也不来朝见了。
English: King Zhou Mu did not listen to the advice and went to solicit Injun Rong. As a result, only the four white wolves and four white deer that Injun Rong paid tribute to came back. From then on, the princes of the Wafu region never came to see the emperor again.

