古文：昔帝轩刻舆几以弼违，大禹勒笋虡而招谏。成汤盘盂，著日新之规；武王户席，题必诫之训。周公慎言于金人，仲尼革容于欹器，则先圣鉴戒，其来久矣。
现代文：相传从前轩辕黄帝在车厢、案桌等物上雕刻铭文，用以帮助自己警惕过错；夏禹曾在乐器架上雕刻铭文，表示希望听取他人的意见；商汤王的《盘铭》，提出 一天要比一天新 的规劝；周武王的《户铭》、《席四端铭》等，写了必须警戒的教训；周公在《金人铭》中，强调 语言要谨慎 ；孔子在鲁桓公庙中，见到欹器而激动得变了脸色。可见先代圣贤，长期以来就注重鉴戒了。
English: According to legend, the former Huangdi Emperor carved inscriptions on carriages, desks and other objects to help himself guard against mistakes; Xia Yu once carved inscriptions on musical instrument stands to express his desire to listen to the opinions of others; Shang Tang Wang's "Pan Ming" proposed that "one day is better than the next day" exhortation; King Zhou Wu's "Domestic Inscription" and "Seat Four Ends Inscription" wrote lessons that must be guarded against; Zhou Gong in "Golden Man Inscription" emphasized that language should be cautious; Confucius in Luhuang Temple was excited and changed his face. It can be seen that the previous generation of sages

古文：故铭者，名也，观器必也正名，审用贵乎慎德。
现代文：铭，就是名称，观察器物必须了解它的名称。正定名称而明确其作用，是为了重视言行谨慎这种美德。
English: An epitaph is a name, and it is necessary to know the name of the object to observe it. To set the name correctly and clarify its role is to attach importance to the virtue of being cautious in words and deeds.

古文：盖臧武仲之论铭也，曰∶ 天子令德，诸侯计功，大夫称伐。 
现代文：鲁国的臧武仲论铭曾说： 写铭文，对天子应以颂扬其美德为主，对诸侯应以肯定其功绩为主，对大夫则只能称赞其征伐的劳苦。 
English: Lu's An Wu Zhong Onming once said: When writing an inscription, it should be mainly to praise the virtues of the emperor, to affirm the merits of the princes, and to praise the hard work of the doctors.

古文：夏铸九牧之金鼎，周勒肃慎之楛矢，令德之事也；吕望铭功于昆吾，仲山镂绩于庸器，计功之义也；魏颗纪勋于景钟，孔悝表勤于卫鼎，称伐之类也。
现代文：如夏代帝王有德，九州的首领便送上金属，铸成金鼎；周代帝王为了传示其美德于后代，便在肃慎国送来的箭上雕刻铭文。这就是关于颂扬美德的例子。吕望辅助周武王的功绩，曾用金属铸成铭文；仲山甫辅佐周宣王的功绩，也曾刻在周代的记功器上。这就是关于肯定功绩的例子。晋国魏颗的战功，曾刻在晋国的景公钟上；卫国孔悝祖先勤于国事的功劳，曾记在孔悝的《鼎铭》中。这就是只称征伐之劳的例子。
English: For example, in the Xia Dynasty, when the emperor was virtuous, the leader of Kyushu sent a crane made of metal to be cast into a golden tripod; in the Zhou Dynasty, in order to pass on his virtue to future generations, the emperor carved an inscription on the arrow sent by Shushan. This is an example of praising virtue. The merits of Lü Wang, who assisted King Zhou Wu, were cast into an inscription made of metal; the merits of Zhongshan Fufu, who assisted King Zhou Xuan, were also engraved on the Zhou Dynasty's recorder. This is an example of affirming merit. The war service of the Wei dynasty of Jin

古文：若乃飞廉有石棺之锡，灵公有夺里之谥，铭发幽石，吁可怪矣！
现代文：至如说飞廉得到天赐的石椁，卫灵公得到黄泉之下的谥号；铭文竟出现在地下的石椁上，这就太奇怪了！
English: It is as if Fei Lian received a stone coffin given by heaven, and Wei Ling Gong received a coffin beneath the Yangtze River; the inscription actually appeared on the underground stone coffin, which is so strange!

古文：赵灵勒迹于番吾，秦昭刻博于华山，夸诞示后，吁可笑也！
现代文：又说赵武灵王曾派人在番吾山上刻他的大脚印，秦昭王叫人在华山上刻了个大棋局：都是用虚夸不实的铭刻来显示后人，这就很可笑了！
English: It is also said that King Zhao Wuling once sent people to carve his big footprints on Fanu Mountain, and King Qin Zhao ordered people to carve a big chess board on Huashan Mountain: they are all false inscriptions to show posterity, which is ridiculous!

古文：详观众例，铭义见矣。
现代文：仔细看看以上正反两面的例子，铭文的意义就很清楚了。
English: Take a closer look at the above examples of positive and negative aspects, and the meaning of the inscription will be very clear.

古文：至于始皇勒岳，政暴而文泽，亦有疏通之美焉。
现代文：到秦始皇时，有《泰山》、《琅玡台》等山岳的刻石，虽然秦代政治残暴，这些刻石的文辞却较为润泽，也还有其畅达之美。
English: By the time of Qin Shihuang, there were engraved stones of mountains such as "Taishan" and "Xingtai." Although the Qin Dynasty was politically brutal, the words of these engraved stones were more moisturized, and they also had a smooth beauty.

古文：若班固《燕然》之勒，张昶《华阴》之碣，序亦盛矣。
现代文：到了汉代，如班固的《封燕然山铭》，张昶的《西岳华山堂阙碑铭》，其序文也写得很长了。
English: In the Han Dynasty, for example, Ban Gu's "Feng Yan Ran Shan Ming" and Zhang Ye's "Xiyue Huashan Hall Shao He Ming," their prefaces were also very long.

古文：蔡邕铭思，独冠古今。
现代文：蔡邕的铭文，更是独冠古今。
English: Cai Qi's inscription is the only one from ancient times to the present.

古文：桥公之钺，吐纳典谟；朱穆之鼎，全成碑文，溺所长也。
现代文：如歌颂桥玄的《黄钺铭》，模仿《尚书》；歌颂朱穆的《鼎铭》，就完全写成碑文了；这是蔡邕惯于写碑文的原因。
English: For example, Xiaoxuan's "Huang Yiming" is a song of praise, imitating "Shang Shu Rong"; Zhu Mu's "Ding Ming" is a song of praise, completely written as an inscription; this is the reason why Cai Xuan is used to writing inscriptions.

古文：至如敬通杂器，准矱武铭，而事非其物，繁略违中。
现代文：至于冯衍所写刀、杖、车等杂器的铭文，虽取法周武王，却写得事不称物，详略不当。
English: As for Feng Yan's inscriptions on knifes, canes, chariots and other knickknacks, although they were written according to the law of King Zhouwu, they were unsatisfactory and lacking in detail.

古文：崔骃品物，赞多戒少，李尤积篇，义俭辞碎。
现代文：此外，崔骃品量器物的铭文，赞颂多而警戒少；李尤写的大量铭文，内容单薄，文辞琐碎。
English: In addition, the inscriptions of Cui Wei's valuables are more praising and less warning; a large number of inscriptions written by Li You, the content is thin, and the wording is trivial.

古文：蓍龟神物，而居博奕之中；衡斛嘉量，而在臼杵之末。
现代文：他把蓍龟之类神物的铭文，和戏玩的《围棋铭》搀杂在一起；把写衡量器的《权衡铭》，放在关于杵臼的铭文之后。
English: He mixed the inscriptions of gods such as the tortoise with the playful "Go," and put the "Weighing" inscription, which describes a measuring device, after the inscription about the mortar.

古文：曾名品之未暇，何事理之能闲哉！
现代文：李尤在品量器物名称上，还没有来得及做好，怎能熟知事物的道理呢！
English: Liyu has not had time to do a good job in the name of the quality object, how can he be familiar with the principle of the object!

古文：魏文九宝，器利辞钝。
现代文：曹丕写了九种宝物的《剑铭》，所讲的刀剑是锐利的，文辞却很平钝。
English: Cao Yu wrote Nine Treasures of the Sword Inscription. The sword is sharp, but the words are dull.

古文：唯张载《剑阁》，其才清采。
现代文：只有张载的《剑阁铭》，写得清明而有辞采。
English: Only Zhang Zai's "Jian Gu Ming" is written clearly and elegantly.

古文：迅足骎骎，后发前至，勒铭岷汉，得其宜矣。
现代文：他的铭文有如快马疾驰，后来居上；晋武帝下令把《剑阁铭》刻在氓山、汉水之间，那是得到适当的处置了。
English: His inscription was like a fast horse galloping and catching up later; Emperor Jinwu ordered the "Kengaku Inscription" to be engraved between the Rogue Mountain and the Han River, and it was dealt with appropriately.

古文：箴者，针也，所以攻疾防患，喻针石也。
现代文：箴，就是针刺，用以批评过错，防止祸患，好比治病的石针。
English: Zhen, that is, acupuncture, used to criticize faults and prevent evils, is like a stone needle to cure diseases.

古文：斯文之兴，盛于三代。
现代文：这种文体兴起后，盛行于夏、商、周三代。
English: After the rise of this style, it prevailed in the Xia, Shang and San dynasties.

古文：夏商二箴，馀句颇存。
现代文：《夏箴》和《商箴》，还留下几个残余句子。
English: "Summer Proverbs" and "Business Proverbs" also left a few residual sentences.

古文：周之辛甲，百官箴阙，唯《虞箴》一篇，体义备焉。
现代文：周代的辛甲，要求各种官吏都写箴辞，用以针刺天子的过失。其中只有《虞人之箴》一篇，箴体的格式和内容都比较完备。
English: Zhou Dynasty's Xin Jia required all kinds of officials to write proverbs, which were used to pinpoint the faults of the emperor. Among them, there was only one "Proverbs of the Conqueror," and the format and content of the proverbs were relatively complete.

古文：迄至春秋，微而未绝。
现代文：到春秋时期，这种文体逐渐少起来，但还没有衰绝。
English: By the Spring and Autumn Period, this style had gradually diminished, but had not yet died out.

古文：故魏绛讽君于后羿，楚子训民于在勤。
现代文：所以晋国魏绛曾用《虞人之箴》中讲的后羿，来讽谏晋君；楚庄王曾用 民生在勤 等话来箴戒国人。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wei of the State of Jin once used the epitaph of the "Proverbs of the Statesmen" to ridicule the prince of Jin; King Chu Zhuang once used the words of "the people's livelihood is at work" to rebuke the people.

古文：战代以来，弃德务功，铭辞代兴，箴文委绝。
现代文：战国以后，抛弃道德，专求有功；因此，铭辞代之而兴，箴文就基本上绝迹了。
English: After the Warring States period, morality was abandoned in favor of merit; as a result, epithets took over and proverbs basically disappeared.

古文：至扬雄稽古，始范《虞箴》，作《卿尹》、《州牧》二十五篇。
现代文：到了汉代，扬雄考古，才模仿《虞人之箴》，写了卿尹、州牧等各种官吏的箴文共二十五篇。
English: It was not until the Han Dynasty that Yang Xiong, an archaeologist, imitated the "Proverbs of the Statesmen" and wrote a total of twenty-five proverbs of various officials such as Jing Yin and Zhu Mu.

古文：及崔胡补缀，总称《百官》。
现代文：后来崔骃、胡广等又加以补写，总称为《百官箴》。
English: Later, Cui Zhen, Hu Guang and others supplemented it, and it was called the "Hundred Official Proverbs."

古文：指事配位，鞶鉴有征，信所谓追清风于前古，攀辛甲于后代者也。
现代文：按照不同的官位，提出应该箴戒的事项，充分发挥鉴戒的作用，这就可以说是学习古人的清风，继承辛甲的做法了。
English: According to different official positions, the matters that should be punished should be put forward, and the role of warning should be given full play. This can be said to be learning from the ancient people and inheriting the practice of Xinjia.

古文：至于潘勖《符节》，要而失浅；温峤《侍臣》，博而患繁；王济《国子》，文多而事寡；潘尼《乘舆》，义正而体芜：凡斯继作，鲜有克衷。
现代文：汉末潘勖的《符节箴》，比较简要，却失于肤浅；东晋温峤的《侍臣箴》，内容广博，却过于繁杂；西晋王济的《国子箴》，虽然旁征博引，内容却很贫乏；潘尼的《乘舆箴》，内容正确，但又写得过于芜杂：所有这些相继出现的作品，很少写得恰到好处。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, Pan Zheng's "Proverbs of the Runes" is concise but superficial; in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Wen Zheng's "Proverbs of Attendants" is extensive in content but too complicated; in the Western Jin Dynasty, Wang Zi's "Proverbs of the Son of the State," although extensively quoted, is poor in content; in the Western Jin Dynasty, Wang Zi's "Proverbs of the Son of the State" is correct in content but too complicated in writing; in the Western Jin Dynasty, Wang Zi's "Proverbs of the Son of the State" is correct in content but too complicated in writing; in the Western Jin Dynasty

古文：至于王朗《杂箴》，乃置巾履，得其戒慎，而失其所施；观其约文举要，宪章武铭，而水火井灶，繁辞不已，志有偏也。
现代文：至于魏国王朗的《杂箴》，把头巾、鞋子也写了进去，虽也有了戒慎的意义，但在箴中写这种东西是不恰当的。《杂箴》的文词简明扼要，是学周武王的铭写的；但它写一些水火井灶之类，就显得拉杂不已了，这是立意不正造成的。
English: As for the "Miscellaneous Proverbs" of King Lang of the Wei Dynasty, the turban and shoes were also written in, although there was a sense of caution, it was inappropriate to write such things in the proverbs. The words of the "Miscellaneous Proverbs" were concise and concise, inscribed by King Zhouwu; but when it wrote about things such as water, fire and wells, it seemed to be mixed up, which was caused by improper intention.

古文：夫箴诵于官，铭题于器，名目虽异，而警戒实同。
现代文：箴是官吏对帝王讽诵，铭是用来品题器物，它们的名称和用途虽然不同，但起警戒的作用是相同的。
English: Although their names and uses are different, their function as a warning is the same.

古文：箴全御过，故文资确切；铭兼褒赞，故体贵弘润。
现代文：箴主要用来抵御国失，所以文词必须准确切实；铭则兼有褒扬赞美的作用，因此，其篇体以弘大润泽为贵。
English: The proverbs are mainly used to resist the loss of the country, so the words must be accurate and practical; the epitaphs also have the effect of praising and praising, so the body of the article is precious with great polish.

古文：其取事也必核以辨，其攡文也必简而深，此其大要也。
现代文：总的来说，铭和箴所讲的事，都必须确实而清楚明白；所用的文词，都必须简要而深远。这就是铭箴二体在写作上的基本要求。
English: On the whole, the things told by the mottos and proverbs must be accurate and clear; the words used must be concise and far-reaching. This is the basic requirement for the writing of the mottos and proverbs.

古文：然矢言之道盖阙，庸器之制久沦，所以箴铭寡用，罕施后代，惟秉文君子，宜酌其远大焉。
现代文：但由于说直话的风气逐渐消失，记功的制度也长期不存在，所以这两种文体都不多用，也就很少施行于后代了。今后的作者，应注意取其弘润、深远的特点。总结：
English: However, due to the gradual disappearance of the straight-talking culture and the long-term non-existence of the merit system, these two styles are not used much and are rarely implemented in future generations. Future authors should pay attention to its broad and far-reaching characteristics. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶铭实器表，箴惟德轨。
现代文：铭主要是彰明器物，箴主要是轨范道理。
English: The epitaph is mainly to highlight the utensils, and the precept is mainly to set an example.

古文：有佩于言，无鉴于水。
现代文：应该牢记警戒的语言，而不要徒取铭箴的形式。
English: The language of caution should be kept in mind, rather than taking the form of a motto.

古文：秉兹贞厉，警乎立履。
现代文：要用这种贞正的勉励，来警戒人的实际行为。
English: This exhortation to chastity should be used to warn people about their actual behavior.

古文：义典则弘，文约为美。
现代文：内容合于常道就能弘大，文辞则以简要为美好。
English: If the content is in line with common practice, it will be able to spread widely, and the wording will be concise and beautiful.

