古文：萧夺剌，字挼懒，遥辇洼可汗宫人。
现代文：萧夺剌，字挼懒，遥辇洼可汗宫人。
English: The people of the Khan's palace are at a loss, the words are sluggish, far away.

古文：祖涅鲁古，北院枢密副使。
现代文：祖父涅鲁古，北院枢密副使。
English: His grandfather, Nehru Gu, was a Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court.

古文：父撒抹，字胡独堇，重熙初补祗候郎君，累迁北面林牙。
现代文：父亲撒抹，字胡独堇，重熙初补为祗候郎君，累迁北面林牙。
English: His father was a plasterer, his family name was Hu Duxuan, and he was initially known as Shouguang Langjun (候郎君) and moved to the north of Linza.

古文：十九年，从耶律宜新、萧蒲奴伐夏，至萧惠败绩之地，获侦候者，知人烟聚落，多国人陷没而不能还者，尽俘以归。拜大父敞稳，知山北道边境事。
现代文：十九年，随从耶律宜新、萧蒲奴讨伐夏国，到达萧惠兵败之地，获得侦候之人，了解了当地人烟村落分布情况，知当地人多为国人陷没而不能回还者，便尽数俘掠而回，因功拜为大父敞稳，知山北道边境事。
English: In the 19th year, he followed Yerut Yixin and Xiao Punu to fight against Xiao Guo, and arrived at the place where Xiao Hui was defeated. He obtained reconnaissance information, learned about the distribution of local villages, and knew that most of the local people were Chinese nationals who were trapped and could not return. He did his best to return with a number of captives. Because he was a great father, he was open and stable. He knew the border of Shanshan North Road.

古文：清宁初，历西南面、西北路招讨使，加同中书门下平章事，卒。
现代文：清宁初，历任西南面、西北路招讨使，加同中书门下平章事，不久去世。
English: At the beginning of the Qing and Ning Dynasties, the successive leaders of the southwestern and northwestern roads invited the envoys, and together with Zhongshumen, they signed a peace treaty. He died soon after.

古文：夺剌体貌丰伟，骑射绝人。
现代文：夺剌身材魁梧，骑射技术过人。
English: He is a burly man with excellent riding and shooting skills.

古文：由祗候郎君升汉人行宫副部署。
现代文：由祗候郎君升为汉人行宫副部署。
English: He was promoted from 候郎君 to the vice-deployment of Hanren Ganguo.

古文：后为乌古敌烈统军使，克敌有功，加龙虎卫上将军，授西北路招讨使。
现代文：后来担任乌古敌烈统军使，战胜敌人有功，加龙虎卫上将军，授西北路招讨使。
English: Later, he served as the envoy of the Ughu enemy's heroic unified army, and won great achievements in defeating the enemy, the general of Garonghuwei, and was awarded the envoy of the northwest road.

古文：因陈北边利害，请以本路诸部与倒塌岭统军司连兵屯戍。
现代文：于是陈奏北部边境的利害，请求率本路诸部与倒塌岭统军司结连兵马屯戍。
English: As a result, Chen took advantage of the situation on the northern border and asked various ministries to join forces with the fallen Lingdun military commander to build a garrison.

古文：再表，不纳。
现代文：两度上表，意见均未被采纳。
English: On both occasions, the opinions were not adopted.

古文：改东北路统军使。
现代文：改任东北路统军使。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the Northeast Road Union Army.

古文：乾统元年，以久练边事，复为西北路招讨使。
现代文：乾统元年，因为长期熟悉边境事务，复任西北路招讨使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong, because of his long-term familiarity with border affairs, he was reinstated as the Northwest Road Recruitment Envoy.

古文：北阻卜耶睹刮率邻部来侵，夺剌逆击，追奔数十里。
现代文：北阻卜耶睹刮率领邻部前来侵犯，夺剌迎击，追亡逐北数十里。
English: The North Blockade led the neighboring troops to invade, capture and counterattack, and chased and killed dozens of miles to the north.

古文：重熙十一年，党项部人多叛入西夏，侯哂受诏，巡西边沿河要地，多建城堡以镇之，徙东京留守。
现代文：二年，乘耶睹刮没有防备之时，派轻骑兵袭击，获取马五千匹，牛羊数也与此相当。在此之前，有诏令地方官员无事者，招讨、副统军、都监三人中应派一员入朝觐见。
English: In the second year, when there was no preparedness, he sent light cavalry to attack and obtained five thousand horses, and the number of cattle and sheep was also equivalent to this. Before this, there was a decree that if local officials had nothing to do, one of the three people should be sent to the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：十三年，与知府萧欧里斯讨蒲卢毛朵部有功，加兼侍中。
现代文：这时同僚都不在，夺剌将军事托付于幕府小吏而入朝，因此被免官。后改任西京留守，再任东北路统军使。死于任上。
English: At this time, none of his colleagues were present, so he was relieved of his duties after entrusting military matters to a minor official of the shogunate and entering the imperial court. Later, he was assigned to stay in West Kyoto, and then to serve as the envoy for the unification of the armies in the Northeast. He died in office.

古文：致仕，卒。耶律古昱，字磨鲁堇，北院林牙突吕不四世孙。
现代文：耶律古昱，字磨鲁堇，北院林牙突吕不四世孙。
English: He is the fourth generation grandchild of Yelu Guzheng, Ma Luzheng, and Beiyin Lin Yatu Lvfu.

古文：有膂力，工驰射。
现代文：力大过人，擅长骑马射箭。
English: He is very strong and good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：开泰间，为乌古敌烈部都监。
现代文：开泰年间，任乌古敌烈部都监。
English: During the reign of Emperor Keitai, he served as the inspector of the Imperial Palace.

古文：会部人叛，从枢密使耶律世良讨平之，以功诏镇抚西北部。
现代文：适逢部人反叛，古昱随从枢密使耶律世良讨伐平定之。因功受诏镇抚西北部。
English: When his subordinates rebelled, Gu Yao followed the imperial envoy, Yerutsira, to fight and subdue them. For his service, he was awarded the title of Zhenfuzhu in the northwest.

古文：教以种树、畜牧，不数年，民多富实。
现代文：教百姓种树、放牧，不上几年，百姓大多变得富足。
English: Teach the people to plant trees and graze cattle, and within a few years, most of the people will become rich.

古文：中京盗起，命古昱为巡逻使，悉擒之。
现代文：中京盗贼起，圣宗命令古昱担任巡逻使，古昱尽数擒获之。
English: From the beginning of the thieves in Beijing, Shengzong ordered Gu Yao to serve as a patrol envoy, and Gu Yao was captured as many times as possible.

古文：上亲征渤海，将黄皮室军，有破敌功，累迁御史中丞，寻授开远军节度使，徙镇归德。
现代文：皇上亲征渤海，古昱率黄皮室军，破敌有功，累迁御史中丞，不久授为开远军节度使，移镇归德。
English: The emperor personally led the conquest of the Bohai Sea, and Gu Zheng led the Huangpi Muromachi Army. He made great achievements in defeating the enemy, and was awarded the title of "Minister of History." Soon, he was awarded the title of "Seasonal envoy of the Kaiyuan Army" and moved to Germany.

古文：重熙二十一年，改天成军节度使，卒于官，年七十，赠同中书门下平章事。
现代文：重熙二十一年，改任天成军节度使，死于任上，年七十岁，赠同中书门下平章事。
English: In the twenty-first year of the reign of Chongxi, he was transferred to the post of Tiancheng Army Festival Envoy. He died in office at the age of seventy, and was presented with the title of Zhongshumen Shimo Pingzhangji.

