古文：李希烈，燕州辽西人。
现代文：李希烈，燕州辽西人。
English: Li Xilei, a native of West Yanzhou, Liaoning Province.

古文：少籍平卢军，从李忠臣浮海战河北有劳。
现代文：年轻时参加平卢军，随从李忠臣泛海战河北有功。
English: When he was young, he joined the Pinglu Army and served with Li Zhongchen in the Battle of Hebei.

古文：及忠臣在淮西，因署偏裨，试光禄卿，军中藉藉高其才。
现代文：及李忠臣任淮西节度使，要安排将佐，让希烈试任光禄卿，军中人交口称赞其才华。
English: And Li Zhongchen was appointed as Huaxi Festival envoy, and it was necessary to arrange a vice-commander, and let Xilai be appointed as Guangluqing on a trial basis. People in the military praised his talent.

古文：会忠臣荒纵不事，得间众怒，逐忠臣听命。
现代文：当时正遇李忠臣贪暴恣肆，不理政事，犯了众怒，将忠臣赶走后上报。
English: At that time, Li Zhongcheng was corrupt and arbitrary, ignored political affairs, and caused public anger. Li Zhongcheng was driven away and reported.

古文：代宗诏忻王为节度副大使，使希烈专留后事，又诏滑亳节度使李勉兼领汴州。
现代文：代宗诏令忻王为节度副使，派李希烈为留后主事，又诏令滑亳节度使李勉兼管汴州。
English: Emperor Daizong decreed that King Gong would be the vice-envoy of the festival, and sent Li Xilai to be the main person to stay behind. He also decreed that Emperor Gaozong would send Li Min to be the deputy of the festival and also to be in charge of Gongzhou.

古文：德宗立，加御史大夫，即拜节度使，名其军曰淮宁以宠之。
现代文：德宗即位，加官希烈为御史大夫，委任他为节度使，改淮西军称淮宁军。
English: When Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he appointed the official Xili as the Grand Historian and appointed him as the Chief of the General Staff, and changed the name of the Western Huai Army to the Western Huai Army.

古文：梁崇义之反，敕诸道进讨，诏进希烈南平郡王、汉南北招讨处置使，又拜诸军都统。
现代文：梁崇义作乱，皇帝命诸道进讨。诏封希烈为南平郡王，任汉南北招讨处置使，又委任他为诸军都统。
English: Liang Chongyi caused a disturbance, and the emperor ordered all roads to be discussed. The emperor made Xili the king of Nanping County, appointed him as the envoy to invite and discuss the disposition of North and South Han, and appointed him as the general of all armies.

古文：平崇义功多，拥兵欲有其地，会山南节度使李承至，不克，犹大掠而去。
现代文：希烈平定崇义功劳大，拥兵想据有其地，而德宗却任李承为山南东道节度使来到襄阳，希烈不能据有，于是大掠而去。
English: Hyeres made a great contribution to the pacification of Chongyi, and his supporters wanted to have their own territory, but Dezong allowed Li Cheng to come to Xiangyang as the host of the festival in Shannan. Hyeres could not have it, so he went away.

古文：以功检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：皇帝因其功升他为检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: Because of his achievements, the emperor promoted him to the position of inspector of schools, and he was awarded the title of Shangshu Rongpu, and the title of Zhongshu Shumen Shimohei.

古文：李纳叛，以检校司空兼淄青节度使讨之。
现代文：李纳叛变，皇帝派检校司空兼淄青节度使去讨伐。
English: Li Na mutinied, and the emperor sent the inspector of schools, Ku Kuan and Jia Qing Jie Du, to crush the rebellion.

古文：希烈拥众三万次许州不进，遣李苣约纳为脣齿，阴计取汴州，即檄李勉假道。
现代文：希烈拥兵三万却屯扎许州不动，派李苣去与李纳结为唇齿，阴谋图取汴州。传檄给李勉处借道。
English: However, the 30,000 soldiers loyal to Heraclius remained in Xuzhou and did not move. He sent Li Zhe to conspire with Li Na to take Xuzhou. Zhuo Zhe gave Li Mian a way out.

古文：勉度所宜，出储陈留，治梁除道以须。
现代文：李勉估量他的意思，乃在陈留准备军需，建桥清道以待。
English: Li Mian gauged his intentions. He was staying in Chen to prepare for military supplies and build bridges to clear the way.

古文：希烈计得，因谩骂勉，勉严备以守。
现代文：希烈计划初步得手，接着谩骂李勉，李勉不答，只严加守备。
English: Hsirye's plan was initially successful, and he went on to abuse Li Mian. Li Mian did not reply, but kept a tight guard.

古文：纳遣游兵导希烈绝汴饷路，勉治蔡渠，引东南馈。
现代文：李纳派游兵引导希烈阻断汴州的饷路。李勉乃凿通蔡渠运道，引运东南粮饷。
English: Li Na sent rangers to guide Hyeres to block the causeway of Luzhou. Li Mian Nai cut the transportation route through the Cai Canal and transported the Southeastern grain.

古文：希烈遣使者约河北硃滔、田悦等连和，凶焰炽然。
现代文：希烈又派使者与河北的朱滔、田悦等相约联和，兵势炽烈。
English: Hilaire also sent an envoy to make peace with Zhu Tao and Tian Yue of Hebei, and the war raged on.

古文：俄而滔等自相王，遣使者来奉笺，希烈亦自号建兴王、天下都元帅，五贼株连半天下。
现代文：不久，朱滔等人自相称王，派使者奉上奏笺，愿尊希烈为帝。希烈乃自号建兴王、天下都元帅。自此，朱滔、李纳、王武俊、田悦、李希烈五贼凶焰达半个天下。
English: Not long after, Zhu Tao and others declared themselves kings and sent an envoy to present the imperial rescript, "May Your Excellency Emperor Xilai be enthroned." Xilai called himself King Jianxing and Marshal of the whole world. Since then, Zhu Tao, Li Na, Wang Wujun, Tian Yue, and Li Xilai, the five thieves, have spread their fierce flames to half of the world.

古文：建中四年正月，诏诸节度以兵掎角攻讨，唐汉臣、高秉哲以兵万人屯汝州。
现代文：建中四年正月，皇帝命各节度使带兵成掎角攻讨五贼，唐汉臣、高秉哲率兵万人屯驻汝州。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of Jianzhong, the emperor ordered the soldiers to attack the five thieves, and Tang Hancheng and Gao Bingzhe led the soldiers to settle in Ruzhou.

古文：未至，贼将乘雾进，王师还，贼取汝州，执李元平，兵西首，东都大震，士皆走河阳、崤、渑。
现代文：尚未到达，贼将乘雾而进，王师返，贼取得汝州。拘捕李元平，兵又西进，东都大惊，士人都逃避至河阳、崤、渑等地。
English: Not yet arrived, the thief will take advantage of the fog to enter, Wang Shih will return, and the thief will obtain Ruzhou. Li Yuanping was arrested, the soldiers went west again, the east was shocked, and the scholars all fled to Heyang, Handan, Handan and other places.

古文：留守郑叔则壁西苑，贼按兵不进。
现代文：留守郑叔则闭守西苑，贼人按兵不进。
English: Uncle Zheng, who stayed behind, closed the west courtyard, and the thieves did not advance.

古文：帝听卢杞计，诏太子太师颜真卿谕贼，已行，又遣左龙武大将军哥舒曜讨之。
现代文：皇帝听信卢杞的建议，诏令太子太师颜真卿去晓谕顺逆祸福。真卿已行，又派左龙武大将军哥舒曜去讨伐。
English: The emperor listened to Lu Xun's suggestion and ordered Yan Zhenqing, the prince's great-grandfather, to proclaim the good fortune and bad fortune. Zhenqing has already gone, and he also sent Brother Shu, the general of the Great General Zalongwu, to fight.

古文：希烈见真卿，傲桀不臣，敕左右訾侮朝政，即北侵汴州，南略鄂州。
现代文：希烈见真卿，桀骜无礼，又让左右谩骂侮辱朝政，且北侵汴州，南攻鄂州。
English: Seeing Zhengying, Xilei was rude and insulted the imperial government with insults from both sides, and invaded Bozhou in the north and Ezhou in the south.

古文：有诏江西节度使嗣曹王皋击之，拔蕲、黄两州，击贼将李良、韩霜露于白岩，二将走。
现代文：有诏令江西节度使嗣曹王皋迎击，攻克蕲、黄两州，追杀贼将李良、韩霜露，二将逃走。
English: An imperial edict ordered Jiangxi Jiedu to send the heir Cao Wangtao to meet the attack, conquer the two states of Yao and Huang, chase and kill the thieves Li Liang and Han Ronglu, and the two will escape.

古文：初，希烈自襄阳还，留姚詹戍邓州，贼又得汝，则武关梗绝。
现代文：当初，李希烈自襄阳回，留姚忄詹屯戍邓州，贼人又攻得汝州，武关交通遂断。
English: At first, Li Xilei returned from Xiangyang and stayed in Yaozhuang, Zhanzhantun and Dengzhou. The bandits attacked Ruzhou again, and Wuguan traffic was cut off.

古文：帝使陕虢观察使姚明昜攵治上津道，置馆通南方贡货。
现代文：皇帝令陕虢观察使姚明扬修筑上津道，设馆以通南方的货运贡物。
English: The emperor ordered Shaanxi and Fujian to observe the construction of the Shangjin Road by Yao Mingyang and set up a museum to collect the freight tribute from the south.

古文：希烈遣董待名、韩霜露、刘敬宗、陈质、翟崇晖分掠州县，官军数奔。
现代文：李希烈派董待名、韩霜露、刘敬宗、陈质、翟崇晖分别侵略州县，官军多次败逃。
English: Li Xilai sent Dong Zhiming, Han Shemlu, Liu Jingzong, Chen Jie, and Zou Chongyi to invade Zhoushan County respectively, and the government army was defeated and fled many times.

古文：曜复取汝州，希烈遣周曾、吕从贲、康琳拒曜，次襄城，与王玢、姚詹、韦清合谋袭希烈，不克，皆死，清奔刘洽。
现代文：哥舒曜又攻克汝州，李希烈派周曾、吕从贲、康琳抵抗。军抵襄城，与王玢、姚忄詹、韦清等合计反击希烈，计未成，皆被杀，只有韦清逃奔刘洽。
English: Go Shu attacked Ruzhou again on Saturday, and Li Xilai sent Zhou Zeng, Lu Conglu, and Kanglin to resist. The army arrived at Xiangcheng, and counterattacked Xilai with Wang Hui, Yao Xizhan, Wei Qing and others. The plan failed, and they were all killed. Only Wei Qing fled to Liuqiao.

古文：希烈惧，还蔡州，上疏归罪曾等。
现代文：李希烈心虚，回归蔡州，上疏归咎周曾等人。
English: Li Xili's heart is empty, he returns to Caizhou, and blames Zhou Zeng and others for the estrangement.

古文：帝不赦，诏斩希烈者，四品以上得其官，五品以下户四百，民赐复三年。遣神策将刘德信将节度、观察、团练子弟兵屯阳翟并力；以李勉为淮西招讨使，曜副之；荆南节度使张伯仪为淮西应援招讨使，山南节度使贾耽与皋副之。
现代文：皇帝不赦，诏令：能斩杀希烈者，四品以上者得其官职，五品以下者封户四百，庶民则免赋三年，又派神策将刘德信率领节度、观察、团练的子弟兵合力屯守阳翟；派李勉为淮西招讨使，哥舒曜为副招讨使；又派荆南节度使张伯仪任淮西应援招讨使，山南节度使贾耽与皋为应援招讨副使。
English: The emperor was not forgiving, and issued a decree: those who could kill the martyrs would get their official positions, those with four or more grades would get their official positions, those with five or less grades would get 400 households, and the common people would be exempted for three years. He also sent the divine policy to Liu Dexin to lead the festival, observation, and group training of the sons of soldiers to stay in Yangshuo; sent Li Mian to be the recruiting envoy for Huaxi, and Go Shuyong to be the deputy recruiting envoy; also sent Jingnan Festival to make Zhang Bo Yi be the recruiting envoy for Huaxi, and Shannan Festival to make J

古文：德信去阳翟，入汝壁，贼取阳翟，覆伯仪军。
现代文：德信离开阳翟，入汝州，贼人攻取阳翟，打败张伯仪，哥舒曜也战而不利，屯驻襄城。
English: Dexin left Impotence, entered Ruzhou, the thieves captured Impotence, defeated Zhang Bo Yi, and Brother Shu also fought on Saturday, and settled in Xiangcheng.

古文：曜战不利，屯襄城，希列怙其壮，举众三万围曜。时帝西狩，师气闉不能抗，城遂陷，曜奔东都。
现代文：希烈恃其得胜，举全军三万人围困曜。当时皇帝西巡，王师士气不振，不能御贼，城陷。哥舒曜逃奔东都。
English: Heraclius defeated him and besieged the capital with 30,000 soldiers. At that time, the emperor was on a western tour, and Wang Shishi was demoralized, unable to repel the invaders, and the city fell. Goshujo fled to the eastern capital.

古文：希烈资惨害，临战阵杀人，血流于前，而饮食自若也，以故人畏服，为尽死。
现代文：希烈生性残暴，临战在阵上杀人，血流于前，而饮食照常。所以人们怕他，为他尽力。
English: He is very cruel by nature, he kills people in battle, blood flows in front of him, but he still eats. So people are afraid of him and do their best for him.

古文：乘襄城之捷，进攻汴州，入之，运土木治道，怒不如程，驱人填堑，号 湿梢 。
现代文：希烈乘襄城战胜，更进攻汴州。入州后运土筑路。工程不能如期，就将人来填沟堑，称之为 湿梢 。
English: Xili defeated Xiangcheng and attacked Zhangzhou. After entering Zhangzhou, he transported earth to build a road. When the project did not meet the schedule, he sent people to fill in the ditches, calling them "wet ditches."

古文：勉奔宋州。
现代文：李勉逃奔宋州。
English: Li Mian fled to Songzhou.

古文：希烈已据汴，僭即皇帝位，国号楚，建元武成；以张鸾子、李绶、李元平为宰相，郑贲为侍中，孙广为中书令；披其地建四节度，以汴州为大梁府治，安州为南关。染石作玺。
现代文：希烈已据有汴州，僭即皇帝位，国号楚，建年号为武成；任张鸾子、李绶、李元平为宰相，郑贲为侍中，孙广为中书令；另剖地设置四节度，以汴州为大梁府治，以安州为南关，将石头染色做帝玺。
English: According to Hili, he already had Bozhou, Bozhou is the emperor's title, the country name is Chu, and the founding year is Wucheng; appointed Zhang Zizi, Li Xi, Li Yuanping as prime minister, Zheng Zi as an attendant, and Sun Guang as a Chinese calligrapher; in addition, he set up four sections, with Bozhou as Dalian Fuzhi, and Anzhou as Nanguan, and dyed the stone to make the imperial seal.

古文：又于上蔡、襄城获折车釭，奉以为瑞，惑其下。
现代文：又在上蔡、襄城缴获折车钅工，奉之以为瑞信，用以迷惑属下。
English: In addition, in Shangcai and Xiangcheng, they seized a forklift operator, which they used to confuse their subordinates by pretending to be Credit Suisse.

古文：因窥江淮，盛兵攻襄邑，守将高翼死之。
现代文：接着窥视江淮，大军攻襄邑，守将高翼战死。
English: Then he peered into the Huai River, the army attacked Xiangyuan, and the guard Gao Ying was killed in battle.

古文：于是汴滑副都统刘洽，率曲环、李克信军十馀万战白塔，不利，洽引还，卒柏少清揽辔曰： 公小不利遽北，奈何？ 
现代文：汴滑副都统刘洽率曲环、李克信军十多万人在白塔与之交战，不能取胜，洽退还。士兵柏少清拦住马辔说： 公小有不利就退兵，为什么？ 
English: Liu Cai, vice-governor of Handan, led Quhuan, and Li Kexin's army of more than 100,000 people fought with it in Baita. Unable to win, they agreed to return. Soldier Bai Shaoqing stopped Ma Wei and said: If the public elementary school is unfavorable, it will withdraw. Why?

古文：洽不听，夜入宋州。
现代文：刘洽不听，连夜入宋州。
English: Liu Cai didn't listen and went to Songzhou overnight.

古文：贼骤胜，径薄宁陵，舟乘衔踵进，亘七十里。
现代文：希烈军轻易取胜，径直进逼宁陵，车船相衔而进，连绵七十里。
English: The Hillel army easily won, went straight to force Ningling, cars and ships marched in line, stretching for seventy miles.

古文：时洽将高彦昭、刘昌共婴垒以守，贼使妖人祈风，火战棚尽，坎堞欲登。
现代文：那时，刘洽的将士高彦昭、刘昌共同筑工事守城，贼人让妖人祈求大风，将战棚全部烧毁，凿城堞登城。
English: At that time, Liu Cai's soldiers Gao Yan Zhao and Liu Chang jointly carried out construction work to defend the city. The thieves asked the sorcerers to pray for a strong wind, burned down all the battlements, and scaled the city walls.

古文：彦昭按剑乘陴，士感奋，风亦反。
现代文：彦昭提剑登城防守，士兵都感奋，风向也反。
English: When Hikoaki raised his sword to defend the city, the soldiers were excited and the wind was against them.

古文：昌计于众曰： 军法，倍不战。
现代文：刘昌与众人商议： 兵法，对方力量是我的两倍，则不战。
English: Liu Chang discussed with the crowd: In the art of war, if the other side is twice as strong as me, then there will be no battle.

古文：贼猥吾寡，不如退以骄贼，自宋出精锐，捣不意，功可成。 
现代文：贼人欺我兵少，不如暂退使贼骄傲，我们自宋出精锐部队，打他个出其不意，定能成功。
English: It is better to retreat temporarily to make the thief proud. We have produced elite troops since the Song Dynasty. If we take him by surprise, we will surely succeed.

古文：彦昭谢曰： 君少待，请尽力。 
现代文： 彦昭辞说： 您且慢，先尽力而为。 
English: Hiko Akechi said, "Wait, do your best first."

古文：乃登城誓众曰： 中丞欲示弱，覆而取之，诚善。
现代文：于是登城向众人发誓说 ：中丞打算让贼人看我们弱小，让城沦陷后再夺回。
English: So he went up to the city and swore to everyone, saying, "Nakajo intends to make the thieves see us as weak, so that the city will fall and then be recaptured."

古文：然我为守，得失在主人，今士创重者须供养，有如弃城去，则伤者死内，逃者死外，吾众尽矣！ 
现代文：这计策确实不错，但我今日守城，得失全在主持人。如今伤重者需要供养，如果我们弃城而去，那将会使伤者死在城内，逃亡者死在城外。我们大伙儿都完了。 
English: It's a good plan, but I'm defending the city today, and it's up to the host to decide whether I succeed or fail. The seriously injured need support now, and if we abandon the city, the injured will die in the city, and the fugitives will die outside the city. We're all finished.

古文：士皆泣，且拜曰： 公在是，谁敢去！ 
现代文：士兵都流泪，且跪誓： 公在这里，谁敢离开！ 
English: The soldiers all shed tears and swore on their knees: The public is here, who would dare to leave!

古文：昌大惭。
现代文：刘昌十分惭愧。
English: Liu Chang was very ashamed.

古文：彦昭击家牛犒军，士死战，斩首三千级。
现代文：彦昭杀了自家的牛犒军，士兵们都死战，杀贼三千人。
English: Hikoaki killed his own army of cattle rustlers. The soldiers fought to the death, killing three thousand thieves.

古文：请援于洽，其属作书，言城且危，彦昭视曰： 君轻我耶？ 
现代文：同时向刘洽请援兵。下属写信，信中说城危在旦夕，彦昭看了说： 您小看我吗？ 
English: At the same time, he asked Liu for reinforcements. A subordinate wrote a letter saying that the city was in imminent danger, and Yan Zhao read it and said: Do you underestimate me?

古文：取纸自为书。
现代文：取过纸来自己写信。
English: He took out a piece of paper to write a letter.

古文：洽得书，喜曰： 健将在西，吾何忧？ 
现代文：刘洽接到信，高兴地说： 有健将在西边，我还担心什么？ 
English: After receiving the letter, Liu Ciao said happily, "Yu Jian will be in the west, what should I worry about?

古文：选兵八百，夜艾而入，贼不知。
现代文：选了八百精兵，夜尽之前入城，贼人不知。
English: He chose eight hundred elite soldiers and entered the city before nightfall, unbeknownst to the thieves.

古文：诘旦傅城，士奋出，希烈大败，取其旆，斩首万计，追北至襄邑，收贼赀粮而还。
现代文：清晨贼人围城，城内士兵奋勇杀出，希烈大败。夺了他的旗，斩杀以万计，一直追杀到襄邑，收缴贼人们的财粮而回。
English: In the early morning, the bandits besieged the city. The soldiers in the city fought bravely and defeated the bandits. They took his flag, killed tens of thousands of people, chased them all the way to Xiangyun, collected the bandits' money and grain, and returned.

古文：洽表其功，拜彦昭御史大夫，实封百五十户。
现代文：刘洽上表报彦昭之功，升彦昭为御史大夫，赐实封一百五十户。
English: Liu Cai reported the merit of Yan Zhao on the table, promoted Yan Zhao to the position of goshi taifu, and granted a real envelope to one hundred and fifty households.

古文：希烈既沮却，而寿州刺史张建封亦屯固始，歊其旁。
现代文：希烈败退，寿州刺史张建封也屯守固始，在其旁扩充势力。
English: Defeated and retreating, Zhang Jianfeng, the famous statesman of Shoushu, also stayed in Gushi and expanded his power.

古文：希烈惧，还汴州，遣崇晖以精兵袭陈，复为洽败，俘众三万，执崇晖，进拔汴州，禽郑贲、刘敬宗、张伯元、吕子岩、李达干，希烈遁归蔡。
现代文：希烈担心，回到汴州，派崇晖率精兵偷袭陈州，又被刘洽打败，俘获崇晖及其兵众三万人。进而攻克汴州，擒获郑贲、刘敬宗、张伯元、吕子岩、李达干，希烈逃回蔡州。
English: Xili was worried, so he returned to Bozhou and sent Chong Li and his elite soldiers to attack Chenzhou. They were defeated by Liu Cai and captured Chong Li and his 30,000 soldiers. They then invaded Bozhou and captured Zheng Li, Liu Jingzong, Zhang Boyuan, Lv Ziyan and Li Dagan. Xili fled back to Caizhou.

古文：贼戍将孙液挈郑州降，帝即拜液为刺史。
现代文：贼戍将孙液带郑州降，皇帝即任孙液为刺史。
English: The bandit Xuan Zang took Sun Zi to Zhengzhou, and the emperor appointed Sun Zi as the crown prince.

古文：贞元二年，遣杜文朝寇襄州，为樊泽所破，获文朝。
现代文：贞元二年，希烈派杜文朝侵襄州，被樊泽打败，文朝亦被擒。
English: In the second year of Zhenyuan, Heraclius sent the Duwen Dynasty to invade Xiangzhou. They were defeated by Heze, and the Duwen Dynasty was also defeated.

古文：会皋、建封、环及李澄四略其地，势日蹙，希烈缩气不敢摇。
现代文：此时皋、建封、环及李澄四面攻略其地，希烈气势日蹙，龟缩不敢动。
English: At this time, Zou, Jianfeng, Huan and Li Cheng attacked the land on all sides. The fierce momentum of the sun was rising, and the tortoise did not dare to move.

古文：啖牛肉而病，亲将陈仙奇阴令医毒之以死。
现代文：后吃牛肉病倒，其亲将陈仙奇暗中令医生将他毒死。
English: After eating beef, he fell ill, and his father secretly ordered the doctor to poison him.

古文：始，希烈入汴，闻户曹参车窦良女美，强取之。
现代文：当初，希烈入汴州，听说户曹参军窦良的女儿很美，强娶之。
English: At the beginning, when Hyeres entered Bozhou, he heard that the daughter of Household Cao's conscript Dou Liang was very beautiful and forced her to marry him.

古文：女顾曰： 慎无戚，我能灭贼 后有宠，与贼秘谋，能转移之。
现代文：窦女对父亲说： 别难过，我能灭贼。 后来很得宠，参与贼人的密谋，且能使他们的谋划改变。
English: Dou's daughter said to her father, "Don't be sad, I can destroy the thieves," and later became very popular, participating in the thieves' conspiracy and being able to change their plans.

古文：尝称仙奇忠勇可用，而妻亦窦姓，愿如姒扰者，以固其夫，希烈许诺。
现代文：她曾说仙奇忠勇可用，仙奇之妻也姓窦，就对希烈说愿与仙奇妻结为姐妹，可以拉拢仙奇，希烈同意。
English: She once said that Xianqi Zhongyong was available, and Xianqi's wife was also surnamed Dou, so she said to Hyeres that she wished to marry Xianqi's wife as a sister, so that she could woo Xianqi, and Hyeres agreed.

古文：乘间往谓仙奇妻曰： 贼虽强，终必败，云何？ 
现代文：得到机会她就去对仙奇妻说： 贼现在虽强，终究必败。 
English: When she got the chance, she went to Xianqi's wife and said, "Though the thief is strong now, he will eventually be defeated."

古文：窦久而寤。
现代文：窦氏时间长了也就醒悟。
English: It took Dou a long time to come to his senses.

古文：及希烈死，子不发丧，欲悉诛诸将乃自立，未决。
现代文：及至希烈死，其子不发丧，想全部诛杀各将后自立，尚未最后决定。
English: And until the death of Hillel, his son did not mourn, he wanted to kill all the generals and then stand on his own, but he had not yet made a final decision.

古文：有献含桃者，窦请分遗仙奇妻，听之，因蜡帛丸杂果中，出所谋。
现代文：此时有来献樱桃的，窦氏请求分一些送给仙奇的妻子，其子同意，窦氏就用蜡封帛条夹在果子中，泄露其打算。
English: At this time, someone came to offer cherries, and Dou asked for some to give to Xianqi's wife. His son agreed, and Dou used a wax seal strip to clamp it in the fruit, revealing his intention.

古文：仙奇大惊，与薛育率兵噪而入。子出遍拜曰： 请去帝号，如淄青故事。 
现代文：仙奇大惊，就与薛育带兵鼓噪而入，希烈子出，遍拜各将说： 愿意去掉皇帝称号。如同淄青李纳一样。 
English: Xianqi was taken aback, so he and Xue Yu led the soldiers in with a loud drumming, and when Hercules came out, they all bowed and said, "I am willing to remove the title of emperor. Just like Gongqing Lina."

古文：语已，斩之，函希烈并妻子七首献天子，尸希烈于市。
现代文：话才说完，即被仙奇等斩杀。于是将李希烈及其妻、子共七人之头函封献天子，暴希烈尸于市。
English: Only after he had finished speaking, he was beheaded by Senchi and others. Therefore, the heads of Li Xilai, his wife, and their seven children were sealed and dedicated to the heavenly son, and the bodies of the martyrs were buried in the city.

古文：帝以仙奇忠，即拜淮西节度使，百姓给复二年。
现代文：皇帝因仙奇忠心，即任他为淮西节度使，当地百姓免赋二年。
English: Due to Xianqi's loyalty, the emperor appointed him as the festival envoy of Huaxi, and the local people were exempted from two years.

古文：俄为吴少诚所杀，有诏赠太子太保。
现代文：不久，仙奇被淮西兵马使一一一李希烈之宠将吴少诚所杀，诏追赠太子太保。
English: Soon after, Xianqi was killed by Wu Shaocheng, the favorite of Li Xilai, who was sent by the soldiers and horses of Huaixi Province, and was posthumously given the title of Prince Taibo.

古文：窦亦死。
现代文：窦氏也死。
English: Dou also died.

古文：硃泚，幽州昌平人。
现代文：黄巢，曹州冤句人。
English: Huang Chao, Caozhou Wrongful Convict.

古文：父怀珪，事安、史二贼，伪置柳城使。
现代文：世代为盐商，富有资财。擅长击剑骑射，略通书牍奏记，颇有口才，喜爱招养亡命之徒。
English: He came from a family of salt merchants and was wealthy. He excelled at fencing, horseback archery, reading and writing, was quite eloquent, and liked to recruit outlaws.

古文：泚资壮伟，腰腹十围，外宽和，中实很刻。
现代文：咸通末年，年岁依然不好，河南一带盗贼蜂起。
English: At the end of the year of Hamdang, the year is still bad, and the thieves around Henan have risen up.

古文：少推父廕，籍军中，与弟滔并为李怀仙部将。
现代文：乾符二年，濮州的名盗王仙芝自长垣发难，有徒众三千，践踏曹、濮二州，俘万人，势力日强。
English: In the second year of the Kianfu era, Wang Xianzhi, the famous thief of Zhangzhou, launched an attack from Nagakaki, with a crowd of three thousand, trampled on Cao and Yao in two states, captured ten thousand people, and became increasingly powerful.

古文：轻财好施，凡战所得，必分麾下士，以动其心，阴储凶德。
现代文：仙芝妄称为大将军，向各道发出檄文，说官吏贪婪、赋税苛繁、赏罚不公。宰相以之为耻，但僖宗全然不知。
English: Senshi arrogantly called himself the great general, and sent out a letter to all the provinces, saying that the officials were greedy, the taxes were exorbitant, and the rewards and punishments were unfair. The prime minister was ashamed of him, but Shizong did not know at all.

古文：硃希彩为节度使，颇委信之。
现代文：仙芝的悍将尚君长、柴存、毕师铎、曹师雄、柳彦璋、刘汉宏、李重霸等十多人大肆掠夺。
English: More than a dozen people, including Xianzhi's mighty generals Shang Junchang, Chai Cun, Bi Shizhen, Cao Shixiong, Liu Yancheng, Liu Hanhong, and Li Shigeba, plundered wildly.

古文：大历七年，希彩为下所杀，众未有属，泚方外屯，而滔主牙兵，尤狡谲，乃潜谂数十人大呼军门曰： 帅非硃公莫可！ 
现代文：黄巢喜欢叛乱，与他的同伙八人召募了几千人马响应仙芝，辗转在河南十五州作乱。
English: Huang Chao liked rebellion, and he and his eight accomplices recruited several thousand horses in response to Xian Zhi, and rode around the 15 prefectures of Henan to make trouble.

古文：众愕眙，因共诣泚，推知留后，遣使至京师听命。
现代文：徒众增至数万。皇帝派平卢节度使宋威和副使曹全日政多次击败贼寇。
English: The number of disciples increased to tens of thousands. The emperor sent Pinglu Jiedu to make Song Wei and the deputy envoy Cao Quanzhongsheng defeat the bandits many times.

古文：有诏检校左散骑常侍，即拜庐龙节度留后。
现代文：于是委任宋威为诸道行营招讨使，拨给步兵三千，骑兵五百。诏令河南各镇均归宋威指挥，派左散骑常侍曾元裕为招讨副使。
English: Therefore, Song Wei was appointed as the recruiting envoy for the campaigns in various provinces, and 3,000 infantry and 500 cavalry were assigned to him. It was decreed that all towns in Henan should be under the command of Song Wei, and Zeng Yuanyu, a left-handed cavalryman, was appointed as the recruiting deputy envoy.

古文：俄迁节度使，封怀宁郡王，实封户二百。
现代文：仙芝攻打沂州，宋威在城下将其击败，仙芝逃走。
English: Xianzhi attacked Zhangzhou, Song Wei defeated him at the foot of the city, and Xianzhi fled.

古文：泚上书谢，遣滔将兵西防秋。
现代文：宋威奏说大贼已死，擅自遣归各道兵马，自回青州，群臣皆入朝贺捷。
English: Song Weisuo said that the great thief was dead, and sent soldiers and horses back to various provinces without authorization. Since returning to Qingzhou, all the vassals have entered the morning of He Jie.

古文：代宗悦，手诏褒美。
现代文：过了三天，州县报告贼寇还在。
English: Three days later, the prefectural government reported that the bandits were still at large.

古文：居三年，求入朝。
现代文：那时士兵刚开始休息，又诏令他们归队出战，都很气忿，思想混乱。
English: At that time, the soldiers had just begun to rest, and they were ordered to return to the team to fight. They were all angry and confused.

古文：自幽州首为逆，怀仙以来，虽外臣顺，然不朝谒，而泚倡诸镇，以骑三千身入卫，有诏起第以待。
现代文：贼人乘机逼近郏城，不到十天连破八县。皇帝担心贼迫近洛阳，号令各道兵马集合拒敌，令凤翔、宁、泾原的兵守陕郡及潼关，元裕守东都，义成、昭义的人马卫护宫廷。仙芝攻汝州，杀了守将，刺史逃走，东都震惊，百官各自脱身逃跑。贼兵击破阳武，围郑州未能得手。
English: The bandits took advantage of the opportunity to approach Lucheng, and in less than ten days they broke through eight counties. The emperor was worried that the bandits were approaching Luoyang, and ordered the soldiers and horses of all provinces to gather to resist the enemy. He ordered the soldiers of Fengxiang, Ning and Yuyuan to guard Shaanxi County and Shaoguan, and the soldiers of Yuan Yu to guard Dongdu, and the soldiers and horses of Yicheng and Zhao Yi to guard the palace. Xianzhi attacked Ruzhou, killed the guard, stabbed Shi and fled, and Dongdu was shocked, and all the officials escaped. The bandits defeated Yangwu and

古文：既行，属疾，或劝还，泚曰： 舆吾尸，犹至京师。 
现代文：蚁聚在邓、汝间。潼关以东的州县大都害怕贼寇，闭城自守。
English: Ants are gathering in Deng and Ru. Most of the prefectures east of Shaoguan are afraid of thieves and robbers, and have closed their cities to protect themselves.

古文：将吏乃不敢言。时四方无事，天子觭日视朝。
现代文：仙芝纵兵四处攻击，攻陷郢、复二州，所过之处，烧杀抢掠几乎不剩活人。
English: Xianzhi's columns attacked in all directions, capturing Yunnan, and recapturing two provinces, burning, killing, and looting wherever they went, leaving almost no survivors.

古文：泚以偶日至，见内殿，赐乘舆马二、战马十、金纟采甚厚，士校皆有赐，宴赍隆渥。
现代文：官军急速追击，仙芝军就沿路丢弃财物，士兵争相拾取，逗留不进，仙芝军转入申、光等州，攻陷隋州，抓住刺史。在安州安营扎寨，又分奇兵围击，攻卢、寿、光等州。其时，宋威已年老昏聩，不胜军务，私下与元裕商议： 过去庞勋被灭，康承训就获罪。
English: The government army quickly pursued, and the Xianzhi army abandoned their belongings along the road. The soldiers scrambled to pick them up, but they could not get in. The Xianzhi army moved to Shen, Guang and other states, invaded Suizhou, and seized the history. They camped in Anzhou, and were besieged by the strange soldiers, and attacked Lu, Shou and Guang and other states. At that time, Song Wei was old and weak, unable to do military affairs, and privately discussed with Yuan Yu: In the past, Pang Xun was destroyed, and Kang Chengxun was convicted.

古文：泚之来，滔摄后务，稍稍翦落泚牙角。
现代文：我们剿贼虽能成功，但以后能免祸吗？不如对贼手下留情。
English: Although we thieves can succeed, will we be able to avoid disaster in the future? It is better to have mercy on the thieves.

古文：泚自知失权，为滔所卖，不得志，乃请留京师。
现代文：将来不幸他们成了皇帝，我们不失为有功之臣。 于是跟踪贼军三十里，观望而不交战。
English: In the future, unfortunately, they would become emperors, and we would become meritorious vassals, so we followed the bandits for thirty miles, watching but not fighting.

古文：帝因授滔节度留后，乃分防秋兵，使各有统：河阳、永平兵，郭子仪主之；决胜、杨猷兵，李抱玉主之；淮西、凤翔兵，马璘主之；汴宋、淄青兵，泚主之。
现代文：皇帝知道后，派陈许节度使崔安潜为行营都统，派前鸿胪卿李琢代宋威，右武卫上将军张自勉代元裕。贼出入蕲、黄，蕲州刺史裴渥劝说仙芝停战，条件是裴为他奏请封官。
English: After the emperor learned of this, he sent Chen Xu Jiedu to persuade Cui Anqian to become the commander-in-chief of the army, Li Tuo, the former Prince of Hongwu, to replace Song Wei, and Zhang Zimin, the commander-in-chief of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, to replace Yuan Yu. The thief went to and from the provinces of Handan, Huangshan, and Zhangzhou to persuade Pei Wo to end the war with Xian Zhi, on the condition that Pei would obtain an official seal for him.

古文：进同中书门下平章事，出屯奉天，赐禁中兵以为宠。
现代文：仙芝与巢等人到裴渥处宴饮。不久，诏任仙芝为左神策军押衙，派中人来宣诏抚慰。仙芝很高兴，但巢却怨恨没有封赏他，骂仙芝道 ：你降了，独自得官，五千多人怎么办？
English: Senshi and Nest and others went to feast at Peiwo's place. Soon after, the emperor appointed Senshi to escort Zuoshenchao's army, and sent a middle-ranking person to announce and comfort him. Senshi was very happy, but Nest was resentful that he was not rewarded, and scolded Senshi: "You've been demoted, you won the post all by yourself, what about more than five thousand people?"

古文：迁检校司空，代李抱玉为陇右节度副大使，仍知河西、泽潞行营兵马事。明年，徙王遂宁。德宗立，改镇凤翔，进封户三百。
现代文：给我兵马，我走。 
English: Give me the horse and I'll go.

古文：建中初，以李怀光代段秀实兼节度泾原，徙屯原州。
现代文：又举手打仙芝，打伤了头。仙芝怕众怒难犯，也不受命，转而袭击州兵，裴渥与中人逃走。
English: He also raised his hand to hit Xianzhi, injuring his head. Xianzhi was afraid of the public's anger, and did not accept the order, but instead attacked the National Guard. Pei Wo and the middle man fled.

古文：怀光前督作，泚与崔宁领兵继进。泾士素闻怀光暴，相恟惧，刘文喜因劫众以乱，请留秀实，又求属泚。
现代文：贼军分成了几路：尚君长入攻陈、蔡；黄巢北击齐、鲁，有一万人，攻入郓州，杀节度使薛崇，既而攻陷沂州，人马扩至几万，控制颍、蔡，固守山查岈山。
English: The bandit army was divided into several routes: Shangjun advanced to attack Chen and Cai; Huang Chao attacked Qi and Lu in the north, with ten thousand men; invaded Bozhou, killed Xue Chong, and then invaded Bozhou, expanding to tens of thousands of men and horses; controlled Handan and Cai; and held fast to the mountain of Zhaozhan.

古文：诏泚代怀光。
现代文：这时柳彦璋攻取江州，抓住刺史陶祥。
English: At this time, Yanukovych invaded Jiangzhou and seized the stronghold of Tao Xiang.

古文：文喜合兵二万乘城，使裨将刘海宾入陈事。
现代文：巢领兵又与仙芝会合，围宋州。张自勉的救兵到，杀贼二千人，仙芝撤围南下，渡汉水，攻荆南。
English: The leader of the nest also met with Xianzhi to encircle Songzhou. Zhang Zimin's rescuers arrived, killed two thousand thieves, Xianzhi withdrew to the south, crossed the Han River, and attacked Jingnan.

古文：海宾请： 假文喜节，臣当斩其首。 
现代文：此时节度使杨知温闭城坚守，贼纵火焚烧城楼，知温不出战。
English: At this time, Yang Zhiwen was forced to keep the city closed. Thieves set fire to the city hall, and Zhiwen did not go to war.

古文：帝曰： 尔诚忠，然我节不可得。 遣还，诏泚、怀光攻之，帝为减太官脯醢给军。
现代文：有诏令高骈代知温之职。骈派一万五千蜀兵运送粮食，按约定三十日到达时，城已被攻陷，知温逃走。贼迎战败走。
English: There was an imperial edict that Gao Gan should succeed Zhiyuan. He sent fifteen thousand Shu soldiers to transport grain, and when they arrived on the 30th as agreed, the city had been captured and Zhiyuan had fled. The bandits lost the battle and fled.

古文：文喜犹闭壁求救于吐蕃。
现代文：此时有诏命左武卫将军刘秉仁为江州刺史。
English: At this time, General Liu Bingren of Zuowei was ordered to write the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：吐蕃师兴，泚、怀光欲避之，别将韩游瑰曰： 戎若来，泾人必变，谁肯为反贼没身于虏者，少须之。面为异俗乎！ 
现代文：选精兵乘小船进入贼军栅，贼大惊，相率投降，柳彦璋被斩。
English: The selected soldiers entered the thieves' gate by boat, the thieves were shocked, they surrendered, and Yanukovych was beheaded.

古文：海宾果与其徒杀文喜，入泚军，泚一无所戮，由是泾人德之。诏加中书令，还屯，进拜太尉。
现代文：巢攻和州，不利。
English: Nest attack and state, unfavorable.

古文：滔合田悦叛，阴遣人与泚相闻，河东马燧获其书，帝召泚示之，泚惶惧请死。
现代文：仙芝围攻洪州，攻下后派徐唐莒守城。进而攻破朗、岳，围潭州，观察使崔瑾打退了他们。贼调兵向浙西，侵扰宣、润，未有所获。于是留驻江西，督促其他部队回河南。皇帝诏令崔安潜回忠武，重新起用宋威、曾元裕，恢复招讨使的名份，杨复光监军。
English: Xianzhi besieged Hongzhou, and after capturing it, sent Xu Tangyi to defend the city. He then attacked Lang, Yue, and Wai-Tanzhou, and the observation made Cui Wei beat them back. The thief transferred troops to western Zhejiang, intruded on Xuan and Run, but did not gain anything. So he stayed in Jiangxi and urged other troops to return to Henan. The emperor ordered Cui An to sneak back to Zhongwu, re-appointed Song Wei and Zeng Yuanyu, and restored the name of the envoy, Yang Fuguang.

古文：帝勉曰： 千里不同谋，卿何谢？ 
现代文：复光派手下吴彦宏带了诏书去招安。
English: Wu Yanhong, a subordinate of the Fuguang faction, brought an edict to recruit An.

古文：更以张镒节度凤翔，还泚京师，加实封千户，不朝请，中人监第。
现代文：仙芝派蔡温球、楚彦威、尚君长来降，准备到京都请罪。又送信给威要求任节度使。宋威假装答应，上奏时却说： 与君长交战，俘获了他。 
English: Senchi sent Cai Wenqiu, Chu Yanwei, and Shang Junlong to come down and prepare to plead guilty in Kyoto. He also sent a letter to Wei asking to be appointed as the envoy to the festival. Song Wei pretended to agree, but when it was played, he said: I fought with Junlong and captured him.

古文：李希烈围哥舒曜于襄城，诏泾原节度使姚令言督镇兵千东救曜，过阙下，师次浐水，京兆尹王翃使吏供军，粝饭菜肴，众怒不肯食，群噪曰： 吾等弃父母妻子前死敌，而乃食此，庸能持身蹈白刃耶？今琼林、大盈库宝訾如山，尚何往？ 
现代文：复光则坚持说他们是来投诚的。
English: Fuguang insisted that they had come to cast their votes.

古文：乃尽甲反旗而鼓。
现代文：皇帝派侍御史与中人前往查询，但无结果。
English: The emperor sent an attendant to inquire, but to no avail.

古文：帝闻，命中人持赐往，人二缣。
现代文：最后将君长等人在狗脊岭斩首。
English: Finally, they beheaded him and others at the Dog Ridge.

古文：士愈悖，射中人，中人返走。
现代文：仙芝怒，转回来攻洪州，进入外城。
English: Enraged, Xian Zhi turned back to attack Hongzhou and entered the outer city.

古文：时令言尚论兵禁中，既上变，乃驰至长乐坂，遇兵还，引满向令言。
现代文：宋威亲自救援，在黄梅将仙芝打败，杀贼兵五万人，俘获仙芝，将头传送京师。
English: Song Wei personally came to the rescue, defeated Xianzhi in Huangmei, killed fifty thousand soldiers, captured Xianzhi, and sent the head to Beijing.

古文：令言大呼曰： 引而东，富贵可取，何失计为灭族事？ 
现代文：当时，黄巢正围攻亳州，君长的弟弟尚让带领仙芝的残军来投奔，推举巢为王，号称 冲天大将军 ，任派各级官将，驱逼河南、山南百姓十多万人随之入淮南，建年号王霸。
English: At that time, Huang Chao was besieging Bozhou. His younger brother, Shang Zhan, led the remnants of Xian Zhi's army to take refuge. He promoted Huang Chao as king, and was known as the great general of Chong Tian. He appointed generals at all levels, and drove more than 100,000 people from Henan and Shannan into Huainan. He was known as the king of the founding year.

古文：众劫令言以西行。
现代文：曾元裕在申州打败贼军，死者万人。
English: Zeng Yuanyu defeated the bandit army in Shenzhou, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：帝复遣使者开谕，贼已阵通化门，杀使者。
现代文：皇帝因宋威错杀尚君长，且讨贼无功，诏令回青州，派元裕为招讨使，张自勉为副使。
English: Because Song Wei mistakenly killed Shang Junchang, and there was no success in finding the thief, the emperor ordered to return to Qingzhou, sent Yuan Yu as an envoy, and Zhang Zimin as a deputy envoy.

古文：帝遣普王与学士姜公辅载金彩慰抚。
现代文：巢攻破考城，陷濮州，元裕军驻扎荆、襄，援兵受阻。
English: The nest broke through Kaocheng, trapped Bozhou, the Yuan Yu army stationed Jing and Xiang, and the reinforcements were blocked.

古文：贼薄丹凤门，诏集六军，无至者。
现代文：改派自勉为东北面行营招讨使，监督各军急速讨贼。
English: He was re-assigned as the envoy to the northeast to supervise the rapid search for the thieves.

古文：先是，关东、河北战不利，禁兵悉东，卫士内空，而神策军使白志贞籍市人隶兵，听其居肆，私取庸自入，故遽迫皆不至。
现代文：巢正袭击襄邑、雍丘，诏令滑州节度使李峄坚守原武。
English: The nest was attacking Yang'eup and Yongqiu, and the edict of the Slanting Festival made Li Jian stick to Yuanwu.

古文：帝出苑北门，羽卫才数十，普王前导，皇太子、王韦二妃、唐安公主及中人百馀骑以从，右龙武军使令狐建以数百人殿。
现代文：巢进攻叶、阳翟，对东都虎视眈眈。其时，左神武大将军刘景仁率兵五千来援东都，河阳节度使郑延休以三千人马坚守河阴。
English: At that time, General Liu Jingren of the Left Shenwu Army led five thousand soldiers to support Dongdu, and the Heyang Festival made Zheng Yanxu defend Heyin with three thousand horses.

古文：夜至咸阳，饭数匕而去。贼已严何诸门，士人羸衣冒出，庐杞、关播、李竦皆逾垣走，与刘从一、赵赞、王翃、陆贽、吴通微等追及帝咸阳。
现代文：巢的人马在江西的被镇海节度使高骈打败；进攻新郑、郏、襄城、阳翟的，被崔安潜赶走；在浙西的被节度使裴璩斩杀了两员大将，战死的不可胜数。
English: In the west of Jiangxi Province, Gao Gan was defeated by Zhenhai Jiedu; in the west of Zhejiang Province, two generals were beheaded by Pei Jiedu; in the west of Zhejiang Province, two generals were killed by Zhenhai Jiedu; in the west of Zhejiang Province, two generals were killed by Pei Jiedu.

古文：郭曙与童奴数十猎苑中，闻跸，谒道左，帝劳之，恳乞从，许之。
现代文：巢大受挫折，于是到天平军乞降。
English: The nest suffered a great setback, so it went to the balance army to beg for surrender.

古文：迟晓至奉天，吏惶惧谒于门。
现代文：诏任巢为右卫将军。巢估计藩镇们各怀异心，不足以控制自己，又反叛而去。转攻浙东，抓住观察使崔趚。
English: Zhao appointed Nezu as the right guard general. Nezu estimated that the towns of the domain harbored different feelings, not enough to control themselves, and rebelled. He turned to eastern Zhejiang and seized the observation post of Cui Qi.

古文：浑瑊以数十骑自夹城入北内，裒兵欲击贼，闻乘舆出，遂奔奉天。
现代文：高骈因此派张氵、梁缵攻贼。巢败，收集残兵穿越江西，攻陷虔、吉、饶、信等州，开辟山道七百里，直达建州。当初，军中传唱民谣： 杀了读书郎，全军见阎王。 
English: As a result, Gao Gan sent Zhang Ye and Liang Ye to attack the bandits. After defeating the bandits, he collected the remaining soldiers, crossed the Jiangxi Province, invaded Kian, Ji, Rao, Xin and other provinces, and opened up a mountain road of seven hundred miles, reaching Jianzhou. At the beginning, the army sang a folk song: "Kill the bookworm, and the whole army will go to hell."

古文：于是人未知帝所在，逾三日，诸王群臣稍稍自间道至。
现代文：巢入闽，被俘的人假称是读书人的都放了。当时是乾符六年三月。巢军由小路围福州，观察使韦岫迎战而败，弃城逃跑。贼军入城，纵火烧房，杀人如麻。
English: At that time, it was March of the 6th year of the Heian period. The Nest Army surrounded Fuzhou from the back roads, watched Wei Wei lose the battle, abandoned the city and fled. The thief army entered the city, set fire to the house, and killed people.

古文：初，令言阵五门，卫兵不出，遂突入含元殿，周呼曰： 天子出矣，今日共可取富贵！ 
现代文：走过崇文馆校书郎黄璞家，下令说： 这是儒者的家，不能烧。 又找到了隐士周朴，问他 ：你能跟我吗？ 朴答 ：天子的官我都不当，怎会从贼？ 
English: He walked past the house of Huang Xuan, the school scribe of the Chongwen Hall, and ordered, "This is the house of a Confucian, it cannot be burned." He also found the hermit Zhou Pu, and asked him, "Can you follow me?" Pu replied, "I am not worthy to be an official of the Son of Heaven, how could I be a thief?"

古文：噪而进，掠宜春苑，入诸宫。
现代文：巢怒，斩杀朴。当时，闽地各州均沦陷，诏令高骈为诸道行营都统，前往讨贼。
English: At that time, all the states in the country had fallen, and the emperor ordered Gao Wei to go to all the provinces to fight against the bandits.

古文：奸人因乱窃入内府盗赀宝，终夜不绝。
现代文：巢攻陷桂管，进而攻广州，送信给节度使李迢，求表荐为天平节度，又胁迫崔趚在朝中为他说话。
English: He invaded Guizhou, and then Guangzhou, sent a letter to the ruler of the state, Li Xi, asking for a recommendation for the ruler of the balance of power, and coerced Cui Xi to speak for him in the court of the emperor.

古文：道路更剽掠，居人严兵自保。
现代文：宰相郑畋准备同意，卢携、田令孜坚持不可。
English: Prime Minister Zheng Rong was ready to agree, but Lu Cui and Tian Lingzi insisted.

古文：贼无属，畏不能久，以泚昔在泾有恩，且失权久，庸思乱，乃相谋曰： 太尉方囚锢，若迎之，事可济。 
现代文：巢又要求任安南都护、广州节度使，皇帝令众臣商议。右仆射于琮说 ：南海船舶来往，每年获利甚多。
English: He also asked to appoint Annan as the guardian of the capital and Guangzhou as the envoy of the festival, and the emperor ordered all the ministers to discuss it. His right-hand man, Sha Yuqi, said: The ships in the South China Sea make a lot of profit every year.

古文：令言率百馀骑见泚，泚伪让不答，留使者饮，以观众心。
现代文：如果被贼人所得，他将增富而国家收益大减。 于是任巢为率府率。
English: If the robbed person gains, he will become richer and the country's income will be greatly reduced.

古文：乃拜巢率府率。巢见诏大诟，急攻广州，执李迢，自号 义军都统 ，露表告将入关，因诋宦竖柄朝，垢蠹纪纲，指诸臣与中人赂遗交构状，铨贡失才，禁刺史殖财产，县令犯赃者族，皆当时极敝。
现代文：巢见诏书后大骂，急攻广州，捉住李迢，自称 义军都统 ，张榜扬言将入关，并诟骂宦官佞臣窃掌大权，破坏朝廷纲纪，指斥众臣与宦官狼狈为奸，选拔官员不看才能等等，都是当时的弊病。皇帝斥责宋威失策，罢其官。
English: After seeing the imperial edict, he swore loudly, attacked Guangzhou in a hurry, captured Li Wei, called himself the "unification of the rebel army," and threatened to enter the customs. He also cursed the eunuchs and eunuchs for stealing power, destroyed the imperial discipline, accused the eunuchs and eunuchs of being in cahoots, and selected officials without considering their talents. These were all the ills of the time. The emperor rebuked Song Wei for his blunders and dismissed his officials.

古文：天子既惩宋威失计，罢之，而宰相王鐸请自行，乃拜鐸荆南节度使、南面行营招讨都统，率诸道兵进讨。鐸屯江陵，表泰宁节度使李系为招讨副使、湖南观察使，以先锋屯潭州，两屯烽驿相望。
现代文：宰相王铎自荐代任，于是任王铎为荆南节度使、南面行营招讨都统，率领各道兵马进剿。铎屯兵江陵，表荐泰宁节度使李系为招讨副使、湖南观察使，派他为讨贼先锋屯驻潭州。两屯驿使相通，烽火相望。
English: Prime Minister Wang Qian recommended himself as a substitute, so Wang Qian was appointed as the Jingnan Festival envoy. He went to the south to campaign for the recruitment of Tudong and led the soldiers and horses of each province into the camp. He went to the camp of Jiangling, recommended the Taining Festival, made Li Jie as the recruiting deputy envoy and Hunan observation envoy, and sent him as the pioneer of the traitors to camp in Tanzhou. The two camp envoys communicated with each other and looked forward to the bonfire.

古文：会贼中大疫，众死什四，遂引北还。
现代文：恰逢巢军传染瘟疫，死者有十分之四，巢领兵北还。
English: It coincided with the plague infecting the Nest Army. Four out of ten died, but the Nest Leader was still alive.

古文：自桂编大桴，沿湘下衡、永，破潭州，李系走朗州，兵十馀万闉焉，投胔蔽江。
现代文：从桂编大木筏，沿湘江而下，陷衡、永等州又击破潭州，李系逃到朗州。官军十余万人全被歼灭，尸体投入江中几乎断流。
English: From Guizhou, they made a large raft and went down along the Hunan River, and from Zengheng and Yongzhou, they broke through Tanzhou, and Li fled to Lanzhou. More than 100,000 government troops were completely annihilated, and the bodies were thrown into the river, almost cutting off the flow.

古文：进逼江陵，号五十万。
现代文：巢进逼江陵，号称五十万。
English: Nest into the Jiangling, reputed to be half a million.

古文：鐸兵寡，即乘城。
现代文：铎兵少，闭城不战。
English: With fewer soldiers, the city was closed and there was no fighting.

古文：先此，刘汉宏已略地，焚庐廥，人皆窜山谷。
现代文：起先，刘汉宏已侵入，纵火焚烧，百姓们避入山谷。
English: At first, Liu Hanhong had invaded, set fire and burned, and the people fled into the valley.

古文：俄而系败问至，鐸弃城走襄阳，官军乘乱纵掠，会雨雪，人多死沟壑。
现代文：接着李系战败的消息传来。铎弃城逃至襄阳，官军乘乱掠夺。遇大雪，僵尸满野。
English: Then came the news of the defeat of the Li dynasty. The abandoned city fled to Yangyang, and the government army plundered it. In the event of heavy snow, zombies were everywhere.

古文：其十月，巢据荆南，胁李迢草表报天子。迢曰： 吾腕可断，表不可为。 
现代文：那年十月，巢盘踞荆南，胁迫李迢上书天子，迢说： 我手腕可断，这样的表不可写。 
English: In October of that year, Jing Nan, the leader of the group, coerced Li Yao to write a letter to the emperor. Yao said, "I can break my wrist, but I can't write such a letter."

古文：巢怒，杀之。
现代文：巢怒，杀迢。
English: The nest is angry and kills the chicks.

古文：欲进蹑鐸，会江西招讨使曹全晸与山南东道节度使刘巨容壁荆门，使沙陀以五百骑钌辔藻鞯望贼阵纵而遁，贼以为怯。
现代文：又准备去追赶王铎。那时江西招讨使曹全日政与山南东道节度使刘巨容坚守荆门，派沙陀将五百匹马佩上华丽的鞍辔朝贼营放去，人则逃走，贼以为官军胆怯。
English: At that time, Jiangxi Province invited Cao Quanzhong and Shannan Province to host a festival to persuade Liu Jirong to hold fast to Jingmen, and sent Shado to put five hundred horses wearing magnificent saddles to the North Korean bandits' camp, but the people fled, and the bandits thought that the government army was timid.

古文：明日，诸将乘以战，而马识沙陀语，呼之辄奔还，莫能禁。
现代文：第二天，将领们乘这些马出战。马听懂沙陀语，呼唤它们就都跑回来了，无法禁止。
English: The next day, the generals rode out to battle on these horses. The horses understood the Sado language, and when they were called out, they all came running back. It was impossible to stop them.

古文：官兵伏于林，斗而北，贼急追，伏发，大败之，执贼渠十二辈。
现代文：官兵埋伏林中，另一些兵出战，失败逃跑，贼急追，伏兵齐出，抓住将领十二人，贼人大败。
English: The officers and soldiers lay in ambush in the forest, some other soldiers went out to fight, failed to escape, the thieves hurriedly chased, the ambush came out in full force, seized twelve generals, and the thieves were defeated.

古文：巢惧，度江东走，师促之，俘什八，鐸招汉宏降之。
现代文：黄巢惊惧，渡江东逃，官军追上来，俘获十分之八。铎招降汉宏。
English: Huang Chao panicked and fled across the East River. The government army caught up with him and captured eight-tenths of him. Han Hong was forced to abdicate.

古文：或劝巨容穷追，答曰： 国家多负人，危难不吝赏，事平则得罪，不如留贼冀后福。 
现代文：有人劝巨容穷追到底。巨容说 ：国家常背信负约，有危难时，舍得重赏；稍得安宁就弃若敝屣，甚至反被治罪。不如留下一些贼寇以企求以后的富贵。 
English: Someone advised Kojong to pursue the matter to the end. Kojong said, "Countries often break their promises and renege on treaties. When there is a crisis, they are willing to pay a heavy price. If there is a little bit of peace, they will give up and even be punished. It is better to leave some thieves and robbers to seek future wealth."

古文：止不追，故巢得复整，攻鄂州，入之。
现代文：于是止军不追，巢因之得重整旗鼓，攻陷了鄂州。
English: As a result, the army did not pursue, and the nest was forced to regroup and attack Ezhou.

古文：全晸将度江，会有诏以段彦枌代其使，乃止。
现代文：全日政准备渡江追贼，正好有诏书来，让段彦莫言代其职，渡江作罢。
English: The all-day government was preparing to cross the river to chase the thief, when an imperial edict came, telling Duan Yan to take over his duties and stop crossing the river.

古文：巢畏袭，转掠江西，再入饶、信、杭州，众至二十万。
现代文：巢担心被袭击，转而侵江西，再入饶、信、杭州。人马聚至二十万。
English: Nest worried about being attacked, turned to invade Jiangxi, and then into Rao, Xin, Hangzhou. People and horses gathered to two hundred thousand.

古文：攻临安，戍将董昌兵寡，不敢战，伏数十骑莽中，贼至，伏弩射杀贼将，下皆走。
现代文：攻临安，守将董昌兵少，不敢迎战，派几十人埋伏丛林中，贼来，就用箭射杀其将领，士兵们就都作鸟兽散了。
English: In attacking Lin'an, the garrison commander, Dong Chang, had few soldiers and did not dare to fight. He sent dozens of men to lie in ambush in the jungle. When the thieves came, they shot his generals with arrows, and the soldiers were scattered like animals and birds.

古文：昌进屯八百里，见舍媪曰： 有追至，告以临安兵屯八百里矣。 
现代文：昌进驻八百里，见一老妇人，对她说： 如有追兵来，你告诉他们临安军屯扎八百里。 
English: Chang entered the eight-hundred-mile garrison and saw an old woman. He said to her, "If there are any pursuing soldiers, tell them that the Lin'an army is stationed eight hundred miles away.

古文：贼骇曰： 向数骑能困我，况军八百里乎？ 
现代文：贼人听说后惊道： 前次只几个人就能挫败我们，如今有屯扎八百里这么多的人马，如何了得。 
English: After hearing this, the thief was surprised and said, "Last time, only a few people could defeat us, but now there are so many people from eight hundred miles away.

古文：乃还，残宣、歙等十五州。
现代文：于是退军扫荡了宣、歙等十五州。
English: As a result, the retreating army swept through 15 provinces, including Xuan and Handan.

古文：广明元年，淮南高骈遣将张潾度江败王重霸，降之。
现代文：广明元年，淮南高骈派张氵渡江打败了王重霸，重霸降。
English: In the first year of the Guangming Dynasty, Zhang Ye of the Huainan Gaozhen faction crossed the river and defeated Wang Chongba. Chongba was demoted.

古文：巢数却，乃保饶州，众多疫，别部常宏以众数万降，所在戮死。诸军屡奏破贼，皆不实，朝廷信之，稍自安。
现代文：另一支队伍常宏带领几万人投降，然都被杀死。各路军多次上报破贼，其实都是虚报，朝廷信以为真，稍觉安心。
English: Another team, led by Changhong, surrendered with tens of thousands of men, but they were all killed. All the armies repeatedly reported to the emperor that they had defeated the bandits, but in fact they were false reports, which the imperial court believed to be true, and felt a little relieved.

古文：巢得计，破杀张潾，陷睦、婺二州，又取宣州。而汉宏残众复奋，寇宋州，掠申、光，来与巢合，济采石，侵扬州。
现代文：巢用计成功，打败杀死张氵，攻陷睦、婺二州，又攻取宣州，此时汉宏的残部卷土重来，进攻宋州，夺取申、光两地来与巢会合。在采石渡江，侵扰扬州。
English: The nest was successful in its strategy, defeating and killing Zhang Qian, attacking and capturing Mutsu, capturing two states, and capturing Xuanzhou. At this time, the remnants of Han Hong made a comeback, attacking Songzhou, seizing Shen and Guangxi to meet with the nest. In quarrying, crossing the river, and invading Yangzhou.

古文：高骈按兵不出。诏兗海节度使齐克让屯汝州，拜全晸天平节度使兼东面副都统。
现代文：高骈按兵不动，诏令兖海诲节度使齐克让屯扎汝州，任全日政为天平节度使兼东面副都统。
English: Gao Jian did not move his troops, and the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict

古文：贼方守滁、和，全晸以天平兵败于淮上。
现代文：贼兵正驻守在滁、和，全日政用天平兵迎敌，败于淮上。
English: The robber soldiers were stationed in Zibo, He, and the whole day the government used the balance soldiers to meet the enemy, and was defeated in Huaijian.

古文：宰相豆卢彖计： 救师未至，请假巢天平节度使，使无得西，以精兵戍宣武，塞汝、郑路，贼首可致矣。 
现代文：宰相豆卢王彖建议 ：救兵未到，请暂派巢为天平节度使，使他不再西进，另派精兵坚守宣武，堵塞汝、郑的通路，贼人的脑袋就可取得了。 
English: Prime Minister Dou Lu Wang Yao suggested: Before the arrival of the rescuers, please temporarily send a nest to the balance of power, so that he will no longer advance westward, and send elite soldiers to adhere to the proclamation of martial law, block the passage of you and Zheng, and the thief's head can be obtained.

古文：卢携执不可，请 召诸道兵壁泗上，以宣武节度统之，则巢且还寇东南，徘徊山浙，救死而已 。
现代文：卢携坚持不行，建议： 召各道人马扼守泗上，令宣武节度统辖各军，这样，巢将回侵东南，仅能在山、浙一带徘徊，偷生而已。 
English: Lu Zhe insisted that it was not possible, and suggested: to call on people and horses from all walks of life to keep a tight rein on the cocoon, and to order Xuanwu Jiedu to take control of all the armies. In this way, the nest would invade the southeast, and it would only be able to wander around the mountains and Zhejiang, only to sneak out.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：前此已诏天下兵屯溵水，禁贼北走。
现代文：在此之前，已诏令天下兵屯守氵殷水，防止贼人北逃。
English: Prior to this, the imperial edict had ordered the whole country's soldiers to stand guard at Yan'an Water to prevent the thieves from fleeing north.

古文：于是徐兵三千道许，其帅薛能馆徐众城中，许人惊谓见袭，部将周岌自溵水还，杀能，自称留后。
现代文：此时徐州兵三千人经过许，帅薛能让其人马住在城中，许人见了以为被偷袭，大惊，部将周岌自氵殷水回来，杀了能，自称是留后。
English: At this time, three thousand Xuzhou soldiers passed by Xu. The handsome Xue Neng let his men and horses live in the city. When Xu saw them, he thought he was being attacked and was shocked. The commander Zhou Rui came back from Yan'an water and killed Neng, claiming to be a left-behind.

古文：徐军闻乱，列将时溥亦引归，囚其帅支详。
现代文：徐军听说乱起，列将时溥领兵回去，囚禁其帅支详。
English: When Xu's army heard of the riot, they ordered Shi Yan to lead the soldiers back and imprisoned him.

古文：兗海齐克让惧下叛，引军还兗州，溵水屯皆散。
现代文：兖海齐克让担心手下叛乱，领军回兖州，氵殷水的驻军星散。
English: Bohai Zik was worried that his subordinates would rebel, so he led his army back to Bozhou, and the garrison in Yan'an was scattered.

古文：巢闻，悉众度淮，妄称 率土大将军 ，整众不剽掠，所过惟取丁壮益兵。
现代文：巢得知情况后，带领全部人马渡淮，妄称 率土大将军 。整肃军纪，不抢不杀，只是招募青壮年增加其兵力。
English: After the nest learned of the situation, he led all the men and horses to Duhuai, claiming to be the leader of the local general. To rectify military discipline, not to rob or kill, but to recruit young adults to increase their strength.

古文：李罕之犯申、光、颍、宋、徐、兗等州，吏皆亡。
现代文：李罕之侵犯申、光、颍、宋、徐、兖等州，官吏均逃走。
English: Li Han's invasion of Shen, Guang, Yao, Song, Xu, Yao and other states, the officials all fled.

古文：巢自将攻汝州，欲薄东都。
现代文：巢自将兵攻汝州，想逼近东都。
English: Cao Zi led his troops to attack Ruzhou, hoping to close in on Dongdu.

古文：当是时，天子冲弱，怖而流泪，宰相更共建言，悉神策并关内诸节度兵十五万守潼关。
现代文：那时，天子尚幼，因害怕而哭泣，宰相们共同建议，调集所有神策军及关内各节度的兵马十五万守潼关。
English: At that time, the heavenly son was still young and cried out of fear. The prime ministers jointly proposed to mobilize all the Shinsaka troops and 150,000 soldiers and horses of each sect in Kansai to guard Shoguan.

古文：田令孜请自将而东，然内震扰，前说帝以幸蜀事。
现代文：田令孜请求自己领兵东讨，但朝内震惊，劝说皇帝避难蜀地。
English: Tian Lingze requested that he lead the army east to discuss, but the court was shocked and persuaded the emperor to take refuge in Shu.

古文：帝自幸神策军，擢左军骑将张承范为先锋，右军步将王师会督粮道，以飞龙使杨复恭副令孜。于是募兵京师，得数千人。
现代文：皇帝去看望神策军，升左军骑将张承范为先锋，右军步将王师会督粮草，以飞龙使杨复恭为令孜副手，于是在京师募兵，招了几千人。
English: The emperor went to visit Shenshao's army. Zhang Chengfan, the cavalry commander of the left army, became the vanguard, Wang Shihui, the commander of the right army, became the commander of grain and grass, and Yang Fuqiong, the commander of the flying dragon, became the deputy commander, so he recruited soldiers in the Beijing division and recruited several thousand people.

古文：当是时，巢已陷东都，留守刘允章以百官迎贼。
现代文：当时，巢已攻陷东都，留守刘允章带百官迎贼。
English: At that time, the nest had captured Dongdu, leaving Liu Yunzhang with a hundred officials to meet the thieves.

古文：巢入，劳问而已，里闾晏然。帝饯令孜章信门，赍遗丰优。
现代文：巢入都，劳问众人，没有惊动百姓，皇帝在章信门为令孜饯行，馈赠优厚。
English: When he entered the capital, he asked many people for help, but did not alarm the people. The emperor went to the Zhangxin Gate to give orders, and the gifts were generous.

古文：然卫兵皆长安高赀，世籍两军，得禀赐，侈服怒马以诧权豪，初不知战，闻料选，皆哭于家，阴出赀雇贩区病坊以备行阵，不能持兵，观者寒毛以忄栗。
现代文：不过卫兵都是长安的富家子弟，世代都任两军，收入赏赐甚多，只会用骏马美服以夸耀权势，全然不懂战事，听说要出征，都在家中痛哭，于是暗中出钱雇用街坊中的穷人做替身。这些人不会用武器，看来令人毛骨悚然。
English: However, the guards are all the children of rich families in Chang'an. For generations, they have served in both armies. They have been rewarded with a lot of income. They only use fine clothes to boast of their power. They do not understand warfare at all. When they heard that they were going to go to war, they all cried bitterly at home. Therefore, they secretly paid money to hire poor people in the neighborhood as stand-ins. These people do not use weapons, which seems creepy.

古文：承范以强弩三千防关，辞曰： 禄山率兵五万陷东都，今贼众六十万，过禄山远甚，恐不足守。 
现代文：承范带领三千精强弓箭手守关，告辞说： 当年安禄山率兵五万攻陷东都。如今黄巢军有六十万，远远超过禄山，恐怕会守不住的。 
English: He said in his farewell speech, "That year, An Lushan led 50,000 soldiers to attack the Eastern Capital. Today, the Yellow Nest Army has 600,000 soldiers, far more than Lushan, and I'm afraid we won't be able to defend it."

古文：帝不许。
现代文：皇帝不同意增兵。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：贼进取陕、虢，檄关戍曰： 吾道淮南，逐高骈如鼠走穴，尔无拒我！ 
现代文：巢兵攻取了陕、虢，警告守关将士说： 我经过淮南，把高骈打得抱头鼠窜。你们不要违抗我。 
English: The soldiers captured Shaanxi and Yunnan, and warned the guards: "I have passed through Huainan and beaten Gao Yunnan to a pulp. Don't disobey me."

古文：神策兵过华，裹三日粮，不能饱，无斗志。
现代文：神策兵过华州，带三天的粮食，不够吃，士兵无斗志。
English: Shen Zhe's soldiers crossed Huazhou with three days' worth of grain, not enough to eat, and no fighting spirit.

古文：十二月，巢攻关，齐克让以其军战关外，贼少却。
现代文：十二月，巢军攻关，齐克让领兵在关外迎战，贼军略退。
English: In December, the Nest Army attacked the pass, Zeke let the leader meet the enemy outside the pass, and the thief army retreated slightly.

古文：俄而巢至，师大呼，川谷皆震，时士饥甚，潜烧克让营，克让走入关。
现代文：一会儿黄巢到了，全军都大声喊叫，山川都为之震动。当时兵士十分饥饿，烧了克让的营盘，克让逃进关内。
English: After a while, the Yellow Nest arrived, the whole army shouted loudly, and the mountains and rivers were shaken. At that time, the soldiers were very hungry and burned Keren's camp. Keren fled into the prison.

古文：承范出金谕军中曰： 诸君勉报国，救且至。 
现代文：承范拿出钱来对军士们说 ：大家务必勉力报国，援军马上就到。 
English: He took out the money and said to the sergeants: "We must do our best to report to the country, reinforcements will arrive soon."

古文：士感泣，拒战。贼见师不继，急攻关，王师矢尽，飞石以射，巢驱氏内堑，火关楼皆尽。
现代文：士兵们感动得泪下，出而拒敌，贼军见官军没有后继，猛力攻关。官军箭用尽了，就用石头代箭。巢逼迫百姓掘土填堑，放火将关楼烧尽。
English: The soldiers were moved to tears and came out to resist the enemy. Seeing that the government army had no successors, the thief army attacked the pass. When the government army ran out of arrows, they used stones to replace the arrows. The nest forced the people to dig and fill the mound, and set fire to burn down the gatehouse.

古文：始，关左有大谷，禁行人，号 禁谷 。
现代文：当初，关左有条大谷，禁止行人入内，称为 禁谷 。
English: Originally, there was a large valley to the left of the pass, which was off-limits to pedestrians and was known as the Forbidden Valley.

古文：贼至，令孜屯关，而忘谷之可入。
现代文：贼军来，令孜守关，忘记此谷可通关内。
English: When the bandits come, let them guard the gate. Forget this valley, they can pass through the gate.

古文：尚让引众趋谷，承范惶遽，使师会以劲弩八百邀之，比至，而贼已入。
现代文：尚让领众人奔向禁谷，承范警觉，急派师会带八百强健弓箭手拦截，待师会等赶到，贼人已入。
English: He still let the leaders of the crowd run to the Forbidden Valley, following the example of vigilance, dispatching a division with eight hundred strong archers to intercept, waiting for the division to arrive, the thieves have entered.

古文：明日，夹攻关，王师溃。
现代文：第二天，巢军内外夹攻，官军大败。
English: The next day, the Nest Army attacked both inside and outside, and the government army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：师会欲自杀，承范曰： 吾二人死，孰当辨者？
现代文：师会准备自杀，承范说： 我们两人死了，谁还能据实报告呢？
English: The teacher's association was preparing to commit suicide, and Shonan said: We are both dead, who can truthfully report this?

古文：不如见天子以实闻，死未晚。 
现代文：不如见天子报告实情，那时再死也不晚。 
English: It's better to see the Son of God and report the truth, then it's not too late to die.

古文：乃羸服逃。
现代文：于是换上破衣逃走。
English: He then put on tattered clothes and fled.

古文：始，博野、凤翔军过渭桥，见募军服鲜燠，怒曰： 是等何功，遽然至是！ 
现代文：起先，博野、凤翔军经过渭桥，见召募来的兵士衣服既新且暖，极为气愤，说 ：他们有什么功劳，竟然能吃好穿好。 
English: At first, when the troops of Bono and Fengxiang passed over the Long Bridge and saw the new and warm clothes of the soldiers who had been called up, they were extremely angry and said, "What merit do they have to be able to eat well and dress well?"

古文：更为贼乡导，前贼归，焚西市。
现代文：转而替贼军当向导，在贼军前回来，焚烧西市。
English: Instead, he acted as a guide for the bandits and returned before the bandits to burn West City.

古文：帝类郊祈哀。会承范至，具言不守状。
现代文：皇帝去郊祭祈神，正逢承范回来，详细报告潼关失守的情况。
English: The emperor went to the suburb festival to pray to the gods, and just as he returned, he reported in detail the situation of the loss of Shiguan.

古文：帝黜宰相卢携。
现代文：皇帝罢黜宰相卢携。
English: The emperor dismissed Prime Minister Roh Jip.

古文：方朝，而传言贼至，百官奔，令孜以神策兵五百奉帝趋咸阳，惟福、穆、潭、寿四王与妃御一二从，中人西门匡范统右军以殿。
现代文：正朝见群臣，传说贼兵到了，百官惊恐逃散，令孜带五百神策兵保护皇帝去咸阳，同行的只有福、穆、潭、寿四王与一两位嫔妃，中人西门匡范带右军殿后。
English: Zheng Dynast saw the group of courtiers, the legendary thief soldiers arrived, hundreds of officials fled in fear, and ordered Zi to go to Xianyang with five hundred divine soldiers to protect the emperor. Only the four kings of Fu, Mu, Tan and Shou and one or two concubines accompanied him, and the middle-aged man Ximen Kuangfan led the right army behind the palace.

古文：巢以尚让为平唐大将军，盖洪、费全古副之。
现代文：巢委任尚让为平唐大将军，盖洪、费全古为副将军。
English: Nest appointed Shangjian as the general of Ping Tang, and Gaihong and Fei Quanguo as deputy generals.

古文：贼众皆被发锦衣，大抵辎重自东都抵京师，千里相属。
现代文：贼人都披发穿锦衣。大多数物资都从东都运来，车队连绵千里。
English: Most of the supplies are transported from the east, and the convoys stretch for thousands of miles.

古文：金吾大将军张直方与群臣迎贼灞上。
现代文：金吾大将军张直方与群臣在灞上迎接黄巢。
English: Kingu's Grand General Zhang Naofang and his vassals were on the raft to welcome Huang Chao.

古文：巢乘黄金舆，卫者皆绣袍、华帻，其党乘铜舆以从，骑士凡数十万先后之。
现代文：巢乘黄金车，卫队们都穿绣袍，红布束发。他的党羽们乘铜车随后，几十万骑士前后相随。
English: Nest rode in a golden chariot, his guards all wearing embroidered robes and red cloth. His followers rode in a bronze chariot, followed by hundreds of thousands of knights.

古文：陷京师，入自春明门，升太极殿，宫女数千迎拜，称黄王。
现代文：从春明门进入京师，登太极殿，数千宫女跪拜迎接，口称 黄王 。
English: Entering the capital from the Chunming Gate and ascending the Taiji Hall, thousands of palace maids kneel to greet him, known as the Yellow King.

古文：巢喜曰： 殆天意欤！ 
现代文：巢高兴地说： 这是天意啊。 
English: Nest happily said: This is God's will.

古文：巢舍田令孜第。贼见穷民，抵金帛与之。
现代文：巢住在田令孜的宅子里，贼见到穷人，就送钱财给他们。
English: The nest lived in Tian Lingzi's house. When the thief saw poor people, he would give them money.

古文：尚让即妄晓人曰： 黄王非如唐家不惜而辈，各安毋恐。 
现代文：尚让还对大家说 ：黄王不像唐廷那样不爱惜你们。各人安心，不必惊慌。 
English: Shangzhan also said to everyone: The Yellow King does not love you as much as Tang Ting. Everyone is at ease, there is no need to panic.

古文：甫数日，因大掠，缚棰居人索财，号 淘物 。
现代文：才过几天，就大肆抢掠起来，把百姓捆绑鞭打索要财物，称之为 淘物 。
English: Just a few days later, they began to plunder the people, tying them up and whipping them to demand their property, which they called "amono."

古文：富家皆跣而驱，贼酋阅甲第以处，争取人妻女乱之，捕得官吏悉斩之，火庐舍不可赀，宗室侯王屠之无类矣。巢斋太清宫，卜日舍含元殿，僭即位，号大齐。求衮冕不得，绘弋绨为之；无金石乐，击大鼓数百，列长剑大刀为卫。
现代文：没有金石乐器，就击大鼓为乐，排列长剑大刀为卫。
English: Without gold and stone musical instruments, they beat large drums for music and lined up long swords and large swords for defense.

古文：大赦，建元为金统。
现代文：下令大赦，建年号为金统。
English: An amnesty was decreed, and the year of establishment was given as Kim Tong.

古文：王官三品以上停，四品以下还之。因自陈符命，取 广明 字，判其文曰： 唐去丑口而著黄，明黄当代唐；又黄为土，金所生，盖天启 云。
现代文：唐官三品以上的都罢职，四品以下的留用不动，并陈列符命，取 广明 二字，解释说： 唐 字去掉 肀 、 口 而加上 黄 ，就是 广 字，明白告知黄该代唐。又黄是土，是金所生。我当皇帝全是天意。 
English: Tang officials with three or more pins were dismissed, and those with four or less pins were left in place, and they displayed their futsal lives, took 广明 two characters, and explained: Tang characters removed,口 and added 黄, that is, 广 字, to clearly inform Huang of the Tang Dynasty. Moreover, 黄 is earth, is born of gold. I am an emperor by the will of heaven.

古文：其徒上巢号承天应运启圣睿文宣武皇帝，以妻曹为皇后，以尚让、赵璋、崔璆、杨希古为宰相，郑汉璋御史中丞，李俦、黄谔、尚儒为尚书，方特谏议大夫，皮日休、沈云翔、裴渥翰林学士，孟楷、盖洪尚书左右仆射兼军容使，费传古枢密使，张直方检校左仆射，马祥右散骑常侍，王璠京兆尹，许建、米实、刘瑭、硃温、张全、彭攒、李逵等为诸将军游弈使，其馀以次封拜。
现代文：他的徒众尊称黄巢为 承天应运启圣睿文宣武皇帝 ，尊其妻曹氏为皇后。黄巢委任尚让、赵璋、崔趚、杨希古为宰相，郑汉璋为御史中丞，李俦、黄谔、尚儒为尚书，方特为谏议大夫，皮日休、沈云翔、裴渥为翰林学士，孟楷、盖洪为尚书左右仆射兼军容使，费传古为枢密使，张直方为检校左仆射，马祥为右散骑常侍，王为京兆尹，许建、米实、刘瑭、朱温、张全、彭攒、李逵等为诸将军游弈使，其余的人都依次封官。
English: His disciples revered Huang Chao as "Emperor Huang Chao" (承天应运启聖睿文宣武皇帝) and his wife Cao as "Empress Huang Chao." Huang Chao appointed Shang Zhan, Zhao Zi, Cui Zi, Yang Xigu as Prime Minister, Zheng Hanzhong as Vice-Minister of History, Li Zhi, Huang Zi, Shang Ru as Minister of Literature, Fang Te as Doctor of Debate, Pi Rixiu, Shen Yun Xiang, and Pei Wo as Academician of Hanlin, Meng Kai and Gui Hong as Vice-Ministers of Literature and Military Affairs, Fei Chuan Gu as

古文：取趫伟五百人号 功臣 ，以林言为之使，比控鹤府。
现代文：又选剽悍伟岸的壮士五百人称为 功臣 ，派林言为将使，守卫鹤府。
English: He also selected five hundred brave men from the fierce and mighty coast to be called "heroes" and sent Lin Yan as a general to guard Hefu.

古文：下令军中禁妄杀人，悉输兵于官。
现代文：下令军中不得乱杀人，将兵士分别隶属各官。
English: He ordered that there should be no indiscriminate killing in the army and that soldiers should be subordinated to officers separately.

古文：然其下本盗贼，皆不从。
现代文：但其手下本是盗贼，都不听命。
English: But his men, who are thieves, do not obey.

古文：召王官，无有至者，乃大索里闾，豆卢彖、崔沆等匿永宁里张直方家。
现代文：召集王官，没一个来的。于是大肆搜索，豆卢王彖、崔沆等躲在永宁里张直方家。
English: The royal officials were summoned, but no one came. Therefore, a large-scale search was carried out, and Zhu Lu Wang Yao, Cui Yao, and others hid in Yongning in Zhang Naofang's house.

古文：直方者，素豪桀，故士多依之。
现代文：张直方，是个豪杰之士，所以很多士人都依附他。
English: Zhang Naofang is a hero, so many scholars are attached to him.

古文：或告贼纳亡命者，巢攻之，夷其家，彖、沆及大臣刘鄴、裴谂、赵濛、李溥、李汤死者百馀人。
现代文：有人报告直方收纳亡命者，巢派人攻入他家，杀了他全家，豆卢王彖、崔沆及大臣刘邺、裴谂、赵氵蒙、李溥、李汤等一百多人都被杀害。
English: It was reported that the Nao side received a fugitive and sent someone to break into his house and kill his entire family. More than a hundred people were killed, including Doulu Wang Qian, Cui Qian, and ministers Liu Qian, Pei Qian, Zhao Qimong, Li Qian, and Li Tang.

古文：将作监郑綦、郎官郑系举族缢。
现代文：将作监郑綦、郎官郑系全族自缢。
English: The warden will be Zheng Yao, and the whole Zheng clan will commit suicide.

古文：是时，乘舆次兴元，诏促诸道兵收京师，遂至成都。
现代文：那时，皇帝到达兴元，诏令各道兵马收复京师，最后皇帝抵达成都。
English: At that time, the emperor arrived in Xingyuan, issued an edict to the soldiers and horses of each province to recover the Beijing division, and finally the emperor arrived in the capital.

古文：巢使硃温攻邓州，陷之，以扰荆、襄。
现代文：巢派朱温攻陷邓州，进而侵扰荆、襄等地。
English: Nest sent Zhu Wen to invade Dengzhou, and then invaded Jing, Xiang and other places.

古文：遣林言、尚让寇凤翔，为郑畋将宋文通所破，不得前。
现代文：派林言、尚让攻打凤翔，半道上被郑畋的将领宋文通打败。
English: He sent Lin Yan and Shang Zhan to attack Feng Xiang, but they were defeated by Zheng He's general Song Wentong.

古文：畋乃传檄召天下兵，于是诏泾原节度使程宗楚为诸军行营副都统，前朔方节度使唐弘夫为行营司马。
现代文：畋乃各处张榜召兵。皇帝诏令泾原节度使程宗楚为诸军行营副都统，前朔方节度使唐弘夫为行营司马。
English: The Emperor issued the Imperial Edict of the Spring Festival to make Cheng Zongchu the deputy commander of the army, and the Spring Festival to make Tang Hongfu the commander of the army.

古文：数攻贼，斩万级。
现代文：多次攻贼，杀敌万人。
English: Attacked thieves many times, killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：邠将硃玫阳为贼将王玫裒兵，俄而杀玫，引军入于王师。
现代文：将朱玫假装替贼将王玫召集兵士，接着杀了王玫，领军归入王师。
English: Zhu Mei pretended to be a thief to summon soldiers to Wang Mei, then killed Wang Mei and led the army to Wang Shi.

古文：弘夫进屯渭北，河中王重荣营沙苑，易定王处存次渭桥，鄜延李孝昌、夏州拓拔思恭壁武功。
现代文：弘夫进驻渭北，河中的王重荣扎营沙苑，易定的王处存进驻渭桥，延的李孝昌、夏州的拓拔思恭坚守武功。
English: Hongfu was stationed in Beiping, Wang Chong Rong of Hezhong was encamped in Shayuan, Wang Shide of Yiding was stationed in Beiping, Li Xiaochang of Yancheng, and Tuoba Shixiong of Xiazhou adhered to martial arts.

古文：弘夫拔咸阳，伐渭水，破尚让军，乘胜入京师。
现代文：弘夫克复了咸阳，渡过渭水，击败尚让，乘胜进军京师。
English: Hongfu recovered Xianyang, crossed Surabaya, defeated Shangzhan, and took advantage of the victory to enter the Beijing division.

古文：巢窃出，至石井。
现代文：巢逃至石井。
English: The nest fled to Ishii.

古文：宗楚入自延秋门，弘夫傅城舍，都人共噪曰： 王师至！ 
现代文：宗楚从延秋门入京师，弘夫也进入城中。京都人共呼 ：王师来了。 
English: Sochu entered the capital from the Yanqiu Gate, and Hiroo also entered the city.

古文：处存选锐卒五千以白自志，綯夜入杀贼，都人传言巢已走，邠、泾军争入京师，诸军亦解甲休，竞掠货财子女，市少年亦冒作綯，肆为剽。
现代文：处存选精兵五千以白巾缠头，夜里入城杀贼。都中人告诉说巢已逃走，泾军争入京师，各兵都解甲休息，争夺钱财子女，京中的无赖也包白巾冒充士兵肆意抢掠。
English: Five thousand selected elite soldiers with white scarves wrapped around their heads entered the city at night to kill the thieves. The people in the capital told them that the nest had fled, the enemy army fought to enter the Beijing division, each soldier disarmed and rested, competed for money and children, and the scoundrels in Beijing also wore white scarves to impersonate soldiers and looted wantonly.

古文：巢伏野，使觇城中弛备，则遣孟楷率贼数百掩邠、泾军，都人犹谓王师，欢迎之。
现代文：黄巢躲在郊外，派人侦察得知城中放松戒备，就派孟楷带领几百人出其不意掩袭、泾军，城中人还以为是王师，欢呼迎接他们。
English: Huang Chao was hiding in the suburbs. When he sent someone to investigate and learned that the city had relaxed its guard, he sent Meng Kai to lead several hundred people to surprise and ambush the troops. The people in the city thought it was Wang Shi and cheered to welcome them.

古文：时军士得珍贿，不胜载，闻贼至，重负不能走，是以甚败。
现代文：那时王师的兵士抢了许多东西，听说贼兵来了，但背着重负跑不快，因此惨败。
English: At that time, the soldiers of Wang's division robbed a lot of things. They heard that the robbers were coming, but they did not run fast with the burden on their backs, so they failed miserably.

古文：贼执弘夫害之，处存走营。
现代文：贼军抓住弘夫，杀了，处存逃走。
English: The bandits grabbed Hiroo, killed him, and fled.

古文：始，王璠破奉天，引众数千随弘夫，及诸将败，独一军战尤力。
现代文：当初，王攻破奉天，带了几千人马追弘夫，及诸将战败，独他一军仍力战。
English: At the beginning, Wang attacked and defeated Bongtian, took several thousand people to chase after Hongfu, and the generals were defeated, but his army still fought hard.

古文：巢复入京师，怒民迎王师，纵击杀八万人，备流于路可涉也，谓之 洗城 。
现代文：巢再度入京，对百姓欢迎王师十分生气，纵容手下滥杀八万人，路上血流成河，称之为 洗城 。
English: When he entered Beijing again, he was very angry with the people for welcoming Wang Shizhu, and allowed his subordinates to kill 80,000 people indiscriminately, causing rivers of blood to flow on the road, which was called "cleansing the city."

古文：诸军退保武功，于是中和二年二月也。
现代文：王师诸军退守武功。这是中和二年二月的事。
English: Wang Shi's army retreated for military valor. This happened in February of the second year of the Sino-Japanese War.

古文：其五月，昭义高浔攻华州，王重荣与并力，克之。
现代文：中和二年五月，昭义的高浔攻华州，王重荣与他合力克复。
English: In May of the second year of the Sino-Japanese War, Akiyoshi Takahata attacked Huazhou, and Wang Chung Rong joined forces with him to repel the attack.

古文：硃玫以泾、岐、麟、夏兵八万营兴平，巢亦遣王璠营黑水，玫战未能胜。郑畋将窦玫夜率士燔都门，杀逻卒，贼震惧。于时畿民栅山谷自保，不得耕，米斗钱三十千，屑树皮以食，有执栅民鬻贼以为粮，人获数十万钱。士人或卖饼自业，举奔河中。
现代文：有人抓住百姓卖给贼人做粮食，得钱几十万。士人们有的卖饼赚钱。又逃奔河中。
English: Someone seized the people and sold them to the thieves to make grain, gaining hundreds of thousands in money. Some of the nobles sold cakes to make money. They also fled into the river.

古文：李孝昌、拓拔思恭徙壁东渭桥，收水北垒。
现代文：李孝昌、拓拔思恭迁至东渭桥固守，收复北垒。
English: Li Xiaochang and Tuoba Sikyong moved to Donglu Bridge to hold fast and recover the northern bastion.

古文：数月，贼帅硃温、尚让涉渭败孝昌等军。
现代文：过了几个月，贼帅朱温、尚让涉渭水击败孝昌等军。
English: A few months later, Zhu Wen and Shang Zhan defeated Xiaochang and his army.

古文：高浔击贼李详，不胜，贼复取华州，巢即授华州刺史，以温为同州刺史。
现代文：高浔击贼李详，不胜，贼人又攻取了华州。巢即任尚让为华州刺史，任温为同州刺史。
English: Gao Zheng defeated the thief Li Zhao, but the thief conquered Huazhou again. Nest that is, he was appointed as the history of Huazhou, and Ren Wen was appointed as the history of the same state.

古文：贼又袭孝昌，二军引去。
现代文：贼又去攻孝昌，孝昌、思恭两军退走。
English: The bandits attacked Xiaochang again, and the two armies of Xiaochang and Sikyong retreated.

古文：贼破陈敬瑄兵，走南山。
现代文：贼攻破陈敬蠧的兵，陈退至南山。
English: Thieves broke through Chen Jingyao's soldiers, and Chen retreated to Nanshan.

古文：齐克俭营兴平，为贼所围，决河灌之，不克。
现代文：齐克俭驻军兴平，被贼军围困，贼决河灌城，但仍不能攻破。
English: Qi Kejian's garrison in Xingping was besieged by the bandits. The bandits poured water into the city from the river, but were still unable to break through.

古文：有题尚书省户讥贼且亡，尚让怒，杀吏，辄剔目悬之，诛郎官门阑卒凡数千人，百司逃，无在者。
现代文：有人在尚书省门上题字讥讽贼人将亡，尚让怒，抓住官吏就杀，还要剜出眼睛挂在门上。杀死郎官守门士卒几千人。百官都逃走，没人留在京师。
English: There is an inscription on the gate of Shangshu Province that mocks the thief who is about to die. If the thief lets go of his anger, he will catch the official and kill him. He will also peck out his eyes and hang them on the gate. He will kill several thousand officials and gatekeepers. Hundreds of officials have fled, and no one is left in Beijing.

古文：天子更以王鐸为诸道行营都统，崔安潜副之，周岌、王重荣为左右司马，诸葛爽、康实为左右先锋，平师儒为后军，时溥督漕赋，王处存、拓拔思恭为京畿都统，处存直左，孝章在北，思恭直右。
现代文：天子委派王铎为诸道行营都统，崔安潜任副手，周岌、王重荣为左右司马，诸葛爽、康实为左右先锋，平师儒为后军，时溥督漕赋，王处存、李孝章、拓拔思恭为京畿都统，处存统左军、孝章统北军、思恭统右军。
English: The Committee of the Celestial Sons appointed Wang Qian as the leader of the Gyeonggi-do Unification Campaign, Choi An as the deputy leader, Zhou Rui and Wang Chung Rong as the left and right Sima, Zhuge Shuang and Kang Shi as the left and right vanguard, Ping Shiru as the rearguard, Ji Yong Guo as the commander, Wang Shuzhen, Li Xiaozhang and Tuoba Shigong as the Gyeonggi-do Unification Campaign, Shuzhen as the left army, Xiaozhang as the northern army and Shigong as the right army.

古文：西门思恭为鐸都监，杨复光监行营，中书舍人卢胤征为克复制置副使。
现代文：西门思恭做王铎的都监，杨复光监行营，中书舍人卢胤征为克复制置副使。
English: Simeon Sikyong was the governor of Wangye, Yang Fuguang was the governor of Xingyuan, and Lu Yanzheng, a scholar of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was the deputy envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：于是鐸以山南、剑南军营灵感祠，硃玫以岐、夏军营兴平，重荣、处存营渭北，复光以寿、沧、荆南军合岌营武功，孝章合拓拔思恭营渭桥，程宗楚营京右。
现代文：于是，铎将山南、剑南的兵马屯驻灵感祠，朱玫将岐、夏的兵马屯驻兴平，王重荣、王处存驻兵渭北，李复光将寿、沧、荆南的兵马与周岌的兵马合驻在武功，孝章与拓拔思恭合兵驻渭桥，程宗楚则驻兵京右。
English: As a result, Zou stationed the soldiers and horses of Shannan and Jiannan at the Inspiration Shrine, Zhu Mei stationed the soldiers and horses of Qi and Xia at Xingping, Wang Chungrong and Wang Shizhuang stationed at the north of Hebei, Li Fuguang stationed the soldiers and horses of Shou, Cang and Jingnan together with the soldiers and horses of Zhou Jia at Wugong, Xiaozhang and Tuoba Shigong together with the soldiers stationed at the Qianqiao, and Cheng Zongchu stationed at the right of Hebei.

古文：硃温以兵三千掠丹、延南鄙，趋同州，刺史米逢出奔，温据州以守。
现代文：朱温带领三千人马攻陷丹及延的南郊，进军同州，刺史米逢逃走。朱温据城固守。
English: Zhu Wen led three thousand horses to attack the southern suburbs of Dan and Yan, marched into Tongzhou, stabbed Shimi and fled. Zhu Wen firmly defended the city.

古文：六月，尚让寇河中，使硃温攻西关，败诸葛爽，破重荣数千骑于河上，爽闭关不出，让遂拔郃阳，攻宜君垒，大雨雪盈尺，兵死什三。
现代文：六月，尚让进攻河中，让朱温攻西关，击败诸葛爽。又在河上击溃了重荣的几千骑兵。诸葛爽闭关坚守不出战，尚让攻取阳，再攻宜君城垒，天降大雪，积雪尺把厚，士兵冻死的几乎十分之三。
English: In June, Shangzhen attacked the middle of the river, and Zhu Wen attacked Xiguan, defeating Zhuge Shuang. Zhuge Shuang also defeated several thousand cavalrymen on the river. Zhuge Shuang did not go to war, but attacked Yang, and then attacked the Yijun fortress. Heavy snow fell, the snow was thick, and almost three-tenths of the soldiers froze to death.

古文：七月，贼攻凤翔，败节度李昌言于涝水，又遣强武攻武功、槐里，泾、邠兵却，独凤翔兵固壁。
现代文：七月，贼攻凤翔，在涝水进攻节度使李昌言。又派强武攻武功、槐里，泾、的兵退却，独凤翔兵闭关坚守。
English: In July, the bandits attacked Fengxiang, and Li Changyan led the attack in Surabaya. He also sent strong troops to attack the soldiers of Wugong, Baili, Handan, and retreated, but the soldiers of Fengxiang remained closed.

古文：拓拔思恭以锐士万八千赴难，逗留不进。
现代文：拓拔思恭带精兵一万八千人去救援，但又迟疑观望。
English: Tuoba Shixiong led 18,000 elite soldiers to rescue, but hesitated to wait and see.

古文：河中粮艘三十道夏阳，硃温使兵夺艘，重荣以甲士三万救之，温惧，凿沉其舟，兵遂围温。
现代文：其时河中有运粮船三十艘经过夏阳。朱温派兵夺船，重荣领三万卫士去救援。朱温害怕，就把粮船全部凿沉。
English: At that time, there were thirty grain ships in the river passing through Xiayang. Zhu Wen sent soldiers to seize the ships and led thirty thousand guards to the rescue. Zhu Wen was afraid and sank all the grain ships.

古文：温既降，重荣遇之厚，故李详亦献款，贼觉，斩之于赤水，更以黄思鄴为刺史。
现代文：重荣兵包围朱温，温被围受窘又估计巢的势力日衰将败。其时，孟楷正掌军政大权，朱温请求援兵，楷压着不报，温即杀了大将马恭而去向重荣投降。皇帝升拓拔思恭为四面都统，令朱玫驻军马嵬。温降后，王重荣对他很好，因此李详也要降。贼人发觉，将李详在赤水杀死。
English: At that time, Meng Kai was in charge of the military and political power, Zhu Wen asked for reinforcements, Kai pressed and did not report, Wen immediately killed the general Ma Gong and went to surrender to Chong Rong. The emperor promoted and promoted Sikyong to be uniform in all aspects, and made Zhu Mei the garrison horse. After the temperature dropped, Wang Chung Rong was very good to him, so Li Zhe also wanted to drop. The thief found out and killed Li Zhe in Chishui.

古文：十月，鐸浚壕于兴平，左抵马嵬，使将薛韬董之，由马嵬、武功入斜谷，以通盩厔，列屯十四，使将梁璩主之，置关于沮水、七盘、三溪、木皮岭，以遮秦、陇。
现代文：另派黄思邺为刺史。十月，王铎将兴平的壕堑疏通，左行抵达马嵬，派将领薛韬督工，再由马嵬、武功入斜谷，直通銩稨。壕内排列十四个驻兵垒，派将领梁璩主管此事。同时在沮水、七盘、三溪、木皮岭等地筑关扼守，挡住秦、陇的通路。
English: In October, Wang Qian cleared the ditch in Xingping to the left and arrived at Ma'an. He sent the general Xue Qian to supervise the work, and then sent Ma'an and Wu Gong into the valley to pass through the ditch. Fourteen garrisons were arranged in the ditch, and sent the general Liang Qian to be in charge of the matter. At the same time, he built checkpoints in Deshui, Qipan, Sanxi and Mupiling to block the passage of Qin and Lu.

古文：京左行营都统东方逵禽贼锐将李公迪，破堡三十。
现代文：京左行营都统东方逵擒贼强将李公迪，攻破贼堡三十个。
English: The Kyo Zuoying Camp, the Dotonbori Orient, and the bandits forced Li Gongdi, and broke through thirty bandit camps.

古文：华卒逐黄思鄴，巢以王遇为刺史，遇降河中。
现代文：华州的兵乘势赶走黄思邺。巢改派王遇为刺史，王遇向河中投降。
English: The soldiers of Huazhou drove away Huang Siyu. The nests were reassigned to Wang Rong, and Wang Rong surrendered to the middle of the river.

古文：明年正月，王鐸使雁门节度使李克用破贼于渭南，承制拜东北行营都统。
现代文：第二年正月，王铎派雁门节度使李克用在渭南破贼。根据官制任李克用为东北行营都统。
English: In the first month of the second year, Wang Qian sent the Wild Goose Gate Festival to Li Ke to break the thieves in southern Fujian. According to the official system, Li Ke used it as the Northeast Campaign Capital.

古文：会鐸与安潜皆罢，克用独引军自岚、石出夏阳，屯沙苑，破黄揆军，遂营乾坑。
现代文：恰逢铎与崔安潜均被罢官。克用独领兵自岚、石出发经夏阳，屯驻沙苑。击破黄揆的人马，进而扎营乾坑。
English: Coincidentally, both Qu and Cui Anqian were dismissed from their posts. Gu used his sole leadership to lead the soldiers to Qu, and they set out from Shishi via Xiayang and stationed themselves in Shayuan. They defeated the troops of Huangpi and then set up camp in Qiankeng.

古文：二月，合河中、易定、忠武等兵击巢。巢命王璠、林言军居左，赵璋、尚让军居右，众凡十万，与王师大战梁田陂。贼败，执俘数万，僵胔三十里，敛为京观。
现代文：二月，会合河中、易定、忠武等地兵力迎击黄巢，巢命王、林言的人马在左，赵璋、尚让的人马在右，合兵十万人，在梁田陂与王师大战，巢败，被俘好几万，陈尸三十里，收敛后封土筑成大坟。
English: In February, troops from Hechong, Yiding, Zhongwu and other places joined forces to attack Huang Chao. The troops of Chao Mei Wang and Lin Yan were on the left, and the troops of Zhao Qi and Shang Zhan were on the right, with a total of 100,000 soldiers. In the great battle between Liang Tian Qi and Wang Shih, Chao was defeated, tens of thousands were captured, and the corpses were found 30 miles away. After they had been collected, the land was fenced off and turned into a large grave.

古文：璠与黄揆袭华州，据之，遇亡去。
现代文：王和黄揆袭击华州，攻陷，王遇逃走。
English: Wang and Huang Qi attacked Huazhou and were defeated. Wang Yu ran away.

古文：克用掘堑环州，分骑屯渭北，命薛志勤、康君立夜袭京师，火廥聚，俘贼而还。
现代文：克用在州四周掘壕堑，分出骑兵屯驻渭北，命薛志勤、康君主夜间偷袭京师，纵火焚烧粮草，俘获了一些贼兵而还。
English: He ordered Xue Zhiqin and Emperor Kang to secretly attack the Beijing Division at night, set fire to grain and grass, and captured some robber soldiers.

古文：巢战数不利，军食竭，下不用命，阴有遁谋，即发兵三万扼蓝田道，使尚让援华州。
现代文：黄巢作战多次失利，军粮尽，部下颇不听调遣，私下有逃离的打算，于是发兵三万扼住蓝田的通道，派尚让援救华州。
English: After repeated defeats in the Battle of Huang Chao and running out of rations, his subordinates did not listen to his instructions and secretly had plans to escape, so he sent 30,000 troops to block the road to Lantian and sent Shang Zheng to rescue Huazhou.

古文：克用率重荣迎战零口，破之，遂拔其城，揆引众出走。
现代文：克用带领重荣于零口迎战，挫败贼军，攻克华州，黄揆带人马逃走。
English: He led Chong Rong into battle at the mouth of the river, defeated the bandit army, conquered Huazhou, and Huang Qi fled with his men.

古文：泾原节度使张钧说蕃、浑与盟，共讨贼。
现代文：泾原节度使张钧劝说蕃、浑结盟共同讨贼。
English: The prime minister of Hebei Province asked Zhang Ye to persuade Yao and Hun to form an alliance to fight against the bandits.

古文：是时，诸镇兵四面至。
现代文：这时，各镇的兵马从四方而来。
English: At this time, soldiers and horses from all towns came from four directions.

古文：四月，克用遣部将杨守宗率河中将白志迁、忠武将庞从等最先进，击贼渭桥，三战，贼三北。
现代文：四月，克用派部将杨守宗率河中将领白志迁、忠武将领庞从等为先头部队在渭桥迎敌，三战三胜。
English: In April, the Kegu faction led by Yang Shuzong, the general Bai Zhi Qian, and the loyal general Pang Zong as the leading troops to meet the enemy at the bridge, and won three victories in three battles.

古文：于是诸节度兵皆奋，无敢后，入自光泰门。
现代文：于是各节度的人马都振奋前进，自光泰门入京师，克用亲自指挥战斗，呐喊声震天动地，贼溃退。
English: As a result, people and horses of all sects were excited to advance. Since Guang Taimen entered the Beijing division, Keren personally commanded the battle, the shouting was earth-shattering, and the bandits retreated.

古文：克用身决战，呼声动天，贼崩溃，逐北至望春，入升阳殿闼。
现代文：王师追赶至望春，入升阳殿大门。
English: Wang Shi chased them to Mochun and entered the gate of the Zhengyang Palace.

古文：巢夜奔，众犹十五万，声趋徐州，出蓝田，入商山，委辎重珍赀于道，诸军争取之，不复追，故贼得整军去。
现代文：黄巢乘夜色逃遁，尚有十五万兵马，扬言去徐州，实则出蓝田，入商山，沿路丢弃财物，尾追的官军争相拾取，无心追赶，因此黄巢得以整军撤退。
English: Huang Chao fled by night, still had 150,000 soldiers and horses, threatened to go to Xuzhou, but actually went out of Lantian and into Shangshan, discarding property along the way. The pursuing government army scrambled to pick it up, and had no intention of catching up. Therefore, Huang Chao was able to withdraw the whole army.

古文：自禄山陷长安，宫阙完雄，吐蕃所燔，唯衢弄庐舍；硃泚乱定百馀年，治缮神丽如开元时。
现代文：自从安禄山攻陷长安，宫阙一直完好无损，吐蕃焚毁的，只是街巷中的百姓住房；朱氵此之乱平定已有一百多年，已装修得美轮美奂与开元年间相似。
English: Since the fall of Anlu Mountain to Chang'an, Gonglu has remained intact, and only the houses of the people in the streets and lanes of Tubo have been burned. Zhu Xi has been calming this turmoil for more than a hundred years, and has been decorated beautifully similar to the years of the first century.

古文：至巢败，方镇兵互入虏掠，火大内，惟含元殿独存，火所不及者，止西内、南内及光启宫而已。
现代文：至黄巢战败，各方镇的兵你来我往地掠夺，焚烧了大内，仅只含元殿独存。火没有殃及的，只有西内、南内及光启宫而已。
English: After the defeat of Huang Chao, soldiers from all sides of the town came to loot and burn Dainai, leaving only the Yuan Dynasty alone. The fire did not affect only the West Palace, the South Palace and the Guangqi Palace.

古文：杨复光献捷行在，帝诏陈许、延州、凤翔、博野军合东西神策二万人屯京师，命大明宫留守王徽卫诸门，抚定居人。
现代文：杨复光到行宫报捷，皇帝诏令陈许、延州、凤翔、博野各军会同东西神策军二万人屯守京师，命大明宫留守王徽守卫各门，安抚居民。
English: Yang Fuguang went to the palace to report the victory, and the emperor ordered Chen Xu, Yanzhou, Feng Xiang, and Bono's armies to join with the East-West Divination Army of 20,000 people to guard the Beijing Division, and ordered Wang Hui to stay at the Daming Palace to guard the doors and pacify the residents.

古文：诏尚书右仆射裴璩修复宫省，购辇辂、仗卫、旧章、秘籍。
现代文：诏令尚书右仆射裴璩修复宫廷，购置辇辂、仗卫，收集整理旧章、秘籍。
English: He ordered his right-hand man, Sho Pei, to repair the palace, purchase fences and guards, and collect and organize old seals and secret books.

古文：豫败巢者：神策将横冲军使杨守亮、蹑云都将高周彝、忠顺都将胡真、天德将顾彦朗七十人。
现代文：共同击败黄巢的还有：神策将横冲军使杨守亮、蹑云都将高周彝、忠顺部将胡真，天德将顾彦朗等七十人。
English: There were also 70 people who jointly defeated Huang Chao: Yang Shouliang, who led the storming army by divine strategy, Gao Zhouqi, who led the storming army by divine strategy, Hu Zhen, who led the loyal and obedient army, and Gu Yanlang, who led the heavenly virtue army.

古文：巢已东，使孟楷攻蔡州。节度使秦宗权迎战，大败，即臣贼，与连和。
现代文：黄巢已东去，派孟楷攻蔡州，节度使秦宗权迎战，大败，即降贼，与之合兵。
English: Huang Chao had already left for the east, and sent Meng Kai to attack Caizhou, and Jiedu led Qin Zongquan into battle. He was soundly defeated, i.e. he surrendered, and joined forces with him.

古文：楷击陈州，败死，巢自围之，略邓、许、孟、洛，东入徐、兗数十州。
现代文：楷又攻陈州，战败而死。黄巢亲自领兵围攻，又攻破邓、许、孟、洛等地，再东入徐、兖数十州。
English: Kai also attacked Chenzhou, but was defeated and died. Huang Shao personally led the siege, and broke through Deng, Xu, Meng, Luo and other places, and then east into dozens of states in Xu and Lu.

古文：人大饥，倚死墙堑，贼俘以食，日数千人，乃办列百巨碓，糜骨皮于臼，并啖之。
现代文：其时大饥荒，很多人倚墙而死，贼抓人充饥，每日吃几千人，还制办了一百个大石碓，将皮骨磨碎了吃。
English: At that time, there was a great famine. Many people died leaning against the wall. Thieves caught people to satisfy their hunger and ate thousands of people every day. They also made a hundred large stone urns and ground up the skin and bones to eat.

古文：时硃全忠为宣武节度使，与周岌、时溥帅师救陈，赵犨亦乞兵太原。
现代文：那时朱全忠是宣武节度使，与周岌、时溥帅兵救陈，赵肎也向太原乞求援兵。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong was the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival, and together with Zhou Rui and Shi Jian, he saved Chen. Zhao Jian also begged Taiyuan for reinforcements.

古文：巢遣宗权攻许州，未克。
现代文：巢派宗权攻许州，不胜。
English: The Nest faction sects attacked Huzhou, but were defeated.

古文：于是粮竭，木皮草根皆尽。
现代文：粮草尽，树皮草根都吃光。
English: The grain and grass are exhausted, and the bark and roots of the trees have been eaten away.

古文：四年二月，李克用率山西兵由陕济河而东，会关东诸镇壁汝州。
现代文：中和四年二月，李克用率山西兵由陕州渡河东来，恰遇关东诸镇坚守汝州。
English: In February of the middle and fourth years, Li Ke used the Shanxi soldiers from Shaanxi to cross the river to the east, just in time for the Guandong towns to hold on to Ruzhou.

古文：全忠击贼瓦子堡，斩万馀级，诸军破尚让于太康，亦万级，获械铠马羊万计，又败黄鄴于西华，鄴夜遁。
现代文：全忠在瓦子堡击贼，杀贼一万多人。各军又在太康打败了尚让，杀贼也有万人，俘获的兵械马羊等亦以万计。接着又在西华打败黄邺。
English: Quanzhong defeated the bandits in Wazi Fort, killing more than 10,000 bandits. The armies also defeated Shangzhan in Taikang, killing tens of thousands of people, and captured tens of thousands of weapons, horses, and sheep. Then they defeated Huangpi in West China.

古文：巢大恐，居三日，军中相惊，弃壁走，巢退营故阳里。
现代文：邺夜里逃走。巢大惊，三日未出战，兵士们也都心惊，逃离阵地。巢撤退至故阳里。
English: They fled in the middle of the night. The nest was so shocked that they did not go out to fight for three days. The soldiers were also shocked and fled their positions. The nest retreated to Goyangli.

古文：其五月，大雨震电，川溪皆暴溢，贼垒尽坏，众溃，巢解而去。
现代文：这年五月大雨滂沱，雷电交加，江河都猛涨，巢的营垒均被水浸坏，无法立足，巢撤军而去。
English: In May of this year, there were heavy rains, thunder and lightning, and the rivers all rose sharply. The camp of the nest was damaged by water, unable to stand, and the nest withdrew.

古文：全忠进戍尉氏，克用追巢，全忠还汴州。
现代文：全忠进守尉氏，克用追巢，全忠回汴州。
English: Quanzhong entered the Shoujun clan, Ke used to chase the nest, Quanzhong returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：巢取尉氏，攻中牟，兵度水半，克用击之，贼多溺死。
现代文：巢攻取了尉氏，再攻中牟，人马渡河才一半，克用乘机袭击，贼人大多落水淹死。
English: The nest was captured by the captain, and then by Zhongmou. Only half of the men and horses crossed the river. He used the opportunity to attack. Most of the thieves fell into the water and drowned.

古文：巢引残众走封丘，克用追败之，还营郑州。巢涉汴北引，夜复大雨，贼惊溃，克用闻之，急击巢河濒。
现代文：巢收集残兵逃往封丘，克用追击，再次打败巢军，回军屯扎郑州，巢经汴北去，夜里又下大雨，贼众大惊，溃不成军。克用得知，迅速出兵，在河边击巢。
English: Kegui gathered the remnants of his army and fled to Fengqiu. Kegui gave chase, defeated Kegui's army again, and returned to Zhengzhou. Kegui went to the north of Yunnan. At night, it rained heavily. The bandits were shocked and could not form an army. When Kegui learned of this, he quickly dispatched troops and attacked Kegui's army at the river.

古文：巢度河攻汴州，全忠拒守，克用救之，斩贼骁将李周、杨景彪等。
现代文：巢渡河攻汴州，全忠坚守拒敌，克用往救，杀死李周、杨景彪等贼强将。
English: Chao crossed the river to attack Bozhou, Quanzhong held out against the enemy, and used his strength to rescue and kill Li Zhou, Yang Jingbiao and other strong generals.

古文：巢夜走胙城，入冤句。
现代文：巢连夜逃往胙城，进入冤句。
English: The nest fled to Lucheng overnight and entered the wrong sentence.

古文：克用悉军穷蹑，贼将李谠、杨能、霍存、葛从周、张归霸、张归厚往降全忠，而尚让以万人归时溥。
现代文：克用率军穷追，贼将李谠、杨能、霍存、葛从周、张归霸、张归厚降全忠，尚让带一万人归附时溥。
English: Kecheng led the army in a desperate pursuit, and the bandits forced Li Qian, Yang Neng, Huo Cun, Ge Cong Zhou, Zhang Gui Ba and Zhang Gui Hou to surrender their allegiance, but they still allowed him to take 10,000 people with him to Shijiazhuang.

古文：巢愈猜忿，屡杀大将，引众奔兗州。
现代文：巢对众将又气又疑，多次杀大将，自领人马奔兖州。
English: Nest will be angry and suspicious of the general public, kill the general many times, and lead people to rush to Luzhou.

古文：克用追至曹，巢兄弟拒战，不胜，走兗、郓间，获男女牛马万馀、乘舆器服等，禽巢爱子。
现代文：克用追至曹州，巢兄弟出战，不胜，退走兖、郓间，克用俘获男女牛马一万多，还有车马器服等，还擒获巢的爱子。
English: He chased them all the way to Caozhou, where the Nest brothers went to fight, but were defeated, and retreated to Shao and Shao'an. He captured more than ten thousand male and female cattle and horses, as well as horse-drawn vehicles and clothing, and also captured Nest's beloved son.

古文：克用军昼夜驰，粮尽不能得巢，乃还。巢众仅千人，走保太山。
现代文：克用的队伍昼夜不停地追赶，兵士疲惫，粮食不继，未能抓获黄巢，领军返回，巢手下还剩千把人，退守太山。
English: Kegui's team chased after the enemy day and night. The soldiers were exhausted and had no food to eat. They failed to capture Huang Chao. The leader of the army returned. There were still a thousand people under Chao's command, and they retreated to Taishan.

古文：六月，时溥遣将陈景瑜与尚让追战狼虎谷，巢计蹙，谓林言曰： 我欲讨国奸臣，洗涤朝廷，事成不退，亦误矣。
现代文：六月，时溥派大将陈景瑜与尚让追击黄巢至狼虎谷，巢计穷，对林言说 ：我原打算为国讨伐奸臣，洗涤朝廷的污浊。事成而不退，这是我的过错。
English: In June, he sent General Chen Jingyu and General Shang Zhan to chase the Yellow Nest to the Valley of Wolves and Tigers, but the nest was poor, and he said to Lin Yan: I originally planned to fight the traitor for the country and cleanse the filth of the imperial court. It is my fault that I did not retreat.

古文：若取吾首献天子，可得富贵，毋为他人利。 
现代文：你拿我的头去献给天子，可得富贵，不要让他人得利。 
English: If you take my head and offer it to the Son of God, you will be rich, but do not let others profit from it.

古文：言，巢出也，不忍。
现代文：林言，是黄巢的外甥，不忍心。
English: Lin Yan, Huang Chao's nephew, could not bear it.

古文：巢乃自刎，不殊，言因斩之，及兄存、弟鄴、揆、钦、秉、万通、思厚，并杀其妻子，悉函首，将诣溥。
现代文：巢于是自刎，但未死。林言乃遵嘱砍下他的头，以及黄巢的哥哥黄存、弟弟黄邺、黄揆、黄钦、黄秉、黄万通、黄思厚的头，又杀了他的妻儿，把头包好，准备到时溥处投降。
English: Lin Yan did as he was told and cut off his head, as well as the heads of Huang Xie's brother Huang Cun, brother Huang Qi, Huang Qi, Huang Qin, Huang Bing, Huang Wan Tong, and Huang Sichuo. He also killed his wife and son, wrapped their heads up, and prepared to surrender at the appointed time.

古文：而太原博野军杀言，与巢首俱上溥，献于行在，诏以首献于庙。
现代文：未及动身，太原博野军杀林言，连同黄巢等的头一起送到时溥处，传献行宫，诏令将这些头祭献宗庙。
English: Before they could leave, the Taiyuan Hakuyo army killed Lin Yan and sent him, together with the heads of Huang Chao and others, to Shijiazhuang to present them to the imperial court. The imperial edict ordered that these head sacrifices be offered to the family temple.

古文：徐州小史李师悦得巢伪符玺，上之，拜湖州刺史。
现代文：徐州小吏李师悦得到黄巢的符玺，进献皇帝，得官湖州刺史。
English: Li Shiyue, a minor official in Xuzhou, obtained the Huang Chao's seal, presented it to the emperor, and became an official in the history of Huzhou.

古文：巢从子浩众七千，为盗江湖间，自号 浪荡军 。
现代文：黄巢的侄子黄浩有七千人马，仍在江湖间闯荡，自称 浪荡军 。
English: Huang Hsiu's nephew Huang Hao has seven thousand horses and is still wandering among the provinces, calling himself the Wandering Army.

古文：天复初，欲据湖南，陷浏阳，杀略甚众。
现代文：天复初年，黄浩想据有湖南，攻陷浏阳，杀人甚多。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Huang Hao wanted to control Hunan, and attacked Liuyang, killing many people.

古文：湘阴强家邓进思率壮士伏山中，击杀浩。
现代文：湘阴的好汉邓进思带领壮士伏居山中，击杀了浩。
English: The hero of Hunan, Deng Jinshi, led the strong men to hide in the mountains and killed Hao.

古文：赞曰：广明元年，巢始盗京师，自陈 唐去丑口而著黄，明黄且代唐也。 
现代文：评论：广明元年，黄巢盗得京师，自称 唐字去掉丑口而加黄就是广字，明白宣告黄将代唐 。
English: Comment: In the first year of the Guangming Dynasty, Huang Chao stole the Beijing division, and claimed that the Tang character was a broad character by removing the ugly mouth and adding yellow. It was clearly announced that Huang Chao would replace Tang.

古文：宗权以中和三年叛，居六年而诛。董昌，杭州临安人。
现代文：朱温终于窃取了神器。这些人大概都是黄巢的党徒，难道是天托他们告知天下唐室将亡吗？董昌，杭州临安人。
English: Zhu Wen finally stole the artifact. These people are probably all party members of the Yellow Nest. Could it be that they were sent by heaven to tell the world that the Tang Dynasty was about to die? Dong Chang, from Hangzhou Lin'an.

古文：始籍土团军，以功擢累石镜镇将。
现代文：最初隶属土团军，因功逐步提升为石镜镇将。
English: He was originally a member of the local regiment army, and was gradually promoted to captain of Shizhen Town for his service.

古文：中和三年，刺史路审中临州，昌率兵拒，不得入，即自领州事。镇海节度使周宝不能制，因表为刺史。
现代文：中和三年，刺史路审中到州里来，董昌率兵挡驾，刺史不得进，董昌就自己管理州事，镇海节度使周宝控制不了他，于是上表请任董昌为刺史。
English: In the middle and third years, Zhi Shih, the middle of the road trial, came to the state, Dong Chang and his soldiers blocked the way, Zhi Shih was not allowed to enter, Dong Chang managed the state affairs on his own, Zhenhai Festival made Zhou Bao unable to control him, so the above table asked Dong Chang to be Zhi Shih.

古文：昌已破刘汉宏，兵益强，进义胜军节度使、检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：董昌击破了刘汉宏，兵力增强了，晋升为义胜军节度使、检校尚书右仆射。
English: Dong Chang defeated Liu Hanhong, the military strength was strengthened, and he was promoted to the commander of the Yixing Army and the right-hand man of the school inspector.

古文：僖宗始还京师，昌取越民裴氏藏书献之，补秘书之亡，授兼诸道采访图籍使。
现代文：僖宗回到京师，董昌取越名裴氏的藏书入献，补秘书之缺，任董昌兼诸道采访图籍使。
English: Xizong returned to Beijing to teach, and Dong Chang took over the collection of books donated by the Yue Ming Pei clan, filling the lack of a secretary, and appointed Dong Chang to be an envoy to interview the books.

古文：始，为治廉平，人颇安之。
现代文：一开始，董昌为政廉正公平，人民安居乐业。
English: At the beginning, Dongchang was committed to political integrity and fairness, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：当是时，天下贡输不入，独昌赋外献常参倍，旬一道，以五百人为率，人给一刀，后期即诛。
现代文：当时，天下的贡奉不齐，独董昌赋外常有加倍贡献，他每十天派人征收一次，以五百人为一组，有谁误期即杀。
English: At that time, tributes from all over the world were unequal, and Dong Changfu often doubled his contribution. He sent people to collect once every ten days, with a group of five hundred people. Anyone who missed the deadline would be killed.

古文：朝廷赖其入，故累拜检校太尉、同中书门下平章事，爵陇西郡王。
现代文：朝廷依赖他的贡奉，所以对他步步晋升直至检校太尉、同中书门下平章事，封爵陇西郡王。
English: The imperial court relied on his tribute, so he was promoted step by step until he was promoted to the rank of captain of the school inspection, and was given the title of King of Shaanxi County.

古文：视诏书讫，字偿一缣，归当制官。
现代文：董昌看完诏书，赏使者每字一匹缣，即依制设官。
English: After reading the edict, Dong Chang rewarded the messenger with a horse for every word, that is, an official was appointed according to the system.

古文：而小人意足，浸自侈大，托神以诡众。
现代文：董昌小人得志，逐渐自高自大，假托神灵以欺骗众人。
English: Dong Chang, a villain, gradually became arrogant and deceived everyone by pretending to be a god.

古文：始立生祠，刳香木为躯，内金玉纨素为肺府，冕而坐，妻媵侍别帐，百倡鼓吹于前，属兵列护门。
现代文：为自己立生祠，用香木雕刻自己的像，内部挖空，用金玉丝绸做内脏，戴着官帽坐着，又做妻妾在旁边侍候，各种优倡在前面鼓吹，又有属兵排列守护在门阶两旁。
English: He built an ancestral shrine for himself, carved his own image with fragrant wood, hollowed out the inside, made the guts with golden silk, sat wearing an official cap, and waited on the side as a wife and concubine. Various noblemen preached in front, and soldiers lined up on both sides of the doorstep.

古文：属州为土马献祠下，列牲牢祈请，或绐言土马若嘶且汗，皆受赏。
现代文：其属州做了个土马献到祠里，摆上供品祈福，编出话说什么祭祀后，土马若嘶鸣且流汗，就能得赏赐。
English: After the prefecture has made a clay horse and dedicated it to the ancestral hall, placed offerings on it and prayed for good fortune, and worked out the words for the sacrifice, if the clay horse neighs and sweats, it will be rewarded.

古文：昌自言： 有飨者，我必醉。 
现代文：董昌则说： 有人来祭供酒菜，我就会感应而醉。 
English: Dong Chang said: If someone comes to offer food and wine, I will be intoxicated.

古文：蝗集祠旁，使人捕沈镜湖，告曰： 不为灾。 
现代文：那年蝗虫飞集祠旁，董昌派人捕捉后将它们沉入镜湖，告之说： 不为灾。 
English: That year, when the locusts gathered near the ancestral hall, Dong Chang sent someone to catch them and sink them into the Mirror Lake, telling them: "Don't be a disaster.

古文：客有言： 尝游吴隐之祠，止一偶人。 
现代文：有个客人曾说 ：我曾到吴隐之的祠堂里去游览过，只有一个木头人。 
English: A guest once said: I once visited Wu Yingzhi's ancestral hall, and there was only one wooden man.

古文：昌闻，怒曰： 我非吴隐之比！ 
现代文：董昌听说后，生气地说 ：我不是吴隐之那样的人。 
English: After hearing this, Dong Chang said angrily, "I am not a person like Wu Yingzhi.

古文：支解客祠前。
现代文：就将那客人在祠前杀害并分尸。
English: They killed the guest in front of the shrine and dismembered his body.

古文：始，罢榷盐以悦人，丰衣食，后稍峭法，笞至千百，或小过辄夷族，血流刑场，地为之赤。
现代文：最初，董昌取消盐的专卖取悦人民，使人民能丰衣足食。后来法规日渐严酷，笞刑往往达到百千下，或是有小过错就杀全家，刑场上血流成河，地都染成了赤色。
English: At first, Dong Chang cancelled the salt monopoly to please the people, so that the people could have enough food and clothing. Later, the laws and regulations became more and more severe, and the flogging often reached a hundred thousand strokes, or the whole family was killed for a small mistake, and the blood flowed into rivers on the execution site, and the ground was dyed red.

古文：有五千馀姓当族，昌曰： 能孝于我，贷而死。 
现代文：据他的刑律，有五千多姓的人家要遭灭族，董昌说： 谁能孝顺我，就免谁死。 
English: According to his penal code, there are more than five thousand surnames of people who are to be exterminated. Dong Chang said: "Whoever can be filial to me will be spared death."

古文：皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：大家都说愿意效忠。
English: Everyone said: Yes.

古文：昌厚养之，号 感恩都 ，刻其臂为誓，亲族至号泣相别者。
现代文：董昌用优厚的待遇养着他们，称之为 感恩都 ，在他们手臂上刻上这三字然后宣誓，亲属们都号哭着与他作别。
English: Dong Chang raised them with generous treatment, called them "Gratitude," engraved these three words on their arms and then swore, relatives were crying to say goodbye to him.

古文：凡民讼，不视狱，但与掷博齿，不胜者死。
现代文：凡有人告状，董昌从不审查案情，而是与他们赌博，输了的就死。
English: Whenever someone sued, Dong Chang never reviewed the case, but gambled with them, and if he lost, he would die.

古文：用人亦取胜者。
现代文：他所用的人也都取赌博中的得胜者。
English: The people he used were all winners at gambling.

古文：昌得郡王，咤曰： 朝廷负我，吾奉金帛不赀，何惜越王不吾与？
现代文：董昌得封爵为郡王，不满而叱： 朝廷有负于我，我奉献的财物数不清，为什么还舍不得把越王给我？你不给，我就自己去取。 
English: Dong Chang was knighted as the county king, he was dissatisfied and scolded: The court has failed me, I have donated countless wealth, why am I still reluctant to give King Yue to me? If you don't give it to me, I will go and get it myself.

古文：吾当自取之！ 下厌其虐，乃劝为帝。近县举狂畐讠虖请，昌令曰： 时至，我当应天顺人。 
现代文：属下为满足他的贪欲，劝他称帝，附近几县均喧闹着呼喊要他称帝。董昌下令说： 时机到了，我一定应天顺人即帝位。 
English: In order to satisfy his greed, his subordinates advised him to proclaim himself emperor, and several nearby counties were noisily shouting for him to proclaim himself emperor. Dong Chang ordered: The time has come, I must accept the throne.

古文：其属吴繇、秦昌裕、卢勤、硃瓚、董庠、李畅、薛辽与妖人应智、王温、巫韩媪皆赞之。
现代文：其下属吴繇、秦昌裕、卢勤、朱瓒、董庠、李畅、薛辽与妖人应智、王温、巫韩媪都附和。
English: His subordinates Wu Qi, Qin Changyu, Lu Qin, Zhu Xi, Dong Qi, Li Chang, Xue Liao, and the monsters Ying Zhi, Wang Wen, and Wu Hanqi all agreed.

古文：昌益兵城四县自防。
现代文：董昌在州城及四县增兵自防。
English: Dong Chang increased troops in Zhucheng and four counties for self-defense.

古文：山阴老人伪献谣曰： 欲知天子名，日从日上生。 
现代文：山阴老人向他献假民谣 ：欲知天子名，日从日上生。 
English: The old man in the shade of the mountain presented him with a fake folk song: If you want to know the name of the Son of God, you have to be born from the sun.

古文：昌喜，赐百缣，免税征。
现代文：董昌很高兴，赐老人缣百段，且免他税赋。
English: Dong Chang was very pleased and gave the old man a hundred rupees and exempted him from taxes.

古文：命方士硃思远筑坛祠天，诡言天符夜降，碧楮硃文不可识。
现代文：又命方士朱思远筑坛祠天。假装天符夜间降落，绿纸红字谁也不认识。
English: He also ordered the sorcerer Zhu Siyuan to build the altar of the shrine of heaven. Pretending that the celestial emblem landed at night, no one knows the green paper and red letters.

古文：昌曰： 谶言 兔上金床 ，我生于卯，明年岁旅其次，二月朔之明日，皆卯也，我以其时当即位。 
现代文：董昌说： 谶言说 兔上金床 ，我生于卯年，明年正是卯年，二月朔的第二天也是卯日，我在那时即帝位。 
English: Dong Chang said: I was born in the year of the rabbit, next year is the year of the rabbit, and the second day of February is also the day of the rabbit. I was the emperor at that time.

古文：客倪德儒曰： 咸通末，《越中秘记》言： 有罗平鸟，主越祸福。 
现代文：客人倪德儒说 ：咸通末年，《越中秘记》上说： 有罗平鸟，主管越地的祸福。 
English: Ni Deru, a guest, said, "It was the last year of Ham Thong. In "The Secret of Viet Nam," it was said, "There is a robin, who is in charge of the misfortunes and blessings of Viet Nam."

古文：中和时，鸟见吴、越，四目而三足，其鸣曰 罗平天册 ，民祀以攘难。
现代文：中和年间，此鸟曾在吴、越出现，四只眼睛三条腿，它的叫声就像 罗平天册 ，百姓们都祭祀以除灾。
English: In the middle of the 19th century, this bird appeared in Wu and Yue. It had four eyes and three legs, and its call was like the Luoping Book of the Heavens. The people made sacrifices to get rid of the disaster.

古文：今大王署名，文与鸟类。 
现代文：现在大王署名，文字与鸟很相像。 
English: Now signed by the king, the words are very similar to those of the bird.

古文：即图以示昌，昌大喜。
现代文：还拿出图来给董昌看，董昌十分高兴。
English: He also took out a diagram to show to Dong Chang, who was very happy.

古文：乾宁二年，即伪位，国号大越罗平，建元曰天册，自称 圣人 ，铸银印方四寸，文曰 顺天治国之印 。
现代文：乾宁二年，董昌称帝，国号 大越罗平 ，建年号为 天册 ，自称 圣人 ，铸银印，四寸见方，印文为 顺天治国之印 。
English: In the second year of Qianning, Dong Chang proclaimed himself emperor, the country's name was Da Yue Luo Ping, the founding year was Tian Zhao, and he claimed to be a saint, casting a silver seal, four centimeters square, and the seal was the seal of Shun Tian rule the country.

古文：又出细民所上铜铅石印十床及它鸟兽龟蛇陈于廷，指曰 天瑞 。
现代文：又拿出小民所献铜印铅石印十个及其他鸟兽龟蛇陈于廷前，指称这些东西为 天瑞 。
English: He also took out ten copper seals, lead seals, stone seals and other birds, beasts, turtles and snakes donated by the common people and displayed them in front of the court, claiming that these things were auspicious.

古文：其下制诏，皆自署名，或曰帝王无押诏，昌曰： 不亲署，何由知我为天子？ 
现代文：他下发诏书制文，都自己署名。有人对他说帝王不在诏书上签押，董昌说： 不亲自署名，怎么知道天子是我呢？ 
English: When someone told him that the emperor did not sign the imperial edict, Dong Chang said, "If I don't sign it myself, how will the emperor know it's me?"

古文：即榜南门曰天册楼。
现代文：并指定南门为天册楼。
English: The south gate was also designated as the Heavenly Scroll Tower.

古文：先是，州寝有赤光，长十余丈；虺长尺馀，金色，见思道亭。
现代文：前些时，州里寝居有赤光，长十多丈；又有一尺多长的金蛇出现在思道亭。
English: Some time ago, there was a red light in the state dormitory, more than ten feet long; and a gold snake more than a foot long appeared in Shidaoting.

古文：昌署寝曰明光殿，亭曰黄龙殿，以自神。
现代文：董昌就将那寝居题为明光殿，思道亭改名为黄龙殿，自称其为神。
English: Dong Chang changed the name of the dormitory to Mingguangden and Shidaoting to Huanglongden, claiming that it was a god.

古文：以次拜置百官，监军与官属皆西北向恸哭，乃北面臣昌。
现代文：又依次设授百官，原监军与官属都面朝西北痛哭，然后向董昌称臣。
English: In turn, hundreds of officials were awarded, and the former supervisors of the army and their subordinates all cried bitterly in the face of the northwest, and then praised their subordinates to Dong Chang.

古文：或请署近侍，昌曰： 吾假处此位，安得如宫禁？ 
现代文：有人请设置近侍。董昌说 ：我处于此位，怎能像宫禁一样用阉人？ 
English: Someone asked him to set up a bodyguard. Dong Chang said: "I am in this position, how can I use a bodyguard like the palace ban?

古文：不许。
现代文：没有批准。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：下书属州曰： 以某日权即位，然昌荷天子恩，死不敢负国。 
现代文：还下书给所属州县 ：我已在某日暂即帝位。但董昌蒙受天子恩泽，至死不敢有负国家。 
English: He also wrote to his prefecture: "I have ascended to the throne temporarily one day. However, Dong Chang was blessed by Heaven, and he did not dare to fail the country until his death.

古文：初，官属不徇昌旨者，节度副使黄碣、山阴令张逊皆诛死。
现代文：当初，官属中不遵循董昌旨意的如节度副使黄石曷、山阴令张逊，都被杀害。
English: At first, officials and subordinates who did not follow the will of Dong Chang, such as the vice-minister Huang Shijie and the commander Zhang Xun, were all killed.

古文：镇海节度使钱镠书让昌曰： 开府领节度，终身富贵，不能守，闭城作天子，灭亲族，亦何赖？
现代文：镇海节度使钱写信责备董昌说 ：你开府领受节度，终身富贵，却不能守；你闭城自称天子，诛灭亲族，你有何倚仗？
English: Zhenhai Festival made Qian write a letter to reproach Dong Chang, saying: You opened the capital to receive the festival, you are rich for life, but you can't keep it; you closed the city, claimed to be the son of heaven, and annihilated relatives, what do you have to rely on?

古文：愿王改图。 
现代文：希望你赶快醒悟改正。 
English: I hope you will wake up and correct yourself soon.

古文：昌不听，焖悉兵三万攻之，望城再拜曰： 大王位将相，乃不臣。
现代文：董昌不听，钱率全部兵力三万人来攻他，望城再次劝谕： 大王已位居将相，竟然有失臣礼。
English: Dong Chang did not listen, and Qian led the entire army of 30,000 men to attack him. Wangcheng once again advised: The great king has been in the position of commander-in-chief, and he has actually failed to show proper court etiquette.

古文：能改过，请谕还诸军。 
现代文：如能改过，我即撤军。 
English: If I can make amends, I will withdraw.

古文：昌惧，献镠钱二百万缗犒军，执应智、王温、韩媪、吴繇、秦昌裕送于镠，且待罪。
现代文：董昌害怕了，献钱二百万缗给钱犒军，将应智、王温、韩媪、吴繇、秦昌裕捆送给钱处置。
English: Afraid, Dong Chang donated two million baht to the Qianlong army, and sent Ying Zhi, Wang Wen, Han Qi, Wu Qi, and Qin Changyu to the Qianlong army in bundles.

古文：焖乃还，表于朝，以为昌不可赦，复讨之，傅城而垒。
现代文：钱撤军，上表朝廷，认为董昌之罪不可赦。乃再度来讨伐，围城筑工事。
English: Qian withdrew his troops, and the imperial court issued a proclamation, saying that Dong Chang's crime was unforgivable. However, they came to fight again, and the siege construction began.

古文：昌又执硃思远、王守真、卢勤送镠军求解。
现代文：董昌又绑了朱思远、王守真、卢勤送到钱军中请求解围。
English: Dong Chang also tied up Zhu Siyuan, Wang Shouzhen, and Lu Qin and sent them to the Qian army to request the lifting of the siege.

古文：昭宗遣中人李重密劳师，除昌官爵，授镠浙东道招讨使。
现代文：昭宗派中人李重密犒军，削除董昌官职爵位，升任钱为浙东道招讨使。
English: Li Chungmi, a member of the Zhaozong sect, removed Dong Chang's official title, and promoted Qian to the post of recruiting envoy to Zhejiang.

古文：昌乃求援于淮南杨行密，行密遣将台濛围苏州，安仁义、田頵攻杭州，以救昌。
现代文：董昌乃向淮南杨行密求援，杨行密派将领台蒙去围苏州，安仁义、田君页去攻杭州，用以救董昌。
English: Dong Chang sought help from Yang Xingmi of Huainan. Yang Xingmi sent his generals to encircle Suzhou, while An Renyi and Tian Junshi attacked Hangzhou to save Dong Chang.

古文：镠将顾全武等数败昌军，昌将多降，遂进围越州。
现代文：钱的将领顾全武等人多次打败董昌的队伍，董昌的将领好多都投降，于是钱进围越州。
English: Qian's generals Gu Quanwu and others repeatedly defeated Dong Chang's troops. Many of Dong Chang's generals surrendered, so Qian marched into Yuezhou.

古文：候人言外师强，辄斩以徇；绐告镠兵老，皆赏。
现代文：侦察兵如果报告外面的兵强盛，就被斩首示众；若报告钱的兵疲惫无士气，就得到赏赐。
English: If the scouts report that the soldiers outside are strong, they will be beheaded; if the soldiers who report the money are tired and demoralized, they will be rewarded.

古文：昌身阅兵五云门，出金帛倾镠众。
现代文：董昌亲自在五云门阅兵，拿出钱来收买钱的人。
English: Dong Chang personally took part in the military parade at Wuyunmen, and took out money to bribe people.

古文：全武等益奋，昌军大溃，遽还，去伪号，曰： 越人劝我作天子，固无益，今复为节度使。 
现代文：顾全武等将格外猛勇，董昌的军队大败，于是回来，削除帝号，说： 越人劝我做天子，实在没什么好处，我还是当节度使。 
English: Gu Quanwu and others would be extraordinarily brave, and Dong Chang's army was defeated, so he came back, removed the emperor's name, and said: If the Viets persuade me to be a godson, it's really no good, I'll still be a regent.

古文：全武四面攻，未克，会台濛取苏州，镠召全武还，全武曰： 贼根本在瓯、越，今失一州而缓贼，不可。 
现代文：顾全武四面齐攻，不胜。此时苏州方面台蒙胜，钱乃召顾全武回来，全武说 ：贼人的根本在瓯、越，现在丢失一个州就让贼人喘息，不是办法。 
English: At this time, the Suzhou front was defeated, Qian Na called Gu Quanwu back, and Quanwu said: The thief's root is in Ying, Yue, and now if we lose one state, it is not a way to let the thief breathe.

古文：攻益急。
现代文：攻城更紧。
English: The siege tightens.

古文：城中以口率钱，虽簪珥皆输军。
现代文：城中按人头敛钱，即使是发簪、耳环也都送交军用。
English: Money is collected in the city on a per capita basis, and even hair buns and earrings are sent to the military.

古文：昌从子真得士心，昌信谗杀之，众始不用命。
现代文：董昌的侄子董真很得人心，董昌听信谗言杀了他，群众就不肯听命了。
English: Dong Chang's nephew, Dong Zhen, was very popular. When Dong Chang killed him, the masses refused to obey his orders.

古文：又减战粮欲犒外军，下愈怨，反攻昌，昌保子城。
现代文：董昌又减战士口粮想用来犒劳外军，下属更怨，反戈击董昌，昌退保子城。
English: Dong Chang also reduced the soldiers' rations to reward the foreign troops, and his subordinates were even more resentful. They fought back against Dong Chang, and Chang withdrew to Baozhicheng.

古文：镠将骆团入见，绐言： 奉诏迎公居临安。 
现代文：钱将领骆团入城见董昌，骗他说： 我奉皇帝诏来迎您到临安去。 
English: Qian General led a group of camels into the city to see Dong Chang and lied to him, saying, "I have come to welcome you to Lin'an according to the emperor's edict.

古文：昌信之，全武执昌还，及西江，斩之，投尸于江，传首京师，夷其族。
现代文：董昌相信了，出来，顾全武将他抓了回来，走到西江，杀了他，投尸于江。传头去京师，将其族人全部夷灭。
English: Dong Chang believed it, came out, Gu Quanwu caught him, went to the West River, killed him, and threw his body into the river. He then went to Beijing to exterminate all his people.

古文：于是斩伪大臣李邈、蒋瑰等百馀人，发昌先墓，火之。
现代文：又斩伪大臣李邈、蒋瑰等一百多人，挖开董昌祖先的坟墓，将尸骸全部烧毁。
English: He also executed more than a hundred people, including the false ministers Li Yu and Jiang Gui, dug up the graves of Dong Chang's ancestors, and burned all the corpses.

古文：昌败，犹积粮三百万斛，金币大抵五百馀帑，而兵不及万人。
现代文：董昌败后，还有积粮三百万斛，金币大概有五百多帑，而其兵却还不到一万人。
English: After the defeat of Dong Chang, there were still three million baht worth of grain and about five hundred baht worth of gold coins, but his soldiers were less than ten thousand.

古文：镠遂为镇海、镇东两军节度云。
现代文：钱于是任镇海、镇东两军的节度。
English: Therefore, Qian became the commander of the two armies of Zhenhai and Zhendong.

