古文：徐渠问田鸠曰： 臣闻智士不袭下而遇君，圣人不见功而接上。
现代文：徐渠问田鸠说： 我听说智士不用历任低级职务就能被君主赏识，圣人不用显示出成绩就能被君主接纳。
English: Xu Qiu asked Tian Qi, "I heard that a wise man can be appreciated by the monarch without ever holding a low-level position, and a saint can be accepted by the monarch without having to show his achievements.

古文：令阳城义渠，明将也，而措于毛伯；公孙亶回，圣相也，而关于州部，何哉？ 
现代文：现在的阳城义渠是个英明的将领，可他曾被安排做个小官；公孙亶回是个杰出的相国，也安排做过地方官，为什么呢？ 
English: The current Yangcheng Yi Qu is a wise general, but he was once arranged to be a minor official; Gongsun Hao Hui is an outstanding compatriot, and he was also arranged to be a local official. Why?

古文：田鸠曰： 此无他故异物，主有度、上有术之故也。
现代文：田鸣说： 这没有别的原因，就因为君主掌握了法和术。
English: Tian Ming said: There is no other reason for this, just because the monarch has mastered the law and the art.

古文：且足下独不闻楚将宋觚而失其政，魏相冯离而亡其国？
现代文：况且，难道您没听说楚国用宋舰为将而败坏了政事，魏国用冯离为相而断送了国家？
English: Besides, haven't you heard that the State of Chu used the Song ship as a pawn to corrupt political affairs, and the State of Wei used the Feng Li as a pawn to destroy the country?

古文：二君者驱于声词，眩乎辩说，不试于毛伯，不关乎州部，故有失政亡国之患。
现代文：两国的君主为花言巧语所驱使，被诡辩利说所迷惑，没通过低级职务的考验，不具备基层工作的经历，结果有败坏政事和断送国家的祸患。
English: The monarchs of the two countries were driven by rhetoric, confused by sophistry, failed to pass the test of low-level positions, and did not have the experience of grassroots work. As a result, they had the misfortune of corrupting politics and ruining the country.

古文：由是观之，夫无毛伯之试，州部之关，岂明主之备哉！ 
现代文：由此看来，那种不经低级职务和基层工作考验的办法，哪里该是明君采取的措施啊！ 
English: From this point of view, the method that has not been tested by low-level positions and grassroots work, where should be the measures taken by Mingjun!

古文：堂谿公谓韩子曰： 臣闻服礼辞让，全之术也；修行退智，遂之道也。
现代文：堂谿公对韩非说： 我听说遵循古礼、讲究谦让，是保全自己的方法；修养品行、隐藏才智，是达到顺心如意的途径。
English: Don Juan said to Han Fei: I have heard that following the ancient rites and paying attention to modesty is a way to preserve oneself; cultivating moral conduct and hiding talent is a way to achieve your heart's desire.

古文：今先生立法术，设度数，臣窃以为危于身而殆于躯。
现代文：现在您立法术，设规章，我私下认为会给您生命带来危险。
English: Now you are legislating, setting rules and regulations that I privately believe will put your life at risk.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么加以验证呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：所闻先生术曰： 楚不用吴起而削乱，秦行商君而富强。
现代文：听说您曾讲道： 楚国不用吴起的主张，而国力削弱，社会混乱；秦国实行商鞅的主张而国家富足，力量强大。
English: I heard that you once preached: Chu did not use Wuqi's proposal, but the national strength weakened and the society was in chaos; Qin implemented Shangyu's proposal, but the country was rich and powerful.

古文：二子之言已当矣，然而吴起支解而商君车裂者，不逢世遇主之患也。
现代文：吴起、商鞅的主张已被证明是正确的，可是吴起被肢解，商鞅被车裂，是因为没碰上好世道和遇到好君主而产生的祸患。 
English: The claims of Wu Qi and Shang Kui have been proved to be correct, but Wu Qi was dismembered and Shang Kui was crushed by a chariot, because they did not encounter a good world and a good monarch.

古文：逢遇不可必也，患祸不可斥也。
现代文：遭遇如何是不能肯定的，祸患是不能排除的。
English: How it will be encountered is uncertain, and disasters cannot be ruled out.

古文：夫舍乎全遂之道而肆乎危殆之行，窃为先生无取焉。 韩子曰： 明先生之言矣。
现代文：放弃保全自己和顺心如意的道路而不顾一切地去干冒险的事，替您设想，我认为这是不可取的。 韩非说： 我明白您的话了。
English: I don't think it's advisable for you to give up the path of self-preservation and self-fulfillment and go all out to do something risky, Han Fei said, "I understand what you're saying.

古文：夫治天下之柄，齐民萌之度，甚未易处也。
现代文：整治天下的权柄，统一民众的法度，是很不容易施行的。
English: It is not easy to rectify the power of the world and unify the laws of the people.

古文：然所以废先王之教，而行贱臣之所取者，窍以为立法术，设度数，所以利民萌便众庶之道也。
现代文：但之所以要废除先王的礼治，而实行我的法治主张，是由于我抱定了这样的主张，即立法术、设规章，是有利于广大民众的做法。
English: However, the reason why I want to abolish the former king's etiquette and implement my rule of law is because I have embraced the idea that legislation and the establishment of regulations are beneficial to the general public.

古文：故不惮乱主暗上之患祸，而必思以齐民萌之资利者，仁智之行也。
现代文：我之所以不怕昏君乱主带来的祸患，而坚持考虑用法度来统一民众的利益，是因为这是仁爱明智的行为。
English: The reason why I am not afraid of the calamity of overthrowing the monarchy and overthrowing the ruler, but insist on considering the use of legal measures to unify the interests of the people, is because this is a wise act of benevolence.

古文：惮乱主暗上之患祸，而避乎死亡之害，知明而不见民萌之资夫科身者，贪鄙之为也。
现代文：害怕昏君乱主带来的祸患，逃避死亡的危险、只知道明哲保身而看不见民众的利益，那是贪生而卑鄙的行为。
English: It is greedy and despicable to be afraid of the evils brought about by the chaos of the ruler, to escape the danger of death, to know only how to protect oneself and not to see the interests of the people.

古文：臣不忍向贪鄙之为，不敢伤仁智之行。
现代文：我不愿选择贪生而卑鄙的做法，不敢毁坏仁爱明智的行为。
English: I will not choose the way of the greedy and the vile, nor will I destroy the work of the compassionate and the wise.

古文：先王有幸臣之意，然有大伤臣之实。 
现代文：您有爱护我的心意，但实际上却又大大伤害了我。 
English: You have the intention to love and care for me, but in reality you have hurt me very much.

