古文：十有二年春，齐高偃帅师纳北燕伯于阳。
现代文：十二年春季，齐国的高偃率领军队把北燕的伯款送到了阳地。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, Gao Jiong of Qi led the army to send Beiyan's Baozhong to Yangdi.

古文：三月壬申，郑伯嘉卒。
现代文：三月壬申日，郑简公去世。
English: In March, on Jinshin Day, Zheng Jiangong passed away.

古文：夏，宋公使华定来聘。
现代文：夏季，宋公派遣华定来鲁国聘问。
English: In the summer, Emperor Song dispatched Huading to Lu to ask questions.

古文：公如晋，至河乃复。
现代文：昭公去到晋国，到达河地就回来了。
English: Shao Gong went to Jin Province, arrived at the river and came back.

古文：五月，葬郑简公。
现代文：五月，安葬郑简公。
English: In May, Zheng Jiangong was buried.

古文：楚杀其大夫成熊。
现代文：楚国杀掉自己的大夫成熊。
English: The state of Chu killed its own doctor, Cheng Xiong.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬十月，公子慭出奔齐。
现代文：送机十月，公子慭逃到了齐国。
English: In October, he fled to Qi Province.

古文：楚子伐徐。
现代文：楚之攻打徐国。
English: Chu Zhi attacked Xu Guo.

古文：故叔仲小、南蒯、公子慭谋季氏。慭告公，而春，齐高偃纳北燕伯款于唐，因其众也。
现代文：晋国攻打鲜虞。十二年春季，齐国的高偃把北燕伯款送到唐地，这是因为唐地的群众愿意接纳他。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, Gao Zheng of Qi sent Bei Yanbo to Tang, because the people of Tang were willing to accept him.

古文：三月，郑简公卒。
现代文：三月，郑简公去世了。
English: In March, Zheng Jiangong passed away.

古文：将为葬除，及游氏之庙，将毁焉。
现代文：将要为安葬而清除道路上的障碍。到达游氏的祖庙，准备拆毁它。
English: Will have to clear the road for the burial. Arrive at Yu's ancestral temple and prepare to demolish it.

古文：子大叔使其除徒执用以立，而无庸毁。曰： 子产过女，而问何故不毁，乃曰，不忍庙也！
现代文：子太叔让他手下清道的人拿着工具站着，暂时不要去拆，说： 子产经过你们这里，如果问你们为什么不拆，就说： 不忍毁掉祖庙啊。对，准备拆了。  
English: The great-great-uncle told his road-clearing men to stand with their tools and not to demolish it for the time being, saying: "Our children have passed through here. If they ask you why you don't demolish it, say: 'I can't bear to destroy the ancestral temple.' Yes, we are preparing to demolish it."

古文：诺，将毁矣！ 既如是，子产乃使辟之。
现代文：这样一番以后，子产就让清道的人避开游氏的祖庙。
English: After this, Zi Fang asked the people of Qingdao to avoid Yu's ancestral temple.

古文：司墓之室，有当道者。
现代文：管理坟墓的人的房屋，有位于当路的。
English: The house of the person in charge of the tomb is located on the same road.

古文：毁之，则朝而塴；弗毁，则日中而塴。子大叔请毁之，曰： 无若诸侯之宾何？ 
现代文：拆了它，就可以在早晨下葬，不拆，就要到中午才能下葬。子太叔请求拆了它，说： 不拆，把各国的宾客怎么办？ 
English: If you tear it down, you can bury it in the morning, but if you don't tear it down, you can't bury it until noon. My great-uncle asked for it to be torn down, saying, "If you don't tear it down, what will you do with the guests from all over the world?"

古文：子产曰： 诸侯之宾，能来会吾丧，岂惮日中？
现代文：子产说： 各国的宾客能够前来参加我国的丧礼，难道会担心迟到中午？
English: Zibo said: If guests from all over the world can come to attend our country's funeral, will they be worried about being late at noon?

古文：无损于宾，而民不害，何故不为？ 
现代文：对宾客没有损害，只要百姓不遭危害，为什么不做？ 
English: There is no harm to the guests, as long as the people are not harmed, why not do it?

古文：遂弗毁，日中而葬。
现代文：于是就不拆，到中午下葬。
English: So they didn't tear it down, and it was buried by noon.

古文：君子谓： 子产于是乎知礼。
现代文：君子认为： 子产在这件事情上懂得礼。
English: The nobleman thought: Zibo knows how to behave in this matter.

古文：礼无毁人以自成也。 
现代文：礼，没有毁坏别人而成全了自己的事。 
English: Thank you for not destroying others and accomplishing your own thing.

古文：夏，宋华定来聘，通嗣君也。
现代文：夏季，宋国的华定来鲁国聘问，为新即位的宋君通好。
English: In the summer, Hua Ding of the Song Dynasty came to Lu to ask for advice, and he was favorable to the newly enthroned Song Jun.

古文：享之，为赋《蓼萧》，弗知，又不答赋。
现代文：设享礼招待他，为他赋《蓼萧》这首诗，他不知道，又不赋诗回答。
English: They invited him to a banquet and gave him a poem, "Biao Xiao," but he didn't know what it was and didn't answer.

古文：昭子曰： 必亡。
现代文：昭子说： 他必定会逃亡。
English: Akiko said, "He will definitely run away."

古文：宴语之不怀，宠光之不宣，令德之不知，同福之不受，将何以在？ 
现代文：诗中所说宴会的笑语不怀念，宠信和光耀不宣扬，美好的德行不知道，共同的福禄不接受，他将凭什么在卿位？ 
English: In the poem, the banquet's laughter is not remembered, the favors and glories are not proclaimed, the beautiful virtues are not known, and the common blessings are not accepted. On what basis will he be elevated to the peerage?

古文：齐侯、卫侯、郑伯如晋，朝嗣君也。
现代文：齐景公、卫灵公、郑定公到晋国去，朝见新立的国君。
English: Lord Qi Jing, Lord Wei Ling and Lord Zheng Ding went to Jin Province to meet the newly-installed sovereign.

古文：公如晋，至河乃复。
现代文：昭公到晋国去，到达黄河边就返回去了。
English: Shao Gong went to Jin Province, arrived at the river and came back.

古文：取郠之役，莒人愬于晋，晋有平公之丧，未之治也。故辞公。
现代文：占取郠地的那一次战役，莒国人向晋国控诉，晋国正好有平公的丧事，没有能够办理，所以辞谢昭公。
English: In the last battle to occupy Yunnan Province, the people of Yunnan complained to the State of Jin. The State of Jin happened to have the funeral of Ping Gong, but they were unable to handle it, so they resigned.

古文：公子慭遂如晋。
现代文：于是公子慭就到了晋国。
English: As a result, he came to Jin Province.

古文：晋侯享诸侯，子产相郑伯，辞于享，请免丧而后听命。
现代文：晋昭公设享礼招待诸侯，子产辅佐郑定公，请求不参加享礼，请求丧服期满然后听取命令。
English: Jin Zhaokong set up a ceremony to invite princes, and Zheng Dingong, the assistant of his children, requested not to participate in the ceremony, requested that the mourning period was over, and then listened to the order.

古文：晋人许之，礼也。
现代文：晋国人答应了，这是合于礼的。
English: The people of Jin agreed, which was proper.

古文：晋侯以齐侯宴，中行穆子相。
现代文：晋昭公和齐景公举行宴会，中行穆子相礼。
English: Prince Jin Zhaohong and Prince Qi Jing held a banquet, during which they performed the "Muzi" ceremony.

古文：投壶，晋侯先。穆子曰： 有酒如淮，有肉如坻。
现代文：以箭投入壶中为乐，晋昭公先投，穆子说： 有酒像淮流，有肉像高丘。
English: Taking pleasure in throwing arrows into the pot, Jin Zhaogong threw first, Mu Zi said: "Wine is like a river, meat is like a hill.

古文：寡君中此，为诸侯师。 
现代文：寡君投中壶，统帅诸侯。 
English: The widower threw in the pot, the commander-in-chief of the lords.

古文：中之。
现代文：投中了。
English: It went in.

古文：齐侯举矢曰： 有酒如渑，有肉如陵。
现代文：齐景公举起矢，说： 有酒如渑水，有肉像山陵。
English: Lord Qi Jing held up an arrow and said, "Wine is like salty water, and meat is like a mountain.

古文：寡人中此，与君代兴。 
现代文：寡人投中壶，代君兴盛。 
English: Few people hit the pot, and the deputy thrives.

古文：亦中之。
现代文：也投中了。
English: It was also a hit.

古文：伯瑕谓穆子曰： 子失辞。
现代文：伯瑕对穆子说： 您的话不恰当。
English: Bo Ke said to Mu Zi: Your words are not appropriate.

古文：吾固师诸侯矣，壶何为焉？
现代文：我们本来就称霸诸侯了，壶有什么用？
English: We used to dominate the lords. What is the use of the kettle?

古文：其以中儁也。
现代文：还是不要把投中看成希奇事。
English: Still, don't think of winning the lottery as a miracle.

古文：齐君弱吾君，归弗来矣。 
现代文：齐君认为我们国君软弱，回去以后不会来了。 
English: Qi Jun thinks that our sovereign is weak and will not come back.

古文：穆子曰： 吾军帅强御，卒乘竞劝，今犹古也，齐将何事？ 
现代文：穆子说： 我们军队统帅强而有力，士兵争相勉励，今天就像从前一样，齐国能做些什么？ 
English: Mu Zi said: Our army commander is strong and powerful, soldiers are competing for encouragement. Today, just like in the past, what can Qi Guo do?

古文：公孙傁趋进曰： 日旰君勤，可以出矣。 
现代文：公孙傁快步走进，说： 天晚了，国君也累了，可以出去了！ 
English: Gongsun Yao quickly walked in and said, "It's getting late, the sovereign is tired, you can go out now!"

古文：以齐侯出。
现代文：就和齐景公一起出去了。
English: I went out with Lord Qi Jing.

古文：楚子谓成虎，若敖之馀也，遂杀之。
现代文：楚灵王认为成虎是若敖的余党，就杀死了他。
English: King Chuling thought that Chenghu was a rookie and killed him.

古文：或谮成虎于楚子，成虎知之而不能行。
现代文：有人在楚灵王那里诬陷成虎，成虎知道了，但是不能出走。
English: Someone framed Chenghuang at King Chu Ling's place. Chenghuang knew, but he couldn't run away.

古文：书曰： 楚杀其大夫成虎。 怀宠也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 楚杀其大夫成虎 ，这是由于他留恋宠幸。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Chu killed his doctor, Chenghu, because he was attached to his favorite.

古文：六月，葬郑简公。
现代文：六月，安葬郑简公。
English: In June, Zheng Jiangong was buried.

古文：晋荀吴伪会齐师者，假道于鲜虞，遂入昔阳。
现代文：晋国的荀吴假装会合齐军的样子，向鲜虞借路，就乘机进入昔阳。
English: Pretending to join the Qi army, Zhang Wu from Jin Province borrowed the road from Xiang Yu, and took the opportunity to enter Xiyang.

古文：秋八月壬午，灭肥，以肥子绵皋归。
现代文：秋季，八月初十日，灭亡肥国，带了肥子绵皋回国。
English: In autumn, at the beginning of August, on the 10th day, after the death of Fei Guo, he returned to China with Fei Zi Mian Ye.

古文：周原伯绞虐其舆臣，使曹逃。
现代文：周朝的原伯绞残暴，他的许多手下人集体逃走。
English: The Zhou Dynasty's Genbo Yan was brutal, and many of his subordinates fled en masse.

古文：冬十月壬申朔，原舆人逐绞而立公子跪寻，绞奔郊。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，原地大众赶走绞，立了公子跪寻。绞逃亡到郊地。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, the local people drove out the nian and forced the nobles to kneel. The nian fled to the suburbs.

古文：甘简公无子，立其弟过。
现代文：甘简公没有儿子，立了他兄弟甘过做国君。
English: Gan Jian Gong did not have a son, so he appointed his brother Gan Xuan to be the king.

古文：过将去成、景之族。
现代文：过准备去掉成公、景公的族人。
English: The ethnic people of Chenggong and Jinggong were eliminated.

古文：成、景之族赂刘献公。丙申，杀甘悼公，而立成公之孙。
现代文：成公、景公的族人贿赂刘献公，二十五日，杀死了甘悼公，立了成公的孙子。
English: The clansmen of Chenggong and Jinggong bribed Liu Xiangong. On the 25th, Liu Xiangong was killed and Chenggong's grandson was established.

古文：丁酉，杀献大子之傅、庾皮之子过。杀瑕辛于市，及宫嬖绰、王孙没、刘州鸠、阴忌、老阳子。
现代文：二十六日，杀了献太子保傅、庾皮的儿子过，在市上杀了瑕辛，又杀了宫嬖绰、王孙没、刘州鸠、阴忌、老阳子。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he killed the sons of the crown prince Baofu and Yanpi, and killed Guo Xin in the market. He also killed Gong Yuchao, Wang Sun Miao, Liu Zhou Jie, Yin Ji, and Lao Yang Zi.

古文：季平子立而不礼于南蒯。
现代文：季平子即位后，对南蒯不加礼遇。
English: After the enthronement of Ji Ping Zi, no courtesy was shown to Nan Xun.

古文：南蒯谓子仲： 吾出季氏，而归其室于公，子更其位，我以费为公臣。 
现代文：南蒯对子仲说： 我赶走季氏，把他的家产归公，您取代他的地位，我带着费地作为公臣。 
English: Nan Xun said to Zizhong: I drove out Ji, returned his family property to the public, you replaced his position, I took Fei Di as a public minister.

古文：子仲许之。
现代文：子仲答应了。
English: Sonaka agreed.

古文：南蒯语叔仲穆子，且告之故。
现代文：南蒯告诉叔仲穆子，同时把原因告诉了他。
English: Nanzhao told Uncle Zhongmuzi and told him the reason.

古文：季悼子之卒也，叔孙昭子以再命为卿。
现代文：季悼子死的时候，叔孙昭子由于再命而做了卿士。
English: When Ji Yuezi died, his great-uncle Akiko became a noble due to his second life.

古文：及平子伐莒，克之，更受三命。
现代文：等到季平子进攻莒国得胜，昭子改受三命。
English: When Ji Heishi attacked Shikoku and won, Akiko received three lives instead.

古文：叔仲子欲构二家，谓平子曰： 三命踰父兄，非礼也。 
现代文：叔仲穆子想要离间季氏和叔孙氏两家，对平子说： 三命超过了父兄，这是不合于礼的。 
English: Uncle Zhongmuzi wanted to separate the two families of the Ji clan and the uncles and grandsons, and said to the Hirats: "Three lives are more than the father and brother, which is not proper.

古文：平子曰： 然。 
现代文：平子说： 是这样。 
English: Hirako said, "That's right."

古文：故使昭子。
现代文：所以就让昭子自己辞谢。
English: Therefore, Akiko was asked to withdraw her thanks.

古文：昭子曰： 叔孙氏有家祸，杀適立庶，故婼也及此。
现代文：昭子说： 叔孙氏发生家祸，杀死嫡子立了庶子，所以婼才到了这一步。
English: Akiko said, "Uncle Sun had a family accident, killed his legitimate son and had an illegitimate son, that's why I've come to this point.

古文：若因祸以毙之，则闻命矣。
现代文：如果是因为祸乱而来讨伐，那么我听从命令了。
English: If the crusade comes because of the calamity, then I have obeyed the order.

古文：若不废君命，则固有著矣。 
现代文：如果不废弃国君的命令，那么本来就有我的位次。 
English: If the sovereign's order is not scrapped, then I would have been promoted.

古文：昭子朝而命吏曰： 婼将与季氏讼，书辞无颇。 
现代文：昭子朝见，命令官吏说： 婼打算和季氏打官司，写诉讼辞的时候不要偏袒。 
English: Akiko met with officials in the morning and ordered them to say, "If you plan to sue the Ji clan, don't be biased when you write your statement of claim.

古文：季孙惧，而归罪于叔仲子。故叔仲小、南蒯、公子慭谋季氏。
现代文：季平子畏惧，就归罪于叔仲子，因此叔仲穆子、南蒯、子仲就打季氏的主意。
English: Ji Ping Zi was afraid and blamed Uncle Zhong Zi, so Uncle Zhong Zi's sons, Nan Zi and Zi Zi took up Ji's idea.

古文：慭告公，而遂从公如晋。
现代文：子仲告诉昭公，就跟随昭公去了晋国。
English: Zizhong told Zhaogong that he would follow Zhaogong to Jin.

古文：南蒯惧不克，以费叛如齐。
现代文：南蒯害怕打不赢，带了费地叛变到了齐国。
English: Nanzhao was afraid of not being able to win, so he took Feidi and mutinied to Qi Province.

古文：子仲还及卫，闻乱，逃介而先。及郊，闻费叛，遂奔齐。
现代文：子仲回国，到达卫国，听到动乱的情况，丢下副使先行逃回国内，到达郊外，听到费地叛乱就逃亡到齐国。
English: Zi Zhong returned to the country, arrived at the defense of the country, heard the situation of turmoil, left the vice-envoy ahead and fled back to the country, arrived in the suburbs, heard the Feidi rebellion and fled to Qi.

古文：南蒯之将叛也，其乡人或知之，过之而叹，且言曰： 恤恤乎，湫乎，攸乎。
现代文：南蒯将要叛变的时候，他的家乡有人知道情况，走过他门口，叹了口气说： 忧愁啊，愁啊，忧啊！
English: When Nan Xuan was about to rebel, someone from his hometown, who knew the situation, walked past his door, sighed and said: Sadness, sadness, sadness!

古文：深思而浅谋，迩身而远志，家臣而君图，有人矣哉！ 
现代文：想法高而智谋浅，关系近而志向远，作为家臣而想为国君图谋，要有人材才行啊！ 
English: Ideas are lofty but wit is shallow, relations are close but ambitions are far, as a vassal who wants to plot for the sovereign, it takes talent!

古文：南蒯枚筮之，遇《坤》之《比》，曰： 黄裳元吉。 
现代文：南蒯不提出所问的事情而占筮，得到《坤》卦变为《比》卦，卦辞说， 黄裳元吉 ，就认为是大吉大利。
English: Nan Xun did not bring up the matter in question, but took advantage of it, and got "Kun" gua to become "Bi" gua. According to the gua, Huang Xiangyuanji, he considered it to be great luck.

古文：以为大吉也，示子服惠伯曰： 即欲有事，何如？ 
现代文：把它给子服惠伯看，说： 如果有事情，怎么样？ 
English: He showed it to Zifu Huibo and said, "What if something happens?

古文：惠伯曰： 吾尝学此矣，忠信之事则可，不然必败。
现代文：惠伯说： 我曾经学习过《易》，如果是忠信的事情就可以符合卦辞的预测，不然就必定失败。
English: Huibo said, "I once studied the Book of Changes. If it is a faithful matter, it can meet the prediction of the prophecy, otherwise it will surely fail.

古文：外强内温，忠也。和以率贞，信也。故曰 黄裳元吉 。
现代文：外表强盛内部温顺，这是忠诚，用和顺来实行占卜，这是信用，所以说 黄裳元吉 。
English: To be outwardly strong and inwardly meek is to be loyal, and to use harmony to practice divination is to be trustworthy. This is why Huang Xiang Yuanji is called Huang Xiang Yuanji.

古文：黄，中之色也。
现代文：黄，是内衣的颜色。
English: Yellow is the color of underwear.

古文：裳，下之饰也。
现代文：裳，是下身的服装。
English: A petticoat is an undergarment.

古文：元，善之长也。
现代文：元，是善的第一位。
English: Yuan, is the first place of good.

古文：中不忠，不得其色。
现代文：内心不忠诚，就和颜色不相符合。
English: If the heart is not loyal, it does not match the color.

古文：下不共，不得其饰。
现代文：在下面不恭敬，就和服装不相符合。
English: If it's not respectful underneath, it doesn't go with the outfit.

古文：事不善，不得其极。
现代文：事情办理不好，就和标准不相符合。
English: If things are not handled well, they do not meet the standards.

古文：外内倡和为忠，率事以信为共，供养三德为善，非此三者弗当。
现代文：内外和谐就是忠，根据诚信办事就是恭，崇尚上述三种德行，就是善，不是这三种德行就无法承当卦辞的预测。
English: Harmony at home and abroad is loyalty, acting in good faith is righteousness, and advocating the above-mentioned three virtues is goodness. Without these three virtues, it is impossible to uphold the prediction of Gua Zhi.

古文：且夫《易》不可以占险，将何事也，且可饰乎？
现代文：而且《易》不能用来预测冒险的事情，您打算做什么呢？
English: And Yi can't be used to predict risky things, what are you going to do?

古文：中美能黄，上美为元，下美则裳，参成可筮。
现代文：而且能不能在下位而恭敬呢？中美就是黄，上美就是元，下美就是裳，这三者都具备了才可以合于卦辞的预测。
English: And can it be respectful in the lower position? The middle beauty is Huang, the upper beauty is Yuan, and the lower beauty is Miao. Only when all three are present can they fit into the prediction of the riddle.

古文：犹有阙也，筮虽吉，未也。 
现代文：如果有所缺少，卦辞虽然吉利，未必能行。 
English: If there is something missing, the words of the riddle, although auspicious, may not work.

古文：将適费，饮乡人酒。
现代文：南蒯将要到费地去，请乡里的人喝酒。
English: Nanlu will go to Feidi and invite the villagers to drink.

古文：乡人或歌之曰： 我有圃，生之杞乎！
现代文：乡里有人唱歌说： 我有块菜地，却生长了枸杞啊！
English: Someone in the countryside sings: I have a vegetable patch, but worms are growing!

古文：从我者子乎，去我者鄙乎，倍其邻者耻乎！
现代文：跟我走的是大男子呵，不跟我走的是鄙陋的人呵，背弃他亲人的可耻呵！
English: He who follows me is a great man, but he who does not follow me is a despicable person, and it is shameful to turn one's back on one's relatives!

古文：已乎已乎，非吾党之士乎！ 
现代文：得了得了，不是我们一伙的人士呵！ 
English: Oh dear, not one of our own!

古文：平子欲使昭子逐叔仲小。
现代文：季平子想要让昭子赶走叔仲子。
English: Kihirako wants Akiko to get rid of Uncle Nakako.

古文：小闻之，不敢朝。
现代文：叔仲子听到了，不敢朝见。
English: Uncle Nakako heard this and did not dare to see her in the morning.

古文：昭子命吏谓小待政于朝，曰： 吾不为怨府。 
现代文：昭子命令官吏告诉叔仲子在朝廷上等待办公，说： 我不充当怨恨聚集的角色。 
English: Akiko ordered officials to tell her uncle Nakako to wait for an office at the Imperial Court, saying, "I will not play the role of gathering resentment.

古文：楚子狩于州来，次于颍尾，使荡侯、潘子、司马督、嚣尹午、陵尹喜帅师围徐以惧吴。
现代文：楚灵王在州来打猎阅兵，驻扎在颍尾，派荡侯、潘子、司马督、嚣尹午、陵尹喜带兵包围徐国以威胁吴国。
English: King Chuling came to the state to hunt and parade, stationed in Shanwei, and sent Wang Hou, Pan Zi, Sima Du, Yan Yin Wu, and Ling Yin Xi to encircle Xu Province with soldiers to threaten Wu Province.

古文：楚子次于乾谿，以为之援。
现代文：楚灵王驻在乾谿，作为他们的后援。
English: King Chuling was stationed in Qianlong to act as their backup.

古文：雨雪，王皮冠，秦复陶，翠被，豹舄，执鞭以出，仆析父从。
现代文：下雪，楚灵王头戴皮帽子，身穿秦国的羽衣，披着翠羽披肩，脚穿豹皮鞋，手拿着鞭子走了出来。仆析父作为随从。
English: When it snowed, King Chuling came out with a fur hat on his head, wearing a Qin feather cloak, a cape with emerald feathers, leopard skin shoes on his feet, and a whip in his hand. His servant and father followed him.

古文：右尹子革夕，王见之，去冠被，舍鞭。与之语曰： 昔我先王熊绎，与吕级、王孙牟、燮父、禽父，并事康王，四国皆有分，我独无有。
现代文：右尹子革晚上去朝见，楚王接见他，脱去帽子、披肩，放下鞭子，和他说话，说： 从前我们先王熊绎，和吕级、王孙牟、燮父、禽父一起事奉康王，齐、晋、鲁、卫四国都分赐了宝器，唯独我国没有。
English: Right Yin Zi Ge went to see the emperor in the evening. King Chu received him, took off his hat and shawl, put down his whip, and spoke to him, saying: Once upon a time, we, Wang Xiong Yu, served King Kang together with King Lv, King Sun Moo, King Yabu, and King Yip. The four kingdoms of Qi, Jin, Lu, and Wei all gave treasures, but our country did not.

古文：今吾使人于周，求鼎以为分，王其与我乎？ 
现代文：现在我派人到成周，请求把鼎作为赏赐，周天子会给我吗？ 
English: Now I send someone to Cheng Zhou to ask for the tripod as a reward. Will Zhou Tianzi give it to me?

古文：对曰： 与君王哉。
现代文：子革回答说： 会给君王啊！
English: Zoga replied, "It will be given to the king!"

古文：昔我先王熊绎，辟在荆山，筚路蓝缕，以处草莽。跋涉山林，以事天子。唯是桃弧、棘矢，以共御王事。
现代文：从前我们先王熊绎住在荆山僻处，乘柴车、穿破衣以开辟丛生的杂草，跋山涉水以事奉天子，只能用桃木弓、枣木箭作为进贡。
English: Once upon a time, our ancestor, Wang Xiongyu, lived in a remote part of the Jing Mountains. He used a fire truck and wore ragged clothes to cut through the thick weeds, and waded through the mountains to serve the heavenly son. He could only use a peach bow and a jujube arrow as tribute.

古文：齐，王舅也。
现代文：齐国，是天子的舅父。
English: Qi Guo is the uncle of Tianzi.

古文：晋及鲁、卫，王母弟也。
现代文：晋国和鲁国、卫国，是天子的同胞兄弟。
English: Jin, Lu, and Wei are all brothers and sisters of the Son of Heaven.

古文：楚是以无分，而彼皆有。
现代文：楚国因此没有得到赏赐，而他们却有，现在是周朝和四国顺服事奉君王了。
English: As a result, the State of Chu was not rewarded, but they were. Now, the Zhou Dynasty and the Four Kingdoms obediently serve the king.

古文：今周与四国服事君王，将唯命是从，岂其爱鼎！ 王曰： 昔我皇祖伯父昆吾，旧许是宅。今郑人贪赖其田，而不我与。
现代文：将会都听从您的命令，难道还爱惜鼎？ 楚灵王说： 以前我们的皇祖伯父昆吾，居住在旧许，现在郑国人贪利这里的土田而不给我们。
English: King Chuling said, "In the past, our imperial ancestor, Uncle Kunwu, used to live here, but now the people of Zheng are greedy and don't want to give us the soil here.

古文：我若求之，其与我乎？ 
现代文：我们如果求取，他会给我们吗？ 
English: If we ask for it, will he give it to us?

古文：对曰： 与君王哉。
现代文：子革回答说： 会给君王啊！
English: Zoga replied, "It will be given to the king!"

古文：周不爱鼎，郑敢爱田？ 
现代文：周朝不爱惜鼎，郑国还敢爱惜土田？ 
English: The Zhou Dynasty did not spare Ding, but will Zheng dare to spare Tsuchida?

古文：王曰： 昔诸侯远我而畏晋，今我大城陈、蔡、不羹，赋皆千乘，子与有劳焉。诸侯其畏我乎？ 
现代文：楚灵王说： 从前诸侯认为我国偏僻而害怕晋国，现在我们大大地修筑陈国、蔡国两个不羹城的城墙，每地都有战车一千辆，您是有功劳的，诸侯会害怕我们了吧！ 
English: King Chuling said: In the past, the princes thought that our country was remote and were afraid of Jin. Now, we are building the walls of the two uninhabited cities of Chen and Cai, and there are a thousand chariots in each place. You are a credit. The princes will be afraid of us!

古文：对曰： 畏君王哉。
现代文：子革回答说： 害怕君王啊！
English: Zoga replied, "Fear the king!

古文：是四国者，专足畏也，又加之以楚，敢不畏君王哉？ 
现代文：光是这四个城邑，也就足够使人害怕了，又加上楚国全国的力量，岂敢不怕君王呢？ 
English: These four cities alone are enough to make people afraid, and with the power of the whole country of Chu, how dare they not be afraid of the king?

古文：工尹路请曰： 君王命剥圭以为柲，敢请命。 
现代文：工尹路请求说： 君王命令破开圭玉以装饰斧柄，谨请发布命令。 
English: The engineer, Yin Lu, requested: "Your Majesty has ordered that Guiyu be broken to make a decorative axe handle. Please issue the order."

古文：王入视之。
现代文：楚灵王走进去察看。
English: King Chuling went inside to investigate.

古文：析父谓子革： 吾子，楚国之望也！
现代文：析父对子革说： 您，是楚国有名望的人。
English: The analyst father said to the son: You are a famous person in Chu.

古文：今与王言如响，国其若之何？ 
现代文：现在和君王说话，答对好像回声一样，国家将怎么办？ 
English: Now I speak with the king, and the answer is like an echo, what will the country do?

古文：子革曰： 摩厉以须，王出，吾刃将斩矣。 
现代文：子革说： 我磨快了刀刃等着，君王出来，我的刀刃就将砍下去了。 
English: Zi Kegu said: I have sharpened my blade and am waiting for the king to come out, and then my blade will cut down.

古文：王出，复语。
现代文：楚灵王出来，又和子革说话。
English: King Chuling came out and spoke to Zige again.

古文：左史倚相趋过。王曰： 是良史也，子善视之。是能读《三坟》、《五典》、《八索》、《九丘》。 
现代文：左史倚相快步走过，楚灵王说： 这个人是好史官，您要好好看待他，这个人能够读《三坟》、《五典》、《八索》、《九丘》。 
English: Zuo Shi leaned over and walked quickly by. King Chu Ling said, "This man is a good historian. You should take a good look at him. This man can read "The Three Graves," "The Five Classics," "The Eight Sorrows" and "The Nine Hills."

古文：对曰： 臣尝问焉。
现代文：子革回答说： 下臣曾经问过他。
English: Zoga replied, "A vassal once asked him why.

古文：昔穆王欲肆其心，周行天下，将皆必有车辙马迹焉。
现代文：从前周穆王想要放纵他自己的私心，周游天下，想要让天下到处都有他的车辙马迹。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Mu Wang wanted to indulge his selfishness, travel around the world, and let the world have his ruts everywhere.

古文：祭公谋父作《祈招》之诗，以止王心。王是以获没于祗宫。
现代文：祭公谋父作了《祈招》这首诗来阻止穆王的私心，穆王因此得以善终于祗宫。
English: In order to stop the selfishness of King Mu, the father made the poem "Invitation to Prayer," and King Mu was finally able to enter the palace.

古文：臣问其诗而不知也。
现代文：下臣问他这首诗，他都不知道。
English: When a subordinate asked him what the poem was about, he didn't know.

古文：若问远焉，其焉能知之？ 
现代文：如果问更远的事情，他哪里能知道？ 
English: If I ask about something further away, how will he know?

古文：王曰： 子能乎？ 
现代文：楚灵王说： 您能知道吗？ 
English: King Chuling said, "Do you know that?"

古文：对曰： 能。
现代文：子革回答说： 能。
English: Zoga replied, "Yes."

古文：其诗曰： 祈招之愔愔，式昭德音。
现代文：这首诗说： 祈招安祥和悦，表现有德者的声音。
English: The poem says, "Pray for peace and tranquility, expressing the voice of a virtuous person."

古文：思我王度，式如玉，式如金。
现代文：想起我们君王的风度，样子好像玉好像金。
English: Reminds me of our king's demeanor, looks like jade, looks like gold.

古文：形民之力，而无醉饱之心。  
现代文：保存百姓的力量，而自己没有醉饱之心。  
English: Preserve the strength of the people, and do not be drunk with your own blood.

古文：王揖而入，馈不食，寝不寐，数日。不能自克，以及于难。
现代文：楚灵王向子革作揖，便走了进去，送上饭来不吃，睡觉睡不着，有好几天，不能克制自己，所以终于遇上了祸难。
English: King Chuling was angry with Zige, so he went inside. He didn't eat the meal he was served, and he couldn't sleep. For several days, he couldn't control himself, so he finally met with a disaster.

古文：仲尼曰： 古也有志，克己复礼，仁也。
现代文：孔子说： 古时候有话说： 克制自己回到礼仪上，这就是仁。 
English: Confucius said: In ancient times, there was a saying: "To restrain oneself and return to propriety is benevolence."

古文：信善哉！
现代文：真是说得好啊！
English: What a great way to put it!

古文：楚灵王若能如是，岂其辱于乾谿？ 
现代文：楚灵王如果能够这样，难道还会在乾谿受到羞辱？ 
English: If King Chuling could do that, would he still be humiliated in the dry dock?

古文：晋伐鲜虞，因肥之役也。
现代文：晋国进攻鲜虞，这是乘灭亡肥国以后而顺路进攻的。
English: Jin was on the verge of attacking, and this was done by taking advantage of the destruction of Fei and attacking on the way.

