古文：刘基，字伯温，青田人。
现代文：刘基，字伯温，青田人。
English: Liu Ji, also known as Bo Wen, is from Aota.

古文：曾祖濠，仕宋为翰林掌书。
现代文：曾祖父刘濠曾在宋朝为官，任翰林掌书。
English: Liu Yao's great-grandfather was an official in the Song Dynasty and served as Hanlin's secretary.

古文：宋亡，邑子林融倡义旅。
现代文：宋亡之后，县城男子林融倡导义旅。
English: After Song's death, Lin Rong, a man from the county seat, advocated a charity trip.

古文：事败，元遣使簿录其党，多连染。
现代文：事情败露，元朝派使臣将其同伙列成名册，许多人被株连。
English: When the affair was exposed, the Yuan Dynasty sent envoys to list his accomplices, and many of them were arrested.

古文：使道宿濠家，濠醉使者而焚其庐，籍悉毁。使者计无所出，乃为更其籍，连染者皆得免。
现代文：使臣中途留宿刘濠家，刘濠便将使臣灌醉，然后放火烧了他的宿舍，名册全被烧毁，使臣毫无办法，只得更改名册，被株连者都得以幸免。
English: The envoy stayed at Liu Ye's house in the middle of the journey. Liu Ye then got the envoy drunk and then set fire to his dormitory. The roster was completely burned. The envoy had no choice but to change the roster, and all the victims were spared.

古文：基幼颖异，其师郑复初谓其父龠曰： 君祖德厚，此子必大君之门矣。 
现代文：刘基自幼聪颖异常，他的老师郑复初曾对其父刘火龠说 ：你祖德深厚，这个孩子日后必成大器。 
English: Liu Ji has been unusually bright since he was a child. His teacher, Zheng Fuzhu, once said to his father, Liu Huoqi: "Your ancestry is profound. This child will become a great man in the future."

古文：元至顺间，举进士，除高安丞，有廉直声。
现代文：元至顺年间，刘基考中进士，授为高安丞，获得廉洁正直的名声。
English: During the Yuan and Shun years, Liu was awarded the title of Gao An Rong (高安丞) and gained a reputation for honesty and integrity.

古文：行省辟之，谢去。
现代文：行省要提升他，刘基谢绝离去。
English: The ministry wanted to promote him, but Liu Kixie refused to leave.

古文：起为江浙儒学副提举，论御史失职，为台臣所阻，再投劾归。
现代文：后来出任江浙儒学副提举，论御史失职之罪，被台臣所阻，刘基两次上奏弹劾，后弃官还乡。
English: Later, he was promoted to the vice-chairman of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Confucianism, and on the crime of dereliction of duty, he was blocked by the Taiwanese, and Liu Ji was impeached twice, after which he resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：基博通经史，于书无不窥，尤精象纬之学。
现代文：刘基博通经史，无书不读，尤其精于天文。
English: Liu Qibao is well versed in the history of literature, but he does not read books. He is especially good at astronomy.

古文：西蜀赵天泽论江左人物，首称基，以为诸葛孔明俦也。
现代文：西蜀赵天泽在评论江右人物时，首推刘基，将他比作诸葛孔明。
English: When Xi Shu Zhao Tian Ze commented on Jiang Yu's character, he first recommended Liu Ji, comparing him to Zhuge Liang.

古文：方国珍起海上，掠郡县，有司不能制。行省复辟基为元帅府都事。
现代文：方国珍起兵海上，抢劫郡县，有关官员控制不了他，行省复任刘基为元帅府都事。
English: Fang Guozhen raised an army at sea and robbed counties. The relevant officials could not control him, and the reinstatement of Liu Ji as the marshal of the provincial government was a matter for the Marshal's Office.

古文：基议筑庆元诸城以逼贼，国珍气沮。
现代文：刘基建议修筑庆元诸城威逼方国珍，方国珍为之气沮。
English: Liu Ji suggested that Qingyuan and other cities should be built to force Fang Guozhen, and Fang Guozhen was upset.

古文：及左丞帖里帖木儿招谕国珍，基言方氏兄弟首乱，不诛无以惩后。
现代文：等到左丞帖里帖木儿招降方国珍时，刘基说方氏兄弟首先作乱，不杀他们无以惩后。
English: When the Left Wing Commander Tsering Timur called for the surrender of Fang Guozhen, Liu Qi said that Fang's brothers were the first to make a disturbance, and there was no way to punish them without killing them.

古文：国珍惧，厚赂基。基不受。
现代文：方国珍心里害怕，重贿刘基，刘基拒不接受。
English: Fang Guozhen was afraid in his heart and bribed Liu Ji, but Liu Ji refused to accept it.

古文：国珍乃使人浮海至京，贿用事者。
现代文：方国珍便派人从海路行船至京，贿赂掌权者。
English: Fang Guozhen then sent people by sea to Beijing to bribe those in power.

古文：遂诏抚国珍，授以官，而责基擅威福，羁管绍兴，方氏遂愈横。
现代文：于是朝廷下诏招抚方国珍，授予他官职，而责怪刘基滥用权力，擅作主张，并让刘基离京去管理绍兴，方氏于是更加骄横。
English: As a result, the imperial court invited Fang Guozhen and granted him an official post, while accusing Liu Ji of abusing power and making unsubstantiated claims, and letting Liu Ji leave Beijing to manage Shaoxing. As a result, Fang became even more arrogant.

古文：亡何，山寇蜂起，行省复辟基剿捕，与行院判石抹宜孙守处州。
现代文：不久，山寇蜂拥而起，行省又召刘基前去剿捕，与行院判石抹宜孙一起驻守处州。
English: Soon, the mountain bandits swarmed, and the provincial government summoned Liu Ji to go and capture them, and stationed him in Zhouzhou together with the court magistrate Shishi Magisun.

古文：经略使李国凤上其功，执政以方氏故抑之，授总管府判，不与兵事。
现代文：经略使李国凤将其功劳上奏，主持政事者因方氏之故压制刘基，授他为总管府判，却不让他掌握兵权。
English: After having Li Guofeng extol his merits, the presiding statesman suppressed Liu Ji for the sake of the Fang clan and awarded him the title of the Chief Administrator, but did not allow him to seize military power.

古文：基遂弃官还青田，著《郁离子》以见志。
现代文：刘基于是弃官归隐青田，著《郁离子》一书以明志。
English: Liu Qi resigned from his post and went into seclusion in Qingdao. He wrote the book "Ikuyion" to make his wishes known.

古文：时避方氏者争依基，基稍为部署，寇不敢犯。
现代文：当时躲避方氏的人都纷纷投靠刘基，刘基稍做部署，贼寇便不敢来犯。
English: At that time, the people who were hiding from the Fang clan all took refuge with Liu Ji. Liu Ji did a little deployment, and the bandits did not dare to come.

古文：及太祖下金华，定括苍，闻基及宋濂等名，以币聘。
现代文：朱元璋攻下金华，平定括苍，闻知刘基及宋濂等人的名声，便以钱财招聘，刘基没有答应。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang conquered Jinhua, pacified Guancheng, and heard of the fame of Liu Ji and Song Xi, and recruited them with money and resources. Liu Ji did not agree.

古文：基未应，总制孙炎再致书固邀之，基始出。既至，陈时务十八策。
现代文：总制孙炎两次写信坚决邀请，刘基始出。到了应天，刘基陈时务十八策。
English: General Secretary Sun Yan twice sent a letter of firm invitation to Liu Ji. When it came to responding to the invitation, Liu Ji came up with eighteen measures.

古文：太祖大喜，筑礼贤馆以处基等，宠礼甚至。
现代文：朱元璋大喜，马上命人建造礼贤馆让刘基等居住，对他们宠爱备至。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang was overjoyed and immediately ordered someone to build a hall of worship for Liu Ji and others to live in. He was very fond of them.

古文：初，太祖以韩林儿称宋后，遥奉之。
现代文：当初，朱元璋因为韩林儿自称宋朝之后，对其遥相尊奉。
English: At first, Zhu Yuanzhang paid homage to Han Lin'er because Han Lin'er claimed to be from the Song Dynasty.

古文：岁首，中书省设御座行礼，基独不拜，曰： 牧竖耳，奉之何为！ 
现代文：每年年初中书省设御座行礼时，唯独刘基不拜，并说 ：韩林儿只是一个牧童罢了，尊奉他干什么？ 
English: Every year at the beginning of the year, when the Imperial Throne is set up by the Ministry of Education and Culture, only Liu Ji does not bow, and says: Han Lin Er is just a shepherd boy, what is the point of honoring him?

古文：因见太祖，陈天命所在。
现代文：因此刘基去拜见朱元璋，陈天命之所在。
English: Therefore, Liu Qi went to see Zhu Yuanzhang, where Chen Tianmin was.

古文：太祖问征取计，基曰： 士诚自守虏，不足虑。
现代文：朱元璋向他询问征取之计，刘基说道： 张士诚只顾保全自己，不值得担心。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang asked him about the requisition plan, Liu Ji said: Zhang Shicheng only cares about protecting himself, it is not worth worrying about.

古文：友谅劫主胁下，名号不正，地据上流，其心无日忘我，宜先图之。
现代文：陈友谅则劫主胁下，名号不正，又地处上游，其心无日忘我，应当先谋取陈友谅。
English: Chen Youyuan is under the threat of kidnapping, the name is dishonest, and the place is upstream, his heart is dayless and forgetful, you should first seek Chen Youyuan.

古文：陈氏灭，张氏势孤，一举可定。
现代文：陈氏灭亡，张氏便势孤力弱，一举即可平定。
English: The Chen clan perished, and the Zhang clan became weak and powerless, and could be subdued in one fell swoop.

古文：然后北向中原，王业可成也。 
现代文：然后北向中原，王业可成。 
English: Then head north to the Central Plains, where you can make a fortune.

古文：太祖大悦曰： 先生有至计，勿惜尽言。 
现代文：朱元璋十分高兴地说： 先生有什么好的计谋，尽管说出来吧。 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang said happily, "If you have any good strategies, please tell me."

古文：会陈友谅陷太平，谋东下，势张甚，诸将或议降，或议奔据钟山，基张目不言。
现代文：当时陈友谅正攻陷太平，谋求东下，势力发展极快。朱元璋手下有人建议投降，有的建议逃往钟山，只有刘基瞪着双眼不说话。
English: At that time, Chen Youjun was attacking Taiping, seeking to go east, and his power was developing rapidly. Some of Zhu Yuanzhang's subordinates suggested surrendering, while others suggested fleeing to Zhongshan. Only Liu Ji stared with his eyes and did not speak.

古文：太祖召入内，基奋曰： 主降及奔者，可斩也。 
现代文：朱元璋便将他召入内室，刘基愤然说道： 主张投降或逃走的，应该斩首。 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang then called him into the inner room, and Liu Ji angrily said: Those who advocate surrender or escape should be beheaded.

古文：太祖曰： 先生计安出？ 
现代文：朱元璋便问： 先生有什么计策？ 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang then asked: What strategy does the teacher have?

古文：基曰： 贼骄矣，待其深入，伏兵邀取之，易耳。
现代文：刘基回答： 陈贼已骄，我们可以待其深入，伏兵拦击，将其打败，这很容易啊。
English: Liu Ji replied: Chen Qi is already arrogant, we can wait for him to go deeper, intercept the ambush, and defeat him, which is easy.

古文：天道后举者胜，取威制敌以成王业，在此举矣。 
现代文：天道后举者胜，取威制敌以成王业，就在此举了。 
English: After the heavenly way, the one who raises up wins, and the one who takes the authority to control the enemy to become a king is raised up.

古文：太祖用其策，诱友谅至，大破之，以克敌赏赏基。基辞。
现代文：朱元璋采用了他的计策，引诱陈友谅军到来，然后大败之。朱元璋以克敌之功赏赐刘基，刘基推辞不受。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang used his strategy to lure Chen Youjun's army to come, and then defeated it. Zhu Yuanzhang rewarded Liu Ji with the achievement of defeating the enemy, and Liu Ji did not accept the rejection.

古文：友谅兵复陷安庆，太祖欲自将讨之，以问基。基力赞，遂出师攻安庆。
现代文：不久陈友谅军复陷安庆，朱元璋打算亲自率军征讨，以此询问刘基，刘基极力赞成，于是朱元璋率军进攻安庆。
English: Soon after, Chen Youyou's army recaptured Anqing. Zhu Yuanzhang planned to personally lead the army to collect the money and asked Liu Ji about it. Liu Ji strongly agreed, so Zhu Yuanzhang led the army to attack Anqing.

古文：自旦及暮不下，基请迳趋江州，捣友谅巢穴，遂悉军西上。
现代文：从早晨到暮色降临，仍未攻下，刘基请求直趋江州，直捣陈友谅的巢穴，于是全军西上。
English: From morning to dusk, still not captured, Liu Ji requested to go straight to Jiangzhou and directly attack Chen Youzhen's lair, so the whole army went west.

古文：友谅出不意，帅妻子奔武昌，江州降。
现代文：陈友谅始料不及，只得带领妻子儿女逃往武昌，江州遂降。
English: Unexpectedly, Chen Youyuan had to lead his wife and children to flee to Wuchang, and Jiangzhou was forced to surrender.

古文：其龙兴守将胡美遣子通款，请勿散其部曲。太祖有难色。基从后蹋胡床。太祖悟，许之。
现代文：其龙兴守将胡美派他的儿子前来表示投降的诚意，请求朱元璋不要解散他的部队，朱元璋面有难色，刘基从背后踢胡床暗示，朱元璋顿时醒悟，应允了胡美的要求。
English: Long Xingshu sent his son to Hu Mei to express the sincerity of surrender, and asked Zhu Yuanzhang not to disband his troops. Zhu Yuanzhang looked puzzled, and Liu Qi kicked Hu's bed from behind, suggesting that Zhu Yuanzhang suddenly woke up and agreed to Hu Mei's request.

古文：美降，江西诸郡皆下。
现代文：胡美遂降，江西诸郡全被攻下。
English: Hu Mei was forced to surrender, and all counties in Jiangxi Province were conquered.

古文：基丧母，值兵事未敢言，至是请还葬。
现代文：刘基丧母时，正值战事紧张，故未敢说，直到这时才请求还乡为母亲举行奠礼。
English: When Liu Ji lost his mother, the war was in full swing, so he did not dare to say anything. It was only then that he asked to return to his hometown to hold a memorial service for his mother.

古文：会苗军反，杀金、处守将胡大海、耿再成等，浙东摇动。
现代文：恰好又逢苗军反叛，杀金华、处州守将胡大海、耿再成等，浙东形势动摇。
English: It just so happened that the Miao Army rebelled, killing Jinhua, and the provincial governors Hu Haihai and Geng Zaicheng. The situation in eastern Zhejiang was shaken.

古文：基至衢，为守将夏毅谕安诸属邑，复与平章邵荣等谋复处州，乱遂定。
现代文：刘基赶到衢州，首先为守将夏毅安抚诸属城，再与平章邵荣等谋划恢复处州，于是平定叛乱。
English: Liu Ji rushed to Zhangzhou, first to pacify the subordinate cities for the protection of Xia Yi, and then to plan the restoration of Zhangzhou with Ping Zhang and Shao Rong, and then to quell the rebellion.

古文：国珍素畏基，致书唁。
现代文：方国珍一向害怕刘基，便致信刘基，对其母去世表示悼唁。
English: Fang Guozhen had always been afraid of Liu Qi, so she sent a letter to Liu Qi to express her condolences on the death of her mother.

古文：基答书，宣示太祖威德，国珍遂入贡。
现代文：刘基给方国珍回信，向他表明朱元璋的威德，方国珍于是向朱元璋进贡。
English: Liu Ji wrote back to Fang Guozhen, telling him of Zhu Yuanzhang's virtue. Fang Guozhen then paid tribute to Zhu Yuanzhang.

古文：太祖数以书即家访军国事，基条答悉中机宜。
现代文：朱元璋多次写信到刘基家询问军国大事，刘基都逐条地详细作答，都能切中要害。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang repeatedly wrote to Liu Ji's home to inquire about military and national affairs. Liu Ji answered in detail, step by step, and was able to get to the heart of the matter.

古文：寻赴京，太祖方亲援安丰。基曰： 汉、吴伺隙，未可动也。 
现代文：不久，刘基返京，朱元璋正要亲自率军支援安丰，刘基劝说道 ：汉、吴都在伺机进攻，我们现在不可轻举妄动。 
English: Soon after, Liu Ji returned to Beijing. Zhu Yuanzhang was about to personally lead an army to support Anfeng. Liu Ji advised: Han and Wu are waiting for an opportunity to attack, we must not act rashly now.

古文：不听。
现代文：朱元璋不听劝告。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：友谅闻之，乘间围洪都。太祖曰： 不听君言，几失计。 
现代文：而陈友谅知道这个情况后，乘机率军围攻洪都，朱元璋这才说道： 我没听你的意见，险些误失大计。 
English: After Chen Youzhen learned of this situation, he took the opportunity to besiege Hongdu, and Zhu Yuanzhang said: I didn't listen to your advice and almost lost the plot.

古文：遂自将救洪都，与友谅大战鄱阳蝴，一日数十接。
现代文：然后亲自带兵援救洪都，与陈友谅大战于鄱阳湖，一天交战数十次。
English: Then he personally led soldiers to rescue Hongdu, and fought with Chen Youzhen in Poyang Lake, fighting dozens of times a day.

古文：太祖坐胡床督战，基侍侧，忽跃起大呼，趣太祖更舟。
现代文：朱元璋坐在胡床上督战，刘基随侍身旁，忽然跃起大呼，催促朱元璋赶快转移到别的船上去。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang sat on the cane bed to supervise the battle. Liu Ji followed the attendant and suddenly shouted loudly, urging Zhu Yuanzhang to quickly transfer to another ship.

古文：太祖仓卒徙别舸，坐未定，飞礮击旧所御舟立碎。友谅乘高见之，大喜。
现代文：朱元璋仓促转移到另一小船上，还未坐定，飞炮便将他原来所乘御船击得粉碎，站在高处的陈友谅见御船被毁，大喜。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang hurriedly transferred to another small boat, and before he was settled, the flying cannon smashed the ship he was originally on. Chen You, who was standing at a high place, was very happy to see the ship was destroyed.

古文：而太祖舟更进，汉军皆失色。
现代文：而朱元璋所乘之船只进不退，汉军都大惊失色。
English: However, the ships of Zhu Yuanzhang did not retreat, and the Chinese army was shocked and disgraced.

古文：时湖中相持，三日未决，基请移军湖口扼之，以金木相犯日决胜，友谅走死。
现代文：当时湖中战斗相持了三日，未决胜负，刘基请求移军湖口以扼住汉军出口，在金木相克的这一天与陈友谅军决战。
English: At that time, the battle in the lake lasted for three days, and the outcome was still undecided. Liu Ji requested to move the army to Hukou to strangle the exit of the Chinese army, and fought a decisive battle with Chen Youyuan's army on this day in Jinmu.

古文：其后太祖取士诚，北伐中原，遂成帝业，略如基谋。
现代文：结果，陈友谅战败，在逃跑途中毙命。其后朱元璋打败张士诚，北伐中原，终于完成帝业，其战略正像刘基筹划的那样。
English: As a result, Chen Youken was defeated and died on the way to escape. Later, Zhu Yuanzhang defeated Zhang Shicheng, led the Northern Expedition to the Central Plains, and finally completed the imperial cause. His strategy was just as Liu Qi had planned.

古文：吴元年以基为太史令，上《戊申大统历》。
现代文：吴元年，朱元璋以刘基为太史令，刘基呈上《戊申大统历》。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Zhu Yuanzhang appointed Liu Ji as Tai Shi Ling, and Liu Ji presented the "Wushen General Calendar."

古文：荧惑守心，请下诏罪己。
现代文：荧惑星出现在心宿位，预示有兵灾祸乱，刘基请求朱元璋下诏罪己。
English: A fluorescent planet appeared in the position of the heart, foreshadowing a military disaster, and Liu Ji asked Zhu Yuan to punish himself.

古文：大旱，请决滞狱。即命基平反，雨随注。
现代文：天大旱，刘基请求处理久积冤案，朱元璋便当即命令刘基予以平反，大雨也就从天而降。
English: The weather was very dry, Liu Ji requested to deal with long-standing grievances, Zhu Yuanzhang immediately ordered Liu Ji to be rehabilitated, and heavy rain fell from the sky.

古文：因请立法定制，以止滥杀。
现代文：刘基趁机请求建立法制，防止滥杀现象。
English: Liu Ji took the opportunity to request the establishment of a legal system to prevent indiscriminate killing.

古文：太祖方欲刑人，基请其故，太祖语之以梦。基曰： 此得土得众之象，宜停刑以待。 
现代文：朱元璋这时正要处决囚犯，刘基便问是什么原因，朱元璋将自己所做的梦告诉他。刘基说： 这是获得疆土和百姓的吉象，所以应当停刑等待。 
English: At that time, Zhu Yuanzhang was about to execute the prisoner. Liu Ji then asked what the reason was. Zhu Yuanzhang told him about the dream he had had. Liu Ji said, "This is a good omen for gaining territory and people, so we should suspend the sentence and wait."

古文：后三日，海宁降。太祖喜，悉以囚付基纵之。
现代文：三日之后，海宁归降，朱元璋很高兴，就将囚犯全部交给刘基释放了。
English: Three days later, Haining surrendered, and Zhu Yuanzhang was so happy that he released all the prisoners to Liu Qi.

古文：寻拜御史中丞兼太史令。
现代文：不久，又授刘基为御史中丞兼太史令。
English: Soon after, Liu Ji was also awarded the title of Imperial Historian and Grand Historian.

古文：太祖即皇帝位，基奏立军卫法，初定处州税粮，视宋制亩加五合，惟青田命毋加，曰： 令伯温乡里世世为美谈也。 
现代文：朱元璋即皇帝位后，刘基上奏制定军卫法。当初确定处州税粮时，仿照宋制每亩加五合，唯独青田县除外，太祖这么说道 ：要让刘伯温家乡世代把此事传为美谈。 
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang ascended the throne, Liu Ji played a leading role in the formulation of the Military Defense Law. When it was initially decided to tax grain in the state, five units per mu were added according to the Song system, with the exception of Aota County. The great-grandfather said: Let Liu Bowen's hometown generation pass this on as a beautiful story.

古文：帝幸汴梁，基与左丞相善长居守。
现代文：太祖巡幸汴梁时，刘基与左丞相李善长一起留守京城。
English: When the great-grandfather went on a tour of the country, Liu Ji stayed in Beijing with the left-wing prime minister, Li Zhengrong.

古文：基谓宋、元宽纵失天下，今宜肃纪纲。令御史纠劾无所避，宿卫宦侍有过者，皆启皇太子置之法，人惮其严。
现代文：刘基认为宋、元两朝都因为过于宽纵而失天下，所以现在应该整肃纲纪，于是便下令御史检举弹劾，不要有任何顾忌，宿卫、宦官、侍从中，凡犯有过错的，一律奏明皇太子，依法惩治，因此人人都畏惧刘基的威严。
English: Liu Ji believed that both the Song and Yuan dynasties lost the world because they were too lenient, so now they should rectify the discipline. Therefore, he ordered the Imperial History Inspection to impeach, without any scruples. If any of the guards, eunuchs, or attendants committed a mistake, they would be reported to the crown prince and punished according to law. Therefore, everyone is afraid of Liu Ji's majesty.

古文：中书省都事李彬坐贪纵抵罪，善长素〈目匿〉之，请缓其狱。基不听，驰奏。报可。方祈雨，即斩之。
现代文：中书省都事李彬因贪图私利，纵容下属而被治罪，李善长一向私宠李彬，故请求从宽发落，刘基不听，并派人骑马速报太祖，得到批准，刘基便在祈雨时，将李彬斩首。
English: Li Bin was punished for greed for personal gain and connivance with subordinates in the capital of the People's Republic of China, Beijing. Li Shanchang had always been fond of Li Bin, so he asked for leniency. Liu Ji did not listen, and sent a man on horseback to report to Taizu. Upon approval, Liu Ji beheaded Li Bin while praying for rain.

古文：由是与善长忤。
现代文：因为这件事，刘基与李善长开始不和。
English: Because of this incident, Liu Ji and Li Shanchang began to quarrel.

古文：帝归，愬基僇人坛壝下，不敬。
现代文：太祖返京后，李善长便向太祖告状，说刘基在坛土遗下杀人，是不敬之举。
English: After the great-grandfather returned to Beijing, Li Shanchang sued the great-grandfather, saying that it was disrespectful for Liu Ji to kill people under the altar soil.

古文：诸怨基者亦交谮之。
现代文：那些平时怨恨刘基的人也纷纷诬陷刘基。
English: Those who usually resent Liu Ji have also framed Liu Ji.

古文：会以旱求言，基奏： 士卒物故者，其妻悉处别营，凡数万人，阴气郁结。
现代文：当时正逢天旱，太祖要求诸臣发表意见，刘基上奏说： 士卒亡故者，他们的妻子全部迁往他营居住，共有数万人，致使阴气郁结。
English: At that time, there was a drought, and the great-grandfather asked the ministers to express their opinions. Liu Qi reported: "The deceased soldiers and their wives all moved to other camps to live, totaling tens of thousands of people, resulting in gloom.

古文：工匠死，胔骸暴露，吴将吏降者皆编军户，足干和气。 
现代文：工匠死后，腐尸骨骸暴露在外，将投降的吴军将吏都编入军户，便足以协调阴阳之气。 
English: After the death of the craftsman, the corpse and bones were exposed, and the generals of the Wu Army who surrendered were all organized into military households, which was enough to coordinate the yin and yang.

古文：帝纳其言，旬日仍不雨，帝怒。
现代文：太祖采纳了他的意见，但十天过后仍不见雨，故而发怒。
English: The great-grandfather accepted his advice, but after ten days there was still no rain, so he became angry.

古文：会基有妻丧，遂请告归。
现代文：此时恰好刘基的妻子死了，所以刘基请求告辞还乡。
English: At this time, Liu Ji's wife happened to die, so Liu Ji asked to return home.

古文：时帝方营中都，又锐意灭扩廓。
现代文：太祖正在营造中都，又积极准备消灭扩廓。
English: Taizu is building Zhongdu, and is actively preparing to eliminate the expansion.

古文：基濒行，奏曰： 凤阳虽帝乡，非建都地。
现代文：刘基临走上奏说 ：凤阳虽是皇上的故乡，但不宜作为建都之地。
English: Liu Jilin stood up and said: Although Fengyang is the hometown of the emperor, it is not suitable as a place to build the capital.

古文：王保保未可轻也。 
现代文：王保保不可轻视。 
English: Wang Baobao should not be despised.

古文：已而定西失利，扩廓竟走沙漠，迄为边患。
现代文：不久，定西之役失利，扩廓逃往沙漠，从那时起一直成为边患。
English: Soon after, it lost the Battle of Dingxi and fled to the desert, where it has remained ever since.

古文：其冬，帝手诏叙基勋伐，召赴京，赐赉甚厚，追赠基祖、父皆永嘉郡公。累欲进基爵，基固辞不受。
现代文：这年冬天，太祖亲自下诏，叙说刘基征伐之功，召他赴京，赏赐甚厚，追赠刘基的祖父、父亲为永嘉郡公，并多次要给刘基进爵，刘基都固辞不受。
English: This winter, the great-grandfather himself issued an edict, recounting Liu Ji's military exploits and calling him to Beijing. The reward was very rich. Liu Ji's grandfather and father were the Yongjia County chiefs, and he repeatedly wanted to give Liu Ji a knighthood. Liu Ji refused.

古文：初，太祖以事责丞相李善长，基言： 善长勋旧，能调和诸将。 
现代文：当初，太祖因事要责罚丞相李善长，刘基劝说道 ：他虽有过失，但功劳很大，威望颇高，能调和诸将。 
English: At first, the great-great-grandfather wanted to punish the prime minister, Ri Son Gwon, for something, but Liu Ji persuaded him, saying, "Although he made a mistake, he has done a great deal of merit, and his prestige is quite high, and he is able to reconcile the generals."

古文：太祖曰： 是数欲害君，君乃为之地耶？
现代文：太祖说： 他三番两次想要加害于你，你还设身处地为他着想？
English: The great-grandfather said, "He tried to harm you three times and twice. Do you still put yourself in his shoes and think about him?

古文：吾行相君矣。 
现代文：我想改任你为丞相。 刘基叩首说道 ：这怎么行呢？
English: I want to appoint you as the prime minister. Liu Ji bowed his head and said: How can this be done?

古文：基顿首曰： 是如易柱，须得大木。若束小木为之，且立覆。 
现代文：更换丞相如同更换梁柱，必须用粗壮结实的大木，如用细木，房屋就会立即倒坍。 
English: Replacing a prime minister is like replacing a beam and column. You must use a large, sturdy tree. If you use a thin tree, the house will immediately collapse.

古文：及善长罢，帝欲相杨宪。宪素善基，基力言不可，曰： 宪有相才无相器。
现代文：后来，李善长辞官归居，太祖想任命杨宪为丞相，杨宪平日待刘基很好，可刘基仍极力反对，说： 杨宪具备当丞相的才能，却没有做丞相的气量。
English: Later, when Li Shanzhong returned from retirement, the great-grandfather wanted to appoint Yang Xian as the prime minister. Yang Xian usually treated Liu Ji very well, but Liu Ji still strongly objected, saying: Yang Xian has the talent to be the prime minister, but he does not have the stamina to be the prime minister.

古文：夫宰相者，持心如水，以义理为权衡，而己无与者也，宪则不然。 
现代文：为相之人，须保持像水一样平静的心情，将义理作为权衡事情的标准，而不能搀杂自己的主观意见，杨宪就做不到。 
English: As a philosopher, one must maintain a calm mood like water, take the principle of justice as the standard for weighing things, and cannot mix one's own subjective opinions. Yang Xian cannot do this.

古文：帝问汪广洋，曰： 此褊浅殆甚于宪。 
现代文：太祖又问汪广洋如何，刘基回答： 他的气量比杨宪更狭窄。 
English: The great-grandfather also asked Wang Guangyang how he was, and Liu Ji replied: His stamina is narrower than Yang Xian.

古文：又问胡惟庸，曰： 譬之驾，惧其偾辕也。 
现代文：太祖接着问胡惟庸，刘基又回答道： 丞相好比驾车的马，我担心他会将马车弄翻。 
English: The patriarch then asked Hu Wei Yong, and Liu Ji also replied: The prime minister is like a horse driving a carriage. I am afraid he will overturn the carriage.

古文：帝曰： 吾之相，诚无逾先生。 
现代文：太祖于是说道 ：我的丞相，确实只有先生你最合适了。 
English: The great-grandfather then said: My prime minister, it is true that only you, sir, are the most suitable.

古文：基曰： 臣疾恶太甚，又不耐繁剧，为之且孤上恩。
现代文：刘基谢绝说： 我太疾恶如仇了，又不耐烦处理繁杂事务，如果勉强承担这一重任，恐怕要辜负皇上委托。
English: Liu Ji Xie said: I am too impatient and impatient to deal with complicated affairs. If I reluctantly take on this important task, I am afraid I will fail to live up to the emperor's mandate.

古文：天下何患无才，惟明主悉心求之，目前诸人诚未见其可也。 
现代文：天下何患无才，只要皇上留心物色就是了。目前这几个人确实不适合担任丞相之职。 
English: There is no lack of talent in the world, as long as the emperor is careful to find it. At present, these people are really not suitable for the post of prime minister.

古文：后宪、广洋、惟庸皆败。
现代文：后来，杨宪、汪广洋、胡惟庸都因事获罪。
English: Later, Yang Xian, Wang Guangyang and Hu Wei Rong were all found guilty.

古文：三年授弘文馆学士。十一月大封功臣，授基开国翊运守正文臣、资善大夫、上护军，封诚意伯，禄二百四十石。
现代文：三年，太祖授刘基为弘文馆学士，十一月，大封功臣，又授刘基为开国翊运守正文臣、资善大夫、上护军，封诚意伯，食禄二百四十石。
English: In the third year, the great-grandfather awarded Liu Ji as a bachelor of the Hongwen Museum, and in November, he was awarded the title of Great Meritorious Servant, and Liu Ji was awarded as the founding father of the country, the commander-in-chief, the senior scholar, the doctor of merit, and the upper protector, and was awarded the title of Sincerity, with a stipend of 240 koku.

古文：明年赐归老于乡。
现代文：第二年，赐刘基还归家乡。
English: The following year, Zi Liu Ji returned to his hometown.

古文：帝尝手书问天象。基条答甚悉而焚其草。
现代文：太祖经常写信给刘基，询问天象，刘基都非常详细地逐条回答，然后将其草稿烧掉。
English: The great-grandfather often wrote to Liu Ji, inquiring about the celestial elephant, Liu Ji answered in great detail one by one, and then burned his draft.

古文：大要言霜雪之后，必有阳春，今国威已立，宜少济以宽大。
现代文：刘基大致说，霜雪之后，必有阳春，现国威已立，应当稍微采用宽大政策来治理天下。
English: Liu Ji said roughly that after frost and snow, there must be a spring, and now that the country's prestige has been established, it should slightly adopt a lenient policy to govern the world.

古文：基佐定天下，料事如神。
现代文：刘基辅佐太祖平定天下，料事如神。
English: Liu Kiefu, the founder of the Qing Dynasty, conquered the whole country.

古文：性刚嫉恶，与物多忤。
现代文：他性情刚烈，疾恶如仇，经常与人发生冲突。
English: He has a strong-willed nature, and often gets into conflicts with people.

古文：至是还隐山中，惟饮酒弈棋，口不言功。
现代文：直到现在他才隐居山中，只是饮酒下棋，从不提起自己的功劳。
English: Only now does he live in seclusion in the mountains, only drinking and playing chess, never mentioning his achievements.

古文：邑令求见不得，微服为野人谒基。基方濯足，令从子引入茆舍，炊黍饭令。
现代文：县令求见，被刘基拒绝，于是便穿着便服，装成乡野之人去见刘基，刘基当时正在洗脚，便让堂侄将他引入茅舍，以黄米饭招待。
English: The county magistrate asked to see him, but Liu Ji refused, so he dressed in casual clothes and pretended to be a villager to see Liu Ji. Liu Ji was washing his feet at the time, so he asked his cousin to bring him to the cottage and invite him with yellow rice.

古文：令告曰： 某青田知县也。 
现代文：县令这时才告诉刘基 ：我是青田知县啊。 
English: It was only then that the county magistrate told Liu Qi: I am from Aota County.

古文：基惊起称民，谢去，终不复见。
现代文：刘基大惊，马上起身称民，然后谢罪离去，终不相见。
English: Liu Ji was shocked. He immediately stood up and praised the people. Then Xie Sin left, and they never saw each other again.

古文：其韬迹如此，然究为惟庸所中。
现代文：刘基的行踪如此秘密，最终还是被胡惟庸中伤陷害。
English: Liu Ji's whereabouts were so secret that he was eventually slandered and framed by Hu Wei Yong.

古文：初，基言瓯、括间有隙地曰谈洋，南抵闽界，为盐盗薮，方氏所由乳，请设巡检司守之。奸民弗便也。
现代文：最初，刘基说瓯、括之间有一块空地叫谈洋，南抵闽界，是盐盗的巢穴，方氏便是由此作乱的，故请设巡检司守卫，奸民为乱便不那么方便了。
English: At first, Liu Ji said that there was an open space between  and 括, which was called "talking about the ocean" and south of, which was a nest of salt thieves. The Fang clan made a disturbance from this, so please set up a patrol inspector to guard. It would be less convenient for the villains to make a disturbance.

古文：会茗洋逃军反，吏匿不以闻。基令长子琏奏其事，不先白中书省。
现代文：时逢茗洋逃兵反叛，官吏都匿而不报，刘基便令长子刘琏将此事上奏，但未先通报中书省。
English: At the time of the rebellion of the Xingyang deserters, the officials all hid and did not report. Liu Ji then ordered his eldest son Liu Wei to report the matter, but did not inform the Ministry of Literature first.

古文：胡惟庸方以左丞掌省事，挟前憾，使吏讦基，谓谈洋地有王气，基图为墓，民弗与，则请立巡检逐民。
现代文：胡惟庸当时正以左丞相的身份主管中书省，对以前与刘基的过节怀恨在心，于是便派手下官员攻击刘基，说谈洋这个地方有帝王之气，刘基想将它作为自己的墓地，因为当地百姓不答应，刘基便请求设巡检司将百姓赶走。
English: At that time, Hu Wei Rong was in charge of the Ministry of Education and Culture as the Minister of Left and Right, and he held a grudge against Liu Ji for the previous offenses, so he sent his officials to attack Liu Ji, saying that this place had the air of an emperor, Liu Ji wanted to use it as his own cemetery, because the local people did not agree, Liu Ji then requested the establishment of a patrol and inspection department to drive the people away.

古文：帝虽不罪基，然颇为所动，遂夺基禄。
现代文：太祖虽然没有加罪于刘基，但颇为这些言论所打动，因而剥夺了刘基的俸禄。
English: Although the great-grandfather did not incriminate Liu Ji, he was quite moved by these remarks, and thus deprived Liu Ji of his salary.

古文：基惧入谢，乃留京，不敢归。
现代文：刘基心中害怕，入朝谢罪，然后呆在京城，不敢返乡。
English: Liu Ji was afraid in his heart. He entered the imperial court to confess his sins, and then stayed in Beijing, not daring to return home.

古文：未几，惟庸相，基大曰： 使吾言不验，苍生福也。 
现代文：不久，胡惟庸当了丞相，刘基悲叹道 ：若是我的话不应验的话，那便是苍生之福了。 
English: Soon after, Hu Wei Yong became chancellor, and Liu Ji lamented, "If my words are not put to the test, then it will be the blessing of a lifetime."

古文：忧愤疾作。
现代文：遂因忧愤交加而发病。
English: As a result, he fell ill with a combination of anxiety and anger.

古文：八年三月，帝亲制文赐之，遣使护归。
现代文：洪武八年，太祖亲自撰文赐给刘基，并派专人护送刘基返乡。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, the great-grandfather personally wrote an article for Liu Ji, and sent a special escort to escort Liu Ji back home.

古文：抵家，疾笃，以《天文书》授子琏曰： 亟上之，毋令后人习也。 
现代文：到家后，病情加重，便将《天文书》授给长子刘琏，并说： 赶快送给皇上，千万不要让后人学习此书。 
English: When he got home, his condition worsened, so he gave the Astronomical Book to his eldest son, Liu Ye, and said, "Give it to the emperor as soon as possible. Don't let future generations study this book."

古文：又谓次子璟曰： 夫为政，宽猛如循环。
现代文：又对次子刘王景说： 为政之事，要宽猛交替。
English: He also said to his second son, Liu Wangjing, "In politics, it is necessary to alternate between the strong and the weak.

古文：当今之务在修德省刑，祈天永命。
现代文：当今之务在于修养德行，减省刑罚，才能祈求上天保佑国运长久。
English: Today's task is to cultivate virtue, reduce penalties, and pray for long-term national prosperity.

古文：诸形胜要害之地，宜与京师声势连络。
现代文：那些战略要害之地，应当与京城遥相呼应，连成一体。
English: Those strategically important places should be closely linked to the capital city.

古文：我欲为遗表，惟庸在，无益也。
现代文：我本想上奏一份遗表，但因胡惟庸当朝掌权，这么做毫无用处。
English: I wanted to write a suicide note, but since Hu WeiYang was in power at the time, it was useless.

古文：惟庸败后，上必思我，有所问，以是密奏之。 
现代文：有朝一日胡惟庸下台后，皇上必然要想起我，如果他向你问什么的话，便将我所说的密奏皇上。 
English: One day, after Hu Wei Yong steps down, the emperor will inevitably think of me. If he asks you anything, he will relay what I have said to the emperor.

古文：居一月而卒，年六十五。
现代文：回家仅住了一个月，刘基便去世了，终年六十五岁。
English: After returning home for only one month, Liu Ji passed away, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：基在京病时，惟庸以医来，饮其药，有物积腹中如拳石。
现代文：刘基在京城生病时，胡惟庸曾派医生来给他治病，刘基吃了药后，腹中便出现了一个像拳头大的石头。
English: When Liu Ji fell ill in Beijing, Hu Wei Yong sent a doctor to treat him. After Liu Ji took the medicine, a stone the size of a fist appeared in his stomach.

古文：其后中丞涂节首惟庸逆谋，并谓其毒基致死云。
现代文：后来中丞涂节首先揭发胡惟庸谋反一案，并且说是胡惟庸下毒将刘基害死的。
English: Later, Chujo Tu Jie first exposed Hu Weiyong's plot to rebel, and said that it was Hu Weiyong who poisoned Liu Ji to death.

古文：基虬髯，貌修伟，慷慨有大节，论天下安危，义形于色。
现代文：刘基满脸虬髯，相貌堂堂，慷慨而有大节，每当谈论天下大事，便义形于色。
English: Liu Ji's face is full of wrinkles, his appearance is dignified, and he is generous and has a big mouth. Whenever he talks about the world's major events, his face lights up.

古文：帝察其至诚，任以心膂。
现代文：太祖知道他非常忠诚，对他委以心腹之任。
English: The great-grandfather knew that he was very loyal and entrusted him with the task of a confidant.

古文：每召基，辄屏人密语移时。
现代文：每次召见刘基，都要避开他人进入内室，单独与刘基长时间密谈。
English: Every time Liu Ji was summoned, he had to avoid other people to enter the inner room and talk with Liu Ji alone for a long time.

古文：基亦自谓不世遇，知无不言。
现代文：刘基也自认为自己得不世之遇，所以在太祖面前知无不言。
English: Liu Ji also thinks that he has been lucky, so he knows everything in front of his great-grandfather.

古文：遇急难，勇气奋发，计画立定，人莫能测。暇则敷陈王道。帝每恭己以听，常呼为老先生而不名，曰： 吾子房也。 
现代文：每到紧急危难关头，刘基总是勇气奋发，计策立定，人莫能测，闲暇之时，便敷陈为王之道，而太祖每次都洗耳恭听，常常称刘基为老先生而不叫他的名字，并说： 你就是我的张子房啊。 
English: Whenever there is an emergency or crisis, Liu Ji always has the courage to work hard, make a plan, no one can predict, and in his spare time, he will impose Chen as the king's way, and the great-grandfather always listens attentively, often calling Liu Ji as the old gentleman without calling his name, and saying: You are my Zhang Zifu.

古文：又曰： 数以孔子之言导予。 
现代文：又说 ：老先生多次以孔子之言来劝导我。 
English: He also said: "The old gentleman has repeatedly used the words of Confucius to persuade me.

古文：宣德二年授貊刑部照磨。宋濂，字景濂，其先金华之潜溪人，至濂乃迁浦江。
现代文：所以，太祖与刘基的帐中密语，世人所知不详，而世间所传为神奇的，大多只是一些阴阳风水之说，并非刘基的至理名言。刘基的文章气势浩大而奇妙，与宋濂同为一代宗师，他的著作有《覆瓿集》、《犁眉公集》流传于世。
English: Therefore, the secret language in the account between the great-grandfather and Liu Ji is unknown to the world, and what is said to be magical in the world is mostly just some yin and yang feng shui, not Liu Ji's wise words. Liu Ji's articles are powerful and wonderful, and he is the same as Song Xi as a generation of guru. His works include "Covered Dragonfly Collection" and "Eyebrow Public Collection" have been passed down to the world.

古文：幼英敏强记，就学于闻人梦吉，通《五经》，复往从吴莱学。
现代文：刘基有二子：刘琏、刘王景。宋濂，字景濂，其祖先是金华潜溪人，到宋濂这一辈才迁至浦江。宋濂幼时聪敏，记忆力强，就学于闻人梦吉，精通《五经》，后又跟随吴莱学习。
English: Liu Ji had two sons: Liu Yao and Liu Wangjing. Song Yao and Zi Jing Yao, whose ancestors were Jinhua Qianxi people, moved to Pujiang in Song Yao's generation. When Song Yao was young, he was smart and had a strong memory. He learned to recite Mengji, mastered the Five Classics, and later studied with Wu Lai.

古文：已，游柳贯、黄溍之门，两人皆亟逊濂，自谓弗如。
现代文：不久，又在柳贯、黄氵晋门下游学，他们两人都极推崇宋濂，自谓不如他。
English: Soon after, he went to study under Liu Gang and Huang Qi Jin. Both of them highly respected Song Qi and said they were not as good as him.

古文：元至正中，荐授翰林编修，以亲老辞不行，入龙门山著书。
现代文：元至正年间，宋濂因举荐授为翰林编修，但他以父母年老为由坚辞不就，而到龙门山闭门著书。
English: During the Yuan and Zheng dynasties, Song Tao was recommended to become the editor of Hanlin, but he refused on the grounds of his parents' old age and went to Longmen Mountain to write a book behind closed doors.

古文：逾十余年，太祖取婺州，召见濂。
现代文：十余年后，朱元璋攻取婺州，召见宋濂。
English: More than ten years later, Zhu Yuanzhang conquered Bozhou and summoned Song Gan.

古文：时已改宁越府，命知府王显宗开郡学，因以濂及叶仪为《五经》师。
现代文：当时婺州已改为宁越府，知府王显宗奉命开郡学，故聘请宋濂及叶仪为《五经》老师。
English: At that time, Bozhou had been changed to Ningyue Prefecture, and the governor Wang Xianzong was ordered to open a county school, so he hired Song Xi and Ye Yi as "Five Classics" teachers.

古文：明年三月，以李善长荐，与刘基、章、溢、叶琛并征至应天，除江南儒学提举，命授太子经，寻改起居注。
现代文：第二年三月，由于李善长的举荐，宋濂与刘基、章溢、叶琛一起应征来到应天，授为江南儒学提举，奉命讲授太子经，不久又改撰起居注。
English: In March of the following year, on the recommendation of Li Shanzhong, Song Qi, Liu Qi, Zhang Yiyi, and Ye Ye came to Yingtian together to apply for the draft, and was awarded the Southern Jiangsu Confucianism Promotion, and was ordered to teach the Prince's Classic, and soon began to write the Annotation.

古文：濂长基一岁，皆起东南，负重名。
现代文：宋濂比刘基大一岁，两人都起于江南，皆负重名。
English: Song Tao is one year older than Liu Ji. Both of them were born in the south of the Yangtze River, and both of them are famous.

古文：基雄迈有奇气，而濂自命儒者。
现代文：刘基雄健豪放，有奇才之气，而宋濂则自命为儒者。
English: Liu Qixiong is a vigorous and energetic person with an air of genius, while Song Tao is a self-proclaimed Confucian.

古文：基佐军中谋议，濂亦首用文学受知，恒侍左右，备顾问。
现代文：刘基在军中出谋划策，宋濂则以文学之长受到朱元璋的赏识，随侍朱元璋左右，作为顾问。
English: Liu Ji was a strategist in the army, while Song Tao was praised by Zhu Yuanzhang for his literary talent, and he served Zhu Yuanzhang as an adviser.

古文：尝召讲《春秋左氏传》，濂进曰： 《春秋》乃孔子褒善贬恶之书，苟能遵行，则赏罚适中，天下可定也。 
现代文：太祖曾召宋濂讲解《春秋左氏传》，宋濂进言道： 《春秋》是孔子褒善贬恶的书，如能遵行，则赏罚公正适中，天下便可平定！ 
English: The great-grandfather once called Song Tao to explain "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi Huang," and Song Tao said: "Spring and Autumn" is a book of Confucius praising good and condemning evil. If you can follow it, the reward and punishment will be fair and moderate, and the world can be pacified!

古文：太祖御端门，口释黄石公《三略》。
现代文：太祖御临端门，口释黄石公《三略》。
English: At the gate of the Great Ancestor's residence, Huang Shikong's "Three Resolutions" was read aloud.

古文：濂曰： 《尚书》二《典》、三《谟》，帝王大经大法毕具，愿留意讲明之。 
现代文：宋濂说： 有了《尚书》二《典》、三《谟》，帝王所需大经大法便已经具备，但愿能留意而将其讲明。 
English: Song Tao said: With the "Shang Shu," the second "Shu" and the third "Mou," the emperor already has the great book and the great law he needs. I hope he can pay attention to it and clarify it.

古文：已，论赏赉，复曰： 得天下以人心为本。
现代文：不久，朝廷论功行赏，宋濂又说 ：得天下以得人心为本。
English: Soon after, the imperial court began to discuss the rewards for meritorious deeds, and Song Tao said, "To win the world is to win the hearts and minds of the people."

古文：人心不固，虽金帛充牣，将焉用之。 
现代文：如果人心不固，尽管有许多的玉帛财富，又有什么用呢？ 
English: If people's hearts are not firm, what is the use of having many jewels and riches?

古文：太祖悉称善。
现代文：太祖认为他所说的全都有理。
English: The great-grandfather thought that everything he said was right.

古文：乙巳三月，乞归省。太祖与太子并加劳赐。
现代文：三月，宋濂请求返乡探亲，太祖及太子都对他备加慰劳、赏赐。
English: In March, Song Tao requested to return home to visit his relatives. Both the great-grandfather and the prince offered him consolation and reward.

古文：濂上笺谢，并奉书太子，勉以孝友敬恭、进德修业。
现代文：宋濂上书谢恩，并致信太子，勉励他要孝友敬恭，进德修业。
English: Song Tao wrote a letter of thanks, and sent a letter to the prince, encouraging him to be filial and respectful, and to study hard.

古文：太祖览书大悦，召太子，为语书意，赐札褒答，并令太子致书报焉。
现代文：太祖看了这封信后十分高兴，立即传召太子，将信中内容告诉他。太祖还亲自赐信褒奖，答复宋濂，并令太子回信以示回报。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy after reading the letter, and immediately summoned the prince to tell him the contents of the letter. The great-grandfather also personally gave the letter a commendation, replied to Song Tao, and asked the prince to reply in return.

古文：寻丁父忧。服除，召还。
现代文：随后宋濂便因父亲去世，服丧守制，守丧期满，即奉诏返京。
English: Subsequently, due to the death of his father, Song Xi followed the mourning system and returned to Beijing upon the expiration of the mourning period.

古文：洪武二年诏修元史，命充总裁官。
现代文：洪武二年，太祖下诏修《元史》，宋濂被任命为总裁官。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to revise the "Original History," and Song Tao was appointed as the president.

古文：是年八月史成，除翰林院学士。
现代文：当年八月书成，宋濂被授为翰林院学士。
English: In August of that year, Song Tao was awarded a bachelor's degree from the Hanlin Academy.

古文：明年二月，儒士欧阳佑等采故元元统以后事迹还朝，仍命濂等续修，六越月再成，赐金帛。
现代文：第二年二月，儒士欧阳佑等收集元朝元统年以后的事迹回京，太祖仍命宋濂等续修《元史》，六个多月后完成，太祖赐以金帛。
English: In February of the second year, the Confucianist Ouyang You and others returned to Beijing to collect the deeds of the Yuan Dynasty after the year of the Yuan Dynasty. The great-grandfather still ordered Song Xi and others to continue the "Yuan History," which was completed more than six months later, and the great-grandfather gave him a gold ingot.

古文：是月，以失朝参，降编修。
现代文：当月，宋濂因上朝有误被参劾，降为编修。
English: In the same month, Song Tao was impeached for making a mistake during the last dynasty and was reduced to an editor.

古文：四年迁国子司业，坐考祀孔子礼不以时奏，谪安远知县，旋召为礼部主事。
现代文：四年，升为国子司业，因考证孔子礼奏不及时而获罪，被贬为安远知县，旋即又被召回，任礼部主事。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the position of provincial secretary, was found guilty of not performing the Confucius ceremony in a timely manner, was demoted to Anyuan County, and was immediately recalled to serve as the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：明年迁赞善大夫。
现代文：第二年升为赞善大夫。
English: The following year, he was promoted to Dr. Zanzan.

古文：是时，帝留意文治，征召四方儒士张唯等数十人，择其年少俊异者，皆擢编修，令入禁中文华堂肄业，命濂为之师。
现代文：这时，太祖很留意文治，征召四方儒士张唯等数十人，选择其中一些年轻有才者，提升为编修，让他们进入宫中文华堂学习，以宋濂为老师。
English: At this time, Taizu paid close attention to the study of literature. He conscripted dozens of people, including Zhang Wei, a Confucianist from the Four Directions, and selected some of the young and talented people to be promoted to editors. They were allowed to study at the Imperial Chinese Culture Hall, with Song Tao as their teacher.

古文：濂傅太子先后十余年，凡一言动，皆以礼法讽劝，使归于道，至有关政教及前代兴亡事，必拱手曰： 当如是，不当如彼。 
现代文：宋濂担任太子之师十余年，太子的一言一行，宋濂都要以礼法来劝导，使其归于正道；而有关政教及前代兴亡之事，宋濂必定会拱手说： 应当是这样，而不应当是那样。 
English: For more than ten years, Song Tao served as the prince's teacher. Every word and deed of the prince, Song Tao had to use etiquette to persuade him to return to the right path; and regarding politics and religion and the rise and fall of the previous generation, Song Tao would certainly say: It should be like this, but it should not be like that.

古文：皇太子每敛容嘉纳，言必称师父云。
现代文：每当这时，皇太子都非常严肃虚心地接受，而且对宋濂言必称师父。
English: Whenever this happens, the crown prince accepts it very seriously and humbly, and calls Song Xuanyan his master.

古文：帝剖符封功臣，召濂议五等封爵。
现代文：当太祖剖符封功臣时，召宋濂前来商议怎样封五等爵位。
English: When the great-great-grandfather was awarded the title of meritorious vassal, he summoned Song Xi to come and discuss how to award him the fifth-class peerage.

古文：宿大本堂，讨论达旦，历据汉、唐故实，量其中而奏之。
现代文：宋濂住在大本堂，通宵达旦，引鉴汉、唐前例，择其适用部分奏报皇上。
English: Song Tao lived in the main hall and stayed up all night, citing Han and Tang precedents, and chose the applicable part to report to the emperor.

古文：甘露屡降，帝问灾祥之故。对曰： 受命不于天，于其人，休符不于祥，于其仁。
现代文：后来当上天屡降甘露时，太祖又问其中是否意味着有灾异或祥瑞，宋濂回答说： 天子不是受命于天，而是受命于人，美德的基础并不是祥瑞，而是仁义。
English: Later, when the heavens repeatedly rained down nectar, the great-grandfather also asked whether it meant disaster or auspiciousness. Song Tao replied: The Son of Heaven is not ordered by heaven, but by man. The foundation of virtue is not auspiciousness, but benevolence.

古文：《春秋》书异不书祥，为是故也。 
现代文：《春秋》只记灾异，不书祥瑞，就是这个道理。 
English: This is the reason why "Spring and Autumn" only records disasters, but does not write about auspiciousness.

古文：皇从子文正得罪，濂曰： 文正固当死，陛下体亲亲之谊，置诸远地则善矣。 
现代文：太祖的堂侄朱文正被定罪，宋濂说： 文正固然罪当死，但请陛下体谅他是你的亲人，还是把他发配到远方为好。 
English: The great-grandfather's cousin, Zhu Wenzheng, was convicted, and Song Tao said, "Wenzheng certainly deserves to die for his crime, but I ask Your Majesty to consider whether he is your relative, or whether it would be better to send him far away.

古文：车驾祀方丘，患心不宁，濂从容言曰： 养心莫善于寡欲，审能行之，则心清而身泰矣。 
现代文：太祖到方丘祭祀，感到心绪不宁，宋濂从容说道： 养心莫过于寡欲，能够择善而行，那么便可以心境清静，身体平安。 
English: The great-grandfather went to the Fangqiu sacrificial rites, feeling restless, Song Tao said calmly: There is no better way to nourish the heart than to have few desires. If you can choose to do good, then you can have a clear mind and a safe body.

古文：帝称善者良久。
现代文：太祖听后连连称赞有道理。
English: There is a reason why the great-grandfather received continuous praise.

古文：尝问以帝王之学，何书为要。濂举《大学衍义》。乃命大书揭之殿两庑壁。
现代文：太祖也常向宋濂询问帝王之学，并问哪些书最值得看，宋濂推荐《大学衍义》一书，太祖于是下令把这本书的内容用大字刻在大殿两边廊壁上。
English: The great-grandfather also often asked Song Tao about the emperor's learning, and asked which books were most worth seeing. Song Tao recommended the book "University Derivation," and the great-grandfather then ordered the contents of this book to be engraved in large letters on the corridor walls on both sides of the hall.

古文：顷之御西庑，诸大臣皆在，帝指《衍义》中司马迁论黄、老事，命濂讲析。
现代文：不久太祖亲临西廊，众大臣也都在场，太祖挑出《衍义》中司马迁论黄、老之学中的一段，让宋濂讲析。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizu came to the West Gallery in person, and all the ministers were also present. Emperor Taizu picked out a passage from "Yan Yi" in which Sima Qian discusses the study of Huang and Lao, and asked Song Tao to explain it.

古文：讲毕，因曰： 汉武溺方技谬悠之学，改文、景恭俭之风，民力既敝，然后严刑督之。
现代文：待宋濂讲完，太祖便说： 汉武帝沉溺于方技荒谬之说，一改汉文帝、景帝节俭之风，民力既已疲惫，而汉武帝还要用严刑来加以监督。
English: After Song Xi finished his speech, the great-grandfather said, "It is absurd to say that Emperor Han Wudi indulged in the arts and crafts. Once Emperor Han Wen and Emperor Jing changed their frugal ways, the people's strength was exhausted, and Emperor Han Wudi had to use severe punishment to supervise them.

古文：人主诚以礼义治心，则邪说不入，以学校治民，则祸乱不兴，刑罚非所先也。 
现代文：如果为人之主能以仁义来治理民心，那么异端邪说就不会传播，而以学校来治理百姓的话，祸乱就不会发生，所以刑罚并不是要优先考虑使用的。 
English: If the ruler of the people can govern the people's hearts with benevolence and righteousness, then heresies will not spread, and if the people are governed by schools, then disasters will not occur, so punishment is not a priority.

古文：问三代历数及封疆广狭，既备陈之，复曰： 三代治天下以仁义，故多历年所。 
现代文：太祖又问三代国运及封疆大小，宋濂都详细作答，并说： 三代都是以仁义治天下的，故能国运长久。 
English: The great-grandfather also asked the three generations about the national movement and the size of the blockaded territory. Song Tao answered in detail and said: The three generations ruled the world with benevolence and righteousness, so the national movement could last for a long time.

古文：又问： 三代以上，所读何书？ 
现代文：朱元璋又问 ：三代以前，人们读什么书呢？ 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang also asked: Three generations ago, what kind of books did people read?

古文：对曰： 上古载籍未立，人不专讲诵。君人者兼治教之责，率以躬行，则众自化。 
现代文：宋濂回答说 ：上古时还没有书籍，也没有人专门讲习学问，君主既治理百姓，也兼教育之责，自己以身作则，百姓自然就已接受了教育。 
English: Song Tao replied, "In ancient times, there were no books, and no one specialized in the study of culture. The monarch not only governed the people, but also had the responsibility of education. He led by example, and the people naturally received education.

古文：尝奉制咏鹰，令七举足即成，有 自古戒禽荒 之言。帝忻然曰： 卿可谓善陈矣。 
现代文：宋濂曾奉命作诗咏鹰，要在七步之内完成，其诗中有 自古戒禽荒 之言，太祖高兴地说： 这可是很好的进言啊！ 
English: Song Tao had been ordered to write a poem about the eagle, which had to be completed within seven steps. In his poem, there was a saying from ancient times about avoiding birds. Grandfather said happily, "This is a very good preface!"

古文：濂之随事纳忠，皆此类也。
现代文：宋濂随事朱元璋，一向忠诚，这些都是例子。
English: Song Tao, Zhu Yuanzhang, always loyal, these are examples.

古文：六年七月迁侍讲学士，知制诰，同修国史，兼赞善大夫。
现代文：六年七月，宋濂升为侍讲学士，负责起草诰文，同修国史，兼赞善大夫。
English: In July of the sixth year, Song Jinsheng became an assistant lecturer of the bachelor, responsible for drafting the imperial edict, the same as the national history, and the praise of the good doctor.

古文：命与詹同、乐韶凤修日历，又与吴伯宗等修宝训。
现代文：受命与詹同、乐韶凤修订日历，又与吴伯宗等编修宝训。
English: He was ordered to revise the calendar with Zhan Tong and Le Yufeng, and to compile the precious teachings with Wu Bozong and others.

古文：九月定散官资阶，给濂中顺大夫，欲任以政事。辞曰： 臣无他长，待罪禁近足矣。 
现代文：九月，给散官定官阶职务。太祖任命宋濂为中顺大夫，想让他处理政事，宋濂推辞道： 臣无他长，只要能就近侍奉皇上就已经很满足了。 
English: In September, the official ranks of the officials were determined. The great-grandfather appointed Song Xi as the doctor of Zhongshun, and wanted him to deal with political affairs. Song Xi said: There is no other superior, as long as I can serve the emperor closely, I am satisfied.

古文：帝益重之。
现代文：太祖对他愈加看重。
English: The great-grandfather valued him more and more.

古文：八年九月，从太子及秦、晋、楚、靖江四王讲武中都。
现代文：洪武八年九月，宋濂跟随太子及秦、晋、楚、靖江四王到中都讲武。
English: In September of the eighth year of Hongwu, Song Tao followed the crown prince and the four kings of Qin, Jin, Chu and Jingjiang to Zhongdu to give a speech on martial arts.

古文：帝得舆图《濠梁古迹》一卷，遣使赐太子，题其外，令濂询访，随处言之。
现代文：太祖获得地图《濠梁古迹》一卷，派人送给太子，并在图外题词，命宋濂访询，随处讲解。
English: The great-grandfather obtained a volume of the map "Qingliang Ancient Monuments" and sent someone to give it to the prince, and wrote an inscription outside the map, ordering Song Tao to inquire and explain everywhere.

古文：太子以示濂，因历历举陈，随事进说，甚有规益。
现代文：太子将地图拿给宋濂看，宋濂逐一举陈，随事劝说，对太子很有规劝告诫作用。
English: The prince showed the map to Song Tao, and Song Tao went through it one by one, persuading him at every turn. It was very effective as a warning to the prince.

古文：濂性诚谨，官内庭久，未尝讦人过。
现代文：宋濂性情诚恳谨慎，长期在宫中为官，却从不攻击他人过失。
English: Song Tao's disposition is sincere and prudent. He has been an official in the palace for a long time, but he never attacks others' faults.

古文：所居室，署 温树 。客问禁中语，即指示之。
现代文：他的住室，题名为 温树 ，如果有客人问起宫中情况，宋濂便将 温树 两字指给他看。
English: If a guest asked about the situation in the palace, Song Tao would point out the word "Wen Shu" to him.

古文：尝与客饮，帝密使人侦视。
现代文：有一次宋濂在家中与宾客一起饮酒，太祖派人暗中观察。
English: Once when Song Tao was drinking with guests at home, Taizu sent someone to observe secretly.

古文：翼日，问濂昨饮酒否，坐客为谁，馔何物。
现代文：第二天，太祖便问宋濂昨天喝酒没有，请了哪几位客人，吃些什么。
English: The next day, Taizu asked Song Tao whether he had drunk alcohol yesterday, which guests he had invited, and what he had eaten.

古文：濂具以实对。
现代文：宋濂一一如实回答。
English: Song Junyi answered truthfully.

古文：笑曰： 诚然，卿不朕欺。 
现代文：太祖笑道： 说得对，你没有欺骗我。 
English: The great-grandfather laughed and said, "That's right, you didn't deceive me."

古文：间召问群臣臧否，濂惟举其善者曰： 善者与臣友，臣知之；其不善者，不能知也。 
现代文：太祖闲时召宋濂询问群臣的善恶优劣，宋濂只是列举表现优良的大臣，并说： 善良的人与我交朋友，我了解他们，而对那些不善之人，我不了解他们！ 
English: When the great-grandfather was not busy, he called Song Tao to inquire about the merits and demerits of the ministers. Song Tao merely listed the ministers who performed well, and said: Good people make friends with me, I understand them, but for those who are not good, I do not understand them!

古文：主事茹太素上书万余言。
现代文：主事茹太素上书万余言，太祖大怒，以此询问廷臣的看法。
English: The person in charge, Ru Tai Su, wrote more than a thousand words in the letter, and the great-grandfather was furious, so he asked the courtier's opinion.

古文：帝怒，问廷臣，或指其书曰： 此不敬，此诽谤非法。 
现代文：有的指着茹太素的上书说： 这是不敬，是诽谤，是违法。 
English: Some pointed to the letter from Rutai Su and said: This is disrespectful, slanderous and illegal.

古文：问濂，对曰： 彼尽忠于陛下耳。陛下方开言路，恶可深罪。 
现代文：太祖问宋濂，宋濂回答 ：茹太素是尽忠于陛下的，陛下现在刚敞开言路，怎么能给他定以大罪呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked Song Tao, and Song Tao replied, "Ruth has always been loyal to your majesty. Your majesty has just opened his mouth, how can he be convicted of a serious crime?"

古文：既而帝览其书，有足采者。悉召廷臣诘责，因呼濂字曰： 微景濂几误罪言者。 
现代文：不久，太祖翻阅茹太素的上书，觉得有不少可取之处，于是便将廷臣全部召来责问，并直呼宋濂的字说道： 若不是景濂，我几乎就要错误地加罪于上书言事的人了。 
English: Soon after, the great-grandfather read through the letter written by Ru Tai Su and felt that there was a lot to be commended, so he summoned all the courtiers for questioning, and directly called Song Tao's words and said: If it were not for Jing Tao, I would almost have mistakenly added guilt to the person who wrote the letter.

古文：于是帝廷誉之曰： 朕闻太上为圣，其次为贤，其次为君子。
现代文：于是太祖又当场称赞宋濂说 ：我听说最上等的是圣人，其次是贤人，再次为君子。
English: So the great-grandfather praised Song Tao again on the spot, saying, "I heard that the highest-ranking person is a saint, followed by a sage, and then a gentleman.

古文：宋景濂事朕十九年，未尝有一言之伪，诮一人之短，始终无二，非止君子，抑可谓贤矣。 
现代文：宋景濂为朕效力十九年，从未说过一句假话，也从未讥讽别人的短处，始终如一，他岂只是君子，还真可以说是贤人了。 
English: Song Jingyao has worked for me for nineteen years. He has never told a lie, nor has he ever ridiculed the shortcomings of others. He has been consistent. He is not only a gentleman, but can truly be said to be a sage.

古文：每燕见，必设坐命茶，每旦必令侍膳，往复咨询，常夜分乃罢。
现代文：每当闲暇之时，宋濂来见，太祖都要下令设座上茶。每当早晨见宋濂，总要下令做膳招待，反复地向宋濂咨询，常常谈到夜半才作罢。
English: Whenever Song Tao came to see him in his spare time, the great-grandfather would order tea to be set up. Whenever he saw Song Tao in the morning, he would always order a meal to be prepared. He repeatedly consulted Song Tao, and often talked about it until midnight.

古文：濂不能饮，帝尝强之至三觞，行不成步。帝大欢乐。御制《楚辞》一章，命词臣赋《醉学士诗》。
现代文：宋濂不会饮酒，而太祖有一次硬让他喝了三觞，使他醉得行不成步，太祖见他这样，十分高兴，并亲自作《楚辞》一章，又下令词臣作《醉学士诗》。
English: Song Tao could not drink alcohol, but the great-grandfather once forced him to drink three gourds, making him too drunk to walk. The great-grandfather was very happy to see him like this, and personally wrote a chapter of "Chu Ci," and ordered the poet to write "Drunken Scholar Poem."

古文：又尝调甘露于汤，手酌以饮濂曰： 此能愈疾延年，愿与卿共之。 
现代文：太祖又有一次将甘露调入汤中，亲手舀起来给宋濂喝，并说： 这种汤能治病，还可以益寿延年，我愿与你共享。 
English: On another occasion, the great-grandfather mixed nectar into the soup, scooped it up with his own hands and gave it to Song Tao to drink, saying, "This soup can cure diseases, and it can also prolong life. I would like to share it with you."

古文：又诏太子赐濂良马，复为制《白马歌》一章，亦命侍臣和焉。
现代文：又下诏令太子赏赐宋濂良马，然后又亲自作《白马歌》一章，也命侍臣赋诗附和。
English: He also issued an imperial edict ordering the prince to reward Song Binliang with a horse, and then personally composed a chapter of the "White Horse Song," and also ordered his attendants to add poems to it.

古文：其宠待如此。
现代文：宋濂所受恩宠便是如此。
English: This was the case with Song Tao's favored son.

古文：九年进学士承旨知制诰，兼赞善如故。
现代文：九年，宋濂晋升为学士，承旨负责起草诰书，仍兼赞善大夫。
English: In the ninth year, Song Jun was promoted to bachelor, and he was responsible for drafting the letter of appointment, and he was still praised as a good doctor.

古文：其明年致仕，赐《御制文集》及绮帛，问濂年几何，曰： 六十有八。 
现代文：第二年，宋濂担任官职，太祖赐给他《御制文集》及绮帛，并问宋濂年纪多大了，宋濂回答： 六十有八。 
English: In the second year, when Song Tao assumed an official post, the great-grandfather gave him the Imperial Anthology and a scepter, and asked Song Tao how old he was, Song Tao replied: "Sixty-eight."

古文：帝乃曰： 藏此绮三十二年，作百岁衣可也。 
现代文：太祖便说： 你若将此绮收藏三十二年，你就可以拿它来做一百岁时的衣服了。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "If you keep this broom for thirty-two years, you can use it to make clothes for when you are a hundred years old."

古文：濂顿首谢。
现代文：宋濂顿首谢恩。
English: Song Xiudong expressed his gratitude.

古文：又明年，来朝。
现代文：又过了一年，宋濂来朝拜见。
English: A year later, Song Tao came to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：十三年，长孙慎坐胡惟庸党，帝欲置濂死。皇后太子力救，乃安置茂州。
现代文：洪武十三年，宋濂的长孙宋慎因胡惟庸案获罪，太祖要将宋濂处死，由于皇后和太子全力相救，才将他安置到茂州。
English: In the 13th year of Hongwu, Song Song's eldest grandson, Song Shen, was found guilty in the Hu Wei Yong case. The great-grandfather wanted to put Song Shen to death, but because the queen and the prince tried their best to save him, he was resettled in Muzhou.

古文：濂状貌丰伟，美须髯，视近而明，一黍上能作数字。
现代文：宋濂相貌丰伟，满脸美髯，眼睛近视却很明亮，能在一粒黍子上面写几个字。
English: Song Tao is a handsome man with a beautiful face. His eyes are short-sighted but very bright. He can write a few words on a piece of dice.

古文：自少至老，未尝一日去书卷。
现代文：从少到老，没有一天离开过书籍，对学问无所不通。
English: From young to old, he has never left books for a single day, and he knows everything about learning.

古文：于学无所不通，为文醇深演迤，与古作者并。
现代文：宋濂文风淳厚而飘逸，可与古代作者媲美。
English: The style of the Song Dynasty's poetry is rich and flowing, comparable to that of ancient authors.

古文：在朝，郊社宗庙山川百神之典，朝会宴享律历衣冠之制，四裔贡赋赏劳之仪，旁及元勋巨卿碑记刻石之辞，咸以委濂，屡推为开国文臣之首。
现代文：在朝时，凡郊社宗庙、山川百神之典，朝会宴享、律历衣冠之制，四裔贡赋、赏劳之仪，旁及元勋巨卿碑记刻石之辞，都委托给宋濂负责。宋濂屡次被推为开国文臣之首。
English: During the reign of the emperor, all the suburban shrines and temples, the edict of the hundred gods of mountains and rivers, the imperial banquets, the system of the ritsuryo robes and crowns, the four-generation tribute, the reward ceremony, as well as the inscription of the great nobles of the Yuan Dynasty, were entrusted to Song Tao. Song Tao was repeatedly promoted to the head of the founding statesman.

古文：士大夫造门乞文者，后先相踵。
现代文：士大夫登门索要诗文者，接踵而至。
English: The scholar-bureaucrat came to the door to ask for the poem, and the poems came one after another.

古文：外国贡使亦知其名，数问宋先生起居无恙否。
现代文：甚至外国前来进贡的使者都知道宋濂的名声，多次问起宋先生日常起居及身体安康否。
English: Even foreign envoys who came to pay tribute knew the reputation of Song Tao, and repeatedly asked about Mr. Song's daily life and physical well-being.

古文：高丽、安南、日本至出兼金购文集。
现代文：高丽、安南、日本甚至出双倍价收购宋濂文集。
English: Goryeo, Annan, and Japan even offered double the price to acquire the Song Dynasty anthology.

古文：四方学者悉称为 太史公 ，不以姓氏。
现代文：四方学者都称宋濂为 太史公 ，而不称其姓氏。
English: Scholars in all four directions refer to Song Tao as Taishigong, rather than by his surname.

古文：虽白首侍从，其勋业爵位不逮基，而一代礼乐制作，濂所裁定者居多。
现代文：宋濂虽以白发老者随侍朱元璋，其功业、爵位却比不上刘基，而一代礼乐制作，宋濂所裁定的居多。
English: Although Song Tao is a white-haired old man accompanying Zhu Yuanzhang, his achievements and titles are not as good as Liu Ji, and the production of a generation of ceremonial music is mostly decided by Song Tao.

古文：其明年，卒于夔，年七十二。
现代文：第二年，宋濂逝于夔，终年七十二岁。
English: The following year, Song Tao died at the age of seventy-two.

古文：知事叶以从葬之莲花山下。蜀献王慕濂名，复移茔华阳城东。
现代文：知事叶以从将其葬于莲花山下，蜀献王仰慕宋濂大名，又将宋濂之墓移至华阳城东。
English: Governor Ye Zeng buried him under the Lotus Mountain, Shu Xianwang admired the Song Dynasty, and moved Song Dynasty's tomb to the east of Huayang City.

古文：弘治九年，四川巡抚马俊奏： 濂真儒翊运，述作可师，黼黻多功，辅导著绩。久死远戍，幽壤沉沦，乞加恤录。 
现代文：弘治九年，四川巡抚马俊上奏说： 宋濂是了不起的大学者，述作可师，又辅佐帝业，功昭绩著，却死在远戍之地，时间已久，坟墓都已败落，乞请皇上体恤审察。 
English: In the ninth year of Hongzhi, Ma Jun, the governor of Sichuan Province, said: Song Tao is a great scholar. He is a great writer, and he has assisted the emperor. He has made great achievements, but he died in a faraway land. It has been a long time, and the tombs have all fallen down. I would like to ask the emperor for his consideration.

古文：下礼部议，复其官，春秋祭葬所。
现代文：于是，孝宗便将此事下到礼部商议，恢复宋濂原官职，每年春秋两季在其所葬之地举行祭祀。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaozong sent the matter to the Ministry of Ceremonies for deliberation, reinstated Song Yu's former official position, and held religious services at the place where he was buried every spring and autumn.

古文：正德中，追谥文宪。
现代文：正德年间，又追封谥号文宪。
English: During the Zhengde era, he was also given the posthumous title of "Wen Xing" (文憲).

古文：仲子璲最知名，字仲珩，善诗，尤工书法。洪武九年，以濂故，召为中书舍人。其兄子慎亦为仪礼序班。
现代文：在宋濂儿子中，次子宋王遂最为有名，宋王遂字中珩，善于作诗，尤精于书法，洪武九年，因为宋濂的缘故，被召为中书舍人，宋濂兄长之子宋慎也为仪礼序班。
English: Among the sons of Song Xi, the second son, Song Wang Sui, was the most famous. Song Wang Sui was good at poetry and especially good at calligraphy. In the ninth year of Hongwu, because of Song Xi, he was called to be a Chinese calligrapher. Song Shen, the son of Song Xi's elder brother, was also a ceremonial order class.

古文：帝数试璲与慎，并教诫之。笑语濂曰： 卿为朕教太子诸王，朕亦教卿子孙矣。 
现代文：太祖曾多次测试宋王遂与宋慎，并教育、告诫他们，并笑着对宋濂说 ：你为朕教育太子及诸王，朕也教一教你的子孙吧。 
English: The great-grandfather had tested Song Wang Sui and Song Sheng many times, and educated and admonished them, and said to Song Tao with a smile: You educate the prince and kings for me, I will also teach your children and grandchildren.

古文：濂行步艰，帝必命璲、慎扶掖之。
现代文：宋濂步行艰难，太祖总要让宋王遂、宋慎搀扶着他。
English: It was difficult for Song Tao to walk. Grandfather always asked Song Wang Sui and Song Sheng Yao to support him.

古文：祖孙父子，共官内庭，众以为荣。
现代文：宋濂一家，祖孙父子，同在内廷为官，众人都觉得这是很荣耀的事。
English: The Song Yi family, grandfather, grandson, father and son, were all officials in the Inner Court, and everyone felt that this was a very honorable thing.

古文：慎坐罪，璲亦连坐，并死，家属悉徙茂州。
现代文：宋慎获罪，宋王遂也被牵连，两人都被处死，家属也全被迁往茂州。
English: Song Shen was found guilty, and Song Wang was also implicated. Both were executed, and their families were all moved to Maozhou.

古文：建文帝即位，追念濂兴宗旧学，召璲子怿官翰林。
现代文：建文帝即位后，追念宋濂兴宗旧学，便召宋王遂之子宋怿到翰林院做官。
English: After Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, he recalled the old learning of the Song Dynasty's King Sui and summoned his son, Song Dynasty's King Sui, to serve as an official at the Hanlin Academy.

古文：永乐十年，濂孙坐奸党郑公智外亲，诏特宥之。
现代文：永乐十年，宋濂之孙因是奸党郑公智的外亲，被牵连获罪，永乐帝下诏特赦了他。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongle Emperor, the grandson of Song Kun, who was a relative of the traitor Zheng Gongzhi, was implicated and convicted, and the Yongle Emperor issued an edict to pardon him.

古文：叶琛，字景渊，丽水人。
现代文：叶琛，字景渊，丽水人。
English: Yeh Tao, Zha Jing Yuan, Lishui Ren.

古文：博学有才藻。
现代文：博学有文才。
English: Erudite and literate.

古文：元末从石抹宜孙守处州，为画策，捕诛山寇，授行省元帅。
现代文：元末跟随石抹宜孙驻守处州，出谋划策，捕杀山寇，授为行省元帅。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was stationed in Zhouzhou with Shima Yi Sun, and was awarded the title of Marshal of Xing Province.

古文：王师下处州，琛避走建宁。
现代文：王师攻下处州，叶琛避逃建宁。
English: Wang Shih captured Jeonju, while Ye Ye avoided and fled Jianning.

古文：以荐征至应天，授营田司佥事。
现代文：因被推荐征召而至应天，授为营田司佥事。
English: Because he was recommended for conscription, he was promoted to the post of Yingtan secretary.

古文：寻迁洪都知府，佐邓愈镇守。
现代文：不久，升迁洪都知府，辅佐邓愈镇守洪都。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the position of Hongdu Prefecture, and assisted Deng Yu as the town guard of Hongdu.

古文：祝宗、康泰叛，愈脱走，琛被执，不屈，大骂，死之。
现代文：祝宗、康泰反叛，邓愈逃脱，叶琛被捉，始终不屈，并且大骂，死于洪都。
English: Zhu Zong, Kangtai rebelled, Deng Yu escaped, Ye Gan was caught, always unyielding, and cursed loudly, and died in Hongdu.

古文：追封南阳郡侯，塑像耿再成祠，后祀功臣庙。
现代文：被追封为南阳郡侯，在耿再成祠内塑像，后在功臣庙中祭祀。
English: He was enthroned as the lord of Nanyang County, and his statue was placed in the Geng Zhaicheng Ancestral Hall, and later enshrined in the Gongshen Temple.

古文：章溢，字三益，龙泉人。
现代文：章溢，字三益，龙泉人。
English: The chapter is overflowing, the word is three benefits, and the dragon is a fountain.

古文：始生，声如钟。
现代文：出生之时，哭声如钟。
English: At the time of birth, crying sounds like a bell.

古文：弱冠，与胡深同师王毅。
现代文：二十岁时，章溢与胡深一起师从王毅。
English: At the age of twenty, Zhang Yiyi learned from Wang Yi together with Hu Sheng.

古文：毅，字叔刚，许谦门人也，教授乡里，讲解经义，闻者多感悟。
现代文：王毅，字叔刚，是许谦的门生，在家乡教书，讲解经义，听者大多感悟。
English: Wang Yi, nicknamed "Uncle Gang," is a protégé of Xu Qian. He teaches in his hometown and explains the meaning of the sutras. Most listeners are impressed.

古文：溢从之游，同志圣贤学，天性孝友。
现代文：章溢跟随他到处游历，有志于圣贤之学，天性孝顺、友爱。
English: Zhang Yue followed him everywhere on his travels. He was interested in the study of saints and sages, and was naturally filial and friendly.

古文：尝游金华，元宪使秃坚不花礼之，改官秦中，要与俱行。
现代文：章溢曾游历金华，元宪使秃坚不花对他以礼相待，秃坚不花调任秦中，要章溢与他同行。
English: Zhang Yiyi once traveled to Jinhua. The Yuan Dynasty's envoy, Bald Jianpu, treated him with courtesy. Bald Jianpu was transferred to the Middle Qin Dynasty, and Zhang Yiyi had to accompany him.

古文：至虎林，心动，辞归。
现代文：至虎林时，章溢心中动摇，告辞回乡。
English: When he reached the tiger forest, Zhang Yue was shaken in his heart and said goodbye to his hometown.

古文：归八日而父殁，未葬，火焚其庐。
现代文：回乡八日后父亲去世，尚未殓葬，大火焚烧其屋。
English: Eight days after returning to his hometown, his father died and was not buried, and his house was burned down.

古文：溢搏颡吁天，火至柩所而灭。
现代文：章溢拍着额头吁求上天，果然大火烧至放置棺材之处时熄灭。
English: Zhang Yiyi patted his forehead and cried out to the heavens, and sure enough, the fire was extinguished when it reached the place where the coffin was placed.

古文：蕲、黄寇犯龙泉，溢从子存仁被执，溢挺身告贼曰： 吾兄止一子，宁我代。 
现代文：蕲、黄侵犯龙泉，章溢的堂侄章存仁被捉，章溢挺身而出，对寇贼说道 ：我哥哥只有一个儿子，我宁愿代替他。 
English: Zhai and Huang invaded Longquan, Zhang Yue's cousin Zhang Cunren was captured, Zhang Yue stood up and said to the bandits: My brother only has one son, I would rather take his place.

古文：贼素闻其名，欲降之，缚于柱，溢不为屈。
现代文：贼寇一向听说章溢的名声，想招降他，便将他绑在柱子上，章溢毫不屈服。
English: The bandits had always heard of Zhang Yiyi's reputation. They wanted to recruit him, so they tied him to a post. Zhang Yiyi did not give in.

古文：至夜绐守者脱归，集里民为义兵，击破贼。
现代文：到夜间哄骗守贼，脱身而归，召集同乡百姓组成义兵，击败贼寇。
English: At night, he coaxed the thief-in-law, escaped and returned, and gathered the villagers to form a volunteer army to defeat the thief-in-law.

古文：俄府官以兵来，欲尽诛诖误者。
现代文：府官随即率军而来，要杀尽有牵连者。
English: The prefectural officials immediately led an army to kill everyone involved.

古文：溢走说石抹宜孙曰： 贫民迫冻馁，诛之何为。 
现代文：章溢前去劝说石抹宜孙说 ：贫苦百姓是迫于饥寒，为什么要处死他们呢？ 
English: Zhang Yue went to persuade Shi Mat Yisun and said: The poor people are forced by hunger and cold, why should they be executed?

古文：宜孙然其言，檄止兵，留溢幕下。
现代文：石抹宜孙觉得他的话有理，便下令止兵，并将章溢留在幕下。
English: Ishimatsu felt that his words were justified, so he ordered a halt to the fighting and left Shosetsu behind the curtain.

古文：从平庆元、浦城盗。授龙泉主簿，不受归。
现代文：章溢随军平定庆元、浦城盗贼，被授为龙泉主簿，章溢推辞不受，返回故乡。
English: Zhang Yiyi followed the army to suppress the Qingyuan and Pucheng thieves, and was awarded the Longquan Master Book. Zhang Yiyi did not accept the rejection and returned to his hometown.

古文：宜孙守台州，为贼所围。
现代文：石抹宜孙驻守台州时，被贼寇包围。
English: When Shi Maku Yi Sun was stationed in Taizhou, he was surrounded by bandits.

古文：溢以乡兵赴援，却贼。
现代文：章溢率领乡兵前往救援，击退贼寇。
English: Zhang Yue led the local soldiers to rescue and repel the bandits.

古文：已而贼陷龙泉，监县宝忽丁遁去，溢与其师王毅帅壮士击走贼。
现代文：不久，贼寇攻陷龙泉，监县宝忽丁逃跑，章溢与其老师王毅率领壮士击走贼寇。
English: Soon, the bandits invaded Longquan. Supervisor County Bao Ku Ding fled. Zhang Yue and his teacher Wang Yi led the strong men to fight off the bandits.

古文：宝忽丁还，内惭，杀毅以反。
现代文：宝忽丁返回后，心有所愧，杀死王毅而反。
English: After Bao Ku Ding returned, he felt guilty and killed Wang Yi.

古文：溢时在宜孙幕府，闻之驰归，偕胡深执戮首恶，因引兵平松阳、丽水诸寇。
现代文：当时章溢正在石抹宜孙幕府，获悉此事，迅速赶回，偕同胡深捉杀首恶，并趁机引兵平定松阳、丽水诸寇。
English: At that time, Zhang Yue was at the Shishimatsu Shogunate, learned of the matter, quickly rushed back, accompanied by Hu Sheng to catch and kill the first evil, and took the opportunity to lead troops to pacify Songyang and Lishui.

古文：长枪军攻婺，闻溢兵至，解去。
现代文：长枪军进攻婺州，听说章溢军至，使撤兵离去。
English: The Long Rifle Army attacked Zhangzhou. When they heard that Zhang Yue's army had arrived, they forced the retreating soldiers to leave.

古文：论功累授浙东都元帅府佥事。
现代文：论功之时，章溢被授为浙东都元帅府佥事。
English: At the time of the award, Zhang Yue was awarded the title of Marshal of the Eastern Zhejiang Province.

古文：溢曰： 吾所将皆乡里子弟，肝脑涂地，而吾独取功名，弗忍也。 
现代文：章溢却说 ：我所率都是故乡子弟，他们肝脑涂地，而我却独取功名，我不忍心啊。 
English: Zhang Yue, however, said, "I am leading a team of my hometown's children, and they are all hard-working, but I am the only one taking credit. I can't bear it."

古文：辞不受。
现代文：因此坚辞不受。
English: Refusing to accept the donated food.

古文：以义兵属其子存道，退隐匡山。
现代文：章溢将义兵交托其子章存道，自己退隐匡山。
English: Zhang Yue entrusted the volunteer soldiers to his son, Zhang Xuan, and retired to Mount Kuangshan.

古文：明兵克处州，避入闽。
现代文：明军攻克处州，章溢避入闽境。
English: The Ming army conquered Zhouzhou, and Zhang Yibing fled to Xizhou.

古文：太祖聘之，与刘基、叶琛、宋濂同至应天。
现代文：后来太祖诚心聘请，章溢与刘基、叶琛、宋濂一同来到应天。
English: Later, Emperor Taizu sincerely hired Zhang Yue to come to Yingtian together with Liu Ji, Ye Ye, and Song Yi.

古文：太祖劳基等曰： 我为天下屈四先生，今天下纷纷，何时定乎？ 
现代文：太祖慰问刘基等说： 为了天下，委屈四位先生了。如今天下纷乱，何时才能平定呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather consoled Liu Ji and others, saying: For the sake of the world, the four gentlemen have been wronged. If there is chaos today, when will it be settled?

古文：溢对曰： 天道无常，惟德是辅，惟不嗜杀人者能一之耳。 
现代文：章溢回答说： 天道无常，只有恩德方能辅助成功，只有不嗜杀人者才能一统天下。 
English: Zhang Yue replied: The way of heaven is impermanent, only benevolence can assist success, and only those who do not want to kill can rule the world.

古文：太祖伟其言，授佥营田司事。
现代文：太祖觉得他的话颇有远见，任命他为佥营田司事。
English: The great-grandfather thought his words were quite far-sighted and appointed him as the secretary of Suyeiden.

古文：巡行江东、两淮田，分籍定税，民甚便之。
现代文：章溢巡行江东、两淮田地，根据户籍确定税额，这对百姓十分有利。
English: Zhang overflowed the parade of Jiangdong, two Huai Tian, according to the household registration to determine the amount of tax, which is very beneficial to the people.

古文：以病久在告，太祖知其念母也，厚赐遣归省，而留其子存厚于京师。
现代文：章溢因久病休假，太祖知道他想念家母，便给予厚赐，让他回乡，而将其子章存厚留在京城。
English: When Zhang Yiyi was on leave due to a long illness, his great-grandfather knew that he missed his mother and gave him a generous gift to return to his hometown, while leaving his son Zhang Yiyi in Beijing.

古文：浙东设提刑按察使，命溢为佥事。
现代文：浙东设提刑按察使时，太祖命章溢为佥事。
English: When the East Zhejiang Province set up a penalty according to the inspector, the great-grandfather's death certificate overflowed into anecdotes.

古文：胡深出师温州，令溢守处州，馈饷供亿，民不知劳。
现代文：胡深出师温州，章溢受命驻守处州，供应粮饷，而百姓不觉烦劳。
English: Hu Sheng went to Wenzhou, Zhang Hui was ordered to stay in Wenzhou to supply grain, and the people were exhausted.

古文：山贼来寇，败走之。
现代文：山贼来侵，章溢率军将其击走。
English: The bandits invaded, and Zhang Yue led the army to drive them away.

古文：迁湖广按察佥事。
现代文：晋升为湖广按察佥事。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Hukang, according to an anecdote.

古文：时荆、襄初平，多废地，议分兵屯田，且以控制北方。
现代文：当时荆、襄初定，废地很多，章溢建议派兵屯田，并且以此控制北方。
English: At that time, Jing and Xiang made a preliminary decision that there was a lot of waste land, and Zhang Yue suggested sending soldiers to occupy the land and thus control the north.

古文：从之。
现代文：太祖听从了他的提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：会浙东按察使宋思颜、孔克仁等以职事被逮，词连溢。
现代文：当时浙东按察使宋思颜、孔克仁等因失职被捕，供词中牵涉到章溢。
English: At that time, Song Siyan, Kong Keren and other East Zhejiang inspectors were arrested for dereliction of duty, and the confession involved chapter overflow.

古文：太祖遣太史令刘基谕之曰： 素知溢守法，毋疑也。 
现代文：太祖为此派太史令刘基前去对章溢传达旨意，说： 我向来知道章溢守法，不要有疑虑。 
English: For this reason, the great-grandfather sent Taishi to Liu Ji to convey his will to Zhang Yiyi, saying: I have always known that Zhang Yiyi abides by the law, do not have any doubts.

古文：会胡深入闽陷没，处州动摇，命溢为浙东按察副使往镇之。
现代文：恰逢胡深进入福建，全军覆没，而处州动摇，太祖命章溢为浙东按察副使前往镇守。
English: Just as Hu Sheng entered Fujian, the whole army was wiped out, and the whole province was shaken. The great-grandfather's seal of life was overflowing as the vice-envoy of the Zhejiang East Inspection went to the town guard.

古文：溢以获罪蒙宥，不应迁秩，辞副使，仍为佥事。
现代文：章溢觉得自己涉罪而受到宽恕，不应迁升，因此推辞副使之职，仍任佥事。
English: Zhang Yue felt that he was pardoned for his crime and should not be promoted, so he refused to be promoted to vice-chairman and remained in the position.

古文：既至，宣布诏旨，诛首叛者，余党悉定。
现代文：章溢到处州后，宣布诏令，处死叛首，余党全被平定。
English: After the chapter spread all over the state, the imperial edict was announced, the rebel leader was put to death, and the rest of the party was completely suppressed.

古文：召旧部义兵分布要害。
现代文：章溢召集旧部义兵分布要害之处。
English: Zhang Yue called for volunteers from the old division to be distributed to key areas.

古文：贼寇庆元、龙泉，溢列木栅为屯，贼不敢犯。
现代文：贼寇侵犯庆元、龙泉，章溢排列木栅严加防御，贼寇不敢来犯。
English: Thieves and robbers invaded Qingyuan and Longquan. Strictly defended by overhanging wooden fences, the thieves and robbers did not dare to come.

古文：浦城戍卒乏食，李文忠欲运处州粮饷之。
现代文：浦城守军缺乏粮食，李文忠欲将处州粮食运去。
English: The defenders of Pucheng were short of grain, and Li Wenzhong wanted to transport the grain from Zhanzhou.

古文：溢以舟车不通，而军中所掠粮多，请入官均给之，食遂足。
现代文：章溢认为车船不通，而军中所掠粮食颇多，请求充公平均供给，于是浦城军粮充足。
English: Zhang Yiyi thought that the car and ship could not pass, but there was a lot of grain plundered in the army, and requested the confiscation of the average supply, so the military grain in Pucheng was sufficient.

古文：温州茗洋贼为患，溢命子存道捕斩之。
现代文：温州茗洋贼寇为患，章溢命其子章存道前往搜捕斩首。
English: Wenzhou was plagued by foreign bandits, and Zhang Yibing's son, Zhang Zengdao, went to search for and behead them.

古文：朱亮祖取温州，军中颇掠子女，溢悉籍还其家。
现代文：朱亮祖攻取温州时，军中抢掠百姓子女颇多，章溢将他们全部放归。
English: When Zhu Liangzu conquered Wenzhou, there were quite a few children of the people who were robbed in the army, and Zhang Yue released them all.

古文：吴平，诏存道守处，而召溢入朝。
现代文：吴地平定后，太祖下诏命章存道驻守处州，而召章溢入朝觐见。
English: After the Wu dynasty was established, Emperor Taizu's imperial edict decreed that the emperor should remain stationed in Shuzhou, while the imperial edict called for him to visit the imperial court.

古文：太祖谕群臣曰： 溢虽儒臣，父子宣力一方，寇盗尽平，功不在诸将后。 
现代文：太祖对群臣说： 章溢虽是儒臣，但他们父子效力一方，寇贼全被平定，其功劳不在诸将之后。 
English: The great-great-grandfather said to his ministers: Although Zhang Yiming was a Confucian scholar, their father and son played an active role, the bandits were all subdued, and their contribution was second only to that of the generals.

古文：复问溢征闽诸将如何。
现代文：又问章溢应派哪位将领前去征伐福建。
English: He also asked which general should be sent to conquer Fujian.

古文：对曰： 汤和由海道，胡美由江西，必胜。
现代文：章溢回答说 ：汤和取海路、胡美由江西前去征讨，必定胜利。
English: Zhang Yue replied, "Tang He took the sea route, while Hu Mei marched from the west of Jiangxi to fight, and they are sure to win."

古文：然闽中尤服李文忠威信。若令文忠从浦城取建宁，此万全计也。 
现代文：但李文忠在福建尤其有威信，如果命李文忠从浦城攻取建宁，将是万全之计。 
English: However, Li Wenzhong is especially respected in Fujian. If Li Wenzhong is ordered to capture Jianning from Pucheng, it will be a perfect plan.

古文：太祖立诏文忠出师如溢策。
现代文：太祖当即按章溢的策划，下诏命李文忠出师。
English: The great-grandfather immediately ordered Li Wenzhong to become his disciple.

古文：处州粮旧额一万三千石，军兴加至十倍。
现代文：处州军粮旧额为一万三千石，战事兴起后加至以前的十倍。
English: The old amount of military grain in Jeonju was 13,000 koku, which was increased tenfold after the outbreak of the war.

古文：溢言之丞相，奏复其旧。
现代文：章溢向丞相建议，恢复了旧额。
English: Zhang Yue suggested to the prime minister that the old amount be restored.

古文：渐东造海舶，征巨材于处。
现代文：浙东建造海船，在处州征求巨木。
English: East Zhejiang is building a sea vessel and soliciting giant trees in Wenzhou.

古文：溢曰： 处、婺之交，山岩峻险，纵有木，从何道出？ 
现代文：章溢说道： 处州、婺州相交之处，山岩峻险，纵然有木材，从什么路运出去呢？ 
English: Zhang Yue said: At the intersection of Wenzhou and Zhangzhou, the mountains and rocks are dangerous. Even if there is wood, how will it be transported?

古文：白行省罢之。
现代文：因而告诉行省停办此事。
English: Therefore, it told the province to suspend the matter.

古文：洪武元年与刘基并拜御史中丞兼赞善大夫。
现代文：洪武元年，章溢与刘基同被授予御史中丞兼赞善大夫。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Zhang Yiyi and Liu Jitong were awarded the title of Imperial Historian and Doctor of Merit.

古文：时廷臣伺帝意，多严苛，溢独持大体。
现代文：当时廷臣窥探皇帝的意图，办事大多严厉苛刻，唯独章溢能持大体。
English: At that time, courtiers spied on the emperor's intentions, and most of them were strict and harsh, except for Zhang Yibing.

古文：或以为言。
现代文：有人因此劝说他。
English: He was persuaded to do so.

古文：溢曰： 宪台百司仪表，当养人廉耻，岂恃搏击为能哉！ 
现代文：章溢却说 ：宪台为百司的仪表，应当教人懂得廉耻，岂能以相互攻讠干抨击为能呢？ 
English: Zhang Yue, however, said: the Constitution is the most important instrument, and people should be taught to be shameless. Is it possible to succeed by attacking and criticizing each other?

古文：帝亲祀社稷，会大风雨，还坐外朝，怒仪礼不合，致天变。
现代文：太祖亲自去祭祀社稷，却遇上了大风雨，回来之后坐在外朝，怒说礼仪不合，以致变天。
English: The great-grandfather himself went to the shrine to offer sacrifices, but was met with a storm. After returning, he sat in the outer court, angrily said that the etiquette did not fit, resulting in a change of weather.

古文：溢委曲明其无罪，乃贳之。
现代文：章溢委婉说明自己无罪，太祖才宽恕了他。
English: Zhang Yibai euphemistically explained that he was not guilty, and the great-grandfather pardoned him.

古文：文忠之征闽也，存道以所部乡兵万五千人从。
现代文：李文忠征伐福建，章存道率所部乡兵一万五千人随往。
English: Li Wenzhong invaded Fujian, and Zhang Cun Dao led 15,000 soldiers from Shobu to accompany him.

古文：闽平，诏存道以所部从海道北征。
现代文：福建平定后，太祖下诏命李存道率所部从海路北征。
English: After Fujian was pacified, Emperor Taizu ordered Li Cunxu to lead his troops to march north by sea.

古文：溢持不可，曰： 乡兵皆农民，许以事平归农，今复调之，是不信也。 
现代文：章溢坚持不可，说： 乡兵都是农民，曾允诺让他们在福建平定后回乡务农，现在又调去北征，这是不讲信用啊。 
English: Zhang Yiyi insisted, saying, "The rural soldiers are all farmers. I had promised to let them return to the countryside to work in agriculture after the pacification of Fujian, but now they have been transferred to the Northern Expedition. This is not trustworthy."

古文：帝不怿。
现代文：太祖听后不悦。
English: Gao Di was very unhappy after listening.

古文：既而奏曰： 兵已入闽者，俾还乡里。
现代文：章溢不久又奏道 ：已经进入福建的乡兵，让他们返回故乡。
English: Zhang Yue soon added, "Let the rural soldiers who have entered Fujian return to their hometowns."

古文：昔尝叛逆之民，宜籍为军，使北上，一举而恩威著矣。 
现代文：而对那些过去曾是叛逆的百姓，应当征召为兵，命其北上，这样便可一举两得，恩威并显。 
English: And for those people who have been rebellious in the past, they should be conscripted as soldiers and ordered to go to the north, so that they can achieve two things at once and show grace.

古文：帝喜曰： 孰谓儒者迂阔哉！
现代文：太祖高兴地说 ：谁说儒者迂远而不切实际呢？
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "Who says Confucianism is far-fetched and impractical?"

古文：然非先生一行，无能办者。 
现代文：没有先生一行，便无人能办此事。 
English: Without you, no one can do this.

古文：溢行至处州，遭母丧，乞守制。
现代文：章溢行至处州时，恰逢母亲去世，请求回乡居丧守孝。
English: When Zhang Yibing traveled to Zhanzhou, it coincided with the death of his mother, and he requested to return to his hometown to mourn.

古文：不许。
现代文：太祖不许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：乡兵既集，命存道由永嘉浮海而北，再上章乞终制。
现代文：乡兵聚集之后，章存道受命由永嘉出发，由海路北上，章溢再次奏请回乡守丧。
English: After the townspeople gathered, Zhang Cundao was ordered to leave Yongjia and go north by sea. Zhang Yue once again asked him to return to his hometown for the funeral.

古文：诏可。
现代文：太祖下诏答应其请求。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：溢悲戚过度，营葬亲负土石，感疾卒，年五十六。
现代文：章溢悲戚过度，殓葬时又亲自背运土石，终也染病去世，终年五十六岁。
English: Zhang overflowed with grief, and at the time of the funeral, he personally carried away the earth and stone. Eventually, he also contracted the disease and passed away, at the age of 56.

古文：帝痛悼，亲撰文，即其家祭之。
现代文：太祖悲痛哀悼，亲自撰文，到章溢家中祭奠。
English: The great-grandfather grieved and mourned, personally wrote an article, and went to Zhang Yiyi's home to pay his respects.

