古文：来瑱哥舒翰马璘白孝德李正己李嗣业马勋汪节彭先觉王俳优钟傅
现代文：来瑱哥舒翰马璘白孝德李正己李嗣业马勋汪节彭先觉王俳优钟傅
English: Liao brother, Shu Han, Ma Zhen, Bai Xiaodong, Li Zhengyi, Li Zhiye, Ma Xun, Wang Jie, Peng Xian Jue, Wang Hao, You Zhongfu

古文：墨君和周归祐王宰
现代文：墨君和周归祐王宰
English: Bokun and Zhou Kui Yu Wang Zai

古文：来瑱
现代文：来瑱
English: Come on

古文：唐来瑱，天宝中至赞善大夫，未为人所知。
现代文：唐朝的来瑱，在玄宗天宝中期官已升到赞善大夫，但不为人们所知。
English: A visitor from the Tang Dynasty, in the middle of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Heavenly Treasures, he had risen to the rank of Zanzan Doctor, but this is not known to the public.

古文：安禄山叛逆，召朝臣各举智谋果决才堪统众者。
现代文：安禄山叛乱时，皇帝下诏让朝臣们推荐有智谋，办事果断，能够统帅众人的人才。
English: At the time of the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, the emperor issued an edict asking courtiers to recommend people with wisdom, decisiveness, and the ability to command others.

古文：左拾遗张镐荐瑱有纵横才略。
现代文：左拾遗张镐推荐来瑱具有经略天下的才干。
English: Zuo Zhiwei recommended by Zhang Xuan has the ability to be a world-class climber.

古文：表入，即日召见，称旨，拜颍川太守，充招讨使，累奏战功。
现代文：奏表上去后，当日召见，皇上很满意，任他为颍川太守，兼招讨史，果然屡建战功。
English: After the report was submitted, he was summoned on the same day, and the emperor was very satisfied. He appointed him as the governor of Shibukawa, and also invited him to discuss history. As expected, he repeatedly made war exploits.

古文：肃宗继位，以瑱武略，尤加任委。
现代文：肃宗李亨继位时，因为来瑱的武略，委以重任。
English: When Su Zong Li Heng succeeded to the throne, he was entrusted with important duties because of his military strategy.

古文：北收河洛，属群贼蜂起，频来攻战，皆为瑱所败。贼等惧之，号为来嚼铁。
现代文：收复了河洛一带，属内群贼蜂拥而起，多次攻战，都被来瑱击败，敌人很害怕他，都叫他来嚼铁。
English: He recovered the area around Helo. His subordinate band of thieves swarmed and fought many times. They were all defeated by the enemy. The enemy was very afraid of him and told him to chew iron.

古文：哥舒翰
现代文：哥舒翰
English: Goshukhan

古文：唐哥舒翰捍吐蕃，贼众三道从山相续而下，哥舒翰持半段折枪，当前击之，无不摧靡。
现代文：唐时，哥舒翰捍守吐蕃。众贼分三路从山上连续攻下来，他手持半截折枪，迎头出击，所向无敌。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Goshukhan defended Tubo. The bandits continuously attacked from the mountain in three directions. Armed with a half-cut rifle, he attacked head-on and was invincible.

古文：翰入阵，善使枪，追贼及之，以枪搭其肩而喝。贼惊顾，翰从而刺其喉，皆高三五丈而坠。
现代文：哥舒翰打仗时善使枪，每当追上敌人时，先用枪搭在敌人的肩膀上，然后大叫一声，当敌人一回头时，便刺他的咽喉，敌人便跌下马来。
English: Goshukhan was good at using a gun in battle. Whenever he caught up with an enemy, he would first put the gun on the enemy's shoulder, then shout, and when the enemy turned around, he would stab him in the throat, and the enemy would fall down.

古文：家僮左车年十五，每随入阵，辄下马斩其首。
现代文：他的家僮左车，才十五岁，每次都跟随入阵，这时便跳下马来割掉被刺者的脑袋。
English: His fifteen-year-old cousin, who always followed him into battle, would jump down from his horse to cut off the victim's head.

古文：马璘
现代文：马璘
English: Ma Xuan

古文：唐广德元年，吐蕃自长安还至凤翔，节度孙守直闭门拒之。
现代文：唐代宗广德元年。吐蕃从长安退出，又来围困凤翔城，节度使孙守直紧闭城门，守城拒敌，已经数日。
English: In the first year of Zongguangde in the Tang Dynasty, Tubo withdrew from Chang'an and besieged Fengxiang City again. The festival made Sun Shouzhi tightly close the city gate and defend the city against the enemy. It has been several days.

古文：围守数日，会镇西节度马璘领精骑千余，自河西救杨志烈回，引兵入城。
现代文：正在这时，镇西节度使马璘领精骑一千多，从河西援救杨志烈回来，他先领兵入城。
English: Just at this time, the town's Western Festival brought more than a thousand horse-drawn horses to rescue Yang Zhili from Hexi, and he led the soldiers into the city first.

古文：迟明，单骑持满，直冲贼众。左右愿从者百余骑。
现代文：第二天黎明，他一人单骑，手持满弓，冲向敌众，左右跟他来的有一百多。
English: At dawn of the next day, he rode alone, armed with a full bow, and charged the enemy. He was followed by more than a hundred men.

古文：璘奋击大呼，贼徒披靡，无敢当者。
现代文：马璘奋战呐喊，敌兵溃散，没有敢抵抗的。
English: The horses neighed their battle cries, the enemy soldiers scattered, and no one dared to resist.

古文：翌日，又逼贼请战。
现代文：第二天，他又向敌阵挑战。
English: The next day, he challenged the enemy again.

古文：皆曰：此将不惜死，不可当，且避之。
现代文：敌人说，这个将领不怕死，无法抵挡，赶紧躲避。
English: The enemy said that this general was not afraid of death and could not be resisted, so he fled.

古文：白孝德
现代文：白孝德
English: Bai Xiaode

古文：唐白孝德为李光弼偏将。
现代文：唐时，白孝德为李光弼的偏将。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Bai Xiaode was the second in command to Li Guangyao.

古文：史思明攻河阳，使骁将刘龙仙卒骑五千，临城挑战。
现代文：史思明攻打河阳时，派骁将刘龙仙率领骑兵五千，到河阳城下挑战。
English: When Shi Siming attacked Kheyang, he sent Liu Longxian to challenge Kheyang with 5,000 cavalry.

古文：龙仙捷勇自恃，举足加马鬣上，谩骂光弼。
现代文：刘龙仙自以为很勇敢，将脚放在马颈上，谩骂李光弼。
English: Liu Longxian thought he was very brave, put his foot on the horse's neck and cursed Li Guangyao.

古文：光弼登城望之，顾诸将曰：孰可取者？
现代文：李光弼登城观望，对诸将说：谁能将他抓来？
English: Li Guangyao went to the city to watch and said to the generals: Who can capture him?

古文：仆固怀思请行，光弼曰：非大将所为，历选其次。左右曰：孝德可。
现代文：仆固怀恩请求前往。光弼说，不能用大将出马。又选择别人，诸将说，孝德可以。
English: Minion Gu Wai En requested to go. Guangyao said that you can not use the general to go. And choose someone else, the generals said that filial piety can be used.

古文：光弼召孝德前，问曰：可乎？
现代文：李光弼召来白孝德，问： 行吗？ 孝德说： 行。 
English: Li Guangyao called Bai Xiaode and asked, "Is it okay?" Xiaode said, "It's okay."

古文：曰：可。光弼问所加几何人而可？曰：独往则可，加人多不可。
现代文：光弼又问需要几个人同去，孝德说： 我自己就行，多了不行。 
English: Guangyao also asked how many people needed to go with him. Xiaode said, "I can go by myself, I can't take more than that."

古文：光弼曰：壮哉！
现代文：光弼说： 好样的！ 
English: Guangyao said: Well done!

古文：终问所欲，对曰：愿备五十骑于军门，候入而继进，及请大众鼓噪以假气，他无用也。
现代文：又问他还有什么要求。白孝德回答说： 先准备好五十名骑兵，等我冲入敌阵时再冲过去，请大家呐喊助威，其他不用了。 
English: He also asked him what else he wanted. Bai Xiaodong replied, "First, prepare fifty cavalry, wait for me to rush into the enemy's line, then rush over, ask everyone to shout encouragement, the rest is unnecessary."

古文：光弼抚其背以遣之。
现代文：李光弼拍了拍他的后背，叫他去了。
English: Li Guangyao patted him on the back and told him to go.

古文：孝德挟二矛，策马截流而渡。
现代文：白孝德手持两杆长矛，策马横渡，走在河当中。
English: Holding two spears in his hand, Bai Xiaode rode his horse across the river and walked in the middle of the river.

古文：半济，怀思贺曰：克矣。
现代文：怀恩高兴地说，准能抓到他。
English: "I'm sure we'll get him," Wine said cheerfully.

古文：光弼曰：未及，何知其克？
现代文：李光弼说，未必，你怎么知道能抓到？
English: Li Guangyao said, not necessarily, how do you know you can catch a carp?

古文：怀恩曰：观其揽跋便僻，可万全。
现代文：怀恩说，我看他信心十足，万无一失。
English: "I think he's got a lot of confidence and a lot of confidence that he's going to do the right thing," Whine said.

古文：龙仙始见其独来，甚易之，足不降鬣。
现代文：刘龙仙看到白孝德一人独来，不以为然，脚仍然放在马颈上。
English: Liu Longxian was not impressed when he saw Bai Xiaode riding alone. His foot was still on the horse's neck.

古文：稍近欲动，孝德摇手止之，若使其不动，龙仙不之测。又止龙仙。孝德曰：侍中使予致词，非他也。
现代文：白孝德走近时，他刚想动，孝德摇手制止了他。刘龙仙为防不测，刚要行动，孝德又制止了他，说，侍中让我来传个话，没别的事。
English: When Bai Xiaode approached, he just wanted to move, but Xiaode waved his hand to stop him. Liu Longxian, as a precaution, just wanted to move, but Xiaode stopped him again, saying, "The waiter asked me to pass on a message, nothing else."

古文：龙仙去三十步，与之言，亵骂如初。
现代文：刘龙仙往前走了三十步，和孝德说话，嘴里仍然谩骂不止。
English: Liu Longxian walked forward thirty paces, spoke with filial piety, and his mouth was still full of abuse.

古文：孝德伺便，因瞋目曰：贼识我乎？
现代文：白孝德抓住机会，怒瞪双目，说 你认识我吗？ 
English: Bai Xiaode seized the opportunity, glared at him, and said, "Do you know me?

古文：龙仙曰：何也？
现代文：龙仙说： 你是谁？ 
English: Dragon Immortal said: Who are you?

古文：曰：国之大将白孝德。
现代文：白孝德说： 我是唐朝大将白孝德。 
English: Bai Xiaode said: I am Tang Dynasty General Bai Xiaode.

古文：龙仙曰：是猪狗乎？
现代文：刘龙仙说： 是猪狗吗？ 
English: Liu Longxian said: Is it a pig dog?

古文：发声虓然，执矛前突，城上鼓噪，五十骑亦继进。
现代文：只听白孝德像狮吼般大喝一声，持矛前进，城上呐喊，那五十精骑也冲杀过来。
English: Just listen to Bai Xiaodong roar like a lion, advance with a spear, shout on the castle, and the fifty horsemen also rush in.

古文：龙仙矢不及发，环走堤上，孝德逐之，斩首提之归。
现代文：刘龙仙箭都没来得及发，只能在堤上转圈跑，白孝德赶上后斩了刘龙仙，提着头回来了。
English: Liu Longxian didn't have time to shoot his arrows, he could only run in circles on the embankment. After Bai Xiaode caught up, he cut off Liu Longxian and came back with his head held high.

古文：李正己
现代文：李正己
English: Li Zhengji

古文：唐李正己本名抱玉。
现代文：唐时，李正己本名抱玉。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Li Zhengji's real name was Bao Yu.

古文：侯希逸为平卢军帅，希逸母即正己姑也。
现代文：侯希逸任平卢军帅，希逸的母亲是正己的姑姑。
English: Hou Xiyi was the military commander of Pinglu, and Xiyi's mother was his aunt.

古文：后与希逸同至青州，骁健有勇力。
现代文：后来，他与侯希逸同到青州，他非常矫健勇敢。
English: Later, he went to Qingzhou with Hou Xiyi. He was very energetic and brave.

古文：宝应中，军中讨史朝义，至郑州。
现代文：唐代宗宝应年中，军队讨伐史朝义，到了郑州。
English: In the middle of the 12th year of the Tang Dynasty, the Zongbao army went to Zhengzhou to fight against the Qing Dynasty.

古文：回纥方强恣，诸节度皆下之。
现代文：军中回纥士兵非常骄横无理，各节度使都低声下气。
English: The soldiers in the middle of the army are very arrogant and unreasonable, and all the rules have made them tone down.

古文：正己时为军候，独欲以气吞之，因与角逐，众军聚观。
现代文：李正己当时是军候，他为了出出这口气，他要和回纥士兵进行摔跤比赛，比赛时士兵都来围观。
English: At that time, Li Zhengyi was a military cadet. In order to show this spirit, he wanted to have a wrestling match with an Uighur soldier. During the match, the soldiers all came to watch.

古文：约曰：后者批之。即逐而先，正己擒其领而批其颡，回纥屎液俱下。
现代文：双方约定，谁输了打谁，摔跤时李正己胜了，他抓住回纥兵的衣领打他的脸，直打得屎尿俱下。
English: Both sides agreed that whoever lost would beat the other, and in the wrestling match, Li Zhengji won. He grabbed the Hui soldier's collar and hit him in the face, knocking him to the ground.

古文：众军呼突，繇是不敢暴。
现代文：士兵们欢呼，那以后，回纥兵再不敢骄横了。
English: The soldiers cheered. After that, the Hui soldiers no longer dared to be arrogant.

古文：会军人逐希逸，希逸奔走。众立正己为帅，朝廷因授平卢节度使。
现代文：恰赶上军人们驱逐侯希逸，希逸逃跑了，大家立李正己为军帅，朝廷授他平卢节度使。
English: Just in time for the soldiers to expel Hou Xiyi, Xiyi ran away. Everyone appointed Li Zheng as the commander of the army, and the court awarded him the title of Pinglu Jiedu envoy.

古文：李嗣业
现代文：李嗣业
English: Li Siye

古文：唐李嗣业领安西北庭行营，常为先锋将，持棒冲击，众贼披靡。
现代文：唐时，李嗣业镇安西北庭行营，曾被任命为先锋将，战斗时，他持棒冲击，众贼溃逃。
English: At the time of the Tang Dynasty, he was appointed as the vanguard general of the camp in the northwest courtyard of the town of Li Xi Ye, and when fighting, he held a stick and struck, and the thieves fled.

古文：与九节度围贼，因中流矢，数日疮欲愈。
现代文：一次，他与九节度使围攻贼寇，中了流箭。
English: On one occasion, he and the nine knights led a siege against the bandits and were hit by a stray arrow.

古文：卧于帐中，忽闻金鼓声乱。问之，知战。因阚，疮中血如注，奄然而卒。
现代文：数日后伤口刚愈合，他卧在帐中，忽听到金鼓乱鸣，他问什么事，知道正打仗，他起来窥看，伤口血流如注，渐渐死亡。
English: A few days later, when the wound had just healed, he was lying in his bed, when he heard a golden drum beating. He asked what was going on, and knew that there was a war going on. He got up and peeked in. The wound was bleeding profusely, and he gradually died.

古文：马勋
现代文：马勋
English: Ma Xun

古文：唐德宗欲幸梁洋，严振遣兵五千至周至以俟南幸。
现代文：唐德宗李适去梁洋，严振派兵五千去周至，用来保卫皇帝南巡。
English: Emperor Dezong of Tang sent Li Si to Liang Yang, and Yan Zhen sent five thousand soldiers to Zhou Zhi, to be used to defend the emperor's southern tour.

古文：其将张用诚阴谋叛背，输款于李怀光，朝廷忧之。
现代文：他的部将张用诚阴谋反叛，他暗中向李怀光献财物，朝廷很忧虑此事。
English: His subordinate Zhang Yicheng plotted to rebel, he secretly donated money to Li Huaiguang, the court was very worried about this.

古文：会梁州将马勋至，上临轩与之谋。
现代文：恰赶上梁州将马勋来了，皇上就和马勋在厅中想办法。
English: Just in time for Liangzhou General Ma Xun to arrive, the emperor and Ma Xun were in the hall trying to find a solution.

古文：勋曰：臣请计日至山南，取节度符召之；即不受召，臣当斩其首以复命。
现代文：马勋说：我请求约定一个时间去山南，用节度振符召张用诚，他若不受召，我就斩了他来复命。
English: Ma Xun said: I asked for an appointment to go to Shannan at a certain time. I called Zhang Yicheng with the festival vibration. If he was not called, I would cut him to restore his life.

古文：上喜曰：几日当至？
现代文：皇上很高兴，说： 几日能到？ 
English: The emperor was delighted and said, "How long will it take to get here?

古文：勋克日时而奏，上勉劳而遣之。
现代文：马勋算了一下时间告诉了皇上，皇上对他进行了一番嘉勉，派他去了。
English: Ma Xun calculated the time and told the emperor, who gave him a blessing and sent him on his way.

古文：勋既得振符，乃与壮士五十人偕行出骆谷。
现代文：马勋拿着节度振符，和五十名壮士同行走出骆谷。
English: Ma Xun walked out of Luohu Valley with fifty strong men, holding the ceremonial bell.

古文：用诚以为未知其叛，以数百骑迓勋。勋与俱之传舍。用诚左右森然。
现代文：张用诚以为别人不知他的反叛阴谋，用数百人迎接马勋，马勋和他同到住所，却见张用诚周围禁卫森严。
English: Zhang Yicheng thought that others did not know about his rebel plot. He welcomed Ma Xun with hundreds of people. Ma Xun went to his residence with him, but Zhang Yicheng was surrounded by strict guards.

古文：勋曰：天寒且休。
现代文：马勋说： 天冷，让他们休息去吧。 
English: Ma Xun said: It's cold, let them rest.

古文：军士左右皆退，勋乃令人多焚其草以诱之，军士争附火。
现代文：左右的军士们都退去。马勋又令人点燃很多柴草，用来引诱士兵，军士们都争着取暖。
English: The sergeants on both sides retreated. Ma Xun also set fire to a lot of firewood to lure the soldiers, and the sergeants fought to keep warm.

古文：勋乃令人从容，出怀中符示之曰：大夫召君。
现代文：马勋又叫人随意活动，他取出怀中的节度振符给张用诚看，并说：大夫召你去。
English: Ma Xun also let people move around at will. He took out the modulation oscillator in his arms to show it to Zhang Yicheng and said, "The doctor is calling you."

古文：用诚惶骇起走，壮士自背束其手而擒之。
现代文：张用诚很惶恐，要逃走。跟马勋来的壮士从后边反背了他的双臂。
English: Zhang Yicheng panicked and wanted to run away. The strong man who had come with Ma Xun grabbed his arms from behind.

古文：不虞用诚之子居后，引刀斫勋。
现代文：没想到张用诚的儿子在后边，举刀要砍马勋。
English: Unexpectedly, Zhang Yicheng's son was in the back, raising his sword to cut Ma Xun.

古文：勋左右俱承其臂，刀不甚下，微伤勋首。
现代文：左右壮士很快地擎住了他的手，刀没有砍下去，只使马勋的头受了点轻伤。
English: The left and right strongmen quickly caught his hand, the knife did not cut down, and only caused Ma Xun's head to be slightly injured.

古文：遂格杀其子，而仆用诚于地，令壮士跨其腹，以刃拟其喉曰：声则死之！
现代文：于是把张用诚的儿子杀了，把张用诚按倒在地，壮士用脚踩着他的肚子，用刀逼近他的咽喉，说：你要喊叫，就叫你死。
English: So he killed Zhang Yicheng's son, pushed Zhang Yicheng to the ground, stomped on his stomach with his foot, put a knife to his throat, and said, "If you scream, I'll kill you."

古文：勋驰就其军，营士已被甲执兵。
现代文：马勋又很快地到了张用诚的军营，兵士们早已披盔甲，执武器。
English: Ma Xun soon arrived at Zhang Yicheng's military camp. The soldiers were already wearing armor and holding weapons.

古文：勋大言曰：汝等父母妻孥皆在梁州，弃之从人反逆，将欲灭汝族耶？大夫使我取张用诚，不问汝辈。
现代文：马勋大声说：你们的父母妻子都在梁州，抛弃了他们跟人叛变，这是要你们灭族的行为，大夫让我捉拿张用诚，不向你们问罪，你们这是要干什么？
English: Ma Xun said in a loud voice: Your parents and wives are all in Liangzhou, abandoning them to rebel against others. This is an act of exterminating your people. The doctor told me to arrest Zhang Yicheng and not to ask you about your crimes. What are you trying to do?

古文：乃何为乎？
现代文：众士兵很害怕，都归顺了。
English: The soldiers were afraid, and they surrendered.

古文：众慑伏。于是缚用诚，遣送洋州，振杖杀之。拔其二使总其众。
现代文：于是绑了张用诚，遣送洋州，乱棍打死。又选拔了二使统领他的部下。
English: So he tied up Zhang Yicheng, sent him to Yangzhou, and beat him to death with a club. He also selected two envoys to lead his subordinates.

古文：勋以药自封其首，来复命，愆约半日。
现代文：马勋用药敷在自己头上，回来向皇上复命，按约定的时间，只晚了半天。
English: Ma Xun applied the medicine on his own head, and came back to reply to the emperor. According to the agreed time, he was only half a day late.

古文：汪节
现代文：汪节
English: Wang Jieming

古文：太微村在绩溪县西北五里。
现代文：太微村在绩溪县西北五里，村中有个叫汪节的人。
English: In the village of Taiwei, five miles northwest of Jixi County, there is a man named Wang Jie.

古文：村有汪节者，其母避疟于村西福田寺金刚下，因假寐，感而生节。
现代文：他母亲因为躲避疟疾病，来到村西福田寺的金刚佛像下，在似睡未睡中，有感应生下了汪节。
English: Because his mother was hiding from malaria, she came to the west of the village, under the statue of the Vajra Buddha at the Fukuda Temple, and while she seemed to be asleep, she gave birth to Wang Jie.

古文：节有神力，入长安，行到东渭桥，桥边有石狮子，其重千斤。
现代文：他的力量他别大。有一次去长安，走到东渭桥，桥边有一石狮子，重千斤。
English: Once, when he went to Chang'an, he walked to the Donglu Bridge, and there was a stone lion on the edge of the bridge, weighing a thousand pounds.

古文：节指而告人曰：我能提此而掷之。
现代文：汪节指着石狮对人说，我能把它提起来扔到一边去。
English: Pointing to the stone lion, Wang Jie said, "I can pick it up and throw it aside."

古文：众不信之。节遂提狮子投之丈余，众人大骇。
现代文：众人不信，汪节便提起石狮扔到一丈多远的地方。
English: People didn't believe it, so Wang Jie picked up the stone lion and threw it as far as he could.

古文：后数十人不能动之，遂以赂请节，节又提而致之故地。
现代文：众人大感惊奇，后来好几十人没有搬动，大家有用钱、物请汪节，他又提起石狮放到原处。
English: Everyone was very surprised. Later, dozens of people did not move. Everyone had money and things to invite Wang Jie. He then picked up the stone lion and put it back in its original place.

古文：寻而荐入禁军，补神策将军。
现代文：很快，经人推荐他到了宫中禁军，任神策将军。
English: Soon, the scribe recommended him to the imperial court as a general of the forbidden army.

古文：尝对御，俯身负一石碾，置二丈方木于碾上，木上又置一床，床上坐龟兹乐人一部，奏曲终而下，无厌重之色。
现代文：曾有一次，面对皇上，他伏在地上，身背一石碾，碾上放两丈见方的木板，木板上又放一张床，床上坐了一部龟兹乐队，直到演奏完曲子才下来，他并不感到沉重吃力。
English: Once, facing the emperor, he prostrated himself on the ground, rolling his back with a stone, rolling up a two-meter-square wooden board, and placing a bed on the board. A turtle band sat on the bed, and did not come down until the music was over. He did not feel heavy and laborious.

古文：德宗甚宠惜，累有赏赐。
现代文：德宗非常看重他，经常给他赏赐。
English: Desong thought highly of him and often gave him gifts.

古文：虽拔山拽牛之力，不能过也。
现代文：别人尽管有拔山拽牛的力量，也超不过他。
English: Others, despite having the strength to pull up mountains and drag cows, are no better than him.

古文：彭先觉
现代文：彭先觉
English: Peng Xian Jue

古文：唐彭先觉叔祖博通膂力绝伦。
现代文：唐时，彭先觉的叔祖彭博通，体力非常大，超过一般人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the uncle of Peng Xian Jue, Peng Botong, was very strong, exceeding the average person.

古文：观者逾主人垣墙，屋宇尽坏，名动京师。
现代文：曾经在长安和壮士魏弘哲、宋令文、冯师本较量力量。
English: In Chang'an, he once competed with the strong men Wei Hongzhe, Song Lingwen, and Feng Shibon.

古文：尝与家君同饮，会瞑，独持两床降阶，就月于庭。
现代文：彭博通用力横躺，叫他们三人取他头下的枕头，三人使出了全部力量，床腿都拽断了，而枕头却没动。观看的人爬过院墙，挤坏了房屋，一时，轰动京城。
English: Bloomberg lay on his side and asked the three of them to take the pillow from under his head. The three of them used all their strength to pull the legs of the bed apart, but the pillow didn't move. People watching climbed over the courtyard wall, jammed the house, and caused a stir in the capital.

古文：酒俎之类，略无倾泄矣。
现代文：他曾经和笔者的父亲喝过酒，天黑了，为了到庭院赏月亮，他一人拿着两张大方桌走下台阶，桌上的酒、菜，没有洒一点一滴。
English: He had once drunk wine with the author's father. It was getting dark, and in order to admire the moon in the courtyard, he walked down the steps alone with two large tables. The wine and food on the table did not spill a single drop.

古文：王俳优
现代文：王俳优
English: Wang Hayou

古文：唐乾符中，绵竹王俳优者有巨力。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，绵竹地方有个叫王俳优的人，力量特别大。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Haoyu in Mianzhu, who was particularly powerful.

古文：每遇府中飨军宴客，先呈百戏。
现代文：每逢府中要犒赏军队和宴请宾客时，都要演杂耍助兴。
English: Whenever the government wanted to reward the troops and entertain guests, they had to perform a juggling act to add to the fun.

古文：王生腰背一船，船中载十二人，舞河传一曲，略无困乏。
现代文：王俳优腰背一船，船中坐十二人，随《河传曲》歌舞，直到曲终，他不感到疲乏。
English: Wang Haoyu sat in a boat with twelve people in it, singing and dancing to the "River Song" until the end of the song. He did not feel tired.

古文：钟傅
现代文：钟傅
English: Zhong Fu

古文：安陆郡有处士姓马忘其名，自云江夏人，少游湖湘，又客于钟陵十数年。
现代文：安陵郡有一个处士姓马，忘记了他的名字，他自己说是江夏人，年轻时在湖南湖北游荡，又在钟陵客居十几年。
English: There is a clerk in Anling County with the surname Ma. I have forgotten his name. He says he is from Jiangxia. When he was young, he wandered around Hubei in Hunan Province and lived in Zhongling for more than ten years.

古文：尝说江西钟傅，本豫章人，少倜傥，以勇毅闻于乡里。
现代文：他曾经说，江西有个叫钟傅的人，本是豫章人。年轻时是个卓越不俗的人物，以他的勇敢强悍闻名乡里。
English: He once said that in Jiangxi Province, there was a man named Zhong Fu, originally from Yuzhang. When he was young, he was an outstanding person, known in the village for his bravery and strength.

古文：不事农业，恒好射猎。
现代文：不喜种农田，而喜欢打猎。
English: He does not like to farm, but likes to hunt.

古文：熊鹿野兽，遇之者无不获焉。
现代文：熊、鹿、虎等野兽，只要他遇见，准能猎到手。
English: Bears, deer, tigers and other wild animals, as long as he meets, will certainly be able to hunt.

古文：一日，有亲属酒食相会，傅素能一饮。是日大醉。
现代文：有一天，亲属请他喝酒吃饭，他平常就能喝酒，这天大醉。
English: One day, his relatives invited him to have a drink with dinner. Normally, he would be able to drink, but on this day he was very drunk.

古文：唯一小仆侍行，比暮方归。
现代文：只有一个小仆跟随他，天黑了才往回走，离家有二三里路，山高谷深。
English: Only a small servant followed him, and when it got dark he walked back. He was two or three miles away from home, deep in the mountains and valleys.

古文：去家二三里，溪谷深遂，有虎黑文青质，额毛圆白，眈眈然自中林而出。百步之外，顾望前来。
现代文：有一只青毛黑色花纹，白色额毛的老虎，双目透着凶光从林中走出，就在百步之外，边看边走来，小仆吓得腿颤抖。
English: Just a hundred paces away, a tiger with blue fur and black markings and a white forehead, its eyes shining with a fierce light, came out of the forest. The servant's legs trembled with fright as he watched.

古文：仆夫见而股栗，谓傅曰：速登大树，以逃生命。
现代文：他告诉钟傅，快爬树，好逃命。钟傅这时酒劲正发作，胆量非常大，就用小仆手中的木棒，站在那里和虎斗。
English: He told Zhong Fu to quickly climb a tree to escape. At this time, Zhong Fu was drunk and very brave, so he stood there and fought the tiger with a wooden stick in the hands of a servant.

古文：傅时酒力方盛，胆气弥粗。
现代文：老虎直奔钟傅而来，他左右跳跃，挥动木棒打虎，虎又爬下了，钟傅也蹲下了。
English: The tiger ran straight towards Zhong Fu. He jumped from side to side and swung a wooden stick to hit the tiger. The tiger climbed down again and Zhong Fu crouched down.

古文：如此者数四。
现代文：过了一会儿，又开始搏斗，这样反复了四次。
English: This has happened several times.

古文：虎之前足，搭傅之肩，傅即以两手抱虎之项，良久。
现代文：老虎的前爪搭在钟傅肩上，钟傅就用两手抱住老虎的脖子，相持了很久。
English: The tiger's front paws rested on Zhongfu's shoulders, and he held the tiger's neck with both hands for a long time.

古文：虎腰既折，傅乃免焉。
现代文：虎无法用他的爪牙，钟傅的勇力也无法施展。
English: The tiger could not use his minions, nor could Zhong Fu use his courage.

古文：数岁后，江南扰乱，群盗四集，傅以斗虎之名，为众所服，推为酋长，竟登戎帅之任，节制钟陵。镇抚一方，澄清六郡。
现代文：双方相持，仆人在旁大声喊叫。家里人以为他喝酒还没回来，拿剑来迎他，见此情景，便挥剑砍虎，虎腰被砍断，钟傅才脱离险境。数年后，江南骚乱，盗贼四起，钟傅以当年斗虎之名，为众人佩服，推选他为头目。后来，竟当了军帅，节制钟陵，镇守一方，平定了六郡。
English: The two sides were holding each other, and the servants were shouting loudly. The family members thought that he had not returned from drinking, so they took a sword to meet him. Seeing this scene, they swung the sword to cut the tiger. The tiger's waist was cut, and Zhong Fu was able to get out of danger. A few years later, there were riots in the south of the Yangtze River, and thieves were everywhere. Zhong Fu was admired by everyone in the name of the tiger fight that year, and was elected as the leader. Later, he actually became the military commander, restrained Zhong Ling, defended the town, and leveled six counties.

古文：唐僖昭之代，名振江西。官至中书令。
现代文：唐朝僖宗、昭宗时代，名振江西，官至中书令。
English: In the era of the Tang Dynasty's Jianzong and Zhaozong dynasties, the name of Zhenjiang was Jiangxi, and the official title was Zhongshirong.

古文：墨君和
现代文：墨君和
English: Mo Jun and

古文：真定墨君和，幼名三旺。世代寒贱，以屠宰为业。
现代文：真定人墨君和，幼年时名叫三旺，世代贫贱，以屠宰为业。
English: Jin Dingren Mo Junhe, who was named Samwang when he was a child, was born into a poor family and made slaughtering his profession.

古文：母怀妊之时，曾梦胡僧携一孺子，面色光黑，授之曰：与尔为子，他日必大得力。
现代文：他母亲在怀孕时，曾梦见一个胡僧领一个面色黑亮的小孩给她，说： 给你当儿子吧，将来必然能借到他的大力。 
English: When his mother was pregnant with him, she had a dream in which a monk brought a dark-skinned child to her and said, "Be my son. I will be able to borrow his strength in the future."

古文：既生之，眉目棱岸，肌肤若铁。
现代文：他生下来时，眉目突出，皮肤铁黑。
English: He was born with a prominent brow and dark skin.

古文：年十五六，赵王镕初继位，曾见之，悦而问曰：此中何得昆仑儿也？
现代文：他长到十五六时，赵王镕刚继位，曾见过他，高兴地问： 这里怎么能有昆仑儿？ 
English: When he was fifteen or sixteen years old, Zhao Wangyong had just succeeded to the throne. He had seen him and asked happily: How can there be a Kunlun child here?

古文：问其姓，与形质相应，即呼为墨昆仑，因以皂衣赐之。
现代文：又问他的姓，和他的皮肤一样，姓墨，就叫他墨昆仑，便赐给他黑衣。
English: He also asked his surname, which was the same as his skin, the surname Mo, so they called him Mokunlun, and gave him a black robe.

古文：是时常山县邑屡为并州中军所侵掠，赵之将卒疲于战敌，告急于燕王李匡威，率师五万来救之。
现代文：当时，常山县境屡次受到并州中军的侵扰掠夺，赵王的官兵打不过敌人，向燕王李匡威告急，请他派兵来援救，收复失城。
English: At that time, the territory of Changshan County was repeatedly invaded and plundered by the combined Chinese and Zhou armies. Zhao Wang's officers and soldiers could not defeat the enemy, so he sent an urgent message to Yan Wang Li Kuangwei, asking him to send troops to rescue and recover the lost city.

古文：并人攻陷数城。燕王闻之，躬领五万骑，径与晋师战于元氏。
现代文：燕王接到信后，亲率五万精骑，在元氏地方和晋师交战，晋军大败。
English: After receiving the letter, Yan Wang led fifty thousand horsemen to fight the Jin army in the area of the Yuan Dynasty, and the Jin army was defeated.

古文：晋师败绩。赵王感燕王之德，椎牛酾酒，大犒于槁城。辇金二十万以谢之。
现代文：赵王为感谢燕王的恩德，杀牛备酒，在槁城犒赏燕军，并用车送来了二十万黄金答谢。
English: In order to thank the benevolence of Yan Wang, Zhao Wang killed cattle to prepare wine, rewarded the Yan army in Lucheng, and sent two hundred thousand gold by car to thank them.

古文：燕王归国，比及境上，为其弟匡俦所拒。
现代文：燕王归国，刚走到边境。他弟弟李国俦却不让他回国。
English: Yan Wang returned to China and just walked to the border. However, his brother Li Guojun did not let him return to China.

古文：赵人以其有德于我，遂营东圃以居之。
现代文：赵国认为燕王曾帮助过自己，便在东辅营造了房子让燕王居住。
English: Zhao Guo believed that Yan Wang had helped him, so he built a house in Dongfu for Yan Wang to live in.

古文：燕主自以失国，又见赵主之方幼，乃图之。
现代文：燕王自己没有了国家，又看到赵主年龄小，便想夺赵王的权力。
English: Yan Wang himself did not have a country, and when he saw that Zhao Shizhen was young, he wanted to seize Zhao Wang's power.

古文：遂从下矣上伏甲。俟赵王旦至，即使擒之。
现代文：他便上下布置了很多伏兵，等赵王早晨到时，就抓住他。
English: He then set up many ambushes up and down, and when King Zhao arrived in the morning, he caught him.

古文：赵王请曰：某承光代基构，主此山河，每被邻寇侵渔，困于守备。赖大王武略，累挫戎锋，获保宗祧，实资恩力。
现代文：赵王说：我是继承了祖宗的大业，主宰这片山河，每当被邻国侵掠时，感到无力守卫，多亏你以武力相助，打败了敌人的侵扰，保住了祖宗的大业，我很感谢你的帮助。
English: Zhao Wang said: I have inherited the great cause of my ancestors, and I dominate this mountain and river. Whenever I was invaded and plundered by a neighboring country, I felt powerless to defend myself. Thanks to your help with force, I defeated the enemy's intrusion and preserved the great cause of my ancestors. I am very grateful for your help.

古文：顾惟幼懦，凤有卑诚，望不忽忽，可伸交让。
现代文：我年幼力单，我希望以诚相待，千万不要这样草率地办事。
English: I am young and single-minded, I hope to treat each other with sincerity, and never act in such a hasty manner.

古文：愿与大王同归衙署，即军府必不拒违。
现代文：你有什么想法可以告诉我，我愿和你一起回到衙门，军府不会抵挡我们。
English: If you have any ideas, please let me know. I am willing to return to the capital with you. The military will not oppose us.

古文：燕王以为然，遂与赵王并辔而进。
现代文：燕王认为赵王说的有道理，便和赵王并辔而行。
English: Yan Wang thought that what Zhao Wang said was reasonable, so he and Zhao Wang walked side by side.

古文：俄有大风并黑云起于城上。俄而大雨，雷电震击。
现代文：不一会儿，刮起了大风，黑云压城，倾盆大雨，雷电交加。
English: A short while later, a gale blew up, black clouds pressed down on the city, torrential rain, and thunder and lightning.

古文：至东角门内，有勇夫袒臂旁来，拳殴燕之介士。即挟负赵主，逾垣而走。
现代文：走到东角门，有一勇士光膀而来，用拳击打燕王的卫兵，挟起赵王，越墙而走，回到军府。
English: When he reached the East Corner Gate, a bare-chested warrior came, punched Yan Wang's guards, picked up Zhao Wang, walked over the wall, and returned to the military headquarters.

古文：遂得归公府。王问其姓名，君和恐其难记，但言曰：砚中之物，王心志之。
现代文：赵王问这勇士的姓名，墨君和怕自己的名字难记，便说，砚中之物。赵王心中记住了。
English: Zhao Wang asked the name of this warrior. Mo Junhe was afraid that his name was hard to remember, so he said, "It's something in the bag." Zhao Wang remembered it in his heart.

古文：左右军士，既见主免难，遂逐燕王。
现代文：左右军士，一见赵王免于灾祸，便要赶燕王。
English: When the left and right sergeants saw that Zhao Wang was spared from the disaster, they wanted to catch up with Yan Wang.

古文：燕王退走于东圃，赵人围而杀之。
现代文：燕王退到东圃，赵国人便将他围而杀之。
English: Yan Wang retreated to Dongpu, and the people of Zhao surrounded him and killed him.

古文：明日，赵王素服哭于庭，兼令具以礼敛。仍使告于燕主。
现代文：第二天，赵王穿白衣服在大庭中哭，并下令以礼仪殡葬燕王，又派人告诉了燕王的弟弟。
English: The next day, Zhao Wang, dressed in white, cried in the courtyard. He ordered a ceremonial funeral for Yan Wang and sent someone to inform Yan Wang's younger brother.

古文：匡俦忿其兄之见杀，即举全师伐赵之东鄙。将释其愤气，而致十疑之书。
现代文：李匡俦得知其兄被杀很愤怒，为了泄愤，便领兵攻打赵国的东部，并向赵国致了《十疑文书》。
English: Li Kuangyu was very angry when he learned that his brother had been killed. In order to vent his anger, he led an army to attack the eastern part of Zhao Guo and sent the "Ten Doubtful Documents" to Zhao Guo.

古文：赵王遣记室张泽以事实答之。
现代文：赵王派记室以事实为依据给予回答。
English: Zhao Wangpai's office replied on the basis of facts.

古文：其略曰：营中将士，或可追乎；天上雷霆，何人计会？
现代文：其中简略地说，营中将士，可以追查，天上的雷霆，谁能管得了？
English: In short, the battalion commander can be traced, the thunder in the sky, who can control it?

古文：词多不载。
现代文：词不多载。
English: There's not much more to say.

古文：赵主既免燕主之难，召墨生以千金赏之，兼赐上第一区，良田万亩，仍恕其十死，奏授光禄大夫。
现代文：赵王免掉了燕王的发难，便召来墨君和，赏给他千金，又赐他好住宅一处，良田万亩。并饶恕他挟王的死罪，授予他光禄大夫。
English: King Zhao was spared the hardships of King Yan, so he summoned Mo Junhe, rewarded him with thousands of gold, and gave him a good house, thousands of acres of good land. He also forgave him the death penalty of King Yan, and awarded him the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：终赵王之世，四十年间，享其富贵。
现代文：赵王当权的四十年里，享尽荣华富贵。
English: During the forty years that King Zhao was in power, he enjoyed all the glory and wealth.

古文：当时闾里，有生子或颜貌黑丑者，多云：无陋，安知他日不及墨昆仑耶？
现代文：当时民间生有丑陋和貌黑的孩子时，大家都说：不怕，也许以后他能赶上墨昆仑呢。
English: At that time, when people had children who were ugly and dark-skinned, everyone said, "Don't be afraid, maybe he can catch up with Mekong Lun in the future."

古文：周归祐
现代文：周归祐
English: Zhou Guisu

古文：燕之旧将周归祐，蓟门更变之际，以剑柱心，刃自背出而不死。
现代文：燕时的旧将周归祐，在蓟门更变时，用剑刺心，剑刃从后背出来竟没有死。
English: Zhou Guisuo, the old general at the time of Yan, stabbed his heart with a sword when the gate was changed. The blade of the sword came out from his back, but he did not die.

古文：奔于梁，为骑将之先锋焉。
现代文：他去了梁国，当了骑将先锋。
English: He went to Liang Province and became a cavalry pioneer.

古文：十五年，夹河百战，通中之疮，往往遇之。
现代文：十五年中，他身经百战，穿透身体的伤口，经常受此伤。
English: In fifteen years, he has been through a hundred battles, penetrating wounds in his body, and he often suffers from this injury.

古文：后唐庄宗入洛，为仇者于猎场席地俾坐，满挽而射，贯腋而出，创愈无恙。
现代文：后唐庄宗李存勖入洛阳时，他的仇人让他在猎场上席地而坐，他们用弓箭射他，箭头却穿过腋下出去了，并没有射死他。
English: Later, when Li Cunxu, the patriarch of Tangzhuang, entered Luoyang, his enemies made him sit cross-legged on the hunting ground. They shot him with a bow and arrow, but the arrow went through his armpit and did not kill him.

古文：仕至郡牧节度留后。
现代文：他的官做到郡牧节度留后。
English: His officials did not stay long after the County Pastoral Festival.

古文：竟死于牖下。
现代文：最后死于窗下。
English: He eventually died under a window.

古文：王宰
现代文：王宰
English: Wang Zai

古文：丁丑岁，蜀师戍于固镇。有巨师曰费铁觜者，本于绿林部下将卒。
现代文：丁丑年，四川军队在固镇防守，军队中有个头目叫费铁觜，他本是绿林中的一个将卒。
English: In the year of Ding Jiu, the Sichuan army was defending Guzhen. There was a leader in the army called Fei Tiejun, who was originally a soldier in the green forest.

古文：其人也，多使人行劫而纳其货。
现代文：这个人经常派人去行劫，把抢来的东西归他。
English: This man often sent people to rob, and they would return the stolen goods to him.

古文：一日，遣都将领人攻河池县。
现代文：一天，派都将领人攻打河池县。
English: One day, the faction will lead people to attack Hechi County.

古文：有王宰者少壮而勇，只与仆隶十数辈止于公署。
现代文：有个姓王的县宰，年轻力壮很勇敢，他和十几个仆隶守在公署内。
English: There was a county magistrate surnamed Wang, who was young, strong and brave. He and a dozen of his servants were stationed at the public security bureau.

古文：群盗夜至，宰启扉而俟之，格斗数刻，宰中镞甚困，贼将逾其阈。小仆持短枪，靠扉而立，连中三四魁首，皆应刃而仆，肠胃在地焉。群盗于是舁尸而遁。
现代文：盗贼晚上来了，他开门后在门后等着，格斗了一段时间后，王宰中了箭行动困难，盗贼刚要跨过门槛，小仆手拿短枪，站在门后，连续刺中三四个盗贼，被刺中的盗贼躺在地上，肠子流在地上，群盗们抬着尸体逃走了。
English: The thief came in the evening, he opened the door and waited behind the door, after a while of fighting, Wang Zai was hit by an arrow, the operation was difficult, the thief was just about to cross the threshold, the little servant took a short gun, stood behind the door, continuously stabbed three or four thieves, the stabbed thieves lay on the ground, the intestines flowed on the ground, the bandits carried the bodies and fled.

古文：他日，铁觜又劫村庄，才合夜，群盗至村。
现代文：后来，费铁觜又劫村庄，天刚黑，群盗便进了村庄，有的砸门而入，有的破墙而入。
English: Later, Fei Tiekun robbed the village again. It was just after dark, and a group of thieves entered the village. Some broke down the door and entered, and some broke through the wall and entered.

古文：或排闼而入者，或四面坏壁而入，民家灯火尚莹煌。丈夫悉遁去，唯一妇人以勺挥釜汤泼之，一二十辈无措手，为害者皆狼狈而奔散。
现代文：民家灯火还很亮，男人们逃走了，只有一个妇女用勺子舀锅中的热水泼烫盗贼，一二十个盗贼措手不及，被妇人泼烫得狼狈而逃。
English: The lights of the houses were still very bright, the men ran away. Only one woman used a spoon to pour hot water from a saucepan to scald the thieves. A dozen or twenty thieves were caught unawares and were scalded by the woman and fled in dismay.

古文：妇人但秉勺据釜，略无所损失。
现代文：妇人仍然拿勺站在锅旁。家中没受多大损失。
English: The woman was still standing by the pot with a spoon. The family did not suffer much damage.

古文：旬月后，铁觜部内数人，有面如疮癞者，费终身耻之。
现代文：一个多月后，铁觜部下有好几个脸上像生了癞疮似的，费铁觜认为这是他终生的耻辱。
English: More than a month later, several of Tiekun's subordinates had acne-like sores on their faces. Fei Tiekun considered this to be his lifelong disgrace.

