古文：李萧卢韦赵和李峤，字巨山，赵州赞皇人。早孤，事母孝。
现代文：李峤，字巨山，赵州赞皇人，幼年时父亲就死了，他侍奉母亲非常孝顺。
English: Li Qian, also known as Jushan, was the emperor of Zhaozhou. His father died when he was young, and he served his mother very dutifully.

古文：为儿时，梦人遗双笔，自是有文辞，十五通《五经》，薛元超称之。
现代文：还是孩子时，梦见有个人送他一对笔，从此文章就写得好。十五岁时就通晓《五经》，受到薛元超的赞赏。
English: When he was still a child, he dreamed that someone gave him a pair of pens, and from then on he wrote well. At the age of fifteen, he was familiar with the "Five Classics" and was appreciated by Xue Yuanchao.

古文：二十擢进士第，始调安定尉。
现代文：二十岁时科试考中进士，开始时，补任安定县尉。
English: At the age of twenty, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and at the beginning, he was appointed as a stable county lieutenant.

古文：举制策甲科，迁长安。
现代文：又应制科考试得甲科，于是迁居长安。
English: In addition, he was awarded Grade A in the entrance examination, and moved to Chang'an.

古文：时畿尉名文章者，骆宾王、刘光业，峤最少，与等夷。
现代文：当时京城官场中以文章知名的还有骆宾王、刘光业，以李峤年纪最轻，名气却与他们同。
English: At that time, Luo Bin Wang and Liu Guangye were also well-known for their articles in the officialdom of Beijing. Li Yao was the youngest, but his fame was the same as theirs.

古文：授监察御史。
现代文：李峤升任监察御史。
English: Li Lan was promoted to Supervisor of History.

古文：高宗击邕、岩二州叛獠，诏监其军，峤入洞喻降之，由是罢兵。
现代文：那时，岭南邕州、岩州的首领反叛，高宗发兵讨伐，诏令李峤去监军事。李峤进入獠人洞穴，宣谕朝廷意旨，招降了他们，因此罢兵而回。
English: At that time, the leaders of Lingnan's Bozhou and Iwazhou rebelled, Gaozong sent troops to fight, and ordered Li Xi to go to military prison. Li Xi entered the cave of the Xiongren, proclaimed the will of the court, invited them to surrender, and therefore withdrew.

古文：稍迁给事中。
现代文：逐渐升官至给事中。
English: Gradually promoted to sergeant.

古文：会来俊臣构狄仁杰、李嗣真、裴宣礼等狱，将抵死，敕峤与大理少卿张德裕、侍御史刘宪覆验，德裕等内知其冤，不敢异。
现代文：那时来俊臣诬陷狄仁杰、李嗣真、裴宣礼等三人下了狱，将要被诛杀了。武后令李峤与大理少卿张德裕、侍御史刘宪复核。张德裕心中明白他们是冤枉的，但因怕得罪来俊臣，不敢提出不同看法。
English: At that time, the three young men who falsely accused Di Renjie, Li Shizhen, and Pei Xuanli went to prison and were about to be beaten to death. The Empress Wu ordered Li Qian to review the case with Zhang Deyu, the Dali minor lord, and Liu Xian, the chamberlain. Zhang Deyu knew in his heart that they were innocent, but he did not dare to put forward a different opinion for fear of offending the young men.

古文：峤曰： 知其枉不申，是谓见义不为者。 
现代文：李峤说： 哪有明知他被枉判而不为之申明的呢？孔子说 ：见义而不为，是为无勇。  
English: Confucius said, "He who knows that he has been unjustly condemned, but does not confess it, is a coward."

古文：卒与二人列其枉，忤武后旨，出为润州司马。
现代文：于是和他们两人一同列举事实，说明其冤枉。为此而违背了武后的旨意，被贬出为润州司马。
English: Therefore, together with the two of them, he listed the facts to show that he was wronged. For this reason, he violated the will of the Empress Dowager and was relegated to the position of Runchu Sima.

古文：久乃召为凤阁舍人，文册大号令，多主为之。
现代文：很久以后，召回任凤阁舍人。朝廷每有文册大号令，都特令李峤撰写。
English: After a long time, he was called back to serve as a retainer of Fengge. The imperial court specifically ordered Li Xi to write every major document.

古文：初置右御史台，察州县吏善恶、风俗得失，峤上疏曰： 禁网上疏，法象宜简，简则法易行而不烦杂，疏则所罗广而不苛碎。
现代文：那时刚开始设置右御史台，巡察州县官吏的善恶，考查风俗的得失。李峤上疏说 ：禁令颁布宜于粗疏，法令条例宜于简单。简单，法令就容易执行而不烦杂；粗疏，就能包罗广泛而不苛碎。
English: At that time, the Right Imperial Historical Research Station was just beginning to be set up, to inspect the merits and demerits of state and county officials, and to examine the gains and losses of customs. Li Xuanwu said: It is appropriate to promulgate prohibitions in a rough manner, and ordinances in a simple manner. In a simple manner, ordinances are easy to implement without being complicated; in a rough manner, they can cover a wide range without being harsh.

古文：伏见垂拱时，诸道巡察使科条四十有四，至别敕令又三十。
现代文：臣曾见垂拱时，诸道巡察使所奏的条目有四十四条，至于另外敕令察访的，又有三十条。
English: When the minister had seen the hanging arch, there were forty-four items recorded by the road inspectors, and as for the other inspection orders, there were thirty.

古文：而使以三月出，尽十一月奏事，每道所察吏，多者二千，少亦千计，要在品核才行而褒贬之。
现代文：巡察使一般都是三月出都，十一月底回来奏事。每道所要考察的文武官员，多的二千多人，少的也有一千左右，都需要品量他们的才能、业绩，然后加以褒贬。
English: The inspectors usually leave the capital in March and return at the end of November to report. The civil and military officials to be inspected in each province, more than two thousand people, and less than one thousand, need to evaluate their talents and performance, and then praise or criticize them.

古文：今期会迫促，奔逐不暇，欲望详究所能，不亦艰哉。
现代文：现在给的时间迫促，到达每一个地方都要匆匆忙忙，哪里还能详细考察他们的能力和工作呢？
English: Now that time is short, and they have to rush to get to every place, where else can they examine their abilities and work in detail?

古文：此非隳於职，才有限，力不逮耳。
现代文：这不是右御史台敢马虎不尽职，而是才能有限，力量达不到啊！
English: It is not that the Right-wing History Channel dares to be sloppy and not do its duty, but that its talent is limited and its strength is not up to the mark!

古文：臣愿量其功程以为节制，使器周於用，力济於时，然后得失可以精核矣。 
现代文：臣希望能衡量其工作量及行程，然后加以指挥节制，使工作能完成得圆满，力量用在需要的地方。这样地方官吏的得失可以精确查核。 
English: The minister hopes to measure the workload and schedule of local officials, and then guide and control them so that the work can be completed successfully and the power can be used where it is needed, so that the gains and losses of local officials can be accurately checked.

古文：又言： 今所察按，准汉六条而推广之，则无不包矣，乌在多张事目也？
现代文：又说 ：现在所要查核的，按照汉朝制定的六条，再推而广之，那就无所不包了。不需要多列条目。
English: He also said, "What we need to check now is in accordance with the six articles formulated by the Han Dynasty, and if we expand it, it will be all-encompassing.

古文：且朝廷万机非无事，而机事之动，常在四方，故出使者冠盖相望。
现代文：且朝廷日常事务，并非无事。麻烦需处理之事，常在四方。所以出京处理事务的连续不断。
English: Moreover, the daily affairs of the imperial court are not without incident. Troubles to be dealt with are often in the four directions. Therefore, there is a continuous stream of matters to be dealt with in Kyoto.

古文：今已置使，则外州之事悉得专之，传驿减矣。
现代文：现在既然设置专使，那就把外州的事全都交付，传驿就可减轻负担了。
English: Now that a special envoy has been set up, all matters concerning the outlying prefectures will be handed over to him, and the burden can be eased by the dispatch of envoys.

古文：请率十州置一御史，以期岁为之限，容其身到属县，过闾里，督察奸讹，访风俗，然后可课其成功。
现代文：恳请一般十个州设一位御史，以一年为期，让他们亲自到属县，入闾里，督察奸邪和伪谬，采集民风和习俗，然后才能算是完成任务。
English: I earnestly request that each of the ten states appoint an imperial historian for a period of one year, so that they can personally go to their counties and villages, inspect the evil and falsehood, collect folk customs and customs, and then complete the task.

古文：且御史出入天禁，励己自脩，比他吏相百也。按劾回庸，纠擿隐欺，比他吏相十也。
现代文：而且御史出入天禁，能激励自己修养道德，与其他官吏相比，有百倍的动力；查访奸邪，揭发欺瞒，与其他官吏相比，有十倍的效果。
English: Moreover, the imperial historian can encourage himself to cultivate morality by going in and out of heaven and earth, and has a hundred times more motivation than other officials; he has ten times the effect of investigating treachery and exposing deception compared to other officials.

古文：陛下诚用臣言，妙择能者委之，莫不尽力效死矣。 
现代文：陛下若能采纳臣言，选择有才能者委任此职，无人会不尽力效命的。 
English: If His Majesty were to heed the advice of his courtiers and choose a talented person to appoint to this post, no one would fail to do their best.

古文：武后善之，下制析天下为二十道，择堪使者。为众议沮止。
现代文：武后觉得他说得很对，下制，分剖天下为二十道，选择能当此任的人，但被众人的议论所阻而作罢。
English: Empress Wu felt that he was quite right when he said that the world should be divided into twenty regions, and that people who could serve in this position should be chosen, but he was stopped by the discussions of many people.

古文：俄知天宫侍郎事，进麟台少监、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：后来，让李峤管理天官侍郎事，晋升麟台少监、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Later, Li Qian was put in charge of the attendants of the celestial officials, and was promoted to the junior superintendent of Lintai and the deputy superintendent of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：迁鸾台侍郎。
现代文：不久，转为鸾台侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Kuchidai-zamiro.

古文：会张锡辅政，峤，其出也，罢为成均祭酒。
现代文：那时，天官侍郎张锡入朝辅政，李峤是他的外甥，即转任成均祭酒。
English: At that time, Zhang Xi, the celestial official's attendant, entered the government as an aide to the emperor, and Li Xi, his nephew, was transferred to the position of the sacrificial wine of Chengjun.

古文：俄检校文昌左丞，留守东都。
现代文：不久，检校文昌左丞，留守东都。
English: Soon after, the school inspector, Wenchang Zu Rong, left Dongdu.

古文：长安三年，以本官复为平章事，知纳言。
现代文：长安三年，又以本官为平章事，管理纳言事。
English: In the three years of Chang'an, he also took this official as a subordinate official and managed the speech.

古文：迁内史，峤辞剧，复为成均祭酒、平章事。
现代文：第二年，升为内史，李峤坚持辞去繁重事务，再复任成均祭酒，平章事则依旧。
English: In the second year, promoted to internal history, Li Wei insisted on resigning from onerous affairs, and then reinstated into the general sacrificial liquor, but the general affairs remained unchanged.

古文：武后将建大像於白司马坂，峤谏： 造像虽俾浮屠输钱，然非州县承办不能济，是名虽不税而实税之。
现代文：长安末年，武后准备在白司马坂建大佛像。李峤上疏劝谏 ：造像虽说是由僧尼出钱，但若无州县的承办也不能成功，所以说名义上不要百姓出钱，但实际上要出。
English: At the end of the Chang'an era, Empress Wu was preparing to build a large Buddha statue in Baishima-zaka. Li Qianxiao advised him: although the statue was paid for by the monks and nuns, it would not be successful if it was undertaken by the county, so it was said that the people should not pay in name, but in fact they should pay.

古文：臣计天下编户，贫弱者众，有卖舍、帖田供王役者。
现代文：臣计算天下在编户口，贫弱者多。有卖房子押田地以交纳劳役的。
English: The vassal calculated that the world is in the process of compiling household accounts, and there are many poor and weak people. There are people who sell houses and farmland to pay labor service.

古文：今造像钱积十七万缗，若颁之穷人，家给千钱，则纾十七万户饥寒之苦，德无穷矣。 
现代文：造像的钱现积储到十七万缗，若将此钱救济穷人，一家给一千，就可解决十七万户百姓的饥寒之苦，功德不可计了。 
English: The money for the statue has now accumulated to 170,000 baht. If this money is used to help the poor, and each family is given 1,000 baht, the suffering of 170,000 people from cold and hunger can be solved. The merit is incalculable.

古文：不纳。
现代文：武后不采纳。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：张易之败，坐附会贬豫州刺史，未行，改通州。
现代文：张易之事败，李峤因为附会张易之兄弟受连累贬为豫州刺史，还未行，改贬通州。
English: After Zhang Yi's defeat, because Zhang Yi's brothers of the Zhang Yi Association were reduced to the status of Henan Province, Li Yao changed it to Tongzhou.

古文：数月，以吏部侍郎召，俄迁尚书。
现代文：几个月以后，召回任吏部侍郎。不久，升为吏部尚书。
English: A few months later, he was recalled to serve as a chamberlain of the Cadastral Department. Soon, he was promoted to Cadastral Secretary of the Cadastral Department.

古文：神龙二年，代韦安石为中书令。
现代文：神龙二年，代韦安石为中书令。
English: In the second year of the Dragon Dynasty, Wei Anshi became the first emperor to issue a Chinese edict.

古文：峤在吏部时，阴欲藉时望复宰相，乃奏置员外官数千。
现代文：李峤在吏部时，心里很想借一时的声望来恢复宰相的地位，于是奏请设置员外官几千人。
English: When Li Qiye was in the cadre department, he was very eager to use his momentary prestige to restore the status of the prime minister, so he requested the establishment of several thousand foreign officials.

古文：既吏众猥，府库虚耗，乃上书归咎于时，因盖向非，曰：元首之尊，居有重门击柝之卫，出有清警戒道之禁，所以备非常，息异望，诚不可易举动，慢防闲也。
现代文：后来官僚多而滥，府库支出增多虚耗。于是上书引咎辞职： 元首是国家的至尊，居处要有重门及巡更的守卫，出外要有清道警戒的路禁，这是为了防备突发情况，消除不轨之想。是绝对不可以随便改变举动，疏于防护的。
English: Later, there were more and more bureaucrats, and the treasury expenditure increased wastefully. Therefore, he wrote a letter of resignation, pointing out the blame: the head of state is the supreme of the country, the residence should have a heavy gate and patrol guards, and the road should have a clear road. This is in order to prevent emergencies and eliminate misconceptions. It is absolutely impossible to change behavior casually and neglect protection.

古文：陛下厌崇邃，轻尊严，微服潜游，阅廛过市，行路私议，朝廷惊惧，如祸产意外，纵不自惜，奈宗庙苍生何？
现代文：陛下不喜欢高高在上，不重视尊严威仪，常常暗中便服出游，入闾里，过街市，以致市井中窃窃私议，朝廷内惶惶不安。万一发生意外事件，即使不爱惜自己，又怎样对得起宗庙及百姓呢？
English: His Majesty does not like to be on a high pedestal, does not value dignity and decorum, and often travels in disguise, entering temples, and passing through streets and markets. This has led to whispering and gossiping in the streets, and panic in the Imperial Court. In the event of an accident, even if he does not spare himself, how can he be worthy of the ancestral temple and the people?

古文：又分职建官，不可以滥。
现代文： 另外，分职务设官吏，不可以滥。
English: In addition, officials who are assigned to different posts must not abuse their power.

古文：传曰： 官不必备，惟其人。 
现代文：《传》中说： 官不必很多，只要用人恰当。 
English: "Biography" said: There is no need to have a lot of officials, as long as people are used appropriately.

古文：自帝室中兴，以不慎爵赏为惠，冒级躐阶，朝升夕改，正阙不给，加以员外。
现代文：自从帝室中兴以来，以随意赏官封爵来表示恩宠。于是有越级提升的，朝升夕改的，正中不够用，再加以员外职的。
English: Since the rise of the imperial family, officials have been awarded knighthoods at will to show their grace. As a result, there are those who are promoted beyond their grade, those who are promoted in the morning, those who are promoted in the evening, those who are not used enough in the middle, and those who are assigned to outside positions.

古文：内则府库为殚，外则黎庶蒙害，非求贤助治之道也。
现代文：这样一来，对内的薪俸支出增加，府库渐空；对外赋税征收增加，百姓愈穷。这不是寻求贤能、辅助治国的办法。
English: As a result, the expenditure on domestic salaries and salaries increased, and the treasury became empty; the collection of foreign taxes increased, and the people became poorer. This is not a way to seek virtue and assist in governing the country.

古文：愿爱晙班荣，息匪服之议。
现代文：希望能爱惜官位的尊荣，平息不敬的议论。
English: I hope I can cherish the honor of the official position and calm down the disrespectful discussion.

古文：今文武六十以上，而天造含容，皆矜恤之。老病者已解还授，员外者既遣复留。
现代文：今文武官员六十岁以上的，均敬恤而留任；老而病已退休还乡的，又返回授官；过去补为员外已经遣返的，又再次留下。
English: The current civil and military officials who are over 60 years old all respectfully remain in their posts; those who are old and sick and have retired to their hometowns return to confer their posts; and those who have been repatriated in the past to supplement their posts as non-commissioned officers remain again.

古文：恐非所以消敝救时也。
现代文：这种做法恐怕不能匡正时弊、扭转局面。
English: I am afraid that this approach will not be able to rectify the current ills and reverse the situation.

古文：请敕有司料其可用进，不可用退。
现代文：恳请下令有司选拔可用之人任官，不可用之人遣回。
English: I earnestly request you to order the department to select and appoint those who can be used, and send back those who cannot be used.

古文：又远方夷人不堪治事，国家向务抚纳而官之，非立功酋长，类糜俸禄。
现代文：再有，远方的夷人没有治国才能。国家过去是为安抚才任他们为官。若不是立功的酋长，只不过白白浪费薪俸罢了。
English: Furthermore, the Irits from far away do not have the ability to govern the country. In the past, the country only allowed them to serve as officials to appease them. If they are not meritorious chiefs, they are just wasting their salaries.

古文：愿商度非要者，一切放还。
现代文：也恳请研究衡量非可用必要的夷人，一律放还。 《易》上说： 如何守好职位呢？
English: It also implored the government to study and measure the non-usable and non-essential emigrants, and release them all. "Yi" said: How to keep a good position?

古文：又《易》称： 何以守位曰仁，何以聚人曰财。 
现代文：要靠仁爱的道德；如何招致人民呢？那就要有财物。 
English: It is necessary to rely on the morality of benevolence; how to attract people? Then there must be wealth.

古文：今百姓乏窭，不安居处，不可以守位。仓储荡耗，财力倾殚，不足以聚人。
现代文：现在的百姓穷困，生活困难，谈不上官员守好职位；仓储空虚，财力枯竭，做不到招致人民。
English: The current people are impoverished and their lives are difficult, so it is impossible for officials to keep their posts; warehouses are empty, financial resources are exhausted, and it is impossible to attract people.

古文：山东病水潦，江左困输转。
现代文：山东有水涝灾害，江左运输困难。
English: There are floods in Shandong, and transportation on the left bank of the Yangtze River is difficult.

古文：国匮於上，人穷於下。
现代文：国家空乏，人民窘困。
English: The country is destitute and the people are in distress.

古文：如令边埸少曌，恐逋亡遂多，盗贼群行，何财召募？
现代文：如果边界疏于戒备，可能逃到境外的人会越来越多，各地盗贼蜂起，哪有财力来招募他们？
English: If the borders are not guarded, more and more people may flee abroad, and thieves will rise up everywhere. Who has the financial resources to recruit them?

古文：何众闲遏乎？
现代文：哪有人力来遏止他们？
English: Who has the power to stop them?

古文：又崇作寺观，功费浩广。
现代文：又大建寺庙道观，人才财力均耗费极大。
English: In addition, it is very expensive to build a temple of Taoism, and it takes a lot of talent and financial resources.

古文：今山东岁饥，糟糠不厌。
现代文：现在山东年年饥荒，糟糠都吃不饱。
English: At present, Shandong is suffering from famine year after year, and there is not enough food to go around.

古文：而投艰厄之会，收庸、调之半，用吁嗟之物，以荣土木，恐怨结三灵，谤蒙四海。
现代文：在民生极其艰难之际，还要收用税赋及劳役，用哀叹怨愤之物来增添寺观的崇丽，恐怕会使三灵之神结怨，会使四海之民生恨。
English: At a time when the people's livelihood is extremely difficult, it is also necessary to collect taxes and laborers, and use objects of lamentation and resentment to add to the sublimity of the temple, which will probably make the gods of the three spirits resentful and make the people of the four seas hate.

古文：又比缘征戍，巧诈百情，破役隐身，规脱租赋。
现代文： 又刻正要征召戍丁，但不少人为躲避征戍、逃脱租税而藏身在寺观中。
English: At the same time, it was time to conscript soldiers, but many people hid in temples to avoid conscription and taxes.

古文：今道人私度者几数十万，其中高户多丁，黠商大贾，诡作台符，羼名伪度。
现代文：如今私下收受的道人几乎有几十万，其中不少是多男的大户、狡黠的商家。他们并非真心出家，而是伪装。
English: Nowadays, there are almost hundreds of thousands of Taoists who receive the teachings privately, and many of them are big families with many sons and cunning merchants. They are not genuinely ordained, but are just pretending to be.

古文：且国计军防，并仰丁口，今丁皆出家，兵悉入道，征行租赋，何以备之？
现代文：何况国计军防都仰仗于男丁。如果男丁都出家了，兵壮都入道了，那么，征戍租赋，又从何得来？
English: What's more, the national budget, military and defense all depend on men. If all men have become monks, and all soldiers have entered the Buddhist path, then where will they get the money to collect rents?

古文：又重赂贵近，补府若史，移没籍产，以州县甲等更为下户。
现代文： 另外，不少人重金贿赂权贵近臣，以买得官爵，移易没籍之产，将州县的甲等改为下户。
English: In addition, many people bribed powerful and noble courtiers with large sums of money to buy official titles, transfer property without citizenship, and change the first class of prefectures and counties to the lower class.

古文：当道城镇，至无捉驿者，役逮小弱，即破其家。
现代文：以致驿道边的城镇几乎连牵驿马的人都没有。劳役派及小弱者，其家即刻破亡。
English: As a result, there were almost no people in the towns along the railway. The homes of the laborers and the weak were destroyed immediately.

古文：愿许十道使访察括取，使奸猾不得而隐。
现代文：望能允许十道使访察，使奸邪狡猾者无处可隐。
English: We hope to be able to allow the Ten-Way Envoys to visit, so that the treacherous and cunning ones have nowhere to hide.

古文：又太常乐户已多，复求访散乐，独持大鼓者已二万员，愿量留之，余勒还籍，以杜妄费。
现代文： 再有太常乐户已不少，又去访求散处各地的乐人。
English: In addition, there are already quite a few regular musicians, and they also visit musicians from all over the country.

古文：中宗以其身宰相，乃自陈失政，丐罢官，无所嫁非，手诏诘让。峤惶恐，复视事。
现代文：现在单举持大鼓者已有二万人。希望能量才留用，其余的都让他们各自回乡，以杜塞浪费。 中宗认为李峤身为宰相，能自陈失政，并请处分罢官，不将错误转嫁他人，下诏慰谕，批评他请罢官的事。李峤惶恐不安，仍然管事。
English: Now there are 20,000 people holding the big drum in a single hand. I hope that the energy will only be used, and the rest will let them return to their hometowns and waste it with duce. Zhongzong believes that Li Qian, as the prime minister, can make himself lose power, and ask for punishment and dismissal, do not pass the mistake on to others, issue a consolation decree, and criticize his request for dismissal. Li Qian is frightened and uneasy, still in charge.

古文：三年，加修文馆大学士，封赵国公，以特进同中书门下三品。
现代文：神龙三年，加修文馆大学士，封爵赵国公，以特进同中书门下三品。
English: In the third year of Shenlong, he was awarded a bachelor's degree of the Academy of Literature and Culture, and was knighted Zhao Guogong. He was promoted to the third grade of the same school.

古文：睿宗立，罢政事，下除怀州刺史，致仕。
现代文：睿宗立，罢免政职，出京为怀州刺史，不久，告老退休。
English: Ruizong Li, removed from office, went to Beijing to make history in Waizhou, and soon retired.

古文：初，中宗崩，峤尝密请相王诸子不宜留京师。
现代文：当初，中宗驾崩，李峤曾有密表，建议相王的儿子们不宜留在京师。
English: At first, after the death of Zhongzong, Li Xi had a secret table, suggesting that the sons of the king should not stay in Beijing.

古文：及玄宗嗣位，获其表宫中，或请诛之。
现代文：及至玄宗即位，在宫中发现李峤所上的表。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, the watch worn by Empress Dowager Li Rong was found in the palace.

古文：张说曰： 峤诚懵逆顺，然为当时谋，吠非其主，不可追罪。 
现代文：有人说该杀了李峤。张说说 ：李峤虽不能明辨顺与逆，但也是为当时出的计谋，排斥对当时主子不利的人。不必追究。 
English: Some people said that Li Yao should be killed. Zhang said: Although Li Yao could not clearly distinguish between obedience and disobedience, it was also a scheme made at that time to exclude those who were unfavorable to the master at that time. There is no need to investigate.

古文：天子亦顾数更赦，遂免，贬滁州别驾，听随子虔州刺史畅之官。
现代文：天子也赦免了他，只是贬为滁州别驾。且听任他随儿子虔州刺史李畅赴任。
English: Tianzi also pardoned him, but he was relegated to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou, and he was allowed to follow his son, the governor of Qianzhou, Li Chang, to the post.

古文：改庐州别驾，卒，年七十。
现代文：改为庐州别驾，死时年七十岁。
English: He was 70 years old at the time of his death.

古文：峤富才思，有所属缀，人多传讽。
现代文：李峤才思敏捷，他写的文章常被人传诵。
English: Mr. Li is a quick thinker, and his articles are often read aloud.

古文：武后时，汜水获瑞石，峤为御史，上《皇符》一篇，为世讥薄。
现代文：武后时，汜水中找到一块瑞石，李峤当时是御史，写了一篇《皇符》献上，遭到世人的鄙薄。
English: When she was empress dowager, a piece of precious stone was found in the waters of the Yunnan River. At that time, Li Lan was the imperial historian, and she wrote an "Imperial Characters" to present to the emperor, which was despised by the world.

古文：然其仕前与王勃、杨盈川接，中与崔融、苏味道齐名，晚诸人没，而为文章宿老，一时学者取法焉。
现代文：他在做官以前，与王勃、杨盈川交往，任官时，与崔融、苏味道齐名。晚年时，当时的文人都不在了，他成了文坛宿老，当时的学者都向他学习，取法于他。
English: Before he became an official, he associated with Wang Bo and Yang Yingchuan, and when he was an official, he was on a par with Cui Rong and Su Fang. In his later years, when the literati of the time were no longer around, he became a literary elder, and scholars of the time learned from him.

