古文：金翁仲儒霍光陈爵苻坚雩都县人何文侯遹成弼玄金邹骆驼裴谈牛氏僮宇文进苏遏韦思玄李员虞乡道士赵怀正金蛇
现代文：金翁仲儒霍光陈爵苻坚雩都县人何文侯遹成弼玄金邹骆驼裴谈牛氏僮宇文进苏遏韦思玄李员虞乡道士赵怀正金蛇
English: Jin Weng, Zhong Ru, Huo Guang, Chen Jie, Qian Jian, Du County People, He Wen Hou, Jian Cheng, Jian Xuan, Jin Jie, Camel Pei, Niu Shi, Wu Wen Jin, Su Yan, Wei Si Xuan, Li Jian, Yu Xiang, Taoist, Zhao Huizhen, Gold Snake

古文：金
现代文：金
English: Money

古文：西方日官之外，有山焉，其长十余里，广二三里，高百余丈。
现代文：西方日官城外，有座山。此山长十多里，宽二三里，高一百多丈，全都是又大又黄的金子。
English: Outside the western city of Nikkan, there is a mountain. This mountain is more than ten miles long, two or three miles wide, and more than a hundred feet high. It is all big and yellow gold.

古文：皆大黄之金，其色殊美，不杂土石，不生草木。
现代文：它的颜色特别美丽，不掺杂泥土和沙石，不生长花草和树木。
English: Its color is particularly beautiful, it is not mixed with mud and sandstone, and it does not grow flowers and trees.

古文：上有金人，高五丈余，皆纯金，名曰金犀。
现代文：山上有一个金人，有五丈多高，全身都是纯金的，名字叫金犀。
English: On the mountain there is a golden man, five stories tall, his whole body is made of pure gold, his name is Golden Rhinoceros.

古文：入山下一丈，有银；又入一丈，有锡；又入一丈，有铅；又入一丈，有丹阳铜。
现代文：进入山下一丈，有银；再进入一丈，有锡；再进入一丈，有铅；再进入一丈，有丹阳铜。
English: Entering the mountain's lower level, there is silver; re-entering one level, there is tin; re-entering one level, there is lead; re-entering one level, there is Danyang copper.

古文：丹阳铜似金，可锻以作错涂之器也。
现代文：丹阳铜象金子一样，经过锻制可以作为镶嵌涂饰器具的原料。
English: Like gold, Danyang copper, after forging, can be used as a raw material for inlaying and decorating tools.

古文：《淮南子》术曰： 饵丹阳之为金也。 
现代文：《淮南子》的学说中谈道： 把丹阳铜里掺入饵料，就可以使它变成金子。 
English: In the teachings of "Huai Nanzi," it is said: If you mix the danyang copper with the alloy, you can turn it into gold.

古文：翁仲儒汉时，翁仲儒家贫力作，居渭川。
现代文：汉朝的时候，翁仲儒因家境贫困而做苦力。当时他家住渭川。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Weng Zhongru worked as a coolie due to the poverty of his family. At that time, his family lived in Luochuan.

古文：一旦，天雨金十斛于其家，于是与王侯争富。
现代文：一天早晨，天上象下雨一样落下十斛即一百斗金子在他家里。于是他可以和王侯比富。
English: One morning, ten shekels of gold, or a hundred bushels, fell from the sky like rain on his house, and he was able to compete with King Bifu.

古文：今秦中有雨金翁，世世富。
现代文：现在秦中地方还有象翁仲儒一样能得到天降金雨的人，因而世世代代都很富有。
English: Now, there are still people in central Qin who, like Weng Zhongru, can receive the rain of money from heaven, so they have been rich for generations.

古文：霍光
现代文：霍光
English: Huo Guang

古文：汉宣帝尝以皂盖车一乘，赐大将军霍光，悉以金铰饰之。
现代文：汉宣帝曾经把一辆黑色盖蓬的车赐给大将军霍光。霍光把这辆车全都用金子装饰起来。
English: Emperor Han Xuan once gave a black covered car to General Huo Guang. Huo Guang decorated the car entirely with gold.

古文：每夜，车辖上有金凤凰飞去，莫如所，至晓乃还，守车人亦见之。
现代文：每到夜晚，车轴的插销上就有一只金凤凰飞出去，不知飞到哪里，直到天亮才飞回来。看守车子的人也看见了。
English: Every night, a golden phoenix would fly out of the axle's socket, I don't know where it went, and it didn't fly back until dawn. The person guarding the car also saw it.

古文：南郡黄君仲，于北山罗鸟，得一小凤子，入手便化成紫金。毛羽翅宛然具足，可长尺余。
现代文：南郡黄君仲，在北山用网捕鸟，捕到了一只小凤凰，拿到手里便变成了紫金，羽毛和翅膀都很完整，能有一尺多长。
English: Huang Junzhong, from Nan County, used a net to catch birds in Beishan. He caught a little phoenix, and when he got it, it turned into purple and gold. The feathers and wings were complete, and it could be more than a foot long.

古文：守车人列云，车辖上凤凰，常夜飞去，晓则俱还。
现代文：再说看守车子的人把那件事后报告了霍光，说： 车轴插销上的金凤凰，经常在夜晚飞出去，天亮才飞回来。
English: In addition, the person guarding the car reported to Huo Guang after the incident, saying: The golden phoenix on the axle plug often flies out at night and only flies back at dawn.

古文：今晓不还，恐为人所得。
现代文：今天天亮后还没飞回来，恐怕被他人得到了。 
English: It didn't fly back after dawn today, and I'm afraid someone else got it.

古文：光甚异之，具以列上。
现代文：霍光对这件事感到特别奇怪，就把守车人所说的事都报告了皇上。
English: Huo Guang felt very strange about this, so he reported to the emperor what the guard had said.

古文：后数日，君仲诣阙，上金凤凰子。
现代文：过了几天，黄君仲到宫里去拜见皇上，便将小金凤凰献给了皇上。
English: A few days later, Huang Junzhong went to the palace to meet the emperor, and presented the little gold phoenix to the emperor.

古文：帝闻而疑之，以置承露盘，倏然飞去。
现代文：宣帝听说是他捕到的，很是怀疑。便把小金凤凰放在承露盘中，小金凤凰突然飞去。
English: Emperor Xuan heard that it was he who caught it, and he was very suspicious. So he put the little golden phoenix in a tray, and the little golden phoenix suddenly flew away.

古文：帝使人寻之，直入光家，至车辖上，乃知信然。
现代文：宣帝令人寻找，只见小金凤凰一直飞进霍光家，落到车轴插销上。宣帝这才信以为真。
English: Xuan Di was sought after, and the little gold phoenix flew all the way into Huo Guang's home and landed on the axle plug. Xuan Di believed this to be true.

古文：帝取其车，每游行，辄乘之。
现代文：宣帝取回了这辆车，每当外出巡游，都乘坐这辆车。
English: Emperor Xuan took the car back and used it whenever he went on a tour.

古文：故嵇康《游仙诗》云，翩翩凤辖，逢此网罗 是也。
现代文：所以嵇康在游仙诗中有 翩翩凤辖，逢此网罗 一句。
English: That's why, in the poem about the journey to the immortals, there is a line about being caught in a net.

古文：陈爵
现代文：陈爵
English: Chen Zhe

古文：汉永平十一年，庐江皖侯国有湖，皖氏小儿曰陈爵、陈挺，年皆十岁以上，相与钓于湖涯。
现代文：汉朝永平十一年，庐江皖侯国内有个湖。皖侯国人氏中有两个小孩名字叫陈爵、陈挺，年龄都在十岁以上。这一天，兄弟俩一起到湖边钓鱼。
English: In the 11th year of the Yongping reign of the Han Dynasty, there was a lake in Minhou County of the Minjiang River. There were two children named Chen Jie and Chen Ting in the Minhou family, both of whom were over ten years old. On this day, the two brothers went fishing together.

古文：挺先钓。爵往问挺曰： 钓宁得乎？ 
现代文：陈挺先钓，陈爵过来问陈挺说： 钓到了吗？ 。
English: Chen Ting fished first. Chen Jie came over and asked Chen Ting, "Did you catch anything?"

古文：挺曰： 得。 
现代文：陈挺说： 钓到了。 
English: Chen Ting said, "I caught a fish."

古文：爵归取竿纶，去挺三十步所，见湖涯有酒樽，色正黄，没水。
现代文：陈爵立刻走回去拿鱼竿和鱼线。走到离陈挺有三十步远的地方，忽然看见湖边有个装酒的器具，颜色纯正而金黄，浸没在水中。
English: Chen Jie immediately went back to get his fishing rod and line. When he reached a place thirty paces away from Chen Ting, he suddenly saw a wine container on the edge of the lake, pure and golden in color, submerged in the water.

古文：爵以为铜也，涉取之，滑重不能举。
现代文：陈爵以为是铜，便趟水进入湖中去取。
English: Thinking it was copper, Chen Jie waded into the lake to retrieve it.

古文：挺望见，共取之，竟不能得。
现代文：因水下滑酒器重而拿不动。陈挺看见了，便过来和陈爵一起拿，仍然拿不动。
English: When Chen Ting saw it, he came over to pick it up with Chen Jie, but he still couldn't hold it.

古文：人入深渊中流，顾见如钱等正黄，数百千枚，即共掇摭，各得满手。
现代文：这时他们二人已进到深水处的湖中央，忽然看见水中有象铜钱一样的东西纯正而金黄，有成百上千个，立刻一起去拾取。
English: At this time, the two of them had entered the middle of the lake in deep water. Suddenly, they saw something pure and golden in the water, like a copper coin. There were hundreds and thousands of them, and they immediately went to pick them up.

古文：走归示其家。
现代文：每个人两只手都抓满了，拿回家去给家里人看。
English: Everyone grabbed two handfuls and took them home to show their families.

古文：爵父国故吏，字君贤，惊曰： 安得此。 
现代文：陈爵的父亲是皖侯国过去的官员，字君贤。他看到儿子得到那么多金钱，惊奇地问道： 在哪里得到这些钱？ 
English: Chen Jie's father, a former official of the Warlord State, Zi Junxian, saw his son get so much money and asked in surprise, "Where did Zhou get all this money?"

古文：爵言其状。
现代文：陈爵便把得到钱的经过说了一遍。
English: Chen Jie then recounted the story of how he got the money.

古文：君贤曰： 此黄金也。 
现代文：君贤说 这是黄金啊。 
English: Junxian said, "This is gold."

古文：即驰与爵俱往，到金处，水中尚多。
现代文：立即和陈爵一块儿奔向湖边，来到有金子的地方，水中还有很多，君贤便自己下水去捡。
English: He immediately ran to the lake with Chen Jie and came to a place where there was gold. There was still a lot of it in the water, so Jun Xian went into the water to collect it.

古文：贤自涉水掇取，爵、挺邻伍并闻，俱竞采之，合得十余斤。
现代文：陈爵、陈挺的邻居们听说之后，都争着来捡金子。金子全被拾取上来，一共有十多斤。
English: After the neighbors of Chen Jie and Chen Ting heard about it, they all scrambled to pick up the gold. All of the gold was picked up, a total of more than ten kilos.

古文：贤言于相，相言太守，遣吏收取。
现代文：君贤将这件事告诉了府相，府相又告诉了太守。太守便派人到陈家收取拣到的金子。
English: Junxian reported the matter to the prefectural minister, who in turn reported it to the governor, who sent someone to Chen's home to collect the gold.

古文：遣门下掾裕躬奉献，且言得金状。
现代文：陈君贤立刻派家人将金子献给官府，并讲述了得到金子的经过。
English: Chen Junxian immediately sent his family members to donate the gold to the government, and described the process of obtaining the gold.

古文：苻坚
现代文：苻坚
English: 坚

古文：前秦苻坚建元五年，长安樵人于城南见金鼎，走白坚。
现代文：前秦苻坚帝建元五年，长安一个砍柴的人在城南看见一只金鼎，立刻跑回城去报告给苻坚。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Jianyuan, before the Qin Dynasty, a woodcutter in Chang'an saw a jinding in the south of the city, and immediately ran back to the city to report to Jianyuan.

古文：坚遣载取，到城，化为铜鼎。
现代文：苻坚派人用车去拉金鼎，拉到城里，金鼎变成了铜鼎。
English: Zou Jian sent someone to pull the gold ring with a car, pulled it to the city, and the gold ring turned into a copper ring.

古文：雩都县人
现代文：雩都县人
English: People from Shidu County

古文：南康雩都县，跨江南出，去县三里，名梦口。
现代文：南康境内有个雩都县，过江向南走，离县城三里路，有个地方名叫梦口。
English: In the territory of Nankang, there is a county called Xidu. Cross the river and walk south. Three miles from the county seat, there is a place called Mengkou.

古文：有穴，状如石室。
现代文：这里有个岩洞，从外看形状像石头房子。
English: There is a cave here that looks like a stone house from the outside.

古文：旧传尝有神鸡，色如好金，出此穴中，奋翼回翔，长鸣响彻。
现代文：很早的时候传说这里曾有神鸡，颜色象上好的金子，从这个洞穴中出来，展翅盘旋飞翔，长长的鸣叫声非常响亮，被人看见它就将身体缩进入洞中。
English: Very early on, it was said that a divine chicken, the color of fine gold, came out of this cave, spread its wings and flew around, its long song was very loud, and when it was seen, it retreated into the cave.

古文：见之辄形入穴中，因号此石为鸡石。
现代文：因此称此岩石为鸡石。
English: Therefore, this rock is called "Chicken Rock."

古文：昔有人耕此山侧，望见鸡出游戏。有一长人，操弹弹之。
现代文：过去有人在这座山旁边耕种，看见鸡出来游戏，有一个身量高的人，手持弹弓射鸡。
English: In the past, people used to farm next to the mountain, and they would see chickens come out to play, and there was a tall man shooting chickens with a slingshot.

古文：鸡遥见，便飞入穴。
现代文：鸡远远地看见，便飞进洞里，弹丸正打在洞上边的岩石上。
English: The chicken saw it from a distance and flew into the hole. The projectile was hitting the rock above the hole.

古文：弹丸正著穴上石，径六尺许，下垂蔽穴，犹有间隙，不复容人。
现代文：这块岩石直径六尺左右，向下垂正好遮住洞口，还留有一道缝，但不能再容下一个人。
English: The rock, about six feet in diameter, hangs down just enough to cover the mouth of the cave, leaving a gap, but not enough for another person.

古文：又有人乘船，从下流还县，未至此崖数里。有一人，通身黄衣，担两笼黄瓜，求寄载之。
现代文：过去有人乘船，从下流回县城，离这座山崖还有好几里时来了一个人，全身穿黄色的衣服，肩挑两笼黄瓜，请求船主载上他。
English: In the past, some people took a boat and floated back to the county seat from downstream. A few miles away from this cliff, a man came, wearing yellow clothes and carrying two cucumbers on his shoulders, and asked the boat owner to take him on board.

古文：黄衣人乞食，船主与之盘酒。
现代文：上船之后，穿黄衣服的人讨要吃的，船主给了他一盘酒食。
English: Once on board, the man in yellow asked for something to eat, and the owner gave him a plate of food and drink.

古文：食讫，至崖下。
现代文：吃完，船到山崖。
English: After eating, the boat goes to the cliff.

古文：船主乞瓜，此人不与，仍唾盘内，径上崖，直入石中。
现代文：船主要瓜，黄衣人不给，并且向盘中唾唾沫。而后径直奔上山崖，一直进入石洞中。
English: The yellow-clothed owner of the boat refused to pay and spat into the dish. He then ran straight up the cliff and into the cave.

古文：船主初甚忿之，见其入石，始知神异。
现代文：船主起初对黄衣人很气忿，见他进入石洞，才知道是神异。
English: At first, the owner of the boat was very angry with the man in yellow. It was only when he saw him enter the cave that he knew it was supernatural.

古文：取向食器视之，见盘上唾，悉是黄金。
现代文：船主取过曾经装过食物的器具观看，只见吐在盘子上面的唾沫，全都变成了黄金。
English: The owner of the boat took the utensil that had once contained the food and looked at it, only to see that the spit on the plate had all turned into gold.

古文：何文
现代文：何文
English: He Wen

古文：张奋者，家巨富，后暴衰，遂卖宅与黎阳程家。
现代文：有一个叫张奋的人，家里大富，后来突然衰落。于是将住宅卖给黎阳程家。
English: There was a man named Zhang Fen, whose family was very rich, and then suddenly fell into decline. So he sold the house to the Li Yang Cheng family.

古文：程入居，死病相继，转卖与邺人何文。
现代文：程家住进来后，死亡生病的事相继发生。程家又将此房转卖给邻居何文。
English: After the Cheng family moved in, the deaths and illnesses occurred one after another. The Cheng family then resold the house to their neighbor He Wen.

古文：文日暮，乃持刀，上北堂中梁上坐。
现代文：何文在太阳落山之后，手中持刀，到北堂中房梁上坐定。
English: After the sun set, He Wen, holding a knife in his hand, went to the middle room of the north hall and sat down on the beam.

古文：至二更竟，忽见一人，长丈余，高冠黄衣，升堂呼问： 细腰，舍中何以有生人气也？ 
现代文：到二更将尽的时候，忽然看见一人，身高有一丈多，头戴高帽穿黄衣，升堂呼唤传问： 细腰，房中为什么有生人的气味？ 
English: At the end of the second watch, he suddenly saw a man, taller than he was, wearing a tall hat and a yellow coat, call out to him from the hall and ask: "Thin waist, why is there the smell of a living person in the room?"

古文：答曰： 无之。 
现代文：回答说： 没有生人的气味。 
English: He replied: "There is no smell of a stranger."

古文：须臾，有一高冠青衣者，次之，又有高冠白衣者，问答并如前。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个戴高帽穿蓝色衣服的人，再过一会儿，又有一个戴高帽穿白色衣服的人，问话和回答都和第一个人一样。
English: In a little while there was a man in a tall hat and blue clothes, and in a little while there was another man in a tall hat and white clothes, who asked and answered the same questions as the first man.

古文：及将曙，文乃下堂中，如向法呼之。问曰： 黄衣者谁也？ 
现代文：快到天亮的时候。何文才从房梁上下到厅堂，象刚才听到的那样开始呼唤，问道： 穿黄衣服的是谁？ 
English: It was almost dawn when Howden climbed down from the rafters into the hall and began to call out, as he had just heard, "Who is that in yellow?"

古文：曰： 金也，在堂西壁下。 
现代文：回答说： 是金，在厅堂西面墙壁下面。 
English: He replied, "It is gold, under the west wall of the hall."

古文： 青衣者谁也？ 
现代文： 穿兰衣服的是谁？ 
English: Who's the one in the blue dress?

古文：曰： 钱也。在堂前井边五步。 
现代文：回答说： 是钱，在厅堂前离井边五步远的地方。 
English: He answered, "Money, in front of the hall, five paces from the edge of the well."

古文： 白衣者谁也？ 
现代文： 穿白衣服的是谁？ 
English: Who is the man in white?

古文：曰： 银也，在墙东北角柱下。 
现代文：回答说： 是银，在墙东北角的柱子下面。 
English: And he said, It is silver; it is under the second pillar that is on the north east corner of the wall.

古文： 汝谁也？ 
现代文： 你是谁？ 
English: Who are you?

古文：曰： 我杵也，在灶下。 
现代文：回答说， 我是棒槌，在灶坑下。 
English: He answered, I am a mallet, under the stove.

古文：及晓，文按次掘之，得金银各五百斤，钱千余万，仍取杵焚之，宅遂清安。
现代文：到天亮，何文按次序挖开刚才说到的地方，得到金银各五百斤，铜钱千万枚，并拿过棒槌用火烧掉，于是这座宅院才清静安宁下来。
English: At dawn, he dug up the places just mentioned in order, got five hundred catties of gold and silver each, and ten million copper coins, and took a mallet and burned them with fire, so the house was calm and quiet.

古文：侯遹
现代文：侯遹
English: Hou Xuan

古文：隋开皇初，广都孝廉侯遹入城，至剑门外，忽见四广石，皆大如斗。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，广都孝廉侯遹进城，到剑门外，忽然看见四块石头，全都象斗一样大。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, when Guangdu Xiaolian Houyi entered the city, he suddenly saw four stones outside the Jianmen Gate, all of which were as big as elephants.

古文：遹爱之，收藏于书笼，负之以驴。
现代文：侯遹很喜爱这几块石头，收起放在装书的竹笼里，驮在驴背上。
English: Hou Yao liked these stones very much. He put them away in a bamboo cage for books and put them on the donkey's back.

古文：因歇鞍取看，皆化为金。
现代文：趁着歇驴的时候抱出来观看，四块石头全都变成了金子。
English: While he was tending the donkeys, he took the opportunity to take them out and watch as all four stones turned into gold.

古文：遹至城货之，得钱百万，市美妾十余人，大开第宅，又近甸置良田别墅。
现代文：侯遹到城里把金子卖了，得钱百万，便从市上买了十几个美丽的女人，回去后扩建住房和宅院，又在城郊购置了良田和别墅。
English: Hou Yi sold his gold in the city and made millions of money. He then bought more than a dozen beautiful women from the market. After he returned, he expanded his house and compound, and purchased good fields and villas on the outskirts of the city.

古文：后乘春景出游，尽载妓妾随从。
现代文：后来侯遹乘着春天的景色出城游玩，所有的妓妾都乘车跟随他出游。
English: Later, Hou Ye took advantage of the spring scenery to travel out of the city, and all the prostitutes followed him by car.

古文：下车，陈设酒肴。
现代文：下车后，一一摆上酒和做熟的鱼肉。
English: After getting off the train, the wine and cooked fish were served one by one.

古文：忽有一老翁，负大笈至，坐于席末。
现代文：忽然有一个老头儿，身背大书箱来到这里，并在筵席的最后边坐下。
English: Suddenly an old man with a large bookcase on his back came and sat down at the end of the table.

古文：遹怒而诟之，命苍头扶出。
现代文：侯遹很生气并辱骂他，命奴仆把老头儿扶出去。
English: Hou Yao was very angry and insulted him. He ordered his servant to help the old man out.

古文：叟不动，亦不嗔恚，但引满啖炙而笑云： 吾此来，求君偿债耳。
现代文：老头儿不动，也不嗔怪和愤怒，只取过来满杯热酒吃下去后笑着说： 我到这里来，是求您偿还欠债。
English: The old man did not move, nor did he show any surprise or anger. He just took a full glass of hot wine and ate it. Then he smiled and said, "I came here to ask you to pay my debt."

古文：君昔将我金去，不记忆乎？ 
现代文：您以前把我的金子拿去，您忘记了吗？ 
English: You took my gold before, have you forgotten?

古文：尽取遹妓妾十余人，投之书笈，亦不觉笈中之窄，负之而趋，走若飞鸟。
现代文：说完，将侯的十几个妓妾全都抓住，放到书箱里，也不觉得书箱狭窄，背起书箱快步走去，行走的速度快如鸟飞。
English: Having said that, he grabbed all of Hou's dozen prostitutes and put them in a bookcase. He didn't feel that the bookcase was too narrow. He picked up the bookcase and walked briskly, walking as fast as a bird flies.

古文：遹令苍头驰逐之，斯须已失所在。
现代文：侯遹令奴仆骑马去追，可一会儿已看不见老头儿在哪里。
English: The lord ordered his servants to chase after him on horseback, but after a while they could no longer see where the old man was.

古文：自后遹家日贫，却复昔日生计。
现代文：自此以后侯遹家中日渐贫困。又退回到原来那样的生活。
English: Since then, Hou Yi's family has become increasingly impoverished, and they have reverted to their old way of life.

古文：十余年，却归蜀。到剑门，又见前者老翁，携所将之妾游行，傧从极多，见遹皆大笑，问之不言，逼之，又失所在。
现代文：十几年后，侯遹去职归蜀，来到剑门，又看见以前那个老头儿，携带那些被他背走的妓妾在悠闲地行走，跟从的人很多，看见侯遹都大笑。侯遹问他们笑什么，他们却不说话；靠近他们，却又看不见他们到哪里去了。
English: Ten years later, Hou Yi left his post and returned to Shu. When he came to Jianmen, he saw the old man again, walking leisurely with the prostitutes he had carried. There were many people following him, and he saw Hou Yi laughing. Hou Yi asked them what they were laughing about, but they didn't speak; he approached them, but he couldn't see where they had gone.

古文：访剑门前后，并无此人，竟不能测也。
现代文：侯遹访遍了剑门前后左右，也没有看到这个老头。
English: Hou Yi visited all around Jianmen, but did not see the old man.

古文：成弼
现代文：最终也猜不出是怎么回事。成弼
English: In the end, I couldn't figure out what was going on.

古文：隋末，有道者居于太白山，炼丹砂，合大还成，因得道，居山数十年。
现代文：隋朝末年，有一个道士居住在太白山，炼丹砂，配制九转还丹成功，于是得道。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was a Taoist living in Taibai Mountain. He successfully purified tansha and prepared nine kinds of tansha, and thus became a Taoist.

古文：有成弼者给侍之，道者与居十余岁，而不告以道。
现代文：道士居住在山上几十年，有个叫成弼的人供给他饮食并侍奉他。道士与成弼共同在山上住了十几年，而从不告诉成弼炼丹的方法。
English: The Taoist priest had lived on the mountain for decades, and a man named Chenglu had provided him with food and served him. The Taoist priest and Chenglu had lived together on the mountain for more than ten years, but had never told Chenglu how to make Dan.

古文：弼后以家艰辞去，道者曰： 子从我久，今复有忧，吾无以遗子，遗子丹十粒。
现代文：后来成弼因家中父母有丧，便向道士告辞回去。道士说： 你跟随我这么久，今天回去是家中有忧患。我没有别的送给你，送你丹十粒。
English: Later, Cheng Yu went back to say goodbye to the Taoist priest because his parents had passed away. The Taoist priest said, "You've been following me for so long, it's sad to go back home today. I don't have anything else to give you, I'll give you ten grains of rice."

古文：一粒丹化十斤赤铜，则黄金矣，足以办葬事。 
现代文：一粒丹化十斤红铜，就是黄金，足够你办葬事。 
English: One grain of red copper is gold, enough for your funeral.

古文：弼乃还，如言化黄金以足用。
现代文：成弼于是回家，像道士说的那样化黄金以满足使用。
English: Cheng Yao then went home and, as the Taoist said, turned it into gold to use it.

古文：办葬讫，弼有异志，复入山见之，更求还丹。
现代文：办完葬事，成弼有了邪恶的意图，又进山去见道士，请求道士能再给他一些丹砂。
English: After the funeral, Cheng Yao had evil intentions and went into the mountains to see a Taoist priest to ask him to give him more Dansha.

古文：道者不与，弼乃持白刃刼之。
现代文：道士不给，成弼竟持刀威逼道士，还是没有得到丹砂，就用刀砍断了道士的两只手。
English: The Taoist didn't give it to him, but Cheng Li actually used his sword to force the Taoist, and when he still didn't get the sand, he cut off the Taoist's two hands with a knife.

古文：既不得丹，则断道者两手，又不得，则刖其足，道者颜色不变。弼滋怒，则斩其头。
现代文：又没有得到，就砍下了道士的双脚，道士颜色不变。成弼更加恼怒，就用刀砍下了道士的头。
English: When he didn't get it, he chopped off the Taoist's feet. The color of the Taoist didn't change. Cheng Yao became even more angry and chopped off the Taoist's head with a knife.

古文：及解衣，肘后有赤囊，开之则丹也。
现代文：等到解开道士的衣服，见胳膊肘后面有红色的口袋，打开口袋里面就是丹砂。
English: When he unzipped the monk's robe, he saw a red pocket behind his elbow. When he opened the pocket, he found Dansha inside.

古文：弼喜，持丹下山。
现代文：成弼很高兴，拿着丹砂下山。
English: Cheng Yao was very happy and went down the mountain with Dansha.

古文：忽闻呼弼声。回顾，乃道者也。
现代文：忽然听见喊他的声音，回头看，喊他的是道士，成弼大惊。
English: All of a sudden, he heard his voice calling out. Looking back, he saw that it was a Taoist monk calling him. He was shocked.

古文：弼大惊，而谓弼曰： 吾不期汝至此，无德受丹，神必诛汝，终如吾矣。 
现代文：道士对成弼说： 我没想到你到这里来，你没有良好的品德享用这些丹砂，神必定会杀死你，最终就象我一样。 
English: The moralist said to Cheng Yao: I didn't expect you to come here, you don't have good moral character to enjoy these sands, God will surely kill you, just like me in the end.

古文：因不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：弼多得丹，多变黄金，金色稍赤，优于常金，可以服饵。
现代文：成弼得到了很多丹砂，用它变化了很多金子。那金子的颜色稍红，优于平常的金子，可以用来服食。
English: A great deal of cinnamon was obtained, and with it a great deal of gold was changed. The color of that gold was slightly red, better than ordinary gold, and it could be used for food.

古文：家既殷富，则为人所告，云弼有奸。
现代文：成弼家于是非常富裕。不久，他便被人告发，说成弼自己私自造钱。
English: The Cheng family was very wealthy, and he was soon accused of making his own money.

古文：捕得，弼自列能成黄金，非有他故也。
现代文：官府将成弼捕去。成弼禀报说自己能把铜变成金子，并没有别的原因。
English: There is no other reason why Cheng Rong reported that he could turn copper into gold.

古文：唐太宗问之，召令造黄金。
现代文：唐太宗听说了这件事，下诏令成弼制造黄金。
English: When Emperor Taizong of Tang heard about this, he issued an edict ordering Chengyu to produce gold.

古文：金成，帝悦，授以五品，敕令造金，要尽天下之铜乃已。
现代文：黄金造成，太宗皇帝很高兴，授以成弼五品官，命令他制造黄金，要将天下所有的铜都用完才能停止。
English: As a result of the gold, Emperor Taizong was very pleased and gave him the title of the fifth grade official and ordered him to produce gold until all the copper in the world was used up.

古文：弼造金，凡数万斤而丹尽。
现代文：成弼开始制造黄金。总共才造了几万斤黄金丹砂就用完了。
English: Chengyao began to make gold. In total, only a few thousand pounds of gold were made, and the cinnamon was used up.

古文：其金所谓大唐金也，百炼益精，甚贵之。
现代文：这些黄金就是所说的大唐金。百炼而更加精粹，非常贵重。
English: This gold is the so-called Great Tang gold. It is refined and more refined, and is very valuable.

古文：弼既艺穷而请去，太宗令列其方，弼实不知方，诉之。
现代文：成弼已经技艺穷尽而请求离去，太宗令他禀告造金的方法。成弼实在不知道具体方法，诉说自己不知。
English: Chengyu had exhausted his skills and asked to leave. Taizong ordered him to tell him how to make money. Chengyu really did not know the specific method, and said that he did not know.

古文：帝谓其诈，怒，胁之以兵，弼犹自列，遂为武士断其手。
现代文：太宗皇帝认为他说谎，很生气，就用兵刃威胁他。成弼仍然说不出方法，于是他的手被武士砍断。还是不说，便砍掉了他的脚。
English: Emperor Taizong thought he was lying and got very angry, so he threatened him with a sword. Chengyu still could not say how, so his hand was cut off by a samurai. Without saying anything, he cut off his foot.

古文：又不言，则刖其足。弼窘急，且述其本末，亦不信，遂斩之。
现代文：成弼急得没有办法，只好述说了他能变化金子的来龙去脉。太宗也不相信，就杀死了成弼。
English: He was in a hurry and had no choice but to tell the story of how he was able to change the gold. Taizong didn't believe him and killed him.

古文：而大唐金遂流用矣。
现代文：而大唐金就在市上流通使用。
English: However, Datang gold is circulated and used in the market.

古文：后有婆罗门，号为别宝。
现代文：后来有个印度僧人，自称能为人辨别宝贝。
English: Then there was an Indian monk who claimed to be able to identify babies.

古文：帝入库遍阅，婆罗门指金及大毯曰： 唯此二宝耳。 
现代文：太宗皇帝把他带进库房一件件地察看。印度僧人手指大唐金和大毯说： 只有这两件是宝贝。 
English: Emperor Taizong took him into the storeroom and examined him one by one. The Indian monk pointed at the gold and the blanket and said, "Only these two are precious."

古文：问毯有何奇异，而谓之宝。
现代文：太宗问大毯有什么神奇和独特的地方，而说它是宝？
English: Taizong asked what was so magical and unique about the blanket, and said it was a treasure.

古文：婆罗门令舒毯于地，以水濡之。水皆流去，毯竟不湿。
现代文：印度僧人让人将大毯打开平铺在地上，向大毯上泼水，水都从大毯上流走，大毯竟一点都不湿。
English: The Indian monk had the blanket spread out on the floor and water was sprinkled on it. The water flowed away from the blanket, and the blanket was not wet at all.

古文：至今外国传成弼金，以为宝货也。玄金
现代文：到现在外国还流传成弼金，并把它当作宝货。玄金
English: To this day, foreign countries still circulate palladium and regard it as a precious commodity.

古文：太宗时，汾州言，青龙白虎吐物在空中，有光如火，坠地隐入二尺。
现代文：太宗时期，汾州地方传言，青龙和白虎口吐一物在空中，发出的光象火一样，坠落到地上面隐没进地下二尺。
English: During the Taizong period, there was a local rumor in Zhangzhou that a blue dragon and a white tiger spat something in the air, and the light emitted was like fire, falling to the ground and disappearing two feet underground.

古文：掘之，得玄金，广尺余，高七尺。
现代文：在此物坠落的地方挖掘，得到一块黑金，宽一尺多，高七尺。
English: A piece of black gold, more than a foot wide and seven feet high, was unearthed at the spot where the object fell.

古文：邹骆驼
现代文：邹骆驼
English: camels

古文：邹骆驼，长安人，先贫，尝以小车推蒸饼卖之。
现代文：邹骆驼，长安人，早先家中贫穷，曾经用小车推蒸饼卖来维持生活。
English: Zou Llama, a Chang'an resident, used to sell steamed buns from a cart to make a living when his family was poor.

古文：每胜业坊角有伏砖，车触之即翻，尘土涴其饼，驼苦之。
现代文：每次越过胜业坊墙角埋的砖时，车轮碰上砖车子立即就翻，尘土把饼弄得很脏，邹骆驼为这很苦恼。
English: Every time they passed over the bricks buried in the corner of the wall of Shengyefang, the wheels hit the bricks and the cart immediately turned over, the dust made the cake very dirty, and the camel was very distressed.

古文：乃将镬斫去十余砖，下有瓷瓮，容五斛许。
现代文：于是他拿来大锄刨去十几块砖。砖下面有一大瓷瓮，容量在五十斗左右。
English: So he took a big shovel to remove a dozen bricks. Underneath the bricks was a large porcelain urn with a capacity of about fifty buckets.

古文：开看，有金数斗，于是巨富。
现代文：打开盖看，里面有好几斗金子。于是邹骆驼家巨富。
English: When he opened the lid, he saw that there were several buckets of gold inside, so he took the camel home and became very rich.

古文：其子昉，与萧佺交厚。
现代文：邹骆驼的儿子邹昉，和萧佺交情很深。
English: Xiao Yao, the son of a camel, was very close to Xiao Yao.

古文：时人语曰： 萧佺附马子，邹昉骆驼儿。
现代文：当时有人谈论说：萧佺是驸马的公子，邹昉是邹骆驼的儿子。
English: At that time, some people said: Xiao Yao is the son of a horse, and Yao is the son of a camel.

古文：非关道德合，只为钱相知。 
现代文：他们的交情与道德品行无关，只因为有钱才使他们相互知心。
English: Their friendship has nothing to do with morality. They only know each other because of money.

古文：裴谈
现代文：裴谈
English: Baidang Zhou

古文：裴谈为怀州刺史，有樵者入太行山，见山穴开，有黄金焉，可数间屋。
现代文：裴谈做怀州刺史时，有个砍柴人进入太行山，看见一个敞开的山洞，里面有黄金，可以装满好几间屋子。
English: When Bae was writing the history of Waizhou, a woodcutter entered Taihang Mountain and saw an open cave with gold that could fill several rooms.

古文：樵者喜，入穴取金，得五铤，皆长尺余。
现代文：砍柴人很高兴，进洞去拿黄金，得到五锭，每锭都有一尺多长。
English: The woodcutter was very happy. He went into the hole to get the gold and got five ingots, each of which was more than a foot long.

古文：因以石窒穴，且志之。
现代文：于是砍柴人用石头封死山洞，并记下了山洞的位置。
English: So the woodcutter sealed the cave with stones and wrote down the location of the cave.

古文：又数日往，则迷其处。
现代文：过了几天砍柴人又进山找那个山洞，就是找不到原来的地方。
English: After a few days, the woodcutter went back into the mountain to look for the cave, but he couldn't find the original place.

古文：樵者颇谙山谷。即于洛城怀州。造开石物锤凿数车。
现代文：砍柴人对山谷特别熟悉，立即在洛城怀州，打造了开石用的工具锤子凿子好几车。
English: The woodcutters were particularly familiar with the valley and immediately built several carts of tools - hammers, chisels - for quarrying stone in Los Angeles and Huizhou.

古文：州有崔司户，知而助之。
现代文：州里有个姓崔的司户，知道了这件事并帮助砍柴人。
English: A householder in the state, surnamed Cui, found out about the incident and helped the woodcutter.

古文：将往开，而谈妻有疾，请道家奏章请命。
现代文：他们将要到山中去开石，而裴谈的妻子由于有病，请道士向天帝上奏章请求延长寿命。
English: They will go to the mountains to quarry stone, and Pei's wife, due to illness, asked the Taoist to request the heavenly emperor to extend her life.

古文：奏章道士忽传天帝诏曰： 帝诏语裴谈，吾太行山天藏开，比有樵夫见之，吾已遗金五铤，命其闭塞。
现代文：上奏章的道士忽然口传天帝的告诫说： 天帝告诉裴谈，我太行山天帝宝藏库曾开，被挨山居住的砍柴人看见。我已经送给他黄金五锭，命他关闭堵塞了山洞。
English: The Taoist priest in the last movement suddenly passed on a warning from the Heavenly Emperor, saying: The Heavenly Emperor told Pei Dan that I had opened the treasure vault of the Heavenly Emperor too far away from the mountain and was seen by the woodcutter who lived in the mountain. I had given him five ounces of gold and ordered him to close and block the cave.

古文：而愚人贪得，重求不获，乃兴恶。将开吾藏，已造锤凿数车。
现代文：而这个愚蠢的人贪得无厌，重又去寻求而没有得到，便心起邪念，要凿开我的宝库，已经打造了锤子凿子好几车。
English: But this foolish man, full of avarice, sought again and again, but did not find, and set his heart on digging through my treasury. He has made many a hammer and chisel.

古文：若开不休，或中吾伏藏。
现代文：假若他开石不停，也许会找到我埋藏的宝藏。
English: If he keeps digging, maybe he'll find my buried treasure.

古文：此若开锤凿。此州人且死尽，深无所益。
现代文：如果在这里用锤、凿开石，这一州的人就会死尽，实在没有好处。
English: If you take a hammer and chisel here, people in this state will die. It's really not good.

古文：此州崔司户，与其同心，但诣崔验之，自当有见。
现代文：这州的崔司户和砍柴人是一条心，只要到崔司户那里去验证这件事，自然会有所见。
English: The Treasuries in this state are of one mind with the loggers, so if you go to the Treasuries to verify this matter, you will naturally have an idea.

古文：急止之，汝妻疾自当瘳矣。 
现代文：应立即制止他们去做这件事，你妻子的病自然会好的。 
English: They should be stopped from doing this immediately and your wife's illness will naturally get better.

古文：谈大异之，即召崔子问故，果符所言。乃没其开石具而禁止之，妻寻有间。
现代文：于是没收了他们的开石工具并禁止他们去开石。裴谈妻子的病不久就有了好转。
English: Their quarrying tools were confiscated and they were banned from quarrying.Pei said his wife's condition soon improved.

古文：牛氏僮
现代文：牛氏僮
English: Cow's gizzard

古文：牛肃曾祖大父，皆葬河内，出家童二户守之。
现代文：牛肃的曾祖父和祖父，死后都埋葬在河内郡。牛肃拨出两个家童住在那里守墓。
English: His great-grandfather and grandfather were both buried in Hanoi County after their deaths, and two of his children live there to guard the grave.

古文：开元二十八年，家僮以男小安，质于裴氏。
现代文：开元二十八年，牛家用男僮仆小安，送到裴家作抵押。
English: In the 28th year of the first month of the year, Niu sent his manservant, Xiao'an, to Bae's house as collateral.

古文：齿牙为疾，昼卧厩中。
现代文：因小安牙齿有病，白天躺在马圈内，好象有人告诉他说： 小安，你为什么不起来？
English: Because Xiao'an's teeth were diseased, he lay in the stables during the day, as if someone had told him: Xiao'an, why don't you get up?

古文：若有告之者曰： 小安，汝何不起，但取仙人杖根煮汤含之，可以愈疾。
现代文：只要取来仙人杖的根煮汤含在嘴里，你的牙病就会好，为什么要忍苦呢？ 
English: As long as you take the root of the cactus and boil the soup in your mouth, your toothache will be better. Why should you suffer?

古文：何忍焉！ 小安惊顾，不见人而又寝。
现代文：小安吃惊地抬头看，不见有人而又躺下。
English: Xiao An looked up in surprise, but did not see anyone lying down again.

古文：未久，告之如初。
现代文：时间不长，同开始时告诉他的话一样，又告诉他一遍。
English: Time is short. Tell him again what you told him at the beginning.

古文：安曰： 此岂神告我乎？ 
现代文：小安说：此话难道是神仙告诉我的吗？
English: Xiao'an said, "Did a fairy tell me this?"

古文：乃行求仙人杖，得大丛，掘其根。
现代文：于是出去寻找仙人杖，找到大灌木，挖它的根，根转眼间壮大。
English: So he went out to look for the magic wand, found a large shrub, dug up its roots, and the roots grew in no time.

古文：根转壮大，入地三尺，忽得大砖，有铭焉。
现代文：挖进地下三尺，忽挖到一块大砖，上面还刻着字。
English: Digging three feet underground, he suddenly unearthed a large brick with words engraved on it.

古文：揭砖已下，有铜钵剅，于其中尽黄金铤，丹砂杂其中。
现代文：揭开砖，在砖的下面，有个铜钵斗，在钵斗里全都是黄金锭，有些丹砂掺杂在里面。
English: Uncover the brick, under the brick, there is a copper crucible, in the crucible all are gold ingots, some are mixed with red sand.

古文：安不知书，既藏金，则以砖铭示村人杨之侃。
现代文：小安不认字，于是把黄金重新藏好，便把砖上刻的字拿给本村人杨之侃看。
English: Xiao'an did not recognize the words, so he hid the gold again, and then showed the words engraved on the bricks to Yang Zhiqian, a villager.

古文：留铭示人，而不告之。
现代文：小安只留下刻的字给人看，而不告诉人是从哪里得到的。
English: Xiao'an only left the engraved words for people to see, without telling them where he got them from.

古文：铭曰：砖下黄金五百两，至开元二十八年五月十八日，有下贼胡人年二十二姓史者得之；泽州城北二十五里白浮图之南，亦二十五里，有金五百两，亦此人得之。
现代文：铭文说：砖下黄金五百两，到开元二十八年五月十八日，有个流落四方的胡人贼子，二十二岁，姓史，得到它；泽州城北二十五里白塔之南，也是二十五里，有金五百两，也为这个人所得。
English: The inscription says: "Five hundred taels of gold beneath the bricks. On May 18th in the year of the founding of the Republic of China in the year of the twenty-eight, there was a twenty-two-year-old Hun thief, surnamed Shi, who lived in Shifang and obtained it. Twenty-five li north of the city of Zezhou and south of the White Pagoda is also twenty-five li, and there is five hundred taels of gold, which was also obtained by this person.

古文：诸人既见铭，道路喧闻于裴氏子。问小安，且讳，执鞭之，终不言。
现代文：众人已经看到了铭文，走在路上互相谈论而被裴氏的儿子听到了，回去问小安，小安躲闪着不说这件事，用鞭子抽，始终不说。
English: People have already seen the inscription, walking on the road talking to each other and being heard by Pei's son, go back and ask Xiao An, Xiao An dodged and did not say anything about it, whipped with a whip, and did not say anything.

古文：于是拷讯，万端不对，拘而闭诸室。
现代文：于是拷打逼问，任你怎么样小安就是不回答。
English: So they tortured and forced him to ask. Xiao'an refused to answer no matter what.

古文：会有画工来访小安，市丹砂焉。
现代文：他们便将小安拘禁起来锁在屋里。恰巧有位画工来访小安，为的是买丹砂。
English: They then detained Xiao An and locked her in the house. Coincidentally, a painter came to visit Xiao An in order to buy Tanzanite.

古文：裴氏子诱问之，画工具言其得金所以。
现代文：裴氏的儿子引诱着问他，画工便将他知道的小安得到金子的经过一五一十地对裴氏儿子说了。
English: Mr. Pei's son lured him to ask him, and the painter told Mr. Pei's son everything he knew about how Xiao An got the gold.

古文：又曰： 吾昨于人处，用钱一百，市砂一斤。
现代文：又说： 我昨天在别人那里，用一百枚钱，买了一斤丹砂。
English: He also said, "Yesterday, I used one hundred coins to buy a kilo of red sand from someone else.

古文：砂既精好，故来更市。 
现代文：丹砂既精又好，所以来这里想再买一些。 
English: The Tanzanite sand is both fine and good, so I came here to buy some more.

古文：张氏益信得金。
现代文：裴氏越加相信小安得到了金子。
English: Mr. Bae is increasingly confident that Mr. Xiao has struck gold.

古文：召小安，以画工示之。
现代文：便把小安叫来，将画工领给他看。
English: So he called Xiao An and showed him the painter.

古文：安曰： 掘得铭后，下得数金丹砂，今无遗矣。 
现代文：小安说： 我挖到刻字的砖后，在下面得到些金子和丹砂，现在一点都没有留下。 
English: Xiao'an said, "After I dug up the engraved bricks, I got some gold and cinnabar underneath, but now there is nothing left.

古文：金宝不得，则又加棰笞治之，卒不言夜中亡去。
现代文：裴氏的儿子没有得到金宝，就又对小安用棍棒进行惩治，小安死也不说。晚上小安逃了出去。
English: When Bae's son didn't get the gold, he punished Xiao An with a club. He didn't say that Xiao An would die. Xiao An escaped in the evening.

古文：会裴氏苍头，自太原赴河内，遇小安于泽州。
现代文：正好裴氏的仆人，从太原到河内郡，在泽州遇到了小安，小安邀他到街上的酒馆喝酒。
English: Just as Bae's servant, from Taiyuan to Hanoi County, met Xiao An in Zezhou, Xiao An invited him to drink in a tavern on the street.

古文：小安邀至市，酒饮酣招去。意者小安便取泽之金乎！
现代文：二人酒正喝得尽情时，小安有人招呼就离开了，想来大概是去取泽州城北的金子吧。
English: When the two of them were drinking to their heart's content, someone called out to Xiao An and he left, presumably to get the gold north of the city of Zezhou.

古文：及苍头至裴言之，方悟。
现代文：直到仆人回到裴家对他们说了这件事，他们才明白。
English: They didn't understand until the servant came back to Bae's house and told them about it.

古文：宇文进
现代文：宇文进
English: Wu Wenzhin

古文：夏县令宇文泰犹子进，尝于田间得一昆仑子，洗拭之，乃黄金也。因宝持之。
现代文：夏县县令宇文泰的侄儿宇文进，曾经在田间拣到一个小玩具昆仑子，把它用水洗净擦干一看，是黄金，就把它当作宝贝保存起来。
English: Wu Wenzhong, the nephew of Xia County's governor, Wu Wentai, once picked up a small toy kunlun in a field. He washed it with water and rubbed it dry. When he saw that it was gold, he kept it as a treasure.

古文：数载后，财货充溢，家族蕃昌。
现代文：几年之后，宇文进家中财产金钱充足，家族兴旺昌盛。
English: A few years later, Uwenjin's family had sufficient property and money, and the family was prosperous.

古文：后一夕失之，而产业耗败矣。
现代文：后来一天夜晚将昆仑子丢失，因而家中产业便消耗衰败了。
English: Then, one night, Kunlun Zi was lost, and as a result, the domestic industry was depleted and decayed.

古文：苏遏
现代文：苏遏
English: Sudocrem

古文：天宝中，长安永乐里有一凶宅，居者皆破，后无复人住。
现代文：天宝年间，长安永乐里有一座很不吉祥的住宅，居住在这里的人全都遭殃，以后便没人再住。
English: During the Tenpo era, there was a very inauspicious house in Yongle, Chang'an. All the people who lived here suffered misfortune, and no one lived there anymore.

古文：暂至，亦不过宿而卒，遂至废破。
现代文：有人暂时到这里住下，也不过夜就死去，终于使这座住宅荒废破落，唯有房屋的厅堂还存留着。
English: People came to live here for a while, but died within the night, leaving the house in ruins, with only the hall remaining.

古文：其舍宇唯堂厅存，因生草树甚多。
现代文：由于住宅荒废因而生长了很多杂草和树木。
English: Many weeds and trees have grown up as a result of abandoned houses.

古文：有扶风苏遏，悾悾遽苦贫穷，知之，乃以贱价，于本主质之。
现代文：有个扶风人叫苏遏，人很诚恳却被家中的贫穷所苦。知道有这座住宅，便以很便宜的价格，从房主那里把房子抵押过来。
English: There is a weathervane named Su Han, who is very sincere but suffers from poverty at home. Knowing about this house, he mortgaged the house from the owner at a very cheap price.

古文：才立契书，未有一钱归主。
现代文：才立完契书，房主并没有得到一文钱。
English: After the deed was signed, the homeowner did not receive a penny.

古文：至夕，乃自携一榻，当堂铺设而寝。
现代文：到了晚上，苏遏就自己提过一张低矮的床，在厅堂当中铺设好睡下。
English: In the evening, Su Sheng brought a low bed by himself and laid it in the middle of the hall to sleep.

古文：一更以后，未寝，出于堂，彷徨而行。
现代文：一更以后，没睡着，便出了厅堂，漫无目的地走着。
English: A moment later, still awake, he left the hall, walking aimlessly.

古文：忽见东墙下有一赤物，如人形，无手足，表里通彻光明。而叫曰： 咄。 
现代文：忽然看见东边墙根有一个红色的东西，像人的形状，没有手和脚，里外透彻明亮，它喊叫： 咄！ 
English: Suddenly he saw at the base of the eastern wall a red thing, like the shape of a man, without hands or feet, bright inside and out, and it called out: "Woof!

古文：遏视之不动。良久，又按声呼曰： 烂木，咄。 
现代文：苏遏见那东西不动，过了很长时间，又按前次的声音呼喊道： 烂木，咄！ 
English: After a long time had passed, Su Jian saw that the thing was not moving, and again called out in accordance with the previous sound: "Rotten wood, poof!"

古文：西墙下有物应曰： 诺。 
现代文：西边墙根下有东西应声说 诺 。
English: At the base of the western wall, something echoed, "No."

古文：问曰： 甚没人？ 
现代文：问道： 什么人？ 
English: He asked: Who is it?

古文：曰： 不知。 
现代文：回答说： 不知道。 
English: A: I don't know.

古文：又曰： 大硬锵。 
现代文：又说： 大硬锵。 
English: And he said, A great and strong lion.

古文：烂木对曰： 可畏。 
现代文：烂木回答说： 可怕。 
English: The rotten tree replied, "Terrible.

古文：良久，乃失赤物所在。
现代文：又过了很长时间，红色的东西就不见了。
English: After a long time, the red object disappeared.

古文：遏下阶，中庭呼烂木曰： 金精合属我，缘没敢叫唤。 
现代文：苏遏走下台阶，在庭院当中叫烂木说： 金精应当注意我，为什么没敢叫唤。 
English: Su Jian walked down the steps and called out to the rotten tree in the middle of the courtyard, saying: Jin Jing should pay attention to me, why didn't you dare to call out?

古文：对曰： 不知。 
现代文：回答说： 不知道。 
English: The prince replied, "I don't know."

古文：遏又问： 承前杀害人者在何处。 
现代文：苏遏又问： 在这之前杀害人的东西在什么地方？ 
English: Su Yan also asked: Where did the things that killed people before this come from?

古文：烂木曰： 更无别物，只是金精。
现代文：烂木说： 再没有别的东西，只是金精。
English: Rotten wood said: There is no other thing, just the gold essence.

古文：人福自薄，不合居之，遂丧逝。亦不曾杀伤耳。 
现代文：那些人自己的福分薄，不应该住在这里，就死去，不曾杀伤。 
English: Those people's own fortune is thin, they should not live here, they will die, they will not be killed.

古文：至明，更无事。
现代文：直到天明，再没什么事。
English: Until dawn, then nothing.

古文：遏乃自假锹锸之具，先于西墙下掘。
现代文：苏遏就自己借来铁锹，先在西墙下挖。
English: Su Kang borrowed a shovel and started digging under the west wall.

古文：入地三尺，见一朽柱，当心木如血色，其坚如石。
现代文：挖进地下三尺，见一根腐朽的柱子，柱子木心的颜色象血一样，可它坚硬如石。
English: Digging three feet into the ground, I found a rotten pillar. The color of the wooden core of the pillar was like blood, but it was hard as stone.

古文：后又于东墙下掘两日，近一丈，方见一方石，阔一丈四寸，长一丈八寸。上以篆书曰：夏天子紫金三十斤，赐有德者。
现代文：后来又在东墙下挖了两天，挖了将近一丈深，才看见一块方形石块，宽一丈四寸，长一丈八寸，上面用篆书写道： 夏朝天子紫金三十斤，赐给有道德的人。 
English: Later, he dug under the east wall for two days, digging nearly a foot deep, until he saw a square stone, one foot four inches wide and one foot eight inches long, on which was written in cursive: Xia Chaozhenzi Zijin 30 jin, given to people with morality.

古文：遏乃自思： 我何以为德。 
现代文：苏遏自己心里想：我以什么为德？
English: Su Yan thought to himself, "What is my virtue?

古文：又自为计曰： 我得此宝，然修德亦可禳之。 
现代文：又自己盘算道：我得了这些财宝，然后再修德，也可消灾。
English: He also thought to himself: I have obtained these treasures, and then I can improve my virtue and eliminate disasters.

古文：沈吟未决，至夜，又叹息不定，其烂木忽语曰： 何不改名为有德，即可矣。 
现代文：他沉吟不决。到了晚上，仍叹息不定。那烂木忽然对他说： 你为什么不改名叫有德，这样就可以了。 
English: He mumbled indecisively, and in the evening he was still groaning. The rotten tree suddenly said to him, "Why don't you change your name to Yude, that will be fine."

古文：遏曰善，遂称有德。
现代文：苏遏说： 好。 于是称作苏有德。
English: Su Yan said, "Good." So he was called Su Youde.

古文：烂木曰： 君子傥能送某于昆明池中，自是不复挠吾人矣。 
现代文：烂木说： 君子您倘若能把我送到昆明池中，从此就不会再扰乱人了。 
English: Rotten wood said: Sir, if you can send me to the Kunming Pool, I will not disturb people anymore.

古文：有德许之。
现代文：苏有德答应了它。
English: Su Youde agreed to it.

古文：明辰更掘丈余，得一铁瓮，开之，得紫金三十斤。
现代文：第二天早晨，苏有德又向下挖了一丈多深。挖到一个铁罐，把铁罐打开，得到紫金三十斤。
English: The next morning, Su Youde dug even deeper. He dug into a tin can, opened it, and found 30 pounds of purple gold.

古文：有德乃还宅价修葺，送烂木于昆明池。
现代文：苏有德就把房钱还给了房主并重新修茸了宅院。把烂木送到昆明池。
English: Su Youde returned the money to the owner of the house and repaired the house. The rotten wood was sent to Kunming Pond.

古文：遂闭户读书，三年，为范阳请入幕，七年内，获冀州刺史。
现代文：于是闭门读书。三年后，被范阳节度使请去做幕僚。七年内，官获冀州刺史。
English: As a result, he studied behind closed doors. Three years later, he was asked by Fan Yang Jiedu to become a staff member. Within seven years, the official was awarded the title of Jizhou Historian.

古文：其宅更无事。
现代文：那座位宅再没出过什么事。
English: Nothing ever happened in that house again.

古文：韦思玄
现代文：韦思玄
English: Wei Sixuan

古文：宝应中，有京兆韦思玄，侨居洛阳。
现代文：宝应年间，有个叫韦思玄的京城人，侨居在洛阳。
English: In the Baoying era, there was a citizen of Beijing named Wei Sigen who lived in Luoyang.

古文：性尚奇，尝慕神仙之术。
现代文：生性崇尚寄异的事情，曾经羡慕神仙的法术。
English: By nature, he admires strange things and once envied the magic of the immortals.

古文：后游嵩山，有道士教曰： 夫饵金液者，可以延寿。
现代文：后来到嵩山游览，有个道士教导他说： 吃金液的人，可以延长寿命。
English: Later, when he visited Songshan Mountain, a Taoist monk taught him: People who eat gold can prolong their life.

古文：吾子当先学炼金，如是则可以肩赤松，驾广成矣。 
现代文：先生您应当先学炼金，若学会炼金就可以和仙人赤松子、广成子并肩了。 
English: Sir, you should learn alchemy first. If you learn alchemy, you can be side by side with the immortals Akamatsu and Hiroshige.

古文：思玄于是求炼金之术，积十年，遇术士数百，终不能得其妙。
现代文：韦思玄于是寻求炼金的方法。过了十年，韦思玄遇见的有道术的人几百个，可始终没有掌握炼金的技巧。
English: After ten years, Wei Sixuan has met hundreds of people with the virtue, but they still haven't mastered the skills of alchemy.

古文：后一日，有居士辛锐者，貌甚清瘦，偢然有寒色，衣弊裘。叩思玄门，谓思玄曰： 吾病士，穷无所归。
现代文：后来有一天，有个叫辛锐的居士，相貌非常清瘦，看上去面带寒色，穿一件破旧的毛皮衣服，敲韦思玄的家门，对韦思玄说： 我是个有病的居士，无家可归。
English: Then, one day, a layman named Xin Rui, who was very thin and looked cold, wearing a worn-out fur coat, knocked on the door of Weixuan's home and said to Weixuan: "I am a sick layman, homeless.

古文：闻先生好古尚奇，集天下异人方士，我故来谒耳，愿先生纳之。 
现代文：听说先生喜好古怪崇尚奇异，结交天下有奇特本领和有神仙方术的人，所以我特来拜见，愿先生能收留我。 
English: I heard that my husband likes eccentric and strange people, and he makes friends with people from all over the world who have special skills and magic formulas, so I came to see him. I hope my husband will be able to take me in.

古文：思玄即止居士于舍。
现代文：韦思玄立即留居士住了下来。
English: Wei Shixuan immediately took in a lodger.

古文：其后居士身疾，臞尽溃血且甚，韦氏一家尽恶之。
现代文：这以后居士身体患病，全身的肉都被血浸泡着且很严重。韦氏一家人全都厌恶他。
English: After this, the householder fell seriously ill, and his whole body was soaked in blood. The entire Wei family detested him.

古文：思玄尝诏术士数人会食，而居士不得预。
现代文：韦思玄曾经邀请几位有道术的人共同吃饭，而居士没有被邀参加。
English: Wei Shixuan once invited several Taoists to have a meal together, but the layman was not invited to participate.

古文：既具膳，居士突至客前，溺于筵席上，尽湿。
现代文：饭菜已经准备好了，居士突然来到客人面前，把尿撒在筵席上，全都湿了。
English: When the meal was ready, the householder suddenly appeared in front of the guests and spilled his urine on the food, making everyone wet.

古文：客怒皆起，韦氏家童亦竞来骂之，居士遂告去，行至庭，忽亡所见。思玄与诸客甚异之，因是其溺，乃紫金也，奇光璨然，真旷代之宝。思玄且惊且叹。有解者曰： 居士紫金精也。 
现代文：韦思玄又是惊奇又是感叹。有人解释说：这个居士是紫金精。
English: Wei Sixuan was both surprised and lamented. Someone explained: This householder is a purple and gold spirit.

古文：征其名氏信矣，且辛者盖西方庚辛金也。而 锐 字 兑 从 金 ，兑亦西方之正位。
现代文：研究一下他的姓名也确实是紫金精。辛就是西方庚辛金，而 锐 字 兑 从 金 ，兑也是西方的正位。
English: If you research his name, it is indeed Zi Jin Jing. Xin is the Western equivalent of Geng Xin Jin, while Rui is the Western equivalent of Jin.

古文：推其义，则吾之解若合符然。
现代文：按字义推测，我的解释是符合其义的。
English: Taken literally, my interpretation is consistent with its meaning.

古文：李员
现代文：李员
English: Li Jian

古文：进士李员，河东人也，居长安延寿里。
现代文：进士李员，河东人，居住在长安延寿里。
English: Jin Shi Li, a native of Hedong, lives in Yanshouli, Chang'an.

古文：元和初夏，一夕，员独处其室。方偃于榻，寐未熟，忽闻室之西隅有微声，纤而远，锵然若韵金石乐，如是久不绝。
现代文：唐朝元和年间初夏的一天晚上，李员独自在他的卧室里，刚仰卧在床上，还没睡熟，忽然听见屋内西边的角落有微弱的声音，细小又象离得很远，就好象撞击金石乐器所产生的韵律，像这样很长时间不断。
English: One evening in the early summer of the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, Li Yan alone in his bedroom, just lying on his back on the bed, not yet asleep, suddenly heard a faint sound in the western corner of the house, small and seemingly far away, as if the rhythm produced by the impact of the gemstone musical instrument, like this for a long time.

古文：俄而有歌者，其音极清越，泠泠然，又久不已。
现代文：一会儿又有人唱歌，歌声极其清远、清脆，又长时间不停。
English: A moment later, someone was singing again. The singing was extremely clear, crisp, and continued for a long time.

古文：员窃志其歌词曰： 色分兰叶青，声比磬中鸣。
现代文：李员暗暗记下了所唱的歌词。歌中唱道： 颜色和秋兰青青的叶子不同，声音敢与石磬比鸣。
English: Li Qian secretly memorized the lyrics of the song, in which the chorus sang: The color is different from the leaves of the autumn orchid, and the voice dares to match the stone cocoon.

古文：七月初七日，吾当示汝形。 
现代文：七月初七这天，我要向你显示出原形。 
English: In the seventh month, on the seventh day of the month, I will show you what he is like.

古文：歌竟，其音阕。
现代文：歌唱完，音乐也停止了。
English: When the singing was over, the music stopped.

古文：员且惊且异。
现代文：李员又惊又感到奇怪。
English: Li was shocked and surprised.

古文：朝日，命家童穷其迹，不能得焉。
现代文：到了早晨，命仆人彻底查找声音的踪迹，可是找不到。
English: In the morning, the servants were ordered to thoroughly search for the sound, but they could not find it.

古文：是夕，员方独处，又闻其声，凄越且久，亦歌如前。
现代文：这天晚上，李员自己单独在屋中，又听见了那声音，歌声凄凉幽远且时间很长，歌词也同前次一样。
English: That evening, Li Qianlong was alone in the house and heard the voice again. The song was bleak, distant and long, and the lyrics were the same as before.

古文：词竟，员心知为怪也，默然异之。
现代文：歌词唱完，李员心里知道这是怪异，默默地惊奇，象这样一连几个晚上，都听到了同样的声音。
English: After singing the lyrics, Li Qian knew in his heart that this was strange, silently surprised, like this for several nights in a row, all heard the same voice.

古文：如是凡数夕，亦闻焉。后至秋，始六日，夜有甚雨，隤其堂之北垣。
现代文：以后到了秋天，开始的前六天，夜晚雨很大，使李员家厅堂北墙倒塌。第二天，墙北面又听见了那声音。
English: Later, in the autumn, six days before the start, it rained heavily at night, causing the north wall of the Li family hall to collapse. The next day, the sound was heard on the north side of the wall.

古文：明日，垣北又闻其声，员惊而视之，于北垣下得一缶，仅尺余，制用金成，形状奇古，与金之缶甚异。
现代文：李员吃惊地观看，在北墙下得到了件乐器是缶，仅一尺多，用黄金制成，形状奇特古怪，与一般的金缶很不同。
English: Li Yan was surprised to see that the musical instrument under the north wall was a can, just over a foot, made of gold, with a strange shape, very different from ordinary gold cans.

古文：苔翳其光，隐然有文，视不可见，盖千百年之器也。
现代文：藓苔遮住了它的光亮，上面隐约有文字，但看不清楚，大概是千百年前的乐器。
English: The moss has obscured its light, and there is faint writing on it, but it's not clear. It's probably a musical instrument from thousands of years ago.

古文：叩之，则其韵极长。
现代文：用手敲打它，它的音韵特别悠长。
English: Beat it with your hand, it has a particularly long rhyme.

古文：即令涤去尘藓，方可读之，字皆小篆书，乃崔子玉座右铭也。
现代文：李员立即令人洗去它上面的泥土和藓苔，上面的字才可以阅读。字全都用小篆书写，原来是崔子玉的座右铭。
English: Li Jian immediately had the mud and moss on it washed off, so that the words on it could be read. The words were all written in small characters, which turned out to be Cui Ziyu's motto.

古文：员得而异之，然竟不知何代所制也。
现代文：李员得到了这件宝物感到很惊异，但始终不知它是哪个朝代制造的。
English: Li Qian was very surprised to get this treasure, but he still did not know which dynasty made it.

古文：虞乡道士
现代文：虞乡道士
English: Yu Xiang Taoist

古文：虞乡有山观，甚幽寂，有涤阳道士居焉。
现代文：虞乡有座山观，非常幽静清寂，有个涤阳道士住在这里。
English: There is a mountain view in Yuexiang, very quiet and tranquil, and there is a Dairyang Taoist living here.

古文：见庭忽有异光，自井泉中发，俄有一物，状若兔，其色若精金，随光而出，环绕醮坛。久之，复入于井。
现代文：大和年间，道士曾在一天晚上独自登上祭坛瞭望，见庭院中忽然有奇异的光，从水井中发出。倾刻有一物，形状象兔，它的颜色象精粹的黄金，随光而出，环绕祭坛，很长时间，又进入井中。
English: During the Yamato era, a Taoist once climbed the altar alone one evening to look around. In the courtyard, he suddenly saw a strange light emanating from the well. There was an object carved in the shape of a rabbit, its color like pure gold, which came out with the light, circled the altar for a long time, and then went into the well.

古文：自是每夕辄见。
现代文：自这之后每天晚上就出现。
English: It's been there every night since.

古文：道士异其事，不敢告于人。
现代文：道士觉得这件事奇怪，不敢告诉别人。
English: The Taoist thought it was strange and did not dare to tell others.

古文：后因淘井，得一金兔，甚小，奇光烂然，即置于巾箱中。
现代文：以后由于淘井，得到一个金兔，很小，光亮奇特灿烂，道士立即将金兔放到巾箱中。
English: Later, as a result of Taoi, a golden rabbit was obtained, small, shiny and strangely brilliant, and the Taoist immediately put the golden rabbit in a towel box.

古文：时御史李戎职于蒲津，与道士友善，道士因以遗之。
现代文：当时御史李戎在蒲津任职，与道士友好，道士就把金兔送给了他。
English: At that time, Goshi Ri Rong was working in Putsu and was friendly with the Taoist priest, who gave him the golden rabbit.

古文：其后戎自奉先县令为忻州刺史，其金兔忽亡去，后月余而戎卒。
现代文：这以后李戎从奉先县令升为忻州刺史，那个金兔忽然失去，以后一个多月李戎死。
English: After this, Li Rong was promoted from the magistrate of Fengxian County to the magistrate of Zhangzhou. That golden rabbit was suddenly lost, and Li Rong died more than a month later.

古文：赵怀正
现代文：赵怀正
English: Zhao Huizheng

古文：汴州百姓赵怀正，住光德坊。
现代文：汴州百姓赵怀正，住在光德坊。
English: Zhangzhou citizen Zhao Huizheng lives in Guangdefang.

古文：大和三年，妻贺，常以女工致镪。
现代文：那是大和三年的事。赵怀正的妻子贺氏，经常做些针线活挣些钱。
English: That was three years ago. Zhao Huizheng's wife, He, often did needlework to earn some money.

古文：一日，有人携石枕求售，贺一环获焉。
现代文：一天，有个人带着一石枕来卖，贺氏用一只玉环换下了石枕。
English: One day, a man brought a stone pillow to sell, and Mr. He replaced the stone pillow with a jade ring.

古文：赵夜枕之，觉枕中如风雨声，因令妻及子各枕一夕，则无所觉。赵枕辄复旧，或喧悸不得眠。
现代文：赵怀正夜晚枕着石枕睡觉时，感觉到枕中好象有风雨声。于是让妻子和儿子各枕一晚，他们都没什么感觉，赵怀正枕着又有原来声音，有时喧闹声让他心跳而睡不着觉。
English: When Zhao Huai Zheng slept with a stone pillow at night, he felt the sound of wind and rain in the pillow. So he let his wife and son sleep with their own pillows for one night. They did not feel anything. Zhao Huai Zheng slept with the original sound. Sometimes the noise made his heart beat and he could not sleep.

古文：其子请碎视之，赵言： 脱碎之无所见，是弃一百之利也，待我死后，尔必破之。 
现代文：他儿子请求他把石枕砸碎看里面有什么，赵怀正说： 如果砸碎它也不见里面有什么，这样就白白丢弃了一百钱的利啊。等我死后，你一定要把它砸碎。 
English: His son asked him to smash the stone pillow to see what was inside. Zhao Huizheng said: If you smash it, you won't see what's inside, so you've thrown away a hundred-dollar profit for nothing. When I die, you must smash it.

古文：经岁余，赵病死。
现代文：过了一年多，赵怀正得病而死。
English: After more than a year, Zhao Huai Zheng fell ill and died.

古文：妻令毁视之，中有金银各一铤，如模铸者。
现代文：他妻子让儿子砸毁石枕看里面到底有什么。石枕砸碎后，里面有金银各一锭，就象按模型浇注成的。
English: His wife asked her son to smash the stone pillow to see what was inside. When the pillow was smashed, there was a pile of gold and silver inside, as if it had been cast according to a model.

古文：所函挺处，其模似预曾勘入，无丝发隙，不知从何而入也。
现代文：好象是事先量好了再铸造一样，金银锭在里面没有头发丝大的缝隙，不知金锭和银锭是怎样进入石枕中。
English: As if they had been measured in advance and then cast, the gold and silver ingots do not have hair-thin gaps inside. I do not know how the gold and silver ingots got into the stone pillow.

古文：梃各长三寸余，阔如巨指。
现代文：金锭和银锭各长三寸多，宽如大姆指。
English: The gold and silver cocoons are each more than three inches long and as wide as a thumb.

古文：遂货之，办其殓及偿债，不余一钱。
现代文：贺氏于是卖了金锭和银锭，办理了家中的丧事又偿还了欠债，没有剩下一个钱。
English: Mr. He then sold his gold and silver ingots, handled the family's funeral and paid off his debts. There was no money left.

古文：贺今住洛惠节坊，段成式家人雇其纫针，亲见其说。
现代文：贺氏现住在洛阳惠节坊，段成式家里的人雇她做针线活时，亲耳听见她说的。
English: Ms. He now lives in Hui Jie Fang, Luoyang. When the Duan Cheng family hired her to do needlework, they heard her say it with their own ears.

古文：金蛇
现代文：金蛇
English: The Golden Snake

古文：开成初，宫中有黄色蛇，夜则自宝库中出，游于阶陛间，光明照耀，不可擒获。
现代文：开成初年，宫中有一条黄色的蛇，夜间便从宝库中出来，在皇宫的台阶间游玩，光明照耀，而不能捉到。
English: In the first year of Kaige's reign, there was a yellow snake in the palace. At night, it would come out of the treasury and wander between the steps of the palace, shining brightly, but it could not be caught.

古文：宫人掷珊瑚玦以击之，遂并玦亡去。
现代文：皇宫中的人用珊瑚玦打蛇，于是蛇和玦都不见了。
English: People in the palace beat the snake with coral, and the snake and the toad disappeared.

古文：掌库者具以事告。
现代文：掌管宝库的人将这件事原原本本地报告了皇上。
English: The person in charge of the treasury reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：上命遍搜库内，得黄金蛇而玦贯其首。
现代文：皇上命令把宝库搜遍，得到一条黄金蛇而珊瑚玦则穿连在蛇头上。
English: The emperor ordered the treasury to be searched, and a golden snake was found with a coral reed attached to its head.

古文：上熟视之，昔隋炀帝为晋王时，以黄金蛇赠陈夫人，吾今不知此蛇得自何处。
现代文：皇上仔细看这条蛇，说： 从前隋炀帝做晋王的时候，把黄金蛇赠送给陈夫人。我现在不知道这条蛇是从哪里来的？ 
English: The emperor looked at the snake carefully and said, "Once upon a time, when the Sui and Qian emperors were the kings of Jin, they gave a golden snake to Lady Chen. Now I don't know where this snake came from.

古文：左右因视额下，有阿麼字。
现代文：殿下文武大臣于是看蛇额下，有 阿麼 两字。
English: Therefore, the minister of the palace and the minister of martial arts looked at the snake's forehead, and there were two words, "Ame."

古文：上蹶然曰： 果不失朕所疑，阿麼即炀帝小字也。 
现代文：皇上急忙说： 果然不出我的猜疑，阿麼就是炀帝的小名。 
English: The emperor said in a hurry, "My suspicions are correct. Ah Mo is the nickname of Emperor Zhaotong."

古文：上之博学敏悟，率多此类。
现代文：皇上真是学问渊博而聪明，还有许多和这相类似的事情。
English: The Emperor is really very learned and clever, and there are many similar things.

古文：遂命取玻璃连环，系蛇于玉彘之前足。
现代文：于是皇上命人拿来玻璃连环，把蛇绑在玉猪的前脚上。
English: So the emperor ordered someone to take a glass link and tie the snake to the front foot of the jade pig.

古文：其后竟不复有所见，以彘食蛇也。
现代文：从这以后宫中就再也没有看见蛇，这是因为猪吃蛇啊。
English: After that, there were no more snakes to be seen in the palace, because pigs eat snakes.

