古文：李鄘，字建侯，江夏人。
现代文：李鄘，字建侯，江夏人。
English: Li Xi, surnamed Jian Hou, a native of Jiangxia.

古文：北海太守邕之侄孙。
现代文：北海太守李邕之侄孙。
English: He was the great-nephew of the governor of the North Sea, Li Xi.

古文：父暄，官至起居舍人。
现代文：父亲暄，官至起居舍人。
English: His father was a carpenter, and he was a layman until he became a government official.

古文：鄘大历中举进士，又以书判高等，授秘书正字。
现代文：李鄘于大历年间应举进士，又以其书法判为高等，官授秘书正字。
English: In the year of the great calendar, Li Xuan was promoted to a scholar, and his calligraphy was judged to be high, and the official secretary was awarded the official title.

古文：为李怀光所辟，累迁监察御史。
现代文：为李怀光征聘，屡屡擢升官至监察御史。
English: He was recruited by Li Huaguang and was repeatedly promoted to inspector general.

古文：及怀光据蒲津叛，鄘与母、妻陷贼中。恐祸及亲，因伪白怀光曰： 兄病在洛，请母往视之。 
现代文：及至李怀光依据蒲津叛乱，李鄘与母亲妻子俱陷贼中，耽心祸及亲人，于是对李怀光假称： 因兄长在洛阳患病，请让家母前往探视。 
English: As far as Li Huaiguang, according to the Puting Rebellion, Li Yan and his mother's wife were both trapped in the thieves, worried about the disaster and relatives, so he pretended to Li Huaiguang: Because his brother was ill in Luoyang, please let my mother go to visit.

古文：怀光许焉，且戒妻子无得从。鄘皆遣行。
现代文：李怀光应允，并警告他不许让妻儿跟着去，李鄘却将他们都打发走了。
English: Li Huaguang agreed and warned him not to let his wife and children go with him, but Li Yao sent them all away.

古文：后怀光知，责之。对曰： 鄘名隶军籍，不得随侍老母，奈何不使妇随姑行也。 
现代文：后来李怀光得知，责问他，他回答说： 我名列军籍，不能随行侍候老母，为什么不让媳妇随婆婆前往呢？ 
English: Later, Li Huaguang learned of this and reprimanded him, to which he replied, "I am a member of the military and cannot accompany my mother, so why not let my daughter-in-law accompany her mother-in-law?"

古文：怀光无以罪之。
现代文：李怀光无法将他定罪。
English: Li Huaiguang could not convict him.

古文：时与故相高郢同在贼廷，乃密奏贼军虚实及攻取之势。德宗赐手诏以劳之。
现代文：当时李鄘同前宰相高郢同在叛贼朝廷，便向皇上密奏贼军虚实及攻取之形势，德宗亲赐手诏以慰劳他们。
English: At that time, Li Yu and former Prime Minister Gao Yu were with the renegade imperial court, and they secretly reported to the emperor the truth and falsehood of the rebel army and the situation of the attack. Emperor Dezong personally gave them a handshake to comfort them.

古文：后事泄，怀光严兵召郢与鄘诘责。
现代文：后来事情泄露，李怀光命三军威严列阵召高郢与李鄘责问。
English: Later, the matter was leaked, and Li Huaiguang ordered the three armies to solemnly line up to summon Gao Jun and Li Jun for questioning.

古文：鄘词激气壮，三军义之。怀光不敢杀，囚之狱中。
现代文：李鄘言辞激烈意气慷慨，三军盛赞其义气，李怀光不敢杀，将他囚禁狱中。
English: Li Yu's words were fierce and generous, and the three armies praised his loyalty. Li Huaguang did not dare to kill him and imprisoned him in prison.

古文：怀光死，马燧就狱致礼，表为河东从事。寻以言不行，归养洛中。
现代文：李怀光死，马燧亲到狱中致礼，表奏李鄘为河东从事，不久因意见不被采纳，辞官归洛中休养。
English: After the death of Li Huaiguang, Ma Yuchen went to the prison to pay his respects. He was engaged in the performance of Li Yao for Hedong. Soon, because his opinion was not accepted, the official returned to Luo Middle School to recuperate.

古文：襄州节度使嗣曹王皋致礼延辟，署从事，奏兼殿中侍御史。
现代文：襄州节度使嗣曹王李皋致礼延聘，用为从事，奏请兼任殿中侍御史。
English: The Yangzhou Festival made a courtesy appointment to the heir of Cao Wang, Li Xi, and asked him to serve as an attendant and historian in the palace.

古文：入为吏部员外郎。
现代文：后入朝为吏部员外郎。
English: Later, he entered the imperial court as a member of the administrative department, Wairo.

古文：徐州张建封卒，其子愔为将校所迫，俾领军务。
现代文：徐州张建封卒，其子张忄音为州署将校胁迫，掌领军务。
English: Zhang Jianfeng of Xuzhou, and his son Zhang Yuyin, an officer of the State Bureau of Coercion, were in charge of military affairs.

古文：诏择临难不慑者，即其军以谕之，遂命鄘为徐州宣慰使。
现代文：诏命挑选临难不惧者到徐州军中宣布朝旨，于是命李鄘为徐州宣慰使。
English: The edict ordered that those who were not afraid of difficulties should be selected to go to the Xuzhou army to announce the imperial edict, so Li Xi was appointed as the Xuzhou propaganda envoy.

古文：鄘直抵其军，召将士，传朝旨，陈祸福，脱监军使桎梏，令复其位。凶党不敢犯。
现代文：李鄘径直抵达其军，召集将士，传达朝旨，陈说利害，将被囚之监军使解脱桎梏，让他恢复原职位，凶党不敢违抗。
English: Li Gan went straight to his army, summoned his soldiers, conveyed the imperial order, stated the interests, released the prisoner's overseer, and restored him to his original position. The evil party did not dare to resist.

古文：及愔上表称兵马留后，鄘以为非诏令所加，不宜称号，立使削去，方受其表。
现代文：及至张忄音上表自称兵马留后，李鄘认为此非诏令所加，不宜称此名号，立即要他去掉，才接受其表。
English: After Zhang Xuan wrote on the watch that he was a soldier, Li Yao thought that this was not added by the edict, and it was not appropriate to call this name. He immediately asked him to remove it before accepting his watch.

古文：迁吏部郎中。
现代文：后李鄘升任吏部郎中。
English: Later he was promoted to junior secretary.

古文：顺宗登极，拜御史中丞，迁京兆尹、尚书右丞。
现代文：顺宗登极，李鄘官拜御史中丞，先后调任京兆尹、尚书右丞。
English: Shunzong ascended to the throne, and Li Yiguan was promoted to the middle-ranked official, and successively transferred to the posts of Jing Zhaoyun and Shang Shu Rong.

古文：元和初，以京师多盗，复选为京兆尹，擒奸禁暴，威望甚著。
现代文：元和初，因京师多盗贼，再度获选为京兆尹，擒奸邪禁暴恶，威望很高。
English: In the Yuan and early Heian period, because there were many thieves in the capital, he was re-elected as Jing Zhaoyun, and he was highly respected.

古文：寻拜检校礼部尚书、凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使。
现代文：不久拜检校礼部尚书、凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使。
English: Soon after the inspection, the school's etiquette department Shang Shu, Feng Xiang Yin, and Feng Xiang Zou Yu attended the ceremony.

古文：是镇承前命帅，多用武将，有 神策行营 之号。
现代文：该镇承前之旧例任命主帅，多用武将，有 神策行营 之封号。
English: The town followed the old practice of appointing a commander, mostly using military generals, with the seal name of "神策行營."

古文：初受命，必诣军修谒。
现代文：受命之初，必至军中接受拜谒。
English: At the beginning of receiving the order, he had to go to the army to receive the salute.

古文：鄘既受命，表陈其不可，诏遂去 神策行营 字，但为凤翔陇右节度。
现代文：李鄘受命之后，上表陈说此例不可，诏令便取消了 神策行营 数字，只称凤翔陇右节度。
English: After Li Xuan received the order, the above table stated that this case was unacceptable, and the imperial decree canceled the number of the divine strategy camp, known only as the Fengxiang right degree.

古文：未几，迁镇太原，入为刑部尚书、兼御史大夫、诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：不久，调任镇守太原，又入朝为刑部尚书、兼御史大夫、诸道盐铁转运使。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of the town guard of Taiyuan, and then he entered the imperial court as the secretary of the Department of Justice, the chief historian, and the envoy for the transportation of salt and iron from various regions.

古文：五年冬，出为扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：元和五年冬，出任扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
English: In the winter of the 5th year of the Yuan and He served as the governor of Yangzhou and the festival envoy of Huainan.

古文：鄘前在两镇，皆以刚严操下，遽变旧制，人情不安，故未几即改去。
现代文：李鄘先前在凤翔、太原两镇，皆以刚直严厉整治部下，迅疾改变旧制，人心不安，故不久即改回。
English: Previously, in Fengxiang and Taiyuan Towns, Li Yao treated his subordinates with rigor and severity, changing the old system rapidly, and people were uneasy, so he soon changed back.

古文：至淮南数岁，就加检校左仆射，政严事理，府廪充积。
现代文：至淮南数年，加授检校仆射，治政严明诸事有序，府库仓廪蓄积充实。
English: In the few years since Huainan, the school inspection has been strengthened, the governance has been strict and orderly, and the prefectural treasury has been fully accumulated.

古文：及王师征淮夷，郓寇李师道表里相援。
现代文：及至王师征讨淮西贼寇，郓州寇李师道与淮西寇表里相援。
English: Wang Shi went to enlist the aid of the Huaixi Thieves and Robbers, and the Zhangzhou Thieves and Robbers and Li Shi Dao came to the aid of the Huaixi Thieves and Robbers.

古文：鄘发楚、寿等州二万余兵，分压贼境，日费甚广，未尝请于有司。
现代文：李鄘发遣楚、寿等州二万余兵，分别压逼贼境，每日费用很大，却未向主管官署请援。
English: Li Kun dispatched more than 20,000 soldiers from Chu, Shou and other prefectures to suppress the bandit territory separately. The daily cost was very large, but he did not ask the competent authority for assistance.

古文：诸道以鄘为倡首，悉索以献，自此王师无匮乏之忧。先是，吐突承璀监淮南军，贵宠莫贰。鄘亦以刚严素著，而差相敬惮，未尝稍失。
现代文：当时因大兵发动，国用不足，宪宗皇帝命盐铁副使程异乘驿车晓谕江南诸道，使其资助军队所需。李鄘因所治境内富庶殷实，便大动府库，除存贮一年所需之外，全都贡献给朝廷，从此王师再无匮乏之忧。先前吐突承璀监淮南军，权贵势要莫敢违逆，李鄘素以刚直严厉著称，对他也表示敬畏，没一点失礼之处。
English: At that time, due to the shortage of state funds caused by the mobilization of the soldiers, the Emperor Jianzong ordered the deputy envoy of the salt and iron, Cheng Yi, to travel by carriage to the southern provinces of the Yangtze River to tell them what they needed to fund the army. Li Qiye, because of the richness and affluence in the territory he ruled, greatly increased the prefectural treasury, and in addition to the storage required for one year, all of it was donated to the imperial court. From then on, Wang Shi no longer had to worry about shortages. Previously, the Tutsi was the overseer of the Huainan Army, and the powerful must not

古文：承璀归，遂引以为相。
现代文：吐突承璀回朝，便举荐李鄘为宰相。
English: When he returned to the imperial court, he recommended Li Xi as prime minister.

古文：十二年，征拜门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：元和十二年，李鄘被召入朝拜门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Yao was called into the service of the groom, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：鄘出入显重，素不以公辅自许，年侵势过，颇安外镇。
现代文：李鄘出入京师位显权重，一向不以朝廷重臣自居。虽然年长，势位过人，却颇善安抚外镇。
English: Li Qiye's visits to and from Beijing show the weight of his position, and he has never regarded himself as a high-ranking official of the imperial court. Although he is old and powerful, he is quite good at appeasing the townsfolk.

古文：登祖筵，闻乐而泣下，曰： 宰相之任，非吾所长也。 
现代文：每登饯行宴席，听到宴乐则泣下，说道： 宰相之职任，不是我所擅长的。 
English: Every time he attends a banquet, he cries when he hears the banquet music, saying: The position of prime minister is not my forte.

古文：行颇缓，至京师，又辞疾归第。
现代文：行进颇为迟缓，至京师，又称病辞官归家。
English: The march was rather slow, and the Beijing division, also known as the sick officer, returned home.

古文：既未朝谒，亦不领政事，竟以疾辞，改授户部尚书。
现代文：既未朝谒皇上，也不受领政事，终于以患病辞职，朝廷改授他户部尚书。
English: He was neither crowned emperor nor received the post of consul, but finally resigned due to illness, and the imperial court awarded him the title of household minister.

古文：俄换检校左仆射，兼太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：随即改授检校左仆射，兼太子宾客，分派至东都洛阳任职。
English: He was immediately re-assigned to the inspection school Zuo Fuxia, also a guest of the prince, and assigned to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：寻以太子少傅致仕。
现代文：不久以太子少傅职位退休。
English: Soon after, he retired from his position as a sous chef.

古文：元和十五年八月卒，赠太子太保，谥曰肃。
现代文：元和十五年八月去世，追赠太子太保，谥号为 肃 。
English: He died in August of the 15th year of the Yuan and was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Taibo. His nickname was Su.

古文：鄘强直无私饰，与杨凭、穆质、许孟容、王仲舒友善，皆任气自负。
现代文：李鄘为人刚强正直而不掩饰自己，与杨冯、穆质、许孟容、王仲舒相友善，这些人都任性而自负。
English: Li Qian is a strong and honest person who does not hide himself. He is friendly with Yang Feng, Mu Qian, Xu Meng Rong and Wang Zhongshu, who are all self-willed and conceited.

古文：然鄘当官严重，为吏以峻法立操，所至称理，而刚决少恩。
现代文：然而李鄘为官严肃庄重，执法严峻，注重政德，所到之处皆据理行事，而处事刚直果断不徇私情。
English: However, Li Yan was a serious and dignified official, strict in law enforcement, and focused on political morality. Wherever he went, he acted according to reason, and dealt with things straightforwardly and decisively without favoritism.

古文：镇扬州七年，令行禁止。
现代文：镇守扬州七年，令行禁止。
English: After seven years of guarding Yangzhou, he was banned from doing so.

古文：自长庆已来，目为名卿。王彦威，太原人。
现代文：凡擒拿杀戮之事，一概交与军吏办理，僚属不敢犯禁，违者则以非法论罪，人们的不满因而较少。
English: All cases of capture and killing were referred to military officials for handling. Colleagues and subordinates did not dare to violate the ban, and violators were charged with illegal acts. As a result, there was less dissatisfaction among the people.

古文：世儒家，少孤贫苦学，尤通《三礼》。
现代文：其子李柱，官至浙东观察使。王彦威，太原人。世代儒学之家，少小失去父母，家境贫困，他刻苦学习，尤其精通《三礼》。
English: His son Li Zhu, an official to the East Zhejiang Observation Mission. Wang Yanwei, Taiyuan people. Generation Confucianism home, lost his parents at an early age, his family was poor, he studied hard, especially proficient in "Three Rites."

古文：无由自达，元和中游京师，求为太常散吏。
现代文：无法自己开通仕途，元和年间出游京师，请求做太常散吏。
English: Unable to make a career for himself, he traveled to Beijing during the Yuan and Qing dynasties and asked to be a commoner.

古文：卿知其书生，补充检讨官。
现代文：太常寺卿了解到他是个书生，让他补任检讨官。
English: Lord Taizhoji learned that he was a scholar and appointed him as a supplementary examiner.

古文：彦威于礼阁掇拾自隋已来朝廷沿革、吉凶五礼，以类区分，成三十卷献之，号曰《元和新礼》，由是知名，特授太常博士。
现代文：王彦威在礼部阁搜集隋以来朝廷沿革及五种吉凶礼仪的资料，按类区分，编成三十卷献给朝廷，取名为《元和新礼》，因而知名，朝廷特授他太常博士。
English: Wang Yanwei collected information on the history of the imperial court and the five auspicious and inauspicious etiquettes since the Sui Dynasty in the etiquette cabinet, divided by category, compiled into thirty volumes dedicated to the imperial court, named "Yuan and New Rites," and thus became well-known. The court specially awarded him a doctorate.

古文：宪宗晏驾，未定谥。
现代文：宪宗驾崩，谥号未定。
English: Kenzong passed away, and his posthumous name is still undecided.

古文：淮南节度使李夷简以宪宗功高列圣，宜特称祖，穆宗下礼官议。
现代文：淮南节度使李夷简认为宪宗功勋高于列朝圣主，应依例称为祖，穆宗将此事下交给礼官计议。
English: The Huainan Festival made Li Yijian think that the merits of the Jianzong were higher than those of the pilgrims, and it should be called the ancestor according to the example. Mu Zong handed the matter over to the etiquette officer for discussion.

古文：彦威奏曰： 据礼经，三代之制，始封之君，谓之太祖。
现代文：王彦威奏道： 据礼经所载，夏商周三代制度，开国之君，称为太祖。
English: Wang Yanwei recited: According to the sutras, the third generation of the Xia merchants, the founder of the country, is called the great ancestor.

古文：太祖之外，又祖有功而宗有德，故夏后氏祖颛顼而宗禹，殷人祖契而宗汤，周人郊祀后稷，祖文王而宗武王。
现代文：太祖之外，又以有功之君称祖、有德之君称宗，故夏后氏以颛顼为祖以禹为宗，殷人以契为祖以汤为宗，周人郊祀后稷，以文王为祖以武王为宗。
English: In addition to the great-grandfather, the meritorious prince was also called the ancestor, and the virtuous prince was called the patriarch. Therefore, the Xia Guo clan took Yu as the ancestor and Yu as the patriarch, the Yin clan took Qi as the ancestor and Tang as the patriarch, the Zhou clan worshipped Houyi, and the King of Literature as the ancestor and King Wu as the patriarch.

古文：自东汉魏晋，渐违经意，沿革不一。子孙以推美为先，自始祖已下并有建祖之制。
现代文：自东汉魏晋以来，逐渐违背经意，承袭旧制又做了不同的改变，子孙将推出美名放在首位，自始祖以下同样有建祖的制度。
English: Since the Eastern Han Dynasty, Wei and Jin Dynasties, it has gradually violated the will of the economy, inherited the old system and made different changes. The descendants will put the introduction of a good name in the first place. Since the founding fathers, there has also been a system of founding fathers.

古文：盖非典训，不可法也。
现代文：然而并非经典训导，不可效法。
English: However, it is not a classic teaching and cannot be imitated.

古文：国朝祖宗制度，本于《周礼》，以景皇帝为太祖，又祖神尧而宗太宗。
现代文：我朝祖宗制度，依据《周礼》，以景皇帝为太祖，又以神尧为祖而以太宗为宗。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," I have the Emperor Jing as my great-great-great-grandfather, and I have Shenshu as my great-great-grandfather, and I have the Ethereal Sect as my sect.

古文：自高宗已降，但称宗。
现代文：自高宗以下，只称宗。
English: From Gaozong and below, it is only called Zong.

古文：谓之尊名，可为成法。
现代文：这叫作尊号，可作为既定之法。
English: This is called the honorific, and it can be taken as an established law.

古文：不然，则太宗造有区夏，理致升平；玄宗扫清内难，翊戴圣父；肃宗龙飞灵武，收复两都，此者应天顺人，拨乱返正，至于庙号，亦但称宗。
现代文：若不这样，那么太宗建立一统之国，治理出升平之世；玄宗扫清内乱，辅佐拥戴父皇；肃宗在灵武即位，收复两都：这都是应天顺人，拨乱反正，到拟定庙号时，也只称宗。
English: If this is not the case, then Taizong established a unified country and governed the world of rising and leveling; Xuanzong cleared up civil strife and supported and supported his father, the emperor; Su Zong ascended the throne in Lingwu and recovered the two capitals: all of this was in accordance with heaven and man, and the turmoil was resolved, and when the temple name was drafted, it was only called Zong.

古文：谨按经义，祖者始也，宗者尊也，故《传》曰： 始封必为祖。 《书》曰： 德高可宗，故号高宗。 
现代文：谨按经书之义，祖者始也，宗者尊也，所以《传》说 始封必为祖 ，《书》称 德高可宗，故号高宗 。
English: According to the meaning of the scriptures, the ancestor is also the beginning, and the founder is also respected. Therefore, "Biography" said that Shihong must be the ancestor, "Book" said that De Gao could be the founder, hence the name Gao Zong.

古文：今宜本三代之定制，去魏、晋之乱法，守贞观、开元之宪章，而拟议大名，垂以为训。
现代文：现应根据三代之定制，抛弃魏晋之乱法，恪守贞观、开元之宪章，而拟议大名，传世以为训导。
English: Now, according to the custom of the three generations, we should abandon the chaotic laws of the Wei and Jin dynasties, adhere to the principles of chastity and the charter of the founding, and propose a daimyo to be passed down as a training guide.

古文：大行庙号，宜称宗。 
现代文：故皇之庙号，应称宗。 
English: The temple name of the late emperor should be called Zong.

古文：制从之。
现代文：定谥时采纳了王彦威的意见。
English: Wu Zetian obeyed the will of the world.

古文：故事，祔庙之礼，先告于太极殿，然后奉神主赴太庙。
现代文：旧例，礻付庙之礼，先到太极殿祝祷，然后敬奉神主前往太庙。
English: According to the old custom, when giving a gift to the temple, first go to the Taiji Hall to pray, and then go to the temple to worship the Lord.

古文：祔礼毕，不再告于太极殿。
现代文：礻付礼完毕，不再到太极殿禀告。
English: After the bowing ceremony is over, there will be no more obituaries at the Taiji Hall.

古文：时宪宗祔庙礼毕，执政详旧典，令有司再告祔享礼毕于太极殿。
现代文：当时宪宗礻付庙礼毕，执政官不详旧典，命主持官员再到太极殿禀告礻付庙祭享之礼完毕。
English: At that time, Emperor Gensong had concluded the ceremony for the dedication of the temple, the consul did not know the old text, and ordered the presiding official to go to the Taiji Hall to announce that the ceremony for the dedication of the temple and the enjoyment of the festival had ended.

古文：彦威执议以为不可，执政怒。
现代文：王彦威坚决认为不可，执政官大怒。
English: Wang Yanwei was adamant that this was unacceptable, and the consul flew into a rage.

古文：会宗正寺进祝版，误以宪宗为睿宗。
现代文：恰好宗正寺进呈祝版，误将宪宗写成睿宗。
English: Sosei-ji Temple happened to receive the congratulatory edition, and mistakenly wrote Kensei Sect as Ruizong Sect.

古文：执政衔其强，奏祝版参差，博士之罪，彦威坐削一阶，夺两季俸。
现代文：执政官仗着权位，奏报祝版有差错乃博士之罪，王彦威因此获罪削夺一级官阶，免发两季俸禄。
English: The consul relied on his position of power, and it was the doctor's fault that there was an error in the congratulatory edition of the report. As a result, Wang Yanwei was convicted of depriving a first-class official rank and was exempted from paying two seasons of salary.

古文：彦威殊不低回，每议礼事，守正不阿附，君子称之。
现代文：王彦威一点也不低头屈服，每当讨论礼仪之事，仍坚守原则决不阿谀逢迎，众君子都称赞他。
English: Wang Yanwei did not bow down and give in at all. Whenever the matter of etiquette was discussed, he still adhered to the principle of never being flattered. All the gentlemen praised him.

古文：累转司封员外郎中。
现代文：后他屡经调任做了司封员外郎中。
English: After that, he was transferred several times and became the second-ranked official.

古文：弘文馆旧不置学士，文宗特置一员以待彦威。
现代文：弘文馆旧制不设置学士，文宗特设学士一员以安置王彦威。
English: Under the old system, the Kobunkwan did not offer a bachelor's degree. Wang Yanwei was placed as a member of the special bachelor's degree program in literature.

古文：寻使魏博宣慰，特赐金紫。
现代文：不久又派魏博宣旨慰问，特赐紫服金鱼袋。
English: Soon after, Weibo also sent a message of condolence, specially giving a purple dress and a goldfish bag.

古文：五年，迁谏议大夫。
现代文：大和五年，升任谏议大夫。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to the post of chief medical officer.

古文：朝廷自诛李师道，收复淄青十二州，未定户籍。乃命彦威充十二州勘定两税使。
现代文：朝廷自诛灭李师道后，收复淄、青等十二州，未核定户籍，于是命王彦威充任十二州勘定两税使。
English: After the imperial court wiped out Li Shidao, it recovered twelve states such as Min and Qing, but did not approve the household registration, so it ordered Wang Yanwei to serve as the twelve-state accountant.

古文：朝法振举，人不以为烦。
现代文：朝廷法规得以实施，人们遵从不以为烦冗。
English: The court regulations were implemented, and people did not think it was tedious to follow them.

古文：以本官兼史馆修撰。
现代文：王彦威又以原职兼史馆修撰。
English: Wang Yanwei continued to work as a historian in his former job.

古文：彦威通悉典故，宿儒硕学皆让之。
现代文：王彦威通晓典章制度，宿儒硕学都要退让几分。
English: Wang Yanwei is well-versed in the system of awards and decorations, and both Zhuge Liang and Zhuge Liang have to concede a few points.

古文：时以仆射上事仪注，前后不定，中丞李汉奏定，朝议未以为允。
现代文：当时因仆射上任时的仪式规定，前后没有定准，中丞李汉奏定制，朝官议论未能通过。
English: At that time, due to the rules of the ceremony at the time of taking office, the front and back were not set, the middle-ranking officer Li Han played a custom, and the discussion of the imperial officials could not be passed.

古文：中书门下奏请依元和七年已前仪注，左右仆射上日，请受诸司四品六品丞郎已下拜。
现代文：中书、门下两省奏请依照元和七年以前的仪礼规定，即左右仆射上任之日，受诸官署四品六品丞、郎以下官员拜谒。
English: In accordance with the ceremonial regulations of the Yuan Dynasty and seven years ago, that is, the day when the left and right flunkeys took office, officials from all government departments, including the fourth grade, sixth grade, junior high school, and junior high school, are requested to pay homage.

古文：彦威奏论曰： 臣谨按《开元礼》：凡受册官，并与卑官答拜。
现代文：王彦威上奏论说： 臣谨察《开元礼》：凡受册封之官，一概与卑位之官相答拜。
English: Wang Yanwei said in his report: The minister should carefully read the "opening ceremony of the first year of the year": all the officials who have been awarded the title will reciprocate with the lower-ranking officials.

古文：国朝官品，令三师三公正一品，尚书令正二品，并是册拜授官。
现代文：国朝官品明令，三师三公为正一品，尚书令为正二品，都是册封授官。
English: According to the imperial edict, the three generals and the three princes were awarded the title of nobility, and Shang Shuling was awarded the title of nobility.

古文：上之日，亦无受朝官再拜之文。
现代文：上任之日，也无受朝官再拜之明文规定。
English: On the day he took office, there was also no explicit provision for him to receive further obeisance from the imperial officials.

古文：仆射班次三公，又是尚书令副贰之职，虽端揆之重，有异百寮，然与群官比肩事主。
现代文：仆射品位低于三公，又是尚书令的副职，虽然其权势之重有异于百僚，但与群官皆比肩事主。
English: The rank of the courier was lower than that of the three princes, and he was also the deputy of the shogun. Although his weight of power was different from that of the hundred officials, he was as important as the group officials.

古文：《礼》曰 非其臣即答拜之 。
现代文：《礼》说： 不是自己的臣下即相答拜。 
English: "Li" said: It is not one's own vassal who reciprocates.

古文：又曰 大夫之臣不稽首 。
现代文：又说： 大夫之臣不稽首。 
English: He also said, "A doctor's vassal does not show his face."

古文：非尊家臣，以避君也。
现代文：并非尊宠家臣，而是避免有欲称君王之心。
English: It is not to honor the favorite vassal, but to avoid the desire to be called the king's heart.

古文：即仆射上日受常参官拜，事颇非仪。
现代文：现在仆射上任之日受那日常参见之官拜谒，事情就很有些不合礼仪。
English: Now, on the day of his inauguration, when he is being courted by the official of the daily newspaper, things are a bit unseemly.

古文：况元和七年已经奏议，酌为定制，编在国章。
现代文：何况元和七年已奏报朝廷研究，斟酌之后成为定制，编入国朝典章。
English: What's more, Yuan He's seven-year plan was submitted to the imperial court for study, and after deliberation, it became a custom and was compiled into the national and imperial ordinances.

古文：近年上仪，又有受拜之礼，礼文乍变，物论未安，请依元和七年敕为定。 
现代文：近年上任的仪式，又有受拜之礼，礼规忽变，舆论不安，请依元和七年敕令作为定制。 
English: In recent years, the ceremony of taking office, there are worship, etiquette changes, public opinion is uneasy, please follow the original and the seven-year imperial edict as a custom.

古文：时李程为左仆射，宰执难于改革，虽不从其议，论者称之。
现代文：当时李程为左仆射，执政宰相难于改革，虽未采纳王彦威的意见，他却得到舆论的赞扬。
English: At that time, Li Cheng was a lackey, and the ruling prime minister was difficult to reform. Although he did not adopt Wang Yanwei's opinion, he was praised by public opinion.

古文：兴平县人上官兴，因醉杀人亡窜，吏执其父下狱，兴自首请罪，以出其父。
现代文：兴平县人上官兴因醉杀人后逃亡，县吏抓了他的父亲下狱，上官兴自首请罪，以求释放他的父亲。
English: Xingping County man Shangguan Xing fled after killing someone while drunk. County officials arrested his father and sent him to prison. Shangguan Xing turned himself in to plead guilty in order to release his father.

古文：京兆尹杜悰、御史中丞宇文鼎，以其首罪免父，有光孝义，请减死配流。
现代文：京兆尹杜忄宗、御史中丞宇文鼎认为他自首请罪使父亲免被囚禁，属光大孝道的义举，请求免其死罪而处以流放。
English: Jing Zhaoyin, Du Yuzhong, and Gu Shizhong, Yu Wenting, believed that his self-surrender to plead guilty and save his father from imprisonment was a noble act of filial piety, and requested that he be exempted from the death penalty and sentenced to exile.

古文：彦威与谏官上言曰： 杀人者死，百王共守。
现代文：王彦威与谏官上书奏道： 杀人者处死，乃古今百王共守之理法。
English: Wang Yanwei and the eunuch wrote a letter saying, "The execution of murderers is a principle that has been observed by hundreds of kings from ancient times to the present.

古文：若许杀人不死，是教杀人。
现代文：假若容许杀人者不被处死，这是教唆杀人。
English: If a murderer is allowed not to be executed, this is incitement to murder.

古文：兴虽免父，不合减死。 
现代文：上官兴虽使其父免于囚禁之苦，也不应减免死罪。 
English: Even though Shangguan Xing spared his father from the suffering of imprisonment, he should not be exempted from the death penalty.

古文：诏竟许决流。
现代文：诏令最终准许判处流放。
English: The edict finally allowed the sentence to be carried out.

古文：彦威诣中书投宰相面论，语讦气盛。
现代文：王彦威到中书省谒见宰相当面论说，语直气盛。
English: Wang Yanwei went to the General Office of the General Administration of Press and Publication to have a face-to-face discussion, and his tone was forthright.

古文：执政怒，左授河南少尹。
现代文：执政宰相发怒，将王彦威降为河南少尹。
English: Enraged, the ruling chancellor demoted Wang Yanwei to Henan Shao Yin.

古文：未几，改司农卿。
现代文：不久，改授司农卿。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the post of Minister of Agriculture.

古文：李宗闵重之。既秉政，授青州刺史、兼御史大夫，充平卢军节度、淄青等观察使。
现代文：李宗闵器重他，执政之后，授他青州刺史兼御史大夫，充当平卢军节度、淄青观察使等职。
English: Li Zongxuan valued him highly. After taking office, he awarded him the post of Qingzhou chief historian and chief historian, and he served as the commander of the Pinglu Army and the Qinghai-Tibet Observation Post.

古文：开成元年，召拜户部侍郎，寻判度支。
现代文：开成元年，王彦威被朝廷征召拜户部侍郎，随即又判度支。
English: In the first year of the Kaisei era, Wang Yanwei was summoned by the imperial court to worship the household attendant, and was immediately judged by the branch.

古文：彦威儒学虽优，亦勤吏事，然货泉之柄，素非所长，性既刚讦，自恃有余。
现代文：他儒学虽优，又勤奋奉职，然而掌理钱财却非所长，性情既刚直，又过于自信。
English: Although he is good at Confucianism and diligent in his duties, he is not good at managing money. His temperament is both upright and overconfident.

古文：尝紫宸廷奏曰： 臣自计司按见管钱谷文簿，皆量入以为出，使经费必足，无所刻削。
现代文：曾在紫宸殿上奏说： 臣自己计算设置现管钱粮文簿，皆量入为出，使经费务必充足，无一项开支被削减。
English: He once made a report at the Privy Council, saying: The minister himself calculated and set up the current management of the money and grain book, and everyone lived within their means, so that the funds must be sufficient, and none of the expenses were reduced.

古文：且百口之家，犹有岁蓄，而军用钱物，一切通用，悉随色额占定，终岁支给，无毫厘之差。
现代文：百口之家，尚有年终储蓄，何况军用钱物，各项开支，均须随项目数额派定，终年供给，没有毫厘之差。
English: A family of a hundred people still has year-end savings, not to mention military money, and all expenses must be allocated according to the amount of the project, and supplied throughout the year, without the slightest difference.

古文：倘臣一旦愚迷，欲自欺窃，亦不可得也。 
现代文：倘若臣一旦愚昧昏迷，企图自欺自盗，也不可能得逞。 
English: If a minister, once in a stupor of ignorance, attempts to deceive himself, he cannot succeed.

古文：名曰《度支占额图》。
现代文：将文簿取名为《度支占额图》。
English: The workbook will be called "Current Expenditure Chart."

古文：既而又进《供军图》曰： 起至德、乾元之际，迄于永贞、元和之初，天下有观察者十，节度二十有九，防御者四，经略者三。
现代文：既而又进献《供军图》说： 起于至德、乾元之际，止于永贞、元和之初，国家十处有观察使，二十九处有节度使，四处有防御使，三处有经略使。
English: At the same time, the introduction of the "Military Supply Map" said: Starting from the beginning of the Zhi De and the Qian Yuan, and ending at the beginning of the Yongzheng and the Yuan He, the country has ten observation envoys, twenty-nine control envoys, four defense envoys, and three economic envoys.

古文：掎角之师，犬牙相制，大都通邑，无不有兵，都计中外各额，至八十余万。
现代文：各地军队互成犄角之势，犹如犬牙交错，大的都会、通达的县邑，没一处没有兵，总计京城及外地兵额达八十余万。
English: Armies from all over the country are at each other's throats, as if the teeth of a dog are intertwined. Large cities and well-connected counties and towns are not without soldiers, with a total of more than 800,000 soldiers in Beijing and other cities.

古文：长庆户口凡三百三十五万，而兵额约九十九万，通计三户资一兵。
现代文：长庆朝户口共三百三十五万，而兵额约九十九万，平均三户资养一兵。
English: The households of the Changqing Dynasty totaled 3.35 million, while the number of soldiers was about 9.9 million, with an average of three households supporting one soldier.

古文：今计天下租赋，一岁所入，总不过三千五百余万，而上供之数三之一焉。
现代文：现计算天下租赋，一年收入，总计不过三千五百余万，而上缴之数达三分之一。
English: Now calculate the total income of the country, the total income of a year is only more than 35 million, and the number of supplies to the imperial court accounts for one-third.

古文：三万之中，二给衣赐。
现代文：三分之中，二分供作衣装之赐。
English: Of the three points, two points were awarded for costumes.

古文：自留州留使兵士衣赐之外，其余四十万众，仰给度支。
现代文：在留守州驻守兵士衣赐之外，其余四十万军队，均仰赖度支供给。
English: In addition to the clothing given to the soldiers stationed in the left-behind states, the remaining 400,000 troops are all dependent on the degree of support and supply.

古文：伏以时逢理安，运属神圣，然而兵不可弭，食哉惟时。
现代文：臣以为时逢太平，国遇圣主，然而军队不可解散，时时需要进食。
English: The vassal thought that the times were peaceful and the country was in the hands of the Lord. However, the army could not be disbanded and needed to be fed at all times.

古文：忧勤之端，兵食是切。
现代文：圣上首先忧虑的事，确为军粮。
English: The first care of the Lord is for the food of his army.

古文：臣谬司邦计，虔奉睿图，辄纂事功，庶裨圣览。 
现代文：臣不避谬误为国家谋划，虔诚奉献自以为睿智的图表，编纂成册，恳请圣上赐览。 
English: The minister does not avoid the fallacy of planning for the country, devoutly dedicates the chart that he thinks is wise, compiles it into a book, and implores the saint to read it.

古文：又纂集国初已来至贞元帝代功臣，如《左氏传》体叙事，号曰《唐典》，进之。
现代文：又编集国初以来至贞元历代功臣事迹，仿效《左传》文体叙事，取名为《唐典》，进献朝廷。
English: He also compiled the deeds of meritorious subjects from the beginning of the country to the reign of Zhenyuan, imitating the narrative style of Zuo Zhuan, and named it "Tang Dynasty" and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：彦威既掌利权，心希大用。
现代文：王彦威掌管财权以后，心中希望大受重用。
English: After Wang Yanwei took charge of the financial rights, he hoped in his heart to be highly valued.

古文：时内官仇士良、鱼弘志禁中用事。
现代文：当时内官仇士良、鱼弘志在宫中专权。
English: At that time, Chushiryo and Ushihiroshi, the palace officials, had absolute power in the palace.

古文：先是左右神策军多以所赐衣物于度支中估，判使多曲从，厚给其价。
现代文：先前，左右神策军常将朝廷所赐衣物拿到度支署中估价换钱，判使多半曲意顺从，付给优厚的价钱。
English: In the past, the left and right divine policy troops often took the clothes given by the imperial court to the customs branch office to exchange the estimated value for money, and ordered most of them to obey and pay a generous price.

古文：开成初，有诏禁止，然趋利者犹希意从其请托。
现代文：开成初年，朝廷下诏禁止，但那些逐利之人仍希望判使顺从他们的请托。
English: In the first year of its opening, the Imperial Court issued an edict forbidding it, but those profit-seekers still hoped that the court would comply with their request.

古文：至是，彦威大结私恩，凡内官请托，无不如意，物议鄙其躁妄。
现代文：到这时，王彦威大结私恩，只要内官请托，没有不如意的，舆论鄙薄他浮躁妄为。
English: By this time, Wang Yanwei had amassed a large amount of personal favors. As long as the officials asked for his help, there was nothing unsatisfactory. Public opinion despised him for his impetuous behavior.

古文：复修王播旧事，贡奉羡余，殆无虚日。
现代文：王彦威又仿效王播旧例，向朝官贡奉羡余钱，几乎一天也不停止。
English: Wang Yanwei also followed Wang Bo's old example and paid tribute to the imperial officials. He did not stop for almost a day.

古文：会边军上诉衣赐不时，兼之朽故。宰臣恶其所为，令摄度支人吏付台推讯。
现代文：正值戍边之军上诉朝廷不按时赐发衣装，而且所发衣物陈旧，宰臣憎恶王彦威所作所为，命拘捕度支署人员交付御史台审讯。
English: At the time of the appeal of the Army of the Flank, the Imperial Court did not issue costumes on time, and the clothing issued was old. The Vice-Minister detested Wang Yanwei's behavior and ordered the arrest of the branch office personnel to be handed over to the History Station for interrogation.

古文：彦威略不介怀，入司视事。
现代文：王彦威毫不在意，依旧入衙理事。
English: Wang Yanwei did not care at all and still became a member of the board.

古文：及人吏受罚，左授卫尉卿，停务，方还私第。
现代文：及至所拘人员受罚，他被降为卫尉卿，停职，才返回私第。
English: When the detainee was punished, he was demoted to the rank of lieutenant and suspended from duty before returning to private life.

古文：三年七月，检校礼部尚书，代殷侑为许州刺史，充忠武军节度、陈许溵观察等使。
现代文：开成三年七月，王彦威任检校礼部尚书，替代殷侑为许州刺史，充任忠武军节度使、陈许氵殷观察使等职。
English: In July of the third year, Wang Yanwei was appointed as the inspector of the school's etiquette department, replacing Yin Xi with Xu Zhou Zhishi, and serving as the commander of the festival of the loyal troops and the observer of Chen Xu and Yin.

古文：会昌中，入为兵部侍郎，历方镇，检校兵部尚书。
现代文：会昌年间，入朝为兵部侍郎，历任方镇守官，检校兵部尚书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Huichang, he entered the imperial court as an attendant of the military department, successively served as a town guard of Fang, and was the inspector of the military department.

古文：卒，赠仆射，谥曰靖。
现代文：死后，追赠仆射，谥号为 靖 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumously posthumous posthumously posthumous posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously.

