古文：五国伐秦，无功而还。
现代文：五国讨伐秦国，无功而返。
English: The Five Kingdoms fought against Qin, but to no avail.

古文：其后，齐欲伐宋，而秦禁之。
现代文：在这之后，齐国要讨伐宋国，秦国制止了它。
English: After that, Qi wanted to invade Song, but Qin stopped it.

古文：齐令宋郭之秦，请合而以伐宋。
现代文：齐国派宋郭去秦国，请求联合来进攻宋国。
English: The State of Qi sent Song Guo to the State of Qin to request a joint attack on the State of Song.

古文：秦王许之。
现代文：秦王答应了。
English: King Qin agreed.

古文：魏王畏齐、秦之合也，欲讲于秦。
现代文：魏王害怕齐国、秦国的联合，也要同秦国讲和。
English: The Wei king was afraid of the union of Qi and Qin, and wanted to make peace with Qin.

古文：谓魏王曰： 秦王谓宋郭曰： 分宋之城，服宋之强者，六国也。
现代文：苏秦对魏王说： 秦王对宋郭说： 分割宋国的城邑，击败宋国强大势力的是六国。
English: Su Qin said to Wei Wang: Qin Wang said to Song Guo: It was the Six Kingdoms that divided the cities and towns of Song and defeated the powerful forces of Song.

古文：乘宋之敝，而与王争得者，楚、魏也。
现代文：趁宋国衰弱，而同大王争利的，是楚国、魏国。
English: The states of Chu and Wei took advantage of the weakness of Song to compete with the Great King.

古文：请为王毋禁楚之伐魏也，而王独举宋。
现代文：请允许我们为了大王不去阻止楚国进攻魏国，大王就独自攻取宋国了。
English: Please allow us, for the sake of the great king, not to prevent Chu from attacking Wei, and the great king will conquer Song on his own.

古文：王之伐宋也，请刚柔而皆用之。
现代文：大王进攻宋国，刚柔两手一齐使用。
English: Da Wang attacked Song, using both hands simultaneously.

古文：如宋者，欺之不为逆者，杀之不为仇者也。
现代文：像宋国这样的国家，欺侮它不能算大逆不道，攻灭它也不能算结仇。
English: If you bully a country like Song, it is not treason, and if you defeat it, it is not revenge.

古文：王无与之讲以取地，既已得地矣，又以力攻之，期于啖宋而已矣。 
现代文：大王不要和宋国讲和来得到土地，已经得到土地了，再加强兵力进攻它，寄期望予齐国灭掉宋国。 
English: The great king should not make peace with the Song Dynasty to get land, but should strengthen the troops to attack it and hope that the Qing Dynasty will destroy the Song Dynasty.

古文： 臣闻此言，而窃为王悲，秦必且用此于王矣。又必且曰王以求地，既已得地，又且以力攻王。
现代文： 臣下听了这些话，心里替大王感到悲哀，秦国一定会用这种方法对待大王，也一定将会使大王陷入困境以此来索取土地，获得了土地，又将用武力进攻大王。
English: After listening to these words, the vassals felt sad for the great king in their hearts. Qin would certainly use this method to treat the great king, and would certainly put the great king in a predicament in order to claim land, acquire land, and attack the great king by force.

古文：又必谓王曰使王轻齐，齐、魏之交已丑，又且收齐以更索于王。
现代文：最后一定会同大王讲和，这就使大王轻视齐国，齐国、魏国的关系就恶化了，又将拉拢齐国更加肆无忌惮地向大王勒索。
English: In the end, he will definitely make peace with the great king, which will make the great king despise Qi, and the relationship between Qi and Wei will deteriorate, and Qi will be drawn to extort the great king more unscrupulously.

古文：秦尝用此于楚矣，又尝用此于韩矣，愿王之深计之也。
现代文：秦国曾经对楚国用过这种策略，也曾对韩国用过这种策略，希望大王深入考虑这件事。
English: Qin had used this tactic against Chu, and had also used it against Korea. I hope the king will think about this.

古文：秦善魏不可知也已。
现代文：秦对魏友好用心深不可测。
English: Qin's friendly intentions towards Wei are unfathomable.

古文：故为王计，太上伐秦，其次宾秦，其次坚约而详讲，与国无相离也。
现代文：所以替大王考虑，最上策是进攻秦国，其次是摒弃秦国，再次是同盟国坚守信约而同泰国假装讲和，同其它国家彼此不结仇。
English: Therefore, in consideration of the great king, the best strategy is to attack Qin State, followed by abandoning Qin State, followed by the allies sticking to their promise and pretending to make peace with Thailand, and not making enemies with other countries.

古文：秦、齐合，国不可为也已。
现代文：秦国、齐国联合，国家就不可能保持下去了。
English: If Qin and Qi were to unite, it would be impossible for the country to survive.

古文：王其听臣也，必无与讲。
现代文：大王还是听从臣下的，一定不要同泰国讲和。
English: The king still listens to his subjects, and must not make peace with Thailand.

古文： 秦权重魏，魏再明孰，是故又为足下伤秦者，不敢显也。
现代文： 秦国权势过大，魏冉明习于诸侯之事，因此即使有为您损伤秦圉的，也不敢明显地表现出来。
English: The power of Qin was too great, and Wei Ranming was accustomed to the affairs of princes. Therefore, even if there was someone who harmed Qin Yu for you, he would not dare to show it clearly.

古文：天下可令伐秦，则阴劝而弗敢图也。
现代文：天下诸侯可以号令攻伐秦国，就会有人暗中劝告而不敢图谋伐秦了。
English: All the princes in the world can give the order to invade Qin, and then someone will secretly advise them not to dare to try to invade Qin.

古文：是天下之伤秦也，则先鬻与国而以自解也。
现代文：看到天下诸侯损伤秦国，就先出卖盟国来自我解脱。
English: Seeing that the princes of the world were damaging Qin, they first betrayed their allies to free themselves.

古文：天下可令宾秦，则为劫于与国而不得已者。
现代文：天下诸侯能够号令摒弃秦国，受到盟国的胁迫而不得已相应。
English: All the princes in the world could give the order to abandon Qin, but they were forced to do so by the coercion of the allies.

古文：天下不可，则先去，而以秦为上交以自重也。
现代文：天下诸侯无法做到，自己就会首先背叛诸侯，而把秦国作为上等的邦交来保全自己。
English: If the princes of the world cannot do it, they will first betray the princes, and regard Qin as a superior diplomatic ally to protect themselves.

古文：如是人者，鬻王以为资者也，而焉能免国于患?
现代文：像这样出人，把出卖大王作为资本，怎能免除国家的祸患呢？
English: How can the country be spared the scourge of betraying a great king as capital?

古文：兔国于患者，必穷三节，而行其上。上不可，则行其中；中不可；则行其下；下不可，则明不与秦。
现代文：免除国家祸患的人，一定用尽三等策略而首先推行上等的，上等策略行不通就推行中等的，中等策略行不通就推行下等的。
English: Those who wish to avoid national calamity must exhaust the third-class strategy and first implement the first-class strategy. If the first-class strategy does not work, the middle-class strategy will be implemented. If the middle-class strategy does not work, the lower-class strategy will be implemented.

古文：而生以残秦，使秦皆无百怨百利，唯已之曾安。
现代文：下等策略行不通就明确表示不同秦国俱存乘损伤秦国，使秦国不择利害的多少，只有阻止魏国两败俱伤的举动才能得到自己的安宁。
English: If the inferior strategy does not work, it is clear that the difference between Qin's survival and the damage to Qin, so that Qin does not care how much interest, only to prevent Wei's two defeats can get their own peace.

古文：令足下鬻之以合于秦，是免国于患者之计也。臣何足以当之?
现代文：让您出卖盟国来向秦国求和，这样免除国家祸患的计策，臣下怎么知道它的可取之处呢？
English: Let you betray your allies to sue for peace with Qin, how will your vassals know the merits of such a strategy to save the country from disaster?

古文：虽然，愿足下之论臣之计也。
现代文：既然如此，希望您能研究臣下的计策。
English: That being the case, I hope you will study your vassal's strategy.

古文： 燕，齐仇国也；秦，兄弟之交也。合仇国以伐婚姻，臣为之苦矣。
现代文： 燕国、齐国是仇国，燕国、齐国同秦国是兄弟之国，让燕国、齐国这样的仇国联合起来，去攻打燕国的婚姻之国秦国，臣下感到为难。
English: Yan Guo and Qi Guo are enemy countries, and Yan Guo and Qi Guo are brother countries with Qin Guo. It is difficult for the vassals to let such enemy countries as Yan Guo and Qi Guo unite to attack Qin Guo, the marriage country of Yan Guo.

古文：黄帝战于涿鹿之野，而西戎之兵不至；禹攻三苗，而东夷之民不起。
现代文：黄帝在涿鹿之野作战，而西戎的军队没有赶到；大禹攻打三苗，而东夷的百姓没有起来响应。
English: The Yellow Emperor fought in the field of the elk, but the army of Xi Rong did not arrive; Dayu attacked Sanmiao, but the people of Dongyi did not rise up to respond.

古文：以燕伐秦，黄帝之所难也，而臣以致燕甲而起齐兵矣。
现代文：使燕国进攻秦国，是黄帝也为难的事，而臣下召来燕国军队并使齐国起兵响应。
English: It was difficult for the Yellow Emperor to make Yan attack Qin, and his vassals called in the Yan army and made Qi raise an army in response.

古文： 臣又偏事三晋之吏，奉阳君、孟尝君、韩呡、周最、周、韩余为徒从而下之，恐其伐秦之疑也。
现代文：臣下又辅饶侍奉三晋的大臣，跟从奉阳君、孟尝君、韩氓、周寂、韩徐为并且列在他们之下，唯恐他们攻伐秦国疑虑不定，自身又同泰国决裂。
English: His vassals also assisted the ministers who served the Three Kingdoms of Jin, and followed and were subordinate to Bongyang, Meng Yuqun, Han Gangu, Zhou Zh, and Han Xu, so that they would not hesitate to attack Qin and break away from Thailand.

古文：又身自丑于秦，扮之请焚天下之秦符者，臣也；次传焚符之约者，臣也；欲使五国约闭秦关者，臣也。
现代文：一开始请求诸侯焚烧天下秦符的，是臣下；再次传告诸侯焚烧秦符的，是臣下；要使五国相约关闭通往秦国关隘的，是臣下。
English: In the beginning, it was the vassals who requested the lords to burn the Qin symbols around the world; it was the vassals who told the lords to burn the Qin symbols again; it was the vassals who wanted the five countries to close the gate to Qin by mutual agreement.

古文：奉阳君、韩余为既和矣，苏修、朱婴既皆阴在邯郸，臣又说齐王而往败之。
现代文：奉阳君、韩余为已经和睦了，苏修、朱婴已经都暗中留在了邯郸，臣下又游说齐王前击败坏宋郭的合秦之约。
English: Bongyangjun and Han Yu were already reconciled, Su Xiu and Zhu Ying had already secretly stayed in the palace, and the vassals also lobbied King Qi to defeat the bad Song Guo's agreement with the Qin Dynasty.

古文：天下共讲，因使苏修游天下之语，而以齐为上交，兵请伐魏，臣又争之以死。而果西因苏修重报。臣非不知秦劝之重也，然而所以为之者，为足下也。 
现代文：诸侯一同讲和，于是派苏络宣扬诸侯的言论，而把齐国作为最好的邦交，请求发兵攻魏，臣下又以死相争，果真从西面由苏修传来齐不伐魏的消息，臣下不是不知道秦国权势之大，然而我所以这样做的原因，是为了您啊。 
English: The princes spoke peace together, so they sent Su Luo to promote the words of the princes, and regarded Qi as the best diplomatic relations, requesting to send troops to attack Wei. The vassals also fought to the death. The news that Qi would not attack Wei really came from Su Xiu in the west. The vassals did not know the great power of Qin, but the reason I did it was for you.

