古文：◎宁宗宁宗冲圣嗣孝皇帝，讳懿璘质班，明宗第二子也。
现代文：宁宗冲圣嗣孝皇帝，名叫懿璘质班，是明宗的第二子。
English: Emperor Ningzongchong Shengzhiqiao, whose name was Gongshengban, was the second son of Emperor Mingzong.

古文：母曰八不沙皇后，乃蛮真氏。
现代文：母亲是八不沙皇后，为乃蛮真氏。
English: His mother was the Empress of Hapusha, a member of the Naobanzhen clan.

古文：初，武宗有子二人，长明宗，次文宗。
现代文：当初，武宗皇帝有两个儿子，长子为明宗，次子为文宗。
English: At first, Emperor Wuzong had two sons, the eldest son was Mingzong and the second son was Wenzong.

古文：延祐中，明宗封周王，出居朔漠。
现代文：延年间，明宗被封为周王，出居于朔漠地区。
English: During the Yan years, Mingzong was given the title of King of Zhou, and was born and lived in Shuo County.

古文：泰定之际，正统遂偏。
现代文：泰定帝登极，遂使正统偏离。
English: When Emperor Taiding ascended to the throne, he deviated from orthodoxy.

古文：天历元年，文宗入绍大统，内难既平，即遣使奉皇帝玺绶，北迎明宗。
现代文：天历元年，文宗入继大统，内乱平定以后，随即派遣使者恭奉皇帝印绶，北上迎接明宗。
English: In the first year of the Tenryaku era, after the civil war had been settled, Emperor Wenzong, who succeeded Emperor Taito, sent an envoy to the north to greet Emperor Myongjong.

古文：明宗崩，文宗复即皇帝位。
现代文：明宗逝世后，文宗重新即皇帝之位。
English: After the death of Emperor Mingzong, Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne.

古文：明宗有子二人，长妥欢帖木耳，次即帝也。
现代文：明宗有两个儿子，长子是妥欢帖木耳，次子就是宁宗了。
English: Mingzong has two sons. The eldest son is Tuo Huan Te Mule, and the second son is Ningzong Ya.

古文：天历三年二月乙巳，封帝为鄜王。
现代文：天历三年二月二十四日，宁宗被册封为鄜王。
English: On the 24th day of the 2nd month of the 3rd year of the lunar calendar, Ningzong was canonized as the Dragon King.

古文：至顺三年八月己酉，文宗崩于上都，皇后导扬末命，申固让初志，传位于明宗之子。
现代文：至顺三年八月十二日，文宗在上都逝世，皇后遵照其临终遗命，申明一再推让的初意，传位于明宗之子。
English: On August 12 of the following year, Emperor Wenzong died in Shangdu, and the empress, in accordance with her dying wishes, declared her original intention of repeatedly pushing for concessions to be passed on to Emperor Mingzong's son.

古文：时妥欢帖木耳出居静江，帝以文宗眷爱之笃，留京师。
现代文：当时妥欢帖木耳出居于静江路，宁宗因受文宗皇帝眷爱深厚的缘故留在京师。
English: At that time, Zhu Huanjie lived in Jingjiang Road, and Ning Zong stayed in Beijing because he was deeply loved by Emperor Wenzong.

古文：太师、太平王、右丞相燕铁木儿，请立帝以继大统。
现代文：太师、太平王、右丞相燕铁木儿请立宁宗入继大统。
English: The Grand Master, King Taiping, and the Minister of the Right, Yan Tiemu'er, invited Li Ningzong to succeed the Grand Master.

古文：于是遣使征诸王会京师，中书百司政务，咸启中宫取进止。
现代文：于是派遣使者征召诸侯王会集于京师，中书省及各官府政务，全都奏请中宫皇后以决定推行与否。
English: As a result, an envoy was sent to summon the princes of the princes to gather in Beijing, and the government affairs of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China were all submitted to the Empress of China to decide whether to implement it or not.

古文：甲寅，中书省臣奉中宫旨，预备大朝会赏赐金银币帛等物。
现代文：十七日，中书省官员恭奉皇后旨意，准备大朝会时所需的赏赐用的金银币帛等物品。
English: On the 17th, the officials of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, in obedience to the will of the Empress, prepared the gold and silver coins and other items needed for the grand imperial meeting.

古文：乙卯，燕铁木儿奉中宫旨，赐驸马也不干子欢忒哈赤、太尉孛兰奚、句容郡王答邻答里、佥事小薛、呵麻剌台之子秃帖木儿、公主本答里、诸王丑汉妃公主台忽都鲁、诸王卯泽妃公主完者台及公主本答里、彻里帖木儿等金、银、币、钞有差。
现代文：十八日，燕铁木儿奉行皇后旨意，赐给驸马也不干之子欢忒哈赤、太尉孛兰奚、句容郡王答邻答里、佥事小薛、阿麻剌台之子秃帖木儿、公主本答里、诸侯王丑汉之妃公主台忽都鲁、诸侯王卯泽之妃公主完者台、彻里帖木儿等人金、银、币、钞多寡不一。
English: On the 18th, Yan Tie Mu'er, in accordance with the queen's will, gave the following people gold, silver, coins, and banknotes in varying amounts: Huan Zi Haqi, the son of Huan Ma Jian, Taifu Yulan Zi, Gu Rong Guo Wang Da Quan Da Li, An Ji Xiao Xue, Ama Xing Tai's son Gao Jie Mu'er, Princess Hong Da Li, the princess of Princes Wang Qiu Han, Princess Tai Kudu Lu, the princess of Princes Wang Wu Ze, and Cheri Jie Mu'er.

古文：是月，浑源、云内二州陨霜杀禾，冀宁路之阳曲、河曲二县及荆门州皆旱，江水又溢，高邮府之宝应、兴化二县，德安府之云梦、应城二县大雨，水。
现代文：这一月，浑源、云内二州降霜伤稼。冀宁路的阳曲、河曲二县及荆门州发生旱灾。
English: This month, frosts in Hunyuan and two counties in Yunnan Province damaged crops, and droughts occurred in Yangqu, two counties in Hequ and Jingmen Province on Jining Road.

古文：九月丁丑，填星犯太微垣左执法。
现代文：长江洪水漫堤。高邮府属宝应、兴化二县，德安府属云梦、应城二县降大雨，发水灾。九月初十，土星凌犯太微垣左执法。
English: The Yangtze River is flooded with levees. Gaoyou Prefecture belongs to Baoying County and Xinghua County, De'an Prefecture belongs to Yunmeng County and Yingcheng County. At the beginning of September 10th, Saturn Ling was arrested by the law enforcement.

古文：辛巳，修皇太后仪仗。
现代文：十四日，修治皇太后仪仗。
English: On the 14th, a ceremonial battle was held to consecrate the empress dowager.

古文：是夜，地震有声来自北。
现代文：这天夜里发生地震，并有大声自北而来。
English: On this night, an earthquake occurred, and there were loud noises coming from the north.

古文：是月，益都路之莒、沂二州，泰安州之奉符县，济宁路之鱼台、丰县，曹州之楚丘县，平江、常州、镇江三路，松江府、江阴州，中兴路之江陵县，皆大水。
现代文：这一月，益都路所辖的莒州、沂州，泰安州的奉符县，济宁路所辖的鱼台、丰县，曹州的楚丘县，平江、常州、镇江三路，松江府、江阴州，中兴路所辖的江陵县，皆发大水。
English: This month, Fengfu County in Bozhou, Ganzhou and Tai'an Province under Yidu Road, Yutai and Feng County under Jining Road, Chuqiu County in Cao Province, Pingjiang, Changzhou and Zhenjiang 3rd Road, Songjiang Prefecture, Jiangyin Province and Gangneung County under Zhongxing Road all experienced heavy water.

古文：河南府之洛阳县旱。
现代文：河南府所辖的洛阳县干旱。
English: Luoyang County, which is under the jurisdiction of Henan Province, is experiencing drought.

古文：十月庚子，帝即位于大明殿，大赦天下，诏曰：
现代文：十月初四，宁宗在大明殿即皇帝位，大赦天下，并下诏书说：
English: On the fourth day of the first month of October, Emperor Ningzong ascended to the throne in the Great Hall of the People, and issued the following edict:

古文：洪惟太祖皇帝，启辟疆宇；世祖皇帝，统一万方；列圣相承，法度明著。
现代文： 惟我太祖皇帝开创基业，世祖皇帝统一天下；尔后列圣相承，法度修明。
English: However, my great-great-grandfather the emperor started the foundation, and the founding father the emperor unified the country; later, he listed the lineage of saints, and revised the laws.

古文：我曲律皇帝入纂大统，修举庶政，动合成法，授大宝位于普颜笃皇帝以及格坚皇帝。
现代文：我武宗皇帝入继大统后，修明举办各类政务，行为合乎成规，后来传授皇帝之位给仁宗皇帝以及英宗皇帝。
English: After Emperor Wuzong succeeded to the Great Office, he carried out various kinds of government affairs in an orderly manner, and later conferred the emperor's throne to Emperor Renzong and Emperor Yingzong.

古文：历数之归，实当在我忽都笃皇帝、紥牙笃皇帝，而各播越辽远。
现代文：天命所归，实当应在我明宗皇帝和文宗皇帝身上，而他们又各自远居于外。
English: The destiny of heaven should really belong to my Emperor Mingzong and Emperor Wenzong, but they live far away from each other.

古文：时则有若燕铁木儿，建义效忠，戢平内难，以定邦国，协恭推戴紥牙笃皇帝。
现代文：当时却有燕铁木儿建议效忠，平定内乱，共同推戴文宗皇帝。
English: At that time, however, there was a suggestion from Yan Tie Muer to pledge allegiance, quell the civil strife, and jointly promote Emperor Wenzong.

古文：登极之始，即以让兄之诏明告天下。
现代文：文宗登极之初，就以让兄之诏明告于天下臣民。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of Emperor Wenzong, Emperor Wenzong made it clear to all the subjects of the country with the edict of letting his brother go.

古文：随奉玺绂，远迓忽都笃皇帝，朔方言还，奄弃臣庶。
现代文：随即恭奉印绶，远迎明宗皇帝，明宗从漠北归来，却匆匆离开臣民而辞世。
English: The seal was then ceremoniously presented to welcome the Emperor Mingzong from afar. Mingzong returned from the north of the desert, but left his subjects in a hurry and died.

古文：紥牙笃皇帝，荐正宸极，仁义之至，视民如伤，恩泽旁被，无间远迩。
现代文：文宗皇帝重登帝位，仁义之至，视民如子，皇恩德泽普被天下，不论路途远近。
English: Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne again. He was benevolent and treated the people as his children. Emperor Ndezep was loved by the whole world, no matter how far he traveled.

古文：顾育眇躬，尤笃慈爱。
现代文：抚育我本人，尤为优厚慈爱。
English: I was raised with a lot of love.

古文：宾天之日，皇后传顾命于太师、太平王、右丞相、答剌罕燕帖木儿，太保、浚宁王、知枢密院事伯颜等，谓圣体弥留，益推固让之初志，以宗社之重，属诸大兄忽都笃皇帝之世嫡。
现代文：辞世之日，皇后传达临终遗命给太师、太平王、右丞相、答剌罕燕铁木儿、太保、浚宁王、知枢密院事伯颜等人，说是文宗弥留之际，重申一再推让的初志，将宗庙社稷的重任，注目于皇兄明宗皇帝的世嫡身上。
English: On the day of her death, the empress conveyed her last will and testament to the Grand Master, King Taiping, the Minister of the Right, the Vice-regent Yan Tiemuer, the Grand Protector, the King of Junning, the Privy Councilor Bo Yan and others, saying that on the occasion of Wenzong's death, she would reiterate the original intention of repeatedly pushing forward, and pay attention to the heir of the emperor's brother Emperor Mingzong.

古文：乃遣使召诸王宗亲，以十月一日来会于大都，与宗王、大臣同奉遗诏。
现代文：于是派遣使者征召诸王宗亲，以十月一日前来集会于大都，与宗室亲王及大臣共同奉行遗诏。
English: Therefore, an envoy was sent to summon all the princes' relatives to come to the capital on October 1st to gather together with the princes and ministers to carry out the imperial edict.

古文：揆诸成宪，宜御神器，以至顺三年十月初四日，即皇帝位于大明殿，可大赦天下。
现代文：根据成规，应继大统。于是在至顺三年十月初四日，即皇帝之位于大明殿。可以大赦天下。
English: According to the established rules, he should succeed to the throne. Therefore, on the 4th day of the 4th month of the 3rd year of Zhishun, that is, when the emperor was in the Great Hall of the People, he could grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：自至顺三年十月初四日昧爽以前，除谋反大逆、谋杀祖父母父母、妻妾杀夫、奴婢杀主、谋故杀人、但犯强盗、印造伪钞、蛊毒魇魅犯上者不赦外，其余一切罪犯，咸赦除之。
现代文：自至顺三年十月初四日天亮以前，除开谋反大罪、谋杀祖父母及父母、妻妾杀夫、奴婢杀主人、故意谋划杀人、但犯强盗罪、印造伪钞、蛊毒魇犯上者不予赦免以外，其余一切罪犯，全都予以赦免。
English: From the beginning of October 3rd to the dawn of October 4th, all criminals will be pardoned, except for those who conspire to commit major crimes, murder their grandparents and parents, kill their husbands, wives and concubines, kill their masters, deliberately plan to commit murder, but do not pardon those who commit robbery, print counterfeit money, and drug trafficking.

古文：大都、上都、兴和三路，差税免三年。
现代文： 大都、上都、兴和三路，免除三年差税。
English: Dadu, Shangdu and Xinghe are exempt from the three-year differential tax.

古文：腹里差发并其余诸郡不纳差发去处，税粮十分为率，免二分。
现代文：腹里地区差发及其余诸路不纳差发的地区，税粮按十分为准，免其二分。
English: In areas with poor distribution in the ventral region and other areas that do not accept poor distribution, the tax grain is based on ten, and is exempted from two points.

古文：江淮以南，夏税亦免二分。
现代文：江淮以南地区，夏税也免其二分。
English: In areas south of the Yangtze River and Huai River, the summer tax is also exempted.

古文：土木工役，除仓库必合修理外，毋复创造，以纾民力。
现代文：土木工程，除仓库必须加以修理的情况以外，不得再行修建，以宽缓民力。
English: Civil engineering projects, except in cases where warehouses must be repaired, may no longer be built, in order to ease the burden on the public.

古文：民间在前应有逋欠差税课程，尽行蠲免。
现代文：民间在此以前应予交纳的拖欠课税等项，全都予以蠲免。
English: All tax arrears and other items that should have been paid by private citizens before this time will be exempted.

古文：监察御史、肃政廉访司官并内外三品以上正官，岁举才堪守令者一人，申达省部，先行录用。
现代文：监察御史、肃政廉访司官员及内外三品以上正职官员，每年推举有才干能任守令者一人，申报至省部，可先行录用。
English: Officials of the Department of Supervision of Imperial History, Suppression of Political Corruption and Investigation, as well as senior officials of three or more grades at home and abroad, will nominate one person each year who has the ability to serve as a guardian, report to the ministry, and can be hired in advance.

古文：如果称职，举官优加旌擢。
现代文：如果办事称职，推举的官员也予以表彰提拔。
English: If they do a good job, the elected officials will also be commended and promoted.

古文：一任之内，或犯赃私者，量其轻重黜罚。
现代文：如在一任之内，犯有贪赃私吞罪者，根据情节轻重予以黜罚。
English: If, within one term of office, a person commits the crime of corruption, he shall be punished according to the severity of the circumstances.

古文：其不该原免重囚，淹禁三年以上、疑不能决者，申达省部，详谳释放。
现代文：对不能予以宽大处理的重囚，关押三年以上，疑而不能判决者，申报省部，详审明白后予以释放。
English: For serious prisoners who cannot be treated leniently, who have been detained for more than three years, and who cannot be sentenced due to doubt, they should report to the provincial and ministerial departments, and be released after a detailed examination.

古文：学校农桑、孝义贞节、科举取士、国学贡试，并依旧制。
现代文：至于学校农桑、孝义贞节、科举取士、国学贡士，都按旧制办理。
English: As for the school Nongsang, Filial Piety Day, Kechu Scholarship, and Kokugaku Scholarship, they are all handled according to the old system.

古文：广海、云南梗化之民，诏书到日，限六十日内出官，与免本罪，许以自新。
现代文：广海与云南地区的刁顽之民，从诏书在当地宣布的那天算起，限六十天以内到官府自首，可免究本罪，允许其重新做人。 啊！
English: The stubborn people in Guanghai and Yunnan regions have 60 days from the day the edict was announced to surrender to the government, and can be exempted from the crime and allowed to live again.

古文：於戏！肆予冲人，托于天下臣民之上，任大守重，若涉渊冰。
现代文：现在我这年幼的人，托于天下臣民之上，担子重而责任大，如临深渊，如行冰上。
English: Now I, a young man, entrusted to the world's subjects, have a heavy burden and great responsibility, like approaching the abyss, like walking on ice.

古文：尚赖宗王大臣、百司庶府，交修乃职，思尽厥忠。
现代文：还得倚仗宗室亲王、元老大臣，及各部门官员，克尽其职，思尽其忠。
English: They also have to rely on the prince of the family, the minister of veterans, and the officials of various departments to fulfill their duties and be loyal.

古文：嘉与亿兆之民，共保承平之治。
现代文：善于与亿万民众一道，共保天下太平的局面。
English: He is good at working with hundreds of millions of people to jointly maintain a peaceful situation in the world.

古文：咨尔多方，体予至意！
现代文：你们各方臣民啊，应体会我的至诚之意！
English: Citizens of all countries, you should experience my sincerity!

古文：故兹诏示，想知悉。
现代文：故特下诏宣示此旨，想已尽知。 
English: Therefore, the Emperor issued a special edict to this effect, and I thought I knew it all.

古文：辛丑，以知枢密院事撒敦为御史大夫，中书右丞撒迪为中书平章政事，宣政使阔里吉思为中书左丞，中书平章政事秃儿哈铁木儿知枢密院事。
现代文：初五，任命知枢密院事撒敦为御史大夫，中书右丞撒迪为中书平章政事，宣政使阔里吉思为中书右丞，中书平章政事秃儿哈铁木儿知枢密院事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Saton, the secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed to the post of goshi taifu, Sadi, the second secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed to the post of the second secretary of the Privy Council, Korigis, the minister of propaganda, was appointed to the post of the second secretary of the Privy Council, and Baldor Hatemur, the second secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed to the post of the second secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：乙巳，造皇太后玉册、玉宝。
现代文：初九，造作皇太后玉册、玉宝。
English: At the age of nine, he made the Empress Dowager's jade book and jade treasure.

古文：丁未，皇太后命作两宫幄殿、车乘、供帐。
现代文：十一日，皇太后命令制作两宫幄殿、车乘及其他应用物品。
English: On the 11th day, the empress dowager ordered the production of the two palaces, carriages and other applied items.

古文：戊申，赏赉诸王金、币，其数如文宗即位之制。
现代文：十二日，赏赐诸王金、币，其数目依照文宗即位时旧例。
English: On the twelfth day, gold and coins were given to the kings, the amount of which was in accordance with the old practice when Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne.

古文：立徽政、中政二院。
现代文：设立徽政、中政二院。
English: The Second House of the Central Government and the Second House of the Central Government were established.

古文：己酉，太白犯斗宿。
现代文：十三日，金星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the 13th, Jin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：敕： 诸王、驸马、勋旧大臣及中书省、枢密院、御史台秩正二品，百司庶府秩至一品者，阙门之内，得施绳床以坐，余皆禁之。 
现代文：下令说： 诸王、驸马、勋旧大臣及中书省、枢密院、御史台官秩为正二品以上，其他各部门官秩至一品者，在阙门之内，方可置放绳床以坐，其余官员一律禁止。 
English: The order said: Kings, emperors, honored and retired ministers, and officials of the Ministry of Literature, the Privy Council, and the Office of the Historian with a rank of Senior Second Class or higher, and officials of other departments with a rank of First Class or higher, may only place a rope bed to sit on inside the main gate. All other officials are prohibited.

古文：庚戌，修郊祀法服。
现代文：十四日，修制郊祀所用的法服。
English: On the 14th, the Buddhist robes used for the suburban religious services were taken off.

古文：以宦者铁古思、哈里兀答儿、黑狗者、阔阔出并为中政院使。
现代文：任命宦官铁古思、哈里兀答儿、黑狗者、阔阔出，并为中政院使。
English: Appointed eunuchs Tie Gu Si, Harry Xie Toer, Black Dog, and Gao Gao, and made them officials of the Central Government.

古文：辛亥，以江浙岁比不登，其海运粮不及数，俟来岁补运。
现代文：十五日，因江浙地区连年欠收，其海运粮食未能达到预定的数目，须等来年补运。
English: On the 15th, due to consecutive years of poor harvests in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, the grain shipped by sea failed to reach the predetermined number and had to wait for next year's supplemental shipment.

古文：壬子，定妇人犯私盐罪，著为令。
现代文：十六日，定立妇人犯私盐罪处罚条例。
English: On the 16th, an ordinance was established to punish women who commit the crime of stealing salt.

古文：甲寅，诸王不赛因遣使贡塔里牙八十八斤、佩刀八十，赐钞三千三百锭。
现代文：十八日，诸侯王不赛因派遣使者进贡塔里牙八十八斤、佩刀八十把，赐予钱钞三千三百锭。
English: On the 18th, the princes sent an envoy to Gontari with eighty-eight catties of gold, eighty swords, and thirty-three hundred denarii.

古文：乙卯，以即位告祭南郊。
现代文：十九日，因即位之事在南郊告祭上天。
English: On the 19th, the enthronement ceremony was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：丙辰，给宿卫士、蒙古、汉军三万人御寒衣。
现代文：二十日，给予宿卫军士、蒙古、汉军三万人御寒服装。
English: On the 20th, 30,000 soldiers from the Mongolian and Chinese armies were given warm clothing.

古文：命江浙行省范铜造和宁宣圣庙祭器，凡百三十有五事。
现代文：命令江浙行省用铜铸造和宁路宣圣庙所需祭器，共一百三十五件。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces were ordered to use copper to cast and Ninglu Xuan holy temple required sacrificial vessels, a total of one hundred and thirty-five.

古文：己未，告祭太庙。
现代文：二十三日，告祭于太庙。
English: On the 23rd, a memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚申，告祭社稷。
现代文：二十四日，告祭社稷之神。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the god of hail was sacrificed.

古文：以伯颜为徽政使，依前开府仪同三司、浚宁王、太保、录军国重事、知枢密院事。
现代文：任命伯颜为徽政使，并照旧为开府仪同三司、浚宁王、太保、录军国重事、知枢密院事。
English: He appointed Bo Yan as the political envoy of the State Emblem, and as before, he was in charge of the three departments of Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, King Junning, Taibo, Record of Military Affairs, and Privy Council Affairs.

古文：提调忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司事伯撒里、右都威卫都指挥使常不兰奚，并为徽政使。
现代文：提调忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司事伯撒里、右都威卫都指挥使常不兰奚，并为徽政使。
English: The commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army, the commander-in-chief of the whole army.

古文：赐诸妃后大朝会赏赉有差。
现代文：赐予诸妃后大朝会应得赏赐多寡不等。
English: The amount of rewards given to empresses by the Grand Council of State varies.

古文：甲子，以诸王忽剌台贫乏，赐钞五百锭。
现代文：二十八日，因诸侯王忽剌台贫穷困乏，赐予钱钞五百锭。
English: On the 28th, because of the poverty and hardship of the princes and lords of Hukongtai, he gave 500 baht in banknotes.

古文：皇弟燕帖古思受戒于西僧加儿麻哇。
现代文：皇弟燕帖古思在西僧加儿麻哇处接受佛戒。
English: The king's younger brother, Yangtze Gu Si, receives the Buddhist precepts from the Western Monk, Kalmaw.

古文：敕： 百官及宿卫士有只孙衣者，凡与宴飨，皆服以侍。
现代文：下敕令说： 百官及宿卫军士有只孙衣者，凡参加宴餐活动，全都带来做服侍之事，如有典卖给人的事，要加以治罪。 
English: The lower court order said: "Civil servants and guardsmen have only one grandchild, and all those who participate in banquet activities bring things to serve. If there is anything to sell to people, it should be punished.

古文：其或质诸人者，罪之。 丙寅，楚丘县河堤坏，发民丁二千三百五十人修之。
现代文：三十日，因楚丘县河堤毁坏，调发民壮二千三百五十人进行修补。
English: On the 30th, due to the destruction of the river dike in Chuqiu County, 2,350 people were sent to repair it.

古文：十一月己巳，诏翰林国史、集贤院、奎章阁学士院集议先皇帝庙号、神主、升祔武宗皇后及改元事。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏翰林国史院、集贤院、奎章阁学士院会集商议先皇帝庙号、神主、升礻付武宗皇后及明年改年号诸事。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Hanlin Academy of National History, the Jixian Academy, and the Keizhang Academy will gather to discuss the emperor's temple name, the god, the promotion of Empress Wu Zong and the change of the year next year.

古文：庚午，赐郯王彻彻秃以海宁州朐山、赣榆、沭阳三县。
现代文：初四，赐予郯王彻彻秃海宁州属朐山、赣榆、沐阳三县作为封地。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he bestowed the three counties of Lushan, Handan and Muyang belonging to Ning Prefecture to King Cheolche Bald as fiefs.

古文：壬申，命郯王彻彻秃镇辽阳。
现代文：初六，命令郯王彻彻秃镇守辽阳。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he ordered the king of Wei to guard Liaoyang.

古文：甲戌，遣宿卫官阿察赤以上皇太后玉册告祭南郊，中书平章政事伯撒里告祭太庙。
现代文：初八，派遣宿卫官阿察赤以皇太后玉册告祭于南郊，中书平章政事伯撒里告祭于太庙。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the palace guard officer, Ataka, was dispatched to announce the festival in the southern suburbs, accompanied by the empress dowager, Gyokushu, and the Chinese scholar, Pingzhang, and the statesman, Besari, to announce the festival in the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊寅，奉玉册、玉宝尊皇后曰皇太后，皇太后御兴圣殿受朝贺。
现代文：十二日，恭奉玉册尊皇后为皇太后。皇太后临御兴圣殿接受百官朝贺。
English: On the 12th, the Empress Tamakazumi was enthroned as empress dowager. The empress dowager received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials at the Imperial Palace.

古文：己卯，帝御大明殿受朝贺。
现代文：十三日，宁宗临御大明殿接受百官朝贺。
English: On the 13th, Ningzong Rinmi Daimyo-den received morning greetings from hundreds of officials.

古文：庚寅，赐诸王宽彻币帛各二千匹，以周其贫。
现代文：二十四日，赐予诸侯王宽彻币、帛各二千匹，以周济其贫乏。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he gave the lords and princes two thousand coppers and two thousand horses each, to relieve their poverty.

古文：左钦察卫士饥，赈粮二月。
现代文：左钦察卫士饥荒，赈济粮食两个月。
English: Zuo Qincha's guards were starving and had to ration food for two months.

古文：壬辰，帝崩，年七岁。
现代文：二十六日，宁宗去世，年仅七岁。
English: On the 26th, Ningzong passed away, only seven years old.

古文：甲午，葬起辇谷，从诸陵。
现代文：二十八日，葬于起辇谷，随同诸陵一道。
English: On the 28th, he was buried in Kichijoji Valley, together with the other mausoleums.

古文：明年六月己巳，明宗长子妥欢帖木耳即位。
现代文：第二年六月初八，明宗长子妥欢帖木儿即皇帝位。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the following year, the eldest son of Emperor Mingzong, Tu Huan Timur, ascended the throne.

古文：至元四年三月辛酉，谥曰冲圣嗣孝，庙号宁宗。
现代文：至元四年三月二十六日，加谥号为冲圣嗣孝皇帝，庙号为宁宗。
English: On the 26th day of March in the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the posthumous name became Emperor Chong Sheng, and the temple name became Ningzong.

古文：四月乙酉，祔于太庙。
现代文：四月二十日，祔祭于太庙。
English: On April 20, the wreath-laying ceremony was held at the Imperial Temple.

