古文：耶律觌烈耶律铎臻王郁耶律图鲁窘耶律觌烈，字兀里轸，六院部蒲古只夷离堇之后。
现代文：耶律觌烈，字兀里轸，六院部蒲古只夷离堇之后。
English: Ye Lu was a fierce warrior, and the six hospitals of Bagu only became extinct after he left the capital.

古文：父偶思，亦为夷离堇。
现代文：父耶律偶思，也是夷离堇。
English: His father, Ye Lu Yuxi, was also an urchin.

古文：初，太祖为于越时，觌烈以谨愿宽恕见器使。
现代文：起初，太祖为于越时，觌烈因为诚实、宽大仁恕而得到器重和任用。
English: At first, the great-great-grandfather was in favor of Vietnam, and he was appointed because of his honesty and magnanimity.

古文：既即位，兄曷鲁典宿卫，以故觌烈入侍帷幄，与闻政事。
现代文：即位之后，觌烈因为兄长耶律曷鲁掌管宿卫，得以入侍皇上，参与政事。
English: After the enthronement, because his elder brother, Yerut Yerut, was in charge of the palace guards, he was able to serve the emperor and participate in politics.

古文：神册三年，曷鲁薨，命觌烈为迭剌部夷离堇，属以南方事。
现代文：神册三年，曷鲁逝世，皇上命觌烈为迭剌部夷离堇，将南方大事托付给他。
English: In the third year of the Divine Record, Jilu died, and the emperor ordered him to leave Jiuyuan, entrusting him with the major events in the south.

古文：会讨党项，皇太子为先锋，觌烈副之。
现代文：适逢讨伐党项，皇太子担任先锋，觌烈辅佐之。
English: When the time came to crack down on the Party, the Crown Prince served as the vanguard, with Yan Rong as his assistant.

古文：军至天德、云内，分道并进。
现代文：大军到天德、云内，分道并进。
English: The large army marched to Tiande and Yunnai and split up.

古文：觌烈率偏师渡河力战，斩获甚众。
现代文：觌烈率领偏师渡河奋力作战，斩首俘获甚众。
English: He bravely led his division across the river and fought hard, beheading many prisoners.

古文：天赞初，析迭剌部为北、南院，置夷离堇。
现代文：天赞初年，分迭剌部为北、南院，分设夷离堇。
English: In the first year of Tianzan, the branch hospitals were divided into North and South hospitals, and the Ili Hospital was set up.

古文：时大元帅率师由古北口略燕地，觌烈徇山西，所至城堡皆下，太祖嘉其功，锡赉甚厚。
现代文：当时大元帅率军自古北口攻取燕地，觌烈在山西攻城略地，所至城堡尽皆攻下，太祖嘉赏其功劳，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: At that time, the grand marshal led the army from the ancient North Gate to capture Yan's land, and fought fiercely in Shanxi to capture the city and the land, and all the castles were captured. Grandfather Ji appreciated his merits and rewarded very richly.

古文：从伐渤海，拔扶余城，留觌烈与寅底石守之。
现代文：随从征讨渤海，攻下扶余城，留觌烈与寅底石守卫。
English: He followed the conquest of the Bohai Sea, captured Buyei City, and stayed with the Toraishi guards.

古文：天显二年，留守南京。
现代文：天显二年，留守南京。
English: Tian Xian spent two years in Nanjing.

古文：十年卒，年五十六。
现代文：十年去世，年五十六岁。
English: He died ten years later, aged fifty-six.

古文：弟羽之。
现代文：弟耶律羽之。
English: His younger brother, Jeroen, is next.

古文：羽之，小字兀里，字寅底哂。
现代文：耶律羽之，乳名兀里，字寅底哂。
English: Yeruduhazhi, Nyanmeiyari, Zhaotangdi.

古文：幼豪爽不群，长嗜学，通诸部语。
现代文：少年时豪放爽直，卓异不凡，成年后酷爱读书，通晓诸部语言。
English: When he was a boy, he was bold and extraordinary. When he became an adult, he loved to read and was fluent in many languages.

古文：太祖经营之初，多预军谋。
现代文：太祖规划营治天下的初期，羽之经常参与军事谋划。
English: In the early days of his great-grandfather's plan to rule the world, Yazhi was often involved in military planning.

古文：天显元年，渤海平，立皇太子为东丹王，以羽之为中台省右次相。
现代文：天显元年，渤海平定，立皇太子为东丹王，以羽之为中台省右次相。
English: In the first year of Tian Xian, the Bohai Sea was pacified, and the crown prince was established as the King of Dongdan, with Yu as the second highest official of Zhongtai Province.

古文：时人心未安，左大相迭剌不逾月薨，羽之莅事勤恪，威信并行。
现代文：当时人心不安定，左大相迭剌不过一个月便逝世了，羽之视事勤勉恭谨，威望与信誉并行。
English: At that time, people's minds were unstable, and the left-wing great-grandfather passed away in just one month. Feather regarded things diligently and respectfully, and prestige and credibility went hand in hand.

古文：太宗即位，上表曰： 我大圣天皇始有东土，择贤辅以抚斯民，不以臣愚而任之，国家利害，敢不以闻。
现代文：太宗即位，羽之上表说： 我大圣天皇开始抚有东土时，挑选贤明的辅相来安抚当地百姓，不因臣之愚昧而加以任用。有关国家利害之事，我怎能不如实奏闻。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Emperor Uechi said, "When I, the Great Holy Emperor, began to conquer the eastern lands, I chose wise assistants to pacify the local people, and did not appoint them because of the ignorance of my subjects. How can I not report on matters of national interest?

古文：渤海昔畏南朝，阻险自卫，居忽汗城。
现代文：渤海从前畏惧南朝，依险自卫，居于忽汗城。
English: Bohai used to be afraid of the Southern Dynasties, relying on risk to defend itself, and lived in Hukang City.

古文：今去上京辽邈，既不为用，又不罢戍，果何为哉？
现代文：现在离上京遥远，既已不能加以利用，又不撤去戍所，到底是要做什么呢？
English: Now that it is far from going to Beijing, it is no longer possible to use it, and it is not removed, what is to be done in the end?

古文：先帝因彼离心，乘衅而动，故不战而克。
现代文：先帝因为彼方背反，找准机会出兵，所以不战而克。
English: The former emperor did not fight because he was opposed by the other side and saw an opportunity to send troops.

古文：天授人与，彼一时也。
现代文：既是天授，也因人谋，只有当时有此时机。
English: Both by nature and by design, only then was there a window of opportunity.

古文：遗种浸以蕃息，今居远境，恐为后患。
现代文：其后代渐渐地繁衍生息，现在又居于遥远的边地，恐怕会成为后患。
English: Their descendants gradually multiplied and now live on the far outskirts, and I'm afraid they will become a problem for the future.

古文：梁水之地，乃其故乡，地衍土活，有木铁盐鱼之利。
现代文：梁水一带乃是他们的故乡，土地广袤而肥沃，又有出产木铁盐鱼之便利。
English: The Liangshui area is their hometown, the land is vast and fertile, and it is convenient to produce saltfish.

古文：乘其微弱，徙还其民，万世长策也。
现代文：乘着他们衰弱，将其百姓迁回原住地，乃是万世长久安定之策。
English: Taking advantage of their weakness, they moved their people back to their original place of residence, which is a long-term and stable strategy.

古文：彼得故乡，又获木铁盐鱼之饶，必安居乐业。
现代文：他们得以住到故乡，又得木铁盐鱼之丰饶，必定会安居乐业。
English: They have been able to live in their hometown, and have the abundance of wood, iron, salt and fish. They will surely live and work happily.

古文：然后选徒以翼吾左，突厥、党项、室韦夹辅吾右，可以坐制南邦，混一天下，成圣祖未集之功，贻后世无疆之福。 
现代文：然后选派兵马驻扎以为我国左翼，以突厥、党项、室韦之辅助为我国右翼，可以轻易地制服南邦，混一天下，成就圣祖未能完成的功业，留给子孙后代无边之福禄。 
English: Then, soldiers and horses were selected to be stationed on the left side of our country, and the right side of our country was assisted by the Turks, Party members, and Shumway. They could easily subdue the Southern States, fight for one day, accomplish the work that the holy ancestors could not complete, and leave boundless blessings for future generations.

古文：表奏，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：书表奏上，皇上嘉赏并采纳之。
English: When the book was published, the Emperor commended it and adopted it.

古文：是岁，诏徙东丹国民于梁水，时称其善。
现代文：这一年，诏令迁东丹国百姓到梁水，一时称赞他的好处。
English: In the same year, the Emperor issued an edict to relocate the people of Dongdan to Liangshui, praising its benefits at the time.

古文：人皇王奔唐，羽之镇抚国人，一切如故。
现代文：人皇王投奔唐国，耶律羽之安抚东丹国民一切如故。
English: The human king went to Tang, and Yeluda's pacification of the Dongdan people remained unchanged.

古文：以功加守太傅，迁中台省左相。
现代文：因功加升为守太傅，迁中台省左相。
English: Due to his merits, he was promoted to the position of Shou Taifu and moved to Zuo, Zhongtai Province.

古文：会同初，以册礼赴阙，加特进。
现代文：会同初年，因逢册礼到宫中朝见，加特进。
English: In the first year of the association, due to the book-signing ceremony, he went to the Imperial Palace for a meeting with the Emperor.

古文：表奏左次相渤海苏贪墨不法事，卒。
现代文：上表奏称左次相渤海耶律苏贪污犯法之事，于这时去世。
English: He passed away at the time of the above-mentioned report on the illegal act of embezzlement committed by his second cousin, Heyer Lussu.

古文：子和里，终东京留守。
现代文：子和里，官至东京留守。
English: Kazuchika Kazuchika is away in Tokyo.

古文：耶律铎臻，字敌辇，六院部人。
现代文：耶律铎臻，字敌辇，六院部人。
English: Yeludong Zhen, Zheqi Zhen, the sixth member of the hospital.

古文：祖蒲古只，遥辇氏时再为本部夷离堇。
现代文：祖父蒲古只，遥辇氏时两度出任本部夷离堇。
English: His grandfather, Puko, was twice the head of the headquarters when he was a member of the Haruka clan.

古文：耶律狼德等既害玄祖，暴横益肆。
现代文：耶律狼德等杀害玄祖之后，更加肆意横行。
English: After the murder of the founder of the Han Dynasty by Yerudolf De and others, it became even more rampant.

古文：蒲古只以计诱其党，悉诛夷之。
现代文：蒲古只用计诱致其党人，将他们全部诛杀。
English: Puko only used a trick to lure his party members and killed them all.

古文：铎臻幼有志节，太祖为于越，常居左右。
现代文：铎臻幼小时便有志向和节操，太祖为于越时，铎臻总是在他左右护卫。
English: When he was young, Zou Zhen had ambition and discipline. His grandfather was from Yue, and Zou Zhen always followed him around.

古文：后即位，梁人遣使求辕轴材，太祖难之。
现代文：后来即位，梁朝派使者来求取做辕轴的材料，太祖为难。
English: Later, when he ascended to the throne, Liang Dynasty sent an envoy to ask for the materials to make the shaft, which was difficult for the great-grandfather.

古文：铎臻曰： 梁名求材，实觇吾轻重。
现代文：铎臻说： 梁朝名义上是求材料，实际上是要窥探我方的轻重虚实。
English: Zou Zhen said: Liang Dynasty is nominally looking for materials, but in fact it is to pry into our weight and reality.

古文：宜答曰： 材之所生，必深山穷谷，有神司之，须白鼻赤驴祷祠，然后可伐。 
现代文：应该答复说： 木材生长的地方，一定是在深山幽谷，有神仙看守，必须用白鼻子的赤驴祈祷祠祭，然后才可以砍伐。 
English: The reply should be: The place where the wood grows must be in a deep mountain valley, guarded by a god, and the white-nosed red donkey must be used to pray for the shrine before it can be cut down.

古文：如此，则其语自塞矣。 
现代文：这么做，则他们便无言以对了。 
English: To do so would leave them speechless.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：后来果然是这样。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：天赞三年，将伐渤海，铎臻谏曰： 陛下先事渤海，则西夏必蹑吾后。
现代文：天赞三年，将要讨伐渤海，铎臻劝谏说： 陛下您先对渤海用兵，则西夏一定抄我们的后路。
English: In the auspicious third year, the Bohai Sea was to be fought over, and Zhen Zhen advised Zhu Xi: "Your Majesty, you should first use troops against the Bohai Sea, and then Western Xia will surely follow our path.

古文：请先西讨，庶无后顾忧。 
现代文：请您先讨西夏，这样就没有后顾之忧了。 
English: Please ask for Xixia first, so that there will be no worries.

古文：太祖从之。
现代文：太祖听从了他。
English: The great-grandfather obeyed him.

古文：及淳钦皇后称制，恶铎臻，囚之，誓曰： 铁锁朽，当释汝！ 
现代文：待到淳钦皇后临朝称制，讨厌铎臻，囚禁了他，发誓说： 铁锁朽烂了，就放你出来！ 
English: When the Empress Junqin came to the imperial court, she detested him, imprisoned him, and swore, "If the iron lock is rotten, I will let you out!"

古文：既而召之，使者欲去锁，铎臻辞曰： 铁未朽，可释乎？ 
现代文：尔后又召见他，使者想去掉锁，铎臻不肯，说： 铁还没有朽烂，怎么能就把我放了呢？ 
English: Then he summoned him again. The messenger wanted to remove the lock, but he refused, saying: "The iron has not yet decayed, so how can I be set free?"

古文：后闻，嘉叹，趣召释之。
现代文：皇后听说，赞赏感叹，赶紧召见，释免了他。
English: When the Empress heard of this, she sighed with appreciation, summoned him to see her at once, and released him.

古文：天显二年卒。
现代文：天显二年去世。
English: Tian Xian died two years later.

古文：弟古、突吕不。
现代文：弟耶律古、耶律突吕不。
English: His younger brother, Yerutugu, is also called Yerututu-Ryu.

古文：古，字涅剌昆，初名霞马葛。
现代文：耶律古，字涅剌昆，初名霞马葛。
English: Yelu Gu, the first name of Xia Magu, the first name of Nirvana Kun.

古文：太祖为于越，尝从略地山右。
现代文：太祖为于越时，他曾经随从在山西一带攻城略地。
English: His great-grandfather was from Yue, and he once followed him to attack cities and towns in Shanxi.

古文：会李克用于云州，古侍，克用异之曰： 是儿骨相非常，不宜使在左右。 
现代文：适逢李克用在云州，耶律古侍卫，李克用惊诧地说： 这孩子依骨相看来很特别，不应该让他侍从左右。 
English: When Li Keqiang happened to be in Yunnan, the ancient bodyguard of Yelu, Li Keqiang said with surprise, "This child is very special according to his bone structure, and he should not be allowed to be a bodyguard."

古文：以故太祖颇忌之。时方西讨，诸弟乱作，闻变，太祖问古与否，曰无。
现代文：因此太祖十分忌惮他，当时正西征，诸弟之乱发生，听说变乱发生，太祖问耶律古参予与否，回答说没有。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather was very wary of him. At that time, he was on the Western Expedition, and there was a riot among his younger brothers. Hearing that a riot had occurred, the great-grandfather asked Yeruko whether he would participate, and she answered no.

古文：喜曰： 吾无患矣！ 
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 我没什么担心的了！ 
English: The great-grandfather said happily: I have nothing to worry about!

古文：趣召古议。
现代文：赶紧召见耶律古前来商议。
English: Urgently summoned Yeruko to come and discuss.

古文：古陈殄灭之策，后皆如言，以故锡赉甚厚。
现代文：耶律古陈述了消灭他们的计策，后来太祖都按他所说去做了，因此赏赐十分丰厚。
English: Yeruko presented a plan to eliminate them, and later the ancestors did as he said, so the reward was very rich.

古文：神册末，南伐，以古佐右皮室详稳老古，与唐兵战于云碧店，老古中流矢，伤甚，太祖疑古阴害之。
现代文：神册末年，南征，让耶律古辅佐右皮室详稳耶律老古，与唐军交战于云碧店。老古中了流矢，伤势很重，太祖怀疑是耶律古暗里伤害他。
English: At the end of the book of God, in the Southern Expedition, Yelu Gu Fu, Yelu Gu Su, and Yelu Lao Gu fought against the Tang army in Yunbei. Lao Gu was hit by a stray arrow and was seriously injured. The great-grandfather suspected that it was Yelu Gu who had secretly hurt him.

古文：古知上意，跪曰： 陛下疑臣耻居老古麾下耶？
现代文：耶律古知道了皇上的想法，跪着说： 陛下怀疑我以位居老古手下为耻吗？
English: Knowing the Emperor's thoughts, Yeruko knelt down and said, "Your Majesty, do you suspect that I am ashamed to be under your command?

古文：及今老古在，请遣使问之。 
现代文：现在老古还活着，请您派使者去问他。 
English: Now that Lao Gu is still alive, please send an emissary to ask him.

古文：太祖使问老古，对曰： 臣于古无可疑者。 
现代文：太祖使人问老古，回答说： 我对于耶律古没什么可怀疑的。 
English: The great-grandfather asked Lao Gu why, and he replied, "I have nothing to doubt about Yelu Gu.

古文：上意乃释。
现代文：皇上心中这才轻松了下来。
English: This made the Emperor feel at ease.

古文：老古卒，遂以古为右皮室详稳。
现代文：老古去世，于是任耶律古为右皮室详稳。
English: Laogu passed away, so Ren Yeluogu was appointed as the right-hand room secretary.

古文：既卒，太祖谓左右曰： 古死，犹长松自倒，非吾伐之也。 
现代文：耶律古去世之后，太祖对左右说： 耶律古死了，好比高大的松树自行倒地，并不是我把它砍倒的。 
English: After the death of Yeluko, the great-grandfather said to the right and left: Yeluko died, like a tall pine tree fell to the ground on its own, I did not cut it down.

古文：突吕不，字铎衮，幼聪敏嗜学。
现代文：突吕不，字铎衮，幼时聪明好学。
English: When he was young, he was bright and eager to learn.

古文：事太祖见器重。
现代文：事奉太祖得到器重。
English: Serving the great-great-grandfather brings great rewards.

古文：及制契丹大字，突吕不赞成为多。
现代文：待到创制契丹大字，突吕不在很大程度上助成其功。
English: When it came to the creation of the Khitan Great Character, Tu Lyu did not help his work to a large extent.

古文：未几，为文班林牙，领国子博士、知制诰。
现代文：不久，为文班林牙，领国子博士、知制诰。
English: Soon after, he became a student of Lin Ya, a leader of the Kuo Zi Ph.D., and a disciple of Zhi Shi.

古文：明年，受诏撰决狱法。
现代文：次年，受诏令撰作决狱法。
English: The following year, a decree was issued to draw up a law on the death penalty.

古文：太祖略燕，诏与皇太子及王郁攻定州。师还至顺州，幽州马步军指挥使王千率众来袭，突吕不射其马踬，擒之。
现代文：太祖攻掠燕地，诏令突吕不与皇太子及王郁进攻定州，军队回师至顺州，幽州马步军指挥使王千率众前来偷袭，突吕不将他的马射倒，活捉了他。
English: The great-grandfather attacked and plundered Yan'an, the emperor ordered Tu Lu not to attack Dingzhou with the crown prince and Wang Yu, the army returned to Shunzhou, the commander of the Yuzhou horse-marching army made Wang Qian lead the crowd to make a surprise attack, Tu Lu did not shoot his horse down and captured him alive.

古文：天赞二年，皇子尧骨为大元帅，突吕不为副，既克平州，进军燕、赵，攻下曲阳、北平。
现代文：天赞二年，皇子尧骨为大元帅，突吕不为副，攻克平州之后，进军燕、赵，攻下曲阳、北平。
English: In the second year of Tianzan, Prince Xie Jian was the grand marshal, and Tu Lv was the deputy. After conquering Pingzhou, he marched into Yan and Zhao, and conquered Quyang and Beiping.

古文：至易州，易人来拒，逾濠而阵。
现代文：兵至易州，易人前来拒战，跨过壕沟结阵。
English: The soldiers went to Yizhou, and the people of Yizhou came to oppose the war and formed a line across the trench.

古文：李景章出降，言城中人无斗志。
现代文：李景章出降，声称易州城中众人没有斗志。
English: Li Jingzhang surrendered, claiming that the people in Yizhou City had no fighting spirit.

古文：大元帅将修攻具，突吕不谏曰： 我师远来，人马疲惫，势不可久留。 
现代文：大元帅准备修治攻城器具，突吕不劝谏说： 我军远道而来，人马疲惫，按理不能久留。 
English: The grand marshal was preparing to repair the siege equipment, and he said, "Our army has come a long way, the men and horses are tired, and they can't stay long.

古文：乃止。
现代文：便没有攻城。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：军还，大元帅以其谋闻，太祖大悦，赐赉优渥。
现代文：大军回国，大元帅将突吕不之谋划上奏，太祖很高兴，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: When the great army returned to the country, the grand marshal announced his plan. The great-grandfather was very happy and the reward was very rich.

古文：车驾西征，突吕不与大元帅为先锋，伐党项有功，太祖犒师水精山。
现代文：皇上西征，突吕不与大元帅担任先锋，讨伐党项立有战功，太祖在水精山慰劳三军。
English: The emperor's westward expedition, Tu Lvun and the grand marshal served as the vanguard, the crusade against the party made great achievements in the war, and the great-grandfather consoled the three armies in Shuijingshan.

古文：大元帅东归，突吕不留屯西南部，复讨党项，多获而还。
现代文：大元帅东归，突吕不留驻于西南部，再次讨伐党项，缴获大量物品而回。
English: The grand marshal returned to the east, but did not stay in the southwestern part of the country. He once again cracked down on the party and seized a large number of items before returning.

古文：太祖东伐，大諲歙降而复叛，攻之，突吕不先登。
现代文：太祖东征，大投降之后又反叛，进攻之，突吕不先登入城。
English: Emperor Taizu's Eastern Expedition, after the Great Surrender, he rebelled and attacked, but he did not enter the city first.

古文：渤海平，承诏铭太祖功德于永兴殿壁。
现代文：渤海平定，仰承诏令铭刻太祖功德于永兴殿殿壁。
English: After the pacification of the Bohai Sea, the imperial edict was issued to inscribe the great-grandfather's merits on the wall of Yongxing Hall.

古文：班师，已下州郡往往复叛，突吕不从大元帅攻破之。
现代文：班师之后，已攻下的州郡又四处反叛，突吕不随大元帅攻破之。
English: After the formation of the division, there were four rebellions in the states and counties that had already been conquered, and Tu Lu did not follow the grand marshal to conquer them.

古文：淳钦皇后称制，有飞语中伤者，后怒，突吕不惧而亡。
现代文：淳钦皇后称制时，有人以流言蜚语中伤突吕不，皇后震怒，突吕不害怕，便逃走了。
English: When Empress Junqin was crowned, someone slandered Tu Lv Ne with a rumor. The empress was furious, but Tu Lv Ne was not afraid and ran away.

古文：太宗知其无罪，召还。
现代文：太宗知道他无罪，召回。
English: Taizong knew he was innocent and recalled him.

古文：天显三年，讨乌古部，俘获甚众。
现代文：天显三年，攻讨乌古部，俘虏缴获甚众。
English: In the third year of Tianxian, they attacked Ugube and captured a large number of prisoners.

古文：伐唐，以突吕不为左翼，攻唐军霞沙寨，降之。
现代文：讨伐唐，以突吕不为左翼军，进攻唐军霞沙寨，降服之。
English: To fight against the Tang Dynasty, the left-wing army of Tu Lvun attacked the Tang Dynasty army of Xia Shazhai and defeated it.

古文：十一年，送晋主石敬瑭入洛。
现代文：十一年，护送晋主石敬瑭进入洛阳。
English: In the eleventh year, he escorted Jin master Shi Jingyao into Luoyang.

古文：及大册，突吕不总礼仪事，加特进检校太尉。
现代文：待到行大册礼，突吕不总管礼仪事务，加特进检校太尉。
English: When it came time for the grand book-signing ceremony, Turow was not in charge of ceremonial affairs, and Gat was the school's inspecting officer.

古文：会同五年卒。
现代文：会同五年去世。
English: He died five years later.

古文：王郁，京兆万年人，唐义武军节度使处直之孽子。
现代文：王郁，京兆万年县人，唐义武军节度使王处直之庶子。
English: Wang Yu, a citizen of Jingzha County for a thousand years, was the illegitimate son of the military commander of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Shanzhong.

古文：伯父处存镇义武，卒，三军推其子郜袭，处直为都知兵马使。
现代文：伯父王处存镇守义武，去世，三军推戴其子王郜继任，以王处直为都知兵马使。
English: His uncle, Wang Duanzhong, died while guarding the town of Yiwu, and the three armies promoted his son, Wang Xi, to succeed him, with Wang Duanzhong as the military envoy to the capital.

古文：光化三年，梁王朱全忠攻定州，郜遣处直拒于沙河。
现代文：光化三年，梁王朱全忠进攻定州，王郜派王处直拒战于沙河。
English: Three years after the Gwanghwa era, Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong attacked Dingzhou, and Wang Xi sent Wang Shu to refuse to fight in Shahe.

古文：兵败，入城逐郜，郜奔太原。
现代文：处直兵败，入城赶走王郜，郜逃奔太原。
English: They were soundly defeated and went into the city to drive out Wang Yao, while Yao fled to Taiyuan.

古文：乱兵推处直为留后，遣人请事梁王。梁与晋王克用绝好，表处直为义武军节度使。
现代文：乱军推王处直为留后，派人请求事奉梁王，愿与晋王李克用绝交，梁王便表奏王处直为义武军节度使。
English: After the rebels pushed Wang Shizhi to stay, they sent a request to serve King Liang, who was willing to break off diplomatic relations with Jin King Li Ke. King Liang then presented Wang Shizhi as the festival envoy of the Volunteer Army.

古文：初，郜之亡也，郁从之。
现代文：当初王郜逃亡时，王郁跟随他。
English: When Wang Yao initially fled, Wang Yu followed him.

古文：晋王克用妻以女，用为新州防御使。
现代文：晋王李克用将女儿嫁给他，任命他为新州防御使。
English: The Jin king Li Ke used his daughter's marriage to him to appoint him as the new state defense envoy.

古文：处直料晋必讨张文礼，镇亡，则定不独存，益自疑。
现代文：处直料想晋一定会攻讨张文礼，镇州亡，那么定州不能独自保存，更加惴惴不安。
English: It was expected that Jin would attack Zhang Wenli and Zhenzhou would be destroyed, so Dingzhou could not be saved on its own, which was even more worrying.

古文：阴使郁北导契丹入塞，以牵晋兵，且许为嗣。
现代文：暗里派王郁到北边导引契丹入关以牵制晋兵，并且许诺让他继嗣。
English: He secretly sent Wang Yu to the north to guide Khitan into the pass to hold back Jin soldiers, and promised to make him his heir.

古文：郁自奔晋，常恐失父心，得使，大喜。
现代文：王郁自从奔晋，总是担心失去父亲的宠爱，得以出使，大喜。
English: Wang Yu has always been worried about losing his father's favor since he ran away to the Jin Dynasty. He was overjoyed to be able to send an envoy.

古文：神册六年，奉表送款，举室来降，太祖以为养子。
现代文：神册六年，上表投诚，带着全家来降附，太祖以王郁为养子。
English: In the sixth year of the divine record, the upper table cast sincerity, and brought the whole family to attach, and the great-grandfather took Wang Yu as his adopted son.

古文：未几，郁兄都囚父，自为留后，帝遣郁从皇太子讨之。
现代文：不久，郁兄王都囚禁父亲，自己做留后，太祖派遣王郁随皇太子讨伐他。
English: Soon after, both of Iku's brothers, Wang Iku and his father, were imprisoned. After he himself was detained, the great-grandfather sent Wang Iku to follow the crown prince to fight him.

古文：至定州，都坚壁不出，掠居民而还。
现代文：兵至定州，王都坚守壁垒不出战，辽军掳掠居民而回。
English: From the soldiers to Dingzhou, Wang Du held fast to the ramparts and did not fight. The Liao army took the residents captive and returned.

古文：明年，从皇太子攻镇州，遇唐兵于定州，破之。
现代文：次年，又随皇太子进攻镇州，在定州遭遇唐兵，击败之。
English: The following year, following the crown prince's attack on Zhenzhou, he encountered Tang soldiers in Dingzhou and defeated them.

古文：天赞二年秋，郁及阿古只略地燕、赵，攻下磁窑务。
现代文：天赞二年秋，王郁及阿古只在燕、赵一带攻城略地，攻下磁窑务。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Tianzan, Wang Yu and Agu only attacked the city in the areas of Yan and Zhao, capturing the magnetic kiln.

古文：从太祖平渤海，战有功，加同政事门下平章事，改崇义军节度使。
现代文：随太祖平定渤海，作战有功，加同政事门下平章事，改任崇义军节度使。
English: With his great-great-grandfather, he pacified the Bohai Sea and achieved great success in battle. He was appointed as the festival envoy of the Chongyi Army.

古文：太祖崩，郁与妻会葬，其妻泣诉于淳钦皇后，求归乡国，许之。
现代文：太祖崩逝，王郁与妻子参加会葬，其妻在淳钦皇后面前哭诉，请求回归故国，皇后答应了。
English: When the great-grandfather passed away, Wang Yu and his wife attended the funeral. His wife cried in front of Empress Junqin and asked to return to her homeland. The Empress agreed.

古文：郁奏曰： 臣本唐主之婿，主已被弑，此行夫妻岂能相保？
现代文：王郁上奏说 ：臣本来是唐帝的女婿，主上已被弑逆，这次去夫妻怎么能相保无事。
English: Wang Yu said: The subject was originally the son-in-law of Emperor Tang, the master has been overthrown, how can the husband and wife be safe this time?

古文：愿常侍太后。 
现代文：愿意终身侍奉太后。 
English: Willing to serve the empress dowager for life.

古文：后喜曰： 汉人中，惟王郎最忠孝。 
现代文：淳钦后高兴地说： 汉人之中，只有王郎最忠最孝。 
English: Afterward, Jun Qin said happily: Among the Han people, only Wang Lang is the most loyal and filial.

古文：以太祖尝与李克用约为兄弟故也。
现代文：因为太祖曾与李克用相约为兄弟，所以这么说。
English: He said this because his great-grandfather and Li Kegui were almost brothers.

古文：寻加政事令。
现代文：不久升任政事令。
English: He was soon promoted to Minister of State.

古文：还宜州，卒。
现代文：回宜州，去世。
English: He returned to Yizhou and passed away.

古文：耶律图鲁窘，字阿鲁隐，肃祖子洽瑽之孙，勇而有谋略。
现代文：耶律图鲁窘，字阿鲁隐，肃祖之子洽礝之孙，勇敢而有谋略。
English: Yerutthuru, also known as Aruin, the son of Su Zu, the grandson of Chaowei, is brave and resourceful.

古文：太宗立晋之役，其父敌鲁古为五院夷离堇，殁于兵，帝即以其职授图鲁窘。
现代文：太宗扶立晋的战役中，图鲁窘之父敌鲁古为五院夷离堇，战死，皇上便将其官职授给图鲁窘。
English: During the campaign of Emperor Taizong Fu Li Jin, the father of Tu Lu Jing, Qu Lu Gu, was exiled to the Fifth Palace and died in battle. The emperor then conferred his official position to Tu Lu Jing.

古文：会同元年，改北院大王，尝屏左右与议大事，占对合上意。
现代文：会同元年，改任为北院大王，皇上曾经屏退左右而与他商议军国大事，应对合于皇上之意。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was reappointed as the Northern Court Great King. The Emperor had been consulting with him on military and national affairs, and the response was in accordance with the Emperor's wishes.

古文：从讨石重贵，杜重威拥十万余众拒滹沱桥，力战数日，不得进。
现代文：随皇上讨伐石重贵，杜重威拥十万余众拒战于滹沱桥，奋力作战数日，没法前进。
English: With the emperor's crusade stone precious, Du Chong held more than one hundred thousand people to refuse to fight in the bridge, struggling to fight for several days, unable to advance.

古文：帝曰： 两军争渡，人马疲矣，计安出？ 
现代文：皇上说： 两军争一渡口，人与马都疲劳了，有什么计策吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "The two armies are fighting for a ferry crossing. Both men and horses are tired. Is there any way out?

古文：诸将请缓师，为后图，帝然之。
现代文：诸将请求延缓进军，以图今后之计，皇上觉得有理。
English: The emperor felt justified in asking the generals to delay the march in order to plan for the future.

古文：图鲁窘厉色进曰： 臣愚窃以为陛下乐于安逸，则谨守四境可也；既欲扩大疆宇，出师远攻，讵能无廑圣虑。
现代文：图鲁窘满面怒容，进言说： 愚臣私下里以为陛下如果喜欢安逸，那么小心把守四境就行了；既然想要扩大疆域，出兵远攻，又怎么可能不劳烦圣虑呢？
English: Turu, with an embarrassed and angry face, said: Foolish minister secretly thought that if your majesty likes to be at ease, then it is enough to carefully guard the four borders; since you want to expand the territory and send troops to attack far away, how can you not worry about it?

古文：若中路而止，适为贼利，则必陷南京，夷属邑。
现代文：如果中途作罢，正好是敌军之利，那么他们一定会攻陷南京，夷平我们的属邑。
English: If we give up halfway, it will be to the advantage of the enemy, and they will certainly capture Nanking and raze our towns.

古文：若此，则争战未已，吾民无奠枕之期矣。
现代文：要这样，就将争战不已，我国百姓就没有安枕之日了。
English: If this is the case, the war will continue and our people will have no place to sleep.

古文：且彼步我骑，何虑不克！
现代文：何况敌人用步兵我方用骑兵，又何必担心不能战胜。
English: Besides, the enemy uses infantry, we use cavalry, so why worry about not being able to win.

古文：况汉人足力弱而行缓，如选轻锐骑先绝其饷道，则事蔑不济矣。 
现代文：况且汉人脚上功夫差，走得慢，如果选派轻骑先行阻断其粮道，那么事情就没有不成功的了！ 
English: Moreover, the Han people have poor footwork and walk slowly. If the light cavalry is sent to block their food route first, then things will not be unsuccessful!

古文：帝喜曰： 国强则其人贤，海巨则其鱼大。 
现代文：皇上高兴地说： 国强则其人贤，海巨则其鱼大。 
English: The emperor said happily, "When a country is strong, its people are wise, and when the sea is vast, its fish are big."

古文：于是塞其饷道，数出师以牵挠其势，重威果降如言。
现代文：于是堵塞晋军粮道，多次出兵牵制和扰乱其兵势，重威果然像图鲁窘所说那样投降了。
English: As a result, the Jin army's food route was blocked, and troops were dispatched several times to contain and disrupt their troop strength. The heavy forces did indeed surrender, as Tulu Shizhe said.

古文：以功获赐甚厚。
现代文：因功获得赏赐十分丰厚。
English: He was rewarded handsomely for his efforts.

古文：明年春，卒军中。
现代文：次年春天，在军中去世。
English: He died in the army the following spring.

