古文：吕命穆王训夏赎刑，作《吕刑》。
现代文：周穆王命吕侯依照夏朝的赎刑作《吕刑》
English: King Zhou Mu ordered Lü Hou to make "Luji" in accordance with the expiation sentence of the Xia Dynasty.

古文：惟吕命，王享国百年，耄荒，度作刑，以诘四方。
现代文：吕侯被命为卿时，穆王在位已经很长时间了，他年纪已经很大了。但还是广泛谋求制定刑法，来制约四方诸侯。
English: When Lü Hou was appointed as lord, King Mu had been on the throne for a long time, and he was very old. However, he still extensively sought to formulate a criminal law to restrict the princes of the four directions.

古文：王曰： 若古有训，蚩尤惟始作乱，延及于平民，罔不寇贼，鸱义，奸宄，夺攘，矫虔。
现代文：王说： 古代有遗训，当时蚩尤开始作乱，波及到平民百姓。无不寇掠贼害，内外作乱，争夺窃盗，诈骗强取。
English: Wang said: In ancient times, there was a lesson that was left behind. At that time, Qiu You began to make disturbances, which affected the common people. There was no harm from robbers, internal and external disturbances, competition for theft, fraud and extortion.

古文：苗民弗用灵，制以刑，惟作五虐之刑曰法。
现代文：苗民不遵守政令，于是就制定刑罚来制服，制定了五种酷刑作为法律。
English: The Miao people did not comply with the decree, so they formulated punishments to subdue them, and formulated five kinds of torture as laws.

古文：杀戮无辜，爰始淫为劓、刵、椓、黥。
现代文：慢慢就开始杀害无罪的人，开始滥用劓、刖、椓、黥等刑罚。
English: Slowly, they began to kill innocent people, and began to abuse punishments such as beating, whipping, beating, beating.

古文：越兹丽刑并制，罔差有辞。
现代文：于是，施行杀戮，抛弃法制，不减免无罪的人。
English: So they kill, abandon the rule of law, and do not pardon the innocent.

古文：民兴胥渐，泯泯棼棼，罔中于信，以覆诅盟。
现代文：苗民互相欺诈，社会变得混乱不堪，没有公平正义，以致背叛誓约。
English: Miao people cheated each other, the society became chaotic, there was no fairness and justice, resulting in betrayal of the pledge.

古文：虐威庶戮，方告无辜于上。上帝监民，罔有馨香德，刑发闻惟腥。
现代文：许多遭受冤屈的无辜百姓向上天申诉，上天了解实情后，发现没有芬芳的德政，刑法所发散的只有腥气。
English: Many innocent people who have suffered grievances have appealed to heaven. After heaven learned the truth, it found that there is no fragrance of moral government, and the criminal law emits only stench.

古文：皇帝哀矜庶戮之不辜，报虐以威，遏绝苗民，无世在下。
现代文：上天怜惜那些无辜受罚的平民百姓，就用威罚处置施行虐刑的人，制止和消灭行虐的苗民，使他们没有后嗣留在世间。
English: Heaven took pity on those innocent civilians who were punished, and used coercive punishment to deal with those who carried out cruel punishments, to stop and eliminate the cruel seedlings, so that they would have no heirs left in the world.

古文：乃命重、黎，绝地天通，罔有降格。
现代文：又命令重和黎，禁止地民和天神相互感通，神和民再不能升降来往了。
English: He also ordered to reestablish peace, forbidding the local people and the gods to communicate with each other, and the gods and the people could no longer come and go.

古文：群后之逮在下，明明棐常，鳏寡无盖。
现代文：高辛、尧、舜相继在下，都显用贤德的人，扶持常道，于是孤苦之人的苦情，没有壅蔽了。
English: Gao Xin, Yao, Yao successively came up, all of whom were virtuous people and supported the normal way, so the complaints of the lonely people were not covered up.

古文：皇帝清问下民鳏寡有辞于苗。
现代文：尧皇帝清楚地听到下民和孤寡对苗民的怨言。
English: Emperor Qian clearly heard the complaints of the commoners and the widows and orphans against the Miao people.

古文：德威惟畏，德明惟明。
现代文：于是提拔贤人，贤人所惩罚的，人都畏服，贤人所尊重的，人们没有不尊重的。
English: So the wise men were promoted, those whom the wise men punished were feared, those whom the wise men respected were not disrespected.

古文：乃命三后，恤功于民。
现代文：命令三位大臣慎重地为民服务。
English: He ordered the three ministers to serve the people prudently.

古文：伯夷降典，折民惟刑；禹平水土，主名山川；稷降播种，家殖嘉谷。
现代文：伯夷制定了法律，用刑罚来管理百姓；大禹平治水土，负责名山大川；后稷教导百姓播种，尽心竭力帮助百姓种植庄稼。
English: Bo Yi formulated laws and used punishments to manage the people; Dayu Ping managed the water and soil and was responsible for the famous mountains and rivers; Hou Yi taught the people to sow seeds and tried his best to help the people grow crops.

古文：三后成功，惟殷于民。
现代文：三位国君功业达成后，就富足了老百姓。
English: After the accomplishment of the three sovereigns, the common people became rich.

古文：士制百姓于刑之中，以教祗德。
现代文：士师又用公正的刑罚制御百官，教导臣民敬重德行。
English: The judges also controlled the officials with just punishments and taught the subjects to respect and practice virtue.

古文：穆穆在上，明明在下，灼于四方，罔不惟德之勤，故乃明于刑之中，率乂于民棐彝。
现代文：尧皇帝恭敬在上，群臣在下也致力于明察建立功业，政治清明，光辉普照天下，没有人不努力遵守美好的德行。所以公平的施用刑罚，治理老百姓以扶持常道。
English: Emperor Qian is respected above, and the ministers below are also committed to observing and establishing the cause, the politics are clear, the glory is shining all over the world, and no one is not trying to abide by the good moral conduct. Therefore, the fair application of punishment, the governance of the people to support the normal way.

古文：典狱非讫于威，惟讫于富。
现代文：主管刑罚的官，不能只树立自己的威严，而是要仁厚，造福万民。
English: The official in charge of punishment should not only establish his own dignity, but also be kind and benefit all people.

古文：敬忌，罔有择言在身。
现代文：又敬、又戒，自身不说坏话。
English: He is respectful and disciplined, and does not speak ill of others.

古文：惟克天德，自作元命，配享在下。 王曰： 嗟！
现代文：他们肩负上天仁爱的美德，自己造就了好命，所以配天在下享有禄位。 王说： 啊！
English: They shouldered the virtue of heaven's benevolence and love, and created a good life for themselves, so they are worthy of heaven and enjoy a lucrative position. The king said: Ah!

古文：四方司政典狱，非尔惟作天牧？
现代文：四方的诸侯们，你们身上不是肩负着治理万民的重任吗？
English: Princes of the four quarters, do you not bear the heavy responsibility of governing the people?

古文：今尔何监？
现代文：现在，你们重视什么呢？
English: Now, what do you value?

古文：非时伯夷播刑之迪？
现代文：难道不是这伯夷施行刑罚的道理吗？
English: Isn't this the reason why punishment should be carried out?

古文：其今尔何惩？
现代文：现在你们要用什么作为惩戒呢？
English: Now what are you going to use as a punishment?

古文：惟时苗民匪察于狱之丽，罔择吉人，观于五刑之中；惟时庶威夺货，断制五刑，以乱无辜，上帝不蠲，降咎于苗，苗民无辞于罚，乃绝厥世。 
现代文：就是苗民不详察狱事的施行，不选择善良的人，监察五刑的公正，就是任用虚张威势，掠夺财物的人，裁决五刑，乱罚无罪，上天不加赦免，降灾给苗民，苗民对上天的惩罚无话可说，于是断绝了他们的后嗣。 王说： 啊！
English: It was because the Miao people did not scrutinize the execution of prison duties, did not choose good people, did not supervise the fairness of the five punishments, appointed those who were arrogant and plundered property, decided on the five punishments, arbitrarily punished the innocent, and did not seek forgiveness from Heaven, that the Miao people were plagued, and the Miao people had nothing to say about Heaven's punishment, so they cut off their heirs.

古文：王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：你们要记住这个教训啊！
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：念之哉。伯父、伯兄、仲叔、季弟、幼子、童孙，皆听朕言，庶有格命。
现代文：伯父、伯兄、仲叔、季弟以及年幼的子孙们，都听从我的话，这样就能享受好的天命了。
English: My uncle, my brother-in-law, my second uncle, my third cousin, and my young grandchildren have all obeyed my words, so they can enjoy a good fate.

古文：今尔罔不由慰曰勤，尔罔或戒不勤。
现代文：如今你们没有人不喜欢慰劳说勤劳了，你们没有人制止自己的懒惰。
English: Now there is no one among you who does not love to be busy, and there is no one among you who restrains his sloth.

古文：天齐于民，俾我一日，非终惟终，在人。
现代文：上天治理下民，暂时任用我们，不成与成，完全在人。
English: Heaven governs the people, temporarily appoints us, and is completely dependent on man.

古文：尔尚敬逆天命，以奉我一人！
现代文：你们可要恭敬地接受天命，来辅助我！
English: You must respectfully accept your destiny to assist me!

古文：虽畏勿畏，虽休勿休。惟敬五刑，以成三德。
现代文：虽然遇到可怕的事，不要害怕；虽然可以休息，也不要休息，希望慎用五刑，养成这三种德行。
English: Although you encounter terrible things, don't be afraid; although you can rest, don't rest. I hope you can use the five punishments carefully to develop these three virtues.

古文：一人有庆，兆民赖之，其宁惟永。 王曰： 吁！
现代文：一人办了好事，万民都受益，国家的安宁就会长久了。王说： 啊！
English: If one person does a good deed, all the people will benefit, and the country will enjoy a long period of peace. The king said, "Ah!

古文：来，有邦有土，告尔祥刑。
现代文：来，诸侯国君和各位大臣，我将少用刑罚、注重德教的详细制度告知给你们。
English: Come, princes, sovereigns, and ministers, I will tell you the detailed system of using less punishment and focusing on moral education.

古文：在今尔安百姓，何择，非人？
现代文：如今你们安定百姓，要选择什么呢，难道不应该是德才兼备的贤人吗？
English: Now that you have stabilized the people, what should you choose? Shouldn't it be a wise person who is both virtuous and talented?

古文：何敬，非刑？
现代文：要慎重什么呢，难道不是刑罚吗？
English: What is there to be cautious about, isn't it a punishment?

古文：何度，非及？
现代文：要考虑什么呢，难道不是公平的审理案件吗？
English: What is there to consider, is it not a fair hearing of the case?

古文：两造具备，师听五辞。五辞简孚，正于五刑。
现代文：原告和被告都在场了，官员就审查五刑的讼辞；如果讼辞核实可信，就用五刑来处理。
English: Once both the plaintiff and the defendant are present, the official will review the five-sentence statement; if the statement is verified as credible, the five-sentence statement will be used.

古文：五刑不简，天于五罚；五罚不服，正于五过。
现代文：如果用五刑处理不能核实，就用五罚来处理；如果用五罚处理也不可从，就用五过来处理。
English: If the five-penalty treatment cannot be verified, it will be treated with five penalties; if the five-penalty treatment cannot be followed, it will be treated with five penalties.

古文：五过之疵：惟官，惟反，惟内，惟货，惟来。
现代文：五过的弊端是：法官畏权势，报恩怨，谄媚内亲，索取贿赂，受人请求。
English: The five evils are: judges fearing power, returning favors, flattering relatives, soliciting bribes, and accepting requests.

古文：其罪惟均，其审克之！
现代文：发现上述弊端，法官的罪就与罪犯相同，你们必须详细察实啊！
English: If you find the above-mentioned defects, the judge's crime is the same as that of the criminal. You must investigate in detail!

古文：五刑之疑有赦，五罚之疑有赦，其审克之！
现代文：如果五刑判决存疑，可以直接赦免；同样地，如果发现五罚存疑，也能够赦免。
English: If the five-penalty verdict is in doubt, it can be directly pardoned; similarly, if the five-penalty is found to be in doubt, it can also be pardoned.

古文：简孚有众，惟貌有稽。无简不听，具严天威。
现代文：刑狱之事要谨慎审核，那是因为要畏惧上天的威严，必须要能够谨慎恭敬地对待。
English: The matter of imprisonment should be carefully examined, because to fear the majesty of heaven, we must be able to treat it with caution and respect.

古文：墨辟疑赦，其罚百锾，阅实其罪。
现代文：判处墨刑感到可疑，可以从轻处治，罚金一百锾，要核实其罪行。
English: Anyone who feels that the sentence of ink torture is suspicious may be given a light punishment, a fine of one hundred baht, and his crime must be verified.

古文：劓辟疑赦，其罪惟倍，阅实其罪。
现代文：判处劓刑感到可疑，可以从轻处治，罚金二百锾，要核实其罪行。
English: If the sentence of whipping is suspicious, it can be punished lightly, with a fine of two hundred baht, and it is necessary to verify the crime.

古文：剕辟疑赦，其罚倍差，阅实其罪。
现代文：判处剕刑感到可疑，可以从轻处治，罚金五百锾，要核实其罪行。
English: If the sentence of flogging is suspicious, it can be punished lightly, with a fine of 500 baht, and it is necessary to verify the crime.

古文：宫辟疑赦，其罚六百锾，阅实其罪。
现代文：判处宫刑感到可疑，可以从轻处治，罚金六百锾，要核实其罪行。
English: Anyone who feels suspicious about being sentenced to palace punishment may be given a light punishment, a fine of 600 baht, and their crime must be verified.

古文：大辟疑赦，其罚千锾，阅实其罪。
现代文：判处死刑感到可疑，可以从轻处治，罚金一千锾，要核实其罪行。
English: If the death sentence is suspicious, it can be punished lightly, with a fine of one thousand baht, and the crime must be verified.

古文：墨罚之属千。劓罚之属千，剕罚之属五百，宫罚之属三百，大辟之罚其属二百。
现代文：墨罚的条目有一千，劓罚的条目有一千，荆罚的条目有五百，宫罚的条目有三百，死罪的刑罚，其条目有二百。
English: There are one thousand entries for ink, one thousand for ink stone, five hundred for ink stone, three hundred for palace punishment, and two hundred for capital punishment.

古文：五刑之属三千。
现代文：五种刑罚的条目共有三千。
English: There are a total of 3,000 items of five kinds of punishments.

古文：上下比罪，无僭乱辞，勿用不行，惟察惟法，其审克之！上刑适轻，下服；下刑适重，上服。
现代文：要上下比较其罪行，不要错乱供辞，不要采取已经废除的法律，应当认真察看案情遵循刑罚，并且要认真审核！
English: It is necessary to compare their crimes up and down, do not make confessions out of order, do not adopt laws that have been abolished, should carefully examine the circumstances of the case, follow the punishment, and carefully review!

古文：轻重诸罚有权。刑罚世轻世重，惟齐非齐，有伦有要。
现代文：如果犯了重罪，上刑宜于减轻，就减一等处治，犯的罪行较轻，但是情节恶劣最好可以从重论处的，要用重刑来处罚。各种刑罚的轻重允许有些灵活性。
English: If a felony is committed, the punishment should be mitigated, and the punishment should be reduced by one grade. If the crime is minor, but the circumstances are bad, it is best to be punished with a heavy sentence. The severity of various punishments allows some flexibility.

古文：罚惩非死，人极于病。非佞折狱，惟良折狱，罔非在中。
现代文：刑罚时轻时重，相同或不相同，要根据实际情况来定。
English: Whether the punishment is lighter or heavier, the same or different, should be determined according to the actual situation.

古文：察辞于差，非从惟从。
现代文：刑罚虽不置人死地，但受刑罚的人感到比重病还痛苦。
English: Although the punishment does not put people to death, those who are punished feel more pain than serious illness.

古文：哀敬折狱，明启刑书胥占，咸庶中正。
现代文：审判案件不能只靠着巧言善辩，要能够做到善良公正，才能让判决准确无误。
English: The trial of a case cannot rely only on clever words and good arguments, and it is necessary to be kind and fair in order to make the judgment accurate.

古文：其刑其罚，其审克之。
现代文：从矛盾处考察供词，不服从的犯人也会服从。
English: Confessions are examined for inconsistencies, and prisoners who do not comply are made to do so.

古文：狱成而孚，输而孚。其刑上备，有并两刑。 
现代文：应当怀着哀怜的心情判决诉讼案件，明白地检查刑书，互相斟酌，都要以公正为标准。当刑当罚，要详细察实啊！
English: Litigation cases should be adjudicated with a sorrowful heart, the punishment documents should be examined clearly, and they should be weighed against each other, all of which should be based on fairness. When it comes to punishment, it is necessary to investigate in detail!

古文：王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：要做到案件判定了，人们信服；改变判决，人们也信服。
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：敬之哉！官伯族姓，朕言多惧。
现代文：刑罚贵在慎重，有时也可以把两种罪行合并考虑，只罚一种。 王说： 啊，要谨慎地对待邢狱啊！
English: The king said, "Oh, be careful with your punishment, for sometimes two crimes may be considered together, and only one punished."

古文：朕敬于刑，有德惟刑。
现代文：诸侯国君以及同姓官员们，对我的话要多多畏惧借鉴。
English: Princes and statesmen, as well as officials with the same surname, should be very wary of my words.

古文：今天相民，作配在下。
现代文：我严谨地对待刑狱处罚之事，实行德政就要善用刑法。
English: I strictly treat the matter of prison punishment, and the implementation of German politics requires the good use of criminal law.

古文：明清于单辞，民之乱，罔不中听狱之两辞，无或私家于狱之两辞！
现代文：如今上天对民众的治理，在人间会确立君主来承接天意，在审理办案的时候要能够明察秋毫而不是听取一面之词偏听偏信。老百姓的治理，无不在于公正地审理双方的诉讼词，不要对诉讼双方的诉词贪图私利啊！
English: Nowadays, the governance of heaven over the people is to establish a monarch on earth to undertake the will of heaven. When handling a case, it is necessary to be able to see the whole picture, rather than listen to one side of the story. The governance of the common people lies in the fair hearing of the words of the two parties, and do not covet the words of the two parties.

古文：狱货非宝，惟府辜功，报以庶尤。
现代文：狱讼接受贿赂不是好事，那是获罪的事，我将以众人犯罪来论处这些人。
English: Imprisonment for accepting bribes is not a good thing, it is a crime, and I will treat these people as criminals.

古文：永畏惟罚，非天不中，惟人在命。
现代文：永远可畏的是上天的惩罚，不是天道不公平，只是人们自己终结天命。
English: What is always to be feared is Heaven's punishment. It is not that Heaven's way is unfair, but that people themselves put an end to Heaven's destiny.

古文：天罚不极，庶民罔有令政在于天下。 
现代文：上天的惩罚不加到贪赃枉法的官员身上，天下的百姓就无法享受好的政治。 王说： 啊！
English: If heaven's punishment is not inflicted on corrupt officials, the people of the world will not be able to enjoy good politics. The king said: Ah!

古文：王曰： 呜呼！嗣孙，今往何监，非德？
现代文：继承天子之位的子孙们，从今以后，你们应该怎么来审理案件呢？难道不是行德吗？
English: Descendants of inheriting the throne of the Son of Heaven, from now on, how should you try cases? Isn't it a virtue?

古文：于民之中，尚明听之哉！
现代文：对于老百姓案情的判决，要明察啊！
English: As for the verdict on the people's case, you should look at it carefully!

古文：哲人惟刑，无疆之辞，属于五极，咸中有庆。
现代文：治理老百姓要运用刑罚，使无穷无尽的讼辞合于五刑，都能公正适当，就有福庆。
English: In order to govern the common people, it is necessary to use criminal punishment, so that the endless litigations can be combined into five punishments, which can be fair and appropriate, and there will be good luck.

古文：受王嘉师，监于兹祥刑。 
现代文：你们接受治理我的好百姓，可要明察这种祥刑啊！ 
English: You, good people, who accept to be governed by me, should clearly see what kind of punishment this is!

