古文：◎世祖六十三年春正月丁卯朔，克潭州，宋安抚使李芾尽室自焚死。
现代文：至元十三年春，正月初一，元军攻克潭州，宋朝安抚使李芾全家自焚而死。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the Yuan army conquered Tanzhou, and the Song Dynasty pacified the whole family of Li Yan and died of self-immolation.

古文：阿里海牙分遣官属招徕未附者，旬日间，湖南州郡相继悉降，得府一、州六、军二、县四十，户五十六万一千一百一十二，口百五十三万七千七百四十。
现代文：阿里海牙分头派遣属下的官员招降尚未归附的人。旬日之内，湖南的州郡全部相继投降，取得一个府、六个州、两个军州、四十个县，共五十六万一千一百一十二户，一百五十三万七千七百四十人。
English: Within ten days, all of Hunan's prefectures and counties surrendered one after another, gaining one prefecture, six prefectures, two military prefectures, and forty counties, with a total of 561,112 households and 1,537,740 people.

古文：伯颜军次嘉兴府，安抚刘汉杰以城降。
现代文：伯颜的军队进驻到嘉兴府，安抚使刘汉杰献城投降。
English: Bojan's army stationed in Jiaxing, pacifying Liu Hanjie to surrender.

古文：董文炳军次乍浦，宋统制官刘英以本军降。
现代文：董文炳的军队进至乍浦，宋军统制官刘英率领本军投降。
English: Dong Wenxuan's army advanced to Zhapu, and Liu Ying, the Song military commander, led his army to surrender.

古文：辛未，董文炳军至海盐，知县事王与贤及澉浦镇统制胡全、福建路马步军总沈世隆皆降。
现代文：初五，董文炳的军队抵达海盐，海盐知县王与贤和澉浦镇统制胡全、福建路马步军总管沈世隆均出降。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Dong Wenzhen's army arrived in Haiyan. Wang Youxian of Haiyan Zhixian County, Hu Quan, the governor of Xiangpu Town, and Shen Shilong, the head of the Fujian Luma Foot Army, all surrendered.

古文：壬申，改都统领司为通政院，以兀良合带等领之。
现代文：初六，把都统领司改为通政院，任命兀良合带等人掌管。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he changed the position of the prefectural governor to the Tongzheng Yuan, and appointed Gong Liang and others to be in charge.

古文：立回易库于诸路，凡十有一，掌市易币帛诸物。
现代文：在各路设立回易库，共有十一个，掌管钱钞绢之类物品的交换。
English: A total of eleven re-exchange offices have been set up along the routes to handle the exchange of money, banknotes and other items.

古文：敕大都路总管府和顾和买，权豪与民均输。
现代文：敕命大都路总管府雇用工匠征收民财，权豪势要之家和一般民户平等交纳赋税。
English: The General Administration of Capital Highway employed artisans to collect people's wealth, and the families of powerful and influential people paid taxes equally with ordinary households.

古文：癸酉，宋相陈宜中遣军器监刘庭瑞赍宋主称藩表章，诣军前禀议，又致宜中等书于伯颜，伯颜以书答之。
现代文：初七，宋朝宰相陈宜中派遣军器监刘庭瑞带着宋朝皇帝自称藩臣的表章，来到军营中禀呈、协商，又把陈宜中的书信递交给伯颜，伯颜用书信答复了他。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Liu Tingrui, the military equipment inspector sent by Chen Yizhong, the prime minister of the Song Dynasty, came to the military camp with the seal of the self-proclaimed vassal of the Song Dynasty emperor to present and negotiate. He also handed Chen Yizhong's letter to Bo Yan, and Bo Yan replied to him by letter.

古文：乙亥，诏谕四川制置使赵定应来朝。
现代文：初九，下诏，令四川制置使赵定应前来朝廷。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the emperor issued an edict ordering the establishment of the Sichuan system, which made Zhao Ding come to the imperial court.

古文：徙大都等路猎户戍大洪山之东，符宝郎董文忠请贫病者勿徙，从之。
现代文：迁徙大都等路的猎户前去戍守大洪山的东侧，符宝郎董文忠请求不要迁徙那些贫穷有病的，皇上允从。
English: Most of the hunters who were waiting for the road to migrate went to guard the eastern side of Dahong Mountain. The treasure hunter Dong Wenzhong asked not to migrate those who were poor and sick, and the emperor agreed.

古文：宋复遣监察御史刘岊赍宋主称藩表至军前，且致书伯颜，为宗社生灵请命。
现代文：宋朝再次派遣监察御史刘巴山带着宋朝皇帝称臣的表章来到军前，并且写信给伯颜，为宗庙、社稷和百姓们请命。
English: The Song Dynasty once again dispatched the inspector Liu Bashan to come to the front of the army with the insignia of the Emperor of the Song Dynasty, and wrote to Bo Yan to plead for his life for the ancestral temple, the community and the people.

古文：丙子，赏合儿鲁带所部将士征建都功银钞锦衣。
现代文：初十，奖赏银两、钱钞、锦衣给合儿鲁带部下征讨建都立下战功的将士。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, silver coins, banknotes, and brocade clothes were awarded to the soldiers who won the battle of building the capital with their subordinates.

古文：丁丑，宋遣都统洪模赍陈宜中、吴坚等书，请俟宗长福王至，同诣军前。
现代文：十一日，宋朝派遣都统洪模带着陈宜中、吴坚等人的书信，请求等宗长福王来到，一起去元军军营。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Song Dynasty sent Hong Miao to the capital with letters from Chen Yizhong, Wu Jian and others, requesting the patriarch Fu Wang to come and go to the Yuan Army camp.

古文：戊寅，伯颜以军出嘉兴府，留万户忽都虎、千户王秃林察戍之。
现代文：十二日，伯颜率领军队退出嘉兴府，留下万户忽都虎、千户王秃林察戍守。
English: On the 12th, Boyan led the army to withdraw from Jiaxing Prefecture, leaving Wanhu Huoduhu and Qianhu Wang Zhao Lin to guard the capital.

古文：刘汉杰仍为其府安抚使。
现代文：刘汉杰仍旧担任嘉兴府安抚使。
English: Liu Hanjie still serves as the Jiaxing Provincial Peace Envoy.

古文：辛巳，命云南行省给建都屯军弓矢。
现代文：十五日，命令云南行中书省给予建都的驻军弓箭。
English: On the 15th, he ordered Yunnan Province to give bows and arrows to the garrison of the capital.

古文：军次崇德县，宋遣侍郎刘庭瑞、都统洪模来迓。
现代文：大军进驻到崇德县，宋廷派侍郎刘廷瑞、都统洪模前来迎接。
English: The large army was stationed in Chongde County, and Song Ting sent his attendant Liu Tingrui and Tutong Hongmo to meet them.

古文：行都元帅府宋都带言： 江西隆兴、建昌、抚州等郡虽附，而闽、广诸州尚阻兵，乞增兵进讨。 
现代文：行都元帅府宋都带上奏说： 江西的隆兴、建昌、抚州等郡虽然归附，但闽州、广州等州尚被敌军阻挡着。请增兵进行征讨。 
English: Song Du, the marshal of the Song capital, brought a report saying: Although the counties of Longxing, Jianchang and Fuzhou in Jiangxi Province have been annexed, the provinces of Ganzhou and Guangzhou are still blocked by the enemy. Please increase the number of soldiers for conscription.

古文：敕以襄汉军四千俾将之。
现代文：敕令把襄阳、汉口的四千名士兵交由他统领。
English: He was given the command of 4,000 soldiers from Xiangyang and Hankou.

古文：壬午，军次长安镇，董文炳以兵来会。
现代文：十六日，大军进驻到长安镇，董文炳率军前来会合。
English: On the 16th, a large army was stationed in Chang'an Town, and Dong Wenyi led the army to meet.

古文：宋陈宜中、吴坚等违约不至。
现代文：宋朝方面的陈宜中、吴坚等违背约言不到。
English: Chen Yizhong, Wu Jian and others from the Song Dynasty did not violate the agreement.

古文：癸未，军次临平镇。
现代文：十七日，大军进驻临平镇。
English: On the 17th, a large army entered Linping Town.

古文：甲申，次皋亭山，阿剌罕以兵来会。
现代文：十八日，进驻皋高山，阿剌罕率军前来会合。
English: On the 18th, stationed in Gaoshan, Ao Han led the army to come to the meeting.

古文：宋主遣其保康军承宣使尹甫、和州防御使吉甫等，赍传国玉玺及降表诣军前。
现代文：宋朝皇帝派遣他的宗室、宝康军承宣使赵尹甫、和州防御使赵吉甫等人带着传国玉玺和投降的表章来到军营。
English: The Emperor of the Song Dynasty dispatched his ancestral family, the Baokang Army to succeed the envoy Zhao Yinfu, and the state defense made Zhao Jifu and others come to the military camp with the national emblem and the surrender badge.

古文：其辞曰： 大宋国主鳷，谨百拜奉表于大元仁明神武皇帝陛下：臣昨尝遣侍郎柳岳、正言洪雷震捧表驰诣阙庭，敬伸卑悃，伏计已彻圣听。
现代文：表章上说 ：大宋国皇帝赵恭谨百拜，向大元的仁明神武皇帝奉上表章：臣昨天曾经派遣侍郎柳岳、正言洪雷震捧着表章急往陛下的宫阙龙廷，恭敬地表达忠实、诚恳的心意，我的心曲已蒙陛下完全了解了。
English: The frontispiece said: "The Emperor of the Great Song Dynasty, Zhao Gongxian, bowed down and offered the previous seal to the Emperor Jinming Shenwu of Taiyuan. Yesterday, the minister had sent the attendant, Liu Yue, and the chief adviser, Hong Lei Zhen, to rush to His Majesty's court, the Dragon Palace, holding the seal, respectfully expressing his loyal and sincere heart. His Majesty has fully understood my heart.

古文：臣眇焉幼冲，遭家多难，权奸似道，背盟误国，臣不及知，至于兴师问罪，宗社阽危，生灵可念。
现代文：臣只是一个渺小的幼童，遭受家邦的诸多灾难，权奸贾似道背弃两国的盟约而误了国事，臣不得而知，以至于频频兴兵问罪。宗庙、社稷危急，百姓们尤可惦念。
English: The vassal was just a small child, who suffered many disasters from his family and the state. The traitor, Jia Xiangdao, betrayed the treaty between the two countries and misjudged the state affairs. The vassal did not know that the soldiers were frequently questioned. The ancestral temple and the social order were in crisis, and the people were particularly saddened.

古文：臣与太皇日夕忧惧，非不欲迁辟以求两全，实以百万生民之命寄臣之身，今天命有归，臣将焉往？
现代文：臣和太皇太后日夜忧愁恐惧，并不是不想迁都逃避以求两全其美，实在是因为百万生灵的性命寄托在臣一个人的身上，现在天命有了新的归向，臣又能到什么地方去呢？
English: The minister and the great empress dowager are worried and fearful day and night. It is not that they do not want to move the capital to escape and seek the best of both worlds. It is because the lives of millions of people are entrusted to the minister alone. Now that the fate of heaven has a new direction, where can the minister go?

古文：惟是世传之镇宝，不敢爱惜，谨奉太皇命戒，痛自贬损，削帝号，以两浙、福建、江东西、湖南北、二广、四川见在州郡，谨悉奉上圣朝，为宗社生灵祈哀请命。
现代文：唯有这件世代相传的镇国之宝不敢吝惜，谨奉太皇太后的训诫，痛切地贬损自己，削除皇帝的尊号，把两浙、江东、江西、湖南、湖北、广东、广西、四川现在还在我朝的州郡，谨全部奉献给圣朝，为宗庙社稷和百姓们祈求、哀恳，请给活命，希望圣上施予哀怜之情。
English: Only this treasure of the town and country, which has been handed down from generation to generation, could not be spared. I respectfully obeyed the admonition of the great empress dowager, bitterly belittled myself, removed the emperor's honorary title, and dedicated all of Zhejiang, Jiangdong, Jiangxi, Hunan, Hubei, Guangdong, Guangxi, and Sichuan, which are now in the prefectures of our dynasty, to the holy dynasty. I prayed and mourned for the ancestral temple community and the people, asking them to give me life, and hoping that the saint would grant me compassion.

古文：欲望圣慈垂哀，祖母太后耄及，卧病数载，臣茕茕在疚，情有足矜，不忍臣祖宗三百年宗社遽至殒绝，曲赐裁处，特与存全，大元皇帝再生之德，则赵氏子孙世世有赖，不敢弭忘。
现代文：祖母太皇太后已及耄耋之年，几年来卧病在床，臣独自内疚于心，心情有值得哀怜之处。臣不忍心让祖宗延续了三百年的宗庙社稷突然灭亡、断绝，委曲陛下赐予裁处，特允保全。大元皇帝让我们再生的恩德，会使赵氏的子孙世世代代都仰赖着，不敢忘记。
English: My grandmother, the great empress dowager, was already in her sixties, and had been bedridden for several years. I alone felt guilty in my heart, and my mood was worthy of pity. I could not bear to let the ancestral temple and shrine, which had lasted for three hundred years, suddenly perish and be cut off, so His Majesty gave me the court and special permission to preserve it. The grace of the Emperor Dai Yuan to let us regenerate will make the children and grandchildren of the Zhao clan rely on it for generations and dare not forget it.

古文：臣无任感天望圣，激切屏营之至。 
现代文：臣不胜感戴皇天，盼望圣慈，急切而惶惧到了极点。 
English: The vassal was overwhelmed with admiration for the emperor, hoped for divine mercy, and was anxious and frightened to the extreme.

古文：伯颜既受降表、玉玺，复遣囊加带以赵尹甫、贾余庆等还临安，召宰相出议降事。
现代文：伯颜接受了降表、玉玺之后，又派遣囊加带带着赵尹甫、贾余庆等返回临安，召集宰相前来商量投降的事情。
English: After Bo Yan accepted the surrender and the imperial edict, he also sent Zhao Yunfu, Jia Yuqing and others back to Lin'an with a bag and a rope, and summoned the prime minister to discuss the surrender.

古文：乙酉，师次临安北十五里，囊加带、洪模以总管殷俊来报，宋陈宜中、张世杰、苏刘义、刘师勇等挟益、广二王出嘉会门，渡浙江遁去，惟太皇太后、嗣君在宫。
现代文：十九日，军队驻扎在临安北面十五里的地方，囊加带、洪模带着总管殷俊前来报告，宋廷陈宜中、张世杰、苏刘义、刘师勇等人挟持着益王、广王两个王子出了嘉会门，渡过浙江而逃走，只有太皇太后、嗣位的君王留在宫中。
English: On the 19th, the army was stationed in a place 15 miles north of Lin'an. Song Ting Chen Yizhong, Zhang Shijie, Su Liu Yi, Liu Shiyong and others took the two princes, Yi Wang and Guang Wang, out of the Jia Hui Gate, crossed Zhejiang and fled. Only the great empress dowager and the heir to the throne remained in the palace.

古文：伯颜亟使谕阿剌罕、董文炳、范文虎率诸军先据守钱塘口，以劲兵五千人追陈宜中等，过浙江不及而还。
现代文：伯颜急忙派使者谕令阿剌罕、董文炳、范文虎率领各自的军队抢先据守钱塘口，用强兵五千人追赶陈宜中等人，追过了浙江，没有追上而返回。
English: Bo Yan hurriedly sent an envoy to order A Jianhan, Dong Wenzhong and Fan Wenhu to lead their respective armies to take the lead in guarding Qiantangkou, chasing Chen Yi Zhongren with five thousand strong soldiers, chasing them through Zhejiang, and returning without catching up.

古文：丙戌，伯颜下令禁军士入城，违者以军法从事。
现代文：二十日，伯颜下令，禁止士兵进入临安城，违令者按照军法处置。
English: On the 20th, Boyan ordered that soldiers were prohibited from entering Lin'an City, and violators would be dealt with in accordance with military law.

古文：遣吕文焕赍黄榜安谕临安中外军民，俾按堵如故。
现代文：派遣吕文焕带着黄榜安抚临安城内外的军民，使他们和原来一样的安居。
English: He dispatched Lü Wenhwan with the yellow banner to pacify the soldiers and civilians inside and outside Lin'an City, so that they could live as peacefully as before.

古文：时宋三司卫兵白昼杀人，张世杰部曲尤横闾里，小民乘时剽杀。
现代文：当时宋朝三司卫的士兵白昼杀人，张世杰的部下尤其横行于市井闾里，小百姓乘机袭杀他们。
English: At that time, the soldiers of the Song Dynasty's Three Guards killed people in broad daylight. Zhang Shijie's subordinates were particularly rampant in the city of Shili, and the common people took the opportunity to attack and kill them.

古文：令下，民大悦。
现代文：伯颜的命令一下，百姓们都很高兴。
English: As soon as the lady-in-waiting gave the order, the people were delighted.

古文：伯颜又遣宣抚程鹏飞，计议孙鼎亨、囊加带、洪君祥入宫，安谕太皇谢氏。
现代文：伯颜又派宣抚使程鹏飞、计议使孙鼎亨、囊加带、洪君祥到皇宫去安慰太皇太后谢氏。
English: Bo Yan also sent Cheng Pengfei, Sun Dingheng, and Hong Junxiang to the imperial palace to comfort Empress Dowager Xie.

古文：丁亥，云南行省赛典赤，以改定云南诸路名号来上。又言云南贸易与中州不同，钞法实所未谙，莫若以交会、〈贝八〉子公私通行，庶为民便。
现代文：二十一日，云南行省的赛典赤把改定的云南各路的名称呈上，又说云南的贸易和中原地区不同，他们实际上还没有熟悉本朝的钞法，不如以宋朝的交会钞币和贝入子在官府和民间流通，为百姓带来方便。
English: On the twenty-first day, Sai Dianchi of Yunnan Province presented the names of the revised Yunnan roads. He also said that Yunnan's trade was different from that of the Central Plains, and they were not familiar with the banknotes of this dynasty. It would be better to use the Song Dynasty's Jiaotong banknotes and Bei Rongzi to circulate in government offices and among the people, bringing convenience to the people.

古文：并从之。
现代文：皇上全部允从。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：戊子，中书省臣言： 王孝忠等以罪命往八答山采宝玉自效，道经沙州，值火忽叛，孝忠等自拔来归，令于瓜、沙等处屯田。 
现代文：二十二日，中书省大臣上奏说： 王孝忠等人因犯罪被命令往八答山采集宝玉以立功赎罪，路经沙州时，正值火忽叛变，王孝忠等自己脱身返回，命他们到瓜洲、沙州屯田。 
English: On the 22nd, the Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy made a report saying: Wang Xiaozhong and others were ordered to go to Batou Mountain to collect precious stones to make merit and atone for their crimes. When passing through Shazhou, it was the time of the fire and mutiny. Wang Xiaozhong and others escaped and returned on their own. They were ordered to go to Guazhou and Shazhou Tunden.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：大名路达鲁花赤小钤部坐奸赃伏诛，没其家。
现代文：大名路镇守官小钤部因犯贪污罪被处死，抄没他的家产。
English: Daimyo-ro, the town's governor, was executed for the crime of embezzlement, and his family property was confiscated.

古文：宋主祖母谢氏遣其丞相吴坚、文天祥，枢密谢堂，安抚贾余庆，中贵邓惟善来见伯颜于明因寺。
现代文：宋朝皇帝的祖母谢氏派遣他的丞相吴坚、文天祥，枢密使谢堂，安抚使贾余庆，宦官邓惟善到因明寺来见伯颜。
English: Emperor Xie of the Song Dynasty, the grandmother of the emperor, sent his prime ministers Wu Jian and Wen Tianxiang, the confidential envoy Xiedang, the pacifying envoy Jia Yuqing, and the eunuch Deng Weishan to Inming Temple to meet Bo Yan.

古文：伯颜顾文天祥举动不常，疑有异志，遂令万户忙古带、宣抚唆都羁留军中。
现代文：伯颜发现文天祥举动失常，怀疑他有另外的目的，于是命令万户忙古带、宣抚使唆都把他羁留在军中。
English: Bohyan found that Wen Tianxiang's behavior was abnormal and suspected that he had another purpose, so he ordered all households to keep him in the army.

古文：且以其降表不称臣，仍书宋号，遣程鹏飞、洪君祥偕来使贾余庆复往易之。
现代文：并且因为宋朝的降表不称臣，仍然写着宋朝的年号，派程鹏飞、洪君祥和来使贾余庆一起再去重新换一道表章。
English: And because the Song Dynasty's lowered watch did not please the minister, it still wrote the year of the Song Dynasty, and sent Pengfei and Hongjun Xianghe to make Jia Yuqing go together to change the watch again.

古文：己丑，军次湖州市。
现代文：二十三日，大军驻扎在湖州市。
English: On the 23rd, a large army was stationed in Huzhou.

古文：遣千户囊加带、省掾王祐，赍传国玉玺赴阙。
现代文：派遣千户囊加带、省掾王带着宋朝的传国玉玺前往朝廷。
English: A thousand households were sent to bring additional bags, and the provincial Yong Wang went to the imperial court with the Song Dynasty's imperial jade bowl.

古文：敕高丽国以有官子弟为质。
现代文：敕令高丽国把官员的子弟送来作人质。
English: The shogun ordered Koryo to send the officials' children as hostages.

古文：中书省臣言： 赋民旧籍已有定额，至元七年新括协济合并户，为数凡二十万五千一百八十。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：交纳赋税的民户，原来的册籍上已经有了定数，至元七年新登记的、各地区互相协作调济赋税的民户，合起来共有二十万零五千一百八十户。 
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report: the number of tax-paying households had already been fixed in the original register, and the newly registered tax-paying households that cooperated with each other in various regions had a total of two hundred and fifty thousand one hundred and eighty households.

古文：敕减今岁丝赋之半。
现代文：皇上敕令减少今年丝税银的一半。
English: The Emperor's edict reduced this year's silk tax by half.

古文：庚寅，伯颜建大将旗鼓，率左右翼万户巡临安城，观潮浙江，于是宋宗室大臣以次来见，暮还湖州市。
现代文：二十四日，伯颜建立大将军旗鼓，率领左右军万户巡视临安城，又观赏钱塘江的海潮；这时候宋朝的宗室大臣按次序前来晋见，天降暮色才返回湖州市。
English: On the 24th, Bo Yan established the general's drum and led the left and right armies to inspect Lin'an City and watch the sea tides of the Qiantang River. At this time, the ministers of the Song Dynasty came to see Jin in order. It was dusk when they returned to Huzhou.

古文：辛卯，张弘范、孟祺、程鹏飞赍所易宋主称臣降表至军前。
现代文：二十五日，张弘范、孟祺、程鹏飞带着换过的宋朝皇帝称臣的降表来到军前。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Hongfan, Meng Yao, and Cheng Pengfei came to the front of the army with the replacement of the Song Dynasty emperor's letter of abdication.

古文：甲午，复蓟州平谷县。
现代文：二十八日，恢复蓟州平谷县。
English: On the 28th, Bozhou Pinggu County was restored.

古文：立随路都转运司，仍诏谕诸处管民官，以瓮吉剌带丑汉所部军五百戍哈答城，不吉带所部军六百移戍建都，其兀儿秃、唐忽军前在建都者，并遣还翼。
现代文：设立随路都转运司，并下诏晓谕各地的管民官。派翁吉剌带、丑汉部下的五百名士兵戍守哈答城，派不吉带部下的六百人转守建都，那兀儿秃、唐忽军队里原来戍守建都的士兵，遣发他们全部返回本营。
English: He set up the Department of Transportation and Relocation of Capital Cities, and issued an edict to the people's administrators of various regions. He sent five hundred soldiers under the command of Weng Jizhe and Ugly Han to guard the city of Hatta, and six hundred soldiers under the command of Wu Jizhe to guard the capital city. The soldiers of the Narmer Bald and Tang Hu armies who originally guarded the capital city were all sent back to their home camp.

古文：穿济州漕渠。
现代文：凿通济州漕运的渠道。
English: Build a channel for the transportation of Jeju rowing boats.

古文：以真定总管昔班为中书右丞。
现代文：任命真定总管昔班为中书右丞。
English: Appointed the former class of the general manager of Shingding as the vice-president of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：二月丁酉，诏刘颉、程德辉招淮西制置使夏贵。
现代文：二月初一，下诏，令刘颉、程德辉招降淮西制置使夏贵。
English: On the first day of February, the imperial edict was issued ordering Liu Bei and Cheng Dehui to recruit and demote Xia Gui from Huaixi Province.

古文：己亥，克临江军。
现代文：初三，攻占临江军。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Linjiang Army was captured.

古文：庚子，宋主鳷率文武百僚诣祥曦殿，望阙上表，乞为藩辅；遣右丞相兼枢密使贾余庆、枢密使谢堂、端明殿学士签枢密院事家铉翁、端明殿学士同签枢密院事刘岊奉表以闻。
现代文：初四，宋恭帝率领文武百官前往祥曦殿，向着宫阙献上表章，请求成为藩臣；派遣右丞相兼枢密使贾余庆，枢密使谢堂，端明殿学士、枢密院佥事家纟玄翁，端明殿学士、枢密院同佥刘巴山奉上表章奏闻大元皇帝。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Song Hong led hundreds of civil and military officials to Xiang Xi's palace, presented a watch badge to the palace eunuch, and requested to become a minister of the domain; dispatched Jia Yuqing, Minister of the Right and Privy Envoy, Xie Tong, Privy Envoy, Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, Duan Xuan Weng, Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, and Liu Bashan, Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, and Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, to present the watch badge to Emperor Duan.

古文：宋主祖母太皇太后亦奉表及笺。
现代文：宋朝皇帝的祖母、太皇太后谢氏也奉上表章和书札。
English: Emperor Song's grandmother, Empress Dowager Dowager Xie, was also presented with a watch badge and a bookplate.

古文：是日，宋文武百司出临安府，诣行中书省，各以其职来见。
现代文：这一天，宋朝的文武百官走出临安府前往行中书省，各凭自己的官职拜见伯颜。
English: On this day, hundreds of civil and military officials of the Song Dynasty walked out of Lin'an Prefecture to go to Xingzhong Shuzhou, and each of them paid a visit to Bo Yan according to their official duties.

古文：行省承制以临安为两浙大都督府，都督忙古带、范文虎入城视事。
现代文：行中书省按照旧制把临安作为两浙大都督府，都督忙古带、范文虎入城处理政务。
English: In accordance with the old system, the Ministry of Education and Culture designated Lin'an as one of the two major prefectural capitals of Zhejiang Province. The prefectural governor was busy with the ancient belt, and Fan Wenhu entered the city to handle government affairs.

古文：辛丑，伯颜令张惠、阿剌罕、董文炳、左右司官石天麟、杨晦等入城，取军民钱谷之数，阅实仓库，收百官诰命符印，悉罢宋官府，散免侍卫禁军。
现代文：初五，伯颜命令张惠、阿剌罕、董文炳、左右司官员石天麟、杨晦等人入城，收取军民和钱粮的数目，查阅核实仓库，没收百官的封授诰命和符节印信，撤销所有的宋朝官署，解散侍卫禁军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Bo Yan ordered Zhang Hui, Ayhan, Dong Wenzhong, Left and Right Division officials Shi Tianlin, Yang Hui and others to enter the city, collect the number of soldiers and civilians and money and grain, inspect and verify the warehouse, confiscate the seal and seal letters of hundreds of officials, revoke all Song Dynasty government offices, and disband the guards of the forbidden army.

古文：宋主鳷遣其右丞相贾余庆等充祈请使，诣阙请命，右丞相命吴坚、文天祥同行。
现代文：宋恭帝派遣他的右丞相贾余庆等充当祈请使，前往大元宫廷请示圣命，贾余庆命吴坚、文天祥同行。
English: Emperor Song of Song dispatched his minister of justice, Jia Yuqing, and others to act as envoys, and went to the Taiyuan court to ask for the holy life. Jia Yuqing accompanied Wu Jian and Wen Tianxiang.

古文：行中书省右丞相伯颜等，以宋主鳷举国内附，具表称贺，两浙路得府八、州六、军一、县八十一，户二百九十八万三千六百七十二，口五百六十九万二千六百五十。
现代文：因为宋恭帝以全国归附于我朝，行中书省右丞相伯颜准备了表章向皇上称贺。两浙路共取得八个府、六个州、一个军州、八十一个县，共有二百九十八万三千六百七十二户，五百六十九万二千六百五十人。
English: Because Emperor Songgyong claimed that the whole country had been annexed to our dynasty, the Minister of the Right of the Song Dynasty and the Minister of the Right of the Song Dynasty, Bo Yan, prepared a certificate to congratulate the emperor. The two Zhejiang provinces gained a total of eight prefectures, six prefectures, one military prefecture, and eighty-one counties, with a total of 2,983,672 households and 5,692,650 people.

古文：丁未，诏谕临安新附府州司县官吏士民军卒人等曰：
现代文：十一日，皇上下诏，晓谕临安新归附的府、州、司、县的官吏、百姓和士兵们说：
English: On the 11th day, the emperor issued an edict to the officials, people and soldiers of the newly annexed capital, prefecture, division and county of Lin'an, saying:

古文：间者行中书省右丞相伯颜遣使来奏，宋母后、幼主暨诸大臣百官，已于正月十八日赍玺绶奉表降附。
现代文： 近来，行中书省右丞相伯颜派遣使者前来奏报，宋朝的太后、幼主以及各个大臣、百官，已经在正月十八日拿着玉玺、印绶、奉上表章归降。
English: Recently, in the middle of the trip, the Minister of the Right of the People's Commissariat of Literature and Calligraphy, Bo Yan, sent an emissary to report that the empress dowager of the Song Dynasty, her son-in-law, as well as various ministers and officials, had surrendered on the 18th day of the first month of the year, holding the jade seal, the seal, and the above-mentioned seal.

古文：朕惟自古降王必有朝觐之礼，已遣使特往迎致。
现代文：我想自古以来，投降的王者必定有朝见的礼节，我已经派遣使臣专门前去迎接。
English: I think that since ancient times, a king who surrenders must have courtly etiquette. I have sent an envoy to meet him.

古文：尔等各守职业，其勿妄生疑畏。
现代文：你们应当各自安守自己的职司、生业，千万不要随便产生怀疑和恐惧。
English: Each of you should be secure in your duties and livelihoods, and never give rise to suspicions and fears.

古文：凡归附前犯罪，悉从原免；公私逋欠，不得征理。
现代文：凡是归附的，以前犯下的罪行一律从宽赦免，公私的拖欠，不得再行征收。
English: All crimes committed in the past will be pardoned, and public and private arrears will no longer be collected.

古文：应抗拒王师及逃亡啸聚者，并赦其罪。
现代文：所有抗拒过大元朝廷军队，以及逃亡在外啸聚山林的人，全部赦免他们的罪行。
English: All those who resisted the Taiyuan imperial court troops, as well as those who fled and gathered in the mountains, were all pardoned of their crimes.

古文：百官有司、诸王邸第、三学、寺、监、秘省、史馆及禁卫诸司，各宜安居。
现代文：百官的府衙、诸侯王的府第、太学、寺署、监署、秘书省、史馆，以及禁卫军各司，都应当各自安居。
English: The residences of the hundred officials, the residences of the princes, the Imperial Academy, the Temple Office, the Supervision Office, the Ministry of Secretaries, the Museum of History, and the various departments of the Imperial Guard should all live in peace.

古文：所在山林河泊，除巨木花果外，余物权免征税。
现代文：所有的山林、河流、湖泊，除了巨树和花果外，其余的物品暂时免于征收赋税。
English: All mountain forests, rivers, lakes, except for giant trees and flowers and fruits, the rest of the items are temporarily exempt from taxation.

古文：秘书省图书，太常寺祭器、乐器、法服、乐工、卤簿、仪卫，宗正谱牒，天文地理图册，凡典故文字，并户口版籍，尽仰收拾。
现代文：秘书省的图牒书籍，太常寺的祭器、乐器、祭服、乐工、仪仗、仪卫，宗正府的族谱，天文地理的图籍，一切典故文字，以及户口册籍，尽数需要收拾整理。
English: The secretary's gazetteer books, the sacred vessels, musical instruments, ceremonial clothing, musicians, ceremonial warriors, and guards of the Taijo-ji Temple, the genealogy of the Zonsefu, the astronomical and geographical books, all the allusions, and the household registration books, as many as needed to be put away.

古文：前代圣贤之后，高尚儒、医、僧、道、卜筮，通晓天文历数，并山林隐逸名士，仰所在官司，具以名闻。
现代文：前代圣贤的后裔、品德高尚的儒士、医生、僧侣、道士、占卜的阴阳生、通晓天文历法的人，以及在山林中隐居的名士，希望各地的官府把他们的名字都报上来。
English: Descendants of the previous generation of sages, highly moral Confucianists, doctors, monks, Taoists, diviners of yin and yang, people familiar with the astronomical calendar, and celebrities who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, hope that government offices around the country will report their names.

古文：名山大川，寺观庙宇，并前代名人遗迹，不许拆毁。
现代文：名山大川，寺观庙宇，以及前代名人的遗迹，一律不许拆毁。
English: Famous mountains and rivers, temples and shrines, and the relics of famous people of previous generations are not allowed to be demolished.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存之人，量加赡给。
现代文：鳏夫、寡妇、孤儿、独老，如果自己无法生存自理，酌量情况予以赡养、供给。 
English: If a widower, a widow, an orphan, or an elderly person is unable to take care of himself or herself, he or she shall be supported and provided for according to the circumstances.

古文：伯颜就遣宋内侍王野入宫，收宋国衮冕、圭璧、符玺及宫中图籍、宝玩、车辂、辇乘、卤簿、麾仗等物。
现代文：伯颜立即派宋朝内侍王野进宫去收取宋朝的皇袍、冠冕、圭璧、符节、印玺、以及宫中的图牒、书籍、宝玩、辂车、辇乘、仪仗、旗仗等物。
English: Bo Yan immediately sent Wang Ye, the Song Dynasty's palace attendant, into the palace to collect the Song Dynasty's imperial robes, crowns, guibis, emblems, seals, as well as the palace's certificates, books, treasure games, chariots, horse-drawn carriages, ceremonial battles, flag battles and other items.

古文：戊申，立浙东西宣慰司于临安，以户部尚书麦归、秘书监焦友直为宣慰使，吏部侍郎杨居宽同知宣慰司事，并兼知临安府事。
现代文：十二日，在临安设立浙东浙西宣慰司，任命户部尚书麦归、秘书监焦友直为宣慰使，吏部侍郎杨居宽与文共同掌管宣慰司事务，并兼任临安府知府。
English: On the 12th, the East Zhejiang and West Zhejiang Consolation Division was set up in Lin'an, and the head of the Household Department, Shang Shumai, and the Secretary Supervisor, Jiao Youzhi, were appointed as consolation envoys, while the head of the Personnel Department, Yang Jikuan, and Wen jointly took charge of the affairs of the Consolation Division, and concurrently served as the prefect of Lin'an.

古文：乙卯，诏谕淮东制置使李庭芝、淮西制置使夏贵及所辖州军县镇官吏军民。
现代文：十九日，下诏招降宋朝淮东制置使李庭芝、淮西制置使夏贵，以及他们所管辖的州、军、县、镇的官吏和军民。
English: On the 19th, Li Tingzhi, the envoy of the Song Dynasty to the East Huaihai Province, and Xia Gui, the envoy to the West Huaihai Province, as well as the officials, soldiers and civilians of the state, army, county and town under their jurisdiction, were ordered to surrender.

古文：丁巳，命焦友直括宋秘书省禁书图籍。
现代文：二十一日，命令焦友直登记宋朝秘书省宫禁中的图籍。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered Jiao Youzhi to register the Song Dynasty secretary's picture book in the provincial palace.

古文：戊午，祀先农东郊。
现代文：二十三日，在东郊祭祀农神。
English: On the 23rd, the worship of the farmer gods began in the eastern suburbs.

古文：淮西制置夏贵以淮西诸郡来降，唯镇巢军复叛，贵遣使招之，守将洪福杀其使，贵亲至城下，福始降，阿术斩之军中。
现代文：淮西制置使夏贵带领淮西各郡前来投降，唯有镇巢军重新叛变，夏贵派遣使者去招降他，守将洪福杀死派去的使者；夏贵亲自到了城下，洪福才投降，阿术将他处死于军中。
English: The establishment of Huaixi Province made Xia Gui lead all counties in Huaixi Province to surrender. Only the Zhenxu Army rebelled again. Xia Gui sent an envoy to invite him to surrender, and the guard killed the envoy sent by Hong Fu. Xia Gui himself came to the city, Hong Fu surrendered, and Ah Xiu killed him in the army.

古文：淮西路得府二、州六、军四、县三十四，户五十一万三千八百二十七，口一百二万一千三百四十九。
现代文：在淮西路共取得二个府、六个州、四个军州、三十四个县，共五十一万三千八百二十七户，一百零二万一千三百四十九人。
English: In Huaxi Road, a total of two prefectures, six prefectures, four military prefectures, and thirty-four counties were obtained, with a total of 5,138,277 households and 1,022,349 people.

古文：庚申，召伯颜偕宋君臣入朝。
现代文：二十四日，征召伯颜和宋朝的君臣一起入朝。
English: On the 24th, Bo Yan was conscripted to enter the imperial court together with the princes and ministers of the Song Dynasty.

古文：辛酉，车驾幸上都。
现代文：二十五日，皇上的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor's carriage drove to Shangdu.

古文：设资戒大会于顺德府开元寺。
现代文：在顺德府开元寺举行资戒大会。
English: In Shunde Prefecture, Kaiyuan Temple held a capital punishment conference.

古文：伯颜遣不伯、周青招泉州蒲寿庚、寿晟兄弟。
现代文：伯颜派遣不伯、周青招降泉州的蒲寿庚、蒲寿晟兄弟。
English: Bo Yan dispatched Bo Bo and Zhou Qing to recruit Quanzhou's Pu Shou Geng and Pu Shou Qi brothers.

古文：甲子，董文炳、唆都发宋随朝文士刘褒然及三学诸生赴京师，太学生徐应镳父子四人同赴井死。
现代文：二十八日，董文炳、唆都遣发宋朝的随朝文士刘躑然，以及太学的诸生员前往京师。太生徐应镳父子四人一起投井而死。
English: On the 28th, the Song Dynasty scribes Liu Yulan, who accompanied the Song Dynasty scribes Dong Wenyi and Zuo Du, and all the members of Taigaku went to Beijing to study. The four members of Taigaku, father and son, threw themselves into a well and died.

古文：帝既平宋，召宋诸将问曰： 尔等何降之易耶？ 
现代文：皇帝平定宋朝以后，召集宋朝诸将问道： 你们为什么这样轻易地就投降了呢？ 
English: After the emperor had pacified the Song Dynasty, he summoned the generals of the Song Dynasty and asked them: Why did you surrender so easily?

古文：对曰： 宋有强臣贾似道擅国柄，每优礼文士，而独轻武官。
现代文：诸将回答说 ：宋朝朝中有权臣贾似道独掌国家大权，总是优待、礼遇文人，唯独轻视武官。
English: The generals replied, "During the Song Dynasty, the powerful vassal Jia Li Dao was in sole charge of the state power. He always treated the literati with preferential treatment and courtesy, but despised the military attaché.

古文：臣等久积不平，心离体解，所以望风而送款也。 
现代文：臣等内心长期郁积着不满，心已离，体已懈，所以就望风而纳款输诚了。 
English: The vassals and others have long been dissatisfied with their hearts, their hearts have been separated, and their bodies have been exhausted, so they have been waiting for the wind to take money and lose their sincerity.

古文：帝命董文忠答之曰： 借使似道实轻汝曹，特似道一人之过耳，且汝主何负焉？
现代文：皇帝命令董文忠回答他们说 ：如果贾似道确实轻视你们这些人，只不过是贾似道一个人的过错罢了，那你们的主上又有什么对不起你们的呢？
English: The emperor ordered Dong Wenzhong to reply to them: "If Jia Lidao really despised you people, and it was just the fault of Jia Lidao alone, then what did your master have against you?

古文：正如所言，则似道之轻汝也固宜。 
现代文：如果真像你们所说的那样，贾似道轻视你们倒是应该的了。 
English: If it is as you say, then Jia Li Dao is right to despise you.

古文：三月丁卯，命枢密副使张易兼知秘书监事。
现代文：三月初二，命枢密院副使张易兼管秘书监事务。
English: On the second day of March, Zhang Yi, Deputy Envoy of the Privy Council, was appointed to be in charge of secretarial supervision.

古文：伯颜入临安，遣郎中孟祺籍宋太庙四祖殿，景灵宫礼乐器、册宝暨郊天仪仗，及秘书省、国子监、国史院、学士院、太常寺图书祭器乐器等物。
现代文：伯颜进入临安城，派遣郎中孟祺登记宋朝太庙四祖享殿的物品，景灵宫的礼器、乐器、册封的印信以及祭天的仪仗，还有秘书省、国子监、国史院、学士院、太常寺的图书、祭品、乐器等物。
English: Bo Yan entered Lin'an City and sent his son-in-law Meng Wei to register the items of the Hall of the Four Ancestors of the Song Dynasty's Taimiao Temple, the ceremonial instruments, musical instruments, sealed letters of Jingling Palace and the ceremonial games of the Festival of Heaven, as well as the books, offerings, musical instruments and other items of the Ministry of Secretaries, the State Children's Guardian, the National Academy of History, the Academy of Sciences and the Taichang Temple.

古文：戊辰，括江南已附州郡军器。
现代文：初三，收聚江南已归附州郡的武器。
English: On the third day of the new year, collect the weapons that have been returned to Fuzhou County from the south of the river.

古文：甲戌，阿术遣使报庐州夏贵已降，文天祥自镇江遁去，追之弗获。
现代文：初九，阿术派遣信使奏报：庐州的夏贵已经投降，文天祥从镇江逃走，追捕他没有抓到。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Ahshu dispatched a messenger to report that Xia Gui of Zhangzhou had surrendered, and that Wen Tianxiang had fled from Zhenjiang, and that he had not been caught.

古文：荆湖南路行中书省言： 潭州既定，湖南州郡降者相继，即分命诸将镇守其地。 
现代文：荆湖南路行中书省上奏说 ：潭州平定以后，湖南投降的州郡一个接着一个，应当立即分别命令诸将前去镇守这些地方。 
English: Jing Hunan Road, the Ministry of Education and Culture said in a report: After the pacification of Tanzhou, the states and counties of Hunan surrendered one after another, and the generals should be ordered to go to the towns to guard these places.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：宋福王与芮自浙东至伯颜军中。
现代文：宋朝的宗室福王赵与芮从浙东抵达伯颜军中。
English: The imperial family of the Song Dynasty, King Fu Zhao and Empress Dowager Guo, arrived from eastern Zhejiang in the Peiyang army.

古文：以独松关守将张濡尝杀奉使廉希贤，斩之，籍其家。
现代文：因为独松关守将张濡曾经杀害奉命出使宋朝的廉希贤，将其斩首，抄没他的家产。
English: Because the governor of Doksong Guan, Zhang Nure, once killed the Song Dynasty envoy, Lian Xixian, whom he had been ordered to dispatch, beheaded him, and confiscated his family property.

古文：乙亥，伯颜等发临安。
现代文：初十，伯颜等人从临安出发。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Boyan and others set out from Lin'an.

古文：丁丑，阿塔海、阿剌罕、董文炳诣宋主宫，趣宋主鳷同太后入觐。
现代文：十二日，阿塔海、阿剌罕、董文炳前往宋朝皇帝的宫殿，催促宋恭帝同太后一起入朝觐见大元皇帝。
English: On the 12th, Atahai, Ajangan, and Dong Wenjun went to the palace of the Emperor of the Song Dynasty to urge Emperor Song and Empress Dowager Song to go to the imperial court to meet Emperor Dayuan.

古文：郎中孟祺奉诏宣读，至 免系颈牵羊 之语，太后全氏闻之泣，谓宋主鳷曰： 荷天子圣慈活汝，当望阙拜谢。 
现代文：郎中孟祺捧着诏书宣读，读到 免系颈牵羊 的话，太后全氏听到这里哭了起来，对宋恭帝说： 承蒙天子的圣慈，才使你活了下来，你应当仰望宫阙拜谢大元皇帝。 
English: Meng Yao, Meng Yao's son-in-law, held the imperial edict and read it aloud, and when he read the words, "Do not tie the sheep by the neck," the Empress Dowager Quan cried when she heard this, and said to Emperor Song, "It is thanks to the mercy of the Son of Heaven that you have survived. You should look up to the palace and worship Emperor Xie Dayuan.

古文：宋主鳷拜毕，子母皆肩舆出宫，唯太皇太后谢氏以疾留。
现代文：宋恭帝拜完之后，母子二人都坐着肩舆出宫，只有太皇太后谢氏因为有病留了下来。
English: After the Song Gong Emperor's prayer, both mother and son left the palace, sitting shoulder to shoulder. Only the Empress Dowager Xie stayed behind due to illness.

古文：戊寅，敕诸路儒户通文学者三千八百九十，并免其徭役，其富实以儒户避役者为民，贫乏者五百户，隶太常寺。
现代文：十三日，敕令各路，通晓辞章文字修养的三千八百九十名儒户，免除他们的全部徭役；有些百姓的富贵实际上是凭着儒户的身份免除徭役而得的；贫穷困乏的有五百户，隶属于太常寺。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the emperor ordered all 3,890 Confucian families who were fluent in words and letters to be exempted from all corvée duties; some people's wealth was actually obtained by virtue of their status as Confucian families exempted from corvée duties; there were 500 poor and destitute families, affiliated with Taijō-ji Temple.

古文：敕淮西庐州置总管万户府，以中书右丞、河南等路宣慰使合剌合孙、襄阳管军万户邸浃并行府事。
现代文：敕令淮西路的庐州设立总管万户府，任命中书右丞、河南等路宣慰使合剌合孙，襄阳管军万户邸浃共同执掌万户府事务。
English: He ordered Zhangzhou of Huaixi Road to set up the general manager of Wanyu Prefecture, appointed Zhongshu Rongzheng, Henan and other roads to send consoling envoys and grandchildren, and the Yangyang management team of Wanyu Residence to jointly manage the affairs of Wanyu Prefecture.

古文：庚辰，囊加带以宋玉玺来上。
现代文：十五日，囊加带带着宋朝的玉玺前来献上。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zou Jia took the Song Dynasty jade bowl with him to present it.

古文：乙酉，赣、吉、袁、南安四郡内附。
现代文：二十日，赣州、吉州、袁州、南安四个郡归附大元。
English: On the 20th, the four counties of Quzhou, Jizhou, Yuanzhou and Nan'an were annexed to Taiyuan.

古文：庚寅，赐郡王瓜都银印。
现代文：二十五日，赐给郡王爪都银印。
English: On the 25th, a silver seal was given to Guwang Jawdu.

古文：敕上都和顾和买并依大都例。
现代文：敕命上都官府，雇用匠户征收民财，都应按照大都的陈例。
English: If the governor orders the prefectural government to hire artisans to collect people's money, it should be done in accordance with the tradition of the prefectures.

古文：以中书右丞昔班为户部尚书。
现代文：任命中书右丞昔班为户部尚书。
English: Appointed Zhongshu Rongzheng of the old class as the head of the household.

古文：闰月丙申，置宣慰司于济宁路，掌印造交钞，供给江南军储。
现代文：闰三月初一，在济宁路设置宣慰司，掌管印制交钞纸币，供应江南军需储备的事。
English: On the first day of the leap month of March, a consolation department was set up in Jining Road, in charge of printing banknotes and supplying military reserves to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：以前西夏中兴签行中书省事暗都剌即思、大都路总管张守智并为宣慰使。
现代文：命令前西夏中兴路行中书省佥事暗都剌即思、大都路总管张守智共同担任宣慰使。
English: Ordered the former Western Xia Zhongxing Road line of the Ministry of Education to immediately think about the incident, and Zhang Shouzhi, the general manager of Datu Road, jointly served as a messenger.

古文：东川行枢密院总帅汪惟正略地涪州，克山寨溪洞凡二十有三所。
现代文：东川行枢密院总帅汪惟正占领涪州地区，攻下山寨溪洞共二十三处。
English: Wang Wei, the commander-in-chief of the Dongchuan-bound Privy Council, occupied the Zhangzhou region and captured a total of 23 Shanzhai Caves.

古文：丁酉，诏湖广阿里海牙、忽都帖木儿赴阙，令脱拨忽鲁秃花、崔斌并留后鄂州。
现代文：初二，征召湖广的阿里海牙、忽都帖木儿前来朝廷，命脱拨忽鲁秃花、崔斌共同留守鄂州。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Ali Hague and Khudu Timur, both from Hukang, were summoned to the imperial court. Khuru Bald Flower and Cui Bin were both ordered to stay in Ezhou.

古文：辛亥，命副枢张易遣宋降臣吴坚、夏贵等赴上都。
现代文：十六日，命令枢密副使张易遣发宋国的降臣吴坚、夏贵等人前往上都。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Zhang Yi, the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, to send Wu Jian, Xia Gui, and others, who had surrendered to the Song Dynasty, to Shangdu.

古文：戊午，淮西万户府招降方山等六寨。
现代文：二十三日，淮西万户府招降方山等六处堡寨。
English: On the 23rd, six fortresses including Fangshan in Wanhu Prefecture, Huaixi Province, were demolished.

古文：甲子，禁西番僧持军器。
现代文：二十九日，禁止西番的僧侣持有武器。
English: On the 29th, the monks of West Pan were prohibited from holding weapons.

古文：以中书省左右司郎中郝祯参知政事。
现代文：任命中书省左右司郎中郝祯为参知政事。
English: Appointed the left and right secretary of the Central Book Ministry, Zhongyi, as a member of the Council of State.

古文：夏四月乙丑朔，阿术以宋高邮、宝应尝馈饷扬州，遣蒙古军将苫彻及史弼等守之，别遣都元帅孛鲁欢等攻泰州之新城。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，阿术因宋朝的高邮、宝应曾经赠送粮饷给扬州，派遣蒙古军将领苫彻及史弼等人戍守。另外派遣都元帅孛鲁欢等进攻泰州的新城县。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, because of the Song Dynasty's high postage and treasure, Ah Shou once presented grain to Yangzhou, and sent Mongolian generals such as Gao Che and Shi Yan to defend it. In addition, he sent Marshal Gao Lu Huan and others to attack Taizhou's Xincheng County.

古文：丁卯，赐诸王都鲁金印。
现代文：初三，赐给诸侯王都鲁金印。
English: On the third day of the first month, the gold seal of Dulu was given to the princes.

古文：戊辰，以河南兵事未息，开元路民饥，并弛正月五月屠杀之禁。
现代文：初四，因为河南的战事尚未停止，开元路百姓饥饿缺食，同时放宽正月和五月不许屠杀牛马的禁令。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, because the war in Henan had not yet stopped, the people of Kailuan Road were starving and short of food. At the same time, the ban on the slaughter of cattle and horses in the first month and May was relaxed.

古文：庚午，敕南商贸易京师者毋禁。
现代文：初六，敕令不要禁止南方的商人到京师来进行贸易。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict did not forbid merchants from the south to come to Beijing to trade.

古文：辛未，行江西都元帅宋都带以应诏儒生医卜士郑梦得等六人进，敕隶秘书监。
现代文：初七，管辖江西的都元帅宋都带把应诏前来的儒生、医士和占卜人郑梦德等六人送到京师，皇上敕令把他们隶属于秘书监。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the marshal Song Du, who governed Jiangxi, brought six people, including Confucian scholars, physicians and soothsayer Zheng Mengde, who came in response to the edict, to the capital. The emperor ordered them to be subordinated to the secretary.

古文：丙子，省东川行枢密院及成都经略司，以其事入西川行院。
现代文：十二日，撤销东川行枢密院的成都经略司，把它们的职司归并到西川行枢密院。
English: On the 12th, the Chengdu Economic Strategy Division of the East River Line Privy Council was revoked, and their functions were merged into the West River Line Privy Council.

古文：复石人山寨居民于信阳军。
现代文：让石人山寨的居民返回信阳军。
English: Let the residents of the stone man's cottage return to the Xinyang Army.

古文：免大都医户至元十二年丝银。
现代文：免征大都医户至元十二年的丝税银。
English: Most of the city's medical institutions are exempt from the silk tax for the next 12 years.

古文：己卯，以侍卫亲军征戍岁久，放令还家，期六月，各归其军。
现代文：十五日，因为侍卫亲军征伐、戍守的年岁太长，命令放他们回家休假，期限为六个月，然后各自返回自己的军营。
English: On the fifteenth day, because the bodyguards were too old to fight and guard the troops, they were ordered to go home on leave for a period of six months, after which they would return to their respective military camps.

古文：庚辰，以水达达分地岁输皮革，自今并入上都。
现代文：十六日，命水达达部的分地每年交纳皮革，从现在起全部交到上都。
English: On the 16th, the subdivided land of Muishui Dadabu will pay leather every year, and from now on, all of it will be handed over to Shangdu.

古文：壬午，召嗣汉天师张宗演赴阙。
现代文：十八日，征召世袭汉朝天师的张宗演前来朝廷。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Zongyuan, the hereditary Han dynasty heavenly teacher, was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：乙酉，召昭文馆大学士姚枢、翰林学士王磐、翰林侍讲学士徒单公履赴上都。
现代文：二十一日，征召昭文馆大学士姚枢、翰林学士王磐、翰林侍讲学士徒单公履前来上都。
English: On the 21st, Yao Zu, a scholar of Shouwen Academy, Wang Ban, a scholar of Hanlin Academy, and Hanlin's attendant lecturer, were summoned to come to Shangdu.

古文：庚寅，修太庙。
现代文：二十六日，修建太庙。
English: On the 26th, the construction of the Great Temple began.

古文：以北京行中书省廉希宪为中书右丞，行中书省事于荆南府。
现代文：任命北京行中书省廉希宪为中书省右丞，在荆南府掌管中书省事务。
English: Liang Xixian was appointed as the vice-governor of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Beijing and took charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Jingnan.

古文：五月乙未朔，伯颜以宋主鳷至上都，制授鳷开府仪同三司、检校大司徒，封瀛国公。
现代文：五月初一，伯颜把宋恭帝带到上都，决定授予他开府仪同三司、检校大司徒，封为瀛国公。
English: On the first day of May, Bo Yan brought Emperor Song Gong to Shangdu and decided to award him the ceremonial title of Kaifu, the title of Tongsisi, the title of Jiankuo, and the title of Gongguo.

古文：以平宋，遣官告天地、祖宗于上都之近郊。遣使代祀岳渎。
现代文：因为平定了宋朝，派遣官员在上都的近郊祭告天地、祖宗。派遣使臣代表皇上祭祀五岳、四渎之神。
English: Because the Song Dynasty had been pacified, officials were dispatched to the outskirts of Shangdu to offer sacrifices to heaven, earth, and ancestors, and envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the gods of the five mountains and the four defilements.

古文：己亥，伯颜请罢两浙宣慰司，以忙古带、范文虎仍行两浙大都督府事，从之。
现代文：初五，伯颜请求撤销两浙宣慰使，派忙古带、范文虎仍旧执掌两浙大都督府的事务，皇上允从。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Bo Yan requested the revocation of the two Zhejiang propaganda and consolation envoys, and sent Busy Gu Zi and Fan Wenhu to still be in charge of the affairs of the two Zhejiang provincial capitals, and the emperor agreed.

古文：庚子，定度量。
现代文：初六，确定度量衡。
English: Sixth period, determine the weights and measures.

古文：壬寅，宋三学生四十六人至京师。
现代文：初八，宋朝的四十六名太学生到达京师。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, forty-six students of the Song Dynasty arrived in Beijing.

古文：癸卯，复沂、莒、胶、密、宁海五州所括民为防城军者为民，免其租徭二年。
现代文：初九，把沂州、莒州、胶州、密州、宁海登记为防城军的百姓复员为民，免除他们两年的租税、徭役。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the people of Luzhou, Luzhou, Jiaozhou, Mizhou and Ninghai who were registered as the city defense army were demobilized as citizens, and they were exempted from two years of taxes and forced labor.

古文：乙巳，赐伯颜所部有功将校银二万四千六百两。
现代文：十一日，赐给伯颜部下有功的将校二万四千六百两白银。
English: On the eleventh day, twenty-four thousand six hundred and two silver coins were given to the meritorious officers under Bo Yan.

古文：阿术遣总管陈杰攻拔泰州之新城，遣万户乌马儿守之，以逼泰州。
现代文：阿术派遣总管陈杰攻占泰州的新城，派遣万户乌马儿镇守该城，以威逼泰州。
English: Chen Jie, the general manager of the dispatch of A art, conquered the new city of Taizhou, and dispatched Wanhu Umar to defend the city and force Taizhou by intimidation.

古文：丁未，宋扬州都统姜才攻湾头堡，阿里别击走之，杀其步骑四百人，右卫亲军千户董士元战死。
现代文：十三日，宋朝扬州都统姜才进攻湾头堡，阿里别击退了他，杀死他的步兵骑兵共四百人，右卫亲军千户董士元战死。
English: On the 13th day of the Song Dynasty, Jiang Cai, the governor of Yangzhou, attacked the Bay Head Fort. Alibey repulsed him, killing a total of four hundred of his infantry and cavalry, and the right guard pro-army thousand households of Dong Shiyuan died in battle.

古文：戊申，宋冯都统等自真州率兵二千、战船百艘袭瓜洲，阿术遣万户昔里罕、阿塔赤等出战，大败之，追至珠金沙，得船七十七艘，冯都统等赴水死。改博州为东昌路。
现代文：十四日，宋朝的冯都统等人从真州率领士兵两千人、战船一百艘袭击瓜洲，阿术派遣万户昔里罕、阿塔赤等人出战，把宋军打得大败，一直追到珠金沙，缴获战船七十七艘，冯都统等投水而死，把博州改为东昌路。
English: On the 14th, Feng Du Tong and others of the Song Dynasty led two thousand soldiers and one hundred warships from Zhenzhou to attack Guazhou. Wanyu Xilikhan, Attachai and others were sent to fight, and the Song Army was defeated. They chased the Song Army all the way to Zhu Jinsha and captured seventy-seven warships. Feng Du Tong and others drowned and died, and changed Bozhou to Dongchang Road.

古文：己酉，括猎户、鹰坊户为兵。
现代文：十五日，登记猎户、鹰坊户为兵。
English: On the 15th, the hunters and eagles were registered as soldiers.

古文：乙卯，靖州张州判及李信、李发焚其城，退保飞山新城，行中书省发兵攻杀之，徙其党及家属于大都。
现代文：二十一日，宋朝靖州的张州判及李信、李发焚毁他们的城池，退守到飞山、新城，行中书省派兵攻击、杀死了他们，把他们的党羽和家属迁移到大都。
English: On the twenty-first day of the Song Dynasty, Zhangzhou of Jingzhou, and Li Xin and Li Fang set fire to their cities and retreated to Feishan and Xincheng. During the campaign, Shuzhou sent troops to attack and kill them, and moved their followers and families to Dadu.

古文：宋江西制置黄万石率其军来附，敕令入觐。
现代文：宋朝江西制置使黄万石率领他的军队前来归顺，皇帝命他入朝觐见。
English: The Song Dynasty's establishment of Jiangxi Province made Huang Wanshi lead his army to surrender, and the emperor ordered him to enter the imperial court.

古文：辛酉，安西王相府请颁诏招合州张珏，不从。
现代文：二十七日，安西王相府请求颁发诏书招降合州的张珏，皇上不允。
English: On the 27th, the Anxi King's Minister's Office requested to issue an edict to recruit Zhang Xuan from Hechu, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：癸亥，升异样局为总管府，秩三品。
现代文：二十九日，把异样局升格为总管府，俸禄为三品。
English: On the 29th, the Bureau of Unusual Samples was upgraded to the General Administration Office, and the salary was raised to three products.

古文：六月甲子朔，敕新附三卫兵之老弱者，放还其家。
现代文：六月初一，敕令：新归附的三卫司老弱士兵，放他们回家。
English: On the first day of June, a royal order was issued: the old and weak soldiers of the newly annexed Three Guards Divisions should be discharged and allowed to go home.

古文：己巳，以孔子五十三世孙曲阜县尹孔治兼权主祀事。
现代文：初六，任命孔子五十三世孙、曲阜县尹孔治兼暂时主持祭孔事务。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the 53rd generation grandson of Confucius, Yin Kongzhi of Qufu County, was appointed as the leader and temporarily presided over the affairs of the Confucius Festival.

古文：命东征元帅府选襄阳生券军五百，充侍卫军。置行户部于大名府，掌印造交钞，通江南贸易。
现代文：命令东征元帅府挑选襄阳生券军士兵五百人充当侍卫军，在大名府设置行户部，掌管印刷交钞纸币，以开通江南的贸易。
English: He ordered the Eastern Expeditionary Marshal's Office to select five hundred soldiers from the Xiangyang Shengzheng Army to serve as bodyguards, set up a household department in Daming Prefecture, and take charge of printing banknotes to open up trade in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：庚午，敕西京僧、道、也里可温、答失蛮等有室家者，与民一体输赋。
现代文：初七，敕令西京僧侣、道士、天主教士、伊斯兰教士等，凡是有家属的，和百姓们同样地交纳赋税。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor ordered the monks, Taoists, Catholics, and Sharia scholars in Xijing, all of whom had families, to pay taxes in the same way as the common people.

古文：辛未，命阿里海牙出征广西，请益兵，选军三万俾将之。
现代文：初八，命令阿里海牙出征广西，阿里海牙请求增兵，挑选三万名士兵由他统领。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered Ali Hague to march to Guangxi. Ali Hague requested an increase in troops and selected thirty thousand soldiers to be led by him.

古文：壬申，罢两浙大都督府，立行尚书省于鄂州、临安。
现代文：初九，撤销两浙大都督府。在鄂州、临安设立行尚书省。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the two Zhejiang prefectural capitals were abolished, and the Ministry of Education and Culture was established in Ezhou and Lin'an.

古文：设诸路宣慰司，以行省官为之，并带相衔，其立行省者，不立宣慰司。
现代文：设立各路宣慰司，以行省级的官员掌管，并带有宰相衔，那些设立行省机构的路，则不设立宣慰司。
English: The comfort women's departments will be set up in each province and will be headed by a provincial-level official with the title of prime minister. The comfort women's departments will not be set up in the provinces where provincial-level agencies have been set up.

古文：甲戌，以《大明历》浸差，命太子赞善王恂与江南日官置局更造新历，以枢密副使张易董其事。
现代文：十一日，因为《大明历》逐渐出现误差，命令太子赞善王恂和江南负责天文历法的官员一起设置机构，重新编制新历法，由枢密副使张易主管这件事。
English: On the 11th day, because the "Great Bright Calendar" gradually showed errors, the prince Zanzan Wang Qian and the officials in charge of the astronomical calendar in the south of the Yangtze River were ordered to set up an organization to re-compile the new calendar, and the deputy envoy Zhang Yi was in charge of the matter.

古文：易、恂奏： 今之历家，徒知历术，罕明历理，宜得耆儒如许衡者商订。 
现代文：张易、王恂上奏说： 现在的历法家，只知道编订历书的方法，很少有懂得历法原理的，应当有像许衡这样的老儒来商量制订。 
English: Zhang Yi and Wang Xuan said: Today's calendarists only know how to compile the calendar, and few understand the principle of the calendar. An old Confucian like Xu Heng should discuss and formulate it.

古文：诏衡赴京师。
现代文：皇上便下诏征召许衡前来京师。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning Xu Heng to come to Beijing as a teacher.

古文：宋扬州姜才夜率步骑数千趋丁村堡，守将史弼、苫彻出战，斩首百余级，获马四十匹。
现代文：宋朝扬州守将姜才夜间率领步兵骑兵几千人前往丁村堡，守将史弼、苫彻出战，斩杀宋军一百多人，缴获战马四十匹。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Yangzhou Governor Jiang Cai led several thousand infantry and cavalry to Dingcun Fort at night. The governors Shi Yan and Yan Che went into battle, killed more than a hundred Song soldiers, and captured forty horses.

古文：诘旦，阿里、都督陈岩以湾头堡兵邀其后，伯颜察儿踵至，所将皆阿术麾下兵，姜才军遥望旗帜，亟走，遂大破之，获米五千余石。
现代文：快天亮时，阿里、都督陈岩率领湾头堡的士兵从背后拦击宋军；伯颜察儿又接着来到，他所率领的都是阿术部下的士兵。姜才的士兵远远地看见元军的旗帜，急忙逃走，于是大破宋军，缴获粮米五千多石。
English: At dawn, Ali and the governor Chen Yan led the soldiers of the Bay Head Fort to stop the Song army from behind; Bo Yanchai came next, he led the soldiers under the Art Department. Jiang Cai's soldiers saw the banner of the Yuan army from afar and hurriedly fled, so they defeated the Song army and captured more than five thousand stones of grain and rice.

古文：阿术又以宋人高邮水路不通，必由陆路馈运，千户也先忽都以千骑邀之，数日米运果来，杀负米卒数千，获米三千石。
现代文：阿术又因宋朝军队无法从高邮的水路通过，而必须经由陆路运输粮食，便派千户也先忽都率领一千名骑兵在陆路拦击；几天以后，米果然由陆路运来，元军杀死运米的兵卒几千人，缴获粮米三千石。
English: Since the Song Dynasty army could not pass through the waterway of Gaoyou, and had to transport grain by land, Ah Shou sent a thousand households and first led a thousand cavalry to intercept by land. A few days later, the rice was indeed transported by land, and the Yuan Army killed several thousand soldiers transporting rice and seized 3,000 kilos of grain and rice.

古文：戊寅，诏作《平金》、《平宋录》，及诸国臣服传记，仍命平章军国重事耶律铸监修国史。
现代文：十五日，皇帝下诏编写《平金平宋录》，以及各国向大元臣服的详细经过，并命令掌管军国重事的耶律铸监修本朝历史。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor issued an edict to compile the "Ping Jin Ping Song Record," as well as the detailed history of the countries' submission to the Great Yuan, and ordered the supervisors of the Yelu Casting, who were in charge of military affairs, to revise the history of the dynasty.

古文：戊子，枢密院上言： 陈宜中、张世杰聚兵福建以攻我师，江西都元帅宋都带求援。 
现代文：二十五日，枢密院上奏说： 陈宜中、张世杰在福建集结军队准备进攻我军，江西都元帅宋都带请求派援兵去。 
English: On the 25th, the Privy Council reported: Chen Yizhong and Zhang Shijie are assembling troops in Fujian in preparation for an attack on our army, and Jiangxi Marshal Song Du has sent reinforcements with a request.

古文：命以安庆、蕲、黄等郡宿兵，付宋都带将之。
现代文：命令把安庆、蕲州、黄州等郡的老兵交付给宋都带率领。
English: An order was issued to hand over the veterans from Anqing, Zhangzhou, Huangzhou and other counties to Song Du to lead.

古文：己丑，宋都带言福建魏天祐、游义荣弃家来附，以天祐为管军总管兼知邵武军事，义荣遥授建宁路同知，充管军千户。
现代文：二十六日，宋都带说福建魏天、游义荣抛弃家庭前来归附。任命魏天担任管军总管，兼掌邵武军事务，遥授游义荣为建宁路同知，充任管军千户。
English: On the 26th, Song Du said that Wei Tian and You Yirong of Fujian abandoned their families and came to attach. Wei Tian was appointed as the chief of the army, and also in charge of the affairs of the Shaowu army. Yu Yirong was known to Jianning Road and served as the commander of a thousand households.

古文：壬辰，下诏招谕宋扬州制置李庭芝以次军官，及通、泰、真、滁、高邮大小官员。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝下诏招降宋朝扬州制置使李庭芝以下的军官，以及通州、泰州、真州、滁州、高邮的大小官员。
English: On the 29th, the emperor issued an edict to recruit officers below the rank of Li Tingzhi, who had been assigned to the Song Dynasty and Yangzhou, as well as officials from Tongzhou, Taizhou, Zhenzhou, Zhangzhou and Gaoyou.

古文：又诏谕陈宜中、张世杰、苏刘义、刘师勇等使降。
现代文：又下诏，令陈宜中、张世杰、苏刘义、刘师勇等人投降。
English: He also issued an edict ordering Chen Yizhong, Zhang Shijie, Su Liuyi, Liu Shiyong and others to surrender.

古文：李庭芝留朱焕守扬州，与姜才率步骑五千东走，阿术亲率百余骑驰去，督右丞阿里、万户刘国杰分道追及泰州西，杀步卒千人，庭芝等仅得入，遂筑长围堑而守之，阿术独当东南面，断其走路。
现代文：李庭芝留下朱焕戍守扬州，自己和姜才一起率领五千名步、骑兵向东而去，阿术亲自率领一百多名骑兵驰马前去，督促右丞阿里、万户刘国杰分路追赶到泰州西门，杀死宋军的步卒一千人，李庭芝等仅单骑入城，元军便环城修筑长长的壕堑而守候着，阿术独自在东南面阻住宋军，断绝宋军逃跑的道路。
English: Li Tingzhi left Zhu Huanqian to defend Yangzhou. He and Jiang Cai led 5,000 infantry and cavalry to the east together. Ah Shou personally led more than 100 cavalry to gallop, urged U.S. President Ali and Liu Guojie to chase to the west gate of Taizhou, and killed 1,000 foot soldiers of the Song Army. Li Tingzhi and others only rode into the city alone. The Yuan Army built a long trench around the city and waited. Ah Shou alone blocked the Song Army in the southeast and cut off the escape route of the Song Army.

古文：以户部尚书张澍参知政事，行中书省事于北京。
现代文：任命户部尚书张澍为参知政事，在北京处置中书省事务。
English: Appointed the head of the Household Department, Shang Shuxiong, as a political advisor, and handled the affairs of the Household Department in Beijing.

古文：秋七月乙未，行中书省左右司郎中孟祺，以亡宋金玉宝及牌印来上，命太府监收之。
现代文：秋季，七月初二，行中书省左右司郎中孟祺把亡宋的金玉宝物及符牌印信奉上，皇帝命太府监收取。
English: In the autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, Zhong Mengqi, the left and right secretary of the Central Book Ministry, sent the gold and jade treasures and badge stamps of the late Song Dynasty, and the emperor ordered the superintendent to collect them.

古文：丙申，淮安、宝应民流寓邳州者万余口，听还其家。
现代文：初三，淮安、宝应的百姓流寓邳州的一万多人，听任他们返回自己的家乡。
English: On the third day of the new year, more than 10,000 people from Huai'an and Baoying, who live in Ganzhou, were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：丁酉，宋涪州观察杨立子嗣荣，请降诏招谕其父，从之。
现代文：初四，宋朝涪州观察使阳立的儿子阳嗣荣请求颁发诏书招降他的父亲，皇上允从。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty's observation of Bozhou made Yang Li's son, Yang Shirong, request the issuance of an imperial edict to invite his father, the emperor, to obey.

古文：戊戌，升阆州为保宁府。
现代文：初五，把阆州升格为保宁府。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Bozhou was upgraded to Boryeong.

古文：敕山丹城直隶省部，以达鲁花赤行者仍领之。
现代文：敕令山丹城直接隶属于行省部门，任命镇守官行者一并掌管。
English: Shandong Shandong City is directly subordinated to the provincial departments, and the town guards are appointed to take charge of the town.

古文：壬寅，以李庭出征，赏其部将李承庆等钞、马、衣服、甲仗有差。
现代文：初九，因为李庭出征，赏给他的部将李承庆等不同数额的钱钞、马匹、衣服、甲仗等。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, because Li Ting went to the front, he rewarded his subordinate Li Chengqing with different amounts of money, horses, clothes, armour and so on.

古文：乙巳，朱焕以扬州降。
现代文：十二日，朱焕献出扬州投降。
English: On the 12th, Zhu Huan surrendered Yangzhou.

古文：丁未，诏谕广西路静江府等大小州城官吏使降。
现代文：十四日，下诏，令广西路静江府等大小州城的官吏投降。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict was issued, ordering the officials of Guangxi Road, Jingjiang Prefecture and other large and small cities to surrender.

古文：甲寅，赐诸王孛罗印。
现代文：二十一日，赐给诸侯王孛罗印信。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a sealed letter was given to the vassals of King Joram.

古文：以杨村至浮鸡泊漕渠洄远，改从孙家务。
现代文：因为从杨村到浮鸡泊漕运的河渠迂回遥远，改从孙家务走。
English: Because the canal detour from Yangcun to the Floating Cockerel is far away, I walked from Sunjiawu instead.

古文：乙卯，宋泰州守将孙良臣与李庭芝帐下卒刘发、郑俊开北门以降，执李庭芝、姜才，系扬州狱。
现代文：二十二日，宋朝泰州守将孙良臣和李庭芝帐下的士兵刘发、郑俊打开北门投降，捕获李庭芝、姜才，关押在扬州狱中。
English: On the 22nd, the Song Dynasty's governor of Taizhou, Sun Liangcheng and Li Tingzhi's soldiers Liu Fa and Zheng Jun opened the north gate to surrender, captured Li Tingzhi and Jiang Cai, and detained them in Yangzhou Prison.

古文：丙辰，阿术以总管乌马儿等守泰州，其通、滁、高邮等处相继来附。
现代文：二十三日，阿术命总管乌马儿等人镇守泰州。通州、滁州、高邮等处相继前来归附。
English: On the 23rd, Umar, the general overseer of Ahshu, and others guarded Taizhou. Tongzhou, Zhangzhou, Gaopo and other departments came to annex it one after another.

古文：淮东路得州十六、县三十三，户五十四万二千六百二十四，口一百八万三千二百一十七。
现代文：淮东路共取得十六个州、三十三个县，共有五十四万二千六百二十四户，一百零八万三千二百一十七人。
English: Huadong Road covers a total of 16 prefectures and 33 counties, with a total of 542,624 households and 1,083,217 people.

古文：遣使持香币祠岳渎后土。
现代文：派遣使臣带着香烛钱钞前去祭祀五岳、四渎和土地大神。
English: Send envoys with incense candles and money to worship the Five Mountains, the Four Deities and the Great God of the Land.

古文：以中书右丞阿里海牙为平章政事，签书枢密院事、淮东行枢密院别乞里迷失为中书右丞，参知政事董文炳为中书左丞，淮东左副都元帅塔出、两浙大都督范文虎、江东江西大都督知江州吕师夔、淮东淮西左副都元帅陈岩并参知政事。
现代文：任命中书右丞阿里海牙为平章政事，任命枢密佥事、淮东行枢密院使别里迷失为中书右丞，任命参知政事董文炳为中书左丞。淮东左副都元帅塔出，两浙大都督范文虎，江东江西大都督、江州知州吕师夔，淮东淮西左副都元帅陈岩均任参知政事。
English: He appointed the Vice-President of the Central Government, Ali Haiga, as the Vice-President of the Central Government, the Vice-President of the Central Government, the Vice-President of the Central Government, Dong Wenyu as the Vice-President of the Central Government, the Vice-President of the Central Government, Fan Wenyu as the Vice-President of the Central Government, the Vice-President of the Central Government, Fan Wenyu as the Vice-President of the Central Government, Fan Wenyu as the Vice-President of the Central Government, Fan Wenyu as the Vice-President of the Central Government, Fan Wenyu as the Vice-President of the Central Government, Fan Weny

古文：八月己巳，穿武清蒙村漕渠。
现代文：八月初七，凿通武清蒙村的漕运河渠。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, the canal canal of Tongwu Qingmeng Village was excavated.

古文：敕汉军都元帅阔阔带、李庭将侍卫军二千人西征。
现代文：敕命汉军都元帅阔阔带、李庭率领二千名侍卫军西征。
English: Li Ting, commander of the Imperial Chinese Army, led 2,000 bodyguards on the Western Expedition.

古文：升漷阴县为漷州。
现代文：把氵郭阴县升格为氵郭州。
English: to upgrade Sheng Guo Yin County to Sheng Guo Prefecture.

古文：乙亥，斩宋淮东制置使李庭芝、都统姜才于扬州市。
现代文：十三日，在扬州市上把宋朝淮东制置使李庭芝、都统姜才斩首。
English: On the 13th, Li Tingzhi and Doutong Jiangcai, who were responsible for establishing the Song Dynasty in Huaidong, were beheaded in Yangzhou.

古文：庚辰，罢襄阳统军司。
现代文：十八日，撤销襄阳统军司。
English: On the 18th, the Xiangyang United Military Department was abolished.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾从上都抵达京师。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：遣太常卿脱忽思以铜爵一、豆二，献于太庙。
现代文：派遣太常卿脱忽思把一只铜爵、二只铜豆献给太庙。
English: Taizongqing Tuo Huxi was dispatched to present a bronze baron and two bronze beans to the Grand Temple.

古文：以四万户总管奥鲁赤参知政事。
现代文：任命四万户总管奥鲁赤为参知政事。
English: Appointed the head of the 40,000 households, Oluka, as a co-governor.

古文：九月壬辰朔，命国师益怜真作佛事于太庙。
现代文：九月初一，命令佛教国师益怜真在太庙做佛事。
English: On the first day of September, he ordered the national teacher of Buddhism, Yi Renzhen, to perform Buddhist rituals in the Great Temple.

古文：己亥，享于太庙，常馔外，益野豕、鹿、羊、蒲萄酒。
现代文：初八，在太庙祭祀供品，除了一般的肴馔之外，还增加了野猪、鹿、羊、葡萄酒。
English: On the first day of the eighth lunar month, in addition to the usual dishes, wild boar, deer, sheep, and wine were added to the offerings at the temple.

古文：庚子，命姚枢、王磐选宋三学生之有实学者留京师，余听还家。
现代文：初九，命令姚枢、王磐在宋朝太学生中挑选有真才实学的留在京师，其余的听任他们回家。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he ordered Yao Zu and Wang Pan to select some of the most talented students from the Song Dynasty to stay in Beijing, and let the rest go home.

古文：辛丑，遣庐州屯田军四千，转漕重庆。
现代文：月初十，派遣泸州的四千名屯田军，由水路转运粮食到重庆。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the year, it dispatched four thousand troops from Tongzhou to transport grain to Chongqing by water.

古文：癸卯，以平宋赦天下。
现代文：十二日，因为平定了宋朝而下令大赦天下。
English: On the 12th, he ordered a general amnesty because he had pacified the Song Dynasty.

古文：乙巳，高丽国王王愖上参议中赞金方庆功，授虎符。
现代文：十四日，高丽国王王忄甚报上参议中赞金方庆的功劳，授给他虎符。
English: On the 14th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Yeonjin, reported on the merits of the councillor, Kim Fang Ching, and awarded him a tiger emblem.

古文：丙午，敕常德府岁贡包茅。
现代文：十五日，敕命常德府每年进贡祭祀用的包茅。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the annual tribute offering of the town of Changde was held.

古文：丁未，谕西川行枢密院移檄重庆，俾内附。
现代文：十六日，谕令西川行枢密院传檄给重庆，令他们归附朝廷。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Nishikawa and the Privy Council to transmit the imperial edict to Chongqing, ordering them to be annexed to the imperial court.

古文：命有司隳沿淮城垒。
现代文：命令地方官府拆毁淮河沿岸的堡垒。
English: The local government was ordered to demolish the fortress along the Huai River.

古文：辛亥，太白犯南斗。
现代文：二十日，太白金星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On the 20th, the too-white Venus entered the heaven zone.

古文：甲寅，太白入南斗。
现代文：二十三日，太白金星进入斗宿天区。
English: On the 23rd, Taibai Venus entered the dooshuku heaven zone.

古文：乙卯，以吐番合答城为宁远府。
现代文：二十四日，把吐蕃的合答城命名为宁远府。
English: On the 24th, he named Hetaocheng in Tubo as Ningyuanfu.

古文：辛酉，召宋宗臣鄂州教授赵与票赴阙。
现代文：三十日，征召宋朝的宗室大臣鄂州教授赵与票灬前来朝廷。
English: On the 30th, Professor Zhao of Ezhou, the Minister of the Imperial Household of the Song Dynasty, was summoned to come to the Imperial Court with the ticket.

古文：设资戒会于京师。阿术入觐。
现代文：在京师举行资戒法会。阿术入朝觐见。
English: A precepts and discipline puja was held in Beijing, and Ah Jiu entered the imperial court.

古文：江淮及浙东西、湖南北等路，得府三十七、州一百二十八、关一、监一、县七百三十三，户九百三十七万四百七十二，口千九百七十二万一千一十五。
现代文：江淮路及浙东、浙西、湖南、湖北等路，共取得三十七个府、一百二十八个州、一处关隘、一个监府、七百三十三个县，共有九百三十一万零四百七十二户，一千九百七十二万一千零一十五人。
English: Jianghuai Road and Zhejiang East, Zhejiang West, Hunan, Hubei and other roads, a total of thirty-seven prefectures, one hundred and twenty-eight states, one pass, one supervisory office, seven hundred and thirty-three counties, a total of nine million three hundred and ten thousand four hundred and seventy-two households, and nineteen million seven hundred and twenty thousand one hundred and fifteen people.

古文：冬十月甲子，以陈岩拔新城、丁村功，赐金五十两，部将刘忠等赐银有差。
现代文：冬季，十月初三，因为陈岩攻占新城、丁村的功劳，赐给他黄金五十两，赐给其部将刘忠等不同数额的白银。
English: In the winter, on the third day of October, because of Chen Yan's achievements in conquering Xincheng and Dingcun, he was awarded fifty taels of gold, and his subordinate Liu Zhong was awarded different amounts of silver.

古文：乙亥，赐皇子北平王出征军士贫乏者羊马币帛有差。
现代文：十四日，赐给随同皇子北平王出征的贫苦士兵数额不同的羊、马和绢帛。
English: On the 14th, different amounts of sheep, horses and mules were given to the poor soldiers who went to war with the prince, King Peiping.

古文：申明以良为娼之禁。
现代文：申令禁止以良家妇女为娼。
English: The decree bans the use of women from good families as prostitutes.

古文：丁亥，两浙宣抚使焦友直以临安经籍、图画、阴阳秘书来上。
现代文：二十六日，两浙宣抚使焦友直把临安的经书、绘画、天文星相秘籍送来献上。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the two Zhejiang prefects asked Jiao Youzhi to bring Lin'an's scriptures, paintings, and secret books of astronomy and astrology.

古文：戊子，淮西安抚使夏贵请入觐，乞令其孙贻孙权领宣抚司事，从之。
现代文：二十七日，淮西安抚使夏贵请求入朝觐见，请求让他的孙子夏贻孙暂时掌管宣抚司事，皇上允从。
English: On the 27th, Xia Gui, the pacifier of Huaixi Province, requested to go to the imperial court for a meeting, and requested that his grandson, Xia Yansun, be temporarily in charge of the procurator, and the emperor agreed.

古文：以淮东左副都元帅阿里为平章政事，河南等路宣慰使合剌合孙为中书右丞，兵部尚书王仪、吏部尚书兼临安府安抚使杨镇、河南河北道提刑按察使迷里忽辛并参知政事。
现代文：任命淮东左副都元帅阿里为平章政事，任命河南等路宣慰使合剌合孙为中书右丞。兵部尚书王仪、吏部尚书兼临安府安抚使杨镇、河南河北道提刑按察使迷里忽辛均任参知政事。
English: He appointed the left vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the vice-governor of Huai-dong, the

古文：参知政事陈岩行中书省事于淮东。
现代文：参知政事陈岩在淮东处置中书省事务。
English: Chen Yan, a member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, is handling the affairs of Shandong Province in Huadong.

古文：十一月癸巳，安西王所部军克万州。
现代文：十一月初三，安西王所部的军队攻占万州。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the troops of the Anxi Royal Headquarters occupied Wanzhou.

古文：壬子，赐龙答温军有功及死事者银钞有差。
现代文：十六日，赐给阿术部下有功的将士二百三十九人，每人二百五十两白银。
English: On the 16th, two hundred and thirty-nine meritorious soldiers under Ah Xiu were given two hundred and fifty-two pieces of silver each.

古文：癸丑，并省内外诸司。丁卯，太阴犯填星。
现代文：西川行枢密院忽敦上奏说 ：部下的士兵长期围困重庆，逃亡的人很多，请求增加士兵一万名，并颁发诏书，招诱逃往大良平的百姓。 
English: Nishikawa's envoy to the Privy Council, Htun Shangsuo, said, "Our soldiers have been besieging Chongqing for a long time, and many people have fled. I request you to increase the number of soldiers by 10,000, and issue an edict to entice the people to flee to Daliangping."

古文：庚申，敕管民及理财之官由中书铨调，军官由枢密院定议。
现代文：皇上均予允从。二十二日，赐给龙答温军中立下战功者和战死者不同数额的银两和钱钞。二十三日，敕命管民官和理财官由中书省选调，管军官由枢密院商议决定。
English: On the 22nd, different amounts of silver and banknotes were given to the war heroes and the war dead of the Longtawen army. On the 23rd, the civil and financial officials were selected by the People's Government of the People's Republic of China, and the officers were decided by the Privy Council.

古文：隳襄汉、荆湖诸城。
现代文：拆毁襄汉、荆湖各城垣。
English: Tear down the city walls of Yanghan and Jinghu.

古文：南平招抚使兼知峡州事赵真，请降诏招谕夔州安抚张起岩，从之。
现代文：南平招抚使兼峡州知州赵真请求颁发诏书招降夔州安抚使张起岩，皇上允从。
English: Nanping's pacification envoy and Qiaozhou's Zhizhou Zhao Zhen requested the issuance of an imperial decree to recruit and demote Zhang Qiyan, the pacification envoy of Zhangzhou, and the emperor agreed.

古文：高丽国王王愖遣其臣判秘书寺朱悦，来告更名睶。
现代文：高丽国王王忄甚派遣他的大臣、署理秘书寺的朱悦前来奏告，他改名为 贝春 。
English: The king of Goryeo, Wang Bingzhi, sent his minister, the acting secretary of the temple, Zhu Yue, to report that he had changed his name to Beichun.

古文：十二月辛酉朔，荧惑掩钩钤。
现代文：十二月初一，荧惑星遮蔽钩钤星官。
English: On the first day of December, the fluorescent planet occulted the Hook star.

古文：以十四年历日赐高丽。
现代文：把至元十四年历书赐给高丽。
English: He gave the 14th year of the Yuan calendar to Goryeo.

古文：丁卯，改云南萝葡甸为元江府路。
现代文：初七，把云南的萝葡甸改为元江府路。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yunnan's Luoguxudian was changed to Yuanjiangfu Road.

古文：辛未，赐塔海所部战士及死事者银钞有差。
现代文：十一日，赐给塔海部下的战士和战死者不同数额的银两、钱钞。
English: On the 11th day, different amounts of silver and banknotes were given to the soldiers under Tahai and the war dead.

古文：赐忽不来等战功十九人银千二百两。
现代文：赐给忽不来等十九名立下战功的人一千二百两白银。
English: He gave twelve hundred taels of silver to nineteen people who had distinguished themselves in the war.

古文：壬申，李思敬告运使姜毅所言悖妄，指毅妻子为证。
现代文：十二日，李思敬控告转运使姜毅说话背逆狂妄，并且指出姜毅的妻子儿女可以做证人。
English: On the 12th, Li Sijing accused Transshipment of making Jiang Yi speak insolently and arrogantly, and pointed out that Jiang Yi's wife and children could be witnesses.

古文：帝曰： 妻子岂证者耶？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：妻子儿女怎么能做证人呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "How can wives and children be witnesses?"

古文：诏勿问。
现代文：下诏不要追究。
English: Do not pursue the case.

古文：乙亥，定江南所设官府。
现代文：十五日，确定江南路设置哪些官府。
English: On the 15th, it was determined which government offices would be located on Jiangnan Road.

古文：辛巳，以军士围守崇庆劳苦，赐钞六千锭。
现代文：二十一日，因为士兵们围困重庆辛苦，赐给钱钞六千锭。
English: On the twenty-first day, because the soldiers had a hard time besieging Chongqing, he gave them 6,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：庚寅，诏谕浙东西、江东西、淮东西、湖南北府州军县官吏军民： 昔以万户、千户渔夺其民，致令逃散，今悉以人民归之元籍州县。
现代文：二十四日，下诏晓谕浙东、浙西、江东、江西、淮东、淮西、湖南、湖北各路的府、州、军、县的官吏和军民： 以前因为万户、千户侵害和掠夺他们的百姓，致使他们逃散，现在让这些百姓全部返回原籍州县。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued to the officials, soldiers and civilians of the prefectures, prefectures, armies and counties of East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang, East Jiangsu, West Jiangsu, East Huaidong, West Huaidong, Hunan and Hubei: In the past, because tens of thousands of households violated and plundered their people, causing them to flee, now let these people all return to their counties of origin.

古文：凡管军将校及宋官吏，有以势力夺民田庐产业者，俾各归其主，无主则以给附近人民之无生产者。
现代文：凡是管军的将校以及宋朝的官吏，有仗势夺取百姓的田地、房屋产业的，令他们各自归还其原主，无主的则用来赐给附近失去生计和产业的百姓。
English: All officers in charge of the army and officials of the Song Dynasty, who have the power to seize the fields and houses of the people, should be ordered to return them to their original owners, and the ownerless ones should be used to give to the people who have lost their livelihoods and industries nearby.

古文：其田租商税、茶盐酒醋、金银铁冶、竹货湖泊课程，从实办之。
现代文：那些田租商税和茶盐酒醋、金银铁冶、竹货湖泊的赋税，一一据实际情况办理。
English: Those land lease business taxes and taxes on tea, salt, wine and vinegar, gold, silver, iron and steel, and bamboo goods lakes will be handled one by one according to the actual situation.

古文：凡故宋繁冗科差、圣节上供、经总制钱等百有余件，悉除免之。 
现代文：凡是从前宋朝繁杂的捐税、差役、皇帝寿诞的供奉、一百多种聚敛钱财的制度，全部予以废除。 
English: All the complicated systems of tax collection, dispatched labor, celebration of the emperor's birthday, and more than a hundred kinds of money and wealth gathering, which had been in place since the Song Dynasty, were abolished.

古文：伯颜言： 张惠守宋府库，不俟命擅启管钥。 
现代文：伯颜上奏说： 张惠看守宋朝的府库，不等到命令就擅自打开库房的锁钥。 
English: "Zhang Hui guarded the treasury of the Song Dynasty and opened the key of the treasury without waiting for an order," said Bo Yan.

古文：诏阿术诘其事，仍谕江之东西、浙之东西、淮之东西官吏等，检核新旧钱谷。
现代文：皇上召令阿术追究这件事，并谕令江东、江西、浙东、浙西、淮东、淮西的官吏检查核实新旧入库的钱粮。
English: The emperor summoned Ah Shou to investigate the matter, and ordered the officials of Jiangdong, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Zhejiang, Huaidong and Huaixi to check and verify the new and old stored grain.

古文：除浙西、浙东、江西、江东、湖北五道宣慰使。
现代文：撤销浙西、浙东、江西、江东、湖北五个路的宣慰使。
English: The propaganda and consolation envoys of the five provinces of West Zhejiang, East Zhejiang, Jiangxi, East Jiangxi and Hubei were revoked.

古文：升江陵为上路，瑞安府仍为温州，陇州为散府，蓟州复置丰闰县，升临洮渭源堡为县。
现代文：把江陵升格为上路。瑞安府仍然恢复温州的名字。陇州定为散府。蓟州重新设置丰润县。把临洮的渭源堡升格为县。
English: Jiangling was upgraded to the first road. Ruian Prefecture still restored the name of Wenzhou. Ganzhou was designated as a separate prefecture. Ganzhou was re-established as Fengrun County. Linyi's Linyuan Fort was upgraded to a county.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按照每年的常例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛，数额各不相同。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：赐诸王乃蛮带等羊马价。赏阿术等战功，及赐降臣吴坚、夏贵等银、钞、币、帛各有差，赐伯颜、阿术等青鼠、银鼠、黄犭由只孙衣，余功臣赐豹裘、獐裘及皮衣帽各有差。是岁，东平、济南、泰安、德州、涟海、清河、平滦、西京西三州以水旱缺食，赈军民站户米二十二万五千五百六十石，粟四万七千七百十二石，钞四千二百八十二锭有奇。平阳路旱，济宁路及高丽渖州水，并免今年田租。
现代文：赐给伯颜、阿术等青鼠、银鼠、黄鼬只孙衣，其他的功臣赐给豹裘、獐裘以及皮衣皮帽，数目不等。这一年，东平、济南、泰安、德州、涟海、清河、平滦、西京以西三州因遭受水灾旱灾而缺少粮食，赈济军队、百姓、驿站户大米二十二万五千五百六十石、小米四万七千七百一十二石、钱钞四千二百八十二锭多。平阳路发生旱灾，济宁路及高丽、沈州发生水灾，均免征今年的田租。
English: In this year, Dongping, Jinan, Tai'an, Dezhou, Bohai, Qinghe, Pingyao, and the three prefectures west of Xijing suffered from a shortage of grain due to floods and droughts. To help the army, the people, and the station households, there were 225,560 kilos of rice, 47,712 kilos of millet, and more than 4,282 banknotes. There was a drought in Pingyang Road, and floods in Jining Road, Goli, and Shenzhou.

古文：断死罪三十四人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共三十四人。
English: A total of thirty-four criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：十四年春正月癸巳，行都元帅府军次广东，知循州刘兴以城降。
现代文：至元十四年春季，初三，行都元帅府的军队驻扎在广东，循州知州刘兴献城投降。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the third day of the first month of the year, the army of the Generalissimo stationed in Guangdong surrendered to Liu Xingcheng in Zhouzhou.

古文：丙申，以江南平，百姓疲于供军，免诸路今岁所纳丝银。
现代文：初六，因为江南已经平定，百姓疲于供应军用物资，免征各路今年所交纳的丝税银。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because the south of the Yangtze River had been pacified and the people were tired of supplying military supplies, the silk tax paid by all roads this year was exempted.

古文：赐嗣汉天师张宗演道灵应冲和真人，领江南诸路道教。
现代文：赐予世袭的汉天师张宗演 演道灵应冲和真人 的称号，管辖江南各路的道教。
English: He bestowed the title of "Dao Ling Yechong" and "Zhenren" on the hereditary Han Tian teacher Zhang Zongyuan, and governed Taoism in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：戊戌，高丽金方庆等为乱，命高丽王治之，仍命忻都、洪茶丘饬兵御备。
现代文：初八，高丽国的金方庆等人作乱，皇帝命令高丽国王平定他们，并命令忻都、洪茶丘整顿兵马进行防御。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Kim Fang Ching and others in Goryeo rebelled. The emperor ordered the king of Goryeo to subdue them, and ordered Jeongdo and Hongchaekwu to reorganize their soldiers and horses for defense.

古文：癸卯，复立诸道提刑按察司。
现代文：十三日，重新设立各道提刑按察司。
English: On the 13th, the Provincial Criminal Investigation Departments were re-established.

古文：甲辰，命阿术选锐军万人赴阙。
现代文：十四日，命令阿术挑选精兵一万人前来朝廷。
English: On the 14th, he ordered Ah Jiu to select 10,000 elite soldiers to come to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，知梅州钱荣之以城降。
现代文：十七日，梅州知州钱荣之献城投降。
English: On the 17th, Meizhou, Chizhou and Qian Rong surrendered.

古文：戊申，赐三卫军士之贫乏者八千三百五十二人各钞二锭、币十匹。
现代文：十八日，赐给贫穷的三卫军士兵八千三百五十二人每人钱钞二锭、绢帛十匹。
English: On the 18th, 8,352 impoverished soldiers of the Third Guards Army were each given money in the amount of two baht and ten rupees.

古文：己酉，赐耶律铸钞千锭。
现代文：十九日，赐给耶律铸钱钞一千锭。
English: On the 19th, he gave her a thousand minted money.

古文：甲寅，敕宋福王赵与芮家赀之在杭、越者，有司辇至京师，付其家。
现代文：二十四日，敕令：如果官府的车辇来京师，可将宋朝的福王赵与芮在杭州、越州的家财带来交付给他家中。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict: If the official car of the government comes to Beijing, it can deliver the family wealth of the Song Dynasty's King Fu Zhao and his wife in Hangzhou and Yuezhou to his home.

古文：丙辰，立建都、罗罗斯四路，守戍乌木等处，并置官属。
现代文：二十六日，建立建都、罗罗斯等四个路，戍守乌木等处，并设置官吏。
English: On the 26th, four roads such as Jiandu and Luolos were established, Ebony and other places were guarded, and officials were set up.

古文：己未，以白玉碧玉水晶爵六，献于太庙。
现代文：二十九日，用六只白玉、碧玉水晶爵敬献给太庙。
English: On the 29th, six white jade and jasper crystal gems were presented to the Imperial Temple.

古文：括上都、隆兴、北京、西京四路猎户二千为兵。
现代文：登记上都、隆兴、北京、西京四个路的猎户二千人为军。
English: On the registration form, there are 2,000 soldiers from the four districts of Longxing, Beijing and Xijing.

古文：置江淮等路都转运盐使司，及江淮榷茶都转运使司。
现代文：设置江淮等路都转运盐使司，以及江淮榷茶都转运使司。
English: A salt transfer station will be set up along the Jianghuai and other routes, and a tea transfer station will be set up along the Jianghuai and other routes.

古文：命嗣汉天师张宗演修周天醮于长春宫，宗演还江南，以其弟子张留孙留京师。
现代文：命承袭汉天师张宗演在长春宫建立周天大醮，张宗演返回江南，把他的弟子张留孙留在京师。
English: Zhang Zongyuan, the successor of Han Tianshi, was ordered to establish Zhou Tian Daju in Changchun Palace. Zhang Zongyuan returned to the south of the Yangtze River and left his disciple Zhang Rusun in Beijing.

古文：二月辛酉，命征东都元帅洪茶丘将兵二千赴上都。
现代文：二月初二，命令征东都元帅洪茶丘率领二千名士卒前往上都。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, he ordered the marshal of the Eastern Expedition, Hong Cha Kuo, to lead two thousand dignitaries to Shangdu.

古文：壬戌，瑞州安抚姚文龙率张文显来降，其家属为宋人所害，赐文龙、文显等钞有差。
现代文：初三，宋朝的瑞州安抚使姚文龙率领张文显前来投降，他们的家属被宋人杀害，赐给姚文龙、张文显等不同数额的钱钞。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Yao Wenlong led by Zhang Wenxian came to surrender to the Song Dynasty's pacification of Ruizhou. Their families were killed by the Song people, and different amounts of money were given to Yao Wenlong and Zhang Wenxian.

古文：癸亥，彗星出东北，长四尺余。
现代文：初四，彗星在东北方向出现，有四尺多长。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, a comet appeared in the northeast direction, more than four feet long.

古文：甲子，遣使代祀岳渎后土。
现代文：初五，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎和土地大神。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, an envoy was dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the five mountains, the four defilements, and the great land god.

古文：丙寅，改安西王傅铜印为银印。
现代文：初七，把安西王太傅的铜印改为银印。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the bronze seal of the Anxi King Taifu was changed to a silver seal.

古文：立永昌路山丹城等驿，仍给钞千锭为本，俾取息以给驿传之须。
现代文：设立永昌路山丹城等处的驿站，并给予一千锭钱钞作为本金，让他们收取利息以供给驿传的花费。
English: Set up post stations at Yongchang Road, Shandan City and other places, and give one thousand baht banknotes as the principal, and let them collect interest to supply the best spending.

古文：诸王只必铁木儿言： 永昌路驿百二十户，疲于供给，质妻孥以应役。 
现代文：诸侯王只必铁木儿上奏说 ：永昌路的一百二十个驿户，疲于驿传的供给，把妻儿典押出去以供役。 
English: Princes and lords only had to make the following report to Tie Mu'er: "One hundred and twenty tenants on Yongchang Road, tired of being supplied by others, have pushed their wives and children out to work for them.

古文：诏赐钞百八十锭赎还之。
现代文：皇帝下诏赐给一百八十锭钱钞把他们的妻儿赎回来。
English: The emperor gave each of them 180 baht to buy back their wives and children.

古文：丁卯，荆湖北道宣慰使塔海拔归州山寨四十七所。
现代文：初八，荆湖北道宣慰使塔海攻占归州的堡寨四十七处。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the propaganda of Jinghu North Road made Tahai seize 47 fortresses in Guizhou.

古文：戊辰，祀先农东郊。
现代文：初九，在东郊祭祀农神。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the farmers' god is worshipped in the eastern suburbs.

古文：甲戌，西川行院不花率众数万至重庆，营浮屠关，造梯冲将攻之，其夜都统赵安以城降。
现代文：十五日，西川行枢密院使不花率领几万名部众抵达重庆，在浮屠关扎营，制造云梯和冲车攻城，当夜都统赵安献城投降。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Privy Council of the Xichuan line led tens of thousands of people to arrive in Chongqing, camped in Futuguan, made cloud ladders and stormed the city, and surrendered the city of Zhao'an that night.

古文：张珏舣船江中，与其妻妾顺流走涪州，元帅张德润以舟师邀之，珏遂降。
现代文：张珏和妻妾，一起乘小船在江中顺流而下逃往涪州，元帅张德润派水军拦截他。张珏便投降了。
English: Zhang Rong and his wife and concubine took a small boat down the middle of the river and fled to Zhangzhou. Marshal Zhang Derun sent a naval force to intercept him. Zhang Rong then surrendered.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾抵达上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：辛巳，命北京选福住所统军三百赴上都。
现代文：二十二日，命令北京挑选福住所统率的士兵三百人前往上都。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Beijing to select three hundred soldiers under the command of Fuxiao to go to Shangdu.

古文：壬午，隳吉、抚二州城，隆兴滨西江，姑存之。
现代文：二十三日，拆除吉州、抚州二州的城垣，隆兴濒临西江，暂时保留城垣。
English: On the 23rd, the city walls in the two prefectures of Chizhou and Fuzhou were dismantled, while the city walls in Longxing, near the Xijiang River, were temporarily retained.

古文：仍选汀州军马守御瑞金县。
现代文：挑选汀州的军马守御瑞金县。
English: The military horse guard of Tingzhou was selected from Goryo County.

古文：丙戌，连州守过元龙已降复叛，塔海将兵讨之，元龙弃城遁。
现代文：二十七日，连州守将过元龙已经投降又重新叛变，塔海率军前去讨伐他，过元龙弃城逃走。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the liaison of the state guard will have surrendered and rebelled again after the Yuanlong, and Takai led the army to fight him, abandoned the city and fled after the Yuanlong.

古文：丁亥，知南恩州陈尧道、佥判林叔虎以城降。
现代文：二十八日，南恩州知州陈尧道、佥判林叔虎献城投降。
English: On the 28th, Chen Xiangdao and Lin Shuguang of Chizhou, Nanshou, surrendered the city.

古文：诏以僧亢吉益、怜真加加瓦并为江南总摄，掌释教，除僧租赋，禁扰寺宇者。
现代文：下诏派僧人亢吉祥、怜真加加瓦共同担任江南总摄，掌管佛教事务，免除僧侣的租税，禁止扰害庙宇。
English: The following edict assigned the monks Gong Jixiang and Ren Zhen Jia Jia to jointly serve as the general director of the south of the Yangtze River, in charge of Buddhist affairs, exempting monks from taxes and prohibiting the disturbance of temples.

古文：以大司农、御史大夫、宣慰使兼领侍仪司事孛罗为枢密副使，兼宣徽使，领侍仪司事。
现代文：任命大司农、御史大夫、宣徽使兼领侍仪司事孛罗为枢密副使，兼任宣徽使，执掌侍仪司事务。
English: Appointed Daisho Nong, Goshi Daifu, Seonghim-so and Seonghim-so as Privy Vice-Minister, Seonghim-so as Seonghim-so and Seonghim-so as Seonghim-so.

古文：三月庚寅朔，以冬无雨雪，春泽未继，遣使问便民之事于翰林国史院，耶律铸、姚枢、王磐、窦默等对曰： 足食之道，唯节浮费，靡谷之多，无逾醪醴曲糵。
现代文：三月初一，因为冬季未降雨雪，接着春天又少雨，皇上派使者询问翰林国使院，哪些事情有利于百姓。耶律铸、姚枢、王磐、窦默等回答说 ：丰衣足食的方法，只有节省。浪费、消耗粮食最多的莫过于酿酒。
English: On the first day of March, because of the lack of snowfall in the winter and the lack of rain in the spring, the emperor sent an envoy to inquire of the Hanlin State Legation as to which things were beneficial to the people. Yerujing, Yaozhu, Wangban, Doumo and others replied: The only way to have enough food and clothing is to economize. There is nothing that wastes and consumes more grain than making wine.

古文：况自周、汉以来，尝有明禁。
现代文：况且从周朝、汉朝以来都曾经有过禁酒的明令。
English: Moreover, since the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, there have been clear orders to ban alcohol.

古文：祈赛神社，费亦不赀，宜一切禁止。 
现代文：祈求神灵、土地的活动花费也很大，应当全部予以禁止。 
English: The activities of praying to gods and the land are also very expensive and should all be banned.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛卯，湖广行中书省言： 广西二十四郡并已内附，议复行中书省于潭州，置广南西路宣抚司于静江。 
现代文：初二，湖广行中书省上奏说： 广西的二十四个郡已经全部归降朝廷，决定重新把行中书省设在潭州，而在静江设置广南西路安抚司。 
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Hukang Xing Zhongshuo Shangxuo said: The twenty-four counties of Guangxi have all surrendered to the imperial court, and it was decided to re-establish the Xing Zhongshuo in Tanzhou, and to set up the Guangnan West Road Pacification Division in Jingjiang.

古文：诏郑鼎所将侍卫军万人还京师，崔斌、阿里海牙同驻静江，忽都铁木儿、郑鼎同驻鄂汉，贾居贞、脱博忽鲁秃花同驻潭州。
现代文：下诏：令郑鼎所率领的一万名侍卫军返回京师，崔斌、阿里海牙均屯驻在静江，忽都帖木儿、郑鼎均屯驻在鄂汉，贾居贞、脱博忽鲁秃花均屯驻在潭州。
English: The following edict was issued: the ten thousand bodyguards led by Zheng Ding were ordered to return to Beijing Division, Cui Bin and Ali Hague were stationed in Jingjiang, Qudu Timur and Zheng Ding were stationed in Ehan, and Jia Juzhen and Debo Khulu Bald Flower were stationed in Tanzhou.

古文：癸巳，以行都水监兼行漕运司事。
现代文：初四，由行都水监兼管漕运司的职司。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the function of acting as the Metropolitan Water Supervisor and managing the Rowing Division was created.

古文：甲午，以郑鼎所部军士抚定静江之劳，命还家少休，期六月赴上都。
现代文：初五，因为郑鼎部下士兵平定静江的功劳，命令他们回家略事休息，约定六月前往上都。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, because soldiers of Zheng Ding's subordinates had contributed to the pacification of Jingjiang, he ordered them to go home for a short rest and agreed to go to Shangdu in June.

古文：乙未，福建漳、泉二郡蒲寿庚、印德傅、李珏、李公度皆以城降。
现代文：初六，福建的漳州、泉州二郡的蒲寿庚、印德博、李珏、李公度都献城投降。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Pu Shugang, Indebo, Li Qian and Li Gongdu from Fujian's Zhangzhou and Quanzhou's two counties all surrendered.

古文：丁酉，括马三万二千二百六匹，孕驹者还其主。
现代文：初八，收聚马匹三万二千二百零六匹，其中有怀孕的归还给它的主人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, 32,206 horses were rounded up, including a pregnant horse that was returned to its owner.

古文：壬寅，广东肇庆府新封等州皆来降。
现代文：十三日，广东肇庆府的新封等州都来归降。
English: On the 13th, Xinfeng and other prefectures in Zhaoqing, Guangdong, surrendered.

古文：癸卯，寿昌府张之纲以从叛弃市。
现代文：十四日，寿昌府的张元纲因为参与谋逆被处死。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Yuangang of Shouchang Prefecture was executed for his participation in the conspiracy.

古文：乙巳，命中外军民官所佩金银符，以色组系于肩腋，庶无亵渎，具为令。
现代文：十六日，命令京师内外的军民官吏佩戴金银牌符，须用彩色丝带系在肩腋处，以免受到亵渎，具文发为命令。
English: On the 16th, military and civilian officials in and out of the capital were ordered to wear gold and silver badges and tie them with colored ribbons at the shoulder so as not to be desecrated. The order was issued in writing.

古文：庚戌，建宁府通判郭缵以城降。
现代文：二十一日，建宁府通判郭缵献城投降。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Jianning prefectural court ordered Guo Xuancheng to surrender.

古文：黄州归附官史胜入觐，以所部将校于跃等三十一人战功闻，命官之。
现代文：黄州归附的官员史胜入朝觐见时，把部下的军官于跃等三十一人的战功奏闻皇上，皇帝命封给他们官职。
English: When the official Shi Sheng, who was annexed by Huangzhou, visited the imperial court, he recited the war exploits of thirty-one subordinate officers, including Yu Yue, to the emperor, and the emperor appointed them to official posts.

古文：签书东西川行枢密院事昝顺言： 比遣同知隆州事赵孟烯赍诏招谕南平军都掌蛮、罗计蛮及凤凰、中垅、罗韦、高崖等四寨皆降。田、杨二家、豕鹅夷民，亦各遣使纳款。 
现代文：东西川行枢密院佥事昝顺上奏说 ：近来派遣隆州同知赵孟烯携带诏书去招降南平军的都掌蛮、罗计蛮，以及凤凰、中垅、罗韦、高崖等四处山寨，均已投降，田、杨二家，豕鹅的夷民，也各自派遣使节来纳款归降。 
English: The Privy Council's anecdote of the East-West River trip, 順上奏, said: The recently dispatched Longzhou confidant Zhao Mengren to carry the edict to recruit the surrender of the Nanping Army, the capital barbarians, Luo Jie barbarians, as well as the villages of Phoenix, Zhongya, Luowei, Gaokao, etc., have all surrendered, and the field, Yang two houses, and the 鹅 of the 夷民 have also each sent envoys to accept the surrender.

古文：壬子，宝应军人施福杀其守将，降于淮东都元帅府，诏以福为千户，佩金符。
现代文：二十三日，宝应军的施福杀死他的守将向淮东都元帅府投降，诏令封施福为千户，佩戴金符牌。
English: On the 23rd, after the Bao Ying Army's Shifu killed his guard, he surrendered to the Huai Dongdu Marshal's Office and was ordered to seal Shifu into a thousand households and wear a gold badge.

古文：癸丑，命汪惟正自东川移镇巩昌。
现代文：二十四日，命令汪惟正从东川移军去镇守巩昌。
English: On the 24th, he ordered Wang Weizheng to move his army from Dongchuan to guard Gongchang.

古文：行中书省承制，以闽浙温、处、台、福、泉、汀、漳、剑、建宁、邵武、兴化等郡降官，各治其郡。
现代文：行中书省按照旧制，命闽浙辖区内温州、处州、台州、福州、泉州、汀州、漳州、剑州、建宁、邵武、兴化等州郡的降官，各自治理原来的地方。
English: In accordance with the old system, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology ordered the demotion of Wenzhou, Zhanzhou, Taizhou, Fuzhou, Quanzhou, Tingzhou, Ganzhou, Jianzhou, Jianning, Shaowu, Xinghua and other counties in the Zhejiang Autonomous Region, and the original localities of each autonomous government.

古文：潭州行省遣使上言： 广南西路庆远、郁林、昭、贺、藤、梧、融、宾、柳、象、邕、廉、容、贵、浔皆降，得府一、州十四。 
现代文：潭州行省派人来上奏说 ：广南西路的庆远、郁林、昭州、贺州、藤州、梧州、融州、宾州、柳州、象州、邕州、廉州、容州、贵州、浔州均已投降，取得一个府、十四个州。
English: Tanzhou sent a delegation to report that Qingyuan, Yulin, Zhaozhou, Hezhou, Fujian, Wuzhou, Rongzhou, Pengzhou, Liuzhou, Xiangzhou, Zhangzhou, Lianzhou, Yongzhou, Guizhou and Zhangzhou on the west road of Guangnan had all surrendered and gained one prefecture and fourteen prefectures.

古文：复立襄阳府襄阳县。
现代文：重新设立襄阳府襄阳县。
English: Re-establish Xiangyang County, Xiangyang Prefecture.

古文：平章政事、浙西道宣慰使阿塔海为平章政事，行中书省事于江淮；郡王合答为平章政事，行中书省事于北京。
现代文：平章政事、浙西道宣慰使阿塔海担任平章政事，在江淮处置中书省事务；郡王合答任平章政事，在北京处置中书省事务。
English: Pingzhang government affairs and Xuancheng of West Zhejiang Province made Atahai serve as Pingzhang government affairs and deal with the affairs of the book province in Jianghuai; Guo Wang jointly served as Pingzhang government affairs and deal with the affairs of the book province in Beijing.

古文：夏四月甲子，宋特磨道将军农士贵、知安平州李惟屏、知来安州岑从毅等，以所属州县溪洞百四十七、户二十五万六千来附。
现代文：夏季，四月初五，宋朝特磨道将军农士贵、平安州知州李维异、来安州知州岑从毅等，率领所属的一百四十七个州、县、溪洞和二十五万六千户百姓前来归附。
English: In the summer, on the 5th day of the 4th month of the lunar month, the general of the Song Dynasty, Peasants Gui, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Weiyi, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li

古文：癸酉，省各路转运司，事入总管府。
现代文：十四日，撤销各路转运司，原有的事务归并到总管府处置。
English: On the 14th, the Road Transportation Division was abolished, and the original affairs were merged into the General Administration Office.

古文：设盐转运司四，置榷场于碉门、黎州，与吐蕃贸易。
现代文：设置四个盐业转运司。在碉门、黎州设置贸易的榷场，与吐蕃进行贸易。
English: Set up four salt industry transshipment departments. Set up trading platforms in Shimen and Lizhou to trade with Tuyu.

古文：丙子，召安抚赵与可、宣抚陈岩入觐。
现代文：十七日，征召安抚使赵与可、宣抚使陈岩入朝觐见。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Youke, the pacification envoy, and Chen Yan, the propaganda envoy, were summoned to the imperial court.

古文：丙戌，禁江南行用铜钱。
现代文：二十七日，禁止江南通用铜钱。
English: On the 27th, the Jiangnan general copper money was banned.

古文：均州复立南漳县。
现代文：在均州重新设置南漳县。
English: Nanlu County was re-established in Junzhou.

古文：五月癸巳，申严大都酒禁，犯者籍其家赀，散之贫民。
现代文：五月初五，严令大都禁止饮酒，违犯者没收其家财散发给贫苦百姓。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, alcohol was strictly prohibited in most places, and violators had their family wealth confiscated and distributed to the poor.

古文：辛丑，千户合剌合孙死于浑都海之战，命其子忽都带儿袭职。
现代文：十三日，千户合剌合孙在浑都海之战中战死，命令他的儿子忽都带儿袭取父职。
English: On the thirteenth day, Chiharu's grandson died in the Battle of the Hunto Sea, and he ordered his son to take over his father's position.

古文：癸卯，改广南西路宣抚司为宣慰司，广西钦、横二州改立安抚司。
现代文：十五日，把广南西路宣抚司改为宣慰司。广西的钦州、横州两州改立安抚司。
English: On the 15th, the Guangnan West Road Publicity and Reassurance Division was changed to the Publicity and Reassurance Division, and the two states of Qinzhou and Hengzhou in Guangxi were changed to the Publicity and Reassurance Division.

古文：各道提刑按察司兼劝农事。
现代文：各道提刑按察司兼管鼓励农业生产的事务。
English: According to the inspector general of each province, it is also in charge of encouraging agricultural production.

古文：敕江南归附官，三品以上者遣质子一人入侍。
现代文：敕命江南归附的降官，三品以上的送一个儿子入朝做人质。
English: He was forced to abdicate in order to return the southern part of the Yangtze River to China, and he sent one of his three sons as a hostage to the North.

古文：西番长阿立丁宁占等三十一族来附，得户四万七百。
现代文：西番部落的酋长阿立丁宁占等三十一个部族前来归附，共四万零七百户。
English: Thirty-one tribes, including the chief of the Xipan tribe, Aliddin Ning Zhan, came to join, with a total of 40,700 households.

古文：丙子，融州安抚使谭昌谋为不轨，伏诛。
现代文：十八日，融州安抚使谭昌图谋不轨被处死。
English: On the 18th, Tan Chang was executed for conspiring to commit a crime.

古文：辛亥，以河南、山东水旱，除河泊课，听民自渔。
现代文：二十三日，因为河南、山东发生水旱灾，免除河流湖泊的赋税，听任百姓们自己捕鱼。
English: On the 23rd, because of floods and droughts in Henan and Shandong, rivers and lakes were exempted from taxation, and the people were allowed to fish on their own.

古文：乙卯，选蒙古、汉军相参宿卫。
现代文：二十七日，挑选蒙古军、汉军的士兵轮流宿卫。
English: On the 27th, soldiers from the Mongolian and Chinese armies were selected to take turns as guards.

古文：诏谕思州安抚使田景贤。
现代文：下诏招降恩州安抚使田景贤。
English: He issued the following edict inviting Tian Jingxian, Enzhou's pacification envoy, to surrender.

古文：又诏谕泸州西南番蛮王阿永，筠连、腾串等处诸族蛮夷，使其来附。
现代文：又下诏招降泸州西南番夷的蛮王阿永，以及筠连、腾串等地各部族的蛮夷，命他们前来归附。
English: He also issued an imperial edict inviting the barbarian king A Yong of the southwest Fan Yi of Zhangzhou to surrender, as well as the barbarians of various tribes in Qilian, Tengzhu and other places, and ordered them to come and surrender.

古文：命真人李德和代祀济渎。
现代文：命道士李德和代表皇帝祭祀济水。
English: Li Dehe, the preacher of life and death, performed the ritual of offering water on behalf of the emperor.

古文：六月丙寅，涪州安抚阳立及其子嗣荣相继来附，命立为夔路安抚使，嗣荣为管军总管，并佩虎符，仍赐钞百锭。
现代文：六月初八，涪州安抚使阳立和他的儿子阳嗣荣相继前来归附，任命阳立为夔路安抚使，阳嗣荣为管军总管，均佩戴虎符，并赐予钱钞一百锭。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Yang Li and his son Yang Xi Rong, the pacifying envoy of Zhangzhou, came to attach themselves successively. Yang Li was appointed as the pacifying envoy of Kushiro, and Yang Xi Rong was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army. They both wore the tiger emblem, and were given one hundred baht in banknotes.

古文：壬寅，赏征广战死之家银各五十两。
现代文：十四日，奖赏征伐广州的战死者家属各五十两白银。
English: On the 14th, the families of those who died in the conquest of Guangzhou were each awarded fifty-two pieces of silver.

古文：丁丑，置尚膳院，秩三品，以提点尚食、尚药局忽林失为尚膳使，其属司有七。
现代文：十九日，设置尚膳院，俸禄为三品，任命掌管皇帝饮食、医药的忽林失为尚膳使，其属下的部门有七个。
English: On the 19th, the Shangzheng Academy was set up, the salary was raised to three rupees, and Gu Linfu, who was in charge of the emperor's diet and medicine, was appointed as the Shangzheng Envoy. There were seven departments under him.

古文：庚辰，赏阳立所部战士钞千锭。
现代文：二十二日，赏赐阳立部下的战士钱钞一千锭。
English: On the 22nd, he rewarded the soldiers of Yang Li's subordinates with 1,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：甲申，荆湖北道宣慰使黑的得谍者，言夔府将出兵攻荆南。
现代文：二十六日，荆湖北道宣慰使黑的抓获间谍，说夔府将要出兵进攻荆南。
English: On the 26th, the North Jinghu Province issued a proclamation to comfort the captured spy, saying that the government would send troops to attack South Jinghu.

古文：谕阳立等与塔海会兵御之。
现代文：皇上谕令阳立等人和塔海合兵防御夔府。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Li and others to join forces with Tahai to defend Shifu.

古文：丁亥，升崇明沙为崇明州。
现代文：二十九日，把崇明沙升格为崇明州。
English: On the 29th, Chongmingsha was upgraded to Chongming Prefecture.

古文：以行省参政、行江东道宣慰使阿剌罕为中书左丞、行江东道宣慰使，湖北道宣慰使奥鲁赤参知政事、行湖北道宣慰使。
现代文：任命行中书省参知政事、暂署江东道宣慰使阿剌罕为中书左丞、暂署江东道宣慰使，任命湖北道宣慰使奥鲁赤为参知政事、暂署湖北道宣慰使。
English: Appointed the Vice-governor of Shandong Province as the Vice-governor, temporarily appointed the Vice-governor of Jiangsu Province as the Vice-governor, temporarily appointed the Vice-governor of Jiangsu Province as the Vice-governor, temporarily appointed the Vice-governor of Hubei Province as the Vice-governor, temporarily appointed the Vice-governor of Hubei Province as the Vice-governor and temporarily appointed the Vice-governor of Hubei Province as the Vice-governor.

古文：秋七月戊子朔，罢大名、济宁印钞局。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，撤销大名、济宁印钞局。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the Daimyo and Jining Printing Bureau was abolished.

古文：壬辰，敕犯盗者皆弃市。
现代文：初五，敕令犯盗窃罪的均处以死刑。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the death penalty was imposed for all theft crimes.

古文：符宝郎董文忠言： 盗有强窃，赃有多寡，似难悉置于法。 
现代文：符宝郎董文忠上奏说 ：盗窃罪有的是抢劫，有的是偷窃，赃款也有多有少，似乎难以都用同样的刑罚处置。 
English: Fu Baolang Dong Wenzhong said in his report: Some theft crimes are robbery, some are theft, and some are embezzlement. It seems difficult to use the same punishment for all of them.

古文：帝然其言，遽命止之。
现代文：皇帝同意他的话，立即下令停止执行这道命令。
English: The emperor agreed with him and immediately ordered the execution of this order to be stopped.

古文：丁酉，敕自今非佩符使臣及军情急速，不听乘传。
现代文：初十，敕令从现在起，不是佩戴符牌的使臣，以及不是有紧急军情的人，不得乘坐驿站的车船。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that from now on, envoys who did not wear badges, as well as people who did not have an emergency military situation, were not allowed to take the train at the station.

古文：戊戌，申禁羊马群之在北者，八月内毋纵出北口诸隘践食京畿之禾，犯者没其畜。
现代文：十一日，申令：北方的羊群和马群，八月之内不得放出北口等各山口践踏、嚼食京畿一带的庄稼，违犯者没收其牲畜。
English: On the 11th, it was decreed that the flocks of sheep and herds of horses in the north should not be allowed to trample and chew the crops in the Gyeonggi region in the north and other mountain passes in August, and violators would have their livestock confiscated.

古文：癸卯，诸王昔里吉劫北平王于阿力麻里之地，械系右丞相安童，诱胁诸王以叛，使通好于海都。
现代文：十六日，诸侯王昔里吉抢夺北平王在阿力麻里的土地，用刑具拘系右丞相安童，引诱、胁迫诸侯王叛变，要他们和海都通好。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the vassal lord Xilingi robbed the land of Beiping Wang in Alimari, used torture instruments to detain the right-wing minister Ando, lured and coerced the vassal lord to rebel, and wanted them to be on good terms with the capital.

古文：海都弗纳，东道诸王亦弗从，遂率西道诸王至和林城北。
现代文：海都不接纳他们，东路的诸侯王也不听从昔里吉，昔里吉便率领西路的诸侯王抵达和林城的北面。
English: The sea would not accept them, and the princes on the east road would not listen to Shurigi, so Shurigi led the princes on the west road and arrived at the north side of He Lincheng.

古文：诏右丞相伯颜帅军往御之。
现代文：皇帝下诏：令右丞相伯颜率军前去讨伐昔里吉。
English: The emperor issued an edict: to order the Minister of the Right, Bo Yan, to lead the army to fight against Shiliji.

古文：诸王忽鲁带率其属来归，与右丞相伯颜等军合。
现代文：诸侯王忽鲁带率领他的部属回归朝廷，与右丞相伯颜等人的军队会合。
English: Prince Khulu led his subordinates back to the imperial court and met with the army led by the chancellor Bo Yan and others.

古文：丙午，置行御史台于扬州，以都元帅相威为御史大夫。
现代文：十九日，在扬州设置行御史台，任命都元帅相威为御史大夫。
English: On the 19th, Yangzhou set up an imperial history platform and appointed Marshal Zhuangwei as imperial historian.

古文：置八道提刑按察司。
现代文：设置八道提刑按察司。
English: Set up an eight-way criminal investigation division.

古文：戊申，东川都元帅张德润等攻取涪州，大败之，擒安抚程聪、程广。
现代文：二十一日，东川都元帅张德润等攻占涪州，大败宋军，俘获安抚使程聪、陈广。
English: On the 21st, the Dongchuan Capital Marshal Zhang Derun and others captured Zhangzhou, defeated the Song Army, and captured the pacification envoys Cheng Cong and Chen Guang.

古文：置行中书省于江西，以参知政事、行江西宣慰使塔出为右丞，参知政事、行江西宣慰使麦术丁为左丞，淮东宣慰使彻里帖木儿、江东宣慰使张荣实、江西宣慰使李恒、招讨使也的迷失、万户昔里门、荆湖路宣抚使程鹏飞、闽广大都督兵马招讨使蒲寿庚并参知政事，行江西省事。
现代文：在江西设置行中书省，任命参知政事、署理江西宣慰使塔出为右丞，任命参知政事、署理江西宣慰使麦术丁为左丞。淮东宣慰使彻里帖木儿、江东宣慰使张荣实、江西宣慰使李恒、招讨使也的迷失、万户昔里门、荆湖路宣抚使程鹏飞、闽广大都督兵马招讨使蒲寿庚均任参知政事，执掌江西行省事务。
English: In Jiangxi, the Ministry of Education was set up, and the Minister of Political Affairs and the Acting Minister of Jiangxi Propaganda and Consolation was appointed as the right-hand man, and the Minister of Political Affairs and the Acting Minister of Jiangxi Propaganda and Consolation was appointed as the left-hand man. The Minister of Political Affairs and the Acting Minister of Jiangxi Propaganda and Consolation was appointed as the right-hand man, and the Minister of Political Affairs and the Acting Minister of Jiangxi Propaganda and Consolation was appointed as the left-hand man. The Minister of Political Affairs and the Acting Minister of Jiangxi Propaganda and Consolation was appointed as the right-hand man. The Minister of Political Affairs and the Acting

古文：壬子，榷大都商税。
现代文：二十五日，由朝廷专管大都的商税。
English: On the 25th, the imperial court was given exclusive control over most of the city's commercial taxes.

古文：丁巳，湖北宣慰司调兵攻司空山，复寿昌、黄州二郡。
现代文：三十日，湖北宣慰司调集兵马攻打司空山，收复寿昌、黄州二郡。
English: On the 30th, Hubei Xuanliao Division mobilized soldiers and horses to attack Shikang Mountain, recovering Shuchang and two counties in Huangzhou.

古文：赐平宋将帅军士及简州军士广西死事者银钞各有差。
现代文：赏赐平定宋朝的将帅、士兵，以及在简州、广西之战中的战死者不同数额的银两、钱钞。
English: The generals and soldiers who pacified the Song Dynasty, as well as the war dead in the battles of Jianzhou and Guangxi, were awarded different amounts of silver and banknotes.

古文：回水窝渊圣广源王加封善佑，常山灵济昭应王加封广惠，安丘雹泉灵霈侯追封灵霈公。
现代文：回水窝的渊圣广源王加封 善佑 二字，常山的灵济昭应王加封 广惠 二字，安丘雹泉的灵霈侯追封为灵霈公。
English: King Guangyuan of Fu Sheng of Huishuo added the word "Zen You" (善佑), King Jing Zhaoying of Changshan added the word "Guang Hui" (广惠), and the Prince Ling of Anqiu Spring was posthumously appointed as the Prince Ling.

古文：以参知政事、行江东道宣慰使吕文焕为中书左丞。
现代文：任命参知政事、署理江东道宣慰使吕文焕为中书左丞。
English: The appointment of Sanchi Seiji and Acting Jiangdosto Xuanjie made Lu Wenhuan the Chushuzojo.

古文：八月戊午朔，诏不花行院西川。
现代文：八月初一，诏令不花在四川执掌枢密院事。
English: On the first day of August, it was decreed that he would not hold the Privy Council in Sichuan.

古文：丁卯，成都路仓收羡余五千石，按察司已治其罪，命以其米就给西川兵。
现代文：初十，成都路仓库收取赋税的羡余额达五千石，按察司已对其处以罪罚，皇帝命令把这些粮食就近交给西川的军队。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Chengdu Road warehouse received a tax of 5,000 koku. According to the inspector general, it had been punished. The emperor ordered that the grain be handed over to the army of Xichuan.

古文：辛未，常德府总管鲁希文与李三俊结构为乱，事觉，命行省诛之。
现代文：十四日，常德府总管鲁希文和李三俊勾结作乱，事情被觉察以后，皇帝命行中书省将他们处死。
English: On the 14th, the head of the Changde Prefecture, Lu Xiwen, and Li Sanjun colluded to create a disturbance. After the incident was discovered, the emperor ordered the People's Commissariat of Education to execute them.

古文：车驾畋于上都之北。
现代文：皇上在上都的北面狩猎。
English: The emperor went hunting in the north of Shangdu.

古文：九月壬申，制镔铁海青圆符。
现代文：九月初六，用镔铁制作海东青圆形符牌。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th lunar month, the East China Sea Qingqing circular signboard was made with pig iron.

古文：丙申，广南东路广、连、韶、德庆、惠、潮、南雄、英德等郡皆内附。
现代文：初十，广南东路的广州、连州、韶州、德庆、惠州、潮州、南雄、英德等郡都归顺朝廷。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the counties of Guangzhou, Lianzhou, Zhangzhou, Deqing, Huizhou, Chaozhou, Nanxiong, Yingde and other counties on the East Road of Guangdong were all transferred to the imperial court.

古文：甲辰，福建行省以宋二王在其疆境，调都督忙兀带、招讨高兴领兵讨之。
现代文：十八日，福建行中书省因为宋朝的两个王都在它的辖区之内，调都督忙兀带、招讨使高兴去讨伐他们。
English: On the 18th, when Fujian was in the middle of Shuzhou Province, because the two kings of the Song Dynasty were both in its jurisdiction, the governor was busy and happy to fight them.

古文：昂吉儿、忻都、唐兀带等引兵攻司空山寨，破之，杀张德兴，执其三子以归。
现代文：昂吉儿、忻都、唐兀带等领兵攻打司空山山寨，攻破山寨，杀死了张德兴，俘获了他的三个儿子回来。
English: The leaders of the army, including Angier, Xidu, and Tang Xizhe, attacked the Sikuoshan cottage, broke through the cottage, killed Zhang Dexing, and captured his three sons.

古文：壬子，福建路宣慰使、行征南都元帅唆都，遣招讨使百家奴、丁广取建宁之崇安等县及南剑州。
现代文：二十六日，福建路宣慰使、署理征南都元帅唆都派遣招讨使百家奴、丁广攻取建宁路的崇安等县和南剑州。
English: On the 26th, the Fujian Road Xuan Ying Envoy, the Acting Marshal of the Southern Expeditionary Army, and the Marshal of the Southern Expeditionary Army dispatched hundreds of soldiers and Ding Guang to conquer the counties of Chong'an and Nanjianzhou on the Jianning Road.

古文：冬十月丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of October in winter.

古文：己未，享于太庙。
现代文：初四，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, offerings are made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚申，湖北宣慰使塔海略地至夔府之太原坪，禽其将，诛之。
现代文：初五，湖北宣慰使塔海攻占土地，直到夔府的太原坪，俘获了该地的守将，将其处死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Hubei Xuancheng ordered Tahai to seize land as far as Taiyuanping in Shanfu, where he captured the local military commander and executed him.

古文：辛酉，弛盖州猎禁。
现代文：初六，放宽盖州不许狩猎的禁令。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the ban on hunting in Gyeongju was relaxed.

古文：乙亥，以宋张世杰、文天祥犹未降，命阿塔海选锐兵防遏隆兴诸城。
现代文：二十日，因为宋朝的张世杰、文天祥还没有投降，命令阿塔海挑选精锐的士卒防御、遏制隆兴路的各城。
English: On the 20th, because Zhang Shijie and Wen Tianxiang of the Song Dynasty had not yet surrendered, he ordered Atahai to select elite soldiers to defend and contain the cities of Longxing Road.

古文：禁无籍军随大军剽掠者，勿过关渡。
现代文：禁止没有登记入籍的士卒跟随大军进行抢劫，不许他们过关渡河。
English: It is forbidden for soldiers who have not registered for naturalization to follow the army to carry out robberies, and they are not allowed to cross the river.

古文：己卯，降臣郭晓、魏象祖入觐，赐币帛有差。
现代文：二十四日，降臣郭晓、魏象祖入朝觐见，皇上赐给他们不同数量的绢帛。
English: On the 24th, the surrendered vassals Guo Xiao and Wei Xiang Zu went to the imperial court for an audience, and the emperor gave them varying amounts of money.

古文：壬午，置宣慰司于黄州。
现代文：二十七日，在黄州设置宣慰司。
English: On the 27th, a hotline was set up in Huangzhou.

古文：甲申，播州安抚使杨邦宪言： 本族自唐至宋，世守此土，将五百年。
现代文：二十九日，播州安抚使杨邦宪上奏说： 本族从唐朝到宋朝，世世代代掌管这片土地，快五百年了。
English: On the 29th, Yang Bangxian, Banzhou's pacification envoy, made a report, saying: Our people have been in charge of this land for generations, from the Tang Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, for nearly five hundred years.

古文：昨奉旨许令仍旧，乞降玺书。 
现代文：昨天接到圣旨，仍旧允许我掌管这地方，请颁降一道玺书。 
English: When I received the imperial edict yesterday, I was still allowed to take charge of this place. I would like to ask you to grant me an imperial edict.

古文：从之。以行省参政忽都帖木儿、脱博忽鲁秃花、崔斌并为中书左丞，鄂州总管府达鲁花赤张鼎、湖北道宣慰使贾居贞并参知政事。
现代文：皇上允从，任命行中书省参知政事忽都帖木儿、脱博忽鲁秃花、崔斌均任中书左丞，鄂州总管府镇守官张鼎、湖北道宣慰使贾居贞均任参知政事。
English: With the emperor's approval, the following were appointed to the post of Vice-governor of Shuzhou Province: Qu Du Timur, Qu Lu Bald Flower, and Cui Bin were all appointed Vice-governor of Shuzhou Province, Zhang Ding, the town guard of the General Administration of Huzhou Province, and Jia Ju Zhen, the consul of Hubei Province, were all appointed Vice-governor.

古文：十一月戊子，枢密院臣言： 宋文天祥与其徒赵孟瀯同起兵，行中书发兵攻之，杀孟瀯，天祥仅以身免。 
现代文：十一月初三，枢密院大臣上奏说： 宋朝文天祥和他的部下赵孟氵营共同起兵，行中书省派兵进攻他们，杀死了赵孟氵营，文天祥仅仅只身脱逃。 
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Minister of the Privy Council delivered a report saying: Song Dynasty, Wen Tianxiang and his subordinate Zhao Mengyuan jointly raised an army. During the campaign, the Ministry of Education sent troops to attack them and killed Zhao Mengyuan. Wen Tianxiang only escaped by himself.

古文：诏以其妻孥赴京师。右副都元帅张德润上涪州功，赐钞千锭。
现代文：皇上下诏把他的妻儿送到京师，右副都元帅张德润上奏涪州之战的功劳，赐给他钱钞一千锭。
English: The emperor sent his wife and son to the capital, and the right vice-captain Zhang Derun gave a speech on the merits of the Battle of Bozhou, awarding him 1,000 baht in money.

古文：乙未，凡伪造宝钞，同情者并处死，分用者减死杖之，具为令。
现代文：初十，凡是伪造钱钞的以及串通一气的，均处以死刑；分用伪钞的，减去死罪，处以杖刑，具文为法令。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, anyone who counterfeits money or colludes with others shall be sentenced to death; anyone who uses counterfeit money shall be sentenced to caning, with the death penalty deducted, and the case shall be recorded as a decree.

古文：庚子，命中书省檄谕中外，江南既平，宋宜曰亡宋，行在宜曰杭州。
现代文：十五日，命令中书省发布文告晓谕朝内外，江南既然已经平定，宋朝应该称为 亡宋 ， 亡宋 的朝廷所在地应当称为杭州。
English: On the 15th, the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy was ordered to issue a communique to inform both inside and outside the dynasty that since the south of the Yangtze River had been pacified, the Song Dynasty should be called the late Song Dynasty, and the location of the imperial court of the late Song Dynasty should be called Hangzhou.

古文：以吏部尚书别都鲁丁参知政事。
现代文：任命吏部尚书别都鲁丁为参知政事。
English: Appointed the head of the civil service, Shangshu Beidou, and Rudin to be co-chairs of the government.

古文：十二月丙辰，置中滦、唐村、淇门驿。
现代文：十二月初二，设置中滦、唐村、淇门的驿站。
English: On the second day of December, the stations of Zhongli, Tangcun and Qimen were set up.

古文：丁卯，以大都物价翔踊，发官廪万石，赈粜贫民。
现代文：十三日，因为大都物价飞涨，发放官仓的粮食一万石，以赈济贫苦百姓。
English: On the 13th, due to soaring prices in most cities, 10,000 koku of grain from government warehouses were distributed to help the poor.

古文：庚午，梁山军袁世安以其城及金石城军民来降。
现代文：十六日，梁山军的袁世安献出他的城池，带着金石城的军民前来归降。
English: On the 16th, Yuan Shian of the Liangshan Army gave up his castle and came to surrender with the soldiers and civilians of Jinshi City.

古文：壬申，潭州行省复祁阳县。
现代文：十八日，潭州行中书省恢复祁阳县。
English: On the 18th, during the visit to Tanzhou, the Ministry of Education and Culture restored Shenyang County.

古文：斩首贼罗飞，余党悉平。
现代文：把贼首罗飞处斩，余党全部被平定。
English: The head of the thief, Luo Fei, was beheaded, and the rest of the party was completely defeated.

古文：乙亥，都元帅杨文安攻咸淳府，克之。
现代文：二十一日，都元帅杨文安攻占咸淳府。
English: On the twenty-first day, Marshal Yang Wen'an captured Xianjunfu.

古文：以十五年历日赐高丽国。
现代文：把至元十五年的历书赐给高丽国。
English: He gave the calendar book of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty to Goryeo.

古文：以参议中书省事耿仁参知政事。
现代文：任命参议中书省事务的耿仁为参知政事。
English: To appoint Geng Ren, who is in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture, to the post of Vice-governor.

古文：冠州及永年县水，免今年田租。
现代文：冠州及永年县发生大水，免征今年的田租。
English: Kwanju and Yongnian counties were exempted from this year's field rent due to heavy water.

古文：导任河，复民田三千余顷。赐诸王金、银、币、帛等物如岁例。
现代文：疏导任河，恢复民田三千多顷，按照每年的常例赏赐诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛等物。
English: He dredged the Renhe River, restored more than 3,000 hectares of people's fields, and rewarded the princes with gold, silver, banknotes, ingots and other items in accordance with the annual routine.

古文：赐诸王也不干、燕帖木儿等五百二十九人羊马价，钞八千四百五十二锭。
现代文：赐给诸侯王也不干、燕帖木儿等五百二十九人羊马钱一一一钞币八千四百五十二锭。
English: It was not enough to give the princes and kings, but also the five hundred and twenty-nine sheep, horses, sheep and horses, eleven thousand and eleven banknotes, eight thousand four hundred and fifty-two pennies.

古文：赏拜答儿等千三百五十五人战功，金百两、银万五千一百两、钞百三十锭及纳失失、金素币帛、貂鼠豹裘、衣帽有差。
现代文：因拜答儿等一千三百五十五人的战功，赏赐黄金一百两、白银一万五千一百两，钱钞一百三十锭，以及纳失失、彩色和素色的绢帛、貂裘、鼠裘、豹裘、衣帽等，数额各不相同。
English: Due to the war service of the 1,355 people including Baida'er, they were rewarded with 102 gold, 15,122 silver, and 130 banknotes, as well as lost and found, colored and plain socks, socks, mouse socks, leopard socks, clothes and hats, etc. The amounts vary.

古文：是岁，赈东平、济南等郡饥民，米二万一千六百十七石、粟二万八千六百十三石、钞万一百十二锭。
现代文：这一年，赈济东平、济南等郡的饥民大米二万一千六百一十七石、小米二万八千六百一十三石、钱钞一万零一百一十二锭。
English: In that year, the amount of rice, millet and banknotes donated to the hungry people in Dongping, Jinan and other counties reached 21,617 koku, 28,613 koku and 10,112 koku, respectively.

古文：断死罪三十二人。
现代文：全年被判处死刑的罪犯三十二人。
English: Thirty-two criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

