古文：畅字少微，邵兄褘子也。
现代文：张畅字少微，是张邵的哥哥张的儿子。
English: Zhang Chang, a minor character, is the son of Zhang Shao's brother, Zhang Ru.

古文：褘少有操行，爲晋琅邪王国郎中令。
现代文：张少年时期就很有操行，曾做晋朝琅笽王国的郎中令。
English: Zhang was very well-behaved as a boy, and once served as a vassal of the Jin Dynasty's Zou Kingdom.

古文：从王至洛。
现代文：跟随琅笽王到过洛阳。
English: He followed the king to Luoyang.

古文：还京都，宋武帝封药酒一罂付褘，使密加酖毒，受命于道自饮而卒。
现代文：回到京城，宋武帝封了药酒一瓮交给张，让他秘密地加入荓毒，他接受了命令，在路上自饮而死。
English: Back in Beijing, Emperor Songwu sealed a bottle of medicinal wine and gave it to Zhang, asking him to secretly drink the poison. He accepted the order and drank himself to death on the road.

古文：畅少与从兄敷、演、镜齐名，爲后进之秀。
现代文：张畅少年时候与堂兄张敷、张演、张镜齐名，是后起之秀。
English: When Zhang Chang was a boy, he was on a par with his cousins Zhang Shiki, Zhang En, and Zhang Zhen, and was a rising star.

古文：起家爲太守徐佩之主簿，佩之被诛，畅驰出奔赴，制服尽哀，爲论者所美。
现代文：最初出门做官是担任太守徐佩之的主簿，徐佩之被处死，张畅便驰马前往奔丧，穿上丧服尽哀，被谈论者所称赞。
English: At first, he went out to be an official to serve as the main book of the eunuch Xu Peizhi. When Xu Peizhi was executed, Zhang Chang rode to the funeral, put on mourning clothes and mourned, and was praised by the talkers.

古文：弟牧尝爲猘犬所伤，医云宜食虾蟆，牧甚难之。
现代文：他的弟弟张牧曾经被疯狗咬伤，医生说应该吃蛤蟆，张牧感到很为难。
English: His brother Zhang Mu was once bitten by a rabid dog. The doctor said he should eat crickets. Zhang Mu felt very embarrassed.

古文：畅含笑先尝，牧因此乃食，创亦即愈。
现代文：张畅含笑先尝，张牧因此才吃了，伤口也就好了。
English: Zhang Changhan smiled and tasted it first, so Zhang Mu ate it, and the wound was healed.

古文：累迁太子中庶子。
现代文：逐步升迁为太子中庶子。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of the prince's middle child.

古文：孝武镇彭城，畅爲安北长史、沛郡太守。
现代文：孝武帝镇守彭城，张畅做安北长史、沛郡太守。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was the governor of Pengcheng, Zhang Chang was the governor of Anbei and the governor of Pei County.

古文：元嘉二十七年，魏太武南征，太尉江夏王义恭统诸军出镇彭城。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，魏太武帝南征，太尉江夏王刘义恭统率各路军队前往镇守彭城。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Wei Taiwu led the Southern Expedition, and Lieutenant Jiangxia King Liu Yigong led the various armies to the town of Pengcheng.

古文：太武亲率大衆，去彭城数十里。
现代文：太武帝亲自率领大军，离彭城几十里。
English: Emperor Taiwu personally led a large army to Wom, dozens of miles away from Pengcheng.

古文：彭城衆力虽多，军食不足，义恭欲弃彭城南归，计议弥日不定。
现代文：彭城兵力虽然很多，而军队粮食不足，刘义恭想放弃彭城南归，计议了一整天也没有拿定主意。
English: Although Pengcheng has a lot of troops, and the army is short of food, Liu Yigong wants to give up Pengcheng and return to the south, and has not made up his mind for a whole day.

古文：时历城衆少食多，安北中兵参军沈庆之议欲以车营爲函箱阵，精兵爲外翼，奉二王及妃媛直趋历城，分城兵配护军将军萧思话留守。
现代文：当时历城兵少粮多，安北中兵参军沈庆之的意见想以车营作为函箱阵，精兵作为外翼，保护二王和妃媛直奔历城，分出部分城中的兵配合护军将军萧思话留守。
English: At that time, Licheng soldiers had less food and more supplies, and Shen Qingzhi, a middle-ranking soldier from Anbei Province who joined the army, wanted to use the car battalion as a mailbox array, and the elite soldiers as an outer wing to protect the two kings and the princess. He went straight to Licheng, and separated some soldiers in the city to cooperate with the escort general Xiao Si, who stayed behind.

古文：太尉长史何勖不同，欲席卷奔郁洲，自海道还都。
现代文：太尉长史何勖不同意，他想全部出动奔向郁洲，从海道还京。
English: Captain-Major Shi He Yao disagreed. He wanted to send all of them to rush to Yuzhou and return to Beijing by sea.

古文：二议未决，更集群僚谋之。
现代文：两种意见没有决定下来，再次召集众官员谋划。
English: The two opinions were not decided, and the officials were called together again to plan.

古文：畅曰： 若历城、郁洲有可至之理，下官敢不高赞。
现代文：张畅说： 如果历城、郁洲有可以前往的道理，下官怎敢不高声赞扬？
English: Zhang Chang said: If Licheng and Yuzhou have a reason to go, how dare subordinates not praise them loudly?

古文：今城内乏食，百姓咸有走情，但以关扃严固，欲去莫从耳。
现代文：现在城内缺乏食物，百姓都有逃走的情绪，只应该关门上锁严密防守，想逃走的不要允许。
English: Now there is a lack of food in the city, and the people are in the mood to escape. All they have to do is close the doors, lock them tightly and guard them. Those who want to escape should not be allowed to do so.

古文：若一旦动脚，则各自散走，欲至所在，何由可得？
现代文：如果一旦动脚，则必然各自逃散，想到达目的地，怎么可能？
English: If once you set foot, you will inevitably flee separately, how is it possible to reach the destination?

古文：今军食虽寡，朝夕犹未窘罄，岂有舍万安之术，而就危亡之道。
现代文：现在军中粮食虽少，每天还没有断绝，怎么能丢弃万全之计，而去走危险的道路！
English: Now, although there is little food in the army, it has not been cut off every day, how can we discard the perfect plan and take the dangerous road!

古文：若此计必用，下官请以颈血汙君马迹。 
现代文：如果这个计策一定要采用，下官请求以脖子上的血污染您的马迹。 
English: If this tactic is to be employed, the sergeant requests that the blood around your neck be used to stain your horse's trail.

古文：孝武闻畅议，谓义恭曰： 张长史言不可异也。 
现代文：孝武帝听到了张畅的建议，对刘义恭说： 张长史的话不可违背。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu heard Zhang Chang's suggestion and said to Liu Yigong: Zhang Changshi's words must not be violated.

古文：义恭乃止。
现代文：刘义恭才停止了。
English: Only then did Liu Yigong stop.

古文：魏太武得至，仍登城南亚父冢，于戏马台立毡屋。
现代文：魏太武帝到达以后，便登上了城南的亚父冢，在戏马台上建起了毡屋。
English: After the arrival of Emperor Wei Taiwu, he ascended to the south of the city and built a carriage house on the circus stage.

古文：先是队主蒯应见执，其日晡时，太武遣送应至小巿门致意，求甘蔗及酒。
现代文：在这以前队中主将蒯应被俘虏，当天下午后半晌，太武帝遣送蒯应到小市门致意，求甘蔗和酒。
English: Prior to this, the main commander of the team, Yao Ying, was captured, and in the late afternoon of the same day, Emperor Taibu sent Yao Ying to Xiaochimen to pay his respects and ask for sugar cane and wine.

古文：孝武遣人送酒二器，甘蔗百挺；求骆驼。
现代文：孝武帝派人送酒二壶、甘蔗一百棵；求骆驼。
English: Emperor Xiaowu sent someone to bring two jars of wine and a hundred sugar cane; he asked for a camel.

古文：明日，太武又自上戏马台，复遣使至小巿门求与孝武相见，遣送骆驼并致杂物，使于南门受之。
现代文：第二天，太武帝自己登上戏马台，又派遣使者到了小市门请求与孝武帝相见，派人送上骆驼并且赠送一些杂物，让在南门接受。
English: The next day, Emperor Taivu himself boarded the circus ring, and sent an envoy to the small city gate to request a meeting with Emperor Xiaowu, sent someone to send a camel and give some miscellaneous items to be accepted at the south gate.

古文：畅于城上与魏尚书李孝伯语。
现代文：张畅在城墙上与魏朝的尚书李孝伯说话。
English: Zhang Chang talks to Wei Dynasty scholar Li Xiao Bo on the city wall.

古文：孝伯问： 君何姓？ 
现代文：李孝伯问： 您姓什么？ 
English: Li Xiaobo asked: What is your surname?

古文：答云： 姓张。 
现代文：回答说： 姓张。 
English: He replied: My surname is Zhang.

古文：孝伯曰： 张长史。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 张长史！ 
English: Li Xiaobo said: Zhang Changshi!

古文：畅曰： 君何得见识？ 
现代文：张畅说： 您怎么认识我？ 
English: Zhang Chang said: How do you know me?

古文：孝伯曰： 君声名远闻，足使我知。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 您的声名远扬，足以使我知道。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: Your fame is far enough to let me know.

古文：因言说久之。
现代文：于是谈了很长时间。
English: So we talked for a long time.

古文：城内有具思者尝在魏，义恭遣视，知是孝伯，乃开门进饷物。
现代文：城内有个叫具思的曾经在魏国呆过，刘义恭让他辨认，知道是李孝伯，于是便开门接受了馈赠的物品。
English: There was a thoughtful person in the city who had once stayed in Wei. Liu Yigong asked him to identify him, and he knew it was Li Xiaobo, so he opened the door and accepted the gift items.

古文：太武又求酒及甘橘，畅宣孝武旨，又致螺杯杂粽，南土所珍。
现代文：太武帝又求酒和甘橘，张畅宣读了孝武帝的意旨，又搞到了螺杯和杂粽，都是南方所珍视的。
English: Emperor Taibu also asked for wine and sweet oranges, Zhang Chang read out the will of Emperor Xiaowu, and got a screw cup and chowder, all of which are prized by the south.

古文：太武复令孝伯传语曰： 魏主有诏借博具。 
现代文：太武帝又让李孝伯传话说： 魏君主有诏令要借一副博具。 
English: Emperor Taowu also sent Li Xiao Bo a message saying: The Wei monarch has issued a decree to borrow a pair of tools.

古文：畅曰： 博具当爲申致，有诏之言，政可施于彼国，何得称之于此。 
现代文：张畅说： 博具我会给你们上报找来， 有诏令 的话，只能用在你们国家，怎么能在这里使用？ 
English: Zhang Chang said, "I'll report to you to find the imperial edict. If there is an imperial edict, it can only be used in your country. How can it be used here?"

古文：孝伯曰： 邻国之君，何爲不称诏于邻国之臣？ 
现代文：李孝伯说： 邻国的君，怎么不可以对邻国的臣称为诏令？ 
English: Li Xiaobo said, "How can you, the sovereign of a neighboring country, not issue an edict to the vassal of a neighboring country?"

古文：畅曰： 君之此称,尚不可闻于中华，况在诸王之贵，而独曰邻国之君邪。 
现代文：张畅说： 您用的这个称呼，尚且不可以用于华夏，何况是在高贵的诸王，怎能单说邻国的君主呢？ 
English: Zhang Chang said, "The title you used cannot be applied to China at all, let alone to the noble kings. How can it be applied to the monarchs of neighboring countries?

古文：孝伯曰： 魏主言太尉、镇军久阙南信，殊当忧邑，若欲遣信，当爲护送。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 魏主说太尉、镇军已经好久没见南方的来信，非常郁闷，如果想要寄信，一定会代为护送。 
English: Li Xiao Bo said: Wei Lord said that the captain and the town army have not seen the letter from the south for a long time, they are very depressed, if they want to send a letter, they will escort it.

古文：畅曰： 此方间路甚多，不复以此劳魏主。 
现代文：张畅说： 这边小路很多，不再以此烦劳魏主。 
English: Zhang Chang said: There are many small roads on this side, so don't bother the Lord with this.

古文：孝伯曰： 亦知有水路，似爲白贼所断。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 我也知道有水路，似乎被白贼所阻断。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: I also know that there is a waterway, which seems to have been blocked by white thieves.

古文：畅曰： 君着白衣，故称白贼邪？ 
现代文：张畅说： 是不是因为您穿着白衣服，所以称为白贼呢？ 
English: Zhang Chang said: Is it because you are wearing white clothes that you are called a white thief?

古文：孝伯大笑曰： 今之白贼亦不异黄巾、赤眉。 
现代文：李孝伯大笑着说： 今天的白贼无异于过去的黄巾、赤眉。 
English: Li Xiao Bo laughed loudly and said: Today's white thieves are no different from the yellow scarves and red eyebrows of the past.

古文：畅曰： 黄巾、赤眉似不在江南。 
现代文：张畅说： 黄巾、赤眉似乎并不在江南。 
English: Zhang Chang said: The yellow scarf and red eyebrows do not seem to be in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：孝伯曰： 亦不离青、徐。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 也没有离开青州、徐州一带。 
English: Li Xiaobo said, "I haven't left Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：畅曰： 今者青、徐实爲有贼，但非白贼耳。 
现代文：张畅说： 现在青州、徐州实在是有贼，但却不是白贼罢了。 
English: Zhang Chang said: Now Qingzhou and Xuzhou really have thieves, but they are not white thieves.

古文：又求博具，俄送与。
现代文：又求博具，不久就送给了他。
English: He also asked for a broom, which was soon given to him.

古文：太武又遣送毡及九种盐并胡豉，云 此诸盐各有所宜：白盐是魏主所食；黑者疗腹胀气懑，细刮取六铢，以酒服之；胡盐疗目痛；柔盐不用食，疗马脊创；赤盐、驳盐、臭盐、马齿盐四种，并不中食。
现代文：太武帝又派人送来了毡和九种盐以及胡豉，说 这几种盐各有特点：白盐是魏主吃的；黑盐治疗腹胀气闷，细细地刮取六铢，用酒服下；胡盐治疗眼疼；柔盐不作食用，治疗马脊背上的创伤；赤盐、驳盐、马齿盐四种，都不能食用。
English: Emperor Taowu also sent people to bring alfalfa and nine kinds of salt, as well as wolfberry, saying that each of these salts has its own characteristics: white salt is mainly eaten by Wei; black salt is used to treat bloating and stuffiness, scrape the six gills finely, and drink wine; wolfberry salt is used to treat eye pain; soft salt is not edible and is used to treat wounds on the horse's back; four kinds of red salt, barbed salt, and horse tooth salt are not edible.

古文：胡豉亦中噉。 
现代文：胡豉也很好吃。 
English: Cucumbers are also delicious.

古文：又求黄甘，并云 魏主致意太尉、安北，何不遣人来至我间？
现代文：又求黄甘，并且说 魏主致意太尉、安北将军，为何不派人到我们这边来？
English: He also asked Huang Gan, and said, "The Lord of Wei sends greetings to Lieutenant and General Anbei, why don't you send someone to our side?"

古文：彼此之情虽不可尽，要须见我小大，知我老少，观我爲人。
现代文：彼此的感情虽然不能完全相通，但是总要见见我是小是大，知道我是老是少，观看我为人如何。
English: Although the feelings of each other can not be completely connected, but always to see I am small is big, know I am always small, watch how I am.

古文：若诸佐不可遣，亦可使僮来。 
现代文：如果诸位官佐不能派遣，也可以派个小僮前来。 
English: If you can't send an aide, you can also send a servant.

古文：畅又宣旨答曰： 魏主形状才力，久爲来往所具，李尚书亲自衔命，不患彼此不尽。
现代文：张畅又宣读旨意并且回答说： 魏主的形貌才力，很久以来就由往来的使者描述过，李尚书亲自奉行使命，不怕彼此不能尽意。
English: Zhang Chang also read out the will and replied: The form and talent of the Wei Lord have long been described by the messengers who have come and gone. Li Shangshu personally carried out the mission and was not afraid of not being able to satisfy each other.

古文：故不复遣信。 
现代文：所以不再派遣信使。 
English: So no more messengers.

古文：又云： 魏主恨向所送马殊不称意，安北若须大马，当更送之；脱须蜀马，亦有佳者。 
现代文：又说： 魏主很遗憾先前所送的马很不称意，安北将军如果需要大马，一定再给送去；如果需要蜀地的马，也有很优良的。 
English: He also said, "Lord Wei is very sorry that the horses he sent earlier were very unsatisfactory. If General Anbei needs large horses, he will definitely send them again; if he needs horses from Shu, there are also very good ones.

古文：畅曰： 安北不乏良驷，送自彼意，非此所求。 
现代文：张畅说： 安北将军不缺乏良马，送马原是对方的意思，不是这边的请求。 
English: Zhang Chang said: General Anbei is not short of good horses. It was the other side's intention to send horses, not a request from this side.

古文：义恭又饷炬烛十挺，孝武亦致锦一匹。又曰： 知更须黄甘，诚非所吝，但会不足周彼一军。
现代文：刘义恭又赠送炬烛十支，孝武帝也送锦一疋，又说： 知道还需要黄甘，的确不是吝惜它，但是一定无法满足你们一军的需求。
English: Liu Yikong also presented ten torches and ten candles, and Emperor Xiaowu also presented a bowl of brocade. He also said, "Knowing that we still need yellow and sweet, I do not begrudge it, but it will certainly not meet the needs of your army."

古文：向给魏主，未应便乏，故不复重付。 
现代文：原先送给魏主的，不应该现在就缺乏了，所以不再重送。 
English: Originally sent to the Wei Lord, it should not be lacking now, so it will not be sent again.

古文：太武复求甘蔗安石榴，畅曰： 石榴出自邺下，亦当非彼所乏。 
现代文：太武帝又求甘蔗、安石榴，张畅说： 石榴出自邺下，也不是应当那边所缺乏的。 
English: Taiwu Emperor also asked for sugar cane and pomegranates, and Zhang Chang said: Pomegranates come from under the plow, and they should not be lacking there.

古文：孝伯曰： 君南土膏粱，何爲着屩？
现代文：李孝伯说： 您所在的南方十分富庶，为什么却穿草鞋？
English: Li Xiaobo said: The south where you are from is very affluent, so why do you wear straw sandals?

古文：君而着此，使将士云何？ 
现代文：连您都穿这，那将士们又该怎样了呢？ 
English: Even you wear this, so what about the generals?

古文：畅曰： 膏粱之言，诚爲多愧，但以不武，受命统军，戎阵之间，不容缓服。 
现代文：张畅说： 富庶的话，实在很惭愧，但是以我的少才，受命统率大军，战阵之间，不容许身着便服。 
English: Zhang Chang said, "I am really ashamed to say that I am a rich man, but with my young talent, I am ordered to lead a large army, and I am not allowed to wear civilian clothes between the battle lines.

古文：太武又遣就二王借箜篌、琵琶、筝、笛等器及棋子。
现代文：太武帝又派人向二王借箜篌、琵琶、筝、笛等乐器和棋子。
English: Emperor Taibu also sent people to borrow musical instruments such as gongs, lutes, kites, and flutes as well as chess pieces from the two kings.

古文：孝伯辞辩亦北土之美，畅随宜应答，吐属如流，音韵详雅，风仪华润。
现代文：李孝伯的辞辩也是北国的美才，张畅随机应答，谈吐如流，音韵清雅，风仪华润。
English: Li Xiao Bo's speech is also the talent of the north country, Zhang Chang randomly answers, talks fluently, has elegant intonation, and his demeanor is rich.

古文：孝伯及左右人并相视叹息。
现代文：李孝伯和左右的人一起相视叹息。
English: Li Xiaobo and the people around him looked at each other and sighed.

古文：时魏声云当出襄阳，故以畅爲南谯王义宣司空长史、南郡太守。
现代文：当时魏国声称要出襄阳，所以让张畅担任南谯王刘义宣司空长史、南郡太守。
English: At that time, Wei claimed to leave Xiangyang, so let Zhang Chang serve as the King of Nanxun, Liu Yixuan, the Air Marshal, and the Governor of Nan County.

古文：三十年，元凶弑逆，义宣发哀之日，即便举兵。
现代文：元嘉三十年，元凶劭杀死皇上举行叛逆，刘义宣发表讣告的时候，就立即起兵。
English: In the 30th year of Yuan Jia, Liu Yixuan immediately raised an army when Liu Yixuan's obituary was published.

古文：畅爲元佐，位居僚首，哀容俯仰，荫映当时。
现代文：张畅为元佐，位居众僚之首，哀容凄惋，感动众人。
English: Zhang Chang was a lieutenant colonel, ranking at the top of all his colleagues. His sad countenance was amazing and moved everyone.

古文：举哀毕，改服着黄裤褶，出射堂简人。
现代文：举行哀悼结束后，改换服装身穿黄裤褶，走出射堂选人。
English: After the mourning was over, he changed his clothes, put on yellow trousers, and walked out of the hall to select a candidate.

古文：音姿容止，莫不瞩目，见者皆愿爲尽命。
现代文：音容姿态，无不瞩目，见到的人都愿意为他尽命。
English: His voice, appearance and posture are all remarkable, and everyone who sees him is willing to do their best for him.

古文：事平，征爲吏部尚书，封夷道县侯。
现代文：事情平定后，征调为吏部尚书，封为夷道县侯。
English: After the matter was settled, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu and appointed as the governor of Yidu County.

古文：义宣既有异图，蔡超等以畅人望，劝义宣留之。
现代文：刘义宣后来有了异图，蔡超等人重视张畅的人望，劝刘义宣把他留下。
English: Liu Yixuan later had a different plan. Cai Chao and others paid attention to Zhang Chang's popularity and persuaded Liu Yixuan to keep him.

古文：乃解南蛮校尉以授畅，加冠军将军，领丞相长史。
现代文：于是便辞去了南蛮校尉职务，把它授给张畅，又加官为冠军将军，兼丞相长史。
English: As a result, he resigned from the post of captain of Nanban, and gave it to Zhang Chang, and was promoted to champion general, concurrently serving as chancellor of Changshi.

古文：畅遣门生荀僧宝下都，因顔竣陈义宣衅状。
现代文：张畅派仆人荀僧宝进京，通过颜竣说明刘义宣准备寻衅起事的情况。
English: Zhang Chang sent his servant Zangzang Bao to Beijing to explain through Yan Shun the situation of Liu Yixuan's preparations to provoke an uprising.

古文：僧宝有私货，停巴陵不时下。
现代文：荀僧宝带有私货，停在巴陵没有及时赶到。
English: Zangzang Bao was carrying personal belongings and did not arrive in time when he stopped in Baling.

古文：会义宣起兵，津路断绝，僧宝遂不得去。
现代文：正赶上刘义宣起兵，道路断绝，荀僧宝于是便无法离开。
English: As Liu Yixuan raised an army just in time, the road was cut off, and Xingxiang Bao was unable to leave.

古文：义宣将爲逆，遣嬖人翟灵宝告畅，畅陈必无此理，请以死保之。
现代文：刘义宣即将叛乱，派他所宠爱的人翟灵宝去告诉张畅，张畅说绝对没有这样的道理，表示以死来保卫皇上。
English: Liu Yixuan was about to rebel and sent his favorite person, Yuling Bao, to tell Zhang Chang. Zhang Chang said that there was absolutely no such reason and said that he would defend the emperor with his death.

古文：灵宝知畅不回，劝义宣杀以徇衆，赖丞相司马竺超人得免。
现代文：翟灵宝知道张畅不肯回心，劝刘义宣把他杀死示众，靠丞相司马竺超人说情才得脱免。
English: Yuling Bao knew that Zhang Chang refused to change his mind, so he persuaded Liu Yixuan to kill him and expose him to the public. It was only through the intercession of the prime minister, Sima Qianchao, that he was able to escape.

古文：进号抚军，别立军部，以收人望。
现代文：又晋升他的封号为抚军将军，另立军部，以收揽人望。
English: He was also promoted to the title of General of the Fuzhou Army, and a separate military department was set up to attract people's attention.

古文：畅虽署文檄，而饮酒常醉，不省文书。
现代文：张畅虽然签署了檄文，但是饮酒常醉，不认得文书。
English: Although Zhang Chang signed the document, he was often drunk and did not recognize the document.

古文：随义宣东下。
现代文：随刘义宣东下。
English: Follow Liu Yixuan to the east.

古文：梁山战败，于乱兵自归，爲军人所掠，衣服都尽。
现代文：在梁山战败，他从乱兵当中自己返回，被军人所抢劫，衣服都被剥光。
English: Defeated in Liangshan, he returned on his own from among the disorderly soldiers, was robbed by the soldiers, and his clothes were stripped.

古文：遇右将军王玄谟乘舆出营，畅已得败衣，因排玄谟上舆。
现代文：遇到右将军王玄谟乘车出营，张畅已经得到了破衣服，于是便挤上了王玄谟的车。
English: When he met Wang Xuanmu, the Right General, leaving the camp by car, Zhang Chang had already obtained the torn clothes, so he squeezed into Wang Xuanmu's car.

古文：玄谟意甚不悦，诸将请杀之，队主张世营救得免。
现代文：王玄谟心里很不高兴，诸将领请求把他杀掉，队主张兴世进行营救才使他得免一死。
English: Wang Xuanmu was very unhappy in his heart. The generals requested that he be killed, but the team insisted that Xingshi carry out the rescue to save him from death.

古文：执送都，下廷尉，寻见原。
现代文：捉住他押送进京，交付给廷尉，不久被宽恕。
English: He was arrested and escorted to Beijing, handed over to a court lieutenant, and was soon pardoned.

古文：起爲都官尚书，转侍中，代子淹领太子右卫率。
现代文：起用为都官尚书，转任侍中，代替儿子张淹兼任太子右卫率。
English: He was appointed as the official of the capital, Shosho, transferred to the position of chamberlain, and also served as the prince's right guard in place of his son, Zhang Ruan.

古文：孝武宴朝贤，畅亦在坐。
现代文：孝武帝宴请朝廷贤士，张畅也在座。
English: Emperor Xiaowu invited court sages to a banquet, and Zhang Chang was also present.

古文：何偃因醉曰： 张畅故是奇才，同义宣作贼，亦能无咎，非才何以致此？ 
现代文：何偃乘着酒醉说： 张畅果然是奇才，伙同刘义宣作贼，也能没罪，没有才怎么能到这种地位？ 
English: "Zhang Chang is indeed a prodigy. He and Liu Yi have confessed to being thieves, but they are not guilty. Without talent, how can they attain such a position?

古文：畅乃厉声曰： 太初之时，谁黄其合？ 
现代文：张畅严厉地说： 太初的时候，谁洗的黄？ 
English: Zhang Chang said sternly: In the beginning, who washed the yellow?

古文：帝曰： 何事相苦。 
现代文：孝武帝说： 为什么要互相挖苦？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu said, "Why should we make fun of each other?

古文：初，元凶时，偃父尚之爲元凶司空，义师至新林，门生皆逃，尚之父子与婢妾共洗黄合，故畅讥之。
现代文：起初，元凶劭作乱的时候，何偃的父亲何尚之是元凶劭的司空，朝廷的义军到了新林，仆役都逃走了，何尚之父子和婢妾一起擦洗黄，所以张畅讥讽他。
English: At first, when the culprits made a disturbance, He Xiang's father, He Shangzhi, was the culprit's second-in-command, the rebel army of the imperial court came to Xinlin, the servants all fled, and He Shangzhi's father and son scrubbed the yellow together with the concubine, so Zhang Can ridiculed him.

古文：孝建二年，出爲会稽太守。
现代文：孝建二年，他出京担任会稽太守。
English: In the second year of Xiao Jian, he went to Beijing to serve as the auditor-general.

古文：后与晋安王子勋同逆，军败见杀。
现代文：死后，谥号为宣。张畅喜爱弟弟的儿子张辑，临终遗命，与张辑合坟，谈论的人对此加以非议。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Xuan. Zhang Chang loved his brother's son, Zhang Ji, and on his deathbed he bequeathed his life to join Zhang Ji in the grave, which was criticized by those who talked about it.

古文：淹弟融。融字思光，弱冠有名。
现代文：张融字思光，二十岁有名。
English: Zhang Rongzizhiguang, famous at the age of 20.

古文：道士同郡陆修静以白鹭羽麈尾扇遗之，曰： 此既异物，以奉异人。 
现代文：道士同郡人陆修静把白鹭羽麈尾扇赠给他，说： 这既然是异物，就把它献给异人。 
English: Lu Xiujing, a Taoist priest and a resident of the county, presented him with an egret fan, saying, "Since this is a foreign object, give it to a stranger."

古文：解褐爲宋新安王子鸾行参军。
现代文：最初做官是担任宋朝新安王刘子鸾的行参军。
English: His first official position was as the procession leader of the Song Dynasty's Xin'an King Liu Ziqi.

古文：王母殷淑仪薨，后四月八日建斋并灌佛，僚佐儭者多至一万，少不减五千，融独注儭百钱。
现代文：新安王的母亲殷淑仪去世，后来四月八日建斋并且浴佛，僚佐布施钱财多的至一万，少的也不低于五千，只有张融的布施却是一百钱。
English: Xin'an Wang's mother, Yin Shu Yi, passed away. Later, on April 8th, he made a fast and took a Buddhist bath. His colleague, Zuo Bu, gave as much as ten thousand and as much as five thousand, but only Zhang Rong gave one hundred money.

古文：帝不悦曰： 融殊贫，当序以佳禄。 
现代文：皇帝不高兴地说： 张融太贫穷了，应当发给他优厚的俸禄。 
English: The emperor was displeased and said: Zhang Rong is too poor, he should be given a generous salary.

古文：出爲封溪令。
现代文：于是调他出京担任封溪令。
English: As a result, he was transferred to Beijing to serve as the Fongxi commander.

古文：从叔永出后渚送之曰： 似闻朝旨，汝寻当还。 
现代文：他的堂叔张永前往后渚去送他说： 好像听到朝廷旨意，你不久就会回来。 
English: His uncle Zhang Yong went to Houzhu to see him off and said, "It seems that you have heard the imperial edict and will be back soon."

古文：融曰： 不患不还，政恐还而复去。 
现代文：张融说： 不怕不能回来，正恐怕回来又会重新离去。 
English: Zhang Rong said, "I'm not afraid that I won't be able to come back, but I'm afraid that if I come back, I'll leave again."

古文：及行，路经嶂嶮，獠贼执融将杀食之。
现代文：等到出发，路经险要的高山，獠贼抓住了张融将要把他杀死吃掉。
English: When they set off, passing through the dangerous high mountains, the bandits caught Zhang Rong and were about to kill and eat him.

古文：融神色不动，方作洛生咏，贼异之而不害也。
现代文：张融神色不动，而作起了带有鼻浊音的吟咏，贼人感到奇异而不再加害他。
English: Zhang Rong's face did not move, but he made a snorting sound, and the thief felt strange and no longer harmed him.

古文：浮海至交州，于海中遇风，终无惧色，方咏曰： 干鱼自可还其本乡，肉脯复何爲者哉。 
现代文：他渡海到了交州，在海中遇到了风，他始终没有惧怕，咏叹道： 干鱼自然可以返回它的本乡，而肉脯还能怎么样呢？ 
English: He crossed the sea to Jiaozhou, encountered the wind in the sea, he has never been afraid, and sighed: The dried fish can naturally return to its hometown, but what about the meat?

古文：又作海赋，文辞诡激，独与衆异。
现代文：又作了《海赋》，文辞诡异激烈，独自与众不同。
English: He also wrote "Haifu," which is strangely intense and unique.

古文：后以示镇军将军顾觊之，觊之曰： 卿此赋实超玄虚，但恨不道盐耳。 
现代文：后来把它拿给镇军将军顾觊之，顾觊之说： 您的这篇赋实在飘逸玄虚，遗憾的只是没有写到盐。 
English: Later, he showed it to the general of the town army, Gu Xizhi. Gu Xizhi said, "This article of yours is full of truth, but unfortunately, it does not mention salt."

古文：融即求笔注曰： 漉沙构白，熬波出素，积雪中春，飞霜暑路。 
现代文：张融立即找来一支笔注上： 淘沙构成白色，熬波析出缟素，积雪堆在和煦的春天，飞霜落在盛暑的道路。 
English: Zhang Rong immediately found a pen to write: Taosha forms white, boiled waves precipitate helium, snow piles up in a warm spring, flying frost falls on a hot road.

古文：此四句后所足也。
现代文：这四句是以后补上的。
English: These four sentences were added later.

古文：觊之与融兄有恩好，觊之卒，融身负坟土。
现代文：顾觊之与张融的哥哥很要好，顾觊之死去后，张融自背坟土。
English: Gu Xizhi and Zhang Rong's brother were very close. After Gu Xizhi's death, Zhang Rong dug his own grave.

古文：在南与交趾太守卞展善。
现代文：在南方与交趾太守卞展交好。
English: In the south, he developed a friendship with Koji Taishou.

古文：展于岭南爲人所杀，融挺身奔赴。
现代文：卞展在岭南被人杀害，张融挺身前往赴丧。
English: Zou Zhan was killed in Lingnan, Zhang Rong volunteered to go to the funeral.

古文：举秀才，对策中第。
现代文：他被举为秀才，考试对策被录取。
English: He was hailed as a prodigy, and was admitted to the examination countermeasures.

古文：爲尚书殿中郎，不就，改爲仪曹郎。
现代文：任命为尚书殿中丞，没有就任，改为仪曹郎。
English: He was appointed as Vice-Commander of the Privy Council, but did not take up the post and was instead appointed as an assistant secretary.

古文：寻请假奔叔父丧，道中罚干钱敬道鞭杖五十，寄系延陵狱。
现代文：不久请假为叔父奔丧，途中责罚钱敬道，杖打五十，寄囚在延陵监狱中。
English: Soon he asked for leave to grieve for his uncle. On the way, he was punished with 50 strokes of the cane and sent to Yanling Prison.

古文：大明五年制，二品清官行僮干杖，不得出十。
现代文：大明五年敕令，政事清简的二品官员对僮仆杖打，不得超过十。
English: According to the imperial edict in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, officials of the second grade with simple political affairs should not beat their servants more than ten times.

古文：爲左丞孙缅所奏，免官。
现代文：他被左丞孙缅所检举，被免官。
English: He was reported by the office of the left-hand senator, Sun Myung, and dismissed.

古文：重定，摄祠部、仓部二曹。
现代文：恢复职位后，主管祠部、仓部二曹。
English: After the reinstatement of the post, the two supervisors in charge of the ancestral hall department and the warehouse department resigned.

古文：时领军刘勉战死，融以祠部议，上应哭勉，见从。
现代文：当时领军刘面力战死，张融根据祠部的建议，提出皇上应当哭刘面力，被采纳。
English: At that time, Liu Mianli, the leader of the army, was killed in battle. Zhang Rong proposed that the emperor should cry for Liu Mianli according to the suggestion of the ancestral hall, which was adopted.

古文：又俗人忌以正月开太仓，融议不宜拘束小忌。
现代文：又俗人忌讳在正月里打开太仓，张融提议不应该拘泥于小节。
English: It is also taboo for the laity to open a Taicang in the first month of the year. Zhang Rong suggested that they should not stick to the small section.

古文：寻兼掌正厨，见宰杀，回车径去，自表解职。
现代文：不久兼掌正厨，见到宰杀牲畜，回车而去，自己上表请求解职。
English: Soon he was also in charge of the main kitchen. When he saw the slaughter of livestock, he went back to his car and asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：再迁南阳王友。
现代文：又调转为南阳王友。
English: He was also transferred to Nanyang Wangyou.

古文：融父畅爲丞相长史，义宣事难，畅将爲王玄谟所杀，时玄谟子瞻爲南阳王长史，融啓求去官，不许。
现代文：张融的父亲张畅担任丞相长史，刘义宣起事失败，张畅将被王玄谟所杀，当时王玄谟的儿子王瞻做南阳王长史，张融上表请求辞官，没有批准。
English: Zhang Rong's father, Zhang Chang, served as chancellor of Nanyang. Liu Yixuan's uprising failed, and Zhang Chang would be killed by Wang Xuanmu. At that time, Wang Xuanmu's son, Wang Zhan, served as Nanyang's chancellor. Zhang Rong requested a resignation from the post, but it was not approved.

古文：融家贫欲禄，乃与从叔征北将军永书曰： 融昔幼学，早训家风，虽则不敏，率以成性。
现代文：张融家里贫困想得到俸禄，便给堂叔征北将军张永写信说： 我幼年入学，很早就受到家风的训教，虽然不够聪敏，但已形成习性。
English: Zhang Rong, whose family was poor, wanted to get a salary, so he wrote a letter to his uncle Zhang Yong, the general of the Northern Expedition, saying: I went to school when I was young, and I was trained by the family style very early. Although I am not smart enough, I have formed a habit.

古文：布衣韦带，弱年所安，箪食瓢饮，不觉不乐。
现代文：布衣服皮腰带，从小就很满足，一筐饭一瓢水，并不觉着不乐。
English: Cloth, clothes, leather belt, I have been very satisfied since childhood, a basket of rice and a bowl of water, and I do not feel unhappy.

古文：但世业清贫，人生多待，榛栗枣修，女贽既长，束帛禽鸟，男礼已大。
现代文：只是家业清贫，人生用项很多，女儿已经长大，需要榛栗枣肉作礼品，男孩已经成人，得用束帛禽鸟为馈赠。
English: However, the family business is poor and there are many necessities in life. The daughter has grown up and needs dates and chestnuts as a gift. The boy has grown up and needs a bunch of ostriches and birds as a gift.

古文：勉身就官，十年七仕，不欲代耕，何至此事。
现代文：从我勤勉做官，十年调动七次，不是为了取代耕田，怎会走到如此光景？
English: Since I diligently worked as an official, I was transferred seven times in ten years, not to replace farmland, how did it come to such a situation?

古文：昔求三吴一丞，虽属舛错，今闻南康缺守，愿得爲之。
现代文：从前求做三吴一名丞官，虽然属于错误，现在听说南康缺少太守，希望能够担当。
English: In the past, he asked to be a chancellor in Samgou, although it was a mistake, but now he heard that Namkang was short of an eunuch, and he hoped to be able to be in charge.

古文：融不知阶级，阶级亦可不知融，政以求丞不得，所以求郡，求郡不得，亦可复求丞。 
现代文：我不懂得门径，门径也可能不知道我，正因为求丞没有得到，所以现在来求郡，求郡得不到，也还可以再求丞。 
English: I do not understand the path, the path may not know me, just because I did not get the request, so now I come to ask the county, if I do not get the county, I can also ask the county again.

古文：又与吏部尚书王僧虔书曰： 融天地之逸人也，进不辨贵，退不知贱，实以家贫累积，孤寡伤心，八侄俱孤，二弟顿弱，岂能山海陋禄，申融情累。
现代文：又给吏部尚书王僧虔写信说： 张融是天地间的一个逸人，晋升不懂得高贵，贬退不知道低贱，实在是因为家贫多年，孤寡伤心，八个侄子都是孤儿，两个弟弟鲁钝虚弱，怎能过于看重俗陋的利禄，增加张融精神的负担。
English: He also wrote to Shangshu Wangxiang Qian, the head of the personnel department, saying: Zhang Rong is a rare person in the world. He does not know how to be promoted, and he does not know how to be demoted. It is really because his family has been poor for many years, and he is lonely and sad. His eight nephews are all orphans, and his two brothers are dull and weak. How can he attach too much importance to vulgar profits and increase the burden of Zhang Rong's spirit?

古文：阮籍爱东平土风，融亦欣晋平闲外。 
现代文：阮籍喜爱东平的土风，张融也欣赏晋平的槛外。 
English: Nguyn Quc likes the local style of Dongping, and Zhang Rong also appreciates the culture of Jinping.

古文：时议以融非御人才，竟不果。
现代文：当时的议论认为张融不是很好的管理人才，终于没有实现。
English: At that time, it was said that Zhang Rong was not a good management talent, but it did not come to fruition.

古文：辟齐太傅掾，稍迁中书郎，非其所好。
现代文：后来他被聘用为齐太傅的属官，逐步提升为中书郎，这是他所不喜欢的。
English: Later, he was hired as a subordinate officer of Qi Taifu and gradually promoted to the position of Zhongshuro, which he did not like.

古文：乞爲中散大夫，不许。
现代文：请求做中散大夫，没有准许。
English: The request was made to Dr. Zhongshan, but was not approved.

古文：张氏自敷以来，并以理音辞、修仪范爲事。
现代文：张氏自从张敷以来，都是以调理音辞、讲究仪范为特长。
English: Mr. Zhang has been specializing in toning vocabulary and paying attention to etiquette since he started playing the shakuhachi.

古文：至融风止诡越，坐常危膝，行则曳步，翘身仰首，意制甚多。
现代文：到了张融，风格诡奇，坐时常常膝部很高，行走则是拖着步子，翘着身子仰着头，创意很多。
English: When it comes to Zhang Rong, his style is strange. When he sits, his knees are often high, and when he walks, he shuffles his steps, tilts his body and tilts his head back. He is very creative.

古文：见者惊异，聚观成巿，而融了无惭色。
现代文：见到的人都很惊异，聚集在一起观看好像是集市，而张融丝毫没有惭愧的表情。
English: The people who saw it were surprised. They gathered to watch it as if it were a fair, but Zhang Rong didn't look ashamed at all.

古文：随例同行，常稽迟不进。
现代文：大家照例同行，他常常迟疑不进。
English: Everyone went along as usual, and he often hesitated.

古文：高帝素爱融，爲太尉时，与融款接。
现代文：高帝平素喜爱张融，做太尉时，与张融交情很好。
English: Emperor Gao loved Zhang Rong. When he was a captain, he had a good relationship with Zhang Rong.

古文：见融常笑曰： 此人不可无一，不可有二。 
现代文：见到张融常常笑着说： 这人不可以没一个，也不可以有两个。 
English: When seeing Zhang Rong, he would often smile and say, "This person cannot be without one, nor can he have two."

古文：即位后，手诏赐融衣曰： 见卿衣服粗故，诚乃素怀有本。
现代文：即位以后，传下手诏赐给张融衣服，说： 看到卿的衣服粗破，确是具有朴素的情怀。
English: After he ascended the throne, he issued an edict to give clothes to Zhang Rong, saying, "Seeing the coarseness of his clothes, he truly has a simple heart.

古文：交尔蓝缕，亦亏朝望。
现代文：与你这样衣衫褴褛地交往，也会有损于朝廷威望。
English: Interacting with you in such a shabby manner will also damage the prestige of the imperial court.

古文：今送一通故衣，意谓虽故，乃胜新也。
现代文：今天送你一件旧衣服，我想衣服虽然旧了，却胜过新的。
English: Today I'm giving you an old dress. I think old clothes are better than new ones.

古文：是吾所着，已令裁减，称卿之体；并履一量。 
现代文：是我所穿的，已经让人重新裁剪，适合卿的身材；并送鞋子一双。 
English: It's the one I wore, which has been re-tailored to fit Sir's frame; and a pair of shoes.

古文：高帝出太极殿西室，融入问讯，弥时方登阶。
现代文：高帝出宫到了太极殿的西室，张融进去问安，过了好久才登上台阶，就座以后，皇上说： 为什么这样慢呢？ 
English: Gao Di came out of the palace to the west room of the Taiji Hall. Zhang Rong went in to say hello. It took a long time to climb the steps. After taking his seat, the emperor said: "Why is it so slow?

古文：及就席，上曰： 何乃迟爲？ 对曰： 自地升天，理不得速。 时魏主至淮而退，帝问： 何意忽来忽去。 
现代文：回答说： 从地上升到天上，照理不应该很快。 当时魏朝君主率军进到淮河又退回去了，高帝问道： 他们为什么忽然来了，又忽然去了？ 
English: At that time, the Wei Dynasty monarch led the army into the Huai River and then retreated, Gao Di asked: Why did they suddenly come and suddenly go?

古文：未有答者，融时下坐，抗声曰： 以无道而来，见有道而去。 
现代文：没有人回答，张融当时坐在下位，高声说道： 由于无道而来，见到有道而去。 
English: No one answered. Zhang Rong was sitting in the lower seat at the time and said in a loud voice: "I came because there was no way, and I left when I saw there was a way."

古文：公卿咸以爲捷。
现代文：公卿都认为反应敏捷。
English: The Lord Advocate agrees that the response has been swift.

古文：融善草书，常自美其能。
现代文：张融擅长草书，常常自己称赞自己的能力。
English: Zhang Rong is good at cursive, and often praises himself for his ability.

古文：帝曰： 卿书殊有骨力，但恨无二王法。 
现代文：高帝说： 卿的书法颇有骨力，只是遗憾没有二王的法度。 
English: Gao Di said, "Your calligraphy is quite solid, but it is a pity that it does not have the rules of the two kings.

古文：答曰： 非恨臣无二王法，亦恨二王无臣法。 
现代文：他回答说： 不光是遗憾臣没有二王的法度，同时也遗憾二王没有臣的法度。 
English: He replied, "It is not only a pity that we do not have the laws of the two kings, but also a pity that the two kings do not have our laws."

古文：融假还乡，诣王俭别。俭立此地举袂不前，融亦举手呼俭曰： 歜曰 王前 。 
现代文：张融告假还乡，到了王俭那里，出来告别，王俭站在那里举着袖子不往前走，张融便举手招呼王俭道： 颜说： 大王前来！  
English: Zhang Rong returned to his hometown after vacation. When he arrived at Wang Jian's place, he came out to say goodbye. Wang Jian stood there holding up his sleeves and did not move forward. Zhang Rong then raised his hand to greet Wang Jian and said: Yan said: Great King, come!

古文：俭不得已趋就之。
现代文：王俭不得已只好走过去，到了他跟前。
English: Wang Jian had no choice but to walk over to him.

古文：融曰： 使融不爲慕势，而令君爲趍士，岂不善乎。 
现代文：张融说： 使张融不变成倾慕权势，而让您成为爱慕贤士，难道不是很好吗？ 
English: Zhang Rong said, "Wouldn't it be great if Zhang Rong didn't turn you into a power worshiper, but instead made you a sage worshiper?

古文：常叹云： 不恨我不见古人，所恨古人又不见我。 
现代文：他常常叹息说： 不遗憾我没见到古人，所遗憾的是古人又没见到我。 
English: He often sighed and said: I am not sorry that I did not see the ancients, but I am sorry that the ancients did not see me.

古文：融与吏部尚书何戢善，往诣戢，误通尚书刘澄。
现代文：张融与吏部尚书何戢要好，前往拜访何戢，却错误地去找了尚书刘澄。
English: Zhang Rong mistakenly went to visit He Zhen, but went to visit Liu Cheng instead.

古文：下车入门，乃曰： 非是。 
现代文：下车进门，便说： 不是。 
English: When he got out of the car and walked through the door, he said, "No."

古文：至户望澄，又曰： 非是。 
现代文：到了房门望见了刘澄，又说： 不是。 
English: When he got to the door, he saw Liu Cheng and said, "No."

古文：既造席视澄曰： 都自非是。 
现代文：已经到了座席前看着刘澄说： 完全不是。 
English: When he reached the seat, he looked at Liu Cheng and said, "Absolutely not."

古文：乃去。
现代文：于是走了。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：其爲异如此。
现代文：他就是这样奇特。
English: That's how weird he is.

古文：又爲长沙王镇军，竟陵王征北谘议，并领记室，司徒从事中郎。
现代文：他又做了长沙王镇军、竟陵王征北咨议，并且兼任记室、司徒从事中郎。
English: He also served as the adviser to the Changsha King's Town Army and the Jingling King's Northern Expedition, and also served as a secretary and a tutor.

古文：永明二年，总明观讲，敕朝臣集听。
现代文：永明二年，在总明观举行讲经，诏令朝臣一起去听。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, a sermon was held at the General Ming Court, and courtiers were ordered to attend.

古文：融扶入就榻，私索酒饮之。
现代文：张融进去后就坐在一个桌子旁边，私下里找来酒饮了起来。
English: After Zhang Rong entered, he sat down next to a table and secretly got some wine to drink.

古文：事毕，乃长叹曰： 呜呼！仲尼独何人哉。 
现代文：事情结束，他长叹说： 啊呀，仲尼算是什么样的人呢！ 
English: When it was over, he said with a long sigh, "Oh, what kind of person is Zhong Ni!

古文：爲御史中丞到撝所奏免官，寻复职。
现代文：被御史中丞到扌为举奏免官，不久又复职。
English: He was removed from his post by imperial edict and soon reinstated.

古文：融形貌短丑，精神清彻，王敬则见融革带宽，殆将至髀，谓曰： 革带太急。 
现代文：张融身形矮小，面貌丑陋，精神清明，王敬则见张融皮带很宽，快要到大腿，便对他说： 皮带束得太紧。 
English: Zhang Rong is short in stature, ugly in appearance, and has a clear spirit. Wang Jing saw that Zhang Rong's belt was very wide, almost reaching his thighs, and said to him: The belt is too tightly bound.

古文：融曰： 既非步吏，急带何爲？ 
现代文：张融说： 我又不是步行小吏，束紧皮带干什么？ 
English: Zhang Rong said, "I am not a petty officer on foot. Why do I have to tighten my belt?

古文：融假东出，武帝问融住在何处，答曰： 臣陆处无屋，舟居无水。 
现代文：张融请假东出，武帝问张融住在什么地方，回答说： 臣在陆地上住没有屋子，在船上住又没有水。 
English: When Zhang Rong asked for leave to go east, Emperor Wu asked Zhang Rong where he lived, and he replied: "A minister lives on land without a house, and on a ship without water.

古文：后上问其从兄绪，绪曰： 融近东出，未有居止，权牵小船于岸上住。 
现代文：后来皇上问他的堂兄张绪，张绪说： 张融最近东出，没有定址，权且牵了一条小船在岸上住。 
English: Later, the emperor asked his cousin Zhang Xu about it. Zhang Xu said: Zhang Rong recently went to the east, but there was no fixed address. He took a small boat to live on the shore.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：皇上大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：后使融接对北使李道固，就席，道固顾而言曰： 张融是宋彭城长史张畅子不？ 
现代文：后来派张融接待和应对北朝的使者李道固，入席就位后，李道固回过头去说： 张融是宋朝的彭城长史张畅的儿子吗？ 
English: Later, Li Daogu, the envoy of the Northern Dynasty, was sent by Zhang Rong to receive and deal with the Northern Dynasty. After taking his seat, Li Daogu turned around and said: Is Zhang Rong the son of the Song Dynasty's Pengcheng governor Zhang Chang?

古文：融嚬蹙久之，曰： 先君不幸，名达六夷。 
现代文：张融紧皱眉头，悲戚了好久，才说： 先父不幸，名字传播到六夷。 
English: Zhang Rong frowned tightly and grieved for a long time before saying: "Unfortunately, my father's name has spread to Liushi.

古文：豫章王大会宾僚，融食炙，始行毕，行炙人便去。
现代文：豫章王大会宾客臣僚，张融爱吃烧肉，刚刚布菜完毕，布菜的人就走了。
English: Yu Zhangwang's guests and ministers of the General Assembly, Zhang Rong likes to eat roasted meat. As soon as the dish was finished, the person who prepared the dish left.

古文：融欲求盐蒜，口终不言，方摇食指，半日乃息。
现代文：张融想要盐蒜，嘴上终于不说，一直摇动食指，半天才停下来。
English: Zhang Rong wanted salt and garlic. Finally, he didn't say it on his lips. He kept shaking his index finger and didn't stop for half a day.

古文：出入朝廷，皆拭目惊观之。
现代文：他出入朝廷，人们都拭目惊异地看着他。
English: He walked in and out of the court, and people looked at him with wide-eyed wonder.

古文：八年，朝臣贺衆瑞公事，融扶入拜起，复爲有司所奏，见原。
现代文：永明八年，朝臣一同庆贺几件吉祥的公事，张融进去拜了拜便起来了，又被有关部门所检举，结果被宽恕。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, the courtiers celebrated several auspicious public events together. Zhang Rong went in, bowed, and then stood up. He was also reported by the relevant departments, but was eventually pardoned.

古文：迁司徒兼右长史。
现代文：调任司徒兼右长史。
English: Transferred to the post of Jito and U no Choshi.

古文：竟陵张欣时爲诸暨令，坐罪当死，欣时父兴世讨宋南谯王义宣，官军欲杀融父畅，兴世以袍覆畅而坐之，以此得免。
现代文：竟陵人张欣时担任诸暨令，犯罪判死刑，张欣时的父亲张兴世讨伐宋朝的南谯王刘义宣，官军要杀张融的父亲张畅，张兴世用袍子盖住了张畅而坐在上面，因此得以免死。
English: When Zhang Xin, the person in charge of the tomb, was in charge of Zhuji, he was sentenced to death for the crime. Zhang Xin's father, Zhang Xingshi, fought against Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxi in the Song Dynasty. The government army wanted to kill Zhang Rong's father, Zhang Chang. Zhang Xingshi covered Zhang Chang with a robe and sat on top of him, so he was spared death.

古文：兴世卒，融着高履爲负土成坟。
现代文：张兴世死后，张融穿着高鞋给他背土堆成坟墓。
English: After the death of Zhang Xingshi, Zhang Rong wore high shoes to give him back soil to pile up into a grave.

古文：至是，融啓竟陵王子良乞代欣时死。
现代文：到了现在，张融上书竟陵王萧子良，请求代替张欣时去死。
English: Now, Zhang Rong has written to King Xiao Ziliang, requesting that he die in place of Zhang Xinji.

古文：子良答曰： 此乃是长史美事，恐朝有常典，不得如长史所怀。 
现代文：萧子良回答说： 这原是长史的一件美事，恐怕朝廷有固定的法律，不能像长史所想的那样做。 
English: Xiao Ziliang replied: This was originally a beautiful thing in the long history. I am afraid that the imperial court has fixed laws and cannot do as the long history thought.

古文：迁黄门郎，太子中庶子，司徒左长史。
现代文：调任黄门郎、太子中庶子、司徒左长史。
English: Transferred to Hwang Mun-ro, the Prince's younger illegitimate son, and Sido Sakanaga.

古文：融有孝义，忌月三旬不听乐，事嫂甚谨。
现代文：张融有孝顺的品德，父亲死亡的月份他三旬都不听音乐，侍奉嫂子十分恭谨。
English: Zhang Rong has the virtue of filial piety. In the month of his father's death, he did not listen to music for three months. He served his sister-in-law very respectfully.

古文：父畅临终谓诸子曰： 昔丞相事难，吾以不同将见杀，缘司马竺超人得活，尔等必报其子。 
现代文：他的父亲张畅临终时对几个儿子说： 从前丞相发难，我因为不肯随同将要被杀，因为司马竺超人的援救，得以活了下来，你们一定要报答他的儿子。 
English: His father, Zhang Chang, said to his sons on his deathbed: "Once upon a time, the prime minister was in trouble, and I was about to be killed because I wouldn't go with him, but because of Sima Yi's superhuman rescue, I survived. You must repay his son."

古文：后超人孙微冬月遭母丧居贫，融吊之，悉脱衣以爲赙，披牛被而反。
现代文：后来竺超人的孙子竺微在十一月遇到了母亲的丧事，在家居丧贫困，张融前往吊慰，完全脱下了自己的衣服作为资助，披上牛被回了家。
English: Later, Zhang Rong's grandson, Yu Wei, met his mother's funeral in November. He was impoverished at home, Zhang Rong went to offer condolences, completely took off his clothes as a subsidy, and was returned home wearing a cow.

古文：常以兄事微。
现代文：他总是把竺微当成哥哥来对待。
English: He always treated Gong Wei as his elder brother.

古文：豫章王嶷、竟陵王子良薨，自以身经佐吏，哭辄尽恸。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷、竟陵王萧子良去世，自己因为曾经身为辅佐官，哭得极为伤心。
English: Because he had been an aide-de-camp, he wept bitterly at the death of Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi and even the tomb king Xiao Ziliang.

古文：建武四年，病卒，遗令建白旐无旒，不设祭，令人捉麈尾登屋复魂。
现代文：建武四年，病死，遗令树立白色的魂幡，不用旒作装饰，不设祭品，让人拿麈尾进屋复魂。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu's reign, after his death from illness, he left instructions to erect a white soul banner. There was no need to make decorations with doves, no offerings were set up, and people were allowed to take doves into the house to recuperate their souls.

古文：曰： 吾生平所善，自当陵云一笑。
现代文：他说： 我生平所喜欢的，自然当是凌云一笑。
English: He said: What I like in my life, naturally, is Lingyun.

古文：三千买棺，无制新衾。
现代文：用三千钱买棺材，不要缝制新的被褥。
English: Buy a coffin for three thousand dollars, don't sew new bedding.

古文：左手执孝经、老子，右手执小品法华经。
现代文：左手拿着《孝经》、《老子》，右手拿着小品《法华经》。
English: In his left hand he is holding the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Laozi," and in his right hand he is holding a small piece of the "Law and Culture Sutra."

古文：妾二人哀事毕，各遣还家。 
现代文：两个妾在丧事结束后，让她们各自回家。 
English: After the funeral, the two concubines were allowed to go home separately.

古文：曰： 吾生平之风调，何至使妇人行哭失声，不须暂停闺合。 
现代文：又说： 我生平的风调，怎么至于让妇人失声痛哭，没有必要在闺阁中暂时停留。 
English: He also said, "The tone of my life is such that it is not necessary to stay in the boudoir for a while to make a woman cry.

古文：融玄义无师法，而神解过人，高谈鲜能抗拒。
现代文：张融在玄学方面没有师法，而精神的领悟超过常人，高谈起来没有人能够相比。
English: Zhang Rong did not have any teacher or method in metaphysics, but his spiritual understanding exceeded that of ordinary people, and no one could compare to him in high-level speech.

古文：永明中遇疾，爲门律，自序云： 吾文章之体，多爲世人所惊，汝可师耳以心，不可使耳爲心师也。
现代文：永明年间遇到疾病，写成了《门律》，《自序》中说： 我的文章的体式，大多为世上的人所惊奇，你可以让心做耳朵的老师，不可以让耳朵做心的老师。
English: Yong Ye met with an illness in the middle of the year and wrote "Door Law," saying in "Self-order": The style of my article is mostly surprising to people in the world. You can let the heart be the teacher of the ear, but you can't let the ear be the teacher of the heart.

古文：夫文岂有常体，但以有体爲常，政当有其体。
现代文：文章难道有常规的体式吗，但却以有体式为常规，正是应该有它的体式。
English: Does the article have a conventional style, but it is conventional to have a style, and it should have its style.

古文：丈夫当删诗、书，制礼乐，何至因循寄人篱下。 
现代文：大丈夫应当删《诗》、《书》，制礼乐，怎么能落到寄人篱下呢？ 
English: It's okay to delete "poetry," "book" and "ritual music," but how can you fall under the fence?

古文：临卒，又戒其子曰： 手泽存焉，父书不读，况父音情，婉在其韵。
现代文：临死的时候，又告诫他的儿子说： 我的手稿都存放着，通常认为父亲的书不要阅读，况且父亲的音容，都体现在音韵当中。
English: On his deathbed, he warned his son: "All my manuscripts are in storage. It is generally believed that one should not read one's father's books, and moreover, one's father's tone is reflected in the music.

古文：吾意不然，别遗尔旨。
现代文：我的看法不同，另外告诉你们一种宗旨。
English: I don't see it that way, and I'll tell you why.

古文：吾文体英变，变而屡奇，岂吾天挺，盖不隤家声。
现代文：我的文体富于变化，变而屡屡显得奇特，哪里是我的天才出众，但也算是不破坏家族名声。
English: My style is changeable, and often strange, and my genius is prodigious, but not to the detriment of the family name.

古文：汝可号哭而看之。 
现代文：你可以号哭着来看它。 
English: You can cry your eyes out looking at it.

古文：答曰： 本朝危乱，四海横流，既不能爲比干之死，实未忍爲微子之去，是以至晚。 
现代文：张融的文集数十卷流行在世上，自己命名他的文集叫作《玉海》。司徒褚彦回询问其中的缘故，张融说： 玉是用来比喻仁德，海是推崇皇上的善行。 
English: Dozens of volumes of Zhang Rong's anthology are popular in the world, and he himself named his anthology "Jade Sea." When asked why, Zhang Rong said: Jade is used as a metaphor for benevolence, and the sea is used to promote the emperor's good deeds.

古文：颖胄深以爲善，即用爲相府谘议。后位御史中丞。
现代文：张氏家族的人物前有张敷、张演、张镜、张畅，后有张充、张融、张卷、张稷。
English: The characters of the Zhang family are preceded by Zhang Jiki, Zhang Xuan, Zhang Jing, Zhang Chang, and followed by Zhang Chong, Zhang Rong, Zhang Meng, and Zhang Xuan.

古文：融与东海徐文伯兄弟厚。
现代文：张融与东海人徐文伯友情深厚。
English: Zhang Rong and the East China Sea man Xu Wenbo have a deep friendship.

古文：文伯字德秀，濮阳太守熙曾孙也。
现代文：文伯字德秀，是濮阳太守徐熙的孙子。
English: Wenbo, also known as Dexiu, was the grandson of Xu Xi, the governor of Shenyang.

古文：熙好黄、老，隐于秦望山，有道士过求饮，留一瓠卢瓜与之，曰： 君子孙宜以道术救世，当得二千石。 
现代文：徐熙爱好黄、老，隐居在秦望山。有个道士路过找水喝，留下一个葫芦给他，说： 您的子孙应该以道术救世，将得到二千石的官位。 
English: Xu Xi loved Huang and Lao, and lived in seclusion in Qinwang Mountain. A Taoist priest passed by looking for water to drink and left a gourd for him, saying, "Your descendants should use Taoism to save the world, and will receive an official rank of 2,000 koku."

古文：熙开之，乃扁鹊镜经一卷，因精心学之，遂名震海内。
现代文：徐熙把葫芦打开，乃是《扁鹊镜经》一卷，便精心学习，于是名震海内。
English: When Xu Xi opened the gourd, it was a volume of the Lotus Sutra, and he studied it carefully.

古文：生子秋夫，弥工其术，仕至射阳令。
现代文：他生了个儿子叫秋夫，更加精通此术，官至射阳令。
English: He gave birth to a son named Qiu Fu, who was more proficient in this art, and rose to the rank of Shaoyangling.

古文：尝夜有鬼呻吟，声甚凄怆，秋夫问何须，答言姓某，家在东阳，患腰痛死。
现代文：曾经夜里有鬼呻吟，声音十分凄怆，秋夫问他需要什么，鬼回答自己姓某，家在东阳，患腰疼病而死。
English: Once upon a time, there was a ghost moaning in the night, its voice was very mournful. The chief asked him what he needed, and the ghost answered that his family name was so-and-so, that his home was in Dongyang, and that he suffered from back pain and died.

古文：虽爲鬼痛犹难忍，请疗之。
现代文：虽然做了鬼，还是疼痛难忍，请他给自己治疗。
English: Although he had performed a ghost, the pain was still unbearable, so he asked him to treat himself.

古文：秋夫曰： 云何厝法？ 
现代文：秋夫说： 用什么方法治疗？ 
English: Akio said: What is the treatment?

古文：鬼请爲刍人,案孔穴针之,秋夫如言，爲灸四处，又针肩井三处，设祭埋之。
现代文：鬼请求自己变作草人，按照穴位进行针灸。秋夫照他说的去办，给他灸了四处，又扎了肩井三处，设了祭礼，把他埋了。
English: The ghost asked to be turned into a grasshopper, and acupuncture was carried out according to the acupuncture points. Qiu Fu did as he said, and gave him moxibustion in four places, and three shoulder wells, set up a festival, and buried him.

古文：明日见一人谢恩，忽然不见。
现代文：第二天见有一个人前来谢恩，忽然就不见了。
English: The next day, she saw a man coming to thank her, but he suddenly disappeared.

古文：当世伏其通灵。
现代文：当时世上的人都很佩服他能通灵界。
English: At that time, people all over the world admired his ability to channel the spirit world.

古文：秋夫生道度、叔向，皆能精其业。
现代文：秋夫生了道度、叔向，都能精通这一行业。
English: Akifu gave birth to Doudou and Shu Xiang, both of whom are proficient in this industry.

古文：道度有脚疾不能行，宋文帝令乘小舆入殿，爲诸皇子疗疾，无不绝验。
现代文：道度患有脚病，不能走路，宋文帝让他乘小轿入殿，为诸皇子治病，无不灵验。
English: Doudou suffered from a foot disease and was unable to walk. Emperor Song allowed him to ride into the palace in a small sedan to treat the illness of the princes, which was a great success.

古文：位兰陵太守。
现代文：位至兰陵太守。
English: He was promoted to Lanling Taishu.

古文：宋文帝云： 天下有五绝，而皆出钱唐。 
现代文：宋文帝说： 天下有五绝，都出在钱塘。 
English: Song Wendi said: There are five great rivers in the world, and all of them come out of Qiantang.

古文：谓杜道鞠弹棋，范悦诗，褚欣远模书，褚胤围棋，徐道度疗疾也。
现代文：所指的是杜道鞠弹棋，范悦诗，褚新远模书，褚胤围棋，徐道度治病。
English: It refers to Du Daoju playing chess, Fan Yue's poetry, Zou Xinyuan's model book, Zou Yan's Go, Xu Daodu's treatment of disease.

古文：道度生文伯，叔向生嗣伯。
现代文：徐道度生了徐文伯，徐叔向生了徐伯嗣。
English: Xu Daoduo gave birth to Xu Wenbo, and Xu Xiuyong gave birth to Xu Boji.

古文：文伯亦精其业，兼有学行，倜傥不屈意于公卿，不以医自业。
现代文：文伯也精于此业，兼有学问，性格倜傥，不屈从于公卿高官，不以医疗为自己的职业。
English: Wenbo was also good at this profession. He had both learning and a shy personality. He did not succumb to nobles and high-ranking officials, and did not take medicine as his profession.

古文：融谓文伯、嗣伯曰： 昔王微、嵇叔夜并学而不能，殷仲堪之徒故所不论。
现代文：张融对徐文伯、徐嗣伯说： 从前王微、嵇叔夜都曾持有理论而不能操作，殷仲堪之徒不必谈论。
English: Zhang Rong said to Xu Wenbo and Xu Zhibo: In the past, Wang Wei and Zou Shuyai both had theories and could not operate, so there was no need to talk about it.

古文：得之者由神明洞彻，然后可至，故非吾徒所及。
现代文：得其微妙者是由于神明洞澈，然后才可以达到，所以不是我们这些人能做到的。
English: The subtlety is due to the divine clarity, and then it can be achieved, so it is not something that we can do.

古文：且褚侍中澄富贵亦能救人疾，卿此更成不达。 
现代文：而且褚澄侍中身份富贵，也能救治人们的疾病，你们现在这样就更不能发达了。 
English: Moreover, the status of rich and noble among the eunuchs can also cure people's diseases, and you will not be able to develop now.

古文：答曰： 唯达者知此可崇，不达者多以爲深累，既鄙之何能不耻之。 
现代文：徐文伯回答说： 只有发达者知道此事可以推崇，不达者大多把它当成是个很大的累赘，既然鄙视它，怎会不以此为耻呢？ 
English: Xu Wenbo replied: Only the developed people know that this matter can be respected, and most of the non-achievers regard it as a great burden. Since they despise it, how can they not be ashamed of it?

古文：文伯爲效与嗣伯相埒。
现代文：徐文伯的疗效和徐嗣伯相近。
English: The curative effect of Xu Wenbo is similar to that of Xu Zhibo.

古文：宋孝武路太后病，衆医不识。
现代文：宋孝武路太后生了病，众医官都看不透。
English: The empress dowager Song Xiaowu fell ill, and all the doctors couldn't figure it out.

古文：文伯诊之曰： 此石博小肠耳。 
现代文：徐文伯诊断说： 这不过就是小肠结石。 
English: Xu Wenbo diagnosed: This is nothing but a small bowel stone.

古文：乃爲水剂消石汤，病即愈。
现代文：于是给她煮了水剂消石汤，病便好了。
English: So they boiled water and de-rocking soup for her, and she got better.

古文：除鄱阳王常侍，遗以千金，旬日恩意隆重。
现代文：任命他担任鄱阳王常侍，赠给千金，十天后恩意更加隆重。
English: He was appointed as the attendant of the King of Shenyang and given a large sum of money. Ten days later, the gratitude was even more grand.

古文：宋明帝宫人患腰痛牵心，每至辄气欲绝，衆医以爲肉症。
现代文：宋明帝的宫人患腰疼牵心，每当发作，便疼得几乎断气，众医官认为是肉症。
English: Emperor Song Ming's concubine suffered from back pain. Whenever she had an attack, the pain was so severe that she almost passed out. The doctors thought it was a flesh disease.

古文：文伯曰： 此发症。 
现代文：徐文伯说： 这是发症。 
English: Xu Wenbo said: This is the onset.

古文：以油投之，即吐得物如发。
现代文：用油来投，便吐出了一种像头发的东西。
English: He poured oil on it, and out came something that looked like hair.

古文：稍引之长三尺，头已成蛇能动，挂门上适尽一发而已，病都差。
现代文：慢慢抽引，长三尺，头已经成蛇形，能摆动，挂在门上，水滴尽后只是一绺头发而已，病即除去。
English: Slowly draw, three feet long, the head has become a snake, can swing, hanging on the door, after the water drips, it is just a bunch of hair, the disease is removed.

古文：宋后废帝出乐游苑门，逢一妇人有娠，帝亦善诊，诊之曰： 此腹是女也。 
现代文：宋后废帝走出乐游苑大门，遇到一个怀孕的妇女，废帝也善于诊病，便给她诊断说： 这肚子里是个女孩。 
English: After the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wudi walked out of the gate of Le Youyuan and met a pregnant woman. Emperor Wudi was also good at diagnosing diseases, so he gave her a diagnosis: There is a girl in this belly.

古文：问文伯，曰： 腹有两子，一男一女，男左边，青黑，形小于女。 
现代文：问徐文伯，徐文伯说： 腹中有两个孩子，一男一女，男在左边，青黑色，形体小于女孩。 
English: Asked Xu Wenbo, Xu Wenbo said: There are two children in the belly, a man and a woman, the man is on the left, blue-black, smaller than the girl.

古文：帝性急，便欲使剖。
现代文：废帝性急，便想让人给她剖开来看。
English: Desperate, she wants someone to cut it open for her.

古文：文伯恻然曰： 若刀斧恐其变异，请针之立落。 
现代文：徐文伯悲伤地说： 如果用了刀斧，恐怕会有变异，请让我给她扎上两针，立刻就会坠落。 
English: Xu Wenbo said sadly, "If you use a knife and an axe, I'm afraid there will be a mutation. Please let me put two needles in her, and she will fall immediately."

古文：便写足太阴，补手阳明，胎便应针而落。
现代文：便在脚上的太阴穴扎了泻针，在手上的阳明穴扎了补针，胎儿便应针而落。
English: A laxative needle was then inserted into the yin-yang hole on the foot, and a filling needle was inserted into the yang-ming hole on the hand, and the fetus fell out in response to the needle.

古文：两儿相续出，如其言。
现代文：两个婴儿相继出来，果然和他说的一样。
English: Two babies came out one after the other, and they did exactly as he said.

古文：子雄亦传家业，尤工诊察，位奉朝请。
现代文：儿子徐雄也传承了他的家业，尤其善于诊察。位居奉朝请。
English: His son Xu Xiong also inherited his family business, and is particularly good at diagnosis.

古文：能清言，多爲贵游所善。
现代文：能清谈，多为贵官所交好。
English: If you can talk clearly, you are likely to be befriended by dignitaries.

古文：事母孝谨，母终，毁瘠几至自灭。
现代文：侍奉母亲十分孝敬，母亲去世，哀伤得自己差点死去。
English: He served his mother with great filial piety. When his mother died, he was so grief-stricken that he almost died.

古文：俄而兄亡，扶杖临丧，抚膺一恸，遂以哀卒。
现代文：不久兄长亡故，他扶着灵杖哭丧，抚着胸口一声恸哭，悲哀而死。
English: Soon after the death of his elder brother, he held his cane and wept, stroked his chest and cried, and died sadly.

