古文：殷契，母曰简狄，有娀氏之女，为帝喾次妃。
现代文：殷契的母亲名叫简狄，她是有娀氏的女儿，是帝喾的第二个妃子。
English: Yin Qi's mother's name was Jian Di. She was the daughter of a noble family and the second concubine of Emperor Qianlong.

古文：三人行浴，见玄鸟堕其卵，简狄取吞之，因孕生契。
现代文：简狄等三个人去到河里去洗澡，看见玄鸟掉下一颗蛋，简狄就捡起来吞了下去，因而怀孕，生下了契。
English: Jane Dee and three others went to the river to bathe, and when they saw the blackbird drop an egg, Jane Dee picked it up and swallowed it. As a result, she became pregnant and gave birth to Che.

古文：契长而佐禹治水有功。
现代文：契长大后，辅佐禹治水有功。
English: After Qi grew up, he assisted Yu in controlling water.

古文：帝舜乃命契曰： 百姓不亲，五品不训，汝为司徒而敬敷五教，五教在宽。 
现代文：舜帝于是任命契说： 现在老百姓们不亲睦，五伦关系不顺，你去担任司徒，要恭谨地推行五伦教育，要以宽厚为根本。 
English: Emperor Qian then appointed Jie and said, "Nowadays, the common people are not amicable, and the relationship between the five elements is not smooth. You will go to serve as a scholar, and you must respectfully promote the education of the five elements, and you must be generous.

古文：封于商，赐姓子氏。
现代文：契被封在商地，赐姓子氏。
English: The deed was sealed at the place of business and he was given the surname Zi.

古文：契兴於唐、虞、大禹之际，功业著於百姓，百姓以平。
现代文：契兴起于唐尧、虞舜、夏禹的时代，在百姓们心中功业昭著，百姓们因此生活安定。
English: Qi arose in the era of Tang Xuan, Yu Xuan, and Xia Yu, and his achievements are well known in the hearts of the people, so the people's lives are stable.

古文：契卒，子昭明立。
现代文：契去世后，他的儿子昭明继位。
English: After Che's death, his son, Shomei, succeeded him.

古文：昭明卒，子相土立。
现代文：昭明去世后，他的儿子相土继位。
English: After the death of Shomei, his son Sodato succeeded to the throne.

古文：相土卒，子昌若立。
现代文：相土去世后，他的儿子昌若继位。
English: After Sodato's death, his son Masanaga succeeded to the throne.

古文：昌若卒，子曹圉立。
现代文：昌若去世后，他的儿子曹圉继位。
English: After the death of Chang Ruo, his son Cao Pi succeeded to the throne.

古文：曹圉卒，子冥立。
现代文：曹圉去世后，他的儿子冥继位。
English: After Cao Pi's death, his son, Hideto, succeeded him.

古文：冥卒，子振立。
现代文：冥去世后，他的儿子振继位。
English: After his death, his son Zhen succeeded him.

古文：振卒，子微立。
现代文：振去世后，他的儿子微继位。
English: After Zhen's death, his son Weizong succeeded to the throne.

古文：微卒，子报丁立。
现代文：微去世后，他的儿子报丁继位。
English: After Wei's death, his son Houting succeeded him.

古文：报丁卒，子报乙立。
现代文：报丁去世后，他的儿子报乙继位。
English: After Houdin's death, his son claimed the second place.

古文：报乙卒，子报丙立。
现代文：报乙去世后，儿子报丙继位。
English: After the death of the second, the son of the third succeeded to the throne.

古文：报丙卒，子主壬立。
现代文：报丙去世后，他的儿子主壬继位。
English: After the death of Emperor Taiping, his son Emperor Ren succeeded to the throne.

古文：主壬卒，子主癸立。
现代文：主壬去世后，他的儿子主癸继位。
English: After the death of Lord Jin, his son Lord Yeongjo succeeded to the throne.

古文：主癸卒，子天乙立，是为成汤。
现代文：主癸去世后，他的儿子天乙继位。这就是成汤。
English: After the death of the chief priest, his son Tian Yi succeeded to the throne. This is Cheng Tang.

古文：成汤，自契至汤八迁。
现代文：成汤，从契到汤，曾经八次迁都。
English: Chengdu, from Chi to Tang, has moved the capital eight times.

古文：汤始居亳，从先王居，作帝诰。
现代文：成汤为此写了《帝诰》一书，向帝喾报告迁都的情况。
English: For this reason, Cheng Tang wrote the book "Imperial Reshuffle" and reported the situation of the relocation of the capital to the emperor.

古文：汤征诸侯。
现代文：成汤在夏朝为方伯，有权征讨诸侯。
English: Cheng Tang was a prefect in the Xia Dynasty and had the right to recruit princes.

古文：葛伯不祀，汤始伐之。
现代文：葛伯不祭祀鬼神，成汤首先征讨他。
English: Ge Bo does not worship ghosts and deities. Cheng Tang is the first to enlist him.

古文：汤曰： 予有言：人视水见形，视民知治不。 伊尹曰： 明哉！
现代文：成汤说： 我说过这样的话：人从水中可以看到自己的样子，从百姓精神面貌可以知道国家治理状况。 伊尹说： 英明啊！
English: Cheng Tang said: I have said this: people can see their own appearance from the water, and can know the state of national governance from the people's spiritual outlook. Yi Yin said: Wise!

古文：言能听，道乃进。
现代文：善言听得进去，道德才会进步。
English: If good words are heard, morals will improve.

古文：君国子民，为善者皆在王官。
现代文：治理国家，抚育万民，凡是有德行做好事的人都要任用为朝廷之官。努力吧，努力吧！ 
English: To govern the country and educate the people, anyone who is virtuous and does good deeds should be appointed as an official of the imperial court. Work hard, work hard!

古文：勉哉，勉哉！ 汤曰： 汝不能敬命，予大罚殛之，无有攸赦。 
现代文：成汤对葛伯说： 你们不能敬顺天命，我就要重重地惩罚你们，概不宽赦。 
English: Cheng Tang said to Ge Bo, "If you can't obey the Mandate of Heaven, I will punish you severely and show no mercy.

古文：作汤征。伊尹名阿衡。
现代文：于是写下《汤征》，记载了征葛的情况。伊尹名叫阿衡。
English: Therefore, he wrote "Tang Zheng" (汤征) and recorded the situation of Zheng Ge. Yi Yin's name was A Heng.

古文：阿衡欲见汤而无由，乃为有莘氏媵臣，负鼎俎，以滋味说汤，致于王道。
现代文：阿衡想求见成汤而没有门路，于是就去给有莘氏做随嫁的臣仆，他背着饭锅砧板，借着谈论烹调滋味的机会向成汤进言，劝说他实行王道。
English: A Heng wanted to marry Cheng Tang, but there was no way, so he went to serve as a retainer to the married couple. He carried a cooking pot and cutting board on his back, and used the opportunity to talk about the taste of cooking to persuade Cheng Tang to practice the royal way.

古文：或曰，伊尹处士，汤使人聘迎之，五反然後肯往从汤，言素王及九主之事。
现代文：也有人说，伊尹本是个有才德而不肯做官的隐士，成汤曾派人去聘请他，前后去了五趟，他才答应前来跟随汤，向成汤讲述远古帝王及九类君主的所做的事。
English: It is also said that Yi Yin was a virtuous hermit who did not want to be an official. Cheng Tang sent someone to recruit him, and he went back and forth five times before he agreed to come and follow Tang and tell Cheng Tang about the deeds of ancient emperors and the nine types of monarchs.

古文：汤举任以国政。
现代文：成汤于是就任用他管理国政。
English: Cheng Tang then appointed him to manage state affairs.

古文：伊尹去汤适夏。既丑有夏，复归于亳。
现代文：伊尹曾经离开商汤到夏都那里，因为看到了夏朝无道的丑恶，所以又回到了商都亳。
English: Yi Yin once left Shangtang to go to Xia Du, but because he saw the pathless ugliness of the Xia Dynasty, he returned to Shangtang.

古文：入自北门，遇女鸠、女房，作女鸠女房。
现代文：他从北门进城时，遇见了商汤的贤臣女鸠和女房，于是写下《女鸠》、《女房》，述说他离开夏朝重回商都时的心情。
English: When he entered the city from the north gate, he met the daughter and wife of the wise men of Shang Tang, so he wrote "Daughter" and "Wife," describing his mood when he left the Summer Palace and returned to the commercial capital.

古文：汤出，见野张网四面，祝曰： 自天下四方皆入吾网。 
现代文：成汤外出，看见野外有人四面张着罗网，张网的人祝祷说： 愿从天上来的，从地下来的，从四方来的，都进入我的罗网！ 
English: And it came to pass, when he was gone out into the field, that he saw a man spread a net upon the land round about: and he that spread it prayed, and said, Oh that they which come from heaven, and from the earth, and from every quarter, might enter into my net!

古文：汤曰： 嘻，尽之矣！ 
现代文：成汤听了说： 嗳，这样就把禽兽全部捕尽了！ 
English: Cheng Tang listened and said, "Wow, I've caught all the animals this way!

古文：乃去其三面，祝曰： 欲左，左。欲右，右。
现代文：于是叫那人撤去三面罗网，让张网的人祝祷说： 想往左边走的就往左边走，想向右边逃的就向右边逃。
English: And he commanded the man that had the net to let down his net on the three sides: and the man that had the net made a prayer, saying, He that will go to the left, let him go to the left; and he that will go to the right, let him go to the right.

古文：不用命，乃入吾网。 
现代文：不听从命令的，就进我的罗网吧。 
English: If you disobey my orders, you'll be caught in my net.

古文：诸侯闻之，曰： 汤德至矣，及禽兽。 
现代文：诸侯听到这件事，都说： 汤真是仁德到极点了，就连禽兽都受到了他的恩惠。 
English: When the princes heard about this, they all said, "Tang is really the most benevolent person. Even the animals have benefited from his kindness."

古文：当是时，夏桀为虐政淫荒，而诸侯昆吾氏为乱。
现代文：当时，夏桀推行暴政，荒淫无道，诸侯昆吾氏又作乱。
English: At that time, Xia Yao carried out tyranny, and the princes of the Kunwu clan rioted.

古文：汤乃兴师率诸侯，伊尹从汤，汤自把钺以伐昆吾，遂伐桀。
现代文：商汤于是举兵率领诸侯征讨，由伊尹跟随着汤。商汤亲自握着大斧讨伐昆吾，接着又去讨伐夏桀。
English: Shang Tang then raised an army and led the princes to fight, and Yi Yin followed Tang. Shang Tang personally fought Kunwu with a large axe, and then went to fight Xia Yao.

古文：汤曰： 格女众庶，来，女悉听朕言。
现代文：商汤说： 你们这些人，来，都听我说。
English: The merchant said, "Come, all of you, listen to me.

古文：匪台小子敢行举乱，有夏多罪，予维闻女众言，夏氏有罪。
现代文：不是我敢于兴兵作乱，是因为夏桀罪大恶极，我也听到你们说，夏桀有罪。
English: It wasn't me who dared to start a riot, it was because Xia Yao's crime was so heinous. I also heard you say that Xia Yao was guilty.

古文：予畏上帝，不敢不正。
现代文：我惧怕上天，不敢不去征伐。
English: I'm afraid of heaven, I dare not not go to the crusade.

古文：今夏多罪，天命殛之。
现代文：如今夏桀犯下了如此多的的罪行，是上天命令我去来消灭他的。
English: Now that Xia Yao has committed so many crimes, Heaven has ordered me to eliminate him.

古文：今女有众，女曰： 我君不恤我众，舍我啬事而割政 。
现代文：现在你们这些人，都说： 我们的国君不体恤我们，抛开我们的农事不管，却要去征伐打仗。 
English: Now all of you are saying, "Our sovereign has no compassion for us, he ignores our farming, but he wants to go to war."

古文：女其曰： 有罪，其奈何 ？
现代文：你们还说： 夏桀有罪，那又能怎么样呢？ 
English: You also said: Xia Yao is guilty, so what can be done?

古文：夏王率止众力，率夺夏国。
现代文：夏王耗尽了国家民力，窃夺整个国家的资财。
English: Xia Wang exhausted the national people's strength and stole the wealth of the whole country.

古文：众有率怠不和，曰： 是日何时丧？
现代文：夏国的民众懈怠消极，怨恨不和，他们都说 这个太阳什么时候灭亡？
English: The people of Xia are lazy and passive, resentful and discordant. They all say, "When will this sun die?"

古文：予与女皆亡 ！
现代文：我们宁愿和你一同灭亡！ 
English: We would rather perish with you!

古文：夏德若兹，今朕必往。
现代文：夏王的德行已经到这种地步，现在我必须前去征讨。
English: Xia Wang's virtue has reached such a level, now I must go to collect.

古文：尔尚及予一人致天之罚，予其大理女。
现代文：希望你们和我一起来奉行上天降下的惩罚，我会重重地奖赏你们。
English: I hope you will join me in carrying out this divine punishment, and I will reward you handsomely.

古文：女毋不信，朕不食言。
现代文：你们不要不信，我绝不会说话不算数。
English: Don't you believe it, I'll never stop talking.

古文：女不从誓言，予则帑僇女，无有攸赦。 
现代文：如果你们违抗我的誓言，我就要惩罚你们，概不宽赦！ 
English: If you violate my oath, I will punish you without mercy!

古文：以告令师，作汤誓。
现代文：商汤把这些话告诉传令长官，写下了《汤誓》。
English: Shang Tang told these words to the commander and wrote down the "Tang Oath."

古文：於是汤曰： 吾甚武 ，号曰武王。
现代文：于是商汤说 我很勇武 ，因此号称武王。
English: So Shang Tang said that I was very brave, and thus became known as King Wu.

古文：桀败於有娀之虚，桀奔於鸣条，夏师败绩。
现代文：夏桀在有娀氏旧地被打败，奔逃到鸣条，夏军溃败。
English: Xia Yao was defeated in the former territory of the Yao clan, and he fled to Mingtai. Xia's army was routed.

古文：汤遂伐三嵕，俘厥宝玉，义伯、仲伯作典宝。
现代文：商汤于是进攻忠于夏桀的三㚇，缴获了他们的宝器珠玉，义伯、仲伯二臣因此写下了《典宝》，说明这是国家的固定财产。
English: Shangtang then attacked the Three Kingdoms loyal to Xia Yao and captured their precious jewels. Yibo and Zhongbo therefore wrote "Treasure Trove," explaining that this was the fixed property of the state.

古文：汤既胜夏，欲迁其社，不可，作夏社。伊尹报。
现代文：商汤战胜夏之后，想换掉夏朝的社神，可是社神是远古共公氏之子句龙，没有谁比得上他，所以没有换成，于是写下《夏社》，说明夏社不可换的道理。
English: After Shangtang defeated Xia, he wanted to change the social god of the Xia Dynasty, but the social god was Gu Long, the son of an ancient commoner. There was no one comparable to him, so he did not change it, so he wrote down "Xia She" to explain the reason why Xia She could not be changed.

古文：於是诸侯毕服，汤乃践天子位，平定海内。
现代文：伊尹向报告了这次战绩。自此，诸侯都表示臣服，商汤登上天子之位，平定了天下。
English: Yi Yin reported this achievement to the emperor. From then on, all the princes expressed their submission, Shang Tang ascended to the position of the Son of Heaven, and the whole world was pacified.

古文：汤归至于泰卷陶，中垒作诰。
现代文：成汤返回途中经过泰卷陶，大臣仲虺作了一篇诰。
English: On his way back to Chengyuan, he passed by a piece of Thai rolled pottery, and Minister Zhongyi wrote a poem about it.

古文：既绌夏命，还亳，作汤诰： 维三月，王自至於东郊。
现代文：汤推翻了夏朝，回到国都亳，写下了《汤诰》： 这年三月，殷王亲自到了东郊。
English: Tang overthrew the Xia Dynasty, returned to the capital and wrote "Tang": In March of this year, King Yin himself came to the eastern suburbs.

古文：告诸侯群后： 毋不有功於民，勤力乃事。
现代文：告诫各诸侯国君： 各位不能不为民众谋立功业，要努力办好你们的职事。
English: He admonished the princes of the various provinces: "You must work hard to do a good job for the people. You must do your job well."

古文：予乃大罚殛女，毋予怨。 
现代文：否则，我就对你们严加惩办，那时不要怨我。 
English: Otherwise, I will punish you severely, so don't blame me.

古文：曰： 古禹、皋陶久劳于外，其有功乎民，民乃有安。
现代文：又说： 过去，禹、皋陶常年在外面操劳，他们为民众建立了功业，民众才得以安宁。
English: He also said, "In the past, Yu and Jintao worked outside all year round. They built up achievements for the people, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：东为江，北为济，西为河，南为淮，四渎已修，万民乃有居。
现代文：他们在东边治理长江，在北边治理济水，在西边治理黄河，在南边治理淮水，四条重要的河道都被他们治理疏通好，百姓才得以安居乐业。
English: They managed the Yangtze River in the east, the Jiu River in the north, the Yellow River in the west, and the Huai River in the south. They managed and dredged the four important rivers, and the people were able to live and work in peace.

古文：后稷降播，农殖百谷。
现代文：后稷教导民众播种耕耘，民众才知道种植各种庄稼。
English: Houyi taught the people to sow and cultivate, and only then did the people know how to grow all kinds of crops.

古文：三公咸有功于民，故後有立。
现代文：他们三位都对民众有功，所以，他们的后代才能够建立国家。
English: All three of them have made contributions to the people, so that their descendants can build the country.

古文：昔蚩尤与其大夫作乱百姓，帝乃弗予，有状。
现代文：从前蚩尤和他的大臣们扰乱百姓，上天就不保佑他们，这样的事是真的有过的。
English: Once upon a time, Qiu You and his ministers disturbed the people, and Heaven did not bless them. Such a thing really happened.

古文：先王言不可不勉。 
现代文：先王的教诲，可不能不用来勉励自己！ 
English: The teachings of the late king should be used to encourage oneself!

古文：曰： 不道，毋之在国，女毋我怨。  
现代文：又说： 你们当中如果有谁做出不合道道义的事，那就不允许在国家治理百姓，那时你们也不要怨恨我。  
English: He also said: If any of you do something immoral, then you should not be allowed to govern the people in the country, and then you should not resent me.

古文：以令诸侯。
现代文：汤用这些话告诫诸侯。
English: Tang used these words to admonish the princes.

古文：伊尹作咸有一德，咎单作明居。
现代文：伊尹写下了《咸有一德》，说明君臣都应该有纯一的品德；咎单写了《明居》，讲的是民众应该遵守的法则。
English: Yi Yin wrote "Haman has a virtue," which shows that all princes and ministers should have a pure moral character; Gui Shan wrote "Mingju," which is about the rules that the people should abide by.

古文：汤乃改正朔，易服色，上白，朝会以昼。
现代文：商汤于是修改历法，又改变了服饰的颜色，崇尚白色，在白天举行了朝会。
English: Shangtang then revised the calendar, changed the color of clothing, advocated white, and held the imperial court in the daytime.

古文：汤崩，太子太丁未立而卒，於是乃立太丁之弟外丙，是为帝外丙。
现代文：商汤逝世之后，太子太丁还没有即位就去世了，于是就立太丁的弟弟外丙为帝，这就是外丙帝。
English: After the death of Shangtang, Prince Taiding died before ascending to the throne, so he made Taiding's younger brother, Wai Pi, the emperor. This is Wai Pi.

古文：帝外丙即位三年，崩，立外丙之弟中壬，是为帝中壬。
现代文：外丙帝即位三年，逝世后，立外丙的弟弟中壬为帝，这就是中壬帝。
English: Emperor Gaobei reigned for three years. After his death, Emperor Gaobei's younger brother, Emperor Zhongren, was established. This is Emperor Zhongren.

古文：帝中壬即位四年，崩，伊尹乃立太丁之子太甲。
现代文：中壬即位四年，逝世后，伊尹就拥立太丁的儿子太甲为帝。
English: Zhongren was on the throne for four years, and after his death, Yi Yin crowned Tai Ding's son Tai Jia as emperor.

古文：太甲，成汤适长孙也，是为帝太甲。
现代文：太甲，是成汤的嫡长孙，就是太甲帝。
English: Taiga is the eldest legitimate grandson of Cheng Tang, that is, Taiga Emperor.

古文：帝太甲元年，伊尹作伊训，作肆命，作徂后。
现代文：太甲元年，伊尹写了《伊训》、《肆命》、《徂后》，陈述了政教法度该做的事请。
English: In the first year of the Taiga era, Yi Yin wrote "The Teachings of Islam," "Desperate for Life," and "After the Crucifixion," stating what should be done in terms of politics and religion.

古文：帝太甲既立三年，不明，暴虐，不遵汤法，乱德，於是伊尹放之於桐宫。
现代文：太甲帝临在位三年，政治不清明，为人暴虐，不遵守汤王的法度，败坏了道德，于是伊尹把他流放到汤的葬地桐宫。
English: Emperor Taiga had been on the throne for three years, his politics were unclear, he was a tyrant, he did not abide by Tang's laws and regulations, and his morals were corrupt. Therefore, Yi Yin exiled him to Tonggong, Tang's burial place.

古文：三年，伊尹摄行政当国，以朝诸侯。
现代文：在之后的三年，伊尹代天子处理政务，主持国事，接受诸侯的朝见。
English: For the next three years, Yi Yin handled government affairs on behalf of the emperor, presided over state affairs, and received imperial visits from princes.

古文：帝太甲居桐宫三年，悔过自责，反善，於是伊尹乃迎帝太甲而授之政。
现代文：太甲在桐宫住了三年，反思忏悔自己的过错，重新向善，于是伊尹又迎接太甲帝返回到朝廷，把政权交还给他。
English: Taiga lived in the Tong Palace for three years, reflected, repented of his mistakes, and became good again, so Yi Yin welcomed Taiga back to the imperial court and handed power back to him.

古文：帝太甲修德，诸侯咸归殷，百姓以宁。
现代文：太甲帝修行德政，诸侯都来归服殷商，百姓也因此得以安宁。
English: Emperor Taiga practised moral government, the lords came to submit to the merchants, and the people were thus able to live in peace.

古文：伊尹嘉之，乃作太甲训三篇，褒帝太甲，称太宗。
现代文：伊尹对太甲帝很赞赏，就写了《太甲训》三篇，用来赞扬太甲帝，称他为太宗。
English: Yi Yin was very appreciative of Emperor Taiga, so he wrote three "Taiga teachings" to praise Emperor Taiga and call him Emperor Taizong.

古文：太宗崩，子沃丁立。
现代文：太宗逝世后，他的儿子沃丁继位。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, his son Wading succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝沃丁之时，伊尹卒。
现代文：沃丁在位的时候，伊尹去逝了。
English: During Wodin's reign, Yi Yun passed away.

古文：既葬伊尹於亳，咎单遂训伊尹事，作沃丁。
现代文：在亳地安葬了伊尹，于是咎单想用伊尹的事迹训诫后人，就写下了《沃丁》。
English: After burying Yi Yun at Fengtian, Gui Shan wanted to use Yi Yun's deeds to admonish future generations, so he wrote "Wading."

古文：沃丁崩，弟太庚立，是为帝太庚。
现代文：沃丁逝世，他的弟弟太庚继位，这就是太庚帝。
English: When Wording died, his younger brother, Tai Geng, succeeded to the throne. This was the Tai Geng Emperor.

古文：帝太庚崩，子帝小甲立。帝小甲崩，弟雍己立，是为帝雍己。
现代文：太庚逝世，他的儿子小甲即位；小甲帝逝世，弟弟雍已继位，这就是雍已帝。
English: After the death of Taigong, his son Xiaojia ascended to the throne; after the death of Xiaojia Di, his brother Yongya succeeded to the throne. This was the beginning of Yongya Di.

古文：殷道衰，诸侯或不至。
现代文：这个时候，殷朝的国势已经衰败，有的诸侯不来朝见了。
English: At this time, the national situation of the Yin Dynasty had already decayed, and some princes did not come to the imperial court.

古文：帝雍己崩，弟太戊立，是为帝太戊。
现代文：雍已逝世后，他的弟弟太戊即位。这就是太戊帝。
English: After Yong died, his younger brother Taewu ascended to the throne. This is Taewu Emperor.

古文：帝太戊立伊陟为相。
现代文：太戊任用伊陟为相。
English: Tae-woo appointed Ihyeon as his consort.

古文：亳有祥桑谷共生於朝，一暮大拱。
现代文：那时候，国都亳有桑树和楮树合生在朝堂上的怪异现象，一夜之间就长得有双手合抱那么粗。
English: At that time, the national capital had a strange phenomenon of a mulberry tree and an eucalyptus tree growing together in the morning hall. Overnight, it grew so thick that it could be held in one's arms.

古文：帝太戊惧，问伊陟。
现代文：太戊帝感到很害怕，就去向伊陟询问。
English: Taowu Di felt very scared, so he went to inquire from Yizhong.

古文：伊陟曰： 臣闻妖不胜德，帝之政其有阙与？
现代文：伊陟说： 我曾经听说，妖异的事物是不能战胜有德行的人的，会不会是您的执政有什么纰漏过失呢？
English: Ili said: I once heard that evil things cannot defeat virtuous people. Could it be that your administration has made some mistakes?

古文：帝其修德。 
现代文：希望您还是要修整德行得好。 
English: I hope you still want to cultivate virtue and do well.

古文：太戊从之，而祥桑枯死而去。
现代文：太戊听从了伊陟的劝告，因而那怪桑树就枯死消失了。
English: Tae-woo listened to Iya's advice, and the strange mulberry tree withered away.

古文：伊陟赞言于巫咸。
现代文：伊陟向巫咸赞美述说了这件事。
English: Yixuan told Wu Xianrong about this.

古文：巫咸治王家有成，作咸艾，作太戊。
现代文：巫咸治理王室朝政有成效，写下《咸艾》，写下《太戊》，记载了他治理朝政的功绩，颂扬了太戊帝的从谏修德。
English: Wu Xian successfully governed the royal court. He wrote "Xian Ai" and "Ta Wu," which recorded his achievements in governing the court and praised Emperor Ta Wu's disciple Xuede.

古文：帝太戊赞伊陟于庙，言弗臣，伊陟让，作原命。
现代文：太戊帝在太庙中赞扬伊陟，说不能像对待其他大臣一样对待他。伊陟谦让不从，写下《原命》，重新解释太戊之命。
English: In the temple, Emperor Taowu praised Iye, saying that he could not be treated like other ministers. Iye did not comply, writing down the "Original Mandate" and reinterpreting Emperor Taowu's mandate.

古文：殷复兴，诸侯归之，故称中宗。
现代文：就这样，殷重新兴盛，诸侯又来归服。因此，称太戊帝为中宗。
English: In this way, Yin flourished anew, and the princes came to submit. Therefore, Taiwu Emperor was called Zhongzong.

古文：中宗崩，子帝中丁立。
现代文：中宗逝世后，他的儿子中丁继位。
English: After the death of Zhongzong, his son Zhongding succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝中丁迁于隞。
现代文：中丁帝迁都于隞。
English: Emperor Zhongding moved the capital to Handan.

古文：河亶甲居相。祖乙迁于邢。
现代文：河亶甲后来定都在相，祖乙又迁都到邢。
English: After that, Hefei Jia was definitely located in Xiang, and Zuyi was moved to Handan.

古文：帝中丁崩，弟外壬立，是为帝外壬。
现代文：中丁帝逝世后，他的弟弟外壬即位，这就是外壬帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhongding, his younger brother Emperor Gairen ascended to the throne. This is Emperor Gairen.

古文：仲丁书阙不具。
现代文：《仲丁》曾记载过这些事，但现书已残佚不存。
English: "Zhongding" once recorded these events, but the present book is no longer extant.

古文：帝外壬崩，弟河亶甲立，是为帝河亶甲。
现代文：外壬帝逝世后，他的弟弟河亶甲继位，这就是河亶甲帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Gaozhong, his younger brother Emperor He Bingjia succeeded to the throne. This is Emperor He Bingjia.

古文：河亶甲时，殷复衰。
现代文：在河亶甲执政时，殷朝国势再次衰弱了。
English: During the reign of He Bingjia, the state of the Yin Dynasty weakened again.

古文：河亶甲崩，子帝祖乙立。
现代文：河亶甲逝世后，他的儿子祖乙继位。
English: After the death of He Bingjia, his son Zu Yi succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝祖乙立，殷复兴。
现代文：祖乙帝即位后，殷又兴盛起来。
English: After Emperor Zuyi ascended the throne, Yin flourished again.

古文：巫贤任职。
现代文：大臣巫咸被任以重职。
English: Minister Wu Ham was appointed to an important post.

古文：祖乙崩，子帝祖辛立。
现代文：祖乙逝世后，他的儿子祖辛帝即位。
English: After the death of Zu Yi, his son Zu Xin ascended to the throne.

古文：帝祖辛崩，弟沃甲立，是为帝沃甲。
现代文：祖辛帝逝世后，他的弟弟沃甲即位，这就是沃甲帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Juxing, his younger brother Woga ascended the throne. This was Emperor Woga.

古文：帝沃甲崩，立沃甲兄祖辛之子祖丁，是为帝祖丁。
现代文：沃甲逝世后，拥立了沃甲之兄祖辛的儿子祖丁即位，这就是祖丁帝。
English: After the death of Wogu, Zuding, the son of Wogu's brother Zuxin, ascended to the throne. This is Zuding Emperor.

古文：帝祖丁崩，立弟沃甲之子南庚，是为帝南庚。
现代文：祖丁逝世后，拥立弟弟沃甲的儿子南庚即位，这就是南庚帝。
English: After the death of Zuding, Nan Geng, the son of his brother Wo Jia, ascended to the throne. This is the Nan Geng Emperor.

古文：帝南庚崩，立帝祖丁之子阳甲，是为帝阳甲。
现代文：南庚帝逝世后，拥立了祖丁帝的儿子阳甲即位，这就是阳甲帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Nan Geng, Emperor Zu Ding's son Yang Jia ascended to the throne. This was Emperor Yang Jia.

古文：帝阳甲之时，殷衰。
现代文：阳甲帝在位的时候，殷的国势衰弱了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yang Jia, Yin's national strength weakened.

古文：自中丁以来，废適而更立诸弟子，弟子或争相代立，比九世乱，於是诸侯莫朝。
现代文：自中丁帝以来，废黜嫡子即位而拥立弟兄及弟兄的儿子，他们的兄弟及其儿子有时为取得王位而互相争斗，连续九代都很混乱，于是诸侯都没有再来朝见。
English: Since Emperor Zhongding, the dethroned legitimate son ascended the throne and supported his brothers and brothers' sons. Their brothers and their sons sometimes fought each other to obtain the throne. Nine consecutive generations were very chaotic, so the princes did not come to the court again.

古文：帝阳甲崩，弟盘庚立，是为帝盘庚。
现代文：阳甲帝逝世后，他的弟弟盘庚继位，这就是盘庚帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Yang Jia, his younger brother Pan Geng succeeded to the throne. This is the Pan Geng Emperor.

古文：帝盘庚之时，殷已都河北，盘庚渡河南，复居成汤之故居，乃五迁，无定处。
现代文：盘庚执政时，殷朝已在黄河以北的奄地定都，盘庚渡过黄河，到黄河以南成汤的故居亳定都。
English: When Pangong was in power, the Yin Dynasty had its capital at Amaechi, north of the Yellow River. Pangong crossed the Yellow River to Chengdu, south of the Yellow River.

古文：殷民咨胥皆怨，不欲徙。
现代文：至此，这已经是第五次迁都了，一直没有固定国都。
English: So far, this is the fifth time the capital has been moved, and there has never been a fixed capital.

古文：盘庚乃告谕诸侯大臣曰： 昔高后成汤与尔之先祖俱定天下，法则可修。
现代文：殷朝的民众一个个都叹息埋怨，不愿再次迁徙。盘庚就告谕诸侯和大臣说： 从前伟大的先王成汤和你们的祖辈们一起平定天下，他们的法度和准则应该遵守。
English: The people of the Yin Dynasty all sighed and complained and did not want to migrate again. Pan Geng then told the princes and ministers: Once upon a time, the great King Cheng Tang and your ancestors together pacified the world, and their laws and principles should be observed.

古文：舍而弗勉，何以成德！ 
现代文：如果我们舍弃而不努力推行，那怎么能够成就德业呢？ 
English: If we give up and don't work hard, how can we achieve virtue?

古文：乃遂涉河南，治亳，行汤之政，然後百姓由宁，殷道复兴。
现代文：于是才渡过黄河来到南岸，治理修缮亳，遵行并施行成汤的政令。此后百姓们得以安定，殷朝的国势又一次兴盛起来。
English: Only then did they cross the Yellow River and come to the south bank to govern, repair and renovate the castle, and follow and implement the edict of Cheng Tang. After that, the people were able to stabilize, and the national situation of the Yin Dynasty once again flourished.

古文：诸侯来朝，以其遵成汤之德也。
现代文：诸侯也纷纷前来朝见了，这是因为盘庚遵循了成汤的德政的缘故。
English: Princes and lords also came to see him in the morning. This was because Pan Gung followed Cheng Tang's policy.

古文：帝盘庚崩，弟小辛立，是为帝小辛。
现代文：盘庚帝逝世后，他的弟弟小辛即位，这就是小辛帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Pangong, his younger brother, Emperor Xiaoxin, ascended the throne. This is Emperor Xiaoxin.

古文：帝小辛立，殷复衰。
现代文：小辛执政时，殷又衰弱了。
English: When Xiaoxin was in power, Yin became weak again.

古文：百姓思盘庚，乃作盘庚三篇。
现代文：百姓们思念盘庚，于是写下了《盘庚》三篇。
English: The people missed Pan Geng, so they wrote down "Pan Geng" in three parts.

古文：帝小辛崩，弟小乙立，是为帝小乙。
现代文：小辛帝逝世以后，他的弟弟小乙即位，这就是小乙帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiao Xin, his brother Emperor Xiao Yi ascended to the throne. This is Emperor Xiao Yi.

古文：帝小乙崩，子帝武丁立。
现代文：小乙帝逝世后，他的儿子武丁即位。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaoyu, his son Wu Ding ascended the throne.

古文：帝武丁即位，思复兴殷，而未得其佐。
现代文：武丁帝即位后，想要复兴殷朝，但一直没有合适的大臣来辅佐。
English: After Emperor Wuding ascended the throne, he wanted to revive the Yin Dynasty, but there was no suitable minister to assist him.

古文：三年不言，政事决定於冢宰，以观国风。
现代文：武丁三年没有发布政见，政事由冢宰来决定，自己审慎地观察国家的风气。
English: Wuding did not issue a political opinion for three years. Political affairs were decided by the magistrate, and he carefully observed the country's customs.

古文：武丁夜梦得圣人，名曰说。
现代文：武丁夜里他梦见见一位圣人，名叫说。
English: During the night in Wuding, he dreamt of a holy man, whose name was:

古文：以梦所见视群臣百吏，皆非也。
现代文：他按照梦中见到的圣人模样来观察群臣百官，没有一个是梦中人的样子。
English: He observed the ministers and officials according to the appearance of the saint he saw in his dream, and none of them looked like the person in the dream.

古文：於是乃使百工营求之野，得说於傅险中。
现代文：于是派百官到民间去四处寻找，终于在傅险找到了说。
English: So they sent hundreds of officials to the people to look for it everywhere, and finally found it in Fuxian.

古文：是时说为胥靡，筑於傅险。
现代文：当时，说是一个服劳役的奴隶，正在傅险修路。
English: At the time, he was said to be a slave laborer who was building a road in Fushan.

古文：见於武丁，武丁曰是也。
现代文：官吏把说带来让武丁看，武丁说就是这个人。
English: The official brought it to Wuding for him to see, and Wuding said that this was the man.

古文：得而与之语，果圣人，举以为相，殷国大治。
现代文：找到说之后，武丁和他交谈，发现他果真是位圣贤之人，就举用他担任国相，殷国得以太平兴盛。
English: After finding him, Wuding talked with him and found that he was indeed a sage. He appointed him as the minister of state, and Yin was able to prosper peacefully.

古文：故遂以傅险姓之，号曰傅说。
现代文：因此就用傅险这个地名来作说的姓，成为傅说。
English: Therefore, he used Fu Xuan, the name of the place, as his surname and became Fu Xuan.

古文：帝武丁祭成汤，明日，有飞雉登鼎耳而呴，武丁惧。
现代文：武丁祭祀成汤，第二天，有一只野鸡飞来站上在鼎耳上鸣叫，武丁很害怕。
English: The next day, a pheasant flew onto the platform and chirped in Wu Ding's ear. Wu Ding was very scared.

古文：祖己曰： 王勿忧，先修政事。 
现代文：祖己说： 大王不必担忧，先办好政事吧。 
English: The ancestor said: The great king need not worry, let's first do a good job of governing.

古文：祖己乃训王曰： 唯天监下典厥义，降年有永有不永，非天夭民，中绝其命。
现代文：祖己又训导武丁说： 上天考察天下的民众主要是是着看他们是否遵守道义。上天赐给人的寿命有长有短，并不是上天让有的人短命夭折，而是他们自己中途断送性命。
English: Zou Zi also instructed Wuding, saying: "Heaven examines the people of the world mainly to see if they abide by morality. The life span given by God is long and short. It is not that God lets some people die prematurely, but that they themselves cut off their lives in the middle.

古文：民有不若德，不听罪，天既附命正厥德，乃曰其奈何。
现代文：有的人不遵循道德，不服从判罚，上天已经下命纠正他的德行了，他这才想起来说： 怎么办 。
English: Some people do not follow morality, do not obey the judgment and punishment. Heaven has ordered him to correct his moral conduct. He just remembered and said, "What should I do?"

古文：鸣呼！王嗣敬民，罔非天继，常祀毋礼于弃道。 
现代文：唉，大王您继承王位，恭敬地对待民众，他们没有谁不是上天的子孙，还要经常祭祀，不要礼奉那些背弃道德的事！ 
English: Alas, great king, you inherit the throne, treat the people with respect, they have no one who is not a child of heaven, but also regularly sacrifice, do not worship those things that betray morality!

古文：武丁修政行德，天下咸驩，殷道复兴。
现代文：武丁修行德政，全国的人民都高兴，殷朝的国势又兴盛了。
English: Wuding practiced virtue politics, the people of the whole country were happy, and the national situation of the Yin Dynasty flourished again.

古文：帝武丁崩，子帝祖庚立。
现代文：武丁帝逝世，他的儿子祖庚帝即位。
English: Emperor Wuding died, and his son Emperor Zu Geng ascended the throne.

古文：祖己嘉武丁之以祥雉为德，立其庙为高宗，遂作高宗肜日及训。
现代文：祖己赞赏武丁因为野鸡出现的怪异现象而行德政，给他立庙，称为高宗，于是写下了《高宗肜日》和《高宗之训》。
English: The ancestor appreciated Wuding's conduct of virtue politics because of the strange phenomenon of pheasants, and gave him a temple, called Gaozong, so he wrote "Gaozong's Day" and "Gaozong's Teaching."

古文：帝祖庚崩，弟祖甲立，是为帝甲。
现代文：祖庚帝逝世，他的弟弟祖甲即位，这就是甲帝。
English: Emperor Zu Geng died, and his brother Emperor Zu Jia ascended to the throne. This is Emperor Jia.

古文：帝甲淫乱，殷复衰。
现代文：甲帝淫乱，殷朝再度衰落。
English: Emperor Jia fornicated, and the Yin Dynasty declined again.

古文：帝甲崩，子帝廪辛立。
现代文：甲帝逝世后，他的儿子廪辛即位。
English: After the death of Emperor Gao, his son Juxing ascended to the throne.

古文：帝廪辛崩，弟庚丁立，是为帝庚丁。
现代文：廪辛逝世，他的弟弟庚丁即位，这就是庚丁帝。
English: When Emperor Shuxin died, his younger brother Emperor Gaoding ascended to the throne. This was Emperor Gaoding.

古文：帝庚丁崩，子帝武乙立。
现代文：庚丁逝世后，他的儿子武乙即位。
English: After the death of Geng Ding, his son Wu Yi ascended to the throne.

古文：殷复去亳，徙河北。
现代文：殷国都离开亳，迁到了黄河以北。
English: The Yin all left Yan and moved to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：帝武乙无道，为偶人，谓之天神。
现代文：武乙帝暴虐无道，制作了一个木偶人，称它为天神。
English: The tyrannical Emperor Wuyi made a puppet man and called it Tenjin.

古文：与之博，令人为行。
现代文：他跟木偶人下棋赌输赢，让旁人替它下子。
English: He gambled with the puppeteer on whether he would win or lose, and let others play for him.

古文：天神不胜，乃僇辱之。
现代文：如果天神没有赢，就侮辱它。
English: If Tenjin doesn't win, insult him.

古文：为革囊，盛血，昂而射之，命曰 射天 。
现代文：又制作了一个皮革的囊袋，里面盛满血，仰天朝它射箭，称这是 射天 。
English: He also made a leather pouch full of blood and shot arrows at it, calling it "shooting at the sky."

古文：武乙猎於河渭之闲，暴雷，武乙震死。
现代文：武乙到黄河和渭河之间去打猎，天上突然打雷，武乙被震死。
English: Wu Yi went hunting between the Yellow River and the Min River. The sky suddenly thundered, and Wu Yi was killed by the shock.

古文：子帝太丁立。
现代文：他的儿子太丁帝即位。
English: His son, Emperor Taiting, came to the throne.

古文：帝太丁崩，子帝乙立。帝乙立，殷益衰。
现代文：太丁帝逝世后，他的儿子乙即位，乙帝即位时，殷朝更加衰落了。
English: After the death of Emperor Taiting, his son B ascended to the throne. When Emperor B ascended to the throne, the Yin Dynasty further declined.

古文：帝乙长子曰微子启，启母贱，不得嗣。
现代文：乙帝的长子叫微子启。启的母亲地位低贱，因而启没有资格继承帝位。
English: Emperor Y's eldest son was named Qiu Zi Kai. Qi's mother had a lowly status, so Qi was not eligible to inherit the throne.

古文：少子辛，辛母正后，辛为嗣。
现代文：乙帝的小儿子叫辛，辛的母亲是正王后，因而辛被立为继承人。
English: Emperor Y's youngest son was named Xin. Xin's mother was the rightful queen, so Xin was made the heir.

古文：帝乙崩，子辛立，是为帝辛，天下谓之纣。
现代文：乙帝逝世后，辛继位，这就是辛帝，天下都管他叫 纣 。
English: After the death of Emperor Y, Emperor Xin succeeded to the throne. This is Emperor Xin. The whole world calls him Emperor Zhou.

古文：帝纣资辨捷疾，闻见甚敏；材力过人，手格猛兽；知足以距谏，言足以饰非；矜人臣以能，高天下以声，以为皆出己之下。
现代文：纣天资聪颖，有口才，行动迅速，耳聪目明；而且气力过人，能徒手与猛兽格斗。他的智慧足可以拒绝臣下的谏劝，他的语言足可以掩饰自己的过错。
English: He was gifted with intelligence, eloquence, swiftness of action, sharpness of hearing and sight; moreover, he was very powerful and could fight with wild beasts with his bare hands. His wisdom was enough to reject the persuasion of his subjects, and his language was enough to cover up his mistakes.

古文：好酒淫乐，嬖於妇人。爱妲己，妲己之言是从。
现代文：他用自己才能在大臣面前夸耀，凭着声威到处抬高自己，认为天下所有的人都不如他。他嗜好喝酒，骄奢淫逸，宠爱女人。他特别宠爱妲己，妲己说的话他都听从。
English: He uses his talent to boast in front of ministers, using his voice to elevate himself everywhere, thinking that everyone in the world is not as good as him. He likes to drink, is proud and lascivious, and loves women. He especially loves himself, and he obeys everything he says.

古文：於是使师涓作新淫声，北里之舞，靡靡之乐。
现代文：于是他让乐师涓创作了新的放荡的乐曲，北里舞曲，淫靡的歌。
English: So he asked the musicians to create a new debauched music, Kitasato dance music, and lascivious songs.

古文：厚赋税以实鹿台之钱，而盈钜桥之粟。
现代文：他加重赋税用来充实鹿台钱库，充盈钜桥粮仓。
English: He used the tax increase to replenish the Lutetia treasury and to fill the grain silos of Queqiao.

古文：益收狗马奇物，充仞宫室。益广沙丘苑台，多取野兽蜚鸟置其中。
现代文：他多方搜集狗马和新奇的玩物，填满了宫室，又大肆扩建沙丘的园林楼台，大量捕捉野兽飞鸟，放置在里面。
English: He collected dogs and horses and new and strange toys in many ways, filling the palace room. He also greatly expanded the garden terrace of the sand dunes, caught a large number of wild animals and birds, and placed them inside.

古文：慢於鬼神。大聚乐戏於沙丘，以酒为池，县肉为林，使男女裸相逐其间，为长夜之饮。
现代文：他对鬼神怠慢无礼，招来大批戏乐聚集在沙丘，用酒来做池水，把肉悬挂起来当作树林，让男女赤身裸体，在那里追逐戏闹，通宵饮酒作乐。
English: He was rude to the gods and ghosts, invited a large number of actors to gather in the dunes, used wine to make pools of water, hung meat as a forest, and let men and women go naked to chase the play and drink all night to make music.

古文：百姓怨望而诸侯有畔者，於是纣乃重刑辟，有炮烙之法。
现代文：百姓们怨恨他，而有的诸侯也背叛了他。于是他就加重刑罚，发明了一种叫做炮格的酷刑。
English: The people hated him, and some of the princes turned against him, so he increased punishments and invented a form of torture called the cannon.

古文：以西伯昌、九侯、鄂侯为三公。
现代文：纣任用西伯昌、九侯、鄂侯为三公。
English: He appointed Xibeichang, Jiuhou and Ehou as the three princes.

古文：九侯有好女，入之纣。九侯女不喜淫，纣怒，杀之，而醢九侯。
现代文：九侯有个美丽的女儿，献给了纣，她不喜淫荡作乐，纣大发雷霆，杀了她，同时把九侯也施以醢刑，剁成肉酱。
English: Jiuhou had a beautiful daughter, dedicated to Yao. She didn't like his lecherous ways, so Yao flew into a rage and killed her. At the same time, he had Jiuhou beaten to a pulp.

古文：鄂侯争之彊，辨之疾，并脯鄂侯。
现代文：鄂侯坚决努力规谏，争辩很激烈，结果鄂侯也遭到脯刑，被制成肉干。
English: E Hou resolutely tried to control the situation, and the debate was fierce. As a result, E Hou was also beaten and made into jerky.

古文：西伯昌闻之，窃叹。
现代文：西伯昌听说了这些事，暗暗叹息。
English: Xi Bochang heard these things and sighed.

古文：崇侯虎知之，以告纣，纣囚西伯羑里。
现代文：崇侯虎知道后，向纣王进行报告，纣就把西伯囚禁在羑里。
English: After learning of this, Chong Houhu reported to the king of Yao, and Yao imprisoned Xi Bo in Yao.

古文：西伯之臣闳夭之徒，求美女奇物善马以献纣，纣乃赦西伯。
现代文：西伯的僚臣闳夭等人，找来了美女、珍宝和好马来献给纣，纣王才赦免了西伯。
English: Xibe's vassals, such as Yao Yao, found beautiful women, precious treasures and good horses to offer to Yao, and the king of Yao pardoned Xibe.

古文：西伯出而献洛西之地，以请除炮烙之刑。
现代文：西伯出狱之后，向纣进献出洛水以西的土地，请求他废除炮格的酷刑。
English: After Xibe was released from prison, he offered the land west of Luoshui to Xunjin and asked him to abolish the torture of the cannon.

古文：纣乃许之，赐弓矢斧钺，使得征伐，为西伯。
现代文：纣答应了他，还赐给他弓箭大斧，让他能够征伐其他诸侯，这样他就成了西部地区的诸侯之长，这就是西伯侯。
English: Yao agreed and gave him a bow and arrow and a large axe so that he could conquer other provinces. Thus, he became the head of the provinces in the western region, that is, the Western Prince.

古文：而用费中为政。
现代文：纣任用费仲管理国家政事。
English: Appointment of fee middlemen to manage state affairs.

古文：费中善谀，好利，殷人弗亲。
现代文：费仲善于阿谀奉承，又贪图财利，因而殷国民众都不和纣王亲近。
English: Feizhong was good at flattery and greedy for money, so the people of Yin were not close to the king.

古文：纣又用恶来。
现代文：纣又任用恶来。
English: I've been called a bad name again.

古文：恶来善毁谗，诸侯以此益疏。
现代文：恶来善长毁谤进谗，诸侯因此越发疏远了纣王。
English: The evil came from the good, and the good came from the evil, and the princes became more and more estranged from the king.

古文：西伯归，乃阴修德行善，诸侯多叛纣而往归西伯。
现代文：西伯回到国都，在私下暗暗修德政，行善事，诸侯中有很多人背叛了纣而来归附西伯。
English: When Xibe returned to the capital, he secretly practiced virtue and did good deeds. Many of the lords betrayed him and joined Xibe.

古文：西伯滋大，纣由是稍失权重。
现代文：西伯的势力越来越强大，纣王渐渐丧失了权势。
English: The power of Xibe became more and more powerful, and Shao Wang gradually lost his power.

古文：王子比干谏，弗听。
现代文：王子比干进谏言劝说纣，纣不肯听。
English: The prince tried to persuade him, but he would not listen.

古文：商容贤者，百姓爱之，纣废之。
现代文：商容是有才德的人，百姓很是敬爱他，纣却废黜了他。
English: Shang Rong was a man of talent and virtue. The people loved him very much, but they overthrew him.

古文：及西伯伐饥国，灭之，纣之臣祖伊闻之而咎周，恐，奔告纣曰： 天既讫我殷命，假人元龟，无敢知吉，非先王不相我後人，维王淫虐用自绝，故天弃我，不有安食，不虞知天性，不迪率典。今我民罔不欲丧，曰 天曷不降威，大命胡不至 ？
现代文：等到西伯攻打饥国并把它灭掉了，纣的大臣祖伊听说后怨恨周国，又非常害怕，跑到纣那里报告说： 上天已经断绝了我们殷国的寿运了。知吉凶的人用大龟占卜，没有一点好征兆。并非是先王不护佑我们后人，而是大王您荒淫暴虐，自绝于天，所以上天才抛弃我们，使我们不得安心生活，不揣度了解天意，就不能遵循常法，使得我国的民众没有不希望殷国灭亡的，他们说： 上天为什么还不显示威严？上天的命令为什么还不到来？ 
English: When Xibe attacked the Hungry Kingdom and destroyed it, Zou Yi, the minister of Zou, heard about it, resented Zhou, and was very afraid. He ran to Zou and reported: Heaven has cut off the good fortune of our Yin Kingdom. People who know good and evil use tortoise divination, and there is no good omen. It is not that the former king did not protect our descendants, but that the great king was brutal and tyrannical, and cut himself off from heaven. Therefore, this genius abandoned us, so that we could not live in peace. Without knowing the will of heaven, we could not follow the common law, so that the people of our country did not

古文：今王其柰何？ 
现代文：大王您如今想怎么办呢？ 
English: Great King, what do you want to do now?

古文：纣曰： 我生不有命在天乎！ 
现代文：纣说： 我生下来不就是有天命护佑吗？ 
English: Zou said, "Wasn't I born with a heavenly destiny?

古文：祖伊反，曰： 纣不可谏矣。 
现代文：祖伊回国后，说： 纣已经无法规劝了！ 
English: After Zui returned to China, he said: "I can't persuade him anymore!

古文：西伯既卒，周武王之东伐，至盟津，诸侯叛殷会周者八百。
现代文：西伯昌死后，周武王率军东征，到达盟津时，诸侯背叛殷纣前来与武王会师的有八百国。
English: After the death of Xibeochang, King Zhou Wu led his army on an eastward march. When they reached Mengjin, there were eight hundred countries whose princes betrayed Yin Xi and came to join forces with King Wu.

古文：诸侯皆曰： 纣可伐矣。 
现代文：诸侯们都说： 可以讨伐纣了！ 
English: The lords all said, "The yakitori can be cut."

古文：武王曰： 尔未知天命。 
现代文：周武王说： 你们不知道天命。 
English: King Zhou Wu said: You don't know the fate of heaven.

古文：乃复归。
现代文：于是又班师回国了。
English: So the class teacher returned to China.

古文：纣愈淫乱不止。
现代文：纣更加淫乱无止境。
English: more lewdness without end.

古文：微子数谏不听，乃与大师、少师谋，遂去。
现代文：微子屡次劝谏，纣都不听，微子就和太师、少师谋议，离开了殷国。
English: Micron repeatedly advised him, but he did not listen, so Micron consulted with the grandmaster and junior master and left Yin.

古文：比干曰： 为人臣者，不得不以死争。 
现代文：比干说： 作为臣子，不能不冒死劝谏。 
English: Bikan said, "As a courtier, I must risk my life to persuade him.

古文：乃彊谏纣。
现代文：于是极力劝谏纣。
English: So I tried my best to persuade him.

古文：纣怒曰： 吾闻圣人心有七窍。 
现代文：纣大怒，说： 我听说圣人的心有七个孔。 
English: Enraged, he said, "I have heard that a saint's heart has seven holes.

古文：剖比干，观其心。
现代文：于是剖开比干的胸膛，挖出他的心来看。
English: So he cut open Bigen's chest and dug out his heart to see.

古文：箕子惧，乃详狂为奴，纣又囚之。
现代文：箕子看到了很害怕，就假装疯癫去做了奴隶。纣又把箕子囚禁起来。
English: When the mule saw this, he was frightened and pretended to be mad and became a slave. The donkey then imprisoned the mule.

古文：殷之大师、少师乃持其祭乐器奔周。
现代文：殷国的太师、少师就拿着祭器、乐器，急急奔逃到周国。
English: The grand master and junior master of Yin Province took the sacred vessels and musical instruments and hurriedly fled to Zhou Province.

古文：周武王於是遂率诸侯伐纣。
现代文：周武王，就率领诸侯讨伐殷纣。
English: King Zhou Wu led the princes in a crusade against Yin Qi.

古文：纣亦发兵距之牧野。
现代文：纣也派出了军队在牧野进行抵抗周军。
English: Yao also sent troops to resist the Zhou army in Makino.

古文：甲子日，纣兵败。纣走入，登鹿台，衣其宝玉衣，赴火而死。
现代文：甲子那一天，纣的军队被打败，纣逃跑进城，登上鹿台，穿上他的宝玉衣，跑到火里自焚而死。
English: On the day of Ji Zi, Yao's army was defeated, and Yao fled into the city, climbed onto the deer platform, put on his precious jade coat, and ran into the fire to burn himself to death.

古文：周武王遂斩纣头，县之白旗。
现代文：周武王砍下纣的头，挂在白旗竿上。
English: King Zhou Wu cut off the head of the baboon and hung it on a white flagpole.

古文：杀妲己。释箕子之囚，封比干之墓，表商容之闾。
现代文：周武王又处死了妲己，释放了被囚禁的箕子，修缮了比干的坟墓，表彰了商容的里巷。
English: King Zhou Wu also executed his son-in-law, released the imprisoned son-in-law, repaired the grave of Bikan, and commended the alleys of Shangrong.

古文：封纣子武庚、禄父，以续殷祀，令修行盘庚之政。殷民大说。
现代文：又分封纣的儿子武庚禄父，让他延续祭祀殷的先人，命令他施行盘庚的德政，殷的民众非常高兴。
English: He also assigned the son of Emperor Gaozong, Wu Ganglu, to his father, asked him to continue the worship of Yin's ancestors, and ordered him to implement Pan Geng's moral government. The people of Yin were very happy.

古文：於是周武王为天子。
现代文：于是，周武王做了天子。
English: As a result, King Zhou Wu became the son of Heaven.

古文：其後世贬帝号，号为王。
现代文：因为殷商后人贬低帝这个称号，所以称为王。
English: Because the descendants of Yin merchants belittled the title of emperor, he was called the king.

古文：而封殷后为诸侯，属周。
现代文：周武王封殷的后代为诸侯，隶属于周。
English: The descendants of Zhouwu King Fengyin are princes and belong to Zhou.

古文：周武王崩，武庚与管叔、蔡叔作乱，成王命周公诛之，而立微子於宋，以续殷后焉。
现代文：周武王逝世后，武庚和管叔、蔡叔发动叛乱，周成王命周公旦诛杀他们，而把微子在宋国封为国君，以延续殷代香火。
English: After the death of King Zhou Wu, Wugang and Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai launched a rebellion. King Zhou Cheng ordered Zhou Gongdan to kill them, and made Wuzi the king of the Song Dynasty to continue the Yin Dynasty.

古文：太史公曰：余以颂次契之事，自成汤以来，采於书诗。
现代文：太史公说：我是根据《商颂》来编定契的事迹，从成汤以来，很多史实材料采自《尚书》和《诗经》。
English: Tai Shikong said: I compiled the deeds of the contract according to the "Merchant's Song." Since Cheng Tang, many historical materials have been taken from the "Shang Shu" and the "Song of Songs."

古文：契为子姓，其後分封，以国为姓，有殷氏、来氏、宋氏、空桐氏、稚氏、北殷氏、目夷氏。
现代文：契为子姓，他的后代受分封，以国名作姓氏，有殷氏、来氏、宋氏、空桐氏、稚氏、北殷氏、目夷氏。
English: Ji was the surname of his son, and his descendants were given different titles and surnames according to the country, including the Yin clan, the Lai clan, the Song clan, the Ku Tong clan, the Waka clan, the Bei Yin clan, and the Mei clan.

古文：孔子曰，殷路车为善，而色尚白。
现代文：孔子曾经说过，殷人乘坐的车最好，那个时代崇尚白色。
English: Confucius once said that the best car to ride in is a white one, and that era advocated white horses.

