古文：兵以静，以专胜。
现代文：军队以沉着冷静致胜，国家以统一团结致胜。
English: The army won with composure and calmness, and the country won with unity and solidarity.

古文：力分者弱，心疑者背。
现代文：部署分散力量就会削弱，决心动摇，士气就会涣散。
English: The deployment of dispersed forces will weaken, the determination will be shaken, and the morale will be scattered.

古文：夫力弱，故进退不豪，纵敌不。
现代文：力量薄弱，就不敢大胆进退，即使有好的战机也可能放走敌人。
English: A weak force will not dare to advance and retreat boldly, and even if it has good warplanes, it may let the enemy go.

古文：将吏士卒，动静一身。心疑背，则计决而不动，动决而不禁。
现代文：将吏士卒，一动一静，都象人的身体一样，如果决心摇思想混扎，就是计划决定了，也不能立即行动，行动起来了，又不能加以控制。
English: Just like the human body, if the decision to shake and the thoughts get mixed up, it means that the plan has been decided and cannot be acted upon immediately, and the action has begun and cannot be controlled.

古文：异口虚言，将无修容，卒无常试，发攻必衄。是谓疾陵之兵，无足与斗。
现代文：军队中众说纷纭，空话连篇，将帅没有严肃的态度，士兵没有正规的训练，这样发动进攻，必然要招致失败，这就是颓废无用的军队，这种军队是不能同敌人战斗的。
English: In the army, there are various opinions and empty talk, the general does not have a serious attitude, and the soldiers do not have formal training. If an attack is launched in this way, it will inevitably lead to failure. This is a decadent and useless army. Such an army cannot fight with the enemy.

古文：将帅者，心也；群下者，支节也。其心动以诚，则支节必力；其心动以疑，则支节必背。
现代文：将帅好比人的首脑，部属好比人的四肢，首脑的决心坚定，四肢的动作必然有力，首脑的决心犹豫，四肢的动作必然迟疑。
English: The commander-in-chief is like the head of a man, and his subordinates are like the limbs of a man. The determination of the head is firm, the movements of the limbs are inevitably powerful, the determination of the head is hesitant, and the movements of the limbs are inevitably hesitant.

古文：夫将不心制，卒不节动，虽胜，幸胜也，非攻权也。
现代文：如果将帅指挥军队，不能象首脑控制四肢那样灵活自如，士兵不能象四肢那样按首脑的指挥行动，这样的军队，即使取得胜利，也是侥幸的胜利，而不是正确指挥的结果。
English: If the commander in chief does not command the army with the same flexibility as the head commands the limbs, and the soldiers do not act according to the head's command as the limbs do, such an army, even if it achieves victory, is a fluke victory, and not the result of correct command.

古文：夫民无两畏也。
现代文：士卒是不会既畏惧敌人又畏惧自己将帅的。
English: A soldier cannot be both afraid of the enemy and afraid of his commander.

古文：畏我侮敌，畏敌侮我，见侮者败，立威者胜。
现代文：畏惧自己的将帅就会蔑视敌人，畏惧敌人就会蔑视自己的将冲。
English: The general who fears himself despises the enemy, and the enemy who fears himself despises his general.

古文：凡将能其道者，吏畏其将也；吏畏其将者，民畏其吏也；民畏其吏者，敌畏其民也。
现代文：将帅被士卒蔑视，作战就会失败；将帅在士卒个有威信，作战就能胜利。凡将帅能掌握运用这个原则，军吏就会畏惧将帅；军吏畏惧将帅，士卒就会畏惧军吏；士卒畏。惧军吏，敌人就会畏惧我军士卒。
English: If the general is despised by the soldiers, the battle will be lost; if the general is respected by the soldiers, the battle will be won. If the general can master and apply this principle, the officers will fear the general; if the officers fear the general, the soldiers will fear the officers; if the soldiers fear the officers, the enemy will fear our officers.

古文：是故知胜败之道者，必先知畏侮之权。
现代文：因此，要知道胜败的道理，首先就要懂得畏惧与蔑视两者的相互关系。
English: Therefore, to know the truth of victory and defeat, we must first understand the interrelationship between fear and contempt.

古文：夫不爱说其心者，不我用也；不严畏其心者，不我举也。
现代文：如果不能以爱托使士卒悦服、士卒就不会为我所用；如果不能以威信使士卒畏成，士卒就不会听我指挥。
English: If you can't please your subordinates with love, they won't be of any use to me; if you can't intimidate them with authority, they won't listen to my command.

古文：爱在下顺，威在上立。
现代文：爱抚在于使下级驯服；威信在于上级自己树立。
English: Caressing is to tame the inferior; prestige is to be established by the superior.

古文：爱故不二，威故不犯。
现代文：爱抚能使士卒不怀二心；威信能使下级不敢违令。
English: Caressing can make subordinates not harbor double-mindedness; prestige can make subordinates dare not disobey orders.

古文：故善将者，爱与威而已。
现代文：所以善于带兵的人，就要善于掌握爱与威的运用。
English: Therefore, those who are good at leading soldiers should be good at mastering the use of love and authority.

古文：战不必胜，不可以言战；攻不必拔，不可以言攻。
现代文：作战没有必胜的把握，就不可以轻言作战，攻城没有必取的把握，就不可以轻言攻城。
English: If you do not have a sure grasp of victory in battle, you should not fight lightly, and if you do not have a sure grasp of attacking the city, you should not attack the city lightly.

古文：不然，虽刑赏不足信也。
现代文：否则，即使采取严刑重赏也是不足以令人信服的。
English: Otherwise, even the use of severe punishment and heavy rewards is not convincing enough.

古文：信在期前，事在未兆。
现代文：威信在于平素树立，事变要在事前预见。
English: The prestige lies in establishing a routine, and events must be foreseen in advance.

古文：故众已聚不虚散，兵已出不徒归，求敌若求亡子，击敌若救溺人。
现代文：所以兵员一经集中，就不能随便解散，军队一经出动，就不能无功而返。寻求敌人要象寻找丢失的孩子那样志在必得，进攻敌人务象抢救落水的人那样奋不顾身地迅速行动。
English: Therefore, once the soldiers are concentrated, they cannot be disbanded at will, and once the army is dispatched, it cannot return without any results. It is necessary to seek the enemy as if searching for a lost child, and to attack the enemy as if rescuing a drowning person.

古文：险者无战心，战者无全气，斗战者无胜兵。
现代文：分兵守险的，不会有决战的意图；进行挑战的，不会使用全部兵力；鲁莽作战的，不会有把握地取得胜利。
English: Those who divide their forces to guard against danger will not have the intention of fighting a decisive battle; those who challenge will not use all their forces; those who fight recklessly will not win with certainty.

古文：凡挟义而战者，我起；争私结怨，不得已；怨结起，待之贵后。
现代文：凡是正义的战争，最好由我首先发动，为争私结怨的战争，应是出于不得已。因结怨而引起的战争，最好后发制人。
English: In a just war, it is best to start first. In a war of selfish grudges, it should be out of necessity. In a war caused by grudges, it is best to start later.

古文：故争必当待之，息必当备之。
现代文：所以说，发动战争，必须看准时机，战争结束，还是应当戒备。
English: Therefore, when starting a war, it is necessary to be punctual, and when the war is over, it is still necessary to be alert.

古文：兵有胜于朝廷，有胜于原野，有胜于市井。
现代文：战争有靠谋略取胜的，有靠野战取胜的，有靠强攻城市取胜的。
English: Some wars are won by stratagem, some by field warfare, and some by storming the city.

古文：斗则失，幸以不败，此不意彼惊惧而曲胜之也。
现代文：总之，要敢于战斗才能胜利，屈服退让就会失败，即使侥幸不败，也是由于敌人意外地发生惊慌而偶然胜利的。
English: In short, it is necessary to dare to fight in order to win, yielding and conceding will fail, even if it is not defeated by chance, it is due to the enemy's unexpected panic and accidental victory.

古文：曲胜，言非全也。
现代文：偶然的胜利不能算是真正的胜利。
English: A fluke victory is not a real victory.

古文：非全胜者，无权名。
现代文：不能获得真正胜利的将领，就不合有真正的权威。
English: Without a truly victorious general, there can be no true authority.

古文：故明主战攻日，合鼓合，节以兵刃，不求胜而胜也。
现代文：所以英明的主帅在作战的时候，必须以正确的指挥，统一的行动来与敌决战，这样，虽不强求胜利而胜利也会自然到来。
English: Therefore, when a wise commander is fighting, he must use correct command and unified action to fight the enemy decisively. In this way, victory will come naturally, although victory is not forced.

古文：兵有去备彻威而胜者，以其有法故也。有器用之早定也，其应敌也周，其总率也极。
现代文：军队也有假装没有准备或故意表示怯弱而取胜的，这是因为它有巧妙的制敌办法，有充分的战斗准备，有周密的应战计划，有坚定的临战指挥的原故。
English: An army can also pretend to be unprepared or feign cowardice and still win, because it has ingenious methods to subdue the enemy, adequate battle preparations, a well-thought-out battle plan, and a firm battle command.

古文：故五人而伍，十人而什，百人而卒，千人而率，万人而将，已已极。其朝死则朝代，暮死则暮代。
现代文：按军队的编制，五人为伍设有伍长，十人为什设有什长，百人为卒设有卒长，千人为率设有率长，万人为军设有将军，这样的编制已经是很周密很完善的了，战斗中指挥官早上战死，早上就有人接替，晚上战死，晚上就有人接替。
English: According to the organization of the army, five people have a corporal, ten people have a sergeant, one hundred people have a sergeant, one thousand people have a captain, and ten thousand people have a general. This organization is already very thorough and perfect. During the battle, the commander died in the morning and was replaced in the morning, and died in the evening and was replaced in the evening.

古文：权敌审将，而后举兵。
现代文：战前要分析敌人的虚实，察明敌将的才能，然后才能起兵。
English: Before the war, it is necessary to analyze the enemy's truth and falsehood, detect the enemy's talent, and then raise an army.

古文：故凡集兵千里者旬日，百里者一日，必集敌境。
现代文：大凡集中军队，远隔千里的，不能超过十天的时间，相距百里的，不能超过一天的时间，而且必须集中在敌人边境附近。
English: In the case of a large-scale concentration of troops, it should not take more than ten days to move troops a thousand miles apart, and it should not take more than one day to move troops a hundred miles apart, and they must be concentrated near the enemy's border.

古文：卒聚将至，深入其地，错绝其道，栖其大城大邑，使之登城逼危，男女数重，各逼地形，而攻要塞。
现代文：兵员已经集中，将帅已经到达，就应立即深入敌人腹地，分别遮断它的交通，包围它的重要城市，迫使放人困守孤城而处于危险的境地。同时把占领地内的男女居民组织起来，重层配置，分头抢占险要地形，向敌人要害突击。
English: Now that the soldiers have been concentrated and the general has arrived, we should immediately go deep into the enemy's heartland, separately cut off its transportation, encircle its important cities, and force the soldiers to defend the lonely city and be in a dangerous situation. At the same time, we should organize the male and female residents in the occupied area, arrange them in multiple layers, seize the dangerous terrain separately, and attack the enemy's key points.

古文：据一城邑而数道绝，从而攻之。敌将帅不能信，吏卒不能和，刑有所不从者，则我败之矣。
现代文：在敌人困守孤城、各方联系又被切断的情况下，再全面发起进攻、就可使敌军将冲丧失威信，官兵互不协力，虽用严刑峻法也不能迫使下级服从命令。
English: In a situation where the enemy is besieged in a lone city and the contact between all parties has been cut off, launching an all-round attack can make the enemy army lose its prestige. Officers and soldiers do not cooperate with each other, and even if they use severe punishments, they cannot force subordinates to obey orders.

古文：敌救未至，而一城已降。
现代文：这样就可以乘势打败敌人、不待敌人援军到达，而守城敌军就已投降了。
English: In this way, it is possible to take advantage of the situation to defeat the enemy, without waiting for the enemy reinforcements to arrive, and the enemy garrison has already surrendered.

古文：津梁未发，要塞未修，城险未设，渠答未张，则虽有城无守矣。
现代文：如果敌人交通设施没有战备，要塞没有修理，工事没有构筑，障碍没有设置，虽有城塞也是不能防守的。
English: If the enemy's transportation facilities are not combat-ready, the fortress is not repaired, the construction is not built, and the obstacles are not set up, even if there is a citadel, it cannot be defended.

古文：远堡未入，戍客未归，则虽有人无人矣。
现代文：边境的堡垒没有部队占领，守边的部队没有调动就绪，虽有人也等于无人了。
English: The border fortress is not occupied by troops, the troops guarding the border have not been mobilized, and although there are people, there is no one.

古文：六畜未聚，五谷未收，财用未敛，则虽有资无资矣。
现代文：敌人应征集的牲畜没有集中，应征集的粮食没有征集。该征收的财物没有收齐，虽有资财也等于没有资财了。
English: The livestock that should have been requisitioned by the enemy was not concentrated, the grain that should have been requisitioned was not requisitioned, the property that should have been requisitioned was not collected, and although there were assets, there were no assets.

古文：夫城邑空虚而资尽者，我因其虚而攻之。
现代文：对这种城邑空虚而资财穷尽的敌人，我应乘虚进攻它。
English: Against this enemy, whose cities are empty and whose resources are exhausted, I should take advantage of the void to attack it.

古文：法曰： 独出独入，敌不接刃而致之。 
现代文：兵法上说， 我军行动自由如入无人之境，敌人不待交锋就已被打败 ，就是指的这种情况。
English: According to the laws of war, our army's freedom of action is like entering no man's land, and the enemy has been defeated without a fight. This is what this situation refers to.

