古文：昔在帝尧，聪明文思，光宅天下。
现代文：从前唐尧称帝的时候,耳聪目明,治理天下有计谋,他的光辉充满天下。
English: Once upon a time, when Tang Xuan was crowned emperor, his ears and eyes were sharp, he had a plan for ruling the world, and his glory filled the world.

古文：将逊于位，让于虞舜，作《尧典》。
现代文：在他即将逊位，禅让给虞舜的时候，作了《尧典》。
English: When he was about to abdicate and give up Zen to Yu Zheng, he wrote "The Book of Zheng."

古文：曰若稽古，帝尧，曰放勋，钦、明、文、思、安安，允恭克让，光被四表，格于上下。
现代文：评价万古帝尧，帝尧名字叫做放勋，他恭敬节俭，明察是非，善理天下，道德纯备，温和宽容。他忠实不懈，又能让贤，光辉普照四方，思虑至于天地。
English: The evaluation of the emperor of all ages, the emperor's name is Fuxun, he is respectful and frugal, observes right and wrong, is rational, moral pure, gentle and tolerant. He is faithful and tireless, but also able to make virtuous, shining in all directions, thinking about heaven and earth.

古文：克明俊德，以亲九族。
现代文：他能发扬大德，使家族亲密和睦。
English: He can promote virtue and make the family close and harmonious.

古文：九族既睦，平章百姓。
现代文：家族和睦以后，又辨明其他各族的政事。
English: After the family was reconciled, the political affairs of other ethnic groups were clarified.

古文：百姓昭明，协和万邦。黎民于变时雍。
现代文：众族的政事辨明了，又协调万邦诸侯，天下众民因此也就相递变化友好和睦起来。
English: The political affairs of all ethnic groups have been identified and coordinated by the princes of all nations. As a result, the people of the world have become more friendly and harmonious.

古文：乃命羲和，钦若昊天，历象日月星辰，敬授民时。
现代文：尧于是命令羲氏与和氏，专职从事天文工作，推算日月星辰运行的规律，制定出历法，从而告诉人们依照时令节气从事生产活动。
English: He then ordered the Shun and Wa clans to engage full-time in astronomical work, calculate the laws of the movement of the sun, moon and stars, and develop a calendar to tell people to engage in production activities according to the seasonal solar terms.

古文：分命羲仲，宅嵎夷，曰暘谷。寅宾出日，平秩东作。
现代文：任命羲仲居住在今山东东部滨海地区，传说中日出的地方。
English: Gongzhong was appointed to live in what is now the eastern coastal area of Shandong Province, the legendary place of sunrise.

古文：日中，星鸟，以殷仲春。
现代文：迎接升起的太阳，注意东边星星升起的顺序。
English: To greet the rising sun, note the rising order of the stars in the east.

古文：厥民析，鸟兽孳尾。申命羲叔，宅南交，曰明都。
现代文：以昼夜平分的那天作为春分，并以鸟星见于南方正中之时作为划分仲春的根据。
English: The vernal equinox is the day when the day and night are of equal length, and the mid-spring is based on the time when the bird star is seen in the middle of the south.

古文：平秩南讹，敬致。日永，星火，以正仲夏。
现代文：昼夜长短相等，南方朱雀七宿黄昏时出现在天的正南方，依据这些确定仲春时节。
English: The length of day and night are equal, and the Southern Ibis appears directly in the south of the sky at dusk, according to which the mid-spring season is determined.

古文：厥民因，鸟兽希革。
现代文：这时，人们分散在田野，鸟兽开始生育繁殖。
English: At this time, people were scattered in the fields, and birds and beasts began to breed.

古文：分命和仲，宅西，曰昧谷。
现代文：又命令羲叔，住在南方的交趾，辨别测定太阳往南运行的情况，恭敬地迎接太阳向南回来。
English: He also ordered Uncle Zou, who lived in the southern part of the country, to distinguish and measure the southward movement of the sun and respectfully welcome the sun back to the south.

古文：寅饯纳日，平秩西成。宵中，星虚，以殷仲秋。
现代文：白昼时间最长，东方苍龙七宿中的火星黄昏时出现在南方，依据这些确定仲夏时节。
English: The length of the day is the longest, and Mars appears in the south at dusk in the seven mansions of the Eastern Dragon, according to which the midsummer time is determined.

古文：厥民夷，鸟兽毛毨。
现代文：这时，人们住在高处，鸟兽的羽毛稀疏。
English: At this time, people lived at high altitudes, and the feathers of birds and animals were sparse.

古文：申命和叔，宅朔方，曰幽都。
现代文：尧帝说： 善治四时之职的是谁啊？
English: Emperor Zou said, "Who is in charge of good governance?

古文：平在朔易。
现代文：我要提升任用他。 
English: I'm going to promote him.

古文：放齐曰： 胤子朱启明。 
现代文：放齐说： 您的儿子丹朱很开明。 
English: He said, "Your son, Dan Zhu, is very open-minded.

古文：帝曰： 吁！
现代文：尧帝说： 唉！
English: You can try it, just use it. The emperor said, "Go ahead, grasshopper!

古文：嚣讼可乎？ 
现代文：他说话虚妄，又好争辩，可以吗？ 
English: He speaks falsely and is argumentative, is that OK?

古文：帝曰： 畴咨若予采？ 驩兜曰： 都！
现代文：尧帝说： 善于处理我们政务的是谁呢？ 驩兜说： 啊！
English: Emperor Gong said, "Who is good at handling our government affairs?" Gong Dabu said, "Ah!

古文：共工方鸠僝功。 帝曰： 吁！
现代文：共工防救水灾已具有成效啊。 尧帝说： 唉！
English: The joint work of flood prevention and relief has already yielded results. Emperor Zou said: Alas!

古文：静言庸违，象恭滔天。 帝曰： 咨！
现代文：他貌似恭敬，而违背道德天性。 尧帝说： 啊！
English: He seems to be respectful, but he goes against his moral nature.

古文：四岳，汤汤洪水方割，荡荡怀山襄陵，浩浩滔天。
现代文：四方的诸侯啊！滔滔的洪水普遍危害人们，水势奔腾包围了山岭，淹没了丘陵，浩浩荡荡，弥漫接天。
English: O princes of the four quarters! The torrential flood has generally harmed people. The surging water has surrounded the mountains and submerged the hills. It is vast and pervasive.

古文：下民其咨，有能俾乂？ 
现代文：臣民百姓都在叹息，有能使洪水得到治理的吗？ 人们都说： 啊！鲧吧。 尧帝说： 唉！
English: The subjects and the people are all sighing, is there anything that can be done to control the flood? People are all saying, "Ah!

古文：佥曰： 于！
现代文：他违背人意，不服从命令，危害族人。 
English: He went against the will of the people, disobeyed orders, and endangered his people.

古文：鲧哉。 
现代文：四方诸侯之长说： 起用吧！
English: The heads of the four principalities said: Let's use it!

古文：帝曰： 吁！
现代文：试试可以，就用他。 尧帝说： 去吧，鲧！
English: You can try it, just use it. The emperor said, "Go ahead, grasshopper!

古文：咈哉，方命圮族。 
现代文：要谨慎啊！ 过了九年，成效不好。尧帝说： 啊！
English: Be careful! After nine years, the results are not good. Emperor Gong said: Ah!

古文：岳曰： 异哉！
现代文：四方的诸侯啊！
English: Princes of the four directions!

古文：试可乃已。 帝曰， 往，钦哉！ 
现代文：我在位已经七十年了，你们当中谁能够顺应天命接替我的位置啊？ 四方诸侯之长说： 我们德行鄙陋，不配登上帝位。 
English: I have been reigning for seventy years. Who among you will be able to fulfill the destiny of heaven and succeed me? The chiefs of the four provinces said, "We are not worthy to ascend the throne of God because of our lowly conduct."

古文：九载，绩用弗成。帝曰： 咨！
现代文：尧帝说： 可以明察贵戚中的贤才，也可以推举地位低微的贤德之人。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: It is possible to discern the wise men among the noble relatives, and it is also possible to nominate the wise men of low status.

古文：四岳。朕在位七十载，汝能庸命，巽朕位？ 
现代文：众人提议说： 在民间有一个穷困的人，他的名字叫虞舜。 
English: The crowd suggested, "Among the common people, there is a poor man whose name is Yu Yao.

古文：岳曰： 否德忝帝位。 
现代文：尧帝说： 是的，我也听说过这个人，他的德行怎么样呢？ 
English: Hao Di said, "Yes, I have also heard of this man. What about his virtue?"

古文：曰： 明明扬侧陋。 
现代文：四方诸侯之长回答说： 他是乐官瞽叟的儿子。
English: The governors of the four provinces replied, "He is the son of the music official, Yao."

古文：师锡帝曰： 有鳏在下，曰虞舜。 
现代文：他的父亲心术不正，他的母亲总是说谎，他的弟弟非常傲慢，但是舜却能同他们和谐相处。
English: His father is devious, his mother is a liar and his brother is arrogant, but Toad gets along with all of them.

古文：帝曰： 俞予闻，如何？ 
现代文：因他的孝心醇厚，治理国务不至于坏吧！ 尧帝说： 我试试考验考验他吧！
English: Because his filial piety is mellow, the governance of the state will not be bad! Emperor Xuan said: Let me try and test him!

古文：岳曰： 瞽子，父顽，母嚚，象傲；克谐以孝，烝烝乂，不格奸。 
现代文：把我的两个女儿嫁给舜，通过两个女儿考察他的德行。 于是命令在妫河的弯曲处举行婚礼，将两个女儿嫁给虞舜。尧帝说： 以后你就敬慎地处理政务吧！ 
English: He ordered that my two daughters should be married to Yao, and that his virtue should be examined through his two daughters, so he ordered that the wedding should be held at the bend of the Yao River, and that the two daughters should be married to Yu Yao. Emperor Yao said, "In the future, you should handle government affairs with caution!"

古文：帝曰： 我其试哉！女于时，观厥刑于二女。 
现代文：舜诚心诚意地推行德教，教导臣民以父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝五种美德指导自身的行为，臣民都可以听从这种教导而不违背。舜总理百官，百官都能承顺。
English: He sincerely and wholeheartedly promoted moral education, teaching his subjects to guide their behavior with the five virtues of fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety. His subjects could all listen to this teaching without disobeying.

古文：厘降二女于妫汭，嫔于虞。
现代文：舜在明堂四门迎接四方宾客，四方宾客都肃然起敬。
English: He greeted the guests from all over the country at the four doors of Myeongdong. The guests from all over the country were awestruck.

古文：帝曰： 钦哉！ 
现代文：舜担任守山林的官，在暴风雷雨的恶劣天气也不迷误。
English: As the official in charge of protecting the mountains and forests, Zou did not falter in the bad weather of storms and thunderstorms.

古文：帝曰： 格！
现代文：尧帝说： 来吧！
English: Shen Di said: Come on!

古文：汝舜。询事考言，乃言底可绩，三载。汝陟帝位。 
现代文：舜，我同你谋划政事，经过三年的考验，你的确取得不少成绩，你现在可以登上天子的大位了！ 
English: After three years of testing, you have indeed made a lot of achievements, and now you can ascend to the throne of the Son of Heaven!

古文：舜让于德，弗嗣。
现代文：舜觉得自己德行不够，要让给有德的人，推让不肯继承。
English: He felt that he was not virtuous enough, so he wanted to give it to a virtuous person, but he did not want to inherit it.

