古文：癸酉七月二十八日出都为五台游。
现代文：癸酉年七月二十八日，从首都出发去游览五台山。
English: On July 28 of the year of the rooster, I set out from the capital to visit Mount Wutai.

古文：越八月初四日，抵阜平南关。
现代文：到八月初四日，来到阜平县南关。
English: On the fourth day of early August, I came to Nankuan, Fuping County.

古文：山自唐县来，至唐河始密，至黄葵渐开，势不甚穹窿矣。从阜平西南过石梁，西北诸峰复嵱嵷上下众多起。
现代文：山从唐县伸来，延伸到唐河开始密集，到黄葵又渐渐敞开，山势不太高大、从阜平县往西南走过石桥，西北众多的山峰又高低起伏地耸起来。
English: The mountains stretch from Tang County and begin to be dense as they extend to the Tang River, and gradually open up to Huangyao. The mountains are not very tall, and from Fuping County to the southwest they pass over a stone bridge, and the numerous peaks in the northwest rise high and low.

古文：循溪左北行八里，小溪自西来注，乃舍大溪，溯西溪北转，山峡渐束。
现代文：沿着溪流左岸往北行八里，有条小溪从西边流来注入，于是离开大溪，溯西边的小溪往北转，山谷渐渐狭窄。
English: I followed the left bank of the stream north for eight miles. A stream flowed in from the west, so I left the big stream and followed the west stream north. The valley gradually narrowed.

古文：又七里，饭于太子铺。
现代文：又走了七里，在太子铺吃饭。
English: We walked another seven miles to have dinner at the Prince's Inn.

古文：北行十五里，溪声忽至。
现代文：往北行十五里，忽然听到溪流声。
English: Fifteen miles to the north, I suddenly heard the sound of a stream.

古文：回顾右崖，石壁数十仞，中坳如削瓜直下。
现代文：回头看右边的山崖，数十丈高的石壁，中间的坳像削瓜一样的直直下去。
English: Looking back at the cliff on the right, the stone wall is dozens of meters high, and the beak in the middle is straight down like a carved melon.

古文：上亦有坳，乃瀑布所从溢者，今天旱无瀑，瀑痕犹在削坳间。
现代文：崖上面也有坳，是瀑布所流经的地方，今年天旱没有水，但瀑布冲泻的痕迹仍留在削坳之间。
English: There is also a ridge above the cliff, which is where the waterfall flows. There was no water this year due to the drought, but traces of the waterfall still remain between the ridges.

古文：离涧二三尺，泉从坳间细孔泛滥出，下遂成流。
现代文：离涧底二兰尺，泉水从坳间的小孔中泛滥而出，往下汇成溪流。
English: Two yards from the bottom of the pond, spring water floods out of the small hole between the paddles and flows down into a stream.

古文：再上，逾鞍子岭。
现代文：再往上走，越过鞍子岭。
English: Walk further up and cross the Kurazu ridge.

古文：岭上四眺，北坞颇开，东北、西北，高峰对峙，俱如仙掌插天，惟直北一隙少杀收束。
现代文：在岭上眺望四周，北面的山坞比较开阔，东北、西北，高峰对峙，山峰都像直插云天的仙人巨掌，只有正北的一隙山坞稍微差一些。
English: Looking around on the ridge, the dock on the north side is relatively open, northeast, northwest, peak confrontation, the peaks are like cactus giant paws sticking straight into the sky, only the dock just to the north is slightly worse.

古文：复有远山横其外，即龙泉关也，去此尚四十里。
现代文：再远处还有山横贯在群峰之外，那就是龙泉关，距离这里还有四十里。
English: Farther away, there is a mountain range beyond the peaks, that is, Longquan Pass, which is still forty miles away.

古文：岭下有水从西南来，初随之北行，已而溪从东峡中去。
现代文：岭下有股从西南流来的溪水，我开始顺着溪水往北走，不久溪水从东边峡谷中流走。
English: At the foot of the ridge, there was a stream flowing from the southwest. I began to follow the stream to the north, and soon the stream was flowing from the middle of the east canyon.

古文：复逾一小岭，则大溪从西北来，其势甚壮，亦从东南峡中去，当即与西南之溪合流出阜平北者。
现代文：我又翻过一座小岭，就有一条从西北流来的大溪，水势很壮观，也是从东南峡谷中流走，想来应该是和西南流来的小溪汇合，然后流出阜平县北。
English: I also climbed over a ridge, and there was a large stream flowing from the northwest, the water potential was very spectacular. It also flowed from the southeast canyon, and it should have merged with the stream flowing from the southwest, and then flowed out of the north of Fuping County.

古文：余初过阜平，舍大溪而西，以为西溪即龙泉之水也，不谓西溪乃出鞍子岭坳壁，逾岭而复与大溪之上流遇，大溪则出自龙泉者。
现代文：我当初经过阜平县时，离开大溪往西走，以为西边的溪流是龙泉关流来的，没有想到溪水却是出自于鞍子岭坳壁，我翻过岭后文与大溪的上游相遇，大溪才是从龙泉关流出的。
English: When I first passed through Fuping County, I left the creek and walked west, thinking that the stream on the west side came from Longquan Pass. I didn't think that the stream water came from the Kuranziling escarpment. After I crossed the ridge, I met the upstream of the creek, which flowed from Longquan Pass.

古文：溪有石梁曰万年，过之，溯流望西北高峰而趋。
现代文：溪流上的石桥名万年，过了桥，溯溪流，遥望着西北的高峰奔赶。
English: The stone bridge over the stream has been famous for thousands of years. After crossing the bridge, they follow the stream and look at the high peaks in the northwest.

古文：十里，逼峰下，为小山所掩，反不睹嶙峋之势。
现代文：行十里，直达高峰下，峰被小山掩映，反而看不见那山石重叠、高低不平的气势。
English: Walk ten miles, straight to the peak, the peak is covered by a hill, but you can't see the overlap of the mountains and the uneven momentum.

古文：转北行，向所望东北高峰，瞻之愈出，趋之愈近，峭削之姿，遥遥逐人向人逼来，二十里之间，劳于应接。
现代文：转朝北走，刚才所看到东北边的高峰，越看越突出，趋之越近，那高峻陡峭的形态，像远远地追随人而来似的，二十里路程之间，都忙于观赏应接。
English: Turning to the north, the high peak just seen on the northeast side, the more you look at it, the more prominent it becomes, and the closer it gets. The high and steep shape seems to follow people from afar, and for twenty miles, everyone is busy watching and responding.

古文：是峰名五岩寨，又名吴王寨，有老僧庐其上。
现代文：这座峰名五岩寨，又名吴王寨，有个老僧人在峰上居住。
English: The peak is called Wuyan Village, also known as Wu Wang Village. An old monk lives on the peak.

古文：已而东北峰下，溪流溢出，与龙泉大溪会，土人构石梁于上，非龙关道所经。
现代文：不久来到东北边的高峰下，溪水往外流淌，和龙泉关流来的大溪会合，当地人在溪上搭有石桥，但不是去龙泉关要过的路。
English: Soon I came to the foot of the peak on the northeast side. The stream water flowed outward and met the stream flowing from Longquan Pass. The locals built a stone bridge over the stream, but it was not the way to go to Longquan Pass.

古文：从桥左北行八里，时遇崩崖矗立溪上。
现代文：从石桥左边行八里，不时地遇到崩塌的崖石矗立在溪边。
English: After walking eight miles from the left side of the stone bridge, we occasionally encountered a collapsed cliff standing on the edge of the stream.

古文：又二里，重城当隘口，为龙泉关。
现代文：又走二里，一座重镇位于关隘口，这就是龙泉关。
English: After another two miles, a major town is located at the pass, which is Longquan Pass.

古文：初五日进南关，出东关。
现代文：初五日往南进入龙泉关，往东出关。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, enter Longquan Pass to the south and leave the pass to the east.

古文：北行十里，路渐上，山渐奇，泉声渐微。
现代文：往北行十里，道路渐渐向上延伸，山峰渐渐奇异，泉水声渐渐消失。
English: Ten miles to the north, the road gradually extends upwards, the mountains gradually become strange, and the sound of the spring gradually disappears.

古文：既而石路陡绝，两崖巍峰峭壁，合沓攒奇，山树与石竞丽错绮，不复知升陟之烦也。
现代文：不久，陡峭的道路断绝，路两边的山崖峰高壁峭，重重叠叠琦景聚集，山中的树木和岩石争奇斗艳，交错如绵绣，让人再也感不到登山的烦劳了。
English: Soon, the steep road was cut off, the cliff peaks on both sides of the road were high and cliffy, overlapping and superimposed mirages gathered, and the trees and rocks in the mountains competed with each other, interlaced like embroidery, so that people could no longer feel the fatigue of climbing.

古文：如是五里，崖逼处复设石关二重。
现代文：在这样的美景中走了五里，崖石狭窄处还设有两道石关。
English: In such a beautiful scenery, I walked five miles, and there were two stone gates at the narrow place of the cliff.

古文：又直上五里，登长城岭绝顶。
现代文：又直直往上走了五里，登上长城岭绝顶。
English: I walked straight up for another five miles and climbed to the very top of the Great Wall.

古文：回望远峰，极高者亦伏足下，两旁近峰拥护，惟南来一线有山隙，彻目百里。
现代文：回头眺望远处的山峰，最高的也低伏在脚下，两旁近处的山峰簇拥而来，只有南部山中有一线缝隙，从缝隙中放眼看可达百里。
English: Looking back at the distant peaks, the highest is also lying at the foot of the mountain, and the nearby peaks are crowded on both sides. Only in the southern mountains is there a slit, from which you can see up to a hundred miles.

古文：岭之上，巍楼雄峙，即龙泉上关也。
现代文：长城岭上，高楼雄壮地耸立着，是龙泉上关。
English: On the ridge of the Great Wall, tall buildings stand majestically, and at the top is Longquan Shangguan.

古文：关内古松一株，枝耸叶茂，干云俊物。
现代文：关内有一棵古松，树干高耸、枝叶茂盛，是高触云霄、秀美出众的物种。
English: There is an ancient pine tree in Guanai, with a towering trunk and luxuriant branches and leaves. It is a species that reaches high into the sky and is outstandingly beautiful.

古文：关之西，即为山西五台县界。
现代文：龙泉上关西面，就是山西省五台县境。
English: On the west side of Longquan, it is the border of Wutai County, Shanxi Province.

古文：下岭甚平，不及所上十之一。
现代文：下岭的路很平，坡度不到上岭时的十分之一。
English: The road to the lower ridge is very flat, the slope is less than a tenth of the one to the upper ridge.

古文：十三里，为旧路岭，已在平地。
现代文：走十三里，名旧路岭，已经到平地了。
English: Thirteen miles away, the famous old road ridge has reached the flatland.

古文：有溪自西南来，至此随山向西北去，行亦从之。
现代文：有条溪水从西南流来，流到这里顺着山往西北流去，我也跟着走。
English: There is a stream coming from the south-west, and it flows here along the mountain to the north-west, and I follow it.

古文：十里，五台水自西北来会，合流注滹沱河。
现代文：十里，五台水从西北流来会合，合流之后注人淖沱河。
English: Ten miles away, the Wutai River flows from the northwest to meet, and after the confluence, it flows into the Renren River.

古文：乃循西北溪数里，为天池庄。
现代文：于是往西北沿着水走了几里，到天池庄。
English: So I walked a few miles northwest along the water to Tianchi village.

古文：北向坞中二十里，过白头庵村，去南台止二十里，四顾山谷，犹不可得其仿佛大概。
现代文：往北在坞中走二十里，经过白头庵村，距离南台只有二十里了，环视山谷四周，还看不出相似天台山的形貌。
English: Walking north for twenty miles in the dock, passing Baotouan Village, only twenty miles away from Nantai, looking around the valley, I still can't see the similar shape of Tiantai Mountain.

古文：又西北二里，路左为白云寺。
现代文：又往西北走二里，道路左侧为白云寺。
English: Another two miles to the northwest, and Baiyun Temple is on the left side of the road.

古文：由其前南折，攀跻四里，折上三里，至千佛洞，乃登台间道。
现代文：从寺前往南转，往上攀登四里，转来转去地上了三里，来到千佛洞，这是登五台山的小路。
English: From the temple, turn south, climb up four miles, turn around three miles on the ground, and come to the Thousand Buddha Caves, which is a path to climb Mount Wutai.

古文：又折而西行，三里始至。
现代文：又转向西行，走三里住宿。
English: Turn west again and walk three miles to the hostel.

古文：初六日风怒起，滴水皆冰。
现代文：初六日狂风怒号，滴水成冰。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the wind blew furiously, and water dripped into ice.

古文：风止日出，如火珠涌吐翠叶中。
现代文：风停日出，太阳像火球一样从青翠的山林中喷薄而出。
English: When the wind stops at sunrise, the sun shoots out like a fireball from the verdant mountain forest.

古文：循山半西南行，四里，逾岭，始望南台在前。
现代文：沿着山腰往西南行，四里，翻越加岭，才看到南台就在前面。
English: I drove along the mountainside to the southwest for four miles, crossing the Jialing Mountains, before I saw NanTai in front of me.

古文：再上为灯寺，由此路渐峻。
现代文：再上去是灯寺，从这里开始，山路渐渐陡峻起来。
English: Further up is the Lantern Temple. From here, the mountain road gradually steepens.

古文：十里，登南台绝顶，有文殊舍利塔。
现代文：走十里，登上南台绝顶，顶上有文殊菩萨的舍利塔。
English: Walk ten miles and climb to the top of Nantai, where there is the Manjusri Bodhisattva's stupa.

古文：北面诸台环列，惟东南、西南少有隙地。
现代文：北面，其它各台环抱耸列，只有东南、西南稍微有空隙处。
English: To the north, the other platforms are lined up in a ring, with only a slight gap in the southeast and southwest.

古文：正南，古南台在其下，远则盂县诸山屏峙，而东与龙泉峥嵘接势。
现代文：正南面，古南台位于下面，远处则盂县的群山如屏障般地峙立着，并且东端还和龙泉关高峻的峰峦山势连接。
English: Facing due south, Gu Nantai is located below, and in the distance, the mountains of Handan County stand like a barrier, and the eastern end is also connected to the lofty peaks of Longquan Pass.

古文：从台右道而下，途甚夷，可骑。
现代文：顺着南台右侧的道路下去，地势很平坦，可以骑马。
English: Go down the road on the right side of Nantai, the terrain is very flat, you can ride a horse.

古文：循西岭西北行十五里，为金阁岭。
现代文：沿着西岭往西北行十五里，名金阁岭。
English: Fifteen miles northwest along the West Ridge, the famous Jingu Ridge.

古文：又循山左西北下，五里，抵清凉石。
现代文：又沿着金阁岭左侧往西北下，行五里，来到清凉石。
English: I also walked along the left side of Jingu Ridge to the northwest, five miles, and came to Qingliangshi.

古文：寺宇幽丽，高下如图画。
现代文：清凉寺庙宇深幽，环境秀丽，高低错落，美如图画。
English: The cool temples are deep and secluded, the environment is beautiful, the highs and lows are staggered, and the beauty is like a picture.

古文：有石为芝形，纵横各九步，上可立四百人，面平而下锐，属于下石者无几。
现代文：有一块灵芝形的石头，长宽都是九步，上面可以站四百个人，上面平整但下面收缩，和下面石头相连的部分不多。
English: There is a stone in the shape of a Ganoderma lucidum. It is nine paces long and wide. Four hundred people can stand on it. It is flat on top but shrinks at the bottom. There are not many parts connected to the stone below.

古文：从西北历栈拾级而上，十二里，抵马跑泉。
现代文：从西北边穿越栈道沿着石阶往上走，十二里，到达跑马泉。
English: From the northwest side, cross the footbridge and walk up the stone steps, twelve miles, to the Happy Horse Spring.

古文：泉在路隅山窝间，石隙仅容半蹄，水从中溢出，窝亦平敞可寺，而马跑寺反在泉侧一里外。
现代文：跑马泉在路边的山窝中间，石缝只能容下半只马蹄，泉水从石缝中溢出，山窝则平坦宽敞，可以建盖寺庙，但跑马寺反而建在泉旁边一里之外。
English: Happy Horse Spring is in the middle of a roadside mountain cave, the stone gap can only accommodate half a horseshoe, the spring water overflows from the stone gap, the mountain cave is flat and spacious, and a temple can be built, but Happy Horse Temple is built one mile away from the spring.

古文：又平下八里，宿于狮子窠。
现代文：又平缓地下了八里，在狮子案住宿。
English: I slowly descended eight miles and stayed at the Lion's Case.

古文：初七日西北行十里，度化度桥。
现代文：初七日往西北行十里，过化度桥。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, I traveled ten miles to the northwest and crossed the Huadu Bridge.

古文：一峰从中台下，两旁流泉淙淙，幽靓靓同静迥绝。
现代文：一座山峰从中台延伸下来，山峰两边流着涂涂的泉水，景色幽静到了极点。
English: A mountain peak extends down from the middle of the plateau. On both sides of the peak, there is a stream of spring water. The scenery is quiet to the extreme.

古文：复度其右涧之桥，循山西向而上，路欹倾斜不平甚。
现代文：又越过山峰右涧上的桥，沿着山峰往西而上，山路十分倾斜不平。
English: I crossed the bridge on the right ridge of the mountain and followed the mountain to the west. The mountain road was very uneven.

古文：又十里，登西台之顶。
现代文：又走十里，登上西台顶。
English: Walk another ten miles and climb to the top of the West Terrace.

古文：日映诸峰，一一献态呈奇。
现代文：阳光辉映下的群峰，一一地呈现出美好的态态和奇异的风貌。
English: The group of peaks reflected in the sun shine, one by one showing a beautiful state and a strange style.

古文：其西面，近则闭魔岩，远则雁门关，历历可府而挈ｑｉè即提取、拾取也。
现代文：西台西面，近处是闭魔岩，远处是雁门关，座座山峰都历历在目，仿佛府身就可以抓住。
English: On the west side of the West Terrace, the nearby area is the Closed Devil Rock, the distant area is the Wild Goose Gate, and the peaks of the Zodiac Mountains are all within sight, as if you can grasp them with your body.

古文：闭魔岩在四十里外，山皆陡崖盘亘，层累而上，为此中奇处。
现代文：闭魔岩在四十里外，山上全是盘旋横贯的陡崖，层层叠叠地堆砌上去，成为这山中的奇特之处。
English: The Enchanted Rock is forty miles away, and all over the mountain there are steep cliffs spiraling across, piled up layer upon layer, making this a special place in the mountains.

古文：入叩佛龛，即从台北下，三里，为八功德水。
现代文：进寺叩拜佛像后，就顺着台北往下走，三里，到八功德水。
English: After entering the temple and bowing to the Buddha statue, I walked down along Taipei, three miles, to the Eight Merits Water.

古文：寺北面，左为维摩阁，阁下二石耸起，阁架于上，阁柱长短，随石参差，有竟不用柱者。
现代文：寺北面，左边是维摩阁，阁下面耸立着两块石头，阁就盖在石头上，阁柱的长短，随石头高低而参差不齐，有的地方完全不用柱子。
English: On the north side of the temple, on the left is the Vimok pavilion. Under the pavilion, there are two stones. The pavilion is covered with stones. The length of the pillars of the pavilion varies with the height of the stones. In some places, there are no pillars at all.

古文：其中为万佛阁，佛俱金碧旃檀即檀香，罗列辉映，不啻万尊。
现代文：正中是万佛阁，佛像都是檀香木的，色彩金碧辉煌，层层排列而互相映衬，不止一万尊。
English: In the middle is the Ten Thousand Buddhas Pavilion. The Buddha statues are all made of sandalwood, the colors are brilliant, and they are arranged in layers to contrast each other. There are more than ten thousand statues.

古文：前有阁二重，俱三层，其周庐环阁亦三层，中架复道，往来空中。
现代文：万佛阁前有两排阁楼，都是三层高，阁楼周围环绕的房屋楼阁也都是三层的，各阁楼之中架有上下通道，人从空中来来往往。
English: In front of the Great Buddha Pavilion, there are two rows of lofts, all three stories high. The houses surrounding the lofts are also three stories high. There are up and down passages in each loft, and people come and go from the sky.

古文：当此万山艰阻，非神力不能运运作、修造此。
现代文：在这艰难险阻的万山之中，要不是神力，又怎能将楼阁建在这里呢！
English: In the midst of these difficult and perilous mountains, if it were not for divine power, how could a castle be built here?

古文：从寺东北行，五里，至大道，又十里，至台中。
现代文：顺着寺往东北走，五里，来到大路上，又走十里，到达中台。
English: Walk along the temple to the northeast, five miles, come to the highway, and walk ten miles to reach Zhongtai.

古文：望东台、南台，俱在五六十里外，而南台外之龙泉，反若更近，惟西台、北台，相与连属。
现代文：遥望东台、南台，都在五六十里以外，但南台之外的龙泉关，反而像离得更近，因为西台、北台，都和龙泉关的山脉相连。
English: From a distance, Dongtai and Nantai are both fifty or sixty miles away, but Longquan Pass, which is outside of Nantai, seems to be closer, because West and North Tais are connected to the mountains of Longquan Pass.

古文：时风清日丽，山开列如须眉。
现代文：这时风清日丽，两边的山像眉毛分开而列。
English: At this time, the weather was fine and the mountains on both sides were lined up like eyebrows.

古文：余先趋台之南，登龙翻石。
现代文：我先去中台南面，登上龙翻石。
English: I went to the south side of Zhongtai first and climbed the Dragon Rock.

古文：其地乱石数万，涌起峰头，下临绝坞，中悬独耸，言是文殊放光摄影处。
现代文：这里布满几万块乱石，堆积成峰头，下面是很深的山坞，峰头悬空耸立，传说是文殊菩萨放光显身影的地方。
English: It is covered with tens of thousands of rocks, piled up to form a peak. Below is a very deep dock, the peak is suspended in the air, and is said to be the place where Manjushri Bodhisattva shone his light.

古文：从台北直下者四里，阴崖悬冰数百丈，曰 万年冰 。
现代文：从中台往北直直下了四里，阴森的崖壁上悬挂着几百丈冰，名 万年冰 。
English: From Zhongtai to the north straight down four miles, the gloomy cliffs are hung with hundreds of feet of ice, known as the "ice of a thousand years."

古文：其坞中亦有结庐者。
现代文：这道坞中也有人家居住。
English: There are also people living in this dock.

古文：初寒无几，台间冰雪，种种而是。
现代文：刚刚寒冷还没几天，五台山中的冰雪竟已有如此种种的形态。
English: It hasn't even been cold for a few days yet, but the ice and snow in the Wutai Mountains has already taken on so many different forms.

古文：闻雪下于七月二十七日，正余出都时也。
现代文：听说是七月二十七日下的雪，正是我从京城出发的日子。
English: I heard that it snowed on the 27th of July, the day I left the capital.

古文：行四里，北上澡浴池。
现代文：行四里，往北登上澡浴池。
English: Walk four miles north to the bathing pool.

古文：又北上十里，宿于北台。
现代文：又往北上十里，在北台住宿。
English: Another ten miles to the north, to stay in Hokutai.

古文：北台比诸台较峻，余乘日色，周眺寺外。
现代文：北台比其它各台都陡峻，我趁着日光，到寺外眺望四周。
English: The north terrace is steeper than the others, and I took advantage of the daylight to look around outside the temple.

古文：及入寺，日落而风大作。
现代文：等进到寺中，太阳落山而刮起大风。
English: When we arrived at the temple, the sun was setting and a strong wind was blowing.

古文：初八日老僧石堂送余，历指诸山曰： 北台之下，东台西，中台中，南台北，有坞曰台湾，此诸台环列之概也。
现代文：初八日老僧人石堂送我出来，他指着一座座山峰说： 北台下面，东台西面，中台正中，南台北面，有山坞名叫台湾，这是众台环绕的概貌。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the old monk Shitang sent me out. He pointed to the mountain peaks and said: Below North Taiwan, west of East Taiwan, in the middle of Central Taiwan, and south of Taipei, there is a mountain dock called Taiwan. This is the general appearance of the mountains surrounding Taiwan.

古文：其正东稍北，有浮青特锐者，恒山也。
现代文：这里正东稍北，有座特别尖锐的青山，那就是恒山。
English: Just to the east and slightly north of here, there is a particularly sharp green mountain, that is, Hengshan.

古文：正西稍南，有连岚一抹者，雁门也。
现代文：正西稍南，有和云雾相连的山峰，是雁门关一带的山峰。
English: Slightly south of due west, there is a mountain peak connected to the clouds and fog, which is the highest peak in the area of Yanmen Pass.

古文：直南诸山，南台之外，惟龙泉为独雄。
现代文：一直向南延伸的群山，除南台之外，只有龙泉关独自称雄。
English: In addition to Nantai, Longquan Pass is the only one to stand out among the mountains that stretch all the way south.

古文：直北俯内外二边，诸山如蓓蕾，惟兹山北护，峭削层叠，嵯峨之势，独露一班通斑。
现代文：直直往北俯视内、外两边，群山都如同花蕾，只有这座山从北面护着群山，陡峭层叠，高峻的山势，由此可以独见一斑。
English: Looking straight to the north, both inside and outside, the mountains are like buds, only this mountain protects the mountains from the north, with steep cascades and high mountain ranges, which makes it unique.

古文：此北台历览之概也。
现代文：这是全面观看北台的概貌。
English: This is a general view of the North Tower.

古文：此去东台四十里，华岩岭在其中。
现代文：这里距离东台四十里，华岩岭在途中。
English: It is forty miles from Dongtai, and Huayangling is on the way.

古文：若探北岳，不若竟由岭北下，可省四十里登降。 余颔之。
现代文：如果探访北岳恒山，不如直接沿华岩岭往北下，可以省掉上下四十里的路程。 
English: If you visit Beidake Hengshan, it is better to go directly north along Huayangling, which can save forty miles of travel.

古文：别而东，直下者八里，平下者十二里，抵华岩岭。
现代文：我点头同意，和石堂告别后往东走，陡直地下了八里，平缓地下了十二里，来到华岩岭。
English: I nodded in agreement, and after saying goodbye to Shitang, I walked eastward, descending eight miles steeply and twelve miles smoothly, and came to Huayangling.

古文：由北坞下十里，始夷。
现代文：沿北坞往下走十里，才到平路。
English: It's a ten-mile walk down the north dock to reach Ping Road.

古文：一涧自北，一涧自西，两涧合而群峰凑，深壑中 一壶天 也。
现代文：一道涧沟从北伸来，一道从西伸来，两道涧沟合拢后群峰凑集，成为高山深壑中的 一壶天 名胜。
English: A gully stretches from the north and a gully from the west, and after the two gullys are closed, the peaks are gathered together, becoming a pot of heaven in the depths of the mountains.

古文：循涧东北行二十里，曰野子场。
现代文：沿涧沟往东北行二十里，名野子场。
English: Twenty miles to the northeast along the reed ditch, the famous field.

古文：南自白头庵至此，数十里内，生天花菜，出此则绝种矣。
现代文：从南边的白头庵一直到这里，数十里以内都长着天花菜，从这里出去则绝种了。
English: From Baekduan in the south all the way to here, within dozens of miles, there are smallpox vegetables growing, and from here on out, the species is extinct.

古文：由此，两崖屏列鼎峙，雄峭万状，如是者十里。
现代文：从这里开始，两旁的山崖屏障般地排列、鼎足似地耸立，雄壮、峻峭，千姿百态，在这样的景观中走了十里。
English: Starting from here, the mountains and cliffs on both sides are arranged like a barrier, towering like a peak, majestic, steep, and varied, and I walked ten miles in such a landscape.

古文：石崖悬绝中，层阁杰起，则悬空寺也，石壁尤奇。
现代文：石崖绝壁之中，有层层楼阁突起，那是悬空寺，石。壁特别奇异。
English: In the middle of the cliff cliff, there is a multi-storey pavilion protruding, it is a suspended temple, stone. The wall is particularly bizarre.

古文：此为北台外护山，不从此出，几不得台山神理云。
现代文：这是北台外围的护山，不从这条路出五台山，几乎体会不到五台山的神奇啊。
English: This is the mountain guard on the outskirts of Beitai. If you don't go out of Mount Wutai from this road, you can hardly experience the magic of Mount Wutai.

