古文：汤以伐桀，而恐天下言己为贪也，因乃让天下于务光。
现代文：商汤已灭夏桀，而怕天下人说自己贪心，于是就把天下让给务光。
English: Shang Tang had destroyed Xia Yao, and fearing that people around the world would say that he was greedy, he gave the world to Wu Guang.

古文：而恐务光之受之也，乃使人说务光曰： 汤杀君，而欲传恶声于子，故让天下于子。 务光因自投于河。
现代文：但怕务光真的接受下来，就又派人劝告务光说： 商汤杀了君主而想把坏名声转嫁给你，所以才把天下让给你。 务光因此投河自尽。
English: But fearing that Mu Guang would really accept, he sent another person to advise Mu Guang, saying: Shang Tang killed the monarch and wanted to pass on the bad reputation to you, so he ceded the world to you. Therefore, Mu Guang threw himself into the river.

古文：秦武王令甘茂择所欲为于仆与行事，孟卯曰： 公不如为仆。
现代文：秦武王叫甘茂在仆官与行事官中选择一种自己想要做的官职。孟卯说： 您不如做仆官。
English: King Qin Wu asked Gan Mao to choose one of the official positions he wanted to do from among the servants and officials. Meng Wu said: You might as well be a servant.

古文：公所长者使也。
现代文：您的特长是做使臣。
English: Your specialty is being an envoy.

古文：公虽为仆，王犹使之于公也。
现代文：您即使做了仆官，君主仍会把使臣的事务交给您。
English: Even if you become a servant, the monarch will still entrust you with the affairs of the envoy.

古文：公佩仆玺而为行事，是兼官也。 
现代文：您佩带着仆官的印信，又做着行事官的事情，这是身兼二职啊! 
English: You wear the seal of a servant, and you also do the things of a steward, which is a double-duty!

古文：子圉见孔子于商太宰。
现代文：子圉把孔子引见给宋国太宰。
English: Zixuan introduced Confucius to the grand vizier of Song.

古文：孔子出，子圉入，请问客。
现代文：孔子走后，子围进来，询问太宰对孔子的看法。
English: After Confucius left, Zi Wai came in and asked Dazai's opinion of Confucius.

古文：太宰曰： 吾已见孔子，则视子犹蚤虱之细者也。
现代文：太宰说： 我见过孔子之后，再看你就像渺小的跳蚤虱子一样了。
English: Dazai said, "After I met Confucius, I look at you like a tiny flea louse.

古文：吾今见之于君。 子圉恐孔子贵于君也，因谓太宰曰： 君已见孔子，亦将视子犹蚤虱也。 太宰因弗复见也。
现代文：我现在就把他引见给君主。 子圉怕孔子被君主看重，因而告诉太宰说： 君主见过孔子后，也会把你看作如同跳蚤虱子一般了。 于是太宰不再向宋君引见孔子。
English: I'll introduce him to the monarch now. Zixuan was afraid that Confucius would be valued by the monarch, so he told the grand vizier: After the monarch sees Confucius, he will also see you as a flea louse. Therefore, the grand vizier no longer introduced Confucius to Song Jun.

古文：魏惠王为臼里之盟，将复立于天子。
现代文：魏惠王主持臼里的盟会，打算恢复周天子的地位。
English: Wei Hui Wang presided over the League of Usuli, intending to restore the status of Zhou Tianzi.

古文：彭喜谓郑君曰： 君勿听。
现代文：彭喜告诉韩王说： 君王别听他的。
English: Peng Xi told Han Wang, "Don't listen to him, Your Majesty.

古文：大国恶有天子，小国利之。
现代文：大国讨厌有天子，天子只对小国有利。
English: Big countries hate having a godson. A godson is only good for small countries.

古文：若君与大不听，魏焉能与小立之？ 
现代文：如果君王和大国都不听他的，魏国还怎么能和小国一起恢复周天子的地位呢？ 
English: If the emperor and the great powers do not listen to him, how can Wei restore the status of Zhou Tianzi together with the small countries?

古文：晋人伐邢，齐桓公将救之。
现代文：晋国讨伐邢国，齐桓公打算前去解救。
English: Jin Province is attacking Shandong Province, and Lord Qi Kuan intends to go to the rescue.

古文：鲍叔曰： 太蚤。
现代文：鲍叔说： 为时太早了。
English: Uncle Bao said: It's too early.

古文：邢不亡，晋不敝；晋不敝，齐不重。
现代文：邢国不灭亡，晋国就不疲惫；晋国不疲备，齐国地位就不会重要起来。
English: If Shan State does not perish, Jin State will not be exhausted; if Jin State is not exhausted, the status of Qi State will not be important.

古文：且夫持危之功，不如存亡之德大。
现代文：况且扶持危国的功德，比不上恢复亡国的功德大。
English: Moreover, the merit of supporting the endangered country is not as great as the merit of restoring the ruined country.

古文：君不如晚救之以敝晋，齐实利；待邢亡而复存之，其名实美。 桓公乃弗救。
现代文：您不如晚点救邢，以便使晋国疲惫，齐国才能真正得到好处。等邢国灭亡后再帮助他们复国，那样的名声才真正美好。 齐桓公于是不去救援。
English: You might as well save Qi later, so as to make Jin tired, so that Qi can really benefit from it. Wait for the death of Qi and then help them restore the country, that kind of reputation is really beautiful. Qi Huan then does not go to the rescue.

古文：子胥出走，边候得之。
现代文：楚人伍子胥出逃，守边官吏抓住了他。
English: Wu Zixuan, a Chu man, ran away, and border officials caught him.

古文：子胥曰： 上索我者，以我有美珠也。
现代文：子胥说： 君主搜捕我，是因为我有美珠。
English: Zixuan said, "The emperor is searching for me because I have a beautiful pearl."

古文：今我已亡之矣。我且曰子取吞之。 候因释之。
现代文：现在我已丢失了一一我会说是你把它抢去吞吃了的！ 
English: Now I've lost one - I'll say you snatched it and ate it!

古文：庆封为乱于齐而欲走越。
现代文：守边官吏因此放走了伍子胥。庆封在齐国作乱后，想出奔到越国。
English: As a result, the border guard officials released Wu Zixuan. After the rebellion in Qi, Qingfeng wanted to flee to Yue.

古文：其族人曰： 晋近，奚不之晋？ 庆封曰： 越远，利以避难。 族人曰： 变是心也，居晋而可；不变是心也，虽远越，其可以安乎？ 
现代文：同族的人说： 晋国近，为何不去晋国？ 庆封说： 越国远，有利于避难。 
English: People of the same ethnic group said, "Jin Guo is near, why not go to Jin Guo?" Qingfeng said, "Going further away is good for refuge."

古文：智伯索地于魏宣子，魏宣子弗予。
现代文：同族的人说： 你把作乱的念头改掉的话。
English: Fellow countrymen say: If only you would give up the idea of causing trouble.

古文：任章曰： 何故不予？ 宣子曰： 无故请地，故弗予。 任章曰： 无故索地，邻国必恐。
现代文：住在晋国就可以了；不把这种念头改掉，即使远居越国，难道就能够安宁吗？ 智伯向魏宣子索要土地，魏宣子不给。任章说： 为什么不给？ 魏宣子说： 平白无故索要土地，所以不给。 任章说： 智伯无故索地，邻国一定会害怕。
English: It is enough to live in Jin Province; if you do not change this way of thinking, even if you live far away in Yue Province, will you be able to be at peace? Zhibo asked Wei Xuan Zi for land, Wei Xuan Zi did not give it. Ren Zhang said: Why not give it? Wei Xuan Zi said: He asked for land for no reason, so he did not give it. Ren Zhang said: Zhibo asked for land for no reason, the neighboring countries will be afraid.

古文：彼重欲无厌，天下必惧。
现代文：他欲壑难填，天下一定会恐惧。
English: He wants to fill the world with fear.

古文：君予之地，智伯必骄而轻敌，邻邦必惧而相亲。
现代文：您给了土地，智伯一定骄傲而轻敌，邻国一定恐惧而相互亲近。
English: You gave the land, Chibo must be proud and despise the enemy, and the neighbors must be afraid and close to each other.

古文：以相亲之兵待轻敌之国，则智伯之命不长矣。
现代文：用相互亲近的军队来对付轻敌的国家，那么智伯的命就不会久长了。
English: If we use close-knit military forces to deal with a country that is a minor enemy, then Zhibo's life will not last long.

古文：《周书》曰： 将欲败之，必姑辅之；将欲取之，必姑予之。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 想要打败它，必须姑且辅助它；想要夺取它，必须姑且给予它。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: If you want to defeat it, you must still assist it; if you want to seize it, you must still give it.

古文：君不如予之以骄智伯。
现代文：您不如把土地给予智伯，以便使他骄傲起来。
English: You might as well give the land to Zhibo to make him proud.

古文：且君何释以天下图智氏，而独以吾国为智氏质乎？ 君曰： 善。 乃与之万户之邑。
现代文：况且您为何放弃用天下的力量来对付智氏，而单独把我国作为智氏的靶子呢？ 宣子说： 好。 于是就把一个万户人家的城邑给了智伯。
English: Moreover, why did you give up using the power of the world to deal with Zhi Shi, and only use our country as Zhi Shi's target? Xuan Zi said, "Good." So he gave Zhi Bo a city with a million households.

古文：智伯大悦，因索地于赵，弗与，因围晋阳。
现代文：智伯十分高兴，接着又向赵国索要土地。赵国不给，智伯因而围攻晋阳。
English: Zhibo was very happy, and then he asked for land from Zhao. Zhao did not give it, and Zhibo besieged Jinyang.

古文：韩、魏反之外，赵氏应之内，智氏以亡。
现代文：韩氏、魏氏在城外反戈，赵氏在城内接应，智氏由此灭亡了。
English: The Han and Wei clans rebelled outside the city, and the Zhao clan responded inside the city. As a result, the Zhi clan perished.

古文：秦康公筑台三年。
现代文：秦康公花了三年时间建筑台观。
English: Qin Kangong spent three years building the platform.

古文：荆人起兵，将欲以兵攻齐。
现代文：楚国出兵，打算前去攻打齐国。
English: Chu dispatched troops, intending to attack Qi.

古文：任妄曰： 饥召兵，疾召兵，劳召兵，乱召兵。
现代文：任妄说： 饥荒招致敌兵，病害招致敌兵，劳民招致敌兵，国乱招致敌兵。
English: Ren Yu said: Famine invites enemy soldiers, disease invites enemy soldiers, laborers invite enemy soldiers, and chaos invites enemy soldiers.

古文：君筑台三年，今荆人起兵将攻齐，臣恐其攻齐为声，而以袭秦为实也，不如备之。 戍东边，荆人辍行。
现代文：您筑了三年台观，现在楚国出兵要攻打齐国，我怕他们以攻打齐国为名，而以袭击秦国为实。不如多加防范。 秦国派兵对东面边境进行戍守，楚国就停止了军事行动。
English: You have built a Taiwan view for three years, and now Chu has sent troops to attack Qi. I am afraid that they will attack Qin in the name of attacking Qi. It is better to take more precautions. Qin sent troops to guard the eastern border, and Chu stopped military operations.

古文：齐攻宋，宋使臧孙子南求救于荆。
现代文：齐国攻打宋国，宋国派减孙子南下向楚国求救。
English: Qi attacked Song, and Song sent Qian to the south to seek help from Chu.

古文：荆大说，许救之，甚欢。
现代文：楚国很高兴，答应给以救援，劲头十足。
English: The State of Chu was very pleased, promised to help, and was full of energy.

古文：臧孙子忧而反。其御曰： 索救而得，今子有忧色，何也？ 臧孙子曰： 宋小而齐大。
现代文：减孙子忧心忡忡地返宋，他的车夫说： 求救的事如愿以偿了，现在您还忧容满面，为什么？ 减孙子说： 宋国小，齐国大。
English: Minus grandson anxiously returned to Song, his coachman said: The request for help has been fulfilled, now you are still worried, why? Minus grandson said: Song Elementary School, Qi National University.

古文：夫救小宋而恶于大齐，此人之所以忧也；而荆王说，必以坚我也。
现代文：为救援弱宋来得罪强齐，这是令人担忧的事；但楚王却那么高兴，一定是想以此来坚定我们抗齐的决心。
English: It is worrisome that the weak Song came to the rescue of the strong Qi, but the King of Chu was so happy that he must have wanted to strengthen our determination to resist Qi.

古文：我坚而齐敝，荆之所利也。 臧孙子乃归。
现代文：我们坚持下去，齐兵就会疲敝，楚国的利益便在这里。 于是减孙子回到了宋国。
English: If we persevere, the Qi soldiers will be exhausted, and the interests of the Chu Kingdom will be here. Therefore, Yan Sunzi returned to the Song Kingdom.

古文：齐人拔五城于宋而荆救不至。
现代文：齐人攻下了宋国五座城池，然而楚国的救兵一直没来救援。
English: The Qi people captured five cities in Song, but the rescuers from Chu never came to the rescue.

古文：魏文侯借道于赵而攻中山，赵肃侯将不许。
现代文：魏文侯向赵国借路去攻打中山国，赵肃侯打算不答应。
English: Wei Wenhou borrowed a road from Zhao Guo to attack Zhongshan Guo, but Zhao Suhou did not agree.

古文：赵刻曰： 君过矣。
现代文：赵刻说： 您错了。
English: Zhao Keke said: You are mistaken.

古文：魏攻中山而弗能取，则魏必罢。
现代文：魏攻打中山如不能拿下来，魏就一定会疲惫。
English: If Wei attacks Zhongshan and fails to take it down, Wei will surely be exhausted.

古文：罢则魏轻，魏轻则赵重。
现代文：魏国疲惫了，地位就会变低，魏国地位变低了，赵国地位就抬高了。
English: If Wei is exhausted, its status will be lowered. If Wei's status is lowered, Zhao's status will be elevated.

古文：魏拔中山，必不能越赵而有中山也。
现代文：魏国攻克中山后，必然不能越过赵国来占有中山。
English: After Wei conquered Zhongshan, it was inevitable that it could not cross Zhao to occupy Zhongshan.

古文：是用兵者魏也，而得地者赵也。
现代文：这样，用兵的是魏国，而得地的是赵国。
English: Thus, it was Wei that used soldiers, but it was Zhao that gained territory.

古文：君必许之。
现代文：您一定得答应借给他道路。
English: You must promise to lend him the road.

古文：许之而大欢，彼将知君利之也，必将辍行。
现代文：答应时显得很高兴，他就会知道您能从中得到好处，结果必将停止军事行动。
English: If he is pleased when you promise, he will know that you will benefit from it, and the result will be to stop the military action.

古文：君不如借之道，示以不得已也。 
现代文：您不如借路给他，并表现出借路是出于不得已的事情。 
English: You might as well give him a way out and show that the way out is out of necessity.

古文：鸱夷子皮事田成子，田成子去齐，走而之燕，鸱夷子皮负传而从。
现代文：鸥夷子皮侍奉田成子。田成子离开齐国，逃往燕国，鸥夷子皮背着出关的符碟跟随着。
English: Tian Cheng Zi left Qi Province and fled to Yan Province, and Yan Zi Pei followed him with the key to the gate on his back.

古文：至望邑，子皮曰： 子独不闻涸泽之蛇乎？
现代文：到了望邑，子皮说： 您难道没听说过干枯湖沼的蛇吗？
English: When they arrived at Mawang, Zi Pi said, "Haven't you heard of the snake in the dry lake?

古文：泽涸，蛇将徙。
现代文：湖沼干枯，蛇准备迁移。
English: As the lake dries up, the snakes prepare to migrate.

古文：有小蛇谓大蛇曰： 子行而我随之，人以为蛇之行者耳，必有杀子者。
现代文：有条小蛇对大蛇说： 您走在前面，我跟在后面，人们会认为这只不过是过路的蛇，必然有人杀死您。
English: A small snake said to a big snake: You go ahead, I'll follow behind. People will think it's just a snake passing by. Someone is bound to kill you.

古文：不如相衔负我以行，人以我为神君也。
现代文：不如相互衔着，您背着我走，人们会把我看作神君。 
English: It would be better if we were attached to each other. If you walk behind me, people will see me as a god.

古文：乃相衔负以越公道。
现代文：于是相互衔嘴，背着穿过大路。
English: So they latched on to each other and rode across the road.

古文：人皆避之，曰： 神君也。
现代文：人们都躲开它们，说它们是神君。
English: People avoid them, saying they are gods.

古文：今子美而我恶，以子为我上客，千乘之君也；以子为我使者，万乘之卿也。
现代文：现在您美而我丑。把您作为我的上客，人们会把我看成千乘小国的君主；把您作为我的使者，人们会把我看成万乘大国的卿相。
English: Now you are beautiful and I am ugly. If you are my guest, people will see me as the ruler of a small country; if you are my messenger, people will see me as the lord of a great country.

古文：子不如为我舍人。 田成子因负传而随之。
现代文：您不如做我的近侍，人们就会把我看成是万乘大国的君主。 田成子因此背着符碟跟随在后。
English: You might as well be my closest attendant, and people will see me as the monarch of a great country. Therefore, Taneshiko follows behind with a compass on her back.

古文：至逆旅，逆旅之君待之甚敬，因献酒肉。
现代文：到了客店，客店主人非常恭敬地招待了他们，并献上了酒肉。
English: When they arrived at the inn, the innkeeper invited them very respectfully and offered them wine and meat.

古文：温人之周，周不纳客。
现代文：温邑有个人来到周，周不接纳他这个客人。
English: A man from Wenyi came to Zhou, but Zhou did not accept him as a guest.

古文：问之曰： 客耶？ 对曰： 主人。 问其巷人而不知也，吏因囚之。
现代文：温人回答说： 是主人！ 问他同巷的人，大家都不认识他，小吏因而把他关了起来。
English: Wen Ren replied, "It's the owner! When I asked his neighbors, they all didn't know him, so the petty official locked him up.

古文：君使人问之曰： 子非周人也，而自谓非客，何也？ 对曰： 臣少也诵《诗》，曰： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。
现代文：周君派人问他： 你不是周人，又自称不是客人，为什么？ 温人回答说： 我小时候读的诗里说： 普天之下，没有不是君王的土地；四海之内，没有不是君王的臣子。 
English: Zhou Jun sent someone to ask him: You are not a Zhou person, and you claim not to be a guest, why? Wen replied: In the poem I read when I was a child, it said: Under the whole sky, there is no land that is not the king's; within the four seas, there are no subjects that are not the king's.

古文：今君天子，则我天子之臣也。
现代文：现在君王您是天子，那我就该是天子的臣子。
English: Now that you, the king, are the Son of Heaven, then I should be a subject of the Son of Heaven.

古文：岂有为人之臣而又为之客哉？
现代文：哪有做人臣子的，却又做他的客人呢？
English: Who is a man's servant, and yet his guest?

古文：故曰：主人也。 君使出之。
现代文：所以我说是主人。 周君让他出了监狱。
English: So I said it was the owner. Zhou Jun let him out of prison.

古文：韩宣王谓樛留曰： 吾欲两用公仲、公叔，其可乎？ 对曰： 不可。
现代文：韩宣王对谬留说： 我想同时重用公仲、公叔，可以吗？ 撵留回答说， 不可以。
English: Han Xuan Wang said to Mu Liu: "I want to reuse both Gongzhong and Gongzhu at the same time, is that OK?" Zhai Liu replied, "No."

古文：晋用六卿而国分，简公两用田成、阚止而简公杀魏两用犀首、张仪，而西河之外亡。
现代文：晋国重用六卿，结果国家遭到了瓜分；齐简公同时重用田成、阚止，结果简公遭到杀害；魏国同时重用犀首、张仪，结果西河之地丢失了。
English: Jin reused the Six Great Lords, and as a result, the country was divided; Qi Jian Gong reused Tiancheng and Xizhi at the same time, and as a result, Jian Gong was killed; Wei reused Rhino's Head and Zhang Yi at the same time, and as a result, the land of the West River was lost.

古文：今王两用之，其多力者树其党，寡力者借外权。
现代文：如今大王同时重用他们，其中势力大的会树立私党，势力小的会借重国外势力。
English: Nowadays, the great king also reuses them, among which the powerful ones will establish a private party, and the weak ones will rely on foreign forces.

古文：群臣有内树党以骄主，有外为交以削地，则王之国危矣。 
现代文：臣子有的在内树立私党来傲视君主，有的在外结交诸侯来宰割国土，这样一来，大王的国家就危险了。 
English: Some courtiers set up a private party within the country to defy the monarch, and some make friends with princes abroad to conquer the land. In this way, the great king's country is in danger.

古文：绍绩味醉寐而亡其裘。
现代文：绍绩昧醉酒睡着后丢失了皮衣。
English: Mr. Shao lost his fur coat after falling asleep drunk.

古文：宋君曰： 醉足以亡裘乎？ 对曰： 桀以醉亡天下，而《康诰》曰： 毋彝酒。彝酒者，常酒也。
现代文：宋君说： 醉酒足以丢失皮衣吗？ 绍绩昧回答说： 夏桀因为醉酒丢失了天下。《尚书·康诰》里说的 不要彝酒 ，彝酒就是常常喝酒。
English: Song Jun said, "Is drunkenness enough to lose one's fur coat?" Shao Qimai replied, "Because of drunkenness, Xia Yao lost the whole world. In "Song of Songs, Kang Yao," it says, "Don't drink too much wine." To drink too much wine is to drink too often.

古文：常酒者，天子失天下，匹夫失其身。 
现代文：常常喝酒的，如是天子就会失去天下，如是平民就会失去性命。 。
English: If you often drink, if you are a god, you will lose the world, if you are a commoner, you will lose your life.

古文：管仲、隰朋从于桓公而伐孤竹，春往冬反，迷惑失道。
现代文：管仲、隰朋跟随齐桓公去讨伐孤竹国，春季出征，冬季返回，迷失了道路。
English: Guanzhong and his friends followed Qi Huan to fight against the Lone Bamboo Kingdom. They went to fight in the spring and returned in the winter. They lost their way.

古文：管仲曰： 老马之智可用也。 乃放老马而随之，遂得道。
现代文：管仲说： 老马的才智可以利用。 就放开老马前行，大家跟随在后，于是找到了路。
English: Guanzhong said, "An old horse's wisdom can be put to good use," so he let the old horse go ahead, and everyone followed behind, and they found their way.

古文：行山中无水，隰朋曰： 蚁冬居山之阳，夏居山之阴。
现代文：走到山里没有水喝，隰朋说： 蚂蚁冬天住在山的南面，夏天住在山的北面。
English: When he got to the mountain and there was no water to drink, Zhaopeng said: Ants live in the south of the mountain in winter, and in the north of the mountain in summer.

古文：蚁壤一寸而仞有水。 乃掘地，遂得水。
现代文：地上蚁封有一寸高的话，地下八尺深的地方就会有水。 于是掘地，结果找到了水。
English: If the ant seal on the ground is one inch high, there will be water eight feet underground. So they dug and found water.

古文：有献不死之药于荆王者，谒者操之以入。
现代文：凭管仲的智慧和隰朋的聪明，碰到他们不知道的，不惜向老马和蚂蚁学习；现在的人不知道用他们的愚蠢之心去向圣人的智慧学习，不是错了吗？
English: With the wisdom of management and the wisdom of friends, when they encounter something they don't know, they don't hesitate to learn from old horses and ants; people nowadays don't know how to use their foolish hearts to learn from the wisdom of saints, isn't that wrong?

古文：中射之士问曰： 可食乎？ 曰： 可。 因夺而食之。
现代文：有人向楚王进献不死之药，传达官拿着药进来。侍卫武官问道： 可以吃吗？ 传达官说： 可以。 
English: Someone offered the medicine of immortality to King Chu, and the messenger came in with the medicine. The bodyguard asked, "Can I eat it?" The messenger said, "Yes."

古文：王大怒，使人杀中射之士。
现代文：侍卫武官就抢过来吃了。楚王大怒，派人去杀侍卫武官。
English: The guards and military attachés snatched it up and ate it. King Chu was furious and sent someone to kill the guards and military attachés.

古文：中射之士使人说王曰： 臣问谒者，曰 可食 ，臣故食之，是臣无罪，而罪在谒者也。
现代文：侍卫武官让人劝谏楚王说： 我问传达官，他说可以吃，我因而吃了药。这证明我没罪，罪在传达官。
English: The military attaché sent someone to dissuade King Zizhu, saying: I asked the messenger, he said I could eat, so I took the medicine. This proves that I am not guilty, the crime is in the messenger.

古文：且客献不死之药，臣食之而王杀臣，是死药也，是客欺王也。
现代文：况且客人进献不死之药，我吃了而大王却要杀我，那就成了死药，这是客人欺骗了大王。
English: Moreover, the guest brought the elixir of life, and I ate it, but the king wanted to kill me, so it became the elixir of death. The guest deceived the king.

古文：夫杀无罪之臣，而明人之欺王也，不如释臣。 王乃不杀。
现代文：杀无罪的人而表明有人欺骗大王，还不如放了我。 于是楚王没有杀他。
English: If killing an innocent person showed that someone had deceived the great king, it would be better to release me. Therefore, King Chu did not kill him.

古文：田驷欺邹君，邹君将使人杀之。
现代文：田驷欺骗邹君，邹君将派人杀他。
English: Tian Qi cheated Zou Jun, Zou Jun will send someone to kill him.

古文：田驷恐，告惠子。
现代文：田驷害伯了，就告诉惠子。
English: When Tian Xuan harmed Bo, he told Keiko.

古文：惠子见邹君曰： 今有人见君，则夹其一目，奚如？ 君曰： 我必杀之。 惠子曰： 瞽两目夹，君奚为不杀？ 君曰： 不能勿夹。 惠子曰： 田驷东欺齐侯，南欺荆王，驷之于欺人，瞽也，君奚怨焉？ 邹君乃不杀。
现代文：惠子谒见邹君说： 如果有一人见到您，就闭上一只眼，怎么样？ 邹君说： 我一定杀了他。 惠子说： 瞎子两只眼都闭着，您为什么不杀？ 邹君说： 瞎子不得不闭双眼 惠子说： 田驷东欺齐侯，南骗楚王。田驷欺骗别人，好象瞎子惯于闭眼，习以为常了，您为何还要怨恨他呢？ 于是邹君没有杀他。
English: When Hui Zi looked at Yu Jun, she said, "What if someone sees you and closes one eye?" Yu Jun said, "I'll definitely kill him." Hui Zi said, "The blind man has both eyes closed, why don't you kill him?" Yu Jun said, "The blind man has to close both eyes." Hui Zi said, "Tian Yu cheated Qihou in the east and deceived King Chu in the south. Tian Yu cheated others, as if the blind man was accustomed to closing his eyes. Why do you still resent him?" So Yu Jun didn't kill him.

古文：鲁穆公使众公子或宦于晋，或宦于荆。
现代文：鲁穆公让自己的儿子们有的去晋国做官，有的去楚国做官。
English: Rumukong let some of his sons go to Jin Province to work as officials, and some went to Chu Province to work as officials.

古文：犁鉏曰： 假人于越而救溺子，越人虽善游，子必不生矣。
现代文：犁钅且说： 从越国借人来救溺水的孩子，越国人虽然善于游泳，但孩子一定救活不了。
English: Zou said, "We hired someone from Yue to save a drowning child. Although Yue people are good swimmers, they couldn't save the child.

古文：失火而取水于海，海水虽多，火必不灭矣，远水不救近火也。
现代文：失火而从海里取水来救，海水虽然很多，但火一定扑不灭了，因为远水救不了近火。
English: Although there is a lot of seawater, the fire will not be extinguished, because the distant water cannot save the nearby fire.

古文：今晋与荆虽强，而齐近，鲁患其不救乎！ 
现代文：现在晋国和楚国虽然强大，但齐国离鲁国近，如果受到齐国攻击，鲁国的祸患恐怕难救了。 
English: Although Jin and Chu are powerful now, Qi is close to Lu. If attacked by Qi, the disaster of Lu would be difficult to avoid.

古文：严遂不善周君，患之。
现代文：韩相严遂和西周国君不和，西周国君很忧虑这件事。
English: Han Sang Yan and Xi Zhou Guojun eventually fell out, and Xi Zhou Guojun was very worried about this.

古文：冯沮曰： 而韩傀贵于君。
现代文：冯沮说： 严遂任相，而韩傀受到韩国君主的器重。
English: Feng De said: Yan Sui was appointed as minister, while Han Guo was highly valued by the Korean monarch.

古文：不如行贼于韩傀，则君必以为严氏也。 
现代文：不如暗杀韩傀，韩君就一定以为是严遂干的。 
English: It's not as bad as assassinating Han Guo, Han Jun must have thought it was Yan Sui who did it.

古文：张谴相韩，病将死。
现代文：张谴任韩相，害重病将要死去。
English: Jang, the current South Korean minister, is gravely ill and will soon die.

古文：虽然，不如公子食我之得民也。 张谴死，因相公乘无正。
现代文：公乘无正拿了三十块金币去探病。过了一天，韩君问张谴说： 如果您死了，叫谁来代替您的职务呢？ 张谴回答说： 公乘无正重视法治并敬畏君主，虽说这样，但他比不上公子食我更得民心。 
English: One day later, Han Jun asked Zhang Guan, "If you die, who will take your place?" Zhang Guan replied, "He valued the rule of law and feared the monarch, but he was more popular than me.

古文：乐羊为魏将而攻中山，其子在中山，中山之君烹其子而遗之羹。乐羊坐于幕下而啜之，尽一杯。
现代文：张谴死后，韩君就让公乘无正做相。乐羊担任魏将去攻打中山国，他的儿子在中山。中山国君把他的儿子煮了，并送给他一些带汁的肉，乐羊坐在帐幕下吃了，吃完了一杯。
English: After Zhang Du's death, Han Jun asked Gong Rong Wu Zheng to make a portrait. Le Yang, as Wei general, went to attack Zhongshan. His son was in Zhongshan. Zhongshan Guo Jun cooked his son and gave him some juicy meat. Le Yang sat under the tent and ate it. He finished one cup.

古文：文候谓堵师赞曰： 乐羊以我故而食其子之肉。 答曰： 其子而食之，且谁不食？ 乐羊罢中山，文候赏其功而疑其心。
现代文：魏文侯对堵师赞说： 乐羊因为我的缘故而吃了他儿子的肉。 堵师赞回答说： 他连儿子都吃了，还有谁不能吃呢？ 乐羊从中山归来，文侯奖赏他的功劳，却怀疑他的用心。
English: Wei Wenhou said to Dou Shizan, "Le Yang ate his son's flesh because of me." Dou Shizan replied, "He even ate his son, who else can't eat? When Le Yang returned from Zhongshan, Wenhou rewarded his merits, but doubted his intentions.

古文：孟孙猎得鹿，使秦西巴持之归，其母随之而啼。
现代文：孟孙猎到一只小鹿，让秦西巴拿着返回。小鹿的母亲跟在后面啼叫。
English: Meng Sun hunted a fawn and let Qin Xiba take it back. The mother of the fawn howled behind.

古文：秦西巴弗忍而与之。
现代文：秦西巴不忍心，就把小鹿给了母鹿。
English: Qin Xiba could not bear it, so he gave the fawn to the doe.

古文：孟孙适，至而求鹿。
现代文：孟孙回来后，来要小鹿。
English: After Meng Sun came back, he came to get the fawn.

古文：答曰： 余弗忍而与其母。 孟孙大怒，逐之。
现代文：秦西巴回答说： 我不忍心，就还给了它的母亲。 孟孙非常气愤，赶走了他。
English: Qin Xiba replied, "I couldn't bear it, so I gave it back to its mother." Meng Sun was very angry and drove him away.

古文：居三月，复召以为其子传。
现代文：过了三个月，又把秦西巴召回来，让他做自己儿子的老师。
English: After three months, he called Qin Xiba back and asked him to be his son's teacher.

古文：其御曰： 曩将罪之，今召以为子传，何也？ 孟孙曰： 夫不忍鹿，又且忍吾子乎？ 故曰： 巧诈不如拙诚。 乐羊以有功见疑，秦古巴以有罪益信。
现代文：他的车夫说： 从前要加罪于他，现在又召来作为儿子的老师，为什么？ 
English: His driver said: Once he was to be punished, now he is called to be his son's teacher. Why?

古文：曾从子，善相剑者也。
现代文：孟孙说： 他对小鹿都不忍下狠心，何况对我的儿子呢？ 
English: Meng Sun said, "He can't bear to be cruel to a fawn, let alone my son."

古文：卫君怨吴王。
现代文：所以说： 智巧、伪诈比不上笨拙、诚实。 
English: Therefore it is said, "Cleverness and deceit are not equal to clumsiness and honesty."

古文：曾从子曰： 吴王好剑，臣相剑者也。
现代文：乐羊因有功遭到怀疑，秦西巴因有罪倍受信任。曾从子是擅长鉴定剑的人。卫君怨恨吴王。
English: Le Yang was doubted because of his merits, while Qin Xiba was trusted because of his guilt. Zeng Zongzi was an expert in identifying swords. Emperor Wei resented King Wu.

古文：臣请为吴王相剑，拔而示之，因为君刺之。 卫君曰： 子之为是也，非缘义也，为利也。
现代文：曾从子说： 吴王喜欢剑，我是鉴定剑的人，请让我去替吴王鉴定剑，在拔剑给他看的时候，趁机帮您刺杀他。 卫君说： 你现在做这件事，不是遵循义，而是为了利。
English: Once, his son-in-law said, "Wu Wang likes swords, I am a sword appraiser, please let me appraise the sword for Wu Wang, and when you draw the sword to show it to him, take the opportunity to help you assassinate him." Wei Jun said, "You are doing this now, not to follow righteousness, but for profit."

古文：吴强而富，卫弱而贫。
现代文：吴国强大而富有，卫国弱小而贫困。
English: The State of Wu is strong and rich, while the State of Wei is weak and poor.

古文：子必往，吾恐子为吴王用之于我也。 乃逐之。
现代文：你一定要去，我伯你会被吴王利用来对付我哩。 于是便把他赶跑了。
English: You must go, my uncle, you will be used by King Wu to deal with me, so I chased him away.

古文：纣为象箸而箕子怖，以为象箸必不盛羹于土铏，则必将犀玉之杯；玉杯象箸必不盛菽藿，则必旄象豹胎；旄象豹胎必不衣短褐而舍茅茨之下，则必锦衣九重，高台广室也。
现代文：商纣制作了象牙筷子，箕子恐惧了，认为使用象牙筷的话，就一定不会再用陶制器皿来盛带汁的肉，就一定会配合使用犀牛角杯或玉杯；玉杯象筷一定不会用来盛豆类食品，就一定要想吃耗牛、大象、豹子的胎儿；吃牦牛、大象、豹子的胎儿，就一定不穿粗布短衣而住茅屋下面，就一定要穿多层的织锦衣服，住上高台大室。
English: The merchants made ivory chopsticks, and the cripples were terrified, thinking that if they used ivory chopsticks, they would never again use pottery vessels to hold meat with juice, they would always use rhinoceros horn cups or jade cups; jade cups and elephant chopsticks would never be used to hold bean food, they would always want to eat cattle, elephants, and leopard foetuses; if they ate snails, elephants, and leopard foetuses, they would never wear coarse cloth shorts and live under a hut, they would always wear multi-layered brocade clothes and live in a lofty room.

古文：称此以求，则天下不足矣。
现代文：按照这个方式追求下去，那么普天下的东西也不够他享受了。
English: If he pursues it in this way, there will not be enough for him to enjoy in the world.

古文：圣人见微以知萌，见端以知末，故见象箸而怖，知天下之不足也。
现代文：圣人见到微小的现象就知道事物的苗头，见到事情的开端就知道最终结果，所以见到象牙筷后箕子就恐惧了，知道普天下的东西都不能满足商纣王的贪欲。
English: The sage saw the tiny phenomenon and knew the germ of things, saw the beginning of things and knew the final result, so when he saw the ivory chopsticks, the mule was afraid, and knew that nothing in the world could satisfy the greed of the merchant king.

古文：周公旦已胜殷，将攻商盖。
现代文：周公旦已战胜殷商，准备攻打商盖。
English: Zhou Gongdan has defeated Yin Shang and is preparing to attack Shang Gai.

古文：辛公甲曰： 大难攻，小易服。
现代文：辛公甲说： 大国难以攻取，小国容易征服。
English: Xin Gongya said: Big countries are difficult to conquer, small countries are easy to conquer.

古文：不如服众小以劫大。 乃攻九夷而商盖服矣。
现代文：不如先征服众多小国来威胁大国。 于是攻取了九夷，商盖跟着被征服了。
English: It is better to conquer many small countries first to threaten the big countries, so Jiujiang was conquered, and Shangkai was conquered as well.

古文：纣为长夜之饮，欢以失日，问其左右，尽不知也。
现代文：商纣不分日夜地饮酒，因狂欢而忘记了日期，问他身边的人，都不知道。
English: He drinks alcohol day and night, forgets the date because of the revelry, and asks the people around him, but they don't know.

古文：乃使人问箕子。
现代文：就派人去问箕子。
English: So they sent someone to inquire about the mule.

古文：箕子谓其徒曰： 为天下主而一国皆失日，天下其危矣。
现代文：箕子对随从说： 做了天下的主子，可自己和左右的人都忘记了日期，国家恐怕很危险了。
English: The mule said to his follower: "I have become the master of the world, but I and everyone around me have forgotten the date. I'm afraid the country is in great danger."

古文：一国皆不知而我独知之，吾其危矣。 辞以醉而不知。
现代文：大家都不知道而我一个人知道。我恐怕也危险了。 就推说喝醉了酒，并不知道日期。
English: Everybody doesn't know and I alone know. I'm afraid I'm in danger, too. He said he was drunk and didn't know the date.

古文：鲁人身善织屦，妻善织缟，而欲徙于越。
现代文：鲁国有个人自己善于编草鞋，妻子善于织生绢。他想迁到越国去，有人告诉他说； 你一定会困窘了 。鲁人说： 为什么？ 
English: There was a man in Lu who was good at weaving straw sandals, and his wife was good at weaving straw cocoons. He wanted to move to Yue. Someone told him: "You will be embarrassed." Lu said: "Why?

古文：或谓之曰： 子必穷矣。 鲁人曰： 何也？ 曰： 屦为履之也，而越人跣行；缟为冠之也，而越人被发。
现代文：这个人说： 草鞋是穿在脚上的，但越国人赤脚走路；生绢做帽，是戴在头上的，但越国人披发，不用戴帽。
English: This person said: straw sandals are worn on the feet, but the Yue people walk barefoot; the ginger is made into a hat and is worn on the head, but the Yue people wear their hair and do not need to wear a hat.

古文：以子之所长，游于不用之国，欲使无穷，其可得乎？ 
现代文：带着你的长处前往用不着它们的国家去活动，想要不困窘，怎么可能呢？ 
English: How is it possible to bring your strengths to a country that doesn't need them, and not be embarrassed?

古文：陈轸贵于魏王。
现代文：陈轸很受魏惠王尊重。
English: Chen Yao is highly respected by Wei Hui Wang.

古文：惠子曰： 必善事左右。
现代文：惠子说： 一定要好好交结君主的侍从。
English: Keiko said, "Be sure to make good friends with the monarch's attendants."

古文：夫杨，横树之即生，倒树之即生，折而树之又生。
现代文：杨树，横着栽就能活，倒 着栽也能活，折断了再栽还照样能活。
English: A poplar tree can live if it is planted sideways or upside down, and it can still live if it is broken and replanted.

古文：然使十人树之而一人拔之，则毋生杨。
现代文：但要是让十个人去栽，一个人来拔，就没有能活的杨树了。
English: But if you ask ten people to plant and one person to pull, there will be no live poplar trees.

古文：至以十人之众，树易生之物而不胜一人者，何也？
现代文：凭十人之众，栽种极易成活的杨树，却经不起一个人来拔，这中间的原因是什么呢？
English: What is the reason why ten people can plant a poplar tree, which is very easy to grow, but only one person can pull it up?

古文：树之难而去之易也。
现代文：是因为栽树困难，拔树容易。
English: Difficult to plant, easy to destroy.

古文：子虽工自树于王，而欲去子者众，子必危矣。 
现代文：你虽然善于在君主面前树立自己，但企图赶走你的人很多，你一定危险了。 
English: Although you are good at establishing yourself in front of the monarch, there are many people who are trying to drive you away. You must be in danger.

古文：鲁季孙新弑其君，吴起仕焉。
现代文：鲁季孙刚刚杀了他的君主，吴起在那儿做官。
English: Lu Jishun had just killed his overlord, Wu Qi, who was an official there.

古文：或谓起曰： 夫死者始死而血，已血而衄，已衄而灰，已灰而土。
现代文：有人对吴起说： 死去的人，刚死时流血；血流尽了，皮肉就枯缩；皮肉枯缩后，就成了残骸；然后残骸又会化成土。
English: Someone said to Wu Qi: "When a dead person dies, blood flows out; when the blood flow is exhausted, the flesh shrinks; when the flesh shrinks, it becomes debris; and then the debris will turn into soil.

古文：及其土也，无可为者矣。
现代文：到化成土后，就再也没有变故了。
English: After the transformation into soil, nothing has changed.

古文：今季孙乃始血，其毋乃未可知也。 吴起因去之晋。
现代文：现在季孙刚刚把鲁君杀掉，往后的变化恐怕就难以弄清楚了！ 吴起因而离开鲁国，到魏国去了。
English: Now that Ji Sun has just killed Lu Jun, it will be difficult to find out what will happen in the future! Wu Qi therefore left Lu and went to Wei.

古文：隰斯弥见田成子，田成子与登台四望。
现代文：隰斯弥拜见田成子，田成子和他一起登台观望四方。
English: Kishimi went to see Nariko Tanaka, who joined him on stage to watch the four sides.

古文：三面皆暢，南望，隰子家之树蔽之。
现代文：三面都没有遮蔽，南面望去，隰斯弥家的树挡住了视线。
English: There is no shade on three sides. Looking south, the trees of the Oshima family block the line of sight.

古文：田成子亦不言。
现代文：因成子并没有说话。
English: Inshi didn't say anything.

古文：隰子归，使人伐之；斧离数创，隰子止之。
现代文：隰斯弥回家，叫人把树砍倒。斧头刚砍了几个口子，隰斯弥制止了。
English: Uthman went home and ordered someone to cut down the tree. The axe had just made a few cuts when Uthman stopped it.

古文：其相室曰： 何变之数也？ 隰子曰： 古者有谚曰： 知渊中之鱼者不祥。
现代文：他的管家说： 为什么变得这么快？ 隰斯弥说： 古代有句谚语说： 知道深渊中有鱼的人不吉祥。 
English: His housekeeper said, "How did he get so big so fast?"Heseme said, "There is an ancient proverb that says, "He who knows the fish in the abyss is not fortunate."

古文：夫田子将有大事，而我示之知微，我必危矣。
现代文：田成子将要干大事，而我却显示出知道他的隐秘，我必定危险了。
English: Tian Cheng Zi is about to do something big, and I'm showing that I know his secret, I must be in danger.

古文：不伐树，未有罪也；知人之所不言，其罪大矣。 乃不伐也。
现代文：不砍树，没有罪过；知道别人心里的事， 这个罪过就大了。 于是不再砍树。
English: There is no sin in not cutting down a tree, but there is great sin in knowing what is in another person's heart, so they stopped cutting down trees.

古文：杨子过于宋，东之逆旅，有妾二人，其恶者贵，美者贱。
现代文：杨朱路过宋国东边的旅店。店主有两个妄，其中丑的地位高。
English: Yang Zhu passed by an inn on the eastern edge of Song. The owner had two brothers, one of whom had a high status.

古文：杨子问其故。
现代文：漂亮的地位低。
English: Beauty has a low status.

古文：逆旅之父答曰： 美者自美，吾不知其美也；恶者自恶，吾不知其恶也。 杨子谓弟子曰： 行贤而去自贤之心，焉往而不美。 
现代文：杨朱问店主缘由，旅店的主人回答说： 长得漂亮的自以为漂亮，我不觉得她漂亮；长得丑的自以为丑，我不觉得她丑。 杨朱对他的弟子说； 做了好事，要去掉自以为好事的想法， 到哪儿能不受到赞美呢？ 
English: Yang Zhu asked the owner of the shop the reason, and the owner of the inn replied: "The beautiful one thinks she is beautiful, but I don't think she is beautiful; the ugly one thinks she is ugly, but I don't think she is ugly." Yang Zhu said to his disciple: "If you have done a good deed, if you want to get rid of the thought that you have done a good deed, where can you not be praised?"

古文：卫人嫁其子而教之曰： 必私积聚。
现代文：有个卫国人嫁女儿而教育她说： 一定要私下积聚财物。
English: There was a tutor who married off his daughter and taught her: You must accumulate wealth privately.

古文：为人妇而出，常也；其成居，幸也。 其子因私积聚，其姑以为多私而出之。
现代文：做人家的妻子而被休回娘家，是常有的事；终身在一起的，是很侥幸的。 他的女儿因此私下积聚财物，她婆婆认为她私心太多，就休了她。
English: It is not uncommon for a man's wife to be divorced and sent back to her daughter's house, but it is very rare for them to stay together for life, so his daughter secretly accumulates wealth, and her mother-in-law thinks she is too selfish and divorces her.

古文：其子所以反者倍其所以嫁。
现代文：他的女儿带回来的财物，比出嫁时所带去的东西多出一倍。
English: His daughter brought home twice as much as she did when she got married.

古文：其父不自罪于教子非也，而自知其益富。
现代文：她的父亲不归罪于自己教育女儿不对，而自以为增加财富是聪明的。
English: Her father does not blame himself for teaching his daughter wrong, but thinks it is clever to increase his wealth.

古文：念人臣之处官者，皆是类也。
现代文：现在处在官位上的臣子，都是这一类人。
English: The courtiers currently in official positions are all of this type.

古文：鲁丹三说中山之君而不受也，因散五十金事其左右。
现代文：鲁丹多次游说中山国君，意见总不被接受，就散发了五十块金币贿赂国君近臣。
English: Rudan lobbied Zhongshan Guojun many times, but his opinions were never accepted, so he distributed fifty gold coins to bribe Guojun's vassals.

古文：复见，未语，而君与之食。
现代文：又见到君主，没有说话，国君就款待他吃饭。
English: Seeing the monarch again, the sovereign treated him to dinner without saying a word.

古文：鲁丹出，而不反舍，遂去中山。
现代文：鲁丹出来后，连住所都没去，就直接离开了中山国。
English: After Rudan came out, he didn't even go to his residence, but left Zhongshan Province directly.

古文：其御曰： 及见，乃始善我。
现代文：他的车夫说： 再次见面时，国君开始和我们交好，你为什么要离开呢？ 
English: His coachman said: When we met again, the sovereign began to make friends with us. Why did you leave?

古文：何故去之？ 鲁丹曰： 夫以人言善我，必以人言罪我。 未出境，而公子恶之曰： 为赵来间中山。 君因索而罪之。
现代文：鲁丹说： 因为他人的话才对我友好，也一定会因为他人的话来怪罪我。 果然，还未走出国境，公子就中伤他说： 鲁丹是为赵国来刺探中山国的。 中山国君因此布置搜捕并要加罪于他。
English: Rudan said: Because the words of others are friendly to me, and they will certainly blame me for the words of others. Sure enough, before leaving the country, the prince slandered him: Rudan is for Zhao to spy on Zhongshan. Zhongshan Guojun therefore arranged a search and wanted to add to his guilt.

古文：田伯鼎好士而存其君，白公好士而乱荆。
现代文：田伯鼎喜欢士人，挽救过他的君主；白公胜喜欢士人，却扰乱了楚国。
English: Tian Bo Ding liked scholars and saved his monarch; Bai Gongsheng liked scholars but disturbed the state of Chu.

古文：其好士则同，其所以为则异。
现代文：他们喜欢士人是相同的，但用士人干的事情却是不同的。
English: They like the same people, but the things they do are different.

古文：公孙友自刖而尊百里，竖刁自宫而謟桓公。
现代文：公孙友自己砍掉脚来使百里奚获得高官，竖刁自行阉割来奉承齐桓公。
English: Gongsun You chopped off his own feet to make Baili Quan gain high-ranking officials, and he castrated himself to flatter Qi Huan.

古文：其自刑则同，其所以自刑之为则异。
现代文：他们自我用刑是相同的，但他们自我用刑的目的却是不同的。
English: Their self-punishment is the same, but the purpose of their self-punishment is different.

古文：慧子曰： 狂者东走，逐者亦东走。
现代文：惠子说： 疯子向东边跑；追赶的人也向东边跑。
English: Keiko said, "The madman is running to the east; the pursuers are also running to the east."

古文：其东走则同，其所以东走之为则异。
现代文：他们向东边跑的行为是相同的，但他们所以向东边跑的目的却是不同的。
English: The act of running to the east is the same, but the purpose of running to the east is different.

古文：故曰：同事之人，不可不审察也。 
现代文：所以说，对做了同样事情的人，不可不严格地加以考察。 
English: Therefore, those who have done the same thing must be strictly examined.

