古文：◎宣宗
现代文：宣宗
English: Xuan Zong

古文：宣宗宪天崇道英明神圣钦文昭武宽仁纯孝章皇帝，讳瞻基，仁宗长子也。
现代文：宣宗宪天崇道英明神圣钦文昭武宽仁纯孝章皇帝，名叫朱瞻基，仁宗长子。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong Xian Tian Chong Dao Yingming Sheng Qin Wen Zhaowu Quan Ren Chun Xiaozhang, named Zhu Zhanji, was the eldest son of Emperor Ren Zong.

古文：母诚孝昭皇后。
现代文：他的母亲是诚孝昭皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Makoto.

古文：生之前夕，成祖梦太祖授以大圭曰： 传之子孙，永世其昌。 
现代文：朱瞻基出生前夕，成祖梦见太祖授给他大圭说： 传之子孙，永世昌盛。 
English: On the eve of Zhu Zhanzhong's birth, Cheng Zu dreamt that his great-grandfather bestowed him with a great-grandchild, saying: "The son of the lineage, the grandson of the lineage, will be prosperous forever."

古文：既弥月，成祖见之曰： 儿英气溢面，符吾梦矣。 
现代文：宣宗满月后，成祖见他说： 儿英气满面，符合我做的梦。 
English: After the full moon of Xuan Zong, Cheng Zu saw him and said: "He is full of youthful vigor, which is in line with my dream.

古文：比长，嗜书，智识杰出。
现代文：朱瞻基渐渐长大，爱好诗书，智识杰出超群。
English: Zhu Zhanji gradually grew up, loved poetry and books, and his intelligence was outstanding.

古文：永乐七年，从幸北京，令观农具及田家衣食，作《务本训》授之。
现代文：永乐七年，跟随成祖巡幸北京，命观察农具及田家衣食，作《务本训》授给他。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, he followed Cheng Zu on a tour of Beijing to observe agricultural tools and the clothing and food of the Tian family, and was awarded the "Basic Training."

古文：八年，成祖征沙漠，命留守北京。
现代文：八年成祖远征漠北，命他留守北京。
English: In the eighth year of Cheng Zu's expedition to the north of the desert, he was ordered to stay in Beijing.

古文：九年十一月，立为皇太孙，始冠。
现代文：九年十一月，立为皇太孙，当时他刚成年加冠。
English: In November of the ninth year, he became the crown prince's great-grandson. At that time, he had just become an adult.

古文：自是，巡幸征讨皆从。
现代文：此后，巡幸征讨都跟随前往。
English: After that, the inspection tour followed.

古文：尝命学士胡广等即军中为太孙讲论经史。
现代文：曾命学士胡广等在军中为皇太孙讲经论史。
English: Hu Guang, a former baccalaureate, lectured on scripture and history for the emperor's grandson in the army.

古文：每语仁宗曰： 此他日太平天子也。 
现代文：每次告诉仁宗说： 这是将来的太平天子。 
English: Each time, he told Rinzong, "This is the Taiping Heavenly Child of the future.

古文：仁宗即位，立为皇太子。
现代文：仁宗即位，立为皇太子。
English: Emperor Nintsune ascends the throne and becomes crown prince.

古文：夏四月，以南京地屡震，命往居守。
现代文：夏四月，因南京多次发生地震，命朱瞻基前往居守。
English: In the summer of April, due to repeated earthquakes in Nanjing, Zhu Zhanji was ordered to stay.

古文：五月庚辰，仁宗不豫，玺书召还。
现代文：五月十一日，仁宗身体不适，下玺书召朱瞻基回京。
English: On May 11, Renzong was unwell, and Zhu Zhanji was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：六月辛丑，还至良乡，受遗诏，入宫发丧。
现代文：六月三日，回到良乡，接受遗诏，进宫发丧。
English: On June 3, he returned to Liangxiang, accepted the will, and went to the palace to mourn.

古文：庚戌，即皇帝位。
现代文：十二日，即皇帝位。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor abdicated.

古文：大赦天下，以明年为宣德元年。
现代文：大肆赦免天下，以第二年为宣德元年。
English: He pardoned the whole world and proclaimed the second year as the first year of the Republic of China.

古文：辛亥，谕边将严守备。
现代文：十三日，告谕边将严加守备。
English: On the 13th, it was announced that the border would be strictly guarded.

古文：甲寅，趣中官在外采办者还，罢所市物。
现代文：十六日，催促在外采办中官全部回京，停止所交易之物。
English: On the 16th, it urged all foreign procurement officials to return to Beijing and stop the traded goods.

古文：秋七月乙亥，尊皇后为皇太后，立妃胡氏为皇后。
现代文：秋七月八日，尊皇后为皇太后，立后妃胡氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, Empress Sonno became Empress Dowager, and Empress Dowager Ho became Empress.

古文：辛卯，镇远侯顾兴祖讨大藤峡蛮，平之。
现代文：二十四日，镇远侯顾兴祖征讨大藤峡叛蛮并平定。
English: On the 24th, Zhenyuan Hou Gu Xingzu led a campaign to subdue the rebellion in Dafuji Gorge.

古文：乙未，谕法司慎刑狱。
现代文：二十八日，告诉法官谨慎用刑。
English: On the 28th, he told the judge to be careful with the sentence.

古文：闰月戊申，安顺伯薛贵、清平伯吴成、都督马英、都指挥梁成帅师巡边。
现代文：闰七月十一日，安顺伯薛贵、清平伯吴成、都督马英、都指挥梁成率师巡行边境。
English: On July 11, Anshun Bo Xuegui, Qingping Bo Wucheng, and Governor Ma Ying all led Liang Cheng's division to patrol the border.

古文：乙丑，杨溥入直文渊阁。
现代文：二十八日，杨溥入文渊阁供职。
English: On the 28th, Yang Hui entered Wenyu Pavilion to serve.

古文：八月戊辰，都指挥李英讨安定曲先叛番，大败之，安定王桑儿加失夹诣阙谢罪。
现代文：八月二日，都指挥李英征讨安定曲先叛乱番人，大败叛番，安定王桑儿加失夹到朝廷谢罪。
English: On August 2nd, he commanded Li Ying to recruit and defeat the rebel guards of the Prince of Stability, and the Prince of Stability, Son'er, went to the imperial court to apologize.

古文：壬申，诏内外群臣举廉洁公正堪牧民者。
现代文：六日，诏内外群臣推举廉洁奉公能胜任牧民官之人。
English: On the 6th, a group of courtiers from both inside and outside the imperial edict elected a person who is honest and can serve the public as a competent herdsman.

古文：癸未，大理卿胡概、参政叶春巡抚南畿、浙江。
现代文：十七日，大理卿胡概、参政叶春巡抚南畿、浙江。
English: On the seventeenth day, Dali Lord Hu Qi, and Ye Chun, the governor of Nanki and Zhejiang, joined politics.

古文：设巡抚自此始。
现代文：巡抚一职从此始设。
English: The post of governor has been established from now on.

古文：九月壬寅，葬昭皇帝于献陵。
现代文：九月六日，葬昭皇帝于献陵。
English: On September 6, Emperor Zhao was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：冬十月戊寅，南京地震，戊子，敕公、侯、伯、五府、六部、大学士、给事中审覆重囚。
现代文：冬十月十三日，南京地震。二十三日，命令公、侯、伯、五府、六部、大学士、给事中审察重大犯罪囚犯。
English: On the winter of October 13th, the Nanjing earthquake occurred. On the 23rd, the order was issued to the public, the county, the township, the five prefectures, the six departments, the university scholars, and the prisoners of major crimes to investigate the case.

古文：十一月戊戌，顾兴祖讨平思恩蛮。
现代文：十一月三日，顾兴祖平定思恩蛮。
English: On November 3rd, Gu Xingzu became calm and thoughtful.

古文：辛酉，薛禄为镇朔大将军巡边。
现代文：二十六日，薛禄为镇朔大将军巡行边境。
English: On the 26th, Xue Lu led a border patrol for General Zhenshuo.

古文：十二月甲申，顾兴祖讨平宜山蛮。
现代文：十二月十九日，顾兴祖平定宜山蛮夷。
English: On December 19th, Gu Xingzu defeated the Yishan barbarians.

古文：是年，哈密回回、满剌撒丁、占城、琉球中山、爪哇、乌斯藏、瓦剌、浡泥入贡。
现代文：这年，哈密、回回、满剌撒丁、占城、琉球中山、爪哇、乌斯藏、瓦剌、氵孛泥入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Hami, Huihua, Manchuria, Sardinia, Zhancheng, Ryukyu Zhongshan, Java, Utsang, Wafang, and Yunnan paid tribute to the North.

古文：宣德元年春正月癸卯，享太庙。
现代文：宣德元年春正月八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of spring in the first year of Xuande, the temple held a religious service.

古文：丁未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，在南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 12th, the Southern Suburbs Grand Festival will take place.

古文：癸丑，赦死罪以下运粮宣府自赎。
现代文：十八日，赦免死罪以下囚犯运军粮到宣府以赎罪。
English: On the 18th, prisoners sentenced to death or less were pardoned and sent army rations to Xuanfu to atone for their sins.

古文：己未，遣侍郎黄宗载十五人清理天下军伍。
现代文：二十四日，派侍郎黄宗载等十五人清理天下军队组织。
English: On the 24th, he sent his attendant Huang Zongzai and 15 others to clean up the world's military organizations.

古文：后遣使，著为令。
现代文：然后派遣使者，写成法令。
English: Then send an envoy, write a decree.

古文：二月戊辰，祭社稷。
现代文：二月四日，祭社稷。
English: On February 4th, the festival ends.

古文：丁丑，耕耤田。
现代文：十三日，耕种謖田。
English: On the 13th, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：丙戌，谒长陵、献陵。
现代文：二十二日，拜谒献陵、长陵。
English: On the 22nd, the visit to the Yongxing Mausoleum and the Changling Mausoleum began.

古文：丁亥，还宫。
现代文：二十三日回宫。
English: Dinghai, return to the palace.

古文：三月己亥，荣昌伯陈智、都督方政讨黎利，败绩于茶笼州，乂安知府琴彭死之。
现代文：三月五日，荣昌伯陈智、都督方政征讨黎利，在茶笼州失败，安知府琴彭战死。
English: On March 5th, Rongchang Bo Chen Zhi, the governor of the capital, led a political campaign to overthrow Lili, but failed in Chaozhou, and died in the battle of Qinpeng in Anchi Prefecture.

古文：癸丑，行在礼部侍郎张瑛兼华盖殿大学士，直文渊阁。
现代文：十九日，皇帝所在地礼部侍郎张瑛兼华盖殿大学士，入文渊阁供职。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Yingqian, an attendant of the Ceremonial Department of the emperor's residence and a scholar of the Huagai Palace, entered the Wenyu Pavilion to serve.

古文：夏四月乙丑，成山侯王通为征夷将军充总兵官，讨黎利，尚书陈洽参赞军务，陈智、方政夺官从立功。
现代文：夏四月二日，成山侯王通为征夷将军充任总兵官，征讨黎利，尚书陈洽辅佐军事事务，陈智、方政削官后随从征讨立功。
English: On April 2 in summer, Chengshan marquis Wang Tong was appointed as the chief military officer for the general of the expeditionary force to conquer Lili, Shangshu Chen Cai assisted in military affairs, and Chen Zhi and Fang Zheng Jian followed the expeditionary force.

古文：五月甲午朔，录囚。
现代文：五月初一，审察囚犯。
English: On the first day of May, the prisoners were inspected.

古文：丙申，诏赦交阯，许黎利自新。
现代文：三日，下诏赦免交趾之罪，允许黎利悔过自新。
English: On the third day, the emperor pardoned the crime of being an accomplice, allowing Lili to repent and reform.

古文：丙午，敕郡县瘗遗骸。
现代文：十三日，命令各郡县掩埋遗露于外的尸骨。
English: On the 13th, all counties were ordered to bury the exposed bones.

古文：庚申，召薛禄还。
现代文：二十七日，召薛禄回京。
English: On the 27th, Xue Lu was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：秋七月癸巳，京师地震，乙未，免山东夏税。
现代文：秋七月二日，京师地震。四月，免除山东夏税。
English: In autumn, on July 2nd, there was an earthquake in Beijing. In April, Shandong summer tax was exempted.

古文：己亥，谕六科，凡中官传旨，必覆奏始行。
现代文：八日，告诉六科，凡是中官传达诏书，必须复奏然后执行。
English: On the eighth day, he told the six departments that whenever the lieutenant general conveyed the edict, it must be repeated and then implemented.

古文：壬子，罢湖广采木。
现代文：二十一日，停止在湖广采伐木料。
English: On the 21st, logging in Hukang was stopped.

古文：八月壬戌，汉王高煦反。
现代文：八月一日，汉王高煦谋反。
English: On August 1st, King Gaozong of Han staged a rebellion.

古文：丙寅，宥武臣殊死以下罪，复其官。
现代文：五日，宽免武臣殊死以下罪行，恢复其官职。
English: On the fifth day, he pardoned the following crimes and resumed his official duties.

古文：己巳，亲征高煦，命郑王瞻埈、襄王瞻墡居守，阳武侯薛禄、清平伯吴成将前锋，大赉五军将士。
现代文：八日，亲自出征高煦，命郑王朱瞻、襄王朱瞻土善居守京师，阳武侯薛禄、清平伯吴成领前锋，大肆赏赐五军将士。
English: On the eighth day, he personally went to Gaocheng, ordered Zheng Wang Zhu Zhan and Xiang Wang Zhu Zhan to be good at guarding the capital, Yang Wuhou Xue Lu and Qingping Bo Wu Cheng to lead the vanguard, and generously rewarded the five soldiers.

古文：辛未，发京师。
现代文：十日，从京师出发。
English: On the 10th, they set off from Beijing.

古文：辛巳，至乐安，帝两遣书谕降，又以敕系矢射城中谕祸福。
现代文：二十日，到乐安，宣宗两次派使者送诏书叫高煦投降，又将诏书用箭头射入城中告诉高煦后果。
English: On the 20th, when he arrived at Le'an, Xuanzong twice sent emissaries to deliver an imperial edict calling on Gao Gan to surrender, and then shot the imperial edict into the city with arrows to inform Gao Gan of the consequences.

古文：壬午，高煦出降。
现代文：二十一日，高煦投降。
English: On the 21st, Gao Gan surrendered.

古文：癸未，改乐安曰武定州。
现代文：二十二日，改乐安为武定州。
English: On the 22nd, it was renamed Wuding Prefecture.

古文：乙酉，班师。
现代文：二十四日回师。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he returned to the division.

古文：九月丙申。 至自武定州，锢高煦于西内。
现代文：九月六日，亲自巡察武定州，将高煦禁锢于西门内。
English: On September 6, he personally inspected Wudingzhou and arrested Gao Gan in the West Gate.

古文：戊戌，法司鞫高煦同谋者，词连晋王、赵王，诏勿问。
现代文：八日，法官审讯高煦同谋，言词中牵连晋王、赵王，下诏不要给他们定罪。
English: On the eighth day, the judge interrogated Gao Wei's accomplice, implicating Jin Wang and Zhao Wang in his speech, and ordered not to convict them.

古文：冬十月戊寅，释李时勉，复为侍读。
现代文：冬十月十八日，释放李时勉，恢复其侍读的职务。
English: In the winter of October 18th, Li Shizhen was released and resumed his duties as a waiter.

古文：十一月乙未，成山侯王通击黎利于应平，败绩，尚书陈洽死之。
现代文：十一月六日，成山侯王通在应平攻击黎利，失败，尚书陈洽战死。
English: On November 6, Chengshan marquis Wang Tong attacked Lili in Yingping, but failed. Shangshu Chen Cai died in the battle.

古文：十二月辛酉，免六师所过秋粮。
现代文：十二月二日，免六师经过之地秋粮。
English: On December 2nd, autumn grain was harvested in the area where the 6th Division had passed.

古文：辛未，录囚，宥免三千余人。
现代文：十二日，审查囚犯，宽恕三千余人。
English: On the 12th, he reviewed prisoners and pardoned more than 3,000 people.

古文：乙酉，征南将军总兵官黔国公沐晟帅兴安伯徐亨、新宁伯谭忠，征虏副将军安远侯柳升帅保定伯梁铭都督崔聚，由云南、广西分道讨黎利，兵部尚书李庆参赞军务。
现代文：二十六日，征南将军总兵官黔国公沐晟率兴安伯徐亨、新宁伯谭忠，征虏副将军安远侯柳升率保定伯梁铭、都督崔聚，由云南、广西分道并进征讨黎利，兵部尚书李庆辅助军务。
English: On the 26th, the general officer of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Guo Gong Muxun, led by Xing Anbo Xu Heng and Xin Ning Bo Tanzhong, the vice-general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Anyuan Hou Liu Sheng, led by Baoding Bo Liangming and the governor of the capital, Cui Ju, split from Yunnan and Guangxi and marched to fight against Lili. Li Qing, the secretary of the military department, assisted in military affairs.

古文：是年，爪哇、暹罗、琉球、苏门答剌、满剌加、白葛达、撒马儿罕、土鲁番、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年，爪哇、暹罗、琉球，苏门答剌、满剌加、白葛达、撒马儿罕、土鲁番、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Java, Siam, Ryukyu, Sumatra, Manchukuo, Bactria, Samarkand, Turpan, Hami, and Ussuri paid tribute to the North.

古文：二年春正月庚子，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：宣德二年正月十一日，在南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the second year of Xuande, the Southern Suburbs Grand Festival began.

古文：丁未，有司奏岁问囚数。
现代文：十八日，官吏奏报每年审问囚犯数量。
English: On the 18th, officials reported the number of prisoners interrogated each year.

古文：帝谓百姓轻犯法，由于教化未行，命申教化。
现代文：宣宗认为，百姓犯轻微之法，是由于教化未行之故，于是下令施行教化。
English: Xuan Zong believed that the reason why the common people committed minor crimes was because they had not been educated, so he ordered the education to be carried out.

古文：二月癸亥，行在户部侍郎陈山为本部尚书兼谨身殿大学士，直文渊阁。
现代文：二月五日，行在户部侍郎陈山为本部尚书兼谨身殿大学士，入文渊阁供职。
English: On February 5th, Chen Shan, the attendant of the household department, was promoted to the post of the head of the department and the honorable person, and was assigned to work in Wenyuan Pavilion.

古文：乙丑，黎利攻交阯城，王通击败之。
现代文：七日，黎利进攻交趾城，被王通击败。
English: On the seventh day, Lili attacked Koji City and was defeated by Wang Tong.

古文：三月辛卯，赐马愉等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赐马愉等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3rd, Ma Yue and other new recruits were given different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月庚申，黎利陷昌江，都指挥李任，指挥顾福、刘顺，知府刘子辅，中官冯智死之。
现代文：夏四月二日，黎利攻陷昌江，都指挥李任，指挥顾福、刘顺，知府刘子辅，中官冯智死于战火中。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of summer, Lili invaded the Changjiang River. Li Ren, Gu Fu, Liu Shun, Liu Zisuke, and Lieutenant General Feng Zhi died in the battle.

古文：甲子，晋王济熿有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：六日，晋王济火黄犯罪，废为庶人。
English: On the sixth day, Jin Wangji committed a crime, and was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：己巳，王通许黎利和。
现代文：十一日，王通允许黎利讲和。
English: On the 11th, Wang Tong allowed Lili to make peace.

古文：五月癸巳，薛禄督饷开平。
现代文：五月六日，薛禄督察开平粮饷。
English: On May 6th, Inspector Xue Lu opened the flat grain warehouse.

古文：己亥，仁宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：十二日，仁宗神位附祭于太庙。
English: On the twelfth day, the Ninshu Shinto deity was enshrined in the Imperial Temple.

古文：丙午，录囚。
现代文：十九日，审查囚犯。
English: On the morning of the ninth day of the month, the prisoners' confessions were examined.

古文：六月戊寅，录囚。
现代文：六月二十一日，审查记录囚犯罪行。
English: On June 21st, a review of recorded prisoner offenses began.

古文：秋七月己亥，黎利陷隘留关，镇远侯顾兴祖拥兵不救，逮治之。
现代文：秋七月十三日，黎利攻陷隘留关，镇远侯顾兴祖拥兵不救，被逮捕惩治。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Lili attacked the narrow pass, and Gu Xingzu, the mayor of Zhenyuan, did not save the soldiers, and was arrested and punished.

古文：庚子，录囚。
现代文：十四日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 20th, the inmate's confession was examined.

古文：辛丑，命都督同知陈怀充总兵官，帅师讨松潘蛮。
现代文：十五日，命令都督同知陈怀充任总兵官，率师征讨松藩叛蛮。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ordered the governor and his friend Chen Huai to serve as the chief military officer and lead the division to fight the rebellion in Songpan.

古文：丁未，薛禄败敌于开平。
现代文：二十日，薛禄在开平打败敌军。
English: On the 20th, Xue Lu defeated the enemy in Kaiping.

古文：八月甲子，黄淮致仕。
现代文：八月九日，黄淮辞官退职。
English: On August 9, Huang Huai resigned and retired.

古文：免两京、山西、河南州县被灾税粮。
现代文：免两京、山西、河南州县遭灾税粮。
English: Grain from disaster-hit counties in Beijing, Shanxi and Henan will be exempt from the tax.

古文：九月壬辰，录囚。
现代文：九月七日，审查囚犯。
English: On September 7, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：乙未，柳升师次倒马坡，遇伏战死。
现代文：十日，柳升军临倒马坡，遇伏兵战死。
English: On the tenth day, Liu Sheng's army fell on Ma Po, and he was killed by an ambush.

古文：是日，保定伯梁铭病卒。
现代文：当天，保定伯梁铭病死。
English: On the same day, Baoding Bo Liangming died of illness.

古文：丙申，尚书李庆病卒。
现代文：十一日，尚书李庆病死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Qing died of illness.

古文：师大溃，参将崔聚，郎中史安，主事陈镛、李宗昉死之。
现代文：官军溃败，参将崔聚、郎中史安、主事陈镛、李宗窻战死。
English: The government army was routed, and the senior generals Cui Zhu, Langzhong Shi'an, and the leading officers Chen Yao and Li Zongyao died in the battle.

古文：冬十月戊寅，王通弃交阯，与黎利盟。
现代文：十月二十四日，王通放弃交趾，与黎利结盟。
English: On October 24th, Wang Tong gave up the alliance and allied with Lili.

古文：十一月乙酉，赦黎利，遣侍郎李琦、罗汝敬立陈暠为安南国王，悉如文武吏士还。
现代文：十一月一日，赦免黎利，派侍郎李琦、罗汝敬立陈詗为安南国王，文武吏士全部召回。
English: On November 1, he pardoned Lili, sent his attendants Li Jun and Luo Ru Jing to install Chen Jun as the king of Annan, and recalled all civil and military officials.

古文：己亥，以皇长子生大赦天下，免明年税粮三之一。
现代文：十五日，因皇长子降生大赦天下，免去第二年税粮的三分之一。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the birth of the emperor's eldest son, a general amnesty was granted, exempting one-third of the next year's tax grain.

古文：十二月丁丑，振陕西饥。并给绢布十五万疋。
现代文：十二月二十四日，赈济陕西饥荒，并给绢布十五万匹。
English: On December 24th, Guizhou provided relief for the famine in Shaanxi Province, and gave 150,000 animals to Xingbo.

古文：是年，爪哇、占城、暹罗、琉球、瓦剌、哈密、亦力把里、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：这一年，爪哇、占城、暹罗、琉球、瓦剌、哈密、亦力把里、撒马尔罕入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Java, Chamcheng, Siam, Ryukyu, Wajian, Hami, Yili, and Samarkand paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：三年春正月甲午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：宣德三年正月十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the third year of Xuande, the grand festival heaven and earth began in the southern suburbs.

古文：丙申，陈怀平松潘蛮。
现代文：十三日，陈怀平定松藩叛蛮。
English: On the 13th, Chen Huai put down the rebellion of the Jingsong clan.

古文：二月戊午，立皇长子祁镇为皇太子。
现代文：二月六日，立皇长子朱祁镇为皇太子。
English: On February 6, the eldest son of the crown prince, Zhu Rongzhen, became the crown prince.

古文：是月，作《帝训》成。
现代文：当月，《帝训》作成。
English: In the same month, "Imperial Discipline" was created.

古文：三月癸未，废皇后胡氏，立贵妃孙氏为皇后。
现代文：三月初一，废皇后胡氏。立贵妃孙氏为皇后。
English: On the first day of March, the queen of the Hu clan was abolished, and the queen of the Sun clan was appointed.

古文：壬辰，录囚。
现代文：十日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 10th, the prisoners were examined.

古文：夏四月癸亥，敕凡官民建言章疏，尚书、都御史、给事中会议以闻，勿讳。
现代文：夏四月十一日，命令凡是官吏平民建议之言或奏章，尚书、都御史、给事中一同商量上报，不需避讳。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, it was ordered that all the words or songs suggested by officials and civilians should be discussed and reported together in the official document, the capital history, and the report, and there was no need to avoid it.

古文：闰月壬寅，录囚。
现代文：闰四月二十一日，审查囚犯。
English: On April 21, the review of prisoners began.

古文：免山西旱灾税粮。
现代文：免去山西旱灾后税粮。
English: Shanxi's post-drought grain tax waived.

古文：甲辰，命有司振恤。
现代文：二十三日，命官吏赈济抚恤。
English: On the 23rd, officials were ordered to subsidize pensions.

古文：庚戌，论弃交阯罪，王通等及布政使弋谦、中官山寿、马骐下狱论死，籍其家，镇远侯顾兴祖并下狱。
现代文：二十九日，判定放弃交趾之罪，王通及布政使弋谦，中官山寿、马骐下狱处死，籍没其家，镇远侯顾兴祖一并下狱。
English: On the 29th, Wang Tong and Bu Zheng Envoy Zou Qian, Vice-Governor Shan Shou and Vice-Governor Ma Jun were sentenced to death for the crime of abandoning kinship, and their families were disowned. Zhenyuanhou Gu Xingzu was also sentenced to death.

古文：五月壬子，李琦、罗汝敬还。
现代文：五月一日，李琦、罗汝敬回京。
English: On May 1, Li Wei and Luo Ruqing returned to Beijing.

古文：黎利表陈暠卒，子孙并绝，乞守国俟命。
现代文：黎利上书奏陈詗死，子孙绝后，请求镇守交趾待命。
English: Lili wrote a letter to Chen Xuan after his death, requesting the town guards to be on standby.

古文：辛酉，录囚。
现代文：十日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 30th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：己巳，复遣罗汝敬等谕黎利立陈氏后。
现代文：十八日，再派罗汝敬等告诉黎利册立陈氏之后。
English: On the 18th, after sending Luo Ruqing and others to tell Lili to appoint Chen.

古文：辛未，赠交阯死事诸臣。
现代文：二十日，追封为交趾而死的诸臣爵位。
English: On the 20th, he posthumously conferred peerages on all the vassals who died for him.

古文：壬申，免北京被灾夏税。
现代文：二十一日，北京遭灾，免除夏税。
English: On the 21st, Beijing suffered a disaster and was exempted from the summer tax.

古文：六月丙戌，免陕西被灾夏税。
现代文：六月五日，免除陕西遭灾夏税。
English: On June 5, Shaanxi was exempted from the disaster-hit summer tax.

古文：丁未，都御史刘观巡视河道。
现代文：二十六日，都御史刘观巡视河道。
English: On the 26th, the Metropolitan Historian Liu Guan went on a tour of the river.

古文：秋七月戊辰，录囚。
现代文：七月十八日，审查囚犯。
English: On July 18th, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：八月辛卯，罢北京行部及行后军都督府。
现代文：八月十二日，罢免北京行部及行后军都督府。
English: On August 12th, the Beijing government and the military governor's office were dismissed.

古文：丁未，帝自将巡边。
现代文：二十八日，宣宗亲自巡视边境。
English: On the 28th, Xuan Zong personally inspected the border.

古文：九月辛亥，次右门驿。
现代文：九月二日，到石门驿。
English: On September 2nd, I went to Shek Mun Ho.

古文：兀良哈寇会州，帝帅精卒三千人往击之。
现代文：兀良哈侵犯会州，宣宗率精骑三千人前往迎击。
English: Hailiangha invaded Huizhou, and Xuanzong led 3,000 horsemen to meet the attack.

古文：己卯，出喜峰口，击寇于宽河。
现代文：六日，兵出喜峰口，在宽河攻击兀良哈。
English: On the sixth day, the soldiers came out of Qifengkou and attacked Qiliangha in Kuanhe.

古文：帝亲射其前锋，殪三人，两翼军并发，大破之。
现代文：宣宗亲自射杀敌军前锋，射死三人，两翼兵突然大举进攻，大破兀良哈。
English: Xuan Zong personally shot and killed the enemy's forward, shot and killed three people, the two wing soldiers suddenly launched a large-scale attack, and broke through the Liangha.

古文：寇望见黄龙旂，下马罗拜请降，皆生缚之，斩渠酋。甲子，班师。
现代文：敌军望见黄龙旗，下马列队请降，全部被活捉，其首领直接被斩杀。十五日，回师。
English: When the enemy saw the yellow dragon flag, they dismounted and asked the cavalry to dismount. They were all captured alive, and their leader was directly beheaded. On the 15th, they returned to their division.

古文：癸酉，至自喜峰口。
现代文：二十四日，亲自巡察喜峰口。
English: On the 24th, he personally inspected the Xifeng entrance.

古文：冬十一月癸酉，锦衣指挥钟法保请采珠东莞，帝曰： 是欲扰民以求利也 ，下之狱。
现代文：十一月二十五日，锦衣卫指挥钟法保请求去东莞采集珠宝，宣宗说： 这是想侵害老百姓以求得利益。 钟法保被下狱。
English: On November 25th, the commander of the Jin Yi Wei, Zhong Fa Bao, requested to go to Dongguan to collect jewelry, and Xuan Zong said: This is an attempt to infringe on the people in order to seek profits.

古文：十二月庚子，广西总兵官山云讨擒忻城蛮。
现代文：十二月二十三日，广西总兵官山云讨平忻城叛蛮。
English: On December 23rd, Guangxi's commander-in-chief, Shan Yun, set out to quell the rebellion in Lucheng.

古文：是年，占城、暹罗、爪哇、琉球、瓦剌、哈密、安南、曲先、土鲁番、亦力把里、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：这一年，占城、暹罗、爪哇、琉球、瓦剌、哈密、安南、曲先、土鲁番、亦力把里、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Chamcheng, Siam, Java, Ryukyu, Batu, Hami, Annam, Quxian, Turpan, Yili, and Samarkand paid tribute to the North.

古文：四年春正月，两京地震。
现代文：宣德四年正月，两京地震。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Xuande, the earthquake in Beijing.

古文：己未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月己丑，南京献驺虞二，礼部请表贺，不许。
现代文：二月十三日，南京进献驺虞二条，礼部请庆贺，不许。
English: On February 13th, two pieces of yakitori were presented in Nanjing. The ceremonial department was not allowed to celebrate.

古文：三月甲戌，遣李琦再谕黎利访立陈氏后。
现代文：三月二十八日，派李琦再次告诉黎利要寻访册立陈氏后裔。
English: On March 28th, Li Yao sent Li Li again to tell him to look for descendants of the Chen clan.

古文：夏四月辛巳，山云讨平柳、浔蛮。
现代文：四月六日，山云平定柳州、浔州叛蛮。
English: On April 6, Liuzhou and Zhangzhou rebelled.

古文：戊子，工部尚书黄福、平江伯陈瑄经略漕运。
现代文：十三日，工部尚书黄福、平江伯陈蠧经略漕运。
English: On the 13th, Huangfu Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and Pingjiang Bo Chenjun of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce took part in the parade.

古文：五月壬子，录囚。
现代文：五月七日，审查囚犯。
English: On May 7, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：六月甲午，罢文吏犯赃赎罪例。
现代文：六月十九日，停止文官犯贪赃罪赎罪旧例。
English: On June 19, the old practice of civil servants committing the crime of embezzlement and expiating the crime was suspended.

古文：己亥，寇犯开平，镇抚张信等战死。
现代文：二十四日，敌军侵犯开平，镇抚张信等战死。
English: On the 24th, the enemy invaded Kaiping, and the governor Zhang Xin and others were killed in the battle.

古文：庚子，薛禄督饷开平。
现代文：二十五日，薛禄监督开平粮饷。
English: On the 25th, Xue Lu supervised the opening of the grain market.

古文：秋七月己未，幸文渊阁。
现代文：七月十五日，巡幸文渊阁。
English: On July 15th, the inspection tour of Wenyu Pavilion began.

古文：八月己卯，起复杨溥。
现代文：八月五日，起复杨溥。
English: On August 5, Yang Hui was restored to power.

古文：九月癸亥，释顾兴祖于狱。
现代文：九月二十日，将顾兴祖从狱中放出。
English: On September 20, Gu Xingzu was released from prison.

古文：冬十月庚辰，幸文渊阁。
现代文：十月七日，巡幸文渊阁。
English: On October 7th, the inspection tour of Wenyu Pavilion began.

古文：癸未，以天寒谕法司录囚。
现代文：十月，因天气寒冷告诉法官审查囚犯。
English: In October, the judge was told to review the prisoner because of the cold weather.

古文：丙戌，制《猗兰操》赐廷臣，谕以荐贤为国之道。
现代文：十三日，制 猗兰操 赐给文武百官，告诉他们要以举荐贤才为建国之道。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the imperial edict was issued to the civil and military officials, telling them to recommend talents as the way to build the country.

古文：庚寅，张瑛、陈山罢。
现代文：十七日，张瑛、陈山停职。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Ying and Chen Shan were suspended.

古文：甲午，阅武于近郊。
现代文：二十一日，在近郊检阅军队。
English: On the 21st, the troops were inspected in the suburbs.

古文：乙未，猎于峪口。
现代文：二十二日，在峪谷打猎。
English: On the 22nd, I went hunting in Shibuya.

古文：戊戌，还宫。
现代文：二十五日，回宫。
English: On the 24th, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：十一月癸卯，薛禄及恭顺侯吴克忠帅师巡宣府。
现代文：十一月一日，薛禄及恭顺伯吴克忠率师巡视宣府。
English: On November 1, Xue Lu and Gong Shun Bo Wu Ke Zhong led the division to inspect Xuanwu.

古文：十二月乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：十二月三日，京师发生地震。
English: On December 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：壬辰，罢中官松花江造船。
现代文：二十日，停止中官在松花江造船。
English: On the 20th, the Vice-Admiral stopped shipbuilding in the Songhua River.

古文：是年，爪哇、占城、琉球、榜葛刺、哈密、土鲁番、亦力把里、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：这一年，爪哇、占城、琉球、榜葛剌、哈密、土鲁番、亦力把里、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Java, Zhancheng, Ryukyu, Bangge, Hami, Turuban, Yili, and Samarkand paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：五年春正月癸丑，大祀天地于南郊。戊辰，尚书夏原吉卒。
现代文：宣德五年正月十二日，在南郊大祭天地。二十七日，尚书夏原吉死。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 5th year of Xuande, in the southern suburb of the great festival world. On the 27th day, Shangshu Xia Yuanji died.

古文：二月壬辰，罢工部采木。
现代文：二月二十一日，停止工部采木。
English: On February 21st, the Ministry of Works stopped harvesting.

古文：癸巳，颁宽恤之令，省灾伤，宽马政，免逋欠薪刍，招流民赐复一年，罢采买，减官田旧科十之三，恤工匠，禁司仓官包纳，戒法司慎刑狱。
现代文：二十二日，颁布宽恤政令： 察看灾伤，放宽马政，减免欠交的粮草，招抚流民归业，减免田租一年，停止采木买卖，减免官田旧科十分之三，抚恤工匠，禁止官吏包揽仓库，告诫法官谨慎用刑。 
English: On the 22nd, a leniency decree was issued: to inspect the disaster and injury, relax the horse policy, reduce and waive the arrears of grain and grass, encourage the displaced to return to work, reduce and waive the field rent for one year, stop the harvesting and trading, reduce and waive three-tenths of the old department of government land, raise the allowance of craftsmen, prohibit government officials from occupying warehouses, and caution judges to use punishment cautiously.

古文：乙未，奉皇太后谒陵。
现代文：二十四日，奉皇太后之命拜谒祖陵。
English: On the 24th, by order of the empress dowager, they paid homage to the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：三月戊申，道见耕者，下马问农事，取耒三推，顾侍臣曰： 朕三推巳不胜劳，况吾民终岁勤动乎。 
现代文：三月八日，途中看见百姓耕田，亲自下马询问农事，拿着耒耜推了三下，环顾左右侍臣说： 朕才推三下就十分劳累，何况老百姓终年劳动呢？ 
English: On March 8th, on the way, he saw the peasants ploughing the fields. He dismounted his horse to inquire about farming. He took the plough and pushed it three times. Looking around, he said, "I'm very tired after only pushing it three times. What's more, the common people work all year round."

古文：命赐所过农民钞，己酉，还宫。
现代文：命侍臣赐给所经过之地百姓钱钞。九日，回宫。
English: He ordered his attendants to give money to the people of the lands they passed through. On the 9th, he returned to the palace.

古文：辛亥，李琦还，黎利称陈氏无后，上表请封。
现代文：十一日，李琦回京。黎利称陈氏无后，上表请求加封。
English: On the 11th day, Li Wei returned to Beijing. Lili said that there was no successor to the Chen clan, and the above request was sealed.

古文：丙辰，免山西去岁被灾田租。
现代文：十六日，免山西去年遭灾后田租。
English: On the 16th, Shanxi was exempted from land rent after the disaster last year.

古文：丁巳，赐林震等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐林震等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the seventeenth day, there were differences in the number and origin of the recruits such as Jie Lin Zhen.

古文：夏四月戊寅，薛禄帅师筑赤城、雕鹗、云州、独石、团山城堡。
现代文：四月八日，薛禄率兵修筑赤城、雕鹗、云州、独石、团山城堡。
English: On April 8th, Xue Lu led the soldiers to build the castles of Akagi, Jiaozuo, Yunnan, Dokdo, and Tuanshan.

古文：五月癸卯，追夺赃吏诰敕，著为令。
现代文：五月四日，追夺贪赃官吏诰赦，写成文以为法令。
English: On May 4, a decree was issued to pursue corrupt officials and pardon them.

古文：丙辰，修预备仓，出官钱收籴备荒。
现代文：十七日，修预备仓库，出官钱收多余粮食以备灾荒。
English: On the seventeenth day, he repaired the reserve warehouse and went out to collect surplus grain to prepare for the disaster.

古文：癸亥，擢郎中况钟、御史何文渊九人为知府，赐敕遣之。
现代文：二十四日，擢升郎中况钟、御史何文渊九人为知府。赐给他们诏书令其上任。
English: On the 24th, nine people were promoted to the position of chifu (governor) including Chuzo Chucho and Mishi Homenyu. They were given an imperial edict to take office.

古文：六月己卯，遣官捕近畿蝗，谕户部曰： 往年捕蝗之使害民不减于蝗，宜知此弊。 
现代文：六月十日，派官吏捕捉近郊蝗虫，告诉户部说： 往年捕蝗使臣侵害百姓不亚于蝗虫本身之害，要知道这一弊病。 
English: On June 10, officials were sent to catch locusts in the suburbs, and they told the Ministry of Housing: "In previous years, locust-hunting envoys harmed the people no less than the locusts themselves. You should be aware of this evil.

古文：因作《捕蝗诗》示之。
现代文：于是作《捕蝗诗》给他们看。
English: So he wrote the "Locust-Catching Poem" to show them.

古文：秋七月癸亥，甄别守令。
现代文：七月二十五日，监别守备命令。
English: On July 25th, he was placed on probation.

古文：八月己巳朔，日食，阴雨不见，礼官请表贺，不许。
现代文：八月初一日，日食，阴雨看不见，礼官请求上表祝贺，不许。
English: On the first day of August, when the sun was eclipsed and no rain was in sight, the etiquette officer asked for congratulations from the table, which was not allowed.

古文：九月丙午，擢御史于谦、长史周忱六人为侍郎，巡抚两京、山东、山西、河南、江西、浙江、湖广。
现代文：九月八日，升御史于谦、长史周忱六人为侍郎，巡视两京、山东、山西、河南、江西、浙江、湖广。
English: On September 8th, Sheng Mi Shi Yu Qian and Chang Shi Zhou Zhen, six attendants, inspected Beijing, Shandong, Shanxi, Henan, Jiangxi, Zhejiang and Hunan.

古文：乙卯，巡近郊。
现代文：十七日，巡视近郊。
English: On the 17th, they inspected the suburbs.

古文：己未，还宫。
现代文：二十一日，还宫。
English: On the 20th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月乙亥，阿鲁台犯辽东，辽海卫指挥同知皇甫斌力战死。
现代文：十月八日，阿鲁台侵犯辽东，辽海卫指挥同知皇甫斌奋力战死。
English: On October 8th, Alutai invaded Liaodong, and Liaohai garrison commander and comrade-in-arms Wang Fubin died in battle.

古文：丙子，巡近郊。
现代文：九日，巡视近郊。
English: On the 9th, they toured the suburbs.

古文：己卯，猎于坌道。
现代文：十二日，去坌道打猎。
English: On the twelfth day, he went hunting on the mountain road.

古文：丙戌，至洗马林，遍阅城堡兵备。
现代文：十九日，到洗马林，全面检查城堡兵备情况。
English: On the 19th, he went to Shimaring to make a comprehensive inspection of the castle's military readiness.

古文：壬辰，还宫。
现代文：二十五日，回宫。
English: On the 25th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：十二月癸巳，曲先叛番平。
现代文：十二月二十七日，平定曲先叛番。
English: On December 27th, Pingding Qu was the first to defect.

古文：闰月己未，敕内外诸司，久淹狱囚者罪之。
现代文：闰十二月二十三日，告诫内外诸官，长时间拖延不审理囚犯者加罪。
English: On the 23rd day of the 12th lunar month, officials at home and abroad were admonished not to delay the trial of prisoners for a long time.

古文：是年，占城、琉球、爪哇、瓦剌、哈密、罕东、土鲁番、撒马儿罕、亦力把里入贡。
现代文：本年，占城、琉球、爪哇、瓦剌、哈密、罕东、土鲁番、撒马儿罕、亦力把里入朝进贡。
English: This year, Zhancheng, Ryukyu, Java, Waju, Hami, Handong, Turpan, Samarkand, and Yili have paid tribute to the North.

古文：六年春正月丁丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：宣德六年正月十二日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 6th year of Xuande, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb.

古文：庚辰，大雨雷电。
现代文：十五日，下大雨，有雷电。
English: On the 15th, there was heavy rain and thunder and lightning.

古文：二月丁酉，侍郎罗汝敬督陕西屯田。
现代文：二月二日，侍郎罗汝敬监督陕西屯田。
English: On February 2, Luo Ruqing, the chamberlain, left to supervise the Shaanxi Tunden.

古文：己亥，浚金龙口，引河达徐州以便漕。
现代文：四日，疏通金龙口，引黄河水到徐州以便漕运。
English: On the fourth day, Jinlongkou was dredged and the Yellow River water was diverted to Xuzhou for paddling.

古文：三月乙亥，命吏部考察外官自布政、按察二司始，著为令。
现代文：三月十一日，命令吏部考察外官，从布政、按察二司开始，成为法令。
English: On March 11th, it was decreed that the Ministry of Personnel should inspect foreign officials, starting with Bu Zheng and the Second Inspection Division.

古文：夏四月己酉，侍郎柴车经理山西屯田。
现代文：四月十五日，侍郎柴车经理山西屯田。
English: On the 15th of April, the manager of Samurai Chai Chariot, Shanxi Tonden, left.

古文：六月己亥，遣使诏黎利权署安南国事。
现代文：六月七日，派使臣下诏黎利全权代理安南国事。
English: On June 7, he sent an envoy, Zhao Lili, to represent Annan in state affairs.

古文：秋七月己巳，录囚。
现代文：七月七日，审查囚犯。
English: On July 7, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：壬午，许朵颜三卫市易。
现代文：二十日，准许朵颜三卫交换买卖。
English: On the 20th, Doan Sanwei was allowed to trade.

古文：冬十月甲辰，陈怀平松潘蛮。
现代文：十月十三日，陈怀平定松藩蛮夷。
English: On October 13th, Chen Huai defeated the barbarians of Jingsong.

古文：十一月丙子，始命官军兑运民粮。
现代文：十一月十五日，开始命令官军兑换民间粮食。
English: On November 15th, he began to order the government army to exchange grain for civilian grain.

古文：乙酉，分遣御史往逮贪暴中官袁琦等。
现代文：二十日，分别派遣御史前往逮捕惩治贪婪残暴的中官袁琦等。
English: On the 20th, imperial historians were separately dispatched to arrest and punish the greedy and brutal vice-governor Yuan Qi and others.

古文：十二月乙未，袁琦等十一人弃市，榜其罪示天下。
现代文：十二月四日，袁琦等十一人被处死弃市，向天下公布其罪行。
English: On December 4th, Yuan Qi and eleven others were sentenced to death and banished from the city, and their crimes were announced to the world.

古文：丁未，金幼孜卒。
现代文：十六日，金幼孜死。
English: On the 16th, Kim Yo-jong died.

古文：庚戌，遣御史巡视宁夏甘州屯田水利。
现代文：十九日，派御史巡视宁夏甘州屯田水利。
English: On the 19th, an inspector was sent to inspect the Tonden water conservancy in Ganzhou, Ningxia.

古文：七年春正月辛酉朔，日有食之，免朝贺。
现代文：这一年，占城、琉球、瓦剌、哈密、苏门答剌、亦力把里入朝进贡。宣德七年正月初一，有日食，免朝贺。
English: In the same year, tributes were paid to the Imperial Court by the cities of Jamsil, Ryukyu, Wajima, Hami, Sumatra, and Iligadari. On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Xuande, there was a solar eclipse, and the Imperial Court was exempt from paying tribute.

古文：癸酉，大祀天地于南郊。二月甲午，以春和谕法司录囚。
现代文：十三日，在南郊大祭天地。二月五日，因春天暖和告诉法官审查囚犯。
English: On the 13th, at the Southern Suburbs Grand Festival, and on the 5th of February, because of the warm spring, he told the judge to examine the prisoner.

古文：三月庚申，下诏行宽恤之政。
现代文：三月一日，下诏施行宽大政策。
English: On March 1, a leniency policy was implemented.

古文：辛酉，谕礼部曰： 朕以官田赋重，十减其三。
现代文：二日，对礼部说： 朕以官田赋税很重，减免十分之三。
English: On the second day, he said to the Ministry of Ceremonies: I am a heavy tax payer, and the reduction and exemption is three-tenths.

古文：乃闻异时蠲租诏下，户部皆不行，甚者戒约有司，不得以诏书为辞。
现代文：我听说从前免租诏书下达后，户部皆不执行，更厉害的甚至约束有关官吏，不以诏书为准。
English: I heard that in the past, after the rent-free edict was issued, the households did not implement it, and even more severely restricted the relevant officials, and did not abide by the edict.

古文：是废格诏令，使泽不下究也。
现代文：于是废除并阻止诏书，使恩典下不到百姓头上去。
English: Therefore, the edict was abolished and blocked, so that the people would not be able to rise up under grace.

古文：自今令在必行，毋有所遏。 
现代文：今天令在必行，不得有任何阻拦。 
English: It is imperative that we do so today, and nothing must stand in the way.

古文：夏四月辛丑，免山西逋赋。
现代文：四月十三日，免山西欠交赋税。
English: On April 13, Shanxi was exempted from tax arrears.

古文：壬寅，募商中盐输粟入边。
现代文：十四日，征募商人运粮到边境，偿以盐券。
English: On the 14th, merchants were recruited to transport grain to the border, in return for salt coupons.

古文：六月癸卯，录囚。
现代文：六月十六日，审查囚犯。
English: On June 16th, the prisoners were examined.

古文：癸丑，罢中官入番市马。
现代文：二十六日，停止中官入番买卖马匹。
English: On the 26th, the sale and purchase of horses by middle officers was suspended.

古文：是月，作《官箴》成，凡三十五篇，示百官。
现代文：这一月，作成《官箴》，共三十五篇，给各官吏看。
English: This month, a total of thirty-five "official proverbs" were compiled for officials to read.

古文：秋八月乙未，敕京官三品以上举才行文学之士，吏部、都察院黜方面有司不职者。
现代文：八月九日，命令京官三品以上推举才行文学之士，吏部、都察院削除有关方面不称职官员。
English: On August 9, he ordered the Beijing authorities to nominate more than three literary figures, and the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Beijing Municipal People's Procuratorate to remove incompetent officials in relevant areas.

古文：九月庚午，诸将巡边。
现代文：九月十五日，各将领巡视边境。
English: On September 15th, the generals came to inspect the border.

古文：是秋，免两畿及嘉兴。湖州水灾税粮。
现代文：这一年秋天，减免两畿及嘉兴、湖州遭水灾后税粮。
English: In the autumn of the same year, tax relief and exemption were extended to the two provinces of Gyeonggi, Jiaxing and Huzhou after they were hit by floods.

古文：冬十一月辛酉，召督漕平江伯陈瑄、侍郎赵新等岁终至京议粮赋利弊。
现代文：十一月六日，召督漕平江伯陈王宣、侍郎赵新等年终到京师讨论粮食赋税利弊得失。
English: On November 6, Chen Wangxuan, the governor of Pingjiang, and Zhao Xin, the chamberlain, came to Beijing at the end of the year to discuss the pros and cons of grain taxation.

古文：是年，占城、琉球、哈密、哈烈、瓦剌、亦力把里入贡。
现代文：这一年，占城、琉球、哈密、哈烈、瓦剌、亦力把里入朝进贡。
English: In that year, the cities of Zhancheng, Ryukyu, Hami, Harei, Waju and Yili paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：八年春正月丁卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：宣德八年正月十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 8th year of Xuande, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月壬子，录囚，宥免五千余人。
现代文：二月二十八日，审查囚犯。宽免五千余人。
English: On February 28, prisoners were reviewed, and more than 5,000 people were pardoned.

古文：三月丙辰，赐曹鼐等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赐曹鼐等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3rd, Cao Jun was awarded the title of "Candidate of the Year" with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：庚辰，谕内外优恤军士，违者风宪官察奏罪之。
现代文：二十七日，告诉内外官优先抚恤将士，违反的风宪官查实加罪。
English: On the 27th, he told the officials at home and abroad to give priority to the promotion of soldiers, and the gendarme who violated the law was found guilty.

古文：是春，以两京、河南、山东、山西久旱，遣使振恤。
现代文：当年春天，因两京、河南、山东、山西长久旱灾，派使臣前往赈恤。
English: In the spring of that year, due to the long-term drought in Beijing, Henan, Shandong and Shanxi, envoys were sent to Bingye.

古文：夏四月戊戌，诏蠲京省被灾逋和、杂课，免今年夏税，赐复一年。
现代文：四月十五日，下诏减免北京遭灾后欠交田租、杂课，免今年夏税，减免田租一年。
English: On April 15, the following decrees were issued to reduce and exempt the arrears of field rent and miscellaneous classes in Beijing after the disaster, exempt this summer's tax, and reduce and exempt field rent for one year.

古文：理冤狱。
现代文：疏理冤假刑狱，减免殊死以下罪行。
English: We will rationalize unjust and fake prison sentences, and commute the sentences of crimes that are punishable by death or less.

古文：减殊死以下，赦军匠在逃者罪。有司各举贤良方正一人。巡按御史、按察使纠贪酷吏及使臣生事者。
现代文：赦免军匠逃亡在外的。官吏各推举贤良方正一人。巡按御史、按察使追究贪赃酷吏及使臣制造事端的。
English: Military artisans who had fled abroad were pardoned. Government officials were each to nominate one virtuous person as their successor. Inspectors were appointed to investigate corrupt and cruel officials and envoys who had caused trouble.

古文：五月丁巳，总兵官都督萧授讨平贵州乌罗蛮。
现代文：五月五日，总兵官都督萧授平定贵州乌罗蛮。
English: On May 5th, the commander-in-chief, the governor Xiao Zhu, arrived in Guizhou to pacify Uroban.

古文：丁卯，山云讨平宜山蛮。
现代文：十五日，山云讨平宜山蛮。
English: On the fifteenth day, the mountains and clouds were discussed.

古文：六月乙酉，祷雨不应，作《闵旱诗》示群臣。
现代文：六月四日，祈雨不下，作《闵旱诗》给群臣看。
English: On June 4th, he prayed for rain, and composed "The Drought Poem" for his ministers to read.

古文：辛丑，诏中外疏决罪囚。
现代文：二十日，诏中外官奏疏判决罪囚。
English: On the 20th, the verdict was announced by the Foreign Ministry.

古文：是夏，复振两京、河南、山东、山西、湖广饥，免税粮。
现代文：这年夏天，再次赈济两京、河南、山东、山西、湖广饥荒，免税粮。
English: In the summer of that year, tax-free grain was again provided to relieve the famine in Beijing, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi and Hukang.

古文：秋七月壬申，免江西水灾税粮。
现代文：七月二十一日，免江西水灾税粮。
English: On July 21st, the Jiangxi flood tax grain was exempted.

古文：八月癸巳，汰京师冗官。
现代文：八月十三日，淘汰京师多余官员。
English: On August 13, the redundant officials of the Beijing Division were eliminated.

古文：闰月辛亥，西域贡麒麟。
现代文：闰八月一日，西域进贡麒麟。
English: On the first day of leap August, the western region paid tribute to the unicorn.

古文：戊午，景星见。
现代文：八日，出现景星。
English: On the eighth day, the star appeared.

古文：礼官请表贺，皆不许。
现代文：礼官请求上表庆贺，都没允许。
English: When the etiquette officer asked for a table to celebrate, he was not allowed.

古文：九月乙酉，遣官录天下重囚。
现代文：九月六日，派官审查天下重大囚犯。
English: On September 6, officials were sent to review the world's most important prisoners.

古文：己亥，阿鲁台部昝卜寇凉州，总兵官刘广击斩之。
现代文：二十日，阿鲁台部昝卜侵犯凉州，被总兵官刘广击败斩杀。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Zibo of the Alutai Department invaded Liangzhou and was defeated and killed by the general officer Liu Guang.

古文：冬十二月乙亥，谕法司宥京官过犯。
现代文：十二月二十六日，告诉法官宽免京官过失犯罪。
English: On December 26th, he told the judge to pardon the Beijing officials.

古文：是年，暹罗、占城、琉球、安南、满剌加、天方、苏门答剌、古里、柯枝、阿丹、锡兰山、佐法儿、甘巴里、加异勒、忽鲁谟斯、哈密、瓦剌、撒马儿罕、亦力把里入贡。
现代文：这一年，暹罗、占城、琉球、安南、满剌加、天方、苏门答剌、古里、柯枝、阿丹、锡兰山、佐法儿、甘巴里、加异勒、忽鲁谟斯、哈密、瓦剌、撒马儿罕、亦力把里入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Siam, Champa, Ryukyu, Annam, Manchukuo, Tianfang, Sumatra, Guri, Kochi, Adan, Mount Ceylon, Safar, Gambari, Qayyarla, Khurrumu, Hami, Batu, Samarkand, and Yili paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：九年春正月辛卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：宣德九年正月十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of Xuande, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb.

古文：二月庚戌，振凤阳、淮安、扬州、徐州饥。
现代文：二月二日，赈济凤阳、淮安、扬州、徐州饥荒。
English: On February 2, famine struck Fengyang, Huai'an, Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：乙卯，申两京、山东、山西、河南宽恤之令。
现代文：七日，重申两京、山东、山西、河南宽恤之令。
English: On the 7th, it reiterated the order of leniency for Beijing, Shandong, Shanxi and Henan.

古文：三月戊寅，山云讨症思恩叛蛮。
现代文：三月一日，山云平定思恩叛蛮。
English: On the first day of March, the mountains and clouds were calm.

古文：夏四月己未，黎利死，子麟来告丧，命麟权署安南国事。
现代文：四月十二日，黎利死，其子黎麟前来告丧，命黎麟全权代理安南国事。
English: On April 12th, Lili died, and his son Lilin came to mourn, and appointed Lilin as the plenipotentiary for Annan's affairs of state.

古文：戊辰，录囚。
现代文：二十一日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 21st, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：五月壬午，瘗暴骸。
现代文：五月六日，掩埋外露尸骨。
English: On May 6, they buried the exposed bones.

古文：秋七月甲申，遣给事中、御史、锦衣卫官督捕两畿、山东、山西、河南蝗。
现代文：七月九日，遣给事中、御史、锦衣卫官督促捕捉两畿、山东、山西河南蝗虫。
English: On July 9, officials from the Central Military Commission, the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, and the Jinling Garrison were sent to urge the capture of locusts in the two Kis, Shandong, and Henan provinces of Shanxi.

古文：八月庚戌，振湖广饥。
现代文：八月六日，赈济湖广饥荒。
English: On August 6th, the famine broke out in the Lake Biji area.

古文：甲子，敕两京、湖广、江西、河南巡抚、巡按御史、三司官行视灾伤，蠲秋粮十之四。
现代文：二十日，命令两京、湖广、江西、河南巡抚、巡按御史、三司官巡行视察灾伤情况，减免秋粮十分之四。
English: On the 20th, it ordered the inspectors of the two capitals, Hukang, Jiangxi and Henan, the inspector of the history and the three officers to inspect the disaster and injury situation, and reduce and exempt four-tenths of the autumn grain.

古文：乙丑，罢工部采办。
现代文：二十一日，停止工部采办。
English: On the twenty-first day, the procurement of the Ministry of Industry and Trade was suspended.

古文：己巳，瓦剌脱欢攻杀阿鲁台，来告捷。
现代文：二十五日，瓦剌脱欢攻杀阿鲁台，前来报告胜利消息。
English: On the 25th, Varangian Huan attacked and killed Alutai, and came to report the news of victory.

古文：九月癸未，自将巡边。
现代文：九月九日，宣宗亲自率兵巡察边境。
English: On September 9, Xuan Zong personally led troops to patrol the border.

古文：乙酉，度居庸关。
现代文：十一日，过居庸关。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it is time to pass the yongguan.

古文：丙戌，猎于坌道。
现代文：十二日，在坌道打猎。
English: On the 12th, they went hunting on the road.

古文：乙未，阿鲁台子阿卜只俺来归。
现代文：二十一日，阿鲁台之子阿卜只俺前来归附。
English: On the twenty-first day, Abdulaziz, the son of Alutai, came to join them.

古文：丁酉，至洗马林，阅城堡兵备。
现代文：二十三日，到洗马林，检阅城堡兵备情况。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Shimaring to inspect the military readiness of the castle.

古文：己亥，大猎。
现代文：二十五日，大肆打猎。
English: On the 25th, they went on a hunting spree.

古文：冬十月丙午，还宫。
现代文：十月三日，回宫。
English: On October 3, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丙辰，都督方政讨平松潘叛蛮。
现代文：十三日，都督方政平定松藩叛蛮。
English: On the 13th, Governor Fang Zheng quelled the rebellion of the Jingsong clan.

古文：甲子，罢陕西市马。
现代文：二十一日，停止陕西买卖马匹。
English: On the 21st, the sale and purchase of horses in Shaanxi was suspended.

古文：丁卯，两畿、浙江、湖广、江西饥，以应运南京及临清仓粟振济。
现代文：二十四日，两畿、浙江、湖广、江西发生饥荒，运南京及临清仓库粮食赈济。
English: On the 24th, famine occurred in the two Kis, Zhejiang, Hukang, and Jiangxi, and grain was transported to Nanjing and Linqing warehouses for relief.

古文：十一月戊戌，停刑。
现代文：十一月二十五日，停止用刑。
English: On November 25, the sentence was suspended.

古文：庚子，免四川被灾税粮。
现代文：二十七日，免四川遭灾后税粮。
English: On the 27th, tax grain was exempted after the disaster in Sichuan.

古文：十二月甲子，帝不豫，卫王瞻埏摄享太庙。
现代文：十二月十九日，宣宗身体不适，卫王朱瞻埏扶宣宗祭祀太庙。
English: On December 19th, Emperor Xuanzong was unwell, and Emperor Wei sent Zhu Zhanqi to assist Emperor Xuanzong's ritual at the Great Temple.

古文：是年，暹罗、占城、琉球、苏门答剌、哈密、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：这一年，暹罗、占城、琉球、苏门答剌、哈密、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Siam, Jamsil, Ryukyu, Sumatra, Hami, and Hwaseong paid tribute to the North.

古文：十年春正月癸酉朔，不视朝，命群臣谒皇太子于文华殿。
现代文：宣德十年正月初一，宣宗没上朝办公，命文武百官在文华殿谒见皇太子。二日，病危。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 10th year of Emperor Xuande's reign, Emperor Xuanzong did not go to the imperial office, but ordered all the military and civilian officials to meet the crown prince at the Palace of Literature. On the second day, Emperor Xuanzong was critically ill.

古文：甲戌，大渐。罢买、营造诸使。
现代文：停止采买，营造诸使。
English: Stop buying, build things.

古文：乙亥，崩于乾清宫，年三十有八。
现代文：三日，死于乾清宫，终年三十八岁。
English: On the third day, he died in Qianqing Palace, at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：遗诏国家重务白皇太后。
现代文：留遗诏天下大事向皇太后陈述。
English: He left his last will and testament to inform the Empress Dowager of the most important events in the world.

古文：丁酉，上尊谥，庙号宣宗，葬景陵。
现代文：二十五日，上尊谥，庙号宣宗，葬于景陵。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Shangzong, temple name Xuan Zong, was buried in Jingling.

古文：赞曰：仁宗为太子，失爱于成祖。
现代文：评论：仁宗为太子时，成祖并不宠爱。
English: Comment: When Rinzong was crown prince, Cheng Zu was not fond of him.

古文：其危而复安，太孙盖有力焉。即位以后，吏称其职，政得其平，纲纪修明，仓庾充羡，闾阎乐业。
现代文：之所以能够危而复安，完全得力于皇太孙，即位以后，官吏称职，政治稳定，法度修明，仓库充实有余，百姓安居乐业，终年没有什么大害。
English: The reason why it was possible to restore peace after danger was entirely due to the great-grandson of the emperor. After the enthronement, the officials were competent, the politics were stable, the laws were amended, the warehouses were well-stocked, and the people lived and worked in peace, and there was no great harm throughout the year.

古文：岁不能灾。盖明兴至是历年六十，民气渐舒，蒸然有治平之象矣。
现代文：明朝从兴起至此时历六十余年，民间逐渐舒缓，显示出安定美好之迹象。
English: It has been more than sixty years since the rise of the Ming Dynasty, and the people have gradually relaxed, showing signs of stability and beauty.

古文：若乃强藩猝起，旋即削平，扫荡边尘，狡寇震慑，帝之英姿睿略，庶几克绳祖武者欤。
现代文：即使强大的封藩突然起事，不久就被治服，扫荡边境，使狡猾的敌人不得不为之震慑。宣宗之深谋远虑与雄才大略，几乎能赛过先祖的武功了。
English: Even if a powerful feudal clan suddenly rose up, it would soon be subdued and sweep the border, so that the cunning enemy would have to be deterred. Xuanzong's forethought and great talent were almost able to surpass the martial skills of his ancestors.

