古文：滕定公薨。世子谓然友曰： 昔者孟子尝与我言于宋，于心终不忘。
现代文：滕定去世了，太子对老师然友说： 上次在宋国的时候孟子和我谈了许多，我记在心里始终不能忘记。
English: When Tengding died, the prince said to his teacher Ranyou: "The last time I was in Song, Mencius and I talked a lot. I can't forget it in my heart.

古文：今也不幸至于大故，吾欲使子问于孟子，然后行事。 
现代文：现在不幸遭遇父亲去世，我想请您先去请教一下孟子，然后才办丧事。 
English: Now, unfortunately, my father has passed away. I would like to ask you to consult Mencius before holding a funeral.

古文：然友之邹问于孟子。
现代文：然友便到邹国去向孟子请教。
English: Yan You went to Shandong Province to ask Mencius for advice.

古文：孟子曰： 不亦善乎！
现代文：孟子说： 很好啊！
English: Mencius said, "Very good!

古文：亲丧固所自尽也。
现代文：父母的丧事本来就应该尽心竭力。
English: A parent's death should be handled with the best of intentions.

古文：曾子曰： 生，事之以礼；死，葬之以礼，祭之以礼，可谓孝矣。 
现代文：曾子曾说： 父母在世时，依照礼节侍奉他们；父母去世，依礼去安葬、去祭祀，这可说是尽孝了。 
English: Zengzi once said: When my parents were alive, I served them according to etiquette; when my parents passed away, I went to bury them according to etiquette and to offer sacrifices, which can be said to be a filial duty.

古文：诸侯之礼，吾未之学也；虽然，吾尝闻之矣。
现代文：诸侯的礼节，我没有学习过，但却也听说过：三年的丧期，穿着粗布做的孝服，喝稀粥。
English: I have not studied the etiquette of the princes, but I have heard of it: a three-year mourning period, wearing coarse cloth, drinking gruel.

古文：三年之丧，齐疏之服，饘粥之食，自天子达于庶人，三代共之。 然友反命，定为三年之丧。
现代文：从天子一直到老百姓，夏、商、周三代都是这样的。 然友回国报告了太子，太子便决定实行三年的丧礼。
English: From the emperor all the way down to the common people, Xia, Shang, and the third generation were all like this. Yan You returned home and reported to the prince, and the prince decided to carry out a three-year funeral.

古文：父兄百官皆不欲，曰： 吾宗国鲁先君莫之行，吾先君亦莫之行也，至于子之身而反之，不可。
现代文：滕国的父老官吏都不愿意。他们说： 我们的宗国鲁国的历代君主没有这样实行过，我们自己的历代祖先也没有这样实行过，到了您这一代便改变祖先的做法，这是不可以的。
English: The elders and officials of the State of Teng did not want to do so. They said, "The past monarchs of our mother country, the State of Lu, did not practice this way, and our own ancestors did not practice this way either. It is not permissible for your generation to change the practices of your ancestors.

古文：且志曰： 丧祭从先祖。 
现代文：而且《志》上说过： 丧礼祭祖一律依照祖先的规矩。 
English: Moreover, it was said in "Zhi": Funeral rites for the ancestors are all in accordance with the rules of the ancestors.

古文：曰： 吾有所受之也。 
现代文：还说： 这是因为我们有所继承。  
English: He also said: This is because we have an inheritance.

古文：谓然友曰： 吾他日未尝学问，好驰马试剑。
现代文：太子对然友说： 我过去不曾学礼问仪，只喜欢跑马舞剑。
English: The prince said to his friend, "In the past, I never learned etiquette. I only liked horse racing and sword dancing.

古文：今也父兄百官不我足也，恐其不能尽于大事，子为我问孟子。 
现代文：现在父老官吏们都对我实行三年丧礼不满，恐怕我无法处理好这件事情了，请您再去替我问问孟子吧！ 
English: Now all the old officials are dissatisfied with my three-year funeral, I'm afraid I can't handle this matter well, please go and ask Mencius for me again!

古文：然友复之邹问孟子。
现代文：然友再次到邹国请教孟子。
English: Yan You once again went to Shandong to consult Mencius.

古文：孟子曰： 然。不可以他求者也。
现代文：孟子说： 要坚持这样做，不可以改变。
English: Mencius said, "If you persist in doing this, you cannot change.

古文：孔子曰： 君薨，听于冢宰。
现代文：孔子说过： 君王死了，太子把一切政务都交给家事代理，自己每天喝稀粥。
English: Confucius said: "When the king dies, the crown prince hands over all government affairs to the family agent, and drinks gruel every day."

古文：歠粥，面深墨。即位而哭，百官有司，莫敢不哀，先之也。 
现代文：脸色深黑，就临孝子之位便哭泣，大小官吏没有谁敢不悲哀，这是因为太子亲自带头的缘故。 
English: His face darkened and he began to weep in the place of filial piety. No official, big or small, dared not to be sad. This was because the crown prince had personally taken the lead.

古文：上有好者，下必有甚焉者矣。 君子之德，风也；小人之德，草也。草上之风必偃。 
现代文：在上位的人有什么喜好，下面的人一定就会喜好得更厉害。领导人的德行是风，老百姓的德行是草。草受风吹，必然随风倒。
English: The leaders' virtue is the wind, and the people's virtue is the grass. The grass is blown by the wind and will inevitably fall with the wind.

古文：是在世子。 
现代文：所以，这件事完全取决于太子。 
English: Therefore, the matter is entirely up to the crown prince.

古文：然友反命。
现代文：然友回国报告了太子。
English: Yanotomo returned home and reported this to the Crown Prince.

古文：世子曰： 然。是诚在我。 
现代文：太子说： 是啊，这件事确实取决于我。 
English: The prince said, "Yes, it does depend on me."

古文：五月居庐，未有命戒。
现代文：于是太子在丧庐中住了五个月，没有颁布过任何命令和禁令。
English: As a result, the prince lived in mourning for five months, without issuing any orders or prohibitions.

古文：百官族人可谓曰知。
现代文：大小官吏和同族的人都很赞成，认为太子懂礼。
English: Officials of all ranks and people of the same ethnicity were all in favour, believing that the crown prince knew etiquette.

古文：及至葬，四方来观之，颜色之戚，哭泣之哀，吊者大悦。
现代文：等到下葬的那一天，四面八方的人都来观看，太子面容的悲伤，哭泣的哀痛，使前来吊丧的人都非常满意。
English: On the day of the funeral, people from all over the world came to watch. The sadness on the prince's face, the weeping grief, made the mourners very satisfied.

