古文：邪在肺，则病皮肤痛，寒热，上气喘，汗出，咳动肩背。
现代文：病邪侵袭肺脏，就会表现为皮肤疼痛，恶寒发热，气逆而喘，出汗，剧咳引动肩背作痛。
English: When the disease invades the lungs, it manifests as skin pain, chills, fever, gasping for breath, sweating, and severe coughing that causes pain in the back of the shoulder.

古文：取之膺中外腧，背三节五脏之傍，以手疾按之，快然，乃刺之。
现代文：治疗时应取胸部中间、外侧的腧穴，以及背部的第三脊椎旁的背俞穴，进针之前先用手快速的按压，患者有了舒适感以后再进针。
English: For treatment, the fistula in the middle and outside of the chest should be taken, as well as the dorsal fistula in the back next to the third spine. Before inserting the needle, quickly press it with your hand. After the patient feels comfortable, insert the needle.

古文：取之缺盆中以越之。
现代文：取缺盆穴，以散解肺中的邪气。
English: The pelvic cavity is removed to dissipate the evil breath in the lungs.

古文：邪在肝，则两胁中痛，寒中，恶血在内，行善掣，节时脚肿。
现代文：病邪侵袭肝脏，表现为两胁疼痛，中焦脾胃寒气偏盛，肝藏血，肝病则瘀血留滞体内，肝气不足以养筋，会出现小腿筋脉抽掣的现象，关节时有肿痛。
English: The disease invades the liver, manifested as bilateral pain, moderate spleen-stomach coldness, the liver hides blood, the liver disease leads to stagnant blood in the body, the liver gas is not enough to build muscle, there will be cramping of the calf muscle pulse, and there will be swelling in the joints.

古文：取之行间，以引胁下，补三里以温胃中，取血脉以散恶血；取耳间青脉，以去其掣。
现代文：治疗取行间穴引气下行，以缓解胁痛；补足三里穴以温中焦脾胃，并针刺本经有血瘀的络脉以除其中的瘀血，并刺双耳间的青络，可以缓解掣痛的症状。
English: The treatment is to draw air down from the hole between the procedures to relieve the pain; supplement the three-mile hole with warm medium-hot spleen and stomach, and needle the vein with blood stasis to remove the blood stasis, and prick the bruise between the ears, which can relieve the symptoms of stasis.

古文：邪在脾胃，则病肌肉痛，阳气有余，阴气不足，则热中善饥；阳气不足，阴气有余，则寒中肠鸣、腹痛；阴阳俱有余，若俱不足，则有寒有热，皆调于三里。
现代文：病邪侵袭脾胃，表现为肌肉痛，如果阳气有余，阴气不足，则胃腑阳热之邪盛而感到胃中灼热，常有饥饿的感觉；如果阳气不足，阴气有余，就会脾气虚寒，而出现肠鸣腹痛的症状；如果阴气和阳气都有余，就会表现为邪气偏盛；阴阳都不足，就表现为正气不足，而病发寒热。
English: The disease invades the spleen and stomach, which is manifested as muscle pain. If there is too much yang and not enough yin, then the stomach is inflamed with yang fever and feels hot in the stomach, often with a feeling of hunger; if there is not enough yang and too much yin, then the temper will be weak and cold, and symptoms of dysentery will appear; if there is too much yin and yang, it will be manifested as evil gas; if there is not enough yin and yang, it will be manifested as lack of righteousness, and the disease will be cold and feverish.

古文：邪在肾，则病骨痛，阴痹。
现代文：但不论是寒是热，都可以针刺足阳明胃经的足三里穴进行调治。
English: However, regardless of whether it is cold or hot, you can use acupuncture to adjust the foot sanli hole of the foot yangming stomach.

古文：阴痹者，按之而不得，腹胀，腰痛，大便难，肩背颈项痛，时眩。
现代文：病邪侵袭肾脏，表现为骨痛、阴痹的病证。阴痹，就是身痛而无定处，即使用手按压也不能确定疼痛的部位，腹胀满，腰酸痛，大便难，肩、背、颈、项都出现屈伸不利的疼痛，有时感到眩晕。
English: The disease invades the kidneys, manifesting as bone pain and palsy. Palsy is defined as body pain without a specific location. Even with hand pressure, the location of the pain cannot be determined. The abdomen is bloated, the lower back is sore, it is difficult to defecate, the shoulder, back, neck, and neck all experience pain that is not conducive to flexion and extension, and sometimes dizziness is felt.

古文：取之涌泉、昆仑，视有血者，尽取之。
现代文：治疗取涌泉、昆仑穴，如有瘀血的现象则针刺出血。
English: The treatment is to take the spring and Kunlun hole, and if there is the phenomenon of bleeding, it is to prick the bleeding with a needle.

古文：邪在心，则病心痛，喜悲，时眩仆，视有余不足而调之其输也。
现代文：病邪侵袭心脏，表现为心痛，情绪悲伤，时有眩晕甚至昏仆，治疗时根据其阴阳气血的有余和不足，来确定如何取本经的腧穴用补虚泻实的方法进行调治。
English: The disease invades the heart, manifesting as heartache, emotional sadness, sometimes dizziness and even drowsiness. During treatment, according to the excess and deficiency of yin and yang qi and blood, it is determined how to take the acupuncture point of the book and use the method of filling the void and adjusting the ejaculation.

