古文：◎熹宗
现代文：熹宗
English: Shizong

古文：熹宗达天阐道敦孝笃友章文襄武靖穆庄勤悊皇帝，讳由校，光宗长子也。
现代文：熹宗达天阐道敦孝笃友章文襄武靖穆庄勤胐皇帝，名叫朱由校，是明光宗的长子。
English: Emperor Zhu Youxiao, the eldest son of Emperor Zhu Youxiao, was the founder of the Mingguang sect.

古文：母选侍王氏。
现代文：其母为选侍王氏。
English: His mother was a member of the Shinsengumi.

古文：万历三十三年十一月，神宗以元孙生，诏告天下。
现代文：万历三十三年十一月，明神宗曾因得此长孙而告示天下。
English: In November of the 33rd year of the lunar calendar, Myojin Sect announced to the world that they had gained their first grandchild.

古文：四十八年，神宗遗诏皇长孙及时册立，未及行。
现代文：四十八年，神宗在遗诏中嘱咐及时册立皇长孙，但未来得及进行。
English: In the 48th year, in his last will and testament, Emperor Shenzong ordered that the eldest grandson of the emperor be registered in a timely manner, but this could not be done in time.

古文：九月乙亥，光宗崩，遗诏皇长子嗣皇帝位。
现代文：九月初一，明光宗驾崩，他在遗诏中说明，要皇长子朱由校即承皇帝位。
English: On the first day of September, when Emperor Mingguangzong passed away, he stated in his last will and testament that he wanted the emperor's eldest son, Zhu Youxiao, to succeed to the throne.

古文：群臣哭临毕，请见皇长子于寝门，奉至文华殿行礼，还居慈庆宫。
现代文：群臣哭罢，就到皇长子卧室门前求见朱由校，并把他恭请到文华殿行礼，之后，返回慈庆宫。
English: After the group of courtiers had finished crying, they went to the front of the eldest son's bedroom to ask to see Zhu Yue, and respectfully invited him to the Wenhua Palace to make a bow, after which he returned to the Cixing Palace.

古文：丙子，颁遗诏。
现代文：二日，公布遗诏。
English: On the second day, the will was made public.

古文：时选侍李氏居乾清宫，吏部尚书周嘉谟等及御史左光斗疏请选侍移宫，御史王安舜疏论李可灼进药之误， 红丸 、 移宫 二案自是起。
现代文：当时，光宗宠妃李选侍仍留住在乾清宫。吏部尚书周嘉谟等人和御史左光斗奏请李妃移宫，御史王安舜也上奏纠弹李可灼进献药丸罪状 ，红丸 、 移宫 案就是这时开始的。
English: At that time, Emperor Guangzong's favorite concubine Li Xuan was still living in the Qianqing Palace. The Red Pill and the Palace Relocation Case began when the officials, including Shangshu Zhou Jia Mu and his secretary Zuo Guangdou, asked Li Fei to move the palace, and the secretary Wang Antao also filed a complaint against Li Kexin for the crime of donating pills.

古文：己卯，选侍移仁寿殿。
现代文：九月四日李妃移居仁寿殿。
English: On September 4, Empress Ri moved into Renshou Palace.

古文：庚辰，即皇帝位。
现代文：五日朱由校即皇帝位。
English: On the fifth day, Zhu Yu was crowned emperor.

古文：诏赦天下，以明年为天启元年。
现代文：颁诏大赦天下，定第二年为天启元年。
English: The imperial edict was issued to grant amnesty to the whole country, and the second year was set as the first year of the Apocalypse.

古文：己丑，以是年八月以后称泰昌元年。
现代文：十六日，又定当年八月以后为泰昌元年。
English: On the 16th, it was decided that after August of that year, it would be the first year of Taichang.

古文：辛卯，逮辽东总兵官李如柏。
现代文：十二日，捉拿辽东总兵官李如柏。
English: On the 12th, Li Rubei, the general officer of Liaodong, was captured.

古文：甲午，荫太监魏进忠兄锦衣卫千户。封乳保客氏为奉圣夫人，官其子。
现代文：十九日封太监魏进忠之兄为锦衣卫千户，奶母客氏为奉圣夫人，同时也让客氏之子做了官。
English: On the 19th, the elder brother of Wei Jinzhong, the eunuch, was named Jin Yi Wei Qianhuo, and his wet nurse, Kake, was named Feng Sheng Lady. At the same time, Kake's son was made an official.

古文：冬十月丙午，葬显皇帝、孝端显皇后于定陵。
现代文：十月三日，将显皇帝和孝端显皇后葬于定陵。
English: On October 3, Emperor Jianxuan and Empress Xiaoduanxuan were buried in the Dingling Mausoleum.

古文：戊申，辽东巡抚都御史袁应泰为兵部侍郎，经略辽东，代熊廷弼。
现代文：五日，辽东巡抚都御史袁应泰代替熊廷弼当上了兵部侍郎，经略辽东。
English: On the fifth day, Yuan Yingtai, the governor of Liaodong, replaced Xiong Tingtao as the attendant of the military department and oversaw Liaodong.

古文：辛酉，御经筵。
现代文：十八日，皇帝听讲经传史鉴。
English: On the eighteenth day, the emperor listened to a lecture on the history of the book.

古文：壬戌，礼部尚书孙如游兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十九日，礼部尚书孙如游兼任东阁大学士，参与军机大事。
English: On the 19th, Sun Ruyou, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, concurrently served as a scholar of Donggak University and participated in the military aircraft event.

古文：丁卯，哕鸾宫灾。
现代文：二十四日，哕鸾宫发生火灾。
English: On the 24th, a fire broke out in the Summer Palace.

古文：十一月丙子，追谥皇妣孝元贞皇后，生母孝和皇太后。
现代文：十一月三日，追封皇母为孝元贞皇太后，生母为孝和皇太后。
English: On November 3, the imperial mother was enthroned as Empress Dowager Takamoto no Sadamune, and the birth mother as Empress Dowager Takatada.

古文：十二月辛酉，方从哲致仕。
现代文：十二月十八日，方从哲辞官。
English: On December 18th, Fang Zhezhi resigned from the post.

古文：天启元年春正月庚辰，享太庙。
现代文：天启元年一月八日，祭奠太庙。
English: On January 8th, the first year of the Apocalypse, a memorial service was held at the Great Temple.

古文：壬辰，追谥伍文定等七十三人。
现代文：二十日，追封伍文定等七十三人。
English: On the 20th, 73 people, including Wu Wenzing, were purged.

古文：壬寅，御史王心一请罢客氏香火土田，魏进忠陵工叙录，不报。
现代文：三十日，御史王心一奏请罢除客氏香火土田，魏进忠越权不报。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Go-Shi made a heartfelt appeal for the removal of the Kake clan's incense fields, and Wei Jinzhong did not report that he had exceeded his authority.

古文：二月甲辰，言官请复当朝口奏及召对之典，从之。
现代文：二月二日，言官请恢复召封之典及当朝口奏，准奏。
English: On February 2nd, the speech officer asked the orchestra to resume the summoning ceremony and the morning concert.

古文：己未，御经筵。
现代文：十七日，熹宗听讲经传史鉴。
English: On the seventeenth day, Emperor Taizong listened to a lecture on the History of Confucianism.

古文：闰月乙酉，以风霾谕群臣修省。
现代文：闰二月十三日，因天气阴霾要群臣们研修学习。
English: On February 13th, due to the gloomy weather, the ministers had to go on a study tour.

古文：丁亥，孙如游致仕。
现代文：六日，孙如游辞官。
English: On the 6th, Sun Ruyou resigned.

古文：丙申，除齐泰、黄子澄戚属戍籍。
现代文：二十四日，取消齐泰、黄子澄的亲戚、属僚等人充军戍籍。
English: On the 24th, the relatives and colleagues of Qitai and Huang Zicheng were revoked.

古文：戊戌，昭和殿灾。
现代文：二十六日，昭和殿发生火灾。
English: On the 26th, a fire broke out in Showa-den.

古文：三月乙卯，大清兵取沈阳，总兵官尤世功、贺世贤战死。
现代文：三月十三日，大清兵取沈阳。总兵尤世功、贺世贤战死。
English: On March 13th, the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty captured Shenyang. The soldiers You Shigong and He Shixian died in the battle.

古文：总兵官陈策、童仲揆、戚金、张名世帅诸将援辽，战于浑河，皆败没。
现代文：总兵陈策、童仲揆、戚金、张名世率诸将援辽，战于浑河，全军覆没。
English: General Chen Ce, Tong Zhongyao, Qi Jin, Zhang Mingshi and other generals came to the aid of Liao, fought in Hunhe, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：壬戌，大清兵取辽阳，经略袁应泰等死之。
现代文：二十二日，大清兵取辽阳。经略袁应泰等战死。
English: On the 22nd, the Qing soldiers took Liaoyang. Yuan Yingtai and others died in the battle.

古文：巡按御史张铨被执，不屈死。
现代文：巡按御史张铨被俘，不屈而死。
English: Zhang Ye, the inspecting magistrate and historian, was captured and died an indomitable death.

古文：丙寅，谕兵部： 国家文武并用，顷承平日久，视武弁不啻奴隶，致令豪杰解体。
现代文：二十六日，训谕兵部： 国家要文武并用，由于太平日久，视士兵不亚于奴隶，致使豪杰散落。
English: On the 26th, the Ministry of Military Affairs issued an edict: The country should use both literature and martial arts. Due to the long period of peace, soldiers were regarded as no less than slaves, resulting in the dispersion of heroes.

古文：今边疆多故，大风猛士深轸朕怀，其令有司于山林草泽间慎选将材。 
现代文：如今边疆多事，天下英雄和朕一样痛心，令有司到山林草泽间探察，精心挑选将才。 
English: Nowadays, there are many things happening on the frontier, and the world's heroes are just as distressed as I am, which has made You Si go to the mountains and forests to investigate and carefully select the generals.

古文：丁卯，京师戒严。
现代文：二十七日，京师戒严。
English: On the 27th, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：夏四月壬申朔，日有食之。甲戌，禁抄发军机。
现代文：四月一日，有日食。三日，禁止抄发军机文书。
English: On April 1, there was a solar eclipse. On the 3rd, it was forbidden to copy and distribute military aircraft documents.

古文：丙子，辽东巡抚佥都御史薛国用为兵部侍郎，经略辽东。
现代文：五日，辽东巡抚佥都御史薛国用当上兵部侍郎，兼辽东经略。
English: On the fifth day, the governor of Liaodong Province and the governor of the capital, Xue Guoying, became the attendant of the military department and the governor of Liaodong Province.

古文：参议王化贞为右佥都御史，巡抚广宁。
现代文：参议王化贞当上右佥都御史，兼广宁巡抚。
English: Councillor Wang Huazhen was appointed as the right-hand man of the capital's governor, and also the governor of Guangning.

古文：戊寅，募兵于通州、天津、宣府、大同。
现代文：七日，在通州、天津、宣府、大同招募兵士。
English: On the 7th, soldiers were recruited in Tongzhou, Tianjin, Xuanfu and Datong.

古文：甲午，募兵于陕西、河南、山西、浙江。
现代文：二十三日，又在陕西、河南、山西、浙江募兵。
English: On the 23rd, soldiers were recruited in Shaanxi, Henan, Shanxi and Zhejiang.

古文：戊戌，册皇后张氏。
现代文：二十七日，册立张氏为皇后。
English: On the 27th, the Zhang clan was enthroned as empress.

古文：五月丁未，贵州红苗平。
现代文：五月六日，平定贵州红苗。
English: On May 6, the red seedlings in Guizhou were pacified.

古文：甲寅，禁讹言。
现代文：十三日，禁止谣言。
English: On the 13th, rumors were banned.

古文：辛酉，陕西都指挥陈愚直以固原兵入援，溃于临洺。
现代文：二十日，陕西都指挥陈愚直率固原军队援救，在临溃败。
English: On the 20th, Chen Guanzhong of Shaanxi Province commanded the Gouyuan army to rescue Chen Guanzhong, but they were soon defeated.

古文：未几，宁夏援辽兵溃于三河。
现代文：不久，宁夏援辽军队在三河溃败。
English: Soon, the Ningxia-aided Liao army was routed in the Three Rivers.

古文：六月癸酉，何宗彦入阁。
现代文：六月三日，何宗彦入阁参政。
English: On June 3, He Munehiko entered the cabinet to participate in politics.

古文：丙子，朱国祚入阁。
现代文：六日，朱国祚入阁参政。
English: On the 6th, Zhu Guozhen entered the cabinet to participate in politics.

古文：熊廷弼为兵部尚书兼右副都御史，经略辽东。
现代文：熊廷弼被任命为兵部尚书兼右副都御史和辽东经略。
English: Xiong Tingyao was appointed as the vice-director of the Military History Department and the right-hand vice-director of the Capital History Department and the Liaodong History Department.

古文：辛巳，兵部尚书王象乾总督蓟、辽军务。
现代文：十一日，兵部尚书王象乾总督蓟、辽军务。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the military governor of Liaoning Province, Shangshuang Xiangqian, left for military affairs.

古文：秋七月乙巳，沈飗入阁。
现代文：七月六日，沈入阁参政。
English: On July 6, Shen joined the cabinet to participate in politics.

古文：八月丙子，擢参将毛文龙为副总兵，驻师镇江城。
现代文：八月七日，提升参将毛文龙为副总兵，驻扎镇江。
English: On August 7th, General Mao Wenlong was promoted to deputy commander-in-chief and stationed in Zhenjiang.

古文：戊子，杭州大火，诏停强造。
现代文：十九日，杭州发生大火，颁诏停止织造。
English: On the 19th, a large fire broke out in Hangzhou, and an edict was issued to stop weaving.

古文：癸巳，停刑。
现代文：十四日，暂停施刑。
English: On the 14th, the sentence was suspended.

古文：九月壬寅，葬贞皇帝于庆陵。
现代文：九月四日，将贞皇帝葬于庆陵。
English: On September 4, Emperor Zhen will be buried in Qingling Mausoleum.

古文：乙卯，永宁宣抚使奢崇明反，杀巡抚徐可求，据重庆，分兵陷合江、纳溪、泸州。
现代文：十七日，永宁宣抚使奢崇明反叛，杀掉巡抚徐可求，占据重庆，并分兵攻陷合江、纳溪、泸州。
English: On the 17th, Yongning's proclamation caused Shuo Chongming to rebel, kill the governor Xu Kegui, occupy Chongqing, and divide the army to invade Hejiang, Naxi, and Zhangzhou.

古文：丁卯，陷兴文，知县张振德死之。
现代文：二十九日，攻陷兴文，知县张振德被杀。
English: On the 29th, Xingwen was invaded and Zhang Zhende from Zhixian County was killed.

古文：冬十月戊辰，御史周宗建请出客氏于外，不听。
现代文：十月一日，御史周宗建请客氏出宫，皇上不听。
English: On October 1, Grand Historian Zhou Zongjian invited Kake to leave the palace, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：给事中倪思辉、朱钦相等相继言，皆谪外任。
现代文：给事中倪思辉、朱钦相等人相继请求，皆被贬为地方官。
English: At the request of Ni Sihui, Zhu Qinxiang and others, they were all demoted to local officials.

古文：丙子，史继偕入阁。
现代文：九日，史继楷入阁参政。
English: On the 9th, Shi Jikai entered the cabinet to participate in politics.

古文：乙酉，奢崇明围成都，布政使朱燮元固守。
现代文：十八日，奢崇明围攻成都，布政使朱燮元固守。
English: On the 18th, Suo Chongming besieged Chengdu, and Buzheng sent Zhu Bingyuan to defend the city.

古文：寻擢燮元佥都御史，巡抚四川。石砫宣抚使女土官秦良玉起兵讨贼。
现代文：不久，朱燮元被提升为佥都御史兼四川巡抚，石石主宣抚史女土官秦良玉起兵讨贼。
English: Soon after, Zhu Xuanyuan was promoted to the post of the governor of Xingtu and the governor of Sichuan, and Qin Liangyu, the daughter of the governor of Xingtu, raised an army to fight the bandits.

古文：壬辰，叶向高入阁。
现代文：二十五日，叶向高入阁参政。
English: On the 25th, Ye Xianggao entered the cabinet to participate in politics.

古文：十二月丁丑，巡抚河南都御史张我续为兵部侍郎，提督川、贵军务。
现代文：十二月十日，巡抚河南的都御史张我续担任兵部侍郎，提督川、贵军务。
English: On December 10, Zhang I, the governor of Henan Province, continued to serve as the attendant of the military department, Admiral Chuan, your military affairs.

古文：陕西巡抚移驻汉中，郧阳巡抚移驻夷陵。
现代文：陕西巡抚移驻汉中，郧阳巡抚移驻夷陵。
English: The Shaanxi governor moved to Hanzhong, and the Shenyang governor moved to Yiling.

古文：湖广官军由巫峡趋忠、涪讨贼。
现代文：湖广官兵经巫峡前往忠、涪讨贼。
English: Hougang officers and soldiers went through Wuxia to investigate the thieves.

古文：庚辰，援辽浙兵哗于玉田。
现代文：十三日，援救辽、浙的军队在玉田哗变。
English: On the 13th, troops from Liao and Zhejiang came to the rescue of the mutiny in Tamada.

古文：辛卯，以熊廷弼、王化贞屡议战守不合，遣使宣谕。
现代文：二十四日，因熊廷弼、王化贞在战和守问题上意见不合，遂派遣使臣谕示。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, because Xiong Tingyu and Wang Huazhen disagreed on the issue of war and defense, they sent an envoy to give instructions.

古文：是年，安南、土鲁番、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，有安南、土鲁番、乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Turuban and Utsang came to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月丁未，延绥总兵官杜文焕、四川总兵官杨愈懋讨永宁贼。
现代文：天启二年正月十二日，延绥总兵官杜文焕、四川总兵官杨愈懋讨伐永宁贼寇。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the second year of the Apocalypse, Du Wenhuan, the chief military officer of Yancheng, and Yang Yuyao, the chief military officer of Sichuan, went to fight against the Yongning bandits.

古文：丁巳，大清兵取西平堡，副将罗一贵死之。
现代文：十七日，大清兵攻取西平堡，副将罗一贵战死。
English: On the 17th, the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty captured Xiping Fort, and Vice Admiral Luo Yigui died in the battle.

古文：镇武营总兵官刘渠、祁秉忠逆战于平阳桥，败没。
现代文：镇武营总兵官刘渠、祁秉忠迎战于平阳桥，全军覆没。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Zhenwu Battalion, Liu Qu, and Zou Bingzhong met the battle at Pingyang Bridge, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：王化贞走闾阳，与熊廷弼等俱入关。
现代文：王化贞退离闾阳，与熊廷弼等一起进入关内。
English: Wang Huazhen retreated from Shenyang and entered Guanzhong with Xiong Tingjun and others.

古文：参政高邦佐留松山，死之。
现代文：参政高邦佐留守松山，战死。
English: Gao Bangsa, a politician, stayed behind in Matsuyama and died in the battle.

古文：壬戌，振山东流徙辽民。
现代文：二十二日，赈济流徙于山东的辽民。
English: On the 22nd, the Liaomin migrated to Shandong.

古文：癸亥，兵部尚书张鹤鸣视师辽东。
现代文：二十三日，兵部尚书张鹤鸣到辽东视察军队。
English: On the 23rd, Shangshu Zhang of the Military Department went to Liaodong to inspect the army.

古文：乙丑，京师戒严。
现代文：二十五日，京师戒严。
English: On the 25th, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：河套部犯延绥。
现代文：河套部落进犯延绥。
English: The Hetao tribe invaded Yancheng.

古文：永宁贼将罗乾象约降，与官军共击贼，成都围解。
现代文：永宁贼将罗乾象约定投降，与官军共击贼军，成都解围。
English: The Yongning bandits agreed to surrender Luo Qianxiang and fight the bandits together with the government army to relieve the siege of Chengdu.

古文：二月癸酉，水西土同知安邦彦反，陷毕节、安顺、平坝、沾益、龙里，遂围贵阳，巡抚都御史李枟、巡按御史史永安固守。
现代文：二月七日，水西土同知安邦彦反叛，攻陷毕节、安顺、平坝、沾益、龙里，接着围困贵阳，巡抚都御史李木云、巡按御史史永安固守。
English: On February 7th, Shu Xi Tu Tong Zhi An Bangyan rebelled and invaded Bijie, An Shun, Pingba, Zhan Yip, Longli, and then besieged Guiyang. The governor of the capital, Li Muyun, and the governor of the capital, Yong An, held out.

古文：戊寅，免天下带征钱粮二年及北畿加派。
现代文：十三日，免除二年天下应征收的钱粮而在北畿加派。
English: On the 13th, they were exempted from the two-year grain tax and sent to North Kivu.

古文：礼部右侍郎孙承宗为兵部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：礼部右侍郎孙承宗担任兵部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与军机要务。
English: The right-hand man of the Ceremonial Department, Sun Chengzong, served as a military officer and a scholar at Donggak University, participating in military affairs.

古文：己丑，孙承宗兼理兵部事。
现代文：二十三日，孙承宗兼理兵部事务。
English: On the 23rd, Sun Chengzong also took charge of the military affairs.

古文：三月丁酉朔，刘一燝致仕。
现代文：三月一日，刘一火景辞官。
English: On March 1, Liu Yijing resigned from his post.

古文：甲辰，阳武侯薛濂管理募兵。
现代文：八日，阳武侯薛濂管理募兵。
English: On the 8th, Yangwu Hou Xueyan managed to recruit soldiers.

古文：兵部侍郎王在晋为尚书兼右副都御史，经略辽、蓟、天津、登、莱军务。
现代文：兵部侍郎王在晋担任尚书兼右副都御史，经略辽、蓟、天津、登、莱军务。
English: In Jin, he served as Shangshu and right vice-governor of the capital, and oversaw the military affairs of Liao, Handan, Tianjin, Deng and Lai.

古文：甲寅，赐文震孟等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐文震孟等人为进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On the 18th, Ji Wen Zhen Meng and others were promoted to the first and second rank, with different origins.

古文：丁巳，敕湖广、云南、广西官军援贵州。
现代文：二十日，诏谕湖广、云南、广西官军救援贵州。
English: On the 20th, Hunan, Yunnan and Guangxi government troops were dispatched to rescue Guizhou.

古文：是春，举内操。
现代文：这年春天，提倡内部操练。
English: This spring, promote internal drills.

古文：夏四月甲申，京师旱。
现代文：四月十九日，京师发生旱灾。
English: On April 19th, a drought occurred in Beijing.

古文：五月戊戌，复张居正原官。
现代文：五月三日，恢复张居正原来官职。
English: On May 3, Zhang Jizheng resumed his former official position.

古文：己亥，录方孝孺遗嗣，寻予祭葬及谥。
现代文：四日，录用方孝孺的子孙，不久给予祭葬并追封。
English: On the fourth day, the descendants of Fang Xiaojun were hired, and they were soon given a ceremonial funeral and sealed.

古文：丙午，山东白莲贼徐鸿儒反，陷郓城。
现代文：十一日，山东白莲贼徐鸿儒反叛，攻陷郓城。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xu Hongru, the thief of Shandong Bai Lian, rebelled and captured Lucheng.

古文：癸亥，秦良玉、杜文焕破贼于佛图关，官军合围重庆，复之。
现代文：二十八日，秦良玉、杜文焕在佛图关大破贼兵，官军合围重庆并收复。
English: On the 28th, Qin Liangyu and Du Wenhuan defeated the bandits at the Buddha Gate, and the government army encircled Chongqing and recaptured it.

古文：六月戊辰，徐鸿儒陷邹县、滕县，滕县知县姬文胤死之。
现代文：六月四日，徐鸿儒攻占邹县、滕县，滕县知县姬文胤被杀。
English: On June 4, Xu Hongru occupied Min County, Teng County, and Ji County of Teng County, and Ji Wenyan was killed.

古文：加毛文龙为总兵官。贵州总兵官张彦芳为平蛮总兵官，从巡抚都御史王三善讨水西贼。
现代文：任命毛文龙为总兵官，贵州总兵官张彦芳担任平蛮总兵官，随巡抚都御史王三善讨伐水西贼兵。
English: Mao Wenlong was appointed as the chief military officer, Guizhou chief military officer Zhang Yanfang was appointed as the ordinary general military officer, and accompanied by the governor of the capital, Wang Sanshan, to fight against the water-logging Western bandits.

古文：己巳，前总兵官杨肇基、游击陈九德帅兵讨山东贼。
现代文：五日，前总兵官杨肇基、游击陈九德率兵讨伐山东贼兵。
English: On the fifth day, the former general officer Yang Zhaoji and the guerrilla Chen Jide led the troops to fight the Shandong bandits.

古文：秋七月甲辰，松潘副使李忠臣约总兵官杨愈懋谋复永宁，不克，皆死之。
现代文：七月十日，松潘副使李忠臣约总兵官杨愈懋谋划收复永宁，没有攻克，双双战死。
English: On July 10, Songpan's deputy envoy, Li Zhongchen, and the general officer Yang Yuxuan planned to recapture Yongning, but failed to do so, and both died in the battle.

古文：贼攻大坝，游击龚万禄战死，遂陷遵义。
现代文：贼兵进攻大坝，游击龚万禄战死，又攻陷遵义。
English: The bandits attacked the dam, the guerrilla Yu Wanlu was killed, and Zunyi fell.

古文：癸丑，沈飗致仕。
现代文：十九日，沈辞官。
English: On the 19th, Shen resigned.

古文：乙卯，神宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：二十一日，神宗牌位被供于太庙。
English: On the 21st, the Shinshu Plaque was finally offered to the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚申，援黔兵溃于新添。
现代文：十九日，援黔的军队在新添溃败。
English: On the 19th, the reinforcement army suffered a new defeat.

古文：癸亥，武邑贼于弘志作乱，寻伏诛。
现代文：四日，武邑贼于弘志作乱，不久被诛灭。
English: On the 4th, the Buyei bandits rioted in Hongzhi and were soon wiped out.

古文：八月庚辰，孙承宗以原官督理山海关及蓟、辽、天津、登、莱军务。
现代文：八月十七日，孙承宗以原官督理山海关以及苏、辽、天津、登、莱军务。
English: On August 17th, Sun Chengzong was appointed as the former official to supervise the Shan Customs and the military affairs of Su, Liao, Tianjin, Deng and Lai.

古文：九月甲午朔，光宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：九月一日，光宗牌位被供于太庙。
English: On September 1st, the Guangzong Plaque was finally offered to the Imperial Temple.

古文：壬寅，御史冯英请设州县兵，按亩供饷，从之。
现代文：九日，御史冯英建议各州县建立军队，按田地供饷，被采纳。
English: On the 9th, Mishi Feng Ying proposed that each state and county should establish an army to provide ploughs according to fields, which was accepted.

古文：乙卯，封皇弟由检为信王。
现代文：二十六日，封皇弟朱由检为信王。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Yuqian, the younger brother of the emperor, became the letter king.

古文：停刑。
现代文：中断行刑。
English: Stay the execution.

古文：冬十月辛未，水西贼犯云南，官军击败之。
现代文：十月九日，水西贼兵进犯云南，官军将其击败。
English: On October 9th, the west-water bandits invaded Yunnan, and the government army defeated them.

古文：辛巳，官军复邹县，擒徐鸿儒等，山东贼平。
现代文：十九日，官军收复邹县，捉住徐鸿儒等，平定了山东贼兵。
English: On the 19th, the government army recovered Min County, captured Xu Hongru and others, and leveled the Shandong bandits.

古文：壬午，总兵官鲁钦代杜文焕为总理，援贵州。
现代文：二十日，总兵官鲁钦代杜文焕为总理，援救贵州。
English: On the 20th, General Lu Qin deputized Du Wenhuan as prime minister to rescue Guizhou.

古文：十一月癸丑，朱燮元总督四川军务。
现代文：十一月二十一日，朱燮元总督四川军务。
English: On November 21, Zhu Rongyuan, the former governor of Sichuan, took over the military affairs.

古文：十二月己巳，王三善、副总兵刘超败贼于龙里，贵阳围解。
现代文：十二月八日，王三善和副总兵刘超在龙里将贼兵击败，贵阳解围。
English: On December 8th, Wang Sanshan and Vice-Commander Liu Chao defeated the bandits in Longli, and Guiyang was liberated.

古文：是年，暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，暹罗前来朝贡。
English: This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月己酉，礼部侍郎朱国祯，尚书顾秉谦，侍郎朱延禧、魏广微，俱礼部尚书东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：天启三年正月十八日，礼部侍郎朱国祯，尚书顾秉谦，侍郎朱延禧、魏广微，全为礼部尚书东阁大学士，参与军机要务。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the third year of the Apocalypse, the attendants of the Ceremonial Department, Zhu Guozhen, Shangshu Gu Bingqian, the attendants of Zhu Yanxi and Wei Guangwei, were all the scholars of the Ceremonial Department, Shangshu Dongge University, and participated in the important military affairs.

古文：乙卯，红夷据澎湖。
现代文：二十二日，红夷据澎湖。
English: On the 22nd, Hongyi arrived in Penghu.

古文：贵州官军三路进讨水西，副总兵刘超败绩于陆广河。
现代文：贵州三路官军进讨水西，副总兵刘超在陆广河战败。
English: Guizhou's three-pronged government army marched westward to attack Shuixi, and Liu Chao, the deputy commander-in-chief, was defeated in Luguanghe.

古文：二月乙酉，赠恤邹县死难博士孟承光及母孔氏，子弘略。
现代文：二月二十五日，奖赏抚恤邹县死难博士孟承光及其母孔氏和儿子弘略。
English: On February 25th, Meng Chengguang, a doctor who died of illness in Handan County, and his mother, Kong, and son, Hongliu, received the award.

古文：是月，停南京进鲜。
现代文：当月，停止南京后进献时鲜。
English: In the same month, Nanjing's late delivery of fresh produce was stopped.

古文：三月癸卯，朝鲜废其主李珲。
现代文：三月十三日，朝鲜废君主李珲。
English: On March 13th, North Korea's deposed monarch, Ri Yong, died.

古文：是春，振山东被兵州县。
现代文：这一年春天，赈济山东遭受战乱的州县。
English: In the spring of that year, the war-torn counties in eastern Shandong Province were at the top of the list.

古文：夏四月庚申朔，京师地震。
现代文：四月一日，京师发生地震。
English: On April 1, an earthquake occurred in the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：己巳，朱国祚致仕。
现代文：十日，朱国祚辞官。
English: On the 10th, Zhu Guozhen resigned.

古文：五月辛丑，四川官军败贼于永宁，奢崇明走红崖。
现代文：五月十二日，四川官军在永宁打败贼兵，奢崇明逃到红崖。
English: On May 12, the Sichuan government army defeated the bandits in Yongning, and Shuxongming fled to Hongyao.

古文：秋七月辛卯，南京大内灾。
现代文：七月三日，南京宫中发生火灾。
English: On July 3, a fire broke out in the Nanjing Palace.

古文：壬辰，奢崇明走龙场，与安邦彦合。
现代文：四日，奢崇明逃到龙场，与安邦彦汇合。
English: On the fourth day, Suk Chongming fled to Longchang and met with An Bangyan.

古文：丁酉，安南寇广西，巡抚都御史何士晋御却之。
现代文：九日，安南敌寇侵犯广西，被巡抚都御史何士晋击退。
English: On the 9th, Annan's enemy raiders invaded Guangxi and were repulsed by the governor of the capital, Shi He Shimin.

古文：己亥，史继偕致仕。
现代文：十一日，史继偕辞官。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shi Jizhen resigned from his post.

古文：九月癸巳，给事中陈良训疏陈防微四事，下镇抚司狱。
现代文：九月六日，给事中陈良训上疏陈述防守的四大问题，被投下镇抚司狱。
English: On September 6th, Chen Liangxun made a speech on the four major problems of defense and was thrown into the prison.

古文：冬十月乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：十月十八日，京师发生地震。
English: In the winter of October 28th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：丁丑，停刑。
现代文：二十日，暂停行刑。
English: On the 20th, the execution was suspended.

古文：闰月壬寅，以皇子生，诏赦天下。
现代文：闰十一月十六日，因得皇子而诏赦天下。
English: On the sixteenth day of the eleventh month, the emperor pardoned the whole country for the sake of the crown prince.

古文：是月，王三善剿水西，屡破贼，至大方。
现代文：当月，王三善进剿水西，多次击败贼兵，攻到大方。
English: In the same month, Wang Sanshan entered the west of Surabaya, defeated the bandits many times, and attacked the capital.

古文：十一月丁巳朔，祀天于南郊。十二月癸巳，封李倧为朝鲜国王。
现代文：十一月一日，在南郊祭天。十二月八日，封李亻宗为朝鲜国王。
English: On November 1st, a festival was held in the southern suburbs, and on December 8th, Ri Son Jong was crowned King of Korea.

古文：戊戌，京师地震。
现代文：十三日，京师发生地震。
English: On the 13th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：庚戌，魏忠贤总督东厂。
现代文：二十五日，魏忠贤总督东厂。
English: On the 25th, Governor Wei Zhongxian visited the East Factory.

古文：是年，暹罗、琉球入贡。
现代文：这一年，有暹罗、琉球前来朝贡。
English: This year, Siam and Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：四年春正月丙辰朔，长兴民吴野樵杀知县石有恒、主簿徐可行，寻伏诛。
现代文：天启四年正月一日，长兴人吴野樵杀掉知县石有恒、主簿徐可行，不久就被捉拿归案。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, the Changxing man Wu Yuxuan killed Shi Youheng and Xu Fei of Zhixian County, and was soon arrested.

古文：乙丑，王三善自大方旋师遇伏，被执死之，诸官将皆死。
现代文：十日，王三善从大方回师，途中被伏击，其人被捉，不屈而死，其他将领也都战死。
English: On the tenth day, Wang Sanshan was returning to his division from Taifang. On the way, he was ambushed. He was captured, and died unyielding. Other generals also died in the battle.

古文：庚午，何宗彦卒。
现代文：十五日，何宗彦死去。
English: On the 15th, He Munehiko passed away.

古文：二月丁酉，蓟州、永平、山海关地震，坏城郭庐舍。
现代文：二月十三日，蓟州、永平、山海关地震，毁坏城墙房屋。
English: On February 13, the earthquakes in Zhangzhou, Yongping and Shanhaiguan destroyed the city walls and houses.

古文：甲寅，京师地震，宫殿动摇有声。
现代文：三十日，京师地震，宫殿摇摇欲坠。
English: On the 30th, there was an earthquake in Beijing, and the palace was left tottering.

古文：帝不豫。
现代文：皇帝患病。
English: The Emperor fell ill.

古文：三月丁巳，疾愈。
现代文：二十日，身体康复。
English: On the 20th, he recovered.

古文：庚申，杭州兵变。
现代文：六日，杭州发生兵变。
English: On the 6th, a mutiny occurred in Hangzhou.

古文：是月，京师屡地震。
现代文：当月，京师多次发生地震。
English: That month, there were several earthquakes in the capital.

古文：夏五月甲寅朔，福宁兵变，有司抚定之。
现代文：五月一日，福宁发生兵变，有司抚平定。
English: On May 1, there was a mutiny in Funing, which was put down by Sifu.

古文：六月癸未，左副都御史杨涟劾魏忠贤二十四大罪，南北诸臣论忠贤者相继，皆不纳。
现代文：六月一日，左副都御史杨涟上奏弹劾魏忠贤，列举了他的二十四大罪状，朝中其他正直官员也相继纠弹魏忠贤，均未被采纳。
English: On June 1, the left vice-governor of the capital, Shi Yangjun, made a petition to impeach Wei Zhongxian, listing his twenty-four major crimes. Other honest officials in the DPRK also successively impeached Wei Zhongxian, but none of them were accepted.

古文：丙申，大雨雹。杖杀工部郎中万燝，逮杖御史林汝翥。
现代文：十四日，天降大雨冰雹，杖杀工部郎中万火景，逮捕并杖击御史林汝翥。
English: On the 14th, heavy rain and hail fell from the sky, the stick killed the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, arrested, and the stick hit the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：秋七月辛酉，叶向高致仕。癸亥，河决徐州。
现代文：七月九日，叶向高辞官。十一日，黄河在徐州决口。
English: On July 9th, Ye Xianggao resigned. On the 11th, the Yellow River broke through in Xuzhou.

古文：振山东饥。
现代文：赈济山东饥荒。
English: to relieve the famine in Shandong Province.

古文：冬十月，削吏部侍郎陈于廷、副都御史杨涟、佥都御史左光斗籍。
现代文：十月，吏部侍郎陈于廷、副都御史杨涟、佥都御史左光斗被削官籍。
English: In October, Chen Yu Ting, the attendant of the personnel department, Yang Jie, the vice-governor of the capital, and Zuo Guangdou, the governor of the capital, were removed from the official register.

古文：十一月己巳，韩爌致仕。
现代文：十一月十九日，韩火广辞官。
English: On November 19th, Han Huiguang stepped down from his post.

古文：是月，贵州官兵败贼于普定，进至织金，破之。
现代文：当月，贵州官军在普定破贼，进攻到织金，再次破贼。
English: That month, the Guizhou government army broke up the bandits in Puding, attacked Weaving Gold, and broke up the bandits again.

古文：十二月辛巳，逮内阁中书汪文言下镇抚司狱。
现代文：十二月一日，逮捕内阁中书汪文言并投下镇抚司狱。
English: On December 1, Wang Wenyan, a member of the cabinet, was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：丙申，朱国祯致仕。
现代文：十六日，朱国祯辞官。
English: On the 16th, Zhu Guozhen resigned.

古文：癸卯，南京地震如雷。
现代文：二十三日，南京地震，响声如雷。
English: On the 23rd, there was an earthquake in Nanjing. The noise was deafening.

古文：是月，两当民变，杀知县牛得用。
现代文：当月，两当农民造反，杀掉知县牛得用。
English: That month, two local farmers rebelled and killed the cattle of Zhixian County.

古文：五年春正月癸亥，大清兵取旅顺。
现代文：天启五年正月十四日，大清攻占旅顺。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, the Great Qing captured Lushun.

古文：戊寅，以庆陵工成，予魏忠贤等荫赉。
现代文：二十九日，因庆陵完工而大赏魏忠贤。
English: On the 29th, Wei Zhongxian was awarded for the completion of Qingling.

古文：是月，总理鲁钦、刘超等自织金旋师，为贼所袭，诸营兵溃。
现代文：当月，总理鲁钦、刘超军从织金回师，被贼兵袭击，官兵溃散。
English: That month, Prime Minister Luqin and Liu Chaojun were attacked by bandits from the Weijing-Hui Division, and the officers and soldiers dispersed.

古文：三月甲寅。释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：三月六日，祭祀先师孔子。
English: On the 6th of March, the worship of Confucius, the founder of Confucianism, ended.

古文：丙寅，赐余煌等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐余煌等为进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: On the 18th, Yu Huang and others were awarded the title of Jin Shi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：甲戌，朱燮元总督云、贵、川、湖、广西军务，讨安邦彦。
现代文：二十六日，朱燮元总督云、贵、川、湖、广西军务，讨伐安邦彦。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Rongyuan, the former governor of Yun, Guizhou, Sichuan, Hubei and Guangxi Provinces, launched a military campaign against An Bangyan.

古文：丁丑，谳汪文言狱，逮杨涟、左光斗、袁化中、魏大中、周朝瑞、顾大章，削尚书赵南星等籍。
现代文：二十九日，判汪文言入狱，逮捕杨涟、左光斗、袁化中、魏大中、周朝瑞、顾大章，尚书赵南星官职被削。
English: On the 29th, Wang Wenyan was sentenced to prison, Yang Yu, Zuo Guangdou, Yuan Huazhong, Wei Daizhong, Zhou Chaorui, Gu Daizhang were arrested, and Shangshu Zhao Nanshing was stripped of his official position.

古文：未几，涟等逮至，下镇抚司狱，相继死狱中。
现代文：不久，杨涟等押到，下镇抚司狱，后相继死于狱中。
English: Soon after, Yang Hui and others were arrested and taken to the prison, where they died one after another.

古文：夏四月己亥，削大学士刘一燝籍。
现代文：四月二十二日，大学士刘一火景被削官籍。
English: On April 22, Liu Yiguo, a university professor, was stripped of his official registration.

古文：五月癸亥，给事中杨所修请以 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三案编次成书，从之。
现代文：五月十六日，给事中杨所修请求把 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三案编成书，允奏。
English: On May 16, at the request of Yang Shoshu, the three cases of "assault," "red circle" and "transfer of palace" were compiled into a book.

古文：乙丑，祀地于北郊。
现代文：十八日，祭祀地于北郊。
English: On the 18th, the place of worship was moved to the northern suburbs.

古文：庚午，行宗室限录法。
现代文：十九日，实行宗室俸禄限额的办法。
English: On the 19th, the method of implementing the limit of the family room salary.

古文：六月丙戌，朱延禧致仕。
现代文：六月十日，朱延禧辞官。
English: On June 10, Zhu Yanxi resigned.

古文：秋七月壬戌，毁首善书院。
现代文：七月十六日，捣毁首善书院。
English: On July 16th, the Shoushen Academy was destroyed.

古文：壬申，韩爌削籍。
现代文：二十六日，韩火广被削官籍。
English: On the 26th, Han Huiguang was stripped of his official status.

古文：甲戌，追论万历辛亥、丁巳、癸亥三京察，尚书李三才、顾宪成等削籍。
现代文：二十八日，重新追查万历辛亥、丁巳、癸亥三京察，尚书李三才、顾宪成等被削官籍。
English: On the 28th, Wanli Xinhai, Ding Xi, and Zou Hai were re-investigated, and Shangshu Li Sancai, Gu Xiancheng, and others were removed from the official register.

古文：八月壬午，毁天下东林讲学书院。
现代文：八月六日，捣毁天下东林讲学书院。
English: On August 6th, Donglin Lecture College was demolished.

古文：削尚书孙慎行等籍。
现代文：削尚书孙慎行等人官籍。
English: Shang Shushu, Sun Shengxing and others were removed from the official register.

古文：戊子，礼部尚书周如磐兼东阁大学士，侍郎丁绍轼、黄立极为礼部尚书，少詹事冯铨为礼部右侍郎，并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十二日，礼部尚书周如磐兼东阁大学士，侍郎丁绍轼、黄立极为礼部尚书，少詹事冯铨为礼部右侍郎，并兼任东阁大学士，参与军机要务。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Zhou Rongyan was appointed as a member of Donggak University, and his attendants Ding Shaoqi and Huang Liqi were appointed as members of the Ministry of Ceremonies. The younger Zhan Zhi Fengqi was appointed as the right attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and also served as a member of Donggak University to participate in military affairs.

古文：己亥，魏广微罢。
现代文：二十三日，魏广微被罢免。
English: On the 23rd, Wei Guangwei was dismissed.

古文：壬寅，熊廷弼弃市，传首九边。
现代文：二十六日，熊廷弼被施刑并暴尸街头，将其首级巡回各地示众。
English: On the 26th, Xiong Tingya was tortured and his corpse paraded through the streets, with his severed head paraded around the country.

古文：九月壬子，辽东副总兵鲁之甲败没于柳河。
现代文：九月七日，辽东副总兵鲁之甲在柳河战败死去。
English: On September 7, Lu Zhijia, deputy commander-in-chief of Liaodong, was defeated and died in Liuhe.

古文：冬十月己卯，兵部尚书高第经略辽、蓟、登、莱、天津军务。
现代文：十月四日，兵部尚书高第经略辽、蓟、登、莱、天津军务。
English: On October 4, the senior cadets of the Military Science High School of the Ministry of National Defense were briefed on the military affairs of Liao, Handan, Deng, Lai and Tianjin.

古文：丙戌，停刑。
现代文：十一日，暂停施刑。
English: On the 11th, the sentence was suspended.

古文：庚寅，孙承宗致仕。
现代文：十五日，孙承宗辞官。
English: On the fifteenth day, Sun Chengzong resigned from his post.

古文：丙申，逮中书舍人吴怀贤下镇抚司狱，杖杀之。
现代文：二十一日，逮捕中书舍人吴怀贤并投下镇抚司狱，用杖刑将其杀死。
English: On the 21st, Wu Huaixian, a middle school teacher, was arrested and thrown into prison, where he was beaten to death with a cane.

古文：庚子，以皇子生，诏赦天下。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝因生儿子而下诏大赦天下。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor pardoned the world for the birth of his son.

古文：十一月壬子，周如磐致仕。
现代文：十一月七日，周如磐辞官。
English: On November 7, Zhou resigned.

古文：十二月乙酉，榜东林党人姓名，颁示天下。
现代文：十二月十一日，将东林党人姓名张榜告示于天下。
English: On December 11, the names of the Donglin Party members were announced to the world.

古文：戊子，戍前尚书赵南星。
现代文：十四日，将前尚书赵南星充军。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Nanxing, the former Shangshu, joined the army.

古文：是年，琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年，有琉球、乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu and Ussuri came to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月戊午，修《三朝要典》。
现代文：天启六年正月十四日，制定三朝要典。
English: On the 14th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Apocalypse, the Three Dynasties Essentials were formulated.

古文：丁卯，大清兵围宁远，总兵官满桂、宁前道参政袁崇焕固守。
现代文：二十三日，大清兵围宁远，总兵官满桂、宁前道参政袁崇焕固守。
English: On the 23rd, the Qing soldiers encircled Ningyuan, and the commander-in-chief of the army, Man Gui, and the politician of Ningyuan Province, Yuan Chonghuan, firmly defended the city.

古文：己巳，围解。
现代文：二十五日，宁远解围。
English: On the 25th, Ningyuan was liberated.

古文：二月乙亥，袁崇焕为佥都御史，专理军务，仍驻宁远。
现代文：二月二日，袁崇焕担任佥都御史，专理军务，仍驻宁远。
English: On February 2, Yuan Chonghuan assumed the post of the imperial historian of the capital, in charge of military affairs, and was still stationed in Ningyuan.

古文：戊戌，以苏杭织造太监李实奏，逮前应天巡抚周起元，吏部主事周顺昌，左都御史高攀龙，谕德缪昌期，御史李应升、周宗建、黄尊素。
现代文：二十五日，因苏杭织造太监李实上告，逮捕前应天巡抚周起元，吏部主事周顺昌，左都御史高攀龙，谕德缪昌期，御史李应升、周宗建、黄尊素。
English: On the 25th, because of the Su Hang weaving, the eunuch Li Si appealed, and before the arrest, the governor of Yingtian, Zhou Qianyuan, the head of the personnel department, Zhou Shunchang, the governor of Zuo, Gao Panglong, the governor of De Mu Chang, the governor of Shi, Li Yingsheng, Zhou Zongjian, and Huang Zunsu.

古文：攀龙赴水死，起元等下镇抚司狱，相继死狱中。
现代文：高攀龙投水自尽，周起元等下镇抚司狱，后相继死在狱中。
English: Gao Panglong committed suicide by throwing himself into the water. Zhou Qi Yuan and others were appointed as prison governors, and they died in prison one after another.

古文：己亥。祭日于东郊。
现代文：二十六日，在东郊祭祀太阳。
English: On the 26th, the sun was worshipped in the eastern suburbs.

古文：三月丁未，设各边镇监军内臣。
现代文：三月四日，在各边镇设置监军安插内臣。
English: On March 4, supervising troops were set up in each border town and vassals were installed.

古文：太监刘应坤镇守山海关，大学士丁绍轼、兵部尚书王永光等屡谏不听。
现代文：太监刘应坤镇守山海关，大学士丁绍轼、兵部尚书王永光等多次上奏进言，都不被采纳。
English: The eunuch Liu Yingkun of Shoushan Customs, the university judge Ding Shaoqi, the military commander Shangshu Wang Yongguang and others repeatedly submitted their suggestions, but they were not adopted.

古文：论宁远解围功，封魏忠贤从子良卿肃宁伯。
现代文：为奖赏宁远解围之功，封魏忠贤次子良卿为肃宁伯。
English: In order to reward Ningyuan's achievement in breaking the siege, Wei Zhongxian's second son, Yangqing, was given the title of Suningbo.

古文：庚戌，安邦彦犯贵州，官军败绩，总理鲁钦死之。
现代文：七日，安邦彦进犯贵州，官军败退，总理鲁钦战死。
English: On the 7th, An Bangyan attacked Guizhou, the government army was defeated, and Prime Minister Lu Qin died in battle.

古文：壬子，袁崇焕巡抚辽东、山海。
现代文：九日，袁崇焕巡抚辽东、山海。
English: On the 9th, Yuan Chonghuan became the governor of Liaodong and Shanhai.

古文：夏四月丁丑，命南京守备内臣搜括应天各府贮库银，充殿工、兵饷。
现代文：四月五日，命令南京守备内臣搜刮应天各府贮藏的库银，充作工、兵饷。
English: On April 5th, he ordered the vassals guarding Nanjing to collect the treasury silver stored in the various prefectures of Yingtian and use it for construction and soldiers.

古文：戊戌，丁绍轼卒。
现代文：二十六日，丁绍轼死去。
English: On the 26th, Ding Shaoqi died.

古文：五月戊申，王恭厂灾，死者甚众。
现代文：五月七日，王恭厂发生火灾，死的人很多。
English: On May 7, a fire broke out at the Wang Gong factory, killing many people.

古文：己酉，以旱灾敕群臣修省。
现代文：八日，因旱灾要群臣自省。
English: On the 8th, because of the drought, the ministers had to examine themselves.

古文：癸亥，朝天宫灾。
现代文：十二日，朝天宫火灾。
English: On the 12th, a fire broke out in the Asatengu Palace.

古文：六月丙子，京师地震，灵丘地震经月。
现代文：六月五日，京师地震，灵丘地震长达一个月。
English: On June 5th, the Jingshi earthquake, the Lingqiu earthquake lasted for a month.

古文：壬午，河决广武。
现代文：十一日，黄河在广武决口。
English: On the 11th day, the Yellow River was at the Guangwu mouth.

古文：辛卯，《三朝要典》成，刊布中外。
现代文：二十日，三朝要典修毕，并向中外公布。
English: On the 20th, the Three Dynasties Ceremony was completed and announced to China and the world.

古文：闰月辛丑，巡抚浙江佥都御史潘汝桢请建魏忠贤生祠，许之。
现代文：闰六月一日，巡抚浙江的佥都御史潘汝桢上奏为魏忠贤建立生祠，准奏。
English: On the first day of leap June, the governor of Zhejiang, Pan Rong, played the first half of the music to build a shrine for Wei Zhongxian, followed by the second half.

古文：嗣是建祠几遍天下。
现代文：接着这样建祠的几乎遍及天下。
English: Subsequently, the practice of building shrines in this way spread to almost every corner of the world.

古文：壬寅，冯铨罢。
现代文：二日，冯铨被罢免。
English: On the second day, Feng Yu was dismissed.

古文：壬子，朱燮元以忧去，偏沅巡抚都御史闵梦得代之。
现代文：十二日，朱燮元忧愤而死，偏沅巡抚都御史闵梦得取而代之。
English: On the 12th, Zhu Rongyuan died of grief and anger, and was replaced by the pro-Yan governor of the capital, Shi Rongmen.

古文：是夏，京师大水，江北、山东旱蝗。
现代文：这个夏天，京师发生大水灾，江北、山东却发生大旱和蝗灾。
English: This summer, there was a big flood in Beijing Division, but there was a big drought and locust plague in Jiangbei and Shandong.

古文：秋七月辛未朔，日当食，阴云不见。
现代文：七月一日，日食，因阴云看不见。
English: July 1st, solar eclipse, not visible due to clouds.

古文：辛巳，下前扬州知府刘铎诏狱，杀之。
现代文：十日，前扬州知府刘铎投下监狱，随后杀死。
English: On the 10th, the former governor of Yangzhou, Liu Wei, was thrown into prison and later killed.

古文：丙戌，礼部侍郎施凤来、张瑞图，詹事李国〈木普〉，俱礼部尚书东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十五日，礼部侍郎施凤来、张瑞图，詹事李国木普，一起提升为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与军机要务。
English: On the 15th, the attendants of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shi Feng Lai, Zhang Ritu, and Zhan Zhizhi Li Guomupu, were promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies and Dongge University, and participated in the important tasks of the military aircraft.

古文：八月，陕西流贼起，由保宁犯广元。
现代文：八月，陕西流贼起事，从保宁进犯广元。
English: In August, bandits in Shaanxi Province rose up and attacked Guangyuan from Boryeong.

古文：九月庚寅，顾秉谦致仕。
现代文：九月二十一日，顾秉谦辞官。
English: On September 21, Gu Bingqian resigned from his post.

古文：壬辰，皇极殿成，停刑。
现代文：二十三日，皇极殿修成，暂停施刑。
English: On the 23rd, the construction of the Imperial Palace was completed, and the execution of the sentence was suspended.

古文：己亥，魏良卿进封肃宁侯。
现代文：三十日，魏良卿被进一步封为肃宁侯。
English: On the 30th, Wei Liangqing was further ennobled as Su Ning Hou.

古文：是月，参将杨明辉赍敕招谕水西贼，被杀。
现代文：当月，参将杨明辉前往招谕水西贼寇，被杀。
English: In the same month, Vice Admiral Yang Minghui went to invite the Water West Thieves, and was killed.

古文：是秋，江北大水，河南蝗。
现代文：当年秋天，江北发生大水灾，河南发生蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of that year, a major flood occurred in the north of the Yangtze River, and a locust plague occurred in Henan.

古文：冬十月戊申，进魏忠贤爵上公，魏良卿宁国公，予诰券，加赐庄田一千顷。
现代文：十月九日，魏忠贤进爵上公，魏良卿为宁国公，并予以公告，加赐庄田一千顷。
English: On October 9, Wei Zhongxian was ennobled and made a duke, and Wei Liangqing was made the duke of Ningguo, which was announced and granted an additional 1,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：己酉，以皇极殿成诏天下，官匠杂流升授者九百六十五人。
现代文：十日，将皇极殿建成之事诏告天下，官匠及各种人升迁授官者达九百六十五人。
English: On the 10th, the completion of the Imperial Palace was announced to the world, and 965 officials and craftsmen were promoted.

古文：癸丑，改修《光宗实录》。
现代文：十四日，修改光宗实录。
English: On the 14th, the Guangzong Record was revised.

古文：十一月庚寅，予魏良卿铁券。
现代文：十一月二十一日，封赐给魏良卿铁券。
English: On November 21, an iron certificate was issued to Wei Liangqing.

古文：十二月戊申，南京地震。
现代文：十二月十日，南京发生地震。
English: On December 10, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：甲子，浔州贼杀守备蔡人龙。
现代文：二十六日，氵寻州贼人杀掉守备蔡人龙。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the bandits in Guizhou killed the guard Cai Renlong.

古文：是年，安南、乌斯藏、琉球入贡。
现代文：这一年，有安南、乌斯藏、琉球前来朝贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Ussuri, and Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月辛未，振凤阳饥。
现代文：天启七年正月三日，赈济凤阳饥荒。
English: On the third day of the first month of the seventh year of the Apocalypse, the famine in Fengyang occurred.

古文：乙亥，太监涂文辅总督太仓银库、节慎库，崔文升、李明道提督漕运河道，核京师、通州诸仓。
现代文：七日，太监涂文辅总督太仓银库、节慎库。崔文升、李明道提督漕运河道，核实京师和通州的各个仓库。
English: On the 7th, the eunuch Tuo Wenshu, the governor of Taicang Silver Bank and Jie Sheng Bank, Cui Wensheng, the admiral of Li Ming Road, and Cao Canal Road verified the warehouses of Beijing Division and Tongzhou.

古文：辛卯，免榷潼关、咸阳商税。
现代文：二十三日，免除潼关、咸阳的商税。
English: On the 23rd, the commercial tax of Shaoguan and Xianyang was exempted.

古文：二月壬戌，修隆德殿。
现代文：二月二十五日，修建隆德殿。
English: February 25th, the construction of Lund Hall begins.

古文：三月癸酉，丰城侯李承祚请开采珠池、铜矿，不许。
现代文：三月六日，丰城侯李承祚请求开采珠池、铜矿，未被允许。
English: On March 6, Fengcheng marquis Li Chengyao's request to mine pearl pond and copper ore was not allowed.

古文：戊子，澄城民变，杀知县张斗耀。
现代文：二十一日，澄城农民制造事变，杀死知县张斗耀。
English: On the twenty-first day, farmers in Chengcheng caused an incident and killed Zhixian Zhang Douyao.

古文：是春，大清兵征朝鲜。
现代文：这年春天，大清兵征朝鲜。
English: In the spring of that year, the Qing Dynasty began conscripting soldiers from Korea.

古文：夏四月丁酉，下前侍郎王之寀镇抚司狱，死狱中。
现代文：四月一日，前侍郎王之宀采被投下镇抚司狱，死在狱中。
English: On April 1st, Wang Zhi Zhe, the former chamberlain, was thrown into the Zhen Fuxi prison and died in prison.

古文：五月己巳，监生陆万龄请建魏忠贤生祠于太学旁，祀礼如孔子，许之。
现代文：五月四日，监生陆万龄请求在太学旁建立魏忠贤生祠，像对孔子一样年年祭祀，准奏。
English: On May 4, Lu Wanling, a probationer, requested the establishment of the Wei Zhongxian Ancestral Shrine next to Taigaku, to be dedicated every year like Confucius.

古文：丙子，大清兵围锦州。
现代文：十一日，大清军队围攻锦州。
English: On the 11th day, the Qing army besieged Jinzhou.

古文：癸巳，攻宁远。
现代文：二十八日，进攻宁远。
English: On the 28th, the attack on Ningyuan began.

古文：六月庚子，锦州围解。
现代文：六月五日，锦州解围。
English: On June 5, the siege of Jinzhou was lifted.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，帝不豫。丙寅，罢袁崇焕。
现代文：七月一日，皇帝生病。二日，罢免袁崇焕。
English: On July 1st, the emperor fell ill. On the 2nd, Yuan Chonghuan was dismissed.

古文：己卯，封魏忠贤孙鹏翼为安平伯。
现代文：十五日，封魏忠贤之孙魏鹏翼为安平伯。
English: On the 15th, the grandson of Wei Zhongxian, Wei Pengyi, was named Anping Bo.

古文：壬午，戍孙慎行。
现代文：十八日，将孙慎行充军。
English: On the 18th, he sent Sun Shengxing to join the army.

古文：丁亥，海贼寇广东。
现代文：二十三日，海盗进攻广东。
English: On the 23rd, pirates attacked Guangdong.

古文：是月，浙江大水。
现代文：当月，浙江发生大水灾。
English: In the same month, a major flood occurred in Zhejiang.

古文：八月丙申，加魏良卿太师，魏鹏翼少师。
现代文：八月三日，加封魏良卿为太师，魏鹏翼为少师。
English: On August 3, Wei Liangqing was awarded the title of Grand Master, and Wei Pengyi was awarded the title of Junior Master.

古文：戊戌，中极、建极二殿成。
现代文：五日，中极殿和建极殿完工。
English: On the fifth day, the central hall and the main hall were completed.

古文：乙巳，召见阁部、科道诸臣于乾清宫，谕以魏忠贤、王体乾忠贞可计大事。
现代文：十二日，在乾清宫召见阁部、科道诸臣说魏忠贤、王体乾十分忠贞，一切大事都可以与他们商量。
English: On the 12th, in the Qianqing Palace, he summoned the cabinet members and scholars to say that Wei was loyal and virtuous, and Wang Tieqian was very loyal, and that all important matters could be discussed with them.

古文：封忠贤侄良栋为东安侯。
现代文：封魏忠贤之侄魏良栋为东安侯。
English: Wei Liangdong, the nephew of Wei Zhongxian, was appointed as Dong'an marquis.

古文：甲寅，大渐。
现代文：二十日，皇帝病情加重。
English: On the 20th, the emperor's condition worsened.

古文：乙卯，崩于乾清宫，年二十三。
现代文：二十一日，在乾清宫死去。年仅二十三岁。
English: On the 21st, he died in the Qianqing Palace. He was only 23 years old.

古文：遗诏以皇第五弟信王由检嗣皇帝位。
现代文：在遗诏中说明由第五个弟弟信王朱由检继承皇位。
English: In the will, it was stated that the fifth younger brother, Prince Shinnosuke, would succeed to the throne.

古文：冬十月庚子，上尊谥，庙号熹宗，葬德陵。
现代文：十月七日，奉上尊谥，庙号熹宗，葬在德陵。
English: On October 7th, he was given the posthumous name of Shanzong and was buried in Deling.

古文：赞曰：明自世宗而后，纲纪日以陵夷，神宗末年，废坏极矣。
现代文：评论：明自从世宗以后，纲纪逐渐衰颓，到神宗末年，已经废弛到极点了。
English: Comment: It is clear that since the time of the Sejong Dynasty, the Gangjeong Sect gradually declined, and by the end of the Shensong Dynasty, it had become extremely decadent.

古文：虽有刚明英武之君，已难复振。
现代文：虽有刚明英武之君，也难以振肃。
English: Although there is Kongming Yingwu, it is difficult to shake off.

古文：而重以帝之庸懦，妇寺窃柄，滥赏淫刑，忠良惨祸，亿兆离心，虽欲不亡，何可得哉。
现代文：又加上皇帝的庸懦，妇寺窃其根本，滥施淫刑，忠良惨遭横祸，万民离心，即使不想亡国，可又怎么办呢！
English: Add to this the emperor's cowardice, the women's temple stealing its foundation, the indiscriminate use of lascivious punishments, the loyal and virtuous suffering great misfortune, and the people being alienated, and even if you don't want to ruin the country, what can you do?

