古文：○侯君集张亮薛万彻兄万均盛彦师卢祖尚刘世让刘兰李君羡等附侯君集，豳州三水人也。
现代文：侯君集，豳州三水人。
English: Hou Junji, a member of the Three Water Tribes of Zhangzhou.

古文：性矫饰，好矜夸，玩弓矢而不能成其艺，乃以武勇自称。
现代文：生性故意做作，好骄傲自夸。玩弓箭没有学成拉弓射箭的技艺，却以武勇自称。
English: His nature is deliberately artificial, he is so proud and boastful. He did not learn the skill of drawing a bow and arrows by playing bow and arrow, but he claimed to be brave.

古文：太宗在籓，引入幕府，数从征伐，累除左虞侯、车骑将军，封全椒县子。
现代文：太宗在做秦王时，引君集入幕府，数次跟从太宗出征，历任左虞候、车骑将军，封全椒县子。
English: When Taizong was the king of Qin, he gathered the princes into the shogunate, several times followed Taizong to go to war, and successively served as the governor of Zuoying, the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the governor of Quanzhe County.

古文：渐蒙恩遇，参预谋议。
现代文：逐渐蒙受恩遇，参与计议。
English: Gradually, he received favorable treatment and participated in deliberation.

古文：建成、元吉之诛也，君集之策居多。
现代文：建成、元吉图谋不轨被杀，君集的策划最多。
English: After completion, Yuan Jitu was killed for malfeasance, and Junji's collection had the largest number of planners.

古文：太宗即位，迁左卫将军，以功进封潞国公，赐邑千户，寻拜右卫大将军。
现代文：太宗即位，君集迁任左卫将军，因为立功晋封潞国公，赐封地一千户，不久拜右卫大将军。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and Junji was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards. Because of his meritorious service, he was promoted to the position of Duke of Shandong Province, granted fiefs to a thousand households, and soon became General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：贞观四年，迁兵部尚书，参议朝政。
现代文：贞观四年，君集迁任兵部尚书，参与朝廷政事。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, he was transferred to the Military Department and participated in the political affairs of the imperial court.

古文：时将讨吐谷浑伏允，命李靖为西海道行军大总管，以君集及任城王道宗并为之副。
现代文：当时准备讨伐吐谷浑伏允，太宗命李靖为西海道行军大总管，命君集及任城王李道宗一起为副帅。
English: At that time, they were preparing to fight against Tugu Hunfujun. Taizong ordered Li Jing to be the general manager of the march on the West Road, and he and the appointed city king, Li Daozong, were the deputy commanders.

古文：九年三月，师次鄯州，君集言于靖曰： 大军已至，贼虏尚未走险，宜简精锐，长驱疾进，彼不我虞，必有大利。
现代文：贞观九年三月，唐军驻扎在鄯州，君集对李靖说： 我大军已到，贼寇尚未逃到险要的地方，我们应当选拔精锐兵力，长驱疾进，敌贼没有料到我军突然到来，我们必有大利。
English: In March of the ninth year of Zhenguan, the Tang army was stationed in Zhangzhou, and Junji said to Li Jing: My army has arrived, the thieves and robbers have not yet fled to the critical place, we should select the elite troops and drive forward. The enemy thieves did not expect the sudden arrival of our army, we will have a big advantage.

古文：若此策不行，潜遁必远，山障为阻，讨之实难。 
现代文：如果这个计策不能实行，贼寇必定暗中逃跑到很远的地方，山隔路阻，讨伐贼寇实在是很难的了。 
English: If this strategy cannot be implemented, the bandits will certainly secretly flee to a far away place, the mountains are a roadblock, and it is really difficult to fight the bandits.

古文：靖然其计，乃简精锐，轻赍深入。
现代文：李靖采纳了君集的计谋，于是选拔精锐骑兵、轻装深入。
English: Li Jing adopted the stratagem of Junji, so he selected elite cavalry and advanced with light equipment.

古文：道宗追及伏允之众于库山，破之。
现代文：李道宗在库山追上伏允的逃兵，击败了贼军。
English: Li Daozong caught up with Fu Yun's deserters in Ku Shan and defeated the bandits.

古文：伏允轻兵入碛，以避官军。
现代文：伏允轻兵逃入沙漠，躲避官军。
English: Fuyong light soldiers fled into the desert to evade the government army.

古文：靖乃中分士马为两道并入，靖与薛万均、李大亮趣北路，使侯君集、道宗趣南路。历破逻真谷，逾汉哭山，经途二千余里，行空虚之地。盛夏降霜，山多积雪，转战过星宿川，至于柏海，频与虏遇，皆大克获。
现代文：于是李靖把唐军分成南北二路一起深入敌境，李靖与薛万均、李大亮取北路，派侯君集、李道宗取南路，途中经过破逻真谷，翻越汉哭山，途经二千余里，行军在茫茫沙漠，盛夏降霜，山多积雪，转战经过星宿川，到达柏海，屡次与贼寇交战，都获得大胜。
English: Therefore, Li Jing divided the Tang army into two routes, north and south, and went deep into the enemy territory together. Li Jing and Xue Wanjun and Li Dayang took the north route, and sent Hou Junji and Li Daozong to take the south route. On the way, they passed through the Luozhen Valley, crossed the Han Weeping Mountain, traveled more than two thousand miles, marched in the vast desert, frosted in midsummer, snow-covered mountains, went to war through the Xingshu River, reached the Baohai Sea, and repeatedly fought with the bandits. They all won a great victory.

古文：北望积玉山，观河源之所出焉。乃旋师，与李靖会于大非川，平吐谷浑而还。
现代文：往北远望积石山，看到河源从这里发源，于是回师，与李靖在大非川胜利会师，平定吐谷浑胜利回朝。
English: He looked far to the north at Jishishan Mountain and saw that the source of the river originated here, so he returned to his division, joined Li Jing in the victory of the Great African River, and returned to the North after the victory of Tuyun.

古文：十一年，与长孙无忌等俱受世封，授君集陈州刺史，改封陈国公。
现代文：贞观十一年，君集与长孙无忌等都受到世封，授君集任陈州刺史，改封为陈国公。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, both Junji and his eldest grandson Mujie received the world title. Junji was awarded the title of Chen State Historian and changed his title to Chen Guogong.

古文：明年，拜吏部尚书，进位光禄大夫。
现代文：第二年，拜吏部尚书，晋位光禄大夫。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the rank of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：君集出自行伍，素无学术，及被任遇，方始读书。
现代文：君集出自军队，平素没有学问技艺，到受任用恩遇，才开始读书。
English: Coming from the military, Kim Ji-sik had no academic skills. It was only after he was appointed that he began to study.

古文：典选举，定考课，出为将领，入参朝政，并有时誉。
现代文：主持选择举用贤能，决定考核官吏成绩，出为将领，入宫参与朝政，一并在当时有声誉。
English: He presided over the selection of merit, decided to evaluate the performance of officials, became a general, entered the palace to participate in court politics, and had a reputation at that time.

古文：高昌王麹文泰时遏绝西域商贾，太宗征文泰入朝，而称疾不至，诏以君集为交河道行军大总管讨之。
现代文：高昌王麴文泰当时阻止断绝西域的商贾，太宗召文泰入朝，文泰却推说有病不到。太宗诏令君集为交河道行军大总管讨伐文泰。
English: At that time, the king of Gochang sent Wentei to stop the merchants from cutting off the western region. Emperor Taizong called Wentei to come to the imperial court, but Wentei said that he was not ill. Emperor Taizong issued an edict to make Junji the commander-in-chief of the cross-river march to fight Wentei.

古文：文泰闻王师将起，谓其国人曰： 唐国去此七千里，涉碛阔二千里，地无水草，冬风冻寒，夏风如焚。风之所吹，行人多死，当行百人不能得至，安能致大军乎？
现代文：文泰听说皇帝的军队将到，对他的国人说： 唐国离这里七千里，沙漠广阔有二千里，地上没有水草，冬季寒风冷冻，夏季热风像火烧，风所吹到的地方，行人大多死去，平常步行一百人不能够到达，大军怎么能到达呢？
English: When Wen Tai heard that the emperor's army was about to arrive, he said to his compatriots: "Tang is seven thousand miles away from here, the desert is two thousand miles wide, there are no water plants on the ground, the winter cold wind is frozen, the summer hot wind is like fire, where the wind blows, most pedestrians die, a hundred people can't reach it on foot, how can a large army reach it?

古文：若顿兵于吾城下，二十日食必尽，自然鱼溃，乃接而虏之，何足忧也！ 
现代文：如果屯兵在我城下，二十天粮食一定会吃光，自然内溃，然后接近而俘虏他们，有什么足以忧虑呢！ 
English: If the garrison is under my city, it will run out of food for twenty days, it will naturally collapse, and then I will approach and capture them. What is there to worry about?

古文：及军至碛口，而文泰卒，其子智盛袭位。
现代文：等到大军到达沙漠入口，文泰死了，他的儿子智盛承袭了王位。
English: By the time the army reached the entrance to the desert, Wen Tai had died, and his son Zhisheng had succeeded to the throne.

古文：君集率兵至柳谷，候骑言文泰克日将葬，国人咸集。
现代文：君集率兵到达柳谷，巡逻侦察的骑兵说文泰限定日期将要下葬，全国的人都将集中在那里。
English: When Kim Ji led his troops to Liugok, the cavalry patrol reconnaissance said that Wen Tai will be buried on a limited date, and people from all over the country will be concentrated there.

古文：诸将请袭之，君集曰： 不可，天子以高昌骄慢无礼，使吾恭行天罚，今袭人于墟墓之间，非问罪之师也。 
现代文：众将请求趁机袭击他们，君集说 ：不行，天子因为高昌王骄慢无礼，派我奉命执行上天对他的惩罚，现在在坟墟墓地之间袭击他们，不是问罪之师。 
English: The crowd pleaded with him to take advantage of the opportunity to attack them, and the emperor said, "No, the Son of Heaven, because King Gaochang was arrogant and impolite, sent me to carry out Heaven's punishment on him, and now I am attacking them between the tombs and cemeteries. I am not an inquisitor."

古文：于是鼓行而前，攻其田地。
现代文：于是击鼓前进，攻打田地。
English: So they beat their drums and marched out to attack the fields.

古文：贼婴城自守，君集谕之，不行。
现代文：敌贼自己环城固守，君集告晓他们，他们不听。
English: The enemy bandits encircled the city on their own and held fast. The king's retinue told them, but they did not listen.

古文：先是，大军之发也，上召山东善为攻城器械者，悉遣从军。
现代文：这以前，大军出发时，朝廷召募山东擅长造攻城器械的人，把他们都派遣从军。
English: In the past, when a large army set out, the imperial court called for people from Shandong who were good at building siege engines and sent them all to join the army.

古文：君集遂刊木填隍，推撞车撞其睥睨，数丈颓穴，抛车石击其城中，其所当者无不糜碎，或张氈被，用障抛石，城上守陴者不复得立。
现代文：君集于是砍伐树木，填在护城壕中，推撞车撞击城墙上齿状的矮墙，从数丈高的地方坠落在穴中，用抛车发射石头攻打敌军城内，所挡住的地方无不打得粉碎，有的士兵张挂毡被，用作屏障向城内抛石头，城上守卫女墙的敌兵不能再站立下去。
English: The king's retinue then cut down trees, filled in the moat, pushed and rammed the car against the jagged low wall on the city wall, fell into the hole from a height of several meters, attacked the enemy army in the city with a stone-throwing car, and the blocked places were all smashed. Some soldiers hung a quilt and used it as a barrier to throw stones into the city. The enemy soldiers guarding the female wall on the city could no longer stand up.

古文：遂拔之，虏其男女七千余口，仍进兵围其都城。
现代文：于是攻克敌城，俘获男女七千余人，进兵包围敌人的都城。
English: As a result, they conquered the enemy city, captured more than seven thousand men and women, and surrounded the enemy capital.

古文：智盛穷蹙，致书于君集曰： 有罪于天子者，先王也。
现代文：智盛困厄窘迫，送达书信给君集说： 有罪于天子的，是先王。
English: In his distress, Zhisheng sent a letter to the royal collection saying, "It was the former king who sinned against the Son of Heaven.

古文：天罚所加，身已丧背。
现代文：上天施加的惩罚，已身死离去。
English: Heaven's punishment has departed with his death.

古文：智盛袭位未几，不知所以愆阙，冀尚书哀怜。 
现代文：智盛即位不久，不知先王罪过的由来，希望尚书哀怜。 
English: Soon after Tomomori's accession to the throne, he did not know the origin of the former king's sins, and hoped that he would write a letter of condolence.

古文：君集报曰： 若能悔祸，宜束手军门。 
现代文：君集回信答复说 ：如果能悔罪，应当自己捆住双手站在军营的门口。 
English: In reply, Kim Ji-sik wrote: If you can repent, you should stand at the gate of the military camp with your hands tied.

古文：智盛犹不出，因命士卒填其隍堑，发抛车以攻之。
现代文：智盛还不出来，因此 君集命令士卒填护城壕，派抛车去攻城。
English: Tomomori could not come out yet, so Kimji ordered his soldiers to fill the trenches and send wagons to attack the city.

古文：又为十丈高楼，俯视城内，有行人及飞石所中处，皆唱言之，人多入室避石。
现代文：又做十丈高楼，俯视城内，有行人到飞石所射中的地方，都高声地告诉他，人们大多入室避石。
English: He also made a ten-story high-rise, overlooking the city. When some pedestrians came to the place hit by the flying stone, they all loudly told him that most people went indoors to avoid the stone.

古文：初，文泰与西突厥欲谷设约，有兵至，共为表里。
现代文：当初，文泰与西突厥欲谷设约定，有军队打来，共同内外呼应。
English: At the beginning, Ventai and West Turkistan agreed to set up a meeting, and there was a call from the army, which was echoed both inside and outside the country.

古文：及闻君集至，欲谷设惧而西走千余里，智盛失援，计无所出，遂开门出降。
现代文：等到听说君集的军队到了，欲谷设畏惧而向西逃一千余里，智盛失援，无计可施，于是开门出来投降。
English: When he heard that Junji's army had arrived, he was afraid and fled to the west for more than a thousand miles. Chisheng was helpless and helpless, so he opened the door and surrendered.

古文：君集分兵略地，遂平其国，俘智盛及其将吏，刻石纪功而还。
现代文：君集分兵夺取地盘，于是平定高昌国，俘获智盛及其将领、官吏，在石上刻记功勋胜利回朝。
English: A detachment of soldiers from Kimji captured the site, thus pacifying Gaochang, capturing Tomomori and his generals and officials, and inscribing their feats of victory on the stone.

古文：君集初破高昌，曾未奏请，辄配没无罪人，又私取宝物。
现代文：君集起初攻克高昌，不曾奏报请示朝廷，就发配没收无罪的人，又私自收取宝物。
English: At the beginning of his conquest of Gaochang, he did not submit a report to the imperial court, but issued orders to confiscate innocent people and secretly collected treasures.

古文：将士知之，亦竞来盗窃，君集恐发其事，不敢制。
现代文：军中将士知道这个情况，也争着盗窃，君集恐怕暴露了这件事，不敢制止。
English: The lieutenant generals knew about this situation and also fought against the theft. I'm afraid that Junji exposed the matter and did not dare to stop it.

古文：及京师，有司请推其罪，诏下狱。
现代文：到了京师，有司请朝廷追究君集的罪过，朝廷诏令君集下狱。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, a magistrate asked the imperial court to investigate the guilt of the prince, and the imperial court ordered the prince to go to prison.

古文：中书侍郎岑文本以为，功臣大将不可轻加屈辱，上疏曰：
现代文：中书侍郎岑文本认为功臣大将不能轻易施加屈辱，上疏说：
English: In the middle of the text, the author thought that the great general could not easily inflict humiliation, so he said:

古文：君集等或位居辅佐，或职惟爪牙，并蒙拔擢，受将帅之任，不能正身奉法，以报陛下之恩。举措肆情，罪负盈积，实宜绳之刑典，以肃朝伦。
现代文： 君集等处在辅佐朝廷的地位，有的职位也是亲信助手，一起蒙受朝廷的提拔，担当将帅的重任，不能正身奉法来报答陛下的恩泽，行为恣情放肆，罪大恶极，确实应当按刑法制度量刑，以此严肃朝廷的伦理道德。
English: The princes and others are in the position of assisting the imperial court, and some positions are also close assistants. They are promoted by the imperial court together and take on the important task of generals. They cannot use the law to repay the grace of His Majesty. Their behavior is arbitrary and impudent, and their crimes are extremely evil. It is true that they should be sentenced according to the criminal law system, so that the ethics of the imperial court can be taken seriously.

古文：但高昌昏迷，人神共弃，在朝议者，以其地在遐荒，咸欲置之度外。
现代文：但高昌糊涂迷惑，人与神共同抛弃，在朝廷中商量国政的，认为高昌地在远荒，都想把高昌置之度外。
English: However, Gaochang is confused and confusing, people and gods abandon it together, and those who discuss national politics in the imperial court think that Gaochang is far away and desolate, and they all want to put Gaochang out of reach.

古文：唯陛下运独见之明，授决胜之略，君集等奉行圣算，遂得指期平殄。
现代文：只有陛下运用独有的远见和智慧，亲授决胜的策略，君集等奉行圣上的策谋，才能够按期平定消灭高昌逆贼。
English: Only if His Majesty uses his unique foresight and wisdom, personally teaches the strategy of decisive victory, and the monarchs and others follow the sacred strategy, will they be able to eliminate the Gaochang traitors on schedule.

古文：若论事实，并是陛下之功，君集等有道路之劳，未足称其勋力。
现代文：如果论事实，都是陛下的功绩，君集等有长途跋涉之劳，不足以称赞他们的功勋。
English: If the facts are all the merits of His Majesty, it is not enough to praise the merits of the long-distance trek of the monarchs and other dignitaries.

古文：而陛下天德弗宰，乃推功于将帅。
现代文：然而陛下天赋的德行不主宰，却把功绩推给将帅。
English: However, the virtue of His Majesty's talent does not dominate, but the merits are pushed to the general.

古文：露布初至，便降大恩，从征之人，皆沾涤荡。
现代文：不封的文书刚到，就降大恩，从征的人，都受到滋润洗荡。
English: As soon as the unsealed document arrived, it was greatly appreciated, and the people who followed the enlistment were all moisturized and washed.

古文：及其凯旋，特蒙曲宴，又对万国，加之重赏。
现代文：到他们凯旋时，特此蒙受私宴，又对万国，加以重赏。
English: When they return in triumph, they will be feted and honored by all nations.

古文：内外文武，咸欣陛下赏不逾时。
现代文：内外文武，都欢欣陛下赏赐及时。
English: Both domestic and foreign scholars and soldiers are delighted that His Majesty has awarded the prize in a timely manner.

古文：而不经旬日，并付大理，虽乃君集等自挂网罗，而在朝之人未知所犯，恐海内又疑陛下唯录其过，似遗其功。
现代文：而没有经过十天半月，又都交给掌刑法的官吏，虽然是君集等自己触犯法律，而在朝的人却不知道他们所犯的罪，恐怕国内又疑心陛下只记录他们的罪过，好像遗漏他们的功绩。
English: However, it did not take more than ten and a half days before they were all handed over to the officials in charge of criminal law. Although it was Junji and others who broke the law themselves, the people in the North did not know the crimes they had committed. I am afraid that the country is suspicious that His Majesty only recorded their sins, as if omitting their merits.

古文：臣以下才，谬参近职，既有所见，不敢默然。
现代文：臣因为低才，错误地参与得到受宠爱的职位，既然有自己的见解，不敢默不开口。
English: The minister, because of his low talent, mistakenly participated in getting the favored position. Since he has his own opinion, he dares not keep silent.

古文：臣闻古之人君，出师命将，克敌则获重赏，不克则受严刑。
现代文： 我听说古代的仁君，出师命将，战胜敌人就获重赏，没战胜敌人就受严酷的刑罚。
English: I've heard that in ancient times, a benevolent ruler, who was a disciple of a great general, would win great rewards if he defeated the enemy, but if he didn't defeat the enemy, he would be severely punished.

古文：是以赏其有功也，虽贪残淫纵，必蒙青紫之宠；当其有罪也，虽勤躬洁己，不免鈇钺之诛。
现代文：因此处在有功的时候，即使是贪婪、残暴、淫乱、放纵，也一定蒙贵官的恩宠，当他有罪时，即使勤勉、恭敬、高洁、克己，也免不了被铁钺杀戮。
English: Therefore, when he is meritorious, even if he is greedy, cruel, lewd, or licentious, he will surely be favored by the dignitaries; when he is guilty, even if he is diligent, respectful, noble, and self-denying, he will inevitably be killed by the anvil.

古文：故《周书》曰： 记人之功，忘人之过，宜为君者也。 
现代文：所以《周书》说 ：记人之功，忘人之过，是适宜做君主的人。 
English: Therefore, "Zhou Shu" said: "He who remembers people's merits and forgets people's faults is a suitable person to be a monarch."

古文：昔汉贰师将军李广利损五万之师，糜亿万之费，经四年之劳，唯获骏马三十匹。
现代文：从前汉朝贰师将军李广利损失了五万人的军队，消耗了亿万的费用，经过了四年的劳碌，仅获得骏马三十匹。
English: Former Han Dynasty general Li Guangli lost an army of fifty thousand men, spent hundreds of millions in expenses, and after four years of hard work, only gained thirty horses.

古文：虽斩宛王之首，而贪不爱卒，罪恶甚多。
现代文：虽然他斩了宛王的首级，却贪婪不爱惜士兵，罪恶很多。
English: Although he beheaded King Wan, he was greedy and did not spare soldiers, committing many crimes.

古文：武帝为万里征伐，不录其过，遂封广利海西侯，食邑八千户。
现代文：武帝因为万里征伐，不记录他的罪过，终于封广利为海西侯，封地八千户。
English: Emperor Wu did not record his crime because he had traveled thousands of miles to conquer the country, so he finally made Guangli the Western Sea Lord, and his fief increased to eight thousand households.

古文：又校尉陈汤矫诏兴师，虽斩郅支单于，而汤素贪盗，所收康居财物，事多不法，为司隶所系。
现代文：再说校尉陈汤假传诏令出兵，虽然杀了郅支单于，然而汤一向贪婪，所收康居财物，做事多违法，被司隶拘囚。
English: In addition, Captain Chen Tang issued a fake imperial edict to send troops, and although he killed Zou Zhichan, Tang had always been greedy. He received wealthy property and did many illegal things. He was taken into custody by officers.

古文：汤乃上疏曰： 与吏士共诛郅支，幸得擒灭。
现代文：汤就上疏说 ：与官兵一起杀郅支，幸亏擒灭了他们。
English: Tang Shangsuo said, "We killed the barbarians together with the officers and soldiers, and fortunately eliminated them."

古文：今司隶乃收系案验，是为郅支报仇也。 
现代文：现在司隶却拘囚立案查验，是为郅支报仇啊。 
English: Now a case has been filed for the arrest and investigation of a subordinate, it's revenge for the bribe.

古文：元帝赦其罪，封汤关内侯，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：元帝赦免了他的罪，封汤为关内侯，赐黄金一百斤。
English: Emperor Yuan pardoned his sin, sealed Tang as Guan Nei Hou, and gave him a hundred catties of gold.

古文：又晋龙骧将军王浚有平吴之功，而王浑等论浚违诏，不受节度，军人得孙皓宝物，并烧皓宫及船。
现代文：还有晋朝龙骧将军王浚有平定吴国的功劳，而王浑等议论浚违诏，不受节制调度，军人获得孙鰑的宝物，一起焚烧了孙鰑的宫室船只。
English: In addition, Wang Jun, the Yongle general of the Jin Dynasty, was credited with the pacification of the State of Wuxi, while Wang Hun and others argued that Jun violated the edict and was not subject to restraint and dispatch. The soldiers obtained Sun Yat-sen's treasures and together they burned Sun Yat-sen's palace ships.

古文：浚上表曰： 今年平吴，诚为大庆，于臣之身，更为咎累。 
现代文：浚上表奏说 ：今年平定吴国，确实是大庆，对于臣自身，更是罪过。 
English: He said, "This year's pacification of the State of Wu is indeed a great success, but it is a great sin for the minister himself.

古文：武帝赦而不推，拜辅国大将军，封襄阳侯，赐绢万匹。
现代文：武帝赦免而不追究他，拜他为辅国大将军，封襄阳侯，赐绢万匹。
English: Emperor Wu pardoned him and did not prosecute him. He was given the title of Vice-Grand General, the title of Prince of Xiangyang, and 10,000 horses.

古文：近隋新义郡公韩擒虎平陈之日，纵士卒暴乱叔宝宫内，文帝亦不问罪，虽不进爵，拜擒虎上柱国，赐物八千段。
现代文：以近来说，隋朝新义郡公韩擒虎平定陈地的那天，纵容士卒在叔宝宫内行凶捣乱，文帝也不问罪，虽然不给他晋爵，但还是拜擒虎为上柱国，赐物八千段。
English: More recently, on the day when the Sui Dynasty and the Xinyi County's Prince Han Xunhu pacified the Chen territory, Emperor Wen indulged his subordinates in wreaking havoc in the Shubao Palace. Emperor Wen did not blame him, although he did not give him a knighthood, but he still regarded Xunhu as a pillar state and gave him eight thousand dan.

古文：由斯观之，将帅之臣，廉慎者寡，贪求者众，是以黄石公《军势》曰： 使智，使勇，使贪，使愚。
现代文：由这看来，将帅这样的臣子，廉洁谨慎的少，贪婪谋求财物的多。因此黄石公《军势》说： 用智，用勇，用贪，用愚。
English: From this point of view, a courtier such as a general is less likely to be honest and prudent, and more likely to be greedy and seek wealth. Therefore, Huangshi Gong's "Military Strength" said: Use wisdom, use courage, use greed, use stupidity.

古文：故智者乐立其功，勇者好行其志，贪者邀趋其利，愚者不计其死。 
现代文：因此智慧的人乐于建立自己的功绩，勇敢的人喜好实行自己的志向，贪婪的人求取趋向自己的利益，愚蠢的人不计较自己的生死。 
English: Because the wise are happy to make meritorious deeds, the brave are happy to act, the greedy seek profits and dare to fight, and the foolish do not care about their death.

古文：是知前圣莫不收人之长，弃人之短，良为此也。
现代文：从这可以知道前代圣人没有不取人之长，弃人之短的，的确是因为这个。
English: From this, we can see that the previous generation of saints did not take advantage of others, but abandoned them, and it was indeed because of this.

古文：臣又闻，夫天地之道，以覆载为先；帝王之德，以含弘为美。
现代文： 我又听说天地之道，把天覆地载庇养包容放在首位；帝王的道德，以包容宽宏为美。
English: I also heard that the way of heaven and earth is to put the protection and tolerance of heaven and earth in the first place; the morality of the emperor is to be tolerant and magnanimous.

古文：夫以区区汉武及历代诸帝，犹能宥广利等，况陛下天纵神武，振宏图以定六合，岂独正兹刑网，不行古人之事哉！
现代文：区区汉武帝及历代的各个帝王，尚且能饶恕李广利等，何况陛下天赋神明而威武，挥动宏图而定天地四方，难道惟独端正这刑律纲常，不遵行古人的事例吗？
English: Emperor Hanwu and all the emperors throughout the ages, even if they can forgive Li Guangli and so on, not to mention that His Majesty is endowed with divine and mighty, and waves the grand plan to determine the four directions of the world, is it only correcting this criminal law and not following the examples of the ancients?

古文：伏惟圣怀，当自已有斟酌。
现代文：俯伏思维圣上的心意，应当自己有所斟酌。
English: You should consider carefully whether you want to succumb to the sacredness of thinking.

古文：臣今所以陈闻，非敢私君集等，庶以萤爝末光，增晖日月。
现代文：臣现在所以陈述见闻，并不敢偏爱君集等，希望用萤火蜡炬般微弱的光，增添日月的光辉。
English: For this reason, the minister now states that he has seen the news and does not dare to favor Junji and others, hoping to use the weak light like a glow-wax torch to add the brilliance of the sun and the moon.

古文：倘陛下降雨露之泽，收雷电之威，录其微劳，忘其大过，使君集重升朝列，复预驱驰，虽非清贞之臣，犹是贪愚之将。
现代文：假若陛下降雨露一般的恩泽，收起雷电般的威风，记载他们微小的功劳，忘却他们大的罪过，让君集重新升入朝廷的位次，再让他尽力效命，虽然不是清廉贞洁的臣子，也还是贪婪愚鲁的将领。
English: If His Majesty were to bestow His grace like rain and dew, and withdraw His majesty like thunder and lightning, and record their small merits, and forget their great sins, and allow the princes to rise again to the ranks of the imperial court, and then let them serve out their lives to the best of their ability, although they are not pure and chaste courtiers, they are still greedy and foolish generals.

古文：斯则陛下圣德，虽屈法而德弥显；君集等愆过，虽蒙宥而过更彰。
现代文：这样一来，那么陛下的圣德即使摧折了刑法，仁德却更加明显，君集的错误过失，即使蒙受宽恕，过失却更加显著。
English: In this way, His Majesty's sanctity, even if it breaks the criminal law, is more obvious, and His Majesty's faults, even if they are forgiven, are more obvious.

古文：足使立功之士，因兹而皆劝；负罪之将，由斯而改节矣。
现代文：足以让立功之士，因此而都受到鼓励，负罪之将，由此而改变节操了。 
English: It is enough for the meritorious to be encouraged, the guilty to be punished, and morality to be changed.

古文：疏奏，乃释。
现代文：分条陈奏，于是朝廷释放君集。
English: After the split, the imperial court released Junshi.

古文：君集自以有功于西域，而以贪冒被囚，志殊怏怏。
现代文：君集自认为对平定西域有功，却因为贪图财利被囚禁，心里很不服气。
English: Kim Ji-sik considered himself to have contributed to the pacification of the western region, but he was imprisoned because of his greed for money and profit, and he was very unconvinced.

古文：十七年，张亮以太子詹事出为洛州都督，君集激怒亮曰： 何为见排？ 
现代文：贞观十七年，张亮凭借太子詹事的身份出任洛州都督，君集激怒张亮说： 为什么被排挤？ 
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Zhang Liang took office as the governor of Loshou by virtue of his status as Prince Zhan Zhi, which infuriated Zhang Liang, who said: Why was he ousted?

古文：亮曰： 是公见排，更欲谁冤！ 
现代文：张亮说： 是您被排挤，还想冤枉谁！ 
English: Zhang Liang said, "You are the one who has been pushed out, and you still want to find someone to blame!

古文：君集曰： 我平一国，还触天子大嗔，何能抑排！ 
现代文：君集说： 我平定一国以来，只能在屋子里左右发怒了，又怎能巴望受到排挤！ 
English: Kim Ji-sik said, "Since I pacified a country, I can only get angry in the house, and how can I hope to be ousted!

古文：因攘袂曰： 郁郁不可活，公能反乎？
现代文：因此揎袖捋臂说 ：忧闷活不下去了，你能造反吗？
English: So he said, "I can't go on living in depression, can you rebel?"

古文：当与公反耳。 
现代文：我就与你一起造反。 
English: I'll rebel with you.

古文：亮密以闻，太宗谓亮曰： 卿与君集俱是功臣，君集独以语卿，无人闻见，若以属吏，君集必言无此。
现代文：张亮将这话告密，太宗对张亮说： 你与君集都是功臣，君集单独把这话告诉你，没有别的人听见，如果把这事交给主管官吏处理，君集必定说没有这事。
English: Zhang Liang reported this to the authorities. Taizong said to Zhang Liang, "You and Junji are both heroes. Junji is the only one to tell you this, no one else heard it. If you were to hand this matter over to the officials in charge, Junji would definitely say that there is no such thing.

古文：两人相证，事未可知。 
现代文：两人相互对证，事情不能弄明白。 
English: The two cross-examined each other, unable to figure things out.

古文：遂寝其事，待君集如初。
现代文：于是止息了这件事，对待君集像当初一样。
English: So they stopped the affair and treated Junji the same way as they did in the beginning.

古文：寻与诸功臣同画像于凌烟阁。
现代文：不久君集与众功臣一同被朝廷把肖像画在凌烟阁上。
English: Soon after, together with all the meritorious officials, he was forced by the imperial court to have his portrait painted on the Lingyaku Pavilion.

古文：时庶人承乾在东宫，恐有废立，又知君集怨望，遂与通谋。
现代文：当时庶人承乾在东宫，恐怕朝廷会废置太子，又得知君集心怀不满，于是与他共同密谋。
English: At that time, the commoner Cheng Qian was in the East Palace, and I was afraid that the court would depose the crown prince. I also learned that the princes were dissatisfied, so I conspired with him.

古文：君集子婿贺兰楚石时为东宫千牛，承乾令数引君集入内，问以自安之术。
现代文：君集的女婿贺男楚石当时任东宫千牛，承乾命令他数次引君集进入东宫，向他求教安稳自己地位的方法。
English: At that time, He's son-in-law He's son-in-law Chu Shi held the position of the Eastern Palace of the Thousand Cows. He ordered him several times to bring the prince into the Eastern Palace and ask him for advice on how to stabilize his position.

古文：君集以承乾劣弱，意欲乘衅以图之，遂赞承乾阴图不轨，尝举手谓承乾曰： 此好手，当为用之。 
现代文：君集认为承乾差劣软弱，心想乘隙借他图谋大业，于是赞成承乾图谋不轨，曾举着手对承乾说： 这好手，应当为你效劳。 
English: Junji thought that Cheng Qian was inferior and weak, and he wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to use him to plot a great cause. Therefore, he approved of Cheng Qian's plot, and once held up his hand to Cheng Qian and said: This good hand should serve you.

古文：君集或虑谋泄，心不自安，每中夜蹶然而起，叹咤久之。
现代文：君集有时担心阴谋泄露，自己心中不能安定，常常半夜突然颠仆而起，叹息悲痛很久。
English: At times, Kim Ji-sik was worried about the conspiracy leaking out, and he could not be stable in his heart. He often woke up suddenly in the middle of the night, sighing and grieving for a long time.

古文：其妻怪而谓之曰： 公，国之大臣，何为乃尔？
现代文：他的妻子感到奇怪就对他说 ：你，是国家大臣，为什么这样？
English: His wife was puzzled and said to him: You are a minister of state, why is that?

古文：必当有故。
现代文：必定有缘故。
English: There must be a reason.

古文：若有不善之事，孤负国家，宜自归罪，首领可全。 
现代文：如果有不好的事，辜负国家，应当自己自首罪行，头颈尚可保全。 
English: If there is something bad, if you fail the country, you should turn yourself in for the crime, and your head and neck can still be saved.

古文：君集不能用。
现代文：君集没能采用妻子的话。
English: Kim Ji-soo failed to use his wife's words.

古文：及承乾事发，君集被收，楚石又诣阙告其事。
现代文：到承乾的事情败露，君集被逮捕，楚石又到皇帝的殿廷告发承乾谋反的事。
English: When the matter of Chengyan was exposed, Junji was arrested, and Chu Shi went to the emperor's court to denounce Chengyan for plotting rebellion.

古文：太宗亲临问曰： 我不欲令刀笔吏辱公，故自鞫验耳。 
现代文：太宗亲自面对君集审问说 ：我不想让刀吏羞辱你，所以亲自审讯验证。 
English: Taizong himself said in the face of Junshi's interrogation: I don't want the swordsman to humiliate you, so I personally interrogated and verified.

古文：君集辞穷。
现代文：君集辞穷。
English: You're a poor quitter.

古文：太宗谓百僚曰： 往者家国未安，君集实展其力，不忍置之于法。
现代文：太宗对百官说： 从前国家没有安定，君集确实施展了他的能力，不忍心把他置之于法。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the hundred officials: In the past, the country was not stable. The monarchs really exerted their ability and did not have the heart to bring him to justice.

古文：我将乞其性命，公卿其许我乎？ 
现代文：我准备给他性命，公卿们允许我的要求吗？ 
English: I'm prepared to give him his life. Will the Lords grant my request?

古文：群臣争进曰： 君集之罪，天地所不容，请诛之以明大法。 
现代文：群臣争着进言说 ：君集的罪，天地所不容，请杀死他来表明国家的法度。 
English: The group of courtiers argued and said, "The crime of the king's retinue is intolerable in heaven and on earth. Please kill him to show the country's rule."

古文：太宗谓君集曰： 与公长诀矣，而今而后，但见公遗像耳！ 
现代文：太宗对君集说： 与你永别了，从今以后，只见你的遗像了！ 
English: Taizong said to Junshi, "I've said goodbye to you forever. From now on, I'll only see your remains!"

古文：因歔欷下泣。遂斩于四达之衢，籍没其家。
现代文：因而哀叹抽泣，于是在四通八达的路上斩了君集，抄没了他的家产。
English: Therefore, he lamented and sobbed, so he cut off Junji on his way to everywhere, and confiscated his family property.

古文：君集临刑，容色不改，谓监刑将军曰： 君集岂反者乎，蹉跌至此！
现代文：君集临刑时，面不改色，对监刑的将军说： 君集哪里是谋反的人呢，失足到了这个地步！
English: When he was about to be executed, he did not change his face, and said to the general who was carrying out the sentence: "Where is Kanji, the rebel? He has fallen so far!

古文：然尝为将，破灭二国，颇有微功。为言于陛下，乞令一子以守祭祀。 
现代文：然而我曾经做过将领，破灭二国，很有些微小的功绩，请为我对陛下说，请求留一个儿子守祭祀。 
English: However, I once served as a general, destroyed two countries, and had some very minor achievements. Please speak for me to His Majesty and ask him to leave a son to keep the sacrificial rites.

古文：由是特原其妻及一子，徙于岭南。
现代文：因此特地赦免了他的妻子和一个儿子，把他们迁到岭南。
English: Therefore, he specifically pardoned his wife and one son and moved them to Lingnan.

