古文：启觉天人之期，扶奖帝王之运。三五圣业，神明大宝，二谋协赞，罔不由兹。
现代文：上天的祥瑞符命，遥远渺茫。 河图  洛书 之类神秘图籍，固然深藏于金柜石室，而《契》、《决》、《纬》、《候》的明确解释，典籍中没有记载。开悟天人的气数，扶助奖掖帝王的运命，天运辅助圣业，神明授予帝位，天神协同谋划，无不是由此。
English: Mysterious books such as the Map of the River and the Book of Luo are indeed deeply hidden in the stone chamber of the golden cabinet, but there is no clear explanation of the "Deed," "Decision," "Latitude" and "Hour" recorded in the classics. The number of enlightened heavenly beings, the support award and the fate of the emperor, the heavenly fortune supporting the sacred cause, the gods awarding the throne, and the gods jointly planning, are all from this.

古文：夫流火赤雀，实纪周祚；雕云素灵，发祥汉氏；光武中兴，皇符为盛；魏膺当涂之谶，晋有石瑞之文，史笔所详，亦唯旧矣。
现代文：烈火流布，白鱼化作火鸟，的确开启了周的帝业，五彩祥云素白明月，是漠代发迹的征兆，光武帝中兴，上天降下盛大符瑞，魏应验了 当涂 的谶语，晋有石头上的吉兆文字，这些史书详细记载的故事，也已陈旧了。
English: The blazing fire spread, the white fish turned into a firebird, which indeed opened the imperial career of Zhou, the colorful auspicious clouds and the white bright moon, which is a sign of the desert era, the Guangwu Emperor Zhongxing, the heaven sent down a grand fury, Wei fulfilled the slang of when to paint, and Jin had auspicious words on the stone. These stories, which are recorded in detail in history books, are also outdated.

古文：齐氏受命，事殷前典。
现代文：齐伐承受天命，事情广泛记载于前代典籍。
English: Qi Wa was destined to succeed, and the event is widely recorded in the previous generation of classics.

古文：黄门郎苏偘撰《圣皇瑞应记》，永明中庾温撰《瑞应图》，其余众品，史注所载。
现代文：黄门郎蓝堡撰写《圣皇瑞应记》，永明年间庾温撰写《瑞应图》，其余的众多图籍，史书中有所记载。
English: Huangmenlang Blue Castle wrote "St. Emperor Rui Ying Ji," and Yongye Middle Zhenwen wrote "Rui Ying Tu," and the rest of the numerous picture books are recorded in the history books.

古文：今详录去取，以为志云。
现代文：现在详细记录取舍，作为祥瑞志。
English: Now record the trade-off in detail, as Xiang Ruizhi.

古文：《老子河洛谶》曰： 年历七七水灭绪，风云俱起龙麟举。 
现代文：《老子河洛谶》说： 年历七七水灭绪，风云俱起龙麟举。 
English: "Lao Zi He Luo Jie" said: The annual calendar is in full swing, and the wind and clouds are rising.

古文：宋水德王，义熙十四年，元熙二年，永初三年，景平一年，元嘉三十年，孝建三年，大明八年，永光一年，泰始七年，泰豫一年，元徽四年，升明三年，凡七十七年，故曰七七也。
现代文：宋属水德为王，义熙年号共十四年，元熙是二年，永初是三年，景平是一年，元嘉是三十年，孝建是三年，大明是八年，永光是一年，泰始是七年，泰豫是一年，元徽是四年，升明是三年，共七十七年，所以说是七七。
English: Song was the king of water virtue. The Yixi era lasted a total of fourteen years, the Yuanxi era two years, the Yongchu era three years, the Jingping era one year, the Yuanjia era thirty years, the Xiaojian era three years, the Daming era eight years, the Yongguang era one year, the Taizhi era seven years, the Taiyuan era one year, the Yuanhui era four years, and the Shuming era three years, for a total of seventy-seven years, so it is said to be seventy-seven.

古文：《易》曰： 云从龙，风从虎。 
现代文：《周易》说： 云从龙，风从虎。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: The cloud comes from the dragon, the wind from the tiger.

古文：关尹云： 龙不知其乘风云而上天也。 
现代文：关尹蜕： 龙是不知道自己乘着风和云上天的。 
English: Guan Yinjun: Dragons do not know that they ascend to heaven by the wind and clouds.

古文：谶又曰： 肃草成，道德怀书备出身，形法治吴出南京。 
现代文：谶语又说： 肃草成，道德怀书备出身，形法治呈出南京。 
English: The slang also said: "Nanjing is a city of solemn grass, moral and book-keeping, and the rule of law."

古文：墥堨河梁，为路也，路即道也。
现代文：以上就是姓讳。南京，是直盆丛的治所基里。
English: The above is the surname taboo. Nanjing is the cradle of the straight basin cluster.

古文：渊塞者，譬路成也。
现代文：谶语又说： 撞竭河梁塞龙渊，消除水灾泄丫撞竭河梁，是路，路就是道。
English: Slang also says: to drain the Serongyuan, to eliminate floods, to drain the Serongyuan, to drain the Serongyuan, is the road, the road is the road.

古文：即太祖讳也。
现代文：渊塞，好比是路成。就是太祖的名讳。
English: Yuan Jie, like Lu Cheng, is the name of the great-grandfather.

古文：消水灾，言除宋氏患难也。
现代文：消水灾，说的是消除宋代的灾难。
English: Eliminating floods means eliminating the disasters of the Song Dynasty.

古文：谶又曰： 上参南斗第一星，下立草屋为紫庭。
现代文：谶语又说： 上参南斗第一星，下立草屋为紫庭。
English: The slang also says: Shangshan Nandu is the first star, and the lower grass house is the purple garden.

古文：神龙之冈梧桐生，凤鸟舒翼翔且鸣。 
现代文：神龙之岗梧桐生，凤鸟舒翼翔且呜。 
English: The sacred dragon, the phoenix, soars and soars.

古文：南斗第一星，吴分也。
现代文：南斗第一颗星，是对应吴的分野。
English: The first star of the Southern Dipper corresponds to the star of Wu.

古文：草屋，萧字也。
现代文：草屋是 萧 字。
English: Kusaya is pronounced as 萧.

古文：又箫管之器，像凤鸟翼也。
现代文：另外箫管乐器，像是凤乌的翅膀。
English: In addition, there are wind instruments, such as the wings of the phoenix.

古文：谶又曰： 箫为二士，天下大乐。 
现代文：谶语又说： 萧为二士，天下大乐。 
English: Slang also says: If two people are in love, the whole world will be happy.

古文：二士，主字也。
现代文：二士，是 主 字。
English: Two, it's the main character.

古文：谶又曰： 天子何在草中宿。 
现代文：谶语又说： 天子何在草中宿。 
English: The slang also says: What is the Son of Heaven doing sleeping in the grass?

古文：宿，萧也。
现代文：宿，就是肃。
English: An inn, that is.

古文：《尚书中候仪明篇》曰： 仁人杰出，握表之象，曰角姓，合音之于。 
现代文：《尚书中候。仪明篇》说： 仁人杰出，握表之象，曰角姓，合音之于。 
English: "Shangshu Shuangwa. Ji Ming Hen" said: Renren outstanding, holding the table of the elephant, said to be the surname of the horns, in unison.

古文：苏偘云： 萧，角姓也。
现代文：苏儡说： 萧，就是角姓。
English: Su Jiao said: Xiao is the surname of the horn.

古文：又八音之器有箫管也。 史臣曰：案晋光禄大夫何祯解 音之于 为曹字，谓魏氏也。
现代文：另外乐器中有箫管。 史臣曰：据晋光禄大夫何祯解释， 音之于 是 曹 字，是说魏代。
English: In addition, there is a gong pipe in the musical instrument. Shichen said: According to the explanation of Jin Guanglu Doctor He Jun, the sound is from the word Cao, which means the Wei Dynasty.

古文：王隐《晋书》云： 卯金音于，亦为魏也。 
现代文：王隐《晋书》说： 卯金音于，也是魏。 
English: Wang Yin's "Jin Shu" said: "U Jin's sound is also Wei.

古文：《候》书章句，本无铨序，二家所称，即有前释，未详偘言为何推据。《孝经钩命决》曰： 谁者起，视名将。 
现代文：《尚书中候》的文章语句，本来没有解释，何、王二家所说，就已经是前人的解释，不清楚苏儡的说法是如何推论的。《孝经钩命决》说： 谁者起，视名将。 
English: There was no explanation for the sentences in the article of "Shang Shuxuchuan" originally. What Wang Erjia said was already the explanation of the predecessors. It is not clear how Su Jiao's argument was deduced. "Xiao Jinghu Shimei" said: Whoever starts, will be regarded as a name.

古文：君者群也，理物为雄，忧劣相次以期兴，将，太祖小讳也。
现代文：君就是群，作为人杰治理万物，排列优劣期望国运兴盛，将是太祖的小名讳。
English: You are the group. As a great man, you govern all things, rank the merits and demerits, and hope for the prosperity of the national movement. This will be the nickname of the great ancestor.

古文：征西将军萧思话见之曰： 此我家讳也。 
现代文：征西将军萧思话见到这条谶语说： 这是我家的忌讳。 
English: When General Xiao Siwei of the Western Expedition saw this slang, he said, "This is a taboo in my family."

古文：王子年歌曰： 金刀治世后遂苦。帝王昏乱天神怒。灾异屡见戒人主。三分二叛失州土。三王九江一在吴。余悉稚小早少孤。一国二主天所驱。 
现代文：王子年歌唱说： 金刀治理天下后世就会痛苦，帝王昏乱天神发怒，灾异屡次出现警告君主，三分之二的地区反叛，国土丧失，三王在九江一个在吴发迹，其余都幼小很早就成为孤儿，一国二主是上天所驱使。 
English: Prince Nian sang: "If the golden sword governs the world, future generations will suffer; emperors will be confused, gods will be angry; calamities will repeatedly appear to warn monarchs; two-thirds of regions will rebel, lands will be lost; three kings in Jiujiang, one in Wuxi, and the rest will become orphans at an early age; one country, two masters is driven by heaven.

古文：金刀，刘也；三分二叛，宋明帝世也；三王九江者，孝武于九江兴，晋安王子勋虽不终，亦称大号，后世祖又于九江基霸迹，此三王也；一在吴，谓齐氏桑梓，亦寄治南吴也；一国二主，谓太祖符运潜兴，为宋代驱除寇难。
现代文：金刀就是刘。三分之二反叛，是塞明帝时代。三王九江，是指孝武帝在九江兴起，晋安王子勋虽然没有成功，但也称帝号，后来世祖又在九江奠定了霸业基础，造就是三王。一在吴，是说齐皇室故乡，治所寄居在辽南县地。一国二主，是说左担承受天命的运数暗中兴起，替宋皇室驱除贼寇灾难。
English: The golden sword is Liu Cai. Two-thirds of the rebellion is the era of Emperor Seming. The three kings of Jiujiang refers to the rise of Emperor Xiaowu in Jiujiang, and although Prince Jian An did not succeed, he was also called the emperor. Later, the ancestors laid the foundation for hegemony in Jiujiang, creating the three kings. One in Wu is the hometown of the Qi royal family, and the government office is in Liaonan County. One country, two masters is that the left shoulder bears the fate of destiny and rises in the dark to drive away the disaster of the Song royal family.

古文：歌又曰： 三禾掺掺林茂孳，金刀利刃齐刈之。 
现代文：歌词又说： 三禾掺掺林茂孳，金刀利刃齐刈之。 
English: The lyrics go on to say: "Three harvests, mixed with forest and reeds, and a sharp knife and razor.

古文：刈，剪也。
现代文：刈，剪除。
English: Cut, cut, cut.

古文：《诗》云： 实始剪商。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 实际开始剪灭商。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Actually start to cut off merchants.

古文：歌又曰： 欲知其姓草肃肃。
现代文：歌词又说： 欲知其姓草肃肃。
English: The lyrics go on to say: If you want to know your last name, look to the grass.

古文：谷中最细低头熟。
现代文：谷中最捆低乙头熟。
English: In the valley, the lowest bunch of cucumbers was ripe.

古文：鳞身甲体永兴福。 
现代文：鳞身甲体永兴福。 
English: Scaly-skinned, armor-clad Yongxingfu.

古文：谷，道；熟，成，又讳也。
现代文：毂，就是道；熟，就是成：合起来又是太祖的名讳。
English: , is the way;熟, is the achievement:together they are the names of the ancestors.

古文：太祖体有龙鳞，斑驳成文，始谓是黑历，治之甚至而文愈明。
现代文：太祖身上有龙鳞，斑驳组成花纹，起初认为是黑历，治疗之后花纹竟然更加清晰。
English: The great-grandfather had dragon scales and mottled patterns on his body. At first, it was thought to be a black spot, but after treatment, the patterns became even clearer.

古文：伏羲亦鳞身也。
现代文：伏羲也是身上长鳞。
English: Fusao also has scales on his body.

古文：《金雄记》曰： 铄金作刀在龙里，占睡上人相须起。 
现代文：《金雄记》说： 铄金作刀在龙里，占睡上人相须起。 
English: "The Story of Jin Xiong" says: "The goldsmith makes the sword in the dragon's den, and the dreamer begins to dream."

古文：又云： 当复有作肃入草。 
现代文：又说： 当复有作，肃入草。 
English: He also said: "When there is restoration, there is creation; when there is destruction, there is grass."

古文：萧字也。
现代文：是预示 萧 字。
English: is a foreshadowing of the word "Shao."

古文：《易》云： 圣人作之。 
现代文：《易经》说： 圣人创作的。 
English: "I Ching" says: Performed by a sage.

古文：《记》又云： 草门可怜乃当悴，建号不成易运沸。 
现代文：《金雄记》又说： 草门可怜乃当悴，建号不成易运沸。 
English: The "Diary of Jin Xiong" also said: The grass gate is pitiful, and it is not easy to build a number.

古文：《诗》云不时，时也。
现代文：《诗经》说不时，就是时。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that when it is not the time, it is the time.

古文：不成，成也。
现代文：不成，就是成。
English: If it doesn't work, it doesn't work.

古文：建号，建元号也。
现代文：建号，是建立纪元年号。
English: It was built in the first century.

古文：易运，革命也。
现代文：易运，是实施变革而应天命。
English: Yi Yun, is to implement the reform and meet the destiny.

古文：谶曰： 周文王受命，千五百岁，河雒出圣人，受命于己未，至丙子为十八周。旅布六郡东南隅，四国安定可久留。 
现代文：谶语说： 周文王受天命，一千五百年后，黄河、雒水出圣人，在己未年受天命，到丙子年为十八个周期，遍布东南角六郡，四方的安定可以长久维持。 
English: Slang says: Zhou Wen Wang was appointed by heaven, and after 1500 years, the Yellow River and Surabaya emerged as a saint. He was appointed by heaven in the year of Zi Wei, and in the year of Cixi, there were 18 cycles, covering six counties in the southeast corner. The stability of the four sides can be maintained for a long time.

古文：案周灭殷后七百八十年，秦四十九年，汉四百二十五年，魏四十五年，晋百五十年，宋六十年，至建元元年，千五百九年也。
现代文：据周减掉殷商之后存在了七百八十年，秦四十九年，汉四百二十五年，魏四十五年，晋一百五十年，宋六十年，到建元元年，是一千五百零九年。
English: According to Zhou, after subtracting Yin Shang, there were seven hundred and eighty years, Qin forty-nine years, Han four hundred and twenty-five years, Wei forty-five years, Jin one hundred and fifty years, Song sixty years, to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, is one thousand five hundred and nine years.

古文：武进县彭山，旧茔在焉。
现代文：武进县彭山，旧的坟茔在此。
English: The old graveyard in Pengshan, Wujin County, is shown here.

古文：其山冈阜相属数百里，上有五色云气，有龙出焉。
现代文：该山峰峦连绵数百里，山上有五色云气，有龙出来。
English: The peak of the mountain stretches for hundreds of miles. There are five-colored clouds on the mountain, and dragons come out.

古文：宋明帝恶之，遣相墓工高灵文占视，灵文先与世相祖善，还，诡答云： 不过方伯。 
现代文：宋明帝认为不祥，派相墓工匠高灵文占验察看，高灵文早就和世祖友好，回来，故意撒谎回答明帝说： 不过能出个诸侯。 
English: Emperor Ming of Song thought it was ominous, so he sent Gao Ling Wenzhan, a tomb craftsman, to inspect it. Gao Ling Wenzhan had been friendly with the ancestor for a long time. When he returned, he deliberately lied and replied to Emperor Ming, saying, "But he can become a prince."

古文：退谓世祖曰： 贵不可言。 
现代文：退朝对世祖说： 此地贵不可言。 
English: The retired emperor said to his ancestor, "This place is precious beyond words.

古文：帝意不已，遣人于墓左右校猎，以大铁钉长五六尺钉墓四维，以为厌胜。
现代文：明帝还不放心，派人到墓地附近围猎，把五六尺长的大铁钉钉在墓的四角，作为镇制。
English: Emperor Ming was still not reassured and sent people to hunt around the cemetery and nail five or six-foot-long iron nails into the four corners of the tomb as a precautionary measure.

古文：太祖后改树表柱，柱忽龙鸣，响震山谷，父老咸志之云。
现代文：太祖后来改立作仪仗柱，柱子忽然发出龙鸣声，响震山谷，父老都记得。
English: The great-grandfather later changed it to a ceremonial pillar. The pillar suddenly emitted the sound of a dragon and shook the valley. My father and mother both remember it.

古文：会稽剡县刻石山，相传为名，不知文字所在。
现代文：会稽剡县刻石山，山名是历代传下的，不知道刻的文字在哪裹。
English: The name of the mountain has been passed down from generation to generation. I don't know where the engraved words are.

古文：升明末，县民袭祖行猎，忽见石上有文凡三处，苔生其上，字不可识。
现代文：升明末年，县裹的百姓儿袭祖打猎，忽然看到石头上有三处文字，青苔生在上面，字无法辨认。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, the children of the people in the county followed their ancestors to hunt, and suddenly saw three words on the stone, with moss growing on it. The words were unrecognizable.

古文：刊苔去之，大石文曰： 此齐者，黄公之化气也。 
现代文：铲去青苔，大石头上的文字是： 这个齐，是黄公的化气。 
English: Shovel away the moss, the words on the large stone are: This Qi is Huanggong's chemical gas.

古文：立石文曰： 黄天星，姓萧字某甲，得贤帅，天下太平。 
现代文：立着的石头上的文字是： 黄天星，姓萧字某甲，得到杰出的统帅，天下太平。 
English: The words on the standing stone are: Huang Tianxing, surnamed Xiao Zi Mou Jia, has become an outstanding commander, the world is at peace.

古文：小石文曰： 刻石者谁？
现代文：小石头上的文字是： 刻石的人是谁?
English: The inscription on the small stone reads: Who was the person who carved the stone?

古文：会稽南山李斯刻秦望之封也。 
现代文：会稽南山李斯刻秦望立。 
English: It is the seal of Nanshan Lisker Qinwangshan.

古文：益州齐后山，父老相传，其名亦不知所起。
现代文：益州齐后山，父老历代相传遣样叫，它的名字也不知道是怎样起的。
English: Qibao Mountain in Yizhou is called the "patriarchal sample" and its name is not known how it originated.

古文：升明三年，有沙门玄畅于山丘立精舍，其日，太祖受禅日也。
现代文：升明三年，有位僧人玄畅在山坡上建起精舍，这天，是太祖接受禅让的日子。
English: Three years after his ascension, a monk named Xuanzang built a hermitage on a hillside. This was the day that the great-grandfather accepted the offer of Zen.

古文：嵩高山，升明三年四月，荥阳人尹午于山东南涧见天雨石，坠地石开，有玺在其中，方三寸。
现代文：嵩高山，升明三年四月，荣阳人尹午在山东南的山涧看到天上降下石头，落到地上裂开，裹边有玺印，三寸见方。
English: In April of the third year of Xingming, Yin Wu, a man from Rongyang, saw a stone fall from the sky in the foothills of southeastern Shandong Province. It fell to the ground and split open. There was a mark on the edge of the stone, three centimeters square.

古文：其文曰： 戊丁之人与道俱，肃然入草应天符。 
现代文：上面的文字是： 戊丁之人与道俱，肃然入草应天符。 
English: The above text is: The people of Bouding are on the right path, solemnly weeding in accordance with the signs of the heavens.

古文：又曰： 皇帝兴运。 
现代文：又说： 皇帝兴运。 
English: He also said, "The emperor is lucky."

古文：午奉玺诣雍州刺史萧赤斧，赤斧表献之。
现代文：尹午捧着玺印拜见雍州刺史萧赤斧。萧赤斧上表进献。
English: Holding a seal, Yin Wu paid homage to Yongzhou scholar Xiao Chiaxu. Xiao Chiaxu presented a gift on the table.

古文：史臣案：昔大人见临洮而铜人铸，临洮生董卓而铜人毁。
现代文：史臣案：从前有巨人出现在临洮，铜人铸成；临洮生出董卓，铜人销毁。
English: Scissors case: Once upon a time, a giant appeared in Linyi, and a bronze man was cast; Linyi produced Dong Zhuo, and the bronze man was destroyed.

古文：有卓而世乱，世乱而卓亡，如有似也。
现代文：有了董卓世间就要混乱，世间混乱董卓就要灭亡，如同是近似。
English: With Dong Zhuo, there will be chaos in the world, and with chaos in the world, Dong Zhuo will perish.

古文：晋末嵩高山出玉璧三十二，宋氏以为受命之详。
现代文：晋末嵩高山出现三十二块玉璧，宋帝认为是受天命的吉兆。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, thirty-two pieces of jade were found in the mountains of Song Dynasty. Emperor Song considered this to be a good omen from heaven.

古文：今此山出玺，而水德云谢，终始之征，亦有类也。
现代文：如今此山又出现玺印，水德的王朝要凋谢，王朝更替的征兆，也是类似的。
English: Now, the mountain is once again showing signs of decay, and the Waterde Dynasty is fading away. The signs of dynastic succession are also similar.

古文：元徽四年，太祖从南郊，望气者陈安宝见太祖身上黄紫气属天。安宝谓亲人王洪范曰： 我少来未尝见军上有如此气也。 
现代文：元徽四年，太祖随从宋帝南郊祭天，观望云气的陈安宝看到太祖身上有黄紫色云气连到天上，陈安宝对亲近的王洪范说： 我从小以来未曾见到军队上空有这样的云气。 
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Taizu followed Emperor Song of the Southern Suburbs to worship the heavens. Chen Anbao, who was watching the clouds, saw the yellow-purple clouds attached to Emperor Taizu. Chen Anbao said to Wang Hongfan, who was close to him, "I haven't seen such clouds over the army since I was a child."

古文：太祖年十七，梦乘青龙西行逐日，日将薄山乃止，觉而恐惧。
现代文：太祖十七岁那年，梦见乘坐青龙西行追赶太阳，太阳将要落山才停止，睡醒后害怕，家裹人间占卜的。
English: In the seventeenth year of his grandfather's life, he dreamed of riding a blue dragon westward to catch up with the sun. The sun was about to set before it stopped. When he woke up, he was afraid.

古文：家人问占者，云 至贵之象也 。苏偘云： 青，木色。
现代文：说是 最尊贵的征兆 。苏儡说： 青，木对应的颜色。
English: Su Jiao said, "Blue is the color of wood.

古文：日暮者，宋氏末运也。 
现代文：日落，是宋朝运数完了。 
English: At sunset, it was the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：泰始七年，明帝遣前淮南太守孙奉伯往淮阴监元会。
现代文：泰始七年，宋明帝派前淮南太守孙奉伯到淮鉴监护元旦朝会。
English: In the seventh year of the Taizhi era, Emperor Song Ming sent Sun Bongbo, the former governor of Huainan Province, to Huaijian to supervise the New Year's Day meeting.

古文：奉伯与太祖同寝，梦上乘龙上天，于下捉龙脚不得。
现代文：逊奎伯与立担一起睡，梦见立担乘龙上天，他在下抓龙脚没有抓到。
English: Sun Kuib slept with Lishan and dreamed that Lishan ascended to heaven on a dragon, but he did not catch the dragon's foot.

古文：觉谓太祖曰： 兖州当大庇生民，弟不见也。 
现代文：醒后对太担说： 兄将来会庇护广大百姓，弟是看不到了。 
English: After waking up, he said to the patriarch: My brother will protect the broad masses of the people in the future, but I cannot see him.

古文：奉伯卒于宋。
现代文：孙奉伯死在宋代。
English: Sun Fongbo died in the Song Dynasty.

古文：清河崔灵运为上府参军，梦天帝谓己曰： 萧道成是我第十九子，我去年已授其天子位。 
现代文：清河崔灵运任上府参军，梦见天帝对自己说： 萧道成是我的第十九个儿子，我去年已经授给他天子之位。 
English: Qinghe Cui Lingyun was appointed to go to the capital to join the army. He dreamed of the heavenly emperor and said to himself: Xiao Daocheng is my 19th son. Last year, I awarded him the position of heavenly son.

古文：自三皇五帝至齐，受命君凡十九人也。
现代文：自三皇五帝到齐受天命的国君，总共是十九人。
English: From the three emperors and five emperors to the sovereigns chosen by heaven, there are a total of nineteen people.

古文：宋泰始中，童谣云 东城出天子 ，故明帝杀建安王休仁。
现代文：宋泰始年间，童谣说 束城出天子 所以宋明帝杀死了建安王述仁。
English: During the Song Dynasty, there was a children's rhyme that said, "Sukecheng brings forth the son of heaven." Therefore, Emperor Song Ming killed King Jian'an Shuren.

古文：苏偘云： 后顺帝自东城即位，论者谓应之，乃是武进县上所居东城里也。 
现代文：麸坦说： 后来岖壶自塞墟即位，议论者认为应了童谣，实际童谣说的东城是指武进县皇上所住的东城里。 
English: Zhan Tan said: Later, Ruggy Jug ascended to the throne from the market, and commentators thought that it was a nursery rhyme, but the actual nursery rhyme said Dongcheng refers to the Dongcheng where the emperor of Wujin County lived.

古文：熊襄云： 上旧乡有大道，相传云秦始皇所经，呼为 天子路 ，后遂为帝乡焉。 
现代文：熊襄说： 皇上的故乡有条大道，相传是秦始皇所经过的，称作 天子路 ，后来就成为帝王之乡。 
English: Xiong Xiang said: There is a road in the emperor's hometown, which is said to have been passed by Qin Shihuang, called Tianzi Road, and later became the emperor's hometown.

古文：案顺帝实当援立，犹如晋之怀、愍，亦有征符。
现代文：顺帝其实应当立为天子，好比晋代的怀帝、愍帝，也有征兆符瑞。
English: In fact, Emperor Shun should be regarded as the Son of Heaven, just like Emperor Huai and Emperor Zhao in the Jin Dynasty. There are also signs of this.

古文：齐运既无巡幸，路名或是秦旧，疑不能详。
现代文：变的运数既然还没有输到，路名或许是砉时的旧名，怀疑不能解释清楚。
English: Since the changed number of operations has not yet been reported, the road name may be the old name of the time, and the suspicion cannot be explained clearly.

古文：世祖年十三，梦举体生毛，发生至足。
现代文：世祖十三岁那年，梦见全身生出毛，毛发生到脚。
English: When he was thirteen years old, he dreamed that his whole body was covered with hair, even down to his feet.

古文：又梦人指上所践地曰 周文王之田 。
现代文：又萝见别人指着他所踏的土地说 周文王的田地 。
English: Luo also saw that others pointed to the land he had trodden and said, "This is King Zhouwen's field."

古文：又梦虚空中飞。
现代文：又梦见在空中飞翔。
English: He also dreamed of flying in the sky.

古文：又梦著孔雀羽衣。
现代文：又萝见穿着孔雀羽衣。
English: I also saw her wearing a peacock feather dress.

古文：庾温云： 雀，爵位也。 
现代文：庾温说： 雀，是指爵位。 
English: Hao Wen said: "Sparrow" refers to the title of nobility.

古文：又梦凤皇从天飞下青溪宅斋前，两翅相去十余丈，翼下有紫云气。
现代文：又梦见凤凰从天上飞下落在青溪旧宅的斋前，两个翅膀相距十多丈，羽翼下有紫色云气。
English: I also dreamed that a phoenix flew down from the sky and landed in front of the pagoda of the Qingxi old house. The two wings were more than ten feet apart, and there was a purple cloud under the wings.

古文：及在襄阳，梦著桑屐行度太极殿阶。
现代文：等到在襄阳时，梦见穿着桑木屐在太极殿的台阶上行走。
English: When I arrived in Yangyang, I dreamed of walking on the steps of the Taiji Hall wearing a mulberry scarf.

古文：庾温云： 屐者，运应木也。 
现代文：庾温说： 木屐，在运数上是对应木。 
English: Hao Wen said, "In terms of the number of operations, the log is the corresponding tree.

古文：臣案，桑字为四十而二点，世祖年过此即帝位，谓著屐为木行也。
现代文：臣下考定桑字是四十二点，世祖年纪过四十二岁就会登帝位，认为穿木屐是行木德。
English: Subordinates judged that the mulberry character was forty-two points, and the ancestor would ascend to the throne when he was over forty-two years old, and thought that wearing a wooden yoke was the best way to practice the virtues of the wood.

古文：屐有两齿有声，是为明两之齿至四十二而行即真矣，及在郢州，梦人从天飞下，头插笔来画上衣两边，不言而去。
现代文：木屐有两个齿口地发出声音，这是表明两个木齿走到四十二岁就会梦想成真。等到在郢州，世祖梦见有人从天上飞下，头上插着笔来画他上衣的两边，没有说话就离去。
English: The woodlouse has two teeth and makes a sound, which indicates that when the two wooden teeth reach the age of forty-two, the dream will come true. In Zhangzhou, the ancestor dreamed that someone flew down from the sky, stuck a pen in his head to draw the sides of his jacket, and left without a word.

古文：庾温释云： 画者，山、龙、华虫也。 
现代文：庾温解释说： 画的内容是山龙华虫。 
English: Hao Wen explained: The content of the painting is the dragon and the caterpillar.

古文：世祖宋元嘉十七年六月己未夜生，无火，婢吹灰而火自燃。
现代文：世祖是宋代元嘉十七年六月己末日晚上出生的，没有火，奴婢吹灰烬，火自己就烧着了。
English: The founder of the world was born on the evening of the last day of June in the 17th year of the Song Dynasty. There was no fire, the slaves blew ashes, and the fire itself burned.

古文：世祖于南康郡内作伎，有弦无管，于是空中有篪声，调节相应。
现代文：世祖在南康郡内做乐工，有丝弦没有吹管，这时空中有篪的声音，应合曲调音节。
English: The ancestor was a musician in Nankang County. There were silk strings but no trumpet. At this time, there was a crackling sound in the air, corresponding to the syllables of the tune.

古文：世祖为广兴相，岭下积旱，水涸，不通船，上部伍至，水忽暴长。
现代文：世祖任广兴相，山岭下持续干旱，水流干涸，不能通船，世祖的队伍来到后，河水忽然暴涨。
English: The ancestor was Ren Guangxing, the drought continued under the mountains, the water flow dried up, and it was impossible to sail. After the ancestor's team arrived, the river suddenly surged.

古文：庾温云： 《易》利涉大川之义也。 
现代文：庾温说： 这是《周易》利于横渡大河的意思 
English: Hao Wen said: This is the meaning that "Zhou Yi" is conducive to crossing the big river

古文：世祖顿盆城，城内无水，欲凿引江流，试掘井，得伏泉九处，皆涌出。
现代文：世祖驻守盆城，城内没有水，要凿沟引长江的水流，试着掘井，掘出九处地下泉水，都涌出水来。
English: The ancestor was stationed in the basin city. There was no water in the city, so he had to dig a ditch to divert the water flow of the Yangtze River, try to dig a well, and excavate nine underground springs, all of which gushed water.

古文：建元元年四月，有司奏： 延陵令戴景度称，所领季子庙，旧有涌井二所，庙祝列云旧井北忽闻金石声，即掘，深三尺，得沸泉。
现代文：建元元年四月，主管部门上奏： 延陵令戴星座说他管辖的至王庙，过去有两处涌水的井，庙中管香火的人都说旧井北忽然听到有金石声，立刻挖掘，挖到三尺深，发现一个喷泉。
English: In April of the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, the competent department issued the following report: Yanling Ling Dai Constellation said that he was in charge of the Wang Temple. In the past, there were two wells that gushed water. People who were in charge of incense in the temple said that the north side of the old well suddenly heard the sound of gold stones, immediately dug, dug to a depth of three feet, and found a fountain.

古文：其东忽有声铮铮，又掘得泉，沸涌若浪。
现代文：旧井东侧忽然有铮铮声，又掘到了泉，泉水像浪一样翻腾。
English: On the east side of the old well, there was suddenly a crackling sound, and a spring was dug. The spring water churned like waves.

古文：泉中得一银木简，长一尺，广二寸，隐起文曰： 庐山道人张陵再拜谒诣起居。 简木坚白而字色黄。 
现代文：泉中发现一根银木简，长一尺，宽二寸，阳文是 庐山道人张陵再拜谒诣起居，木简颜色极白而字呈黄色。 
English: A silver wooden block was found in the spring. It was one foot long and two inches wide. The Chinese characters on it read, "People of Lushan Road lived in Zhangling, and worshiped the dragon." The block was extremely white in color, while the characters were yellow.

古文：谨案《瑞应图》： 浪井不凿自成，王者清静，则仙人主之。 
现代文：根据《瑞应图， 涌起水浪的井不用挖掘自会形成，帝王追求清静，就要由仙人主事 。
English: According to the "Rui Ying Map," the well of surging waves will be formed without excavation, and the emperor's pursuit of tranquility will be led by the immortals.

古文：《孔氏世录》云： 叶精帝道，孔书明巧，当在张陵。 
现代文：《孔氏世录》说： 精通帝王之道。写明为政技巧，应当在张陵。 
English: "Kong's Biography" said: Mastering the way of the emperor, writing clear political skills, should be in Zhangling.

古文：宋均注云： 张陵佐封禅。
现代文：宋均注释说： 张陵辅佐封禅。
English: Songjun commented, "Zhang Ling Fu Zhao Feng Zen."

古文：一云陵，仙人也。 
现代文：又说张陵是仙人。 
English: It is also said that Zhang Ling is a fairy godmother.

古文：元徽三年，太祖在青溪宅，斋前池中忽扬波起浪，涌水如山，有金石响，须臾有青龙从池中出，左右皆见之。
现代文：五銮三年，左担住在壹还家宅，屋前的水池中忽然扬起波浪，涌起的水像山一样，发出金石声响，不一会儿有条青龙从水池中冲出，身边的人都看到了。
English: Fifty-three years ago, I was living in a family house. Suddenly, a wave arose in the pool in front of the house. The surging water was like a mountain, emitting a golden sound. Soon, a blue dragon rushed out of the pool, and everyone around saw it.

古文：升明元年，青龙见齐郡。
现代文：升明元年，青龙出现在齐郡。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Qinglong appeared in Qi County.

古文：建元四年，青龙见顺阳郡清水县平泉湖中。
现代文：建元四年，青龙出现在从阳郡清水县平泉邀中。
English: In the fourth year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Qinglong appeared in the invitation from Zhuyang County, Shimizu County, Hiraizumi.

古文：永明七年，黄龙见曲江县黄池中，一宿二日。
现代文：永明七年，黄龙出现在曲江县的黄池中，一宿二天。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, Huanglong appeared in Huangchi, Qujiang County, and stayed there for two days.

古文：中兴二年，山上云障四塞，顷有玄黄五色如龙，长十余丈，从西北升天。
现代文：中兴二年，山上四周云气缭绕，不久有黑黄五色云气像龙一样，长十多丈，从西北方升天。
English: In the second year of ZTE, the mountain was surrounded by clouds, and soon there were black, yellow and five-colored clouds like dragons, more than ten meters long, rising from the northwest.

古文：宋泰始末，武进旧茔有兽见，一角，羊头，龙翼，马足，父老咸见，莫之识也。
现代文：宋泰始末年，武进县的旧坟地有怪兽出现，一个角，羊头，龙翅膀，马脚，父老乡亲都看到了，没有人认识。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, a monster appeared in an old cemetery in Wujin County. The villagers saw a horn, a sheep's head, dragon wings, and horse feet, but no one recognized it.

古文：永明十年，鄱阳郡献一角兽，麟首，鹿形，龙鸾共色。
现代文：永明十年，鄱阳郡进献一角兽，麒麟头，鹿身，龙和鸾共有的颜色。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, Shenyang County presented a unicorn, unicorn head, deer body, dragon and dragonfly with common colors.

古文：《瑞应图》云： 天子万福允集，则一角兽至。 
现代文：《瑞应图》说： 天子会聚万种福佑，一角兽就会出现。 
English: "Rui Yingtu" said: The heavenly son will gather all kinds of blessings, and the unicorn will appear.

古文：十一年，白象九头见武昌。
现代文：永明十一年，九头白象出现在武昌。
English: In the eleventh year of the Ming Dynasty, nine white elephants appeared in Wuchang.

古文：史臣曰：《记》云，升中于天，麟凤至而龟龙格。
现代文：史臣曰：《记》说，升到天空，麒麟、凤凰、龟、龙来到。
English: Shichen said: "Ji" said that after ascending to the sky, the unicorn, phoenix, turtle and dragon came.

古文：则凤皇巢乎阿阁，麒麟在乎郊薮，岂非驯之在庭，扰以成畜，其为瑞也如此！
现代文：那么凤凰在阿阁筑巢，麒麟在郊外草泽生存，岂不是在庭园驯养，改造成家畜，它们作为祥瑞就是如此。
English: So the phoenix nests in the attic, and the unicorn survives in the grass in the suburbs. Isn't it domesticated in the garden and transformed into livestock, which is what they are as Xiangrui.

古文：今观魏、晋己来，世称灵物不少，而乱多治少，史不绝书。
现代文：现在看魏、晋以来，世间号称灵物的东西不少，可是动乱多太平少，史书的记载没有中断过。
English: Now, since the Wei and Jin dynasties, there have been many things in the world known as spiritual objects, but there have been too few upheavals, and the records of history books have not been interrupted.

古文：故知来仪在沼，远非前事，见而不至，未辨其为祥也。
现代文：所以知道凤凰在沼泽出现，远不是前代故事，出现而不飞来，无法分辨是否是祥瑞。
English: Therefore, knowing that the phoenix appeared in the swamp is far from the previous generation's story, appearing but not flying, and it is impossible to distinguish whether it is Xiang Rui.

古文：升明三年三月，白虎见历阳龙亢县新昌村。
现代文：升明三年三月，白虎出现在历阳龙亢县新昌村。
English: In March of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, a white tiger appeared in Xinchang Village, Longyan County, Liyang.

古文：新昌村，嘉名也。
现代文：新昌村是吉祥的名字。
English: Xinchang Village is an auspicious name.

古文：《瑞应图》云： 王者不暴白虎仁。 
现代文：《瑞应图》说： 帝王施仁白虎亦仁。 
English: "Rui Yingtu" said: Emperor Shiren is followed by Baihuiren.

古文：建元四年三月，白虎见安蛮虔化县。
现代文：建元四年三月，白虎出现在安蛮虔化县。
English: In March of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, a white tiger appeared in Anbar Qianhua County.

古文：中兴二年二月，白虎见东平寿张安乐村。
现代文：中兴二年二月，白虎出现在东平寿张安乐村。
English: In February of the second year of ZTE, the white tiger appeared in Dongping Shou Zhang Anle Village.

古文：升明二年，驺虞见安东县五界山，师子头，虎身，龙脚。
现代文：升明二年，绉虞出现在室卢逊五男迪，狮子头，虎身，龙脚。
English: In the second year after his ascension, Zou Yu appeared in Muroson as the fifth son of Di, with the head of a lion, the body of a tiger and the feet of a dragon.

古文：《诗传》云： 驺虞，义兽，白虎黑文，不食生物，至德则出。 
现代文：《诗传》说： 骝虞是义兽，白虎黑纹，不吃生物，至德之世就会出现。 
English: "Shih Chuan" said: Shanyu is a righteous beast, white tiger black stripe, do not eat living things, the world of virtue will appear.

古文：升明三年，太祖为齐王，白毛龟见东府城池中。
现代文：升明三年，立趄做变王，白毛龟出现在塞应城的水池中。
English: Three years after ascension, the white-haired turtle appeared in the pool of Saying City.

古文：建元二年，休安陵获玄龟一头。
现代文：建元二年，休安陵捕获一头玄龟。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, a hawksbill turtle was captured from the tomb of Shu'an.

古文：永明五年，武骑常侍唐潜上青毛神龟一头。
现代文：永明五年，武骑常侍唐潜进献一头青毛神龟。
English: In the 5th year of the Yongming era, the knight-errant of the Tang Dynasty presented a green-furred tortoise to the emperor.

古文：七年六月，彭城郡田中获青毛龟一头。
现代文：永明七年六月，彭城郡田地中捕获一头青毛龟。八月。
English: In June of the seventh year of Yongming, a green turtle was caught in a field in Pengcheng County.

古文：八月，延陵县前泽畔获毫龟一枚。
现代文：延陵县前的水泽边捕获一只毫龟。
English: A turtle was caught by Mizusawa in front of Yanling County.

古文：八年四月，长山县王惠获六目龟一头，腹下有 万欢 字，并有卦兆。
现代文：八年四月，长山县王蛊捕获一头六目龟，腹下有 万欢 字样，并且有卦兆。
English: In April of 2008, Wang Hui of Changshan County caught a six-eyed turtle with the characters "萬欢" and "卦兆" under its belly.

古文：六月，建城县昌城田获四目龟一头，下有 万齐 字。
现代文：六月，建城县昌城田地中捕获一头四目龟，下面有 万齐 字样。
English: In June, a four-eyed turtle was caught in a field in Changcheng, Jiancheng County, with the word "Wanqi" below.

古文：九年五月，长山县获神龟一头，腹下有巽、兑卦。
现代文：九年五月，长山县捕获一头神龟，腹下有《巽》、《兑》卦。
English: In May of the ninth year, a tortoise was caught in Nagayama County. It had "," "兑" and "卦" under its belly.

古文：中兴二年正月，逻将潘道盖于山石穴中获毛龟一头。
现代文：中兴二年正月，逻将潘道盖在山石洞穴中捕获一头毛龟。
English: In the first month of the second year of ZTE, Pan Dao Gui caught a turtle in a rock cave.

古文：升明三年，世祖遣人诣宫亭湖庙还福，船泊渚，有白鱼双跃入船。
现代文：升明三年，世祖派人到宫亭湖庙报答福佑，船停泊在水边，有白鱼双双跃入船中。
English: Three years after his ascension, the patriarch sent someone to the Temple of the Palace Pavilion Lake to repay the blessing. The boat was moored at the water's edge, and two pairs of white fish jumped into the boat.

古文：永明五年，南豫州刺史建安王子真表献金色鱼一头。
现代文：永明五年，南豫州刺史建安王子真上表进献一头金色鱼。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, Prince Jian'an of the Southern Yu Prefecture presented a goldfish to the emperor.

古文：建元元年八月，男子王约获白雀一头。
现代文：建元元年八月，男子王约捕获一只白雀。
English: In August of the first year of the Jianyuan era, a man named Wang Cao caught a white finch.

古文：九月，秣陵县获白雀一头。
现代文：九月，拯堕墨捕获一只白雀。
English: In September, a white finch was caught by the rescue team.

古文：二年四月，白雀集郢州府馆。
现代文：二年四月，白雀聚集在旦泌府宾馆。
English: In April of the second year, the white finches gathered at the Danzhufu Hotel.

古文：五月，白雀见会稽永兴县。
现代文：五月，白雀出现在盒檀丞翌锤。
English: In May, the white sparrow appeared in the box after the hammer.

古文：永明元年五月，郢州丁坡屯获白雀一头。
现代文：永明元年五月，坚业工丝生捕获一只白雀。
English: In May of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Jianye Gongsheng caught a white finch.

古文：三年七月，安城王暠第获白雀一头。
现代文：三年七月，安成王萧嵩的府第捕获一只白
English: In July of the third year, a white pheasant was caught for the first time in the capital of Ancheng Wang Xiao Song

古文：九月，南郡江陵县获白雀一头。
现代文：九月，卢郡辽陆题捕获一只白雀。
English: In September, a white finch was captured in Lu County, Liaoning Province.

古文：四年七月，白雀见临汝县。
现代文：四年七月，白雀出现在堕垄鳄。
English: In July 2004, a white finch appeared on a saltwater crocodile.

古文：七年六月，盐官县获白雀一头。
现代文：七年六月，盐宜历捕获一只白雀。
English: In June of the seventh year, Yan Yili captured a white finch.

古文：八年，天门临澧县获白雀一头。
现代文：八年，玉盟堕漫题捕获一只白雀。
English: In the eighth year, a white sparrow was caught by the Jade Alliance.

古文：九年七月，吴郡钱塘县获白雀一头。
现代文：九年七月，吴郡钱塘县捕获一只白雀。
English: In July 2009, a white finch was caught in Qiantang County, Wuxi County.

古文：八月，豫州获白雀一头。
现代文：八月，邃丛捕获一只白雀。
English: In August, a white finch was caught in the reeds.

古文：十年五月，齐郡获白雀一头。
现代文：十年五月，变登捕获一只白雀。
English: In May of the tenth year, Zenden caught a white finch.

古文：建元元年五月，白乌见巴郡。
现代文：建元元年五月，白乌出现在旦型。
English: In May of the first year of Jianyuan, Baiwu appeared in Dan type.

古文：永明四年三月，三足乌巢南安中陶县庭。
现代文：永明四年三月，三足乌在亩塞空脑庭院筑巢。
English: In March of the 4th year of Yongming, the three-legged owl built a nest in the courtyard of Mu Ce.

古文：八年四月，阳羡县获白乌一头。
现代文：八年四月，阳羡县捕获一只白乌。
English: In April of the eighth year, a white crane was captured in Yangsen County.

古文：隆昌元年四月，阳羡县获白乌一头。
现代文：隆昌元年四月，阳羡县捕获一只白乌。
English: In April of the first year of Longchang, a white crane was captured in Yangxian County.

古文：建元二年，江陵县获白鼠一头。
现代文：建元二年，江陵县捕获一只白鼠。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, a white rat was caught in Gangneung County.

古文：永明六年，白鼠见芳林园。
现代文：永明六年，白鼠出现在芳林园。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongming era, a white rat appeared in the Fanglin Garden.

古文：十年九月，义阳郡获白鼠一头。
现代文：十年九月，义阳郡捕获一只白鼠。
English: In September, a white rat was caught in Yiyang County.

古文：永明四年，丹阳县获白兔一头。
现代文：永明四年，丹阳县捕获一只白兔。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, a white rabbit was captured in Danyang County.

古文：升明元年六月，庆云见益都。
现代文：升明元年六月，益都出现五色云。
English: In June of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, five-colored clouds appeared in Yidu.

古文：建元元年，世祖拜皇太子日，有庆云在日边。
现代文：建元元年，世祖拜为皇太子那天，有五色云出现在太阳旁边。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, on the day when the ancestor of the world became the crown prince, a five-colored cloud appeared next to the sun.

古文：三年，华林园醴泉堂东忽有瑞云，周圆十许丈，高下与景云楼平，五色藻密，光彩映山，徘徊良久，行转南行，过长船入华池。
现代文：三年，华林园醴泉堂束边忽然有一朵祥云，圆周长十多丈，高低与景云楼齐平，五彩縯纷，光照山峦，徘徊很久，转往南边飞去，飞过长船进入华池。
English: In the third year, there was suddenly a auspicious cloud on the edge of the bundle of the Hualin Garden and the Spring Hall. The circumference was more than ten meters long, the height was as high as the Jingyun Building, the colors were colorful, and the mountains were illuminated. It lingered for a long time, then flew to the south and flew over the long boat into the Huali Lake.

古文：升明二年，宣城临成县于藉山获紫芝一枝。
现代文：升明二年，宣城临成县在藉山采到一枝紫
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, a climber from Lincheng County, Xuancheng City, harvested a purple sprig from a mountain

古文：永明八年三月，阳城县获紫芝一株。
现代文：永明八年五月，阳城县采到一株紫芝。
English: In May of the eighth year of Yongming, a purple grass was harvested in Yangcheng County.

古文：隆昌元年正月，襄阳县获紫芝一茎。升明二年四月，昌国县徐万年门下棠树连理。
现代文：元年正月，塞厘壁采到一株紫芝。升明二年四月，昌国县徐万年家门口有两棵棠树枝杈相连。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, a purple grass was harvested from the Seli wall. In April of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year, there were two tangos at the doorstep of Xu Wannian in Changguo County.

古文：九月，豫州万岁涧广数丈，有树连理，隔涧腾枝相通，越壑跨水为一干。
现代文：九月，豫州万岁涧宽数丈，有树枝杈相连，树枝隔着山涧凌空相通，跨越沟壑水流成为一个主干。
English: In September, the width and height of the branches of the trees are connected, and the branches of the trees are connected across the mountains, and the water flow across the gully becomes a trunk.

古文：建元二年九月，有司奏上虞县枫树连理，两根相去九尺，双株均耸，去地九尺，合成一干。
现代文：建元二年九月，主管部门报告上虞县有枫树枝杈相连，两棵树的根相距九尺，两树都高耸，离地面九尺高，合成一个树干。
English: In September of the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the competent authority reported that in Shangyu County, there was a maple tree whose branches were connected, the roots of the two trees were nine feet apart, and both trees were towering, nine feet high from the ground, forming a trunk.

古文：故鄣县枫树连理，两株相去七尺，大八围，去地一丈，仍相合为树，泯如一木。
现代文：故鄣县有枫树枝杈相连，两棵树相距七尺，粗八围，离地面一丈高，仍相合成树，宛如一棵。
English: Therefore, there is a maple tree in Handan County. The branches of the two trees are connected, and the two trees are seven feet away from each other. They are coarse and round, and they are one height above the ground. They are still a composite tree, just like a tree.

古文：山阳县界若邪村有一綍木，合为连理。
现代文：山阳县境内若邪村有一棵榇树，与另一棵树枝杈连合到一起。
English: In Waka Yaku Village, Sanyang County, there is a banyan tree that is connected to another tree branch.

古文：淮阴县建业寺梨树连理。
现代文：淮阴县建业寺有梨树枝杈相连。
English: Jianye Temple in Huaiyin County has pear trees with branches joined at the base.

古文：建康县梨树耀絪一本作耀攘五围，连理六枝。
现代文：建康县有梨树、耀楼一本作耀攘粗五围。六个枝杈连在一起。
English: In Jiankang County, there is a pear tree and a tower with six branches connected together.

古文：永明元年五月，木连理生安成新喻县。
现代文：永明元年五月，枝权相连的树生长在安成新喻县。
English: In May of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, a tree with its branches joined at the base grew in Ancheng Xinyu County.

古文：又生南梁陈县。
现代文：另外还生长在南梁陈县。
English: In addition, it also grows in Nanliangchen County.

古文：闰月，璇明殿外阁南槐树连理。
现代文：闰月，璇明殿外阁南的槐树枝权相连。
English: During the intercalary month, the branches of the eucalyptus trees on the south side of the outer pavilion of the Shimei-den Hall are connected to each other.

古文：八月，盐官县内乐村木连理。
现代文：八月，盐官县内乐村有树枝杈相连。
English: In August, the branches of trees in Nei Le Village, Yanquan County, were connected.

古文：二年七月，乌程县陈文则家槿树连理。
现代文：二年七月，乌程县陈文则家的槿树枝杈相连。
English: In July of the second year, the branches of the eucalyptus trees of Chen Wenzhe's house in Wucheng County were connected.

古文：七月，新冶县槐栗二木合生异根连理，去地数尺，中央小开，上复为一。
现代文：七月，新冶县有两棵槐树、栗树长在一起，根分开但枝杈相连，离地面几尺高，中部一小段分开，上部又合而为一。
English: In July, there were two eucalyptus and chestnut trees growing together in Xinye County. The roots were separate but the branches were connected. They were a few feet above the ground, with a small section in the middle and the upper part joined together.

古文：三年正月，安城县榆树二株连理。
现代文：三年正月，安城县两棵榆树枝权相连。
English: In the first month of the third year, two eucalyptus branches in Ancheng County were connected.

古文：二月，安阳县梓树连理。
现代文：二月，安阳县有梓树枝杈相连。
English: In February, the branches of two trees in Anyang County were connected.

古文：九月，句阳县之谷山槿树连理，异根双挺，共杪为一。
现代文：九月，句阳县的谷山有槿树枝杈相连，根部分离双双挺立，树梢合而为一。
English: In September, there was an eucalyptus tree in Gu Shan, Guyang County. The branches of the tree were connected, and the roots were separated and stood upright, and the tree tops were merged into one.

古文：十二月，永宁左郡渼木连理。
现代文：十二月，永宁左郡有椭树枝杈相连。
English: In December, there was an elliptical tree in Zuo County, Yongning.

古文：四年二月，秣陵县乔天明园中李树连理生，高三尺五寸，两枝别生，复高三尺，合为一干。
现代文：四年二月，秣陵县乔天明家园中的李树枝权长到一起，高三尺五寸，有两枝另外长出，又高三尺，合成一个主干。
English: In February of the fourth year, the prickly pear branches in Qiao Tianming's home in Fuling County grew together, three feet and five inches high, and two other branches grew, three feet high, to form a trunk.

古文：五年正月，秣陵县华僧秀园中四树连理。
现代文：五年正月，秣陵县华僧秀家园中有四棵树枝杈相连。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, there were four tree branches connected to each other in the Huasongxiu homestead in Fuling County.

古文：六年四月，江宁县北界赖乡齐平里三成逻门外路东，太常萧惠基园楥树二株连理，其高相去二尺，南大北小，小者倾柯南附，合为一树，枝叶繁茂，圆密如盖。
现代文：六年四月，江宁县北界赖乡齐平里三成逻门外路东太常萧惠基园中的援树两棵枝杈连在一起，树高相差二尺，南大北小，小的一棵树枝向南倾附，合成一棵树，枝叶繁茂，树形圆密犹如伞盖。
English: In April of the sixth year, the two branches of the supporting tree in Xiao Hui Ji Garden, Qi Ping Li San Cheng Luo Men Wai Road East Taichang, Lai Township, North Jiangning County, were connected together. The height of the tree was two feet apart, and the branches of the small tree in the north and the small tree in the south leaned to the south to form a tree. The branches and leaves were luxuriant, and the tree shape was round and dense like an umbrella cover.

古文：七年，江宁县李树二株连理，两根相去一丈五尺。
现代文：七年，江宁县有两株李树枝杈相连，两个树根相距一丈五尺。
English: In the seventh year, in Jiangning County, there were two branches of a linden tree connected, and the roots of the two trees were separated by a height of five feet.

古文：八年，巴陵郡树连理四株。
现代文：八年，巴陵郡有四棵树枝杈相连。
English: Eight years ago, there were four tree branches tied together in Baling County.

古文：三月，武陵白沙戍槻木连理，相去五尺，俱高三尺，东西二枝，合而通柯。
现代文：三月，武陵白沙戍有两棵榇树枝杈相连，两树相距五尺，都是三尺高，东西两枝，连在一起。
English: In March, there were two eucalyptus trees standing side by side in Baisha, Wuling. The two trees were five feet apart, both three feet high, with two branches on each side.

古文：十二月，紫桑县陶委天家树连理。
现代文：十二月，柴桑县陶委天家的树枝杈相连。
English: In December, the branches of the House of Heaven of the Chaisang County Ceramics Committee were joined together.

古文：永明五年，山阴县孔广家园柽树十二层。
现代文：永明五年，山阴县孔广家园中的里树十二层枝杈。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, the twelve-layered branches of the village tree in Kongguang Township, Sanyin County, sprouted.

古文：会稽太守随王子隆献之，种芳林园凤光殿西。
现代文：会稽太守随王萧子隆把它进献朝廷，种在芳林园凤光殿西边。
English: The Grand Steward of the Association presented it to the Imperial Court with Wang Xiaozilong and planted it on the west side of the Fengguang Palace in the Fanglin Garden.

古文：九年，秣陵县斗场里安明寺有古树，众僧改架屋宇，伐以为薪，剖树，木里自然有 法大德 三字。
现代文：九年，秣陵县斗场里安明寺有棵古树，众位僧人改建房屋，将古树砍伐作为木柴，劈开树木，里面有天然的 法大德 三个字。
English: In the ninth year, there was an old tree in Anming Temple in Douchang, Fuling County. Many monks rebuilt the house, cut down the old tree as firewood, and split the trees. There were three words of natural Dharma virtue inside.

古文：始兴郡本无欓树，调味有阙。
现代文：始兴郡本来没有欓树，缺少这一调味品。
English: Shixing County originally had no eucalyptus trees, so it lacked this seasoning.

古文：世祖在郡，堂屋后忽生一株。
现代文：世祖在该郡的时候，堂屋后面忽然长出一棵横树。
English: When Sezu was in the county, a tree suddenly grew up behind the hall.

古文：升明二年十月，甘露降建康县。
现代文：升明二年十月，建康县降了甘美的雨露。
English: In October of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiankang County received a sweet rain.

古文：十一月，甘露降长山县。
现代文：十一月，长山县降厂甘美的雨露。
English: In November, the luscious rain dew from the Changshan County Huan factory.

古文：十二月，甘露降彭山松树，至九日止。
现代文：十二月，甘美的雨露降在彭山的松树上，一直下到九日。
English: In December, the sweet rain and dew fell on the pine trees of Pengshan until the 9th.

古文：建元元年九月，甘露降淮南郡桃石榴二树。
现代文：建元元年九月，甘美的雨露降在淮南郡的两棵桃树和石榴树上。
English: In September of the first year of Jianyuan, sweet rain and dew fell on two peach trees and pomegranate trees in Huainan County.

古文：有司奏甘露降新汲县王安世园树。
现代文：主管部门报告甘美的雨露降在新汲县王安世家园中的树上。
English: The competent department reported that the sweet rain and dew fell on the trees in Wang Anshi's homestead in Xinqu County.

古文：永明二年四月，甘露降南郡桐树。
现代文：永明二年四月，甘美的雨露降在南郡的桐树上。
English: In April of the second year of Yongming, the luscious rain and dew fell on the paulownia trees in Nan County.

古文：四年二月，甘露降临湘县李树。
现代文：四年二月，甘美的雨露降在临湘县的李树上。
English: In February, luscious rain and dew fell on the linden trees in Linxiang County.

古文：三月，甘露降南郡桐树。
现代文：三月，甘美的雨露降在南郡的桐树上。
English: In March, luscious rain and dew fell on the paulownia trees in Nanshun.

古文：四月，甘露降睢阳县桃树。
现代文：四月，甘美的雨露降在睢阳县的桃树上。
English: In April, the luscious rain and dew fell on the peach trees in Poyang County.

古文：五年四月，甘露降荆州府中阁外桐树。
现代文：五年四月，甘美的雨露降在荆州府中合外的桐树上。
English: In April of the fifth year, the luscious rain and dew fell on the paulownia trees outside Zhonghe, Jingzhou.

古文：六年，甘露降芳林园故山堂桐树。
现代文：六年，甘美的雨露降在芳林园故山堂的桐树上。
English: For six years, the luscious rain and dew fell on the paulownia trees of the former mountain chapel in the Hōrin Garden.

古文：九年八月，甘露降上定林寺佛堂庭，中天如雨，遍地如雪，其气芳，其味甘，耀日舞风，至晡乃止。
现代文：九年八月，甘美的雨露降在上定林寺佛堂前的庭院中，天空好像下雨，遍地似雪，雨露的气味芬芳，味道甘美，在日光中闪耀，在风中起舞，到傍晚才停止。
English: In August of the ninth year, the luscious rain and dew fell in the courtyard in front of the Buddha hall of Shangdinglin Temple. The sky seemed to rain and the whole place looked like snow. The smell of the rain and dew was fragrant and sweet, shining in the sunlight and dancing in the wind. It only stopped in the evening.

古文：尔后频降钟山松树，四十余日乃止。
现代文：此后频频降在钟山的松树上，四十多天才停止。
English: After that, it frequently fell on the pine trees of Zhongshan, and it took more than forty days to stop.

古文：十月，甘露降泰安陵树。
现代文：十月，甘美的雨露降在泰安陵的树上。
English: In October, the luscious rain and dew fell on the trees of Tai'an Mausoleum.

古文：中兴二年三月，甘露降茅山，弥漫数里。
现代文：中兴二年三月，甘美的雨露降在茅山，弥漫数里。
English: In March of the second year of ZTE, the luscious rain and dew fell in Mao Mountain, covering several miles.

古文：元徽四年三月，醴泉出昌国白鹿山，其味甚甘。
现代文：元徽四年三月，昌国白鹿山流出甘美的泉水，水的味道很甜。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Yuanhui Dynasty, a luscious spring water flowed out of Bailu Mountain in Changguo Province. The water tasted very sweet.

古文：永明元年正月，新蔡郡固始县获嘉禾，一茎五穗。
现代文：永明元年正月，面墓塑玺篮逊收获到嘉禾，一根茎五个穗。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Yongming era, the Menghong sculpture basket was harvested to Jiahe, and one stem had five spikes.

古文：八月，新蔡县获嘉禾，二茎九穗，一茎七穗。
现代文：八月，面墓题收获嘉禾，二根茎九个穗，一根茎七个穗。
English: In August, the tomb faces the harvest of Jiahe. Two stems have nine spikes, and one stem has seven spikes.

古文：十一月，固始县获嘉禾，一茎九穗。
现代文：十一月，固始县收获嘉禾，一根茎九个穗。
English: In November, Gushi County harvested Jiahe, a stem with nine spikes.

古文：二年八月，梁郡睢阳县界野田中获嘉禾，一茎二十三穗。
现代文：二年八月，凿垫睢阳县境内田野中收获到嘉禾，一根茎二十三个穗。
English: In August of the second year, Jiahe was harvested from the fields in the territory of Jiaozhou, Shiyang County, and one stem grew 23 ears.

古文：五年九月，莒县获嘉禾一株。
现代文：五年九月，莒县收获到一株嘉禾。
English: In September of the fifth year, a plant of Jiahe was harvested in Jixian County.

古文：十年六月，海陵齐昌县获嘉禾，一茎六穗。
现代文：十年六月，海陵齐昌县收获到嘉禾，一根茎六个穗。
English: In June of the 10th year, Jiahe was harvested in Hailing Qichang County, and one stem had six spikes.

古文：十一年九月，睢阳县田中获嘉禾一株。
现代文：十一年九月，睢阳县田地中收获到一株嘉禾。
English: In September of the 11th year, a plant of Jiahe was harvested from a field in Fenyang County.

古文：升明二年九月，建宁县建昌村民采药于万岁山，忽闻涧中有异响，得铜钟一枚，长二尺一寸，边有古字。
现代文：升明二年九月，建宁县建昌村百姓在万岁山辨药，忽然听到山涧中有异样的声响，发现一口铜钟，长二尺一寸，边上有古文字。
English: In September of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the people of Jianchang Village, Jianning County, went to investigate medicine on Mount Wanlian. Suddenly, they heard a strange sound in the hawthorn and found a copper bell, two feet and one inch long, with ancient characters on the edge.

古文：建元元年十月，涪陵郡蜑民田健所住岩间，常留云气，有声响澈若龙吟，求之积岁，莫有见者。
现代文：建元元年十月，涪陵郡簧族人田健所居住的山岩间，经常有云气留驻，发出清澈的声响好似龙吟，寻找了几年，没有发现什么。
English: In October of the first year of Jianyuan, between the rocks of the mountain where Tian Jian, a member of the Reed Tribe of Fuling County, lived, clouds often lingered, emitting a clear sound like a dragon singing. After several years of searching, nothing was found.

古文：去四月二十七日，岩数里夜忽有双光，至明往，获古钟一枚，又有一器名淳于，蜑人以为神物，奉祠之。
现代文：去年四月二十七日，山间几里地外晚上忽然发出两处光亮，等到天明前往，找到一口古钟，另外有一件器物名叫淳于，蛋族人当作神物供奉。
English: On April 27 last year, several miles away in the mountains, two bright lights suddenly appeared in the evening. When they went there at dawn, they found an ancient bell and another object called Junyu, which the Egg people worshipped as a god.

古文：永明四年四月，东昌县山自比岁水以来，恒发异响，去二月十五日，有一岩褫落。县民方元泰往视，于岩下得古钟一枚。
现代文：永明四年四月，柬昌县的山连续几年以来，经常发出异样声响，去年二月十五，有一处山岩脱落，县裹百姓方元泰前往观看，在岩下发现一口古钟。
English: In April of the fourth year of the Yongming era, the mountains in Jiaochang County had been making unusual noises for several years in a row. On February 15 last year, a mountain rock fell off, and the people of Fangyuan County went to see it and found an ancient bell under the rock.

古文：五年三月，豫宁县长岗山获神钟一枚。
现代文：五年三月，豫宁县长岗山发现一口神钟。
English: In March of the fifth year, a sacred bell was found on Changgang Mountain in Yuanning County.

古文：九年十一月，宁蜀广汉县田所垦地入尺四寸，获古钟一枚，形高三尺八寸，围四尺七寸，县柄长一尺二寸，合高五尺，四面各九孔。
现代文：九年十一月，宁蜀广汉县开垦田地，挖入一尺四寸，发现一口古钟，形状是高三尺八寸，钟围四尺七寸，悬挂的钟柄长一尺二寸，合起来高五尺，四面各有九孔。
English: In November of the ninth year, Guanghan County, Ningshu, opened up a field, dug down one foot and four inches, and found an ancient bell. The shape is three feet and eight inches high, with a circumference of four feet and seven inches. The hanging bell handle is one foot and two inches long, and is five feet high when combined. It has nine holes on each side.

古文：更于陶所瓦间见有白光，窥寻无物，自后夜夜辄复有光。既经旬日，村民张庆宣瓦作屋，又于屋间见光照内外，庆宣疑之，以告孔休先，乃共发视，获玉玺一钮，璧方八分，上有鼻，文曰 帝真 。
现代文：另外在制陶处的瓦缝裹发现有白光，窥视寻找没有发现东西，此后每天夜裹就重复出现白光，这样经过了十天，村民张庆宣用瓦盖屋，又在屋缝裹发现光照内外，张庆宣认为可疑，把这事告诉了孔休先，二人就一起揭开瓦来看，发现一力 玉印，玉璧方形八分大小，上边有鼻，上面的文字是 帝真 。
English: In addition, a white light was found in the tile seam wrap at the pottery-making place. Peeping and searching did not find anything. After that, the white light repeated every night. After ten days, the villager Zhang Qingxuan used a tile roof, and found light inside and outside the roof seam wrap. Zhang Qingxuan thought it was suspicious and told this to Kong Xuxian. The two of them opened the tile together to see and found a strong jade seal. The jade seal was square and eight minutes in size, with a nose on the top and the word "Imperial" on the top.

古文：曲阿县民黄庆宅左有园，园东南广袤四丈。种菜，辄鲜异，虽加采拔，随复更生。
现代文：曲阿县百姓黄庆住宅左边有个园子，园子的东南部宽广四丈，每次种上菜，就鲜美异常，虽然采拔，但随后又再长出。
English: On the left side of the Huangqing residence of the people of Qua County, there is a garden. The southeastern part of the garden is wide and tall. Every time the dish is planted, it is unusually delicious. Although it is plucked, it will grow again later.

古文：夜中恒有白光，皎质属天，状似县绢，私疑非常。
现代文：夜裹常有白光，皎洁素白与天相连，形状好似悬挂的绢。黄庆私下怀疑不是常物，请巫师占卜。
English: At night, there is often white light, and the jade and sapphire are connected to the sky, and the shape is like a hanging cocoon. Huang Qing privately suspects that it is not an ordinary thing, and asks a sorcerer to tell fortunes.

古文：请师卜候，道士傅德占使掘之，深三尺，获玉印一钮，文曰 长承万福 。
现代文：道士傅德占卜后让掘地，深入三尺，发现一方玉印，上面的文字是 长承万福 。
English: After divination, the Taoist Fu De dug into the ground, three feet deep, and found a jade seal on one side, with the words "Changcheng Wanfu" above.

古文：永明二年正月，冠军将军周普孙于石头北厢将堂见地有异光照城堞，往获玉玺一钮，方七分，文曰 明玄君。 
现代文：永明二年正月，冠军将军周普琢在石头北厢的将军公堂看到地上有一道异常的光照到城墙上，到了那里发现一方玉印，七分见方，上面的文宁是 明玄君 。
English: In the first month of the second year of Yongming, the champion general Zhou Putuo saw an unusual light on the ground shining on the city wall in the stone north wing of the general public hall. When he got there, he found a jade seal on one side, seven points square, and the top was Ming Xuanjun.

古文：十一月，虏国民齐详归入灵丘关，闻殷然有声，仰视之，见山侧有紫气如云，众鸟回翔其间。
现代文：十一月，敌国百姓齐祥回去进入灵丘关，听到有很大的响动，仰头一看，看到山侧有云一样的紫气，许多鸟盘旋其间。
English: In November, the people of the enemy country all went back to enter Lingqiu Pass. They heard a great noise, looked up, and saw a cloud-like purple atmosphere on the side of the mountain, with many birds circling in it.

古文：详往气所，获玺方寸四分，兽钮，文曰 坤维圣帝永昌 。
现代文：齐祥前往紫气所在的地方，发现一枚一寸四分见方的印，兽形印钮，上面的文字是 坤维圣帝永昌 。
English: Qi Xiang went to the place where the purple gas was, and found a one-inch-quarter-square seal, a beast-shaped seal button, with the words "Kunwei Shengdi Yongchang" written on it.

古文：送与虏太后师道人惠度，欲献虏主。
现代文：送给胡虏太后的老师道人惠度，想献给胡虏国君。
English: Teacher Daojin Huidu, who gave it to Empress Dowager Khurki, wanted to dedicate it to King Khurki.

古文：惠度睹其文，窃谓 当今衣冠正朔，在于齐国 。
现代文：惠度看到上面的文字，私下认为 当今的正统，在于齐国 。
English: When Huidu saw the above text, he privately thought that today's orthodoxy lies in Qi.

古文：遂附道人惠藏送京师，因羽林监崔士亮献之。
现代文：于是让道人惠藏带着送往齐国京城，通过羽林监崔士亮献给朝廷。
English: So he had the Taoist Huizang take it with him to the capital city of Qi, and presented it to the imperial court through the Ulin overseer, Cui Shiliang.

古文：三年七月，始兴郡民龚玄宣云，去年二月，忽有一道人乞食，因探怀中出篆书真经一卷，六纸，又表北极一纸，又移付罗汉居士一纸，云从兜率天宫下，使送上天子，因失道人所在。
现代文：三年七月，始兴郡百姓龚玄宣说，去年二月，忽然有一个道人前来讨饭，从怀裹掏出一卷篆写的真经，六张纸，又有表奏北极大帝的一张纸，又有转交罗汉居士的一张纸，说是从兜率天宫下来的，让送给天子，说完就不知道人哪裹去了。
English: In July of the third year, the people of Shixing County, Zou Xuan Xuan, said that last February, a Taoist suddenly came to beg for food. He pulled out a scroll of sutras, six pieces of paper, a piece of paper depicting the Great Emperor of the Arctic, and a piece of paper that was handed over to Luo Han Jushi, saying that he had come down from the Heavenly Palace to give it to the Son of Heaven. After saying this, he did not know where he had gone.

古文：今年正月，玄宣又称神人授皇帝玺，龟形，长五寸，广二寸，厚二寸五分，上有 天地 字，中央 萧 字，下 万世 字。
现代文：今年正月，龚玄宣又声称神人传授皇帝玺印，龟的形状，长五寸，宽二寸，厚二寸五分，上部有 天地 字样，中间是 萧 字，下部是 万世 字样。
English: In the first month of this year, Yu Xuanxuan also claimed that the godman taught the emperor the seal, the shape of a turtle, five inches long, two inches wide, two inches and five minutes thick, with the words "Heaven and Earth" at the top, "Xiao" in the middle, and "Wansei" at the bottom.

古文：十年，兰陵民齐伯生于六合山获金玺一钮，文曰 年予主 。
现代文：十年，兰陵百姓齐伯生在六合山发现一方金印，上面的文字是 年予主 。
English: Ten years ago, Lanling citizen Qi Borsheng found a gold seal on the Liuhe Mountain, with the words "Year of the Lord" written on it.

古文：世祖治盆城，得五尺刀一十口，永明年历之数。
现代文：世祖治理盆城，得到十一口五尺刀，正好是永明年号历经的年数。
English: The ancestor governed the basin city and obtained eleven five-foot swords, which is exactly the number of years that Yongnianbei has experienced.

古文：升明三年，左里村人于宫亭湖得靫戟二枚，傍有古字，文远不可识。
现代文：升明三年，左里村的人在宫亭湖发现二只鞭戟，旁边有古文字，字太古老无法辨识。
English: Three years after the Enlightenment, people in the village of Zuoli found two whips in Lake Mirador, with ancient characters next to them. The characters were too old to be recognized.

古文：泰始中，世祖于青溪宅得钱一枚，文有北斗七星双节。又有人形带剑。
现代文：泰始年间，世祖在青溪家宅发现一枚钱币，有双节北斗七星花纹，另外有带剑的人形。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Shizu found a coin in the Qingxi family home, with a double-sectioned Big Dipper star pattern, and a human figure with a sword.

古文：及治盆城，又得一大钱，文曰 太平百岁 。
现代文：等到治理盆城，又得到一枚大钱，上面的文字是 太平百岁 。
English: When he came to govern the basin city, he received another large sum of money with the words "Taiping is 100 years old" written on it.

古文：永明七年，齐兴太守刘元宝治郡城，于堑中获钱百万，形极大，以献台为瑞，世祖班赐朝臣以下各有差。
现代文：永明七年，齐兴郡太守刘元宝治理郡城，在护城河中发现了百万钱币，形状极大，把它们献给了朝廷作为祥瑞，世祖赏赐朝中大臣以下各有不等。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, Liu Yuanbao, the governor of Qixing County, who governed the county town, found a million coins in the moat. They were extremely large, and he presented them to the imperial court as a gift of good luck.

古文：十年，齐安郡民王摄掘地得四文大钱一万二千七百十枚，品制如一。
现代文：十年，齐安郡百姓王摄掘地发现了一万二千七百一十枚四文的大钱，品制完全相同。
English: Ten years later, the excavation site of Qian County People's Wang found 12,710 pieces of 4 yuan coins, with the same quality.

古文：建元元年，郢州监利县天井湖水色忽澄清，出绵，百姓采以为纩。
现代文：建五元年，郢州监利县天井湖的水色忽然澄清，生出丝绵，百姓采来用作绵絮。
English: In the fifth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the water color of the Ceiling Lake in Jianli County, Zhangzhou, suddenly became clear, and silk was produced, which was used as lint by the people.

古文：永明二年，护军府门外桑树一株，并有蚕丝绵被枝茎。
现代文：永明二年，护军府门外的一株桑树，并有蚕丝绵披在枝茎上。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, there was a mulberry tree outside the gate of the garrison, and silk was draped on the branches and stems.

古文：史臣案：汉光武时有野蚕成茧，百姓得以成衣服。
现代文：史臣案：汉光武帝时有野蚕变成茧，百姓得到用来做成衣服。
English: Shishen's case: Emperor Guangwu of Han had wild silkworms turned into cocoons, and the people were used to make clothes.

古文：今则浮波幕树，其亦此之类乎？
现代文：现在则是水上生绵，树上披蚕丝，它们也属于此类。
English: Now it is the water-dwelling cormorants and the tree-dwelling silkworms, which also belong to this group.

古文：永明八年，始兴郡昌乐村获白鸠一头。
现代文：永明八年，始兴郡旦銮挝捕获一只白鸠。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, a white stork was caught in Danzhao, Shixing County.

古文：二年，彭泽县获白雉一头。
现代文：二年，彭泽县捕获一只白雉。
English: Two years ago, an egret was captured in Pengze County.

古文：七年，郁林获白雉一头。
现代文：七年，办林捕获一只白雉。
English: In seven years, he caught one egret.

古文：十年，青州氵臣液戍获白雉一头。
现代文：十年，青州姬液戍捕获一只白雉。
English: Ten years ago, a paddlefish was caught by a heron in Qingzhou.

古文：五年，望蔡县获白鹿一头。
现代文：五年，望蔡县捕获一头白鹿。
English: Five years ago, a white deer was caught in Wangcai County.

古文：九年，临湘获白鹿一头。
现代文：九年，临湘捕获一头白鹿。
English: In the ninth year, a white deer was captured in Linxiang.

古文：六年，蒲涛县亮野村获白獐一头。
现代文：六年，蒲涛县亮野村捕获一头白獐。
English: Six years ago, a white stork was caught in Liang Nomura, Putao County.

古文：九年，义阳安昌县获白獐一头。
现代文：七年，型业捕获一头白獐。八年，余干县捕获一头白獐。
English: In the seventh year, an egret was caught in Mengye, and in the eighth year, an egret was caught in Yugang County.

古文：十年，司州清激戍获白獐一头。
现代文：九年，盏厘宣旦题捕获一头白獐。十年，业遣邀应捕获一头白獐。
English: In the ninth year, Xuan Danzhi caught a egret. In the tenth year, he was invited to catch a egret.

古文：十一年，广陵海陵县获白獐一头。
现代文：十一年，庐堕迤壁噩捕获一头白獐。
English: In the eleventh year, an egret was caught by a cormorant.

古文：七年，越州献白珠，自然作思惟佛像，长三寸。
现代文：七年，越州进献白珠，呈天然的佛沉思状，长三寸。
English: In the seventh year, Yuezhou donated a white bead, which was a natural Buddha meditation shape, three inches long.

古文：上起禅灵寺，置刹下。
现代文：皇上起造禅灵寺，放置在佛塔下面。
English: The emperor set out to build a Zen temple and placed it under the pagoda.

古文：七年，吴郡太守江斅于钱塘县获苍玉璧一枚以献。
现代文：七年，吴郡太守江斅在钱塘县得到一枚苍色玉璧进献。
English: In the seventh year, the governor of Wu County, Jiang Chen, received a pallid jade gem from Qiantang County.

古文：七年，主书朱灵让于浙江得灵石，十人举乃起，在水深三尺而浮。世祖亲投于天渊池试之，刻为佛像。
现代文：七年，主书朱灵让在浙江得到一块灵石，十个人才能举起，在三尺深的水中就能浮起，世祖亲手投到天渊池中试验，刻成佛像。
English: In the seventh year, the main scribe, Zhu Ling, obtained a spiritual stone in Zhejiang. Ten people could lift it, and it could float in three feet of water. Shizu personally threw it into the Tianyuan Pool to test it and carved it into a Buddha statue.

古文：二年，从阳丹水县山下得古鼎一枚。
现代文：二年，从阳丹水县山下发现一只古鼎。
English: Two years ago, an ancient crane was found under a mountain in Yangdanshui County.

古文：三年，越州南高凉俚人海中网鱼，获铜兽一头，铭曰 作宝鼎，齐臣万年子孙承宝 。
现代文：三年，越业南高凉俚族人在海中捕鱼，获得一头铜兽，铭文说 制作宝鼎，蛮臣子孙万年承用宝器 。
English: In the third year, the Yueyuan South Gaolang Yi people fished in the sea and obtained a bronze beast. The inscription said that they made Baoding, and the descendants of the barbarians inherited the treasure.

古文：赞曰：天降地出，星见先吉。
现代文：赞曰：上天降下，大地出产，星辰预先显示吉祥。
English: Zang Zai said: The heavens descend, the earth produces, and the stars show auspiciousness in advance.

古文：造物百品，详之载述。
现代文：创造各种物品，详细记载叙述。
English: Create various items, record and describe them in detail.

