古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻刺有五官五阅，以观五气。
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：我听说在针刺治疗疾病时，有五官五官的诊法，可以用来观测五气。
English: Huang Di asked Qi Bo: I heard that when acupuncture is used to treat diseases, there is a diagnosis method of the five senses, which can be used to observe the five qi.

古文：五气者，五脏之使也，五时之副也。愿闻其五使当安出？
现代文：所谓五气，是指五脏的内在的变化反映于体表的现象，是由五脏产生和支配的，它的盛衰与春、夏、长夏、秋、冬五季相配合。
English: The so-called five qi refers to the phenomenon that the internal changes of the five internal organs are reflected on the surface of the body. It is generated and controlled by the five internal organs, and its rise and fall is coordinated with the five seasons of spring, summer, long summer, autumn and winter.

古文：岐伯曰：五官者，五脏之阅也。
现代文：我想知道五脏之气是怎样表现在面部的呢？岐伯说：人的面部五官，是五脏在身体外部的反映。
English: I would like to know how the five viscera are expressed on the face? Qi Bo said: The five facial features of a person are the reflection of the five viscera on the outside of the body.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻其所出，令可为常。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道五官是如何反映五脏的变化，以便把它作为诊断的常规。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know how the five senses reflect changes in the five internal organs, so that it can be used as a diagnostic routine.

古文：岐伯曰：脉出于气口，色见于明堂，五色更出，以应五时，各如其常，经气入臓，必当治理。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：五脏的变化可以通过脉象的形式表现于寸口，也可以通过五色的形式表现在明堂。青、赤、黄、白、黑五色交替出现，与五季气候的变化相应，每一时令都有其正常的所主颜色在鼻部显现，如果邪气循经络深入内脏，必然出现异常的颜色，此时应根据变化的颜色所对应的内在脏腑进行治疗。黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Qi Bo said: The changes in the five viscera can be expressed through the form of pulse images at the base of the nose, and can also be expressed through the form of five colors in the alcove. Blue, red, yellow, white and black five colors appear alternately, corresponding to the changes in the five-season climate, and each season has its normal host color in the nose. If the evil gas follows the meridians deep into the internal organs, abnormal colors will inevitably appear. At this time, it should be treated according to the internal viscera corresponding to the changed color. Huang Di said: Well said.

古文：五色独决于明堂乎？
现代文：诊察五色仅只取决于鼻部吗？
English: Does the five-color diagnosis only depend on the nose?

古文：岐伯曰：五官已辨，阙庭必张，乃立明堂，明堂广大，蕃蔽见外，方壁高基，引垂居外，五色乃治，平搏广大，寿中百岁，见此者，刺之必已，如是之人者，血气有余，肌肉坚致，故可苦以针。
现代文：岐伯说：如果五官的气色分明，两眉之间和额头开阔饱满，鼻子宽而高，脸颊至耳门的肌肉丰满凸起，耳边四周的骨骼和肌肉方正，下颚高厚，耳垂凸露于外很长，面部五色表现正常，五官端正宽阔而匀称，那么这样的人就能够活过一百岁。观察到以上的面部表现，即使发生疾病，施用针刺也一定能够治愈。因为像这样的人，气血充足，肌肉坚实致密，所以可以迅速地用针刺进行治疗。
English: Qi Bo said: If the facial features are clear, the space between the two eyebrows and the forehead is wide and full, the nose is wide and high, the muscles of the cheek to the ear are full and raised, the bones and muscles around the ear are square, the lower jaw is thick, the earlobe is long and exposed, the facial five colors are normal, and the facial features are wide and well-proportioned, then such a person can live for a hundred years. Observing the above facial features, even if there is a disease, the application of acupuncture will definitely be able to cure. Because people like this have enough qi and blood, the muscles are solid and dense,

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻五官。
现代文：黄帝说：我想了解五官与五脏的相互关系。
English: Huang Di said: I want to understand the relationship between the five senses and the five viscera.

古文：岐伯曰：鼻者，肺之官也。目者，肝之官也。口唇者，脾之官也。舌者，心之官也。耳者，肾之官也。
现代文：岐伯说：鼻是反映肺脏的外象器官，眼睛是反映肝脏的外象器官，口唇是反映脾脏的外象器官，舌是反映心脏的外象器官，耳是反映肾脏的外象器官。
English: Qi Bo said: The nose is an external organ reflecting the lungs, the eyes are an external organ reflecting the liver, the lips are an external organ reflecting the spleen, the tongue is an external organ reflecting the heart, and the ear is an external organ reflecting the kidney.

古文：黄帝曰：以官何候？
现代文：黄帝说：从五官的表现，如何推断疾病呢？
English: Huang Di said: From the appearance of the five senses, how can we deduce the disease?

古文：岐伯曰：以候五脏。
现代文：岐伯说：通过五官的表现，可以推断五脏的病变。
English: Qi Bo said: Through the performance of the five senses, it is possible to infer the lesions of the five viscera.

古文：故肺病者，喘息鼻张。
现代文：肺的病变，出现呼吸喘急，鼻翼煽动。
English: Lung lesions, wheezing, nasal irritation.

古文：肝病者，眦青。
现代文：肝的病变，出现眼角发青。
English: Hepatic lesions, appearance of cyanosis around the eyes.

古文：脾病者，唇黄。
现代文：脾的病变，出现口唇发黄。
English: lesions of the spleen, yellowing of the lips.

古文：心病者，舌卷短，颧赤。
现代文：心的病变，出现舌体卷曲短缩，两颧发红。
English: lesions of the heart, the appearance of tongue curl shortening, cheek redness.

古文：肾病者，颧与颜黑。
现代文：肾的病变，出现两颧和额部发黑。
English: Kidney lesions, double eyelids and blackened forehead.

古文：黄帝曰：五脉安出，五色安见，其常色殆者如何？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人脉象是正常的，五色也是正常的，但这种人虽然气色正常，一得病却很危险，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people's connections are normal, and the five colors are normal, but although this kind of person looks normal, it is very dangerous to get sick. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：五官不辨，阙庭不张，小其明堂，蕃蔽不见，又埤其墙，墙下无基，垂角去外，如是者，虽平常殆，况加疾哉？
现代文：岐伯说：五官的气色不分明，两眉之间和额头不开阔，鼻子窄小，脸颊至耳门的肌肉不饱满，耳边四周骨骼和肌肉坍陷，下颚平陷，耳垂和耳上角尖窄且向外翻，像这样的人，在平时就体质很弱，更何况再遇到疾病呢？
English: Qi Bo said: The facial features are indistinct, the space between the eyebrows and the forehead is not wide, the nose is narrow and small, the muscles from the cheek to the ear are not full, the bones and muscles around the ear are collapsed, the lower eyelid is flat, the earlobe and the upper corner of the ear are narrow and turned outwards. People like this are very weak in normal times, let alone when they encounter diseases.

古文：黄帝曰：五色之见于明堂，以观五脏之气，左右高下，各有形乎？
现代文：黄帝说：五脏表现于鼻部，据此可以推断五脏之气的内在变化，那么在鼻的左右上下，有一定的反映部位吗？
English: Huang Di said: The five viscera are manifested in the nose, according to which the internal changes of the five viscera can be inferred. Then, is there a certain reflecting part on the left and right sides of the nose?

古文：岐伯曰：脏腑之在中也，各以次舍，左右上下，各如其度也。
现代文：岐伯说：脏腑深居于胸腹之中，各有一定的位置，所以反映五脏之气盛衰的五色，在鼻子的左右上下也有一定的位置。
English: Qi Bo said: The internal organs are deep in the middle of the chest and abdomen, and each has a certain position. Therefore, the five colors that reflect the rise and fall of the five internal organs also have a certain position on the left and right sides of the nose.

