古文：奔丧之礼：始闻亲丧，以哭答使者，尽哀；问故，又哭尽哀。
现代文：奔丧的礼节一听到亲人的死讯时，就用哭泣声来回答报丧人，尽情哀哭；然后才询问亲人死亡的原因，听过报丧人的叙述以后，接着又哭，尽情地痛哭。
English: The etiquette of mourning, upon hearing the news of the death of a relative, is to answer the mourner with weeping and weep as much as possible; then inquire about the cause of the death of a relative, and after listening to the story of the mourner, continue to cry and weep as much as possible.

古文：遂行，日行百里，不以夜行。
现代文：于是就动身上路返家。每天赶一百里路，但不在夜里赶路。
English: So he set out on the road to return home. He drove a hundred miles a day, but not at night.

古文：唯父母之丧，见星而行，见星而舍。
现代文：只有奔父母之丧，才能在星星未隐没时上路，到黄昏星星出现时歇宿。
English: Only after the death of one's parents can one go on a journey when the stars have not yet set, and take a rest when the stars appear at dusk.

古文：若未得行，则成服而后行。
现代文：如果由于某种原因不能马上动身奔丧，那就要把丧服准备齐全后穿着上路。
English: If, for some reason, it is not possible to leave immediately for the funeral, it is necessary to prepare the funeral clothes and wear them on the road.

古文：过国至竟，哭尽哀而止。
现代文：在奔丧的路上，每经过一个国家的国境线都要哭，哭到充分发泄了心中的悲哀为止。
English: On the way to the funeral, I cried every time I passed the border of a country. I cried until I had fully released the sadness in my heart.

古文：哭辟市朝。
现代文：在路上哭时要避开集市。
English: When crying on the road, avoid the bazaar.

古文：望其国竟哭。
现代文：望见本国的国境要哭，而且从此以后就哭不绝声了。
English: I cried when I saw my country's border, and I haven't stopped crying since.

古文：至于家，入门左，升自西阶，殡东，西面坐，哭尽哀，括发袒，降堂东即位，西乡哭，成踊，袭绖于序东，绞带。反位，拜宾成踊，送宾，反位；有宾后至者，则拜之，成踊、送宾皆如初。
现代文：到了家门口，从门的左面进去，从西阶登堂，走到灵柩东面，面朝西而跪，放声痛哭，尽哀而止，这时候要脱去吉冠，用麻绳束发，袒露左臂；然后从西阶下堂，在昨阶之东就位，面朝西痛哭，同时还要跺脚；然后到东序东边穿好衣服，戴上麻经，系上绞带；然后再回到昨阶东边主人的位置，拜谢宾客，跺脚大哭；然后将宾客送到殡宫门外，再回到昨阶东边主人的位置。
English: At the door of the house, enter from the left side of the door, enter the hall from the west staircase, walk to the east of the coffin, kneel facing west, cry loudly and weep, and stop mourning. At this time, you should take off the crown of glory, use the hemp rope to bundle the hair, and expose the left arm; then walk down the hall from the west staircase, take a position in the east of the last step, face west and cry bitterly, and also stamp your feet; then go to the east side of the east row to get dressed, wear a hemp sutra, and tie a noose; then return to the east side of the

古文：众主人兄弟皆出门，出门哭止；阖门，相者告就次。
现代文：如果有的宾客迟到，作主人的还要向他们拜谢，跺脚大哭，送客出门，都和刚才所作的一样。
English: If any of the guests were late, the host would thank them, stomp his feet and cry, and send them out the door, just as he had just done.

古文：于又哭，括发袒成踊；于三哭，犹括发袒成踊。
现代文：送过宾客之后，主人的庶兄弟、堂兄弟都走出殡宫门，出门以后就停止哭泣，然后阖上殡宫的门，赞礼的相就告诉主人该到倚庐去了。
English: After seeing off the guests, the host's brothers-in-law and cousins all walked out of the door of the funeral home. After leaving the door, they stopped crying and then bolted the door of the funeral home. The celebrant told the host that it was time to go to the funeral.

古文：三日，成服，拜宾、送宾皆如初。
现代文：第二天早晨哭灵的时候，仍然用麻绳束发，袒露左臂，跺脚大哭。
English: The next morning, when she was crying, she still had her hair tied with twine, bared her left arm, stomped her feet and cried.

古文：奔丧者非主人，则主人为之拜宾送宾。
现代文：第三天早晨哭灵的时候， 还是用麻绳束发，袒露左臂，跺脚大哭。
English: On the morning of the third day, when she was crying, she still tied her hair with a hemp rope, bared her left arm, stomped her feet and cried.

古文：奔丧者自齐衰以下，入门左中庭北面哭尽哀，免麻于序东，即位袒，与主人哭成踊。于又哭、三哭皆免袒，有宾则主人拜宾、送宾。
现代文：第四天才把整套丧服穿戴齐备，但 对于来吊唁的宾客的拜谢和送出，其礼数仍和第一天一样。奔丧的人如果不是主人，那么对于前来吊唁的宾客人替他拜谢和送出。奔丧的人如果是齐衰以下的亲属，就由主在到达家门以后，从门的左边进去，站在院子当中，面向北，放声痛哭，尽哀而止；然后到东序东边脱去吉冠，戴上免，系上麻腰带，再站到自己应站的位置上袒露左臂，主人跺脚痛哭，自己也跟着跺脚痛哭。
English: On the fourth day, the whole set of mourning clothes was put on and ready, but the number of thanks and send-off for the guests who came to pay condolences was still the same as the first day. If the mourner was not the owner, then the guests who came to pay condolences would be thanked and sent off for him. If the mourner was a relative below the level of Qi Fen, the owner would enter from the left side of the door after arriving at the door of the house, stand in the middle of the yard, facing north, cry loudly, and stop all the grief; then go to the east side of the east row to take off the crown, put it on, tie a

古文：丈夫妇人之待之也，皆如朝夕哭，位无变也。
现代文：在第二天早晨、第三天早晨哭灵时，其打扮、其礼数也都和第一天刚到家时一样。
English: In the morning of the second day and the morning of the third day, when the spirits were crying, their dress and the number of their salutations were the same as when they arrived home on the first day.

古文：奔母之丧，西面哭尽哀，括发袒，降堂东即位，西乡哭，成踊，袭免绖于序东，拜宾、送宾，皆如奔父之礼，于又哭不括发。
现代文：如果有宾客前来吊唁，就由主人替他拜宾、送宾。主人、主妇对于奔丧者的到来，都是站在朝夕哭时的位置上等待，不因奔丧者的到来而有所改变。嫡子奔母之丧，也是到了家门口，从门的左边进去，从西阶登堂，走到灵柩东面，面朝西而跪，放声痛哭，尽哀而止；然后脱去吉冠，用麻绳束发，袒露左臂；然后从西阶下堂，在昨阶之东就位，面朝西痛哭，同时跺脚；然后戴上免，腰间系上麻带。
English: If a guest comes to offer condolences, the host will pray for the guest and escort the guest. The host and hostess wait for the arrival of the mourner, standing in the position of the morning and evening crying, and do not change due to the arrival of the mourner. The legitimate son went to his mother's funeral, also arrived at the door of the house, entered from the left side of the door, ascended from the west step, walked to the east of the coffin, kneeled facing west, cried loudly, and stopped in grief; then took off the crown, tied his hair with a twine, and exposed his left arm; then went down from the west step, took

古文：妇人奔丧，升自东阶，殡东，西面坐，哭尽哀；东髽，即位，与主人拾踊。
现代文：宾客前来吊唁，嫡子的拜宾、送宾之礼都和奔父丧时一样。只是在第二天早晨哭灵时就不再用麻绳束发，而是戴上免。夫人奔丧，是从堂东的侧阶上堂，走到灵柩的东边跪下，放声大哭，尽哀而止髻，再走到自己的哭位上。
English: Guests came to offer condolences, and the eldest son's homage and send-off were the same as at the time of his father's funeral. However, the next morning, when the spirit was crying, he no longer tied his hair with twine, but put on a shawl. The lady went to the funeral, walked up the side steps from the east of the church, walked to the east side of the coffin, knelt down, cried loudly, stopped crying in grief, and then walked to her own place to cry.

古文：奔丧者不及殡，先之墓，北面坐，哭尽哀。
现代文：然后到东序去掉裹发的缅与主人轮流跺脚痛哭。
English: Then the Burmese and the owner, who had removed the hair wraps, took turns stomping their feet and crying.

古文：主人之待之也，即位于墓左，妇人墓右，成踊尽哀括发，东即主人位，绖绞带，哭成踊，拜宾，反位，成踊，相者告事毕。
现代文：面朝西露出发为父亲奔丧的人如果没有赶在停殡待葬期间到家，那就要先到墓地上去，面向北而跪，放声痛哭，尽哀而止。在家代他主持丧事的人接待他的礼数，是在墓左就位，妇人在墓右就位。奔丧者跺脚痛哭，尽哀而止，用麻绳束发；然后到墓的东边就主人之位，戴上麻续，系上纹带，跺脚痛哭；拜谢前来吊唁的宾客，回到原位，跺脚痛哭。
English: If the mourner who sets out for his father facing the west and the dew does not arrive home in time for the funeral, he must first go to the cemetery, kneel facing the north, cry loudly, and stop crying. The person who presides over his funeral at home receives him with the left side of the grave and the woman on the right side of the grave. The mourner stomps his feet and cries, stops crying, and ties his hair with a hemp rope; then he goes to the east side of the grave to take the master's place, wears a hemp belt, ties a band, and stomps his feet and cries; the guests who come to offer condolences return to

古文：遂冠归，入门左，北面哭尽哀，括发袒成踊，东即位，拜宾成踊。
现代文：这时候赞礼的相宣布哭墓的事情结束。奔丧者于是戴上帽子，回到家门口，从门的左边进去；面向北，放声痛哭，尽哀而止；然后用麻绳束发，袒露左臂，跺脚痛哭；然后到昨阶之东就位，拜谢宾客，跺脚痛哭。
English: The mourners then put on their hats, returned to the front door of the house, and entered from the left side of the door; facing north, they cried loudly and stopped crying; then they tied their hair with twine, bared their left arms, and stomped their feet and cried; then they took their places on the east side of the last step, thanked the guests, and stomped their feet and cried.

古文：宾出，主人拜送；有宾后至者则拜之成踊；送宾如初。
现代文：宾客退出，主人拜送到门外。有的宾客吊唁来晚了，主人仍然是拜谢、跺脚痛哭、送客这一套礼数，和开始的时候一样。
English: The guests leave, and the host sends them out the door. Some guests are late with their condolences, and the host still has the same set of etiquette as at the beginning: bowing, stomping his feet and crying, and sending the guests on their way.

古文：众主人兄弟皆出门，出门哭止，相者告就次。
现代文：这时候，主人的庶兄弟、堂兄弟都退出殡宫的门，出了门就要停止哭泣，赞礼的相就告诉主人该到倚庐去了。
English: At this time, the master's brothers-in-law and cousins all left the door of the funeral parlor. When they left the door, they had to stop crying. The look of praise told the master that it was time to go to the coffin.

古文：于又哭，括发成踊；于三哭，犹括发成踊。
现代文：在第二天早晨哭灵的时候，用麻绳束发，跺脚痛哭。在第三天早晨哭灵的时候，仍然如此。
English: On the morning of the second day, when the spirit was crying, she tied her hair with a hemp rope, stomped her feet and cried bitterly. On the morning of the third day, when the spirit was crying, she did the same.

古文：三日成服，于五哭，相者告事毕。
现代文：第四天才把整套的丧服穿戴齐备。在第五天早晨哭灵的时候，赞礼的相宣告在殡宫要做的事已经结束。
English: On the fourth day, the mourning clothes were put on and ready, and on the fifth day, after the weeping of the spirit, the celebrant announced the end of the funeral.

古文：为母所以异于父者，壹括发，其余免以终事，他如奔父之礼。
现代文：为母亲奔丧的人如果没有赶在停殡待葬期间到家 只有在从墓地刚回到家里时用麻绳束发一次，其余的时候都是戴着免行事，除了这一点以外，其余的礼数都和奔父之丧一样。
English: If the mourners for the mother did not arrive at home in time for the funeral, they would be sent home only once with a twine when they just returned home from the cemetery, and the rest of the time they would be wearing a pass. Except for this, the rest of the etiquette is the same as for the father's funeral.

古文：齐衰以下不及殡：先之墓，西面哭尽哀，免麻于东方，即位，与主人哭成踊，袭。
现代文：奔齐衰以下亲属之丧，如果来不及在停殡待葬期间赶回，就要先到墓地，面朝西痛哭，尽情哀哭。在墓的东边脱去吉冠，戴上免，腰间系上麻带，然后就位，和主人一道痛哭跺脚，然后穿好衣服。
English: If it is too late to rush back during the period of suspension of the funeral, you should first go to the cemetery, face west and weep bitterly, weep as much as you can. On the east side of the grave, take off the crown, put it on, tie a hemp belt around your waist, then take your place, cry and stomp your feet with your master, and then get dressed.

古文：有宾则主人拜宾、送宾；宾有后至者，拜之如初。
现代文：有宾客来吊唁，就由主人拜宾、送宾。来吊的宾客如有迟到者，拜宾、送宾的事仍由主人承担，就像刚才一样。
English: If there are guests coming to offer condolences, it is up to the host to greet and see them off. If there are late arriving guests, the host will still be responsible for greeting and seeing them off, just like before.

古文：相者告事毕。
现代文：赞礼的相宣告哭墓的事完毕。
English: The number of funeral etiquette is basically the same as that mentioned above; the only difference is that the relatives below Qi Fen wear a headdress on the cemetery and a hemp belt around the waist, instead of using a hemp rope to tie the hair and expose the left arm.

古文：遂冠归，入门左，北面哭尽哀，免袒成踊，东即位，拜宾成踊，宾出，主人拜送。
现代文：奔丧者于是戴上帽子，回到家门口，从门的左边进去，面向北而哭，尽哀为止；然后戴上免，袒露左臂，跺脚痛哭；然后在昨阶之东就位，主人为之拜宾，而奔丧者跺脚痛哭。来吊的宾客退出，主人拜谢送出门外。
English: The mourner then put on his hat, returned to the door of the house, entered from the left side of the door, facing north and cried until he was sad; then he put on his cap, bared his left arm, stomped his feet and cried; then he took his place at the east of the last step, the owner bowed to the guests, and the mourner stomped his feet and cried. The guests withdrew, and the owner thanked them and sent them out the door.

古文：于又哭，免袒成踊；于三哭，犹免袒成踊。
现代文：在第二天哭灵的时候，戴上免，袒露左臂，跺脚痛哭。在第三天哭灵的时候，仍然如此。
English: On the second day, when the spirit is crying, put on the amulet, bare your left arm, stomp your feet and weep. On the third day, when the spirit is crying, do the same.

古文：三日成服，于五哭，相者告事毕。
现代文：第四天才把丧服穿戴齐备，在第五天哭灵之后，赞礼的相就宣布奔丧礼结束。
English: On the fourth day, the mourning clothes were put on and ready, and on the fifth day, after the weeping of the spirit, the celebrant announced the end of the funeral.

古文：闻丧不得奔丧，哭尽哀；问故，又哭尽哀。
现代文：听到父母的噩耗而又不能奔丧，在这种情况下的礼节是：放声痛哭，尽哀为止；然后向使者询问父母去世的原因，问罢，又放声痛哭，尽哀为止。
English: When you hear the sad news of your parents and cannot grieve, the etiquette in this case is: cry loudly and weep until you are sad; then ask the messenger why your parents died, ask again, cry loudly and weep until you are sad.

古文：乃为位，括发袒成踊，袭绖绞带即位，拜宾反位成踊。
现代文：于是赶忙安排灵堂，设立哭位，用麻绳束发，袒露左臂，跺脚痛哭；然后穿好衣服，戴上麻纽，系上绞带，在昨阶下就主人之位；拜谢前来吊唁的宾客，拜谢之后回到原位，跺脚痛哭。
English: So he hurriedly arranged the funeral hall, set up a crying place, tied his hair with a hemp rope, bared his left arm, and stomped his feet to cry; then dressed, put on a hemp rope, tied a noose, and took the master's place under the last step; thanked the guests who came to offer condolences, and returned to his original place after thanking, stomping his feet and crying.

古文：宾出，主人拜送于门外，反位；若有宾后至者，拜之成踊，送宾如初。
现代文：来宾退出，主人拜送于门外，然后又返回原位。如果有的宾客来吊唁时迟到了，主人照样要表示拜谢，跺脚痛哭，送客出门，就像接待没有迟到的宾客那样。
English: If a guest is late for condolences, the host should still express his thanks, stomp his feet and cry, and send the guest out of the door, just as if he were receiving a guest who was not late.

古文：于又哭，括发袒成踊，于三哭，犹括发袒成踊，三日成服，于五哭，拜宾送宾如初。
现代文：第二天哭灵的时候，用麻绳束发，袒露左臂，跺脚痛哭。在第三天哭灵的时候，还仍然如此。
English: On the second day, when the spirit cried, she tied her hair with a hemp rope, bared her left arm, stomped her feet and cried bitterly. On the third day, when the spirit cried, it was still the same.

古文：若除丧而后归，则之墓，哭成踊，东括发袒绖，拜宾成踊，送宾反位，又哭尽哀，遂除，于家不哭。主人之待之也，无变于服，与之哭，不踊。自齐衰以下，所以异者，免麻。
现代文：到第四天才把整套丧服穿戴齐备。
English: It took until the fourth day to get the full set of mourning clothes ready.

古文：凡为位，非亲丧，齐衰以下，皆即位哭尽哀，而东免绖，即位，袒、成踊、袭，拜宾反位，哭成踊，送宾反位，相者告就次。
现代文：在第五天哭灵的时候，拜宾、送宾的礼数和第一天一样。如果奔丧者是在家人除去丧服之后方才归家，那就要先到墓地上去，痛哭跺脚；然后到墓东就主人之位，用麻绳束发，袒露左臂，戴上麻纽，然后拜谢来吊唁的宾客，返回原位跺脚痛哭，送宾出门；然后回到原位，又痛哭到尽哀为止，于是除去孝服。回到家中就不再哭了。
English: On the fifth day of mourning, the number of rituals for paying respects to and seeing off the deceased is the same as on the first day. If the mourner returns home only after the family has removed the mourning clothes, he or she should first go to the graveyard, weep and stamp his or her feet; then go to the grave's owner's place, tie his or her hair with a hemp rope, expose his or her left arm, and put on a riding crop. Then thank the guest who has come to offer condolences, return to the original place, stamp his or her feet and weep, and send the guest out of the door; then return to the original place, weep until

古文：三日，五哭卒，主人出送宾；众主人兄弟皆出门，哭止。
现代文：原先在家代为主持丧事的人在接待奔丧者时，可以不再脱下吉服而改穿孝服，可以陪着奔丧者一道哭泣，但不再跺脚。
English: When the person who originally presided over the funeral on behalf of the family received the mourners, they could no longer take off the auspicious clothes and wear the filial piety clothes. They could accompany the mourners and cry together, but they would no longer stomp their feet.

古文：相者告事毕。
现代文：齐衰以下的亲属在家人除去丧服之后方才归家，其奔丧的礼数和上边讲的基本相同；所不同的只是在墓地上头上戴免，腰间系上麻带，而不再用麻绳束发和袒露左臂。
English: The number of funeral etiquette is basically the same as that mentioned above; the only difference is that the relatives below Qi Fen wear a headdress on the cemetery and a hemp belt around the waist, instead of using a hemp rope to tie the hair and expose the left arm.

古文：成服拜宾。若所为位家远，则成服而往。
现代文：凡是在外地按亲疏排列哭位而哭泣时，都不设奠。
English: There is no memorial service for those who weep in a foreign land, where the places for weeping are sparsely arranged according to kinship.

古文：齐衰，望乡而哭；大功，望门而哭；小功，至门而哭；缌麻，即位而哭。
现代文：不奔丧而在外边哭泣的次数是：为天子哭九次，为诸侯哭七次，为卿、大夫哭五次，为士哭三次。
English: The number of times to weep outside without grieving is: nine times to weep for the heavenly son, seven times to weep for the princes, five times to weep for the lords and doctors, and three times to weep for the servants.

古文：哭父之党于庙；母妻之党于寝；师于庙门外；朋友于寝门外；所识于野张帷。
现代文：大夫在别国为自己过去的国君哭泣的时候，不能自以为主人而拜宾、送客。
English: When a doctor in another country is weeping for his past sovereign, he cannot think of himself as the host and greet guests and send them on their way.

古文：凡为位不奠。哭天子九，诸侯七，卿大夫五，士三。大夫哭诸侯，不敢拜宾。
现代文：做臣子的出使别国，为自己的君主哭泣时，也不能以主人自居拜宾、送宾。
English: When you are an envoy of a vassal to another country and weep for your monarch, you can't present yourself as the host to greet and see off guests.

古文：诸臣在他国，为位而哭，不敢拜宾。
现代文：诸侯的兄弟居住在其它国家，为诸侯也是按亲疏排列哭位哭泣。
English: The princes' brothers live in other countries, and they also cry for the princes in the order of their relatives.

古文：与诸侯为兄弟，亦为位而哭。凡为位者壹袒。
现代文：凡是在外国依亲疏排列哭位哭泣的人，只要袒露左臂一次。
English: Anyone who cries in a foreign country with relatives sparsely arranged in a crying position only needs to expose their left arm once.

古文：所识者吊，先哭于家而后之墓，皆为之成踊，从主人北面而踊。
现代文：只是一般交往的人吊丧，先到丧去哭哭，然后道墓地，无论在丧家还是在墓地哭泣，都要跺脚，其方式是跟在主人后面，面向北跺脚。
English: It's just that the people we usually associate with are mourning. First, they go to the funeral to cry, and then they go to the cemetery. Whether they are crying at the funeral home or at the cemetery, they have to stomp their feet. The way is to stomp behind the owner, facing north.

古文：凡丧，父在父为主；父没，兄弟同居，各主其丧。
现代文：凡有丧事，父亲在世就由父亲主持；如果父已死亡，兄弟都住在一起的，就各自为自己的子孙主持丧事。
English: If there is a funeral and the father is alive, the father is to preside; if the father is dead and the brothers are living together, each of them is to preside over the funeral of his son or daughter.

古文：亲同，长者主之；不同，亲者主之。
现代文：如果大家与死者的亲属关系都相同，就由年龄最大的人主持丧事；如果关系不同，就由关系最亲密的人主持。
English: If everyone is related to the deceased in the same way, the funeral will be presided over by the oldest person; if the relationship is different, it will be presided over by the person with the closest relationship.

古文：闻远兄弟之丧，既除丧而后闻丧，免袒成踊，拜宾则尚左手。
现代文：听到远房兄弟的死讯，但却在除丧之后才听到的，虽然也用麻布束发，袒露左臂哭泣跺脚，但拜宾时要把左手包在右手外边。
English: If you hear the news of the death of a distant sibling, but only after the mourning period is over, you should wrap your left hand around the outside of your right hand when greeting guests, although you should also wear a linen headband, bare your left arm, weep, and stomp your feet.

古文：无服而为位者，唯嫂叔；及妇人降而无服者麻。
现代文：不需穿丧服但仍站在按亲疏排定的位置上哭泣的，只有嫂叔之间，以及本来有服而因出嫁降为无服的族姑姊妹们，她们都要在吊服上加麻绖。
English: Those who do not need to wear mourning clothes but still stand on the position arranged according to the distance between relatives and cry, are only between sisters-in-law and uncles, as well as sisters-in-law who originally had clothes but were reduced to no clothes because they got married. They all have to add sackcloth to the hanging clothes.

古文：凡奔丧，有大夫至，袒，拜之，成踊而后袭；于士，袭而后拜之。
现代文：凡是奔丧者到家正在行礼的时候，有大夫来吊丧，主人就袒露左臂向大夫下拜，跺脚哭泣后再穿上衣服。
English: Whenever a mourner arrives at home and is performing the funeral rites, a doctor comes to mourn, and the owner bows down to the doctor with his left arm bared, stomps his feet and cries before putting on his clothes.

