古文：子曰： 述而不作，信而好古，窃比于我老彭。 
现代文：孔子说： 转述先哲的思想而不创立自己的思想，相信而且喜好古代的东西，我私下把自己比做老彭。 
English: Confucius said, "I secretly compare myself to Lao Peng, who paraphrases the thoughts of the ancient philosophers without creating his own thoughts, and believes in and likes ancient things.

古文：子曰： 默而识之，学而不厌，诲人不倦，何有于我哉？ 
现代文：孔子说： 默默地记住我所看到的听到的知识，努力学习而从不满足，教导别人而不知疲倦，这对我来说有什么呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "What is there for me in silently remembering the knowledge I have seen and heard, in studying hard but never being satisfied, in teaching others tirelessly?

古文：子曰： 德之不修，学之不讲，闻义不能徙，不善不能改，是吾忧也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不去修养品德，不去讲习学问，听到义却不追随，有了错误缺点不能改正，这些都是我所忧虑的事情。 
English: Confucius said, "I am worried about not cultivating one's character, not studying the teachings, hearing the truth but not following it, having mistakes and shortcomings and not being able to correct them.

古文：子之燕居，申申如也，夭夭如也。
现代文：孔子闲居在家的时候，衣着舒展齐整，仪态温和。
English: When Confucius was idling at home, his clothes were neatly stretched, and his demeanor was mild.

古文：子曰： 甚矣吾衰也！久矣吾不复梦见周公。 
现代文：孔子说： 我衰老得很厉害了，我已经好久没有梦见周公了。 
English: Confucius said, "I am very old, and I haven't dreamed of Zhou Gong for a long time.

古文：子曰： 志于道，据于德，依于仁，游于艺。 
现代文：孔子说： 以道为志向，以德为根据，以仁为依靠，而游憩于礼、乐、射、御、书、数六艺之中。 
English: Confucius said: Take the Tao as the aspiration, virtue as the basis, and benevolence as the reliance, and take pleasure in the six arts of etiquette, music, archery, poetry, calligraphy, and arithmetic.

古文：子曰： 自行束脩以上，吾未尝无诲焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 只要谁愿意拿出干肉作为见面礼来拜见我，我从来没有不给他教诲的。 
English: Confucius said, "If anyone comes to see me with a gift of dry meat, I will not refuse to teach him."

古文：子曰： 不愤不启，不悱不发，举一隅不以三隅反，则不复也。 
现代文：孔子说： 教导学生，不到他冥思苦想仍领会不了的时候，不去开导他；不到他想表达又找不到合适的言辞表达的时候，不去启发他。教给他一个东西，如果他不能举一反三，就不要重复教他了。 
English: Confucius said: "In teaching a student, do not enlighten him until he is lost in thought and unable to comprehend; do not enlighten him until he wants to express himself and cannot find the right words. Teach him one thing, and if he cannot give one example, do not repeat it to him."

古文：子食于有丧者之侧，未尝饱也。
现代文：孔子在有丧事的人旁边吃饭，从来没有吃饱过。
English: Confucius ate next to mourners and never had enough to eat.

古文：子于是日哭，则不歌。
现代文：孔子在这一天为吊丧而哭泣过，就不再唱歌。
English: On this day, Confucius wept in mourning and stopped singing.

古文：子谓颜渊曰： 用之则行，舍之则藏，惟我与尔有是夫！ 
现代文：孔子对颜渊说： 如果用我，就去积极行动；如果不用我，就藏起来。
English: Confucius said to Yan Yuan: If you use me, you should act positively; if you don't use me, you should hide.

古文：子路曰： 子行三军，则谁与？ 
现代文：只有我和你才能这样吧！ 子路说： 如果让您率领三军，您愿找谁一起共事呢？ 
English: Only you and I can do this, right? Zilu said, "If you were to lead the three armies, who would you like to work with?"

古文：子曰： 暴虎冯河，死而无悔者，吾不与也。
现代文：孔子说： 赤手空拳和老虎搏斗，徒步涉水过大河，即使这样死了都不后悔的人，我是不会与他共事的。
English: Confucius said: I would not work with a man who fights tigers with his bare hands and wades through rivers on foot, and even if he dies in this way, he would not regret it.

古文：必也临事而惧，好谋而成者也。 
现代文：我所要找的共事的人，一定是遇事谨慎小心，善于谋划而且能完成任务的人。 
English: The person I want to work with is someone who is careful, who plans, and who gets things done.

古文：子曰： 富而可求也，虽执鞭之士，吾亦为之。
现代文：孔子说： 如果富贵合乎于道就可以去追求，即使是手执马鞭做一个车夫，我也愿意去做。
English: Confucius said, "If being rich and famous is in accordance with the Tao, I can pursue it. Even if I have to be a driver with a horse whip in my hand, I am willing to do it."

古文：如不可求，从吾所好。 
现代文：如果富贵不合于道就不必去追求，还是做自己喜欢做的事情。 
English: If wealth is not in line with the Tao, you don't have to pursue it, you can still do what you like to do.

古文：子之所慎：斋，战，疾。
现代文：孔子所谨慎小心对待的是斋戒、战争和疾病这三件事。
English: The three things that Confucius was careful about were fasting, war, and disease.

古文：子在齐闻《韶》，三月不知肉味，曰： 不图为乐之至於斯也。 
现代文：孔子在齐国听了乐曲《韶》后，很长一段时间吃肉也无法尝出肉的滋味，他说： 没想到对音乐的欣赏竟能达到如此高的境界。 
English: After Confucius listened to the music "Rong" in Qi Province, he could not taste the taste of meat for a long time. He said: I did not expect that the appreciation of music could reach such a high level.

古文：冉有曰： 夫子为卫君乎？ 
现代文：冉有问子贡说： 老师会帮助卫国的国君吗？ 
English: Ran Youqigong said: Will the teacher help the prince of the country?

古文：子贡曰： 诺，吾将问之。 
现代文：子贡说： 嗯，我去问问他吧。 
English: Zigong said, "Well, let me ask him."

古文：入，曰： 伯夷、叔齐何人也？ 
现代文：于是子贡就进去问孔子： 伯夷、叔齐是什么样的人呢？ 
English: So the tributary went in and asked Confucius, "What kind of person is Bo Yi and Uncle Qi?"

古文：曰： 古之贤人也。 
现代文：孔子说： 古代的贤人。 
English: Confucius said: Wise men of ancient times.

古文：曰： 怨乎？ 
现代文：子贡又问： 他们有怨恨吗？ 
English: Zigong also asked: Do they hold grudges?

古文：曰： 求仁而得仁，又何怨？ 
现代文：孔子说： 他们求仁而得到了仁，为什么又怨恨呢？ 
English: Confucius said: They asked for benevolence and received benevolence, so why do they resent?

古文：出，曰： 夫子不为也。 
现代文：子贡出来对冉有说： 老师不会帮助卫君。 
English: Zigong came out and said to Ran You: Teacher will not help Wei Jun.

古文：子曰： 饭疏食饮水，曲肱而枕之，乐亦在其中矣。
现代文：孔子说： 我整天吃粗粮，喝冷水，弯着胳膊做枕头，也自得其乐。
English: Confucius said: I eat coarse grains all day, drink cold water, bend my arms to make pillows, and enjoy myself.

古文：不义而富且贵，于我如浮云。 
现代文：用不正当的手段得来的富贵，我把它看作天上的浮云。 
English: Ill-gotten wealth is like a cloud in the sky to me.

古文：子曰： 加我数年，五十以学《易》，可以无大过矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 再给我增加几年寿命，让我到五十岁时学习《易经》，我便可以没有大的过错了。 
English: Confucius said, "Give me a few more years of life, and let me study the I Ching until I am fifty, and then I will not make any big mistakes."

古文：子所雅言，《诗》、《书》、执礼，皆雅言也。
现代文：孔子有时讲雅言，读《诗》、念《书》和执行礼事，用的都是雅言。
English: Confucius sometimes spoke elegantly, read "poetry," read "books" and performed ceremonial duties, all using elegantly.

古文：叶公问孔子于子路，子路不对。
现代文：叶公向子路问孔子是个什么样的人，子路不答。
English: When Ye Gong asked Zi Lu what kind of person Confucius was, Zi Lu did not answer.

古文：子曰： 女奚不曰：其为人也，发愤忘食，乐以忘忧，不知老之将至云尔。 
现代文：孔子对子路说： 你为什么不这样说：他这个人，发愤用功到连吃饭都忘了，快乐得忘记了忧愁，不知道衰老将要到来等等。 
English: Confucius said to Zilu: "Why don't you say this: This person, angry and hard-working, even forgets to eat, happy to forget sadness, does not know that aging is coming, and so on.

古文：子曰： 我非生而知之者，好古，敏以求之者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我不是生下来就懂得知识，只是喜爱古代的文化，勤奋敏捷地去求得知识。 
English: Confucius said, "I was not born with knowledge, but I like ancient culture and am diligent in seeking knowledge."

古文：子不语怪、力、乱、神。
现代文：孔子不谈论怪异、暴力、变乱、鬼神。
English: Confucius does not talk about weirdness, violence, chaos, ghosts and gods.

古文：子曰： 三人行，必有我师焉。
现代文：孔子说： 多个人同行，其中必定有人可以做我的老师。
English: Confucius said: If there are many people traveling together, there must be someone who can be my teacher.

古文：择其善者而从之，其不善者而改之。 
现代文：我选择他好的方面向他学习，看到他不善的方面就对照自己改正自己的缺点。 
English: I choose his good aspects to learn from him, and see his bad aspects to correct my shortcomings against myself.

古文：子曰： 天生德于予，桓魋其如予何？ 
现代文：孔子说： 上天赋予了我品德，桓魋能把我怎么样？ 
English: Confucius said: Heaven has endowed me with virtue, how can I be deceived?

古文：子曰： 二三子以我为隐乎？
现代文：孔子说： 弟子们，你们以为我对你们有什么隐瞒没有教授的吗？
English: Confucius said: Disciples, do you think that I have something to hide from you?

古文：吾无隐乎尔！
现代文：我没有什么隐瞒不教你们的。
English: I have nothing to hide from you.

古文：吾无行而不与二三子者，是丘也。 
现代文：我没有一点不向你们公开的，这就是我孔丘的为人。 
English: I have nothing to hide from you. This is who I am, Confucius.

古文：子以四教：文，行，忠，信。
现代文：孔子教学有四项内容:文献、品行、忠诚、信实。
English: The teaching of Confucius has four contents: literature, conduct, loyalty, and truthfulness.

古文：子曰： 圣人，吾不得而见之矣；得见君子者斯可矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 圣人我是不可能看到了，能看到君子，这就可以了。 
English: Confucius said, "It is impossible for me to see a sage, but if I can see a gentleman, that is enough."

古文：子曰： 善人，吾不得而见之矣，得见有恒者斯可矣。
现代文：孔子又说： 善人我不可能看到了，能见到始终如一保持好的品德的人，这也就可以了。
English: Confucius also said, "I cannot see a good person, but I can see a person who consistently maintains a good moral character, and that's fine.

古文：亡而为有，虚而为盈，约而为泰，难乎有恒矣。 
现代文：没有却装作有，空虚却装作充实，穷困却装作富足，这样的人是难于有恒心保持好的品德的。 
English: It is difficult for those who have nothing but pretend to have, for those who are empty but pretend to be full, for those who are poor but pretend to be rich, to have the perseverance to maintain good character.

古文：子钓而不纲，弋不射宿。
现代文：孔子用鱼竿钓鱼而不用渔网捕鱼。
English: Confucius fished with a rod, not with a net.

古文：子曰： 盖有不知而作之者，我无是也。
现代文：用弋射的方式获取猎物，但是从来不射取归巢栖息的鸟兽。孔子说： 大概有自己不懂却凭空造作的人吧，我却没有这样做过。
English: Confucius said: "There are probably people who don't know what they're doing but make things up out of thin air, but I've never done that.

古文：多闻，择其善者而从之；多见而识之，知之次也。 
现代文：多听，选择其中好的来学习；多看，然后全部记在心里，这是次一等的智慧。 
English: To hear much, and choose that which is best to learn; to see much, and keep it all to thine heart, is the next best wisdom.

古文：互乡难与言，童子见，门人惑。
现代文：互乡这地方的人难以同他们交谈，孔子却接见了互乡的一个童子，弟子们都觉得疑惑。
English: It is difficult for people in this area to converse with them, but Confucius met a boy from his hometown, and his disciples were puzzled.

古文：子曰： 与其进也，不与其退也，唯何甚？
现代文：孔子说： 我是肯定他的上进，不是肯定他的退步。
English: Confucius said: I am certain of his advancement, but not of his retrogression.

古文：人洁己以进，与其洁也，不保其往也。 子曰： 仁远乎哉？
现代文：何必做得太过分呢？别人修饰容仪而来要求上进，就应该赞成他的这种做法，而不要总是抓住他的过去不放。 孔子说： 仁难道离我们很遥远吗？
English: Why should you go too far? If someone wants to improve his appearance, you should agree with him and not always hold on to his past. Confucius said: "Is benevolence far away from us?

古文：我欲仁，斯仁至矣。 
现代文：我想要为仁行善，那么仁德就自然而然的到了。 
English: If I want to do good for benevolence, then benevolence will naturally come.

古文：陈司败问： 昭公知礼乎？ 
现代文：陈司败问： 鲁昭公懂得礼吗？ 
English: Chen Sibei asked: Does Lu Zhaogong know the etiquette?

古文：孔子曰： 知礼。 
现代文：孔子说： 他懂得礼。 
English: Confucius said, "Be polite."

古文：孔子退，揖巫马期而进之，曰： 吾闻君子不党，君子亦党乎？
现代文：孔子走出去后，陈司败向巫马期作了个揖，请他走近自己，对他说： 我听说君子不因关系亲近而偏袒，难道君子还偏袒别人吗？
English: After Confucius left, Chen Shibei made a gesture to Wuma Jiu, invited him to come closer to him, and said to him, "I heard that a gentleman does not favor someone because he is close to him. Do gentlemen still favor others?

古文：君取于吴，为同姓，谓之吴孟子。
现代文：鲁君在吴国娶了一个同姓的女子为做夫人，是国君的同姓，称她为吴孟子。
English: In the State of Wu, Lu Jun married a woman with the same surname as his wife. She had the same surname as the sovereign and was called Wu Mengzi.

古文：君而知礼，孰不知礼？ 
现代文：如果鲁君算是知礼，还有谁不知礼呢？ 
English: If Lu Jun is considered to be polite, who else is not polite?

古文：巫马期以告，子曰： 丘也幸，苟有过，人必知之。 
现代文：巫马期把这句话告诉了孔子。孔子说： 我真是幸运。如果有错误，别人一定会指出来让我知道。 
English: Wuma told this to Confucius. Confucius said: I am really lucky. If there is a mistake, others will certainly point it out and let me know.

古文：子与人歌而善，必使反之，而后和之。
现代文：孔子与他人一起唱歌，如果那人唱得好，一定会请他再唱一遍，然后应和他。
English: Confucius sang with others, and if that person sang well, he would ask him to sing again, and then sing with him.

古文：子曰： 文，莫吾犹人也。躬行君子，则吾未之有得。 
现代文：孔子说： 就书本知识来说，大约我和别人差不多，做一个身体力行的君子，那我还没有做到。 
English: Confucius said: As far as book knowledge is concerned, I am about the same as others. As far as being a gentleman who works hard, I have not yet achieved that.

古文：子曰： 若圣与仁，则吾岂敢？
现代文：孔子说： 把我称作圣人和仁人，我怎么敢当！
English: Confucius said, "How dare you call me a sage and a benevolent person!

古文：抑为之不厌，诲人不倦，则可谓云尔已矣。 
现代文：不过是朝着圣与仁的方向去努力做而不满足，教诲别人也从不感觉疲倦，则可以这样说的。 
English: However, it can be said that it is not enough to make efforts in the direction of holiness and benevolence, and teaching others never feels tired.

古文：公西华曰： 正唯弟子不能学也。 
现代文：公西华说： 这正是我们这些弟子学不到的。 
English: Gong Xihua said, "This is exactly what we disciples cannot learn.

古文：子疾病，子路请祷。
现代文：孔子病情严重，子路向鬼神祈祷。
English: Confucius was seriously ill, and Zilu prayed to ghosts and gods.

古文：子曰： 有诸？ 
现代文：孔子说： 有这回事吗？ 
English: Confucius said: Is there such a thing?

古文：子路对曰： 有之。
现代文：子路说： 有的。
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：《诔》曰： 祷尔于上下神祇。  
现代文：《诔》文上说： 为你向天地神灵祈祷。  
English: The "" text said: Pray to the gods and spirits of heaven and earth for you.

古文：子曰： 丘之祷久矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 我早就在祈祷了。 
English: Confucius said, "I have already begun to pray."

古文：子曰： 奢则不孙，俭则固。
现代文：孔子说： 奢侈了就会不恭顺，节俭了就会寒酸。
English: Confucius said: If you are extravagant, you will not be obedient, and if you are frugal, you will be shabby.

古文：与其不孙也，宁固。 
现代文：与其不恭顺，宁可寒酸。
English: It is better to be shabby than deferential.

古文：子曰： 君子坦荡荡，小人长戚戚。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子心胸开阔，神定气安；小人则斤斤计较，患得患失。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman is broad-minded and calm; a ruffian is calculating and anxious.

古文：子温而厉，威而不猛，恭而安。
现代文：孔子温和而又严厉，有威仪而不凶猛，谦恭而又安祥。
English: Confucius is gentle but stern, dignified but not fierce, courteous but peaceful.

