古文：世人有得雷斧、雷楔者，云： 雷神所坠，多于震雷之下得之。 而未尝亲见。
现代文：传闻世人有拾得雷斧、雷楔的，说是天上的雷神所遗落，多可在震雷之下的地面上拾到，而我未曾亲自见过。
English: It is rumored that people have found thunder axes and thunder wedges, which are said to have been left behind by the god of thunder in the sky. Most of them can be found on the ground under the thunder, but I have never seen them in person.

古文：元丰中，予居随州，夏月大雷震一木折，其下乃得一楔，信如所传。
现代文：元丰年间，我在随州，夏天发生大雷震，下面一棵树被劈断，我也找到一件楔子，果然如世人所传。
English: During the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, I was in Suzhou. In the summer, there was a large thunderstorm, and a tree was split below. I also found a wedge, just as people said.

古文：凡雷斧多以铜铁为之；楔乃石耳，似斧而无孔。
现代文：凡是雷斧，多用铜铁制造，而楔是石制的，像斧而没有孔。
English: All thunder axes are mostly made of copper and iron, while the wedge is made of stone, like an axe but without a hole.

古文：世传雷州多雷，有雷祠在焉，其间多雷斧、雷楔。
现代文：世传雷州多雷，那里建有雷祠，祠中就多有雷斧、雷楔。
English: According to legend, there is a thunder shrine in Dorei, Leizhou, and there are many thunder axes and thunder wedges in the shrine.

古文：按《图经》，雷州境内有雷、擎二水，雷水贯城下，遂以名州。
现代文：我翻查《图经》，雷州境内有雷、擎两条河，雷水经过城下，因此其地就因水名而叫雷州。
English: I checked the "Tu Jing" and found that there are two rivers in Leizhou, the Lei and the Qing, and the Lei water passes under the city, so the place is called Leizhou because of the water name.

古文：如此，则 雷 自是水名，言 多雷 乃妄也。
现代文：如果这样的话，则这个 雷 自是水名，说雷州之名得自多雷乃是妄说。
English: If this is the case, then the thunder itself is the name of the water, and it is a fallacy to say that the name of Leizhou is derived from Dorai.

古文：然高州有电白县，乃是邻境，又何谓也？
现代文：然而高州又有电白县，与雷州是邻境，这个 电白 又是什么意思呢？
English: However, Gaozhou also has Dibai County, which is adjacent to Leizhou. What does this Dibai mean?

古文：治平元年，常州日禺时，天有大声如雷，乃一大星，几如月，见于东南。
现代文：治平元年间，常州有一天傍晚时分，天空响起雷鸣一般的声音，原来是一颗大星，差不多像月亮那么大，出现在天空的东南方。
English: During the first year of the Heian period, one evening in Changzhou, the sky rang with a thunderous sound. It turned out to be a large star, almost as large as the moon, appearing in the southeast of the sky.

古文：少时而又震一声，移著西南。又一震而坠在宜兴县民许氏园中。
现代文：过了不多久又发出一声震响，大星移到了西南方，接着又震了一下便坠落到了宜兴县一个姓许人家的园子里。
English: Not long after, another earthquake was heard. The big star moved to the southwest, and after another shock, it fell into the garden of a family named Xu in Yixing County.

古文：远近皆见，火光赫然照天，许氏藩篱皆为所焚。
现代文：或远或近的人们都看到了，熊熊火光照亮天空，许家园子的篱笆都被火烧毁了。
English: People both near and far saw the blazing flames light up the sky, and the fences of many homes were destroyed by the fire.

古文：是时火息，视地中有一窍如杯大，极深。
现代文：这时火光熄灭了，看到地里有一个像杯口大小的洞，非常深。
English: At that moment, the light of the fire went out, and I saw a hole in the ground the size of a cup, very deep.

古文：下视之，星在其中，荧荧然。
现代文：向下望去，落下的星在里面还荧荧地发着光亮。
English: Looking down, the fallen star still glows fluorescently inside.

古文：良久渐暗，尚热不可近。
现代文：很长时间才慢慢暗下来，不过还是热得无法接近。
English: It took a long time for it to get dark, but it was still too hot to approach.

古文：又久之，发其窍，深三尺余，乃得一圆石，犹热，其大如拳，一头微锐，色如铁，重亦如之。
现代文：又过了很长时间，挖开那个洞三尺多深，于是得到一块圆形的石头，还是热的，像拳头般大小，一头略微有点尖，颜色像铁，分量也像铁。
English: After a long time, digging the hole more than three feet deep, they got a round stone, still hot, the size of a fist, with a slightly pointed end, the color of iron, and the weight of iron.

古文：州守郑伸得之，送润州金山寺，至今匣藏，游人到则发视。
现代文：知州郑伸得到了这块陨石，把它送到了润州的金山寺，直到现在还用匣子收藏着，有游客来了就打开匣子让人观赏。
English: Chizhou Zhengxin obtained this meteorite and sent it to the Jinshan Temple in Runzhou. Until now, it has been kept in a box. When tourists come, they open the box for people to see.

古文：王无咎为之传甚详。
现代文：王无咎对这件事作了很详细的记载。
English: Wang Muxin made a very detailed record of the incident.

古文：内侍李舜举家曾为暴雷所震。
现代文：内侍李舜举家曾被暴雷所震。
English: The family of the chambermaid, Li Ying, was once shaken by a thunderstorm.

古文：其堂之西室，雷火自窗间出，赫然出檐，人以为堂屋已焚，皆出避之。
现代文：他家堂屋的西头房间，有雷火从窗户冒出，赫然蹿出于房檐之上，家里人以为堂屋已被烧了，都跑出去躲避。
English: In the west-facing room of his family house, there was a lightning fire coming out of the window and bursting out of the eaves. The family members thought that the house had been burned, and they all ran out to escape.

古文：及雷止，其舍宛然，墙壁窗纸皆黔。
现代文：及暴雷停止，那间房子却宛然如故，只是墙壁和窗纸都变黑了。
English: When the lightning stopped, the house was still there, but the walls and windows had turned black.

古文：有一木格，其中杂贮诸器，其漆器银釦者，银悉镕流在地，漆器曾不焦灼。
现代文：屋内有一个木架，其中杂七杂八地存放着各种器物，那些有银饰的漆器，银饰全都熔化流到了地上，漆器却不见被烤焦。
English: There is a wooden shelf inside the house, in which all kinds of utensils are stored haphazardly. Those lacquerware with silver ornaments, the silver ornaments have all melted and flowed to the ground, but the lacquerware has not been burned.

古文：有一宝刀，极坚钢，就刀室中镕为汁，而室亦俨然。
现代文：有一口宝刀，极为刚硬，就在刀鞘里被熔化为铁汁，而刀鞘也俨然完好无损。
English: There was a precious knife, extremely hard, which was melted into iron juice in the scabbard, and the scabbard was still intact.

古文：人必谓火当先焚草木，然后流金石，今乃金石皆铄，而草木无一毁者，非人情所测也。
现代文：人们通常必定会认为，雷火为害当先焚草木，然后才熔化金石；而现在却是金石都被熔化，草木反而无一被毁，这不是人之常情所能推测的。
English: One would normally think that thunder and lightning would first burn the vegetation and then melt the precious stones; but now the precious stones have all been melted, but none of the vegetation has been destroyed. This is not something that can be predicted by common sense.

古文：佛书言 龙火得水而炽，人火得水而灾 ，此理信然。
现代文：佛书上说 龙火得水会更炽烈，人火得水则会熄灭 ，这话确有道理。
English: In the Buddhist scriptures, it is said that if a dragon catches fire, the water will become more intense, but if a human catches fire, the water will go out. This is indeed true.

古文：人但知人境中事耳，人境之外，事有何限？
现代文：人只不过了解人世间的事情罢了，人世间之外，无穷无尽的事理又有何极限？
English: People only understand the things of this world. What are the limits of the endless things outside of this world?

古文：欲以区区世智情识，穷测至理，不其难哉！
现代文：欲以区区人世间的知识和情理，去追根究底地测量终极的道理，不是太难了吗？
English: Isn't it too difficult to use the knowledge and reason of the human world to pursue the ultimate truth of measurement?

古文：人有前知者，数千百年事皆能言之，梦寐亦或有之，以此知万事无不前定。
现代文：人有号称能 前知 的，世传这种人就连数十百千年之后的事都能预言，就是梦寐中的事或者将来也会发生，以此知道万事无不是 前定 的。
English: There are people who claim to be able to predict the future, and it is said that such people can even predict things that will happen tens or hundreds of thousands of years in the future, that is, things that are in a dream or will happen in the future, in order to know that everything is predetermined.

古文：余以谓不然，事非前定。
现代文：我对这些说法不以为然。
English: I don't buy any of that.

古文：方其知时，即是今日，中间年歳，亦与此同时，元非先后。
现代文：万事并没有 前定 的，当所谓将来的某件事被人们知道的时候，它便已是 今日 的事；从 今日 到预言的将来的年岁，这中间所有的时间都与 今日 同时，原没有先后。
English: Everything is not predetermined. When something of the so-called future is known, it is already today's event; from today to the prophesied future years, all the time in between is at the same time as today, there is no sequence.

古文：此理宛然，熟观之可谕。
现代文：这道理看似曲折，仔细体察就会明白。
English: This principle may seem tortuous, but a closer look will make it clear.

古文：或曰： 苟能前知，事有不利者，可迁避之。 
现代文：有人说：假如能够 前知 ，那么将来事情有不利的就可以躲避。
English: Some people say: If you can know in advance, then you can avoid things that are unfavorable in the future.

古文：亦不然也。
现代文：这说法也不是那么回事。
English: Actually, that's not true.

古文：苟可迁避，则前知之时，已见所避之事；若不见所避之事，即非前知。
现代文：假如可以躲避，那么人们在 前知 的时候，就已看出所要躲避的事；若是看不出所要躲避的事，那就说明人们不能 前知 。
English: If it can be avoided, then when people know in advance, they have already seen the thing to be avoided; if they do not see the thing to be avoided, it means that people cannot know in advance.

