古文：缅字元长，年数岁，外祖中山刘仲德异之曰： 此儿非常器，非止爲张氏宝，方爲海内令名也。 
现代文：张缅字元长，几岁的时候，外祖父中山刘仲德就认为他很不一般，说： 这孩子不是平凡人，不只是张家的宝贝，还会名扬海内。 
English: When Zhang Mengzhi Yuancheng was a few years old, his maternal grandfather, Zhongshan Liu Zhongde, thought he was very unusual, saying: This child is not an ordinary person, not only the treasure of the Zhang family, but will also be famous at sea.

古文：齐永元末兵起，弘策从武帝向都，留缅襄阳，年始十岁，每闻军有胜负，忧喜形于顔色。
现代文：齐朝永元末年梁武帝起兵，其父张弘策跟随武帝进兵建康，把张缅留在襄阳，当时才十岁，每听到军队有胜负消息，忧喜都流露在脸上。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era of the Qi Dynasty, Emperor Liang Wudi raised an army. His father, Zhang Hongze, followed Emperor Wu into Jiankang and left Zhang Meng in Xiangyang. At that time, he was only ten years old. Whenever he heard the news of the army's victory or defeat, his face would show his sorrow and joy.

古文：及弘策遇害，缅丧过于礼，武帝每遣喻之。
现代文：弘策遇害时，张缅服丧超越礼节，武帝便派人来告诫他。
English: When Hongsaku was killed, Zhang Meng's funeral went beyond etiquette, and Emperor Wu sent someone to admonish him.

古文：服阕，袭封洮阳县侯。
现代文：丧服期满后，袭封洮阳县侯。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he seized the fief of Fenyang County.

古文：起家秘书郎，出爲淮南太守。
现代文：初次作官任秘书郎，出京为淮南太守。
English: For the first time, he served as an official secretary and went to Beijing as the governor of Huainan Province.

古文：时年十八，武帝疑其年少，未闲吏事，遣主书封取郡曹文案，见其断决允惬，甚称赏之。
现代文：当时只有十八岁，武帝怕他年轻，不熟悉官吏的事务，派主书把他办的案卷封好取回京城查看，见他处理得都很恰当，很是称赞。
English: At that time, he was only eighteen years old. Emperor Wu was afraid that he was too young and not familiar with the affairs of officials, so he sent the chief clerk to seal the case file he had handled and take it back to Beijing for inspection. He handled it very appropriately, which was highly praised.

古文：再迁云麾外兵参军。
现代文：又升迁他为云麾外兵参军。
English: He was promoted again and joined the army as a foreign soldier from Yunqi.

古文：缅少勤学，自课读书，手不辍卷。
现代文：张缅从小勤于学习，读书能自我督促，手不释卷。
English: Zhang Meng has been diligent in learning since childhood. He can self-supervise his reading and never lets go of a book.

古文：有质疑者，随问便对，略无遗失。
现代文：有人提问，随问随答，全无错失。
English: Someone asked a question, followed by a question, followed by an answer, all without error.

古文：殿中郎缺，帝谓徐勉曰： 此曹旧用文学，且雁行之首，宜详择其人。 勉举缅充选。
现代文：殿中缺郎官，武帝对徐勉说： 这个部门以前都用文学之官，而且是朝班的领头人，应当仔细挑选。 徐勉推举张缅充任人选。
English: There was a shortage of courtiers in the imperial court, and Emperor Wu said to Emperor Xu: This department used to be in charge of literature, and the head of the court should be carefully selected. Emperor Xu recommended Zhang Mengcheng as the candidate.

古文：顷之，爲武陵太守，还拜太子洗马、中舍人。
现代文：不久，任武陵太守，回京后又拜太子洗马、中舍人。
English: Soon after, he was appointed the governor of Wuling, and after returning to Beijing, he also became the prince's aide-de-camp.

古文：缅母刘氏以父没家贫，葬礼有阙，遂终身不居正室，不随子入官府。
现代文：张缅母亲刘氏因张缅父亲去世家境贫穷而葬礼不周全，于是终身不居正室，不跟随儿子一起进官府。
English: Zhang Meng's mother, Ms. Liu, did not follow her son to the government office and did not live with her for the rest of her life because the funeral was incomplete due to Zhang Meng's father's death and the family's poverty.

古文：缅在郡所得俸禄不敢用，至乃妻子不易衣裳，及还都，并供之母振遗亲属。
现代文：张缅在郡里所得的俸禄不敢享用，以至于老婆孩子没有什么可换的衣服，等回到京都，一起上交给母亲来赈济亲属。
English: Zhang Meng did not dare to enjoy the salary earned in the county, so that his wife and children did not have any clothes to change, so they returned to Kyoto and together handed them over to their mother to help relatives.

古文：虽累载所蓄，一朝随尽，缅私室常阏然如贫素者。
现代文：虽然是多年的积蓄，一下子就完了，张缅自己家里常常空寂冷落好像贫寒之士。
English: Although it is many years of savings, it is all over at once, Zhang Myeong's own home is often empty and cold, like a poor man.

古文：累迁豫章内史。缅爲政任恩惠，不设鈎距，吏人化其德，亦不敢欺。
现代文：逐渐升迁为豫章内史，张缅为政推行恩惠，不用诈谋，官吏百姓受他的德政感化，也都不敢有欺诈行为。
English: Gradually promoted to the internal history of Yuzhang, Zhang Meng took the lead in promoting favors, without fraud, and officials and people were influenced by his German politics, and they did not dare to commit fraud.

古文：故老咸云 数十年未有也 。
现代文：老者们都说： 几十年来没有过啊。 
English: The old people all said: It hasn't happened for decades.

古文：后爲御史中丞，坐收捕人与外国使斗，左降黄门，兼领先职，俄复旧任。
现代文：后来作御史中丞，因为抓捕犯人和外国使节发生争斗，降职为黄门郎，兼任以前的职务，不久又官复原职。
English: Later, he was appointed to the position of goshi chujo, but because there was a fight between the foreign envoys and the prisoners, he was demoted to the position of hwangmenro, which was also his previous position, and he was soon reinstated.

古文：缅居宪司，推绳无所顾望，号爲劲直。
现代文：张缅在御史任上，推行法纪无所顾忌，号称刚直。
English: Zhang Meng, on his appointment as imperial historian, had no scruples about enforcing the law and discipline, and was known for his firmness.

古文：武帝乃遣图其形于台省，以励当官。迁侍中，未拜卒，诏便举哀。
现代文：武帝派人给他画像挂在御史衙门，来勉励为官的人，升迁为侍中，未正式任命时去世。诏命即时举哀。
English: Emperor Wu sent someone to give him a picture to hang on the imperial palace gate, to encourage officials, to be promoted to an attendant, and he died without being officially appointed. The imperial edict was immediately mourned.

古文：昭明太子亦往临哭。
现代文：昭明太子也亲临哭吊。
English: Prince Akira Akira also came to mourn.

古文：吕僧珍字元瑜，东平范人也。世居广陵，家甚寒微。
现代文：张缅抄录《后汉书》、《晋书》各家不同之处著成《后汉纪》四十卷，《晋抄》三十卷，又抄录《江左集》没来得及写成，有文集五卷。
English: Zhang Meng transcribed the differences between the "Post-Han Dynasty" and "Jin Dynasty" books into the "Post-Han Dynasty" forty volumes, the "Jin Dynasty" thirty volumes, and also transcribed the "Jiang Sa Collection" before it could be written, with five volumes of collections.

古文：童儿时从师学，有相工历观诸生，指僧珍曰： 此儿有奇声，封侯相也。 
现代文：吕僧珍字元瑜，东平范县人，世代居住广陵，家里很贫寒。小时候从师学习，有相面人看遍了众学生，指着僧珍说： 这孩子声音不同寻常，是封侯之相。 
English: Lv Sangzhen, a native of Fan County, Dongping, has lived in Guangling for generations, and his family was very poor. When he was a child, he was studying under a teacher. The teacher looked at all the students and pointed to Sangzhen and said, "This child's voice is unusual. He has the appearance of a prince."

古文：事梁文帝爲门下书佐。
现代文：在萧顺之那里作门下书佐。
English: In Xiao Shunzhi's place, he worked as a junior assistant.

古文：身长七尺七寸，容貌甚伟，曹辈皆敬之。
现代文：身长七尺七寸，容貌魁伟，同僚都很敬重他。
English: He is seven feet seven inches tall, with a dashing appearance, and his colleagues hold him in high regard.

古文：文帝爲豫州刺史，以爲典签，带蒙令。
现代文：萧顺之作豫州刺史时，任命他为典签，兼任蒙县令。
English: When Xiao Shun wrote the history of Yuzhou, he was appointed as the signature and also served as the county magistrate of Mengxian.

古文：帝迁领军将军，补主簿。
现代文：萧顺之升任领军将军后，补任他为主簿。
English: After Xiao Shunzhi was promoted to the leading general, he was appointed as the main book.

古文：祅贼唐宇之寇东阳，文帝率衆东讨，使僧珍知行军衆局事。
现代文：唐宀禹之进犯东阳，萧顺之率兵东讨，让僧珍主管行军各局的事务。
English: Tang Xuan Yu attacked Dongyang, and Xiao Shun led his troops eastward, leaving Sozhen in charge of the affairs of the marching troops.

古文：僧珍宅在建阳门东，自受命当行，每日由建阳门道，不过私室。
现代文：僧珍家在建阳门东，自从领受命令担当职务后，每天从建阳门过，都不进自己家门。
English: Monk Zhenjia is in the east of Jianyang Gate. Since receiving the order to assume his duties, he has passed through Jianyang Gate every day and has not entered his own house.

古文：文帝益以此知之。
现代文：萧顺之因此对他更加了解信任。
English: As a result, Xiao Shunzhi understood and trusted him more.

古文：司空陈显达出军沔北，见而呼坐，谓曰： 卿有贵相，后当不见减，深自努力。 
现代文：司空陈显达出兵沔阳北，看到他而招呼他入座，对他说： 你有贵人相，最终也不会遭贬抑，要好好努力。 
English: Siku Chen Xianda sent troops to the north of Yangyang, and when he saw him, he invited him to sit down and said to him: You have a noble appearance, and you will not be demeaned in the end. You should work hard.

古文：建武二年，魏军南攻，五道并进。
现代文：齐建武二年，魏军南攻，五路并进。
English: In the second year of Qi Jianwu, the Wei army attacked the south, and the five roads advanced simultaneously.

古文：武帝帅师援义阳，僧珍从在军中。
现代文：萧衍率军援助义阳，僧珍随从在军中。
English: Xiao Yan led the army to aid Yiyang, and Sozhen followed him in the army.

古文：时长沙宣武王爲梁州刺史，魏军围守连月，义阳与雍州路断。
现代文：当时萧懿为梁州刺史，魏军围困数月，义阳和雍州道路被截断。
English: At that time, Xiao Wei was the history of Liangzhou, the Wei army was besieged for several months, and the roads of Yiyang and Yongzhou were cut off.

古文：武帝欲遣使至襄阳，求梁州问，衆莫敢行。僧珍固请充使，即日单舸上道。
现代文：萧衍想派使者到襄阳，打听梁州的消息，众人没人敢去，僧珍却坚决要求担任使节，当天驾一条小船上路。
English: Xiao Yan wanted to send an envoy to Yangyang to inquire about the news from Liangzhou. No one dared to go, but the monk Zhen insisted on serving as an envoy, and drove a small boat that day.

古文：及至襄阳，督遣援军，且获宣武王书而反，武帝甚嘉之。
现代文：等到襄阳，督促派遣援军，又拿到萧懿的书信返回，萧衍对他十分赞赏。
English: When he arrived in Yangyang, he urged the dispatch of reinforcements and received Xiao Yan's letter to return. Xiao Yan highly appreciated him.

古文：东昏即位，司空徐孝嗣管朝政，欲要僧珍与共事。僧珍知不久当败，竟弗往。
现代文：齐东昏侯即位，司空徐孝嗣管理朝政，想让僧珍和他一块共事，僧珍知道齐朝不久就要败亡，终竟没有去。
English: When Qidong passed away and Prince Xu Xiaozhi ascended the throne, Sikyong Xu Xiaozhi managed the government of the dynasty and wanted to let Sozhen work with him. Sozhen knew that the Qidong dynasty would soon be defeated, but in the end he did not go.

古文：武帝临雍州，僧珍固求西归，得补邔令。
现代文：萧衍到雍州后，僧珍坚决要求西归，于是朝廷让他补了一个己阝县令。
English: After Xiao Yan arrived in Yongzhou, the monk Zhen firmly demanded that he return to the west, so the court let him make up a Ji'nan County Order.

古文：及至，武帝命爲中兵参军，委以心膂。
现代文：等到任后，萧衍任命他为中兵参军，把他当作心腹骨干。
English: After he took office, Xiao Yan appointed him as a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army to join the army, and regarded him as a close confidant.

古文：僧珍阴养死士，归之者甚衆。
现代文：僧珍偷偷地蓄养为他效力卖命的人，投奔他的人很多。
English: The monk Zhen secretly kept people who worked for him and worked hard, and many people joined him.

古文：武帝颇招武猛，士庶响从，会者万馀人。
现代文：萧衍也招揽勇武之士，上下响应，聚集了万余人。
English: Xiao Yan also invited brave warriors, and more than ten thousand people gathered in response.

古文：因命按行城西空地，将起数千间屋爲止舍。
现代文：然后命人勘察城西空地，计划盖几千间房屋作为驻扎之处。
English: Then he ordered people to survey the open space west of the city, and planned to build several thousand houses as a place to stay.

古文：多伐材竹，沈于檀溪，积茅盖若山阜，皆未之用。
现代文：砍伐很多竹材，沉在檀溪里，积蓄的茅草堆得像小山，都没有派上用场。
English: Cutting down a lot of bamboo, sinking in the sand dunes, the accumulated thatch piled up like a hill, have not come in handy.

古文：僧珍独悟其指，因私具橹数百张。
现代文：只有僧珍明白他的心意，于是私自准备了几百只船桨。
English: Only the monk Zhen understood his intention, so I prepared several hundred oars.

古文：及兵起，悉取檀溪材竹，装爲船舰，葺之以茅，并立办。
现代文：等萧衍起兵时，把檀溪里的竹子都取了出来，打造成战船，上边用茅草覆盖，都很快办齐了。
English: When Xiao Yan raised an army, he took all the bamboo out of the sand dunes and made it into a warship, covering the top with thatch. It was all done quickly.

古文：衆军将发，诸将须橹甚多，僧珍乃出先所具，每船付二张，争者乃息。
现代文：军队将要出发，众将士需要船桨很多，僧珍把他先前准备的拿出来，每船发给两只，争夺才算停息。
English: The army was about to set out, and the soldiers needed a lot of oars, so the monk Zhen took out the oars he had prepared earlier and gave two oars to each boat. Only then did the fighting stop.

古文：武帝以僧珍爲辅国将军、步兵校尉，出入卧内，宣通意旨。
现代文：萧衍任僧珍为辅国将军、步兵校尉，出入他的卧室，传达他的意旨。
English: Xiao Yan appointed Sozhen as an auxiliary general and infantry lieutenant, and went in and out of his bedroom to convey his intentions.

古文：大军次江甯，武帝使僧珍与王茂率精兵先登赤鼻逻。
现代文：大军驻在江宁，萧衍派僧珍和王茂率精兵先登赤鼻逻。
English: A large army was stationed in Jiangning, and Xiao Yan sent the monk Zhen and Wang Mao to lead the elite soldiers to climb the Red Nose first.

古文：其日，东昏将李居士来战，僧珍等大破之，乃与茂进白板桥。垒立，茂移顿越城，僧珍守白板。
现代文：那天，东昏侯大将李居士来战，僧珍等人大败了他，于是与王茂进军白板桥，筑起城垒后，王茂移军驻越城，僧珍守白板。
English: On that day, the Dongguan warlord Li Jushi came to fight, and Sozhen and others defeated him, so he marched with Wang Mao to the Whiteboard Bridge. After building the fortress, Wang Mao moved his army to Yuecheng, and Sozhen guarded the Whiteboard.

古文：李居士知城中衆少，直来薄城。
现代文：李居士知道城内兵少，径直前来迫近城垒。
English: Li Guosi knew that there were few soldiers in the city, so he went straight ahead and approached the city wall.

古文：僧珍谓将士曰： 今力不敌，不可战，亦勿遥射。
现代文：僧珍对将士们说： 现在我们力量敌不过他们，不可交战，也不要远射。
English: Monk Zhen said to the soldiers: Now our strength is no match for them. You must not engage in battle, and you must not fire from a distance.

古文：须至堑里，当并力破之。 
现代文：一定要等他们进到壕堑里面，再努力打败他们。 
English: You have to wait for them to get into the trenches and then try to beat them.

古文：俄而皆越堑，僧珍分人上城，自率马步三百人出其后，内外齐击，居士等应时奔散。
现代文：不久敌军都越过壕堑，僧珍分派人上城，自率马步军三百人出击敌人背后，内外一齐夹击，居士等人立时奔逃溃散。
English: Soon, the enemy troops all crossed the trench, and the monk Zhen dispatched people to the city. He led the horse-and-foot army of three hundred people to attack the enemy's back, and both inside and outside were clamped together. Residents and others immediately fled and dispersed.

古文：及武帝受禅，爲冠军将军、前军司马，封平固县侯。
现代文：等到武帝受禅，任命他为冠军将军、前军司马，封平固县侯。
English: When Emperor Wu accepted Zen, he appointed him as the champion general, the former military leader, and the lord of Pinggu County.

古文：再迁左卫将军，加散骑常侍，入直秘书省，总知宿卫。
现代文：又升任左卫将军，加散骑常侍，进入秘书省当班，总管皇宫警卫。
English: He was also promoted to General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, and given the additional posts of Cavalryman and Cavalryman, Secretary of the Ministry, and Chief of the Imperial Palace Guard.

古文：天监四年，大举北侵，自是僧珍昼直中书省，夜还秘书。
现代文：天监四年，梁朝大举北侵，从此僧珍白天到中书省值勤，晚上回秘书省。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, the Liang Dynasty invaded the north in a big way. Since then, the monk Zhen has been on duty at the Chinese Literature Department during the day and back at the Secretary Department in the evening.

古文：五年旋军，以本官领太子中庶子。
现代文：五年退兵，以他的本官职衔担任太子中庶子。
English: He retired from the military five years later and served as the Prince's middle son-in-law with his official title.

古文：僧珍去家久，表求拜墓，武帝欲荣以本州，乃拜南兖州刺史。
现代文：僧珍离家日久，上表请求回家祭扫坟墓，武帝想让他作家乡的长官以增其荣耀，于是委任他为南兖州刺史。
English: Monk Zhen had been away from home for a long time, and he asked for permission to go home to sweep the tomb. Emperor Wu wanted to make him the governor of the writer's hometown to increase his glory, so he appointed him as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：僧珍在任，见士大夫迎送过礼，平心率下，不私亲戚。
现代文：僧珍在任上，与士大夫相见迎送注重礼节，对下属一视同仁，对亲戚不徇私情。
English: While in office, Monk Zhen paid attention to etiquette when meeting and seeing off the scholar-officials, treated subordinates equally, and did not show favoritism to relatives.

古文：兄弟皆在外堂，并不得坐。指客位谓曰： 此兖州刺史坐，非吕僧珍床。 
现代文：兄弟们在外堂时，都不让入座，指着客座对他们说： 这是兖州刺史的座位，不是吕僧珍的座位。 
English: When the brothers were in the outer hall, they would not allow anyone to take a seat, pointing at the guests and saying to them: This is the seat of Zhangzhou Jishi, not the seat of Lv Sozhen.

古文：及别室促膝如故。
现代文：等到了别的房内，便促膝而坐一如往常。
English: When they got to the other room, they knelt down and sat as usual.

古文：从父兄子先以贩葱爲业，僧珍至，乃弃业求州官。
现代文：他的一个堂兄弟原来以卖葱为业，僧珍到任后，就弃业要求在州里作官。
English: One of his cousins used to sell green onions, but after he took office, he gave up his job and asked to work as an official in the prefecture.

古文：僧珍曰： 吾荷国重恩，无以报效，汝等自有常分，岂可妄求叨越。
现代文：僧珍说： 我蒙受国家重恩，没有什么可报效，你们各有自己的本分，怎能有非分要求。
English: Monk Zhen said: I have received a great favor from the state, there is nothing to repay, you each have your own duty, how can there be a wrong request.

古文：当速反葱肆耳。 
现代文：应该赶快回到葱铺里去。 
English: You should hurry back to the onion shop.

古文：僧珍旧宅在市北，前有督邮廨，乡人咸劝徙廨以益其宅。
现代文：僧珍旧宅在城北，门前有督邮官署，人们都劝他把督邮官署迁走来扩大自己的宅院。
English: The monk Zhen's old house was in the north of the city, and there was a post office in front of the door. People advised him to move the post office to expand his house.

古文：僧珍怒曰： 岂可徙官廨以益吾私宅乎。 
现代文：僧珍发怒说： 怎么能挪动朝廷官署来扩大我的私宅呢！ 
English: Monk Zhen said angrily, "How can I move the Imperial Household Agency to expand my private residence?"

古文：姊适于氏，住市西小屋临路，与列肆杂。
现代文：他的姐姐嫁给于氏，住在城西临街的小屋里，和做买卖的铺子杂处。
English: His sister, married to Yu, lives in a small house on the west side of the city, with a shop and a variety of shops.

古文：僧珍常导从卤簿到其宅，不以爲耻。
现代文：僧珍经常由随从带路到姐姐家去，并不以此为耻。
English: Monk Zhen is not ashamed of the fact that his attendant often leads the way to his sister's house.

古文：在州百日，征爲领军将军，直秘书省如先。
现代文：在南兖州百日后，征召回京作领军将军，和先前一样在秘书省任职。
English: After 100 days in southern Luzhou, he was called back to Beijing as the leading general, and served in the Ministry of Secretaries as before.

古文：常以私车辇水洒御路。
现代文：经常用自己的车子运水洒宫内道路。
English: He often uses his car to carry water to sprinkle the roads inside the palace.

古文：僧珍既有大勋，任总心膂，性甚恭慎。
现代文：僧珍立有大功，又是朝廷心腹骨干，但性情恭敬谨慎。
English: The monk Zhenli had great merit and was the backbone of the imperial court, but his disposition was respectful and cautious.

古文：当直禁中，盛暑不敢解衣。
现代文：在宫内值班，盛夏也不敢解衣。
English: On duty at the Imperial Palace, she didn't dare to take off her clothes in the height of summer.

古文：每侍御坐，屏气鞠躬，对果食未尝举箸。
现代文：每当在御座前侍候，都是屏气躬身，对瓜果食物从未动过筷子。
English: Whenever he waits in front of the throne, he bows with bated breath. He has never touched the chopsticks for the melon and fruit food.

古文：因醉后取一甘食，武帝笑谓曰： 卿今日便是大有所进。 
现代文：有一次因为喝醉后拿了一个柑子来吃，武帝笑着对他说： 你今天真是大有长进。 
English: Once, because he took a mandarin orange to eat after getting drunk, Emperor Wu smiled and said to him, "You've really made a lot of progress today."

古文：禄俸外，又月给钱十万，其馀赐赉不绝于时。
现代文：除正常的俸禄外，又每月给他十万钱，其余的赏赐经常不断。
English: In addition to his normal salary, he is also given 100,000 yuan a month, and the rest of the reward is constantly increasing.

古文：初，武帝起兵，攻郢州久不下，咸欲走北。僧珍独不肯，累日乃见从。
现代文：当初，武帝起兵时，久攻郢州不下，众人都要北撤，只有僧珍不肯，过了好几天才顺从大家。
English: At first, when Emperor Wu raised an army, he could not go on attacking Zhangzhou for a long time, and everyone wanted to withdraw to the north. Only the monk Zhen refused, and it took several days for everyone to obey.

古文：一夜，僧珍忽头痛壮热，及明而颡骨益大，其骨法盖有异焉。
现代文：一天夜里，他忽然头疼发烧，等到天明额骨更大了，恐怕是他的骨相异于常人。
English: One night, he suddenly had a headache and fever. By dawn, his frontal bone was larger. I was afraid that his bones were different from those of ordinary people.

古文：十年，疾病，车驾临幸，中使医药日有数四。
现代文：天监十年，僧珍病重，武帝车驾亲临探视，宫廷使者送医药每天有三四次。
English: After ten years of celestial supervision, the monk Zhen was seriously ill, and Emperor Wu drove a car to visit him in person. The palace emissary sent medicine three or four times a day.

古文：僧珍语亲旧曰： 吾昔在蒙县热病发黄，时必谓不济。
现代文：僧珍对亲友们说： 我从前在蒙县发热病，当时认为一定不行了。
English: Monk Zhen said to her relatives and friends: I once had a fever in Meng County, and I thought it must be over.

古文：主上见语， 卿有富贵相，必当不死 。
现代文：主上对我说， 你有富贵相，必定死不了 。
English: The Lord said to me, "Since you are rich, you will not die.

古文：俄而果愈。
现代文：不久果然痊愈。
English: He soon recovered.

古文：吾今已富贵，而复发黄，所苦与昔政同，必不复起。 
现代文：我如今已经富贵，而又发热病，其病症和那时恰恰一样，必定不能再好了。 
English: Now that I am rich and prosperous, I have a fever, exactly the same as it was then, and it will not get better.

古文：竟如言卒于领军官舍。
现代文：后来果然像他说的那样死在领军的官舍里。
English: Later he did indeed die, as he said, in the official residence of the army's leader.

古文：武帝即日临殡，赠骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，諡曰忠敬。
现代文：武帝当天就亲临问丧，赠骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，谥为 忠敬 。
English: Emperor Wu paid his respects in person on the day of the funeral, and presented the general of the imperial cavalry, the imperial rescript, and the three divisions of the imperial guard, as a tribute to his loyalty.

古文：武帝痛惜之，言爲流涕。
现代文：武帝痛惜他的死亡，说起他来就掉泪。
English: Emperor Wu deplored his death and shed tears when talking about him.

古文：子淡嗣。
现代文：他的儿子吕淡继承其位。
English: His son, Lü Tan, succeeded him.

古文：初，宋季雅罢南康郡，市宅居僧珍宅侧。
现代文：起先，宋季雅被罢免南康郡守，在僧珍住宅旁买下房子住。
English: At first, Song Jiya was removed from his post as governor of Nankang County and bought a house next to the residence of the monk Zhen.

古文：僧珍问宅价，曰 一千一百万 。
现代文：僧珍问他房价，回答说 一千一百万 。
English: Monk Zhen asked him the price of the house and he answered eleven million.

古文：怪其贵,季雅曰： 一百万买宅，千万买邻。 
现代文：僧珍奇怪价钱怎么这么贵，季雅说： 一百万买房子，一千万买邻居。 
English: Monk Zhen wondered why the price was so expensive, Ji Ya said: One million to buy a house, ten million to buy a neighbor.

古文：及僧珍生子，季雅往贺，署函曰 钱一千 。
现代文：僧珍生儿子时，季雅去道贺，在礼封上写 钱一千 。
English: When the monk Zhen gave birth to a son, Ji Ya went to congratulate him and wrote "one thousand" on the envelope.

古文：阍人少之，弗爲通，强之乃进。
现代文：把门的认为太少，不给他通报，他一再要求才能进门。
English: The doorkeepers thought it was too little and didn't inform him, so he had to ask repeatedly to get in.

古文：僧珍疑其故，亲自发，乃金钱也。
现代文：僧珍对此怀疑，亲自拆封，原来是金钱。
English: Monk Zhen doubted this and personally opened the envelope. It turned out to be money.

古文：遂言于帝，陈其才能，以爲壮武将军、衡州刺史。
现代文：于是对武帝说起此事，陈述他的才能，武帝使他作壮武将军、衡州刺史。
English: So he told Emperor Wu about the matter and stated his talent, and Emperor Wu made him a Zhuangwu general and Hengzhou historian.

古文：将行，谓所亲曰： 不可以负吕公。 
现代文：宋季雅将要赴任时，对他的亲近人说： 不可以辜负吕公。 
English: When Song Jiya was about to take office, he said to his relatives: You must not fail Lv Gong.

古文：在州大有政绩。
现代文：在衡州任上干得很有成绩。
English: He did a great job in Henzhou.

