古文：神农以赭鞭鞭百草，尽知其平毒寒温之性，臭味所主，以播百谷，故天下号神农也。
现代文：神农用赤褐色的鞭子鞭打各种草木，周而全部了解了它们的无毒、有毒、寒热、温凉的性质，以及酸、咸、甘、苦、辛等五味所主治的疾病，然后根据这些经验再播种各种谷物，所以天下的百姓叫他 神农 。
English: Shennong used a reddish-brown whip to whip all kinds of plants, and comprehensively understood their non-toxic, toxic, hot and cold, warm and cool nature, as well as the diseases caused by acid, salty, sweet, bitter and spicy, and then sowed various grains according to these experiences, so the people of the world called him Shennong.

古文：赤松子者，神农时雨师也，服冰玉散，以教神农，能入火不烧。
现代文：赤松子，是神农时候的雨师。他服用一种用玉屑等浸泡在水中而制成的使人发热的药物，并把它教给了神农。他能进入火中而不被焚烧。
English: Akamatsuko was Shennong's rain master. He took a fever-inducing drug made from jade chips soaked in water and taught it to Shennong. He could go into the fire without being burned.

古文：至昆仑山，常入西王母石室中，随风雨上下。
现代文：他到昆仑山，经常进入仙女西王母的石室之中，随着风雨来来去去。
English: When he went to Kunlun Mountain, he often entered the stone room of the fairy Queen of the West, and came and went with the wind and rain.

古文：炎帝少女追之，亦得仙，俱去。
现代文：炎帝的小女儿追求他，也得了仙道，跟他一起走了。
English: Emperor Yan's little daughter chased after him, and she also gained immortality, and went away with him.

古文：至高辛时，复为雨师，游人间。
现代文：到帝喾的时候，他又做了雨师，游戏人间。
English: When he came to the imperial capital, he became a rainmaker and played games with people.

古文：今之雨师本是焉。
现代文：现在的雨师即来源于此。
English: This is where the present-day Amu Division comes from.

古文：赤将子轝者，黄帝时人也。
现代文：赤将子舆，是黄帝的同时代的人。
English: Red Admiral Zi Ying was a contemporary of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：不食五谷，而啖百草华。
现代文：他不吃五谷，而吃各种草木的花。
English: He doesn't eat grains, but eats all kinds of plants and flowers.

古文：至尧时，为木工。能随风雨上下。
现代文：到尧的时代，他又做了木工，他能随着风雨来来去去。
English: In his younger days, he was a carpenter, and he could come and go with the wind and rain.

古文：时于市门中卖缴，故亦谓之缴父。
现代文：常常在集市上出售缴，所以人们把他称作 缴父 。
English: Often sold at fairs, he was known as the "Father of Taxation."

古文：宁封子，黄帝时人也。
现代文：宁封子，是黄帝时候的人。
English: Ning Fuzi is a person from the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：世传为黄帝陶正，有异人过之，为其掌火。能出五色烟。
现代文：历代都传说他是给黄帝管制造陶器的陶正。有一个神异的人来拜访他，为他掌管火候，能在五彩缤纷的烟火中进出。
English: Throughout the ages, legend has it that he was Taozheng, who made pottery for the Yellow Emperor. A supernatural man came to visit him and controlled the fire for him, allowing him to go in and out of the multicolored fireworks.

古文：久则以教封子，封子积火自烧，而随烟气上下。
现代文：过了一段时间，这人就把这法术教给封子。封子堆起了柴火自焚，却只能随着烟火上下飘动，结果被烧成了灰烬。
English: After a while, the man taught the spell to Fuzi, who made a pile of firewood and set himself on fire, but he could only float up and down with the fireworks. As a result, he was burned to ashes.

古文：视其灰烬，犹有其骨。
现代文：人们仔细察看那灰烬，还有他的骨头在里面呢。
English: The ashes were examined and found to contain his bones.

古文：时人共葬之宁北山中。故谓之宁封子。
现代文：当时的人就一起把他埋葬在宁北山中，所以人们叫他宁封子。
English: People at that time buried him together in the Ningbei Mountains, so people called him Ning Fuzi.

古文：偓佺者，槐山采药父也。
现代文：偓佺，是槐山的采药师。
English: He is the herbalist of Lushan.

古文：好食松实。形体生毛，长七寸。两目更方。能飞行逐走马。
现代文：他喜欢吃松树的果实，身体上长着七寸长的毛，双眼能看向不同的方向；能飞也似地奔走，追赶那奔跑着的马。
English: He likes to eat the fruit of pine trees, has seven inches of hair on his body, his eyes can look in different directions; he can fly and also run, chasing the running horse.

古文：以松子遗尧，尧不暇服。
现代文：他曾用松子赠送给尧，尧没有空吃。
English: He used to give pine nuts as a gift to Toad, and Toad was never short of food.

古文：松者，简松也。时受服者，皆三百岁。
现代文：这种松树，名叫简松，当时吃过的人，都活了三百岁。
English: People who ate this pine tree, named Jansong, lived to be 300 years old.

古文：彭祖者，殷时大夫也。姓钱，名铿。帝颛顼之孙，陆终氏之中子。
现代文：彭祖，是殷朝的大夫，姓钱，名铿，帝颛顼的孙子、陆终氏的第二个儿子。
English: Peng Zu, a doctor of the Yin Dynasty, surnamed Qian, was the grandson of Emperor Qian and the second son of Lu Zhen.

古文：历夏而至商末，号七百岁。
现代文：他经历过夏朝，一直活到商朝末年，号称活了七百岁。
English: He lived through the Summer Dynasty and lived until the end of the Shang Dynasty, claiming to have lived seven hundred years.

古文：常食桂芝。
现代文：他常常吃桂花和灵芝草。
English: He often eats osmanthus and reishi grass.

古文：历阳有彭祖仙室。
现代文：安徽历阳山有彭祖的仙室。
English: Liyang Mountain in Anhui Province is home to Peng Zu's hermitage.

古文：前世云：祷请风雨，莫不辄应。
现代文：前代的人都说：在那儿祈风求雨，无不有应。
English: The people of the previous generation said: "Pray for wind and rain there, and everything will come to you."

古文：常有两虎在祠左右。
现代文：在这祠堂的旁边还经常有两只老虎。
English: There are also two tigers that often roam around the shrine.

古文：今日祠之讫地，则有两虎迹。
现代文：今天祠堂已经没有了，但地上还有两只老虎留下的足迹。
English: Today, the ancestral hall is no longer there, but the footprints of two tigers still remain on the ground.

古文：师门者，啸父弟子也。
现代文：师门，是啸父的徒弟。
English: Shimen, an apprentice of Father Wu.

古文：能使火。食桃葩。
现代文：他能使唤火，吃桃花。
English: He can summon fire and eat peach blossoms.

古文：为孔甲龙师。
现代文：他是孔甲的龙师。
English: He is Kong Jia's dragon master.

古文：孔甲不能修其心意，杀而埋之外野。
现代文：孔甲不能遵循他的意志办事，所以把师门杀死埋葬在郊外的荒野之中。
English: Kong Jia couldn't follow his will, so he killed Shimen and buried him in the wilderness outside the city.

古文：一旦，风雨迎之。山木皆燔。
现代文：一天，有风雨前来把他迎接上天，山上的树木全都烧光了。
English: One day, a storm came to meet him in the sky, and all the trees on the mountain were burnt out.

古文：孔甲祠而祷之，未还而死。
现代文：孔甲到那儿祭祀祈祷，但还没有回家就死了。
English: Kong Jia went there to offer sacrifices and prayers, but died before returning home.

古文：前周葛由，蜀羌人也。
现代文：周代的葛由，是当时蜀国羌族人。
English: Ge Yu of the Zhou Dynasty was a member of the Yi people of Shu at that time.

古文：周成王时，好刻木作羊卖之。
现代文：周成王时，他喜欢把木头雕刻成羊卖掉。
English: When Zhou Chengwang was king, he liked to carve wood into sheep and sell them.

古文：一旦，乘木羊入蜀中，蜀中王侯贵人追之，上绥山绥山多桃，在峨眉山西南，高无极也。
现代文：有一天，他骑了木羊进入蜀国之中，蜀国里的王侯贵族追他，便一起上了绥山。绥山上面多桃树，位于峨眉山西南，高不见顶。
English: One day, he rode a wooden goat into the middle of Shu, and the princes and nobles of Shu chased him, and they went up Lushan together. There are many peach trees on Lushan, which is located in the southwest of Mount Emei, and it is too high to see the top.

古文：随之者不复还，皆得仙道。
现代文：跟随他去的人不再回来，都得了仙道。
English: Those who followed him never came back, and all of them were blessed with immortality.

古文：故里谚曰： 得绥山一桃，虽不能仙，亦足以豪。 
现代文：所以乡间的谚语说： 得到绥山上的一只蟠桃，即使不能成仙，也足以使自己成为英豪。 
English: Therefore, a proverb in the countryside says: "If you get a peach from Lushan Mountain, even if you can't become immortal, it's enough to make you a hero."

古文：山下立祠数十处。
现代文：山下建了几十座庙。
English: Dozens of temples have been built under the mountain.

古文：崔文子者，泰山人也。
现代文：崔文子，是泰山郡人。
English: Cui Wenzi is from Taishan County.

古文：学仙于王子乔。
现代文：他曾向王子乔学习仙道。
English: He once learned the Way of Immortality from Prince Joe.

古文：子乔化为白蜺，而持药与文子。
现代文：王子乔变成了一只白色的寒蝉，拿了药给文子。
English: Prince Qiao turned into a white cicada and took the medicine to Wenzi.

古文：文子惊怪，引戈击蜺，中之，因堕其药。
现代文：文子十分惊奇，便拿起长戈向寒蝉刺去，把它刺中了，那药就掉了下来。
English: Fumiko was very surprised, so she picked up the shovel and stabbed at the cicada. She hit it, and the medicine fell out.

古文：俯而视之，王子乔之尸也。
现代文：文子低头看那寒蝉，竟是王子乔的尸体。
English: Fumiko looked down at the cicada, which turned out to be the corpse of Prince Joe.

古文：置之室中，覆以敝筐。
现代文：于是把他放在屋子里，用破竹筐盖好。
English: So they put him in the house and covered him with a broken bamboo basket.

古文：须臾，化为大鸟。
现代文：过了一会儿，尸体变成了一只大鸟。
English: After a while, the corpse turned into a big bird.

古文：开而视之，翻然飞去。冠先，宋人也。
现代文：文子打开竹筐去看它，大鸟竟扑打着翅膀飞走了。冠先，是宋国人。
English: Fumiko opened the bamboo basket to look at it, and the big bird actually flapped its wings and flew away.

古文：钓鱼为业。
现代文：以钓鱼为业，住在睢水边上已有一百多年了。
English: He has been fishing and living on the edge of Surabaya for more than a hundred years.

古文：居睢水旁，百余年，得鱼，或放，或卖，或自食之。
现代文：他钓到了鱼，有的放掉，有的卖掉，有的自己吃掉。
English: He caught fish, some he released, some he sold, and some he ate.

古文：常冠带，好种荔，食其葩实焉。
现代文：他经常戴着帽子，束着带子，穿得十分整齐。他喜欢种荔枝，吃它的花和果实。
English: He often wears a cap, a headband and is very neatly dressed. He likes to grow lychees and eat their flowers and fruits.

古文：宋景公问其道，不告，即杀之。
现代文：宋景公曾向他求问长寿之道，他不肯说，于是宋景公就把他杀了。
English: Song Jing Gong once asked him the way to longevity, but he refused to tell him, so Song Jing Gong killed him.

古文：后数十年，踞宋城门上，鼓琴，数十日乃去。
现代文：几十年以后，他竟坐在宋国的城门上弹琴，弹了几十天才离去。
English: Decades later, he actually sat on the gate of the Song Dynasty to play the piano. He played for dozens of days before leaving.

古文：宋人家家奉祠之。琴高，赵人也。
现代文：于是宋国的民众把他奉为神仙祭祀他。琴高，是赵国人。
English: As a result, the people of the Song Dynasty worshipped him as a god. Qin Gao was a native of Zhao.

古文：能鼓琴。为宋康王舍人。
现代文：他会弹琴，是宋康王的侍从宾客。
English: He could play the piano, and was an attendant guest of King Song Kang.

古文：行涓彭之术，浮游冀州、涿郡间二百余年。
现代文：他奉行涓子、彭祖的道术，在冀州的涿郡之中漂泊了二百多年。
English: He followed the Taoism of Zizi and Pengzu, and wandered for more than two hundred years among the counties in Jizhou.

古文：后辞入涿水中，取龙子，与诸弟子期之。曰： 明日皆洁斋候。 于水旁设祠屋。
现代文：后来他告别众人到涿水中去擒捉龙子，与徒弟们约定说： 明天你们都整洁身心，等候在涿水岸边，并在岸边设置一所祠堂。 
English: Later, he bade farewell to everyone and went to Surabaya to catch dragon eggs. He made an appointment with his disciples, saying, "Tomorrow, you will all be clean and ready to wait on the shore of Surabaya, and set up a shrine on the shore."

古文：果乘赤鲤鱼出，来坐祠中。且有万人观之。
现代文：第二天他果然骑着红鲤鱼出水，来到祠堂中坐下，当时还有上万人来围观他。
English: The next day, he did indeed ride the red herring out of the water, came to the ancestral hall and sat down. At that time, tens of thousands of people came to watch him.

古文：留一月，乃复入水去。
现代文：他逗留了一个月，才又潜入到水中去。
English: He stayed for a month before diving back into the water.

古文：陶安公者，六安铸冶师也。
现代文：陶安公，是六安县的金属冶炼师。
English: Tao An Gong is a metal smelter from Lu'an County.

古文：数行火。火一朝散上，紫色冲天。公伏冶下求哀。
现代文：他经常用火，有一次火焰突然发散上去，紫色的火光直冲天空，陶安公害怕得趴倒在冶炼炉下请求上天哀怜宽赦。
English: He often used fire. On one occasion, the flames suddenly spread upwards, and the purple glow shot straight up into the sky. Tao An Gong was so scared that he fell on his face under the smelting furnace and begged for mercy from the heavens.

古文：须臾。朱雀止冶上，曰： 安公！安公！冶与天通。
现代文：过了一会了，一只朱雀停在冶炼炉上，对他说： 安公安公，你的冶炼炉与天相通。
English: After a while, a chaffinch stopped at the smelting furnace and said to him, "An public security officer, your smelting furnace is connected to the heavens.

古文：七月七日，迎汝以赤龙。 
现代文：七月七日，迎接你的是条赤龙。 
English: On July 7th, you will be greeted by a red dragon.

古文：至时，安公骑之，从东南去。
现代文：到了那天，安公骑上赤龙，从东南方离地而去。
English: On that day, An Gong rode a red dragon and left the earth from the southeast.

古文：城邑数万人，豫祖安送之，皆辞诀。
现代文：城内几万人，事先为安公祭祀路神、饯行送别，一一和他辞别。
English: Tens of thousands of people in the city came to pay their respects to Ankong by offering sacrifices to the Road God and bidding him farewell.

古文：有人入焦山七年，老君与之木钻，使穿一盘石，石厚五尺，曰： 此石穿；当得道。 
现代文：有一个人，进入长江中的焦山已七年了，太上老君给他一个木钻，让他去钻穿一块大石头，这石头有五尺厚。太上老君对他说： 这块石头钻穿了，你就能得道。 
English: There was a man who had been in Mount Jiao in the Yangtze River for seven years. The Lady Superior gave him a wooden drill and asked him to drill through a large stone, which was five feet thick. The Lady Superior said to him, "If you drill through this stone, you will attain the Way."

古文：积四十年，石穿，遂得神仙丹诀。
现代文：这人一共钻了四十年，石头被钻穿了，结果便得到了炼丹成仙的秘诀。
English: The man drilled for a total of forty years, the stone was drilled through, and as a result, he obtained the secret of making immortality.

古文：鲁少千者，山阳人也。
现代文：鲁少千，是山阳县人。
English: Lu Shaoqian is from Sanyang County.

古文：汉文帝尝微服怀金过之，欲问其道。
现代文：汉文帝曾经隐瞒了身份穿着平民百姓的服装携带了黄金去拜访他，想向他问道。
English: Emperor Hanwen once concealed his identity, dressed in civilian clothes and carried gold to visit him and wanted to ask him.

古文：少千拄金杖，执象牙扇，出应门。
现代文：鲁少千撑着黄金拐杖，拿着象牙扇子，走出家门来迎接他。
English: Lu Shaoqian, holding a golden cane and an ivory fan, came out of the house to meet him.

古文：淮南王安，好道术。设厨宰以候宾客。
现代文：淮南王刘安喜好道术，聘请了厨师来迎候宾客。
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, was fond of Taoism and hired a chef to welcome his guests.

古文：正月上午，有八老公诣门求见。
现代文：正月上旬的辛日，有八位老人登门求见。
English: On a bitter day in the early part of the first month of the year, eight elderly people came to see me.

古文：门吏曰王，王使吏自以意难之，曰： 吾王好长生，先生无驻衰之术，未敢以闻。 公知不见，乃更形为八童子，色如桃花。
现代文：看门人禀报了淮南王，淮南王让看门人自己出主意去难住他们。这看门人就对他们说： 我们的王爷向往长生不老，各位老先生没有防止衰老的方法，所以我没敢把你们求见的消息报告给我们的王爷。 老人们知道不会被接见了，就变成了八个小孩，面色就象桃花一样。
English: The doorkeepers tipped off King Huainan, who let the doorkeepers come up with their own plan to embarrass them. The doorkeepers then said to them, "Our prince yearns to live forever, and you old gentlemen have no way to prevent aging, so I didn't dare report the news of your request to our prince. The old men knew they wouldn't be received, so they turned into eight children, with faces like peach blossoms.

古文：王便见之，盛礼设乐，以享八公。
现代文：淮南王就接见了他们，礼节十分隆重，还配备了音乐，来让这八位老人享用。
English: Huainan King received them, the etiquette is very grand, but also equipped with music, to let the eight old people enjoy.

古文：援琴而弦，歌曰： 明明上天，照四海兮。知我好道，公来下兮。
现代文：淮南王拿过琴来边弹边唱道： 光明的上天，照耀四海啊；知道我喜爱道术，让老人下凡来啊。
English: Huainan Wang took the lute and played it while singing: "Bright heaven, shine on the four seas; know that I love Taoism, let the old man come down everywhere."

古文：公将与余，生羽毛兮。升腾青云，蹈梁甫兮。
现代文：老人们将和我一起，身上长出羽毛啊；腾空登上青云，把梁甫山踩在脚下啊。
English: The old people will grow feathers together with me; they will fly up to Qingyun and trample Liangfushan underfoot.

古文：观见三光，遇北斗兮。驱乘风云，使玉女兮。 
现代文：观望日月星辰，与北斗相遇啊，乘风驾云，使唤神女啊。 
English: Watching the sun, moon and stars, encountering the Big Dipper, riding the wind and clouds, summoning the goddess.

古文：今所谓淮南操是也。
现代文：今天所谓的《淮南琴曲》，就是这首歌。
English: Today's so-called "Huainan Qinqiu" is this song.

古文：刘根，字君安。京兆长安人也。
现代文：刘根，字君安，是京兆长安人。
English: Liu Gen, alias Junan, is a native of Chang'an, Beijing.

古文：汉成帝时，入嵩山学道。遇异人授以秘诀，遂得仙。能召鬼。
现代文：汉成帝的时候，他曾到嵩山学习道术，碰上一个神异的人，把神仙的秘诀教给了他，于是他就得到了仙道，能召见鬼。
English: When Han Chengdi was emperor, he went to Songshan to study Taoism. He met a supernatural person and taught him the secret of the immortals. As a result, he obtained the way of the immortals and was able to summon demons.

古文：颍川太守史祈以为妖，遣人召根，欲戮之。
现代文：颖川太守史祈认为这是妖怪作祟，便派人召见刘根，想杀死他。
English: Yingchuan Governor Shiqi thought that this was the work of a specter, so he sent someone to summon Liu Gen and try to kill him.

古文：至府，语曰： 君能使人见鬼，可使形见。
现代文：刘根到了太守府上后，史祈便对他说： 您能让人见到鬼，必须让人看见鬼的形状，否则就杀了你！ 
English: After Liu Gen arrived at the Imperial Governor's residence, Shi Qi then said to him: You can make people see ghosts, you must make people see the shape of ghosts, otherwise they will kill you!

古文：不者，加戮。 
现代文：刘根说： 这很容易。
English: Liu Gen said, "It's easy.

古文：根曰： 甚易。 
现代文：请借一下您面前的笔墨让我写一下符箓。 
English: Please lend me the pen and ink in front of you and let me write the characters.

古文：借府君前笔砚书符，因以叩几；须臾，忽见五六鬼，缚二囚于祈前。
现代文：他写好后将这符箓敲了一下桌子。一会儿，忽然看见五六个鬼绑着两个囚犯来到史析眼前。
English: After he finished writing, he tapped the symbol on the table. A moment later, he suddenly saw five or six ghosts come to the historian with two prisoners tied to them.

古文：祈熟视，乃父母也。
现代文：史祈仔细一打量，竟是父母亲。
English: Shi Qie carefully measured a dozen, and it turned out to be her parents.

古文：向根叩头曰： 小儿无状，分当万死。 
现代文：他父母亲向刘根磕着头说： 我儿子无礼，罪该万死。 
English: His parents shook their heads at Liu Gen and said, "My son is impolite and deserves to die."

古文：叱祈曰： 汝子孙不能光荣先祖，何得罪神仙，乃累亲如此。 
现代文：又训斥史祈说： 你们这些子孙不能光宗耀祖，为什么还要得罪神仙，让你父母亲也受到这样的拖累！ 
English: He also reprimanded Shi Qi and said, "You children and grandchildren can't just glorify your ancestors, why do you have to offend the gods and drag your parents down like this!

古文：祈哀惊悲泣，顿首请罪。
现代文：史析惊恐万状，悲哀地哭泣着，向刘根磕头请罪。
English: The historian was terrified, wept sadly, and pleaded guilty to Liu Gen Shantou.

古文：根默然忽去，不知所之。
现代文：刘根一声不响地忽然离去了，不知到了什么地方。
English: Liu Gen suddenly left without a word, and I don't know where he went.

古文：汉明帝时，尚书郎河东王乔，为邺令。
现代文：汉明帝的时候，尚书郎河东郡人王乔做邺县县令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanming, Shang Shulang and Wang Qiao, a native of Hedong County, served as county magistrates of Jixian County.

古文：乔有神术，每月朔，尝自县诣台。
现代文：王乔有仙道，每月初一，常常从邺县到尚书台来。
English: Wang Qiao has a fairy tale. On the first day of every month, he often comes from Jixian to Shangshudai.

古文：帝怪其来数，而不见车骑；密令太史候望之。
现代文：汉明帝对他来得这样频繁而又看不见他的车马感到很奇怪，就秘密地命令太史监视他。
English: Han Mingdi felt very strange that he came so frequently and could not see his chariot and horse, so he secretly ordered Taishi to monitor him.

古文：言其临至时，辄有双凫，从东南飞来。
现代文：大史汇报说，王乔将来临的时候，总是有两只野鸭从东南方飞来。
English: Dashi reported that when Wang Qiao came, there were always two wild ducks flying from the southeast.

古文：因伏伺，见凫，举罗张之，但得一双舄。
现代文：汉明帝便派人埋伏下来伺侯，看见野鸭再来，就拿起网把它们罩住，结果却只得到一双木履。
English: Han Mingdi then sent someone to lie in wait, and when he saw the wild ducks coming, he took up the net to cover them, but in the end he only got a pair of clogs.

古文：使尚书识视，四年中所赐尚书官属履也。
现代文：让尚方令辨认，原来是明帝四年时赐给尚书台官员们的鞋子。
English: Shang Fang ordered them to identify the shoes, which were originally given to Shang Shudai's officials by Emperor Ming for four years.

古文：蓟子训，不知所从来。
现代文：蓟子训，不知是从什么地方来的。
English: I don't know where it came from.

古文：东汉时，到洛阳见公卿，数十处，皆持斗酒片脯候之。曰： 远来无所有，示致微意。 
现代文：东汉时，他到洛阳，拜见了几十个大官，每次拜见时都拿了一杯酒一片干肉款待他们，并说： 我远道而来，没有什么东西，只能用它来表示一点小小的心意。 
English: When he was in the Eastern Han Dynasty, he went to Luoyang and met with dozens of dignitaries. Every time he met with them, he took a glass of wine and a piece of dried meat to entertain them, and said: I have come a long way, I have nothing, I can only use it to express a little bit of my heart.

古文：坐上数百人，饮啖终日不尽。
现代文：宴席上几百个人，吃吃喝喝整天没个完。
English: There were several hundred people at the banquet, eating and drinking all day long.

古文：去后，皆见白云起，从旦至暮。
现代文：离开后都看见有白云升起，从早晨直到傍晚都这样。
English: After they left, they saw a white cloud rising, and it stayed that way from morning until evening.

古文：时有百岁公说：小儿时见训卖药会稽市，颜色如此。
现代文：当时有个百岁老人说： 我小时候，看见蓟子训在会稽集市上卖药，面色也象这样。 
English: At that time, a centenarian said, "When I was a child, I saw Xun Zixun selling medicine at the fair, and his face looked like this.

古文：训不乐住洛，遂遁去。
现代文：蓟子训不喜欢住在洛阳，就悄悄溜走了。
English: Xun Zixun did not like living in Luoyang, so he quietly slipped away.

古文：正始中，有人于长安东霸城，见与一老公共摩挲铜人，相谓曰： 适见铸此，已近五百岁矣。 
现代文：正始年间，有人在长安东面的霸城，看见他与一位老人一起在抚摸铜象，并对老人说： 当时看见铸造这铜象，到现在已快五百年了。 
English: At the beginning of the year, someone saw him stroking a bronze elephant with an old man in the city of Baocheng, east of Chang'an, and said to the old man: At that time, I saw the casting of this bronze elephant, and now it has been almost five hundred years.

古文：见者呼之曰： 蓟先生小住。 
现代文：这看见的人向他喊道： 蓟先生等一等。 
English: People who saw him called out to him, "Mr. Zou, stop for a moment!

古文：并行应之。视若迟徐，而走马不及。
现代文：他一边走一边答应着，看上去好象在慢吞吞地走，但奔跑着的马也追不上。
English: He said yes as he walked, seeming to shuffle along, but he couldn't keep up with a galloping horse.

古文：汉阴生者，长安渭桥下乞小儿也。
现代文：汉朝的阴生，是长安渭桥下讨饭的小孩，常常在市场上讨饭。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Yin Sheng was a child who begged for food under the Chang'an Bridge. He often begged for food at the market.

古文：常于市中丐，市中厌苦，以粪洒之。
现代文：市场上的人觉得讨厌，就用大粪泼他。
English: The man in the market is disgusted and pelts him with excrement.

古文：旋复在市中乞，衣不见污如故。
现代文：但一会儿他又在市场上乞讨，而衣服就象原来那样没被搞脏。
English: But a moment later he was begging in the market again, and his clothes were not soiled as before.

古文：长吏知之，械收系，着桎梏，而续在市乞。
现代文：官吏知道后，用刑具拘捕了他，给他带上了手铐脚镣，但他又继续在市场上讨饭。
English: When the officials found out, they arrested him with torture instruments and handcuffed him, but he continued to beg in the market.

古文：又械欲杀之，乃去。
现代文：官吏又拘捕了他，并想杀死他，他就逃跑了。
English: Officers arrested him again and tried to kill him, but he escaped.

古文：洒之者家，屋室自坏，杀十数人。
现代文：向他泼大粪的人家中，房屋都自己倒塌了，压死了十几个人。
English: In the homes of those who had thrown excrement at him, the buildings collapsed on their own, crushing more than a dozen people to death.

古文：长安中谣言曰： 见乞儿与美酒，以免破屋之咎。 
现代文：长安城中流传的歌谣说： 看见讨饭的小孩儿，快点给他喝美酒，以免塌房的灾祸再临头。 
English: A folk song circulating in Chang'an City says: "If you see a child begging for food, quickly give him some good wine, lest the disaster of a collapsed building befall you again."

古文：谷城乡平常生，不如何所人也。
现代文：山东谷城县乡下小卒常生，不知道是什么地方人。
English: He is a regular pupil at a rural primary school in Gucheng County, Shandong Province. It is not known what kind of local people he is.

古文：数死而复生。时人为不然。
现代文：他几次死而复生，当时的人认为不会有这种事。
English: He came back to life several times, which people at the time didn't think was possible.

古文：后大水出，所害非一，而平辄在缺门山上大呼言：平常生在此。
现代文：后来洪水暴发，遭灾的地方不止一处，而他总是在缺门山上大喊，说： 小卒常生在这儿。 
English: Later, when there was a flood and more than one place was affected, he would always shout from the mountain, "This is where my son was born."

古文：云复雨，水五日必止。
现代文：又说： 还要下雨，洪水过五天一定会退下去的。 
English: He also said, "It's still going to rain, and the floodwaters will definitely recede after five days."

古文：止，则上山求祠之。但见平衣杖革带。
现代文：洪水退后，人们就上山向他祈祷，只见他穿着整齐，手持拐杖，束着皮带。
English: After the flood had receded, people went up the mountain to pray to him, only to find him neatly dressed, holding a cane and wearing a leash.

古文：后数十年，复为华阴市门卒。
现代文：过了几十年，他又当了华阴县城的守门人。
English: Decades later, he became the gatekeeper of Huayin County.

古文：左慈，字符放，庐江人也。
现代文：左慈，字元放，是庐江郡人。
English: Zuo Ci, also known as Zuo Yuanbo, is a native of Minjiang County.

古文：少有神通。尝在曹公座，公笑顾众宾曰： 今日高会，珍羞略备。
现代文：他年轻时就很有神通，曾出席曹操的宴会，曹操笑着环顾各位宾客说： 今日贵宾聚会，山珍海味大致齐备了。
English: When he was young, he was very magical. He once attended Cao Cao's banquet. Cao Cao looked around the guests with a smile and said, "Today's VIP gathering, the mountain and sea delicacies are almost ready."

古文：所少者，吴松江鲈鱼为脍。 
现代文：所缺少的，只是吴国松江中的鲈鱼做的鱼末子了。 
English: All that was missing was the youngest fish, a carp from the Songjiang River in Wuxi.

古文：放曰： 此易得耳。 
现代文：元放说： 这容易搞到。 
English: Yuan Fang said: This is easy to get.

古文：因求铜盘贮水，以竹竿饵钓于盘中，须臾，引一鲈鱼出。
现代文：于是他要了一只铜盘，装满水。用竹竿安上了鱼饵在盘中垂钓。一会儿，便钓出一条鲈鱼。
English: So he asked for a copper pan, filled with water. With a bamboo pole, he attached a fishing rod and fished in the pan. After a while, he caught a catfish.

古文：公大拊掌，会者皆惊。
现代文：曹操热烈鼓掌，宴会上的人都惊讶不已。
English: Cao Cao applauded enthusiastically, and everyone at the banquet was astonished.

古文：公曰： 一鱼不周坐客，得两为佳。 
现代文：曹操说： 一条鱼不能使宴席上的宾客都吃上，有两条才好。 
English: Cao Cao said, "One fish cannot satisfy all the guests at a banquet, two are better."

古文：放乃复饵钓之。须臾，引出，皆三尺余，生鲜可爱。
现代文：元放就又下饵钓鱼，一会儿，又钧出一条，与前一条一样，都有三尺多长，新鲜得十分可爱。
English: After releasing the fish, he went fishing again, and after a while, he caught another one. Like the previous one, it was more than three feet long, and it was very fresh and lovely.

古文：公便自前脍之，周赐座席。
现代文：曹操便亲自走上前去把它做成鱼末子，赐给宴席上的每个人吃。
English: Cao Cao then personally stepped forward to make it into the youngest fish and give it to everyone at the banquet to eat.

古文：公曰： 今既得鲈，恨无蜀中生姜耳。 
现代文：曹操说： 现在已经搞到了鲈鱼，遗憾的只是没有蜀国的生姜作佐料。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Now we've got eel, but unfortunately we don't have ginger from Shu as a seasoning.

古文：放曰： 亦可得也。 
现代文：元放说： 这也是搞得到的。 
English: Yuan Fang said: This can also be done.

古文：公恐其近道买，因曰： 吾昔使人至蜀买锦，可敕人告吾使；使增市二端。 
现代文：曹操怕他在近处买，就说： 我过去曾派人到蜀国买锦缎，你可以命令别人告诉我委派的人，让他多买二端。 
English: Cao Cao was afraid that he would buy it nearby, so he said, "In the past, I sent someone to Shu Province to buy brocade. You can order someone else to tell my representative to buy more brocade."

古文：人去，须臾还，得生姜。又云： 于锦肆下见公使，已敕增市二端。 
现代文：元放走了，一会儿就回来了，搞到了生姜，又对曹操说： 在卖织锦的启铺里见到了您所派遣的人，我已命令他多买二端。 
English: Yuan let him go, came back a moment later, got the ginger, and said to Cao Cao: I saw the person you sent in the opening of the brocade shop. I have ordered him to buy two more ends.

古文：后经岁余，公使还，果增二端。
现代文：后来过了一年多，曹操所委派的人回来，果然多买了二端织锦。
English: Later, after more than a year, the person appointed by Cao Cao came back and bought more brocade.

古文：问之，云： 昔某月某日，见人于肆下，以公敕敕之。 
现代文：曹操问他，他说： 过去某月某日，我在店铺里遇见一人，他把您的命令传达给了我。 
English: Cao Cao asked him, and he said: "On a certain day of a certain month in the past, I met a person in a shop, and he conveyed your order to me.

古文：后公出近郊，士人从者百数，放乃赉酒一罂，脯一片，手自倾罂，行酒百官，百官莫不醉饱。公怪，使寻其故。
现代文：后来，曹操外出到近郊游玩：陪同他的士大夫有一百多。
English: Later, Cao Cao went out to play in the nearby countryside: he was accompanied by more than a hundred scholars and doctors.

古文：行视沽酒家，昨悉亡其酒脯矣。
现代文：走访了卖酒的店铺，原来他们的酒和干肉昨天全部丢失了。
English: We visited a liquor store, and it turned out that all their liquor and dried meat had been lost yesterday.

古文：公怒，阴欲杀放。
现代文：曹操大怒，暗中打算杀掉元放。
English: Cao Cao was furious and secretly planned to kill Yuan Fang.

古文：放在公座，将收之，却入壁中，霍然不见。
现代文：有一次，元放在曹操的宴席上，曹操正要逮捕他，他竟退进墙壁里，忽然不见了。
English: Once, when Yuan was at Cao Cao's banquet and Cao Cao was about to arrest him, he retreated into the wall and suddenly disappeared.

古文：乃募取之。
现代文：曹操就悬赏搜捕他。
English: Cao Cao offered a reward for his capture.

古文：或见于市，欲捕之，而市人皆放同形，莫知谁是。
现代文：有人在集市上看见了他，正要捕捉他时，集市上的人却都与元放一模一样，不知道哪一个才是元放。
English: Someone saw him in the market and was about to catch him, but the people in the market were all exactly the same as the original, and they didn't know which one was the original.

古文：后人遇放于阳城山头，因复逐之。遂走入羊群。
现代文：后来，有人在河南阳城山顶遇见元放，就又追赶他，他就逃进了羊群。
English: Later, someone met Yuan Fang on the top of a mountain in Yangcheng, Henan Province, and chased him, and he fled into the sheep.

古文：公知不可得，乃令就羊中告之，曰： 曹公不复相杀，本试君术耳。
现代文：曹操知道抓不到元放了，就命令部下到羊群中去告诉元放说： 曹公不再杀你了，原来不过是试试你的道术罢了。
English: Cao Cao knew that he would not be able to capture Yuan Fang, so he ordered his subordinates to go to the sheep and tell Yuan Fang: "Cao Gong will no longer kill you, it was just a test of your skills."

古文：今既验，但欲与相见。 
现代文：现在已经揖到了验证，所以只想和你相见一面。 
English: Now that I've been validated, I just want to meet you face to face.

古文：忽有一老羝，屈前两膝，人立而言曰： 遽如许。 
现代文：忽然有一只老公羊，屈起前腿的两膝，象人一样站着说道： 何必忙乱成这样！ 
English: Suddenly, there was an old ram, bent down on his two front knees, standing like a man and saying: "Why do you have to make such a mess!

古文：人即云： 此羊是。 
现代文：人们立刻说： 这只羊就是元放。 
English: People immediately said: This sheep was originally released.

古文：竞往赴之。而群羊数百，皆变为羝，并屈前膝，人立，云： 遽如许。 
现代文：便争着跑过去捉它，可是这群羊几百只，都变成了公羊，也都屈起了前腿的膝关节，象人一样站着说： 何必忙乱成这样！ 
English: They all ran to catch it, but this flock of several hundred sheep all turned into rams, and they all bent their forelegs at the knee, and stood like men, saying, "Why should we be in such a hurry?

古文：于是遂莫知所取焉。
现代文：于是人们就不知道该捉哪一只羊了。
English: So people don't know which sheep to catch.

古文：老子曰： 吾之所以为大患者，以吾有身也；及吾无身，吾有何患哉。 
现代文：老子说： 我之所以有大的祸患，是因为我有身体。等到我没有了身体，我还有什么祸患呢？ 
English: Lao Tzu said, "The reason why I have great misfortune is because I have a body. When I no longer have a body, what misfortune will I still have?"

古文：若老子之俦，可谓能无身矣。岂不远哉也。
现代文：象老子这种人，可说是能把身体不当作一回事了，但与元放相比，难道不是差得远吗？
English: A person like Lao Zi can be said to be able to disregard the body as a thing, but compared to Yuan Fang, isn't it far from it?

古文：孙策欲渡江袭许，与于吉俱行、时大旱。
现代文：吴国孙策想渡过长江袭击魏国首都许昌，于是带着道士于吉一起走。
English: Sun Ce of Wu wanted to cross the Yangtze River to attack Xu Chang, the capital of Wei, so he took the Taoist Yu Ji with him.

古文：所在熇厉，策催诸将士，使速引船，或身自早出督切。见将吏多在吉许。
现代文：当时天气十分干旱，他们所在的地方炎热得厉害。孙策就催促全体官兵，让他们快一点把船拉来准备渡江进军。他又亲自一早出去督促，却看见将宫们多聚集在于吉那里。
English: At that time, the weather was very dry and it was very hot where they were. Sun Ce urged all the officers and soldiers to quickly pull the boat to prepare for crossing the river. He personally went out in the morning to urge, but saw that most of the palaces were gathered in Ji.

古文：策因此激怒，言： 我为不如吉耶？
现代文：孙策因此而被激怒了，说： 我做得不及于吉吗？
English: Sun Ce was infuriated by this and said, "Didn't I do better than Yu Ji?"

古文：而先趋附之。 
现代文：你们倒先去依附他！ 
English: But you go ahead and cling to him!

古文：便使收吉至，呵问之曰： 天旱不雨，道路艰涩，不时得过。
现代文：就派人去抓于吉。于吉被抓来了，孙策就责备他说： 天气干旱得一直不下雨，水遭受到阻碍，不知道什么时候才能拉齐船只渡过江去，所以我一早出来动员大家。
English: Yu Ji was arrested, and Sun Ce reproached him, saying, "The weather is so dry that there has been no rain, the water has been obstructed, and I don't know when we will be able to get the boats across the river, so I came out early to mobilize everyone."

古文：故自早出，而卿不同忧戚，安坐船中，作鬼物态，败吾部伍。
现代文：但您不和我共患难，却安心坐在船中，装神弄鬼，败坏我的部队。
English: Yet you have not walked with me in my distress, but have sat securely in the ship, playing the harlot, to the ruin of my troops.

古文：今当相除。 
现代文：今天该把你宰了！ 
English: You're getting slaughtered today!

古文：令人缚置地上暴之，使请雨若能感天，日中雨者，当原赦；不尔，行诛。
现代文：就命令部下把他绑了扔在地上，让太阳晒他，并命令他求雨。如果他能感动上天，中午就下雨的话，就宽大赦免他；否则，就执行死刑。
English: He ordered his men to tie him up, throw him on the ground, let the sun shine on him, and ordered him to pray for rain. If he could move the heavens to make it rain at noon, he would be granted clemency; otherwise, he would be executed.

古文：俄而云气上蒸，肤寸而合；比至日中，大雨总至，溪涧盈溢。
现代文：一会儿，云气向上蒸腾，一块一块地合拢来。等到中午，倾盆大雨一下子倒了下来，河流山川都满得溢出来了。
English: After a while, the clouds evaporated upwards and closed up piece by piece. At noon, torrential rain fell all at once, and the rivers and streams were overflowing.

古文：将士喜悦，以为吉必见原，并往庆慰。
现代文：官兵们十分高兴，认为于吉一定能被宽大了，就一起前往庆贺慰问。
English: The officers and soldiers were very happy and thought that Yuji would definitely be pardoned, so they went to celebrate and offer condolences.

古文：策遂杀之。
现代文：孙策却在这时把于吉杀了。
English: However, Sun Ce killed Yu Ji at this time.

古文：将士哀惜，藏其尸。
现代文：官兵们都很悲痛惋借，就把他的尸体藏了起来。
English: The officers and soldiers were so grief-stricken that they hid his body.

古文：天夜，忽更兴云覆之。
现代文：那天夜里，忽然又有乌云升起，把他的尸体盖住了。
English: That night, a dark cloud suddenly rose and covered his body.

古文：明旦往视，不知所在。
现代文：第二天一早跑去一看，不知道于吉的尸体到什么地方去了。
English: The next morning, I ran to take a look, not knowing where Yuji's body had gone.

古文：策既杀吉，每独坐，彷佛见吉在左右。
现代文：孙策杀了于吉以后，每当一个人坐着，就仿佛看见于吉在他的旁边。
English: After Sun Ce killed Yu Ji, whenever a person sat, it was as if he saw Yu Ji next to him.

古文：意深恶之，颇有失常。
现代文：他心里非常厌恶于吉，精神也有点失常了。
English: He was very disgusted with Yuji in his heart, and his spirit was a bit deranged.

古文：后治疮方差，而引镜自照，见吉在镜中，顾而弗见。
现代文：后来他治疗伤口刚刚痊愈，便拿起镜子来照自己，却看见于吉在镜子中，他便转过头不看。
English: Later, when his treatment wound had just healed, he picked up a mirror to look at himself, but when he saw Yu Ji in the mirror, he turned his head away.

古文：如是再三。扑镜大叫，疮皆崩裂，须臾而死。
现代文：象这样照了好几次，他突然扑倒在镜子上大叫大嚷、伤口便都溃裂开来，一会儿就死了。
English: After several such exposures, he suddenly threw himself on the mirror and screamed so loudly that his wounds burst open and he died in an instant.

古文：介琰者，不知何许人也。
现代文：介琰，不知是什么地方人。
English: Kaede, I don't know what kind of local.

古文：住建安方山，从其师白羊公杜受玄一无为之道。能变化隐形。
现代文：他住在建安郡的方山，跟随着他的老师白羊公。杜契曾从他那里学到了 玄一 、 无为 等道家学说，能变化或者是隐去自己的身体。
English: He lived in Fangshan, Jian'an County, and followed his teacher, Aries, from whom he had learned the Taoist doctrines of "Xuan Yi" (玄一) and "Wu Wei" (無為), and was able to change or hide his body.

古文：尝往来东海，暂过秣陵，与吴主相闻。
现代文：介琰曾去东海郡，短时间经过吴国首都秣陵，与吴国大帝孙权认识了。
English: When he went to Donghai County, he briefly passed by the capital of Wu, Fuling, and got to know Sun Quan, the Great Emperor of Wu.

古文：吴主留琰，乃为琰架宫庙，一日之中，数遣人往问起居。
现代文：孙权留住了介琰，就给介琰建造了道观庙宇。一日之中，多次派入去问寒问暖。
English: Sun Quan kept Jie Ye and built a Taoist temple for him. During the day, he sent Jie Ye to the temple several times to ask about the weather.

古文：琰或为童子，或为老翁，无所食啖，不受饷遗。
现代文：介琰有时变成小孩，有时变成老头，没有吃的，却从不接受人们送去的饭菜。
English: Sometimes he becomes a child, sometimes an old man. He has no food, but he never accepts meals sent by people.

古文：吴主欲学其术，琰以吴主多内御，积月不教。
现代文：孙权想学他的道术，介琰因为孙权的宫妃太多，所以过了几个月也没有教给他。
English: Sun Quan wanted to learn his martial arts, but because there were too many of Sun Quan's concubines, they did not teach him after a few months.

古文：吴主怒，敕缚琰，着甲士引弩射之。
现代文：孙权生气了，下令绑住介琰，让身穿盔甲的士兵拿箭射他。
English: Enraged, Sun Quan ordered that he be tied up and shot with arrows by armored soldiers.

古文：弩发，而绳缚犹存不知琰之所之。
现代文：箭射过去了，缚他的绳子还在，却不知道介琰到什么地方去了。
English: The arrow had passed, but the rope was still there, and he didn't know where it had gone.

古文：吴时有徐光者，尝行术于市里：从人乞瓜，其主勿与，便从索瓣，杖地种之；俄而瓜生，蔓延，生花，成实；乃取食之，因赐观者。
现代文：吴国有个叫徐光的人，曾在街坊上表演法术。他向卖瓜的人要瓜吃，那卖瓜的不给，他便向卖瓜的要瓜子，然后用拐杖在地上打了个洞把它种上。一会儿瓜子发芽，爪蔓延伸，开花结瓜，他就摘下来吃，又送给观看的人吃。
English: In the State of Wu, there was a man named Xu Guang, who used to perform magic in the neighborhood. He asked the person selling melons to eat the melons, but the person selling the melons wouldn't give it to him. So he asked the person selling the melons to give him the melon seeds, and then he made a hole in the ground with a cane and planted it. After a while, the melon seeds sprouted, the claw vines extended, and the melons bloomed. He picked them off to eat, and then gave them to the people watching.

古文：鬻者反视所出卖，皆亡耗矣。
现代文：卖瓜的回头看看他卖的瓜，都没有了。
English: When the man selling melons looked back at the melons he was selling, they were all gone.

古文：凡言水旱甚验。
现代文：徐光说到的水灾旱情，都很灵验。
English: The floods and droughts mentioned by Xu Guang are all very effective.

古文：过大将军孙綝门，褰衣而趋，左右垂践。
现代文：有一次他经过大将军孙綝的门口，提起衣服急匆匆地跑过去，鄙弃地向两边吐唾沫并用脚践踏着。
English: Once he passed the door of General Sun Yat-sen, picked up his clothes and hurried over, contemptuously spitting on both sides and trampling them with his feet.

古文：或问其故。答曰： 流血臭腥不可耐。 
现代文：有人问他这样做的原因，他回答说： 那里流血的腥气，实在让人不能忍受。 
English: Asked why he did it, he replied: "The smell of blood in there is unbearable.

古文：綝闻恶而杀之。
现代文：孙綝听见了这话，十分憎恨他，就把他杀了。
English: When Sun Yat-sen heard this, he hated him so much that he killed him.

古文：斩其首，无血。
现代文：砍去他的头，却没有血。
English: They cut off his head, but there was no blood.

古文：及綝废幼帝，更立景帝，将拜陵，上车，有大风荡綝车，车为之倾。
现代文：到后来孙綝废除幼帝孙亮，改立孙休为景帝，将要拜谒皇陵让景帝登基，刚上车，忽然有大风摇荡着孙綝的车子，车子被大风刮倒了。
English: Later, Sun Yat-sen abolished the young Emperor Sun Liang and replaced him with Sun Xiu as Emperor Jing. He was going to pay homage to the Emperor's tomb and let Emperor Jing ascend to the throne. As soon as he got on the car, a strong wind suddenly rocked Sun Yat-sen's car, and the car was blown down by the strong wind.

古文：见光在松树上拊手指挥嗤笑之，綝问侍从，皆无见者。俄而景帝诛綝。
现代文：孙綝只见徐光在松树上指手划脚地讥笑他。孙綝问随从人员看贝徐光没有，大家都说没看见，不久景帝就把孙綝杀了。
English: Sun Yat-sen only saw Xu Guang pointing and mocking him on a pine tree. Sun Yat-sen asked his attendants if they had seen Bei Xuguang, but everyone said they had not seen him. Soon after, Emperor Jing killed Sun Yat-sen.

古文：葛玄，字孝先，从左元放受九丹液仙经。
现代文：葛玄，字孝先，曾跟随左元放学习《九丹金液仙经》。
English: Ge Xuan, also known as Xiao Xian, once followed Zuo Yuanbo to study "The Book of the Nine Immortals."

古文：与客对食，言及变化之事，客曰： 事毕，先生作一事特戏者。 
现代文：他曾与客人面对面吃饭，谈到变化的事情，客人说： 等吃完饭，先生作一个变化来玩玩。 
English: He once dined face-to-face with a guest, and when talking about change, the guest said, "After dinner, sir, make a change and have some fun."

古文：玄曰： 君得无即欲有所见乎？ 
现代文：葛玄说： 您为什么不想马上看一下呢？ 
English: Ge Xuan said: Why don't you want to take a look at it right away?

古文：乃嗽口中饭，尽变大蜂数百，皆集客身，亦不螫人。
现代文：就喷出嘴里的饭，那饭粒全都变成了大胡蜂，一共有几百只，都聚集在客人身上，也不刺人。
English: He spit out the rice in his mouth, and the rice grains all turned into wasps, a total of several hundred, all gathered on the guests, and did not sting anyone.

古文：久之，玄乃张口，蜂皆飞入，玄嚼食之，是故饭也。
现代文：过了些时候，葛玄就张开嘴巴，胡蜂都飞了进去。
English: After some time, Ge Xuan opened his mouth, and the wasps flew in.

古文：又指虾蟆及诸行虫燕雀之属，使舞，应节如人。
现代文：葛玄咀嚼着，仍然是原来的米饭，他又指挥蛤蟆以及各种爬虫燕雀之类让它们跳舞，这些动物跳起舞来就象人一样合乎节奏。
English: Ge Xuan munched on the rice, which was still the same as before. He also directed the dragonflies and various reptiles such as chaffinches to dance. These animals danced to the same rhythm as humans.

古文：冬为客设生瓜枣，夏致冰雪。
现代文：他冬天为客人置办新鲜的瓜果、枣子，夏天给客人们献上寒冰白雪。
English: In winter, he buys fresh melons, fruits, and dates for his guests, and in summer, he presents his guests with cold ice and snow.

古文：又以数十钱使人散投井中，玄以一器于井上呼之，钱一一飞从井出。
现代文：他又曾用几十个钱币，让人乱丢在井里，然后他拿了一只容器在井上面呼唤它们，这些钱币就一个一个地从井里飞出来了。
English: He also used to use dozens of coins that people threw randomly into the well, and then he took a container and called them above the well, and the coins flew out of the well one by one.

古文：为客设酒，无人传杯，杯自至前，如或不尽，杯不去也。
现代文：他为客人置办酒宴，没有人送杯子。杯子会自己来到客人的面前，如果没喝完，杯子就不会离去。
English: He would hold a banquet for his guests, and no one would bring a glass. The glass would come to the guests on its own, and if they didn't finish drinking, the glass wouldn't leave.

古文：尝与吴主坐楼上，见作请雨土人，帝曰： 百姓思雨，宁可得乎？ 
现代文：有一次，他和孙权坐在楼上，看见人们在做求雨的泥人。孙权说： 百姓盼望下雨，但做些泥人难道就可以得到吗？ 
English: Once, when he and Sun Quan were sitting upstairs, they saw people making mud puppets to pray for rain. Sun Quan said, "The people hope for rain, but can they get it by making mud puppets?"

古文：玄曰： 雨易得耳！ 
现代文：葛玄说： 雨水倒是容易搞到的。 
English: Ge Xuan said: It is easy to get rainwater.

古文：乃书符着社中，顷刻间，天地晦冥，大雨流淹。
现代文：就写了道符箓放在土地庙里，顷刻之间，天阴地暗，大雨瓢泼，积水流淌。
English: He wrote down the Taoist symbols and placed them in the local temple. In an instant, the sky turned dark, heavy rain fell, and stagnant water began to flow.

古文：帝曰： 水中有鱼乎？ 
现代文：孙权说： 水中有鱼吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Are there fish in the water?

古文：玄复书符掷水中，须臾，有大鱼数百头。
现代文：葛玄又写了一道符箓扔进水中。一会儿，水里就有大鱼几百条。
English: Ge Xuan wrote another charm and threw it into the water. Soon, there were hundreds of big fish in the water.

古文：使人治之。
现代文：孙权就派人抓了这些鱼来烧吃。
English: Sun Quan sent someone to catch these fish and cook them.

古文：吴猛，濮阳人。仕吴，为西安令，因家分宁。
现代文：吴猛，是濮阳县人，在吴国做官，任西安县令，因而家住分宁县。
English: Wu Meng, a native of Fenyang County, worked as an official in the State of Wu and served as the governor of Xi'an County. As a result, he lived in Banning County.

古文：性至孝。遇至人丁义，授以神方；又得秘法神符，道术大行。
现代文：他本性极为孝顺，遇到圣人丁义，丁义把仙道教给了他。他又获得了秘诀神符，于是他的法术十分畅行。
English: He was extremely filial by nature, and met the saint Ding Yi, who taught him the way of the immortals. He also obtained the secret charm, so his magic was very smooth.

古文：尝见大风，书符掷屋上，有青乌衔去。风即止。
现代文：他曾经碰上大风，就写了符箓扔在屋上，便有一只三脚青鸟衔去，大风马上停息了。
English: Once, when he was caught in a gale, he wrote down a charm and threw it on the roof, and a three-legged blue bird flew away, and the gale immediately died down.

古文：或问其故。曰： 南湖有舟，遇此风，道士求救。 
现代文：有人问其中的缘故，他说： 南湖有条船，遭到这大风的袭击，船上的道士正在求救呢。 
English: When someone asked the reason, he said: There is a boat in Nanhu Lake that was hit by this strong wind, and the Taoist on board is calling for help.

古文：验之果然。
现代文：人们去验证了一下，果然是这样。
English: People checked it out and it's true.

古文：西安令于庆死，已三日，猛曰： 数未尽，当诉之于天。 
现代文：西安县令干庆，死了已经三天了，吴猛说： 他的气数还没有到头，应该向上天申诉。 
English: It's been three days since the death of Xi'an County Governor Ganqing, Wu Meng said: He hasn't reached the end of his life, he should appeal to heaven.

古文：遂卧尸旁，数日，与令俱起。
现代文：于是就躺在尸体旁边。几天后，就与干庆一块儿起来了。
English: So she lay down next to the body. A few days later, she got up together with Ganqing.

古文：后将弟子回豫章，江水大急，人不得渡；猛乃以手中白羽扇画江水，横流，遂成陆路，徐行而过，过讫，水复。
现代文：后来他带领徒弟回豫章郡，长江水流十分湍急，人们无法摆渡。吴猛就用手中的白羽扇对着江面一划，江水就横着流动了，他划的地方就成了陆路，他们就慢慢地走着过了长江。
English: Later, he led his apprentice back to Yuanzhang County. The Yangtze River was flowing very fast, and people could not ferry across. Wu Meng used the white feather fan in his hand to stroke the river surface, and the river water flowed sideways. The place he drew became a land route, and they slowly walked across the Yangtze River.

古文：观者骇异。
现代文：他们走过后，江水又恢复成老样子，观看的人都很惊奇。
English: After they passed by, the water of the river returned to its old state, surprising the onlookers.

古文：尝守浔阳，参军周家有狂风暴起，猛即书符掷屋上，须臾风静。
现代文：他曾经在浔阳县任职，周参军家中矣然狂风大作，吴猛即写了符箓扔在屋上，一会儿风就静止了。
English: He once served in Poyang County, Zhou Zhan's military home was already a windstorm, Wu Meng immediately wrote symbols and threw them on the roof, and the wind stopped for a moment.

古文：园客者，济阴人也。貌美，邑人多欲妻之，客终不娶。
现代文：园客，是济阴郡人，容貌长得很美，同邑的人大多想把女儿嫁给他，但园客始终不讨老婆。
English: The gardener, a native of Jilin County, was very beautiful. Most of his fellow villagers wanted to marry their daughters to him, but the gardener never asked for a wife.

古文：尝种五色香草，积数十年，服食其实。
现代文：他曾经种了五彩缤纷的香草，让它一直长几十年，然后吃它的果实。
English: He used to grow colourful herbs, let them grow for decades and then eat the fruit.

古文：忽有五色神蛾，止香草之上，客收而荐之以布，生桑蚕焉。
现代文：忽然有一只五彩缤纷的仙蛾停在香草上。园客把它捉起来放在布上，这仙蛾就在布上产下了蚕卵。
English: Suddenly, a colourful fairy moth landed on the herbs. The gardener caught it and placed it on the cloth, where it laid its silkworm eggs.

古文：至蚕时，有神女夜至，助客养蚕，亦以香草食蚕。
现代文：到养蚕的时候，有个仙女夜里来到园客家，帮助园容养蚕，她也用香草喂蚕。
English: When it came to raising silkworms, a fairy came to the Hakka Garden at night to help the gardeners raise silkworms. She also fed the silkworms with herbs.

古文：得茧百二十头，大如瓮，每一茧缫六七日乃尽。
现代文：他们后来获得蚕茧一百二十个，个个都大得象酒瓮。每一只蚕茧，缫六七天才能把丝缫完。
English: They later obtained one hundred and twenty cocoons, each as big as a wine barrel, and each cocoon took sixty-seven days to finish cocooning.

古文：缫讫，女与客俱仙去，莫知所如。
现代文：这所有的蚕丝都缫完了，仙女就和园客一起成仙而离开了人间，没有人知道他们到了什么地方。
English: When all the silk has been spun, the fairy and the gardener become immortals and leave the world. No one knows where they have gone.

古文：汉，董永，千乘人。
现代文：汉朝的董永，是千乘县人。
English: Dong Yong of the Han Dynasty was a native of Senju County.

古文：少偏孤，与父居肆，力田亩，鹿车载自随。
现代文：小时候就死了母亲，和父亲一起生活。他尽力种田，用窄小的车子让父亲坐在里面伴随着自己。
English: His mother died when he was a child, and he lived with his father. He tried his best to farm the land, using a narrow cart to let his father sit inside with him.

古文：父亡，无以葬，乃自卖为奴，以供丧事。
现代文：父亲死了，没有钱埋葬，他就把自己卖给人家当奴仆，用得到的钱来办理丧事。
English: When his father died and there was no money to bury him, he sold himself as a slave and used the money to pay for the funeral.

古文：主人知其贤，与钱一万，遣之。
现代文：买主知道他贤能孝顺，就给了他一万个钱，叫他回家去守丧。
English: The buyer knew that he was virtuous and filial, so he gave him ten thousand yuan and told him to go home to attend the funeral.

古文：永行，三年丧毕，欲还主人，供其奴职。道逢一妇人曰： 愿为子妻。 
现代文：董永守完了三年孝，想要回到买主那里去干劳役，在路上碰到一个女子，对他说： 我愿意做您的妻子。 
English: After completing the three years of filial piety, Dong Yongshu wanted to return to the buyer to do labor service. On the way, he met a woman who said to him: I am willing to be your wife.

古文：遂与之俱。
现代文：就和董永一起到买主家去了。
English: Together with Dong Yong, they went to the master's house.

古文：主人谓永曰： 以钱与君矣。 
现代文：主人对董永说： 我已经把钱奉送给您啦。 
English: The owner said to Dong Yong: I have already sent the money to you.

古文：永曰： 蒙君之惠，父丧收藏，永虽小人，必欲服勤致力，以报厚德。 
现代文：董永说： 承蒙您的恩德，我父亲死了才得到安葬。我虽然是个卑微的人，也一定要尽心竭力来报答您的大恩。 
English: Dong Yong said: Thanks to your kindness, my father died before he was buried. Although I am a humble person, I must do my best to repay your great kindness.

古文：主曰： 妇人何能？ 
现代文：主人说： 这女人会干什么呢？ 
English: The host asked: What can this woman do?

古文：永曰： 能织。 
现代文：董永说： 会纺织。 
English: Dong Yong said: Can weave.

古文：主曰： 必尔者，但令君妇为我织缣百疋。 
现代文：主人说： 您一定要这样来报答我的话，就只要让您妻子给我织一百匹双丝细绢。 
English: And he said, If thou wilt do me this kindness, let thy wife spin me a hundred yarns.

古文：于是永妻为主人家织，十日而毕。
现代文：于是董永的妻子为主人家纺织，十天就织完了。
English: So Dong Yong's wife began to weave for her master's family and finished the weaving in ten days.

古文：女出门，谓永曰： 我，天之织女也。
现代文：这女子出门后对董永说： 我是天上的织女。
English: After the woman left the house, she said to Dong Yong: I am the heavenly weaver.

古文：缘君至孝，天帝令我助君偿债耳。 
现代文：只是因为您极其孝顺。天帝才命令来帮您偿还欠债的。 
English: It is only because of your extreme filial piety that the Heavenly Emperor has ordered me to help you pay off your debts.

古文：语毕，凌空而去而去，不知所在。
现代文：说完，就腾空而去，不知到了什么地方。
English: After saying this, he left empty-handed, and I don't know where he went.

古文：初，钩弋夫人有罪，以谴死，既殡，尸不臭，而香闻十余里。因葬云陵，上哀悼之。
现代文：当初，汉武帝夫人赵婕好犯了罪，因为受到责罚而忧死在云阳宫。当时已经把她放进柏材准备埋葬了，她的尸体却不发臭，反而香飘十多里，因此就把她埋葬在云陵。
English: At first, Emperor Hanwu's wife, Zhao Yinghao, committed a crime, and because she was punished, she died of grief in Yunyang Palace. At that time, she had already been placed in cypress wood to be buried, but her body did not stink, but it was fragrant for more than ten miles, so she was buried in Yunnan Mausoleum.

古文：又疑其非常人，乃发冢开视，棺空无尸，惟双履存一云。
现代文：汉武帝哀悼她，又疑心她不是个普通的人，就发掘坟墓开棺验看。棺村里空空的没有尸体，只有两只鞋还在。
English: Emperor Hanwu mourned her and suspected that she was not an ordinary person, so he excavated the grave, opened the coffin and inspected it. There was no body in the empty coffin, only two shoes were left.

古文：昭帝即位，改葬之，棺空无尸，独丝履存焉。
现代文：还有一种传闻说：汉昭帝即位，重新埋葬她，棺材里空空的没有尸体，只有一双丝鞋还遗留在里面。
English: There is also a rumor that Emperor Han Zhao ascended the throne and reburied her. There was no corpse in the empty coffin, only a pair of silk shoes remained inside.

古文：汉时有杜兰香者，自称南康人氏。
现代文：汉朝时有个叫杜兰香的人，自称是南康人氏。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Tulan Xiang, who claimed to be a member of the Nankang people.

古文：以建业四年春，数诣张传。
现代文：在建兴四年春天，她屡次来找张傅。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jianxing, she repeatedly came to find Zhang Fu.

古文：传年十七，望见其车在门外，婢通言： 阿母所生，遗授配君，可不敬从？ 
现代文：张傅当时十七岁，望见她的车子停在门外，而她的丫鬟来传达她的话说： 我娘生了我，让我嫁给您，我哪能不恭敬从命呢！ 
English: Zhang Fu, who was 17 at the time, saw her car parked outside the door, and her maid came to convey her words: My mother gave birth to me, let me marry you, how can I not respect my life!

古文：传，先名改硕，硕呼女前，视，可十六七，说事邈然久远。
现代文：张傅先前已把名字改成了张硕。张硕便呼唤这女子走上前来，打量了一番，大约十六七岁，而她谈到的却都是很久很久以前的事。
English: Zhang Fu had previously changed his name to Zhang Shuo. Zhang Shuo called the woman to come forward, looked at her, about sixteen or seventeen years old, and all she talked about was a long, long time ago.

古文：有婢子二人：大者萱支，小者松支。
现代文：她有丫鬟二人，大的叫萱支，小的叫松支。
English: She has two maids of honour, the eldest is called Ying Zhi and the youngest is called Song Zhi.

古文：钿车青牛上，饮食皆备。
现代文：装饰着金花的车用青牛拉着，车上吃的喝的都齐备。
English: The car, decorated with gold flowers, is pulled by a young bull, and everything to eat and drink is available on board.

古文：作诗曰： 阿母处灵岳，时游云霄际。
现代文：她作诗道： 我娘住在神山上，经常游览九重天。
English: She wrote a poem: My daughter lives on Kamiyama and often visits the Nine Heavens.

古文：众女侍羽仪，不出墉宫外。
现代文：羽毛仪仗婢女持，宫墙外头不露面。
English: Feathers are held by maids of honor, and they do not appear outside the palace walls.

古文：飘轮送我来，岂复耻尘秽。
现代文：飘飘车轮送我来，难道再羞住人间？
English: Are you ashamed to live in the world, when the wheels of your chariot bring you here?

古文：从我与福俱，嫌我与祸会。 
现代文：依我幸福不寓身，嫌我祸患在面前。 
English: My happiness does not depend on my body, and my misfortune is in front of me.

古文：至其年八月旦，复来，作诗曰： 逍遥云汉间，呼吸发九嶷。
现代文：到那一年八月初一，她又来了，作诗道： 自由往来天河间，呼吸散发九嶷山。
English: On the first day of August of that year, she came again, and wrote a poem: "Freedom to travel between heaven and rivers, breath to disperse nine mountains."

古文：流汝不稽路，弱水何不之。 
现代文：追求你呵不停步，穷乡僻壤何处不跑遍？ 
English: The pursuit of you does not stop, where do you not run through the backwoods?

古文：出薯子三枚，大如鸡子，云： 食此，令君不畏风波，辟寒温。 
现代文：她拿出山药果三个，象鸡蛋一样大，对张硕说： 把这吃了，让您不怕风浪，不受冷暖的影响。 
English: She took out three yam berries, as big as eggs, and said to Zhang Shuo: "Eat this, so that you will not be afraid of wind and waves, and will not be affected by cold and heat.

古文：硕食二枚，欲留一，不肯，令硕食尽。
现代文：张硕吃了两个，想留一个。她不肯，让张硕吃光。
English: Zhang Shuo ate two and wanted to keep one. She refused and let Zhang Shuo eat it all.

古文：言： 本为君作妻，情无旷远，以年命未合，且小乖，大岁东方卯，当还求君。 
现代文：她又对张硕说： 我本来要给您做妻子，感情可别疏远了。只因为我现在年龄还没有到数，其中稍微有点不协调。等到太岁位于东方卯次的单阏年，我会回来追求您的。 
English: She also said to Zhang Shuo, "I was going to be your wife, but let's not alienate our feelings. Just because I'm not old enough to count, it's a little incongruous. I'll come back to pursue you when I'm too old, in the year of the rooster in Dongfangwuji."

古文：兰香降时，硕问祷祀何如。
现代文：杜兰香降临时，张硕问： 祈祷祭祀的事怎么样？ 
English: When the Tulan incense fell, Zhang Shuo asked: What about the prayer and worship?

古文：香曰： 消魔自可愈疾，淫祀无益。 
现代文：兰香说： 消魔本来就能治好疾病，过分的祭祀并没有好处。 
English: Lan Xiang said: Exorcism can cure diseases. Excessive sacrifices are not beneficial.

古文：香以药为消魔。
现代文：兰香把药物称为 消魔 。
English: Lan Xiang called the drug "demon elimination."

古文：魏济北郡从事掾弦超，字义起，以嘉平中夜独宿，梦有神女来从之。自称： 天上玉女，东郡人，姓成公，字知琼，早失父母，天帝哀其孤苦，遣令下嫁从夫。 
现代文：魏朝济北郡主管文书、检举非法的从事掾弦超，字义起，在嘉平年间的一个夜晚独自一人睡觉，梦见有一个仙女来眼他，自称是天上的神女，东郡人，姓成公，字知琼，早年失去了父母，天帝哀怜她孤昔伶仃，就让地下凡出嫁，跟从丈夫过日子。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Jibei County was in charge of the paperwork and prosecution of the illegal practice of playing the gong chord. Literally, he slept alone one night during the Jiaping era. He dreamed that a fairy came to see him, claiming to be a heavenly goddess. Donggun people, surnamed Chenggong and surnamed Zhiqiong, lost their parents at an early age, and the heavenly emperor pitied her for being lonely. He let the underground marry and live with her husband.

古文：超当其梦也，精爽感悟，嘉其美异，非常人之容，觉寤钦想，若存若亡，如此三四夕。一旦，显然来游，驾辎軿车，从八婢，服绫罗绮绣之衣，姿颜容体，状若飞仙，自言年七十，视之如十五六女。
现代文：但睡醒以后再认真想想，又觉得这件事似乎有似乎没有。象这样过了三四夜。有一天，分明是知琼来游玩了，她驾着有帷帐的车子，跟着八个丫鬟，穿着绫罗绸缎做的衣服，体态容色，就象神仙一样。她自己说已经七十岁了，但看上去好象只有十五六岁。
English: One day, when it was clear that Chih-Chion had come to play, she was driving a car with a curtain, followed by eight maids, wearing clothes made of satin and satin, with a physique like a fairy. She said she was seventy years old, but she looked like she was only fifteen or sixteen.

古文：车上有壶榼，青白琉璃五具。
现代文：牢上有壶、榼等用青色、白色的琉璃宝石做的酒器五件。
English: In the dungeon there are five jars, urns and other drinking vessels made of blue and white lapis lazuli.

古文：食啖奇异，馔具醴酒，与超共饮食。
现代文：吃的喝的都非常奇特，她准备了饭菜和美酒，和弦超一起吃喝。
English: What they ate and drank was very strange. She prepared food and wine, and they ate and drank together.

古文：谓超曰： 我，天上玉女，见遣下嫁，故来从君，不谓君德。
现代文：她对弦超说： 我是天上的神女，被派到人间嫁人，所以来跟您。
English: She said to Zhenchao, "I am a celestial goddess who was sent to the human world to marry a man, so I have come to follow you.

古文：宿时感运，宜为夫妇。
现代文：不是因为您有什么特别的德行，而是有感于前世的缘分，我俩应该结为夫妻。
English: Not because of any special virtue of yours, but because of a feeling of a previous life's fate, we should get married.

古文：不能有益，亦不能为损。
现代文：我们做了夫妻，不能得到多少好处，但也不会有什么害处。
English: We can't get much benefit from being husband and wife, but we can't do any harm.

古文：然往来常可得驾轻车，乘肥马，饮食常可得远味，异膳，缯素常可得充用不乏。
现代文：不过，以后出门经常可以驾着轻便的车子，让肥壮的马拉车，吃的经常可以有远方的山珍海味和非同寻常的饭菜，绸缎常常可以任你做衣服而不会缺乏。
English: However, in the future, you can often go out driving a light car, let the fat horse-drawn carriage, eat often can have distant mountain seafood and unusual meals, silk and satin can often let you make clothes and will not lack.

古文：然我神人，不为君生子，亦无妒忌之性，不害君婚姻之义。
现代文：但我是仙人，不能给您生儿子，也没有妒忌心，不妨害您正常的婚姻。 
English: But I am a fairy godmother, I cannot give you a son, and I have no jealousy, I don't want to harm your normal marriage.

古文：遂为夫妇。 赠诗一篇，其文曰： 飘浮勃逢敖，曹云石滋芝。
现代文：于是就和弦超结为夫妻，并赠送诗歌一篇，歌词写道： 飘游在渤海蓬莱仙境中，喧闹着吐云之山更繁荣。
English: As a result, they became husband and wife, and presented her with a poem, the lyrics of which read: Floating in the fairyland of Penglai in the Bohai Sea, the noisy mountain of Tuyun is more prosperous.

古文：一英不须润，至德与时期。
现代文：灵芝不靠雨露润，德高到时会亨通。
English: Ganoderma lucidum does not rely on rain and dew, and it will succeed when it is virtuous.

古文：神仙岂虚感，应运来相之。
现代文：神仙感应岂凭空？顺应命运来帮兄。
English: Is it all in vain to invoke the gods? Obey your destiny to help your brother.

古文：纳我荣五族，逆我致祸菑。 
现代文：娶我亲属都富贵，违背我意灾祸凶。 
English: Marry my relatives are rich and noble, go against my wishes and bring disaster.

古文：此其诗之大较，其文二百余言，不能尽录。
现代文：这不过是那篇诗歌的主要几句。那首诗有二百多字，不能全部抄录在这里。
English: These are just the main lines of the poem, which has more than two hundred words and cannot be copied in its entirety here.

古文：兼注易七卷，有卦，有象，以彖为属。
现代文：她又注释《易经》，共七卷，她的《易经》注释，既有卦、爻，又有说明卦、爻含义的象辞，她的注释都以录辞为根据。
English: She also annotated the "I Ching," a total of seven volumes. Her "I Ching" annotation begins with the words "卦" and "," as well as the symbols that explain the meaning of "卦" and "." Her annotation is based on the transcription.

古文：故其文言既有义理，又可以占吉凶，犹扬子之太玄，薛氏之中经也。
现代文：所以，她的解说，既阐述了其中的涵义道理，又可以用来预卜吉凶，就象扬雄的《太玄经》、薛氏的《中经》一样。
English: Therefore, her commentary not only expounds the meaning of the sutras, but can also be used to predict good and bad luck, just like Yang Xiong's "Tai Xuan Jing" and Xue's "Middle Classic."

古文：超皆能通其旨意，用之占候。
现代文：弦超都能领会其中的意思，根据它来观察天象变化而预测吉凶。
English: Zhenchao can understand its meaning and use it for divination.

古文：作夫妇经七八年，父母为超娶妇之后，分日而燕，分夕而寝，夜来晨去，倏忽若飞，唯超见之，他人不见。
现代文：两人做夫妻一起过了七八年，弦超的父母亲为弦超娶了媳妇以后，她就隔一天来和弦超吃饭，隔一夜来和弦超睡觉，夜里来早晨走，来去时快得象飞一样，只有弦超看得见她，别人都看不见。
English: The two of them spent seven or eight years together as husband and wife. After Zheng Chao's parents married Zheng Chao's daughter-in-law, she came to dinner with Zheng Chao every other day, went to bed with Zheng Chao every other night, came in the morning and left in the evening, and came and went as fast as she could fly. Only Zheng Chao could see her, and no one else could.

古文：虽居闇室，辄闻人声，常见踪迹，然不睹其形。
现代文：弦超虽然住在关闭得紧紧的房间里，但人们总是听得见里面有人声，也常常看见有人来过的痕迹，但就是看不见知琼的身形。
English: Although Zhenchao lives in a tightly closed room, people can always hear someone's voice inside, and often see signs that someone has been there, but they can't see Zhiqiong's figure.

古文：后人怪问，漏泄其事；玉女遂求去。
现代文：后来人们奇怪地问弦超，弦超泄露了她的情况。
English: Later, people strangely asked Zhenchao, and Zhenchao revealed her situation.

古文：云： 我，神人也。
现代文：知琼就要求离开弦超，她说： 我是仙人，虽然与您私通，却不愿让别人知道。
English: Knowing Qiong, she asked to leave Zhenchao. She said, "I am a fairy godmother. Although I have sexual intercourse with you, I don't want others to know.

古文：虽与君交，不愿人知，而君性疏漏，我今本末已露，不复与君通接。
现代文：而您的性子太粗疏，藏不住话，现在我的底细已经被你泄露出去了，我不再与您交欢了。
English: But your nature is too coarse to be concealed, and now that you have divulged my innermost secrets, I will no longer have sex with you.

古文：积年交结，恩义不轻；一旦分别，岂不怆恨？
现代文：多年来和您云雨相欢，恩爱不浅，一旦分离，难道不悲痛？
English: Over the years, you and I have been together through thick and thin, and our love is not shallow. Once we are separated, won't it be sad?

古文：势不得不尔。各自努力！ 
现代文：但情势不能不这样，我们就各自珍重吧！ 
English: But the situation cannot be otherwise, so let's cherish each other!

古文：又呼侍御下酒，饮啖，发簏，取织成裙衫两副遗超。
现代文：她又叫来仆人，斟酒端菜，一同吃喝；又打开竹编的圆箱，取出用一种名贵的丝织品做的裙子和衣衫两套送给弦超，又写了一首诗赠送给他。
English: She also called the servants, poured wine and served food, and they ate and drank together. She also opened the bamboo-woven round box, took out two sets of skirts and shirts made of a precious silk fabric and gave them to Zhenchao. She also wrote a poem and gave it to him.

古文：又赠诗一首，把臂告辞，涕泣流离，肃然升车，去若飞迅。
现代文：她挽着弦超的手臂和他告别，泪水纵横，泣不成声，然后谨慎地登上车子，象飞一样地走了。
English: She took Zhenchao's arm and said goodbye to him, tears streaming down her face, unable to hold back the tears, and then cautiously boarded the car and sped away.

古文：超忧感积日，殆至委顿。
现代文：弦超天天忧虑，几乎到了卧病不起的地步。
English: Over the past few days, I have been sad and sentimental, almost to the point of malaise.

古文：去后五年。超奉郡使至洛，到济北鱼山下，陌上西行，遥望曲道头有一马车，似知琼。
现代文：知琼离开后又过了五年，弦超受郡里的委派出差到洛阳去，来到济北郡鱼山脚下的小路上时，一边向西走着，一边遥望前方，只见前面道路拐弯的地方有一辆马车，好象是知琼。
English: Five years passed after Zhi Qiong left. Zhenchao was sent to Luoyang by the county commission. When he came to a small road at the foot of Yu Mountain in Jibei County, he walked westward and looked far ahead. He saw a carriage at the corner of the road ahead, which seemed to be Zhi Qiong.

古文：驱驰至前，果是也。
现代文：他马上赶着马向前追去，果然是知琼。
English: He immediately spurred his horse forward and chased after it. Sure enough, it was Zhi Qiong.

古文：遂披帷相见，悲喜交切。
现代文：知琼就拉开车帐相见，真是又悲又喜。
English: It was both sad and happy to see Joan pull out her driver's license.

古文：控左援绥，同乘至洛。遂为室家，克复旧好。至太康中，犹在。但不日日往来，每于三月三日，五月五日，七月七日，九月九日旦，十五日辄下，往来经宿而去。张茂先为之作神女赋。
现代文：知琼勒住了左边的马，让弦超拉着车绳上车，两人一起乘车到洛阳，就又成了夫妻，恢复了过去的恩爱生活，到太康年间知琼还在，只是不天天来往，但每逢三月初三、五月初五、七月初七、九月初九、以及初一、十五日，她总是会来的，住上一夜就又走了。张华为她写了篇《神女赋》。
English: Knowing Qiong held down the horse on the left and let Zhenchao pull the rope to get on the car. The two of them took the car to Luoyang together and became husband and wife again, restoring the past love life. In the Taikang years, knowing Qiong was still there, but she did not come and go every day. But every third day of March, the fifth day of May, the seventh day of July, the ninth day of September, and the first day and the fifteenth day of September, she would always come, stay for one night and leave again. Zhang Hua She wrote a "Goddess Fu."

