古文：孙何，字汉公，蔡州汝阳人。
现代文：孙何字汉公，蔡州汝阳人。
English: Sun He Zi Han Gong, from Ruyang, Caizhou.

古文：祖镒，唐末秦宗权据州，强以宾佐起之。
现代文：祖父孙镒，唐末秦宗权占据蔡州，强迫以宾佐起用他。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Sun Yat-sen's grandfather, Qin Zongquan, occupied Caizhou and forced Yibin Zuo to serve him.

古文：镒伪疾不应，还家，以讲授为业。
现代文：孙镒假装有病不应召，回到家中，以传授学业为职。
English: Pretending to be ill, Sun Yat-sen did not respond to the summons and returned home to teach school.

古文：父庸，字鼎臣，显德中，献《赞圣策》九篇，引唐贞观所行事，以魏元成自况。
现代文：父亲孙庸，字鼎臣，显德年间，敬献《赞圣策》九篇，引用唐贞观年间的政事，以魏玄成自比。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiande, his father Sun Yong, known as the "Supreme Minister of the Three Kingdoms," dedicated to Emperor Xiande nine articles of "Praise for the Sacred Policy," quoting the political affairs during the reign of Emperor Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty and comparing them to Wei Xuancheng.

古文：得对，言曰： 武不可黩，敛不可厚，奢不可放，欲不可极。 世宗奇其言，命中书试，补开封兵曹掾。
现代文：得到对策的机会，其言说： 武力不可滥用，聚敛不可深重，奢侈不可放纵，欲望不可达到极点。 后周世宗认为其言奇异，让孙庸考试中书，补为开封兵曹掾。
English: When he was given the opportunity to respond, he said, "Force should not be abused, concentration should not be profound, luxury should not be indulged, and desire should not reach the extreme." Later, Zhou Shizong thought his words were strange, and had Sun Yong, who had written a paper in the examination, fill in as the Kaifeng soldier Cao Yao.

古文：建隆初，为河南簿。
现代文：建隆初年，任河南县主簿。
English: In the first year of Jianlong, he served as the chief bookkeeper of Henan County.

古文：太平兴国六年，鸿胪少卿刘章荐其材，改左赞善大夫。
现代文：太平兴国六年，鸿胪少卿刘章向朝廷推举他，改任左赞善大夫。
English: In the sixth year of the Taiping Xingguo, Hongyu Shaoqing Liu Zhang recommended him to the imperial court, and he was appointed Zuo Zanzhenshan Doctor.

古文：历殿中丞、知龙州而卒。
现代文：先后任殿中丞、龙州知州而死。
English: He was successively appointed as Tono no chujo (vice-commander of the palace guards) and Ryoshu no chishu (governor of Ryoshu Province).

古文：何十岁识音韵，十五能属文，笃学嗜古，为文必本经义，在贡籍中甚有声。
现代文：孙何十岁就懂得音韵，十五岁时能写文章，坚持学习，嗜好古文，所写文章一定依照经义，在贡生中很有名声。
English: At the age of ten, Sun He understood musical rhyme. At the age of fifteen, he was able to write articles, insisted on studying, and was fond of ancient texts. The articles he wrote must be in accordance with the meaning of the scriptures. He was very famous in Gongsheng.

古文：与丁谓齐名友善，时辈号为 孙丁 。
现代文：孙何和丁谓一样有名且友善，当时人称之为 孙丁 。
English: Sun He was as famous and friendly as Ding Zhao, and people called him Sun Ding at that time.

古文：王禹偁尤雅重之。
现代文：王禹翶特别推重孙何。
English: Wang Yuxuan has a special emphasis on Sun He.

古文：尝作《两晋名臣赞》、《宋诗》二十篇、《春秋意》、《尊儒教仪》，闻于时。
现代文：曾经作《两晋名臣赞》、《宋诗》二十篇、《春秋意》、《尊儒教议》，闻名于世。
English: He once wrote "Two Jin Famous Courtiers," "Twenty Song Poems," "Spring and Autumn," and "Confucianism," which are famous in the world.

古文：淳化三年举进士，开封府、礼部俱首荐，及第又得甲科，解褐将作监丞、通判陕州。
现代文：淳化三年推举为进士，在开封府、礼部都是第一个被推荐，进士及第又获得甲科，解褐将作监丞、通判陕州。
English: In three years, Junhua was selected as a candidate for promotion. He was the first to be recommended in Kaifeng Prefecture and the Ministry of Ceremonies. He was also the first to be recommended for promotion and won the first place in the first grade, and the second place in the second grade, and the third place in the second grade. He will serve as a supervisor and judge in Shaanxi Province.

古文：召入直史馆，赐绯，迁秘书丞、京西转运副使。
现代文：奉召入直史馆，赐予绯衣，升任秘书丞、京西转运副使。
English: He was called to join the Museum of Direct History, given a ceremonial robe, and promoted to secretary-general and vice-envoy for transportation between Beijing and the West.

古文：历右正言，改右司谏。
现代文：任右正言，改任右司谏。
English: He was appointed to the post of Ushogun and later to the post of Ujitsuna.

古文：真宗初，何献五议：其一，请择儒臣有方略者统兵；其二，请世禄之家肄业太学，寒隽之士州郡推荐，而禁投贽自媒者；其三，请复制举；其四，请行乡饮酒礼；其五，请以能授官，勿以恩庆例迁。
现代文：真宗初年，孙何敬献五条奏议：第一，请选拔有谋略的儒生大臣统领军队；第二，请让世代官禄之家子弟在太学学习，寒门才智出众之人由州郡推荐，严禁送礼自行介绍；第三，请恢复制举；第四，请实行乡饮酒礼；第五，请按照能力授予官职，不要凭借皇恩庆典来升任官职。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu Sect, Sun Hejing proposed five suggestions: First, please select a strategic Confucian minister to lead the army; second, please let the children of generational officials study at Taiyue; those with outstanding talents should be recommended by the state and county, and it is strictly forbidden to present gifts on their own; third, please restore the promotion system; fourth, please implement the township drinking ceremony; fifth, please award official positions according to ability, and do not rely on the imperial grace celebration to be promoted to official positions.

古文：上览而善之。
现代文：真宗看后认为很好。
English: After Tang Ruizong watched his performance, he thought that what he said was right.

古文：咸平二年，举入阁故事，何次当待制，献疏曰：
现代文：咸平二年，列举入的旧例，孙何依次担当待制，于是敬献奏疏说：
English: In the second year of Xianping, the old cases were listed, and Sun He was in charge of the standby system in turn, so he said:

古文：六卿分职，邦家之大柄也。
现代文：六卿各有职分，这是国家的大权。
English: Each of the six lords has a position, which is the power of the state.

古文：有吏部辨考绩而育人材，有兵部简车徒而治戎备，有户部正版图而阜货财，有刑部谨纪律而诛暴强，有礼部祀神示而选贤俊，有工部缮宫室而修堤防，六职举而天下之事备矣。
现代文：吏部根据考核的成绩来培养人才，兵部检阅军队治理军事装备，户部划正版图丰富财物，刑部严肃纪律诛杀强暴，礼部祭祀神灵选拔贤才，工部修缮宫室整治堤防，六职完备天下之事也就完备了。
English: According to the results of the assessment, the cadre department will train talents, the military department will review the army and manage military equipment, the household department will rectify the territory map and enrich the property, the criminal department will seriously discipline and fight against rape, the ritual department will worship the gods and select talents, the work department will repair the palace room and rectify the embankment, and the six positions will complete the world.

古文：故周之会府，汉之尚书，立庶政之根本，提百司之纲纪。
现代文：因此周代的会府，汉代的尚书，都是国家生存的根本，掌握着百官升迁的标准。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty's Kaifu and the Han Dynasty's Shangshu are both fundamental to the survival of the country and hold the standard for the promotion of hundreds of officials.

古文：令、仆率其属，丞、郎分其行，二十四司粲焉星拱，郎中、员外判其曹，主事、令史承其事。
现代文：令、仆统率下属，丞、部各负其责，二十四司如众星拱月一样灿烂，郎中、员外郎分别胜任其职，主事、令史尽职办事。
English: The lords, the servants and the subordinates under the leadership of the leadership, the chiefs and the ministers each bear their responsibilities, the 24 departments are as brilliant as the stars and the constellations, the vassals and the vassals are respectively competent in their duties, and the chiefs and the lords do their duty.

古文：四海九州之大，若网在纲。
现代文：四海九州之大，犹如网在纲上，纲举目张。
English: The vastness of Kyushu across the four seas is like a net stretched across the sea.

古文：唐之盛时，亦不闻别分利权，创使额，而军须取足。
现代文：唐朝盛时，也没有听说分权别利，首创置使者名目，但军事费用充足。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was at its peak, it was not unheard of that the separation of powers would be advantageous, and the title of emissary was created for the first time, but the military expenses were sufficient.

古文：及元宗侈心既萌，召发既广，租调不充，于是萧景、杨钊始以地官判度支，而宇文融为租调地税使，始开利孔，以构祸阶。
现代文：到唐玄宗萌发了奢侈之心，广泛发布各种诏令，租调供应不充足，这样萧景、杨钊开始用地官判度支，宇文融为租调地税使，谋利之洞开始出现，构成了以后祸患的基础。
English: By the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong's extravagant heart had sprouted, various edicts were widely issued, and the supply of land tax was insufficient. As a result, Xiao Jing and Yang Jie began to use the land officer's discretionary expenditure, and Uwen Rong became the land tax officer. The hole of profit-making began to appear, which formed the foundation of future disasters.

古文：至于肃、代，则有司之职尽废，而言利之臣攘臂于其间矣。
现代文：到唐肃宗、代宗时，有司的职责全部废弃，到处都是求利之臣。
English: By the time of Su Zong and Daizong of the Tang Dynasty, all the duties of the officials had been abandoned, and everywhere there were courtiers seeking profit.

古文：于是叛乱相仍，经费不充，迫于军期，切于国计，用救当时之急，卒以权宜裁之。
现代文：这样导致叛乱频繁，国家军费不足，被战争时限逼迫，为国家生计所迫，由于救当时之急，都是用暂时适合的办法来衡量一切事务。
English: This has led to frequent rebellions, insufficient national military expenditure, being forced by the time limit of the war, being forced by the national livelihood, and due to the urgency of the time, all affairs are measured by means that are temporarily suitable.

古文：五代短促，曾莫是思。
现代文：五代存在时间很短，对此没有这样反思。
English: Five generations have existed for a very short time, and there is no such reflection.

古文：今国家三圣相承，五兵不试，太平之业，垂统立制，在此时也。
现代文：现在国家已三代相继，不用武力，建立太平之世，建立各种法规，都在这时了。
English: Now the country has been three generations in a row, without the use of force, the establishment of a peaceful world, the establishment of various laws and regulations, are at this time.

古文：所宜三部使额，还之六卿，慎择户部尚书一人，专掌盐铁使事，俾金部郎中、员外郎判之。
现代文：应将三部官吏名额，归还六卿，谨慎地选择户部尚书一人，专门经营盐铁使事让金部郎中、员外郎处理。
English: It is necessary to return the posts of officials of the three ministries to the six nobles, carefully select one person of the household, Shosho, to specialize in the management of salt and iron, and let the vice-minister of the Ministry of Finance and the vice-minister of Foreign Affairs deal with it.

古文：又择本行侍郎二人，分掌度支、户部使事，各以本曹郎中、员外郎分判之，则三使洎判官，虽省犹不省也。
现代文：又选择本行侍郎二人，分别掌管度支、户部使事，让本曹郎中、员外郎各自处理。这样从三使到判官，虽然名称没有了但实际还存在着。
English: In addition, two attendants of this line were selected to be in charge of the household branch and the household envoy, respectively, and let the junior attendant and the outside attendant deal with it separately. In this way, from the third envoy to the judge, although the name is gone, it actually still exists.

古文：仍命左右司郎中、员外总知帐目，分勾稽违。
现代文：再让左右司郎中、员外郎总管账目，分清类别加以核实，也起到避嫌和监督作用。
English: In addition, the accounts of the general managers of the left and right departments and the foreign affairs department should be verified to distinguish the categories, which will also play a role in avoiding suspicion and supervision.

古文：职守有常，规程既定，则进无掊克之虑，退有详练之名，周官唐式，可以复矣。
现代文：官吏职责一定，各种规章制度已经确定，这样国家征收赋税不用担心有用苛捐重税盘剥之虑，不征收时也有详细明白的原因，周代的官制唐代的样式，就可以恢复了。
English: The duties of officials are certain, and various rules and regulations have been determined. In this way, the state can collect taxes without worrying about the use of heavy taxes. There are also detailed and clear reasons for not collecting taxes. The official Tang Dynasty style of the Zhou Dynasty can be restored.

古文：兹事非艰，在陛下行之尔。
现代文：这种事情并不艰难，只要陛下实行就可以了。
English: This kind of thing is not difficult, as long as His Majesty implements it.

古文：是冬，从幸大名，诏访边事。
现代文：这年冬天，孙何跟随真宗巡视大名，受诏询问边疆之事。
English: In the winter of that year, Sun He followed the True Sect to inspect the daimyo, and received an imperial edict to inquire about the frontier.

古文：何疏曰：
现代文：孙何上疏说：
English: Sun He Jangsu said:

古文：陛下嗣位以来，训师择将，可谓至多，以高祖之大度，兼萧王之赤心，神武冠于百王，精兵倍于前代。
现代文：陛下即位以来，训练军队选择将领，可以说做了许多为国之事，有高祖宽广大度的心胸，兼有萧王的慈爱之心，雄健威武为百王之首，兵力强劲要超过前代好几倍。
English: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has trained the army to select generals, and it can be said that he has done a lot of things for the country. He has a broad and broad-minded heart, and at the same time has the loving heart of King Xiao. He is the strongest and most powerful of the hundred kings, and his military strength is several times stronger than that of the previous generation.

古文：分阃仗钺者，固当以身先士卒为心，贼遗君父为耻。
现代文：统兵的将帅，应当以身先士卒为意念，以陷害抛弃君父作为耻辱。
English: The commander of the general staff should have the intention of being the first man, and abandoning his father as a disgrace.

古文：而列城相望，坚壁自全，手握强兵，坐违成算，遂使腥膻得计，蛇豕肆行，焚劫我郡县，系累我黎庶。
现代文：边城相望，各种壁垒完备，手中掌握有强劲的兵力，但由于谋算有误，于是让敌人得利，兵马横行，抢劫焚烧郡县，捆绑祸害我国百姓。
English: The border cities faced each other, all kinds of barriers were complete, and a strong military force was in the hands of the Qing Dynasty. However, due to a miscalculation, the enemy was allowed to benefit, the soldiers and horses were rampant, robbing and burning counties, and tying up and harming the Chinese people.

古文：陛下摅人神之忿怒，悯河朔之生灵，爰御六师，亲幸澶、魏，天声一振，敌骑四逃，虽镇、定道路已通，而德、棣烽尘未息，此殆将帅或未得人，边奏或有壅阏，邻境不相救援，糗粮须俟转输之所致也。
现代文：陛下替天行道，怜悯河朔的老百姓，于是率领军队，亲自到澶州、魏州，一声怒吼，敌人四处逃窜，尽管镇、定敌军已退，但德州、棣州仍战祸不断，这恐怕是或者选将不当，或者上奏军报被耽搁，相邻的军队不相救援，军粮需要等待运输而造成的。
English: On behalf of Heaven, His Majesty took pity on the common people of Hexuo, and led the army to personally go to Bozhou and Weizhou, shouting angrily. The enemy fled in all directions. Although the enemy troops had retreated, Texhou and Bozhou were still plagued by war. I am afraid that this was caused by the improper selection of generals, or the delay in sending the military report, the failure of the neighboring armies to rescue each other, and the need to wait for the transportation of military grain.

古文：将帅者何？
现代文：将帅怎么样？
English: What about Generalissimo?

古文：或恃勇无谋，或忌功玩寇，但全城堡，不恤人民。
现代文：有的依仗勇猛但没有谋略，有的互相嫉妒轻视敌人，只保全城堡不怜悯百姓。
English: Some rely on bravery but have no strategy, some are jealous of each other and despise the enemy, only preserving the castle and not pitying the people.

古文：边奏者何？
现代文：边疆上奏军情怎么样？
English: What about the military situation on the border?

古文：护塞之臣，固禄守位，城池焚劫，不以实闻，老幼杀伤，托言他盗。
现代文：保卫边疆的大臣，只保住官位拿到一定的俸禄，城池被焚烧抢劫，不将实际情况上报，老百姓被敌军所杀，假托是其他强盗所杀。
English: The minister of border defense only kept his official position and received a certain salary, the city was burned and looted, but the actual situation was not reported, and the common people were killed by the enemy, pretending to be killed by other robbers.

古文：不救援者何？
现代文：不救援者怎么样？
English: What about non-rescuers?

古文：缘边州县，城垒参错，如辅车唇齿之相依，若头目手足之相卫，托称兵少不出，或待奏可乃行。
现代文：在边疆的州县，城池交错，就好像辅和车唇齿互相依托，像头目手脚互相保护，托言兵力少不救援其他部队，或者等待上奏以后才能出兵。
English: In the states and counties of the frontier, the city and county are interlaced, just like the auxiliary and the car are mutually supported, like the leader's hands and feet protect each other, the pretext is that the troop strength is too small to rescue other troops, or the troops can only be dispatched after waiting for the report.

古文：俟辇输者何？
现代文：等待军粮运输的怎么样呢？
English: What about waiting for the military rations to arrive?

古文：敌骑往还，猋驰鸟逝，赢粮景从，万两方行，迨乎我来，寇已遁去。
现代文：敌军骑兵往返来回，如犬奔驰鸟飞逝一样，速度极快，征召很多运输粮食的民夫，待征收到许多粮食才开始运输，等到我军运来粮食时，敌人就已经逃走了。
English: The enemy cavalry went back and forth, like a dog galloping past a bird, with great speed. Many civilians were conscripted to transport grain, and many grains were conscripted and received before transportation began. By the time our army transported the grain, the enemy had already fled.

古文：此四者，当今急务。
现代文：这四点，都是现在急待解决的事情。
English: These four points are all matters that urgently need to be resolved now.

古文：择将帅，则莫若文武之内，参用谋臣；防壅阏，则莫若凡奏边防，陛见庭问；合救援，则莫若督以军令，听其便宜；运糗粮，则莫若轻赍疾驱，角彼趫捷。
现代文：选择将帅，不如在文官武臣之内加以选用，用谋臣来辅佐；防止上奏被阻塞，不如凡是边防上奏，陛下亲自披览并在朝廷上询问；交战时需要救援，不如用军令来督促，让将帅们见机行事；运输军粮，不如携带财物派骑兵快速运送，来与敌军骑兵的矫捷相抗。
English: It is better to choose a commander-in-chief than to choose one from the ranks of civilian officers and retainers, and to use a strategist to assist him; to prevent a blocked advance, it is better to conduct an advance to the border, and His Majesty personally inspect and inquire at the imperial court; when a rescue is needed during a battle, it is better to use a military order to urge the commanders to act at the right time; to transport military food, it is better to carry property and send cavalry to quickly transport it, to compete with the agility of enemy cavalry.

古文：今大驾既驻邺下，契丹终不敢萌心南牧，所虑荐食者，惟东北无备之城，缮完周防，不可不慎。
现代文：现在陛下既已驻扎在邺下，契丹始终不敢萌生南下侵略之心，陛下要考虑的是，只是东北边境没有完备的战防，修缮城池完备边防，不能不慎重。
English: Now that His Majesty has been stationed under the yoke, the Khitan still dare not have the heart to invade the south. What His Majesty has to consider is that the northeastern border does not have a complete defense, and it is necessary to carefully repair the city and complete the border defense.

古文：且蜂虿有毒，豺狼无厌。
现代文：况且蜂虿这种毒虫有毒，豺狼没有满足的时候。
English: Moreover, the wasp is a poisonous insect, and the jackal is not satisfied.

古文：今契丹西畏大兵，北无归路，兽穷则搏，物不可轻，余孽尚或稽诛，奔突亦宜预备。
现代文：如今契丹西边害怕大军，北边又没有退路，野兽走投无路就会拼命，对他们不能轻视，遗留的敌军尚待加以诛杀，战败逃跑的敌军我们也应该有所防备。
English: Now, the western side of Khitan is afraid of the large army, and the northern side has no way out. If the beast has no way out, it will fight hard. They cannot be despised. The remaining enemy troops have yet to be killed, and we should also be prepared for the enemy troops that have been defeated and fled.

古文：大河津济，处处有之，亦望量屯禁兵，扼其要害，则请和之使，不日可待。
现代文：大河渡口，到处都有，也希望陛下根据地域大小驻扎军队，扼守要害之处，这样敌军请求议和的使者，不久就会前来。
English: There are river crossings everywhere, and I also hope that His Majesty will station troops according to the size of the region and hold the key points, so that the enemy's messenger requesting peace negotiations will come soon.

古文：真宗览而嘉之。
现代文：真宗披览了孙何的奏书并加以赞赏。
English: Shinsong reviewed Sun He's performance and appreciated it.

古文：及傅潜逗挠无功，何又请斩潜以徇。
现代文：等到傅潜延误扰乱军事计划无功而返，孙何上疏请将傅潜斩首示众。
English: When Fu Qian's delay disrupted the military plan without any results, Sun He Shangshu requested that Fu Qian be beheaded.

古文：俄权户部判官，出为京东转运副使，又献疏请择州县守宰，省三司冗员，遴选法官，增秩益奉。
现代文：不久权户部判官，离京担任京东转运副使，又上疏请求选择州县守宰，减少三司多余的官员，慎重地选择法官，增加俸禄提高品级。
English: Soon after, he became the judge of the household department, left Beijing to serve as the vice-envoy of Jingdong Transportation, and then requested Shang Shou to select the governor of the county, reduce the redundant officials of the three departments, carefully select the judges, increase the salary and improve the grade.

古文：未几，徙两浙转运使，加起居舍人。
现代文：不久，调任两浙转运使，兼起居舍人。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of the envoy for the transfer of goods between the two Zhejiang Provinces, and also became a layman.

古文：景德初，代还，判太常礼院。
现代文：景德初年，代职还京，判太常礼院。
English: In the first year of King Jingde's reign, he returned to Beijing on an acting basis and became the judge of Taizhongli Academy.

古文：俄与晁迥、陈尧咨并命知制诰，赐金紫，掌三班院。
现代文：不久与晁迥、陈尧咨共同被任命为知制诰，赐予金紫官服，主管三班院。
English: Soon after, he was jointly appointed as the chief of Zhizhe County, given a gold and purple official uniform, and put in charge of three hospitals.

古文：何先已被疾，勉强亲职。一日，奏事上前，坠奏牍于地，俯而取之，复坠笏。
现代文：在此之前，孙何已经有病在身，勉强任职，一天，在朝中上奏言事，将奏牍掉在地上，弯腰去拾奏牍，又将朝笏掉在地上。
English: Prior to this, Sun He had already been ill and barely held office. One day, while delivering a speech at the morning meeting, he dropped the cymbal on the ground, bent down to pick it up, and dropped the cymbal again.

古文：有司劾以失仪，诏释之。
现代文：有司以有失礼仪对孙何加以弹劾，真宗下诏不予追究。
English: Some officials impeached Sun He for improper etiquette, but Shinsong did not pursue the matter.

古文：何惭，上章求改少卿监，分司西京养疾，上不许，第赐告，遣医诊视。
现代文：孙何感到惭愧，上章请求改任少卿监，分司西京养病，真宗没有允许，在官宅赐予允许休假，派遣医生前去诊断探视。
English: Sun He felt ashamed. The previous chapter asked him to be reassigned to the position of Shaoqing Supervisor, Subdivision of West Beijing to recover from illness. However, Shinsong did not allow him to do so. He was granted permission to take a vacation at the official residence, and a doctor was sent to visit him for diagnosis.

古文：医勉其然艾，何答曰： 死生有命。 卒不听。
现代文：医生劝勉孙何这样的身体应当保养，孙何回答说： 死和生都是上天安排好的。 最终不听劝告。
English: The doctor advised Sun He that such a body should be taken care of, but Sun He replied, "Both death and life are arranged by heaven.

古文：是冬卒，年四十四。
现代文：这年冬天，死，终年四十四岁。
English: He died this winter, aged forty-four.

古文：上在澶渊，闻之悯惜，录其子言为大理评事。
现代文：真宗在澶渊，听到孙何死的消息感到怜悯痛惜，选录孙何的儿子孙言任大理评事。
English: Shinsong was in Shanyuan, felt pity and regret when he heard the news of Sun He's death, and selected Sun He's son, Sun Yan, to be the critic of Dali.

古文：何乐名教，勤接士类，后进之有词艺者，必为称扬。
现代文：孙何乐于名教，经常接见文士，对有作词才能的年轻学士，一定给予称赞和表扬。
English: Sun He is fond of famous scholars, often receives scribes, and always praises and commends young scholars who have the ability to write lyrics.

古文：然性褊急，不能容物。
现代文：但孙何性情急躁，不能容忍别人的过失。
English: However, Sun He is quick-tempered and cannot tolerate others' faults.

古文：公佐卒，又以次子寿隆试将作监主簿。
现代文：在浙右期间专断严厉苛刻，州郡之人对此很忧虑。孙何好学，写有《驳史通》十余篇，有文集四十卷。弟弟孙仅。
English: During his time in Zhejiang, he was very harsh and arbitrary, and the people of Zhoushan County were very worried about this. Sun He was eager to learn, and he wrote more than ten chapters of "Fixing History" and forty volumes of anthologies. Only his younger brother Sun.

古文：昌符为屯田员外郎。戚纶字仲言，应天楚丘人。
现代文：戚纶字仲言，应天楚丘人。
English: He is a close relative and a mediator. He is a native of Yingtianchuqiu.

古文：父同文，字文约，自有传。
现代文：父亲戚同文，字文约，自己有传。
English: His father was a relative of the same family, and the words and phrases were passed down to him.

古文：纶少与兄维以文行知名，笃于古学，喜谈名教。
现代文：戚纶少年时与其兄戚维以文章品行知名，坚持不懈学习古文，喜欢谈论名教。
English: When he was a teenager, he and his older brother Qi Wei were well-known for their articles, persevered in studying ancient texts, and liked to talk about famous teachings.

古文：太平兴国八年举进士，解褐沂水主簿。
现代文：太平兴国八年考中进士，被任命为沂水主簿。
English: Taiping Xingguo eight years of junior high school entrance examination, was appointed as the main book of Surabaya.

古文：按版籍，得逋户脱口漏租者甚众。
现代文：按照名册和户籍，搜求到许多逃亡户脱漏的户口漏交的租税。
English: According to the register and household registration, many fugitive households have been searched for tax evasion.

古文：徙知太和县。
现代文：调任太和县知县。
English: He was transferred to Chishun, Taiwa County.

古文：同文卒于随州，纶徒步奔讣千里余。
现代文：戚同文在随州去世，戚纶步行千余里奔丧。
English: A relative of Tongwen passed away in Suzhou, and his relatives walked more than a thousand miles to pay their respects.

古文：俄诏起复莅职，就加大理评事。
现代文：不久诏令起复任职，于是加任大理评事。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated by imperial edict, and then he was appointed as a commentator of Dali.

古文：江外民险悍多构讼，为《谕民诗》五十篇，因时俗耳目之事，以申规诲，老幼多传诵之。
现代文：长江以南百姓性情险恶强悍经常发生诉讼官司，戚纶写下《谕民诗》五十篇，运用当地风俗和百姓熟悉的事情，来规诫教诲百姓，当地百姓大多传诵它。
English: The people south of the Yangtze River are vicious and strong-willed, and lawsuits often occur. A relative of mine wrote down 50 "Oral Folk Poems," using local customs and things familiar to the people to discipline and teach the people. Most of the local people recite it.

古文：每岁时必与狱囚约，遣归祀其先，皆如期而还。
现代文：每年按时与监狱囚犯约定，派遣他们回家祭祀先祖，囚犯都按期返回。
English: Every year, according to the agreement with the prison inmates, they are sent home to worship their ancestors, and the prisoners return on schedule.

古文：迁光禄丞，坐鞫狱陈州失实，免官。
现代文：升任光禄丞，由于审讯陈州官司失实而犯有过失，免除官职。
English: Guanglu Rongcheng, who was promoted to the post, was relieved of his official duties for committing negligence due to the fact that Chenzhou's trial was untruthful.

古文：著《理道评》十二篇，钱若水、王禹偁深所赏重。
现代文：写有《理道评》十二篇，钱若水、王禹翶十分赏识看重。
English: There are twelve articles in the "Reason and Logic Review," which Qian Ruoshui and Wang Yuxuan highly appreciate and value.

古文：久之，复授大理评事、知永嘉县。
现代文：后来，又授予大理评事、知永嘉县。
English: Later, it was awarded to Dali Commentator and Chiyongjia County.

古文：境有陂塘之利，浚治以备水旱。
现代文：境内有池塘灌溉之利，疏通治理防止水涝旱灾。
English: There are ponds in the territory for irrigation and dredging to prevent floods and droughts.

古文：复为光禄寺丞，转运使又上其政绩，连诏褒之。
现代文：又担任光禄寺丞，转运使又将其政绩上报，朝廷多次下诏书褒奖戚纶。
English: He also served as the priest of Koroku-ji Temple, and the transfer envoy also reported his political achievements, and the Imperial Court repeatedly awarded him with the Imperial Rescript.

古文：真宗即位，转著作佐郎、通判泰州。
现代文：真宗即位，转任著作佐郎、通判泰州。
English: Shinso ascended the throne, and was transferred to the posts of Shososaro and Tsudan Taishu.

古文：将行，秘书监杨徽之荐其文学纯谨，宜在馆阁，命为秘阁校理。
现代文：准备上任，秘书监杨徽之向朝廷推荐戚纶文章学问美好严谨，应留在馆阁，任命为秘阁校理。
English: In preparation for taking office, Secretary Supervisor Yang Huizhi recommended to the imperial court that Qi Xuan's articles were beautiful and rigorous, and should remain in the cabinet, and was appointed as the secret cabinet's proofreader.

古文：受诏考校司天台职官，定州县职田条制。诏馆阁官以旧文献，上嘉纶所著，特改太常丞，俄判鼓司、登闻院。
现代文：受诏考试校司天台职官，制定州县职田条规制度，诏令馆阁官员敬献旧文，真宗赞扬戚纶所写之文，特地改任太常丞，不久判鼓司、登闻院。
English: He received the imperial edict for the examination of school superintendents and rooftop officials, and established a system of rules and regulations for state and county vocational schools. He also ordered the officials of the Cabinet Office to dedicate old documents, and the officials of the Shinshu Sect to praise the articles written by their relatives, and he was specially appointed as Taizanjo, and soon he was appointed as the Drum Master, and was admitted to Dengwen Academy.

古文：出内府缗帛市边粮，诏纶乘传往均市之。
现代文：拿出官府所藏钱帛买军粮，朝廷诏令戚纶乘坐驿车前往协调买卖。
English: He took out the government's stash of money to buy grain for the army, and the imperial court ordered his relatives to take a carriage to coordinate the purchase.

古文：景德元年，判三司开拆，赐绯鱼，改盐铁判官。
现代文：景德元年，判三司开拆，被赐予帛、鱼，改任盐铁判官。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingde, he was appointed as the judge of salt and iron.

古文：上疏言边事，甚被嘉奖。
现代文：上疏奏言边防之事，很受真宗嘉奖。
English: His speech on the border defense in Joso was well received by the Shinshu sect.

古文：十月，拜右正言、龙图阁待制，赐金紫。
现代文：十月，授予右正言、龙图阁待制，赐予金紫服。
English: In October, he was awarded the Right Speech, the Longtu Pavilion, and the Gold and Purple Uniform.

古文：时初建是职，与杜镐并命，人皆荣之。
现代文：当时开始设置这个官职，和杜镐一起被任命。
English: At that time, this post was first established, and he was appointed together with Du Xi.

古文：纶久次州县，留意吏事，每便殿请对，语必移晷，或夜中召见，多所敷启。
现代文：戚纶长期任州县官吏，对政事十分关注，每次上殿言对，必谈到日影西移，有时夜中被召见，也多有陈述。
English: A long-serving state and county official, he was very concerned about political affairs. Every time he went to the palace, he said the right thing. He would always talk about the sun moving west. Sometimes he was called to see him at night, and he often made a statement.

古文：俄上奏曰： 夫出纳献替，王臣之任；章疏奏议，谏者之职。
现代文：不久戚纶上奏说： 出谋献计，是大臣的职责；章疏奏议，是谏者的职责。
English: Soon after, he said: It is the duty of the minister to devise a plan; it is the duty of the secretary to make a report.

古文：臣屡蒙召对，皆延数刻，屈万乘之尊，接一介之士，圣德渊深，包纳荒秽，体其至愚，不罪触犯，安敢循嘿不言。
现代文：臣下多次承蒙召见应对，每次都被接见很长时间，委屈万乘的尊严，接见微贱之臣，圣德广大，包纳荒秽，臣下十分愚钝，触犯禁律不予治罪，怎敢顺俗不言呢？
English: Subordinates have been summoned many times to respond, and each time they have been received for a long time, with the dignity of grievance. Subordinates have been received who are lowly, with a wide range of sanctity, including the absurd. Subordinates are very stupid. Violations of prohibitions are not punished. How dare they follow the rules and not speak out?

古文：谨摭十事该治本者附于章左：一曰王畿关辅，二曰五等封建，三曰复制科，四曰崇国学，五曰辟旷土，六曰修贡举，七曰任大臣，八曰置平籴，九曰益厢军、减禁兵，十曰修《六典》令式。 词颇深切，上为嘉奖。
现代文：谨选择十件应该治本的事情附在奏章左边：一是王畿关辅，二是五等分封，三是复制科，四是推崇国学，五是开辟扩大国土，六是修贡举，七是任用大臣，八是设置平价买进粮食的部门，九是增加厢军、减少禁卫军，十是修撰《六典》条令法规。 言词很诚恳切合实际，真宗给予嘉奖。
English: I would like to select ten things that should be addressed and attach them to the left of the record: First, Wang Gui Guan Fu, second, the five-class division, third, the copying department, fourth, the promotion of Chinese studies, fifth, the opening up and expansion of the country, sixth, the repair of tribute, seventh, the appointment of ministers, eighth, the establishment of a department to buy grain at a parity price, ninth, the increase of the van army and the reduction of the imperial guard, and tenth, the revision of the regulations of the "Sixth Code." The words are very sincere and practical, and the true sect is commended.

古文：二年，与赵安仁、晁迥、陈充、朱巽同知贡举，纶上言取士之法，多所规制，并纳用焉。
现代文：景德二年，起用赵安仁、晁迥、陈充、朱巽同知贡举，戚纶上奏所说选择文士的办法，大多成为条规制令，得到朝廷采用。
English: In the second year of King Jingde, Zhao Anren, Zhai, Chen Chong and Zhu Xi were appointed as Tongzhi tribute, and most of the methods for selecting scribes mentioned in the report of the imperial court became regulations and were adopted by the imperial court.

古文：预修《册府元龟》，会置官总在京诸司之务，凡百三十司，命纶与刘承珪同领其事。
现代文：准备修撰《册府元龟》，恰好朝廷设置官员总管在京各司事务，共一百三十司，让戚纶与刘承王圭共同主管此事。
English: It so happened that the imperial court set up an official to be in charge of all the departments in Beijing, a total of one hundred and thirty departments, to prepare for the revision of "The Book of the Yuan Turtle," and let Qi Xi and Liu Chengwang Gui jointly supervise the matter.

古文：判鸿胪寺。
现代文：判鸿胪寺。
English: Hung Hom Pagoda.

古文：先是，群臣诏葬，公私所费无定式。
现代文：在此之前，王公大臣受诏安葬，公私花费没有一定的标准。
English: Prior to this, there was no set standard for public and private expenditure on the funeral of Wang Gong.

古文：纶言其事，诏同晁迥、朱巽、刘承珪校品秩之差，定为制度，遂遵行之。
现代文：戚纶上书禀告此事，诏令戚纶与晁迥、朱巽、刘承王圭校定官吏的等级，形成制度，于是遵照执行。
English: Qi Rong wrote a letter to report the matter, and ordered Qi Rong to calibrate the ranks of officials with Zhai, Zhu Xi and Liu Chengwang Gui to form a system, and then comply with the implementation.

古文：纶以三公、尚书、九列之任，唐末以来，有司渐繁，纲目不一，谓宜采《通礼》、《六典》令式，比类沿革，著为大典，时论称之。
现代文：戚纶认为三公、尚书、九列的官职，从唐末以来，有司逐渐增加，号令不统一，建议应当采用《通礼》、《六典》法令条规，按类进行继承和改革，写成大典，当时人们对此称赞不已。
English: Qi Qi believed that the official positions of the Three Princes, the Grand Secretary, and the Nine Columns had gradually increased since the end of the Tang Dynasty, and the orders were not uniform. It was suggested that the regulations of the "Passage" and "Six Codes" should be adopted, and the succession and reform should be carried out according to the categories, and a grand code should be written. At that time, people praised this.

古文：进秩右司谏、兵部员外郎。
现代文：任右司谏、兵部员外郎。
English: He was appointed to the post of Ujitsuna, and became a member of the military department.

古文：时诏禁群臣匿名上封及非次升殿奏事，纶谓 忠谠之入，当开奖言路，若疏远之士，尤艰请对 ，上颇嘉之。
现代文：当时朝廷禁止大臣们匿名上奏以及越级上廷言事，戚纶说： 忠诚正直的人，应当广开言路并对上言者予以奖励，如果是朝廷疏远之人，就更难上书言事了。 
English: At that time, the imperial court forbade ministers from anonymously reporting and speaking to the imperial court beyond their ranks. A relative said: "Loyal and honest people should open up their channels of communication and reward those who speak up. If someone is estranged from the imperial court, it will be more difficult to write and speak.

古文：大中祥符元年，掌吏部选事。
现代文：真宗对此很赞赏。大中祥符元年，主管吏部选官之事。
English: In the first year of Xiangfu University, the selection of the person in charge of the personnel department took place.

古文：上初受灵文，纶上疏曰： 臣遐稽载籍，历考秘文，验灵应之垂祥，顾天人之相接。
现代文：真宗刚刚接受祭灵之文，戚纶上疏说： 臣下考究过古代典籍和秘文，检验神灵回应显示吉祥，不过是天人互相反映。
English: Shinshong had just received the text of the ritual spirit, and his relative, Shangsuo, said: The vassals have studied ancient classics and secret texts, and the examination of the response of the gods shows auspiciousness, but it is the reflection of the gods and men.

古文：陛下绍二圣丕业，启万世鸿基，勤行企道，恭默思元，上天降鉴，瑞牒昭锡，聿示临民之戒，用恢奕叶之祥。
现代文：陛下继承先圣的大业，开启万世的鸿图，勤于政事，恭敬沉思，上天降下借鉴，赐予吉祥户册，显示统治人民的警戒，用来光大累世的吉祥。
English: His majesty inherits the great cause of the previous saint, opens the vast map of the world, is diligent in politics, reverently contemplates, uses the heavens to learn from, bestows the auspicious register, shows the vigilance of the ruling people, and is used to magnify the auspicious of the ages.

古文：乞诏有司，速修大祀，载命侍从，摹写祥符，勒于嘉玉，藏之太庙，别以副本秘于中禁，传示万叶，无敢怠荒。
现代文：请求诏令有司，尽快举行大祀，命令侍从，摹写祥符，用瑞玉系着，藏在太庙，另外又以副本秘密地藏在禁中，传之万代，不敢怠慢荒废。
English: Request the imperial edict to have a division, hold a grand ritual as soon as possible, order attendants, write auspicious symbols, tie them with precious stones, hide them in the Imperial Temple, and secretly hide them in the Forbidden City with a copy, passed down for generations, do not dare to neglect the waste.

古文：然臣恐流俗幻惑狂谋，以人鬼之妖辞，乱天书之真旨。
现代文：但臣下担心被流俗迷惑不受拘束，用人鬼的妖言，来破坏天书的真实用意。
English: However, his vassals, fearing that they would be deceived by vulgarity, were not restrained and used human and ghostly gossip to destroy the true intention of the heavenly book.

古文：伏望端守元符，凝神正道，以答天贶，以惠烝黎。 是冬，封泰山，命纶同计度发运事。
现代文：臣下端守符瑞，注视正道，来报答上天的赐予，使百姓都享受恩惠。 这年冬天，真宗祀封泰山，命令戚纶共同商议运送之事。
English: In order to repay the blessings bestowed by heaven, and so that the people can all enjoy the blessings, the vassals should keep a close watch on Fu Rui and keep an eye on the right path. This winter, the True Sect worshiped Mount Tai and ordered the relatives to jointly discuss the matter of transportation.

古文：礼成，迁户部郎中、直昭文馆，待制如故。
现代文：典礼完毕，升任户部郎中、直昭文馆，像以前一样待制。
English: After the ceremony was over, he was promoted to the position of junior assistant to the chief of the Household Division and Naoaki Library, and he remained in the same position as before.

古文：被诏，同编《东封祥瑞封禅记》。
现代文：被诏令，共同编撰《东封祥瑞封禅记》。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to jointly compile the "Dongfeng Xiangrui Feng Zenki."

古文：会峻待制之秩，又兼集贤殿修撰。
现代文：恰逢提高待制的等级，又兼任集贤院修撰。
English: It coincided with the raising of the level of the pending system, and also served as the compilation of the Shixian Academy.

古文：建议修释奠仪，颁于天下；立常平仓，隶司农寺，以平民籴，皆从之。
现代文：建议制作并解释祭奠礼仪，颁布天下，设立常平仓，隶属司农寺，来平抑民间买卖，都被采纳。
English: Proposals to create and explain the ritual of the festival, to promulgate it throughout the country, and to establish a permanent warehouse, affiliated with the Sionong Temple, to suppress private trade, have all been adopted.

古文：尝宴饯种放于龙图阁，诏近臣为序，上览纶所作，称其有史才。
现代文：曾经在龙图阁设宴为种放饯行，朝廷下诏左右大臣为文作序，真宗披览戚纶所作，称赞他有史才。
English: Once, a banquet was held at Longtu Pavilion to celebrate the release of the seeds, the Imperial Court issued an edict to the left and right ministers for the preface of the text, and the True Sect reviewed the work of the relatives and praised him for his historical talent.

古文：三年，擢枢密直学士，上作诗宠之。
现代文：三年，升任枢密直学士，真宗作诗对他表示宠爱。
English: In three years, he was promoted to the post of Privy Direct Bachelor, and the poetry of the True Sect showed him favor.

古文：祀汾阴，复领发运之职。
现代文：祭祀汾阴，又兼任发运之职。
English: He was in charge of offering sacrifices to the goddess Yin, and he was also in charge of shipping.

古文：居无何，出知杭州，就加左司郎中。
现代文：不久，出知杭州，又兼任左司郎中。
English: Not long after, he was sent to Hangzhou, where he also served as a junior left-hand sergeant.

古文：属江潮为患，乃立埽岸，以易柱石之制，虽免水患，而众颇非其变法。
现代文：所在之地江水涨潮成为祸患，戚纶于是命人修筑护堤，将柱石全部换掉，尽管免除了水患，但当时民众却很责怪他设置护堤。
English: The rising tide of the river water became a disaster in the place where he was, so his relatives ordered him to build a berm and replace all the pillars. Although he avoided the flood, the people at the time blamed him for setting up the berm.

古文：胡则时领发运，尝居杭州，肆纵不检，厚结李溥，纶素恶之。
现代文：胡则这时担任发运使，曾留居杭州，放纵妄为不检点，与李溥交谊深厚，戚纶对他向来讨厌。
English: At that time, Hu Zeng served as a shipping agent. He had stayed in Hangzhou, indulging in indiscretions. He had a deep friendship with Li Xuan, and Qi Xuan had always disliked him.

古文：通判吴耀卿，则之党也，伺纶动静，密以报则。
现代文：通判吴耀卿，是胡则的党羽，暗中窥探戚纶的一举一动，将情况报告给胡则。
English: Interpreter Wu Yaoqing, a member of Hu Zhe's faction, secretly spied on Qi Yao's every move and reported the situation to Hu Zhe.

古文：则时为当涂者所昵，因共捃摭纶过，徙知扬州。
现代文：胡则当时为当权者所亲近，于是一起收集戚纶的过失，后来戚纶调任扬州知州。
English: At that time, Hu was close to the people in power, so he collected Qi Xi's faults together. Later, Qi Xi was transferred to Yangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：惟扬亦溥、则巡内，持之益急，求改僻郡，徙徐州。
现代文：维扬也在李溥、胡则的势力之内，控制更加严厉，戚纶请求调任偏僻郡县，结果调往徐州。
English: Wei Yang was also under the influence of Li Yu and Hu Ze, and the control was more severe. Qi Yu requested to be transferred to a remote county, but he was transferred to Xuzhou.

古文：八年，与刘综并罢学士，授左谏议大夫。
现代文：八年，戚纶和刘综都被罢去学士，授予左谏议大夫。
English: In eight years, both Qi Yu and Liu Zongyi were dismissed from their bachelor's degrees and were awarded the title of Zuo Yu Xuan Doctor.

古文：代还，复知青州。
现代文：代职回京，又任青州知州。
English: He returned to Beijing on an acting basis, and was also appointed to Qingzhou and Chizhou.

古文：岁饥，发公廪以救饿殍，全安甚众。
现代文：这年发生饥荒，戚纶拿出官府所藏粮食来救助饥饿的百姓，使许多老百姓得以保全生命安定生活。
English: Famine occurred that year, and the relatives took out the grain stored by the government to help the starving people, so that many people were able to save their lives and live a stable life.

古文：徙郓州，王遵诲为劝农副使，尝佐西边，寓家永兴，闺门不肃，事将发，知府寇准为平之。
现代文：调往郓州，王遵诲任劝农副使，曾任西部边境将帅，寄居在永兴家中，闺门不肃，丑恶被揭发，知府寇准替王遵诲平息了此事。
English: Transferred to Bozhou, Wang Zunyi was appointed vice-minister of agriculture, once served as the western border commander, lived in Yongxing's home, his girlfriends were not respectable, and the scandal was exposed. The governor, Guozhong, calmed the matter for Wang Zunyi.

古文：纶因戏谑语及准，遵诲恚怒，以为污己，遂奏纶谤讪，坐左迁岳州团练副使，易和州。
现代文：戚纶用言语戏谑寇准，遵诲十分愤怒，以为戚纶污辱他，于是上奏说戚纶故意诽谤诋毁，戚纶因此降为岳州团练副使，调到和州。
English: Qi Rong used words to tease Qo Jun, and Zun Yi was very angry, thinking that Qi Rong had insulted him, so he reported that Qi Rong had deliberately slandered and defamed him. As a result, Qi Rong was demoted to vice-envoy of Yuezhou Rehearsal Team and transferred to Hezhou.

古文：天禧四年，改保静军副使。
现代文：天禧四年，改任保静军副使。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Tenji, he was reassigned as the deputy envoy of the Baoding Army.

古文：是冬，以疾求归故里，改太常少卿，分司南京。
现代文：这年冬天，由于患病请求回归乡里，改任太常少卿，分司南京。
English: This winter, due to illness, he requested to return to his hometown and was reassigned to the position of Taizang Shaoqing, Subdivision of Nanjing.

古文：五年，卒，年六十八。
现代文：五年，死，终年六十八岁。
English: He died five years later, aged 68.

古文：纶笃于古学，善谈名理，喜言民政，颇近迂阔。
现代文：戚纶笃志于古学，善谈名理，喜欢谈论政治，有些迂腐疏阔。
English: Qi Yan is dedicated to ancient studies, good at discussing philosophy, likes to talk about politics, and is somewhat pedantic and broad-minded.

古文：事兄维友爱甚厚，维卒，讣闻，哀恸不食者数日。
现代文：与其兄戚维感情深厚，戚维死，戚纶听到告丧，十分悲痛以致数日不吃任何东西。
English: With his brother, Qi Wei, the feelings are deep, Qi Wei died, Qi Wei heard the announcement of the funeral, very sad that he did not eat anything for a few days.

古文：与交游故旧，以信义著称。
现代文：在朋友和亲友的交往中，以信义著称。
English: He was known for his loyalty in his dealings with friends and relatives.

古文：士子谒见者，必询其所业，访其志尚，随才诱诲之。
现代文：儒士前来拜见者，必询问他的学业，试探他的志向和崇尚，根据其才能进行诱导教诲。
English: If a Confucianist comes to visit, he must inquire about his studies, probe his aspirations and reverence, and guide and teach him according to his ability.

古文：尝云： 归老后，得十年在乡闾讲习，亦可以恢道济世。 大中祥符中，继修礼文之事，纶悉参其议，与陈彭年并职，屡召对，多建条式，恩宠甚盛。
现代文：曾经说 ：告老还乡后，用十年时间在乡间讲习，也可以恢复古道救济世人。 大中祥符年间，继续修撰礼仪条文，戚纶经常参与建议，与陈彭年共职，多次召见应对，订立许多条规，很受真宗宠爱。
English: He once said, "After returning to the village at an old age, if you spend ten years studying in the countryside, you can also restore the ancient road to help the world." During the Xiangfu year of the Middle School, he continued to write down the etiquette regulations, relatives often participated in the suggestions, worked with Chen Pengnian, summoned him many times to respond, and established many regulations. He was very favored by the True Sect.

古文：乐于荐士，每一奏十数人，皆当时知名士。
现代文：乐于推荐士人，每次上奏十数人，都是当时知名人士。
English: He was happy to recommend scholars, and more than a dozen were recommended each time, all of whom were well-known figures at the time.

古文：晚节为权幸所排，遂不复振。
现代文：晚年被权贵宠幸者排斥，从此不再复起。
English: In his later years, he was ostracized by powerful and privileged people, and he never made a comeback.

古文：善训子弟，虽至清显，不改其纯俭。
现代文：善于教导子弟，虽然地位显赫，他仍然十分节俭。
English: He was good at teaching his children and, despite his high position, he was very frugal.

古文：既没，家无余赀。
现代文：死后，家中没有多余的财物。
English: After his death, there were no superfluous belongings in the family.

古文：张知白时知府事，辍奉以助其丧。
现代文：张知白当时主管朝事，停止俸禄来资助戚纶的丧事。
English: Zhang Zhibai, who was in charge of the Imperial Household Agency at the time, stopped his salary to fund the funeral of his relative.

古文：家人于几阁间，得《遗戒》一篇，大率皆诱劝为学。
现代文：其家人在小楼间，得《遗戒》一篇，大多都是劝导人们为学。
English: His family lives in a small apartment building, and most of the "legacy precepts" are to persuade people to study.

古文：有集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the series.

古文：又前后奏议，有机务利害、备边均田之策，别为《论思集》十卷，分上下篇。
现代文：又有前后上奏条议，有关政府政务的利弊、边防防备均田的上策，另集为《论思集》十卷，分为上下篇。
English: There are also articles on the pros and cons of government affairs, the advantages and disadvantages of border defense, and the best strategy for preparing the field. Another collection is the "Thought Collection" ten volumes, divided into the upper and lower parts.

古文：天圣中，其子舜宾献之，诏赠左谏议大夫。
现代文：天圣年间，戚纶之子戚舜宾将《论思集》敬献朝廷，昭令追赠左谏议大夫。
English: During the Tenshin era, Chihiro's son Chihiro Bin dedicated "On Shishu" to the Imperial Court, and was posthumously awarded the title of Zuo Shiyi Daifu.

古文：舜宾，官太子中舍。
现代文：戚舜宾，官太子中舍。
English: A relative of the Crown Prince, the official residence of the Crown Prince.

古文：张去华，字信臣，开封襄邑人。
现代文：张去华字信臣，开封襄邑人。
English: Zhang Decheng is a Chinese character meaning "trustworthy minister" and a native of Xiangyuan, Kaifeng.

古文：父谊，字希贾。
现代文：张去华之父张谊，字希贾。
English: Zhang Zuohua's father, Zhang Rui, was called Xijia.

古文：好学，不事产业。
现代文：好学，不事家业。
English: Eager to learn, doesn't care about homework.

古文：既孤，诸父使督耕陇上，他日往视之，见阅书于树下，怒其不亲穑事，诟辱之。
现代文：张谊在父亲去世后，其长辈让其在田陇上耕作，一天前去查视，见张谊在树下看书，对他不亲自耕作十分愤怒，于是对他进行辱骂。
English: After Zhang Yi's father passed away, his elders let him work in the rice fields. One day, they went to check and saw Zhang Yi reading a book under a tree. They were very angry that he did not work in person, so they insulted him.

古文：谊谓其兄曰： 若不就学于外，素志无成矣。 遂潜诣洛阳龙门书院，与宗人沆、鸾、湜结友，故名闻都下。
现代文：张谊对其兄长说： 如果不出外求学，向来的志向就无法实现。 于是就暗中到洛阳龙门书院，与同宗人张沆、张鸾、张结为朋友，因而名闻洛阳。
English: Zhang Yi said to his elder brother: "If you don't go out to study, you won't be able to realize your ambition." So he secretly went to Luoyang Longmen Academy, and became friends with his fellow monks Zhang Zheng, Zhang Zheng and Zhang Jie, and thus became famous in Luoyang.

古文：长兴中，和凝掌贡举，谊举进士，调补耀州团练推官。
现代文：长兴年间，和凝掌管贡举，张谊考中为进士，调补耀州团练推官。
English: During the Changxing years, he was a tributary to the leader of the Yangtze River, a candidate in the Zhangye Examination, and a member of the Yozhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：晋天福初，代还。
现代文：后晋天福初年，代职回京。
English: In the first year after the enthronement of Tianfu, he returned to Beijing on an acting basis.

古文：会凝由内署拜端明殿学士，署门不接宾客，谊闻之，即日致书于凝，以为 切近之职，实当顾问，四方利害，所宜询访，若不接宾客，聋瞽耳目，坐亏职业，虽为自安计，其可得乎？ 凝大奇之，他日，荐于宰相桑维翰曰： 凝门生中有张谊者，性介直，颇涉辞艺，可备谏职。 未几，超拜左拾遗。
现代文：虽然为了自身的安全计议，这样又能得到什么呢？ 和凝十分惊奇，有一天，就将张谊推荐给宰相桑维翰说： 和凝门生中有位张谊，性情耿直，在诗词方面颇有才能，可以担任谏职。 
English: Although he considered it for his own safety, what could he gain from it? He was so surprised that one day he recommended Zhang Yi to the Prime Minister, Sun Weihan, saying, "One of He Jing's students is Zhang Yi, he has a straightforward temperament and is quite talented in poetry, so he can hold this position.

古文：谊以晋室新造，典礼未完，数上章请复有唐故事。
现代文：不久，破格授予左拾遗。张谊认为后晋新近建立，在登基典礼未完，就多次上章请求恢复有唐制度。
English: Zhang Yi believed that the Later Jin Dynasty was newly established, and before the enthronement ceremony was over, he repeatedly petitioned the emperor to restore the Tang Dynasty system.

古文：又言契丹有援立之助，所宜敦信谨备，不可自逸，以启衅端。
现代文：又说契丹有援立晋室之功，晋室应当厚道信实谨慎防备，不能自行放逸，以开启祸端。
English: He also said that the Khitan had the merit of helping to establish the Jin dynasty, and that the Jin dynasty should be kind, faithful, prudent and cautious, and should not allow itself to be led astray, which would lead to disaster.

古文：改右补阙，充集贤殿修撰，历礼部员外郎、侍御史。
现代文：改任右补阙，充任集贤殿修撰，历任礼部员外郎、侍御史。
English: He was reappointed to the post of Utsubo no jo, and was assigned to the post of Shisen-dono Shusan, and successively held the posts of ceremonial member, Wairo, and Samurai goshi.

古文：改仓部、知制诰，加礼部郎中。
现代文：改任仓部、知制诰，兼任礼部郎中。
English: He was reassigned to the positions of warehouse manager and secretary, and concurrently served as a junior member of the ceremonial department.

古文：乾祐初，真拜中书舍人。
现代文：乾初年，任中书舍人。
English: In the first year of Qian, he resigned from his post.

古文：时苏逢吉、杨邠、王章辈攀附汉祖，骤得大用，搢绅多附之，谊不为屈，故共嫉之。
现代文：这时苏逢吉、杨、王章之流攀附汉祖，立刻得到重用，官绅们大多依附他们，张谊不屈服于他们，因而遭到他们的嫉妒。
English: At this time, Su Fengji, Yang and Wang Zhang clung to the Han ancestors, and immediately received heavy use. Most of the officials and gentry clung to them, and they were jealous because they did not give in to them.

古文：遣谊为吴越宣谕使，与兵部郎中马承翰同往赐官告。
现代文：派遣张谊为吴越宣谕使，与兵部郎中马承翰一同前往，朝廷赐予官职。
English: Zhang Yi was dispatched as the envoy of Wu Yue's proclamation, and he went together with Ma Chenghan, the warlord, and was given an official post by the imperial court.

古文：浙人每迓朝使，必列步骑以自夸诧，谊与承翰窃笑之。
现代文：浙人每次迎接朝廷使者，一定排列步兵骑兵来自相夸耀，张谊与马承翰暗地嘲笑这种作法。
English: Every time the people of Zhejiang greeted the imperial envoys, they boasted of a certain arrangement of infantry and cavalry. Zhang Xi and Ma Chenghan secretly ridiculed this practice.

古文：又乘酒，言词有轻发者，钱俶甚耻之，乃奏谊擅箠防援官。
现代文：在喝酒时乘着酒兴，说了一些轻薄之词，钱亻叔感到十分羞耻，于是上奏说张谊擅自鞭打防御官。
English: While drinking, he took advantage of the joy of drinking and said some frivolous words. Uncle Qian Rong felt very ashamed, so he reported that Zhang Yi had whipped the defense officer without permission.

古文：又夜集，与承翰使酒，语相侵，坐贬均州司户，改房州司马，岁余卒。
现代文：又晚会宴集，与马承翰喝酒，互相言词相犯，由此张谊贬为均州司户，改任房州司马，一年后去世。
English: He also attended the evening banquet, drank with Ma Chenghan, and exchanged words with him. As a result, Zhang Yi was relegated to the position of Junzhou Sima, and was renamed Fangzhou Sima. He died a year later.

古文：去华幼励学，敏于属辞，以荫补太庙斋郎。
现代文：张去华幼年勤奋好学，对写文作辞十分敏捷，因父亲的官荫补太庙斋郎。
English: Zhang Zenghua was studious and eager to learn at an early age, and he was very quick at writing. He was promoted to the position of Taimiao Jairo due to his father's official position.

古文：周世宗平淮南，去华时年十八，慨然叹曰： 兵战未息，民事不修，非驭国持久之术。 因著《南征赋》、《治民论》，献于行在。
现代文：周世宗平定淮南，张去华十八岁，感慨而叹说 ：战争不停止，老百姓的事务不加治理，这不是保持统治国家长久的办法。 因而写下《南征赋》、《治民论》，敬献给周世宗。
English: Zhou Shizong pacified Huainan, Zhang went to China at the age of eighteen, and sighed with emotion, saying: If the war does not stop and the affairs of the people are not governed, this is not a way to maintain a long-term rule of the country. Therefore, he wrote "Southern Expedition" and "On the Governance of the People" and dedicated them to Zhou Shizong.

古文：召试，授御史台主簿。属三院议事，不得预坐，谓所亲曰： 簿领之职，非壮夫所为。 即弃官归郑州，杜门不出者三载。
现代文：被召应试，授予御史台主簿之职，隶属三院议事，不得列朝，他对所亲近的人说： 簿领的职位，不是我所干的。 于是抛弃官职回到郑州，三年闭门不出。
English: He was called to take an examination, and was given the post of chief bookkeeper of the Imperial Historical Records Office, and was subordinated to the deliberation of the three courts, and was not allowed to be appointed to the imperial court. He said to those close to him, "The position of bookkeeper is not my doing. I therefore abandoned my official position and returned to Zhengzhou, and did not leave the house for three years.

古文：建隆初，始携文游京师，大为李昉所称。
现代文：建隆初年，才开始携带诗文游学京师，被李日方大加称赞。
English: It was only in the first year of Jianlong that he began to bring poetry and literature to study in Beijing, which was highly praised by the Japanese side.

古文：明年，举进士甲科，即拜秘书郎、直史馆。
现代文：第二年，考中进士甲科，并授予秘书郎、直史馆之职。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to Division A in the junior high school entrance examination, and was awarded the position of secretary and direct history museum.

古文：以岁满不迁，上章自诉，因言制诰张澹、卢多逊、殿中侍御史师颂文学肤浅，愿得校其优劣。
现代文：因年限已到没有升迁，张去华上章自诉，并说制诰张澹、卢多逊，殿中侍御史师颂文学肤浅，希望与他们比较好坏。
English: As his term of office had expired and he had not been promoted, Zhang went to Huazhongzhang to sue for damages. He also said that the literary works of Zhang Ye and Ludoson, the palace attendants and historians, were superficial, and he hoped that they would be better or worse.

古文：太祖立召澹辈与去华临轩策试，命陶谷等考之。
现代文：太祖立即召令张澹等人与张去华临轩策试，让陶谷等人进行考试。
English: The great-grandfather immediately ordered Zhang Xuan and others to go to Huarinshan to plan the test with Zhang, and let Tao Gu and others conduct the test.

古文：澹以所对不应问，降秩，即擢去华为右补阙，赐袭衣、银带、鞍勒马。
现代文：张澹由于答对不是所应问的，就被降级，因而就提升张去华为右补阙，赐予袭衣、银带、鞍勒马。
English: Zhang Xuan was demoted because his answer was not the right one, so he was promoted to go to Huawei to make up for it, and was given a suit of armor, a silver belt, and a saddle horse.

古文：朝议薄其躁进，以是不迁秩者十六年。
现代文：朝廷官员议论轻视张去华急躁升职，因而张去华十六年不被提职。
English: Officials of the imperial court spoke disparagingly of Zhang's hasty promotion to China, as a result of which Zhang was not promoted to China for 16 years.

古文：尝得对便殿，询及家世，遂诉父始忤权贵，因罹重贬。
现代文：曾经在便殿应对，被太祖问到家世，张去华于是诉说父亲开始由于得罪权贵们，因而遭到贬职。
English: Once, when he was asked about his family history by his great-grandfather in the hall of residence, Zhang went to China to tell him that his father had been demoted because he had offended the powerful.

古文：宰相薛居正亦为言之，太祖为之动容，且曰： 汉室不道，奸臣擅权，此朕所亲见也。 荆湖平，命通判道州。
现代文：宰相薛居正也替张去华诉说，太祖为此感动，并说： 汉室不仁道，奸臣专权，这是我所亲自看到的。 荆湖平定后，命为道州通判。
English: The prime minister, Xue Juzheng, also spoke on behalf of Zhang when he went to China, saying that the great-grandfather was moved by this, and said: "I have seen for myself that the Han family is not benevolent, and betrays the exclusive right of the vassal.

古文：去华上言： 桂管为五岭冲要，令刘鋹保境固守，赖之为捍蔽，若大军先克其城，以趣番禺，如践无人之境。 且言桂州可取之状，有诏嘉奖。
现代文：张去华上奏说 ：桂管为五岭的交通要道，如今刘钅长为了保全领地顽强坚守，依赖桂管作为防卫屏障，如果大军首先攻占他的城池，奔赴番禺，犹如进入无人之境。 并叙说桂州能够攻取的情状，太宗颁布诏令给予奖励。
English: Zhang went to China to report: Guizhou is an important transportation route for the Five Ridges, and now Liu Yuchang, in order to preserve the territory, tenaciously sticks to it, relying on Guizhou as a defense barrier. If the army first captures his castle and rushes to Panyu, it will be like entering no man's land. And describing the situation that Guizhou can be captured, Taizong issued a decree to give a reward.

古文：代还，知磁、乾二州，选为益州通判，迁起居舍人、知凤翔府。
现代文：回京，任磁、乾二州知州，选为益州通判，升任起居舍人、知凤翔府。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was appointed as the magistrate of Chizhou, the second state of Qian, and the magistrate of Yizhou, and was promoted to the position of the chief resident of Xiangfu, the second state of Chifeng.

古文：从太宗征太原，监随驾左藏库，就命为京东转运使。
现代文：随从太宗征战太原，督管随军左藏库，于是任命为京东转运使。
English: He accompanied Emperor Taizong to Taiyuan and supervised the Zuozang Library, after which he was appointed as the Beijing-Tianyun envoy.

古文：历左司员外郎、礼部郎中。
现代文：先后担任左司员外郎、礼部郎中。
English: He successively held the positions of Saseki no Wairo and Reibu no Wairo.

古文：太平兴国七年，为江南转运使。
现代文：太平兴国七年，任江南转运使。
English: In the seventh year of Taiping Xingguo, he was appointed as the Jiangnan Trans-shipment Envoy.

古文：雍熙中，王师讨幽州，去华督宋州馈运至拒马河，就命掌河北转运事。
现代文：雍熙年间，宋军讨伐幽州，张去华监督宋州粮草运输到拒马河，于是命为河北转运使。
English: During the reign of Yongxi, the Song army attacked Yuzhou, and Zhang went to China to supervise the transportation of grain and grass from Songzhou to the Yaoma River, so he was ordered to be the transfer envoy for Hebei.

古文：三年，知陕州，未行，著《大政要录》三十篇以献，上览而嘉之，诏书褒美，赐彩五十匹，因留不遣。
现代文：第三年，任陕州知州，没有到任，写下《大政要录》三十篇敬献朝廷，太宗看后对此加以称赞，诏令给予嘉奖，赐予五十匹彩丝，因此留京没有派遣。
English: In the third year, he was appointed to Chizhou, Shaanxi Province, but did not arrive at the post. He wrote down 30 articles of the "Grand Political Guidebook" as a tribute to the imperial court. After reading it, Emperor Taizong praised it, gave a commendation, and awarded fifty colored silk. Therefore, he did not stay in Beijing.

古文：会许王尹京，命为开封府判官，殿中侍御史陈载为推官，并赐金紫。
现代文：恰遇许王为开封尹，张去华被任命为开封府判官，殿中侍御史陈载为推官，都赐予金紫服。
English: It so happened that Xu Wang was appointed as Kaifeng Yin, Zhang Dehua was appointed as Kaifeng magistrate, and Chen Zhao, the palace attendant, was appointed as the magistrate. All of them were given gold and purple uniforms.

古文：谓曰： 卿等皆朝之端士，特加选用，其善佐吾子。 各赐钱百万。
现代文：太宗说 ：你们都是朝廷的正直之臣，特地加以选择任用，要很好地辅佐我的儿子。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "You are all honest courtiers of the imperial court, specially selected and appointed to assist my son well.

古文：逾岁，就拜左谏议大夫，又令枢密使王显传旨，谕以辅成之意。
现代文：各赐予钱百万缗，一年后，就授予左谏议大夫，又令枢密使王显下达旨意，表明辅助的意思。
English: They each gave a million baht in money, and a year later, they awarded it to Zuo Jiao, and also ordered the privy envoy Wang Xian to issue a will, indicating the intention of assistance.

古文：未几，有庐州尼道安讼弟妇不实，府不为治，械系送本州。
现代文：不久，庐州尼姑道安诉讼其弟妇不诚实，开封府不给妇人治罪，就用镣铐拘禁送回庐州。
English: Soon, the Zhangzhou nun Dao'an sued her brother-in-law for dishonesty. The Kaifeng government did not punish the woman, and she was sent back to Zhangzhou under house arrest.

古文：弟妇即徐铉妻之甥。
现代文：弟妇是刘铉妻子的外甥。
English: The sister-in-law is the nephew of Liu Yao's wife.

古文：道安伐登闻鼓，言铉以尺牍求请，去华故不为治。上怒，去华坐削一任，贬安州司马。
现代文：道安击打登闻鼓，说刘铉用书信请托，张去华所以不治罪，太宗大怒，张去华被免除一职，贬为安州司马。
English: Daoan beat the drum, saying that Liu Yao used a letter to ask Zhang to go to China, so he would not punish Zhang. He was so furious that Zhang went to China and was relieved of his post and demoted to Anzhou Sima.

古文：岁余，召授将作少监、知兴元府，未行，改晋州。迁秘书少监、知许州。
现代文：这年年末，受召授予将作少监、知兴元府，没有到任，改任晋州知州，升任秘书少监、知许州。
English: At the end of the year, he was called to serve as a junior supervisor, Chixing Yuanfu, but he did not arrive at the post, he was reassigned to Jinzhou Chizhou, and promoted to the secretary of the junior supervisor, Chizhou.

古文：真宗嗣位，复拜左谏议大夫。
现代文：真宗即位，又授予左谏议大夫。
English: Shinso ascended to the throne, and was also awarded the title of Zuo Jianli Doctor.

古文：未几，迁给事中、知杭州。
现代文：不久，升任给事中、知杭州。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Zhongzheng, known as Hangzhou.

古文：两浙自钱氏赋民丁钱，有死而不免者，去华建议请除之，有司以经费所仰，固执不许。
现代文：两浙从钱氏征收丁赋以来，有的死了也不免除，张去华建议请求免除死者的赋税，有司以经费依靠为由，一直坚持没有批准。
English: Since the collection of Dingfu from the Qian clan in Zhejiang and Zhejiang, some dead people have not been exempted. Zhang Gaohua suggested that the deceased should be exempted from the tax. Some departments have insisted on not approving it on the grounds of relying on funds.

古文：咸平二年，徙苏州。
现代文：咸平二年，迁任苏州。
English: In the second year of Xianping, he was transferred to Suzhou.

古文：顷之，以疾求分司西京。
现代文：不久，由于疾病请求分司两京。
English: Soon, due to illness, he requested to be transferred to Kyoto.

古文：在洛葺园庐，作中隐亭以见志。
现代文：在洛阳修补园庐，作中隐亭来表明自己的心志。
English: In Luoyang, he repaired the garden gate and built the Zhongyin Pavilion to show his determination.

古文：景德元年，改工部侍郎致仕。三年，卒，年六十九。
现代文：景德元年改任工部侍郎。三年，去世，终年六十九岁。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Jingde was appointed as a chamberlain of the engineering department. He died three years later, at the age of 69.

古文：去华美姿貌，善谈论，有蕴藉，颇尚气节。
现代文：张去华身材高大面貌美好，善于谈论，为人稳重，见解深邃，崇尚节操。
English: Zhang Dehua is tall, good-looking, good at talking, steady, insightful, and a stickler for discipline.

古文：在营道得父同门生何氏二子，教其学问。
现代文：在营道抚养其父亲同事何氏二子，教给他们学问。
English: He raised the two sons of his father's colleague, Mr. Ho, in the camp road and taught them the culture.

古文：受代，携之京师，慰荐馆谷，并登仕籍。
现代文：后来，张去华受委托将他们带到京师，对他们加以劝慰并推荐给教馆，最后走上仕途。
English: Later, Zhang went to China on commission to bring them to the Beijing division, comfort them and recommend them to the teaching center, and finally embarked on his career.

古文：尝献《元元论》，大旨以养民务穑为急，真宗深所嘉赏，命以缣素写其论为十八轴，列置龙图阁之四壁。
现代文：曾经敬献《元元论》，大意是以抚养百姓致力农业作为当务之急，真宗十分赞赏，让人用白色丝绢将其论策写成十八幅条幅，挂列安置在龙图阁的四壁。
English: He once dedicated "Yuan Yuan Theory," to the effect that it was urgent to raise the people and devote themselves to agriculture. Shinshong was very appreciative, and had people write his theory into eighteen strips of white silk and hang them on the four walls of Longtu Pavilion.

古文：然不饰边幅，颇为清议所贬，以是不登显用。
现代文：但条幅没有裱饰，遭到清议的贬斥，因此不被委以重任。
English: However, the banner was not decorated with ornaments, and was rejected outright, so it was not entrusted with important tasks.

古文：有集十五卷。子师古至国子博士，师锡殿中丞，师颜国子博士。
现代文：有文集十五卷，他的儿子张师古为国子博士，张师锡任殿中丞，张师颜为国子博士。
English: There are 15 volumes of the anthology, and his son Zhang Shigu is a Doctor of Nationality, Zhang Shixin is a Junior Middle Officer, and Zhang Shiyan is a Doctor of Nationality.

