古文：霍光字子孟，票骑将军去病弟也。
现代文：霍光字子孟，是骠骑将军霍去病的弟弟。
English: Huo Guang Zi Meng is the younger brother of General Huo Guang Zi.

古文：父中孺，河东平阳人也，以县吏给事平阳侯家，与侍者卫少皃私通而生去病。
现代文：他的父亲中孺，是河东平阳人，以县吏的身份在平阳侯家供事，同侍女卫少儿私通而生下霍去病。
English: His father, Zhongyao, was from Pingyang in the east of the river. As a county official, he worked for the Pingyang family and had an affair with the maid, Wei Shao'er.

古文：中孺吏毕归家，娶妇生光，因绝不相闻。
现代文：中孺差事完成后回到家中又娶妻生下霍光，与卫少儿断了关系不通音信。
English: After the completion of the errand, he returned home, married his wife and gave birth to Huo Guang. He broke off the relationship with Wei Shaoer and did not communicate.

古文：久之，少皃女弟子夫得幸于武帝，立为皇后，去病以皇后姊子贵幸。
现代文：过了一段时间，少儿的妹妹子夫得宠于汉武帝，被立为皇后，霍去病由于是皇后姐姐的儿子而地位尊贵并受到皇帝的宠幸。
English: After a period of time, Shao'er's younger sister Zifu was favored by Emperor Hanwu and was appointed as empress. Because he was the son of the empress's sister, he had a distinguished status and was favored by the emperor.

古文：既壮大，乃自知父为霍中孺，未及求问。
现代文：霍去病长大成人后，才知道自己的父亲是霍中孺，但一直未来得及探访。
English: It was only after he became an adult that he learned that his father was Huo Zhongyao, but he never had time to visit him.

古文：会为票骑将军击匈奴，道出河东，河东太守郊迎，负弩矢先驱，至平阳传舍，遣吏迎霍中孺。
现代文：恰好霍去病被封为骠骑将军去攻打匈奴，路过河东，河东太守到城郊去迎接，背着弓箭在前面带路，到平阳侯家裹的接待处休息。
English: It just so happened that Huo went to the sick and was appointed as a cavalry general to attack the Xiongnu, passing through Hedong, the governor of Hedong went to the outskirts of the city to meet, led the way with a bow and arrow on his back, and rested at the reception of Pingyang Houjia.

古文：中孺趋入拜谒，将军迎拜，因跪曰： 去病不早自知为大人遗体也。 
现代文：霍去病就派小吏去请霍中孺来相见。中孺急忙赶来很恭敬地晋见，霍去病上前迎接揖拜，跪下说： 去病早先不知道自己是您的骨肉。 
English: When Huo became ill, he sent a minor official to invite Huo Zhongyi to meet him. Zhongyi hurried to meet him very respectfully. When Huo became ill, he came forward to greet him. He knelt down and said, "I went to the hospital not knowing that I was your own flesh and blood.

古文：中孺扶报叩头，曰： 老臣得托命将军，此天力也。 
现代文：中孺伏地叩头说： 老臣能把命运寄托给将军，这是上天所助啊。 
English: In the middle, he prostrated himself and said, "If an old minister can entrust his fate to a general, it is a blessing from heaven."

古文：去病大为中孺买田宅、奴婢而去。
现代文：去病为中孺买了大量的田地、房宅、奴婢后离开。
English: After going on sick leave, he bought a large amount of fields, houses, slaves and maidservants for Zhongyao and left.

古文：还，复过焉，乃将光西至长安，时年十余岁，任光为郎，稍迁诸曹、侍中。
现代文：还军的时候，霍去病又经过河东，于是就把霍光带到了长安，当时霍光才十几岁，就任命霍光为郎，不久就迁升为诸曹侍中。
English: When returning to the army, Huo became ill and passed through Hedong, so he brought Huo Guang to Chang'an. At that time, Huo Guang was only a teenager, he appointed Huo Guang as his son, and soon he was promoted to be one of the attendants of Cao.

古文：去病死后，光为奉车都尉、光禄大夫，出则奉车，入侍左右，出入禁闼二十余年，小心谨慎，未尝有过，甚见亲信。
现代文：去病死后，霍光被封为奉车都尉光禄大夫，皇帝出行则以奉车身份随驾，在宫内就侍奉左右，进出禁宫有二十多年，一直小心谨慎，未曾有遇差错，很受皇帝的亲近信赖。
English: After his death from illness, Huo Guang was given the title of Feng Chariot Lieutenant Guanglu Doctor. He accompanied the emperor on his travels as a Feng Chariot. He served around the palace and was in and out of the Forbidden City for more than 20 years. He was always careful and never made a mistake. He was very close to and trusted by the emperor.

古文：征和二年，卫太子为江充所败，而燕王旦、广陵王胥皆多过失。
现代文：征和二年，卫太子被江充陷害所败，燕王刘旦、广陵王刘胥又都有很多过失。
English: In the second year of the War of Succession, Wei Taizi was defeated by Jiang Cheng's frame-up, and Yan Wang Liu Dan and Guangling Wang Liu Yao both made many mistakes.

古文：是时，上年老，宠姬钩弋赵婕妤有男，上心欲以为嗣，命大臣辅之。
现代文：这时候皇上年老，宠姬钩弋赵婕妤生了一个男孩，皇上心中打算把皇位传给他，并命大臣来辅佐他。
English: At this time, the emperor was old, and his favorite concubine, Zhao Ye, gave birth to a boy. In his heart, the emperor planned to pass the throne to him, and appointed a minister to assist him.

古文：察群臣唯光任大重，可属社稷。
现代文：皇上观察群臣中衹有霍光才可担当重任，辅助社稷。
English: The emperor observed that among the courtiers, only Huo Guang could take on heavy responsibilities and assist in the work of the community.

古文：上乃使黄门画者画周公负成王朝诸侯以赐光。
现代文：皇上于是就叫宫廷画师画了一张周公背着成王接受诸侯朝贺的画赐给霍光。
English: The emperor then asked the court painter to draw a picture of Zhou Gong receiving the morning greetings from the princes with Cheng Wang on his back and gave it to Huo Guang.

古文：后元二年春，上游五柞宫，病笃，光涕泣问曰： 如有不讳，谁当嗣者？ 
现代文：后元二年的春天，皇上出游五柞宫，病得很厉害，霍光流泪问道： 如果皇上有不测，那当由谁来继位？ 
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor went on a trip to Wuzhen Palace and was very ill. Huo Guang asked with tears: If there is an accident in the emperor, who should succeed?

古文：上曰： 君未谕前画意邪？
现代文：皇上说道： 难道您还不明白上次送给您的画的意思吗？
English: The Emperor said, "Don't you understand the meaning of the painting I gave you last time?

古文：立少子，君行周公之事。 
现代文：立少子为帝，您当照周公辅佐成王那样行事。 
English: You should do as Zhou Gongfu assisted Emperor Shicheng by making a minor son emperor.

古文：光顿首让曰： 臣不如金日磾。 
现代文：霍光叩头，谦让说： 我比不上金日磾。 
English: Huo Guang kowtowed and said humbly: I am no match for Kim Il Sung.

古文：日磾亦曰： 臣外国人，不如光。 
现代文：金日磾也说： 我是外国人，不如霍光。 
English: Kim Il-sung also said: I am a foreigner, but I am not as good as Ho Kwong.

古文：上以光为大司马大将军，日磾为车骑将军，及太仆上官桀为左将军，搜粟都尉桑弘羊为御史大夫，皆拜卧内床下，受遗诏辅少主。
现代文：皇上于是就任命霍光为大司马大将军，金日磾为车骑将军，以及太仆上官桀为左将军，搜粟都尉桑弘羊为御史大夫。他们都在天子卧室内的床前叩拜受职，接受遣诏辅佐年幼的君主。
English: The emperor then appointed Huo Guang as the grand general of horses, Kim Il Sung as the general of chariots and cavalry, as well as the eunuch superior general Tong Tong as the general of the left, and the commander of the Sogou army, Kuang Hongyang, as the grand master of history. They all bowed before the bed in the heavenly son's bedroom to accept the post and receive the young monarch.

古文：明日，武帝崩，太子袭尊号，是为孝昭皇帝。
现代文：第二天，武帝驾崩，太子承袭皇位，称为孝昭皇帝。
English: The next day, Emperor Wu died, and the crown prince succeeded to the throne, known as Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：帝年八岁，政事一决于光。
现代文：皇帝年仅八岁，政事全由霍光来决定。
English: The emperor was only eight years old, and all government affairs were decided by Huo Guang.

古文：先是，后元元年，侍中仆射莽何罗与弟重合侯通谋为逆，时，光与金日磾、上官桀等共诛之，功未录。
现代文：在这以前，后元年时，侍中仆射莽何罗同他的弟弟重合侯莽通合谋反叛，当时霍光同金日磾、上官桀等人一起诛杀了这些叛逆，其功没有被记录颁赏。
English: Prior to this, in the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the attendant servant Shih Meng He Luo and his younger brother Shuhei Hou Meng Tong conspired to rebel. At that time, Huo Guang fought and killed these rebels together with Kim Il Sung, Shangguan Yu and others, and his achievement was not recorded and awarded.

古文：武帝病，封玺书曰： 帝崩发书以从事。 
现代文：武帝病后，密封玺书说： 我死以后打开玺书遵照从事。 
English: After Emperor Wu fell ill, he sealed the imperial edict and said, "After I die, I will open the imperial edict and follow it."

古文：遗诏封金日磾为秺侯，上官桀为安阳侯，光为博陆侯，皆以前捕反者功封。
现代文：遣诏封金日磾为诧侯，上官桀为安阳侯，霍光为博陆侯，都是按照以前捕杀叛逆的功劳来分封的。
English: The emperor sent the envoys to enclose Kim Il-sung as Jianhou, Shangguan Yu as Anyanghou, and Huo Guang as Boluhou, all of which were divided according to the merits of capturing and killing traitors.

古文：时，卫尉王莽子男忽侍中，扬语曰： 帝崩，忽常在左右，安得遗诏封三子事！
现代文：当时卫尉王莽的儿子王忽为侍中，在外面扬言道： 帝崩的时候，我经常在他的身边，哪裹会有遣韶封他们的事！
English: At that time, the son of the guard officer Wang Mang, Wang Hu, was an attendant, and he threatened outside: When the emperor died, I was always by his side, how could there be a matter of sending and sealing them!

古文：群儿自相贵耳。 
现代文：这帮人是在自己抬高自己。 
English: These people are self-aggrandizing.

古文：光闻之，切让王莽，莽鸩杀忽。
现代文：霍光听到这些话后，严厉责备王莽，王莽用毒酒杀死了王忽。
English: After hearing these words, Huo Guang severely rebuked Wang Mang, who killed Wang Hu with poisoned wine.

古文：光为人沉静详审，长财七尺三寸，白皙，疏眉目，美须髯。
现代文：霍光性格沉静，思虑周到，身高衹有七尺三寸，皮肤白皙，疏眉朗目，须髯很美。
English: Huo Guang is quiet and thoughtful. He is seven feet three inches tall, with fair skin, a sparse brow, and beautiful whiskers.

古文：每出入下殿门，止进有常处，郎仆射窃识视之，不失尺寸，其资性端正如此。
现代文：每当他出入殿门的时候，前进、停止的时候都有固定的位置。郎仆射暗中做记号来观察，发现不差分毫，他的资质就像这样端正。
English: Whenever he went in and out of the palace gate, there was a fixed position when he advanced and stopped. The servant secretly made a mark to observe, and found that there was no difference at all, and his qualifications were just like this.

古文：初辅幼主，政自己出，天下想闻其风采。
现代文：霍光辅佐幼主的时候，政令由自己发布，天下人都仰慕他的风采。
English: When Huo Guangfu assisted his young master, he issued the decree himself, and people all over the world admired his style.

古文：殿中尝有怪，一夜群臣相惊，光召尚符玺郎，郎不肯授光。
现代文：宫殿中曾经有过鬼怪之事，整夜群臣都很惊慌，霍光召见掌管符玺的郎官，郎官不肯把玺给霍光。
English: There had been a ghostly event in the palace, and the courtiers were in a panic all night. Ho Guang summoned the steward who was in charge of the seal. The steward refused to give the seal to Ho Guang.

古文：光欲夺之，郎按剑曰： 臣头可得，玺不可得也！ 
现代文：霍光想夺取符玺，郎官按剑说道： 我的头可以得到，但玺却不可为你所得！ 
English: When Huo Guang wanted to seize the talisman, the vassal pressed his sword and said, "You can have my head, but not the talisman!"

古文：光甚谊之。
现代文：霍光很敬佩郎官的行为。
English: Huo Guang very much admires his stepfather's behavior.

古文：明日，诏增此郎秩二等。
现代文：第二天，就下韶把这个郎官的官秩升了两级。
English: The next day, the lower court raised the official rank of this steward by two levels.

古文：众庶莫不多光。
现代文：众人没有不赞许霍光的这种行为的。
English: Many people did not disapprove of Huo Guang's behavior.

古文：光与左将军桀结婚相亲，光长女为桀子安妻。
现代文：霍光与左将军上官桀是儿女亲家，关系亲密，霍光的大女儿嫁给上官桀的儿子上官安为妻。
English: Huo Guang and General Zuo Shang Guanjun are close relatives. Huo Guang's eldest daughter married Shang Guanjun's son Shang Guanjun.

古文：有女年与帝相配，桀因帝姊鄂邑盖主内安女后宫为婕妤，数月立为皇后。
现代文：上官安有个女儿年龄同昭帝相当，上官桀就通过！昭帝的姐姐鄂邑盖主把上宣室的女儿纳进后宫当婕妤，几个月后就被立为皇后。
English: Shangguan An had a daughter who was the same age as Emperor Zhao, and Shangguan An passed the imperial examination! Emperor Zhao's sister, the Empress Dowager, brought Shangguan An's daughter into the harem to serve as an empress, and a few months later she was made empress.

古文：父安为票骑将军，封桑乐侯。
现代文：皇后的父亲上宣昼就被任命为骠骑将军，封为桑乐侯。
English: The queen's father was appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry at noon, and was given the title of Sangrakuo.

古文：光时休沐出，桀辄入代光决事。
现代文：霍光有时休假出宫，上官桀就进宫代替霍光处理政事。
English: Huo Guang sometimes went out of the palace on leave, and Shangguan Zou went into the palace to deal with political affairs instead of Huo Guang.

古文：桀父子既尊盛，而德长公主。
现代文：上官桀父子位尊势盛之后，很感激长公。
English: After the superior officer's father and son's success, he was very grateful to the eldest son.

古文：公主内行不修，近幸河间丁外人。
现代文：长公主没有操行，亲近宠幸河问的丁外人。
English: The eldest princess didn't behave herself and befriended the outsider who was her favorite.

古文：桀、安欲为外人求封，幸依国家故事以列侯尚公主者，光不许。
现代文：上官继、上官安打算替丁外人请求封侯，希望按照国家以前衹有列侯与公主配婚的惯例封侯，但霍光没有同意。
English: Shangguan Zhi and Shangguan An planned to request that Ding, a foreigner, be made a prince, hoping that he would be made a prince in accordance with the country's previous practice of marrying princes and princesses, but Huo Guang did not agree.

古文：又为外人求光禄大夫，欲令得召见，又不许。
现代文：他们又为丁外人求取光禄大夫之职，以期得到昭帝的召见，再次被霍光拒绝。
English: They also sought the post of Guanglu doctor for Ding Gaozhong, with a view to being summoned by Emperor Zhao, and were once again rejected by Huo Guang.

古文：长主大以是怨光。
现代文：长公主因此就对霍光非常怨恨。
English: As a result, the eldest princess was very resentful of Huo Guang.

古文：而桀、安数为外人求官爵弗能得，亦惭。
现代文：而上官桀、上官安因为几次为丁外人求取官爵没有成功，也感到很惭愧。
English: However, Shangguan Xuan and Shangguan An also felt very ashamed because they did not succeed in obtaining a title of nobility for Ding Gaozhong several times.

古文：自先帝时，桀已为九卿，位在光右。及父子并为将军，有椒房中宫之重，皇后亲安女，光乃其外祖，而顾专制朝事，繇是与光争权。
现代文：在汉武帝的时候，上官桀已在九卿之列，官位在霍光之上，等到上官父子同为将军的时候，又有了宫中皇后的重要关系，皇后是上官安的亲生女儿，霍光衹不过是她的外祖父，却反而独自专揽朝政，上官父子因此就与霍光争夺权力。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, Shangguan Zhai was already one of the nine nobles, and his official rank was higher than that of Huo Guang. When Shangguan father and son were both generals, there was also an important relationship between the empress of the palace. The empress was Shangguan An's biological daughter, and Huo Guangzhang was only her grandfather, but on the contrary, he was exclusively in charge of the court politics. Therefore, Shangguan father and son competed with Huo Guang for power.

古文：燕王旦自以昭帝兄，常怀怨望。
现代文：燕王刘旦自以为是昭帝的哥哥，却没有继承帝位，就常抱有怨恨之心。
English: Yan Wang Liu Dan thought he was the elder brother of Emperor Zhao, but he did not inherit the imperial throne, so he often harbored resentment.

古文：及御史大夫桑弘羊建造酒榷、盐铁，为国兴利，伐其功，欲为子弟得官，亦怨恨光。
现代文：还有御史大夫桑弘羊建议设立酒类专卖、盐铁官营的制度，为国家增加了财富，桑弘羊便居功自傲，打算为自己的子弟谋得官职，没有如愿，因此也怨恨霍光。
English: Also, the imperial historian, Kuang Hongyang, proposed the establishment of a liquor monopoly and a salt and iron official camp system, which increased the wealth of the country. Kuang Hongyang was proud of his achievements and planned to get an official post for his son. However, he did not get what he wanted, so he also resented Huo Guang.

古文：于是盖主、上官桀、安及弘羊皆与燕王旦通谋，诈令人为燕王上书，言： 光出都肄郎羽林，道上称跸，太官先置。 
现代文：于是鄂邑盖主、上官桀、上官安以及桑弘羊这些人就与燕王刘旦一同设谋，假装让人替燕王来上书，说： 霍光出城演练郎官、羽林，行进在路上像皇帝出行那样设置威仪，而且还让太官提前准备饭菜。
English: As a result, the lord of Omur, Shangguan, Shangguan An, and Kuanghongyang plotted together with Yan Wang Liu Dan, pretending to have someone write a letter for Yan Wang, saying: "Hoguang went out of the city to train his vassals and eagles, marching on the road like an emperor traveling to set up dignity, and also let the eunuch prepare meals in advance.

古文：又引： 苏武前使匈奴，拘留二十年不降，还乃为典属国，而大将军长史敞亡功为搜粟都尉，又擅调益莫府校尉。
现代文：还有苏武以前出使匈奴，被拘留二十年没有投降，回来后衹当了典属国，而大将军的长史杨敞没有功劳，却当了搜粟都尉。霍光又擅自调入来增加自己幕府的校尉。
English: Also, Su Wu had previously sent an envoy to the Huns, was detained for twenty years without surrendering, and became a vassal state after his return, while the commander of the general, Shi Yangzhang, had no merit, but became the captain of the poppy search. Ho Guang also transferred himself without authorization to increase his shogunate's lieutenant.

古文：光专权自恣，疑有非常。
现代文：霍光专权放肆，恐怕他有不良的企图。
English: I'm afraid he has bad intentions.

古文：臣旦愿归符玺，入宿卫，察奸臣变。 
现代文：臣刘旦愿交还燕王的符节玺印，入朝值宿守卫，审察奸臣的阴谋。 
English: The vassal Liu Dan is willing to return the seal of the Rune Festival of King Yan, enter the imperial guard, and investigate the conspiracy of the treacherous vassal.

古文：候司光出沐日奏之。
现代文：等霍光出宫休假的时候乘机上奏了此书。
English: When Huo Guang left the palace for vacation, he played this book on the plane.

古文：桀欲从中下其事，桑弘羊当与诸大臣共执退光。
现代文：上官桀打算从宫内直接发下其事，桑弘羊就和其他大臣一起将霍光拘捕并解除他的职务。
English: Shangguan Zhai planned to send the matter directly from the palace, and Kuang Hongyang, together with other ministers, arrested Huo Guang and relieved him of his duties.

古文：书奏，帝不肯下。
现代文：奏书交上去后，昭帝留住奏书不肯颁下。
English: After the report was handed over, Emperor Zhao kept the report and refused to issue it.

古文：明旦，光闻之，止画室中不入。
现代文：第二天早晨，霍光听说了这件事，就留在殿前的画室中没有进去朝拜。
English: The next morning, when Huo Guang heard about this, he stayed in the studio in front of the temple and did not go in to worship.

古文：上问： 大将军安在？ 
现代文：皇上问道 大将军在哪裹？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Where is the great general?"

古文：左将军桀时曰： 以燕王告其罪，故不敢入。 
现代文：左将军上官桀回答说： 因为燕王告发他的罪行，所以不敢进来。 
English: General Zuo Shangguan replied: Because Yan Wang accused him of crimes, he did not dare to come in.

古文：有诏召大将军。
现代文：皇上就下诏召见大将军。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning him to see the general.

古文：光入，免冠顿首谢，上曰： 将军冠。朕知是书诈也，将军亡罪。 
现代文：霍光进来后，取下官帽，叩头谢罪，皇上说： 将军请戴上帽子，朕知道这封奏书是假的，将军没有罪过。 
English: After Huo Guang came in, he took off his official cap, bowed to the emperor and said, "General, please put on your cap. I know this record is fake. The general did nothing wrong."

古文：光曰： 陛下何以知之？ 
现代文：霍光问道： 陛下凭什么知道我没有罪呢？ 
English: Huo Guang asked: How does His Majesty know that I am not guilty?

古文：上曰： 将军之广明都郎，属耳；调校尉以来未能十日，燕王何以得知之？
现代文：皇上说道： 将军到广明，演习郎官衹是近来的事，调选校尉到现在也不过十天，燕王是怎么知道这些事的？
English: The emperor said, "The general has come to Guangming, the drill of the officials is a recent thing, and the transfer of the captain has only been ten days. How did Yan Wang know about these things?

古文：且将军为非，不须校尉。 
现代文：况且将军要做非法的事，也不需要校尉的。 
English: Besides, it doesn't take a captain for a general to do something illegal.

古文：是时，帝年十四，尚书左右皆惊，而上书者果亡，捕之甚急，桀等惧，白上小事不足遂，上不听。
现代文：这时候昭帝年仅十四岁，尚书以及左右的大臣都很吃惊，而呈送书信的人果然逃走了，官府开始紧急搜捕。上官桀等人感到害怕了，就对皇上说这衹是一件小事，不值得穷追究竟，皇上没有听从。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhao was only fourteen years old. Shang Shuxu and the ministers around him were very surprised, and the person who presented the letter escaped. The government began an urgent search. The superior officers and others were afraid and said to the emperor that this was a small matter, not worth pursuing to the end. The emperor did not listen.

古文：后桀党有谮光者，上辄怒曰： 大将军忠臣，先帝所属以辅朕身，敢有毁者坐之。 
现代文：后来上官桀的党羽凡有说霍光的坏话的，昭帝就发怒道： 大将军是忠臣，先帝所托付来辅佐朕的，敢有诽谤他的人就判他的罪。 
English: Later, Emperor Zhao was furious with any of his subordinates who spoke ill of Huo Guang. He said, "The general is a loyal subject, entrusted by the former emperor to assist me. Anyone who dares to slander him will be judged guilty.

古文：自是桀等不敢复言，乃谋令长公主置酒请光，伏兵格杀之，因废帝，迎立燕王为天子。
现代文：从这以后，上官桀等人就不敢再说坏话了，他们就密谋让长公主摆酒席请霍光赴宴，准备埋伏士兵击杀他，乘机再废除昭帝，迎立燕王为天子。
English: From then on, Shangguan Zhai and others no longer dared to say bad words. They plotted to have the eldest princess host a banquet to invite Huo Guang to the banquet, preparing to ambush the soldiers to kill him, and take the opportunity to abolish the Emperor Zhao and welcome Yan Wang as the Son of Heaven.

古文：事发觉，光尽诛桀、安、弘羊、外人宗族。
现代文：事情被发觉，霍光就将上官桀、上官安、桑弘羊、丁外人等人及家族全都诛杀了。
English: When the matter was discovered, Huo Guang killed Shangguan Yu, Shangguan An, Kuang Hongyang, Ding Jiaoren and their families.

古文：燕王、盖主皆自杀。
现代文：燕王、盖主也都自杀。
English: Both Yan Wang and the landlord committed suicide.

古文：光威震海内。
现代文：霍光的威势震动全国。
English: The power of Huo Guang shook the whole country.

古文：昭帝既冠，遂委任光，讫十三年，百姓充实，四夷宾服。
现代文：昭帝成年后，就正式委任霍光执政，到昭帝十三年，百姓生活充裕厚实，四方的各少数民族都称臣归服。
English: After Emperor Zhao came of age, he officially appointed Huo Guang as his regent. By the 13th year of Emperor Zhao, the people's life was abundant and rich, and all ethnic minorities in the four directions were subject to him.

古文：元平元年，昭帝崩，亡嗣。
现代文：元平元年，昭帝驾崩，没有继承人。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Ping Dynasties, Emperor Zhao died without an heir.

古文：武帝六男独有广陵王胥在，群臣议所立，咸特广陵王。
现代文：汉武帝六个儿子中独有广陵王刘胥还活着。各位大臣商议所要立的人选，大家都主张立广陵王。
English: Among the six sons of Emperor Hanwu, only the Guangling King Liu Bei is still alive. The ministers discussed the candidates to be appointed, and they all advocated the appointment of the Guangling King.

古文：王本以行失道，先帝所不用。
现代文：广陵王本来因为行为有失道德，没有被先帝选用。
English: Guangling Wang was originally not chosen by the former emperor because of his immoral behavior.

古文：光内不自安。
现代文：霍光内心自感不安。
English: Huo Guang felt uneasy inside.

古文：郎有上书言： 周太王废太伯立王季，文王舍伯邑考立武王，唯在所宜，虽废长立少可也。
现代文：有郎官上书说： 周太王废掉太伯而立王季，文王舍弃伯邑考而立武王，衹要对国家有利，即使是废黜长子而立少子也是可以的。
English: An official wrote: Zhou Taifang abolished Taibu and established Wang Ji, Wen Wang abandoned Boi and established Wu Wang. If it is beneficial to the country, it is even possible to abolish the eldest son and establish a younger son.

古文：广陵王不可以承宗庙。 
现代文：广陵王是不可以继承宗庙社稷的。 
English: Guangling Wang is not allowed to inherit the family temple.

古文：言合光意。
现代文：所说的正好同霍光心意相合。
English: What he said coincided with Ho Guang's intention.

古文：光以其书视丞相敞等，擢郎为九江太守，即日承皇太后诏，遣行大鸿胪事少府乐成、宗正德、光禄大夫吉、中郎将利汉迎昌邑王贺。
现代文：霍光就把这份奏书给丞相杨敞等人看，并且把这个郎官提升为九江太守，当天就奉皇太后的诏令，派遣代理大鸿胪事务的少府乐成、宗正刘德、光禄大夫丙吉、中郎将利汉去迎接昌邑王刘贺。
English: Huo Guang showed this report to the chancellor Yang Jiao and others, and promoted this vassal to the governor of Jiujiang. On the same day, he sent the agents of the Great Hung Hom Affairs, Shofu Lexing, Zongzheng Liu De, Guanglu Doctor Bingji, and Vice Admiral Lihang to meet the Changyi King Liu He, according to the imperial decree of the Empress Dowager.

古文：贺者，武帝孙，昌邑哀王子也。
现代文：刘贺是漠武帝的孙子，昌邑哀王的儿子。
English: Liu He was the grandson of Emperor Mengwu and the son of Emperor Changwu.

古文：既至，即位，行淫乱。
现代文：他到宫中后，登上帝位，不久就行为淫乱。
English: After he arrived at the palace and ascended to the throne, he soon began to commit adultery.

古文：光忧懑，独以问所亲故吏大司农田延年。
现代文：霍光忧虑气愤，独自以此事去问亲信的旧臣大司农田延年。
English: Anxious and angry, Huo Guang went alone to ask his trusted old vassal farmer Yan Nian.

古文：延年曰： 将军为国柱石，审此人不可，何不建白太后，更选贤而立之？ 
现代文：田延年说： 将军作为国家的柱石，既然发觉这个人不可委以社稷，为什么不向太后建议禀报，另外选一个贤能之人立他为帝呢？ 
English: Tian Yannian said, "The general is the pillar of the country. Since it was found that this person could not be appointed as the emperor, why not suggest to the empress dowager that she should choose another capable person to be the emperor?

古文：光曰： 今欲如是，于古尝有此不？ 
现代文：霍光说道： 我也想这么办，不知在古代有没有这样的先例？ 
English: Huo Guang said: I also want to do this. I wonder if there is a precedent for this in ancient times.

古文：延年曰： 伊尹相殷，废太甲以安宗庙，后世称其忠。
现代文：田延年答道： 伊尹任殷朝丞相的时候，就废黜了太甲用来安定国家，后代的人都称赞他的忠诚。
English: Tian Ennian replied: When Yi Yin was the prime minister of the Yin Dynasty, he deposed Taiga to stabilize the country, and later generations praised his loyalty.

古文：将军若能行此，亦汉之伊尹也。 
现代文：将军如果也能这样做，就是汉朝的伊尹了。 
English: If a general could do the same, he would be the Yi Yin of the Han Dynasty.

古文：光乃引延年给事中，阴与车骑将军张安世图计，遂召丞相、御史、将军、列侯、中二千石、大夫、博士会议未央宫。
现代文：霍光就把田延年引荐为给事中，暗中同车骑将军张安世谋划，于是就在未央宫召集丞相、御史、将军、列侯、中二千石、大夫、博士等一同商议。
English: Huo Guang introduced Tian Ennian to the matter, secretly plotted with the general Zhang Anshi, and then convened the prime minister, minister of history, general, lord of the manor, 2,000 koku junior high school students, doctors, and doctors at the Weiyang Palace for discussion.

古文：光曰： 昌邑王行昏乱，恐危社稷，如何？ 
现代文：霍光说道： 昌邑王行为昏聩淫乱，恐怕会危及国家，你们看怎么办？ 
English: Huo Guang said: King Changyi's behavior is erratic, and I'm afraid it will endanger the country. What do you think?

古文：群臣皆惊鄂失色，莫敢发言，但唯唯而已。
现代文：众大臣大惊失色，不敢发言，衹是唯唯诺诺而已。
English: The ministers were so shocked that they did not dare to speak, but merely nodded.

古文：田延年前，离席按剑，曰： 先帝属将军以幼孤，寄将军以天下，以将军忠贤能安刘氏也。
现代文：田延年离开座席走上前来，手按住长剑说道： 先帝把年幼的孤儿托给将军，把天下交付给将军，是因为将军忠诚贤能，能够稳固刘氏的天下。
English: Tian Yannian left his seat and came forward, holding his long sword in his hand and said: The former emperor entrusted the young orphans to the general and handed over the country to the general, because the general was loyal and capable and could stabilize the country of the Liu clan.

古文：今群下鼎沸，社稷将倾，且汉之传谥常为孝者，以长有天下，令宗庙血食也。
现代文：如今群臣百姓鼎沸，国家将要倾覆。而且汉朝皇帝相传的谧号常用 孝 字，是为了长久地拥有天下，让宗庙永久享受祭祀。
English: Nowadays, the masses of subjects and commoners are in full swing, and the country is about to be overthrown. Moreover, the Han dynasty emperor's hereditary nickname commonly used the word "xiao" is in order to own the world for a long time, so that the ancestral temple can enjoy the sacrifice forever.

古文：如令汉家绝祀，将军虽死，何面目见先帝于地下乎？
现代文：如今汉家将要断绝香火，将军即使以死谢罪，又有什么脸面到九泉之下去见先帝呢？今天的议事，应当即刻解决。
English: Now that the Han dynasty is about to break off the incense, even if the general is sentenced to death, what kind of face would he have to go down to Nine Springs to see the former emperor? Today's proceedings should be resolved immediately.

古文：今日之议，不得旋踵。群臣后应者，臣请剑斩之。 
现代文：群臣中如果有拖延回答的，臣下请求用这把剑斩了他。 
English: If any of his vassals delayed in replying, his vassals requested that he be beheaded with this sword.

古文：光谢曰： 九卿责光是也。
现代文：霍光告罪说： 九卿责备我是对的。
English: Huo Guang pleaded guilty and said: Jiujing is right to blame me.

古文：天下匈匈不安，光当受难。 
现代文：天下骚动不安，我应当受到责罚。 
English: The world is in an uproar, and I deserve to be punished.

古文：于是议者皆叩头，曰： 万姓之命在于将军，唯大将军令。 
现代文：于是参加议事的大臣都叩头说道： 万民的性命都系在将军一人的身上，我们愿听将军的指示。 
English: So the ministers who took part in the deliberation all kowtowed and said: The lives of all the people depend on the general alone, and we are willing to listen to the general's instructions.

古文：光即与群臣俱见白太后，具陈昌邑王不可以承宗庙状。
现代文：霍光立刻同群臣一起谒见禀告太后，详细陈述昌邑王不能继承皇位的情况。
English: Huo Guang immediately went to see the Empress Dowager together with his courtiers to inform her of the obituary, and made a detailed statement about the situation that King Changyi could not succeed to the throne.

古文：皇太后乃车驾幸未央承明殿，诏诸禁门毋内昌邑群臣。
现代文：皇太后于是乘车来到未央承明殿，诏令各个宫禁门卫不要放昌邑王的群臣进宫。
English: The empress dowager then came by car to the Weiyang Chengming Palace and ordered the palace guards not to let the courtiers of the King of Changyi enter the palace.

古文：王入朝太后还，乘辇欲归温室，中黄门宦者各持门扇，王入，门闭，昌邑群臣不得入。
现代文：昌邑王进宫朝见太后返回，准备坐辇车回到温室，宫中的黄门宦官各自手持门扇，等昌邑王进去后，就把宫门关上，昌邑王的群臣就进不来了。
English: King Changyi entered the palace in the morning to see the empress dowager and returned, preparing to take the carriage back to the greenhouse. The eunuchs of the Yellow Gate in the palace each held a door, and when King Changyi entered, they closed the palace door, and King Changyi's courtiers could not enter.

古文：王曰： 何为？ 
现代文：昌邑王问道： 这是干什么？ 
English: Changyi Wang asked: What is this?

古文：大将军跪曰： 有皇太后诏，毋内昌邑群臣。 
现代文：大将军跪下说： 皇太后有诏令，不让昌邑王的群臣进来。 
English: The general knelt down and said, "The Empress Dowager has issued an edict not to let the ministers of the King of Chang'e come in.

古文：王曰： 徐之，何乃惊人如是！ 
现代文：昌邑王说： 慢点来，为什么要弄得这么吓人！ 
English: Changyi Wang said, "Slow down, why do you have to be so scary!"

古文：光使尽驱出昌邑群臣，置金马门外。
现代文：霍光派人将昌邑王的群臣全部驱逐出宫，集中在金马门外。
English: Huo Guang sent people to expel all the vassals of King Changyi from the palace and concentrated them outside the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：车骑将军安世将羽林骑收缚二百余人，皆送廷尉诏狱。
现代文：车骑将军张安世率领羽林骑士拘捕捆绑了二百多人，都交给廷尉关在诏令所规定的监狱内。
English: The cavalry general Zhang Anshi led the Wu Lin knights to arrest and tie up more than two hundred people, all of whom were handed over to the imperial lieutenant and locked up in the prison prescribed by the imperial edict.

古文：令故昭帝侍中中臣侍守王。
现代文：并命令原昭帝的侍中、中常侍看守昌邑王。
English: He also ordered the former Emperor Zhao's attendants, the middle attendants, to watch over the King of Chang'er.

古文：光敕左右： 谨宿卫，卒有物故自裁，令我负天下，有杀主名。 
现代文：霍光告诫他们说： 你们要小心值班守卫，昌邑王如果突然死了或自杀，就会让我对不起天下人，背上杀害君王的罪名。 
English: Huo Guang warned them: "You should be careful about the guards on duty. If King Changyi dies suddenly or commits suicide, I will be blamed for killing the king.

古文：王尚未自知当废，谓左右： 我故群臣从官安得罪，而大将军尽系之乎？ 
现代文：昌邑王这时还不知道自己要被罢黜，对身边的人说： 我原来的群臣随员有什么罪，而大将军全把他们关押起来了。 
English: At that time, King Changyi did not know that he was about to be deposed, and he said to the people around him, "What is the crime of my former retainers, and the general has detained them all."

古文：顷之，有太后诏召王，王闻召，意恐，乃曰： 我安得罪而召我哉！ 太后被珠襦，盛服坐武帐中，侍御数百人皆持兵，其门武士陛戟，陈列殿下。
现代文：不久，太后下诏召见昌邑王。昌邑王听到要召见自己，心中开始害怕起来，于是说： 我犯了什么罪要召见我厂太后披着珍珠缀成的短袄，穿着盛装坐在布置兵器的帷帐中，几百名宫廷卫士都拿着武器，期门武士持戟守卫台阶，他们都排列在殿下。
English: Soon after, the empress dowager issued an edict summoning King Chang'e. Upon hearing that he was to be summoned, King Chang'e began to fear in his heart, and said: "What crime have I committed to summon my factory empress dowager, wearing a short gown with pearls, dressed in full regalia, sitting in a curtain of arranged weapons, hundreds of palace guards all holding weapons, and future samurai holding halberds guarding the steps, all of whom are lined up in front of His Imperial Highness.

古文：群臣以次上殿，召昌邑王伏前听诏。
现代文：群臣按顺序走进殿来，叫昌邑王伏在前面听诏令。
English: The group of courtiers entered the hall in order and told Changyi Wang to kneel in front of them to listen to the imperial edict.

古文：光与群臣连名奏王，尚书令读奏曰：
现代文：霍光同各位大臣一起联名奏劾昌邑王，尚书令宣读奏章道：
English: Huo Guang, together with the ministers, jointly petitioned to impeach Changyi Wang. He ordered to read out the petition, saying:

古文：丞相臣敞、大司马大将军臣光、车骑将军臣安世、度辽将军臣明友、前将军臣增、后将军臣充国、御史大夫臣谊、宜春侯臣谭、当涂侯臣圣、随桃侯臣昌乐、杜侯臣屠耆堂、太仆臣延年，太常臣昌、大司农臣延年、宗正臣德、少府臣乐成、廷尉臣光，执金吾臣延寿、大鸿胪臣贤、左冯翊臣广明、右扶风臣德、长信少府臣嘉、典属国臣武、京辅都尉臣广汉、司隶校尉臣辟兵、诸吏文学光禄大夫臣迁、臣畸、臣吉、臣赐、臣管、臣胜、臣梁、臣长幸、臣夏侯胜、太中大夫臣德、臣卬昧死言皇太后陛下：臣敞等顿首死罪。
现代文：臣丞相杨敞、臣大司马大将军霍光、臣车骑将军张安世、臣度辽将军范明友、臣前将军韩增、臣后将军趟充国、臣御史大夫蔡谊、臣宜春侯王谭、臣当涂侯魏圣、臣随桃侯趟昌乐、臣杜侯复陆屠耆堂、臣太仆杜延年、臣太常苏昌、臣大司农田延年、臣宗正刘德、臣少府史乐成、臣廷尉李光、臣执金吾李延寿、臣大鸿胪韦贤、臣左冯翊田广明、臣右扶风周德、臣长信少府傅嘉、臣典属国苏武、臣京辅都尉赵广汉、臣司隶校尉辟兵、臣诸吏文学光禄大夫王迁、臣宋畸、臣丙吉、臣赐、臣管、臣胜、臣梁、臣长幸、臣夏侯胜、臣太中大夫德、臣趟印冒死罪禀告皇太后陛下：臣杨敞等人顿首死罪。
English: Vice-Minister Yang Zhan, Vice-Major General Ma Guang, Vice-Chariot and Cavalry General Zhang Anshi, Vice-Major General Fan Mingyou, Vice-Major General Han Zeng, Vice-Major General Zhaisheng Guo, Vice-Major General Cai Rui, Vice-Major General Yichun Hou Wang Tan, Vice-Major General Tuo Hou Wei Sheng, Vice-Major General Zhu Hou Fu Lu, Vice-Major General Tu Yan Nian, Vice-Major General Su Chang, Vice-Major General Nong Tian Yan Nian, Vice-Major General Zong Zheng Liu De, Vice-M

古文：天子所以永保宗庙总一海内者，以慈孝、礼谊、赏罚为本。
现代文：天子之所以能够长久保持宗庙并拥有天下，是因为他能够以慈孝、礼义、赏罚分明作为根本。
English: The reason why the Son of Heaven is able to maintain the ancestral temple for a long time and possess the whole world is because He is able to take filial piety, courtesy, and clear distinction between reward and punishment as the foundation.

古文：孝昭皇帝早弃天下，亡嗣，臣敞等议，礼曰 为人后者为之子也 ，昌邑王宜嗣后，遣宗正、大鸿胪、光禄大夫奉节使征昌邑王典丧。
现代文：孝昭皇帝由于遇早地离开人间，没有继承人，臣杨敞等人商议，根据礼所说的 做某人的继承人的人就是他的儿子 ，昌邑王适于做继承人，于是便派遣宗正、大鸿胪、光禄大夫等官员奉持符节出使征召昌邑王来主持昭帝的丧事。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhao left the world at an early age and had no heir. His vassal Yang Chang and others discussed that, according to the etiquette, the person to be someone's heir was his son, and Changyi Wang was suitable to be the heir. Therefore, officials such as Zong Zheng, Dahong Zang, and Guanglu Doctor were dispatched to summon Changyi Wang to preside over Emperor Zhao's funeral.

古文：服斩縗，亡悲哀之心，废礼谊，居道上不素食，使从官略女子载衣车，内所居传舍。
现代文：昌邑王穿上丧服后，却没有悲哀的意思，而且还弃礼义于不顾，在路上不吃素食，派遣随从官吏抢掠女人，用遮蔽的车子把她们弄到他所住的驿馆。
English: After putting on his mourning clothes, King Changyi did not mean to be sad, but he also abandoned courtesy and righteousness, did not eat vegetarian food on the road, sent his officials to rob women, and used a covered car to get them to his residence.

古文：始至谒见，立为皇太子，常私买鸡豚以食。
现代文：从刚开始到达京城谒见太后被立为皇太子起，就经常私下买鸡、猪来吃。
English: From the moment he arrived in Beijing to see the empress dowager crowned crown prince, he often bought chicken and pigs to eat in private.

古文：受皇帝信玺、行玺大行前，就次发玺不封。
现代文：在昭帝灵柩前接受信玺、行玺后，就在居丧的地方打开玺印不再封上。
English: In front of the coffin of Emperor Zhao, after receiving the letter and the funeral rites, open the seal in the place of mourning and no longer seal it.

古文：从官更持节，引内昌邑从官驺宰官奴二百余人，常与居禁闼内敖戏。
现代文：随从的官员又拿着符节，带领吕邑王的从宫、马官、官奴二百多人进宫，经常与他们在禁宫中玩耍游戏。
English: Accompanying officials also took the symbols and led more than 200 people from the palace, equestrian officials, and official slaves of King Lyuyi into the palace, and often played games with them in the Forbidden Palace.

古文：自之符玺取节十六，朝暮临，令从官更持节从。
现代文：亲自到保管符玺的地方取走十六根符节，早晚去灵柩前哭祭时，让随从的官员轮换着拿着符节跟着。
English: He personally went to the place where the charms were kept to take away the sixteen charms, and in the morning and evening when he went to the wailing ritual before the coffin, he let the officials accompanying him take turns holding the charms.

古文：为书曰： 皇帝问侍中君卿：使中御府令高昌奉黄金千斤，赐君卿取十妻。 
现代文：还写信说： 皇帝问候侍中君卿：派中御府的长官高昌送去黄金一千斤，赐给君卿娶十个妻子。 
English: He also wrote: "The Emperor sends his greetings to the Lord Chamberlain: He has sent the Governor of the Imperial Household, Gao Chang, to send a thousand kilos of gold and grant the Lord Chamberlain ten wives.

古文：大行在前殿，发乐府乐器，引内昌邑乐人，击鼓歌吹作俳倡。
现代文：孝昭皇帝的灵柩还停放在前殿，便叫人取出乐府的乐器，把昌邑国的乐人引进宫来，击鼓歌唱、吹奏乐器，扮演戏子。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhao's coffin was still in the vestibule, so they called for people to take out the musical instruments from the Music Palace and bring musicians from Changyi Province to the palace to play drums, sing, play musical instruments, and act as actors.

古文：会下还，上前殿，击钟磬，召内泰壹宗庙乐人辇道牟首，鼓吹歌舞，悉奏众乐。
现代文：等到灵柩下葬返回，就到前殿去敲打钟磬，还把泰壹宗庙的乐人沿着辇道引到牟首，击鼓吹奏，载歌载舞，演奏各种音乐。
English: When the coffin was buried and returned, he went to the front hall to strike the bell, and also led the musicians of the Taiyi Temple along the path to Muxou, playing drums, singing and dancing, and playing various music.

古文：发长安厨三太牢具祠阁室中，祀已，与从官饮啖。
现代文：从长安厨取出三副太牢供品，陈放在阁室中进行祭祀，祭祀完毕，就同随从的官员大吃大喝。
English: From the Chang'an kitchen, they took out three sets of Taiji offerings and placed them in the attic room for the sacrifice. After the sacrifice was over, they ate and drank with the accompanying officials.

古文：驾法驾，皮轩鸾旗，驱驰北官、桂宫，弄彘斗虎。
现代文：驾着皇帝出行时专用的车马，车上蒙着虎皮，插着鸾旗，驱车跑到北宫、桂宫，追野猪，斗老虎。
English: He drove the chariot and horse specially used by the emperor when traveling, with a tiger skin on the car and a banner, and drove to the North Palace and the Katsura Palace, chasing wild boars and fighting tigers.

古文：召皇太后御小马车，使官奴骑乘，游戏掖庭中。
现代文：又召来皇太后用的小马车，叫官奴骑乘，在嫔妃居住的掖庭中嬉笑娱乐。
English: He also summoned the pony car used by the empress dowager, and had the officials and servants ride in it. They had fun in the courtyard where the empress dowager lived.

古文：与孝昭皇帝宫人蒙等淫乱，诏掖庭令敢泄言要斩。
现代文：还同孝昭皇帝的宫人蒙等行淫乱之事，下诏对掖庭令说，有敢泄露外传的人就要处以腰斩之刑。
English: He also committed adultery with Emperor Xiao Zhao's palace attendant Meng Rong, and issued an edict saying that anyone who dared to divulge the rumor would be sentenced to beheading.

古文：太后曰： 止！
现代文：太后说： 停一下！
English: The empress dowager said: Stop!

古文：为人臣子当悖乱如是邪！ 
现代文：为人臣子怎么能这样糊涂放肆呢！ 
English: How could a courtier be so foolish and impudent!

古文：王离席伏。
现代文：昌邑王离开席位伏在地上。
English: Changyi Wang left his seat and prostrated on the ground.

古文：尚书令复读曰：
现代文：尚书令又读道：
English: Shang Shuling also read:

古文：取诸侯王、列侯、二千石绶及墨缓、黄绶以并佩昌邑郎官者免奴。
现代文：昌邑王取出诸侯王、列侯、二千石的绶带以及黑色、黄色绶带一起给昌邑国的郎官佩戴，把他们免为良人。
English: The king of Chang'e took out the sashes of the princes and vassals, the sashes of two thousand stones, and the black and yellow sashes to wear together for the vassals of Chang'e country, and exempted them from being good men.

古文：变易节上黄旄以赤。
现代文：将符节上的黄旄改为红色。
English: Change the amber circle on the clef to red.

古文：发御府金钱、刀剑、玉器、采缯、赏赐所与游戏者。
现代文：把御府中的金子钱币，刀剑玉器，彩色绸缎赏给一同嬉游娱乐的人。
English: The gold, coins, swords, jade objects, and colorful silk brocades in the Imperial Palace will be awarded to those who have fun together.

古文：与从官官奴夜饮，湛沔于酒。
现代文：同随从的官员以及没入官府的奴隶整夜聚饮，沉湎于酒中。
English: He and his entourage of officials, as well as the slaves who had infiltrated the government offices, spent the night drinking and indulging in alcohol.

古文：诏太官上乘舆食如故。
现代文：下韶叫太官送上皇帝平时的膳食。
English: The eunuch ordered the eunuch to bring the emperor his usual meal.

古文：食监奏未释服未可御故食，复诏太官趣具，无关食盐。
现代文：食监奏道，没有除去丧服不可进用平曰的饭菜，就下诏叫太官赶快准备，不要通过食监。
English: The food inspector said that if the mourning clothes were not removed, the usual meals could not be used. He issued an edict to tell the eunuch to prepare quickly and not to go through the food inspector.

古文：太官不敢具，即使从官出买鸡豚，诏殿门内，以为常。
现代文：太官不敢去准备，就派侍臣去宫外买来鶸和猪，下诏给宫殿门卫叫他们放行，以此作为常规。
English: The eunuch did not dare to prepare, so he sent a courtier to buy a yakitori and a pig outside the palace, and ordered the palace doorman to let them go, as a rule.

古文：独夜设九宾温室，延见姊夫昌邑关内侯。
现代文：独自在夜晚于温室设九宾之礼，把他的姐夫昌邑关内侯请来相见。
English: On his own, he held a nine-guest party in the greenhouse at night and invited his brother-in-law, Changyi Guan Nei Hou, to come and meet him.

古文：祖宗庙祠未举，为玺书使使者持节，以三太牢祠昌邑哀王园庙，称嗣子皇帝。
现代文：列祖列宗的祭庙还没有举行，就作玺书派使者拿着符节，用三副太牢祭祀昌邑哀王的陵园宗庙，自称为嗣子皇帝。
English: The festival of the ancestors and the ancestors had not yet been held, so the envoys of the Imperial Academy of Letters, holding the festival, used three pairs of dungeons to worship the mausoleum temple of the king of Changyi, who called himself the heir emperor.

古文：受玺以来二十七日，使者旁午，持节诏诸官署征发，凡一千一百二十七事。
现代文：接受皇帝玺印以来的二十七天中，使者往来不绝，拿着符节向各个官署下达韶令征索物品，共有一千一百二卜七起。
English: In the 27 days since receiving the Emperor's seal, the envoys have been in and out of each other's offices, taking the countersigns to issue official orders to collect items, a total of one thousand one hundred and twenty-two thousand seven.

古文：文学、光禄大夫夏侯胜等及侍中傅嘉数进谏以过失，使人簿责胜，缚嘉系狱。
现代文：文学光禄大夫夏侯胜等以及侍中傅嘉几次为他的过失进言规劝，他就派人拿着文书责备夏侯胜，并把傅嘉绑起来关进牢裹？
English: He sent someone with a document to reprimand Xia Hou Sheng, and tied Fu Jia up and put her in prison.

古文：荒淫迷惑，失帝王礼谊，乱汉制度。
现代文：他荒淫昏乱，失去帝王的礼义，破坏丁汉朝的制度。
English: He was wild and disorderly, lost the emperor's propriety, and destroyed the system of the Ding Han Dynasty.

古文：臣敞等数进谏，不变更，日以益甚，恐危社稷，天下不安。
现代文：臣杨敞等人几次进言规谏，他都不改变过错，反而一天比一天厉害，恐怕要危害国家，天下不安。
English: Minister Yang Zhan and others have made several speeches and rules, but he does not change his mistakes, but becomes more and more powerful every day. I am afraid that he will harm the country, and the world is uneasy.

古文：臣敞等谨与博士臣霸、臣隽舍、臣德、臣虞舍、臣射、臣仓议，皆曰： 高皇帝建功业为汉太祖，孝文皇帝慈仁节俭为太宗，今陛下嗣孝昭皇帝后，行淫辟不轨。
现代文：臣杨敞等谨与博士孔霸、臣隽舍、臣德、臣虞舍、臣射、臣后仓商议，都说： 高皇帝因为创建汉朝基业，所以称汉太祖，孝文皇帝因为仁慈节俭被称为太宗，如今陛下继承孝昭皇帝之后，行为放纵不合法度。
English: Vassals Yang Zhan and others discussed with Dr. Kong Ba, Vassal Gao She, Vassal De, Vassal Yu She, Vassal Sha, and Vassal Hou Cang, and said: Emperor Gao was called Han Taizu because he founded the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Xiaowen was called Taizong because of his kindness and frugality. Now that His Majesty has succeeded Emperor Xiaozhao, his indulgent behavior is illegal.

古文：《诗》云： 籍曰未知，亦既抱子。 五辟之属，莫大不孝。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 若说无知，也已抱子，五刑的条文规定，罪孽没有比不孝更大的。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If you speak ignorance, you have already borne a child. The five punishments stipulate that there is no greater sin than being unfilial."

古文：周襄王不能事母，《春秋》曰 天王出居于郑 ，繇不孝出之，绝之于天下也。
现代文：周襄王不能侍奉好母亲，《春秋》就说 天王出居到郑国，因为他不孝而被赶出京城，使他与天下人隔绝。
English: Zhou Xiang Wang could not serve his good mother. "Spring and Autumn" said that Tian Wang emigrated to Zheng, because he was unfilial and was driven out of the capital, isolating him from the world.

古文：宗庙重于君，陛下未见命高庙，不可以承天序，奉祖宗庙，子万姓，当废。 
现代文：宗庙比君王更重要，陛下没有到高庙接受大命，就不可以继承上天的意旨，奉祀祖宗宗庙，统治天下万民，应当废黜。 
English: The ancestral temple is more important than the king. If his majesty does not go to the high temple to accept the great mission, he cannot inherit the will of heaven, worship the ancestral ancestral temple, rule all the people in the world, and should be deposed.

古文：臣请有司御史大夫臣谊、宗正臣德、太常臣昌与太祝以一太牢具，告祠高庙。
现代文：臣请求有关官员御史大夫蔡谊、宗正刘德、太常苏昌和太祝准备一副太牢供品，告祭高庙。
English: The minister requested the relevant officials to prepare a pair of offerings from the imperial palace for the high temple, namely, the imperial historian Cai Yi, Zong Zheng Liu De, the emperor Su Chang and the emperor Zhu.

古文：臣敞等昧死以闻。
现代文：臣杨敞等人冒死罪来奏报。
English: The vassal Yang Chang and others risked the death penalty to report it.

古文：皇太后诏曰： 可。 
现代文：皇太后下诏说： 准奏。 
English: The Empress Dowager issued an edict saying, "Let it be played."

古文：光令王起拜受诏，王曰： 闻天子有争臣七人，虽亡道不失天下。 
现代文：霍光就叫昌邑王起来跪拜接受诏令，昌邑王说道： 听说天于衹要有静臣七个人，即使无道也不会失去天下。 
English: Huo Guang then asked King Changyi to stand up and kneel down to accept the edict. King Changyi said, "I heard that there should be seven ministers of silence in heaven and earth. Even if there is no way, the world will not be lost.

古文：光曰： 皇太后诏废，安得天子！ 
现代文：霍光说： 皇太后已下韶令废黜，哪裹还是天子！ 
English: Huo Guang said: The empress dowager has been deposed by imperial order, what a son of heaven!

古文：乃即持其手，解脱其玺组，奉上太后，扶王下殿，出金马门，群臣随送。
现代文：于是上前抓住他的手，解下他身上的玺印绶带，捧上交给太后，扶着昌邑王下了宫殿，走出金马门，群臣跟着送行。
English: So he went up and grabbed his hand, untied the seal ribbon from his body, handed it to the empress dowager, supported the king of Chang'e to leave the palace, walked out of the Golden Horse Gate, and the courtiers followed him.

古文：王西面拜，曰： 愚戆不任汉事。 
现代文：昌邑王向西面拜道： 我愚昧不明事理，不堪担当汉朝的重任。 
English: King Changyi bowed to the West and said, "I am stupid and unreasonable, and I cannot bear the heavy responsibilities of the Han Dynasty."

古文：起就乘舆副车。
现代文：起身坐上皇帝侍从的车辆。
English: He got up and got into the carriage of the emperor's attendants.

古文：大将军光送至昌邑邸，光谢曰： 王行自绝于天，臣等驽怯，不能杀身报德。
现代文：大将军霍光把昌邑王送到昌邑邸后，霍光告罪道： 您的行为白绝于上天，臣下等怯懦无能，不能自杀来报答您的恩德。
English: After General Huo Guang sent King Changyi to Changyi's residence, Huo Guang pleaded guilty: Your behavior is worthless to heaven, and your subjects are too cowardly and incompetent to commit suicide to repay your kindness.

古文：臣宁负王，不敢负社稷。
现代文：臣下宁可有负大王，不敢对不起国家。
English: The vassals would rather have a negative king than a sorry state.

古文：愿王自爱，臣长不复见左右。 
现代文：但愿大王能够自爱，臣下将再也不能见到您了。 
English: I hope the great king can love himself, and his vassal will never see you again.

古文：光涕泣而去。
现代文：霍光哭着离开了昌邑王。
English: Huo Guang left Changyi Wang in tears.

古文：群臣奏言： 古者废放之人屏于远方，不及以政，请徙王贺汉中房陵县。 
现代文：群臣又上奏说： 古代被罢黜放逐之人都流放到很远的地方，不使他干扰国家政令，我们请求把昌邑王刘贺迁到汉中房陵县。 
English: The group of courtiers also reported, "In ancient times, those who were deposed and exiled were exiled to far away places so that they would not interfere with the state's decrees. We request that Liu He, the king of Changyi, be moved to Fangling County, Hanzhong Province.

古文：太后诏归贺昌邑，赐汤沐邑二千户。
现代文：太后下诏命刘贺回到昌邑，并赐给他收取赋税的私邑二千户。
English: The empress dowager ordered Liu He to return to Chang'e, and gave him 2,000 private households to collect taxes.

古文：昌邑群臣坐亡辅导之谊，陷王于恶，光悉诛杀二百余人。
现代文：昌邑国的群臣由于没有尽辅佐教导君臣之谊，使王误入歧途而获罪。霍光就将他们全部杀了，共有二百多人。
English: The vassals of the state of Chang'e were found guilty of leading the king astray by not doing enough to help and teach him about the friendship between kings and vassals. Huo Guang killed all of them, a total of more than 200 people.

古文：出死，号呼市中曰： 当断不断，反受其乱。 
现代文：当这些人被拉出去处死的时候，都在街道中哭泣呼喊道： 当断不断，反受其乱。 
English: When these people were dragged out to be put to death, they all cried in the streets and shouted: "Stop interfering!

古文：光坐庭中，会丞相以下议定所立。
现代文：霍光坐在朝廷中，会同丞相以下大臣商议决定所立的人选。
English: Huo Guang sat in the imperial court and, together with the ministers from the prime minister on down, discussed the candidates to be appointed by Mao.

古文：广陵王已前不用，及燕刺王反诛，其子不在议中。
现代文：广陵王早在这之前就没有被选用，等到燕剌王谋反被诛，他的儿子也就不在议论中了。
English: Guangling Wang had not been elected long before this, and when Yan Xuan Wang was arrested for rebellion, his son was no longer in the discussion.

古文：近亲唯有卫太子孙号皇曾孙在民间，咸称述焉。
现代文：近亲中现衹有卫太子的孙子号称皇曾的还在民间，受到普遍称赞。
English: Among the close relatives, the grandson of the current crown prince is said to be still popular among the people, and has been widely praised.

古文：光遂复与丞相敞等上奏曰： 《礼》曰： 人道亲亲故尊祖，尊祖故敬宗。 
现代文：霍光便又同丞相杨敞等大臣一同上奏说： 《礼》书中说 为人之道能够亲爱亲人就能尊崇祖先，能够尊崇祖先就能够敬重宗庙 。
English: Huo Guang then made a report together with the chancellor Yang Zhan and other ministers, saying: "The Book of Rites says that if you can love your relatives, you can respect your ancestors, and if you can respect your ancestors, you can respect your ancestral temple.

古文：大宗亡嗣，择支子孙贤者为嗣。
现代文：如今大宗没有继承人，就应选择旁支子孙中贤能的人作为继承人。
English: Now that there are no heirs for the most part, it is necessary to choose a capable person from the descendants of the collateral branch as an heir.

古文：孝武皇帝曾孙病已，武帝时有诏掖庭养视，至今年十八，师受《诗》、《论语》、《孝经》，躬行节俭，慈仁爱人，可以嗣孝昭皇帝后，奉承祖宗庙，子万姓。
现代文：孝武皇帝的曾孙病已，武帝时有韶令在掖庭中抚养照看，到现在年已十八，从师学习《诗》、《论语》、《孝经》，身体力行节俭，仁慈爱人，可以继承孝昭皇帝的皇位，事奉祖先宗庙，统治万民。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's great-grandson has fallen ill. Emperor Xiaowu had the imperial command to raise and care for him in the imperial court. He is now 18 years old. He studies "Poetry," "Analects" and "Filial Piety" from his teacher. He is physically frugal, benevolent and loving. He can inherit the throne of Emperor Xiaozhao, serve the ancestral temple and rule the people.

古文：臣昧死以闻。 
现代文：臣下冒死以告。 
English: A vassal risked his life to sue.

古文：皇太后诏曰： 可。 
现代文：皇太后下诏说： 准奏。 
English: The Empress Dowager issued an edict saying, "Let it be played."

古文：光遣宗正刘德至曾孙家尚冠里，洗沐赐御衣，太仆以軨猎车迎曾孙就斋宗正府，入未央宫见皇太后，封为阳武侯。
现代文：霍光就派遣宗正刘德到曾孙家尚冠里，帮他洗梳沐浴，赐给他皇帝的衣服，叫太仆用轻便小车把曾孙接到宗正府进行斋戒，入未央宫谒见皇太后，被封为阳武侯。
English: Huo Guang sent Zong Zheng Liu De to his great-grandson's house, Shang Guanzhong, to help him wash and bathe, gave him the emperor's clothes, asked the servant to use a light car to take the great-grandson to Zong Zheng's palace for fasting, to enter the Weiyang Palace to see the empress dowager, and was named Yang Wuhou.

古文：已而光奉上皇帝玺绶，谒于高庙，是为孝宣皇帝。
现代文：不久霍光就捧上皇帝的印玺，然后到高庙去拜谒，造就是孝宣皇帝。
English: Soon after, Huo Guang held up the emperor's seal, and then went to the high temple to pay homage to Emperor Xiaoxuan.

古文：明年，下诏曰： 夫褒有德，赏元功，古今通谊也。
现代文：第二年，皇帝下诏说： 褒奖有德的人，赏赐有大功的人，是古今的常理。
English: In the second year, the emperor issued the following edict: "To reward those who are virtuous and to reward those who have made great contributions is a common sense from ancient times to the present.

古文：大司马、大将军光宿卫忠正，宣德明恩，守节乘谊，以安宗庙。
现代文：大司马大将军霍光守卫宫廷忠诚正直，宣扬道德彰明恩泽，保守节操秉行仁义，用来安定宗庙。
English: Major General Ma Huoguang guarded the palace with loyalty and honesty, preached morality and benevolence, upheld conservative discipline and benevolence, and was used to stabilize the ancestral temple.

古文：其以河北、东武阳益封光万七千户。 
现代文：将河北、东武阳的一万七千户加封给霍光。 
English: Seventeen thousand households in Hebei and Dongwuyang will be added to Huo Guang.

古文：与故所食凡二万户。
现代文：加上他以前的封地一共有两万户。
English: In addition to his former fiefdom, there are a total of twenty thousand households.

古文：赏赐前后黄金七千斤，钱六千万，杂缯三万匹，奴婢百七十人，马二千匹，甲第一区。
现代文：前后赏给他黄金七千斤，钱六千万，各色彩帛三万匹，奴婢一百七十人，马二千匹，上等住宅一处。
English: He was rewarded with seven thousand pounds of gold, sixty million in money, thirty thousand horses of all colors, one hundred and seventy slaves, two thousand horses, and a fine residence.

古文：自昭帝时，光子禹及兄孙云皆中郎将，云弟山奉车都尉、侍中，邻胡、越兵。
现代文：从昭帝时起，霍光的儿子霍禹以及霍光哥哥的孙子霍云都已是中郎将，霍云的弟弟霍山任奉车都尉、侍中，掌握胡、越兵权。
English: From the time of Emperor Zhao, Huo Guang's son, Huo Yu, and Huo Guang's brother's grandson, Huo Yun, were already middle-ranking generals. Huo Guang's younger brother, Huo Shan, served as a lieutenant in the imperial chariot and a chamberlain, and controlled the military power of Hu and Yue.

古文：光两女婿为东西宫卫尉，昆弟诸婿外孙皆奉朝请，为诸曹大夫、骑都尉，给事中。
现代文：霍光的两个女婿分别是东西宫的卫尉，霍光兄弟的女婿及外孙都有资格参加朝会，担当诸曹大夫，骑都尉，给事中的官职。
English: Huo Guang's two sons-in-law are the guards of the East and West Palace, respectively. Huo Guang's brothers' sons-in-law and grandsons are eligible to participate in the imperial court, and are responsible for Zhu Cao doctor, cavalry captain, and other official positions.

古文：党亲连体，根据于朝廷。
现代文：党派亲族连成一体，盘根错节地占据了朝廷。
English: The relatives of the party became one and occupied the imperial court.

古文：光自后元秉持万机，及上即位，乃归政。
现代文：霍光从后元以来一直总理朝政，等到皇上登基以后，才归还朝政。
English: Huo Guang had been the prime minister of the imperial court since the late Yuan Dynasty. It was not until after the emperor ascended to the throne that the imperial court was restored.

古文：上廉让不受，诸事皆先关白光，然后奏御天子。
现代文：皇上谦让不肯接受，各种政事都要先请示霍光后，再上奏给天子。
English: Emperor Qianren refused to accept it. All kinds of political affairs should first be requested from Huo Guang, and then reported to Tianzi.

古文：光每朝见，上虚己敛容，礼下之已甚。
现代文：霍光每次上朝参见，皇上都谦恭严肃，对他十分恭敬礼让。
English: Every time Huo Guang went to the imperial court, the emperor was humble and serious, and he was very respectful and courteous.

古文：光秉政前后二十年，地节二年春病笃，车驾自临问光病，上为之涕泣。
现代文：霍光执政前后达二十年，地节二年春他病得很厉害，皇上亲自去他家探望病情，为之流泪哭泣。
English: Huo Guang had been in power for twenty years. In the spring of the second year of his reign, he became very ill. The emperor personally visited his home to see how he was doing and shed tears for him.

古文：光上书谢恩曰： 愿分国邑三千户，以封兄孙奉车都尉山为列侯，奉兄票骑将军去病祀。 
现代文：霍光上书谢恩说： 我愿把我封国食邑的三千产用来分封我哥哥的孙子奉车都尉霍山为列侯，以供奉我哥哥骠骑将军霍去病的祭祀。 
English: Huo Guang wrote a letter of thanks, saying, "I am willing to use the three thousand production of my state-owned food village to assign my brother's grandson, Feng Che Duan Huoshan, as a vassal, in order to offer my brother the sacrifice of riding General Huo to cure his illness."

古文：事下丞相、御史，即日拜光子禹为右将军。
现代文：皇上把此事交给丞相御史办理，当天就授任霍光的儿子霍禹为右将军。
English: The emperor handed the matter over to the chancellor, Mishi, and on the same day, he appointed Ho Guang's son, Ho Yu, as the right general.

古文：光薨，上及皇太后亲临光丧。
现代文：霍光去世后，皇上及皇太后都亲自到霍光的灵堂去吊唁。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, both the emperor and the empress dowager personally went to Huo Guang's funeral hall to offer condolences.

古文：太中大夫任宣与侍御史五人持节护丧事。
现代文：太中大夫任宣和五个侍御史一同拿着符节操办丧事。
English: Tai Chung Dr. Ren Xuan and five attendants together held the funeral rites.

古文：中二千石治莫府冢上。
现代文：中二千石的大臣在墓地上设置幕府办事。
English: In the middle of the year, a minister of 2,000 koku set up a bakufu office on the cemetery.

古文：赐金钱、缯絮、绣被百领，衣五十箧，璧珠玑玉衣，梓宫、便房、黄肠题凑各一具，枞木外臧椁十五具。
现代文：皇上还赐给金钱、帛绢丝绵，绣花棉被一百条，衣服五十箱，金镂玉衣，内棺、外椁、黄肠题凑各一副，随葬的外藏枞木椁十五副。
English: The emperor also gave money, silk satin, one hundred embroidered cotton quilts, fifty boxes of clothes, a gold-encrusted jade dress, an inner coffin, an outer coffin, and a yellow intestine, and fifteen pairs of wooden coffins.

古文：东园温明，皆如乘舆制度。
现代文：柬园制作的温明秘器，全都如同皇帝的规格。
English: All the Wenming secret utensils made in the Cambodian Garden are made according to the emperor's specifications.

古文：载光尸柩以辒辌车，黄屋在纛，发材官轻车北军五校士军陈至茂陵，以送其葬。
现代文：用辊鲸车载着霍光的遗体，车上用黄缎覆盖，辕左插上羽饰大旗，派材官、轻车、北军五校士兵列队一直到达茂陵，来为霍光送葬。
English: A beaked whale car was used to carry the body of Huo Guang. The car was covered with yellow coats, and a large feathered flag was put on the left side of the coffin. The material officer, light vehicles, and soldiers from the five schools of the Northern Army were sent in a line all the way to Muling to attend the funeral of Huo Guang.

古文：谥曰宣成侯。
现代文：给他赐谧号为宣成侯。
English: He was given the title of Xuancheng marquis.

古文：发三河卒穿复士，起冢祠堂。置园邑三百家，长丞奉守如旧法。
现代文：征发河东、河南、河内三郡的士兵挖掘墓穴，盖起陵墓祠堂，设置看护的园邑三百家，长史、丞掾按照旧法侍奉守护陵园。
English: The soldiers from the three counties of Hedong, Henan and Hanoi were conscripted to excavate tombs, build mausoleums and ancestral halls, and set up 300 gardens and villages for guardianship. Changshi and Zheng He served as guardians of the cemeteries in accordance with the old law.

古文：既葬，封山为乐平侯，以奉车都尉领尚书事。
现代文：霍光被安葬以后，宣帝就封霍山为乐平侯，以奉车都尉的身份兼管尚书的事务。
English: After Huo Guang was buried, Emperor Xuan designated Huoshan as Leping, and he also managed the affairs of Shangshu as a lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：天子思光功德，下诏曰： 故大司马、大将军、博陆侯宿卫孝武皇帝三十有余年，辅孝昭皇帝十有余年，遭大难，躬秉谊，率三公、九卿、大夫定万世册，以安社稷，天下蒸庶咸以康宁。
现代文：天子追思霍光的功德，下韶令说： 已故大司马大将军博陆侯在宫禁中侍奉孝武皇帝三十余年，辅佐孝昭皇帝又有十多年，中间遭遇到重大的灾难，挺身执仗正义，率领三公九卿大夫决定万年大计以安定国家，天下的黎民百姓才获得安康太平。
English: Tianzi reflected on the merits of Huo Guang, and said in his edict: The late Major General Bo Luhong served Emperor Xiaowu for more than 30 years during the palace ban, and Emperor Xiao Zhao for more than 10 years. In the middle, he encountered a major disaster, stood up for justice, and led the three princes and nine doctors to decide on a long-term plan to stabilize the country. Only then will the people of the world be healthy and peaceful.

古文：功德茂盛，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：他的功德无量，朕极为嘉许。
English: His merits are immeasurable, and I highly commend him.

古文：复其后世，畴其爵邑，世世无有所与，功如萧相国。 
现代文：决定免去他后代的徭役。子孙继承他的封爵食邑，世世代代不准改变，他的功劳与萧相国同等。 
English: It was decided to exempt his descendants from the post of eunuch. His descendants inherited his title of nobility, and were not allowed to change it from generation to generation. His merit was equal to that of Xiao Xianguo.

古文：明年夏，封太子外祖父许广汉为平恩侯。
现代文：第二年夏天，宣帝封太子的外祖父许广汉为平恩侯。
English: In the summer of the following year, Xu Guanghan, the maternal grandfather of Emperor Xuan and crown prince, became the Prince of Ping'en.

古文：复下诏曰： 宣成侯光宿卫忠正，勤劳国家，善善及后世，其封光兄孙中郎将云为冠阳侯。 
现代文：又下诏令道： 宣盛堡霍光在宫禁中侍奉天子忠诚正直，为国家辛勤操劳。褒奖善良的人应推及后代，此封霍光哥哥的孙子中郎将霍云为冠阳侯。 
English: He also issued an imperial edict, saying, "Hoguang of Xuan Sheng Fort served the Son of Heaven faithfully and honestly during his confinement, and worked hard for the country. Those who are good should be rewarded in the future generations. The grandson of Hoguang's elder brother, Zhong Lang, will make Huo Yun the crown prince.

古文：禹既嗣为博陆侯，太夫人显改光时所自造茔制而侈大之。
现代文：霍禹继爵为博陆侯后，太夫人显改变了霍光生前自己设计的墓地规制而加以扩大。
English: After Huo Yu's successor became Boluo, the Empress Dowager apparently changed the cemetery regulations that Huo Guang himself had designed during his lifetime and expanded them.

古文：起三出阙，筑神道，北临昭灵，南出承恩，盛饰祠室，辇阁通属永巷，而幽良人婢妾守之。
现代文：建起三个出口的门阙，修筑神道，北面靠近昭灵，南面越出丞墨。大肆装修祠堂，辇车的专用道直通到墓穴中的永巷，又幽禁平民、奴婢、侍妾来守护。
English: The three exit gates were built, the Shinto shrine was built, the north side was close to the Zhaoling, and the south side overflowed with ink. The ancestral hall was extensively decorated, a special road for cars led directly to the Yongxiang in the tomb, and civilians, slaves, and concubines were forbidden to guard it.

古文：广治第室，作乘舆辇，加画绣茵冯，黄金涂，韦絮荐轮，侍婢以五采丝挽显，游戏第中。
现代文：还大建住宅，制造乘坐的辇车，增加饰有图案的绣花坐垫、把手，并涂饰黄金，又用皮裹着丝絮包住车轮，侍从婢女用五彩的丝带拉着显所乘坐的车，在住宅中游戏取乐。
English: He also built a large house, made a carriage to ride in, added embroidered cushions and handles decorated with patterns, and painted gold, and wrapped the wheels with leather and silk. The servant girl pulled the car he was riding in with multicolored ribbons, and had fun playing in the house.

古文：初，光爱幸监奴冯子都，常与计事，及显寡居，与子都乱。
现代文：当初，霍光宠爱家奴总管冯子都，常同他商量事情，等到显守寡独居时，她便和冯子都通奸。
English: At first, Huo Guang favored Feng Zidu, the head of the family slaves, and often discussed things with him. When she was a widow living alone, she and Feng Zidu both committed adultery.

古文：而禹、山亦并缮治第宅，走马驰逐平乐馆。
现代文：而霍禹、霍山也同时修缮住宅，常在平乐馆跑马追逐。
English: At the same time, Huo Yu and Huo Shan also repaired their houses, and often chased horses at the Pingle Pavilion.

古文：云当朝请，数称病私出，多从宾客，张围猎黄山苑中，使苍头奴上朝谒，莫敢谴者。
现代文：霍云每当朝会的时候，多次称病私下外出，带着很多宾客，在黄山苑囿中张围打猎，却委派奴仆代为上朝谒见，没有人敢谴责。
English: Whenever there was a meeting of the Imperial Court, Huo Yun repeatedly called in sick and went out privately. He took many guests with him and went hunting in the middle of Huangshan Garden. However, he appointed his servants to go to the Imperial Court to see him. No one dared to condemn him.

古文：而显及诸女，昼夜出入长信宫殿中，亡期度。
现代文：而且显和她的几个女儿，不分白天黑夜地进出长信宫的宫殿中，没有限度。
English: Moreover, Hsien and several of her daughters enter and leave the palace of Changxin Palace day and night, without limit.

古文：宣帝自在民间闻知霍氏尊盛日久，内不能善。
现代文：宣帝在民间时就听说并知晓霍氏尊贵强盛日子长久，心中并不认为这是一件好事。
English: When he was a commoner, Emperor Xuan heard about and knew that the noble and powerful Huo family had been in power for a long time. In his heart, he did not think this was a good thing.

古文：光薨，上始躬亲朝政，御史大夫魏相给事中。
现代文：霍光去世后，宣帝才开始亲自治理朝政，让御史大夫魏相任给事中。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, Emperor Xuan only began to take personal control of the imperial government, leaving the imperial historian Wei Xiang in charge.

古文：显谓禹、云、山： 女曹不务奉大将军余业，今大夫给事中，他人一间，女能复自救邪？ 
现代文：显对霍禹、霍云、霍山等人说： 你们这些人不努力继承大将军的遣业，如今大夫任给事中，一旦有人在中间挑拨，你们还能拯救自己吗？ 
English: Xian said to Huo Yu, Huo Yun, Huoshan and others: You people do not strive to inherit the great general's career, now the doctor is in charge, once someone provokes in the middle, can you save yourself?

古文：后两家奴争道，霍氏奴入御史府，欲蹋大夫门，御史为叩头谢，乃去。
现代文：后来霍、魏两家的奴仆争路，霍氏的奴仆就跑到御史大夫府中，要踢坏他府中的大门，御史为此叩头请罪，他们才离开。
English: Later, the servants of the two families, Huo and Wei, quarreled. The servants of Huo ran to the palace of the Grand Historian to kick down the gate of his palace. The Grand Historian apologized for this, and they left.

古文：人以谓霍氏，显等始知忧。
现代文：有人把这件事告诉了霍家，显等人才开始知道将有忧患。
English: Someone told the Huo family about this, and only then did they begin to know that there would be trouble.

古文：会魏大夫为丞相，数燕见言事。
现代文：等到魏大夫担任丞相，经常在闲暇时被召见谈论政事。
English: By the time Dr. Wei became chancellor, he was often called upon to discuss politics in his spare time.

古文：平恩侯与侍中金安上等径出入省中。
现代文：平恩侯和侍中金安上都能直接出入宫禁中。
English: Both Prince Ping'en and the chief equerry Kim Anjo were able to directly enter and leave the palace.

古文：时，霍山自若领尚书，上令吏民得奏封事，不关尚书，群臣进见独往来，于是霍氏甚恶之。
现代文：适时霍山仍旧兼领尚书的事务，但皇上叫官吏百姓可以密封奏章上报，不必通过尚书，群臣百官进见皇上可以独自往来，霍氏对此非常不满。
English: At the right time, Huoshan was still in charge of the affairs of the imperial rescript, but the emperor told the officials and the people that they could seal the record and report it. They did not have to go through the imperial rescript, and the hundreds of courtiers and officials could visit the emperor alone. Huo was very dissatisfied with this.

古文：宣帝始立，立微时许妃为皇后。
现代文：宣帝刚登基时，就册封卑贱而未显达时所娶的许妃为皇后。
English: When Emperor Xuanxuan had just ascended to the throne, he made the humble and unattainable Xu Hui, whom he had married, the empress.

古文：显爱小女成君，欲遣之，私使乳医淳于衍行毒药杀许后，因劝光内成君，代立为后，语在《外戚传》。
现代文：显很喜爱她的小女儿成君，想使她得到富贵，就暗自派产科医生淳于衍下毒药杀死许后，乘机劝霍光要宣帝娶成君，取代许后成为皇后。这些事《外戒传》中有记载。
English: She loved her little daughter, Chengjun, very much, and wanted to make her rich, so she secretly sent her obstetrician, Junyuan, to kill Xu Hou with poison, and took the opportunity to persuade Huo Guang to marry Chengjun to Emperor Xuan and replace Xu Hou as the empress. These things are recorded in "The Tale of the Outer Precepts."

古文：始，许后暴崩，吏捕诸医，劾衍侍疾亡状不道，下狱。
现代文：当时许后突然死亡之时，官吏逮捕了宫中所有医生，并弹劾淳于衍在治病过程中行迹可疑，不合常理，就把他关进了监狱。
English: At the time of Princess Hsu's sudden death, officials arrested all the palace doctors and impeached Chun Yu Yan for behaving suspiciously and unreasonably in the course of treating patients, and put him in prison.

古文：吏簿问急，显恐事败，即具以实语光。
现代文：狱吏对他审问得很急迫，显害怕事情败露，就把实情告诉了霍光。
English: The warden interrogated him very urgently, and he told the truth to Huo Guang, apparently afraid that the matter would be exposed.

古文：光大惊，欲自发举，不忍，犹与。
现代文：霍光大吃一惊，想亲自去告发这件事又不忍心，正在犹豫。
English: Huo Guang was taken aback. He wanted to report the matter in person but couldn't bear it. He was hesitating.

古文：会奏上，因署衍勿论。
现代文：适逢此案的奏章上报，霍光就乘机批覆对淳于衍不必再追究。
English: When the report of this case was reported, Huo Guang took the opportunity to approve that there was no need to investigate Chun Yuyan.

古文：光薨后，语稍泄。
现代文：霍光薨后，真相开始慢慢泄露出去。
English: After Huo Guang died, the truth began to slowly leak out.

古文：于是上始闻之而未察，乃徙光女婿度辽将军、未央卫尉、平陵侯范明友为光禄勋，次婿诸吏中郎将、羽林监任胜出为安定太守。
现代文：对这件事皇上衹是刚听说到但不明虚实，就调动霍光的女婿度辽将军未央宫的卫尉平陵侯范明友任光禄勋，第二个女婿诸吏中郎将羽林监任胜出任安定太守。
English: The Empress Dowager had just heard about this matter, but it was not clear whether it was true or not, so she transferred Huo Guang's son-in-law Du Liao, General Wei Yang's palace guard Lieutenant Pingling Hou Fan Ming You Ren Guang Lu Xun, and the second son-in-law Zhu Li Zhong Lang appointed Ulin Supervisor Ren Sheng as the governor of stability.

古文：数月，复出光姊婿给事中光禄大夫张朔为蜀郡太守，群孙婿中郎将王汉为武威太守。
现代文：几个月后，又调出霍光姐姐的女婿给事中光禄大夫张朔任蜀郡太守，孙女婿中郎将王汉为武威太守。
English: A few months later, the son-in-law of Huo Guang's sister, Guanglu Doctor Zhang Shuo, was appointed as the governor of Shu County, and the grandson-in-law, Zhong Lang, appointed Wang Han as the governor of Wuwei.

古文：顷之，复徙光长女婿长乐卫尉邓广汉为少府。
现代文：遇了不久，又调霍光的大女婿长乐宫卫尉邓广漠任少府。
English: Not long after the meeting, Deng Guangmo, the eldest son-in-law of Huo Guang, was transferred to the position of Junior Governor of Changle Palace.

古文：更以禹为大司马，冠小冠，亡印绶，罢其右将军屯兵官属，特使禹官名与光俱大司马者。
现代文：再调霍禹任大司马，衹戴小帽子，没有印章，撤销了他的右将军及所统辖的驻军官兵，衹是让霍禹的官名与霍光一样，都是大司马。
English: He then transferred Hoyu to the position of grand steward, wearing a small hat and without a seal, and revoked his right general and the stationed officers and soldiers under his jurisdiction. The official name of Hoyu is the same as that of Hokwang, both are grand stewards.

古文：又收范明友度辽将军印绶，但为光禄勋。
现代文：又收回范明友度辽将军的官印，衹让他任光禄勋。
English: He also took back the official seal of General Fan Mingyou Du Liao, and made him a member of the Order of the Star.

古文：及光中女婿赵平为散骑、骑都尉、光禄大夫将屯兵，又收平骑都尉印绶。
现代文：还有霍光的三女婿赵平为散骑骑都尉光禄大夫统领驻军，又把趟平的骑都尉官印收回。
English: Moreover, Huo Guang's third son-in-law, Zhao Ping, led the garrison as the cavalry captain Guang Lu, and took back the official seal of the cavalry captain.

古文：诸领胡越骑、羽林及两宫卫将屯兵，悉易以所亲信许、史子弟代之。
现代文：所有统领的胡人、越人骑兵、羽林军以及两宫卫队所统领的士兵，都改为由宣帝所亲信的许、史两家子弟代为统领。
English: All the soldiers led by the Hu people, the Viet cavalry, the Ulin army and the two palace guards were replaced by Xu and Shi's two sons, who were trusted by Emperor Xuan.

古文：禹为大司马，称病。
现代文：霍禹被任命为大司马后，就称说有病。
English: After Huo Yu was appointed chief steward, he claimed to be ill.

古文：禹故长史任宣候问，禹曰： 我何病？
现代文：霍禹原先的长史任宣来探望问候，霍禹说道： 我哪裹有什么病？
English: Huo Yu's former master Ren Xuan came to visit and say hello. Huo Yu said: What kind of illness do I have?

古文：县官非我家将军不得至是，今将军坟墓未干，尽外我家，反任许、史，夺我印绶，令人不省死。 
现代文：天子不是靠我家将军怎么能到现在的地步，如今将军的坟墓还没有干，他就一律疏远排斥我们家族，反而任用许、史两家的人员，还没收了我的官印，真让人死都弄不明白。 
English: The Son of Heaven did not rely on my family's general to get to where he is now. Now that the general's grave is not yet dry, he has completely alienated and excluded our family. Instead, he has appointed people from the two families of Xu and Shi, and has also confiscated my official seal. It is truly incomprehensible.

古文：宣见禹恨望深，乃谓曰： 大将军时何可复行！
现代文：任宣见霍禹怨恨很深，就对他说道： 大将军的时代怎么还能再有！
English: Ren Xuanxi saw that Huo Yu's resentment was very deep, and said to him: How can the era of the great general still exist!

古文：持国权柄，杀生在手中。
现代文：把持国家的权柄，生杀予夺操在手中。
English: Seize the power of the state, life and death are in your hands.

古文：廷尉李种、王平、左冯翊贾胜胡及车丞相女婿少府徐仁皆坐逆将军意下狱死。
现代文：廷尉李种、王平、左冯翊贾胜胡以及车丞相的女婿少府徐仁都因冒犯大将军的意旨而被下狱处死。
English: Imperial officers Li Zheng, Wang Ping, Zuo Feng Rong Jia Sheng Hu, as well as the son-in-law of General Cha's minister, Shofu Xu Ren, were all sent to prison and executed for offending the general.

古文：使乐成小家子得幸将军，至九卿封侯。
现代文：使乐成这样的小户人家子弟因为受到将军宠爱，官至九卿，爵为列侯。
English: Because of the general's favor, the children of such a small family, who were favored by the general, rose to the rank of nine lords, and the title of lord of the manor.

古文：百官以下但事冯子都、王子方等，视丞相亡如也。
现代文：百官以下衹事奉冯子都、王子方等人，根本不把丞相放在眼里。
English: The lower echelons of the eunuchs served Feng Zidu, Prince Fang and others, and did not pay any attention to the prime minister.

古文：各自有时，今许、史自天子骨肉，贵正宜耳。
现代文：这是各自有自己的时代，如今许、史两家是天子的骨肉姻亲，得到尊贵正是理所当然。
English: This was a time when each had its own era. Today, Xu and Shi are the flesh-and-blood in-laws of the Son of Heaven, and it is a matter of course for them to be honored.

古文：大司马欲用是怨恨，愚以为不可。 
现代文：大司马如果因此而心怀怨恨，我认为不应该。 
English: I don't think it's right for the mayor to hold a grudge.

古文：禹默然。
现代文：霍禹听后沉默不语。
English: Huo Yu was silent after listening.

古文：数日，起视事。
现代文：过了几天，霍禹又上朝处理事务。
English: A few days later, Huo Yu again went to the North to deal with matters.

古文：显及禹、山、云自见日侵削，数相对啼泣，自怨。
现代文：显和霍禹、霍山、霍云眼看着自己的权势一天天被削夺，几次相对流泪啼哭，自相埋怨。
English: Xianhe, Huoyu, Huoshan and Huoyun watched their power being taken away day by day. They shed tears and cried several times and complained to each other.

古文：山曰： 今丞相用事。县官信之，尽变易大将军时法令，以公田赋与贫民，发扬大将军过失。
现代文：霍山说： 现在丞相执政，受到皇帝信赖，全部改变大将军当时制定的法令，将公田授给贫民，以宣扬大将军的过失。
English: Huoshan said: Now the prime minister in power, trusted by the emperor, has changed all the decrees made by the general at that time, and awarded public land to the poor in order to publicize the general's fault.

古文：又诸儒生多窭人子，远客饥寒，喜妄说狂言，不避忌讳，大将军常仇之，今陛下好与诸儒生语，人人自使书对事，多言我家者。
现代文：又有诸位儒生，大多是穷人子弟，远道而来客居京城，衣食不保，却喜欢口出狂言，不避忌讳，大将军曾对这些人忌恨如仇，如今陛下却喜欢同众儒生交谈，又让他们自行上书答对政事，这些人就尽说我们家的事。
English: There are also all the Confucian scholars, mostly the children of the poor, who come from far away to live in the capital, who are not provided with food and clothing, but like to utter wild words and do not avoid taboos. The great general once hated these people with a vengeance, but now His Majesty likes to talk with all the Confucian scholars, and let them write their own answers to political affairs. These people can talk about our family.

古文：尝有上书言大将军时主弱臣强，专制擅权，今其子孙用事，昆弟益骄恣，恐危宗庙，灾异数见，尽为是也。
现代文：曾经有人上书说大将军在时，主弱臣强，揽权独裁，如今他的子孙当权，兄弟们更加骄横恣肆，恐怕将要危及宗庙社稷，灾异怪事频繁出现，都是因为这个缘故。
English: Someone once wrote a letter saying that when the great general was in power, the master was weak, the vassal was strong, and he was a dictator. Now that his children and grandchildren are in power, his brothers are even more arrogant and wanton, and I am afraid that they will endanger the family temple and community, and disasters and strange occurrences are frequent, all because of this.

古文：其言绝痛，山屏不奏其书。
现代文：他的话说得极其痛切，我就压下没有把此书上奏。
English: His words were so poignant that I suppressed them and did not publish the book.

古文：后上书者益黠，尽奏封事，辄下中书令出取之，不关尚书，益不信人。 
现代文：后来上书的人更加狡猾，全都使用密封奏事，皇上就叫中书令出来取走，不通过尚书，皇上越来越不信任我了。 
English: Later, the people who sent the letter were more cunning. They all used sealed records. The emperor ordered the middle secretary to come out and take it away. If I didn't pass the official letter, the emperor became more and more distrustful of me.

古文：显曰： 丞相数言我家，独无罪乎？ 
现代文：显问道： 丞相屡次说我家的事，难道就没有罪过吗？ 
English: Xian asked, "Isn't it a crime for the prime minister to repeatedly talk about my family?

古文：山曰： 丞相廉正，安得罪？
现代文：霍山答道： 丞相廉洁正直，哪裹能有罪？
English: Huoshan replied, "If the prime minister is honest and upright, how can he be guilty?"

古文：我家昆弟诸婿多不谨。
现代文：我家的弟兄们和各位女婿大多行为不慎。
English: Most of my brothers and sons-in-law are careless.

古文：又闻民间讠雚言霍氏毒杀许皇后，宁有是邪？ 
现代文：又听民间盛传说霍家用毒杀死了许皇后，真有此事吗？ 
English: I also heard a popular folk tale that the Huo family poisoned and killed Queen Xu. Is this really true?

古文：显恐急，即具以实告山、云、禹。
现代文：显很害怕，就全部将实情告诉了霍山、霍云、霍禹。
English: He was very scared and told the whole truth to Huoshan, Huo Yun and Huo Yu.

古文：山、云、禹惊曰： 如是，何不早告禹等！
现代文：霍山、霍云、霍禹惊慌地说道： 像这等事情，为什么不早对我们说呢？
English: Huo Shan, Huo Yun and Huo Yu said in panic: Why didn't you tell us about such things earlier?

古文：县官离散斥逐诸婿，用是故也。
现代文：天子离散斥逐我们家的几个女婿，是因为这个缘故啊。
English: It was for this reason that the Son of God scattered and drove away several sons-in-law from our family.

古文：此大事，诛罚不小，奈何？ 
现代文：这是一件大事，处罚可不会轻，怎么办？ 
English: This is a big deal, the punishment will not be light, what to do?

古文：于是始有邪谋矣。
现代文：从此他们就开始有了邪谋。
English: From then on, they began to plot.

古文：初，赵平客石夏善为天官，语平曰： 荧惑守御星，御星，太仆奉车都尉也，不黜则死。 
现代文：当初，赵平的门客石夏知晓天文，他对赵平说： 荧惑守着御星，御星是太仆奉车都尉的星宿，他们不是被贬官就是被杀死。 
English: At the beginning, Zhao Ping's guest, Shi Xia, who knew astronomy, said to Zhao Ping: "Fluorescence is guarding the star, the star is the star of the servant, they are either demoted or killed.

古文：平内忧山等。
现代文：趟平内心替霍山等人担忧。
English: Watanehira was worried for Huoshan and the others.

古文：云舅李竟所善张赦见云家卒卒，谓竟曰： 今丞相与平恩侯用事，可令太夫人言太后，先诛此两人。
现代文：霍云的舅舅李竟的好友张赦见霍云家族岌岌可危，就对李竟说： 如今丞相与平恩侯当权，可以叫太夫人告诉太后，先把这两个人杀了。
English: Seeing that the Huo Yun family was in a precarious situation, Zhang Zong, a good friend of Huo Yun's uncle Li Qingting, said to Li Qingting: Now that the prime minister and the prince Ping En are in power, you can ask the empress dowager to tell the empress dowager to kill these two people first.

古文：移徙陛下，在太后耳。 
现代文：罢黜陛下，就在于皇太后。 
English: It is up to the Empress Dowager to depose His Majesty.

古文：长安男子张章告之，事下廷尉。
现代文：长安男子张章告发了这件事，宣帝就把此事交给廷尉处理。
English: Zhang Zhang, a man from Chang'an, reported the incident, and Emperor Xuan gave the matter to the imperial lieutenant to deal with.

古文：执金吾捕张赦、石夏等，后有诏止勿捕。
现代文：执金吾拘捕了张赦、石夏等人，后来又有韶令制止，不准拘捕。
English: Zhang Miao, Shixia and others were arrested by the enforcement of Kingu, and later there was a royal order to stop them and not allow them to be arrested.

古文：山等愈恐，相谓曰： 此县官重太后，故不竟也。
现代文：霍山等人更加恐慌，相对说道： 这是天子看重太后的面子，所以没有深究。
English: Huoshan and others were even more alarmed, and said, "This is the face of the emperor valuing the empress dowager, so there is no in-depth investigation."

古文：然恶端已见，又有弑许后事，陛下虽宽仁，恐左右不听，久之犹发，发即族矣，不如先也。 
现代文：但是凶兆已显现，又有毒杀许后的事，陛下即使宽大仁厚，就怕他左右的人不听，时间久了仍然会追查，一旦查清就要被灭族，我们不如先动手。 
English: But the ominous signs have already appeared, and the poisonous and murderous things have begun. Even if His Majesty is generous and kind, he is afraid that the people around him will not listen, and they will still investigate after a long time. Once they are investigated, they will be exterminated. We might as well start first.

古文：遂令诸女各归报其夫，皆曰： 安所相避？ 
现代文：于是就叫几个女儿各自回去告诉自己的丈夫，都说： 哪裹还有地方避难呢？ 
English: So she sent her daughters away, each to her husband, saying, "Where is any place to flee?"

古文：会李竟坐与诸侯王交通，辞语及霍氏，有诏云、山不宜宿卫，免，就第。
现代文：适逢李竟因与诸侯工勾结而致罪，供辞中涉及霍氏，宣帝就下韶说霍云、霍山不宜在宫中供职，免官回家。
English: When Li actually committed a crime by colluding with a provincial official, and Huo was implicated in his confession, Emperor Xuan said that Huo Yun and Huo Shan were not suitable to serve in the palace, and they were dismissed and sent home.

古文：光诸女遇太后无礼，冯子都数犯法，上并以为让，山、禹等甚恐，显梦第中井水溢流庭下，灶居树上，又梦大将军谓显曰： 知捕儿不？亟下捕之。 
现代文：霍光的几个女儿对待太后无礼，冯子都数次犯法，皇上就一同加以责问，霍山、霆噩等人感到很害怕。题在梦中见到住宅中的井水溢出流到厅堂下，厨房裹的炉灶挂在了大树上，又梦见大将军对显说： 你知道我们的儿子要被捕了吗？
English: Several of Huo Guang's daughters were rude to the empress dowager, and Feng Zi had broken the law several times. The emperor scolded them together. Huoshan, Tingyong and others were very scared. In the dream, I saw the well water in the house overflow and flow under the hall, and the stove wrapped in the kitchen hung on the big tree. I also dreamed of the general saying to Xian: Do you know that our son is going to be arrested?

古文：第中鼠暴多，与人相触，以尾画地。
现代文：他们很快就会来捕人的。 住宅中的老鼠一下多了起来，与人相互碰撞，用尾巴在地上乱画。
English: They'll be round soon, and the mice in the house are multiplying, bumping into each other and scratching their tails on the floor.

古文：鸮数鸣殿前树上。
现代文：猫头鹰几次在殿前的树上叫唤。
English: The owl hooted several times in the tree in front of the hall.

古文：第门自坏。云尚冠里宅中门亦坏。
现代文：住宅的门无缘无故毁坏，霍云尚冠里住宅中的门也无缘无故地坏了。
English: The door of the residence was broken for no reason, and the door in the residence of Huo Yun Shangguanli was also broken for no reason.

古文：巷端人共见有人居云屋上，彻瓦投地，就视，亡有，大怪之。
现代文：街巷口的人都看到有人坐在霍云的屋顶上，揭下瓦片扔到地上，到跟前去看，却又没有见到人，感到非常奇怪。
English: People on the street corner saw someone sitting on the roof of Huoyun, took down the tiles and threw them on the ground. They came to look, but they didn't see anyone. It was very strange.

古文：禹梦车骑声正讠雚来捕禹，举家忧愁。
现代文：霍禹梦中听到车马喧喧嚷嚷地来捕捉他，全家对这些怪事感到忧愁。
English: In his dream, Huo Yu heard the noisy horses and chariots come to capture him, and the whole family was saddened by these strange events.

古文：山曰： 丞相擅减宗庙羔、菟、蛙，可以此罪也。 
现代文：霍山说道： 丞相擅自减少宗庙供品的羔羊、兔子、青蛙，可以用这来定他的罪。 
English: Huoshan said, "The fact that the chancellor reduced the number of lambs, rabbits, and frogs offered to the ancestral temple without permission can be used to convict him.

古文：谋令太后为博平君置酒，召丞相、平恩侯以下，使范明友、邓广汉承太后制引斩之，因废天子而立禹。
现代文：他们设谋叫太后为博平君设置酒席，把丞相、平恩侯以下的官员召来，让范明友、邓广汉奉太后的制令将这些人拉出去斩首，乘机罢除天子而立霍禹为帝。
English: They plotted to have the empress dowager set up a banquet for Bo Pingjun, summon officials below the prime minister and Ping Enhou, and have Fan Mingyou and Deng Guanghan take orders from the empress dowager to drag these people out and behead them, taking the opportunity to remove the heavenly son and establish Huo Yu as emperor.

古文：约定未发，云拜为玄菟太守，太中大夫任宣为代郡太守。
现代文：相约定的计划还没有实施，霍云就被任命为玄菟太守，太中大夫任宣被任命为代郡太守。
English: The agreed plan has not yet been implemented, and Huo Yun was appointed as the governor of Xuanzang, and the vice-governor Ren Xuan was appointed as the acting governor of the county.

古文：山又坐写秘书，显为上书献城西第，八马千匹，以赎山罪。
现代文：霍山又因为抄写宫禁秘书犯法，显为此上书表示愿献出城西的宅第及一千匹马用以赎霍山的罪。
English: Huoshan also violated the law by copying the secretaries of the palace ban, and apparently wrote a letter to this effect, expressing his willingness to give up his residence in the west of the city and a thousand horses to atone for Huoshan's sin.

古文：书报闻，会事发觉，云、山、明友自杀，显、禹、广汉等捕得。
现代文：宣帝在奏书上衹批覆知道了。刚好他们密谋的事被发觉，霍云、霍山、范明友自杀，显、霍禹、邓广汉等人被捕捉到。
English: Emperor Xuan found out about it in his report. Just as their conspiracy was discovered, Huo Yun, Huoshan, Fan Mingyou committed suicide, and Xian, Huo Yu, Deng Guanghan and others were arrested.

古文：禹要斩，显及诸女昆弟皆弃市。
现代文：霍禹被腰斩，显及她的几个女儿兄弟都被处死。
English: Huo Yu was beheaded from the waist down, and several of her daughters and brothers were also executed.

古文：唯独霍后废处昭台宫，与霍氏相连坐诛灭者数千家。
现代文：惟独霍后被废黜幽禁在昭台宣。与星医相牵连而被定罪诛杀灭族的有好几千家。
English: However, only Huo Hou was deposed and imprisoned in Zhaotai Xuan. There are several thousand families who were convicted of killing and exterminating people after being implicated with Xing Yi.

古文：上乃下诏曰： 乃者东织室令史张赦使魏郡豪李竟报冠阳侯云谋为大逆，朕以大将军故，抑而不扬，冀其自新。
现代文：宣帝于是下诏说： 不久以前束织室令史张赦指使魏郡的大户李竟给冠阳侯霍云回话，密谋犯上作乱，朕因为大将军的缘故，就将事情压住没有公开，希望他们能改过白新。
English: Emperor Xuan then issued the following edict: Not long ago, the weaving room ordered the historian Zhang Meng to instruct the Wei County big house Li to reply to Guanyang Hou Huoyun and conspire to commit a riot. Because of the general, I suppressed the matter and did not make it public. I hope they can make amends.

古文：今大司马博陆侯禹与母宣成侯夫人显及从昆弟子冠阳侯云、乐平侯山诸姊妹婿谋为大逆，欲诖误百姓。
现代文：如今大司马博陆侯霍禹和他的母亲宣成侯的夫人显以及堂弟的儿子冠阳侯霍云、乐平侯霍山和他们姊妹的女婿们阴谋造，企图连累百姓。
English: Nowadays, the grand secretary Mabo Lu Hou Hoyu and his mother Xuan Cheng Hou's wife Xian, as well as his cousin's sons Guanyang Hou Hoyun, Leping Hou Hoshan and their sister's sons-in-law, conspire to lure the people.

古文：赖宗庙神灵，先发得，咸伏其辜，朕甚悼之。
现代文：幸亏祖宗的神灵保佑，被事先发觉并捕获，全部都伏法处决。朕对这件事很痛心。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the blessing of the ancestral deities, they were discovered and captured in advance, and all of them were executed according to the law. I am very sad about this.

古文：诸为霍氏所诖误，事在丙申前，未发觉在吏者，皆赦除之。
现代文：所有被霍氏所连累的人，如果事情发生在丙申以前，还没有发觉报官在押的，一律赦免。
English: All the people who were implicated by Huo, if the incident happened before Hun Sen and they had not yet discovered that the reporter was in custody, will all be pardoned.

古文：男子张章先发觉，以语期门董忠，忠告在曹杨惲，惲告侍中金安上。
现代文：男子张章先发觉了这件事，把它告诉了期门董忠，董忠又报告给左曹杨，杨惮报告给侍中金安上。
English: Zhang Zhang, the man, discovered the matter first and told it to Dong Zhong, the porter. Dong Zhong reported it to Zuo Cao Yang, and Yang Shuo reported it to Jin An Shang, the chamberlain.

古文：惲召见对状，后章上书以闻。
现代文：杨惮被召见陈述情况，后来张章又上书报告。
English: Yang Shuo was summoned to report on the situation, and later Zhang Zhang also submitted a written report.

古文：侍中史高与金安上建发其事，言无入霍氏禁闼，卒不得遂其谋，皆雠有功。
现代文：侍中史高与金安上建议告发这件事，说不准霍氏进入宫禁中，霍氏的阴谋才没有成功，他们都同样有功。
English: Attendants Shi Gao and Jin An suggested to report the matter, saying that Mr. Huo was not allowed to enter the palace, and Mr. Huo's plot did not succeed. They all contributed equally.

古文：封章为博成侯，忠高昌侯，惲平通侯，安上都成侯，高乐陵侯。 
现代文：特封张章为博成侯，董忠为高吕侯，杨惮为平通侯，金安上为都成侯，史高为乐陵侯。 
English: Zhang Zhang is the special envoy of Bo Cheng Hou, Dong Zhong is the special envoy of Gaolu Hou, Yang Shuo is the special envoy of Ping Tong Hou, Jin An Shang is the special envoy of Du Cheng Hou, and Shi Gao is the special envoy of Le Ling Hou.

古文：初，霍氏奢侈，茂陵徐生曰： 霍氏必亡。
现代文：当初，霍氏生活奢侈，茂陵的徐生就说： 霍氏一定会灭亡。
English: At the beginning, Huo's life was extravagant, and Xu Sheng of Murying said: Huo will surely perish.

古文：夫奢则不逊，不逊必侮上。
现代文：因为一旦骄奢就不会恭顺，不恭顺就必定要侮蔑皇上。
English: Because once you are arrogant, you will not be obedient, and if you are not obedient, you must despise the emperor.

古文：侮上者，逆道也。
现代文：侮蔑皇上是大逆不道的。
English: Insulting the emperor is an act of high treason.

古文：在人之右，众必害之。
现代文：在人之上，定会受到众人的忌恨。
English: On top of people, it will certainly be hated by many people.

古文：霍氏秉权日久，害之者多矣。
现代文：霍氏掌握权柄的日子很久，忌恨的人就多了。
English: Mr. Huo has been in power for a long time, so there are more people who abhor him.

古文：天下害之，而又行以逆道，不亡何待！ 
现代文：天下的人都忌恨他们，而他们又倒行逆施，不灭亡还等什么呢！ 
English: The whole world hates them, and yet they continue to do the opposite. If they don't perish, what are they waiting for?

古文：乃上疏言： 霍氏泰盛，陛下即爱厚之，宜以时抑制，无使至亡。 书三上，辄报闻。
现代文：于是就上书进言道： 霍氏权势太盛，陛下即使很厚爱他们，也应该时时加以克制，不要让他们走上毁灭的道路。 
English: So he wrote a letter saying, "The power of the Ho family is too great. Even if Your Majesty loves them very much, you should always restrain them and not let them go down the path of destruction."

古文：其后霍氏诛灭，而告霍氏者皆封。
现代文：上书三次，皇上祇回覆说知道了。后来霍氏被诛杀灭亡之后，凡是告发霍氏的人都得到封赏。
English: After sending the letter three times, the emperor only replied that he knew. Later, after Ho was beaten to death, anyone who denounced him received a reward.

古文：人为徐生上书曰： 臣闻客有过主人者，见其灶直突，傍有积薪，客谓主人，更为曲突，远徙其薪，不者且有火患。
现代文：有人替徐生上书说道： 臣听说有一个客人去拜访主人，看到主人家炉灶的烟囱是笔直的，旁边堆有柴草，客人就告诉主人，要他换个弯曲的烟囱，将柴草搬得远一点，不然将会有火灾。
English: Someone wrote a letter on behalf of Xu Sheng, saying: The minister heard that a guest came to visit the owner. Seeing that the chimney of the owner's stove was straight and there was a pile of firewood next to it, the guest told the owner to replace it with a curved chimney and move the firewood further away, otherwise there would be a fire.

古文：主人嘿然不应。
现代文：主人默然不应。
English: The host should not have remained silent.

古文：俄而家果失火，邻里共救之，幸而得息。
现代文：不久主人家果然失火，邻居街坊都来救火，幸而火被扑灭。
English: Not long after, the owner's house did indeed catch fire. Neighbors from all over the neighborhood came to put out the fire. Fortunately, the fire was extinguished.

古文：于是杀牛置酒，谢其邻人，灼烂者在于上行，余各以功次坐，而不录言曲突者。
现代文：于是主人杀牛摆酒，酬谢他的邻居，被烧伤的人安排坐在上座，其他的人按出力大小依次入座，惟独没有酬谢那个让他换个弯曲烟囱的人。
English: So the owner killed the cow and offered wine to reward his neighbor, the burned man was arranged to sit on the upper seat, the others were seated in order of power, but he did not reward the man who asked him to change the bend of the chimney.

古文：人谓主人曰： 乡使听客之言，不费牛、酒，终亡火患。
现代文：有个人对主人说： 如果当初你听客人的话，今天也就用不着破费杀牛置酒，而且始终不会有火灾。
English: One man said to his host: "If you had listened to your guests in the beginning, there would be no need to kill cattle and store wine today, and there would never be a fire."

古文：今论功而请宾，曲突徙薪亡恩泽，焦头烂额为上客耶？ 
现代文：现在论功请客，对那位建议换弯曲的烟囱、将柴草搬开的人不作报答，怎么烧得焦头烂额的人反而成了上宾之客呢？
English: Now, when it comes to honoring a guest, how is it that the man who suggested changing the crooked chimney and removing the firewood was not rewarded, but the man who burned his forehead became the guest of honor?

古文：主人乃寤而请之，今茂陵徐福数上书言霍氏且有变，宜防绝之。
现代文：主人这才省悟而去请那位客人。现在茂陵的徐福几次上书说霍氏将有变故，应加以防患杜绝。
English: It was only then that the host came to his senses and invited the guest. Xu Fu, who now lives in Maolin, wrote several times to say that there would be a change in Mr. Huo, and that it should be prevented and eliminated.

古文：乡使福说得行，则国亡裂土出爵之费，臣亡逆乱诛灭之败。
现代文：假使当初徐福的建议得以采纳，国家就不会有割地封爵的花费，大臣就不会有谋反诛减的祸败。
English: If Xu Fu's suggestion had been adopted at the time, the country would not have had to spend money on land division and knighting, and the minister would not have had to try to mitigate the disaster.

古文：往事既已，而福独不蒙其功，唯陛下察之，贵徙薪曲突之策，使居焦发灼烂之右。 
现代文：往事已经过去，但衹有徐福却有功未赏，望陛下明察，能够重视搬走柴草弯曲烟囱的良策，使其功在身体毛发被烧烂的人之上。 
English: The past is the past, but those who have done good deeds have not been rewarded. I hope that His Majesty can pay attention to the good policy of removing the bent chimneys of firewood, and make it work on the people whose body hair has been burned.

古文：上乃赐福帛十匹，后以为郎。
现代文：皇上于是就赐给徐福绢帛十匹，后来又任命他当了郎官。
English: The emperor then gave Xu Fuxin ten horses, and later appointed him as a vassal.

古文：宣帝始立，谒见高庙，大将军光从骖乘，上内严惮之，若有芒刺在背。
现代文：宣帝刚登基时，去参拜高庙，大将军霍光与他同坐一辆车，皇上心裹很害怕，好像有芒刺在背。
English: When Emperor Xuancheng had just ascended to the throne, he went to visit the Gao Temple. General Huo Guang rode with him in a car. The emperor was very scared, as if he had a mole on his back.

古文：后车骑将军张安世代光骖乘，天子从容肆体，甚安近焉。
现代文：后来车骑将军张安世代替霍光陪乘，天子就比较安逸自在，身体舒展自如，感到非常安全亲近。
English: Later, Zhang An, the general of the cavalry, accompanied Huo Guang for generations. Tianzi was more comfortable and at ease, his body stretched freely, and he felt very safe and close.

古文：及光身死而宗族竟诛，故俗传之曰： 威震主者不畜，霍氏之祸萌于骖乘。 
现代文：等到霍光死后，他的宗族也都被诛，因此民间就传说着： 威势震动君主的人不会被容留，霍氏的祸患开始于陪乘。 
English: After the death of Huo Guang, his clan was also taken away, so the folk legend said: Those who shake the monarch with their power will not be tolerated, and the evil of the Huo clan began with the escort.

古文：至成帝时，为光置守冢百家，吏卒奉词焉。
现代文：到成帝时，为霍光安置了一百家守墓的人，吏卒按时祭祀。
English: By the time of the enthronement of Emperor Cheng, a hundred families of tomb keepers had been placed for Huo Guang, and the officials regularly made sacrifices.

古文：元始二年，封光从父昆弟曾孙阳为博陆侯，千户。
现代文：元始二年，霍光堂兄弟的曾孙霍阳被封为博陆侯，赐食邑一千户。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Huo Guang's cousin's great-grandson, Huo Yang, was made the governor of Bolu and granted food to a thousand households in the county.

古文：金日磾字翁叔，本匈奴休屠王太子也。
现代文：金日磾字翁叔，本来是匈奴休屠王的太子。
English: Kim Il Sung, also known as Uncle Weng, was originally the prince of the Xiongnu King Xiu Tuo.

古文：武帝元狩中，票骑将军霍去病将兵击匈奴右地，多斩首，虏获休屠王祭天金人。
现代文：武帝元狩年间，骠骑将军霍去病带兵攻打匈奴的西部地区，斩杀了很多人。还夺取了休屠王用以祭祀天神的金铸的佛像。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Yuan Dynasty, the cavalry general Huo went sick and led troops to attack the western region of the Xiongnu, killing many people. He also seized the gold Buddha statue that King Xu Tuo used to worship the gods.

古文：其夏，票骑复西过居延，攻祁连山，大克获。
现代文：那年夏天，骠骑将军又从西面经过居延，攻打祁连山，大获全胜。
English: In the summer of that year, the general of the Qin cavalry passed through Jiuyan from the west and attacked Qilian Mountain, and won a complete victory.

古文：于是单于怨昆邪、休屠居西方多为汉所破，召其王欲诛之。
现代文：由此，单于就怨恨住在西面的昆邪、休屠多次被汉军所攻破，想把他们的王召去杀掉。
English: As a result, Kunzong and Xiutu, who resided in the west, were repeatedly defeated by the Han army, who wanted to call their king to kill him.

古文：昆邪、休屠恐，谋降汉。
现代文：昆邪、休屠二王感到害怕，就谋划投降汉朝。
English: Kings Kun Yul and Xiu Tu were afraid and planned to surrender to the Han Dynasty.

古文：休屠王后悔，昆邪王杀之，并将其众降汉。
现代文：休屠王后来反悔，昆邪王就把他杀了，并率领他的部下一同投降了汉朝。
English: King Xiu Tu later repented, and King Kunzang killed him and led his subordinates to surrender to the Han Dynasty.

古文：封昆邪王为列侯。
现代文：昆邪王被封为列侯。
English: King Kunzang was made a vassal lord.

古文：日磾以父不降见杀，与母阏氏、弟伦俱没入官，输黄门养马，时年十四矣。
现代文：金日磾由于他的父亲不肯投降而被杀死，就同他的母亲板氏、弟弟金伦一同被收进宫府为奴，送他到黄门养马，这一年他才十四岁。
English: Because his father refused to surrender and was killed, Kim Il-sung, along with his mother Ban and younger brother Kim Ryong, was taken into the palace as a slave and sent to the Yellow Gate to raise horses. He was only fourteen years old at the time.

古文：久之，武帝游宴见马，后宫满侧。
现代文：过了很久，漠武帝游乐召阅各部所养马匹，后宫的嫔妃都站满武帝的两侧。
English: After a long time, the horses raised by various ministries were summoned by the Emperor Mo Wu for pleasure, and the concubines of the harem stood on both sides of the Emperor.

古文：日磾等数十人牵马过殿下，莫不窃视，至日磾独不敢。
现代文：金日蝉等数十人牵着马经过殿下，其他的人没有不偷偷地窥视的，衹有金日磾经过时不敢偷看。
English: Dozens of people, including the golden sun cicadas, lead horses past His Imperial Highness. Other people do not dare to peek when the golden sun cicadas pass by.

古文：日磾长八尺二寸，容貌甚严，马又肥好，上异而问之，具以本状对。
现代文：金日磾身高八尺二寸，容貌很威严，马又养得膘肥体壮，武帝感到奇怪就问他，他如实作答。
English: Kim Il Sung was eight feet two inches tall, with a very dignified appearance. The horse had been raised to be fat and strong. Emperor Wu felt strange and asked him about it. He answered truthfully.

古文：上奇焉，即日赐汤沐衣冠，拜为马监，迁侍中、驸马都尉、光禄大夫。
现代文：武帝觉得此人奇特，当天就赐给他沐浴衣冠，任命他为养马总管，又升任他为侍中驸马都尉光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Wu thought this man was strange, and on the same day, he gave him a yakitori crown, appointed him to be the head of horse breeding, and promoted him to the position of chamberlain and horse captain Guanglu doctor.

古文：日磾既亲近，未尝有过失，上甚信爱之，赏赐累千金，出则骖乘，入侍左右。
现代文：金日磾受到皇上亲近后，不曾有过失，武帝很是信任喜爱他，赏赐给他的加起来有金子一千多两，皇帝出宫他就陪乘，在宫内就奉侍在身边。
English: After Kim Il-sung was approached by the emperor, he did not make any mistakes. Emperor Wu trusted and loved him very much. The rewards given to him added up to more than a thousand and two gold. He accompanied the emperor when he left the palace and served at his side in the palace.

古文：贵戚多窃怨，曰： 陛下妄得一胡儿，反贵重之！ 
现代文：贵戚都私下抱怨，说： 陛下随便得到一胡儿，反而器重他！ 
English: His noble relatives all complained privately, saying, "His Majesty got a beard for nothing, but he values it!

古文：上闻，愈厚焉。
现代文：武帝听到这些话后，更加厚待金日磾。
English: After hearing these words, Emperor Wu treated Kim Il Sung more generously.

古文：日磾母教诲两子，甚有法度，上闻而嘉之。
现代文：金日磾的母亲教导两个儿子，很有分寸和方法，武帝听说后就表彰了她。
English: Kim Il-sung's mother taught her two sons in a very measured and methodical way, and Emperor Wu commended her when he heard about it.

古文：病死，诏图画于甘泉宫，署曰 休屠王阏氏 。
现代文：她病死后，武帝下诏叫人替她画像并放在甘泉宫，上面写着： 休屠王板氏。 
English: After she died of illness, Emperor Wu issued an edict to have someone paint her portrait and place it in the Ganquan Palace, with the inscription: Hugh Tuo Wangban.

古文：日磾每见画常拜，乡之涕泣，然后乃去。
现代文：金日磾每次见到画像都要叩拜，面对画像流泪哭泣，然后才离去。
English: Every time Kim Il-sung saw an image, he had to bow down, face the image, shed tears and weep, and then leave.

古文：日磾子二人皆爱，为帝弄儿，常在旁侧。
现代文：金日磾的两个儿子都很可爱，成为供武帝狎弄的孩童，经常呆在武帝身边。
English: Both of Kim Il Sung's sons were very cute, and they became children for Emperor Wu to tease. They often stayed with Emperor Wu.

古文：弄儿或自后拥上项，日磾在前，见而目之。
现代文：造两个孩童有一次从后面抱住武帝的脖颈，金日磾在前面看见了，就向他们瞪眼。
English: When two children once hugged Emperor Wu's neck from behind, Kim Il Sung glared at them when he saw them in front of him.

古文：弄儿走且啼曰： 翁怒。 
现代文：孩童跑开并哭着说： 老先生发怒了。 
English: The child ran away crying, "The old man is angry.

古文：上谓日磾 何怒吾儿为？ 
现代文：武帝对金日磾说： 你为什么对我的孩童发怒呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said to Kim Il Sung, "Why are you angry with my child?

古文：其后弄儿壮大，不谨，自殿下与宫人戏，日磾适见之，恶其淫乱，遂杀弄儿。
现代文：后来这两个孩童都长大了，其中一个行为不谨，在殿下同宫人游戏，金日磾正好看见了，他痛恨这个孩童的淫乱，就把他杀了。
English: Later, when the two children had both grown up, one of them behaved immorally and played with the palace staff in the presence of the prince. Kim Il Sung happened to see this, hated the child's immorality, and killed him.

古文：弄儿即日磾长子也。
现代文：这个孩童就是金日磾的大儿子。
English: The child is Kim Il Sung's eldest son.

古文：上闻之大怒，日磾顿首谢，具言所以杀弄儿状。
现代文：武帝听到这件事后大怒，金日磾叩头请罪，详细报告了之所以要杀死孩子的情况。
English: Emperor Wu was furious when he heard about this, and Kim Il Sung made a grovelling apology and gave a detailed account of why he wanted to kill the child.

古文：上甚哀，为之泣，已而心敬日磾。
现代文：武帝感到很哀痛，为他流泪，过后武帝心中就敬重起金日磾。
English: Emperor Wu felt very sad, shed tears for him, and after that, Emperor Wu's heart revered Kim Il Sung.

古文：初，莽何罗与江充相善，及充败卫太子，何罗弟通用诛太子时力战得封。
现代文：原先的时候，莽何罗和江充很要好。等到卫太子被江充所害，莽何罗的弟弟莽通由于诛杀太子时尽力作战而得到封赏。
English: Originally, Meng He Luo and Jiang Chong were very close. When Wei Taizi was victimized by Jiang Chong, Meng He Luo's younger brother Meng Tong received a reward for fighting hard when fighting and killing the prince.

古文：后上知太子冤，乃夷灭充宗族党与。
现代文：后来武帝知道了太子的冤情，就把江充的宗族与同党尽数诛灭。
English: Later, Emperor Wu learned of the prince's grievances, and annihilated Jiangchong's clan and party as much as possible.

古文：何罗兄弟惧及，遂谋为逆。
现代文：莽何罗兄弟害怕祸及自己，就谋划造。
English: The Menggoro brothers, fearing the worst for themselves, hatched a plan.

古文：日磾视其志意有非常，心疑之，阴独察其动静，与俱上下。
现代文：金日磾见他们心志异常，心中就开始怀疑。暗中一个人观察他们的动静，同他们一同出入宫殿。
English: When Kim Il-sung saw that their morale was abnormal, he began to have doubts in his heart. A person secretly observed their movements and went in and out of the palace with them.

古文：何罗亦觉日磾意，以故久不得发。
现代文：莽何罗也觉察到金日磾的意思，因此很久不能发难。
English: Meng He Luo also sensed Kim Il Sung's meaning, so he couldn't make trouble for a long time.

古文：是时，上行幸林光宫，日磾小疾卧庐。
现代文：这个时候武帝到林光宫去，金日磾因为一点小病而躺在宫中休息的地方。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu went to Lin Guang Palace, where Kim Il Sung was lying down to rest due to a minor illness.

古文：何罗与通及小弟安成矫制夜出，共杀使者，发兵。
现代文：莽何罗同莽通还有他们的小弟莽安成假托皇帝的命令夜晚出来，一同把使者杀了，然后发兵谋反。
English: Meng Ho Lo, along with Meng Tong and their younger brother Meng Ancheng, came out at night on the pretext of the emperor's order, killed the messenger together, and then sent troops to rebel.

古文：明旦，上未起，何罗亡何从外入。
现代文：第二天早上，武帝还没有起床，莽何罗没有藉口从外面进宫。
English: The next morning, Emperor Wu had not yet woken up, and Meng He Luo had no excuse to enter the palace from outside.

古文：日磾奏厕心动，立入坐内户下。
现代文：金日磾上厕所时忽然心有所动，他就立即进去坐在裹面的屋子裹。
English: When Kim Il-sung went to the toilet, he suddenly felt something in his heart. He immediately went inside and sat in a room with his face wrapped in a cloth.

古文：须臾，何罗袖白刃从东箱上，见日磾，色变，走趋卧内欲入，行触宝瑟，僵。
现代文：一会儿，莽何罗袖裹藏着匕首从束厢进来，看见金日磾，脸色顿时一变，朝皇帝卧处快步奔去，想要进去，却碰到了瑟器，一下子呆在那儿。
English: After a while, Meng He Luo, with a hidden dagger in his sleeve, came in from the casket, saw Jin Rong Yao, his face suddenly changed, and he quickly ran to the emperor's bedside. He wanted to go in, but he bumped into a tool and suddenly stayed there.

古文：日磾得抱何罗，因传曰： 莽何罗反！ 
现代文：金日磾乘机抱住了莽何罗，然后高声呼喊道： 莽何罗造反了！ 
English: Kim Il Sung took the opportunity to hug Meng Ho Lo, and then shouted loudly: Meng Ho Lo has rebelled!

古文：上惊起，左右拔刃欲格之，上恐并中日磾，止勿格。
现代文：武帝受惊连忙起来，左右的人拔出刀想搏杀莽何罗，武帝怕误伤金日磾，就叫左右的人不要击杀。
English: Emperor Wu was startled and hurried up. The people on his right and left pulled out their swords and wanted to fight and kill the madman. Emperor Wu was afraid of accidentally wounding Kim Il Sung, so he told the people on his right and left not to kill him.

古文：日磾捽胡投何罗殿下，得禽缚之，穷治，皆伏辜。
现代文：金日婵抓住莽何罗的脖颈部把他扔到殿下，卫士这才抓住了莽何罗并把他绑了起来，彻底追查所有谋反的人都伏了罪。
English: Kim Il-sung grabbed Mang Chol-ro by the scruff of the neck and threw him to His Imperial Highness. The guards then grabbed Mang Chol-ro and tied him up. All those who had plotted to rebel were thoroughly investigated and found guilty.

古文：由是著忠孝节。
现代文：从此金日磾以忠孝的节操著称。
English: From then on, Kim Il Sung was known for his loyalty and filial piety.

古文：日磾自在左右，目不忤视者数十年。
现代文：金日磾自从在武帝身边，目不斜视数十年。
English: Kim Il-sung has not looked sideways for decades since he was around Emperor Wu.

古文：赐出宫女，不敢近。
现代文：赐给他的宫女，他从来不敢亲近。
English: He never dared to approach the princess who was given to him.

古文：上欲内其女后宫，不肯。
现代文：武帝想把他的女儿娶进后宫，他不答应。
English: Emperor Wu wanted to marry his daughter into his harem, but he refused.

古文：其笃慎如此，上尤奇异之。
现代文：金日磾就是这样的忠厚谨慎，武帝更加觉得他与众不同。
English: Kim Il-sung was just such a loyal and prudent person, and Emperor Wu felt even more that he was different.

古文：及上病，属霍光以辅少主，光让日磾。日磾曰： 臣外国人，且使匈奴轻汉。 
现代文：等到武帝生病，嘱托霍光辅佐年幼的君主，霍光推让金日磾，金日磾说： 臣是外国人，如果这样将使匈奴轻视汉朝。 
English: When Emperor Wu fell ill, he asked Huo Guangfu to assist the young monarch. Huo Guangfu gave the position to Kim Il Sung. Kim Il Sung said, "The minister is a foreigner. If this happens, the Huns will despise the Han Dynasty."

古文：于是遂为光副。
现代文：于是他就当了霍光的副手。
English: So he became Ho Guang's deputy.

古文：光以女妻日磾嗣子赏。
现代文：霍光把女儿嫁给了金日磾的承嗣之子金赏。
English: Huo Guang married his daughter to Jin Rong, the son of the heir of Kim Il Sung.

古文：初，武帝遗诏以讨莽何罗功封日磾为秺侯，日磾以帝少不受封。
现代文：后来，武帝遣诏以讨伐莽何罗的功劳封金日磾为姹侯，金日磾以昭帝年少为由不接受封侯。
English: Later, Emperor Wu sent an imperial edict to the effect that Kim Il Sung was to be made a vassal for his efforts in fighting the Mongolian Horde, but Kim Il Sung did not accept the vassal title on the grounds that Emperor Zhao was too young.

古文：辅政岁余，病困，大将军光白封日磾，卧授印绶。
现代文：金日磾辅佐政事有一年多后，病得很厉害，大将军霍光禀告皇帝加封金日磾，金日磾躺着接受了印绶。
English: More than a year after Kim Il-sung's ascension to the throne, he fell seriously ill. General Ho Kwang reported to the emperor that Kim Il-sung's seal had been sealed. Kim Il-sung accepted the seal lying down.

古文：一日，薨，赐葬具冢地，送以轻车介士，军陈至茂陵，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：一天，金日磾薨，赐给他家安葬的用具和墓地，用轻车武士为他送行，军队一直排列到茂陵，给他的谧号为敬侯。
English: One day, Kim Il-sung gave him the equipment and cemetery for his family burial, sent him on his way with light-vehicle warriors, and the army was lined up all the way to Muryeong, and gave him the nickname "Jung-woo."

古文：日磾两子，赏、建，俱侍中，与昭帝略同年，共卧起。
现代文：金日磾的两个儿子金赏、金建都为侍中，与昭帝年龄大致相同，一同起卧。
English: Kim Il Sung's two sons, Kim Bong and Kim Jong Il, were both chamberlains, roughly the same age as Emperor Zhao, and they slept together.

古文：赏为奉车，建驸马都尉。
现代文：金赏为奉车都尉，金建为驸马都尉。
English: Jin Jian was awarded the title of Feng Che Duifeng, and Jin Jian was awarded the title of Xi Ma Duifeng.

古文：及赏嗣侯，佩两绶。上谓霍将军曰： 金氏兄弟两人不可使俱两绶邪？ 
现代文：等到金赏继承了侯爵，佩带两条绶带，昭帝就对霍将军说： 金氏兄弟两个人难道不可以都佩带两条绶带吗？ 
English: When Jin Bounty inherited the marquis and wore two ribbons, Emperor Zhao said to General Huo: Can't both Kim brothers wear two ribbons?

古文：霍光对曰： 赏自嗣父为侯耳。 
现代文：霍光答道： 金赏自己是继承他父亲而为侯爵的。 
English: Huo Guang replied, "He rewarded himself with money for succeeding his father and becoming a marquis."

古文：上笑曰： 侯不在我与将军乎？ 
现代文：昭帝笑着说： 封侯不就在于我和将军吗？ 
English: Zhao Di said with a smile, "Isn't it just me and the general who are to be enthroned?"

古文：光曰： 先帝之约，有功乃得封侯。 
现代文：霍光说道： 先帝曾订下规定，有功才可以封侯。 
English: Huo Guang said: The former emperor had stipulated that only meritorious people could be knighted.

古文：时年俱八九岁。
现代文：这一年他们都衹有八九岁。
English: This year, they are all in their eighties and nineties.

古文：宣帝即位，赏为太仆，霍氏有事萌牙，上书去妻。
现代文：宣帝即位后，金赏为太仆官，霍氏有些事开始显露端绪，他就上书请求休妻。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, Jin Rong was promoted to the position of the second-in-command. Some things began to reveal themselves to Mr. Huo, and he sent a letter requesting his wife to divorce him.

古文：上亦自哀之，独得不坐。
现代文：皇上也很哀怜他，衹有他没有被牵连致罪。
English: The emperor was also very sorry for him, but he was not implicated in the crime.

古文：元帝时为光禄勋，薨，亡子，国除。
现代文：元帝时金赏任光禄勋，死后没有儿子，封国被除去。
English: At the time of the Yuan Emperor, Ren Guanglu was rewarded with gold. After his death, there was no son, and the fief was removed.

古文：元始中继绝世，封建孙当为秺侯，奉日磾后。
现代文：元始中期恢复已灭绝的宗祀，就封金建的孙子金当为诧侯，作为金日珲的后代。
English: At the beginning and middle of the restoration of the extinct religious rites, the grandson of the feudal Kim Jian, Kim Dang, was surprised, as a descendant of Kim Il Sung.

古文：初，日磾所将俱降弟伦，字少卿，为黄门郎，早卒。
现代文：当初，金日珲带着一同投降的弟弟金伦，字少卿，任黄门郎，早死。
English: At first, Kim Il-sung took his younger brother Kim Lun, who surrendered together with him, as well as Zhaoxaoqing, Ren Huangmenro, and died early.

古文：日磾两子贵，及孙则衰矣。而伦后嗣遂盛，子安上始贵显封侯。
现代文：金曰珲的两个儿子都很显贵，到孙子这一代就衰落了，而金伦的后代则开始兴盛起来，他的儿子金安上开始显贵并被封侯。
English: Both of Kim Il Sung's sons were very distinguished, but Kim Il Sung's grandson's generation declined, while Kim Il Sung's descendants began to prosper, and his son Kim An Sang became distinguished and was made a prince.

古文：安上字子侯，少为侍中，惇笃有智，宣帝爰之。
现代文：金安上字子侯，年轻时为侍中，性情淳厚有智谋，宣帝很喜爱他。
English: Jinan Shang Zi Hou, when he was young, he was an attendant, his temperament was honest and clever, and Emperor Xuan loved him very much.

古文：颇与发举楚王廷寿反谋，赐爵关内侯，食邑三百户。
现代文：他很积极参与了揭发检举楚王刘延寿反叛的阴谋，被赐爵为关内侯，赐给食邑三百户。
English: He took an active part in exposing and denouncing the conspiracy of Chu King Liu Yanshou's rebellion. He was given the title of Lord of Guanai and given 300 households in the food village.

古文：后霍氏反，安上传禁门闼，无内霍氏亲属，封为都成侯，至建章卫尉。
现代文：后来霍氏谋反，金安上传令关闭宫门，不要放霍氏亲属进去，又被封为都成侯，后升到建章卫尉。
English: Later, the Huo clan plotted a rebellion, and Jin An issued an order to close the palace gate, not to let the relatives of the Huo clan enter. He was also named the Duke of Chengdu, and later promoted to the Jianzhang Guards Lieutenant.

古文：薨，赐冢茔杜陵，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：去世后，赐给杜陵的墓地，谧号为敬侯。
English: After his death, he was given to the cemetery of Duling, and his nickname was Jinghou.

古文：四子，常、敞、岑、明。
现代文：金安上有四个儿子，分别是金常、金敞、金岑、金明。
English: Jinan has four sons, namely, Jin Chang, Jin Zhang, Jin Yao, and Jin Ming.

古文：岑、明皆为诸曹、中郎将，常光禄大夫。
现代文：金岑、金明都任诸曹中郎将，金常官为光禄大夫。
English: Jin Xuan and Jin Ming were both appointed to the posts of Cao Zhong Lang General, and Jin Changguan was appointed to the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：元帝为太子时，敞为中庶子，幸有宠，帝即位，为骑都尉光禄大夫、中郎将侍中。元帝崩，故事，近臣皆随陵为园郎，敞以世名忠孝，太后诏留侍成帝，为奉车水衡都尉，至卫尉。
现代文：元帝还是太子的时候，金敞是中庶子，有幸为太子所宠爱，太子登基后，金敞官为骑都尉光禄大夫，中郎将侍中，元帝驾崩后，按以往的惯例，亲近的大臣都要到皇陵去守墓，金敞因为世代以忠孝著名，就被太后韶令留下来侍奉成帝，任奉车水衡都尉，官位一直到卫尉。
English: When the Yuan Emperor was still a prince, Jinzhan was the middle child, and was fortunate to be the prince's favorite. After the prince ascended to the throne, Jinzhan was a cavalry captain, Guanglu Daifu, and his middle son was an aide-de-camp. After the Yuan Emperor's death, according to the previous practice, close ministers had to go to the imperial mausoleum to guard the tomb. Because Jinzhan was known for his loyalty and filial piety for generations, he was ordered by the Empress Dowager to stay and serve the emperor. He served as the captain of the carriage and water balance, and his official rank went all the way

古文：敞为人正直，敢犯颜色，左右惮之，唯上亦难焉。
现代文：金敞为人正直，敢于冒犯君主的威严，左右的人都畏惧他，即使是元帝也对他很敬畏。
English: Jinzang was an honest man and dared to offend the majesty of the monarch. People on both sides were afraid of him. Even the Yuan Emperor was in awe of him.

古文：病甚，上使使者问所欲，以弟岑为托。
现代文：金敞病重时，元帝派使者去问他有什么要求，金敞就为他的弟弟金岑请求封官。
English: When Jinzang was seriously ill, the Yuan Emperor sent an emissary to ask him what he wanted, and Jinzang requested an official seal for his brother Jin Yong.

古文：上召岑，拜为使主客。
现代文：元帝就召见金岑，拜官为使主客。
English: Emperor Yuan summoned Jin Zheng and made him the guest of honor.

古文：敞子涉本为左曹，上拜涉为侍中，使待幸绿车载送卫尉舍。
现代文：金敞的儿子金涉本来官为左曹，元帝就任金涉为侍中，派人用皇孙车载送他到卫尉的官舍。
English: Jinzang's son, Jinzang, was originally a left-handed official, and the Yuan Emperor appointed Jinzang as an attendant, and sent someone to take him to the guard's official residence in the imperial grandson's car.

古文：须臾卒。
现代文：不久金敞去世。
English: Jinzang died soon after.

古文：敞三子，涉、参、饶。
现代文：金敞有三子，他们是金涉、金参、金饶。
English: Jinzang has three sons, they are Jinzang, Jinzang and Jinrao.

古文：涉明经俭节，诸儒称之。
现代文：金涉通晓经术，廉洁忠贞有节操，受到诸位儒生的称赞。
English: He is well versed in the scriptures, honest, loyal and disciplined, and has been praised by Confucian scholars.

古文：成帝时为侍中、骑都尉，领三辅胡、越骑。
现代文：成帝时官为侍中骑都尉，统领三辅的胡、越骑兵。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chengdu, he served as a lieutenant of the cavalry, commanding the three auxiliary cavalry troops of Hu and Yue.

古文：哀帝即位，为奉车都尉，至长信少府。
现代文：哀帝即位后，金涉被任命为奉车都尉，官位一直到长信少府。
English: After Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, Jin Zang was appointed as the lieutenant of Fengche, and his official rank went all the way to Changxin Shophu.

古文：而参使匈奴，匈奴中郎将、越骑校尉、关内都尉，安定、东海太守。
现代文：金参则出使匈奴，历任匈奴中郎将，越人骑兵校尉，关内都尉，安定、束海太守。
English: Jin San was sent as an envoy to the Xiongnu, and successive Xiongnu middle captains, Viet cavalry lieutenant, Guanai captain, stable, Sokai governor.

古文：饶为墟骑校尉。
现代文：金饶任越人骑兵校尉。
English: Jinrao appointed a Viet cavalry captain.

古文：涉两子，汤、融，皆侍中、诸曹、将、大夫。
现代文：金涉有两子，他们是金汤、金融，都任侍中诸曹将大夫。
English: He had two sons, Jin Tang (金汤) and Jin Jin (金融), both of whom served as attendants and generals.

古文：而涉之从父弟钦举明经，为太子门大夫，哀帝即位，为太中大夫给事中，钦从父弟迁为尚书令，兄弟用事。
现代文：金涉的堂弟金钦以明经被举用，官为太子门大夫，哀帝即位后，被任命为太中大夫给事中，金钦的堂弟金迁为尚书令，兄弟都当权。
English: Jin Zang's cousin, Jin Qin, was promoted to Mingjing, and was appointed as the prince's gate doctor. After Emperor Ai ascended the throne, he was appointed as the great middle doctor. In this matter, Jin Qin's cousin, Jin Qian, was the Shang Shuling, and both brothers were in power.

古文：帝祖母傅太后崩，钦使护作，职办，擢为泰山、弘农太守，著威名。
现代文：哀帝的祖母傅太后崩，金钦主管葬送之事，事完之后，就被提升为泰山、弘农太守，以威名著称。
English: After the death of Fu Taigo, the grandmother of the deceased emperor, Jin Qin was in charge of the funeral. After the funeral, he was promoted to Taishan and Hongnong Taishu, famous for his prestige.

古文：平帝即位，征为大司马司直、京兆尹。
现代文：平帝即位后，被征任为大司马司直、京兆尹。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ping, he was appointed as the grand secretary of Ma Sizhi and Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：帝年幼，选置师友，大司徒孔光以明经高行为孔氏师，京兆尹金钦以家世忠孝为金氏友。
现代文：平帝年纪小，选择设置师友，大司徒孔光因通晓经术行为高尚被选任为孔氏师，京兆尹金钦因家中世代忠孝被选任为金氏友。
English: When Emperor Ping was young, he chose to set up teachers and friends. The great disciple Kong Guang Rong was chosen as Kong's teacher because of his knowledge of scripture and noble behavior, and Emperor Jingzha Yin Jinqin was chosen as Kim's friend because of the loyalty and filial piety of generations in his family.

古文：徙光禄大夫、侍中，秩中二千石，封都成侯。
现代文：升官为光禄大夫侍中，俸禄为中二千石，封爵都成侯。
English: He was promoted to the position of a junior attendant of Dr. Guanglu, his salary was 2,000 koku, and he was knighted.

古文：时，王莽新诛平帝外家卫氏，召明礼少府宗伯凤入说为人后之宜，白令公卿、将军、侍中、朝臣并听，欲以内厉平帝而外塞百姓之议。
现代文：当时王莽刚诛杀了乎帝的舅舅卫氏一家，召见明礼少府宗伯凤进宫讲说为人后代应有的行为，下令要求公卿、将军、侍中、朝臣都去听讲，希望在内能警戒平帝，在外能堵塞百姓的议论。
English: At that time, Wang Mangong killed the Wei family, who were almost the emperor's uncles, and summoned Mingli Shofu Zongbofeng to the palace to lecture on the proper behavior for future generations. He ordered the nobles, generals, chamberlains, and courtiers to listen to the lecture, hoping to warn Emperor Ping at home and to block the people's discussion abroad.

古文：钦与族昆弟秺侯当俱封。
现代文：金钦和他的本族堂弟诧侯金当都被封侯。
English: Both Jinqin and his cousin of the same family, Jin Dang, were given the title of marquess.

古文：初，当曾祖父日磾传子节侯赏，而钦祖父安上传子夷侯常，皆亡子，国绝，故莽封钦、当奉其后。
现代文：原先，金当的曾祖父金珲传到儿子节侯金赏，金钦的祖父金安上传到儿子夷侯金常，都没有儿子，封国废除，所以王莽就赏封金钦、金当：要他们作为金日磾、金安上的后代。
English: Originally, Jintang's great-grandfather Jintao passed down to his son Jintang's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao's great-grandfather Jintao

古文：当母南即莽母功显君同产弟也。
现代文：金当的母亲南也就是王莽的母亲功显君的妹妹。
English: Kintang's mother, Nan, is also the sister of Wang Mang's mother, Gong Xianjun.

古文：当上南大行为太夫人。
现代文：金当为他母亲南上书给大行要求封为太夫人。
English: Jin Dang wrote to his mother in the south, asking for the title of grand lady.

古文：钦因缘谓当： 诏书陈日磾功，亡有赏语。
现代文：金钦找机会对金当说： 诏书上衹有讲述金日珲功劳的，没有提到金赏。
English: Looking for an opportunity, Jinqin said to Jin Dang, "In the edict, there is a description of the merits of Kim Il Sung, but there is no mention of a gold reward.

古文：当名为以孙继祖也，自当为父、祖父立庙。
现代文：金当名分上作为孙子继承先祖，自然要替父亲、祖父立祠庙。
English: As the grandson inherits the ancestors, it is natural that he should build a temple for his father and grandfather.

古文：赏故国君，使大夫主其祭。 
现代文：金赏是前封地的国君，也应叫大夫为他主持祭祀。 
English: The gold reward is the sovereign of the former fiefdom, and the doctor should also be asked to preside over the sacrifice for him.

古文：时，甄邯在旁，庭叱钦，因劾奏曰： 钦幸得以通经术，超擢侍帷幄，重蒙厚恩，封袭爵号，知圣朝以世有为人后之谊。
现代文：当时甄邯在旁边，就在朝廷中斥责金钦，弹劾他道： 金钦有幸能够因为通晓经术，被破格提升侍奉皇帝左右，又蒙受厚恩，被封承袭爵号，让他知道圣朝世代都有为人后代的礼义。
English: At that time, Zhen Rong was nearby, and he rebuked and impeached Jin Qin Rong in the imperial court, saying: Jin Qin was fortunate to be able to serve the emperor and others in an unprecedented manner because of his knowledge of the scriptures, and he also received great favors and was sealed to inherit the title of knight, so that he knew that the Holy Dynasty generation had the courtesy of future generations.

古文：前遭故定陶太后背本逆天，孝哀不获厥福，乃者吕宽、卫宝复造奸谋，至于返逆，咸伏厥辜。
现代文：前一次，已故定陶太后忘本逆天，孝哀没有得到她的保佑，还有吕宽、卫实又发动奸谋，以至于谋反，都伏法。
English: On the previous occasion, the late Empress Dowager Ding Tao forgot her duty and rebelled against Heaven, filial piety did not receive her blessing, and Lyu Kuan and Weishi also launched a treacherous plot, to the extent of plotting a rebellion, all of which were against the Fa.

古文：太皇太后惩艾悼惧，逆天之咎，非圣诬法，大乱之殃，诚欲奉承天心，遵明圣制，专一为后之谊，以安天下之命，数临正殿，延见群臣，讲习《礼经》。
现代文：太皇太后从错误中吸取教训，知道违背天理的灾祸。非议圣人蔑视国法，这是大乱的祸根，太皇太后诚心诚意想秉承上天的意志，遵守彰明皇制，专心致志于为人之后的礼义，来安定天下的百姓，多次登临正殿，召见朝廷各位大臣，讲习《礼经》。
English: The empress dowager learned from her mistakes and knew the calamity of violating the principles of heaven. She criticized the saints for flouting the laws of the country, which was the root cause of the chaos. The empress dowager sincerely wanted to uphold the will of heaven, abide by the imperial system, concentrate on the etiquette of being human, and stabilize the people of the world. She repeatedly visited the main hall, summoned the ministers of the court, and studied the "Rituals."

古文：孙继祖者，谓亡正统持重者也。
现代文：孙子过继给祖父，是没有正统的后代来承继主持宗庙祭祀的缘故。
English: The grandson's succession to the grandfather is due to the fact that there are no orthodox descendants to succeed to preside over the ancestral temple's rituals.

古文：赏见嗣日磾，后成为君，持大宗重，则《礼》所谓 尊祖故敬宗 ，大宗不可以绝者也。
现代文：金赏继嗣于金日磾，后来成为封国领主，主持大宗的宗庙祭祀，造就是《礼》所说的 能尊崇祖宗就能敬重宗庙 ，大宗是不可以断绝的。
English: Kim Il Sung's successor Kim Il Sung, who later became a feudal lord, presided over a large number of ancestral temple sacrifices, which is what the "Rite" said that if you can respect the ancestors, you can respect the ancestral temple, and the large number can not be cut off.

古文：钦自知与当俱拜同谊，即数扬言殿省中，教当云云。
现代文：金钦自己知道与金当一道受封，应遵守相同的道德标准，就多次在宫殿中扬言，教金当怎样怎样。
English: Jinchin himself knew that he should abide by the same moral standards as Kim Dang, so he repeatedly threatened in the palace to teach Kim Dang what to do.

古文：当即如其言，则钦亦欲为父明立庙而不入夷侯常庙矣。
现代文：金当如果像金钦所说的那样去做了，那么金钦也就想为他父亲金明立宗庙而不进夷侯金常的庙了。
English: If Jintang did as Jinqin said, then Jinqin would also want to build a temple for his father, Jinming, and not enter the temple of the barbarian lord, Jinchang.

古文：进退异言，颇惑众心，乱国大纲，开祸乱原，诬祖不孝，罪莫大焉。
现代文：这个人前后话语矛盾，颇能蛊惑人心，扰乱国家的纲纪，开启祸乱的源头，欺骗祖宗，行为不孝，罪过没有比这更大的了。
English: There is no greater sin than this man's contradictory utterances, his ability to demagogue the people, disrupt the country's discipline, open the source of disaster, deceive the ancestors, and act unfilial.

古文：尤非大臣所宜，大不敬。
现代文：而且这更不是大臣所应做的事，实属大不敬。
English: What's more, this is not what a minister should be doing, it's downright disrespectful.

古文：秺侯当上母南为太夫人，失礼不敬。 
现代文：梡侯金当上书要求为母亲南封太夫人，失礼不敬。 
English: Gong Hou Jin Dang wrote a letter asking for his mother to be Nanfeng's wife, which was disrespectful.

古文：莽白太后，下四辅、公卿、大夫、博士、议郎，皆曰： 钦宜以时即罪。 
现代文：王莽把这些告诉了太后，又叫四辅、公卿、大夫、博士、议郎等讨论，他们都说： 金钦应立即问罪。 
English: Wang Mang told this to the empress dowager, and called the four aides, the court noble, the doctor, the doctor, and the speaker to discuss. They all said: Jinqin should be charged immediately.

古文：谒者召钦诣诏狱，钦自杀。
现代文：谒者就召金钦到奉诏令关押犯人的监狱来，金钦自杀身亡。
English: The instigator summoned Jinqin to the prison where prisoners were being held according to imperial edict, and Jinqin committed suicide.

古文：邯以纲纪国体，亡所阿私，忠孝尤著，益封千户。
现代文：甄邯因为维护国体没有阿谀和私情，忠孝卓著，被加封食邑千户。
English: Because Zhen Rong did not have any personal feelings for the maintenance of the National Sports Festival, and his loyalty and filial piety were outstanding, he was sealed with a thousand households in the county.

古文：更封长信少府涉子右曹汤为都成侯。
现代文：又封长信少府金涉的儿子右曹金汤为都成侯。
English: He also made Right Cao Jintang, the son of Changxin Shofu Jintang, the Prince of Chengdu.

古文：汤受封日，不敢还归家，以明为人后之谊。
现代文：金汤受封的当天，不敢回到家中，用以彰明为人之后的意义。
English: On the day of the investiture of King Tang, he dared not return home to show the meaning of the ring.

古文：益封为后，莽复用钦弟遵，封侯，历九卿位。
现代文：加封之后，王莽任用金钦的弟弟金遵。封他为侯，位至九卿。
English: After the addition of the title, Wang Mang appointed Jinqin's younger brother, Jin Zun. He was given the title of Hou (侯) and raised to the rank of Jiuqing (九卿).

古文：赞曰：霍光以结发内侍，起于阶闼之间，确然秉志，谊形于主。
现代文：赞曰：霍光从小就在皇帝身边供使唤，崛起于宫闱之中，坚定志向，品德行迹受到皇上的赏识。
English: Zang said: Huo Guang has been at the emperor's side since he was a child, rising to the top of the imperial court. He has a strong will, and his moral conduct has been appreciated by the emperor.

古文：受襁褓之托，任汉室之寄，当庙堂，拥幼君，摧燕王，仆上官，因权制敌，以成其忠。
现代文：后来又接受辅佐幼主的托付，肩任汉室的寄望。主持朝廷，拥护幼君，摧毁燕王的谋反，挫败上官桀的阴谋，凭藉权力制服敌人，成就了他的忠诚。
English: Later, he also accepted the commission to assist the young lord and shouldered the hopes of the Han family. He presided over the court, supported the young prince, destroyed Yan Wang's rebellion, thwarted the conspiracy of the upper officials, and subdued the enemy by virtue of power, and achieved his loyalty.

古文：处废置之际，临大节而不可夺，遂匡国家，安社稷。
现代文：身处皇帝废立的关头，身临大节而志向不变，才得以匡正国家，安定社稷。
English: Only when we were at the critical moment of the emperor's abdication, on the eve of the grand festival, and our aspirations remained unchanged, were we able to rectify the country and stabilize society.

古文：拥昭立宣，光为师保，虽周公、阿衡，何以加此！
现代文：拥护昭帝，确立宣帝，霍光担任师保，即使周公、阿衡，也没有什么超过霍光的地方！
English: Supporting Zhao Di, establishing Xuan Di, and Huo Guang as a tutor, even if Zhou Gong and A Heng, there is nothing more than Huo Guang!

古文：然光不学亡术，暗于大理，阴妻邪谋，立女为后，湛溺淫溢之欲，以增颠覆之祸，死财三年，宗族诛夷，哀哉！
现代文：但是霍光不学无术，不明大理，隐瞒妻子的奸邪阴谋，立他的女儿为皇后，沉湎于永不满足的欲望，以致增添了灭亡的灾祸，他死后仅三年，宗族就被全部诛灭，悲哀啊！
English: But Huo Guang did not learn anything, did not know the truth, concealed his wife's treacherous plot, set up his daughter as queen, indulged in insatiable desires, thus adding to the disaster of destruction. Only three years after his death, the clan was completely annihilated, sad!

古文：昔霍叔封于晋，晋即河东，光岂其苗裔乎！
现代文：往昔霍叔封国在晋，晋也就是河东的地方，霍光难道是他的后代吗？
English: In the past, Huo Shu's fiefdom was in Jin, which is to the east of the river. Is Huo Guang his descendant?

古文：金日磾夷狄亡国，羁虏汉庭，而以笃敬寤主，忠信自著，勒功上将，传国后嗣，世名忠孝，七世内侍，何其盛也！
现代文：金日磾是少数民族之人，亡国后被作为俘虏关在汉庭，凭藉他的虔诚恭敬感悟了皇上，以忠诚信实而著称，建立功勋被封为上将，封国传给后人，世代都以忠孝着名，七代都为内侍，这是何等的荣盛！
English: Kim Il Sung was a member of an ethnic minority. After the fall of the country, he was imprisoned as a prisoner in the Imperial Palace. By virtue of his piety and reverence, he impressed the emperor. He was known for his loyalty and faithfulness. He was awarded the title of admiral for his achievements in the establishment of the country, and passed it on to future generations. Generations have been famous for their loyalty and filial piety, and seven generations have served as imperial attendants. What a glory!

古文：本以休屠作金人为祭天主，故因赐姓金氏云。
现代文：原本因为休屠人做金人用来祭祀天神，所以就赐他姓金氏。
English: Originally, he was given the surname Kim because he was used as a golden man to worship the gods.

