古文：卫将军文子将立先君之庙于其家，使子羔访于孔子。
现代文：卫国将军文子将要在他的封地上建立先代君王的庙宇，派子羔向孔子询问有关礼仪。
English: The patriotic general, Fumiko, was going to build a temple to the previous emperor on his fief, and sent a lamb to ask Confucius about the etiquette.

古文：子曰： 公庙设于私家，非古礼之所及，吾弗知。 
现代文：孔子说： 将公家的庙宇建立在私人的封地上，这是古代礼仪所没有的，我不知道。 
English: Confucius said: I do not know how to build a public temple on a private fief, which is not in the ancient etiquette.

古文：子羔曰： 敢问尊卑上下立庙之制，可得而闻乎？ 
现代文：子羔说： 请问建立宗庙的尊卑上下的有关礼制，我能够听一听吗？ 
English: The little lamb said, "I would like to know about the etiquette for establishing the hierarchy of the ancestral temple. Can I listen to it?"

古文：孔子曰： 天下有王，分地建国，设祖宗，乃为亲踈贵贱多少之数。
现代文：孔子说： 自从天下有了君王，分封土地，建立国家，设立祖宗的宗庙，于是就有了亲疏、贵贱、多少的区分。
English: Confucius said, "Ever since there were kings in the world, land was divided into fiefdoms, a country was established, and ancestral temples were set up, there have been distinctions between relatives and strangers, and between high and low, and so on.

古文：是故天子立七庙，三昭三穆，与太祖之庙而七；太祖近庙，皆月祭之，远庙为祧，有二祧焉，享尝乃止。
现代文：因此天子在建七庙的时候，左边是三座昭庙，右边是三座穆庙，连同太祖庙一共是七庙。太祖庙为近亲的庙，每个月都要祭祀一次。远祖的庙叫 祧 ，有二祧，每季祭祀一次。
English: Therefore, when the Son of Heaven was building the Seven Temples, there were three Sho-temples on the left and three Mu-temples on the right. Together with the Taizu-temple, there were a total of seven temples. The Taizu-temple was a close relative of the Seven Temples, and had to be sacrificed once a month. The temple of the distant ancestors was called the Shizuku, and had two Shizuku, and was sacrificed once a season.

古文：诸侯立五庙，二昭二穆，与太祖之庙而五，祖考庙，享尝乃止。
现代文：诸侯建五庙，两座昭庙，两座穆庙，连同太祖的庙一共是五庙，叫做祖考庙，每一季都会祭祀一次。
English: The princes built five temples, two Sho-temples and two Mu-temples. Together with the temple of the great-grandfather, there are a total of five temples, which are called Zukao-temples. A ritual is held once every season.

古文：大夫立三庙，一昭一穆，与太祖之庙而三，享尝乃止。
现代文：大夫在建立三庙的时候，一座昭庙，一座穆庙，连同太祖的庙一共是三庙，叫做皇考庙，每一季祭祀一次。
English: When the doctor established the three temples, one Zhaotie Temple, one Mu Temple, together with the temple of the great-grandfather, there are three temples, called the imperial examination temple, and sacrifices are held once a season.

古文：士立一庙，曰考庙，王考无庙，合而享尝乃止。
现代文：士建立一庙，叫做考庙，没有祖庙，父祖合祭，每一季祭祀一次。
English: There is no ancestral temple, but there is a father-and-ancestor festival, which is held once every season.

古文：庶人无庙，四时祭于寝。
现代文：平民百姓则不立庙，四季就在家中寝室祭祀。
English: Ordinary people, on the other hand, do not set up temples, but worship in their bedrooms at home throughout the four seasons.

古文：此自有虞以至于周之所不变也。
现代文：这种制度从有虞到周代都没有改变。
English: This system has not changed from the Yu dynasty to the Zhou dynasty.

古文：凡四代帝王之所谓郊者，皆以配天；其所谓禘者，皆五年大祭之所及也。
现代文：凡是四代帝王称作郊祭的，都和祭天一起祭祀。称作禘的，是五年一次的盛大祭祀，都配天祭祀。
English: All of the four generations of emperors called Suburban Festival are sacrificed together with the Festival of Heaven, and the one called Summer Festival, which is a grand festival held once every five years, are all associated with the Festival of Heaven.

古文：应为太祖者，则其庙不毁；不及太祖，虽在禘郊，其庙则毁矣。
现代文：地位为太祖的，他的庙不毁，不到太祖辈分的，即使受到禘、郊的祭祀，他的庙也可以毁。
English: The status of the great-grandfather, his temple will not be destroyed, less than the great-grandfather's generation, even if it is worshiped by the eunuchs and the suburbs, his temple can also be destroyed.

古文：古者，祖有功而宗有德，诸见祖宗者，其庙皆不毁。 
现代文：古代把祖有功而宗有德的叫做祖宗，他们的庙都不能毁。 
English: In ancient times, people who had ancestors with merits and virtues were called ancestors, and their temples could not be destroyed.

古文：子羔问曰： 祭典云： 虞氏祖颛顼而宗尧；夏后氏亦祖颛顼而宗禹；殷人祖契而宗汤；周人祖文王而宗武王。 
现代文：子羔问道： 据祭典说： 从前有虞氏的庙以虞氏为祖而以尧为宗，夏后氏的庙以颛顼为祖而以禹为宗，殷人以契为祖而以汤为宗，周人以文王为祖而以武王为宗。 
English: The lamb asked, "According to the festival, it is said that in the past, the temples of the Yu clan had the Yu clan as the ancestor and the Zou clan as the sect, the temples of the Xiaguo clan had the Zou clan as the ancestor and the Yu clan as the sect, the Yin clan had the Qi clan as the ancestor and the Tang clan as the sect, and the Zhou clan had the Wenwang clan as the ancestor and the Wuwang clan as the sect.

古文：此四祖四宗，或乃异代，或其考祖之有功德，其庙可也。
现代文：这四祖四宗，或者是时代不同，或者其祖先有功德，他们的庙可以永远供奉不毁。
English: These four ancestors of the four sects, or different times, or their ancestors have merits, their temples can be forever worshiped and not destroyed.

古文：若有虞宗尧，夏祖颛顼，皆异代之有功德者也。亦可以存其庙乎？ 
现代文：像有虞氏以尧为宗，夏代颛顼为祖，都是不同时代有功德的，他们的庙也可以永存不毁吗？ 
English: For example, the Yu clan, whose ancestor was Yu, and the Xia dynasty, whose ancestor was Yu, both had merits in different eras. Can their temples also survive forever?

古文：孔子曰： 善，如汝所问也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 是的，正如你所问的那样。
English: Confucius replied, "Yes, just as you asked.

古文：如殷周之祖宗，其庙可以不毁。其他祖宗者，功德不殊，虽在殊代，亦可以无疑矣。
现代文：如殷人、周人的祖宗，其庙可以不毁，其他的祖宗，功德和他们祖先相同，虽在不同的时代，无疑也是不可毁的。
English: For example, the ancestors of the Yin people and the Zhou people, their temples can not be destroyed. Other ancestors, with the same merits as their ancestors, although in different times, are undoubtedly indestructible.

古文：《诗》云： 蔽茀甘棠，勿翦勿伐。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 那幼小的甘棠树啊，不要剪它的枝和干啊，那是召伯曾经休息过的地方。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: That young neem tree, don't cut its branches and trunk, that's where Zhao Bo once rested.

古文：邵伯所憩，周人之于邵公也，爱其人，犹敬其所舍之树。况祖宗其功德而可以不尊奉其庙焉？ 
现代文：周人对于召公，他们爱他这个人进而爱护他曾经在其下休息过的树，何况祖宗有功德，怎可以不尊奉他的庙呢？ 
English: As for Zhouren's calling to the priesthood, they loved him as a person and loved the tree under which he once rested. Moreover, their ancestors had merits, so how could they not honor his temple?

