古文：辩慧，乱之赞也；礼乐，淫佚之徵也；慈仁，过之母也；任誉，奸之鼠也。
现代文：巧言善变，聪明有智谋，是民众违法乱纪的帮手；礼与乐，是放荡淫佚的引子；仁与慈是犯罪的根源；任用举荐，是奸邪的庇护所。
English: Clever words, clever and resourceful, are the helpers of the people in breaking the law and discipline; etiquette and fun are the inducers of debauchery and lasciviousness; benevolence and compassion are the root causes of crime; appointment and recommendation are the shelters of evil.

古文：乱有赞则行，淫佚有徵则用，过有母则生，奸有鼠则不止。
现代文：坏事有了帮助才能四处流行，放荡有了引导才能做起来，错误有了根源才能产生，罪过有了庇护的场所就无法制止。
English: Evil can only spread with help, debauchery can only arise with guidance, mistakes can only arise with a root cause, and sin cannot be stopped with a place of refuge.

古文：八者有群，民胜其政；国无八者，政胜其民。民胜其政，国弱；政胜其民，兵强。
现代文：这八种东西结成群，民众就会不受政府法令的限制国家就会衰弱；政府的法令能压制住民众，兵力就会强盛。
English: If these eight things come together, the people will not be restricted by government decrees, the country will weaken; if government decrees can suppress the people, the army will be strong.

古文：故国有八者，上无以使守战，必削至亡。
现代文：所以，国家如果有这八种东西，国君就没有办法派遣民众去防守和作战，国家一定会被削弱直到灭亡。
English: Therefore, if the country has these eight things, the sovereign will not be able to send the people to defend and fight, and the country will be weakened until it is destroyed.

古文：国无八者，上有以使守战，必兴至王。
现代文：国家没有这八种东西，国君就有办法役使民众去防守和打仗，国家就一定兴旺，直到称霸天下。
English: If a country does not have these eight things, the sovereign has the means to use the people to defend and fight, and the country will surely prosper until it dominates the world.

古文：用善，则民亲其亲；任奸，则民亲其制。
现代文：用所谓的善民治理民众，民众就会只爱他的亲人；用所谓的奸民治理民众，那么民众就会遵守国家的法制。
English: Govern the people with the so-called good people, and the people will only love their relatives; govern the people with the so-called villains, and the people will abide by the country's legal system.

古文：合而复者，善也；别而规者，奸也。
现代文：民众结合起来就会互相掩盖过失，这就是所谓的善；使民众疏远分开，互相监督。
English: When the people are united, they will cover up each other's faults. This is the so-called good. Alienate the people, separate them, and supervise each other.

古文：章善，则过匿；任奸，则罪诛。
现代文：这就是所谓的奸。
English: This is called treachery.

古文：过匿，则民胜法；罪诛，则法胜民。民胜法，国乱；法胜民，兵强。
现代文：民众凌驾在法规之上，国家就会混乱；法规限制住民众，国家的兵力就强大。
English: When the people are above the law, the state is disorderly; when the law limits the people, the state is strong.

古文：故曰：以良民治，必乱至削；以奸民治，必治至强。
现代文：所以说，用所谓的良民整理国家，国家就一定会乱，直到被削弱。用所谓的奸民治理国家，就一定能治理好国家，直到强大。
English: Therefore, if you use the so-called good people to organize the country, the country will certainly be chaotic until it is weakened. If you use the so-called traitors to govern the country, you will definitely be able to govern the country well until it is strong.

古文：国以难攻，起一取十，国以易攻，起十亡百。
现代文：国家用难以获得的实力去攻打其他国家，用一分力量能取得十分效果；国家用容易得到的空谈去攻打其他国家，用一分力量会损失百倍的力量。
English: If a country uses hard-to-obtain strength to attack other countries, it can achieve great results with one point of strength; if a country uses easy-to-obtain empty talk to attack other countries, it will lose a hundred times its strength with one point of strength.

古文：国好力，曰以难攻；国好言，曰以易攻。
现代文：国家喜欢实力，这叫用难以得到的东西去攻打别国。
English: Countries like power, which means using hard-to-obtain things to attack other countries.

古文：民易为言，难为用。
现代文：国家喜欢空谈，这叫用易于获得的东西去攻打别国。
English: Countries like to talk, which means attacking other countries with things that are easy to obtain.

古文：国法作民之所难，兵用民之所易而以力攻者，起一得十；国法作民之所易，兵用民之所难而以言攻者，出十亡百。
现代文：民众喜欢做空谈之事，国家就难以役使他们去从事农耕和作战，国家的法规督促民众作难以做到的事，战争中利用民众这些实力去攻打别国，动用一份力量能获得十倍的收获；国家的法规督促民去做容易做的事，战争中用民众所难具备的东西攻打别国，那么出十分的力量会损失百倍。
English: The people like to do idle talk, so the state makes it difficult for them to engage in farming and warfare. The state's laws and regulations urge the people to do things that are difficult to do. In the war, the people use these strengths to attack other countries, and use a force to get ten times the harvest. The state's laws and regulations urge the people to do things that are easy to do. In the war, the people use things that are difficult to have to attack other countries, then the full strength will be lost a hundred times.

古文：罚重，爵尊；赏轻，刑威。
现代文：刑罚重了，爵位显得尊贵；赏罚少了，刑罚才更威严。
English: The greater the punishment, the higher the rank; the lesser the reward, the greater the punishment.

古文：爵尊，上爱民；刑威，民死上。
现代文：爵位尊贵，这是君主爱护民众；刑罚有威严，民众才能拼死为君主效命。
English: Dignity and nobility, this is the monarch's love for the people; punishment is majestic, the people can only die for the monarch.

古文：故兴国行罚，则民利；用赏，则上重。
现代文：所以强盛的国家使用刑罚，民众就能被君主役使；施用奖赏，那么君主就会受到尊重。
English: Therefore, if a powerful country uses punishment, the people will be able to be used by the monarch; if it uses reward, then the monarch will be respected.

古文：法详，则刑繁；法繁，则刑省。
现代文：法令周详，那么刑罚就会繁多；法令简明，那么刑罚就会减少。
English: The more detailed the law, the more numerous the punishments; the more concise the law, the fewer the punishments.

古文：民治则乱，乱而治之，又乱。
现代文：民众不服从管治国家就会混乱，混乱了又去治理它，就会更乱。
English: If the people do not obey the government, there will be chaos. If there is chaos and the government tries to manage it, there will be even more chaos.

古文：故治之于其治，则治；治之于其乱，则乱。民之情也治，其事也乱。
现代文：所以治理国家要在社会安定的时候，那么才能治理好。在它混乱的时候去治理，就会更乱。
English: Therefore, a country should be governed when the society is stable so that it can be governed well. If it is governed when it is chaotic, it will be even more chaotic.

古文：故行刑，重其轻者，轻者不生，则重者无从至矣，此谓治之于其治者。
现代文：民众的心情本来希望国家安定，他们做的事情却是国家混乱。所以使用刑罚，对民众犯的轻罪施行重的刑罚，那么轻微的犯罪就不会发生，严重的犯罪就不能出现了。这就叫国家安定的时候去治理。
English: The mood of the people originally wanted the country to be stable, but what they are doing is creating chaos in the country. Therefore, the use of punishment, the imposition of heavy punishment for minor crimes committed by the people, so that minor crimes will not occur, and serious crimes will not occur. This calls for the country to be governed when it is stable.

古文：行刑。重其重者，轻其轻者，轻者不止，则重者无从止矣，此谓治之于其乱也。
现代文：使用刑罚，犯重罪的重罚，犯轻罪的轻罚，那么轻微的犯罪不能制止，严重的犯罪就更无法制止了。这就叫在民众乱的时候去治理。
English: With the use of criminal penalties, heavy punishment for serious crimes and light punishment for minor crimes, minor crimes cannot be stopped, and serious crimes cannot be stopped. This is called governing in times of civil disorder.

古文：故重轻，则刑去事成，国强；重重而轻轻，则刑至而事生，国削。
现代文：所以轻罪重罚，那么刑罚能除掉而事情也能办成，国家就会强大；使用刑罚有重有轻，那么刑罚虽然用了，犯罪的事却仍然发生，国家就会被削弱。
English: Therefore, if minor crimes are punished severely, then the punishment can be eliminated and things can be done, and the country will be strong; if the use of punishment is heavy or light, then although the punishment is used, the crime still occurs, and the country will be weakened.

古文：民勇，则赏之以其所欲；民怯，则杀之以其所恶。故怯民使之以刑，则勇；勇民使之以赏，则死。
现代文：民众打仗勇敢，那么国君就应该用民众想要的爵位来奖赏他们；民众胆小，那么就用他们讨厌的刑罚消除他们的胆怯。因此，对胆小的民众用刑罚出去胆怯，那么他们就会变得勇敢；对勇敢的民众使用奖赏，那么勇敢的民众就会拼死效力。
English: If the people are brave in war, then the sovereign should reward them with the titles that the people want; if the people are cowardly, then they should be punished with the punishments that they hate. Therefore, if the people are cowardly, then they will be brave; if the people are brave, then the people will be brave.

古文：怯民勇，勇民死，国无敌者必王。
现代文：胆小的民众变勇敢，勇敢的民众拼死效力。所向无敌的国家，一定能称霸天下。
English: Cowardly people become brave, and brave people fight to the death. The invincible country to which we aspire will surely be able to dominate the world.

古文：民贫则弱国，富则淫，淫则有虱，有虱则弱。
现代文：民众贫穷，国家就弱，民众富裕，那么就放纵自己，民众放荡就会产生虱害，有了像虱子一样的危害，国家就会被削弱。
English: If the people are poor, the state is weak; if the people are rich, they are self-indulgent; if the people are dissolute, they are harmful; if they are harmful like lice, the state is weakened.

古文：故贫者益之以刑，则富；富者损之以赏，则贫。治国之举，贵令贫者富、富者贫。
现代文：所以对穷人用刑罚，迫使他们务农以增加收入，这样就会富足；对富裕的人用鼓励他们买官的办法，使他们减少财富，就会变穷。治理国家的措施，最重要的是贫穷的变富裕，富裕的变贫穷。
English: Therefore, the poor should be punished by forcing them to work in agriculture to increase their income, so that they can become rich; the rich should be encouraged to buy officials to reduce their wealth, so that they can become poor. The most important measure for governing the country is to make the poor rich and the rich poor.

古文：贫者富，国强；富者贫，三官无虱。
现代文：贫困的变富裕，国家就会强大；富裕的变贫困，农民、官吏、商人这三种职业就不会有虱害产生。
English: If the poor become rich, the country will be strong; if the rich become poor, the three occupations of farmers, government officials, and businessmen will not be harmful.

古文：国久强而无虱者必王。
现代文：国家能长久强大，有没有虱子一样的危害产生，一定能称霸天下。
English: The country can be strong for a long time, and if there is no harm like lice, it will surely dominate the world.

古文：刑生力，力生强，强生威，威生德，德生于刑。
现代文：刑罚能产生实力，实力能产生强大，强大能产生威力，威力能产生恩惠，恩惠从刑罚中产生。
English: Punishment begets power, power begets might, might begets power, might begets favor, favor begets punishment.

古文：故刑多，则赏重；赏少，则刑重。
现代文：因此刑罚多了，那么奖赏就丰厚了；奖赏少了，那么刑罚就显得过分严厉了。
English: Therefore, if the punishment is more, then the reward is rich; if the reward is less, then the punishment is too severe.

古文：民之有欲有恶也，欲有六淫，恶有四难。
现代文：民众有喜欢的也有讨厌的，民众所喜欢的事中有六种放荡的事情，他们讨厌四种难做的事。
English: People have their likes and dislikes. There are six kinds of debauchery that people like, and four kinds of difficult things that they dislike.

古文：从六淫，国弱；行四难，兵强。
现代文：国家放任民众中这六种放荡的事，国家实力会被削弱；国家推行四种民众畏难的事，兵力就强大。
English: If the state allows the people to indulge in these six kinds of debauchery, the strength of the state will be weakened; if the state promotes the four kinds of people's fear, the strength of the army will be strong.

古文：故王者刑于九而赏出一。
现代文：所以能称霸天下的国家，刑罚就用在九个方面，奖赏却只从农战这一个方面出。
English: Therefore, in a country that can dominate the world, punishment is used in nine aspects, but rewards only come from one aspect, the agricultural war.

古文：刑于九，则六淫止；赏出一，则四难行。
现代文：刑罚用的面多，那么六种放荡的坏事就能制止；奖赏从农战这一个方面出，那么四种畏难的事就能推行。
English: If the punishment is more extensive, then the six kinds of debauchery can be stopped; if the reward comes from the agricultural war, then the four fearsome things can be carried out.

古文：六淫止，则国无奸；四难行，则兵无敌。
现代文：六种放荡的事情被制止，那么国家就没有奸邪，四种难做的事能推行，那么军队就没有敌手。
English: If the six kinds of debauchery are stopped, there will be no treason in the country; if the four kinds of difficult things can be carried out, then the army will have no enemy.

古文：民之所欲万，而利之所出一。民非一，则无以致欲，故作一。
现代文：民众所想得到的东西很多，可是能获得爵位的途径只要农耕和作战一条路，民众想要得到的爵位不通过这条路，那么就无法获得他们想要的东西，所以民众必须专心从事农耕和作战。
English: There are many things that people want, but the only way to get a knighthood is through farming and fighting. If people don't get the knighthood they want through this way, then they can't get what they want, so people must concentrate on farming and fighting.

古文：作一则力抟，力抟则强。
现代文：民众专心从事农耕和作战，那么力量就能集中，力量集中国家就会强大。
English: If the people concentrate on farming and fighting, then the forces can be concentrated, and the country will be strong when the forces are concentrated.

古文：强而用，重强。
现代文：国家力量集中又用来对外对外打仗，国家就会更加强大。
English: If the national strength is concentrated and used to fight wars abroad, the country will become more powerful.

古文：故能生力，能杀力，曰攻敌之国，必强。
现代文：因此，能够创造实力而又能使用实力的国家，叫做攻打敌人的国家，这样的国家一定强大。
English: Therefore, a country that can create strength and use strength is called a country that attacks the enemy. Such a country must be strong.

古文：塞私道以穷其志，启一门以致其欲，使民必先行其所要，然后致其所欲，故力多。
现代文：堵塞谋求个人私利的门路，用来断绝民主的妄想。只打开奖励民众专心从事农耕和作战这一条路，用来满足民众的需要。让民众一定先做他们所厌恶的，然后获得他们想得到的东西，所以国家的实力才能雄厚。
English: Block the path of seeking personal self-interest to break the illusion of democracy. Only open the path of rewarding the people to concentrate on farming and fighting to meet the needs of the people. Let the people must first do what they hate, and then get what they want, so the strength of the country can be strong.

古文：力多而不用，则志穷；志穷，则有私；有私，则有弱。故能生力，不能杀力，曰自攻之国，必削。
现代文：实力雄厚却不使用，那么民众得到爵位的愿望就会落空了；民众谋求爵位的希望落空，那么民众就会产生私心；民众有了私心，那么国家的实力就会被削弱，因此，能够创造实力，不能使用实力的国家，叫做自己攻打自己国家，一定会被削弱。
English: If the strength is strong but not used, then the people's desire to get a knighthood will be frustrated; if the people's hope of seeking a knighthood is frustrated, then the people will have selfishness; if the people have selfishness, then the country's strength will be weakened. Therefore, a country that can create strength but cannot use strength will be weakened if it attacks its own country.

古文：故曰：王者，国不蓄力，家不积粟。
现代文：所以说：能够称霸天下的国家，不储存实力，民众家中也不囤积粮食。
English: Therefore, it is said that a country that can dominate the world does not stockpile power, nor does it stockpile grain in people's homes.

古文：国不蓄力，下用也；家不积粟，上藏也。
现代文：国家不储存实力，是为了调动民众的力量；民众的家中不存粮食，是国家要把粮食储藏在官仓中。
English: The state does not stockpile power, in order to mobilize the power of the people; the people do not store grain in their homes, it is the state that wants to store grain in government warehouses.

古文：国治：断家王，断官强，断君弱。重轻，刑去。
现代文：治理国家有几种情况：在民众的家中能决断是与非的国家，能称霸天下，由官吏来决断事情的国家就强大，由国君来决断事情的国家就弱。轻罪重罚，刑罚就能去掉。
English: There are several situations in the governance of a country: a country that can decide what is right and wrong in the homes of the people, can dominate the world, a country where officials decide things is strong, and a country where the sovereign decides things is weak. Misdemeanors are heavily punished, and punishments can be removed.

古文：常官，则治。
现代文：按法规来选用官吏，国家就能治理好。
English: If officials are selected in accordance with laws and regulations, the country can be well governed.

古文：省刑，要保，赏不可倍也。有奸必告之，则民断于心，上令而民知所以应。
现代文：要减少刑罚，就要在民众中建立什伍制度，使民众互相监督，互相约束，对那些揭发犯罪者的奖赏不可失信。发现奸邪一定要告发它，那是由于民众的心中能判断是非。国君发布的命令民众明白应响应。
English: In order to reduce the punishment, it is necessary to establish a system of checks and balances among the people, so that the people can supervise each other and restrain each other, and the reward for those who expose the criminal must not be dishonest. If treason is found, it must be reported, because the people can judge right and wrong in their hearts. The people should clearly respond to the order issued by the sovereign.

古文：器成于家，而行于官，则事断于家。
现代文：器物在民众的家中作成，便能在官府中通行使用，那是因为事情在家中就能明确。
English: Objects made in people's homes can then be used in government offices, because things can be clarified at home.

古文：故王者刑赏断于民心，器用断于家。
现代文：所以成霸业的君主如何实行奖赏和刑罚在民众心中十分明白，就佝器物该是什么样在民众家中能明确一样。
English: Therefore, how a tyrannical ruler rewards and punishes is very clear in the hearts of the people, just as it is clear in the homes of the people what bedding should be like.

古文：治明则同，治暗则异。
现代文：社会政治清明，那么民众就会心齐，社会正当黑暗，民众对问题就会产生异议。
English: If the social and political situation is clear, then the people will be of one mind. If the social situation is dark, then the people will have objections to the problem.

古文：同则行，异则止，行则治，止则乱。治则家断，乱则君断。
现代文：民众同君主的意见相同，国家的法令就能执行，民众同君主政见不同，国家的法令就不能实行。
English: If the people have the same opinion as the monarch, the state's laws can be implemented. If the people have a different opinion from the monarchy, the state's laws cannot be implemented.

古文：治国者贵不断，故以十里断者弱，以五里断者强。
现代文：国家的法令就能执行，国家就能治理好。国家的法令就不能实行，国家就会混乱。国家能治理好，是因为民众在家中就能判断对错。
English: The laws of the country can be implemented, and the country can be governed well. If the laws of the country cannot be implemented, the country will be in chaos. The country can be governed well because the people can judge right and wrong at home.

古文：家断则有余，故曰：日治者王。
现代文：国家混乱，那就要君主做决断。
English: If the country is in chaos, it is up to the monarch to make a decision.

古文：官断则不足，故曰：夜治者强。
现代文：治理国家最可贵的是在民众中作出决断，所以十个村子以内做出决断的国家弱，在五个村子以内做出决断的国家强。
English: The most valuable thing in governing the country is to make decisions among the people, so the country that makes decisions within ten villages is weak, and the country that makes decisions within five villages is strong.

古文：君断则乱，故曰：宿治者削。故有道之国，治不听君，民不从官。
现代文：因此，实行法治的国家，官吏处理政务不必听从君主，民众处理事务也不必听从官吏。
English: Therefore, in a country that practices the rule of law, officials do not have to listen to the monarch when handling government affairs, and the people do not have to listen to officials when handling affairs.

