古文：起旃蒙作噩，尽强圉大渊献，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。梁纪二梁武帝天监四年
English: a total of three years. Liang Ji II and Liang Wudi served as celestial supervisors for four years.

古文：高祖武皇帝二天监四年春，正月，癸卯朔，诏曰： 二汉登贤，莫非经术，服膺雅道，名立行成。
现代文：春季正月，癸卯朔，武帝发布诏令： 两汉时期的读书人登贤入仕，莫不是通过经术之业，他们都信奉大雅之道，个个饱学，因此能立功名，成大业。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Wu issued a royal edict: Readers of the two Han dynasties were promoted to higher ranks through the study of the classics. They all believed in the way of great elegance and were well-educated. Therefore, they were able to make a name for themselves and achieve great things.

古文：魏、晋浮荡，儒教沦歇，风节罔树，抑此之由。
现代文：魏、晋以来，士人浮华放荡，而儒教衰败，风节得不到树立，当是其根本原因。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, Confucianism was on the wane. Perhaps because of this, it was not possible to establish the spirit of the festival.

古文：可置《五经》博士各一人，广开馆宇，招内后进。 
现代文：所以，可以设置《五经》博士各一人，广开馆宇，招纳后进。 
English: A "Five Classics" doctorate should be set up, with one doctorate per person, and a wide range of schools should be set up to accept young people to study.

古文：于是以贺瑒及平原明山宾、吴兴沈峻、建平严植之补博士，各主一馆，馆有数百生，给其饩廪，其射策通明者即除为吏，期年之间，怀经负笈者云会。
现代文：于是，将贺及平原人明山宾、吴兴人沈峻、建平人严植之补为博士，让他们各主持一馆，讲学执教，每馆有好几百名学生，由朝廷供给口粮等生活资用，其中在射策考试时应对自如，风解深刻透彻者，即被任为官吏。因此，一年之间，天下士子怀经负笈，云集而至。
English: As a result, He and the plainsmen Ming Shanbin, Wu Xingren Shenjun, and Jian Pingren Yan Zhi were appointed as doctors, and they each presided over a hall, lectured and coached. Each hall had several hundred students, and the imperial court provided rations and other living expenses. Among them, those who were able to cope with the strategic examination and had a profound understanding of the style were appointed as officials. Therefore, within a year, the world's scholars gathered in droves.

古文：瑒，循之玄孙也。
现代文：贺是贺循的玄孙。
English: He is the great-great-grandson of He Xun.

古文：又选学生，往会稽云门山从何胤受业，命胤选门徒中经明行修者，具以名闻。
现代文：朝廷又挑选学生，送他们去会稽云门山跟从何胤接受学业，命令何胤选拨门徒中通晓经学、品行优秀者，把他们的姓名上报朝廷。
English: The imperial court also selected students and sent them to Yunmen Mountain to follow He Yinshan to study, and ordered He Yinshan to select disciples who were well versed in the scriptures and had excellent moral character, and report their names to the imperial court.

古文：分遣博士祭酒巡州郡立学。
现代文：朝廷又分遣博士祭酒巡视各州郡的立学情况。
English: In addition, the Imperial Court dispatched doctors to inspect the status of the establishment of schools in each state and county.

古文：初，谯国夏侯道迁以辅国将军从裴叔业镇寿阳，为南谯太守，与叔业有隙，单骑奔魏。
现代文：原先，谯国人夏侯道迁以辅国将军的身份随从裴叔业镇守寿阳，担任南谯太守，因与裴叔业不合，于是就一个人骑马奔投了北魏。
English: Originally, Xia Hou Dao Jian, a native of Shan State, followed Pei Shiye as an auxiliary general to guard Shouyang, and served as the governor of Southern Shan. Because he did not get along with Pei Shiye, he rode into the Northern Wei Dynasty alone.

古文：魏以道迁为骁骑将军，从王肃镇寿阳，使道迁守合肥。
现代文：北魏任命夏侯道迁为骁骑将军，随从王肃镇守寿阳，王肃指派夏侯道迁驻守合肥。
English: The Northern Wei appointed Xia Hou Dao Qian as the general of the cavalry, followed by Wang Su Zhen to guard Shouyang, and Wang Su assigned Xia Hou Dao Qian to guard Hefei.

古文：肃卒，道迁弃戍来奔，从梁、秦二州刺史庄丘黑镇南郑；以道迁为长史，领汉中太守。
现代文：王肃去世，夏侯道迁丢下戍所来投靠南朝，随从梁、秦二州刺史庄丘黑镇守南郑，庄丘黑任命夏侯道迁为长史，兼汉中太守。
English: After the death of Wang Su, Xia Hou Dao Qian left the imperial palace to join the Southern Dynasty. He followed Liang and Qin Erzhou Zi Shi Zhuang Qiu Hei as the town guard of Nan Zheng. Zhuang Qiu Hei appointed Xia Hou Dao Qian as the long-term governor, and also the vice-governor of Han.

古文：黑卒，诏以都官尚书王珍国为刺史，未至，道迁阴与军主考城江忱之等谋降魏。
现代文：庄丘黑死后，朝廷诏令都官尚书王珍国为刺史，没有到任，夏侯道迁便私下里与军主考城人江忱之等人密谋投降北魏。
English: After the death of Zhuang Qiuhe, the imperial court decreed that the governor of the capital, Shang Shu Wang Zhenguo, should be appointed as the chief historian. However, he did not take up the post, and Xia Hou Daoqian secretly conspired with the military commander, the city examiner Jiang Zhenzhi and others to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：先是，魏仇池镇将杨灵珍叛魏来奔，朝延以为征虏将军、假武都王，助戍汉中，有部曲六百馀人，道迁惮之。
现代文：早先之时，北魏镇守仇池的将领杨灵珍反叛北魏来投奔南齐，南齐朝廷任命他为征虏将军、假武都王，让他协助戍守汉中，手下共有部曲六百人，夏侯道迁很害怕他。
English: At an earlier time, Yang Lingzhen, the general of the Northern Wei who guarded the enemy's pool, rebelled against the Northern Wei and went to Nanqi. The Nanzhi court appointed him as a conscript general, a fake Wudu king, and asked him to help defend Hanzhong. He had a total of 600 subordinates. Xia Hou Daoqian was very afraid of him.

古文：上遣左右吴公之等使南郑。道迁遂杀使者，发兵击灵珍父子、斩之，并使者首送于魏。
现代文：梁武帝派遣左右心腹吴公之等人出使南郑，夏侯道迁便杀害了使者，又发兵袭击杨灵珍父子，斩了他们，把他们的首级连同武帝派来的使者的首级一并送到北魏。
English: Emperor Liang Wudi dispatched his right and left henchmen Wu Gongzhi and others to send envoys to Nan Zheng. Xia Hou Dao Qian then killed the envoys, and sent troops to attack Yang Lingzhen and his son, beheaded them, and sent their heads together with the heads of the envoys sent by Emperor Wu to Northern Wei.

古文：白马戍主君天宝闻之，引兵击道迁，败其将庞树，遂围南郑。
现代文：白马的戍主尹天宝得知这一消息之后，带兵去袭击夏侯道迁，打败了夏侯道迁的将领庞树，于是围困南郑。
English: After the tyrant Yin Tianbao of the White Horse learned of this news, he led his troops to attack Xia Hou Daoqian, defeated the general Pang Shu of Xia Hou Daoqian, and then besieged Nan Zheng.

古文：道迁求救于氐王杨绍先、杨集起、杨集义，皆不应，集义弟集郎独引兵救道迁，击天宝，杀之。
现代文：夏侯道迁向氐王杨绍先、杨集起、杨集义求救，都不予理睬，只有杨集义的弟弟杨集朗带兵去援救夏侯道迁，向尹天宝发起了攻击，杀了他。
English: Xia Hou Dao Qian appealed to Yang Shao Xian, Yang Jiji and Yang Jiji for help, but they ignored him. Only Yang Jiji's younger brother Yang Jilang led an army to rescue Xia Hou Dao Qian, launched an attack on Yin Tian Bao and killed him.

古文：魏以道迁为平南将军、豫州刺史、丰县侯。
现代文：北魏任命夏侯道迁为平南将军、豫州刺史、丰县侯。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Xia Hou as the general of Pingnan, the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Feng County.

古文：又以尚书刑峦为镇西将军、都督征梁、汉诸军事，将兵赴之。
现代文：又任命尚书邢峦为镇西将军和都督梁、汉诸军事，并让他率兵前去赴任。
English: He also appointed Shang Shuxuan as the general of Zhenxi and the military governor of Liang and Han, and let him lead the troops to take office.

古文：道迁受平南，辞豫州，且求公爵，魏主不许。
现代文：夏侯道迁接受了平南将军一职，辞掉了豫州刺史之职，并且要求封为公爵，宣武帝不准许。
English: Xia Hou Dao Qian accepted the post of Pingnan general, resigned from the post of Yuzhou scribe, and asked to be made a duke, but Emperor Xuanwu did not allow it.

古文：辛亥，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛亥，梁武帝在南郊祭祀，并诏令大赦天下。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Liangwu held a religious ceremony in the southern suburbs, and issued a decree to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：乙丑，魏以骠骑大将军高阳王雍为司空，加尚书令广阳王嘉仪同三司。
现代文：乙丑，北魏任命骠骑大将军高阳王元雍为司空，加封尚书令广阳王元嘉仪同三司。
English: Second, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the cavalry general Gaoyang Wangyuan Yong as the Secretary of the Air Force, and added Guangyang Wangyuan Jiayi as the Third Secretary.

古文：二月，丙子，魏以宕昌世子梁弥博为宕昌王。
现代文：二月丙子，北魏封容昌世子梁弥博为宕昌王。
English: In February, Northern Wei Emperor Yongchang's heir, Liang Yibo, became King Tang Chang.

古文：上谋伐魏，壬午，遣卫尉卿杨公则将宿卫兵塞洛口。
现代文：武帝策谋讨伐北魏，壬午，派遣卫尉卿杨公则率领宿卫兵堵塞了洛口。
English: Emperor Wu planned to fight against the Northern Wei Dynasty, and at the time of the Renpo Emperor, he sent Yang Gongze, the captain of the imperial guards, to block the entrance to Luokou.

古文：壬辰，交州刺史李凯据州反，长史李畟讨平之。
现代文：壬辰，交州刺史李凯占据了州城反叛朝廷，长史李讨伐并平定了李凯的反叛。
English: In Imjin, Jiaozhou stabbed Li Kai, who supported the rebellion in his home state, and the long history of Li's dissident activities brought him down.

古文：魏邢峦至汉中，击诸城戍，所向摧破。
现代文：北魏邢峦到达汉中，对各城堡发起了攻击，所向无敌，无坚不摧。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in the Han Dynasty, it launched an attack on each castle, which was invincible and indestructible.

古文：晋寿太守王景胤据石亭，峦遣统军李义珍击走之。
现代文：晋寿太守王景胤占据着石亭，邢峦派遣统军李义珍打跑了他。
English: Wang Jingyin, the governor of Jin Shou, occupied Shitei, and sent Li Yizhen, a member of the United Front Army, to beat him.

古文：魏以峦为梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：北魏任命邢峦为梁、秦二州刺史。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Zou as Liang, and the Qin Dynasty appointed Erzhou as Zou.

古文：巴西太守庞景民据郡不下，郡民严玄思聚众自称巴州刺史，附于魏，攻景民，斩之。
现代文：巴西太守庞景民占据郡城，拒不投降，郡中之民严玄思聚集群众，自封为巴州刺史，投附于北魏，攻打庞景民并将他斩首。
English: The governor of Brazil, Pang Jingmin, occupied the county seat and refused to surrender. The people of the county thought hard and gathered the masses, proclaimed themselves as the history of Pazhou, attached themselves to the Northern Wei Dynasty, attacked Pang Jingmin and beheaded him.

古文：杨集起、集义闻魏克汉中而惧，闰月，帅群氐叛魏，断汉中粮道，峦屡遣军击破之。
现代文：杨集起、杨集义得知北魏攻克汉中的消息之后害怕了，于闰三月，率领氐族部落反叛了北魏，切断了汉中的粮道，邢峦多次派遣军队去袭击、打败了他们。
English: Yang Jiqi and Yang Jiyi were afraid after learning the news that the Northern Wei Dynasty had conquered the Han Dynasty. In March, they led the Yi tribe to rebel against the Northern Wei Dynasty, cut off the Han Dynasty's food supply, and repeatedly sent troops to attack and defeat them.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，以行宕昌王梁弥博为河、凉二州刺史、宕昌王。
现代文：夏季，四月丁巳，梁朝任命行宕昌王梁弥博为河、凉二州刺史和宕昌王。
English: In the summer, in April, the Liang Dynasty appointed the king of the Tang Dynasty, Liang Yibo, the king of the Tang Dynasty, the king of the Liang Dynasty, the king of the Liang Dynasty, the king of the Liang Dynasty, the king of the Tang Dynasty, and the king of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：冠军将军孔陵等将兵二万戍深杭，鲁方达戍南安，任僧褒等戍石同，以拒魏。
现代文：梁朝冠军将军孔陵等人率兵两万戍守深杭，鲁方达戍守南安，任僧褒等人戍守石同，以便抵拒北魏。
English: The champion general of the Liang Dynasty, Kong Ling, and others led 20,000 soldiers to defend Shuhang, Lu Fangda defended Nan'an, and Ren Sangpo and others defended Shidong, in order to resist the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：刑峦遣统军王足将兵击之，所至皆捷，遂入剑阁。
现代文：邢峦派遣统军王足带兵去袭击，所到之处无不告捷，于是进入剑阁。
English: He dispatched the king's foot soldiers of the United Army to attack, and everywhere they went, they were successful, so they entered the Sword Pavilion.

古文：陵等退保梓潼，足又进击破之。
现代文：孔陵等人只好退保梓潼，王足又进攻，打败了他们。
English: Kongling and others had no choice but to retreat to Zizhao, and Wangfei attacked again and defeated them.

古文：梁州十四郡地，东西七百里，南北千里，皆入于魏。
现代文：于是，梁州十四郡之地，东西七百里，南北一千里，全部归入北魏版图。
English: As a result, Liangzhou's fourteen counties, seven hundred miles east to west and a thousand miles north to south, were all included in the Northern Wei territory.

古文：初，益州刺史当阳侯邓元起以母老乞归，诏征为右卫将军，以西昌侯渊藻代之。
现代文：起初，益州刺史邓元起因母亲年老而乞求归还故里，朝廷下诏征调他为右卫将军，另以西昌侯萧渊藻取代他益州刺史之职。
English: At first, Deng Yuan, the prince of Yizhou, begged for the return of his hometown due to his mother's old age, and the imperial court ordered him to be transferred to the right guard general, and Xiao Yuanmao, the prince of Xichang, replaced him as the prince of Yizhou.

古文：渊藻，懿之子也。
现代文：萧渊藻是萧渊懿的儿子。
English: Xiao Yuanmao is the son of Xiao Yuanjun.

古文：夏侯道迁之叛也，尹天宝驰使报元起。
现代文：夏侯道迁反叛之时，尹天宝派使者驰告邓元起。
English: At the time of Xia Hou's rebellion, Yin Tianbao sent an envoy to denounce Deng Yuanqi.

古文：及魏寇晋寿，王景胤等并遣告急，众劝元起急救之，元起曰： 朝廷万里，军不猝至，若寇贼侵淫，方须扑讨，董督之任，非我而谁，何事匆匆救之！ 
现代文：等到北魏侵犯晋寿之时，王景胤等人也遣使去向邓元起告急，众人都劝说邓元起急速前去援救，邓元起却说： 朝廷离这里万里之遥，军队不会很快就会来到的，如果入侵的寇贼进一步成势，方才须前去讨伐夷荡，而督帅之任，除了我还有谁呢？所以，何必现在就匆匆忙忙地前去救援呢？ 
English: When the Northern Wei invaded Jinju, Wang Jingyin and others also sent messengers to Deng Yuanzhi to express their urgency. Everyone persuaded Deng Yuanzhi to rush to the rescue, but Deng Yuanzhi said: The imperial court is thousands of miles away from here, the army will not come soon, if the invading bandits become more powerful, they will have to go to fight the barbarians, and who else is in charge of the superintendent? So, why rush to the rescue now?

古文：诏假元起都督征讨诸军事，救汉中，而晋寿已陷。
现代文：朝廷诏令邓元起代理都督征讨诸军事，让他去援救汉中，但是此时晋寿已经沦陷了。
English: The imperial court ordered Deng Yuanqi, the acting governor, to enlist the military and let him rescue Hanzhong, but by this time Jinshou had already fallen.

古文：萧渊藻将至，元起营还装，粮储器械，取之无遗。
现代文：萧渊藻将要抵达，邓元起营造回去时的行装，他把粮资储备和各种器械兵仗搜罗一空，些微不剩。
English: Xiao Yuanmao was about to arrive, and Deng Yuanzhong began to prepare his luggage for the trip back. He gathered all the grain reserves and all kinds of military equipment, and there was nothing left.

古文：渊藻入城，恨之；又救其良马，元起曰： 年少郎子，何用马为！ 
现代文：萧渊藻入城之后，见到这一情形，对邓元起怀恨在心。萧渊藻要邓元起的良马，邓元起却对他说： 你一个年少郎君，要马干什么呢？ 
English: After Xiao Yuanmao entered the city, he saw this situation and held a grudge against Deng Yuanzhi. Xiao Yuanmao wanted Deng Yuanzhi's good horse, but Deng Yuanzhi said to him: You are a young man, what do you want with a horse?

古文：渊藻恚，因醉，杀之，元起麾下围城，哭，且问故，渊藻曰： 天子有诏。 
现代文：萧渊藻无比忿怒，借邓元起酒醉之机，杀了他。邓元起的部下把城围住，痛哭主帅，且问主帅被杀之缘故，萧渊藻对他们说： 天子有诏令。 
English: Xiao Yuanmao was so furious that he took the opportunity of Deng Yuanzhi's drunkenness to kill him. Deng Yuanzhi's subordinates surrounded the city, wept bitterly for the boss, and asked the boss why he was killed. Xiao Yuanmao said to them: "The Son of Heaven has an edict."

古文：众乃散。
现代文：众人才散去了。
English: The crowd dispersed.

古文：遂诬以反，上疑焉。
现代文：于是，萧渊藻就诬告邓元起反叛，武帝对此疑而不信。
English: As a result, Xiao Yuanmao falsely accused Deng Yuan of starting a rebellion, which Emperor Wu doubted and did not believe.

古文：元起故吏广汉罗研诣阙讼之，上曰： 果如我所量也！ 
现代文：邓元起的故吏广汉人罗研来到朝廷告状，武帝说： 果然同我所思量的一样。 
English: Luo Yan, a Guanghan who was a former official of Deng Yuanzhi, came to the imperial court to complain. Emperor Wu said, "It's just as I thought.

古文：使让渊藻曰： 元起为汝报仇，汝为仇报仇，忠孝之道如何！ 
现代文：武帝派使者斥责萧渊藻说： 邓元起为你报了父仇，你却为仇人而报仇，杀害了他，忠孝之道在那里呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu sent an envoy to reprimand Xiao Yuanmao, saying: Deng Yuanzhi avenged your father for you, but you took revenge for the enemy and killed him. Where is your loyalty and filial piety?

古文：乃贬渊藻号为冠军将军；赠元起征西将军，谥曰忠侯。
现代文：于是贬萧渊藻号为冠军将军，赠邓元起征西将军，谥号为忠侯。
English: As a result, Xiao Yuanmao's title was demoted to Champion General, Deng Yuanqi's title was given to General of the Western Expedition, and his nickname was Zhonghou.

古文：李延寿论曰：元起勤乃胥附，功惟辟土，劳之不图，祸机先陷。
现代文：李延寿说：邓元起勤勉于事，能体贴下属，能奉事朝廷，开辟疆土，功不可没，功劳没有受到赏赐，却先陷祸遇难。
English: Li Yanshou said: Deng Yuan was diligent in his work from the beginning, able to be considerate to subordinates, able to serve the imperial court, and open up the territory. His contribution is indispensable. His contribution was not rewarded, but he fell into trouble and died first.

古文：冠军之贬，于罚已轻。梁之政刑，于斯为失。私戚之端，自斯而启。年之不永，不亦宜乎！
现代文：萧渊藻仅仅被贬为冠军将军，所受的惩罚实在是太轻了，梁朝的政治、刑律，在这件事上出现了大的失误，由此而开启了朝廷庇护亲族的弊端，所以不能长久立国，不也是很相宜的吗？
English: Xiao Yuanmao was only degraded to a champion general, and the punishment he received was really too light. The politics and criminal law of the Liang Dynasty made a big mistake in this matter, which opened up the drawback of the imperial court sheltering relatives, so he could not establish the country for a long time. Isn't it also very appropriate?

古文：益州民焦僧护聚众数万作乱，萧渊藻年未弱冠，集僚佐议自击之；或陈不可，渊藻大怒，斩于阶侧。
现代文：益州的百姓焦僧护聚众造反，萧渊藻年纪还不满二十岁，他召集手下的僚佐们商议要亲自去歼击叛民，有人说他不可以亲自去，萧渊藻勃然大怒，就把说话的人斩于庭阶的侧旁。
English: The people of Yizhou gathered to support the rebellion. Xiao Yuanmao was not yet twenty years old. He gathered his colleagues to discuss whether he should personally destroy the rebels. Some people said that he should not go in person. Xiao Yuanmao flew into a rage and beheaded the speaker on the side of the courtyard steps.

古文：乃乘平肩舆巡行贼垒。贼弓乱射，矢下如雨，从者举楯御矢，渊藻命去之。
现代文：于是，萧渊藻乘坐着平肩舆，在叛民的营垒周围巡行，叛民用弓箭乱射，箭雨纷至，随从们举着盾牌为他挡箭，他却命令把盾牌拿开。
English: As a result, Xiao Yuanmao rode a flat-shouldered horse and paraded around the rebels' camp. The rebels shot arrows and arrows indiscriminately, and arrows rained down on him. His followers held up shields to protect him from the arrows, but he ordered them to take the shields away.

古文：由是人心大安，击僧护等，皆平之。
现代文：因此，人心大安，争相出击焦僧护等，都平定了他们。
English: Therefore, the people's peace of mind, competing to attack the Jiao monks, and so on, have leveled them.

古文：六月，庚戌，初立孔子庙。
现代文：六月庚戌，梁朝初立孔子庙。
English: In June of the Geng Dynasty, the Confucius Temple was built in the early days of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：豫州刺史王超宗将兵围魏小岘。
现代文：豫州刺史王超宗率兵围攻北魏小岘。
English: Wang Chao Zong, the Prince of Yuzhou, led an army to besiege Xiaotang in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁卯，魏扬州刺史薛真度遣兼统军李叔仁等击之，超宗兵大败。
现代文：丁卯，北魏扬州刺史薛真度派遣兼统军李叔仁等人出击，王超宗的军队一败涂地。
English: Dingwu, Northern Wei, Yangzhou, Zhangshi, Xue Zhendu, sent Li Shuren and others to attack, and Wang Chaozong's army was completely defeated.

古文：冠军将军王景胤、李畎、辅国将军鲁方达等与魏王足战，屡败。秋，七月，足进逼涪城。
现代文：冠军将军王景胤、李畎、辅国将军鲁方达等同北魏的王足交战，屡战屡败，秋季，七月，王足进逼涪城。
English: The champion generals Wang Jingyin, Li Xi, and Lu Fangda fought against Wang Zu of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and were repeatedly defeated. In the autumn, in July, Wang Zu entered and besieged Lucheng.

古文：八月，壬寅，魏中山王英寇雍州。
现代文：八月壬寅，北魏中山王元英入侵雍州。
English: In August, King Yuanying of the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Yongzhou.

古文：庚戌，秦、梁二州刺史鲁方达与魏王足统军纪洪雅、卢祖迁战，败，方达等十五将皆死。
现代文：庚戌，梁朝秦、梁二州刺史鲁方达与北魏王足手下的统军纪洪雅、卢祖迁交战，战败，鲁方达等十五员将领都战死。
English: Geng Xuan, Liang Chao Qin, Liang Erzhou Zhi Shi and Lu Fangda fought against the unified army of Ji Hongya and Lu Zuqian under the Northern Wei King Fu, and were defeated. Fifteen generals including Lu Fangda died in the battle.

古文：壬子，王景胤等又与祖迁城，败，景胤等二十四将皆死。
现代文：壬子，王景胤等人又与卢祖迁交战，也战败，王景胤等二十四位将领全部战死。
English: Ren Zi, Wang Jingtian and others also fought against Lu Zuqian and were also defeated. Wang Jingtian and other twenty-four generals all died in battle.

古文：杨公则至洛口，与魏豫州长史石荣战，斩之。
现代文：杨公则到达洛口，与北魏豫州长史石荣交战，将石荣斩首。
English: Yang Gong reached Luokou and fought with Shi Shirong, the governor of North Wei and Yu, and beheaded him.

古文：甲寅，将军姜庆真与魏战于羊石，不利，公则退屯马头。
现代文：甲寅，将军姜庆真与北魏军队在羊石交战，没有取胜，杨公则只好退驻于马头。
English: A Yin, General Jiang Qingzhen fought with the Northern Wei army in Yangshi, but did not win. Yang Gong had no choice but to withdraw to Madu.

古文：雍州蛮沔东太守田青喜叛降魏。
现代文：担任沔东太守的雍州蛮人田青喜反叛梁朝，投降了北魏。
English: The Yongzhou barbarian Tian Qingxi, who served as the governor of Shandong, rebelled against the Liang Dynasty and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏有芝生于太极殿之西序，魏主以示侍中崔光。光上表，以为： 此《庄子》所谓 气蒸成菌 者也。
现代文：北魏朝廷太极殿内的西墙下生长出了灵芝，北魏宣武帝拿来给侍中崔光看，崔光就此事而上表皇上，认为： 这只是《庄子》一书中所讲的 气蒸成菌 罢了。
English: Ganoderma lucidum grew under the west wall of the Taiji Hall of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty showed it to the attendant Cui Guang. Cui Guang reported the matter to the emperor and thought: This is just the vaporization of bacteria mentioned in the book "Zhuang Zi."

古文：柔脆之物，生于墟落秽温之地，不当生于殿堂高华之处；今忽有之，厥状扶疏，诚足异也。
现代文：这种柔脆的菌类之物，一般生长在废墟角落污秽潮湿的地方，不应当生长在殿堂这样高贵华丽之处；如今忽然生长出来了，而且其形状繁茂，实在是奇怪之事。
English: It is a strange thing that this soft, brittle fungus, which usually grows in the corners of ruins, in filthy, damp places, and ought not to grow in so noble and splendid a place as a temple, should now suddenly have sprung up, and that its shape should be luxuriant.

古文：夫野木生朝，野鸟入庙，古人皆以为败亡之象，故太戊、中宗惧灾修德，殷道以昌，所谓 家利而怪先，国兴而妖豫 者也。
现代文：野木生于朝庭，野鸟飞入宗庙，古人都认为这是败亡的征兆，所以商王太戊、高宗有惧于祥桑、谷共生于朝内以及野鸡飞在鼎上之异兆而修德积善，国运因此而得以复兴昌盛，这正是所谓 家族吉利而怪异先行，国家兴盛而妖异预见 。
English: Wild trees were born in the imperial court, wild birds flew into the ancestral temple, the ancients believed that this was a sign of defeat, so the merchant kings Ta Wu and Gao Zong were afraid of the strange signs of Xiang San, Gu symbiosis born in the imperial court, and pheasants flying on the summit, and they were virtuous and virtuous, and the national movement was able to revive and flourish as a result. This is the so-called family is lucky and strange ahead, the country is prosperous and the devil is foreseen.

古文：今西南二方，兵革未息，郊甸之内，大旱逾时，民劳物悴，菲此之甚，承天育民者所宜矜恤。伏愿陛下侧躬耸意，惟新圣道，节夜饮之乐，养方富之年，则魏祚可以永隆，皇寿等于山岳矣。 
现代文：如今西方和南方兵戈未息，京郊周围大旱久时，百姓劳崐苦，万物憔悴，已经到了万分严重的地步，而承受上天旨意养育万民的天子在此之际正应该加以体恤，所以恳请陛下关心朝廷内外之事，亲身过问，弘扬圣道，节制夜间饮酒的娱乐，保养正值年轻的身体，如此则北魏的国祚可以永远兴隆，皇寿与山岳等齐。 
English: Now that the war between the West and the South is not over, and when there is a long drought around the suburbs of Beijing, the people's toil and suffering, and the destruction of all things, have reached a very serious level. And the Son of God, who bears the will of heaven to raise all peoples, should be sympathized with on this occasion. Therefore, I implore His Majesty to be concerned about matters inside and outside the imperial court, to personally investigate, to promote the holy way, to control the entertainment of drinking at night, and to maintain a young body. In this way, the Northern Wei Dynasty can flourish forever, and the longevity of the emperor is equal to that of the mountains.

古文：于是魏主好宴乐，故光言及之。
现代文：此时，北魏宣武帝喜好宴饮欢乐，所以崔光在上表中特意提到这点。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty liked to feast and have fun, so Cui Guang specifically mentioned this in the above table.

古文：九月，己巳，杨公则等与魏扬州刺史元嵩战，公则败绩。
现代文：九月己巳，杨公则等人与北魏扬州刺史元嵩交战，杨公则败北。
English: In September, Yang Gongze and others fought against the Northern Wei Yangzhou assassin Yuan Song, and Yang Gongze was defeated.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，上大举伐魏，以扬州刺史临川王宏都督北讨诸军事，尚书右仆射柳惔为副，王公以下各上国租及田谷以助军。
现代文：冬季，十月丙午，武帝发动军队大举征伐北魏，任命扬州刺史临川王萧宏为都督北讨诸军事，尚书右仆射柳为副，王公以下者各上交封国所收之租和职田所收之谷以便资助军队。
English: In the winter, on the afternoon of October 3, Emperor Wu launched a large-scale military campaign against the Northern Wei Dynasty. He appointed Yangzhou Zishi Linchuan Wang Xiaohong to be the military governor of the North, Shangshu's right-hand man Shailiu to be the deputy, and Wang Gong and his subordinates to hand over the rent received by the state and the valley received by the farmland in order to fund the army.

古文：宏军于洛口。
现代文：萧宏驻军于洛口。
English: Xiao Hong stationed his troops in Lokou.

古文：杨集起、集义立杨绍先为帝，自皆称王。
现代文：杨集起、杨集义拥立杨绍先为帝，自己都称王。
English: Yang Zhiqi, Yang Zhiyi supported Yang Shaoqi to become emperor, and they all called themselves kings.

古文：十一月，戊辰朔，魏遣光禄大夫杨椿将兵讨之。
现代文：十一月戊辰朔，北魏派遣光禄大夫杨椿率兵讨伐杨集起等。
English: In November, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the Guanglu doctor Yang Zhan to lead the troops to fight against Yang Ji.

古文：魏王足围涪城，蜀人震恐，益州城戍降魏者什二三，民自上名籍者五万馀户。
现代文：北魏王足围攻涪城，蜀人大为震惊、恐惧，益州的城堡有十分之二三投降了北魏，百姓自动报上名籍的有五万多户。
English: The Northern Wei besieged and besieged the city of Shu, and the people of Shu were shocked and frightened. Two-thirds of the castles in Yizhou surrendered to the Northern Wei, and more than 50,000 households automatically registered their names.

古文：刑峦表于魏主，请乘胜取蜀，以为： 建康、成都，相去万里，陆行既绝，惟资水路。水军西上，非同年不达，益州外无军援，一可图也。
现代文：邢峦上表北魏宣武帝，请求乘胜而进取蜀地，认为： 建康与成都相离万里之遥，陆路已经阻断，唯一可依靠的就是水路了，但是水军西上，没有一年的时间是到不了的，益州外无援军，这是可以攻取的第一点理由。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty, who was on the table, requested to take advantage of the victory and advance to Shu, saying: Jiankang is thousands of miles away from Chengdu, the land route has been blocked, and the only way to rely on is the water route. However, the navy can not reach the west without a year, and there is no reinforcement outside Yizhou. This is the first reason why it can be captured.

古文：顷经刘季连反，邓元起攻围，资储空竭，吏民无复固守之志，二可图也。
现代文：蜀地前不久经历了刘季连反叛，邓元起攻打围困之事，物资储备空竭，官方和百姓都失去了固守的信心，这是可以攻占的第二点理由。
English: Not long ago, Shu experienced Liu Qilian's rebellion, Deng Yuan's attack and siege, material reserves were exhausted, and both the authorities and the people lost confidence in holding on. This is the second reason why it can be captured.

古文：萧渊藻裙屐少年，未洽治务，宿昔名将，多见囚戮，今之所任，皆左右少年，三可图也。
现代文：萧渊藻不过是一个衣装华丽而无真才实学的少年，完全不懂治理之道，过去的名将，大多数都被他囚禁杀戮了，现在所任用的，都是他左右的一些少年人，这是可以攻取的第三点理由。
English: Xiao Yuanmao is nothing more than a young man with flashy clothes and no real talent, who does not know how to govern. Most of the famous generals in the past were imprisoned and killed by him, and those who are currently appointed are all young people around him. This is the third reason that can be grasped.

古文：蜀之所恃，唯在剑阁，今既克南安，已夺其险，据彼竟内，三分已一；自南安向涪，方轨无碍，前军累败，后众丧魄，四可图也。
现代文：蜀地所依恃的只在剑阁，现在既攻克崐了南安，已经夺取了其险要之地，据此天险而向内推进，已占取了境内三分之一的地方；从南安向涪陵，道路宽展，可以双车并行，蜀军前军累战屡败，后头的闻风而丧胆，这是可以攻取的第四点理由。
English: Shu's only foothold is Jiange. Now that it has conquered Nan'an, it has seized its most important place. According to this natural danger, it has pushed inward and has occupied one-third of the territory. From Nan'an to Fuling, the road is wide enough for two cars to travel side by side. The front army of the Shu army has been defeated many times, and the rear army is discouraged by the wind. This is the fourth reason why it can be conquered.

古文：渊藻是萧衍骨肉至亲，必无处理，若克涪城，渊藻安青城中坐而受困，必将望风逃去；若其出斗，庸、蜀士卒驽怯，弓矢寡弱，五可图也。
现代文：萧渊藻是萧衍的骨肉至亲，必定不愿以死固守，若果攻克涪城，萧渊藻怎肯呆在城中坐而受困，必将望风而逃跑；他如果出战，无奈庸、蜀之地的士卒们才能低下而胆怯，弓箭缺少而无力，这是可以攻取的第五点理由。
English: Xiao Yuanmao was Xiao Yan's closest relative. He would not be willing to die to defend the city. If he conquered Lucheng, Xiao Yuanmao would not want to stay in the city and be trapped. He would look for the wind and escape. If he went to war, he would have no choice but to fight. The soldiers of Shu could only be low and timid, lacking bows and arrows, and powerless. This is the fifth reason to conquer.

古文：臣内省文吏，不习军旅，赖将士竭力，频有薄捷。
现代文：我本为朝中文官，不熟习军旅之事，但是幸赖将士们尽心竭力，以致频有捷报传来，尽管是那么微小而不足道。
English: I am a North Korean and Chinese officer, and I am not familiar with military travel, but I am glad that the soldiers have made every effort, so that there are often good news, even though it is so small and insignificant.

古文：既克重阻，民心怀服，瞻望涪、益，旦夕可屠。正以兵少粮匮，未宜前出，今若不取，后图便难。
现代文：现在已经攻克重重险阻，民心归顺，观望涪、益两城，旦夕可得，只是因兵少粮缺，不宜于前去攻打，但现在如不夺取，以后再攻打就难了。
English: Now, we have overcome many obstacles, and the people's hearts have been won over. We can get the two cities as soon as possible. However, due to the shortage of soldiers and food, it is not appropriate to go forward to attack. However, if we do not capture them now, it will be difficult to attack them later.

古文：况益州殷实。户口十万，比寿春、义阳，其利三倍。
现代文：况且益州殷富，有十万户人家，与寿春、义阳相比，其利益高出三倍。
English: Moreover, Yizhou is prosperous, with 100,000 households, and its profit is three times higher than that of Shuchun and Yiyang.

古文：朝廷若欲进取，时不可失；若欲保境宁民，则臣居此无事，乞归侍养。 
现代文：朝廷如果想要攻取该地，就不应该失去这次机会；如果想要保护境内安宁百姓，则我呆在这里实无事可做，因此乞求归家侍养双亲。 
English: If the imperial court wants to conquer this place, it should not lose this opportunity; if it wants to protect the peaceful people in the country, I have nothing to do here, so I begged to go home and take care of my parents.

古文：魏主诏以 平蜀之举，当更听后敕。
现代文：宣武帝给邢峦的诏令中说： 关于平定蜀地之举，你应当等着听取后面的敕令。
English: Emperor Xuanwu said in his imperial edict to Zhou: Regarding the move to pacify Shu, you should wait to hear the subsequent imperial edict.

古文：寇难未夷，何得以养亲为辞！ 
现代文：现在寇难还没有平定，你怎么能以侍养亲人为借口而引退呢？ 
English: Now that the siege has not been settled, how can you retire under the pretext of taking care of your relatives?

古文：峦又表称： 昔邓艾、钟会帅十八万众，倾中国资储，仅能平蜀，所以然者，斗实力也。
现代文：邢峦又上表说： 过去邓艾、钟会统领十八万大军，倾尽中原的资财储备，才能平定蜀地，之所以如此，是以实力相斗呀。
English: "In the past, Deng Ai and Zhong Hui led 180,000 troops and exhausted the resources and financial reserves of the Central Plains in order to pacify Shu. The reason for this is that they fought each other with strength.

古文：况臣才非古人，何宜以二万之众而希平蜀！
现代文：何况我的才能比不上古人，那里可以靠两万兵力而希求平定蜀地呢？
English: What's more, my talent is no better than that of the ancients. Where can I hope to pacify Shu with twenty thousand troops?

古文：所以敢者，正以据得要险，士民慕义。此往则易，彼来则难，任力而行，理有可克。
现代文：之所以敢如此，正因为占据了险要之地，士人和百姓们都倾慕向往大义，我们由此而前进则容易，他们前来抵挡则难，只要我们根据力量而行事，理应攻克。
English: The reason why we dare to do so is precisely because we occupy a precarious position. Both the scholars and the people admire and yearn for the great righteousness. It is easy for us to advance from this, and it is difficult for them to resist. As long as we act according to our strength, we should conquer.

古文：今王足已逼涪城，脱得涪，则益州乃成擒之物，但得之有早晚耳。
现代文：现在王足已经逼近涪城，假如取得了涪陵，则益州就成了待擒之物，只是得到手有早晚之别罢了。
English: Now Wangzu has approached Fucheng, and if he obtains Fulin, then Yizhou will become a prize to be coveted, but it will be a matter of time before he gets his hands on it.

古文：且梓潼已附民户数万，朝廷岂可不守！
现代文：何况梓潼已经归附的民户有好几万，朝廷岂可以不加以镇守呢？
English: What's more, there are tens of thousands of private households to which Tzu Chi has been annexed. Can the imperial court do without town guards?

古文：又，剑阁天险，得而弃之，良可惜矣！
现代文：还有，剑阁天险，如得而放弃，实在是可惜。
English: Also, it's a shame to give up the chance to go to the Heaven's Gate of Jiange.

古文：臣诚知战伐危事，未易可为。
现代文：我诚然知道征战讨伐是危险的事情，不可轻易进行。
English: I do know that a crusade is a dangerous thing and should not be undertaken lightly.

古文：自军度剑阁以来，鬓发中白，日夜战惧，何可为心！
现代文：自从我军越过剑阁以来，我的鬓发已经斑白，日日夜夜为战事情况而焦虑不安，心情紧张得都无法忍受下去了。
English: Ever since our army crossed the Jiange Pass, my hair has turned white, I have been anxious day and night about the war situation, and my mood has become unbearably tense.

古文：所以勉强者，既得此地而自退不守，恐负陛下之爵禄故也。
现代文：之所以能勉强坚持着，只是因为考虑到既然已经得到了该地而又自动撤退不加驻守，恐怕有负于陛下所给予的爵位俸禄。
English: The reason why he was able to hold out reluctantly was only because he considered that since he had already obtained the land and had withdrawn automatically without a garrison, he would probably have to pay less than the knighthood salary given by His Majesty.

古文：且臣之意算，正欲先取部城，以渐而进。
现代文：而且我心中打算，正想先攻取涪城，然后渐次而进。
English: Moreover, in my mind, I was planning to capture Shicheng first, and then advance gradually.

古文：若得涪城，则中分益州之地，断水陆之冲。彼外无援军，孤城自守，何能复持久哉！
现代文：如果得到涪城，就可以把蜀地分为两伴，阻断水陆交通的要道，他们没有外面来的援军，以孤城而自守，怎么能够持久得了呢？
English: If they get Lucheng, they can divide Shu into two groups and cut off the important water and land transportation routes. They have no reinforcements from outside and defend themselves as a lone city. How can they last?

古文：臣今欲使军军相次，声势连接，先为万全之计，然后图功；得之则大利，不得则自全。
现代文：我现在想让各支队伍相次而进，前后连接，互相声援，首先做到万无一失，然后图取大功，如能得到则有大利，不得则可以做到自我保全。
English: I now want all teams to advance in succession, connect back and forth, and support each other. First, be foolproof, and then try to get great credit. If you can get it, you will have an advantage, and if you can't, you can achieve self-preservation.

古文：又，巴西、南郑，相距千四百里，去州迢遰，恒多扰动。
现代文：另外，巴西与南郑相距一千四百里，离州城遥远，经常发生骚乱。
English: In addition, Brazil and Nan Zheng are 1,400 miles apart, far from the state capital, and riots often occur.

古文：昔在南之日，以其统绾势难，曾立巴州，镇静夷、獠，梁州藉利，因而表罢。
现代文：过去属南朝占领之时，由于这里难以统辖管理，曾经设立过巴州，以便镇领夷、獠，而梁州借利，所以上表请求罢撤了该州。
English: In the past, when it was under the occupation of the Southern Dynasties, because it was difficult to control and manage here, Ba Prefecture was set up in order to control Yi and Handan, while Liang Prefecture borrowed money, so it was withdrawn at the request of the table.

古文：彼土民望，严、蒲、何、杨，非唯一族，虽率居山谷，而豪右甚多，文学风流，亦为不少，但以去州既远，不获仕进。至于州纲，无由厕迹，是以郁怏，多生异图。
现代文：这个地方的大户人家有严、蒲、何、杨等姓，不仅仅是一族，他们虽然居住在山谷之中，可是豪强大族很多，文章风流之士也为数不少，但因离州城很远，因此不能获得仕进机会，甚至州里地位较高的佐吏，也无法能跻身其中，因此愤愤不平，多生异图之心。
English: The big families in this area have surnames such as Yan, Pu, He, and Yang, and they are not just one family. Although they live in the valley, there are many powerful families, and there are also quite a few famous people, but because they are far away from the state capital, they cannot get the opportunity to advance. Even the higher-ranking officials in the state cannot join them, so they are resentful and have different ideas.

古文：比道迁建义之始，严玄思自号巴州刺史，克城以来，仍使行事。
现代文：到夏侯道迁建举大义之初，严玄恩自称为巴州刺史，攻克州城以来，仍然让他任刺史之职。
English: At the beginning of the relocation and construction of Xia Hou Road, Yan Xuan'en called himself the scribe of Bazhou. Since he conquered the city of Bazhou, he still let him serve as a scribe.

古文：巴西广袤千里，户馀四万，若于彼立州，镇摄华、獠，则大贴民情，从垫江已还，不劳征伐，自为国有。 
现代文：巴西这个地方广袤千里，户口还余下四万之多，如果在这里设置州，镇摄华、獠，则可以大大地安定民心，从垫江以西，不用征伐，就自然为我国所有了。 
English: Brazil is a vast place with thousands of miles, and there are as many as 40,000 remaining hukou. If we set up a prefecture, town of Zhenghua, and county here, we can greatly stabilize the people's hearts. From the west of the Mat River, without conquest, it will naturally be owned by our country.

古文：魏主不从。
现代文：宣武皇帝没有听从邢峦的建议。
English: However, Emperor Xiaowen did not accept his opinion.

古文：先是，魏主以王足行益州刺史。
现代文：早先之时，北魏宣武帝任命王足兼益州刺史。
English: Earlier, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Jie as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：上遣天门太守张齐将兵救益州，未至，魏主更以梁州军司泰山羊祉为益州刺史。
现代文：梁武帝派遣天门太守张齐率兵去援救益州，还没有到达，宣武帝又改任梁州军司泰山人羊祉为益州刺史。
English: Emperor Liangwu dispatched Zhang Qi, the guardian of the Heavenly Gate, to rescue Yizhou with his soldiers. However, before he arrived, Emperor Xuanwu was appointed as the military governor of Liangzhou.

古文：王足闻之，不悦，辄引兵还，遂不能定蜀。
现代文：王足知道这一消息之后，十分不悦，便带兵返回了，于是北魏没有能够平定蜀地。
English: After Wang Zu learned this news, he was very displeased and returned with his soldiers. As a result, the Northern Wei Dynasty was not able to pacify Shu.

古文：久之，足自魏来奔。
现代文：许久之后，王足从北魏来投靠了梁朝。
English: After a long time, Wang Zu came from the Northern Wei Dynasty to join the Liang Dynasty.

古文：刑峦在梁州，接豪右以礼，抚小民以惠，州人悦之。
现代文：邢峦在梁州之时，对当地的豪强大族以礼相接，对小民百姓抚之以恩惠，因此全州之人都很欢喜。
English: When he was in Liangzhou, he treated the local powerful and powerful clans with courtesy and favored the common people, so the people of the whole state were very happy.

古文：峦之克巴西也，使军主李仲迁守之。
现代文：邢峦攻克巴西，让军主李仲迁镇守。
English: conquered Brazil and let the commander Li Zhongqian defend the town.

古文：仲迁溺于酒色，费散兵储，公事谘承，无能见者。
现代文：李仲迁沉溺于酒色，私自挪用耗散军费，有关公事需要向他请示报告之时，却找不到他的人影。
English: Li Zhongqian indulged in liquor, misappropriated and dissipated military expenses, and when it was necessary to ask him for a report on relevant official matters, he could not be found.

古文：峦忿之切齿，仲迁惧，谋叛，城人斩其首，以城来降。
现代文：邢峦对此气的咬牙切齿，李仲迁害怕了，密谋反叛，城中的人将李仲迁斩首，献城投降了梁朝。
English: Zhai gnashed his teeth at this anger, Li Zhongqian was scared and plotted a rebellion. The people in the city beheaded Li Zhongqian and surrendered the city to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：十二月，庚申，魏遣骠骑大将军源怀讨武兴氐，刑峦等并受节度。
现代文：十二月庚申，北魏派遣骠骑大将军源怀讨伐武兴的氐族部落，邢峦等人一并接受源怀的指挥调遣。
English: In December of Goshun, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the cavalry general Yuan Huai to fight the Yao tribe of Wuxing, and Yan and others accepted the command and dispatch of Yuan Huai.

古文：司徒、尚书令谢朏以母忧去职。
现代文：梁朝司徒、尚书令谢因为母亲守丧而去职。
English: Liang Chaositu and Shang Shulingxie resigned from their posts due to their mother's funeral.

古文：是岁，大穰，米斛三十钱。
现代文：这一年，大丰收，米价每斛三十钱。
English: This year, with a bumper harvest, the price of rice rose to 30 yuan per bushel.

古文：高祖武皇帝二天监五年
现代文：天监五年
English: Five years of the Sky Supervisor

古文：春，正月，丁卯朔，魏于后生子昌，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，丁卯朔，北魏于皇后生下儿子元昌，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of spring, Ding Yushuo, the Northern Wei Dynasty gave birth to the empress's son, Yuanchang, and pardoned the world.

古文：杨集义围魏关城，刑峦使建武将军傅竖眼讨之，集义逆战，竖眼击破之。乘胜逐北，壬申，克武兴，执杨绍先，送洛阳。
现代文：杨集义围攻北魏关城，邢峦派遗建武将军傅竖眼去讨伐，杨集义迎战，傅竖眼击败了杨集义，并乘胜追逐败军，壬申，攻克了武兴，抓获了杨绍先，押送往洛阳。
English: Yang Jiyi besieged Guancheng in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the Qing Dynasty sent Fu Zhizhen, the last surviving general of Jianwu, to fight against Yang Jiyi. Fu Zhizhen defeated Yang Jiyi, and took advantage of the victory to chase the defeated army. Jinshin defeated Wu Xing, captured Yang Shaoshan, and sent him to Luoyang.

古文：杨集起、杨集义亡走。遂灭其国，以为武兴镇，又改为东益州。
现代文：杨集起、杨集义逃跑了，于是灭掉了他们所建之国，改为武兴镇，其后又改为东益州。
English: Yang Jiqi and Yang Jiyi ran away, so they destroyed the country they built, changed it to Wuxing Town, and then changed it to Dongyizhou.

古文：乙亥，以前司徒谢朏为中书监、司徒。
现代文：乙亥，梁朝任命前司徒谢为中书监、司徒。
English: Yi Hai, Liang Dynasty appointed former scholar Xie as the book supervisor and scholar.

古文：冀州刺史桓和击魏南青州，不克。
现代文：梁朝冀州刺史桓和攻打北魏的南青州，没有攻克。
English: The Liang Dynasty conquered Hebei Province, but failed to conquer Nanqing Province in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏秦州屠各王法智聚众二千，推秦州主簿吕苟儿为主，改元建明，置百官，攻逼州郡。
现代文：北魏秦州匈奴屠各部落的王法智聚集两千人，推举秦州主簿吕苟儿为首领，改年号为 建明 ，设置了百官，攻逼州郡。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Fazhi of the various tribes of Qin State Xiongnu Tu gathered two thousand people, elected Qin State's main book Luguo Er as the leader, changed the year name to Jianming, set up a hundred officials, and attacked the county.

古文：泾州民陈瞻亦聚众称王，改元圣明。
现代文：泾州的百姓陈瞻也聚众称王，改年号为 圣明 。
English: The people of Zhangzhou Chenzhang also gathered to praise the king, and changed the year name to Shengming.

古文：己卯，杨集起兄弟相帅降魏。
现代文：己卯，杨集起兄弟一起投降了北魏。
English: He and his brother Yang Jiji surrendered to the Northern Wei together.

古文：甲申，封皇子纲为晋安王。
现代文：甲申，梁朝封皇子萧纲为晋安王。
English: Jiashen, the crown prince of the Liang Dynasty, Xiao Gang, became the King of Jin'an.

古文：二月，丙辰，魏主诏王公以上直言忠谏。
现代文：二月丙辰，北魏宣武帝诏令王公以下的官员对自己直言忠谏。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty decreed that officials below the rank of prince should be honest and loyal to themselves.

古文：治书侍御史阳固上表，以为： 当今之务，宜亲宗室，勤庶政，贵农桑，贱工贾，绝谈虚穷微之论，简桑门无用之费，以救饥寒之苦。 
现代文：诏书侍御史阳固上表，认为： 圣上当今所应做的是要亲近宗室，勤于庶政，鼓励农桑，抑制工商，杜绝一切不切合实际的谈论玄虚之理，压缩佛门无用的费用，用以救济饥寒之苦。 
English: Shi Yanggu, the attendant of the imperial edict, said: What the saint should do today is to be close to his family, be diligent in general affairs, encourage farmers and mulberry trees, restrain industry and commerce, put an end to all impractical talk about the principles of the occult, reduce the useless expenses of the Buddhist gate, and use it to relieve the suffering of hunger and cold.

古文：时魏主委任高肇，疏薄宗室，好桑门之法，不亲政事，故固言及之。
现代文：当时宣武帝把政事委任于高肇，疏远皇室宗亲，热衷于佛法，不亲自过问朝廷政事，所以阳固才有上述之言。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanwu delegated the political affairs to Gao Zhao, alienated the royal family relatives, was keen on Buddhism, and did not personally inquire about the political affairs of the court, so Yang Gu had the above-mentioned words.

古文：戊午，魏遣右卫将军元丽都督诸军讨吕苟儿。
现代文：戊午，北魏派遣右卫将军元丽督率各路军队讨伐吕苟儿。
English: In the afternoon, the Northern Wei dispatched the right guard general, Yuan Liguo, to lead the various armies to fight against Luguo.

古文：丽，小新成之子也。
现代文：元丽是小新成的儿子。
English: Yuan Li is the son of Xiao Xincheng.

古文：乙丑，徐州刺史历阳昌义之与魏平南将军陈伯之战于梁城，义之败绩。
现代文：乙丑，梁朝徐州刺史历阳人昌义之同北魏平南将军陈伯之在梁城交战，昌义之战败。
English: In the second century, Liang Dynasty, Xuzhou dynasty, Liyang people, Changyi and Northern Wei Pingnan General Chen Bozhi fought in Liangcheng, and Changyi was defeated.

古文：将军萧昞将兵击魏徐州，围淮阳。
现代文：梁朝将军萧率兵攻打北魏徐州，围攻淮阳。
English: General Xiao of the Liang Dynasty led troops to attack Xuzhou in Northern Wei and besieged Huaiyang.

古文：三月，丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，丙寅朔，发生日食。
English: In March, the solar eclipse occurred.

古文：己卯，魏荆州刺史赵怡、平南将军奚康生救淮阳。
现代文：己卯，北魏荆州刺史赵怡、平南将军奚康生前去援救淮阳。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Jing Zhou sent Zhao Yi and the Pingnan general Jie Kang to rescue Huaiyang.

古文：魏咸阳王禧之子翼，遇赦，求葬其父。屡泣请于魏主，魏主不许。
现代文：北魏咸阳王元禧的儿子元翼，遇赦后请求安葬父亲，数次在宣武帝面前哭着请求，宣武帝没有准许。
English: The son of the Northern Wei Hamyang King Yuan Xi, Yuan Ying, after being pardoned, asked to bury his father. He cried and begged several times in front of Emperor Xuanwu, but Emperor Xuanwu did not allow it.

古文：癸未，翼与其弟昌、晔来奔。
现代文：癸未，元翼同其弟弟元昌、元晔前崐来奔投梁朝。
English: In the meantime, Yuan Ying and his younger brothers, Yuan Chang and Yuan Xianzheng, came to invest in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：上以翼为咸阳王，翼以晔嫡母李妃之子也，请以爵让之，上不许。
现代文：武帝封元翼为咸阳王，元翼因为元晔是正室母亲李妃所生，所以请求把爵位让给元晔，但是武帝没有准许。
English: Emperor Wu gave the title of Xianyang King to Yuan Ying. Yuan Ying requested to give the title to Yuan Ying because Yuan Ying was the son of Emperor Wu's legal mother, Empress Li, but Emperor Wu did not grant permission.

古文：辅国将军刘思效败魏青州刺史元系于胶水。
现代文：梁朝的辅国将军刘思效在胶水击败了北魏青州刺史元系。
English: Liu Sihui, the general of the Liang Dynasty's Auxiliary State, defeated the Northern Wei Qingzhou Zhishu Yuan Dynasty in glue.

古文：临川王宏使记室吴兴丘迟为书遗陈伯之曰： 寻君去就之际，非有它故，直以不能内审诸己，外受流言，沈迷猖蹶，以至于此。
现代文：临川王萧宏让记室吴兴人丘迟写信送给陈伯之，信中说道： 思量您投降北魏之时，没有别的原因，只是因为内心不能自审，外受流言的影响，迷乱而猖狂，以至于到了这样的地步。
English: King Xiaohong of Linchuan had the recorder Wu Xingrenqiu write a letter to Chen Bozhi, saying: When you thought about surrendering to the Northern Wei Dynasty, there was no other reason, but because you couldn't judge yourself internally, you were affected by rumors externally, and you were confused and rampant, to such an extent.

古文：主上屈法申恩，吞舟是漏，将军松柏不翦，亲戚安居，高台未倾，爱妾尚在。
现代文：当今皇上不惜不按法律以申恩德，即使再大的罪过也能宽宥，所以将军您的祖坟没有被毁，松柏茂盛；您留在江南的亲戚都没有以叛党连坐，而安居自苦；您的宅第没有受损，池台如故；您的爱妾还守在家中，没有被官家收去或流落于其他人家。
English: Today's emperor does not hesitate to issue decrees according to the law, and even the greatest sins can be pardoned. Therefore, your ancestral tomb has not been destroyed, and pine and cypress trees are flourishing; your relatives who remained in the south of the Yangtze River did not sit together as rebels, but lived peacefully; your homestead has not been damaged, and the pool deck remains as it was; your beloved concubine is still at home, and has not been taken away by officials or exiled to other people's homes.

古文：而将军鱼游于沸鼎之中，燕巢于飞幕之上，不亦惑乎！
现代文：可是，将军您却如鱼游于沸鼎之中，如燕筑巢于飞动的幕布之上，至今身在敌营，这不是非常糊涂的事吗？
English: Isn't it puzzling that you, General, are as dangerous as a fish swimming in a pot of boiling water, or a swallow building a nest on a flying tent?

古文：想早励良图，自求多福。 
现代文：希望您能早日替自己谋一条好的出路，以便获得日后的幸福。 
English: I hope that you will make plans to return home as soon as possible and find happiness for yourself.

古文：庚寅，伯之自寿阳梁城拥众八千来降，魏人杀其子虎牙。
现代文：庚寅，陈伯之从寿阳梁城率领八千人马来投降梁朝，北魏人杀了他的儿子陈虎牙。
English: Geng Yin, Chen Bo Zhi led eight thousand Malays from Shouyang Liangcheng to surrender to the Liang Dynasty. The Northern Wei killed his son Chen Hoga.

古文：诏复以伯之为西豫州刺史；未之任，复以为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：武帝诏令仍以陈伯之为西豫州刺史，陈伯之还没有到任，又任命他为通直散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Wu's edict still designated Chen Bozhi as the prefect of West Henan Province. However, Chen Bozhi had not yet arrived at the post, and he was also appointed as a regular attendant.

古文：久之，卒于家。
现代文：后来，陈伯之在家中去世。
English: Some time later, Chen Bozhi passed away at home.

古文：初，魏御史中尉甄琛表称： 《周礼》，山林川泽有虞、衡之官，为之厉禁，盖取之以时，不使戕贼而已，故虽置有司，实为民守之也。
现代文：起初，北魏御史中尉甄琛上表讲道： 《周礼》中制定了专管山林川泽的山虞、林衡、川衡、泽虞之官，制定了关于山林川泽的严厉禁令，这是使百姓在规定的时令内获取利益，而不让随意乱砍滥取，所以虽然设置了这样的官员，实际上却是百姓自己守护。
English: At the beginning, Northern Wei Imperial Lieutenant Zhen Rong preached on the table: "In the Zhou Li, the officials in charge of the mountains, forests, rivers and streams of the mountains, forests, rivers and streams, and rivers and streams were formulated, and a strict ban on the mountains, forests, rivers and streams was formulated. This was to enable the people to obtain benefits within the specified time, and not to allow random cutting and abuse. Therefore, although such officials were set up, they were actually the people's own guardians.

古文：夫一家之长，必惠养子孙，天下之君，必惠养兆民，未有为人父母而吝其醯醢，富有群生而榷其一物者也。
现代文：一家之长，必须抚养他的子孙，天下之君，必须惠养万民，没有做父母吝啬醋酱、富有天下万物而专占一物的。
English: The head of a family must bring up his children and grandchildren, and the ruler of the world must benefit all the people. There is no such thing as a parent who is stingy with vinegar sauce, rich in all things under the sun, and monopolizes one thing.

古文：今县官鄣护河东盐池而收其利，是专奉口腹而不及四体也。
现代文：如今朝廷独霸河东的盐池而坐收其利，这是专奉口腹而不及四体。
English: Nowadays, the imperial court dominates the salt ponds in the east of the river and reaps its profits. This is a special service for the rich, but not for the poor.

古文：盖天子富有四海，何患于贫！
现代文：天子富有四海，何患于贫！
English: The Son of God is rich in every way, but how he suffers from poverty!

古文：乞弛盐禁，与民共之。 
现代文：所以，乞请放松盐禁，与民共享其利。 
English: Therefore, please relax the salt ban and share its benefits with the people.

古文：录尚书事勰、尚书邢峦奏，以为： 琛之所陈，坐谈则理高，行之则事阙。
现代文：录尚书事元勰和尚书邢峦也上奏，认为： 甄琛所讲的，坐着谈论则高明合理，而实际执行则行不通。
English: The recorder and monk Zhuang Zhi Yuan and Zhuang Zi also spoke up, saying: What Zhen Zi said is clever and reasonable to talk about while sitting, but it is not feasible to implement in practice.

古文：窃惟古之善治民者，必污隆随时，丰俭称事，役养消息以成其性命。
现代文：我们认为古来善于统治百姓的，必定升降依时，丰俭随事，役使养育互为消长以成全他们性命。
English: We believe that those who have been good at ruling the people in ancient times must rise and fall according to the times, be frugal with things, and serve and nurture each other to fulfill their lives.

古文：若任其自生，随其饮啄，乃是刍狗万物，何以君为！
现代文：如果任其自生自长，随其饮水啄食，那是把百姓当作刍草狗畜，还要君主做什么呢？
English: If it is left to its own devices and allowed to eat and drink as it pleases, it is treating the people like mongrel dogs. What else should the monarch do?

古文：是故圣人敛山泽之货，以宽田畴之赋；收关市之税，以助什一之储。取此与彼，皆非为身，所谓资天地之产，惠天地之民也。
现代文：所以，圣人获取山泽之货，收取关市之税，来补助田亩什一之赋之不足，以供国用，此处取来用到彼处，都不是为了自己，正所谓利用天地的出产，施惠于天下之民。
English: Therefore, the saint obtained goods from Yamazawa, collected taxes from the customs city, to subsidize the shortage of the tithe of the field and mu, to be used for the country, and took them from here to use them elsewhere, not for himself, but to use the production of heaven and earth, to benefit the people of the world.

古文：今盐池之禁，为日已久，积而散之，以济军国，非专为供太官之膳羞，给后宫之服玩。
现代文：如今禁止私人采盐，已经实行了很长时间了，集中其财富而使用，是为了维持国家和军队的开支，并不是专门为了供给皇宫的饮食，以及后宫的服饰玩物。
English: Now the prohibition of private salt-mining, which has been in force for a long time, concentrates its wealth and uses it to maintain the expenses of the state and the army, and not exclusively to supply the diet of the palace, and the costume playthings of the harem.

古文：既利不在己，则彼我一也。然自禁盐以来，有司多慢，出纳之间，或不如法。
现代文：既然不是为了皇上一人享乐，那么让老百姓获利同让国家获利都是一样的。然而，自从禁盐以来，官员们多有不经心的，收支出纳中间，或者有不按照法令执行的行为。
English: Since it is not for the pleasure of the emperor alone, it is the same to let the people profit as to let the country profit. However, since the ban on salt, officials have been careless, in the middle of collection and payment, or have not performed in accordance with the law.

古文：是使细民嗟怨，负贩轻议，此乃用之者无方，非作之者有失也。
现代文：因此，使老百姓抱怨在心，商贩们非议在口，这只不过是管理者无方，并非是制定禁令的人有过失。
English: Therefore, it is not the fault of the person who made the ban, but the fault of the managers who let the people complain in their hearts and the merchants complain in their mouths.

古文：一旦罢之，恐乖本旨。
现代文：一旦撤销盐池禁令，恐怕有违于本初之意。
English: Once the ban on salt ponds is revoked, I'm afraid it will go against the original intention.

古文：一行一改，法若弈棋，参论理要，宜如旧式。 
现代文：一行一改，没有定法，正如奕棋者那样举棋不定，所以按理而论，应该维持过去的样子而不变。 
English: One line at a time, there is no set method, just as the player of the game of chess is uncertain, so logically, it should maintain the past appearance and remain unchanged.

古文：魏主卒从琛议，夏，四月，乙未，罢盐池禁。
现代文：宣武帝最终采纳了甄琛崐的建议，夏季，四月乙未，撤销了盐池禁令。
English: Emperor Xuanwu finally adopted Zhen's suggestion, and in the summer, in April, revoked the ban on salt ponds.

古文：庚戌，魏以中山王英为征南将军、都督扬、徐二州诸军事，帅众十馀万以拒梁军，指授诸节度，所至以便宜从事。
现代文：庚戌，北魏任命中山王元英为征南将军，都督扬、徐二州诸军事，统率十多万大军抵抗梁朝军队，指挥各路军队，所到之处随机而行事。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Yuanying of Zhongshan was appointed as a general to invade the south, and Yang and Xu Erzhou, the military governors, led more than one hundred thousand troops to resist the Liang Dynasty army, and commanded the various armies, acting randomly wherever they went.

古文：江州刺史王茂将兵数万侵魏荆州，诱魏边民及诸蛮更立宛州，遣其所署宛州刺史雷豹狼等袭取魏河南城。
现代文：梁朝江州刺史王茂率兵数万入侵北魏荆州，诱使北魏边境上的民众以及各蛮族部落另立宛州，并派遣自己所任命的宛州刺史雷豹狼等去袭取北魏河南城。
English: Liang Zhaozhou's viceroy Wang Mao led tens of thousands of soldiers to invade the Northern Wei Jingzhou, enticed the people on the Northern Wei border and various barbarian tribes to set up a separate Wanzhou, and sent his own appointed Wanzhou viceroy Lei Jia Wol and others to attack the Northern Wei Henan City.

古文：魏遣平南将军杨大眼都督诸军击茂，辛酉，茂战败，失亡二千馀人。
现代文：北魏派遣平南将军杨大眼督率各路军马抗击王茂，辛酉，王茂战败，失散伤亡两千多人。
English: The Northern Wei dispatched the Pingnan general Yang Dajian to lead all the horses and chariots to fight against Wang Mao, and the battle ended in a stalemate. Wang Mao was defeated, and more than two thousand people were killed and wounded.

古文：大眼进攻河南城，茂逃还；大眼追至汉水，攻拔五城。
现代文：杨大眼进而攻打河南城，王茂逃返，杨大眼追至汉水，攻占了五城。
English: Yang Dajian then attacked Henan City, Wang Mao fled back, Yang Dajian chased to Hanshui, and captured five cities.

古文：魏征虏将军宇文福寇司州，俘千馀口而去。
现代文：北魏征虏将军宇文福侵犯梁朝司州，掠夺了一千多人口而离去。
English: The Northern Wei general Yu Wenfu invaded Liang Chaozhou, plundered more than a thousand people and left.

古文：五月，辛未，太子右卫率张惠绍等侵魏徐州，拔宿预，执城主马成龙。
现代文：五月辛未，梁朝太子右卫率张惠绍等人入侵北魏徐州，攻占宿预，抓住了城主马成龙。
English: In May of Xinwei, Zhang Huishao and others, led by the prince of Liang Dynasty, invaded the Northern Wei Xuzhou, occupied Shudu, and captured the lord of the city, Ma Chenglong.

古文：乙亥，北徐州刺史昌义之拔梁城。
现代文：乙亥，北徐州刺史昌义之攻占了梁城。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Northern Xuzhou assassin Chang Yi captured Liangcheng.

古文：豫州刺史韦睿遣长史王超等攻小岘，未拔。
现代文：豫州刺史韦睿派遣长史王超等去攻打小岘，没有攻下来。
English: The governor of Yuzhou, Shi Wei Rui, dispatched the governor, Shi Wang Chao, and others to attack Xiaotang, but they did not succeed.

古文：睿行围栅，魏出数百人陈于门外，睿欲击之，诸将皆曰： 向者轻来，未有战备，徐还授甲，乃可进耳。 
现代文：韦睿将要围栅栏，北魏派出数百人排阵在城门外，韦睿想要攻击他们，诸位将领们都说： 前次轻装而来，没有很好地备战，应该慢慢回去给士兵发授甲衣，方才可以进击。 
English: Wei Rui was about to build a fence. The Northern Wei sent hundreds of men to line up outside the city gate. Wei Rui wanted to attack them. All the generals said, "The last time we came lightly armed, we did not prepare well for the battle. We should slowly go back and issue armor to the soldiers before we can attack."

古文：睿曰： 不然。
现代文：韦睿回答： 不对。
English: Wei San said, "That's not right."

古文：魏城中二千馀人，足以固守，今无故出人于外，必其骁勇者也。苟能挫之，其城自拔。 
现代文：北魏城中有两千多人，足以固守，现在无缘无故而把人马安排在外面，这些人一定是特别骁勇善战者，如果能挫败他们，这座成就自然能攻下来。 
English: There are more than two thousand people in the Northern Wei City, enough to hold on, and now they are arranging people and horses outside for no reason. These people must be particularly brave and good fighters. If they can be defeated, this achievement can naturally be attacked.

古文：众犹迟疑，睿指其节曰： 朝廷授此，非以为饰，韦睿法不可犯也！ 
现代文：众人还迟疑不定，韦睿指着旄节说道： 朝廷给了我这东西，不是用来做装饰的，我韦睿的军法是不容违反的。 
English: The crowd was still hesitant. Wei Rui pointed to the skull and said: "The court gave me this thing, it is not for decoration, I Wei Rui's military law is not allowed to be violated.

古文：遂进击之，士皆殊死战，魏兵败走，因急攻之，中宿而拔，遂至合肥。
现代文：于是开始向北魏的军队发起攻击，兵士们都殊死作战，北魏的兵士败逃，因此便对小岘发起了猛烈攻击，次日夜间攻下了小岘，于是到达了合肥。
English: So they began to attack the Northern Wei army. The soldiers fought to the death. The Northern Wei soldiers were defeated and fled, so they launched a fierce attack on Xiaoju. The next day, they captured Xiaoju at night, and then arrived in Hefei.

古文：先是，右军司马胡景略等攻合肥，久未下，睿按山川，夜，帅众堰肥水，顷之，堰成水通，舟舰继至。
现代文：原先，右军司马胡景略等攻打合肥，久攻不下，韦睿巡视了山川地理形势，夜间，率领众人修堰阻拦肥水，很快，堰坝筑成水路连通，舟船相继而至。
English: Originally, the right-wing military secretary Ma Hu Jingliao and others attacked Hefei, but they could not attack for a long time. Wei Rui inspected the geographical situation of the mountains and rivers. At night, he led the people to build a dam to block the fertilizer water. Soon, the dam was built into a waterway, and boats came one after another.

古文：魏筑东、西小城夹合肥，睿先攻二城，魏将杨灵胤帅众五万奄至。
现代文：北魏修筑了东、西小城以便夹护合肥，韦睿先攻打下这两座小城，北魏将领杨灵胤率领五万军队忽然而至。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty built the East and West Small Towns in order to protect Hefei. Wei Rui attacked the two small towns first, and the Northern Wei general Yang Lingyan suddenly arrived with 50,000 troops.

古文：众惧不敌，请奏益兵，睿笑曰： 贼至城下，方求益兵，将何所及！
现代文：众人害怕不能抵挡得住，请求上奏朝廷派兵增援，韦睿笑道说： 贼寇来到了城下，方才请求增兵，那里还能来得及呢？
English: The people were afraid that they would not be able to resist, and asked the imperial court to send reinforcements. Wei Rui said with a smile: The bandits came to the city, and only then did they ask for more troops. How could they still have time?

古文：且吾求益兵，彼亦益兵。兵贵用奇，岂在众也！ 
现代文：况且我请求增兵，对方也增兵，用兵之法贵在出奇制胜，岂在人数众多呢？ 
English: Moreover, if I ask for more troops, the other side will also increase the number of troops. The use of troops is expensive in a surprise victory, is there a large number of people?

古文：遂击灵胤，破之。
现代文：于是出击杨灵胤，打败了他。
English: So he attacked Yang Lingyin and defeated him.

古文：睿使军主王怀静筑城于岸以守堰，魏攻拔之，城中千馀人皆没。
现代文：韦睿派军主王怀静在岸边修筑城堡来守护堰坝，北魏攻占了城堡，城中一千多人全部淹死。
English: Wei Rui sent the army commander Wang Huaijing to build a castle on the shore to guard the dam. The Northern Wei conquered the castle, and more than a thousand people in the city were all drowned.

古文：魏人乘胜至堤下，兵势甚盛，诸将欲退还漅湖，或欲保三叉，睿怒曰： 宁有此邪！ 
现代文：北魏军队乘胜来到堤下，兵势特别凶猛，韦睿手下的诸位将领想要退回到巢湖去，有人提出想回保三叉，韦睿怒不可遏，说： 那里有这样的道理呢！ 
English: The Northern Wei army took advantage of the victory and came under the embankment. The army was particularly fierce. The generals under Wei Rui wanted to retreat back to the lake. Some people suggested that they wanted to return to Bao Trident. Wei Rui was furious and said: There is such a reason!

古文：命取伞扇麾幢，树之堤下，示无动志。
现代文：他命令人取来自己的伞扇麾幢，树立在堤下，以表示毫无退撤之意。
English: He ordered people to take their own umbrella fans and erect them under the embankment to show that they had no intention of withdrawing.

古文：魏人来凿堤，睿亲与之争，魏兵却，因筑垒于堤以自固。
现代文：北魏人来凿堤，韦睿亲自与其搏斗，北魏兵退撤了崐，于是韦睿又在堤上修筑了城垒，以便固守。
English: The Northern Wei people came to dig a dike, and Wei Rui personally fought against them. The Northern Wei soldiers retreated, so Wei Rui built a fortress on the dike in order to hold on.

古文：睿起斗舰，高与合肥城等，四面临之，城中人皆哭，守将社元伦登城督战，中弩死。
现代文：韦睿起造战舰，其高低与合肥城相等，从四面逼近合肥城，城里的人都怕的哭了，守将杜元伦登城督战，被弩机射中而身亡。
English: Wei Rui started to build a warship, the height and width of which were equal to that of Hefei City. It approached Hefei City from all sides. People in the city were afraid and cried. Du Yuan, the warden of Lunden City, was shot by a machine gun and died.

古文：辛巳，城溃，俘斩万馀级，获牛马以万数。
现代文：辛已，合肥城溃破，俘虏和斩杀了一万多人，抓获的牛羊以万计数。
English: The siege of Hefei was broken, more than 10,000 people were captured and killed, and tens of thousands of cattle and sheep were captured.

古文：睿体素羸，未尝跨马，每战，常乘板舆督厉将士，勇气无敌；昼接宾旅，夜半起，算军书，张灯达曙。
现代文：韦睿的体质向来赢弱，从来没有骑过马，每次战斗，都乘坐在板舆上监督激励将士们，勇气十足，所向无敌；他白天接待宾客来访者，夜半起来，谋算军书，直到清晨，没有倦意。
English: Wei Rui's constitution has always been weak and weak. He has never ridden a horse. In every battle, he sat on the board to supervise and inspire the soldiers. He is full of courage and invincible. He receives guests and visitors during the day, gets up in the middle of the night, and calculates military records until the early morning. He is not tired.

古文：抚扦其众，常如不及，故投募之士争归之。
现代文：他对部下爱护备至，常恐不及，所以投奔他的人士争相前来。
English: He was very protective of his men and often too scared, so those who ran to him came in droves.

古文：所至顿舍，馆宇籓墙，皆应准绳。
现代文：他所到达之处住的地方，房屋围墙，都合乎规定。
English: Wherever he ends up, the place where he lives, the walled compound, it's all according to the rules.

古文：诸军进至东陵，有诏班师。去魏城既近，诸将恐其追蹑，睿悉遣辎重居前，身乘小舆殿后，魏人服睿威名，望之不敢逼，全军而还。
现代文：各路军马抵达东陵，有诏令传来让班师而返，众将领们担心北魏军队随后追击，韦睿安排全部辎重在前而行，自己乘坐小车殿后，北魏军队摄服于韦睿的威名，眼望着却不敢逼近，梁朝军队全部安然而返。
English: All the armies and horses arrived in Dongling, and a decree was issued to let the squadron return. The generals were worried that the Northern Wei army would chase after them. Wei Rui arranged for all the baggage to go ahead. After he took a carriage, the Northern Wei army submitted to Wei Rui's prestige, but did not dare to approach, and the Liang Dynasty army all returned safely.

古文：于是迁豫州治合肥。
现代文：于是，梁朝把豫州治所迁到合肥。
English: As a result, Liang moved the Henan Provincial Government to Hefei.

古文：壬午，魏遣尚书元遥南拒梁兵。
现代文：壬午，北魏派遣尚书元遥南下抵抗梁朝军队。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Shang Shuyuan to the far south to resist the Liang Dynasty army.

古文：癸未，魏遣征西将军于劲节度秦、陇诸军。
现代文：癸未，北魏派遣征西将军于劲指挥秦、陇之地的军队。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the Western Conquest General Yu Jian to command the armies of Qin and Shandong.

古文：丁亥，庐江太守闻喜裴邃克魏羊石城，庚寅，又克霍丘城。
现代文：丁亥，庐江太守闻喜人裴邃攻克了北魏的羊石城，庚寅，又攻克了霍丘城。
English: Dinghai, the governor of the Minjiang River, and Wenshijin Peiqi conquered the Northern Wei's Yangshi City, and Geng Yin conquered Huoqiu City.

古文：六月，庚子，青、冀二州刺史桓和克朐山城。
现代文：六月，庚子，青、冀二州刺史桓和攻克了朐山城。
English: In June, Geng Zi, Qing and Hebei conquered Lushan City.

古文：乙巳，魏安西将军元丽击王法智，破之，斩首六千级。
现代文：乙巳，北魏安西将军元丽进攻王法智，打败了他，斩首六千多。
English: At this time, the Northern Wei Anxi General Yuan Li attacked Wang Fazhi, defeated him, and beheaded more than six thousand.

古文：张惠绍与假徐州刺史宋黑水陆俱进，趣彭城，围高冢戍，魏武卫将军奚康生将兵救之，丁未，惠绍兵不利，黑战死。
现代文：张惠绍与代理徐州刺史的宋黑水陆并进，直抵彭城，围攻高冢戍，北魏武卫将军奚康生率兵前去援救，丁未，张惠绍出兵失利，宋黑战死。
English: Zhang Huishao and Song Hei Shui Lu, the agent of Xuzhou stabbing history, marched side by side, reached Pengcheng, besieged Gao Gan, the Northern Wei Wuwei General Zou Kangsheng led the troops to rescue, Ding Wei, Zhang Huishao sent troops failed, Song Hei died in battle.

古文：太子统生五岁，能遍诵《五经》；庚戌，始自禁中山居东宫。
现代文：太子萧统年方五岁，就能完整地诵读《五经》。庚戌，萧统始从皇宫中搬出入住东宫。
English: At the age of five, Prince Xiao Tong was able to recite the "Five Classics" completely. After the Geng Zi, Xiao Tong began to move out of the Imperial Palace to live in the East Palace.

古文：丁巳，魏以度支尚书邢峦都督东讨诸军事。
现代文：丁巳，北魏委派度支尚书邢峦都督东讨诸军事。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Committee sent the governor of Dushan to the East to discuss military affairs.

古文：魏骠骑大将军冯翊惠公源怀卒。
现代文：北魏骠骑大将军冯翊惠公源怀去世。
English: The general of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Feng Junhui, passed away.

古文：怀性宽简，不喜烦碎，常曰： 为贵人当举纲维，何必事事详细！
现代文：源怀性格宽容直率，不喜欢烦琐之事，常常说： 做贵人应当举纲执要，何必事事俱到呢？
English: He is tolerant and straightforward by nature, and does not like tedious things. He often says: To be a noble person, you should stick to the program, why do you have to do everything?

古文：譬如为屋，但外望高显，楹栋平正，基壁完牢，足矣；斧斤不平，斫削不密，非屋之病也。 
现代文：譬如建房屋，只要从外面望去高大突出，梁柱平正，地基和墙壁完好坚固，就足够了。刀斧不平，砍削不细，并非是房屋的毛病。 
English: For example, to build a house, it is enough to see from the outside that the ridge is tall and protruding, the beams and columns are straight, and the foundation and walls are intact and solid. If the knife and axe are not flat and the cutting is not fine, it is not a problem with the house.

古文：秋，七月，丙寅，桓和击魏兗州，拔固城。
现代文：秋季，七月丙寅，桓和攻打北魏兖州，攻占了固城。
English: In the autumn, in July, Hsin-Yin and Huan-He attacked Bozhou of the Northern Wei Dynasty and captured Gucheng.

古文：吕苟儿率众十馀万屯孤山，围逼秦州，元丽进击，大破之。
现代文：梁朝吕苟儿率领十多万人驻扎在孤山，围逼秦州，元丽进攻，大败吕苟儿。
English: Liang Zhaoguo led more than one hundred thousand people stationed in the lonely mountain, besieged Qinzhou, attacked Yuanli, and defeated Lioguo.

古文：行秦州事李韶掩击孤山，获其父母妻子，庚辰，苟儿帅其徒诣丽降。
现代文：代理秦州刺史李韶偷袭孤山，抓获了吕苟儿的父母、妻子和儿女，庚辰，吕苟儿率领部下向元丽投降。
English: The agent of the Qin State Jishi, Li Yan, raided the lonely mountain, captured the parents, wife and children of Lv Guorong, Geng Chen, and Lv Guorong led his subordinates to surrender to Yuan Li.

古文：兼太仆卿杨椿别讨陈瞻，瞻据险拒守。
现代文：北魏兼太仆卿杨椿另外去讨伐陈瞻，陈瞻据险抗守。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor and Empress Dowager's manservant Yang Chin also went to fight Chen Zhan, and Chen Zhan resisted dangerously.

古文：诸将或请伏兵山蹊，断其出入，待粮尽而攻之，或欲斩木焚山，然后进讨。椿曰： 皆非计也。
现代文：将领中有人请求在山涧中埋藏伏兵，阻断陈瞻的出入之道，等待他粮食耗尽之后再攻打，有人主张伐木烧山，然后再攻打，杨椿说： 这都不是良策。
English: Some of the generals asked to bury an ambush in the mountains, block Chen Zhan's way in and out, and wait for him to run out of food before attacking. Some advocated logging and burning the mountain before attacking. Yang Tsubaki said: This is not a good strategy.

古文：自官军之至，所向辄克，贼所以深窜，正避死耳。
现代文：自从官军出发以来，所到之处，无不攻克，贼寇们之所以窜入深山之中，正是为了逃避死亡。
English: Since the departure of the government army, they have conquered everywhere they went. The reason why the bandits broke into the deep mountains was precisely to escape death.

古文：今约勒诸军，勿更侵掠，贼必谓我见险不前；待其无备，然后奋击，可一举平也。 
现代文：现在命令各路军队暂时按兵不动，不要进攻，贼寇们一定认为我们见险不前；我们乘其不备之时，奋力攻击，就可以一举平定他们。 
English: Now we have ordered the troops on all sides to hold their positions for the time being and not to attack. The bandits must think that we are running out of time. If we take advantage of their unpreparedness and attack with all our strength, we will be able to subdue them at one stroke.

古文：乃止屯不进。
现代文：于是，让部队驻扎下来，不再前进了。
English: As a result, the troops were stationed and no longer advanced.

古文：贼果出抄掠，椿复以马畜饵之，不加讨逐。
现代文：贼寇们果然出来抢掠，杨椿又以马匹作为诱饵，不加以追击。
English: The bandits did indeed come out to loot, and Yang Camellia used the horses as bait, and did not pursue them.

古文：久之，阴简精卒，衔枚夜袭之，斩瞻，传首。
现代文：许久，杨椿悄悄地挑选精悍兵卒，让他们口中衔着木棒以免弄出声响，乘夜偷袭陈瞻，斩了陈瞻，传送首级到洛阳。
English: For a long time, Yang Tsubaki quietly selected brave soldiers, let them hold a wooden stick in their mouths so as not to make noise, sneaked Chen Zhan at night, beheaded Chen Zhan, and sent the head to Luoyang.

古文：秦、泾二州皆平。
现代文：于是，秦、泾两州都平定了。
English: As a result, both the Qin and Min states were pacified.

古文：戊子，徐州刺史王伯敖与魏中山王英战于阴陵，伯敖兵败，失亡五千馀人。
现代文：戊子，徐州刺史王伯敖与北魏中山王元英在阴陵交战，王伯敖兵败，失散伤亡五千多人。
English: Wu Zi, Xuzhou Zishi, Wang Boqi and Northern Wei Zhongshan Wang Yuanying fought in Yinling, Wang Boqi was defeated, and more than five thousand casualties were lost.

古文：己丑，魏发定、冀、瀛、相、并、肆六州十万人以益南行之兵。
现代文：己丑，北魏征发定、冀、瀛、相、并、肆六州十万人以增加南进之兵。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty conscripted 100,000 people from six states, including Dading, Hebei, Shandong, Sichuan, and Gansu, to increase the number of soldiers marching south.

古文：上遣将军角念将兵一万屯蒙山，招纳兗州之民，降者甚众。
现代文：梁武帝派遣将军角念率兵一万驻扎蒙山，招纳兖州的百姓，前来投降的人很多。
English: Emperor Liangwu dispatched General Jiao Nian with 10,000 soldiers stationed in Mengshan to recruit the people of Zhangzhou, and many people came to surrender.

古文：是时，将军萧及屯固城，桓和屯孤山。
现代文：这时，将军萧及驻守在固城，桓和驻守在孤山。
English: At this time, General Xiao Ji was stationed in Gucheng, and Huan He was stationed in Loushan.

古文：魏邢峦遣统军樊鲁攻和，别将元恒攻及，统军毕祖朽攻念。
现代文：北魏邢峦派遣统军樊鲁攻打桓和，别将元恒攻打萧及，统军毕祖朽攻打角念。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent the united army of Jielu to attack Kuanhe, not to attack Yuanheng, and the united army of Bi Zu Gui to attack Huanmen.

古文：壬寅，鲁大破和于孤山，恒拔固城，祖配击念，走之。
现代文：壬寅，樊鲁大败桓和于孤山，元恒攻下了固城，毕祖朽进攻角念，赶跑了他。
English: Jinyin, Janglu defeated and defeated in the lonely mountain, Yuanheng captured the fortified city, Bi Zukui attacked Junnian, and drove him away.

古文：己酉，魏诏平南将军安乐王诠督后发诸军赴淮南。
现代文：己酉，北魏诏令平南将军安乐王元诠督率后出发的各路军队赶赴淮南。
English: After the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict ordering the Pingnan general An Le Wang Yuan to take the lead, the various armies rushed to Huainan.

古文：诠，长乐之子也。
现代文：元诠是元长乐的儿子。
English: Yuan Yan is the son of Yuan Changle.

古文：将军蓝怀恭与魏邢蛮战于睢口，怀恭败绩，峦进围宿预。
现代文：将军蓝怀恭与北魏邢峦在睢口交战，蓝怀恭战败，邢峦进而围攻宿预。
English: The general Lan Huaigong fought with the Northern Wei army at Hukou, Lan Huaigong was defeated, and the army then besieged Suiyuan.

古文：怀恭复于清南筑城，峦与平南将军杨大眼合攻之，九月，癸酉，拔之，斩怀恭，杀获万计。
现代文：蓝怀恭又在清水之南修筑城堡，邢峦与平南将军杨大眼合攻蓝怀恭，九月癸酉，攻克城堡，斩了蓝怀恭，斩杀俘获梁军以万计数。
English: Lan Huaiqiong also built a castle in the south of Qingshui. He and the Pingnan general Yang Dajian jointly attacked Lan Huaiqiong. In September, they conquered the castle, killed Lan Huaiqiong, and killed and captured tens of thousands of Liang's troops.

古文：张惠绍弃宿预，萧昞弃淮阳，遁还。
现代文：张惠绍放弃了宿预，萧放弃了淮阳，逃跑了回来。
English: Zhang Huishao gave up his lodging, Xiao gave up Huaiyang and fled back.

古文：临川王宏以帝弟将兵，器械精新，军容甚盛，北人以为百数十年所未之有。
现代文：临川王萧宏以皇上弟弟的身份率兵出发，武器装备精良崭新，军容甚壮，北方人认为百十来年所没有见过。
English: Linchuan King Xiaohong set out as the emperor's younger brother and led the troops. The weapons and equipment were sophisticated and brand new, and the army was very strong. The northerners believed that they had not seen anything like this in a hundred years.

古文：军次洛口，前军克梁城，诸将欲乘胜深入，宏性懦怯，部分乖方。
现代文：军队到达洛口，前军攻克了梁城，诸位将领想乘胜而深入，但是萧宏生性懦怯，安排部署失当。
English: The army arrived at Lokou, the former army conquered Liangcheng, and the generals wanted to take advantage of the victory and go deeper, but Xiao Hong was cowardly and the deployment was inappropriate.

古文：魏诏邢峦引兵渡淮，与中山王英合攻梁城。宏闻之，惧，召诸将议旋师。吕僧珍曰： 知难而退，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：北魏诏令邢峦领兵渡过淮崐河，同中山王元英合师攻打梁城，萧宏知道此消息后，大为惊恐，召集各位将领商议撤兵，吕僧珍说道： 知难而退，不是非常对的吗？ 
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict ordering Xing to lead his troops across the Huaiyu River and attack Liangcheng with Zhongshan Wang Yuanying's joint division. After Xiao Hong learned this news, he was greatly alarmed and called together the generals to discuss the withdrawal of troops. Lü Sengzhen said: Isn't it right to retreat in the face of adversity?

古文：宏曰： 我亦以为然。 
现代文：萧宏说： 我也认为应该这样。 
English: Xiao Hong said: I also think it should be like this.

古文：柳惔曰： 自我大众所临，何城不服，何谓难乎！ 
现代文：柳却说： 自从我大军出征以来，所到之处，哪座城池不被征服，怎么能说难呢？ 
English: Liu, however, said: "Since the departure of my great army, which city has not been conquered, how can it be said to be difficult?

古文：裴邃曰： 是行也，固敌是求，何难之避！ 
现代文：裴邃也说道： 这次出征，就是找敌人来打，有什么难可避呢？ 
English: Pei Xuan also said: This expedition is to find the enemy to fight, what is difficult to avoid?

古文：马仙琕曰： 王安得亡国之言！
现代文：马仙更说道： 大王您怎么能说出这样的亡国之言呢？
English: Ma Xian said, "Great King, how can you say such words about overthrowing the country?"

古文：天子扫境内以属王，有前死一尺，无却生一寸！ 
现代文：天子把扫平境内的重任付给大王您，应该向前一尺死，而不可退后一寸生！ 
English: The Son of Heaven has given you, the great king, the important task of sweeping the country. You should die one foot forward, and not live one inch back!

古文：昌义之怒，须发尽磔，曰： 吕僧珍可斩也！
现代文：昌义之怒不可遏，气得头发和胡须都竖起来了，叫道： 吕僧珍应当斩首！
English: Chang Yi's anger could not be contained. He was so angry that his hair and beard were standing on end. He shouted: "Lu Sonzhen should be beheaded!"

古文：岂有百万之师出未逢敌，望风遽退！何而目得见圣主乎！ 
现代文：那里有百万之师出来还没有遇上敌人，就望风而匆匆撤退，有什么脸面去见圣上呢？ 
English: Where there are a million soldiers who come out before they meet the enemy, and hastily retreat when they see the wind, who has the face to go to the Holy One?

古文：硃僧勇、胡辛生拔剑而退，曰： 欲退自退，下官当前向取死。 
现代文：朱僧勇、胡辛生两人拨剑而起，说道： 谁要想撤退，自己撤退好了，下官我当前进决一死战。 
English: Zhu Sangyong and Hu Xinsheng both raised their swords and said, "Whoever wants to withdraw, let him withdraw. I am now entering a battle to the death."

古文：议者罢出，僧珍谢诸将曰： 殿下昨来风动，意不在军，深恐大致沮丧，故欲全师而返耳。 
现代文：参加议论的将领结束后退了出来，吕僧珍向诸将谢罪说： 殿下从昨天开始心神不定，无意于战，深深担心战事失利，所以欲想军队无损而返。 
English: When the generals who had participated in the discussion had finished, they withdrew, and Lü Sengzhen said to the generals, "Your highness, since yesterday, has been unsettled, has no intention of fighting, and is deeply worried about losing the battle, so he wants to return the army intact.

古文：宏不敢遽违群议，停军不前。
现代文：萧宏不敢立即违背众人的建议，只好按兵不动。
English: Xiao Hong did not dare to immediately go against everyone's advice, so he had no choice but to stand his ground.

古文：魏人知其不武，遗以巾帼，且歌之曰： 不畏萧娘与吕姥，但畏合肥有韦虎。 
现代文：北魏人知道萧宏缺乏英武之气，就给他送来了妇女用的头巾和发饰，并且编了一首歌唱道： 不畏萧娘与吕姥，但畏合肥有韦虎。 
English: The Northern Wei people knew that Xiao Hong lacked military prowess, so they sent him women's headscarves and hair ornaments, and made up a song to sing: Don't be afraid of Xiao Niang and Lvuba, but be afraid of Hui Fei and Wei Hu.

古文：虎，谓韦睿也。
现代文：歌中之 虎 指韦睿。
English: The tiger in the song refers to Wei Rui.

古文：僧珍叹曰： 使始兴、吴平为帅而佐之，岂有为敌人所侮如是乎！ 
现代文：吕僧珍叹息着说： 这次行动，如果让始兴王和吴平侯为统帅，而我辅佐他们，那里会让敌人这样地侮辱呢？ 
English: Lv Sozhen said with a sigh: If this operation is led by King Shi Xing and Wu Ping Hou, and I assist them, where would the enemy allow such an affront?

古文：欲遣裴邃分军取寿阳，大众停洛口，宏固执不听，令军中曰： 人马有前行者斩！ 
现代文：吕僧珍想要派遣裴邃带领一部分兵力攻取寿阳，而让大部队停在洛口，但是萧宏固执不听，对军中下命令： 凡是人马有前行者，一律斩首！ 
English: Lv Sozhen wanted to send Pei Hao to lead a part of the army to attack Shouyang, and let the main army stop at Lokou, but Xiao Hong stubbornly disobeyed and ordered the army: If anyone goes ahead, they will be beheaded!

古文：于是将士人怀愤怒。
现代文：于是，将士们人人满腔愤怒。
English: As a result, the soldiers were all filled with rage.

古文：魏奚康生驰遣杨大眼谓中山王英曰： 梁人自克梁城已后，久不进军，其势可见，必畏我也。
现代文：北魏奚康生派杨大眼火速赶去对中山王元英说： 梁朝人自从攻克梁城以后，久久不再进军，其情形可以看得清楚，必定是害怕我们。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Kang Sheng sent Yang Dajian to rush to Zhongshan Wang Yuanying and said, "Since the Liang Dynasty conquered Liangcheng, they have not marched for a long time. You can see their situation clearly. They must be afraid of us."

古文：王若进据洛水，彼自奔败。 
现代文：大王若是进而占据洛水，他们一定会逃跑的。 
English: If the great king continues to occupy Luoshui, they will certainly flee.

古文：英曰： 萧临川虽騃，其下有良将韦、裴之属，未可轻也。
现代文：元英说： 萧临川虽然愚呆，但他手下却有良将韦睿、裴邃等人，不可以轻敌。
English: Yuan Ying said: Although Xiao Linchuan is stupid, he has good generals such as Wei Rui and Pei Yao under his command. He should not underestimate the enemy.

古文：宜且观形势，勿与交锋。
现代文：应该先观察一下形势，不要与他们交战。 
English: We should first observe the situation and not fight with them.

古文：张惠绍号令严明，所至独克，军于下邳，下邳人多欲降者，惠绍谕之曰： 我若得城，诸卿皆是国人，若不能克，徒使诸卿失乡里，非朝廷吊民之意也。
现代文：张惠绍号令严明，所到之处无不取胜，驻军于下邳，下邳人很多都想投降他，张惠绍劝谕这些人说： 我如果攻下了这座城，你们就自然都成了圣上治下的臣民了，如果不能攻克，白白地使各位丧失家园，这不是朝廷怜悯百姓的本意呀。
English: Zhang Huishao gave strict orders that wherever he went, he would not fail to win. He stationed his troops in the city of Xiamen, and many people in Xiamen wanted to surrender to him. Zhang Huishao advised these people, saying, "If I capture this city, you will naturally become subjects under the rule of the Holy One. If I cannot conquer it, I will cause you to lose your homes for nothing. This is not the intention of the imperial court to show mercy to the people."

古文：今且安堵复业，勿妄自辛苦。 
现代文：现在你们且安居乐业，不要妄自辛苦。 
English: Nowadays, it's still important to take care of your own business first, so don't waste your hard work.

古文：降人咸悦。
现代文：想要投降的人都心悦诚服。
English: Those who came to surrender were happy.

古文：己丑，夜，洛口暴风雨，军中惊，临川王宏与数骑逃去。将士求宏不得，皆散归，弃甲投戈，填满水陆，捐弃病者及羸老，死者近五万人。
现代文：己丑，夜间，洛口有暴风雨，军中一片惊慌，临川王萧宏带着几个人骑马逃跑了，将士们四处找不着他，就全跑散而归，所丢弃的盔甲兵器，水中和地上到处都是，有病者和年老体弱者都被扔下不顾，死亡都近五万人。
English: At night, there was a storm in Lokou, and the army panicked. Linchuan King Xiaohong fled on horseback with several people. The soldiers couldn't find him everywhere, so they all ran away. The discarded armor and weapons were everywhere, in the water and on the ground. The sick and the old and infirm were abandoned, and nearly fifty thousand people died.

古文：宏乘小船济江，夜至白石垒，叩城门求入。
现代文：萧宏乘坐小船渡过长江，在夜间到了白石垒，叩打城门请求入内。
English: Xiao Hong took a small boat across the Yangtze River and arrived at the White Stone Fort at night, knocking on the gate to request entry.

古文：临汝侯渊猷登城谓曰： 百万之师，一朝鸟散，国之存亡，未可知也。
现代文：临汝侯萧渊猷登上城楼对萧宏说： 你统领百万之师，一朝作鸟兽散，国家的生死存亡，还未可预料。
English: When Lord Xiaoyuan ascended the castle tower, he said to Xiao Hong, "You are in command of a million soldiers, and you will be scattered like birds and beasts. The life and death of the country cannot be predicted.

古文：恐奸人乘间为变，城不可夜开。 
现代文：我担心奸人乘机生变，所以不能在夜间打开城门。 
English: I can't open the gates at night, for fear of spies taking advantage.

古文：宏无以对，乃缒食馈之。
现代文：萧宏听了无言以对，于是萧渊猷就用绳子把食物从城上吊下去让萧宏吃了。
English: Xiao Hong was speechless, so Xiao Yuanjun used a rope to hang the food from the castle for Xiao Hong to eat.

古文：渊猷，渊藻之弟。
现代文：萧渊猷是萧渊藻的弟弟。
English: Xiao Yuanzhang is the younger brother of Xiao Yuanzhang.

古文：时昌义之军梁城，闻洛口败，与张惠绍皆引兵退。
现代文：当时，昌义之驻军梁城，听说洛口方面失败，就与张惠绍领兵撤退了。
English: At that time, Changyi's garrison in Liangcheng, hearing that the Lokou side had failed, withdrew with Zhang Huishao leading the troops.

古文：魏主诏中山王英乘胜平荡东南，遂北至马头，攻拔之，城中粮储，魏悉迁之归北。
现代文：北魏宣武帝诏令中山王元英乘胜平荡东南，元英一直追逐至马头，攻下了马头城，城中的粮食储备，全部被北魏人运还北方。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to the King of Zhongshan, Yuan Ying, to take Shengping to the southeast. Yuan Ying chased him all the way to Ma Tau, captured Ma Tau City, and the grain reserves in the city, all of which were transported back to the north by the Northern Wei people.

古文：议者咸曰： 魏运米北归，当不复南向。 
现代文：人们都议论说： 北魏人运米北归，一定不再南下了。 
English: People all argued that: the Northern Wei people's movement must return to the north, and must not go south again.

古文：上曰： 不然，此必欲进兵，为诈计耳。 
现代文：梁武帝说： 不对，这一定是他们还想进兵，而特意作此伪诈之计。 
English: Liang Wu Di said: No, it must be that they still want to enter the army, and deliberately make this deception.

古文：乃命修钟离城，敕昌义之为战守之备。
现代文：于是命令修筑钟离城，并命令昌义之作好守卫钟离城的准备。
English: Therefore, he ordered the construction of the bell tower, and ordered Changyi to prepare to guard the bell tower.

古文：冬，十月，英进围钟离，魏主诏邢峦引兵会之。
现代文：冬季十月，元英进而围攻钟离，北魏宣武帝诏令邢峦带领部队与元英会合。
English: In the winter of October, Yuan Ying further besieged Zhongli, and the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict to lead the troops to meet with Yuan Ying.

古文：峦上表，以为： 南军虽野战非敌，而城守有馀，今尽锐攻钟离，得之则所利无几，不得则亏损甚大。
现代文：邢峦上表，认为： 梁朝军队虽然在野战方面不是我们的敌手，但是在守城方面却绰绰有余，如今我们使出全部力量攻打钟离，攻下来了所得到的好处没有多少，万一攻不下来则所受的损失是巨大的。
English: Zou Shang watch, said: Although the Liang Dynasty army is not our opponent in the field, it is more than enough in the defense of the city. Now we have used all our strength to attack Zhongli, and the benefits we have gained are not much. If we do not attack, the losses will be huge.

古文：且介在淮外，借使束手归顺，犹恐无粮难守，况杀士卒以攻之乎！
现代文：而且钟离在淮南，假使该城束手归顺我们，尚且担心没有粮食难以驻守，更何况用众多士卒的生命来攻取呢！
English: Moreover, the clock is ticking in Huainan. Even if the city surrenders to us, we still fear that it will be difficult to garrison it without food, not to mention using the lives of many soldiers to capture it!

古文：又，征南士卒从戎二时，疲弊死伤，不问可知。
现代文：还有，南征的士卒从夏到秋连续两个季度作战，疲惫伤亡情况，不问自知。
English: Moreover, the soldiers of the Southern Expedition fought for two consecutive quarters from summer to autumn, and they knew all about the exhaustion and casualties.

古文：虽有乘胜之资，惧无可用之力。
现代文：所以，虽有乘胜之勇，恐怕却无可用之力。
English: Therefore, although there is the courage to take advantage of victory, I am afraid there is no power to use.

古文：若臣愚见，谓宜修复旧戍，抚循诸州，以俟后举，江东之衅，不患其无。 
现代文：如果依我的愚见，应该修复旧的寨堡，安抚各州，以便等待下一步行动，江东的空子，不愁找不到。 
English: If, in my foolish opinion, the old fortifications should be repaired, and the states pacified, in order to await the next step, the loophole in the east of the river will not be difficult to find.

古文：诏曰： 济淮掎角，事如前敕，何容犹尔盘桓，方有此请！可速进军！ 
现代文：宣武帝诏令： 你渡过淮河，与元英形成夹攻之势，事情已如前次的命令所说，哪能再让你犹豫徘徊，再作请求！应迅速进军！ 
English: Emperor Xuanwu's edict: You have crossed the Huai River and formed a pincer movement with Yuan Ying, the situation is as the previous order said, how can you hesitate and make a request again! You should march quickly!

古文：峦又表，以为： 今中山进军钟离，实所未解。
现代文：邢峦又上表，指出： 现在中山王进军钟离，实在是不知其所以然。
English: Zou also pointed out the above table, pointing out: Now Zhongshan Wang's march into Zhongli is really unknown.

古文：若为得失之计，不顾万全，直袭广陵，出其不备，或未可知。
现代文：如果不从得失方面来考虑，不顾一切，直接去奔袭广陵，出其不备，或许说不定还可以攻得下来。
English: If we do not consider the gains and losses, and regardless of everything, directly attack Guangling, we may be able to attack it.

古文：若正欲以八十日粮取钟离城者，臣未之前闻也。
现代文：如果想以八十天为期攻取钟离城，我是闻所未闻。
English: I've never heard of an 80-day plan to take the city of Zhongli.

古文：彼坚城自守。不与人战，城堑水深，非可填塞，空坐至春，士卒自弊。
现代文：他们坚城自守，不与我们交战，城壕里水很深，无法填塞，而我们空坐到春天，士卒们将不战而自己败溃。
English: They have fortified themselves, and will not fight against us; the water is too deep in the ditches to fill them, and we sit empty until the spring, when the soldiers will be defeated without a fight.

古文：若遣臣赴彼，从何致粮！
现代文：如果派遣我前去那里，从何处获得粮食呢？
English: If I am sent there, where will I get food?

古文：夏来之兵，不赍冬服，脱遇冰雪，何方取济！
现代文：我们的军队是从夏天出发的，没有准备冬装，如果遇上冰雪，从什么地方得到救济呢？
English: Our troops set out in the summer without winter clothing. If they encounter ice and snow, where will they get relief?

古文：臣宁荷怯懦不进之责，不受败损空行之罪。
现代文：我宁可承担怯懦而不敢前进的责任，也不愿意领受失败损伤、白白行动一场的罪名。
English: I would rather bear the responsibility of cowardice and not dare to move forward, rather than accept the failure and injury, the crime of acting in vain.

古文：钟离天险，朝贵所具，若有内应，则所不知；如其无也，必无克状。
现代文：钟离地处天险，这一点朝中的大臣们都知晓，如果有内部策应，说不定或许还可以得手；如果没有内应，则一定无法攻克。
English: The clock is ticking, and the ministers of the DPRK and China are all aware of this. If there is an internal response, it may be possible to succeed; if there is no internal response, it will certainly be impossible to overcome.

古文：若信臣言，愿赐臣停，若谓臣惮行求还，臣所领兵尽付中山，任其处分，臣止以单骑随之东西。
现代文：如果陛下相信我的话，那么希望恩赐我停止前进；如果认为我害怕此行而要求返回，那么乞求把我所领的军队全部交付给中山王，听任他指挥部署，而我只以单骑随他东西奔走。
English: If Your Majesty believes my words, then I hope that You will grant me the grace to stop advancing; if You think that I am afraid of this trip and ask to return, then I beg You to give all the troops under my command to King Zhongshan and let him command and deploy, and I will only follow him on horseback.

古文：臣屡更为将，颇知可否，臣既谓难，何容强遣！ 
现代文：我多次率兵出征，颇知事情之可否，我既然认为此行难成，何必还要强迫遣派呢？ 
English: I've led troops into battle many times, and I know enough to know whether things are possible or not. Since I think this trip will be difficult, why should I be forced to send troops?

古文：乃召峦还，更命镇东将军萧宝寅与英同围钟离。
现代文：于是，诏令邢峦返回，另命令镇东将军萧宝寅与元英一同围攻钟离。
English: As a result, he ordered Zhendong General Xiao Baoying and Yuan Ying to besiege Zhongli.

古文：侍中卢昶素恶峦，与侍中、领右卫将军元晖共谮之，使御史中尉崔亮弹峦在汉中掠人为奴婢。
现代文：侍中卢昶向来忌恨邢峦，于是就乘机与侍中、领右卫将军元晖一道中伤邢峦，让御史中尉崔亮弹劾邢峦在汉中曾经抢掠当地人为奴婢。
English: Lu Yao, the chamberlain, had always hated Yao, so he took the opportunity to slander Yao together with Yuan Yao, the chamberlain and captain of the right guard, and let Gu Shi lieutenant Cui Liang impeach Yao for robbing the local people as slaves in the Han Dynasty.

古文：峦以汉中所得美女赂晖，晖言于魏主曰： 峦新有大功，不当以赦前小事案之。 
现代文：邢峦用在汉中所得的美女贿赂元晖，元晖就对宣武帝说： 邢峦新近有大功，不应当以大赦天下之前的一件小事来追查他。 
English: He bribed Yuan Shao with a beautiful woman from the Han Dynasty, and Yuan Shao said to Emperor Xuanwu: "You have recently made great achievements, you should not investigate him for a small matter before the general amnesty.

古文：魏主以为然，遂不问。
现代文：宣武帝同意此言，于是就不再追问了。
English: Emperor Xuanwu agreed to this, so he did not pursue the matter any further.

古文：晖与卢昶皆有宠于魏主，而贪纵，时人谓之 饿虎将军 、 饥鹰侍中 。
现代文：元晖与卢昶都得宠于北魏宣武帝，而又特别贪纵，当时人称他们两人分别是 饿虎将军 、 饥鹰侍中 。
English: Both Yuan Xuan and Lu Xun were favored by the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwu, and they were particularly greedy. At that time, they were called the Hungry Tiger General and the Hungry Eagle Attendant, respectively.

古文：晖寻迁吏部尚书，用官皆有定价，大郡二千匹，次郡、下郡递减其半，馀官各有等差，选者谓之 市曹 。
现代文：元晖很快就升为吏部尚书，他任用官员都有定价，大郡为二千匹绢帛，次郡、下郡递减其半，其余官位各有等差，选官的人称为 市曹 。
English: Yuan Shun was soon promoted to the position of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. The officials he appointed were all priced according to the highest price. The largest county was two thousand horses, the second county and the lower county were reduced by half, and the remaining ranks were all unequal. The person who selected the officials was called the mayor.

古文：丁酉，梁兵围义阳者夜遁，魏郢州刺史娄悦追击，破之。
现代文：丁酉，梁朝围攻义阳的军队听说洛口的军队溃逃，于夜间逃遁，北魏郢州刺史娄悦追击，击败了梁朝的逃兵。
English: The army of Dingyao and Liang Dynasty besieging Yiyang heard that the army of Luokou had broken and fled, and fled at night. In Northern Wei Dynasty, Shizhi Jieyue pursued and defeated the deserters of Liang Dynasty.

古文：柔然库者可汗卒，子伏图立，号佗汗可汗，改元始平。
现代文：柔然国库者可汗去世，其子伏图继立，号称佗汗可汗，改年号为始平。
English: Khan, the gentle treasurer of the state, died, and his son Vutu succeeded him. He was known as Sukhan Khan, and his era name was changed to Shiheping.

古文：戊申，佗汗遣使者纥奚勿六跋如魏请和。
现代文：戊申，佗汗派遣使节纥奚勿六跋来到北魏求和。
English: Wushin and Ganhan sent envoys to the Northern Wei to sue for peace.

古文：魏主不报其使，谓勿六跋曰： 蠕蠕远祖社仑，乃魏之叛臣，往者包容，暂听通使。
现代文：宣武帝不愿和解，没有派使节回访，对勿六跋说： 蠕蠕的远祖社仑，乃是北魏的叛臣，过去我们容纳它，暂时允许互通使节。
English: Emperor Xuanwu did not want to be reconciled and did not send an envoy to pay a return visit. He said to Bela: Bela's distant ancestor, Sha Lun, was a traitor to the Northern Wei Dynasty. In the past, we accommodated him and temporarily allowed the exchange of envoys.

古文：今蠕蠕衰微，不及畴昔，大魏之德，方隆周、汉，正以江南未平，少宽北略，通和之事，未容相许。
现代文：现在蠕蠕衰落了，比不上从前了，而我们大魏国的仁德，正和周朝、汉朝一样方兴未艾，只是因为江南尚未平定，所以对北方稍微有所宽容，和好的事情，是不会答应的。
English: Now, the Weimar Republic is in decline and cannot be compared to the past, while the benevolence of our Great Wei State is still in the ascendant, just like the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty. However, because the south of the Yangtze River has not yet been pacified, it is a little tolerant of the north, and it will not agree to good things.

古文：若修籓礼，款诚昭著者，当不尔孤也。 
现代文：如果你们能对我们执藩国之礼，而且能明显地表示诚意，我们一定不会对不起你们的。 
English: If you can do us the honor of ruling the country, and can clearly show your sincerity, we will not be sorry for you.

古文：魏京兆王愉、广平王怀国臣多骄纵，公行属请，魏主诏中尉崔亮究治之，坐死者三十馀人，其不死者悉除名为民。
现代文：北魏京兆王元愉、广平王无怀的藩国中臣子大多骄奢纵肆，公然地营私舞弊，宣武帝诏令中尉崔亮彻底整治他们，结果获罪而被处死的有三十多人，那些没有被处死的全部除名为民。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, most of the middle-ranking vassals of the feudal states, including King Yuan Yu of the Northern Wei Dynasty and King Guangping of the Northern Wei Dynasty, were arrogant, indulgent, and openly engaged in self-serving fraud. Emperor Xuanwu ordered Lieutenant Cui Liang to thoroughly rectify them. As a result, more than thirty people were convicted and executed, and all those who were not executed were removed as citizens.

古文：惟广平右常侍杨昱、文学崔楷以忠谏获免。
现代文：唯有广平王的右常侍杨昱、文学崔楷因忠谏而获免。
English: Only Yang Jie, the right-hand man of King Guangping, and the literati Cui Kai were exempted because of their loyalty.

古文：昱，椿之子也。
现代文：杨昱是杨椿的儿子。
English: Yang Hui is the son of Yang Qin.

古文：十一月，乙丑，大赦。
现代文：十一月乙丑，梁朝大赦天下。
English: In November, the second ugliness, the Liang Dynasty amnestied the world.

古文：诏右卫将军曹景宗都督诸军二十万救钟离。
现代文：武帝诏令右卫将军曹景宗督率各路军队二十万援救钟离。
English: Emperor Wu ordered the right guard general Cao Jingzong to lead 200,000 troops from all directions to rescue Zhong Li.

古文：上敕景宗顿道人洲，俟众军齐集俱进。
现代文：武帝命令曹景宗停在道人洲，等待各路军马汇集后一齐进发。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Cao Jingzong to stop at Tao Renzhou and wait for all the horses to gather before moving forward.

古文：景宗固启求先据邵阳洲尾，上不许。
现代文：曹景宗坚决启奏请求先据邵阳洲尾，但是武帝不准许。
English: Cao Jingzong resolutely requested that Shaoyang Zhouwei be performed first, but Emperor Wu did not allow it.

古文：景宗欲专其功，违诏而进，值暴风猝起，颇有溺者，复还守先顿。
现代文：曹景宗想独得其功，就违反诏令而独进，恰遇暴风骤起，许多人被刮到水中淹死，就返回道人洲先驻扎下来。
English: Cao Jingzong wanted to get the credit alone, so he went ahead alone in violation of the imperial edict. When a sudden storm arose, many people were swept into the water and drowned, so he returned to the province of Renzhou to settle down first.

古文：上闻之，曰： 景宗不进，盖天意也。
现代文：武帝知道这一情况之后，说： 曹景宗没有前进，这是天意呀。
English: After learning of this, Emperor Wu said, "It is the will of Heaven that Cao Jingzong did not advance.

古文：若孤军独往，城不时立，必致狼狈。
现代文：如果他孤军独往，城堡不能及时修筑起来，必定会一败涂地。
English: If he goes it alone, and the castle is not built in time, it will be a complete failure.

古文：今破贼必矣。 
现代文：天意如此，现在击败寇贼是一定的了。 
English: Providence being what it is, the defeat of the bandits is now certain.

古文：初，汉归义侯势之末，群獠始出，北自汉中，南至邛、笮，布满山谷。
现代文：起初，汉代归义侯刘势的后期，獠人各部落才开始扩展，北自汉中，南至邛、笮，布满山谷。
English: At first, it was only in the late period of the Han Dynasty, when Liu Xie was elevated to the title of Yihou, that the various tribes of the Qin people began to expand, from the middle of the Han Dynasty in the north to the Qin and Qin dynasties in the south, covering the valley.

古文：势既亡。蜀民多东徙，山谷空地皆为獠所据。
现代文：刘势死后，蜀地之民大多东迁，山谷空地全被獠人所占据。
English: After Liu Xie's death, most of the people of Shu moved to the east, and all the open spaces in the valley were occupied by the Xiongnu.

古文：其近郡县与华民杂居者，颇输租赋，远在深山者，郡县不能制。
现代文：那些靠近郡县与汉族民众杂居的獠人，还交纳赋税，至于那些远住在深山之中的，郡县根本管不着他们。
English: Those who live near the county and the Han people also pay taxes. As for those who live far away in the mountains, the county cannot control them at all.

古文：梁、益二州岁伐獠以自润，公私利之。
现代文：梁、益两州每年都讨伐獠人，无论公私都从中得到了好处。
English: Both states of Liang and Yick have been fighting against the Xiongnu every year, and both the public and private sectors have benefited from it.

古文：及邢峦为梁州，獠近者皆安堵乐业，远者不敢为寇。
现代文：邢峦做梁州刺史时，住在近处的獠人都安居乐业，住得远的也不敢出来抢掠。
English: When he was making the history of Liangzhou, the people of Liang who lived in the vicinity lived and worked peacefully, and those who lived far away did not dare to come out to loot.

古文：峦既罢去，魏以羊祉为梁州刺史，傅竖眼为益州刺史。
现代文：邢峦被调走之后，北魏任命羊祉为梁州刺史，傅竖眼为益州刺史。
English: After Zhai was transferred, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yang Zhi as the governor of Liangzhou and Fu Xian as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：祉性酷虐，不得物情。
现代文：羊祉这个人性格残暴，不得人心。
English: The character of this person is cruel and unpopular.

古文：獠王赵清荆引梁兵入州境为寇，祉遣兵击破之。
现代文：獠王赵清荆带梁朝兵进入州境侵掠，羊祉派兵击败了他们。
English: The warlord Zhao Qingjing led Liang's troops to invade and plunder the state's territory, and the Sheep and Goats dispatched troops to defeat them.

古文：竖眼施恩布信，大得獠和。
现代文：傅竖眼广旋恩惠，立信于众，结果与獠人之间取得了和解。
English: As a result of Fu's benevolence, he won the trust of the public and achieved reconciliation with the Xiongren.

古文：十二月，癸卯，都亭靖侯谢朏卒。
现代文：十二月癸卯，都亭侯谢去世。
English: In December, Du Ting Hou Xie passed away.

古文：魏人议乐，久不决。
现代文：北魏人议定乐律，久而不决。
English: The Northern Wei people agreed on the melody, but it was not decided for a long time.

古文：高祖武皇帝二天监六年
现代文：天监六年
English: Six years of Tianjing

古文：春，正月，公孙崇请委卫军将军、尚书右仆射高肇监其事；魏主知肇不学，诏太常卿刘芳佐之。
现代文：春季，正月，北魏公孙崇奏请委任卫军将军、尚书右仆射高肇监督制定乐律之事，宣武帝知道高肇不学无术，诏令太常卿刘芳辅佐他。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Northern Wei Gongsun Chongso asked to appoint the General of the Guards, Shangshu's right-hand man, Gao Zhao, to supervise the formulation of the music rules. Emperor Xuanwu knew that Gao Zhao did not learn and did not have any skills, and he was assisted by Liu Fangyu, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：魏中山王英与平东将军杨大眼等众数十万攻钟离。
现代文：北魏中山王元英与平东将军杨大眼等数十万人马攻打钟离。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Yuanying of Zhongshan and the Pingdong general Yang Dajian led hundreds of thousands of people to attack Zhongli.

古文：钟离城北阻淮水，魏人于邵阳洲两岸为桥，树栅数百步，跨淮通道。
现代文：钟离城北边有淮水为阻，北魏人在邵阳洲两岸架桥，树立栅栏数百步长，跨过淮水连通了南北道路。
English: Zhong is blocked by Huai Shui on the north side of the city. The Northern Wei people built bridges on both sides of Shaoyangzhou, erected fences hundreds of paces long, and connected the north-south road across Huai Shui.

古文：英据南岸攻城，大眼据北岸立城，以通粮运。
现代文：元英占据南岸攻城，杨大眼占据北岸修筑城堡，以便粮运畅通。
English: Yuan Ying occupied the south bank to attack the city, and Yang Dagan occupied the north bank to build a castle so that grain could be transported smoothly.

古文：城中众才三千人，昌义之督帅将士，随方抗御。
现代文：钟离城中才有三千人，昌义之督率将士，随机应变地守卫。
English: There were only three thousand people in the city at that time, and the commander of Changyi led the soldiers, guarding at random.

古文：魏人以车载土填堑，使其众负土随之，严骑蹙其后。人有未及回者，因以土迮之。
现代文：北魏人用车载土填入城壕之中，让大伙背着土跟随车后，又派骑兵紧跟在后面，那些来不及返回来的人，就被土埋进去了，不一会儿城壕就被填满了。
English: The Northern Wei people used truck-mounted soil to fill in the trenches, let everyone follow the truck with the soil on their backs, and sent cavalry to follow closely behind. Those who did not have time to return were buried in the soil, and the trenches were filled in a short time.

古文：俄而堑满，冲车所撞，城土辄颓，义之用泥补之，冲车虽入而不能坏。
现代文：北魏人用冲车撞城墙，所撞之处城墙上的土就掉下来一大片，昌义之用泥巴涂补，因此冲车虽然能撞入但不能撞毁城墙。
English: The Northern Wei people rammed the city wall with a car, and a large piece of soil fell down on the wall where it was hit. Chang Yi used mud to patch it up, so although the car could crash into the city wall, it could not destroy it.

古文：魏人昼夜苦攻，分番相代，坠而复升，莫有退者。
现代文：北魏军队昼夜苦攻，轮班相替，从云梯上掉下来再上去，没有人后退。
English: The Northern Wei army fought hard day and night, changing shifts, falling down from the ladder and going up again, and no one retreated.

古文：一日战数十合，前后杀伤万计，魏人死者与城平。
现代文：每天交战数十次，前后杀伤的人以万计数，北魏死去的人的尸体堆的与城墙一般高。
English: Dozens of battles were fought every day, tens of thousands of people were killed and wounded, and the piles of bodies of those who died in the Northern Wei Dynasty were as high as the city walls.

古文：二月，魏主召英使还，英表称： 臣志殄逋寇，而月初已来，霖雨不止，若三月晴霁，城必可克，愿少赐宽假。 
现代文：二月，宣武帝诏令元英返回，元英上表说： 我矢志歼灭寇敌，然而月初以来，天气淫雨不止，如果三月里天气放晴的话，钟离城就一定可以攻克，希望圣上恩赐，再稍微宽限些时日。 
English: In February, Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict ordering Yuan Ying to return. Yuan Ying wrote: I am determined to annihilate the invaders. However, since the beginning of the month, the weather has not stopped raining. If the weather clears up in March, Zhongli will surely be able to conquer the city. I hope that the Almighty will grant me a little more time.

古文：魏主复赐诏曰： 彼土蒸湿，无宜久淹。
现代文：宣武帝又诏令元英： 那里的地气蒸湿，不宜于久住长留。
English: Emperor Xuanwu also issued a decree to Yuan Ying: The atmosphere there is steamy and humid, and it is not suitable for long-term residence.

古文：势虽必取，乃将军之深计，兵久力殆，亦朝廷之所忧也。 
现代文：钟离城虽然势在必取，但这只是将军的深入考虑，而用兵时间久长力量耗尽，这也是朝廷所担忧的呀。 
English: Although it was imperative to evacuate the city, this was only the general's in-depth consideration, and the use of soldiers for a long time exhausted their strength, which was also the concern of the court.

古文：英犹表称必克，魏主遣步兵校尉范绍诣英议攻取形势。
现代文：元英再上表言称钟离城必定能攻克，宣武帝就派遣步兵校尉范绍到达元英那里商议攻取的形势。
English: Once again, Yuan Ying made a statement that Zhongli could definitely conquer the city, and Emperor Xuanwu sent infantry lieutenant Fan Shao to Yuan Ying to discuss the situation of conquest.

古文：绍见钟离城坚，劝英引还，英不从。
现代文：范绍见钟离城非常坚固，就劝说元英撤兵返回，但是元英不听从。
English: Fan Shao saw that the bell from the city was very strong and persuaded Yuan Ying to withdraw and return, but Yuan Ying did not listen.

古文：上命豫州刺史韦睿将兵救钟离，受曹景宗节度。
现代文：梁武帝命令豫州刺史韦睿率兵去援救钟离，接受曹景宗的指挥。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered the Yuzhou general Shi Wei Rui to lead an army to rescue Zhong Li and accept the command of Cao Jingzong.

古文：睿自合肥取直道，由阴陵大泽行，值涧谷，辄飞桥以济师。
现代文：韦睿从合肥取直道，经由阴陵大泽而行，遇上了涧谷，就架起飞桥让部伍过去。
English: Wei Rui took a straight road from Hefei, passing through Yinling Dasawa, encountered Shibuya, and set up a take-off bridge to let the group pass.

古文：人畏魏兵盛，多劝睿缓行。睿曰： 钟离今凿穴而处，负户而汲，车驰卒奔，犹恐其后，而况缓乎！
现代文：人们害怕北魏兵势强盛，很多人都劝说韦睿缓行，韦睿却说： 钟离城眼下正挖穴而住，负户而汲，情况异常危急，就是车驰卒奔，还恐怕来不及的，何况缓慢而行呢！
English: People were afraid of the powerful Northern Wei army. Many people tried to persuade Wei Rui to go slowly. However, Wei Rui said, "Clock away from the city, I am digging a hole to live in, and I am looking for a house to live in. The situation is extremely critical. Even if the car is speeding, I am afraid it is too late, let alone walking slowly!"

古文：魏人已堕吾腹中，卿曹勿忧也。 
现代文：北魏人已经落入我的腹中了，各位不必担忧。 
English: The Northern Wei people have already fallen into my belly, you don't have to worry.

古文：旬日至邵阳。上豫敕曹景宗曰： 韦睿，卿之乡望，宜善敬之！ 
现代文：十日之间到达邵阳，武帝预先告戎曹景宗说： 韦睿是你们州里的望族出身，应该好好地敬重他。 
English: When Emperor Wu arrived in Shaoyang ten days later, he told the eunuch Cao Jingzong in advance: "Wei Rui is from a prestigious family in your province, you should respect him.

古文：景宗见睿，礼甚谨。上闻之，曰： 二将和，师必济矣。 
现代文：曹景宗见了韦睿，礼节甚为恭谨，武帝得知其情后说： 两个将领和好，军队一定能取胜。 
English: When Cao Jingzong met Wei Rui, his etiquette was very respectful. After learning of the situation, Emperor Wu said: The two generals are reconciled, and the army will surely win.

古文：景宗与睿进顿邵阳洲，睿于景宗营前二十里夜掘长堑，树鹿角，截洲为城，去魏城百馀步。
现代文：曹景宗与韦睿进驻邵阳洲，韦睿连夜在曹景宗营地前二十里之处挖掘长沟，把带枝叉的树木，竖立其中，截邵阳洲筑城，离北魏军队的城堡仅百余步远近。
English: Cao Jingzong and Wei Rui were stationed in Shaoyangzhou. Overnight, Wei Rui dug a long ditch twenty miles in front of Cao Jingzong's camp, erected trees with branches and forks in it, and cut off Shaoyangzhou to build a city. It was only a hundred steps away from the castle of the Northern Wei army.

古文：南梁太守冯道根，能走马步地，计马足以赋功，比晓而营立。
现代文：南梁太冯道根，能走马量地，计算马的步数而分配每人的工作量，天亮城垒就建成了。
English: Nan Liang Taifeng Dogen was able to walk the horse in a measured way, calculate the number of steps of the horse and distribute the workload of each person, and the fortress was built at dawn.

古文：魏中山王英大惊，以杖击地曰： 是何神也！ 
现代文：北魏中山王元英大吃一惊，用杖击打着地面说道： 这是哪位神灵的保佑啊！ 
English: King Yuan Ying of the Northern Wei Dynasty was taken aback, and struck the ground with his cane, saying, "What kind of god's blessing is this?"

古文：景宗等器甲精新，军容甚盛，魏人望之夺气。
现代文：曹景宗等人的武器甲盔精新，军容特别强盛，北魏军队看见就气馁了。
English: The weapons and armor of Cao Jingzong and others were sophisticated, and the military was particularly strong. The Northern Wei army was discouraged when they saw this.

古文：景宗虑城中危惧，募军士言文达等潜行水底，赍敕入城，城中始知有外援，勇气百倍。
现代文：曹景宗忧虑城中危惧，招募军士言文达等人潜水而行，把圣旨送入城中，城中方才知道外面援军到了，因此勇气百倍。
English: Cao Jingzong worried about the danger in the city, recruited soldiers such as Jin Wenda and others to dive into the city, and sent the holy will into the city. The people in the city only knew that outside reinforcements had arrived, so they were a hundred times more courageous.

古文：杨大眼勇冠军中，将万馀骑来战，所向皆靡。
现代文：杨大眼勇冠军中，率领一万多骑兵来交战，所向披靡，不可敌挡。
English: Among the champions of Yang Dajianyong, he led more than ten thousand cavalry to fight, which was invincible and unstoppable.

古文：睿结车为陈，大眼聚骑围之，睿以强弩二千一时俱发，洞甲穿中，杀伤甚众。
现代文：韦睿把战车连接起来组成阵势，杨大眼聚集骑兵围攻，韦睿用强弩两千一起发射，穿透铠甲射中人，杀伤了大批北魏人马。
English: Wei Rui connected the chariots to form a formation, Yang Dajuang gathered the cavalry to besiege, Wei Rui fired with a two thousand strong crossbow, penetrated the armor and shot people, killing a large number of Northern Wei people.

古文：矢贯大眼右臂，大眼退走。
现代文：箭射穿了杨大眼的右臂，杨大眼退走了。
English: The arrow pierced Yang Daime's right arm, and Yang Daime retreated.

古文：明旦，英自帅众来战，睿乘素木舆，执白角如意以麾军。一日数合，英乃退。
现代文：第二天早晨，元英亲自率部来交战，韦睿乘坐没有加漆的木车，手执白角如意来指挥军队，一日之内交战了数次，元英才被迫撤退。
English: In the morning of the next day, Yuan Ying personally led his troops to fight. Wei Rui rode in an unpainted wooden carriage, holding a white horn in his hand to command the army. They fought several times in one day, and Yuan Yingcai was forced to retreat.

古文：魏师复夜来攻城，飞矢雨集。睿子黯请下城以避箭，睿不许。军中惊，睿于城上厉声呵之，乃定。
现代文：北魏军队在夜里又来攻城，箭雨密集而至，韦睿的儿子韦黯请求下城墙去避箭，韦睿不准许，军中一片震惊，韦睿站在城墙上厉声呵叱，人心才安定下来。
English: The Northern Wei army attacked the city again in the night. The rain of arrows came thick and fast. Wei Rui's son Wei Qiu asked to go down the city wall to avoid the arrows. Wei Rui did not allow it. The army was shocked. Wei Rui stood on the city wall and scolded them. Only then did people's hearts settle down.

古文：牧人过淮北伐刍稾者，皆为杨大眼所略，曹景宗募勇敢士千馀人，于大眼城南数里筑垒，大眼来攻，景宗击却之。
现代文：放牧人到淮水北岸去割蒿草，全被杨大眼掠抢走了。曹景宗招募勇敢之士一千余人，在杨大眼的城堡之南数里之处筑建保垒，杨大眼来攻打，曹景宗打退了他。
English: The herdsmen who went to the north shore of Huai Shui to cut the reeds were all plundered by Yang Dajian. Cao Jingzong recruited more than a thousand brave men to build a stronghold a few miles south of Yang Dajian's castle. Yang Dajian attacked and Cao Jingzong repulsed him.

古文：垒成，使别将赵草守之，有抄掠者，皆为草所获，是后始得纵刍牧。
现代文：堡垒修成了，曹景宗派别将赵草守着，北魏人再有抄掠者，全都被赵草抓获，从此之后方才可以放牧打草了。
English: After the fortress was completed, the Cao Jing sect faction guarded Zhao Cao, and the Northern Wei people and other raiders were all captured by Zhao Cao. It was only after this that they could graze.

古文：上命景宗等豫装高舰，使与魏桥等，为火攻之计。令景宗与睿各攻一桥：睿攻其南，景宗攻其北。
现代文：武帝命令曹景宗等人事先装修高大船舰，使其与北魏的桥一样高，实行火攻之计，令曹景宗和韦睿各攻一座桥，韦睿攻南桥，曹景宗攻北桥。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Cao Jingzong and others to decorate the tall ships in advance, making them as high as the bridges of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and implement the fire attack strategy, ordering Cao Jingzong and Wei Rui to attack one bridge each, Wei Rui to attack the South Bridge, and Cao Jingzong to attack the North Bridge.

古文：三月，淮水瀑涨六七尺。睿使冯道根与庐江太守裴邃、秦郡太守李文钊等乘斗舰竞发，击魏洲上军尽殪。
现代文：三月，淮水暴涨六七尺，韦睿指派冯道根与庐江太守裴邃、秦郡太守李文钊等人乘战舰一时竞发，差不多把北魏在邵阳洲上的军队全歼灭光。
English: In March, when the Huai River rose by 67 feet, Wei Rui assigned Feng Dogen to compete with Pei Jun, the governor of the Minjiang River, Li Wenjun, the governor of Qin County, and others on a warship, and almost completely annihilated the Northern Wei army on Shaoyangzhou.

古文：别以小船载草，灌之以膏，从而焚其桥。风怒火盛，烟尘晦冥，敢死之士，拔栅斫桥，水又漂疾，倏忽之间，桥栅俱尽。
现代文：又用小船载草，草上灌上膏油，纵船放火而烧其桥，风劲火盛，烟尘遮天蔽日，敢死之士奋勇出击，拨栅砍桥，水流又特别湍急，倏忽之间，桥和栅栏就全不见了。
English: Small boats were used to carry the grass, the grass was poured with oil, the barge was set on fire and burned its bridge, the wind was fierce, the smoke covered the sky, the daredevils bravely attacked, the gate was cut, the water flow was particularly rapid, and suddenly, the bridge and the fence were all gone.

古文：道根等皆身自搏战，军人奋勇，呼声动天地，无不一当百，魏军大溃。
现代文：冯道根等人都亲自搏战，战士们人人奋勇争先，呼喊声震天动地，个个一以当百，锐不可挡，北魏军队大崩溃。
English: Von Dogen and others fought personally, the soldiers all fought bravely for the lead, the shouts were earth-shattering, each one was a hundred, unstoppable, and the Northern Wei army collapsed.

古文：英见桥绝，脱身弃城走，大眼亦烧营去，诸垒相次土崩，悉弃其器甲争投水，死者十馀万，斩首亦如之。
现代文：元英见桥断了，就脱身弃城而逃跑，杨大眼也放火烧了营盘而去。北魏军队的营垒相次而土崩瓦解，兵士们都扔下器甲争相投水而逃，结果死去的有十多万，被斩首的也有这么多。
English: When Yuan Yingyan saw that the bridge was broken, he left the city and ran away. Yang Dayan also set fire to the camp and left. The Northern Wei army's camps collapsed one after another, and the soldiers all threw down their weapons and rushed to throw water and flee. As a result, more than a hundred thousand people died, and so many were beheaded.

古文：睿遣报昌义之，义之悲喜，不暇答语，但叫曰： 更生！更生！ 
现代文：韦睿派人报告昌义之，昌义之悲喜交加，激动的连话都说不上来，只是叫道： 得以再生，得以再生！ 
English: Wei Rui sent someone to report to Changyi. Changyi's grief and joy were intertwined. I couldn't even say the words of excitement. I just shouted: To be reborn, to be reborn!

古文：诸军逐北至濊水上，英单骑入梁城，缘淮百馀里，尸相枕藉，生擒五万人，收其资粮、器械山积，牛马驴骡不可胜计。
现代文：各路军队追击魏军到水边上，元英单骑进入梁城，沿着淮水一百多里范围内，尸体相互枕藉，梁朝军队生擒北魏军队五万人，收缴其物资粮食以及各种器械堆得象山一样，牛马驴骡则不可胜计。
English: The various armies pursued the Wei army to the water's edge, and Yuan Ying rode single-handedly into Liangcheng. Within more than a hundred miles along Huai Shui, the corpses were piled on top of each other. The Liang Dynasty army killed 50,000 Northern Wei troops, seized their supplies and grain, and piled up all kinds of equipment like a mountain. The number of cattle, horses, and donkeys was incalculable.

古文：义之德景宗及睿，请二人共会，设钱二十万，官赌之。
现代文：昌义之非常感激曹景宗和韦睿，请他们二人一起聚会，设下二十万钱，在徐州官厅上掷樗蒲赌博。
English: Chang Yizhi was very grateful to Cao Jingzong and Wei Rui, and invited the two of them to get together and set aside two hundred thousand yuan to gamble on the Xuzhou government office.

古文：景宗掷得雉；睿徐掷得卢，遽取一子反之，曰： 异事！ 
现代文：曹景宗掷得 雉 ；韦睿慢慢地掷得 庐 ，立即取一子翻过来，说道： 怪事呀！ 
English: Cao Jingzong threw a thunderbolt; Wei Rui slowly threw a thunderbolt, immediately took one son and turned it over, saying: Strange thing!

古文：遂作塞。
现代文：于是变成了 塞 。
English: So it turned into a blockage.

古文：景宗与群帅争先告捷，睿独居后，世尤以此贤之。
现代文：曹景宗同其他将帅争着先去告捷，只有韦睿独居其后，世人尤其因这一点而赞扬他。
English: Cao Jingzong competed with other generals to be the first to achieve success, only Wei Rui lived alone afterwards, and the world praised him especially for this.

古文：诏增景宗、睿爵邑，义之等受赏各有差。
现代文：武帝诏令增加曹景宗和韦睿的爵邑，昌义之等人所受赏赐各有多少不等。
English: Emperor Wu decreed to increase the peerage of Cao Jingzong and Wei Rui, and the number of rewards given to people such as Chang Yi varied.

古文：夏，四月，己酉，以江州刺史王茂为尚书右仆射，安成王秀为江州刺史。
现代文：夏季，四月己酉，梁朝任命江州刺史王茂为尚书右仆射，安成王萧秀为江州刺史。
English: In the summer, in April, the Liang Dynasty appointed Wang Mao, the governor of Jiangsu Province, as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and An Cheng Wang Xiao Xiu as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：秀将发，主者求坚船以为斋舫，秀曰： 吾岂爱财而不爱士乎！ 
现代文：萧秀将要出发赴任，管事的人要求用坚固船只装载库中财物，萧秀说： 我怎么能爱财物而不爱士呢？ 
English: When Xiao Xiu was about to leave for his post, the person in charge asked him to use a sturdy boat to load the property in the warehouse. Xiao Xiu said: How can I love property and not love people?

古文：乃以坚者给参佐，下者载斋物。既而遭风，斋舫遂破。
现代文：于是把坚固船只让给参佐人士们乘坐，用差的船装载物资，途中遇上大风，装运物资的船只破而沉没了。
English: As a result, the sturdy ships were given to the senators to ride on, and the poor ships were used to load the supplies. On the way, there was a strong wind, and the ships carrying the supplies broke and sank.

古文：丁巳，以临川王宏为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，建安王伟为扬州刺史，右光禄大夫沈约为尚书左仆射，左仆射王莹为中军将军。
现代文：丁巳，梁朝任命临川王萧宏为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，建安王萧伟为扬州刺史，右光禄大夫沈约为尚书左仆射，左仆射王莹为中军将军。
English: Ding Si, the Liang Dynasty appointed Linchuan King Xiaohong as the cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary, Jian'an King Xiaowei as the Yangzhou historian, Uguanglu doctor Shen Yu as the left-handed general, and the left-handed general Wang Ying as the Chinese general.

古文：六月，丙午，冯翊等七郡叛，降魏。
现代文：六月丙午，冯翊等七个郡反叛投降了北魏。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of June, seven rebel counties, including Fengyao, surrendered to the Northern Wei.

古文：秋，七月，丁亥，以尚书右仆射王茂为中军将军。
现代文：秋季，七月丁亥，梁朝任命尚书右仆射王茂为中军将军。
English: In the autumn, in July of Dinghai, the Liang Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Wangmao, as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：八月，戊子，大赦。
现代文：八月戊子，梁朝大赦天下。
English: August Bosi and Liang Chao were pardoned by the emperor.

古文：魏有司奏： 中山王英经算失图，齐王萧宝寅等守桥不固，皆处以极法。 
现代文：北魏主管官员上奏： 中山王元英谋算失策，齐王萧宝寅等人守桥不固，都应处以极刑。 
English: The official in charge of the Northern Wei issued a report: Zhongshan Wang Yuanying made a miscalculation, Qi Wang Xiao Baoting and others failed to guard the bridge, and should be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：己亥，诏英、宝寅免死，除名为民，杨大眼徙营州为兵。
现代文：己亥，宣武帝诏令免元英、萧宝寅死，从朝廷中除名而为民，杨大眼流放营州充军。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict exempting Yuan Ying and Xiao Baotang from death, expelling them from the imperial court and making them citizens, and banishing Yang Dajian to Yingzhou to join the army.

古文：以中护军李崇为征南将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：朝廷任命中护军李崇为征南将军、扬州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed the middle guard Li Chong as the general to conquer the south, and Yangzhou as the history.

古文：崇多事产业。征南长史狄道辛琛屡谏不从，遂相纠举。诏并不问。
现代文：李崇购置的产业很多，征南长史狄道人辛琛屡次劝谏他而不听，于是便产生了纠葛，闹到了皇帝那里，宣武帝诏令对他们二人都不予追究。
English: There were many properties that Li Chong had purchased. The Southern General of the Expedition, Shi Di Dao's subordinate Xin Xuan, repeatedly tried to persuade him, but he would not listen. As a result, a dispute arose, which was brought to the emperor. Emperor Xuanwu issued a decree that neither of them would be investigated.

古文：崇因置酒谓琛曰： 长史后必为刺史，但不知得上佐何如人耳。 
现代文：李崇因此而置办酒席，对辛琛说： 长史你今后必定能升为刺史，但是不知道你选用什么样的人作上佐呢？ 
English: Li Chong therefore arranged a banquet for him and asked him: "Long history, you will certainly be able to be promoted to the post of chief historian in the future, but I don't know what kind of person you will choose to be the chief historian?

古文：琛曰： 若万一叨忝，得一方正长史，朝夕闻过，是所愿也。 
现代文：辛琛回答说： 如果有幸能承担此任，将选用一个刚直方正的长史，以便一早一晚能经常闻悉自己的过错，这就是我所盼愿的。 
English: Hsin-tao replied, "If I am fortunate enough to assume this position, I will choose a long history of being upright and upright, so that I can always know my mistakes in the morning and evening, which is what I hope for."

古文：崇有惭色。
现代文：李崇听了，满面愧色。
English: Li Chongmen is ashamed.

古文：九月，己亥，魏以司空高阳王雍为太尉，尚书令广阳王嘉为司空。
现代文：九月己亥，北魏任命司空高阳王元雍为太尉，尚书令广阳王元嘉为司空。
English: In September of the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, the Secretary of the Air Force, as the first lieutenant, and Guangyang Wang Yuan Jia as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：甲子，魏开斜谷旧道。
现代文：甲子，北魏开通了斜谷旧道。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, the old road through the valley was opened.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，以五兵尚书徐勉为吏部尚书。
现代文：冬季，十月壬寅，梁朝任命五兵尚书徐勉为吏部尚书。
English: In the winter, in October of Jinyin, the Liang Dynasty appointed the five soldiers Shangshu Xu Yan as the official Shangshu.

古文：勉精力过人，虽文案填积，坐客充满，应对如流，手不停笔。
现代文：徐勉这个人精力过人，虽然文案上堆积满要处理的公文，宾客满座，他却可以应对如流，而手中的笔还不停止批阅公文。
English: Xu Qian is a man of extraordinary energy. Although he has a pile of paperwork to deal with and a full house of guests, he can cope with the flow, and the pen in his hand does not stop approving official documents.

古文：又该综百氏，皆为避讳。
现代文：他还熟悉各个家族的情况，在和他们应对交往时避免触犯他们的家讳。
English: They also go through hundreds of surnames, so they can avoid using nicknames.

古文：尝与门人夜集，客虞暠求詹事五官，勉正色曰： 今夕止可谈风月，不可及公事。 
现代文：有一天夜里，徐勉与门人们会集在一起，有个客人虞向他请求詹事五官的职位，徐勉严肃地说道： 今晚只可以谈论风月，不可以涉及公事。 
English: One night, Xu Mian and his servants were gathered together. A guest had asked him for the position of the five officials in charge of domestic affairs. Xu Mian said seriously, "Tonight, we can only talk about the wind and the moon, but we can't get involved in business affairs."

古文：时人咸服其无私。
现代文：当时的人都佩服他无私心。
English: People at the time admired his selflessness.

古文：闰月，乙丑，以临川王宏为司徒、行太子太傅，尚书左仆射沈约为尚书令、行太子少傅，吏部尚书昂昂为右仆射。
现代文：闰月乙丑，梁朝任命临川王萧宏为司待、行太子太傅，尚书左仆射沈约为尚书令、行太子少傅，吏部尚书袁昂为右仆射。
English: On the second day of the leap month, the Liang Dynasty appointed Linchuan Wang Xiaohong as the secretary, Xing as the prince's grand steward, Shangshu's left-hand man Shen Yao as the prince's secretary, Xing as the prince's junior steward, and Shangshu's right-hand man Yuan Ang as the secretary.

古文：丁卯，魏皇后于氏殂。
现代文：丁卯，北魏皇后于氏去世。
English: Ding Wu, Empress of the Northern Wei Dynasty, passed away.

古文：是时高贵嫔有宠而妒，高肇势倾中外，后暴疾而殂，人皆归咎高氏。宫禁事秘，莫能详也。
现代文：这时，高贵嫔得宠而妒心十足，高肇权倾朝廷内外，于皇后暴疾而死，人们都归咎于高氏，宫闱中的事情神秘，不能知道详情。
English: At this time, the noblewoman was favored and full of jealousy, Gao Zhao's power was in and out of the court, the queen died of a violent illness, people blamed Gao, the things in the palace were mysterious, and it was impossible to know the details.

古文：甲申，以光禄大夫夏侯详为尚书左仆射。
现代文：甲申，梁朝任命光禄大夫夏侯详为尚书左仆射。
English: Gao Shin, Liang Dynasty appointed Guanglu Doctor Xia Hou as Shang Shuzha's right-hand man.

古文：乙酉，魏葬顺皇后于永泰陵。
现代文：乙酉，北魏安葬顺皇后于永泰陵。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Empress Shun was buried in Yongtai Mausoleum.

古文：十二月，丙辰，丰城景公夏侯详卒。
现代文：十二月丙辰，梁朝丰城景公夏侯详去世。
English: In December, Liang Chaofengcheng Jinggong Xia Houzhao passed away.

古文：乙丑，魏淮阳镇都军主常邕和以城来降。
现代文：乙丑，北魏淮阳镇都军主常邕和献城投降梁朝。
English: In Yixiu, the Northern Wei Huaiyang Town capitulated to the Liang Dynasty.

