古文：◎历七
现代文：历七
English: 7th day of the seventh month

古文：▲回回历法一
现代文：回回历法一
English: Go back to calendar one.

古文：《回回历法》，西域默狄纳国王马哈麻所作。
现代文：《回回历法》，是西域默狄纳国王马哈麻所制订。
English: The "Hakka Calendar" was established by King Mahama of Mardin in the western region.

古文：其地北极高二十四度半，经度偏西一百零七度，约在云南之西八千馀昊。
现代文：那个地方北纬二十四度半，西经一百零七度，大约在云南西面八千多里。
English: That place is 24.5 degrees north latitude and 107 degrees west longitude, about 8,000 miles west of Yunnan.

古文：其历元用隋开皇己未，即其建国之年也。
现代文：历法计时的起点用隋开皇己未年，也竞是该国建国的那一年。
English: The starting point of the calendar is the year of the Sui Emperor, which is also the year of the founding of the country.

古文：洪武初，得其书於元都。
现代文：洪武初年，从元大都得到这种历书。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, this calendar was obtained from the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：以三百五十四日为一周，周一十十月有闰日。凡有闰闰凡百二十八年而而宫闰三十一日，以三百五十四日为一周，周十二月，月有闰日。
现代文：十五年秋，太祖认为西域推算天象最精确，其五星纬度中国又役有，就命令翰林李种、昊伯宗和回回大师马沙亦黑等翻译这本书。《回回历法》不用闰月，以三百六十五日为一年。每年分十二宫，有的宫内有闰日，大凡一百二十八年宫闰三十一日。以三百五十四日为一周，每周十二个月，有的月有闰日，大凡三十年月闰十一日。
English: In the autumn of the fifteenth year, Emperor Taizu believed that the Western Zodiac was the most accurate in calculating the celestial bodies, and that its five-star latitude was also useful in China, so he ordered Hanlin Lisheng, Hao Bozong and Huihui master Ma Sha Yihe to translate the book. "Huihui Calendar" does not use the leap month, with 365 days as a year. Every year is divided into 12 months, some have a leap day in the 12th month, and the most common 128 years have a leap day on the 31st day. With 354 days as a week, every week has 12 months, some months have a leap day,

古文：凡三十年月闰十一日，历千九百四十一年，宫月日辰再会。此其立法之大概也。
现代文：经过一千九百四十一年，宫、月、日、辰再次会合。这就是《回回历法》立法的要点。
English: After 1941, the palace, the month, the day, and the hour meet again. This is the key point of the legislation of the "Back to Back Calendar."

古文：按西域历术见於史者，在唐有《九执历》，元有札马鲁丁之《万年历》。
现代文：按西域历法数术见于史籍的，在唐代有《九执历》，元有札马鲁丁之《万年历》。
English: According to the Western calendar, there is a "nine-year calendar" in the Tang Dynasty, and originally there was a "perpetual calendar" by Zama Rudin.

古文：《九执因》最疏，《万年历》行之未久。
现代文：《九执历》最粗疏，《万年历》实行不久。
English: The "nine-year calendar" is the most crude, and the "perpetual calendar" has not been implemented for long.

古文：唯《回回历》设科，隶钦天监，与《大统》参用二百七十馀年。
现代文：只有《回回历》设了科，隶属于钦天监，与《大统历》参互使用了二百七十多年。
English: Only the "Back to Back Calendar" has a department, which is subordinate to the Qin Tianjun, and has been used in conjunction with the "Grand Unified Calendar" for more than 270 years.

古文：虽於交食之有无深浅，时有出入，然胜於《九执》、《万年》远矣。
现代文：虽然对于日食月食的有食亏的多少，不时有些出入，但远逮胜过《九执历》、《万年历》了。
English: Although there are some discrepancies from time to time regarding the number of eclipses and lunar eclipses, it is far superior to the "Nine-year Calendar" and "Perpetual Calendar."

古文：但其书多脱误。
现代文：但这种书有很多脱落讹误。
English: But this kind of book has a lot of flaws.

古文：盗盖其人之隶籍台官者，类以土盘布算，仍用其本国之书。
现代文：大概那些隶属于台官的人，都用沙盘推算，就用他们本国的书。
English: Presumably, those who are subordinate to Taiwan officials use their own country's books for their calculations.

古文：而明之习其术者，如唐顺之、陈壤、袁黄辈之所论著又自成一家言。
现代文：而明代学习《回回历》的，如唐顺之、陈壤、袁黄等人的论著，又自成一家之言。
English: On the other hand, the works of Tang Shunzhi, Chen Zang, Yuan Huang and others, who studied the Hui Hui Calendar in the Ming Dynasty, have become household words.

古文：以故翻译之本不行於世，其残缺宜也。
现代文：因此译本不流行于世，这些害的残缺也就是很自然的了。
English: Therefore, translated books are not popular in the world, and these harmful defects are quite natural.

古文：今为博访专门之裔，考究其原书，以补其脱落，正其讹舛，为《回回历尖》，著於篇。
现代文：现在为此广泛地访问有专长的传人，考究原书，以补充它的脱落，纠正它的讹误，写成《回回历法》，载入志中。
English: Now, for this purpose, he has extensively interviewed expert inheritors, studied the original book to supplement its loss, corrected its mistakes, and written "Back to Back Calendar" to be recorded in his diary.

古文：积年起西域阿喇必年，下至洪武甲子，七百八十六年。
现代文：累积年数：从西域阿喇必年，堕旦皇己未年。起，往下到洪武甲子年，共七百八十六年。
English: Accumulated years: From the Western Regions' Alabi Year, the year before the fall of the Tang Dynasty, onwards to the Hongwu Jiazi Year, a total of 786 years.

古文：用数天周度三百六十。
现代文：使用的基本数据：天一周三百六十度。
English: The basic data used: 360 degrees all day long.

古文：七曜数日一，月二，火三，水四，木五，金六，土七。
现代文：宫度从白羊起，节气以春分为首，时间从午时后段开始。午时前段四刻属于前一天。七曜的序数：日为一，月为二，火星为三，水星为四，木星为五，金星为六，土星为七。
English: The house degree starts from Aries, the solar terms are divided into spring first, and the time starts from the late afternoon. Four hours in the early afternoon belong to the previous day. The ordinal numbers of the seventh day: the day is one, the moon is two, Mars is three, Mercury is four, Jupiter is five, Venus is six, Saturn is seven.

古文：宫数白羊初，金牛一，阴阳二，世蟹三，狮子四，变女五，天秤六，天蝎七，人马八，磨羯九，实宝瓶十，变鱼十一。
现代文：以七曜纪日，不用甲子。宫的序数：白羊为初，金牛焉兰，阴阳为二，巨蟹为三，狮子焉四，双女为五，天秤为六，天蝎为七，人马为八，磨羯为九，实瓶焉十，双鱼为十一。
English: According to the Gregorian calendar, there is no need for the letter K. The ordinal numbers of the zodiac are: Aries for the first, Taurus for the second, Yin for the second, Cancer for the third, Leo for the fourth, Gemini for the fifth, Libra for the sixth, Scorpio for the seventh, Cancer for the eighth, Virgo for the ninth, Aquarius for the tenth, and Pisces for the eleventh.

古文：宫日白羊戌宫三十一日。
现代文：各宫日数：白羊戌宫三十一日。
English: Number of days in each palace: 31 days in Aries Palace.

古文：金牛酉宫三十一日。
现代文：金牛酉宫三十一日。
English: It is the 31st day of the year of the golden calf.

古文：阴阳申宫三十一日。
现代文：阴阳申宫三十一日。
English: On the 31st day of Yin Yang Sheng Gong.

古文：巨蟹未宫三十二日。
现代文：巨蟹未宫三十二日。
English: Thirty-two days without a crab.

古文：狮子午宫三十一日。
现代文：狮子午宫三十一日。
English: On the 31st day of the Lion's Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：娈女巳宫三十一日。
现代文：双女巳宫三十一日。
English: On the 31st day of the month, the twin sisters left the palace.

古文：天秤辰宫三十一日。
现代文：天秤辰宫三十日。
English: The 30th day of the month of Libra.

古文：天蝎卯宫三十日。
现代文：天蝎卯宫三十日。
English: The 30th day of Scorpio Ugu.

古文：人马寅宫二十九日。
现代文：人马寅宫二十九日。
English: It is the 29th day of the year of the Horse Horse Yin Palace.

古文：磨羯丑宫二十九日。宝瓶子宫三十日。
现代文：大月三十日，小月二十九日，共三百五十四日，这是十二个月的日数。
English: On the thirtieth day of the month, and on the twenty-ninth day of the month, were three hundred and fifty-four days: all the days of the twelve months.

古文：变鱼亥宫三十日。月分大小单月大，变月小。
现代文：遇到月份有闰月的年份，就在第十二个月内增加一日，共三百五十五日。
English: In years when there is a leap month, one day is added to the 12th month, for a total of 355 days.

古文：太阳五星最高行度太阳二宫二十九度二十一分。
现代文：太阳五星最高行度：太阳在二宫二十九度二十一分。
English: The highest degree of the five stars of the sun: the sun rises in the second house at 29 degrees 21 minutes.

古文：土星八宫十四度四十八分。
现代文：土星在八宫十四度四十八分。
English: Saturn is in the 8th house at 14 degrees 48 minutes.

古文：木星六宫初度八分。
现代文：木星在六宫初度八分。
English: Jupiter is in the 6th house for the first time.

古文：火星四宫十五度四分。
现代文：火星在四宫十五度四分。
English: Mars is in the 4th house at 15 degrees 4 minutes.

古文：金星二宫十七度六分。
现代文：金星在二宫十七度六分。
English: Venus is in 2nd house 17 degrees 6 minutes.

古文：水星七宫六度十七分。
现代文：水星在七官六度十七分。
English: Mercury is in the 7th house, 6 degrees, 17 minutes.

古文：求月分闰日置西域岁前积年，减一，以一百三十一年乘之，内加一百九十四，以三十为法屡减之，馀在十九已上，其年月分有闰闰已下则无。
现代文：求月分闰日：朔的余日。以西域历法本年以前的积年，减一，乘以一百三十一，用总数来乘。再加一百九十四，闰应。除以三十，余数在十九以上，闰限。这年的月份有闰日，十九以下就没有闰日。
English: Find the intercalary day of the month: the remaining day of the new moon. According to the Western calendar method, subtract one from the accumulative year before this year, multiply by 131, and multiply by the total number. Add 194, and the intercalary day should be. Divide by 30, and the remaining number is more than 19, and the intercalary day limit. The month of this year has a leap day, and there is no leap day below 19.

古文：於除得之数，满七去之，馀即所求年第一月一日七曜。
现代文：除得的商，满七就去掉，剩下的就是所求的这一年第一月第一天的七曜数。
English: The subtracted quotient is removed when it reaches seven, and the remainder is the required seven-day number of the first day of the first month of the year.

古文：加次法置积日，减月闰内加三百三十一日，以三百五十四除之，馀数内减去所加三百三十一，又减二十三，又减二十四，又减一，为实距年得数。又法：以气积内减月闰，以三百五十四除之，馀减洪武加次二十四，又减补日二十三，又减改应损日一，得数如前。
现代文：为实际相距年己未年至今的得数。另一种算法：用气积宫闰加通闰为气积。减月闰，用十一乘距历元的年数，再加十四，除以三十，即得到月闰数。除以三百五十四，余数城去洪武年的加次二十四，又减去补充的日数二十三，又减改闰应减少的一日，得数和前一种算法一样。
English: Another algorithm: using the intercalary month as the gas volume, adding the intercalary month as the gas volume, subtracting the intercalary month, using the number of years of eleven by the distance of the calendar element, adding fourteen, dividing by thirty, that is, obtaining the number of intercalary months. Dividing by three hundred and fifty-four, adding twenty-four times the remaining number of years to the Hongwu year, and subtracting the additional number of days twenty-three, and subtracting the one day that should be reduced by the intercalary day, the result is the same as the previous algorithm.

古文：▲太阳行度
现代文：求通闰，用十一日，乘以距历元的年数。
English: To find the leap day, multiply the number of years from the calendar by eleven.

古文：求最高总度置西域岁前积年，入总年零年月分日期立成内，各取前年前月前日最高行度并之。
现代文：因为数据表中的运行度数，都是本年本月本日的实足数字。如果求十年而用十年的数据，就超过了实数。月和日的道理舆此相同。以下仿此。
English: Because the running rates in the data table are the actual figures for the current month of the current year. If you ask for ten years and use ten years of data, you will exceed the actual number. The reason for the month and day is the same. Follow the example below.

古文：求最高行度置求到最高总度，加测定太阳最高行度，即年求年白羊宫最高行度。
现代文：求最高的度数：将求到的最远总度数，加上测定到的太阳的最远运行度数，二宫二十九度二十一分。就是所求年份白羊宫的最速运行度数。
English: Find the highest degree: the farthest total degree to be found, plus the measured farthest movement degree of the sun, the second house twenty-nine degrees twenty-one minutes, is the fastest movement degree of Aries in the requested year.

古文：如求次宫，累加五秒零六微。
现代文：如果要求下一宫，就累加五秒零六微。
English: If you ask for the next house, it adds up to five seconds and a half.

古文：求次月，加四秒五十六微。
现代文：如果求下一月，就累加四秒五十六微。
English: If you ask for the next month, it adds up to 4.566 microseconds.

古文：求中心行度置积年入总年零年月日立成内，各取日中心行度并之，内减一分四秒，即所求白羊宫第一日中心行度。
现代文：求中心运行度数：太阳平均运行度数。将积年代入总年零年月日数据表中，各取太阳的中心运行度数相加，取法同前。再减一分四秒，就得到白羊宫第一日的中心运行度数。
English: Find the center movement rate: the sun's average movement rate. Enter the number of years into the total year and month data table, add the center movement rate of each sun, and the method is the same as before. Subtract one minute and four seconds to get the center movement rate of the first day of the Aries Palace.

古文：求各宫月日，按每日行度累加之。
现代文：求各宫每月每日的度数，按每日运行度数五十九分八秒累计相加。
English: Find the daily frequency of each palace for each month, and add it up according to the daily running frequency of 59 minutes and 8 seconds.

古文：求自行度置其日中心行度，减其宫最高行度，即得。
现代文：减一分四秒，有人说是西域距离中原的里程差异，不对，是己未年的宫分最后一天的度应。求自行度数：将某日的中心运行度数，减所在宫的最远运行度数，就可以得到。
English: Minus one minute and four seconds, some people say that it is the difference in distance between the western region and the Central Plains, but it is not true, it is the degree of the last day of the previous year.

古文：求加减差。
现代文：即代入求盈缩差的度数。
English: The degree of contraction of the instant-input P/E ratio.

古文：以自行宫度为引数，入太阳加减立成内，照引数宫度取加减差。
现代文：求加减差：即盈缩差。以自行度的宫分度数焉引数，代入太阳加减数据表内，照自变量的宫分度数取加减差。
English: Addition and subtraction: that is, the addition and subtraction. With the self-degree of the hysteresis number as the argument, it is substituted into the solar addition and subtraction data table, and the addition and subtraction is taken according to the hysteresis number of the variable.

古文：其度下小馀，用比例法，以本加减差，与后度加减差相减，馀数通为秒，与引数小馀相乘，得数为纤，以六十收之，为微、为秒、为分。
现代文：这叫未定差。其度下的小余，用比例法，以本度的加减差，舆后一度的加减差相减，余数化为秒，如一分化为六十秒。与自变量的小余也化为秒相乘，得数为纤，秒乘秒，得纤。按六十进制，进为微、秒、分。
English: This is called the undetermined difference. The small remainder under the degree is rounded up using the proportion method, with the addition and subtraction of the degree, and the addition and subtraction of the second after the second, and the remaining number is converted into seconds, such as one division into sixty seconds. The small surplus with the independent variable is also multiplied into seconds, and the result is fiber, and the seconds are multiplied by the seconds, and the result is fiber. According to the sexagesimal system, it is advanced to micro, seconds, and minutes.

古文：视前所得未定加减差数较，少於后数者加之，多於后数者减之，是为加减定差分。
现代文：后面以此为准。
English: The following shall be subject to this.

古文：求经度黄道度。
现代文：求经度：黄道度。
English: Find the longitude: the ecliptic.

古文：置其日中心行度，以加减定差分加减之，即得。
现代文：设置日中心行度，用加减定差分加减它，视定差引数自行宫度，在初宫至五宫为减定差分，六宫至十一宫为加定差分。即得。
English: Set the sun-centered degree, add and subtract it with the add-subtract fixed difference, and the apparent difference argument is the degree of the uterus itself, with the subtractive fixed difference for the first to the fifth uterus, and the additive fixed difference for the sixth to the eleventh uterus.

古文：求七曜置积年入立成内，取总年零年月日下七曜数并之，累去七数，馀即所求白羊宫一日七曜。
现代文：求七曜：将积年代入数据表内，取总年零年月日下的七曜数相加，除以七，余数即所求年白羊宫第一日的七曜数。
English: To find the seventh day of the week: put the accumulated years into the data table, add the number of the seventh day of the week under the total year and month, and divide by seven. The remaining number is the number of the seventh day of the first day of the year you are looking for.

古文：如求次宫者，内加各宫七曜数。
现代文：如果求下一宫，就加上各宫的七曜数。
English: If you ask for the next house, add the number of weeks for each house.

古文：如求逐日，累加一数，满七去之。
现代文：如果求每一天，就逐次加一，满七就减去。
English: If you ask for it every day, add one to the total and subtract it when you reach seven.

古文：▲太阴行度
现代文：求月亮、五星、罗计七曜同此。太阴行度
English: Pray for the moon, the five stars, and the lunar calendar on the same day.

古文：求中心行度置积年入立成内，取总零年月日下中心行度并之，得数，内减一十四分，即所求年白羊宫一日中心行度。
现代文：求中心运行度数：将积年代入数据表内，取总年零年月日下的中心运行度数相加，得数再减十四分，己未年的应转数。就是所求年份白羊宫第一日的中心运行度数。
English: Find the center operation frequency: put the accumulated time into the data table, add the center operation frequency under the total year and month, and subtract fourteen points from the result, which is the number of revolutions in the previous year. It is the center operation frequency of the first day of the Aries Palace in the requested year.

古文：如求逐日，累加日行度。
现代文：如果要求每一天的，就逐次加上每日的运行度数。
English: If daily operation is required, the daily operating frequency will be added successively.

古文：求加倍相离度置积年入立成内，取总年零年月日下加倍相离度并之，内减二十六分，即所求白羊宫一日度也。
现代文：十三度一零三五。求加倍相离度：月亮在小轮上运行，舆太阳运行到同宫同度后，又相分离。将积年代入数据表内，取总年零年月日下的加倍相离度相加，再减二十六分，就是所求的白羊宫第一日的度数。
English: Thirteen degrees and ten thirty-five. Find the doubling separation degree: the moon runs on a small wheel, and the sun runs to the same degree as the same palace, and then separates. Enter the accumulated time into the data table, add the doubling separation degree of the total year and month and day, and then subtract twenty-six points, which is the desired degree of the first day of the Aries Palace.

古文：如逐日，累加倍离日行度。
现代文：如果要求每一天的，就累计和太阳的加倍相离度数。
English: If it is required every day, the cumulative number of degrees of separation from the sun will be doubled.

古文：求本轮行度置积年入立成内，取总零年月日下本轮行度并之，内减一四分，即所求白羊宫一日度也。
现代文：二十四度二二五三二二，折半，就是小轮心距离太阳的度数。求本轮运行度数：即月亮运转的度数。将积年代入数据表内，取总年零年月日下本轮运行度数相加，再减十四分，就是所求白羊宫第一日的度数。
English: Twenty-four degrees, two-twenty-five, three-twenty-two, divided by half, is the degree of the small wheel's center from the sun. Find the degree of operation of this round: that is, the degree of operation of the moon. Put the accumulated years into the data table, take the total year and month and day, add the degree of operation of this round, and then subtract fourteen points, which is the degree of the first day of the Aries Palace.

古文：如求各日，累加本轮日行度。
现代文：如果要求每一天的，就累计每一天的本轮运行度数。
English: If it is required every day, the number of running cycles of each day will be accumulated.

古文：求第一加减差以加倍相离宫度为引数，入太阴第一加减立成内，取加减差。
现代文：十三度三分五四。求第一加减差：又叫倍离差。以加倍相离宫分度数为自变量，代入月亮第一加减数据表内，取加减差。
English: Thirteen degrees, three minutes, and fifty-four. Find the first addition and subtraction: also known as doubling the separation. Take the doubling of the degree of separation as the independent variable, substitute it into the first addition and subtraction data table of the moon, and take the addition and subtraction.

古文：又与下差相减，余乘引数小余，得数为秒，以六十收之为分，用加减未定差，得第一分差。
现代文：未定差。又与下一个数的加减差相减，余数乘以引数的小数，得数为秒，分乘以分。按六十进制为分，用来加或减未定差，后一个数的未定羞多就相加，少就相减，和太阳一样。得到第一差分。
English: Undetermined difference. And with the addition and subtraction of the next number, the remainder is multiplied by the fraction of the argument, and the number obtained is the second, and the minute is multiplied by the minute. According to the sexagesimal system, it is used to add or subtract the undetermined difference, and the undetermined difference of the latter number is added if it is more, and subtracted if it is less, like the sun. Get the first difference.

古文：求本轮行度置其日本轮行度，以第一差分加减之。
现代文：求本轮行定度：将某一天的本轮运行度数，舆第一差分相加或相减。
English: Determine the degree of this round: add or subtract the degree of this round of operation on a certain day, and the first difference.

古文：求第二加减差以本轮行定度度为引数，入太阴第二加减立成内，取未定差，依比例法，求得零数加减之为第二加减差分。
现代文：看倍离度，前六宫加，后六宫减。求第二加减差：以本轮行定度为引数，代入月亮第二加减数据表内，取未定差，按照比例法，同前。求得零数相加或相减，得到第二加减差分。
English: Look at the doubling separation degree, the first six houses plus, the second six houses minus. Find the second addition and subtraction difference: take the fixed degree of this round as the argument, substitute the second addition and subtraction data table of the moon, take the undetermined difference, according to the proportion method, the same as before. Add or subtract the zeros to get the second addition and subtraction difference.

古文：求比数分以们离宫度，入第一加减立成内，取比数分。
现代文：根据引数，六宫以前为减，六宫以后为加。求比数分：将加倍相离度的宫分度数，代入第一加减数据表内，取比数分。
English: According to the argument, before the sixth house, it is minus, and after the sixth house, it is plus. To find the score: Substitute the degree of the doubling of the separation degree into the first add and subtract data table, and take the score.

古文：如们离零分在三十分已上者，取下度比敷分。
现代文：如倍离度零分在三十分以上的，取下一度的比数分。
English: If the doubling separation of zero points is more than thirty minutes, remove the one-time score.

古文：求远近度以本轮行定宫度为引敷，入阴第二加减立成内，取远近度分。
现代文：求远近度：以本轮行定度的宫分度数为引敷，代入月亮第二加减差数据表内，取远近度分。
English: Find the distance and proximity: take the degree of the rising of the current cycle as an example, substitute it into the data table of the second addition and subtraction of the moon, and take the distance and proximity.

古文：其引数零分，亦依比例法取之。
现代文：其自变量零分，也依比例法取数。
English: The number of zeros of the independent variable is also taken according to the proportional method.

古文：求凡差定差置比敷分，以远近度通分乘之，以六十约之为分，即凡差。
现代文：求泛差定差：取比敷分，将远近度化成分与之相乘，除以六十换算为分，就是泛差。
English: Find the fixed difference: take the ratio and multiply the far-and-near component by it, and divide by sixty conversion points, which is the fixed difference.

古文：以凡差加入第二加减差，即为定差。
现代文：将泛差与第二加减差相加，就是定差。
English: Add the spread to the second plus or minus and you get the standard deviation.

古文：求经度置其日太阴中心行度，以定差加减之，即太阴经度。
现代文：求经度：将某一天月亮的中心运行度数，与定差相加减，就是月亮的经度。
English: Longitude: the longitude of the moon is obtained by adding and subtracting the degree of the moon's central motion on a given day from the constant difference.

古文：▲太阴纬度
现代文：根据本轮的行定度，六官以前焉减，六宫以后焉加。太阴纬度
English: According to the degree of alignment of this round, the six offices will decrease before, and the six palaces will increase after.

古文：求计都与月相离度置其日太限经度，内减其日计都行度，即计都与月相离度分。
现代文：取相应的数据，按照比例法求得零数相加或相减，上升值的六宫相加，下降值的六宫相减。得到纬度的度数。
English: Take the corresponding data, add or subtract the zeros according to the proportional method, add the six houses of the rising value, and subtract the six houses of the falling value. The degree of latitude is obtained.

古文：求纬以计都与月相离宫度为引数，入太阴纬度立成，取其度分，依比例法求得零分加减之，得纬度分。求计罗行度置积年入总年零年月日立成内，取罗计中心行度并之，为其年白羊宫一日行度。
现代文：引数在六宫以前为黄道北，在六官以后为黄道南。求计都、罗喉的运行度数：将积年代入总年零年月日数据表内，取计都、罗喉的中心运行度数相加，为这一年白羊宫第一日的运行度数。
English: The argument is the north of the zodiac before the 6th house, and the south of the zodiac after the 6th house. The running frequency of the calculating capital and Luo throat: the accumulated years are entered into the total year and month date data table, and the running frequency of the center of the calculating capital and Luo throat is added, which is the running frequency of the first day of the year's Aries Palace.

古文：求各宫一日，以各宫日行度加之，与十二宫相减，馀即所求宫一日计都行度。
现代文：求各宫的第一日，以各宫的日运行度数相加，与十二官相减，余数就是所求的这一宫第一日计都的运行度数。
English: On the first day of each palace, add the daily operation frequency of each palace and subtract the daily operation frequency of the twelve organs. The remaining number is the desired operation frequency of the first day of the palace.

古文：如求计都逐日细行，以前后二段行度相减，馀以相距日数除之，为日差。
现代文：如果要求计都每天的具体运行度数，将前后两段的运行度数相减，余数除以相距的数，就是日差。
English: If the requirement is to measure the specific operating frequency of each day, subtract the operating frequency of the first and last two sections, and divide the remaining number by the number of distances, which is the daily difference.

古文：又置前段计都行度，以日差累减之。
现代文：又将前段的计都运行度数，逐次减去日差。
English: In addition, the running frequency of the meter in the previous paragraph is summed up, and the daily difference is subtracted one by one.

古文：如求罗喉行度，置其日计都行度内。
现代文：如求罗喉的逼行度数，将某日的计都运行度数加上六宫。
English: If you are looking for the degree of compulsion of the throat, add the degree of running a certain day to the sixth house.

古文：▲五星经度
现代文：五星经度
English: Five Star Longitude

古文：求最高总度数同太阳，依前太阳术求之。
现代文：求最高总度数：数据同太阳，按照前面求太阳的方法求取。
English: Find the maximum total power: the data is the same as the sun, according to the previous method of finding the sun.

古文：求最高行度置所求本星最高总度，加测定本星最高行度，为其年白羊最高行度。
现代文：求最高行度：将所求的星的最辽总度数，加上测定的此星的最远运行度数，见前面。就是这一年白羊宫的最速运行度数。
English: Find the highest degree of motion: add the highest total degree of motion of the desired star to the measured furthest degree of motion of this star, see above. This is the fastest degree of motion of Aries in this year.

古文：求扣宫各日，加各宫日行度。
现代文：求各官各日的，加上各宫各日的运行度数。
English: Ask each official for the number of days, plus the number of days each palace is open.

古文：求日中心行度依太阳术求之。
现代文：求每天的中心运行度数：按照求太阳度数的方法求取。
English: Find the daily central running frequency: according to the method of finding the solar frequency.

古文：求自行度置积年入立成总零年月日下，各取自行度并之，得其年白羊宫一日自行度。
现代文：求自行度数：将积年代入数据表总年零年月日之下，各取自行度数相加，得到这一年白羊宫第一日的自行度数。
English: Find the self-sufficiency rate: put the accumulated time into the data table under the total year and month, and add the self-sufficiency rate of each, to get the self-sufficiency rate of the first day of the year.

古文：土、木、金三星减一分，水星减三分，火星不减。
现代文：土、木、金三星减一分，水星减三分，火星不减。
English: Earth, wood and gold three stars minus one point, Mercury minus three points, Mars does not decrease.

古文：如求各宫各日，照本星自行度累加之。
现代文：如求各宫各日，按照所求的星自行度数逐次累计。
English: If you ask for each palace each day, according to the desired star self-degree, it will be accumulated successively.

古文：水星如自行度遇三宫初度，作五日一段算，至九宫初度，作十日一段算纬度亦然。
现代文：水星的自行度数如果遇到第三宫的初度，就以五日作为一段计算，到了第九宫的初度，就以十日作为一段计算。纬度也是这样。
English: Mercury's proper motions, if they meet the first degree of the third house, are calculated as a period of five days, and when they reach the first degree of the ninth house, they are calculated as a period of ten days. The same is true for latitude.

古文：求中心行度中轮心度土、木、火三星，置太阳中心行度，减其星自行度，为三星中心行度。
现代文：求中心运行度数和小轮心度数：就是入历度五星本轮。土、木、火三星，用太阳中心运行度数，减去这些星的自行度数，就是这三颗星的中心运行度数。
English: Find the central running frequency and the small wheel heart rate: that is, the five-star main wheel of the history. Earth, wood, fire three stars, with the sun center running frequency, minus the self-propulsion frequency of these stars, is the central running frequency of these three stars.

古文：内又减最高行度，为三星小轮心度。
现代文：其中又减去最速运行度数，就是三颗星的小轮心度数。
English: Then subtract the fastest running speed, which is the small wheel speed of the three stars.

古文：金、水二星，其中心行度即太阳中心行度，内减其星最高行度，馀为其星小轮心度。
现代文：金、水二星，它们的中心运行度数就是太阳的中心运行度数，其中减去遣二星的最远运行度数，余数就是它们的小轮心度数。
English: Gold, water two stars, their central running frequency is the sun's central running frequency, of which minus the farthest running frequency of the two stars, the remaining number is their small wheel heart rate.

古文：求第一加减差以其星小轮心宫度为引数，入本星第一加减立成，依比例法求之。
现代文：如果不够减，就加十二宫再减。求第一加减差：盈缩差。以某星的小轮心度数为引数，代入这颗星的第一加减数据表，按照比例法求。
English: If it is not enough to subtract, add the zodiac and then subtract. Find the first addition and subtraction: the addition and subtraction. Take the small wheel heart rate of a star as an argument, substitute the first addition and subtraction data table of this star, and find it according to the proportional method.

古文：求自行定度及小轮心定度视第一加减差引数，在初宫至五宫，用加减差，加自行度，减小轮心度，各为定度。
现代文：方法同太阳、月亮。求自行定度及小轮心定度：根据第一加减差的引数，在初宫至第五宫，用加减差，加自行度数，减小轮心度数，就成为各宫的定度。
English: The method is the same as the sun and the moon. Find the self-determination and the small wheel center determination: according to the first plus and minus argument, in the first house to the fifth house, use the plus and minus difference, add the self-determination number, and reduce the small wheel center number to become the determination of each palace.

古文：在六宫至一宫，用加减差，减自行度，加小轮心度，各为定度。
现代文：在第六宫至第十一宫，用加减差，减自行度数，如小轮心度数，就成为各宫的定度。
English: In the sixth house to the eleventh house, with the addition and subtraction of the self-degree, such as the small wheel heart rate, it becomes the determination of each palace.

古文：求第二加减差以其星自行定度，入本第二加减立成内，取其度分，用比例法加减之。
现代文：求第二加减差：将某星的自行定度，代入本星的第二加减数据表内，提取度数，用比例法加或减。
English: Find the second addition and subtraction: Substitute the self-determination of a star into the second addition and subtraction data table of the star, extract the degree, and add or subtract by the proportional method.

古文：同前。
现代文：同前。
English: Same as before.

古文：求比敷分如土、木、金、水星，以本星小轮心一宫度，入第一加减立成内，取比敷分，如引数小馀在三十分已上，取手行经敷分。
现代文：求比数分：如果是土、木、金、水星，就将本星的小轮心定度，代入第一加减数据表内，取比数分数据。如果自变量的小数在三十分以上，就取后一行的比数分数据。
English: Find the ratio: If it is earth, wood, gold, or mercury, set the small wheel center of the star, insert it into the first add and subtract data table, and take the ratio data. If the decimal of the independent variable is more than thirty minutes, take the ratio data of the next line.

古文：如火星，则必用比例法求之。
现代文：如果是火星，就必须用比例法求取。
English: If it is Mars, it must be obtained by the proportional method.

古文：求远近度以自行定宫度，入第二加减立成内，取远近度，依比例法求之。
现代文：求远近度：将自行定宫度，代入第二加减数据表内，取远近度，按照比例法求取。
English: Find the far and near degree: Substitute the self-determined degree of the uterus into the second addition and subtraction data table, take the far and near degree, and obtain it according to the proportional method.

古文：求凡差定差法同太阴。
现代文：求泛差定差：方法同月亮。
English: Find the difference of the fixed difference: the method is the same as the moon.

古文：求经度置小轮心定度，以定差加减之，内加其星最高行度。
现代文：求经度：取小轮心定度，用定差加或减，根据引数的定数，在六宫以前相加，六宫以后相减。
English: To find the longitude: Take the small wheel center constant, use the constant difference to add or subtract, according to the constant of the argument, add before the sixth house, and subtract after the sixth house.

古文：求留段以其段小轮心，定宫谍为引数，入五星顺退留立成内，於同宫近度，取本星度分，与前后行查减。
现代文：又以自变量的宫分度数，缄去数据表内同宫的相近度数，与前后相减，余数化成分相乘，用六度来除，数据表每行相差六度。
English: Also, using the hysterectomy rate of the independent variable, subtract the similar hysterectomy rates in the data table, subtract from and subtract from, multiply by the remainder, and divide by six degrees. Each row of the data table differs by six degrees.

古文：又以引数宫度，减立成内同宫近度，两减，馀通分相乘，用六度除之，六十分收之，顺加逆减於前取度分，得数与其日自行定度同者，即本日留。
现代文：再按六十分进位，与前面所取的顺留表内的数据相加，或与前面所取的退留表内的数据相减，得数与该星的日自行定度相同的，本日就会停留。
English: Then, it is advanced by sixty minutes, added to the data in the previous remaining table, or subtracted from the data in the previous leaving table, and the result is the same as the self-determination of the day of the star, and it will stay today.

古文：如自行定度多者已过留日，少者未到留日。
现代文：如果自行定度多的，就已过了停留的时间，少的就没有到停留的时间。
English: If the self-assessment is too high, the stay time has passed, and if it is too low, the stay time has not arrived.

古文：欲得细率，以所得数与其人日自行定度相减，馀以各星一日自行度约之，即得留日在本日前后数也。
现代文：如果想得到详细的数据，以所得到的数据与各星的日自行定度相减，余数用各星的一日自行定度相约，如土星一日的自行定度为五十七分多等。就得到停留时间在本日前后的数据。
English: If you want to get detailed data, subtract the obtained data from the daily self-determination of each star, and use the remaining number to approximate the daily self-determination of each star, for example, Saturn's daily self-determination is more than fifty-seven minutes.

古文：求细行分土、木、金、火四星，以前后两段经度相减，以相距除之为日行分。
现代文：土星停留七天，在它停留时间的前三天和后三天，都与停留时间的数据相同。木星停留五天，在它停留的前两天和后两天，都与停留时间的数据相同火、金、水三星不停留，后退了就前行，前行了就后退，只是在运行度数极小时有停留。
English: Saturn stays for seven days, and the first three days and the last three days of its stay are the same as the data of the stay time. Jupiter stays for five days, and the first two days and the last two days of its stay are the same as the data of the stay time. Fire, gold, and water stars do not stay, they move forward when they move backward, and they move backward when they move forward, but they stay when the running frequency is extremely low.

古文：水星以白羊宫初日经度，又与前一日经度相减，馀为初日行分。
现代文：求精细运行数：土、木、金、火四星，以前后两段的经度相减，除以相距的日数，就是每日运行的分数。水星以白羊官第一日的经度，又与前一日的经度相减，余数为第一日的运行分数。
English: Determine the number of fine runs: earth, wood, gold, fire four stars, the longitude of the first and last two segments are subtracted, divided by the number of days apart, which is the daily run score. Mercury is the longitude of the first day of Aries, and is subtracted from the previous day's longitude, and the remaining number is the first day's run score.

古文：又置前后二段经度相减，馀以相距日除之，为平行分。
现代文：又将前后两段的经度相减，余数除以相距的日数，就是平均日运行分数。
English: The average daily running score is obtained by subtracting the longitude of the previous and next two sections and dividing the remaining number by the number of days apart.

古文：与初日行分加减，倍之，以前段前一日与后段相距日数除之之为日差。
现代文：与第一日的运行分数加或减，再乘以二，用前段前一日与后段相差的日数去除，就是日差。
English: Add or subtract from the running score of the first day, then multiply by two, and use the number of days between the previous day and the next day to remove the difference, which is the daily difference.

古文：以加减初日行分，为日行分。
现代文：用以加或减第一日的运行分数，第一日的运行分数少于平均运行分数就加，多就诚。
English: With the addition or subtraction of the first day's running score, the first day's running score is less than the average running score.

古文：五星各置前段经度，以逐日行分顺加退减之，为各星逐日经度。
现代文：就是所求日的运行分数。五星各用前段经度，用每天的运行分数顺行依次加，逆行依次减，就得到各星逐日的经度。
English: It is the running score of the desired day. For each of the five stars, the forward longitude is used as a decimal point, and the running score of each day is used to add in the forward direction and subtract in the reverse direction to obtain the longitude of each star from day to day.

古文：求伏见视各星自行定度，在伏见立成内限度已上者，即五星晨夕伏见也。
现代文：求伏见现：比照各星自行定度，在隐现数据表限度以上的，就会早晨隐去傍晚出现。
English: Appearance: According to the self-determination of each star, if it is above the limit of the data table, it will appear in the morning and disappear in the evening.

古文：五星纬度求自行定度置自行宫度分，其宫以一十乘为度。
现代文：五星纬度：求最远总运行度数、中心运行度数、自行度数，小轮心度数，都按照求五星经度的方法求取。
English: Five-star latitude: to find the furthest total running frequency, the center running frequency, the self-running frequency, the small wheel center frequency, all according to the method of finding the five-star longitude.

古文：其度以二十乘之为分，满六十约之为度。
现代文：求自行定度：将自行度的宫分乘以十就是度。
English: Seek self-determination: Multiply the degree of self-determination by ten to get the degree.

古文：其分亦以二十乘之为秒，满六十约之属分。
现代文：如第一宫，乘以十得十度，这是用约法折算，以制定纬度数据表。度数乘以二十就是分，分满了六十就进位焉度。
English: For example, the first house, multiplied by ten is ten degrees, which is converted by the method of approximation to establish a latitude data table. The degree multiplied by twenty is a point, and when it is divided by sixty, it is a degree.

古文：并之即得。求小轮心定度置小轮心宫度分，其宫以五乘之为度。
现代文：分也乘以二十就是秒，秒满了六十就进位为分。将度、分、秒相加就得到要求的数。求小轮心定度：将小轮心的宫分乘以五就是度。如第一宫乘以五，就得到五度。
English: A minute multiplied by twenty is a second, and a second multiplied by sixty is a minute. Add degrees, minutes, and seconds to get the required number. Determine the cogwheel center: Multiply the minute of the cogwheel center by five is a degree. If the first house is multiplied by five, you get five degrees.

古文：其度以一十乘之为分，满六十约之迷度。
现代文：度数乘以十就是分，分满了六十就进位为度。
English: A degree multiplied by ten is a point, and when it is divided by sixty, it becomes a degree.

古文：其分亦以一十乘之为秒，满六十约之为分。
现代文：分也乘以十就是秒，秒满了六十就进位为分。
English: A minute multiplied by ten is a second, and a second multiplied by sixty is a minute.

古文：并之即得。
现代文：将度、分、秒相加就得到要求的数。
English: Add the number of degrees, minutes and seconds to get the required number.

古文：求纬度以小轮心定度及自行度，入本星纬度立成内两取，得数与后行相减。
现代文：求纬度：将小轮心定度和自行定度，代入本星纬度数据表中雨相结合取得数据，一纵一横交叉。
English: To find the latitude: Substitute the small wheel center fixation and self-fixation into the local star latitude data table to obtain data in combination with rain, one vertical and one horizontal cross.

古文：又以小轮心定立成上小轮心定相减，两减馀相乘，以立成上小轮心度累加数除之。
现代文：得到数据后与后一行的数据相减。如果遇到交黄道的，舆后一行相加。又以小轮心定度，舆数据表中的小轮心定度相减，最上面的横行。两次相减的余数相乘，再用数据表中小轮心度的累加数相除。
English: After getting the data, it is subtracted from the data in the next row. If there is a cross zodiac, it is added to the next row. It is also determined by the small wheel center, subtracted from the small wheel center in the data table, and the uppermost one is rampant. The remainder of the two subtractions is multiplied, and then the accumulated number of the small wheel center in the data table is divided.

古文：复以自行定度与立成上自行定度相减，又以两取数，与下行相减，两减馀相乘，以立成上自行度累加数除之，收之为分。与前寄左数相加减，即得黄道南北纬定分。
现代文：满六十进制焉分。再与前面暂时寄放的数字相加或相减，如果纵横交叉取得的数多于下一行的就减，少的就加。如果遇到交黄道的，所得的数据多于前面暂时寄存数的，就在所得数据中减去寄存数，剩下的就是交遇黄道的南北分数。就得到黄道南北纬的度数。
English: Then add or subtract with the previously temporarily stored number. If the number obtained by the vertical and horizontal cross is more than the next line, it is reduced, and if it is less, it is added. If there is an intersection of the ecliptic, and the obtained data is more than the previously temporarily stored number, the stored number is subtracted from the obtained data, and the rest is the north-south fraction of the intersection of the ecliptic. The degrees of the north and south latitudes of the ecliptic are obtained.

古文：求纬度细行分置其星前段纬度，与后段纬度相减，馀以相距日除之，为日差。
现代文：求纬度详细运行数：将某星前段的纬度，舆后段的纬度相减，余数除以相距的日数，就是日差。
English: To find the latitude of a star, subtract the latitude of the first part of the star and the latitude of the second part of the star, and divide the remaining number by the number of days apart, which is the daily difference.

古文：置前段纬度，以日差顺加退减，即逐日纬度分。
现代文：将前段的纬度，按日差顺行依次加，逆行依次减，就得到每一天的纬度分。
English: Add the latitude of the previous section in ascending order according to the daily difference, and subtract it in descending order according to the daily difference, to get the latitude of each day.

古文：若前后段南北不同者，置其星前后段纬度并之，以相距日除之，为日差。
现代文：如果前后段有南纬北纬的不同，将该星前后段的纬度相加，以相距的日数来除，就是日差。
English: If there is a difference in latitude between the front and back of the star, the latitude of the front and back of the star is added and divided by the number of days apart, which is the day difference.

古文：置前段纬度，以日差累减之，至不及减者，於日差内减之，馀以日差累加之，即得逐日纬度。
现代文：将前段纬度，用日差依次相减，到不够减时，用日差来减这个数，所得余数用日差依次相加，就得到每一天的纬度。
English: The latitude of each day is obtained by subtracting the latitude of the previous paragraph by the number of days in order, and subtracting this number by the number of days in order, and adding the remaining number by the number of days in order.

古文：推日食法辨日食限视合朔太阴纬度，在黄道南四十五分已下，黄道北九十分已下，为人食。
现代文：推算日食的方法：推算日食的各个数据，如中午前日月合朔，用前一天的数据推算，如中午后日月合朔，用后一天的数据推算。辨别是否发生日食的界限：根据日月合朔时月亮的纬度，在黄道以南四十五分以下，黄道以北九十分以下，将有日食。
English: Method of calculating the solar eclipse: calculate the various data of the solar eclipse, such as the new moon before noon, use the data of the previous day to calculate, such as the new moon after noon, use the data of the next day to calculate. Distinguish whether the solar eclipse occurs: According to the latitude of the moon at the time of the new moon, there will be a solar eclipse below forty-five minutes south of the ecliptic and below ninety minutes north of the ecliptic.

古文：若合朔为尽，则全见食。
现代文：如果日月合朔在白天，就能完全看见日食。
English: If the new moon occurs during the day, the eclipse will be fully visible.

古文：若膈朔在日未出三时及日已入十五分，皆有带食。
现代文：如果合朔在太阳升起前三时及太阳已落后十五分，一时的四分之一。都有带食。
English: If the new moon is at three o'clock before sunrise and the sun is fifteen minutes behind, it is a quarter of an hour. Both have food.

古文：若合朔在夜刻者不算。
现代文：如果合朔在晚上的不算。
English: Not if it happens in the evening.

古文：求食甚凡时即合朔。
现代文：求食甚的时间：即日月合朔。
English: Best time to feed: Immediately after sunrise.

古文：置午正太阴行过太阳度，通秒，以二十四乘之为实，置太阴日行度，减太阳日行度，通秒为法，除之为时。时下零数以六下通之为分，分下零数以六十通之为秒，三十秒已上收为一分，六十分收为一时，共为食甚凡时。
现代文：将正午时月亮超过太阳的度数，计算方法见后面月食时月亮每一时刻超过太阳的度数。化为秒，乘以二十四作为被除数，将月亮的日行度数，减去太阳的日行度数，化为秒作为除数，二者相除即是时数时以下的零数乘以六十化为分，分以下的零数乘以六十化为秒，三十秒以上收为一分，六十分收为一时，加起来就是食甚的时间。
English: Convert the number of degrees at noon when the moon exceeds the sun, the calculation method is shown in the following: the number of degrees at each moment when the moon exceeds the sun during a lunar eclipse. Convert to seconds, multiply by 24 as the divisor, and convert the diurnal degree of the moon, minus the diurnal degree of the sun, into seconds as the divisor. The difference between the two is that the number of zeros below the hour is multiplied by the sixtieth as a minute, the number of zeros below the minute is multiplied by the sixtieth as a second, and more than thirty seconds is reduced to one minute, and sixty minutes is reduced to one hour. The sum is

古文：求各朔太阳经度以食甚凡时通分，以太阳日行度通秒乘之，以二十四除之为秒，满六十约之为秒分，用加减午正太阳度，得合朔时太阳经度。
现代文：求日月合朔时太阳的经度：将食甚时间化成分，将太阳的日行度数化成秒与之相乘，再处以二十四即得到微，满六十进制为秒为分，再用以加或减正午时太阳的度数，正午前日月合朔相减，正午后相加。得到合朔时太阳的经度。
English: To find the longitude of the sun at the time of the new moon: take the time component of the eclipse and multiply it by the diurnal degree of the sun into seconds, then divide by 24 to get the minimum, and divide by 60 to get the second, and then use it to add or subtract the degree of the sun at noon, subtract the new moon before noon and add it after noon. Get the longitude of the sun at the time of the new moon.

古文：求加减分视合朔时太阳宫度，入昼夜加减立成内，取加减分，依比例法求之。
现代文：也就是食甚时太阳运行的黄道度数。求加减分：将日月合朔时太阳的富分度数，代入昼夜加减数据表内，取加减分，依比例法求取。
English: That is, the ecliptic degree of the sun's movement at the time of the eclipse. Addition and subtraction: Substitute the richness degree of the sun at the time of the new moon into the day and night addition and subtraction data table, take the addition and subtraction points, and obtain according to the proportional method.

古文：求子正至合朔时分秒置食甚凡时，以加减分分加减之，用加减十二时，即子正至合朔时分秒。
现代文：求午夜至日月合朔的时分秒：将食甚的时间，用加减分加或减，正午前合朔相减，正午后相加。再加或减十二时，正午前合朔减十二时，正午后加十二时。就得到午夜至合朔的时分秒。
English: To find the hour, minute and second from midnight to the new moon: add or subtract the time from midnight to the new moon by adding or subtracting points, add or subtract before noon to the new moon, and add after noon. Then add or subtract 12 o'clock, before noon to the new moon subtract 12 o'clock, and after noon add 12 o'clock. You will get the hour, minute and second from midnight to the new moon.

古文：求第一东西差经差。视合朔时，太阳宫在立成右七宫取上行时，在左七宫取下行时，以子正至合朔时，取经差，依比例法求之。
现代文：按漠历规定时间从午夜算起，就改变方法以与《大统历》相合，这并不是《回回历》本来的方法。求第一东西差：经度差。将日月合朔时太阳所在的宫分在数据表经纬时加减数据表。上七官取右行的时数，顺行。在下七宫取左行的时数，逆行。用午夜至合朔的时间，取经度差，按比例法求取，只用时以下的小数求取。
English: According to the lunar calendar, the specified time is calculated from midnight, and the method is changed to coincide with the "Great General Calendar," which is not the original method of the "Houhou Calendar." Find the first east-west difference: longitude difference. Add and subtract the palace points where the sun is located at the time of the new moon to the data table at the time of the latitude and longitude. The upper seven organs take the number of hours in the right direction, and go forward. In the lower seven palaces, take the number of hours in the left direction, and go backwards. Use the time from midnight to the new moon to take the difference in longitude, and obtain it by

古文：第一东西差。
现代文：下同。就是第一东西差。
English: Same as below. That's the first thing that's different.

古文：求第二东西差视合朔时，太阳宫在立成内，取次宫子正至合朔时经差，依比例法求之，为第二东西差。
现代文：求第二东西差：将日月合朔时太阳所在的宫分在数据表中，同上。取下一官午夜至合朔时的经度差，按比例法求取，就是第二东西差。
English: Find the second east-west difference: take the meridian at which the sun is located at the time of the new moon in the data table, the same above. Take the difference in longitude between the official midnight and the new moon, and find it by the proportional method, which is the second east-west difference.

古文：求第一南北差以合朔时，太阳宫及子正，至合朔时入立成内，取纬差，依比例法求之，为第一南北差。
现代文：求第一南北差：纬度差。将日月合朔时太阳所在的宫分及午夜至合朔的时间代入数据表内，同上。取纬度差，按比例法求取，就是第一南北差。
English: Find the first north-south difference: the latitude difference. Substitute the solar equinox and the time from midnight to the new moon into the data table, the same as above. Take the latitude difference and find it by the proportional method, which is the first north-south difference.

古文：求第二南北差以合朔太阳宫，取次宫子正至合朔时纬差，依比例法求之，为第二南北差。
现代文：求第二南北差：以日月合朔时太阳的官分，取下一宫午夜至合朔时的纬度差，按照比例法求取，就是第二南北差。
English: Find the second north-south difference: take the official division of the sun at the time of the new moon, take the latitude difference between midnight and the new moon, and find it according to the proportional method, which is the second north-south difference.

古文：求第二时差以膈朔太阳宫及子正至膈朔时，入立成取时差，依比例法求之。
现代文：求第一时差：将日月合朔时太阳的宫分及午夜至合朔的时间，代入数据表中取时差，按照比例法求取。
English: Find the first time difference: take the meridian of the sun at the time of the new moon and the time from midnight to the new moon, insert it into the data table to obtain the time difference, and obtain it according to the proportional method.

古文：第二时差公合朔太阳宫，取次宫子正至合朔时时差差，依比例法求之。
现代文：求第二时差：以日月合朔时太阳的宫分，取下一宫午夜至合朔时的时差，按照比例法求取。
English: Find the second time difference: take the time difference between midnight and the time of the new moon from the first quarter of the sun at the time of the new moon, and find it according to the proportional method.

古文：求合朔时东西差以第一东西差与第二东西差相减，馀通秒，以乘合朔时太阳度分，以三十度除之为纤，以六十收之为微、为秒、为分、经加减第一东西差，为合朔时东西差。
现代文：求日月合朔时的东西差：用第一东西差和第二东西差相减，余数化为秒，乘以合朔时太阳的度数，也化为秒。用三十度相除得到纤数，再按六十进制为微、秒、分，用来加或减第一束西差，第一束西差少于第二东西差的加，多的减，下冈。
English: To find the east-west difference at the time of the new moon: use the first east-west difference and the second east-west difference to reduce, and the remaining number is converted into seconds. Multiply by the degree of the sun at the time of the new moon, and it is also converted into seconds. Divide by thirty degrees to get the number of fibers, and then use the base-60 system to add or subtract the first bunch of west difference, the first bunch of west difference is less than the second west-east difference, plus, more minus, down hill.

古文：求合朔时南北差以第一南北差与第南北差相减，馀通秒，以乘太阳度分，以三十除之为纤，依率收之为微、秒、分，以加减第一南北差，为各朔时南北差。
现代文：就是日月合朔时的东西差。求日月合朔时的南北差：用第一南北差和第二南北差相减，余数化为秒，再乘以太阳的度数，用三十相除得到纤数，按比率进位为微、秒、分，再加或减第一南北差，就是日月合朔时的南北差。
English: It is the east-west difference at the time of the new moon. To find the north-south difference at the time of the new moon: use the first north-south difference and the second north-south difference to reduce, and the remaining number is converted into seconds. Then multiply by the degree of the sun, and divide by thirty to get the number of fibers. According to the ratio, the carry-forward is micro, seconds, and minutes. Then add or subtract the first north-south difference, which is the north-south difference at the time of the new moon.

古文：求合朔时差以第一第二两时差相减，乘太阳度分，以三十除之，依率帐之，用加减第一时差，为合朔时差。
现代文：求日月合朔时的时差：用第一、第二两个时差相减，乘以太阳的度数，除以三十，按比率进位，再加或减第一时差，就是日月合朔时的时差。
English: To find the time difference at the time of the new moon: subtract the first and second two time differences, multiply by the number of degrees of the sun, divide by thirty, carry forward according to the ratio, and then add or subtract the first time difference, which is the time difference at the time of the new moon.

古文：求合朔时本轮行度以本轮日行度通分，以乘食甚凡时，以二十四除之为秒，依率收之为分、为度，以加减午正本轮行度，为合朔时行度。
现代文：求日月合朔时本轮的运行度数：将本轮的日运行度数十三度四分化为分，乘以食甚的时间，也化为分。除以二十四得到秒，按照比率进位为分、度，用以加或减正午本轮运行度数，正午前减，正午后加。就是合朔时的运行度数。
English: Find the running frequency of the current round at the time of the new moon: divide the daily running frequency of the current round by dozens of three degrees into quarters, multiply by the eclipse time, and also into minutes. Divide by twenty-four to get seconds, and according to the ratio carry forward to minutes, degrees, used to increase or decrease the running frequency of the current round at noon, decrease before noon, and increase after noon. That is the running frequency at the time of the new moon.

古文：求比敷分以本轮行度入立成，取同宫近度太阴比敷分，依比例法求之。
现代文：求比数分：将本轮运行度数代入数据表，太阳、月亮昼夜时行影径数据表。取同宫相近度数月亮的比数分，按照比例法求取。
English: Find the ratio: put the current rotation frequency into the data table, the sun, the moon, day and night, the shadow path data table. Take the ratio of the number of moons that are similar to the palace, and obtain it according to the proportional method.

古文：求东西定差置合朔时东西差通秒，以比敷分通秒乘之为纤以六十收之为微、为秒、为分，以加合朔东西差，为定差。
现代文：求东西定差：将合朔时的东西差化为秒，再将比数分化为秒与之相乘得到纤数。按六十进制为微、秒、分，再加合朔时的东西差，只有加，没有诚。就是定差。
English: Find the east-west constant difference: convert the east-west difference at sunrise to seconds, and then divide the ratio into seconds and multiply it to get the fractional number. According to the sexagesimal system, it is micro, seconds, minutes, and then add the east-west difference at sunrise, only add, no sincerity. It is the constant difference.

古文：求南北定差法同东西定差。
现代文：求南北定差：方法同东西定差。
English: Find the north-south fixed difference: the method is the same as the east-west fixed difference.

古文：求食甚定时视其日合朔时，太阳度在立成左七宫，其时差，黑字减，白字加，在右七宫，白字减，黑字加，皆加减於子正至合朔时，得数命起正减之，得某时初正。
现代文：求食甚定时：即食甚定分。根据某日日月合朔的时间，太阳的运行度数在数据表经纬时差加减数据表。左面七宫时，时差黑字减，白字加，在右面七宫时，白字减，黑字加，都加减从午夜到合朔的时间，得数按漠历时间从午夜算起的规定减去十二，得到某时的初步整时。
English: According to the time of sunrise on a certain day, the running frequency of the sun is added to and subtracted from the data table of the time difference between latitude and longitude. At the time of the seven palaces on the left, the time difference is subtracted by the black letter and added by the white letter. At the time of the seven palaces on the right, the time difference is subtracted by the white letter and added by the black letter. Both are subtracted from the time from midnight to sunrise. The number obtained is subtracted by twelve according to the provisions of the lunar calendar time from midnight, and the initial whole time of a certain time is obtained.

古文：馀通为秒，以一千乘之，以一百四下四除之，以六十约之，满百为刻，即食甚定时。
现代文：余数化为秒，乘以一千，再除以一百四十四，六十分为一时，每日一千四石四十分，所以乘以一千，又除以一百四十四。按六十进制，满一百为一刻，就是食甚定时。
English: The remainder is converted into seconds, multiplied by one thousand, and then divided by one hundred and forty-four, and sixty minutes is one hour, one thousand four hundred and forty minutes a day, so multiply by one thousand, and then divide by one hundred and forty-four.

古文：求食甚太阴经度於合朔太阳经度内，加减东西定差，即得食甚太阴经度。
现代文：求食甚时月亮的经度：在日月合朔时太阳的经度内，加或减东西定差，就得到食甚时月亮的经度。
English: The longitude of the moon at the time of eclipse: within the longitude of the sun at the time of the new moon, add or subtract the east-west fixed difference to get the longitude of the moon at the time of eclipse.

古文：求合朔计都度置食甚凡时通分，以计都日行度通秒乘之，以二十四除之为微，满六十收之为秒、为分，以加减其日午时计都行度，为合朔时计都度。
现代文：其加或减根据食甚定时时差的加减。求日月合朔时计都的度数：将食甚时间化为分，将计都的日行度数三分十一秒化为秒与之相乘，除以二十四得到微，满六十进制为秒、分，用来加或减这一天正午时计都的运行度数，罗喉、计都逆行，午前合朔相加，午后相减。就是合朔时计都的度数。
English: Its addition or subtraction is based on the addition or subtraction of the eclipse-to-fixed time difference. Find the degree of the sun-moon synodic time: convert the eclipse-to-time to minutes, convert the diurnal degree of the synodic time to seconds and multiply it, divide by 24 to get a decimal, and convert to seconds and minutes at the end of the sexagesimal system. Used to add or subtract the running degree of the noon time of this day, Luo throat, the synodic time is retrograde, the morning synodic time is added, and the afternoon synodic time is subtracted. That is the degree

古文：求合朔太阴纬度食甚时，太降经度内加减合朔时计都度，馀为计都与月相离度，入太阴纬度立成取之。
现代文：求日月合朔时月亮的纬度：将食甚时月亮的经度，加或减合朔时计都的度数，余数为计都与月亮的相离度，再代入月亮纬度数据表中查取。
English: Find the latitude of the moon at the time of the new moon: add or subtract the longitude of the moon at the time of the eclipse, the degree of the new moon, and the remaining number is the degree of separation between the meter and the moon, and then enter it into the moon latitude data table.

古文：求食甚太阴纬度南北定差内。加减合朔时太阴纬度，在黄道南加，北减。
现代文：求食甚时月亮的纬度：将南北定差加或减合朔时月亮的纬度，在黄道南相加，在黄道北相减。
English: The latitude of the moon at the time of feeding: add or subtract the north-south fixed difference to the latitude of the moon at the new moon, add in the south of the zodiac, and subtract in the north of the zodiac.

古文：得食甚纬度。
现代文：得到食甚时的纬度。
English: The latitude at the time of the eclipse.

古文：求合朔时太阳自行度用太阳日行度通秒，以乘食甚凡时，用二十四除之，得数为微，满六十收之为秒、为分，以加减其日午正自行度，得合朔自行度。
现代文：求日月合朔时太阳的自行度数：将太阳的日行度数五十九分八秒化为秒，乘以食甚的时间，也化为秒。除以二十四，得数为微，满六十进制焉秒、分，再加或减这一天正午的自行度数，正午前合朔相减，正午后合朔相加。
English: To find the sun's proper motion at the time of the new moon: convert the sun's diurnal motion of fifty-nine minutes and eight seconds into seconds, multiply by the time of eclipse, and also into seconds. Divide by twenty-four, the result is negligible, full of sixty-second, minute, and then add or subtract the self-motion of noon on this day, before noon the new moon is subtracted, and after noon the new moon is added.

古文：求太阳径分以合朔太阳自行度为引数，入立成内同宫近度，取太阳径分，依比例法求之。
现代文：得到合朔时的自行度数。求太阳径分：以合朔时太阳的自行度数焉引数，代入数据表影径分数据表。内同官相近的度数内，取太阳径分，按照比例法求取。
English: Obtain the proper motion of the sun at sunrise. Calculate the solar diameter: Take the proper motion of the sun at sunrise as an argument, and substitute the data table for the shadow diameter data table. Within the number of degrees that are close to the same, take the solar diameter, and obtain it according to the proportional method.

古文：求太阴径分以合朔时本轮行度为引数，入立成同上内取同宫近度太阴径分，依比例法求之。
现代文：求月亮径分：以合朔时本轮运行度数为引数，代入数据表同上。内，取同宫相近度数月亮的径分，按照比例法求取。
English: Calculate the moon's diameter: take the crescent of the current round of operation at the time of the new moon as an argument, and substitute the data table above. In particular, take the crescent of the moon with the same degree of similarity to the palace, and calculate it according to the proportional method.

古文：求二半径分并太阳、太阴雨径分，半之。
现代文：求二半径分：将太阳、月亮二者的径分相加，除以二。
English: Find two radii: add the radii of the sun and the moon together and divide by two.

古文：求太阳食限分置二半径分，内减食甚太阴纬度，馀为太阳食限。
现代文：求太阳食限分：将二半径分，减食甚时月亮的径分，剩余数是太阳发生日食的界限。
English: Find the solar eclipse limit: divide the radius by two, reduce the eclipse to the diameter of the moon, and the remaining number is the limit of the solar eclipse.

古文：求太阳食甚定分以太阳食限分通秒，以一千乘之为实，以太阳径分通秒为法除之，以百约之为分，为太阳食甚定分。
现代文：如不够减就不会发生日食。如果月亮役有纬度的，就发生日全食。如果月亮没有纬度而太阳径分大于月亮径分的，发生日环食。求太阳食甚定分：将太阳食限分化为秒，乘以一千作为被除数，将太阳径分化为秒作除数相除，按一百进位为分，就是太阳食甚定分。
English: If there is not enough reduction, a solar eclipse will not occur. If the moon has a latitude, a total solar eclipse will occur. If the moon does not have a latitude and the sun's radius is greater than the moon's radius, an annular solar eclipse will occur. To determine the solar eclipse: divide the solar eclipse limit into seconds, multiply by one thousand as the divisor, divide the solar diameter into seconds as the divisor, and divide by one hundred, which is the solar eclipse.

古文：求时差食甚太阴纬度通秒自乘，二半径分亦通秒自乘，两自乘数相减，馀以平方开之，以二十四乘之为实，以其日太阴日行度内减太阳日行度通分为法。
现代文：求时差：即定用分。将食甚时月亮的纬度化为秒自乘，二半径分也化为秒自乘，两个得数相减，余下的数开平方，再乘以二十四作为被除数，将这一天月亮的日运行度数减太阳的日运行度数化为分作为除数。
English: Find the time difference: that is, use the fixed minutes. The latitude of the moon at the time of the eclipse is converted into seconds multiplied by itself, and the two radii are also converted into seconds multiplied by themselves. The two obtained numbers are subtracted, the remaining numbers are squared, and then multiplied by twenty-four as the divisor. The daily movement degree of the moon on this day is reduced by the daily movement degree of the sun into minutes as the divisor.

古文：实如法而一，得数为分，满六十分为一时，为时差。
现代文：两数相除，得数为分，满六十分为一时，就是时差。
English: If two numbers are different, the result is a point, and if it is over sixty minutes, it is one hour, which is the time difference.

古文：求初亏置食甚定时，内减时差，馀时命起子正减之，得初正时。
现代文：求初亏：将食甚定时，减去时差，余数按汉历时间从午夜算起的规定减去十二，得到初步的整时。
English: Find the first loss: subtract the time difference from the fixed time of the meal, and subtract twelve from the remaining number according to the provisions of the Chinese calendar time from midnight, to obtain the initial whole time.

古文：馀分通秒，以一千乘之，以一百四十四除之，以六十约之，满百为刻，为初亏时刻。
现代文：余下的分化为秒，乘以一千，除以一百四十四，按六十进制为分，满一百分为一刻，就是初亏的时刻。
English: The remaining differentiation into seconds, multiplied by one thousand, divided by one hundred and forty-four, divided by sixty, and one hundredth of a minute, is the moment of the first loss.

古文：求复圆置食甚定时，内加时差，命起子正，如初亏法，得复圆时刻。
现代文：求复圆：将食甚定时，加上时差，时间按汉历规定从午夜算起，如同求初亏的方法，得到复圆的时刻。
English: Seeking rejuvenation: the time of eating is fixed, plus the time difference, the time is calculated from midnight according to the Chinese calendar, just like the method of seeking the first loss, to get the time of rejuvenation.

古文：求初亏食甚圆方位与《大统》法同。
现代文：求初亏、食甚、复圆的方位：与《大统历》方法相同。
English: Seek the direction of initial loss, eclipse, and recovery: the same method as the "Great General Calendar."

古文：推月食法辨月食限视望日太阴经度与罗喉或计都度相离二十三度之内，太阳纬度在一度八分之下，为有食。
现代文：推算月食的方法：推算月食的各种数据，正午以前望的，用前一天的推算，正午以后望的，用第二天的推算。辨别是否发生月食的界限：在望日月亮的经度和罗喉或计都的度数相距在十三度以内，月亮的纬度在一度八分以下，会发生月食。
English: Methods for calculating lunar eclipses: Calculate the various data of lunar eclipses, from those seen before noon, use the previous day's calculation, and those seen after noon, use the next day's calculation. The boundaries for distinguishing whether a lunar eclipse occurs: A lunar eclipse occurs when the longitude of the moon looking at the sun and the longitude of Luogou or Chengdu are less than thirteen degrees apart, and the latitude of the moon is below one degree eight minutes.

古文：又视合望在太阴未出二量，未入二时，其限有带食。
现代文：又合望发生在月亮没有出来前二时，没有降下前二时，都有带食。
English: Conjunctions also occurred when the moon did not rise before 2:00 a.m. and did not set before 2:00 a.m., both of which brought food.

古文：其在二时已上者不算。
现代文：那些在二时以上的不计在内。
English: Those over two o'clock are not included.

古文：求食甚凡时置其日太阴经度内减六宫，以减其日午正太阳度为午前望。置相减馀数相通秒，以二十四乘之为实，置其日太阴经度，内减前一日太阴经度，馀为太阳日行度。
现代文：将这一天月亮的经度，减去前一天月亮的经度，如果是在午后望的，减第二天月亮的经度。余数是月亮的日运行度数。又将这一天正午太阳的经度，减去前一天正午太阳的经度，如果在午后望的，减第二天太阳的经度。余数是太阳的日运行度数。
English: Take the longitude of the moon on this day, subtract the longitude of the moon on the previous day, and if it is seen in the afternoon, subtract the longitude of the moon on the next day. The remainder is the diurnal motion of the moon. Then take the longitude of the sun at noon on this day, subtract the longitude of the sun at noon on the previous day, and if it is seen in the afternoon, subtract the longitude of the sun on the next day. The remainder is the diurnal motion of the sun.

古文：两日行度相减，馀通秒为法，除实得数为时。
现代文：两个日运行度数相减，余数化为秒作为除数，与被除数相除，得数为时。
English: The running frequency of two days is subtracted, and the remaining number is converted into seconds as a divisor, and divided by the divisor, the resulting number is time.

古文：其时下馀数，以六十通之为分、秒，即所求食甚凡时。
现代文：时下的小数，按六十化为分、秒，就是所求的食甚时间。
English: The decimal part of the hour, converted to minutes and seconds according to sixty, is the desired eclipse time.

古文：求食甚月离黄道宫度置食甚凡时，与太阳日行度俱通秒相乘，以二十四除之，得数为纤潢六十收之为微、为秒、为分，以加减其日午正太阳度，为望时太阳度，加六宫，即得所求。
现代文：求食甚畴月亮距离黄道的宫分度数：将食甚的时间，与太阳日运行度数都化为秒相乘，除以二十四，得数为纤。满六十进制为微、秒、分，用来加或减这一天正午太阳的经度，午前望减，午后望加。就是望时太阳的经度。加上六宫，就是所求的月亮的度数。
English: The degree of the moon from the ecliptic of the ecliptic to the ecliptic of the ecliptic: multiply the time of the ecliptic and the solar day by the number of seconds, divide by twenty-four, and the result is the number of fibers. The full sixty is divided into micro, seconds, and minutes, used to add or subtract the longitude of the sun at noon on this day, in the morning it is subtracted, and in the afternoon it is added. It is the longitude of the sun at the time of observation. Add the sixth house, and it is the degree of the desired moon.

古文：求昼夜加减差以望时太阳宫度为引数，入昼夜加减立成内，取加减分，依比例法求之。
现代文：求昼夜加减差：以望时太阳的宫分度数为引数，代入昼夜加减数据表内，取加减分，按照比例法求取。
English: Calculate the difference between day and night: take the rising degree of the sun's meridian as an argument, substitute it into the day and night addition and subtraction data table, take the addition and subtraction points, and calculate it according to the proportional method.

古文：求食甚定时置食甚凡时，以昼夜加减差法加减之。
现代文：求食甚定时：将食甚的时间，与昼夜加减差加或减。
English: Seeking food at the right time: add or subtract the time of eating from the difference between day and night.

古文：得数，用加减一十二时，命起子正，得初正时。
现代文：午前望减，午后望加。得数加或减十二时，如午后望加十二时，午前望与十二时相减。
English: In the morning, the watch is lowered, and in the afternoon, it is raised. If the watch is raised or lowered by 12 o'clock, and in the afternoon the watch is raised by 12 o'clock, then the watch is raised or lowered by 12 o'clock.

古文：其小馀，如法收为刻，法详日食。
现代文：按汉历规定时间从午夜算起，得到初步的整时。其余小数，按比率进位焉刻，方法详见日食。
English: According to the Chinese calendar, the specified time is calculated from midnight, and the initial full time is obtained. The remaining decimals are advanced according to the ratio, and the method is detailed in the eclipse.

古文：得定时。
现代文：得到定时。
English: Get it on time.

古文：求望时计都度置食甚凡时，通秒为实，以计都日行度通秒乘之，以二十四除之，得数为纤以六十收之为微、为秒、为分，用加减其日午正计都行度，即得。
现代文：求望时计都的度数：将食甚的时间，化为秒作为被乘数，将计都的日运行度数三分十一秒化为秒与之相乘，除以二十四，得数为纤。按六十进位焉微、秒、分，再加或减这一天正午计都的运行度数，罗喉、计都逆行，午前望加，午后望减。
English: The degree of the clock: convert the time of the eclipse into seconds as the multiplier, multiply the daily running degree of the clock by three minutes and eleven seconds into seconds, divide by twenty-four, and the result is the number of fibers. According to the sixty-degree angle, seconds, minutes, and then add or subtract the running degree of the clock at noon on this day, Luo throat, counterclockwise, increase in the morning, decrease in the afternoon.

古文：求望时太阴纬度置食甚月离黄道度，内减望时计都度，馀为计都与月相离度，入太阴纬度立成取之。
现代文：就得到了。求望时月亮的纬度：将食甚时月亮距离黄道的度数，减去望时计都的度数，如不够减，加十二宫再喊。余数为计都与月亮相离的度数，再代入月亮纬度数据表中查取。
English: Got it. The latitude of the moon when looking up: subtract the degree of the eclipse when the moon is farthest from the ecliptic, subtract the degree of the timepiece, if it is not enough, add the zodiac. The remaining number is the degree of the timepiece and the moon, and then enter it into the moon latitude data table for retrieval.

古文：求望时本轮行度置太阴本轮日行度，通分，以食甚凡时通秒乘之，以二十四除之为微，以六十收之为秒、为分、为度，用加减其日午正本轮行度，即得。
现代文：求望时本轮的运行度数：即列入月亮迟疾历表的。将月亮本轮日运行度数，十三度四分。化为分，用食甚时间化为秒与之相乘，再除以二十四得到微，按六十进制为秒、分、度，再加或减逭一天正午的本轮运行度数，午前望减，午后望加。
English: The movement rate of the current cycle at the time of expectation: that is, it is included in the moon delay calendar. Convert the current daily movement rate of the moon, thirteen degrees and four minutes, into minutes, multiply it by the time taken to convert it into seconds, then divide it by 24 to get the minimum, according to the sexagesimal system for seconds, minutes, degrees, and then add or subtract the current cycle movement rate at noon one day, expect to decrease in the morning, expect to increase in the afternoon.

古文：求太阴径分以望时本轮行宫度，入影径分立成求之。
现代文：就得到了。求月亮径分：将望时本轮运行的宫分度数，代入影径分数据表中求取。
English: Obtain the Moon's diameter: Find the degree of the Moon's umbra in the data table by substituting the degree of the Moon's shadow for the degree of the Moon's umbra.

古文：求太阴影径分以望时本轮行宫度，放影径分立成，取之。
现代文：方法详见日食。求月亮影径分：将望时本轮运行的宫分度数，代入影径分数据表中查取。
English: For details of the method, see the solar eclipse.To find the Moon's shadow path: Find the degree of the Moon's shadow path in the data table by substituting the degree of the Moon's shadow path into the degree of the Moon's shadow path.

古文：求望时太阳自行度以太阳日行度与食甚凡时俱通秒相乘，以二十四除之，得数为纤，满六十收为微、为秒、为分，以减其日午正太阳自行度。
现代文：求望时太阳自行度数：将太阳日运行度数五十九分八秒和食甚时间都化为秒相乘，除以二十四，得数为纤。满六十进制为微、秒、分，再加或减这一天正午太阳的自行度数。
English: The sun's proper motion at the time of observation: Multiply the sun's diurnal motion of fifty-nine minutes and eight seconds and the eclipse time into seconds, divide by twenty-four, and the result is a number. The base sixty is micro, seconds, minutes, and then add or subtract the sun's proper motion at noon on this day.

古文：求影径减差以其日太阳自行範度为引数，入影径立成内，於同宫近度取太阴影径差分，依比例法求之。
现代文：方法同日食求太阳经度。求影减差：以某日太阳自行的宫分度数为自变量，代入影径数据表肉，在同宫相近的度数取月亮影径差分，按照比例法求取。
English: Method Find the sun's longitude on the same day of the eclipse. Find the shadow reduction: take the degree of the sun's meridian on a certain day as the independent variable, substitute the shadow diameter data for the table flesh, take the moon shadow diameter difference from the degree close to the same degree, and obtain it according to the proportional method.

古文：求影径定分置太阴影径分，内减影径减差分。
现代文：方法详见前面。求影径定分：将月亮的影径分，减去影径减差分。
English: For details of the method, see the previous section. Determining the path of the moon: subtract the path of the moon from the path of the moon.

古文：求二半径分置太阴径分，加影径定分，半之。
现代文：求二半径分：将月亮径分，加影径定分，除以二。
English: Find the radius of two: divide the diameter of the moon by two, add the radius of the shadow and divide by two.

古文：求太阴食限置二半径分，内减望时太阴纬度。
现代文：求月亮是否发生月食的界限：将二半径分，诚去望时月亮的纬度。
English: Ask the moon whether there is a lunar eclipse boundary: divide the two radii, and honestly look at the moon's latitude.

古文：求食甚定分置食限分，通秒，以一千乘之为实，以太阴径分秒为法，除之，以百约之灾分，为食甚定分。
现代文：如不够减，就不会发生月食。求食甚定分：将发生月食界限的数据化为秒，乘以一千作为被除数，将月亮径分化为秒作为除数相除，按一百进位焉分，就是食甚定分。
English: If there is not enough reduction, there will be no lunar eclipse. To determine the eclipse: convert the data of the eclipse boundary into seconds, multiply by one thousand as the divisor, divide the moon's diameter into seconds as the divisor, and divide by one hundred, that is, the eclipse is determined.

古文：求太阴逐时行过太阳分置太阴望时经度，减前一日太阴经度，又置望时太阳自行度，减前一日太阳自行度，以两馀数相减，为太阴昼夜行过太阳度。
现代文：求月亮每时超过太阳的度数：将月亮望时的经度，减去前一天月亮的经度，又将望时太阳的自行度数，减去前一天太阳的自行度数，将这两个余数相减，就是月亮昼夜超过太阳的度数。
English: Find the number of degrees by which the moon exceeds the sun every hour: subtract the longitude of the previous day's moon from the longitude of the moon at the time of observation, subtract the self-degree of the sun at the time of observation from the self-degree of the previous day's sun, and subtract the two remaining numbers, which is the number of degrees by which the moon exceeds the sun day and night.

古文：通秒以二十四除之，满六十收之，得逐时行过太阳分。
现代文：化为秒除以二十四，满六十进制，就得到每一时超过太阳的度数。
English: divided by 24 to get the number of degrees above the sun for each hour.

古文：求时差以太阴纬度分，通秒自乘，又以二半径分通秒自乘，两数相减，馀开平方为实，以太阴行过太阳度通秒为法除之，得数即时刻差。
现代文：求时差：将月亮的纬度数，化为秒自乘，又将二半径分化为秒自乘，两数相减，剩余数开平方作为被除数，将月亮每时超过太阳的度数化为秒作为除数相除，得数就是时差。
English: Find the time difference: convert the number of latitudes of the moon into seconds multiplied by itself, and divide the two radii into seconds multiplied by itself, subtract the two numbers, and square the remaining number as the divisor, convert the number of degrees of the moon exceeding the sun every hour into seconds as the divisor, and divide it, and the result is the time difference.

古文：求初亏复圆时刻以时差减食甚定时，得初亏时刻。
现代文：就是初亏至食甚的实际时间。求初亏复圆的时刻：以时差减食甚定时，得到初亏的时刻。
English: It is the actual time from the first loss to the first loss. The time to recover the first loss: the time to reduce the loss with the time difference, and the time to get the first loss.

古文：加食甚定时，得复圆时刻。
现代文：加食甚定时，得到复圆的时刻。
English: When the meal is added regularly, it is the moment of rejuvenation.

古文：其命时收刻之法，并同日食。
现代文：规定时间从午夜算起、进位为刻的方法，都与日食相同。
English: The method of calculating the specified time from midnight and advancing it to the hour is the same as for a solar eclipse.

古文：求食既至食甚时差置二半径分，减太阴径分，通秒自乘，又置太阴纬度亦通秒自乘，相减，平方开之为实。
现代文：求食既至食甚的时差：将二半径分，减月亮径分，化为秒自乘，又将月亮纬度也化为秒自乘，两数相减，再开平方作为被除数。
English: The time difference between the solstice and the eclipse: take two radii, subtract the moon's diameter, and multiply by the second. Take the moon's latitude and multiply by the second. Subtract the two numbers, and then divide by the square.

古文：以太阴逐时行过太阳度通秒为法除之，得数即时差。
现代文：将月亮每时超过太阳的度数化为秒作为除数与之相除，得数就是时差。
English: Divide the number of degrees by which the moon exceeds the sun every hour into seconds as a divisor, and the result is the time difference.

古文：求食既生光时刻以食既至食甚时差，减食甚定时，为食既时刻。
现代文：求食既生光的时刻：将食既至食甚的时差，减去食甚定时，就是食既的时刻。
English: The moment when it is time to eat: the time difference between the time of eating and the time of eating, minus the time of eating, is the time of eating.

古文：加食甚定时，为生光时刻。
现代文：加食甚定时，就是生光的时刻。
English: When adding food is even regular, it is the time of birth.

古文：求初亏食甚复圆方位与《大统》法同。
现代文：求初亏食甚复圆方位：与《大统历》方法相同。
English: Seeking the direction of first loss and then recovery: the same as the "Great General Calendar" method.

古文：求日出入时以午正太阳经度为引数，入西域昼夜时立成，取其度分，依比例法求之，为未定分。
现代文：求太阳出入的时间：以正午太阳的经度为引数，代入西域昼夜时数据表中，取出度数，按照比例法求取，得到未定分。
English: Solve for the time of sunrise and sunset: take the longitude of the noon sun as an argument, substitute it into the western day and night time data table, take out the degree, obtain it according to the proportional method, and get the undetermined score.

古文：又引於数相对宫度内，取其度分，亦依比例法求之，为后未定分。
现代文：又在自变量相对的官度内，查取度分，如初官三度，就在六官三度查取。也按照比例法求取，得到后未定分。
English: In addition, in the relative rank of the independent variable, the search degree is increased, for example, the first rank is increased by three degrees, and the sixth rank is increased by three degrees. It is also obtained according to the proportional method, and the score is not determined after it is obtained.

古文：两未定分相减，不及减，馀通秒，用十五除之，六十收之为分、为时，得其日昼时分秒。
现代文：两个未定分相减，如不够减，加三百六十度再减。余数化为秒，除以十五，按六十进制焉分、时，就得到逭一天白天的长度。
English: Two undetermined fractions are subtracted, if not enough, add 360 degrees and then subtract. The remaining number is converted to seconds, divided by 15, and divided by 60 to get the length of a day.

古文：半之为其日半昼时分秒。
现代文：折半就是这一天日出到正午半个白天的长度。
English: A half-day is the length of the day from sunrise to noon.

古文：以半昼时分秒减十二时，馀为日出时分秒，加十二时为日入时分秒。
现代文：用十二时减半个白天的长度，余数就是日出的时刻，加十二时，就是日落的时刻。
English: Twelve o'clock is used to halve the length of the day, the remainder being the time of sunrise, and adding twelve o'clock is the time of sunset.

古文：求日月出入带食分秒视其日日出时分秒，较多於初亏时分秒，少於食甚定时及复时分秒者，即有带食。
现代文：求日月出入带食的时间：将某日日出的时间，加上日落的时间，如果多于初亏的时间，少于食甚定时和复圆的时间，就有带食。
English: Ask the time of eclipse: add the time of sunrise on a certain day to the time of sunset, if it is more than the time of the first loss, less than the time of eclipse or the time of regularity and the time of re-circle, there will be eclipse.

古文：置其日日出时或日入时，与食甚定时分秒相减，馀为带食差。
现代文：将这一天日出或日落的时间，与食甚定时时间相减，余数就是带食差。
English: Subtract the time of sunrise or sunset on this day from the time of eclipse, and the remaining number is the eclipse difference.

古文：置日月食甚定分，以带食差通秒乘之，以时差通秒除之，得数为带食分。
现代文：将日月食甚定分，用带食差化为秒与之相乘，再用时差化为秒与之相除，得数就是带食分。
English: If the eclipse of the sun and the moon is very definite, multiply it by the eclipse difference to the second, and then divide it by the time difference to the second, the result is the eclipse.

古文：於食甚定分内减带食分，馀为日月带食所见之分。
现代文：在食甚定分内减去带食分，余数就是日月带食能见到的时间。
English: Subtract the eclipse time from the eclipse precision, and the remaining time is the time when the eclipse can be seen.

古文：求月食更点置二十四时，内减昼时，又减晨昏时，馀不夜时，通秒五约之为更法。
现代文：求月食发生时的更和点：在二十四时内，减去白天的时间，又减去早晨黄昏的时间，七十二分，就是汉历的五刻弱。
English: Find the more harmonious point when the lunar eclipse occurs: within twenty-four hours, subtract the daytime time, and subtract the morning twilight time, seventy-two minutes, which is five minutes short of the Chinese calendar.

古文：寺分更法为点法。
现代文：剩下的就是夜晚的时间，化为秒除以五就是每更的时间。
English: The rest is the time of the night, divided into seconds and divided by five is the time of every second.

古文：如食在子正以前者，置初亏食甚复圆等时，内减日入时，又减半晨昏时，馀通就，以更法减之为更数。
现代文：更除以五就是每点的时间。如果月食在午夜以前，将初亏食甚复圆等时间，减去日落的时间，又减去早晨黄昏时间的一半，三十六分。余数化为秒，用一更的时间去减，就得到更的序数。
English: If the lunar eclipse occurs before midnight, subtract the time from the first eclipse to the second eclipse, subtract the time from the sunset, and subtract half of the time from the morning twilight, and you will get 36 minutes. The remaining number is converted into seconds, and if you subtract one more time, you will get a higher number.

古文：不满更法者，以点法减之为点数。
现代文：不够一更时间的，用一点的时间去减，就得到点的序数。
English: If one more time is not enough, subtract it with a little time to get the ordinal number of points.

古文：食在子正已后者，置夜时半之，加初亏食甚复圆等时，以更法减之为更数。
现代文：月食在午夜以后的，用夜时的一半，加初亏食甚复圆等时间，用一更的时间去减，就得到更的序数。
English: For lunar eclipses after midnight, use half of the night time, add the time from the first lunar eclipse to the second lunar eclipse, and subtract one more time to get a higher ordinal number.

古文：不满更法者，以点法减之为点数。
现代文：不够一更时间的，用一点的时间去减，就得到点的序数。
English: If one more time is not enough, subtract it with a little time to get the ordinal number of points.

古文：皆命起初更、初点。
现代文：都规定从初更、初点开始。
English: All stipulate starting from the first change, the first point.

古文：▲太阴五星凌犯求太阴昼夜行度以本日经度与次日经度相减，馀即本日昼夜行度。
现代文：喊去一更的时间，减一次为一更，剩下不足一更的时间，也虚算为一更。求点法同上。太阴五星凌犯求月亮昼夜的运行度数：将本日的经度和次日的经度相减，余数就是本日昼夜的运行度数。
English: Call out one more time, subtract one time for one more, and the remaining time that is less than one more is also calculated as one more. The point method is the same as above. The sun, the moon and the five stars overlap to find the running frequency of the moon day and night: subtract today's longitude and the next day's longitude, and the remaining number is the running frequency of today's day and night.

古文：求太阴晨昏刻度置其日午太阴经度，内加立成其日昏刻加差，即为其日太阴昏刻经度。
现代文：求月亮早晨黄昏的度数：将这一天正午月亮的经度，加上数据表月亮出入晨昏加减数据表。中这一天黄昏时的加差，就是这一天月亮黄昏时的经度。
English: Find the degree of the moon in the morning twilight: add the longitude of the moon at noon on this day to the data table, and add and subtract the morning twilight from the data table. The difference at dusk on this day is the longitude at dusk on this day.

古文：置其次日午正太阴经度，减立成其日晨刻减差，即为其日太阴晨刻经度。
现代文：将第二天正午月亮的经度，减去数据表中本日早晨的减差，就是遭一天月亮早晨的经度。
English: Taking the longitude of the moon at noon the next day and subtracting the difference from this morning in the data table is the longitude of the moon in the morning.

古文：求月出入度置其日午正太阴经度，加立成内即前立成其日月入加差，即为其日月入时太阴经度。
现代文：求月亮出入时的度数：将这一天正午月亮的经度，加数据表内即上面的数据表这一天月落的加差，就是这一天月落时的月亮经度。
English: Find the number of degrees when the moon rises and sets: take the longitude of the moon at noon on this day, add the difference of the setting of the moon on this day in the data table, that is, the data table above, and it is the longitude of the moon at the setting of the moon on this day.

古文：加立成内其日月出加差，即其日月出时太阴经度。
现代文：加上数据表内这一天月出的加差，就是这一天月出时月亮的经度。
English: In addition to the difference of the crescent moon rising on this day in the data table, it is the longitude of the moon at the time of the moon rising on this day.

古文：耱太阴所犯星座朔后视昏刻度至月入度，望后视月出度至晨刻度，入黄道南北各像星立成内，经纬度相近在一度已下者，取之。
现代文：求月亮所冲犯的星座：朔日后比较月亮黄昏经度和月落经度，望日后比较月出经度和月亮早晨的经度，代入黄道南北各像星数据表内，经纬度相近在一度以下的，就选取。
English: Ask for the constellation that the moon is impinging on: after the new moon, compare the moon's twilight longitude and the lunar longitude, compare the moonrise longitude and the moon's morning longitude after the new moon. Substitute it into the data table of the zodiac's north and south stars. If the latitude and longitude are close to one degree or less, select it.

古文：求时刻置其日午正太阴经度，与取到各像星经度相减，通分，以二十四乘之，以太阴昼夜行度亦通分除之，得初正时。
现代文：求冲犯星座的时刻：将逭一天正午月亮的经度，与取到的各像星座的经度相减，化为分，乘以二十四，用月亮昼夜的运行度数也化为分。相除，得到初步的整时。
English: To find the moment of impact with the constellations: subtract the longitude of the moon at noon on the previous day from the longitude of each constellation and divide by 24. Divide by the degree of the moon's movement between day and night and divide by 24. Divide and get the initial time.

古文：其小馀，以六十通之为分，以一竿千乘之，一百国十四除之，以百约之为刻，即得所求时刻。
现代文：那些小数，按六十化为分，乘以一千，除以一百四十四，按一百进位为刻，就得到所求的时刻。
English: Those decimals, divided by sixty, multiplied by a thousand, divided by a hundred and forty-four, and divided by a hundred, yield the required time.

古文：求上下相离分置太阴纬度与年犯星纬度相减，馀为上下相离分。
现代文：求上下相离的度数：将月亮的纬度与所冲犯的星座的纬度相减，余数就是上下相离的度数。
English: Find the degrees of separation: subtract the latitude of the moon from the latitude of the constellation that it is colliding with, and the remainder is the number of degrees of separation.

古文：若月星同在南，月多为下离。
现代文：如果月亮和星座同在黄道以南，月亮纬度多焉下离，月亮纬度少为上离。
English: If the moon and the constellation are south of the ecliptic, the moon's latitude is mostly down, and the moon's latitude is mostly up.

古文：同在北，月多为上离，下为下离。
现代文：如果同在北，月亮纬度多为上离，周亮纬度少为下离。
English: If it is in the north, the moon's latitude is mostly up, and the perihelion latitude is less down.

古文：若南北不同，月在北为上离，南为下离。
现代文：如果南北不同，月亮在北为上离，月亮在南为下离。
English: If the north and south are different, the moon is up in the north, and the moon is down in the south.

古文：求五星凌犯各星相离置其日五星经纬度，入黄道立成内，视各像内外星经纬度，在一度已下和取之。
现代文：求五星冲犯各星相离的度数：将这一天五星的经纬度，代入黄道数据表内，比较各像内外星的经纬度，在一度以下的选取。
English: Find the number of degrees of separation between the five stars: put the latitude and longitude of the five stars on this day into the zodiac data table, compare the latitude and longitude of the extraterrestrials in each image, and select the one below.

古文：其五星纬度与各星纬度相减，馀即上下相离分。
现代文：将五星纬度与各星纬度相减，余数就是上下相离的度数。
English: Subtract the latitude of the five stars from the latitude of each star, and the remainder is the number of degrees separating the top and bottom.

古文：求月犯五星，五星相犯视太阴经纬度，五星经纬度相近在一度已下者，取之。
现代文：求月亮冲犯五星、五星相互冲犯：比较月亮的经纬度和五星的经纬度，相近在一度以下的，选取。
English: Ask the moon to collide with the five stars, and the five stars to collide with each other: compare the longitude and latitude of the moon and the longitude and latitude of the five stars, and select those that are less than one degree apart.

