古文：祝钦明字文思，京兆始平人。
现代文：祝钦明别名文思，京兆始平人。
English: Congratulate Qinming, also known as Wensi, the founder of Beijing.

古文：父綝，字叔良，少通经，颇著书质诸家疑异；门人张后胤既显宦，荐于朝，诏对策高第，终无极尉。
现代文：父亲名綝，别名叔良，年轻时通晓先秦史籍，写了不少文章对诸子百家提出疑问和不同观点；他的学生张后胤做了高官后，向朝廷举荐了他，诏令论述政治、经义方面的问题，以优秀成绩被录用，在无极县尉的任上去世。
English: When he was young, his father, Mingsheng, also known as Shuliang, was well versed in pre-Qin history and wrote many articles to raise questions and different points of view on various schools. After his student Zhang Houyin became a high-ranking official, he recommended him to the imperial court. He discussed political and economic issues, and was hired with excellent results. He died in the position of Wuji County Lieutenant.

古文：钦明擢明经，为东台典仪。
现代文：祝钦明参加明经科考试中选，任东台典仪。
English: Congratulate Qin Ming on being selected to take part in the Ming School of Economics exam and being appointed to the East Taiwan ceremony.

古文：永淳、天授间，又中英才杰出、业奥《六经》等科，拜著作郎，为太子率更令。
现代文：高宗永淳至武则天天授年间，又先后参加英才杰出、业奥 六经 等科考试中选，授予著作郎，任太子率更令。
English: During the years when Gao Zongyongjun and Wu Zetian were awarded every day, he successively participated in the selection of outstanding talent, and the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade of the sixth grade.

古文：中宗在东宫，钦明兼侍读，授太子经，兼弘文馆学士。
现代文：中宗李显退位当皇太子时，祝钦明兼任侍读，给太子讲授儒家经典，兼任弘文馆学士。
English: When Li Xian abdicated as the crown prince, Zhu Qinming also served as an attendant, lectured to the prince on Confucian classics, and served as a scholar of the Hongwen Library.

古文：中宗复位，擢国子祭酒、同中书门下三品。
现代文：中宗复位后，提拔为国子祭酒、同中书门下三品。
English: After the restoration of Chuzo, it was promoted to Kuniko Matsuri Sake, and became one of the three products of the same Chuzo school.

古文：进礼部尚书，封鲁国公，食实封户三百。
现代文：后来升任礼部尚书，封为鲁国公，得到收纳三百户租税的实封。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, given the title of Prince of Lu, and received a sealed tax receipt for 300 households.

古文：桓彦范、崔玄、袁恕巳，敬晖等皆从受《周官》大义，朝廷尊之。
现代文：桓彦范、崔玄日韦、袁恕己、敬晖等人都跟着他学习《周礼》的主要内容，朝廷敬重他。
English: Kuan Yan Fan, Cui Xuan Rih Wei, Yuan Shou Ji, Jing Qi and others all studied the main content of "Zhou Li" with him, and the imperial court respected him.

古文：以匿亲忌日，为御史中丞萧至忠所劾，贬申州刺史。
现代文：因为隐瞒父母去世的日期，被御史中丞萧至忠弹劾，贬为申州刺史。
English: Because he concealed the date of his parents' death, he was impeached by the Imperial Historian, Xiao Zhizhong, and was relegated to the status of a mere footnote in the history of Shenzhou.

古文：入为国子祭酒。
现代文：后来调回朝廷任国子祭酒。
English: Later, it was transferred back to the Imperial Court to serve as the national son's festival wine.

古文：景龙三年，天子将郊，钦明与国子司业郭山恽阴迎韦后意，谬立议曰：《周官》天神曰祀，地祗曰祭，宗庙曰享。
现代文：景龙三年，中宗准备到京城南郊祭祀天地，祝钦明和国子司业郭山恽暗中迎合韦皇后的心意，错误地建议说： 《周礼》把敬天神叫作祀，敬地神叫作祭，敬祖先叫作享。
English: In the third year of Jinglong, Zhongzong prepared to go to the southern suburb of Beijing to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, congratulating Qin Ming and Guo Shanzhang, the Secretary of State, and secretly pandering to the heart of Queen Wei. He mistakenly suggested that: "Zhou Li" called worshipping the sky god, worshiping the earth god as a sacrifice, and worshiping the ancestors as enjoyment.

古文：《大宗伯》曰： 祀大神，祭大祗，享大鬼，王有故不预，则摄而荐。
现代文：《大宗伯》篇说：祀天神，祭地，享祖先，君主有缘故不亲自参加，就派人代理祭献。
English: "Daizongbo" says: the gods, sacred places and ancestors should be worshipped. If the monarch does not attend in person for some reason, he or she should send someone to offer the sacrifice on his or her behalf.

古文：追师掌后首服，以待祭祀。
现代文：追师掌管王后的礼帽，准备参加祭祀。
English: An usher holds the Queen's hat as she prepares to take part in the service

古文：内司服掌后六服，祭祀则供。
现代文：内司服掌管王后的衣、衤俞狄、阙狄、鞠衣、展衣、缘衣这六种礼服，祭祀时就供她穿戴。
English: Naishi-fu is in charge of the queen's six types of ceremonial dress, including kimono, geode, geode, yakitori, geode, and geode, which she wears during religious services.

古文：又九嫔，凡大祭祀，后裸献则赞瑶爵。
现代文：还有宫中女官，凡有大祭祀活动，王后用酒祭奠祖先时她们就帮忙递送酒杯。
English: There are also palace maids of honour, who help to carry the wine glasses when there is a big religious event and the queen is honouring her ancestors with wine.

古文：然则后当助天子祀天神、祭地只。
现代文：这样看来，王后就应当协助君主祀天神、祭地。
English: From this point of view, the queen should help the monarch to worship gods and shrines.

古文：郑玄称：阙狄，后助王祭群小祀服。
现代文：郑玄声称：阙狄，这是王后协助君主举行小祭祀的礼服。
English: Zheng Xuan said, "This is the dress worn by the queen to assist the monarch in holding a small religious service.

古文：小祀尚助，况天地哉？
现代文：小祭祀尚且需要王后助祭，何况是祭祀天地呢？
English: A queen coadjutor is still needed for a small ritual, and what about a ritual for heaven and earth?

古文：阙狄之上，祎、礻俞、狄，三服皆以助祭，知祎衣助大祀也。
现代文：阙狄以上，衣、衤俞狄，这三种礼服都是用来协助祭祀的，可见衣是用来协助大祭祀的。
English: The three types of ceremonial dress above the kentei, the robe and the kentei, are all used to assist in the sacrificial rites. It can be seen that the robe is used to assist in the great sacrificial rites.

古文：王之祭服二：曰先王兗冕，先公冕。
现代文：君主的祭服有两种：叫作先王衮冕，先公冕。
English: There are two types of ceremonial robes for the monarch: the crown of the first king and the crown of the first prince.

古文：故后助祭，亦以祎衣祭先王，礻俞狄祭先公。
现代文：所以王后协助祭祀，也穿衣祭先王，穿衤俞狄祭先公。
English: Therefore, the queen assisted in the sacrificial rites, and also dressed the previous king for the festival, and dressed the previous prince for the festival.

古文：不言助祭天地，举此以明彼，反三隅也。
现代文：这里没谈协助祭祀天地，是举个例子来说明全部规章制度，叫作举一反三。
English: There is no talk here about assisting in the worship of heaven and earth, but it is an example to illustrate all the rules and regulations, which is called a counterexample.

古文：《春秋外传》：禘郊，天子亲射其牛，王后亲春其粢。 
现代文：《春秋外传》说： 郊外祭祀，天子亲自射所用的牛，王后亲自舂所用的稷。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Outside Biography" says: The suburban sacrificial rites, the oxen used by the heavenly son himself, and the plough used by the queen herself.

古文：世妇诏后之礼事，不专主宗庙。
现代文：女官王后参与祭礼，不只是主持祭祀祖先。
English: The empress dowager participated in the festival, not only presiding over the ancestor worship.

古文：《祭统》曰： 祭也者，必夫妇亲之，所以备内外之官。 
现代文：《祭统》说： 祭祀，必须夫妻亲自参加，以便警戒宫廷内外的官员。 
English: According to the "Shrine Regulations," the husband and wife must attend the ritual in person in order to alert officials inside and outside the court.

古文：哀公问孔子曰： 冕而亲迎，不已重乎？ 
现代文：鲁哀公询问孔子说 ：君主亲自迎亲，不是太隆重了吗？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius, "Isn't it too grand for the monarch to greet relatives in person?

古文：答曰： 合二姓之好，以继先圣之后，以为天地宗庙社稷主，君何谓已重焉？ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 男女结婚，为先王传宗接代，永远当国家朝廷的主宰，您怎么说这样太隆重了呢？ 
English: Confucius replied, "When a man and a woman get married, the first king will succeed to the throne, and he will always be the head of the national court. How can you say that this is too grand?

古文：则知后宜助祭。
现代文：由此可知皇后应当协助祭祀。
English: From this it can be seen that the empress should assist in the sacrificial rites.

古文：臣请因经谊，制仪典。
现代文：我们请求按照经书的义理，制定礼仪规章。 
English: We request that the rules of etiquette be established in accordance with the principles of scripture.

古文：帝虽不睿，犹疑之，召礼官质问。
现代文：中宗虽然并不精明，还是疑惑不定，招见礼部官员咨询。
English: Although Zhongzong was not clever, he still had doubts and invited officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies for consultation.

古文：于是太常博士唐绍、蒋钦绪对： 钦明所引，皆宗庙礼，非祭天地者。
现代文：这时太常博士唐绍、蒋钦绪回答说： 祝钦明引证的，都是祭祀祖先的礼仪，不是祭祀天地的规章。
English: At this time, Dr. Tang Shao and Dr. Jiang Qinxu replied, "The citations of Zhu Qinming are all the rituals of sacrificing ancestors, not the rules of sacrificing heaven and earth.

古文：周、隋而上，无皇后助祭事。 
现代文：北周、隋朝以前，没有皇后协助祭祀天地的先例。 
English: Before the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties, there was no precedent of an empress assisting in the sacrifice of heaven and earth.

古文：帝令宰相参订，绍、钦绪又引博士彭景直共议曰：《周官》所云祀、祭、享，皆互言。
现代文：中宗叫宰相们评议论证，唐绍、蒋钦绪又引荐博士彭景直一起评议说： 《周礼》所讲的祀、祭、享，都是同义词。
English: Zhongzong asked the prime ministers to discuss the argumentation, and Tang Shao and Jiang Qinshu also introduced Dr. Peng Jingzhi to discuss together and said: The worship, festival and enjoyment mentioned in the "Weekly Ritual" are all synonyms.

古文：《典瑞》： 两圭以祀地。 
现代文：《典瑞》说 ：两次献酒来 祀 地神。 
English: "Tenrei" says: Two offerings of wine to worship the earth god.

古文：《司几筵》： 设祀先王昨席。 
现代文：《司几筵》说： 摆设 祀 先王的席位。 
English: "Sikyaku" says: Set up a seat to worship the former king.

古文：《内宗》： 掌宗庙祭祀。
现代文：《内宗》说 ：掌管宗庙的祭 祀 。 
English: "Naizong" says: He is in charge of the rituals of the ancestral temple.

古文：传曰： 圣人为能飨帝。 
现代文：书传里说 ：圣人才能 享 天神。 
English: According to legend, only saints can enjoy Tenjin.

古文： 春秋祭祀，以时思之。 
现代文： 春季、秋季祭祀天地，按时思念神灵。 
English: In spring and autumn, they offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, and pray for the gods on time.

古文：此祀天称享，享庙称祭也。
现代文：这里就是把祀天称为 享 天，享庙称为 祭 庙的例证。
English: Here is an example of calling a worshipping temple a "sacred temple" and a "holy temple" a "sacred temple."

古文：礼家凡称大祭祀，不独主天。
现代文：礼仪家凡是称作大祭祀的，不仅仅是祭祀天神。
English: What is generally called a great sacrifice by ritualists is not just a sacrifice to Tenjin.

古文：《爵人》： 大祭祀，与量人受举斝之卒爵。 祭天不祼，则九嫔赞瑶爵，容庙称大祭祀也。
现代文：《郁人》说： 大祭祀，主管祭器的官员郁人和掌管行政区划的官员量人担任祭祀副职。 
English: "Ikutohito" says: In large-scale rituals, Ikutohito, the official in charge of the sacrificial vessels, and Ikutohito, the official in charge of the administrative divisions, serve as vice-officers for the rituals.

古文：钦明据《大宗伯》之职，以谓后有祭天地之礼。
现代文：祭天是不用献酒的，那么宫中女官帮忙递送酒器，祭祀祖先也叫大祭祀。祝钦明根据《大宗伯》的职责，来断定皇后应当参加祭天地的礼仪。
English: There is no need to offer wine to the deities, so the palace maids help with the delivery of wine vessels. The ancestor sacrifice is also called the great sacrifice. Zhu Qinming determined that the empress should participate in the ritual of sacrificing heaven and earth according to the duties of the "great patriarch."

古文：按经： 凡祀大神、祭大祗、享大鬼，帅执事而卜宿，视涤濯，涖玉鬯，省牲镬，奉玉盥，制大号。
现代文：据经典记载 ：凡是祀天神、祭地、享祖先，带领办事人员占卜斋戒住所，检查洗涤祭品，督促洗涤祭器，察看烹煮牲畜的鼎锅，清点盛黍稷的玉器，拟订堂皇的名号。
English: According to the classic records: for those who worship the gods, the sacred places, and the ancestors, the leading clerks divined the fasting and fasting places, checked the washing of the sacrificial offerings, urged the washing of the sacrificial vessels, inspected the cooking pots of the livestock, and the jade vessels with clear points, and worked out the majestic name.

古文：若王不与祭祀，则摄位。 
现代文：如果君主不参加祭祀活动，就派人代理他的职责。 
English: If the king does not participate in the ritual for some reason, he will perform the ritual on behalf of the king.

古文：自凡而推，兼言王祭天地宗庙也。
现代文：从以上所举例证类推，是统称君主祭祀天地祖先。
English: By analogy with the above examples, they are collectively known as the ancestors of heaven and earth who were sacrificed by the monarchs.

古文：下言： 凡大祭祀，王后不与，则摄而荐。 
现代文：下边还讲： 凡是大祭祀活动，王后不参加，就派人代理献酒。 
English: It also says at the bottom: Whenever there is a great sacrificial event and the Queen does not attend, she sends someone to serve the wine on her behalf.

古文：直王后祭庙一凡耳。
现代文：只是王后祭祀祖先的一个例证而已。
English: Just one example of the queen's ancestor worship.

古文：若当助祭天地，应不列重凡。
现代文：如果应当协助祭祀天地，就不会分述大祭、中祭、小祭。
English: If it were necessary to assist in the worship of heaven and earth, there would be no need to describe the great festival, the middle festival, and the small festival.

古文：且内宗、外宗所掌，皆佐王后庙荐，无佐祭天地语。
现代文：并且王族女儿、君主的外甥女儿主管的，都是帮忙王后祭祀祖先，没有帮助祭祀天地的说法。
English: Moreover, the daughters of the royal family and the daughter-in-law of the nephew of the monarch are all helping the queen to sacrifice the ancestors, but they are not helping to sacrifice heaven and earth.

古文：有如助祭天地，谁当赞佐者？
现代文：如果王后协助祭祀天地，谁当她的助手呢？
English: If the queen helps to sacrifice heaven and earth, who will be her assistant?

古文：是则摄荐为宗庙明甚。
现代文：那么这里说的代理献酒是指祭祀祖先就明确得很。
English: So it is very clear that the proxy offering of wine here refers to the sacrificial ancestors.

古文：内司服掌后祭服，无祭天服。
现代文：内司服管理的王后祭服，并无祭天的礼服。
English: The queen's ceremonial dress, which is managed by the secretary of the interior, does not have a ceremonial dress for the festival.

古文：礼家说曰： 后不助祭天地五岳，故无具服。 
现代文：礼仪家说明道： 王后不参与祭祀天地五岳，所以没有祭祀天地五岳的礼服。 
English: The etiquette expert explained: The queen does not participate in the ritual of the Five Mountains of Heaven and Earth, so there is no ceremonial dress for the ritual of the Five Mountains of Heaven and Earth.

古文：又言： 后有五辂，以重翟从祭先王先公，以厌翟从飨诸侯，以安车朝夕见王，以翟车采桑，以辇车游宴。 
现代文：又说 ：王后有五种大车，坐重翟陪同祭祀先王先公，坐厌翟陪同款待诸侯，坐安车早晚拜见君主，坐翟车采摘桑叶，坐辇车游乐饮宴。 
English: He also said: The queen has five kinds of chariots. She rode a heavy chariot to accompany the sacrificial rites of the previous kings and princes, rode a heavy chariot to accompany the hospitality of the princes, rode a light chariot to visit the monarch in the morning and evening, rode a light chariot to pick mulberry leaves, and rode a light chariot to enjoy the banquet.

古文：按此，后无祭天车明甚。
现代文：根据这段记载，王后没有祭天的大车明确得很。
English: According to this record, it is very clear that the queen did not sacrifice the chariot.

古文：然后助王祭天地，古无闻焉。
现代文：这样看来，皇后协助君主祭祀天地，自古以来都没有这种事。 
English: In this way, the empress assisted the monarch in sacrificing heaven and earth, which has not happened since ancient times.

古文：时左仆射韦巨源助后掎掣帝，夺政事，即传钦明议，帝果用其言，以皇后为亚献。
现代文：当时左仆射韦巨源帮助韦皇后挟制中宗，夺取政权，就帮忙祝钦明讲话，中宗终于采纳了他们的建议，命令韦皇后主持第二轮进献仪式。
English: At that time, the left-hand servant, Wei Jiuyuan, helped the Queen of Wei to seize power, and helped Zhu Qinming to make a speech. The Emperor of China finally accepted their suggestion and ordered the Queen of Wei to preside over the second round of the offering ceremony.

古文：取大臣李峤等女为斋娘，奉豆笾。
现代文：叫来大臣李峤等人的女儿担任为韦皇后办祭祀事务的斋娘，帮助祭祀。
English: The daughter of Minister Li Jun and others was called in to serve as a sacrificial maiden for the Queen of Wei to help with the sacrifices.

古文：礼成，诏斋娘有夫者悉进官。
现代文：郊祭结束后，诏令已婚斋娘的丈夫都提升官职。
English: After the end of the suburb festival, it was decreed that the husbands of married women would all be promoted to official positions.

古文：初，后属婚，上食禁中，帝与群臣宴，钦明自言能《八风舞》，帝许之。
现代文：当初，韦皇后嫁给中宗当女官，到宫廷进献食物，中宗和朝臣们饮宴，祝钦明自己说会跳八风舞，中宗同意他跳。
English: At first, Empress Wei married Chungjong as a lady-in-waiting, went to the court to present food, Chungjong and courtiers had a banquet, congratulated Chunming that he could dance the Eight Winds Dance, and Chungjong agreed to dance.

古文：钦明体肥丑，据地摇头睆目，左右顾眄，帝大笑。
现代文：祝钦明身体肥胖丑陋，蹲在地上摇着脑袋，鼓大眼睛，左顾右盼，中宗大声欢笑。
English: Zhu Qinming's body is fat and ugly. He squats on the ground shaking his head, his eyes wide, looking to the right and to the left. Zhong Zong laughs loudly.

古文：吏部侍郎卢藏用叹曰： 是举《五经》扫地矣！ 
现代文：吏部侍郎卢藏用叹惜说： 这种行为将《五经》的声誉败坏无余了！ 
English: Lu Zang, the secretary of the personnel department, said with regret: This kind of behavior has completely ruined the reputation of the "Five Classics"!

古文：景云初，侍御史倪若水劾奏： 钦明、山恽等腐儒无行，以谄佞乱常改作，百王所传，一朝惰放。
现代文：睿宗景云初年，侍御史倪若冰弹劾说： 祝钦明、郭山恽等人是迂腐无用的儒生，行为恶劣，凭着谄媚奸巧扰乱法制改变规章，历代君主的传统，一下子就破坏丢弃了。
English: In the first year of Ruizong Jingyun, the attendant Shi Ni Ruo Bing impeached and said: Zhu Qinming, Guo Shanzhong and others are pedantic and useless Confucianism, their behavior is bad, they use flattery and treachery to disrupt the legal system and change regulations, and the traditions of monarchs of all generations are suddenly destroyed and discarded.

古文：今圣德中兴，不宜使小人在朝，请斥远之，以肃具臣。 
现代文：如今我朝再次振兴，不应让小人留在朝廷，请把他们赶得远远的，来警戒不称职的朝臣。 
English: Now that my reign has been reinvigorated, villains should not be allowed to remain in the imperial court. Please drive them far away to warn incompetent courtiers.

古文：乃贬钦明饶州刺史，山恽括州刺史。
现代文：于是把祝钦明贬为饶州刺史，郭山恽贬为括州刺史。
English: As a result, Zhu Qinming was relegated to the status of Raozhou stabbing history, and Guo Shanzhang was relegated to the status of Guanzhou stabbing history.

古文：钦明于《五经》为该淹，自见坐不孝免，无以澡祓，乃阿附韦氏，图再用，又坐是见逐，诸儒共羞之。
现代文：祝钦明对于《五经》精通渊博，自己却因不孝获罪而被罢官，无法洗清名声，就奉承巴结韦皇后，希望重新任用，又因而获罪被赶出朝廷，各儒生都为此感到羞愧。
English: Zhu Qinming was well versed in the "Five Classics," but he was dismissed for being unfilial. Unable to clear his name, he flattered Empress Bajiewei, hoping to be reappointed, and was expelled from the imperial court for the crime. All Confucian scholars are ashamed of this.

古文：后徙洪州都督，入为崇文馆学士，卒。
现代文：后来改任洪州都督，调回朝廷任崇文馆学士，才死去。
English: Later, he was appointed the governor of Hongzhou and transferred back to the imperial court to become a scholar of the Chongwen Academy before he died.

