古文：显祖纪显祖献文皇帝，讳弘，高宗文成皇帝之长子也。
现代文：显祖献文皇帝，名弘，是高宗文成皇帝的长子，母亲叫李贵人。
English: Emperor Xianzu, also known as Nagahiro, was the eldest son of Emperor Gao Zongwencheng. His mother was Li Guijin.

古文：母曰李贵人。兴光元年秋七月，生于阴山之北。
现代文：显祖于兴光元年秋季七月，在阴山北面出生。
English: Xianzu was born in July of the autumn of the first year of Xingguang, in the north of Yinshan.

古文：太安二年二月，立为皇太子。
现代文：太安二年二月，被立为皇太子。
English: In February of the second year of Taian, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：聪睿机悟，幼而有济民神武之规，仁孝纯至，礼敬师友。
现代文：显祖聪明睿智、机敏颖悟，从小就有济救百姓的神武气象，仁孝纯至，礼敬师友。
English: Xianzu was clever, wise, and quick-witted. From childhood, he was gifted with the ability to help and save people. He was kind, pure, and respectful to his teachers and friends.

古文：和平六年夏五月甲辰，即皇帝位，大赦天下。
现代文：和平六年夏五月十二日，显祖登上皇帝宝座，大赦天下。
English: On the twelfth day of May in the summer of the sixth year of peace, Emperor Xianzu ascended the throne and pardoned the world.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊奉皇后为皇太后。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：车骑大将军乙浑矫诏杀尚书杨保年、平阳公贾爱仁、南阳公张天度于禁中。
现代文：车骑大将军乙浑假称圣旨杀害尚书杨保年、平阳公贾爱仁、南阳公张天度于宫中。
English: The chariot and cavalry general Yi Hun killed Shang Shu Yang Bao Nian, Pingyang Gong Jia Airen, and Nanyang Gong Zhang in the palace under the pretense of the holy will.

古文：戊申，侍中、司徒、平原王陆丽自汤泉入朝，浑又杀之。
现代文：十六日，侍中、司徒、平原王陆丽从汤泉入朝，乙浑又把他杀了。
English: On the 16th, Lu Li, the chambermaid, the scholar and the king of the plain, entered the imperial court from Tangquan, and Yihun killed him again.

古文：己酉，以侍中、车骑大将军乙浑为太尉、录尚书事，东安王刘尼为司徒，尚书左仆射和其奴为司空。
现代文：十七日，显祖任命侍中、车骑大将军乙浑为太尉、录尚书事，东安王刘尼为司徒，尚书左仆射和其奴为司空。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Xianzu appointed the chamberlain and general of cavalry and cavalry, Yi Hun, as the first lieutenant, and recorded Shang Shuji, the king of Dong'an, Liu Ni, as the steward, and Shang Shuji's right-hand man, Ya, and his servant as the steward.

古文：壬子，以淮南王他为镇西大将军、仪同三司，镇凉州。
现代文：二十日，显祖任命淮南王元他为镇西大将军、仪同三司，镇守凉州。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Xianzu appointed Huainan Wangyuan as the general of Zhenxi, the three departments of Yidong, and the town guard of Liangzhou.

古文：六月，封繁阳侯李嶷为丹阳王，征东大将军冯熙为昌黎王。
现代文：六月，显祖封繁阳侯李嶷为丹阳王，征东大将军冯熙为昌黎王。
English: In June, Emperor Xianzu made Shangyang marquis Li Xi the king of Danyang, and Eastern Expeditionary General Feng Xi the king of Changli.

古文：乙丑，诏曰： 夫赋敛烦则民财匮，课调轻则用不足，是以十一而税，颂声作矣。
现代文：七月初三，显祖下诏书说： 大凡赋役繁重，老百姓的财富就会匮乏，课税轻微则国家用度不足，所以缴十分之一的课税，则老百姓即会赞扬朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of July, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict saying: If the tax burden is heavy, the wealth of the people will be scarce. If the tax burden is light, the state will not have enough resources. Therefore, if the tax burden is one-tenth, the people will praise the imperial court.

古文：先朝榷其轻重，以惠百姓。
现代文：先朝君王权其轻重，确定了惠待百姓的办法。
English: In the previous dynasty, the importance of royal power was paramount, and a way of benefiting the people was determined.

古文：朕承洪业，上惟祖宗之休命，夙兴待旦，惟民之恤，欲令天下同于逸豫。
现代文：朕继承鸿大的基业，上思祖宗的钧命美意，夜以继昼，虔诚敬职，思宽万民，欲让天下之人全能安居乐业。
English: I will carry on the great legacy of Hongda. I will think about the precious lives and noble intentions of my ancestors day and night. I will be pious and dedicated to my duties. I will be open-minded to all people. I want everyone in the world to be able to live a peaceful and happy life.

古文：而徭赋不息，将何以塞烦去苛，拯济黎元者哉！
现代文：但连年以来，徭役赋敛不断，这怎么能够塞烦去苛、拯救黎民呢！
English: But year after year, the corrupt officials have been getting richer and richer. How can this be a way to save the Li people?

古文：今兵革不起，畜积有余，诸有杂调，一以与民。 
现代文：现在战争停息，官府仓积有余，加之于民的各种杂赋，一律还给老百姓。 
English: Now that the war has come to an end, the government has accumulated more than enough reserves, and in addition to the people's miscellaneous endowments, they will all be returned to the people.

古文：秋七月癸巳，太尉乙浑为承相，位居诸王上，事无大小，皆决于浑。
现代文：秋季七月初二，太尉乙浑为丞相，官位处诸王之上，朝廷内外，事不拘大小，都由他断决处理。
English: On the second day of the first month of July in autumn, Taijun Yixun became chancellor of the court. He held an official rank higher than that of kings, and he handled all matters, large and small, inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：九月庚子，曲赦京师。丙午，诏曰： 先朝以州牧亲民，宜置良佐，故敕有司，班九条之制，使前政选吏，以待俊乂，必谓铨衡允衷，朝纲应叙。
现代文：九月初十，显祖下诏书说： 先朝因州郡长官治理百姓，应设置优良的辅佐官员，故明令有关部门，颁布九条制度，使以前的政选官吏，都由才德杰出的人来充任，一定要是铨选拔用公允中正，才能使朝廷的政治理想得以贯彻。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month of the year, Emperor Xianzu issued an imperial edict, saying, "Since the previous dynasties relied on prefectural governors to govern the people, they should set up excellent assistant officials. Therefore, the relevant departments were ordered to promulgate a nine-article system, so that the former elected officials would be filled by people with outstanding moral qualities. The selection must be fair and just, so that the political ideals of the imperial court could be implemented.

古文：然牧司宽惰，不祗宪旨，举非其人，愆于典度。
现代文：然而牧守及有关部门宽懈松散，不按宪律旨意，所选的官员滥而无用，亵渎了典章制度的神圣性。
English: However, the pastor and the relevant departments are lax and loose, do not follow the will of the Constitution, the elected officials are useless and profane the sanctity of the award system.

古文：今制：刺史守宰到官之日，仰自举民望忠信，以为选官，不听前政共相干冒。
现代文：今特令如下：刺史郡宰上任的那天，可自行选拔民望所归的忠信之人作为属官，不允许前任长官干扰。
English: Now, the special order is as follows: On the day of taking office, the county governor of Zhishi County may independently select a loyal person who is popular among the people as a subordinate official, and does not allow the previous governor to interfere.

古文：若简任失所，以罔上论。 
现代文：如果选拔失准，以欺君瞒上论罪。 
English: If the selection is not accurate, it will be a crime to deceive the prince.

古文：是月，刘子业征北大将军、义阳王刘昶自彭城来降。
现代文：这个月，刘子业政权的征北大将军、义阳王刘昶从彭城前来归降。
English: This month, Liu Ziye's regime's general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Liu Ye, the king of Yiyang, came from Pengcheng to surrender.

古文：冬十月，征阳平王新成、京兆王子推、济阴王小新成、汝阴王天赐、任城王云入朝。
现代文：冬季十月，显祖征召阳平王拓跋新成、京兆王拓跋子推、济阴王拓跋小新成、汝阴王拓跋天赐、任城王拓跋云到朝廷。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Xianzu summoned Yangping King Tuoba Xincheng, Jingzhao King Tuoba Zitu, Jiyin King Tuoba Xiao Xincheng, Ruyin King Tuoba Tianzheng, and Rencheng King Tuoba Yun to the imperial court.

古文：是岁，刘子业叔父彧杀子业僭立。
现代文：这一年，刘子业叔父刘杀了刘子业纂夺皇位。
English: In that year, Liu Ziyang's uncle Liu killed Liu Ziyang to seize the throne.

古文：天安元年春正月乙丑朔，大赦，改年。
现代文：天安元年春季正月初一，朝廷大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Tian'an, the imperial court amnestied the world and changed the year.

古文：二月庚申，丞相、太原王乙浑谋反伏诛。
现代文：二月初二，丞相、太原王乙浑谋反被诛杀。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：乙亥，以侍中元孔雀为濮阳王，侍中陆定国为东郡王。
现代文：十七日，显祖任命侍中元孔雀为濮阳王，侍中陆定国为东郡王。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Xianzu appointed the chamberlain Yuan Peacock as the King of Shenyang, and the chamberlain Lu Dingguo as the King of Donggun.

古文：三月庚子，以陇西王源贺为太尉。
现代文：三月十三日，任命陇西王源贺为太尉。
English: On March 13th, he appointed Wang Yuanhe of Shaanxi Province as a lieutenant.

古文：辛丑，高宗文成皇帝神主祔于太庙。
现代文：十四日，把高宗文成皇帝神位请入太庙。
English: On the 14th, he invited Emperor Gaozongwencheng into the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛亥，帝幸道坛，亲受符箓；曲赦京师。
现代文：二十四日，显祖驾临道坛，亲自接受道家秘密文书符录；赦免京师罪人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Emperor Xianzu arrived at the Buddhist altar and personally accepted the secret manuscript of the Taoist school; he pardoned the sinners of the Beijing school.

古文：高丽、波斯、于阗、阿袭诸国遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、波斯、于阗、阿袭等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Goryeo, Persia, Yunnan, Afghanistan and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏诸有诈取爵位，罪特原之，削其爵职。
现代文：秋季七月二十六日，显祖下诏免除那些诈取爵位的人的罪行，削除其官爵职位。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of autumn, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict to absolve those who defrauded the nobility of their crimes and to remove their official nobility positions.

古文：其有祖、父假爵号货赇以正名者，不听继袭。
现代文：若是父、祖辈以钱财贿赂求得的爵位，不准子孙承袭。
English: If one's father or ancestors obtained a title of nobility through bribery, one's descendants are not allowed to inherit it.

古文：诸非劳进超迁者，亦各还初。
现代文：不是因为劳苦功高而越级提拔的，一律降归原职。
English: Those who are not promoted beyond their grade because of their hard work will be demoted to their original posts.

古文：不以实闻者，以大不敬论。
现代文：不如实上报的，以大不敬罪论处。
English: Those who do not report as truthfully as possible will be punished with the crime of "gross disrespect."

古文：九月，刘彧司州刺史常珍奇以悬瓠内属。
现代文：九月，刘政权的司州刺史常珍奇以悬瓠归顺皇魏。
English: In September, Chang Zhenqi, the governor of Shizhou Province under Liu's regime, returned to Shunhuang and Wei with a hanging banner.

古文：己酉，初立乡学，郡置博士二人、助教二人、学生六十人。
现代文：二十五日，开始建立乡学，郡设置博士二人，助教二人，学生六十人。
English: On the 25th, the establishment of the township school began, and the county set up two doctors, two teaching assistants, and sixty students.

古文：刘彧徐州刺史薛安都以彭城内属。彧将张永、沈攸之击安都。
现代文：刘政权的徐州刺史薛安都以彭城归顺皇魏，刘的将领张永、沈攸之袭击安都。
English: The Xuzhou branch of Liu's regime, Xue'an, surrendered to Emperor Wei at Pengcheng, and Liu's generals Zhang Yong and Shen You led an attack on Andu.

古文：诏北部尚书尉元为镇南大将军、都督诸军事，镇东将军、城阳公孔伯恭为副，出东道救彭城；殿中尚书、镇西大将军、西河公元石都督荆、豫、南雍州诸军事，给事中、京兆侯张穷奇为副，出西道救悬瓠。
现代文：显祖下诏任命北部尚书尉元为镇南大将军、都督诸军事，镇东将军、城阳公孔伯恭为副帅，从东道出发救彭城之危；殿中尚书、镇西大将军、河西公元石都督荆、豫、南雍州诸军事，给事中、京兆侯张穷奇为副帅，从西道出发救悬瓠之危。
English: Emperor Xianzu issued an edict appointing Shang Shuyuan in the north to be the general of Zhennan and the military governor of the city, and Zhendong general and Chengyang Gong Kong Boqiong to be the vice-commander of the army, to save the danger of Pengcheng from the host; Shang Shuyuan in the palace, the general of Zhenxi, the military governor of Shishi, Jing, Henan and Nanyang in the west, and Zhang Qianqi of Jingzhou as the vice-commander of the army, to save the danger from the west.

古文：冬十月，曹利、彤曷国各遣使朝献。
现代文：冬季十月，曹利、彤曷国各派使者来朝纳贡。
English: In the winter of October, the emissaries of the states of Cao Li and Lu came to pay tribute to the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：十有一月壬子，刘彧兗州刺史毕众敬遣使内属。
现代文：十一月二十九日，刘兖州刺史毕众敬派使者请求归顺朝廷。
English: On November 29th, Liu Bozhou sent an envoy to request to submit to the imperial court.

古文：十有二月己未，尉元军次于秺，彧将周凯、张永、沈攸之相继退走。
现代文：十二月初六，尉元的军队驻扎于舎，刘将周凯、张永、沈攸之相继率部退去。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the army of Lieutenant Yuan was stationed in the house, and Liu withdrew the troops led by Zhou Kai, Zhang Yong and Shen Yu successively.

古文：皇弟安平薨。
现代文：皇弟拓跋安平去世。
English: His younger brother, Tuoba Anping, passed away.

古文：是岁，州镇十一旱，民饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：这一年，境内州郡十分之一遭受旱灾，百姓闹饥荒，官府开仓济民。
English: In that year, one-tenth of the prefectures and counties in the territory suffered from drought, the people suffered from famine, and the government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：皇兴元年春正月癸巳，尉元大破张永、沈攸之于吕梁东，斩首数万级，冻死者甚众。
现代文：皇兴元年春季正月十一日，尉元在吕梁山东面大破张永、沈攸之，杀了敌人数万名，被冻死的人也很多。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Emperor Xing, Lieutenant Yuan defeated Zhang Yong and Shen Youzhi in the east of Luliang Mountain, killing tens of thousands of enemies, and many people were frozen to death.

古文：获刘彧秦州刺史垣恭祖、羽林监沈承伯。
现代文：擒获刘的秦州刺史垣恭祖、羽林监沈承伯。
English: Liu's fellow Qin statesmen, Shigeki Kyongzu and Ulin Supervisor Shen Chengbo, were also arrested.

古文：永、攸之单骑走免。
现代文：张永、沈攸之单骑逃脱。
English: Zhang Yong and Shen You escaped on horseback.

古文：获军资器械不可胜数。
现代文：缴获的军资器械不可胜数。
English: The number of captured military equipment is immeasurable.

古文：刘彧遣使朝贡。
现代文：刘派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Liu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：庚子，东平王道符谋反于长安，杀副将驸马都尉万古真、钜鹿公李恢、雍州刺史鱼玄明。
现代文：十八日，东平王拓跋道符在长安谋反，杀了其副将、驸马都尉万古真，钜鹿公李恢，雍州刺史鱼玄明。
English: On the 18th, Dongping Wang Tuoba Daofu plotted a counterattack in Chang'an, killing his vice-commander, Hema Captain Wan Guzheng, Elk King Li Huai, and Yongzhou Fisherman Xuanming.

古文：丙午，诏司空、平昌公和其奴、东阳公元丕等讨道符。
现代文：二十四日，显祖下诏命司空、平昌公和其奴，东阳公元丕等人讨伐道符。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict ordering Siku, Pyeongchang and his vassal Dongyang to fight Daofu.

古文：丁未，道符司马段太阳攻道符，斩之，传首京师。
现代文：二十五日，道符的司马段太阳攻击道符，杀了他，把其头颅送到京城。
English: On the 25th, the Daofu's Sima Duan Sun attacked the Daofu, killed him, and sent his head to the capital.

古文：道符兄弟皆伏诛。
现代文：道符兄弟双双被杀。
English: Both Daofu brothers were killed.

古文：闰月，以顿丘王李峻为太宰。
现代文：闰月，任命顿丘王李峻为太宰。
English: In the leap month, the king of Dongqiu, Li Jun, was appointed Dazai.

古文：刘彧青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固并遣使请举州内属。诏平东将军长孙陵，平南将军、广陵公侯穷奇赴援之。
现代文：刘政权的青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固都派使者前来请求举州归顺，显祖下诏命平东将军长孙陵，平南将军、广陵公侯穷奇率军前往增援。
English: Shen Wenshu, the governor of Qingzhou, and Cui Daogu, the governor of Jizhou, both of which were under Liu's regime, sent envoys to request Huizhou's surrender. Emperor Xianzu ordered the general of Pingdong, Changsunling, the general of Pingnan, and the prince of Guangling, Qianqi, to lead the army to reinforce.

古文：二月，诏使持节、都督诸军事、征南大将军慕容白曜督骑五万次于碻磝，为东道后援。
现代文：二月，命使持节、都督诸军事、征南大将军慕容白曜督领五万骑兵驻扎石高石敖，作为东道的后援部队。
English: In February, he ordered General Murong Baiyou, the military governor and general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, to station 50,000 cavalrymen in Shigao, Shizuku, as a backup force for the Eastern Route.

古文：济阴王小新成薨。
现代文：济阴王拓跋小新成逝世。
English: Jilin King Tuoba Xiaoxincheng passed away.

古文：高丽、库莫奚、具伏弗、郁羽陵、日连、匹黎尔、于阗诸国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：高丽、库莫奚、具伏弗、郁羽陵、日连、匹黎尔、于阗等国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Envoys from Goryeo, Kumgang, Gufu, Ikuhuling, Nichiren, Piriel, and Yunnan came to pay tribute.

古文：刘彧东平太守申纂戍无盐，遏绝王使，诏征南大将军慕容日曜督诸军以讨之。
现代文：刘政权的东平太守申纂戍守无盐，阻断显祖的使者，显祖下诏命征南大将军慕容白曜督领诸军前去讨伐。
English: The Dongping Empress Dowager of Liu's regime, Shenzhuan, blocked the envoys of Emperor Xianzu. Emperor Xianzu issued an edict ordering General Murong Baiyowu to lead the army to fight.

古文：三月甲寅，克之。
现代文：三月初三，打败了敌人。
English: On March 3rd, we defeated the enemy.

古文：沈文秀、崔道固复叛归刘彧，白曜回师讨之，拔彧肥城、垣苗、麋沟三戍。
现代文：沈文秀、崔道固又叛归刘政权，白曜回师讨伐，拔除刘的肥城、垣苗、麋沟三处戍关。
English: Shen Wenxiu and Cui Daogu also rebelled and returned to Liu's regime, and Bai You returned to fight against the division, and pulled out Liu's Fucheng, Gaki Miao, and Shugu three checkpoints.

古文：夏四月，白曜攻升城，戍主房崇吉遁走。
现代文：夏季四月，白曜攻打升城，戍主房崇古逃走。
English: In the summer of April, Baiyang attacked Shengcheng, and the lord of the house, Chonggu, fled.

古文：秋八月，白曜攻历城。
现代文：秋季八月，白曜攻打历城。
English: In the autumn of August, they attacked Licheng on a Saturday.

古文：丁酉，行幸武州山石窟寺。
现代文：十八日，显祖驾临武州石窟寺。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Xuanzong drove to the Wuzhou Grottoes Temple.

古文：戊申，皇子宏生，大赦，改年。
现代文：二十九日，皇子元宏出生，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 29th, Prince Motohiro was born. He was granted amnesty and his name was changed.

古文：九月壬子，高丽、于阗、普岚、粟特国各遣使朝献。
现代文：九月初三，高丽、于阗、普岚、栗特国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the third day of the third month of September, envoys from Goryeo, Yunnan, Pu'er and the State of Liutang came to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，进冯翊公李白爵梁郡王。
现代文：初八，晋封冯翊公李白为梁郡王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Bai, the prince of Fenghuang, was promoted to be the king of Liang County.

古文：是月，诏赐六镇贫人布，人三匹。
现代文：这个月，下诏赐给境内六镇贫苦人布匹，每人三匹。
English: This month, the next edict gave cloth to the poor in six towns in the territory, three per person.

古文：冬十月癸卯，田于那男池。
现代文：冬季十月二十五日，显祖在那男池田猎。
English: On the 25th day of October in winter, Henzo went hunting in Ikeda.

古文：濮阳王孔雀坐怠慢，降爵为公。
现代文：濮阳王元孔雀因怠慢行为，被降爵为公。
English: Wang Yuan Peacock of Shenyang was demoted to a peerage for his negligent behavior.

古文：二年春二月癸未，田于西山，亲射虎豹。
现代文：皇兴二年春季二月初七，显祖在西山田猎，亲射虎豹。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month in the spring of the 2nd year of Emperor Xing, Xianzu hunted in West Yamada and shot a tiger leopard.

古文：崔道固及刘彧梁邹戍主、平原太守刘休宾举城降。
现代文：崔道固及刘粱邹戍主、平原太守刘休宾举城归降皇魏。
English: Cui Daogu, Liu Xuan and the governor of the plain Liu Xubing surrendered the city to Emperor Wei.

古文：是月，徐州群盗司马休符自称晋王，将军尉元讨平之。
现代文：这个月，徐州群盗司马休符自称晋王，将军尉元讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: This month, Xuzhou bandit Sima Huifu claimed to be the king of Jin, and the general's subjugation of Yuan quelled the rebellion.

古文：三月，白曜进围东阳。
现代文：三月，慕容白曜进军围困东阳城。
English: In March, Murong Baiyou marched to besiege Dongyang City.

古文：戊午，刘彧遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二日，刘派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 12th, Liu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：夏四月辛丑，以南郡公李惠为征南大将军、仪同三司、都督关右诸军事、雍州刺史，进爵为王。
现代文：夏季四月二十六日，显祖任命南郡公李惠为征南大将军、仪同三司、都督关右诸军事、雍州刺史，晋爵为王。
English: On the 26th day of the 4th month of summer, Emperor Xianzu appointed Li Hui, the governor of Nanshan County, as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the military governor of Guanzhou, the military governor of Yongzhou, and the king of the promotion.

古文：高丽、库莫奚、契丹、具伏弗、郁羽陵、日连、匹黎尔、叱六手、悉万丹、阿大何、羽真侯、于阗、波斯国各遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、库莫奚、契丹、具伏弗、郁羽陵、日连、匹黎尔、叱六手、悉万丹、阿大何、羽真侯、于阗、波斯等国各派使者前来朝贡。
English: Envoys from Goryeo, Kumho, Khitan, Gufu, Ikuhuling, Nichiren, Piriel, Shorokuzu, Sivan, Adaho, Ujinhaku, Khotan, Persia and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：五月乙卯，田于崞山，遂幸繁畤。
现代文：五月十一日，显祖在崞山打猎，于是驾临繁。
English: On May 11th, Xianzu was hunting in Lushan, so he drove to Shifang.

古文：辛酉，还宫。
现代文：十七日，回到宫中。
English: On the 17th, he returned to the palace.

古文：六月庚辰，以河南辟地，曲赦京师殊死以下。
现代文：六月初六，因黄河以南疆域扩大，特赦京师死罪以下的罪犯。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：以昌黎王冯熙为太傅。
现代文：任命昌黎王冯熙为太傅。
English: King of Changli, Feng Xi, was appointed Taifu.

古文：秋九月辛亥，封皇叔桢为南安王，长寿为城阳王，太洛为章武王，休为安定王。
现代文：秋季九月初八，封皇叔拓跋桢为南安王，拓跋长寿为城阳王，拓跋太洛为章武王，拓跋休为安定王。
English: In autumn, on the eighth day of the ninth month, the emperor's uncle Tuobao was crowned the king of Nan'an, Tuobao Changshou was crowned the king of Chengyang, Tuobaotalo was crowned the king of Zhangwu, and Tuobaohu was crowned the king of Ding'an.

古文：冬十月辛丑，上田于冷泉。
现代文：冬季十月三十日，显祖在冷泉田猎。
English: On the 30th day of October in winter, Henzo was hunting in Reizei.

古文：十有一月，以州镇二十七水旱，开仓赈恤。
现代文：十一月，因为境内州镇有二十七个发生各种水旱灾害，朝廷开仓济民。
English: In November, due to the occurrence of various flood and drought disasters in 27 prefectures and towns in the territory, the imperial court opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：十有二月甲午，诏曰： 顷张永迷扰，敢拒王威，暴骨原隰，残废不少。
现代文：十二月二十二日，显祖下诏书说： 一段时期以来，张永叛乱，竟敢抗拒圣王之威，残暴善良，为害非小。
English: On December 22nd, Emperor Xianzu issued an imperial edict saying: "For some time, Zhang Yong rebelled, dared to resist the authority of the holy king, was cruel and kind, and caused great harm.

古文：死生冤痛，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：百姓死生冤痛，朕十分挂念悲悯。
English: I am very concerned about the people's grievances in life and death.

古文：天下民一也，可敕郡县，永军残废之士，听还江南；露骸草莽者，收瘗之。 
现代文：天下老百姓都是朕的子民，可告示各郡县，被张永军队残害的人，可以让他们还归江南；露骨草莽的尸体，收拾掩埋起来。 
English: All the people in the world are my people. I can announce to all counties and counties that the people who were killed by Zhang Yong's army can return to the south of the Yangtze River. The bodies of those who have exposed their bones can be collected and buried.

古文：是月，悉万丹等十余国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：这个月，悉万丹等十多个国家各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: This month, envoys from more than ten countries, including Sivanandan, came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月乙丑，东阳溃，虏沈文秀。
现代文：皇兴三年春季正月二十七日，东阳城被攻破，沈文秀被俘。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Emperor Xing, Dongyang City was breached and Shen Wenshu was captured.

古文：戊辰，司空、平昌公和其奴薨。
现代文：三十日，司空、平昌公和其奴去世。
English: On the 30th, Siku, Pyeongchanggong and his servant passed away.

古文：二月，蠕蠕、高丽、库莫奚、契丹国各遣使朝献。
现代文：二月，蠕蠕、高丽、库莫奚、契丹国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In February, envoys from North Korea, South Korea, Kumgang and Khitan came to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，以上党公慕容白曜为都督青齐东徐三州诸军事、征南大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史，进爵济南王。
现代文：初三，显祖任命上党公慕容白曜为都督青齐东徐三州诸军事、征南大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史，晋爵为济南王。
English: On the third day of his junior year, Emperor Xianzu appointed the high-ranking party official Mu Rong Bai You as the military governor of Qingqi, Dongxu and Sanzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony and the history of Qingzhou, and the king of Jinan.

古文：夏四月壬辰，刘彧遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏季四月十七日，刘派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In the summer, on April 17th, Liu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丙申，名皇子曰宏，大赦天下。
现代文：二十一日，给皇子取名叫宏，大赦天下。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the prince was given the name Hiroshi.

古文：丁酉，田于崞山。
现代文：二十二日，显祖到崞山打猎。
English: On the 22nd, Xianzu went to Lushan to go hunting.

古文：五月，徙青州民于京师。
现代文：五月，把青州百姓部分迁置京城。
English: In May, Qingzhou residents were partially relocated to Beijing.

古文：六月辛未，立皇子宏为皇太子。
现代文：六月初四，立皇子元宏为皇太子。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, Prince Motohiro was appointed crown prince.

古文：秋七月，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋季七月，蠕蠕国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In the autumn of July, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Emperor.

古文：冬十月，侍中、太宰、顿丘王李峻薨。
现代文：冬季十月，侍中、太宰、顿丘王李峻去世。
English: In the winter of October, Li Jun, a chamberlain, Dazai, and Dongqiu King, passed away.

古文：十有一月，吐谷浑别帅白杨提度汗率户内附。
现代文：十一月，吐谷浑别帅白杨提度汗率领治下户民归附皇魏。
English: In November, under the leadership of Baiyang Tidukhan, the people of Tugu were annexed by the Emperor Wei.

古文：襄城公韩颓进爵为王。
现代文：襄城公韩颓晋爵为王。
English: The Prince of Xiangcheng, Han Yu Jinjie, became the king.

古文：四年春正月，诏州镇十一民饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：皇兴四年春季正月，显祖下诏因境内州镇十之有一发生饥荒，开仓济民。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict to open warehouses to help the people due to the famine in one of the ten states and towns in the territory.

古文：二月，以东郡王陆定国为司空。
现代文：二月，任命东郡王陆定国为司空。
English: In February, the king of Dong County, Lu Dingguo, was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：高丽、库莫奚、契丹各遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、库莫奚、契丹各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Envoys from Goryeo, Kumgang, and Khitan came to pay tribute.

古文：吐谷浑拾寅不供职贡，诏使持节、征西大将军、上党王长孙观讨之。
现代文：吐谷浑拾寅不供给应纳的贡赋，显祖下诏命使持节、征西大将军、上党王长孙观前去讨伐。
English: Hunchin of Tukoku did not provide the tribute that should have been paid, and Emperor Showa gave the order to send Jichijitsu, the general of the Western Conquest, and the king of the upper party, Chosun Kan, to fight.

古文：广阳王石侯薨。
现代文：广阳王石侯逝世。
English: Guangyang Wang Shihou passed away.

古文：三月丙戌，诏曰： 朕思百姓病苦，民多非命，明发不寐，疚心疾首。
现代文：三月二十二日，显祖下诏书说： 朕思百姓疾病痛苦，民多非命，朕难以安睡，痛心疾首。
English: On March 22nd, Emperor Xianzu issued an imperial edict saying: "I think of the people's painful illnesses, many of whom have died, I find it difficult to sleep peacefully, and my heart aches.

古文：是以广集良医，远采名药，欲以救护兆民。
现代文：因此要广集医术精良的医生，采集珍奇名药，欲救护亿兆平民。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to gather a wide range of doctors with excellent medical skills, collect rare and famous drugs, and save billions of civilians.

古文：可宣告天下，民有病者，所在官司遣医就家诊视，所须药物，任医量给之。 
现代文：可宣告天下，老百姓有疾病的，当地官府派医生上门医治，所需的药物，任医生量情给予。 
English: It can be announced to the world that the people have diseases, the local government will send doctors to treat them, and the necessary drugs will be given by the doctors.

古文：夏四月辛丑，大赦天下。
现代文：夏季四月初八，大赦天下。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month in summer, a general amnesty is held.

古文：戊申，长孙观军至曼头山，大破拾寅。拾寅与麾下数百骑宵遁。拾寅从弟豆勿来及其渠帅匹娄拔累等率所领降附。
现代文：十五日，长孙观的军队到了曼头山，大破拾寅，拾寅与部下数百骑兵乘黑夜逃走，拾寅堂弟豆勿来及其主帅匹娄拔累等率领所部降附。
English: On the fifteenth day, Nagasunko's army arrived at Mantou Mountain, and defeated Shuei. Shuei and hundreds of his cavalrymen fled in the dark. Shuei's cousin Doushiro and his commander Shibei led the troops to surrender.

古文：五月，封皇弟长乐为建昌王。
现代文：五月，显祖封皇弟长乐为建昌王。
English: In May, Emperor Xianzu appointed Emperor Jianchang's younger brother, Emperor Changle.

古文：六月，刘彧遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月，刘派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In June, Liu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：秋八月，群盗入彭城，杀镇将元解愁，长史勒兵灭之。
现代文：秋季八月，群盗入据彭城，杀害镇守将领元解愁，长史统军扑灭了敌人。
English: In the autumn of August, a group of thieves broke into the fortress of Pengcheng, killed the commander of the town guard to relieve their sorrows, and the Long History United Army extinguished the enemy.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯边境。
English: Creep creep invade the border.

古文：九月丙寅，舆驾北伐，诸将俱会于女水，大破虏众。
现代文：九月初五，显祖御驾北伐，朝中诸将都汇聚在女水，大败蠕蠕。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, Emperor Xianzu led the Northern Expedition, and all the generals of the dynasty gathered in Nianshui and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：具体史实记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：司徒、东安王刘尼坐事免。
现代文：司徒、东安王刘尼因犯罪被免除官爵。
English: Liu Ni, the King of Eastern An, was stripped of his title because of his crimes.

古文：壬申，车驾至自北伐，饮至策勋，告于宗庙。
现代文：十一日，显祖凯旋而归，大宴将领，分封官爵，告祀宗庙。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Xianzu returned in triumph. He was feted with a grand banquet, given a title of nobility, and his ancestral temple was dedicated.

古文：冬十月，诛济南王慕容白曜、高平王李敷。
现代文：冬季十月，杀济南王慕容白曜、高平王李敷。
English: In the winter of October, Jinan King Murong Baiyou and Gaoping King Lishiki were killed.

古文：十有一月，诏弛山泽之禁。
现代文：十一月，显祖下诏解除山林泽池的禁令。
English: In November, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict to lift the ban on climbing in the mountains, forests and ponds.

古文：十有二月甲辰，幸鹿野苑、石窟寺。
现代文：十二月十五日，显祖驾临鹿野苑、石窟寺。
English: On December 15th, Emperor Xianzu drove to Deer Park and Grotto Temple.

古文：阳平王新成薨。
现代文：阳平王拓跋新成逝世。
English: Yangping King Tuoba Xincheng passed away.

古文：五年春三月乙亥，诏曰： 天安以来，军国多务，南定徐方，北扫遗虏。
现代文：皇兴五年春季三月十七日，显祖下诏书说： 天安年间以来，军队国家事务繁杂，南边平定徐地，北方扫除遗乱虏寇。
English: On the 17th day of March in the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict saying: Since the era of Tian'anmen, the military affairs of the country have been complicated, the south has been gradually pacified, and the north has swept away the ruins of the invaders.

古文：征戍之人，亡窜非一，虽罪合刑书，每加哀宥。
现代文：征战戎戍的人，死亡流窜非在少数，虽然说这些人罪当判罚，但朕每每怜悯哀宥。
English: Those who enlisted in the war are not a small number of those who died. Although it is said that these people should be punished for their crimes, I have every sympathy for them.

古文：然宽政犹水，逋逃遂多。
现代文：但是宽松的政律犹如流水，从中遁逃的人越发增多。
English: But lax laws are like running water, and more and more people are fleeing from them.

古文：宜申明典刑，以肃奸伪。
现代文：应该申明典律刑法，以纠肃奸伪之人。
English: It is necessary to clarify the legal and criminal laws to punish those who commit fraud.

古文：自今诸有逃亡之兵及下代守宰浮游不赴者，限六月三十日悉听归首；不首者，论如律。 
现代文：从今以后凡有逃亡的兵卒及下级守宰玩忽职守不把他们缉拿归案的，限在六月三十日以前全部自首归案，不自首的依律治罪。 
English: From now on, all soldiers who have escaped and lower-level guards who have neglected their duties and failed to bring them to justice must surrender before June 30, and those who do not surrender will be punished according to the law.

古文：诏假员外散骑常侍邢祐使于刘彧。
现代文：显祖下诏命假员外散骑常侍邢出使刘政权。
English: Under Emperor Xianzu's edict, the government of Liu was established.

古文：夏四月，西部敕勒叛，诏汝阴王天赐、给事中罗云讨之。
现代文：夏季四月，西部敕勒叛乱，显祖下诏让汝阴王元天赐、给事中罗云前去讨伐。
English: In the summer of April, there was a rebellion in the western part of Jilin, and Emperor Xianzu issued an edict to let Ruyin Wangyuan go to the front to fight.

古文：云为敕勒所袭杀，死者十五六。
现代文：罗云被敕勒人偷袭杀害，死难士卒十分之五六。
English: Luo Yun was killed in a surprise attack by the people of Mule, with the death toll reaching five or six out of ten.

古文：北平王长孙敦薨。
现代文：北平王长孙敦逝世。
English: Beiping King Chosun Tun passed away.

古文：六月丁未，行幸河西。
现代文：六月二十日，显祖行幸黄河以西。
English: On June 20th, Emperor Xuanzong went to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：秋七月丙寅，遂至阴山。
现代文：秋季七月初十，显祖抵达阴山。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Xianzu arrived in Yinshan.

古文：八月丁亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月初一，显祖回到宫中。
English: In August of Dinghai, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：帝雅薄时务，常有遗世之心，欲禅位于叔父京兆王子推，语在《任城王云传》。群臣固请，帝乃止。
现代文：显祖不念情于世务，经常有出世之心，打算把皇位禅让给叔父京兆王拓跋子推，事见《任城王云传》，群臣坚决请求他别这样做，显祖只好作罢。
English: Emperor Xianzu did not care about the affairs of the world, and often had a desire to be famous. He planned to give the imperial throne to his uncle, Emperor Taobao. According to "The Legend of Emperor Ren," the courtiers firmly asked him not to do so, and Emperor Xianzu had no choice but to give up.

古文：丙午，册命太子曰： 昔尧舜之禅天下也，皆由其子不肖。
现代文：二十日，显祖册命太子说： 过去尧、舜之所以要禅让天下，都是由于他们的儿子不肖。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the prince said, "In the past, the reason why  and  wanted to give Zen to the world was because their sons were not good-looking.

古文：若丹朱、商均能负荷者，岂搜扬仄陋而授之哉？
现代文：如果像丹朱、商均那样堪负重任，他们哪会搜才剔陋地把天下交给他人呢？
English: If, like Danzhu and Shangyun, they are able to bear the heavy responsibilities, which of them will search for the best way to hand over the world to others?

古文：尔虽冲弱，有君人之表，必能恢隆王道，以济兆民。
现代文：你虽幼小，却有作为人君的仪表，一定能够光大隆盛君王之道，济救黎民。
English: Although you are young, you have the appearance of a ruler, and you will surely be able to magnify the way of the king and save the people of Li.

古文：今使太保、建安王陆馛，太尉源贺持节奉皇帝玺绶，致位于尔躬。
现代文：今天朕让太保、建安王陆馥，太尉源贺持节奉皇帝玉玺绶带，把皇位交给你。
English: Today, I would like to have Taibo, Jianan Wang, Lu Xi, and Taifu Yuan, He Jizhi, present the imperial sash to the emperor and hand over the throne to you.

古文：其践升帝位，克广洪业，以光祖宗之烈，使朕优游履道，颐神养性，可不善欤？ 
现代文：你登上帝位，应拓展宏大的基业，以光大祖宗的英烈之绩，使朕能够优游世外，修神养性，岂不是很好的事吗？ 
English: When you ascend to the throne of God, shouldn't it be a good thing for you to expand the great foundation, highlight the heroic feats of our great ancestors, enable us to travel the world, and cultivate our spirituality?

古文：丁未，诏曰： 朕承洪业，运属太平，淮岱率从，四海清晏。
现代文：二十一日，显祖下诏说： 朕继承洪业，运道太平，淮、岱归顺，四海清宁。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Xianzu issued an edict saying, "I have inherited the Hongye, the Taihe, the Huai, the Qi and the Qunun, and the four seas are becoming clear and tranquil.

古文：是以希心玄古，志存澹泊。
现代文：所以朕属心玄远，胸怀淡泊。
English: Therefore, I am far-sighted and light-hearted.

古文：躬览万务，则损颐神之和；一日或旷，政有淹滞之失。
现代文：如朕亲自处理万机，则损害了肉体精神的和谐；如朕一日不理政事，则国家事务又有怠慢之忧。
English: If I personally deal with everything, it will damage the harmony of the body and spirit; if I do not deal with politics for a day, then there is a risk of negligence in national affairs.

古文：但子有天下，归尊于父；父有天下，传之于子。
现代文：然子有天下，尊崇其父；父有天下，自然传给其子。
English: If the son has the kingdom, he will honor his father; if the father has the kingdom, he will naturally pass it on to his son.

古文：今稽协灵运，考会群心，爰命储宫，践升大位。
现代文：现在朕查协神灵运数，考察群臣之心，命太子登上皇位。
English: Now I'm looking into the number of the gods, examining the hearts of my subjects, and the crown prince's ascension to the throne.

古文：朕方优游恭己，栖心浩然，社稷乂安，克广其业，不亦善乎？
现代文：朕然后优游四方，栖心世外，社稷平安，皇基日广，不也是很好的事情吗？
English: I then prefer to travel in all directions, live outside the world, the society is safe, the foundation is broad, is not it also a very good thing?

古文：百官有司，其祗奉胤子，以答天休。
现代文：文武百官有关部门，都应尊奉朕的儿子，以此酬答天功。
English: All officials and relevant departments should respect and serve my son, as a reward for his heavenly merits.

古文：宣布宇内，咸使闻悉。 
现代文：将此诏颁布海内，让天下人都知道。 
English: This edict will be promulgated at sea, so that everyone in the world knows about it.

古文：于是群公奏曰： 昔三皇之世，澹泊无为，故称皇。
现代文：于是官员们启奏说： 过去三皇时代，淡泊无为，故而称作 皇 。
English: So the officials said: In the past three emperors' era, there was nothing to do, so they were called "emperors."

古文：是以汉高祖既称皇帝，尊其父为太上皇，明不统天下。
现代文：是以汉高祖既称皇帝便称其父为太上皇，明确其不统御天下。
English: The reason is that since Emperor Han Gaozhu was called Emperor, his father was called Emperor, making it clear that he did not rule the world.

古文：今皇帝幼冲，万机大政，犹宜陛下总之。
现代文：今天皇帝年龄尚小，万机大政，还是应该让陛下亲自断理。
English: Today, the emperor is still young and has great political power, so His Majesty should be allowed to make his own judgment.

古文：谨上尊号太上皇帝。 
现代文：我们谨上尊号为太上皇帝。 
English: We respectfully use the honorific title "Emperor."

古文：乃从之。
现代文：于是显祖接受了这个意见。
English: So he followed the advice of Gong Su.

古文：己酉，太上皇帝徙御崇光宫，采椽不斫，土阶而已。
现代文：二十三日，太上皇帝迁居崇光宫，宫中设备简陋，宫阶是土筑成的。
English: On the 23rd, the empress dowager moved into the Sogo Palace. The palace was poorly equipped, and the steps were made of earth.

古文：国之大事咸以闻。
现代文：国家大事都报给他知道。
English: National events are reported to him.

古文：承明元年，年二十三，崩于永安殿，上尊谥曰献文皇帝，庙号显祖，葬云中金陵。
现代文：承明元年，二十三岁，在永安殿逝世，尊称他为献文皇帝。庙号显祖，葬在云中金陵。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, at the age of twenty-three, he died in Yongan Hall, and was revered as the emperor of dedications. He was given the temple name Xianzu and was buried in Yunzhong Jinling.

古文：史臣曰：聪睿夙成，兼资能断，其显祖之谓乎？
现代文：史臣曰：聪明睿智，才学早成，多能多艺，决断果毅，说的不就是显祖吗？
English: Shichen said: Smart and wise, early learning, multi-talented and multi-skilled, decisive and resolute, is not it Xianzu?

古文：故能更清漠野，大启南服。
现代文：所以他能清定漠野，大开南疆。
English: That's why he was able to clear the desert and open up southern Xinjiang.

古文：而早怀厌世之心，终致宫闱之变，将天意哉！
现代文：而早怀厌世之心，终而导致帝位的变化，这是天意啊！
English: However, his early world-weariness eventually led to a change in the imperial throne, which was God's will!

