古文：长恨传无双传
现代文：长恨传无双传
English: Long-hated legend passes away

古文：长恨传
现代文：长恨传
English: Chang Huan Chuan

古文：唐开元中，泰阶平，四海无事。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，天下太平，四海无事。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, the world was at peace and there was no trouble in the four seas.

古文：玄宗在位岁久，倦于旰食宵衣，政无大小，始委于丞相。
现代文：玄宗做皇帝已多年，渐渐厌倦了朝政，不再夜以继日地处理国事，把朝中的大小事务，都交给丞相去处理。
English: Xuanzong had been emperor for many years, and he was getting tired of court politics. He no longer dealt with state affairs day and night, and left all the affairs of the court, large and small, to the prime minister to deal with.

古文：稍深居游宴，以声色自娱。
现代文：他自己经常深居内宫游戏宴饮，用音乐和美色使自己快乐。
English: He himself often lived deep in the inner palace of games and banquets, using music and beauty to make himself happy.

古文：先是，元献皇后武淑妃皆有宠，相次即世；宫中虽良家子千万数，无悦目者。上心忽忽不乐。
现代文：在此之前，元献皇后和武淑妃都受过玄宗的宠幸，她们相继去世后，宫中虽有上等人家女儿成千上万，却没有一个看得上眼的，皇上整天闷闷不乐。
English: Prior to this, both Empress Yuanxian and Empress Wuxu had been favored by Emperor Xuanzong. After their deaths, although there were thousands of daughters of high-ranking families in the palace, there was not a single one who was attractive. The emperor was depressed all day long.

古文：时每岁十月，驾幸华清宫，内外命妇，焜耀景从，浴日余波，赐以汤沐，春风灵液，淡荡其间。
现代文：皇帝洗过澡后，就赏赐命妇们也在御用温泉中洗浴。春风吹拂着华清池水，命妇们自由自在地沐浴在水中，皇上不禁有些心旌摇荡，期望能遇到一个可心的女子。
English: After the emperor had bathed, he rewarded his wives with a bath in the royal hot spring. The spring breeze blew the water of the Huaqing Pool, and the wives bathed freely in the water. The emperor could not help but shake his heart, hoping to meet a beautiful woman.

古文：上心油然，恍若有遇，顾左右前后，粉色如土。
现代文：可是他看看前后左右的嫔妃，却觉得一个个面色如土，毫无光彩。
English: However, when he looked at the concubines in front, behind, and to the right and left, he felt that they all looked like dirt, with no luster.

古文：诏高力士，潜搜外宫，得弘农杨玄琰女于寿邸。
现代文：于是下令，叫高力士暗地里到宫外搜寻美人。结果在寿王府中找到了弘农郡杨玄琰的女儿。
English: Therefore, he ordered that Colossus secretly search for a beautiful woman outside the palace. As a result, the daughter of Yang Xuanqi of Hongnong County was found in Shouwang Palace.

古文：既笄矣，鬓发腻理，纤秾中度，举止闲冶，如汉武帝李夫人。
现代文：这个少女已经到了成年，鬟发细腻润泽，不胖不瘦身材适中，一举一动都娴静娇媚，就像汉武帝的李夫人。
English: This girl has reached adulthood, her hair is finely moisturized, she is neither fat nor thin, she is of moderate stature, and her every move is quiet and charming, just like Emperor Hanwu's Lady Li.

古文：别疏汤泉，诏赐澡莹。
现代文：于是另外为她设了一个温泉浴池，让她去洗浴。
English: In addition, a hot spring bath was set up for her so that she could take a bath.

古文：既出水，体弱力微，若不任罗绮，光彩焕发，转动照人。上甚悦。
现代文：洗完出水以后，显得身体很柔弱无力，好像连穿轻柔的绸衣也经受不住了，却更加光彩焕发，明艳照人，皇上非常高兴。
English: After being washed out of the water, his body appeared very weak and feeble, as if he couldn't even bear to wear soft silk clothes, but he was even more radiant and bright, and the emperor was very happy.

古文：进见之日，奏《霓裳羽衣》以导之。
现代文：在她正式进见皇上那天，乐队奏起《霓裳羽衣曲》为她伴行。
English: On the day of her formal entry into the presence of the Emperor, the orchestra accompanied her with a rendition of "The Robe Song."

古文：定情之夕，授金钗钿合以固之。又命戴步摇，垂金珰。
现代文：在定情的那天晚上，皇上送给她金钗钿盒，用来加深彼此间的爱情，又命她戴上金制步摇，和金制耳坠儿。
English: On the night of the betrothal, the emperor gave her a gold locket to deepen their love, and ordered her to wear a gold crotchet and a gold earring.

古文：明年，册为贵妃，半后服用。
现代文：第二年，册封为贵妃，衣服用品的待遇相当于皇后的一半。
English: The following year, she was made an honorary princess, and her clothing allowance was equal to half that of the empress.

古文：由是冶其容，敏其词，婉娈万态，以中上意，上益嬖焉。
现代文：从此杨贵妃努力把自己的容貌打扮得更艳丽，使自己的语言更聪明机智，做出种种妩媚的姿态，来迎合皇上的心意，皇上当然就愈加宠爱她了。
English: From then on, Yang Guifei tried her best to dress up her appearance more brightly, make her language more clever and witty, and make all kinds of charming gestures to cater to the emperor's mind. Of course, the emperor loved her more and more.

古文：时省风九州，泥金五岳，骊山雪夜，上阳春朝，与上行同辇，止同室，宴专席，寝专房。
现代文：当时皇上巡视各州，祭祀五岳山川，在骊山上过雪夜，在上阳宫度过春天的早晨，贵妃与皇上走时同车，住宿同房，饮宴专席，睡觉专房。
English: At that time, the emperor toured all the states, worshiped the mountains and rivers of the Five Mountains, spent a snowy night on the Lushan Mountain, and spent a spring morning at the Shangyang Palace. Guifei and the emperor traveled in the same car, stayed in the same room, had a special banquet, and slept in a special room.

古文：虽有三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻、暨后宫才人、乐府妓女、使天子无顾盼意。
现代文：皇上虽有三夫人、九嫁、二十七世妇、八十一御妻和后宫的才人、乐府的无数歌女，但皇上连看她们一眼的兴趣都没有。
English: Although the Emperor had three wives, nine daughters-in-law, twenty-seven granddaughters-in-law, eighty-one great-granddaughters-in-law, talented people in the harem, and countless singers in the music hall, the Emperor was not even interested in looking at them.

古文：自是六宫无复进幸者。
现代文：从此六宫中再也没有能为皇帝侍寝的人了。
English: From then on, there was no longer anyone in the Six Palaces who could lie in wait for the emperor.

古文：非徒殊艳尤态，独能致是；盖才知明慧，善巧便佞，先意希旨，有不可形容者焉。
现代文：这不仅是由于杨贵妃突出的容貌和妩媚的风姿，还因为她有才能有智慧，聪明伶俐，善于讨好献媚。皇帝还没开口，她就猜到皇帝心意而去迎合他，这当中真有些无法言传的妙处。
English: This was not only due to Yang Guifei's outstanding looks and charming demeanor, but also because she was talented, wise, clever, and good at pleasing and flattering. Before the emperor even opened his mouth, she guessed the emperor's mind and catered to him. There is truly something indescribable about this.

古文：叔父昆弟皆列在清贵，爵为通侯，姊妹封国夫人，富埒主室。车服邸第，与大长公主侔，而恩泽势力，则又过之。
现代文：贵妃的叔父兄弟都做了清高尊贵的官，封爵为公侯，姊妹都封为国夫人，富贵跟皇族相等，车马、衣服、住宅与皇帝的姑母相同，而得到的好处和权力却超过了他们。
English: Her uncles and brothers all became high-ranking dignitaries, knighted as princes, and her sisters were made queens. They were as rich as the royal family, and they had the same car, horse, clothes, and house as the emperor's aunt, but the benefits and power they received exceeded them.

古文：出入禁门不问，京师长吏为之侧目。
现代文：贵妃的亲属出入宫禁无人敢问，京城的长官对他们也不敢正眼相看。
English: No one dared to ask about the ban on the entry and exit of the relatives of the empress dowager, and the governors of the capital did not dare to look them in the eye.

古文：故当时谣咏有云： 生女勿悲酸，生男勿欢喜。 
现代文：因此当时民间有歌谣说： 生女勿悲酸，生男勿喜欢。 
English: Therefore, at that time, there was a folk song saying: Don't be sad when you have a baby girl, and don't like when you have a baby boy.

古文：又曰： 男不封候女作妃，君看女却为门楣。 
现代文：又说： 男不封侯女作妃，君看女却为门楣。 
English: He also said: "A man does not make his mistress his wife, but a woman is his best friend."

古文：其为人心羡慕如此。
现代文：可见杨氏家族被人们所羡慕已达到何种地步。
English: You can see the extent to which the Yang family has been envied by people.

古文：天宝末，兄国忠盗丞相位，愚弄国柄。
现代文：天宝末年，贵妃的哥哥杨国忠窃踞了丞相之位，蒙蔽皇帝，把持了国家大权。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, Guifei's brother Yang Guozhong usurped the position of prime minister, hoodwinked the emperor, and seized state power.

古文：及安禄山引兵向阙，以讨杨氏为辞。
现代文：等到安禄山领兵向京城进发，把讨伐杨氏家族作为借口。
English: Wait until An Lushan leads the troops to march into the capital and use the attack on the Yang family as an excuse.

古文：潼关不守，翠华南幸。
现代文：潼关很快失守，皇帝只好向南逃跑。
English: Shaoguan was soon lost, and the emperor had to flee to the south.

古文：出咸阳道，次马嵬，六军徘徊，持戟不进。
现代文：出了咸阳，途中停在马嵬坡时，皇帝的禁卫军都拿着武器不肯再前进。
English: When they left Xianyang and stopped at Malangpo on the way, the emperor's guards refused to advance any further.

古文：从官郎吏伏上马前，请诛错以谢天下。
现代文：这时随从的大小官员跪在皇帝车驾前，请求像汉景帝诛杀晁错那样，杀掉杨国忠向天下谢罪。
English: At this time, the attendant officials kneeled in front of the emperor's chariot and asked him to kill Yang Guozhong and apologize to the world, just as Emperor Han Jing had done.

古文：国忠奉牦缨盘水，死于道周。
现代文：杨国忠捧着谢罪的牦牛缨和水盘向皇帝请罪，结果被处死于道旁。
English: Yang Guozhong pleaded guilty to the emperor with a yakitori and a bowl of water. As a result, he was executed on the side of the road.

古文：左右之意未快，上问之，当时敢言者，请以贵妃塞天下之怒。
现代文：但左右的侍从仍不满意，皇上问他们，当时敢说话的人就请求杀掉杨贵妃消除天下人的怨恨。
English: However, the attendants on both sides were still not satisfied. The emperor asked them, "Those who dared to speak at that time asked to kill Yang Guifei to eliminate the resentment of the people around the world."

古文：上知不免，而不忍见其死，反袂掩面，使牵而去之。
现代文：皇上知道这事难以挽回，可又不忍心看见贵妃死，就扯起袖子挡住脸，让人把她拉走。
English: The Emperor knew that this was irreparable, but he could not bear to see her die, so he pulled up his sleeve to hide his face and let someone take her away.

古文：仓皇展转，竟就绝于尺组之下。
现代文：贵妃慌张挣扎，终于被白绫带绞死。
English: Guifei panicked and struggled, and was finally hanged with a white ribbon.

古文：既而玄宗狩成都，肃宗禅灵武。
现代文：不久玄宗逃到了成都，肃宗在灵武继承了皇位。
English: Soon after, Xuanzong fled to Chengdu, and Su Zong succeeded to the throne in Lingwu.

古文：明年，大凶归元，大驾还都，尊玄宗为太上皇，就养南宫，自南宫迁于西内。
现代文：第二年，叛乱之凶安禄山被杀死，玄宗的车驾又回到了都城。肃宗把玄宗尊为太上皇，让他到南面的兴庆宫殿去养老，不久又让他迁到西内太极宫。
English: In the second year, the rebel An Lushan was killed, and Xuanzong's chauffeur returned to the capital. Su Zong respected Xuanzong as the emperor, let him go to the Xingqing Palace in the south to retire, and soon let him move to the West Inner Taiji Palace.

古文：时移事去，乐尽悲来，每至春之日，冬之夜，池莲夏开，宫槐秋落，梨园弟子，玉管发音，闻《霓裳羽衣》一声，则天颜不怡，左右欷歔。
现代文：时光流逝，往事已去，唐玄宗不禁乐尽悲来。每到春天的白昼，冬天的夜晚，他看到池中莲花夏天盛开，宫中的槐树秋天落叶，听乐伎吹奏玉管，尤其一听到《霓裳羽衣曲》，心中就郁郁不乐，左右的侍从也叹息不止。
English: Time passed, the past was gone, and Tang Xuan Zong couldn't help but mourn. Every spring day and winter night, he saw the lotus flowers blooming in the pond in summer, the eucalyptus trees in the palace in autumn, listened to the music and played the tambourine, especially when he heard the "Cloak and Feather Song," his heart was depressed and unhappy, and the attendants around him also sighed.

古文：三载一意，其念不衰。
现代文：三年当中，想念贵妃的感情始终没有减少。
English: Over the past three years, the feelings of missing Guifei have never diminished.

古文：求之梦魂，杳杳而不能得。
现代文：想从梦中见到贵妃，也始终渺茫不能实现。
English: If you want to see Guifei in your dreams, it's always a long shot.

古文：适有道士自蜀来，知上心念杨妃如是，自言有李少君之术。
现代文：当时正好有个道士从四川来到长安，知道太上皇心里非常想念杨贵妃，就说自己有李少君的招魂法术。
English: At that time, a Taoist monk from Sichuan happened to come to Chang'an. Knowing that Yang Guifei was greatly missed by the Emperor, he said that he had Li Shaojun's soul-winning magic.

古文：玄宗大喜，命致其神。
现代文：玄宗一听非常高兴，让他去找贵妃的魂灵。
English: Hearing this, Xuanzong was very happy and asked him to find the spirit of the noblewoman.

古文：方士乃竭其术以索之，不至。
现代文：方士便使出他的全部法术来找，但没有找到。
English: The sorcerer used all his magic to find it, but it was not there.

古文：又能游神驭气，出天界，没地府，以求之，又不见。
现代文：又腾云驾雾，上到天界，下入地府来寻找，仍没找到。
English: Again, he went up to the sky and down to the underworld to look for it, but still couldn't find it.

古文：又旁求四虚上下，东极绝天涯，跨蓬壶，见最高仙山。上多楼阁，西厢下有洞户，东向，窥其门，署曰《玉妃太真院》。
现代文：于是又到周围东西南北四方和天地之外去寻找。最东面到了极远的天边，跨过蓬莱，见到一座最高的仙山，上面有很多楼阁，西厢房檐下有个洞门，朝东，看那门上写着 玉妃太真院 。
English: So he went to the surrounding four directions, north, south, east, west, and beyond heaven and earth to look for cranes. He went as far east as the farthest edge of the sky, crossed the Penglai, and saw a highest fairy mountain, with many castles on it, and a cave door under the west wing, facing east. Look at the door that says "Tamifii Taishin-in."

古文：方士抽簪扣扉，有双鬟童出应门。方士造次未及言，而双鬟复入。
现代文：方士拔下簪子敲门，有个扎着双鬟的女童出来开门，方士匆忙未及开口，而女童却又进去了。
English: The sorcerer pulled out a pair of pliers and knocked on the door. A girl with pigtails came out to open the door. Before the sorcerer could open his mouth, the girl went in again.

古文：俄有碧衣侍女至，诘其所从来。
现代文：不一会儿有个穿着绿衣服的侍女出来了，问方士从什么地方来。
English: Presently a servant-maid in green came out, and asked the seer whence he came.

古文：方士因称唐天子使者，且致其命。
现代文：方士说自己是唐朝天子的使者，并且传达了玄宗的使命。
English: Fang Shi said that he was the messenger of Tang Dynasty and conveyed the mission of Xuanzong.

古文：碧衣云： 玉妃方寝，请少待之。 
现代文：穿绿衣的人说： 玉妃正睡觉，请稍微等一会儿。 
English: The man in green said, "The princess is sleeping, please wait a moment."

古文：于时云海沉沉，洞天日晚，琼户重阖，悄然无声。
现代文：这时云雾缭绕着仙洞，天色渐渐昏暗，美玉做成的门重新关了起来，静悄悄的没有声息。
English: At this time, clouds and fog swirled around the fairy cave, the sky gradually darkened, and the door made of gems was closed again, and there was no sound.

古文：方士屏息敛足，拱手门下。
现代文：方士屏住呼吸，恭恭敬敬地拱着手站在门口。
English: Fang Shi held his breath and respectfully stood at the doorway with his arms folded.

古文：久之而碧衣延入，且曰： 玉妃出。 
现代文：过了好半天，穿绿衣的侍女才引导方士进去，并且说： 玉妃出来了。 
English: After more than half a day, a maid in a green dress led the priests inside and said, "The princess has come out."

古文：俄见一人，冠金莲，披紫绡，珮红玉，曳凤舄，左右侍者七八人，揖方士，问皇帝安否。
现代文：不一会儿，就看见一个人，戴着金色莲花冠，披着紫色的绡衣，身佩红玉，穿着凤头鞋，在七八个仙女的簇拥下缓步走来，正是杨贵妃。
English: In a short while, she saw a person wearing a golden lotus crown, a purple robe, a scarlet bead, and a pair of high-heeled shoes, walking slowly under the embrace of seven or eight fairies. It was Yang Guifei.

古文：次问天宝十四载已还事，言讫悯然。
现代文：她向方士行了礼，问皇帝平安与否，然后又问了天宝十四年以后的事。
English: She bowed to the abbot, asked the emperor if he was safe, and then asked him about what happened fourteen years after Tianbao.

古文：指碧衣女，取金钗钿合，各拆其半，授使者曰： 为谢太上皇，谨献是物，寻旧好也。 
现代文：玉妃说完后，脸上显得忧郁悲伤，用手示意穿绿衣的侍女，让她取来金钗钿盒，各拆下一半，交给使者，说： 替我向太上皇道谢，我敬献这件东西，是为了找回过去的情意。 
English: After she finished speaking, her face was sad and melancholy. She waved her hand at the maid in the green dress and asked her to fetch the gold ingot box. She tore off half of each and handed it to the messenger, saying, "Thank the Emperor for me. I'm offering this thing in order to regain the feelings of the past."

古文：方士受辞与信，将行，色有不足。
现代文：方士接受了玉妃的话和信物，将要动身返回时，脸上露出不满足的样子。
English: Fang Shi accepted Yu Fei's words and token, and when he was about to leave and return, his face showed his dissatisfaction.

古文：玉妃因征其意，复前跪致词： 乞当时一事，不闻于他人者，验于太上皇。
现代文：玉妃于是询问方士还有什么要求。方士就走上前跪下说： 请说一件你们两人当时的私事，这事是别人没有听到的，以便向太上皇证实。
English: The sorcerer stepped forward, knelt down, and said, "Please tell me about a private matter between the two of you at that time, which no one else has heard, so that I can confirm it to the Emperor."

古文：不然，恐钿合金钗，罹新垣平之诈也。 
现代文：不这样，恐怕钿盒金钗会被看作汉文帝时以道术行骗的新垣平所设的骗局了。 
English: Otherwise, I'm afraid the gold ingot box will be seen as a trick set up by Arakigahira, who cheated with Taoism during the Han Dynasty.

古文：玉妃茫然退立，若有所思，徐而言曰： 昔天宝十年，侍辇避暑骊山宫，秋七月，牵牛织女相见之夕，秦人风俗，夜张锦绣，陈饮食，树花燔香于庭，号为乞巧。
现代文：玉妃一时想不起什么，往后退了几步站住了，好像在回忆什么。
English: Not able to recall anything for a moment, Jade Princess stepped back a few paces and stood still, as if remembering something.

古文：宫掖间尤尚之。时夜始半，休侍卫于东西厢，独侍上。
现代文：当时已到半夜，侍卫们已在东西厢房中休息，我单独侍候皇上。
English: At that time, it was already midnight, the attendants were already resting in the east and west wing rooms, and I was waiting for the emperor alone.

古文：上凭肩而立，因仰天感牛女事，密相誓心，愿世世为夫妇。
现代文：皇上扶着我的肩站着，仰望天空感叹牛郎织女的遭遇。于是我俩秘密地互相发出心中的誓言，愿世世代代都作夫妻。
English: The Emperor stood with his hand on my shoulder, looking up at the sky and lamenting the fate of the Cowherd and Weaver Maid. So we both secretly swore to each other that we would be husband and wife for generations to come.

古文：言毕，执手各呜咽。
现代文：说完了，拉着手各自轻声哭泣。
English: When it was over, they held hands and wept softly.

古文：此独君王知之耳。 
现代文：这件事只有皇上知道。 
English: Only the Emperor knows about this.

古文：因自悲曰： 由此一念，又不得居此，复于下界，且结后缘。
现代文：玉妃接着又伤感地说： 由于当年这个念头，我不能长住在这里了，还要再回到人间，再结以后的缘份。
English: Jade Princess went on to say sadly, "Because of that thought, I can't live here for a long time, and I have to return to the human world again to make a future relationship.

古文：或在天，或在人，决再相见，好合如旧。 
现代文：或者在天上，或者在人间。我俩一定会再相见，合好相处，就像以前那样。 
English: Whether in heaven or on earth, we'll meet again, and we'll get along just like we did before.

古文：因言 太上皇亦不久人间，幸唯自安，无自苦也。 
现代文：还说： 太上皇在人间的时间也不长了，希望多多珍重，不要自找苦恼。
English: He also said, "The Emperor has not long left on this earth. I hope you will cherish what you have and not cause yourself trouble."

古文：使者还奏太上皇，上心嗟悼久之。
现代文：使者回来向太上皇奏报了见贵妃的经过，太上皇帝不免叹息伤感了好半天。
English: When the messenger returned and reported to the Emperor on what had happened, the Emperor sighed and felt sad for a long time.

古文：余具国史。
现代文：其余的事情都写在国家史书中了这里就不谈了。
English: The rest is in the national history books, but that's about it.

古文：至宪宗元和元年，周至县尉白居易为歌，以言其事。并前秀才陈鸿作传，冠于歌之前。目为《长恨歌传》。
现代文：到了唐宪宗元和元年，周至县的县尉白居易做了一篇歌，用它来叙述这件事，并且把以前秀才陈鸿作的一篇传记，放在歌的前面，看作是《长恨歌传》。
English: In the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Zong and the 1st year of the Tang Dynasty, Bai Juyi, the county lieutenant of Zhou County, wrote a song to describe the incident, and put a biography written by the former genius Chen Hong in front of the song as "Song of Longing."

古文：居易歌曰：汉皇重色思倾国，御宇多年求不得；杨家有女初长成，养在深闺人不识。
现代文：居易的歌写道： 汉代皇帝重视女色想得到一位绝代佳人。可是在宫廷内外多年都没有找到。杨家有位女儿刚刚长成人，养在深深的闺房中还没有人发现她。
English: Juyi's song wrote: Han Dynasty emperors valued female beauty and wanted to get a great beauty. However, they did not find her for many years both inside and outside the court. The Yang family has a daughter who has just grown up, and no one has found her in the deep boudoir.

古文：天生丽质难自弃，一朝选在君王侧。
现代文：天生的绝代佳丽终不会被埋没，一朝被选进宫来到君王身边。
English: The natural beauty will not be buried, she will be chosen to enter the palace to be with the king.

古文：回眸一笑百媚生，六宫粉黛无颜色。
现代文：回头一笑生出千娇百媚，皇帝后宫的所有嫔妃顿时黯然失色。
English: All the concubines in the emperor's harem were suddenly eclipsed.

古文：春寒赐浴华清池，温泉水滑洗凝脂，侍儿扶起娇无力，始是新承恩泽时。
现代文：乍暖还寒的早春皇帝让她在华清池中洗浴，温柔滑腻的泉水洗濯着凝脂似的皮肤。侍女扶起她来，她显得娇弱无力，这是承受皇帝宠爱的开始。
English: In the early spring, when it was warm and cold again, the emperor had her take a bath in the Huaqing Pool. The gentle, smooth spring water washed her gelatinous skin. The maid picked her up, and she looked delicate and weak. This was the beginning of the emperor's favor.

古文：云鬓花颜金步摇，芙蓉帐暖度春宵，春宵苦短日高起，从此君王不早朝。
现代文：乌云般的鬓发，鲜花似的容貌，戴着黄金的步摇，跟皇帝一起在温暖的芙蓉帐里共度春天的良宵。春夜苦短转眼已是黎明，太阳又高高地升起来了，从此君王再也不起早去上朝了。
English: His hair like a dark cloud, his face like a flower, his gait like a golden calf, he and the emperor spent the spring night together in the warm hibiscus tent. The spring night was so short that it was already dawn, the sun rose high again, and from then on the emperor never got up early to go to court.

古文：承欢侍宴无闲暇，春从春游夜专夜。
现代文：贵妃时刻逗皇上开心，侍候皇上宴饮，简直没有空闲的时候，春天陪着皇上春游，每天晚上都独自侍候皇上。
English: Guifei always makes the emperor happy, waiting for the emperor's banquet, when there is almost no free time, she accompanies the emperor on a spring tour in spring, and waits for the emperor alone every evening.

古文：汉宫佳丽三千人，三千宠爱在一身。
现代文：皇宫中有三千美人，对这三千美人的宠爱都集中到杨家女儿一人身上了。
English: There are three thousand beauties in the imperial palace, and the favor of these three thousand beauties is concentrated on one daughter of the Yang family.

古文：金屋妆成娇侍夜，玉楼宴罢醉和春。
现代文：把自己打扮得娇滴滴的在金屋中侍候皇上过夜，在玉楼上饮宴完后，醉意朦胧，春心荡漾。
English: She dressed herself up to the nines to wait for the emperor in the gold room for the night, and after the banquet on the jade floor, she was drunk and hazy, with a spring in her step.

古文：姊妹弟兄皆列土，可怜光彩生门户。
现代文：姊妹弟兄都被分封得到土地，浩荡的皇恩给杨氏家族增添了无限的光彩。
English: All the brothers and sisters were assigned land, and the immense grace of the emperor added infinite glory to the Yang family.

古文：遂令天下父母心，不重生男重生女。
现代文：于是便让天下父母的心，不重视生男而重视生女儿。
English: As a result, the hearts of parents around the world began to place less importance on the birth of a son and more on the birth of a daughter.

古文：骊宫高处入青云，仙乐风飘处处闻。
现代文：骊山上的宫殿高耸入云。风吹着仙境般的音乐到处都能听得见。
English: The palace on Lushan Mountain soars into the sky, and the wind blowing fairyland music can be heard everywhere.

古文：缓歌慢舞凝丝竹，尽日君王看不足。
现代文：舒缓的歌唱，缓慢的舞蹈和乐器配合得美妙和谐，从早到晚的歌舞皇上仍然看不够。
English: The soothing singing, slow dancing and musical instruments are in perfect harmony, and the emperor still can't get enough of the singing and dancing from morning to night.

古文：渔阳鞞鼓动地来，惊破《霓裳羽衣曲》。
现代文：渔阳地方的鞞鼓声惊天动地的传了过来，震惊打乱了《霓裳羽衣曲》的歌舞。
English: The thunderous sound of gongs and drums from the Yuyang region came from far and wide, shocking and disrupting the singing and dancing of the "Cloak and Feather Dance."

古文：九重城阙烟尘生，千乘万骑西南行。
现代文：京城和皇宫烟尘滚滚，皇帝只好带着千军万马向西南逃奔。
English: The capital and the imperial palace were covered in smoke and dust, and the emperor had no choice but to flee to the southwest with thousands of troops.

古文：翠华摇摇行复止，西出都门百余里。
现代文：车盖和旌旗乱纷纷的晃动着，走一阵停一阵。出了京城的门向西走了一百多里。
English: The cover of the car and the chequered flag were waving wildly, and we stopped and started walking. We left the gates of the capital and walked more than a hundred miles to the west.

古文：六军不发无奈何，宛转蛾眉马前死。
现代文：御林军停住不走，皇上无可奈何，那绝世的美女只好痛苦地死在了马前。
English: The imperial forest troops could not be stopped, and the emperor had no choice but to let the beautiful woman die in front of the horse.

古文：花钿委地无人收，翠翘金雀玉搔头。君王掩面救不得，回看血泪相和流。
现代文：带花的钿盒落到了地上也没人去收拾，还有翠翘、金省、玉搔头也落到地上，皇上用袖子捂着脸没法搭救，回头看到这种惨状，不禁血泪交流。
English: The crockery box with flowers fell to the ground and no one went to pick it up, and the jade, gold, and jade bowls also fell to the ground. The emperor covered his face with his sleeves and could not be saved. When he looked back and saw this tragic situation, he could not help but exchange blood and tears.

古文：黄埃散漫风萧索，云栈萦回登剑阁。峨眉山下少行人，旌旗无光日色薄。
现代文：黄土飞扬秋风萧瑟，大队人马走过曲折险峻的栈道登上了剑阁，峨眉山下行人稀少，旌旗也显得没有光彩，太阳光也很暗淡。
English: The loess is flying, the autumn wind is gloomy, a large group of people have walked through the twists and turns of the steep embankment to reach Jiange, there are few pedestrians under Mount Emei, the national flag also appears to be dull, and the sunlight is also dim.

古文：蜀江水碧蜀山青，圣主朝朝暮暮情，行宫见月伤心色，夜雨闻铃肠断声。
现代文：四川的江水一片碧绿，四川的山峦一片青翠，这就像圣明的皇上朝朝暮暮想念贵妃的心情。在行宫中看到月亮也感到是令人伤心的颜色。
English: The rivers of Sichuan are green and the mountains of Sichuan are green. This is just like the mood of the emperor of Shengming who missed his queen in the morning and evening. Seeing the moon in the palace is also a sad color.

古文：天旋日转回龙驭，到此踌躇不能去。
现代文：在下雨的夜晚听到屋檐上挂的铃声也像是悲痛的哭声。天地转换，皇上回京，又经过贵妃死去的地方，不免徘徊留恋不忍离去。
English: On a rainy night, hearing the bells hanging from the eaves also sounds like a cry of grief. As the heavens and earth change, the emperor returns to Beijing, and passes by the place where Guifei died, he cannot help but linger and yearn to leave.

古文：马嵬坡下泥土中，不见玉颜空死处。
现代文：马嵬坡下的泥土里，看不到美丽的容颜了，只有贵妃死的地方还在那里。
English: In the dirt under the foothills of the foothills, you can no longer see her beautiful face. Only the place where Guifei died is still there.

古文：君臣相顾尽沾衣，东望都门信马归。
现代文：君臣互相看着，不禁泪下沾衣。向东望到了长安城门，信马由缰没精打彩地进了京城。
English: The princes and courtiers looked at each other and could not help but shed tears. Looking east, they reached the Chang'an City Gate, and the faithful horse entered the capital city with great enthusiasm.

古文：归来池苑皆依旧，太液芙蓉未央柳。芙蓉如面柳如眉，对此如何不泪垂？
现代文：回来以后，宫中的水池、园林还像原来那样，太液池里的荷花和未央宫中的柳树依然都在，看到荷花就想起贵妃的脸，看到柳叶就想起贵妃的眉，面对着这些情景怎能不使人伤心落泪？
English: After returning, the pools and gardens in the palace are still as they were before, the lotus flowers in the pond and the willow trees in the Summer Palace are still there. When you see the lotus flowers, you will think of the face of the empress dowager, and when you see the willow leaves, you will think of the eyebrows of the empress dowager. Faced with these scenes, how can people not shed tears?

古文：春风桃李花开夜，秋雨梧桐叶落时。
现代文：在春风吹柳，桃花李花盛开的夜晚，在秋雨绵绵，梧叶飘落的时候，就更加难过。
English: In the spring breeze blowing willow, peach blossoms and plum blossoms in full bloom at night, in the autumn rain, when the leaves fall, it is even more sad.

古文：西宫南苑多秋草，落叶满阶红不扫。
现代文：西宫的南内宫里长满了秋草，落下的红叶堆满了庭院，也无心打扫。
English: The south inner courtyard of the West Palace is overgrown with autumn grass, and the fallen red leaves are piled up in the courtyard, and there is no intention to clean.

古文：梨园弟子白发新，椒房阿监青娥老。
现代文：过去在梨园学艺的青年人现在都已有白头发，内宫中的女官青春容颜也都变老了。
English: The young people who used to study at Liyuan now have white hair, and the young faces of the maids of honor in the Inner Court have also become old.

古文：夕殿萤飞思悄然，孤灯挑尽未成眠。
现代文：每当黄昏时候，宫殿前萤火虫飞舞，皇上愁闷不语，一盏孤灯，灯草快烧尽了还未睡着。
English: Whenever it was dusk, fireflies danced in front of the palace, the emperor was gloomy and silent, and a lone lamp was burning out before he fell asleep.

古文：迟迟钟漏初长夜，耿耿星河欲曙天。
现代文：报时的更鼓和漏钟也仿佛慢了起来，长夜漫漫，微明的天河里星星闪闪发光，天已快亮了仍然不能入睡。
English: The timekeeper's drum and the chiming clock seem to have slowed down, the night is long, the stars are shining in the dimly lit sky, the sky is almost bright, but I still can't fall asleep.

古文：鸳鸯瓦冷霜华重，翡翠衾寒谁与共？
现代文：鸳鸯瓦冰凉，上面结了一层厚厚的霜，绣着翡翠鸟的被和谁一起盖呢？
English: The tiles are cold, there is a thick layer of frost on them, and the quilt is embroidered with an emerald bird. Who will you cover it with?

古文：悠悠生死别经年，魂魄不曾来入梦。
现代文：长长的生离死别已经过了一年多，可是贵妃的魂魄却没有来过梦中。
English: More than a year has passed since her long separation from life and death, but Guifei's soul has not come to her in a dream.

古文：临邛道士鸿都客，能以精诚致魂魄。
现代文：四川临邛有位道士来到鸿都宫门前求见，说他能凭精诚招来贵妃的灵魂。
English: In Linyi, Sichuan, a Taoist came to the front of the Hongdu Palace to ask for an audience, saying that he could win the soul of the princess with his sincerity.

古文：为感君王展转思，遂令方士殷勤觅。
现代文：因为被皇上的一往情深所感动，方士决心去寻找贵妃的在天之灵。
English: Because they were deeply moved by the emperor's love, the monks resolved to search for the spirit of the empress in the heavens.

古文：排空驭气奔如电，升天入地求之遍。
现代文：他腾云驾雾快如闪电，上天入地各处都找遍了。
English: He soared through the clouds and through the fog as fast as lightning, searching everywhere in heaven and on earth.

古文：上穷碧落下黄泉，两处茫茫皆不见。
现代文：往上找遍了青天，往下寻遍了黄泉，不论是天上地下都没见到贵妃的踪影。
English: He searched the blue sky above and the hell below, but there was no trace of Guifei in heaven or on earth.

古文：忽闻海上有仙山，山在虚无缥缈间。
现代文：忽然听说海上有座仙山，这座山隐隐约约在虚无缥渺的天地之间。
English: Suddenly, I heard that there is a fairy mountain on the sea. This mountain is vaguely between the sky and the earth.

古文：楼殿玲珑五云起，其中绰约多仙子。
现代文：山上的楼台殿阁精巧别致，五色祥云冉冉升起，那里面有很多艳丽动人的仙女。
English: The palace pavilion on the hill is exquisite and unique, the five-colored auspicious clouds are rising, and there are many beautiful and charming fairies there.

古文：中有一人名太真，雪肤花貌参差是。
现代文：其中有一个人名叫太真，雪白的皮肤和鲜花一般的容貌，跟贵妃差不多。
English: One of them was a man named Taizhen, with snow-white skin and the appearance of a flower, similar to Guifei.

古文：金阙西厢叩玉肩，转教小玉报双成。
现代文：道士来到仙山后，在黄金的门楼西边叩响了玉石的门，请开门的仙僮小玉向里面的仙女双成通报一下。
English: After the Taoist came to the Fairy Mountain, he knocked on the jade door on the west side of the golden gate tower. Please inform the fairy Shuangcheng inside the door.

古文：闻道汉家天子使，九华帐里梦魂惊。
现代文：听说是唐天子派来了使者，贵妃在精美的帐子里从梦中惊醒。
English: It is said that Tang Tianzi sent an envoy, and Guifei woke up from her dream in a beautiful tent.

古文：揽衣推枕起徘徊，珠箔银屏迤遈开。
现代文：她揽起衣裾推开枕头，激动得脚步都有些慌乱不稳，在她面前串珠的帘子和镶银的屏风一层一层都打开了。
English: She picked up the hem of her dress and pushed back the pillow, her steps were a little unsteady with excitement, and in front of her, the beaded curtains and the silver screen were opened one layer at a time.

古文：云鬓半偏新睡觉，花冠不整下堂来。
现代文：只见贵妃像云彩似的发髻偏向一边，刚刚睡醒，花冠没有整理就走下堂来迎接客人。
English: You can just see the cloud-like bangs of her hair leaning to one side. She had just woken up and walked down the hall without arranging the wreath to greet her guests.

古文：风吹仙袂飘飘举，犹似《霓裳羽衣舞》。
现代文：这时风吹动着她的衣袖高高飘起，仍然像当年跳《霓裳羽衣舞》那样。
English: At this time, the wind was blowing and her sleeves were floating high, still like when she danced "Dancing with the Feathers."

古文：玉容寂寞泪阑干，梨花一枝春带雨。
现代文：苍白的面容显得十分忧伤，脸上的泪痕横一道竖一道的，那柔弱娇美的神态就像春天里一枝带雨的梨花。
English: Her pale face looked very sad, and the tear stains on her face stood side by side. Her soft and delicate demeanor was like a pear blossom in the spring with rain.

古文：含情凝睇谢君王，一别音容两渺茫。
现代文：她含情凝视向皇上道歉说： 自从分别后，双方的音容笑貌都看不见了。
English: Gazing lovingly at the emperor, she apologized, saying, "Since we separated, we haven't been able to hear each other's voices, see each other's smiles.

古文：昭阳殿里恩爱绝，蓬莱宫中日月长。
现代文：昭阳殿里的恩爱已经断绝，蓬莱宫中的日子却没有尽头。
English: The love affair in the Shoyang Palace has been broken off, but the days in the Penglai Palace have not ended.

古文：回头下望人寰处，不见长安见尘雾。
现代文：回头下看人间世界，看不到长安只看到一片尘雾。
English: Looking back at the human world, I can't see Chang'an, only a dusty fog.

古文：空将旧物表深情，钿合金钗寄将去。
现代文：只能用原来的东西表示深深的情意，请把这钿盒金钗捎回去吧。
English: Can only use the original things to express deep feelings, please take this box of gold back.

古文：钗留一股合一扇，钗劈黄金合分钿。
现代文：金钗我留下了一股，盒子留下一半，黄金的钗分开了，盒上的镶饰也分开了。
English: I left a strand of gold, and half the box; the gold cord was broken, and the ornaments on the box were also broken.

古文：但令心似金钿坚，天上人间会相见。
现代文：只要我们的心像金钿那样坚固，无论在天上或在人间都会再相见的。 
English: As long as our hearts are as strong as gold ingots, we will meet again, whether in heaven or on earth.

古文：临别殷勤重寄词，词中有誓两心知。七月七日长生殿，夜半无人私语时： 在天愿为比翼鸟，在地愿为连理枝。 
现代文：道士临去时，贵妃又一次诚恳庄重地托他向皇上转达几句话，那就是当年七夕在长生殿里半夜时两个人共同发出的誓愿： 在天上愿意做比翼双飞的鸟儿，在地上愿意成为两棵根茎相连的大树。 
English: When the moralist was about to leave, the empress again earnestly and solemnly asked him to convey a few words to the emperor, that is, the vows that two people jointly issued at midnight on the seventh day of the year in the Eternity Hall: In the sky, I would like to be a bird with two wings, and on the ground, I would like to be a tree with two roots connected.

古文：天长地久有时尽，此恨绵绵无绝期。无双传
现代文：天地虽长久，也有完结的时候，然而唐明皇和杨贵妃的悲伤怨恨，是永远也不会有终结的啊！无双传
English: Although heaven and earth are long, there is also a time of completion, however, the sorrowful resentment of Emperor Tang Ming and Yang Guifei will never come to an end!

古文：唐王仙客者，建中中朝臣刘震之甥也。
现代文：王仙客是唐德宗建中年间朝中大臣刘震的外甥。
English: Wang Xianke was the nephew of Liu Zhen, the Minister of the Middle Kingdom during the middle years of Tang Dezongjian.

古文：初，仙客父亡，与母同归外氏。
现代文：当初仙客的父亲死了，便只好和母亲一起回到了姥姥家。
English: When Senka's father died, he had no choice but to return to his grandmother's house with his mother.

古文：震有女曰无双，小仙客数岁，皆幼稚，戏弄相狎，震之妻常戏呼仙客为王郎子。
现代文：刘震有个女儿叫无双，比仙客小几岁，二人都是孩童，所以经常在一块儿亲密地玩耍。刘震的妻子经常开玩笑地喊仙客为 王郎君 。
English: Liu Zhen has a daughter named Muxing, who is a few years younger than Xian Ke. Both are children, so they often play together closely. Liu Zhen's wife often jokingly calls Xian Ke Wang Langjun.

古文：如是者凡数岁，而震奉孀姊及抚仙客尤至。
现代文：就这样过了好几年，刘震侍奉守寡的姐姐，抚养仙客，都做得很周到。
English: In this way, after several years, Liu Zhen has served the widowed sister and raised the Immortal Guest, all done very thoughtfully.

古文：一旦，王氏姊疾，且重，召震约曰： 我一子，念之可知也，恨不见其婚室。
现代文：有一天，姐姐病了，而且很重，就把刘震叫到面前约定说： 我只有一个儿子，惦念他这是可想而知的事，遗憾的是，看不到他结婚成家了。
English: One day, when her sister was very ill, she called Liu Zhen in front of her and said, "I only have one son. It's understandable that I miss him. Unfortunately, I don't see him getting married and starting a family."

古文：无双端丽聪慧，我深念之，异日无令归他族，我以仙客为托。
现代文：无双端庄美丽，而且很聪明，我也深深地惦记着她，以后不要让她嫁到别的家族去。我就把仙客托付给你了。
English: Uniquely dignified, beautiful, and very clever, I also think about her deeply, and don't let her marry into another family in the future. I've entrusted Seiketsu to you.

古文：尔诚许我，瞑目无所恨也。 
现代文：你如果答应了我，我就没有什么遗憾，死也瞑目了。 
English: If you said yes, I would have no regrets, and I would be happy to die.

古文：震曰： 姊宜安静自颐养，无以他事自挠。 
现代文：刘震说： 姐姐应该静下心来，好好调养身体，不要用别的事扰乱自己的心绪。 
English: Liu Zhen said: My sister should calm down, take care of her body, and not disturb her mood with other things.

古文：其姊竟不痊。
现代文：不久姐姐就去世了。
English: Soon after, my sister passed away.

古文：仙客护丧，归葬襄邓。
现代文：仙客护送灵车，回襄邓安葬。
English: Immortals escorted the hearse back to Xiang Deng's burial.

古文：服阕，思念身世，孤孑如此，宜求婚娶，以广后嗣。
现代文：守丧三年后，仙客不免考虑自己的遭遇、前途。心想我老是孤身一人怎么行？应该赶快结婚，以便后代繁盛。
English: Three years after the funeral, Xian Ke couldn't help but think about his own experiences and future. He thought to himself, "How can I be alone all the time? I should get married as soon as possible so that future generations can prosper."

古文：无双长成矣，我舅氏岂以位尊官显而废旧约耶？
现代文：无双已经长大了，我舅舅难道会因为地位尊贵官职显赫而废除原来的婚约吗？
English: Now that my uncle has grown up, will my uncle cancel the original marriage contract because of his status as a dignified official?

古文：于是饰装抵京师。
现代文：于是打扮一番到了京城。
English: As a result, the best-dressed arrived in Kyoto.

古文：时震为尚书租庸使，门馆赫奕，冠盖填塞。
现代文：那时刘震已做了尚书租庸使，门庭显赫，做官的来来往往，车马堵塞了门口。
English: At that time, Liu Zhen had already become a prominent official, and officials came and went frequently, and cars and horses blocked the entrance.

古文：仙客既觐，置于学舍，弟子为伍。
现代文：仙客进见舅舅后，被安置在学馆里，与那些学子生活在一起。
English: After seeing his uncle, Xian Ke was placed in a school hall and lived with the students.

古文：舅甥之分，依然如故，但寂然不闻选取之议。
现代文：舅甥的关系，仍像当初那样好，但是关于选女婿的事舅舅却一直不提。
English: The relationship between the uncle and nephew is still as good as it was at the beginning, but the uncle has never mentioned the matter of choosing a son-in-law.

古文：又于窗隙间窥见无双，姿质明艳，若神仙中人，仙客发狂，唯恐姻亲之事不谐也。
现代文：仙客从窗缝中曾偷偷看见过无双，见她姿态容貌十分艳丽，就像是一位仙女下凡。仙客爱得发狂，唯恐婚姻的事不能成功。
English: The hermit had secretly seen a matchless young woman through the cracks of the window, and saw that her posture and appearance were very beautiful, like a fairy descending to earth. The hermit was madly in love, fearing that the marriage would not succeed.

古文：遂鬻囊橐，得钱数百万，舅氏舅母左右给使。
现代文：于是便卖掉了带来的行装，总共卖得几百万钱。
English: As a result, they sold the costumes they had brought with them, selling millions of dollars in total.

古文：达于厮养，皆厚遗之。又因复设酒馔，中门之内，皆得入之矣。
现代文：对在舅父舅母身边的随从心腹，直至于粗活的奴仆，都送了厚礼，并摆了酒席招待他们，于是中门以内，仙客都能随便出入了。
English: For the attendants and confidants around the uncle and aunt, right up to the rough-working servants, they all sent gifts and set up a banquet to invite them, so within the middle gate, the immortals can freely enter and exit.

古文：诸表同处，悉敬事之。
现代文：在和各中表亲相处时，都用恭敬的态度对待他们。
English: When they are with their second cousins, they treat them with respect.

古文：遇舅母生日，市新奇以献，雕镂犀玉，以为首饰。舅母大喜。
现代文：遇到舅母生日，就买些新奇的东西作生日贺礼，买了雕犀刻玉的工艺品，给舅母做首饰，舅母因此非常高兴。
English: When it was my aunt's birthday, I bought some novelty items as a birthday gift. I bought a carved bead craft and made jewelry for my aunt. My aunt was very happy.

古文：又旬日，仙客遣老妪，以求亲之事，闻于舅母。舅母曰： 是我所愿也，即当议其事。 
现代文：又过了十天，仙客派了一位老太太，向舅母提起了求亲的事。舅母说： 这是我的愿望，很快就会商量这件事的。 
English: Ten days later, the hermit sent an old woman to his aunt to ask for her hand in marriage. "It is my wish," said the aunt, "and we will soon discuss the matter."

古文：又数夕，有青衣告仙客曰： 娘子适以亲情事言于阿郎，阿郎云： 向前亦未许之。 
现代文：又过了几个晚上，有个婢女来告诉仙客： 你舅母刚才把求婚的事对你舅舅说了，舅舅说： 以前我并没答应过呀！ 
English: A few nights later, a servant girl came to tell the hermit: Your aunt just told your uncle about the marriage proposal, and your uncle said: I didn't say yes before!

古文：模样云云，恐是参差也。 
现代文：情形如此，恐怕事情有出入了。 
English: That being the case, I'm afraid things have come and gone.

古文：仙客闻之，心气俱丧，达旦不寐，恐舅氏之见弃也，然奉事不敢懈怠。
现代文：仙客听了这个话，心一下子全凉了，从晚到早没有睡觉，唯恐舅舅真的变了卦，侍奉舅父舅母更不敢稍有懈怠。
English: After hearing this, Xian Ke's heart suddenly became cold, and he didn't sleep from night to morning, fearing that his uncle had really changed his mind, and he didn't dare to slack off in serving his uncle and aunt.

古文：一日，震趋朝，至日初出，忽然走马入宅，汗流气促。唯言 锁却大门，锁却大门。 
现代文：一天，刘震去上朝，到太阳刚出来时，忽然骑马跑回家中，汗流满面，呼吸急促，不断说： 快锁上大门！锁上大门！ 
English: One day, Liu Zhen went to the morning, and when the sun just came out, he suddenly ran home on horseback, sweating profusely, breathing rapidly, and kept saying: Quickly lock the gate! Lock the gate!

古文：一家惶骇，不测其由。
现代文：一家人都惊慌害怕，猜不出是什么原因。
English: The whole family was panicked and scared, and we couldn't figure out why.

古文：良久乃言： 泾原兵士反，姚令言领兵入含元殿，天子出苑北门，百官奔赴行在。
现代文：过了老半天，刘震才说： 泾源的士兵造反，姚令言带着军队进了含元殿。天子从花园的北门逃出去了，百官都向皇帝去的地方。
English: After half a day, Liu Zhencai said: The soldiers of Xinyuan rebelled, and Yao Lingyan led the army into the Hanyuan Palace. Tianzi escaped from the north gate of the garden, where all the officials went to the emperor.

古文：我以妻女为念，略归部署。 
现代文：我惦记着妻子儿女，回来稍微安排一下。 
English: I thought about my wife and children and came back to make some arrangements.

古文：疾召仙客： 与我勾当家事，我嫁与尔无双。 
现代文：又赶快把仙客叫来说： 你替我安排一下家里的事，等平静以后我把无双嫁给你！ 
English: Then she quickly called her fairy godmother and said, "Arrange my affairs at home for me, and when everything is calm, I will marry you!"

古文：仙客闻命，惊喜拜谢。
现代文：仙客听到吩咐，又惊又喜，拜谢舅舅。
English: When Xianke heard the order, he was both surprised and pleased. He thanked his uncle.

古文：乃装金银罗锦二十驮，谓仙客曰： 汝易衣服，押领此物，出开远门，觅一深隙店安下；我与汝舅母及无双，出启夏门，绕城续至。 
现代文：于是刘震装满金银锦缎二十驮，对仙客说： 你换换衣服，押着这些东西，从开远门出去，找一个深巷里的旅店安排住下。我与你舅母和无双从启夏门出去，绕城随后赶到。 
English: So Liu Zhen filled twenty bags of gold and silver brocade and said to Xian Ke: You change your clothes, hold these things, go out from the far door, find an inn in a deep alley and arrange to stay. I go out with your aunt and no match from the summer gate, go around the city and then arrive.

古文：仙客依所教，至日落，城外店中待久不至。
现代文：仙客依照吩咐行动。到太阳落地，在城外店里等了好久，舅舅他们也没到。
English: When the sun set, they waited for a long time in the store outside the city, but their uncle did not arrive.

古文：城门自午后扃锁，南望目断。
现代文：城门从午后就上了锁，向南极力远望，望到什么也看不见了，也没发现舅父一家。
English: The city gates had been locked since the afternoon, and I looked as far as I could to the south, but I couldn't see anything, and I couldn't find my uncle's family.

古文：遂乘骢，秉烛绕城，至启夏门，门亦锁。
现代文：于是骑上青骢马，拿着蜡烛，绕城寻找。到了启夏门，城门也锁着。
English: So he rode on a young horse, took a candle, and searched around the city. When he reached the summer gate, the gate was also locked.

古文：守门者不一，持白棓，或立或坐。
现代文：守门的和平时不同，他们拿着白木棒，有的站着，有的坐着。
English: The gatekeepers are different from usual. They are holding white wooden sticks, some are standing, some are sitting.

古文：仙客下马徐问曰： 城中有何事如此？ 
现代文：仙客下马，慢慢问道： 城里到底出了什么事情？
English: Senka dismounted and slowly asked: What exactly happened in the city?

古文：又问 今日有何人出此？ 
现代文：今天有什么人从这里出城了？ 
English: Has anyone from here left town today?

古文：门者曰： 朱太尉已作天子。
现代文：守城门的人说： 朱太尉已做了皇帝。
English: The person guarding the gate said, "Lieutenant Zhu has become emperor.

古文：午后有一人重戴，领妇人四五辈，欲出此门。街中人皆识，云是租庸使刘尚书。门司不敢放出。
现代文：午后有一个人带了很多东西，还带了四五个妇女，想从此门出去，街上的人都认识，说是租庸使刘尚书，守城的不敢放行。
English: In the afternoon, there was a man who brought a lot of things with him. He also brought four or five women with him. He wanted to go out through this gate. People on the street knew him. He said he was Liu Shangshu, a mercenary, and the city guards did not dare to let him go.

古文：近夜追骑至，一时驱向北去矣。 
现代文：快到很晚时追赶的骑兵到了，就押送驱赶着他们向北走了。 
English: When the pursuing cavalry arrived in the late afternoon, they drove them north.

古文：仙客失声恸哭，却归店。
现代文：仙客禁不住痛哭起来，只好又回到店中。
English: Unable to hold back tears, Senka had to go back to the store.

古文：三更向尽，城门忽开，见火炬如昼，兵士皆持兵挺刃，传呼斩斫使出城，搜城外朝官。
现代文：三更将尽的时候，城门忽然打开，只见火把照耀得如白天一样，士兵都拿着刀枪呼喊传话说： 斩斫使出城了！搜索在城外的朝廷官员！ 
English: When the Sanchong was about to end, the city gate suddenly opened, and the torches shone like the day. The soldiers all held their swords and guns and shouted a message saying: "The imperial army has left the city! Search for the imperial officials outside the city!

古文：仙客舍辎骑惊走，归襄阳，村居三年。
现代文：仙客便丢下了辎重车骑，惊慌地逃走了。他回到了襄阳，在乡下住了三年。
English: Xianke abandoned his horse-drawn carriage and fled in panic. He returned to Yangyang and lived in the countryside for three years.

古文：后知克复，京师重整，海内无事，乃入京，访舅氏消息。
现代文：后来知道叛乱平息京城光复天下太平了，于是动身进京，打探舅舅家的消息。
English: Later, when he knew that the rebellion had been quelled and the capital had been restored to peace, he set out for Beijing to find out what had happened to his uncle's family.

古文：至新昌南街，立马彷徨之际，忽有一人马前拜。熟视之，乃旧使苍头塞鸿也。
现代文：到了京城新昌街，正停下马进退不定时，忽然有一个人在马前下拜，仙客仔细一看，原来是自己过去的老仆人塞鸿。
English: When he arrived at Xinchang Street in Beijing, he was just about to stop his horse, when suddenly a man bowed down in front of the horse. When Xian Ke took a closer look, it turned out to be his old servant, Sai Hong.

古文：鸿本王家生，其舅常使得力，遂留之。
现代文：塞鸿本来是王家的家生奴，曾侍奉过仙客的舅舅，舅舅觉得他很得力，就留在自己家里使唤了。
English: Sai Hong was originally a slave of the Wang family. He had served the uncle of the Immortal Guest. The uncle thought he was very capable, so he stayed at his home to serve him.

古文：握手垂涕，仙客谓鸿曰： 阿舅舅母安否？ 
现代文：现在二人相见，不免感伤地拉着手流泪。仙客问塞鸿道： 我舅舅和舅母都平安吗？ 
English: Now, when they see each other, they can't help but tearfully hold hands. Fairy Guest asked Sai Hongdao: Are my uncle and aunt safe?

古文：鸿云： 并在兴化宅。 
现代文：塞鸿说： 他们都在兴化里的府宅中。 
English: Sai Hong said: They are all in a mansion in Xinghua.

古文：仙客喜极云： 我便过街去。 
现代文：仙客喜出望外说： 我马上就过街去看望他们。 
English: An overjoyed Senka said, "I'll go across town to see them right away."

古文：鸿曰： 某已得从良，客户有一小宅子，贩缯为业。
现代文：塞鸿说： 我已经赎身成为平民，租了一间小房子，以卖丝织品为业。
English: Sai Hong said: I have redeemed myself and become a commoner, renting a small house and selling silk products.

古文：今日已夜，郎君且就客户一宿，来早同去未晚。 
现代文：现在天快黑了，您就暂时到我那里住一宿，明早一块去您舅舅家也不晚。 
English: Now that it's getting dark, you can stay with me for the night, and we'll go to your uncle's house in the morning.

古文：遂引至所居，饮馔甚备。
现代文：塞鸿把仙客领到自己住的地方，准备了丰盛的饭菜。
English: Sai Hong led the hermit to his place of residence and prepared a sumptuous meal.

古文：至昏黑，乃闻报曰： 尚书受伪命官，与夫人皆处极刑，无双已入掖庭矣。 
现代文：到了天黑时，塞鸿才对仙客说： 您舅舅刘尚书在叛乱后接受过伪政府的官职，光复后，他和你舅母一起被朝廷处死了。无双已送进宫廷当了奴婢。 
English: It was not until nightfall that Sai Hong said to Xian Ke: Your uncle Liu Shangshu accepted an official post in the pseudo-government after the rebellion. After he was liberated, he and your aunt were executed by the imperial court. They were sent to the imperial court as slaves.

古文：仙客哀冤号绝，感动邻里。
现代文：仙客悲哀怨恨，哭得死去活来，邻居们都被感动了。
English: The fairy godmother was sad and resentful, crying herself to death. The neighbors were moved.

古文：谓鸿曰： 四海至广，举目无亲戚，未知托身之所。 
现代文：仙客对塞鸿说： 天下极大，举目无亲，我不知道自己托身的地方在哪里！ 
English: Immortal said to Sai Hong: The world is so vast, I have no relatives, I don't know where I can hide!

古文：又问曰： 旧家人谁在？ 
现代文：又问道： 原先的仆人谁还在此地？ 
English: He also asked, "Which of the former servants is still here?"

古文：鸿曰： 唯无双所使婢采苹者，今在金吾将军王遂中宅。 
现代文：塞鸣说： 只有无双使唤过的婢女采苹，现在还在金吾将军王遂中的家里。 
English: Sai Ming said, "Only the maidservant who was summoned by the matchless messenger to pick apples is still at the home of Kingu General Wang Suizhong.

古文：仙客曰： 无双固无见期，得见采苹，死亦足矣。 
现代文：仙客说： 无双看来是没有再见的机会了，能见见采苹，死也满足了。 
English: Senkaku said: It seems that there is no chance to see each other again. If I can see the apple picking, death is also satisfied.

古文：由是乃刺谒，以从侄礼见遂中，具道本末，愿纳厚价，以赎采草。 
现代文：于是递上名片，以堂侄的礼节拜见王遂中，把事情的经过从头到尾都说了，并表示愿用高价赎回采苹。
English: So he handed over his business card, greeted Wang Suizhong with the etiquette of a cousin, told him the whole story from beginning to end, and expressed his willingness to redeem the apple picking with a high price.

古文：遂中深见相知，感其事而许之。
现代文：遂中被仙客这种真挚的深情所感动，答应了他的要求。
English: Finally, he was moved by Senka's sincere affection and agreed to his request.

古文：仙客税屋，与鸿苹居。
现代文：仙客于是租了房子，和采苹、塞鸿同住。
English: As a result, Xianke rented a house and lived with Zheping and Saihong.

古文：塞鸿每言郎君年渐长，合求官职，悒悒不乐，何以遣时？
现代文：塞鸿常常对仙客说： 您年龄渐渐大了，应该谋个官职，整天郁郁不乐，怎么过日子？ 
English: Sai Hong often said to Xian Ke: You are getting old, you should seek a government post, you are depressed all day, how can you live?

古文：仙客感其言，以情恳告遂中。
现代文：对他的话，仙客有所感悟，就把自己的心里话诚恳地告诉了王遂中。
English: For his words, Xianke was impressed and sincerely told Wang Suizhong his heartfelt words.

古文：遂中荐见仙客于京兆尹李齐运，齐运以仙客前御为富平县尹，知长乐驿。
现代文：王遂中于是就带着王仙客去见京兆尹李齐运，向他推荐。李齐运就派仙客去做富平县尹，兼管长乐驿站。
English: Wang Suizhong then took Wang Xianka to see Jing Zhao Yin Li Qi Yun and recommended him. Li Qi Yun sent Xianka to do Yin in Fuping County, also in charge of the Changle Railway Station.

古文：累月，忽报有中使押领内家三十人往园陵，以备洒扫，宿长乐驿。
现代文：过了几个月，有一天，忽听报告说宫中的太监押着三十名宫女去清扫皇陵，途中要在长乐驿住宿。
English: A few months later, one day, I suddenly heard a report that the eunuch in the palace was holding thirty palace maids to clean the imperial mausoleum, and on the way they were going to stay in Changle.

古文：毡车子十乘下讫。仙客谓塞鸿曰： 我闻宫嫔选在掖庭，多是衣冠子女，我恐无双在焉，汝为我一窥，可乎？ 
现代文：等宫中的十辆毡车上的人都下来后，仙客对塞鸿说： 我听说宫女选入内廷的，多是官宦子女，恐怕无双也在里面。你为我偷偷看一看，好吗？ 
English: After waiting for the people on the ten carriage in the palace to come down, the hermit said to Sai Hong: I heard that the palace maids selected to enter the inner court were mostly the children of officials and nobles, and I'm afraid there are no matches inside. Would you sneak a look for me, please?

古文：鸿曰： 宫嫔数千，岂便及无双？ 
现代文：塞鸿说： 宫女好几千，哪里就会轮到无双！ 
English: Sai Hong said, "There are thousands of maids of honor, and there will be a matchless turn anywhere!"

古文：仙客曰： 汝但去，人事亦未可定。 
现代文：仙客说： 你只管去，人间常常有意想不到的事。 
English: The hermit said, "Go ahead. People often do unexpected things.

古文：因令塞鸿假为驿吏，烹茗于帘外，仍给钱三千。约曰： 坚守茗具，无暂舍去，忽有所睹，即疾报来。 
现代文：于是叫塞鸿假扮为驿吏，在帘外煮茶。还给了三千钱，约定说： 牢牢看守着茶具，一会儿也不要离开。稍有所见就赶快来告诉我。 
English: So he asked Sai Hong to pretend to be a tea steward and make tea outside the curtain. He also gave him three thousand yuan and agreed to say, "Keep a close eye on the tea set and don't leave it for a moment. If you see anything, come and tell me quickly."

古文：塞鸿唯唯而去。
现代文：塞鸿连声答应着去了。
English: Sai Hong Lianxiang agreed to go.

古文：宫人悉在帘下，不可得见之，但夜语喧哗而已。
现代文：宫女全在帘子里面，不能看到她们，晚上只听见嘈杂的说话声音罢了。
English: The ladies of the court were all inside the curtain, so they could not be seen, and in the evening they could only be heard talking noisily.

古文：至夜深，群动皆息，塞鸿涤器构火，不敢辄寐，忽闻帘下语曰： 塞鸿塞鸿，汝争得知我在此耶？
现代文：到了深夜，各种活动都停了，塞鸿洗刷器具，添柴续火，不敢去睡。忽然听到帘子里说： 塞鸿，塞鸿！你怎么知道我在这里呢？
English: In the middle of the night, all kinds of activities have stopped. Sai Hong washes the utensils, adds wood to the fire, and does not dare to go to sleep. Suddenly, he heard from the curtain: Sai Hong, Sai Hong! How did you know I was here?

古文：郎健否？ 
现代文：郎君身体健康吗？ 
English: Is your husband in good health?

古文：言讫呜咽。
现代文：说完了低声哭起来。
English: She finished speaking and began to cry in a low voice.

古文：塞鸿曰： 郎君见知此驿，今日疑娘子在此，令塞鸿问候。 
现代文：塞鸿说： 郎君现在主管这个驿站，今天疑心娘子会在此处，所以叫我来问候。 
English: Sai Hong said, "Rong Jun is in charge of this station now, so I doubted that my daughter would be here today, so I called to say hello.

古文：又曰： 我不久语，明日我去后，汝于东北舍阁子中紫褥下，取书送郎君。 
现代文：无双又说： 不能多说话，明天我离开后，你到东北方阁子中的紫色褥子底下取出书信送给郎君。 
English: Muxun also said, "I can't talk too much. After I leave tomorrow, go to the northeastern pavilion and take out a letter from under the purple curtain to give it to my husband."

古文：言讫便去。
现代文：说完就离开了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：忽闻帘下极闹，云： 内家中恶，中使索汤药甚急。 
现代文：忽然听到帘子里面很吵闹，说是有宫女得了急病，太监要汤药要得很急。
English: Suddenly, I heard a lot of noise inside the curtain, saying that there was a lady-in-waiting who had suddenly fallen ill, and that the eunuch was in a hurry to get the soup medicine.

古文：乃无双也。
现代文：原来说话的就是无双。
English: Originally, there was no one to talk to.

古文：塞鸿疾告仙客，仙客惊曰： 我何得一见？ 
现代文：塞鸿急忙把情况告诉了仙客，仙客吃惊的说： 我怎样才能见她一面呢？ 
English: Sai Hong hurriedly told the situation to the hermit, and the hermit said in surprise, "How can I see her face?

古文：塞鸿曰： 今方修渭桥，郎君可假作理桥官，车子过桥时，近车子立，无双若认得，必开帘子，当得瞥见耳。 
现代文：塞鸿说： 现在正修渭河桥，郎君可以假充理桥官，车子过桥时，你靠近车子站着，无双如果认出你来，一定会掀开车帘，这样就能见到她了。 
English: Sai Hong said, "The Lugu River Bridge is currently under construction. My husband can pretend to be a bridge official. When the car is crossing the bridge, you should stand close to the car. If no one recognizes you, they will definitely open the curtains so that they can see her.

古文：仙客如其言，至第三车子，果开帘子，窥见，真无双也。
现代文：仙客按照他的话办了。等到第三辆车经过时，果然掀开了帘子，仙客往里一看，果真是无双。
English: The hermit did as he said. When the third car passed by, he opened the curtain, and when he looked inside, there was no one like him.

古文：仙客悲感怨慕，不胜其情。
现代文：仙客伤感怨恨渴慕，简直承受不了这种复杂的心情。
English: Sad, resentful and longing, the hermit could hardly bear this complex mood.

古文：塞鸿于阁子中褥下得书，送仙客。
现代文：宫女们离开驿站后，塞鸿在阁子中的褥子下面找到了书信，送给了仙客。
English: After the palace maids left the post station, Sai Hong found a letter under the braid in the loft and gave it to the hermit.

古文：花笺五幅，皆无双真迹，词理哀切，叙述周尽。
现代文：是五张花笺，上面都是无双亲手写的字，词句十分悲哀恳切，叙述详尽周到。
English: It was a five-sheet card, on which were handwritten words, the words were very sad and earnest, and the description was detailed and thoughtful.

古文：仙客览之，茹恨涕下，自此永诀矣。
现代文：仙客看后，只能含恨落泪，觉得从此以后再也不会见到无双了。
English: After seeing it, Xianke could only shed tears of hatred, feeling that she would never see another match from then on.

古文：其书后云： 常见敕使说，富平县古押衙，人间有心人，今能求之否？ 
现代文：那封信结尾处说： 常听见皇帝的使者说，富平县有位姓古的押衙，是位愿意为人排忧解难的人，现在你能去求求他吗？ 
English: At the end of the letter, it said: I have often heard the emperor's emissary say that there is a person named Gu in Fuping County who is willing to solve people's problems. Now, can you go and ask him?

古文：仙客遂申府。请解驿务，归本官。
现代文：仙客便向府里提出申请，请求解除驿务，回去做原官。
English: Senka then filed an application with the prefectural government, requesting to be relieved of his duties and return to his former position.

古文：遂寻访古押衙，则居于村墅。
现代文：批准后，便去寻访古押衙。打听后得知，古先生原来住在乡下简陋的房子里。
English: After approval, he went to look for Guo Oshuan. After inquiring, he learned that Mr. Gu used to live in a humble house in the countryside.

古文：仙客造谒，见古生。
现代文：仙客去拜访，见到了古先生。
English: The hermit went to visit and met Mr. Gu.

古文：生所愿，必力致之，缯彩宝玉之赠，不可胜纪。
现代文：以后凡是古先生所希望的，仙客一定努力办到，赠送给古先生的各种颜色的丝织品和珍宝玉石不计其数。
English: In the future, wherever Mr. Gu wishes, Xiake will work hard to make it happen. There are countless silk fabrics and precious jade stones of various colors presented to Mr. Gu.

古文：一年未开口。
现代文：这样过了一年，仙客并未开口提什么要求。
English: After a year of this, Senka did not ask for anything.

古文：秩满，闲居于县，古生忽来，谓仙客曰： 洪一武夫，年且老，何所用？
现代文：任满后，仙客闲住在县里，古先生忽然来了，对仙客说： 我古洪是一介武夫，人也已经老了，还有什么用呢？
English: After the end of his term of office, Xian Ke idly lived in the county. Mr. Gu suddenly came and said to Xian Ke: I Gu Hong is a warrior, and I am already old. What else is there to do?

古文：郎君于某竭分，察郎君之意，将有求于老夫。
现代文：郎君对我竭尽情谊，我观察郎君的用意，好像有什么事要求我办。
English: My husband is very affectionate towards me, and I observe his intentions, as if he were asking me to do something.

古文：老夫乃一片有心人也，感郎君之深恩，愿粉身以答效。 
现代文：我倒是有一片急人之难的心啊！很感激郎君的大恩，愿意粉身碎骨来报答！ 
English: I do have a desperate heart! I'm very grateful for my husband's great kindness, and I'm willing to break my bones to repay him!

古文：仙客泣拜，以实告古生。
现代文：仙客哭着下拜，把实情告诉了古先生。
English: Crying and bowing, Xianke told Mr. Gu the truth.

古文：古生仰天，以手拍脑数四曰： 此事大不易，然与郎君试求，不可朝夕便望。 
现代文：古先生仰望天空，用手再三地拍脑袋，说： 这事太不容易办了，可是还是要替郎君试一试，但不能指望很快成功。 
English: Mr. Gu looked up at the sky, patted his head repeatedly with his hand, and said, "This is too difficult to do, but I still want to try for my husband, but I can't expect to succeed soon.

古文：仙客拜曰： 但生前得见，岂敢以迟晚为限耶？ 
现代文：仙客拜谢说： 只要生前能见到无双就行，哪敢限定时间的早晚呢？ 
English: As long as you can see the matchless before you die, how dare you set a time limit?

古文：半岁无消息。
现代文：此后半年没有消息。
English: After that there was no news for half a year.

古文：一日扣门，乃古生送书，书云： 茅山使者回，且来此。 
现代文：有一天，有人敲门，原来是古先生送了信来。信上说： 茅山使者回来了，你暂且来我这里一趟。 
English: One day, someone knocked on the door, and it turned out to be Mr. Gu who had sent a letter. The letter said: The messenger from Mao Shan has returned, please come to my house for a while.

古文：仙客奔马去，见古生，生乃无一言。又启使者，复云： 杀却也，且吃茶。 
现代文：仙客骑上马就跑去见古先生。古先生竟一句话不说，仙客又问使者，回答说： 已经杀掉了，暂且喝茶吧。 
English: Senka got on his horse and ran to see Mr. Gu. Mr. Gu didn't say a word. Senka asked the messenger again and replied, "I've already killed him, let's drink tea for a while."

古文：夜深，谓仙客曰： 宅中有女家人识无双否？ 
现代文：夜深的时候，古先生对仙客说： 你家里有认识无双的女仆吗？ 
English: In the middle of the night, Mr. Gu said to Xian Que, "Do you have a maid at home who knows no one?

古文：仙客以采苹对，仙客立取而至。
现代文：仙客说采苹认识无双，而且马上把采苹带了过来。
English: Senkaku said that he knew no one else who picked apples, and he immediately brought the apple picker with him.

古文：古生端相，且笑且喜云： 借留三五日，郎君且归。 
现代文：古先生仔细看了看，一边笑一边高兴地说： 借她留住三五天，郎君暂且回去吧。 
English: Mr. Gu took a closer look, smiled and said happily: Let her stay for three or five days, and let my husband go back for the time being.

古文：后累日，忽传说曰： 有高品过，处置园陵宫人。
现代文：过了几天以后，忽然传来消息说，有位大官经过这里，去处置陵园中的一名宫女。
English: A few days later, news suddenly came that a high-ranking official had passed through here to deal with a concubine in the cemetery.

古文：仙客心甚异之，令塞鸿探所杀者，乃无双也。
现代文：仙客心中觉得很奇怪，让塞鸿去打听被杀的人是谁，原来竟是无双！
English: Xian Ge thought it was very strange to ask Sai Hong to find out who the person who was killed was. It turned out to be a match!

古文：仙客号哭，乃叹曰： 本望古生，今死矣，为之奈何？ 
现代文：仙客号啕大哭，叹息说： 本来寄希望于古先生，现在已经死了，我还能有什么办法呢？ 
English: The hermit burst into tears and said with a sigh, "I had pinned my hopes on Mr. Gu, but now he is dead. What else can I do?

古文：流涕歔欷，不能自已。
现代文：等开门一看，原来是古先生。
English: When I opened the door, it turned out to be Mr. Gu.

古文：是夕更深，闻叩门甚急，及开门，乃古生也，领一篼子入，谓仙客曰： 此无双也，今死矣，心头微暖，后日当活。微灌汤药，切须静密。 
现代文：只见他领着一乘软轿进来，对仙客说： 这就是无双，现在死了，不过心窝微温，后天会活过来。给她灌些汤药，千万要安静保密。 
English: I only saw him lead a limousine in and say to Senka, "This is no match. She is dead now, but her heart is slightly warm, and she will come back to life the day after tomorrow. Fill her with some soup medicine, and be sure to keep it quiet and confidential."

古文：言讫，仙客抱入阁子中，独守之。
现代文：说完话，仙客就把无双抱进了阁子里，一个人伴着她。
English: After he finished speaking, the fairy godmother took the matchless toddler into the attic, accompanied by a man.

古文：至明，遍体有暖气。见仙客，哭一声遂绝，救疗至夜方愈。
现代文：到了第二天早晨，无双遍身都有了热气，睁眼看见了仙客，哭了一声，就昏死过去，抢救治疗到晚上才缓过来。
English: In the morning of the next day, Muxing had hot air all over his body. He opened his eyes and saw Xianke. He cried and passed out. The rescue treatment was delayed until the evening.

古文：古生又曰： 暂借塞鸿，于舍后掘一坑。 
现代文：古先生又说： 暂时借用一下塞鸿，到房后挖个坑。 
English: Mr. Gu also said, "Let's borrow Saihong for a while and dig a pit after arriving at the house."

古文：坑稍深，抽刀断塞鸿头于坑中。
现代文：坑挖得较深的时候，古先生抽出刀来，把塞鸿的头砍落到坑里。
English: When the pit was dug deeper, Mr. Gu pulled out a knife and cut off Sai Hong's head into the pit.

古文：仙客惊怕。
现代文：仙客又吃惊又害怕。
English: The hermit was surprised and afraid.

古文：古生曰： 郎君莫怕，今日报郎君恩足矣。
现代文：古先生说： 郎君不要怕，今天我已经报答了郎君的恩情。
English: Mr. Gu said, "Don't be afraid, son-in-law, today I have repaid your kindness.

古文：比闻茅山道士有药术，其药服之者立死，三日却活。
现代文：前些日子我听说茅山道士有一种药，那种药吃下去，人会立刻死去，三天后却会活过来，我派人专程去要了一丸。
English: A few days ago, I heard that there is a medicine from the Taoist monks of Mao Shan. If you eat that medicine, you will die immediately, but you will come back to life after three days. I sent someone to get a pill.

古文：某使人专求得一丸，昨令采苹假作中使，以无双逆党，赐此药令自尽。
现代文：昨天让采苹假扮宦官，说因为无双是属于叛逆一伙的人，赐给她这种药命她自尽。
English: Yesterday, he had Zhaoping pretend to be a eunuch, saying that because Muxing belonged to a rebellious group of people, he gave her this medicine and ordered her to commit suicide.

古文：至陵下，托以亲故，百缣赎其尸。
现代文：尸体送到墓地时，我又假托是她的亲朋故旧，用百匹绸缎赎出了她的尸体。
English: When the body was sent to the cemetery, I pretended to be her relatives and friends, and bought her body with a silk purse.

古文：凡道路邮传，皆厚赂矣，必免漏泄。
现代文：凡是路上的馆驿，我都送了厚礼，一定不会泄漏。
English: Whenever there is a gift on the road, I have sent a gift, and it will not leak.

古文：茅山使者及舁篼人，在野外处置讫。
现代文：茅山使者和抬软轿的人，在野外就把他们处置光了。
English: Mao Shan envoys and people carrying soft sedans, they disposed of them in the field.

古文：老夫为郎君，亦自刎。
现代文：我为了郎君，也要自杀。
English: I'd kill myself for my son-in-law.

古文：君不得更居此，门外有檐子一十人，马五匹，绢二百匹，五更挈无双便发，变姓名浪迹以避祸。 
现代文：郎君不能再住在此地，门外有轿夫十人，马五匹，绢二百匹，五更天时，你就带着无双出发，然后就改名换姓，飘泊远方去避祸吧！ 
English: Your husband can no longer live here. There are ten carriages, five horses, and two hundred mules outside the door. When you are five days old, you will set out with no match, and then change your name and move far away to avoid trouble!

古文：言讫，举刀，仙客救之，头已落矣，遂并尸盖覆讫。
现代文：说完就举起了刀，仙客急忙去阻挡，但古先生人头已经落地。
English: Having said this, he raised his sword. The hermit rushed to stop him, but Mr. Gu's head had already fallen to the ground.

古文：未明发，历四蜀下峡，寓居于渚宫。
现代文：于是把古先生的头与身子合到一起埋葬了。埋完后，趁天没亮就出发了。历经四川，三峡，最后寄居于江陵的渚宫。
English: So he buried Mr. Gu's head and body together. After the burial, he left before dawn. He traveled through Sichuan, the Three Gorges, and finally stayed at the Nagisa Palace in Gangneung.

古文：悄不闻京兆之耗，乃挈家归襄邓别业，与无双偕老矣，男女成群。
现代文：后来一直也没听到京城有什么不好的消息，于是就带着家眷回到了襄邓别墅。仙客与无双终于白头偕老，子女成群。啊！
English: Later, I never heard any bad news from Beijing, so I took my family back to the Xiangtang Villa. At last, the Immortal and the Unmatched have grown old, and my children are in droves. Ah!

古文：噫！人生之契阔会合多矣，罕有若斯之比，常谓古今所无。
现代文：人生的离散聚合之事多得很，却很少有可与这件事相比的，常说这是古今都没有的事。
English: There are many instances of the discrete aggregation of life, but few that can be compared to this event, which is often said to be unprecedented.

古文：无双遭乱世藉没，而仙客之志，死而不夺，卒遇古生之奇法取之，冤死者十余人。
现代文：无双生逢乱世，财产与人都被没收入了官府，而仙客的志向，至死不改变，终于遇到古先生，用奇特的方法救回了无双。
English: In a chaotic world, no one is born without a pair. The government confiscates everyone's property and people, but the aspiration of the Immortal, which does not change until death, finally meets Mr. Gu, who uses a strange method to save the matchless.

古文：艰难走窜后，得归故乡，为夫妇五十年。
现代文：为了成全这件事屈死的人有十多个，艰难逃窜，最后得以回到故乡，做为夫妇一起生活了五十年，真是天下少有的奇事啊。
English: In order to accomplish this, there are more than ten people who succumbed to death, fled with difficulty, and finally were able to return to their hometown, living together as a couple for fifty years. It is truly a rare miracle in the world.

