古文：子墨子曰：方今之时，复古之民始生，未有正长之时，盖其语曰，天下之人异义，是以一人一义，十人十义，百人百义。
现代文：墨子说：从现在回头考察古代人类刚刚诞生，还没有行政长官的时候，他们的说法是： 天下各人的意见不一样。 所以一人有一种意见，十人有十种意见，百人有百种意见。
English: Mozi said: From now on, when we look back at the time when ancient humans were just born and there was no chief executive, they said: Everyone's opinion is different, so one person has one opinion, ten people have ten opinions, and a hundred people have a hundred opinions.

古文：其人数兹众，其所谓义者亦兹众。是以人是其义，而非人之义，故相交非也。
现代文：人数越多，意见也就越多。所以每人都认为自己的意见对，而认为别人的意见错，因而相互攻击。
English: The more people there are, the more opinions there are, so everyone thinks their opinion is right and everyone else's is wrong, so they attack each other.

古文：内之父子兄弟作怨雠，皆有离散之心，不能相和合。
现代文：在家内父子兄弟相互怨恨，都有离散之心，不能和睦相处。
English: In the family, the father, son and brother hate each other, have a heart of separation, and cannot live in harmony.

古文：至乎舍余力，不以相劳；隐匿良道，不以相教；腐朽余财，不以相分。天下之乱也，至如禽兽然。无君臣上下长幼之节、父子兄弟之礼，是以天下乱焉。
现代文：以致有余力的不愿意帮助别人；把好的道理隐藏起来，不愿意指教别人；让多余的财物腐烂，也不愿意分给别人，因此天下混乱，如同禽兽一般，没有君臣上下长幼的区别，没有父子兄弟之间的礼节，因此天下大乱。
English: To such an extent that those who have extra strength are unwilling to help others; they hide the good principles and are unwilling to teach others; they let the extra wealth rot and are unwilling to share it with others. As a result, the world is in chaos, just like animals. There is no distinction between the eldest and the youngest among princes and ministers, and there is no etiquette between father and son, so the world is in chaos.

古文：明乎民之无正长以一同天下之义，而天下乱也，是故选择天下贤良、圣知、辩慧之人，立以为天子，使从事乎一同天下之义。
现代文：明白了没有行政长官来统一天下的意见，天下就会大乱，所以人们就选择天下贤良、聪明而口才好的人，推举他立为天子，使他从事于统一天下的意见。
English: It was understood that without a chief executive to unify the opinions of the world, the world would be in chaos. Therefore, people chose a wise, intelligent and eloquent person, elected him as the son of heaven, and made him engage in unifying the opinions of the world.

古文：天子既以立矣，以为唯其耳目之请，不能独一同天下之义，是故选择天下赞阅贤良、圣知、辩慧之人，置以为三公，与从事乎一同天下之义。
现代文：天子已立，认为仅仅依靠自己耳闻目见的情况，不能独自统一天下的意见，所以又选择考察天下贤良、聪明而口才好的人，推举他为三公，参与从事统一天下的意见。
English: The Son of Heaven has been established, and he believes that he cannot unify the opinions of the world solely by relying on what he has heard and seen. Therefore, he chose to investigate the wise, intelligent and eloquent people in the world, and elected him as the Three Kings to participate in unifying the opinions of the world.

古文：天子三公既巳立矣，以为天下博大，山林远土之民，不可得而一也。是故靡分天下，设以为万诸侯国君，使从事乎一同其国之义。
现代文：天子、三公已经立定了，又因天下地域太广，远方山野的百姓，不可能统一，所以划分天下，设立了数以万计的诸侯国君，让他们从事于统一他们各国的意见。
English: The Son of Heaven and the Three Sovereigns have already been established, and because the world is too vast and the people of the distant mountains and fields cannot be unified, they divided the world and set up tens of thousands of princes and sovereigns to let them engage in the unification of the opinions of their countries.

古文：国君既已立矣，又以为唯其耳目之请，不能一同其国之义，是故择其国之贤者，置以为左右将军大夫，以至乎乡里之长，与从事乎一同其国之义。
现代文：国君既已立定了，又因但靠他一人的耳目所及，尚不能统一一国的意见，所以又在他们国内选择一些贤人，立为国君左右的将军、大夫，以及远至乡里之长，让他们参加从事统一国内的意见。
English: Since the sovereign has already been established, but because it is not yet possible to unify the opinions of a country by relying on his ears and eyes alone, they also select some wise men in their country and appoint them as generals, doctors, and even village chiefs around the sovereign, so that they can participate in the unification of domestic opinions.

古文：天子、诸侯之君、民之正长，既已定矣，天子为发政施教曰： 凡闻见善者，必以告其上；闻见不善者，亦必以告其上。
现代文：天子、诸侯国君、百姓的行政长官既已立定，天子就发布政令，说： 凡听到或看到善，必须报告给上面；凡听到或看到不善，也必须报告给上面。
English: As soon as the Son of Heaven, the sovereign of the realm, and the administrator of the people had been established, the Son of Heaven issued a decree, saying, "Whoever hears or sees good must report it to the higher authorities; whoever hears or sees evil must also report it to the higher authorities.

古文：上之所是，必亦是之；上之所非，必亦非之。
现代文：上面认为是对的，必须也认为对；上面认为是错的，也必须认为错。
English: If you think the above is right, you must also think it is right; if you think it is wrong, you must also think it is wrong.

古文：己有善，傍荐之；上有过，规谏之。
现代文：自己有好的计谋，就广泛地献给上面；上面有过失，就加以规谏。
English: If you have a good strategy, you should dedicate it to the top; if the top is at fault, you should control it.

古文：尚同义其上，而毋有下比之心。
现代文：与上面意见一致，而不要有与下面勾结的私心。
English: Agree with the above, but do not have the selfishness to collude with the below.

古文：上得则赏之，万民闻则誉之。
现代文：这样，上面得知就会赏赐他，万民听见了就会赞美他。
English: Then the princes will hear, and reward him; the people also will hear, and praise him.

古文：意若闻见善，不以告其上；闻见不善，亦不以告其上。
现代文：假如听到或看到善，而不报告给上面；凡听到或看到不善，也不报告给上面。
English: If you hear or see anything good, do not report it; if you hear or see anything bad, do not report it.

古文：上之所是不能是，上之所非不能非。
现代文：上面认为对的，不肯说对，上面认为错的，不肯说错。
English: Those who think the above is right are not willing to say it is right, and those who think the above is wrong are not willing to say it is wrong.

古文：己有善，不能傍荐之；上有过，不能规谏之。
现代文：自己有好的计谋，不能广泛地献给上面；上面有过失，也不能予以规谏。
English: If you have a good plan, you can't give it to the higher-ups; if the higher-ups are at fault, you can't discipline them.

古文：下比而非其上者，上得则诛罚之，万民闻则非毁之。 
现代文：与下面勾结而非毁上面。凡此等人，上面得知就要诛罚他，万民听见了就要非议他。 
English: He that confirmeth with the lower is not for the destruction of the higher: but whoso confirmeth with the higher shall be punished: but he that confirmeth with the people shall be praised.

古文：故古者圣王之为刑政赏誉也，甚明察以审信。
现代文：所以古时圣王制定刑法赏誉，都非常明察、可靠。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, when the holy kings enacted criminal laws, they were very clear-sighted and reliable.

古文：是以举天下之人，皆欲得上之赏誉，而畏上之毁罚。
现代文：因此凡是天下的百姓，都希望得到上面的赏赐赞扬，而害怕上面的非毁与惩罚。
English: Therefore, all the people in the world hope to receive rewards and praise from above, but fear destruction and punishment from above.

古文：是故里长顺天子政而一同其里之义。
现代文：所以里长顺从天子的政令，使他这一里内意见一致。
English: Therefore, the village chief obeyed the decree of the heavenly son, so that his opinion was unanimous within the village.

古文：里长既同其里之义，率其之里之万民以尚同乎乡长，曰： 凡里之万民，皆尚同乎乡长而不敢下比，乡长之所是，必亦是之；乡长之所非，必亦非之。
现代文：里内的意见一致了，又率领里内的百姓向上与乡长意见一致，说： 凡里内的百姓，都应该和乡长统一，而不敢与下面勾结。乡长认为是对的，大家都必须认为对；乡长认为错的，大家也都必须认为错。
English: The opinion within the village was unanimous, and he led the people within the village to agree with the opinion of the head of the village, saying: All the people within the village should be unified with the head of the village, and not dare to collude with below. If the head of the village thinks it is right, everyone must think it is right; if the head of the village thinks it is wrong, everyone must think it is wrong.

古文：去而不善言，学乡长之善言；去而不善行，学乡长之善行。 
现代文：去掉你们不好的话，学习乡长的好话；去掉你们不好的行为，学习乡长的好行为。 
English: Get rid of your bad words and learn the good words of the township chief; get rid of your bad behavior and learn the good behavior of the township chief.

古文：乡长固乡之贤者也，举乡人以法乡长，夫乡何说而不治哉？
现代文：乡长本是乡内的贤人。如果全乡人都能效法乡长，还能说乡内会治不好吗？
English: The township chief is a wise man in the township. If all the villagers can follow the example of the township chief, can we still say that the township will be cured?

古文：察乡长之所以治乡者，何故之以也？
现代文：考察之所以能把乡内治好，是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason why the inspection can cure the countryside?

古文：曰：唯以其能一同其乡之义，是以乡治。
现代文：回答说：只因为他能使全乡意见一致，所以乡内就治理好了。
English: He replied, "Just because he can make the whole village agree, the village will be well governed."

古文：乡长治其乡而乡既已治矣，有率其乡万民，以尚同乎国君，曰： 凡乡之万民，皆上同乎国君而不敢下比。
现代文：乡长治理他的乡，而乡内已经治理好了，又率领他乡内的万民，以上同于国君，说： 凡是乡内的万民，都应上同于国君，而不可与下面勾结。
English: The village headman governs his village, and the village has been governed well, and he also leads all the people in his village, the above is the same as the sovereign, saying: All the people in the village should be the same as the sovereign, and not collude with the below.

古文：国君之所是，必亦是之；国君之所非，必亦非之，去而不善言，学国君之善言；去而不善行，学国君之善行。 
现代文：国君认为是对的，大家也必须认为对；国君认为错的，大家也必须认为错。去掉你们不好的话，学习国君的好话；去掉你们不好的行为，学习国君的好行为。 
English: What the sovereign thinks is right, everyone must also think is right; what the sovereign thinks is wrong, everyone must also think is wrong. Eliminate your bad words, learn the sovereign's good words; eliminate your bad behavior, learn the sovereign's good behavior.

古文：国君固国之贤者也，举国人以法国君，夫国何说而不治哉？
现代文：国君本是一国之中的贤人，如果国中所有的人都能效法国君，那么还能说这一国会治不好吗？
English: The sovereign is the wise man in the country. If all the people in the country can follow the example of the sovereign, then can it be said that the country is not healthy?

古文：察国君之所以治国，而国治者，何故之以也？
现代文：考察国君所以能把国内治好，是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason why the examination of the sovereign can cure the country?

古文：曰：唯以其能一同其国之义，是以国治。
现代文：回答说： 只因为他能统一全国的意见，所以国内就治理好了。 
English: He replied: Just because he can unify the opinion of the whole country, it is better to govern the country.

古文：国君治其国而国既已治矣，有率其国之万民以尚同乎天子，曰： 凡国之万民，上同乎天子而不敢下比。
现代文：国君治理他本国，而国内已治理好了，又率领他国内的万民，以上同于天子，说： 凡是国内的万民，都应上同于天子，而不可与下面勾结。
English: The prince that reigneth in his own country, when the affairs of his own kingdom are set in order, and governeth all the people that are in it, is equal unto the Son of God, saying, All the people that are in the land shall be equal unto the Son of God: and there shall be none mightier than he.

古文：天子之所是，必亦是之；天子之所非，必亦非之。
现代文：天子认为是对的，大家也必须认为对；天子认为错的，大家也必须认为错。
English: What Heavenly Son thinks is right, everyone must also think is right; what Heavenly Son thinks is wrong, everyone must also think is wrong.

古文：去而不善言，学天子之善言；去而不善行，学天子之善行。 
现代文：去掉你们不好的话，学习天子的好话；去掉你们不好的行为，学习天子的好行为。 
English: Eliminate your bad words and learn the good words of the Son of God; eliminate your bad actions and learn the good actions of the Son of God.

古文：天子者，固天下之仁人也，举天下之万民以法天子，夫天下何说而不治哉？
现代文：天子本是天下最仁爱的人，如果全天下的万民都能效法天子，那么还能说天下会治理不好吗？
English: The Son of Heaven is the most benevolent person in the world. If all the people in the world can imitate the Son of Heaven, then can it be said that the world will be governed badly?

古文：察天子之所以治天下者，何故之以也？
现代文：考察天子所以能把天下治理好，是什么缘故呢？
English: Investigate why the Son of Heaven can govern the world well. What is the reason?

古文：曰：唯以其能一同天下之义，是以天下治。
现代文：回答说： 只因为他能统一天下的意见，所以天下就治理好了。
English: He replied, "Just because he can unify the opinions of the world, the world will be governed well."

古文：夫既尚同乎天子，而未上同乎天者，则天□将犹未止也。
现代文：已经做到向上服从天子，而还不能服从上天，那么天灾还会不止。
English: If you have obeyed the Son of Heaven to the best of your ability, but are still unable to obey God, then there will be more natural disasters.

古文：故当若天降寒热不节，雪霜雨露不时，五谷不孰，六畜不遂，疾灾戾疫，飘风苦雨，荐臻而至者，此天之降罚也，将以罚下人之不尚同乎天者也。
现代文：假如遇到气候的寒热不调，雪霜雨露降得不合时令，五谷不熟，六畜不旺，疾疫流行，暴风久雨接二连三，这就是上天降下的惩罚，用以惩诫那些不愿上同于天的世人。
English: If the weather is unseasonably cold and hot, if the snow, frost, rain, and dew fall out of season, if the grain is unripe, if the animals are not in season, if there is an epidemic of disease, and if there is a long succession of rainstorms, this is a punishment sent down from heaven to discipline those who do not want to go to heaven.

古文：故古者圣王明、天鬼之所欲，而避天、鬼之所憎，以求兴天下之利，除天下之害，是以率天下之万民，齐戒沐浴，洁为酒醴粢盛，以祭祀天、鬼。
现代文：所以古时的圣王知道天帝鬼神喜欢什么，从而能避免天帝鬼神所憎恶的东西，以求天下之害，所以率领天下的万民，斋戒沐浴，预备了洁净而丰盛的酒饭，用来祭祀天帝鬼神。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy king knew what the heavenly emperor liked, so he could avoid the things that the heavenly emperor hated in order to cause harm to the world. Therefore, he led all the people in the world, fasted and bathed, and prepared clean and plentiful food and drink to sacrifice to the heavenly emperor.

古文：其事鬼神也，酒醴粢盛，不敢不蠲洁，牺牲不敢不腯肥，珪璧币帛不敢不中度量，春秋祭祀，不敢失时几，听狱不敢不中，分财不敢不均，居处不敢怠慢。
现代文：他们对鬼神的奉祀，酒饭不敢不洁净丰盛；牺牲不敢不肥壮硕大；珪璧币帛不敢不合乎大小标准；春秋二季的祭祀，不敢错过时间；审理狱讼，不敢不公正；分配财物，不敢不均匀；待人处事不敢怠慢礼节。
English: In their worship of ghosts and gods, they do not dare to make their food and drink unclean and rich; they do not dare to make sacrifices that are not big and fat; they do not dare to use coins that are too large or too small; they do not dare to miss the time of the spring and autumn festivals; they do not dare to be unfair in the trial of prison cases; they do not dare to distribute wealth unevenly; and they do not dare to neglect the etiquette in dealing with others.

古文：曰：其为正长若此，是故上者天、鬼有厚乎其为正长也，下者万民有便利乎其为政长也。
现代文：这是说：他像这样当行政长官，在上的天帝鬼神优厚地看待他，在下的万民也便利他。
English: This is to say: He is like this when he is the chief executive, the heavenly emperors, spirits and gods above look favorably on him, and the people below also facilitate him.

古文：天、鬼之所深厚而能疆从事焉，则天、鬼之福可得也。万民之所便利而能疆从事焉，则万民之亲可得也。
现代文：天帝鬼神优厚地看待他，而他能努力办事，那么他就可以得到天帝鬼神的福了；万民便利他，而他能努力办事，那么他就可以得到万民的爱戴了。
English: Heaven and earth view him favorably, and if he can work hard, then he can get the blessing of heaven and earth; if all people facilitate him, and if he can work hard, then he can get the love of all people.

古文：其为政若此，是以谋事得，举事成，入守固，出诛胜者，何故之以也？
现代文：他以此治理政事，所以谋事得计，作事成功，守御坚固，出战胜利。这是什么缘故呢？
English: In this way, he managed the affairs of state, so he had a good plan, a successful operation, a strong defense, and a victory in the war. What is the reason for this?

古文：曰：唯以尚同为政者也。
现代文：回答说：只因为他在治理政事上能统一意见。
English: He replied: "Only because he is able to unify opinion on governance."

古文：故古者圣王之为政若此。
现代文：所以古代圣王治理政事是这样的。
English: This is probably how the ancient holy kings governed.

古文：今天下之人曰： 方今之时，天下之正长犹未废乎天下也，而天下之所以乱者，何故之以也？ 
现代文：现在天下的人说： 在今天，存在于普天之下的各种行政长官并未废除，而造成天下混乱的原因在哪里呢？ 
English: Now people all over the world say: Today, the various chief executives that exist under the whole world have not been abolished, and what is the cause of the chaos in the world?

古文：子墨子曰： 方今之时之以正长，则本与古者异矣。譬之若有苗之以五刑然。
现代文：墨子说： 现在天下的行政长官，根本就和古代不同，就好像有苗族制订五刑那样。
English: Mozi said: The chief administrators of the world today are fundamentally different from those in ancient times. It is as if the Miao people had formulated the Five Punishments.

古文：昔者圣王制为五刑以治天下，逮至有苗之制五刑，以乱天下，则此岂刑不善哉？
现代文：古代的圣王制定五刑，用来治理天下；等到有苗族制定五刑，却用来扰乱天下。这难道就是刑法不好吗？
English: The ancient holy kings formulated the Five Punishments to govern the world; when the Miao people formulated the Five Punishments, they were used to disrupt the world. Is this a bad criminal law?

古文：用刑则不善也。
现代文：是刑法使用得不好。
English: Criminal law is not being used properly.

古文：是以先王之书《吕刑》之道曰： 苗民否用练，折则刑，唯作五杀之刑，曰法。
现代文：所以先王的书《吕刑》上这样记载： 苗民不服从政令，就加之以刑。他们作了五种意在杀戮的刑罚，也叫作法。 
English: Therefore, it is recorded in the book of the former king, "Lu Ji," as follows: Miao people disobeyed government orders and were punished. They made five kinds of punishments that were intended to kill, also known as practices.

古文：则此言善用刑者以治民，不善用刑者以为五杀，则此岂刑不善哉？
现代文：这说的是善于用刑罚可以治理百姓，不善用刑罚就变成五杀了。这难道是刑法不好吗？
English: What this says is that if you are good at using punishment, you can govern the people, but if you are not good at using punishment, you will end up with five deaths. Is this not a good thing for criminal law?

古文：用刑则不善，故遂以为五杀。
现代文：是刑法使用得不好，所以就变成了五杀。
English: It is the criminal law that has not been used well, so it has turned into five murders.

古文：是以先王之书《术令》之道曰： 唯口出好兴戎。
现代文：所以先王的书《术令》记载说： 人之口，可以产生好事，也可以产生战争。 
English: Therefore, the previous king's book "Magical Decree" recorded that: A person's mouth can produce good things, but it can also produce war.

古文：则此言善用口者出好，不善用口者以为谗贼寇戎，则此岂口不善哉？
现代文：这说的就是善用口的，可以产生好事；不善用口的，就可以产生谗贼战争。这难道是口不好吗？
English: This is to say that those who are good at using their mouths can produce good things; those who are not good at using their mouths can produce wars between thieves. Is this a bad thing?

古文：用口则不善也，故遂以为谗贼寇戎。
现代文：是由于不善用口，所以就变成谗贼战争。 
English: It's because we don't use our mouths well that it has turned into a war between thieves.

古文：故古者之置正长也，将以治民也。
现代文：所以古时候设置行政长官，是用来治理百姓的。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, the chief executive was set up to govern the people.

古文：譬之若丝缕之有纪，而罔罟之有纲也，将以运役天下淫暴而一同其义也。
现代文：就好像丝线有纪、网罟有纲一样，他们是用来收服天下淫暴之徒，并使之与上面协同一致的。
English: Just as a silk thread has its discipline and a net has its outline, they are used to restrain the world's lewd and violent people and make them work in harmony with the above.

古文：是以先王之书《相年》之道曰： 夫建国设都，乃作後王君公，否用泰也。轻大夫师长，否用佚也。维辩使治天均。 
现代文：所以先王的书、老年人的话说过： 建国设都，设立天子诸侯，不是让他骄奢淫佚的；而设卿大夫师长，也不是叫他们放纵逸乐的，乃是让他们分授职责，按公平之天道治理。 
English: That is why the Book of the Ancients, the Sayings of the Ancients, said: The founding of a country and the establishment of a capital city, the establishment of the sons of heaven and princes, does not make him arrogant and lewd; and the establishment of a minister, doctor, and teacher, does not make them indulge in pleasure, but rather allows them to assign duties and govern according to the heavenly way of fairness.

古文：则此语古者上帝鬼神之建设国都立正长也，非高其爵，厚其禄，富贵佚而错之也。将以为万民兴利除害，富贵贫寡，安危治乱也。
现代文：这说的就是古时天帝鬼神建设国都，设置官长，并不是为了提高他们的爵位，增加他们的俸禄，使他过富贵淫佚的生活，而是让他给万民兴利除害，使贫者富，使民少者众，使危者安，使乱者治。
English: What this means is that in ancient times, the Heavenly Emperor and the Gods of the Heavens and the Earth built capitals and set up officials, not in order to raise their ranks, increase their salaries, and make them live a rich and lascivious life, but to make them benefit the people, eliminate harm, make the poor rich, make the people less numerous, make the dangerous safe, and make the chaotic ones rule.

古文：故古者圣王之为若此。
现代文：所以古代圣王的作为是这样的。
English: That is why the actions of the ancient holy kings were like this.

古文：今王公大人之为刑政则反此，政以为便譬，宗于父兄故旧，以为左右，置以为正长。
现代文：现在的王公大人行使政事却与此相反：将宠幸的弄臣、宗亲父兄或世交故旧，安置在左右，都置立为行政长官。
English: However, the current Wang Gongdao exercises government affairs in the opposite way: he places his favorite jester, his father's father and brother, or his old friends on the right and left, and appoints them as the chief executive.

古文：民知上置正长之非正以治民也，是以皆比周隐匿，而莫肯尚同其上。
现代文：于是百姓知道天子设立行政长官并不是为了治理百姓，所以大家都结党营私，隐瞒良道，不肯与上面意见一致。
English: As a result, the people knew that the chief executive was not established by God to govern the people, so they all formed their own parties, concealed their good deeds, and refused to agree with the opinions above.

古文：是故上下不同义。
现代文：因此，上面与下面对于事理的看法发生偏差。
English: Therefore, there is a deviation between the above and the following views on the matter.

古文：若苟上下不同义，赏誉不足以劝善，而刑罚不足以沮暴。
现代文：假如上面与下面意见不一致，那么赞赏不能勉励人向善，而刑罚也不能阻止暴行。
English: If the above does not agree with the following, then praise cannot encourage people to be good, and punishment cannot prevent violence.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：曰：上唯毋立而为政乎国家，为民正长，曰： 人可赏，吾将赏之。 
现代文：回答说：假定处在上位、管理着国家、作为百姓行政长官的人说： 这个人可以赏，我将赏他。 
English: And he said, Suppose the prince, the governor of the land, the great officer of the people, shall say, This man is worthy; I will give him a reward.

古文：若苟上下不同义，上之所赏，则众之所非。
现代文：如果上面和下面意见不一致，上面所赏的人，正是大家所非议的人，说我们众人与他相处，众人都认为他不好。
English: If the above and below do not agree, the person praised above is exactly the person everyone is criticizing, saying that we all get along with him, and everyone thinks he is not good.

古文：曰人众与处，于众得非，则是虽使得上之赏，未足以劝乎！上唯毋立而为政乎国家，为民正长，曰： 人可罚，吾将罚之。 
现代文：那么，这人即使得到上面的赏，也就不能起劝勉作用了！假定处在上位，管理着国家，作为百姓行政长官的人说： 这个人可以罚，我将要罚他。 
English: So, even if this person receives a reward from above, it will not have a persuasive effect! Suppose someone in a higher position, managing the country, as the people's administrator, says: This person can be punished, I will punish him.

古文：若苟上下不同义，上之所罚，则众之所誉，曰人众与处，于众得誉，则是虽使得上之罚，未足以沮乎！
现代文：如果上面和下面意见不一致，上面所罚的人，正是大家所赞誉的人，说我们众人与他相处，众人都赞誉他好。那么，这人即使得到惩罚，也不能阻止不善了！
English: If there is a disagreement between the above and below, and the person punished by the above is the very person praised by everyone, saying that we all get along with him and everyone praises him, then even if this person is punished, it will not stop him from doing bad things!

古文：若立而为政乎国家，为民正长，赏誉不足以劝善，而刑罚不沮暴，则是不与乡吾本言 民始生未有正长之时 同乎？
现代文：假定处在上位、管理着国家、作为百姓行政长官的人赞赏不能劝善，而刑罚又不能止暴，那不是与我前面说过的 百姓刚产生，没有长官之时 的情况一样了吗？
English: Supposing that those who are in high positions, who administer the state, and who are the chief administrators of the people, cannot commend the good, and that punishment cannot stop the violence, is that not the same as what I said before, when the people had just been born and there were no chiefs?

古文：若有正长与无正长之时同，则此非所以治民一众之道。
现代文：如果有行政长官与没有行政长官的时候一样，那么这就不是用来治理百姓、统一民众的办法。
English: If having a chief executive is the same as not having a chief executive, then this is not the way to govern the people and unify the people.

古文：故古者圣王唯而审以尚同，以为正长，是故上下情请为通。
现代文：所以古代的圣王，因为能够审慎地统一民众的意见，立为行政长官，所以上下之情就沟通了。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy king, because he was able to prudently unify the opinions of the people, was appointed as the chief executive, so the feelings from above and below were communicated.

古文：上有隐事遗利，下得而利之；下有蓄怨积害，上得而除之。
现代文：上面若有尚被隐蔽而遗置的利益，下面的人能够随时开发他，使他得到好处；下面若有蓄积的怨和害，上面也能够随时除掉他。
English: If there are hidden and neglected interests at the top, the people at the bottom can exploit them at any time and benefit them; if there are accumulated grievances and harms at the bottom, the people at the top can also get rid of them at any time.

古文：是以数千万里之外，有为善者，其室人未遍知，乡里未遍闻，天子得而赏之；数千万里之外，有为不善者，其室人未遍知，乡里未遍闻，天子得而罚之。
现代文：所以远在数千或数万里之外，如果有人做了好事，他的家人还未完全知道，他的乡人也未完全听到，天子就已知道并赏赐他；远在数千或数万里之外，如果有人做了坏事，他的家人还未完全知道，他的乡人也未完全听到，天子就已知道并惩罚了他。
English: Therefore, thousands or tens of thousands of miles away, if someone did a good deed, his family did not fully know, and his villagers did not fully hear, the Son of Heaven already knew and rewarded him; thousands or tens of thousands of miles away, if someone did a bad deed, his family did not fully know, and his villagers did not fully hear, the Son of Heaven already knew and punished him.

古文：是以举天下之人，皆恐惧振动惕栗，不敢为淫暴，曰： 天子之视听也神！ 
现代文：所以所有天下的人，十分害怕和震动战栗，不敢做淫暴的事。说： 天子的视听如神。 
English: Therefore fear and trembling seized all people everywhere, so that they did not dare to commit sexual immorality, saying, "The Son of Man is equal to God."

古文：先王之言曰： 非神也。夫唯能使人之耳目助己视听，使人之吻助己言谈，使人之心助己思虑，使人之股肱助己动作。 
现代文：先王说过这样的话： 不是神，只是能够使他人的耳目帮助自己视听；使他人的唇吻帮助自己言谈，使他人的心帮助自己思考，使他人的四肢帮助自己动作。 
English: The previous king said something like this: It is not God, but the ability to make other people's ears and eyes help them see and hear; to make other people's lips and kisses help them speak, to make other people's hearts help them think, and to make other people's limbs help them move.

古文：助之视听者众，则其所闻见者远矣；助之言谈者众，则其德音之所抚循者博矣；助之思虑者众，则其谈谋度速得矣；助之动作者众，即其举事速成矣。
现代文：帮助他视听的人多，那么他的所见所闻就广大了；帮助他言谈的人多，那么他的声音所安抚范围就广阔了；帮助他思考的人多，那么计划很快就能实行了；帮助他动作的人多，那么他所做的事情很快就能成功了。
English: The more people who help him to see and hear, the wider the range of what he can see and hear; the more people who help him to speak, the wider the range of what his voice can soothe; the more people who help him to think, the faster the plan can be implemented; the more people who help him to act, the faster he can succeed in what he does.

古文：故古者圣人之所以济事成功，垂名于后世者，无他故异物焉，曰：唯能以尚同为政者也。
现代文：所以古代的圣人能够把事情办成功、名垂后世，没有别的其他原因，只是能够以上同的原则来行使政事。
English: Therefore, there is no other reason why the sages of ancient times were able to run their affairs successfully and leave a good name for posterity, but only because they were able to carry out political affairs according to these same principles.

古文：是以先王之书《周颂》之道之曰： 载来见彼王，聿求厥章。 
现代文：所以先王的书《周颂》上曾说过： 始来见君王，寻求文章制度。 
English: Therefore, in the book of the former king, "Zhou Song," it was said: First, see the king, seek the article system.

古文：则此语古者国君诸侯之以春秋来朝聘天子之庭，受天子之严教，退而治国，政之所加，莫敢不宾。
现代文：这说的是古代的诸侯国君在每年的春秋二季，到天子的朝廷来朝聘，接受天子严厉的教令，然后回去治理他们的国家，因此政令所到之处，没有人敢不服。
English: This refers to the fact that in ancient times, princes and sovereigns went to the emperor's court in the spring and autumn every year, received the emperor's stern edict, and then returned to govern their country. Therefore, no one dared to disobey the edict wherever it came.

古文：当此之时，本无有敢纷天子之教者，《诗》曰： 我马维骆，六辔沃若，载驰载驱，周爰咨度。 
现代文：当这个时候，根本没有人敢变乱天子的教令，《诗经》上说： 我的马是黑色鬃毛的白马，六条马缰绳柔美光滑，在路上或快或慢地跑，在所到之处普遍地询访查问。 
English: At that time, no one dared to go against God's order. The Book of Songs said, "My horse is a white horse with a black mane. Its six bridles are soft and smooth. On the road, it runs fast or slow. Everywhere it goes, it makes inquiries.

古文：又曰： 我马维骐，六辔若丝，载驰载驱，周爰咨谋。 
现代文：又说： 我的马是青黑色毛片的，六条马缰绳像丝一般光滑，在路上或快或慢地跑，在所到之处普遍地询问谋划。 
English: He also said: My horse is a blue-black wool piece, six horse bridles are smooth as silk, running fast or slow on the road, and generally inquiring about the plan everywhere.

古文：即此语也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: That's what it means.

古文：古者国君诸侯之闻见善与不善也，皆驰驱以告天子。
现代文：古代的国君诸侯听见或看到好与坏的事情，都跑去报告天子。
English: The ancient kings and lords heard or saw good and bad things, and they all ran to report to the Son of Heaven.

古文：是以赏当贤，罚当暴，不杀不辜，不失有罪，则此尚同之功也。
现代文：所以赏的正好是贤人，罚的正好是暴人，不杀害无辜，也不放过有罪，这就是上同带来的功效。
English: Therefore, the reward is just for the wise, the punishment is just for the violent, the innocent is not killed, and the guilty is not spared. This is the effect brought about by Shangdong.

古文：是故子墨子曰： 今天下之王公大人士君子，请将欲富其国家，众其人民，治其刑政，定其社稷，当若尚同之不可不察，此之本也。 
现代文：所以墨子说： 现在天下的王公大人士君子，如果真想使他们的国家富有，百姓众多，刑政治理，国家安定，就不可不考察上同，因为这是为政的根本。 
English: Therefore, Mozi said: If the princes and great men and gentlemen of today's world really want to make their countries rich, have a large number of people, a criminal justice system, and a stable country, they must study Shangdong, because this is the foundation of politics.

