古文：黄帝问曰：余闻方士，或以脑髓为脏，或以肠胃为脏，或以为腑。敢谓更相反，皆自谓是，不知其道，愿闻其说。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说方士之中，有人以脑髓为脏,有人以肠胃为脏，也有的把这些都称为腑，如果向它们提出相反的意见，却又都坚持自己的看法，不知哪种理论是对的，希望你谈一谈这个问题。
English: Huang Di asked: I have heard that among the magicians, some are dirty with the brain, some are dirty with the stomach, and some call these all maggots. If you put forward the opposite opinion to them, they all insist on their own opinion. I don't know which theory is right. I hope you can talk about this issue.

古文：岐伯对曰：脑、髓、骨、脉、胆、女子胞，此六者，地气之所生也，皆藏于阴而象于地，故藏而不泻，名曰奇恒之腑。
现代文：岐伯回答说：脑、髓、骨、脉、胆、女子胞，这六种是禀承地气而生的，都能贮藏阴精，就象大地包藏万物一样，所以它们的作用是藏而不泻，叫做奇恒之腑。
English: Qibo replied, "Brain, marrow, bone, vein, gallbladder, and ovaries, these six are born from the earth, and can store yin essence, just like the earth contains all things, so their role is to hide and not to leak, called Qiheng's cocoon.

古文：夫胃、大肠、小肠、三焦、膀胱，此五者，天气之所生也，其气象天，故泻而不藏，此受五脏浊气，名曰传化之腑，此不能久留输泻者也。
现代文：胃、大肠、小肠、三焦、膀胱，这五者是禀承天气所生的，它们的作用，像天一样的健运周转，所以是泻而不藏的，它们受纳五脏的浊气，所以称为传化之腑。这是因为浊气不能久停其间，而必须及时转输和排泄的缘故。
English: The stomach, the large intestine, the small intestine, the trigeminal nerve, and the urinary bladder are the five organs that are born from the weather. Their role, like the good fortune of heaven, is not hidden. They receive the argon gas from the five internal organs, so they are called the "transmitted argon." This is because the argon gas cannot stay there for a long time, but must be transferred and excreted in time.

古文：魄门亦为五脏使，水谷不得久藏。
现代文：此外，肛门也为五脏行使输泻浊气，这样，水谷的糟粕就不会久留于体内了。
English: In addition, the anus also exerts a laxative effect on the internal organs, so that the dregs of the valley will not remain in the body for a long time.

古文：所谓五脏者，藏精气而不泻也，故满而不能实；六腑者，传化物而不藏，故实而不能满也。
现代文：所谓五脏，它的功能是贮藏精气而不向外发泻的，所以它是经常地保持精气饱满，而不是一时地得到充实。六腑，它的功能是将水谷加以传化，而不是加以贮藏，所以它有时显的充实，但却不能永远保持盛满。
English: The so-called five viscera, its function is to store the essence and not to leak it out, so it is constantly kept full of essence, rather than being temporarily filled. The six bowels, its function is to pass on the valley, rather than to store it, so it is sometimes full, but it cannot be kept full forever.

古文：所以然者，水谷入口，则胃实而肠虚；食下则肠实而胃虚。
现代文：六腑之所以出现这种情况，是因为水谷入口下行，胃被充实了，但肠中还是空虚的；食物再下行，肠充实了，胃中又空虚了，这样依次传递。
English: The reason for this is that when the entrance of the water trough goes down, the stomach is filled, but the intestine is still empty; the food goes down again, the intestine is filled, and the stomach is empty, and this is passed in turn.

古文：故曰实而不满，满而不实也。
现代文：所以说，六腑是一时的充实，而不是持续的盛满，五脏则是持续盛满而不是一时的充实。
English: Therefore, the six glands are temporarily full, but not continuously full, and the five viscera are continuously full, but not temporarily full.

古文：帝曰：气口何以独为五脏主？
现代文：黄帝问道：为什么气口脉可以独主五脏的病变呢？
English: Huangdi asked: Why is it that the trachea can dominate the lesions of the internal organs?

古文：岐伯曰：胃者水谷之海，六腑之大源也。五味入口，藏于胃，以养五脏气。
现代文：岐伯说：胃是水谷之海，为六腑的泉源，饮食五味入口，留在胃中，能充养五脏之气。
English: Qi Bo said: "The stomach is the sea of the valley, the spring of the six humors. It is the entrance of the five flavors of food. If it remains in the stomach, it can nourish the five viscera.

古文：气口亦太阴也，是以五脏六腑之气味，皆出于胃，变见于气口。
现代文：气口脉是手太阴肺经所经之处，所以五脏六腑的水谷精微，都出自胃，反应于气口脉。
English: The trachea is where the palms of the hands pass through the lungs, so the viscera are fine, all from the stomach, reacting to the trachea.

古文：故五气入鼻，藏于心肺，心肺有病，而鼻为之不利也。
现代文：而五气入鼻，藏留于心肺，所以心肺有了病变，则鼻为之不利。
English: However, the qi enters the nose and stays in the heart and lungs, so if the heart and lungs have lesions, the nose will be unfavorable.

古文：凡治病必察其上下，适其脉，观其志意，与其病也。
现代文：凡治病，必先观察其上、下的变化，诊查其脉候的虚实，查看其情志精神的状态，还要辨别其疾病情况。
English: When treating a disease, it is necessary to first observe the changes above and below, diagnose the falsity of its pulse, check the state of its emotional spirit, and also distinguish its disease condition.

古文：拘于鬼神者，不可与言至德，恶于针石者，不可与言至巧。
现代文：对那些拘守鬼神迷信观念的人，是不能与其谈论至深的医学理论的，对那些讨厌针石治疗的人，也不可能和他们讲什么医疗技巧。
English: For those who cling to superstitious notions of ghosts and spirits, it is impossible to talk to them about the deepest medical theories, and for those who hate acupuncture, it is impossible to tell them about any medical techniques.

古文：病不许治者，病必不治，治之无功矣。
现代文：有病不许治疗的人，他的病是治不好的，勉强治疗也收不到应有的功效。
English: If a person has a disease that does not allow treatment, his disease is incurable, and even if he is treated reluctantly, he will not receive the proper effect.

