古文：孙破虏吴夫人，吴主权母也。本吴人，徙钱唐，早失父母，与弟景居。
现代文：破虏将军孙坚的吴夫人，是吴主孙权的母亲，原来是吴郡人，迁居钱塘，早年父母去世，与弟吴景住在一起。
English: Mrs. Wu, the wife of the defeated general Sun Jian, was the mother of the ruler of Wu, Sun Quan. Originally from Wu County, she moved to Qiantang. Her parents died early, and she lived with her brother, Wu Jing.

古文：孙坚闻其才貌，欲娶之。
现代文：孙坚得知她才貌出众，想纳娶她。
English: When Sun Jian learned of her outstanding talent, he wanted to marry her.

古文：吴氏亲戚嫌坚轻狡，将拒焉，坚甚以惭恨。
现代文：吴家亲戚嫌弃孙坚轻佻狡诈，将要拒绝这一请求，孙坚非常惭愧怨恨。
English: The relatives of the Wu family disliked Sun Jian's flippancy and cunning, and were going to refuse this request. Sun Jian was very ashamed and resentful.

古文：夫人谓亲戚曰： 何爱一女以取祸乎？
现代文：吴夫人对亲戚们说： 为何要因爱惜一个女儿而惹来祸灾呢？
English: Mrs. Wu said to her relatives, "Why does cherishing one daughter bring disaster?

古文：如有不遇，命也。 
现代文：如果遇到的不是良人，也是命啊。 
English: If you don't meet the right person, it's your life.

古文：於是遂许为婚，生四男一女。
现代文：于是才答应为他们婚配，她和孙坚有四子一女。
English: So she agreed to marry for them. She and Sun Jian have four sons and one daughter.

古文：景常随坚征伐有功，拜骑都尉。
现代文：吴景经常跟随孙坚四处征战，建立军功，被任命为骑都尉。
English: Wu Jing often followed Sun Jian to fight everywhere, established military merit, and was appointed as a cavalry captain.

古文：袁术上景领丹杨太守，讨故太守周昕，遂据其郡。
现代文：袁术上表请任吴景兼任丹杨太守，征讨原太守周昕，于是占据丹杨郡。
English: On the table, Yuan Shou asked Wu Jing to serve as the governor of Danyang at the same time, to fight against the former governor Zhou Qi, and thus occupy Danyang County.

古文：孙策与孙河、吕范依景，合众共讨泾县山贼祖郎，郎败走。
现代文：孙策与孙河、吕范依附吴景，聚合部队一起讨伐泾县山贼祖郎，祖郎败走。
English: Sun Ce, Sun He, Lu Fan, and Wu Jing gathered their forces to fight the mountain bandit Zuro of Min County, but Zuro was defeated and fled.

古文：会为刘繇所迫，景复北依术，术以为督军中郎将，与孙贲共讨樊能、于麋於横江，又击笮融、薛礼於秣陵。
现代文：适逢吴景被刘繇逼迫，再返北方投靠袁术，袁术任命他为督军中郎将，与孙贲共同到横江征讨樊能、于糜，又到秣陵进攻笮融、薛礼。
English: When Wu Jing was persecuted by Liu Bei, he returned to the north to support Yuan Shou. Yuan Shou appointed him as the commander-in-chief of the army. Together with Sun Yat-sen, he went to the Yangtze River to fight against Xuaneng and Yuyao, and went to Fuling to attack Xuan Rong and Xue Li.

古文：时策被创牛渚，降贼复反，景攻讨，尽禽之。
现代文：当时孙策在牛渚受伤，投降之人再次反叛，吴景前往攻讨，将他们全部抓获。
English: At that time, Sun Ce was injured in Niu Nagi, and those who surrendered rebelled again. Wu Jing went to attack and captured them all.

古文：从讨刘繇，繇奔豫章，策遣景、贲到寿春报术。
现代文：跟随孙策征讨刘繇，刘繇逃奔豫章。孙策派吴景、孙贲前至寿春向袁术报告。
English: He followed Sun Ce to recruit Liu Bei, and Liu Bei fled to Yuzhang. Sun Ce sent Wu Jing and Sun Qianqian to Shuchun to report to Yuan Shu.

古文：术方与刘备争徐州，以景为广陵太守。
现代文：袁术当时正和刘备争夺徐州，就任吴景为广陵太守。
English: At that time, Yuan Shuxu was competing with Liu Bei for Xuzhou, and Wu Jing was appointed governor of Guangling.

古文：术后僣号，策以书喻术，术不纳，便绝江津，不与通，使人告景。
现代文：袁术后来僭号称帝，孙策写信提示他，袁术不听，孙策便堵截长江渡口，不和袁术联通，并派人告知吴景。
English: Yuan Shuxu later pretended to be emperor, and Sun Ce wrote a letter to remind him. Yuan Shuxu did not listen, so Sun Ce blocked the Yangtze River ferry, refused to communicate with Yuan Shuxu, and sent someone to inform Wu Jing.

古文：景即委郡东归，策复以景为丹杨太守。
现代文：吴景当即放弃广陵东归，孙策又任命吴景为丹杨太守。
English: Wu Jing immediately gave up Guangling Donggui, and Sun Ce also appointed Wu Jing as the governor of Danyang.

古文：汉遣议郎王誧衔命南行，表景为扬武将军，领郡如故。
现代文：汉朝廷派遣议郎王讠甫带着使命南行，上表请任吴景为扬武将军，依然兼任郡守。
English: The Han imperial court sent the negotiator Wang Shufu with a mission to the south, and appointed Wu Jing as Yangwu General, still concurrently serving as county governor.

古文：及权少年统业，夫人助治军国，甚有补益。
现代文：等到孙权年少继承大统，吴夫人协助他治理军国大事，非常有裨益。
English: When Sun Quan succeeded to the throne at a young age, Mrs. Wu assisted him in managing the military affairs, which was very beneficial.

古文：建安七年，临薨，引见张昭等，属以后事，合葬高陵。
现代文：建安七年，她临去世前，召见张昭等人，将后事托付给他们，与孙坚合葬于高陵。
English: In the seventh year of Jian'an, before her death, she summoned Zhang Zhao and others, entrusted the succession to them, and was buried with Sun Jian in Gaoling.

古文：八年，景卒官，子奋授兵为将，封新亭侯，卒。
现代文：建安八年，吴景在官任上去世。他的儿子吴奋被拨付士兵，担任将领，封为新亭侯，后来去世。
English: In the eighth year of Jianan, Wu Jing died in office. His son Wu Fen was assigned to soldiers, served as a general, and was named the new prince, and later died.

古文：子安嗣，安坐党鲁王霸死。
现代文：他的儿子吴安继承爵位。吴安受鲁王孙霸的党案牵连而被处死。
English: His son Wu An inherited the title. Wu An was implicated in the party case of Lu King Sun Ba and was executed.

古文：奋弟祺嗣，封都亭侯，卒。
现代文：吴奋弟弟吴祺继承爵位，被封为都亭侯。
English: Wu Fen's younger brother Wu Yao inherited the title of nobility and was given the title of Du Ting Hou.

古文：子纂嗣。纂妻即滕胤女也，胤被诛，并遇害。
现代文：吴祺死后，他的儿子吴纂继承爵位，吴纂的妻子就是滕胤的女儿，滕胤被诛，他们一同被杀。
English: After Wu Xi's death, his son Wu Cao inherited the title of nobility. Wu Cao's wife was Teng Ying's daughter. Teng Ying was arrested and they were both killed.

古文：吴主权谢夫人，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：吴主孙权的谢夫人，会稽郡山阴人。
English: Lady Xie, the wife of Sun Quan, the ruler of Wu, was a member of the Guishan Yin people.

古文：父煚，汉尚书郎、徐令。
现代文：她的父亲谢，担任过汉朝的尚书郎、徐县县令。
English: Her father Xie, served as the Han Dynasty's Shang Shulang, Xu County.

古文：权母吴，为权聘以为妃，爱幸有宠。
现代文：孙权母亲吴夫人，为孙权聘谢氏作为妃子，受到宠幸，恩宠很盛。
English: Mrs. Wu, the mother of Sun Quan, hired Mr. Xie as a concubine for Sun Quan, and was favored and favored very much.

古文：后权纳姑孙徐氏，欲令谢下之，谢不肯，由是失志，早卒。
现代文：后来孙权纳娶姑母的孙女徐氏，想让谢夫人名份在徐氏之下，谢夫人不肯，从此失宠，很早就去世了。
English: Later, Sun Quan Na married Xu, the granddaughter of his aunt, and wanted Mrs. Xie's title to be below that of Mr. Xu. Mrs. Xie refused, fell out of favor, and died very early.

古文：后十馀年，弟承拜五官郎中，稍迁长沙东部都尉、武陵太守，撰后汉书百馀卷。
现代文：过了十几年，她的弟弟谢承担任五官郎中，渐渐升为长沙东部都尉、武陵太守。著写了《后汉书》一百多卷。
English: A dozen years later, her younger brother Xie Cheng served as one of the five officials, and gradually rose to the eastern captain of Changsha and the governor of Wuling. He wrote more than a hundred volumes of "Hou Han Shu."

古文：吴主权徐夫人，吴郡富春人也。
现代文：吴主孙权的徐夫人，是吴郡富春县人。
English: Mrs. Xu, the wife of Sun Quan, the ruler of Wu, was from Fuchun County, Wu County.

古文：祖父真，与权父坚相亲，坚以妹妻真，生琨。
现代文：她的祖父徐真，与孙权父亲孙坚关系友好，孙坚将妹妹嫁给徐真，生子徐琨。
English: Her grandfather, Xu Zhen, had a friendly relationship with Sun Quan's father, Sun Jian. Sun Jian married his sister to Xu Zhen and had a son, Xu Jun.

古文：琨少仕州郡，汉末扰乱，去吏，随坚征伐有功，拜偏将军。
现代文：徐琨年少时在州郡作官，汉末动乱，他辞去官职，跟随孙坚四处征战，建立军功，担任偏将军。
English: When he was young, Xu Xi served as an officer in Zhouzhou County. At the end of the Han Dynasty, there was turmoil. He resigned from his official post and followed Sun Jian to fight in various places. He established military merit and served as a partial general.

古文：坚薨，随孙策讨樊能、于麋等於横江，击张英於当利口，而船少，欲驻军更求。
现代文：孙坚去世后，他跟随孙策在横江讨伐樊能、于麋等，在当利口攻打张英，但是船只少，想要停留驻军寻求船只。
English: After Sun Jian's death, he followed Sun Ce in the Yokoe River to fight Shun Rong, Yu Qi, and others, and in Dang Likou to attack Zhang Ying, but there were few ships, and he wanted to stay in the garrison to look for ships.

古文：琨母时在军中，谓琨曰： 恐州家多发水军来逆人，则不利矣，如何可驻邪？
现代文：徐琨的母亲当时在军营中，对徐琨说： 恐怕州里会多派出水军来迎击，这样就处于不利之地，怎么可以驻军停留呢？
English: Xu Yao's mother was in the military camp at the time, and said to Xu Yao: I'm afraid that the state will send more naval forces to meet the attack, so it will be at a disadvantage. How can the garrison stay?

古文：宜伐芦苇以为泭，佐船渡军。 
现代文：应当砍伐芦苇编做筏，帮助船队渡兵。 
English: The reeds should be cut down and made into rafts to help ferry the fleet.

古文：琨具启策，策即行之，众悉俱济，遂破英，击走笮融、刘繇，事业克定。
现代文：徐琨详细报告给孙策，孙策当即施行，军队全都得以渡江，就攻破张英，击溃笮融、刘繇，奠定东吴大业基础。
English: Xu Xi made a detailed report to Sun Ce. Sun Ce immediately implemented the plan, and all the troops were able to cross the river. They defeated Zhang Ying, defeated Xun Rong and Liu Bei, and laid the foundation for the great cause of East Wu.

古文：策表琨领丹杨太守，会吴景委广陵来东，复为丹杨守，琨以督军中郎将领兵，从破庐江太守李术，封广德侯，迁平虏将军。
现代文：孙策上表请任徐琨兼任丹杨太守，恰遇吴景放弃广陵回到东面，孙策再让吴景担任丹杨太守，让徐琨以督军中郎将身份率兵。徐琨跟随孙策攻破庐江太守李术，被封为广德侯，升任平虏将军。
English: On the table, Sun Tse asked Xu Xi to serve as the governor of Danyang, and when Wu Jing abandoned Guangling and returned to the east, Sun Tse again asked Wu Jing to serve as the governor of Danyang, and let Xu Xi lead the troops as the commander-in-chief. Xu Xi followed Sun Tse to defeat Li Shu, the governor of the Li River, and was named the prince of Guangde and promoted to the general of Pingru.

古文：后从讨黄祖，中流矢卒。
现代文：后来随从孙策征讨黄祖，因中流箭身亡。
English: Later, he followed Sun Ce Zheng to investigate Huang Zu, and was killed by a mid-range arrow.

古文：琨生夫人，初適同郡陆尚。
现代文：徐琨生徐夫人，起初嫁给同郡人陆尚。
English: Xu Ying Sheng's wife, Mrs. Xu, was originally married to Lu Shang, a fellow county resident.

古文：尚卒，权为讨虏将军在吴，聘以为妃，使母养子登。
现代文：陆尚死后，孙权以讨虏将军身份在吴郡，就聘她为妃，让她像母亲一样抚养儿子孙登。
English: After the death of Lu Shang, Sun Quan hired her as a concubine to raise his son Sun Deng like a mother.

古文：后权迁移，以夫人妒忌，废处吴。
现代文：后来孙权迁居别处，因为徐夫人妒忌，就废弃了她，让她住在吴郡。
English: Later, Sun Quan moved to another place. Because Mrs. Xu was jealous, he abandoned her and let her live in Wuxi County.

古文：积十馀年，权为吴王及即尊号，登为太子，群臣请立夫人为后，权意在步氏，卒不许。
现代文：十多年后，孙权做了吴王，并登基称帝，册立孙登为太子，大臣们奏请立徐夫人为皇后，但孙权心中想册立步夫人，最终也没有答应朝臣的。
English: More than ten years later, Sun Quan became the King of Wu, ascended to the throne and became emperor. Sun Quan was appointed as the crown prince, and the ministers petitioned for the appointment of Lady Xu as the empress. However, Sun Quan wanted to appoint Lady Xu in his heart, and in the end, he did not agree to the courtier.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来徐夫人因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：兄矫，嗣父琨侯，讨平山越，拜偏将军，先夫人卒，无子。
现代文：她的哥哥徐矫，继承父亲徐琨的侯爵，征讨平定山越，担任偏将军，在徐夫人之前去世，没有儿子，由他的弟弟徐祚继承封号。
English: Her brother Xu Jia, the marquis who succeeded his father Xu Xi, fought for the pacification of Shan Yue, served as a general, died before Mrs. Xu, had no son, and his brother Xu Xi inherited the title.

古文：弟祚袭封，亦以战功至芜湖督、平魏将军。
现代文：徐祚因为战功官至芜湖都督、平魏将军。
English: Because of his military exploits, Xu Xi became the governor of Wuhu and the general of Pingwei.

古文：吴主权步夫人，临淮淮阴人也，与丞相骘同族。
现代文：吴主孙权的步夫人，临淮郡淮阴人，与丞相步骘是同族。
English: The step-wife of Wu ruler Sun Quan, a native of Huaiyin in Linhuai County, was a member of the same clan as Joseph.

古文：汉末，其母携将徙庐江，庐江为孙策所破，皆东渡江，以美丽得幸於权，宠冠后庭。
现代文：汉朝末年，她的母亲带着她准备迁到庐江，庐江被孙策攻破，她们都东渡长江，因为容貌美丽受到孙权的宠爱，她的宠爱超过后宫所有人。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, her mother took her to prepare to move to the Li River. The Li River was broken by Sun Ce, and they all went to the Yangtze River. Because of her beautiful appearance, she was favored by Sun Quan, and her favor exceeded that of everyone in the harem.

古文：生二女，长曰鲁班，字大虎，前配周瑜子循，后配全琮；少曰鲁育，字小虎，前配朱据，后配刘纂。
现代文：她生有二女，大女儿叫鲁班，字大虎，先许配周瑜的儿子周循，后又改嫁全琮；小女儿叫鲁育，字小虎，先许配朱据，后又许配刘纂。
English: She gave birth to two daughters. The eldest daughter, named Luban, with the Chinese character 大虎, was first betrothed to Zhou Yu's son, Zhou Zun, and later remarried to Quanzhang. The youngest daughter, named Lu Yu, with the Chinese character 小虎, was first betrothed to Zhu Jian, and later betrothed to Liu Zuo.

古文：夫人性不妒忌，多所推进，故久见爱待。
现代文：步夫人性情不好妒忌，对孙权都有推动，故此长时间地受到宠爱。
English: Mrs. Bu is not a jealous person, and she encourages Sun Quan. Therefore, she has been favored for a long time.

古文：权为王及帝，意欲以为后，而群臣议在徐氏，权依违者十馀年，然宫内皆称皇后，亲戚上疏称中宫。
现代文：孙权为王以及称帝，想要立她为王后和皇后，而群臣都认为应该是徐氏，孙权违背自己的心愿十多年，但是宫中都称步夫人为皇后，亲属上疏也称他为中宫皇后。
English: Sun Quan was the king and emperor, and wanted to make her the queen and empress, but the courtiers all thought that it should be the Xu clan. Sun Quan went against his own wishes for more than ten years, but the palace called Mrs. Pu the empress, and the relatives also called him the queen of the middle palace.

古文：及薨，臣下缘权指，请追正名号，乃赠印绶，策命曰： 惟赤乌元年闰月戊子，皇帝曰：呜呼皇后，惟后佐命，共承天地。
现代文：步夫人去世后，大臣们顺着孙权的心意，请求追封她皇后的尊号，于是追赐印玺、绶带，策封说： 赤乌元年闰月初一，皇帝说：呜呼皇后，思念皇后辅佐天命，与我一起承受生命。
English: After the death of Lady Bu, the ministers, following the wishes of Sun Quan, requested that the honorary title of empress be conferred on her, and so the seals and ribbons were given, and the seal said: On the first day of the leap month in the first year of the Red Wu, the emperor said: "Woo hoo, empress. I miss the empress. She assists the mission of heaven, and shares my life with me."

古文：虔恭夙夜，与朕均劳。
现代文：日夜恭敬虔诚，与我一样辛苦勤劳。
English: He is respectful and pious day and night, and works as hard as I do.

古文：内教脩整，礼义不愆。
现代文：修养优良品行端庄，礼仪上没有过失。
English: Cultivate good manners, behave with dignity, and have no lapses in etiquette.

古文：宽容慈惠，有淑懿之德。
现代文：性情宽容慈惠，有贤淑美好的品德。
English: His disposition is tolerant, benevolent and benevolent, and he has a virtuous and beautiful character.

古文：民臣县望，远近归心。
现代文：天下万民远远瞻仰，远近归心。
English: All the people in the world look up to it from far away, and return to it from near and far.

古文：朕以世难未夷，大统未一，缘后雅志，每怀谦损。是以于时未授名号，亦必谓后降年有永，永与朕躬对扬天休。
现代文：朕因为战乱没有平定，天下尚未统一，也因为皇后本人高尚的情趣，常怀谦让之心，所以当时没有授予皇后名号，还以为皇后一定寿命长久，能和我一起亲自称颂上天的赐福。
English: I did not confer the title of empress at that time because the war was not settled and the country had not yet been unified, and also because the empress herself had a noble taste and was always humble. I also thought that the empress would live a long life and would be able to personally praise the blessings of heaven with me.

古文：不寤奄忽，大命近止。
现代文：没有料到突然之间，她的寿命终止。
English: She did not expect her life to end so suddenly.

古文：朕恨本意不早昭显，伤后殂逝，不终天禄。
现代文：朕悔恨自己的想法没有早日彰显，哀伤皇后去世，未能尽享天福。
English: I regret that my thoughts did not manifest themselves sooner, I mourn the death of the empress, and I have not been able to enjoy the blessings of heaven.

古文：愍悼之至，痛于厥心。
现代文：悲痛之至，痛心疾首。
English: It's heartbreaking. It's heartbreaking.

古文：今使使持节丞相醴陵侯雍，奉策授号，配食先后。
现代文：现在派使持节丞相醴陵侯顾雍，捧册授号，与先逝的皇后一样受祭。
English: Now, they have sent the minister of the festival, Gongling Hou Gu Yong, to hold the book and award the title, and receive the same sacrifice as the deceased empress.

古文：魂而有灵，嘉其宠荣。呜呼哀哉！ 
现代文：如果灵魂有识，也能赞赏所受恩荣。呜呼哀哉！ 
English: If the soul has understanding, it can also appreciate the honor it has received. Alas!

古文：葬於蒋陵。
现代文：将步夫人安葬在蒋陵。
English: Lady Shifu was buried in the Jiangling Mausoleum.

古文：吴主权王夫人，琅邪人也。
现代文：吴主孙权的王夫人，是琅王牙郡人。
English: The wife of Sun Quan, the ruler of Wu, was from Wangya County, Shandong Province.

古文：夫人以选入宫，黄武中得幸，生和，宠次步氏。
现代文：她因选妃入宫。黄武年间得孙权宠幸，生下孙和，她的恩宠仅次于步氏。
English: She entered the palace as a princess. During the Huangwu era, she was favored by Sun Quan and gave birth to Sun He. Her favor is second only to that of the Bu clan.

古文：步氏薨后，和立为太子，权将立夫人为后，而全公主素憎夫人，稍稍谮毁。
现代文：步氏去世后，孙和被册立为太子，孙权想要立王夫人为皇后，而全公主鲁班一向讨厌王夫人，故在孙权面前渐渐诋毁她。
English: After the death of Mr. Bu, Sun He was enthroned as the crown prince. Sun Quan wanted to make Mrs. Wang the empress, but Princess Luban always hated Mrs. Wang, so she gradually slandered her in front of Sun Quan.

古文：及权寝疾，言有喜色，由是权深责怒，以忧死。
现代文：到孙权病重，就说王夫人面有喜色，于是孙权大怒，责骂王夫人，王夫人因此忧郁而死。
English: When Sun Quan was seriously ill, he said that Mrs. Wang was happy, so Sun Quan was furious and scolded Mrs. Wang. As a result, Mrs. Wang died of melancholy.

古文：和子皓立，追尊夫人曰大懿皇后，封三弟皆列侯。
现代文：孙和的儿子孙皓登基，追封王夫人为 大懿皇后 ，她的三个弟弟都受封为侯。
English: Sun He, the son of Sun He, ascended to the throne, followed by Wang Mi as the Queen of Daxi, and her three younger brothers were all crowned as princes.

古文：吴主权王夫人，南阳人也，以选入宫，嘉禾中得幸，生休。
现代文：吴主孙权的另一位王夫人，南阳人，也是因选妃入宫。嘉禾年间得孙权宠爱，生下儿子孙休。
English: Another wife of Sun Quan, the ruler of Wu, who was from Nanyang, also entered the palace as a princess. During the Jiahe period, she was favored by Sun Quan and gave birth to a son, Sun Xiu.

古文：及和为太子，和母贵重，诸姬有宠者，皆出居外。
现代文：及至孙和被册立为太子，孙和的母亲身份贵重，其他受到宠爱的妃嫔，都被撵出宫外。
English: When Sun Wo was enthroned as crown prince, Sun Wo's status as a mother was highly valued, and all the other favored concubines were banished from the palace.

古文：夫人出公安，卒，因葬焉。
现代文：王夫人迁到公安，去世后就安葬在那儿。
English: Mrs. Wang moved to the Public Security Bureau and was buried there after her death.

古文：休即位，遣使追尊曰敬怀皇后，改葬敬陵。
现代文：孙休登基后，派遣使者前往公安追尊她为 敬怀皇后 ，改葬敬陵。
English: After Sun Xiu ascended to the throne, he sent an envoy to the public security bureau to ask for her to be revered as the "revered empress" and to be reburied in a revered mausoleum.

古文：王氏无后，封同母弟文雍为亭侯。
现代文：王氏娘家无后人，故封她的同母弟弟文雍为亭侯。
English: Wang's daughter's family had no descendants, so her half-brother, Wen Yong, was made the prince of the palace.

古文：吴主权潘夫人，会稽句章人也。
现代文：吴主孙权的潘夫人，是会稽郡句章县人。
English: Mrs. Pan, the wife of Sun Quan, the ruler of Wu, was from Juchang County.

古文：父为吏，坐法死。
现代文：她的父亲是州中吏役，因违法被处死。
English: Her father, a state middle-ranking official, was executed for breaking the law.

古文：夫人与姊俱输织室，权见而异之，召充后宫。
现代文：潘夫人和姐姐一起被送到皇宫织室中，孙权看到她，觉得很奇异，就将她充入后宫。
English: Lady Pan was sent to the royal weaving room with her sister. Sun Quan saw her and thought she was very strange, so he stuffed her into the harem.

古文：得幸有娠，梦有以龙头授己者，己以蔽膝受之，遂生亮。
现代文：得到宠幸后而有身孕，梦见有人将一个龙头送给自己，自己恭敬地接受了，于是生下孙亮。
English: After being favored, she became pregnant. She dreamed that someone gave her a dragon's head, which she respectfully accepted, and gave birth to Sun Liang.

古文：赤乌十三年，亮立为太子，请出嫁夫人之姊，权听许之。
现代文：赤乌十三年，孙亮被册立为太子，潘夫人请求允许自己的姐姐出宫嫁人，孙权同意了。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Sun Liang was registered as the crown prince. Lady Pan requested permission to allow her sister to marry outside the palace, and Sun Quan agreed.

古文：明年，立夫人为皇后。
现代文：第二年，孙权册立潘夫人为皇后。
English: In the following year, Sun Quan crowned Lady Pan as empress.

古文：性险妒容媚，自始至卒，谮害袁夫人等甚众。
现代文：她性情容易妒忌，巧言令色，自进宫到去世，诋毁陷害袁夫人等多人。
English: Her temperament was prone to jealousy, and she was a smooth talker. From the time she entered the palace until her death, she slandered and framed many people, including Mrs. Yuan.

古文：权不豫，夫人使问中书令孙弘吕后专制故事。
现代文：孙权生病，她派人向中书令孙弘问过去吕后专制的情况。
English: When Sun Quan fell ill, she sent someone to ask Sun Hong, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, about the situation of Lvov's dictatorship in the past.

古文：侍疾疲劳，因以羸疾，诸宫人伺其昬卧，共缢杀之，讬言中恶。
现代文：在侍候孙权时过分劳累，因此虚弱病倒，宫女们待她昏睡后，一起将她勒死，假说她因病而死。
English: She was overworked while waiting for her grandson, and fell ill as a result. After the ladies-in-waiting had put her into a coma, they strangled her together, assuming that she had died from her illness.

古文：后事泄，坐死者六七人。
现代文：后来事情败露，因此而死的有六七人。
English: It later transpired that six or seven people died as a result.

古文：权寻薨，合葬蒋陵。
现代文：孙权不久去世，潘夫人与他合葬于蒋陵。
English: Sun Quan died soon after, and Mrs. Pan was buried with him in the Chiang Mausoleum.

古文：孙亮即位，以夫人姊婿谭绍为骑都尉，授兵。
现代文：孙亮继位后，任命潘夫人的姐夫谭绍为骑都尉，授以兵权。
English: After Sun Liang succeeded to the throne, he appointed Mrs. Pan's brother-in-law Tan Shao as a cavalry captain and granted him military power.

古文：亮废，绍与家属送本郡庐陵。
现代文：孙亮被废黜后，谭绍及其家属被遣返原籍庐陵郡。
English: After Sun Liang was deposed, Tan Shao and his family were repatriated to their hometown in Fuling County.

古文：孙亮全夫人，全尚女也。
现代文：孙亮的全夫人，是全尚的女儿。
English: Sun Liang's wife, Quanzhang, is Quanzhang's daughter.

古文：从祖母公主爱之，每进见辄与俱。
现代文：她的叔祖母全公主宠爱她，每次入宫觐见都带她一起去。
English: Her aunt and grandmother, the princesses, loved her and took her with them every time they came to the palace.

古文：及潘夫人母子有宠，全主自以与孙和母有隙，乃劝权为潘氏男亮纳夫人，亮遂为嗣。
现代文：等到潘夫人母子受到宠爱，全公主认为认为自己和孙和的母亲有嫌隙，就劝孙权为潘夫人所生儿子孙亮娶全夫人，孙亮于是被立为太子。
English: When Lady Pan's mother and son were favored, Princess Quan thought that there was a rift between her and Sun He's mother, so she advised Sun Quan's son, Sun Liang, who was born to Lady Pan, to marry Lady Quan. Sun Liang was then made the crown prince.

古文：夫人立为皇后，以尚为城门校尉，封都亭侯，代滕胤为太常、卫将军，进封永平侯，录尚书事。
现代文：全夫人被册立为皇后，孙亮以全尚为城门校尉，并封为都亭侯，代替滕胤为太常、卫将军，晋封为永平侯，管理尚书事。
English: The whole wife was made empress, and Sun Liang promoted Quanzhang to the position of castle gate captain, and appointed him as the governor of the capital, replaced Teng Ying as the governor of Taizhong and Wei, and promoted him to the position of Yongping, and managed Quanzhang's affairs.

古文：时全氏侯有五人，并典兵马，其馀为侍郎、骑都尉，宿卫左右，自吴兴，外戚贵盛莫及。
现代文：当时全氏一门有五人封侯，全都管掌军队，其余担任侍郎、骑都尉，日夜守卫陛下，自东吴兴盛以来，外戚势力强盛无人能及。
English: At that time, there were five feudal lords of the whole clan, all of whom were in charge of the army, and the rest served as attendants, cavalry captains, and guarded His Majesty day and night. Since Dongwu Xingsheng, no one has been able to match the strength of the foreign relatives.

古文：及魏大将诸葛诞以寿春来附，而全怿、全端、全祎、全仪等并因此际降魏，全熙谋泄见杀，由是诸全衰弱。
现代文：等到魏国大将诸葛诞以寿春城归附东吴，而全怿、全端、全祎、全仪等都借机投降魏国，全熙因计谋泄露被杀，自是全氏家族开始衰败。
English: By the time the Wei general Zhuge Zi was born, Shuchun City was annexed to Eastern Wu, and Quanzhang, Quanzhang, Quanzhang, Quanzhang, and Quanzhang all took the opportunity to surrender to Wei. Quanzhi was killed for leaking the plot, and the whole family began to decline.

古文：会孙綝废亮为会稽王，后又黜为候官侯，夫人随之国，居候官，尚将家属徙零陵，追见杀。
现代文：恰遇孙綝废黜孙亮为会稽王，后又贬为候官侯。全夫人随从他到封地，定居在候官。全尚带着家属迁到零陵郡，被追杀于其地。
English: It so happened that Sun Yat-sen dethroned Sun Liang as King of Hefei, who was later demoted to the status of vassal-in-waiting. His wife followed him to the fief and settled in the vassal-in-waiting. Sun Yat-sen and his family moved to Luling County, where he was chased and killed.

古文：孙休朱夫人，朱据女，休姊公主所生也。
现代文：孙休的朱夫人，是朱据的女儿，孙休的姐姐朱公主所生。
English: Sun Xiu's wife, Lady Zhu, was the daughter of Zhu Zu, and the daughter of Sun Xiu's sister, Princess Zhu.

古文：赤乌末，权为休纳以为妃。
现代文：赤乌末年，孙权为孙休娶朱氏为妃。
English: At the end of the Red Emperor Wu's reign, Sun Quan married Sun Xiu to Zhu Shi as his wife.

古文：休为琅邪王，随居丹阳。
现代文：孙休为琅邪王，朱夫人随同到丹阳居住。
English: Sun Xiu was the king of evil, and Mrs. Zhu accompanied him to Danyang.

古文：建兴中，孙峻专政，公族皆患之。
现代文：建兴年间，孙峻把持朝政，王公家族都视他为祸害。
English: During the Jianxing period, Sun Jun was in charge of the imperial government, and Wang Gong's family regarded him as a scourge.

古文：全尚妻即峻姊，故惟全主祐焉。
现代文：全尚的妻子就是孙峻的姐姐，所以只有这位全公主帮助孙峻。
English: Zenshang's wife is Sun Jun's sister, so only this Zenshang princess helps Sun Jun.

古文：初，孙和为太子时，全主谮害王夫人，欲废太子，立鲁王，朱主不听，由是有隙。
现代文：起初，孙和还是太子时，全公主诋毁王夫人，想废除孙和，而立鲁王为太子，朱公主不同意，所以两人有了嫌隙。
English: At first, when Sun He was still crown prince, Princess Quan slandered Wang's wife and wanted to abolish Sun He and install Lu Wang as crown prince. Princess Zhu did not agree, so the two had a rift.

古文：五凤中，孙仪谋杀峻，事觉被诛。
现代文：五凤年间，孙仪谋划杀害孙峻，事情败露后被处死。
English: During the Wufeng period, Sun Yi plotted to kill Sun Jun and was executed after the plot was uncovered.

古文：全主因言朱主与仪同谋，峻枉杀朱主。
现代文：全公主趁机劝说朱公主和孙仪同谋，孙峻冤枉并处死朱公主。
English: Princess Quan took the opportunity to persuade Princess Zhu and Sun Yi to conspire together. Sun Jun wronged and executed Princess Zhu.

古文：休惧，遣夫人还建业，执手泣别。
现代文：孙休很害怕，将朱夫人遣回建业，拉手流着泪告别。
English: Sun Xiu was very scared and sent Mrs. Zhu back to Jianye, bidding her farewell with tears streaming down his face.

古文：既至，峻遣还休。
现代文：到建业后，孙峻又将她遣送回孙休身边。
English: After arriving at Jianye, Sun Jun sent her back to Sun Xiu's side.

古文：太平中，孙亮知朱主为全主所害，问朱主死意？全主惧曰： 我实不知，皆据二子熊、损所白。 
现代文：太平年间，孙亮知道朱公主被全公主所陷害，就问朱公主的死因是什么，全公主恐惧地说： 我实在不知道，都是朱据的两个儿子朱熊、朱损告诉我的。 
English: In the Taiping era, when Sun Liang knew that Princess Zhu had been framed by Princess Quan, he asked what the cause of Princess Zhu's death was. Princess Quan said fearfully, "I really don't know. Both Zhu Zu's two sons, Zhu Xiong and Zhu Zai, told me."

古文：亮杀熊、损。
现代文：孙亮杀死朱熊、朱损。
English: Sun Liang killed Zhu Xiong and Zhu Zai.

古文：损妻是峻妹也，孙綝益忌亮，遂废亮，立休。
现代文：朱损的妻子是孙峻的妹妹，孙綝更加怨恨孙亮，于是废黜孙亮，改立孙休。
English: Zhu Jia's wife was Sun Jun's sister. Sun Yao hated Sun Liang even more, so he deposed Sun Liang and replaced him with Sun Xiu.

古文：永安五年，立夫人为皇后。
现代文：永安五年，孙休册立朱夫人为皇后。
English: In the fifth year of Yongan, Sun Hui made Lady Zhu the empress.

古文：休卒，群臣尊夫人为皇太后。
现代文：孙休死后，文武百官尊朱夫人为皇太后。
English: After Sun Xiu's death, Lady Zongzhu, a civil and military dignitary, became the empress dowager.

古文：孙皓即位月馀，贬为景皇后，称安定宫。
现代文：孙皓登基一个多月后，将她贬为景皇后，居住的后宫为安定宫。
English: More than a month after Sun Yat-sen ascended to the throne, he relegated her to the position of Empress Jing, and the harem she lived in was called the Palace of Stability.

古文：甘露元年七月，见逼薨，合葬定陵。
现代文：甘露元年七月，被逼而死，与孙休合葬于定陵。
English: In July of the first year of Kamloops, he was forced to die and was buried together with Sun Hui in the Dingling Mausoleum.

古文：孙和何姬，丹杨句容人也。
现代文：孙和的何姬，是丹杨郡句容县人。
English: Sun He's He Ji is from Danyang County, Guryong County.

古文：父遂，本骑士。
现代文：父亲何遂，原来是骑士。
English: My father turned out to be a knight.

古文：孙权尝游幸诸营，而姬观於道中，权望见异之，命宦者召入，以赐子和。
现代文：孙权曾巡游各军营，何姬在路旁观看，孙权望见她，觉得她很奇异，让宦官将她召入宫中，赐给儿子孙和。
English: Sun Quan had been on a tour of the military camps. He Ji was watching from the roadside. Sun Quan saw her and thought she was very strange. He asked the eunuch to call her into the palace and give her to his son Sun He.

古文：生男，权喜，名之曰彭祖，即皓也。
现代文：后来生个男孩，孙权大喜，取名为彭祖，就是孙皓。
English: Later, she gave birth to a boy, Sun Quan Daxi, who was named Peng Zu, that is, Sun Yao.

古文：太子和既废，后为南阳王，居长沙。
现代文：太子孙和被废黜后，后做了南阳王，居住长沙。
English: After the dethronement of the crown prince and his descendants, he became the king of Nanyang and lived in Changsha.

古文：孙亮即位，孙峻辅政。
现代文：孙亮登基后，孙峻在旁辅佐。
English: After Sun Liang ascended to the throne, Sun Jun assisted him.

古文：峻素媚事全主，全主与和母有隙，遂劝峻徙和居新都，遣使赐死，嫡妃张氏亦自杀。
现代文：孙峻向来谄媚全公主，全公主与孙和的母亲有嫌隙，就劝说孙峻将孙和迁到新都居住，派使者赐死孙和，孙和嫡妃张氏也自杀而死。
English: Sun Jun had always been fond of Princess Quan. When Princess Quan had a disagreement with Sun He's mother, she persuaded Sun Jun to move Sun He to live in Xindu and sent an envoy to have Sun He killed. Sun He and his wife Zhang also committed suicide and died.

古文：何姬曰： 若皆从死，谁当养孤？ 
现代文：何姬说： 如果都跟着去死，谁扶养孤儿呢？ 
English: He Ji said: If everyone dies, who will support the orphans?

古文：遂拊育皓，及其三弟。
现代文：就教抚养育孙皓和他三个弟弟。
English: He raised his grandson and his three younger brothers.

古文：皓即位，尊和为昭献皇帝，何姬为昭献皇后，称升平宫，月馀，进为皇太后。
现代文：孙皓登基，追尊孙和为 昭献皇帝 ，尊何姬为 昭献皇后 ，称为升平宫。过了一个多月，晋封何姬为皇太后。
English: Sun Yat-sen ascended to the throne, followed by Son Son He as crowned emperor, and Son He He as crowned empress, known as the Palace of Ascension. After more than a month, Son He was crowned empress dowager.

古文：封弟洪永平侯，蒋溧阳侯，植宣城侯。
现代文：又给何氏的弟弟何洪封爵永平侯，何蒋为溧阳侯，何植为宣城侯。
English: He also gave He's younger brother He Hong the title of Yongping Marquis, He Jiang the title of Shenyang Marquis, and He Zhi the title of Xuancheng Marquis.

古文：洪卒，子邈嗣，为武陵监军，为晋所杀。
现代文：何洪去世，他的儿子何邈承袭爵位，担任武陵监军，后被晋军杀害。
English: He Hong died, and his son He Rong inherited the title and served as the inspector of Wuling, and was later killed by the Jin army.

古文：植官至大司徒。
现代文：何植官至大司徒。
English: How many officials have been promoted to the rank of Daisetsu?

古文：吴末昬乱，何氏骄僣，子弟横放，百姓患之。
现代文：东吴末年君主昏乱，何氏骄横僭越，子弟们恣意妄为，百姓们将他们当做祸患。
English: At the end of the Eastern Wu Dynasty, the monarch was in a daze, Ho was arrogant and arrogant, his sons acted arbitrarily, and the people regarded them as a scourge.

古文：故民讹言 皓久死，立者何氏子 云。
现代文：所以民间讹传说 孙皓已去世很久，何氏儿子被册为太子 。
English: Therefore, the folklore says that Sun Yat-sen died a long time ago, and Ho's son was registered as the crown prince.

古文：孙皓滕夫人，故太常胤之族女也。
现代文：孙皓的滕夫人，是已故太常滕胤的族女。
English: Sun Yat-sen's wife Teng was a descendant of the late Emperor Taizong's daughter Tengyin.

古文：胤夷灭，夫人父牧，以疏远徙边郡。
现代文：滕胤被灭族后，夫人的父亲滕牧，因为与滕胤关系疏远而被迁到边远郡县。
English: After Teng Tan was exterminated, his wife's father, Teng Mu, was moved to a remote county because of his estranged relationship with Teng Tan.

古文：孙休即位，大赦，得还，以牧为五官中郎。
现代文：孙休登基，大赦天下，滕牧一家得以回京，孙休以滕牧为五官中郎。
English: Sun Xiu ascended to the throne, the world was amnestied, the Tengmu family was able to return to Beijing, and Sun Xiu took Tengmu as the leader of the five officials.

古文：皓既封乌程侯，聘牧女为妃。
现代文：孙皓被封为乌程侯，又纳娶滕牧女儿为妃。
English: Sun Yat-sen was made the lord of Ucheng and married Teng Mu's daughter.

古文：皓即位，立为皇后，封牧高密侯，拜卫将军，录尚书事。
现代文：孙皓即位后，册立滕夫人为皇后，封滕牧为高密侯，授予他卫将军之职，总领尚书事务。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's accession to the throne, Lady Teng was made the empress, and Feng Tengmu was given the title of Gao Mi Hou. He was given the position of Wei general and was in charge of Shangshu affairs.

古文：后朝士以牧尊戚，颇推令谏争。
现代文：后来朝臣们认为滕牧是皇帝的亲属，常推举他向皇帝孙皓谏诤。
English: Later, the courtiers believed that Teng Mu was a relative of the emperor, and often recommended him to Emperor Sun Yat-sen.

古文：而夫人宠渐衰，皓滋不悦，皓母何恒左右之。
现代文：而滕夫人受到的宠幸渐渐衰弛，孙皓越来越不喜欢她，孙皓母亲何姬常左右着他的行为。
English: But Mrs. Teng's favor gradually faded, Sun Yat-sen disliked her more and more, and Sun Yat-sen's mother, He Ji, often influenced his behavior.

古文：又太史言，於运历，后不可易，皓信巫觋，故得不废，常供养升平宫。
现代文：又太史说，在国家命数上，皇后不可更换，孙皓迷信巫觋，故此滕夫人得以不被废黜，常年供养在升平宫。
English: And Tai Shi said that on the national life number, the queen cannot be replaced, and Sun Yat-sen was superstitious about witchcraft, so Mrs. Teng could not be dethroned and was kept in the Shangping Palace all year round.

古文：牧见遣居苍梧郡，虽爵位不夺，其实裔也，遂道路忧死。
现代文：滕牧被遣送到苍梧郡，虽说他的爵位没有被免除，其实也即是流放，于是他在路上忧郁而死。
English: Teng Mu was sent to Cangwu County, and although his title was not revoked, he was actually exiled, and he died of melancholy on the way.

古文：长秋官僚，备员而已，受朝贺表疏如故。
现代文：皇后宫中的官员，都不过凑数而已，只是滕夫人仍与过去一样能接受朝贺和上表上疏。
English: The officials in the Queen's palace are just making up the numbers, but Mrs. Teng is still able to accept morning greetings and the above table.

古文：而皓内诸宠姬，佩皇后玺绂者多矣。
现代文：而孙皓宫内的各位宠妃，大多佩带着皇后玺、绂。
English: However, most of the favorite concubines in Sun Yat-sen's palace wore the empress's brooches and bracelets.

古文：天纪四年，随皓迁于洛阳。
现代文：天纪四年，滕夫人随孙皓迁到洛阳。
English: Four years later, Mrs. Teng moved to Luoyang with Sun Yat-sen.

古文：评曰：易称 正家而天下定 。
现代文：评曰：《易经》中说 家中安稳天下才能稳定 。
English: Comment: In the I Ching, it is said that the world can only be stable when the family is stable.

古文：诗云： 刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御于家邦。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 给自己的妻子作榜样，推广到兄弟，才能治理国家。 
English: In the Book of Songs, it says, "If you set an example for your wife and spread it to your brothers, then you will be able to govern the country."

古文：诚哉，是言也！
现代文：这些话说得真对啊！
English: These words are so true!

古文：远观齐桓，近察孙权，皆有识士之明，杰人之志，而嫡庶不分，闺庭错乱，遗笑古今，殃流后嗣。
现代文：远看过去齐桓公，现在观察眼前的孙权，都有识人之明，超群的志向，却不分嫡庶，导致宫廷秩序错乱，后世嘲笑，殃及后代。
English: Looking far into the past, Prince Qi Huan, and now observing the current Sun Quan, are both knowledgeable and ambitious, but they do not distinguish between the heir and the heir, leading to disorder in the court, ridicule in future generations, and blighting future generations.

古文：由是论之，惟以道义为心、平一为主者，然后克免斯累邪！
现代文：由此来看，只有那些将道义当做本心，公平一心为主宰的人，才能免除这些劳累啊！
English: From this point of view, only those who regard morality as their true heart, and fairness as their main concern, can be exempted from these burdens!

