古文：◎河渠一
现代文：河渠一
English: Canal 1

古文：○黄河上
现代文：黄河上
English: On the Yellow River

古文：黄河，自唐以前，皆北入海。
现代文：黄河，从唐以前，都是往北流入海。
English: Since before the Tang Dynasty, the Yellow River has always flowed north to the sea.

古文：宋熙宁中，始分趋东南，一合泗入淮，一合济入海。
现代文：宋熙宁年间，纔分道奔向东和南，一支汇合于泅水流入淮河，另一支汇合于济水流入海。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the Yunnan branch ran to the east and south. One branch joined the Yunnan River and flowed into the Huai River, while the other joined the Jishui River and flowed into the sea.

古文：金明昌中，北流绝，全河皆入淮，元溃溢不时，至正中受害尤甚，济宁、曹、郓间，漂没千馀里。
现代文：金明昌年间，北边一支河断流，整个黄河之水都流入淮河。元时，经当决堤，至正年间受害特别严重，济宁、曹、鄣之间，淹没干余里。
English: During the reign of Jin Mingchang, a river in the north was cut off, and the entire Yellow River flowed into the Huai River. In the Yuan Dynasty, after the break of the dike, the damage was particularly serious in the Zheng Dynasty. Between Jining, Cao, and Handan, more than a kilometer was flooded.

古文：贾鲁为总制，导使南，汇淮入海。
现代文：贾鲁作总制，引导河水使其向南，汇于淮河流入海。
English: Jialu made the overall system, guided the river water to the south, and merged with the Huaihe River into the sea.

古文：明洪武元年决曹州双河口，入鱼台。
现代文：明洪武元年，决堤于曹州双河口，流入鱼台。
English: In the first year of the Ming Hongwu, the dike broke at the mouth of Caozhou Shuanghe and flowed into Yutai.

古文：徐达方北征，乃开塌场口，引河入泗以济运，而徙曹州治於安陵。
现代文：徐达正北征，于是开通塌场口，引导黄河流入泅水以贯通运河，又迁曹州治所于安陵。
English: Xu Da was on the Northern Expedition, so he opened the mouth of the landslide site, guided the Yellow River into Surabaya to pass through the canal, and moved the Caozhou Judicial Office to Anling.

古文：塌场者，济宁以西、耐牢坡以南直抵鱼台南阳道也。
现代文：塌场，在济宁以西、耐牢坡以南，是直达鱼台南阳的通道。
English: The landslide site, in the west of Jining and south of the resistant slope, is a direct channel to the Nanyang of Yutai.

古文：八年，河决开封太黄寺堤。
现代文：八年，黄河决口于开封太黄寺堤。
English: Eight years ago, the Yellow River broke through the Taihuang Temple embankment in Kaifeng.

古文：诏河南参政安然发民夫三万人塞之。
现代文：下诏令河南参政安然调集民工三万人堵塞决口。
English: He issued a decree ordering Henan to participate in politics and mobilize 30,000 migrant workers to block the exit.

古文：十四年决原武、祥符、中牟，有司请兴筑。
现代文：十四年，决堤于原武、祥符、中牟，主管部门请求修筑堤防。
English: Fourteen years ago, the levees were breached in the cities of Wonmu, Xiangfu, and Zhongmou, and the authorities requested that the levees be rebuilt.

古文：帝以为天灾，令护旧堤而已。
现代文：皇帝认为这是天灾，只是下令保护旧堤罢了。
English: The emperor thought it was a natural disaster and ordered the old dike to be protected.

古文：十五年春，决朝邑。
现代文：十五年春天，决堤于朝色。
English: In the spring of 1915, the dike broke in the early morning.

古文：七月决荥泽、阳武。
现代文：七月，决堤于荣泽、阳武。
English: In July, the dike was breached in Rongze and Yangwu.

古文：十七年决开封东月堤，自陈桥至陈留横流数十里。
现代文：十七年，决堤于开封束月堤，从陈桥到陈留，横流敷十里。
English: In the seventeenth year, the dike was broken at the Kaifeng crescent moon dike, from Chenqiao to Chenliu, with a cross-flow of ten miles.

古文：又决杞县，入巴河。
现代文：又决堤于杞县，流入巴河。
English: It also broke through the dike in Jixian County and flowed into the Ba River.

古文：遣官塞河，蠲被灾租税。
现代文：派遣官吏堵塞黄河决口，免征受灾百姓租税。
English: Officials were dispatched to block the mouth of the Yellow River, exempting the affected people from paying taxes.

古文：二十二年，河没仪封，徙其治於白楼村。
现代文：二十二年，黄河水淹没仪封，迁其县治于北楼村。
English: In 1922, the Yellow River flooded Yifeng, and the county seat was moved to Beilou Village.

古文：二十三年春，决归德州东南凤池口，迳夏邑、永城。
现代文：二十三年春天，决堤于归德州东南凤池口，直接流到夏邑、永城。
English: In the spring of 1923, the levee broke at Fengchiqou, southeast of Guizhou, and the river flowed directly to Xiayu and Yongcheng.

古文：发兴武等十卫士卒，与归德民并力筑之。
现代文：调集兴武等十卫的士卒，与归德百姓一起合力筑堤。
English: He mobilized ten guardsmen including Xingwu and worked with the people who had returned to Germany to build the dike.

古文：罪有司不以闻者。
现代文：罪罚不禀报朝廷的有关官吏。
English: Relevant officials who reported to the imperial court were not punished.

古文：其秋，决开封西华诸县，漂没民舍。
现代文：那年秋天，决堤于开封西华诸县，淹没民房。
English: In the autumn of that year, the dike broke in the counties of Xihua in Kaifeng, flooding houses.

古文：遣使振万五千七百馀户。
现代文：派遣使者赈济一万五千七百余户。
English: Sending emissaries to help more than 15,700 households.

古文：二十四年四月，河水暴溢，决原武黑洋山，东经开封城北五里，又东南由陈州、项城、太和、颍州、颍上，东至寿州正阳镇，全入於淮。
现代文：二十四年四月，河水暴涨，决堤于原武黑洋山，向东经开封城北五里，又向东南经由陈州、项城、太和、颖州、颖上，束流至寿州正阳镇，全都流入淮河。
English: In April of the 24th year, the river water surged and broke through the dike in the Genwuhaiyang Mountain, flowing eastward five miles north of Kaifeng, and flowing southeastward through Chenzhou, Xiangcheng, Taihe, Yingzhou, and Yinggang to Shoushou Zhengyang Town, all of which flowed into the Huai River.

古文：而贾鲁河故道遂淤。
现代文：而贾鲁河故道于是淤塞。
English: As a result, the old path of the Jalu River was silted up.

古文：又由旧曹州、郓城两河口漫东平之安山，元会通河亦淤。
现代文：又流经旧曹州、郭城两河口，淹没东平的安山，元时的会通河也被淤塞。
English: It also flows through the two estuaries of old Caozhou and Guocheng, flooding the Andes Mountains in Dongping. The original Huitong River was also silted up.

古文：明年复决阳武，汜陈州、中牟、原武、封丘、祥符、兰阳、陈留、通许、太康、扶沟、杞十一州县，有司具图以闻。
现代文：第二年，又决堤于阳武，泛滥于陈州、中牟、原武、封丘、祥符、兰阳、陈留、通许、太康、扶沟、杞等十一个州县，有关官吏绘成地图报告朝廷。
English: In the second year, the dike broke in Yangwu, and the flood spread to 11 prefectures and counties including Chenzhou, Zhongmou, Wonwu, Fengqiu, Xiangfu, Lanyang, Chenliu, Tongxu, Taikang, Fuguo, and Handan. The relevant officials drew a map and reported to the imperial court.

古文：发民丁及安吉等十七卫军士修筑。
现代文：调集民工和安吉等十七个卫军士修筑。
English: Mobilized migrant workers and seventeen guardsmen and sergeants such as Anji to build it.

古文：其冬大寒，役遂罢。
现代文：这年冬天，非常寒冷，工程就停止下来。
English: This winter, when it was very cold, the project was halted.

古文：三十年八月决开封，城三面受水。
现代文：三十年八月，决堤于开封，城三面遭受水淹。
English: In August of the thirtieth year, the dike broke in Kaifeng, and the city was flooded on three sides.

古文：诏改作仓库於荥阳高阜，以备不虞。
现代文：韶令改建仓库于荣阳高坡，以防不测。
English: The imperial edict ordered that the warehouse be rebuilt in Rongyang Gaopo to prevent accidents.

古文：冬，蔡河徙陈州。
现代文：这年冬天，蔡河改道陈州。
English: This winter, the Cai River was diverted to Chenzhou.

古文：先是，河决，由开封北东行，至是下流淤，又决而之南。
现代文：在此之前，黄河决堤，从开封北向东流，到这时下游淤塞，又决口向南流。
English: Prior to this, the Yellow River broke through the dike and flowed from Kaifeng north to east. At this time, the downstream was silted up, and the river flowed south.

古文：永乐三年，河决温县堤四十丈，济、涝二水交溢，淹民田四十馀里，命修堤防。
现代文：永乐三年，黄河在温县决堤四十丈，济、涝二水汇合漫涨，淹没百姓耕地四十余里，皇帝命令修筑堤防。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the Yellow River broke through the dike forty meters high in Wen County, and the confluence of the two rivers, the Jie and the Qin, surged, flooding more than forty miles of cultivated land. The emperor ordered the construction of a dike.

古文：四年修阳武黄河决岸。
现代文：四年，修筑阳武黄河溃决的堤岸。
English: It took four years to build the embankment of the Yangwu Yellow River.

古文：八年伙，河决开封，坏城二百馀丈，民被患者万四千馀户，没田七千五百馀顷。
现代文：八年秋天，黄河决堤于开封，毁坏城墙二百余丈。百姓遭受水灾者一万四千余户，渣没耕地七千五百余顷。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng, destroying more than 200 meters of the city wall. More than 14,000 households suffered from floods, and more than 7,500 hectares of cultivated land were lost.

古文：帝以国家藩屏地，特遣侍郎张信往视。
现代文：皇帝以开封为国家的屏障，特派遣侍郎张信前往察看。
English: The emperor regarded Kaifeng as a national barrier, and specially dispatched his attendant Zhang Xin to inspect it.

古文：信言： 祥符鱼王口至中滦下二十馀里，有旧黄河岸，与今河面平。
现代文：张信说： 祥符鱼王口到中滦以下二十余里，有旧黄河堤岸，与现在的河面齐平。
English: Zhang Xin said: Xiangfu Yuangkou is more than 20 miles below Zhonglu, and there is an old Yellow River embankment, which is flush with the current river surface.

古文：浚而通之，使循故道，则水势可杀。 
现代文：将它疏通，使水沿着故道流，水势就可以减缓。 
English: If it is dredged and the water flows along the old path, the water potential can be slowed down.

古文：因绘图以进。
现代文：于是绘制成图进呈朝廷。
English: As a result, the drawing was made into a map and presented to the imperial court.

古文：时尚书宋礼、侍郎金纯方开会通河。
现代文：当时，尚书宋礼、侍良匡金纯正开通会通河。
English: At that time, Shang Shuxu, Song Li, and the attendant Liang Kuang, Jin Chunzheng, opened the Tonghe.

古文：帝乃发民丁十万，命兴安伯徐亨、侍郎蒋廷瓒偕纯相治，并令礼总其役。
现代文：皇帝就调集民工十万，命兴安伯徐亨、侍郎蒋廷瓒与金纯共同治理，同时命令宋礼统管这项工程。
English: The emperor mobilized 100,000 migrant workers and ordered Xing Anbo Xu Heng, Jiang Tingtao and Jin Chun to jointly manage the project. At the same time, he ordered Song Li to take charge of the project.

古文：九年七月，河复故道，自封丘金龙口，下鱼台塌场，会汶水，经徐、吕二洪南入於淮。
现代文：九年七月，黄河流回到故道，从封丘金龙口，下至鱼台塌场，汇合于汶水，流经徐、吕二洪往南流入淮。
English: In July of the ninth year, the Yellow River returned to its former path, flowing from Fenqiu Jinlongkou, down to the Yutai landslide site, converging at Wenshui, flowing through Xu and Lv Erhong to the south and flowing into Huai.

古文：是时，会通河已开，黄河与之合，漕道大通，遂议罢海运，而河南水患亦稍息。
现代文：这时，会通河已经开通，黄河与之汇合，漕运之道畅通，于是商议停止海运，而河南水灾也稍微平息。
English: At this time, the Huitong River has been opened, the Yellow River has merged with it, and the paddling route is smooth. Therefore, it was discussed to stop shipping, and the flooding in Henan has subsided slightly.

古文：已而决阳武中盐堤，漫中牟、祥符、尉氏。
现代文：不久决堤于阳武中盐堤，淹没中牟、祥符、尉氏。
English: Soon, the dike broke at the Yangwuzhong Salt Dike in Yangwuzhong, submerging Zhongmou, Xiangfu, and Leung.

古文：工部主事兰芳按视，言： 堤当急流之冲，夏秋泛涨，势不可骤杀。
现代文：工部主事蔺芳巡视，上奏道： 堤岸正当急流的要冲，夏秋河水泛滥，水势不可突然碱缓。
English: The person in charge of the engineering department, Yu Fang, made a tour of inspection, and said: The embankment is about to be rushed by the rapids, the Xiaqiu River is flooded, and the water potential must not be suddenly slowed down.

古文：宜卷土树椿以资捍御，无令重为民患而已。 
现代文：应当将藤条卷成圆柱，填实泥工，树立木桩，以抵御洪水，不让洪水再给百姓造成灾祸了。 
English: It is necessary to roll rattan strips into cylinders, fill them with masonry, and erect wooden piles to resist floods and prevent floods from causing disaster to the people.

古文：又言： 中滦导河分流，使由故道北入海，诚万世利。
现代文：又奏道： 在中滦疏导黄河分流，使它由故道往北流入海，这实在是万世之利。
English: He also said: The diversion of the Yellow River in Zhongluo Canal, so that it flows northward into the sea from the old route, is truly a benefit for all time.

古文：但缘河堤埽，止用蒲绳泥草，不能持久。
现代文：但是因为河的堤坝，祇用蒲绳泥草，不能持久。
English: But because of the river's levees, the grass can't last.

古文：宜编木为囤，填石其中，则水可杀，堤可固。 
现代文：应当用木栅编成圆囤，中间用石头填寅，则水势可以碱缓，堤岸可以牢固。 
English: It should be woven into a round cocoon with a wooden grid, and the middle should be filled with stone, then the water potential can be moderated, and the embankment can be firmly built.

古文：诏皆从其议。
现代文：诏令全依从他的主张。
English: The following edict fully complies with his opinion and upgrades Guangzhou to the general administration of highways.

古文：十四年决开封州县十四，经怀远，由涡河入於淮。
现代文：十四年，决堤于开封十四个州县，经由怀远，从涡河流入淮。
English: Fourteen years ago, the dike was broken in fourteen counties and prefectures in Kaifeng, and the river flowed from the Vortex River into the Huai River via Huaiyuan.

古文：二十年，工部以开封土城堤数溃，请浚其东故道。
现代文：二十年，工部认为开封土城堤岸多次溃决，请求疏通其束面的故道。
English: In the past 20 years, the Ministry of Works believed that the embankment of Kaifeng Ducheng had been breached many times, and requested that the old way of its bund face be cleared.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：宣德元年霪雨，溢开封州县十。
现代文：宣德元年，久雨，河水泛滥于开封十个州县。
English: In the first year of Xuande, heavy rain and river flooding occurred in ten prefectures and counties in Kaifeng.

古文：三年，以河患，徙灵州千户所於城东。
现代文：三年，因为黄河水患，迁灵州千户所于城东。
English: Three years ago, due to the Yellow River flood, the Lingshou Thousand Households Research Station was relocated to the east of the city.

古文：六年从河南布政使言，浚祥符抵仪封黄陵冈淤道四百五十里。
现代文：六年，依从河南布政使的主张，疏通祥符到仪封黄陵冈的淤塞河道四百五十里。
English: In six years, in accordance with the proposal of the Henan Bu political envoy, the silted river channel from Xiangfu to Yifeng Huangling Mountain was cleared for 450 miles.

古文：是时，金龙口渐淤，而河复屡溢开封。
现代文：这时，金龙口渐渐淤塞，而黄河又多次泛滥于开封。
English: At this time, Jinlongkou gradually silted up, and the Yellow River repeatedly flooded Kaifeng.

古文：十年从御史李懋言，浚金龙口。
现代文：十年，依从御史李懋的主张，疏通金龙口。
English: Ten years later, in accordance with the proposal of the imperial historian Li Xi, the dredging of the Golden Dragon estuary began.

古文：正统二年筑阳武、原武、荥泽决岸。
现代文：正统二年，修筑阳武、原武、荣泽溃决的堤岸。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, the embankments of Yangwu, Yuanwu and Rongze were built.

古文：又决濮州、范县。
现代文：又决堤于濮州、范县。
English: The levees were also breached in Ganzhou and Fan County.

古文：三年，河复决阳武及邳州，灌鱼台、金乡、嘉祥。
现代文：三年，黄河又决堤于阳武及邳州，淹没鱼台、金乡、嘉祥。
English: Three years later, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Yangwu and Luzhou, flooding Yutai, Jinxiang and Jiaxiang.

古文：越数年，又决金龙口、阳谷堤及张家黑龙庙口，而徐、吕二洪亦渐浅，太黄寺巴河分水处，水脉微细。
现代文：过了几年，又决堤于金龙口、阳谷堤及张家黑龙庙口，而徐、旦二洪也渐渐变浅，太黄寺巴河分水处，水流细小。
English: A few years later, levees were breached at Jinlongkou, Yanggu Levee and Zhangjiagang Black Dragon Temple, while Xu and Tan Erhong also gradually became shallow. At the water diversion point of Taihuangjiaba River, the water flow was small.

古文：十三年方从都督同知武兴言，发卒疏浚。
现代文：十三年，纔依从都督同知武兴的主张，调集士卒疏通。
English: In the thirteenth year, Zou followed the suggestion of the governor Tongzhi Wu Xing and mobilized the soldiers to clear the road.

古文：而陈留水夏涨，决金村堤及黑潭南岸。
现代文：然而，陈留河水夏天暴涨，决堤于金村堤及黑潭南岸。
English: However, the Chenliu River water surged in the summer, bursting the dike at the Jincun dike and the south bank of the Black Lake.

古文：筑垂竣，复决。
现代文：修筑的河堤将近竣工，又溃决。
English: The embankment, which was nearly completed, was breached again.

古文：其秋，新乡八柳树口亦决，漫曹、濮，抵东昌，冲张秋，溃寿张沙湾，坏运道，东入海。
现代文：这午秋天，新乡八柳树口也溃决，泛滥于曹、濮，到达东昌，直冲张秋，溃堤于寿张沙湾，毁坏漕运河道，往东流入海。
English: On this autumn afternoon, the Xinxiang Eight Willows Estuary also broke through, flooding Cao and Handan, reaching Dongchang, rushing straight into Zhangqiu, breaking the dike in Shou Zhangsha Bay, destroying the canal road, and flowing into the sea to the east.

古文：徐、吕二洪遂浅涩。
现代文：徐、吕二洪便变浅淤塞。
English: Xu and Lv Erhong became shallow blockages.

古文：命工部侍郎王永和往理其事。
现代文：命工部侍郎王永和前往处理此事。
English: Wang Yonghe, an attendant of the Ministry of Works, went to deal with the matter.

古文：永和至山东，修沙湾未成，以冬寒停役。
现代文：王永和到达山东，修筑沙湾堤岸还未竣工，因冬天寒冷而停工。
English: When Wang Yonghe arrived in Shandong, the construction of the Sand Bay Embankment was not yet completed, and it was stopped due to the cold winter.

古文：且言河决自卫辉，宜敕河南守臣修塞。
现代文：并且说黄河自卫辉决堤，应当诏令河南守臣去修筑。
English: Moreover, it was said that the Yellow River broke through the embankment in self-defence, and the Henan governor should be ordered to rebuild it.

古文：帝切责之，令山东三司筑沙湾，趣永和塞河南八柳树，疏金龙口，使河由故道。
现代文：皇帝严厉谴责他，令山东三司修筑沙湾堤岸，督促王永和堵塞河南八柳树决口，疏通金龙口，使河水经由故道。
English: The emperor severely reprimanded him, ordered the three departments of Shandong to build the embankment of Shawan Bay, and urged Wang Yonghe to block the mouth of the Eight Willows in Henan Province, clear the mouth of the Golden Dragon, and let the river water pass through the old road.

古文：明年正月，河复决聊城。
现代文：第二年正月，河又决堤于聊城。
English: In the first month of the second year, the river broke through the dike again in Liaocheng.

古文：至三月，永和浚黑洋山西湾，引其水由太黄寺以资运河。
现代文：到了三月，王永和疏通黑洋山西湾河道，引其水经由太黄寺以供给运河。
English: In March, Wang Yonghe dredged the West Bay River in the Black Sea Mountains and diverted its water through Taihuang Temple to supply the canal.

古文：修筑沙湾堤大半，而不敢尽塞，置分水闸，设三空放水，自大清河入海。
现代文：修筑沙湾堤岸刚到大半，而不敢完全堵塞，建立分水闸，设立三个闸门放水，从大清河流入海。
English: The construction of the embankment of Shawan Bay has just reached a large part, but dare not completely block it, establish a diversion gate, set up three gates to release water from the Daqing River into the sea.

古文：且设分水闸二空於沙湾西岸，以泄上流，而请停八柳树工。
现代文：而且又设两个分水闸门于沙湾西岸，以泄上游洪水，因而请求停止八柳树的工程。
English: Moreover, two diversion gates were set up on the west coast of Shawan Bay to release upstream floodwaters, thus requesting the suspension of the Yalongshu project.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是时，河势方横溢，而分流大清，不耑向徐、吕。
现代文：这时，黄河水势刚泛滥，而分流于大清河，不只流向徐、旦二洪。
English: At this time, the Yellow River had just flooded, and the diversion of the Daqing River flowed not only to Xu and Tan Erhong.

古文：徐、吕益胶浅，且自临清以南，运道艰阻。
现代文：徐、垦二洪更加淤塞水浅，而且从临清河以南开始，漕运河道航行艰难。
English: The rivers of Xu and Jian Erhong are more silted and shallow, and it is difficult to navigate the canal from the south of Linqing River.

古文：景泰二年特敕山东、河南巡抚都御史洪英、王暹协力合治，务令水归漕河。
现代文：景泰二年，特敕令山东、河南巡抚都御史洪英、王暹齐心协力合作治理，务必让水回到漕河。
English: In the second year of King Taejo, King Taejo ordered the governor of Shandong and Henan Provinces, Emperor Shi Hongying, and King Siem to work together to cooperate in the management of the river, and to ensure that the water returned to the Caohe River.

古文：暹言： 黄河自陕州以西，有山峡，不能为害；陕州以东，则地势平缓，水易泛溢，故为害甚多。
现代文：王暹说： 黄河从陕州以西，有山峡，不能造成灾害；陕州以束，则地势平坦舒缓，河水容易泛滥，所以多造成灾害。
English: Wang Siam said: The Yellow River starts from the west of Shaanxi Province, there are mountain gorges, it cannot cause disasters; in Shaanxi Province, the terrain is flat and gentle, the river is easy to flood, so it mostly causes disasters.

古文：洪武二十四年改流，从汴梁北五里许，由凤阳入淮者为大黄河。
现代文：洪武二十四年改道，从汴梁北边大约五里，经由凤阳流入淮河的叫大黄河。
English: In the 24th year of Hongwu's reign, the river was rerouted to flow into the Huaihe River, also known as the Great Yellow River, via Fengyang, about five miles north of Shiliang.

古文：其支流出徐州以南者为小黄河，以通漕运。
现代文：其支流出于徐州以南的叫小黄河，以使漕运河道畅通。
English: Its tributary from the south of Xuzhou is called the Small Yellow River, so that the canal canals can flow smoothly.

古文：自正统十三年以来，河复故道，从黑洋山后径趋沙湾入海明，但存小黄河从徐州出。
现代文：自正统十三年以来，黄河又复归故道，从黑洋山后直奔沙湾入海，只保留小黄河从徐州流出。
English: Since the thirteenth year of orthodoxy, the Yellow River has returned to its original path, running straight from the back of the Black Sea Mountain to the Gulf of Sha into the sea, leaving only the small Yellow River flowing out of Xuzhou.

古文：岸高水低，随浚随塞，以是徐州之南不得饱水。
现代文：岸高水低，随即疏通随即淤塞，所以，徐州之南不能得到充足的流水。
English: Due to the low water level on the shore, dredging is followed by silting, so the south of Xuzhou can not get enough running water.

古文：臣自黑洋山东南抵徐州，督河南三司疏浚。
现代文：臣从黑洋山东南到达徐州，督促河南三司疏通。
English: The minister arrived in Xuzhou from the southeast of Mount Heiyang and urged the three departments of Henan to dredge.

古文：临清以南，请以责英。 
现代文：临清以南，请把责任交给洪英。 
English: South of Linqing, please give the responsibility to Hong Ying.

古文：未几，给事中张文质劾暹、英治水无绩，请引塌场水济徐、吕二洪，浚潘家渡以北支流，杀沙湾水势。
现代文：不久，给事中张文质检举王暹、洪英治水无功绩，请求引塌埸水通徐、旦二洪，疏通潘家渡以北的支流，碱缓沙湾水势。
English: Not long after, Zhang Wenqin, who was in charge of the case, accused Wang Siam and Hong Ying of doing nothing to treat the water, and requested that the water channels of the Yanshui River be diverted to the Xu and Tang Erhong Rivers, that the tributaries north of the Panjiadu River be dredged, and that the water potential of the Shawan Bay be alleviated.

古文：且开沙湾浮桥以西河口，筑闸引水，以灌临清，而别命官以责其成。
现代文：并且开通沙湾浮桥以西的河口，筑闸门引水，以注入临清河，而另命官员，把这件事交给他去完成。
English: He also opened the estuary to the west of the Shawan Floating Bridge, built a gate to divert water to inject it into the Linqing River, and ordered another official to give him this matter to complete.

古文：诏不允，仍命暹、英调度。
现代文：下诏不允许，仍命王暹、洪英指挥调遣。
English: This was not allowed by the edict, but Wang Siam and Hong Ying were still ordered to command and dispatch the troops.

古文：时议者谓： 沙湾以南地高，水不得南入运河。
现代文：这时，谈论的人说： 沙湾以南地势高，水不能往南流入运河。
English: At this time, the person who was talking said: The land south of Sha Wan is high, and water cannot flow south into the canal.

古文：请引耐牢坡水以灌运，而勿使经沙湾，别开河以避其冲决之势。 
现代文：请求引耐牢坡水注入运河，而不使其流经沙湾，另开河道以避免其冲决的水势。 
English: The request was to divert water flowing downhill into the canal, rather than allowing it to flow through Sandy Bay, and to divert the river to avoid the force of the rushing water.

古文：或又言： 引耐牢坡水南去，则自此以北枯涩矣。 
现代文：有的人又说： 引耐牢坡水向南流，那么从此以北的河水就会枯竭。 
English: Some people also said: If the water that is resistant to the slope is diverted to flow southward, then the river water north of here will be exhausted.

古文：甚者言： 沙湾水湍急，石铁沉下若羽，非人力可为。
现代文：还有人甚至认为： 沙湾水流急速，石铁沉下就像羽毛一样，不是用人力可以治理的。
English: Some people even believe that: the rapid flow of water in Shawan Bay, and the sinking of stone and iron like feathers, cannot be controlled by manpower.

古文：宜设齐醮符咒以禳之。 
现代文：应当设斋坛祈神请僧道昼符念咒来消除灾害。 
English: A sacrificial altar should be set up to pray to the gods and ask the monks to chant mantras to eliminate disasters.

古文：帝心甚忧念，命工部尚书石璞往治，而加河神封号。
现代文：皇帝心里非常担忧，命工部尚书石璞前去治理，并且加上河神封号。
English: The emperor was very worried in his heart and ordered the Ministry of Works to go to Shangshu Shihong to deal with it, and added the river god's seal number.

古文：璞至，浚黑洋山至徐州以通漕，而沙湾决口如故。
现代文：互璞到任后，疏通黑洋山至徐州的河道以通漕运，而沙湾决口还是像原来那样。
English: After the arrival of the mutual agreement, the river channel from Heiyangshan to Xuzhou was dredged and transported by rowing, but the mouth of Shawan Bay was still as it was before.

古文：乃命中官黎贤、阮洛，御史彭谊协治。
现代文：于是命宦官黎贤、阮洛，御史彭谊协同治理。
English: Therefore, he ordered the eunuchs Li Xian, Ruan Luo, and Gu Shibang to jointly govern the country.

古文：璞等筑石堤於沙湾，以御决河，开月河二，引水以益运河，且杀其决势。
现代文：石璞等于沙湾修筑石堤，用以防御河水决口，开辟二条月河，引水以增加运河，并且减缓其决口的水势。
English: Shijiazhuang is equal to Shawan to build a stone dike to protect the river mouth, open up two moon rivers, divert water to increase the canal, and slow down the water potential of its mouth.

古文：三年五月，河流渐微细，沙湾堤始成。
现代文：三年五月，河水渐渐细小，沙湾堤纔建成。
English: In May of the third year, the river water gradually decreased, and the dike of Shawan Bay was built.

古文：乃加璞太子太保，而於黑洋山、沙湾建河神二新庙，岁春秋二祭。
现代文：于是加封石璞为太子太保，而在黑洋山、沙湾修建二座河神新庙，每年春秋祭祀二次。
English: As a result, Sekigahara was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and two new temples to the river god were built in Mount Heiyang and Shawan, with the ritual held twice a year in spring and autumn.

古文：六月，大雨浃旬，复决沙湾北岸，掣运河之水以东，近河地皆没。
现代文：六月，连续下了十天大雨，又决堤于沙湾北岸，牵掣运河水束流，靠近黄河的地区令被淹没。
English: In June, it rained heavily for ten days in a row. The dike broke on the north bank of Shawan Bay, diverting the canal's water flow, and the area near the Yellow River was flooded.

古文：命英督有司修筑。
现代文：命洪英督促主管部门修筑。
English: Hong Ying urged the competent authorities to build.

古文：复敕中官黎贤、武艮，工部侍郎赵荣往治。
现代文：又敕令子官黎，贤、武艮，工部侍郎趟荣前去治理。
English: He also ordered his subordinate officials Li, Xian, and Wuxuan, as well as the chamberlain of the engineering department, to go to Rong.

古文：四年正月，河复决新塞口之南，诏复加河神封号。
现代文：四年正月，黄河又决堤于新塞口之南，诏令又加河神封号。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the Yellow River broke through the dike again in the south of Xinjiekou, and the river god seal was added to the decree.

古文：至四月，决口乃塞。
现代文：到四月，决口纔被堵塞。
English: By April, the breach had been plugged.

古文：五月，大雷雨，复决沙湾北岸，掣运河水入盐河，漕舟尽阻。
现代文：五月，大雷雨，又决堤于沙湾北岸，牵掣运河水流入盐河，漕运船只完全受阻。
English: In May, heavy thunderstorms caused the dike to break on the north shore of Shawan Bay, diverting canal water into the Salt River, completely blocking rowing boats.

古文：帝复命璞往。
现代文：皇帝又命石璞前去治理。
English: The emperor also ordered Shi Lang to come forward to govern.

古文：乃凿一河，长三里，以避决口，上下通运河，而决口亦筑坝截之，令新河、运河俱可行舟。
现代文：于是开凿一河，长三里，以避免决口，上下通于运河，而在决口处也筑坝拦截，让新河、运河都可以行船。
English: So they dug a river, three miles long, to avoid a breach, up and down to the canal, and at the breach they also built a dam to intercept, so that both the new river and the canal could be navigated.

古文：工毕奏闻。
现代文：工程完工上奏朝廷。
English: The completion of the project was reported to the Imperial Court.

古文：帝恐不能久，令璞且留处置，而命谕德徐有贞为佥都御史耑治沙湾。
现代文：皇帝担心不能持久，令石璞暂且留在那里处置，而命谕德徐有贞为愈都御史专门治理沙湾。
English: The emperor was worried that it would not last, so he ordered Shijie to stay there for the time being, and ordered De Xu Youzhen to govern Shawan specifically.

古文：时河南水患方甚，原武、西华皆迁县治以避水。
现代文：这时，河南水患正厉害，原武、西华都迁移县治以避洪水。
English: At this time, the flooding in Henan Province was severe, and both Huanwu and Xihua moved their county seats to avoid the floods.

古文：巡抚暹言： 黄河旧从开封北转流东南入淮，不为害。
现代文：巡抚王暹上奏说： 黄河原从开封北转向东南流入淮河，没有造成灾害。
English: The inspector, Wang Siam Shangsoo, said: The Yellow River flows from Kaifeng in the north to the southeast into the Huaihe River, causing no disasters.

古文：自正统十三年改流为二。
现代文：从正统十三年改成分流为二条。
English: From the 13th year of orthodoxy, there are two streams.

古文：一自新乡入柳树，由故道东经延津、封丘入沙湾。
现代文：一条从新乡八柳树起，沿着故道向东经过延津、封丘流入沙湾。
English: One starts from Xinxiang Eight Willows and follows the old road eastward, passing through Yanjin, Fengqiu and flowing into Shawan.

古文：一决荥泽，漫流原武，抵祥符、扶沟、通许、洧川、尉氏、临颍、郾城、陈州、商水、西华、项城、太康。
现代文：一条决堤于荣泽，泛滥流经原武，直到祥符、扶沟、通许、洧川、尉氏、临颖、郾城、陈州、商水、西华、项城、太康。
English: A levee was breached in Rongze, and the flooding flowed through Wonmoo until it reached Xiangfu, Buqiao, Tongxu, Minchuan, Yi, Linying, Shicheng, Chenzhou, Shangshui, Xihua, Xiangcheng, and Taikang.

古文：没田数十万顷，而开封患特甚。
现代文：淹没农田数十万顷，而开封的水患特别严重。
English: Hundreds of thousands of hectares of farmland have been inundated, with flooding in Kaifeng being particularly severe.

古文：虽尝筑大小堤於城西，皆三十馀里，然沙土易坏，随筑随决，小堤已没，大堤复坏其半。
现代文：虽曾修筑大仆堤于城西，都有三十多里，然而沙土容易被冲坏，随即修筑随即溃决，小堤已经淹没，大堤又被冲毁过半。
English: Although more than 30 miles of dikes have been built in the west of the city, the sandy soil is easily washed away, and the construction is immediately followed by the collapse, the small dike has been flooded, and the large dike has been washed away more than half.

古文：请起军民夫协筑，以防后患。 
现代文：请求调集官兵和民工共同修筑，以防后患。 
English: The request calls for the mobilization of officers and soldiers and civilian workers to jointly build, in order to prevent future problems.

古文：帝可其奏。
现代文：皇帝准许他的奏请。
English: The patriarch approved his suggestion.

古文：太仆少卿黄仕儁亦言： 河分两派，一自荥泽南流入项城，一自新乡八柳树北流，入张秋会通河，并经六七州县，约二千馀里。
现代文：太仆少卿黄仕儁也说： 黄河分成两条，一条从荣泽往南流入项城，一条从新乡八柳树往北流入张秋会通河，并经过六七个州县，大约两千余里。
English: Huang Shijun, the servant of the Young Master, also said: The Yellow River is divided into two, one flows from Rongze to the south into Xiangcheng, and one flows from Xinxiang Bailuxi to the north into Zhangqiu Huitong River, and passes through six or seven states and counties, about two thousand miles.

古文：民皆荡析离居，而有司犹徵其税。
现代文：百姓都妻离子散流离失所，然而主管官吏还照样征收他们的赋税。
English: People have been displaced from their homes, yet officials continue to collect their taxes.

古文：乞敕所司覆视免徵。 
现代文：请求诏令主管部门重新审察，免征租税。 
English: Request the competent authority to re-examine and exempt from tax.

古文：帝亦可其奏。
现代文：皇帝也准许他的奏请。
English: The emperor also allowed him to perform.

古文：巡抚河南御史张澜又言： 原武黄河东岸尝开二河，合黑洋山旧河道引水济徐、吕。
现代文：巡抚河南御史张澜又奏道： 原武黄河东岸曾开通二河，汇合黑洋山旧河道，引水通徐、吕二洪。
English: Zhang Lan, the governor of Henan Province, also recited: Originally, the east bank of the Wuhong River had two rivers, which joined the old river of the Black Sea Mountain, and the water was diverted to Xu and Lü Erhong.

古文：今河改决而北，二河淤塞不通，恐徐、吕乏水，必妨漕运，黑洋山北，河流稍纡回，请因决口改挑一河以接旧道，灌徐、吕。 
现代文：今河改道北流，二河淤塞不通，担心徐、吕二河缺水，一定妨碍漕运，黑洋山以北，黄河水流稍稍迂回，请求顺着决口改挖一河以接通旧河道，注水入徐、吕二洪。 
English: The Ima River has been diverted to the north, the two rivers are blocked and impassable, and it is feared that the water shortage of the Xu and Lv2 rivers will definitely hinder the transportation of rowing boats. North of the Black Sea Mountains, the Yellow River water flow is slightly diverted, and it is requested to dig a river along the breach to connect the old river channel and inject water into the Xu and Lv2 rivers.

古文：帝亦从之。
现代文：皇帝也依从他的请求。
English: The emperor also followed his advice.

古文：有贞至沙湾，上治河三策： 一置水闸门。
现代文：徐有贞到沙湾，上奏治河三条办法： 一是建置水闸门。
English: Xu Youzhen went to Shawan and proposed three measures to control the river: First, build a sluice gate.

古文：臣闻水之性可使通流，不可使堙塞。
现代文：臣听说河水的特性可以使其畅通，不能使其堵塞。
English: The minister heard that the characteristics of river water can make it flow smoothly, but it cannot be blocked.

古文：禹凿龙门，辟伊阙，为疏导计也。
现代文：大禹凿开龙门，开辟伊阙，为疏导打算。
English: Dayu chiseled open the gantry, opened up the Yili, and planned for the diversion.

古文：故汉武堙瓠子终弗成功，汉明疏汴河逾年著绩。
现代文：所以汉武帝用堵塞瓠子的办法，最终还是不能成功，漠明帝疏通汴河，刚过一年就取得显著的成绩。
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwu's method of plugging the dike was not successful in the end. Emperor Mo Ming dredged the Min River and achieved remarkable results in just one year.

古文：今谈治水者甚众，独乐浪王景所述制水门之法可取。
现代文：现在谈论治水的人很多，只有乐浪王景所说的建置水闸门的办法可取。
English: Many people are now talking about flood control, and only the method of building sluice gates, as described by Le Lang Wang Jing, is advisable.

古文：盖沙湾地土皆沙，易致坍决，故作坝作闸皆非善计。
现代文：大概沙湾地上都是沙，容易导致坍塌溃决，所以筑坝建闸都不是好的办法。
English: It is likely that there is sand on the ground of Shawan Bay, which can easily lead to collapse and collapse, so building dams and gates is not a good way.

古文：请依景法损益其间，置闸门於水，而实其底，令高常水五尺。
现代文：请依从王景的办法，作一些改变，建置闸门于水中，而筑寅其底，让其高于平常水位五尺。
English: Please follow Wang Jing's method, make some changes, build the gate in the water, and build it at the bottom, so that it is five feet higher than the usual water level.

古文：小则拘之以济运，大则疏之使趋海，则有通流之利，无堙塞之患矣。
现代文：水小则可以控制起来以济运河，水大便疏导使它直流大海，就有通流的利益，而无堵塞的祸患。
English: Small amounts of water can be controlled to save the canal, and water and manure can be diverted to make it flow directly to the sea, which has the benefit of flow, but not the disaster of blockage.

古文：一开分水河。
现代文：一是开辟分水河。
English: The first is to open up the diversion of the river.

古文：凡水势大者宜分，小者宜合。
现代文：凡是水势大的地方应当分流，小的应当聚合。
English: Wherever the water potential is large, it should be diverted, and where it is small, it should be pooled.

古文：今黄河势大恒冲决，运河势小恒乾浅，必分黄水合运河，则有利无害。
现代文：现在黄河水势大，常常冲垮堤岸，运河水势弱小，常常干枯少水，必须分流黄河水，汇合入运河，就会有利而无害。
English: At present, the Yellow River has a large water potential and often overflows its banks, while the canal has a weak water potential and often dries up. It is necessary to divert the Yellow River water and merge it into the canal, which will be beneficial and harmless.

古文：请度黄河可分之地，开广济河一道，下穿濮阳、博陵及旧沙河二十馀里，上连东、西影塘及小岭等地又数十里，其内则有古大金堤可倚以为固，其外有八百里梁山泊可恃以为泄。
现代文：请求测量黄河可以分流的地方，开辟广济河一道，下通濮阳、博陵及旧沙河二十余里，上接东、西影塘及小岭等地又数十余里，其内则有古大金堤，可以依凭它作为坚固的堤岸，其外有八百里梁山泊可以依赖它泄洪。
English: Request to measure the places where the Yellow River can be diverted, and open up the Guangji River together, with more than 20 miles of downstream passage to Poyang, Boling and the old Sand River, and more than dozens of miles of upstream connection to Dong, West Yingtang and Xiaoling. Among them, there is the ancient Great Golden Dike, which can be relied on as a solid embankment, and there are 800 miles of Liangshan Po that can rely on it for flood discharge.

古文：至新置二闸亦颇坚牢，可以宣节，使黄河水大不至泛溢为害，小亦不至乾浅以阻漕运。 
现代文：至于新修建的二个闸门也很坚固牢实，可以疏散和控制，使黄河水大时不至于泛滥成灾，水小时也不至于挽枯少水而阻碍漕运。 
English: As for the newly built two gates, they are also very strong and solid, and can be evacuated and controlled, so that the Yellow River will not flood when the water level is high, and the water will not block the water flow when the water level is low.

古文：其一挑深运河。
现代文：他的一个办法是挖深运河。
English: One of his solutions was to dig a deep canal.

古文：帝谕有贞，如其议行之。
现代文：皇帝诏令徐有贞，依照他的主张进行治理。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Xu Youzhen to govern in accordance with his proposal.

古文：有贞乃逾济、汶，沿卫、沁，循大河，道濮、范，相度地形水势，上言： 河自雍而豫，出险固而之夷斥，水势既肆。
现代文：徐有贞就越过济、汶，沿着卫、沁，顺着黄河，经过濮、范，测量地形水势，上奏说： 黄河从雍到豫，流出险固之地而到平坦宽广之处，水势无拘无束。
English: Xu Yuzhen went to Fuzhi and Wen, along the Wei and Yunnan Rivers, and along the Yellow River, passing through Yunnan and Fan, to measure the topography and water potential. He said in the introduction: The Yellow River flows from Yong to Yunnan, flows out of the perilous land to a flat and wide place, and the water potential is unrestrained.

古文：由豫而兖，土益疏，水益肆。
现代文：由豫到兖，土地更加疏松，水势更加无拘无束。
English: From Henan to Yunnan, the land is more loose and the water potential is more unrestrained.

古文：而沙湾之东，所谓大洪口者，适当其冲，於是决焉，而夺济、汶入海之路以去。
现代文：然而沙湾以束，所谓的大洪口堤岸，正好对着它的要冲，于是溃决，因而夺取济、汶入海的水道而去。
English: However, Sha Wan Yitong, the so-called large estuary embankment of Hongkou, was exactly opposite its headwaters, so it broke, thus seizing the waterway into the sea of Jie and Wen.

古文：诸水从之而泄，堤以溃，渠以淤，涝则溢，旱则涸，漕道由此阻。
现代文：诸水跟着往这里排泄，堤岸因此而溃决，沟渠因此而淤塞，雨水多就泛滥，雨水少就枯竭，漕运通道因此而受阻。
English: Waters are discharged here, the embankment is breached as a result, the ditch is blocked as a result, more rainwater floods, less rainwater dries up, and the rowing channel is blocked as a result.

古文：然骤而堰之，则溃者益溃，淤者益淤。
现代文：然而突然把水堵起来，那么溃决遇的河堤就更容易溃决，淤塞过的河道就更容易淤塞。
English: However, if the water is suddenly blocked, it will be easier to break through the dam, and the silted river will be more likely to be silted up.

古文：今请先疏其水，水势平乃治其决，决止乃浚其淤。 
现代文：现在请先疏通刃里的河水，水势平缓就治理那里的溃决，决岸制止便疏通那里的淤塞。 
English: Now, please first clear the river water in the blade. If the water level is smooth, it will control the outburst there. If you stop the outburst, it will clear the blockage there.

古文：於是设渠以疏之，起张秋金堤之首，西南行九里至濮阳泺，又九里至博陵陂，又六里至寿张之沙河，又八里至东、西影塘，又十有五里至白岭湾，又三里至李鞬，凡五十里。
现代文：于是开挖沟渠疏导河水，起于张秋金堤之首，往西南流九里到濮阳滦，又流九里到博陵陂，又流六里到寿张的沙河，又流八里到束、西影塘；又流十五里到白嵌湾，又流三里到李隼，总共五十里。
English: As a result, a ditch was dug to divert the river water, which started at the head of the Zhangqiu Golden Dike and flowed southwest for nine miles to Shiyang, nine miles to Boling, six miles to Shuzhang's Shahe, eight miles to Zuo and Xiyingtang, fifteen miles to Baijiay Bay, and three miles to Li'an, a total of fifty miles.

古文：由李鞬而上二十里至竹口莲花池，又三十里至大潴潭，乃逾范暨濮，又上而西，凡数百里，经澶渊以接河、沁，筑九堰以御河流旁出者，长各万丈，实之石而键以铁。
现代文：由李举往前流二十里到竹口蓬花池，又流三十里到大潲潭，于是越过范及濮，又往前向西流，总共数百里，经过澶渊以与河、沁相接，修筑九座拦河坝以防御旁出的河水，长各万丈，用石头填实，并用铁器固定。
English: From Li He, it flows for twenty miles to Zhukou Penghua Pond, and for thirty miles to Datong Lake, and then crosses the Fan River and the Yangtze River, and then flows westward for a total of several hundred miles, passing through the Yangtze River to connect with the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River, and building nine dams to protect the water flowing out of the side, each of which is very tall, filled with stones, and fixed with iron tools.

古文：六年七月，功成，赐渠名广济。
现代文：六年七月，大功告成，赐渠名广济。
English: In July of the sixth year, the great work was completed, and Guangji was given its name.

古文：沙湾之决垂十年，至是始塞。
现代文：沙湾的决堤将近十年，到这时纔堵塞成功。
English: It has been nearly ten years since the break of the dike in Shawan Bay, by which time the dam had been successfully blocked.

古文：亦会黄河南流入淮，有贞乃克奏功。
现代文：也汇合于黄河往南流入淮河，徐有贞纔得以上奏成功。
English: It also converges with the southward inflow of the Yellow River into the Huai River, and Xu Youzheng was able to play the role successfully.

古文：凡费木铁竹石累数万，夫五万八千有奇，工五百五十馀日。
现代文：总共耗费木、铁、竹、石累计数万，民工五万八千有余，用工五百五十余天。
English: In total, tens of thousands of wood, iron, bamboo and stone have been consumed, and more than 58,000 migrant workers have been employed for more than 550 days.

古文：自此河水北出济漕，而阿、鄄、曹、郓间田出沮洳者，百数十万顷。
现代文：从此以后，河水北流通漕运，而阿、鄄、曹、鄣之间免离涝灾的田地有一百几十万顷。
English: Since then, the water of the river has been channeled northward, and there are more than one million hectares of farmland between A, B, Cao, and Handan that are free from flood damage.

古文：乃浚漕渠，由沙湾北至临清，南抵济宁，复建八闸於东昌，用王景制水门法以平水道，而山东河患息矣。
现代文：然后疏通漕运渠道，从沙湾向北到临清，向南到济宁，又修建八座闸门于束昌，用王景建置水闸门的办法来平衡水道，而山东境内黄河造成的祸患平息了。
English: Then, the canal transport channels were cleared, from Shawan to the north to Linqing and to the south to Jining, and eight locks were built in Sokchang. Wang Jing used the method of building locks to balance the waterway, and the disaster caused by the Yellow River in Shandong Province subsided.

古文：七年夏，河南大雨，河决开封、河南、彰德。
现代文：七年夏，河南下大雨，黄河决堤于开封、河南、彰德。
English: In the summer of the seventh year, it rained heavily in Henan, and the Yellow River burst its banks in Kaifeng, Henan and Changde.

古文：其秋，畿辅、山东大雨，诸水并溢，高地丈馀，堤岸多冲决。
现代文：这年秋，京城周围、山东又下大雨，诸水一齐泛滥，高出地面一丈余，堤岸多被冲决。
English: In the autumn of that year, there was another heavy rain around Beijing and Shandong, and all the waters flooded together, rising more than a meter above the ground, and the embankments were mostly washed away.

古文：仍敕有贞修筑。
现代文：皇帝仍然诏令徐有贞修筑。
English: The emperor still ordered Xu Youzhen to rebuild it.

古文：未几，事竣，还京入见。
现代文：不久，修筑堤岸竣工，回到京城拜见皇帝。
English: Soon, the construction of the embankment was completed, and he returned to the capital to meet the emperor.

古文：奖劳甚至，擢副都御史。
现代文：奖誉慰劳备至，提升为副都御史。
English: He was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal and promoted to Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：天顺元年修祥符护城大堤。
现代文：天顺元年，修筑祥符护城大堤。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the construction of the Xiangfu moat was completed.

古文：五年七月，河决汴梁土城，又决砖城，城中水丈馀，坏官民舍过半。周王府宫人及诸守土官皆乘舟筏以避，军民溺死无算。
现代文：五年七月，黄河决堤于汴梁土城，又决堤于砖城，城中洪水一丈多深，毁坏官署民房过半周王府宫人及各地方官，都乘舟船和筏子以避难，军民被淹死不计其数。
English: In July of the fifth year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Huliangdu City, and also broke through the dike in Qilian City. The flood in the city was very deep, destroying more than half of the government offices and private houses. Around the palace, the palace people and all local officials took boats and rafts to take refuge. Countless soldiers and civilians were drowned.

古文：襄城亦决县城。
现代文：襄城县城也溃决。
English: Xiangcheng County was also defeated.

古文：命工部侍郎薛远往视，恤灾户、蠲田租，公廨民居以次修理。
现代文：皇帝命工部侍郎薛远前去察看，抚恤受灾人家、减免田租，官署民房依次修理。
English: The emperor ordered Xue Yuan, an aide-de-camp of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, to inspect the situation, and the affected families were given subsidies, farm rents were reduced and exempted, and the government offices and private houses were repaired in turn.

古文：明年二月，开祥符曹家溜，河势稍平。
现代文：第二年二月，开通祥符曹家溜，黄河水势渐渐平缓。
English: In February of the following year, the Xiangfu Caojia Tunnel was opened, and the water level of the Yellow River gradually subsided.

古文：七年春，河南布政司照磨金景辉考满至京，上言： 国初，黄河在封丘，后徙康王马头，去城北三十里，复有二支河：一由沙门注运河，一由金龙口达徐、吕入海。
现代文：七年春，河南布政司照磨金景辉考绩期满到京城，上奏说： 建国之初，黄河在封丘，后改道于康王马头，距离城北三十里，又有二支河：一从沙门注入运河，一从金龙口直达徐、吕二河入海。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the Secretary for Political Affairs of Henan Province, Jin Jinghui, arrived in Beijing at the end of the performance evaluation period, and said: At the beginning of the founding of the country, the Yellow River was in Fengqiu, and then diverted to Kangwangma Tou, 30 miles north of the city, and there were two rivers: one from Shamen into the canal, one from Jinlongkou straight to Xu, and Lv Erhe into the sea.

古文：正统戊辰，决荥泽，转趋城南，并流入淮，旧河、支河俱堙，漕河因而浅涩。
现代文：正统戊辰，决堤于荣泽，转而直奔城南，一起流入淮河，旧黄河、支河全被堵塞，漕河因而水浅不畅通。
English: The orthodox Pentecost broke through the dike at Rongze, turned to the south of the city, and flowed into the Huaihe River. The old Yellow River and its tributaries were all blocked, and the shallow water of the Caohe River was not smooth.

古文：景泰癸酉，因水迫城，筑堤四十里，劳费过甚，而水发辄溃，然尚未至决城壕为人害也。
现代文：景泰癸酉，因为洪水迫近城下，筑堤四十里，耗费过多，而洪水发生就溃决，然而还不至于溃决城壕，成为百姓的祸害。
English: In Jingtaizhou, because the flood was approaching the city, forty miles of dikes were built, which cost too much. When the flood occurred, it broke through, but it did not break through the trenches and became a scourge to the people.

古文：至天顺辛巳，水暴至，土城砖城并圮，七郡财力所筑之堤，俱委诸无用，人心惶惶，未知所底。
现代文：到了天顺辛巳，洪水突然到来，土城砖城一齐垮塌，用七郡财力所筑之堤，全部弃之而无用，人心惶惶，不知道所至。
English: When the rainy season came, the flood came suddenly, the brick city of Tucheng collapsed all at once, and the dikes built with the financial resources of seven counties were all abandoned and useless. People were panicked and did not know what to do.

古文：夫河不循故道，并流入淮，是为妄行。
现代文：黄河不顺着故道，一齐流入淮河，这是妄行。
English: The Yellow River does not follow the old path and flows into the Huaihe River at the same time. This is reckless.

古文：今急宜疏导以杀其势。
现代文：如今应当赶快疏导以碱缓其水势。
English: Now it should be quickly diluted with alkali to soften its water potential.

古文：若止委之一淮，而以堤防为长策，恐开封终为鱼鳖之区。
现代文：如果仅仅聚集于一条淮河，而把修筑堤防作为长久的办法，我担心开封城终究会成为汪洋大海。
English: If we only concentrate on one Huai River and build a dike as a long-term solution, I am afraid that Kaifeng City will eventually become a vast ocean.

古文：乞敕部檄所司，先疏金龙口宽阔以接漕河，然后相度旧河或别求泄水之地，挑浚以平水患，为经久计。 
现代文：乞请敕令工部檄告有关官吏，先疏通金龙口，使其宽阔以接通运河，然后测量旧黄河或者另外寻求泄水之地，疏通以平息水患，作为长久之计。 
English: Please order the Ministry of Works to inform the relevant officials to first dredge Jinlongkou, make it wide to connect the canal, and then measure the old Yellow River or seek another place to discharge water, dredge to calm the flood, as a long-term plan.

古文：命如其说行之。
现代文：皇帝命令依照他的办法进行治理。
English: The emperor ordered that the city be governed according to his methods.

古文：成化七年命王恕为工部侍郎，奉敕总理河道。
现代文：成化七年，命王恕为工部侍郎，奉诏总管黄河道治理。
English: In the seventh year of Chenghua, Mei Wangshu became the attendant of the work department, and was appointed as the general manager of the Yellow River.

古文：总河侍郎之设，自恕始也。
现代文：总河侍郎的设置，从王恕开始。
English: The setting of the general river waiter, starting with Wang Shulong.

古文：时黄河不为患，恕耑力漕河而已。
现代文：这时，黄河没有造成祸患，玉塑专力治理漕河罢了。
English: At this time, the Yellow River did not cause any disaster, and Gypsum Plaster concentrated on managing the Caohe River.

古文：十四年，河决开封，坏护城堤五十丈。
现代文：十四年，黄河决堤于开封，冲坏护城堤五十丈。
English: Fourteen years ago, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng, breaking the moat by 50 meters.

古文：巡抚河南都御史李衍言： 河南累有河患，皆下流壅塞所致。
现代文：巡抚河南都御史李衍说： 河南屡屡有黄河之患，都是下游阻塞所致。
English: Li Yan, the governor of Henan, said: Henan has repeatedly suffered from the Yellow River, all caused by downstream blockages.

古文：宜疏开封西南新城地，下抵梁家浅旧河口七里壅塞，以泄杏花营上流。
现代文：应当疏通开封西南新城之地，下至梁家浅旧河口七里的壅塞，以泄杏花营上游之水。
English: It is necessary to clear the blockage seven miles downstream of the shallow old estuary of Liangjia, in the southwest of Kaifeng New Town, to release the water from the upper reaches of the apricot flower camp.

古文：又自八角河口直抵南顿，分导散漫，以免祥符、鄢陵、睢、陈、归德之灾。
现代文：又从八角河口直到南顿，分别引导漫流之水，以免祥符、鄢陵、睢、陈、归德之灾。 
English: In addition, from the mouth of the Bajiao River to Nantong, the flowing water was separately guided to avoid the disasters of Xiangfu, Fuling, Handan, Chen and Gui De.

古文：乃敕衍酌行之。
现代文：于是，敕令李衍斟酌进行治理。
English: As a result, the Emperor ordered Li Yan to govern at his own discretion.

古文：明年正月迁荥泽县治以避水，而开封堤不久即塞。
现代文：第二年正月，迁移荣泽县治以避洪水，而开封堤不久就被堵塞。
English: In the first month of the second year, the government of Rongze County relocated to avoid flooding, and the dike was soon blocked.

古文：弘治二年五月，河决开封及金龙口，入张秋运河，又决埽头五所入沁。
现代文：弘治二年五月，黄河决堤于开封及金龙口，流入张秋运河，又决堤于埽头五所入泌。
English: In May of the second year of Hongzhi, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng and Jinlongkou and flowed into the Zhangqiu Canal. It also broke through the dike in Shantou and seeped into five other cities.

古文：郡邑多被害，汴梁尤甚，议者至请迁开封城以避其患。
现代文：郡县多遭受灾害，汴梁特别严重，议论这事的人极力请求迁移开封城以避其患。
English: Counties and counties often suffer from disasters, and Huliang is particularly serious. People who discuss this matter strongly request that Kaifeng City be relocated to avoid it.

古文：布政司徐恪持不可，乃止。
现代文：布政司徐恪持不同意见，于是停止。
English: Chief Secretary Xu Ke held a different opinion, so the process was halted.

古文：命所司大发卒筑之。
现代文：命令主管官吏大量调集士卒修筑河堤。
English: He ordered the officials in charge to mobilize a large number of soldiers to build a river dike.

古文：九月命白昂为户部侍郎，修治河道，赐以特敕，令会山东、河南、北直隶三巡抚，自上源决口至运河，相机修筑。
现代文：九月，命白昂为户部侍郎，修治黄河河道，赐以特别诏令，令会同山东、河南、北直隶三巡抚，从上游决口到运河，看准时机进行修筑。
English: In September, Bai'an was appointed as the head of the household to repair the Yellow River, and a special edict was issued, ordering him to work with the three governors of Shandong, Henan and North Zhili to build a canal from the upstream mouth to the canal.

古文：三年正月，昂上言： 臣自淮河相度水势，抵河南中牟等县，见上源决口，水入南岸者十三，入北岸者十七。
现代文：三年正月，白昂上奏道： 臣从淮河察看测量水势，直到河南中牟等县，看见上游决口处，河水流入南岸的十分之三，流入北岸的十分之七。
English: In the first month of the third year, Bai Ao wrote: The minister observed and measured the water potential from the Huaihe River to Zhongmou and other counties in Henan, and saw that at the upstream break, the river water flowed into three-tenths of the south bank and seven-tenths of the north bank.

古文：南决者，自中牟杨桥至祥符界析为二支：一经尉氏等县，合颍水，下涂山，入於淮；一经通许等县，入涡河，下荆山，入於淮。
现代文：南岸决口的河水，从中牟杨桥到祥符界分为二支流：一支经尉氏等县，合于颖水，向下流到涂山，入于淮河；一支经通许等县，入于涡河，向下流到剂山，流入淮河。
English: The river water of the South Bank Breach is divided into two tributaries from Zhongmou Yangqiao to Xiangfu Boundary: one flows through Fuzhi and other counties, merges with Yingshui, flows down to Tuishan, and enters the Huaihe River; one flows through Tongxu and other counties, enters the Vortex River, flows down to Jiaoshan, and flows into the Huaihe River.

古文：又一支自归德州通凤阳之亳县，亦合涡河入於淮。
现代文：又一支从归德州直通凤阳的毫县，也汇合于涡河流入淮河。
English: Another line, from Guizhou to Fengyang, also joins the Huai River at the Vortex River.

古文：北决者，自原武经阳武、祥符、封丘、兰阳、仪封、考城，其一支决入金龙等口，至山东曹州，冲入张秋漕河。
现代文：北岸决口的河水，从原武经过阳武、祥符、封丘、兰阳、仪封、考城，其一支决口流入金龙等口，到山东曹州，冲入张秋漕河。
English: The water of the north bank of the mouth of the river flows from Yuanwu through Yangwu, Xiangwu, Fenqiu, Lanyang, Yifeng and Kaocheng. One of the mouths flows into Jinlong and other mouths, to Shandong Caozhou, and rushes into the Zhangqiu River.

古文：去冬，水消沙积，决口已淤，因并为一大支，由祥符翟家口合沁河，出丁家道口，下徐州。
现代文：去年冬，水退沙积，决口已淤塞，因而合为一大支流，从祥符翟家口合于沁河，出于丁家道口，向下流到徐州。
English: Last winter, the water retreated and the sediment accumulated, and the outlet was silted up. As a result, it merged into a large tributary, from Xiangfu to the mouth of the Lijiang River, and from the mouth of the Dingjia Road, it flowed down to Xuzhou.

古文：此河流南北分行大势也。
现代文：这是河流南北分流的大趋势。
English: This is the general trend of the north-south diversion of rivers.

古文：合颍、涡二水入淮者，各有滩碛，水脉颇微，宜疏浚以杀河势。
现代文：合颖、涡二水流入淮河的，各有浅滩沙石，水流很小，应当疏通以碱缓水势。
English: Where the Heying and Vortex waters flow into the Huai River, each has a shoal of sand and stone, and the water flow is very small. It should be dredged with alkali to slow down the water potential.

古文：合沁水入徐者，则以河道浅隘不能受，方有漂没之虞。
现代文：合于沁水流入徐州的支流，则因河道浅狭窄不能容纳，纔有漂没之忧。
English: The tributary that meets the Surabaya water flowing into Xuzhou cannot be accommodated due to the shallowness and narrowness of the river, and there is a risk of drifting.

古文：况上流金龙诸口虽暂淤，久将复决，宜於北流所经七县，筑为堤岸，以卫张秋。
现代文：况且上流金龙诸口虽暂时淤塞，时间久了将再次决口，应当在北流经过的七县，筑成堤岸，以护卫张秋。
English: Moreover, although the upstream mouths of the Jinlong are temporarily silted up, they will break open again after a long time. A dike should be built in the seven counties through which the north stream passes to guard Zhangqiu.

古文：但原敕治山东、河南、北直隶，而南直隶淮、徐境，实河所经行要地，尚无所统。 
现代文：但是，原诏令治理山东、河南、北直隶，而南直隶淮、徐境，实为黄河所流经的重要地方，还没有统一治理。 
English: However, Shandong, Henan, and North Zhili were governed by the original edict, while South Zhili, Huai, and Xujing, which are actually important places through which the Yellow River flows, have not yet been unified.

古文：於是并以命昂。
现代文：于是，诏令白昂一并治理。
English: As a result, the Emperor ordered that Bai'an be governed as a whole.

古文：昂举郎中娄性协治，乃役夫二十五万，筑阳武长堤，以防张秋。
现代文：白昂推举郎中娄性协同治理，于是，调集民工二十五万，修筑阳武长堤，以防张秋洪水。
English: Bai Ao recommended his son to coordinate the management of floods. Therefore, 250,000 migrant workers were mobilized to build the Yangwu long embankment to prevent the Zhangqiu flood.

古文：引中牟决河出荥泽阳桥以达淮，浚宿州古汴河以入泗，又浚睢河自归德饮马池，经符离桥至宿迁以会漕河，上筑长堤，下修减水闸。
现代文：引中牟决口的黄河水出于荣泽阳桥以达淮河，疏通宿州古汴河以入泅水，再疏通睢河从归德饮马池，经过簦整桥到宿迁以汇合于漕河，上筑长堤，下修减水闸。
English: The Yellow River water from Rongzeyang Bridge to the Huai River, diverted through the Suzhou Gushan River to enter the Surabaya Water, and then diverted through the Surabaya River from Guide Drinking Pond, through the bridge repair to Suqian to converge on the Cao River, build a long embankment and repair and reduce the sluice.

古文：又疏月河十馀以泄水，塞决口三十六，使河流入汴，汴入睢，睢入泗，泗入淮，以达海。
现代文：又疏通月河十余里以泄洪，堵塞决口三十六，使黄河沆入汴，汴流入睢，睢流入泗，泗流入淮，以流入大海。
English: It also dredged more than ten miles of the Yuehe River to discharge floodwaters, blocked 36 outfalls, and caused the Yellow River to flow into the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River to flow into the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River to flow into the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River to flow into the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River to flow into the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River to flow into the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River to flow into the Huai River, and the Huai River to flow into the sea.

古文：水患稍宁。
现代文：水患渐渐平息。
English: The flood gradually subsided.

古文：昂又以河南入淮非正道，恐卒不能容，复於鱼台、德州、吴桥修古长堤；又自东平北至兴济凿小河十二道，入大清河及古黄河以入海。
现代文：白昂又认为河往南入于淮非正道，担心最终不能容纳，又于鱼台、德州、昊桥修筑旧长堤；又从束平北到兴济开凿小河十二条，流入大清河及旧黄河以入海。
English: Bai Ang also believed that the river went south into the Huaifan Road, and worried that it could not be accommodated in the end. He also built old long dikes in Yutai, Dezhou and Haoqiao; he also dug 12 small rivers from Sokping North to Xingji, which flowed into the Daqing River and the old Yellow River to enter the sea.

古文：河口各建石堰，以时启闭。
现代文：河口各建石堰，按时开关。
English: All stone weirs in the estuary will be opened and closed on time.

古文：盖南北分治，而东南则以疏为主云。
现代文：因为南北应分治，而东南则以疏导为主。
English: Because the north and south should be governed separately, while the southeast is mainly guided by dredging.

古文：六年二月以刘大夏为副都御史，治张秋决河。
现代文：六年二月，以刘大夏为副都御史，治理张秋的黄河决口。
English: In February of the sixth year, Liu Daxia was appointed as the deputy governor of the capital to govern the Yellow River mouth of Zhangqiu.

古文：先是，河决张秋戴家庙，掣漕河与汶水合而北行，遣工部侍郎陈政督治。
现代文：在这之前，黄河决堤于张秋戴家庙，牵制漕河与汶水汇合而北流，派遣工部侍郎陈政督促治理。
English: Prior to this, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Zhangqiu Daijia Temple, diverted the Caohe River and the Wenshui River to merge and flow northward, and dispatched Chen Zheng, an attendant of the Ministry of Works, to urge the governance.

古文：政言： 河之故道有二：一在荥泽孙家渡口，经朱仙镇直抵陈州；一在归德州饮马池，与亳州地相属。
现代文：陈政说： 黄河的故道有二：一在荣泽孙家渡口，经由朱仙镇直达陈州；一在归德州饮马池，与亳州地相连。
English: Chen Zheng said: There are two ancient routes of the Yellow River: one starts at Rongze Sunjia Ferry Port and goes straight to Chenzhou via Zhuxian Town; the other starts at Guizhou Drinking Horse Pond and is connected to Zhangzhou.

古文：旧俱入淮，今已淤塞，因致上流冲激，势尽北趋。
现代文：原来都流入淮河，今已淤塞，因而导致上游的冲击，水势完全往北流。
English: Originally, they all flowed into the Huai River, but now they have been silted up, resulting in the upstream impact, and the water potential has completely flowed northward.

古文：自祥符孙家口、杨家口、车船口，兰阳铜瓦厢决为数道，俱入运河。
现代文：从祥符孙家口、杨家口、车船口和兰阳铜瓦厢溃决成为数道，全都流入运河。
English: From Xiangfu to Sunjiakou, Yangjiakou, Chefunakou and Lanyang, the copper and tile carriages were crushed into several channels, all of which flowed into the canal.

古文：於是张秋上下势甚危急，自堂邑至济宁堤岸多崩圮，而戴家庙减水闸浅隘不能泄水，亦有冲决。
现代文：于是张秋上下水势非常危急，从堂邑到济宁堤岸多垮塌，而戴家庙减水闸浅窄不能泄水，也有冲决之危。
English: As a result, Zhangqiu's upstream and downstream water situation is very critical. The embankment from Dongyue to Jining has mostly collapsed, and the shallow and narrow sluice gate of Daijia Temple cannot discharge water, and there is also a risk of rushing.

古文：请浚旧河以杀上流之势，塞决河以防下流之患。 
现代文：请求疏通旧黄河以减缓上游的水势，堵塞黄河决口以防下游之患。 
English: It is requested to dredge the old Yellow River to slow down the upstream water potential, and to block the mouth of the Yellow River to prevent the downstream.

古文：政方渐次修举，未几卒官。
现代文：陈政正依次修筑，不久就死于任上。
English: Chen Zhengzheng built them one after another, and died soon after taking office.

古文：帝深以为忧，命廷臣会荐才识堪任者。
现代文：皇帝深为担忧，命朝廷大臣会合推举有才识能胜任的人。
English: The emperor was deeply worried and ordered the Imperial Council of Ministers to nominate someone with talent and competence.

古文：佥举大夏，遂赐敕以往。
现代文：都推举刘大夏，于是赐敕刘大夏令前往。
English: They all nominated Liu Daxia, so they gave him the go-ahead to go.

古文：十二月，巡按河南御史涂升言： 黄河为患，南决病河南，北决病山东。
现代文：十二月，巡按河南御史涂升说：董河造成水患，南岸决堤使河南受灾，北岸决堤使山东受灾。
English: In December, the Henan Provincial Historian Tu Sheng said: The Dong River caused floods, the southern bank of the dike caused damage to Henan, and the northern bank of the dike caused damage to Shandong.

古文：昔汉决酸枣，复决瓠子；宋决馆陶，复决澶州；元决汴梁，复决蒲口。
现代文：从前，汉时决堤于酸枣，又决堤于瓠子；宋时决堤于馆陶，又决堤于澶州；元时决堤于汴梁，又决堤于蒲口。
English: In the past, in the Han Dynasty, the dike was broken at Yaju, and it was also broken at Jiazi; in the Song Dynasty, the dike was broken at Guangtou, and it was also broken at Zhangzhou; in the Yuan Dynasty, the dike was broken at Qiliang, and it was also broken at Pukou.

古文：然汉都关中，宋都大梁，河决为患，不过濒河数郡而已。
现代文：然而汉时建都关中，宋时建都大梁，黄河决堤造成灾难，不过是靠近黄河的几个郡罢了。
English: However, during the Han Dynasty, Guanzhong was built as the capital, and during the Song Dynasty, Dalian was built as the capital. The Yellow River burst its banks, causing a disaster, but only in a few counties near the Yellow River.

古文：今京师专藉会通河岁漕粟数百万石，河决而北，则大为漕忧。
现代文：如今京师专门凭借会通河每年漕运粮食几百万石，黄河决堤而北流，则是漕运的最大忧虑。
English: Nowadays, the Beijing Division relies on the Huitong River to transport millions of stone of grain every year. The Yellow River breaks through the dike and flows north, which is the biggest concern of rowing.

古文：臣博采与论，治河之策有四：
现代文：臣广泛地采纳众多议论，治理黄河的办法有四：
English: There are four ways to manage the Yellow River:

古文： 一曰疏浚。
现代文：第一是疏通。
English: The first is dredging.

古文：荥、郑之东，五河之西，饮马、白露等河皆黄河由涡入淮之故道。
现代文：荣、郑之东，五河之西，饮马、白露等河，都是黄河从涡流入淮河的故道。
English: The East of Rong, Zheng, the West of the Five Rivers, the Drinking Horse, the White Dew and other rivers are all the old ways of the Yellow River flowing into the Huaihe River from the vortex.

古文：其后南流日久，或河口以淤高不泄，或河身狭隘难容，水势无所分杀，遂泛滥北决。
现代文：这以后，向南流的时间久了，有的河口因为淤塞太高不能排泄，有的河床狭窄难以容纳，水势役有地方分流碱缓，于是泛滥，北岸决堤。
English: After that, the southward flow took a long time. Some estuaries could not be drained because the siltation was too high, and some riverbeds were narrow and difficult to accommodate. The water potential was slow in some places, so flooding occurred and the north bank was breached.

古文：今惟丽上流东南之故道，相度疏浚，则正流归道，馀波就壑，下流无奔溃之害，北岸无冲决之患矣。
现代文：现在只有慢慢沿着上游东南的故道，测量疏通，则主流就会回归河道，余水流向沟壑，下游无奔溃的危害，北岸无冲决堤岸的祸患了。
English: Now, it is only necessary to slowly follow the old path of the upstream southeast, measure and dredge, then the mainstream will return to the river, the remaining water will flow to the gully, there will be no harm of rushing downstream, and there will be no disaster of the north bank breaking through the embankment.

古文：二曰扼塞。
现代文：第二是堵塞。
English: The second is gridlock.

古文：既杀水势於东南，必须筑堤岸於西北。
现代文：已经于东南减缓水势，必须于西北修筑堤岸。
English: The water level has been reduced in the southeast, and a dike must be built in the northwest.

古文：黄陵冈上下旧堤缺坏，当度下流东北形势，去水远近，补筑无遗，排障百川悉归东南，由淮入海，则张秋无患，而漕河可保矣。 
现代文：黄陵冈上下旧堤残缺朽坏，应当测量下游东北的地形水势，距离河水远近，一卢不漏地进行补筑，排泄阻挡众河流全都流归东南，从淮河入海，则张秋就没有水患，而漕河可得到保护了。
English: The old levees upstream and downstream of Huangling Hill are incomplete and rotten. It is necessary to measure the topographic water potential of the downstream northeast, and the distance from the river is far and near. It is necessary to complete the construction without missing a single rupee, and the drainage will block the flow of all rivers to the southeast. From the Huaihe River into the sea, there will be no flood in Zhangqiu, and the Caohe River can be protected.

古文：三曰用人，荐河南佥事张鼐。
现代文：第三是用人，推举河南愈事张鼐。
English: The third is an employee, Zhang Jun, who was elected as Henan governor.

古文：四曰久任，则请专信大夏，且於归德或东昌建公廨，令居中裁决也。
现代文：第四是久任，请求专一信任刘大夏，并且在归德或束昌修建官署，让他从中裁决。
English: The fourth was a long-serving official, who requested that Liu Daxia be trusted exclusively, and that an official office be built in Guizhong or Sokchang for him to adjudicate.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：皇帝认为对。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：七年五月命太监李兴、平江伯陈锐往同大夏共治张秋。
现代文：七年五月，命太监李兴、平江伯陈锐前去与刘大夏共同治理张秋。
English: In May of the seventh year, the eunuchs Li Xing and Pingjiang Bo Chen Rui went to work with Liu Daxia to jointly govern Zhang Qiu.

古文：十二月筑塞张秋决口工成。
现代文：十二月，修筑堵塞张秋决口工程完成。
English: In December, the construction of the Zhangqiu culvert blockage project was completed.

古文：初，河流湍悍，决口阔九十馀丈，大夏行视之，曰： 是下流未可治，当治上流。 
现代文：当初，黄河水流湍急凶猛，决口宽九十余丈，刘大夏察看决口，说： 这是下游不能治理，应当治理上游。 
English: At the beginning, the Yellow River flowed so fast and furiously that the mouth of the river was more than ninety meters wide. Liu Daxia looked at the mouth of the river and said, "This is something that cannot be managed downstream, but should be managed upstream."

古文：於是即决口西南开越河三里许，使粮运可济，乃浚仪封黄陵冈南贾鲁旧河四十馀里，由曹出徐，以杀水势。
现代文：于是就在决口的西南开凿越河三里左右，使运粮河道可以畅通，于是疏通仪封黄陵冈以南贾鲁旧河道四十余里，从曹州流出到徐州，以减缓水势。
English: As a result, about three miles of the Yuehe River were excavated in the southwest of the breach, so that the grain transport channel could be unimpeded, and more than forty miles of the old Jialu River channel south of Yifeng Huangling Hill were dredged, flowing from Caozhou to Xuzhou, to slow down the water potential.

古文：又浚孙家渡口，别凿新河七十馀里，导使南行，由中牟、颍川东入淮。
现代文：又疏通孙家渡口，另外开凿新河道七十余里，引导使其南流，从中牟、颖川向东流入淮河。
English: In addition, the Sunjia Ferry Port was dredged, and more than 70 miles of new river channels were excavated to guide its southward flow, from which the Zhongmou and Yingchuan Rivers flowed eastward into the Huaihe River.

古文：又浚祥符四府营淤河，由陈留至归德分为二。
现代文：又疏通祥符四府营淤河，从陈留到归德分为二支流。
English: It also dredged the Shifu Yinghe River, which is divided into two tributaries from Chenliu to Guide.

古文：一由宿迁小河口，一由亳涡河，俱会於淮。
现代文：一支经由宿迁小河口，一支经由毫涡河，都汇合于淮。
English: One through Suqian small estuary, one through the Maozhou River, all converge in Huai.

古文：然后沿张秋两岸，东西筑台，立表贯索，联巨舰穴而窒之，实以土。
现代文：然后沿着张秋两岸，在东西两岸修筑平台，竖立标记，贯穿绳索，连接大船，船中洞先堵塞，用土填实大船。
English: Then, along both sides of Zhangqiu, on both sides of the east and west, build a platform, erect signs, run through ropes, connect the big ship, block the hole in the ship first, and fill the big ship with soil.

古文：至决口，去窒沉舰，压以大埽，且合且决，随决随筑，连昼夜不息。
现代文：到了决口，去其堵塞物使船沉没，再用大埽重压，这样一边合拢一边溃决，一边溃决一边堵塞，昼夜连续不停。
English: At the breach, remove the blockage that caused the ship to sink, and then use the large anchor to apply heavy pressure. In this way, one side is closed and one side is broken, and one side is broken and one side is blocked. Day and night are continuous.

古文：决既塞，缭以石堤，隐若长虹，功乃成。
现代文：决口完全堵塞，再用石堤围绕，隐约如长虹一般，工程则宣告完成。
English: The breach is completely blocked, then surrounded by a stone embankment, vaguely like a rainbow, and the project is declared complete.

古文：帝遣行人赍羊酒往劳之，改张秋名为安平镇。
现代文：皇帝派遣使者携带羔羊美酒前去犒劳他们，改张秋之名为安平镇。
English: The emperor sent an envoy with lamb and wine to reward them, and changed the name of Zhangqiu to Anping Town.

古文：大夏等言： 安平镇决口已塞，河下流北入东昌、临清至天津入海，运道已通，然必筑黄陵冈河口，导河上流南下徐淮，庶可为运道久安之计。 
现代文：刘大夏等说： 安平镇决口已被堵塞，黄河下游往北流入束昌、临清到天津入海，漕运河道已经畅通，然而必须筑堤于黄陵冈河口，引导黄河上游往南流到徐、淮，也许可以成为漕运诃道长久安全之计。 
English: Liu Daxia and others said: the mouth of Anping Town has been blocked, the lower reaches of the Yellow River flow north to Sokchang, Linqing to Tianjin and into the sea, and the canal route has been smooth. However, it is necessary to build a dike at the mouth of the Huanglinggang River and guide the upper reaches of the Yellow River to flow south to Xu and Huai, which may be a long-term and safe solution for the canal route.

古文：廷议如其言。
现代文：朝廷议定依照他们的主张。
English: The Imperial Court agreed to act in accordance with their proposal.

古文：乃以八年正月筑塞黄陵冈及荆隆等口七处，旬有五日而毕。
现代文：于是从八年正月开始修筑堵塞黄陵冈及剂隆等决口七处，用了十五天时间完成。
English: As a result, from the first month of the eighth year, the construction of blocking Huangling Hill and Jialong and other seven outcrops began, and it took 15 days to complete.

古文：盖黄陵冈居安平镇之上流，其广九十馀丈，荆隆等口又居黄陵冈之上流，其广四百三十馀丈。
现代文：黄陵冈处于安平镇上游，其宽九十余丈，剂隆等决口又处于黄陵冈上游，其宽四百三十余丈。
English: Huangling Hill is located in the upper reaches of Anping Town, with a width of more than 90 meters. Jialong and other outcrops are also located in the upper reaches of Huangling Hill, with a width of more than 430 meters.

古文：河流至此宽漫奔放，皆喉襟重地。
现代文：黄河流到这里宽阔奔放，都是险要重地。
English: The Yellow River is wide and free-flowing here, and it is a critical point.

古文：诸口既塞，於是上流河势复归兰阳、考城，分流迳徐州、归德、宿迁，南入运河，会淮水，东注於海，南流故道以复。
现代文：诸决口完全被堵塞，于是，上游河水又回到兰阳、考城，分流经徐州、归德、宿迁，向南流入运河，汇合于淮水，向东注于大海，向南流的故道因此恢复。
English: As a result, the upstream river water returned to Lanyang and Kaocheng, diverted through Cangzhou, Guide and Suqian, flowed southward into the canal, converged at Huai Shui, and flowed eastward into the sea, thus restoring the old way of southward flow.

古文：而大名府之长堤，起胙城，历滑县、长垣、东明、曹州、曹县抵虞城，凡三百六十里。
现代文：而大名府的长堤，起于胙城，经过滑县、长垣、束明、曹州、曹县直达虞城，总共三百六十里。
English: On the other hand, the long embankment of the Daimyo-fu started from Shicheng, passed through Nami County, Nagagaki, Sokumin, Caozhou and Cao County, and reached directly to Yucheng, a total of 360 miles.

古文：其西南荆隆等口新堤起于家店，历铜瓦厢、东桥抵小宋集，凡百六十里。
现代文：其西南剂隆等决口的新堤起自于家店，经过铜瓦厢、束桥直达小宋集，总共一百六十里。
English: The new embankment of the Southwestern Jialong and other breaches starts from Yujiadian, passes through the copper tile box and the bund bridge, and reaches Xiao Songji, a total of one hundred and sixty miles.

古文：大小二堤相翼，而石坝俱培筑坚厚，溃决之患於是息矣。
现代文：大小二堤互相辅助，而石坝都筑得坚实宽厚，溃决之患于是平息。
English: The two dikes, large and small, support each other, and the stone dams are built solid and wide, so the danger of collapse has subsided.

古文：帝以黄陵冈河口功成，敕建黄河神祠以镇之，赐额曰昭应。
现代文：皇帝以黄陵冈河口工程完成，敕令修建黄河神祠以镇水，赐横额叫做 昭应 。
English: The emperor completed the Huanglinggang estuary project, and ordered the construction of the Yellow River Shrine to control water. The banner is called Zhaoying.

古文：其秋，召大夏等还京。
现代文：这年秋，召刘大夏等回到京城。
English: In the autumn of that year, Liu Daxia and others were summoned back to Beijing.

古文：荆隆即金龙也。
现代文：荆隆就是金龙。
English: Jinglong is the Golden Dragon.

古文：十一年，河决归德。
现代文：十一年，黄河决堤于归德。
English: In the eleventh year, the Yellow River broke through the embankment to return to Germany.

古文：管河工部员外郎谢缉言：黄河一支，先自徐州城东小浮桥流入漕河，南抵邳州、宿迁。
现代文：管河工部员外郎谢缉上奏说： 黄河的一条支流，原先是从徐州城束小浮桥流入漕河，往南直达邳州、宿迁。
English: Wei Lang Xie, a member of the Guanhe River Engineering Department, said: A tributary of the Yellow River originally flowed into the Caohe River from the Xuzhou Chengzhu Small Floating Bridge, and went south to Luzhou and Suqian.

古文：今黄河上流於归德州小坝子等处冲决，与黄河别支会流，经宿州、睢宁，由宿迁小河口流入漕河。
现代文：今黄河上游堤岸在归德州小坝子等处被冲决，舆黄河的另一支流汇合，经过宿州、睢宁，从宿迁小河口流入漕河。
English: Now, the upstream embankment of the Yellow River has been washed away in Guizhou, Dezhou, Xiaobanzi and other places, and another tributary of the Yellow River has converged, passing through Suzhou and Huning, and flowing into the Caohe River from the Suqian small estuary.

古文：於是小河口北抵徐州水流渐细，河道浅阻。
现代文：于是，小河口以北直到徐州的水流逐渐细小，河道水浅阻塞。
English: As a result, the water flow north of the small estuary to Xuzhou gradually decreased, and the river was shallowly blocked.

古文：且徐、吕二洪，惟赖沁水接济，自沁源、河内、归德至徐州小浮桥流出，虽与黄河异源，而比年河、沁之流合而为一。
现代文：而且徐、旦二河，祇有依赖于沁水接济，从沁源、河内、归德到徐州小浮桥流出，虽与黄河不同源，但是，近年河、沁之流合而为一。
English: Moreover, the two rivers, the Hsu and the Tan, only depend on the Sui for water supply, and flow out from the Sui source, Hanoi, Gui De to the Xuzhou small floating bridge. Although they have different sources from the Yellow River, in recent years, the flow of the river and the Sui have merged into one.

古文：今黄河自归德南决，恐牵引沁水俱往南流，则徐、吕二洪必至浅阻。
现代文：今黄河从归德以南决口，担心会牵引沁水都往南流，则徐、旦二河必然导致水浅阻塞。
English: Now that the Yellow River has broken out from the south of Gui De, it is feared that it will draw all the water to the south, and the Xu and Tang rivers will inevitably lead to shallow water blockage.

古文：请亟塞归德决口，遏黄水入徐以济漕，而挑沁水之淤，使入徐以济徐、吕，则水深广而漕便利矣。 
现代文：请求赶快堵塞归德决口，阻止黄水入徐以济漕河，并且挖通沁水的淤塞，使其入徐以济徐、吕二河，则水深河宽而漕运便利了。 
English: The request is to quickly block the Gui De mouth, prevent the yellow water from entering the Xu Yizi Cao River, and dig through the siltation of the brackish water, so that it can enter the Xu Yizi Cao River and the Lv Er River, then the river is wide and the paddling is convenient.

古文：帝从其请。
现代文：帝依从他的奏请。
English: The emperor acceded to his request.

古文：未几，河南管河副使张鼐言： 臣尝请修筑侯家潭口决河，以济徐、吕二洪。
现代文：不久，河南管河副使张鼐奏道： 臣曾经请求修筑侯家潭口决堤的黄河堤岸，以便拯济徐、吕二河。
English: Not long after, the deputy envoy of Henan Guanhe, Zhang Xuan, said: The minister had requested the construction of the Yellow River embankment at the Houjiatankou breakwater in order to save the Xu and Lv Erhe rivers.

古文：今自六月以来，河流四溢，潭口决啮弥深，工费浩大，卒难成功。
现代文：今从六月以来，河水四处泛滥，潭口决堤更深，工程耗费浩大，仓猝之间难以成功。
English: Now, since June, the river has flooded everywhere, the dam has broken deeper, the project has cost a lot of money, and it is difficult to succeed in a hurry.

古文：臣尝行视水势，荆隆口堤内旧河通贾鲁河，由丁家道口下徐、淮，其迹尚在。
现代文：臣曾经到那里察看过水势，荆隆口堤内旧黄河通页鲁河，从丁家道口流到徐、淮，其遗迹尚在。
English: The minister once went there to inspect the water potential. The old Yellow River flows through the Shilu River in the dike of Jinglongkou, and flows from the mouth of Dingjia Road to Xu and Huai. Its remains are still there.

古文：若於上源武陟木栾店别凿一渠，下接荆隆口旧河，俟河流南迁，则引之入渠，庶沛然之势可接二洪，而粮运无所阻矣。 
现代文：假若在上游武陟木乐店另外开凿一渠，下接剂隆口旧黄河，等待河水南流，则将它引入沟渠，也许迅急之水可以通到二河，而粮运就没有什么阻碍了。 
English: If another canal were to be dug upstream of Wuxi Mule Shop, and the siphoning agent were to be introduced into the ditch at the mouth of the old Yellow River, waiting for the southward flow of the river, perhaps the swift water could flow to the two rivers, and there would be no obstacle to grain transportation.

古文：帝为下其议於总漕都御史李蕙。
现代文：皇帝为此把他的主张下交总漕都御史李蕙。
English: For this reason, the emperor submitted his proposal to the commander-in-chief, Emperor Li Xi.

古文：越二岁，兖州知府龚弘上言： 副使鼐见河势南行，欲自荆隆口分沁水入贾鲁河，又自归德西王牌口上下分水亦入贾鲁河，俱由丁家道口入徐州。
现代文：过了二年，兖州知府龚弘上奏说： 副使张鼐看到黄河水势向南流，打算从剂隆口分沁水入贾鲁河，又从归德西王牌口上下分流也入贾鲁河，都由丁家道口流入徐州。
English: Two years later, Zhang Hong, the governor of Zhangzhou, said in his report: Deputy envoy Zhang Jun saw the southward flow of the Yellow River and planned to divert water from Jiaolongkou into the Jalu River, and also diverted water from the upper and lower branches of Guidxi ace mouth into the Jalu River, all of which flowed into Xuzhou from Dingjiakou.

古文：但今秋水从王牌口东行，不由丁家口而南，顾逆流东北至黄陵冈，又自曹县入单，南连虞城。
现代文：但是今年秋洪水从王牌口向东流，不由丁家口南流，反而逆流东北到黄陵冈，又从曹县入单，南连虞城。
English: However, this autumn, the floodwater flowed eastward from the trumpet mouth, not southward from the Dingjiakou, but instead counter-flowed northeast to Huanglinggang, and from Cao County into the single, southern Lianyucheng.

古文：乞令守臣亟建疏浚修筑之策。 
现代文：请命令守臣赶快提出疏浚和修筑的计策。 
English: Please order your retainer to quickly come up with a plan for dredging and construction.

古文：於是河南巡抚都御史郑龄言： 徐、吕二洪藉河、沁二水合流东下，以相接济。
现代文：于是河南巡抚都御史郑龄说： 徐、吕二河凭借河、沁二水合流束下，互相接济。
English: As a result, Zheng Ling, the governor of Henan Province, said: Xu and Lv Erhe, by virtue of the confluence of the river and the two rivers, are intertwined and mutually benefit each other.

古文：今丁家道口上下河决堤岸者十有二处，共阔三百馀丈，而河淤三十馀里。
现代文：今丁家道口上下黄河溃决堤岸十二处，共宽三百余丈，而黄河淤塞三十余里。
English: There are twelve levee breaches of the Yellow River at the upstream and downstream of the mouth of Dingjia Road, with a total width of more than 300 meters, and the Yellow River is silted up for more than 30 miles.

古文：上源奔放，则曹、单受害，而安平可虞；下流散溢，则萧、砀被患，而漕流有阻。
现代文：上游奔放，则曹、单受害，而安平使人忧虑；下游泛滥，则萧、殇遭受水患，而漕河有险阻。
English: If the upstream is unrestrained, Cao and Shan will suffer, while Anping will be worried; if the downstream is flooded, Xiao and Yao will be flooded, and Caohe will be in danger.

古文：浚筑诚急务也。 
现代文：疏通和筑堤实为急切的事务。 
English: Dredging and embankment construction are indeed urgent matters.

古文：部覆从之，乃修丁家口上下堤岸。
现代文：工部回复依从他的主张，于是修筑丁家口上下堤岸。
English: The Ministry of Works replied that it would follow his suggestion, and built the embankment upstream and downstream of Dingjiakou.

古文：初，黄河自原武、荥阳分而为三：一自亳州、凤阳至清河口，通淮入海；一自归德州过丁家道口，抵徐州小浮桥；一自洼泥河过黄陵冈，亦抵徐州小浮桥，即贾鲁河也。
现代文：原先，黄河从原武、荣阳分流为三：一条从亳州、凤阳到清河口，通过淮河入海；一条从归德州经过丁家道口，直达徐州小浮桥；一条从洼泥河经过黄陵冈，也直达徐州小浮桥，即贾鲁河。
English: Originally, there were three branches of the Yellow River from Yuanwu and Rongyang: one from Bozhou and Fengyang to the mouth of the Qing River, entering the sea through the Huaihe River; one from Guizhou through the mouth of Dingjia Road, reaching Xuzhou Small Floating Bridge; one from the Muddy River through Huangling Mountain, also reaching Xuzhou Small Floating Bridge, that is, the Jalu River.

古文：迨河决黄陵冈，犯张秋，北流夺漕，刘大夏往塞之，仍出清河口。
现代文：等到黄河决堤于黄陵冈，侵犯张秋，北流夺去漕河水道，刘大夏前去堵塞它，仍然流出于清河口。
English: Wait until the Yellow River breaks through the dike in Huanglinggang, invades Zhangqiu, the north current takes the Caohe waterway, Liu Daxia goes to block it, and it still flows out of the Qinghekou.

古文：十八年，河忽北徙三百里，至宿迁小河口。
现代文：十八年，黄河忽然往北改道三百里，到宿迁小河旦。
English: In 18 years, the Yellow River suddenly changed its course 300 miles north to Suqian, a small river town.

古文：正德三年又北徙三百里，至徐州小浮桥。
现代文：正德三年，又往北改道三百里，到徐州小浮桥。
English: Zhengde three years, and then northbound diversion of three hundred miles, to Xuzhou small pontoon bridge.

古文：四年六月又北徙一百二十里，至沛县飞云桥，俱入漕河。
现代文：四年六月，又往北改道一百二十里，到沛县飞云桥，都流入漕河。
English: In June of the same year, it was rerouted another 120 miles north to Feiyun Bridge in Peixian County, all of which flowed into Caohe.

古文：是时，南河故道淤塞，水惟北趋，单、丰之间河窄水溢，决黄陵冈、尚家等口，曹、单田庐多没，至围丰县城郭，两岸阔百馀里。
现代文：这时，南边黄河故道淤塞，河水只有向北流，单、丰之间河道狭窄洪水泛滥，决堤于黄陵冈、尚家等口，曹、单田地房舍多被淹没，以至水围丰县外城，两岸宽一百余里。
English: At this time, the old route of the Yellow River on the south side was silted up, and the river water only flowed northward. The narrow river between Shan and Feng was flooded. The levee broke at the mouth of Huangling Hill and Shangjia, and most of the houses in Cao and Shan fields were flooded, even as far as the outer city of Shuiwei Feng County, with a width of more than 100 miles on both sides.

古文：督漕及山东镇巡官恐经钜野、阳谷故道，则夺济宁、安平运河，各陈所见以请。
现代文：督漕及山东镇巡官担心经由巨野、阳谷故道，便会夺去济宁、安平运河，各自陈述自己的见解以奏请皇上。
English: The overseer of the canal and the inspector of Shandong Town were worried that the old road through the Giant Field and the Yanggu Valley would take away the Jining and Anping Canals. They each stated their own opinions to appeal to the emperor.

古文：议未定。
现代文：主张没有确定。
English: The claim has not been determined.

古文：明年九月，河复冲黄陵冈，入贾鲁河，泛溢横流，直抵丰、沛。
现代文：第二年九月，黄河又冲决黄陵冈堤岸，流入贾鲁河，泛滥横流，直达丰、沛。
English: In September of the following year, the Yellow River broke through the Huanglinggang Embankment and flowed into the Jialu River, flooding and flowing across the river until it reached Feng and Pei.

古文：御史林茂达亦以北决安平镇为虞，而请浚仪封、考城上流故道，引河南流以分其势，然后塞决口，筑故堤。
现代文：御史林茂达也以北决殷安平镇为忧虑，从而请求疏通仪封、考城上游故道，引导黄河向南流以分散其水势，然后堵塞决口，修筑故堤。
English: Gu Xilin Maoda was also worried about the northern break-off of Yinanping Town, so he requested to clear the old road upstream of Jifeng and Kaocheng, guide the Yellow River to flow southward to disperse its water potential, and then block the break and build the old dike.

古文：工部侍郎崔岩奉命修理黄河，浚祥符董盆口、荥泽孙家渡，又浚贾鲁河及亳州故河各数十里，且筑长垣诸县决口及曹县外堤、梁靖决口。
现代文：工部侍郎崔岩奉命治理黄河，疏通祥符董盆口、荣泽孙家渡，又疏通贾鲁河及毫州故河各数十里，并且修筑长垣诸县决口及曹县外堤、梁靖决口。
English: Cui Yan, the steward of the engineering department, was ordered to control the Yellow River, dredge the Xiangfu Dongbongou and Rongze Sunjiadu, and dredge dozens of miles of the Jalu River and the Milzhou Old River, as well as build the Chagaki County Breakwater, the Cao County Outer Levee and the Liangjing Breakwater.

古文：功未就而骤雨，堤溃。
现代文：工程未完成而突然下雨，堤岸演决。
English: The project was not completed when it suddenly rained and the embankment collapsed.

古文：岩上疏言： 河势冲荡益甚，且流入王子河，亦河故道，若非上流多杀水势，决口恐难卒塞。
现代文：崔岩上奏说： 黄河水势冲击放纵更加厉害，并且流入王子河，也是黄河故道，假若不在上游多碱缓水势，决口恐怕短时间内难以堵塞。
English: Cui Yan Shangsoo said: The Yellow River water potential impact is more severe, and it flows into the Oji River, which is also the ancient way of the Yellow River. If it were not for the upstream multi-alkaline water potential, the outlet would be difficult to block in a short time.

古文：莫若於曹、单、丰、沛增筑堤防，毋令北徙，庶可护漕。 
现代文：不如在曹、单、丰、沛增筑堤防，不让它改道北流，也许可以保护漕河。 
English: It would be better to build a dike in Cao, Shan, Feng and Peizeng to prevent it from diverting to the north, and perhaps protect the Caohe River.

古文：且请别命大臣知水利者共议。
现代文：并且请求另命大臣中懂得水利工程的人共同商议。
English: He also asked other ministers who understand water conservancy projects to discuss the matter together.

古文：於是帝责岩治河无方，而以侍郎李堂代之。
现代文：于是，皇帝责备崔岩治河无方，而以侍郎李堂代替他。
English: As a result, the emperor reproached Cui Yanzhe for not doing anything, and replaced him with Li Dong, a chamberlain.

古文：堂言： 兰阳、仪封、考城故道淤塞，故河流俱入贾鲁河，经黄陵冈至曹县，决梁靖、杨家二口。
现代文：李堂说： 兰阳、仪封、考城故道淤塞，所以河水都流入贾鲁河，经过黄陵冈到曹县，决堤于梁靖、杨家二口。
English: Li Tang said: The ancient roads of Lanyang, Yifeng and Kaocheng are silted up, so the river water flows into the Jalu River, passes through Huanglinggang to Cao County, and breaks through the dike at Liangjing and Yangjia.

古文：侍郎岩亦尝修浚，缘地高河淀，随浚随淤，水杀不多，而决口又难筑塞。
现代文：侍郎崔岩也曾疏浚，由于地面高黄河淤泥沉积，一边疏浚一边淤塞，水势减缓不多，而决口又难堵塞。
English: The steward Choi Yan also dredged. Due to the high silt deposition of the Yellow River on the ground, the dredging side was blocked, the water potential did not slow down much, and the breach was difficult to block.

古文：今观梁靖以下地势最卑，故众流奔注成河，直抵沛县，藉令其口筑成，而容受全流无地，必致回激黄陵冈堤岸，而运道妨矣。
现代文：今观梁靖以下地势最低，所以众流奔注而成河，直达沛县，即使决口堵塞，而容纳全部水流没有地方，必然导致迂回冲击黄陵冈堤岸，而漕运河道就受妨碍了。
English: Now, the terrain below Guan Liangjing is the lowest, so many streams are pouring into the river, reaching Peixian. Even if the outlet is blocked, and there is no place to accommodate all the water flow, it will inevitably lead to a roundabout impact on the Huanglinggang embankment, and the canal road will be hindered.

古文：至河流故道，堙者不可复疏，请起大名三春柳至沛县飞云桥，筑堤三百馀里，以障河北徙。 
现代文：至于黄河故道，堵塞之处不可以再疏通，请求从大名三春柳到沛县飞云桥，修筑堤岸三百余里，以阻碍黄河改道向北。 
English: As for the old path of the Yellow River, the blockage can no longer be cleared, and it is requested to build a dike of more than three hundred miles from the daimyo Sunchunliu to the Feiyun Bridge in Peixian to prevent the Yellow River from diverting to the north.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：六年二月，功未竣，堂言： 陈桥集、铜瓦厢俱应增筑，请设副使一人耑理。 
现代文：六年二月，工程未竣工，李堂说： 陈桥集、铜瓦厢都应当增筑堤岸，请设副使一人专门治理。 
English: In February of the sixth year, before the project was completed, Li Tang said: Chenqiao set and copper tile box should increase the embankment, please set up a deputy envoy for special management.

古文：会河南盗起，召堂还京，命姑已其不急者。
现代文：正值河南盗贼四起，召李堂返回京城，令暂且停止那些不急于办理之事。
English: At the same time, thieves in Henan Province were on the rise. Li Dong was called back to Beijing and ordered to temporarily stop those things that were not urgent.

古文：遂委其事於副使，而堤役由此罢。
现代文：于是，把治河事委托于副使，而修筑堤岸的工程由此停止。
English: As a result, river management was entrusted to the deputy envoy, and the project to build the embankment was stopped.

古文：八年六月，河复决黄陵冈。
现代文：八年六月，黄河又决堤于黄陵冈。
English: In June of the same year, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Huangling Hill.

古文：部议以其地界大名、山东、河南，守土官事权不一，请耑遣重臣，乃命管河副都御史刘恺兼理其事。
现代文：工部议定，因其地界于大名、山东、河南，地方官吏的职权不统一，请专门派遣重要大臣。于是命管河副都御史刘恺兼管其事。
English: The Ministry of Works agreed that, because the territorial boundaries were in Daimyo, Shandong, and Henan, the powers of local officials were not unified, so they asked to specially send important ministers. As a result, Liu Ye, the deputy governor of Hebei, was also in charge of the matter.

古文：恺奏，率众祭告河神，越二日，河已南徙。
现代文：刘恺上奏，率领众人祭告河神，过了两天，河已改道向南。
English: Liu Yao led the people to worship the river god. Two days later, the river had changed its course to the south.

古文：尚书李鐩因请祭河，且赐恺羊酒。
现代文：尚书李锤于是请求祭河，并且赐予刘恺羔羊美酒。
English: Shangshu Lihammer then asked for a sacrificial river, and gave Liu Ying lamb wine.

古文：恺於治河束手无策，特归功於神。
现代文：刘恺对于治理黄河毫无办法，特别归功于河神。
English: Liu Bei had no way of controlling the Yellow River, and he owed a great deal to the river god.

古文：曹、单间被害日甚。
现代文：曹、罩之间遭受灾害一天天严重。
English: The disasters suffered by Cao and Gu have become more and more serious.

古文：世宗初，总河副都御史龚弘言： 黄河自正德初载，变迁不常，日渐北徙。
现代文：世宗初年，总河副都御史龚弘说： 黄河从正德初年开始，变迁没有规律，一天天改道北流。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the vice-governor of the total river, Mi Shi Jiong, said: Since the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the Yellow River has changed irregularly, and it has changed its course to the north day by day.

古文：大河之水合成一派，归入黄陵冈前乃折而南，出徐州以入运河。
现代文：大河之水合成一条水流，回流到黄陵冈前就转而向南，流出徐州而流入运河。
English: The water of the great river forms a stream, and before flowing back to Huangling Mountain, it turns to the south, flows out of Xuzhou and flows into the canal.

古文：黄陵岁初筑三埽，先已决去其二，惧山、陕诸水横发，加以霖潦，决而趋张秋，复由故道入海。
现代文：黄陵冈当初修筑三条堤岸，先已溃决失去其二，害怕山东、陕西诸水横流，加以连绵大雨，决堤而直冲张秋，再经由故道入海。
English: Huanglinggang originally built three embankments, but the first one was destroyed and the second one was lost. It was afraid of the cross-flow of Shandong and Shaanxi rivers, and the continuous heavy rain. It broke through the embankment and went straight to Zhangqiu, and then entered the sea through the old road.

古文：臣尝筑堤，起长垣，由黄陵冈抵山东杨家口，延袤二百馀里。
现代文：臣曾修筑堤岸，起于长垣，经由黄陵冈直达山东杨家口，长宽二百余里。
English: The minister once built an embankment, starting from Nagagaki, passing through Huangling Mountain and reaching Yangjiakou in Shandong, with a length and width of more than two hundred miles.

古文：今拟距堤十里许再筑一堤，延袤高广如之。
现代文：今准备在距堤十里左右再筑一堤，横长高宽如同旧堤。
English: Now they are preparing to build another embankment about ten miles from the old one, with the same width and height as the old one.

古文：即河水溢旧堤，流至十里外，性缓势平，可无大决。 
现代文：即使河水漫过旧堤，流到十里之外，水势平缓，不会发生大的演决。 
English: Even if the river overflows the old levee and flows ten miles away, the water level will be moderate and there will be no major demonstrations.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：自黄陵冈决，开封以南无河患，而河北徐、沛诸州县河徙不常。
现代文：自黄陵冈决堤，开封以南无黄河之患，而黄河以北的徐、沛诸州县境，黄河改道不定。
English: Since the Huangling Mountains break through the dike, there is no danger of the Yellow River south of Kaifeng, while the Yellow River north of the Xu and Peizhou county borders, and the Yellow River diversion is uncertain.

古文：嘉靖五年，督漕都御史高友玑请浚山东贾鲁河、河南鸳鸯口，分泄水势，毋偏害一方。
现代文：嘉靖五年，督漕都御史高友玑请求疏通山东贾鲁河、河南鸳鸯口，分泄水势，不使它偏害一方。
English: In the fifth year of Jiajing, Gao Youjun, the governor of the capital, requested the dredging of the Jalu River in Shandong and the estuary in Henan, to divide the water release potential and prevent it from harming one side.

古文：部议恐害山东、河南，不允。
现代文：工部议论担心会危害山东、河南，没有允许。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Trade did not allow the discussion, fearing that it would harm Shandong and Henan.

古文：其冬，以章拯为工部侍郎兼佥都御史治河。
现代文：这年冬，以章拯为工部侍郎兼任愈都御史治理黄河。
English: In the winter of that year, Izakatsu was appointed as a chamberlain of the engineering department and also served as the governor of the Yellow River.

古文：先是，大学士费宏言： 河入汴梁以东分为三支，虽有冲决，可无大害。
现代文：在此之前，大学士费宏说： 黄河流入汴梁以东分为三支流，虽有冲毁决堤，但无大的灾害。
English: Prior to this, Feihong, a university scholar, said: The Yellow River is divided into three tributaries east of the entrance to the Qilian Mountains. Although there are levee breaks, there are no major disasters.

古文：正德末，涡河等河日就淤浅，黄河大股南趋之势既无所杀，乃从兰阳、考城、曹、濮奔赴沛县飞云桥及徐州之溜沟，悉入漕河，泛溢弥漫，此前数年河患也。
现代文：正德末年，涡河等河道一天天淤塞，黄河水大部分南奔之势已经无法碱缓，于是从兰阳、考城、曹、濮奔赴沛县飞云桥及徐州的溜沟，全都流入漕河，泛滥弥漫，这是以前数年的黄河水患。
English: At the end of the Zhengde era, the Turbul River and other river channels were silted up day by day, and most of the Yellow River's southward flow could no longer be slowed down. Therefore, from Lanyang, Kaocheng, Cao and Qianfeng to Feiyun Bridge in Pei County and the ravine in Xuzhou, they all flowed into the Caohe River, flooding everywhere. This was the Yellow River flood in previous years.

古文：近者，沙河至沛县浮沙涌塞，官民舟楫悉取道昭阳湖。
现代文：近年的情况，沙河到沛县泥沙淤塞，官民的舟船全部取道昭阳湖。
English: In recent years, the Shahe River to Pei County has been silted up with silt, and all the boats of officials and citizens have taken the road of Shoyang Lake.

古文：春夏之交，湖面浅涸，运道必阻，涡河等河必宜亟浚。 
现代文：春夏之交，湖面水浅干涸，运输河道必定受阻，涡河等河必须赶快疏通。 
English: At the turn of spring and summer, the shallow water of the lake dries up, the transport channel must be blocked, and rivers such as the turbulent river must be quickly dredged.

古文：御史戴金言： 黄河入淮之道有三：自中牟至荆山合长淮曰涡河；自开封经葛冈小坝、丁家道口、马牧集鸳鸯口至徐州小浮桥口曰汴河；自小坝经归德城南饮马池抵文家集，经夏邑至宿迁曰白河。
现代文：御史戴金说： 黄河流入淮河之道有三：从中牟到荆山合于长淮的叫涡河；从开封经过葛冈小坝、丁家道口、马牧集鸳鸯口到徐州小浮桥口叫汴河；从小坝经过归德城南饮马池直达文家集，又经夏邑到宿迁叫白河。
English: There are three ways for the Yellow River to flow into the Huai River: from Zhongmou to the junction of Jingshan and Changhuai is called the Vortex River; from Kaifeng through Gegang Xiaoba, Dingjia Road, and Ma Muxi Pass to Xuzhou Xiao Fuqiao Pass is called the Fen River; from Xiaoba through Guide City South Drinking Horse Pond to Wenjiaqiu, and through Xiayi to Suqian is called the White River.

古文：弘治间，涡、白上源堙塞，而徐州独受其害。
现代文：弘治年间，涡、白上游堵塞，而徐州独受其害。
English: During the Hongzhi era, the upper reaches of the Vortex and Bai rivers were clogged, and Xuzhou was the only victim.

古文：宜自小坝至宿迁小河并贾鲁河、鸳鸯口、文家集壅塞之处，尽行疏通，则趋淮之水不止一道，而徐州水患杀矣。 
现代文：应当将从小坝到宿迁小河并于贾鲁河、鸳鸯口、文家集的堵塞之处，全部进行疏通，则奔向淮河之水就不止一道，而徐州的水患也解决了。 
English: From the small dam to Suqian creek and the blockage of the Jalu River, Hukou and Wenjiaji, all should be dredged, then the water rushing to the Huai River will not be more than one, and the flood in Xuzhou will be solved.

古文：御史刘栾言： 曹县梁靖口南岸，旧有贾鲁河，南至武家口十三里，黄沙淤平，必宜开浚。
现代文：御史刘乐说： 曹县梁靖口南岸，原有贾鲁河，向南到武家口十三里，黄沙淤平河遒，必须开通。
English: Superintendent Liu Le said: It is necessary to open the southern bank of Liangjingkou in Cao County, the original Jialu River, southward to Wujiakou thirteen miles, Huangsha dikes.

古文：武家口下至马牧集鸳鸯口百十七里，即小黄河旧通徐州故道，水尚不涸，亦宜疏通。 
现代文：武家口流到马牧集鸳鸯口一百七十里，即小黄河旧通徐州的故道，河水尚未干涸，也应疏通。 
English: It is 170 miles from Wujiakou to Mamuji Hukou, which is the old route of the Little Yellow River to Xuzhou. The river has not yet dried up and should be dredged.

古文：督漕总兵官杨宏亦请疏归德小坝、丁家道口、亳州涡河、宿迁小河。
现代文：督漕总兵官杨宏也请求疏通归德小坝、丁家道口、亳州涡河、宿迁小河。
English: Yang Hong, the general officer in charge of rowing, also requested the dredging of Guide Dam, Dingjia Pass, Zhangzhou Turbulent River and Suqian Creek.

古文：友玑及拯亦屡以为言。
现代文：高友玑和章拯也屡次以此上奏。
English: Gao Youjun and Zhang Zheng also repeatedly played this up.

古文：俱下工部议，以为浚贾鲁故道，开涡河上源，功大难成，未可轻举，但议筑堤障水，俾入正河而已。
现代文：全都下发到工部讨论，认为疏通贾鲁河故道，开凿涡河上游，工程浩大难以完成，不可轻率行动，只是主张筑堤挡水，使流入正河罢了。
English: All of them were sent to the Ministry of Industry and Trade for discussion. They believed that it would be difficult to complete the huge project of dredging the old path of the Jalu River and excavating the upper reaches of the Vortex River, and that they should not act rashly. They only advocated building a dike to block the water and let it flow into the Zhenghe River.

古文：是年，黄河上流骤溢，东北至沛县庙道口，截运河，注鸡鸣台口，入昭阳湖。
现代文：这年，黄河上游骤涨，东北到沛县庙道口，截断运河，注入鸡鸣台口，流入昭阳湖。
English: This year, the upstream of the Yellow River rose sharply, cutting off the canal from the northeast to the Miao Daokou of Pei County, injecting into the Jining Daokou, and flowing into the Shoyang Lake.

古文：汶、泗南下之水从而东，而河之出飞云桥者漫而北，淤数十里，河水没丰县，徙治避之。
现代文：汶、泗南流之水从而向东流，而黄河水出于飞云桥的漫流而向北，淤塞数十里，黄河水淹没丰县，迁移县治避免灾害。
English: As a result, the water of the Wen and Minan streams flowed eastward, while the Yellow River water flowed northward due to the wandering flow of the Feiyun Bridge, silting up for dozens of miles. The Yellow River water flooded Feng County, and the county government was relocated to avoid disasters.

古文：明年，拯言： 荥泽北孙家渡、兰阳北赵皮寨，皆可引水南流，但二河通涡，东入淮，又东至凤阳长淮卫，经寿春王诸园寝，为患叵测。
现代文：第二年，章拯说： 荣泽北孙家渡、兰阳北赵皮寨，都可以引水向南流，但二河通涡，向东入淮，又向东到凤阳长淮卫，经由寿春王诸帝陵墓，造成的祸患难以测度。
English: In the second year, Zhang Zheng said: Rongze North Sunjiadu and Lanyang North Zhao Pizhai can divert water to the south, but the two rivers swirl eastward into Huai, and eastward to Fengyang Changhuaiwei, passing through the mausoleum of Emperor Shuchun. The disaster caused is difficult to measure.

古文：惟宁陵北坌河一道，通饮马池，抵文家集，又经夏邑至宿州符离桥，出宿迁小河口，自赵皮寨至文家集，凡二百馀里，浚而通之，水势易杀，而园寝无患。 
现代文：只有宁陵北坌河一道，通饮马池，直达文家集，又经过夏邑到宿州符离桥，出宿迁小河口，从赵皮寨到文家集，总共二百余里，疏浚而使其畅通，水势就容易碱缓，而皇帝陵也无水患。 
English: Only the Ningling Beilun River, flowing through Maqi, straight to Wenjiaqiu, and passing through Xiayi to Suzhou Fuyu Bridge, out of the small estuary, from Zhao Pizhai to Wenjiaqiu, a total of more than two hundred miles, dredging to make it smooth, the water potential is easy to alkaline, and the emperor's tomb is also free from flooding.

古文：乃为图说以闻。
现代文：于是绘图说明让皇帝知道。
English: So he let the emperor know about the drawing instructions.

古文：命刻期举工。
现代文：皇帝命限期动工。
English: The construction was started within the emperor's lifetime.

古文：而河决曹、单、城武杨家、梁靖二口、吴士举庄，冲入鸡鸣台，夺运河，沛地淤填七八里，粮艘阻不进。
现代文：而黄河决堤于曹、单、城武杨家、梁靖二口、昊士举庄，冲入鸡鸣台，夺去运河，沛地淤塞七八里，运粮船只受阻不能前行。
English: However, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Cao, Shan, Chengwu Yangjia, Liangjing two mouths, and Haoshi Zhuang, rushed into Jiningdai, seized the canal, and blocked seven or eight miles. Grain transport vessels were blocked and could not move forward.

古文：御史吴仲以闻，因劾拯不能办河事，乞择能者往代。
现代文：御史昊仲上报，于是弹劾章拯不能治理黄河，请选择有能力的人前去替代。
English: Gu Shi Haozhong reported, so impeachment Zhang Zheng can not govern the Yellow River, please choose a capable person to replace him.

古文：其冬，以盛应期为总督河道右都御史。
现代文：这年冬，命盛应期为总督河道右都御史。
English: In the winter of that year, Meisho was appointed as the governor of Hetao Utsu Imperial Palace.

古文：是时，光禄少卿黄绾、詹事霍韬、左都御史胡世宁、兵部尚书李承勋各献治河之议。
现代文：这时，光禄少卿黄绾、詹事霍韬、左都御史胡世宁、兵部尚书李承勋各自献上治河的主张。
English: At this time, Guanglu Shaoqing Huang Qi, Zhan Zhi Huo Qi, Zuo Guo Shi Hu Shining, and Hyobu Shangshu Li Chengxun each presented their ideas for river management.

古文：绾言： 漕河资山东泉水，不必资黄河，莫若浚兖、冀间两高中低之地，道河使北，至直沽入海。 
现代文：黄绾说：漕河取资于山东的泉水，不必取黄河水，不如疏通兖、冀之间两边高中间低的地方，引导黄河使往北流，到直沽入海。
English: Huang Qi said, "The Caohe River draws its water from the springs in Shandong. It is not necessary to draw water from the Yellow River. It is better to dredge the high, middle and low areas on both sides of the Caohe River and the Hebei River, and guide the Yellow River to flow northward to Zhouzhuang and enter the sea.

古文：韬言： 议者欲引河自兰阳注宿迁。
现代文：霍韬说：谈论治河的人想引黄河从兰阳注入宿迁。
English: "People who talk about river management want to divert the Yellow River from Lanyang to Suqian," said Huo Wei.

古文：夫水溢徐、沛，犹有二洪为之束捍，东北诸山亘列如垣，有所底极，若道兰阳，则归德、凤阳平地千里，河势奔放，数郡皆壑，患不独徐、沛矣。
现代文：洪水泛滥于徐、沛，还有两条大河为它护卫，东北诸山绵延排列如矮墙，有所终止，假若取道兰阳，则归德、凤阳平地千里，河的水势奔放，数郡之地都成为沟壑，水患就不单是徐、沛了。
English: Floods are rampant in Xu and Pei, and there are two large rivers to protect it. The mountains in the northeast are arranged like a low wall, and there is a termination. If you take the Lanyang Highway, you will return to De and Fengyang, thousands of miles away. The river's water potential is unrestrained, and several counties have become gullies. Floods are not just in Xu and Pei.

古文：按卫河自卫辉汲县至天津入海，犹古黄河也。
现代文：考察卫河从卫辉汲县到达天津入海，就是古黄河。
English: The Wei River, which flows into the sea from Weihui County to Tianjin, is the ancient Yellow River.

古文：今宜於河阴、原武、怀、孟间，审视地形，引河水注於卫河，至临清、天津，则徐、沛水势可杀其半。
现代文：今应当在河阴、原武、怀、孟之间，察看地形，别黄河水注入卫河，到临清、天津，则徐、沛水势就可以减缓一半。
English: Now it is time to inspect the terrain between Heyin, Yuanwu, Huai and Meng. Do not inject Yellow River water into Weihe. If you go to Linqing and Tianjin, the water potential of Xu and Pei can be reduced by half.

古文：且元人漕舟涉江入淮，至封丘北，陆运百八十里至淇门，入御河达京师。
现代文：而且元人漕运船只渡过大江进入淮河，到封丘北，陆运一百八十里到淇门，进入御河到达京城。
English: Moreover, Yuanren rowing boats crossed the Yangtze River into the Huai River, to Fengqiu North, land transport one hundred and eighty miles to Qimen, into the Ohe River to reach Beijing.

古文：御河即卫河也。
现代文：御河即卫河。
English: The Oka River is also known as the Wei River.

古文：今导河注卫，冬春溯卫河沿临清至天津，夏秋则由徐、沛，此一举而运道两得也。 
现代文：今引黄河注入卫河，冬春时，逆卫河而上，沿着临清到天津，夏秋时，则从徐、沛，这是一举而漕运河道两相得利。
English: At present, the Yellow River flows into the Wei River. In winter and spring, it flows against the Wei River and goes up, along the Linqing River to Tianjin. In summer and autumn, it flows from Xu and Pei. This is a canal road that benefits both sides.

古文：世宁言： 河自汴以来，南分二道：一出汴城西荥泽，经中牟、陈、颍，至寿州入淮；一出汴城东祥符，经陈留、亳州，至怀远入淮。
现代文：胡世宁说：黄河从汴城流出，向南分为二道：一道出于汴城西荣泽，经过中牟、陈、颖，到寿州流入淮河；一道出于汴城束祥符，经过陈留、毫州，到怀远流入淮河。
English: Hu Shining said: The Yellow River flows out of Lucheng and divides into two paths to the south: one flows out of Lucheng Xirongze, through Zhongmou, Chen and Ying, and flows into the Huaihe River in Shoushou; the other flows out of Lucheng Sokshengfu, through Chenliu and Maozhou, and flows into the Huaihe River in Huaiyuan.

古文：其东南一道自归德、宿州，经虹县、睢宁，至宿迁出其东，分五道：一自长垣、曹、郓至阳谷出；一自曹州双河口至鱼台塌场口出；一自仪封、归德至徐州小浮桥出；一自沛县南飞云桥出；一自徐、沛之中境山、北溜沟出。
现代文：其东南一道从归德、宿州，经过虹县、睢宁，到宿迁出于其束，分为五道：一从长垣、曹、郫到阳谷流出；一从曹州双河口到鱼台塌场口流出；一从仪封、归德到徐州小浮桥流出；一从沛县南飞云桥流出；一从徐、沛之中境山、北溜沟流出。
English: In the southeast, it flows from Guide, Suizhou, through Hongxian and Suining, to Suqian from its bundles, and is divided into five roads: one flows from Nagagaki, Cao and Handan to Yanggu; one flows from Caozhou Shuanghekou to the mouth of the Yutai landslide site; one flows from Yifeng and Guide to Xuzhou Xiaowu Bridge; one flows from Nanfeiyun Bridge in Pei County; one flows from Xu and Pei Zhongjing Mountain and North Gully.

古文：六道皆入漕河，而南会於淮。
现代文：六条河道都流入漕河，而往南汇合于淮。
English: The six rivers all flow into the Caohe River and converge at Huaihe to the south.

古文：今诸道皆塞，惟沛县一道仅存。
现代文：今诸条河道都淤塞，只有沛县一条河道存在。
English: Now all the rivers are silted up, and only one river in Pae County remains.

古文：合流则水势既大，河身亦狭不能容，故溢出为患。
现代文：合流则水势就增大，河床又狭窄不能容纳，所以横溢为患。
English: At the confluence, the water potential increases, and the riverbed is too narrow to accommodate, so overflowing is a problem.

古文：近又漫入昭阳湖，以致流缓沙壅。
现代文：近又漫流入昭阳湖，以致水流缓慢泥沙淤积。
English: It recently flowed into Lake Shoyang, causing the water to slowly accumulate silt and sediment.

古文：宜因故道而分其势，汴西则浚孙家渡抵寿州以杀上流，汴东南出怀远、宿迁及正东小浮桥、溜沟诸道，各宜择其利便者，开浚一道，以泄下流。
现代文：应当利用故道而分其水势，汴城之西，则疏通孙家渡直达寿州的河道，以减缓上游水势，汴城东南出怀远、宿迁及正东小浮桥、溜沟诸河道，各应选择其有利的地方，开通一条河道，以泄下游。
English: The old route should be used to divide its water potential. To the west of Lucheng, the river channel from Sunjiadu to Shoushu should be dredged to slow the upstream water potential. The river channels from the southeast of Lucheng to Zhuhai, Suqian, and the small floating bridge and gully in the east of Lucheng should each choose its favorable place and open a river channel to release the downstream.

古文：或修武城南废堤，抵丰、单接沛北庙道口，以防北流。
现代文：或修筑武城南废堤，直达丰、单连接沛北庙道口，以防止北流。
English: Or to build the Wucheng South Wastes Dike, directly to Dafeng, and single-linked to the Peihoku Temple Road, in order to prevent the northward flow.

古文：此皆治河急务也。
现代文：这些都是治理黄河的紧急事务。
English: These are all urgent matters for the management of the Yellow River.

古文：至为运道计，则当於湖东滕、沛、鱼台、邹县间独山、新安社地别凿一渠，南接留城，北接沙河，不过百馀里。
现代文：至于为漕运河道谋划，就应当在湖束滕、沛、鱼台、邹县之间的独山、新安社等地另外开凿一渠，南接留城，北接沙河，不过百余里。
English: As for the planning of the canal route, another canal should be dug in the Dokshan, Xin'an and other places between Huzhongteng, Pei, Yutai and Jixian counties, connecting Lucheng in the south and Shahe in the north, but more than a hundred miles.

古文：厚筑西岸以为湖障，令水不得漫，而以一湖为河流散漫之区，乃上策也。 
现代文：加厚西岸堤防以阻挡湖水，让水不能泛滥，而把一湖作为河水分洪的地方，这纔是上策。
English: Thickening the west bank of the dike to block the lake water, so that the water cannot flood, and using a lake as a place for river water to flood is the best strategy.

古文：承勋言： 黄河入运支流有六。
现代文：李承勋说：黄河流入运河的支流有六。
English: Li Chengxun said: There are six tributaries of the Yellow River into the canal.

古文：自涡河源塞，则北出小黄河、溜沟等处，不数年诸处皆塞，北并出飞云桥，於是丰、沛受患，而金沟运道遂淤。
现代文：白涡河水源堵塞，则向北出于小黄河、溜沟等处，没有几年，各处都被堵塞，往北并出于飞云桥，于是丰、沛遭受水患，而金沟运道于是淤塞。
English: When the source of the Baiyun River was blocked, the water flowed northward from the Small Yellow River, gullies and other places. Within a few years, all places were blocked. To the north, it also flowed from Feiyun Bridge. As a result, Feng and Pei suffered from floods, and the Golden Ditch was blocked.

古文：然幸东面皆山，犹有所障，故昭阳湖得通舟。
现代文：然而，幸亏束面都是高山，仍然有所阻挡，所以昭阳湖能够通行船只。
English: However, thanks to the fact that the area is surrounded by high mountains, it is still blocked, so boats can pass through Shoyang Lake.

古文：若益徙而北，则径奔入海，安平镇故道可虑，单县、谷亭百万生灵之命可虞。
现代文：假若逐渐改道北流，则直接奔入大海，安平镇故道使人忧虑，单县、谷亭百万人民的生命使人担心。
English: If the current is gradually diverted to the north, it will rush directly into the sea. Anping Town's former course is worrying, and the lives of one million people in Shan County and Gu Ting are worrying.

古文：又益北，则自济宁至临清运道诸水俱相随入海，运何由通？
现代文：再逐渐北流，那么从速空到临清运道诸水都会相继跟着流入大海，运道怎么能畅通？
English: Then it gradually flows northward, so from the expressway to the Linqing shipping channel, all the waters will flow into the sea one after another. How can the shipping channel be smooth?

古文：臣愚以为相六道分流之势，导引使南，可免冲决，此下流不可不疏浚也。
现代文：臣认为应察看六条支流分流之势，引导它使往南流，可以避免冲决，这样下游不可不疏通。
English: The minister believed that it was necessary to observe the potential of the diversion of the six tributaries, and guide it to flow southward, so that it could avoid rushing, and the downstream could not but be dredged.

古文：欲保丰、沛、单县、谷亭之民，必因旧堤筑之，堤其西北使毋溢出，此上流不可不堤防也。 
现代文：要想保护丰、沛、单县、谷亭的人民，必须依照旧堤进行修筑，西北筑堤不使水漫出，此上游不可不修筑堤防。
English: If we want to protect the people of Feng, Pei, Shan County and Gu Ting, we must build according to the old embankment. The northwest embankment should not allow water to overflow, and the upstream should not build an embankment.

古文：其论昭阳湖东引水为运道，与世宁同。
现代文：他主张从昭阳湖东引水为运道的言论，舆胡世宁相同。
English: He advocated diverting water from the eastern part of Zhaoyang Lake as the transportation route, which is the same as the opinion of Hu Shining.

古文：乃下总督大臣会议。
现代文：于是下发总督大臣会同议决。
English: As a result, the Council of State Governors and Ministers passed the same resolution.

古文：七年正月，应期奏上，如世宁策，请於昭阳湖东改为运河。
现代文：七年正月，应期上奏皇帝，如同胡世宁的办法，请在昭阳湖束改为运河。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, in response to the emperor's request, as Hu Shining's method, please change the Shoyang Lake Bund into a canal.

古文：会河决，於庙道口三十馀里，乃别遣官浚赵皮寨，孙家渡，南、北溜沟以杀上流，堤武城迤西至沛县南，以防北溃。
现代文：恰巧黄河决口，淤塞庙道口三十余里，于是另外派遣官吏疏通赵皮寨，孙家渡和南、北溜沟，以减缓上游水势，筑堤于武城向西延至沛县南，以防北面溃决。
English: It so happened that the Yellow River had burst its banks and blocked more than 30 miles of the temple road, so officials were dispatched to dredge Zhao Pizhai, Sunjiadu and the south and north gullies to slow the upstream water flow, and to build a dike in Wucheng to extend west to the south of Pei County to prevent the north side from bursting.

古文：会旱灾修省，言者请罢新河之役，乃召应期还京，以工部侍郎潘希曾代。
现代文：恰巧旱灾发生，修身反省，言官请停止修筑新河的工程，就召应期返回京城，以工部侍郎潘希曾替代。
English: Coincidentally, a drought occurred, and after self-reflection, the speaker asked the officials to stop the construction of the new river project, and returned to Beijing during the call-up period. He was replaced by Pan Xi Zeng, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：希曾抵官，言： 迩因赵皮寨开浚未通，疏孙家渡口以杀河势，请敕河南巡抚潘埙督管河副使，刻期成功。 
现代文：潘希曾到任，说： 近因趟皮寨疏浚未通，应疏通孙家渡口以碱缓黄河水势，请敕令河南巡抚潘垠督管黄河副使，限期完成。 
English: Pan Xi once arrived at the post and said: "Recently, due to the failure of the dredging of the dredging site, it is necessary to dredge the Sun Jia ferry port with alkali to slow down the water potential of the Yellow River. Please order the Henan governor, Pan Yu, to supervise the deputy envoy of the Yellow River, and complete the deadline.

古文：帝从其奏。
现代文：皇帝依从他的奏请。
English: The emperor complied with his request.

古文：希曾又言： 漕渠庙道口以下忽淤数十里者，由决河西来横冲口上，并掣闸河之水东入昭阳湖，致闸水不南，而飞云桥之水时复北漫故也。
现代文：潘希曾又说： 漕渠庙道口以下忽然淤塞数十里，由决河西之水来横冲口上，并牵制闸河之水向东流入昭阳湖，致使闸水不南流，而这就是飞云桥之水时而又向北漫流出原因。
English: Panshi also said: The canal was suddenly silted up for dozens of miles below the entrance to the temple, and the water from the west of the river came to the headwaters, and the water from the sluice was diverted to flow eastward into the Zhaoyang Lake, causing the sluice water not to flow south, and this is the reason why the water from the Feiyun Bridge flowed out to the north.

古文：今宜於济、沛间加筑东堤，以遏入湖之路，更筑西堤以防黄河之冲，则水不散缓，而庙道口可永无淤塞之虞。 
现代文：现在应当在济、沛之间加筑束堤，以阻止流入昭阳湖的水道，再筑西堤以防黄河的冲击，则水就不分散缓流，而庙道旦可以永无淤塞之忧。 
English: Now it is time to build a dike between Ji and Pei to block the waterway flowing into Zhao Yang Lake, and then build a west dike to prevent the impact of the Yellow River. Then the water will not disperse and slow down, and the temple road will never be blocked.

古文：帝亦从之。
现代文：皇帝也依从他的主张。
English: The emperor also followed his advice.

古文：八年六月，单、丰、沛三县长堤成。
现代文：八年六月，单、丰、沛三县长堤修成。
English: In June of the eighth year, the long dike of Shan, Feng and Pei counties was completed.

古文：九年五月，孙家渡河堤成。
现代文：九年五月，孙家渡河堤修成。
English: In May of the ninth year, Sun Jia's crossing of the river dike was completed.

古文：逾月，河决曹县。
现代文：过了一月，黄河决堤于曹县。
English: A month later, the Yellow River burst its banks in Cao County.

古文：一自胡村寺东，东南至贾家坝入古黄河，由丁家道口至小浮桥入运河。
现代文：一从胡村寺束，向东南流到贾家坝入古黄河，从丁家道口到小浮桥入运河。
English: First, it flows southeastward from Hu Cunzhu Bund to Jiajiaba into the ancient Yellow River, and from Dingjia Intersection to Small Floating Bridge into the canal.

古文：一自胡村寺东北，分二支：一东南经虞城至砀山，合古黄河出徐州；一东北经单县长堤抵鱼台，漫为坡水，傍谷亭入运河。
现代文：一从胡村寺东北，分为二支流：一由东南经虞城到殇山，汇合古黄河出于徐州；一从东北经单县长堤直达鱼台，漫流为坡水，靠近谷亭流入运河。
English: One from the northeast of Hu Cun Temple, divided into two tributaries: one from the southeast via Yucheng to Lushan, merging the ancient Yellow River from Xuzhou; one from the northeast via the long embankment of Shan County straight to Yutai, flowing downhill, flowing into the canal near Gu Ting.

古文：单、丰、沛三县长堤障之，不为害。
现代文：单、丰、沛三县长堤阻挡洪水，不造成灾害。
English: The long dikes in Shan, Feng and Pei counties block floods and do not cause disasters.

古文：希曾上言： 黄由归德至徐入漕，故道也。
现代文：潘希曾上奏说： 黄河由归德到徐州流入漕河，这是故道。
English: Pan Xi once said: The Yellow River flows into the Caohe River from Guide to Xuzhou. This is the old way.

古文：永乐间，浚开封支河达鱼台入漕以济浅。
现代文：永乐年间，疏通开封支河到达鱼台流入漕河以济其水浅。
English: During the Yongle era, the branch of the Kaifeng River that reached Yutai was dredged to flow into the Cao River to improve its shallow water.

古文：自弘治时，黄河改由单、丰出沛之飞云桥，而归德故道始塞，鱼台支河亦塞。
现代文：从弘治时，黄河改道从单、丰出于沛的飞云桥，而归德故道开始淤塞，鱼台支河也淤塞。
English: From the time of Hongzhi, the Yellow River was diverted from the single, rich and abundant Feiyun Bridge, and the old road to Germany began to clog, and the Yutai tributary was also clogged.

古文：今全河复其故道，则患害已远，支流达於鱼台，则浅涸无虞，此漕运之利，国家之福也。 
现代文：今整个黄河恢复其故道，则灾害已经远离，支流达于鱼台，则水枯浅干涸也不必忧虑，此是漕运的便利，是国家的福祉。 
English: Now that the entire Yellow River has resumed its old course, the disasters have been far away, the tributaries have reached the Yutai, and the water is shallow and dry, there is no need to worry. This is the convenience of paddling and the welfare of the country.

古文：帝悦，下所司知之，乃召希曾还京。
现代文：皇帝喜悦，下发通知有关部门，于是召潘希曾回到京城。
English: The emperor was pleased and issued a notice to the relevant departments, so he summoned Pan Xi Zeng to return to Beijing.

古文：自是，丰、沛渐无患，而鱼台数溢。
现代文：从此，丰、沛渐渐没有水患，而鱼台却频频泛滥。
English: Since then, Feng and Pei have gradually been free of flooding, while Yutai has been flooded frequently.

古文：十一年，总河佥都御史戴时宗请委鱼台为受水之地，言： 河东北岸与运道邻，惟西南流者，一由孙家渡出寿州，一由涡河口出怀远，一由赵皮寨出桃源，一由梁靖口出徐州小浮桥。
现代文：十一年，总河愈都御史戴时宗请求舍弃鱼台，让它成为容纳洪水的地方，说： 黄河东北堤岸与漕运河道相邻，祇有向西南流的支河，一由孙家渡出于寿州，一由涡河口出于怀速，一由趟皮寨出于桃源，一由梁靖口出于徐州小浮桥。
English: In the eleventh year, the Grand Historian of the Yellow River, Dai Shizong, requested the abandonment of Yutai to make it a place to accommodate floods, saying: The northeast bank of the Yellow River is adjacent to the Cao Canal Road, and there are only tributaries flowing to the southwest, one from Sunjiadu out of Shuzhou, one from the mouth of the Vortex River out of Huaihai, one from Wai Pizhai out of Taoyuan, and one from Liang Jingkou out of Xuzhou Small Floating Bridge.

古文：往年四道俱塞，全河南奔，故丰、沛、曹、单、鱼台以次受害。
现代文：过去，四条支流都被淤塞，整个黄河向南奔流，所以丰、沛、曹、单、鱼台依次遭受灾害。
English: In the past, the four tributaries were silted up, and the entire Yellow River flowed southward, so Feng, Pei, Cao, Shan and Yutai suffered disasters in turn.

古文：今患独钟於鱼台，宜弃以受水，因而道之，使入昭阳湖，过新开河，出留城、金沟、境山，乃易为力。
现代文：今水患单独集中于鱼台，应当舍弃以容纳洪水，因而引导它，使流入昭阳湖，经过新开河，出于留城、金沟、境山，这样纔容易取得功效。
English: Now that the flood is concentrated in Yutai alone, the dam should be abandoned to accommodate the flood and thus guide it so that it flows into Zhaoyang Lake, passes through the Xinkai River, and flows out of Lucheng, Jingu, and Jingshan. In this way, it is easy to obtain efficacy.

古文：至塞河四道，惟涡河经祖陵，未敢轻举，其三支河颇存故迹，宜乘鱼台壅塞，令开封河夫卷埽填堤，逼使河水分流，则鱼台水势渐减，俟水落毕工，并前三河共为四道，以分泄之，河患可已。 
现代文：至于被淤塞的四支河道，只有涡河经过祖陵，役敢轻率行动，其余三支河道略存旧迹，应该趁鱼台壅塞之机，诏令开封治河民工卷竹木成圆形填寅土石以筑堤，迫使黄河水分流，则鱼台水势就会渐渐减弱，等待洪水下降修筑完工，同前三支河共为四条河道，以分泄洪水，黄河水患就能够停息。 
English: As for the four rivers that have been blocked, only the Turbulent River passes through the ancestral mausoleum, and the soldiers dare to act rashly. The remaining three rivers still have some traces of the past. It is necessary to take advantage of the opportunity to prevent the obstruction of the Yutai River. The decree should be issued to open the Yutai River, and the workers should roll the bamboo into a circular shape and fill it with mudstone to build a dike, forcing the Yellow River to flow. Then the Yutai River water potential will gradually weaken, waiting for the flood to fall and the construction to be completed. As with the previous three rivers, there are a total of four

古文：明年，都御史朱裳代时宗，条上治河二事，大略言： 三大支河宜开如时宗计，而请塞梁靖口迤东由鱼台入运河之岔口，以捍黄河，则谷亭镇迤南二百馀里淤者可浚，是谓塞黄河之口以开运河。
现代文：第二年，都御史朱裳替代戴时宗，向皇帝上陈治河=事，大略是说： 三大支河应依照戴时宗的计划开通，而请堵塞梁靖口往东由鱼台入运河的岔口，以护卫黄河，则谷亭镇向南二百余里淤塞的地方就可以疏通，这就叫做堵塞黄河的决口以开通运河。
English: In the second year, Zhu Xiang, the governor of the capital, took the place of Dai Shizong and proposed to the emperor to solve the river issue, roughly saying: the three major rivers should be opened in accordance with the plan of Dai Shizong, and please block the Liangjing entrance to the east from the Yutai entrance to the canal to guard the Yellow River, then the silted place of Gu Ting Town more than two hundred miles south can be unblocked. This is called blocking the mouth of the Yellow River to open the canal.

古文：黄河自谷亭转入运河，顺流而南，二日抵徐州，徐州逆流而北，四日乃抵谷亭，黄水之利莫大於此。
现代文：黄河从谷亭转入运河，顺流向南，二日到达徐州，徐州逆流向北，四日纔到达谷亭，黄河水利没有比这更大的。
English: The Yellow River enters the canal from Gu Ting, flows southward, reaches Xuzhou on the second day, flows northward from Xuzhou, and reaches Gu Ting on the fourth day. The water conservancy of the Yellow River is no greater than this.

古文：恐河流北趋，或由鱼台、金乡、济宁漫安平镇，则运河堤岸冲决；或三支一有壅淤，则谷亭南运河亦且冲决。
现代文：担心黄河北流，或者由鱼台、金乡、济宁泛滥于安平镇，则运河堤岸被冲决；或者三支河一旦有淤塞，则谷亭南面的运河也将被冲决。
English: If it is feared that the Yellow River will flow to the north, or flood Anping Town from Yutai, Jinxiang and Jining, then the canal embankment will be washed away; or if the three rivers are silted up, then the canal south of Gu Ting will also be washed away.

古文：宜缮筑堤岸，束黄入运，是谓借黄河之水以资运河。 
现代文：应当修筑堤岸，约束黄河流入运河，这叫做借黄河之水来供给运河。 
English: A dike should be built to restrict the Yellow River from flowing into the canal. This is called borrowing water from the Yellow River to supply the canal.

古文：诏裳相度处置。
现代文：诏令朱裳测量之后进行治理。
English: Zhao ordered Zhu Xiang to carry out the treatment after the measurement.

古文：十三年正月，裳复言：
现代文：十三年正月，朱裳又说：
English: In the first month of the thirteenth year, Zhu Xi also said:

古文： 今梁靖口、赵皮寨已通，孙家渡方浚。
现代文：今梁靖口、赵皮寨已经畅通，孙家渡正在疏浚。
English: Now Liang Jingkou and Zhao Pizhai have been unblocked, and Sunjiadu is being dredged.

古文：惟涡河一支，因赵皮寨下流睢州野鸡冈淤正河五十馀里，漫於平地，注入涡河。
现代文：只有涡河一支，因赵皮寨下游睢州野鸡冈淤塞主河道五十余里，漫流于平地，注入涡河。
English: There is only one vortex river, because the lower reaches of Zhao Pizhai, Luzhou Pheasant Hill, silted up the main river for more than 50 miles, wandering on the plain and injecting into the vortex river.

古文：宜挑浚深广，引导漫水归入正河，而於睢州张见口筑长堤至归德郭村，凡百馀里，以防泛溢。
现代文：应当挖深挖宽河道，引导漫流之水回流入正河，并且在睢州张见口修筑长堤到归德郭村，总共一百余里，以防止泛滥。
English: It is necessary to dig a deep and wide river channel, guide the stray water back into the main river, and build a long embankment from Zhangmingkou in Zhangzhou to Guideguo Village, a total of more than one hundred miles, in order to prevent flooding.

古文：更时疏梁靖口下流，且挑仪封月河入之，达於小浮桥，则北岸水势杀矣。
现代文：更时常疏通梁靖口下游，又挖仪封半月形河道注入到那里，达到小浮桥，则北岸水势就可以减缓了。
English: If the lower reaches of the Liangjing estuary are dredged more often, and the half-moon-shaped river channel is dredged and injected there to reach the small pontoon bridge, the water potential of the north bank can be slowed down.

古文：夫河过鱼台，其流渐北，将有越济宁、趋安平、东入於海之渐。
现代文：董河经过鱼台，其流向逐渐向北，将有越过济宁、直奔安平、向东流入海的迹象。
English: The Donghe River passes through Yutai, and its flow direction is gradually northward. There will be signs of crossing Jining, going straight to Anping, and flowing eastward into the sea.

古文：尝议塞岔河之口以安运河，而水势汹涌，恐难遽塞。
现代文：曾商议堵塞岔河之口以使运河安定，然而水势汹涌，担心难以立即堵塞。
English: It was discussed to block the mouth of the Min River to stabilize the canal, but the water was so turbulent that it was feared that it would be difficult to block it immediately.

古文：塞亦不能无横决，黄陵冈、李居庄诸处不能无患。
现代文：即使堵塞也不能说没有横决堤岸之危，黄陵冈、李居庄诸处不能说没有水患。
English: Even if there is a blockage, it cannot be said that there is no danger of breaking through the embankment, and Huangling Mountain and Lijuzhuang cannot be said to be free from flooding.

古文：徐州迤上至鲁桥泥沙停滞，山东诸泉水微，运道必涩。
现代文：徐州往上到鲁桥泥沙淤积，山东诸泉水细微，漕运河道必然水浅难行。
English: From Xuzhou up to Luqiao, mud and sand have accumulated. The springs in Shandong are shallow, and it is difficult to navigate the canal.

古文：请创筑城武至济宁缕水大堤百五十馀里，以防北溢。
现代文：请重新修筑城武到济宁缕水大堤一百五十余里，以防止向北泛滥。
English: Please rebuild the more than 150-mile embankment from Chengwu to Jining to prevent flooding to the north.

古文：而自鲁桥至沛县东堤百五十馀里修筑坚厚，固之以石。
现代文：而从鲁桥到沛县束一百五十余里长堤修筑坚固宽厚，并用石头使其牢固。
English: However, the 150-plus-mile-long embankment stretching from Luqiao to Sokou in Peixian County was built to be strong and wide, and was reinforced with stone.

古文：自鱼台至谷亭开通淤河，引水入漕，以杀鱼台、城武之患，此顺水之性不与水争地者也。
现代文：从鱼台到糓亭开通淤塞河道，引水流入漕河，以除去鱼台、城武的水患，这是顺从水的特性不与水争地的办法。
English: From Yutai to Fengting, a silted river channel will be opened, and water will be diverted into Caohe to eliminate flooding in Yutai and Chengwu. This is a way of complying with the characteristics of water and not competing with water.

古文：孙家渡、涡河二支俱出怀远，会淮流至凤阳，经皇陵及寿春王陵至泗州，经祖陵。
现代文：孙家渡、涡河二支流均出于怀逮，汇于淮河流到凤阳，经过皇陵及寿春王陵到泗州，经过祖陵。
English: The Sunjiadu River and the two tributaries of the Turbulent River both flow out of Huaiyi, converging on the Huaihe River to Fengyang, passing through the Imperial Mausoleum and the Tomb of King Shuchun to Luzhou, and passing through the ancestral tomb.

古文：皇陵地高无虑，祖陵则三面距河，寿春王陵尤迫近。
现代文：皇陵地高无忧虑，祖陵则三面临河，寿春王陵尤其迫近水边。
English: The imperial mausoleum is high without worries, the ancestral mausoleum faces the river three times, and the Shuchun royal mausoleum is especially close to the water's edge.

古文：祖陵宜筑土堤，寿春王陵宜砌石岸，然事体重大，不敢轻举也。
现代文：祖陵应当筑土堤，寿春王陵应当砌成石堤，然而这事情重大，不敢轻率行动。
English: The ancestral mausoleum should build an earth embankment, and the tomb of King Shuchun should be built into a stone embankment. However, this is a serious matter, and we dare not act rashly.

古文：清江浦口正当黄、淮会合之冲，二河水涨漫入河口，以致淤塞滞运，宜浚深广。
现代文：清江浦口正当黄、淮汇合的要冲，二河水涨漫流入河口，以导致淤塞阻碍漕还。
English: The Qingjiang River's Pukou estuary is at the confluence of the Huang and Huai Rivers, and the water of the two rivers flows into the estuary, causing silting and obstructing water supply.

古文：而又筑堤以防水涨，筑坝以护行舟，皆不可缓。
现代文：应当挖深挖宽河道而又修筑堤岸，以防止水涨，修筑堤坝以保护来往船只，都不可延缓。
English: It is necessary to dig deep and widen the river and build a dike to prevent the water from rising, and build a dike to protect the ships coming and going.

古文：往时淮水独流入海，而海口又有套流，安东上下又有涧河、马逻诸港以分水入海。
现代文：过去，淮水单独流入大海，而海口又有套流，安东上下又有涧河、马逻诸港口以分流河水入海。
English: In the past, the Huai River flowed into the sea alone, while the estuary had its own diversion, and upstream and downstream of the Andong River, the Minhe River, and the Maluo River had their own diversion of river water into the sea.

古文：今黄河汇入於淮，水势已非其旧，而诸港套俱已堙塞，不能速泄，下壅上溢，梗塞运道。
现代文：今黄河汇入淮河，水势已经不是它过去那样，而诸港口河套都已经堵塞，不能快速泄洪，下游堵塞上游泛滥，阻碍漕运水道。
English: Now that the Yellow River has merged into the Huai River, the water potential is no longer what it used to be, and all the port estuaries have been blocked, unable to quickly release the flood, blocking the upstream flooding in the downstream, and hindering the waterway.

古文：宜将沟港次第开浚，海口套沙，多置龙爪船往来爬荡，以广入海之路，此所谓杀其下流者也。
现代文：应当将沟渠港口依次开通，海口河套的淤沙，多用龙爪船来回爬梳清除，以加宽入海之路，造就是所说的除去其下游淤塞的办法。
English: The ditch ports should be opened in sequence, and the silt in the Haikou River should be removed by using the dragon claw boat to comb back and forth, so as to widen the road into the sea, which is the so-called method of removing the downstream silt.

古文：河出鱼台虽借以利漕，然未有数十年不变者也。
现代文：黄河出于鱼台，虽借以便利于漕运，然而没有数十年不变的。
English: The Yellow River flows out of Yutai, and although it is used to facilitate paddling, it has not remained unchanged for decades.

古文：一旦他徙，则徐、沛必涸。
现代文：一旦改道，则徐、沛之水必然干涸。
English: Once the course is changed, the water of Xu and Pei will inevitably dry up.

古文：宜大浚山东诸泉以汇於汶河，则徐、沛之渠不患乾涸，虽岔河口塞亦无虞矣。 
现代文：应当大力疏通山东诸泉水以汇于汶河，则徐、沛的渠水就不必担忧它会干涸，即使岔河口被堵塞也无忧虑了。
English: The springs of Shandong should be vigorously dredged to meet the Wenhe River, then the slow and abundant canal water will not have to worry that it will dry up, and even if the mouth of the Wei River is blocked, there is no worry.

古文：工部覆如其议，帝允行之。
现代文：工部批覆依照他的意见，皇帝允许施行。
English: In accordance with his opinion, the Emperor allowed the Ministry of Works to carry out the review.

古文：未几，裳忧去，命刘天和为总河副都御史代裳。
现代文：不久，朱裳服丧离去，命刘天和为总河副都御史，代替朱裳。
English: Soon after, Zhu Xiangfu passed away, and Liu Tianhe was appointed as the vice-governor of the capital, replacing Zhu Xiang.

古文：是岁，河决赵皮寨入淮，谷亭流绝，庙道口复淤。
现代文：这年，黄河决堤于趟皮寨流入淮河，谷亭河水断流，庙道口又被淤塞。
English: In this year, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Wai Pizhai and flowed into the Huai River. The water of the Gu Ting River was cut off, and the entrance to the temple was blocked.

古文：天和役夫十四万浚之。
现代文：刘天和调集民工十四万进行疏通。
English: Liu Tianhe mobilized 140,000 migrant workers to carry out dredging.

古文：已而河忽自夏邑大丘、回村等集冲数口，转向东北，流经萧县，下徐州小浮桥。
现代文：不久，黄河忽然从夏邑大丘、回村等集冲决数道决口，转向东北，流经萧县，下流到徐州小浮桥。
English: Not long after, the Yellow River suddenly turned to the northeast, flowing from Xia'e Daqiu, Hui Cun and other places to Xiaozhou Xiao Fuqiao.

古文：天和言： 黄河自鱼、沛入漕河，运舟通利者数十年，而淤塞河道、废坏闸座、阻隔泉流、冲广河身，为害亦大。
现代文：刘天和说： 黄河从鱼、沛流入漕河，漕运船只往来便利数十年，然而淤塞河道、毁坏闸门基座、阻隔水流、冲宽河床，为害也大。
English: Liu Tianhe said: The Yellow River flows into the Caohe River from the Fish River and the Pei River, and it has been convenient for decades for rowing vessels to come and go. However, it is also harmful to block the river channel, destroy the gate base, block the water flow, and widen the riverbed.

古文：今黄河既改冲从虞城、萧、砀，下小浮桥，而榆林集、侯家林二河分流入运者，俱淤塞断流，利去而害独存。
现代文：今黄河已经改道从虞城、萧、砚流出，下流到小浮桥，而榆林集、侯家林二河分流入运河的地方，全都淤塞断流，便利失去而祸害独存。
English: At present, the Yellow River has been diverted from flowing out of Yucheng, Xiao and Handan to flowing downstream to Xiao Fuqiao, while the places where the two rivers of Yulin and Hujialin flow into the canal have all been blocked and cut off. The convenience has been lost, but the scourge remains.

古文：宜浚鲁桥至徐州二百馀里之淤塞。 
现代文：应当疏通鲁桥到徐州二百余里的淤塞。 
English: The blockage of more than 200 miles from Luqiao to Xuzhou should be cleared.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝命令可行。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：十四年从天和言，自曹县梁靖口东岔河口筑压口缕水堤，复筑曹县八里湾至单县侯家林长堤各一道。
现代文：十四年，依从刘天和的计策，从曹县梁靖口的束岔河口修筑压口缕水堤，又修筑曹县八里湾到单县候家林长堤各一道。
English: In the 14th year, in accordance with Liu Tianhe's strategy, a dam was built from the Sokou estuary in Liangjingkou, Cao County, and a long levee was built from Baili Bay in Cao County to Hujia Lin in Shan County.

古文：是年冬，天和条上治河数事，中言： 鲁桥至沛县东堤，旧议筑石以御横流，今黄河既南徙，可不必筑。
现代文：这年冬，刘天和备文上呈治理黄河敷事，其中说： 鲁桥到沛县束堤，原来商议筑石堤以防洪水横流，今黄河已经改道向南，可不必修筑。
English: This winter, Liu Tianhe made a written report on the management of the Yellow River, in which he said: Luqiao to Pei County bund dike, originally discussed building a stone dike to prevent flood cross-flow, now the Yellow River has been diverted to the south, but there is no need to build.

古文：孙家渡自正统时全河从此南徙，弘治间淤塞，屡开屡淤，卒不能通。
现代文：孙家渡自正统时开始，整个黄河从此改道向南，弘治年间淤塞，多次开通多次淤塞，最终不能疏通。
English: The whole Yellow River has been diverted to the south since the time of Sun Yat-sen. During the reign of King Hongzhi, the river was silted up. It was opened many times and silted up many times. In the end, it could not be dredged.

古文：今赵皮寨河日渐冲广，若再开渡口，并入涡河，不惟二洪水涩，恐亦有陵寝之虞，宜仍其旧勿治。
现代文：今趟皮寨的河道一天天冲宽，假若再开一渡口，一起流入涡河，不祇是二河不畅通，担心也有浸淹皇帝陵墓之忧，应当依照原来的样子不进行治理。
English: The river at Pizhai this time is widening day by day. If a ferry is opened again and both rivers flow into the turbulent river, not only will the two rivers not flow smoothly, but there is also a fear of flooding the emperor's tomb. It should not be governed according to the original appearance.

古文：旧议祥符盘石、兰阳铜瓦厢、考城蔡家口各添筑月堤。
现代文：原来商议在祥符盘石、兰阳铜瓦厢、考城蔡家口各增筑月堤一道。
English: Originally, it was discussed to build a moon embankment at Xiangfu Panshi, Lanyang Copper Tile Box, and Caocheng Caijiakou.

古文：臣以为黄河之当防者惟北岸为重，当择其去河远者大堤中堤各一道，修补完筑，使北岸七八百里间联属高厚，则前勘应筑诸堤举在其中，皆可罢不筑。 
现代文：臣以为黄河应当防护的地方只能以北岸为重，应当选择离河远的大堤中堤各一道，修补完整，使北岸七八百里之间的高厚堤岸连续不断，则原来勘测应筑的诸堤全在其中，都可以停止不筑。 
English: The minister thought that the place where the Yellow River should be protected should only focus on the north bank. A large dike and a middle dike should be selected far away from the river, and they should be repaired and completed, so that the high-thickness dike between the seven or eight hundred miles of the north bank is continuous. If all the dikes that should be built in the original survey are in the middle, they can be stopped without building.

古文：帝亦从之。
现代文：皇帝也依从他的主张。
English: The emperor also followed his advice.

古文：十五年，督漕都御史周金言： 自嘉靖六年后，河流益南，其一由涡河直下长淮，而梁靖口、赵皮寨二支各入清河，汇於新庄闸，遂灌里河。
现代文：十五年，督漕都御史周金说： 从嘉靖六年以后，河流更加向南，其一从涡河直到长淮，而梁靖口、赵皮寨二支河各流入清河，汇合于新庄闸，全部注入里河。
English: In the fifteenth year, Zhou Jin, the governor of the capital, said: After six years since Jiajing, the rivers have moved further south, one from the Turbulent River to Changhuai, while the two rivers of Liangjingkou and Zhao Pizhai each flow into the Qing River, converge at Xinzhuangzao, and all flow into the Li River.

古文：水退沙存，日就淤塞。
现代文：水退沙积，一天天被淤塞。
English: As the water recedes, the sediment accumulates and becomes silted up day by day.

古文：故老皆言河自汴来本浊，而涡、淮、泗清，新庄闸正当二水之口，河、淮既合，昔之为沛县患者，今移淮安矣。
现代文：年老的人都说河从汴来本就浑浊，而涡、淮、泗清澈，新庄闸正当二水汇合之口，河、淮已经汇合，从前造成沛县灾难的，今转移到淮安了。
English: The old people said that the river was muddy from the beginning, but the vortex, Huai and Huai are clear. Xinzhuang sluice is the mouth of the confluence of the two waters. The river and Huai have converged. What once caused the disaster in Peixian has now moved to Huai'an.

古文：因请於新庄更置一渠，立闸以资蓄泄。 
现代文：因而请在新庄再建一渠，建立闸门以供蓄水泄水。 
English: Therefore, please rebuild a canal in Xinzhuang and build a sluice gate to supply water storage and discharge.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十六年冬从总河副都御史于湛言，开地丘店、野鸡冈诸口上流四十馀里，由桃源集、丁家道口入旧黄河，截涡河水入河济洪。
现代文：十六年冬，依从总河副都御史于湛的主张，开通地丘店，野鸡冈诸河口上游四十余里，从桃源集、丁家道口流入旧黄河，拦截涡河水流入黄河济洪。
English: In the winter of the 16th year, in accordance with the idea of the deputy capital of the total river, the deputy capital of the history of Yutang, the ditch shop was opened, the pheasant hill was more than forty miles upstream of the estuary of the rivers, and it flowed into the old Yellow River from the Taoyuan Set and the Dingjia Pass, and the turbulent water flowed into the Yellow River to help the flood.

古文：十八年，总河都御史胡缵宗开考城孙继口、孙禄口黄河支流，以杀归、睢水患，且灌徐、吕，因於二口筑长堤，及修筑马牧集决口。
现代文：十八年，总河都御史胡钻宗开通考城孙继口、孙禄口黄河支流，以除去归、睢的水患，并且注入徐、吕二河，于是在二口修筑长堤，及修筑马牧集决口。
English: In the 18th year, the Grand Historian of the Yellow River, Hu Zhansong, opened the tributaries of the Yellow River at Kaocheng Sunjikou and Sunlukou to remove the floods of Gui and Lu, and injected them into the Xu and Lü rivers, and then built a long dike at the two mouths, and built a dam at the mouth of Ma Muxi.

古文：二十年五月命兵部侍郎王以旂督理河道，协总河副都御史郭持平计议。
现代文：二十年五月，命兵部侍郎王以旃监督治理河道，协同总河副都御史郭持平商量谋划。
English: In May of the 20th year, he ordered the attendant of the military department, Wang, to supervise the management of the river with a shovel, and to discuss and plan in cooperation with the vice-governor of the total river, Guo Jiping.

古文：先一岁，黄河南徙，决野鸡冈，由涡河经亳州入淮，旧决口俱塞。
现代文：前一年，黄河改道南流，决堤于野鸡冈，从涡河经毫州流入淮河，旧决口全部堵塞。
English: The previous year, the Yellow River was diverted to flow south, breaking through the dike at Pheasant Hill and flowing from the Vortex River into the Huaihe River through Millizhou. The old breach was completely blocked.

古文：其由孙继口及考城至丁家道口，虞城入徐、吕者，亦仅十之二。
现代文：其从孙继口及考城到丁家道口和虞城流入徐、吕二河的，也只有十分之二。
English: Only two-tenths of the water flowing into the Xu and Lü Erhe Rivers from Sun Jikou and Kaocheng to Dingjiakou and Yucheng is fresh water.

古文：持平久治弗效，降俸戴罪。
现代文：郭持平久治不见成效，罚降俸禄戴罪立功。
English: Guo Jiping's long-term treatment was not effective, and he was fined and demoted.

古文：以旂至，上言： 国初，漕河惟通诸泉及汶、泗，黄河势猛水浊，迁徙不常，故徐有贞、白昂、刘大夏力排之，不资以济运也。
现代文：王以旃到任，土奏说： 建国之初，漕河只通诸泉水及汶、泗，黄河水势汹涌浑浊，经常改道，所以徐有贞、白昂、刘大夏全力排水，不取黄河水济运河之水。
English: When Wang Yixuan took office, he said: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Caohe River only led to the springs and the Wen and Lu. The Yellow River was turbulent and turbid, and it often changed its course. Therefore, Xu Yizhen, Baiang and Liu Daxia did their best to drain the water, and did not take water from the Yellow River to save water for the canal.

古文：今幸黄河南徙，诸闸复旧，宜浚山东诸泉入野鸡冈新开河道，以济徐、吕；而筑长堤沛县以南，聚水如闸河制，务利漕运而已。 
现代文：今幸好黄河改道南流，诸闸门恢复原样，应当疏通山东诸泉水流入野鸡冈新开河道，以济徐、旦二河；而且修筑长堤于沛县以南，聚积河水如同闸门一样，务必使漕运便利罢了。 
English: Now, fortunately, the Yellow River has been rerouted to flow south, and the sluice gates have been restored to their original form. It is necessary to unclog the flow of Shandong springs into the Pheasants' Hill and open the river channel, and to build a long dike in the south of Pei County. The accumulation of river water is like a sluice gate, so it is necessary to make paddling convenient.

古文：明年春，持平请浚孙继口及扈运口、李景高口三河，使东由萧、砀入徐济运。
现代文：第二年春，郭持平请求疏通孙继口及扈运口、李景高口三河，使往东从萧、肠入徐以济漕运。
English: In the spring of the following year, Guo Jiping requested that the three rivers of Sun Ji Port, Minhang Port, and Li Jing Gao Port be dredged to facilitate the transportation of goods from Xiao and Ji into Xu to the east.

古文：其秋，从以旂言，於孙继口外别开一渠泄水，以济徐、吕。
现代文：这年秋，依从王以旃的主张，在孙继口外另开一渠泄水，以济徐、吕二河。
English: In the autumn of that year, in accordance with Wang Yixuan's proposal, another canal was opened outside the mouth of the Sun Ji River to discharge water, and the Jixu River and Lv Erhe River were drained.

古文：凡八月，三口工成，以旂、持平皆被奖，遂召以旂还。
现代文：总共八个月，三河口工程完成，王以旅、郭持平都受到嘉奖，于是召玉旦旃回京。
English: In a total of eight months, the Sanhekou project was completed, and both Wang Yibai and Guo Jiping received awards, so they called Yu Danzhang back to Beijing.

古文：未几，李景高口复淤。
现代文：不久，李景高口又被淤塞。
English: Soon, Li Jinggao's mouth was blocked again.

古文：先是，河决丰县，迁县治於华山，久之始复其故治。
现代文：在此之前，黄河决堤于丰县，迁县治于华山，遇了很久纔恢复其故治。
English: Prior to this, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Feng County and moved to Huashan County, and it took a long time to restore its former rule.

古文：河决孟津、夏邑，皆迁其城。
现代文：黄河决堤于孟津、夏邑，都迁其县城。
English: The Yellow River broke through the dike in Mengjin and Xiayi, both of which moved to their county seat.

古文：及野鸡冈之决也，凤阳沿淮州县多水患，乃议徙五河、蒙城避之。
现代文：到野鸡冈堤溃决，凤阳沿淮河的州县多有水患，于是议定迁移五河、蒙城以避水灾。
English: When the Pheasant Hill dike was breached, many counties along the Huai River in Fengyang were flooded. Therefore, it was agreed to relocate Wuhe and Mengcheng to avoid floods.

古文：而临淮当祖陵形胜不可徙，乃用巡按御史贾太亨言，敕河抚二臣亟浚砀山河道，引入二洪，以杀南注之势。
现代文：然而临淮正当祖陵形胜不可迁移，就采用巡按御史贾太亨的主张，敕令河抚二臣赶快疏通踢山河道，引入二大水，以灭缓南流之水势。
English: However, as Lin Huai's ancestral tomb could not be moved, he adopted the idea of the inspector-general Jia Taiheng, and ordered the two ministers to quickly clear the Kishan River and introduce two large rivers to slow down the south-flowing water.

古文：二十六年秋，河决曹县，水入城二尺，漫金乡、鱼台、定陶、城武，冲谷亭。
现代文：二十六年秋，黄河决堤于曹县，水入县城深二尺，漫淹金乡、鱼台、定陶、城武，直冲谷亭。
English: In the autumn of the 26th year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Cao County, and the water entered the county seat two feet deep, flooding Jinxiang, Yutai, Dingtao, Chengwu, and Zhouchi Valley Pavilion.

古文：总河都御史詹瀚请於赵皮寨诸口多穿支河，以分水势。
现代文：总河都御史詹瀚请求在趟皮寨诸河口多开通支河，以分流水势。
English: Zhanhanhan, the prefectural governor of Chonghe, requested that more tributaries be opened at the mouth of the Wanzhizhai River to divert the water flow.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令可行。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：三十一年九月，河决徐州房村集至邳州新安，运道淤阻五十里。
现代文：三十一年九月，徐州房村集到邳州新安黄河决堤，漕运河道淤阻五十里。
English: In September of 31st, Xuzhou Fangcun gathered in Xin'an, Ganzhou to break the dike of the Yellow River and block the canal for 50 miles.

古文：总河副都御史曾钧上治河方略，乃浚房村至双沟、曲头，筑徐州高庙至邳州沂河。
现代文：总河副都御史曾钧献上治河计谋，于是疏通房村到双沟、曲头河道，筑堤于徐州高庙到邳州沂河。
English: Zeng Xi, the vice-governor of Xuzhou, proposed a plan to control the river, and dredged the river from Fangcun to Shuanggou and Qutou, and built a dike from Gaomiao in Xuzhou to Lianhe in Zhangzhou.

古文：又言： 刘伶台至赤晏庙凡八十里，乃黄河下流，淤沙壅塞，疏浚宜先。
现代文：又说： 刘伶台到赤晏庙共八十里，是黄河下游，淤沙壅塞，应当先行疏通。
English: He also said: Liu Xingtai is a total of eighty miles to the Red Lotus Temple, which is in the lower reaches of the Yellow River, and is blocked by silt. It should be dredged first.

古文：次则草湾老黄河口，冲激淹没安东一县，亦当急筑，更筑长堤矶嘴以备冲激。
现代文：其次就是草湾老黄河口，冲击淹没安束一县，也应当赶快修筑，再筑长堤矶嘴以防备冲击。
English: Next is the old Yellow River estuary of Caowan, the impact of which flooded Anzuka County. It should also be built quickly, and then the long dike should be built to prevent the impact.

古文：又三里沟新河口视旧口水高六尺，开旧口有沙淤之患，而为害稍轻；开新口未免淹没之虞，而漕舟颇便。
现代文：又三里沟新河口比旧河口水高六尺，开通旧河口有泥沙淤积之患，但为害较轻；开通新河口不免淹没之忧，但漕运船只颇为便利。
English: The water level of the new estuary of Sanli ditch is six feet higher than that of the old estuary. The opening of the old estuary may cause sedimentation, but it is less harmful. The opening of the new estuary may cause flooding, but it is quite convenient for rowing boats.

古文：宜暂闭新口，建置闸座，且增筑高家堰长堤，而新庄诸闸甃石以遏横流。 
现代文：应当暂时堵塞新河口，建置闸门基座，并且增筑高家堰长堤，而新庄诸闸门用石砌成墙壁以阻挡横流。 
English: The new estuary should be temporarily blocked, the base of the sluice gate should be built, and the long embankment of Gao Jia Weir should be added, while the gates of Xinzhuang should be built into stone walls to block the cross-flow.

古文：帝命侍郎吴鹏振灾户，而悉从钧奏。
现代文：皇帝命侍郎昊鹏赈济灾民，而全部依从曾钩的奏请。
English: The emperor ordered all officials to help the victims of the disaster, and they all obeyed Zeng Guo's request.

古文：三里沟新河者，督漕都御史应槚以先年开清河口通黄河之水以济运。
现代文：三里沟新河，是督漕都御史应杠在以前开通清河口接通黄河之水以济漕运之处。
English: Sanli ditch, Xinhe, is the place where the governor of the capital, Gu Shi, opened the Qinghe estuary to connect the water of the Yellow River to facilitate the transportation.

古文：今黄河入海，下流涧口、安东俱涨塞，河流壅而渐高，泻入清河口，沙停易淤，屡浚屡塞。
现代文：今黄河流入大海，下游涧口、安束全都淤塞，河流壅塞而逐渐增高，泄入清河口，泥沙停下容易淤塞，多次疏浚多次堵塞。
English: Now that the Yellow River flows into the sea, the lower reaches of the estuary and the delta are all silted up. The river is blocked and gradually rises, leaking into the Qinghe estuary. When the sediment stops, it is easily silted up, and it is repeatedly dredged and repeatedly blocked.

古文：沟在淮水下流黄河未合之上，故闭清河口而开之，使船由通济桥溯沟出淮，以达黄河者也。
现代文：沟在淮水下游黄河没有汇合之上，所以堵塞清河口而又开通它，使船只从通济桥逆沟而上出于淮河，以到达黄河。
English: The ditch is located in the Huai Shui downstream of the Yellow River without confluence, so it blocks the Qinghe estuary and opens it, so that ships from Tongji Bridge reverse the ditch and go out of the Huaihe River to reach the Yellow River.

古文：时浚徐、邳将讫工，一夕，水涌复淤。
现代文：当时，疏浚徐、邳快要完工，一天晚上，河水涌来又被淤塞。
English: At that time, the dredging of the Xu River and the Yangtze River was nearing completion. One night, the river surged and was silted up.

古文：帝用严嵩言，遣官祭河神。
现代文：皇帝采用严嵩的主张，派遣官吏祭祀河神。
English: The emperor adopted Yan Song's idea and sent officials to offer sacrifices to the river god.

古文：而鹏、钧复共奏请急筑浚草湾、刘伶台，建闸三里沟，迎纳泗水清流；且於徐州以上至开封浚支河一二，令水分杀。
现代文：而昊鹏、曾钧又共同奏请赶快修筑草湾堤岸，疏通刘伶台，建闸门于三里沟，迎纳泅水清流；并在徐州以上到开封疏通支河一二，让水势分流减缓。
English: Meanwhile, Haopeng and Zeng Rong jointly requested that the embankment of Tsukusa Bay be built as soon as possible, Liu Xuntai be dredged, and a sluice gate be built at Sanli ditch to welcome the clear flow of salty water; and that one or two tributaries be dredged from Xuzhou to Kaifeng to slow down the diversion of water.

古文：其冬，漕河工竣，进钧秩侍郎。
现代文：这年冬，漕河工程竣工，提升曾钧官阶任侍郎。
English: In the winter of that year, the Caohe project was completed, and Zengyuan was promoted to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：三十七年七月，曹县新集淤。
现代文：三十七年七月，曹县新集淤塞。
English: In July, 1937, Cao County's Xinji dam burst.

古文：新集地接梁靖口，历夏邑、丁家道口、马牧集、韩家道口、司家道口至萧县蓟门出小浮桥，此贾鲁河故道也。
现代文：新集地接梁靖口，经过夏邑、丁家道口、马牧集、韩家道旦、旦家道口到萧县蓟门出于小浮桥，这就是贾鲁河故道。
English: The new agglomeration connects Liangjingkou, passing through Xiayun, Dingjia Road, Mamuji, Hanjia Road and Dandan, Dandan Road to Xiaoshan Yamen out of the small pontoon, which is the old road of Jalu River.

古文：自河患亟，别开支河出小河以杀水势，而本河渐涩。
现代文：自从黄河水患多次发生，另开支河出于小河以减缓水势，而本河渐渐不畅通。
English: Since the Yellow River flood occurred many times, the river was diverted from the small river to slow down the water potential, and the river gradually became impassable.

古文：至是遂决，趋东北段家口，析而为六，曰大溜沟、小溜沟、秦沟、浊河、胭脂沟、飞云桥，俱由运河至徐洪。
现代文：到这时便决堤，直奔东北段家口，分而成为六支，叫做大溜沟、小溜沟、秦沟、浊河、胭脂沟、飞云桥，都从运河到徐洪。
English: At this time, it broke through the dike and went straight to the northeast section of the mouth of the house, and was divided into six branches, called the big gully, the small gully, the Qin gully, the Wei River, the rouge gully, and the flying cloud bridge, all from the canal to Xu Hong.

古文：又分一支由砀山坚城集下郭贯楼，析而为五，曰龙沟、母河、梁楼沟、杨氏沟、胡店沟，亦由小浮桥会徐洪，而新集至小浮桥故道二百五十馀里遂淤不可复矣。
现代文：又分一支从砠山坚城集下流到郭贯楼，分而成为五支，叫做龙沟、母河、梁楼沟、杨氏沟、胡店沟，也从小浮桥流出汇合于徐洪，而新集到小浮桥故道二百五十余里就被淤塞不可恢复了。
English: There is also a branch that flows from the Lushan Jiancheng Set downstream to the Guo Jianlou, which is divided into five branches, called the Dragon Ditch, the Mother River, the Lianglou Ditch, the Yangji Ditch, and the Hu Dian Ditch. It also flows from the Small Floating Bridge and converges at Xu Hong. The more than 250 miles of the old road from the New Set to the Small Floating Bridge has been blocked and cannot be restored.

古文：自后，河忽东忽西，靡有定向，水得分泻者数年，不至壅溃。
现代文：从此以后，黄河忽束忽西，没有定向，水得以分泄数年，不至于淤塞溃决。
English: Since then, the Yellow River has swirled back and forth, without direction, and the water has been able to separate and leak for several years without causing silting.

古文：然分多势弱，浅者仅二尺，识者知其必淤。
现代文：然而分流多了水势就减弱，水浅的祇有二尺，有识的人知道它一定会淤塞。
English: However, if there is more diversion, the water potential will weaken. The water is only two feet shallow, and people with insight know that it will certainly clog.

古文：至四十四年七月，河决沛县，上下二百馀里运道俱淤。
现代文：到四十四年七月，黄河决堤于沛县，上下二百余里漕运河道全部淤塞。
English: By July of 1944, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Peixian County, and the more than 200-mile canal was completely blocked.

古文：全河逆流，自沙河至徐州以北，至曹县棠林集而下，北分二支：南流者绕沛县戚山杨家集，入秦沟至徐；北流者绕丰县华山东北由三教堂出飞云桥。
现代文：整个黄河逆流而上，从沙河到徐州以北。到曹县棠林集以下，往北分为二支：南流的绕沛騵戚山杨家集，流入秦沟到徐州；北流的绕丰县华山东北从三教堂出于飞云桥。
English: The entire Yellow River flows upstream, from the Shahe River to the north of Xuzhou. Below the Tanglin Set in Cao County, it is divided into two branches to the north: the south stream flows around the Qiji Mountain Yangjia Set and flows into the Qin Ditch to Xuzhou; the north stream flows around Huashan Northeast in Feng County from the Three Churches to the Feiyun Bridge.

古文：又分而为十三支，或横绝，或逆流入漕河，至湖陵城口，散漫湖坡，达於徐州，浩渺无际，而河变极矣。
现代文：又分为十三支，有的东西断流，有的逆流入漕河，到了湖陵城口，漫衍湖坡，到达徐州，广阔无边，而黄河的变化达到极点。
English: It is also divided into thirteen branches, some of which cut off the flow, some of which flowed back into the Caohe River, to the Huling city gate, the lake slope, to Xuzhou, the vast expanse, and the changes in the Yellow River reached the extreme.

古文：乃命朱衡为工部尚书兼理河漕，又以潘季驯为佥都御史总理河道。
现代文：于是命朱衡为工部尚书兼管河漕，又以潘季驯为愈都御史总理河道。
English: As a result, Zhu Heng was appointed as the head of the engineering department and the river oarsman, and Pan Ji Tame was appointed as the chief river oarsman.

古文：明年二月，复遣工科给事中何起鸣往勘河工。
现代文：第二年二月，又派遣工科给事中何起岛前去勘察治河工程。
English: In February of the following year, the engineering department was dispatched to the island to investigate the river management project.

古文：衡巡行决口，旧渠已成陆，而盛应期所凿新河故迹尚在，地高，河决至昭阳湖不能复东，乃定计开浚。
现代文：朱衡巡行到决口，旧渠已成陆地，但盛应期所开新河故迹尚在，因地势高，黄河决堤到昭阳湖不能再往东，于是议定计划进行开凿。
English: Zhu Heng cruised to the breach, the old canal had become land, but the historical site of the new river opened by Sheng Ying period was still there. Due to the high ground, the Yellow River could not break the dike to Zhao Yang Lake any further east, so they agreed on a plan to excavate.

古文：而季驯则以新河土浅泉涌，劳费不赀，留城以上故道初淤可复也。
现代文：然而潘季驯则认为新河土浅泉涌，耗费将不计其数，留城以上故道初次淤塞可以恢复。
English: However, Pan Ji Tame believes that the new river soil shallow spring is better, the cost will be incalculable, and the old road can be restored after the first blockage.

古文：由是二人有隙。
现代文：从此二人便有了隔阂。
English: The two have been estranged ever since.

古文：起鸣至沛，还，上言： 旧河之难复有五。
现代文：何起鸣到了沛县，回到京城，上奏说： 旧黄河之道难以恢复的原因有五。
English: How many chants have reached Peixian and returned to Beijing, saying: There are five reasons why the old Yellow River route is difficult to restore.

古文：黄河全徙必杀上流，新集、庞家屯、赵家圈皆上流也，以不赀之财，投於河流已弃之故道，势必不能，一也。
现代文：黄河完全改道必然减缓上游水势，新集、庞家屯、赵家圈都在上游。以无计其数的资财，投入到河流已经废弃的故道，势必不能这样做，此其一。
English: The complete rerouting of the Yellow River will inevitably slow down the upstream water potential. Xinji, Pangjiatun and Zhaojiakou are all upstream. With countless funds and resources, investing in the abandoned old path of the river, it is bound to be impossible to do so.

古文：自留城至沛，莽为巨浸，无所施工，二也。
现代文：从留城到沛县，广阔之地已成巨大的湖泽，没有地方施工，此其二。
English: From Remicheng to Peixian, the vast land has become a huge lake, and there is no place for construction.

古文：横亘数十里，褰裳无路，十万之众何所栖身，三也。
现代文：横贯敷十里，撩起衣裳都役道路可走，十万之多的民工到什么地方栖息，此其三。
English: This is the third place where more than 100,000 migrant workers can live after walking ten miles across the site and picking up their clothes to go to work.

古文：挑浚则淖隐，筑岸则无土，且南塞则北奔，四也。
现代文：疏通则烂泥陷入，修筑堤岸但又无土，并且南边堵塞则又向北奔流，此其四。
English: Dredging is sinking into mud, building a dike but no soil, and blocking the south side is rushing to the north, this is the fourth.

古文：夏秋淫潦，难保不污，五也。
现代文：夏秋季节雨多水大，难以保证不淤塞，此其五。
English: In summer and autumn, there is a lot of rain and water, and it is difficult to ensure that there is no silting up.

古文：新河开凿费省，且可绝后来溃决之患。
现代文：新河开通费用省，并且可以杜绝以后溃决的水患。
English: It saves the cost of opening a new river, and can prevent floods from breaking out in the future.

古文：宜用衡言开新河，而兼采季驯言，不全弃旧河。 
现代文：应当采纳朱衡的计策开通新河，同时采用潘季驯的计策，不全部拾弃旧黄河。 
English: We should adopt Zhu Heng's strategy to open up a new river, and at the same time adopt Pan Ji Tame's strategy to not completely abandon the old Yellow River.

古文：廷臣议定，衡乃决开新河。
现代文：朝廷大臣议定，朱衡就决心开辟新河。
English: The ministers of the imperial court agreed, and Zhu Heng resolved to open up a new river.

古文：时季驯持复故道之议，廷臣又多以为然。
现代文：这时，潘季驯坚持恢复故道的主张，朝廷大臣多数又认为这样可行。
English: At this time, Pan Ji Tame insisted on the idea of restoring the old way, and most of the ministers of the imperial court thought that this was feasible.

古文：遂勘议新集、郭贯楼诸上源地。
现代文：于是勘查讨论新集、郭贯楼等上游之地。
English: As a result, upstream areas such as Xinji and Guojun Building were surveyed and discussed.

古文：衡言： 河出境山以北，则闸河淤；出徐州以南，则二洪涸；惟出境山至小浮桥四十馀里间，乃两利而无害。
现代文：朱衡说：黄河出于境山以北，则闸河淤塞；出于徐州以南，则二水干涸；祇有出于境山到小浮桥四十余里之间，纔两利而无害。
English: Zhu Heng said: If the Yellow River flows north of Jingshan, the sluice river will be silted up; if it flows south of Xuzhou, the two waters will dry up; only if it flows from Jingshan to the small pontoon bridge for more than forty miles, it will be beneficial to both and harmless.

古文：自黄河横流，砀山郭贯楼支河皆已淤塞，改从华山分为南北二支：南出秦沟，正在境山南五里许，运河可资其利；惟北出沛县西及飞云桥，逆上鱼台，为患甚大。
现代文：自从黄迩泛滥以来，踢山郭贯楼支河都已被淤塞，改道从华山流出分为南北二支河：南出于秦沟，正在境山南五里左右，运河可以利用；只有向北出于沛县西及飞云桥，逆流而上到鱼台，造成水患更大。
English: Since the flooding of the Yellow River, all the tributaries of the Jianlou in Kishan County have been silted up, and the outflow from Huashan has been diverted into two north-south rivers: the south comes from the Qin Ditch, which is about five miles south of the mountains, and the canal can be used; only the north comes from the west of Peixian County and Feiyun Bridge, and flows upstream to Yutai, causing greater flooding.

古文：朝廷不忍民罹水灾，拳拳故道，命勘上源。
现代文：朝廷不忍百姓遭受水灾，眷颅黄河旧道，命勘查上游。
English: The imperial court could not bear to see the people suffer from the floods, and decided to explore the upper reaches of the Yellow River.

古文：但臣参考地形有五不可。
现代文：但臣参考地形有五不可。
English: However, there are five reasons why the reference terrain cannot be used.

古文：自新集至两河口皆平原高阜，无尺寸故道可因，郭贯楼抵龙沟颇有河形，又系新淤，无可驻足，其不可一也。
现代文：从新集到两河口都是平原高山，无尺寸故道可依凭，郭贯楼到龙沟颇有河形，又是新淤塞，没有地方可以停留下来，这是不可行之一。
English: From Xinji to the two estuaries, there are plains and high mountains. There is no dimension for the old road to rely on. From Guoqianlou to Longgou, there is quite a river shape, and it is a new blockage. There is no place to stay. This is one of the impossibilities.

古文：黄河所经，鲜不为患，由新集则商、虞、夏邑受之，由郭贯楼则萧、砀受之，今改复故道，则鱼、沛之祸复移萧、砀，其不可二也。
现代文：黄河所经过的地方，少有不造成水患，经由新集则商、虞、夏邑遭受萁害，经由郭贯楼则萧、砚遭受其害，今改复故道，则鱼、沛之祸又转移到萧、殇，这是不可行之二。
English: In the places where the Yellow River passes, there are few that do not cause floods. Through the new dams, the merchants, states and summer villages suffered flood damage, and through the Guoqianlou, the Xia and Lu suffered damage. Now that the old way has been restored, the fish and pestilence have been transferred to Xia and Lu. This is not feasible.

古文：河西注华山，势若建瓴，欲从中凿渠，挽水南向，必当筑坝横截，遏其东奔，於狂澜巨浸之中，筑坝数里，为力甚难，其不可三也。
现代文：黄河向西注入华山，势如高处之水下注，要想从中开通水渠，引水南流，必须筑坝拦截，阻止河水束奔，在狂波巨泽之中，修筑堤坝数里，用力非常困难，这是不可行之三。
English: The Yellow River flows westward into Mount Huashan, with the force of water pouring down from a high place. If you want to open a canal from it and divert water to the south, you must build a dam to intercept and prevent the river from rushing. In the midst of wild waves and huge lakes, it is very difficult to build dams for several miles, and it is very difficult. This is not feasible.

古文：役夫三十万，旷日持久，骚动三省，其不可四也。
现代文：役使民工三十万，旷日持久，骚扰三省，这是不可行之四。
English: It is unfeasible to send 300,000 migrant workers to work for a long time and harass three provinces.

古文：大役踵兴，工费数百万，一有不继，前功尽隳，其不可五也。
现代文：大工程一个接一个兴起，工程耗费数百万，一旦接续不上，就会前功尽弃，这是不可行之五。
English: Large projects spring up one after another, projects cost millions, and if they are not continued, the previous work will be abandoned. This is one of the five impossibilities.

古文：惟当开广秦沟，使下流通行，修筑南岸长堤以防奔溃，可以苏鱼、沛昏垫之民。 
现代文：还是应当挖宽秦沟，使下游畅通，修筑南岸长堤以防止奔溃，可以免除鱼、沛两地困于水灾的百姓的灾难。
English: It is still necessary to dig a wide Qin ditch to make the downstream smooth, and build a long embankment on the south bank to prevent rushing, which can avoid the disaster of the fish and the people trapped in the flood in the two places.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：衡乃开鱼台南阳抵沛县留城百四十馀里，而浚旧河自留城以下，抵境山、茶城五十馀里，由此与黄河会。
现代文：朱衡便开通鱼台南阳到沛县留城一百四十余里河道，又从留城以下疏通旧河，直到境山、茶城五十余里，从此与黄河汇合。
English: Zhu Heng then opened a river channel of more than 140 miles from Nanyang, Yutai to Lucheng, Pei County, and dredged the old river from Lucheng to more than 50 miles from Jingshan and Chacheng, and then merged with the Yellow River.

古文：又筑马家桥堤三万五千二百八十丈，石堤三十里，遏河之出飞云桥者，趋秦沟以入洪。
现代文：又修筑马家桥堤三万五千二百八十丈，石堤三十里，阻止出于飞云桥的黄河，直奔秦沟以入大水。
English: They also built the Majia Bridge Embankment with a height of 35,280 meters and a stone embankment of 30 miles to prevent the Yellow River from flowing out of the Flying Cloud Bridge and going straight to the Qin Ditch to enter the flood.

古文：於是黄水不东侵，漕道通而沛流断矣。
现代文：于是黄水不向东侵犯，漕运河道畅通而沛县断流。
English: As a result, the yellow water did not invade to the east, the canal road was smooth and the flow in Pei County was cut off.

古文：方工未成，河复决沛县，败马家桥堤。
现代文：刚开工未建成，黄河又决堤于沛县，毁坏马家桥堤。
English: Just before construction began, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Peixian County, destroying the bridge embankment of Majia.

古文：论者交章请罢衡。
现代文：评论此事的人纷纷上奏请求罢免朱衡。
English: People commenting on the matter have called for Zhu Heng to be dismissed.

古文：未几，工竣。
现代文：不久，工程竣工。
English: Soon, the project was completed.

古文：帝大喜，赋诗四章志喜，以示在直诸臣。
现代文：皇帝大喜，赋诗四首以记喜庆，把诗给在朝值班的各位大臣看。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and composed four poems to celebrate the occasion. He showed the poems to the ministers on duty in the morning.

古文：隆庆元年五月加衡太子少保。
现代文：隆庆元年五月，加封朱衡为太子少保。
English: In May of the first year of the Longqing era, Zhu Heng was appointed as the Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：始河之决也，支流散漫遍陆地，既而南趋浊河。
现代文：当初黄河决堤，支流泛滥遍陆地，随后向南奔流浊河。
English: At first, the Yellow River burst its banks and its tributaries flooded the land, followed by the southward rush of the Minhe River.

古文：迨新河成，则尽趋秦沟，而南北诸支河悉并流焉。
现代文：等到新河开成，则全都奔流秦沟，而南北诸支河全部并流。
English: When the new river is completed, it will all flow into the Qin Ditch, and all the tributaries in the north and south will flow together.

古文：然河势益大涨。
现代文：然而黄河水势更加大涨。
English: However, the Yellow River is expected to rise even more.

古文：三年七月决沛县，自考城、虞城、曹、单、丰、沛抵徐州俱受其害，茶城淤塞，漕船阻邳州不能进。
现代文：三年七月，决堤于沛县，从考城、虞城、曹、单、鬯、沛直到徐州全都遭受其害，茶城淤塞，漕运船只阻于邳州不能前进。
English: In July of the third year, the dike broke in Pae County, and from Khao Cheng, Yucheng, Cao, Shan, Shan and Pae to Xuzhou all suffered from it. Cha Cheng was blocked, and the rowing boat could not move forward in Zhangzhou.

古文：已虽少通，而黄河水横溢沛地，秦沟、浊河口淤沙旋疏旋壅。
现代文：随后虽稍稍疏通，但黄河水泛滥于沛县境，秦沟、浊河口淤沙一边疏浚一遏壅塞。
English: Subsequently, although it was slightly dredged, the Yellow River water flooded in the territory of Pei County, and the Qin ditch and the estuary of the Bohai River were dredged to contain the blockage.

古文：朱衡已召还，工部及总河都御史翁大立皆请於梁山之南别开一河以漕，避秦沟、浊河之险，后所谓泇河者也。
现代文：朱衡已被召回，工部及总河都御史翁大立都请求在梁山之南另开一河以作漕运，避开秦沟、浊河的险地，这就是后来所说的洳河。
English: Zhu Heng had been recalled, and the Ministry of Works and the general river capital, Weng Dalit, requested that another river be opened in the south of Liangshan for rowing, avoiding the dangerous areas of Qin Gully and Minhe River, which was later called Minhe River.

古文：诏令相度地势，未果行。
现代文：诏令测量地势，结果没有施行。
English: A decree was issued to survey the terrain, but the results were never implemented.

古文：四年秋，黄河暴至，茶城复淤，而山东沙、薛、汶、泗诸水骤溢，决仲家浅运道，由梁山出戚家港，合於黄河。
现代文：四年秋，黄河水突然到来，茶城又淤塞，而山东沙、薛、汶、泗诸水突然泛滥，决堤于仲家浅漕运河道，经由梁山出于戚家港，汇合于黄河。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, the Yellow River water suddenly arrived, the tea city was silted up again, and the Shandong Sha, Xue, Wen and Zou rivers suddenly flooded, breaking the dike at the Zhongjia shallow canal road, passing through the Liangshan out of the Qijia port and converging on the Yellow River.

古文：大立复请因其势而浚之。
现代文：翁大立又请求顺着其水势而疏通它。
English: Weng Dalit also requested that it be dredged in accordance with its water potential.

古文：是时，淮水亦大溢，自泰山庙至七里沟淤十馀里，而水从诸家沟傍出，至清河县河南镇以合於黄河。
现代文：这时，淮水也大肆泛滥，从泰山庙到七里沟淤塞十余里，而水从诸家沟旁流出，到清河县河南镇也汇合于黄河。
English: At this time, the Huai River also flooded wildly, silting up more than ten miles from Mount Tai Temple to Shili Ditch, while water flowed out from the side of Zhijia Ditch and also converged on the Yellow River to Henan Town, Qinghe County.

古文：大立又言： 开新庄闸以通回船，复陈瑄故道，则淮可无虞。
现代文：翁大立又说： 开通新庄闸使返回的船只畅通，恢复陈管故道，则淮河可以无忧虑。
English: Weng Dali also said: the opening of the Xinzhuang lock to make the returning ships smooth, and the restoration of the old way of Chen Guan, then the Huaihe River can start without worries.

古文：独黄河在睢宁、宿迁之间迁徙未知所定，泗州陵寝可虞。
现代文：只有黄河在睢宁、宿迁之间改道不知定在什么地方，泗州陵墓使人忧虑。
English: Only the Yellow River has changed its course between Suining and Suqian, and it is not known where. The Mausoleum in Bozhou is a cause for concern.

古文：请浚古睢河，由宿迁历宿州，出小浮桥以泄二洪之水。
现代文：请求疏通古睢河，从宿迁经过宿州，出于小浮桥以泄二河之水。
English: The request is to dredge the Gushan River, from Suqian through Suqian, out of the small pontoon bridge to drain the water of the two rivers.

古文：且规复清河、鱼沟分河一道，下草湾，以免冲激之患，则南北运道庶几可保。 
现代文：并且规划恢复清河、鱼沟分河一道，下流到草湾，以避免冲击的祸患，那么南北漕运河道也许可以得到保护。 
English: Moreover, it is planned to restore the Qinghe River and the Yugou Branch River together, flowing down to Caowan to avoid the scourge of impact, then the north-south canal route may be protected.

古文：时大立已内迁，方受代，而季驯以都御史复起总理河道。
现代文：这时翁大立已内调任京官，正要去接任，而潘季驯以都御史之职又起用总理河道。
English: At this time, Weng Dali had already been transferred to the Beijing office and was about to take over, while Pan Jitong was appointed as Prime Minister He Dao with the post of Metropolitan Historian.

古文：部议令区画。
现代文：工部议定让他分别规划。
English: The Ministry of Works agreed to let him plan it separately.

古文：九月，河复决邳州，自睢宁白浪浅至宿迁小河口，淤百八十里，粮艘阻不进。
现代文：九月，黄河又决堤于邳州，从睢宁白浪浅到宿迁小河口，淤塞一百八十里，粮船受阻不能前进。
English: In September, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Luzhou again. The river was silted up for 180 miles from the mouth of the Suqian small estuary to the Shining White Wave. Grain barges were blocked from moving forward.

古文：大立言： 比来河患不在山东、河南、丰、沛，而专在徐、邳，故先欲开泇河口以远河势、开萧县河以杀河流者，正谓浮沙壅聚，河面增高，为异日虑耳。
现代文：翁大立说： 近来黄河水患不在山东、河南、丰、沛，而专在徐、邳，所以先要开通洳河口以使黄河水势远离、开通萧县河以减缓黄河水流，正因为浮沙淤积，河面增高，成为他日的忧虑。
English: Weng Dali said: Recently, the flooding of the Yellow River is not in Shandong, Henan, Feng and Pei, but only in Xu and Handan. Therefore, it is necessary to first open the mouth of Handan River to keep the water potential of the Yellow River away, and open the Xiaoxian River to slow down the flow of the Yellow River. It is precisely because of the siltation of floating sand that the river surface has increased, which has become a concern for the future.

古文：今秋水洊至，横溢为灾。
现代文：今秋水再次到来，泛滥成灾。
English: This autumn, the water came again, causing widespread flooding.

古文：权宜之计，在弃故道而就新冲；经久之策，在开泇河以避洪水。 
现代文：权宜之计，在于舍弃故道而归于新的信道；长久之策，在于开通洳河以避免洪水。 
English: The short-term solution is to abandon the old road and build a new one; the long-term solution is to open the Bohai River to avoid flooding.

古文：乞决择於二者。
现代文：请求决择于二者。
English: The request is to choose between the two.

古文：部议主塞决口，而令大立条利害以闻。
现代文：工部议定主张堵塞决口，而让翁大立备绦陈利害上报。
English: The Ministry of Works agreed on the idea of blocking the breach, and let Weng Dai prepare and submit the report.

古文：大立遂以开泇口、就新冲、复故道三策并进，且言其利害各相参。
现代文：翁大立就把开通洳口、归于新的通道、恢复故道三个办法一起呈上，并且说明三者相互有利有弊。
English: Weng Dali presented the three methods of opening the gate, attributing to the new channel, and restoring the old way together, and explained that the three were mutually beneficial and disadvantageous.

古文：会罢去，策未决，而季驯则主复故道。
现代文：适逢罢官离去，对他的提议未作决定，而潘季驯则主张恢复故道。
English: When he was dismissed from office, his proposal was not decided, and Pan Ji Tame advocated the restoration of the old way.

古文：时茶城至吕梁，黄水为两崖所束，不能下，又不得决。
现代文：这时茶城到吕梁，黄河水被两崖所约束，不能下流，又不能演决。
English: At this time, the tea city came to Luliang, and the Yellow River water was constrained by two cliffs. It could not flow downstream, nor could it be diverted.

古文：至五年四月，乃自灵璧双沟而下，北决三口，南决八口，支流散溢，大势下睢宁出小河，而匙头湾八十里正河悉淤。
现代文：到五年四月，纔从灵璧双沟以下，在北岸决三口，南岸决八口，支流泛滥，大量水势下流到睢宁幽于小河，而匙头湾八十里主河全部淤塞。
English: By April of the fifth year, from Lingbi to Shuanggou, there were three outfalls on the north bank and eight outfalls on the south bank. The tributaries were flooded, and a large amount of water flowed down to Huning in a small river, while the main river in Shitou Bay was completely blocked.

古文：季驯役丁夫五万，尽塞十一口，且浚匙头湾，筑缕堤三万馀丈，匙头湾故道以复。
现代文：潘季驯役使民工五万，十一个决口全部堵塞，并且疏通匙头湾，修筑缕堤三万余丈，匙头湾故道又恢复。
English: Pan Ji's retainer made 50,000 migrant workers work, blocked all 11 breaches, and dredged the Key Head Bay, built a jetty of more than 30,000 meters, and restored the old way of Key Head Bay.

古文：旋以漕船行新溜中多漂没，季驯罢去。
现代文：随后因漕运之船行驶于新的急流中，多被冲走沉没，潘季驯被罢官离去。
English: Subsequently, due to the rowing boat traveling in the new rapids, it was mostly washed away and sank, and Pan Ji Tame was dismissed and left.

古文：六年春，复命尚书衡经理河工，以兵部侍郎万恭总理河道。
现代文：六年春，又命令尚书朱衡经理黄河治理工程，以兵部侍郎万恭总理河道。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, he also ordered Shangshu Zhu Heng, the manager of the Yellow River Governance Project, to escort the Prime Minister, Wan Gong, to the river.

古文：二人至，罢泇河议，专事徐、邳河，修筑长堤，自徐州至宿迁小河口三百七十里，并缮丰、沛大黄堤，正河安流，运道大通。
现代文：二人到任后，取消治理洳河的主张，专门治理徐、邳河，修筑长堤，从徐州到宿迁小河口三百七十里，同时修补丰、沛大黄堤，使河入正道安定水流，漕运河道很畅通。
English: After the two of them took office, they canceled the idea of managing the Min River, and focused on managing the Xu and Min Rivers. They built a long dike, stretching 370 miles from Xuzhou to Suqian Xiaohekou, and repaired the Feng and Pei Dahuang dikes at the same time, so that the river entered the right path and the water flow was stable, and the canal path was very smooth.

古文：衡乃上言： 河南屡被河患，大为堤防，今幸有数十年之安者，以防守严而备御素也。
现代文：朱衡于是上奏说： 黄河之南多次遭受黄河水患，大修堤防，现在幸亏有了数十年的安定，因为防守严密而且预先又有防备。
English: Zhu Heng then said: The south of the Yellow River has suffered from the Yellow River flood many times, and the dike has been overhauled. Now, fortunately, there has been decades of stability, because the defense is tight and there is a precaution in advance.

古文：徐、邳为粮运正道，既多方以筑之，则宜多方以守之。
现代文：徐、邳为粮运正道，既然用多种方法来修筑堤岸，就应当用多种方法来护卫它。
English: Xu and Handan are the right way for grain transportation. Since multiple methods are used to build the embankment, multiple methods should be used to guard it.

古文：请用夫每里十人以防，三里一铺，四铺一老人巡视。
现代文：请用民工每里十人加以防护，三里一个驿站，四个驿站用一位老人巡视。
English: Please use ten migrant workers per kilometer to provide protection, one post station every three miles, and one elderly person to patrol four post stations.

古文：伏秋水发时，五月十五日上堤，九月十五日下堤，愿携家居住者听。 
现代文：伏秋水发生时，五月十五日上堤，九月十五日下堤，愿意携带全家居住的听便。 
English: When the autumn floods occur, they go up the embankment on May 15th and down the embankment on September 15th. They are willing to carry the convenience of living with the whole family.

古文：诏如议。
现代文：诏令依照他的主张。
English: The edict was issued in accordance with his wishes.

古文：六月，徐、邳河堤工竣，遂命衡回部，赏衡及总理河道都御史万恭等银币有差。
现代文：六月，徐、邳河堤修建完工，就命朱衡回到工部，赐予朱衡及总理河道都御史万恭等不同数量的银两彩帛。
English: In June, after the completion of the construction of the river embankment of Xu and Lu, Zhu Heng was ordered to return to the Ministry of Works and was awarded different amounts of silver and two-colored enamel by Zhu Heng and the Prime Minister of the River Capital, Shi Wangyong.

古文：是岁，御史吴从宪言： 淮安而上清河而下，正淮、泗、河、海冲流之会。
现代文：这年，御史昊从宪说： 淮安以上，清河以下，正是淮、泗、河、海水灌注汇合之处。
English: In that year, Gu Shihao Congxian said: "Above Huai'an and below Qinghe, it is precisely the confluence of Huai, Lu, He and seawater perfusion.

古文：河潦内出，海潮逆流，停蓄移时，沙泥旋聚，以故日就壅塞。
现代文：河水从内地流出，海潮逆流，经过一段时间停留，泥沙随即淤积，因此一天天壅塞。
English: The river water flows out from the inland, against the tide, and after a period of stay, the silt is immediately silted up, so it is blocked day by day.

古文：宜以春夏时浚治，则下流疏畅，泛溢自平。 
现代文：应当在春夏时疏浚，则下游畅通，泛溢自然就会平息。 
English: It should be dredged in spring and summer, then the downstream will be smooth, and the overflow will naturally subside.

古文：帝即命衡与漕臣勘议。
现代文：皇帝便命朱衡与漕臣勘察商议。
English: The emperor then ordered Zhu Heng to investigate and discuss with Cao.

古文：而督理河道署郎中事陈应荐挑挖海口新河，长十里有奇，阔五丈五尺，深一丈七尺，用夫六千四百馀人。
现代文：而督理河道署郎中事陈应荐开掘入海口的新河，长十里多，宽五丈五尺，深一丈七尺，使用民工六千四百余人。
English: However, the superintendent of the Hydrographic Department, Lang Zhongji Chen, recommended the opening of a new river into the estuary, which is more than ten miles long, five feet wide and seven feet deep, and employs more than 6,400 migrant workers.

古文：衡之被召将还也，上疏言： 国家治河，不过浚浅、筑堤二策。
现代文：朱衡被召将回到朝廷，上疏说： 国家治理河道，不过是疏通浅道、修筑河堤两个办法。
English: When Zhu Heng was summoned to return to the imperial court, he said: The national governance of river channels is nothing more than the two methods of dredging shallow channels and building river dikes.

古文：浚浅之法，或爬或涝，或逼水而冲，或引水而避，此可人力胜者。
现代文：疏通浅道的办法，有的爬松淤泥，有的捞取淤泥，有的逼使河水冲刷，有的引水避开，这些是可以用人力取胜的。
English: The methods of dredging shallow channels, some climbing loose silt, some dredging silt, some forcing river water to wash, some diverting water to avoid, these can be won by manpower.

古文：然茶城与淮水会则在清河，茶城、清河无水不浅。
现代文：然而茶城与淮水汇合则在清河，茶城、清河没有哪一段水不浅。
English: However, the confluence of Chaecheng and Huai Shui is in the Qinghe River, and there is no section of water in Chaecheng or Qinghe that is not shallow.

古文：盖二水互为胜负，黄河水胜则壅沙而淤，及其消也，淮漕水胜，则冲沙而通。
现代文：因为二水互有胜负，黄河水胜就壅沙而淤塞，等到河水消退，淮水漕河水胜，就会冲刷泥沙而畅通。
English: Because the two rivers compete with each other, the water of the Yellow River will wash away the sand and become silted up. When the river recedes, the water of the Huai River will wash away the sand and flow smoothly.

古文：水力盖居七八，非专用人力也。
现代文：水的力量大概占十分之七八，不是专用人力可成。
English: The power of water accounts for about seventy-eight out of ten, and it can be done without special manpower.

古文：筑堤则有截水、缕水之异，截水可施於闸河，不可施於黄河。
现代文：修筑堤岸则有阻挡水、疏导水的区别，挡水之法可以用于闸河，不玎用于黄河。
English: When building an embankment, there is a difference between blocking water and channeling water. The method of blocking water can be used for sluice rivers, but not for the Yellow River.

古文：盖黄河湍悍，挟川潦之势，何坚不瑕，安可以一堤当之？
现代文：因为黄河水流迅急凶猛，挟持河川的水势，有什么坚固的堤岸没有小毛病？怎么可以用一道河堤去挡住它呢？
English: Because the Yellow River's current is swift and fierce, holding back the river's water potential, what kind of solid embankment does not have minor problems? How can a river embankment be used to block it?

古文：缕水则两岸筑堤，不使旁溃，始得遂其就下入海之性。
现代文：疏导水则是在两岸筑堤，不使河水从两旁溃决，纔能顺从其往低处流入大海的特性。
English: Dredging is the process of building dikes on both sides of a river to prevent the river from bursting its banks and allowing the water to flow downstream to the sea.

古文：盖以顺为治，非以人力胜水性，故至今百五六十年为永赖焉。
现代文：这大概就是顺从水性来治理，不是用人力战胜水性，所以至今一百五六十年来成为永久的依靠。
English: This is probably governed by obeying the nature of water, not by using manpower to overcome the nature of water, so it has become a permanent reliance for a hundred and fifty or sixty years.

古文：清河之浅，应视茶城，遇黄河涨落时，辄挑河、潢，导淮水冲刷，虽遇涨而塞，必遇落而通，无足虑也。
现代文：清河水浅，应当看茶城的情况，遇到黄河水涨回落之时，就挖通河、潢，引导淮水冲刷，虽遇河水涨而堵塞，必然会遇河水回落而畅通，不值得忧虑。
English: The Qinghe River is shallow. It is necessary to look at the situation of the tea city. When the Yellow River water rises and falls, it is necessary to dig through the river, dredge and guide the water to wash. Although it is blocked when the river water rises, it will inevitably flow smoothly when the river water falls. It is not worth worrying about.

古文：惟清江浦水势最弱，出口处所适与黄河相值。
现代文：只有清江浦水势最弱，出口处所正与黄河相遇。
English: Only the Qingjiang-Pu River has the weakest water potential, and its outlet is where it meets the Yellow River.

古文：宜于黄水盛发时，严闭各闸，毋使沙淤。
现代文：应当在黄河水涨最大时，严密地关闭各闸门，不使泥沙淤积。
English: When the water level of the Yellow River is at its highest, the floodgates should be tightly closed to prevent the accumulation of silt.

古文：若口则自隆重庆三年海啸，壅水倒灌低洼之地，积潴难泄。
现代文：如果海口则从隆庆三年发生海啸，阻隔河水倒流入低洼之地，积蓄停水难以排泄。
English: If a tsunami occurs in Haikou in three years from Longqing, it will block the inflow of river water into low-lying areas, and it will be difficult to drain the accumulated water.

古文：宜时加疏浚，毋使积塞。
现代文：应当适时加以疏通，不使其堵塞。
English: It should be dredged in a timely manner and should not be blocked.

古文：至筑黄河两岸堤，第当缕水，不得以拦截为名。 
现代文：至于修筑黄河两岸堤防祇当疏导水流，不能以拦截为名来修筑。 
English: As for the construction of dikes on both sides of the Yellow River to prevent flooding and guide water flow, it cannot be built in the name of interception.

古文：疏上，报闻而已。
现代文：奏章呈上，回报皇帝已知道罢了。
English: The report has been submitted, and the Emperor only knows the reply.

