古文：陈庆之兰钦陈庆之，字子云，义兴国山人也。
现代文：陈庆之字子云，是义兴国山人。幼年就随从高祖。
English: Chen Qingzhi's character Zi Yun is a mountaineer from Yixing Province. He followed Gao Zu at an early age.

古文：幼而随从高祖。高祖性好棋，每从夜达旦不辍，等辈皆倦寐，惟庆之不寝，闻呼即至，甚见亲赏。
现代文：高祖喜好下棋，每次下棋都是通霄达旦不停止，同辈都疲倦睡觉，衹有庆之不睡觉，闻呼即至，很被亲信赏识。
English: Gao Zu likes to play chess. Every time he plays chess, he never stops. His peers are tired and go to sleep. He does not go to sleep when he is happy. When he hears the call, he immediately comes. He is highly appreciated by his close friends.

古文：从高祖东下平建鄴，稍为主书，散财聚士，常思效用。
现代文：跟随高祖束下平定建邺，稍后任主书，散财召募士兵，常思发挥作用。
English: He followed Gao Zuzhu to pacify Jianye, and later served as chief scribe, distributed money to recruit soldiers, and often thought about playing a role.

古文：除奉朝请。
现代文：授奉朝请。
English: Give it to me in the morning.

古文：普通中，魏徐州刺史元法僧于彭城求入内附，以庆之为武威将军，与胡龙牙、成景俊率诸军应接。
现代文：普通年间，魏徐州刺史元法僧在彭城请求内附，以庆之为武威将军，与胡龙牙、成景俊率诸军应接他。
English: In ordinary years, Wei Xuzhou Jishi Yuan Fa Monk in Pengcheng requested and attached to celebrate General Wu Wei, and Hu Longya and Cheng Jingjun led the army to meet him.

古文：还，除宣猛将军、文德主帅，仍率军二千，送豫章王综入镇徐州。
现代文：回师后，授宣猛将军、文德主帅，仍然率军二千，送豫章王萧综去镇守徐州。
English: After returning to the division, he still led an army of two thousand and sent Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Saming to guard Xuzhou.

古文：魏遣安豊王元延明、临淮王元彧率众二万来拒，屯据陟□。
现代文：魏派安丰王元延明、临淮王元或率众二万来抵抗，驻守在陟口。
English: Wei sent Anfeng Wangyuan to Yanming and Linhuai Wangyuan with perhaps 20,000 men to resist, and they were stationed at the entrance to the city.

古文：延明先遣其别将丘大千筑垒浔梁，观兵近境。
现代文：延明先派其别将丘大干在浔梁筑垒，在边境显示兵力。
English: Yanming first sent his second-in-command, Qiu Dagang, to build fortifications at the Jiao Liang and display his military strength at the border.

古文：庆之进薄其垒，一鼓便溃。
现代文：庆之进逼他的土垒，一仗他就溃败了。
English: He was defeated in a single battle when Qing Zhijin forced him to abandon his base.

古文：后豫章王弃军奔魏，众皆溃散，诸将莫能制止。庆之乃斩关夜退，军士得全。
现代文：后来豫章王丢弃军队逃奔魏，众人都溃散，诸将不能制止，庆之便砍断门闩破城，夜晚退兵，军士得以保全。
English: Later, King Yuanzhang abandoned the army and fled to Wei. Everyone scattered, and the generals could not stop them. Qingzhi then cut down the gate and broke through the city. He withdrew at night, and the sergeant was saved.

古文：普通七年，安西将军元树出征寿春，除庆之假节、总知军事。
现代文：普通七年，安西将军元树出征寿春，授庆之假节、总知军事。
English: In ordinary seven years, Ansi General Yuan Shu went to fight in Shuchun, the false festival of celebration, the general knowledge of military.

古文：魏豫州刺史李宪遣其子长钧别筑两城相拒。庆之攻之，宪力屈遂降，庆之入据其城。
现代文：魏豫州刺史李宪派其子长钩另筑两个城垒相抗拒，庆之进攻他，李宪力尽于是投降，庆之入据其城。
English: Li Xian, the governor of Wei-Yuzhou, sent his son Changhu to build two more fortresses to resist Qingzhi. Qingzhi attacked him, Li Xian did his best to surrender, and Qingzhi entered the city.

古文：转东宫直阁，赐爵关中侯。
现代文：转任东宫直合，赐爵位关中侯。
English: He was transferred to Togu Jikiai and given the peerage of Kanso no Naka no marquis.

古文：大通元年，隶领军曹仲宗伐涡阳。
现代文：大通元年，隶属领军萱住塞征伐过盐。
English: In the first year of Datong, it was subordinated to the leader of the army to conquer salt.

古文：魏遣征南将军常山王元昭等率马步十五万来援，前军至驼涧，去涡阳四十里。
现代文：龚派征南将军常山王元昭等人率骑步兵十五万来援助，前军到达驼涧，距涡阳四十里。
English: Yao sent the general of the Southern Expedition Changshan Wang Yuan Zhao and others to come to the aid with 150,000 cavalry and infantry. The vanguard arrived at Huludao, forty miles away from Turuyang.

古文：庆之欲逆战，韦放以贼之前锋必是轻锐，与战若捷，不足为功，如其不利，沮我军势，兵法所谓以逸待劳，不如勿击。
现代文：庆之想迎战，童筮认为贼的前锋必是轻捷精锐，舆战若胜，不足为功，舆战不利，败坏我们的军势，兵法所说要以逸待劳，不如勿击。
English: Qingzhi wanted to go to war, and Tonglu thought that the thief's vanguard must be light and sharp. If the public opinion war is victorious, it is not enough to do good deeds. If the public opinion war is unfavorable, it will ruin our military strength. According to the military law, it is better to wait for the enemy, rather than strike.

古文：庆之曰： 魏人远来，皆已疲倦，去我既远，必不见疑，及其未集，须挫其气，出其不意，必无不败之理。
现代文：庆之说： 魏人从远处来，都已疲倦，离我军既然很远，必不被怀疑，趁他们没有聚集，必须挫败他们的锐气，出其不意，一定没有不败的道理。
English: Qingzhi said, "Wei people come from far away, they are all tired. Since they are far away from our army, they will not be suspected. If they do not gather, they must be defeated. If they are caught by surprise, there must be no reason why they cannot be defeated."

古文：且闻虏所据营，林木甚盛，必不夜出。
现代文：且听说敌军所据营垒，林木甚盛，必不夜出。
English: And they shall not go out at night: for the woods are full of horses and chariots of war.

古文：诸君若疑惑，庆之请独取之。 
现代文：诸君若有疑惑，庆之请独自攻取他。 
English: If you have any doubts, Qingzhi, please attack him alone.

古文：于是与麾下二百骑奔击，破其前军，魏人震恐。
现代文：于是舆部下二百骑兵奔击魏军，攻破其前军，魏人震恐。
English: As a result, two hundred cavalrymen under his command rushed to attack the Wei army, defeated its front army, and the Wei people were terrified.

古文：庆之乃还与诸将连营而进，据涡阳城，与魏军相持。
现代文：庆之于是还军舆诸将连营而进攻，占据涡阳城，与魏军相对峙。
English: Therefore, Qingzhi's returning army would attack the camp together, occupy the Vortex Yangcheng, and confront the Wei army.

古文：自春至冬，数十百战，师老气衰，魏之援兵复欲筑垒于军后，仲宗等恐腹背受敌，谋欲退师。
现代文：自春至冬，打了敷十百仗，军队疲惫士气渐衰，魏的援兵又想在庆之军后筑垒，仲宗等人害怕腹背受敌，谋划想退师。
English: From spring to winter, ten hundred battles were fought, the army's tired morale gradually declined, Wei's reinforcements wanted to build a fort after Qing's army, Zhongzong and others were afraid of being attacked from behind and planned to withdraw.

古文：庆之杖节军门曰： 共来至此，涉历一岁，糜费粮仗，其数极多。诸军并无斗心，皆谋退缩，岂是欲立功名，直聚为抄暴耳。
现代文：庆之在军门前执持旄节说： 共来至此，经历一年，糜费粮食武器，其数极多，诸军并无斗心，皆谋划退缩，哪裹是想立功名，简直是为了抢劫而连营。
English: Celebrating the Lantern Festival in front of the military gate, Qingzhi said: We have all come here, experienced a year, spent grain and weapons, and there are a great number of them. The armies have no fighting spirit, they are all planning to retreat. They are all trying to make a name for themselves, and they are simply camped together for the sake of robbery.

古文：吾闻置兵死地，乃可求生，须虏大合，然后与战。
现代文：吾闻置士兵死地，便可让他去求生还，必须在敌人大会合时，然后舆他作战。
English: When I hear that a soldier has been killed, I can let him go and try to survive. It must be at the end of the enemy's congress, and then I must fight him.

古文：审欲班师，庆之别有密敕，今日犯者，便依明诏。 
现代文：果真想班师，庆之别有密令，今犯者，便依明韶行事。 
English: If you really want to be a team player, there is a secret order not to celebrate, and the current offender will act according to it.

古文：仲宗壮其计，乃从之。
现代文：仲宗佩服他的计谋，便听从他。
English: Zhongzong admired his stratagem and obeyed him.

古文：魏人掎角作十三城，庆之衔枚夜出，陷其四垒，涡阳城主王纬乞降。
现代文：魏人为了牵制兵力修筑十三个城垒，庆之横衔枚于口中，夜晚出城，攻陷敌人四个城垒，涡阳城主王纬乞降。
English: In order to hold back the troops, the Wei people built thirteen fortresses. Qingzhi shouted a banner in his mouth, went out of the city at night, captured four fortresses of the enemy, and Wang Wei, the lord of the Turbuyang Castle, begged for surrender.

古文：所余九城，兵甲犹盛，乃陈其俘馘，鼓噪而攻之，遂大奔溃，斩获略尽，涡水咽流，降城中男女三万余口。
现代文：所余九个城垒，军力还很强盛，便陈列被俘被杀敌人的左耳，擂鼓呐喊进攻敌人，于是敌人大奔溃，斩获略尽，涡水被填塞，降获城中男女三万余。
English: The remaining nine fortresses, still very strong militarily, displayed the left ear of the captured and killed enemy, beating drums and shouting to attack the enemy, so the enemy rushed, made a few gains, filled the whirlpool, and captured more than thirty thousand men and women in the city.

古文：诏以涡阳之地置西徐州。
现代文：韶以涡阳之地设置西徐州。
English: Set up West Xuzhou in the land of the swirling sun.

古文：众军乘胜前顿城父。
现代文：众军乘胜向前驻留在城父。
English: The troops took advantage of the victory and stayed in the city.

古文：高祖嘉焉，赐庆之手诏曰： 本非将种，又非豪家，觖望风云，以至于此。
现代文：高祖称赞，赐给庆之亲笔写的韶书说： 本非将门子孙，又非豪门大家，不满时势，以至于此。
English: Gao Zu praised and gave Qing Zhi's parents a handwritten letter saying: This is not the descendants of the generals, nor is it a wealthy family, dissatisfied with the current situation, so much so.

古文：可深思奇略，善克令终。
现代文：可深思奇略，善始善终。
English: A good beginning makes a good ending.

古文：开硃门而待宾，扬声名于竹帛，岂非大丈夫哉！ 
现代文：打开朱门接待宾客，宣扬名声在书册中，难道不是大丈夫吗! 
English: Isn't it all right to open the vermilion gate to receive guests and promote fame in the book?

古文：大通初，魏北海王元颢以本朝大乱，自拔来降，求立为魏主。
现代文：大通初年，魏北海王元颢因本朝大乱，主动摆脱困境来投降，请求立他为魏主。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, due to the turmoil in the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Yuancheng of the Northern Wei Dynasty took the initiative to get out of the predicament and surrendered, requesting that he be appointed as the ruler of Wei.

古文：高祖纳之，以庆之为假节、飚勇将军，送元颢还北。
现代文：高祖接纳了他，任庆之假节、飙勇将军，送元颢还北方。
English: Gao Zu received him, and sent him back to the north on the occasion of the celebration of the holiday, General Gao Yong.

古文：颢于涣水即魏帝号，授庆之使持节、镇北将军、护军、前军大都督，发自铚县，进拔荥城，遂至睢阳。
现代文：元颢在涣水即魏帝号，授庆之使持节、镇北将军、护军、前军大都督，从绖县出发，进取荣城，于是到了睢阳。
English: The Emperor of Wei, the Emissary Festival, the General of Zhenbei, the Protector of the North, and the Grand Governor of the former army, set out from Lixian County to enter Rongcheng, and then arrived in Fenyang.

古文：魏将丘大千有众七万，分筑九城以相拒。
现代文：魏将领丘大干有部众七万，分筑九个城垒相抗拒。
English: Wei generals built nine fortresses on the hill, which was resisted by the 70,000-strong Dagan army.

古文：庆之攻之，自旦至申，陷其三垒，大千乃降。
现代文：庆之进攻他，自黎明至下午，攻陷三个城垒，大干于是投降。
English: Qingzhi attacked him from dawn to afternoon, captured three fortresses, and Dagan surrendered.

古文：时魏征东将军济阴王元晖业率羽林庶子二万人来救梁、宋，进屯考城，城四面萦水，守备严固。
现代文：当时魏征束将军济阴王元晖业率皇家卫军、有爵者的服役人二万来救凿、塞，进驻画球，城四面绕水，守备严固。
English: At that time, the Wei general Jiyin Wang Yuanxuan led the royal guard, and the service personnel of the nobles came to rescue the chisel and plug, and stationed the painting ball. The city was surrounded by water on all sides, and the defense was strict.

古文：庆之命浮水筑垒，攻陷其城，生擒晖业，获租车七千八百辆。
现代文：庆之命浮水筑垒，攻陷其城，活捉肿墓，缴获输纳租赋的车辆有七千八百辆。
English: Qingzhi ordered the construction of a floating barrier, captured the city, captured the swollen tomb alive, and seized 7,800 vehicles that lost rent.

古文：仍趋大梁，望旗归款。
现代文：便直趋大矾，敌人望旗投降。
English: The enemy surrendered at the sight of the flag.

古文：颢进庆之卫将军、徐州刺史、武都公。
现代文：五题进升庆之卫将军、篮塑刺史、逮壑公。
English: Five questions lead to the general of Shinging Wei, the history of basket sculpture, and the arrest of Shao Gong.

古文：仍率众而西。
现代文：于是率众人西去。
English: So he led the people westward.

古文：魏左仆射杨昱、西阿王元庆、抚军将军元显恭率御仗羽林宗子庶子众凡七万，据荥阳拒颢。
现代文：魏左仆射杨昱、西阿王元庆、抚军将军元显恭率领皇帝卫军、皇族子弟、有爵者的服役人共七万，占据荣阳抗拒元颢。
English: Wei's left-hand servant Yang Jie, Xi'an's King Yuanqing, and the general of the army of Fuzhou, Yuan Xianyang, led the emperor's guards, the royal children, and the servants of the nobles, a total of seventy thousand, occupying Rongyang and resisting Yuan Jie.

古文：兵既精强，城又险固，庆之攻未能拔。
现代文：兵既精强，城又险固，庆主攻城未能拔取。
English: The soldiers were both strong and the city was well-fortified. The Qing emperor was unable to take the city.

古文：魏将元天穆大军复将至，先遣其骠骑将军尔硃吐没儿领胡骑五千，骑将鲁安领夏州步骑九千，援杨昱；又遣右仆射尔硃世隆、西荆州刺史王罴骑一万，据虎牢。
现代文：魏将领元天穆大军又将至，先派他的骠骑将军尔朱吐没儿带领胡骑五千，骑兵将领鲁安带领夏州步骑兵九千，援助杨旦；又派右仆射尔硃世隆、西荆州刺史王罴骑兵一万，据守虎牢。
English: The Wei general Yuan Tianmu's large army was also approaching, and he first sent his cavalry general Er Zhu Tu Meng to lead 5,000 horsemen, and cavalry general Lu'an to lead 9,000 infantry cavalry from Xiazhou to assist Yang Dan; he also sent his right-hand man Sha'er Qishilong and 10,000 cavalry from West Jingzhou Jinshi Wangqin to guard the tiger's stronghold.

古文：天穆、吐没儿前后继至，旗鼓相望。
现代文：天穆、吐没儿前后继至，旗鼓相望。
English: Tianmu and Tu Miao came one after another, looking at each other.

古文：时荥阳未拔，士众皆恐，庆之乃解鞍秣马，宣喻众曰： 吾至此以来，屠城略地，实为不少；君等杀人父兄，略人子女，又为无算。
现代文：当时茎盐没有拔取，士众皆恐惧，庆之便解下马鞍喂饱战马，向众人宣谕说： 吾至此以来，破城杀民，侵略土地，实为不少；君等杀人父兄，掠人子女，又不可计算。
English: At that time, the stalks of salt had not been plucked, and the soldiers were all afraid. In celebration, he unsaddled his saddle and fed his war horse, proclaiming to the people: Since then, I have destroyed the city, killed the people, and invaded the land, which is quite a lot; you and your murderous brothers and sisters, and plundered children, cannot be counted.

古文：天穆之众，并是仇雠。
现代文：天穆的众人，都是仇人。
English: All the people of Tianmu are enemies.

古文：我等才有七千，虏众三十余万，今日之事，义不图存。
现代文：我们才有七千人，虏众三十余万，今日之事，义不谋求生存。
English: There were only seven thousand of us, out of a total of more than three hundred thousand captives. In today's world, righteousness does not seek to survive.

古文：吾以虏骑不可争力平原，及未尽至前，须平其城垒，诸君无假狐疑，自贻屠脍。 
现代文：吾与虏骑不可在平原以力气相竞争，当他未全到来时，须平定他的城垒，诸君不要狐疑，那样会自己贻误让人屠杀切成肉泥。 
English: I must not compete with the horseman in strength on the plain, and when he does not arrive in full, his fortress must be leveled. Gentlemen, do not be suspicious, that will lead to their own mistakes being slaughtered and chopped into meat.

古文：一鼓悉使登城，壮士东阳宋景休、义兴鱼天愍逾堞而入，遂克之。
现代文：于是一鼓作气全都登城，壮士束阳人塞星体、盏璺人鱼天愍跳过城上矮墙而入，于是攻克城垒。
English: So they all went to the city with great enthusiasm. The strong men, Zoku Yangren, Zi Xingtuo, Zhenyao Mermaid, and Tianyao jumped over the low wall of the city and entered, thus conquering the fortress.

古文：俄而魏阵外合，庆之率骑三千背城逆战，大破之，鲁安于阵乞降，元天穆、尔硃吐没儿单骑获免。
现代文：顷刻间墓军在城外合拢，庆之率骑兵三千背城迎战，大破魏军。鲁安在阵地乞降。元玉夔、氽朱吐没儿一人一马得以逃脱。
English: In an instant, the tomb army closed in outside the city, and the three thousand cavalrymen led by Qingzhi broke through the Wei army. Lu'an was begging for surrender at the position. Yuan Yuxuan and Zou Zhutu were able to escape one by one.

古文：收荥阳储实，牛马谷帛不可胜计。
现代文：收取荣阳储存实物，牛马谷帛不可胜计。
English: Receiving Rongyang storage in kind, Niu Magu Valley is incalculable.

古文：进赴虎牢，尔硃世隆弃城走。
现代文：进赴虎牢，氽朱世尘弃城逃走。
English: After entering the tiger prison, Zhu Shibo abandoned the city and fled.

古文：魏主元子攸惧，奔并州。
现代文：墓主元子攸很惧怕，奔逃垂。
English: The owner of the tomb, Motoko You, was very afraid and ran away.

古文：其临淮王元彧、安豊王元延明率百僚，封府库，备法驾，奉迎颢入洛阳宫，御前殿，改元大赦。
现代文：丝堕旺互盛、室乌丝五延塱率百僚，封闭储藏财物兵甲的处所，准备好皇帝用的车马，奉迎五题入洛阳宫，在前殿登位，改年号大赦罪犯。
English: Shi Dewangwang mutually prospered, and his wife, Wu Si Wenyan, led a hundred officials, closed the place for storing property and armor, prepared the chariots and horses for the emperor, welcomed the five questions into the Luoyang Palace, ascended to the throne in the front hall, and amnestied the criminals.

古文：颢以庆之为侍中、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫，增邑万户。
现代文：元题任庆之为侍中、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫，增加食邑万户。
English: Renqing's original theme was to be a chamberlain, a chariot and cavalry general, and a doctor of the left hand, increasing the number of households.

古文：魏大将军上党王元天穆、王老生、李叔仁又率众四万，攻陷大梁，分遣老生、费穆兵二万，据虎牢，刁宣、刁双入梁、宋，庆之随方掩袭，并皆降款。
现代文：魏大将军上党王元天穆、王老生、奎抠仁又率众四万，攻陷大梁，分派老生、登穆兵二万，据守虚空，亘宣、丑双入凿、塞，庆之依据情势突然袭击，都顺服投降。
English: The Wei general Wang Yuan Tianmu, Wang Laosheng, and Qui Yanren, who were the leaders of the party, led a total of 40,000 people to attack the girders, assigned 20,000 soldiers to Laosheng and Dengmu, guarded the void, and made sudden attacks on the basis of the situation. They all surrendered.

古文：天穆与十余骑北渡河。
现代文：天穆舆十余骑兵向北渡董回。
English: Ten or more cavalrymen of the Tianmu army marched north to Dongbei.

古文：高祖复赐手诏称美焉。
现代文：产担又赐亲笔写的韶书称美庆之。
English: The midwife also gave Mao a handwritten letter, which he called "beautiful celebration."

古文：庆之麾下悉著白袍，所向披靡。
现代文：庆之部下全穿白袍，所向披靡。
English: All of Kei's subordinates wear white robes and are invincible.

古文：先是洛阳童谣曰： 名师大将莫自牢，千兵万马避白袍。 
现代文：先是洛阳有童谣说： 名师大将不要自认为固牢，千兵万马要避开白袍。 
English: First of all, there is a nursery rhyme in Luoyang that says: A great teacher should not think of himself as solid, and thousands of soldiers should avoid white robes.

古文：自发铚县至于洛阳，十四旬平三十二城，四十七战，所向无前。
现代文：自从蛭县出发至洛阳共一百四十天，削平三十二个城垒，交战四十七次，所去的地方，谁也阻挡不住。
English: It took a total of one hundred and forty days from the departure of Min County to Luoyang. Thirty-two fortresses were leveled, and there were forty-seven battles. No one could stop the places they went.

古文：初，元子攸止单骑奔走，宫卫嫔侍无改于常。颢既得志，荒于酒色，乃日夜宴乐，不复视事。与安豊、临淮共立奸计，将背朝恩，绝宾贡之礼；直以时事未安，且资庆之之力用，外同内异，言多忌刻。
现代文：当初，元子攸衹单骑败走，宫廷裹的卫尉、嫔、诗人往常的制度没有改变，元颢得志后，便沉溺在酒色中，日夜宴乐，不再就职治事，舆安丰王、临淮王共立奸计，将要背叛朝恩，拒绝入贡朝见天子的礼仪；祇是因为时事未安定，而且还要依靠庆之的能力和作用，所以外同内异，言语多妒忌刻薄。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Zi Youjun rode alone and was defeated, and the usual system of palace guards, eunuchs, and poets did not change. After Yuan Zi won his heart, he indulged in wine, feasted day and night, and no longer took office to govern affairs. King Anfeng and King Lin Huai jointly set up a treacherous plan, and they would betray the grace of the dynasty and refuse to pay tribute to the dynasty to see the etiquette of the heavenly son. It was only because the current affairs were not stable, and they also had to rely on the ability and role of Qingzhi, so they were different from each other, and their words were

古文：庆之心知之，亦密为其计。
现代文：庆之心知此事，也秘密设计。
English: Qingxin knew about this and secretly designed it.

古文：乃说颢曰： 今远来至此，未伏尚多，若人知虚实，方更连兵，而安不忘危，须预为其策。
现代文：便对元颢说： 今远来至此地，未降服的人尚多。如果这些人知道我们的虚实，就一并更加连兵，而且应该居安思危，需要预先准备对策。
English: He then said to Yuan Shao: There are still many people who have come all the way to this place and have not surrendered. If these people knew the truth about us, they would all be more loyal to us, and they should live with peace of mind, and need to prepare countermeasures in advance.

古文：宜启天子，更请精兵；并勒诸州，有南人没此者，悉须部送。 
现代文：应该启禀天子，再请派精兵；并强制诸州，有南边人没入此地者，全须押送来。 
English: They should invoke the name of the Son of God, and then invite the dispatch of elite soldiers; and compel the states to escort all southerners who have not entered this place.

古文：颢欲从之，元延明说颢曰： 陈庆之兵不出数千，已自难制；今增其众，宁肯复为用乎？
现代文：元颢想听从，元延明对元颢说： 陈庆之的兵不出敷千，你自己已经难控制他，今增加他的众人，他岂肯再为你用呢?
English: Yuan Xuan wanted to listen, so Yuan Yanming said to Yuan Xuan: Chen Qingzhi's soldiers do not amount to a thousand, you have already found it difficult to control him, now add his people, will he be willing to use you again?

古文：权柄一去，动转听人，魏之宗社，于斯而灭。 
现代文：失去权柄，行动听从别人，魏的宗庙社稷，到此而灭。 
English: After losing power and following others in their actions, Wei's Zongmiao sect died out.

古文：颢由是致疑，稍成疏贰。
现代文：元颢由是致疑，对庆之逐渐疏远和背离。
English: Motohide was suspicious of Yoshiyuki, and gradually distanced himself from Yoshiyuki.

古文：虑庆之密启，乃表高祖曰： 河北、河南一时已定，唯尔硃荣尚敢跋扈，臣与庆之自能擒讨。
现代文：又忧虑庆之向上密奏，便自己先向高祖上表说： 河北、河南一时已平定，惟有氽朱荣尚敢跋扈，臣舆庆之自能擒讨他。
English: He was also worried about Qingzhi's upward secret play, so he first went to Gao Zu and said: Hebei and Henan have been pacified for a while, but Zhu Rong still dares to advance, and the vassal Qingzhi can defeat him.

古文：今州郡新服，正须绥抚，不宜更复加兵，摇动百姓。 
现代文：今州郡刚归服，正需要安抚，不宜再次加兵，劳动百姓。 
English: Imazu County has just been subdued, it is in need of appeasement, it is not appropriate to increase the number of soldiers again, laboring people.

古文：高祖遂诏众军皆停界首。
现代文：高祖于是下韶众军都停驻在边界前缘。
English: Therefore, Gaozu stationed the entire army of the Lower Han in the front edge of the border.

古文：洛下南人不出一万，羌夷十倍，军副马佛念言于庆之曰： 功高不赏，震主身危，二事既有，将军岂得无虑？
现代文：洛下有南人不到一万，羌夷是他们的十倍，军副马佛念向庆之说： 功高不奖赏，使君主畏忌自身就危险，这二事已经出现，将军难道无虑?
English: There are less than ten thousand southerners under Luo, and ten times as many barbarians. The vice-commander Ma Fucheng said to Qingzhi, "If there is no reward for meritorious service, it is dangerous to make the sovereign afraid. These two things have already happened. Is the general not worried?"

古文：自古以来，废昏立明，扶危定难，鲜有得终。
现代文：自古以来，废昏君立明君，扶危定难，很少有人得到善终。
English: Since ancient times, it has always been the duty of the government to help the weak and the poor, but few people have been able to achieve a happy ending.

古文：今将军威震中原，声动河塞，屠颢据洛，则千载一时也。 
现代文：今日将军威震中原，声动河塞，杀了元颢据守洛阳，则是千载难遇的机会。 
English: Today, General Wei shook the Central Plains, moved the river dam, and killed the Yuan Dynasty to defend Luoyang. It is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：庆之不从。
现代文：庆之没有听从。
English: Keizhi did not listen.

古文：颢前以庆之为徐州刺史，因固求之镇。
现代文：元颢以前任庆之为徐州刺史，因此庆之固求去镇守。
English: Yuan Zang had previously appointed Qing Zi as the governor of Xuzhou, so Qing Zi insisted on becoming the governor of the town.

古文：颢心惮之，遂不遣。
现代文：元颢心裹畏惧他，于是不派他去。
English: For fear of him they did not send him.

古文：乃曰： 主上以洛阳之地全相任委，忽闻舍此朝寄，欲往彭城，谓君遽取富贵，不为国计，手敕频仍，恐成仆责。 
现代文：便说： 主上将洛阳之地全付托给你，忽然听闻舍去朝廷的决定，想往彭城，会说君很快取得富贵，不为国家计谋了，手敕连续不断，留下你恐怕变成我的责任了。 
English: He said, "The Lord entrusted the whole land of Luoyang to you. Suddenly, when I heard the decision to go to the imperial court, I wanted to go to Pengcheng. He said, "You will soon become rich and famous. You are no longer scheming for the country. The handcuffs will continue. I am afraid it will become my responsibility to leave you behind."

古文：庆之不敢复言。
现代文：庆之不敢再言。
English: Qingzhi didn't dare to say more.

古文：魏天柱将军尔硃荣、右仆射尔硃世隆、大都督元天穆、骠骑将军尔硃吐没儿、荣长史高欢、鲜卑、芮芮，勒众号百万，挟魏主元子攸来攻颢。颢据洛阳六十五日，凡所得城，一时反叛。
现代文：魏天柱将军氽朱茔、右仆射企塞世隆、大都督五玉垄、骠骑将军氽朱吐没儿、氽朱荣的长史高欢、鲜卑、芮芮，统众人号称有百万；挟持魏主元子攸来攻元颢，元颢据守洛阳六十五日，凡所得城垒，一时都反叛他。
English: The long history of Wei Tianzhu's general Zou Zhu Rong, his right-hand man Shaqi Xie Shilong, the great governor Wu Yu Rong, his cavalry general Zou Zhu Tu Xun, and Zou Zhu Rong is famous for its million-year history. They all claimed to have a million-year history. They took Wei's master Yuan Zi You to attack Yuan Zong, and Yuan Zong held Luoyang for sixty-five days. All the fortresses they gained rebelled against him for a while.

古文：庆之渡河守北中郎城，三日中十有一战，伤杀甚众。
现代文：庆之渡黄河守北中郎城，三日中作战十一次，伤杀的人很多。
English: Qing Zhi Du of the Yellow River guarded the North Zhonglang City, and fought eleven times in three days, injuring and killing many people.

古文：荣将退，时有刘助者，善天文，乃谓荣曰： 不出十日，河南大定。 
现代文：氽朱荣将要退兵，时有刘灵助，懂得天文，便对尔朱荣说： 不出十日，河亩会大定。 
English: Zou Zhu Rong was about to retire from the army, when Liu Ling Su, who knew astronomy, said to Er Zhu Rong: "Within ten days, the river mu will be settled.

古文：荣乃缚木为筏，济自硖石，与颢战于河桥，颢大败，走至临颍，遇贼被擒，洛阳陷。
现代文：叁塞茔于是缚木成筏，从堕互渡童逗，与五题在迥钟作战，亘题大败，逃至堕垣，遇贼被擒，洛阳失陷。
English: Therefore, he tied the wood into a cocoon, from the fall to the water crossing, fought with the five problems in the clock, defeated, fled to the fallen wall, was caught by the thief, and Luoyang fell.

古文：庆之马步数千，结阵东反，荣亲自来追，值蒿高山水洪溢，军人死散。
现代文：庆之有马步兵数千，结阵向东返，尔朱荣亲自来追，碰巧嵩高山洪水泛滥，军人死散。
English: In celebration, thousands of horse infantrymen returned to the east, and Le Zhu Rong himself came to chase them. As it happened, the mountains were flooded, and the soldiers were scattered.

古文：庆之乃落须发为沙门，间行至豫州，豫州人程道雍等潜送出汝阴。
现代文：庆之便削发剃须成为僧徒，从小路行至豫州，豫州人程道雍等人暗地把他送出汝阴。
English: Qingzhi then cut his hair and shaved his beard to become a monk, and traveled from a small road to Yuzhou. People from Yuzhou, including Cheng Daoyong, secretly sent him out of Ruyin.

古文：至都，仍以功除右卫将军，封永兴县侯，邑一千五百户。
现代文：至都城，仍以功劳授右卫将军，封为永兴县堡，食邑一千五百户。
English: Even after reaching the capital, he was still awarded the title of General of the Right Division for his meritorious service, and was given the title of Yongxing County Citadel.

古文：出为持节、都督缘淮诸军事、奋武将军、北兗州刺史。
现代文：后来出任持节、都督缘淮诸军事、奋武将军、北兖州刺史。
English: Later, he served as Jisetsu, the military governor of Donghuai, the general of Tengwu, and the governor of Beilun.

古文：会有妖贼沙门僧强自称为帝，土豪蔡伯龙起兵应之。僧强颇知幻术，更相扇惑，众至三万，攻陷北徐州，济阴太守杨起文弃城走，钟离太守单希宝见害，使庆之讨焉。
现代文：这时有妖贼僧徒坛强自称为帝，土豪墓值垄起兵应和他，僧强颇懂幻术，更加煽动蛊惑人心，徒众至三万，攻陷北徐州，济阴太守杨起文弃城逃走，钟整太守单希实被害，派庆之讨伐他。
English: At this time, there was a thief-monk, Toutan Qiang, who claimed to be the emperor. The local powerful tombs rallied to fight against him. Toutan Qiang, who was quite familiar with magic, incited and demagogued the people even more. Toutan Qiang's followers numbered up to 30,000 and invaded northern Xuzhou. Yang Qianwen, the de facto governor of Jilin, abandoned the city and fled. Zhongzheng, the de facto governor of Shanxi Province, was injured and sent to fight against him.

古文：车驾幸白下，临饯谓庆之曰： 江、淮兵劲，其锋难当，卿可以策制之，不宜决战。 
现代文：皇帝亲临白下设宴送行，对庆之说： 江、进兵强劲，其锋难抵挡，卿可以用策略制服他，不宜决战。 
English: The emperor himself came to the White House to hold a banquet to send off the troops, and said to Qingzhi: Jiang, the marching troops are strong, and their front is difficult to resist. You can use strategies to subdue him, and it is not appropriate to fight a decisive battle.

古文：庆之受命而行。
现代文：庆之受命而行。
English: Keizhi was ordered to go.

古文：曾未浃辰，斩伯龙、僧强，传其首。
现代文：不到十二天，斩杀伯龙、僧强，传其头颅示众。
English: Less than twelve days later, he killed Bolong and Sangqiang, and displayed their heads to the public.

古文：中大通二年，除都督南、北司、西豫、豫四州诸军事、南、北司二州刺史，余并如故。
现代文：中大通二年，授都督南司、北司、西豫、豫四州诸军事，南司、北司二州刺史，其余职位照旧。
English: In the second year of Zhongdazhong, the four prefectures of Nanshi, Beizhi, Xi'an, and Henan were given the post of military governor, and the two prefectures of Nanshi and Beizhi were given the post of prefectural governor, while the other posts remained unchanged.

古文：庆之至镇，遂围悬瓠。
现代文：庆之至镇，便包围鉴趣。
English: When Qingzhi came to town, he surrounded Jiankui.

古文：破魏颍州刺史娄起、扬州刺史是云宝于溱水，又破行台孙腾、大都督侯进、豫州刺史尧雄、梁州刺史司马恭于楚城。
现代文：在涂丞攻破毯题州刺史娄起、提业刺史星云室，又在楚越攻破行台还疆、大都督堡进、辽州刺史尧雄、銮蛆刺史司马恭。
English: In Tu Zheng, he broke through the blankets of Zhizhou and stabbed Shi Jianqi, and in Zhu Yue, he broke through Gangtai and returned to China, in Dadu and Fort Jin, in Liaozhou, he stabbed Shi Jianxiong, and in Jiaozhou, he stabbed Shi Simaqiong.

古文：罢义阳镇兵，停水陆转运，江湖诸州并得休息。
现代文：撤除羞堡镇兵，停止水陆运输，江湖诸州并得以休整。
English: Remove the soldiers from the town of Shibao, stop land and water transportation, and allow the provinces and regions to take a break.

古文：开田六千顷，二年之后，仓廪充实。
现代文：开辟田地六千顷，二年之后，仓廪充实。
English: He opened up six thousand hectares of fields, and two years later, the granaries were full.

古文：高祖每嘉劳之。
现代文：直担经常嘉许慰劳他。
English: The direct supervisor often commends and consoles him.

古文：又表省南司州，复安陆郡，置上明郡。
现代文：又上表撤销南司州，恢复安陆郡，设置上明郡。
English: In addition, the above table revoked Nanshi County, restored Anlu County, and set up Shangming County.

古文：大同二年，魏遣将侯景率众七万寇楚州，刺史桓和陷没，景仍进军淮上，贻庆之书使降。
现代文：大同二年，魏遣将侯景率众七万侵犯楚州，刺史桓和陷没，侯景于是进军进上，送信给庆之让他投降。
English: In the second year of Datong, Wei dispatched 70,000 troops led by Hou Jing to invade Chuzhou and besiege Shihuanhe. As a result, Hou Jing marched on and sent a message to Qingzhi to make him surrender.

古文：敕遣湘潭侯退、右卫夏侯夔等赴援，军至黎浆，庆之已击破景。
现代文：敕遣湘潭侯退、右卫夏侯夔等人赴援，军至黎浆，庆之已击破侯景。
English: Zou sent Xiangtan Houwei, right guard Xia Houyi and others to help, and the army went to Li Li. Qingzhi had defeated Houjing.

古文：时大寒雪，景弃辎重走，庆之收之以归。
现代文：当时大寒雪，侯景丢弃军用物资败走，庆之收取而归。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily. Hou Jing abandoned the military supplies and left, but Qingzhi collected them and returned.

古文：进号仁威将军。
现代文：进升号仁威将军。
English: Forward to General Ren Wei.

古文：是岁，豫州饥，庆之开仓赈给，多所全济。
现代文：遣年，豫州荒年，庆之开仓救济，多有全济。
English: In the year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the year of famine in Yuzhou, and the relief of opening warehouses in celebration, there are many examples of total relief.

古文：州民李升等八百人表请树碑颂德，诏许焉。
现代文：州民李升等八百人上表请为庆之树碑颂德，下韶同意。
English: Eight hundred people, including Li Sheng, a citizen of the state, are invited to come up to the table as a celebration of the tree monument, and the lower jaw agrees.

古文：五年十月，卒，时年五十六。
现代文：五年十月，去世，时年五十六岁。
English: In October of the same year, he passed away at the age of 56.

古文：赠散骑常侍、左卫将军，鼓吹一部。
现代文：追赠散骑常侍、左卫将军，给一部鼓吹。
English: Afterward, he gave away the horseback riding attendant and the left guard general to a group of preachers.

古文：谥曰武。
现代文：谧号武。
English: He was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：敕义兴郡发五百丁会丧。
现代文：下诏义兴郡派五百丁共同参加丧葬仪式。
English: In the following, Yixing County sent five hundred horses to participate in the funeral ceremony.

古文：庆之性祗慎，衣不纨绮，不好丝竹，射不穿札，马非所便，而善抚军士，能得其死力。
现代文：庆之性敬慎，衣不穿丝绸，不喜好音乐，参加射礼不穿有装饰的鑪甲，骑的马并不敏捷，然而善于抚慰军士，因此他们都能效死尽力。
English: They are cautious in celebrating, they don't wear silk, they don't like music, they don't wear decorated armor to participate in the shooting ceremony, and the horses they ride are not agile, but they are good at soothing the soldiers, so they can do their best.

古文：长子昭嗣。
现代文：长子陈昭承嗣。
English: The eldest son, Chen Zhaoxing, succeeds him.

古文：第五子昕，字君章。
现代文：第五子陈听，字君章。
English: The fifth son, Chen Huan, is called Jun Zhang.

古文：七岁能骑射。
现代文：七岁能骑射。
English: The seven-year-old can ride and shoot.

古文：十二随父入洛，于路遇疾，还京师。
现代文：十二岁随父入洛阳，在路上得病，返回京师。
English: At the age of twelve, he followed his father to Luoyang. He fell ill on the way and returned to Beijing.

古文：诣鸿胪卿硃异，异访北间形势，昕聚土画地，指麾分别，异甚奇之。
现代文：拜访鸿膻卿朱异，朱异问北方形势，陈昕在地上聚土画图，示意区别，朱异很惊奇。
English: He paid a visit to Hongyuqing Zhu Yiyi. Zhu Yiyi asked him about the situation in the north. Chen Yiyi drew a map of soil concentration on the ground and pointed out the difference. Zhu Yiyi was very surprised.

古文：大同四年，为邵陵王常侍、文德主帅、右卫仗主，敕遣助防义阳。
现代文：大同四年，任邵陵王常侍、文德主帅、右卫仗主，敕命派他去义阳助防。
English: In the four years of Datong, he served as the attendant of King Shao Ling, the head coach of Wende, and the head of the right guard, and sent him to Yiyang to help the defense.

古文：魏豫州刺史尧雄，北间骁将，兄子宝乐，特为敢勇。
现代文：魏豫州刺史尧雄。是北面的猛将，兄子宝乐，特别勇敢。
English: Wei Yuzhou stabbed Shixiong. He was a fierce general in the north, and his elder brother Baole was particularly brave.

古文：庆之围悬瓠，雄来赴其难，宝乐求单骑校战，昕跃马直趣宝乐，雄即散溃，仍陷溱城。
现代文：庆之包围墨垫，画笙来解救危难，宣乐要求单骑交战，速听跃马直趋实乐，尧雄军立即散溃，于是攻陷溱坛。
English: Qingzhi encircled the ink pad, painted the cocoon to relieve the danger, Xuan Le requested a single-rider engagement, listening to the prancing horse straight to the real music, the hero army immediately scattered, and then attacked the cocoon.

古文：六年，除威远将军、小岘城主，以公事免。
现代文：六年，授威远将军、小岘城主，因公事免职。
English: Six years later, General Zhu Weiyuan, the lord of Xiaojuan City, was removed from his post for official business.

古文：十年，妖贼王勤宗起于巴山郡，以昕为宣猛将军，假节讨焉。
现代文：十年，妖贼王勤宗在巴山郡起兵，任陈昕为宣猛将军，假节去征讨。
English: Ten years later, the thief Wang Qinzong raised an army in Bashan County, appointed Chen Jie as a fierce general, and went to fight on the holiday.

古文：勤宗平，除阴陵戍主、北谯太守，以疾不之官。
现代文：勤宗平定，授陈听阴堕戍主、韭盏太守，因疾病未到任。
English: Emperor Qinzong, Emperor Jian, Emperor Jianyin, Emperor Zhaozhuang, and Empress Dowager Zhaozhuang did not attend the ceremony due to illness.

古文：又除骠骑外兵，俄为临川太守。
现代文：又授骠骑外兵，不久任临川太守。
English: He was also awarded the title of Cavalry Foreign Soldier, and soon became the governor of Linkawa Province.

古文：太清二年，侯景围历阳，敕召昕还，昕启云： 采石急须重镇，王质水军轻弱，恐虑不济。 
现代文：太清二年，侯景包围历阳，诏令召陈听返回，陈听启奏说： 采石急须重兵镇守，王质水军力量弱小，担心忧虑不顶用。 
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Houjing besieged Liyang, and issued an imperial edict summoning Chen He to return. Chen He said: "Quarrying stone requires a large number of soldiers to defend the town, and the royal navy is weak. Worry and anxiety are useless."

古文：乃板昕为云骑将军，代质，未及下渚，景已渡江，仍遣率所领游防城外，不得入守。
现代文：于是委任陈听为云骑将军，代替王质，陈听还没有到水边，侯景已渡河，于是派率所领部将游防城外，不得入守。
English: Therefore, he appointed Chen He as the general of the Cloud Rider to replace the royal hostage. Chen He had not yet reached the water's edge, and Hou Jing had already crossed the river. Therefore, he sent the leader of the leading unit to swim outside the city, and he was not allowed to enter the city.

古文：欲奔京口，乃为景所擒。
现代文：想逃奔京口，却被侯景所擒。
English: He wanted to flee to the capital, but was captured by Houjing.

古文：景见昕殷勤，因留极饮，曰： 我至此得卿，余人无能为也。 
现代文：侯景见陈听勤奋，因此留他尽情畅饮，说： 我至此地得到卿。其他人做不到。 
English: Hou Jing saw that Chen listened diligently, so he let him drink to his heart's content, saying, "I've got my lord here. No one else can do it."

古文：令昕收集部曲，将用之，昕誓而不许。
现代文：令陈昕收集军队，将要使用，速匝誓死不从。
English: Chen Zhen ordered to gather the army, which would be used, but Huan swore he would not obey.

古文：景使其仪同范桃棒严禁之，昕因说桃棒令率所领归降，袭杀王伟、宋子仙为信。
现代文：谴使他的仪同茎曼睡严禁速贩，陈昕于是说服桃棒令率所领部众归降，以袭杀王伟、宋子仙为信号。
English: As punishment, his eunuchs were made to sleep with their fathers, and they were strictly forbidden to engage in hawking. Chen Xi then persuaded Taobao to order the leaders to surrender, using the attack on and killing of Wang Wei and Song Zixian as a signal.

古文：桃棒许之，遂盟约，射启城中，遣昕夜缒而入。
现代文：桃棒答应了，于是结盟约，把启书射进城中，遣陈听夜晚缒绳入城。
English: Peach Stick agreed, so they agreed to form an alliance, shot the letter of initiation into the city, and sent Chen He to lead the reins into the city at night.

古文：高祖大喜，敕即受降，太宗迟疑累日不决，外事发泄，昕弗之知，犹依期而下。
现代文：高祖大喜，敕令即刻受降，太宗迟疑多不决。在外面秘密泄露，陈听不知道，仍然按期下到城外。
English: Gao Zu was overjoyed, the imperial edict was immediately accepted, and Taizong was hesitant and indecisive. Secrets were leaked outside, but Chen did not know, and still went outside the city as scheduled.

古文：景邀得之，乃逼昕令更射书城中，云 桃棒且轻将数十人先入。 
现代文：侯景阻截得到陈听，便逼陈昕让他再向城中射书，说 桃棒暂且率数十人先入城。 
English: When Hou Jing's interception was heard by Chen, he forced Chen Yao to let him shoot books into the city again, saying that Taobao would temporarily lead dozens of people into the city first.

古文：景欲裹甲随之。
现代文：侯景想带兵器随他入城。
English: Hou Jing wanted to take weapons with him into the city.

古文：昕既不肯为书，期以必死，遂为景所害，时年三十三。
现代文：陈昕既然不肯写书，也料想必死，遂被侯景杀害，时年三十三岁。
English: Since Chen Yao did not want to write a book, he also expected to die, so he was killed by Hou Jing at the age of thirty-three.

古文：兰钦，字休明，中昌魏人也。
现代文：兰钦字休明，是中昌魏人。
English: Lanqin, whose family name was Xiuming, was a member of the Zhongchang Wei dynasty.

古文：父子云，天监中，军功官至云麾将军，冀州刺史。
现代文：父亲兰云，天监年间，军功官至云麾将军，任冀州刺史。
English: His father, Lan Yun, was a military meritorious officer to the rank of general during his time in the Heaven's Prison, and was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：钦幼而果决，篸捷过人。随父北征，授东宫直阁。
现代文：兰钦年幼而处事果决，矫健敏捷超人，随父北征，授东宫直合。
English: As a young boy, Lanqin was decisive in his dealings, a vigorous and agile superman. He followed his father to the Northern Expedition and was awarded the Eastern Palace.

古文：大通元年，攻魏萧城，拔之。
现代文：大通元年，攻打魏萧城，攻取城垒。
English: In the first year of Datong, he attacked Wei Xiaocheng and captured the fortress.

古文：仍破彭城别将郊仲，进攻拟山城，破其大都督刘属众二十万。
现代文：接着打败彭城别将郊仲，进攻拟山撼，攻破其大都督刘属部众二十万。
English: Next, he defeated Pengcheng's subordinate general Jianzhong, attacked the quasi-mountain Zhaozhou, and broke through the 200,000 subordinates of its great governor Liu.

古文：进攻笼城，获马千余匹。
现代文：进攻笼城，缴获马千余匹。
English: Attacked Keisei, captured more than a thousand horses.

古文：又破其大将柴集及襄城太守高宣、别将范思念、郑承宗等。
现代文：又攻破其大将柴集及襄城太守高宣、别将范思念、郑承宗等人。
English: He also defeated his general, Chai Ji, and the governor of Xiangcheng, Gao Xuan, as well as other generals, such as Fan Sinen and Zheng Chengzong.

古文：仍攻厥固、张龙、子城，未拔，魏彭城守将杨目遣子孝邕率轻兵来援，钦逆击走之。
现代文：于是进攻厥固、张龙、子城，没有攻下，魏彭城守将杨目派子耋邕率轻装士兵来援助，兰钦迎击赶走他。
English: So they attacked Jugu, Zhanglong, and Zicheng, but failed to capture them. Wei Peng, the city's warden, sent Yang Miao and his lightly armed soldiers to help, and Lan Qin met the attack and drove him away.

古文：又破谯州刺史刘海游，还拔厥固，收其家口。
现代文：又攻破谯州刺史刘海游，还来拔取厥固，收捕他的家人。
English: He also broke through Liu Haiyu, the statesman of Zhangzhou, and came to take Juegu and arrest his family members.

古文：杨目又遣都督范思念、别将曹龙牙数万众来援，钦与战，于阵斩龙牙，传首京师。
现代文：杨目又派都督范思念、别将曹龙牙敷万部众来援，整麸舆之作战，在战阵斩杀龙牙，把头颅传递到京师。
English: Yang Mue also sent the governor, Fan Sinen, to persuade Cao Longya to come to the aid of all the people, rectify the war, kill Longya in the battle, and pass the head to the Beijing division.

古文：又假钦节，都督衡州三郡兵，讨桂阳、阳山、始兴叛蛮，至即平破之。
现代文：又假兰钦节，都督衡州三郡兵，讨伐桂阳、阳山、始兴反叛蛮人，即就平定了。
English: On the occasion of Lanqin Festival, the governor of Hengzhou dispatched soldiers from three counties to fight against the rebellious barbarians in Guiyang, Yangshan and Shixing.

古文：封安怀县男，邑五百户。
现代文：封为安怀县男，食邑五百户。
English: It is the largest manor in Anhui County, with 500 households.

古文：又破天漆蛮帅晚时得。
现代文：又攻破丢漆蛮帅晚时得。
English: He was also able to break through the paint, which was quite impressive in the late stages.

古文：会衡州刺史元庆和为桂阳人严容所围，遣使告急，钦往应援，破容罗溪，于是长乐诸洞一时平荡。
现代文：逭时衡州刺史元庆和被桂阳人严容包围，遣使告急，道筮前往应援，在墨选打败勇逊，于是匡銮诸洞一时全平荡。
English: At that time, Hengzhou was besieged by the Yuanqing and Guiyang people. The envoys were in a hurry, and the Taoist nuns went to help, defeating the brave and weak in the election. As a result, all the dungeons of Guanzhang were completely leveled for a while.

古文：又密敕钦向魏兴，经南郑，属魏将托跋胜寇襄阳，仍敕赴援。
现代文：又密敕兰钦前往魏兴，经过南鄞，正逢韭强将领珏壁胜侵略塞鹰，便命令盐趑赴援。
English: Lanqin also went to Weixing, passing through Nanlu, just as the stubborn generals won the victory over the invading Saiyak, they ordered Yancheng to come to their aid.

古文：除持节、督南梁、南、北秦、沙四州诸军事、光烈将军、平西校尉、梁、南秦二州刺史，增封五百户，进爵为侯。
现代文：授兰钦持节、督南梁、南秦、北秦、沙四州诸军事、光烈将军、平西校尉、梁、南秦二州刺史，增封食邑五百户，进爵位为侯。
English: He was awarded the Lan Qin Holding Festival, the military governor of Nan Liang, South Qin, North Qin, and Shas four states, the brilliant general, the Pingxi lieutenant, Liang, and the history of the two states of South Qin, the 500 households of the food village were increased, and the knighthood was marquis.

古文：破通生，擒行台元子礼、大将薛俊、张菩萨，魏梁州刺史元罗遂降，梁、汉底定。
现代文：后攻破通生，捉住行台元子礼、大将麈垡、张菩萨，墓凿丛刺史五墨于是投降，銮、濩平定。
English: After defeating Tong Sheng, they captured Xing Tai Yuan Zi Luo, General Zou Zi, Zhang Bodhisattva, and the grave-digger Cong Zi Shi Wu Mo, and then surrendered, and Zou and Zou were pacified.

古文：进号智武将军，增封二千户。
现代文：又进升号智武将军，增封二千户。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of Chibu Shogun, with an additional 2,000 households.

古文：俄改授持节、都督衡、桂二州诸军事、衡州刺史。未及述职，魏遣都督董绍、张献攻围南郑，梁州刺史杜怀瑶请救。钦率所领援之，大破绍、献于高桥城，斩首三千余，绍、献奔退，追入斜谷，斩获略尽。
现代文：不久改授持节、都督衡、桂二州诸军事、衡州刺史，没来得及到职，魏遣都督董绍、张献攻围直翅，梁州刺史丝堡墨请求救援，率所领部众去救援，在高桥城大败董绍、张献，斩首三干余，绍、献败逃，追入斜谷，斩获略尽。
English: He was soon given the title of "Holding Festival," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou," "Governor of Guizhou,"

古文：西魏相宇文黑泰致马二千匹，请结邻好。
现代文：玺蕴相宇文黑泰送马二千匹，请结为友好邻邦。
English: Yuwen and Hei-tai send two thousand horses, please become friendly neighbors.

古文：诏加散骑常侍，进号仁威将军，增封五百户，仍令述职。
现代文：诏令加兰钦散骑常侍，进升号仁威将军，增封五百户，仍然让他去任职。
English: The emperor ordered Galanchin to send his equerry on horseback and promote him to the rank of General Renwei, increasing his territory by 500 households, but he was still allowed to take up his post.

古文：经广州，因破俚帅陈文彻兄弟，并擒之。
现代文：治理广州，因此攻破俚帅陈文彻兄弟，并捉住他们。
English: to govern Guangzhou, thus defeating the Chen Wencher brothers and capturing them.

古文：至衡州，进号平南将军，改封曲江县公，增邑五百户。
现代文：至衡州，进升号子南将军，改封曲江县公，增加食邑五百户。
English: As far as Hengzhou, General Jin Sheng Zi Nan changed his title to Qujiang County official, increasing the number of food villages by 500 households.

古文：在州有惠政，吏民诣阙请立碑颂德，诏许焉。
现代文：在州治理有惠政，吏民到宫阙请求为他立碑颂德，下韶同意。
English: In the state governance, there is a favorable policy, the officials and the people went to the palace to request the erection of a monument to him, and the lower court agreed.

古文：征为散骑常侍、左卫将军，寻改授散骑常侍、安南将军、广州刺史。
现代文：征入为散骑常侍、左卫将军，不久改授散骑常侍、安南将军、广州刺史。
English: He was conscripted as a cavalryman, General Zuo Wei, and was soon awarded as a cavalryman, General Annan, and the history of Guangzhou.

古文：既至任所，前刺史南安侯密遣厨人置药于食，钦中毒而卒，时年四十二。
现代文：既至任所，前刺史南安侯密遣厨人将毒药放进食物中，兰钦中毒而死，时年四十二岁。
English: As soon as he arrived at the post, the former assassin, Shinnan Hou, sent a cook to put poison in the food. Lanqin was poisoned and died at the age of forty-two.

古文：诏赠侍中、中卫将军，鼓吹一部。
现代文：下诏追赠侍中、中卫将军，给一部鼓吹。
English: The Emperor posthumously bestowed the titles of Samurai, Vice Admiral, and General of the Middle Palace Guards to a group of propagandists.

古文：子夏礼，侯景至历阳，率其部曲邀击景，兵败死之。
现代文：子夏礼，侯景至历阳时，率领他的部下阻击侯景，兵败而死。
English: His son Xia Li, when Hou Jing went to Liyang, led his subordinates to block Hou Jing, and died in defeat.

古文：史臣曰：陈庆之、兰钦俱有将略，战胜攻取，盖颇、牧、卫、霍之亚欤。
现代文：史臣曰：陈庆之、兰钦俱有用兵谋略，战胜攻取，与盖颇、牧、卫、霍相匹敌。
English: Shichen said: Chen Qingzhi and Lanqin both had effective military strategies, defeated and captured, and were comparable to Geppo, Mu, Wei and Huo.

古文：庆之警悟，早侍高祖，既预旧恩，加之谨肃，蝉冕组珮，亦一世之荣矣。
现代文：庆之机敏聪慧，早就侍奉直担，既预有旧恩，又加上他谨慎恭敬，戴蝉冠，服饰有组带玉佩，也是一世的荣耀。
English: Keizhi was quick-witted and intelligent, and had already served as a direct burden bearer. Not only did he have the old grace, but he was also cautious and respectful. He wore a cicada crown, and his clothes had a band of jade. It was also the honor of a lifetime.

