古文：起著雍滩，尽柔兆执徐，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。汉武帝元光二年
English: It lasted for a total of nine years, starting in the second year of Emperor Yuan Guang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元光二年
现代文：冬季，十月，武帝来到雍地，在五举行祭祀。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Wu came to Yongdi and held a ritual on the 5th.

古文：冬，十月，上行幸雍，祠五畤。李少君以祠灶却老方见上，上尊之。
现代文：李少君凭借祭祀灶神求长生不老的方术进见武帝，武帝很尊敬他。
English: Li Shao Jun gained access to Emperor Wu with the help of the sacrificial stove god's method of seeking immortality. Emperor Wu respected him very much.

古文：少君者，故深泽侯舍人，匿其年及其生长，其游以方遍诸侯，无妻子。
现代文：李少君是已去世的深泽侯的舍人，他隐瞒了自己的年龄、出生成长的地方，凭借着他的方术周游结交诸侯，没有妻子儿女。
English: Li Shaojun was a concubine of the deceased Fukasawa lord. He concealed his age and the place of his birth and upbringing. He traveled around and made friends with lords by virtue of his strategy. He had no wife or children.

古文：人闻其能使物及不死，更馈遗之，常馀金钱、衣食。
现代文：人们听说李少君能役使鬼神万物，并有长生不老的方术，纷纷赠送财礼给他，所以他经常有余剩的金钱和衣食用品。
English: People have heard that Li Shaojun can use all things to help ghosts and gods, and that he has a method of immortality. They have given him gifts of money and gifts, so he often has money and food and clothing left over.

古文：人皆以为不治生业而饶给，又不知其何所人，愈信，争事之。
现代文：人们都认为他不经营产业却很富袷，又不知他是什么地方的人，更加相信他，争着侍奉他。
English: People all think that he does not run the industry but is very rich, and they do not know where he is. They believe in him more and compete to serve him.

古文：少君善为巧发奇中。
现代文：李少君善于用巧妙的语言猜中一些离奇的事情。
English: Li Shaojun is good at using clever language to guess some bizarre things.

古文：尝从武安侯饮，坐中有九十馀老人，少君乃言与其大父游射处；老人为儿时从其大父，识其处，一坐尽惊。
现代文：他曾经陪武安侯田饮酒，座中有位九十多岁的老人，李少君就说起与老人的祖父一起游玩射猎的地方；老人还是儿童时曾跟随祖父，记得那个地方，满座的客人都大吃一惊。
English: He had once accompanied Wu'an Houtian to drink, and there was a ninety-plus-year-old man in the audience. Li Shaojun talked about the place where he played shooting with the old man's grandfather; the old man had followed his grandfather when he was a child. When he remembered that place, all the guests were taken aback.

古文：少君言上曰： 祠灶则致物，致物而丹沙可化为黄金，寿可益，蓬莱仙者可见；见之，以封禅则不死，黄帝是也。
现代文：李少君对武帝说： 祭祀灶神就能招来奇异之物，招来了奇异之物就可以使丹砂化为黄金，可以延年益寿，可以见到蓬莱的仙人。见到仙人，进而举行封禅仪式，就可以长生不死，黄帝就是这样的。
English: Li Shaojun said to Emperor Wu, "If you worship the god of the hearth, you will be able to attract strange things; if you invite strange things, you will be able to turn sand into gold, you will be able to prolong your life, and you will be able to see the immortals of Penglai. If you see the immortals and then hold a sealing ceremony, you will be able to live forever. This is what the Yellow Emperor is like."

古文：臣尝游海上，见安期生，食臣枣，大如瓜。
现代文：我曾经在海上漫游，遇见了安期生，他给我枣吃，那枣如同瓜一般大。
English: I once travelled by sea and saw An Ji Sheng. He brought me a jujube, as big as a melon, to eat.

古文：安期生仙者，通蓬莱中，合则见人，不合则隐。 
现代文：安期生是仙人，往来于蓬莱仙境，谁和他合，他就显身相见，谁和他不合，他就隐身不见。 
English: Immortals are born in an auspicious time, and they go back and forth in the Penglai Mountains. When they meet, they see each other, but when they don't, they don't.

古文：于是天子始亲祠灶，遣方士入海求蓬莱安期生之属，而事化丹沙诸药齐为黄金矣。
现代文：于是武帝就开始亲自祭祀灶神，派遣方士到大海中去寻找蓬莱安期生之类的仙人，并且从事熔化丹砂和其它药物，企图炼出黄金。
English: So Emperor Wu began to personally worship the god of the hearth, sent magicians to the sea to search for immortals such as those born in the Penglai era, and engaged in melting cinnabar and other drugs in an attempt to refine gold.

古文：居久之，李少君病死，天子以为化去，不死；而海上燕、齐怪迂之方士多更来言神事矣。
现代文：过了很久，李少君病死，武帝认为他化身成仙，并没有死去；因此，燕地、齐地等沿海地区那些怪诞迂谬的方士，纷纷前来对武帝谈论有关神仙的事情了。
English: After a long time, Li Shaojun died of illness, and Emperor Wu believed that he was reincarnated as a immortal, and did not die; therefore, the grotesque and absurd magicians in coastal areas such as Yanchi and Qidi came to Emperor Wu to talk about the immortal.

古文：亳人谬忌奏祠太一。
现代文：毫县人谬忌奏请武帝祭祀太一神。
English: The people of Miao County performed a ritual to ask Emperor Wu to worship Taiyi.

古文：方曰： 天神贵者太一，太一佐曰五帝。 
现代文：他在上奏的方形木牍上写道： 天神中最尊贵的是太一神，太一神的辅佐是五帝神。 
English: He wrote on the square wooden stake at the beginning of the piece: The most noble of the gods is the god Taichi, and the god Taichi is assisted by the five gods.

古文：于是天子立其祠长安东南郊。
现代文：于是，武帝就在长安的东南郊建立了祭祀太一神的祭坛。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu built an altar in the southeastern suburb of Chang'an to worship Taichi.

古文：雁门马邑豪聂壹，因大行王恢言： 匈奴初和亲，亲信边，可诱以利致之，伏兵袭击，必破之道也。 
现代文：雁门郡马邑县的豪强之士聂壹，通过大行王恢向武帝建议： 匈奴刚刚与汉和亲结好，亲近信任边境吏民，可用财利引诱他们前来，汉军预设伏兵袭击，这是肯定会打败匈奴人的妙计。 
English: Yanmen County, Mayi County, one of the brave and strong men, suggested to Emperor Wu through Da Xingwang Hui: The Huns have just made peace with the Han Dynasty, they trust the border officials and people closely, they can use money and interest to lure them to come, and the Han Army has set up an ambush attack. This is a great plan that will surely defeat the Huns.

古文：上召问公卿。王恢曰： 臣闻全代之时，北有强胡之敌，内连中国之兵，然尚得养老、长幼，种树以时，仓廪常实，匈奴不轻侵也。
现代文：武帝召集公卿讨论这个建议，战国之初，代国保有它的全境时，北面有强敌匈奴的威胁，内受中原诸国军队的牵制，但仍然可以尊养老人，抚育幼童，按照季节时令种粮植树，粮仓中一直有充足的储粮，匈奴不敢轻易入侵。
English: Emperor Wu convened the nobles to discuss this proposal. At the beginning of the Warring States period, when the country retained its entire territory on behalf of the country, there was a threat from the strong enemy Huns in the north, and it was constrained by the armies of the Central Plains countries, but it was still possible to respect the elderly, raise young children, grow grain and plant trees according to the season, and there was always sufficient grain storage in the granary. The Huns did not dare to invade easily.

古文：今以陛下之威，海内为一，然匈奴侵盗不已者，无他，以不恐之故耳。
现代文：现在，凭陛下的神威，天下一统，但匈奴的入侵却持续不断，形成这种局面的原因，没有别的，只是因为在于没有使匈奴恐惧罢了。
English: Now, by the grace of your majesty, the world is united, but the invasion of the Huns continues. The reason for this situation is nothing other than the fact that the Huns are not afraid.

古文：臣窃以为击之便。 
现代文：我私下认为打击匈奴对国家有利。 
English: Privately, the vassal considered the attack to be advantageous.

古文：韩安国曰： 臣闻高皇帝尝围于平城，七日不食；及解围反位，而无忿怒之心。
现代文：韩安国说： 我听说高皇帝曾被匈奴围困在平城，七天没能吃上饭；等到解脱围困返回都城之后，却没有愤怒之心。
English: Han An Guo said: I heard that Emperor Gao was once besieged by the Huns in Pingcheng and was unable to eat for seven days; when he returned to the capital after the siege was lifted, he had no anger.

古文：夫圣人以天下为度者也，不以己私怒伤天下之功，故遣刘敬结和亲，至今为五世利。
现代文：圣人有包容天下的器度，不因自身的私怒而伤害天下大局，所以高皇帝派遣刘敬为使臣与匈奴和亲，到现在已为五世的人带来益处。
English: The sage has the ability to tolerate the world, and does not harm the overall situation of the world due to his own selfish anger. Therefore, Emperor Gao sent Liu Jing as an envoy to make peace with the Xiongnu, which has brought benefits to the people of the fifth generation.

古文：臣窃以为勿击便。 恢曰： 不然。
现代文：我私下认为不打匈奴对国家有利。 王恢说： 不对。
English: Privately, I think that not fighting the Xiongnu is good for the country.Wang Hui said, "That's not right.

古文：高帝身被坚执锐，行几十年，所以不报平城之怨者，非力不能，所以休天下之心也。
现代文：高帝身披铠甲，手执利器，征战将近几十年，他不向匈奴报复被困平城的怨恨，并不是因为力所不及，而是出于让天下人休息的仁心。
English: Gao Di, wearing armor and holding a sharp weapon, fought for nearly decades. He did not retaliate against the Huns for the resentment of the trapped Pingcheng, not because he was powerless, but out of a benevolent heart to give the world a rest.

古文：今边境数惊，士卒伤死，中国槥车相望，此仁人之所隐也。
现代文：现在边境经常受到匈奴侵扰，受伤战死的士兵很多，中原地区运载死亡士兵棺木的车辆络绎不绝，这是仁人所悲痛的事。所以说打匈奴是应当的。 韩安国说： 不对。
English: Now the border is often invaded by the Huns, there are many wounded and killed soldiers, and the Central Plains region has an endless stream of vehicles carrying the coffins of dead soldiers, which is a sad thing for the benevolent. Therefore, it is appropriate to fight the Huns. Han'an said: Not right.

古文：故曰击之便。 安国曰： 不然。
现代文：我听说善于用兵的人，让自己的军队温饱以等待敌军饥饿，严明军纪以等待敌军混乱，安居军营以等待敌军疲劳。
English: I have heard that those who are good at using soldiers let their troops have food and clothing to wait for the enemy to be hungry, strict military discipline to wait for the enemy to be confused, and live in military camps to wait for the enemy to be tired.

古文：臣闻用兵者以饱待饥，正治以待其乱，定舍以待其劳；故接兵覆众，伐国堕城，常坐而役敌国，此圣人之兵也。
现代文：所以，崐一旦交战，就会全歼敌人；一旦进攻敌国，就会攻破城防，经常安坐不动地迫使敌人俯首听命，这是圣人的作战方法。
English: Therefore, once a dragonfly engages in battle, it will completely annihilate the enemy; once it attacks the enemy country, it will break through the city defenses, and often sit still to force the enemy to bow their heads and obey orders. This is the sage's method of warfare.

古文：今将卷甲轻举，深入长驱，难以为功；从行则迫胁，衡行则中绝，疾则粮乏，徐则后利，不至千里，人马乏食。《兵法》曰： 遗人，获也 ，臣故曰勿击便。 恢曰： 不然。
现代文：现在如果轻易地对匈奴用兵，长驱直崐入，难以成功；如果孤军深入就会受到威胁，齐头并进就没有后继，进军太快就会缺乏粮食给养，进军缓慢就会丧失有利的战机，还没有走到一千里，就会人马都缺乏粮食。这正是《兵法》所说： 派出军队，就会被敌人擒获。 所以我说不打匈奴为好。 王恢说： 不对。
English: Now, if soldiers are easily used against the Xiongnu, it is difficult to succeed in driving straight into them; if a lone army goes deep, it will be threatened; if they go head to head, there will be no successor; if they advance too quickly, they will lack food supplies; if they advance slowly, they will lose advantageous warplanes; if they have not gone a thousand miles, they will all lack food. This is exactly what the "Law of War" says: If you send an army, you will be captured by the enemy. So I say it is better not to fight the Xiongnu. Wang Huai said: Not right.

古文：臣今言击之者，固非发而深入也。将顺因单于之欲，诱而致之边，吾选枭骑、壮士阴伏而处以为之备，审遮险阻以为其戒。
现代文：我现在所说的打匈奴的方法，本不是征发军队深入敌境；而是要利用单于的贪欲，引诱他们到我们的边境，我们挑选骁勇的骑兵和壮士，暗中埋伏，用来防备敌军，谨崐慎地据守险要的地势，以加强防御的力量。
English: The method of fighting the Huns, of which I am now speaking, does not consist in sending troops deep into the enemy's country, but in luring them to our frontiers by the lure of private avarice, in selecting gallant horsemen and strong men to lie in ambush for the enemy, and in cautiously holding a precarious position in order to strengthen our defences.

古文：吾势已定，或营其左，或营其右，或当其前，或绝其后，单于可禽，百全必取。 
现代文：我们的部署已经完成，有的军队攻崐打敌军左翼，有的军队攻打敌军右翼，有的军队阻止敌人前进，有的军断绝敌人的退路，这样就肯定能擒住单于，必定大获全胜。 
English: Our deployment has been completed. Some troops will attack the enemy's left flank, some troops will attack the enemy's right flank, some troops will block the enemy's advance, and some troops will cut off the enemy's retreat. In this way, we will surely be able to hold the enemy's flank and win a complete victory.

古文：上从恢议。
现代文：武帝采纳了王恢的主张。
English: Emperor Wu adopted Wang Hui's idea.

古文：夏，六月，以御史大夫韩安国为护军将军，卫尉李广为骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，太中大夫李息为材官将军，将车骑、材官三十馀万匿马邑旁谷中，约单于入马邑纵兵。
现代文：夏季，六月，汉武帝任命御史大夫韩安国为护军将军，卫尉李广为骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，太中大夫李息为材官将军，统率战车、骑兵、步兵共三十多万人暗中埋伏在马邑附近的山谷中，约定等单于进入马邑就挥军出击。
English: In the summer, in June, Emperor Hanwu appointed the imperial historian Han An Guo as the general of the escort, the guard lieutenant Li Guang as the general of the cavalry, the servant Sun He as the general of the light vehicle, the general Wang Hui as the general of the general camp, and the doctor Li Xiu as the general of the material officer. A total of more than 300,000 people, under the command of chariots, cavalry and infantry, were secretly lying in ambush in the valley near Mayi. It was agreed that the army would launch an attack as soon as they entered Mayi.

古文：阴使聂壹为间，亡入匈奴，谓单于曰： 吾能斩马邑令、丞，以城降，财物可尽得。 
现代文：汉军暗地派聂壹当间谍，逃到匈奴人那儿，聂壹对单于说： 我能杀马邑县的县令和县丞，献城归降，您可以得到全城的所有财物。 
English: The Han army secretly sent him to be a spy, and he fled to the Huns. He said to Yan: "I can kill the county magistrate and the county magistrate of Ma'i County, surrender the city, and you can get all the property of the whole city."

古文：单于爱信，以为然而许之。
现代文：单于很喜欢信任聂壹，认为他说得对，就同意了他的计划。
English: I just trusted him and thought he was right, so I agreed.

古文：聂壹乃诈斩死罪囚，县其头马邑城下，示单于使者为信，曰： 马邑长吏已死，可急来！ 
现代文：聂壹返回马邑县城，就斩杀死刑囚犯，用来假冒县令、县丞，把他们的头挂在马邑城下，让单于的使者观看，以此做为证明，说： 马邑县的长官已经死了，你们可以赶快来！ 
English: As soon as he returned to the county seat of Mayi, he beheaded the death-row prisoners and used them as fake county magistrates and county commissioners. He hung their heads under the county seat of Mayi for the envoys of Shan Yu to see, as a proof, saying: The governor of Mayi county is dead, you can come quickly!

古文：于是单于穿塞，将十万骑入武州塞。
现代文：于是，单于越过边塞，统率十万骑兵进入武州塞。
English: So he marched through the border fortress alone, leading more than a hundred thousand cavalry into the Wuzhou fortress.

古文：未至马邑百馀里，见畜布野而无人牧者，怪之。
现代文：走到距离马邑县城还有一百多里的地方，单于见牲畜遍野，却没有一个放牧的人，感到奇怪。
English: When I got to a place more than a hundred miles away from the county seat of Mayi, I was surprised to see cattle all over the fields, but no one to graze them.

古文：乃攻亭，得雁门尉史，欲杀之，尉史乃告单于汉兵所居。
现代文：单于就派人攻打亭隧，俘虏了雁门郡的尉史，要杀掉他，这个尉史就告诉单于汉兵埋伏的地点。
English: Single sent people to attack the Ting Tunnel, captured the lieutenant history of Ganmen County, and wanted to kill him, this lieutenant history told single the location of the ambush of the Han soldiers.

古文：单于大惊曰： 吾固疑之。 
现代文：单于大吃一惊，说： 我本来就怀疑其中有诈。 
English: In a shocked voice, she said, "I was already suspicious about this.

古文：乃引兵还，出曰： 吾得尉史，天也！ 
现代文：就领兵撤退，在撤出汉境之后，单于说： 我俘虏了这个尉史，是天保佑我啊！ 
English: After withdrawing from Han territory, Shan Yu said: "I have captured this warlord, God bless me!"

古文：以尉史为天王。
现代文：就称尉史为 天王 。
English: He was crowned emperor.

古文：塞下传言单于已去，汉兵追至塞，度弗及，乃皆罢兵。
现代文：边塞守军传报单于已率军退走，汉军追到边塞，估计追不上了，就全军撤回。
English: The leaflets of the border fortress defenders led the army to retreat, the Chinese army chased them to the border fortress, but it was estimated that they would not be able to catch up, so the whole army withdrew.

古文：王恢主别从代出击胡辎重，闻单于还，兵多，亦不敢出。
现代文：王恢指挥另一支军队，从代地出发，准备袭击匈奴的后勤给养，听说单于返回，军队很多，也不敢出击。
English: Wang Wei commanded another army, which set out from the place of substitution, preparing to attack the logistics supply of the Xiongnu. It is said that when he returned, there were many troops, and he did not dare to attack.

古文：上怒恢。
现代文：武帝对王恢很恼怒。
English: Emperor Wu was very angry with Wang Hui.

古文：恢曰： 始，约为入马邑城，兵与单于接，而臣击其辎重，可得利。
现代文：王恢说： 根据原来的计划，约定引匈奴进入马邑县城，主力军队与单于交战，而我率军袭击他们的后勤给养，可以获胜。
English: Wang Huai said: According to the original plan, it was agreed to lead the Xiongnu into the county town of Mayi, the main army would fight against the Shan, and I would lead the army to attack their logistics supply, and could win.

古文：今单于不至而还，臣以三万人众不敌，只取辱。
现代文：现在单于未到马邑就全军撤回，我用三万人的军队打不过匈奴大军，那样做只能是自辱。
English: Now, if I withdraw the whole army before reaching Maye, I can't beat the Hun army with an army of thirty thousand. It would only be a humiliation.

古文：固知还而斩，然完陛下士三万人。 
现代文：我本知道撤兵回来是要杀头的，但这样却保全了陛下的三万将士。 
English: Of course, the vassal knew that he would be killed when he returned, but in this way, he could protect His Majesty's thirty thousand soldiers.

古文：于是下恢廷尉。廷尉当 恢逗桡，当斩。 
现代文：于是汉武帝就把王恢交附廷尉审判，廷尉判决： 王恢避敌观望，不敢出击，判处斩首。 
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu handed Wang Hui over to a court lieutenant for trial. The court lieutenant ruled: Wang Hui avoided watching the enemy and did not dare to attack. He was sentenced to be beheaded.

古文：恢行千金丞相分，分不敢言上，而言于太后曰： 王恢首为马邑事，今不成而诛恢，是为匈奴报仇也。 
现代文：王恢暗中向丞相田行贿一千金，求他开脱罪名，田不敢向武帝说，就对太后说： 王恢第一个提出了在马邑诱歼匈奴主力的计划，现在行动失败而杀了王恢，这是等于为匈奴报了仇啊。 
English: Wang Huai secretly paid a bribe of one thousand gold to the Minister of Justice Tian and asked him to exonerate him. Tian did not dare to tell Emperor Wu, so he said to the Empress Dowager: Wang Hui was the first to propose a plan to lure and exterminate the main force of the Xiongnu in Mayu. Now that the operation failed and Wang Hui was killed, this was tantamount to taking revenge for the Xiongnu.

古文：上朝太后，太后以分言告上。
现代文：武帝朝见太后时，太后就把田的话告诉了武帝。
English: When Emperor Wu met the Empress Dowager in the morning, the Empress Dowager told Emperor Wu about Tian's words.

古文：上曰： 首为马邑事者恢，故发天下兵数十万，从其言为此。
现代文：武帝说： 王恢是马邑计划的主谋，我听从了他的建议，调集了天下几十万人马，安排了这次军事行动。
English: Emperor Wu said: Wang Huai was the mastermind of the Ma'eup plan. I followed his advice, mobilized hundreds of thousands of horses from all over the world, and arranged this military operation.

古文：且纵单于不可得，恢所部击其辎重，犹颇可得以慰士大夫心。
现代文：况且，即使捉不到单于，王恢的军队袭击匈奴的后勤给养，仍然可以安慰将士们的心。
English: Moreover, even if Wang Wei's army could not capture the Hun's logistical supply, it could still comfort the hearts of his soldiers.

古文：今不诛恢，无以谢天下。 
现代文：如今不杀王恢，无法向天下人谢罪。 
English: If you don't kill Wang Wei now, you won't be able to apologize to the world.

古文：于是恢闻，乃自杀。
现代文：王恢得知了武帝的话，就自杀了。
English: Wang Hui heard about this and committed suicide.

古文：自是之后，匈奴绝和亲，攻当路塞，往往入盗于汉边，不可胜数；然尚贪乐关市，嗜汉财物；汉亦关市不绝，以中其意。
现代文：从此之后，匈奴断绝了与汉的和亲，进攻扼守大路的要塞，常常入侵汉朝边境，不可胜数；但是匈奴仍然贪图在边关的互市贸易，喜爱汉朝的财物；汉朝也不关闭边境贸易市场，以投其所好。
English: After that, the Huns broke off the peace with the Han Dynasty, attacked the fortresses guarding the highway, and often invaded the border between the Han Dynasty and the Han Dynasty. However, the Huns still coveted the cross-border trade and loved the Han Dynasty's property. The Han Dynasty also did not close the border trade market in order to pursue its own interests.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元光三年
现代文：元光三年春季，黄河决口改道，从顿丘向东南方流去。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Yuan Guang era, the Yellow River was diverted at its mouth and flowed from Dongqiu to the southeast.

古文：春，河水徙，从顿丘东南流。夏，五月，丙子，复决濮阳瓠子，注巨野，通淮、泗，泛郡十六。
现代文：夏季，五月，丙子，黄河又一次在濮阳县的瓠子决口，注入钜野县，连通了淮河和泗水，十六个郡受水灾。
English: In the summer, in May, the Yellow River once again broke through the Hanzi mouth of Poyang County and flowed into Putian County, connecting the Huaihe River and Surabaya. Sixteen counties were flooded.

古文：天子使汲黯、郑当时发卒十万塞之，辄复坏。
现代文：武帝派汲黯、郑当时征发十万役夫堵塞黄河决口，刚刚堵住，就又被洪水冲毁。
English: Emperor Wu sent an army to block the mouth of the Yellow River, and Zheng sent 100,000 soldiers to block the mouth. As soon as it was blocked, it was washed away by the flood.

古文：是时，田分奉邑食鄃，鄃居河北，河决而南，则鄃无水灾，邑收多。
现代文：当时，田的食邑是县；县在黄河北岸，黄河决口向南泛滥，县就不会遭受水灾，食邑收入就会增加。
English: At that time, Tian's food village was a county; the county was on the north bank of the Yellow River, and the Yellow River's mouth flooded to the south. The county would not suffer from floods, and the income of the food village would increase.

古文：分言于上曰： 江、河之决皆天事，未易以人力强塞，塞之未必应天。 
现代文：田对武帝说： 长江、黄河的决口都是天意的安排，用人力强行堵塞很不容易，堵住了未必符合天意。 
English: Tian said to Wu Di: The mouth of the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are all arranged by providence. It is not easy to block them by force, and it may not be in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：而望气用数者亦以为然。
现代文：而那些候望云气和使用法术的方士们也认为是这样。
English: In addition, people who rely on divination and fortune-telling say the same thing.

古文：于是天子久之不复事塞也。
现代文：这样一来，武帝很长时间不再征发人力从事堵塞决口的工程。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu did not solicit manpower to engage in the project of plugging the breach for a long time.

古文：初，孝景时，魏其侯窦婴为大将军，武安侯田蚡乃为诸郎，侍酒跪起如子侄。已而分日益贵幸，为丞相。
现代文：当初，孝景帝在位时，魏其侯窦婴担任大将军，武安侯田才是个普通的郎官，陪侍窦婴饮酒时，田下跪起立如同儿子、侄子一样；后来，田日益显贵受宠，出任丞相。
English: At first, when Emperor Xiao Jing was on the throne, Wei Qihou Dou Ying served as a great general, and Wu'an Hou Tian was an ordinary steward. When accompanying Dou Ying drinking, Tian knelt down and stood up like a son or nephew; later, Tian became increasingly prominent and was favored to serve as prime minister.

古文：魏其失势，宾客益衰，独故燕相颍阴灌夫不去。
现代文：而魏其侯窦婴失去了权势，依附他的宾客越来越少，唯独原来的燕相、颍阴县人灌夫不离去。
English: However, Wei Qihou Dou Ying lost his power, and his guests became fewer and fewer. Only the original Yan Xiang and Jinyin County people did not leave.

古文：婴乃厚遇夫，相为引重，其游如父子然。
现代文：窦婴就厚待灌夫，两人互相援引、互相倚重，来往如同父子一样。
English: Dou Ying was kind to Guan Fu, the two of them invoked each other, leaned on each other, and went back and forth like father and son.

古文：夫为人刚直，使酒，诸有势在己之右者必陵之；数因酒忤丞相。
现代文：灌夫为人刚强正直，好借酒使气，对那些权势在自己之上的权贵，必定给予凌辱；他多因酒后闹事冒犯丞相田。
English: Kanfu was a strong and upright man, who would use alcohol to get his way, and would certainly humiliate those who had power over him; he often offended Josho Soda by getting into trouble after drinking.

古文：丞相乃奏案： 灌夫家属横颍川，民苦之。 
现代文：丞相就向武帝弹劾： 灌夫家属在颍川郡横行霸道，百姓都被害苦了。 
English: The minister of justice impeached Emperor Wu: Kanfu's family members were running amok in Luochuan County, and the people were suffering.

古文：收系夫及支属，皆得弃市罪。
现代文：于是收捕灌夫和包括旁支亲属在内的家人，都被判处公开斩首示众的罪名。
English: As a result, Ganfu and his family members, including collateral relatives, were all convicted of public beheading.

古文：魏其上书论救灌夫，上令与武安东朝廷辨之。
现代文：魏其侯窦婴上书营救灌夫，武帝命令他和武安侯田到太后居住的东宫中，当廷申辩。
English: Wei's vassal lord Dou Ying wrote a letter to rescue Guan Fu, and Emperor Wu ordered him and Wu'an Hou Tian to go to the East Palace, where the Empress Dowager lived, and plead their case before the court.

古文：魏其、武安因互相诋讦。
现代文：魏其侯、武安侯就利用这个机会互相诋毁。
English: Wei Ji Hou and Wu An Hou used this opportunity to slander each other.

古文：上问朝臣： 两人孰是？ 
现代文：武帝问朝廷群臣： 他们两人谁对？ 
English: Then the Emperor asked the ministers in the court: Who was right in what the two of them said?

古文：唯汲黯是魏其，韩安国两以为是；郑当时是魏其，后不敢坚。
现代文：只有汲黯认为魏其侯对，韩安国认为两人都对；郑当时本认为魏其侯对，后来不敢坚持。
English: Only Ji Ying thought Wei Qihou was right, Han An Guo thought both were right; Zheng thought Wei Qihou was right at the time, but later did not dare to insist.

古文：上怒当时曰： 吾并斩若属矣。 
现代文：武帝怒骂郑当时说： 我把你这类的人一起斩了！ 
English: Emperor Wu scolded Zheng angrily and said, "I have cut off all your kind of people!"

古文：即罢。起，入。上食太后，太后怒不食，曰： 今我在也，而人皆藉吾弟；令我百岁后，皆鱼肉之乎！ 
现代文：随即罢朝，站起来，进入内宫，侍奉太后用餐，太后气冲冲地不吃饭，说： 如今我还活着，别人已经在欺负我的弟弟；假若我死了，他们就都来宰杀他了！ 
English: Then he immediately went to the palace, stood up, entered the inner palace, served the empress diner, and the empress angrily refused to eat, saying: Now that I am alive, others are already bullying my brother; if I die, they will all come to slaughter him!

古文：上不得已，遂族灌夫；使有司案治魏其，得弃市罪。
现代文：武帝没有办法，就下令将灌夫满门处斩；派执法官员审查魏其侯，判处魏其侯斩首示众。
English: Emperor Wu had no choice but to order the execution of Guanfu Manmeng; he sent law enforcement officials to examine Wei Qihou and sentenced Wei Qihou to be beheaded in public.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元光四年冬，十二月晦，论杀魏其于渭城。春，三月，乙卯，武安侯分亦薨。
现代文：元光四年冬季，十二月三十日，根据所定罪名在渭城处死了魏其侯窦婴。春季，三月，乙卯，武安侯田也死去了。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the Yuan Guang Dynasty, on December 30, Wei Qihou Dou Ying was executed in Lucheng according to the name of the convicted. In the spring, in March, Wu An Hou Tian also died.

古文：及淮南王安败，上闻分受安金，有不顺语，曰： 使武安侯在者，族矣！ 
现代文：等到后来淮南王刘安谋反失败，武帝得知田接受过刘安的黄金，并且说过大逆不道的话，就说： 假若武安侯还活着，就应该把他灭族了！ 
English: Later, when Liu An, the king of Huainan, failed in his counter-plot, and Emperor Wu learned that Tian had accepted Liu An's gold and had spoken treasonous words, he said: If Wu An is still alive, he should be exterminated!

古文：夏，四月，陨霜杀草。
现代文：夏季，四月，出现寒霜，冻死了野草。
English: In the summer, in April, there was frost and the weeds froze to death.

古文：御史大夫安国行丞相事，引，堕车，蹇。
现代文：御史大夫韩安国代理丞相职务，为武帝引导车驾，从车上摔下来，成了跛腿。
English: Imperial Historian Han An Guo, acting as chancellor, guided the chariot for Emperor Wu. He fell from the chariot and became lame.

古文：五月，丁巳，以平棘侯薛泽为丞相，安国病免。
现代文：五月，丁巳，汉武帝任命平棘侯薛泽为丞相；韩安国因病免职。
English: In May, Emperor Hanwu appointed Ping Sheng Hou Xue Ze as chancellor; Han An Guo was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：地震。赦天下。
现代文：发生了地震；大赦天下。
English: There was an earthquake; there was a general amnesty.

古文：九月，以中尉张欧为御史大夫。
现代文：九月，武帝任命中尉张欧为御史大夫。
English: In September, Emperor Wu appointed Lieutenant Zhang Ou as the imperial historian.

古文：韩安国疾愈，复为中尉。
现代文：韩安国的腿疾痊愈，重新出任为中尉。
English: After recovering from his leg ailment, Han An Guo was reinstated as a lieutenant.

古文：河间王德，修学好古，实事求是，以金帛招求四方善书，得书，多与汉朝等。
现代文：河间王刘德，努力钻研学问，喜好古代典籍、治学注重实事求是，用黄金丝帛购买各地的好书，购得的书，数量与汉朝廷的存书一样多。
English: Kawama Wang Liu De, diligently studied the culture, liked ancient classics, studied with a focus on seeking truth from facts, and purchased good books from all over the world with gold silk brooms. The number of books purchased was as much as the books stored by the Han Dynasty.

古文：是时，淮南王安亦好书，所招致率多浮辩。
现代文：当时，淮南王刘安也喜爱书籍，他所征集到的大多是浮滑论辩的书；而刘德所征集的书，都是用古代文字书写的先秦时期的旧书。
English: At the same time, Liu An, the king of Huainan, also loved books. Most of the books he brought were not practical.

古文：献王所得书，皆古文先秦旧书，采礼乐古事，稍稍增辑至五百馀篇，被服、造次必于儒者，山东诸儒多从之游。
现代文：他搜集礼乐制度的古事，稍加增订，编辑成书，长达五百余篇。他的思想和言谈举止，都务求符合儒家学说，崤山以东的儒生大多追随他，与他交往。
English: He collected the ancient history of the ritual music system, slightly updated it, and edited it into a book of more than five hundred articles. His thoughts and speech manners were all in line with the Confucian doctrine. Most Confucian students east of Shaoshan followed him and interacted with him.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元光五年
现代文：元光五年
English: Five Years of Yuan Guang

古文：冬，十月，河间王来朝，献雅乐，对三雍宫及诏策所问三十馀事。
现代文：冬季，十月，河间王刘德来京朝见，进献用于郊庙朝会的正乐，回答了有关三雍宫的典章制度及皇帝拟定的三十多个问题。
English: In the winter, in October, King Liu De of Kawama came to the imperial court in Beijing. He presented the sacred music for the suburban temple imperial court, and answered more than thirty questions about the ceremonial system of Sanyong Palace and the emperor's plan.

古文：其对，推道术而言，得事之中，文约指明。
现代文：他的回答，都是依据并阐明了儒学思想，抓住了问题的关键，文字简捷，观点明确。
English: His answers were all based on and clarified Confucianism, grasped the key to the problem, concise and clear.

古文：天子下太乐官常存肄河间王所献雅声，岁时以备数，然不常御也。
现代文：武帝下令让掌管宫廷音乐的太乐官经常练习河间王所献的雅乐，作为年节典礼中的项目，但平常很少演奏。
English: Emperor Wu ordered the music director in charge of court music to regularly practice the court music dedicated by King Haoma as an item in the annual festival ceremony, but it was rarely played.

古文：春，正月，河间王薨，中尉常丽以闻，曰： 王身端行治，温仁恭俭，笃敬爱下，明知深察，惠于鳏寡。 
现代文：春季，正月，河间王刘德去世，中尉常丽向朝廷报告了他的死讯，并说： 河间王立身端正，行为谨饬，温良仁义，恭敬俭朴，敬上爱下，聪明智慧，洞察隐微，恩惠及于鳏夫寡妇。 
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Kawama Wang Liu De passed away. Lieutenant Chang Li reported his death to the imperial court, and said: Kawama Wang stood up straight, behaved prudently, was gentle and kind, respectful and frugal, respected and loved, clever and wise, insightful and subtle, and favored widows and widowers.

古文：大行令奏： 谥法： 聪明睿知曰献， 谥曰献王。 
现代文：大行令奏报武帝： 《谥法》说： 聪明睿智称之为献。 
English: The grand order was reported to Emperor Wu: "The Law of the Dragon" said: "Cleverness and wisdom are called dedication.

古文：班固赞曰：昔鲁哀公有言： 寡人生于深宫之中，长于妇人之手，未尝知忧，未尝知惧。 
现代文：议定河间王刘德的谥号为献王。 班固赞曰：过去鲁哀公曾说过这样的话： 我在深宫中出生，在妇人抚育下长大，从不知道什么是忧愁，从未体验过什么是恐惧。 
English: It was agreed that the posthumous name of Liu De, the king of Kawama, would be presented to the king. Ban Guzan said: In the past, Lu Aigong had said something like this: I was born in a deep palace, raised by a woman, never knew what sadness was, never experienced what fear was.

古文：信哉斯言也，虽欲不危亡，不可得已！
现代文：这话说得多么真实啊。这样的人做君主，即便他不想使国家陷入危亡的绝境，也不可能啊！
English: How true this is. It is impossible for such a man to be a monarch, even if he does not want to plunge the country into a desperate situation!

古文：是故古人以宴安为鸩毒，无德而富贵谓之不幸。
现代文：所以古人把安享太平看成为毒酒，把没有仁德而身居富贵之位称之为不幸。
English: Therefore, the ancients regarded the peaceful enjoyment of peace as poisoned wine, and called it a misfortune to live in a position of wealth without benevolence.

古文：汉兴，至于孝平，诸侯王以百数，率多骄淫失道。
现代文：汉朝建国，直到孝平帝，诸侯王数以百计，大多骄横荒淫丧失道德。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, by the time of Xiaoping, there were hundreds of princes and kings, most of whom were arrogant and immoral.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：沈溺放恣之中，居势使然也。
现代文：沉溺在放纵恣肆的环境中，他们所处的地位导致他们如此。
English: wallowing in the permissive environment that their position has led them to.

古文：自凡人犹系于习俗，而况哀公之伦乎！ 夫唯大雅，卓尔不群 ，河间献王近之矣。
现代文：即使是常人都要深受习俗的影响，何况鲁哀公之类的人呢！ 学识渊博，出类拔萃 ，河间献王刘德可说近似这样的人。
English: Even ordinary people must be deeply influenced by customs, not to mention people like Lu Aigong! Highly educated, outstanding, Liu De can be said to be similar to such a person.

古文：初，王恢之讨东越也，使番阳令唐蒙风晓南越。
现代文：当初，王恢率军讨伐东越的时候，派番阳县令唐蒙去向南越王说明进军意图。
English: At first, when Wang Wei led the army to fight against East Vietnam, he sent Tang Meng, the commander of Panyang County, to explain his intention to march to the king of South Vietnam.

古文：南越食蒙以蜀枸酱，蒙问所从来。
现代文：南越人让唐蒙吃蜀地所产的枸酱，唐蒙问是从什么地方来的。
English: The South Vietnamese let Tang Meng eat the dipping sauce produced in Shu, and Tang Meng asked where it came from.

古文：曰： 道西北牂柯江。
现代文：南越人说： 是从西北方向的柯河运来的。
English: The South Vietnamese said: It was transported from the Ke River in the northwest.

古文：牂柯江广数里，出番禺城下。 
现代文：柯江宽几数，从番禺城近旁流过。 
English: The Ke River is several kilometers wide and flows past Panyu City.

古文：蒙归至长安，问蜀贾人。
现代文：唐蒙回到长安，又问蜀地的商人。
English: When Tang Meng returned to Chang'an, he asked the merchant from Shu again.

古文：贾人曰： 独蜀出枸酱，多持窃出市夜郎。
现代文：商人说： 只有蜀地出产枸酱，许多人私自带着它出境去卖给夜郎。
English: The merchant said, "Only Shu produces dipping sauce, and many people smuggle it out of the country to sell it to Yelang.

古文：夜郎者，临牂柯江，江广百馀步，足以行船。
现代文：夜郎靠近柯江，柯江宽一百多步，行船毫无问题。
English: Yelang is close to the Shike River. The river is several hundred paces wide and is perfectly navigable.

古文：南越以财物役属夜郎，西至桐师，然亦不能臣使也。 
现代文：南越国利用财物引诱和支配夜郎，向西一直影响到桐师人的居住地，但也不能让这一地区成为南越的臣属国，对它俯首听命。 
English: South Vietnam used its wealth to seduce and control Yelang, and has been influencing the residence of Tong Shiren to the west, but it cannot allow this region to become a vassal state of South Vietnam, bowing down to it.

古文：蒙乃上书说上曰： 南越王黄屋左纛，地东西万馀里，名为外臣，实一州主也。
现代文：唐蒙就向武帝上书说： 南越王使用只有皇帝才能用的黄屋左纛，盘踞东西长达万余里的地区，名义上是朝廷的外臣，实际上是一州之主。
English: Tang Meng wrote to the emperor and said: The king of South Vietnam rode in Huangya's car with Zuo Xi's flag on the car, his land was more than ten thousand miles from east to west, he was nominally a foreign minister, but in fact he was the ruler of a province.

古文：今以长沙、豫章往，水道多绝，难行。
现代文：现在如果从长沙国、豫章郡出兵征讨南越，水路大多淤塞断绝，难以通行。
English: Nowadays, if you go from Changsha and Yuzhang County, the waterways are mostly blocked, making it difficult to travel.

古文：窃闻夜郎所有精兵可得十馀万，浮船牂柯江，出其不意，此制越一奇也。
现代文：我听说夜郎的精兵总计可有十余万人，我军乘船顺柯江而下，出其不意，这是制服南越的一条奇计。
English: I heard that the total number of Yelang's elite soldiers could be more than 100,000 people. Our army took a boat down the Ke River and took them by surprise. This was a strange plan to subdue South Vietnam.

古文：诚以汉之强，巴、蜀之饶，通夜郎道为置吏，甚易。 
现代文：只要真的使用汉朝的强威，再加上巴、蜀两地富袷的经济力量，那么，打通夜郎的道路，在那儿设置官吏实施统治，是很容易做到的。 
English: As long as the power of the Han Dynasty was really used, together with the rich economic power of Ba and Shu, it would be easy to open the way to Yelang and set up officials to govern there.

古文：上许之。
现代文：武帝批准了唐蒙的建议。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：乃拜蒙为中郎将，将千人，食重万馀人，从巴、蜀筰关入，遂见夜郎侯多同。
现代文：于是，武帝任命唐蒙为中郎将，率领士兵一千人和运输粮食衣物的民夫一万多人，经过巴蜀两郡，从关进入夜郎境内，于是见到夜郎侯多同。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu appointed Tang Meng as the commander-in-chief, led a thousand soldiers and more than ten thousand people to transport grain and clothing, passed through the two counties of Bashu, entered the territory of Yelang from Guan, and then saw Yelang Hou Datong.

古文：蒙厚赐，喻以威德，约为置吏，使其子为令。
现代文：唐蒙带来厚重的赏赐，告知汉朝的严威圣德，约定由朝廷在当地任命官吏，并让多同的儿子担任县令一级官员。
English: Tang Meng gave him many rewards, and enlightened him with the martial prowess and benevolence of the Han Dynasty. He agreed to set up officials for them, and let his son be the equivalent of the county magistrate.

古文：夜郎旁小邑皆贪汉缯帛，以为汉道险，终不能有也，乃且听蒙约。
现代文：夜郎附近的小城邑都贪图得到汉朝的丝绸，他们以为从汉朝到当地来，道路艰险，汉朝终究不可能占有这片地区，于是就暂且表示服从唐蒙的约定。
English: The people in the small towns around Yelang coveted the Han Dynasty's silk cloth. They thought that the Han Dynasty's road to Yelang was a dangerous one. After all, they could not occupy themselves, so they temporarily accepted the Tang and Mongolian covenant.

古文：还报，上以为犍为郡，发巴、蜀卒治道，自僰道指牂柯江，作者数万人，士卒多物故，有逃亡者。用军兴法诛其渠率，巴、蜀民大惊恐。
现代文：唐蒙返京奏报，武帝就在这一地区设立了犍为郡，征发巴、蜀两郡的士卒修筑道路，从道指向柯江，修路的人有数万人，许多士卒死亡，有的士卒就逃跑了；唐蒙等人用 军兴法 诛杀逃亡士卒的头目，巴、蜀百姓极度惊恐。
English: Tang and Meng Meng reported back to Beijing that Emperor Wu had set up a detachment in this area to build a road from the two counties of Ba and Shu. Tens of thousands of people worked on the road, many of whom died and some of whom fled. Tang and Meng Meng used the "military renaissance" method to kill the leader of the fugitive soldiers. The people of Ba and Shu were extremely frightened.

古文：上闻之，使司马相如责唐蒙等，因谕告巴、蜀民以非上意；相如还报。
现代文：武帝得知此事，就派司马相如前去责备唐蒙等人，并公开告知巴蜀一带的百姓，唐蒙等人的作法并不是皇帝的本意；司马相如返京奏报处置情况。
English: When Emperor Wu learned of this, he sent Sima Xiangru to rebuke Tang Meng and others, and publicly informed the people around Bashu that the actions of Tang Meng and others were not the original intention of the emperor; Sima Xiangru returned to Beijing to report on the situation.

古文：是时，邛、筰之君长。闻南夷与汉通，得赏赐多，多欲愿为内臣妾，请吏比南夷。
现代文：这时，邛人和人的部落酋长听说南夷与汉朝结交，得到很多的赏赐，大多甘愿做汉朝统治下的臣民，请朝廷仿照统治南夷的模式，在他们的居住地任命官吏。
English: At this time, the tribal chiefs of the Xiongnu and Xiongnu heard that the Nanyi had made friends with the Han Dynasty and received many rewards. Most of them were willing to be subjects under the rule of the Han Dynasty. They asked the imperial court to follow the model of ruling the Nanyi and appoint officials in their place of residence.

古文：天子问相如，相如曰： 邛、筰、冉駹者近蜀，道亦易通。秦时尝通，为郡县，至汉兴而罢。
现代文：武帝询问司马相如的意见，相如说： 邛？冉都靠近蜀郡，道路也容易开通；秦朝时曾经开通，设置过郡县，到汉朝建国才罢废。
English: Emperor Wu inquired about Sima Xiangru's opinion, and Xiangru said: Shandong is close to Shu County, and the road is also easy to open; during the Qin Dynasty, it was opened and counties were set up, but it was not abolished until the founding of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今诚复通，为置郡县，愈于南夷。 
现代文：现在如果真能再次开通，在那儿设置郡县，将胜过南夷地区。 
English: Now, if we can really reopen it and set up a county there, it will be better than the Nanyi area.

古文：天子以为然，乃拜相如为中郎将，建节往使，及副使王然于等乘传，因巴、蜀吏币物以赂西夷。
现代文：天子认为他说得对，就任命司马相如为中郎将，持皇帝的符节出使西夷，相如和副使王然于等人乘坐驿车，利用巴蜀两郡的官府财物收买西夷；邛？
English: Tianzi thought he was right, so he appointed Sima Xiangru as the second-in-command, and sent an envoy to Xiyi with the emperor's symbols, just as the deputy envoy Wang Ranyu and others took a carriage and used the government property of the two counties of Bashu to bribe Xiyi;

古文：邛、筰、冉駹、斯榆之君。皆请为内臣。
现代文：冉、斯榆各部族的酋长，都请求做汉朝直接统治下的臣民。
English: The chiefs of all the tribes in Ran and Sui asked to become subjects under the direct rule of the Han Dynasty.

古文：除边关；关益斥，西至沬、若水，南至牂柯为徼，通零关道，桥孙水以通邛都，为置一都尉、十馀县，属蜀。
现代文：废除了原有的边关，新设立的边关向外扩展，西部到达沫水、若水，南至柯江为界，开通了零关道，在孙水上架起了桥，用来接连邛都，在这一地区设立了一个都尉、十多个县，隶属于蜀郡。
English: The original border checkpoint was abolished, and the newly established border checkpoint expanded outward, reaching the west to the Modyu and Ruoshui, and the south to the Kejiang River as the boundary, opening the zero checkpoint road, erecting a bridge on the Sunshui to connect the capital, and establishing a governor and more than ten counties in this area, which are subordinate to Shu County.

古文：天子大说。
现代文：武帝很高兴。
English: Emperor Wu was very pleased.

古文：诏发卒万人治雁门阻险。
现代文：武帝下诏调集一万士卒修治雁门郡的险要关隘。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict to mobilize ten thousand soldiers to repair and govern the dangerous pass in Ganmen County.

古文：秋，七月，大风拔木。
现代文：秋季，七月，出现大风，拔起树木。
English: In autumn, in July, there are strong winds, uprooting trees.

古文：女巫楚服等教陈皇后祠祭厌胜，挟妇人媚道；事觉，上使御史张汤穷治之。
现代文：女巫师楚服等教陈皇后祭神祈祷，使用妇人诅咒的方法，企图除去与陈皇后争宠的女人；事情败露，武帝指派御史张汤彻底查处。
English: The sorceress Chu Fu and others taught Empress Chen to worship and pray, and used the method of a woman's curse in an attempt to remove the woman who competed for favor with Empress Chen; the matter was revealed, and Emperor Wu assigned the historian Zhang Tang to investigate thoroughly.

古文：汤深竟党与，相连及诛者三百馀人，楚服枭首于市。
现代文：张汤深入地追究有关的人，相互牵联和被处死的有三百多人，楚服在街市被斩首，头颅高悬示众。
English: Zhang Tang thoroughly investigated the people involved, and more than three hundred people were implicated and executed. Zhu Fu was beheaded in the street market, and his head was hung high for the public to see.

古文：乙巳，赐皇后册，收其玺绶，罢退，居长门宫。
现代文：乙巳，武帝赐给皇后一份册书，收回了皇后的印玺，废去尊号，贬入长门宫。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu gave the empress a copy of the register, withdrew the empress's seal, abolished the honorary title, and relegated her to Nagato Palace.

古文：窦太主惭惧，稽颡谢上。
现代文：陈皇后的母亲窦太主羞惭恐惧，向武帝叩头请罪。
English: Empress Chen's mother Dou Taishu was ashamed and afraid, and begged Emperor Wu for forgiveness.

古文：上曰： 皇后所为不轨于大义，不得不废。
现代文：武帝说： 皇后的行为不符合大义，不得不把她废黜。
English: Emperor Wu said: The behavior of the empress does not conform to the great righteousness, and she had to be deposed.

古文：主当信道以自慰，勿受妄言以生嫌惧。
现代文：你应该相信道义而放宽心怀，不要轻信闲言而产生疑虑和恐惧。
English: You should believe in morality and relax your mind, do not believe in gossip and have doubts and fears.

古文：后虽废，供奉如法，长门无异上宫也。 
现代文：皇后虽然被废了，仍会按照法度受到优待，居住在长门宫与居住在上宫并无区别。 
English: Although the empress has been abolished, she will still receive preferential treatment in accordance with the law. There is no difference between living in the Nagato Palace and living in the Upper Palace.

古文：初，上尝置酒窦太主家，主见所幸卖珠儿董偃，上赐之衣冠，尊而不名，称为 主人翁 ，使之侍饮；由是董君贵宠，天下莫不闻。
现代文：当初，武帝曾经在窦太主家中摆设酒席，窦太主引见了她宠幸的珠宝商人董偃，武帝赏赐给董偃衣服和冠帽，为了表示尊重，不称他的名字而称他为 主人翁 ，让他陪侍饮酒；从此董偃尊贵受宠，天下人没有不知道的。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu once held a banquet at the home of Empress Dou. Empress Dou met her favorite jewelry merchant, Dong Xuan. Emperor Wu gave Dong Xuan clothes and a crown cap. In order to show respect, he did not call him by his name, but called him the master, and let him drink alcohol with his attendants. Since then, Dong Xuan has been favored by the world.

古文：常从游戏北宫，驰逐平乐观鸡、鞠之会，角狗、马之足，上大欢乐之。
现代文：董偃经常陪同武帝在北宫游戏，在平乐观骑马追逐、参与斗鸡、踢球，赛狗、赛马，武帝十分欢喜。
English: Dong Xuan often accompanied Emperor Wu to play games at the Northern Palace, and he was very happy to ride a horse, participate in cockfights, kick a ball, dog racing, and horse racing.

古文：上为窦太主置酒宣室，使谒者引内董君。
现代文：武帝在宣室中摆酒款待窦太主，派谒者引导董偃入内。
English: Emperor Wu served wine to Dou Taishu in the Xuanwu Room, and sent an envoy to guide Dong Hao inside.

古文：是时，中郎东方朔陛戟殿下，辟戟而前曰： 董偃有斩罪三，安得入乎！ 
现代文：当时，中郎东方朔持戟立燥马追逐、参与斗鸡、踢球，赛狗、赛马，武帝十分欢喜。
English: At that time, the middle son, Dongfang Shuo, stood up to chase the horse, participate in cockfights, kickball, greyhound racing, horse racing, and Emperor Wu was very happy.

古文：上曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：武帝在宣室中摆酒款待窦太主，派谒者引导董偃入内。
English: The emperor said: What is the crime?

古文：朔曰： 偃以人臣私侍公主，其罪一也。
现代文：当时，中郎东方朔持戟立在殿下，他放下戟走近武帝说： 董偃犯有三项死罪，怎能让他进来呢！ 武帝说： 你说的是什么呢？ 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: As a subject of the emperor, Dong Zhuo served the princess in private, which was the first crime.

古文：败男女之化，而乱婚姻之礼，伤王制，其罪二也。
现代文：东方朔说： 董偃以臣子的身份私通公主，这是他的第一条罪状。败坏男女风化，而且还扰乱婚俗结姻的礼数，破坏了大王您颁布的律法体制，这是他的第二条罪状。
English: The second crime is to corrupt the manners between men and women, disrupt the marriage ceremony, and destroy the imperial court system.

古文：陛下富于春秋，方积思于《六经》，偃不遵经劝学，反以靡丽为右，奢侈为务，尽狗马之乐，极耳目之欲，是乃国家之大贼，人主之大蜮，其罪三也。 
现代文：陛下年轻，正在努力学习《六经》等儒学典籍，董偃不遵循经书教诲劝勉学习，反而崇尚豪华追求奢侈，尽情地享受斗狗赛马的欢乐，极力满足感官欲望，他是国家的大贼，君主的大害，这是他的第三条罪状。 
English: His majesty is young and is trying hard to study the "Six Classics" and other Confucian classics. Dong Xuan does not follow the teachings of the scriptures to encourage study, but instead advocates luxury, pursues luxury, enjoys the joy of dog fighting and horse racing, and strives to satisfy sensory desires. He is a great thief of the country and a great harm to the monarch. This is his third crime.

古文：上默然不应，良久曰： 吾业已设饮，后而自改。 
现代文：武帝沉默不答，过了很久才说： 我今天已准备好宴席了，以后再自己改正吧。 
English: Emperor Wu remained silent and did not answer, and only after a long time did he say, "I have prepared the banquet today. I'll correct myself later."

古文：朔曰： 不可。夫宣室者，先帝之正处也，非法度之政不得入焉。
现代文：东方朔说： 宣室，本来是先帝处理政务的地方，不是讨论有关法度的政务的人都不得进入。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: Xuanwu, it was originally the place where the former emperor handled government affairs, and people who did not discuss government affairs related to the rule of law were not allowed to enter.

古文：故淫乱之渐，其变为篡。
现代文：所以乱的苗头发展，就会变成篡夺君位。
English: Therefore, the development of the seeds of chaos will turn into the usurpation of the throne.

古文：是以竖貂为淫而易牙作患，庆父死而鲁国全。 
现代文：正是由于这个道理，当年齐桓公因信用竖貂和易牙受害，而庆父死后，鲁国就得以保全。 
English: It is precisely because of this reason that Qi Kuan suffered from bad credit and loose teeth, but after the death of his father, Lu was able to be preserved.

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：武帝说： 你说得好！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：有诏止，更置酒北宫，引董君从东司马门入；赐朔黄金三十斤。
现代文：下诏让董偃停下来待命，重新在北宫设置酒宴，领董偃从东司马门入宫，赏赐给东方朔三十斤黄金。
English: The next edict asked Dong Xuan to stop and stand by, set up a wine banquet again in the North Palace, led Dong Xuan from the East Sima Gate into the palace, and rewarded Dongfang Shuo with thirty catties of gold.

古文：董君之宠由是日衰。
现代文：董偃所受的宠爱，自此以后日益衰减。
English: From then on, Dong Xuan's favour waned.

古文：是后，公主、贵人多逾礼制矣。
现代文：此后，公主、贵人大多不按礼制行事了。
English: After that, most princesses and nobles no longer followed the etiquette.

古文：上以张汤为太中大夫，与赵禹共定诸律令，务在深文。
现代文：武帝任命张汤为太中大夫，张汤与赵禹共同制定了各项法律条令，务求繁密严苛。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Zhang Tang as the Grand Physician. Zhang Tang and Zhao Yu jointly formulated various laws and regulations to ensure that they were complex and strict.

古文：拘守职之吏，作见知法，吏传相监司。
现代文：严格控制在职官吏，制定了官员知人犯罪而不举报就要判刑的 见知法 ，使官吏互相监视、互相侦察。
English: Strictly control the on-duty officials, and formulate the "law of seeing and knowing," which requires officials to be sentenced if they know someone who has committed a crime without reporting it, so that officials can monitor and investigate each other.

古文：用法益刻自此始。
现代文：从此开始，用法更加严厉刻苛了。
English: From then on, the usage became harsher.

古文：八月，螟。
现代文：八月，庄稼发生螟虫之害。
English: In August, disaster relief began.

古文：是岁，征吏民有明当世之务、习先圣之术者，县次续食，令与计谐。
现代文：这一年，武帝征召官吏百姓中明晓当世政务、熟知古代圣王治国之术的人到朝廷任职，命令应征者与各地进京的 上计吏 同行，由沿途各县供应饭食。
English: In this year, Emperor Wu summoned officials and commoners who were familiar with contemporary government affairs and the ancient art of ruling the country to serve in the imperial court. He ordered the conscripts to accompany the chief accountants from all over the country to Beijing, and to provide meals from the counties along the way.

古文：菑川人公孙弘对策曰： 臣闻上古尧、舜之时，不贵爵赏而民劝善，不重刑罚而民不犯，躬率以正则遇民信也；末世贵爵厚赏而民不劝，深刑重罚而奸不止，其上不正，遇民不信也。
现代文：菑川人公孙弘在考试时答道： 我听说上古尧舜那个时期，没有尊贵的官爵和丰厚的奖赏，但百姓却相互勉励行善；不重刑罚，但百姓却不犯法，这是因为君主为臣民做出了正直的表率，而且对待百姓很讲信用；到了末代，有尊贵的官爵和丰厚的赏赐，但百姓却得不到劝勉，设立了严酷的刑罚却不能禁止违法犯罪，当时的君主本身不正，对待百姓又不讲信用。
English: During the examination, Sun Hong, a native of Hechuan, answered: I heard that in the time of the Ancients, there were no noble lords and rich rewards, but the people encouraged each other to do good; there was no heavy punishment, but the people did not break the law. This was because the monarch set an honest example for his subjects and treated the people with great trust. In the last generation, there were noble lords and rich rewards, but the people were not persuaded, and harsh punishments were established, but they could not prohibit illegal crimes. The monarch at that time was not honest and treated the people with great trust.

古文：夫厚赏重刑，未足以劝善而禁非，必信而已矣。
现代文：用丰厚的奖赏和严酷的刑罚，还不足以鼓励行善、禁止作恶，只有靠讲信用，才能达到这一目的。
English: Generous rewards and harsh punishments are not enough to encourage good deeds and prohibit bad ones. Only by talking about trust can we achieve this goal.

古文：是故因能任官，则分职治；去无用之言，则事情得；不作无用之器，则赋敛省；不夺民时，不妨民力，则百姓富；有德者进，无德者退，则朝廷尊；有功者上，无功者下，则群臣逡；罚当罪，则奸邪止；赏当贤，则臣下劝。
现代文：所以，根据人的才能而委任的官职，就能各司其职，做好工作；抛弃无用的虚言，就能了解事情的真相；不制作无用的器物，就可以减少对百姓的赋税；不在农忙季节征发役夫，不妨害民力，百姓就会富裕；有德的人受到重用，无德的人被罢免，朝廷就尊贵威严；有功的人升职，无功的人降级，群臣就会明白退让的道理；判处刑罚与罪过相应，就能制止犯罪；给予奖赏与贤能相符，就能劝勉臣子。
English: Therefore, officials appointed according to people's talents will be able to perform their duties and do a good job; discard useless lies and understand the truth of the matter; do not make useless utensils and reduce taxes on the people; do not recruit officials during the busy farming season, do not harm the people's power, and the people will be rich; virtuous people will be reused, and unethical people will be dismissed, and the imperial court will be dignified and majestic; meritorious people will be promoted, and unmeritorious people will be demoted, and the ministers will understand the reason for concession; impose punishment corresponding to the crime and stop the crime; give rewards in line with

古文：凡此八者，治之本也。
现代文：这八项，是治理国家的根本。
English: These eight items are fundamental to governing the country.

古文：故民者，业之则不争，理得则不怨，有礼则不暴，爱之则亲上，此有天下之急者也。
现代文：天下百姓，让他们各自从事生产就不会发生争斗，事情得到合理的解决就不会怨恨，让他们接受教育知道礼义就不会使用暴力，君主爱护他们，他们就会亲近君主，此是统治天下的当务之急。
English: The people of the world, let them each engage in production, there will be no fighting, if things are resolved reasonably, there will be no resentment, let them receive education to know the etiquette, they will not use violence, the monarch will love them, they will be close to the monarch, this is the top priority of ruling the world.

古文：礼义者，民之所服也；而赏罚顺之，则民不犯禁矣。
现代文：礼义，是百姓甘愿服从的；再用奖赏和刑罚来推行礼义，百姓就不会违犯禁令了。
English: The people are willing to obey the rules of etiquette. If rewards and punishments are used to enforce the rules of etiquette, the people will not violate the ban.

古文： 臣闻之：气同则从，声比则应。
现代文： 我听说：气相同就能互相影响带动，声相同就能互相呼应。
English: I heard that the same qi can influence and drive each other, and the same voice can echo each other.

古文：今人主和德于上，百姓和合于下，故心和则气和，气和则形和，形和则声和，声和则天地之和应矣。
现代文：现在，君主在上面使自己的言行符合德义，百姓在下面与君主相谐调，所以心和就能气和，气和就能形和，形和就能声和，声和就会出现天地安和了。
English: Now that the Emperor is carrying out the policy of virtue at the top, and the people are acting with the same spirit and the same virtue at the bottom, therefore, the same spirit and the same virtue will result in the same aspiration, the same aspiration will result in the same action, and the same action will result in a coordinated speech.

古文：故阴阳和，风雨时，甘露降，五谷登，六畜蕃，嘉禾兴，硃草生，山不童，泽不涸，此和之至也。 
现代文：所以阴阳调和，风雨适时，甘露降下，五谷丰登，六畜兴旺，茁壮稻谷生机勃勃，红色瑞草萌生成长，山岭不光秃，湖泊不干涸，这是天地安和的最佳状态。 
English: Therefore, the yin and yang are in harmony, the wind and rain are timely, the nectar is falling, the five grains are abundant, the six animals are thriving, the rice is vigorous, the red shoots are growing, the mountains are not bare, and the lakes are not dry. This is the best state of peace in the world.

古文：时对者百馀人，太常奏弘第居下。
现代文：当时参加对策考试的有一百多人，太常奏报考试成绩，把公孙弘列为下等。
English: At that time, more than a hundred people took part in the countermeasures examination, and the examination results were reported too often, and Gongsun Hong was ranked as the lowest.

古文：策奏，天子擢弘对为第一，拜为博士，待诏金马门。
现代文：对策上呈武帝，武帝把公孙弘的对策成绩提升为第一名，任命他为博士，在金马门伺应召对。
English: Emperor Wu was present at the countermeasure. Emperor Wu promoted Gongsun Hong's countermeasure achievement to the first place, appointed him as a doctor, and waited for the call at the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：齐人辕固，年九十馀，亦以贤良征。
现代文：齐人辕固，已经九十多岁了，也被选为贤良，征召入京。
English: Qi Ren Ronggu, already more than ninety years old, was also selected as a virtuous person and conscripted to Beijing.

古文：公孙弘仄目而事固，固曰： 公孙子，务正学以言，无曲学以阿世。 
现代文：公孙弘斜着眼睛，不正视辕固，辕固说： 公孙先生，一定要依据儒学论事，可不要歪曲儒学来迎合当世！ 
English: Gongsun Hong tilted his eyes, not looking at Gonggu, Gonggu said: Mr. Gongsun, we must follow the Confucianism, but don't distort Confucianism to meet the modern world!

古文：诸儒多疾毁固者，固遂以老罢归。
现代文：儒生们有许多人嫉妒诽谤辕固，辕固就以年老为名免官回原籍了。
English: Many Confucians were jealous of and slandered Deng Guo, who was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown in the name of old age.

古文：是时，巴、蜀四郡凿山通西南夷道，千馀里戍转相饷。
现代文：这时，巴、蜀等四郡开凿山险修筑连接西南夷的通道，千余里外转运粮饷。
English: At this time, Ba, Shu and other four counties excavated mountain hazards to build a channel connecting the southwest of Yiwu, transporting grain for more than a thousand miles.

古文：数岁，道不通，士罢饿、离暑湿死者甚众；西南夷又数反，发兵兴击，费以巨万计而无功。
现代文：过了几年，道路没有开通，修路的士兵疲惫饥饿、遭受炎热潮湿折磨而死的人很多，西南夷又多次反叛，调集军队去进攻，军费开支以万万计，却不见功效。
English: After a few years, the road did not open, the soldiers who built the road were tired and hungry, and many people died from the hot and humid torture. Xuanxi Yi rebelled many times, mobilized troops to attack, and spent tens of thousands of dollars on military expenses, but did not see any effect.

古文：上患之，诏使公孙弘视焉。
现代文：武帝很担忧，下诏派公孙弘前去该地视察情况。
English: Emperor Wu was very worried and sent Gongsun Hong to the area to inspect the situation.

古文：还奏事，盛毁西南夷无所用，上不听。
现代文：公孙弘返京奏报情况，极力批评开通西南夷没有什么作用，武帝不听从他的意见。
English: When Gongsun Hong returned from his inspection, he reported to the emperor that it was useless to denigrate the Xuanxi Yi, and the emperor did not accept his opinion.

古文：弘每朝会议，开陈其端，使人主自择，不肯面折廷争。
现代文：公孙弘每当在朝廷讨论问题时，总是列举陈述事情的端绪，让武帝自己抉择，不肯在朝廷之上与武帝当面争辩。
English: Whenever Gongsunhong discussed a problem in the imperial court, he always listed the starting points of the presentation of the matter, and let Emperor Wu make his own choice, and refused to argue with Emperor Wu in person in the imperial court.

古文：于是上察其行慎厚，辩论有馀，习文法吏事，缘饰以儒术，大说之，一岁中迁至左内史。
现代文：因此武帝看出他为人谨慎厚道，善于辩论，熟悉文书法令和具体的官府公务，又会用儒术加以文饰，对他非常欣赏，一年之中升官到左内史。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu saw that he was a prudent and kind person, good at debate, familiar with official documents and specific official duties of the government, and could use Confucianism to decorate his writings. He appreciated him very much, and was promoted to the position of Zuonaishi within a year.

古文：弘奏事，有不可，不廷辨。
现代文：公孙弘上奏，遇到武帝不同意时，他不在朝廷上争辩。
English: When Emperor Wu disagreed, he did not argue in court.

古文：常与汲黯请间，黯先发之，弘推其后，天子常说，所言皆听，以此日益亲贵。
现代文：常与汲黯请求单独召见，先由汲黯提出问题，后由公孙弘进一步补充，武帝经常听得很高兴，所提的建议都加以采纳，因此，公孙弘越来越得到武帝的亲近和重用。
English: He was often summoned to meet with Emperor Wu separately at the request of Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu first asked questions to Emperor Wu, and then Emperor Wu asked questions to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu often listened with pleasure and accepted all the suggestions. As a result, Emperor Wu became more and more close to Emperor Wu and used Emperor Wu more and more.

古文：弘尝与公卿约议，至上前，皆倍其约以顺上旨。
现代文：公孙弘曾经和公卿商定某一问题的处置意见，到了武帝面前，他却完全背弃了原来的约定，而迎合武帝的心意。
English: Gongsunhong had once agreed with a nobleman on the disposition of a certain issue, but when he came before Emperor Wu, he completely reneged on the original agreement and pandered to Emperor Wu's will.

古文：汲黯廷诘弘曰： 齐人多诈而无情实。始与臣等建此议，今皆倍之，不忠！ 
现代文：汲黯当即在朝廷上批评公孙弘说： 齐人大多欺诈而不忠诚老实；他开始和我们一道商定此条建议，现在却全都背弃了，这是不忠！ 
English: Ku Ying immediately criticized Gongsun Hong in court, saying, "Most Qi people are deceitful and not loyal and honest; he began to work with us to agree on this proposal, but now he has completely reneged on it. This is disloyalty!"

古文：上问弘。弘谢曰： 夫知臣者，以臣为忠；不知臣者，以臣为不忠。 
现代文：武帝责问公孙弘，公孙弘谢罪说： 了解我的人，认为我忠；不了解我的人，认为我不忠。 
English: Emperor Wu reprimanded Gongsunhong, Gongsunhongxie said: Those who know me, think I am loyal; those who do not know me, think I am disloyal.

古文：上然弘言。
现代文：武帝认为他说得对。
English: The Emperor agreed with Gongsunhiro's statement.

古文：左右幸臣每毁弘，上益厚遇之。
现代文：武帝身边的亲信经常诋毁公孙弘，武帝对他却更加优待。
English: The favored vassals around the emperor constantly slandered Sun Hong, but the emperor treated Sun Hong more and more generously.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元光六年
现代文：元光六年冬季，开始对商人的车辆征税。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of the Yuan Guang era, the merchants' vehicles began to be taxed.

古文：冬，初算商车。大司农郑当时言： 穿渭为渠，下至河，漕关东粟径易，又可以溉渠下民田万馀顷。 
现代文：大司农郑当时建议： 从渭水开辟一条河道，下连黄河，用来漕运函谷类以东地区的粮食，路线直而且方便，又可灌溉河道附近的一万多顷农田。 
English: At that time, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture Zheng suggested: to open a channel from Surabaya to the lower reaches of the Yellow River, which would be used to transport grain east of Hanzhong. The route is straight and convenient, and can irrigate more than 10,000 hectares of farmland near the channel.

古文：春，诏发卒数万人穿渠，如当时策；三岁而通，人以为便。
现代文：春季，武帝下诏调集数万役卒开掘河道，按照郑当时的建议办事；用了三年时间，河道开通了，大家都认为很方便。
English: In the spring, Emperor Wu issued an edict to mobilize tens of thousands of officials to excavate the river channel and act in accordance with Zheng's suggestion at that time; it took three years to open the river channel, and everyone thought it was very convenient.

古文：匈奴入上谷，杀略吏民。
现代文：匈奴入侵上谷郡，杀害抢掠官吏百姓。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Shanggu County, killing and looting officials and civilians.

古文：遣车骑将军卫青出上谷，骑将军公孙敖出代，轻车将军公孙贺出云中，骁骑将军李广出雁门，各万骑，击胡关市下。
现代文：武帝派遣车骑将军卫青从上谷郡出兵，骑将军公孙敖从代国出兵，轻车将军公孙贺从云中郡出兵，骁骑将军李广从雁门郡出兵，各自率领一万骑兵，出击屯兵在边关贸易市场附近的匈奴军队。
English: Emperor Wu dispatched the cavalry general Wei Qing from Shanggu County, the cavalry general Gong Sun Ye from Degu, the light cavalry general Gong Sun He from Yunzhong County, and the cavalry general Li Guang from Yanmen County, each leading ten thousand cavalry, to attack the Hun troops stationed near the border trade market.

古文：卫青至龙城，得胡首虏七百人；公孙贺无所得；公孙敖为胡所败，亡七千骑；李广亦为胡所败。
现代文：卫青进攻到龙城，斩首和俘获匈奴七百多人；公孙贺一无所得；公孙敖被匈奴打败，损失了七千骑兵；李广也被匈奴打败。
English: Wei Qing attacked Longcheng, beheaded and captured more than seven hundred Huns; Gongsun He gained nothing; Gongsun Ya was defeated by the Huns and lost seven thousand cavalry; Li Guang was also defeated by the Huns.

古文：胡生得广，置两马间，络而盛卧，行十馀里；广佯死，暂腾而上胡儿马上，夺其弓，鞭马南驰，遂得脱归。
现代文：匈奴人活捉了李广，把他安置在两匹并行的马匹中间，让他躺在用绳子结成的网袋中，走出了十多里路；李广先是装死，后来突然纵身跃起，跳到了一个匈奴人骑坐的马上，夺得他的弓箭，打着马向南奔驰，于是得以逃脱归来。
English: The Huns captured Li Guang alive, placed him in the middle of two parallel horses, let him lie in a mesh bag made of rope, and walked more than ten miles; Li Guang first pretended to be dead, then suddenly jumped up, jumped on a horse ridden by a Hun, captured his bow and arrow, and galloped south with the horse, so he was able to escape and return.

古文：汉下敖、广吏，当斩，赎为庶人；唯青赐爵关内侯。
现代文：汉朝廷把公孙敖、李广交付司法官吏审讯，罪当斩首，后出钱赎罪，做了平民；只有卫青被赏给关内侯的爵位。
English: The Han court handed Gongsun Yao and Li Guang over to judicial officials for trial, beheaded them for the crime, and then paid money to atone for the crime and made them civilians; only Wei Qing was awarded the title of Guan Nei Marquis.

古文：青虽出于奴虏，然善骑射，材力绝人；遇士大夫以礼，与士卒有恩，众乐为用，有将帅材，故每出辄有功。
现代文：卫青虽然出身于奴仆，但是善于骑马射箭，勇力超过常人；对官吏士大夫以礼相待，对士兵有恩，众人都愿为他效力，他有做军事统帅的才能，所以每次率兵出征能立下战功。
English: Although Wei Qing was born as a slave, he was good at horseback riding and archery, and his bravery exceeded that of ordinary people. He treated officials and doctors with courtesy, and was kind to soldiers. Everyone was willing to serve him. He had the ability to be a military commander, so he was able to make war achievements every time he led soldiers out.

古文：天下由此服上之知人。
现代文：天下人由此都佩服武帝的知人善任。
English: As a result, people all over the world admired Emperor Wu's acquaintance, Zenren.

古文：夏，大旱，蝗。
现代文：夏季，大旱，出现蝗灾。
English: In summer, droughts and locust plagues occur.

古文：六月，上行幸雍。
现代文：六月，武帝亲临雍县。
English: In June, Emperor Wu personally visited Yongxian.

古文：秋，匈奴数盗边，渔阳尤甚。
现代文：秋季，匈奴多次攻掠边境，渔阳郡受害最为严重。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu repeatedly attacked and plundered the border, and Yuyang County suffered the most serious damage.

古文：以卫尉韩安国为材官将军，屯渔阳。
现代文：武帝任命卫尉韩安国担任材官将军，率兵驻守渔阳郡。
English: Emperor Wu appointed the guard lieutenant Han An Guo to serve as the general officer, leading the troops stationed in Yuyang County.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元朔元年
现代文：元朔元年
English: In the first year of the Yuan Shuo

古文：冬，十一月，诏曰： 朕深诏执事，兴廉举孝，庶几成风，绍休圣绪。
现代文：冬季，十一月，武帝下诏书说： 朕殷切嘱告官吏，奖励廉吏，举荐孝子，希望能养成风气，继承和发扬光大古代圣人的事业。
English: In winter, in November, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: I earnestly order officials to be denounced, reward corrupt officials, and recommend filial sons, hoping to develop a culture and inherit and carry forward the cause of the great ancient saints.

古文：夫十室之邑，必有忠信；三人并行，厥有我师。
现代文：有十户人家居住的小村落，其中必定有忠信之士；三人共同行走，其中必定有可做我老师的贤人。
English: In a city of ten mansions, there must be loyalty; three abreast, there must be my teacher.

古文：今或至阖郡而不荐一人，是化不下究，而积行之君子壅于上闻也。
现代文：现在有的郡甚至不向朝廷举荐一个贤人，这说明政令教化不能贯彻下去，而那些积累了善行的贤人君子，被壅闭，使天子无法得知。
English: At present, some counties do not even recommend a wise man to the imperial court, which shows that the edification of the edict cannot be carried out, and those wise men and gentlemen who have accumulated good deeds are locked up, so that the emperor cannot know.

古文：且进贤受上赏，蔽贤蒙显戮，古之道也。
现代文：况且，推荐贤人的人给以上等的奖赏，壅闭贤人的人给以公开的杀戮，这是古代的治世原则。
English: What's more, it was an ancient principle that those who promoted virtue would be rewarded and those who suppressed it would be punished.

古文：其议二千石不举者罪。 
现代文：应该议定二千石官员不向朝廷举荐人才的罪名！ 
English: Two thousand koku officials should agree not to recommend talent to the imperial court!

古文：有司奏： 不举孝，不奉诏，当以不敬论；不察廉，不胜任也，当免。 
现代文：有关官吏奏报： 凡是不举荐孝子的，属于不遵守诏令的行为，应当按 不敬 的罪名论处；凡是不察举廉吏的，就是不胜任职务，应当免官。 
English: Report on officials: Anyone who does not recommend a filial son, which is an act of non-compliance with the imperial edict, should be punished as a crime of disrespect; anyone who does not recommend a corrupt official is incompetent and should be dismissed.

古文：奏可。
现代文：武帝批准了这一建议。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：十二月，江都易王非薨。
现代文：十二月，江都王刘非去世。
English: In December, the king of Jiangdu, Liu Fei, passed away.

古文：皇子据生，卫夫人之子也。
现代文：皇子刘据出生，他是卫夫人所生的儿子。
English: Prince Liu Zhen was born, the son of Lady Wei.

古文：三月，甲子，立卫夫人为皇后，赦天下。
现代文：三月，甲子，武帝立卫夫人为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In March, Emperor Wu and Empress Wei were pardoned and became empresses.

古文：秋，匈奴二万骑入汉，杀辽西太守，略二千馀人，围韩安国壁；又入渔阳、雁门，各杀略千馀人。
现代文：秋季，匈奴用二万骑兵入侵汉境，杀死辽西郡的太守，掳去两千多人，围困韩安国指挥的汉军营垒；又侵入渔阳郡和雁门郡，在两地各杀害或掳掠了一千多人。
English: In the autumn, the Huns invaded Han territory with twenty thousand cavalry, killed the governor of Liaoxi County, abducted more than two thousand people, and besieged the Han camp commanded by Han An Guo; they also invaded Yuyang County and Yanmen County, killing or abducting more than one thousand people in each of the two places.

古文：安国益东徙，屯北平；数月，病死。
现代文：韩安国迁往更远的东方，率军驻守北平；数月之后，病死。
English: Han An moved farther east and stationed his army in Peiping. A few months later, he died of illness.

古文：天子乃复召李广，拜为右北平太守。
现代文：武帝就再次起用李广，任命他为右北平太守。
English: Emperor Wu once again appointed Li Guang and appointed him as the governor of the North of Ping.

古文：匈奴号曰 汉之飞将军 ，避之，数岁不敢入右北平。
现代文：匈奴称李广为 汉朝的飞将军 ，畏避李广，连续几年不敢入侵右北平郡。
English: The Xiongnu called Li Guang the "Flying General" of the Han Dynasty, shunned Li Guang, and dared not invade Ping County in the North for several years.

古文：车骑将军卫青将三万骑出雁门，将军李息出代；青斩首虏数千人。
现代文：车骑将军卫青统率三万骑兵从雁门郡出击，将军李息领兵从代郡出击；卫青所部斩杀匈奴数千人。
English: General Wei Qingtong led 30,000 cavalry from Ganmen County, General Li Xi led the troops from Dai County; Wei Qingtong killed thousands of Huns.

古文：东夷薉君南闾等共二十八万人降，为苍海郡；人徒之费，拟于南夷，燕、齐之间，靡然骚动。
现代文：东夷君南闾等二十八万人归降，朝廷在其居住区设置了苍海郡；因此而支付的安置徒众的费用，与南夷地区的相同，燕、齐一带，出现骚动。
English: Two hundred and eighty thousand people, including Dongyijun Nanlu, surrendered, and the imperial court set up Canghai County in their residential area. As a result, the cost of resettling the monks was the same as that of the Nanyi area, and there was unrest in the Yan and Qi areas.

古文：是岁，鲁共王馀、长沙定王发皆薨。
现代文：这一年，鲁王刘馀、长沙王刘发都去世了。
English: In the same year, King Liu Yu of Lu and King Liu Fa of Changsha both died.

古文：临菑人主父偃、严安，无终人徐乐，皆上书言事。
现代文：临菑人主父偃、严安，无终县人徐乐，都向武帝上书议论政事。
English: The Linyi people, such as the main father Yu, Yan'an, and the endless county people Xu Le, all wrote to Emperor Wu to discuss political affairs.

古文：始，偃游齐、燕、赵，皆莫能厚遇，诸生相与排摈不容；家贫，假贷无所得，乃西入关上书阙下，朝奏，暮召入。
现代文：当初，主父偃在齐、燕、赵各地活动，都没有受到人家的厚待，儒生们联合起来排斥他，不能相容；家中贫穷，借贷无门，主父偃就西入关中，到皇宫的门阙下上书，早晨把奏书呈上，晚上就被召入宫中拜见武帝。
English: At the beginning, Master Gong's activities in various parts of Qi, Yan and Zhao were not well received by others. Confucian scholars united to exclude him, which was not compatible. The family was poor and had no access to loans. Master Gong went to the West Gate of the Imperial Palace to submit his report. In the morning, he submitted his report, and in the evening, he was called into the palace to meet Emperor Wu.

古文：所言九事，其八事为律令；一事谏伐匈奴，其辞曰： 《司马法》曰： 国虽大，好战必亡；天下虽平，忘战必危。 
现代文：他上书谈了九项事情，其中八项是关于律令问题；另外一项是谏止征伐匈奴，他写道： 《司马法》说： 国家虽大，喜好战争必定灭亡；天下虽太平，忘掉战事必定危险。 
English: In his letter, he talked about nine things, eight of which were about the issue of the ritsuryo code; the other was to stop the conquest of the Xiongnu. He wrote: "The Sima Law says: Although the country is large, if it likes war, it will certainly perish; although the world is peaceful, forgetting war will certainly be dangerous.

古文：夫怒者逆德也，兵者凶器也，争者末节也。
现代文：愤怒是背逆之德，兵器是不祥之物，争斗是最末的节操。
English: Anger is a traitorous virtue, weapons are ominous, and fighting is the last defense.

古文：夫务战胜，穷武事者，未有不悔者也。
现代文：那些追求战争胜利、穷兵黩武的人，没有不悔恨的。
English: Those who pursue the victory of war and those who are poor in arms are not without regret.

古文：昔秦皇帝并吞战国，务胜不休，欲攻匈奴。
现代文： 从前，秦始皇吞并列国，求胜的欲望没有止休，就想攻打匈奴。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Shihuang tried to attack the Xiongnu after he had annexed other countries and his desire for victory had not abated.

古文：李斯谏曰： 不可。
现代文：李斯劝阻说： 不可这样做。
English: Li Si dissuaded him, saying, "You can't do that.

古文：夫匈奴，无城郭之居，委积之守，迁徙鸟举，难得而制也。
现代文：匈奴没有城郭等定居的处所，没有储藏物资钱粮的仓库，迁徙不定，如同鸟飞，很难得以制服它。
English: The Xiongnu do not have a place to settle such as a castle, and do not have a warehouse to store goods, money, and grain. Their migration is uncertain, like a bird's flight, and it is difficult to subdue them.

古文：轻兵深入，粮食必绝；踵粮以行，重不及事。
现代文：军队轻装深入敌境，粮食供应必定断绝；军队携带军粮行动，就会因负重而赶不上战机。
English: If light troops are sent deep into the Huns, then the food supply will certainly be cut off; if they march into the army with a lot of grain, the material will be heavy and difficult to transport, and it will not help.

古文：得其地，不足以为利也；得其民，不可调而守也；胜必杀之，非民父母也；靡敝中国，快心匈奴，非长策也。 
现代文：夺得匈奴的土地，不足以为国家带来好处；俘获匈奴的民众，不可调教，也无法设置官员进行管理；如果战胜匈奴，只能杀掉他们，而这又不是为民父母的明君该有的行为；使中原地区疲敝，使匈奴人快意，这不是正确的决策。 
English: Conquering the land of the Xiongnu is not enough to bring benefits to the country; the people who captured the Xiongnu cannot be trained, nor can officials be set up to manage them; if the Xiongnu are defeated, they can only be killed, and this is not the behavior of a ruler who should be the parents of the people; it is not the right decision to make the Central Plains region tired and the Huns happy.

古文：秦皇帝不听，遂使蒙恬将兵攻胡，辟地千里，以河为境。
现代文：泰始皇不听从劝告，就派蒙恬率军进攻匈奴，开辟疆土千里，与匈奴以黄河河套划界。
English: The First Emperor of Qin did not accept Li Si's suggestion and sent Meng Yao and his army to attack the Xiongnu, opening up thousands of miles of land, with the Yellow River as the national border.

古文：地固沮泽、咸卤，不生五谷。
现代文：这一带本来就是湖泊和盐碱地，不能种植五谷。
English: Originally, this area was made up of lakes and salt marshes, and it was not possible to grow crops.

古文：然后发天下丁男以守北河，暴兵露师十有馀年，死者不可胜数，终不能逾河而北，是岂人众不足，兵革不备哉？
现代文：后来，秦始皇又调集全国成年男子去戍守北河，军队暴露在外十多年，死者多得无法统计，终究不能越过黄河占领北部地区，这难道是因为兵力不足、装备不齐吗？
English: Later, Qin Shihuang also mobilized the adult men of the whole country to defend the Beihe River. The army was exposed for more than ten years, and the dead were too many to count. After all, they could not cross the Yellow River to occupy the northern region. Is this because of insufficient troops and inadequate equipment?

古文：其势不可也。
现代文：是形势不允许啊。
English: No, the situation doesn't allow it!

古文：又使天下蜚刍、啮輓粟，起于东陲、琅邪负海之郡，转输北河，率三十钟而致一石。
现代文：又使天下百姓急速地用车船运输粮草，从东、琅邪等沿海郡县开始，运输到北河，大约起运时的三十锺粮食，运到目的地仅存一石。
English: It also caused the people of the world to rapidly transport grain and grass by car and ship, starting from the coastal counties and counties such as Dongzhou and Shiyan, and transported to the Beihe River, about 30 tons of grain at the start of transportation, and only one stone remained at the destination.

古文：男子疾耕，不足于粮饷，女子纺绩，不足于帷幕，百姓靡敝，孤寡老弱不能相养，道路死者相望，盖天下始畔秦也。
现代文：男子拼命耕作，收获不够缴纳军粮，女子纺线绩麻，织出的布帛满足不了军营帐蓬的需要，百姓倾家荡产，无法养活孤寡老弱，路上死去的人一个接一个，天下人就从此开始反叛秦朝了。
English: The men worked hard at farming, but the harvest was not enough to pay for military rations. The women spun hemp, and the cloth they wove could not meet the needs of the military camp tents. The people lost their homes and could not feed the old and weak. People died one after another on the road. The people of the world began to rebel against the Qin Dynasty.

古文：及至高皇帝，定天下，略地于边，闻匈奴聚于代谷之外而欲击之。
现代文： 等到高皇帝平定天下，到边境巡行，听说匈奴人集中在代谷的外面，就想去进攻他们。
English: When Emperor Gao had pacified the country and was on a border patrol, he heard that the Huns were concentrated outside the valley and wanted to attack them.

古文：御史成进谏曰： 不可。
现代文：有位名叫成的御史进言劝阻说： 不能这样做。
English: "Do not attack the Xiongnu," he said.

古文：夫匈奴之性，兽聚而鸟散，从之如搏影。
现代文：匈奴人的习性，忽而如同野兽聚集，忽而如同鸟类分飞，追赶他们就好象与影子搏斗一样，无从下手。
English: The habits of the Xiongnu, like beasts gathering and birds flying, chasing them like catching shadows.

古文：今以陛下盛德攻匈奴，臣窃危之。 
现代文：现在，凭陛下这样的盛大功德，却要去攻击匈奴，我私下认为很危险。 
English: Now, to attack the Huns on the strength of his majesty's virtue, I secretly think it is dangerous.

古文：高帝不听，遂北至于代谷，果有平城之围。高皇帝盖悔之甚，乃使刘敬往结和亲之约，然后天下忘干戈之事。
现代文：高皇帝不听从他的意见，于是就向北进军到达代谷，果然发生了被围困在平城的事变，高皇帝大概非常后悔，才派遣刘敬前往匈奴，缔结和亲的盟约，从此之后全国上下就忘记了战争的事情了。
English: Emperor Gao did not listen to his advice, so he marched north to Dadaigu, and the incident of being besieged in Pingcheng really happened. Emperor Gao probably regretted very much before sending Liu Jing to the Xiongnu to conclude a peace treaty. From then on, the whole country forgot about the war.

古文： 夫匈奴难得而制，非一世也；行盗侵驱，所以为业也，天性固然。
现代文： 匈奴难以制服，不是这一代才如此。侵犯城邑劫掳人畜，这是他们的生业，天性本来就是这样。
English: The Xiongnu are hard to subdue, and not just this generation. Invading towns and kidnapping people and animals is their livelihood, it's in their nature.

古文：上及虞、夏、殷、周，固弗程督，禽兽畜之，不属为人。
现代文：远到虞、厦殷、周统治时期，本来就不对匈奴征收贡赋、实施监督，只把他们视为禽兽，不当做人来看待。
English: As far back as the reigns of Yu, Xiayin and Zhou, the Xiongnu were not subject to tribute or supervision. They were regarded as animals and not as human beings.

古文：夫上不观虞、夏、殷、周之流，而下循近世之失，此臣之所大忧，百姓之所疾苦也。 
现代文：不向上回顾虞、夏、殷、周的传统，却向下沿用近代的失误，这是我所最忧虑的事，也是天下百姓所疾苦的事。 
English: Not looking up to the tradition of Yu, Xia, Yin and Zhou, but following the mistakes of modern times, this is what worries me the most, and it is also what the people around the world are suffering from.

古文：严安上书曰： 今天下人民，用财侈靡，车马、衣裘、宫室，皆竞修饰，调五声使有节族，杂五色使有文章，重五味方丈于前，以观欲天下。
现代文：严安上书说： 现在全国的百姓，花费钱财，生活奢侈腐化，车辆马匹、衣服裘装、房屋住宅竟相修饰得富丽堂皇，谐调音乐使它有节奏，混杂颜色使它色彩斑斓，美味佳肴广列于前，用来显示自己的欲望。
English: Yan'an wrote: "Nowadays, the people of the whole country are spending money and living a luxurious and corrupt life. Vehicles, horses, clothes, houses and residences have been decorated magnificently. Harmonious music makes it rhythmic, mixed colors make it colorful, and delicious dishes are widely used to show their desires.

古文：彼民之情，见美则愿之，是教民以侈也；侈而无节，则不可赡，民离本而徼末矣。
现代文：那些百姓的本性，见到漂亮的东西就要仿效，这是用奢侈来引导民众；追求奢侈而无节制，就无法满足欲望，百姓就会脱离农桑本业而去从事工商末业了。
English: The nature of those people is that when they see something beautiful, they want to imitate it. This is using luxury to guide the people. If they pursue luxury without restraint, they will not be able to satisfy their desires. The people will leave the main industry of agriculture and mulberry and engage in the secondary industry of industry and commerce.

古文：末不可徒得，故缙绅者不惮为诈，带剑者夸杀人以矫夺，而世不知愧，是以犯法者众。
现代文：工商末业的财利不能凭空飞来，所以穿官服的不忌惮作欺诈的事，带剑的竟相杀人以取豪夺，对这样的行径，世人不知羞愧，因此犯法的人很多。
English: Money and profit cannot be made out of thin air, which is why those who wear official uniforms are not afraid to commit fraud, and those who carry swords actually kill each other to take plunder. The world is not ashamed of such actions, so there are many people who break the law.

古文：臣愿为民制度以防其淫，使贫富不相燿以和其心；心志定，则盗贼消，刑罚少，阴阳和，万物蕃也。
现代文：我希望结民众设立制度以约束他们的过度欲望，使富有者不向贫困者夸耀以调和人心；人心安定了，盗贼就会消除，少用刑罚，阴阳和调，万物就会茂盛。
English: I hope to unite the people to establish a system to restrain their excessive desires, so that the rich do not boast to the poor to reconcile people's hearts; when people's hearts are stable, thieves will be eliminated, less use of punishment, yin and yang and harmony, everything will flourish.

古文：昔秦王意广心逸，欲威海外，使蒙恬将兵以北攻胡，又使尉屠睢将楼船之士以攻越。
现代文：过去，秦始皇踌躇满志，贪得无厌，想向海外显示威力，派蒙恬率兵向北进攻匈奴，又派尉屠睢率领水军将士去进攻越人。
English: In the past, Emperor Qin Shi Huang, full of ambition and insatiable greed, wanted to show his power to the outside world. He sent Meng Rong and his army to attack the Huns in the north, and also sent Lieutenant Tu Rong and his sailors to attack the Viets.

古文：当是时，秦祸北构于胡，南挂于越，宿兵于无用之地，进而不得退。
现代文：在这个时期，秦朝兵连祸结，北方与匈奴交战，南方和越人难分胜负，军队驻扎在无用之地，只能前进而无法退回。
English: During this period, the Qin Dynasty soldiers were constantly plagued by misfortune, the North was at war with the Xiongnu, the South and the Viets were inseparable, the army was stationed in a useless place, and could only advance but could not return.

古文：行十馀年，丁男被甲，丁女转输，苦不聊生；自经于道树，死者相望。
现代文：历时十多年，成年男子当兵打仗，成年女子运送粮饷，生活悲惨，活不下去，纷纷在路边树上上吊自杀，死者一个接一个。
English: It lasted for more than ten years. Adult men fought as soldiers, adult women transported grain sacks, their lives were miserable and they could not go on living. They hanged themselves on the roadside trees one after another.

古文：及秦皇帝崩，天下大畔，灭世绝祀，穷兵之祸也。
现代文：等到秦始皇死，天下反叛，秦被灭了后代，绝了祭祀，这是穷兵黩武产生的祸害啊。
English: When Qin Shihuang died, the whole country rebelled, Qin's descendants were exterminated, and sacrifices were abolished. This is the scourge of the poor soldiers.

古文：故周失之弱，秦失之强，不变之患也。
现代文：所以，周朝失之于衰弱，秦朝失之于强暴，都是不改变国政所产生的恶果。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty's fault is weak, and the Qin Dynasty's fault is strong, both of which are unable to adapt to the times and have caused the disaster of losing the country.

古文：今徇西夷，朝夜郎，降羌、僰，略薉州，建城邑，深入匈奴，燔其龙城，议者美之。此人臣之利，非天下之长策也。 
现代文：现在，朝廷要征服西夷地区，诱使夜郎入朝称臣，降服羌人和人，攻取州，建筑城邑，进军匈奴腹地，烧毁匈奴的龙城，议事的大臣们都赞美这些行动和计划；但这只能让主持其事的大臣得到好处，对于国家来说不是好计策。 
English: Now, the imperial court wants to conquer the Xiyi region, lure Yelang into the imperial court to become a vassal, subjugate Han people and people, capture provinces, build cities and towns, march into the Hun hinterland, and burn down the Hun dragon city. The deliberating ministers all praise these actions and plans; but this can only benefit the minister presiding over the matter, and is not a good strategy for the country.

古文：徐乐上书曰： 臣闻天下之患，在于土崩，不在瓦解，古今一也。
现代文：徐乐上书武帝，说： 我听说天下的最大祸害，在于土崩，不在于瓦解，古今都是如此。
English: Xu Le wrote to Emperor Wu, saying: I have heard that the greatest evil in the world lies in landslides, not in collapse, and this has been the case from ancient times to the present.

古文：何谓土崩？
现代文： 什么叫 土崩 ？
English: What is a landslide?

古文：秦之末世是也。
现代文：秦朝末年就是土崩。
English: This was the situation at the end of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：陈涉无千乘之尊、疆土之地，身非王公、大人、名族之后，乡曲之誉，非有孔、曾、墨子之贤，陶硃、猗顿之富也；然起穷巷，奋棘矜，偏袒大呼，天下从风。
现代文：陈涉没有千乘之主的尊位，没有一尺的封地，本身不是王公贵人名门望族的后代，没有获得乡里的赞誉，没有孔子、曾子、墨子那样的贤德，也没有陶朱公和猗顿那样的财富；但是，他起自贫民居住的街巷，举起长戟，袒露一个臂膀大呼，天下人闻风响应。
English: Chen Wanzhou did not have the high rank of the Lord of the Thousand Riders, did not have a foot of fief, was not a descendant of a prince or a famous family, did not receive praise from the countryside, did not have the virtues of Confucius, Zengzi and Mozi, and did not have the wealth of Tao Zhu Gong and Xudong. However, he started from the streets where the poor lived, raised his long shovel and shouted loudly, and the whole world responded to the wind.

古文：此其故何也？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：由民困而主不恤，下怨而上不知，俗已乱而政不修。
现代文：这是由于民众困苦而君主却不加体恤，臣民怨恨而君主却毫不知情，社会风俗已乱而国家政治却仍不进行整治。
English: This is due to the fact that the people are suffering and the monarch is not sympathetic, the subjects are resentful and the monarch does not know anything, the social customs are in disarray and the national politics are still not rectified.

古文：此三者，陈涉之所以为资也，此之谓土崩。
现代文：这三条，正是陈涉用来起事的资本，这就是所说的土崩。
English: These three points are the capital used to start the uprising, which is the so-called landslide.

古文：故曰天下之患在乎土崩。何谓瓦解？
现代文：所以说天下最大的祸害在于土崩。 什么叫 瓦解 ？
English: Therefore, the biggest scourge in the world is landslide. What is collapse?

古文：吴、楚、齐、赵之兵是也。
现代文：吴、楚、齐、赵的举兵叛乱就是瓦解。
English: The military rebellion of Wu, Chu, Qi and Zhao is just like this.

古文：七国谋为大逆，号皆称万乘之君，带甲数十万，威足以严其境内，财足以劝其士民；然不能西攘尺寸之地，而身为禽于中原者，此其故何也？
现代文：七国之主图谋叛乱，他们都号称是拥有万辆战车的诸侯王，有数十万的军队，其威力足以控制封地全境，其财力足以奖励他属下的官吏百姓；但是他们却不能向西夺取国家一尺一寸的土地，反而在中原地区被俘虏，这是什么原因呢？
English: The rulers of the Seven Kingdoms are plotting a rebellion. They all claim to be princes and kings with tens of thousands of chariots, hundreds of thousands of troops, whose power is sufficient to control the entire territory of the fief, and whose financial resources are sufficient to reward his subordinate officials and people. However, they cannot seize one inch of the country's land to the west, but are captured in the Central Plains. What is the reason?

古文：非权轻于匹夫而兵弱于陈涉也。
现代文：并不是因为他们的权势比一个平民轻，也不是因为他们的兵力比陈涉弱。
English: It's not because they have less power than a civilian, or because their forces are weaker than Chen's.

古文：当是之时，先帝之德未衰而安土乐俗之民众，故诸侯无竟外之助，此之谓瓦解。
现代文：在那时，先帝的德政影响还没有衰减，而且安土乐俗的百姓很多，所以诸侯得不到本人封地之外的援助，这就是所说的瓦解。
English: At that time, the influence of the former emperor's German politics had not yet waned, and there were still many people who enjoyed the customs of Anatolia, so the lords could not receive assistance outside of their own fiefdoms. This is the so-called collapse.

古文：故曰天下之患不在瓦解。
现代文：所以说天下最大的祸害不在于瓦解。
English: Therefore, the world's greatest scourge is not disintegration.

古文：此二体者，安危之明要，贤主之一留意而深察也。
现代文： 这两个问题，是关系国家安危的关键，贤明的君主对此是应该注意并且认真观察的。
English: These two questions are the key to the security of the country, and wise monarchs should pay attention to them and carefully observe them.

古文：间者，关东五谷数不登，年岁未复，民多穷困，重之以边境之事，推数循理而观之，民宜有不安其处者矣。
现代文： 近来，函谷关以东地区粮食连年歉收，年景没有恢复正常，百姓大多穷困，再加上还要承担边境战争的负担，按照规律和常理来看，百姓之中应该出现不安分守己的人了。
English: Recently, the grain harvest in the area east of Hakodate has been poor for years, the economic situation has not returned to normal, and the people are mostly poor. In addition, they have to bear the burden of the border war. According to the law and common sense, there should be people among the people who are uneasy and keep to themselves.

古文：不安，故易动；易动者，土崩之势也。
现代文：不安分守己，就容易动乱；百姓容易动乱，这就是土崩的局势。
English: Anxious to keep to themselves, they are prone to turmoil; the people are prone to turmoil, this is a landslide situation.

古文：故贤主独观万化之原，明于安危之机，修之庙堂之上而销未形之患也，其要期使天下无土崩之势而已矣。 
现代文：所以贤明的君主只注意观察万物变化的根本原因，明了安危的关键，治理于朝廷之上，就能消除尚未完全形成的祸患，其要领不过是设法使天下没有土崩的局势罢了。 
English: Therefore, a wise monarch only pays attention to observing the root causes of changes in all things, understands the key to safety, and rules over the court, which can eliminate the disaster that has not yet fully formed. Its essence is nothing more than trying to prevent the world from a landslide situation.

古文：书奏，天子召见三人，谓曰： 公等皆安在，何相见之晚也！ 
现代文：奏书上呈武帝，武帝召见了他们三人，对他们说： 诸位原来都在何处，我们为什么相见得这样晚！ 
English: Emperor Wu was mentioned in the report. Emperor Wu summoned the three of them and said to them, "Where have you all been? Why did we meet so late?

古文：皆拜为郎中。
现代文：武帝都把他们任命为郎中。
English: Emperor Wu appointed them as his retainers.

古文：主父偃尤亲幸，一岁中凡四迁，为中大夫。大臣畏其口，赂遗累千金。
现代文：主父偃更受武帝信任宠幸，一年之内共升了四次官，担任了中大夫；大臣们都害怕主父偃贿崐赂赠送他的财物总计有千金。
English: His father Zhai was even more favored by Emperor Wu's trust. Within a year, he was promoted to four vice-ministers and served as a middle doctor. The ministers were all afraid of his father Zhai and bribed him to give away his property, which totaled thousands of yuan.

古文：或谓偃曰： 太横矣！ 
现代文：有人对主父偃说： 您太蛮横了！ 
English: Someone said to Master Zou: You are too arrogant!

古文：偃曰： 吾生不五鼎食，死即五鼎烹耳！ 
现代文：主父偃说： 我如果活着享受不到列五鼎进餐的贵人生活，死时就受五鼎烹的酷刑好了！ 
English: Master Zou said, "If I don't live long enough to enjoy the noble life of dining in the Five-Star Dining Room, I'd rather be tortured by the Five-Star Dining Room when I die!"

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元朔二年冬，赐淮南王几杖，毋朝。
现代文：元朔二年冬季，武帝赏赐淮南王刘安几案和手杖，恩准他不必来京朝见。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Yuan Shuo, Emperor Wu rewarded the King of Huainan, Liu An, with several cases and a cane, granting him the grace of not having to come to Beijing to see the imperial court.

古文：主父偃说上曰： 古者诸侯不过百里，强弱之形易制。
现代文：主父偃劝说武帝道： 古代诸侯的封地不超过方圆百里，朝廷强地方弱的这种格局，容易控制。
English: Master Zou advised Emperor Wu: The fiefdoms of ancient princes did not exceed a hundred miles in circumference, and this pattern, where the imperial court was strong and the provinces weak, was easy to control.

古文：今诸侯或连城数十，地方千里，缓则骄奢，易为淫乱，急则阻其强而合从以逆京师。以法割削之，则逆节萌起，前日晁错是也。
现代文：现在的诸侯有的连城数十座，封地方圆千里，朝廷控制较宽时，他们就骄横奢侈，容易做出乱的事情，朝廷控制一紧时，他们就会凭借自身的强大而联合起来反叛朝廷；如果用法令来分割削弱他们，就会产生叛乱的苗头。
English: Some of today's lords are connected to dozens of cities, and their fiefdoms stretch for thousands of miles. When the imperial court's control is broad, they are arrogant and extravagant, and prone to disorder. When the imperial court's control is tight, they will unite to rebel against the imperial court by virtue of their own strength. If they are divided and weakened by decrees, there will be the seeds of rebellion.

古文：今诸侯子弟或十数，而适嗣代立，馀虽骨肉，无尺地之封，则仁孝之道不宣。
现代文：以前晁错推行削藩政策而导致吴楚七国叛乱就是这种情况。现在诸侯王的子弟有的多达十几人，而只有嫡长子继承王位，其他人虽然也是诸侯王的亲生骨肉，却不能享有一尺的封地，这就使得仁孝之道不明显了。
English: This was the case in the past when the erroneous implementation of the policy of reducing the number of feudal domains led to the rebellion of the seven states of Wuchu. Nowadays, there are as many as a dozen sons and daughters of princes, but only the eldest son inherits the throne. Although others are the flesh and blood of princes, they cannot enjoy a foot of fief, which makes the way of benevolence and filial piety not obvious.

古文：愿陛下令诸侯得推恩分子弟，以地侯之，彼人人喜得所愿。上以德施，实分其国，不削而稍弱矣。 
现代文：希望陛下命令诸侯王可以把朝廷给他的恩惠推广到其他子弟的身上，用本封国的土地封他们做侯，他们人人都为得到了希望得到的东西而欢喜；陛下用的是推行恩德的方法，实际上却分割了诸侯的封国领地，朝廷没有采用削夺的政策，而王国却逐渐衰弱了。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will order the princes to extend the favors given to him by the court to his other sons, and use the land of the fief to make them princes. They are all happy to get what they hope to get. His Majesty used the method of promoting benevolence, but actually divided the fief territory of the princes. The court did not adopt the policy of cutting and grabbing, but the kingdom gradually weakened.

古文：上从之。
现代文：武帝听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：春，正月，诏曰： 诸侯王或欲推私恩分子弟邑者，令各条上，朕且临定其号名。 
现代文：春季，正月，武帝下诏说： 诸侯王中有想推广自己所享受的恩惠，分封领地给子弟的，命令各自一一奏报，朕准备亲自给他们确定封邑的名号。 
English: In the spring, in the first month, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying, "If any of the princes and kings want to promote the favors they have enjoyed and parcel out territories to their children, I order them to report to me one by one. I am ready to personally determine the names of the fiefs for them."

古文：于是籓国始分，而子毕侯矣。
现代文：从此之后，诸侯王国开始被分割，而诸侯王的子弟们都成了侯了。
English: From then on, the vassal kingdoms began to be divided up, and the sons of the vassal kings became vassals.

古文：匈奴入上谷、渔阳，杀略吏民千馀人。
现代文：匈奴入侵上谷郡、渔阳郡，杀害和掳掠官吏百姓一千多人。
English: The Huns invaded Shanggu County and Yuyang County, killing and kidnapping more than a thousand officials and civilians.

古文：遣卫青、李息出云中以西至陇西，击胡之楼烦、白羊王于河南，得胡首虏数千，牛羊百馀万，走白羊、楼烦王，遂取河南地。
现代文：武帝派遣卫青、李息从云中郡出击，向西一直打到陇西，在黄河以南进攻匈奴的一方的楼烦王和白羊王，获得匈奴首级和俘虏数千，夺得牛羊一百多万头，赶走了白羊王和楼烦王，于是就夺取了黄河以南地区。
English: Emperor Wu sent Wei Qing and Li Xixi to attack from Yunzhong County, and they fought westward all the way to Shaanxi. They attacked the Huns south of the Yellow River on the side of Lou Tuo Wang and Baiyang Wang, captured thousands of Hun heads and prisoners, captured more than one million cattle and sheep, drove away Baiyang Wang and Lou Tuo Wang, and then seized the area south of the Yellow River.

古文：诏封青为长平侯，青校尉苏建、张次公皆有功，封建为平陵侯，次公为岸头侯。
现代文：武帝下诏封卫青为长平侯；卫青的校尉苏建和张次功，都立了军功，武帝封苏建为平陵侯，封张次功为岸头侯。
English: Emperor Wu decreed that Wei Qing should be awarded the title of Changping Hou (長平侯); Wei Qing's lieutenant Su Jian and Zhang Zikong were both awarded the title of Military Merit; Emperor Wu awarded Su Jian the title of Pingling Hou (平陵侯) and Zhang Zikong the title of Kishi Tou Hou (岸头侯).

古文：主父偃言： 河南地肥饶，外阻河，蒙恬城之以逐匈奴，内省转输戍漕，广中国，灭胡之本也。 
现代文：主父偃说： 黄河以南地区，土地肥沃富饶，对外有黄河天险为屏障，蒙恬当年在此地修筑城池以驱逐匈奴，对内节省了转运输送屯戍漕运的人力物力，又扩大了中国的疆域，这是消灭匈奴的根本方法。 
English: Father Zou said: In the area south of the Yellow River, the land is fertile and rich, and the Yellow River is a natural barrier to the outside world. Meng Zou built a castle here to expel the Xiongnu, saving manpower and material resources for domestic transportation, and expanding China's territory. This is the fundamental way to eliminate the Xiongnu.

古文：上下公卿议，皆言不便。
现代文：武帝把他的意见交给公卿大臣讨论；大家都说不便利。
English: Emperor Wu gave his opinion to the nobles and ministers for discussion; everyone said it was not convenient.

古文：上竟用偃计，立朔方郡，使苏建兴十馀万人筑朔方城，复缮故秦时蒙恬所为塞，因河为固。
现代文：武帝终究还是采用了主父偃的计谋，设置了朔方郡，派遣苏建征调十多万民夫修筑朔方城，又修缮原秦王朝时期蒙恬所建造的要塞，利用黄河天险作屏障。
English: In the end, Emperor Wu adopted the strategy of his father Zhai and set up Shuofang County, dispatched more than 100,000 people from the Soviet Union to build Shuofang City, and repaired the fortress built by Mengye during the original Qin Dynasty, using the Yellow River as a barrier.

古文：转漕甚远，自山东咸被其劳，费数十百巨万，府库并虚；汉亦弃上谷之斗辟县造阳地以予胡。
现代文：水陆运输的路程十分遥远，自崤山以东的地区，人民都蒙受运输的劳苦，耗资高达数十百万万，钱府粮库被支付一空。汉朝还放弃了上谷郡所辖的与匈奴犬牙交错的僻远县份造阳县，把这片土地给了匈奴。
English: The distance of land and water transportation is very far. Since the area east of Lushan Mountain, the people have all suffered the labor of transportation, costing up to tens of millions of yuan, and the Qianfu granary has been paid in full. The Han Dynasty also abandoned the remote counties under the jurisdiction of Shanggu County and Zhaoyang County, which are intertwined with the Huns, and gave this land to the Huns.

古文：三月，乙亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：三月，乙亥晦，发生日食。
English: In March, on the eve of the Chinese New Year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：夏，募民徙朔方十万口。
现代文：夏季，汉朝廷招募了十万百姓迁居朔方郡。
English: In the summer, 100,000 people were recruited to migrate to Shuofang County.

古文：主父偃说上曰： 茂陵初立，天下豪桀，并兼之家，乱众之民，皆可徙茂陵；内实京师，外销奸猾，此所谓不诛而害除。 
现代文：主父偃对武帝说： 茂陵邑刚刚设立，天下有名的豪强人物、兼并他人的富家大户、鼓励大众动乱的人，都可以迁移到茂陵邑居住；这样对内充实了京师，对外消除了奸邪势力，这就是所说的不用诛杀就消除了祸害。 
English: Master Zou said to Emperor Wu, "Mouring-eup has just been established. Famous and powerful people in the world, rich families who annex others, and people who encourage public turmoil can all migrate to live in Mouring-eup. This has enriched the Beijing division internally and eliminated the evil forces externally. This is what is called eliminating the scourge without fighting.

古文：上从之，徙郡国豪杰及訾三百万以上于茂陵。
现代文：武帝听从了他的意见，迁徙各郡国的豪强人物和财产超过三百万钱以上的富户到茂陵邑居住。
English: Emperor Wu listened to his advice and moved all the powerful people and rich families with assets of more than three million yuan to live in Muryeong-eup.

古文：轵人郭解，关东大侠也，亦在徙中。
现代文：轵县人郭解，是函谷关以东地区的著名侠士，也在被迁徙之列。
English: Guo Jie, a resident of Handan County, is a famous knight in the area east of the Hakodate Pass. He is also among those being relocated.

古文：卫将军为言： 郭解家贫，不中徙。 
现代文：卫将军替郭解说好话： 郭解家中贫困，不合迁徙的标准。 
English: General Wei Qing spoke for him: Guo is a poor family man and does not belong to the migration target.

古文：上曰： 解，布衣，权至使将军为言，此其家不贫。 
现代文：武帝说： 郭解是平民，他的权势大到使将军替他说情，这证明他家不穷。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Guo Xie is a commoner, and his power is so great that he can make a general intercede for him, which proves that his family is not inexhaustible.

古文：卒徙解家。
现代文：终究迁徙了郭解全家。
English: Eventually, Guo Jie's entire family moved.

古文：解平生睚眦杀人甚众，上闻之，下吏捕治解，所杀皆在赦前。
现代文：郭解平生因被人瞪视之类的小事杀了许多人，武帝听说了，就下令司法官吏把郭解逮捕，立案审查，审查的结果说明，郭解所犯的罪都在颁布赦令之前。
English: In his lifetime, Guo De had killed many people for trifles such as being stared at. When Emperor Wu heard about this, he ordered judicial officials to arrest Guo De and file a case for review. The results of the review showed that Guo De's crimes were all committed before the pardon was issued.

古文：轵有儒生侍使者坐，客誉郭解，生曰： 解专以奸犯公法，何谓贤！ 
现代文：轵县有位儒生陪侍前来审案的使者坐，座中客人赞扬郭解，儒生就说： 郭解专门以奸邪触犯国法，怎么能说他贤能！ 
English: In Handan County, a Confucian scholar accompanied by an attendant came to sit with the emissary of the trial. The guests praised Guo De, and the Confucian scholar said: Guo De specifically violated the law of the country with treachery, how can he be said to be virtuous!

古文：解客闻，杀此生，断其舌。
现代文：郭解的门客听了这话，就杀死了这个儒生，并割去他的舌头。
English: When Guo Jie's disciple heard this, he killed the Confucian scholar and cut out his tongue.

古文：吏以此责解，解实不知杀者，杀者亦竟绝，莫知为谁。
现代文：审案官吏用这件事来责问郭解，郭解确实不知道是谁杀的人，杀人凶手到最后也没有查清是谁。
English: The investigating officers used this incident to interrogate Guo De. Guo De really did not know who killed the person, and the murderer did not find out who it was until the end.

古文：吏奏解无罪，公孙弘议曰： 解，布衣，为任侠行权，以睚眦杀人。解虽弗知，此罪甚于解杀之。当大逆无道。 
现代文：官吏向武帝奏报郭解无罪，公孙弘议论说： 郭解只是一个平民百姓，做行侠弄权的事情，看谁不顺眼就随意杀掉；轵县儒生的被杀，郭解虽然不知情，但这个罪比郭解亲手杀人还要大，应按大逆无道的罪名判决论罪。 
English: The officials reported to Emperor Wu that Guo De was not guilty, and Gongsun Hong said: Guo De is just a commoner, doing things to gain power, and killing anyone who is not pleasing to the eye; Guo De did not know about the killing of the Confucian students in Handan County, but this crime is even greater than Guo De's murder with his own hands, and it should be judged according to the crime of high treason.

古文：遂族郭解。
现代文：于是就把郭解灭族。
English: So he destroyed the Guo clan.

古文：班固曰：古者天子建国，诸侯立家，自卿大夫以至于庶人，各有等差，是以民服事其上而下无觊觎。
现代文：班固曰：古时候天子封立诸侯之国，诸侯封立大夫之家，从卿大夫直到平民百姓，各有等级，由于这个原因，所以百姓诚心侍奉他们的上司，而臣下没有觊觎篡夺之心。
English: Ban Gu said: In ancient times, the country was ruled by feudal lords, and the lords ruled the doctor's house, from the doctor to the common people, each with a grade. For this reason, the people sincerely served their superiors, and the vassals did not have the heart to usurp.

古文：周室既微，礼乐、征伐自诸侯出。桓、文之后，大夫世权，陪臣执命。
现代文：周王室衰微之后，礼乐制度和征伐命令从诸侯发出；到齐桓公、晋文公之后，大夫世代掌握国家权力，又发展到大夫的家臣执掌一国政令。
English: After the decline of the Zhou royal family, the ritual music system and conquest orders were issued by the lords; after King Qi Huan and King Jinwen, the doctor generation took control of state power, and it developed to the doctor's vassal holding a national decree.

古文：陵夷至于战国，合从连衡，繇是列国公子，魏人信陵，赵有平原，齐有孟尝，楚有春申，皆藉王公之势，竞为游侠，鸡鸣狗盗，无不宾礼。
现代文：逐渐发展到战国，出现了合纵连横，于是列国的公子，魏国有信陵君，赵国有平原君，齐国有孟尝君，楚国有春申君，他们都凭借王公的权势，争着延揽游侠，连鸡鸣狗盗之徒都受到嘉宾的礼待。
English: Gradually developed to the Warring States period, there was a series of mergers and acquisitions, so the princes of the countries, Wei state-owned Xinling Jun, Zhao state-owned Pingyuan Jun, Qi state-owned Mengyak Jun, Chu state-owned Chunshen Jun, all of them, by virtue of the authority of the prince, competed to recruit rangers, and even the chicken chirping dog thieves were treated with courtesy by the guests.

古文：而赵相虞卿，弃国捐君，以周穷交魏齐之厄；信陵无忌，窃符矫命，戮将专师，以赴平原之急；皆以取重诸侯，显名天下，扼腕而游谈者，以四豪为称首。
现代文：赵国的相虞卿，抛弃了国家和君主，去解救走投无路的朋友魏齐的厄运；信陵君魏无忌，偷盗兵符假传王命，杀害将领控制军队，用来解救平原君的危急；他们都因此增加了在诸侯中的影响，向天下人炫耀了名声，扼腕游说的人，把这四位豪杰当作最值得称道的人。
English: Zhao's brother-in-law Yuqing abandoned the country and the monarch to save his friend Wei Qi, who was in a desperate situation; Shuling's son Wei Mugu, stole the soldiers' emblems to fake the king's order, killed the generals to control the army, and used them to save Pingyuan's critical situation; all of them increased their influence among the princes, flaunted their fame to the world, and lobbied with their hands. These four heroes are considered the most praiseworthy people.

古文：于是背公死党之议成，守职奉上之义废矣。
现代文：于是，就形成了背叛国家而为私交献身的社会舆论，遵守职责侍奉君主的道义就被废弃了。
English: As a result, the agreement to betray the imperial court and form a private party became a reality, and the tradition of strictly observing public duties and honoring the monarch began to decline.

古文：及至汉兴，禁网疏阔，未知匡改也。
现代文：等到汉朝建国，法网不严密，不知道改正这种弊端。
English: By the time of the founding of the Han Dynasty, the legal network was not strict, and it was not known to correct this drawback.

古文：是故代相陈豨从车千乘，而吴濞、淮南皆招客以千数。外戚大臣魏其、武安之属竞逐于京师，布衣游侠剧孟、郭解之徒驰骛于阎闾、权行州域。力折公侯，众庶荣其名迹，觊而慕之。
现代文：所以代国的丞相陈用千辆车子做随从队伍，而吴王刘濞、淮南王刘安都招集宾客数以千计；外戚大臣魏其侯窦婴、武安侯田之类的人，在京师争权夺利，平民游侠剧孟、郭解之流，横行于乡里，称霸一方，其势力可挫败公卿王侯，众多的百姓都觉得这些人的名声事迹很光荣，向往羡慕他们。
English: Therefore, Chen, the acting prime minister of the country, used a thousand cars to make an escort team, while the king of Wu, Liu Bei, and the king of Huainan, Liu An, both invited thousands of guests; the maternal relatives of the ministers Wei Qihou Douyou and Wu'an Houtian fought for power and profit in Beijing, and the civilian ranger drama Meng and Guo Xie were rampant in the countryside, seeking hegemony, and their power could defeat the noble princes. Many people felt that these people's reputation and deeds were very glorious, and longed to envy them.

古文：虽其陷于刑辟，自与杀身成名，若季路、仇牧，死而不悔。
现代文：百姓即便是犯罪而陷入死地，自己却以杀身成名而引以自豪，就好象当年的季路、仇牧一样，到死也不后悔。
English: Even if the people commit crimes and fall into death, they are proud of themselves for killing themselves to become famous, just like the Qilu and Qiu Mu of that year, they do not regret it to death.

古文：故曾子曰： 上失其道，民散久矣。 
现代文：所以曾子说： 君主丧失原则，百姓离心离德已有很长时间了。 
English: Therefore, Zengzi said: People in high positions do not act according to the rules, and the people have long been alienated from morality.

古文：非明王在上，示之以好恶，齐之以礼法，民曷由知禁而反正乎！
现代文：如果没有贤明的君主在上，告知百姓什么行为是该受到表彰的，什么行为是应该摈弃的，并且用礼义法度去约束他们，那些百姓怎么能知道什么是违犯禁令的行为，从而改邪归正呢！
English: If there is no wise ruler above to tell the people what actions are to be commended, what actions are to be abandoned, and to restrain them with etiquette laws, how can those people know what is a violation of the ban, and thus turn evil into good!

古文：古之正法：五伯，三王之罪人也；而六国，五伯之罪人也。夫四豪者，又六国之罪人也。
现代文：按照古代的公正法则：春秋时期的五霸，是三代圣王的罪人；而战国时期争雄的六国，是五霸的罪人；至于说到信陵君等四豪，又是六国的罪人。
English: According to the ancient law of justice: the Five Dynasties in the Spring and Autumn Period are the sinners of the three generations of holy kings; and the Six Kingdoms in the Warring States Period are the sinners of the Five Dynasties; as for the Four Dynasties such as the Emperor Xinying, they are also the sinners of the Six Kingdoms.

古文：况于郭解之伦，以匹夫之细，窃杀生之权，其罪已不容于诛矣。
现代文：更何况象郭解之流的人，只不过是个渺小的平民百姓，却窃取生杀大权，他的罪恶已到了非杀不可的地步了。
English: Moreover, people like Guo Jie, who use their lowly status as civilians to steal the power to kill and kill, their sins are already intolerable.

古文：观其温良泛爱，振穷周急，谦退不伐，亦皆有绝异之姿。
现代文：再看郭解的温良博爱，接济穷困，解救急难，谦虚退让而不自夸，也都不同凡响。
English: However, looking back at the other side of them, they are gentle and friendly, helpful, humble and courteous, and also have an extraordinary style.

古文：惜乎，不入于道德，苟放纵于末流，杀身亡宗，非不幸也。
现代文：可惜啊，象郭解这般人物，不按照道德规范行事，却在行侠这种社会末流中苟且放纵，最后自己身死，全族被杀，这并非是不幸。
English: It is a pity that a person like Guo Xie, who did not act in accordance with moral norms, but indulged in the social undercurrent of chivalry, finally died and his whole family was killed. This is not a misfortune.

古文：荀悦论曰：世有三游，德之贼也：一曰游侠，二曰游说，三曰游行。
现代文：荀悦论曰：世上有三游，是破坏道德的奸贼：一是游侠，二是游说，三是游行。
English: Confucianism says: There are three kinds of traveling in the world, which are the traitors who destroy morality: one is the ranger, the second is lobbying, and the third is the parade.

古文：立气势，作威福，结私交以立强于世者，谓之游侠；饰辩辞，设诈谋，驰逐于天下以要时势者，谓之游说；色取仁以合时好，连党类，立虚誉以为权利者，谓之游行。
现代文：树立名气声望，作威作福，结交私人党羽，用来称强于世的，称为游侠；修饰辩辞，设置诡计诈谋，周游天下以操纵时势的，称为游说；和言悦色，以此迎合当世君主的喜好，结连党羽，扩大虚名以谋取权利，这样的人，称作游行。
English: He is called a knight-errant who establishes his fame and reputation, makes a show of virtue, and makes friends with private party members, in order to be regarded as stronger than the world; he is called a lobbyist who embellishes his arguments, sets up tricks and schemes, and travels around the world to manipulate the current situation; and he is called a marcher who speaks pleasantly in order to cater to the preferences of the current monarch, unite party members, and expand his false reputation in order to seek power.

古文：此三者，乱之所由生也；伤道害德，败法惑世，先王之所慎也。
现代文：这三类人，都是产生祸乱的根源；他们伤害道德，败坏法度，迷惑民心，所以先王慎重对待。
English: These three types of people are the root causes of evil; they hurt morals, corrupt laws, and confuse the people's hearts, so the first king treated them carefully.

古文：国有四民，各修其业。不由四民之业者，谓之奸民。
现代文：国家有士、农、工、商四种民众，各自从事自己的职业；凡是不从事这种种职业的人，称为奸民。
English: There are four kinds of people in the country, namely, soldiers, farmers, workers and merchants, each of whom is engaged in his own occupation; anyone who does not engage in this kind of occupation is called a traitor.

古文：奸民不生，王道乃成。
现代文：没有奸民，王道政治就实现了。
English: Without treacherous people, royal politics will be realized.

古文：凡此三游之作，生于季世，周、秦之末尤甚焉。
现代文：三游的形成，都出现在末世，周、秦两代的末世尤为严重。
English: The formation of the Three Kingdoms occurred in the end times, and the end times of the Zhou and Qin dynasties were particularly severe.

古文：上不明，下不正，制度不立，纲纪驰废；以毁誉为荣辱，不核其真；以爱憎为利害，不论其实；以喜怒为赏罚，不察其理。
现代文：君上不明，臣下不正，制度不立，纲纪废弛；把社会舆论的褒贬作为尊荣或困辱的依据，不去核实这些舆论的真假；根据好恶来决定利害关系，不考虑是否属实；根据喜怒决定奖赏或惩罚，不去分析其中的道理。
English: The ruler is unknown, the vassals are dishonest, the system is not established, and the discipline is useless; the praise and criticism of social public opinion is used as the basis for honor or humiliation, without verifying the truth or falsity of these public opinions; the interests are determined according to likes and dislikes, without considering whether it is true; the reward or punishment is determined according to emotions, without analyzing the reason.

古文：上下相冒，万事乖错，是以言论者计薄厚而吐辞，选举者度亲疏而举笔，善恶谬于众声，功罪乱于王法。
现代文：上下相互冒犯，万事全都混乱错误，因此，发表评论的人，看对方与自己交情的厚薄来决定怎样张口说话；负有推荐官员职责的人，估量对方和自己关系的亲疏而用笔写出推荐评语；善与恶的区分，错误地受众人评价的制约；功与罪的判定，也和国法的规定相矛盾。
English: Everything is confused and erroneous. Therefore, those who make comments decide how to open their mouths by looking at the thickness of the relationship between the other party and themselves; those who have the responsibility of recommending officials measure the closeness of the relationship between the other party and themselves and write a recommendation comment with a pen; the distinction between good and evil is wrongly restricted by the evaluation of the crowd; the judgment of merit and crime also contradicts the provisions of the national law.

古文：然则利不可以义求，害不可以道避也。
现代文：像这样的话，就不能遵循道义去谋求利益，也无法根据道义去避开祸害。
English: In such a case, it is impossible to seek benefits in accordance with morality, and it is impossible to avoid evils in accordance with morality.

古文：是以君子犯礼，小人犯法，奔走驰骋，越职僭度，饰华废实，竞趣时利。
现代文：所以君子违背礼义，小人触犯法律，奔走游说，越职侵权，破坏法度，追求浮华，摈弃实质，争着追求一时之利。
English: Therefore, the gentleman violates the etiquette, the villain violates the law, rushes to lobby, infringes on the duty, destroys the law, pursues the glitz, abandons the essence, and competes to pursue the momentary profit.

古文：简父兄之尊而崇宾客之礼，薄骨肉之恩而笃朋友之爱，忘修身之道而求众人之誉，割衣食之业以供飨宴之好，苞苴盈于门庭，聘问交于道路，书记繁于公文，私务众于官事，于是流俗成而正道坏矣。
现代文：轻视尊奉父兄的大义，而重视对待宾客的礼节，减少骨肉之间的亲恩，而加重朋友之间的情谊，忘记了自己修养的原则，而追求众人的赞誉，损伤衣食来源的农桑本业，用来满足盛宴豪饮的欲望，馈赠礼物的人挤满了门庭，探访问候的人在道路上随处可见，私人交往的书信比官府公文繁忙，处理的私事此官府公事还多，于是，流俗形成，而正道却衰败了。
English: They despise the great virtue of honoring one's father and brother, but attach importance to the etiquette of treating guests, reduce the kinship between the flesh and blood, but increase the friendship between friends, forget the principle of self-cultivation, but pursue the praise of many people, damage the agricultural mulberry industry, which is the source of food and clothing, and is used to satisfy the desire for feasting and drinking, gift-giving people are crowded in the courtyard, and people waiting for visitors can be seen everywhere on the road, private correspondence is busier than official correspondence, and there are more private affairs to deal with than official affairs. As a result, customs have formed, but

古文：是以圣王在上，经国序民，正其制度；善恶要于功罪而不淫于毁誉，听其言而责其事，举其名而指其实。
现代文：所以圣明的君主在位时，治理国家，整顿百姓，严明有关制度；善与恶的区分主要取决于是立功还是犯罪，而不受舆论毁誉的扰乱，听其言还得责求行事，举出名还要指出实。
English: Therefore, when a saintly monarch is on the throne, he governs the country, rectifies the people, and clarifies the relevant system; the distinction between good and evil mainly depends on whether it is meritorious or criminal, and is not disturbed by the discredit of public opinion. You have to listen to his words and ask him to act, and you have to point out the truth.

古文：故实不应其声者谓之虚，情不覆其貌者谓之伪，毁誉失其真者谓之诬，言事失其类者谓之罔。
现代文：所以，名不副实的称之为虚，表里不一的称之为伪，毁誉不符合实际的称之为诬，议论事情丧失原则的称之为罔。
English: Therefore, the name that does not match reality is called false, the one that does not match reality is called false, the one that does not match reality is called false, and the one that talks about the principle of losing things is called false.

古文：虚伪之行不得设，诬罔之辞不得行，有罪恶者无侥倖，无罪过者不忧惧，请谒无所行，货赂无所用，息华文，去浮辞，禁伪辩，绝淫智，放百家之纷乱，壹圣人之至道，养之以仁惠，文之以礼乐，则风俗定而大化成矣。
现代文：虚伪的行为不许出现，诬罔的言论不得流行，有罪恶的人不能侥幸逃避惩罚，没有罪恶过失的人不必担忧恐惧，私人请托处处碰壁，贿赂无人接受，抛弃浮华虚文，淘汰虚言巧语，禁止强词夺理，杜绝不正当的智谋，斥退百家之学的纷乱，统一于圣人的最高道术，用仁爱恩惠来教育百姓，再用礼乐制度加以修饰，就会风俗稳定而达到天下大治了。
English: Hypocritical behavior should not be allowed to appear, slanderous speech should not be popular, evildoers should not be able to escape punishment, those who have no sins and faults should not worry about fear, private requests should be met with obstacles everywhere, bribes are not accepted, flashy and fictitious literature should be abandoned, false and clever words should be eliminated, strong words should not be used, improper wit should be eliminated, the chaos of a hundred schools of thought should be rejected, the highest Taoism should be unified with that of saints, the people should be educated with benevolence and grace, and the liturgy system should be used to embellish, then the customs will be stable

古文：燕王定国与父康王姬奸，夺弟妻为姬，杀肥如令郢人。
现代文：燕王刘定国与他父亲康王的姬妾通奸，又夺走他弟弟的妻子做姬妾。
English: Yan Wang Liu Dingguo committed adultery with his father Kang Wang's concubine, and stole his brother's wife to be his concubine.

古文：郢人兄弟上书告之，主父偃从中发其事。
现代文：他杀了肥如县的县令郢人，郢人的兄弟上书朝廷告发了他的恶行，主父偃从中朝把这份弹劾文书转给外朝大臣。
English: He killed the county magistrate of Hiru County, and the brother of the magistrate reported his evil deed to the court in a letter. The father of the magistrate forwarded the impeachment document to the foreign minister.

古文：公卿请诛定国，上许之。
现代文：公卿议罪，请求武帝诛杀刘定国，武帝批准了。
English: The court noble pleaded guilty and asked Emperor Wu to kill Liu Dingguo, which Emperor Wu approved.

古文：定国自杀，国除。
现代文：刘定国自杀，封国被废除。
English: Liu Dingguo committed suicide, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：齐厉王次昌亦与其姊纪翁主通。
现代文：齐厉王刘次昌也与他姐姐纪翁主私通。
English: Liu Cichang, the king of Qi Li, also had an affair with his sister, Ji Wenzhu.

古文：主父偃欲纳其女于齐王，齐纪太后不许。
现代文：主父偃想把女儿嫁给齐王，齐王的母亲纪太后不同意。
English: King Qi's mother, Empress Dowager Ji, did not agree to her daughter's marriage.

古文：偃因言于上曰： 齐临菑十万户，市租千金，人众殷富，巨于长安，非天子亲弟、爱子，不得王此。
现代文：主父偃就趁机对武帝说： 齐都临是有十万户居民的大都会，市井商税高达千金，人口众多而且地方富袷，超过长安，不是天子的亲弟和得宠的儿子，不得在此地为王。
English: Master Zhai took the opportunity to say to Emperor Wu, "Qiduling is a metropolis with a hundred thousand residents, the municipal and commercial tax is as high as a thousand gold, the population is large and the place is rich, exceeding Chang'an. If you are not the younger brother of the son of heaven and the favored son, you must not be the king here.

古文：今齐王于亲属益疏，又闻其姊乱，请治之！ 
现代文：现在的齐王和陛下的血亲关系越发疏远了，又听说他和他姐姐通奸伦，请求查处齐王！ 
English: The blood relationship between the current King Qi and His Majesty is becoming more and more distant. I also heard that he and his sister committed adultery, and asked for an investigation of King Qi!

古文：于是帝拜偃为齐相，且正其事。
现代文：于是，武帝就任命主父偃担任齐国的相，并且负责审查齐王的问题。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu appointed the main father, Zou, as the minister of Qi, and was responsible for examining the issue of the king of Qi.

古文：偃至齐，急治王后宫宦者，辞及王；王惧，饮药自杀。
现代文：主父偃一到齐国，就立即捕审齐王后宫中的宦官，供词牵连到齐王；齐王害怕了，喝毒药自杀。
English: As soon as his father Zhai arrived in Qi, he immediately arrested and tried the eunuchs in the palace of the Queen of Qi, and the confession implicated the King of Qi; the King of Qi was afraid and drank poison to commit suicide.

古文：偃少时游齐及燕、赵，及贵，连败燕、齐。赵王彭祖惧，上书告主父偃受诸侯金，以故诸侯子弟多以得封者。
现代文：主父偃年轻时曾游历齐和燕、赵三国之地，等到他身居高位，接连毁灭了燕、齐两国，赵王刘彭祖害怕自己成为主父偃的下一个迫害的目标，就上书给武帝，告发主父偃接受诸侯贿赂的金钱，由于这个原因诸侯王的子弟大多得以封侯。
English: When Zhao Wang Liu Peng Zu was young, he traveled to the three countries of Qi, Yan and Zhao. When he was in a high position, he successively destroyed Yan and Qi. Zhao Wang Liu Peng Zu was afraid that he would become the next target of his father's persecution. He sent a letter to Emperor Wu, accusing his father of accepting money bribed by princes. For this reason, most of the sons of princes were able to be crowned as princes.

古文：及齐王自杀，上闻，大怒，以为偃劫其王令自杀，乃征下吏治。
现代文：等到武帝得知齐王自杀的消息，勃然大怒，认为是主父偃劫持齐王迫使他自杀，就把主父偃召回，逮捕下狱。
English: When Emperor Wu learned the news of King Qi's suicide, he flew into a rage, believing that it was his father Zhai who had kidnapped King Qi and forced him to commit suicide. He recalled his father Zhai, arrested him and sent him to prison.

古文：偃服受诸侯金，实不劫王令自杀。
现代文：主父偃承认他接受诸侯金钱贿赂，但实在没有强迫齐王自杀。
English: Master Zhai admitted that he accepted money and bribes from the princes, but he did not force King Qi to commit suicide.

古文：上欲勿诛，公孙弘曰： 齐王自杀，无后，国除为郡入汉，主父偃本首恶。
现代文：武帝想不杀主父偃，公孙弘说： 齐王自杀，没有后代继承，封国被废除改设为郡，领地归属朝廷。这件灭人之国的恶事，主父偃是罪魁。
English: Emperor Wu did not want to kill his master, Gongsun Hong said: King Qi committed suicide, there were no descendants to inherit, the fiefdom was abolished and converted into a county, and the territory belonged to the imperial court. This evil deed of destroying the country, the master, Gongsun Hong, was the chief culprit.

古文：陛下不诛偃，无以谢天下。 
现代文：陛下如果不杀主父偃，就没有办法向天下人谢罪道歉。 
English: Your Majesty, if you do not kill your master and father, there is no way to apologize to the world.

古文：乃遂族主父偃。
现代文：于是，武帝就把主父偃全家灭族。
English: As a result, the emperor killed his father and the rest of the family.

古文：张欧免，上欲以蓼侯孔臧为御史大夫。
现代文：张欧被罢免，武帝想任命蓼侯孔臧继任御史大夫。
English: Zhang Ou was ousted, and Emperor Wu wanted to appoint Gong Hou Kong Wei as his successor.

古文：臧辞曰： 臣世以经学为业，乞为太常，典臣家业，与从弟侍中安国纲纪古训，使永垂来嗣。 
现代文：孔臧辞谢说： 我家中世代以传习经学为业，请任命我担任太常，典掌我家世传的职业，与堂弟、侍中孔安国一道总结、归纳古人训诫，使儒学永传后世。 
English: Kong Yu Jie Xie said: My family's generation has been devoted to the study of Confucianism. Please appoint me as the Grand Master to take charge of my family's ancestral profession. Together with my cousin, the attendant Kong An Guo, I will summarize and summarize the teachings of the ancients, so that Confucianism will be passed down to future generations.

古文：上乃以臧为太常，其礼赐如三公。
现代文：武帝就任命孔臧为太常，对他的礼仪赏赐如同三公一样。
English: Emperor Wu then appointed Kong Xi as the Grand Master, and bestowed upon him the same etiquette as the Three Princes.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之下元朔三年
现代文：元朔三年
English: In the third year of the Yuan Shuo

古文：冬，匈奴军臣单于死，其弟左谷蠡王伊稚斜自立为单于，攻破军臣单于太子于单，于单亡降汉。
现代文：冬季，匈奴军臣单于死，他的弟弟左谷蠡王伊稚斜自立为单于，进攻并打败了军臣单于的太子於单，於单逃到汉朝来归降。
English: In the winter, the Xiongnu warlord Shan Shan died, and his younger brother, Zuogu Shao Wang Yizhicang, stood up for Shan Shan, attacked and defeated the warlord Shan Shan's prince Shan Shan, and Shan fled to the Han Dynasty to surrender.

古文：以公孙弘为御史大夫。
现代文：汉武帝任命公孙弘担任御史大夫。
English: Emperor Hanwu appointed Gongsunhong to the post of Grand Historian.

古文：是时，方通西南夷，东置苍海，北筑朔方之郡。
现代文：这时，朝廷正开通西南夷，在东方设置苍海郡，在北方修筑朔方郡的郡城。
English: At this time, the imperial court was opening the southwestern Yiwu, setting up Canghai County in the east, and building the county seat of Shuofang County in the north.

古文：公孙弘数谏，以为罢敝中国以奉无用之地，愿罢之。
现代文：公孙弘多次进谏，认为以中原地区疲惫不堪为代价，去供奉那些无用之地，得不偿失，请求废止这些举动。
English: Gongsun Hong repeatedly petitioned the Central Plains government, arguing that it was a waste of time and money to pay tribute to those useless places at the cost of the Central Plains' exhaustion, and requested that these actions be abolished.

古文：天子使硃买臣等难以置朔方之便；发十策，弘不得一。
现代文：武帝让朱买臣等人就设置朔方郡的便利，对公孙弘进行反驳，提了十个问题，公孙弘连一个也回答不了。
English: Emperor Wu asked Zhu Baichen and others to set up the convenience of Shuofang County to refute Gongsun Hong, and raised ten questions. Gongsun Honglian could not answer a single one.

古文：弘乃谢曰： 山东鄙人，不知其便若是，愿罢西南夷、苍海而专奉朔方。 
现代文：公孙弘就表示请罪说： 我是崤山以东的乡鄙之人，不知道设置朔方郡有这么多的好处，请求废止对西南夷、苍海地区的经营而集中力量经营朔方郡。 
English: Gongsun Hong pleaded guilty, saying: I am a villager from the east of Lushan. I did not know that setting up Shuofang County has so many benefits. I request to abolish the management of Southwest Yiwu and Canghai regions and concentrate on the management of Shuofang County.

古文：上乃许之，春，罢苍海郡。
现代文：武帝同意了他的请求。春季，罢废了苍海郡的建置。
English: Emperor Wu agreed to his request. In the spring, the construction of Canghai County was cancelled.

古文：弘为布被，食不重肉。
现代文：公孙弘用麻布做被子，一顿饭不摆设两种肉菜。
English: Gongsun Hongge cloth quilt, do not eat more than two kinds of meat and vegetables when eating.

古文：汲黯曰： 弘位在三公，奉禄甚多；然为布被，此诈也。 
现代文：汲黯说： 公孙弘高居三公之位，朝廷给他的俸禄很多；但是他用布做被子，这是骗人的把戏。 
English: "His great-grandson, Honggao, holds the position of the three great lords, and the court has given him a large salary; however, he uses cloth to make quilts, which is a trick.

古文：上问弘，弘谢曰： 有之。
现代文：武帝就此询问公孙弘，公孙弘谢罪说： 确有其事。
English: The emperor asked Gongsunhiro about it, and he apologized and said, "There is such a thing.

古文：夫九卿臣善者无过黯，然今日廷诘弘，诚中弘之病。
现代文：说到九卿当中与我关系好的，没有人超过汲黯了，可是今天他在朝廷之上质问我，确实切中我的问题。
English: When it comes to the nine nobles who have a good relationship with me, no one is better than Kyubey, but today he questioned me at the Imperial Court, and he really got to the heart of my problem.

古文：夫以三公为布被，与小吏无差，诚饰诈，欲以钓名，如汲黯言。
现代文：说到以三公的显赫富贵，而制作布被，与小官吏没有区别，这确实是矫饰做作，想借此沽名钓誉，正象汲黯所说的那样。
English: When it comes to making quilts with the illustrious wealth of the three princes, there is no difference between them and minor officials. This is indeed an affectation, and they want to take advantage of this to make a name for themselves, just as Kyubei said.

古文：且无汲黯忠，陛下安得闻此言！ 
现代文：况且，如果没有汲黯的忠直，陛下怎么能听到这些话！ 
English: Moreover, how could His Majesty have heard these words if he had not been so loyal!

古文：天子以为谦让，愈益厚之。
现代文：武帝认为公孙弘谦让，越发尊重他。
English: Emperor Wu thought that Gongsun Hong Qian was superior and respected him more and more.

古文：三月，赦天下。
现代文：三月，大赦天下。
English: In March, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：夏，四月，丙子，封匈奴太子于单为涉安侯，数月而卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙子，武帝封匈奴太子於单为涉安侯，过了几个月於单就死了。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu conferred the title of Xiongnu Crown Prince on Yu Shan as the vassal of Tang An, and a few months later, Yu Shan died.

古文：初，匈奴降者言： 月氏故居敦煌、祁连间，为强国，匈奴冒顿攻破之。
现代文：起初，匈奴归降朝廷的人说： 月氏原来居住在敦煌和祁连山之间，是一个强国，匈奴冒顿单于攻破了它。
English: At first, the people who said that the Xiongnu surrendered to the imperial court said: The Yue clan originally lived between Dunhuang and Qilian Mountain, it was a powerful country, and the Xiongnu dared to break it.

古文：老上单于杀月氏王，以其头为饮器。
现代文：老上单于杀了月氏国王，把他的头骨做成了饮酒的器皿。
English: Old Shangdan killed the Moon King and made his skull into a drinking vessel.

古文：馀众遁逃远去，怨匈奴，无与共击之。 
现代文：其余的月氏部众逃走到远方，怨恨匈奴，但没有人与他们联合去进攻匈奴。 
English: The rest of the Yue clan fled far away, resenting the Xiongnu, but no one joined them to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：上募能通使月氏者，汉中张骞以郎应募，出陇西，径匈奴中；单于得之，留骞十馀岁。
现代文：武帝就招募能出使月氏国的人。汉中人张骞以郎官的身份应募，从陇西郡出发，直接进入匈奴的腹地；匈奴单于捉住了张骞，把他拘留了十多年。
English: Emperor Wu recruited people who could dispatch envoys to the country of the Yue clan. Zhang Ye, a Han Chinese, responded to the recruitment as a retainer and set out from Shaanxi County and directly entered the hinterland of the Xiongnu; the Xiongnu captured Zhang Ye and detained him for more than ten years.

古文：骞得间亡，乡月氏西走，数十日，至大宛。
现代文：张骞得到机会逃脱，向着月氏国所在的西方走去，过了数十日，到达大宛国。
English: Zhang Ye was given a chance to escape, and he headed west to where Yue's country was located. After dozens of days, he reached the big destination country.

古文：大宛闻汉之饶财，欲通不得，见骞，喜，为发导译抵康居，传致大月氏。
现代文：大宛国早就听说中国富有，想通使结好，却不能实现，见到张骞，十分高兴，替他安排了向导和翻译，抵达康居国，再转送到大月氏国。
English: Dawan Country had long heard that China was rich. They tried to negotiate a better deal, but it could not be realized. They were very happy to see Zhang Ye. They arranged a guide and translator for him, arrived in Kangju Country, and then transferred to Dazhong Country.

古文：大月氏太子为王，既击大夏，分其地而居之，地肥饶，少寇，殊无报胡之心。
现代文：大月氏原来的太子做了国王，进攻大夏国之后，分割了大夏国的土地而安居下来，当地土地肥沃富饶，很少有外敌入侵，已没有丝毫向匈奴复仇的打算了。
English: The former prince of the Otsuki clan became king. After the attack on Daxia, he divided the land of Daxia and settled down. The local land is fertile and rich, there are few foreign invasions, and there is no intention to take revenge on the Huns.

古文：骞留岁馀，竟不能得月氏要领，乃还；并南山，欲从羌中归，复为匈奴所得，留岁馀。
现代文：张骞滞留了一年多，终究不知道月氏人打的什么主意，就启程返回；张骞沿着南山走，想通过羌人的居住地返归，又被匈奴人捉住了，拘留了一年多。
English: Zhang Hui stayed for more than a year, and finally, not knowing what the Yue people had in mind, he set off to return; Zhang Hui walked along the Nanshan and wanted to return through the residence of the Xiong people, and was caught by the Huns and detained for more than a year.

古文：会伊稚斜逐于单，匈奴国内乱，骞乃与堂邑氏奴甘父逃归。
现代文：正逢伊雅斜驱逐於单，匈奴国内混乱，张骞就和堂邑氏的奴隶甘父逃脱归来。
English: At the time of the expulsion of Ia Xian to Shan, the Huns were in turmoil, and Zhang Xuan escaped and returned with his cousin's slave, Gan Fu.

古文：上拜骞为太中大夫，甘父为奉使君。
现代文：武帝任命张骞为太中大夫，甘父为奉使君。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Zhang Ye as the Grand Physician, and Gan Zhe as the Minister.

古文：骞初行时百馀人，去十三岁，唯二人得还。
现代文：张骞当初出发时有一百多人，离开汉朝十三年，只有他们二人得以生还。
English: At the time of Zhang Ye's departure, there were more than a hundred people. Thirteen years after he left the Han Dynasty, only the two of them survived.

古文：匈奴数万骑入塞，杀代郡太守恭，及略千馀人。
现代文：匈奴的几万骑兵越过边界，攻杀代郡太守恭，还掳掠了一千多人。
English: Tens of thousands of Hun cavalry crossed the border, attacked and killed the daigun Taizhongong, and also captured more than a thousand people.

古文：六月，庚午，皇太后崩。
现代文：六月，庚午，皇太后驾崩。
English: In June, at noon, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：秋，罢西夷，独置南夷、夜郎两县、一都尉，稍令犍为自葆就，专力城朔方。
现代文：秋季，朝廷罢废了在西夷地区的建置，只设了南夷、夜郎两县和一个都尉，后来又逐渐令犍为郡自行保全并完善地方建置，以便朝廷集中力量修筑朔方郡的郡城。
English: In the autumn, the imperial court abolished the construction in the Xiyi area, and only set up two counties, Nanyi and Yelang, and one captain. Later, it gradually ordered the county to preserve and improve the local construction, so that the imperial court could concentrate its efforts on building the county seat of Shuofang County.

古文：匈奴又入雁门，杀略千馀人。
现代文：匈奴再次入侵雁门郡，杀害和掳掠一千多人。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Yanmen County again, killing and robbing more than a thousand people.

古文：是岁，中大夫张汤为廷尉。
现代文：这一年，中大夫张汤出任廷尉。
English: In this year, the junior doctor Zhang Tang was appointed as a court lieutenant.

古文：汤为人多诈，舞智以御人。
现代文：张汤为人十公狡诈，玩弄巧智驾御他人。
English: Zhang Tang is a cunning person and is good at manipulating others.

古文：时上方乡文学，汤阳浮慕，事董仲舒、公孙弘等。以千乘儿宽为奏谳掾，以古法义决疑狱。
现代文：当时，武帝正倾心儒学，张汤就假装敬慕儒家大师的的样子，尊重董仲舒、公孙弘等人；他任用千乘人宽担任奏谳掾，用古代的法令和经义判决疑难案件。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was devoting his heart to Confucianism. Zhang Tang pretended to admire the Confucian masters and respect Dong Zhongshu, Gongsun Hong and others. He appointed Qian Xingrenguan as the reciter and used ancient decrees and scriptures to judge difficult cases.

古文：所治，即上意所欲罪，与监、史深祸者；即上意所欲释，与监、史轻平者；上由是悦之。
现代文：张汤审判案件的手法是：倘若是皇上想加罪处治的人，就把他交给那些执法严苛的监、史审判；如果是皇上想要从宽解脱的人，就把他交给执法轻平的监、史审判；武帝国此对他很满意。
English: Zhang Tang's method of judging cases was: if it was a person whom the emperor wanted to punish, he would hand him over to those who were strict in enforcing the law, the court of history; if it was a person whom the emperor wanted to release from leniency, he would hand him over to those who were lenient in enforcing the law, the court of history; the Wu Empire was very satisfied with him.

古文：汤于故人子弟调护之尤厚；其造请诸公，不避寒暑。
现代文：张汤对于老朋友的子弟，照顾得特别周到；他去诸公重臣家中问候请安，不避严厉寒酷暑。
English: Zhang Tang took special care of the younger son of an old friend; he went to Zhu Gong's chief minister's home to say hello, and did not avoid the severe cold and heat.

古文：是以汤虽文深、意忌、不专平，然得此声誉。
现代文：所以，张汤虽然执法来苛、心怀妒忌，断狱不公平，却博得了好名声。
English: Therefore, although Zhang Tang was harsh on law enforcement, jealous, and unfair to break out of prison, he gained a good reputation.

古文：汲黯数质责汤于上前曰： 公为正卿，上不能褒先帝之功业，下不能抑天下之邪心，安国富民，使囹圄空虚，何空取高皇帝约束纷更之为！
现代文：汲黯多次在武帝而前质问、责备张汤说： 您身为正卿，上不能褒扬先帝的功业，下不能抑制天下百姓的邪心，使国家安定、百姓富裕，临狱空虚，为什么却只知把高皇帝所定的律令胡乱变更！
English: Ku Ying repeatedly questioned and reproached Zhang Tang in front of Emperor Wu, saying, "You, as a righteous lord, cannot praise the work of the former emperor above, and cannot restrain the evil hearts of the people of the world below, make the country stable, the people rich, and the prison empty, but why do you only know how to change the rules and regulations set by Emperor Gao!

古文：而公以此无种矣。 
现代文：而且您将会因此而断子绝孙了。 
English: And you will have lost a great-grandchild because of it.

古文：黯时与汤论议，汤辩常在文深小苛；黯伉厉守高，不能屈，忿发，骂曰： 天下谓刀笔吏不可以为公卿，果然！
现代文：汲黯经常与张汤争辩，张汤的言论在紧扣律令条文，大小节上苛求，汲黯伉直严峻，坚守高沿的原则，却不能驳倒张汤，愤极发怒，大骂张汤说： 天下人都说刀笔吏不能做公卿，果然如此！
English: He often argued with Zhang Tang. Zhang Tang's remarks were strict in adhering to the provisions of laws and regulations, demanding in terms of size and size, stern and stern, and adhering to the principle of high-level, but he could not refute Zhang Tang. He was extremely angry and scolded Zhang Tang, saying: People all over the world say that a clerk cannot be a nobleman, and it is true!

古文：必汤也，令天下重足而立，侧目而视矣！ 
现代文：如果一切都按张汤的主张去做，将使天下人陷入重足而立、侧目而视的恐惧之中了！ 
English: If you must act according to what Zhang Tang said, you will make the world so afraid that they will not dare to stand with their feet together, and their eyes will not dare to look straight ahead!

古文：冬，上行幸甘泉。
现代文：四年冬季，武帝前往甘泉。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, Emperor Wu went to Ganquan.

古文：夏，匈奴入代郡、定襄、上郡，各三万骑，杀略数千人。
现代文：夏季，匈奴用三万骑兵分别入侵代郡、定襄郡和上郡，杀害和掳掠了数千人。
English: In the summer, the Huns used 30,000 cavalrymen to invade the counties of Dai, Dingxiang and Shang respectively, killing and kidnapping thousands of people.

