古文：六年春，王正月，杞伯益姑卒。
现代文：流年春季，周历正月，杞文公去世。
English: In the spring of the previous year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Gong Wenguang passed away.

古文：葬秦景公。
现代文：安葬秦景公。
English: Qin Jingsong is buried peacefully.

古文：夏，季孙宿如晋。
现代文：夏季，季孙宿去到晋国。
English: In the summer, Qisun stayed in Jin Province.

古文：葬杞文公。
现代文：安葬杞文公。
English: Funeral of 文公.

古文：宋华合比出奔卫。
现代文：宋国的华合比逃到了卫国。
English: The Song dynasty's Hua He Bi fled to the Qing dynasty.

古文：秋九月，大雩。
现代文：秋季九月，举行了大的求雨祭祀活动。
English: In autumn and September, a large rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：楚薳罢帅师伐吴。
现代文：楚国的薳罢率领军队攻打吴国。
English: The warlord of Chu led the army to attack Wu.

古文：冬，叔弓如楚。
现代文：冬季，叔弓去到楚国。
English: In winter, Shuyun went to Chu.

古文：齐侯伐北燕。
现代文：齐侯率兵攻打北燕。
English: Qi Hou led an army to attack Beiyan.

古文：六年春，王正月，杞文公卒，吊如同盟，礼也。
现代文：六年春季，周王朝历法的正月，杞文公去世。鲁国前去吊唁好像对同盟的国家一样，这是合于礼的。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Gongwen Gong passed away. It was proper for Lu to go to offer condolences as if it were an allied country.

古文：大夫如秦，葬景公，礼也。
现代文：鲁国大夫去到秦国，参加秦景公的葬礼，这是合于礼的。
English: Dr. Lu went to Qin to attend Qin Jinggong's funeral, which was proper.

古文：三月，郑人铸刑书。
现代文：三月，郑国把刑法铸在鼎上。
English: In March, Zheng Guo put the criminal law on top.

古文：叔向使诒子产书曰： 始吾有虞于子，今则已矣。
现代文：叔向派人送给子产一封信，说： 开始我对您寄予希望，现在完了。
English: My uncle sent a letter to my mother-in-law, saying: At first I had hopes for you, but now they are gone.

古文：昔先王议事以制，不为刑辟，惧民之有争心也。
现代文：从前先王衡量事情的轻重来断定罪行，不制定刑法，这是害怕百姓有争夺之心。
English: In the past, the former king used to judge the seriousness of things to determine the crime, and did not enact criminal law. This was because he was afraid that the people would have a competitive spirit.

古文：犹不可禁御，是故闲之以义，纠之以政，行之以礼，守之以信，奉之以仁，制为禄位以劝其从，严断刑罚以威其淫。
现代文：还是不能防止犯罪，因此用道义来防范，用政令来约束，用礼仪来奉行，用信用来保持，用仁爱来奉养。制定禄位，以勉励服从的人，严厉地判罪，以威胁放纵的人。
English: It is still not possible to prevent crime, so we should use moral principles to prevent it, government decrees to restrict it, etiquette to practice it, trust to maintain it, and benevolence to nurture it. We should set up positions of honor to encourage those who obey, and sternly judge those who commit crimes, and threaten those who indulge in them.

古文：惧其未也，故诲之以忠，耸之以行，教之以务，使之以和，临之以敬，涖之以强，断之以刚。
现代文：还恐怕不能收效，所以用忠诚来教诲他们，根据行为来奖励他们，用专业知识技艺教导他们，用和悦的态度使用他们，用严肃认真对待他们，用威严监临他们，用坚决的态度判断他们的罪行。
English: I am afraid that it will not work, so I will teach them with loyalty, reward them according to their behavior, teach them with professional knowledge and skills, use them with a friendly attitude, treat them seriously, supervise them with dignity, and judge their crimes with a resolute attitude.

古文：犹求圣哲之上，明察之官，忠信之长，慈惠之师，民于是乎可任使也，而不生祸乱。
现代文：还要访求聪明贤能的卿相、明白事理的官员、忠诚守信的乡长、慈祥和蔼的老师，百姓在这种情况下才可以使用，而不致于发生祸乱。
English: It is also necessary to look for a wise and competent prime minister, a sensible official, a loyal and trustworthy village chief, and a kind and gentle teacher. The people can only use them in this situation without disaster.

古文：民知有辟，则不忌于上，并有争心，以征于书，而徼幸以成之，弗可为矣。
现代文：百姓知道有法律，就对上面不恭敬。大家都有争夺之心，用刑法作为根据，而且侥幸得到成功，就不能治理了。
English: When the people know that there is a law, they do not respect the authorities. Everyone has a competitive spirit, using criminal law as a basis, and if they are lucky enough to succeed, they cannot be governed.

古文：夏有乱政而作《禹刑》，商有乱政而作《汤刑》，周有乱政而作《九刑》，三辟之兴，皆叔世也。
现代文：夏朝有违犯政令的人，就制定禹刑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xia, people who violated government orders were sentenced to death.

古文：今吾子相郑国，作封洫，立谤政，制参辟，铸刑书，将以靖民，不亦难乎？
现代文：商朝有触犯政令的人，就制定汤刑。周朝有触犯政令的人，就制定九刑。三种法律的产生，都处于末世了。现在您辅佐郑国，划定田界水沟，设置毁谤政事的条例，制定三种法规，把刑法铸在鼎上，准备用这样的办法安定百姓，不也是很难的吗？
English: During the Shang and Zhou Dynasties, those who violated government decrees were sentenced to Tang. Those who violated government decrees during the Zhou and Zhou Dynasties were sentenced to Nine Punishments. The emergence of three kinds of laws is in the last days. Now you are assisting Zheng Guo, delineating the field boundaries, setting up regulations on defamation of government affairs, formulating three kinds of regulations, and casting the criminal law on the summit, and preparing to use this method to stabilize the people. Isn't it also difficult?

古文：《诗》曰： 仪式刑文王之德，日靖四方。 
现代文：《诗》说： 效法文王的德行，每天抚定四方。 
English: "Poetry" said: Imitate the virtue of the French king, and settle the four directions every day.

古文：又曰： 仪刑文王，万邦作孚。 
现代文：又说： 效法文王，万邦信赖。 
English: He also said, "Follow the example of the French king and win the trust of all nations."

古文：如是，何辟之有？
现代文：像这样，何必要有法律？
English: As such, why is there a need for laws?

古文：民知争端矣，将弃礼而征于书。
现代文：百姓知道了争夺的依据，将会丢弃礼仪而征用刑书。
English: When the people know of a dispute, they must abandon propriety and go to the punishment book for proof.

古文：锥刀之末，将尽争之。
现代文：刑书的一字一句，都要争个明白。
English: Every word of the penal code must be clearly understood.

古文：乱狱滋丰，贿赂并行，终子之世，郑其败乎！
现代文：触犯法律的案件更加繁多，贿赂到处使用。在您活着的时候，郑国恐怕要衰败吧！
English: Cases of violations of the law are more numerous, and bribery is used everywhere. While you are alive, I am afraid that Zheng Guo will decline!

古文：肸闻之，国将亡，必多制，其此之谓乎！ 
现代文：肸听说， 国家将要灭亡，必然多订法律 ，恐怕说的就是这个吧！ 
English: I've heard it said that if a country is going to perish, it's inevitable that more laws will be made. I'm afraid that's exactly what I'm talking about!

古文：复书曰： 若吾子之言。
现代文：子产复信说： 像您所说的这样。
English: The maternity hospital replied: "It is as you say.

古文：侨不才，不能及子孙，吾以救世也。
现代文：侨没有才能，不能考虑到子孙，我是用来挽救当前的世界。
English: Overseas Chinese have no talent, can not take into account the descendants, I am used to save the current world.

古文：既不承命，敢忘大惠？ 
现代文：既然不能接受您的命令，又岂敢忘了您的恩惠？ 
English: Since I cannot accept your order, how dare I forget your favor?

古文：士文伯曰： 火见，郑其火乎。
现代文：士文伯说： 大火星出现，郑国恐怕会发生大火灾吧！
English: Shwenbo said, "If a great Mars appears, I'm afraid there will be a great fire in Zhengguo!"

古文：火未出而作火以铸刑器，藏争辟焉。
现代文：大火星还没有出现，而使用火来铸造刑器，包藏着引起争论的法律。
English: The Great Mars had not yet appeared, and the use of fire to forge an instrument of punishment contained a controversial law.

古文：火如象之，不火何为？ 
现代文：大火星如果象征这个，不引起火灾还能表示什么？ 
English: If the great Mars symbolizes this, what else can it represent without causing a fire?

古文：夏，季孙宿如晋，拜莒田也。
现代文：夏季，季孙宿到晋国去，这是为了拜谢不讨伐占取莒国土田的缘故。
English: In the summer, Qisun stayed in Jin Province in order to thank him for not invading and seizing the land of Qin.

古文：晋侯享之，有加笾。
现代文：晋平公设享礼招待他，有外加的菜肴。
English: Jinping publicly set up a banquet to invite him, with extra dishes.

古文：武子退，使行人告曰： 小国之事大国也，苟免于讨，不敢求贶。
现代文：季孙宿退出，派行人报告说： 小国事奉大国，如果免于被讨伐。不敢再求赏赐。
English: When Ji Sunjuku withdrew, the dispatchers reported: "Small countries serve big countries, and if they are not attacked, they will not dare to ask for rewards."

古文：得贶不过三献。
现代文：得到赏赐也不超过三献。
English: No more than three offerings will be given.

古文：今豆有加，下臣弗堪，无乃戾也。 
现代文：现在菜肴有所增加，下臣不敢当，恐怕这是罪过。 
English: Now that the number of dishes has increased, I'm afraid it's a sin for a vassal to dare to be greedy.

古文：韩宣子曰： 寡君以为驩也。 
现代文：韩宣子说： 寡君用它来讨取您的欢心。 
English: Han Xuan Zi said, "Oligarchs use it to win your favor.

古文：对曰： 寡君犹未敢，况下臣，君之隶也，敢闻加贶？ 
现代文：季孙宿回答说： 寡君尚且不敢当，何况下臣是君王的奴隶，岂敢听到有外加多赏赐？ 
English: Qisunjuku replied, "Even if you are a monarch, you would not dare to do so, and what's more, your vassals are the slaves of the monarch. Would they dare to hear that there are extra rewards?

古文：固请彻加而后卒事。
现代文：坚决请求撤去加菜，然后结束享宴。
English: Insist on removing the side dishes, and then end the meal.

古文：晋人以为知礼，重其好货。
现代文：晋国人认为他懂得礼仪，在宴礼中重重地送给他财物。
English: The people of Jin believed that he understood etiquette and lavished him with gifts at banquets.

古文：宋寺人柳有宠，大子佐恶之。
现代文：宋国的寺人柳受到宋平公宠信，太子佐讨厌他。
English: Liu, a member of a temple in Song, was favored by Song Ping, and the crown prince disliked him.

古文：华合比曰： 我杀之。 
现代文：华合比说： 我去杀了他。 
English: Hua Habi said: I went to kill him.

古文：柳闻之，乃坎用牲埋书，而告公曰： 合比将纳亡人之族，既盟于北郭矣。 
现代文：寺人柳听到了，就挖坑、杀牲口、把盟书放在牲口上埋起来。然后报告宋平公说： 合比准备将逃亡在外的人召回来，已经在北边外城结盟了。 
English: Upon hearing this, the temple man, Liu, dug a pit, killed the animals, and buried the alliance document on the animals. He then reported to Song Pinggong, "Hepi is preparing to call back those who have fled abroad, and has already formed an alliance in the northern outskirts of the city."

古文：公使视之，有焉，遂逐华合比。
现代文：宋平公派人去看，果然有这回事，就驱逐了华合比。
English: Song Ping Gong sent someone to investigate, and sure enough, this was the case, so he expelled Hua He Bi.

古文：合比奔卫。
现代文：华合比逃亡到卫国。
English: Huaabi fled to the defense of the country.

古文：于是华亥欲代右师，乃与寺人柳比，从为之征曰： 闻之久矣。 
现代文：当时华亥想要取代华合比的右师这一官职，就和寺人柳勾结，为他作证明说： 这件事我也早已听到。 
English: At that time, Hua Hai wanted to replace Hua Hebi's right-hand man, so he colluded with the temple man, Liu, and testified for him, saying, "I have already heard about this matter.

古文：公使代之。
现代文：宋平公让他代替了华合比。
English: Song Ping Gong let him replace Hua Hebi.

古文：见于左师，左师曰： 女夫也，必亡！
现代文：华亥进见左师，左师说： 你这个人一定要逃亡。
English: Hua Hai went to see Zuo Shi, and Zuo Shi said, "You must escape."

古文：女丧而宗室，于人何有？
现代文：你毁坏你的宗族，对别人会怎么样？
English: If you destroy your clan, what will happen to the others?

古文：人亦于女何有？
现代文：别人也会对你怎么样？
English: What will others think of you?

古文：《诗》曰： 宗子维城，毋俾城坏，毋独斯畏。 
现代文：《诗》说： 嫡长子就是城垣，不要使城垣毁坏，不要使自己孤立而有所害怕。 
English: The "Poem" says: The firstborn is the city wall, do not destroy the city wall, do not isolate yourself and be afraid.

古文：女其畏哉！ 
现代文：你大概会害怕的吧！ 
English: You'd probably be scared!

古文：六月丙戌，郑灾。
现代文：六月初七日，郑国发生火灾。
English: On June 7, a fire broke out in Zhengzhou.

古文：楚公子弃疾如晋，报韩子也。
现代文：楚国的公子弃疾到晋国去，这是为了回报韩宣子的致送晋女。
English: The prince of Chu abandoned his illness to go to Jin, in return for Han Xuan Zi's gift of a Jin woman.

古文：过郑，郑罕虎、公孙侨、游吉从郑伯以劳诸柤。
现代文：经过郑国，郑国的子皮、子产、子太叔跟从郑简公在柤地慰劳他。
English: After passing through Zheng Guo, Zheng Guo's Zi Pei, Zi Zang, Zi Taizhong followed Zheng Jian Gong to comfort him in Shunde.

古文：辞不敢见。
现代文：公子弃疾辞谢不敢见面。
English: Xie did not dare to meet him.

古文：固请见之，见，如见王，以其乘马八匹私面。
现代文：郑简公坚决请求，这才肯见面。进见郑简公好像进见楚王，用驾车的马八匹作为私人进见的礼物。
English: Zheng Jiangong firmly requested, only then would he be willing to meet. Seeing Zheng Jiangong was like seeing King Chu, with eight driving horses as a gift for private vision.

古文：见子皮如上卿，以马六匹。
现代文：进见子皮好像进见楚国的上卿，用马六匹。
English: It is as if the emperor of the state of Chu has come to see his son's hide, with six horses.

古文：见子产，以马四匹。
现代文：进见子产，用马四匹。
English: I'm going to have a litter of four foals.

古文：见子大叔，以马二匹。
现代文：进见子太叔，用马两匹。
English: Uncle Jinmeizi rode two horses.

古文：禁刍牧采樵，不入田，不樵树，不采蓺，不抽屋，不强匄。
现代文：禁止割草放牧采摘砍柴，不进入农田，不砍树木，不摘菜果，不拆房屋，不强行讨取。
English: It is forbidden to cut grass, graze, pick and cut firewood, not to enter farmland, not to cut trees, not to pick vegetables and fruits, not to demolish houses, and not to forcibly collect.

古文：誓曰： 有犯命者，君子废，小人降。 
现代文：发誓说： 有触犯命令的，君子撤职，小人降等。 
English: He swore: Those who violate orders will be removed from their posts, villains will be demoted, and so on.

古文：舍不为暴，主不慁宾。
现代文：寄住的时期不作暴行，主人不用担心客人。
English: There will be no violence during the stay, so the host does not have to worry about the guests.

古文：往来如是。郑三卿皆知其将为王也。
现代文：一往一来都像这样，郑国的三个卿都知道他将要做楚王了。
English: It had always been like this. The three nobles of Zheng knew that he would become the king of Chu.

古文：韩宣子之適楚也，楚人弗逆。
现代文：韩宣子到楚国去的时候，楚国人不出来迎接。
English: When Han Xuan Zi went to Chu, the people of Chu did not come out to greet him.

古文：公子弃疾及晋竟，晋侯将亦弗逆。
现代文：公子弃疾到达晋国国境，晋平公也不想派人迎接。
English: The prince abandoned his illness and arrived at the border of Jin, and Jinping didn't want to send anyone to meet him.

古文：叔向曰： 楚辟我衷，若何效辟？
现代文：叔向说： 楚国不正派，我们正派。
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Chu Province is not honest, but we are.

古文：《诗》曰： 尔之教矣，民胥效矣。 
现代文：为什么去学不正派？《诗》说， 你的教导，百姓都要仿效。 
English: Why go to the wrong school? "Poetry" says, "Your teaching, the people should follow."

古文：从我而已，焉用效人之辟？《书》曰： 圣作则。 
现代文：根据我们自己的办就是了，哪里用得着学别人的不正派？《书》说， 圣人做出准则。 
English: According to our own way of doing things is enough, where is the need to learn the wrong way of others? "Book" said, saints make rules.

古文：无宁以善人为则，而则人之辟乎？
现代文：宁可以善人做准则，难道还去学别人的不正派吗？
English: Is it better to be guided by good people, or to follow the bad example of others?

古文：匹夫为善，民犹则之，况国君乎？ 
现代文：一个普通人做好事，百姓还以他为准则，何况国君？ 
English: An ordinary person does good things, and the people still use him as a standard, not to mention the sovereign?

古文：晋侯说，乃逆之。
现代文：晋平公高兴了，就派人迎接公子弃疾。
English: When Jinping Gong was happy, he sent someone to welcome the prince to abandon his illness.

古文：秋九月，大雩，旱也。
现代文：秋季，九月，举行大的雩祭，这是由于发生了旱灾。
English: In the autumn, in September, there is a big burnt offering because of the drought.

古文：徐仪楚聘于楚。楚子执之，逃归。
现代文：徐仪楚到楚国聘问，楚灵王囚禁了他，他逃回徐国。
English: Xu Yichu went to Chu to ask questions. King Chu Ling imprisoned him, and he fled back to Xu.

古文：惧其叛也，使薳洩伐徐。
现代文：楚灵王害怕他背叛，派薳泄进攻徐国。
English: King Chuling was afraid of his treachery and sent his troops to attack Xu.

古文：吴人救之。
现代文：吴国人救援徐国。
English: The Wu people came to the rescue of the Xu.

古文：令尹子荡帅师伐吴，师于豫章，而次于乾谿。
现代文：令尹子荡率领军队进攻吴国，在豫章出兵而住在乾谿。
English: He ordered Yin Zihang to lead an army to attack the State of Wu, and sent troops to Yuzhang while he was living in Jianye.

古文：吴人败其师于房钟，获宫厩尹弃疾。
现代文：吴国人在房钟击败了令尹子荡的军队，俘虏了宫厩尹弃疾。
English: The people of Wu defeated the army led by Yin Zihuang in Fuzhong and captured the palace stables of Yin Qianzhi.

古文：子荡归罪于薳洩而杀之。
现代文：子荡把罪过推在薳泄身上而杀了他。
English: The son-in-law put the blame on the vent and killed him.

古文：冬，叔弓如楚聘，且吊败也。
现代文：冬季，叔弓到楚国聘问，并且慰问战争失败。
English: In the winter, Shukyu went to the State of Chu to ask for advice, and to offer his condolences for the failure of the war.

古文：十一月，齐侯如晋，请伐北燕也。
现代文：十一月，齐景公到晋国，请求同意进攻北燕。
English: In November, Qi Jing Gong went to Jin Province to request permission to attack Beiyan.

古文：士匄相士鞅，逆诸河，礼也。
现代文：士匄辅佐士鞅在黄河边上迎接，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper that Shifu assisted Shifu to meet him on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：晋侯许之。
现代文：晋平公同意了。
English: Emperor Jinpyeong agreed.

古文：十二月，齐侯遂伐北燕，将纳简公。
现代文：十二月，齐景公就发兵进攻北燕，打算把燕简公送回去。
English: In December, Qi Jing Gong sent troops to attack Bei Yan, intending to send Yan Jian Gong back.

古文：晏子曰： 不入。
现代文：晏子说： 简公不要送回去。
English: Zizi said, "Don't send Jian Gong back.

古文：燕有君矣，民不贰。
现代文：燕国有了国君，百姓对他没有二心。
English: Yan's country has a sovereign, and the people have no qualms about him.

古文：吾君贿，左右谄谀，作大事不以信，未尝可也。 
现代文：我们的国君贪财，左右的人阿谀奉承，办大事不讲信用，所以还是不可以呢！ 
English: Our sovereign is greedy for money, the people around him are sycophants, and he doesn't believe in doing big things, so it's still not allowed!

