古文：赵郡王琛清河王岳
现代文：赵郡王高琛，字永宝，高祖的弟弟。
English: Zhao County, Wang Gaojun, surnamed Yongbao, Gao Zu's younger brother.

古文：赵郡王琛，字永宝，高祖之弟也。少时便弓马，有志气。
现代文：少时熟习弓马，有志气。
English: He learned archery and horsemanship at a young age and has a strong will.

古文：高祖既匡天下，中兴初，授散骑常侍、镇西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖匡正天下，中兴初，授散骑常侍、镇西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Gao Zu Kuang Zheng ruled the world, and in the early days of ZTE, he gave out the titles of riding attendant, Zhenxi general, and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor.

古文：既居禁卫，恭勤慎密，率先左右。
现代文：琛位居禁卫，恭勤慎密，以身示范。
English: He's a guard, he's respectful, he's careful, he's a role model.

古文：太昌初，除车骑大将军、左光禄大夫，封南赵郡公，食邑五千户。
现代文：太昌初，拜车骑大将军、左光禄大夫，封南赵郡公，食邑五千户。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, there were five thousand households in the food village, including the general of the car-hailing and horse-riding, the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, and the governor of Nan Zhao County.

古文：寻拜骠骑大将军、特进、开府仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：不久拜骠骑大将军、特进、开府仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, the grand marshal, the special envoy, the Kaifu ceremony and the three officials, and the straggling equestrian attendants arrived.

古文：永熙二年，除使持节、都督定州刺史、六州大都督。
现代文：永熙二年，为使持节、都督定州刺史、六州大都督。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, it was the Envoys' Day, and the prefectural governors of six prefectures and the governor of six prefectures were appointed.

古文：琛推诚抚纳，拔用人士，甚有声誉。
现代文：琛推诚抚纳，拔用人才，极有声誉。
English: It is highly reputed for its sincerity in promoting and nurturing talent.

古文：及斛斯椿等衅结。高祖将谋内讨，以晋阳根本，召琛留掌后事，以为并、肆、汾大行台仆射，领六州九酋长大都督，其相府政事琛悉决之。
现代文：当斛斯椿等人结成团伙，高祖准备讨伐之时，认为晋阳是根本，召琛使其留掌后事，并委任他为并、肆、汾大行台仆射，领六州九酋长大都督。而相府的大事都由琛来处理决定。
English: When Gaozhu and others formed a group and Gaozhu was preparing for a crusade, Gaozhu thought that Jinyang was the fundamental, and called Gaozhu to stay in charge of the aftermath, and appointed him as the governor of the six states and nine chiefs. And the important matters of the provincial capital were handled and decided by Gaozhu.

古文：天平中，除御史中尉，正色纠弹，无所回避，远近肃然。
现代文：天平中，任御史中尉，认真纠弹，无所顾忌，所有的人对他肃然起敬。
English: In the balance of the scale, Ren Youshi, lieutenant, seriously corrected the bullet, without any scruples, and all the people revered him.

古文：寻乱高祖后庭，高祖责罚之，因杖而毙，时年二十三。
现代文：不久淫乱高祖的后宫，遭受责罚，被杖击而死，时年二十三。
English: Soon after, she fornicated with Gaozhu's harem, was punished, and was caned to death at the age of twenty-three.

古文：赠使持节、侍中、都督冀定沧瀛幽殷并肆云朔十州诸军事、骠骑大将军、冀州刺史、太尉、尚书令，谥曰贞平。
现代文：赠使持节、侍中、都督冀定沧瀛幽殷并肆云朔十州诸军事、骠骑大将军、冀州刺史、太尉、尚书令，谥号贞平。
English: He was awarded the title of Jixi, and the title of Jizhong, and the title of Jizhong, and the title of Jizhong, and the title of Jizhong, and the title of Jizhong, and the title of Jizhong.

古文：天统三年，又赠假黄钺、左丞相、太师、录尚书事、冀州刺史，进爵为王，配飨高祖庙庭。
现代文：天统三年，又赠假黄钅戊、左丞相、太师、录尚书事、冀州刺史，晋爵为王，配享高祖庙庭。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he also bestowed the titles of Huang Rongwu, Zuo Rongwu, Taishi, Rokushang Shuji, Jizhou Shishi, Jinjie Wang, and Gao Zu Temple Garden.

古文：子睿嗣。
现代文：子睿嗣继。
English: His son, Kei Mutsu, became heir to the throne.

古文：睿小名须拔，生三旬而孤，聪慧夙成，特为高祖所爱，养于宫中，令游娘母之，恩同诸子。
现代文：睿小名须拔，生下一个月其父就死了。但因聪慧早成，极得高祖钟爱，被收养在宫中，为游娘抚养，同皇子们一样的待遇。
English: Her father died a month after she was born, but because she was so clever and precocious, she was very much loved by her great-grandfather, and was adopted into the imperial court and raised as a wandering daughter, receiving the same treatment as the princes.

古文：魏兴和中，袭爵南赵郡公。
现代文：魏兴和年中，袭爵南赵郡公。
English: During the Eastern Wei Xinghe period, he inherited the title of Nan Zhao Guo from his father, Zhao Guo Wang Gaoqi.

古文：至四岁，未尝识母，其母则魏华阳公主也。
现代文：直到四岁，还不知道母亲是谁。其母是魏华阳公主。
English: Until the age of four, she did not know who her mother was. Her mother was Wei Huayang Princess Wu.

古文：有郑氏者，睿母之从母姊妹之女，戏语睿曰： 汝是我姨儿，何因倒亲游氏。 
现代文：有位郑氏，是睿母亲的叔伯姊妹的女儿，对睿开玩笑说： 你是我的姨侄儿子，为什么不亲我却要亲游氏？ 
English: One Zheng, the daughter of Rui's mother's uncle and sister, joked to Rui, "You are my nephew, why don't you kiss me, but you want to kiss Yu?"

古文：睿因问访，遂精神不怡。
现代文：睿问明原因，精神就不太振作了。
English: When I asked the reason, my spirits were not very buoyant.

古文：高祖甚以为怪，疑其感疾，欲命医看之。
现代文：高祖极其奇怪，怀疑他身体有病，想请医生给治治。
English: Gaozu was very strange, he suspected that he was ill and wanted to be treated by a doctor.

古文：睿对曰： 儿无患苦，但闻有所生，欲得暂见。 高祖惊曰： 谁向汝道耶？ 
现代文：睿说： 我没有病的痛苦，只是想见见我的生身母亲。 高祖惊异，问： 谁告诉你的？ 
English: Rui said, "I don't have the pain of illness, I just want to see my biological mother." Gao Zu was surprised and asked, "Who told you?"

古文：睿具陈本末。
现代文：睿就一五一十地进行了报告。
English: Rui made a report on 150.

古文：高祖命元夫人令就宫与睿相见，睿前跪拜，因抱头大哭。
现代文：高祖便请元夫人在宫里同睿见面，睿向前几步跪在地上，拜见母亲，两人于是抱头痛哭。
English: Gao Zu then asked the former first lady to meet with Rui in the palace. Rui took a few steps forward and knelt on the ground to meet his mother. The two then hugged and cried.

古文：高祖甚以悲伤。语平秦王曰： 此儿天生至孝，我儿子无有及者。 
现代文：高祖也十分悲伤，对平秦王讲： 此儿天生的孝顺，在我的儿子中没有人赶得上他。 
English: Gaozu was also very sad, and said to King Ping Qin, "This boy is born with filial piety, and none of my sons can match him.

古文：遂为休务一日。
现代文：并且为睿特意一天不理朝事。
English: He was suspended from his duties for a day.

古文：睿初读《孝经》，至 资于事父 ，辄流涕歔欷。
现代文：睿初次诵读《孝经》，读至 资于事父 一语，则泪流满面，欷不已。
English: Rui recited the "Filial Piety" for the first time, and when he read the words, "I owe everything to my father," he burst into tears and sobbed.

古文：十岁丧母，高祖亲送睿至领军府，为睿发丧，与声殒绝，哀感左右，三日水浆不入口。
现代文：十岁时母亲去世，高祖亲自把他送到领军府，还帮他料理丧事。睿大声号哭，几乎闭过气去，三天没喝一口水，使左右十分感动。
English: When he was ten years old, his mother died. Gaozu personally took him to the military headquarters and helped him prepare for the funeral. Rui cried loudly, almost lost his breath, and didn't drink a sip of water for three days, which left everyone very moved.

古文：高祖与武明娄皇后殷勤敦譬，方渐顺旨。
现代文：高祖与武明娄皇后殷勤劝慰，他才有所克制。
English: Gao Zu and Empress Wu Mingya consoled him diligently, and only then did he show some restraint.

古文：居丧尽礼，持佛像长斋，至于骨立，杖而后起。
现代文：守孝尽礼，依佛法长斋，以至于骨瘦如柴，依仗手杖才能站立。
English: Filial piety, according to the Buddhist law of fasting, so that the bones are as thin as wood, relying on a cane to stand.

古文：高祖令常山王共卧起，日夜说喻之。
现代文：高祖下令常山王日夜陪伴，用道理说服他。
English: Gaozu ordered to accompany Changshan Wang day and night, and use reason to persuade him.

古文：并敕左右不听进水，虽绝清漱，午后辄不肯食。
现代文：还敕令左右不准给他进水，虽然没有了水，但他还是不肯吃饭。
English: He was also ordered not to give him water. Although there was no water, he still refused to eat.

古文：由是高祖食必唤睿同案。
现代文：因此高祖吃饭时一定把他叫来坐在同一张桌上。
English: Therefore, Gaozu always invited him to sit at the same table when eating.

古文：其见愍惜如此。
现代文：其可怜爱惜即可见一斑。
English: You can see their pity and love.

古文：高祖崩，哭泣呕血。
现代文：高祖驾崩，睿哭得吐了血。
English: Gao Zu passed away, Rui cried and vomited blood.

古文：及壮，将为婚娶，而貌有戚容。
现代文：成人了，准备结婚时，脸上还留存着忧戚悲哀。
English: When I became an adult and was preparing to get married, I still had a sad look on my face.

古文：世宗谓之曰： 我为尔娶郑述祖女，门阀甚高，汝何所嫌而精神不乐？ 
现代文：世宗问他： 我帮你娶郑述祖的女儿，她家门第十分高大，你好像嫌弃而有些精神不乐吧？ 
English: Sejong asked him, "I will help you marry the daughter of Zheng Shuzhu. She is from a very high family. You seem to dislike her and are somewhat unhappy, aren't you?"

古文：睿对曰： 自痛孤遗，常深膝下之慕，方从婚冠，弥用感切。 
现代文：睿答： 自从我成了孤儿之后，常羡慕别人有父有母，到了结婚的时候，此种情感更是强烈。 
English: Answer: Since I became an orphan, I have often envied others for having a father and a mother, and when it comes to marriage, this feeling is even stronger.

古文：言未卒，呜咽不自胜。
现代文：话还没有说完，又情不自禁地哭了起来。
English: Before the words were out of my mouth, I couldn't help but cry again.

古文：世宗为之悯默。
现代文：世宗也因此默然无语。
English: As a result, Sejong was speechless.

古文：励己勤学，常夜久方罢。
现代文：睿勤奋好学，经常读书到深夜。
English: He is bright, diligent and eager to learn. He often reads late into the night.

古文：武定末，除太子庶子。
现代文：武定末年，授太子庶子。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was the illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：显祖受禅，进封爵为赵郡王，邑一千二百户，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：显祖受魏禅，晋封爵为赵郡王，食邑一千二百户，迁散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Xian's ancestors were subject to the Wei and Zen dynasties, and Emperor Zhao was awarded the title of Jin County King. There were 1200 households in the county, and the imperial equerries were dispersed.

古文：睿身长七尺，容仪甚伟，闲习吏职，有知人之鉴。
现代文：睿身长七尺，容仪俊伟，熟悉吏事，且有知人之明。
English: He is seven feet tall, has a handsome appearance, is familiar with official matters, and knows people well.

古文：二年，出为定州刺史，加抚军将军、六州大都督，时年十七。
现代文：天保二年，出任定州刺史，加抚军将军、六州大都督，年仅十七岁。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, the general of the Qafo army, and the governor of six states, at the age of only seventeen.

古文：睿留心庶事，纠摘奸非，劝课农桑，接礼民俊，所部大治，称为良牧。
现代文：睿用心政事，纠察奸非，劝课农桑，礼接民俊，所管辖的地区治理得井井有条，时人称之为良牧。
English: He was a shrewd and diligent politician. He picketed against treachery, advised farmers and peasants, and received the people courteously. The area under his jurisdiction was well-governed and orderly. At that time, it was known as Liangmu.

古文：三年，加仪同三司。
现代文：三年，加仪同三司。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the Third Division.

古文：六年，诏睿领山东兵数万监筑长城。
现代文：六年，帝诏睿带山东数万兵卒修筑长城。
English: In six years, Emperor Zhaorai led tens of thousands of soldiers from Shandong to build the Great Wall.

古文：于时盛夏六月，睿在途中，屏除盖扇，亲与军人同其劳苦。
现代文：这时恰好是盛夏的六月，睿在途中，命令撤除盖扇，与军人一样同甘共苦。
English: At this time, it happened to be midsummer in June. On the way, Rui ordered the removal of the fan cover, and shared the joys and sorrows with the soldiers.

古文：而定州先有冰室，每岁藏冰，长史宋钦道以睿冒犯暑热，遂遣舆冰，倍道追送。
现代文：定州城早就有冰室，每年也收藏冰块，长史宋钦道认为睿顶着酷暑，就派人用车拉着冰块，兼程追赶。
English: Dingzhou city has long had an ice room, and ice is also collected every year. Chang Shi Song Qin Dao thought that Rui was suffering from the heat, so he sent someone to pull the ice with a car and catch up.

古文：正值日中停车，炎赫尤甚，人皆不堪，而送冰者至，咸谓得冰一时之要。
现代文：中午睿部众停下休息，正是特别热的时候，人们都受不了了，正好送冰的人到，兵卒们都希望能够得到一点冰水。
English: At noon, the soldiers stopped to rest. It was a particularly hot day, and the soldiers couldn't stand it. The ice man had just arrived, and the soldiers were all hoping to get some ice water.

古文：睿乃对之叹息云： 三军之人，皆饮温水，吾以何义，独进寒冰，非追名古将，实情所不忍。 
现代文：睿对冰叹息说： 三军之人，喝的是热水，我有什么仁义，独饮寒冰，不是想摹仿古代的名将，是现实情况逼迫我这样作。 
English: Rui sighed to the ice and said, "People of the three armies, drinking hot water, what kind of benevolence do I have? Drinking cold ice alone is not to imitate the ancient famous players, but the reality of the situation forces me to do so.

古文：遂至消液，竟不一尝。
现代文：他统统地让给了兵士们，而自己则未尝一滴。
English: He gave it all to the soldiers without tasting a drop himself.

古文：兵人感悦，遐迩称叹。
现代文：士兵们个个感动，很长时间都在津津乐道。
English: The soldiers were all moved and stayed for a long time in the music.

古文：先是，役徒罢作，任其自返。
现代文：以前的规矩是劳役结束，让人们自己回家。
English: The previous rule was that labor service ended and people were allowed to go home on their own.

古文：丁壮之辈，各自先归；羸弱之徒，弃在山北，加以饥病，多致僵殒。
现代文：年轻力壮的先走了，老弱病瘦的却被抛弃在山的北边，加上饥饿疾病，很多的人就这样死了。
English: The young and strong went first, but the old, weak, sick and thin were abandoned on the northern side of the mountain. In addition to starvation and disease, many people died in this way.

古文：睿于是亲帅所部，与之俱还，配合州乡，部分营伍，督帅监领，强弱相持，遇善水草，即为停顿，分有余，赡不足，屯以全者十三四焉。
现代文：睿于是亲自率领自己的部众，和他们一块回家，并依照州郡县乡，划分营伍，置帅监领，强弱相配，遇到好的水草，就停下来休息，分有余，补不足，依靠此法活下来的十有三四。
English: Rui then personally led his subordinates and went home with them, and according to the state, county, county and township, divided the battalion, set a commander and supervisor, matched the strength and weakness, encountered good aquatic plants, stopped to rest, divided the surplus, made up the shortage, and relied on this method to survive.

古文：七年，诏以本官都督沧瀛幽安平东燕六州诸军事、沧州刺史。
现代文：七年，帝诏睿以本官都督沧、瀛、幽、安、平、东燕六州诸军事，沧州刺史。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Zhao Rui took his position as the governor of Cangzhou, Handan, Yu, An, Ping and Dongyan six military states, and made history in Cangzhou.

古文：八年，征睿赴邺，仍除北朔州刺史，都督北燕、北蔚、北恒三州，及库推以西黄河以东长城诸镇诸军事。
现代文：八年，征召睿赶赴邺城，又拜他为北朔州刺史，都督北燕、北蔚、北恒三州以及库推以西黄河以东长城各镇诸军事。
English: In the eighth year, Rui was called up to rush to Shicheng, and he was also worshiped as the history of Beishuozhou, the military governor of Beiyan, Beibei, and Beicheng, as well as the towns of the Great Wall west of Kudu and east of the Yellow River.

古文：睿慰抚新迁，量置烽戍，内防外御，备有条法，大为兵民所安。
现代文：睿安抚慰问新迁入的人户，设置烽戍，内防外御，定有条令，极得兵民拥戴。
English: Rui appeased and comforted the newly-moved-in households, set up fences, internal defense and external control, and had rules and regulations, which was greatly supported by the soldiers and people.

古文：有无水之处，祷而掘井，锹锸裁下，泉源涌出，至今号曰赵郡王泉。
现代文：在没有水的地方，祈祷后掘井，锹铲才下，水就流出来了，直到现在，人们都把这种井叫做 赵郡王泉 。
English: In places where there is no water, a well is dug after the prayer, and the shovel and spade are lowered, and the water flows out. Until now, people have called this well the Zhao County Wangquan.

古文：九年，车驾幸楼烦，睿朝于行宫，仍从还晋阳。
现代文：九年，帝巡行到了楼烦，睿朝见行宫，就跟着返回了晋阳。
English: In the ninth year, the imperial procession arrived at Loudui. Rui Zhaocheng saw the procession and followed the procession back to Jinyang.

古文：时济南以太子监国，因立大都督府，与尚书省分理众事，仍开府置佐。
现代文：此时济南王以太子身份监国，于是就设立了大都督府，同尚书省分理政务，依然按制度开府设立僚佐。
English: At this time, the King of Jinan assumed the status of the overseer of the country, so he set up the great governor's office, and divided the government affairs with Shangshu Province, still according to the system of setting up a government office and setting up a ministerial assistant.

古文：显祖特崇其选，乃除睿侍中、摄大都督府长史。
现代文：显祖特别重视这一人选，便拜睿为侍中、摄大都督府长史。
English: Emperor Xianzu paid special attention to this candidate, and Bai Rui became the chamberlain and chief photographer of the prefectural governor.

古文：睿后因侍宴，显祖从容顾谓常山王演等曰： 由来亦有如此长史不？
现代文：睿后来赴宴，显祖回过头来对常山王演等人说： 原先也有这样的长史吗？
English: Rui later went to a banquet, and Xianzu turned around and said to Changshan Wang Rong and others, "Was there such a long history before?

古文：吾用此长史何如？ 
现代文：我用的这位长史怎么样？ 
English: How about this long-handled cane I'm using?

古文：演对曰： 陛下垂心庶政，优贤礼物，须拔进居蝉珥之荣，退当委要之职，自昔以来，实未闻如此铨授。 
现代文：演答： 陛下留心政事，优贤礼物，须拔晋升，就占居了蝉珥的光荣；贬退，也当委以重任，自古至今，确实没有听说过这样的铨授。 
English: Answer: Your Majesty should pay attention to the political affairs, the gift of excellence, if you have to promote, you will occupy the glory of the cicadas; if you have to demote, you should also be entrusted with heavy responsibilities. From ancient times to the present, indeed, there has never been such a conferment.

古文：帝曰： 吾于此亦自谓得宜。 
现代文：帝说： 对此，我也认为安排得合适。 
English: Di said: In this regard, I also think that the arrangement is appropriate.

古文：十年，转仪同三司、侍中、将军、长史，王如故。
现代文：十年，转仪同三司，侍中、将军、长史、王依然保留。
English: Ten years later, the ceremony with the three divisions, chamberlains, generals, long history, and kings is still retained.

古文：寻加开府仪同三司、骠骑大将军、太子太保。
现代文：很快又加开府仪同三司、骠骑大将军、太子太保。
English: He was soon joined by the Prefect, the Third Division, the Cavalry General, and the Crown Prince.

古文：皇建初，行并州事。
现代文：皇建初年，行并州刺史事。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, it was a historic event to merge the two states.

古文：孝昭临崩，预受顾托，奉迎世祖于邺，以功拜尚书令，别封浮阳郡公，监太史，太子太傅，议律令。
现代文：孝昭帝死前，预受托付，从邺迎接世祖归来，因功拜尚书令，别封为浮阳郡公，监太史、太子太傅，议定律令。
English: Before the death of Emperor Xiaozhao, he was entrusted in advance to meet the return of his ancestor from the capital, and because of his merits, he was awarded the title of Shang Shuling, the title of Fuyang County, the title of Juntai Shi, the title of Taifu, and the title of Taifu, and the ritsuryo were agreed.

古文：又以讨北狄之功，封颍川郡公。
现代文：又由于征讨北狄的功劳，封颍川郡公。
English: In addition, because of the merit of soliciting Bei Di, he was awarded the title of Gongchuan County.

古文：复拜尚书令，摄大宗正卿。
现代文：再拜尚书令，摄大宗正卿。
English: Once again, I bow to Shang Shuling, and the photo is of Taizong Zhengqing.

古文：天统中，追赠睿父琛假黄钺，母元氏赠赵郡王妃，谥曰贞昭，华阳长公主如故，有司备礼仪就墓拜授。
现代文：天统中，朝廷追赠睿父琛假黄钅戊，赠母元氏赵郡王妃，谥贞昭，华阳长公主封号依然保留，有关部门备好礼仪到琛墓前拜授。
English: In the imperial edict, the imperial court posthumously bestowed the surnames of Rui, Yuan, Huang, Zhao, Zhao, Zhen, Zhen, Zhao, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen,

古文：时隆冬盛寒，睿跣步号哭，面皆破裂，呕血数升。
现代文：时隆冬盛寒，睿光着脚号哭，脸皮都被冻破了，还吐了许多的血。
English: It was the dead of winter, he was barefoot, crying profusely, his face cracked, and he vomited several liters of blood.

古文：及还，不堪参谢，帝亲就第看问。
现代文：回家后，连拜谢的力气也没有了，帝亲自来到家里看望。
English: After returning home, he didn't even have the strength to offer thanks. The emperor himself came to visit the family.

古文：拜司空，摄录尚书事。
现代文：拜司空，摄录尚书事。
English: Bye Sku, the shooting is still in progress.

古文：突厥尝侵轶至并州，帝亲御戎，六军进止皆令取睿节度。
现代文：突厥曾侵扰到并州，帝亲自统领军队围剿，而军队的前进后退都令睿节度。
English: The Turks once invaded and annexed the state, and the emperor personally led the army to encircle it, and the army's advance and retreat were all disciplined.

古文：以功复封宣城郡公。
现代文：以功复封宣城郡公。
English: He was awarded the title of Xuancheng County magistrate.

古文：摄宗正卿，进拜太尉，监议五礼。
现代文：摄宗正卿，进拜太尉，监议五礼。
English: Chozong Zhengqing, Jinbei Taifu, Supervision of the Five Rites.

古文：睿久典朝政，清真自守，誉望日隆，渐被疏忌，乃撰古之忠臣义士，号曰《要言》，以致其意。
现代文：睿久掌朝政，清真自守，声誉日盛，这样慢慢地受到了疏远，于是他选录古代忠臣义士的事迹，编成一书，名叫《要言》，以表达自己的情怀。
English: He gradually became estranged from his wise and long-serving government, his strict adherence to the principles of halal, and his growing reputation. Therefore, he selected the deeds of ancient loyalists and compiled them into a book called "Key Words" to express his feelings.

古文：世祖崩，葬后数日，睿与冯翊王润、安德王延宗及元文遥奏后主云： 和士开不宜仍居内任。 
现代文：世祖崩，埋葬后的几天，睿与冯翊王润、安德王延宗及元文遥上书后主说： 和士开不应该再任朝官。 
English: A few days after the founder's death and burial, Rui, together with Feng Xuan Wang Run, Ando Wang Yan Zong, and Yuan Wen Yao, wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: He Shikai should no longer be an imperial official.

古文：并入奏太后，因出士开为兖州刺史。
现代文：还向太后做了报告，于是朝廷出士开为兖州刺史。
English: He also made a report to the empress dowager, so the imperial court appointed him as the official historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：太后曰： 士开旧经驱使，欲留过百日。 
现代文：太后说： 士开为旧臣，我们想留过先帝的百日。 
English: The empress dowager said, "Shikai is an old retainer, and we want to keep the hundred days of the former emperor.

古文：睿正色不许。
现代文：睿正色不同意。
English: Rui Zhengxue disagreed.

古文：数日之内，太后数以为言。
现代文：几天之中，太后多次向他提及这样的意思。
English: In the course of a few days, the Empress mentioned this to him several times.

古文：有中官要人知太后密旨，谓睿曰： 太后意既如此，殿下何宜苦违。 
现代文：有一中官要人知晓太后的密旨，对睿说： 太后已有了自己的想法，殿下何必与她对抗？ 
English: A middle-ranking official who was privy to the empress dowager's secret wishes said to Rui: The empress dowager already has her own ideas. Why does Your Highness need to fight against her?

古文：睿曰： 吾国家事重，死且不避，若贪生苟全，令国家扰攘，非吾志也。
现代文：睿说： 国家大事，死也不能逃避，如果苟且偷生，使国家扰攘，不是我的思想。
English: Rui said, "Death is a national event that cannot be avoided. It is not my intention to live a life that disturbs the country.

古文：况受先皇遗旨，委寄不轻。
现代文：何况我接受过先皇的遗诏，任务更重。
English: What's more, I accepted the last emperor's last will and testament, so my task is even more important.

古文：今嗣主幼冲，岂可使邪臣在侧。
现代文：如今嗣主年幼，岂能让邪臣在他身旁。
English: Now that the heir is young, he can't have an evil vassal by his side.

古文：不守之以正，何面戴天。 
现代文：不守正，我有何面目见人。 
English: If I'm not honest, I don't know who I am.

古文：遂重进言，词理恳切。
现代文：因而再次进言，极其恳切。
English: So he spoke again, very earnestly.

古文：太后令酌酒赐睿。
现代文：太后令左右斟酒赐给睿。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered Rui to have wine poured for him.

古文：睿正色曰： 今论国家大事，非为卮酒！ 
现代文：睿满脸严肃地说： 现在讨论的是国家大事，不是喝酒！ 
English: With a serious face, he said, "We are discussing national affairs, not drinking!"

古文：言讫便出。
现代文：说完就走出去了。
English: Just say the word and walk out.

古文：其夜，睿方寝，见一人可长丈五，臂长丈余，当门向床，以臂压睿，良久，遂失所在。
现代文：这天晚上，睿刚睡下，看见一身长一丈五尺、臂长丈多的人，站立门口面对着床铺，用胳膊压着睿，很久，才不知去向。
English: That night, just after Rui fell asleep, he saw a man who was five feet tall with long arms standing at the door facing the bed, pressing Rui with his arms for a long time before he knew where he was going.

古文：睿意甚恶之，便起坐独叹曰： 大丈夫命运一朝至此！ 
现代文：睿心情极不好，坐起来哀叹着说： 大丈夫的命就是这样的！ 
English: Rui was in a very bad mood. He sat up and lamented, "This is what a healthy man's life is like!"

古文：恐为太后所杀，旦欲入朝，妻子咸谏止之。
现代文：他担心太后派人谋杀，早晨就想入朝，妻子儿女一齐劝谏，这才作罢。
English: Fearing that the empress dowager had sent someone to commit the murder, he wanted to go to court in the morning, but his wife and children persuaded him to stop.

古文：睿曰： 自古忠臣，皆不顾身命，社稷事重，吾当以死效之，岂容令一妇人倾危宗庙。
现代文：睿说： 自古忠臣，哪个不珍惜生命，社稷大事，我当用死来抗抵，哪能让一妇人危害宗庙！
English: Rui said, "Loyal retainer since ancient times, who does not cherish life, social and political events, I should use death to resist, how can a woman endanger the ancestral temple!

古文：且和士开何物竖子，如此纵横，吾宁死事先皇，不忍见朝廷颠沛。 
现代文：再说，士开是个什么东西，这样猖狂，我宁可用死来服侍先皇，也不忍心看着朝廷颠覆。 
English: Besides, Shikai is something, he's so reckless, I'd rather die serving the First Emperor than watch the Imperial Court be overthrown.

古文：至殿门，又有人曰： 愿殿下勿入，虑有危变。 
现代文：到宫殿门口，又有人说： 请殿下不要进去，恐怕有危险。 
English: At the entrance to the palace, someone else said: "Please, Your Royal Highness, don't go in, I'm afraid there's danger."

古文：睿曰： 吾上不负天，死亦无恨。 
现代文：睿说： 我上不负天，死也无憾！ 
English: He said, "I'm as good as heaven, and I have no regrets about dying."

古文：入见太后，太后复以为言，睿执之弥固。
现代文：入殿见了太后，太后又提起前话，睿还是不同意。
English: On entering the palace, Gao Rui's attitude became more resolute when he saw the empress dowager. The empress dowager repeated what she had said yesterday.

古文：出至永巷，遇兵被执，送华林园，于雀离佛院令刘桃枝拉而杀之，时年三十六。
现代文：出来走到永巷，被兵士捉住，押送到华林园，在雀离佛院被刘桃枝杀了，时年三十六。
English: He came out and walked to Yongxiang, was caught by soldiers, escorted to Hualin Garden, and was killed by Liu Taozhi at Jiali Buddhist Temple, at the age of 36.

古文：大雾三日，朝野冤惜之。
现代文：睿死后的三天，天天大雾，朝野都称冤枉。
English: Three days after Rui's death, it was foggy every day, and both the emperor and the people said that they had been wronged.

古文：期年后，诏听以王礼葬，竟无赠谥焉。
现代文：一年后，帝诏用王礼安葬，但一直没有赠谥。
English: A year later, Emperor Taizhao was buried with full state honours, but he was never presented with an imperial scepter.

古文：子整信嗣。
现代文：子整信嗣继。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Tadamasa Nobushige.

古文：历散骑常侍、仪同三司。
现代文：整信曾任官散骑常侍、仪同三司。
English: To rectify the situation, he served as an official horseback riding attendant and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：好学有行检，少年时因猎坠马，伤腰脚，卒不能行起，终于长安。
现代文：好学有德行。少时因狩猎从马背上跌下，腰、腿重伤，不能走路，死在长安城。
English: When he was young, he fell off his horse while hunting, seriously injuring his lower back and leg, and was unable to walk. He died in Chang'an City.

古文：琛同母弟惠宝早亡，元象初，赠侍中、尚书令、都督四州诸军事、青州刺史。
现代文：琛同母弟惠宝早死，元象初，赠侍中、尚书令、都督四州诸军事、青州刺史。
English: His younger half-brother Hui Bao died at an early age, and he was given the titles of Junior Chamberlain, Senior Registrar, Military Governor of the Four Provinces, and Military Historian of Qingzhou.

古文：天统三年，重赠十州都督，封陈留王，谥曰文恭，以清河王岳第十子敬文嗣。
现代文：天统三年，重赠十州都督，封陈留王，谥文恭，以清河王岳第十子敬文为后嗣。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, the governors of ten prefectures were re-awarded, and King Chen Liu and King Wenqong were crowned, with King Qinghe's tenth son, King Yue's tenth son, King Wen, as his heir.

古文：清河王岳，字洪略，高祖从父弟也。
现代文：清河王高岳，字洪略，高祖从父弟。
English: Gao Yue, King of the Qing River, surnamed Hong Rong, Gao Zu from his father and brother.

古文：父翻，字飞雀，魏朝赠太尉，谥孝宣公。
现代文：父高翻，字飞雀，魏朝赠太尉，谥孝宣公。
English: His father Gao Fu, the character Feizhao, was given the title of Tai Liang by the Wei Dynasty, and Zou Xiao Xuangong.

古文：岳幼时孤贫，人未之知也，长而敦直，姿貌嶷然，沈深有器量。
现代文：岳幼年孤单贫穷，很少人认识他。长大后敦厚朴直，身材高大，深沉且有气量。
English: In his childhood, Yue was lonely and poor, and few people knew him. When he grew up, he was simple and straightforward, tall, deep and powerful.

古文：初，岳家于洛邑，高祖每奉使入洛，必止于岳舍。
现代文：最早岳的家在洛阳，高祖每次接受使命来洛，必定住在岳家。
English: Yue's earliest home was in Luoyang. Whenever Gao Zu received a mission to come to Luoyang, he would definitely stay at Yue's home.

古文：岳母山氏，尝夜起，见高祖室中有光，密往觇之，乃无灯，即移高祖于别室，如前所见。
现代文：岳的母亲山氏，曾半夜起来，看见高祖的住室有光亮，偷偷地往里看，却没有灯，第二天让高祖睡另外的房间，还是这样。
English: Yue's mother, Ms. Shan, once got up in the middle of the night and saw a bright light in Gao Zu's room. She secretly looked inside, but there was no light. The next day, she asked Gao Zu to sleep in another room, and the same thing happened.

古文：怪其神异，诣卜者筮之，遇《乾》之《大有》，占之曰： 吉，《易》称 飞龙在天，大人造也 ，飞龙九五大人之卦，贵不可言。 
现代文：她十分惊奇，就到卜者那里求筮，占语称： 吉，《易》说 龙飞天上，是大人的造化 ，飞龙九五是大人的卦象，贵不可言。 
English: She was very surprised, so she went to the fortuneteller to ask for a sign, saying in Chinese: Ji, Yi said that the dragon flying in the sky is the creation of an adult, and the flying dragon nine five is an adult's Gua Zi, precious beyond words.

古文：山氏归报高祖。
现代文：山氏回家将占筮之事报告给了高祖。
English: When Yamushi got home, he reported the incident to Gaozu.

古文：后高祖起兵于信都，山氏闻之，大喜，谓岳曰： 赤光之瑞，今当验矣，汝可间行从之，共图大计。 
现代文：后高祖于信都起兵，山氏听到后，十分高兴，对岳说： 红光的瑞兆，今天当要验证了，你可以从小路赶去投奔，同他一道共谋大事。 
English: After that, Gao Zu and Yuxin both raised an army. Upon hearing this, Mr. Shan was very happy and said to Mr. Yue, "This is the auspicious sign of the red light. Today is the day to prove it. You can rush to join the army from the side road and work together with him to achieve great things."

古文：岳遂往信都。
现代文：于是岳赶赴信都。
English: As a result, Yue rushed to Xindu.

古文：高祖见之，大悦。
现代文：高祖见岳，极其欢悦。
English: Gao Zu was overjoyed.

古文：中兴初，除散骑常侍、镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫，领武卫将军。
现代文：中兴初年，授散骑常侍、镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫，领武卫将军。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was awarded the titles of Cavalry General, Zhendong General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and Lin Wuwei General.

古文：高祖与四胡战于韩陵，高祖将中军，高昂将左军，岳将右军。
现代文：高祖在韩陵同四胡交战，高祖统中军，高昂率左军，岳将右军。
English: Gaozu was at war with Shihou in Hanling. Gaozu led the central army, Gao led the left army, and Yue led the right army.

古文：中军败绩，贼乘之，岳举麾大呼，横冲贼阵，高祖方得回师，表里奋击，因大破贼。
现代文：中军大败，胡贼乘势推进，岳举旗大喊，率先冲进敌阵，高祖才挥师反击，里外夹攻，大破四胡。
English: The Chinese army suffered a crushing defeat, the Hu bandits took advantage of the situation to advance, Yue raised his flag and shouted, leading the charge into the enemy lines. Gaozucai waved his division to counterattack, attacked from the inside and outside, and smashed four Hu.

古文：以功除卫将军、右光禄大夫，仍领武卫。
现代文：因功拜卫将军、右光禄大夫，仍领武卫将军。
English: Due to the merits of General Baiwei and Doctor Uguanglu, he still leads General Wuwei.

古文：太昌初，除车骑将军、左光禄大夫，领左右卫，封清河郡公，食邑二千户。
现代文：太昌初，除车骑将军、左光禄大夫，领左右卫，封清河郡公，食邑二千户。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, the doctor of the left light and the doctor of the left light, the leader of the left and right guards, the governor of Qinghe County, and two thousand households in the food village.

古文：母山氏，封为郡君，授女侍中，入侍皇后。
现代文：母亲山氏，封为郡君，授女侍中，入宫服侍皇后。
English: His mother, Yamaji, was given the title of county princess, was given the title of maidservant, and entered the palace to serve the empress.

古文：时尔朱兆犹据并州，高祖将讨之，令岳留镇京师，迁骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：此时尔朱兆还占领着并州，高祖准备出兵攻讨，令岳留守京师，迁官为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: At this time, Zhu Zhao was still occupying and annexing the state, Gao Zu was preparing to send troops to attack, leaving Yue to stay in the Beijing division, and he was transferred to be the commander of the cavalry general and the three divisions of Yidong.

古文：天平二年，除侍中、六州军事都督，寻加开府。
现代文：天平二年，除侍中、六州军事都督，不久加开府。
English: In the second year of the Tenpyo era, Takaoka was again appointed by the imperial court as a chamberlain and military governor of six prefectures, and was soon given the additional title of kaifu.

古文：岳辟引时贤，以为僚属，论者以为美。
现代文：岳招纳贤士，以为僚属，受时论赞美。
English: Yue recruited sages, thought they were his colleagues, and was praised by the theory of time.

古文：寻都监典书，复为侍学，除使持节、六州大都督、冀州大中正。
现代文：很快总监典书，复为侍学，除使持节、六州大都督、冀州大中正。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the post of chief librarian, and then to the post of attendant, in addition to the post of envoy, the post of governor of six states, and the post of vice-president of Jizhou University.

古文：俄拜京畿大都督，其六州事悉诣京畿。
现代文：不久拜京畿大都督。他所管辖的六州事务都在京畿处理。
English: He soon became the governor of Gyeonggi Province, and the affairs of the six provinces under his jurisdiction were all handled in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：时高祖统务晋阳，岳与侍中孙腾等在京师辅政。
现代文：时高祖在晋阳理事，岳与侍中孙腾等人则在京师辅政。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was a director in Jinyang, while Yue and Sun Teng, an attendant, were assistant governors in Beijing.

古文：元象二年，遭母忧去职。
现代文：元象二年，因母死而去职。
English: He left the post two years ago due to the death of his mother.

古文：岳性至孝，尽力色养，母若有疾，衣不解带，及遭丧，哀毁骨立，高祖深以忧之，每日遣人劳勉。
现代文：岳十分孝顺，尽心赡养，母亲若有疾病，他便会衣不解带地认真照顾。
English: Yue is very filial and devoted to his mother. If his mother is ill, he will take good care of her.

古文：寻起复本任。
现代文：很快起复本官。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：二年，除兼领军将军。
现代文：二年，除兼领军将军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of general in addition to leading the army.

古文：兴和初，世宗入总朝政，岳出为使持节、都督、冀州刺史，侍中、骠骑、开府仪同如故。
现代文：兴和初年，世宗入京总理朝政，岳出为使持节、都督、冀州刺史，侍中、骠骑、开府仪同等职依旧。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Shizong entered Beijing as the prime minister of the imperial court, and Yue became the envoy of the emperor, the governor, and the historian of Jizhou, and the same positions as the chamberlain, the equestrian, and the keeper of the imperial residences remained.

古文：三年，转青州刺史。
现代文：三年，转任青州刺史。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of Qingzhou chief historian.

古文：岳任权日久，素为朝野畏服，及出为藩，百姓望风詟惮。
现代文：岳掌权时间长，一向让朝野畏服，当任职青、冀二州后，百姓望风战栗。
English: Yue has been in power for a long time. He has always made the court and the country fear him. When he took office in Qing and Hebei provinces, the people trembled.

古文：武定元年，除晋州刺史、西南道大都督，得绥边之称。
现代文：武定元年，任晋州刺史、西南道大都督，得到了 绥边 的称誉。
English: In the first year of the Wuding era, he was appointed as the Jinzhou chief historian and the governor of the Southwest Province, and gained the reputation of being the best in the region.

古文：时岳遇患，高祖令还并治疗，疾瘳，复令赴职。
现代文：此时岳患病，高祖请他回并治疗，病愈，又回到了晋州。
English: At this time, Yue fell ill, Gao Zu asked him to return and treat him. After he recovered, he returned to Jinzhou.

古文：及高祖崩，侯景叛，世宗征岳还并，共图取景之计。
现代文：高祖崩，侯景叛，世宗召岳回并，共商攻讨侯景的大计。
English: Gao Zu passed away, Hou Jing rebelled, and Shizong called Yue back to merge with him, and together they discussed the plan to attack Hou Jing.

古文：而武帝乘间遣其贞阳侯明率众于寒山，拥泗水灌彭城，与景为掎角声援。
现代文：这时，梁武帝趁机派贞阳侯萧明率众赶往寒山，阻挡泗水淹灌彭城，与侯景互为犄角支援。
English: At this time, Emperor Liangwu took advantage of the opportunity to send Zhengyang Hou Xiao Ming and his followers to Qanshan to block the floodwater from flooding Pengcheng, and he and Houjing supported each other.

古文：岳总帅诸军南讨，与行台慕容绍宗等击明，大破之，临阵擒明及其大将胡贵孙，自余俘馘数万。
现代文：岳统率诸军南讨，与行台慕容绍宗等击打萧明，大获全胜，在战场上活捉了萧明和他手下的大将胡贵孙，俘虏以及杀死的有几万人。
English: Yue Tong led the army to the south, fought against Xiao Ming with Gongtai Murong Shaozong and others, and won a complete victory. He captured Xiao Ming and his general Hu Guisun alive on the battlefield, and captured and killed tens of thousands of people.

古文：景乃拥众于涡阳，与左卫将军刘丰等相持。
现代文：侯景就拥众在涡阳，与左卫将军刘丰等人相对抗。
English: Hou Jing had his supporters in the Vortex Yang, opposing the Left Guard General Liu Feng and others.

古文：岳回军追讨，又破之，景单骑逃窜。
现代文：岳又回军向侯景进攻，大败景军，景一个人骑马逃遁。
English: Yue returned to attack Houjing, defeating the Jing army, and Jing fled alone on horseback.

古文：六年，以功除侍中、太尉，余如故，别封新昌县子。
现代文：六年，以功任侍中、太尉，其余官职如故，别封为新昌县子。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to the posts of chamberlain and captain, and the rest of his official positions remained the same. He was given the title of the son of Xinchang County.

古文：又拜使持节、河南总管、大都督，统慕容绍宗、刘丰等讨王思政于长社。
现代文：又拜使持节、河南总管、大都督，率领慕容绍宗、刘丰等人讨伐王思政。
English: He also paid tribute to the envoy Jizhe, the Henan governor-general, the great governor, led by Murong Shaozong, Liu Feng and others to fight against Wang Sisi.

古文：思政婴城自守，岳等引洧水灌城。
现代文：思政据长社城以固守，岳等人便引来洧水灌城。
English: According to Shizeng, Chosha Castle was to be held fast, and Yue and the others were lured to flood the city with water.

古文：绍宗、刘丰为思政所获，关西出兵援思政，岳内外防御，甚有谋算。
现代文：绍宗、刘丰被思政虏获，关西出兵增援思政，岳内防外御，胸有成竹。
English: Shao Zong and Liu Feng were captured by Shizheng, Kansai sent troops to reinforce Shizheng, and Yue took the lead in internal defense and external control.

古文：城不没者三板。
现代文：长社城涌进了很多的水。
English: A lot of water poured into the city of Chosha.

古文：会世宗亲临，数日城下，获思政等。
现代文：适逢世宗亲临督战，几天就将长社城攻破，并且抓获了思政等人。
English: When Shizong personally came to supervise the battle, he broke through the Chosha Castle in a few days and captured Shizheng and others.

古文：以功别封真定县男，世宗以为己功，故赏典弗弘也。
现代文：因功别封真定县男，世宗认为攻下长社是自己的功劳，所以对岳的奖赏不太丰厚。
English: As a man from Jinding County, Sejong considered the capture of Chosha to be his own achievement, so the reward for Yue was not very rich.

古文：世宗崩，显祖出抚晋阳，令岳以本官兼尚书左仆射，留镇京师。
现代文：世宗死，显祖出京安抚晋阳，令岳以本官兼尚书左仆射，留守京师。
English: After Shizong's death, Xianzu went to Beijing to pacify Jinyang, leaving Yue to remain in Beijing as his subordinate.

古文：天保初，进封清河郡王，寻除使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、宗师、司州牧。
现代文：天保初，晋封清河郡王，不久为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、宗师、司州牧。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the king of Qinghe County, and soon became the envoy of the festival, the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, the grandmaster, and the provincial governor.

古文：五年，加太保。
现代文：五年，加太保。
English: Five years in the Pacific.

古文：梁萧绎为周军所逼，遣使告急，且请援。
现代文：梁朝萧绎被周军逼迫，遣使告急，还请求支援。
English: Persecuted by Zhou's army, Liang Chao Xiaoyan sent envoys to the emergency and also requested support.

古文：冬，诏岳为西南道大行台，统司徒潘相乐等救江陵。
现代文：冬，帝诏岳为西南道大行台，都统司徒潘相乐等援救江陵。
English: In winter, Mount Tei Zhaoyue was the southwestern highway's main route, and the prefectural governors, including Pan Xiangle, came to the rescue of Gangneung.

古文：六年正月，师次义阳，遇荆州陷，因略地南至郢州，获梁州刺史司徒陆法和，仍克郢州。
现代文：六年正月，军队驻扎义阳，正好荆州城被周军攻陷，岳乘机抢占了向南一直到郢州的土地，还抓获了梁的郢州刺史陆法和，占领了郢州城。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, the army was stationed in Yiyang, just as Jingzhou City was captured by the Zhou Army. Yue took the opportunity to seize the land all the way south to Zhangzhou. He also captured Liang's Zhangzhou Jishi Land Law and occupied Zhangzhou City.

古文：岳先送法和于京师，遣仪同慕容俨据郢城。
现代文：岳先派人将法和送往京城，命令仪同慕容俨据守郢城。
English: Yuexian sent someone to take the law and send it to the capital, ordering Yi and Murong to defend the capital.

古文：朝廷知江陵陷，诏岳旋师。
现代文：朝廷得江陵陷落消息，诏令岳回师。
English: When the imperial court received the news of the fall of Gangneung, it ordered Yue to return to his division.

古文：岳自讨寒山、长社及出随、陆，并有功绩，威名弥重。
现代文：岳自率军攻讨寒山、长社，及进攻随、陆，均有战功，威名更重。
English: Yue himself led the army to attack Kansan, Chosha, and attack Sui and Lu, all of which have war achievements and are more prestigious.

古文：而性华侈，尤悦酒色，歌姬舞女，陈鼎击钟，诸王皆不及也。
现代文：但他喜好奢侈，尤悦酒色，歌姬舞女，陈鼎击钟，诸王都赶不上他。
English: But he likes luxury, Yueyue wine color, singer and dancer, Chen Ding strikes the bell, the kings can't catch up with him.

古文：初，高归彦少孤，高祖令岳抚养，轻其年幼，情礼甚薄。
现代文：当初，高归彦少孤，高祖请岳抚养，岳认为他年少，待其刻薄。
English: At first, Gao Guibin was a little orphan, and Gao Zu asked Yue to raise him. Yue thought he was young and treated him harshly.

古文：归彦内衔之而未尝出口。
现代文：归彦心里不高兴但没有挂在嘴上。
English: Kunihiko wasn't happy in his heart, but he didn't say so.

古文：及归彦为领军，大被宠遇，岳谓其德己，更倚赖之。
现代文：当归彦做了领军，大受宠幸时，岳以为他会感谢自己，因此十分地依赖他。
English: When Kunihiko became the leader of the army and was greatly favored, his mother-in-law thought he would thank her, so she fully relied on him.

古文：归彦密构其短。
现代文：归彦秘密地搜寻他的短处。
English: Kakihiko surreptitiously searches for his weakness.

古文：岳于城南起宅，听事后开巷。
现代文：岳在城南修建宅第，在听事厅后开小巷。
English: Yue built a mansion in the south of the city and opened an alley behind the auditorium.

古文：归彦奏帝曰： 清河造宅，僭拟帝宫，制为永巷，但唯无阙耳。 
现代文：归彦向帝报告说： 清河王修建的住宅，规格与帝宫相似，还造有永巷，只不过没有阙而已。 
English: Guihang reported to the emperor: The residence built by King Qinghe is similar in size to the imperial palace. It also has a long alley, but there is no gate.

古文：显祖闻而恶之，渐以疏岳。
现代文：显祖听报告后心中厌恶，就渐渐地疏远了他。
English: After listening to the report, Xianzu was disgusted and gradually distanced himself from him.

古文：仍属显祖召邺下妇人薛氏入宫，而岳先尝唤之至宅，由其姊也。
现代文：岳又请显祖征召邺城妇女薛氏入宫，但岳却把薛氏传唤到了自己的住宅，这是由于薛氏姊姊的缘故。
English: Yue also asked Xianzu to summon the Qincheng woman Xue to the palace, but Yue summoned Xue to his own house because of Xue's sister.

古文：帝悬薛氏姊而锯杀之，让岳以为奸民女。
现代文：帝将薛氏姊吊起来砍掉了脚后杀死了她，责备岳奸淫民女。
English: The emperor hanged Xue's sister, chopped off her feet, and killed her, accusing her of adultery.

古文：岳曰： 臣本欲取之，嫌其轻薄不用，非奸也。 
现代文：岳辩解道： 我本来是想娶她为妻的，但她轻薄，我讨厌，不是奸污。 
English: The mother-in-law defended: I originally wanted to marry her, but she is frivolous, I hate her, it's not rape.

古文：帝益怒。
现代文：帝更加恼怒。
English: As a result, Emperor Guangwu became increasingly angry.

古文：六年十一月，使高归彦就宅切责之。
现代文：六年十一月，遣高归彦到他的家中给以严厉责备。
English: In November of the sixth year, he sent Gao Guihang to his home to give him a severe reprimand.

古文：岳忧悸不知所为，数日而薨，故时论纷然，以为赐鸩也。
现代文：岳忧惧不知如何是好，几天后就死了，因此社会上议论纷纷，认为是皇帝赐鸩的结果。
English: Yue Zhanhan did not know what to do, and died a few days later. As a result, there was a lot of discussion in the community, and it was thought to be the result of the emperor bestowing an imperial edict.

古文：朝野叹惜之。
现代文：朝野都为他惋惜。
English: Asano all felt sorry for him.

古文：时年四十四。
现代文：岳死时四十四岁。
English: My father-in-law was forty-four when he died.

古文：诏大鸿胪监护丧事，赠使持节、都督冀定沧瀛赵幽济七州诸军、太宰、太傅、定州刺史，假黄钺，给辒辌车，赗物二千段，谥曰昭武。
现代文：帝诏大鸿胪监护丧事，赠使持节、都督冀定沧瀛赵幽济七州诸军、太宰、太傅、定州刺史，假黄钺，给车京车，物二千段，谥号昭武。
English: Emperor Zhaozong oversaw the funeral ceremony, and presented Zhao Youji, the military commander of the seven states, Dazai, Taifu, Dingzhou, the history of the seven states, the false Huang Di, the Beijing car, two thousand pieces of goods, and the nickname Zhaowu.

古文：初，岳与高祖经纶天下，家有私兵，并畜戎器，储甲千余领。
现代文：当初岳与高祖筹谋天下，家有私兵，收藏着武器，储集铠甲多领。
English: In the beginning, Yue and Gao Zu plotted to rule the world. The family had its own private army, collected weapons, and stockpiled armour and many collars.

古文：世宗之末，岳以四海无事，表求纳之。
现代文：世宗末年，岳认为四海太平，上表请求交纳。
English: In the last years of his reign, Yue believed that the four seas were peaceful, and requested payment of the above table.

古文：世宗敦至亲之重，推心相任，云： 叔属居肺腑，职在维城，所有之甲，本资国用，叔何疑而纳之。 
现代文：世宗极其看重至亲的关系，对岳十分信任，说： 叔叔位居肺腑，职在卫国，所有兵甲，本为国用，叔叔为何疑惑而要上交呢？ 
English: The Sejong attaches great importance to the relationship between relatives, and has great trust in Yue, saying: My uncle is in the highest position, and is in charge of defending the country. All military armor is originally used by the state. Why does my uncle have doubts and want to hand it over?

古文：文宣之世，亦频请纳，又固不许。
现代文：文宣帝时，岳也多次请求交纳，但没有得到同意。
English: At the time of Emperor Wenxuan, Yue also repeatedly requested payment, but did not receive consent.

古文：及将薨，遗表谢恩，并请上甲于武库，至此葬毕，方许纳焉。
现代文：临死之前，上表谢恩，并请将兵甲上交武库。直至葬事完毕，朝廷才批准他的生前请求。
English: Before his death, he expressed his gratitude and requested that his armor be handed over to the arsenal. The Imperial Court did not approve his request until after the funeral.

古文：皇建中，配享世宗庙庭。
现代文：皇建中，配享世宗庙庭。
English: It was built during the reign of the emperor, and it shares the same temple courtyard as the Sejong.

古文：后归彦反，世祖知其前谮，曰： 清河忠烈，尽力皇家，而归彦毁之，间吾骨肉。 
现代文：后来归彦叛逆，世祖明白归彦原先对岳的诬陷，说： 清河忠烈，尽心皇室，但归彦攻击他，是离间我们的关系。 
English: Afterward, Gui Yan rebelled, and the ancestor understood that Gui Yan had originally framed Yue, saying, "Qinghe is loyal and devoted to the imperial family, but Gui Yan's attack on him is a breach in our relationship.

古文：籍没归彦，以良贱百口赐岳家。
现代文：籍没归彦家口财产，将良贱百口赏赐给岳家。
English: The property of the Hiko family did not return to the family, and 100 shares were awarded to the father-in-law's family.

古文：后又思岳之功，重赠太师、太保，余如故。
现代文：后又思念岳的功劳，重赠太师、太保，余官依旧。
English: Later, he also remembered the merits of Yue, and gave him the title of grandmaster and grand tutor again, and his other posts remained the same.

古文：子劢嗣。
现代文：子劢嗣继。
English: His son Xiao Qin became his successor.

古文：劢，字敬德，夙智早成，为显祖所爱。
现代文：劢，字敬德，夙智早成，为显祖钟爱。
English: , the character敬德, 智早成, is a favorite of Xianzu.

古文：年七岁，遣侍皇太子。
现代文：年七岁，被派去侍奉皇太子。
English: At the age of seven, he was sent to serve the crown prince.

古文：后除青州刺史，拜日，显祖戒之曰： 叔父前牧青州，甚有遗惠，故遣汝慰彼黎庶，宜好用心，无坠声绩。 
现代文：后任青州刺史。拜官之日，显祖告诫他说： 叔父前为青州刺史，有很多的惠政，所以派你去安抚那里的民众，要好好用心，不要败坏了你父亲的名声。 
English: On the day of the memorial service, Hsien Tzu admonished him, "My uncle was the governor of Qingzhou and had many favorable policies, so he sent you to appease the people there. You should be careful not to ruin your father's reputation."

古文：劢流涕对曰： 臣以蒙幼，滥叨拔擢，虽竭庸短，惧忝先政。 
现代文：劢流着泪说： 我年纪尚小，就蒙受如此的提拔，虽要竭尽全力，但还是害怕愧对先父。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, he said, "I am too young to have received such a promotion, and although I will do my best, I am still afraid of being ashamed of my father.

古文：帝曰： 汝既能有此言，吾不虑也。 
现代文：帝说： 你既然说出了这样的话，我也就不须担心了。 
English: The emperor said, "Since you have said this, I don't have to worry about it.

古文：寻追授武卫将军、领军、祠部尚书、开府仪同三司。
现代文：很快又追授武卫将军、领军、祠部尚书、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Imperial Guards, Commander of the Imperial Army, Keeper of the Imperial Shrine, Keeper of the Imperial Palace, and the Third Division.

古文：以清河地在畿内，改封乐安王。
现代文：由于清河地在京畿之内，改封乐安王。
English: As Qinghe is located in Gyeonggi Province, his title was changed to King Le An.

古文：转侍中、尚书右仆射，出为朔州行台仆射。
现代文：转侍中、尚书右仆射，出为朔州行台仆射。
English: In the transfer of attendants, Shang Shuxu was the right-hand man and Shuo Zhou was the left-hand man.

古文：后主晋州败，太后从土门道还京师，敕劢统领兵马，侍卫太后。
现代文：后主败晋州，胡太后从土门道返回京城，帝敕劢统领兵马，侍卫太后。
English: After the main defeat of Jinzhou, the Empress Dowager Hu returned to Beijing from the Dumen Road, the emperor led the soldiers and horses, and the guards of the Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：时佞幸阍寺，犹行暴虐，民间鸡猪，悉放鹰犬搏噬取之。
现代文：这时的佞幸宦官，依然肆行暴虐，看见老百姓的鸡猪，他们就放出鹰犬追逐猎取。
English: At this time, the eunuchs, still rampant with violence, saw the people's chickens and pigs, and they released the eagle dogs to chase and hunt.

古文：劢收仪同三司苟子溢徇军，欲行大戮。太后有令，然后释之。
现代文：劢抓住了仪同三司苟子溢，示众后想将他处死，太后下令，劢被迫将其释放。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered him to be released after she caught him in the act of adultery and wanted to put him to death.

古文：刘文殊窃谓劢曰： 子溢之徒，言成祸福，何容如此，岂不虑后生毁谤耶？ 
现代文：刘文殊私底下对劢说： 子溢之徒，一语可成祸福，怎能容忍他们胡作非为，难道没有考虑后世的诽谤？ 
English: Liu Wenshu said to Zou privately, "The words of those who are overflowing with children can be a blessing and a curse. How can we tolerate their misdeeds? Didn't they consider the slander of future generations?

古文：劢攘袂语文殊曰： 自献武皇帝以来，抚养士卒，委政亲贤，用武行师，未有折衄。
现代文：劢捋袖伸臂对文殊讲： 从献武皇帝以来，抚养士卒，委政贤士，用武行师，未尝出现破绽。
English: He told Manjushri: Since the emperor's accession to the throne, we have raised up scholars, political sages, and martial artists, and there has never been a flaw.

古文：今西寇已次并州，达官多悉委叛，正坐此辈专政弄权，所以内外离心，衣冠解体。
现代文：眼下西寇已经占领了并州，达官贵人很多投敌叛国，正是因为这伙人的专政弄权，所以内外离心，衣冠解体。
English: Right now, the Western Invaders have occupied and annexed the state, and many high-ranking officials and dignitaries have joined the enemy and committed treason. It is precisely because of this group of people's dictatorship and power-grabbing that the internal and external centrifugal forces have disintegrated.

古文：若得今日斩此卒，明日及诛，亦无所恨。
现代文：如果今天能斩杀此辈，明日我被处死，也没有什么遗憾的。
English: If I could kill this generation today, and be executed tomorrow, I would have no regrets.

古文：王国家姻娅，须同疾恶，返为此言，岂所望乎！ 
现代文：王是国家的亲戚，应同朝廷一样的好恶。反而讲出了这样的话，还有什么希望！ 
English: The king is a relative of the state and should have the same likes and dislikes as the imperial court. Instead, he said such a thing, what hope is there!

古文：太后还至邺，周军续至，人皆恟惧，无有斗心，朝士出降，昼夜相属。
现代文：太后刚刚回到邺，周军就接踵而至，所以人们都很害怕，几乎没有了斗志，朝士投降，日夜相继。
English: As soon as the empress dowager returned to Handan, the Zhou army arrived one after another, so people were very afraid and had almost no fighting spirit. The Asahi surrendered day and night.

古文：劢因奏后主曰： 今所翻叛，多是贵人，至于卒伍，犹未离贰。
现代文：劢因此上书后主说： 眼下叛投的，多是达官贵人，但老百姓却还没有生出贰心。
English: Therefore, after the letter was submitted, the Lord said, "Most of those who have defected at this time are high-ranking officials, but the common people have not yet given birth to a rebellious heart.

古文：请追五品已上家属，置之三台，因协之曰： 若战不捷，即退焚台。 
现代文：请将五品以上官吏的家属，在三台安置，并威胁他们说： 如果仗打败了，后撤时就要焚毁三台。 
English: Please place the families of officials with five or more court ranks in San Tai, and threaten them, saying, "If the war is lost, we will burn down San Tai when we retreat."

古文：此曹顾惜妻子，必当死战。
现代文：这些人顾惜妻子，一定要拼命战斗。
English: This kind of people all take care of their wives and children, and will fight to the death.

古文：且王师频北，贼徒轻我，今背城一决，理必破之，此亦计之上者。 
现代文：再说王师多次失败，周军轻视我们，现在背城一战，一定可以打败周军，这是上等计策。 
English: Besides, Wang Shih has failed many times, and the Zhou army has despised us. Now that we have turned our backs on the city, we can surely defeat the Zhou army. This is a superior strategy.

古文：后主卒不能用。
现代文：后主始终没有采纳劢的建议。
English: Subsequent owners never took up his suggestion.

古文：齐亡入周，依例授开府。
现代文：齐亡后劢入周，依制度授开府。
English: After Qi's death, Zhou entered Zhou, and according to the system, Zhou was awarded the capital.

古文：隋朝历杨、楚、光、洮四州刺史。
现代文：隋时分别做过扬、楚、光、洮四州刺史。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Yang, Chu, Guang, and Qin made the history of the four states respectively.

古文：开皇中卒。
现代文：开皇中卒。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Ming.

古文：史臣曰：《易》称： 天地盈虚，与时消息，况于人乎！ 
现代文：史臣曰：《易经》上说： 天地也是随时代的变化而变化的，何况人呢? 
English: Shichen said: "In the I Ching, it says: Heaven and earth also change with the changes of the times, not to mention people.

古文：盖以通塞有期，污隆适道。
现代文：总是因为人世上顺利险阻都有个定敷，兴衰成败都随着大道而消长。
English: It's always because there is a set rule for the smooth and dangerous obstacles in the human world, and the rise and fall, success and failure all follow the road.

古文：举世思治，则显仁以应之；小人道长，则俭德以避之。
现代文：全社会都期待国治民安时，则大行仁道来应和天意人心；小人当道弄权时，则收敛自己以避其锋。
English: The whole society expects that when the country is governed and the people are safe, the great ones will act in a benevolent way to meet the wishes of the people; when the villains play with power, they will restrain themselves to avoid their front.

古文：至若负博陆之图，处藩屏之地，而欲迷邦违难，其可得乎。
现代文：至若接受了托孤顾命的重任，处于屏藩皇家的颢贵地位，而希圃逃避职责，那怎么行呢?
English: If he accepted the heavy responsibility of entrusting his life to others, and was in the noble position of the royal family of Ping, but Xipu evaded his duties, how could it be done?

古文：赵郡以跗萼之亲，当顾命之重，高揖则宗社易危，去恶则人神俱泰。
现代文：趟郡王以皇亲血脉，处于顾命大臣的要位，拱手揖让则国家危难，力除奸小则入神皆庆。
English: If the king of the county is a blood relative of the emperor, he is in the important position of the minister for the protection of the emperor's life. If he makes a concession, the country will be in danger. If he removes the traitor, everyone will celebrate.

古文：是用安夫一德，同此贞心，践畏途而不疑，履危机而莫惧。
现代文：因而他坚持报国大德，心怀安邦大志，明知践畏途而无所顾忌，履险境而一往直前。
English: Therefore, he insisted on upholding the great virtue of the country, cherishing the great aspiration of safeguarding the country, knowing that he would tread the path of fear without any scruples, and marching forward in the face of danger.

古文：以斯忠义，取毙凶慝。
现代文：以他这样的一腔忠义，却终于取死于奸小之手。
English: With such a ring of loyalty, he finally died at the hands of a traitor.

古文：岂道光四海，不遇周成之明；将朝去三仁，终见殷墟之祸。
现代文：难道真的是道德光照四海而不遇周成王鉴人之明；难道一定会因朝中失去三贤士而殷商终归灭亡!
English: Is it really true that morality shines on the four seas without encountering Zhou Cheng Wang's discernment; is it certain that Yin Shang will eventually perish due to the loss of the three sages in the middle of the dynasty!

古文：不然则邦国殄瘁，何影响之速乎！
现代文：不然的话，北齐的倾覆灭亡怎么来得如此之快呢?
English: Otherwise, how did Beiqi's downfall and destruction come so quickly?

古文：清河属经纶之会，自致青云，出将入相，翊成鸿业，虽汉朝刘贾，魏室曹洪，俱未足论其高下。
现代文：高岳生当龙虎风云际会之期，参与创业，自致青云，出将入相，襄成高齐大业，即使拿汉代刘贾，魏室曹洪等相比，都不足以论其高下。
English: Gao Yue was born in the Dragon and Tiger period, participated in entrepreneurship, self-induced youth, entered the phase, and became Gao Qi's great career. Even if compared with Liu Jia in the Han Dynasty and Cao Hong in the Wei Dynasty, it is not enough to talk about his high and low.

古文：天保不辰，易生悔咎，固不可掩其风烈，适以彰显祖之失德云。
现代文：天保年间时运乖舛，滋生祸端，然而掩盖不了清河王的高风亮节，适足以显示显祖皇帝的失德而已。
English: During the Tenpo era, the weather was bad, breeding disaster, but it could not cover up the Qinghe King's high winds and bright festival, which was enough to show the emperor's immorality.

古文：赞曰：赵郡英伟，风范凝正。
现代文：赞曰：趟郡王英迈雄伟，一代风范正直凝重。
English: Praise said: the county king is heroic and majestic, and the generation is upright and dignified.

古文：天道无亲，斯人斯命。
现代文：天道无亲不佑善人，竟使斯人陷于斯命!
English: Heaven has no relatives to bless the good people, but it has made the good people trapped in the bad life!

古文：赫赫清河，于以经国。
现代文：功烈赫赫的清河王，是位经邦治国的真人才。
English: The illustrious Qinghe Wang is a true talent who has governed the country.

古文：末路小疵，非为败德。
现代文：后期生活上一点小毛病，不足以损毁他光荣的一生。
English: A few hiccups in his later life were not enough to mar his glorious life.

