古文：起玄黓困敦，尽屠维协洽，凡八年。
现代文：起玄黓困敦，尽屠维协洽，一共八年。
English: A total of eight years have passed since then.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十二年
现代文：隋文帝开皇十二年
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Sui

古文：春，二月，己巳，以蜀王秀为内史令兼右领军大将军。
现代文：春季，二月己巳，隋朝任命蜀王杨秀为内史令兼右领军大将军。
English: In the spring, in February, the Sui Dynasty appointed Yang Xiu, King of Shu, as the Inner Historian and the right-hand leading general.

古文：国子博士何妥与尚书右仆射邳公苏威争议事，积不相能。
现代文：国子博士何妥与尚书右仆射邳公苏威议论政事时，素来意见不同，各不相让。
English: When discussing politics, Dr. Kuniko He Tuo and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao Gong Su Wei always had different opinions and would not give in to each other.

古文：威子夔为太子通事舍人，少敏辩，有盛名，士大夫多附之。
现代文：苏威的儿子苏夔担任太子通事舍人，他从小就机敏善辩，享有盛名，士大夫都樊附巴结他。
English: Su Wei's son, Su Shi, served as the prince's chief adviser. From childhood, he was quick-witted and eloquent, and enjoyed a high reputation. All the magistrates followed and flattered him.

古文：及议乐，夔与妥各有所持；诏百僚署其所同，百僚以威故，同夔者什八九。
现代文：及至讨论修订音乐时，苏夔和何妥各有自己的主张。于是隋文帝下诏令百官群臣各自发表意见，百官大臣由于苏威的缘故，十分之八九都表示赞成苏夔的主张。
English: When it came to discussing the revision of the music, Su Shi and He Tuo each had their own opinion. Therefore, Emperor Sui Wen issued an edict ordering the officials and ministers to express their opinions. Due to Su Wei, 89 out of 100 ministers agreed with Su Shi's opinion.

古文：妥恚曰： 吾席间函丈四十馀年，反为昨暮儿之所屈邪！ 
现代文：何妥愤愤不平地说： 我当国子博士都四十多年了，现在反倒屈居于一个乳臭未干的小儿之下！ 
English: How appropriate to say indignantly: I have been a Kuniko doctor for more than forty years, but now I am subservient to an infant!

古文：遂奏： 威与礼部尚书卢恺、吏部侍郎薛道衡、尚书右丞王弘、考功侍郎李同和等共为朋党。省中呼弘为世子，同和为叔，言二人如威之子弟也。 
现代文：于是向文帝上奏说： 苏威和礼部尚书卢恺、吏部侍朗薛道衡、尚书右丞王弘、吏部考功侍郎李同和等人结党营私，尚书省中称呼王弘为世子，称呼李同和为叔，这是说他们两人就如同苏威的儿子和兄弟。 
English: So he reported to Emperor Wen: Su Wei and the ceremonial secretary Wang Shulun, the staff secretary Lang Xue Daoheng, the staff secretary Wang Hong, the staff secretary Li Tonghe and others formed a party. The staff secretary called Wang Hong the heir and Li Tonghe the uncle, which meant that the two of them were like Su Wei's sons and brothers.

古文：复言威以曲道任其从父弟彻、肃罔冒为官等数事。
现代文：又告发苏威以不正当手段为堂弟苏彻、苏肃谋求官职等几项罪行。
English: In addition, Su Wei was accused of using improper means to seek official positions for his cousins, Su Che and Su Su, and other crimes.

古文：上命蜀王秀、上柱国虞庆则等杂案之，事颇有状。
现代文：于是文帝命令蜀王杨秀、上柱国虞庆则等人负责调查此事，基本属实。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen ordered Shu Wang Yangxiu, Shang Zhuan Guoyuqing and others to be responsible for investigating the matter, which is basically true.

古文：上大怒。秋，七月，乙巳，威坐免官爵，以开府仪同三司就第；卢恺除名，知名之士坐威得罪者百馀人。
现代文：隋文帝非常愤怒，秋季，七月乙巳，苏威因此被免除官职爵位，只保留开府仪同三司，回家闲居；卢恺被免官除名，受牵连而获罪的知名人士多达一百余人。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very angry. In the autumn, in July, Sui Wei was relieved of his official title and knighthood, retaining only the Kaifu ceremony and the three offices, and went home to idle; Lu Wei was removed from office, and more than a hundred famous people were implicated and convicted.

古文：初，周室以来，选无清浊；及恺摄吏部，与薛道衡等甄别士流，故涉朋党之谤，以至得罪。
现代文：自从北周建立以来，选拔官吏不管品德好坏，及至卢恺代理吏部尚书，与薛道衡一起对官吏的品德加以分别，所以遭到结交朋党的诽谤，以至于获罪。
English: Since the establishment of Northern Zhou, the selection of officials, regardless of good or bad moral character, has been slandered by the friends of the party, so much so that they were found guilty.

古文：未几，上曰： 苏威德行者，但为人所误耳！ 
现代文：不久，隋文帝又说： 苏威是个有德行的人，只是被别人所误罢了。 
English: Soon, Emperor Sui also said: Su Wei was a virtuous person, but he was mistaken by others.

古文：命之通籍。
现代文：于是下令苏威可以参预朝会宴请。
English: He had his name inscribed outside the palace gates.

古文：威好立条章，每岁责民间五品不逊，或答云： 管内无五品之家。 
现代文：苏威热衷于订立各种规章制度，每年都责备民间各地不重视推行儒家仁、义、礼、智、信五常的教化，有的地方官回答道： 在我管辖的地区内没有五品以上的官员。 
English: Su Wei was keen to establish various rules and regulations, and every year he reproached the people of various regions for not attaching importance to the implementation of Confucianism's five principles of benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith. Some local officials replied: In the area under my jurisdiction, there are no officials above the fifth grade.

古文：其不相应领，类多如此。
现代文：其不相领会，多数类此。
English: They don't understand each other, most of them are like that.

古文：又为馀粮簿，欲使有无相赡；民部侍郎郎茂以为烦迂不急，皆奏罢之。
现代文：苏威又编制出余粮帐簿，打算令民间有无互相调节，民部侍郎郎茂认为这种作法烦琐迂阔，难以推行，于是向文帝上奏，予以废除。
English: Su Wei also compiled a surplus grain account book, intending to make the people mutually adjust whether they had grain or not. The Minister of the People's Department, Langmao, considered this practice to be cumbersome and difficult to implement, so he appealed to Emperor Wen to abolish it.

古文：茂，基之子也，尝为卫国令。有民张元预兄弟不睦，丞、尉请加严刑，茂曰： 元预兄弟本相憎疾，又坐得罪，弥益其仇，非化民之意也。 
现代文：郎茂是郎基的儿子，他曾经担任卫国县令，有平民百姓张元预兄弟不相和睦，县丞、县尉请求对张元预兄弟严刑治罪，郎茂说： 张元预兄弟之间本来就互相憎恶，如果因此将他们治罪，他们就会更加仇恨，达不到教化百姓的目的。 
English: Langmao is the son of Langji. He once served as the county magistrate of Weiguo County. There were civilians who did not get along with the Zhangyuan brothers. The county magistrate and the county lieutenant requested that the Zhangyuan brothers be severely punished. Langmao said: The Zhangyuan brothers hated each other from the beginning. If they were punished for this, they would hate each other even more, which would not achieve the purpose of enlightening the people.

古文：乃徐谕之以义。
现代文：于是郎茂就用仁义慢慢开导他们。
English: So Lang Mao slowly enlightened them with benevolence and righteousness.

古文：元预等各感悔，顿首请罪，遂相亲睦，称为友悌。
现代文：张元预兄弟都深受感动而后悔不已，向郎茂叩头请罪，于是兄弟之间互相亲爱和睦，民间乡里都称赞他们的友爱孝悌。
English: Zhang Yuanyuan's brothers were deeply moved and regretful, and they apologized to Langmao. As a result, the brothers loved and reconciled with each other, and the people in the village praised their friendship and filial piety.

古文：己巳，上享太庙。
现代文：己巳，隋文帝到太庙祭祀祖先。
English: At that time, the Sui Emperor went to the Imperial Temple to worship his ancestors.

古文：壬申晦，日有食之。
现代文：壬申晦，出现日食。
English: In summer, in June, Goshun restored Liu Bei's mausoleum and garden. In Jinshin, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：帝以天下用律者多春驳，罪同论异，八月，甲戌，制：诸州死罪，不得辄决，悉移大理按覆，事尽，然后上省奏裁。 
现代文：隋文帝因为天下的执法官吏对法律的理解多有错误，往往发生罪行相同而判决不同的现象，八月甲戌，下制书说： 各州犯有死罪的案件，州府不得随意判决定案，要全部移送大理寺审理复查，复查完毕后，再呈奏尚书省裁决。 
English: In August, Emperor Sui Wenzong issued a document stating that, due to the fact that law enforcement officials all over the world often make mistakes in their understanding of the law, and the same crimes are often given different sentences. The document said: In cases of capital crimes committed in various states, the state government must not arbitrarily decide the case, but must all be transferred to Dali Temple for trial and review. After the review is completed, it will be submitted to Shangshu for ruling.

古文：冬，十月，壬午，上享太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月壬午，隋文帝到太庙祭祀祖先。
English: In the winter, in October at noon, the Sui Emperor went to the Imperial Temple to worship his ancestors.

古文：十一月，辛亥，祀南郊。
现代文：十一月辛亥，文帝在南郊举行祭天大祀。
English: In November of Xinhai, Emperor Wen held a grand festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：己未，新义公韩擒虎卒。
现代文：己未，新义公韩擒虎去世。
English: In the meantime, Sinuigong Han Shenghu passed away.

古文：十二月，乙酉，以内史令杨素为尚书右仆射，与高颎专掌朝政。
现代文：十二月乙酉，隋朝任命内史令杨素为尚书右仆射，与尚书左仆射高一起掌管朝政。
English: At the end of December, the Sui Dynasty appointed Yang Su, the Inner Historian, as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and he and Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shigao, took charge of the imperial government.

古文：素性疏辩，高下在心，朝臣之内，颇推高颎，敬牛弘，厚接薛道衡，视苏威蔑如也，自馀朝贵，多被陵轹。
现代文：杨素秉性粗疏而有辩才，对侍他人随意褒贬，在朝臣之中，他很推崇高，尊敬太常卿牛弘，倾心结交薛道衡，而根本瞧不起苏威，其余的当朝权贵大都受到他的欺凌侮辱。
English: Yang Su was coarse-natured and argumentative. He praised and disparaged his attendants at will. Among the courtiers, he was highly respected. He respected Tai Changqing Niu Hong, made close friends with Xue Daoheng, and looked down on Su Wei. The rest of the powerful nobles of the time were bullied and insulted by him.

古文：其才艺风调优于颎；至于推诚体国，处物平当，有宰相识度，不如颎远矣。
现代文：杨素的才艺风度优于高，至于以诚侍人，体谅国家，处事公平，具备宰相的见识和器度，他远不如高。
English: Yang Su's talent and demeanor are superior to Gao's, but as far as serving others with sincerity, understanding the country, dealing with things fairly, and having the insight and demeanor of a prime minister, he is far inferior to Gao.

古文：右领军大将军贺若弼，自谓功名出朝臣之右，每以宰相自许。
现代文：右领军大将军贺若弼自认为他的功勋名望在其他的群臣之上，因此经常以宰相自任。
English: General Horakazu, the right-hand leader of the army, believed that his achievements and reputation were superior to those of the other retainers, so he often appointed himself as prime minister.

古文：既而杨素为仆射，弼仍为将军，甚不平，形于言色，由是坐免官，怨望愈甚。
现代文：不久，杨素被任命为尚书右仆射，自己还是将军，所以非常愤恨不平，并在言谈脸色上表现出来，于是他被朝廷罢免职务，因而愈加怨恨。
English: Soon after, Yang Su was appointed as Shang Shu's right-hand man, but he was still a general, so he was very resentful and showed it in his speech and countenance, so he was removed from his post by the court, thus increasing his resentment.

古文：久之，上下弼狱，谓之曰： 我以高颎、杨素为宰相，汝每昌言曰： 此二人惟堪啖饭耳！ 
现代文：过了一段时间后，隋文帝将贺若弼逮捕下狱，问他说： 我任命高、杨素为宰相，而你经常扬言说： 这两个人只会吃饭。 
English: After a period of time, Emperor Sui Wen arrested and imprisoned He Ruoqiao and asked him: I appointed Gao and Yang Su as prime ministers, and you often threatened: These two will only eat.

古文：是何意也？ 
现代文：你这话是什么意思？ 
English: What do you mean by that?

古文：弼曰： 颎，臣之故人；素，臣舅子。臣并知其为人，诚有此语。 
现代文：贺若弼回答说： 高是我的老朋友，杨素是我舅舅的儿子，我深知他们的为人，所以敢说那样的话。 
English: He Ruoqi replied: Gao is my old friend, Yang Su is my uncle's son, I know them well, so I dare to say such a thing.

古文：公卿奏弼怨望，罪当死。
现代文：公卿大臣上奏说贺若弼怨恨朝廷，犯了死罪。
English: The Minister of the Court of Chancery reported that He Ruoqi had a grudge against the imperial court and had committed a capital crime.

古文：上曰： 臣下守法不移，公可自求活理。 
现代文：文帝又对贺若弼说： 百官大臣严格执法，判定你犯有死罪，你得自己寻找活命的理由。 
English: Emperor Wen also said to He Ruoqiao: "The ministers of all levels strictly enforce the law, and if you are convicted of a capital crime, you have to find your own reason to live.

古文：弼曰： 臣恃至尊威灵，将八千兵渡江，擒陈叔宝，窃以此望活。 
现代文：贺若弼说： 我仰仗着陛下威灵，率领八千名兵士渡过长江，俘获了陈后主陈叔宝，我想以此功劳请求活命。 
English: He Ruoqi said: I relied on His Majesty Wiling, led eight thousand soldiers across the Yangtze River, and captured Chen Shubao, the Queen of Chen. I would like to use this achievement to ask for my life.

古文：上曰： 此已格外重赏，何用追论！ 
现代文：文帝说： 朝廷对此已格外重赏，现在怎么还能再提此事？ 
English: Emperor Wen said, "The Imperial Court has given this a special award, so how can this matter be brought up again?

古文：弼曰： 臣已蒙格外重赏，今还格外望活。 
现代文：贺若弼说： 我是已经得到过格外重赏，只是今天还想请求陛下格外开恩，保全性命。 
English: He Ruoqi said: I have already received a special reward, but today I would like to ask His Majesty to be extraordinarily gracious and save my life.

古文：既而上低回者数日，惜其功，特令除名。
现代文：在这以后的几天里，文帝稍微回心转意，顾念他战功卓著，特令免除一切官爵职务，除名为民。
English: In the next few days, Emperor Wen had a slight change of heart, and in consideration of his outstanding war service, he ordered that he be exempted from all official and noble positions, and that his name be removed from the people.

古文：岁余，复其爵位，上亦忌之，不复任使，然每宴赐，遇之甚厚。
现代文：一年以后，文帝虽然又恢复了贺若弼的爵位，但也对他产生猜忌，不再任命他担任具体职务，但是朝会宴请赏赐群臣时，给他的侍遇仍很优厚。
English: A year later, although Emperor Wen restored He Ruoxuan's peerage, he was also suspicious of him and no longer appointed him to specific positions. However, when he invited and rewarded ministers at the morning banquet, he was still treated very well.

古文：有司上言： 府藏皆满，无所容，积于廊庑。 帝曰： 朕既薄赋于民，又大经赐用，何得尔也？ 对曰： 入者常多于出，略计每年赐用，至数百万段，曾无减省。 
现代文：文帝又下诏书说： 粮食布帛宁愿积蓄在民间百姓家里，也不要储藏于国家府库，今年河北、河东地区的田租可减征三分之一，军人应缴纳的份额可减征一半，全国各地成丁应缴纳的调全部免征。 
English: Emperor Wen also issued an edict saying: Grain should be stored in the homes of ordinary people rather than in the state treasury. This year, the land rent in Hebei and Hedong regions can be reduced by one-third, the share payable by soldiers can be reduced by half, and all the taxes payable by households across the country are exempted.

古文：于是更辟左藏院以受之。诏曰： 宁积于人，无藏府库。河北、河东今年田租三分减一，兵减半功，调全免。 时天下户口岁增，京辅及三河地少而人众，衣食不给，帝乃发使四出，均天下之田，其狭乡每丁才至二十亩，老少又少焉。高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十三年
现代文：当时隋朝全国的户口每年都在增加，京畿地区和河北、河南、河东三河地区地少人多，许多平民衣食不足，于是文帝就向全国各地派出使节，重新调整分配天下的田地，地少人多的狭乡每个成年丁口只能分到二十亩地，老人和孩童能分到的土地更少。十三年
English: At that time, the household registration of the Sui Dynasty and the whole country was increasing every year. The population of the Gyeonggi region and the regions of Hebei, Henan and the Three Rivers in the east of the country was less and more, and many civilians were short of food and clothing. Therefore, Emperor Wen sent envoys to all parts of the country to re-adjust the distribution of the world's fields. In narrow townships with fewer people, each adult Dingkou could only be allocated 20 mu of land, and the elderly and children could only be allocated less land.

古文：春，正月，壬子，上祀感生帝。
现代文：春季，正月壬子，隋文帝祭祀感生帝。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Jinsi, Sui Emperor Wen worshiped Emperor Kang Sheng.

古文：壬戌，行幸岐州。
现代文：壬戌，隋文帝巡幸岐州。
English: On the 21st, the emperor left for Qizhou.

古文：二月，丙午，诏营仁寿宫于岐州之北，使杨素监之。
现代文：二月丙午，隋文帝下诏令在岐州北面营建仁寿宫，派遣杨素监督施工。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of February, Emperor Sui Wen issued a decree to build the Renshou Palace in the north of Qizhou, and dispatched Yang Su to supervise the construction.

古文：素奏前莱州刺史宇文恺检校将作大匠，记室封德彝为土木监。
现代文：杨素上奏请求朝廷委派前莱州刺史宇文恺临时代理将作大匠，记室参军封德彝为土木监。
English: Yang Su petitioned the imperial court to appoint the former Laizhou governor Shishi Yuwen as the chief architect, and the secretary of the army, Feng Dejun, as the civil engineering supervisor.

古文：于是夷山堙谷以立宫殿，崇台累榭，宛转相属。
现代文：于是平山填谷构筑宫殿，高台累榭，宛转相连。
English: As a result, Hirayama filled the valley to build a palace, which was encumbered by the high plateau and connected to the destination.

古文：役使严急，丁夫多死，疲屯颠仆，推填坑坎，覆以土石，因而筑为平地。
现代文：在营建过程中督使严急，服役丁夫死亡众多。很多人疲备不堪，倒地而死，尸体被填入坑中，上面用土石覆盖，因而筑成平地。
English: During the construction process, the supervision was very strict, and many servicemen died. Many people were exhausted and fell to the ground and died, and the bodies were filled into the pit and covered with earth and stone, thus creating a flat ground.

古文：死者以万数。
现代文：死的人数以万计。
English: The death toll is in the tens of thousands.

古文：丁亥，上至自岐州。
现代文：丁亥，隋文帝自岐州返回长安。
English: Dinghai, Sui Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an from Qizhou.

古文：己卯，立皇孙暕为豫章王。
现代文：己卯，隋朝册封皇孙杨为豫章王。
English: In the early 9th century, the crown prince's grandson was named Prince Yuanzhang.

古文：暕，广之子也。
现代文：杨是晋王杨广的儿子。
English: Yang was the son of the Jin king Yang Guang.

古文：丁酉，制： 私家不得藏纬候、图谶。 
现代文：丁酉，隋文帝下制书说： 民间私家不得收藏预卜吉凶的纬候、图谶之类的书籍。 
English: Ding Xuan, a book maker under the Sui Dynasty, said: "Private homes are not allowed to collect books such as fortunetelling, fortune-telling and so on.

古文：秋，七月，戊辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月戊辰晦，出现日食。
English: In autumn, around the end of July, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：是岁，上命礼部尚书牛弘等议明堂制度。
现代文：这一年，隋文帝下令礼部尚书牛弘等人讨论研究古代明堂的建筑结构。
English: In this year, Emperor Sui ordered the ceremonial department Shang Shuxiu Hong and others to discuss and study the architectural structure of the ancient Ming Hall.

古文：宇文恺献明堂木样，上命有司规度安业里地，将立之；而诸儒异议，久之不决，乃罢之。
现代文：宇文恺向文帝呈献了明堂的木制模型，于是文帝下令有关官吏在长安安业里规划出地皮，准备建立明堂。可是由于朝中的儒生意见不同，很长时间不能形成一致意见，只好作罢。
English: Uwen Zang presented a wooden model of the Ming Hall to Emperor Wen, who then ordered the relevant officials to plan out the land in Chang'an and Anye to prepare for the construction of the Ming Hall. However, due to the different opinions of Confucians in the court, they could not form a consensus for a long time and had to give up.

古文：上之灭陈也，以陈叔宝屏风赐突厥大义公主。
现代文：隋文帝灭掉陈后，将陈叔宝的屏风赏赐给突厥可贺敦大义公主。
English: After Emperor Sui Wen eliminated Chen, he gave the screen of Chen Shubao to the Turkish princess Khotan Dayi.

古文：公主以其宗国之覆，心常不平，书屏风，为诗叙陈亡以自寄。
现代文：大义公主因为她的宗国北周宇文氏灭亡，心里一直愤愤不平，于是就在屏风上作诗，叙述陈亡国的事，借以寄托自己对故国的哀思。
English: Princess Daiyi was always angry and upset because of the death of her home country, the Northern Zhou Dynasty, so she wrote a poem on the screen, describing the death of her home country, to express her sorrow for her home country.

古文：上闻而恶之，礼赐渐薄。
现代文：隋文帝知道此事后就忌恨大崐义公主，对她逐渐冷淡，赏赐也日益减少。
English: After learning of this, Emperor Sui Wen hated Princess Dazhongyi, and gradually became indifferent to her, and his rewards also dwindled.

古文：彭公刘昶先尚周公主，流人杨钦亡入突厥，诈言昶欲与其妻作乱攻隋，遣钦来密告大义公主，发兵扰边。
现代文：彭公刘昶以前也娶了北周帝室公主为妻，隋朝流民杨钦逃入突厥，谎称刘昶打算和妻子一起兴兵作乱，攻打隋朝，因此派遣杨钦来密告大义公主，请求突厥发兵侵扰隋朝边境。
English: Peng Gong Liu Yao had also previously married the princess of the Northern Zhou Dynasty. Yang Qin, a Sui Dynasty refugee, fled to Turkey, falsely claiming that Liu Yao planned to join his wife in creating a disturbance and attacking the Sui Dynasty. Therefore, Yang Qin was sent to inform Princess Dayi and request the Turks to send troops to invade the Sui Dynasty border.

古文：都蓝可汗信之，乃不修职贡，颇为边患。
现代文：突厥都蓝可汗相信了杨钦的话，于是就不再谨守藩国的职责，按时朝贡，时常发兵侵犯隋境。
English: The Turkic Tulan Khan believed Yang Qin's words, so he no longer respected the duties of the domain, paid tribute on time, and often sent troops to invade the Sui territory.

古文：上遣车骑将军长孙晟使于突厥，微观察之。
现代文：隋文帝派遣车骑将军长孙晟出使突厥，暗中观察了解情况。
English: Sui Emperor Wen dispatched General Sun Yat-sen to Turkey to secretly observe and understand the situation.

古文：公主见晟，言辞不逊，又遣所私胡人安遂迦与杨钦计议，扇惑都蓝。
现代文：大义公主见了长孙晟后，出言不恭，又派和她私通的胡人安遂迦去与杨钦计议谋划，煽动鼓惑都蓝可汗。
English: After Princess Dayi saw her eldest grandchild Yao, she spoke disrespectfully, and sent her concubine Hu An Sui Jia to discuss and plan with Yang Qin, inciting and agitating Du Lan Khan.

古文：晟至京师，具以状闻。
现代文：长孙晟回到京师后，将所见所闻向隋文帝作了报告。
English: After the eldest grandson, Yao, returned to Beijing, he reported what he had seen and heard to the Sui Emperor.

古文：上遣晟往索钦；都蓝不与，曰： 检校客内无此色人。 
现代文：于是文帝又派遣长孙晟到突厥索要杨钦，都蓝可汗不给，回答说： 检查过我们的宾客，其中没有这个人。 
English: So Emperor Wen again sent his eldest grandson Yao to the Turks to ask for Yang Qin, but Du Lan Khan would not give it to him. He replied, "I have checked our guests, and this man is not among them.

古文：晟乃赂其达官，知钦所在。夜，掩获之，以示都蓝，因发公主私事，国人大以为耻。
现代文：于是长孙晟就贿赂突厥的达官贵人，知道了杨钦躲藏的地方，在夜里突然将他抓获，然后给都蓝可汗看，并趁机揭发了大义公主和胡人安遂迦的私情，突厥国人得知后认为是极大的耻辱。
English: As a result, the eldest grandson, Yao, bribed a high-ranking Turkish dignitary, learned where Yang Chin was hiding, suddenly captured him in the night, then showed him to Du Lan Khan, and took the opportunity to expose the love affair between Princess Dayi and Hu Man An Sui Jia, which the Turkic people considered to be a great shame.

古文：都蓝执安遂迦等，并以付晟。
现代文：于是都蓝可汗拿获了安遂加等人，一并交付长孙晟带回隋朝。
English: As a result, Du Lan Khan captured An Sui Jia and others, and handed them over to the eldest grandson Zou to bring back to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：上大喜，加授开府仪同三司，仍遣入突厥废公主。
现代文：隋文帝十分高兴，加授长孙晟开府仪同三司，并派他出使突厥劝说废除大义公主。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very pleased and awarded the eldest grandson, Sun Yat-sen, with the Grand Cordon of the Three Departments, and sent him to the Turks to persuade them to abolish Princess Dayi.

古文：内史侍郎裴矩请说都蓝使杀公主。
现代文：内史侍郎斐矩请求出使突厥劝说都蓝可汗，使他杀掉大义公主。
English: Naishi's steward, Fico, requested that a Turkic envoy be sent to persuade Du Lan Khan to kill Princess Dayi.

古文：时处罗侯之子染干，号突利可汗，居北方，遣使求婚，上使裴矩谓之曰： 当杀大义公主，乃许婚。 
现代文：当时前突厥莫何可汗处罗侯的儿子染干号称为突利可汗，居住在突厥国的北方，他派遣使者向隋朝求婚，隋文帝就派遣裴矩对他说： 只有杀掉大义公主，隋朝才能答应婚事。 
English: At that time, the son of the former Turki Mokhe Khan of Roh, known as Turi Khan, lived in the north of the Turkic country. He sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to propose marriage. The Sui Emperor sent Pei Jian to him and said: Only by killing Princess Dayi can the Sui Dynasty agree to the marriage.

古文：突利复谮之于都蓝，都蓝因发怒，杀公主，更表请婚，朝议将许之。
现代文：于是突利可汗也向都蓝可汗说大义公主的坏话，都蓝可汗因此大怒，杀了大义公主，重新向隋朝上表求婚，朝廷准备答应都蓝可汗。
English: As a result, Turi Khan also spoke ill of Princess Dayi to Du Lan Khan. Du Lan Khan was furious, killed Princess Dayi, and proposed to the Sui Dynasty again. The court was ready to agree to Du Lan Khan.

古文：长孙晟曰： 臣观雍虞闾反覆无信，直以与玷厥有隙，所以欲依倚国家，虽与为婚，终当叛去。
现代文：长孙晟说： 我看都蓝反复无常，不讲信用，只因为和西方达头可汗玷厥结下怨恨，所以才依倚我朝。即使是我们双方建立了婚烟关系，他终久也会叛变而去。
English: The eldest grandson said: I think that Du Lan is fickle and untrustworthy. He only relies on my dynasty because he has a grudge against the Western leader Khan. Even if we both establish a marriage relationship, he will eventually rebel and leave.

古文：今若得尚公主，承藉威灵，玷厥、染干必受其征发。
现代文：现在都蓝可汗如果能娶到大隋公主为妻，那末他就可以凭籍我们大隋的威灵而发号施令，达头可汗玷厥与染干必然会听从他的指挥调度。
English: Now, if Du Lan Khan can marry the great Sui princess, then he will be able to issue orders by virtue of our great Sui's will, and the great Khan will certainly obey his command and scheduling.

古文：强而更反，后恐难图。
现代文：这样都蓝可汗的势力将会更加强大，强大后再起来反叛，以后恐怕就很难制服了。
English: In this way, the Blue Khan's forces will be more powerful, and when they are strong, they will rebel, and it will be difficult to subdue them in the future.

古文：且染干者，处罗侯之子，素有诚款，于今两代，前乞通婚，不如许之，招令南徙，兵少力弱，易可抚驯，使敌雍虞闾以为边捍。 
现代文：况且染干是处罗侯的儿子，素来诚心归服，至今已有两代，以前他曾派遣使节来求婚，不如答应他，然后招抚劝诱他率领部落向南迁移，染干兵少力弱，容易驯服，我们可以利用他抵御都蓝可汗以保卫北方边疆。 
English: Moreover, Zeng Gan is the son of the lord of Zhenluo, who has always sincerely submitted, and there have been two generations so far. Previously, he had sent an envoy to propose marriage, it is better to agree to him, and then entice him to lead the tribe to migrate south. Zeng Gan soldiers are weak and easy to tame. We can use him to resist the Du Lan Khan to defend the northern border.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：文帝听了称赞道： 这个主意好！ 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：复遣晟慰谕染干，许尚公主。
现代文：于是再次派遣长孙晟前去安慰晓谕染干，答应他可以娶公主为妻。
English: So he again sent his eldest grandson, Yao, to comfort Zeng Jian, promising him that he could marry the princess.

古文：牛弘使协律郎范阳祖孝孙等参定雅乐，从陈阳山太守毛爽受京房律法，布管飞灰，顺月皆验。
现代文：礼部尚书牛弘请协律郎范阳人祖孝孙等人参与修订雅乐，祖孝孙曾从师陈阳山太守毛爽学习京房的律吕之法，律管中葭灰飞动，顺序和十二个月份全部符合。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Niu Hong, invited the co-rulers Fan Yang, Zu Xiaosun and others to participate in the revision of the elegant music. Zu Xiaosun had learned from the teacher Chen Yangshan Taishou Mao Shuang the law of the Beijing room, the ashes fly in the law pipe, and the order and the twelve months are all consistent.

古文：又每律生五音，十二律为六十音，因而六之，为三百六十音，分直一岁之日以配七音，而旋相为宫之法，由是著名。
现代文：又每种律调有五个音级，十二种律调共有六十个音级，把这六十个音级重复六次，就构成三百六十个音级，分别和一年的三百六十天对应起来，然后再和宫、商、角、徵、羽、变宫、变徵七个音级配合起来而形成各种律调节奏。于是，古代旋相为宫之法，才重新大白于天下，被人们所认识。
English: In addition, each mode has five tone levels, and the twelve modes have a total of sixty tone levels. These sixty tone levels are repeated six times to form three hundred and sixty tone levels, corresponding respectively to the three hundred and sixty days of the year, and then combined with the seven tone levels of palace, merchant, horn, sign, feather, changing palace, and changing sign to form various rhythmic modulations. As a result, the ancient method of turning the melody into a palace was reintroduced to the world and became known to people.

古文：弘等乃奏下请复用旋宫法，上犹记何妥之言，注弘奏下，不听作旋宫，但用黄钟一宫。
现代文：因此，牛弘等人上奏请求重新使用旋宫法演奏音乐，可是文帝还记着以前何妥所说的话，于是就在牛弘等人的奏书上面批示，不许采用旋宫法，仍旧只使用黄钟一宫。
English: Therefore, Ushihiro and others petitioned for the re-use of the method of twisting the palace to play music, but Emperor Wen still remembered what He Tuo had said before, so he ordered in Ushihiro and others' petition that the method of twisting the palace should not be used, and only the yellow bell and palace should still be used.

古文：于是弘等复为奏，附顺上意，其前代金石并销毁之，以息异议。
现代文：于是，牛弘等人重新上奏，附和文帝的旨意，请求把前代的金石乐器之类全部予以销毁，以平息人们在音乐方面的不同意见。
English: As a result, Ushihiro and others re-played the music, adhered to the will of Emperor Wen, and requested that all previous Kinshi musical instruments and the like be destroyed in order to quell people's different opinions in music.

古文：弘等又作武舞，以象隋之功德；郊庙飨用一调，迎气用五调。
现代文：牛弘等人又创作了武舞，用来表现隋朝的功德；规定在举行郊、庙祭祀时只使用黄钟一宫，在祈求丰年的迎气祭祀时，可分别使用黄钟的角、徵、宫、商、羽五调。
English: Ushihiro and others also created a martial dance to express the merits of the Sui Dynasty. It was stipulated that only the yellow bell and one palace should be used when holding suburban and temple rituals, and that the horn, symbol, palace, merchant, and feather of the yellow bell could be used separately when praying for the welcoming ritual of the year of plenty.

古文：旧工稍尽，其余声律，皆不复通。
现代文：从此以后，老乐师逐渐死去，新乐师对黄钟律调以外的其它声律，都不再通晓。
English: Since then, the old musicians have gradually died, and the new musicians are no longer familiar with other vocal rhythms other than the yellow bell rhythm.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十四年
现代文：十四年春季，三月，隋朝新乐修订完成。
English: In March of the spring of the 14th year, the revision of the Sui Dynasty New Music was completed.

古文：春，三月，乐成。夏，四月，乙丑，诏行新乐，且曰： 民间音乐，流僻日久，弃其旧体，竞造繁声，宜加禁约，务存其本。 
现代文：夏季，四月乙丑，隋文帝下诏令颂行新乐，并且说： 民间音乐流入邪僻不正已经很久，丢弃了音乐原崐来的主体风格，竞相造作繁杂的声律，应该加以禁止，务必保存音乐本来意义。 
English: In the summer, in the second month of April, the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty issued an edict to celebrate the new music, and said: It has been a long time since folk music has flowed into the corrupt, abandoned the original main style of music, and competed to create complex vocal rhythms. It should be banned, and the original meaning of music must be preserved.

古文：万宝常听太常所奏乐，泫然泣曰： 乐声淫厉而哀，天下不久将尽！ 
现代文：著名乐师万宝常听了太常寺乐师所演的音乐后，伤心落泪地说： 乐声淫厉而又哀惋，天下不久将会灭亡！ 
English: After listening to the music performed by the musicians of Taejoji Temple, the famous musician Wanbao often said with tears in his eyes: The music is lascivious and mournful, and the world will soon perish!

古文：时四海全盛，闻者皆谓不然；大业之末，其言卒验。
现代文：当时隋朝正处在全盛时期，听到的人都认为他的预言不会兑现；到了大业末年，万宝常的预言终于得到证实。
English: At that time, the Sui Dynasty was in its heyday, and everyone who heard his prophecy thought that it would not come true; by the end of the Great Cause, Wanbao Chang's prophecy was finally confirmed.

古文：宝常贫而无子，久之，竟饿死。
现代文：万宝常生活贫穷又没有儿子，很久以后，竟饥饿而死。
English: Manpo always lived in poverty and had no son, but died of starvation a long time later.

古文：且死，悉取其书烧之，曰： 用此何为！ 
现代文：临死的时候，他把自己的书籍全部烧掉，悲愤地说： 读这些书能有什么用处！ 
English: On his deathbed, he burned all his books, saying bitterly: "What's the use of reading them!

古文：先是，台、省、府、寺及诸州皆置公廨钱，收息取给。
现代文：以前，隋朝在中央台、省、府、寺各机构和地方各州县都设立了公廨钱，每年放贷出去，收取利息以供需用。
English: In the past, the Sui Dynasty established public money in the central government, provinces, prefectures, temples and other institutions and local states and counties, and lent it out every year, charging interest for supply and demand.

古文：工部尚书苏孝慈以为 官司出举兴生，烦扰百姓，败损风俗，请皆禁止，给地以营农。 
现代文：工部尚书苏孝慈认为： 官府放贷，收息盈利，烦扰百姓，败坏风俗，请求陛下明令禁止，而由国家拨给他们田地以经营农业。 
English: Su Xiaoji, a senior official of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, believed that: the government's lending, interest collection and profit-making, disturbing the people, corrupting customs, and requesting His Majesty to expressly prohibit, and the state to allocate fields to them to operate agriculture.

古文：上从之。六月，丁卯，始诏 公卿以下皆给职田，毋得治生，与民争利。 
现代文：隋文帝听从了他的建议，六月丁卯，下诏书说： 公卿大臣以下各级官吏都分配给职分田，不得再经商放贷，与民争利。 
English: Emperor Sui followed his advice and issued the following edict in June of the following year: "Officials at all levels below the rank of court noble and minister are all assigned to duty-assigned fields, and are no longer allowed to engage in business and lending, and compete with the people for profits.

古文：秋，七月，乙未，以邳公苏威为纳言。
现代文：秋季，七月乙未，隋朝任命邳公苏威为纳言。
English: In the autumn, in July of the same year, the Sui Dynasty appointed Gong Su Wei as Nagan.

古文：初，张宾历既行，广平刘孝孙及冀州秀才刘焯并言其失。
现代文：当初，隋朝颁行了张宾修撰的《甲子元历》以后，广平人刘孝孙与冀州秀才刘焯都上书指出了新历的失误。
English: At the beginning, after the Sui Dynasty issued the "Jiazi Yuan Calendar" written by Zhang Binxiu, the Guangping people Liu Xiaosun and the Jizhou talent Liu Xuan both pointed out the mistakes of the new calendar.

古文：宾方有宠于上，刘晖附会之，共短孝孙等，斥罢之。
现代文：当时因为张宾正受到隋文帝的宠信，仪同三司刘晖又附会张宾，两人一起向隋文帝诋毁刘孝孙，于是文帝就驳回了刘孝孙的建议。
English: At that time, because Zhang Bin was being favored by the Sui Emperor Wenzong, the Third Division of Liu Bei and the Third Division of Liu Bei also attached Zhang Bin, and the two of them together slandered Liu Xiaosun to the Sui Emperor Wenzong, so the Emperor Wenzong rejected Liu Xiaosun's suggestion.

古文：后宾卒，孝孙为掖县丞，委官入京，上其事，诏留直太史，累年不调，乃抱其书，使弟子舆榇来诣阙下，伏而恸哭；执法拘而奏之。
现代文：后来张宾去世，刘孝孙担任了掖县县丞，他弃官入京，再一次上书提出了自己的意见，文帝下诏令他留在太史曹担任直太史，但多年没有调动他的职务，于是他自己抱着书，让弟子门生们抬着棺材来到宫阙前，伏地痛哭；执法官吏拘捕了他，然后奏报隋文帝。
English: Later, Zhang Bin died, and Liu Xiaosun served as the county magistrate of Jixian County. He resigned his post and entered Beijing, and once again submitted his opinion in writing. Emperor Wen issued a decree ordering him to remain in Taishi Cao to serve as the first emperor, but he did not transfer his duties for many years. So he himself held the book and let his disciples carry the coffin to the front of the imperial court, and cried bitterly; the law enforcement officials arrested him, and then reported to Emperor Wen.

古文：帝异焉，以问国子祭酒何妥，妥言其善。
现代文：文帝感到惊异，就询问国子祭酒何妥，何妥回答说刘孝孙的建议很对。
English: Emperor Wen was surprised and asked what kind of wine was suitable for the national son's sacrifice. He replied that Liu Xiaosun's suggestion was right.

古文：乃遣与宾历比较短长。
现代文：于是文帝就让他将自己的历法和张宾的历法比较高下优劣。
English: So Emperor Wen asked him to compare his own calendar with Zhang Bin's calendar.

古文：直太史勃海张胄玄与孝孙共短宾历，异论锋起，久之不定。
现代文：直太史勃海人张胄玄和刘孝孙共同指责张宾的历法，于是异议蜂起，长期争论不休。
English: Zhang Yixuan and Liu Xiaosun, who were the direct descendants of the Shibhai Emperor, jointly accused Zhang Bin's calendar, so the dissent arose and the debate continued for a long time.

古文：上令参问日食事，杨素等奏： 太史凡奏日食二十有五，率皆无验，胄玄所刻，前后妙中，孝孙所刻，验亦过半。 
现代文：文帝派人询问验证双方历法所定日食的情况，尚书右仆射杨素等人上奏说： 太史们根据张宾的历法所奏报的日食总共有二十五次，基本上都与事实不符；而张胄玄所推定的日食日期，前后全都得到验证，准确无误；刘孝孙所推定的日食日期，符合的也超过一半。 
English: Emperor Wen sent someone to inquire about the status of verifying the solar eclipses determined by the two calendars. Shang Shu's right-hand man, Yang Su, and others made a report: There were a total of twenty-five solar eclipses reported by the historians according to Zhang Bin's calendar, basically all of which did not match the facts; and the dates of solar eclipses estimated by Zhang Xuanxuan were all verified and accurate; the dates of solar eclipses estimated by Liu Xiaosun also matched more than half.

古文：于是上引孝孙、胄玄等亲自劳徠。
现代文：于是文帝就召见刘孝孙和张胄玄两人，亲自加以慰问勉励。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen summoned Liu Xiaosun and Zhang Xuanxuan to personally offer his condolences and encouragement.

古文：孝孙请先斩刘晖，乃可定历，帝不怿，又罢之。
现代文：刘孝孙请求先处斩刘晖，然后他才能制定新历，文帝很不高兴，就又下令终止了制定新历的工作。
English: Liu Xiaosun requested that Liu Bei be beheaded first, so that he could make a new calendar. Emperor Wen was very displeased and ordered the work of making a new calendar to be stopped.

古文：孝孙寻卒。
现代文：刘孝孙不久就去世了。
English: Liu Xiaosun passed away soon after.

古文：关中大旱，民饥，上遣左右视民食，得豆屑杂糠以献。
现代文：隋朝关中地区大旱，百姓饥荒，隋文帝派遣左右侍臣察看老百姓的食物，左右侍臣拿回了百姓所吃的豆屑杂糠呈献给文帝。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Guanzhong region was hit by drought and the people were starving. Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty sent his right and left courtiers to inspect the people's food. The right and left courtiers took back the bean scraps that the people had eaten and presented them to Emperor Wen.

古文：上流涕以示群臣，深自咎责，为之不御酒肉者，殆将一期。
现代文：文帝流着眼泪将这些东西展示给百官大臣们看，并深深地自责，从此不再饮酒吃肉，坚持了将近一年。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Emperor Wen showed these things to his ministers, and deeply reproached himself. From then on, he no longer drank alcohol or ate meat, and persisted for nearly a year.

古文：八月，辛未，上帅民就食于洛阳，敕斥候不得辄有驱逼。
现代文：八月辛未，隋文帝率领关中百姓前往洛阳地区度荒，并下敕令警卫的士兵不得驱赶百姓。
English: In August Xinwei, Sui Wendi led the people of Guanzhong to Luoyang to relieve the famine, and issued an imperial order that the soldiers of the guard should not drive away the people.

古文：男女参厕于仗卫之间，遇扶老携幼者，辄引马避之，慰勉而去。至艰险之处，见负担者，令左右扶助之。
现代文：百姓们男男女女参杂行进在禁卫和仪仗队伍中间，文帝如果遇到扶老携幼的逃难者，总是牵马让路，好言慰勉而去；到了艰险难行的地方，遇到挑担负重的逃难者，就命令左右随从上前扶助。
English: The common people, both men and women, marched in the middle of the guards and the honor guard. If Emperor Wen encountered refugees who were helping the elderly with their children, he would always lead the horse to give way and go away with a good word of consolation. When he came to a place where it was difficult to travel and encountered refugees who were carrying heavy loads, he ordered the left and right to follow and help.

古文：冬，闰十月，甲寅，诏以齐、梁、陈宗祀废绝，命高仁英、萧琮、陈叔宝以时修祭，所须器物，有司给之。
现代文：冬季，闰十月甲寅，隋文帝下诏，由于北齐、梁、陈三国帝室的宗庙祭祀废绝，命令原北齐高平王高仁英、原后梁国君萧琮、原陈后主陈叔宝三人分别按时负责祭祀，祭祀时所需要的器物，由朝廷有关部门主管官吏供给。
English: In winter, in leap October, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty issued an edict that, since the ancestral temple sacrifices of the imperial families of the Northern Qi, Liang, and Chen dynasties had been abolished, he ordered the former Northern Qi Gaoping King Gao Renying, the former Northern Qi Emperor Liang Guojun Xiao Jun, and the former Northern Qi Emperor Chen Shubao to be responsible for the sacrificial rituals on time. The utensils needed for the sacrificial rituals were supplied by the officials in charge of the relevant departments of the imperial court.

古文：陈叔宝从帝登邙山，侍饮，赋诗曰： 日月光天德，山河壮帝居；太平无以报，愿上东封书。 
现代文：陈叔宝随从文帝登上洛阳城北邙山，在陪侍文帝饮酒时赋诗说： 日月光天德，山河壮帝居；太平无以报，愿上东封书。 
English: Chen Shubao accompanied Emperor Wen to Mount Lushan in the north of Luoyang City. While drinking wine with Emperor Wen, he wrote a poem saying: The sun and the moon illuminate heaven and earth, the mountains and rivers are the residence of the mighty emperor; there is no peace to report, I would like to go to the East to seal the book.

古文：并表请封禅。帝优诏答之。
现代文：并上表请求文帝上泰山祭祀天地，文帝用亲切客气的诏令答复了他。
English: And the above table asked Emperor Wen to go to Mount Taishan to sacrifice heaven and earth, Emperor Wen replied to him with a cordial and courteous edict.

古文：它日，复侍宴，及出，帝目之曰： 此败岂不由酒！
现代文：在另一天，陈叔宝又在文帝举行的宴会上作陪，等他离开时，文帝目送他说： 他的败亡难道不是正由于酒吗！
English: On another day, Chen Shubao also accompanied the emperor at a banquet held by Emperor Wen. When he was about to leave, Emperor Wen looked at him and said, "Isn't his downfall due to wine?"

古文：以作诗之功，何如思安时事！
现代文：与其在作诗上下功夫，不如用来考虑安定时事政局！
English: Instead of working hard on poetry, it is better to consider the stability of the current political situation!

古文：当贺若弼渡京口，彼人密启告急，叔宝饮酒，遂不之省。
现代文：当初在贺若弼率军渡过长江拿下京口时，就有人向陈朝廷密信告急，可是陈叔宝正在饮酒，根本不看。
English: At the beginning, when He Ruoqi and his army crossed the Yangtze River and took Beijing, some people sent a secret message to the Chen Dynasty to express their urgency, but Chen Shubao was drinking and did not look at all.

古文：高颎至日，犹见启在床下，未开封。
现代文：一直到高到达建康的那天，还发现告急密信犹扔在床下，根本就没有开封。
English: Until the day Gao arrived in Jiankang, he also found that the urgent confidential letter was still under the bed and had not been opened at all.

古文：此诚可笑，盖天亡之也。
现代文：这件事真是可笑，实在是上天要让陈灭亡。
English: This matter is really ridiculous, it is really God's will to let Chen perish.

古文：昔苻氏征伐所得国，皆荣贵其主，苟欲求名，不知违天命；与之官，乃违天也。 
现代文：以前前秦苻坚南征北伐所吞并的国家，都荣耀尊贵原来的国君，苻坚只是想博取好名声，不知道这样做是违背天命的。给上天已经抛弃的君主官做，就是违背了上天的旨意。 
English: In the past, the countries annexed by the former Qin Shi Jian's Southern Expedition and Northern Expedition all glorified and honored the original sovereigns. Shi Jian just wanted to gain a good reputation, not knowing that doing so was against the destiny of heaven. To do so to the monarchs that heaven had abandoned was to violate the will of heaven.

古文：齐州刺史卢贲坐民饥闭民粜，除名。
现代文：齐州刺史卢贲因饥荒时关闭义仓不让粜粮给老百姓，被朝廷除名为民。
English: Qizhou Zhishuluguan closed its granary during the famine and did not allow the grain to be given to the people, and was expelled by the imperial court.

古文：帝后复欲授以一州，贲对诏失旨，又有怨言，帝大怒，遂不用。
现代文：隋文帝后来想再授予他一州刺史，而卢贲在回复文帝诏书时不合文帝的意，再加上又有怨言，文帝十分愤怒，就不再起用他。
English: Sui Emperor Wen later wanted to award him the title of "one-state statesman," but Lu Wei did not meet Emperor Wen's wishes when replying to Emperor Wen's edict, and he also complained. Emperor Wen was very angry and no longer used him.

古文：皇太子为言： 此辈并有佐命功，虽性行轻险，诚不可弃。 
现代文：皇太子杨勇为他上奏说： 象卢贲这些人都有佐命大功，他虽然秉性轻薄，行为险诈，但是也不能弃之不用。 
English: Crown Prince Yang Yong made a report for him, saying: Like Lu Wei, all of these people have made great contributions to their lives. Although he is light-hearted and treacherous, he cannot be discarded.

古文：帝曰： 我抑屈之，全其命也。
现代文：文帝回答说： 我压制他，是为了保全他的性命。
English: Emperor Wen replied: I suppressed him in order to save his life.

古文：微刘昉、郑译、卢贲、柳裘、皇甫绩等，则我不至此。
现代文：如果不是刘、郑译、卢贲、柳裘、皇甫绩等人的辅助，我也不会成为大隋天子。
English: If it were not for the assistance of Liu, Zheng Zi, Lu Wei, Liu Qiu, and Wang Fuxi, I would not have become a great Sui Tianzi.

古文：然此等皆反覆子也，当周宣帝时，以无赖得幸。
现代文：但他们都是些反复无常的小人，在北周宣帝时，他们都是以不正当的手段得到了宣帝宠幸。
English: However, they were all capricious villains. When Emperor Xuanzong was proclaimed in Northern Zhou, they all obtained the privilege of proclaiming the emperor by improper means.

古文：及帝大渐，颜之仪等请以赵王辅政，此辈行诈，顾命于我。
现代文：及至宣帝病重，颜之仪等人请求让赵王宇文招辅政，而他们这些人公然作假，伪造遗诏，让我辅政。
English: When Emperor Xuan was gravely ill, Yan Zhi Yi and others requested that Zhao Wang Yuwen be recruited as a vice-premier, but these people blatantly lied and forged the will to make me a vice-premier.

古文：我将为政，又欲乱之，故昉谋大逆，译为巫蛊。
现代文：及至我将要当政，他们又想作乱，所以刘谋反，郑译用巫术诅咒。
English: When I was about to take office, they wanted to make trouble again, so Liu plotted a rebellion, and Zheng cursed me with witchcraft.

古文：如贲之例，皆不满志，任之则不逊，置之则怨望，自为难信，非我弃之。
现代文：象卢贲这类人，永远不会有满足欲望的时候，任用他们则骄横不法，弃置他们则怨天尤人，这要怪他们自己不能取信于人，并不是我要抛弃他们。
English: People like Lu Wei will never have the time to satisfy their desires, they are arrogant and lawless when they are appointed, and they are resentful when they are abandoned. It is their own fault that they cannot gain the trust of others, not that I want to abandon them.

古文：众人见此，谓我薄于功臣，斯不然矣。 
现代文：众人见我这样对侍他们，都认为我对待功臣太刻薄，其实并不是那么回事。 
English: When people see me serving them like this, they think I'm being mean to the heroes, but that's not the case.

古文：贲遂废，卒于家。
现代文：卢贲遂被废黜，后来在家中去世。
English: Lu Wei was deposed and later died at home.

古文：晋王广帅百官抗表，固请封禅。
现代文：晋王杨广率领百官大臣上表，极力坚持请求文帝上泰山祭祀天地。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, led a hundred officials and ministers to the table, and strongly insisted on asking Emperor Wen to go to Mount Tai to sacrifice heaven and earth.

古文：帝令牛弘等创定仪注，既成，帝视之，曰： 兹事体大，朕何德以堪之！
现代文：于是隋文帝命令牛弘制定祭祀天地的礼节仪式，牛弘制定完成，文帝看后说： 这件事非同小可，朕有什么德行能承受呢？
English: So Emperor Sui ordered Niu Hong to draw up a ritual for the sacrifice of heaven and earth. Niu Hong completed it. After reading it, Emperor Wen said, "This is no small matter. What kind of virtue can I bear?

古文：但当东巡，因致祭泰山耳。 
现代文：只到东方巡视，顺便祭祀一下泰山。 
English: They only went to the east for inspection, and made a sacrifice to Mount Tai by the way.

古文：十二月，乙未，车驾东巡。
现代文：十二月乙未，文帝巡幸东方。
English: In December, Emperor Wen went on a tour of the East.

古文：上好禨祥小数，上仪同三司萧吉上书曰： 甲寅，乙卯，天地之合也。
现代文：隋文帝喜爱预卜吉凶灾祥的雕虫小技，上仪同三司萧吉上书说： 甲崐寅、乙卯之年，是天地阴阳之气相互交合的时候。
English: Emperor Sui loved the little art of carving insects to foretell auspicious and calamitous events. The Great Hierarch and the Three Emperors Xiao Qi wrote: The year of Jia Yu Yin and Yi Yu is the time when the yin and yang of heaven and earth intermingle.

古文：今兹甲寅之年，以辛酉朔旦冬至，来年乙卯，以甲子夏至。
现代文：今年是甲寅年，辛酉朔那天冬至，来年是乙卯年，甲子那天夏至。
English: This year is the year of the rooster, the winter solstice on the day of the new moon, the next year is the year of the rooster, and the summer solstice on the day of the rooster.

古文：冬至阳始，郊天之日，即至尊本命；夏至阴始，祀地之辰，即皇后本命。
现代文：冬至过后阳气开始上升，是祭天的日子，那天正是陛下的本命日；夏至过后阴气开始上升，是祭地的时刻，那天正是皇后的本命日。
English: After the winter solstice, the yang begins to rise, which is the day of the festival of heaven, and that day is the fateful day of His Majesty; after the summer solstice, the yin begins to rise, which is the time of the festival, and that day is the fateful day of the Empress.

古文：至尊德并乾之覆育，皇后仁同地之载养，所以二仪元气并会本辰。 
现代文：陛下的恩德如同天之覆育众生，皇后的仁爱如同地之载养万物，所以天地两仪的元气一起聚合在陛下和皇后的生辰日期上。 
English: His Majesty's benevolence nurtures all beings like the sky, and the Empress's benevolence nurtures all things like the earth. Therefore, the vitality of both heaven and earth are gathered together on the birthday of His Majesty and the Empress.

古文：上大悦，赐物五百段。
现代文：文帝听后大喜，于是赏赐萧吉布帛等物五百段。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen was overjoyed and rewarded Xiao Jibao and others with five hundred dan.

古文：吉，懿之孙也。
现代文：萧吉是萧懿的孙子。
English: Xiao Ji is the grandson of Xiao Yao.

古文：员外散骑侍郎王劭言上有龙颜戴干之表，指示群臣。
现代文：员外散骑常侍王劭说文帝有龙颜和头部有肉突起如角的奇异相貌，并指示给百官大臣们看。
English: Wang Qian, a non-commissioned officer and frequent waiter, said that Emperor Wen had a dragon's complexion and a strange appearance with his head protruding like a horn, and instructed the ministers to look at him.

古文：上悦，拜著作郎。
现代文：文帝听了也大为高兴，于是就任命王劭为著作郎。
English: Emperor Wen was also very pleased to hear this, so he appointed Wang Yao as the scribe.

古文：劭前后上表言上受命符瑞甚众，又采民间歌谣，引图书谶纬，捃摭佛经，回易文字，曲加诬饰，撰《皇隋灵感志》三十卷奏之，上令宣示天下。
现代文：王劭前后多次上表书，陈述文帝受命即位所出现的种种吉祥的征兆，又采集民间歌谣，征引预卜吉凶的谶纬图书，摘录佛经中的记载，采取改换文字、歪曲附会等手法，撰成《皇隋灵感志》三十卷上奏文帝，文帝下令将此书宣示天下。
English: Wang Qian repeatedly went to the register to report the various auspicious signs that appeared when Emperor Wen was ordered to ascend the throne. He also collected folk songs, collected books that predicted auspiciousness, extracted records from Buddhist scriptures, and used methods such as changing words and distorting appendices to compile the 30-volume "Imperial Sui Inspiration." Emperor Wen ordered the book to be announced to the world.

古文：劭集诸州朝集，使盥手焚香，而读之，曲折其声，有如歌咏，经涉旬朔，遍而后罢。
现代文：于是王劭召集全国各州的朝集使，让他们洗手焚香而诵读此书，并且故意读得抑扬顿挫，好象歌咏一般，读了十多天，直到把全书读完才罢。
English: So Wang Xi called together the imperial envoys from all the states of the country, and asked them to wash their hands, burn incense, and recite the book. They deliberately recited the book in staccato rhythm, as if it were a song, and read it for more than ten days, until they had finished reading the entire book.

古文：上益喜，前后赏赐优洽。
现代文：文帝更加高兴，先后赏赐给王劭大量钱财。
English: Emperor Wen was even more pleased and successively rewarded Wang Xi with a large amount of money.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十五年
现代文：十五年春季，正月壬戌，隋文帝车驾停在齐州。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, in the first month of the year, Sui Emperor Wen parked his car in Qizhou.

古文：春，正月，壬戌，车驾顿齐州。庚午，为坛于泰山，柴燎祀天，以岁旱谢愆咎，礼如南郊；又亲祀青帝坛。赦天下。
现代文：庚午，在泰山上修起祭坛，焚烧柴火祭祀上天，由于去年出现了旱情，文帝就自陈过失，以向上天请罪，祭祀仪式和南郊大祀相同。随后文帝又亲自登坛祭祀青帝。又下令大赦天下。
English: At noon, an altar was set up on Mount Tai, and firewood was burned as a sacrifice to the heavens. Due to the drought last year, Emperor Wen confessed his wrongdoing and asked the heavens for forgiveness. The sacrificial ceremony was the same as that of the Southern Suburbs. Emperor Wen then personally ascended the altar to sacrifice the young emperor. He also ordered a general amnesty for the whole world.

古文：二月，丙辰，收天下兵器，敢私造者坐之；关中、缘边不在其例。
现代文：二月丙辰，隋文帝下令收缴天下兵器，民间敢有私自制造者问罪；关中和沿边地区不在此例。
English: In February, Sui Emperor Wencheng ordered the confiscation of the world's weapons, and the people dared to have private manufacturers prosecuted; Guanzhong and the border areas are not in this case.

古文：三月，己未，至自东巡。
现代文：三月己未，隋文帝结束东巡回到长安。
English: In March, the Sui Emperor returned to Chang'an after his eastern tour.

古文：仁寿宫成。
现代文：隋岐州仁寿宫修建完工。
English: The construction of the Sui and Qizhou Renshou Palace was completed.

古文：丁亥，上幸仁寿宫。
现代文：丁亥，隋文帝驾幸仁寿宫。
English: Dinghai, the Sui Emperor drove to the Palace of Good Fortune and Longevity.

古文：时天暑，役夫死者相次于道，杨素悉焚除之。上闻之，不悦。
现代文：当时天气暑热，服役丁夫死者相连于道，杨素把死尸全部都焚烧清除，文帝听说后，心中不高兴。
English: At that time, the weather was hot, and the deceased Dingfu was connected to the road. Yang Su burned all the dead bodies. After hearing this, Emperor Wen was not happy.

古文：及至，见制度壮丽，大怒曰： 杨素殚民力为离宫，为吾结怨天下。 
现代文：及至文帝来到仁寿宫，见宫殿结构雄伟壮丽，就怒冲冲地说： 杨素殚竭民力修建这座离宫，是为我结怨于天下百姓。 
English: When Emperor Wen came to Renshou Palace and saw the magnificent structure of the palace, he said angrily: "Yang Su Shi used all the people's strength to build this detached palace, and it is because of me that I have caused resentment among the people of the world.

古文：素闻之，惶恐，虑获谴，以告封德彝。曰： 公勿忧，俟皇后至，必有恩诏。 
现代文：杨素听说后，惶恐不安，预料将会受到谴责，就将文帝发怒之事告诉了土木监封德彝，封德彝说： 您不必担忧，等皇后来到以后，陛下必定会有诏书赞扬您。 
English: When Yang Su heard of this, he panicked and expected to be reprimanded, so he told the civil engineering supervisor Feng Dejun about Emperor Wen's anger. Feng Dejun said, "You don't have to worry, when the emperor comes, His Majesty will surely have an edict praising you."

古文：明日，上果召素入对，独孤后劳之曰： 公知吾夫妇老，无以自娱，盛饰此宫，岂非忠孝！ 
现代文：第二天，隋文帝果然召见杨素入宫谈话，独孤皇后慰劳杨素说： 你知道我们夫妇已老，没有娱乐的地方，所以将这座宫殿装修得如此华丽，这岂不正是你忠孝的表现！ 
English: The next day, Emperor Sui Wen really summoned Yang Su to enter the palace for a talk. The lonely queen consoled Yang Su and said: You know that our couple is old and there is no place for entertainment, so you decorated this palace so gorgeously. Isn't this just a manifestation of your loyalty and filial piety!

古文：赐钱百万，锦绢三千段。
现代文：于是赏赐给他钱一百万，锦帛三千段。
English: So he was rewarded with one million yuan and 3,000 baht.

古文：素负贵恃才，多所凌侮；唯赏重德彝，每引之与论宰相职务，终日忘倦，因抚其床曰： 封郎必当据吾此座。 
现代文：杨素仗着自己地位高贵，富有才气，对公卿大臣常有凌侮，唯独赏识器重封德彝，常邀他一起议论宰相的职务，畅谈终日，不知疲倦，并手抚自己的坐床说： 封郎一定能坐上我的宰相座位。 
English: Yang Su, relying on his noble status and rich talent, often insulted the noble minister, but he only appreciated the re-appointment of virtue. He often invited him to discuss the prime minister's duties together. They talked all day long, tirelessly, and stroked his sitting bed and said: "Feng Lang can definitely sit on my prime minister's seat."

古文：屡荐于帝，帝擢为内史舍人。
现代文：杨素因此屡次向文帝推荐封德彝，文帝提拔封德彝为内史舍人。
English: As a result, Yang Su repeatedly recommended Feng Dejun to Emperor Wen, and Emperor Wen promoted Feng Dejun to the position of Inner Historian.

古文：夏，四月，己丑朔，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月己丑朔，隋朝大赦天下。
English: Summer, April is already ugly, the Sui Dynasty is pardoned by the world.

古文：六月，戊子，诏凿底柱。
现代文：六月戊子，隋文帝下诏令凿开黄河中的底柱山。
English: In June, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty issued an edict to open the base pillar mountain in the Yellow River.

古文：庚寅，相州刺史豆卢通贡绫文布，命焚之于朝堂。
现代文：庚寅，相州刺史豆卢通向朝廷进贡绫纹布，隋文帝下令在朝堂上予以焚毁。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the order was given to burn it in the morning hall.

古文：秋，七月，纳言苏威坐从祠太山不敬，免，俄而复位。
现代文：秋季，七月，纳言苏威由于在随从隋文帝祭祀泰山时犯了大不敬之罪，被免官，但很快就又恢复了职务。
English: In the autumn, in July, Nagon Suwei was removed from his post because he committed the crime of great disrespect when he followed the Sui and Wen dynasties to worship Mount Tai, but he soon resumed his duties.

古文：上谓群臣曰： 世人言苏威诈清，家累金玉，此妄言也。
现代文：文帝对百官群臣说： 世人都说苏威假装清廉，实际上家中堆满了金玉珍宝，这完全是一派胡言。
English: Emperor Wen said to the hundreds of officials and courtiers: The world says that Su Wei pretends to be clean, but in fact his home is full of gold and precious stones. This is complete nonsense.

古文：然其性狠戾，不切世要，求名太甚，从己则悦，违之必怒，此其大病耳。 
现代文：但是苏威秉性残暴，为人处事不合适宜，求名的欲望太强，别人顺从自己则皆大欢喜，不顺从自己则恼羞成怒，这是他最大的缺点。 
English: However, his temperament is fierce, impractical, and the pursuit of fame is too heavy. He likes those who obey him and hates those who disobey him. This is his biggest shortcoming.

古文：戊寅，上至自仁寿宫。
现代文：戊寅，隋文帝从仁寿宫回到长安。
English: Wu Yin, Sui Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an from Renshou Palace.

古文：冬，十月，戊子，以吏部尚书韦世康为荆州总管。
现代文：冬季，十月戊子，隋朝任命吏部尚书韦世康为荆州总管。
English: In the winter, in October, the Sui Dynasty appointed Shang Shuwei Shikang as the general manager of Jingzhou.

古文：世康，洸之弟也，和静谦恕，在吏部十馀年，时称廉平。
现代文：韦世康是韦的弟弟。他秉性温和谦虚，前后主管吏部十余年，当时人都称赞他清廉公正。
English: Wei Shikang is Wei's younger brother. He is mild-mannered and modest, and has been in charge of the personnel department for more than ten years. At that time, people praised him for his integrity and fairness.

古文：常有止足之志，谓子弟曰： 禄岂须多，防满则退；年不待暮，有疾便辞。 
现代文：他常怀有知足之乐，对子弟家人告诫说： 俸禄岂能越多越好，为防止多而招祸，应该抽身早退；年龄也不必等到衰老以后，有病便可以辞官归养。 
English: He often had a sense of contentment and cautioned his children's families, saying, "Isn't it better to have as much salary as possible? In order to prevent too much from bringing misfortune, you should retire early. You don't have to wait until you are old. If you are ill, you can resign and return to your family."

古文：因恳乞骸骨。
现代文：因此上表恳求告老退休。
English: Therefore, the petition implores him to retire.

古文：帝不许，使镇荆州。
现代文：文帝不答应，派遣他出镇荆州。
English: Emperor Wen did not agree and sent him out of the town of Jingzhou.

古文：时天下惟有四总管，并、扬、益、荆，以晋、秦、蜀三王及世康为之，当世以为荣。
现代文：当时全国只有四位总管，设在并、扬、益、荆四州，分别由晋王扬广、秦王杨俊、蜀王杨秀和韦世康担任，当时都认为这是很荣耀的事。
English: At that time, there were only four chief administrators in the country, located in the four states of Anhui, Yang, Yixing and Jing, respectively held by Jin Wang Yangguang, Qin King Yangjun, Shu King Yangxiu and Wei Shikang. At that time, they all thought it was a very honorable thing.

古文：十一月，辛酉，上幸温汤。
现代文：十一月辛酉，隋文帝驾幸骊山温泉。
English: In November, the Sui and Wen dynasties came to Lushan Hot Spring.

古文：十二月，戊子，敕： 盗边粮一升已上，皆斩，仍籍没其家。 
现代文：十二月戊子，隋文帝下敕书说： 凡是盗取边疆军粮一升以上，都要斩首，并且没收全部家产。 
English: In December, Emperor Sui Wenzi issued an imperial edict saying: Anyone who steals more than one liter of military rations from the frontier will be beheaded, and all family property will be confiscated.

古文：己丑，诏文武官以四考受代。
现代文：己丑，隋文帝下诏令天下文武官吏要连考四年，决定升降。
English: Sui Emperor Wen decreed that the civil and military officials of the world should take the examination for four years in a row, and decided to promote and demote.

古文：汴州刺史令狐熙来朝，考绩为天下之最，赐帛三百匹，颁告天下。
现代文：汴州刺史令孤熙考满入朝，由于他的政绩为天下第一，所以隋文帝赐给他绢帛三百匹，并且将他的事迹布告天下。
English: Zhangzhou engraved history to make Guo Xi pass the examination and enter the imperial court. Because his political achievements were the first in the world, the Sui Emperor gave him 300 horses and announced his deeds to the world.

古文：熙，整之子也。
现代文：令孤熙是令孤整的儿子。
English: Ling Guoxi is the son of Ling Guozhe.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十六年
现代文：十六年
English: Sixteen years.

古文：春，正月，丁亥，以皇孙裕为平原王，筠为安成王，嶷为安平王，恪为襄城王，该为高阳王，韶为建安王，煚为颍川王，皆勇之子也。
现代文：春季，正月丁亥，隋朝册封皇孙杨裕为平原王，杨筠为安城王，杨嶷为安平王，杨恪为襄城王，杨该为高阳王，杨韶为建安王，杨为颍川王，他们都是皇太子杨勇的儿子。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Dinghai, the Sui Dynasty officially crowned Emperor Sun Yangyu as the King of the Plain, Emperor Yang Jie as the King of Ancheng, Emperor Yang Jie as the King of Anping, Emperor Yang Jia as the King of Xiangcheng, Emperor Yang Jie as the King of Gaoyang, Emperor Yang Jie as the King of Jian'an, and Emperor Yang as the King of Hechuan. They were all sons of Crown Prince Yang Yong.

古文：夏，六月，甲午，初制工商不得仕进。
现代文：夏季，六月甲午，隋朝首次下制令工商业者不得做官。
English: In the summer, on the afternoon of June 1st, the Sui Dynasty for the first time decreed that industrialists and merchants were not allowed to work as officials.

古文：秋，八月，丙戌，诏： 决死罪者，三奏然后行刑。 
现代文：秋季，八月丙戌，隋文帝下诏书说： 判决死刑的罪犯，必须呈奏三次，然后才能行刑。 
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty issued an edict saying: "Criminals sentenced to death must perform three times before they can be executed.

古文：冬，十月，己丑，上幸长春宫；十一月，壬子，还长安。
现代文：冬季，十月己丑，隋文帝驾幸同州长春宫；十一月壬子，文帝回到长安。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty was fortunate enough to visit the Spring Palace with the governor; in November, Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an.

古文：党项寇会州，诏发陇西兵讨降之。
现代文：党项人侵犯会州，文帝下诏令调发陇西的军队讨伐并降附了党项族。
English: Dangxiang people invaded Huizhou, and Emperor Wen issued a decree to dispatch troops from Shaanxi to fight and subjugate the Dangxiang people.

古文：帝以光化公主妻吐谷浑可汗世伏；世伏上表请称公主为天后，上不许。
现代文：隋文帝将光化公主嫁给吐谷浑可汗世伏，世伏上表请求称呼公主为天后，文帝不答应。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty married Princess Guanghua to Khan Shifu of the Tugu Kingdom. Shifu requested that the princess be called the Queen of Heaven, but Emperor Wen did not agree.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十七年春，二月，癸未，太平公史万岁击南宁羌，平之。
现代文：十七年春季，二月癸未，太平公史万岁率军攻打居住在南宁地区的羌族人，平定了他们。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, in February, Taiping Gongshi Wanling led the army to attack the Yi people living in the Nanning area and pacified them.

古文：初，梁睿之克王谦也，西南夷、獠莫不归附，唯南宁州酋帅爨震恃远不服。
现代文：当初，北周行军元帅梁睿平定王谦的时候，西南夷、獠等族莫不归顺朝廷，唯有南宁州的酋帅震依恃路途遥远，不肯臣服。
English: At the beginning, when Marshal Liang Rui of the Northern Zhou marched to subdue Wang Qian, there was no way that the Southwest Yi, Yao and other ethnic groups would not submit to the imperial court. Only the chief of Nanning Province, Zhen Yixuan, was far away and refused to submit.

古文：睿上疏，以为： 南宁州，汉世牂柯之地，户口殷众，金宝富饶。
现代文：于是梁睿上疏，认为： 南宁州本是汉代的柯，人口众多，财宝丰富。
English: As a result, Liang Rui Shang Zuo believed that: Nanning was originally a Han dynasty county, with a large population and rich treasures.

古文：梁南宁州刺史徐文盛为湘东王征赴荆州，属东夏尚阻，未遑远略，土民爨瓚遂窃据一方，国家遥授刺史，其子震相承至今。
现代文：在侯景之乱时，梁南宁州刺史徐文盛被湘东王萧绎召赴荆州，由于当时华夏战乱，无暇顾及经略边远地区，当地土著瓒遂得以窃据一方，国家只好远远地授予他刺史职务，由他的儿子震承袭至今。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, Xu Wensheng, the chief historian of Ningzhou in Liangnan, was summoned to Jingzhou by Xiaoyan, the king of East Hunan. Due to the war in China at that time, there was no time to take into account the remote areas, and the local indigenous people were able to steal one side. The state had no choice but to grant him the post of chief historian far away, and his son has inherited it to this day.

古文：而震臣礼多亏，贡赋不入，乞因平蜀之众，略定南宁。 
现代文：而震作为臣子，礼节多缺，又不向朝廷缴纳贡赋，所以我请求率领平定巴、蜀地区的军队，前去平定南宁。 
English: But Zhen, as a vassal, lacked manners and did not pay tribute to the imperial court, so I asked him to lead the army to pacify Dingba and Shu regions and go to pacify Nanning.

古文：其后南宁夷爨玩来降，拜昆州刺史，既而复叛。
现代文：后来南宁夷族首领玩归降隋朝，被任命为昆州刺史，可是他不久就又反叛。
English: Later, the leader of the Nanning Yi people returned to the Sui Dynasty and was appointed as the governor of Queensland, but he soon rebelled.

古文：乃以左领军将军史万岁为行军总管，帅众击之，入自蜻蛉川，至于南中。
现代文：于是隋朝任命左领军将军史万岁为行军总管，率军攻打玩，从蜻蛉川进入，到达南中地区。
English: As a result, the Sui Dynasty appointed the left-leading army general Shi Wanling as the general manager of the march, led the army to attack and play, entered from Luochuan, and reached the south-central region.

古文：夷人前后屯据要害，万岁皆击破之；过诸葛亮纪功碑，渡西洱河，入渠滥川，行千馀里，破其三十馀部，虏获男女二万馀口。
现代文：夷族人前后屯据着战略要地，依险固守，都被史万岁率军攻破。越过诸葛亮的纪功碑，渡过西洱河，进入渠滥川，转战千余里，攻破夷族三十多个部落，俘获男女两万余口。
English: The barbarians were entrenched in strategic locations, clinging to the perils, and were all defeated by the army led by Shi Wanling. They crossed the Zhuge Liang Monument, crossed the Xidi River, entered the Duxian River, fought for more than a thousand miles, defeated more than 30 tribes of barbarians, and captured more than 20,000 men and women.

古文：诸夷大惧，遣使请降，献明珠径寸，于是勒石颂美隋德。
现代文：因此夷人害怕，纷纷派遣使节向史万岁请求归降，献出直径约长一寸的大明珠，于是刻碑歌颂隋朝的功德。
English: As a result, the barbarians were afraid and sent envoys one after another to Sui to ask him to surrender, offering a large pearl with a diameter of about one inch, so they carved a monument to praise the merits of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：万岁请将爨玩入朝，诏许之。爨玩阴有二心，不欲诣阙，赂万岁以金宝，万岁于是舍玩而还。
现代文：史万岁又向朝廷上书请求带玩入朝，文帝下诏同意，可是玩暗中怀有二心，不想入朝，因此用金银珠宝贿赂史万岁，史万岁就放了玩而班师还朝。
English: Shi Wanlong also sent a letter to the imperial court to request that he bring the toy into the imperial court. Emperor Wen agreed, but secretly harbored a double heart and did not want to enter the imperial court. Therefore, he bribed Shi Wanlong with gold, silver and jewelry. Shi Wanlong then released the toy and the teacher was still in the imperial court.

古文：庚寅，上幸仁寿宫。
现代文：庚寅，隋文帝驾幸仁寿宫。
English: Emperor Go-In and Emperor Sui-Wen ride through the Palace of Good Fortune and Long Life.

古文：桂州俚帅李光仕作乱，帝遣上柱国王世积与前桂州总管周法尚讨之，法尚发岭南兵，世积发岭北兵，俱会尹州。
现代文：居住在桂州的俚族首领李光仕反叛作乱，隋文帝派遣上柱国王世积和前桂州总管周法尚率军前去讨伐。周法尚调发驻扎在岭南地区的军队，王世积调发驻扎在岭北地区的军队，都在伊州会师。
English: Li Guangshi, the leader of the Yao people, who lived in Guizhou, rebelled and caused a disturbance. The Sui Emperor sent the king Shizhe and the former governor of Guizhou, Zhou Fashang, to lead the army to fight. Zhou Fashang sent troops stationed in the southern part of Lingnan, and Wang Shizhe sent troops stationed in the northern part of Lingnan, both of which joined forces in Yizhou.

古文：世积所部遇瘴，不能进，顿于衡州，法尚独讨之。
现代文：王世积率领的军队因为遇到瘴疫，无法前进，只得停在衡州。于是周法尚独自率军攻打李光仕。
English: The army led by Wang Shizhe was unable to advance because of the epidemic, and had to stop in Hengzhou. Therefore, Zhou Fa still led the army to attack Li Guangshi alone.

古文：光仕战败，帅劲兵走保白石洞。法尚大获家口，其党有来降者，辄以妻子还之。居旬日，降者数千人。
现代文：李光仕战败，率领精锐部队退保白石洞，周法尚俘获了大批李光仕部队的亲属家人，李光仕的部下有来向官军投降的，就归还他的妻子家人，十多天内，投降的俚人有数千人。
English: Li Guangshi was defeated and led the elite troops to retreat to Baishi Cave. Zhou Fa still captured a large number of relatives and family members of Li Guangshi's troops. When Li Guangshi's subordinates surrendered to the government army, they returned to his wife's family. In more than ten days, there were thousands of people who surrendered.

古文：光仕众溃而走，追斩之。
现代文：最后，李光仕部众溃散，他本人狼狈逃跑，被隋军追上斩首。
English: In the end, Li Guang's staff dispersed, and he himself fled in disarray, only to be caught and beheaded by the Sui army.

古文：帝又遣员外散骑侍郎何稠募兵讨光仕，稠谕降其党莫崇等，承制署首领为州县官。
现代文：隋文帝又派遣员外散骑侍郎何稠召募军队讨伐李光仕，何稠劝降了李光仕的党羽莫崇等人，又以朝廷之命署置俚族首领担任州县官。
English: Sui Emperor Wen also dispatched troops to recruit troops to fight against Li Guangshi. He also persuaded Motsung and other members of Li Guangshi's party to abdicate, and by order of the imperial court, appointed leaders of the Yi ethnic group to serve as prefectural and county officials.

古文：稠，妥之兄子也。
现代文：何稠是何妥哥哥的儿子。
English: How thick is the brother's son.

古文：上以岭南夷、越数反，以汴州刺史令狐熙为桂州总管十七州诸军事，许以便宜从事，刺史以下官得承制补授。
现代文：隋文帝由于居住在岭南地区的夷族、越族多次起兵反叛，于是任命汴州刺史令狐熙为桂州总管十七州诸军事，允许他相机行事，授权他可以朝廷之命任免州刺史以下各级官吏。
English: Because the Yi and Yue people who lived in the Lingnan region rebelled many times, Emperor Sui Wendi appointed Guizhou Zhishi Ling Foo Xi as the military governor of the seventeen states of Guizhou, allowed him to act as a camera, and authorized him to appoint officials at all levels below the imperial court.

古文：熙至部，大弘恩信，其溪洞渠帅更相谓曰： 前时总管皆以兵威相胁，今者乃以手教相谕，我辈其可违乎！ 
现代文：令狐熙上任后，大力推行恩德信义，于是岭南溪洞中的夷、越族酋帅互相说道： 以前各任总管都是以军队相威胁，今天的总管却是以亲笔教令来开导，我们怎么能再违抗呢？ 
English: After Ling Xuxi took office, he vigorously promoted "Ende Xinyi," so the Yi and Yue chiefs in the cave of Lingnan Creek said to each other: Previously, each chief executive threatened with the army, but today's chief executive is to enlighten with his own instruction, how can we defy it again?

古文：于是相帅归附。
现代文：于是相继率领部落归降。
English: As a result, they successively led the tribe to surrender.

古文：先是州县生梗，长吏多不得之官，寄政于总管府。
现代文：先前，岭南各地州县往往违抗命令，朝廷委派的官吏无法到位任职，只好寄居在总管府。
English: Previously, prefectures and counties in various parts of Lingnan often disobeyed orders, and officials appointed by the imperial court were unable to take up their posts, so they had to live in the headquarters.

古文：熙悉遣之，为建城邑，开设学校，华、夷感化焉。
现代文：现在令狐熙把他们全都派遣到职，并为各州县营建城邑，开设学校，因此汉、夷各族人民都感化宾服。
English: Now, Ling Xuxi sent them all to work, and built cities and towns for each prefecture and county, and opened schools. As a result, the people of all ethnic groups of Han and Yi were influenced by the guest dress.

古文：俚帅宁猛力，在陈世已据南海，隋因而抚之，拜安州刺史。
现代文：俚族首领宁猛力在陈统治时期已据有南海，隋崐朝因此对他采取安抚政策，任命他为安州刺史。
English: The leader of the Yi people, Ning Mengli, had gained control of the South China Sea during the reign of Chen. Therefore, the Sui and Qin Dynasties adopted a policy of appeasement towards him and appointed him as the governor of Anzhou.

古文：猛力恃险骄倨，未尝参谒。
现代文：宁猛力依仗着地形险要，桀骜不驯，从来不曾参拜谒见总管。
English: Relying on the dangerous terrain, Ning Mengli never went to see the general manager.

古文：熙谕以恩信，猛力感之，诣府请谒，不敢为非。
现代文：令狐熙对他施以恩德信义，宁猛力大受感动，于是来到总管府拜见，从此不敢再胡作非为。
English: Ning Mengli was greatly moved by the kindness and loyalty shown to him by Ling Xixi, so he came to visit him at the General Administration Office. From then on, he did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：熙奏改安州为钦州。
现代文：令狐熙又奏报朝廷，把安州改称钦州。
English: Ling Xuxi also reported to the imperial court, changing Anzhou to Qinzhou.

古文：帝以所在属官不敬惮其上，事难克举，三月，丙辰，诏 诸司论属官罪，有律轻情重者，听于律外斟酌决杖。 
现代文：隋文帝因为政府各部门的属官往往不尊敬惧怕上司长官，难以提高办事效率，三月丙辰，下诏书说： 各主管部门给属官定罪，如果按律应该从轻发落，但犯罪情节又比较严重的，允许在法律规定之外斟酌处以杖刑。 
English: Because the subordinate officers of various government departments often do not respect and fear their superiors, it is difficult to improve work efficiency. In March, Emperor Sui Wen said in the next edict: The competent departments shall convict the subordinate officers. If it is according to the law, it should be given a lighter sentence, but if the crime is more serious, it is allowed to impose a cane punishment at its discretion in addition to the provisions of the law.

古文：于是上下相驱，迭行捶楚，以残暴为干能，以守法为懦弱。
现代文：于是各级部门上下互相强迫，乱行捶打，把残暴酷虐当作有办事能力，把遵纪守法当作懦弱无能。
English: As a result, departments at all levels forced each other and beat each other indiscriminately, treating cruelty and brutality as if they had the ability to do things, and treating discipline and law-abiding as if they were weak and incompetent.

古文：帝以盗贼繁多，命盗一钱以上皆弃市，或三人共盗一瓜，事发即死。
现代文：隋文帝由于天下盗贼繁多，下令凡是偷窃一文钱以上的人都要在闹市中被处死，暴尸街头，曾有三人一起偷了一个瓜，事情败露后三人都被立即处死。
English: Sui Emperor Wen, due to the large number of thieves in the world, ordered that anyone who stole more than a penny should be executed in the city. On the street of dead bodies, there were three people who stole a melon together. After the matter was revealed, all three were immediately executed.

古文：于是行旅皆晏起早宿，天下懔懔。
现代文：于是行旅之人都早睡晚起，天下百姓人心惶惶。
English: As a result, travelers are going to bed early and getting up late, and people all over the world are panicking.

古文：有数人劫执事而谓之曰： 吾岂求财者邪！
现代文：有几个人劫持了执法官吏，对他们说： 我们不是盗财之人！
English: Some people kidnapped the law enforcement officers and said to them: "We are not thieves!

古文：但为枉人来耳。
现代文：只为被冤死的众人而来。
English: I'm only here for the people who were unjustly killed.

古文：而为我奏至尊：自古以来，体国立法，未有盗一钱而死者也。
现代文：现在要求你们替我们上奏皇上，自古以来制定的法律，都没有偷窃一文钱就判处死刑的条款。
English: Now we ask you to report for us, Your Majesty, that the laws enacted since ancient times have no provision for the death penalty for stealing a penny.

古文：而不为我以闻，吾更来，而属无类矣！ 
现代文：你们如果不将我们的话转奏朝廷，等我们再来抓住你们，你们就不能活命了！ 
English: If you do not report our words to the imperial court, you will not be able to live until we catch you again!

古文：帝闻之，为停此法。
现代文：文帝听说后，就废除了这项法令。
English: When Emperor Wen heard about this, he repealed the decree.

古文：帝尝乘怒，欲以六月杖杀人，大理少卿河东赵绰固争曰： 季夏之月，天地成长庶类，不可以此时诛杀。 
现代文：隋文帝曾经在盛怒之时，想在六月份杖刑杀人，大理寺少卿河东人赵绰苦苦争谏说： 盛夏季节，正是天地间万物旺盛生长的月份，不可在此时杀人。 
English: When Emperor Sui Wen was in a rage, he wanted to kill people with a cane in June. Zhao Qiao, the Shaoqing of Dali Temple and a person from the east of the river, struggled to say: The midsummer season is the month when all things in heaven and earth grow vigorously. It is not permissible to kill people at this time.

古文：帝报曰： 六月虽曰生长，此时必有雷霆；我则天而行，有何不可！ 
现代文：文帝回答说： 六月份虽然是万物生长的季节，但上天也会有雷霆震怒发生；我效法上天行事，有什么不可以呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen replied: Although June is the season for the growth of all things, there will also be thunder and fury in heaven; if I act according to heaven, what is wrong with that?

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是就下令将人杖杀了。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：大理掌固来旷上言大理官司太宽，帝以旷为忠直，遣每旦于五品行中参见。
现代文：大理寺掌固来旷上言说大理寺执法官吏对囚犯量刑定罪太宽，隋文帝因此认为来旷忠诚正直，让他每天早晨站在五品官员的行列中参见。
English: Lai Kuang, the abbot of Dali Temple, said that the enforcement officers of Dali Temple were too broad in sentencing prisoners, so the Sui Emperor believed that Lai Kuang was loyal and honest, and let him stand in the ranks of five officials every morning.

古文：旷又告少卿赵绰滥免徒囚，帝使信臣推验，初无阿曲，帝怒，命斩之。
现代文：来旷又上告说大理少卿赵绰违法释放囚徒，文帝派遣使臣前去调查，发现赵绰根本没有枉法偏袒之事，文帝非常愤怒，下令将来旷斩首。
English: Lai Kuang also appealed that Dali Shaoqing Zhao Quan illegally released prisoners. Emperor Wen sent an envoy to investigate and found that Zhao Quan did not favor favoritism at all. Emperor Wen was very angry and ordered the beheading of Lai Kuang.

古文：绰固争，以为旷不合死，帝拂衣入阁。
现代文：赵绰苦苦谏诤，认为来旷按照法律构不成死罪，文帝不听，拂衣进入中。
English: Zhao Qiao was bitter and twisted, he thought that it was not a capital crime to come and go according to the law, Emperor Wen did not listen, and he entered middle school.

古文：绰矫言， 臣更不理旷，自有它事，未及奏闻。 
现代文：赵绰又假称： 我不再申理来旷的事情，我还有别的事没有来得及奏闻。 
English: Zhao Qiao also pretended: I will no longer explain the things that have happened, I still have other things that I have not had time to report.

古文：帝命引入阁，绰再拜请曰： 臣有死罪三，臣为大理少卿，不能制驭掌固，使旷触挂天刑，一也。囚不合死，而臣不能死争，二也。臣本无它事，而妄言求入，三也。 
现代文：文帝让人引赵绰来到后，赵绰再拜奏请说： 我犯了三项死罪：身为大理寺少卿，没有能管制约束住掌固来旷，使他触犯了朝廷刑律，这是第一；囚犯罪不当死，而我不能以死相争，这是第二；我本来没有别的事，而以妄言，求见陛下，这是第三。 
English: After Emperor Wen had Zhao Cao brought to him, Zhao Cao again bowed and begged: "I have committed three capital offenses: as a young master of the Dalian Temple, I failed to control and restrain the wandering of the palms, causing him to violate the imperial criminal law, which is the first; the prisoner committed a crime of wrongful death, and I can't fight death with death, which is the second; I had nothing else to do, but I asked to see Your Majesty with false words, which is the third.

古文：帝解颜。
现代文：文帝听了他的话，脸色才缓和下来。
English: After listening to his words, Emperor Wen's face softened.

古文：会独孤后在坐，命赐绰二金杯酒，并杯赐之。
现代文：当时正碰上独孤皇后在坐，就下令赏赐赵绰两金杯酒，并且连金杯也赏赐给他。
English: At that time, when the lonely queen was sitting, he ordered to reward Zhao Qiao with two gold cups of wine, and even the gold cup was also awarded to him.

古文：旷因免死，徙广州。
现代文：因此，来旷得以免除一死，被流放到广州。
English: As a result, Lai Yan was spared death and was exiled to Guangzhou.

古文：萧摩诃子世略在江南作乱，摩诃当从坐，上曰： 世略年未二十，亦何能为？以其名将之子，为人所逼耳。 
现代文：原陈骠骑将军萧摩诃的儿子萧世略在江南地区举兵作乱，萧摩诃应当连坐治罪，隋文帝说： 萧世略年纪还未满二十岁，能有什么作为，只因为他是名将的儿子，所以被别人所胁迫罢了。 
English: Xiao Shiliu, the son of Xiao Maqian, a former general of the Chenzheng cavalry, raised an army in the south of the Yangtze River to cause turmoil. Xiao Maqian should be punished with imprisonment for life, Sui Emperor Wen said: Xiao Shiliu is still under the age of twenty, and can do nothing, but because he is the son of a famous general, so he was coerced by others.

古文：因赦摩诃。
现代文：于是下令赦免萧摩诃。
English: So he pardoned Capricorn.

古文：绰固谏不可，上不能夺，欲绰去而赦之，因命绰退食。
现代文：赵绰苦苦谏诤不崐能这样做，文帝也不能使他屈服。文帝又想等赵绰离去后再下令赦免萧摩诃，于是让赵绰退下去吃饭。
English: Zhao Qiao could not do this, and Emperor Wen could not make him give in. Emperor Wen also wanted to wait for Zhao Qiao to leave before ordering the pardon of Xiao Miao, so he let Zhao Qiao retire to eat.

古文：绰曰： 臣奏狱未决，不敢退。 
现代文：但是赵绰回答说： 我呈奏的案件还没有叛决，因此我不敢退下。 
English: But Zhao Cao replied, "The case I'm presenting hasn't been overturned yet, so I don't dare to withdraw.

古文：上曰： 大理其为朕特舍摩诃也。 
现代文：文帝只好宣布： 请大理寺法官为朕特赦萧摩诃。 
English: Emperor Wen had no choice but to announce: I ask the judge of the Dali Temple to pardon Xiao Miao for me.

古文：因命左右释之。
现代文：于是命令左右近臣释放了萧摩诃。
English: As a result, the people around him are killed and the Capricorn is released.

古文：刑部侍郎辛亶尝衣绯裈，俗云利官；上以为厌蛊，将斩之。
现代文：刑部侍郎辛曾经穿过红色的裤子，民间风俗说穿红色裤子可以官运亨通；隋文帝认为这是妖术，将要把他斩首。
English: The executioner Xin once wore red trousers. Folk custom says that wearing red trousers can bring good luck in official business; Emperor Sui thought it was magic and was going to behead him.

古文：绰曰： 法不当死，臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：赵绰说： 根据法律不应当处死，我不敢接受诏命。 
English: Zhao Qiao said: According to the law, the death penalty should not be carried out. I dare not accept the edict.

古文：上怒甚，曰： 卿惜辛亶而不自惜也！ 
现代文：文帝震怒，对赵绰说： 你可惜辛的性命，难道不可惜自己的性命吗？ 
English: Enraged, Emperor Wen said to Zhao Qiao, "You are sorry for Xin's life. Shouldn't you be sorry for your own life?

古文：命引绰斩之。
现代文：于是下令将赵绰推出斩首。
English: He then ordered Zhao Zhaozhu to be beheaded.

古文：绰曰： 陛下宁杀臣，不可杀辛亶。 
现代文：赵绰回答说： 陛下可以处死我，但不能处死辛。 
English: Zhao Chao replied, "Your Majesty can put me to death, but you cannot put Xin to death.

古文：至朝堂，解衣当斩，上使人谓绰曰： 竟何如？ 
现代文：赵绰被押到朝堂，解去衣服，正准备处斩时，文帝又派人对他说： 你抗命不尊的下场如何？ 
English: When Zhao Zhaozhu was taken to the imperial court, stripped of his clothes, and was about to be beheaded, Emperor Wen sent someone to say to him: "What happened to you for disobeying orders?

古文：对曰： 执法一心，不敢惜死！ 
现代文：赵绰回答说： 我一心一意公正执法，因此不敢爱惜自己的性命。 
English: Zhao Qiao replied: I am single-minded in enforcing the law fairly, so I dare not spare my own life.

古文：上拂衣而入，良久，乃释之。
现代文：文帝拂衣进入后宫，过了很长时间，才传令释放赵绰。
English: Emperor Wen whipped off his robe and entered the harem. It took a long time before a messenger was sent to release Zhao Qiao.

古文：明日谢绰，劳勉之，赐物三百段。
现代文：第二天，文帝又向赵绰道歉，好言慰问勉励他，赏赐他布帛等物三百段。
English: The next day, Emperor Wen again apologized to Zhao Qiao, encouraged him with kind words and condolences, and rewarded him with 300 pieces of cloth and other items.

古文：时上禁行恶钱，有二人在市，以恶钱易好者，武候执以闻，上令悉斩之，绰进谏曰： 此人所坐当杖，杀之非法。 
现代文：当时隋文帝严禁民间使用假钱，有两人在集市上用假钱兑换由官府铸造的好钱，巡查社会治安的武候抓获了他们，并报告了朝廷，文帝下令将他们斩首，赵绰进谏说： 他们所犯的罪应该判处杖刑，处死他们不符合法律。 
English: At that time, the Sui Emperor strictly forbade the use of counterfeit money by the people. Two people used counterfeit money to exchange good money minted by the government at the market. The military officers who inspected social security caught them and reported to the court. Emperor Wen ordered them to be beheaded. Zhao Cao Jinjun said: The crime they committed should be sentenced to cane punishment. Executing them is not in accordance with the law.

古文：上曰： 不关卿事。 
现代文：文帝回答说： 这不关你的事。 
English: Wendi said, "It's none of your business."

古文：绰曰： 陛下不以臣愚暗，置在法司，欲妄杀人，岂得不关臣事！ 
现代文：赵绰说： 陛下不因为愚昧无知，把我放置在执法部门，现在陛下想胡乱杀非罪之人，怎么能不关我执法大臣的事！ 
English: Zhao Qiao said: His Majesty did not put me in the law enforcement department because of ignorance. Now that His Majesty wants to randomly kill innocent people, how can it not be related to my law enforcement minister?

古文：上曰： 撼大木，不动者当退。 
现代文：文帝又说： 摇动高大树木的时候，如果树木不动就该知难而退。 
English: Wen Di also said: When shaking tall trees, if the trees do not move, you should know the difficulty and retreat.

古文：对曰： 臣望感天心，何论动木。 
现代文：赵绰也回答说： 我希望自己的一片忠心能感动苍天，何况是摇动树木。 
English: Zhao Chao also replied, "I hope that a piece of my loyalty can move the heavens, let alone shake the trees.

古文：上复曰： 啜羹者热则置之，天子之威，欲相挫邪！ 
现代文：文帝又说： 喝汤的时候，如果汤热就放在一边，天子的权威，你也想挫折它吗？ 
English: Wen Di also said: When drinking soup, if the soup fever is put aside, the authority of the Son of Heaven, do you also want to frustrate it?

古文：绰拜而益前，诃之，不肯退，上遂入。
现代文：赵绰再次跪拜后又向前靠近，文帝厉声呵斥他，越绰还是不肯退避，于是文帝就起身回后宫。
English: After Zhao Qiao bowed again and approached forward, Emperor Wen rebuked him sharply, but Qiao still refused to retreat, so Emperor Wen got up and returned to the harem.

古文：治书侍御史柳彧复上奏切谏，上乃止。
现代文：治书侍御史柳又上奏恳切劝谏，文帝才不再坚持将那两人处死。
English: The secretary, Shiryu, again appealed to Emperor Wen, but he no longer insisted that the two men be put to death.

古文：上以绰有诚直之心，每引入阁中，或遇上与皇后同榻，即呼绰坐，评论得失，前后赏赐万计。
现代文：隋文帝因为赵绰忠诚正直，常常把他带进中谈话，有时遇到文帝正和皇后同床而坐，即令赵绰也就坐，和他评论朝政得失，前后赏赐的布帛财物多达上万。
English: Because of Zhao Qiao's loyalty and honesty, the Sui Emperor often brought him into the conversation. Sometimes, when he met Emperor Wen, he was sitting in the same bed with the queen, and even made Zhao Qiao sit, and he commented on the gains and losses of the imperial government. The cloth goods awarded before and after amounted to tens of thousands.

古文：与大理卿薛胄同时，俱名平恕；然胄断狱以情而绰守法，俱为称职。
现代文：赵绰和大理寺卿薛胄同时，都享有公正宽恕的好名声；只是薛胄审理和判决案件多根据情理定罪，而赵绰只根据法律条文办案，两人都很称职。
English: Both Zhao Cao and Xue Yao, the abbot of Dali Temple, enjoy a good reputation for fairness and forgiveness; however, Xue Yao's trial and sentencing of cases are mostly based on reason and conviction, while Zhao Cao only handles cases according to the provisions of the law. Both of them are very competent.

古文：胄，端之子也。
现代文：薛胄是薛端的儿子。
English: Xue Qi is the son of Xue Duan.

古文：帝晚节用法益峻，御史于元日不劾武官衣剑之不齐者，帝曰： 尔为御史，纵舍自由。 
现代文：隋文帝晚年用法愈加严厉苛刻，曾有当值的御史在正月初一的大朝会时没有对衣冠佩剑不整齐的武官提出弹劾，文帝就说： 你作为御史，却不履行职责，放任自流。 
English: In the later years of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Wen's usage of the term became more and more severe and harsh. At the grand imperial court meeting on the first day of the first month, the imperial historian who had been on duty at the time did not impeach the military attaché whose crown and sword were not in order. Emperor Wen said: As an imperial historian, you are not fulfilling your duties, and you are letting things take their own course.

古文：命杀之，谏议大夫毛思祖谏，又杀之。
现代文：于是下令将当值御史处死；谏议大夫毛思祖进谏，文帝又下令将他处死。
English: Therefore, he ordered the execution of the imperial historian on duty; after consulting with Dr. Mao Szu, Emperor Wen also ordered his execution.

古文：将作寺丞以课麦迟晚，武库令以署庭荒芜，左右出使，或授牧宰马鞭、鹦鹉，帝察知，并亲临斩之。
现代文：将作寺丞由于征收麦秆迟晚，卫尉寺武库令由于署庭荒芜，左右近臣出使，有的收受地方官吏赠送的马鞭、鹦鹉，文帝访察知道后，都亲临刑场将他们斩首。
English: Because of the late collection of wheat straw, the commander of the temple was late to collect the wheat straw, the commander of the temple arsenal was late to collect the ammunition due to the deserted courtyard, the left and right courtiers sent envoys, and some received horsewhips and parrots presented by local officials. After the Emperor Wen's inspection knew, they all came to the execution site and beheaded them.

古文：帝既喜怒不恒，不复依准科律。
现代文：隋文帝变得喜怒无常，不再依据法律条款量刑定罪。
English: Emperor Sui Wen became moody and no longer convicted according to the provisions of the law.

古文：信任杨素，素复任情不平，与鸿胪少卿陈延有隙，尝经蕃客馆，庭中以马屎，又众仆于氈上樗蒲，以白帝。
现代文：文帝信任尚书右仆射杨素，而杨素又感情用事，不能公平地处事待人。他因和鸿胪寺少卿陈延之间崐有隔阂，有一次经过接待蕃邦客人的客馆，发现庭院中有马屎，又有一些仆人在毡毯上赌博，就告诉了文帝。
English: Emperor Wen trusted Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yang Su, but Yang Su was also emotional and could not treat people fairly. Because there was a rift between him and Chen Yan, the Shaoqing of Hongluo Temple, he once passed through a guest house that received guests from Shan State, found horse manure in the courtyard, and some servants gambling on carpets, and told Emperor Wen.

古文：帝大怒，主客令及樗蒲者皆杖杀之，棰陈延几死。
现代文：文帝听后大怒，下令把鸿胪寺主客令和参加赌博的仆人全部杖杀，陈延也被捶打得奄奄一息。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wen became very angry and ordered that the master and guest of Hongye Temple and all the servants who took part in the gambling be beaten to death. Chen Yan was also beaten to death.

古文：帝遣新卫大都督长安屈突通往陇西检覆群牧，得隐匿马二万馀匹，帝大怒，将斩太仆卿慕容悉达及诸监官千五百人。
现代文：隋文帝派遣亲卫大都督长安人屈突通到陇西去检查由太仆寺掌管的牧场，得到各牧场隐匿下来没有登记在册的马共两万余匹，于是文帝怒不可遏，将要把太仆寺卿慕容悉达和各牧场监牧官吏一千五百人一齐斩首。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty sent the pro-defender of the capital, Governor Chang'an Qutong, to Shaanxi Province to inspect the pastures under the control of the Taipu Temple, and obtained a total of more than 20,000 horses that had been hidden and not registered in each pasture. Therefore, Emperor Wen was furious and was going to behead the Lord of the Taipu Temple, Mu Rong Sida, and 1,500 pastoral officials of each pasture.

古文：通谏曰： 人命至重，陛下奈何以畜产之故杀千有馀人！
现代文：屈突通进谏说： 人命关天，最为珍贵，陛下怎么能因为畜牲的缘故而一下子杀害一千多人！
English: "Human life is the most precious thing in the world. How can your majesty kill more than a thousand people at once because of an animal!" said Qu Tsutong Jinlu.

古文：臣敢以死请！ 
现代文：我将以死相争。 
English: I will fight to the death.

古文：帝真目叱之，通又顿首曰： 臣一身分死，就陛下丐千馀人命。 
现代文：文帝瞪眼怒骂他，屈突通又叩头说： 我拿分内该死的这条命向陛下换取一千余条性命。 
English: Emperor Wen glared at him and scolded him, while Emperor Qu suddenly bowed his head and said, "I will exchange this life, which is the only life worth dying for, for more than a thousand lives for Your Majesty."

古文：帝感寤，曰： 朕之不明，以至于此！
现代文：文帝这才醒悟过来，对屈突通说： 这都是由于朕不明事理，以致于荒唐到这个地步！
English: It was only then that Emperor Wen came to his senses and said to Emperor Qu: "It's all because I don't understand things, to the point of absurdity!

古文：赖有卿忠言耳。 
现代文：幸亏有了你的忠言，才没有铸成大错。 
English: Fortunately, thanks to your loyal advice, there was no big mistake.

古文：于是悉达等皆减死论，擢通为右武候将军。
现代文：于是慕容悉达等人都被免死定罪，文帝又提拔屈突通为左武候将军。
English: As a result, Murong Siddar and others were exonerated from the death penalty, and Emperor Wen promoted Qu Jutong to the rank of General of the Left Division.

古文：上柱国彭公刘昶与帝有旧，帝甚亲之；其子居士，任侠不遵法度，数有罪，上以昶故，每原之。
现代文：上柱国彭公刘昶和隋文帝有旧交，隋文帝非常亲信他；刘昶的儿子刘居士负气仗义，不遵守朝廷法度，曾数次犯罪，文帝由于刘昶的缘故，每次都宽宥了他。
English: Liu Bei, the Peng Gong of Shangzhu, had an old friendship with Sui Emperor Wen, and Sui Emperor Wen trusted him very much; Liu Bei's son, Liu Juxi, had a bad temper, did not abide by the imperial law, and had committed several crimes. Emperor Wen pardoned him every time because of Liu Bei.

古文：居士转骄恣，取公卿子弟雄健者，辄将至家，以车轮括其颈而棒之，殆死能不屈者，称为壮士，释而与交。
现代文：于是刘居士有恃无恐，越加骄横放纵，猎取公卿大臣子弟中高大健壮者，到自己家里，把车轮套到他脖子上，然后用棍棒一通乱打，差不多快被打死还能不屈服求饶的人，就称为壮士，与他相交为友。
English: As a result, Liu Kuishi was fearless and became more and more arrogant and indulgent. He would hunt down tall and robust sons and sons of nobles and ministers, go to their homes, put a cartwheel around their necks, and then beat them indiscriminately with a club. Those who were beaten almost to death and still did not give in to begging for mercy were called strong men, and he befriended them.

古文：党与三百人，殴击路人，多所侵夺，至于公卿妃主，莫敢与校。
现代文：刘居士的党羽有三百人，他们无故殴打路人，侵夺财物，为非作歹，甚至于连公卿大臣、后妃公主也都不敢和他们计较。
English: There are three hundred members of Liu Kuishi's party. They beat passers-by without reason, seize property, and commit misdeeds. Even nobles, ministers, and princesses do not dare to contend with them.

古文：或告居士谋为不轨，帝怒，斩之，公卿子弟坐居士除名者甚众。
现代文：后来有人上告说刘居士图谋不轨，文帝很愤怒，下令将刘居士斩首，公卿大臣的子弟受到牵连而被除名为民的非常多。
English: Later, someone filed a complaint that Liu Jushi was plotting, and Emperor Wen was so angry that he ordered Liu Jushi to be beheaded. Many sons of noblemen and ministers were implicated and removed from public life.

古文：杨素、牛弘等复荐张胄玄历术。上令杨素与术数人立议六十一事，皆旧法久难通者，令刘晖等与胄玄等辩析之。
现代文：尚书右仆射杨素、大常卿寺牛弘等人再次向隋文帝推荐张胄玄的历法，于是文帝令杨素和掌管律历的官吏讨论提出了六十一个问题，都是旧历法长期以来很难解释清楚的，让拥护旧历法的刘晖等人和张胄玄等人互相辩难解释。
English: Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yang Su, and the Grand Changqing, Tera Niu Hong, once again recommended Zhang Xuan's calendar to Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, so Emperor Wen ordered Yang Su and the officials in charge of the legal calendar to discuss and put forward sixty-one questions, all of which were difficult to explain clearly for a long time by the old calendar, so that Liu Xuan and others who supported the old calendar and Zhang Xuan and others had difficulty explaining each other.

古文：晖杜口一无所答，胄玄通者五十四，上乃拜胄玄员外散骑侍郎兼太史令，赐物千段，令参定新术。
现代文：结果刘晖闭口无言，而张胄玄解释通了五十四个问题，于是文帝就任命张胄玄为员外散骑常侍兼太史令，赏赐给他布帛财物一千余段，并令他参酌修定新的历法。
English: As a result, Liu Bei was speechless, while Zhang Xuanxuan explained fifty-four questions, so Emperor Wen appointed Zhang Xuanxuan as a non-commissioned officer of the cavalry and the Grand Historian, rewarded him with more than a thousand pieces of cloth and property, and asked him to participate in the revision of the new calendar.

古文：至是，胄玄历成。
现代文：此时，张胄玄历法修订完成。
English: At this time, the revision of Zhang Xuan calendar was completed.

古文：夏，四月，戊寅，诏颁新历；前造历者刘晖等四人并除名。
现代文：夏季，四月戊寅，文帝下诏令颁行新历。先前参加修订张宾历法的刘晖等四人都被除名为民。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu Yin and Emperor Wen issued a decree to issue a new calendar. Liu Wei and four others who had previously participated in the revision of Zhang Bin's calendar were all expelled as citizens.

古文：秋，七月，桂州人李世贤反，上议讨之。诸将数人请行，上不许，顾右武候大将军虞庆则曰： 位居宰相，爵乃上公，国家有贼，遂无行意，何也？ 
现代文：秋季，七月，桂州人李世贤举兵造反，隋文帝和百官大臣商议发兵征讨，有好几位将帅请命出征，文帝都没答应，而对右武候大将军虞庆则说： 你位居宰相，受封上柱国、鲁国公，现在国家出现了叛贼，你却根本没有领兵出征的意思，这是为什么？ 
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Shixian, a Guizhou native, raised an army to rebel. Sui Emperor Wen and hundreds of ministers discussed the conscription of soldiers. Several generals asked for orders to go to war, but Emperor Wen did not agree, and said to Yu Qing, the right-armed general: You are the prime minister, you have been awarded the title of the pillar country and the prince of Lu, and now the country has a traitor, but you have no intention of leading soldiers to war. Why is this?

古文：庆则拜谢，恐惧，乃以庆则为桂州道行军总管，讨平之。
现代文：虞庆则叩头请罪，惶恐不安，于是文帝就任命虞庆则为桂州道行军总管，率军前去平定叛乱。
English: Yu Qingzhe kowtowed and pleaded guilty, panicked and uneasy, so Emperor Wen appointed Yu Qingzhe as the chief marshal of the Guizhou Road, and led the army to quell the rebellion.

古文：秦王俊，幼仁恕，喜佛教，尝请为沙门，不许。
现代文：秦王杨俊从小就仁爱宽恕，爱好佛教，曾经请求出家当和尚，隋文帝没有答应。
English: Qin King Yang Jun loved mercy and forgiveness from a young age, and was fond of Buddhism. He once asked to become a monk, but the Sui Emperor did not agree.

古文：及为并州总管，渐好奢侈，违越制度，盛治宫室。
现代文：等到他担任了并州总管以后，生活逐渐奢侈，违越制度规定，大规模修建和装饰宫殿府第。
English: After he assumed the post of the chief administrator of the annexed prefecture, his life gradually became luxurious, he violated the system regulations, and built and decorated the palace on a large scale.

古文：俊好内，其妃崔氏，弘度之妹也，性妒，于瓜中进毒，由是得疾，征还京师。
现代文：杨俊好近女色，他的妃子崔氏是崔弘度的妹妹，生性妒忌，就在瓜中置毒，杨俊因此中毒得病，被文帝召回京师。
English: Yang Jun liked to be close to women. His concubine Cui, the younger sister of Cui Hongdu, was jealous and poisoned the melon. As a result, Yang Jun was poisoned and became ill. He was recalled to Beijing by Emperor Wen.

古文：上以为奢纵，丁亥，免俊官，以王就第。
现代文：文帝因为杨俊骄奢纵欲，丁亥，下令罢免了他的官职，以王爵回家闲居。
English: Emperor Wen dismissed Yang Jun from his official post because of his extravagant and debauched lifestyle, and ordered him to return home and live idly with the title of prince.

古文：崔妃以毒王，废绝，赐死于家。
现代文：崔妃因为向秦王下毒，被废除了妃子名位，赐死在家中。
English: Because she poisoned King Qin, Queen Cui was deprived of her title of concubine and was allowed to die at home.

古文：左武卫将军刘升谏曰： 秦王非有它过，但费官物，营廨舍而已，臣谓可容。 
现代文：左武卫将军刘升上言谏道： 秦王并没有别的罪过，只不过是耗费国家钱财营造宫舍府第而已，我认为可以宽容他。 
English: Liu Sheng, General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, said: King Qin did not commit any other crimes, but he spent the country's money and resources to build palaces and residences. I think he can be tolerated.

古文：上曰： 法不可违。 
现代文：文帝回答说： 国家的法律不可违背。 
English: Emperor Wen replied, "The laws of the country must not be violated.

古文：杨素谏曰： 秦王之过，不应至此，愿陛下详之！ 
现代文：尚书右仆射杨素又进谏说： 秦王的过错，不应如此惩处，请陛下再慎重考虑！ 
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Jie Yangsu, also chimed in, saying, "The Qin King's mistake should not be punished in such a way, please reconsider carefully!

古文：上曰： 我是五儿之父，非兆民炎父？
现代文：文帝又回答说： 我难道只是太子杨勇、晋王杨广、秦王杨俊、蜀王杨秀、汉王杨谅五个儿子的父亲，而不是天下百姓的君父？
English: Emperor Wen also replied: Am I just the father of five sons, Prince Yang Yong, Jin King Yang Guang, Qin King Yang Jun, Shu King Yang Xiu, Han King Yang Tong, and not the sovereign father of the people of the world?

古文：若如公意，何不别制天子儿律！
现代文：如果像你说的那样，为何不专门制定用于天子儿子的法令？
English: If, as you say, why not have a special law for the Son of God?

古文：以周公之为人，尚诛管、蔡，我诚不及周公远矣，安能亏法乎！ 
现代文：以周公姬旦的为人施政，尚且诛杀举兵造反的管叔、蔡叔，我确实比周公差得很远，又怎么能枉法徇私呢？ 
English: With Zhou Gong Hidan as the person to administer politics, and even though I fought and killed Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, who raised an army to rebel, I am indeed very far from Zhou Gong, so how can I help myself in vain?

古文：卒不许。
现代文：始终没有答应。
English: In the end, he did not agree.

古文：戊戌，突厥突利可汗来逆女，上舍之太常，教习六礼，妻以宗女安义公主。
现代文：戊戌，突厥突利可汗来长安迎娶隋室公主，隋文帝招待他住在太常寺，并派人教他学习中国传统婚制的纳采、问名、纳吉、纳徵、请期、亲迎六礼，将宗女安义公主嫁给他为妻。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty invited him to live in Taizhong Temple, and sent someone to teach him the traditional Chinese marriage system of Na Zhe, Qianmei, Naji, Na Zheng, Ba Zhe, and Jianying, and to marry his daughter Princess An Yi to him as his wife.

古文：上欲离间都蓝，故特厚其礼，遣太常卿牛弘、纳言苏威、民部尚书斛律孝卿相继为使。
现代文：文帝因为想离间突利可汗和都蓝可汗之间的关系，所以故意将这次婚礼操办得特别隆重，相继派遣太常卿牛弘、纳言苏威、民部尚书斛律孝光作为使节出使突厥。
English: Because Emperor Wen wanted to separate the relationship between the Turi Khan and the Durang Khan, he deliberately made the wedding ceremony particularly grand, successively sending the Grand Vizier Ushihiro, Nagan Suwei, and the Minister of the People's Department, Shang Shuling, as envoys to Turkey.

古文：突利本居北方，既尚主，长孙晟说其帅众南徙，居度斤旧镇，锡赉优厚。
现代文：突利可汗本来居住在突厥的北方，在娶了安义公主以后，长孙晟劝说他率领部落南迁，居住在都斤山旧镇，隋朝对他赏赐优厚。
English: Turi Khan originally lived in the north of Turku. After marrying Princess An Yi, his eldest grandson Zou persuaded him to lead the tribe to move south and live in the old town of Dujin Mountain. The Sui Dynasty rewarded him generously.

古文：都蓝怒曰： 我，大可汗也，反不如染干！ 
现代文：于是都蓝可汗恼羞成怒，说： 我是突厥国的大可汗，现在反不如小可汗染干！ 
English: So Du Lan Khan became angry and said, "I am the Great Khan of the Turkic countries, but now it's time for the little khan to grow up!"

古文：于是朝贡遂绝，亟来抄掠边鄙。
现代文：于是就断绝了向隋朝的朝贡，屡次出兵侵扰抄掠隋朝边境。
English: As a result, he cut off the tribute to the Sui Dynasty and repeatedly sent troops to invade and plunder the Sui Dynasty border.

古文：突利伺知动静，辄遣奏闻，由是边鄙每先有备。
现代文：但是突利可汗每当观察了解到都蓝可汗的动静，就很快派遣使节奏报朝廷，因此隋朝边境每次都先作好了准备。
English: However, whenever the Turi Khan observed and learned about the movements of the Du Lan Khan, he quickly dispatched the cadence to report to the imperial court, so the Sui Dynasty and the North Korean border were prepared first every time.

古文：九月，甲申，上至自仁寿宫。
现代文：九月甲申，隋文帝从仁寿宫回到长安。
English: In September of Jiaxun, Sui Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an from Renshou Palace.

古文：何稠之自岭南还也，宁猛力请随稠入朝。稠见其疾笃，遣还钦州，与之约曰： 八九月间，可诣京师相见。 
现代文：员外散骑侍郎何稠从岭南起程返回京师时，钦州刺史宁猛力请求随何稠入朝，何稠见他病得厉害，就让他返回钦州，与他相约说： 八九月间，可到京师相会。 
English: When the non-commissioned officer and cavalryman He Chouzhu returned to Beijing Division from Lingnan, Qin Zhi Shining strongly requested He Chouzhu to accompany him to the North, and when He Chouzhu saw that he was seriously ill, he let him return to Qin Zhou and made an appointment with him, saying: In August and September, you can meet him in Beijing Division.

古文：使还，奏状，上意不怿。
现代文：何稠回朝后，奏明了情况，文帝有些不高兴。
English: After Ho Chou returned to the imperial court and reported the situation, Emperor Wen was somewhat displeased.

古文：冬，十月，猛力病卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，宁猛力病逝。
English: In winter, in October, Ning Mengli died of illness.

古文：上谓稠曰： 汝前不将猛力来，今竟死矣！ 
现代文：文帝对何稠说： 你以前没有带宁猛力来长安，现在他竟然去世了！ 
English: Emperor Wen said to Ho Chou: You didn't bring Ning Mengli to Chang'an before, but now he has passed away!

古文：稠曰： 猛力与臣约，假令身死，当遣子入侍。
现代文：何稠说： 宁猛力与我约定，如果他去世，就派遣他的儿子入朝侍奉。
English: He said: "Ning Meng Liguo agreed with me that if he died, he would send his son to serve in the imperial court.

古文：越人性直，其子必来。 
现代文：越人性格直爽，他的儿子必定会来朝。 
English: The people of Viet Nam are straightforward, and his son will definitely come.

古文：猛力临终，果戒其子长真曰： 我与大使约，不可失信，汝葬我毕，即宜登路。 
现代文：宁猛力临终的时候，果然告诫儿子宁长真说： 我和朝廷大使何稠有约，不能失信，你把我安葬完毕，就应当立即上路。 
English: When Ning Mengli was on his deathbed, he admonished his son, Ning Changzhen, saying, "I have a contract with the ambassador of the imperial court, and I cannot break it. When you have finished burying me, you should go on your way immediately."

古文：长真嗣为刺史，如言入朝。
现代文：宁长真继任钦州刺史，遵照父亲的遗言入朝长安。
English: Ning Changzheng succeeded to the post of Qinzhou magistrate and, in accordance with his father's last words, entered the court of Chang'an.

古文：上大悦曰： 何稠著信蛮夷，乃至于此！ 
现代文：隋文帝十分高兴，说： 何稠在蛮、夷族心中拥有的信誉，竟达到了这种地步！ 
English: The emperor was very pleased and said, "How dare you speak to a barbarian like that.

古文：鲁公虞庆则之讨李世贤也，以妇弟赵什住为随府长史。
现代文：鲁公虞庆则率军讨伐李世贤时，任命妻弟赵什住为总管府长史。
English: When Lu Gongyu Qingzhe led the army to fight against Li Shixian, he appointed his brother-in-law Zhao Shizhu as the chief administrator of the prefectural governor.

古文：什住通于庆则爱妾，恐事泄，乃宣言庆则不欲此行，上闻之，礼赐甚薄。
现代文：赵什住和虞庆则的爱妾私通，恐怕事情泄露，于是对外宣扬说虞庆则不乐意出征，隋文帝听到后，对虞庆则的礼遇赏赐很微薄。
English: Zhao Shizhu and Yu Qingzhe had a love affair with a concubine, and they were afraid that the affair would be leaked, so they announced to the outside world that Yu Qingzhe was not willing to go to war. After the Sui Emperor heard this, he gave Yu Qingzhe a very meager courtesy reward.

古文：庆则还，至潭州临桂岭，观眺山川形势，曰： 此诚险固，加以足粮，若守得其人，攻不可拔。 
现代文：虞庆则班师途中，走到潭州临桂崐岭，观察眺望山川形势，说道： 此地确实地形险要，如果有充足的粮草，再委派得力干将据险防守，攻不可破。 
English: Yu Qingzhe, on the way to the team, walked to the Lingui Mountains of Tanzhou, observed the situation of the mountains and rivers, and said: The terrain here is indeed dangerous. If there is sufficient grain and grass, then the competent cadres will be assigned to defend against the danger, and the attack will not be broken.

古文：使什住驰诣京师奏事，观上颜色，什住因告庆则谋反，下有司案验。
现代文：虞庆则派遣赵什住驰骑赶往京师向朝廷呈奏公事，顺便观察文帝对他的态度，什住乘机向朝廷告发说虞庆则谋反，文帝下令有关部门调查。
English: Yu Qing then dispatched Zhao Shizhujie to rush to Beijing to present a report to the imperial court, incidentally observing Emperor Wen's attitude towards him. Shizhujie took the opportunity to inform the imperial court that Yu Qing was plotting a rebellion, and Emperor Wen ordered the relevant departments to investigate.

古文：十二月，壬子，庆则坐死，拜什住为柱国。
现代文：十二月壬子，虞庆则因此事被处死，又授予赵什住柱国。
English: In December, Ren Zi and Yu Qing Zi were executed for this incident, and Zhao Shizhu was awarded the title of State Councillor.

古文：高丽王汤闻陈亡，大惧，治兵积谷，为拒守之策。
现代文：高丽王高汤得悉陈灭亡后，非常害怕，于是大力训练军队，聚积粮草，筹划一旦遭到隋军侵犯时所应采取的抵抗策略。
English: After learning of Chen's death, King Gaotang of Goryeo was very afraid, so he vigorously trained the army, accumulated grain and grass, and planned the resistance strategy to be taken in the event of invasion by the Sui army.

古文：是岁，上赐汤玺书，责以 虽称籓附，诚节未尽 。
现代文：这一年，隋文帝赐给高汤玺书，责备他 虽然做了隋朝的藩附属国，却没有尽到臣子应有的忠诚。 
English: In the same year, Emperor Sui Wen gave Gao Tang a letter of reprimand, reproaching him for not being as loyal as a vassal should be, despite being a vassal state of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：且曰： 彼之一方，虽地狭人少，今若黜王，不可虚置，终须更选官属，就彼安抚。
现代文：并且说： 你所统辖的地区，虽然地狭民少，但如果现在废黜了你的王位，也不能没有人负责治理，终究需要朝廷重新选派官属，前去安抚黎民百姓。
English: He also said: Although the area under your jurisdiction is small and has few people, if you are now deposed from your throne, no one can be responsible for governance. After all, the imperial court needs to re-elect officials and reassure the people.

古文：王若洒心易行，率由宪章，即是朕之良臣，何劳别遣才彦！
现代文：你如果能洗心革面，完全遵照朝廷的法令制度，就是朕的良臣，朕又何必再派遣贤才呢？
English: If you can cleanse your heart and face, and completely comply with the imperial court's legal system, you are my good minister, why do I have to send a wise man again?

古文：王谓辽水之广，何如长江？
现代文：你认为辽河的宽广比长江如何？
English: Do you think the Liao River is wider than the Yangtze River?

古文：高丽之人，多少陈国？
现代文：高丽的兵民比陈多少？
English: How many soldiers and citizens of Goryeo are there compared to Chen?

古文：朕若不存含育，责王前愆，命一将军，何待多力！
现代文：如果朕不是存有包容、养育天下黎民百姓之心，责问你以往的过失，派遣一位将帅率军前去问罪，根本用不着跟你多费气力！
English: If I don't have the heart to be tolerant and nurture the Li people around the world, and if I don't ask you about your past mistakes, and if I don't send a general to lead the army to ask you about your sins, then I don't need to make much effort with you!

古文：殷勤晓示，许王自新耳。 
现代文：之所以对你殷勤劝导，是允许你改过自新。 
English: The reason I'm trying to persuade you is to allow you to make amends.

古文：汤得书，惶恐，将奉表陈谢。
现代文：高汤得到文帝玺书后，惶恐不安，准备向朝廷奉表谢罪。
English: After Gao Tang received Emperor Wen's imperial edict, he panicked and prepared to apologize to the imperial court.

古文：会病卒，子元嗣立，上使使拜元为上开府仪同三司，袭爵辽东公。
现代文：恰巧得病去世，他的儿子高元继位，文帝派遣使节授予高元上开府仪同三司，承袭辽东公爵位。
English: Coincidentally, he died of illness, and his son Gao Yuan succeeded to the throne. Emperor Wen dispatched an envoy to confer Gao Yuan with the title of Grand Duke of Liaodong.

古文：元奉表谢恩，因请封王，上许之。
现代文：高元向朝廷奉表谢恩，并请求授予王爵，文帝同意。
English: Gao Yuan sent a letter of thanks to the imperial court and requested to be granted a royal title. Emperor Wen agreed.

古文：吐谷浑大乱，国人杀世伏，立其弟伏允为主，遣使陈废立之事，并谢专命之罪，且请依俗尚主；上从之。
现代文：吐谷浑大乱，国中人杀死可汗世伏，拥立他的弟弟伏允为君主，派遣使臣向隋朝陈述废立可汗的理由和经过，并且请求朝廷宽恕国人的擅命专行之罪，还请求依照吐谷浑的习俗，允许伏允娶嫂子光化公主为妻；隋文帝允从。
English: In the Great Turmoil of Tuyuhun, the people of the country killed the khan Shifu, supported his brother Fu Yun as the monarch, sent envoys to the Sui Dynasty to explain the reasons and procedures for the dethronement of the khan, and asked the court to forgive the compatriots for the crime of acting without authorization. They also requested that, in accordance with the customs of Tuyuhun, Fu Yun be allowed to marry his sister-in-law, Princess Guanghua; the Sui Emperor agreed.

古文：高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十八年
现代文：从此以后，吐谷浑每年都遣使朝贡。十八年
English: From then on, Togakushi sent tribute every year.

古文：春，二月，甲辰，上幸仁寿宫。
现代文：春季，二月甲辰，隋文帝驾幸仁寿宫。
English: Spring, February Jia Chen, the Sui Emperor drove to the Palace of Good Fortune and Long Life.

古文：高丽王元帅靺鞨之众万馀寇辽西，营州总管冲击韦走之。
现代文：高丽王高元率领族部众一万余人侵犯隋朝辽西地区，营州总管韦冲率军打退了高元。
English: Goryeo King Gao Yuan led more than ten thousand people of the clan to invade the western region of Liao of the Sui Dynasty. Yingzhou Governor Wei Chong led the army to repel Gao Yuan.

古文：上闻而大怒，乙巳，以汉王谅、王世积并为行军元帅，将水陆三十万伐高丽，以尚书左仆射高颎为汉王长史，周罗睺为水军总管。
现代文：隋文帝得知后非常愤怒，乙巳，任命汉王杨谅、上柱国王世积同为行军元帅，统率水陆三十万大军征伐高丽；又任命尚书左仆射高为汉王元帅府长史，周罗为水军总管。
English: After learning of this, Emperor Sui Wen was very angry. Therefore, he appointed Han King Yang Jun and Shangzhuan King Shijian as marching marshals to lead the 300,000-strong army and navy to conquer Korea. He also appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Shigao, as Han Marshal and prefectural governor, and Zhou Luo as commander of the navy.

古文：延州刺史独孤陀有婢曰徐阿尼，事猫鬼，能使之杀人，云每杀人，则死家财物潜移于畜猫鬼家。
现代文：延州刺史独孤陀有个婢女名叫徐阿尼，她供奉猫的鬼魂，能让猫鬼杀人，还说每当猫鬼杀人以后，死者家中的财物都会神不知鬼不觉地转移到供奉猫鬼的家庭。
English: There is a maidservant named Xuani in Yanzhou Zhishi Duoduo. She worships the ghost of a cat and can make the cat ghost kill people. She also said that whenever the cat ghost kills people, the belongings of the deceased's family will be unknowingly transferred to the family that worships the cat ghost.

古文：会独孤后及杨素妻郑氏俱有疾，医皆曰： 猫鬼疾也。 
现代文：正好独孤皇后和杨素的夫人郑氏都生病，医生都说： 这是由于猫鬼作祟而引发的疾病。 
English: Just as the lonely empress and Yang Su's wife, Zheng Shixuan, both fell ill, the doctors said: This is a disease caused by cats.

古文：上以陀，后之异母弟，陀妻，杨素异母妹，由是意陀所为。令高颎等杂治之，具得其实。
现代文：隋文帝因为独孤陀是皇后的同父异母弟，独孤陀的妻子是杨素的同父异母妹，因此怀疑是独孤陀所为，下令高等人一起审理验证，全部弄清了事实真相。
English: Emperor Sui Wen, suspecting that Duolouda was the culprit, ordered the higher-ranking officials to investigate and verify the case together, as Duolouda was the half-brother of the empress, and Duolouda's wife was the half-sister of Yang Su. All the facts were clarified.

古文：上怒，令以犊车载陀夫妻，将赐死。独孤后三日不食，为之请命曰： 陀若蠹政害民者，妾不敢言；今坐为妾身，敢请其命。 
现代文：于是文帝怒从心起，下令用牛车押解独孤陀夫妻，崐要把他们赐死，独孤皇后三天没有吃饭，为独孤陀请求保全性命说： 如果独孤陀由于蠹政害民而获罪，我不敢为他说话；现在独孤陀是由于我而获罪，所以斗胆请求陛下保全他的性命。 
English: So Emperor Wen became furious from the bottom of his heart, and ordered the ox-drawn cart to be used to escort Duolot's husband and wife. He wanted to put them to death. Duolot's queen did not eat for three days, and begged for Duolot's life to be spared, saying: "If Duolot was guilty of harming the people through his tyranny, I would not dare to speak for him; now Duolot is guilty because of me, so I have the courage to ask His Majesty to spare his life."

古文：陀弟司勋侍郎整诣阙求哀，于是免陀死，除名为民，以其妻杨氏为尼。
现代文：独孤陀的弟弟司勋侍郎独孤整也来到宫中求情，因此文帝赦免了独孤陀的死罪，将他革职为民，令他的妻子杨氏出家为尼姑。
English: Du Guota's younger brother, Shixun Zhi Lang Du Guotao, also came to the palace to plead for mercy, so Emperor Wen pardoned Du Guota's capital crime, dismissed him as a commoner, and ordered his wife, Yang, to become a nun.

古文：先是，有人讼其母为猫鬼所杀者，上以为妖妄，怒而遣之。
现代文：以前，曾有人上告说他的母亲是被人供奉的猫鬼所杀，文帝认为是妖言妄语，愤怒地将他斥退遣返。
English: In the past, someone had complained that his mother had been killed by a cat ghost, which was worshipped by people. Emperor Wen considered this to be the ravings of a demon and angrily expelled him from the country.

古文：至是，诏诛被讼行猫鬼家。
现代文：至此，文帝就下诏令诛杀被告发供奉猫鬼的人家。
English: At this point, Emperor Wen issued an edict to kill the homes of people who offered cats and ghosts to the accused.

古文：夏，四月，辛亥，诏： 畜猫鬼、蛊毒、厌媚野道之家，并投于四裔。 
现代文：夏季，四月辛亥，隋文帝又下诏书说： 凡是供奉猫鬼、畜养毒虫、从事妖术的家庭，都流放到边陲地区。 
English: In the summer, in April of Xinhai, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty issued another edict, saying: All families that worship cats and ghosts, raise poisonous insects, or engage in witchcraft will be exiled to the Fengtai region.

古文：六月，丙寅，下诏黜高丽王元官爵。
现代文：六月丙寅，隋文帝下诏废黜高丽王高元的官爵。
English: In June, King Goryeo Gaoyuan was dethroned by Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen.

古文：汉王谅军出临渝关，值水潦，馈运不继，军中乏食，复遇疾疫。
现代文：汉王杨谅率军从临渝关出塞，正碰上连日大雨，后方粮草运不到，军中缺乏食粮，又遇到了疾疫流行。
English: When the Han King Yang Peng led his army out of Linyuguan, it was encountering continuous heavy rain, the rear could not transport grain and grass, there was a shortage of grain in the army, and there was a disease epidemic.

古文：周罗睺自东莱泛海趣平壤城，亦遭风，船多飘没。
现代文：周罗率水军从东莱渡海向平壤城前进，途中也碰上了大风，船只多被吹散沉没。
English: Zhou Luo led the navy from Donglai across the sea to Pyongyang City. On the way, they also encountered strong winds, and most of the ships were blown apart and sank.

古文：秋，九月，己丑，师还，死者什八九。
现代文：秋季，九月己丑，隋朝大军被迫还师，兵士死了十分之八九。
English: In the autumn, when September turned ugly, the Sui Dynasty army was forced to return to the division, and eight out of ten soldiers died.

古文：高丽王元亦惶惧遣使谢罪，上表称 辽东粪土臣元 ，上于是罢兵，待之如初。
现代文：高丽王高元也很害怕，派遣使节向朝廷谢罪认错，上表称 辽东粪土臣子高元 ，文帝于是下令罢兵，像以前一样对待他。
English: Gao Yuan, the king of Goryeo, was also afraid. He sent an envoy to the imperial court to apologize for his mistake, and the above table called Gao Yuan, the native son of Liaodong Dung, and Emperor Wen then ordered a military strike and treated him as before.

古文：百济王昌遣使奉表，请为军导，帝下诏谕以 高丽服罪，朕已赦之，不可致伐。 
现代文：百济国王余昌派遣使节向隋朝上表，请求在讨伐高丽时担任军队的向导，隋文帝下诏书，告诉说： 高丽已经服罪归附，朕已经下令加以赦免，不可再进行讨伐。 
English: Baekje's King Yuchang sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to ask Toru to serve as an army guide during the campaign against Goryeo. Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty issued an edict, saying: Goryeo has confessed to the crime, I have ordered to pardon it, and it is no longer allowed to carry out the campaign.

古文：厚其使而遣之。
现代文：隆重地接待百济的使节后遣送回国。
English: After a grand reception, Baekje's envoys were sent back home.

古文：高丽颇知其事，以兵侵掠其境。
现代文：后来高丽知道了此事，就出动军队侵犯劫掠百济国的边境地区。
English: Later, when Goryeo learned of this, it dispatched troops to invade and plunder the border areas of Baekje.

古文：辛卯，上至自仁寿宫。
现代文：辛卯，隋文帝从仁寿宫回到长安。
English: In Xinwu, Sui Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an from Renshou Palace.

古文：冬，十一月，癸未，上祀南郊。
现代文：冬季，十一月癸未，隋文帝在南郊举行祭天大典。
English: In the winter, in late November, the Sui Emperor Wen held a grand festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：高颎及左卫大将军元旻等固请曰： 万岁雄略过人，将士乐为致力，虽古名将，未能过也。 
现代文：十二月，隋朝在从京师长安到岐州仁寿宫之间，建立了十二所行宫。南宁夷族首领玩再次起兵反叛。蜀王杨秀上奏说： 去年史万岁率军平定南宁地区时收受玩的贿赂而释放了他，致使现在又生祸患。 于是隋文帝就责问史万岁，而史万岁则矢口否认，文帝大怒，下令将史万岁斩首。
English: In December, the Sui Dynasty built twelve line palaces between Beijing's Chang'an and Qizhou's Renshou Palace. The leader of the Nanning Yi people rebelled again. Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, said: Last year, Shi Wanlong led the army to pacify the Nanning region and received a bribe from Shi Wanlong to release him, resulting in the current disaster. So the Sui Emperor Wen questioned Shi Wanlong, and Shi Wanlong denied it outright. The Emperor Wen was furious and ordered the beheading of Shi Wanlong.

古文：上意少解，于是除名为民。高祖文皇帝上之下开皇十九年
现代文：尚书左仆射高和左卫大将军元等向文帝一再求情说： 吏万岁勇气智谋过人，将士都乐意为他效力，即使是古代的名将，也没有超过他的。 文帝稍微有些回心转意，于是将史万岁革职为民。十九年
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant, Shigao, and General Yuan of the Left Division repeatedly pleaded with Emperor Wen, saying, "Long live the officials who have the courage to outwit others, and the soldiers who are willing to serve him. Even the famous generals of ancient times did not surpass him. Emperor Wen had a slight change of heart, so he dismissed Shi Wanzhong as a commoner.

古文：春，正月，癸酉，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月癸酉，隋朝大赦天下罪人。
English: In the spring, on the first day of the first month, the Sui Dynasty pardoned all the sinners in the world.

古文：二月，甲寅，上幸仁寿宫。
现代文：二月甲寅，隋文帝驾幸仁寿宫。
English: In February, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty arrived at the Palace of Good Fortune and Long Life.

古文：突厥突利可汗因长孙晟奏言都蓝可汗作攻具，欲攻大同城。
现代文：突厥突利可汗通过长孙晟上奏说都蓝可汗制造攻城器械，打算进攻大同城。
English: Turku Turli Khan, through his eldest grandson Zou Shang, said that Du Lan Khan made siege equipment and planned to attack Datong City.

古文：诏以汉王谅为元帅，尚书左仆射高颎出朔州道，右仆射杨素出灵州道，上柱国燕荣出幽州道以击都蓝，皆取汉王节度；然汉王竟不临戎。
现代文：于是隋文帝下诏任命汉王杨谅为元帅，命令尚书左仆射高率军从朔方道出塞，尚书右仆射杨素率军从灵州道出塞，上柱国燕荣率军从幽州道出塞，攻打突厥都蓝可汗，各军都受汉王杨谅指挥调度；然而汉王并没有亲临前线，指挥战事。
English: As a result, Emperor Sui appointed the Han King Yang Peng as a marshal, and ordered the Shangshu's left-hand servant Jia Gao to lead the army out of Shuo Fang Road, the Shangshu's right-hand servant Jia Yang Su to lead the army out of Lingzhou Road, and the upper pillar country Yan Rong to lead the army out of Yuzhou Road to attack the Turkic capital Blue Khan. All armies were commanded and dispatched by the Han King Yang Peng; however, the Han King did not personally come to the front line to command the war.

古文：都蓝闻之，与达头可汗结盟，合兵掩袭突利，大战长城下，突利大败。
现代文：都蓝可汗得知后，就与达头可汗结成同盟，合兵袭击突利可汗，双方在长城附近展开激战，结果突利可汗大败。
English: When the Tulan Khan learned of this, he formed an alliance with the Tatou Khan and together they attacked the Turi Khan. The two sides fought a fierce battle near the Great Wall, with the result that the Turi Khan was soundly defeated.

古文：都蓝尽杀其兄弟子侄，遂渡河入蔚州。
现代文：都蓝可汗将突利可汗的兄弟子侄全部杀害，然后率军渡河进入蔚州。
English: Tulang Khan killed all the brothers, sons and nephews of Tulig Khan, and then led his army across the river into Ulsan.

古文：突利部落散亡，夜，与长孙晟以五骑南走，比旦，行百馀里，收得数百骑。
现代文：突利可汗的部落败散，夜里和长孙晟带着五名骑兵向南奔逃，到天亮时，逃出一百余里，又收罗了数百名骑兵。
English: The tribe of the Turi Khan was scattered, and in the night, he and his eldest son Ran fled south with five horsemen. By dawn, they had fled more than a hundred miles and gathered hundreds of horsemen.

古文：突利与其下谋曰： 今兵败入朝，一降人耳，大隋天子岂礼我乎！
现代文：突利可汗与他的部下商议道： 如今我兵败投奔隋朝，不过是一个降人罢了，大隋天子又怎么会再对我以礼相待！
English: Turi Khan discussed with his subordinates: Now that I have defected to the Sui Dynasty, it's just a demotion, how can the great Sui Emperor treat me with courtesy again!

古文：玷厥虽来，本无冤隙，若往投之，必相存济。 
现代文：达头可汗玷厥虽然和都蓝可汗连兵而来，但他和我本无冤仇，我如果去投奔他，他必然会收留帮助。 
English: Although Tatou Khan Tseruk came to join forces with Du Lan Khan, he and I had no grudge against each other. If I went to join him, he would certainly accept my help.

古文：晟知之，密遣使者入伏远镇，令速举烽。
现代文：长孙晟得悉了突利可汗的打算，悄悄派人进入附近的伏远镇，下令火速燃起烽火。
English: After learning of Turi Khan's plan, the eldest grandson, Yao, quietly sent someone into the nearby town of Fuyuan and ordered a bonfire to be lit immediately.

古文：突利见四烽俱发，以问晟，晟绐之曰： 城高地迥，必遥见贼来。
现代文：突利可汗望见四处烽火同时燃起，向长孙晟询问情况，长孙晟欺骗他说： 烽火台都是建在高处，所以能看得很远，必定是发现有敌军入侵。
English: The Turi Khan saw four bonfires burning at the same time and asked the eldest grandson about the situation. The eldest grandson deceived him and said: The bonfires are all built at high altitudes, so they can see very far. They must have discovered an enemy invasion.

古文：我国家法，若贼少，举二烽；来多，举三烽；大逼，举四烽。
现代文：我国的制度是如果敌军来得少，就举起两处烽火；来得多，就举起三处烽火；只有敌军大兵压境，才举起四处烽火。
English: Our country's system is that if the number of enemy troops is small, two bonfires are lit; if the number is large, three bonfires are lit; and four bonfires are lit only when the enemy troops are pressing on the border.

古文：彼见贼多而又近耳。 
现代文：现在四处烽火惧起，显然是守护的将士发现敌军既来得多又离得近。 
English: Now bonfires were burning everywhere, and it was clear that the soldiers guarding them saw the enemy coming closer and closer.

古文：突利大惧，谓其众曰： 追兵己逼，且可投城。 
现代文：突利可汗非常害怕，就对他的部众说： 后面追兵已经逼近，只好暂且进城避难。 
English: The Turi Khan was very frightened and said to his men: "The pursuers are approaching from behind, we have to take refuge in the city for the time being.

古文：既入镇，晟留其达官执室领其众，自将突利驰驿入朝。
现代文：进入伏远镇以后，长孙晟留下突厥达官贵族执室率领他的部众，自己带领突利可汗乘驿马入朝。
English: After entering Fuyuan Town, the eldest grandson Yu left the office of the Turkic officials and nobles to lead his subordinates, and himself led the Turkic khan to enter the imperial court on a horse.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，突利至长安。
现代文：夏季，四月丁酉，突利可汗来到长安。
English: In the summer, in April, the Turkic Khan came to Chang'an.

古文：帝大喜，以晟为左勋卫骠骑将军，持节护突厥。
现代文：隋文帝十分高兴，任命长孙晟为左勋卫骠骑将军，持节监护突厥。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very pleased and appointed his eldest son, Sun Quan, as the General of the Left Division of Guards and Cavalry and the guardian of the Turkic people.

古文：上令突利与都蓝使者因头特勒相辩诘，突利辞直，上乃厚待之。
现代文：隋文帝令突利可汗和都蓝可汗的使节因头特勒进行辩论，突利可汗理直气壮，文帝于是厚待他。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty ordered the envoys of the Turi Khan and the Durang Khan to have a head-to-head debate. The Turi Khan was justifiably emboldened, so Emperor Wen treated him well.

古文：都蓝弟都速六弃其妻子，与突利归朝，上嘉之，使突利多遗之珍宝以慰其心。
现代文：都蓝可汗的弟弟郁速六抛弃了妻子家人，和突利可汗一起投奔隋朝，文帝称赞了他，让突利可汗多送给他财宝珍玩加以慰劳。
English: Du Lan Khan's younger brother, Ikuhayu, abandoned his wife and family and fled to the Sui Dynasty with Turi Khan. Emperor Wen praised him and asked Turi Khan to give him more treasures and precious toys as consolation.

古文：高颎使上柱国赵仲卿将兵三千为前锋，至族蠡山，与突厥遇，交战七日，大破之；追奔至乞伏泊，复破之，虏千馀口，杂畜万计。
现代文：高派遣上柱国赵仲卿率军三千人为前锋，进至族蠡山，与突厥军队遭遇，连续交战了七天，大败突厥军队；又追击来到乞伏泊，又一次打败突厥军队，俘获一千余人，牛羊杂畜达万头之多。
English: Gao dispatched Zhao Zhongqing of Shangzhu, who led an army of three thousand as the vanguard, marched to Shaoshan, encountered the Turkish army, fought for seven days in a row, and defeated the Turkish army; he also pursued and came to Qibao, once again defeated the Turkish army, captured more than a thousand people, and there were as many as ten thousand heads of cattle and sheep.

古文：突厥复大举而至，仲卿为方陈，四面拒战，凡五日。
现代文：这时突厥的大军来到，赵仲卿将军队布成方阵，四面抗击，前后又激战了五天。
English: At this time, the Turkish army arrived. Zhao Zhongqing formed the army into a square formation, resisted on all sides, and fought back and forth for five days.

古文：会高颎大兵至，合击之，突厥败走，追度白道，逾秦山七百馀里而还。
现代文：正巧高率大军赶到，和赵仲卿合击突厥，突厥军队战败退走，高率军继续追击，经过白道。越秦山七百多里，然后还师。
English: It just so happened that the high-ranking army arrived and fought with Zhao Zhongqing against the Turks. The Turkish army was defeated and retreated, and the high-ranking army continued to pursue, passing through the White Road. It crossed the Qin Mountains for more than seven hundred miles, and then returned to the division.

古文：杨素军与达头遇。
现代文：杨素的军队和达头可汗遭遇。
English: Yang Su's army encountered the Tatou Khans.

古文：先是诸将与突厥战，虑其骑兵奔突，皆以戎车步骑相参，设鹿角为方陈，骑在其内。
现代文：在此之前，隋军将领率军和突厥打仗，因为担心突厥的骑兵往来冲突，都采用战车、骑兵和步兵相互交叉配合的阵法，摆下方阵，营外普遍埋设带尖的木桩，骑兵在最里边。
English: Prior to this, the generals of the Sui army led the army and the Turks to fight, because they were worried about the conflict between the Turkish cavalry, they all adopted the formation of chariots, cavalry and infantry cross-coordinated with each other, arranged in a square formation, and generally buried spiked wooden stakes outside the camp, with the cavalry in the innermost.

古文：素曰： 此乃自固之道，未足以取胜也。 
现代文：杨素说： 这种阵法是自我保守的办法，难以克敌取胜。 
English: Yang Su said: This kind of formation is a self-preservation method, and it is difficult to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：于是悉除旧法，令诸军为骑陈。
现代文：于是全部废除以前的阵法，下令各军都摆开骑兵阵势。
English: As a result, he abolished all of the previous formations and ordered all armies to set up cavalry formations.

古文：达头闻之，大喜曰： 天赐我也！ 
现代文：达头可汗听说后，欣喜若狂地说： 这真是上天赐予我的大好时机！ 
English: After hearing this, Tatou Khan was overjoyed and said, "This is truly a great opportunity given to me by God!

古文：下马仰天而拜，帅骑兵十馀万直前。
现代文：于是下马对天而拜，率领骑兵十余万直扑隋军。
English: So he dismounted and bowed to the sky, leading more than a hundred thousand cavalry to directly attack the Sui army.

古文：上仪同三司周罗睺曰： 贼陈未整，请击之。 
现代文：上仪同三司周罗说： 敌军阵形不整，请求发起攻击。 
English: Shang Yi and Zhou Luo of the Third Division said: The enemy's formation is not in order, please launch an attack.

古文：先帅精骑逆战，素以大兵继之，突厥大败，达头被重创而遁，杀伤不可胜计，其众号哭而去。
现代文：于是率领精锐骑兵迎战，杨素指挥大军随后继进，突厥军队大败，达头可汗带着重伤逃跑，隋军杀伤敌军不可胜计，突厥残军号啕痛哭而去。
English: As a result, he led the elite cavalry to meet the battle, Yang Su commanded the army and then advanced, the Turkish army was defeated, Dadu Khan fled with serious injuries, the Sui army killed and wounded the enemy army, and the Turkish remnants went away crying bitterly.

古文：六月，丁酉，以豫章王暕为内史令。
现代文：六月，丁酉，任命豫章王杨为内史令。
English: In June, Ding Xi appointed Yu Zhang Wang Yang as the Minister of the Interior.

古文：宜阳公王世积为凉州总管，其亲信安定皇甫孝谐有罪，吏捕之，亡抵世积，世积不纳。
现代文：宜阳公王世积任凉州总管，他的亲信安定人皇甫孝谐犯罪，执法官吏搜捕他，他逃亡来到王世积府第，王世积不收留庇护他。
English: Yiyang Prince Wang Shizhe was the governor of Liangzhou, his close confidant and fixer Wang Fu Xiaohong committed a crime, law enforcement officers searched for him, he fled to Wang Shizhe's residence, and Wang Shizhe did not shelter him.

古文：孝谐配防桂州，因上变，称 世积尝令道人相其贵不，道人答曰： 公当为国主，又将之凉州。 
现代文：皇甫孝谐被抓获后，被配隶军伍，防守桂州，因此他上书告发王世积，说： 王世积曾经让道士为他看相，问自己能否富贵，道士回答说： 你会当上国君，又将往凉州任职。 
English: After the emperor was captured, he was assigned to a subordinate army to defend Guizhou, so he wrote a letter to Wang Shizhe, saying: Wang Shizhe once asked a Taoist to look after him and asked if he could be rich. The Taoist replied: You will become the king of the country and will serve in Liangzhou.

古文：其所亲谓世积曰： 河西天下精兵处，可图大事。 
现代文：王世积的亲信对他说： 河西是全国出精兵强将的地区，可以图谋大事。 
English: Wang Shizhe's close confidant said to him: "Hexi is a region that produces fine soldiers and strong generals throughout the country, and can plot great things.

古文：世积曰： 凉州土旷人希，非用武之国。  
现代文：王世积回答说： 凉州地旷人稀，不是用武的地方。  
English: Wang Shizhe replied: Liangzhou is a sparsely populated place, not a place to use weapons.

古文：世积坐诛，拜孝谐上大将军。
现代文：王世积因此被处死，任命皇甫孝谐为上大将军。
English: As a result, Wang Shizhe was put to death, and Emperor Fu Xiaojin was appointed as the supreme commander.

古文：独孤后性妨忌，后宫莫敢进御。
现代文：独孤皇后生性妒忌，后宫的妃嫔宫女都不敢进御侍夜。
English: Lonely queens are jealous of each other, and the concubines in the harem are afraid to attend the court.

古文：尉迟迥女孙，有美色，先没宫中。上于仁寿宫见而悦之，因得幸。
现代文：原北周尉迟迥的孙女非常漂亮，过去被籍没入宫，隋文帝在仁寿宫见到她后非常喜欢，因此得到文帝的宠幸。
English: The granddaughter of the former Northern Zhou Fei Lingering was very beautiful. In the past, she was not admitted to the palace. Sui Emperor Wen liked her very much after seeing her in the Renshou Palace, so she was favored by Emperor Wen.

古文：后伺上听朝，阴杀之。上由是大怒，单骑从苑中出，不由径路，入山谷间二十馀里。
现代文：独孤皇后趁隋文帝坐朝听政的时候，暗中派人杀害了她，文帝大为愤怒，单骑从皇宫后苑出门，也不走正路，进入山谷中二十余里。
English: The lonely empress took advantage of the time when Sui Emperor Wen was sitting in the palace listening to politics, secretly sent someone to kill her. Emperor Wen was very angry and rode out of the palace backyard alone, without taking the right path, into the valley for more than twenty miles.

古文：高颎、杨素等追及上，扣马苦谏。
现代文：高、杨素等人驰骑追上，拦住马苦苦劝谏。
English: Gao, Yang Su and others galloped to catch up, stopping the horse and struggling to persuade him.

古文：上太息曰： 吾贵为天子，不得自由！ 
现代文：隋文帝叹息道： 我贵为天子，竟如此不得自由！ 
English: Emperor Sui Wen sighed and said, "I am a son of Heaven, and I am not free like this!

古文：高颎曰： 陛下岂以一妇人而轻天下！ 
现代文：高说： 陛下怎么能由于一个妇人而看轻天下？ 
English: Gao said: "How can His Majesty look down on the world because of a woman?

古文：上意少解，驻马良久，中夜方还宫。
现代文：于是文帝心中的怒气稍有缓和，立马长久，一直到半夜才回到宫中。
English: As a result, the anger in Emperor Wen's heart eased slightly, and he did not return to the palace until midnight.

古文：后俟上于阁内，及至，后流涕拜谢，颎、素等和解之，因置酒极欢。
现代文：独孤皇后也一直坐在寝宫内等候文帝，文帝回来后，皇后涕泪交流，拜谢请罪，高、杨素等人又好言劝解，于是隋文帝才高兴起来，置酒设宴欢乐。
English: The lonely empress had also been sitting in her bedchamber waiting for Emperor Wen. After Emperor Wen returned, the empress exchanged tears, prayed for forgiveness, and Gao, Yang Su, and others offered good words of persuasion. So Emperor Wen became happy and had a banquet of wine.

古文：先是后以高颎父之家客，甚见亲礼，至是，闻颎谓己为一妇人，遂衔之。
现代文：以前，独孤皇后由于高是父亲独孤信的家客，对他很客气礼敬，这件事发生后，得悉高称自己为一妇人，因此怨恨他。
English: In the past, because Gao was her father's trusted guest, the lonely queen was very polite and respectful to him. After this happened, she learned that Gao called herself a woman, so she resented him.

古文：时太子勇失爱于上，潜有废立之志，从容谓颎曰： 有神告晋王妃，言王必有天下，若之何？ 
现代文：当时皇太子杨勇失去了隋文帝的宠爱，文帝暗地里起了废立的念头，曾经从容地对高说： 有神告诉晋王杨广的妃子，说晋王必定享有天下，你说该怎么办？ 
English: At that time, the crown prince Yang Yong lost the favor of the Sui Emperor Wen. The Emperor Wen secretly had the idea of abolishing the throne. He calmly said to Gao: If there is a god to tell the consort of the Jin king Yang Guang that the Jin king must enjoy the world, what should you do?

古文：颎长跪曰： 长幼有序，其可废乎！ 
现代文：高长跪不起，回答说： 长幼有序，怎么可以废黜太了？ 
English: Gao Chang could not kneel down and replied, "The eldest and the youngest are in order, how can the dethronement be too much?

古文：上默然而止。独孤后知颎不可夺，阴欲去之。
现代文：独孤皇后知道高在废立问题上肯定不会曲意赞成，于是暗中打算把他赶出朝廷。
English: The lonely empress knew that Gao would certainly not approve of the abolition issue, so she secretly planned to expel him from the imperial court.

古文：会上令选东宫卫士以入上台，颎奏称： 若尽取强者，恐东宫宿卫太劣。 
现代文：恰好隋文帝下令挑选东宫卫士到皇宫上台值班宿卫，高上奏说： 如果陛下把强壮的卫士都选走，恐怕东宫的宿卫力量太弱。 
English: It just so happened that Emperor Sui Wen ordered the selection of the East Palace guards to be the guards on duty at the palace. Gao Shangsuo said: If Your Majesty selects all the strong guards, I am afraid that the East Palace's guards will be too weak.

古文：上作色曰： 我有时出入，宿卫须得勇毅。
现代文：文帝脸色大变说： 我时常出外巡幸，所以宿卫之士必须要壮勇强健。
English: Emperor Wen's face changed dramatically and he said, "I often go out on inspection tours, so the guards must be brave and strong."

古文：太子毓德东宫，左右何须壮士！
现代文：而太子只需要安坐东宫培养仁德，左右那里用得着壮士缩卫！
English: But the crown prince only needs to sit quietly in the East Palace to cultivate benevolence, and the strong men on his right and left need to be on guard!

古文：此极弊法。如我意者，恒于交番之日，分向东宫，上下团伍不别，岂非佳事！
现代文：所以在东宫保持强大的警卫力量是极大的弊政。卫士中合我意的，经常在轮换当值交接的那天，分配前去宿卫东宫，如此则两宫宿卫合为一体，难道不是件好事情？
English: Therefore, maintaining a strong guard force in the East Palace is a great maladministration. The guards often go to the East Palace before the assignment on the day of rotation and handover of duty, which is a good thing. If so, wouldn't it be a good thing for the two palaces to be integrated?

古文：我熟见前代，公不须仍踵旧风。 
现代文：我十分熟悉前代各种制度的得失，你不必请求仍然沿袭传统的作法。 
English: I'm very familiar with the ins and outs of previous systems, and you don't have to ask me to still do things the traditional way.

古文：颎子表仁，娶太子女，故上以此言防之。
现代文：因为高的儿子高表仁娶了太子杨勇的女儿，所以文帝用这些话提醒他。
English: Because Gao's son Gao Wufen married the daughter of Prince Yang Yong, Emperor Wen used these words to remind him.

古文：颎夫人卒，独孤后言于上曰： 高仆射老矣，而丧夫人，陛下何能不为之娶！ 
现代文：高夫人去世，独孤皇后对隋文帝说： 高仆射已经老了，又丧夫人，陛下怎能不为他再娶一房继室？ 
English: When Lady Gao died, the lonely empress said to Sui Wen Di: Gao Minyao is already old, and his wife has passed away. How can His Majesty not marry another concubine for him?

古文：上以后言告颎。
现代文：文帝把皇后的话转告了高。
English: Emperor Wen relayed the queen's words to Gao.

古文：颎流涕谢曰： 臣今已老，退朝，唯斋居读佛经而已。虽陛下垂哀之深，至于纳室，非臣所愿。 
现代文：高凄然泪下，感谢说： 我已经年迈，退朝以后，只是斋居诵读佛经而已，虽然陛下如此深崐深地哀怜我，但是说到再娶，实非我所愿。 
English: Gao wept bitterly and said with gratitude, "I am already old, and since I retired from the imperial court, I have only been fasting and reciting Buddhist scriptures. Although Your Majesty pities me so deeply and profoundly, when it comes to remarrying, it is really not my wish.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：于是文帝只好作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：既而颎爱妾生男，上闻之，极喜，后甚不悦。
现代文：随后不久高的爱妾生下一个儿子，文帝听说后非常高兴，而皇后却很不愉快。
English: Soon after, Gao's beloved concubine gave birth to a son, and Emperor Wen was very happy to hear about it, but the empress was very unhappy.

古文：上问其故，后曰： 陛下尚复信高颎邪？
现代文：文帝问她其中缘故，皇后说： 陛下还能再相信高吗？
English: When Emperor Wen asked her the reason for this, the empress said, "Can Your Majesty still trust Gao?"

古文：始，陛下欲为颎娶，颎心存爱妾，面欺陛下。
现代文：开始时，陛下打算为高迎娶继室，而由于心里装着爱妾，于是当面欺哄陛下，说他不愿再娶。
English: At the beginning, His Majesty intended to marry a step-sister for Gao Yingcheng, but because he had a mistress in his heart, he deceived His Majesty in person and said that he did not want to marry again.

古文：今其诈已见，安得信之！ 
现代文：如今他的欺诈已经暴露，陛下怎么能再信任他？ 
English: Now that his deceit has been exposed, how can His Majesty ever trust him again?

古文：上由是疏颎。
现代文：文帝因此开始疏远高。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen began to distance himself from Gao.

古文：伐辽之役，颎固谏，不从，及师无功，后言于上曰： 颎初不欲行，陛下强遣之，妾固知其无功矣！ 
现代文：隋文帝决定讨伐高丽时，高曾一再进谏，文帝没有听从。及至出师无功，独孤皇后又对文帝说： 高一开始就不愿意出征，陛下强派他前往，我就知道他一定不会成功。 
English: When Sui Emperor Wen decided to invade Goryeo, Gao had repeatedly made overtures to Emperor Wen, but Emperor Wen did not listen. When Gao's efforts were in vain, Empress Wen said to Emperor Wen: Gao did not want to go to war from the very beginning. Your Majesty forced him to go, and I knew that he would not succeed.

古文：又，上以汉王年少，专委军事于颎，颎以任寄隆重，每怀至公，无自疑之意，谅所言多不用。
现代文：另外，文帝由于元帅汉王杨谅年少，把所有军务都委任高，而高也因为文帝对他寄以厚望，所以常怀有至公守正之心，没有产生过自避嫌疑的念头，对杨谅的话多不听从。
English: In addition, Emperor Wen, due to the young age of Marshal Han Wang Yangren, delegated all military affairs to Gao, and Gao, because Emperor Wen had high hopes for him, often harbored the desire to be honest and upright, never had the idea of avoiding suspicion, and did not listen to Yangren's words.

古文：谅甚衔之，及还，泣言于后曰： 儿幸免高颎所杀。 
现代文：于是杨谅十分痛恨高，及至回到长安，痛哭流涕对皇后说： 我幸亏没有被高杀掉。 
English: So Yang Peng hated Gao very much, and when he returned to Chang'an, he cried bitterly and said to the queen: I am lucky that Gao did not kill me.

古文：上闻之，弥不平。
现代文：文帝知道后，心中愈发愤愤不平。
English: When Emperor Wen learned of this, he became more and more indignant.

古文：及击突厥，出白道，进图入碛，遣使请兵，近臣缘此言颎欲反。
现代文：及至高领军攻打突厥，大军追击越过了白道，谋划进一步深入大漠之中，于是派人向朝廷请求增兵，隋文帝左右近臣据此说高图谋造反。
English: When the supreme leader led the army to attack the Turks, the pursuit of the large army crossed the White Road and planned to go further into the desert. Therefore, he sent someone to the imperial court to request an increase in troops. According to this, the close vassals of the Sui and Wen dynasties said that Gao planned to rebel.

古文：上未有所答，颎已破突厥而还。
现代文：文帝还没答复，而高已打败突厥而班师还朝。
English: Emperor Wen had not yet replied, but Gao had defeated the Turks and returned to China.

古文：及王世积诛，推核之际，有宫禁中事，云于颎处得之，上大惊。
现代文：及至前凉州总管王世积被朝廷处死，在审问的时候，有一些宫禁中的事情，王世积说是从高那里得知的，文帝大吃一惊。
English: When Wang Shizhe, the former governor of Liangzhou, was executed by the imperial court, during the interrogation, there were some things in the palace ban, Wang Shizhe said that he learned from Gao, Emperor Wen was very surprised.

古文：有司又奏 颎及左右卫大将军元旻、元胄，并与世积交通，受其名马之赠。 
现代文：有关职掌官吏又上奏说： 高和左右卫大将军元、元胄，都与王世积交结往来，并接受了王世积赠送的名马。 
English: Relevant officials also reported: Gao and the left and right guards generals, Yuan and Yuan Xi, all had dealings with Wang Shizhe, and accepted the famous horse presented by Wang Shizhe.

古文：旻、胄坐免官。
现代文：于是元、元胄都被朝廷罢免了官职。
English: As a result, both Yuan and Yuan Xi were dismissed from their posts by the imperial court.

古文：上柱国贺若弼、吴州总管宇文弼、刑部尚书薛胄、民部尚书斛律孝卿、兵部尚书柳述等明颎无罪，上愈怒，皆以属吏，自是朝臣无敢言者。
现代文：上柱国贺若弼、吴州总管宇文、刑部尚书薛胄、民部尚书斛律孝卿、兵部尚书柳述等人都上奏申明高无罪，可是文帝更加发怒，下令将他们都交付执法官吏问罪，因此百官群臣没有人再敢为高说情。
English: Shangzhu Province's Herojuan, Wuzhou's governor-general Uwen, the criminal department's Shangshu Xuejun, the people's department's Shangshu Ritsutaka, and the military department's Shangshu Liuxu all sent letters to declare Gao's innocence, but Emperor Wen was even more angry and ordered that they all be handed over to the law enforcement officials for questioning. As a result, none of the hundreds of officials and ministers dared to intercede for Gao.

古文：秋，八月，癸卯，颎坐免上柱国、左仆射，以齐公就第。
现代文：秋季，八月癸卯，高被罢免上柱国、尚书左仆射官职，以齐公归家闲居。
English: In the autumn, at the end of August, Gao was removed from his posts as Shangzhu Guo and Shangshu Zuofu, and returned home to idle.

古文：未几，上幸秦王俊第，召颎侍宴。
现代文：不久，隋文帝驾幸秦王杨俊的府第，召高在宴会上作陪。
English: Soon after, Emperor Sui Wen drove to Qin King Yang Jun's capital and summoned Gao to accompany him at a banquet.

古文：颎歔欷悲不自胜，独孤后亦对之泣。
现代文：高见到文帝后欷不已，悲不自胜，独孤皇后也当着高的面泫然落泪。
English: Gao saw that Emperor Wen was exhausted and inconsolable, and the lonely empress also burst into tears in front of Gao.

古文：上谓颎曰： 朕不负公，公自负也。 
现代文：文帝对高说： 朕不负你，这是你自作自受。 
English: Emperor Wen said to Gao, "I can't live up to you, this is your own doing.

古文：因谓侍臣曰： 我于高颎，胜于儿子，虽或不见，常似目前。
现代文：文帝因此对左右侍臣们说： 我对待高胜过自己的亲生儿子，即使不见他的面，他也好象常在我的眼前。
English: Emperor Wen therefore said to the courtiers around him: I treat Gao Sheng better than my own son. Even if I don't see him, he is always in my sight.

古文：自其解落，瞑然忘之，如本无高颎。
现代文：自从他解官离职以后，我就把他完全遗忘了，好像从来也没有过高这个人。
English: Ever since he was dismissed, he was forgotten in the blink of an eye, as if he never existed.

古文：人臣不可以身要君，自云第一也。 
现代文：所以，做人臣的不能要挟君主，自认为是天下第一。 
English: Therefore, as a vassal, you cannot blackmail the monarch. You think you are the best in the world.

古文：顷之，颎国令上颎阴事，称其子表仁谓颎曰： 司马仲达初托疾不朝，遂有天下。
现代文：没多久，齐公高的国令上言告发高秘事，称高的儿子高表仁对高说 曹魏时太傅司马仲达起初借口有病不入宫朝见，后来遂夺取了天下。
English: Not long after, Qigong Gao's son Gao Biao Ren told Gao that Cao Wei's grand vizier Ma Zhongda initially used the excuse of illness to avoid entering the imperial court, and later conquered the world.

古文：公今遇此，焉知非福！ 
现代文：您如今也有此遭遇，又怎知道这不是将来洪福齐天的征兆？ 
English: You are also experiencing this now, so how do you know that this is not a sign of a prosperous future?

古文：于是上大怒，囚颎于内史省而鞫之。
现代文：隋文帝异常愤怒，下令把高囚禁在内史省，进行审问。
English: The Sui Emperor was extremely angry and ordered Gao to be imprisoned in the Ministry of Internal Affairs for interrogation.

古文：宪司复奏沙门真觉尝谓颎云： 明年国有大丧。 
现代文：执法部门又上奏说佛门真觉禅师曾经对高说： 明年国家有大丧。 
English: The law enforcement department also reported that the Buddhist monk, Zen Master Shinkaku, once said to Gao: "Next year, the country will be in great sorrow."

古文：尼令晖复云： 十七、十八年，皇帝有大厄，十九年不可过。 
现代文：尼姑令晖也对高说： 开皇十七、十八年，皇帝有大难，十九年则过不去。 
English: The nun Lingya also said to Gao: In the seventeenth and eighteenth years of the emperor's reign, the emperor had great difficulties, and in the nineteenth year, he could not get through.

古文：上闻而益怒，顾谓群臣曰： 帝王岂可力求！
现代文：文帝知道后愈加怒不可遏，对百官群臣说： 崐帝王难道是可力求而得的吗？
English: After learning this, Emperor Wen became even more furious and said to the hundreds of officials and courtiers: "Is Emperor Zou something that can be strived for?

古文：孔子以大圣之才，犹不得天下。
现代文：孔子以大圣之才，还不能得天下。
English: Confucius can't rule the world with his great wisdom.

古文：颎与子言，自比晋帝，此何心乎！ 
现代文：高和他儿子的谈话，自比西晋宣帝司马懿，这是居心何在？ 
English: Gao and his son's conversation, from the Bixi Jinxuan Emperor Sima Yu, what is the intention?

古文：有司请斩之。上曰： 去年杀虞庆则，今兹斩王世积，如更诛颎，天下其谓我何！ 
现代文：有关职掌官吏请求将高斩首，文帝说： 我去年杀了虞庆则，今年又斩了王世积，如果再诛戮高，天下人会怎么看我呢？ 
English: Relevant officials requested that Gao be beheaded, and Emperor Wen said: I killed Yu Qingzhe last year, and I beheaded Wang Shizhe this year. If I kill Gao again, what will the world think of me?

古文：于是除名为民。
现代文：于是下令将高除名为民。
English: So he abolished his title and became a commoner.

古文：颎初为仆射，其母戒之曰： 汝富贵已极，但有一斫头耳，尔其慎之！ 
现代文：高刚担任尚书左仆射时，他的母亲告诫他说： 你现在富贵已极，但不要忘了还有掉脑袋的危险，你可要处处小心谨慎！ 
English: When Gao Gang served as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, his mother admonished him: "You are extremely rich now, but don't forget that there is still the danger of losing your head. You must be careful at all times!"

古文：颎由是常恐祸变。
现代文：因此高时常担心发生灾祸。
English: As a result, Gao Gan often fears a calamity.

古文：至是，颎欢然无恨色。
现代文：现在得以保全性命，高很高兴而没有怨恨。
English: Now that his life has been spared, Gao is happy but not bitter.

古文：先是国子祭酒元善言于上曰： 杨素粗疏，苏威怯懦，元胄、元颎正似鸭耳。
现代文：以前，国子祭酒元善曾对文帝说： 杨素粗疏，苏威懦弱，元胄、元之流就好象鸭子，随波逐流。
English: In the past, Emperor Wenzong said to Emperor Wenzong: Yang Su is coarse, Su Wei is weak, and Yuan Xuan and Yuan Nian are like ducks, drifting with the tide.

古文：可以付社稷者，唯独高颎。 
现代文：可以托付国事的只有高一人。 
English: Only sorghum can be entrusted to the company.

古文：上初然之。
现代文：文帝起初也认为他说得很对。
English: At first, Emperor Wen also thought he was right.

古文：及颎得罪，上深责之，善忧惧而卒。
现代文：及至高获罪，文帝狠狠地责备元善，元善忧惧而死。
English: When Emperor Wen was found guilty to the highest degree, he severely reprimanded Yuan Zheng, and Yuan Zheng died of fear.

古文：九月，以太常卿牛弘为吏部尚书。
现代文：九月，隋朝任命太常寺卿牛弘为吏部尚书。
English: In September, the Sui Dynasty appointed Ushihiro, the chancellor of Taizhoji Temple, as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：弘选举先德行而后文才，务在审慎，虽致停缓，其所进用，并多称职。
现代文：牛弘主持选拔官吏时先德行而后文才，十分谨慎，虽然导致对官吏的除授缓慢，但是所进用的官吏大都能称职。
English: When presiding over the selection of officials, Ushihiro was very careful to select those who were virtuous before those who were literate. Although this led to the slow removal of officials, most of the officials he used were competent.

古文：吏部侍郎高孝基鉴赏机晤，清慎绝伦，然爽俊有馀，迹似轻薄，时宰多以此疑之；唯弘深识其真，推心任委。
现代文：吏部侍郎高孝基有鉴赏之才，机敏明察，清廉谨慎无人可比，可惜太过于豪爽俊逸，反使人觉得他有些轻薄不端，当时的大臣多因此对他有些疑虑；唯有牛弘最了解他，对他诚心任用。
English: There is no one who can match the discerning talent, shrewdness and prudence of Gao Xiaoji, the head of the cadre, but unfortunately, he was too proud and handsome, which made people think that he was a bit frivolous. Therefore, most of the ministers at that time had some doubts about him; only Niu Hong knew him best and appointed him sincerely.

古文：隋之选举得人，于斯为最，时论弥服弘识度之远。
现代文：整个隋朝的选举，此时做得最好，最能获得人才，当时舆论更加佩服牛弘有远见卓识和涵养度量。
English: The election of the entire Sui Dynasty was best done at this time, the best way to obtain talent. At that time, public opinion was more impressed by Niu Hong's foresight and tolerance.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，以突厥突利可汗为意利珍豆启民可汗，华言意智健也。
现代文：冬季，十月甲午，隋朝册封突厥突利可汗为意利珍豆启民可汗，汉语的意思是 意志智慧强健 。
English: In the winter, on the afternoon of October 1, the Sui Dynasty officially crowned the Turkic Turkic Khan as the Italian Zhenzu Qimin Khan, which in Chinese means strong-willed wisdom.

古文：突厥归启民者男女万馀口，上命长孙晟将五万人于朔州筑大利城以处之。
现代文：突厥部落归附启民可汗的男女百姓达一万多人，文帝命令长孙晟率军五万人，在朔州修建大利城，以安置突厥降人。
English: There were more than ten thousand men and women from the Turkic tribes who had been annexed to the Qimin Khan. Emperor Wen ordered the eldest son, Sun Quan, to lead an army of fifty thousand people to build Dali City in Shuozhou to resettle the Turkic descendants.

古文：时安义公主已卒，复使晟持节送宗女义成公主以妻之。
现代文：当时隋安义公主已经去世，文帝又派遣长孙晟持节护送宗女义成公主嫁给启民可汗。
English: At that time, Princess Sui An Yi had already passed away, and Emperor Wen sent his eldest grandson, Yu Jizhe, to escort his granddaughter, Princess Yicheng, to marry Qimin Khan.

古文：晟奏： 染干部落，归者益众，虽在长城之内，犹被雍虞闾抄掠，不得宁居。
现代文：长孙晟上奏说： 突利可汗染干部落，百姓归附的越来越多，虽然让他们居住在长城以内，但还是遭到都蓝可汗雍虞闾的侵扰抄掠，没法安定地生活。
English: The eldest grandson, Zou Shangsuo, said: The Turi Khan dyed and dried tribes, the people attached more and more, although they let them live within the Great Wall, but they were still invaded and plundered by the Du Lan Khan Yong Yue, and they could not live stably.

古文：请徙五原，以河为固，于夏、胜两州之间，东西至河，南北四百里，掘为横堑，令处其内，使得任情畜牧。 
现代文：请求将他们迁徙到五原地区，以黄河作为天然屏障，在夏、胜两州之间，东西都到黄河，南北相隔四百里，挖掘横向壕沟，让突厥人居住在里面，使他们任意畜牧。 
English: They requested that they be moved to the Wuhuan region, using the Yellow River as a natural barrier. Between Xia and Sheng, the two states, the Yellow River runs from east to west, and the north and south are separated by four hundred miles. A transverse trench was dug for the Turks to live in, and they were allowed to graze their livestock as they pleased.

古文：上从之。
现代文：隋文帝听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：又令上柱国赵仲卿屯兵二万为启民防达头，代州总管韩洪等将步骑一万镇恒安。
现代文：隋文帝又命令上柱国赵仲卿屯兵两万为启民可汗防御突厥达头可汗，代州总管韩洪等人率步骑一万人镇守恒安。
English: Emperor Sui also ordered Zhao Zhongqing of Shangzhu Province to raise 20,000 troops to defend the Qimin Khan against the Turkic Tatou Khan, and the daizhou governor Han Hong and others led 10,000 people to defend Heng'an.

古文：达头骑十万来寇，韩洪军大败，仲卿自乐宁镇邀击，斩首虏千馀级。
现代文：达头可汗率领骑兵十万来入侵，韩洪军队大败，赵仲卿从乐宁镇率军截击达头军队，斩首一千余级。
English: Dagou Khan led 100,000 cavalry to invade, defeating Han Hong's army. Zhao Zhongqing led an army from LeNing Town to intercept Dagou's army, beheading more than a thousand troops.

古文：帝遣越公杨素出灵州，行军总管韩僧寿出庆州。太平公史万岁出燕州，大将军武威姚辩出河州，以击都蓝。
现代文：隋文帝派遣越公杨素率军从灵州出塞，行军总管韩率僧寿率军从庆州出塞，大平公史万岁率军从燕州出塞，大将军武威人姚辩率军从河州出塞，攻打突厥都蓝可汗。
English: Emperor Sui Wen dispatched the Vietcong Yang Su led the army out of Lingzhou, the marching general Han led the monk Shou led the army out of Gyeongju, the great general Da Ping led the army out of Yanzhou, and the great general Wu Wei people Yao Du led the army out of Hezhou to attack the Turkic capital Blue Khan.

古文：师未出塞，十二月，乙未，都蓝为部下所杀，达头自立为步迦可汗，其国大乱。
现代文：隋军还没有出塞，十二月乙未，都蓝可汗被部下杀死，达头可汗自立为步迦大可汗，突厥国内大乱。
English: The Sui army had not yet left the country, and in December of the same year, Du Lan Khan was killed by his subordinates, Dadu Khan became independent as Bu Jia Da Khan, and there was turmoil in the Turkic country.

古文：长孙晟言于上曰： 今官军临境，战数有功，虏内自携离，其主被杀，乘此招抚，可以尽降。
现代文：长孙晟对文帝说： 如今官军已逼近突厥边境，并且取得数次胜利。敌国内部分崩离析，可汗被杀，如果崐乘机前去招抚，突厥部落会全部降附。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, said to Emperor Wen, "Nowadays, the government army has approached the Turkish border, and has achieved several victories. Parts of the enemy's country have fallen apart, the khan has been killed, and if Yao takes the opportunity to appease, the Turkish tribe will all surrender.

古文：请遣染干部下分道招慰。 
现代文：请求派遣启民可汗染干的部下分道去招抚慰问。 
English: Request to send the subordinates of the Khan of the Qin Dynasty to separate to solicit condolences.

古文：上从之。
现代文：文帝听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：降者甚众。
现代文：突厥部落很多归附隋朝。
English: Many Turkic tribes were incorporated into the Sui Dynasty.

