古文：谢瞻、孔琳之
现代文：孔琳之字颜琳，会稽山阴人。
English: The character of Kong Lin is Yan Lin, which means a person from the Mountain of Yin.

古文：谢瞻，字宣远，一名檐，字通远，陈郡阳夏人，卫将军晦第三兄也。年六岁，能属文，为《紫石英赞》、《果然诗》，当时才士，莫不叹异。
现代文：祖父孔沈是晋朝的丞相掾。
English: His grandfather, Kong Shen, was the prime minister of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖沈，晋丞相掾。父貵，光禄大夫。琳之强正有志力，好文义，解音律，能弹棋，妙善草隶。
现代文：父亲孔貵，是光禄大夫。孔琳之刚强正直，有志向有能力，喜爱读书作文，通晓音乐，特别会写草书和隶书。
English: Her father, Kong Rong, was a doctor of Guanglu. Kong Lin is strong and honest, has ambition and ability, likes to read and write, is familiar with music, and can especially write cursive and cursive.

古文：郡命主簿，不就，后辟本国常侍。
现代文：本郡任命他当主簿，没有应命，后来他被征用为本国的常侍。
English: The county appointed him as chief clerk, but he did not follow the order, and later he was requisitioned as a regular attendant in his home country.

古文：桓玄辅政为太尉，以为西阁祭酒。
现代文：桓玄辅佐晋朝官拜太尉，用孔琳之为西阁祭酒。
English: Emperor Jin's aide-de-camp, Kuan Xuan Fu, was given the title of Tai Liang (太尉) and used Kong Lin as the wine for the West Pagoda Festival.

古文：桓玄时议欲废钱用谷帛，琳之议曰： 《洪范》八政，以货次食，岂不以交易之所资，为用之至要者乎？
现代文：桓玄时朝廷议论，想废除金钱，用谷子和布帛交换。孔琳之论述此事说： 《洪范》中说的八大政事，把货币放在吃饭后面，难道不是因为交易行为是日常生活的最重要的一项吗？
English: At the time of Huan Xuan, the imperial court was debating whether to abolish money and replace it with grain and cloth. Commenting on the matter, Kong Linzhi said: Isn't it because the act of trading is the most important part of daily life that the eight major political affairs mentioned in "Hong Fan" put money behind the meal?

古文：若使不以交易，百姓用力于为钱，则是妨其为生之业，禁之可也。
现代文：如果不让金银为货币，百姓把精力投在铸钱上，那么必定妨碍他们做其他事，所以禁止百姓造钱是对的。
English: If gold and silver are not allowed to be used as money, and the people invest their energy in minting money, it will certainly hinder them from doing other things, so it is right to prohibit the people from making money.

古文：今农自务谷，工自务器，四民各肄其业，何尝致勤于钱。
现代文：今日农民只管种谷物，手工业者只管制造工具，士农工商各人只管经营他们的事业。又有哪个人用心于造钱呢？
English: Today, farmers only grow grain, craftsmen only make tools, and farmers, farmers, and businessmen only run their businesses. Who else is intent on making money?

古文：故圣王制无用之货，以通有用之财，既无毁败之费，又省运置之苦，此钱所以嗣功龟贝，历代不废者也。
现代文：所以圣人制造无用的钱，而使有用的物质流通，既没有浪费多余费用，又减轻运输的艰难。这就是货币表现为龟壳贝壳，历朝历代都没有废除的原因。
English: Therefore, sages created useless money and circulated useful materials, which did not waste unnecessary expenses and reduced the difficulty of transportation. This is the reason why money appears as a turtle shell shell and has not been abolished throughout the ages.

古文：谷帛为宝，本充衣食，今分以为货，则致损甚多。
现代文：谷物布帛是宝贝，用来作为吃饭穿衣。如果今天把其中一部分划分出来作为货币，那么必定有很多损害。
English: Cereal cloth is a treasure, used for food and clothing, and if today a part of it were to be divided up and used as money, there would be a lot of damage.

古文：又劳毁于商贩之手，耗弃于割截之用，此之为敝，著于自曩。
现代文：而且谷物布匹在商贩的手中损坏，在加减乘除中消耗。这样做的弊端，古人已说得很清楚。
English: Moreover, the grain cloth was damaged in the hands of merchants and consumed in addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. The ancients have made the drawbacks of doing so very clear.

古文：故钟繇曰： 巧伪之民，竞蕴湿谷以要利，制薄绢以充资。 
现代文：所以钟繇说： 奸诈的百姓，争着用湿谷物来抬高价值，制造薄薄的布帛充作货币。 
English: So Zhong Qi said: "The treacherous people are competing to use wet grain to raise the value and make thin cloth bags for money.

古文：魏世制以严刑，弗能禁也。
现代文：魏代历朝用严刑惩治，但没有效果。
English: The Wei Dynasty used severe punishment to restrict it, but it could not be banned.

古文：是以司马芝以为用钱非徒丰国，亦所以省刑。
现代文：所以司马芝认为用钱不仅使国家富裕，也可以减少刑罚。
English: Therefore, Sima Zhi believed that the use of coins and money is to make the country rich, and it can also reduce the penalty.

古文：钱之不用，由于兵乱积久，自至于废，有由而然，汉末是也。
现代文：货币之所以没有采用完全由于战乱长期存在，以至废弃是有原因的，汉代末年便是这样。
English: The reason why the currency was not adopted was entirely due to the long-term existence of war, so that there was a reason for abandonment, as was the case at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今既用而废之，则百姓顿亡其财。
现代文：今日钱已使用，再废除它，那么百姓一下子便失去了他的钱财。
English: Today money is used, abolish it and the people lose their money.

古文：今括囊天下之谷，以周天下之食，或仓庾充衍，或粮靡斗储，以相资通，则贫者仰富，致之之道，实假于钱。
现代文：如今搜集天下的谷物，以满足天下人的饮食需要，有的仓库充足，有的只是斗把左右的储存，自然是贫穷百姓依靠富人，达到这一步，完全依靠货币。
English: Nowadays, to collect the world's grain to meet the dietary needs of the world's people, some warehouses are sufficient, and some are just storing left and right. It is natural for poor people to rely on the rich, and to reach this step, they rely entirely on money.

古文：一朝断之，便为弃物，是有钱无粮之民，皆坐而饥困，此断钱之立敝也。
现代文：一旦废除货币，那便是被抛弃的东西，有钱无粮的百姓都坐而待毙，这是废除金钱马上会产生的祸害。
English: Once the currency is abolished, it is something to be abandoned, and the people with money and no food are sitting and waiting to die, which is the evil that will immediately arise from the abolition of money.

古文：且据今用钱之处不为贫，用谷之处不为富。
现代文：况且今日用钱的地方不穷，用谷的地方也不富。
English: Moreover, the places where money is used today are not abundant, and the places where grain is used are not rich.

古文：又民习来久，革之必惑。
现代文：另外人民用钱已习惯了，改变它必然导致混乱。
English: In addition, people are used to using money, and changing it will inevitably lead to chaos.

古文：语曰： 利不百，不易业。 
现代文：俗话说： 获利不超过一百倍，人们是不会改换他的职业的。 
English: As the saying goes: A man will not change his profession unless he can earn a hundred times more.

古文：况又钱便于谷邪？魏明帝时，钱废谷用，三十年矣。以不便于民，乃举朝大议。精才达治之士，莫不以为宜复用钱，民无异情，朝无异论。
现代文：况且钱比谷物用起来更方便，魏明帝时，废除货币用谷交换，三十年时间，因为不方便人民生活，于是朝中进行大讨论，深通政治经济的大人物，无不认为应该再用钱，人民没有反对意见，朝中没有异议。
English: Moreover, money is more convenient to use than grain. When Wei Mingdi abolished the exchange of money for grain, for thirty years, because it was inconvenient for the people's life, the DPRK and China had a big discussion. All the bigwigs who were well versed in politics and economy thought that money should be used again. The people had no objection and there was no objection from the DPRK.

古文：彼尚舍谷帛而用钱，足以明谷帛之弊，著于已试。
现代文：那个时代尚且舍弃谷物而用钱作为交换工具，足以说明用谷物交换的弊端，已被当年的人们深深认识。
English: At that time, people still used money as a means of exchange instead of grain, which is enough to illustrate the drawbacks of using grain as a medium of exchange, which were already well known to the people of that time.

古文：世或谓魏氏不用钱久，积累巨万，故欲行之，利公富国。
现代文：世人或者认为魏朝不用钱很长时间，积累了很多钱，所以最后又用了钱，有利公家有利于国。
English: The world may think that the Wei Dynasty did not use money for a long time and accumulated a lot of money, so it finally used money again.

古文：斯殆不然。
现代文：其实并非如此。
English: This is not the case.

古文：昔晋文后舅犯之谋，而先成季之信，以为虽有一时之勋，不如万世之益。
现代文：当年晋文公之所以后赏赐舅犯，而先赏奖成季的忠信才谋，就是因为他认为权谋虽然有利于一时，不如诚信有利于万世。
English: At that time, the reason why Prince Jinwen later rewarded his brother-in-law, but first rewarded the loyal talent of the season, was because he thought that although the power strategy was good for a while, it was not as good as the integrity.

古文：于时名贤在列，君子盈朝，大谋天下之利害，将定经国之要术。
现代文：魏国时一些名臣贤人在朝，君子并列，仔细谋划天下，商讨有利有害的各种大事，决定经营国家的根本方法。
English: At that time, famous sages were among the officials, virtuous gentlemen were all over the dynasty, everyone discussed the pros and cons of the world situation, and the basic method of governing the country would be determined.

古文：若谷实便钱，义不昧当时之近利，而废永用之通业，断可知矣。
现代文：如果谷物确实比货币方便，应该不只追求一时的方便，而离开永远有用的顺利，这是显而易见的。
English: If the grain is really more convenient than money, it is reasonable not to be blinded by the petty interests of the time, and the abolition of something that is always useful is clearly understandable.

古文：斯实由困而思革，改而更张耳。
现代文：这实际上是因为积累的弊端太多而想变革，改造旧的方式罢了。
English: It's really just a case of getting into a difficult situation and thinking about change, changing things up.

古文：近孝武之末，天下无事，时和年丰，百姓乐业，便自谷帛殷阜，几乎家给人足，验之事实，钱又不妨民也。
现代文：晋孝武帝末年，天下安宁，风调雨顺，五谷丰登。百姓乐业，自然谷物丰收，布帛充满，几乎家家丰衣足食，从这时的史实来看，钱也不妨碍人民的富裕。
English: In the last years of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, the country was peaceful, the weather was good, and the grain was plentiful. The people enjoyed their work, the natural grain harvest was plentiful, the cloth was full, and almost every family had plenty of food and clothing. From the historical point of view at this time, money did not hinder the people's wealth.

古文：顷兵革屡兴，荒馑荐及，饥寒未振，实此之由。
现代文：近些年来战乱不断发生，饥荒交迫。贫寒没有解决，也是因为这个原因。
English: Soon, war broke out several times, famine came one after another, and cold and hunger were not resolved. This is the real cause.

古文：公既援而拯之，大革视听，弘敦本之教，明广农之科，敬授民时，各顺其业，游荡知反，务末自休，固以南亩竞力，野无遗壤矣。
现代文：明公既然拯救天下，拨乱反正，改革制度，崇尚根本的教化，重视增加农业投资，给人民因时制宜，顺其自然，游子荡夫迷途知返，追逐末利的人自然止息，基本上达到了大家努力种田种地，旷野没能多余的土地了。
English: Since the Ming emperor saved the world, rectified the chaos, reformed the system, advocated fundamental enlightenment, attached importance to increasing agricultural investment, gave the people time-based measures, and let nature take its course, the wanderer wanderer lost his way and returned, and the person chasing the last profit naturally stopped, basically everyone's efforts have reached the point of planting fields and cultivating land, and the wilderness has not been able to spare land.

古文：于是以往，升平必至，何衣食之足恤。
现代文：从这往前走，太平之日必然可以达到，更不用担心衣服饮食了。
English: Moving forward from here, the day of peace can certainly be achieved, let alone worry about clothes and diet.

古文：愚谓救弊之术，无取于废钱。 
现代文：我认为拯救时代弊病，不需要废去金钱。 
English: I do not think that the remedy for the evils of our time is to be found in the abolition of coinage.

古文：玄又议复肉刑，琳之以为： 唐、虞象刑，夏禹立辟，盖淳薄既异，致化实同，宽猛相济，惟变所适。
现代文：桓玄又打算恢复肉刑。孔琳之认为： 唐尧虞舜制定刑律，夏禹建立法制。大概因为敦朴和刻薄的风俗不同，但是达到政治清平的方法一样，宽容和严厉交替使用，不断地改变政策适应时代。
English: Huan Xuan also planned to resume corporal punishment. Kong Linzhi believed that: Tang Zhou Yu established the criminal law, and Xia Yu established the legal system. Probably because of the difference between simple and harsh customs, but the method of achieving political equanimity is the same, alternating between tolerance and severity, and constantly changing policies to adapt to the times.

古文：《书》曰 刑罚世轻世重 ，言随时也。
现代文：《尚书》说： 刑罚有的时代重，有的时代轻。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Some times the punishment is heavy, some times it is light.

古文：夫三代风纯而事简，故罕蹈刑辟；季末俗巧而务殷，故动陷宪网。
现代文：说的是刑法随时代变化而变化。三代时期，风俗淳朴，政事简明，所以当时很少有人犯法；世纪末期，风俗巧伪而政事繁多，所以人们动不动便触犯刑法。
English: It is said that the criminal law changes with the times. In the Three Dynasties period, the customs were simple and the political affairs were concise, so few people broke the law at that time; at the end of the century, the customs were ingenious and the political affairs were numerous, so people broke the criminal law at every turn.

古文：若三千行于叔世，必有踊贵之尤，此五帝不相循法，肉刑不可悉复者也。
现代文：如果三千条刑法在世纪末通用，必然导致鞋价上涨的问题，这正是五帝法律不一样，肉刑不可以全部恢复的原因。
English: If the three thousand disciples of Confucius are in a chaotic world, there will inevitably be accusations of using too much punishment. This is precisely the reason why the five emperors do not follow each other's example and why physical punishment cannot be fully restored.

古文：汉文发仁恻之意，伤自新之路莫由，革古创制，号称刑厝，然名轻而实重，反更伤民。
现代文：汉文帝表现他的仁厚心肠，感概重新做人的道路未能打开，于是改变古代的法令，在当时被称为刑法废除的时代。名义上是轻了，实际上刑法反而重了，反而更加伤害百姓。
English: Emperor Hanwen showed his benevolence and generosity of heart, feeling that the road to becoming human again could not be opened, so he changed the ancient laws and decrees, in what was then known as the era of the abolition of criminal law. In name, it was light, but in fact the criminal law was heavy, but it hurt the people more.

古文：故孝景嗣位，轻之以缓。
现代文：所以孝景帝即位后，继续缓和减轻刑罚。
English: Therefore, after Emperor Xiao Jing ascended the throne, he continued to relax and reduce the punishment.

古文：缓而民慢，又不禁邪，期于刑罚之中，所以见美在昔，历代详论而未获厥中者也。
现代文：刑罚缓和以后而百姓又目无法纪。因刑罚又威慑不了邪恶的人，就要使刑罚达到适中。这也是古人加以称赞，历代详加商讨但又没有解决的问题。
English: After the punishment is mitigated, the people cannot be disciplined. Because the punishment cannot deter the evil person, it is necessary to make the punishment moderate. This is also a problem praised by the ancients and discussed in detail by successive generations, but it has not been solved.

古文：兵荒后，罹法更多。
现代文：兵荒之后，人民犯法更多。
English: After the war, more people broke the law.

古文：弃市之刑，本斩右趾，汉文一谬，承而弗革，所以前贤恨恨，议之而未辩。
现代文：斩首的刑罚，本来是斩去右脚趾。汉文帝一错，沿袭而没有改变，所以前人感到遗憾，研究它们而又没有得到解决。
English: The punishment of beheading was originally the amputation of the right toe. Emperor Han Wen made a mistake and did not change it, so the predecessors regretted that they studied it and did not solve it.

古文：钟繇、陈群之意，虽小有不同，而欲右趾代弃市。
现代文：钟繇、陈群的看法小有不同，但都希望用斩去右脚趾代替砍头。
English: Zhong Rong and Chen Qun have slightly different opinions, but they both hope to cut off the right toe instead of the head.

古文：若从其言，则所活者众矣。
现代文：如果按他们说的去做，必然使很多人活下去。
English: If you do what they say, you're bound to keep a lot of people alive.

古文：降死之生，诚为轻法，然人情慎显而轻昧，忽远而惊近，是以盘盂有铭，韦弦作佩，况在小人，尤其所惑，或目所不睹，则忽而不戒，日陈于前，则惊心骇瞩。
现代文：免除死亡，刑法确实是减轻了，但人们对于明显的处罚总是谨慎的，对于看不清的东西总是忽视的，忽视远方的东西，注意眼前的现象，所以古人鼎盘之上刻有箴言，把用韦玉做的弦佩带在身上，用以警戒自己细微的地方。况且小人们尤其糊涂，眼中看不见的东西，便忽视而不戒备，每日呈现在眼前的，便心惊肉跳。
English: Exemption from death, the criminal law is indeed mitigated, but people are always cautious about obvious punishments, always ignore things that are not clear, ignore things that are far away, and pay attention to the phenomena at hand. Therefore, the ancients engraved proverbs on the top plate, and wore strings made of marbles on their bodies to guard themselves against subtle places. Moreover, small people are particularly confused, and they ignore things that are not visible to the eyes without being alert, and they are presented in front of their eyes every day, and they are scared.

古文：由此言之，重之不必不伤，轻之不必不惧，而可以全其性命，蕃其产育，仁既济物，功亦益众。
现代文：由此看来，犯了重罪必须处罚，犯了轻罪也不能逃避惩处。这样就可以保全人们的性命，使人口增加，仁心救人，功效显著。
English: From this perspective, those who have committed serious crimes must be punished, and those who have committed minor crimes cannot escape punishment. In this way, people's lives can be saved, the population can be increased, and people can be saved with benevolence. The effect is significant.

古文：又今之所患，逋逃为先，屡叛不革，逃身靡所，亦以肃戒未犯，永绝恶原。
现代文：另外今日所可忧虑的，逃犯首先需要考虑。多次反叛的没有消除，应该让那些逃亡的人无处藏身，用以警戒还未触犯刑律的人，永远铲除罪恶的根源。
English: In addition to the concerns of today, fugitives should be considered first. Repeated rebellions have not been eliminated, and those who have fled should be given nowhere to hide, to warn those who have not yet violated the criminal law, and to eradicate the root of evil forever.

古文：至于余条，宜依旧制。
现代文：至于其他的法条，应该按老刑罚来。
English: As for other laws, the old punishments should be applied.

古文：岂曰允中，贵献管穴。 
现代文：这还谈不上适中，可贵的是窥一斑而知全豹，立一条而增进全面地改革。 
English: This is far from being moderate. What is valuable is to see the whole picture with a single glance, establish a clear direction and promote comprehensive reform.

古文：玄好人附悦，而琳之不能顺旨，是以不见知。
现代文：桓玄喜欢别人依附顺从于他，但是孔琳之不能这样，所以不被其赏爱。
English: Kuan Xuan likes others to agree with him, but Kong Linzhi cannot follow his wishes, so he is not appreciated.

古文：迁楚台员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：孔琳之接着升任楚台员外散骑侍郎。
English: Kong Linzhi was then promoted to the post of Chu-tai member outside horseback riding attendant.

古文：遭母忧，去职。
现代文：遇到母亲去世，离官去职。
English: When his mother died, he resigned from his post.

古文：服阕，除司徒左西掾，以父致仕自解。
现代文：守孝期满，被任为司徒左西掾。他又以父亲退休为名辞让了。
English: At the end of his term of filial piety, he was appointed as the West Prefect of Stutsu Province. He resigned in the name of his father's retirement.

古文：时司马休之为会稽内史、后将军，仍以琳之为长史。
现代文：当时司马休之当会稽内史、后将军，仍以孔琳之为长史。
English: At that time, Konrin was still the long-standing history of Sima Xiu's current association as an internal auditor and post-general.

古文：父忧，去官。
现代文：孔琳之父亲去世，他又辞官了。
English: Kong Lin's father passed away and he resigned from his post.

古文：服阕，补太尉主簿，尚书左丞，扬州治中从事史，所居著绩。
现代文：守孝期满，补任太尉主簿、尚书左丞、扬州治中从事史，在任上都很称职，成绩显著。
English: After the expiration of the period of filial piety, he was appointed as the second lieutenant of the main book, the second lieutenant of the left book, and the second lieutenant of the left book, and the second lieutenant of the left book, and the second lieutenant of the left book, and the second lieutenant of the left book, and the second lieutenant of the left book, and the second lieutenant of the left book.

古文：时责众官献便宜，议者以为宜修庠序，恤典刑，审官方，明黜陟，举逸拔才，务农简调。
现代文：当时要求朝中大臣谈论和陈述建议。一些人认为应该修治学校，减轻刑罚，明确职责和赏罚条例，举荐人才，重视农业，缓轻征役。
English: At that time, the ministers of the DPRK and China were asked to discuss and present suggestions. Some people believed that it was necessary to improve schools, reduce punishments, clarify responsibilities and reward and punishment regulations, recommend talents, attach importance to agriculture, and ease conscription.

古文：琳之于众议之外，别建言曰： 夫玺印者，所以辩章官爵，立契符信。
现代文：孔琳之在众人建议之外又提议说： 玺书和官印，为的是明确官职真假，向人们表示它的权威。
English: In addition to the suggestions made by many people, Kong Linzhi also proposed: the official seal and the official seal, in order to clarify whether the official position is true or false, and to show people its authority.

古文：官莫大于皇帝，爵莫尊于公侯。
现代文：官员中没有比皇帝更大的，爵位没有比公侯更显贵的。
English: No official is greater than the emperor, and no title is more distinguished than that of prince.

古文：而传国之玺，历代迭用，袭封之印，奕世相传，贵在仍旧，无取改作。
现代文：而传国玺宝，历代连续使用。继封的文印，也是代代相传，它的可贵在于古老和沿袭，而不需要改换制造。
English: The national treasure, however, has been used continuously throughout the ages. The seal of the succeeding seal has also been passed down from generation to generation. Its value lies in its antiquity and lineage, without the need to change the manufacturing process.

古文：今世唯尉一职，独用一印，至于内外群官，每迁悉改，讨寻其义，私所未达。
现代文：今日只有尉官这一职务，只用一种印绶。至于朝中内外各种官职，每次升任便全部改换印绶，研究它的本来意义，我还是不能明白为什么。
English: Today, only the post of lieutenant is used, and only one seal is used. As for the various official posts inside and outside the DPRK, every time they are promoted, they all change the seal. Studying its original meaning, I still can't understand why.

古文：若谓官各异姓，与传袭不同，则未若异代之为殊也。
现代文：如果认为每个官员姓氏不同，和继承的情况不同，那么还不像不同朝代的差异。
English: If the surname of each official is different, and the inheritance situation is different, it is not like the difference between different dynasties.

古文：若论其名器，虽有公卿之贵，不若帝王之重；若以或有诛夷之臣，忌其凶秽，则汉用秦玺；延祚四百，未闻以子婴身戮国亡，而弃之不佩。
现代文：如果谈官职的尊卑，虽然公卿的官职很高贵，但没有帝王那么重要。如果因为某官曾遭受斩杀的惩罚，同时也忌讳那个官职，那么汉朝用秦朝的传国玺，保存了四百年，没有听说秦子婴因为本身被杀国破家亡，而汉帝王便没有用传国玺的。
English: If we talk about the dignity and inferiority of official positions, although the official position of the nobles is very noble, it is not as important as the emperor. If, because a certain official had been punished by beheading, he also shunned that official position, then the Han Dynasty used the Qin Dynasty's imperial edict to preserve it for four hundred years, and did not hear that Qin Ziying was killed because he was killed and his family destroyed, and the Han Emperor did not use the imperial edict.

古文：帝王公侯之尊，不疑于传玺，人臣众僚之卑，何嫌于即印。
现代文：以帝王公侯如此尊贵的身份在传国玺的使用上毫无怀疑，普通的卑小官职，又为什么嫌恶前人用的官印呢？
English: There is no doubt about the use of the imperial seal with the emperor and prince in such a distinguished position, but why do ordinary low-ranking officials hate the official seal used by their predecessors?

古文：载籍未闻其说，推例自乖其准。
现代文：在古籍上没听说这种情况，按事推理也不合道理。
English: This situation is unheard of in ancient books, and it is unreasonable to reason from it.

古文：而终年刻铸，丧功肖实，金银铜炭之费，不可称言，非所以因循旧贯易简之道。
现代文：反而一年到头，不断地刻印铸印，浪费工夫，消耗物质。金银铜铁的花费，简直说不清有多少，这是不能继承优良传统使政治简明易行的。
English: On the other hand, it is not possible to carry on the fine tradition of making politics simple and easy by constantly stamping casts all year round, wasting time and material, and expending gold, silver, copper and iron beyond all reckoning.

古文：愚谓众官即用一印，无烦改作。
现代文：我认为各个官职都各用一种印绶，不需反复改铸。
English: I think that each official position should use one kind of seal, and there is no need to change it repeatedly.

古文：若有新置官，又官多印少，文或零失，然后乃铸，则仰裨天府，非唯小益。 
现代文：如果有新设置的官，或者官员多印绶少，或者印文消失，然后才能铸造，那么上则有利于国家，不仅是小的好处。 
English: If there are newly-appointed officials, or if officials print more money than before, or if printed money disappears before it can be minted, then the increase is beneficial to the country, not just a small benefit.

古文：又曰： 凶门柏装，不出礼典，起自末代，积习生常，遂成旧俗。
现代文：又说： 丧事的办理，在古代的典籍中没有记载，完全是从后世兴起的。老习惯成为规矩，成为一般的风俗。
English: He also said: The handling of funerals was not recorded in ancient classics, but arose entirely from later generations. Old habits became rules and became general customs.

古文：爰自天子，达于庶人，诚行之有由，卒革必骇。
现代文：上自天子，下至百姓，这样做确实有原因，突然改革必然惊骇耳目。
English: From heaven above to the people below, there is indeed a reason for this, and the sudden reform is bound to be shocking.

古文：然苟无关于情，而有愆礼度，存之未有所明，去之未有所失，固当式遵先典，厘革后谬，况复兼以游费，实为民患者乎！凡人士丧仪，多出闾里，每有此须，动十数万，损民财力，而义无所取。
现代文：然而这些习惯如果不和人情相关，反而害了百姓。
English: However, if these habits are not related to human feelings, they will harm the people.

古文：至于寒庶，则人思自竭，虽复室如悬磬，莫不倾产殚财，所谓葬之以礼，其若此乎。谓宜谨遵先典，一罢凶门之式，表以素扇，足以示凶。 又曰： 昔事故饥荒，米谷绵绢皆贵，其后米价登复，而绢于今一倍。
现代文：保存它们未必有用。
English: It may not be useful to keep them.

古文：绵绢既贵，蚕业者滋，虽勤厉兼倍，而贵犹不息。
现代文：布帛绸缎价格既然昂贵，养蚕的人就多了，人们虽然加倍的勤劳，但它的高价总跌不下来。
English: Since the price of brocade silk cocoons is expensive, there are more people raising silkworms. Although people are working twice as hard, its high price will not fall.

古文：愚谓致此，良有其由。
现代文：我认为导致这样的原因是有的。
English: I think there are reasons for this.

古文：昔事故之前，军器正用铠而已，至于袍袄裲裆，必俟战阵，实在库藏，永无损毁。
现代文：在大乱之前，军队衣服只用铠甲而已，至于军袍军袄和军衬衫必须打仗时才发，平时把它们放在仓库中，永远不会有损害。
English: Before the turmoil, the army's clothing only used armor. As for uniforms, uniforms and shirts, they were issued only when it was necessary to fight, and they were stored in warehouses during peacetime. They would never be damaged.

古文：今仪从直卫及邀罗使命，或有防卫送迎，悉用袍袄之属，非唯一府，众军皆然。
现代文：如今的仪仗部队和游行的使者，或者警卫士兵参加和迎送仪式的军人，都用军袍军袄，不仅某一军府，甚至其他各部队都是如此。
English: Today's ceremonial troops and parade emissaries, or guard soldiers participating in and escorting ceremonial soldiers, all use military uniforms and uniforms, not only for a certain military department, but even for other troops.

古文：绵帛易败，势不支久。又昼以御寒，夜以寝卧，曾未周年，便自败裂。
现代文：布绸容易损坏，不能长久保存，而且白天用它们来防寒，夜晚用它们来寝睡，不用一年便会毁坏。
English: Cloth is easily damaged and cannot be preserved for a long time. Moreover, it is used to protect against cold during the day and to sleep at night. It will be destroyed within a year.

古文：每丝绵新登，易折租以市，又诸府竞收，动有千万，积贵不已，实由于斯，私服为脂艰贵，官库为之空尽。
现代文：每年蚕棉丰收，容易按租税折价购买，另外各军府纷纷收购，动不动有几千，所以布帛一直昂贵，确实因为如此，私人的衣服因此而缺乏，而官府又为它而亏空。
English: Every year, there is a bumper harvest of cochineal cotton, which is easy to buy at a tax discount. In addition, the military authorities have purchased thousands of cochineal, so cochineal has always been expensive. Indeed, because of this, private clothes are scarce, and the government is in deficit because of it.

古文：愚谓若侍卫所须，固不可废，其余则依旧用铠。小小使命送迎之属，止宜给仗，不烦铠袄。
现代文：我认为像待卫部队，是必需它们的，其余的部队则必须仍旧用铠甲，小小迎来送往的仪式，只应分配军仗器械，不用铠甲和军袄。
English: I think that, like the guards, they are necessary, and the rest of the troops must still use armor. The small welcoming ceremony should only allocate military equipment, not armor and military pay.

古文：用之既简，则其价自降 
现代文：用的人少了，布帛的价格自然跌落。 
English: With fewer people using it, the price of cloth bags will naturally fall.

古文：又曰： 夫不耻恶食，唯君子能之。
现代文：他又说： 不以朴素的饮食为耻，只有君子能够做到。
English: He also said: Do not be ashamed of a simple diet, only a gentleman can do it.

古文：肴馔尚奢，为日久矣。
现代文：佳肴美宴，崇尚奢侈，已很长久了。
English: It's been a long time since fine dining and luxury were the order of the day.

古文：今虽改张是弘，而此风未革。
现代文：今日虽然不断地改正，但这个风气仍未改变。
English: Today, despite constant corrections, this culture has not changed.

古文：所甘不过一味，而陈必方丈，适口之外，皆为悦目之费，富者以之示夸，贫者为之殚产，众所同鄙，而莫能独异。
现代文：他们真正喜欢吃的不过是一种菜肴，而吃起来却有一大桌子，除了满足口腹的欲望之外，都是为了悦人耳目。富人用它们夸耀自己，穷人因此而竭资殚产。这样本来是人们非常痛恨的，但谁也无法不做。
English: What they really like to eat is just a dish, but when they eat it, there is a big table, which is not only to satisfy the desires of the mouth, but also to please the eyes and ears. The rich use them to boast themselves, and the poor use them to make money. This is what people really hate, but no one can do without it.

古文：愚谓宜粗为其品，使奢俭有中；若有不改，加以贬黜，则德俭之化，不日而流。 
现代文：我认为应该粗略地制定规则，使奢侈和节俭达到一个适中的比例，如果有人还不改正，加以贬斥；那么节俭美德的教化，马上便可传播。 
English: In my opinion, it is necessary to draw up a rough rule, so that luxury and frugality reach a reasonable proportion, and if someone still does not correct it, to denounce it; then the education of the virtue of frugality can be spread immediately.

古文：迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：孔琳之迁任尚书吏部郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：义熙六年，高祖领平西将军，以为长史，大司马琅邪王从事中郎。又除高祖平北、征西长史，迁侍中。
现代文：义熙六年高祖兼平西将军，用他当长史，又用他当大司马琅笽王的从事中郎，任命他为高祖的平北、征西将军长史，再升他当侍中。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Gao Zu and Pingxi General used him as the chief historian, and also used him as the chief secretary of King Ma Jun to engage in middlemen, appointed him as the ancestor of Gao Bei, the chief historian of the Western Expedition, and then promoted him to be a chamberlain.

古文：宋台初建，除宋国侍中。
现代文：宋国刚刚建立。任他为宋国侍中。
English: When the Song Dynasty was just established, he was appointed as a Song State Attendant.

古文：出为吴兴太守，公事免。
现代文：再出外当吴兴太守。又因公免职。
English: He went out again to serve as Wu Xing's grand marshal. He was also dismissed for misconduct.

古文：永初二年，为御史中丞。
现代文：永初二年，孔琳之当御史中丞。
English: In the second year of the Edo period, Konrin no togishi chujo appeared.

古文：明宪直法，无所屈桡。
现代文：孔琳之通晓法律，执法严明公正。
English: Kong Lin is familiar with the law, and the law enforcement is strict and fair.

古文：奏劾尚书令徐羡之曰： 臣闻事上以奉宪为恭，临下以威严为整。然后朝典惟明，莅众必肃。
现代文：他弹劾尚书令徐羡之说： 我听说臣子侍奉上司以守法为恭敬，而对下人以威严为整齐，然后朝廷法律明白，任事必然严肃。
English: He impeached Shang Shuling Xu Enjun and said: I have heard that a vassal serves his superior with respect by abiding by the law, and treats his subordinates with dignity and neatness. Then the imperial court understands the law, and the appointment must be serious.

古文：斯道或替，则宪纲其颓。
现代文：这个规矩一被打乱，那么法制便会崩溃。
English: If this rule is disrupted, the legal system will collapse.

古文：臣以今月七日，预皇太子正会。
现代文：我在本月七日参加皇太子的正会。
English: On the 7th of this month, I attended the crown prince's formal meeting.

古文：会毕车去，并猥臣停门待阙。
现代文：会完了车准备回去，和其他人在门边等待。
English: After the meeting, the car is ready to go back, and the others are waiting at the door.

古文：有何人乘马，当臣车前，收捕驱遣命去。
现代文：有一个人乘了一匹马在我的车前逮捕一个人并叫拉了开去。
English: There was a man on a horse in front of my car arresting a man and pulling him away.

古文：何人骂詈收捕，咨审欲录。
现代文：那个人一边骂一边捉人审问加以逮捕。
English: The man was cursing and swearing as he detained people for questioning and arrest.

古文：每有公事，臣常虑有纷纭，语令勿问，而何人独骂不止，臣乃使录。
现代文：每有公事，我常常担心引起麻烦，叫手下人不要多管。而那个人叫骂不止，我便叫人把他叫来。
English: Whenever there is a business matter, I often worry about causing trouble and ask my subordinates not to meddle too much. But that person kept cursing, so I asked someone to call him in.

古文：何人不肯下马，连叫大唤，有两威仪走来，击臣收捕。
现代文：那人不肯下马，连叫大喊，有两个威仪士兵走来，打我的收逮那人的部下。
English: The man did not want to get off his horse and even shouted. Two soldiers came and beat my men who were trying to arrest the man.

古文：尚书令省事倪宗又牵威仪手力，击臣下人。
现代文：尚书令省事倪宗又牵威仪士兵的手，打我的部属。
English: Shang Shuling saved Ni Zong and took the soldiers' hands and beat my subordinates.

古文：宗云： 中丞何得行凶，敢录令公人。
现代文：倪宗说： 中丞怎么能行凶，敢抓令公的人。
English: Ni Zong said, "How can Zhongzheng commit crimes and dare to arrest public officials?

古文：凡是中丞收捕，威仪悉皆缚取。 
现代文：凡是中丞逮捕的，威仪们都可以捆起带走。 
English: Anyone arrested by the chujo could be tied up and taken away by the dignitaries.

古文：臣敕下人一不得斗，凶势辀张，有顷乃散。
现代文：我叫手下人，一点也不要动手，但他们气焰猖獗，好久才散去。
English: I told my men not to touch anything, but they were so furious that it took a long time for them to disperse.

古文：又有群人就臣车侧，录收捕樊马子，互行筑马子顿伏，不能还台。
现代文：又有一群人在我的车旁，逮捕樊马子，又一起按住马子叫他跪在地下，把他带走，不能回到御史台。
English: There was another group of people next to my car, arresting the mule, and together they held the horse down and made him kneel on the ground. They took him away, so he couldn't return to Goshidai.

古文：臣自录非，本无对校，而宗敢乘势凶恣，篡夺罪身。
现代文：我想他们抓人是不法的，又没有证据，而倪宗敢凭借权势肆无忌惮，带走有罪的人。
English: I think they arrested people illegally and without evidence, and Ni Zong dared to use his power to take away the guilty.

古文：尚书令臣羡之，与臣列车，纷纭若此，或云羡之不禁，或云羡之禁而不止。
现代文：尚书令徐羡之和我都乘坐车子。而闹出这样的事，凶气嚣张，有的说是徐羡之不禁止下人，有的说是徐羡之禁止了但没有效果。
English: Shang Shu ordered Xu Enzhi and me to take the car. And such a thing happened, the violence was violent, some said that Xu Enzhi did not prohibit the following people, and some said that Xu Enzhi prohibited it, but there was no effect.

古文：纵而不禁，既乖国宪；禁而不止，又不经通。
现代文：放纵罪人而不禁止，不符合国法，禁止而没有效果又说不通。
English: To indulge the guilty without prohibiting is not in accordance with the law of the land, and prohibition is ineffective and meaningless.

古文：陵犯监司，凶声彰赫，容纵宗等，曾无纠问，亏损国威，无大臣之体，不有准绳，风裁何寄。
现代文：罪犯侵犯法官，如此猖獗，容允倪宗等，一点也不纠弹，损害国家的权威，不成大臣的体统，不对他加以制裁，法律又有什么地位。
English: Criminals' encroachment on judges is so rampant, Ni Zong and others are tolerated, and there is no correction at all, which damages the authority of the state, undermines the dignity of the minister, and does not impose sanctions on him. What is the status of the law?

古文：羡之内居朝右，外司辇毂，位任隆重，百辟所瞻。
现代文：徐羡之在朝廷为首要官员，外面管大小事务，朝廷寄巨大的希望于他，是官员的模仿对象。
English: Xu Enzhi was the most important official in the imperial court. He was in charge of large and small affairs. The imperial court pinned great hopes on him, and he was the object of officials' imitation.

古文：而不能弘惜朝章，肃是风轨。
现代文：他却不能守朝廷的法规，严肃风纪，以致使部属放纵，凌辱法官。
English: However, he was unable to abide by the rules and regulations of the imperial court and maintain a serious demeanor, so much so that he indulged his subordinates and abused the judges.

古文：致使宇下纵肆，凌暴宪司，凶赫之声，起自京邑，所谓己有短垣，而自逾之。又宗为篡夺之主，纵不纠问，二三亏违，宜有裁贬。
现代文：凶恶的气焰，从京城窜起，真是自己有矮墙而亲自逾越。而倪宗为抢夺的主犯。徐羡之放开不问，对这几种不法行为，应该加以惩罚。
English: The wicked arrogance, from the capital city, really has its own low wall and personally crosses it. And Ni Zong is the main offender of the robbery. Xu Qian did not ask to be released, and these kinds of illegal acts should be punished.

古文：请免羡之所居官，以公还第。
现代文：我请求免除徐羡之的官职，以公的身份回到自己家里。
English: I request that Xu Enzhi be relieved of his official duties and return to his home in an official capacity.

古文：宗等篡夺之愆，已属掌故御史随事检处。 
现代文：倪宗等人的抢走犯人的罪行，我已经叫掌故的御史根据实情加以控告。 
English: For the crime of Ni Zong and others snatching away the criminal, I have ordered the magistrate to file a complaint according to the facts.

古文：诏曰： 小人难可检御，司空无所问，余如奏。 
现代文：高祖下诏书说： 小人们难以管制，司空不用牵涉，其余按奏文处理。 
English: Gao Zu's imperial edict said: Minorities are difficult to control, the air force should not be involved, and the rest should be dealt with according to the imperial edict.

古文：羡之任居朝端，不欲以犯宪示物。
现代文：徐羡之当朝廷第一大官，不想让别人看他犯了法。
English: Xu Enzhi, as the highest-ranking official in the imperial court, did not want others to see him break the law.

古文：时羡之领扬州刺史，琳之弟璩之为治中，羡之使璩之解释琳之，停寝其事。
现代文：当时徐羡之兼扬州刺史，孔琳之的弟弟孔璩之当他的治中。徐羡之叫孔璩之劝说孔琳之叫他算了。
English: At that time, Xu Enzhi was also the governor of Yangzhou, and Kong Linzhi's younger brother, Kong Xizhi, was in charge of his administration. Xu Enzhi called Kong Xizhi to persuade Kong Linzhi to call him.

古文：琳之不许。
现代文：孔琳之不同意。
English: Kong Lin did not agree.

古文：璩之固陈，琳之谓曰： 我触忤宰相，正当罪止一身尔，汝必不应从坐，何须勤勤邪！ 
现代文：孔璩之坚决要他这样。孔琳之说： 我触犯宰相，只不过我一人有害，你绝对不会被我株连，何必这么为人效劳呢？ 
English: Kong Linzhi said, "I have offended the prime minister, but I am the only one who is harmful. You will never be my disciple. Why do you have to be such a servant?"

古文：自是百僚震肃莫敢犯禁。
现代文：于是朝中百官震动，不敢犯法。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials in the court were shocked and did not dare to break the law.

古文：高祖甚嘉之，行经兰台，亲加临幸。
现代文：高祖很称赞他，经过兰台处时亲自看他。
English: Gaozu praised him very much, and personally watched him when he passed the orchid stand.

古文：又领本州大中正，迁祠部尚书。
现代文：孔琳之又兼任本州大中正，再迁祠部尚书。
English: Kong Linzhi also concurrently served as the head of the Honshu University Junior High School, and resettled the ancestral hall.

古文：不治产业，家尤贫素。
现代文：他不经营财物，家中尤其贫困。
English: He does not deal in property and his family is particularly poor.

古文：景平元年，卒，时年五十五。追赠太常。
现代文：景平元年，孔琳之去世，享年五十五，被追认为太常。
English: In the first year of Jingping, Kong Linzhi died at the age of fifty-five, and was considered to be too common.

古文：子邈，有父风，官至扬州治中从事史。
现代文：他的儿子孔邈，有父亲风格，官至扬州治中从事史。
English: His son, Kong Xi, has his father's style, and has been engaged in history since he was a junior official in Yangzhou.

古文：邈子觊，别有傅。觊弟道存，世祖大明中，历黄门吏部郎，临海王子顼前军长史、南郡太守。
现代文：孔邈的儿子孔，另有传记，孔的弟弟道存，在世祖大明年间，历任黄门吏部郎，临海王刘子顼前军长史，南郡太守。
English: There is also a biography of Kong, the son of Kong Ye, and Kong's younger brother, Daozun, who served as the Yellow Gate leader, the former military commander of Linhai King Liu Ziqi, and the governor of Nan County during the reign of King Sejong the Great.

古文：晋安王子勋建伪号，为侍中，行雍州事。事败自杀。
现代文：晋安王刘子勋开建伪府，孔道存当侍中，代管雍州事务，刘子勋失败后他自杀了。
English: Liu Zixun, the king of the Jin and An dynasties, started to build a pseudo-government, and Kong Dao served as an attendant, in charge of the affairs of Yongzhou. After Liu Zixun's failure, he committed suicide.

