古文：萧阿剌，字阿里懒，北院枢密使孝穆之子也。
现代文：萧阿剌，字阿里懒，北院枢密使萧孝穆之子。
English: Xiao Aqian, alias Ali Lazy, was the son of Xiao Xiaomu, the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：幼养宫中，兴宗尤爱之。
现代文：幼时养育于宫中，兴宗尤其喜爱他。
English: He was raised in the imperial court as a child, and Emperor Xingzong was especially fond of him.

古文：重熙六年，为弘义宫使。
现代文：重熙六年，任弘义宫使。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Chongxi, he was appointed as an envoy to the court of Emperor Hirohito.

古文：累迁同知北院枢密使，加同中书门下平章事，出为东京留守。
现代文：累迁同知北院枢密使，加同中书门下平章事，出京任东京留守。
English: He was successively moved to the position of the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court of Tongzhi, and in addition, he was appointed to the position of the Vice-Regent of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and left for Tokyo.

古文：二十一年，拜西北路招讨使，封西平郡王。
现代文：二十一年，拜为西北路招讨使，封为西平郡王。
English: In the 21st year, he was appointed as the recruiting envoy for the Northwest Road and was named the king of Xiping County.

古文：寻尚秦晋国王公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：不久娶秦晋国王公主，拜为驸马都尉。
English: Soon after, he married the princess of King Qin Jin and was given the title of Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：清宁元年，遗诏拜北府宰相，兼南院枢密使，进王韩。
现代文：清宁元年，遗诏拜阿剌为北府宰相，兼任南院枢密使，进位为韩王。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the last will and testament of Emperor Baiaojun made him the prime minister of the northern prefecture, and he also served as the privy councilor of the southern court, and was promoted to the position of the king of Korea.

古文：明年，改北院枢密使，徙王陈，与萧革同掌国政。
现代文：次年，改任北院枢密使，改封陈王，与萧革同掌国政。
English: The following year, he was reappointed as the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, changed his title to Chen Wang, and took charge of state affairs together with Xiao Ge.

古文：革谄谀不法，阿剌争之不得，告归。
现代文：萧革谄媚阿谀，不遵法纪，阿剌争之不得，告老还乡。
English: Xiao Ge's charming grandma, who does not follow the law and discipline, and who cannot be disputed by grandma, has returned to his hometown.

古文：上由此恶之，除东京留守。
现代文：道宗因此厌恶他，除为东京留守。
English: As a result, Michimune detested him, and he stayed away from Tokyo.

古文：会行瑟瑟礼，入朝陈时政得失。
现代文：适逢行瑟瑟礼，入朝陈奏朝政得失。
English: When the time was right, he bowed deeply and entered the imperial court, recounting the gains and losses of imperial rule.

古文：革以事中伤，帝怒，缢杀之。
现代文：萧革借事中伤阿剌，皇上发怒，缢杀之。
English: Xiao Ge took advantage of the situation to slander Grandma. The emperor was angry and killed her.

古文：皇太后营救不及，大恸曰： 阿剌何罪而遽见杀？ 
现代文：皇太后营救不及，十分悲痛，说： 阿剌犯了什么罪，怎么突然间就把他杀了？ 
English: The empress dowager could not be saved and was very sad, saying: What crime did Grandmother commit, why did she suddenly kill him?

古文：帝乃优加赙赠，葬乾陵之赤山。
现代文：皇上于是优厚地赠送助丧钱物，葬于乾陵之赤山。
English: The emperor then generously donated money to help with the funeral expenses, and the body was buried in the Akayama section of the Qianling Mausoleum.

古文：阿剌性忠果，晓世务，有经济才。
现代文：阿剌生性忠诚而果敢，通晓谋身治世之事，有治国之才。
English: Ah Ying was born with a loyal and resolute nature. He was well-versed in the business of governing himself and the world, and had the ability to govern the country.

古文：议者以谓阿剌若在，无重元、乙辛之乱。
现代文：议者认为如果阿剌还活着，不会出现重元、乙辛之乱。
English: The legislator believed that if the grandmother was still alive, there would be no Chongyuan and Yixin Rebellion.

古文：耶律义先，于越仁先之弟也。
现代文：耶律义先，于越仁先之弟。
English: He was the younger brother of Yeru Yoshiaki and Yuetsuhito Yoshiaki.

古文：美风姿，举止严重。
现代文：风采美奂，举止庄严稳重。
English: She is beautiful and graceful, and her demeanor is dignified and steady.

古文：重熙初，补祗候郎君班详稳。
现代文：重熙初，补为祗候郎君班详稳。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he was appointed to the post of Shiko-ro.

古文：十三年，车驾西征，为十二行糺都监，战功最，改南院宣徽使。
现代文：十三年，兴宗西征，义先担任十二行纠都监，因战功第一，改任南院宣徽使。
English: In the thirteenth year of Xingzong's Western Expedition, Yixian served as the inspector of the Twelve Quarrels, and because of his outstanding war service, he was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan Emperor.

古文：时萧革同知枢密院事，席宠擅权，义先疾之。
现代文：当时萧革与他同知枢密院事，恃宠专权，义先讨厌他。
English: At that time, Xiao Ge was his confidant in the Privy Council, and he enjoyed the exclusive power. Yixian hated him.

古文：因侍宴，言于帝曰： 革狡佞喜乱，一朝大用，必误国家！ 
现代文：趁着侍宴的机会，对皇上说 ：萧革狡诈谄媚，喜欢任意妄为，一旦得到大用，必定会误了国家！ 
English: Taking advantage of the occasion of the banquet, he said to the emperor: Xiao Ge is cunning and charming, likes to act arbitrarily, and once he gets a great use, he will surely lose the country!

古文：言甚激切，不纳。
现代文：言词十分激烈直率，皇上没有听从他的劝谏。
English: His words were very fierce and direct, and the emperor did not listen to his advice.

古文：它日侍宴，上命群臣博，负者罚一巨觥。
现代文：又一天侍宴，皇上命群臣博戏，负者罚一巨觥酒。
English: Another day, another banquet. The emperor ordered his ministers to gamble. The loser would be fined a huge amount of wine.

古文：义先当与革对，怃然曰： 臣纵不能进贤退不肖，安能与国贼博哉！ 
现代文：义先应当与萧革对弈，他不高兴地说 ：臣纵然不能荐举贤能，斥退不肖之徒，但又怎能与国贼博戏呢！ 
English: Yixian should first play against Xiao Ge, he said unhappily: "Even though the minister cannot recommend the virtuous and reject the unscrupulous, how can he play with the traitors!"

古文：帝止之曰： 卿醉矣！ 
现代文：皇上制止他说 ：你喝醉了！ 
English: The Emperor stopped him and said, "You're drunk!"

古文：义先厉声诟不已。上大怒，赖皇后救，得解。
现代文：义先仍然高声诟骂不已，皇上大怒，幸得皇后相救，得以解脱。
English: Yixian was still shouting abuse at the top of his voice, and the emperor was furious. Fortunately, the empress came to his rescue and he was able to free himself.

古文：翌日，上谓革曰： 义先无礼，当黜之。 
现代文：次日，皇上对萧革说： 义先无礼，应当罢黜他。 
English: The next day, the emperor said to Xiao Ge: "You are disrespectful, you should dismiss him."

古文：革对曰： 义先天性忠直，今以酒失而出，谁敢言人之过？ 
现代文：萧革回答说 ：义先天性忠诚正直，这次是因为醉了酒而失言，要不有谁会当面指斥别人的过失呢？ 
English: Xiao Ge replied: Righteousness, loyalty, and honesty are innate. This time, it was a drunken slip of the tongue. Otherwise, who would point out someone else's faults to their face?

古文：上谓革忠直，益加信任。
现代文：皇上认为萧革忠诚正直，对他更加信任。
English: The emperor believed that Xiao Ge was loyal and honest, and trusted him more.

古文：义先郁郁不自得，然议事未尝少沮。
现代文：义先郁郁寡欢，很不适意，然而对于议事仍不曾气馁。
English: Yixian was gloomy and unhappy, very uncomfortable, but he was still not discouraged by the proceedings.

古文：又于上前博，义先祝曰： 向言人过，冒犯天威。
现代文：又有一次，在皇上面前博戏，义先举杯祝酒说： 先前指责别人的过失，冒犯了天威。
English: On another occasion, during a play in front of the emperor, Yixian first raised his glass in a toast and said, "Previously accusing others of wrongdoing, I offended Heaven and Earth.

古文：今日一掷，可表愚款。 
现代文：今日一掷，可表表我的诚意。 
English: One throw today can show my sincerity.

古文：俄得堂印。
现代文：接着掷得个堂印。
English: He then scored a touchdown.

古文：上愕然。
现代文：皇上惊讶无比。
English: The Emperor was very surprised.

古文：十六年，为殿前都点检，讨蒲奴里，多所招降，获其酋长陶得里以归，手诏褒奖，以功改南京统军使，封武昌郡王。奏请统军司钱营息，以赡贫民。
现代文：十六年，义先任殿前都点检，讨伐蒲奴里，大量招降，俘获其酋长陶得里而回，封为武昌郡王。奏请统军可以主管钱库以营利息，以供养贫民。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Yixian, he inspected the front of the imperial palace, went on a crusade to Punuli, invited a large number of surrenders, captured its chieftain Tao Deri and returned, and was crowned the king of Wuchang County. He requested that the unified army could be in charge of the treasury and pay interest to feed the poor.

古文：未期，军器完整，民得休息。
现代文：不满一年，军器完好无损，百姓得到休养生息。
English: In less than a year, the military equipment was intact, and the people were able to rest and recuperate.

古文：二十一年，拜惕隐，进王富春，薨，年四十二。
现代文：二十一年，拜为惕隐，进位为富春王，逝世，年四十二岁。
English: In the twenty-first year of his reign, he died at the age of forty-two, having been promoted to the throne of King Fuchun.

古文：傥使蒙恩地下，臣愿毕矣。 上曰： 此朕遗忘之过。 
现代文：义先常常告诫其族人说 ：国中三父房，都是皇上的兄弟，不孝不义之事尤其不能做。 
English: Yixian often admonished his people, saying, "The three fathers of the country are all brothers of the emperor. In particular, you must not do anything that is unfilial or unjust.

古文：追封燕王。是年，从萧惠伐夏，败于河南，例被责。
现代文：他与部下交往无论贵贱贤愚，都与对方平礼相待。
English: In his dealings with his subordinates, no matter whether they were noble or lowly, wise or foolish, he always treated them with courtesy.

古文：清宁初，为南面林牙，卒。萧陶隗，字乌古邻，宰相辖特六世孙。
现代文：其妻乃晋国长公主之女，每每遇到中表亲来，不穿礼服不相见，所以内外多为感化。清宁间，追赠许王。萧陶隗，字乌古邻，宰相辖特六世孙。
English: His wife was the daughter of the eldest princess of Jin, and whenever she met a middle cousin, they did not wear ceremonial dress and did not see each other, so they were mostly influential both inside and outside. During the Qing and Ning Dynasties, King Xu was posthumously awarded. Xiao Tao, a neighbor of Wu Gu, was the sixth-generation grandson of the prime minister.

古文：刚直有威重。
现代文：刚直，有威严、庄重之气度。
English: Straightforward, with a dignified, solemn air.

古文：咸雍初，任马群太保。
现代文：咸雍初，任马群太保。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, Ma Qun served as the imperial bodyguard.

古文：素知群牧名存实亡，悉阅旧籍，除其羸病，录其实数，牧人畏服。
现代文：他一向知道群牧是名存实亡，将旧簿册尽数翻过一遍，除去羸弱多病之人，改录实数，牧人敬服。
English: He always knew that the herdsmen were dead in name only. He turned over the old books and records as many times as possible, removed the weak and sick people, re-recorded the real numbers, and the herdsmen respected him.

古文：陶隗上书曰： 群牧以少为多，以无为有。
现代文：陶隗上书说： 群牧以少充多，以无充有。
English: The Tao Te Ching said in its first letter: "The herd herdsmen should make the most of what they have, and make the most of what they don't have."

古文：上下相蒙，积弊成风。
现代文：上下互相蒙蔽，累积弊病养成风气。
English: The upper and lower classes deceive each other, and the accumulated ills develop into a culture.

古文：不若括见真数，著为定籍，公私两济。 
现代文：不如检括得真实有效的数目，写成固定户籍，于公私两方面都有好处。 
English: It is better to check the true and effective number and write a fixed household registration, which is good for both public and private.

古文：从之。
现代文：道宗从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：畜产岁以蕃息。
现代文：畜产每年得到增殖。
English: Livestock production is increasing every year.

古文：大康中，累迁契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：大康年间，累迁契丹行宫都部署。
English: During the prosperous years, the relocation of the Khitan imperial court was deployed.

古文：上尝谓群臣曰： 北枢密院军国重任，久阙其人，耶律阿思、萧斡特剌二人孰愈？ 
现代文：皇上曾对群臣说 ：北枢密院乃是军国重任，长期缺乏合适人选，耶律阿思、萧斡特剌二人谁更好？ 
English: The Emperor once said to his courtiers, "The Northern Privy Council is a major military and state responsibility, and there has been a long-term lack of suitable candidates. Who is better, Yerut Asit or Xiao Yutian?

古文：群臣各誉所长，陶隗独默然。
现代文：群臣分别称赞他们两人的长处，只有陶隗不做声。
English: The courtiers separately praised the strengths of the two of them, with only Tao Xuan remaining silent.

古文：上问： 卿何不言？ 陶隗曰： 斡特剌懦而败事；阿思有才而贪，将为祸基。
现代文：皇上问： 你为何不说话？ 陶隗说： 斡特剌因懦弱而败事；阿思有才而贪婪，将成为祸胎。
English: The emperor asked, "Why don't you speak up?" Tao Zheng said, "The mediator lost the case because of his cowardice; As is talented and greedy, and will become the child of misfortune."

古文：不得已而用，败事犹胜基祸。 
现代文：不得已而任用之，败事之人还是强于生祸乱之人。 
English: Appointed out of necessity, those who fail are still stronger than those who create disasters.

古文：上曰： 陶隗虽魏征不能过，但恨吾不及太宗尔！ 
现代文：皇上说： 陶隗，即使是魏征也不能超过他，恨只恨我比不上唐太宗罢了！ 
English: The emperor said, "Tao Xuan, even Wei Zheng couldn't surpass him. I only hate that I'm not as good as Tang Taizong!"

古文：然竟以阿思为枢密使。
现代文：然而最终任命阿思为枢密使。
English: However, he was eventually appointed a Privy Counsellor.

古文：由是阿思衔之。
现代文：因此阿思衔恨于他。
English: That's why Asmodeus hates him.

古文：九年，西圉不宁，阿思奏曰： 边隅事大，可择重臣镇抚。 
现代文：九年，西境不安宁，阿思上奏说 ：边疆事务十分重要，可选择重臣镇抚。 
English: In the ninth year, when there was unrest in the western region, Ashi made a report saying, "Frontier affairs are very important, and we can choose a senior minister to pacify them."

古文：上曰： 陶隗何如？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：陶隗如何？ 
English: The emperor said, "How is Tao Zhen?"

古文：阿思曰： 诚如圣旨。 
现代文：阿思说 ：皇上所言极是。 
English: Athos said: "What the emperor said is very true.

古文：遂拜西南面招讨使。
现代文：于是拜陶隗为西南面招讨使。
English: As a result, Bai Taoqi invited envoys for the southwestern side.

古文：阿思阴与萧阿忽带诬奏贼掠漠南牧马及居民畜产，陶隗不急追捕，罪当死，诏免官。
现代文：阿思暗里与萧阿忽带诬奏贼人劫掠漠南牧马及居民畜产，陶隗没有立即追捕，其罪当处死，诏令免官。
English: Ashi secretly and Xiao Ahu made a false accusation that thieves had robbed the horses and livestock of the residents in the south of the desert. Tao Yan did not immediately pursue them, and his crime was punishable by death. He was dismissed from his post by imperial edict.

古文：久之，起为塌母城节度使。
现代文：过了很久，起用为塌母城节度使。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the chief of the festival of the fallen mother city.

古文：未行，疽发背卒。
现代文：还未动身，疽发于背而死。
English: Before he could leave, gangrene broke out in his back and he died.

古文：陶隗负气，怒则须髯辄张。每有大议，必毅然决之。
现代文：陶隗负气、发怒则胡须自行竖立，每当有重要议案，必定会果敢地断决。
English: When he is angry, his mustache stands up by itself. Whenever there is an important motion, he will surely make a decisive decision.

古文：虽上有难色，未尝遽已。
现代文：即使皇上面有难色，也不曾就此罢手。
English: Even if the Emperor was displeased, he did not give up.

古文：见权贵无少屈，竟为阿思所陷，时人惜之。
现代文：见到权贵也不肯些须屈附，最终为阿思所陷害，时人觉得可惜。
English: It was a pity for the people at the time to see that the dignitaries were not willing to give in, and were eventually framed by Ah Si.

古文：二子，曰图木、辖式。阿思死，始获进用。
现代文：二子，名为萧图木、萧辖式，在阿思死后才得到选拔任用。
English: His two sons, named Xiao Tu Mu and Xiao Gui Shi, were only selected and appointed after Ashi's death.

古文：萧塔剌葛，字陶哂，六院部人。
现代文：萧塔剌葛，字陶哂，六院部人。
English: Xiao Tacheng Ge, surnamed Tao Qian, the sixth member of the hospital.

古文：素刚直。
现代文：一向刚直不阿。
English: He's always been a stand-up guy.

古文：太祖时，坐叔祖台哂谋杀于越释鲁，没入弘义宫。
现代文：太祖时，因叔祖台哂谋杀于越释鲁之事连坐，被抄没入弘义宫。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, he was imprisoned for the murder of his uncle, Tai Ye, in Yuexilu, and was exiled to the Hongyi Palace.

古文：世宗即位，以舅氏故，出其籍，补国舅别部敞史。
现代文：世宗即位，因为是舅父，出其宫籍，补为国舅别部敞史。
English: When Sejong ascended to the throne, because he was an uncle, he was made a member of the Imperial Family, and was added as an uncle of the country.

古文：或言泰宁王察割有无君心。
现代文：有人称泰宁王察割有蔑视君王之心。
English: Some people say that Taining Wang Cabao has a disdain for kings.

古文：塔剌葛曰： 彼纵忍行不义，人孰肯从！ 
现代文：塔剌葛说： 他纵然忍心行不义之事，又有谁肯听从他呢！ 
English: Tahurqa said, "Who will listen to him, even if he should persist in doing evil?"

古文：他日侍宴，酒酣，塔剌葛捉察割耳，强饮之曰： 上固知汝傲狠，然以国属，曲加矜悯，使汝在左右，且度汝才何能为。
现代文：后来一日侍宴，酒至半酣，塔剌葛捉住察割的耳朵，强行劝他喝酒说 ：皇上本来就知道你倨傲狠戾，然而皇上所以将国事托付于你，对你曲意加以怜悯，让你呆在身边，只不过是为了考察一下你的才干到底如何罢了。
English: Later, one day at a banquet, when the wine was half gone, the gardener took hold of the cutter's ear and forcibly persuaded him to drink, saying: The emperor knew that you were arrogant and cruel, but the emperor entrusted the affairs of state to you, took pity on your music, and let you stay around, just to see what your talent was like.

古文：若长恶不悛，徒自取赤族之祸！ 
现代文：如果你长时怙恶不悛，只不过会自取灭族之祸！ 
English: If you persist in doing evil, you will only bring disaster to your own people!

古文：察割不能答，强笑曰： 何戏之虐也！ 
现代文：察割不能作答，勉强笑着说： 怎么开这么毒的玩笑呢！ 
English: Cheka couldn't answer, but grudgingly smiled and said, "How can you make such a poisonous joke!

古文：天禄末，塔剌葛为北府宰相，及察割作乱，塔剌葛醉詈曰： 吾悔不杀此逆贼！ 
现代文：天禄末，塔剌葛任北府宰相，及至察割作乱，塔剌葛醉中骂他说： 我后悔没有杀这个逆贼！ 
English: At the end of the Tenroku era, Taeko Takeda became the prime minister of the Northern prefecture, and when Chakao rioted, Taeko Takeda got drunk and cursed him, saying, "I regret not killing this traitor!"

古文：寻为察割所害。
现代文：不久为察割所杀害。
English: He was soon killed by the police.

