古文：岷山在蜀郡氐道县，大江所出，东南过其县北。
现代文：眠山在蜀郡氏道县，大江就发源在这里，往东南流过县北。
English: Mingshan is in Shidao County, Shu County. The source of the Yangtze River is here, and it flows southeast through the northern part of the county.

古文：岷山即渎山也，水曰渎水矣。又谓之汶阜山，在徼外，江水所导也。
现代文：崛山就是渎山，水叫渎水，又叫坟阜山，远在边境以外，江水就发源在那里。
English: Horiyama is Kuroyama, water is Kuroyama, and it is also called Gafusan. Far away from the border, the source of the river is there.

古文：《益州记》曰：大江泉源，即今所闻，始发羊膊岭下，缘崖散漫，小水百数，殆未滥觞矣。
现代文：《益州记》说：大江的源泉：按现今所知，开头是从羊膊岭下流出。水沿山崖散开，涓涓细流多以百计，浅得几乎连酒杯也浮不起。
English: "Yizhou Chronicle" said: The source of the big river: as far as we know now, the beginning flows out from under the Goat's Millet Ridge. The water spreads along the cliffs, with hundreds of trickling streams, so shallow that even a wine glass can hardly float.

古文：东南下百余里，至白马岭，而历天彭阙，亦谓之为天彭谷也。
现代文：水向东南流泻百余里，到达白马岭，经过天彭阙，又叫天彭谷。
English: The water flows southeast for more than a hundred miles, reaching Baima Ridge, passing through Tianpeng, also known as Tianpeng Valley.

古文：秦昭王以李冰为蜀守，冰见氐道县有天彭山，两山相对，其形如阙，谓之天彭门，亦曰天彭阙。
现代文：秦昭王派李冰当蜀郡太守，李冰见氏道县有天彭山，两山相对；形状如门，称为天彭门，又叫天彭阙。
English: Qin Zhao Wang sent Li Bing to be the governor of Shu County, Li Bing saw that there was Tianpeng Mountain in the county, and the two mountains were opposite; the shape was like a door, known as Tianpeng Gate, also known as Tianpeng Gate.

古文：江水自此已上，至微弱，所谓发源滥觞者也。
现代文：江水从这里起，上流十分细弱，所谓发源时只能浮起酒杯，就指这里。
English: From here, the upstream of the river is very weak, and the so-called source can only float a wine glass, which refers to here.

古文：故扬子云《蜀都赋》曰：两江珥其前者也。
现代文：汉元延年间。县里有两条江，都流经郡城下面，所以扬子云《蜀都赋》说：两江从前面穿过。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there were two rivers in the county, both of which flowed under the county seat, so Yang Zi Yun, "Shudu Fu," said: the two rivers pass in front.

古文：《风俗通》曰：秦昭王使李冰为蜀守，开成都两江，溉田万顷。
现代文：《风俗通》说：秦昭王派李冰去当蜀郡太守，在成都开凿了两条河渠，可以灌溉百顷田亩。
English: "Folklore" said: Qin Zhao Wang sent Li Bing to be the governor of Shu County, and he dug two canals in Chengdu, which can irrigate a hundred hectares of land.

古文：江神岁取童女二人为妇。
现代文：江神每年需要两个小姑娘做妻子，李冰把自己的女儿送去与江神成亲，直入神祠，向神劝酒。
English: The river god needs two little girls to be his wife every year. Li Bing sends his daughter to marry the river god, straight into the shrine, to persuade the god to drink.

古文：冰以其女与神为婚，径至神祠，劝神酒，酒杯恒澹澹，冰厉声以责之，因忽不见。
现代文：但江神不饮，酒杯里只泛起一丝丝波纹。李冰厉声斥责，于是忽然不见了。好久，江岸旁有两牛相斗。
English: However, the river god did not drink, and only a trace of ripples appeared in the wine glass. Li Bing severely reprimanded, so he suddenly disappeared. For a long time, there were two cows fighting next to the riverbank.

古文：良久，有两牛斗于江岸旁，有间，冰还，流汗，谓官属曰：吾斗大亟，当相助也。
现代文：一会儿，李冰回来了，满身大汗，对下属说：我斗得精疲力竭了，你们该帮我一下。
English: After a while, Li Bing came back, sweating profusely, and said to his subordinates: "I'm exhausted from fighting, you should help me.

古文：南向腰中正白者，我绶也。
现代文：南面那头牛腰间纯白色，那就是我的缭带。
English: The cow to the south is pure white around the waist, and that is my iris.

古文：主簿刺杀北面者，江神遂死。
现代文：于是主簿刺杀了北面那头牛，江神于是就死了。
English: As a result, the main book stabbed the cow to the north, and the river god died.

古文：蜀人慕其气决，凡壮健者，因名冰儿也。
现代文：蜀人敬佩他的胆略和果决，因而把身强力壮的孩子都称为冰儿。
English: The people of Shu admire his boldness and determination, so they call all able-bodied children Bing'er.

古文：秦惠王二十六年，遣张仪与司马错等灭蜀，遂置蜀郡焉。王莽改之曰导江也。
现代文：秦惠王二十七年，派张仪和司马错等人去灭蜀，设置了蜀郡；王莽改名为导江。
English: In the 27th year of Qin Hui's reign, he sent Zhang Yi and Sima Zhe to destroy Shu and set up Shu County; Wang Mang changed his name to Dujiang.

古文：仪筑成都以象咸阳。
现代文：张仪按咸阳的格局修筑了成都城。
English: Zhang Yi built Chengdu City according to the pattern of Xianyang.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，改梁曰益州，以新启犍为、牂柯、越巂，州之疆壤益广，故称益云，初治广汉之雒县，后乃徙此。
现代文：晋太康年间把梁州改为益州，因为新开发了键为、胖柯、越锡三地，州郡的疆域更加辽阔了，所以称为益州。开始时治所在广汉的锥县，以后才迁到这里来。
English: During the reign of Jin Taikang, Liangzhou was changed to Yizhou, because the newly developed keys were Cangzhou, Fatty Ke and Yuexi, and the territory of the county was more extensive, so it was called Yizhou. At the beginning, it was governed by Cui County in Guanghan, and later moved here.

古文：故李固《与弟圄书》曰，固今年五十七，鬓发已白，所谓容身而游，满腹而去，周观天下，独未见益州耳。
现代文：所以李固《与弟圈书》说：我今年五十七岁，鬓发都白了。正像人们所说的：有了安身之所就去游历，心满意足了就离开。我周游天下，只是还没有看到过益州。
English: Therefore, Li Gu said in "The Book of the Circle of Brothers": I am fifty-seven years old this year, and my hair is white. Just as people say: If you have a safe place, you will travel, and if you are satisfied, you will leave. I have traveled around the world, but I have not seen Yizhou.

古文：昔严夫子常言：经有五，涉其四，州有九，游其八。
现代文：从前严夫子常说：经有五部，已读过四部，州有九个，已游过八个。
English: In the past, Yan Fuzi used to say, "I have read four of the five books, and have swum through eight of the nine prefectures."

古文：欲类此子矣。
现代文：我是很想能像这位先生一样。
English: I would love to be able to swim like this gentleman.

古文：初，张仪筑城，取土处去城十里，因以养鱼，今万顷池是也。
现代文：当初张仪筑城时，取土的地方离城十里，后来就用来养鱼；这就是现在的万顷池。
English: Originally, when Zhang Yi was building the city, the place where the soil was taken was ten miles away from the city. Later, it was used to raise fish; this is the current Wanhao Pond.

古文：城北又有龙堤池，城东有千秋池，西有柳池，西北有天井池。津流径通，冬夏不竭。
现代文：城北有龙堤池，城东有千秋池，城西有柳池，西北有天井池，都有水渠相通，冬夏不涸。
English: There are Longji Pond in the north of the city, Qianqiu Pond in the east of the city, Willow Pond in the west of the city, and Ceiling Pond in the northwest of the city, all of which are connected by canals, and do not dry up in winter and summer.

古文：西南两江有七桥，直西门郫江上，曰冲治桥，西南石牛门曰市桥，吴汉入蜀，自广都令轻骑先往焚之。桥下谓之石犀渊，李冰昔作石犀五头，以厌水精，穿石犀渠于南江，命之曰犀牛里，后转犀牛二头，一头在府市市桥门，一头沉之于渊也，大城南门曰江桥，桥南曰万里桥，西上曰夷星桥，下曰笮桥。
现代文：后来又把两头犀牛移掉；一头移到府城市场的市桥门，一头就沉在渊里。在大城南门的叫江桥。在桥南的是万里桥。向西走是夷星桥。下面是窄桥。
English: Later, the two rhinoceroses were removed; one was moved to the city bridge gate of the capital market, and the other sank into the abyss. The south gate of the city is called Jiangqiao. To the south of the bridge is Wanliqiao. To the west is Yixingqiao. Below is the narrow bridge.

古文：南岸道东有文学，始文翁为蜀守，立讲堂，作石室于南城。
现代文：南岸路东有一所学堂。起初，文翁当蜀郡太守，创立讲堂，又在南城修筑石室。
English: There is a school on the east side of Nan'an Road. At first, Wen Weng, when he was the governor of Shu County, founded a lecture hall and built a stone room in Nancheng.

古文：永初后，学堂遇火，后守更增二石室。
现代文：永初以后，学堂失火焚毁，后任太守又增加了两所石室。
English: After Yongchu, the school was destroyed by fire, and the succeeding governor added two more stone rooms.

古文：后州夺郡学，移夷星桥南岸道东。
现代文：后来州衙门侵占郡学基址，就把郡学移到夷星桥南岸的路东去。
English: Later, when Zhoushengmen invaded the county school site, the county school was moved to the east of the road on the south bank of the Yixing Bridge.

古文：道西城，故锦官也。
现代文：路西有城，就是旧时的锦官城。
English: There is a city on the west side, which is the old Jin Guan City.

古文：言锦工织锦，则濯之江流，而锦至鲜明，濯以他江，则锦色弱矣，遂命之为锦里也。
现代文：据说织锦工人织成锦缎后，在江水里洗灌，锦缎就色泽鲜艳；如在别的江河里洗灌，锦缎就会褪色，于是取名为锦里。
English: It is said that after the brocade workers weave the brocade into brocade, they wash it in the river water, and the brocade will have a bright color; if it is washed in other rivers, the brocade will fade, so it is called brocade.

古文：蜀有回复水，江神尝溺杀人，文翁为守，祠之，劝酒不尽，拔剑击之，遂不为害。
现代文：蜀郡有回复水，水里的江神曾溺死人。文翁做了太守后，立祠奉祀，为神斟酒劝饮而神不饮尽，文翁拔剑刺他，江神就不再害人了。
English: There is backwater in Shu County. The river god in the water once drowned people. After Wen Weng became the emperor, he built a small shrine to worship. He poured wine for the god to drink, but the god did not drink it all. Wen Weng pulled out his sword and stabbed him. The river god would no longer harm people.

古文：江水东径广都县，汉武帝元朔二年置，王莽之就都亭也。
现代文：江水往东流经广都县。广都县置于汉武帝元朔二年前，就是王莽的就都亭。
English: The river flows eastward through Guangdu County. Guangdu County was placed in Han Emperor Yuan Shuo two years ago, it is Wang Mang's Zhudu Pavilion.

古文：李冰识察水脉，穿县盐井，江西有望川原，凿山崖度水，结诸陂池，故盛养生之饶，即南江也。
现代文：李冰能察看水脉，他开凿了县里的盐井。江西有望川原，开凿山岩引水流过。蓄积在破塘里，所以人民生活所需的物产非常丰富。
English: Li Bing can see the water veins. He dug the salt wells in the county. In Jiangxi, there is a promising river plain. He dug the mountain rock to divert the water. It is accumulated in the broken pond, so the products needed for people's lives are very rich.

古文：又从冲治桥北折曰长升桥。
现代文：这就是南江。江水又从冲治桥北转，有桥叫长升桥。
English: This is the Nanjiang River. The river water turns north from Chongzhi Bridge, and there is a bridge called Changsheng Bridge.

古文：城北十里曰升仙桥，有送客观，司马相如将人长安，题其门曰：不乘高车驷马，不过汝下也。
现代文：城北十里，叫升仙桥，有送客观。司马相如将去长安时，在门上题字说：我不乘高车驯马，决不从你下面走过！
English: When Sima Xiangru was about to leave for Chang'an, he inscribed a message on the gate saying: "I don't ride a chariot to train horses, and I will never walk under you!"

古文：后人邛蜀，果如志焉。
现代文：后来到了邓蜀，果然如愿以偿。
English: Later, I came to Dengshu, and my wish came true.

古文：李冰沿水造桥，上应七宿，故世租谓吴汉曰：安军宜在七桥连星间。
现代文：李冰沿江造了七座桥，与天上的北斗七星相对应，所以世祖对吴汉说：部署军队应当选在连成七星的七座桥梁之间。
English: Li Bing built seven bridges along the river, corresponding to the seven stars of the Big Dipper in the sky, so the ancestor said to Wu Han: the deployment of the army should be selected between the seven bridges connected to the seven stars.

古文：汉自广都乘胜进逼成都，与其副刘尚南北相望，夹江为营，浮桥相对。
现代文：吴汉从广都乘胜进逼成都，和他的副将刘尚南北相呼应，隔江在两岸建立军营，其间以浮桥相连。
English: Wu Han forced his way into Chengdu from Guangdong by taking advantage of the victory, and his vice-general, Liu Shang, echoed the north and south, establishing military camps on both sides of the river, connected by a pontoon bridge.

古文：公孙述使谢丰扬军市桥出汉后，袭破汉，坠马落水，缘马尾得出，入壁。
现代文：公孙述派遣谢丰在市桥逞兵，迁回到吴汉背后攻破他的阵地，吴汉落马跌入水中，幸而拉着马尾又得以出水。
English: According to Gongsun, Xie Feng sent his soldiers to attack Wu Han at the city bridge, and they moved back behind Wu Han to break through his position. Wu Han fell into the water, but luckily he was able to pull his horse's tail and get out of the water.

古文：命将夜潜渡江就尚，击丰，斩之于是水之阴。
现代文：他进入军营，命令部将连夜偷偷渡江，向刘尚靠拢，合兵进攻谢丰，终于在江水南岸杀了他。
English: He entered the military camp, the commanding officer secretly crossed the river overnight, approached Liu Shang, attacked Xie Feng with the soldiers, and finally killed him on the south bank of the river.

古文：江北则左对繁田，文翁又穿湔以溉灌繁田千七百顷。
现代文：大江北岸，左边与繁田相对，文翁又凿通渝浪水来灌溉繁田一千七百顷的田亩。
English: On the north bank of the Dajiang River, opposite the cultivated fields on the left, Wen Weng once again chisels through the waves to irrigate the 1,700 hectares of cultivated fields.

古文：湔水又东绝绵洛，径五城界，至广都北岸，南入于江，谓之五城水口，斯为北江。
现代文：渝水又往东流到绵络，经五城边界到广都北岸，南流注入江水，汇流处叫五城水口。这就是北江。
English: The Yucheng River flows eastward to a continuous stream, passing through the Wucheng boundary to the northern bank of Guangdong. The southern stream injects river water, and the confluence is called the Wucheng Water Port. This is the Beijiang River.

古文：江水又东至南安为壁玉律，故左思云东越玉津也。
现代文：江水又往东流到南安，有璧玉津，所以左思说：向东越过玉津。
English: The river flowed eastward to Nan'an, and there was Tamatsu, so Zuo Si said, "Go east across Tamatsu."

古文：又东南过犍为武阳县，青衣水、沫水从西南来，合而注之。
现代文：又往东南流过键为郡武阳县，青衣水、沫水从西南流来，汇合后注人江水。
English: It also flows to the southeast, passing through the county of Wuyang County. Qingyi water and foam water flow from the southwest, and after confluence, the water of the Renren River is injected.

古文：郡本云川地也，蜀建兴三年置。
现代文：武阳县就是旧时的大夜郎国，汉武帝建元六年开拓了那个地区，设置了郡县。
English: Wuyang County was the country of the great nightingale in the old days. Emperor Hanwu opened up the area in the sixth year of the Jianyuan and set up counties.

古文：仆水又南径永昌郡邪龙县而与贪水合。
现代文：太初四年以蜀郡西部的邓花设置沈黎郡，管辖旋牛道；天汉四年。仆水又往南流，经过永昌郡邪龙县，与贪水汇合。
English: In the first four years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Denghua in the western part of Shu County was set up as Shenli County to govern the Roundabout Road; in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Tianhan, the Servant Water flowed southward, passing through Yongchang County, Yalong County, and merging with the Greedy Water.

古文：水出青蛉县，上承青蛉水，径叶榆县，又东南至邪龙入于仆。
现代文：贪水发源于青岭县，上流承接青岭水，流经叶榆县，然后往东南流，到邪龙注入仆水。
English: The Qianshui originates in Qingling County, the upstream receives Qingling water, flows through Yecheng County, and then flows to the southeast, injecting tributary water into Yalong.

古文：仆水又径宁州建宁郡，州故康降都督屯，故南人谓之屯下。刘禅建兴三年分益州郡置。
现代文：仆水又流经宁州建宁郡。宁州原来是床降都督驻兵的地方，所以南方人称为屯下，刘禅建兴三年，分益州郡而设置。
English: The tributary also flows through Jianning County, Ningzhou. Ningzhou was originally the place where the governor was stationed, so the southerners called it a township, and Liu Zen Jianxing set it up as a subdivision of Yizhou County for three years.

古文：历双柏县，即水入焉，水出秦臧县牛兰山，南流至双柏县，东注仆水。
现代文：仆水流经双柏县，汇合了即水。即水发源于秦减县牛兰山，往南流到双柏县，往东注入仆水。
English: The tributary water flows through Shuangbai County and merges with the spring water. The spring water originates from Niu Lan Mountain in Qin Min County, flows south to Shuangbai County, and flows east into the tributary water.

古文：又东至来唯县入劳水。
现代文：仆水又往东流，到来唯县注入劳水。
English: The tributary water also flows eastward, and when it reaches Wei County, it is injected with hard water.

古文：水出徼外，东径其县，与仆水合。
现代文：劳水发源于边境外，往东流经来唯县与仆水汇合。
English: The Laoshui originates from outside the border and flows eastward through Laiwei County, where it meets the Houzhu.

古文：仆水东至交州交趾郡泠县，南流入于海。
现代文：仆水往东流到交州交趾郡卷冷县，往南流入大海。
English: The tributary water flows eastward to Zhuleng County, Jiaozuo Jiaozi County, and flows southward into the sea.

古文：江水自武阳东至彭亡聚。
现代文：江水从武阳往东流到彭亡聚。
English: The water of the river flows eastward from Wuyang to Pengniu.

古文：昔岑彭与吴仅溯江水人蜀，军次是地，知而恶之。
现代文：从前岑彭与吴汉溯江进入蜀境，队伍在这里住宿。
English: In the past, Nie Peng and Wu Han followed the river into Shu territory, and the team stayed here.

古文：会日暮不移，遂为刺客所害。
现代文：他听到这个地名感到很讨厌，但当时天色已晚，也就没有转移营地，于是就被刺客暗杀。
English: He hated the name, but it was too late to move his camp and he was killed by the Assassins.

古文：谓之平模水，亦曰外水。
现代文：这段江流称为平模水，也叫外水。
English: This section of the river is called the Pingmo River, also known as the Outer Water.

古文：此地有彭冢，言彭祖冢焉。
现代文：这里有个彭家，据说就是彭祖的坟。
English: There is a Peng family here, which is said to be the tomb of Peng Zu.

古文：江水又东南径南安县，西有熊耳峡，连山竞险，接岭争高。
现代文：江水又往东南流，经过南安县，西面有个熊耳峡，连绵不断的峰峦，比邻相接的山岭，似乎在竞相比险争高。
English: The river flows to the southeast, passing through Nan'an County, with Xiong'er Gorge to the west. The continuous peaks and ridges of the adjacent mountains seem to be competing with each other for height.

古文：汉河平中，山崩地震，江水逆流。
现代文：汉河平年间前一前，发生地震山崩，江水倒流。
English: During the Han River flood, an earthquake and landslide occurred, and the river flowed backwards.

古文：悬溉有滩，名垒坻，亦曰盐溉、李冰所平也。
现代文：有个急滩，名叫垒低，又叫盐溉，是李冰把它凿平的。
English: There is a steep beach, called Weiqiao, also known as salt irrigation, which Li Bing chiseled flat.

古文：县治青衣江会，衿带二水矣，即蜀王开明故治也。
现代文：南安县的治所在青衣江汇流处，夹在二水之间，这里也就是蜀王开明原来的治所。
English: Nan'an County is located at the confluence of the Qingyi River, sandwiched between two rivers. This is where Shu Wang Kaiming was originally located.

古文：来敏《本蜀论》曰：荆人鄨令死，其尸随水上，荆人求之不得，令至汶山下，复生，起见望帝。
现代文：来敏《本蜀论》说：荆人瞥令死后，尸体随水漂向上流。
English: Limin "Bonshu Theory" said: After the death of Jingren Biao, the corpse floated upstream with the water.

古文：望帝者，杜宇也，从天下。
现代文：因此荆人找不到他。瞥令漂到汉山下面却复活了，他起来去见望帝，望帝就任命他为宰相。
English: As a result, he could not be found. He floated to the bottom of Mount Han, but was revived. He got up and went to see the emperor, who appointed him prime minister.

古文：女子朱利，自江源出，为宇妻，遂王于蜀，号曰望帝；望帝立以为相。
现代文：望帝就是杜宇，他是从天上落下来的。有个叫朱利的姑娘，从江水的源头出来，做了杜宇的妻子。于是杜宇就在蜀称王，号称望帝。
English: Wang Di is Du Yu, he fell from the sky. A girl named Julie came from the source of the river and became Du Yu's wife. So Du Yu became king in Shu and was known as Wang Di.

古文：时巫山峡而蜀水不流，帝使令凿巫峡通水，蜀得陆处。
现代文：当时因巫山山峡太窄，蜀水不能畅通，望帝派瞥令去开凿巫峡，以疏通水流，于是蜀人才得以在陆地上居处。
English: At that time, because the Wushan Gorge was too narrow and the Shu water could not flow smoothly, Emperor Wang sent an order to excavate the Wushan Gorge to unblock the water flow, so the Shu people were able to live on land.

古文：望帝自以德不若，遂以国禅，号曰开明。
现代文：望帝自以为恩德比不上他，就让国给他，号为开明。
English: Emperor Wang thought that Nder couldn't compete with him, so he gave him the country, calling it enlightened.

古文：县南有峨盾山，有蒙水，即大渡水也。
现代文：南安县南有峨眉山，有嚎水，就是大渡水。
English: Nan'an County has Mount Emei to the south, and Surabaya has Surabaya Water, which is Dadu Water.

古文：水发蒙溪，东南流与俄水合。
现代文：檬水源出壕溪，往东南流，与俄水汇合。
English: The source of the lemonade is the Trench Creek, which flows southeast and merges with the Russian River.

古文：水出徼外，径汶江道。
现代文：俄水源出边境以外，流经泣江道。
English: The source of Russian water goes beyond the border and flows through the Weeping River.

古文：吕忱曰：渽水出蜀。
现代文：吕忱说：澈水发源于蜀。
English: Lü Zhen said: "Clear water originates from Shu."

古文：许慎以为俄水也。出蜀汶江徼外。
现代文：许慎认为所谓澈水就是俄水，发源于蜀坟江的边境以外。
English: Xu Shen believes that the so-called cheshi is Russian water, originating from outside the borders of the Shuhou River.

古文：从水，我声。
现代文：俄字偏旁从水，读作我。
English: The Russian character "偏旁" means "from the water" and is pronounced as "me."

古文：南至南安，入大渡水。
现代文：俄水南流到南安，注入大渡水；大渡水又往东流，注入江水。
English: The Russian water flows south to Nan'an, injecting the Dadu water; the Dadu water also flows eastward, injecting the river water.

古文：大渡水又东人江，故《山海经》曰蒙水出汉阳西，入江滠阳西。
现代文：所以《山海经》说：嚎水发源于汉阳西，在摄阳西边流入江。
English: Therefore, the "Mountain and Sea Classic" said: "The Surabaya water originates from the west of Hanyang and flows into the river on the west side of the setting sun.

古文：又东南过道县北，若水、淹水合从西来注之。
现代文：又往东南流过英道县北边，若水、淹水汇合西来注人。
English: It also flows southeastward through the northern part of Yingdao County. If there is water or flooding, it will merge with the west to pour people.

古文：又东，渚水北流注之。
现代文：又东流，者水北流注入。
English: It also flows to the east, and is fed by the North Yangtze River.

古文：县本人居之。
现代文：焚道县原是夔人的居地。
English: Tangdao County was originally inhabited by the Yao people.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：夷中最仁，有仁道，故字从人。《秦纪》所谓僮之富者也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：焚人在夷人中最仁，有仁爱之风，所以焚字偏旁从人；《秦记》也说：多焚人憧仆。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Burning people is the most benevolent among the barbarians, and there is a benevolent and loving style, so the burning words are side by side with people; "Qin Ji" also says: More burning people yearn for servants.

古文：其邑，高后六年城之。
现代文：焚道县在高后六年筑城。
English: Tanido County built a city six years after high school.

古文：汉武帝感相如之言，使县令南通道，费功无成，唐蒙南入，斩之，乃凿石开阁，以通南中。迄于建宁，二千余里，山道广丈余，深三四丈，其錾凿之迹犹存。
现代文：汉武帝听了司马相如的话，派遣县令开路南通焚道，但枉费人力，没有开成。唐蒙去南方把他杀了，于是凿石开辟栈道，以通南中，直到建宁为止；其间二千余里的山路，宽一丈有余，深三四丈，凿痕都还存在。
English: Emperor Hanwu listened to Sima Xiangru's words and dispatched the county magistrate to open the road south of the burning road, but wasted manpower and did not open it. Tang Meng went to the south and killed him, so he chiseled stones to open the footpath to the south and up to Jianning. The mountain road of more than two thousand miles is more than a foot wide and three or four feet deep, and the chisel marks still exist.

古文：王莽更曰治也，山多犹猢，似猴而短足，好游岩树，一腾百步，或三百丈，顺往倒返，乘空若飞。
现代文：王莽改名，称为英治。山中多犹瑚，形状像猴子，但脚稍短，喜欢在岩头和树上•嬉戏，一跳远达百步，甚至三百丈，凌空上下往返，像飞一般矫捷。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Ying Zhi. In the mountains, there are a lot of monkeys. They are shaped like monkeys, but their legs are a little short. They like to play on the rocks and trees. They can jump up to a hundred paces or even three hundred meters in one jump, and they can go up and down in a volley, which is as fast as flying.

古文：县有蜀王兵兰，其神作大难江中，崖峻阻险，不可芽凿，李冰乃积薪烧之，故其处悬岩，犹有五色焉。赤白照水玄黄，鱼从来，至此而止，言畏崖屿不更上也。
现代文：焚道县有蜀王兵营的栅栏，山神大肆作祟，江中崖壁险阻，无法开凿。于是李冰堆柴去烧，所以那里的悬崖还留有斑斓的色彩，或红或白，映着江水；黄黑相间的鱼从焚道游来，到这里就停下了，据说是害怕崖壁和险礁，不敢再向上游了。
English: In Bonfire Road County, there is the fence of Shu Wang's military camp. The mountain gods have worked hard, and the cliffs in the middle of the river are dangerous and cannot be excavated. So Li Bing piled up firewood to burn, so the cliffs there still have a mottled color, either red or white, reflecting the river water; yellow and black fish swim from Bonfire Road and stop here. It is said that they are afraid of cliffs and dangerous reefs and dare not swim upstream again.

古文：《益部耆旧传》曰：张真妻，黄氏女也，名帛。
现代文：《益都眷旧传》说：张真寿是黄家女儿，名帛。
English: "Yiddu Shenglu Zhuan" said: Zhang Zhenshu is a daughter of the Huang family, a famous scholar.

古文：真乘船覆没，求尸不得。
现代文：张真乘船覆没，找不到尸体。
English: Zhang Zhen drowned in a boat and his body was never found.

古文：帛至没处滩头，仰天而叹，遂自沉渊。
现代文：黄帛到沉船处的滩头，仰天长叹，投水沉入深渊。
English: Huang Yao went to the beach where the ship had sunk, sighed, and threw water into the abyss.

古文：积十四日，帛持真手于滩下出。
现代文：十四日后，黄帛抓着张真的手在滩下浮上来。
English: Fourteen days later, Huang Qi, clutching Zhang Zhen's hand, surfaced under the beach.

古文：时人为说曰：符有先络，道有张帛者也。
现代文：当时人们有句谚语说：符有先络，焚道有张帛。
English: At that time, people had a saying: "There is a prelude to the letter, and there is a preamble to the road."

古文：江水又与符黑水合，水出宁州南广郡南广县。
现代文：江水又与符黑水汇合。符黑水源出宁州南广郡南广县。
English: The river also merges with the Fuhai River. The source of the Fuhai River is in Nangang County, Ningzhou.

古文：县故犍为之属县也，汉武帝太初元年置，刘禅延熙中分以为郡。导源汾关山，北流，有大涉水注之。
现代文：南广县原是键为郡的属县，置于汉武帝太初元年分设为郡。符黑水发源于汾关山，往北流，有大涉水注入。
English: Nanguang County was originally a county belonging to the county, and was set up as a county in the first year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu. The black water originates from Shuguang Mountain and flows northward, with large wading water injected.

古文：水出南广县，北流注符黑水，又北径道入江，谓之南广口。
现代文：大涉水源出南广县，往北流，注入符黑水；又往北经夔道入江，汇流处叫南广口。
English: The large wading water source flows out of Nanguang County and flows northward, injecting black water. It also flows northward into the river through a canal, and the confluence is called Nanguangkou.

古文：渚水则未闻也。
现代文：诸水却没有听说过。
English: But they have never heard of Zhu Shui.

古文：又东过江阳县南，洛水从三危山，东过广魏洛县南，东南注之。
现代文：又往东流过江阳县南边，洛水从三危山往东流过广魏郡洛县南面，往东南注人。
English: It also flowed eastward through the south of Jiangyang County, and Luoshui from Sanxia Mountain flowed eastward through the south of Luo County, Guangwei County, and poured into the southeast.

古文：洛水出洛县漳山，亦言出梓潼县柏山。
现代文：洛水发源于洛县漳山，也有人说发源于梓渲县柏山。
English: Luoshui originated in Lushan, Luo County, and some people say that it originated in Baishan, Ziren County.

古文：《山海经》曰：三危在燉煌南，与岷山相接，山南带黑水。
现代文：《山海经》说：三危在敦煌南，与婿山相连接，黑水在山南流过。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: the Three Dangers are in the south of Dunhuang, connected with the Son of the Mountain, and the Black Water flows through the south of the mountain.

古文：又《山海经》不言洛水所导。《经》曰出三危山，所未详。
现代文：此外，《山海经》不提洛水发源地，而《水经》则说洛水发源于三危山，不知有何根据。
English: In addition, the "Shanhai Jing" does not mention the source of Luo Shui, while the "Shui Jing" says that Luo Shui originated from the Three Dangers Mountain, I do not know what basis.

古文：常璩云：李冰导洛通山水，流发瀑口，径什邡县。
现代文：常壕说：李冰导洛水流过山间，水从瀑口出发，流经什郊县。
English: Changqiao said: Li Bing led Luo water to flow through the mountains. The water started from the mouth of the waterfall and flowed through Shijiao County.

古文：诗至孝，母好饮江水，嗜鱼脍，常以鸡鸣溯流汲江。
现代文：汉高帝六年的住处。姜诗的母亲喜欢喝江水，吃薄鱼片；他十分孝敬母亲，常常听到鸡啼就早起到上流去汲水。
English: It was the residence of Emperor Han Gao for six years. Jiang Shi's mother loved to drink river water and eat thin fish fillets; he was very respectful of his mother, and often heard the rooster crow and went upstream to draw water.

古文：子坐取水溺死，妇恐姑知，称托游学，冬夏衣服，实投江流。
现代文：他的儿子姜坐打水时失足淹死，妻子怕婆婆知道悲痛，就瞒着她说出外读书去了；每年冬夏给他缝衣，实际上却投到江里。
English: His son Jiang lost his footing and drowned while sitting in the water. His wife was afraid that her mother-in-law would know about her grief, so she went out to study without telling her. Every winter and summer, she sewed clothes for him, but they were actually thrown into the river.

古文：于是至孝上通，涌泉出其舍侧，而有江之甘焉。
现代文：他们这种极顶的孝心感动了上天，于是在他们屋边从地下涌出泉水，和江水一样甘例。
English: This supreme filial piety of theirs moved the heavens, and a spring of water gushed out of the ground at the edge of their roof. It was as good an example as the river water.

古文：诗有田滨江泽卤，泉流所溉，尽为沃野。
现代文：姜诗有田坐落在江边，是低洼盐碱地，但经此泉浇灌后，就成为一片沃野。
English: Jiangshi Arita is located on the edge of the river. It is a low-lying saline land, but after being watered by this spring, it has become a fertile field.

古文：又涌泉之中，旦旦常出鲤鱼一双以膳焉，可谓孝悌发于方寸，徽美著于无穷者也。
现代文：此外，涌泉之中天天常有一对鲤鱼出现，以供食用。这真可说是孝敬之情发自心灵深处，美德的典范百世流芳了。
English: In addition, a pair of eels often appear in the spring every day for eating. This can truly be said to be a filial piety from the depths of the soul, and a model of virtue has spread throughout the ages.

古文：洛水又南径新都县，蜀有三都，谓成都、广都，此其一焉。
现代文：洛水继续南流，经过新都县。蜀有三都：指成都、广都，新都也是其中之一。
English: Luoshui continued to flow south, passing through Xindu County. Shu has three capitals: Chengdu, Guangdong, and Xindu is also one of them.

古文：与绵水合。水西出绵竹县，又与湔水合，亦谓之郫江也，又言是涪水。
现代文：洛水与发源西边绵竹县的绵水汇合，又与渝水汇合。渝水也叫娜江，又称涪水。
English: Luoshui merges with Mianshui in Mianzhu County on the west side of the source, and also merges with Yuishui. Yuishui is also called Najiang, also known as Lushui.

古文：吕忱曰：一曰湔。
现代文：吕忱说：又叫渝水。
English: Lu Zhen said: It is also called Chongshui.

古文：然此二水俱与洛会矣。
现代文：那么二水都与洛水相汇合了。
English: Then the two rivers converged with the Luo River.

古文：又径犍为牛鞞县为牛鞞水。
现代文：洛水又流经键为郡牛鞠县，称为牛斡水。
English: Luoshui also flows through the county of Niuqiu County, known as Niuyuanshui.

古文：昔罗尚乘牛鞞水，东征李雄，谓此水也。
现代文：从前罗尚乘牛稗水东征李雄，说的就是此水。
English: Once upon a time, Luo Shang went to the East to conquer Li Xiong by means of the water of Niu Xuan.

古文：县以汉武帝元封二年置。
现代文：牛斡县置于汉武帝元封二年。
English: Niuyu County was placed under the imperial fief of Emperor Hanwu two years later.

古文：又东径资中县，又径汉安县，谓之绵水也。
现代文：牛斡水又往东流经资中县，又流经汉安县，称为绵水。
English: The water of Niu Miao also flows eastward through Zhizhong County and flows through Han'an County, which is called wavy water.

古文：自上诸县，咸以溉灌，故语曰：绵洛为没沃也。
现代文：以上各县都利用这条水来灌溉。所以俗话说：绵、洛可以淹灌。
English: The above-mentioned counties all use this water for irrigation. Therefore, as the saying goes: Mian and Luo can be flooded.

古文：汉景帝六年封赵相苏嘉为侯国，江阳郡治也。
现代文：绵水又称中水，到江阳县方山脚下入江，汇流处叫绵水口。
English: Mianshui, also known as Zhongshui, enters the river at the foot of Fangshan in Jiangyang County, and the confluence is called Mianshui Port.

古文：故犍为枝江都尉，建安十八年刘璋立。
现代文：江阳县濒二江，位于江水和洛水的汇流处。汉景帝六年刘璋所设。
English: Jiangyang County is located at the confluence of the Erjiang River and the Luoshui River. It was built by Liu Bei in the sixth year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：江中有大阙、小阙焉。季春之月，则黄龙堆没，阙乃平也。
现代文：江中有大网和小网，暮春时节水涨，黄龙堆淹没，二网也就平了。
English: There are large nets and small nets in the river. At the end of the spring season, the water rises, the Huanglong heap is flooded, and the two nets are flat.

古文：昔世祖微时，过江阳县，有一子。
现代文：从前世祖寒微时候，经过江阳县。
English: It has passed through Jiangyang County since ancient times.

古文：望气者言江阳有贵儿象，王莽求之，而獠杀之。
现代文：他有个儿子，因为望气者说江阳有出贵儿的气象，王莽派人去找那人，结果捕杀了他。
English: He had a son, and Wang Mang sent someone to look for him, and ended up catching and killing him, because the hopefuls said that Jiangyang had the makings of a noble son.

古文：后世祖怨，为子立祠于县，谪其民罚布数世。
现代文：后来世祖怨恨，在县城为他立祠，并谴责当地百姓，接连几代要他们罚布。
English: Later, the ancestor held a grudge, built a shrine for him in the county seat, and condemned the local people, asking them to pay fines for several generations in a row.

古文：扬雄《琴清英》曰：尹吉甫子伯奇至孝，后母谮之，自投江中。
现代文：扬雄《琴清英》说：尹吉甫的儿子伯奇极其孝顺，因受后母诬陷而投江，身上缠满了青苔和水草。
English: Yang Xiong's "Qin Qingying" said: "Yin Jifu's son, Boqi, was extremely filial. Because he was framed by his stepmother, he threw himself into the river. His body was covered with moss and weeds.

古文：衣苔带藻，忽梦见水仙赐其美药，思惟养亲，扬声悲歌。船人闻之而学之。
现代文：他忽然梦见水仙赠送良药，心中想拿回去奉养父母，于是就高声唱起悲歌来，船夫听到，也学着唱。
English: He suddenly dreamt that Narcissus was giving away good medicine, and in his heart he wanted to take it back to his foster parents, so he sang a lament in a loud voice, and the boatman heard it and learned to sing it.

古文：吉甫闻船人之声，疑似伯奇，援琴作《子安之操》。
现代文：尹吉甫听到船夫的歌声，觉得很像伯奇，就捧琴来弹了一曲《子安之操》。
English: When Yin Jifu heard the boatman's singing voice, he thought it sounded very much like Birch, so he picked up the piano and played a piece of music, "Zi'an's Drill."

古文：江水径汉安县北。
现代文：江水流经汉安县北。
English: The river flows through the north of Han'an County.

古文：县虽迫山川，土地特美，蚕桑鱼盐家有焉。
现代文：汉安县虽然处于江河和山陵之间，地势局促，但土壤特别肥沃，蚕桑鱼盐家家户户都有。
English: Although Han'an County is located between rivers and mountains, the terrain is cramped, but the soil is particularly fertile. Every household has silkworm mullet fish salt.

古文：江水东径樊石滩，又径大附滩，频历二险也。
现代文：江水往东流经樊石滩，又流经大附滩，接连经过两处险地。
English: The water of the river flows eastward through the Jinshi Beach and the Dahui Beach, successively passing through two dangerous places.

古文：县长赵祉遣吏先尼和，以永建元年十二月诣巴郡，没死成湍滩，予贤求丧不得。
现代文：又往东流过符县北邪东南，绍部水从符关往东北注人。符县旧时属于麒爽的地域。汉武帝建元六年十二月去巴郡，在成湍滩覆舟淹死。他的儿子先贤找不到他的尸体。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northeastern and southeastern parts of Fuxian, and the water of Shabu flowed from Fuguan to northeastern Jianren. Fuxian used to be a lively area. Emperor Hanwu went to Bashun in December of the 6th year of Jianyuan and drowned in a boat on Chengyu Beach. His son Shenxian could not find his body.

古文：女络，年二十五岁，有二子，五岁以还。
现代文：女儿先络二十五岁，有两个儿子，都还不到五岁。
English: She has a 25-year-old daughter and two sons, both under five.

古文：至二年二月十五日，尚不得丧、络乃乘小船，至父没处，哀哭自沉。见梦告贤曰：至二十一日，与父俱出。
现代文：到二年二月十五日，仍没有找到尸体。于是先络就乘小船到父亲溺死的地方悲哭，自己也投水了，并托梦先贤说：到二十一日我会和父亲一起出来的。
English: On February 15, 2002, they still hadn't found his body. So, he first took a small boat to the place where his father had drowned and wept. He also threw himself into the water, recalling the dream and saying, "I will come out with my father on the 21st."

古文：至日，父子果浮出江上。
现代文：到了那天，父女果然一起在江上浮出。
English: On that day, father and daughter surfaced on the river together.

古文：郡、县上言，为之立碑，以旌孝诚也。
现代文：郡县上报，为她立碑，以表扬她的孝心。
English: The county reported the case and erected a monument in her honor to commend her filial piety.

古文：其鰼部之水，所未闻矣，或是水之殊目，非所究也。
现代文：至于绍部水，却没有听到过，也许是水的别名吧，不过我没有研究过。
English: As for Saube water, I haven't heard of it. Maybe it's another name for water, but I haven't studied it.

古文：又东北至巴郡江州县东，强水、涪水、汉水、白水、宕渠水五水合，南流注之。
现代文：又往东北流到巴郡江州县东边，强水、涪水、汉水、白水、宕渠水五水相汇合，南流注人江水。
English: It also flows to the northeast to the eastern edge of Jiangzhou County, Ba County. The strong water, turbid water, Chinese water, white water, and stagnant canal water converge, and the southern stream injects the water of the Yangtze River.

古文：强水即羌水也。宕渠水即潜水、渝水矣。
现代文：强水就是羌水；宕渠水就是潜水、渝水。
English: Strong water is brackish water; stagnant water is submerged water and stagnant water.

古文：巴水出晋昌郡宣汉县已岭山，郡隶梁州，晋太康中立，治汉中。
现代文：巴水发源于晋昌郡宣汉县巴岭山。晋昌郡属梁州，置于晋太康年间一，州治在汉中。
English: Ba Shui originated from Ba Ling Shan, Xuanhan County, Jinchang County. Jinchang County belongs to Liangzhou, and was placed in the first year of Jin Taikang. The state is governed by Hanzhong.

古文：县南去郡八百余里，故蜀巴渠。
现代文：宣汉县南距巴郡八百余里，原属巴渠郡。
English: Xuanhan County is more than 800 miles south of Bachu County and was originally part of Bachu County.

古文：西南流历巴中，径巴郡故城南，李严所筑大城北，西南入江。
现代文：巴水往西南流过巴中，又经巴郡老城以南、李严所筑的大城以北，往西南注入江水。
English: The Bachu River flows southwest through the middle of Bachu, south of the old town of Bachu County, north of the big city built by Li Yan, and flows southwest into the river.

古文：庾仲雍所谓江州县对二水口，右则涪内水，左则蜀外水、即是水也。
现代文：庚仲雍说：江州县与两处水口相望，右边是涪内水，左边是蜀外水，说的就是这条水。
English: Geng Zhongyong said: "Jiangzhou County is facing two water outlets. On the right is the Inner Shu River, and on the left is the Outer Shu River. It is this water that I am talking about.

古文：江州县，故巴子之都也。
现代文：江州县昔时是巴子的都邑。
English: In the past, Jiangzhou County was the capital of Bazi.

古文：《春秋》桓公九年，巴子使韩服告楚，请与邓好是也。
现代文：《春秋》：桓公九年前，巴子遣韩服规劝楚国，请他们与邓修好。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Nine years ago, Emperor Kuan Zi sent Hanfu to persuade Chu to make peace with Deng Xiaoping.

古文：及七国称王，巴亦王焉。
现代文：到了七国称王时，巴也称王了。
English: When the time came for the seven kingdoms to proclaim their kings, Ba also proclaimed himself king.

古文：秦惠王遣张仪等救苴侯于巴，仪贪巴、苴之富，因执其王以归，而置巴郡焉，治江州。
现代文：秦惠王派遣张仪等去巴援救直侯，张仪贪巴、直的财富，于是就俘了它们的国王回来，并在那里设置巴郡，以江州为郡治。
English: Qin Hui King sent Zhang Yi and others to Ba to rescue Zhou, Zhang Yi coveted Ba and Zhou's wealth, so he captured their king and returned, and set up Ba County there, with Jiangzhou as the county.

古文：汉献帝初平元年，分巴为三郡，于江州则永宁郡治也。
现代文：汉献帝初平元年，分巴郡为三郡，江州则是永宁郡的治所。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Wenba County was divided into three counties, and Jiangzhou became the capital of Yongning County.

古文：至建安六年，刘璋纳蹇胤之讼，复为巴郡，以严颜为守。
现代文：到了建安六年，刘璋接受赛允的意见，又恢复了巴郡，派严颜去做太守。
English: In the sixth year of Jian'an, Liu Bei accepted Sai Yun's opinion, restored Ba County, and sent Yan Yan to be the governor.

古文：颜见先主入蜀，叹曰：独坐穷山，放虎自卫。
现代文：严颜见先主入蜀，叹道：独坐在深山里，放虎出来保卫自己，在这里有一天该要褪胸顿足，痛悔无及了！
English: When Yan Yan saw his ancestor enter Shu, he sighed: sitting alone in the deep mountains, letting the tiger out to defend himself, here one day he should have bowed his head and repented!

古文：汉世郡治江州巴水北，北府城是也。后乃徙南城。
现代文：汉时郡治是江州，就是巴水北岸的北府城，以后才迁到南城。
English: The county seat of the Han Dynasty was Jiangzhou, that is, Beifu Town on the north bank of the Bachu River. Later, it was moved to Nancheng.

古文：刘备初以江夏费观为太守，领江州都督。
现代文：刘备起初派江夏费观当太守，兼任江州都督。
English: At first, Liu Bei appointed Jiang Xiafeiguan as the governor-general, and he also served as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：后都护李严，更城周十六里，造苍龙、白虎门，求以五郡为巴州治，丞相诸葛亮不许，竟不果。
现代文：后来都护李严改建城垣，周长十六里，建造了苍龙、白虎等城门，要求把五郡交给巴州管辖；但垂相诸葛亮不许，终于没有实现。
English: Later, Du Guo and Li Yan rebuilt the city wall with a circumference of 16 miles, built the Saurong, White Tiger and other gates, and demanded that the five counties be handed over to the jurisdiction of Bazhou; however, they were not allowed to follow all the rules, and in the end, it did not happen.

古文：地势侧险，皆重屋累居，数有火害，又不相容、结舫水居者五百余家，承二江之会，夏水增盛，坏散颠没，死者无数。
现代文：江州地势倾斜而峻险，山坡建屋，都是层层相叠，因此火灾经常发生；人们又互不相容，造船住在水上的五百余家。这里地处两江的汇合处，夏季江水猛涨，船只被冲毁沉没，淹死的人不计其数。
English: The terrain of Jiangzhou is steep and steep, and the houses on the hillside are all stacked on top of each other, so fires often occur; people are incompatible with each other, and there are more than 500 houses built on the water. It is located at the confluence of the two rivers. In summer, the water rises sharply, the ships are washed away and sunk, and countless people drown.

古文：县有官橘、官荔枝园，夏至则熟。二千石常设厨膳，命士大夫共会树下食之。
现代文：县里有官府的桔园和荔枝园，到了夏天，果实成熟，太守常常备了饭菜，招士大夫到树下来会聚同食。
English: There are orange orchards and litchi orchards belonging to the government in the county. In the summer, when the fruits are ripe, the governor often prepares meals, and the officials come down from the trees to eat together.

古文：县北有稻田，出御米也。
现代文：县北有稻田，出产专供皇室食用的稻米。
English: There are rice paddies in the north of the prefecture, which produce rice exclusively for the royal family.

古文：县下又有清水穴，巴人以此水为粉，则皜曜鲜芳，贡粉京师，因名粉水，故世谓之为江州堕林粉。粉水亦谓之为粒水矣。
现代文：县内又有清水穴，巴人用这洞穴里的水来磨粉，磨出的粉洁白照眼，鲜美芳香，用以进贡京城，因名此水为粉水。所以人们把这种粉叫做江州堕林粉，粉水又叫粒水了。
English: There is also a clear water cave in the county. The Ba people use the water in this cave to grind powder. The ground powder is white and shines in the eyes, and has a delicious aroma. It is used to pay tribute to the capital. Because of the name, this water is powder water. Therefore, people call this powder Jiangzhou Fallen Forest Powder, and the powder water is also called granular water.

古文：江之北岸，有涂山，南有夏禹庙、涂君祠，庙铭存焉。
现代文：江水北岸有涂山，南岸有夏禹庙、涂君祠，庙铭还在。
English: The north bank of the river has Tu Mountain, the south bank has Xia Yu Temple and Tu Jun Temple, and the temple inscription is still there.

古文：常璩、庾仲雍并言禹娶于此。
现代文：常壕、庚仲雍都说禹就是在这里娶妻的。
English: Changkeng and Geng Zhongyong both said that Yu married his wife here.

古文：余案群书，咸言禹娶在寿春当涂，不于此也。
现代文：我查过许多书，都说禹在寿春当涂娶妻，不是在这里。
English: I have checked many books, and they all say that Yu should marry his wife in Shuchun, not here.

古文：又东至枳县西，延江水从牂柯郡北流西屈注之。
现代文：又往东流到积县西边，延江水从样柯郡北流，向西转弯注入。
English: It also flows eastward to the west of Jie County, and the water of the Yanjiang River flows from the north of Samye County and turns to the west.

古文：江水东径阳关巴子梁，江之两岸，犹有梁处，巴之三关，斯为一也。
现代文：江水往东流，经过阳关巴子梁。江的两岸现在还有桥梁遗址，是巴郡三关之一。
English: The river water flows eastward, passing through Yangguan Baziliang. There are still bridge sites on both sides of the river, which is one of the three passes in Ba County.

古文：延熙中，蜀车骑将军邓芝为江州都督，治此。
现代文：延熙年间，蜀国的车骑将军邓芝当江州都督，治所就在这里。
English: During the Yanxi Dynasty, the general of Shu, Deng Zhi, was the governor of Jiangzhou, and the government office was located here.

古文：江水又东，右径黄葛峡，山高险，全无人居。
现代文：江水继续往东流，右边流过黄葛峡。这里山峰又高又险，完全无人居住。
English: The river continues to flow eastward, passing through the Huangge Gorge on the right. The mountains here are high and dangerous, and completely uninhabited.

古文：江水又左径明月峡，东至梨乡，历鸡鸣峡。
现代文：江水左边又流过明月峡，往东流到梨乡，流过鸡鸣峡。
English: On the left side of the river, the water flows through the Mingyue Gorge, flows eastward to the Pear Township, and flows through the Chiming Gorge.

古文：江之南岸有枳县治。
现代文：江水南岸有积县治所。
English: On the south bank of the river is the Jie County Government.

古文：《华阳记》曰：枳县在江州巴郡东四百里，治涪陵水会。庾仲雍所谓有别江出武陵者也。
现代文：《华阳记》说：积县在江州巴郡东四百里，治所在涪陵水的汇流处；这就是庚仲雍说的：有支江自武陵分出。
English: "Hua Yang Ji" said: Ji County is four hundred miles east of Jiangzhou Ba County, and its capital is located at the confluence of Fuling Water; this is what Geng Zhongyong said: There are branches of the river from Wuling.

古文：水乃延江之枝津，分水北注，径涪陵入江，故亦云涪陵水也。
现代文：此水是延江的支派，分水北注，经涪陵入江，所以也叫涪陵水。
English: This water is a tributary of the Yangtze River. It is diverted to the North Channel and enters the river through Fuling, so it is also called Fuling Water.

古文：其水南导武陵郡，昔司马错溯舟此水，取楚黔中地。
现代文：此水导源于南方的武陵郡，从前司马错沿此江逆流而上，夺取了楚国的黔中地区。
English: This water conduit originates from the south of Wuling County. From the former Sima fault, it flows upstream along this river, capturing the Yuzhong area of Chu.

古文：延熙中，邓芝伐徐巨射玄猿于是县。猿自拔矢，卷木叶塞射创。
现代文：延熙年间，邓芝征讨徐巨，在积县射黑猿；黑猿自己拔掉箭，卷起树叶塞住伤口。
English: During the Yanxi Dynasty, Deng Zhi enlisted the help of Xu Jiu and shot a black monkey in Jie County; the black monkey pulled out the arrow himself and rolled up the leaves to plug the wound.

古文：芝叹曰：伤物之生，吾其死矣。
现代文：邓芝叹道：残害动物的生命，我恐怕要死了！
English: Deng Zhi sighed: I'm afraid I'm going to die if I destroy the lives of animals!

古文：江水又东径涪陵故郡北，后乃并巴郡，遂罢省。
现代文：江水又往东流过旧涪陵郡北边，涪陵以后并入巴郡，于是撤废。
English: The river water also flowed eastward through the north of the former Fuling County. After Fuling was merged into Ba County, it was abolished.

古文：江水又东径文阳滩，滩险难上。
现代文：江水又往东流过文阳滩；此滩水势险恶，上行十分困难。
English: The river also flows eastward through Benyang Beach; the water potential of this beach is dangerous, and it is very difficult to go upstream.

古文：江水又东径汉平县二百余里，左自涪陵东出百余里，而届于黄石，东为桐柱滩。
现代文：江水又继续往东流，经过汉平县二百余里，左边从涪陵东出百余里，流到黄石，东边是桐柱滩。
English: The river continued to flow eastward, passing through Hanping County for more than two hundred miles, and on the left from Fuling eastward for more than a hundred miles, flowing to Huangshi, and to the east is Tongzhu Beach.

古文：又径东望峡，东历平都，峡对丰民洲，旧巴子别都也。
现代文：又流经东望峡，东经平都。东望峡与丰民洲相望，昔时是巴子的陪都。
English: It also flows through Dongwang Gorge and Pingdu to the east. Dongwang Gorge and Fengminshu face each other. In the past, it was the capital of Bazi.

古文：《华阳记》曰：巴子虽都江州，又治平都。
现代文：《华阳记》说：巴子虽然建都于江州，但也以平都为治所，指的就是这地方。
English: "Hua Yang Ji" said: Although Bazi was built in Jiangzhou, it was also governed by Pingdu, referring to this place.

古文：即此处也。有平都县，为巴郡之隶邑矣。县有天师治，兼建佛寺，甚清灵。
现代文：有平都县，是巴郡的属县，县里有天师治，还兼建佛寺，十分清幽灵验。
English: There is Pingdu County, which is an affiliated county of Ba County. The county has Tianshizhi, and also built a Buddhist temple, which is very clear.

古文：县有市肆，四日一会。
现代文：还有个市场，每四日开市一次。
English: There is also a market, which opens every four days.

古文：江水右径虎须滩，滩水广大，夏断行旅。
现代文：江水右岸经流虎须滩，滩阔水大，夏季行旅断绝。
English: On the right bank of the river, there is the Tiger's Foot Beach. The beach is wide and the water is big. Summer travel is prohibited.

古文：江水又东径临江县南，王莽之监江县也。
现代文：江水又往东流经临江县南，这就是王莽的监江县。
English: The river also flows eastward through the south of Linjiang County, which is Wang Mang's Jianjiang County.

古文：《华阳记》曰：县在枳东四百里，东接胸忍。县有盐官。
现代文：《华阳记》说：县在积东四百里，东与胸忍县接壤，驻有盐官。
English: "Hua Yang Ji" said: the county is four hundred miles to the east, and the east is bordered by Chestnut County, and there is a salt officer stationed there.

古文：自县北入盐井溪，有盐井营户。
现代文：从县城往北进入盐井溪，有经营盐井的民户。
English: From the county seat northward into Yanai Creek, there are private households that operate salt wells.

古文：溪水沿汪江。
现代文：溪水流注入江。
English: The stream flows into the river.

古文：江水又东得黄华水口，江浦也，左径石城南。
现代文：江水又往东流到黄华水口―这是个牛扼湖―左边经石城南面。
English: The river then flows east to the Huanghua Reservoir - this is an oxbow lake - passing south of Shicheng on the left.

古文：庾仲雍曰：临江至石城黄华口一百里。
现代文：庚仲雍说：从临江到石城黄华口一百里。
English: Geng Zhongyong said: It is a hundred miles from Linjiang to Shicheng Huanghuagou.

古文：又东至平洲，洲上多居民。
现代文：又往东流，到了平洲，洲上居民很多。
English: It then flows eastward to Pingzhou, where there are many residents.

古文：又东径壤涂而历和滩。又东径界坛，是地巴东之西界，益州之东境，故得是名也。
现代文：又往东流，经过壤涂，流过和滩；又往东流，经过界坛―这是巴东的西界，益州的东境，因有此名。
English: It also flows eastward, passing through Sodatu, flowing through Hotan; it also flows eastward, passing through the border - this is the western border of Badong, the eastern border of Yizhou, hence the name.

古文：又东过鱼复县南，夷水出焉。
现代文：又往东流过鱼复县南边，夷水发源在这里。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Yufu County, and the source of the floodwaters is here.

古文：江水又东，右得将龟溪口。
现代文：江水继续往东流，右岸有将龟溪口。
English: The water of the river continues to flow eastward, with the mouth of the Shogame Creek on the right bank.

古文：《华阳记》曰：朐忍县出灵龟，咸熙元年，献龟于相府，言出自此溪也。
现代文：《华阳记》说：胸忍县出产灵龟。咸熙元年，有人到宰相府里献龟，说是此溪所出。
English: "Hua Yang Ji" said: "Chonin County produced a spirit turtle. In the first year of the Han Dynasty, someone went to the Prime Minister's Office to donate a turtle, saying that it was from this stream.

古文：江水又东，会南、北集渠，南水出涪陵县界，谓之阳溪。北流径巴东郡之南浦侨县西。
现代文：江水又往东流，汇合了南集渠和北集渠。南水源出涪陵县界，称为阳溪，往北流经巴东郡的南浦侨县西边。
English: The water of the river flows eastward again, merging the South Channel and the North Channel. The source of the south water comes from the border of Fuling County, known as Yangxi, and flows northward through the west of Nanpuqiao County in Badong County.

古文：溪硖侧，盐井三口，相去各数十步，以木为桶，径五尺，修煮不绝。
现代文：溪流所经的山峡旁有盐井三口，相距各数十步，用直径五尺的大木桶来装，不停地煮盐。
English: Next to the gorge through which the stream flows, there are three salt wells, each a few dozen paces apart, which are filled with large wooden barrels with a diameter of five feet and continuously boil salt.

古文：溪水北流注于江，谓之南集渠口，亦曰于阳溪口。
现代文：溪水往北流注入江水，汇流处称为南集渠口，又叫于阳溪口。
English: The water of the stream flows northward into the river, and the confluence is called the Nanji canal mouth, also called the Yuyang creek mouth.

古文：北水出新浦县北高梁山分溪。南流径其县西，又南百里，至朐忍县，南入于江，谓之北集渠口，别名班口，又曰分水口，朐忍尉治此。
现代文：北水源出新浦县北方高梁山的分溪，往南流经该县西边，又往南流了一百里，到了胸忍县，然后往南注入江水；汇流处称为北集渠口，别名班口，又叫分水口，胸忍尉的治所就在这里。
English: The north water source comes from the branch of the mountain stream of Gaoliang Mountain in the north of Xinpu County, flows south through the west of the county, and flows south for a hundred miles, to the county of Chestnut, and then flows south into the river water; the confluence is called the north channel mouth, also known as the band mouth, also known as the branch mouth, and the Chestnut's clinic is here.

古文：江水又东，右径汜溪口，盖江汜决入也。
现代文：江水又往东流，右边流经把溪口，是江水分流后重又注入处。
English: The water of the river flows to the east, and the right side flows through the mouth of the creek, which is the place where the water of the river is re-injected after flowing.

古文：江水又东，径石龙而至于博阳二村之间，有盘石，广四百丈，长六里，阻塞江川，夏没冬出，基亘通诸。
现代文：江水又往东流经石龙，流到博阳二村之间。有块宽四百丈，长六里的巨石阻塞江流，夏季没入水中，冬季露出水面，基岩绵亘，与江心的洲诸相连。
English: The river then flows eastward through Shilong and flows between the two villages of Boyang. A 400-meter-wide, six-mile-long boulder blocks the flow of the river. It is submerged in the summer and comes to the surface in the winter. The bedrock is long and connected to the river's central islands.

古文：又东径羊肠虎臂滩。
现代文：又往东流经羊肠虎臂滩。
English: It also flows eastward through Sheep Gut and Tiger Arm Beach.

古文：杨亮为益州，至此舟覆，惩其波澜，蜀人至今犹名之为使君滩。
现代文：杨亮当益州刺史，到这里翻了船。蜀人苦于滩中波澜险恶，至今还把它叫做使君滩。
English: Yang Liang, the founder of Yizhou, overturned his boat here. The people of Shu suffered from the dangerous waves in the beach, and still call it Jijun Beach.

古文：江水又东，彭水注之。
现代文：江水又往东流，有彭水注入。
English: The river also flows eastward, with the inflow of the Pengshui River.

古文：水出已渠郡獠中，东南流径汉丰县东，清水注之。
现代文：彭水发源于巴渠郡撩中，往东南流经汉丰县东面，汇合了清水。
English: The Peng Water originates in the middle of Baqiu County and flows southeast through the east of Hanfeng County, where it meets the Clear Water.

古文：水源出西北巴渠县东北巴岭南獠中，即巴渠水也。
现代文：清水发源于西北方巴渠县东北巴岭以南的撩中，就是巴渠水。
English: The clear water originates from the middle of the reeds south of the Northeast Baling in northwest Bachu County, which is Bachu Water.

古文：西南流至其县，又西入峡，檀井溪水出焉。又西出峡，至汉丰县东而西注彭溪，谓之清水口。
现代文：此水往西南流到该县，又往西流进入山峡―檀井溪水就发源在这里―又西流出峡，到汉丰县东，往西注入彭溪，汇流处叫清水口。
English: This water flows to the southwest to the county, and then flows westward into the mountain gorge - the source of the water of the Dangjing Creek is here - and then flows westward out of the gorge, to the east of Hanfeng County, and westward into Pengxi, and the confluence is called the clear water mouth.

古文：彭溪水又南，径朐忍县西六十里，南流注于江，谓之彭溪口。
现代文：彭溪水又往南流，经过胸忍县西六十里，南流注入江水，汇流处叫彭溪口。
English: The water of Pengxi River flows southward, passing through the west sixty miles of Shuanglin County, and the south stream is injected into the river water. The confluence is called Pengxi Mouth.

古文：江水又东，右径朐忍县故城南。
现代文：江水又往东流，右边流经胸忍县老城南。
English: The river then flows eastward, passing through the southern part of the old city in Shunan County on the right.

古文：常璩曰：县在巴东郡西二百九十里，县治故城，跨其山阪，南临大江。江之南岸有方山，山形方峭，枕侧江濆。
现代文：常球说：胸忍县在巴东郡西二百九十里，县治就在老县城，坐落在山坡上，南濒大江；大江南岸有方山，山呈方形，十分陡峭，一侧濒江。
English: Changqiu said, "Chongnin County is 290 miles west of Badong County, and the county seat is in the old county seat. It is located on a hillside, bordering the Yangtze River to the south. There is a square mountain on the south bank of the Yangtze River. The mountain is square and very steep, bordering the Yangtze River on one side.

古文：江水又东径瞿巫滩，即下瞿滩也，又谓之博望摊。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过瞿巫滩，就是下瞿滩，又叫博望滩；左岸有汤溪水注入。
English: The water of the river flows eastward, passing through the Jiuwu Beach, that is, the Lower Jiuwu Beach, also known as the Bohang Beach; the left bank is filled with Tang Creek water.

古文：左则汤溪水注之，水源出县北六百余里上庸界，南流历县，翼带盐井一百所，巴川资以自给。
现代文：汤溪水源出县北六百余里的上庸边界，往南流经县城，两岸有盐井一百余处，巴、川就靠这些盐井来自给。
English: The source of the Tang River is from the Shangyong boundary, more than 600 miles north of the county, and flows south through the county seat. There are more than 100 salt wells on both sides of the river, and the Ba and the river rely on these salt wells for their own supply.

古文：粒大者，方寸，中央隆起，形如张伞，故因名之曰伞子盐。
现代文：盐粒大的一寸见方，中央隆起，形状就像一把张开的伞。所以叫伞子盐。
English: The salt grains are one inch square, with a bulge in the center, shaped like an open umbrella. That's why it's called umbrella salt.

古文：有不成者，形亦必方，异于常盐矣。
现代文：有的虽然不呈伞状，但也一定是方形的、和普通的盐不同。
English: Some, although not umbrella-shaped, must also be square, unlike ordinary salt.

古文：王隐《晋书地道记》曰：人汤口四十三里，有石，煮以为盐。
现代文：王隐《晋书•地道记》说：从汤口进去四十三里，有石头可以煮出盐来。
English: Wang Yin's "Jinshu•Hindu Records" said: Forty-three miles from the mouth of the soup, there is a stone that can boil salt.

古文：石大者如升，小者如拳，煮之，水竭盐成，盖蜀火井之伦，水火相得乃佳矣。
现代文：石头大的像升，小的像拳头，煮到水都干尽，盐也就结成了。这大概也是蜀地的天然气井一类，水火互相配合，才能煮出好盐来。
English: A large stone is like a litre, a small one is like a fist, and when boiled until the water has dried up, the salt is formed. This is probably also a type of natural gas well in Shoudi. Water and fire work together to produce good salt.

古文：汤水下与檀溪水合，水上承巴渠水，南历檀井溪，谓之檀井水。下入汤水。
现代文：汤水下流，与檀溪水汇合。檀溪水上流承接巴渠水，南流经檀井溪，叫檀井水，下流注入汤水。
English: The upstream flow of the sand dune water receives the water of the Ba Canal, and the southward flow through the sand dune creek is called the sand dune water, and the downstream flow injects the sand dune water.

古文：汤水又南人于江，名曰汤口。
现代文：汤水又往南流，注入江水，汇流处叫汤口。
English: The soup water flows south again, and is injected into the river water. The confluence is called the mouth of the soup.

古文：江水又径东阳滩。
现代文：江水又流经东阳滩。
English: The river also flows through Dongyang Beach.

古文：江上有破石，故亦通谓之破石滩，苟延光没处也。
现代文：江中有一块破石，所以也通称为破石滩，就是苟延光淹死的地方。
English: There is a broken stone in the river, so it is also known as the broken stone beach, which is the place where Gou Yan Guang drowned.

古文：常璩曰：水道有东阳、下瞿数滩，山有大小石城势，灵寿木及橘圃也。
现代文：常壕说：水道中有东阳、下瞿等滩，山有大石城势和小石城势，有灵寿树和桔园。
English: He said: "In the waterway, there are beaches such as Dongyang and Jiaozuo, mountains such as Daishi Castle and Xiaoshi Castle, and there are lingzhu trees and orange orchards.

古文：故《地理志》曰：县有橘官，有民市。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：县里有桔官，有民间市场。
English: Therefore, "Geography" said: there are orangutans in the county, and there is a private market.

古文：江水又径鱼复县之故陵，旧郡治故陵溪西二里故陵村，溪即永谷也。
现代文：江水又流经毕县的故陵。老郡治在故陵溪西二里的故陵村•故陵溪靠近永谷。
English: The river also flows through the ancient tombs of Bi County. The old county seat is located two miles west of the ancient tombs of the ancient tombs of the ancient tombs of the ancient tombs near Yonggu.

古文：地多木瓜树，有子大如，白黄，实甚芬香，《尔雅》之所谓楙也。
现代文：当地木瓜很多，木瓜树结的果实大的像酒壶，呈黄白色，十分芳香，就是《尔雅》所谓林。
English: There are a lot of local papayas, and the fruits of papaya trees are as big as wine jugs, yellow-white, and very fragrant, which is the so-called forest in "Lya."

古文：江水又东为落牛滩，径故陵北。江侧有六大坟。
现代文：江水又往东流，就是落牛滩；流经故陵北边，江边有六大坟。
English: The river also flows eastward, that is, to Lok Niu Beach. It flows to the north of the ancient mausoleum, and there are six large tombs along the river.

古文：庾仲雍曰：楚都丹阳所葬，亦犹枳之已陵矣，故以故陵为名也，有鱼复尉，戍此，江之左岸有巴乡村，村人善酿，故俗称巴乡清，郡出名酒。
现代文：庚仲雍说：这是楚建都于丹阳时所葬，正像积的巴陵一样，所以用故陵作为地名，有鱼复尉驻守在这里。江水左岸有个巴乡村，村人善于酿酒，所以民间把那里酿的酒称为巴乡清。郡中出产名酒。
English: Geng Zhongyong said: This is the tomb of Chu Jiandu when he was buried in Danyang. It is just like the Balin tomb, so it uses the tomb as a place name. There is a fishery officer stationed here. There is a Ba village on the left bank of the river. The villagers are good at brewing wine, so the people call the wine brewed there Ba Xiangqing. The county produces famous wine.

古文：村侧有溪，溪中多灵寿木。中有鱼，其头似羊，丰肉少骨，美于余鱼。
现代文：•村边有溪，溪里灵寿树很多；水中有鱼，鱼头像羊，肉多骨少，比别的鱼味更鲜美。
English: • There is a stream at the edge of the village, and there are many reishi crabs in the stream; there are fish in the water, the fish head is like a sheep, the meat is more bony and less, and it is more delicious than other fish.

古文：溪水伏流径平头山，内通南浦故县陂湖。
现代文：溪水潜流经平头山底下，与旧南浦县的湖塘相通。
English: The underground stream flows through the bottom of the Pingdu Mountain and connects with the lake in the former Nampo County.

古文：其地平旷，有湖泽，中有菱芡鲫雁，不异外江，凡此等物，皆人峡所无，地密恶蛮，不可轻至。
现代文：这一带土地平旷，有湖泊沼泽，生长菱芡等水生植物，还有卿鱼和大雁，与外江没有两样；这些东西都是进峡之后所看不到的。这地方有很多凶恶的蛮人，不可轻率前去。
English: The land in this area is flat, with lakes and marshes, aquatic plants such as water hyacinth, as well as fish and wild geese, which are no different from the outside river; these things are not visible after entering the gorge. There are many vicious barbarians in this place, and you should not go there lightly.

古文：江水又东，右径夜清而东历朝阳道口，有县治，治下有市，十日一会。
现代文：江水又东流，右边流经夜清；又往东流过朝阳道口，这里有县治，县治下有市场，十日一次集市。
English: The river also flows to the east, flowing on the right through Yeching; it also flows eastward through the Chaoyang Intersection, where there is county government, a market under county government, and a market on the 10th.

古文：江水又东，左径新市里南，常璩曰：巴旧立市于江上，今新市里是也。
现代文：江水又东流，左边流经新市里南。常壕说：先前巴地在江上立市，就是现今的新市里。
English: The river also flows to the east, and on the left it flows through the southern part of Xincheng. Changqiao said: Previously, Bati established a city on the river, which is today's Xincheng.

古文：江水又东，右合阳元水，水出阳口县西南，高阳山东，东北流径其县南，东北流，丙水注之。
现代文：江水又往东流，在右边汇合了阳元水。阳元水发源于阳口县西南的高阳山东边，往东北流经该县南，往东北流，有丙水注入。
English: The water of the river flows to the east, and the Yangyuan Water joins it on the right. The Yangyuan Water originates from the east side of Gaoyang Mountain in the southwest of Yangkou County, flows to the northeast through the south of the county, and flows to the northeast, and is injected with Hei water.

古文：水发县东南柏枝山，山下有丙穴，穴方数丈，中有嘉鱼，常以春末游诸，冬初入穴，抑亦褒汉丙穴之类也。
现代文：丙水发源于该县东南的柏枝山。山下有丙穴，洞宽数丈，洞中有嘉鱼，常常在暮春时节游到沙洲旁，初冬时进入洞内，或许也像褒汉、丙穴之类吧。
English: The Cui Water originates from the southeast of the county in Mount Baiji. There is a Cui Hole at the bottom of the mountain, the hole is a few meters wide and tall, and there are fish in the hole. They often swim next to the sandbar in late spring and enter the cave in early winter. Perhaps they are also like Baohan and Cui Hole.

古文：其水北流入高阳溪。溪水又东北流，注于江，谓之阳元口。
现代文：丙水往北流，注入高阳溪，溪水又往东北流，注入江水，汇流处叫阳元口。
English: The G water flows northward and is injected into Gaoyang Creek, and the stream water flows northeastward and is injected into the river water. The confluence is called Yangyuankou.

古文：江水又东径南乡峡，东径永安宫南，刘备终于此，诸葛亮受遗处也。
现代文：江水继续往东流，经过南乡峡，东经永安宫南面。刘备就死在这里，这也是诸葛亮接受遗诏的地方。
English: The river continued to flow eastward, passing through Nanxiang Gorge and passing to the south of Yongan Palace. Liu Bei died here, which is also the place where Zhuge Liang received his last will and testament.

古文：其间平地可二十许里，江山迥阔，入峡所无。
现代文：其间平地约二十余里，江山旷阔，是入峡后所没有的。
English: Among them, there are more than twenty miles of flat land, and the country is vast, which is not found after entering the gorge.

古文：城周十余里，背山面江，颓塘四毁，荆棘成林，左右民居多星其中。
现代文：城墙周长十余里，背后倚山，面前临江，四面都是废毁的城墙，荆棘成林，附近居民不少在其间垦种。
English: The perimeter of the city wall is more than ten miles long, with the mountains behind it and the river in front of it. On all four sides are ruined city walls, thorns have become forests, and many nearby residents have planted thistles among them.

古文：江水又东径诸葛亮图垒南，石债平旷，望兼川陆，有亮所造八阵图，东跨故垒，皆累细石为之。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过诸葛亮八阵图石堆南面。
English: The river then flows eastward, passing the south side of the Zhuge Liang eight-square stone mound.

古文：自垒西去，聚石八行，行间相去二丈，因曰：八阵既成，自今行师庶不覆败。
现代文：石滩平坦开阔，河流和田野一览无余。这里有诸葛亮所造的八阵图，向东跨越军营遗址，都用细石堆砌而成。从遗址向西，堆叠了八行石头，行距二丈，于是他说：八阵排成了，从今天起，用兵大概可以不致打败仗了吧！
English: The beach is flat and wide, and there is an unobstructed view of the river and fields. Here are the eight formations created by Zhuge Liang. To the east, across the military camp site, they are all made of fine stone. From the site to the west, eight rows of stones are stacked, the rows are two feet apart, so he said: The eight formations are finished, from today, the use of soldiers can probably not defeat the war!

古文：皆图兵势行藏之权，自后深识者所不能了。
现代文：八阵图所表示的都是用兵虚虚实实，随机应变的战术，后世对兵法有高深研究的人也看不懂。
English: What the eight-battalion chart represents is a tactic of making use of the imaginary to create the real and the real to create the imaginary, and a tactic of random contingency. It cannot be understood by future generations who have studied the art of war at a high level.

古文：今夏水漂荡，岁月消损，高处可二三尺，下处磨灭殆尽。
现代文：现在因夏季大水的冲激，岁月的侵蚀消磨，高处还留下二三尺，低处差不多把痕迹都荡尽了。
English: Now, due to the impact of the summer flood and the erosion of the years, there are still two or three feet left in the high places, and the low places have almost exhausted the traces.

古文：江水又东径赤岬城西，是公孙述所造，因山据势，周回七里一百四十步，东高二百丈，西北高千丈，南连基白帝山，甚高大，不生树木。其石悉赤。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过赤呷城西面。公孙述依据山势筑成此城，周长七里一百四十步，东高二百丈，西北高达干丈；南面的城基则与白帝山相连。白帝山极其高大，山上不生树木，岩石都呈储红色。
English: The river also flows eastward, passing the west side of Akasaki Castle. Gongsun said that the city was built according to the mountain range, with a circumference of seven miles and one hundred and forty paces, a height of two hundred paces in the east, and a height of three hundred paces in the northwest; the southern city foundation is connected to Mount Paidei. Mount Paidei is extremely tall, there are no trees on the mountain, and the rocks are red.

古文：土人云，如人袒胛，故谓之赤岬山。
现代文：当地人说，此山就像一个人袒露着肩脚，所以叫赤脚山。
English: Locals say that this mountain is like a man standing bare-shouldered, which is why it is called Barefoot Mountain.

古文：《淮南子》曰：徬徨于山岬之旁。
现代文：《淮南子》说：仿徨在山呻旁边。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: Imitation wanders next to the mountain moan.

古文：《注》曰：岬，山胁也。
现代文：《注》说：呷就聂山的胁下。
English: "Note" said: "He is under the threat of Mount Lushan.

古文：郭仲产曰：斯名将因此而兴矣。
现代文：郭仲产说：这个名称将因此而流行了。
English: Guo Zhongyan said: This name will be popular because of this.

古文：江水又东径鱼复县故城南，故鱼国也。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过鱼复县老城南面。
English: The river then flows eastward, passing south of the old town of Yufu County.

古文：《春秋左传》文公十六年。庸与群蛮叛，楚庄王代之，七遇皆北，惟裨、鯈、鱼人逐之是也。
现代文：鱼复县就是昔时的鱼国。《春秋左传》：文公十六年前，庸和郡蛮反叛，楚庄王出兵征讨，连打了七次败仗，实际上是裨、修、鱼各族人民把他们赶走的。
English: Yufu County was once known as the country of fish. "Spring and Autumn Left-Handed Biography": Sixteen years ago, Yonghe County rebelled violently, and the king of Chu Zhuang sent troops to fight. They were defeated seven times in a row. In fact, it was the people of all ethnic groups who helped, repaired, and drove them away.

古文：《地理志》江关都尉治。公孙述名之为白帝，取其王色。
现代文：据《地理志》载，这是江关都尉的治所，公孙述称它为白帝，是以在当地现形的白龙王取名的。
English: According to the "Geography," this was the residence of the governor of Jiangguan, Gongsun, who called it Bai Di, named after the local White Dragon King.

古文：蜀章武二年，刘备为吴所破，改白帝为永安，巴东郡治也。
现代文：蜀国章武二年，刘备被东吴打败，把白帝改名为永安，是巴东郡的治所。
English: In the second year of Zhangwu of Shu, Liu Bei was defeated by Dongwu and changed the name of Baidu to Yongan, which is the capital of Badong County.

古文：汉献帝兴平元年，分巴为二郡，以鱼复为故陵郡。
现代文：汉献帝兴平元年，把巴分为二郡，把鱼复立为故陵郡；赛清向刘璋建议改为巴东郡，治所是白帝城。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xingping of the Han Dynasty, Ba was divided into two counties, and Yu was reinstated as the county of the former imperial mausoleum; Sai Qing suggested to Liu Bei that it should be changed to the county of Badong, and the administrative center was Baidicheng.

古文：蹇胤诉刘璋，改为巴东郡，治白帝山，城周回二百八十步，北缘马岭，接赤岬山，其间平处，南北相去八十五丈，东西七十丈，又东傍东瀼溪，即以为隍。
现代文：城周长二百八十步，北面沿着马岭，与赤押山相接；山间平坦的地方，南北相距八十五丈，东西七十丈；东濒东攘溪，就作为护城河；西南俯临大江，下望令人头晕目眩。
English: The perimeter of the city is 280 paces long. To the north, along the Ma Ling, it is adjacent to Mount Akao. In the flat area between the mountains, the distance between north and south is 85 paces, and the distance between east and west is 70 paces. To the east, it is bordered by the Dongzho River, which serves as a moat. To the southwest, it overlooks the Dajiang River, and the view below is dizzying.

古文：西南临大江，窥之眩目。惟马岭小差委迤。犹斩山为路，羊肠数四，然后得上。
现代文：唯有马岭只是稍稍有点绵延曲折，但也凿山筑路，羊肠小道七转八弯，然后才能上去。
English: Only the horse ridge is just a little bit long and winding, but it is also a mountain road, and the sheep gut path has seven turns and eight bends before it can go up.

古文：益州刺史鲍陋镇此，为谯道福所围，城里无泉，乃南开水门，凿石为函道，上施木天公，直下至江中，有似猿臂相牵，引汲然后得水。
现代文：益州刺史鲍陋镇守在这里，被谁道福所包围。城里没有水，于是在南面开了水门，在岩壁上凿出函道，上面装了木天公，一直放到江里，好像猴子手牵着手那样来汲水，方才弄到了水。
English: There was no water in the city, so they opened the water gate on the south side, dug out a channel on the rock wall, mounted a wooden sky god on it, and placed it in the river, as if monkeys were holding hands to draw water. Only then did they get water.

古文：水门之西，江中有孤石，为淫顶石，冬出水二十余丈，夏则没。亦有裁出处矣。
现代文：水门西面，江中有一块孤石，就是淫预石；冬天露出水面二十余丈，夏天没在水下，也有只露出一点的地方。
English: On the west side of the sluice gate, there is a solitary rock in the river, which is a precursor stone. In winter, it is exposed to the surface of the water for more than 20 meters, and in summer it is not under water, and there is also a place where it is only exposed a little.

古文：县有夷溪，即佷山清江也。《经》所谓夷水出焉。
现代文：县里有夷溪，就是恨山的清江；《水经》里说夷水发源在这里，指的就是此水。
English: In the county, there is the Yixi River, which is the Qingjiang River of the Hanzhong Mountains; the "Water Sutra" says that the source of the Yixi River is here, referring to this water.

古文：江水又东径广溪峡，斯乃三峡之首也。
现代文：江水继续往东流，经过广溪峡，这是三峡的上端。
English: The river continues to flow eastward, passing through Guangxi Gorge, which is the upper end of the Three Gorges.

古文：其间三十里，颓岩倚木，厥势殆交。
现代文：峡长三十里。其间惊险的危岩，斜出的树木，看来几乎两边要互相交接似的。
English: The gorge is thirty miles long, and between the dangerous rocks and the leaning trees, it almost looks as if the two sides are about to meet.

古文：北岸山上有神渊，渊北有白盐崖，高可千余丈，俯临神渊。
现代文：北岸山上有神渊，渊北有白盐崖，高达千余丈，俯临神渊。
English: On the north shore of the mountain there is a divine abyss, and to the north of the abyss there is a white salt cliff, more than a thousand meters high, overlooking the divine abyss.

古文：土人见其高白，故因名之。
现代文：当地人看到它又高又白，所以取了这个名字。
English: Locals saw it as tall and white, hence the name.

古文：天旱，燃木岸上，推其灰烬，下秽渊中，寻即降雨。
现代文：天旱时在岸上焚烧树木，把灰烬推到深潭中，弄脏潭水，不久就会下雨。
English: In times of drought, trees are burned on the shore, and the ashes are pushed into the deep pool, polluting the pool water, and it will soon rain.

古文：常璩曰：县有山泽水神，旱时鸣鼓请雨，则必应嘉泽。
现代文：常壕说：县里有山泽水神，天旱时击鼓求雨，就一定应验，会有甘霖喜降。
English: Changqiao said: There are mountain and lake water gods in the county. When there is a drought, drumming for rain will surely come true, and there will be rain and happiness.

古文：《蜀都赋》所谓应鸣鼓而兴雨也。
现代文：这就是《蜀都赋》所说的：一敲鼓就会下雨。
English: This is what "Shu Du Fu" said: It will rain as soon as the drum is beaten.

古文：峡中有瞿塘、黄龛二滩，夏水回复，沿溯所忌。
现代文：峡中有瞿塘、黄完两处险滩，夏天－洪水激起旋涡，上滩下滩都要提心吊胆。
English: There are two dangerous beaches in the gorge, Qutang and Huangguan. In summer, floods cause whirlpools. Both the upper beach and the lower beach should be concerned.

古文：瞿塘滩上有神庙，尤至灵验。刺史二千石径过，皆不得鸣角伐鼓。
现代文：瞿塘滩上有个神庙，尤其灵验，刺史二千石一级官员经过这里，都不可吹号打鼓。
English: There is a temple on the Qutang Beach, which is particularly effective. If a first-class official with a history of 2,000 koku passes through here, he is not allowed to play the bugle and drum.

古文：商旅上水，恐触石有声，乃以布裹篙足。
现代文：商旅上下水时，怕碰到石头发出声响，就用布包起撑竿的下端。
English: When going up and down the water on a business trip, the lower end of the pole is wrapped in cloth to prevent it from making noise when it hits a rock.

古文：今则不能尔，犹飨荐不辍。
现代文：现在虽不这样做了，但祭祀水神还是没有中断过。
English: Although this is no longer done, the worship of the water deities has not been discontinued.

古文：此峡多猿，猿不生北岸，非惟一处，或有取之，放著北山中，初不闻声，将同狢兽渡汶而不生矣。
现代文：峡中猿猴很多，但北岸却没有猿猴―这里不是仅指某一处。有人捕捉了猿猴放到北山去，却一点也听不到它的叫声了。也许就像貉那样，过了汶水就不能生存了。
English: There are a lot of monkeys in the gorge, but there are no monkeys on the north bank - this is not just a place. Someone caught the monkey and put it on the north mountain, but could not hear its cries at all. Perhaps, like the baboon, it could not survive after the Wen Shui.

古文：其峡，盖自昔禹凿以通江，郭景纯所谓巴东之峡，夏后疏凿者。
现代文：这条山峡大概是从前大禹开凿出来疏导江水的吧。郭景纯也说过，巴东山峡是夏禹王开凿，以疏通水流的。
English: Guo Jingshun also said that the Badong Gorge was dug by King Xia Yu to channel the water flow.

