古文：天下无不是底父母，世间最难得者兄弟。
现代文：天下没有不是的父母，世间最难得的是兄弟。
English: There are no wrong parents in the world, and the rarest thing in the world is a brother.

古文：须贻同气之光，无伤手足之雅。
现代文：必须保持同胞的情谊，互致同气连根的荣光，不要损伤了手足之间的情分。
English: It is necessary to maintain the brotherhood of compatriots, mutually achieve the glory of solidarity, and do not damage the affection between brothers and sisters.

古文：玉昆金友，羡兄弟之俱贤；伯埙仲篪，谓声气之相应。
现代文： 玉昆金友 比喻兄弟皆具才能贤德； 伯埙仲篪 形容兄弟间意气相合亲密无间。
English: Tamukun Jinyu metaphorically said that all brothers have talent and virtue; Haku Chung-soo described the brothers' spirit as close and intimate.

古文：兄弟既翕，谓之花萼相辉；兄弟联芳，谓之棠棣竞秀。
现代文：兄弟之间和睦友爱称为 花萼相辉 ；兄弟都才华横溢流芳于世，称作 棠棣竞秀 。
English: The harmony and friendship between the brothers is called "flower calyx mutual glory"; the brothers are all talented and popular in the world, known as "Tang Xing Xiu."

古文：患难相顾，似鹡鸰之在原；手足分离，如雁行之折翼。
现代文：兄弟之间患难与共，彼此体恤称为 鹡鸰在原 ；兄弟分离如同飞雁被折断了翅膀。
English: Brothers share the hardships together, and call each other "brothers in the wilderness"; brothers separated are like geese whose wings are broken.

古文：元方季方俱盛德，祖太丘称为难弟难兄；宋郊宋祁俱中元，当时人号为大宋小宋。
现代文：汉代陈元方、季方皆有美盛之德，他的父亲称他们是 难兄难弟 ；宋代宋郊、宋祁都中状元，当时的人称他们为 大宋小宋 。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Chen Yuanfang and Ji Fang both had the virtue of beauty, and his father called them "difficult brothers"; in the Song Dynasty, the Song Suburbs and the Song Yangtze all had the virtue of beauty, and the people at that time called them "Big Song" and "Small Song."

古文：荀氏兄弟，得八龙之佳誉；河东伯仲，有三凤之美名。
现代文：汉代荀淑育有八子并有才名，赢得八龙的佳誉；唐代薛收与薛德音、薛元敬叔侄三人齐名，有三凤的美名。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Juxu Shuyu had eight sons and was famous for his talent, winning the reputation of the eight dragons; in the Tang Dynasty, Xue Rui, Xue Deyin, Xue Yuanjing and their three nephews were equally famous, and had the reputation of the three phoenixes.

古文：东征破斧，周公大义灭亲；遇贼争死，赵孝以身代弟。
现代文：周公为了社稷大义东征三年，杀了叛乱的弟弟；汉代赵礼遇贼，赵孝欲代弟而死兄弟俩为此而争执。
English: Zhou Gong went on a three-year crusade for social justice and killed his rebellious younger brother; in the Han Dynasty, Zhao Li encountered a thief, and Zhao Xiao wanted to die in his brother's place, and the two brothers quarreled about this.

古文：煮豆燃萁，谓其相害；斗粟尺布，讥其不容。
现代文： 煮豆燃萁 比喻骨肉兄弟自相残害； 斗粟尺布 讥讽兄弟之间互不相容。
English: Boiling beans and burning cocoons are metaphors for fraternal self-mutilation; the poppy scarf satirizes the incompatibility between brothers.

古文：兄弟阋墙，谓兄弟之斗狠；天生羽翼，谓兄弟之相亲。
现代文：兄弟感情生变，互相争强斗狠称为 兄弟阋墙 ； 天生羽翼 ，是说如上天赐予的羽翼，生来便需互相扶持，共同抵御外来的仇敌。
English: Brothers' feelings change, and they fight each other fiercely, which is called "brotherly walls"; natural wings, that is, wings given by heaven, are born with the need to support each other and jointly resist foreign enemies.

古文：姜家大被以同眠，宋君灼艾而分痛。
现代文：后汉姜肱天生友爱，做了长枕大被兄弟同眠；宋太祖用艾叶灼烧自己，来分担弟弟灼艾的痛苦。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Jiang Chen was born with a love of friendship and made a long pillow for his brothers to sleep together; Song Taizu burned himself with mugwort leaves to share the pain of his brother's burning.

古文：田氏分财，忽瘁庭前之荆树；夷齐让国，共采首阳之蕨薇。
现代文：隋朝田氏兄弟分家产，屋前紫荆树忽然枯萎；商末伯夷、叔齐互相让位，商朝亡后共同避居首阳山，采薇菜而食。
English: The brothers of the Sui Asada clan divided the family property, and the bauhinia tree in front of the house suddenly withered; Shangmai Boyi and Uncle Qi gave way to each other, and after the death of the Shang dynasty, they lived together in Shouyang Mountain, picking vegetables and eating them.

古文：虽曰安宁之日，不如友生；其实凡今之人，莫如兄弟。
现代文：虽说在安宁的日子里，兄弟还没有朋友亲密，但在世上却没有什么比得上兄弟之间情谊的深重。
English: There is nothing in the world like the affection of brothers, though in quiet days they have not friends near and dear.

