古文：韦世康韦世康，京兆杜陵人也，世为关右著姓。
现代文：韦世康，京兆杜陵人，韦家世世代代都是关内的大姓。
English: Wei Shikang, a resident of Jingzha Tulin, and the Wei family have been the biggest surnames in Guanai for generations.

古文：祖旭，魏南幽州刺史。
现代文：祖父韦旭，魏国南幽州刺史。
English: Grandfather Wei Xu, Wei Guo Nan Yuzhou stabbing history.

古文：父夐，隐居不仕，魏、周二代，十征不出，号为逍遥公。
现代文：父亲韦夐，隐居不仕，在北魏、北周两代，十次征他出仕，他都不出山，世人称之为 逍遥公 。
English: In the Northern Wei and Northern Zhou dynasties, his father Wei Wei, who lived in seclusion, was called to serve ten times. He never went out of the mountains, and the world called him "Prodigal."

古文：世康幼而沉敏，有器度。
现代文：世康小时即沉稳敏捷，有器度。
English: The World Health Organization (WHO) is calm, steady, agile, and organized.

古文：年十岁，州辟主簿。
现代文：十岁，州里任他为主簿。
English: At the age of ten, the state appointed him as the head librarian.

古文：在魏，弱冠为直寝，封汉安县公，尚周文帝女襄乐公主，授仪同三司。
现代文：在北魏，他二十岁左右，即在皇宫值班，封为汉安县公，娶周文帝之女襄乐公主，授为仪同三司。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, when he was about twenty years old, he was on duty at the imperial palace, was named the Han'an County official, married Princess Xiangle, the daughter of Emperor Zhouwen, and was awarded the title of the third division.

古文：后仕周，自典祠下大夫历沔、硖二州刺史。
现代文：后仕北周，从任典祠下大夫，历任沔州、硖州刺史。
English: Later, he served as Bei Zhou, from Ren Dynasty Shrine, he became a doctor, and successively served as the governor of Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：从武帝平齐，授司州总管长史。
现代文：随周武帝平安北齐，授为司州总管长史。
English: With Emperor Zhou Wu of the Heian Northern Qi Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Sizhou Governor-General.

古文：于时东夏初定，百姓未安，世康绥抚之，士民胥悦。
现代文：那时东夏刚平定，百姓尚未安定下来，韦世康安抚他们，士民都很高兴。
English: At that time, the East Xia had just been pacified, and the people had not yet settled down. Wei Shikang appeased them, and the people were very happy.

古文：岁馀，入为民部中大夫，进位上开府，转司会中大夫。
现代文：一年多后，回京任民部中大夫，升任上开府，转任司会中大夫。
English: More than a year later, he returned to Beijing as a junior doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was promoted to the post of the head of the government, and was transferred to the post of a junior doctor of the Secretariat.

古文：尉迥之作乱也，高祖忧之，谓世康曰： 汾、绛旧是周、齐分界，因此乱阶，恐生摇动。
现代文：尉迟迥造反时，担任北周丞相的隋高祖很担忧，对韦世康说： 汾州、绛州过去是北周、北齐的分界线，那里发生暴乱，恐怕动摇国家。
English: Sui Gaozu, who served as Northern Zhou's prime minister, was very worried when the Northern Zhou rebelled. He said to Wei Shikang: Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou used to be the dividing line between Northern Zhou and Northern Qi. If there is a riot there, I am afraid the country will be shaken.

古文：今以委公，善为吾守。 
现代文：现在我把那里委托给你，请你好好给我守住。 
English: Now I am entrusting it to you, so please take good care of it for me.

古文：因授绛州刺史，以雅望镇之，阖境清肃。
现代文：因此让他当绛州刺史，凭他的威望镇守，全境安宁。
English: Therefore, let him be the history of Zhangzhou, with his prestige as the town guard, the whole territory will be peaceful.

古文：世康性恬素好古，不以得丧干怀。
现代文：韦世康生性恬静好古，不因得失而动脑筋。
English: Wei Shikang is calm and calm, and does not think about gains and losses.

古文：在州尝慨然有止足之志，与子弟书曰： 吾生因绪馀，夙沾缨弁，驱驰不已，四纪于兹。
现代文：在绛州，曾慨然有退隐之志，他给子弟们写信说： 我因生在世家大族，一向蒙受家族恩典，因此为官，到处奔走，到现在已经四、五十年了。
English: In Zhangzhou, he once had the desire to retire, and he wrote to his sons: I have always received family grace because I was born into a large family, so I have been working as an official and running around everywhere, and it has now been forty or fifty years.

古文：亟登衮命，频莅方岳，志除三惑，心慎四知，以不贪而为宝，处膏脂而莫润。
现代文：我总是急急忙忙为王命奔走，频繁地镇守地方，志在除掉三惑，心里慎重地守着四知，以不贪为宝，身处肥缺而一无所取。
English: I am always in a hurry to run for the king's life, frequently guarding the place, aiming to eliminate the three confusions, carefully guarding the four knowledge in my heart, taking non-greed as a treasure, and gaining nothing in a time of scarcity.

古文：如斯之事，颇为时悉。
现代文：这些事情，颇为时人知晓。
English: These things are pretty well known.

古文：今耄虽未及，壮年已谢，霜早梧楸，风先蒲柳。
现代文：现在我虽未老，但壮年已经过去，寒霜先打梧桐，北风早摧蒲柳。
English: Although I am not old now, my prime has already passed. The cold frost first hit the sycamore, and the north wind soon destroyed the willow.

古文：眼暗更剧，不见细书，足疾弥增，非可趋走。
现代文：我的眼睛更加昏花，已经看不到小字了；足疾更厉害，不能快走了。
English: My eyes are more dim, and I can no longer see the fine print; my foot is worse, and I can't walk fast.

古文：禄岂须多，防满则退，年不待暮，有疾便辞。
现代文：爵禄怎能要多，为了防止满盈应该退让；年岁不必暮年，有病就辞职。
English: How can you ask for more salary, in order to prevent fullness, you should concede; you don't have to be in your twilight years, you can resign if you are ill.

古文：况娘春秋已高，温清宜奉，晨昏有阙，罪在我躬。
现代文：何况我的老母年事已高，我应该好好地侍奉她，早晚侍奉有缺，就是我的罪过。
English: Besides, my old mother is very old. I should serve her well. If I fail to serve her, it is my fault.

古文：今世穆、世文并从戎役，吾与世冲复婴远任，陟岵瞻望，此情弥切，桓山之悲，倍深常恋。
现代文：现在，世穆、世文都已从军，我和世冲又都在远地作官，登高眺望故乡，退隐回乡之情更加迫切。桓山之悲，比以前更深。
English: Now that Shimo and Shibun have both joined the military, and Shichong and I have both served as officials in faraway places, it is even more urgent for us to retire and return to our hometown. The sorrow of Mt. Kansai is deeper than before.

古文：意欲上闻，乞遵养礼，未访汝等，故遣此及。
现代文：我想上达天子，请他按养亲之礼，放我回家侍奉老母。
English: I want to reach the Son of Heaven and ask him to let me go home to serve my old mother as a gift for raising a family.

古文：兴言远慕，感咽难胜。 
现代文：没和你们商量，所以让人送这封信。
English: I didn't consult with you, so I had someone deliver this letter.

古文：诸弟报以事恐难遂，于是乃止。
现代文：我写此信时，心在遥远的故乡，感叹悲戚之情，实在让我无法承受。 
English: As I write this letter, my heart is in my distant hometown, lamenting the feelings of grief, which is really unbearable for me.

古文：在任数年，有惠政，奏课连最，擢为礼部尚书。
现代文：他的弟弟们以为，退休之事恐怕难以办成，于是作罢。他在任几年，有仁政惠风，赋税也连年交得最多，被提升为礼部尚书。
English: His younger brothers thought that it would be difficult for him to retire, so they gave up. He was in office for several years, had a benevolent political climate, and paid the most taxes year after year. He was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：世康寡嗜欲，不慕贵势，未尝以位望矜物。
现代文：世康清心寡欲，不慕权贵，未曾因自己地位、威望高而看不起他人。
English: World Health Organization is pure-hearted and averse to covetousness, does not admire the powerful and the noble, and has never looked down on others because of its high status and prestige.

古文：闻人之善，若己有之，亦不显人过咎，以求名誉。
现代文：听说人家有长处，就像自己有那样高兴，也不显示人家的过失，以求取名誉。
English: When he hears of a man's strength, he rejoices as if it were his own, and he does not expose another's faults in order to gain honor.

古文：寻进爵上庸郡公，加邑至二千五百户。
现代文：不久晋爵为上庸郡公，增加食邑到二千五百户。
English: Soon after, Jinjie became the county magistrate of Shangyong County and increased the number of food villages to 2,500.

古文：其年转吏部尚书，馀官如故。
现代文：这年转任吏部尚书，其他官职依旧。
English: This year, he was transferred to the Ministry of Justice, and his other posts remained the same.

古文：四年，丁母忧去职。
现代文：开皇四年，因母丧离职。
English: Four years into his reign, he left office due to the death of his mother.

古文：未期，起令视事。
现代文：不到一年，朝廷要他复职管事。
English: Less than a year later, the imperial court asked him to resume his duties.

古文：世康固请，乞终私制，上不许。
现代文：世康坚持请求皇上下制让他退休，皇上不同意。
English: The World Health Organization insisted on asking the emperor to let him retire, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：世康之在吏部，选用平允，请托不行。
现代文：世康在吏部时，选人任官公平，请求、托人之事行不通。
English: When the World Health Organization was in the personnel department, the selection of personnel and the appointment of officials were fair, and the request and entrustment of personnel did not work.

古文：开皇七年，将事江南，议重方镇，拜襄州刺史。
现代文：开皇七年，将到江南任职，当时朝中议论，要重视方镇，于是授他襄州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of the emperor's reign, he will serve in the south of the Yangtze River. At that time, the DPRK and China discussed the importance of Fangzhen, so he was awarded the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：坐事免。
现代文：因牵连他事被免官。
English: He was removed from office as a result of his conviction.

古文：未几，授安州总管，寻迁为信州总管。
现代文：不久，授他为安州总管，后又迁任信州总管。
English: Soon, he was given the post of Anzhou chief administrator, and later moved to Shinshu chief administrator.

古文：十三年，入朝，复拜吏部尚书。
现代文：开皇十三年，回京入朝，重授他为吏部尚书。
English: In the thirteenth year of the emperor's reign, he returned to Beijing to enter the imperial court, and he was re-awarded the title of the official.

古文：前后十余年间，多所进拔，朝廷称为廉平。
现代文：前后十几年间，他多有奖掖后进之事，朝廷称他廉洁、公平。
English: Over the past dozen years, he has received many awards and promotions, and the Imperial Court has called him honest and fair.

古文：尝因休暇，谓子弟曰： 吾闻功遂身退，古人常道。
现代文：他曾在休闲时，对子弟们说： 我听说，功成身退，这是古人的常道。
English: When he was at leisure, he once said to his children: I have heard that it is the common practice of the ancients to retire after achieving great success.

古文：今年将耳顺，志在悬车，汝辈以为云何？ 
现代文：现在我年龄快到六十，我想辞去官职，回家闲居，你们认为怎样？ 
English: Now that I am nearing sixty, I want to resign from my post and go back to my home. What do you think?

古文：子福嗣答曰： 大人澡身浴德，名立官成，盈满之诚，先哲所重。
现代文：他儿子韦福嗣回答说： 大人修身养德，名立官成，防止盈满的告诫，这是先哲所重视的。
English: His son, Wei Fuzhi, replied, "Adult cultivation of the body and the cultivation of virtue, the establishment of fame and success, and the prevention of fullness are the warnings that the ancients attach importance to.

古文：欲追踪二疏，伏奉尊命。 
现代文：您想学习二疏，那就按您的意思办吧。 
English: If you want to learn Nisho, then do as you please.

古文：后因侍宴，世康再拜陈让曰： 臣无尺寸之功，位亚台铉。
现代文：后来因侍奉皇上饮宴，韦世康又请求辞职，他说： 我无尺寸之功，但地位却仅在宰相之下。
English: Later, Wei Shikang asked to resign because he had served the emperor at a banquet. He said, "I have no merit in size, but my position is only below the prime minister."

古文：今犬马齿濆，不益明时，恐先朝露，无以塞责。
现代文：现在我已年老，对这个圣明的时代没有什么作用，恐怕先于朝露早早死去，无法对朝廷作交待。
English: Now that I am old, I have no role to play in this sacred era, and I am afraid that I will die early, before the morning dew, and will not be able to report to the imperial court.

古文：愿乞骸骨，退避贤能。 
现代文：我想请求退休，以让贤士出头。 
English: I'd like to ask for retirement so that the good guys can take over.

古文：上曰： 朕夙夜庶几，求贤若渴，冀与公共治天下，以致太平。
现代文：皇上说： 我日思夜想，求贤若渴，想和你共治天下，以求太平。
English: The emperor said, "I think about you day and night, and I long for you, I want to rule the world with you, and I want peace."

古文：今之所请，深乖本望，纵令筋骨衰谢，犹屈公卧治一隅。 
现代文：你今天的请求，与我的本意完全不符。即使你筋骨衰老，我仍想委屈你，让你睡着治理一方。 
English: Your request today is completely inconsistent with my intention. Even if you are old, I still want to wrong you and let you sleep to rule the party.

古文：于是出拜荆州总管。
现代文：于是让他出京任荆州总管。
English: So he sent him to Beijing to be the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：时天下唯置四大总管，并、扬、益三州，并亲王临统，唯荆州委于世康，时论以为美。
现代文：当时天下只设了四大总管，并州、扬州、益州三州，都是亲王统帅，只有荆州交给韦世康，当时人们传为美谈。
English: At that time, there were only four major headquarters in the world, and the three states of Ganzhou, Yangzhou and Yizhou were all prince generals, and only Jingzhou was handed over to Wei Shikang. At that time, people said it was a beautiful story.

古文：世康为政简静，百姓爱悦，合境无讼。
现代文：世康为政清静简单，老百姓很喜欢，全境均无诉讼。
English: The country's healthcare system is clean, quiet, and simple, and the people like it very much. There are no lawsuits in the whole territory.

古文：十七年，卒于州，时年六十七。
现代文：开皇十七年，在荆州去世，时年六十七岁。
English: In the seventeenth year of the emperor's reign, he died in Jingzhou at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：上闻而痛惜之，赠赙甚厚。
现代文：皇上听到消息，深感痛惜，赠送了很多财物。
English: When the Emperor heard the news, he was deeply sorry and gave away a lot of property.

古文：赠大将军，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠大将军名号，谥号叫做 文 。
English: He was posthumously given the title of general, and his nickname was Wen.

古文：世康性孝友，初以诸弟位并隆贵，独季弟世约宦途不达，共推父时田宅尽以与之，世多其义。
现代文：韦世康生性孝顺友善。当初因各位兄弟都很显达，只有小弟弟韦世约仕途不通达，兄弟们都把父亲留下的田地财产全部给小弟弟。
English: Wei Shikang's nature is filial, obedient and friendly. At first, because all the brothers were very accomplished, only the little brother Wei Shiyou did not succeed, and the brothers all gave the field property left by their father to the little brother.

古文：长子福子，官至司隶别驾。
现代文：世人都夸奖他们仁义。他的长子韦福子，官至司隶别驾。
English: His eldest son, Wei Fu Zi, was a high-ranking official.

古文：次子福嗣，仕至内史舍人，后以罪黜。
现代文：次子韦福嗣，官至内史舍人，后来因犯罪被废黜。
English: The second son, Wei Fuzhi, was a bureaucrat who disdained history, and was later deposed for his crimes.

古文：杨玄感之作乱也，以兵逼东都，福嗣从卫玄战于城北，军败，为玄感所擒，令作文檄，辞甚不逊。
现代文：杨玄感造反时，率兵逼进东都洛阳，韦福嗣随卫玄在城北作战，官军失败，福嗣被杨玄感抓住。玄感让他作檄文，他的言辞很不像话。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, he led his troops into the eastern capital Luoyang. Wei Fuzhi followed Wei Xuan to fight in the north of the city. The government army failed, and Fuzhi was caught by Yang Xuanxuan. Xuanxuan asked him to write an apology, and his words were very unseemly.

古文：寻背玄感还东都，帝衔之不已，车裂于高阳。
现代文：继而背叛杨玄感回到东都，皇帝记恨不已，把他车裂于高阳。
English: Subsequently, he betrayed Yang Xuanxuan and returned to Dongdu. The emperor hated him and broke his chariot in Gaoyang.

古文：少子福奖，通事舍人，在东都与玄感战没。
现代文：韦世康的小儿子韦福奖，任通事舍人。在东都，福奖与玄感作战阵亡。
English: Wei Shikang's youngest son, Wei Fuxi, was a reluctant general. In Dongdu, Fuxi was killed in battle with Xuanquan.

古文：洸字世穆，性刚毅，有器干，少便弓马。
现代文：韦洸字世穆，生性刚毅，有才干，小时即熟悉弓马。
English: Wei Xuan, a world-class scholar, is naturally strong-willed and talented. He was familiar with the bow and arrow at an early age.

古文：仕周，释褐直寝上士。数从征伐，累迁开府，赐爵卫国县公，邑千二百户。
现代文：仕北周，开始当直寝上士，几次跟随出征，累次升迁到任开府，赐爵位为卫国县公，食邑一千二百户。
English: He served in Northern Zhou, starting as a staff sergeant, several times following the expedition, repeatedly promoted to Renkaifu, awarded the title of Weiguo County official, and served 1,200 households.

古文：高祖为丞相，从季父孝宽击尉迥于相州，以功拜柱国，进封襄阳郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相后，他随小叔父韦孝宽到相州进攻尉迟迥，因战功授为柱国，晋爵为襄阳郡公，食邑二千户。
English: After Sui Gaozu became the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, he followed his uncle Wei Xiaokuan to Xiangzhou, where he served as an attack lieutenant. He was awarded the title of "pillar of the country" for his military exploits, the title of "Prince of Xiangyang County" and the title of "feeder of 2,000 households."

古文：时突厥寇边，皇太子屯咸阳，令洸统兵出原州道，与虏相遇，击破之。
现代文：当时突厥进犯边塞，皇太子驻扎在咸阳，命令韦洸统领兵马出原州道，与突厥人相遇，打败敌人。
English: At that time, the Turks invaded the border fortress, and the crown prince was stationed in Xianyang. He ordered General Wei Wei to lead the soldiers out of the original state road, meet with the Turks, and defeat the enemy.

古文：寻拜江陵总管。
现代文：继而授他为江陵总管。
English: He was subsequently appointed as the chief administrator of Gangneung.

古文：未几，以母疾征还。
现代文：不久，因母亲生病被调回京师。
English: Soon, he was transferred back to the capital due to his mother's illness.

古文：俄拜安州总管。
现代文：继而授他为安州总管。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed as the General Manager of Anzhou.

古文：伐陈之役，领行军总管。
现代文：平定陈国时，他兼任行军总管。
English: When Chen Guo was subdued, he also served as the commander-in-chief of the march.

古文：及陈平，拜江州总管，率步骑二万，略定九江。
现代文：平定陈国后，授他为江州总管，率步兵、骑兵二万，平定九江。
English: After subduing Chen Guo, he was given the title of the Chief Administrator of Jiangsu Province. He led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to subdue Jiujiang.

古文：陈豫章太守徐璒据郡持两端，洸遣开府吕昂、长史冯世基以兵相继而进。
现代文：陈国的豫章太守徐王登，占据九江，心怀二意。韦洸派开府吕昂、长史冯世基率兵相继而进。
English: Xu Wangden, the governor of Chen's Yuzhang Dajie, occupied Jiujiang with a double mind. Wei Wei sent troops led by the governor of Lu'ang, Changshi Feng Shiji, one after another.

古文：既至城下，璒伪降，其夜率所部二千人袭击昂。
现代文：既到城下，徐王登装作投降，当夜率所部二千人袭击吕昂。
English: Once under the city, Xu Wangden pretended to surrender. That night, two thousand people from the headquarters attacked Lu'an.

古文：昂与世基合击，大破之，擒璒于阵。
现代文：吕昂与冯世基合力进攻，大破敌军，在阵前活捉了徐王登。
English: Lü An and Feng Shiji jointly attacked, defeated the enemy army, and captured Xu Wangden before the battle.

古文：高梁女子洗氏率众迎洸，遂进图岭南。
现代文：高梁的女子洗氏率众迎接韦洸，于是进而率部进取岭南。
English: Gaoliang's woman, Saizhi, led the crowd to welcome Wei Wei, and then led the group to enter Lingnan.

古文：上遣洸书曰： 公鸿勋大业，名高望重，率将戎旅，抚慰彼方，风行电扫，咸应稽服。
现代文：皇上送书信给韦洸说： 你功勋很大，名望很高，率领劲旅，安抚那里。你风行电扫，他们都应顺服。
English: The emperor sent a letter to Wei Wei, saying: Your merits are great, your reputation is high, lead a vigorous journey, pacify there. Your popularity is sweeping, they should all obey.

古文：若使干戈不用，兆庶获安，方副朕怀，是公之力。 
现代文：如果你不用干戈，百姓得到安宁，这才符合我心，是你的大力。 
English: If you don't have to go to war and the people have peace, that's what's in my heart, that's your strength.

古文：至广州，说陈渝州都督王猛下之，岭表皆定。
现代文：韦洸到了广州，劝说陈国的渝州都督王猛投降，岭南都被平定。
English: Wei Wei arrived in Guangzhou and persuaded Wang Meng, the governor of Yuzhou in the State of Chen, to surrender. Lingnan was pacified.

古文：上闻而大悦，许以便宜从事。
现代文：皇上知道了，十分高兴，同意他见机行事。
English: When the Emperor learned of this, he was very pleased and agreed to act as he saw fit.

古文：洸所绥集二十四州，拜广州总管。
现代文：韦洸安定了二十四个州，授他为广州总管。
English: Wei Wei stabilized twenty-four states, and he was awarded the title of General Manager of Guangzhou.

古文：上以其父身死王事，拜协柱国。
现代文：一年多后，番禺人王仲宣聚众造反，率部包围了韦洸，韦洸率部抵抗时，被流矢射中而去世。
English: More than a year later, Wang Zhongxuan, a resident of Panyu, rallied the people to rebel, and his troops surrounded Wei Xuan. When Wei Xuan's troops resisted, he was shot by an arrow and died.

古文：后历定、息、秦三州刺史，皆有能名，卒官。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为上柱国，赐他家绵绢上万段。谥号叫 敬 。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of Shangzhu Guo and granted his family tens of thousands of ducats. His posthumous name was Jing.

古文：艺字世文，少受业国子。
现代文：他儿子韦协继承爵禄。韦艺字世文，小时受学业于国子。
English: His son Wei Xie inherited the peerage. Wei Yiyi, also known as World Literature, received his early education in Kuniko.

古文：周武帝时，数以军功致位上仪同，赐爵修武县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：北周武帝时，几次因军功升迁，当了上仪同，赐爵为修武县侯，食邑八百户。
English: During the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was promoted several times due to his military achievements. He was awarded the title of Shang Yi Tong, given the title of Lord of Xiuwu County, and became the ruler of 800 households.

古文：授左旅下大夫。
现代文：授为左旅下大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Zuo Liangxing Doctor.

古文：出为魏郡太守。
现代文：出京任魏郡太守。
English: Xu Yi went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Wei County.

古文：及高祖为丞相，尉迥险图不轨，朝廷微知之，遣艺季父孝宽驰往代迥。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，尉迟迥图谋不轨，朝廷也略略知晓。派韦艺的小叔父韦孝宽去代替尉迟迥。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he sent Wei Yi's little uncle Wei Xiaokang to replace him.

古文：孝宽将至鄴，因诈病，止传舍，从迥求药，以察其变。
现代文：孝宽快到邺下时，假装有病，住在驿站里，派人到尉迟迥处求药，以观其动静。
English: When Takahiro was about to be discharged, he pretended to be ill and lived in a nursing home. He sent someone to the nursing home to ask for medicine and watch his movements.

古文：迥遣艺迎孝宽。
现代文：尉迟迥派韦艺迎接韦孝宽。
English: Wei Wei sent Wei Yi to meet Wei Xiaokang.

古文：孝宽问迥所为，艺党于迥，不以实答。
现代文：孝宽问尉迟迥的所作所为，韦艺与尉迟迥结党，不照实说。
English: When Xiaokuan asked Wei Yiyi what he had done, Wei Yiyi said that he had formed a party with Wei Yiyi, which was not true.

古文：孝宽怒，将斩之，艺惧，乃言迥反状。
现代文：孝宽发了火，要杀他，韦艺害怕，才说出尉迟迥造反的情状。
English: Xiao Guang was enraged and wanted to kill him, Wei Yi was afraid, and only then did he reveal the circumstances of the lieutenant's rebellion.

古文：孝宽于是将艺西遁，每至亭驿，辄尽驱传马而去。复谓驿司曰： 蜀公将至，宜速具酒食。 
现代文：韦孝宽于是带着韦艺往西逃，每到一个驿站，就把里头的马全部赶走，又对驿站官员说： 蜀公尉迟迥快来了，应快快准备酒食。 
English: Wei Xiaokuan then fled to the west with Wei Yi. Whenever he came to a post station, he drove away all the horses inside. He also said to the post station officials: "Shu Gongfei is coming soon, you should quickly prepare food and drink."

古文：迥寻遣骑追孝宽，追人至驿，辄逢盛馔，又无马，遂迟留不进，孝宽与艺由是得免。
现代文：尉迟迥继而派人追孝宽。追兵到了驿站，就遇上好酒好菜，又无马可换，于是迟留不进，韦孝宽与韦艺这才免于一死。
English: Wei Xiaokuan and Wei Yi were only saved from death when Wei Xiaokuan sent someone to chase after Wei Xiaokuan. When Wei Xiaokuan's pursuers arrived at the station, they were met with good wine and good food, and there was no horse to change, so Wei Xiaokuan and Wei Yi were delayed.

古文：高祖以孝宽故，弗问艺之罪，加授上开府，即从孝宽击迥。
现代文：高祖因韦孝宽的缘故，不追究韦艺的罪过，还授他上开府，让他立即随韦孝宽进攻尉迟迥。
English: Gao Zu did not investigate Wei Yi's crime because of Wei Xiaokuan's success, and also gave him the title of Shangkaifu, so that he could immediately follow Wei Xiaokuan to attack the enemy.

古文：及破尉惇，平相州，皆有力焉。
现代文：打破尉迟迥，平定相州，韦艺都有功。
English: Wei Yi contributed to breaking the feudal lags, pacifying the states, and Wei Yi's art.

古文：以功进位上大将军，改封武威县公，邑千户。
现代文：韦艺因功升任上大将军，改封为武威县公，食邑一千户。
English: Wei Yiyi was promoted to the post of senior general for his merits, and changed his title to the governor of Wuwei County, with more than a thousand households in the county.

古文：以修武县侯别封一子。高祖受禅，进封魏兴郡公。
现代文：另封他一子为修武县侯爵。高祖受禅登基后，韦艺晋爵为魏兴郡公。
English: In addition, his only son was named the Marquis of Shouwu County. After Gao Zu was enthroned, Wei Yi Jinjie became the Duke of Wei Xing County.

古文：岁馀，拜齐州刺史。
现代文：一年多后，授为齐州刺史。
English: More than a year later, he was awarded the title of "Chizhou stabbing history."

古文：为政清简，士庶怀惠。
现代文：他为政清廉简静，士民都很怀念他的恩惠。
English: He was a clean and simple politician, and the people all miss his benevolence.

古文：在职数年，迁营州总管。
现代文：在职几年，迁任营州总管。
English: After several years of service, he was transferred to the post of Yingzhou general manager.

古文：艺容貌瑰伟，每夷狄参谒，必整仪卫，盛服以见之，独坐满一榻。番人畏惧，莫敢仰视。
现代文：韦艺身材魁伟，每次有夷人、狄人参见，他都要整仪卫，穿官服，以召见他们。他自己独坐于一榻，番人惧怕他，不敢抬头看。
English: Wei Yi is a tall man. Every time he sees a barbarian or a barbarian, he has to straighten his ceremonial guard and wear an official uniform to summon them. He sits alone in a bunk bed. The guards are afraid of him and dare not look up.

古文：而大治产业，与北夷贸易，家资巨万，颇为清论所讥。
现代文：但他大治家产，与北方夷人贸易，家产巨万，因此颇为世人讥讽。
English: However, he managed his family's wealth well, traded with the northern barbarians, and amassed a huge fortune. As a result, he was quite the target of ridicule.

古文：开皇十五年卒官，时年五十八。
现代文：开皇十五年，在官任上去世，时年五十八岁。
English: In the fifteenth year of the emperor's reign, he died in office, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：谥曰怀。
现代文：谥号为 怀 。
English: The nickname stuck.

古文：冲字世冲，少以名家子，在周释褐卫公府礼曹参军。
现代文：韦冲字世冲。小时，因是名门子弟，在北周开始当卫公府礼曹参军。
English: Wei Chong, also known as Shichong. At an early age, because he was the son of a noble family, he began to join the army as a sergeant of the Civil Guard in Northern Zhou.

古文：后从大将军元定渡江伐陈，为陈人所虏，周武帝以币赎而还之。
现代文：后随大将军元定渡江讨伐陈国，被陈国人抓住。周武帝用钱把他赎回。
English: Later, he followed the general Yuan Ding to cross the Yangtze River to fight against Chen and was captured by the Chen people. Emperor Zhou used money to ransom him.

古文：帝复令冲以马千匹使于陈，以赎开府贺拔华等五十人及元定之柩而还。
现代文：武帝又让韦冲带着千匹良马，出使陈国，赎回开府贺拔华等五十人，以及元定的灵柩。
English: Emperor Wu also let Wei Chong take a thousand good horses, send Chen Guo, redeem fifty people such as Kaifu He Bahua, and the original coffin.

古文：冲有辞辩，奉使称旨，累迁少御伯下大夫，加上仪同。
现代文：韦冲会讲话，奉命出使，很合皇上旨意，累次升迁到任少御伯下大夫，加授上仪同。
English: Wei Chong would give a speech, was ordered to send an envoy, and was very much in line with the emperor's will. He was repeatedly promoted to the position of Shao Uncle, and was also awarded the title of Shang Yi Tong.

古文：于时稽胡屡为寇乱，冲自请安集之，因拜汾州刺史。
现代文：那时，稽胡屡为边患，韦冲自己请求去对付他们，因此授他为汾州刺史。
English: At that time, Qihu was often a border problem, Wei Chong himself asked to deal with them, so he was awarded the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：高祖践阼，征为兼散骑常侍，进位开府，赐爵安固县侯。
现代文：隋高祖登基后，调他当散骑常侍，升任开府，赐爵为安固县侯爵。
English: After Sui Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was transferred to be a knight-errant, promoted to the post of Kaifu, and given the title of Marquis of Angu County.

古文：岁馀，发南汾州胡千馀人北筑长城，在途皆亡。
现代文：一年多后，调发南汾州胡人一千多人北筑长城，但在路上，他们都逃跑了。
English: More than a year later, more than a thousand Hu people from southern Luzhou were sent north to build the Great Wall, but on the way, they all ran away.

古文：上呼冲问计，冲曰： 夷狄之性，易为反覆，皆由牧宰不称之所致也。
现代文：皇上叫来韦冲问计，韦冲说： 夷狄人的生性，就是爱反复无常，都是因为地方长官不称职所导致的。
English: The emperor called Wei Chong to inquire, and Wei Chong said: The nature of the Yidi people is to be capricious, which is caused by the incompetence of local governors.

古文：臣请以理绥静，可不劳兵而定。 
现代文：我请求跟他们讲道理，安定他们，可不劳兵而定。 
English: I beg you to go and pacify them with reason, so that the rebellion may be put down without the use of arms.

古文：上然之，因命冲绥怀叛者。
现代文：皇上以为然，因此命令韦冲安抚那些怀叛的人。
English: The emperor thought so, so he ordered Wei Chong to pacify those who harbored rebellion.

古文：月馀皆至，并赴长城，上下书劳勉之。
现代文：过了一个多月，胡人都去修长城。皇上下书慰劳勉励他。
English: After more than a month, Hu Man went to repair the Great Wall. The emperor wrote a letter of consolation to encourage him.

古文：寻拜石州刺史，甚得诸胡欢心。
现代文：继而授他石州刺史，很得诸部胡人的欢心。
English: Subsequently, he was awarded the Shishu Shishi, which was well received by all the Hu people.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：因遭母丧离职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：俄而起为南宁州总管，持节抚慰。
现代文：不久重新作官，当南宁州的总管，持节安抚那里的夷人。
English: Soon he was back in office, as the governor of Nanning, trying to pacify the barbarians there.

古文：复遣柱国王长述以兵继进。
现代文：又让柱国王长述率兵跟着去。
English: He also asked the pillar king, Chang Su, to lead the soldiers to follow him.

古文：冲上表固让。
现代文：韦冲上表朝廷，推辞当总管。
English: Wei rushed to the front of the imperial court and resigned as chief steward.

古文：诏曰： 西南夷裔，屡有生梗，每相残贼，朕甚愍之，已命戎徒，清抚边服。以开府器干堪济，识略英远，军旅事重，故以相任。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 西南方的夷人，屡屡有梗阻，常常互相残杀，我很怜悯他们，已下令部队，镇守、安抚那里，因为开府你才干足以胜任此职，你见识远大，军旅是大事，所以把它交给你。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "The barbarians in the southwest have repeatedly obstructed and often killed each other. I feel very sorry for them. I have ordered troops to guard and pacify the town. Since you are talented enough to hold this post, you are far-sighted, and military travel is a big deal, I will give it to you.

古文：知在艰疚，日月未多，金革夺情，盖有通式。
现代文：我知道你还在服丧，但是军旅大事要压倒私人的感情，这是有通例的。
English: I know you're still in mourning, but it's customary for military events to override personal feelings.

古文：宜自抑割，即膺往旨。 
现代文：你应该克制自己，立即去到任。 
English: You should restrain yourself and go to work immediately.

古文：冲既至南宁，渠帅爨震及西爨首领皆诣府参谒。
现代文：韦冲到了南宁，渠帅爨震和西爨首领都到他府上拜见他。
English: Wei rushed to Nanning, and the leaders of Shuai and Xidi all went to his palace to see him.

古文：上大悦，下诏褒扬之。
现代文：皇上很高兴，下诏书表扬他。
English: The Emperor was delighted, and praised him in the next imperial edict.

古文：其兄子伯仁，随冲在府，掠人之妻，士卒纵暴，边人失望。
现代文：他哥哥的儿子韦伯仁，随韦冲在总管府中。伯仁抢夺他人的妻子，士兵又放纵，边疆人很失望。
English: His brother's son, Wei Bo Ren, followed Wei Chong in the headquarters. Bo Ren robbed other people's wives, soldiers were indulgent, and the frontiersmen were disappointed.

古文：上闻而大怒，令蜀王秀治其事。
现代文：皇上知道了，十分生气，命令蜀王杨秀治其罪。
English: When the emperor found out, he was very angry and ordered Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, to punish him for his crime.

古文：益州长史元岩，性方正，案冲无所宽贷，冲竟坐免。
现代文：益州长史元岩，生性方正，调查韦冲之事，毫不讲客气，韦冲竟受连累免职。
English: Governor Shi Yuanyan, who was born in Fangzheng, investigated Wei Chong, and, to say the least, Wei Chong was removed from office.

古文：其弟太子洗马世约，谮岩于皇太子。
现代文：韦冲之弟、太子洗马韦世约，在皇太子面前进元岩的谗言。
English: Wei Chong's younger brother, the crown prince Shima Wei Shiyou, in front of the crown prince Shingenyan's slander.

古文：上谓太子曰： 古人有沽酒酸而不售者，为噬犬耳。
现代文：皇上对太子说： 古人有卖酒因酒酸而卖不出去的，只是因为被狗舔酒罢了。
English: The emperor said to the prince, "In ancient times, people couldn't sell wine because of the tartness of the alcohol, but that was just because the dogs licked the wine.

古文：今何用世约乎？
现代文：你现在何必用韦世约？
English: Why do you have to use Wei Shiyou now?

古文：适累汝也。 
现代文：这是让他连累你呀！ 
English: That's letting him string you along!

古文：世约遂除名。
现代文：韦世约于是被除名。
English: Wei Shiyu was then expelled.

古文：后数载，令冲检校括州事。
现代文：几年后，朝廷令韦冲代理括州事。
English: A few years later, the imperial court ordered Wei Chong to act as the representative of the state affairs.

古文：时东阳贼帅陶子定、吴州贼帅罗慧方并聚众为乱，攻围婺州永康、乌程诸县，冲率兵击破之。
现代文：当时东阳贼帅陶子定、吴州贼帅罗慧方都聚众造反，围攻婺州的永康、乌程等县。韦冲率兵打败了他们。
English: At that time, the Dongyang bandit leader Tao Zi Ding and the Wuzhou bandit leader Luo Hui gathered together to rebel and besieged Yongkang, Wucheng and other counties in Ganzhou. Wei Chong led the troops to defeat them.

古文：改封义丰县候，检校泉州事。
现代文：改封韦冲为义丰县侯爵，代理泉州事。
English: Wei Chong's title was changed to Marquis of Yifeng County, acting on behalf of Quanzhou.

古文：寻拜营州总管。
现代文：不久授他为营州总管。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Yingzhou.

古文：冲容貌都雅，宽厚得众心。
现代文：韦冲容貌文雅，为人宽厚，深得众人之心。
English: Wei Chong has an elegant appearance, is a generous person, and has won the hearts of many people.

古文：怀抚靺鞨、契丹，皆能致其死力。
现代文：他安抚靺鞨、契丹，都能让他们拼死效力。
English: He can appease the mujahideen and the Khitan and make them fight to the death.

古文：奚、畏惧，朝贡相续。
现代文：奚人、靅人都怕他，不断入朝进贡。
English: The people of both Han and Song were afraid of him and constantly paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：高丽尝入寇，冲率兵击走之。
现代文：高丽人曾入侵，韦冲率兵打败他们。
English: The Goryeo people once invaded, and Wei Chong led an army to defeat them.

古文：仁寿中，高祖为豫章王暕纳冲女为妃，征拜民部尚书。
现代文：仁寿中，高祖为豫州王杨日柬娶韦冲之女为王妃，调韦冲当民部尚书。
English: In Ren Shou, Gao Zu married the daughter of Wei Chong as the princess for the king of Yuzhou, Yang Rihkham, and transferred Wei Chong to the Ministry of People's Affairs.

古文：未几，卒，时年六十六。
现代文：不久，韦冲去世，时年六十六岁。
English: Soon after, Wei Chong died at the age of 66.

古文：少子挺，最知名。
现代文：他小儿子韦挺，诸子中最有名。
English: His youngest son, Veytin, is the most famous of them all.

古文：寿字世龄。
现代文：韦寿字世龄。
English: Wei Shou is the Chinese character for longevity.

古文：父孝宽，周上柱国、郧国公。
现代文：父亲韦孝宽，北周的上柱国、郧国公。
English: His father, Wei Xiaokuan, was the ruler of Shangzhu Province and Shandong Province in northern Zhou.

古文：寿在周，以贵公子，早有令誉，为右侍上士，迁千牛备身。
现代文：韦寿在北周，因是贵公子，早有美名，任右侍上士，后升任千牛备身。
English: Wei Shou was in the North Zhou, because he was a noble man, he had a good reputation, he was appointed as a right-hand man staff sergeant, and later he was promoted to Qianyu bodyguard.

古文：赵王为雍州牧，引为主簿。寻迁少御伯。
现代文：赵王为雍州牧，召韦寿为主簿，不久升任少御伯。
English: Zhao Wang was the herdsman of Yongzhou, called Wei Shou as his master, and was soon promoted to the position of Shao Guobang.

古文：武帝亲征高氏，拜京兆尹，委以后事。
现代文：周武帝亲征高氏时，授他为京兆尹，把留守京城的事托付给他。
English: When Emperor Zhou Wu personally recruited Gao, he gave him the title of Jing Zhaoyun and entrusted him with the task of remaining in Beijing.

古文：以父军功，赐爵永安县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：因他父亲的军功，他被赐为永安县侯爵，食邑八百户。
English: Because of his father's military service, he was given the title of marquis of Yong'an County, with 800 households.

古文：高祖为丞相，以其父平尉迥，拜寿仪同三司，进封滑国公，邑五千户。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，因他父亲平定了尉迟迥，授韦寿仪同三司，晋爵为滑国公，食邑五千户。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, because of his father's victory, he was given the title of "Lieutenant" (尉迟), the title of "Wai Shou Yi" (授韦寿儀) and the title of "Third Secretary" (三司), the title of "Prince" (晋爵) and the title of "Governor" (滑国公), and he had to feed 5,000 households.

古文：俄以父丧去职。
现代文：不久因父丧离职。
English: He left the company shortly after his father's death.

古文：高祖爱禅，起令视事，寻迁恆、毛二州刺史，颇有治名。
现代文：隋高祖受禅后，让他出来复职管事，继而任恒州、毛州二州刺史，很有政声。
English: After Sui Gaozhu received Zen, he was reinstated as a steward, and then appointed as the governor of the two states of Hengzhou and Maozhou. He had a strong political voice.

古文：开皇十年，以疾征还，卒于家，时年四十二。
现代文：开皇十年，因病调回京师，在家中去世，时年四十二岁。
English: In the tenth year of the emperor's reign, he was transferred back to Beijing due to illness, and died at home, at the age of forty-two.

古文：谥曰定。
现代文：谥号叫 定 。
English: The nickname is final.

古文：仁寿中，高祖为晋王昭纳其女为妃。
现代文：仁寿中，高祖为晋王杨昭娶他女儿为王妃。
English: During his benevolent life, Gao Zu married Yang Zhao, the King of Jin, to his daughter.

古文：以其子保峦嗣。
现代文：让他的儿子韦保峦继承爵禄。
English: Let his son Wei Baojun inherit the peerage.

