古文：法制不议，则民不相私。刑杀毋赦，则民不偷于为善。爵禄毋假。则下不乱其上。
现代文：法制不容私议，人们就不敢相互营私；刑杀不容宽赦，人们就不敢忽视为善；授爵赐禄的大权不假送于人，臣下就不会作乱于人君。
English: The legal system does not allow private discussion, so people dare not engage in private business with each other; capital punishment is not forgivable, so people dare not ignore it as a good thing; the power to bestow knighthoods and bonuses does not have to be given to people, and subordinates will not make trouble for people.

古文：三者藏于官则为法，施于国则成俗，其余不彊而治矣。
现代文：这三事掌握在官府，就是 法 ；推行到全国民众，就成其为俗。其他事情不用费力就可以安定国家了。
English: These three things are in the hands of the government, that is, the law; if they are promoted to the people of the whole country, they will become common.Other things can stabilize the country without any effort.

古文：君壹置则仪，则百官守其法。上明陈其制，则下皆会其度矣。
现代文：国君统一立法，百官就都能守法；上面把制度公开，下面行事就都能合于制度。
English: If the country adopts unified legislation, all officials will be able to abide by the law. If the government at the top makes the system public, the government at the bottom will be able to act according to the system.

古文：君之置其仪也不一，则下之倍法而立私理者必多矣。
现代文：如果国君立法不能统一，下面违公法而另立私理的人就必然增多。
English: If the legislation of the sovereign cannot be unified, the number of people who violate the public law and set up their own private reason will inevitably increase.

古文：是以人用其私，废上之制，而道其所闻，故下与官列法，而上与君分威。国家之危，必自此始矣。
现代文：这样人人都行其私理，不行上面法制而宣传个人的主张。所以，百姓与官法对立，大臣与君主争权，国家的危险，一定从这里开始。
English: In this way, everyone acts according to his or her own principles, disregarding the above-mentioned legal system and propagating personal opinions. Therefore, the confrontation between the people and the official law, the struggle between the minister and the monarch, and the danger of the country must start from here.

古文：昔者圣王之治其民也不然，废上之法制者，必负以耻。
现代文：从前，圣王治理人民就不是这样，对于不执行君主公法的，一定给予惩处。
English: In the past, the holy king did not govern the people in this way. If he did not enforce the monarch's public law, he would certainly be punished.

古文：财厚博惠，以私亲于民者，正经而自正矣。
现代文：这样做，用大量钱财和施惠来收揽人心的人，因整顿公法就自然纠正过来了。
English: In this way, those who use a large amount of money and favors to win the hearts and minds of the people are naturally corrected by the rectification of public law.

古文：乱国之道，易国之常，赐赏恣于己者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：圣王既死，后继者就差多了。
English: Destroying the country's righteous path, changing the country's regular law, and awarding titles and rewards are all decided by the individual's will, and are prohibited by the holy king.

古文：圣王既殁，受之者衰，君人而不能知立君之道，以为国本，则大臣之赘下而射人心者必多矣，君不能审立其法，以为下制。则百姓之立私理而径于利者必众矣。
现代文：统治人民而不懂立君之道，并以此为立国的根本，大臣们拉拢下级而收买人心的，就一定多了；为君而不能审定立法的，并以此为下面的规范，百姓中自立私理而积极追求私利的，也一定多了。
English: There must be more people who rule the people without knowing how to establish a monarchy, and take this as the basis for establishing a country, and more ministers who win over subordinates and buy people's hearts; there must be more people who cannot approve legislation for the sake of the king, and take this as the following norm, and there must be more people who are self-reliant and actively pursue self-interest.

古文：昔者圣王之治人也，不贵其人博学也，欲其人之和同以听令也。
现代文：从前，圣王在考治人材的时候，不看重他的博学，但却希望他能与君主一致而听从君令。
English: Once upon a time, the Holy King, when assessing a person, did not value his erudition, but hoped that he would be in agreement with the monarch and obey the royal order.

古文：《泰誓》曰： 纣有臣亿万人，亦有亿万之心，武王有臣三千而一心，故纣以亿万之心亡，武王以一心存 。
现代文：《泰誓》说： 殷纣王有臣亿万人，也有亿万条心；周武王有臣三千人，却只有一条心。 所以，纣王因亿万心而亡，武王因一心而存。
English: "The Thai Oath" says: King Yin Zang had a hundred million subjects and a hundred million hearts; King Zhou Wu had three thousand subjects but only one heart. Therefore, King Zang died because of a hundred million hearts, and King Wu lived because of one heart.

古文：故有国之君，茍不能同人心，一国威，齐士义，通上之治，以为下法，则虽有广地众民，犹不能以为安也。
现代文：因此，一国之君，如不能使人心归己，统一国家权威，统一士人意志，使上面的治理措施贯彻为下面的行为规范，那末，虽有广大的国土，众多的人民，还不能算是安全的。
English: Therefore, if the ruler of a country cannot win the hearts and minds of the people, unify the authority of the country, unify the will of the scholars, and make the above governance measures into the following behavioral norms, then, although there is a vast land and many people, it cannot be considered safe.

古文：君失其道，则大臣比权重，以相举于国，小臣必循利以相就也。
现代文：君主失道的时候，大臣就联合权势在国中互相抬举，小臣们也必然为私利而趋从他们。
English: When the monarch loses his way, the ministers take advantage of the joint power to elevate each other in the country, and the ministers inevitably follow them for their own benefit.

古文：故举国之士，以为亡党，行公道以为私惠。进则相推于君，退则相誉于民，各便其身，而忘社稷。以广其居，聚徒威群。上以蔽君，下以索民。
现代文：所以，他们便举用国士作为私党，利用公法谋取私利；在君前互相推崇，在民间互相吹捧；各图己便，忘掉国家，以扩大势力范围，结聚徒党，上以蒙蔽国君，下以搜刮百姓。
English: Therefore, they use the statesmen as a private party, take advantage of the public law to seek private interests; promote each other in front of the prince, and tout each other among the people; each of them forgets the country in order to expand the sphere of influence, gathers the clique, blinds the prince with the upper hand, and robs the people with the lower hand.

古文：此皆弱君乱国之道也，故国之危也。
现代文：这都是削弱君主破坏国家的作法。所以是国家的危险。
English: These are all ways of weakening the monarch and undermining the state, hence the danger to the state.

古文：乱国之道，易国之常，赐赏恣于己者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：破坏国家正道，改变国家常法，封赐与禄赏之事全随个人意志决定，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: Destroying the country's righteous path, changing the country's regular law, and awarding titles and rewards are all decided by the individual's will, and are prohibited by the holy king.

古文：擅国权以深索于民者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：擅专国权以严重搜刮人民，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: The Holy King wants to prohibit the abuse of state power by means of serious raids on the people.

古文：其身毋任于上者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：不肯为朝廷任职作事，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: Refusing to work for the imperial court is forbidden by the holy king.

古文：进则受禄于君，退则藏禄于室，毋事治职，但力事属，私王官，私君事，去非其人而人私行者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：在朝廷领受俸禄于君主，回家来积藏俸禄于私室，不干自己应办的公事，只努力发展部属，私用国家官吏，私决君主大事，排除不该排除的人而私自行事，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: Receiving a salary from the monarch at the court, coming home to accumulate a salary in his private room, not doing the official work he should do, only working hard to develop subordinates, using state officials for private purposes, deciding the monarch's affairs, excluding people who should not be excluded and doing things on his own, is what the holy king wants to prohibit.

古文：修行则不以亲为本，治事则不以官为主，举毋能、进毋功者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：修德不以事亲为根本，办事不以奉公为主旨，举用无能的人，荐引无功之辈，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: It is forbidden by the holy king to cultivate virtue without taking relatives as the foundation, to do business without making service as the main purpose, to promote incompetent people, and to recommend worthless generations.

古文：交人则以为己赐，举人则以为己劳，仕人则与分其禄者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：为国家结交人材当作自己的恩赐，推荐人材当作自己的功劳，任用人材又从中分取俸禄，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: For the country to befriend talent as its own gift, to recommend talent as its own merit, to appoint talent and to take a salary from it, is what the holy king wants to prohibit.

古文：交于利通而获于贫穷，轻取于其民而重致于其君，削上以附下，枉法以求于民者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：既结交权势，又收揽穷人；轻取于民而重求于君，削上就下，枉法收买人民，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: It is forbidden by the holy king to make friends with the powerful and to take advantage of the poor; to take advantage of the people and to demand more from the king; to cut off what is above and what is below; and to bribe the people in vain.

古文：用不称其人，家富于其列，其禄甚寡而资财甚多者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：享用与本人身份不相称、家产超过爵位的等级，俸禄很少而资财很多，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: The Holy Father wants to prohibit the enjoyment of an income that is not commensurate with one's status, a family fortune that exceeds the level of a knighthood, a small salary but a lot of wealth.

古文：拂世以为行，非上以为名，常反上之法制以成群于国者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：干违背时代潮流的事情，靠非议君上来猎取名声，经常反对朝廷的法制，并以此结聚徒党于国内，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: To do things that go against the trend of the times, to seek fame by criticizing the emperor, to constantly oppose the legal system of the imperial court, and thus to gather the clique in the country, is what the holy king wants to prohibit.

古文：饰于贫穷，而发于勤劳，权于贫贱，身无职事，家无常姓，列上下之闲，议言为民者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：扮成贫穷的样子，而不肯辛勤劳动，暂时安于贫贱，自身没有常业，自家没有恒产，活动于社会上下之间，而声称是为了人民，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: Pretending to be poor, but not willing to work hard, temporarily settling for poverty, not having a regular job, not having a permanent income for one's family, moving between the upper and lower levels of society, while claiming to be for the people, is what the holy king wants to prohibit.

古文：壶士以为亡资，修田以为亡本，则生之养私不死然后失缫以深与上为市者。圣王之禁也。
现代文：供养游士和修治武器作为自己的政治资本，豢养贼臣和私藏敢死之徒，然后强直不让而严重地与君主讨价争权，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: The holy king wants to prohibit the practice of raising wanderers and repairing weapons as one's own political capital, raising vassals and death-defying people, and then stubbornly and seriously bargaining with the monarch for power.

古文：审饰小节以示民时言大事以动上远交以踰群，假爵以临朝者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：注意修饰小节以显于人民，经常议论大事以打动国君，广泛结交以凌驾群僚，凭借自己的地位以控制朝政，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: Attention to embellishing details in order to appear to the people, frequent discussion of important matters in order to impress the sovereign, extensive contacts in order to dominate colleagues, and control of the government by virtue of one's position are prohibited by the holy king.

古文：卑身杂处隐行辟倚，侧入迎远，遁上而遁民者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：屈身于人群之中，暗行不正之事，潜入别国或接纳外奸，欺瞒君主又欺瞒人民，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: To give oneself up in the midst of the crowd, to secretly commit injustice, to infiltrate other countries or to receive foreign spies, to deceive the monarch and deceive the people, is what the holy king wants to prohibit.

古文：诡俗异礼，大言法行，难其所为，而高自错者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：实行奇怪的风俗和反常的礼节，语言夸大而行为骄傲，把自己所做过的事，说得非常难做，借此以抬高自己，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: To practice strange customs and unorthodox manners, to be proud and boastful in speech and deed, and to speak of what one has done as if it were very difficult, in order to exalt oneself, is forbidden by the Holy King.

古文：守委闲居，博分以致众。勤身遂行，说人以货财。济人以买誉，其身甚静，而使人求者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：有积蓄而生活安逸，广施财物以收买民众，殷勤行事，顺从人意，用财货收买人心，用救济沽名钓誉，政治上稳坐不动而使人主动拥护，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: The holy king wants to prohibit people from living comfortably with savings, bribing people with money and goods, acting courteously, obeying people's wishes, bribing people's hearts with money and goods, fishing for fame and reputation with relief, and sitting still in politics and making people actively support them.

古文：行辟而坚言诡而辩，术非而博，顺恶而泽者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：行为邪僻而坚持不改，把奇谈怪论讲得头，头是道，办法错误而数量很多，支持邪恶而善于辩解，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: The holy king wants to prohibit the following: acting wickedly and persisting in doing so, talking about bizarre theories in a clever way, the first is the way, the methods are wrong and numerous, supporting evil and being good at justification.

古文：以朋党为友，以蔽恶为仁，以数变为智，以重敛为忠，以遂忿为勇者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：以结纳朋党为友爱，以包庇罪恶为仁慈，以投机善变为有智，以横征暴敛为忠君，以发泄私忿为勇敢，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: It is forbidden by the holy king to accept friends as friends, to cover up evil as benevolence, to be wise by being opportunistic, to be loyal by being violent, and to vent one's private anger as bravery.

古文：固国之本，其身务往于上，深附于诸侯者，圣王之禁也。
现代文：闭塞国家根本，努力蒙蔽国君，又密切勾结其它诸侯国，是圣王所要禁止的。
English: Obstructing the foundation of the country, trying to deceive the sovereign, and closely colluding with other vassal states, is what the holy king wants to prohibit.

古文：圣王之身，治世之时，德行必有所是，道义必有所明；故士莫敢诡俗异礼，以自见于国，莫敢布惠缓行，修上下之交，以和亲于民。
现代文：作为圣王，处在治世的时候，讲德行必须立下正确标准，讲道义也必须有个明确准则。所以士人们不敢推行怪异的风俗和反常的礼节在国内自我表现；也不敢布施小惠，缓行公法和修好上下以收揽民心；也不敢越级僭职，谋取功利以讨好于国君。
English: As a holy king, when he reigns, he must set a correct standard for preaching virtue and a clear standard for preaching morality. Therefore, the scholars dare not promote strange customs and abnormal etiquette to express themselves in the country; they dare not give out small benefits, delay the implementation of public laws and improve the upper and lower levels to win the hearts of the people; they also dare not overstep their duties and seek benefits to please the sovereign.

古文：圣王之治民也，进则使无由得其所利，退则使无由避其所害，必使反乎安其位，乐其群，务其职，荣其名，而后止矣。
现代文：圣王的治理人民，向上爬的总是要使他无法得利，推卸责任的总是要使他无法逃避惩罚。必须使人们回到安其职位、乐其同人、努力于职务、珍惜其名声的轨道上来，才算达到目的。
English: The holy king's governance of the people must always make it impossible for him to make profits when he climbs up, and it must always make it impossible for him to evade punishment when he shirked his responsibilities. The goal must be achieved by bringing people back to the track of securing their positions, pleasing their colleagues, working hard at their duties, and cherishing their reputation.

古文：故踰其官而离其群者，必使有害。
现代文：所以，对于超越职权而脱离同事的人，应当使之受害；对于不胜任而失职的，必须使之受辱。
English: Therefore, those who exceed their authority and separate themselves from their colleagues should be made to suffer; those who are incompetent and derelict in their duties must be humiliated.

古文：不能其事而失其职者，必使有耻；是故圣王之教民也，以仁错之，以耻使之，修其能，致其所成而止。
现代文：因此，圣王的教育人民，就是用仁爱来保护，用惩罚来驱使，并提高他们的能力使之有所成就而后止。
English: Therefore, the education of the holy king's people is to protect them with benevolence, to drive them with punishment, and to improve their ability to achieve something.

古文：故曰： 绝而定，静而治，安而尊，举错而不变者，圣王之道也。 
现代文：所以说：坚决而镇定，稳定而图治，安国而尊君，有所举措而不朝令夕改，这都是圣王的治世之道。
English: Therefore, it is said: resolute and calm, stable and trying to rule, secure the country and honor the king, and take measures without making changes from one day to the next, this is the way of the holy king's reign.

