古文：万章问曰： 或谓孔子于卫主痈疽，于齐主侍人瘠环，有诸乎？ 
现代文：万章问： 有人说，孔子在卫国宦官痈疽家里主持私塾教务，在齐国时住在太监瘠环家里主持私塾教务，有这样的事吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: Some people say that Confucius presided over a private school at the home of the eunuch Xing Gang, who was in charge of the defense of the country, and presided over a private school at the home of the eunuch Xing Huan, who was in charge of the defense of the country. Is there such a thing?

古文：孟子曰： 否，不然也。好事者为之也。
现代文：孟子说： 不，不是这样的，这是好事之徙编造出来的。
English: Mencius said, "No, that's not the case. It's a fabrication of good things."

古文：于卫主颜雠由。弥子之妻与子路之妻，兄弟也。弥子谓子路曰： 孔子主我，卫卿可得也。 
现代文：孔子在卫国时在颜雠由家，弥子的妻子和子路的妻子是姐妹，弥子告诉子路说： 孔子要是住在我家，便可以得到卫国的卿位。 
English: When Confucius was at home in Yancheng at the time of the defense of the country, Yizi's wife and Zilu's wife were sisters. Yizi told Zilu: If Confucius lived in my house, he could get the title of the defense of the country.

古文：子路以告。孔子曰： 有命。 
现代文：子路将这话告诉孔子，孔子说： 凡事皆有天命。 
English: Zilu told this to Confucius, who said, "Everything has a destiny."

古文：孔子进以礼，退以义，得之不得曰 有命 。
现代文：孔子进依照行为规范，退依照行为方式，得到或得不到都说是 有天命安排 。
English: Confucius advanced according to behavioral norms, retreated according to behavioral patterns, and received or did not receive was said to be predestined.

古文：而主痈疽与侍人瘠环，是无义无命也。
现代文：如果他住在痈疽和宦官瘠环家中去，就是无视礼义和命运了。
English: If he went to live in the homes of the eunuchs and the eunuchs, he would be ignoring etiquette and fate.

古文：孔子不悦于鲁卫，遭宋桓司马将要而杀之，微服而过宋。
现代文：孔子在鲁国和卫国不顺心，又遇上宋国的司马桓魋想要在路上拦截杀害他，于是就改变装束通过宋国。
English: Confucius was not happy in the State of Lu and the State of Wei, and when he met the Sima Huanqian of the State of Song, he wanted to intercept and kill him on the road, so he changed his attire and passed through the State of Song.

古文：是时孔子当阨，主司城贞子，为陈侯周臣。
现代文：那个时候孔子正是处在困境之中，便住在陈国司城贞子家里，做了陈侯周的臣子。
English: At that time, Confucius was in a difficult situation, so he stayed at the home of Chen Guosi Cheng Sadako and became a vassal of Chen Hou Zhou.

古文：吾闻观近臣，以其所为主；观远臣，以其所主。
现代文：我听说观察身边的大臣，主要看他的所作所为；而远方的大臣呢，就要看他拥护的主人是谁。
English: I've heard that when you observe a minister nearby, you mainly look at what he does; but when you look at a minister far away, you have to look at who his master is.

古文：若孔子主痈疽与侍人瘠环，何以为孔子？ 
现代文：如果孔子在宦官痈疽和太监瘠环家里主持私塾教务，怎么还能算是孔子呢？ 
English: If Confucius presided over a private school in the home of the eunuch Gangrene and the eunuch Huan, how could he still be considered Confucius?

