古文：卢仲海王垂武丘寺李佐公窦裕商顺李载高励萧遇朱自劝
现代文：卢仲海王垂武丘寺李佐公窦裕商顺李载高励萧遇朱自劝
English: Lu Zhonghai Wang of the Trave Monastery, Li Zagong Dou, Yu Shang Shun, Li Zai Gao Li, Xiao Yu, Zhu Zizhong

古文：卢仲海
现代文：卢仲海
English: Lu Zhonghai

古文：大历四年，处士卢仲海与从叔缵客于吴。
现代文：大历四年，处士卢仲海和堂叔缵客居在吴地。
English: In the fourth year of the lunar calendar, officials Lu Zhonghai and Dong Shuxuan stayed in Wudi.

古文：夜就主人饮，欢甚，大醉。
现代文：晚上和主人喝酒非常高兴，大醉。
English: In the evening, I was very happy to drink with my host, and I got very drunk.

古文：郡属皆散，而缵大吐，甚困。更深无救者，独仲海侍之。
现代文：其他人都走了，而缵大吐，很困，没有服侍的人，只有卢仲海服侍他。
English: The others had all left, but Lu Zhonghai was the only one to serve the man who was vomiting and sleepy.

古文：仲海性孝友，悉箧中之物药以护之。
现代文：仲海心性孝敬长者，拿出盒中的所有药品来救护他。
English: Zhonghai's filial piety and respect for the elderly, take out all the medicines in the box to rescue him.

古文：半夜缵亡，仲海悲惶，伺其心尚煖，计无所出。
现代文：半夜缵死了。
English: At midnight the stork died.

古文：忽思礼有招魂望反诸幽之旨，又先是有力士说招魂之验，乃大呼缵名，连声不息，数万计。
现代文：仲海非常悲痛，没有主意，一看他心口还热，忽然想到礼书上有招魂离返冥界的说法，以前又有术士说过招魂的事例，就大呼喊缵的名字，连声不停，有几万次。
English: Zhonghai was very sad, he had no idea. When he saw it, his heart was still hot. Suddenly, he remembered that there was a saying in the book of etiquette about calling a soul from the underworld. In the past, sorcerers had also said that there were cases of calling a soul. He shouted the name of the dragonfly, incessantly, tens of thousands of times.

古文：忽苏而能言曰：赖尔呼救我。
现代文：缵忽然苏醒而说：全靠你呼喊救我。
English: Suddenly, the baboon woke up and said, "It's all up to you to cry out and save me."

古文：即问其状，答曰：我向被数吏引，言郎中命邀迎。
现代文：随即问他情况。回答说：我被几名差吏引导，说郎中让他们请我。
English: He immediately asked him about the situation. He replied, "I was guided by several officers and told that my brother-in-law asked them to invite me.

古文：问其名，乃称尹。
现代文：问他主人的名字，说是姓尹。
English: When asked his master's name, he said his surname was Yin.

古文：逡巡至宅，门阀甚峻，车马极盛，引入。
现代文：犹犹豫豫地走到门前，大门非常高大，车马很多。进去后，尹迎接出来说： 酒量如何？
English: He hesitantly walked to the front of the door. The door was very tall and there were a lot of cars and horses. After entering, Yin greeted him and said, "How much alcohol do you drink?"

古文：尹迎劳曰： 饮道如何，常思曩日破酒纵思，忽承戾止。浣濯难申，故奉迎耳。
现代文：我常想好久没有尽情喝酒了，忽然承蒙您到来，郁闷难以洗涤，所以非常欢迎您。
English: I often think that I have not been drinking to my heart's content for a long time, and suddenly, thanks to your arrival, I am depressed and difficult to wash, so you are very welcome.

古文：乃遥入，诣竹亭坐。
现代文：就转弯到了竹亭坐下。
English: He turned the corner to the bamboo pavilion and sat down.

古文：客人皆朱紫，相揖而坐。
现代文：客人都穿官服，互相行礼坐下。
English: The guests, all wearing official uniforms, bowed to each other and sat down.

古文：左右进酒，杯盘炳曜，妓乐云集，吾意且洽，都亡行李之事。
现代文：左右侍酒斟酒，杯盘闪耀，妓乐云集。我的情绪非常融洽，都忘了咱们出来行走的事了。
English: With wine being poured left and right, glasses and plates sparkling, and prostitutes gathering, I was in a very harmonious mood, and we all forgot about going out for a walk.

古文：中宴之际，忽闻尔唤声。
现代文：宴会中途的时候，忽然听到你召唤我的声音。
English: In the middle of the banquet, I suddenly heard your voice calling me.

古文：众乐齐奏，心神已眩，爵行无数，吾始忘之。
现代文：各种乐器一齐演奏，我的心神已经迷乱，饮酒无数，我就忘了。
English: All kinds of musical instruments played together, my mind has been confused, drinking countless, I forgot.

古文：俄顷，又闻尔唤声且悲，我心恻然。
现代文：过了一会儿，又听到你召唤我的声音，非常悲痛，我的心情也很悲痛。
English: After a while, I heard your voice calling me again. It was very sad, and my heart was sad.

古文：如是数四，且心不便，请辞，主人苦留，吾告以家中有急，主人暂放我来，当或继请。
现代文：就这样一连四次，我的心中不得安宁，请求告辞，主人苦苦挽留。我告诉他因为家中有急事，主人暂时放我回来。
English: In this way, four times in a row, I had no peace in my heart, I asked to say goodbye, and my master struggled to stay. I told him that because there was an emergency at home, my master temporarily let me come back.

古文：授吾职事，吾向以虚诺。
现代文：还要再次邀请我，授予我官职，我对他假意答应。
English: He also wanted to invite me again, to give me an official position, and I pretended to agree.

古文：及到此，方知是死，若不呼我，都忘身在此。吾始去也，宛然如梦。
现代文：等到了这里，才知道是死了。若不召唤我，我都忘掉自己的身体在这里了，宛然如梦。
English: When I got here, I knew I was dead. If they hadn't called me, I would have forgotten my body was here. It was like a dream.

古文：今但畏再命，为之奈何？
现代文：现在只是害怕再来请我，这事怎么办？
English: Now I'm just afraid to invite me again. What should I do?

古文：仲海曰：情之·至隐，复无可行。
现代文：仲海说：事情到了这个地步，再没有别的办法可行。
English: "Things have come to this point, and there is no other way," Mr. Nakaumi said.

古文：前事既验，当复执用耳。
现代文：前面那件事既然应验了，就应该再使用。
English: Now that the foregoing has come to pass, it should be used again.

古文：因焚香诵咒以备之。
现代文：缵就焚香吟诵咒语以防不测。
English: The baboons burn incense and chant incantations to ward off bad luck.

古文：言语之际，忽然又没，仲海又呼之，声且哀厉激切，直至欲明方苏。曰：还赖尔呼我，我向复饮，至于酣畅。
现代文：言语之中，忽然又死了，仲海又呼唤他。声音哀厉激切，直到天快亮的时候，缵才苏醒过来，说：还是靠你呼唤我，我又去饮酒，到了酣畅时，坐在小路上醉了。
English: In the middle of his speech, he suddenly died again, and Zhonghai called for him again. His voice was mournful and agitated, and it was not until the early morning that Yao woke up and said, "It's still up to you to call me. I went to drink again, and when I was sober, I sat on the path and got drunk.

古文：坐寮径醉，主人方敕文牒，授我职。
现代文：主人下了文书，授我官职。
English: My master signed a document to appoint me to an official position.

古文：闻尔唤声哀厉，依前恻怛。
现代文：听到你召唤我的声音哀厉，象先前那样悲痛。
English: To hear your voice calling me is sad, as sad as before.

古文：主人讶我不始，又暂乞放归再三。
现代文：主人惊奇我心情不悦，我又再三请求他暂时放我回去。
English: My host was surprised that I was in a bad mood, and I repeatedly asked him to let me go back for a while.

古文：主人笑曰： 大奇 。
现代文：主人笑着说： 太奇怪了 。
English: The owner smiled and said, "It's so strange."

古文：遂放我来。
现代文：就放我回来了。
English: They let me back in.

古文：今去留未诀。鸡鸣兴，阴物向息，又闻鬼神不越疆。
现代文：现在去留没有告别，鸡叫起来，阴间的东西一向休息，又听说鬼神不越过这个界线。
English: Now there is no farewell, the rooster crows, the things of the underworld always rest, and it is said that ghosts and gods do not cross this line.

古文：吾与尔逃之，可乎？
现代文：我和你逃走，行吗？
English: I'll run away with you, okay?

古文：仲海曰：上计也。
现代文：仲海说：这是上策。
English: "This is the best strategy," said Nakaumi.

古文：即具舟，倍道併行而愈。
现代文：就准备了船，加快速度走了。
English: So they got the boat ready and sped off.

古文：王垂
现代文：王垂
English: Wang Tie

古文：太原王垂，与范阳卢收友善，唐大历初，尝乘舟于淮浙往来。至石门驿旁，见一妇人於树下，容色殊丽，衣服甚华，负一锦囊。
现代文：太原人王垂和范阳人卢收是好朋友。唐大历初年，他们曾乘船在淮、浙间行走，到石门驿旁，看见一个妇人在树下，容貌非常美丽，衣服非常华美，背着一个锦囊。
English: Wang Tiao from Taiyuan and Lu Shu from Fanyang are good friends. In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, they were traveling by boat between Huai and Zhejiang. When they came to the stone gate, they saw a woman under a tree. She was very beautiful, her clothes were very ornate, and she was carrying a brocade bag.

古文：王卢相谓曰：妇人独息，妇囊可图耳。
现代文：三垂、卢收互相说：妇人独自休息，妇人的包裹可以图谋。
English: San Zhuan and Lu Hui said to each other: "A woman should rest alone, and a woman's package should be planned."

古文：乃弥棹伺之，妇人果问曰：船何适？
现代文：就停桨等她。妇人果然问：船往什么地方去？
English: So he stopped the oars and waited for her. The woman asked, "Where is the boat going?"

古文：可容寄载否？
现代文：能否捎上我？
English: Can you hook me up?

古文：妾夫病在嘉兴，今欲省之，足痛不能去。
现代文：我丈夫生病在嘉兴，现在想去探望他，脚疼不能走。
English: My husband is ill in Jiaxing. I want to visit him now, but my feet hurt and I can't walk.

古文：二人曰：虚舟且便可寄尔。
现代文：二人说：空船方便，可以捎上你。
English: The two said, "An empty boat is convenient, we can put you on it."

古文：妇人携囊而上，居船之首。
现代文：妇人带着包裹上船，坐在船头。
English: The woman boarded the boat with the package and sat in the bow.

古文：又徐挑之，妇人正容曰：暂附何得不正耶？
现代文：二人慢慢挑逗她，妇人正色道：暂时求助你们，怎么能不正经呢？
English: The two of them slowly tease her, and the woman blushes: "How can it be wrong to ask for your help for a while?

古文：二人色炸。
现代文：二人脸色惭愧。
English: They both looked ashamed.

古文：垂善鼓琴，以琴悦之。
现代文：王垂善于弹琴，用琴声取悦她。
English: Wang Trie is good at playing the piano, using the sound of the piano to please her.

古文：妇人美艳粲然，二人振荡，乃曰：娘子固善琴耶？
现代文：妇人美艳灿然。二人极其振奋，就说：娘子本来也会弹琴吗？
English: The woman was very beautiful and radiant. The two were very excited and said, "Is it true that your daughter can also play the piano?"

古文：妇人曰：少所习。
现代文：妇人说：小时学过。
English: The woman said: "I have been learning to sing for an hour.

古文：王生拱琴以授，乃抚《轸泛弄》泠然。
现代文：王垂拱手把琴给她，妇人抚弄一曲《轸泛弄》。
English: Wang Tie handed the piano to her, and the woman played a piece of music, "Dao Pan Rong."

古文：王生曰：未尝闻之，有以见文君之诚心矣。
现代文：王垂说：不曾听到过，好象见到了卓文君的真情。
English: Wang Tie said, "I've never heard of it, but it's like I've seen Zhuo Wenjun's true feelings."

古文：妇人笑曰：委相如之深也。
现代文：妇人笑着说：凝聚着司马相如的深情。
English: The woman said with a smile: condensing Sima's deep feelings.

古文：遂稍亲合，其诙谐慧辨不可言，相视感悦，是夕与垂偶会船前。
现代文：于是就稍稍亲热一点，谈吐和谐，聪慧、雄辨不可言表，互相感到高兴，这天晚上就和王垂苟合在船前。
English: So they got a little bit intimate, talked harmoniously, cleverly, unspeakably masculine, and felt happy with each other. That evening, they had sex with Wang Liu in front of the ship.

古文：收稍被隔碍而深叹慕。
现代文：卢收稍被隔开，非常羡慕。
English: Lu Hui was slightly separated, very envious.

古文：夜深，收窃探囊中物，视之，满囊骷髅耳。收大骇，知是鬼矣，而无因达于垂。
现代文：夜深时，卢收偷偷拿妇人包裹中的东西看，满包全是骷髅，卢收非常害怕，知道妇人是鬼，但没有机会告诉王垂。
English: Late at night, Lu Jie secretly took a look at the contents of the woman's package. The package was full of maggots. Lu Jie was very scared and knew that the woman was a ghost, but he didn't have a chance to tell Wang Tie.

古文：听其私狎甚缱绻。
现代文：听他的调情，非常缠绵。
English: Listen to his flirting, very lingering.

古文：既而天明，妇人有故暂下，收告垂，垂大慑曰：计将安出？
现代文：到了天亮，妇人因故暂时下船，卢收告诉了王垂。王垂非常恐怖说：有什么办法？
English: At dawn, the woman got off the boat for some reason, and Lu Jie told Wang Diao. Wang Diao was very scared and said, "What can I do?"

古文：收曰：宜伏箦下。
现代文：卢收说：你藏在床下。
English: Lu Shui said: You hide under the bed.

古文：如其言。
现代文：王垂照他的话做了。一会儿。
English: Wang Tie did as he was told. After a while.

古文：须臾妇人来问：王生安在？
现代文：妇人回来了，问王垂在哪儿？
English: When the woman returned, she asked Wang Du where he was.

古文：收绐之曰：适上岸矣。
现代文：卢收骗她说：刚才上岸去了。
English: Lu Jie lied to her and said: I just went ashore.

古文：妇人甚剧，委收而迫垂，望之稍远，乃弃于岸。
现代文：妇人反应很快，抛开卢收去追王垂。看她走得远一点，就把她丢到岸上，加快速度行船。
English: The woman reacted quickly, throwing away the oar to chase Wang Tie. Seeing her go a little further, he threw her onto the shore and sped up the boat.

古文：併棹倍行数十里外，不见来，夜藏船处闹。
现代文：走到几十里开外，不见妇人来。晚上停船在船多的地方。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, he did not see the woman coming. In the evening, the boat stopped at a place where there were many boats.

古文：半夜后，妇人至，直入船，拽垂头。
现代文：半夜后，妇人来了，直奔船上，拽王垂的头。
English: After midnight, the woman came and went straight to the boat, dragging Wang Lue's head.

古文：妇人四面有眼，腥秽甚，齿咬垂，垂困。
现代文：妇人四面都有眼睛，腥秽之气强烈，咬着王垂。
English: The woman has eyes on all four sides and a strong foul breath, biting her hair.

古文：二人大呼，众船皆助，遂失妇人。
现代文：王垂被困，二人大声呼救，大家都过来帮助，妇人就逃走了。
English: Wang Liu was trapped, the two shouted for help, everyone came to help, and the woman fled.

古文：明日，得纸梳于席上，垂数月而卒。
现代文：第二天，得到一个纸梳子在席上，王垂几个月后死了。
English: The next day, getting a paper comb at the table, Wang Zhuo died a few months later.

古文：武丘寺
现代文：武丘寺
English: Bukkyo-ji Temple

古文：苏州武丘寺，山嵚崟，石林玲珑，楼雉叠起，绿云窈窕，入者忘归。
现代文：苏州武丘寺，在山间高耸着。石林精巧，楼台和城墙叠起，绿云环绕，进来的人都忘了回去。
English: Suzhou Wuqiu Temple, towering in the mountains. The stone forest is exquisite, the tower and the city wall are stacked, surrounded by green clouds, and people who come in forget to go back.

古文：大历初，寺僧夜见二白衣上楼，竟不下，寻之无所见。
现代文：大历初年，寺里的僧人夜里见二个穿白衣服的人上楼，竟然没有下来，找他们没找到。
English: In the first year of the lunar calendar, the monks in the temple saw two people dressed in white go upstairs at night, but they didn't come down, and they couldn't find them.

古文：明日，峻高上见题三首，信鬼语也。
现代文：第二天，高山上有题诗三首，都是鬼的语言。
English: The next day, there were three poems inscribed on the mountain, all in the language of ghosts.

古文：其词曰：幽明虽异路，平昔添工文。
现代文：其词曰：幽明虽异路，平昔添工文。
English: His words were: Although Yuming is a different road, it is still a work of art.

古文：欲知潜寐处，山北两孤坟。
现代文：欲知潜寐处。山北两孤坟。
English: There are two lonely graves in the northern part of the mountain.

古文：高松多悲风，潇潇清且哀。
现代文：高松多悲风，萧萧清且哀。
English: Takamatsu has more sad wind, but Xiao Xiao Qing is also sad.

古文：南山接幽陇，幽陇空崔嵬。
现代文：南山接幽陇，幽陇空崔嵬。
English: The Nanshan is next to the Yuxuan, and the Yuxuan is in the sky.

古文：白日徒煦煦，不照长夜台。
现代文：白日徒煦煦，不照长夜台。
English: Walk during the day, not according to the long night.

古文：谁知生者乐，魂魄安能回。
现代文：谁知生者乐，魂魄安能回。
English: Who knows if the living are happy, if the soul can return safely.

古文：况复念所亲，恸哭心肝摧。
现代文：况复念所亲，恸哭心肝摧。
English: When I think of my loved ones, my heart breaks and I cry.

古文：恸器更何言，哀哉复哀哉。
现代文：恸器更何言，哀哉复哀哉。
English: What can I say, it's sad, sad, sad.

古文：神仙不可学，形化空游魂。
现代文：神仙不可学，形化空游魂。
English: Immortals can't learn, but they can shape wandering souls.

古文：白日非我朝，青松围我门。
现代文：白日非我朝，青松围我门。
English: The day is not my morning, the young pines surround my door.

古文：虽复隔生死，犹知念子孙。
现代文：虽复隔生死，犹知念子孙。
English: Though separated in life and death, they still remember their children and grandchildren.

古文：何以遣悲惋，万物归其根。
现代文：何以遣悲惋，万物归其根。
English: All things return to their roots.

古文：寄语世上人，莫厌临芳樽。
现代文：寄语世上人，莫厌临芳罇。
English: To send a message to the world, I am not averse to coming to Aramid.

古文：庄上有墓林，古冢累累，其文尚存焉。
现代文：庄上有个墓地，古墓累累，那几首诗还在那里。
English: There is a graveyard on the estate, full of ancient tombs, and the poems are still there.

古文：李佐公
现代文：李佐公
English: Li Zuogong

古文：李佐公，大历中在卢州。
现代文：李佐公，大历年中在卢州。
English: Li Zuogong in Luzhou in the middle of the lunar year.

古文：有书吏王庾请假归。夜行郭外，忽值引驺呵避，书吏映大树窥之，且怪此无尊官也。
现代文：有个书吏叫王庾，请假回家，晚上在郊外行走，忽然遇到某个骑马的侍从大声呵避。书吏躲在枝后偷看，并且责怪这人不尊重官吏。
English: A librarian named Wang Yao, who was returning home on leave, was walking in the evening in the suburbs when he suddenly encountered an attendant on horseback, who shied away loudly. The librarian hid behind a branch to peep, and accused the man of disrespecting officials.

古文：导骑后一人紫衣，仪卫如大使。
现代文：见前导的后面，有一个身穿紫衣的人，仪仗排场好象节度使，后面有一辆车，正在渡河。
English: Behind the guide, there is a man dressed in purple, the ceremonial parade is like a festival, and behind there is a car that is crossing the river.

古文：后有车一乘，方渡水，御者前曰：车軥索断。紫衣曰：检簿。
现代文：驾车的人上前报告说：拉车的绳子断了。紫衣人说：查看簿子。
English: The driver came forward to report that the rope pulling the car had broken. The man in purple said, "Check the book."

古文：遂见数吏检之曰：合取卢州某里张道妻脊筋修之。
现代文：就看见几名差吏查看簿子，说应该取来卢州某里张道的妻子脊背上的筋修理。
English: He saw several officials looking over the book and saying that they should come and repair the muscle on the back of Zhang Dao's wife's spine in Luzhou.

古文：乃书吏之姨也。
现代文：那人是书吏的姨。
English: The woman was the librarian's aunt.

古文：顷刻吏回，持两条白物各长数尺，乃渡水而去。
现代文：一会儿的功夫，差吏回来了，手拿两条白色的东西，各长几尺，就渡水走了。
English: After a moment's effort, the policeman came back, took two white things, each a few feet long, and walked across the water.

古文：至姨家，尚无恙。
现代文：书吏到他姨家，姨还没有病。
English: The librarian went to his aunt's house, but she was not ill.

古文：经宿患背痛，半日而卒。
现代文：过了一宿，发觉背痛。半天就死了。
English: After an overnight stay, he noticed back pain. He died half a day later.

古文：窦裕
现代文：窦裕
English: Dou Yu

古文：大历中有进士窦裕者，家寄淮海。下第将之成都，至洋州无疾卒。
现代文：大历年中，有个进士叫窦裕，寄居淮海，落榜后将去成都，走到洋州无疾而卒。
English: In the year of the great calendar, there was a scholar named Dou Yu, who lived in Huaihai. After he fell off the list, he would go to Chengdu. He went to Yangzhou and passed away without any illness.

古文：常与淮阴令吴兴沈生善，别有年矣。声尘两绝，莫知其适。
现代文：窦裕常与淮阴县令吴兴人沈生友善，分别有一年了，互相断绝了消息，不知道他去什么地方。
English: Dou Yu is often friendly with Wu Xingren Shen Sheng, the governor of Huaiyin County. They have been separated for a year and have cut off communication with each other. They do not know where he is going.

古文：沈生自淮海调补金堂令，至洋州舍于馆亭中。
现代文：沈生从淮海调补为金堂县令，到了洋州，住在馆亭中。
English: Shen Sheng was transferred from Huaihai to be the county magistrate of Jintang, and went to Yangzhou, where he lived in a pavilion.

古文：是夕，风月晴朗，夜将半。生独若有所亡，而不得其寝。
现代文：这天晚上，风清月朗，快到半夜，沈生独坐若有所失，不能睡觉。
English: On this night, the wind is clear and the moon is bright, and it is almost midnight. Shen Shen can't sleep if he sits alone.

古文：俄见一白衣丈夫，自门步来，且吟且嗟，似有恨而不舒者。
现代文：一会儿见一穿白衣男子，从门外走进来，一边吟诵一边叹息，似有遗憾不能舒张的样子。
English: After a while, I saw a man dressed in white walk in from outside the door, chanting and sighing as he went. He looked like he regretted not being able to relax.

古文：久之，今曰：家依楚水岸，身寄洋州馆。
现代文：过了很长时间，他吟诵着：家依楚水岸，身寄洋州馆。
English: After a long time, he chanted: "Home is the Chu waterfront, and I'm staying at the Yangzhou Pavilion."

古文：望月独相思，尘襟泪痕满。
现代文：望月独相思，尘襟泪痕满。
English: Mochizuki is infatuated with him, and his face is streaked with tears.

古文：生见之，甚觉类窦裕，特起与语，未及，遂无见矣。
现代文：沈生看见他，觉得很象窦裕，特意起来和他交谈，没等起身，他就不见了。
English: Shen Sheng saw him and thought he looked very much like Dou Yu. He deliberately got up to talk to him, but before he could get up, he was gone.

古文：乃叹曰：吾与窦君别久矣，定为鬼耶？
现代文：沈生就叹息着说：我和窦君分别很久了，难道碰见鬼了？
English: Shen Sheng sighed and said: I have been separated from Dou Jun for a long time, have I met a ghost?

古文：明日驾而去，行未数里，有殡在路前。
现代文：第二天，驾车而去。没走几里路，有个灵柩停在前路。
English: The next day, I drove away. Within a few miles, there was a casket parked in the driveway.

古文：有识者曰：进士窦裕殡宫。
现代文：有认识的说：这是进士窦裕下葬之处。
English: An acquaintance said: This is the place where Jin Shi Dou Yu was buried.

古文：生惊，即驰至馆，问馆吏，曰：有进士窦裕，自京游蜀，至此暴亡。
现代文：沈生大惊，就奔回馆亭问馆吏。馆吏说：有个进士窦裕，从京城到蜀地，走到这暴死。
English: Shen Sheng was so shocked that he ran back to the pavilion to ask the librarian. The librarian said: There was a scholar Dou Yu, who went from Beijing to Shu to this violent death.

古文：太守命殡于馆南二里外，道左殡宫是也。
现代文：太守命令葬在馆南边二里之外，大道左边下葬的地方就是。
English: The abbot ordered that the body be buried two miles to the south of the museum, which is where the body was buried on the left side of the avenue.

古文：即至奠拜泣而去。
现代文：沈生就到坟前哭祭一番而去。
English: Shen Sheng went to the graveside wailing ceremony first.

古文：商顺
现代文：商顺
English: Shangshun

古文：丹阳商顺，娶吴郡张昶女。
现代文：丹阳人商顺，娶了吴郡张昶的女儿。
English: Shang Shun, a resident of Danyang, married the daughter of Zhang Ye of Wu County.

古文：昶为京兆少尹，卒葬浐水东，去其别业十里。
现代文：张昶是京兆少尹，死后葬在浐水之东，离他家十里。
English: Zhang Xuan was a minor official of the Beijing Zhao Dynasty. After his death, he was buried in the east of Surabaya, ten miles away from his home.

古文：顺选集在长安，久之，张氏使奴入城迎商郎。
现代文：商顺因选官而赴长安，时间长了，张氏让仆人进城迎接商郎。
English: Shang Shun went to Chang'an due to the election of officials. After a long time, Mr. Zhang asked his servants to come to the city to meet the merchant.

古文：顺日暮与俱往，奴盗饮极醉，与顺相失。
现代文：商顺在傍晚和仆人一起回来。仆人偷偷喝酒，醉了，和商顺失散了。
English: In the evening, Shang Shun came back with his servant. The servant secretly drank alcohol and got drunk. He and Shang Shun became separated.

古文：不觉其城门已闭，无如之何，乃独前行。
现代文：不知不觉城门已经关闭，商顺不知道往什么地方走，就独自前行。
English: Unconsciously, the city gate has been closed, and Shang Shun does not know where to go, so he goes alone.

古文：天渐昏黑，雨雪交下，且所驴甚蹇，迷路不知所之，但信驴所诣。
现代文：天渐渐黑了，雨雪交加，并且所骑之驴行动非常迟缓，又迷了路不知去哪儿，只是任驴走着。
English: It was getting dark, it was raining and snowing, and the donkey he was riding was moving very slowly. He got lost and didn't know where to go, so he just let the donkey walk.

古文：计行十数里，而不得见村墅，转入深草，苦寒甚战。
现代文：大约走了十几里，看不到村庄。辗转走到深草之处，苦寒更加剧烈。
English: After walking for about a dozen miles, I couldn't see the village. I turned around and walked to a place of deep grass, where the bitter cold was even more intense.

古文：少顷，至一涧，涧南望见灯火。
现代文：一会儿，到了一个山涧，看见涧南有灯火。
English: After a while, we arrived at a mountain pass and saw a lighthouse in the south of Laos.

古文：顺甚喜，行至，乃紫篱茅屋数间，扣门数百下方应，顺问曰：远客迷路，苦寒，暂欲寄宿。
现代文：商顺非常高兴，走到那里，有几间茅草屋。
English: Shang Shun was very happy. When he got there, there were several thatched houses.

古文：应曰：夜暗，雨雪如此，知君是何人。
现代文：敲门几百下才有人答应。商顺说：我是远道来的客人，迷了路，非常冷，想暂时借住一宿。回答说：夜深了，雨雪这么大，谁知你是什么人？
English: After knocking on the door several hundred times, someone finally agreed. Shang Shun said: "I am a guest who has come from far away, lost my way, very cold, and would like to temporarily borrow a night's stay." He replied: "It's late at night, the rain and snow are so heavy, who knows who you are?

古文：且所居狭陋，不堪止宿。
现代文：而且居处狭小简陋，不能借宿。
English: Moreover, the living quarters are small and simple, and cannot be rented out.

古文：固拒之，商郎乃问张尹庄去此几许，曰：近西南四五里，顺以路近可到。乃出涧，西南行十余里，不至庄。
现代文：拒绝商顺。商顺就问张尹庄离这多远？对方说：在靠近西南方四、五里。商顺以为路近可以赶到，就出了山涧，往西南方走了十几里，也没到庄子。
English: Shang Shun refused. Shang Shun then asked Zhang Yin Zhuang how far away is Zhuang from here? The other party said: "It is four or five miles to the southwest." Shang Shun thought that the road was close enough to reach, so he left the foothills, walked more than ten miles to the southwest, and did not reach Zhuangzi.

古文：雨雪转甚，顺自审必死，既不可，行欲何之，乃系驴于桑下，倚树而坐。
现代文：雨雪转大，商顺自认为必死无疑，既然不能这样，走又能到什么地方呢？就把驴拴在桑树下，倚树而坐。
English: As the rain and snow intensified, Shang Shun thought that he would surely die. Since this was not possible, where could he go? He tied his donkey under the mulberry tree and sat leaning against it.

古文：须臾，见一物，状若烛笼，光照数丈，直诣顺前，尺余而止。
现代文：一会儿看见一个东西，形状象灯笼，光照几丈远，直接走到商顺面前一尺多远的地方停住了。
English: After a while, he saw something shaped like a lantern shining a few feet away. He walked directly in front of Shang Shun and stopped more than a foot away.

古文：顺初甚惧，寻而问曰：得非张公神灵引导余乎？
现代文：商顺最初非常害怕，过了一会儿才问：莫非是张公神灵来引导我吗？
English: At first, Shang Shun was very scared, but after a while he asked: Is it Zhang Gong's spirit guiding me?

古文：乃前拜曰：若是丈人，当示归路。
现代文：就上前拜谢说：若是丈人，请指示回家的路。
English: He stepped forward and said to Bai Xie: "If you are my father-in-law, please show me the way home."

古文：视光中有小道，顺乃乘驴随之，稍近火移，恒在前尺余。
现代文：见灯光下有条小道，商顺就骑驴跟随。稍稍靠近，灯光就移开，总在他前面一尺多远。
English: Seeing a path under the lights, Shang Shun rode a donkey to follow. A little closer, the lights moved away, always more than a foot ahead of him.

古文：行六七里，望见持火来迎，笼光遂灭。
现代文：走了六、七里，看见有人拿着灯光来迎接，灯光就灭了。
English: After walking six or seven miles, I saw someone coming to meet me with a lantern, and the lantern went out.

古文：及火至，乃张氏守茔奴也。
现代文：等灯光到了一看，是张家看坟的仆人。
English: When the lights came on, it was Zhang Jia's servant who was looking at the grave.

古文：顺问何以知己来，奴云：适闻郎君大呼某，言商郎从东来，急往迎。如此再三，是以知之。
现代文：商顺问他怎么知道自己来？仆人说：刚才听见张公大声召呼我，说商郎从东边来、快去迎接，如此二三次，这样就知道了。
English: Shang Shun asked him how he knew he was coming. The servant said, "Just now, I heard Zhang Gong calling me loudly, saying that a merchant was coming from the east, so I hurried to meet him. I did this two or three times, and that's how I knew."

古文：遂宿奴庐中，明旦方去。
现代文：商顺就住在仆人的草房中，第二天早晨才离开。
English: Shang Shun stayed in the servant's grass hut, and only left the next morning.

古文：李载
现代文：李载
English: Li Zai

古文：大历七年，转运使吏部刘晏在部为尚书，大理评事李载摄监察御史，知福建留后。
现代文：大历七年，转运使吏部刘晏在吏部任尚书。大理评事李载兼任监察御史，主管福建事宜。
English: In the 7th year of the Tai Lian calendar, Liu Zhen, the transfer envoy of the personnel department, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department. Li Zai, the commentator of Dali, also served as the supervisor of the history and was in charge of Fujian affairs.

古文：载于建州浦城置使院，浦城至建州七百里，犹为清凉。
现代文：李载在建州浦城设置使衙。浦城到建州七百里，非常荒凉。
English: Li Zai set up an envoy in Jianzhou Pucheng. Pucheng is seven hundred miles from Jianzhou, very desolate.

古文：载心惧瘴疠，不乐职事，经半载卒。后一日，复生如故。
现代文：李载心里害怕瘴疫，不愿意任职，过半年死了，过了一天，又活了，同往常一样。
English: Li Zai was afraid of the plague in his heart and did not want to take up the post. Six months later, he died. A day later, he was alive again, as usual.

古文：家人进食，载如平常食之。谓家人曰：已死，今暂还者，了使事耳。
现代文：家人端饭，李载象平常一样吃饭，对家人说：我已经死了，现在暂时回来的原因，是了结公事。
English: When the family members served the meal, Li Zai said to his family members, "I have died. The reason why I have come back temporarily is to finish my business."

古文：乃追其下未了者，使知一切，交割付之。
现代文：就追问属下没办完的事。他主办了一切，分别交付给人。
English: He inquired about the unfinished business of his subordinates. He hosted everything and handed it over to people separately.

古文：后修状与尚书别，兼作遗书，处分家事。
现代文：后来又写了封信与尚书告别，同时算作遗书，处理家事。
English: Later, he also wrote a letter to bid farewell to Shang Shu, which was also counted as a suicide note, to deal with family affairs.

古文：妻崔氏先亡，左右唯一小妻，因谓之曰：地下见先妻，我言有汝，其人甚怒，将欲有所不相利益，为之奈何？
现代文：他的妻子崔氏先死了，身边只有一个小妾，就对她说：我已经死了，在地下见到了先前的妻子。我说有了你，她非常生气，将要有不利你的事，怎么办？
English: His wife, Cui, died first, and he had only one concubine at his side, so he said to her: "I am already dead, I saw my previous wife in the underground. I said that with you, she was very angry, there will be something unfavorable to you, what should I do?"

古文：今日欲至，不宜久留也。
现代文：今天她快来了，不宜久留。
English: She's arriving today. Don't stay too long.

古文：言讫，分财与之，使行官送还北。
现代文：说完，分了一些财物给她，让行官送她回北边。
English: After that, he gave her some belongings and asked the officials to send her back to the north.

古文：小妻便尔下船，行官少事未即就路。
现代文：小妾马上到了船上，行官有点小事，未能上路。
English: The concubine immediately got on the boat, but the steward had a small problem and couldn't make the trip.

古文：载亦知之，召行官至，杖五下，使骤去。
现代文：李载也知道了，召来行官，打了五杖，让他快去。
English: Li Zai also knew about it. He summoned an official and beat him with five canes, telling him to hurry.

古文：事毕食讫，遂卒。
现代文：事情处理完，吃完饭，他就死了。
English: After everything was taken care of, after he ate his meal, he died.

古文：高励
现代文：高励
English: Gao Li

古文：高励者，崔士光之丈人。
现代文：高励是崔士光的丈人。
English: Gao Li is the father-in-law of Cui Shiguang.

古文：夏日，在其庄前桑下，看人家打麦。
现代文：夏天，在他庄子前面的桑树下，看人家打麦。
English: In the summer, he watches people threshing wheat under the mulberry tree in front of his farm.

古文：见一人从东走马来，至励再拜，云：请治马足。
现代文：见一个人从东边骑马过来，到高励面前拜了又拜，说：请治疗马脚。
English: He saw a man on horseback coming from the east. He bowed and prostrated before Gao Li and said, "Please treat my horse's leg."

古文：励云：我非马医，焉得疗马？
现代文：高励说：我不是马医，怎么能治马？
English: Gao Li said: I am not a horse doctor, how can I treat a horse?

古文：其人笑云：但为胶粘即得。
现代文：那人笑着说：只用胶粘上就行了。
English: The man smiled and said, "Just use glue to stick it on."

古文：励初不解其言，其人乃告曰：我非人，是鬼耳。
现代文：高励开始不明白他的话，那人就告诉他说：我不是人，是鬼。
English: Gao Li did not understand his words at first, so the man told him, "I am not a person, but a ghost."

古文：此马是木马，君但洋胶粘之，便济行程。
现代文：这匹马是木马，您只多用胶粘上它，使可以帮它行走了。
English: This horse is a Trojan horse, you just have to glue it with more glue so that you can help it walk.

古文：励乃取胶煮烂，出至马所，以见变是木马。
现代文：高励就取出胶煮烂，出来到马厩，看见那匹马已经变成了木马。
English: Gao Li took out the boiled glue, went out to the stables, and saw that the horse had turned into a wooden horse.

古文：病在前足，因为粘之。
现代文：病在前脚，就给它粘上。
English: If the disease is in the forefoot, it is glued to the toe.

古文：送胶还舍，及出，见人已在马边。
现代文：送胶回屋，等到出来，看见那人已在马旁边，马非常骏伟。
English: I sent the glue back to the house, and when I came out, I saw that the man was already next to the horse. The horse was very tall.

古文：马其骏，还谢励讫。便上马而去。
现代文：那人谢过高励，就上马而去。萧遇
English: The man thanked him profusely, mounted his horse and rode away.

古文：萧遇信州刺史萧遇少孤，不知母墓。
现代文：信州刺史萧遇小时候是孤儿，不知道母亲的墓。
English: Shinshu assassin Shi Xiao was orphaned as a child and did not know his mother's grave.

古文：数十年，将改葬。
现代文：几十年后，准备改葬，旧墓地在京都，就到了那儿。
English: Decades later, when the old cemetery in Kyoto was being prepared for reburial, I went there.

古文：旧茔在都，既至，启，乃误开卢会昌墓。
现代文：打开坟墓，是错开了卢会昌的墓，才知道不是母亲的坟墓，就伤心地回去了。
English: When he opened the grave, he staggered over Lu Huichang's grave. Only then did he realize that it was not his mother's grave, and he went back sadly.

古文：既至，具以情诉，华曰：试可耳。
现代文：听说河阳有个方士叫道华，善于召鬼，就重金聘来，详细地把事情告诉了他。道华说：可以试一下。
English: Having heard that there was a sorcerer in Kheyang called Daohua, who was good at summoning ghosts, he paid him a lot of money and told him everything in detail. Daohua said: "You can try it.

古文：乃置坛洁诚，立召卢会昌至，一丈夫也，衣冠甚伟，呵之曰：萧郎中太夫人茔，被尔墓侵杂，使其迷误。忽急寻求，不尔，当旦夕加罪。
现代文：就洁净设坛，马上召呼卢会昌到。见是一个男子，衣冠非常气派。道华呵叱他说：萧郎中太夫人的墓，被你的墓侵犯，使萧郎中迷惑搞错，赶快寻找，不然就天天加大你的罪过。
English: He cleaned and set up the altar, and immediately called Lu Huichang to come. He saw a man with a very elegant robe. Daohua scolded him, saying, "Your tomb has invaded Lady Xiao Lang's tomb, causing Xiao Lang to be confused and make a mistake. Find it quickly, otherwise you will increase your sins every day."

古文：会昌再拜曰：某贱役者，所管地累土三尺，方十里，力可及。周外则不知矣。
现代文：卢会昌拜了又拜，说：我是卑贱的仆役，所管地盘共深三尺，方圆十里，我的能力只可涉及这些，这个范围外的就不知道了。
English: Lu Xuan bowed and bowed again, saying, "I am a lowly servant. The area I am in charge of is a total of three feet deep and ten miles in circumference. My ability can only deal with these, and I don't know anything outside of this scope."

古文：但管内无萧郎中太夫人墓，当为索之。以旦日为期。
现代文：只是我的管辖之内没有萧郎中太夫人墓，我应为他寻找，以明天早晨为期限。
English: However, there is no grave of Lady Xiao Lang within my jurisdiction. I should search for him, with a deadline of tomorrow morning.

古文：及朝，华与遇俱往。行里余，遥见会昌奔来曰：吾缘寻索，颇扰鬼神，今使按责甚急，二人可疾去。
现代文：到了早晨，道华和萧遇都去了，走了一里多地，远远地看见卢会昌奔跑过来说：我因为寻找，颇多打扰鬼神，现在派人责罚很紧急，你们两个应该快点离开。
English: In the morning, Daohua and Xiao Ran both went there and walked for more than a mile. They saw Lu Huichang running in the distance and said, "I have disturbed the spirits a lot because of my search. It is urgent to send someone to punish me now. You two should leave quickly."

古文：言讫而灭，二人去之数百步，顾视，见青黑气覆地，竟日乃散。
现代文：说完就没了。两人走了几百步，四下一看，见黑气盖地，一天才散。
English: The two walked a few hundred steps, looked around, saw the black air cover the ground, and only then left.

古文：既而会昌来曰：吾为君寻求，大受阴司谴罚，今计穷矣。请辞去。
现代文：不久卢会昌来说：我给您寻找，大受阴司责罚，现在办法用尽了，请让我告辞离去。
English: Soon Lu Huichang said: "I have searched for you, suffered a lot of punishment, and now I have exhausted my means. Please let me leave."

古文：华归河阳，遇号哭。自是端居一室。
现代文：道华回到河阳，萧遇号哭，从此住最边上的一个屋子。
English: When Daohua returned to Heyang, Xiao Ying cried, and from then on he lived in a house on the farthest edge.

古文：夜忽如梦中，闻户外有声，呼遇小名曰：吾是尔母。
现代文：夜晚忽然象在梦中，听到门外有声音，召呼萧遇的小名说：我是你的母亲。
English: Suddenly in the night, as if in a dream, she heard a voice outside her door, calling out Xiao Yu's nickname and saying, "I am your mother."

古文：遇惊走，出户拜迎。
现代文：萧遇惊讶地跑出，到门外拜见迎接他的母亲。
English: Xiao Yu ran out in surprise and went to meet his mother outside the door.

古文：见其母，母从暗中出。
现代文：母亲从黑暗中走出，萧遇和她相见象母亲在世一样。
English: My mother came out of the darkness, and when I met her, it was like my mother was still alive.

古文：遇与相见如平生，谓遇曰：汝至孝动天，诚达星神，祇灵降鉴，今我与汝相见，悲怆盈怀。
现代文：母亲对萧遇说：你极其孝顺感动了上天，精诚传达到星神，地神引以为鉴，现在我和你相见。母亲悲怆满怀，萧遇号哭悲恸很久。
English: My mother said to Xiao Yu, "Your extreme filial piety has touched the heavens, your sincerity has reached the star gods, and the earth gods have taken it as a model, and now I am meeting you." My mother was filled with grief, and Xiao Yu cried and grieved for a long time.

古文：遇号恸久之，又叹曰：吾家孝子，有闻于天，虽在泉壤，其为众流所仰。然孝子之感天达神，非惟毁形灭性，所尚由哀耳。
现代文：母亲又说：我家的孝子，闻名于天，我虽在黄泉，很被众人仰慕，但孝子感动天地之神，不只是损害身体，这都是由于悲哀。
English: The mother also said, "The filial son of my family is famous in heaven. Although I am in hell, I am greatly admired by many people. However, the filial son has moved the gods of heaven and earth, and it is not just damage to the body, it is all due to sorrow.

古文：因与遇论幽冥报应之旨，性命变通之道。乃曰：祸福由人，但可累德。上天下临，实如影响。其有树善不感者，皆是心不同耳。
现代文：就和萧遇谈论幽冥中报应的情况，性命变通的道理，说：祸福由人，但可积德，上天的报应，其实象事物的回声，也有做了善事没有报答的，都是心不诚。
English: Talking with Xiao Yu about the situation of retribution in the dark, the principle of life being flexible, he said: misfortune and fortune are caused by people, but virtue can be accumulated, and the retribution of heaven is actually like the echo of things. There are also people who have done good deeds and have not been rewarded. They are all dishonest.

古文：言叙久之，遇悲慰感激曰：不意更闻过奖之言，庶万分不恨矣。
现代文：言谈很久，萧遇悲痛得以安慰，十分感激地说：不在意听过奖的话，小子实在没有遗憾了。
English: After talking for a long time, Xiao was able to comfort his grief and said with great gratitude: "I don't care if I've heard the award, the boy really has no regrets."

古文：乃述迷误茔域之恨，乃曰：吾来亦为此。年岁寝远，汝小，何由而知？
现代文：就说了迷误墓地的遗憾。母亲说：我来也是为了这事，年代久远，你那时还小，怎么能知道呢？
English: She spoke of her regret at having strayed into the cemetery. Her mother said, "I came here for this reason, too. It was a long time ago, and you were a child at the time, so how could you know?"

古文：吾墓上已有李五娘墓，亦已平坦，何可辨也？
现代文：我的坟上已经有了李五娘墓，也已经平坦了，怎么能辨别呢？
English: My grave already has Li Wuzhong's grave on it, and it is also flat. How can I distinguish it?

古文：汝明日，但见乌鹊群集，其下是也。
现代文：你明天只要看见乌鹊聚集，那下面就是。
English: If you see a gathering of egrets tomorrow, that's what's down there.

古文：又曰：若护我西行，当以二魂舆入关。
现代文：又说：若送我西行，应该用两个灵车进关。
English: He also said: "If you send me west, you should use two hearses to enter the customs."

古文：问其故，答曰：为叔母在此，亦须归乡。
现代文：问她原因，回答说：因为叔母在这，也要还乡。
English: When I asked her why, she replied, "Because my aunt is here and I want to go back home."

古文：遇曰：叔母为谁耶？
现代文：萧遇说：叔母是谁？
English: Xiao Yu said, "Who is your aunt?"

古文：母曰：叔母则是汝外婆，吾亦自呼作叔母，怜吾孤独，尝从咸阳来此伴吾。后因神祇隔绝，不得去，故要二魂舆耳。
现代文：母亲说：叔母就是你的外婆，我也自称她为 叔母 ，她可怜我孤独，曾想从咸阳到这陪伴我，后因地神隔绝，不能离开那里，所以要两个灵车。
English: My mother said, "Your aunt is your grandmother. I also call her my aunt. She took pity on my loneliness. She wanted to accompany me from Xianyang to here, but she was cut off by the earth god and couldn't leave, so she wanted two hearses."

古文：言讫而去，倏忽不见。
现代文：说完就离去，很快不见了。
English: After saying this, he left and soon disappeared.

古文：遇哀号待晓，即于乌鹊所集平地，掘之。信是李五娘墓，更于下得母墓，方得合葬。
现代文：萧遇悲伤地哭到天亮，就在乌鹊聚集的平地挖掘，果真是李五娘的墓，再在下面挖到母亲的墓，才得以合葬。
English: Xiao Yu wept with sorrow until dawn, and then dug in the flat ground where the blackbirds had gathered. It turned out to be the grave of Li Wuzhong's fifth daughter, and then dug down to her mother's grave to be able to bury them together.

古文：朱自劝
现代文：朱自劝
English: Zhu Zizhong

古文：吴县朱自劝以宝应年亡。大历三年，其女寺尼某乙，令往市买胡饼，充斋馔物。
现代文：吴县朱自劝在宝应年中死亡，大历三年，他的女儿在寺里当一名尼姑，让婢女去买胡饼，充当斋饭。
English: Zhu Zixu of Wuxian County died in the year of the Fire Rooster, in the third year of the lunar calendar. His daughter worked as a nun in the temple, and asked her maid to go and buy coarse bread to serve as a meal.

古文：于河西见自劝与数骑宾从二十人，状如为官。见婢歔欷，问：汝和尚好在，将安之。
现代文：婢女在河西看见朱自劝和几个骑马的随从二十人，形状好象做官的样子，看见婢女就叹息起来，问：你家和尚好吗？你要去哪儿？
English: In Hexi, the servant girl saw Zhu Zizhong and several of his twenty horse-riding followers, who looked like officials. When she saw them, she sighed and asked, "How is your family? Where are you going?"

古文：婢云：命市胡饼作斋。
现代文：婢女说：让我买胡饼当斋饭。
English: The maidservant said, "Let me buy a loaf of bread for my evening meal."

古文：劝云：吾此正复有饼。
现代文：朱自劝说：我这正好还有饼。
English: Zhu Zi said persuasively, "I just happen to have some bread."

古文：回命从者，以三十饼遗之，兼传问讯。
现代文：回头命令跟从的人：把三十个饼给她，并代为问候。
English: He turned to his followers and said, "Bring her thirty loaves of bread, and greet her."

古文：婢至寺白尼，尼悲涕不食，饼为众人所食。
现代文：婢女回到寺院向尼姑说了这件事，尼姑悲泣不吃，饼被众人吃了。
English: The maid returned to the temple and told the nun about the incident. The nun cried and refused to eat, and the bread was eaten by everyone.

古文：后十余日，婢往市，路又见自劝，慰问如初。复谓婢曰：汝和尚不了，死生常理，何可悲涕，故寄饼亦复不食。
现代文：过了十几天，婢女去买东西，路上又见到了朱自劝，慰问和第一次一样，朱自劝又对婢女说：你家和尚不明事理，死生是正常的道理，怎么可以悲伤落泪呢？
English: After a dozen days, the maid went to buy something, and on the way she saw Zhu Zi Xuan again. The condolences were the same as the first time. Zhu Zi Xuan also said to the maid: Your family still does not know the reason, death and life are normal, how can you be sad and shed tears?

古文：今可将三十饼往，宜令食也。
现代文：以前给她的饼也不吃，现在可把三十个饼带去，应该让她吃。
English: She used to refuse to eat the cakes that were given to her, but now she can take thirty cakes with her, and she should be allowed to eat them.

古文：婢还，终不食。
现代文：婢女回来，尼姑始终不吃。
English: When the maid returned, the nun still refused to eat.

古文：后十日，婢于市，复见自劝。问讯毕，谓婢曰：方冬严寒，闻汝和尚未挟纩。今附绢二匹，与和尚作寒具。
现代文：又过了十天，婢女在市上，又看到朱自劝，问候完毕，对婢女说：正是冬天严寒，听说你家和尚没有棉衣，现在给你两匹绢，给和尚做御寒的衣服。
English: Ten days later, when the maid was in the market, she saw Zhu Zizhu again. After the greetings were over, he said to the maid: "It is very cold in winter. I heard that your family still does not have cotton clothes. Now I will give you two mules to make warm clothes for the monk."

古文：婢承命持还，以绢授尼。
现代文：婢女奉命拿回来，把绢给了尼姑。
English: The maid was ordered to take it back and gave it to the nun.

古文：尼以一匹制裤，一留贮之。
现代文：尼姑用一匹绢做了裤子，一匹绢留下存放起来。
English: The nun used one donkey to make the trousers and kept the other in storage.

古文：后十余日，婢复遇自劝，谓曰：有客数十人，可持二绢。令和尚于房中作馔，为午食。
现代文：十多天后，婢女又遇到朱自劝，朱自劝对她说：有几十个客人，可以拿两匹绢，让和尚在房中做饭，当午餐。
English: More than ten days later, the maid met Zhu Zizhu again. Zhu Zizhu told her: There are dozens of guests, you can take two donkeys and let the monk cook in the room for lunch.

古文：明日午时，吾当来彼。
现代文：明天午时，我当去那里。
English: I have to be there by noon tomorrow.

古文：婢还，尼卖绢，市诸珍膳。
现代文：婢女回去，尼姑卖绢，买了各种珍奇美食。
English: The maidservants went back, the nuns sold candy and bought all kinds of rare delicacies.

古文：翌日待之，至午，婢忽冥昧久之，灵语因言客至。
现代文：第二天等待他们，到了午时，婢女忽然很久不省人事，显灵传语说客人到了。
English: The next day she waited for them. At noon, the maid suddenly lost consciousness for a long time. A spirit told her that the guests had arrived.

古文：婢起只供食，食方毕，又言曰：和尚好住，吾与诸客饮食致饱，今往已。
现代文：婢女立起地供神食，刚吃完，又说道：和尚安好，我和各位客人饮食很饱，现在走了。
English: The maidservant stood up to offer the food to the deity, and as soon as she had finished, she said again: "The monk is safe, I and all the guests have had enough to eat, and now I am leaving."

古文：婢送自劝出门，久之方悟，自尔不见。
现代文：婢女送朱自劝出门，很久才醒过来，从此再没看见朱自劝。
English: The maidservant sent Zhu Zixu out of the house. It took him a long time to wake up, and he never saw Zhu Zixu again.

