古文：十月选成熟栀子，取子淘净，晒干。
现代文：十月的时候选取成熟的栀子果实，把子取出，淘洗干净，晒干收藏。
English: In October, pick ripe hazelnut fruits, take out the seeds, wash them, dry them and collect them.

古文：至来春三月，选沙白地，劚畦。
现代文：等到来年春天三月，选择空闲的沙土地，掘治成畦。
English: In the spring and March of the next year, choose an idle sandy land and dig it into a mound.

古文：区深一尺，全去旧土，却收地上湿润浮土，筛细，填满区。
现代文：区坑一尺深，将旧土全部去掉，另外收敛地面上湿润的表土，用筛筛细，把区坑填满。
English: the pit is one foot deep, remove all the old soil, and collect the moist topsoil on the ground. Use a fine sieve to fill the pit.

古文：下种稠密，如种茄法。细土薄糁。
现代文：播种要稠密，如同种茄子的方法，用细土薄撒覆盖。
English: Sowing should be dense, as in the method of growing eggplants, covered with a thin layer of fine soil.

古文：上搭箔棚遮日，高可一尺。
现代文：畦上搭盖箔棚遮蔽日晒，棚高约一尺。
English: A foil canopy was erected over the cocoon to shield it from the sun. The canopy was about a foot high.

古文：旱时，一二日用水于棚上频频浇洒，不令土脉坚垎。
现代文：天旱时，每隔一两天便用水在棚上频繁地浇洒，不要让畦土变得干硬。
English: When the weather is dry, water the shed frequently every one or two days. Do not let the rammed earth become hard and dry.

古文：四十余日，芽方出土。
现代文：约需四十多天，幼芽方可长出地面。
English: It takes about forty days for the young shoots to grow out of the ground.

古文：薅治，浇溉。
现代文：应经常拔草、松土和浇水。
English: Weeds, loose soil and watering should be done regularly.

古文：至冬月，厚用蒿草藏护。
现代文：到了冬季，要用厚厚的蒿草将其覆盖并保护好。
English: In winter, it should be covered with thick rushes and protected.

古文：次年三月移开，相去一寸一科。
现代文：第二年三月进行分栽，相隔一尺远栽一棵。
English: In March of the following year, the trees were divided and planted one foot apart.

古文：锄治、浇溉宜频。
现代文：锄草松土、浇水要勤。
English: Grass and pine soil should be watered frequently.

古文：冬月，用土深拥根株，其枝梢用草包护。
现代文：冬季，用土把根部壅埋得深深的，枝梢用草包裹加以保护。
English: In winter, the roots should be deeply buried with soil, and the branches should be protected by wrapping them in grass.

古文：至次年三四月又移，一步半一科，栽成行列。
现代文：至第三年三四月间再移一次，一步半远栽一棵，要栽得行列整齐。
English: Between March and April of the third year, move it once more, and plant a tree one and a half steps away, so that the rows are neatly planted.

古文：须园内穿井，频浇，频锄。
现代文：栀园内应该凿井，经常浇水和锄草松土。
English: A well should be dug in the garden, watering and weeding the pine soil regularly.

古文：每岁冬，须北面厚夹篱障，以蔽风寒。
现代文：每年冬天，均要在园子的北面夹编一道厚的篱笆墙，以便挡蔽寒风吹袭。
English: Every winter, a thick fence wall is built on the north side of the garden in order to block the cold wind.

古文：第四年，开花结实。
现代文：第四年便可开花结实。
English: In the fourth year, it can flower and grow strong.

古文：十月收摘，甑内微蒸过，晒干用。
现代文：十月间采摘收取，放进甑锅稍微蒸过，晒干后便可用来染色。
English: They are picked in October, put into a steamer and steamed slightly. After drying, they can be used for dyeing.

