古文：萧得里底，字糺邻，晋王孝先之孙。
现代文：萧得里底，字纠邻，晋王萧孝先之孙。
English: Xiao Deli Di, the word rectification, the grandson of the Jin king Xiao Xiaosheng.

古文：父撒钵，历官使相。
现代文：父撒钵，历任使相。
English: His father, Sakaki, was a minister.

古文：得里底短而偻，外谨内倨。
现代文：得里底身材短小而背驼，对人小心谨慎而内心倨傲。
English: Deli Di is short and stooped, cautious with people but proud inside.

古文：大康中，补祗候郎君，稍迁兴圣宫副使，兼同知中丞司事。
现代文：大康年间，补为祗候郎君，渐升为兴圣宫副使，兼同知中丞司事。
English: During the prosperous years, he was promoted to the post of Shiko-rokun, and gradually rose to the position of vice-envoy to the Heungseong Palace, as well as the secretary to his classmate Chujo.

古文：大安中，燕王妃生子，得里底以妃叔故，历宁远军节度使、长宁宫使。
现代文：大安年间，燕王妃生子，得里底因是王妃之叔，历任宁远军节度使、长宁宫使。
English: During the Taian era, the son of Queen Yan was born, and since Deride was the uncle of the princess, he was successively appointed as the Ningyuan Army Festival envoy and the Changning Palace envoy.

古文：寿隆二年，监讨达里得、拔思母二部，多俘而还，改同知南京留守事。
现代文：寿隆二年，监军攻讨达里得、拔思母二部，大肆俘掳而回，改任同知南京留守事。
English: In the second year of Shulong, the supervising army attacked Daride and Batshimo, captured and returned, and was reassigned to stay in Nanjing.

古文：乾统元年，为北面林牙、同知北院枢密事，受诏与北院枢密使耶律阿思治乙辛余党。阿思纳贿，多出其罪；得里底不能制，亦附会之。
现代文：乾统元年，任北面林牙、同知北院枢密事，受诏与北院枢密使耶律阿思究治乙辛余党，阿思收受贿赂，大多出脱其罪行；得里底无法制止他，也附会他的意见。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qian, Lin Ya, who was from the north, was appointed as the privy councilor of the Northern Court. He received the edict and the Northern Court's privy councilor, Yelu Ah Si, investigated and punished the remaining party members. Ah Si accepted bribes and got away with most of his crimes; Deli Di could not stop him and also supported his opinion.

古文：四年，知北院枢密事。
现代文：四年，任知北院枢密事。
English: For four years, he served as Privy Councilor of Chihoku-in.

古文：夏王李乾顺为宋所攻，遣使请和解，诏得里底与南院枢密使牛温舒使宋平之。
现代文：夏王李乾顺遭到宋军攻击，派使者请求我国出面和解，诏令得里底与南院枢密使牛温舒出使宋国平息纠纷。
English: Li Qianshun, the king of Xia, was attacked by the Song army and sent an envoy to request China to come forward for reconciliation. The emperor ordered that Lidi and the privy council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty send Niu Wenshu to send an envoy to Song to quell the dispute.

古文：宋既许，得里底受书之日，乃曰： 始奉命取要约归，不见书辞，岂敢徒还。 
现代文：宋已经答应讲和，得里底接受和议书的那天，说道： 我初来时奉命取得和约回国，现在我连信中文辞都没看见，怎么能空手而回。 
English: Song had already promised to make peace, and on the day that the Dalai Lama accepted the peace proposal, he said: When I first came here, I was ordered to obtain a peace treaty and return to my country. Now I haven't even seen the Chinese words of the letter, how can I return empty-handed.

古文：遂对宋主发函而读。
现代文：于是当着宋主之面打开书信读了一遍。
English: So he opened the letter and read it in front of Lord Song.

古文：既还，朝议为是。
现代文：回国之后，朝议认为他做得对。
English: After returning to China, the North Korean government thought he had done the right thing.

古文：天庆三年，加守司徒，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：天庆三年，加守司徒，封兰陵郡王。
English: In the third year of Tianqing, he was promoted to the position of county magistrate of Lanling County.

古文：女直初起，廷臣多欲乘其未备，举兵往讨，得里底独沮之，以至败衄。
现代文：女真刚刚兴起时，朝臣大多主张乘他们还无防备之时，发兵前往讨伐；只有萧得里底出面阻止，以至于最终败于女真之手。
English: When Nyoshin was just emerging, most of the courtiers advocated taking advantage of the fact that they were still defenseless to send troops to the crusade; only Shodrid came forward to prevent it, so that they were eventually defeated by Nyoshin.

古文：天祚以得里底不合人望，出为西南面招讨使。
现代文：天祚因为得里底不得人心，出贬为西南面招讨使。
English: Because Tianzhu was unpopular in Lijiang, it was demoted to the southwestern side to invite envoys.

古文：八年，召为北院枢密使，宠任弥笃。
现代文：八年，征召为北院枢密使，宠幸和重用更加坚固。
English: Eight years later, he was conscripted as a Privy Counsellor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：是时，诸路大乱，飞章告急者络绎而至，得里底不即上闻，有功者亦无甄别。
现代文：当此之时，诸路大乱，飞传奏章告急者接连而至，得里底并不立即奏闻，对于有功之人也不加鉴别给赏。
English: At this time, all roads were in chaos, and emergency callers came one after another, but they were not immediately reported, and no reward was given to those who were meritorious.

古文：由是将校怨怒，人无斗志。
现代文：因此将校怨恨恼怒，士兵毫无斗志。
English: As a result, the officers are resentful and angry, and the soldiers have no fighting spirit.

古文：保大二年，金兵至岭东。
现代文：保大二年，金兵到达岭东。
English: In the second year of college, Jinbing arrived in Lingdong.

古文：会耶律撒八、习骑撒跋等谋立晋王敖卢斡事泄，上召得里底议曰： 反者必以此儿为名，若不除去，何以获安。 
现代文：适逢耶律撒八、习骑撒跋等人图谋扶立晋王敖卢斡之事败露，皇上召见得里底商议说： 反叛之人必定以此儿为号召，如果不除去，怎么能得到安宁！ 
English: When it became clear that the attempt by Jerusabath, Abiathar, and others to help establish King Joram of the Jin dynasty had failed, the emperor summoned him to consult with the Delites and said: "The rebels must take this as a call, if they do not remove it, how can they obtain peace!

古文：得里底唯唯，竟无一言申理。
现代文：得里底唯唯诺诺，竟然没有说一句话来为晋王申辩。
English: Deli Di was so submissive that he didn't even say a word to defend Jin Wang.

古文：王既死，人心益离。
现代文：晋王死后，人心更加离散。
English: After the death of Jin Wang, the hearts of the people became even more scattered.

古文：金兵逾岭，天祚率卫兵西遁。
现代文：金兵翻越山岭，天祚率领卫兵向西逃遁。
English: The gold soldiers climbed over the mountains, and Tianyao led the guards to flee to the west.

古文：元妃萧氏，得里底之侄，谓得里底曰： 尔任国政，致君至此，何以生为！ 
现代文：元妃萧氏，乃得里底之侄女，对得里底说： 你主持国政，造成君王落到这步田地，你还活着干什么？ 
English: The former Empress Xiao, Nadiridi's niece, said to Nadiridi: "You presided over the state affairs, causing the monarch to fall to this level, what are you still doing alive?

古文：时广州渤海作乱，乃与驸马都尉萧韩家奴袭其不备，平之，复败敌将侯概于川州。
现代文：得里底只是一个劲地谢罪，不能作答。次日，天祚发怒，驱逐了得里底及其子麽撒。得里底离去之后，被耶律高山奴抓获送给金兵。
English: The next day, the heavens were angry and expelled Delidi and his son, Kosa. After Delidi left, he was captured by the Jerud highlanders and given to the Golden Soldier.

古文：是岁，东京叛，遇敌来击，师溃；独酬斡率麾下数人力战，殁于阵，追赠龙虎卫上将军。耶律章奴，字特末衍，季父房之后。
现代文：得里底瞅准看守疏忽，脱身逃回，又为耶律九斤得到，送给耶律淳。当时耶律淳已经僭号称帝，得里底自知无法免死，便斥责说： 我不能奉事僭越窃号之君主！ 绝食数日，去世。子麽撒，为金兵所杀。耶律章奴，字特末衍，季父房之后裔。
English: Derrida's jailer was negligent, escaped and returned, and received nine pounds for Yerut, and gave it to Yerut Jun. At that time, Yerut Jun had already proclaimed himself emperor, and Derrida knew that he could not avoid death, so he rebuked: I can not serve the monarch who stole the sign! He went on a hunger strike for several days and died. His son was killed by the gold soldiers. Yerut Zhangnu, the word is Te Matsuyan, is the descendant of his father's house.

古文：父查剌，养高不仕。
现代文：父查剌，隐居不仕。
English: His father, Zha Rong, lived in seclusion.

古文：章奴明敏善谈论。
现代文：章奴聪明机敏，善于谈论。
English: Zhang Nong is smart and quick-witted, and good at talking.

古文：大安中，补牌印郎君。
现代文：大安年间，补为牌印郎君。
English: During the Taian era, Shu became the master of the seal.

古文：乾统元年，累迁右中丞，兼领牌印宿直事。
现代文：乾统元年，累迁至右中丞，兼领牌印宿直事。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qian, he was successively transferred to the position of U-chujo, concurrently holding the post of Injuku Naoji.

古文：六年，以直宿不谨，降知内客省事。
现代文：六年，因为值宿不谨慎，降为知内客省事。
English: Six years later, because it was not prudent to stay on duty, it was downgraded to a domestic guest to save trouble.

古文：天庆四年，授东北路统军副使。
现代文：天庆四年，授东北路统军副使。
English: In the fourth year of Tianqing, he was awarded the title of deputy envoy of the Northeast United Front.

古文：五年，改同知咸州路兵马事。
现代文：五年，改任同知咸州路兵马事。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the same post in charge of the troops and horses on the Chishanzhou Road.

古文：及天祚亲征女直，萧胡笃为先锋都统，章奴为都监。
现代文：及至天祚亲征女真，萧胡睹担任先锋都统，章奴任都监。
English: And to Tianyao's personal enlistment of Jianzhen, Xiao Huzhi served as the vanguard of the capital, and Zhang Nu served as the supervisor of the capital.

古文：大军渡鸭子河，章奴与魏国王淳妻兄萧敌里及其甥萧延留等谋立淳，诱将卒三百余人亡归。
现代文：大军渡过鸭子河，章奴与魏国王耶律淳之妻兄萧敌里及其外甥萧延留等人谋划扶立耶律淳，引诱将士三百余人逃回。
English: The large army crossed the Duzi River, and Zhang Niu, together with Xiao Qili, the brother-in-law of the Wei King Yerutong, and his nephew Xiao Yan Ryu, and others, plotted to overthrow Yerutong and lure more than three hundred soldiers to flee back.

古文：既而天祚为女直所败，章奴乃遣敌里、延留以废立事驰报淳。
现代文：不久天祚为女真击败，章奴便派敌里、延留以废天祚立淳之事飞速报告于耶律淳。
English: Soon after, Tianzhu was defeated by Jianzhen, and Zhang Nong quickly sent an envoy to the enemy to report to Yelu Jun that Tianzhu had defeated and detained Jelu Jun.

古文：淳犹豫未决。
现代文：耶律淳犹豫不决。
English: Yeruchun hesitates.

古文：会行宫使者乙信持天祚御札至，备言章奴叛命，淳对使者号哭，即斩敌里、延留首以献天祚。
现代文：适逢行宫使者乙信带着天祚的书信前来，详述章奴反叛王命之经过，耶律淳对着使者失声痛哭，便将敌里、延留斩首献给天祚。
English: When the messenger to the palace, Yixin, arrived with a letter from Tianyao, detailing the details of Zhang's rebellion against the king's order, Ye Lu Chun lost his voice and wept bitterly at the messenger, and then beheaded his enemy, Yan Liu, to Tianyao.

古文：章奴见淳不从，诱草寇数百攻掠上京，取府库财物。
现代文：章奴见耶律淳不从，便引诱草寇数百人袭击抢夺上京，夺取府库中的财物。
English: When Zhang Nong saw that Yerutong did not comply, he lured hundreds of grasshoppers to attack and rob the capital, seizing property in the government treasury.

古文：至祖州，率僚属告太祖庙云： 我大辽基业，由太祖百战而成。
现代文：到祖州，率领手下官员向太祖陵庙祷告说 ：我们大辽的基业，是由太祖经千百次征战而奠立的。
English: When he arrived in Zhuzhou, he led his subordinate officials to pray at the tomb of the great ancestor, saying, "The foundation of our great Liao Dynasty was laid by the great ancestor through thousands of wars.

古文：今天下土崩，窃见兴宗皇帝孙魏国王淳道德隆厚，能理世安民，臣等欲立以主社稷。
现代文：如今天下土崩瓦解，我私下发现兴宗皇帝之孙魏国王耶律淳德行深厚，能够治理国家安定百姓，臣等想扶立他以主持社稷大业。
English: If today's society were to fall apart, I would privately discover that Emperor Xingzong's grandson, the Wei King Ye Lu Junde, was a man of profound virtue, capable of governing the country and stabilizing the people, and that his vassals wanted to promote him to preside over the great cause of social reform.

古文：会淳适好草甸，大事未遂。
现代文：适逢耶律淳前往好草甸去了，大事未成。
English: When the time was right, Ye Lu Jun went to the Good Meadow, but nothing happened.

古文：迩来天祚惟耽乐是从，不恤万机。强敌肆侮，师徒败绩。
现代文：近来天祚只知游玩享乐，不理政事；强敌肆意侮辱我邦，军队一败再败。
English: In recent times, the gods only know how to play for pleasure and do not care about politics; strong enemies wantonly insult our country, and the army is defeated again and again.

古文：加以盗贼蜂起，邦国危于累卵。臣等忝预族属，世蒙恩渥，上欲安九庙之灵，下欲救万民之命，乃有此举。
现代文：加上盗贼纷起，国家危于累卵，臣等忝在宗族之列，世代蒙受恩泽，在上想安宁九庙在天之灵，在下想救济万民之性命，所以才有此举。
English: In addition, thieves are on the rise, the country is in danger of being burdened with eggs, the vassals are in the ranks of the clan, the generations have received grace, and they want to pacify the nine temples in the spirit of heaven, and they want to save the lives of all people, so they have this move.

古文：实出至诚，冀累圣垂佑。 
现代文：实出于一片至诚之心，希望历代圣上赐予福佑。 
English: In fact, out of a sincere heart, I hope that the past generations of saints will bestow blessings.

古文：西至庆州，复祀诸庙，仍述所以举兵之意，移檄州县、诸陵官僚，士卒稍稍属心。
现代文：向西进军至庆州，又祭祀诸庙，仍旧陈述之所以举兵之意图，传檄于州县、诸陵官僚，士卒渐渐归心。
English: Marching westward to Gyeongju, they also made sacrifices to the temples, and still stated the intention of raising an army, which was passed on to the bureaucrats of the prefectures and counties and the tombs, and the soldiers gradually came to their senses.

古文：时饶州渤海及侯概等相继来应，众至数万，趋广平淀。
现代文：时逢饶州渤海以及侯概等人相继响应前来，拥兵至数万人，前往广平淀。
English: At that time, Baohai of Raozhou and others such as Hou Zhou came to respond successively, and tens of thousands of soldiers marched to Guangpingyuan.

古文：其党耶律女古等暴横不法，劫掠妇女财畜。
现代文：其党人耶律女古等人横行不守法纪，抢掠妇女、财产和牲畜。
English: Members of his party, such as Ye Lu Jingu, rampantly disobeyed the law and looted women, property and livestock.

古文：章奴度不能制，内怀悔恨；又攻上京不克，北走降虏。
现代文：章奴料想无法制止，心怀悔恨；又进攻上京，未能攻下，北逃，想投降北虏。
English: Zhang Nong thought that he would not be able to stop it, and felt remorse; he also attacked Beijing, failed to capture it, fled to the north, and wanted to surrender to the northern troops.

古文：顺国女直阿鹘产率兵追败之，杀其将耶律弥里直，擒贵族二百余人，其妻子配役绣院，或散诸近侍为婢；余得脱者皆遁去。
现代文：顺国女真阿鹘产率兵追击，打败了他，杀其将领耶律弥里直，活捉贵族二百余人，将其妻子儿女发配到绣院服劳役，或者发给诸近侍做奴婢；其余得以脱身者均逃跑了。
English: Shun Guo's daughter, Zhen'an, led the troops in pursuit and defeated him, killed his general, Yerutmi Ritsuna, captured more than two hundred nobles alive, and sent their wives and children to the embroidery yard to serve as laborers, or sent them to their close attendants to be slaves; the rest who were able to escape all fled.

古文：章奴诈为使者，欲奔女直，为逻者所获，缚送行在，伏诛。
现代文：章奴假称是使者，想投奔女真，为巡逻之人所抓获，捆绑送到行宫，被诛杀。
English: Pretending to be an emissary, Zhang Nong wanted to join Niang Zhen, but he was caught by the patrol, tied up and taken to the palace, where he was beaten to death.

