古文：邢昺，字叔明，曹州济阴人。
现代文：邢昺，字叔明，是曹州济阴人。
English: , the character 叔明, is a native of Caozhou, Jilin Province.

古文：太平兴国初举《五经》，廷试日，召升殿讲《师》、《比》二卦，又问以群经发题。太宗嘉其精博，擢《九经》及第，授大理评事、知泰州盐城监，赐钱二十万。
现代文：大平兴国初，邢昺考五经进士，廷试之日，赴殿讲师、比二卦，又问以群经发题，太宗嘉其博学精深，擢九经进士及第，授大理评事、知泰州盐城监，赐钱二十万。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, when the examination of the Five Classics was being held, and the day of the court examination was approaching, the lecturer went to the palace, compared the two gospels, and asked the questions of the Five Classics. Taizong Jia, with his profound knowledge, was promoted to the ninth grade of the nine classics, awarded the title of university science critic, and the supervisor of Yancheng in Zhitai Province, and was given 200,000 yuan.

古文：昺以是监处楚、泰间，泰僻左而楚会要，盐食为急，请改隶楚州，从之。
现代文：邢昺因此监处楚、泰之间，泰州僻左而楚州会要，盐食问题比较严重，邢昺请朝廷将泰州合并入楚州，朝廷采纳了他的建议。
English: Therefore, between the supervision of Chu and Tai, Taizhou was far away and Chu would want it, and the salt problem was more serious. He asked the court to merge Taizhou into Chuzhou, and the court accepted his suggestion.

古文：明年，召为国子监丞，专讲学之任。迁尚书博士，出知仪州，就转国子博士。代还，赐绯，选为诸王府侍讲。
现代文：第二年，邢昺被召为国子监丞，专门负责讲学事宜，不久升迁尚书博士，出知仪州，转为国子博士，代还，服赐大红，选为诸王府侍讲。
English: In the second year, Zou was called to be the provincial son supervisor, and was specifically responsible for lecturing matters. Soon he was promoted to the position of Doctor of Letters, promoted to the position of Doctor of Literature, promoted to the position of Doctor of Literature, promoted to the position of Doctor of Literature, promoted to the position of Doctor of Literature, promoted to the position of Doctor of Literature, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the position of Vice-President, promoted to the

古文：雍熙中，迁水部员外郎，改司勋。端拱初，赐金紫，累迁金部郎中。
现代文：雍熙中，迁水部员外郎，改司勋，端拱初年，服赐金紫，累迁金部郎中。
English: In the Yongxi period, he was the second son of a member of the Ministry of Relocation and Resettlement, and the third son of a member of the Ministry of Relocation and Resettlement, and the first son of a member of the Ministry of Relocation and Resettlement, and the second son of the Ministry of Relocation and Resettlement.

古文：真宗即位，改司勋郎中，俄知审刑院，以昺儒者不达刑章，命刘元吉同领其事。
现代文：真宗即位后，邢昺改任司勋郎中，不久知审刑院，因其为儒者不精刑法，故命刘元吉同领其事。
English: After Emperor Zhenzong ascended to the throne, he changed his name to Shixun Lang, and soon learned about the Criminal Court. Since he was a Confucian and did not understand criminal law, he ordered Liu Yuanji to be in charge of the case.

古文：是冬，昺上表自陈夙侍讲讽，迁右谏议大夫。
现代文：这年冬天，邢昺上表，自陈夙侍讲讽，迁右谏议大夫。
English: This winter, 上表, from Chen 侍 lecture irony, moved to the right 議醫生.

古文：咸平初，改国子祭酒。
现代文：咸平初年，改为国子祭酒。
English: In the first year of Hampyeong, it was changed to Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：二年，始置翰林侍讲学士，以昺为之。
现代文：咸平二年，朝廷开始设置翰林侍讲学士一职，以邢昺为之。
English: In the second year of Xianping, the imperial court began to set up the post of Hanlin's attendant lecturer, with Zou as the head.

古文：受诏与杜镐、舒雅、孙奭、李慕清、崔偓牷等校定《周礼》、《仪礼》、《公羊》、《谷梁春秋传》、《孝经》、《论语》、《尔雅义疏》，及成，并加阶勋。
现代文：邢昺受诏与杜镐、舒雅、孙、李慕清、崔亻屋亻全等共同校定《周礼》、《仪礼》、《公羊春秋传》、《谷梁春秋传》、《孝经》、《论语》、《尔雅义疏》。
English: He and Du Yu, Shu Ya, Sun, Li Mu Qing, and Cui Yuya all jointly calibrated "Weekly Rituals," "Rites and Ceremonies," "The Spring and Autumn of the Ram," "The Spring and Autumn of Gu Liang," "The Book of Filial Piety," "The Analects," and "The Story of Ya Yi."

古文：俄为淮南、两浙巡抚使。
现代文：完工后，参加校书者并加阶勋，不久，邢昺为淮南、两浙巡抚使。
English: After completion, those who participated in the school book were awarded with the order of merit, and soon became the Huainan and the two Zhejiang governors.

古文：初置讲读之职，即于便坐令昺讲《左氏春秋》，侍读预焉。五年讲毕，宴近臣于崇政殿，赐昺袭衣、金带，加器币，仍迁工部侍郎，兼国子祭酒、学士如故。
现代文：朝廷设置讲读之职，即令邢昺入内给皇帝讲《左氏春秋》，五年才讲完，皇帝为此宴近臣于崇政殿，特赐邢昺袭衣、金带加器币，仍迁工部侍郎，兼国子祭酒、学士如故。
English: The imperial court set up the duty of lecturing, that is, the emperor was ordered to enter the palace to speak to the emperor about "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and it took five years to complete the speech. For this banquet, the emperor gave a special gift to a close vassal at the Su Zheng palace, a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a special gift of a

古文：知审官院陈恕丁内艰，以昺权知院事。
现代文：知审官院陈恕丧母后，以邢昺权知审官院。
English: After Chen Ji's mother's death, he was appointed to the Court of Final Appeal.

古文：景德二年，上言： 亡兄素尝举进士，愿沾赠典。 特赠大理评事。
现代文：景德二年，邢昺对皇帝说： 我已故的哥哥邢素曾举进士，愿沾赠典。 皇帝因而赐其为大理评事。
English: In the second year of King Jingde's reign, Yao said to the emperor, "My late brother Yao Su once raised a scholar, and I would like to receive a gift certificate." The emperor thus gave him the title of Dali Commentator.

古文：是夏，上幸国子监阅库书，问昺经版几何，昺曰： 国初不及四千，今十余万，经、传、正义皆具。
现代文：这年夏天，皇帝亲临国子监查阅藏书，问邢昺经版有多少，邢昺说： 国初不到四千卷，现在已有十多万卷，且经、传、正义样样俱全。
English: In the summer of that year, the emperor himself came to the imperial procurator to inspect the collection of books and asked him how many editions of the sutras there were. He said: At the beginning of the country, there were less than four thousand volumes, but now there are more than one hundred thousand volumes, and the sutras, legends, and justice are all complete.

古文：臣少从师业儒时，经具有疏者百无一二，盖力不能传写。
现代文：臣早年从师学儒时，经具有疏者百无一、二，此因力量不够所致，现在诸经传板本齐全，士庶之人皆有所藏，此乃儒者赶上了幸运之世。 
English: In his early years, when he was learning Confucianism from his teacher, there were only one or two people who had a poor grasp of Confucianism. This was due to his lack of strength. Now, all the books of Confucianism are complete, and everyone has a copy. This is because Confucianism has caught up with the world of fortune.

古文：今板本大备，士庶家皆有之，斯乃儒者逢辰之幸也。 上喜曰： 国家虽尚儒术，非四方无事，何以及此！ 上又访以学馆故事，有未振举者，昺不能有所建明。先是，印书所裁余纸，鬻以供监中杂用，昺请归之三司，以裨国用。
现代文：皇帝高兴地说 ：国家虽然崇尚儒术，然而，如果不是四方太平也不能至此。 皇帝又访以学馆旧事，有未振举者，邢昺不能有所建树说明。起初，印书后所裁剪下来的边角之纸，一般都拿去卖钱，以供监中杂用，而邢昺请归之三司，以裨国用。
English: The emperor said happily: Although the country advocates Confucianism, however, if it is not a four-way peace, it can not be so. The emperor also visited the old affairs of the Academy, and if there was anyone who had not been promoted, he could not explain it. At first, the paper cut off the corners after the book was printed was generally taken to sell money for miscellaneous use in the prison, but please return it to the three divisions to benefit the country.

古文：自是监学公费不给，讲官亦厌其寥落。
现代文：从此，监学公费不给，一些讲学之官也厌其清高。
English: Since then, public fees have not been paid to supervisors, and some lecturers are also fed up with the high fees.

古文：上方兴起道术，又令昺与张雍、杜镐、孙奭举经术该博、德行端良者，以广学员。
现代文：皇上刚刚开始兴崇道术，故又令邢昺与杜镐、张雍、孙选举一些精通经术、德行端良者去充实学员。
English: The emperor had just begun to promote Taoism, so he also ordered Zhuang, Du Juan, Zhang Yong, and Sun to elect some people who were proficient in Taoism and virtuous to enrich the students.

古文：三年，加刑部侍郎。
现代文：景德三年，邢昺加官刑部侍郎。
English: In the third year of Jingde's reign, he became an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department of the Shijiazhuang Government.

古文：昺居近职，常多召对，一日从容与上语及宫邸旧僚，叹其沦丧殆尽，唯昺独存。
现代文：邢昺多任一些与皇帝较亲近的职，因而时常接受皇帝咨询。有一次，邢昺与皇上从容交谈，当谈到宫邸旧僚时，皇上叹息旧僚们一个个先后亡故，只有邢昺还活着。
English: On one occasion, Zou had a leisurely conversation with the emperor. When talking about his former colleagues at the imperial residence, the emperor lamented that his former colleagues had passed away one after another, and only Zou was still alive.

古文：翌日，赐白金千两，且诏其妻至宫庭，赐以冠帔。
现代文：第二天，皇上特赐邢昺白金千两，且诏其妻至宫廷，赐以披肩和围巾。
English: The next day, the emperor gave him 1,000 taels of platinum and sent his wife to the court with a shawl and scarf.

古文：四年，昺以羸老艰于趋步上前，自陈曹州故乡，愿给假一年归视田里，俟明年郊祀还朝。
现代文：景德四年，邢昺以羸老步履艰难为由，自请回一趟曹州故乡，希望皇上准假一年，以便归视田里，到第二年郊祀开始时即回朝。
English: In the fourth year of King Jingde's reign, on the grounds that it was difficult for him to keep pace with the times, he invited himself to return to his hometown of Caozhou. He hoped that the emperor would be granted a year's leave so that he could return to his fields, and that he would return to the imperial court at the beginning of the second year of suburb worship.

古文：上命坐，慰劳之，因谓曰： 便可权本州，何须假耶？ 昺又言杨砺、夏侯峤同为府僚，二臣没皆赠尚书。
现代文：皇上让座给邢昺，并安慰说： 你可权知曹州，如此，则工作、回乡合而为一，何须请假呢？ 邢昺又说杨砺、夏侯峤与自己同为府僚，他们二人去世后，皆赠有尚书荣衔。
English: The emperor gave up his seat to Yan, and consoled him by saying: You have the authority to know Caozhou, so work and returning home are combined into one, why do you need to take time off? Yan also said that Yang Xuan, Xia Houyan and himself were government officials, and after the death of the two of them, they were all awarded the title of Shangshu.

古文：上悯之，翌日，谓宰相曰： 此可见其志矣。 即超拜工部尚书、知曹州、职如故。
现代文：皇上同情邢昺，第二天便对宰相说 ：此足可见其志矣。 即破例拜邢昺为工部尚书，知曹州职如故。
English: The emperor was sympathetic to him, and on the next day he said to the prime minister, "This is a clear indication of his aspiration, that is, he will, for the first time ever, be a member of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and will continue to be in charge of Caozhou.

古文：入辞日，赐袭衣、金带。是日，特开龙图阁，召近臣宴崇和殿，上作五、七言诗二首赐之，预宴者皆赋。
现代文：入辞之日，皇上赐袭衣、金带于邢昺，特开龙图阁，召近臣宴于崇和殿，皇上做五言诗和七言诗两首赐邢昺，参加宴会的人皆赋诗献词。
English: On the day of his inaugural address, the emperor bestowed the imperial robe and gold sash on the eunuch, and specially opened the Dragon Hall, and invited his close vassals to a banquet at the Chonghe Hall. The emperor gave the eunuch two poems, a five-sentence poem and a seven-sentence poem, and everyone who attended the banquet contributed a poem.

古文：昺视壁间《尚书》、《礼记图》，指《中庸》篇曰：凡为天下国家有九经。
现代文：邢昺看到墙壁后所挂《尚书图》、《礼记图》，手指《中庸篇》说，凡为天下国家有九经，且陈其大义。
English: After seeing the wall-mounted "Shang Shu-tu," "Li Ji-tu" and "Zhongyong Zhen," he said that there are nine scriptures for every country in the world, and they are of great significance.

古文：因陈其大义，上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇上嘉纳之。
English: The Emperor Kaname is coming.

古文：及行，又令近臣祖送，设会于宜春苑。
现代文：将要上路回乡时，皇上又令近臣前来相送，欢送会设于宜春苑。
English: When he was about to set off on his journey back to his hometown, the Emperor had his close vassals come to see him off, and the farewell party was held at Yichun Court.

古文：大中祥符初，上东封泰山，昺表曹州民请车驾经由本州，仍令济阴令王范部送父老诣阙，优诏答之。
现代文：大中祥符初，皇上率僧侣百官东封泰山，邢昺上表请东封车驾路经曹州，还指使官吏王范组织乡里父老到朝廷请愿。
English: At the beginning of the Great Middle Xiangfu, the emperor led hundreds of officials and monks to Dongfeng Taishan, and asked Dongfeng to drive through Caozhou. He also instructed the official Wang Fan to organize the villagers to petition the imperial court.

古文：俄召还。车驾进发，命判留司御史台。
现代文：皇上有感于这一片诚心，答应了他们的要求。很快，邢昺被召回朝中，东封车驾出发时，皇上命邢昺判留司御史台。
English: Impressed by this piece of sincerity, the emperor agreed to their request. Soon, Yao was recalled to the imperial court, and when he set off in Dongfeng car, the emperor ordered him to stay on the throne.

古文：礼毕，进位礼部尚书。
现代文：东封仪式完毕后，邢昺进位礼部尚书。
English: After the Dongfeng ceremony, the investiture ceremony was held.

古文：上勤政悯农，每雨雪不时，忧形于色，以昺素习田事，多委曲访之。
现代文：皇上勤于政事，关心农事。如遇风不调、雨不顺的时节，便忧形于色。因邢昺熟悉农事，所以皇上经常向他讨教。
English: The emperor was diligent in politics and concerned about agriculture. If the weather was bad, he would be sad. Because he was familiar with agriculture, the emperor often asked him for advice.

古文：初，田家察阴晴丰凶，皆有状候，老农之相传者率有验，昺多采其说为对。
现代文：起初，田农们察觉气候与年成好坏有密切关系，日积月累便有了丰富的经验，邢昺吸收这些经验后，提供给皇上做参考。
English: At first, the farmers noticed that the weather was closely related to the good or bad harvest. Over time, they gained a wealth of experience, and after absorbing this experience, they provided it to the emperor for reference.

古文：又言： 民之灾患，大者有四：一曰，疫，二曰旱，三曰水，四曰畜。
现代文：邢昺说 ：老百姓受灾最严重的有四种情况：一是瘟疫，二是旱灾，三是水灾，四是畜灾。
English: Zou said: There are four situations in which the people are most seriously affected by disasters: one is plague, the second is drought, the third is flood, and the fourth is animal disaster.

古文：灾岁必有其一，但或轻或重耳。四事之害，旱暵为甚，盖田无畎浍，悉不可救，所损必尽。《传》曰： 天灾流行，国家代有。
现代文：每年必有其中一灾困扰百姓，只灾情轻重略有不同，而这四灾之中，尤以旱灾危害最甚，因为如果田地干涸，庄稼便毫无收成，《左传》中所说的 天灾流行，国家代有。 
English: Every year, there must be one of these disasters that troubles the people, only the severity of the disaster is slightly different. Among these four disasters, drought is the most harmful, because if the fields dry up, the crops will have no harvest. The natural disaster epidemic mentioned in Zuo Zhuan exists in every country.

古文：此之谓也。 
现代文：就是这个道理。 
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：三年，被病请告，诏太医诊视。
现代文：大中祥符三年，邢昺患病告于上，皇帝诏太医为之诊视。
English: In the third year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, Emperor Zhao was diagnosed and treated by the imperial physician.

古文：六月，上亲临问疾，赐名药一奁、白金器千两、缯彩千匹。
现代文：六月，皇帝还亲临探望邢昺，并赐名药一盒、白金器千两、丝绸千匹。
English: In June, the emperor also visited Zou in person, and gave him a box of famous medicine, a thousand pieces of platinum ware, and a thousand pieces of silk.

古文：国朝故事，非宗戚将相，无省疾临丧之礼，特有加于昺与郭贽者，以恩旧故也。
现代文：过去，如果不是宗戚将相，皇帝是不会行探病临丧之礼的，此特加于邢昺与郭贽，是因为皇帝对他们素来器重。
English: In the past, if it were not for the relatives of the generals, the emperor would not perform the funeral ceremony. This was specially added to Yu Yu and Guo Yu, because the emperor has always been important to them.

古文：未几，有旨命中书召其子太常博士知东明县仲宝、国子博士知信阳军若思还侍疾。
现代文：邢昺患病后，皇帝命中书召邢昺之子，即太常博士知东明县的邢仲宝和国子博士知信阳军的邢若思回来侍候父亲。
English: After Zhai became ill, the emperor ordered Zhai's sons, namely, Zhai Zhongbao of the Tai Chang Dr. Zhidongming County and Zhai Ruosi of the Guozi Dr. Zhishin Yangjun, to come back to wait for their father.

古文：逾月卒，年七十九，则左仆射，三子并进秩。
现代文：邢昺得病一个月后就去世了，终年七十九岁，被赠左仆射荣衔，其三子也受到外进品秩的优抚。
English: He died after a month of illness, at the age of seventy-nine. He was given the honorary title of Zuoxi, and his three sons also received the honorary title of imported goods.

古文：初，雍熙中，昺撰《礼选》二十卷献之，太宗探其帙，得《文王世子篇》，观之甚悦，因问卫绍钦曰： 昺为诸王讲说，曾及此乎？ 绍钦曰： 诸王常时访昺经义，昺每至发明君臣父子之道，必重复陈之。 太宗益喜。
现代文：雍熙年间，邢昺曾撰《礼选》二十卷献上，太宗翻阅其书时，看到《文王世子篇》一文，甚为高兴，因问卫绍钦说 ：邢昺在给诸王讲学时，是否讲过这一篇？ 卫绍钦回答说 ：诸王时常询问一些经义问题，邢昺则每当讲到君臣父子之道时，必反复讲解。 太宗听后更感欣慰。
English: During the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, Yu had written twenty volumes of "Selected Rites" for presentation. When Taizong was looking through his books, he was very pleased to see the article "Wen Wang Shizi" and asked Wei Shaoqin: "When you were lecturing to the kings, did you ever talk about this article?" Wei Shaoqin replied: "The kings often ask about some questions about the meaning of scripture, but whenever you talk about the way of the father and son, you must explain it repeatedly. Taizong felt even more gratified after listening.

古文：上尝因内阁暴书，览而称善，召昺同观，作《礼选赞》赐之。
现代文：真宗皇帝也曾因内阁多书，览而称好。并召邢昺同观，还亲自做《礼选赞》赐与邢昺。
English: Emperor Jianzong also praised the cabinet for its many books and reviews, and summoned his peers, and also personally made the "Celebration of the Selection" to bestow the award.

古文：昺言： 家无遗稿，愿得副本。 上许之。
现代文：邢昺说： 我家中无《礼选》遗稿，希望能得一副本。 
English: Zou said, "I don't have the last copy of "Election" at home, and I hope to get a copy."

古文：缮录未毕而昺卒，亟诏写二本，一本赐其家，一本俾置冢中。
现代文：皇上答应了他的要求，然而缮录未完毕，邢昺就辞世了。真宗皇帝马上下诏抄写两本，一本赐其家，一本放入邢昺墓中。
English: The emperor agreed to his request. However, he died before the record was completed. Emperor Zhenzong immediately copied two copies of the edict, one to be given to his family and one to be placed in Zou's tomb.

古文：昺在东宫及内庭，侍上讲《孝经》、《礼记》、《论语》、《书》、《易》、《诗》、《左氏传》。据传疏敷引之外，多引时事为喻，深被嘉奖。
现代文：邢昺在东宫及内廷，为太子和皇上讲《孝经》、《礼记》、《论语》、《书》、《易》、《诗》、《左氏传》，除旁征博引之外，还注意联系实际，深受嘉奖。
English: In the East Palace and the Inner Court, he read "Filial Piety," "Rites," "Analects," "Books," "Elegy," "Poem" and "Biography of Zuo Shi" for the prince and the emperor. In addition to collecting quotations, he also paid attention to the connection with reality, which was highly commended.

古文：上尝问： 管仲、召忽皆事公子纠，小白之入，召忽死之，管仲乃归齐相桓公。
现代文：皇上曾问： 管仲和召忽都曾事奉公子纠，小白之入，召忽死之，管仲遂转相齐桓公。
English: The emperor once asked, "Both Guan Zhong and Zhao Kuo once served as courtiers, Xiao Bai's entry, Zhao Kuo's death, Guan Zhong eventually turned into Qi Kuan.

古文：岂非召忽以忠死，而管仲不能固其节，为臣之道当若是乎？
现代文：岂非召忽以忠死，而管仲不固守其节，为臣之道是这样的吗？
English: Isn't this the way to be a vassal, to be loyal to death, and not to stick to one's principles?

古文：又郑注《礼记·世子篇》云： 文王以勤忧损寿，武王以安乐延年。
现代文：郑玄注《礼记？世子篇》说： 周文王因为勤于政事而缩短寿命，周武王因为享受安乐而益寿延年。 
English: Zheng Xuan's annotation of "Li Ji? Sezih Hen" said: King Zhouwen shortened his life because he was diligent in politics, and King Zhouwu prolonged his life because he enjoyed peace and quiet.

古文：朕以为本经旨意必不然也。且夏禹焦劳，有玄圭之赐，而享国永年。
现代文：朕以为《礼记》之本意不是这样的，况且夏禹焦劳尽瘁，有玄圭之赐，而享国永年。
English: I thought that this was not the original intention of "Li Ji," and besides, Xia Yu worked hard and diligently, with the gift of Xuan Gui, and enjoyed the country forever.

古文：若文王能忧人之心，不自暇逸，纵无感应，岂至亏损寿命耶？ 各随其事理以对。
现代文：若文王能以忧人之心，不图安逸，纵无感应，也不至于折损寿命。 邢昺对皇帝所提的问题，皆能依事理给予回答。
English: If King Wen can act with a worried heart, without seeking comfort, even if there is no response, it will not impair life.  The questions raised by the emperor can all be answered according to the facts.

古文：又请冬至罢祀五帝，大雩设五帝而罢祠昊天上帝。事下有司议，不合而止。
现代文：起初，在咸平年间，王钦若知贡举，有人揭发钦若收受应举者的贿赂，御史台追究其事，王钦若极力辩解。当时，邢昺与边肃、毋宾古、阎承翰在太常寺复查，邢昺力辩王钦若无罪，而以洪湛抵罪。王钦若因此而非常感激邢昺。
English: At first, during the Han and Ping Dynasties, if Wang Qin knew about the tribute, if someone revealed that Wang Qin received bribes from the recipients, the State Administration of History would investigate the matter, and if Wang Qin strenuously defended himself. At that time, Yan and Bian Su, Bo Bingu, and Yan Chenghan reviewed the case at Taizhong Temple, and vigorously argued that Wang Qin was not guilty, but confessed the crime to Hong Tan. Wang Qin was very grateful for this.

古文：瑜，官至工部侍郎致仕。王昭素，开封酸枣人。
现代文：邢昺后来之所以能长期受真宗宠信，在很大程度上应得力于王钦若。王昭素，开封酸枣人。
English: To a large extent, it was Wang Qinruo, Wang Zhaoxu, the man who opened the sealed jujube, who made it possible for the jujube to be favored by the Jinshu sect for a long time.

古文：少笃学不仕，有至行，为乡里所称。
现代文：他青少年时期专心致志学习，不追求功名利禄，有高尚的品德，为乡里人所称赞。
English: During his teenage years, he devoted himself to studying, did not pursue fame and fortune, and had a noble character, which was praised by the villagers.

古文：常聚徒教授以自给，李穆与弟肃及李惲皆常师事焉。
现代文：他靠教书维持生活，李穆及其弟弟李肃、李恽都是他的学生。
English: He supported himself by teaching, and Li Mu and his younger brothers, Li Su and Li Yao, were his students.

古文：乡人争讼，不诣官府，多就昭素决之。
现代文：王昭素乡里的人争讼，不找官府，却找王昭素解决。
English: People in Wang Zhaoxu's township do not go to the government to resolve their disputes, but to Wang Zhaoxu.

古文：昭素博通《九经》，兼究《庄》、《老》，尤精《诗》、《易》，以为王、韩注《易》及孔、马疏义或未尽是，乃著《易论》二十三篇。
现代文：王昭素博通《九经》，并研究《老》、《庄》，尤其精通《诗经》、《易经》。他认为王弼、韩康伯注的《易经》和孔颖达、马嘉运对《易经》的疏义不见得都正确，于是就著《易论》二十三篇。
English: Wang Zhaoxu was well versed in the "Nine Classics" and studied "Lao" and "Zhuang," and was especially proficient in the "Book of Songs" and the "Book of Changes." He believed that the "Book of Changes" annotated by Wang Xi and Han Kangbo and the "Book of Changes" annotated by Kong Yingda and Ma Jiayun were not necessarily correct, so he wrote 23 articles of the "Book of Changes."

古文：太祖问曰： 何以不求仕进，致相见之晚？ 对曰： 臣草野蠢愚，无以裨圣化。 赐坐，令讲《易·乾卦》，召宰相薛居正等观之，至 飞龙在天 ，上曰： 此书岂可令常人见？ 昭素对曰： 此书非圣人出不能合其象。 因访以民间事，昭素所言诚实无隐，上嘉之。
现代文：于是宋太祖赐他坐，令他讲《易经乾卦》，召宰相薛居正等来观看。当王昭素讲到 飞龙在天 这一句时，皇帝说： 这事岂可令常人看到？ 王昭素说： 这事非圣人出不能符合它的象征。 于是宋太祖问他民间的事情，王昭素所回答的都很诚实，毫无隐讳，皇帝因而称赞他。
English: So Emperor Song Taizu gave him a seat, asked him to recite "I Ching Kenga," and summoned the prime minister, Xue Jizheng, to watch. When Wang Zhaoxu spoke of "a flying dragon in the sky," the emperor said: "Is this something that can be seen by ordinary people?" Wang Zhaoxu said: "If it was not written by a sage, it would not fit with its symbol." So Emperor Song Taizu asked him about the affairs of the common people. Wang Zhaoxu's answer was very honest and frank, and the emperor praised him for it.

古文：以衰老求归乡里，拜国子博士致仕，赐茶药及钱二十万，留月余，遣之。
现代文：王昭素以年老体衰请求回乡里，皇帝封他国子博士然后让他致仕，赏赐他许多茶叶和药以及钱二十万，留在京城月余才送他回家。
English: Wang Zhaoxu requested to return to the countryside due to his old age and poor health. The emperor made him a doctor of the country and then made him serve, rewarded him with a lot of tea and medicine and 200,000 yuan. He stayed in Beijing for more than a month before sending him home.

古文：年八十九，卒于家。
现代文：王昭素年八十九岁时，死于家。
English: Wang Zhaoxu was eighty-nine years old when he died at home.

古文：昭素颇有人伦鉴。
现代文：王昭素颇有人伦的鉴赏能力。
English: Wang Zhaoxu has a good appreciation of human nature.

古文：初，李穆兄弟从昭素学《易》，常谓穆曰： 子所谓精理，往往出吾意表。 又语人曰： 穆兄弟皆令器，穆尤沈厚，他日必至廊庙。 后果参知政事。
现代文：起初，李穆兄弟从他学《易》，他常对李穆说： 你所说的精理，往往出乎我的意料之外。 又对人说： 李穆兄弟皆良材，李穆尤其深沉厚道，他日一定位至宰相。 后来李穆果然官拜参知政事。
English: At first, the Li Mu brothers learned "Yi" from him, and he often said to Li Mu: "The wisdom you mentioned is often beyond my expectation," and told people: "The Li Mu brothers are all good people, and Li Mu is especially profound and kind, and he will definitely be the prime minister one day."

古文：昭素每市物，随所言而还直，未尝论高下。
现代文：王昭素每次到市场买东西，随卖主说要多少钱就给多少钱，从来不讨价还价。
English: Every time Wang Zhaoxu went to the market to buy something, he would pay whatever the seller asked for and never bargained.

古文：县人相告曰： 王先生市物，无得高取其价也。 治所居室，有椽木积门中，夜有盗者抉门将入，昭素觉之，即自门中潜掷椽于外，盗者惭而去，由是里中无盗。
现代文：市场里的商人都互相转告说 ：王先生买东西，我们不能多要他的钱。 王昭素修房子，有椽木堆积门中，深夜有盗木料的人撬门将要进来，王昭素发觉后，就从门中暗自把椽木掷于外，盗的人惭愧得离去，从此他住的里中没有了盗贼。
English: The merchants in the market all told each other, "Mr. Wang buys things, we can't ask him for more money." Wang Zhaoxu was renovating a house, and there were elm trees piled up in the doorway. Late at night, someone who was stealing wood was about to break in. When Wang Zhaoxu found out, he secretly threw the elm trees out of the doorway. The thief was so ashamed that he left. Since then, there have been no thieves in his house.

古文：三年，卒，年七十九。尝撰《帝王手鉴》十卷，并注曹唐《大游仙诗》十五卷。
现代文：他家里有一条驴，人都来借，他每次外出，总先问家里的僮奴说： 外面有没有借驴的呢？ 回答说： 没有。 他才外出。
English: He had a donkey at home, and people would come to borrow it. Whenever he went out, he would first ask his manservant, "Is there anyone outside who would like to borrow a donkey?" He would answer, "No," and then he would go out.

古文：其子世安上之，特赐出身。李之才字挺之，青社人也。
现代文：他的行为就纯洁质朴得这样。王昭素有个儿子叫仁著，也有高尚的品德。李之才字挺之，青社人。
English: His behavior is so pure and simple. Wang Zhaoxu has a son named Ren Zhuang, who also has a noble character. Li Zi Cai Zi Ting Zi, a young social worker.

古文：天圣八年同进士出身，为人朴且率，自信，无少矫厉。
现代文：宋仁宗天圣八年同进士出身，为人纯朴直率、自信，无少许矫揉造作和过甚的地方。
English: Song Renzong was born in the eighth year of Tian Sheng. He was a simple, straightforward and self-confident person, without a little bit of affectation and exaggeration.

古文：师河南穆修，修性庄严寡合，虽之才亦频在诃怒中，之才事之益谨，卒能受《易》。
现代文：他拜河南穆修为师，穆修性格急躁严厉落落寡合，即使像李之才这样的人也经常在呵斥怒骂之中，但李之才事奉他更加勤谨，终于能够从他那里学到《易经》。
English: He was a disciple of Mu Xiu from Henan Province. Mu Xiu's character was impatient, stern and uncompromising. Even someone like Li Zhicai was often shouting and cursing, but Li Zhicai served him more diligently and was finally able to learn the I Ching from him.

古文：时苏舜钦辈亦从修学《易》，其专授受者惟之才尔。
现代文：当时苏舜钦等也从穆修学《易经》，但是得穆修真传的只有李之才一人。
English: At that time, Su Suqin and others also learned the "I Ching" from Mu Xiu, but only Li Zhi was the only one who got the true transmission of Mu Xiu.

古文：脩之《易》受之种放，放受之陈抟，源流最远，其图书象数变通之妙，秦、汉以来鲜有知者。
现代文：穆修的《易经》是向种放学的，种放的《易经》是向陈搏学的，其源流最远，图书象数变化之妙，是秦汉以来少有人知道的。
English: Mu Xiu's "I Ching" was handed down from generation to generation, and the "I Ching" that was handed down from generation to generation was learned from Chen Bo. Its source is the farthest away, and the wonderful change in the number of books is something that few people have known since the Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：之才初为卫州获嘉主簿、权共城令。
现代文：李之才开始做官是担任卫州获嘉的主簿，并暂时代理共城令。
English: Li Zhicai began to work as an official when he served as the main book for the awarding of honors in Weizhou, and temporarily acted as the Communist Party of China.

古文：时邵雍居母忧于苏门山百源之上，布裘蔬食，躬爨以养父。
现代文：这时邵雍居母丧于苏门山百源上，每天布裘蔬食，亲自烧火做饭以养活他的父亲。
English: At this time, Shao Yong's mother died on Mount Su-men's Baiyuan. Every day, he ate vegetables and cooked by himself to feed his father.

古文：之才叩门来谒，劳苦之曰： 好学笃志果何似？ 雍曰： 简策之外，未有迹也。 之才曰： 君非迹简策者，其如物理之学何？ 他日，则又曰： 物理之学学矣，不有性命之学乎？ 雍再拜，愿受业，于是先示之以陆淳《春秋》，意欲以《春秋》表仪《五经》，既可语《五经》大旨，则授《易》而终焉。
现代文：李之才说 ：你不是考究典籍的人，对物理的学问学得怎么样呢？ 日后他又对邵雍说： 物理的学问你已经学了，不还有性命的学问吗？ 邵雍遂对他再拜，愿意从他受业。于是李之才就先教他陆淳的《春秋》，意思想以《春秋》表明它包涵了《五经》，既可以告诉他《五经》的大意，然后再讲授《易经》就可以结束学业。
English: Li Zhicai said, "You are not a scholar of classics, how well do you know physics?" Later, he said to Shao Yong, "You have learned physics, but don't you have the knowledge of life?" Shao Yong then bowed to him again and was willing to be taught by him. So Li Zhicai first taught him Lu Chun's "Spring and Autumn," meaning to show with "Spring and Autumn" that it included the "Five Classics," so that he could tell him the gist of the "Five Classics," and then he could finish his studies by teaching "I Ching."

古文：其后雍卒以《易》名世。
现代文：后来邵雍终于以研究《易经》而闻名于世。
English: Later, Shao Yong finally became famous in the world for his study of the I Ching.

古文：之才器大，难乎识者，栖迟久不调。
现代文：李之才由于才气太大，难得有人了解，因此长久不调，惋惜他的人就说 ：你应该稍微贬损自己以求得进取。 
English: Li Zizai, because of his great talent, is rarely understood by anyone, so he has been out of tune for a long time. People who pity him say: You should depreciate yourself a little in order to get ahead.

古文：或惜之，则曰： 宜少贬以图荣进。 石延年独曰： 时不足以容君，盍不弃之隐去。 再调孟州司法参军。时范雍守孟，亦莫之知也。
现代文：石延年一个人却说： 这是时局不足以容纳你，你何不弃官隐居。 后李之才调升孟州司法参军，这时范雍守孟州，也不能了解他。
English: Shi Yanren, however, said: This is a situation that is not enough to accommodate you, why don't you resign and live in seclusion. After Li Zhicai was transferred to the Mengzhou judiciary to join the army, when Fan Yong was in charge of Mengzhou, he could not understand him.

古文：雍初自洛建节守延安，送者皆出境外，之才独别近郊。
现代文：范雍第一次自洛阳建节守延安，送的人都送出境外，李之才一个人在近郊与他告别。
English: For the first time, Fan Yong held a festival in Yan'an from Luoyang. The people he sent were sent abroad, and Li Zhicai was the only one to bid farewell to him in the suburbs.

古文：其才又达世务，使少用于世，必过人远甚，恨其贫不能决其归心，知之者当共成之。 延年复书曰： 今业文好古之士至鲜且不张，苟遗若人，其学益衰矣。 延年素不喜谒贵仕，凡四五至道卿门，通其书乃已。
现代文：了解他的人应该共同努力，使他在事业上有所成就。 石延年给尹洙回信说 ：今天精通文字爱好古文的人最少而且不发达，假若遗弃这个人，那么这种学问就更加衰落了。 石延年平生最不喜欢拜访大官，他四五次到叶道卿的大门，只把书信递进去。
English: People who know him should work together to make him successful in his career.Shi Yan Nian wrote back to Yin Qi, saying: Today, people who are proficient in writing and love ancient texts are few and far between, and if we abandon this person, then this kind of knowledge will further decline.Shi Yan Nian did not like visiting dignitaries in his lifetime.He went to Ye Dao's gate four or five times, only to hand in letters.

古文：道卿荐之，遂得应铨新格，有保任五人，改大理寺丞，为缑氏令。
现代文：叶道卿得信后，把李之才向朝廷推荐，李之才遂得应选新格，有保任五人，改为大理寺丞，任缑氏县令。
English: After Ye Daoxing received the letter, he recommended Li Zhicai to the imperial court, and Li Zhicai was elected to the new position, with five guarantors, changed to Dali Temple, and appointed as the county magistrate.

古文：未行，会延年与龙图阁直学士吴遵路调兵河东，辟之才泽州签署判官。
现代文：未及成行，会石延年与龙图阁直学士吴遵路调兵河东，征辟李之才为泽州签署判官。
English: Before it could be carried out, Shi Yannian and Longtuge direct bachelor Wu Zunlu transferred troops to the east of the river, and Li Zhicai was recruited as the judge of Zezhou.

古文：泽人刘羲叟从受历法，世称 羲叟历法 ，远出古今上，有杨雄、张衡所未喻者，实之才授之。
现代文：泽州人刘义叟因而得向李之才学习历法，也称 义叟历法 ，这种历法远远超出古今历法之上，有扬雄、张衡没说清楚的，实际却是李之才传授给他的。
English: As a result, Liu Yixuan, a resident of Zezhou, had to learn the calendar from Li Zhicai, also known as the Yixuan calendar, which is far superior to the ancient and modern calendars. Although Yang Xiong and Zhang Heng did not make it clear, it was actually Li Zhicai who taught him.

古文：在泽转殿中丞，丁母忧，甫除丧，暴卒于怀州官舍，庆历五年二月也。
现代文：李之才在泽州一段时间后又转升殿中丞，碰巧母亲去世，他刚刚解除丧服，就暴病死在怀州官舍，这是庆历五年二月的事情。
English: After a period of time in Zezhou, Li Zhicai was promoted to the rank of junior middle officer. By chance, his mother passed away. He had just taken off his mourning clothes when he died violently ill in a government office in Huizhou. This happened in February of the fifth year of the Gregorian calendar.

古文：时尹洙兄渐守怀，哭之才过哀，感疾，不逾月亦卒。
现代文：这时，尹洙的哥哥尹子渐镇守怀州，对李之才的死悲伤过度，染疾不到一个月也死了。
English: At this time, Yin Xi's brother, Yin Ziqian, was stationed in Huai Zhou. He was overwhelmed with grief over Li Zhicai's death, and died less than a month after contracting the disease.

古文：之才归葬青社，邵雍表其墓，有曰： 求于天下，得闻道之君子李公以师焉。 
现代文：李之才死后归葬青社，邵雍为他题写墓碑，其中有句说 ：我求之于天下，终于得到闻道的君子李公做我的老师。 
English: After Li Zhicai's death, he was buried in the youth club, and Shao Yong inscribed a tombstone for him, one of which said: "I begged the world, and finally got the gentleman Li Gong, who knew the Tao, to be my teacher."

