古文：孟子曰： 宰我、子贡、有若智足以知圣人。
现代文：孟子说： 宰我、子贡、有若等三人的智慧足以了解圣人。
English: Mencius said, "Kill me, Zigong, and Arroko are three people who are wise enough to understand a sage."

古文：污，不至阿其所好。 
现代文：如果圣人有了污点，不至阿其所好，阿谀奉承。 
English: If a saint has a blemish, it is not good to flatter him.

古文：赵岐注云： 三人之智足以识圣人。
现代文：赵岐注释说： 三人的智慧足以识圣人。
English: Zhao Qi commented: The wisdom of three people is enough to recognize a saint.

古文：污，下也。言三人虽小污不平，亦不至于其所好，阿私所爱而空誉之。 
现代文：污，下也，指三人虽小污不平，也不至于投其所好，偏心所爱而违心地吹捧别人。 
English: "Dirty" also refers to the fact that although the three of them are a little dirty, they will not be able to vote for what they like, eccentrically love and tout others against their will.

古文：详其文意，足以识圣人是一句。 污，下也 ，自是一节。
现代文：仔细审核其文意，可以肯定 足以识圣人 后为一句号。 污，下也 自然是另一句。
English: After carefully examining the meaning of the sentence, we can be sure that "sufficient to identify the saint" is a sentence number.

古文：盖以 下 字训 污 也，其义明甚。
现代文：此处是用 下 字来解释 污 ，其意思非常明白。
English: In this passage, the word "filth" is used to explain pollution, and its meaning is very clear.

古文：而老苏先生乃作一句读，故作《三子知圣人污论》，谓： 三子之智，不足以及圣人高深幽绝之境，徒得其下焉耳。 
现代文：而苏沟竟认为这两句乃是一句话，因此特意写了一篇《三子知圣人污论》，文中说： 三人的智慧无法达到圣人高深幽绝的境界，最多只不过是仅得其下而已。 
English: However, Sugou actually thought that these two sentences were one sentence, so he deliberately wrote an article, "Three Sons Know the Stain of the Sage," which said: The wisdom of three people cannot reach the realm of the high, deep, and profound of the sage, at most, it is only just below it.

古文：此说窃谓不然，夫谓 夫子贤于尧、舜，自生民以来未有 ，可谓大矣，犹以为污下何哉？
现代文：我认为这种说法是不对的，他既然说 孔子比尧、舜更贤，自古以来绝无仅有 ，可以说是伟大之极了，然而又说他尚有 污下 ，这是怎么回事呢？
English: I don't think this statement is correct. Since he said that Confucius was wiser than Sun Tzu and Mao Zedong, and was unique since ancient times, it can be said that he was great. However, he also said that he was tainted. What's going on?

古文：程伊川云： 有若等自能知夫子之道，假使污下，必不为阿好而言。 
现代文：程颐先生说： 有若等人当然能够知悉孔子之道，假使污下，必定不会为投其所好而虚美人。 
English: Mr. Cheng Yu said: If there are people who can certainly know the way of Confucius, if they are tainted, they will not be falsely beautiful in order to please him.

古文：其说正与赵氏合。大抵汉人释经子，或省去语助，如郑氏笺《毛诗》 奄观铚艾 云： 奄，久。
现代文：这种说法与赵岐的看法正好相同，大抵汉代人解释经书与诸子著作时，往往省略语气助词，如郑玄解释《毛诗》中的： 奄观铚艾 说： 奄，久。
English: This statement is exactly the same as Zhao Qi's view. Usually, when the Han Dynasty interprets the scriptures and the works of the sons, they often omit the tone words, such as Zheng Xuan's interpretation of "Mao Shi" in: 奄观艾 said: 奄,久.

古文：观，多也。 
现代文：观，多也。 
English: It's a lot to take in.

古文：盖以久训奄，以多训观。
现代文：也就是以 久 训 夸 ，以 多 训 观 。
English: That is to say, long-term training is praised, and multi-training is praised.

古文：近者黄启宗有《补礼部韵略》，于 淹 字下添 奄 字，注云： 久观也。 
现代文：近来，黄启宗著有《补礼部韵略》一书，在 淹 字下又增添一个 奄 字，并且注释说： 久观也 。
English: Recently, Huang Qizong wrote a book, "Supplement to the Rhymes of the Ministry of Rites and Rituals," in which he added another "am" character under the "f" character, and the commentary said: "Long-sighted, too."

古文：亦是误以《笺》中五字为一句。
现代文：他也是错误地把郑玄《毛诗笺》中的五个字当作一句了。
English: He also mistakenly took five words from Zheng Xuan's "Mao Shi Huang" as a sentence.

