古文：秦楚之际，楚怀王以牧羊小儿为项氏所立，首尾才三年。
现代文：秦楚之际，楚怀王只是牧羊的小孩儿，被项氏立为王，前后才三年。
English: At the time of Qin Chu, King Chu Huai was just a shepherd boy. He was made king by the Xiang clan after only three years.

古文：以事考之，东坡所谓天下之贤主也。
现代文：根据史事来考究，正是苏东坡所说的天下的贤明君主。
English: According to historical research, he is exactly what Su Dongpo called the world's wisest monarch.

古文：项梁之死，王并吕臣、项羽军，自将之，羽不敢争。
现代文：项梁死了以后，怀王合并了吕臣、项羽的军队，自己统领全军，项羽也不敢力争。
English: After the death of Xiang Liang, King Huai merged the armies of Lü Chen and Xiang Yu and led the whole army himself. Xiang Yu did not dare to fight.

古文：见宋义论兵事，即以为上将军，而羽乃为次将。
现代文：楚怀王见到宋义谈论军事，就拜他为上将军，而项羽才是次将。
English: When King Chu Huai saw Song Yi talking about military affairs, he worshipped him as the top general, while Xiang Yu was the second-in-command.

古文：择诸将入关，羽怨秦，奋势愿与沛公西，王以羽慓悍祸贼，不许，独遣沛公，羽不敢违。
现代文：怀王挑选诸位将领进入关中，项羽怨恨秦朝，激奋作势愿意同刘邦西进，怀王认为项羽敏捷晓悍、凶狠残暴，不肯同意，只派遣了刘邦，项羽也不敢违抗。
English: King Huai selected the generals to go to Guanzhong. Xiang Yu resented the Qin Dynasty and was eager to go west with Liu Bang. King Huai thought that Xiang Yu was agile, fierce and cruel. He did not agree and only sent Liu Bang. Xiang Yu did not dare to resist.

古文：及秦既亡，羽使人还报王，王曰： 如约。 
现代文：等到秦朝灭亡以后，项羽派人回来报告楚怀王，怀王说： 按照原来的约定行事。 
English: After the fall of the Qin Dynasty, Xiang Yu sent someone back to report to King Huai of Chu. King Huai said, "Act according to the original agreement."

古文：令沛公王关中。
现代文：命令刘邦统治关中。
English: Liu Bang was ordered to rule Guanzhong.

古文：此数者，皆能自制命，非碌碌孱主受令于强臣者，故终不能全于项氏。
现代文：这几个方面，楚怀王都能够自己控制命运，不是庸碌无为地受命于强悍大臣的软弱君主，因此最后被项羽杀了。
English: In all these aspects, King Chu Huai was able to control his own destiny, and was not a weak monarch who was ordered to do nothing by a strong minister. Therefore, he was finally killed by Xiang Yu.

古文：然遣将救赵灭秦，至于有天下，皆出其手。
现代文：然而他调遣将领解救赵国消灭秦国，直到获得天下成为义帝，都是他亲手所为。
English: However, he dispatched generals to liberate, save Zhao, and destroy Qin, until he gained the world and became a righteous emperor, all of which were done by his own hands.

古文：太史公作《史记》，当为之立本纪，继于秦后，迨其亡，则次以汉高祖可也。
现代文：大史公作《史记》，应当为他写个本纪，接在秦朝的后面，写到他灭亡之后，再接着写汉高祖就可以了。
English: The great historian's work "Histories" should write a book for him, following the Qin Dynasty, writing about him after his death, and then writing about Han Gaozu.

古文：而乃立《项羽本纪》，义帝之事特附见焉，是直以羽为代秦也，其失多矣。
现代文：可是竟然写了《项羽本纪》，义帝的事只附带着见于其中，这简直是认为项羽取代了秦朝，其中的失误太多了。
English: However, he went so far as to write "Xiang Yu's Biography," in which the matter of Yidi is only incidentally mentioned. This is nothing short of believing that Xiang Yu replaced the Qin Dynasty. There are too many mistakes in it.

古文：高祖尝下诏，以秦皇帝、楚隐王亡后，为置守冢，并及魏、齐、赵三王，而义帝乃高祖故君，独缺不问，岂简策脱佚乎？
现代文：汉高祖曾经下过诏文，在秦皇帝、楚隐王死后，为他们安排守护坟墓的人，跟魏、齐、赵三王一起提及，而且义帝是高祖原来的君主，偏偏遗漏而没有说到，难道是竹简书册脱漏亡佚了吗？
English: Han Gaozu once issued an imperial edict, and after the death of Emperor Qin and King Chu Yin, the person who arranged for them to guard the tomb was mentioned together with the Wei, Qi, and Zhao kings. Moreover, Emperor Yidi was Gaozu's original monarch, but it was omitted and not mentioned. Is it possible that the Bamboo Pamphlet was leaked and lost?

