古文：卫灵公将之晋，至濮水之上，夜闻鼓新声者，说之，使人问之，左右皆报弗闻。
现代文：卫灵公将要到晋国去，到达濮水岸边，晚上听见有人在弹奏新曲子，很喜欢，派人寻问弹奏的人，身边的人都说没有听见弹奏。
English: Wei Ling Gong was about to go to Jin Province and arrived at the shore of Surabaya. In the evening, he heard someone playing a new tune, which he liked very much. He sent someone to find out who was playing it, but everyone around him said that they did not hear it being played.

古文：召师涓而告之曰： 有鼓新声者，使人问左右，尽报弗闻其状似鬼，子为我听而写之。 师涓曰： 诺！ 
现代文：卫灵公召见师涓并把此事告诉他说： 有弹奏新曲子的人，派人寻问，我身边的人全都说没有听见，这种现象有点像是鬼在那里弹奏，您为我认真听曲子把它谱写下来。 师涓说： 是。 
English: Wei Ling Gong called Shifu to see him and told him about the matter: There is someone playing a new piece of music, send someone to inquire, the people around me all say they did not hear it, this phenomenon is a bit like a ghost playing there, you listen to the music carefully and write it down for me. Shifu said: Yes.

古文：因静坐抚琴而写之。
现代文：于是静坐弹琴而谱写曲子。
English: So he sat down to play the piano and compose a piece.

古文：明日报曰： 臣得之矣，然而未习，请更宿而习之。 灵公曰： 诺！ 
现代文：第二天向卫灵公报告说： 我掌握这个新曲了，然而还不熟练，请求再住一夜让我熟练它。 卫灵公说： 好吧。 
English: The next day he reported to Wei Ling Gong: "I have mastered this new piece, but I am not proficient yet. I request that you let me stay another night so that I can master it." Wei Ling Gong said: "Okay."

古文：因复宿。明日已习，遂去之晋。
现代文：第二天师涓完全熟练了此曲，于是离开此地而往晋国去。
English: The next day, Shizhao had completely mastered the piece and left for Jin Province.

古文：晋平公觞之施夷之台，酒酣，灵公起曰： 有新声，愿请奏以示公。 
现代文：晋平公请卫灵公在施夷宫喝酒，喝得很酣畅时，灵公离席对平公说： 有新曲子，请允许奏给您听听。 平公说： 好吧。 
English: Jin Ping Gong invited Wei Ling Gong to have a drink at Shiyi Palace. When the drink was very smooth, Ling Gong left the table and said to Ping Gong: There is a new piece, please allow me to play it for you. Ping Gong said: Okay.

古文：公曰： 善！ 乃召师涓，令坐师旷之旁，援琴鼓之。
现代文：就召来师涓，让他坐在师旷的身旁，拿琴弹奏起来。
English: So he called for Shigeo and had him sit next to Shigeo and play the harp.

古文：未终，旷抚而止之，曰： 此亡国之声，不可遂也。 
现代文：曲子尚未奏完，师旷按住琴制止弹奏，说： 这是亡国之音，不可奏完。 
English: Before the piece was finished, Shigemitsu stopped it by pressing down on the harp, saying, "This is the sound of a dying country. You cannot finish it."

古文：平公曰： 此何道出？ 
现代文：平公问： 这支曲子是从哪里来的呢？ 
English: Ping Gong asked: Where did this piece of music come from?

古文：师旷曰： 此师延所作淫声，与纣为靡靡之乐也。
现代文：师旷回答说： 这是师延所作的淫荡音乐，奏给纣王听的靡靡之音。
English: Shi Ku replied, "This is the lascivious music that Shi Yan made, and it's the sound that the king of Qi heard.

古文：武王诛纣，悬之白旄，师延东走，至濮水而自投，故闻此声者，必於濮水之上。
现代文：因武王诛灭纣王，把纣王的头悬挂在白旄旗杆上，师延往东逃跑，到濮水时投河自杀，所以听见这支曲子一定是在濮水岸边。
English: Because King Wu killed the dragon king and hung the dragon king's head on the white dragon flagpole, the dragon king fled to the east and committed suicide by jumping into the river when he reached Surabaya, so he must have heard this piece of music on the shore of Surabaya.

古文：先闻此声者，其国削，不可遂也。 
现代文：先听见这支曲子的，他的国土会被侵占而亡国，所以不能让它奏完。 
English: If he heard it first, his country would be invaded and destroyed, so he couldn't let it finish.

古文：平公曰： 寡人好者音也，子其使遂之。 
现代文：平公说： 我所喜欢的就是音乐，你让他奏完吧。 
English: Heiko said, "What I like is music. Let him finish playing."

古文：师涓鼓究之。
现代文：师涓弹奏完这支曲子。
English: Shifu finished playing the piece.

古文：平公曰： 此所谓何声也？ 
现代文：平公问： 这称做什么曲子？ 
English: Ping Gong asked: What is this piece called?

古文：师旷曰： 此所谓清商。 
现代文：师旷说： 这称为清商曲。 
English: Shigeaki said, "This is called Qing Shangqu."

古文：公曰： 清商固最悲乎？ 
现代文：平公问： 清商曲确实最悲哀吗？ 
English: Ping Gong said: Is the Qing Shang tune really the most beautiful tune?

古文：师旷曰： 不如清徵。 
现代文：师旷说： 不如清徵悲哀。 
English: Shigeaki said, "It's still not as good as fine tuning."

古文：公曰： 清徵可得闻乎？ 
现代文：平公问： 清徵曲能够听听吗？ 
English: Ping Gong asked: Is it possible to listen to Qing Dynasty recruitment songs?

古文：师旷曰： 不可！
现代文：师旷说： 不行！
English: Shimei said, "No!

古文：古之得听清徵者，皆有德义君也。今吾君德薄，不足以听之。 
现代文：古代能够听清徵曲的人，都是有德义的君王，现在我国君王德义浅薄，不配听清徵曲。 
English: In ancient times, those who could clearly hear the call for music were kings with virtue and righteousness. Now, our kings have shallow virtue and righteousness, and are not worthy to hear the clear call for music.

古文：公曰： 寡人所好者音也，愿试听之。 
现代文：平公说： 我所喜欢的就是音乐，希望能听听清徵曲。 
English: Heiko said, "What I like is music, and I hope to be able to hear the audition piece clearly."

古文：师旷不得已，援琴鼓之。
现代文：师旷迫不得已，只好拿琴来弹奏清徵曲。
English: In desperation, the teacher had no choice but to take the piano to play Qingzheng.

古文：一奏，有玄鹤二八从南方来，集於郭门之上危；再奏而列；三奏，延颈而鸣，舒翼而舞。
现代文：奏第一遍，有黑鹤十六只从南方飞来，停聚在廊门高高的屋脊上，奏第二遍黑鹤排列成队形，奏第三遍黑鹤伸长颈子鸣叫，展翅起舞。
English: The first time it was played, sixteen black cranes flew from the south and gathered on the high roof ridge of the corridor door. The second time it was played, the black cranes lined up in formation. The third time it was played, the black cranes stretched their necks, chirped, spread their wings and danced.

古文：音中宫商之声，声彻於天。
现代文：鹤的叫声合乎宫商之声，声音响彻天空。
English: The call of the cranes matched the sound of the palace merchants, and the sound echoed through the sky.

古文：平公大悦，坐者皆喜。
现代文：平公很高兴，在座的人全都欣喜不已。
English: Heiko was delighted, and everyone present was overjoyed.

古文：平公提觞而起，为师旷寿，反坐而问曰： 乐莫悲於清徵乎？ 
现代文：平公举着酒杯站起来，向师旷敬酒表示祝贺，回到座位上问道： 乐曲没有比清徵更悲哀的了吗？ 
English: Ping Gong stood up with a glass of wine, congratulated Shi Yuan on the toast, returned to his seat and asked: Is there no sadder music than Qing Zheng?

古文：师旷曰： 不如清角。 
现代文：师旷说： 清徵不如清角悲哀。 
English: Shi Mei said: "Seizheng is not as sad as Qingjiao."

古文：平公曰： 清角可得闻乎？ 
现代文：平公问： 清角曲可以听听吗？ 
English: Ping Gong asked: Can I listen to the Clear Angle Song?

古文：师旷曰： 不可！
现代文：师旷说： 不行！
English: Shimei said, "No!

古文：昔者黄帝合鬼神於西大山之上，驾象舆，六玄龙，毕方并辖，蚩尤居前，风伯进扫，雨师洒道，虎狼在前，鬼神在後，虫蛇伏地，白云覆上，大合鬼神，乃作为清角。
现代文：从前黄帝召集鬼神于西大山上，驾着象车，六条黑龙和毕方并列站在车键上，蚩尤坐在车前面，风伯扫地开路，雨师清洒道路，虎狼走在车前，鬼神跟在车后，虫蛇伏在地上，白云覆盖在车上空，召集众多鬼神，这才弹奏清角曲。
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor summoned the ghosts and gods on the West Great Mountain, driving an elephant car, six black dragons and Bi Fang stood side by side on the keys, Qiu You sat in front of the car, the wind swept the road, the rain master sprinkled the road, the tiger and wolf walked in front of the car, the ghosts and gods followed behind the car, the worms and snakes lay on the ground, and the white clouds covered the sky above the car. He summoned many ghosts and gods, and only then did he play the "Clear Angle" music.

古文：今主君德薄，不足以听之。
现代文：现今您的德薄，不配听清角曲。
English: At present, your virtue is weak, and you are not worthy of listening to the clarion call.

古文：听之，将恐有败。 
现代文：听了清角曲，恐怕会有凶祸。 
English: Listen, I'm afraid something bad is going to happen.

古文：平公曰： 寡人老矣，所好者音也，愿遂听之。 
现代文：平公说： 我老了，所喜欢的就是音乐，就让我听听它吧。 
English: Ping Gong said: I am old, my hobby is music, I hope to finish listening to it.

古文：师旷不得已而鼓之。
现代文：师旷不得已而弹奏清角曲。
English: As a last resort, Shigeaki began to play.

古文：一奏之，有云从西北起；再奏之，风至，大雨随之，裂帷幕，破俎豆，堕廊瓦，坐者散走。
现代文：奏第一遍清角曲，有乌云从西北方升起，奏第二遍清角曲，暴风刮来，大雨随风而降，帷幕被撕裂，俎、豆礼器被打破，廊房上的瓦都吹落下来，在座的人都逃散了。
English: During the first performance of the "Clear Angle" melody, a dark cloud rose from the northwest. During the second performance of the "Clear Angle" melody, a storm blew in, heavy rain fell with the wind, the curtain was torn, the gongs and bean crockery were broken, the tiles on the hallway were blown down, and everyone present fled.

古文：平公恐惧，伏於廊室。
现代文：平公很害怕，仆伏在廊室之间。
English: Heiko was very scared and crouched between the corridors.

古文：晋国大旱，赤地三年。
现代文：晋国遭大旱，三年寸草不生。
English: As a result, there was a three-year drought in Jin Province, and not a single blade of grass grew.

古文：平公之身遂癃病。
现代文：平公的身体害了手脚麻痹病。
English: As a result, Hirako's body became paralyzed.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这怎么解释呢？
English: What does that mean?

古文：曰：是非卫灵公国且削，则晋平公且病，若国且旱妖也？
现代文：解释说： 这如果不是卫灵公将要亡国，那就是晋平公将要得病，或者晋国将遭大旱的妖象。
English: He explained, "If it's not Lord Wei Ling who is going to destroy the country, it's Lord Jin Ping who is going to get sick, or if it's the specter of drought in Jin Province.

古文：师旷曰 先闻此声者国削 。二国先闻之矣。
现代文：师旷说 首先听到这支曲子的国家被侵占而灭亡 ，卫、晋二国君王都首先听了乐曲并未亡国。
English: Shigeaki said that the first country to hear this piece of music was occupied and destroyed, and the kings of Wei and Jin were the first to listen to the music and did not lose their country.

古文：何知新声非师延所鼓也？
现代文：怎么知道新曲子不是师延所弹奏的呢？
English: How do you know that the new piece was not played by Shi Yan?

古文：曰：师延自投濮水，形体腐於水中，精气消於泥涂，安能复鼓琴？
现代文：解释说：师延投濮水自杀，形体腐烂在河水中，精气消失于污泥之中，怎么能再奏琴呢？
English: He explained: Shi Yan committed suicide by throwing himself into the river, his body rotted in the river water, and his spirit disappeared in the mud. How could he play the piano again?

古文：屈原自沉於江，屈原善著文，师延善鼓琴。如师延能鼓琴，则屈原能复书矣。
现代文：屈原自投于汨罗江而死，屈原善于写文章，师延善于奏琴，如果师延能在水中奏琴，那么屈原也能又在江底写文章了。
English: Qu Yuan threw himself into the Qiluo River and died. Qu Yuan was good at writing articles, Shi Yan was good at playing the piano. If Shi Yan could play the piano in the water, then Qu Yuan could also write articles at the bottom of the river.

古文：杨子云吊屈原，屈原何不报？
现代文：杨子云写文章悼念屈原，屈原为什么不回答他呢？
English: Yang Ziyun wrote an article to mourn Qu Yuan. Why didn't Qu Yuan answer him?

古文：屈原生时，文无不作；不能报子云者，死为泥涂，手既朽，无用书也。
现代文：屈原活着的时候，什么文章都能写，不能回答杨子云，是由于死后变成污泥，手已经腐烂了，没有手来写文章的缘故。
English: When Qu Yuan was alive, he could write any article, but he couldn't answer Yang Ziyun, because after his death he turned into sludge, his hands had rotted, and he didn't have hands to write articles.

古文：屈原手朽无用书，则师延指败无用鼓琴矣。
现代文：屈原手腐烂了不能用来写文章，那么师延的手指腐烂了也不能用来奏琴了。
English: If Qu Yuan's hand is rotten and cannot be used to write articles, then Shi Yan's fingers are rotten and cannot be used to play the piano.

古文：孔子当泗水而葬，泗水却流，世谓孔子神而能却泗水。
现代文：孔子面对泗水埋葬，泗水倒流，世人认为孔子神灵而能使泗水倒流。
English: Confucius was buried facing the flood, and the flood was reversed. The world believes that Confucius is a god and can reverse the flood.

古文：孔子好教授，犹师延之好鼓琴也。
现代文：孔子喜欢教书传授知识，就象师延爱好奏琴一样。
English: Confucius liked to teach and pass on knowledge, just as Shi Yan liked to play the piano.

古文：师延能鼓琴於濮水之中，孔子何为不能教授於泗水之侧乎？
现代文：师延死后能在濮水之中奏琴，孔子死后为什么不能在泗水岸边教书传授知识呢？
English: After the death of Shi Yan, he could play the piano in Surabaya. After the death of Confucius, why couldn't he teach and impart knowledge on the shore of Surabaya?

古文：赵简子病，五日不知人。大夫皆俱，於是召进扁鹊。
现代文：赵简子病了，五天不省人事，官员们都很担忧，于是召来扁鹊。
English: Zhao Jianzi fell ill and was unconscious for five days. The officials were worried and summoned Bian Que.

古文：扁鹊入视病，出，董安於问扁鹊。扁鹊曰： 血脉治也，而怪？
现代文：扁鹊进去看病，出来时，董安于向扁鹊打听病情，扁鹊说： 血脉正常，你为什么要大惊小怪呢？
English: Bian Que went in to see a doctor. When he came out, Dong An Rong asked Bian Que about his condition. Bian Que said, "Your blood is normal. Why are you making such a fuss?"

古文：昔秦缪公尝如此矣，七日悟。
现代文：过去秦穆公曾经也是这样，七天就苏醒了。
English: In the past, Qin Mu Gong was also like this. He woke up after seven days.

古文：悟之日，告公孙支与子舆曰： 我之帝所，甚乐。
现代文：穆公醒过来的那天，告诉公孙支和子舆说： 我去到天帝住的地方，非常高兴。
English: On the day Mu Gong woke up, he told Gongsun Zhi and Zi Ying: "I am very happy to go to the place where the Heavenly Emperor lives.

古文：吾所以久者，适有学也。
现代文：我所以要去这么久，是因为正好有所领教啊。
English: The reason I stayed so long was because I happened to be studying.

古文：帝告我晋国且大乱，五世不安，其将霸，未老而死；霸者之子，且令而国男女无别。 
现代文：天帝告诉我晋国将要大乱，五世不得安宁，晋国的后代将会成就霸业，但不到老年便会死去，霸主的儿子将会使你们国家发生淫乱之事。 
English: The Heavenly Emperor told me that there will be great turmoil in Jin Province, the fifth generation will not have peace, the descendants of Jin Province will achieve hegemony, but they will die before old age, and the son of the overlord will cause your country to have sexual promiscuity.

古文：公孙支书而藏之於箧。
现代文：公孙支记下穆公的话并收藏起来，秦国的谶语就从这里出现。
English: Gongsun Zhi recorded the words of Mu Gong and collected them, and the slang of Qin State emerged from here.

古文：於是晋献公之乱，文公之霸，襄公败秦师於崤而归纵淫，此之所。
现代文：晋献公引起的祸乱，晋文公的霸业，晋襄公在崤山打败秦国军队回来后纵欲淫乱，这些都是你所知道的事情。
English: The calamity caused by Jin Xian Gong, the tyranny of Jin Wenguong, and the debauchery of Jin Xiang Gong after he defeated the Qin army in Lushan and returned, are all things you know.

古文：今主君之病与之同，不出三日，病必间，间必有言也。 
现代文：现在赵简子的病与秦穆公的相同，不出三天，病必然好转，病好转后一定会有话要讲。 
English: Now Zhao Jianzi's illness is the same as that of Qin Mu Gong. Within three days, the illness will inevitably get better. After the illness gets better, there will definitely be something to talk about.

古文：居二日半，简子悟，告大夫曰： 我之帝所，甚乐，与百神游於钧天，靡乐九奏万舞，不类三代之乐，其声动人心。
现代文：停了两天半，赵简子苏醒过来，他告诉其他官员说： 我去到天帝住的地方，非常高兴，与众神仙遨游在天的中央，宏丽的乐曲多番演奏，万人齐舞，不像夏、商、周三代的乐曲，乐曲声激动人心。
English: After stopping for two and a half days, Zhao Jianzi woke up and told the other officials: I went to the place where the Heavenly Emperor lived. I was very happy. I swam in the middle of the sky with the gods and immortals. Magnificent music was played many times, and everyone danced. Unlike the music of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, the music was exciting.

古文：有一熊欲我，帝命我射之，中熊，熊死。
现代文：有一头熊想要抓我，天帝命令我射熊，我射中熊，熊死了。
English: There was a bear that tried to catch me, and God told me to shoot the bear. I shot the bear, and the bear died.

古文：有罴来，我又射之，中罴，罴死。
现代文：有一头罴过来，我又射罴，射中罴，罴也死了。
English: A badger came along, I shot it again, it was hit again, and the badger died.

古文：帝甚喜，赐我笥，皆有副。
现代文：天帝很高兴，赏赐我两个竹笥，都有备用的笥。
English: Heavenly Father was pleased and rewarded me with two bamboo rafts, each with a spare raft.

古文：吾见兒在帝侧。帝属我一翟犬，曰： 及而子之长也，以赐之。 
现代文：我看到一个小孩子在天帝身边，天帝交给我一条狄犬，说： 等到你的儿子长大以后，就把这条狄犬赐给他。 
English: I saw a small child standing next to Heavenly Father. Heavenly Father gave me a female dog and said, "When your son grows up, give him this female dog."

古文：帝告我： 晋国且，世而亡；嬴姓将大败周人於范魁之西，而亦不能有也。
现代文：天帝告诉我说： 晋国将要衰败，七代以后就要灭亡，嬴姓将要在范魁之西大败卫国，但也不能占有它。
English: The Heavenly Emperor told me, "The State of Jin will decline and fall, and after seven generations it will be destroyed. The Xiong family will defeat and defend the country in the west of Fankui, but they will not be able to occupy it.

古文：今余将思虞舜之勋，适余将以其胄女孟姚配而世之孙。  
现代文：我现在思念舜的功劳，正要把他的后代的女儿孟姚许配给你的七世孙。  
English: I am now thinking of the merits of Yao, and I am about to give his descendant's daughter, Meng Yao Xu, to your seventh generation grandchildren.

古文：董安於受言而书藏之，以扁鹊言告简子，简子赐扁鹊田四万亩。
现代文：董安于听了赵简子的话后写下来收藏起，并把扁鹊说的事告诉了赵简子。赵简子赏赐四万亩田给扁鹊。
English: After listening to Zhao Jianzi's words, Dong Anyu began to write down and collect, and told Zhao Jianzi what Bianqi had said. Zhao Jianzi rewarded Bianqi with 40,000 mu of farmland.

古文：他日，简子出，有人当道，辟之不去。
现代文：有一天，赵简子外出，有人挡住道路，驱赶他也不离开，随从的人准备逮捕他。
English: One day, when Zhao Jianzi was out, someone blocked the road and drove him away, but he did not leave. His followers were preparing to arrest him.

古文：从者将拘之，当道者曰： 吾欲有谒於主君。 从者以闻，简子召之，曰： 嘻！
现代文：挡路的人说： 我有事要当面告诉主君。 随从的人把他的话告诉了赵简子，简子召见了他，说： 好呀！
English: The man who stood in the way said, "I have something to tell my master face to face." The man's attendants told Zhao Jianzi what he had said. Jianzi summoned him and said, "Good!

古文：吾有所见子游也。 
现代文：这是我在梦中见到过的子晰啊。 
English: It's the clearest I've ever seen in my dreams.

古文：当道者曰： 屏左右，愿有谒。 
现代文：挡路的人说： 请屏退随从的人，有事当面告诉您。 
English: The passer-by said, "Please make the two attendants step back. I have something to report."

古文：简子屏人。
现代文：简子屏退了随从的人。
English: Yasuko told people to move back.

古文：当道者曰： 日者主君之病，臣在帝侧。 
现代文：挡路的人说： 前些时候主君生病，我在天帝的身旁。 
English: The person standing in the way said, "Some time ago, my master was ill, and I was at the emperor's side.

古文：简子曰： 然，有之。
现代文：简子说： 对，有这回事。
English: "Yes, there is such a thing," she said.

古文：子见我何为？ 
现代文：您见我在干什么呢？ 
English: What do you see me doing?

古文：当道者曰： 帝令主君射熊与罴皆死。 
现代文：挡路的人说： 天帝命令你射熊与罴，熊罴都射死了。 
English: The man who stood in the way said, "God has ordered you to shoot the bear and the donkey, and the donkey is dead."

古文：简子曰： 是何也？ 
现代文：简子问： 这意味着什么呢？ 
English: Jane asked: What does this mean?

古文：当道者曰： 晋国且有大难，主君首之。
现代文：挡路的人说： 晋国将有大难，主君首当其冲。
English: The passer-by said, "Jin Province will be in great trouble, and you will be the first to be affected."

古文：帝令主君灭二卿，夫罴皆其祖也。 
现代文：天帝命令主君消灭二卿，那个熊罴都是他们的祖先。 
English: The Heavenly Emperor ordered his master to exterminate the two nobles. That bear cub was their ancestor.

古文：简子曰： 帝赐我二笥皆有副，何也？ 
现代文：简子问： 天帝赐给我两个竹笥，都有备用的笥，意味着什么呢？ 
English: Jane said, "God has given me two bamboo boxes, and they both have matching small boxes. What does this mean?"

古文：当道者曰： 主君之子，将克二国於翟，皆子姓也。 
现代文：挡路的人说： 主君的儿子将在翟战胜代国和知氏，两国都姓子。 
English: The man standing in the way said, "The master's son will defeat the vassal and the vassal's son. Both countries are surnamed Zi."

古文：简子曰： 吾见兒在帝侧，帝属我一翟犬，曰 及而子之长以赐之 夫兒何说以赐翟犬？ 
现代文：简子问： 我看见小孩子在天帝身边，天帝交给我一条狄犬，说 等到你的儿子长大后就把这条狄犬赐给他 ，把狄犬赐给儿子是什么意思呢？ 
English: Janzi asked: I saw a child standing next to Heavenly Father. Heavenly Father gave me a Di dog, saying that when your son grows up, you will give him this Di dog. What does it mean to give a Di dog to your son?

古文：当道者曰： 兒，主君之子也。
现代文：挡路的人说： 小孩，是主君的儿子。
English: And they that stood in the way said, This child is the son of my lord.

古文：翟犬，代之先也。
现代文：狄犬，是代国的祖先。
English: Di, the dog, is the ancestor of the nation.

古文：主君之子，且必有代。
现代文：主君的儿子一定会拥有代国。
English: The master's son will surely have a successor state.

古文：及主君之後嗣，且有革政而胡服，并二国翟。 
现代文：到主君的后代，将会有革新政治而穿胡人衣服，在翟地吞并二国的事。 
English: In the future generations of the lord, there will be a renovation of politics and the wearing of Hu people's clothes, and the annexation of the two countries in Shunde.

古文：简子问其姓而延之以官。
现代文：简子问他的姓名要请他当官。
English: Yasuko asks his last name and wants to hire him as a clerk.

古文：当道者曰： 臣野人，致帝命。 
现代文：挡路的人说： 我是山野之人，只是传达天帝的命令。 
English: The man who stood in the way said, "I am a man of the mountains and fields, but I am only conveying the orders of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：遂不见。
现代文：于是就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：是何谓也？
现代文：这怎么解释呢？
English: How can this be explained?

古文：曰：是皆妖也。
现代文：解释说：这些全都是妖象。
English: He explained: "These are all demon elephants.

古文：其占皆如当道言，所见於帝前之事。
现代文：这些妖象预示的内容，完全和挡路的人说的在天帝面前发生的事情一样。
English: The foreshadowing of these monsters is exactly the same as what those who stand in the way say happened in front of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：所见当道之人，妖人也。
现代文：简子所见到的挡路人是个妖人。
English: The person blocking the road that Jane saw was a genie.

古文：其後晋二卿范氏、中行氏作乱，简子攻之，中行昭子、范文子败，出奔齐。
现代文：那以后，晋国的二卿范氏和中行氏作乱，简子攻击他们，中行文子和范昭子失败，逃亡到齐国去。
English: After that, the two nobles of Jin, the Fan clan and the Zhongxing clan, started a riot, and Jianzi attacked them. Zhongxing's son, Fumiko, and Fan's daughter, Akiko, failed and fled to Qi.

古文：始，简子使姑布子卿相诸子，莫吉；至翟妇之子无恤，以为贵。
现代文：当初，简子让姑布子卿给自己的几个儿子看相，没有一个是吉相，看到狄妇生的儿子无恤时，认为他是贵人之相。
English: At first, Chien Tzu asked his aunt, the Lady of the Cloth, to choose a consort for each of her sons, but none of them were good matches. When Chien Tzu saw Di's son, she thought he was a noble match.

古文：简子与语，贤之。
现代文：简子和无恤谈话，很器重他。
English: Jane and Ruthless talk, very respectful of him.

古文：简子募诸子曰： 吾藏宝符於常山之上，先得者赏。 
现代文：简子召集几个儿子说： 我在常山上藏有宝符，谁先找到它有赏。 
English: Kenzo gathered a few of his sons and said, "I have a treasure hidden in the Changshan Mountains. Whoever finds it first will be rewarded."

古文：诸子皆上山，无所得。
现代文：各个儿子都上山去找，谁也没有找到。
English: All the sons went up the mountain to look for him, but no one could find him.

古文：无恤还曰： 已得符矣。 
现代文：无恤回来说： 我已经找到宝符了。 
English: He returned without regret and said, "I have found the treasure."

古文：简子问之，无恤曰： 从常山上临代，代可取也。 
现代文：简子问这件事，无恤说： 从常山上下临代国，代国就可以占领。 
English: When asked about this, Chien Tzu said, "From Changshan to Linyi, Linyi can be occupied.

古文：简子以为贤，乃废太子而立之。
现代文：简子认为他有才能，就废掉太子而立无恤为太子。
English: Kenji thought he had talent, so he abolished the position of crown prince and became crown prince without a shirt.

古文：简子死，无恤代，是为襄子。
现代文：简子死后，无恤继位，这就是赵襄子。
English: After the death of Chien Tzu, Zhao Xiang Zi succeeded to the throne.

古文：襄子既立，诱杀代王而并其地。又并知氏之地。
现代文：襄子继位以后，诱杀代王并吞并了代国土地，又吞并了知氏的领地。
English: After Xiangzi succeeded to the throne, he booby-trapped the acting king and annexed the land of the acting country, and also annexed the territory of Zhuo Zhi.

古文：後取空同戎。
现代文：后来娶空同戎女子为妻。
English: He later married a woman from the Ku Tong Rong.

古文：自简子後，世至武灵王，吴入其孟姚。其後，武灵王遂取中山，并胡地。
现代文：自赵简子以后，七代传到赵武灵王，吴广献他的女儿娃嬴给武灵王，她就是天帝提到的孟姚。从那以后，武灵王终于夺取了中山国，吞并了胡地。
English: Since Zhao Jianzi, seven generations have been passed down to Zhao Wuling Wang. Wu Guang dedicated his daughter, Wa Yan, to Wuling Wang. She was the Meng Yao mentioned by the Heavenly Emperor. Since then, Wuling Wang finally captured Zhongshan Province and annexed the Hudi.

古文：武灵王之十九年，更为胡服，国人化之。
现代文：武灵王十九年，更换为胡人的服装，国内的人也习惯了这种胡装。
English: In the 19th year of King Wuling, it was replaced by the clothing of the Hu people. People in China have also become accustomed to this kind of Hu clothing.

古文：皆如其言，无不然者。
现代文：这一切都如挡路的人所预言的那样，没有一处不是如此。
English: It's all exactly as predicted by the roadblockers, and nowhere is it different.

古文：盖妖祥见於兆，审矣，皆非实事。
现代文：这是吉凶通过某些征兆表现出来，就很清楚的了，全都不是真实的事情。
English: It's a matter of fortune and misfortune manifesting themselves through certain signs, so it's clear that none of this is real.

古文：吉凶之渐，若天告之。
现代文：吉凶的苗头，好像是上天在预告一般。
English: The signs of auspicious and inauspicious events seem to be heralded by the heavens.

古文：何以知天不实告之也？
现代文：根据什么知道上天不如实预告人呢？
English: On what basis does God know who is a false prophet?

古文：以当道之人在帝侧也。
现代文：根据挡路的人在天帝的身旁。
English: According to the man blocking the road, he was standing next to the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：夫在天帝之侧，皆贵神也。致帝之命，是天使者也。
现代文：在天帝的身旁，都是些贵神，传达天帝的命令，是上天的使者。
English: Beside the heavenly emperor, there are all the noble gods, conveying the orders of the heavenly emperor, they are the messengers of heaven.

古文：人君之使，车骑备具，天帝之使，单身当道，非其状也。
现代文：人君的使者，车骑全都俱备，天帝的使者，独自一人挡在路上，这不是天帝使者的样子。
English: The emissary of the human ruler is fully equipped with a chariot and a horse. The emissary of the heavenly emperor stands alone on the road. This is not the appearance of the emissary of the heavenly emperor.

古文：天官百二十，与地之王者以异也。
现代文：天官有一百二十个，和地上君王的官数没有什么不同。
English: There are one hundred and twenty heavenly officers, no different from the number of officers of earthly kings.

古文：地之王者，官属备具，法象天官，禀取制度。
现代文：地上的君王，大小官吏俱备，效法于天官，承受上天的制度。
English: The kings of the earth, officials great and small, follow the example of the heavenly officials and inherit the heavenly system.

古文：天地之官同，则其使者亦宜钧。
现代文：天上与地上的官制既然相同，那么他们的使者也应当一样。
English: Since the government of heaven and earth is the same, their messengers should be the same.

古文：官同人异者，未可然也。
现代文：官制相同而人不同，不能认为是正确的。
English: It cannot be considered correct to have the same system of government but different people.

古文：何以知简子所见帝非实帝也？
现代文：根据什么知道简子所梦见的天帝不是真实的天帝呢？
English: On what basis do you know that the heavenly emperor that Jianzi dreamed of is not the real heavenly emperor?

古文：以梦占之，楼台山陵，官位之象也。
现代文：根据梦来推断可以知道这一点。楼台山陵，是官位的象征。
English: This can be deduced from the dream. The tower and the mountain mausoleum are symbols of official rank.

古文：人梦上楼台，升山陵，辄得官位。
现代文：人梦见上楼台、登山陵，往往可以获得官位。
English: People dream of climbing the staircase, climbing the mausoleum, and can often obtain an official rank.

古文：实楼台山陵非官位也，则知简子所梦见帝者非天帝也。
现代文：实际上楼台山陵并不是官位，就可知简子所梦见的天帝并不真是天帝。
English: In fact, the Loudai Mountain Mausoleum is not an official rank, so it can be seen that the Heavenly Emperor dreamed of by Jian Zi is not really the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：人臣梦出人君，人君必不见，又必不赐。
现代文：臣子梦见君王，君王一定没有见过臣子，也必然不会赏赐臣子。
English: If a vassal dreams of the king, the king must not have seen the vassal, and must not reward the vassal.

古文：以人臣梦占之，知帝赐二笥、翟犬者，非天帝也。
现代文：根据臣子的梦来推测，知道梦中天帝赐给简子两个竹笥和一条狄犬，这个天帝并不是真天帝。
English: According to the minister's dream, knowing that in the dream the emperor gave Janzi two bamboo shoots and a dog, this emperor is not the true emperor.

古文：非天帝，则其言与百鬼游於钧天，非天也。
现代文：不是真天帝，那么简子说他和百鬼在天中央遨游，那并不是真的天堂。
English: If it is not the true Heavenly Emperor, then Janzo said that he and the hundred ghosts wandered in the center of heaven, which is not really heaven.

古文：鲁叔孙穆子梦天压己者，审然是天下至地也。
现代文：鲁国叔孙穆子梦见天压住了自己，如果真是这么回事，这是天掉到地上来了。
English: Lu Guo's great-uncle Mu Zi dreamed that the sky was crushing him. If this is really the case, it means that the sky has fallen to the ground.

古文：至地则有楼台之抗，不得及己，及己则楼台宜坏。
现代文：天掉到地上，就有楼台顶住它，不会压倒叔孙穆子自己的身上。如果压到他自己的身上，那么楼台该是被压坏了。
English: If the sky falls to the ground, there will be a platform to hold it up, and it will not crush Uncle Sun Muc's own body. If it crushes his own body, then the platform should be crushed.

古文：楼台不坏，是天不至地。
现代文：楼台没有压坏，这是天没有掉到地上。
English: The platform was not crushed, which means that the sky did not fall to the ground.

古文：不至地则不得压己。
现代文：天没有掉到地上，就不会压到他自己的身上。
English: If the sky hadn't fallen to the ground, it wouldn't have fallen on him.

古文：不得压己则压己者非天也，则天之象也。
现代文：不会压到他自己的身上，那么压到他自己身上的，就不是天了，而是天的象征。
English: If it does not press down on his own body, then what presses down on his own body is not heaven, but a symbol of heaven.

古文：叔孙穆子所梦压己之天非天，则知赵简子所游之天非天也。
现代文：叔孙穆子所梦见的压在自己身上的天不是天，那么就知道赵简子所遨游的天也并不是天。
English: The sky that Uncle and Grandson Mu Zi dreamt of and that weighed down on his body was not a sky, so we know that the sky that Zhao Jian Zi traveled to was not a sky.

古文：或曰： 人亦有直梦。见甲，明日则见甲矣；梦见君，明日则见君矣。 
现代文：有人说： 人也有直接应验了的梦，梦见某甲，第二天就见到某甲了。梦见君王，第二天就见到君王了。 
English: Some people say: People also have dreams that are directly fulfilled. If you dream of a certain person, you will see that person the next day. If you dream of a king, you will see the king the next day.

古文：曰：然。
现代文：解释说：确实如此。
English: The general said yes.

古文：人有直梦，直梦皆象也，其象直耳。
现代文：人有直接应验的梦，直梦全都是虚像，这种虚象不过是直接应验的罢了。
English: People have dreams of direct fulfillment. All direct dreams are illusions. These illusions are nothing more than direct fulfillment.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：直梦者梦见甲，梦见君，明日见甲与君，此直也。
现代文：所谓直梦梦见某甲，梦见君王，第二天见到某甲和君王，这就叫直梦。
English: The so-called direct dream is a dream of seeing a certain person, a dream of seeing a king, and the next day seeing a certain person and a king. This is called a direct dream.

古文：如问甲与君，甲与君则不见也。
现代文：如果去问某甲和君王，某甲与君王则没有见到他。
English: If you ask a certain A and the king, A and the king did not see him.

古文：甲与君不见，所梦见甲与君者，象类之也。
现代文：某甲与君王没有见到他，他所梦见的某甲与君王，只是类似某甲与君王的虚象。
English: The so-and-so and the king did not see him, and the so-and-so and the king he dreamed of was just an imaginary image similar to the so-and-so and the king.

古文：乃甲与君象类之，则知简子所见帝者象类帝也。
现代文：用某甲与君王的虚象来类推这件事，就知道简子所梦见的天帝只是类似天帝的虚象而已。
English: By using the imaginary image of a certain emperor as an analogy for this matter, we know that the heavenly emperor dreamed of by Jian Zi is just an imaginary image similar to the heavenly emperor.

古文：且人之梦也，占者谓之魂行。
现代文：况且人所做的梦，占卜者认为它是魂在行动。
English: Moreover, when a person has a dream, soothsayers consider it to be the soul in action.

古文：梦见帝，是魂之上天也。
现代文：梦见天帝，是魂到天上去了。
English: Dreaming of the heavenly emperor means that the soul has gone to heaven.

古文：上天犹上山也。
现代文：上天如同登山。
English: Heaven is like climbing a mountain.

古文：梦上山，足登山，手引木，然後能升。
现代文：梦见上山，足登山路，手攀树木，然后才能登上去。
English: Dreaming of going up the mountain, climbing the mountain path by foot, climbing trees by hand, and then being able to climb up.

古文：升天无所缘，何能得上？
现代文：升天没有可以登攀的东西，怎么能上得去呢？
English: If there is nothing to climb up to heaven, how can one go up?

古文：天之去人以万里数。
现代文：天距离人要以万里计算。
English: The distance between people should be calculated in thousands of miles.

古文：人之行，日百里。魂与体形俱，尚不能疾，况魂独行安能速乎？
现代文：人行走，每天不过一百里，魂与形体在一起，尚且不能走得很快，何况魂单独行走，怎么能走得快呢？
English: Man walks only a hundred miles a day, and the soul cannot walk very fast when it is with the body. How can the soul walk fast when it is alone?

古文：使魂行与形体等，则简子之上下天，宜数岁乃悟，七日辄觉，期何疾也！
现代文：假使魂行走的速度与形体相等，那么简子上天下地，应该几年才能苏醒，七天就醒过来，为什么往返得这么快呢？
English: Assuming that the speed at which the soul travels is equal to that of the body, why does Jane travel so quickly from one place to another, taking several years to wake up and only seven days to wake up again?

古文：夫魂者精气也，精气之行与云烟等。
现代文：魂，是精气，精气行走和云烟相同，经考察云烟飘行不能很快。
English: The soul is the spirit, and the spirit walking is the same as the smoke, and after investigation, the smoke can't travel very fast.

古文：案云烟之行不能疾，使魂行若蜚鸟乎，行不能疾。
现代文：要说魂行如同飞鸟一样吗？
English: Would you say that the soul's movements are like those of a bird?

古文：人或梦蜚者用魂蜚也，其蜚不能疾於鸟。
现代文：魂行就不能很快。人有时梦见在飞行，是靠魂在飞，它飞行的速度并不比鸟快。
English: The soul cannot travel very fast. People sometimes dream that they are flying, but it is the soul that is flying. It does not fly faster than a bird.

古文：天地之气，尤疾速者，飘风也，飘风之发，不能终一日。
现代文：天地之气中速度最快的，是狂风。狂风吹起来，不能吹一整天。
English: The fastest speed in the atmosphere of heaven and earth is the raging wind. When the raging wind blows, it cannot blow all day.

古文：使魂行若飘风乎，则其速不过一日之行，亦不能至天。
现代文：要说魂行如同狂风一样吗？那么它的速度不过是狂风一天的距离，也不能到达天上。
English: If the soul's movement is like a strong wind, then its speed is only one day's distance of the strong wind, and it cannot reach the sky.

古文：人梦上天，一卧之顷也，其觉，或尚在天上，未终下也。
现代文：人梦见上天，不过睡一觉那么短的时间，醒来的时候，感到自己也许还在天上，而没有最终回到地上来。
English: People dream of going to heaven, but after sleeping for such a short time, when they wake up, they feel that they may still be in heaven, but have not finally returned to the earth.

古文：若人梦行至雒阳，觉，因从雒阳悟矣。
现代文：好像有人做梦到了洛阳，醒来的时候，就感到自己是在洛阳醒过来的了。
English: It's as if someone had a dream about Luoyang, and when they woke up, they felt like they woke up in Luoyang.

古文：魂神蜚驰何疾也！
现代文：简子的魂神飞驰何等的迅速啊！
English: How swiftly does the spirit of Yoriko fly!

古文：疾则必非其状。必非其状，则其上天非实事也。非实事则为妖祥矣。
现代文：飞得极快就一定不是他的样子，一定不是他的样子那么他上天就不是实事了，不是实事就是表示吉凶的征兆了。
English: If he flies very fast, it must not be his appearance, and if it is not his appearance, then his ascension to heaven is not a fact, and if it is not a fact, it is a sign of good or bad luck.

古文：夫当道之人，简子病，见於帝侧，後见当道象人而言，与相见帝侧之时无以异也。
现代文：那个挡路的人，简子病中见到他在天帝身旁，后来见他挡在路上像人一样的说话，和在天帝身旁相见的时候，没有什么不同。
English: The man who stood in the way was no different from the one I saw standing next to Emperor Tiandi during his illness. Later, I saw him standing in the way, speaking like a human being, and when I saw him next to Emperor Tiandi.

古文：由此言之，卧梦为阴候，觉为阳占，审矣。
现代文：由此说来，睡梦中出现的征兆是 阴侯 ，醒时看到的征兆是 阳占 。这就很清楚了。
English: From this, it is clear that the signs appearing in sleep are "yinhou" and the signs seen when awake are "yangzhan."

古文：赵襄子既立。知伯益骄，请地韩、魏，韩、魏予之；请地於赵，赵不予。
现代文：赵襄子继位后，知伯更加骄横，他向韩国和魏国索取土地，韩国和魏国给予了他；他向赵国索取土地，赵国不给。
English: After Zhao Xiangzi succeeded to the throne, Zhibo became even more arrogant. He asked for land from Korea and Wei, and Korea and Wei gave it to him; he asked for land from Zhao, but Zhao did not give it to him.

古文：知伯益怒，遂率韩、魏攻赵襄子。
现代文：知伯更是发怒，于是率领韩、魏进攻赵襄子。
English: Zhi Bo was even angrier, so he led Han and Wei to attack Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：襄子惧，用奔保晋阳。
现代文：襄子惧怕，于是逃跑出去守住晋阳。
English: Xiangzi was afraid, so he ran away to protect Jinyang.

古文：原过从，後，至於托平驿，见三人，自带以上可见，自带以下不可见，予原过竹二节，莫通，曰： 为我以是遗赵无恤。 
现代文：原过随他逃跑，落在后边，到达王泽，看到三个人，自腰带以上部分看得见，自腰带以下部分看不见。三人给原过两节竹子，竹节不通，说： 为我们把这两节竹子赠送给赵无恤。 
English: The former ran away with him, fell behind, arrived at Wangze, and saw three people, visible from the part above the waistband, invisible from the part below the waistband. The three people gave the former two sections of bamboo, the bamboo section did not pass, saying: For us, give these two sections of bamboo to Zhao Wuxi.

古文：既至，以告襄子。
现代文：原过赶上赵襄子，把这件事告诉了襄子。
English: I caught up with Zhao Xiangzi and told him about this.

古文：襄子齐三日，亲自割竹，有赤书曰： 赵无恤，余霍大山阳侯，天。
现代文：襄子斋戒三天，亲自剖开竹子，竹子里有红字，写的是： 赵无恤，我是霍太山山阳侯，是天使。
English: Xiangzi fasted for three days and personally cut open the bamboo. There was a scarlet letter in the bamboo, which read: "Zhao Wuxi, I am the prince of Mount Huotai, an angel.

古文：三月丙戌，余将使汝灭知氏，汝亦祀我百邑，余将赐汝林胡之地。 
现代文：三月丙戌日，我将让你消灭知氏，你也要在百邑祭祀我，我将把林胡之地赐给你。 
English: On the third day of the third month, I will let you destroy the Chishi, and you shall sacrifice to me in a hundred villages, and I will give you the land of Linhu.

古文：襄子再拜，受神之命。
现代文：襄子拜了两拜，接受了神的指示。
English: Xiangzi bowed twice and accepted God's instruction.

古文：是何谓也？
现代文：这怎么解释呢？
English: How can this be explained?

古文：曰：是盖襄子且胜之祥也。
现代文：解释说：这大概是赵襄子将要取胜的预兆吧。
English: "This is probably a sign that Zhao Xiangzi is going to win," he explained.

古文：三国攻晋阳岁余，引汾水灌其城，城不浸者三板。
现代文：三国进攻晋阳一年多，引汾河水灌晋阳城，城只差三板就要淹没了。
English: The three countries attacked Jinyang for more than a year, and the waters of the Yangtze River flooded Jinyang City. The city was only three planks away from being submerged.

古文：襄子惧，使相张孟谈私於韩、魏，韩、魏与合谋，竟以三月丙戌之日，灭知氏，共分其地。
现代文：襄子惧怕，派相官张孟谈和韩、魏私下谈判，韩、魏与赵合谋，竟然在三月丙戌日那天，反而灭掉了知氏，三国共分了知氏的领地。
English: Xiangzi was afraid, so he sent the prime minister Zhang Meng to talk with Han and Wei to negotiate in private. Han, Wei and Zhao conspired, and on the day of the third lunar month, on the contrary, they exterminated the Chizhi, and the three countries shared the territory of the Chizhi.

古文：盖妖祥之气。象人之形，称霍大山之神，犹夏庭之妖象龙，称褒之二君；赵简子之祥象人，称帝之使也。
现代文：大概是妖祥之气像人的形状，自称是霍太山的神，如同夏朝宫廷的妖象像龙，自称是褒国的两位君王一样。赵简子遇到的妖象像人，自称是天帝的使者。
English: It is probably the shape of the yokozho that resembles a human, claiming to be the god of Mount Huotai, just as the yokozho in the summer court resembled a dragon and claimed to be the two kings of Bao Guo. The yokozho that Zhao Jianzi encountered resembled a human and claimed to be the messenger of the heavenly emperor.

古文：何以知非霍大山之神也？
现代文：根据什么知道不是霍太山的神呢？
English: How do you know it's not the god of Mount Houta?

古文：曰：大山，地之体，犹人有骨节，骨节安得神？
现代文：解释说：太山，是地的形体，好比人有骨节一样，骨节怎么会成为神呢？
English: He explained, "Taisan is the shape of the earth, just like people have bones. How can bones become gods?

古文：如大山有神，宜象大山之形。
现代文：如果霍太山有神，这个神应该像霍太山的形状。
English: If Mount Huotai has a god, this god should be shaped like Mount Huotai.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：人谓鬼者死人之精，其象如生之形。
现代文：人们认为鬼是死人的精神变的，它的形象如同活人的形象。
English: It is believed that the ghost is the spirit of a dead person, and its image is like the image of a living person.

古文：今大山广长不与人同，而其精神不异於人。
现代文：现在霍太山又广又长与人不相同，而它的精神却和人没有一点不同。
English: Now, Mount Huotai is as wide and long as a human being, but its spirit is no different from a human being.

古文：不异於人则鬼之类人。
现代文：和人没有一点不同，那就不是山神而是鬼类似于人。
English: If they are no different from humans, then they are not mountain gods, but ghosts similar to humans.

古文：鬼之类人，则妖祥之气也。
现代文：鬼类似于人，那就是妖祥之气构成的了。
English: Ghosts are similar to people, that's what the evil spirit is made up of.

古文：秦始皇帝三十六年，荧惑守心，有星坠下，至地为石，刻其石曰： 始皇死而地分。 
现代文：秦始皇帝三十六年，荧惑星侵犯心宿，有星从天坠下来，到地上变为石头。有老百姓在这块殒石上刻字： 始皇当死国土分裂。 
English: In the 36th year of Qin Shi Huang's reign, a star fell from the sky and turned into stone on the ground. Some people wrote on the stone: "The first emperor should die and the country should be divided."

古文：始皇闻之，令御史逐问莫服，尽取石旁家人诛之，因燔其石，使者从关东夜过华阴平，或有人持璧遮使者，曰： 为我遗镐池君。 
现代文：始皇听见这件事，命令御史追查，没有人承认，就把住在殒石旁的人全部抓来杀掉，随着烧毁了这块殒石。秋天，秦始皇的使者在晚上从关东路过华阴平舒，有人拿着一块璧拦住使者，说： 请为我把璧赠送给镐池君。 
English: When the First Emperor heard about this, he ordered his historian to investigate, and if no one admitted it, he arrested and killed all the people living near the oyster stone, and then burned the oyster stone.In the autumn, when the emissary of the First Emperor of Qin passed Huayin Pingshu in the evening from Kanto, someone stopped the emissary with a stone and said, "Please give the stone to Zuchi for me."

古文：因言曰： 今年祖龙死。 
现代文：随着又说： 明年祖龙要死了。 
English: He also took the opportunity to say: This year, the ancestor died.

古文：使者问之，因忽不见，置其璧去。
现代文：使者想问这件事，忽然这个人就不见了，留下那块璧就离开了。
English: The messenger wanted to ask him about it, but suddenly the man disappeared, leaving the stone behind.

古文：使者奉璧，具以言闻，始皇帝默然良久，曰： 山鬼不过知一岁事，乃言曰 祖龙 者，人之先也。 
现代文：使者献上璧并把事情的经过原原本本地报告了秦始皇。秦始皇沉默很久，说： 山鬼只不过知道一年以内的事情。 于是又说：  祖龙 是人的祖先。 
English: The messenger presented the gems and reported to Qin Shi Huang, the first emperor of China, how the matter had originally gone. Qin Shi Huang was silent for a long time, saying, "The mountain demon only knows things within a year." Then he said, "The ancestor of the dragon is the ancestor of man."

古文：使御府视璧，乃二十八年行渡江所沉璧也。
现代文：让御府官来看这块璧，原来是二十八年出巡时沉入江中的那块璧。
English: Let the prefectural government officials come and see this gem, which was originally the gem that sank into the river during the inspection tour in 2008.

古文：明三十七年，梦与海神战，如人状。
现代文：第二年是秦始皇三十七年，秦始皇梦见与海神交战，海神像人的形状。
English: The second year was the thirty-seventh year of Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang dreamed of fighting with the sea god, the sea god resembled the shape of a man.

古文：是何谓也？
现代文：这怎么解释呢？
English: How can this be explained?

古文：曰：皆始皇且死之妖也。
现代文：解释说：这些全是秦始皇将要死去而出现的妖象。
English: He explained, "These are all demon elephants that appeared when Qin Shi Huang was about to die.

古文：始皇梦与海神战，恚怒入海，候神射大鱼，自琅邪至劳、成山不见。
现代文：始皇梦见和海神交战，很愤怒，就乘船入海，等候射杀象征海神的大鱼，从琅邪山直到劳山、成山都没有看见大鱼。
English: The first emperor dreamed of fighting the sea god and was very angry, so he took a boat into the sea, waiting to shoot and kill the big fish symbolizing the sea god. He did not see the big fish from Mount Zhaozha to Mount Lao and Mount Cheng.

古文：至之罘山，还见巨鱼，射杀一鱼，遂旁海西至平原津而病，至沙丘而崩。
现代文：到了之罘山，回来时看见了大鱼，射死一条大鱼，于是沿着海岸向西航行到达平原津渡口秦始皇就病了，到了沙丘秦始皇就死了。
English: When he arrived at Zhulong Mountain, he saw a big fish when he came back and shot a big fish, so he sailed west along the coast to reach the plain of Tsu Tukou. Qin Shihuang became ill, and when he reached the sand dunes, he died.

古文：当星坠之时，荧惑为妖，故石旁家人刻书其石，若或为之，文曰 始皇死 ，或教之也。
现代文：当天上的星坠下之时，荧惑出现妖象，所以殒石旁的家人刻写字在殒石上，好像是有什么东西让人刻石的，刻的字是 始皇死 ，好像是有什么东西教人这样刻的。
English: When the star in the sky fell, a demonic elephant appeared, so the family members next to the flint engraved words on the flint, as if there was something for people to carve stone, the engraved word was "the death of the first emperor," as if there was something to teach people to carve like this.

古文：犹世间童谣，非童所为，气导之也。
现代文：如同世间上的童谣，不是儿童所编造的，是 阳气 诱导他们唱的。
English: Like the nursery rhymes of the world, they are not made up by children, but are induced by yang qi.

古文：凡妖之发，或象人为鬼，或为人象鬼而使，其实一也。
现代文：凡是妖象出现，有的是像人形的鬼，有的是人像鬼而活动，其实质都是一样的。
English: Whenever a demonic elephant appears, some of them look like humanoid ghosts, some of them act like ghosts, but their essence is the same.

古文：晋公子重耳失国，乏食於道，从耕者乞饭。
现代文：晋公子重耳逃亡别国，在路上断绝了粮食，向耕田的人乞讨饭食。
English: With a heavy heart, Jin Gongzi fled to another country. On the way, he ran out of food and begged for food from the farmers.

古文：耕者奉塊土以赐公子。
现代文：耕田的人献上一块土给公子，公子很冒火。
English: The cultivator presented a piece of soil to the prince, who was very excited.

古文：公子怒，咎犯曰： 此吉祥，天赐土地也。 
现代文：咎犯说： 这是吉祥的征兆，是上天赐给你土地。 
English: The culprit said, "This is an auspicious sign. Heaven has given you this land."

古文：其後公子得国复土，如咎犯之言。
现代文：事后公子重建国家收复了国土，完全像咎犯所讲的一样。
English: After the incident, he rebuilt the country and recovered the land, just like the culprit said.

古文：齐田单保即墨之城，欲诈燕军，云： 天神下助我。 
现代文：齐国的田单守卫即墨城，想欺骗燕军，说 有天神下来帮助我。 
English: Tian Shan, the guardian of Qi, that is, Mocheng, wanted to deceive Yan's army, saying that an angel would come down to help me.

古文：有一人前曰： 我可以为神乎？ 
现代文：有一个人上前说： 我可以成为神吗？ 
English: A man came forward and said, "Can I be God?"

古文：田单却走再拜事之，竟以神下之言闻於燕军。
现代文：田单退走两次拜他，侍奉他为神，终于把神从天上下来帮助齐国的话传到了燕军那里。
English: Tian Shan retreated twice to worship him and serve him as a god, and finally spread the word of God coming down from heaven to help Qi to the Yan army.

古文：燕军信其有神，又见牛若五采之文，遂信畏惧，军破兵北。
现代文：燕军相信齐国有神帮助，又看见牛身上好像有五色花纹，于是更加相信而害怕，燕军被攻破吃了败仗。
English: Yan's army believed that Qi had the help of the gods, and saw that the cow seemed to have five-color patterns on its body, so they believed more and were afraid. Yan's army was defeated and defeated.

古文：田单卒胜，复获侵地。
现代文：田单终于获胜，又收复了被侵占的国土。
English: Tian Shan finally won and regained the occupied land.

古文：此人象鬼之妖也。
现代文：这是人像鬼的妖象。
English: It's an anthropomorphic monster elephant.

古文：使者过华阴，人持璧遮道，委璧而去，妖鬼象人之形也。
现代文：秦始皇的使者路过华阴，有人拿着璧拦在路上，又放下璧而离去，是妖气构成的鬼像人的形状。
English: The emissary of the First Emperor of Qin passed Huayin, someone stopped him on the road with a gem, and then put down the gem and left. It is the shape of a ghost-like person made up of evil spirits.

古文：夫沉璧於江，欲求福也。
现代文：沉璧在江中，是想祈求福佑。
English: Shen Bi in the middle of the river, is to pray for good luck.

古文：今还璧，示不受物，福不可得也。
现代文：现在水神把璧归还秦始皇，是表示他不接受礼物，秦始皇就不可能获得福佑。
English: Now that the god of water has returned the gem to Qin Shihuang, it means that he does not accept gifts, and Qin Shihuang cannot receive blessings.

古文：璧者象前所沉之璧，其实非也。
现代文：这块璧，像从前沉于江中的那块璧，其实并不是同一块璧。
English: This piece of stone, like the piece of stone that sank in the river before, is actually not the same piece of stone.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么证明它呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：以鬼象人而见，非实人也。
现代文：根据鬼像人的形状而出现，它并不是真实的人来证明。
English: Based on the shape of the ghostly figure, it is not a real person to prove.

古文：人见鬼象生存之人，定问生存之人，不与己相见，妖气象类人也。
现代文：有人看见鬼像是某个活着的人，一定会去问这个活着的人，这个活着的人并没有与自己见过面，是妖气构成的鬼像人的形状。
English: Someone who sees a ghostly likeness of a living person is bound to ask about this living person. This living person has not met him or herself, but is the shape of a ghostly person formed by evil spirits.

古文：妖气象人之形，则其所赍持之物，非真物矣。 祖龙死 ，谓始皇也。
现代文：妖气构成的鬼像人的形状，那么它所拿着的璧，就不是真的璧。 祖龙死 ，说的是秦始皇。
English: If a demonic spirit takes the shape of a ghost, then the gem it is holding is not a real gem.

古文：祖，人之本；龙，人君之象也。
现代文：祖，是人的祖先；龙，是君王的象征。
English: Zu, is the ancestor of man; dragon, is the symbol of the king.

古文：人、物类，则其言祸亦放矣。
现代文：人和物都是类似的虚象，那么所预言的祖龙死也只是一种比方而己。
English: People and things are similar illusions, so the prophesied death of the ancestors is just a metaphor.

古文：汉高皇帝以秦始皇崩之岁，为泗上亭长，送徒至骊山。
现代文：汉高皇帝在秦始皇死的那一年，当泗上亭长，押送服劳役的人去骊山。
English: In the year of Qin Shi Huang's death, Emperor Henkel, as the head of the imperial court, escorted the forced laborers to Shaoshan.

古文：徒多道亡，因纵所将徒，遂行不还。
现代文：役徒大部分在半路上逃跑了，高祖随着放走了所要押送的役徒，于是役徒全都走了不再回来。
English: Most of the servants ran away in the middle of the road, and Gaozu let go of the servants he wanted to escort, so the servants all left and never came back.

古文：被酒，夜经泽中，令一人居前，前者还报曰： 前有大蛇当道，愿还。 
现代文：高祖带着酒意，于夜间在大泽中小道上行走，让一个人走在前头。走在前头的人回来报告说： 前面有大蛇挡在路上，请往回走吧。 
English: Gaozu, with a taste for alcohol, was walking at night on a small road in Osawa, and asked a man to walk in front of him. The man in front came back and reported: "There is a big snake blocking the road ahead, please go back."

古文：高祖醉，曰： 壮士行何畏！ 
现代文：高祖醉了，说： 壮士行路，怕什么！ 
English: Gao Zu was drunk and said, "A strong man travels, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：乃前，拔剑击斩蛇，蛇遂分两，径开。
现代文：于是往前走，拔剑砍斩大蛇，于是大蛇被分成两截。
English: So he went forward, drew his sword and cut the snake into two pieces.

古文：行数里，醉因卧。
现代文：小道通了，走了几里路，高祖由于酒醉而躺下来。
English: After walking several miles along the trail, Gao Zu lay down because he was drunk.

古文：高祖後人至蛇所，有一老妪夜哭之人曰： 妪何为哭？ 
现代文：跟随高祖而落在后边的人走到斩蛇的地方，有一个老妇人在夜间哭这条蛇。后边来的人问： 老妇为什么事痛哭？ 
English: An old woman was weeping over the snake in the night. The people who came behind asked, "Why is the old woman weeping?"

古文：妪曰： 人杀吾子。 
现代文：老妇说： 有人杀了我的儿子。 
English: The old woman said, "Someone killed my son."

古文：人曰： 妪子为何见杀？ 
现代文：后边的人问： 你的儿子为什么被杀呢？ 
English: The people in the back ask: Why was your son killed?

古文：妪曰： 吾子白帝子，化为蛇当径。
现代文：老妇说： 我的儿子是白帝的儿子，变化成蛇挡在小道上。
English: The old woman said, "My son is the son of Baidi, and he has turned into a snake blocking the path."

古文：今者赤帝子斩之，故哭。 
现代文：现在，赤帝的儿子斩杀了他，所以我痛哭。 
English: Now, the Red Emperor's son has killed him, so I'm crying.

古文：人以妪为妖言，因欲笞之。妪因忽不见。
现代文：后边的人认为老妇说的是妖言，因此想用鞭子打她，老妇人忽然不见了。
English: The people in the back thought that the old woman was talking nonsense, so they wanted to beat her with a whip. Suddenly, the old woman disappeared.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这怎么解释呢？
English: What does that mean?

古文：曰：是高祖初起威胜之祥也。
现代文：解释说： 这是高祖刚刚兴起威力胜人的祥兆。
English: He explained: This is a good omen that Gaozu has just emerged and is more powerful than others.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：以妪忽然不见也。
现代文：根据老妇人忽然不见来证明。
English: Based on the old woman's sudden disappearance.

古文：不见，非人，非人则鬼妖矣。
现代文：忽然不见，必不是人，不是人那就是鬼妖了。
English: If it suddenly disappears, it's not a person. If it's not a person, it's a ghost.

古文：夫以妪非人，则知所斩之蛇非蛇也。
现代文：由于老妇不是人，就可知高祖斩杀的蛇不是蛇。
English: Since the old woman is not a person, we can know that the snake that Gaozhu killed is not a snake.

古文：云白帝子，何故为蛇夜而当道？
现代文：说是白帝的儿子，为什么变为蛇在夜间挡在小道上呢？
English: He said he was the son of Emperor Paidei. Why did he turn into a snake and stand on the path at night?

古文：谓蛇白帝子，高祖赤帝子；白帝子为蛇，赤帝子为人。
现代文：说蛇是白帝的儿子，高祖是赤帝的儿子，白帝的儿子为蛇，赤帝的儿子却为人。
English: It is said that the snake is the son of the White Emperor, Gaozu is the son of the Red Emperor, the son of the White Emperor is a snake, but the son of the Red Emperor is a man.

古文：五帝皆天之神也，子或为蛇，或为人。
现代文：五帝都是天上的神，有的儿子为蛇，有的儿子却为人。
English: The five emperors were all gods in the sky, and some of their sons were snakes, while others were human.

古文：人与蛇异物，而其为帝同神，非天道也。
现代文：人和蛇是不同的物类，而他们的父亲都是五帝之一同为天神，这不符合天道。
English: People and snakes are different species, and their fathers are both one of the Five Emperors and both Tenjin, which is not in accordance with the heavenly way.

古文：且蛇为白帝子，则妪为白帝後乎？
现代文：况且蛇是白帝的儿子，那么老妇是白帝的妻子吗？
English: Besides, the snake is the son of the White Emperor, so is the old woman the wife of the White Emperor?

古文：帝者之後，前後宜备，帝者之子，官属宜盛。
现代文：白帝的妻子，前后该有随从，白帝的儿子，官员下属应该很多。
English: Emperor Baidu's wife should have an entourage, Emperor Baidu's son, and there should be many subordinates of officials.

古文：今一蛇死於径，一妪哭於道。云白帝子，非实，明矣。
现代文：现在一条蛇死在小道上，一个妇人在小道上痛哭，说他是白帝的儿子，并不是真实的，就很明白了。
English: Now that a snake has died on the path and a woman is crying bitterly on the path, saying that he is the son of the White Emperor and is not real, it is very clear.

古文：夫非实则象，象则妖也，妖则所见之物皆非物也，非物则气也。
现代文：不真实则是虚象，虚象则是妖，是妖那么所见到的东西就不是真实的物，不是真实的物则是阳气了。
English: If it's not real, it's an illusion, and if it's an illusion, it's a demon, and if it's a demon, then what you see is not real, and if it's not real, it's yang.

古文：高祖所杀之蛇非蛇也。则夫郑厉公将入郑之时，邑中之蛇与邑外之蛇斗者，非蛇也，厉公将入郑，妖气象蛇而斗也。郑国斗蛇非蛇，则知夏庭二龙为龙象，为龙象，则知郑子产之时龙战非龙也。
现代文：高祖斩杀的那蛇不是真实的蛇，郑厉公将要进入都城新郑时，妖气像蛇的形状而相斗。郑国相斗的蛇不是真实的蛇，那么可知夏朝宫廷里出现的两条龙是阳气构成的龙象，是龙象，那么可知郑国子产时互相争斗的龙不是真正的龙。
English: The snake that Gao Zu killed was not a real snake. When Zheng Li Gong was about to enter the capital city of Xinzheng, the demons fought each other in the shape of a snake. The snake that Zheng Guo fought was not a real snake, so it can be known that the two dragons that appeared in the court of the Xia Dynasty were dragon-elephant composed of yang, they were dragon-elephant, so it can be known that the dragons that fought each other during the birth of Zheng Guo Zi were not real dragons.

古文：天道难知，使非，妖也；使是，亦妖也。
现代文：天道难以知晓，如果不是龙、蛇；那么就是妖象；如果是龙、蛇，那么也还是妖象。
English: It is difficult to know the way of heaven. If it is not a dragon or a snake, then it is a demon elephant. If it is a dragon or a snake, then it is still a demon elephant.

古文：留侯张良椎秦始皇，误中副车。
现代文：留侯张良槌杀秦始皇，误中随从的车。
English: Zhang Liangzhu killed Qin Shihuang by mistake, and accidentally hit the car that was following him.

古文：始皇大怒，索求张良。
现代文：始皇大怒，命令搜捕张良。
English: The first emperor was furious and ordered the search and arrest of Zhang Liang.

古文：张良变姓名，亡匿下邳，常闲从容步游下邳上，有一老父，衣褐至良所，直堕其履下，顾谓张良： 孺子下取履。 
现代文：张良改名换姓逃跑去躲藏在下邳。张良经常闲适从容地在下邳桥上散步游览，有一个老头穿着粗布衣来到张良散步的地方，故意把他的鞋掉到桥下去，看着张良说： 小后生到桥下面去给我捡鞋子。 
English: Zhang Liang changed his name and ran away to hide in the Lower Yangtze. Zhang Liang often leisurely strolled on the Lower Yangtze Bridge. An old man wearing a coarse cloth came to Zhang Liang's walking place, deliberately dropped his shoes down to the bridge, looked at Zhang Liang and said: "Little Hou Sheng, go under the bridge and pick up my shoes."

古文：良愕然，欲殴之，以其老，为强忍下取履，因跪进履。父以足受履，笑去。
现代文：张良很惊呀，想揍这位老头，因为老头年纪大，勉强忍气到桥下面捡鞋子，接着跪下奉上鞋子，老头用脚接受鞋，笑着离开了。
English: Zhang Liang was very surprised and wanted to hit the old man, because the old man was old and could barely bear to go under the bridge to pick up the shoes. Then he knelt down and offered the shoes. The old man accepted the shoes with his feet and left with a smile.

古文：良大惊。
现代文：张良很惊奇。
English: Zhang Liang was surprised.

古文：父去里所，复还，曰： 孺子可教矣。
现代文：老头走了一里左右又回来，说： 后生有出息可把本事传给你。
English: The old man walked away for about a mile and then came back and said, "You, child, can teach.

古文：後五日平明，与我期此。 
现代文：五天以后天刚亮时，和我在此相见。 
English: Five days later, at first light, you will meet me here.

古文：良怪之，因跪曰： 诺！ 
现代文：张良很奇怪，就跪下说： 好的。 
English: Zhang Liang felt very strange, so he knelt down and said, "Okay."

古文：五日平明，良往。父已先在，怒曰： 与老人期，後，何也？去！
现代文：五天后天刚亮，张良就去那里，老头已经先在那里了，很不高兴地说： 和老年人约会，迟到，怎么回事呢？回去！
English: Five days later, just after dawn, Zhang Liang went there. The old man had already been there first, and he said with displeasure: Dating an elderly person, being late, what's the matter? Go back!

古文：後五日早会。 
现代文：五天后早点来见面。 
English: Five days later, meet me early.

古文：五日鸡鸣复往。父又已先在，复怒曰： 後，何也！
现代文：五天后鸡叫时张良又去，老头又已经先在那里了，又不高兴地说： 又迟到，怎么回事呢？回去！
English: Five days later, when the rooster crowed, Zhang Liang went there again. The old man was already there first, and he said unhappily, "I'm late again, what's the matter? Go back!"

古文：去，後五日复早来。 
现代文：五天后再早点来。 
English: Come back early in five days.

古文：五日，良夜未半往。有顷，父来，喜曰： 当如是矣。 
现代文：五天后，张良未到半夜就去了，一会儿，老头来到，高兴地说： 应当像这样啊。 
English: Five days later, Zhang Liang left before midnight. After a while, the old man came and said happily, "It should be like this."

古文：出一篇书，曰： 读是则为帝者师。
现代文：老头拿出一本书，说： 读了这本书就能做帝王的老师。
English: The old man took out a book and said, "If you read this book, you can be the emperor's teacher."

古文：後十三年，子见我济北，谷成山下黄石即我也。 
现代文：十三年后，你在济北来见我，谷成山下的黄石就是我。 
English: Thirteen years later, you came to see me in Jibei, and the yellow stone under the mountain in Gucheng was me.

古文：遂去，无他言，弗复见。
现代文：于是就离开了，没有说其他的话，也不再见张良。
English: So he left without saying anything else, and never saw Zhang Liang again.

古文：旦日视其书，乃《太公兵法》也。
现代文：第二天张良看这本书，是一部《太公兵法》。
English: The next day, Zhang Liang read this book, which was a copy of the "Law of Civil War."

古文：良因异之，习读之。
现代文：张良因此很珍奇这部书，熟读这部书。
English: Zhang Liang is therefore very rare in this book, familiar with this book.

古文：是何谓也？
现代文：这怎么解释呢？
English: How can this be explained?

古文：曰：是高祖将起，张良为辅之祥也。
现代文：这是汉高祖将要兴起，张良成为辅佐的吉兆。
English: This is a good sign that Henkel will rise and Zhang Liang will become an assistant.

古文：良居下邳任侠，十年陈涉等起，沛公略地下邳，良从，遂为师将，封为留侯。
现代文：张良隐居在下邳，仰强扶弱，十年后陈涉等人起兵，沛公占领下邳，张良跟随沛公，沛公于是以张良为师、将，封张良为留侯。
English: Zhang Liang lived in seclusion in Xiamen, relying on the strong to support the weak. Ten years later, Chen Zhu and others raised an army, and Pei Gong occupied Xiamen. Zhang Liang followed Pei Gong. Pei Gong then used Zhang Liang as a teacher and commander, and Zhang Liang as a prisoner.

古文：後十三年，高祖过济北界，得谷成山下黄石，取而葆祠之。
现代文：十三年后，张良随高祖经过济北界，遇到谷成山下的黄石。取回来极尊贵地祭祀它。
English: Thirteen years later, Zhang Liang, accompanied by Gao Zu, passed through the northern region of Jibei and encountered the Yellow Stone under the Gucheng Mountain. He retrieved it and reverently sacrificed it.

古文：及留侯死，并葬黄石。
现代文：等到留侯死时，与黄石同时下葬。
English: When he died, he was buried at the same time as Huangshi.

古文：盖吉凶之象神矣，天地之化巧矣，使老父象黄石，黄石象老父，何其神邪？
现代文：大概吉凶之象很神奇，天地的变化很巧妙，让老头像黄石，黄石像者老头，多么神妙啊！
English: Perhaps the signs of fortune and misfortune are very magical, the changes in the heavens and earth are very clever, making the old man like Yellowstone, Yellowstone like the old man, how wonderful!

古文：问曰： 黄石审老父，老父审黄石耶？ 
现代文：问道： 黄石真能变老人，老人真能变黄石吗？ 
English: Question: Can Huangshi really turn into an old man, and can an old man really turn into Huangshi?

古文：曰：石不能为老父，老父不能为黄石。
现代文：回答说：黄石不能变老人，老人不能变黄石。
English: He replied: "Yellowstone cannot turn into an old man, and an old man cannot turn into Yellowstone.

古文：妖祥之气见，故验也。
现代文：妖祥之气出现，所以有征兆。
English: There are signs of the emergence of the spirit of evil omens.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：晋平公之时，石言魏榆。
现代文：晋平公的时候，魏榆的石头说了话。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinpyeong, the stone in Weiwuying spoke.

古文：平公问於师旷曰： 石何故言？ 
现代文：平公问师旷： 石头为什么说话？ 
English: Ping Gong asked Shi Wu: Why does the stone speak?

古文：对曰： 石不能言，或凭依也。
现代文：师旷回答说： 石头不能说话，是有什么东西凭借石头说话。
English: Shi Ku replied, "Stone cannot speak, but something speaks with the help of stone."

古文：不然，民听偏也。 
现代文：如不是这样，就是老百姓听错了。 
English: If this is not the case, then the people have misheard.

古文：夫石不能人言，则亦不能人形矣。
现代文：石头不能说人的话，那么也就不能变成人的形状。
English: A stone cannot speak human words, so it cannot change into a human shape.

古文：石言，与始皇时石坠郡，民刻之，无异也。
现代文：石头说话，与秦始皇时候殒石坠落在东郡，老百姓在石头上刻字，没有什么不同。
English: The stone speaks, and it is no different from the time of Qin Shi Huang, when flints fell on Dongshun and people carved on the stones.

古文：刻为文，言为辞。
现代文：雕刻出来就是文字，说出来就是言辞。
English: To carve is to write, to speak is to speak.

古文：辞之与文，一实也。
现代文：言辞与文字，实质上是一样的。
English: Words and letters are essentially the same.

古文：民刻文，气发言。民之与气，一性也。
现代文：老百姓雕刻文字，气能发出语言，老百姓与气，性质是一样的。
English: Ordinary people carve words, qi can emit language, and the nature of ordinary people and qi is the same.

古文：夫石不能自刻，则亦不能言。
现代文：石头不能自己刻自己，那么也就不能说话。
English: If a stone cannot carve itself, it cannot speak.

古文：不能言，则亦不能为人矣。
现代文：不能说话，那也就不能变成人了。
English: If you can't talk, you can't become human.

古文：《太公兵法》，气象之也。
现代文：《太公兵法》是阳气构成的虚象。
English: "Tai Gong Hei Ho" is an illusion of yang qi.

古文：何以知非实也？
现代文：根据什么知道它不是真实的呢？
English: How do you know it's not real?

古文：以老父非人，知书亦非太公之书也。
现代文：根据老人不是真实的人，可知书也不是太公的书。
English: According to the old man is not a real person, but the book is not too public.

古文：气象生人之形，则亦能象太公之书。
现代文：阳气能构成像活人的形状，那么也能构成像太公之书那样的书。
English: If yang qi can form the shape of a living person, then it can also form a book like the Book of the Grand Duke.

古文：问曰：气无刀笔，何以为文？
现代文：问道： 气没有刀笔，用什么写成文字呢？ 
English: He asked, "If qi does not have a knife and pen, how can it be used to write?

古文：曰：鲁惠公夫人仲子，生而有文在其掌，曰 为鲁夫人 。
现代文：回答说：鲁惠公的夫人仲子，生下来就有字在她的手掌上，字是 为鲁国君的夫人 这几个字。
English: He replied, "Ru Huigong's wife, Zhong Zi, was born with the words on the palm of her hand, the words are for the wife of Lu Guojun.

古文：晋唐叔虞文在其手曰 虞 。
现代文：晋唐叔虞有文字在他的手上，字是 虞 字。
English: Emperor Jintang's uncle Yu had a letter in his hand. The letter was Yu Zi.

古文：鲁成季友文在其手曰 友 。
现代文：鲁成季友有字在他的手上，字是 友 字。
English: Lu Chengjitomo has a character in his hand, the character is Tomo.

古文：三文之书，性自然；老父之书，气自成也。
现代文：三个人手掌上的字是天生就有的；老人所传的书，是阳气自然形成的。
English: The characters on the palms of the three people are innate; the book passed down by the old man is naturally formed by the yang.

古文：性自然，气自成，与夫童谣口自言，无以异也。
现代文：天生就有的，气自然形成的，和那些童谣是儿童口里自己说出来的，没有什么不同。
English: It's no different from those nursery rhymes that come out of a child's mouth.

古文：当童之谣也，不知所受，口自言之。
现代文：倘若童谣，不知是谁传授的，是儿童口中自说的。
English: If the nursery rhyme, I don't know who taught it, it was said by the children themselves.

古文：口自言，文自成，或为之也。
现代文：童谣由口中自说，手上的文字自然形成，都象是有什么东西造成的。
English: The nursery rhymes are spoken by the children themselves, and the words on their hands are formed naturally, as if they were caused by something.

古文：推此以省太公钓得巨鱼，刳鱼得书，云 吕尚封齐 ，及武王得白鱼，喉下文曰 以予发 ，盖不虚矣。
现代文：从这里推测知道太公钓得一条大鱼，剖开鱼得到一本书，书上说： 吕尚将封在齐 ，以及周武王得到白鱼，喉下有文字： 把天下给姬发 ，大概都不会是虚假的了。
English: From this, we can surmise that knowing that Taigong caught a big fish, cut open the fish to get a book, the book said: Lushan will be sealed, and King Zhouwu got a white fish, with a text under his throat: Give the world to Himefa, will probably not be false.

古文：因此复原《河图》、《洛书》言光衰存亡、帝王际会，审有其文矣，皆妖祥之气，吉凶之瑞也。
现代文：由此又考察《河图》、《洛书》上所说的国家的兴衰存亡、帝王的兴起，确实有那些文字了。这些全都是妖祥之气构成的，是吉凶的征兆。
English: From this, we also examined the rise and fall of countries, the rise and fall of emperors, and the rise of emperors mentioned in the "River Chart" and the "Book of Luo," and found that these words did indeed exist.

