古文：宇文化及，左翊卫大将军述之子也。
现代文：宇文化及是左翊卫大将军宇文述的儿子。
English: He was the son of U Bunka and General U Wenshu of the Left Division.

古文：性凶险，不循法度，好乘肥挟弹，驰骛道中，由是长安谓之轻薄公子。
现代文：性情凶狠阴险，不遵守法度，喜欢乘坐肥马，手持弹弓，在路上驱马乱跑，因此长安人说他是个轻佻浅薄的公子。
English: He has a fierce and sinister disposition, does not abide by the law, likes to ride a fat horse, holds a slingshot, and drives horses on the road, so Chang'an people say that he is a frivolous and shallow gentleman.

古文：炀帝为太子时，常领千牛，出入卧内。
现代文：炀帝做太子时，化及任禁卫官，出入卧室。
English: When Emperor Xuan was crown prince, he was appointed as a palace guard and went in and out of the bedroom.

古文：累迁至太子仆。
现代文：屡屡升迁，到当太子仆。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and became the prince's servant.

古文：数以受纳货贿，再三免官。
现代文：化及因接受他人财物，多次被罢官。
English: He has been removed from office several times for accepting money and property from others.

古文：太子嬖昵之，俄而复职。
现代文：由于太子喜爱他，不久便官复原职。
English: As the prince liked him, he was soon reinstated.

古文：又以其弟士及尚南阳公主。化及由此益骄，处公卿间，言辞不逊，多所陵轹。
现代文：又因他的弟弟宇文士及娶南阳公主为妻，化及更加骄横，与公卿们相处时，出言不逊，多有欺凌。
English: And because of his younger brother, U-Wen-Shi, and his marriage to Nanyang Princess, he became even more arrogant. When he got along with the nobles, he was often rude and bullying.

古文：见人子女狗马珍玩，必请托求之。
现代文：看见人家有美女、小狗、肥马、珍贵玩物，便一定托人弄到手。
English: If you see someone else with a beautiful woman playing with a dog or a horse, you must ask someone to get it.

古文：常与屠贩者游，以规其利。
现代文：经常与屠夫小贩交游，以便谋求他人的利益。
English: They often make friends with butchers and take advantage of them.

古文：炀帝即位，拜太仆少卿，盖恃旧恩，贪冒尤甚。
现代文：炀帝即位后，授宇文化及太仆少卿之职，化及仗恃与炀帝的老交情，更加贪婪。
English: After Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, he was bestowed with the title of Universal Culture and Taigu Shaoqing, and his old friendship with Emperor Xuan became even more greedy.

古文：大业初，炀帝幸榆林，化及与弟智及违禁与突厥交市。
现代文：大业初年，炀帝巡幸榆林，化及与其弟智及违犯禁令和突厥人做生意。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, Emperor Gao went on a tour of Yulin, where he met his younger brother Zhi and violated the ban to do business with the Turks.

古文：帝大怒，囚之数月，还至青门外，欲斩之而后入城，解衣辫发，以公主故，久之乃释，并智及并赐述为奴。
现代文：炀帝大怒，囚禁他数月。炀帝回到青门城外时，打算先杀化及兄弟后进城，等到脱掉他们的衣服，绾起他们的头发，准备行刑时，因为南阳公主的缘故，炀帝考虑很久之后又放掉他们，让化及和智及以及宇文述为奴仆。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and imprisoned him for several months. When Emperor Xuan returned to Qingmen outside the city, he planned to kill Hwa and his brothers first and then enter the city. When he took off their clothes, picked up their hair and prepared to execute them, for the sake of Princess Nanyang, Emperor Xuan considered for a long time before releasing them, leaving Hwa and Wachi and Wu Wenshu as slaves.

古文：述薨后，炀帝追忆之，遂起化及为右屯卫将军，智及为将作少监。
现代文：宇文述死后，炀帝想起了他，于是提拔化及为右屯卫将军，智及为将作少监。
English: After the death of Uwen Shu, Emperor Gong remembered him, so he was promoted and became the general of the Right Tunwei, and Zhi and Wei became the junior inspectors.

古文：是时李密据洛口，炀帝惧，留淮左，不敢还都。
现代文：这时，李密据守洛口，炀帝很害怕，留在淮水南，不敢回都城。
English: At this time, Li Mi was stationed in Lokou, and Emperor Gao was very scared and stayed in the south of Huai Shui, not daring to return to the capital.

古文：从驾骁果多关中人，久客羁旅，见帝无西意，谋欲叛归。
现代文：而跟从炀帝的骁勇兵士大多是关中之人，长期客居在外，见炀帝又没有西归的打算，想反叛炀帝而西归。
English: However, most of the brave soldiers who followed Emperor Gong were people from Guanzhong, who had stayed away for a long time. Seeing that Emperor Gong had no intention of returning to the West, they wanted to rebel against Emperor Gong and return to the West.

古文：时武贲郎将司马德戡总领骁果，屯于东城，风闻兵士欲叛，未之审，遣校尉元武达阴问骁果，知其情，因谋构逆。共所善武贲郎将元礼、直阁裴虔通互相扇惑曰： 今闻陛下欲筑宫丹阳，势不还矣。
现代文：当时总领骁勇之士的是武贲郎将司马德戡，驻扎在东城，司马德戡听说士兵们有谋反的势头，还不清楚，便派校尉元武达暗中询问骁勇之士，司马德戡知道其中情形后，便趁机图谋叛逆，与他所交好的武贲郎将元礼、直阁裴虔通互相煽动说： 现在听说陛下想在丹阳修筑宫殿，看来将不回京都了。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief of the samurai warriors was Takehiro Shogun Sima Deya, stationed in Dongcheng. Sima Deya heard that the soldiers had the momentum of plotting a rebellion, but it was not clear, so he sent Lieutenant Colonel Yuan Wuda to secretly interrogate the samurai warriors. After Sima Deya knew the situation, he took the opportunity to plot a rebellion. He and his friends, Takehiro Shogun Genrei and Zhogaku Peiqian, incited each other to say: Now I heard that His Majesty wants to build a palace in Danyang, it seems that he will not return to Kyoto.

古文：所部骁果莫不思归，人人耦语，并谋逃去。
现代文：而陛下所统率的骁勇之士没有一个不想回京都的，他们暗中商议，打算一起逃亡。
English: However, none of His Majesty's brave warriors did not want to return to Kyoto, and they secretly discussed their plans to escape together.

古文：我欲言之，陛下性忌，恶闻兵走，即恐先事见诛。
现代文：我想告诉陛下，而陛下性情猜忌，厌恶听到兵逃的话，我担心的是未奏完就招致杀身之祸。
English: I want to tell your majesty, who has a suspicious nature and hates to hear of desertions, that I'm afraid I'm going to get killed before I've finished.

古文：今知而不言，其后事发，又当族灭我矣。进退为戮，将如之何？ 
现代文：现在既然知道这件事，却又不上奏陛下，一旦事情发生，一定会被诛灭九族，进退都是被杀，将怎么办啊？ 
English: Now that I know about this, but I don't mention it to Your Majesty, once it happens, the Nine Tribes will definitely be annihilated, and everyone who enters or leaves will be killed. What will happen?

古文：虔通曰： 上实尔，诚为公忧之。 
现代文：虔通说： 皇上果真这样，我们的确是为您担扰。 
English: Qiantong said, "It's true, Your Majesty, we are really worried about you.

古文：德戡谓两人曰： 我闻关中陷没，李孝常以华阴叛，陛下收其二弟，将尽杀之。
现代文：司马德戡对两人说： 我听说关中沦陷，李孝常在华阴反叛，陛下逮捕了他的两个弟弟，将要把他们都杀死。
English: Sima Deyao said to the two: I heard that Guanzhong had fallen, that Li Xiaozang had rebelled in Huayin, and that His Majesty had arrested his two younger brothers and was going to kill them both.

古文：吾等家属在西，安得无此虑也！ 
现代文：我们的家眷都在关西，怎么能没有这样的忧虑！ 
English: Our families are all in Kansai, how can we not have such worries!

古文：虔通曰： 我子弟已壮，诚不自保，正恐旦暮及诛，计无所出。 
现代文：虔通说： 我的孩子已经长大，现在的确自身难保，正担心早晚被杀，但无计可施。 
English: Qiantong said: My child has grown up, and now it is really difficult to protect myself. I am worried that I will be killed sooner or later, but there is nothing I can do.

古文：德戡曰： 同相忧，当共为计取。
现代文：司马德戡说： 我们有相同的忧虑，应当共商大计。
English: Sima Deyao said: We have the same concerns, we should discuss the plan together.

古文：骁果若走，可与俱去。 
现代文：如果骁勇之士逃跑，我们可以和他们一起逃离。 
English: If the brave run away, we can run away with them.

古文：虔通等曰： 诚如公言，求生之计，无以易此。 
现代文：虔通等人说： 的确像您说的这样，求生之法没有比这更好的。 
English: Pious and others said: Indeed, as you say, there is no better way to survive.

古文：因递相招诱。
现代文：于是一个个地招来劝诱。
English: As a result, they pass on messages to each other and attract recruits.

古文：又转告内史舍人元敏、鹰扬郎将孟秉，符玺郎李覆、牛方裕、直长许弘仁、薛良，城门郎唐奉义，医正张恺等，日夜聚博，约为刎颈之交，情相款昵，言无回避，于座中辄论叛计，并相然许。
现代文：又转告内史舍人元敏，鹰扬郎将孟秉、符玺郎李覆、牛方裕，直长许弘仁、薛良，城门郎唐奉义，医正张恺等人，日夜相聚赌博，结为生死之交，相互之间诚恳而亲密，说话开诚布公，毫不掩饰，在席上总是谈论反叛之计，大家都同意这样做。
English: He also told Yuan Min, a historian, that Meng Bing, Li Zhe, Niu Fang Yu, Xu Hongren, Xue Liang, Tang Bongyi, Zhang Xuan, and others gathered to gamble day and night, and became friends for life and death. They were sincere and intimate with each other, spoke openly and frankly, and always talked about rebellion at the table. Everyone agreed to do so.

古文：时李孝质在禁，令骁果守之，中外交通，所谋益急。
现代文：当时李孝质被囚禁，炀帝令骁勇之士看守着他，内外相互传递消息，谋反之事更加紧急。
English: At that time, Li Xiaojie was imprisoned, and Emperor Gao ordered his brave men to guard him, and they passed on information to each other both inside and outside, making the matter of plotting a rebellion even more urgent.

古文：赵行枢者，乐人之子，家产巨万，先交智及，勋侍杨士览者，宇文甥，二人同告智及。
现代文：赵行枢是乐师的儿子，家产巨万，以前交好宇文智及。勋侍杨士览，是宇文家的外甥，二人一起报告智及。
English: Zhao Xingzhu was the son of a musician and had a huge family fortune. He had previously been a friend of Wu Wen Zhi, and Yang Shizhu, a nephew of the Wu Wen family, both reported to Wu Wen Zhi.

古文：智及素狂悖，闻之喜，即共见德戡，期以三月十五日举兵同叛，劫十二卫武马，虏掠居人财物，结党西归。
现代文：智及平常狂妄背理，听了很高兴，于是与二人同见司马德戡，约定在三月十五日举兵同叛，劫取十二卫武马，抢走居民的财物，结伙西归。
English: After listening to the wisdom and usual arrogance, they were very happy, so they went to see Sima Deya together with the two men, and agreed to raise an army and rebel on March 15, kidnap twelve guards and horses, rob residents of their property, and return to the west in a group.

古文：智及曰： 不然。
现代文：智及说： 不能这样。
English: Wisdom and said: Otherwise.

古文：当今天实丧隋，英雄并起，同心叛者已数万人，因行大事，此帝王业也。 
现代文：当今老天的确要灭隋，英雄到处起义，同心反叛的士兵已有几万人，应趁机做大事，这是成就帝王之业的时候。 
English: Today, God indeed wants to destroy Sui and Sui dynasties. Heroes are rising up everywhere. Tens of thousands of soldiers have rebelled with one heart. We should seize the opportunity to do great things. This is the time to accomplish the emperor's cause.

古文：德戡然之。
现代文：司马德戡认为这是对的。
English: Sima Deguan thought that he was right.

古文：行枢、薛良请以化及为主，相约既定，方告化及。
现代文：赵行枢、薛良请求以化及为主。相互约定后，才告诉化及。
English: Zhao Xingzhu and Xue Liang requested that Huajing be given priority. After mutual agreement, Huajing was told.

古文：化及性本驽怯，初闻大惧，色动流汗，久之乃定。
现代文：化及本来愚钝胆小，刚听时十分害怕，色变汗流，很久才平静。
English: and originally stupid and timid, I was very scared when I first listened to it, my color turned to sweat, and it took me a long time to calm down.

古文：义宁二年三月一日，德戡欲宣言告众，恐以人心未一，更思谲诈以协骁果，谓许弘仁、张恺曰： 君是良医，国家任使，出言惑众，众必信。
现代文：义宁二年三月初一，司马德戡想公开告诉众人，担心人心不齐，便另想欺诈之法以便威迫骁勇之士，对许弘仁、张恺说： 你们是良医，被皇上信任，如果你们说话迷惑众兵士，众兵士一定相信。
English: On the first day of the third month of the second year of Yining, Sima Dejun wanted to tell everyone openly. Fearing that people's hearts were not in harmony, he thought of another method of deception in order to intimidate the brave men. He said to Xu Hongren and Zhang Ye: You are good doctors, trusted by the emperor. If you talk and confuse the soldiers, the soldiers will certainly believe you.

古文：君可入备身府，告识者，言陛下闻说骁果欲叛，多酿毒酒，因享会尽鸩杀之，独与南人留此。 
现代文：你们可进入备身府，告诉你们认识的人，说陛下听说骁勇之士将要反叛，酿了许多毒酒，要趁宴会用毒酒杀死他们，只和南边的人留在这里。 
English: You can go to the Imperial Palace and tell the people you know that His Majesty heard that the brave warriors were going to rebel and brewed a lot of poisoned wine to kill them with poisoned wine at the banquet. Only the people from the south will stay here.

古文：弘仁等宣布此言，骁果闻之，递相告语，谋叛逾急。
现代文：许弘仁、张恺公开散布这些谣言，骁勇之士听说后，相互转告，谋划反叛更加急切。
English: Xu Hongren and Zhang Ye openly spread these rumors, and after hearing them, the brave men of Qi told each other, and the planning of the rebellion became more urgent.

古文：德戡知计既行，遂以十日总召故人，谕以所为。众皆伏曰： 唯将军命！ 
现代文：司马德戡知道时机成熟，于是在三月初十召来旧部，把谋反的行动告诉他们。众人都趴在地上说： 只听将军的命令！ 
English: Sima Deya knew that the time was ripe, so at the beginning of March 10th, he summoned the old ministry and told them about the action of plotting a rebellion. Everyone lay on the ground and said: Just listen to the general's orders!

古文：其夜，奉义主闭城门，乃与虔通相知，诸门皆不下钥。
现代文：这夜，唐奉义主管关闭城门，于是和虔通约定，所有的门都不上锁。
English: That night, the head of Tang Bongyi closed the city gate, so he agreed with Qian Tong that all the doors would not be locked.

古文：至夜三更，德戡于东城内集兵，得数万人，举火与城外相应。
现代文：到三更，司马德戡在东城内招集兵马，得到几万人，点火和城外相呼应。
English: At three o'clock, Sima Deya called up soldiers and horses in the east of the city, got tens of thousands of people, ignited and echoed outside the city.

古文：帝闻有声，问是何事。虔通伪曰： 草坊被烧，外人救火，故喧嚣耳。 
现代文：炀帝听见外面有声音，问是什么事，虔通假装说： 只是草坊被烧，外面的人在救火，所以有喧哗叫嚣之声罢了。 
English: When Emperor Xuan heard a noise outside, he asked what was going on. Qiantong pretended to say, "It's just that the hay barn was on fire, and people outside were putting out the fire, so it was just a lot of noise."

古文：中外隔绝，帝以为然。
现代文：宫内与外面隔绝，炀帝也就信了。
English: Isolated from the outside world in the palace, Emperor Qian believed Pei Qiantong's words.

古文：孟秉、智及于城外得千余人，劫候卫武贲冯普乐，共布兵分捉郭下街巷。
现代文：孟秉、智及在城外聚集一千多人，劫持候卫武贲冯普乐，一起布置士兵分散到城内大街小巷去捉人。
English: Meng Bing, Zhizhi and more than a thousand people gathered outside the city, kidnapped Wei Wuqi and Feng Pule, and together arranged soldiers to disperse into the streets and alleys of the city to catch people.

古文：至五更中，德戡授虔通兵，以换诸门卫士。
现代文：到五更中，司马德戡交给虔通一批士兵，去代替各门卫兵。
English: In the middle of the five-day march, Sima Dejun handed over a group of soldiers to Qiantong to replace the guards at each gate.

古文：虔通因自开门，领数百骑，至成象殿，杀将军独孤盛。
现代文：虔通趁机打开门，带领几百骑兵，到成象殿，杀死将军独孤盛。
English: Pei Qiantong then opened the city gate, led several hundred cavalry, came to Chengxiang Hall, and killed the general.

古文：武贲郎将元礼遂引兵进，突卫者皆走。
现代文：武贲郎将元礼于是领兵上前，宿卫者纷纷逃走。
English: Takehiro then led the troops forward, and the guards fled.

古文：虔通进兵，排左阁，驰入永巷，问： 陛下安在？ 
现代文：虔通命令士兵在左边排列，奔入永巷，问： 陛下在哪里？ 
English: Qiantong ordered the soldiers to line up on the left and rushed into Yongxiang, asking: "Where is Your Majesty?"

古文：有美人出，方指云： 在西阁。 
现代文：有美人出来，用手一指说： 在西阁。 
English: A beautiful woman came out and said with a wave of her hand: "In the West Pavilion."

古文：从往执帝。
现代文：虔通跟着宫妃去拘捕炀帝。
English: Go ahead and capture the Emperor.

古文：帝谓虔通曰： 卿非我故人乎！
现代文：炀帝对虔通说： 你不是我的老朋友吗？
English: Emperor Qian asked Pei Qiantong, "Isn't he an old friend of mine?"

古文：何恨而反？ 
现代文：为什么反叛我？ 
English: What kind of grudge would cause them to rebel?

古文：虔通曰： 臣不敢反，但将士思归，奉陛下还京师耳。 
现代文：虔通说： 我不敢谋反，只是将士思念故里，尊奉陛下您回京师罢了。 
English: Pei Qiantong said: The vassal dares not rebel, he just wants to return to his hometown and serve his majesty as a teacher in Beijing.

古文：帝曰： 与汝归。 
现代文：炀帝说： 我和你回京师。 
English: Shen Di said: I will go back to Beijing with you.

古文：虔通因勒兵守之。
现代文：虔通于是布置兵士守住炀帝。
English: Pei Qiantong then led an army to defend Emperor Zhao.

古文：至旦，孟秉以甲骑迎化及。化及未知事果，战栗不能言，人有来谒之者，但低头据鞍，答云 罪过 。
现代文：到早晨，孟秉用甲骑迎接化及，化及还不知道事情已经成功，战战兢兢连话也说不出来，有人来拜见他，化及只是低着头按住鞍回答说： 罪过呀！ 
English: In the morning, Meng Bing rode an armored horse to meet and greet him. He did not yet know that the matter had been successful. He was too afraid to speak. Someone came to see him. He just kept his head down and held the saddle. He replied: "It's a sin!

古文：时士及在公主第，弗之知也。智及遣家僮庄桃树就第杀之，桃树不忍，执诣智及，久之乃见释。
现代文：当时士及在公主府中，不知道这件事，智及派家丁庄桃树到公主府上刺杀公主，庄桃树不忍心，捉住她去见智及，很久才被释放。
English: At that time, Zhuangzhu was in the princess's palace and did not know about this matter. Zhi Er sent his family member Ding Zhuang Taoshu to the princess's palace to assassinate the princess. Zhuang Taoshu did not have the heart to catch her to see Zhi Er, and she was not released for a long time.

古文：化及至城门，德戡迎谒，引入朝堂，号为丞相。
现代文：化及到城门，司马德戡前去迎接，引入朝堂，称为丞相。
English: When U Bunka arrived at the city gate, Sima Deyu greeted him and led him into the imperial hall, calling him U Bunka and the prime minister.

古文：令将帝出江都门以示群贼，因复将入。
现代文：命令将炀帝推出江都门在群贼面前示众，又将炀帝推回江都门。
English: He was ordered to take Emperor Gong out of the Jiangdu Gate to meet the rebels, so he brought Luo in again.

古文：遣令狐行达弑帝于宫中，又执朝臣不同己者数十人及诸外戚，无少长害之，唯留秦孝王子浩，立以为帝。
现代文：之后，派令狐行达在宫中杀死炀帝，又拘捕与自己不同政见的朝臣数十人和所有外戚，无论年龄大小，全部杀掉，只留下秦孝王的儿子杨浩，立为皇帝。
English: After that, he sent Gu Xingda to kill Emperor Qian Rong in the palace. He also arrested dozens of courtiers who disagreed with his political views and all his relatives, regardless of age, and killed them all, leaving only Yang Hao, the son of Qin Xiaowang, as emperor.

古文：十余日，夺江都人舟楫，从水路西归。
现代文：十多天后，叛军强夺了江都百姓的船只，从水上向西而归。
English: After more than ten days, they robbed the boats of the people in Jiangdu and returned to the west by water.

古文：至显福宫，宿公麦孟才、折冲郎将沈光等谋击化及，反为所害。
现代文：到显福宫，宿公麦孟才、折冲郎将沈光等密谋击杀化及，反被化及杀害。
English: When they arrived at the Xianfu Palace, the innkeepers, Mai Mengcai and Ori Chongro, plotted with Shen Guang and others to attack the Yu culture and were killed by the Yu culture.

古文：化及于是入据六宫，其自奉养，一如炀帝故事。每于帐中南面端坐，人有白事者，默然不对。
现代文：化及于是占据六宫，像从前炀帝一样，常在帐中面南正襟危坐，如果有人陈述事情，化及沉默不答。
English: As a result, Emperor Hui occupied the Sixth Palace. Like Emperor Zhou in the past, Emperor Hui often sat in the middle of the table, and if someone made a statement, Emperor Hui would remain silent.

古文：下牙时，方收取启状，共奉义、方裕、良、恺等参决之。
现代文：官吏退朝后，化及才收起启状，与唐奉义、牛方裕、薛良、张恺等人一起讨论决定。
English: After the officials left the imperial court, the emperor and empress only closed the opening letter and discussed the decision with Tang Bongyi, Niu Fangyu, Xue Liang, Zhang Ye and others.

古文：行至徐州，水路不通，复夺人车牛，得二千两，并载宫人珍宝。
现代文：船行到徐州，水路不通，又强取百姓的牛和牛车，得到二千辆车，将宫女珍宝一起载上。
English: When they went to Xuzhou, the waterway was impassable, and they also robbed the people's vehicles and cattle, and obtained two thousand oxcarts, all of which were used to transport palace people and treasures.

古文：其戈甲戎器，悉令军士负之。
现代文：那些作战的武器，全部让军士背着。
English: Armour-piercing weapons were ordered to be carried on the soldier's back.

古文：道远疲极，三军始怨。
现代文：路途遥远，士兵疲惫至极，三军将士开始怨恨。
English: The journey is long, the soldiers are very tired, and all three armies are beginning to resent each other.

古文：德戡失望，窃谓行枢曰： 君大谬误我。
现代文：司马德戡大失所望，私下对赵行枢说： 您使我犯了一个大错误。
English: Deeply disappointed, Sima Deyu privately said to Zhao Xingzhu: You have made me make a big mistake.

古文：当今拨乱，必藉英贤，化及庸暗，君小在侧，事将必败，当若之何？ 
现代文：现在治理乱世，一定要借助贤能之人，化及平庸愚昧，众小人在他身边，事将败亡，该怎么办啊？ 
English: Now, to govern the chaotic world, we must rely on the help of a virtuous person, turn into mediocrity and stupidity, the villains are around him, things will fail, what should we do?

古文：行枢曰： 在我等尔，废之何难！ 
现代文：赵行枢说： 成败在我们，废掉他有什么难处！ 
English: Zhao Xingzhu said: Success or failure is up to us, what is the difficulty in abolishing him!

古文：因共李本、宇文导师、尹正卿等谋，以后军万余兵袭杀化及，更立德戡为主。
现代文：于是同李本、宇文导师、尹正卿等商量准备用后军一万多人偷袭杀死化及，改立司马德戡为主。
English: As a result, he discussed with Li Ben, Uwen Tutor, Yin Zhengqing and others to prepare to use more than 10,000 rear-guard troops to make a surprise attack to kill and replace Sima Deyao.

古文：弘仁知之，密告化及，尽收捕德戡及其支党十余人，皆杀之。
现代文：许弘仁知道这件事后，秘密告诉化及，化及捕获了司马德戡及其手下余党十多人，全部杀掉。
English: After Xu Hongren found out about this, he secretly told Hua Jia, and Hua Jia captured Sima Dejun and more than ten of his subordinates, killing them all.

古文：引兵向东郡，通守王轨以城降之。
现代文：领兵向东郡进发，通守王轨献城而降。
English: The leader of the army marched to the eastern capital Luoyang and surrendered the city of Wangluo.

古文：元文都推越王侗为主，拜李密为太尉，令击化及。
现代文：元文都推举越王杨侗为主，授李密为太尉，派李密攻打化及。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, the king of Yue, Yang Jie, was elected as the monarch, Li Mi was appointed as the first lieutenant, and the order was given to invade and conquer Yunnan.

古文：密遣徐勣据黎阳仓。
现代文：李密派遣徐世绩据守黎阳仓。
English: Li Mi dispatched Xu Shigong to guard Li Yang Cang.

古文：化及渡河，保黎阳县，分兵围勣。
现代文：化及兵渡黄河，欲保住黎阳县，分兵包围徐世绩。
English: In order to keep Liyang County, the division surrounded Xu Shibing.

古文：密壁清淇，与勣以烽火相应。
现代文：李密的军队驻扎在清淇，与徐世绩用烽火联系。
English: Li Mi's army was stationed in Qingqi, and he communicated with Xu Shigei through a campfire.

古文：化及每攻仓，密辄引兵救之。
现代文：化及每次攻打黎阳仓，李密就率领军队去援助。
English: Each time Li Yangcang was attacked, Li Mi led the army to come to its aid.

古文：化及数战不利，其将军于弘达为密所擒，送于侗所，镬烹之。
现代文：化及屡战不利，部将于弘达也被李密俘虏，送到杨侗那儿，杨侗用锅烹煮了于弘达。
English: Due to the unfavorable weather and repeated battles, the commander of Hongda was also captured by Li Mi and sent to Yang Hui. Yang Hui boiled yu Hongda in a pot.

古文：化及粮尽，渡永济渠，与密决战于童山，遂入汲郡求军粮，又遣使拷掠东郡吏民以责米粟。
现代文：化及军粮用尽，渡过永济渠，与李密在童山决战，于是进入汲郡寻求军粮，又派人拷打东郡官吏和百姓，向他们索取粮食。
English: He crossed the Yongji Canal and fought a decisive battle with Li Mi in Tongshan, so he went into Ku County to seek military supplies, and sent people to torture officials and people in Dong County to solicit grain from them.

古文：王轨怨之，以城归于李密。
现代文：王轨怨恨化及，打开城门投降李密。
English: Wang Lule became resentful and opened the city gate to surrender to Li Mi.

古文：化及大惧，自汲郡将率众图以北诸州。
现代文：化及十分害怕，从汲郡带领众兵企图占据汲郡以北的各州。
English: and was so afraid that he led the troops from Kyu-gun to try to occupy the provinces north of Kyu-gun.

古文：其将陈智略率岭南骁果万余人，张童兒率江东骁果数千人，皆叛归李密。
现代文：他的部将陈智略率领南方骁勇之士一万多人，张童儿带领江东骁勇几千人，都投降李密。
English: Chen Zhiliu led more than ten thousand people in Lingnan and Zhang Tong'er led several thousand people in Jiangdong, all of whom rebelled against Li Mi.

古文：化及尚有众二万，北走魏县。
现代文：化及还有兵马两万，向北到魏县。
English: Yu Wenchuan and another 20,000 soldiers and horses fled north to Wei County.

古文：张恺等与其将陈伯谋去之，事觉，为化及所杀。
现代文：张恺等人与他的部将陈伯密谋逃走，事情败露后，被化及杀害。
English: Zhang Xuan and others conspired with his subordinate Chen Bo to escape. After the affair was exposed, they were transformed and killed.

古文：腹心稍尽，兵势日蹙，兄弟更无他计，但相聚酣宴，奏女乐。
现代文：化及心腹之人渐渐没有，兵力一天比一天窘迫，化及弟兄别无他计，只是相聚酣饮，让宫女奏乐相陪。
English: The loyalists have all been killed, the number of soldiers is dwindling day by day, and there is nothing to be done for Yu Kun and his brothers. They just get together to drink and enjoy women's music.

古文：醉后，因尤智及曰： 我初不知，由汝为计，强来立我。今所向无成，士马日散，负杀主之名，天下所不纳。今者灭族，岂不由汝乎？ 
现代文：酒后，化及指责智及说： 我当初本不知道，是你设计，勉强立我为主，现在所向不成，兵马一天比一天少，又蒙受弑君的罪名，天下难容，今将灭九族，难道不是你的缘故吗？ 
English: After drinking, he changed and blamed Zhi and said: I didn't know at the beginning, it was you who designed and forced me to be the master, but now I can't do it, the number of soldiers and horses is decreasing day by day, and I have been accused of being a tyrant, which is unacceptable to the world, and now I will exterminate nine ethnic groups, isn't it because of you?

古文：持其两子而泣。
现代文：化及拉着两个儿子哭泣。
English: She hugged her two sons and began to cry.

古文：智及怒曰： 事捷之日，都不赐尤，及其将败，乃欲归罪。
现代文：智及愤怒地说： 事情成功的时候，相互不责怪；等到大事将败，就推卸责任。
English: When things are going well, they don't blame each other; when things are going badly, they pass the buck.

古文：何不杀我以降建德？ 
现代文：为什么不把我杀死去投降窦建德呢？ 
English: Why not kill me and surrender to Dou Jiande?

古文：兄弟数相斗阋，言无长幼，醒而复饮，以此为恆。
现代文：兄弟两个多次争吵，说话没有大小之分，酒醒后又饮，把这作为常事。
English: The brothers fought with each other many times. There was no distinction between the elder and the younger. When they sobered up, they would drink again, which was often the case.

古文：其众多亡，自知必败，化及叹曰： 人生故当死，岂不一日为帝乎？ 
现代文：而部下大多逃跑了，化及自知必败，感叹地说： 人生来就是要死的，难道不能做一天皇帝吗？ 
English: But most of his subordinates ran away, and he, knowing that he was doomed to defeat, said with a sigh: To live is to die, can't you be emperor for a day?

古文：于是鸩杀浩，僭皇帝位于魏县，国号许，建元为天寿，署置百官。
现代文：于是毒杀杨浩，在魏县自立为帝，国号许，改元天寿，设置文武百官。
English: As a result, he poisoned Yang Hao, established himself as emperor in Wei County, changed the country's name to Xu, changed the era to Tianshou, and set up a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：攻元宝藏于魏州，四旬不克，反为所败，亡失千余人。
现代文：化及在魏州攻打元宝藏，四十天攻不下来，反而被元宝藏打败，失去了一千多人。
English: and attacked Yuan Baoshu in Weizhou, but was defeated by Yuan Baoshu after 40 days and lost more than 1,000 men.

古文：乃东北趣聊城，将招携海曲诸贼。
现代文：于是向东北方向逃到聊城，将要招募海边众贼。
English: As a result, he fled northeast to Liaocheng, intending to recruit thieves from the seaside.

古文：时遣士及徇济北，求馈饷。
现代文：派士及占领济北，寻找粮草。
English: sent troops and occupied Jibei, looking for grain and grass.

古文：大唐遣淮安王神通安抚山东，并招化及。
现代文：大唐派淮安王神通安抚山东军民，并招降化及。
English: Datang sent Huai'an Wang Shentong to pacify Shandong's military and people, and recruit and demote leaders.

古文：化及不从，神通进兵围之，十余日不克而退。
现代文：化及不听从，神通进兵包围他，十多天不能攻克化及而退兵。
English: When he refused to obey, the supernatural soldiers surrounded him. For more than ten days, they were unable to conquer him and withdrew.

古文：窦建德悉众攻之。
现代文：窦建德集合全部人马攻打化及。
English: Dou Jiande gathered all the forces to attack Yu Qun and.

古文：先是，齐州贼帅王薄闻其多宝物，诈来投附。化及信之，与共居守。
现代文：在这之前，齐州贼帅王薄听说化及有很多宝物，假意投降归附化及，化及相信了王薄，与王薄共同居守。
English: Prior to this, the Qizhou thief Wang Bo had heard about and had a lot of treasures, pretended to surrender and accede, and believed Wang Bo, and lived together with Wang Bo.

古文：至是，薄引建德入城，生擒化及，悉虏其众。
现代文：到这时，王薄带领窦建德军队入城，活捉了化及，全部俘虏了化及的部下。
English: At this time, Wang Bo led Dou Jiande's army into the city, captured Huai Ji alive, and captured all of Huai Ji's men.

古文：先执智及、元武达、孟秉、杨士览、许弘仁，皆斩之。
现代文：首先抓住智及、元武达、孟秉、杨志览、许弘仁，全部斩首。
English: First of all, they seized Zhizhi, Yuanwuda, Meng Bing, Yang Zhizhan, and Xu Hongren, and beheaded them all.

古文：乃以轞车载化及之河间，数以杀君之罪，并二子承基、承趾皆斩之，传首于突厥义成公主，枭于虏庭。
现代文：用囚车押化及到河间，罗列化及弑君的罪名，连同他的两个儿子承基、承趾一起杀掉，将首级传到突厥义成公主那儿，在虏庭示众。
English: They drove him in a prison wagon to Hema, listed the charges against him, and killed him, together with his two sons, Choeji and Choeji, and sent the heads to the Turkish princess, Yicheng, to be displayed in the palace.

古文：士及自济北西归长安。
现代文：士及从济北西归长安。
English: and returned to Chang'an from the northwest of Jibei.

