古文：凡人主之所以劝民者，官爵也；国之所以兴者，农战也。
现代文：通常国君用来勉励民众的是官职和爵位。可是国家得以兴旺的根本却是农业和军事。
English: Usually, the monarch uses official positions and titles to encourage the people, but it is agriculture and military that are essential for the country to thrive.

古文：今民求官爵，皆不以农战，而以巧言虚道，此谓劳民。
现代文：现在民众用来求取官职和爵位的方法都不是农耕和作战功绩，而是靠花言巧语和空洞无物的说教，这叫做使百姓怠惰。
English: The method now used by the people to obtain offices and titles of nobility is not by agriculture and military merit, but by means of rhetoric and empty and worthless sermons. This is called making the people lazy.

古文：劳民者，其国必无力；无力者，其国必削。
现代文：使百姓怠惰的国家，统治必然软弱无力。统治软弱无力，那么国力就会被削弱。
English: If a country makes its people lazy, its government will inevitably be weak and feeble. If its government is weak and feeble, its strength will be weakened.

古文：善为国者，其教民也，皆作壹而得官爵，是故不官无爵。
现代文：善于治理国家的君主，他教化民众都是要求通过专心务农来得到官职和爵位。如果不这样做就不会得到官职也没有爵位。
English: The monarch, who was good at governing the country, taught the people to demand that they should earn their official posts and titles by concentrating on farming, otherwise they would not be able to earn their official posts and titles.

古文：国去言，则民朴；民朴，则不淫。民见上利之从壹空出也，则作壹；作壹，则民不偷营；民不偷营，则多力；多力，则国强。
现代文：国家废除空谈，民众就朴实不放纵，民众看见国家给人们的赏禄都是从农耕与作战这一途径发出，那么便会专心从事农耕和作战。
English: When the state abolishes empty talk, the people will not indulge in frivolity, and when the people see that the rewards given by the state to the people are issued from the way of farming and fighting, then they will concentrate on farming and fighting.

古文：今境内之民皆曰： 农战可避，而官爵可得也。 
现代文：民众专心从事农耕和作战，就不会苟且谋求其它事。
English: If the people concentrate on farming and fighting, they will not seek other things.

古文：是故豪杰皆可变业，务学《诗》、《书》，随从外权，上可以得显，下可以求官爵；要靡事商贾，为技艺，皆以避农战。
现代文：民众不苟且谋求其它事，国家的实力就会雄厚，实力雄厚，国家就会强大。现在国内的民众都说： 农耕和作战可以逃避，而官职和爵位一样可以得到。 所以那些有才华的豪杰都要改变自己的职业，而专研学习《诗》《书》，追随其它诸候国的权势，好的可以得到高官厚禄，次一点也能得到一个官职；那些平庸之人便去经商，搞手工业，凭借这种方式来逃避农耕和作战。
English: If the people are diligent and seek other things, the strength of the country will be strong, the strength will be strong, the country will be strong. Now the people in the country are saying: farming and fighting can be avoided, and official positions can be obtained as well as knighthoods. Therefore, those talented heroes have to change their careers, and specialize in studying "poetry" and "books" and follow the power of other countries. The best can get high-ranking and high-paying positions, and the second can also get an official position; those mediocre people will go into business, engage in handicrafts, and use this method to avoid farming and fighting.

古文：具备，国之危也。
现代文：以上情况都出现，国家就危险了。
English: If all of the above happens, the country is in danger.

古文：民以此为教者，其国必削。
现代文：国君用以上两种人来教育民众，这个国家的实力就一定会削弱。
English: If the ruler uses the above two kinds of people to educate the people, the strength of this country will surely weaken.

古文：善为国者，仓廪虽满，不偷于农；国大、民众，不淫于言。则民朴壹。
现代文：善于治理国家的君主，粮仓虽然满了也不放松农耕；国家的土地广大，人口众多，也不能让空洞无物的言论泛滥，那么民众就会淳朴专一。
English: Monarchs who are good at governing the country, do not relax farming although the granary is full; the country's land is vast, the population is large, and it is impossible to let empty and insubstantial speech flood, then the people will be simple and single-minded.

古文：民朴壹，则官爵不可巧而取也。
现代文：民众淳朴专一，那官职和爵位就不能靠花言巧语来取得。
English: The people are simple and single-minded, and official posts and titles of nobility cannot be obtained by means of rhetoric.

古文：不可巧取，则奸不生。
现代文：不能靠花言巧语来取得官职和爵位，那么奸猾的人就不会产生。
English: If office and knighthood could not be obtained by flattery, there would be no treacherous men.

古文：奸不生，则主不惑。
现代文：奸民不产生，君主就不会受迷惑。
English: If there are no traitors, the sovereign will not be troubled.

古文：今境内之民及处官爵者，见朝廷之可以巧言辩说取官爵也，故官爵不可得而常也。
现代文：现在国内的民众以及据有官职和爵位的人看见朝廷中能靠巧妙的空谈，诡辩的说教来获得官职和爵位，所以官职和爵位就不可能靠国家的法规获得。
English: At present, the people in China, as well as those who have official posts and peerages, see that officials and peerages can be obtained by clever empty talk and sophistication in the imperial court, so it is impossible to obtain official posts and peerages by national laws and regulations.

古文：是故进则曲主，退则虑私，所以实其私，然则下卖权矣。
现代文：因此这些人进入朝堂便曲意逢迎君主，下朝回家便图谋自己的私利，用来满足自己的野心。如果这样的话，他们就会在下面卖弄权势，谋取私欲。
English: Therefore, these people enter the imperial court with the intention of welcoming the monarch, and when they return home, they seek their own selfish interests to satisfy their own ambitions. If this is the case, they will show off their power and seek their own desires.

古文：夫曲主虑私，非国利也，而为之者，以其爵禄也；下卖权，非忠臣也，而为之者，以末货也。
现代文：曲意逢迎君主图谋自己的私利，就不会对国家有利，他们这样做的目的是为了得到爵位和厚禄；私下出卖国家权力就不是忠臣；他们这么做的原因，就是为追求金钱和财利。
English: It is not for the good of the country that they seek their own private advantage, but for the purpose of obtaining titles and honors; it is not loyal to betray the power of the state in private, but for the pursuit of money and financial gain.

古文：然则下官之冀迁者皆曰： 多货，则上官可得而欲也。 
现代文：如果这样的话，希望升官的下级便说： 财产多了，那么就能得到高官亲安处之。 
English: If this is the case, the lower ranks who hope to be promoted will say, "I have more wealth, so I can get a high-ranking official to be kind to me."

古文：曰： 我不以货事上而求迁者，则如以狸饵鼠尔，必不冀矣；若以情事上而求迁者，则如引诸绝绳而求乘枉木也，愈不冀矣。
现代文：并且还说： 我不用上金钱财物待奉上级来取得升迁，那么就会像用猫做食饵引老鼠上钩一样，一定不会有什么希望。假如用情感待奉上级来求得升迁，那么就像手牵着已经断了的墨线想校正弯曲的木材，更加没有希望了。
English: And he also said: "If I don't use money and property to wait for my superiors to get promoted, then it will be like using a cat to make a bait to catch a mouse, there will be no hope. If I use my emotions to wait for my superiors to get promoted, then it's like holding a broken ink line in my hand to straighten bent wood, it's even more hopeless.

古文：二者不可以得迁，则我焉得无下动众取货以事上而以求迁乎？ 
现代文：因为这两种办法都不能得到升迁，那我怎能不到下面去役使民众，到处搜刮钱财来待俸上级而谋求升官呢？ 
English: Since I can't get promoted by either of these two methods, how can I not go to the lower levels to serve the people, and scrounge around for money to wait for the salary of my superiors and seek promotion?

古文：百姓曰： 我疾农，先实公仓，收余以食亲；为上忘生而战，以尊主安国也。
现代文：百姓说： 我积极务农，先装满国家的粮仓，收取剩下的粮食供养亲人，替君主舍生忘死去作战，来使君主尊贵，使国家安定。
English: The people said: I am actively engaged in farming, first filling the country's granary, collecting the remaining grain to feed my relatives, and fighting for the monarch, sacrificing my life and forgetting to die, to make the monarch noble and the country stable.

古文：仓虚，主卑，家贫。然则不如索官。 
现代文：如果国家的粮仓空虚，国君地位就会卑微，家庭就会贫穷，假如这样还不如谋取个官做。 
English: If the country's granary is empty, the position of the sovereign will be lowly, and the family will be poor. If so, it is better to seek a post.

古文：亲戚交游合，则更虑矣。
现代文：亲戚朋友在交往相聚中，就会考虑不再从事农业生产。
English: When relatives and friends get together, they will consider no longer engaging in agricultural production.

古文：豪杰务学《诗》、《书》，随从外权；要靡事商贾，为技艺，皆以避农战。
现代文：有才华的杰出人士会专心学习《诗》《书》，追随外国的权势；普通人会去经商，搞手工业，都靠这些来逃避农耕和作战。
English: Talented and outstanding people will concentrate on learning "poetry" and "books" and follow foreign powers; ordinary people will do business and engage in handicrafts, all of which are to escape farming and fighting.

古文：民以此为教，则粟焉得无少，而兵焉得无弱也？
现代文：君主用这种思想教化民众，那么国库的粮食怎能不减少，而兵力怎能不被削弱呢？
English: How can the food of the treasury not be diminished, and how can the strength of the army not be weakened, when the sovereign uses this idea to indoctrinate the people?

古文：善为国者，官法明，故不任知虑。
现代文：善于治理国家的君主，任命官吏的法规严明，所以不任用那些喜欢卖弄，图谋不轨的人。
English: Monarchs who are good at governing the country have strict rules for appointing officials, so they do not appoint those who like to show off and plot.

古文：上作壹，故民不俭营，则国力抟。
现代文：君主专心于农耕和作战，所以民众就不会苟且经营农耕作战以外的行业，那么国家的力量就集中到农耕作战上。
English: The monarch concentrates on farming and warfare, so the people will not strictly run industries other than farming and warfare, so the power of the state will be concentrated on farming and warfare.

古文：国力抟者强，国好言谈者削。故曰：农战之民千人，而有《诗》、《书》辩慧者一人焉，千人者皆怠于农战矣。
现代文：国家的力量集中就会强大，国家崇尚空谈就会被削弱，所以说，从事农耕和作战的民众有一千人，而出现一个学《诗》《书》和巧言善辩的人，那么一千人都会对从事农耕作战松懈了。
English: Concentration of the country's strength will be strong, and the country's advocacy of empty talk will be weakened. Therefore, there are a thousand people engaged in farming and fighting, and if there is a person who learns "poetry," "books" and eloquence, then a thousand people will be slack in engaging in farming and fighting.

古文：农战之民百人，而有技艺者一人焉，百人者皆怠于农战矣。
现代文：从事农耕作战的民众有一百人，出现一个人搞手工业，那这一百人就都会放松了农耕和作战。
English: There are a hundred people engaged in farming and warfare, and if one person is engaged in handicrafts, then these hundred people will relax their farming and warfare.

古文：国待农战而安，主待农战而尊。
现代文：国家依赖农耕和作战而安全，君主依靠农耕和作战才能尊贵。
English: The country depends on farming and war for its security, and the monarch depends on farming and war for his dignity.

古文：夫民之不农战也，上好言而官失常也。
现代文：民众不从事农耕和作战，那是因为君主喜欢虚伪的空谈而选用官吏失去了法规。
English: The people do not engage in farming and warfare, it is because the monarch likes hypocritical empty talk and the election of officials has lost its regulation.

古文：常官则国治，壹务则国富。
现代文：依法选用官吏，国家就能做到社会安定；专心务农，国家就会富强。
English: If officials are selected in accordance with the law, the country will be able to achieve social stability; if they concentrate on agriculture, the country will become rich and strong.

古文：国富而治，王之道也。
现代文：国家富强而又政治清明，这是称王天下的道路。
English: The country is rich and strong, and the politics are clear. This is the way to be the king of the world.

古文：故曰：王道作外，身作壹而已矣。
现代文：所以称王的道路不是靠外交，而是自己专心从事农耕和作战罢了。
English: Therefore, the king's path is not to rely on diplomacy, but to concentrate on farming and fighting.

古文：今上论材能知慧而任之，则知慧之人希主好恶使官制物以适主心。是以官无常，国乱而不壹，辩说之人而无法也。
现代文：现在的国君仅凭考察人的才能和智慧来任用他们，那么聪明的人就会根据君主的喜欢爱恨来讨君主的欢心，使官吏处理政务千方百计适合君主的口味，因此国家选用官吏就没有了法规，这样国家就会混乱，而民众不会专心从事耕作和作战，善于巧舌游说的人就更加无法无天了。
English: The present sovereign appoints them only on the basis of their talent and wisdom, so clever people will please the monarch according to the monarch's likes and dislikes, and make officials deal with government affairs in every possible way to suit the monarch's taste. Therefore, there is no law for the selection of officials by the state, so the country will be in chaos, and the people will not concentrate on farming and fighting. People who are good at clever lobbying will be even more lawless.

古文：如此，则民务焉得无多？而地焉得无荒？
现代文：像这样的民众从事的其它职业怎么会不多，而土地又怎么能不荒芜呢？
English: How can there be so few other jobs for people like this, and how can the land not be barren?

古文：《诗》、《书》、礼、乐、善、修、仁、廉、辩、慧，国有十者，上无使守战。国以十者治，敌至必削，不至必贫。
现代文：《诗》、《书》、礼制、音乐、慈善、修养、仁爱、谦洁、善辩、聪慧，国家有这十种人，君主就无法让民众守土作战，国家用这十种人治理，敌人到了，国土就一定被割削，敌人不来国家也一定会贫穷。
English: "Poetry," "books," etiquette, music, charity, self-cultivation, benevolence, modesty, eloquence, wisdom, the country has these ten kinds of people, the monarch can not let the people defend the land and fight, the country uses these ten kinds of people to govern, when the enemy arrives, the land will definitely be cut, and if the enemy does not come, the country will certainly be poor.

古文：国去此十者，敌不敢至，虽至必却；兴兵而伐，必取；按兵不伐，必富。
现代文：国家没有这十种人，敌人不敢来侵犯，就是来了，也一定会退却；如果发兵前去讨伐敌国，一定能取胜；如果按兵不动，不去讨伐，就一定会富足。
English: If a country does not have these ten kinds of people, the enemy will not dare to invade, and even if he comes, he will certainly retreat; if he sends troops to fight the enemy country, he will surely win; if he does not move his troops and does not fight, he will certainly be rich.

古文：国好力者以难攻，以难攻者必兴；好辩者以易攻，以易攻者必危。
现代文：国家注重实力，谨慎地进攻。谨慎地进攻，就一定会兴旺；喜欢空谈的国家轻率地去攻打别国就一定会危险。
English: Countries should focus on strength and attack cautiously. If they attack cautiously, they will surely prosper; if they attack rashly, they will surely be in danger.

古文：故圣人明君者，非能尽其万物也，知万物之要也。
现代文：所以那些有威望的人和英明的君主并不是能运用万物，而是掌握了世上万事万物的规律和要领。
English: Therefore, those prestigious people and wise monarchs are not able to use everything, but have mastered the laws and essentials of everything in the world.

古文：故其治国也，察要而已矣。
现代文：因此他们治理国家的办法就是辩明要领罢了。
English: So their way of running the country is to argue the point.

古文：今为国者多无要。
现代文：现在治理国家的人多没有掌握要领。
English: Many people who govern the country now do not have a grasp of the essentials.

古文：朝廷之言治也，纷纷焉务相易也。
现代文：在朝廷讨论治国的方法时，说客七嘴八舌众论不一，都想改变对方的观点。
English: When the methods of governing the country were being discussed in the imperial court, the lobbyists were full of conflicting opinions, and they all wanted to change the other side's point of view.

古文：是以其君惛于说，其官乱于言，其民惰而不农。
现代文：因此，国君被不同的说法弄得糊里糊涂，而官吏被这些言谈弄得昏头胀脑，国中的民众也不愿意从事农耕。
English: As a result, the sovereign was confused by the different opinions, the officials were befuddled by these opinions, and the people of the country did not want to engage in farming.

古文：故其境内之民，皆化而好辩、乐学，事商贾，为技艺，避农战。如此，则不远矣。
现代文：所以那些国家的民众都变得喜欢空谈和巧辩了，更喜欢从事经商、搞手工业，逃避农耕和作战，如果这样，那国家离灭亡就不远了。
English: Therefore, the people of those countries have become fond of empty talk and rhetoric, preferring to engage in business and handicrafts, avoiding farming and warfare. If so, the country is not far from extinction.

古文：国有事，则学民恶法，商民善化，技艺之民不用，故其国易破也。
现代文：国家动荡，而那些有知识的人讨厌法规，商人善于变化，手工业者无所用，所以这个国家就容易被攻破。
English: The country is unstable, and those who have knowledge hate regulations, businessmen are good at changing, craftsmen are useless, so the country is easy to break.

古文：夫农者寡而游食者众，故其国贫危。
现代文：从事农耕的人少而靠巧言游说吃饭的人众多，所以这个国家就会贫穷危险。
English: With few people engaged in farming and many relying on persuasion to eat, the country would be dangerously poor.

古文：今夫螟、螣、蚼蠋春生秋死，一出而民数年不食。今一人耕而百人食之，此其为螟、螣、蚼蠋亦大矣。
现代文：那些危害农作物的螟虫等害虫春天生出，秋天死掉，寿命很短，但只要它们出现一次，民众就会因虫害歉收，几年没有饭吃，现在一个人种地却供一百人吃饭，那么这些人比螟虫等害虫对国家的危害更大。
English: Those aphids and other pests that harm crops are born in the spring and die in the fall, and their lifespan is very short. But as long as they appear once, the people will have a poor harvest due to insect pests, and they will not eat for several years. Now, one person can grow food for a hundred people, so these people are more harmful to the country than aphids and other pests.

古文：虽有《诗》、《书》，乡一束，家一员，犹无益于治也，非所以反之之术也。
现代文：如果这样，虽然《诗》、《书》，每个乡一捆，每家一卷，对治理国家一点用处也没有，也不是将贫穷变富有，将弱国变强国的办法。
English: If so, although "Poetry" and "Books," a bundle of each township, a volume of each family, are of no use at all for governing the country, nor is it a way to make poverty rich and a weak country strong.

古文：故先王反之于农战。
现代文：所以以前那些有作为的君主抛弃空谈，依靠农耕和作战来变贫为富，变弱为强。
English: Therefore, those effective monarchs in the past abandoned empty talk and relied on farming and warfare to become poor and rich, weak and strong.

古文：故曰：百人农、一人居者王，十人农、一人居者强，半农半居者危。
现代文：因此说：如果一百人从事耕作，一个人闲着，这个国家就能称王天下；十个人从事农耕，一个人头着，这个国家就会强大；有一半人从事农耕，有一半人闲着，这个国家就危险了。
English: Therefore it is said: If a hundred men are engaged in farming and one is idle, the country will be able to rule the world; if ten men are engaged in farming and one is the leader, the country will be strong; if half of the people are engaged in farming and half are idle, the country will be in danger.

古文：故治国者欲民者之农也。国不农，则与诸侯争权不能自持也，则众力不足也。
现代文：所以治理国家的人都想让民众务农，国家不重视农耕，就会在诸侯争霸时不能自保，这是因为民众的力量不足。
English: Therefore, the people who govern the country want to let the people do agriculture. If the country does not attach importance to agriculture, it will not be able to protect itself when the princes fight for hegemony. This is because the power of the people is insufficient.

古文：故诸侯挠其弱，乘其衰，土地侵削而不振，则无及已。
现代文：因此，其它诸侯国就来削弱它，侵犯它，使它衰败。这个国家的土地就会被侵占，从此一蹶不振，到那时就来不及想办法了。
English: Therefore, other principalities will come to weaken it, to encroach upon it, to bring it to ruin, and the land of this country will be occupied and ruined, and then there will be no time to find a solution.

古文：圣人知治国之要，故令民归心于农。
现代文：圣贤的君主懂得治理国家的要领。因此命令民众都把心放在农业上。
English: The saintly monarch knew the essentials of governing a country, so he ordered the people to focus on agriculture.

古文：归心于农，则民朴而可正也，纷纷则易使也，信可以守战也。
现代文：民众专心务农，那么民众就朴实好管理，有诚信就容易役使，民众诚实便可以用来守城作战。
English: If the people concentrate on farming, then the people will be simple and good at management, and if they have integrity, they will be easy to serve, and the people's honesty can be used to defend the city.

古文：壹则少诈而重居，壹则可以赏罚进也，壹则可以外用也。
现代文：民众专心耕种，那么就很少有奸诈之事，而且看重自己的故土不愿迁移，民众专心于农耕作战，那么就能用奖赏和惩罚的办法来鼓励上进，民众专心于农耕作战，就可以用他们来对外作战。
English: If the people concentrate on farming, then there will be little treachery, and they value their homeland and do not want to migrate. If the people concentrate on agricultural warfare, then they can use rewards and punishments to encourage advancement. If the people concentrate on agricultural warfare, they can use them to fight abroad.

古文：夫民之亲上死制也，以其旦暮从事于农。
现代文：民众同君主亲近，并为了法度去牺牲自己，那么他们早晚就会都去从事农耕作战。
English: If the people are close to the monarch and sacrifice themselves for the law, then sooner or later they will all engage in agricultural warfare.

古文：夫民之不可用也，见言谈游士事君之可以尊身也、商贾之可以富家也、技艺之足以口也。
现代文：民众如果不可以被使用，是因为他们看见靠空谈游说的人待俸君主也可以使自己得到尊贵的地位，商人也可以发财致富，手工业者也能以此养家糊口。
English: If the people cannot be used, it is because they see that by means of empty talk and lobbying, the salaried monarch can also make himself noble, the merchant can also get rich, and the handicraftsman can support his family.

古文：民见此三者之便且利也，则必避农。
现代文：民众看到这三种人的职业安适，又可以得财利，就一定会逃避农耕和作战。
English: When the public sees that these three kinds of people have a comfortable career and can make money, they will definitely avoid farming and fighting.

古文：避农，则民轻其居。
现代文：逃避农耕，那么民众就会轻视自己的居住地。
English: If people avoid farming, they will despise where they live.

古文：轻其居，则必不为上守战也。
现代文：轻视自己的居住地，那么就一定不会替君主守土作战。
English: If you despise the place where you live, then you will not fight to defend the land for the monarch.

古文：凡治国者，患民之散而不可抟也，是以圣人作壹，抟之也。
现代文：凡是治理国家的人都害怕民众散漫而不能集中。所以英明的君主都希望民众能将心思集中在农耕上。
English: All rulers fear that the people are too distracted to concentrate, so wise monarchs want them to concentrate on farming.

古文：国作壹一岁者，十岁强；作壹十岁者，百岁强；作壹百岁者，千岁强；千岁强者王。
现代文：如果民众专心于农耕和作战一年，国家就能强大十年；如果民众专心于农耕和作战十年，国家就能强大一百年；如果民众专心于农耕和作战一百年，国家就能强大一千年，强大一千年才能称王于天下。
English: If the people concentrate on farming and fighting for one year, the country will be strong for ten years; if the people concentrate on farming and fighting for ten years, the country will be strong for a hundred years; if the people concentrate on farming and fighting for a hundred years, the country will be strong for a thousand years, and it will be strong for a thousand years before it can be king of the world.

古文：君脩赏罚以辅壹教，是以其教有所常，而政有成也。
现代文：君主制定赏罚作为教育民众的辅助手段，所以对民众的教育有常法，治理国家也就会有成绩。
English: The monarch formulated rewards and punishments as an auxiliary means of educating the people, so there is a common law for the education of the people, and there will be achievements in governing the country.

古文：王者得治民之至要，故不待赏赐而民亲上，不待爵禄而民从事，不待刑罚而民致死。
现代文：称王天下的君主掌握了统治民众的办法，所以不等君主实行赏罚民众便亲附于君主了，不等君主封爵加禄而民众便从事农战了，不等君主使用刑罚而民众就拼死效命了。
English: He said that the monarchs of the world have mastered the means of ruling the people, so the people do not wait for the monarch to reward and punish the people to adhere to the monarch, the people do not wait for the monarch to knight and the people to engage in agricultural warfare, and the people do not wait for the monarch to use punishment.

古文：国危主忧，说者成伍，无益于安危也。
现代文：在国家危亡、君主忧虑的时候，巧言善辩的空谈之士成群，但对国家的安危没有任何益处。
English: In a time of national peril and monarchical anxiety, a host of smooth-talking windbags is of no benefit to the safety of the country.

古文：夫国危主忧也者，强敌大国也。
现代文：国家面临危亡，君主忧虑是因为遇上了强大的敌国。
English: The country is in danger, and the monarch is worried because he has met a powerful enemy.

古文：人君不能服强敌、破大国也，则修守备，便地形，抟民力，以待外事，然后患可以去，而王可致也。
现代文：君主不能战胜强敌，攻破大国，那么就要修整用于防御的设施，考察地形，集中民众力量来应付外来的战事，这样灾难就可以消除了，而称王天下的目的也就达到了。
English: If the monarch cannot defeat the strong enemy and break through the big country, then it is necessary to repair the facilities used for defense, examine the terrain, and concentrate the people's strength to cope with foreign wars. In this way, the disaster can be eliminated, and the purpose of calling the king of the world has been achieved.

古文：是以明君修政作壹，去无用，止浮学事淫之民，壹之农，然后国家可富，而民力可抟也。
现代文：因此英明的君主治理国家应专心于农耕和作战，清除那些无用的东西，禁止民众学习那些空洞浮华的学问和从事游说等不正当职业，让他们专心于农耕，这样国家就能富强，民众的力量也可以集中了。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch who governs the country should concentrate on farming and fighting, remove those useless things, prohibit the people from studying those empty and flashy studies and engaging in illegal occupations such as lobbying, and let them concentrate on farming, so that the country can be rich and strong, and the power of the people can be concentrated.

古文：今世主皆忧其国之危而兵之弱也，而强听说者。说者成伍，烦言饰辞，而无实用。
现代文：现在各国国君都担心自己的国家危亡而且军事力量薄弱，却愿意听游说之客空洞的议论，说客们成群结队，絮烦无有的言谈没有什么实际用处。
English: At present, the sovereigns of all countries are worried about the peril of their countries and the weakness of their military forces, but they are willing to listen to the empty talk of lobbyists. The lobbyists are in droves, and the idle talk has little practical use.

古文：主好其辩，不求其实。说者得意，道路曲辩，辈辈成群。
现代文：君主爱听他们的辩说，不去探求这些言谈的实用价值，因此说客们非常得意，无论走在什么地方都巧言诡辩，一伙又一伙成群结队。
English: The monarch liked to listen to their arguments, not to explore the practical value of these talks, so the lobbyists were very good at it, no matter where they went, they were eloquent and sophistical, one group after another.

古文：民见其可以取王公大人也，而皆学之。
现代文：民众看这些人能用这种本领取悦王公大臣，便都学习他们。
English: When the public saw that these people could use this kind of money to obtain the pleasure of the prince, they all learned from them.

古文：夫人聚党与，说议于国，纷纷焉，小民乐之，大人说之。
现代文：于是这些人结成党羽，在国内高谈阔论，夸夸其谈，普通人喜欢这么做，王公大臣高兴他们这样。
English: As a result, these people formed a political party and began to speak loudly and boastfully in the country. Ordinary people like to do this, and the crown prince was happy for them to do so.

古文：故其民农者寡而游食者众。
现代文：因此国中民众务农的人少而靠游说吃饭的人多。
English: As a result, there are fewer people in the country who work in agriculture and more people who rely on lobbying.

古文：众，则农者殆；农者殆，则土地荒。
现代文：游说的人多，那么从事农耕的人便会懈怠，务农的人懈怠了，那么田地就会荒芜。
English: If there are many people lobbying, then the people engaged in farming will slack off, and if the people engaged in farming slack off, then the fields will become barren.

古文：学者成俗，则民舍农从事于谈说，高言伪议。
现代文：学习花言巧语空谈成风，民众就会放弃农耕而高谈阔论。
English: If it becomes popular to learn fancy words and empty talk, the people will give up farming and talk a lot.

古文：舍农游食而以言相高也，故民离上而不臣者成群。
现代文：民众放弃农耕，改为靠高谈阔论吃饭，并且凭花言巧语获取尊崇。所以民众远离君主，而不臣服的人成群结队。
English: The people have given up farming, and eat by means of high-sounding speeches, and gain respect by means of smooth talk. Therefore, the people are far away from the monarch, and those who do not submit are in droves.

古文：此贫国弱兵之教也。
现代文：这就是使国家贫穷、军队薄弱的原因。
English: This is what keeps countries poor and armies weak.

古文：夫国庸民之言，则民不畜于农。
现代文：如果国家凭空谈使用民众，那么民众就不喜欢从事农耕。
English: If the state uses people on the basis of empty talk, then people do not like to engage in farming.

古文：故惟明君知好言之不可以强兵辟土也，惟圣人之治国作壹、抟之于农而已矣。
现代文：因此只有英明的君主知道喜欢空谈不能用来增强军队的战斗力、开疆辟土，只有圣明的人治理国家靠专心于农耕和作战，集中民众的力量罢了。
English: Therefore, only a wise monarch knows that idle talk cannot be used to enhance the combat effectiveness of the army and open up the territory. Only a holy man can govern the country by concentrating on farming and fighting and concentrating the power of the people.

