古文：凡刺之要，官针最妙。
现代文：大凡针刺的要点，在于准确选用符合规格的针具。
English: The key to great needling lies in the accurate selection of needles that meet the specifications.

古文：九针之宜，各有所为，长短大小，各有所施。不得其用，病弗能移。
现代文：九种针具之所以适合于临床应用，就在于它们各有其不同的治疗作用，长的、短的、大的、小的，都各有其不同的施用对象，如果使用不得法，病症就不能治愈。
English: The reason why nine kinds of needles are suitable for clinical application is that they each have their own different therapeutic effect. Long, short, large, and small needles each have their own different object of application. If they cannot be used, the disease cannot be cured.

古文：疾浅针深，内伤良肉，皮肤为痈；病深针浅，病气不泻，支为大脓。
现代文：疾病在浅表，却用针深刺，就会损伤内部的肌肉，并导致皮肤上发生脓肿；疾病在深部，却用针浅刺，非但病气不能泻除，反而皮肤上会发生大的疮疡。
English: If the disease is superficial, but the needle is deeply pierced, it will damage the internal muscles and lead to abscesses on the skin; if the disease is deep, but the needle is shallowly pierced, not only can the disease not be eliminated, but large sores will occur on the skin.

古文：病小针大，气泻太甚，疾必为害；病大针小，气不泄泻，亦复为败。
现代文：病症轻微的，却用大针去刺，刺激过重，就会使元气泻伤太过而导致病情更加严重；病症严重的，却用小针微刺，邪气得不到疏泄，也为治疗失败。
English: If the disease is mild, it is pricked with a large needle, and if the stimulation is too heavy, it will cause the original qi diarrhea to be too much and cause the disease to be more serious; if the disease is serious, it is pricked with a small needle, and the evil spirit cannot be dissipated, and the treatment will fail.

古文：失针之宜，大者泻，小者不移。已言其过，请言其所施。病在皮肤无常处者，取以镵针于病所，肤白勿取。
现代文：因此，如果不能选用适宜的针具进行针刺，应该用小针的时候却误用了大针，刺之过分，就会损伤正气；而应该用大针的时候却误用了小针，刺之不足，则病邪也不能祛除。
English: Therefore, if it is not possible to select a suitable needle for acupuncture, when a small needle should be used, a large needle is mistakenly used, and if it is too much, it will damage the virtuous qi; but when a large needle should be used, a small needle is mistakenly used, and if it is not enough, the disease cannot be eliminated.

古文：病在分肉间，取以圆针于病所。病在经络痼痹者，取以锋针。
现代文：以上已经讲了误用针具的害处，下面再来谈一谈各种针具的合理施用方法。
English: The above has already talked about the harm of misusing needles. Next, let's talk about the reasonable application methods of various needles.

古文：病在脉、气少、当补之者，取以鍉针于井荥分俞。病为大脓者，取以铍针。
现代文：病在皮肤浅表而游走不定的，当取用箭头形的镵针在病痛的所在处进行针刺，以泻除风热；但如果患部的肤色苍白而并无红肿充血的迹象，则说明热邪已去，就不能再取用镵针来进行治疗。
English: If the disease is on the surface of the skin and cannot be controlled, the arrow-shaped acupuncture needle should be used to prick the site of the disease to relieve the wind fever. However, if the skin color of the affected area is pale and there is no sign of redness and congestion, it means that the fever has gone, and the acupuncture needle can no longer be used for treatment.

古文：病痹气暴发者，取以圆利针。病痹气痛而不去者，取以毫针。
现代文：病在皮下浅层的肌肉或肌腱之间的，当取用针端呈卵圆形的员针在病痛的所在处施行推摩，以流通气血。
English: If the disease is between the muscles or tendons in the shallow layer under the skin, when the oval-shaped acupuncture needle is used, the needle is rubbed at the site of the disease to circulate qi and blood.

古文：病在中者，取以长针。病水肿不能通关节者，取以大针。
现代文：病在经络、属于顽固性的痹证的，当取用三棱形的锋针来进行治疗，以作刺络放血之用。
English: If the disease is in the meridians and is an intractable paralytic, a triangular-shaped needle should be used for treatment, to be used for cauterization and bloodletting.

古文：病在五脏固居者，取以锋针，泻于井荥分俞，取以四时。
现代文：病在经脉、属气虚不足的虚证而应施用补法的，当取用不刺入皮肤的鍉针分别按压各经的井、荥、输、经、合等腧穴，以使其血气流通。
English: If the disease is in the meridians, it is a symptom of qi deficiency and should be treated with supplementation. When using a Qigong needle that does not pierce the skin, press each meridian well, navel, channel, meridian, and sinusoid respectively to circulate blood and qi.

古文：凡刺有九，以应九变。
现代文：病属于脓疡之类的，当取用剑形的铍针来进行治疗，以作切开排脓之用。
English: The disease is similar to an abscess, and should be treated with a sword-shaped forceps, which is used to cut out the abscess.

古文：一曰俞刺，俞刺者，刺诸经荥俞臓俞也；二曰远道刺，远道刺者，病在上，取之下，刺腑俞也；三曰经刺，经刺者，刺大经之结络经分也；四曰络刺，络刺者，刺小络之血脉也；五曰分刺，分刺者，刺分肉之间也；六曰大泻刺，大泻刺者，刺大脓以铍针也；七曰毛刺，毛刺者，刺浮痹皮肤也；八曰巨刺，巨刺者，左取右，右取左；九曰焠刺，焠刺者，刺燔针则取痹也。凡刺有十二节，以应十二经。一曰偶刺，偶刺者，以手直心若背，直痛所，一刺前，一刺后，以治心痹。
现代文：病属急性发作的痹证，当取用既圆且锐的员利针来进行治疗，深刺之，以治暴痛。病属痹病疼痛日久不愈的，当取用形如毫毛的毫针来进行治疗，可较长时间地留针，以去痛痹。
English: Acute paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralytic paralyt

古文：刺此者，傍针之也。
现代文：病已在深部的，当取用长针来进行治疗，以去在内之邪。
English: If the disease is already deep-seated, a long needle should be used to carry out the treatment in order to remove the evil.

古文：二曰报刺，报刺者，刺痛无常处也。上下行者，直内无拔针，以左手随病所按之，乃出针，复刺之也。
现代文：第三种叫做恢刺。恢刺法，就是直刺在筋的旁边，然后再或前或后地提插捻转，扩大针孔，以舒缓筋脉拘急之症状的针刺法。
English: The third method is called "re-piercing." "Re-piercing" is a method of acupuncture in which a straight needle is placed next to the muscle, and then the needle is inserted and twisted, either forward or backward, to enlarge the needle hole and relieve the symptoms of muscle tension.

古文：三曰恢刺，恢刺者，直刺傍之，举之前后，恢筋急，以治筋痹也。四曰齐刺，齐刺者，直入一，傍入二，以治寒气小深者；或曰三刺，三刺者，治痹气小深者也。
现代文：这种刺法，适用于治疗筋脉拘挛而致疼痛的筋痹病。第四种叫做齐刺。齐刺法，就是在病变部位的正中直刺一针，在其左右两旁又各刺一针的针刺法，用以治疗寒气稽留范围较小而部位又较深的痹证。这种针刺法，三针齐下，所以也有称它为三刺。运用三刺，主要就是为了治疗寒痹之气范围小且部位深的那一类疾病的。
English: This method of pricking is suitable for the treatment of myocardial infarction, which causes pain due to constriction of the myocardium. The fourth method is called qi-pricking. The qi-pricking method is a method of pricking a needle directly in the middle of the diseased area, and a needle pricking a needle on both sides of it, which is used to treat the cold gas retention range is small and the area is deep. This method of pricking three needles at once, so it is also called three pricks. The use of three pricks is mainly to treat the type of disease in which the cold gas range is small and the area is deep.

古文：五曰扬刺，扬刺者，正内一，傍内四，而浮之，以治寒气之搏大者也。
现代文：第五种叫做扬刺。扬刺法，就是在病变部位的正中刺一针，再在四周刺四针，且都用浅刺的针刺法，用以治疗寒气稽留面积较广而部位较浅的病证。
English: The fifth method is called needling. The needling method is to prick one needle in the middle of the lesion site, and then prick four needles around it, and all of them are used with a shallow needling method to treat colds with a wide retention area and a shallow site.

古文：六曰直针刺，直针刺者，引皮乃刺之，以治寒气之浅者也。
现代文：第六种叫做直针刺。直针刺法，就是在针刺时将穴位处的皮肤提起，然后将针沿皮刺入，但不刺入肌肉的针刺法，用以治疗寒气稽留部位较浅的病证。
English: The sixth method is called direct acupuncture. The direct acupuncture method is to lift the skin at the point of acupuncture, and then insert the needle along the skin, but not into the muscle. It is used to treat the shallow cold retention site.

古文：七曰输针，输刺者，直入直出，稀发针而深之，以治气盛而热者也。
现代文：第七种叫做输刺。输刺法，在操作时，进针和出针的动作都较快，直刺而入，直针而出，取穴较少且刺入较深，用以治疗气盛而有热的病证，主泻热。
English: The seventh is called infusion. Infusion method, in the operation, the movement of the needle in and out of the needle is faster, the straight needle enters, the straight needle comes out, the holes are fewer and the puncture is deeper, used to treat the symptoms of high blood pressure and fever, the main fever.

古文：八曰短刺，短刺者，刺骨痹，稍摇而深之，致针骨，所以上下摩骨也。
现代文：第八种叫做短刺。短刺法，适用于骨节浮肿，不能活动，局部发冷的骨痹病。进针时，要缓缓刺入，进针后，要稍稍摇动针体，再行深入，以使针尖达到骨的附近，再上下提插，以摩擦骨部。
English: The eighth type is called short prick. The short prick method is suitable for osteomyelitis in which the bone joints are swollen, immobile, and partially cold. When inserting the needle, it should be inserted slowly. After inserting the needle, it is necessary to slightly shake the needle body, then go deeper so that the needle tip reaches the vicinity of the bone, and then insert it up and down to rub the bone.

古文：九曰浮刺，浮刺者，傍入而浮之，以治肌急而寒者也。
现代文：第九种叫做浮刺。浮刺法，就是从病所的旁边斜刺进针，浮浅地刺入肌表的针刺法，用以治疗肌肉挛急且属于寒性的病证。
English: The ninth type is called floating needling. The floating needling method is to insert a needle obliquely from the side of the clinic and shallowly pierce the epidermis, which is used to treat muscle spasm and cold symptoms.

古文：十曰阴刺，阴刺者，左右率刺之，以治寒厥；中寒厥，足踝后少阴也。
现代文：第十种叫做阴刺。阴刺法，就是左右两边经络要同时进针的针刺法，用以治疗阴寒内盛的寒厥证。患寒厥证，与足少阴肾经有关，针刺治疗取足内踝后方肾经上的原穴太溪穴。
English: The tenth type is called yin qi. Yin qi is a method of acupuncture in which needles are inserted into the left and right meridians at the same time. It is used to treat cold sores that are cold to the core. Cold sores are related to the small amount of yin in the kidneys, and acupuncture is used to treat the original hole on the kidney behind the ankle in the foot.

古文：十一曰傍针刺，傍针刺者，直刺傍刺各一，以治留痹久居者也。
现代文：第十一种叫做傍针刺。傍针刺法，就是在病所直刺一针，再在其旁边刺一针的针刺法，用以治疗邪气久居不散的留痹证。
English: The eleventh type is called paracentesis. Paracentesis is a method of acupuncture in which a needle is inserted directly into the affected area, and then another needle is inserted next to it, to treat the lingering symptoms of evil spirits.

古文：十二曰赞刺，赞刺者，直入直出，数发针而浅之出血，是谓治痈肿也。
现代文：第十二种叫做赞刺。赞刺法，其进针和出针的动作都较快，在患处快而浅地直刺几针，目的就在于使其出血以泄散局部的郁血，这也是消散痈肿的一种针刺法。
English: The twelfth type is called "Zanzashi." The "Zanzashi" method, the movement of the needle into and out of the needle is relatively fast, and several needles are inserted quickly and shallowly in the affected area. The purpose is to make it bleed to dissipate local congestion, which is also a kind of acupuncture method for dissipating abscesses.

古文：脉之所居，深不见者，刺之微内针而久留之，以致其空脉气也。
现代文：脉络分布在深部而不显现于外、不能用肉眼看见的，在针刺时，要轻微地进针，刺入其内，并长时间地提捻针，以使孔穴中的脉气上行而产生针感。
English: Vein distribution is deep and does not appear on the outside, it cannot be seen with the naked eye. When needling, it is necessary to slightly insert the needle, pierce it, and twist the needle for a long time, so that the pulse gas in the hole rises and produces a needle sensation.

古文：脉浅者，勿刺，按绝其脉乃刺之，无令精出，独出其邪气耳。
现代文：脉络分布在浅部而现于外的，就不能直接针刺，必须先按压隔绝其脉，使血脉停留然后才可以进行针刺。只有这样，才不致出血，也就不使精气外泄，而只将邪气去除。
English: If the vein distribution is shallow and appears externally, direct acupuncture is not possible. It is necessary to press and isolate the vein first, so that the blood vein stays and then acupuncture can be performed. Only in this way will there be no bleeding, and the essence will not leak out, but only the evil spirit will be removed.

古文：所谓三刺则谷气出者，先浅刺绝皮，以出阳邪，再刺则阴邪出者，少益深，绝皮致肌肉，未入分肉间也；已入分肉之间，则谷气出。
现代文：所谓 三刺 是指可以使谷气出而产生针感的针刺法，就是先浅刺进入皮肤，以宣泄卫分的阳邪；然后再刺入一些，以使卫分的阴邪能够外出，而其刺入的深度，也只是稍稍深一些，比皮肤的浅层略深，透过了皮肤，接近了肌肉，但还不能达到分肉之间；最后再将针尖深入到分肉之间，这时就会使谷气出而产生酸麻重胀等针感。
English: The so-called "three pricks" refers to the needling method that can make the qi come out and produce a pinching sensation, that is, the first shallow prick enters the skin to vent the yang evil of the health element; then some more are pierced to allow the yin evil of the health element to go out, and the depth of the piercing is only slightly deeper, slightly deeper than the shallow layer of the skin, through the skin, close to the muscle, but can not yet reach the tender point; finally, the needle tip is deepened to the tender point, then the qi will come out and produce a tingling sensation such as swelling.

古文：故《刺法》曰： 始刺浅之，以逐邪气而来血气；后刺深之，以致阴气之邪；最后刺极深之，以下谷气。 
现代文：所以古医书《刺法》中说： 开始时浅刺皮肤，可以驱逐浅表的邪气，而使血气流通；此后再刺入较深，就可以宣散阴分的邪气；最后刺入极深，到了一定的深度，就可以通导谷气而产生针感。 
English: Therefore, it is said in the ancient medical book "Stabbing Method": At the beginning, if you lightly prick the skin, you can expel the superficial evil gas and make the blood gas circulate; after that, if you prick deeper, you can dissipate the negative evil gas; finally, if you prick very deep, when it reaches a certain depth, you can conduct the grain gas and produce a pinching sensation.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：其内容说的正是这种 三刺 的针刺法。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：故用针者，不知年之所加，气之盛衰，虚实之所起，不可以为工也。
现代文：所以，运用针法来治疗疾病的医者，不知道每年风、寒、暑、湿、燥、火六气加临的时期，每一节气中六气盛衰的情况，以及因气候变化而引起病情的虚实变化，就不能成为良医。
English: Therefore, a doctor who uses the needle method to treat diseases cannot be a good doctor if he does not know the period of wind, cold, heat, humidity, dryness and fire every year, the situation of the rise and fall of the six winds in each solar term, and the true and false changes in the condition of the disease caused by climate change.

古文：凡刺有五，以应五脏。
现代文：针刺法有五种，可以适用于与五脏有关的病变。
English: There are five types of acupuncture, which can be applied to lesions related to the internal organs.

古文：一曰半刺，半刺者，浅内而疾发针，无针伤肉，如拔毛状，以取皮气，此肺之应也。
现代文：第一种叫做半刺。半刺法，就是浅刺进入皮肤后，很快就急速出针，而并不损伤肌肉的针刺法，其动作就好像拔去毫毛一样。
English: The first is called the half-piercing method. The half-piercing method means that after the shallow piercing enters the skin, the needle is quickly released, but the needling method does not damage the muscle, and its action is like pulling out the hairs.

古文：二曰豹文刺，豹文刺者，左右前后针之，中脉为故，以取经络之血者，此心之应也。
现代文：其主要目的就在于使皮肤轻微地感受一下刺激，以疏泄皮肤浅表部的邪气。因为肺主皮毛，所以这是和肺脏相应的针刺法。
English: Its main purpose is to make the skin feel slightly irritated, in order to vent the evil spirits of the superficial part of the skin. Because the lung is the main fur, so this is the needling method corresponding to the lung.

古文：三曰关刺，关刺者，直刺左右尽筋上，以取筋痹，慎无出血，此肝之应也；或曰渊刺；一曰岂刺。
现代文：第二种叫做豹文刺。豹文刺法，就是在病变部位的前后左右，针刺多下，而使刺点像豹的斑纹一样的针刺法。
English: The second method is called leopard-patterned needling. The leopard-patterned needling method is a method of needling that involves multiple needling in front of, behind, and around the affected area, so that the needling points look like the stripes of a leopard.

古文：四曰合谷刺，合谷刺者，左右鸡足，针于分肉之间，以取肌痹，此脾之应也。
现代文：合谷刺法，就是在患处中间正刺一针，左右两侧各斜刺一针，呈鸡足一样的形状，并将针刺入到分肉之间的针刺法，用以治疗肌痹病。因为脾主肌肉，所以这是和脾脏相应的针刺法。
English: The Hegu method is a method of acupuncture in which a needle is inserted in the middle of the affected area, and a needle is inserted diagonally on each side of the right and left sides, taking the shape of a chicken foot, and the needle is inserted between the lobes to treat myopathy. Because the spleen is the main muscle, this is the method of acupuncture corresponding to the spleen.

古文：五曰输刺，输刺者，直入直出，深内之至骨，以取骨痹，此肾之应也。
现代文：第五种叫做输刺。输刺法，在操作时，进针和出针的动作都较快，直刺而入，直针而出，且要将针深刺至骨的附近，用以治疗骨痹病。因为肾主骨，所以这是和肾脏相应的针刺法。
English: The fifth method is called transfusion. In the transfusion method, the movement of the needle into and out of the needle is fast, the needle goes straight in, the needle goes straight out, and the needle should be pierced deep into the vicinity of the bone to treat osteomyelitis. Because the kidney is the main bone, this is the needle pricking method corresponding to the kidney.

