古文：◎舆服四
现代文：舆服四
English: Public dress four

古文：○皇帝宝玺皇后册宝皇妃以下册印皇太子册宝皇太子妃册宝亲王以下册宝册印铁券印信符节宫室制度臣庶室屋制度器用
现代文：皇帝宝玺皇后册宝皇妃以下册印皇太子册宝皇太子妃册宝亲王以下册宝册印铁券印信符节宫室制度臣庶室屋制度器用
English: Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor, Emperor

古文：明初宝玺十七：其大者曰 皇帝奉天之宝 ，曰 皇帝之宝 ，曰 皇帝行宝 ，曰 皇帝信宝 ，曰 天子之宝 ，曰 天子行宝 ，曰 天子信宝 ，曰 制诰之宝 ，曰 敕命之宝 ，曰 广运之宝 ，曰 皇帝尊亲之宝 ，曰 皇帝亲亲之宝 ，曰 敬天勤民之宝 ；又有 御前之宝 、 表章经史之宝 及 钦文之玺 。
现代文：明代初年，皇帝的玺印有十七种。其中大的有 皇帝奉天之寅 、 皇帝之宝 、 皇帝行实 、 皇帝信宝 、 天子之寅 、 天子行宝  天子信寅 、 制诰之实 、 敕命之宝 、 广运之实 、 皇帝尊亲之实 、 皇帝亲亲之实 、 敬天勤民之宝 ，又有 御前之宝  表章经史之寅 以及 钦文之玺 。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there were seventeen kinds of imperial seals. The most important of them were Emperor Feng Tianzhuang, Emperor's Treasure, Emperor Xingzhi, Emperor's Trustworthy, Son of Heaven, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's Treasure, Son of Heaven's

古文：丹符出验四方。
现代文：皇帝的符信出，取效天下。
English: When the emperor's seal is issued, it takes effect all over the world.

古文：洪武元年欲制宝玺，有贾胡浮海献美玉，曰： 此出于阗，祖父相传，当为帝王宝玺。 
现代文：洪武元年，打算制作玺印，有外国商人航海来中国进献美玉，说： 这块玉出自于阗，我的祖辈与父辈代代相传，应当作为帝王的玺印。 
English: In the first year of Hongwu, a foreign merchant sailed to China to offer a precious stone, saying, "This stone comes from Yunnan. My ancestors and parents have passed it down from generation to generation. It should be used as an imperial seal."

古文：乃命制为宝，不知十七宝中，此玉制何宝也。
现代文：于是皇帝就命令制作为宝印，不知道在十七枚窦印中这块玉制成的是哪一个宝印。
English: So the emperor ordered it to be made into a treasure seal. He did not know which of the seventeen countersigns this piece of jade was made into.

古文：成祖又制 皇帝亲亲之宝 、 皇帝奉天之宝 、 诰命之宝 、 敕命之宝 。
现代文：成祖又制作 皇帝亲亲之宝 、 皇帝奉天之实 、 诰命之宝 、 救命之寅 。
English: Chengzu also produced the treasures of the emperor's relatives, the emperor's dedication to heaven, the treasure of the dying, and the life-saving tiger.

古文：弘治十三年，鄠县民毛志学于泥河滨得玉玺，其文曰 受命于天，既寿永昌 。
现代文：弘治十三年，鄂县百姓毛志学在泥河边得到一块玉玺，上面写着 受命于天，既寿永昌 。
English: In the thirteenth year of Hongzhi, the people of E County, Mao Zhixue, obtained a piece of jade bowl by the muddy river, on which was written, "Commanded by heaven, both life and death are eternal."

古文：色白微青，螭纽。
现代文：颜色发白微微有点青色，螭形印纽。
English: The color is white with a slight bluish tint, and it is stamped in the shape of a skull.

古文：陕西巡抚熊翀以为秦玺复出，遣人献之。
现代文：陕西巡抚熊辨认为是秦朝的玺印再次出现，派人把它献给朝廷。
English: The governor of Shaanxi Province, Xiong Xiong, saw the seal of the Qin Dynasty reappear and sent someone to present it to the imperial court.

古文：礼部尚书傅瀚言： 自有秦玺以来，历代得丧真伪之迹具载史籍。
现代文：礼部尚书傅瀚说： 自从有秦玺以来，历代得失真假的踪迹都记载在史害上。
English: Shangshu Fuhan, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: Since the Qin Dynasty, the traces of distortion of truth and falsehood throughout the ages have been recorded in history.

古文：今所进，篆文与《辍耕录》等书摹载鱼鸟篆文不同，其螭纽又与史传所纪文盘五龙、螭缺一角、旁刻魏录者不类。
现代文：今天所进献的，篆文与《辍耕录》等书摹写记载的鱼乌篆文不同，那螭形印纽又与史传所记载的有五条盘龙文饰、螭缺一角、旁边刻有魏录的不同。
English: The seal script presented today is different from the fish-shaped seal script recorded in "Dropping the Cultivation Record" and other books, and the seal-shaped seal is also different from the historical legend that there are five dragon embellishments, one corner of the seal is missing, and there is a Wei record engraved on the side.

古文：盖秦玺亡已久，今所进与宋、元所得，疑皆后世摹秦玺而刻之者。
现代文：大致秦玺亡佚已久，今天所进献的舆宋、元所得，怀疑都是后世摹拟秦玺而刻制的。
English: Most of the Qin and Song dynasties have long since passed away, and it is suspected that the inscriptions of the Song and Yuan dynasties presented today were carved by later generations in imitation of the Qin dynasty.

古文：窃惟玺之用，以识文书，防诈伪，非以为宝玩也。
现代文：我认为玺印的用途，是用来做文书的标识，防止伪诈，不是用作宝物玩赏的。
English: I think the purpose of the seal is to mark the document and prevent fraud, not to use it as a treasure.

古文：自秦始皇得蓝田玉以为玺，汉以后传用之，自是巧争力取，谓得此乃足以受命，而不知受命以德，不以玺也。
现代文：自从秦始皇得到蓝田玉刻成宝玺，汉代以后传承使用。从此巧谋争强力夺，说得到它就足以受天命，却不知受天命靠的是德行，不是靠玺印。
English: Ever since the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty obtained the treasure chisel carved from Lantian jade, it has been passed down and used since the Han Dynasty. Since then, they have been cleverly competing for power, saying that obtaining it is enough to receive the Mandate of Heaven, but they do not know that receiving the Mandate of Heaven depends on virtue, not on the seal.

古文：故求之不得，则伪造以欺人；得之则君臣色喜，以夸示于天下。
现代文：所以追求它而得不到，就伪造用来欺诈人；得到了，君臣就喜形于色，用来炫耀于天下。
English: Therefore, if they pursue it but fail to obtain it, they will forge it and use it to deceive people; if they obtain it, they will be overjoyed and use it to show off to the world.

古文：是皆贻笑千载。
现代文：这些都是贻笑千年的事。
English: These are all things that have been going on for millennia.

古文：我高皇帝自制一代之玺，文各有义，随事而施，真足以为一代受命之符，而垂法万世，何藉此玺哉！ 
现代文：我朝高皇帝自己制作一代玺印，每一个玺印上的文字各有意义，因事而设，真正足以为一代接受天命的印符，而可以垂留于万世作为仪范，何必凭借此玺呢？ 
English: I, Emperor Gao, made a generation of seals myself. The characters on each seal have their own meaning, and are set according to the circumstances. They are truly enough to accept the seal of destiny for a generation, and can be left as a ritual for all eternity. Why do we need to rely on this seal?

古文：帝从其言，却而不用。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的话，抛弃不用。
English: The emperor obeyed his words, and there was no need to abandon him.

古文：嘉靖十八年，新制七宝：曰 奉天承运大明天子宝 、 大明受命之宝 、 巡狩天下之宝 、 垂训之宝 、 命德之宝 、讨罪安民之宝 、敕正万民之宝 。与国初宝玺共为御宝二十四，尚宝司官掌之。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，新制宝玺七个，它们是： 奉天承运大明天子宝 、 大明受命之宝 、 巡狩天下之实 、 垂训之宝 、 命德之宝 、 讨罪安民之宝 、 敕正万民之宝 与开园初期的宝玺一起，共为二十四枚，由尚实司官员掌管。
English: In the 18th year of Jiajing, there were seven newly-made treasures, which were: the treasure of carrying the treasure of Daming, the treasure of being ordered by Daming, the treasure of hunting the world, the treasure of learning, the treasure of virtue, the treasure of keeping the people safe, and the treasure of keeping the people righteous. Together with the treasures in the early days of the park, there were a total of twenty-four treasures, which were managed by the officials of the Shangshi Division.

古文：皇后之册：用金册二片，依周尺长一尺二寸，广五寸，厚二分五厘。
现代文：皇后的册符。用金册二片，按照周时尺寸长一尺二寸，宽五寸，厚二分五厘。
English: The queen's seal. Two pieces of gold, one foot two inches long, five inches wide, and two-and-a-half inches thick, according to the weekly measurement.

古文：字依数分行，镌以真书。
现代文：文字按字敷分行，用楷书镑刻。
English: The text is written according to the Chinese characters, and is inscribed in block letters.

古文：上下有孔，联以红绦，开阖如书帙，藉以红锦褥。
现代文：上下有孔，用红丝系连，开阖像书籍，用红锦褥垫着。
English: There are holes at the top and bottom, connected with red thread, opened like books, and padded with red brocade.

古文：册盝用木，饰以浑金沥粉蟠龙，红纻丝衬里，内以红罗销金小袱裹册，外以红罗销金夹袱包之，五色小绦萦于外。
现代文：装册符的小匣用木头制作，用浑金沥粉蟠龙图案文饰，红色纡丝做衬里，里面用红色绫罗嵌以金线的小袱裹束册符，外面用红色绫罗嵌以金线夹袱包裹，五色的小丝带萦绕在外。
English: The small case of the bookmark is made of wood, decorated with a dragon pattern in dark gold and red satin, lined with red satin, the bookmark is wrapped with a small bundle of red satin inlaid with gold thread, the outside is wrapped with a small bundle of red satin inlaid with gold thread, and small five-colored ribbons are wrapped around the outside.

古文：宝用金，龟纽，篆文曰 皇后之宝 ，依周尺方五寸九分，厚一寸七分。
现代文：寅玺用金制成，龟形印纽，用篆文写着 皇后之寅 ，按周时尺寸五寸九分见方，厚一寸七分。
English: The tiger's beak is made of gold, with a tortoise-shaped seal and the words "Queen's Tiger" written in Chinese characters. It measures 5.9 cm square and 1.7 cm thick.

古文：宝池用金，阔取容。
现代文：玺池用黄金制作，宽取其能容纳宝玺。
English: The pond is made of gold and is wide enough to hold a treasure chest.

古文：宝箧二副，一置宝，一置宝池。
现代文：装玉玺的匣子有二副，一副放置宝玺，一副放置宝池。
English: There are two boxes containing jade urns, one for placing treasure urns and one for placing treasure ponds.

古文：每副三重：外箧用木，饰以浑金沥粉蟠龙，红纻丝衬里；中箧用金鈒蟠龙；内小箧饰如外箧，内置宝座，四角雕蟠龙，饰以浑金。
现代文：每副裹外三层：外层用木制成，用潭金沥粉蟠龙图案装饰，红色纡丝作里衬；中间一层用金嵌蟠龙图案；内层小匣装饰如同外匣，里面放置宝座，四角雕有蟠龙图案，用浑金装饰。
English: Each pair of wraps has three outer layers: the outer layer is made of wood, decorated with a dragon pattern, and red satin thread as a lining; the middle layer is decorated with a gold-embedded dragon pattern; the inner casket is decorated like an outer casket, with a throne inside, and the four corners are carved with a dragon pattern and decorated with dark gold.

古文：座上用锦褥，以销金红罗小夹袱裹宝，其箧外各用红罗销金大夹袱覆之。
现代文：座上用锦褥，用嵌有金线的红色绫罗小夹袱包裹宝玺，匣子外面各用红色绫罗嵌有金线的大夹袱覆盖。
English: The seat is covered with brocade, the treasure chest is wrapped with small red baubles embedded with gold thread, and the outside of each box is covered with large red baubles embedded with gold thread.

古文：临册之日，册宝俱置于红髹舆案，案顶有红罗沥水，用担床举之。
现代文：等到册封之日，册与宝都放在红漆舆案上，案顶有红色绫罗沥水，用担床托举。
English: On the day of sealing, both the book and the treasure were placed on a red lacquer case, with red muddy water on the top, and held up with a stretcher.

古文：皇贵妃而下，有册无宝而有印。
现代文：皇贵妃以下，有册符没有宝玺而有印。
English: Below the rank of empress dowager, there are bookmarks that do not have treasure chests but have seals.

古文：妃册，用镀金银册二片，广长与后册同。
现代文：贵妃的符册，用镀金银册二片，长度宽度与皇后的册相同。
English: The Queen's scroll, made of two gold-plated silver plates, is the same length and width as the Queen's scroll.

古文：册盝饰以浑金沥粉蟠凤。
现代文：装册的小匣用浑金沥粉蟠凤图案装饰。
English: The small box in which the books are stored is decorated with a mud-gold-and-bitumen-and-phoenix motif.

古文：其印用金，龟纽，尺寸与诸王宝同，文曰 皇妃之印 。
现代文：印用黄金，龟形印纽，尺寸与诸王宝玺相同，印上的文字是 皇妃之印 。
English: Printed with gold, turtle-shaped seal, the size is the same as that of the king's jewels, and the printed text is the seal of the empress.

古文：箧饰以蟠凤。
现代文：印匣用蟠凤图案装饰。
English: The seal box is decorated with a dragon and phoenix pattern.

古文：宣德元年，帝以贵妃孙氏有容德，特请于皇太后，制金宝赐之，未几即诞皇嗣。
现代文：宣德元年，皇帝以贵妃孙氏有容貌贤德，特别向皇太后请求，制作金宝印赐给她，不久就生下了皇子。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, the emperor asked the empress dowager to make a golden seal for the empress dowager with the request that the empress dowager of the Sun Dynasty should have good looks and virtue. Soon after, she gave birth to a prince.

古文：自是贵妃授宝，遂为故事。
现代文：从此贵妃被授予宝玺，于是成为成例。
English: Since then, Guifei has been awarded the Breguet Prize, which has become a precedent.

古文：嘉靖十年，立九嫔，册用银，杀皇妃五分之一，以金饰之。
现代文：嘉靖十年，册立九嫔，册符用银，大小小于皇妃的五分之一，用黄金装饰。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, nine seals were set up, the seals were made of silver, the size was less than one-fifth of that of the empress, and they were decorated with gold.

古文：皇太子册宝：册用金，二片，其制及盝箧之饰与皇后册同。
现代文：皇太子的册宝。册符用黄金，为二片，它的形制以及匣子的装饰与皇后的册符相同。
English: The crown prince's seal. The seal is made of gold and consists of two pieces. Its shape and the decoration of the box are the same as the queen's seal.

古文：宝用金，龟纽，篆书 皇太子宝 。
现代文：宝玺用黄金制成，龟形印组，用篆文写为 皇太子宝 。
English: The treasure chasuble is made of gold with a tortoise-shaped seal and is inscribed with the words "Crown Prince's Treasure."

古文：其制及池箧之饰与后宝同。
现代文：它的形制以及宝池、宝匣的装饰与皇后的宝玺相同。
English: Its shape, as well as the decoration of the treasure pool and the treasure box, are the same as the queen's treasure chests.

古文：皇太子妃册宝：其册用金，两叶，重百两，每叶高一尺二寸，广五寸。
现代文：皇太子妃的册宝。册符用黄金，两叶片，重一百两，每一叶片高一尺二寸，宽五寸。
English: The treasure of the crown princess. The bookmark is made of gold, two leaves, weighs one hundred taels, each leaf is one foot two inches high and five inches wide.

古文：藉册以锦，联册以红丝绦，垫册以锦褥，裹册以红罗销金袱。
现代文：用锦帛铺垫册，用红色丝带联缀册，用锦褥衬垫册，用红色绫罗嵌有金线的袱单裹册。
English: With brocade padding book, with red ribbon interlocking book, with brocade padding book, with red embroidery inlaid with gold thread binding book.

古文：其盝饰以浑金沥粉云凤，内有花银钉铰，嵌金丝铁筦龠；外以红罗销金袱覆之。
现代文：它的盒子用潭金沥粉云凤图案装饰，内有纯银钉铰，镶嵌着金丝的铁质锁匙；外面用红色绫罗嵌有金线的袱单覆盖。
English: Its box is decorated with a gold-painted cloud and phoenix pattern, with a sterling silver nail clamp inside, and an iron key inlaid with gold wire; the outside is covered with red enamel and a luggage tag embedded with gold wire.

古文：其金宝之制未详。
现代文：皇太子妃的金宝的形制不知详惰。
English: The form of the crown princess's golden treasure is not known in detail.

古文：洪武二十八年更定，止授金册，不用宝。
现代文：洪武二十八年重新规定，祇授予金册，不用赏玺。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu, it was re-determined that only the gold record would be awarded, and no award would be given.

古文：亲王册宝：册制与皇太子同。
现代文：亲王的册宝。册符的样式与皇太子相同。
English: The prince's seal. The style of the seal is the same as that of the crown prince.

古文：其宝用金，龟纽，依周尺方五寸二分，厚一寸五分，文曰 某王之宝 。
现代文：他的宝玺用金，龟形印纽，按照周尺为五寸二分见方，厚一寸五分，宝玺文字是 某王之宝 。
English: His gold brooch, with a tortoise-shaped seal, is five centimeters and two minutes square and one centimeter and five minutes thick. The brooch is inscribed with the words "Treasure of a King."

古文：池箧之饰，与皇太子宝同。
现代文：宝池、宝盒的装饰，与皇太子的宝玺相同。
English: The decoration of the treasure pond and the treasure box is the same as that of the crown prince's treasure basket.

古文：宝盝之饰，则雕蟠螭。
现代文：装宝玺的匣子上的装饰，雕刻有蟠螭图案。
English: The decoration on the box containing the treasure urn, engraved with a skull motif.

古文：亲王妃册印：其金册，高视太子妃册减一寸，馀制悉同，册文视亲王。
现代文：亲王的妃册印。她的金册，高比太子妃的金册少一寸，其余样式全都相同，册文比照亲王而定。
English: Her gold album is one inch less than the gold album of the crown princess, and the rest of the styles are all the same, and the text is determined according to the prince.

古文：其金印之制未详。
现代文：她的金印的样式不知详情。
English: I don't know the details of her gold seal.

古文：洪武二十八年更定，止授金册。
现代文：洪武二十八年重新规定，只授予金册。
English: Hongwu 28 years of re-regulation, only awarded a gold book.

古文：公主册印：银册二片，镌字镀金，藉以红锦褥。
现代文：公主的册印。银质册符二片，镑刻文字镀金，用红色锦褥铺垫。
English: The princess's seal. Two silver bookmarks, gilt pound engraving, padded with red brocade.

古文：册盝饰以浑金沥粉蟠螭。
现代文：册匣用浑金沥粉蟠螭图案装饰。
English: The bookcase is decorated with a pattern of mud-gold pitch-powdered enamel.

古文：其印同宋制，用金，龟纽，文曰 某国公主之印 。
现代文：她的印和宋代的形制相同，用金，龟形印纽，印文是 某国公主之印 。
English: Her seal has the same shape as that of the Song Dynasty. It is made of gold with a turtle-shaped seal. The seal is the seal of a princess of a certain country.

古文：方五寸二分，厚一寸五分。
现代文：五寸二分见方，厚一寸五分。
English: Five and a half centimeters square, one and a half centimeters thick.

古文：印池用金，广取容。
现代文：印池用黄金制成，宽取其能容纳印。
English: The seal pool is made of gold and is as wide as it can hold the seal.

古文：印外箧用木，饰以浑金沥粉盘凤，中箧用金鈒蟠凤，内小箧，饰如外箧。
现代文：印的外匣用木，用浑金沥粉盘凤图案装饰，中间的匣子用金质镶嵌蟠凤图案装饰，里面的小匣，装饰如同外面的匣子。
English: The outer box of the seal is made of wood and decorated with a mud-gold and pitch-powder pattern, the middle box is decorated with a gold-inlaid pattern, and the small box inside is decorated like the outer box.

古文：亲王世子金册金宝：承袭止授金册，传用金宝。
现代文：亲王世子的金册金宝。承袭只授予金册，承传用金宝。
English: The heir of the prince inherits only the golden book and the golden treasure.

古文：世子妃亦用金册。
现代文：世子妃也用金册。
English: The heir to the throne also used a gold book.

古文：洪武二十三年铸世子妃印，制视王妃，金印，龟纽，篆文曰 某世子妃印 。
现代文：洪武二十三年，铸造世子妃印，形制比照王妃，金印，龟形印纽，篆文是 某世子妃印 。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu, he cast the seal of a prince's heir, the shape of which is a princess's likeness, a gold seal, a turtle-shaped seal, and the inscription is the seal of a prince's heir.

古文：郡王，镀金银册、镀金银印，册文视世子。
现代文：郡王，镀金银册、镀金银印，册符上的文字根据世子而定。
English: County king, gold-plated silver booklet, gold-plated silver seal, the words on the booklet are determined according to the descendant.

古文：其妃止有镀金银册。
现代文：郡王妃祇有镀金银册。
English: There is only a gold-plated silver version of the Countess.

古文：功臣铁券：洪武二年，太祖欲封功臣，议为铁券，而未有定制。
现代文：功臣的铁券。洪武二年，太祖打算分封功臣，商议制铁券，但没有固定的形制。
English: In the 2nd year of Hongwu, Emperor Taizu planned to divide the territory among the meritorious vassals and discussed the issue of iron certificates, but there was no fixed form.

古文：或言台州民钱允一有家藏吴越王镠唐赐铁券，遂遣使取之，因其式而损益焉。
现代文：有人说台州人堡鱼二有家藏的昊越王钱刨所得唐朝赐给他的铁券，就派使者取来，依照它的样式加以增损。
English: It is said that King Ho Yue of Taizhou had a hoard of iron certificates given to him by the Tang Dynasty. He sent an envoy to retrieve them and increase or decrease their value according to their appearance.

古文：其制如瓦，第为七等。
现代文：它的形制像瓦，分为七等。
English: It is shaped like a tile and is divided into seven grades.

古文：公二等：一高尺，广一尺六寸五分；一高九寸五分，广一尺六寸。
现代文：公二等：一等高一尺，宽一尺六寸五分；一等高九寸五分，宽一尺六寸。
English: 2nd class: 1st class is 1 foot high and 1 foot 6 inches wide; 1st class is 9 inches high and 1 foot 6 inches wide.

古文：侯三等：一高九寸，广一尺五寸五分；一高八寸五分，广一尺五寸；一高八寸，广一尺四寸五分。
现代文：侯分三等：一等高九寸，宽一尺五寸五分；一等高八寸五分，宽一尺五寸；一等高八寸，宽一尺四寸互分。
English: 3rd class: 1st class is 9 inches high and 1 foot 5 inches wide; 1st class is 8 inches high and 1 foot 5 inches wide; 1st class is 8 inches high and 1 foot 4 inches wide.

古文：伯二等：一高七寸五分，广一尺三寸五分；一高六寸五分，广一尺二寸五分。
现代文：伯分二等：一等高七寸五分，宽一尺三寸五分；一等高六寸五分，宽一尺二寸五分。
English: 2nd class: 7'5" tall, 1'3" wide; 6'5" tall, 1'2" wide.

古文：外刻履历、恩数之详，以记其功；中镌免罪、减禄之数，以防其过。
现代文：外面详细地刻有履历、赐予的封号等级以记录他的功劳；中间刻有免罪、碱禄的次数，以防止过错。
English: The outside is engraved in detail with the curriculum vitae, the rank of the given seal to record his merit; the middle is engraved with the number of pardons and alms to prevent mistakes.

古文：字嵌以金。
现代文：文字用金镶嵌。
English: The lettering is inlaid with gold.

古文：凡九十七副，各分左右，左颁功臣，右藏内府，有故则合之，以取信焉。
现代文：共九十七副，各分左右，左半颁给功臣，右半藏于内府，如有事就合起来，以资取信。
English: There are a total of ninety-seven pairs, each around a point. The left half is awarded to meritorious vassals, while the right half is kept at Naifu. If something comes up, they are put together and used to obtain letters.

古文：三年，大封功臣，公六人，侯二十八人，并赐铁券。
现代文：三年，大封功臣，公六人，侯二十八人，一并赐予铁券。
English: In the third year, six noblemen and twenty-eight noblewomen were awarded iron certificates.

古文：公：李善长、徐达、李文忠、冯胜、邓愈、常茂。
现代文：公，李善长、徐达、李文忠、冯胜、邓愈、常茂。
English: Gong, Li Shanchang, Xu Da, Li Wenzhong, Feng Sheng, Deng Yu, Chang Mao.

古文：侯：汤和、唐胜宗、陆仲亨、周德兴、华云龙、顾时、耿炳文、陈德、郭子兴、王志、郑遇春、费聚、吴良、吴桢、赵庸、廖永忠、俞通源、华高、杨璟、康铎、朱亮祖、傅友德、胡美、韩政、黄彬、曹良臣、梅思祖、陆聚。
现代文：侯，汤和、唐胜宗、陆仲亨、周德兴、华云龙、颅时、耿炳文、陈德、郭子兴、王志、郑遇春、费聚、昊良、昊桢、赵庸、廖永忠、俞通源、华高、杨璟、康铎、朱亮祖、傅友德、胡美、韩政、黄彬、曹良臣、梅思祖、陆聚。
English: Hou, Tang He, Tang Shengzong, Lu Zhongheng, Zhou Dexing, Hua Yunlong, Chenshi, Geng Yaowen, Chen De, Guo Zixing, Wang Zhi, Zheng Yuechun, Fei Ju, Hao Liang, Hao Wei, Zhao Yong, Liao Yongzhong, Zou Tongyuan, Hua Gao, Yang Wei, Kang Wei, Zhu Liangzu, Fu Youde, Hu Mei, Han Zheng, Huang Bin, Cao Liangchen, Mei Zu, Lu Ju.

古文：二十五年，改制铁券，赐公傅友德，侯王弼、耿炳文、郭英及故公徐达、李文忠，侯吴杰、沐英，凡八家。
现代文：二十五年，改制铁券，赐给公傅友德，侯王弼、耿炳文、郭英以及已死的公徐达、李文忠，侯昊杰、沐英，共八家。
English: In the 25th year, the system of iron certificates was reformed and given to eight families, including Gong Fu Youde, Hou Wangyao, Geng Yuwen, Guo Ying, and the deceased Gong Xuda, Li Wenzhong, Hou Haojie, and Mu Ying.

古文：永乐初，靖难功臣亦有赐者。
现代文：永乐初年，靖难功臣也有被赐予铁券的。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Jingnan meritorious vassals were also given iron coupons.

古文：百官印信：洪武初，铸印局铸中外诸司印信。
现代文：百官印信。洪武初年，铸印局铸造朝廷内外各司印信。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, the Sealing Bureau began to cast the seals of all departments inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：正一品，银印，三台，方三寸四分，厚一寸。
现代文：官正一品，银印，三台，三寸四分见方，厚一寸。
English: One official dish, silver seal, three sets, three and a quarter centimeters square, one inch thick.

古文：六部、都察院并在外各都司，俱正二品，银印二台，方三寸二分，厚八分。
现代文：六部、都察院和在外的各都司，都是正二品，银印，二台，三寸二分见方，厚八分。
English: The Six Departments, the Research Institute of the Capital, and the Departments of the Capital in the outside world, are all two-piece, silver-sealed, two-unit, three-inch-two-centimeter square, eight-centimeter thick.

古文：其馀正二品、从二品官，银印二台，方三寸一分，厚七分。
现代文：其余正二品、从二品官，银印，二台，三寸一分见方，厚七分。
English: The rest are two-grade, two-grade official, silver seal, two sets, three inches one point square, and seven points thick.

古文：惟衍圣公以正二品，三台银印，则景泰三年赐也。
现代文：惟独衍圣公以正二品，有三台，银印，是景泰三年赐予的。
English: However, Yansheng Gong alone has two official products, three sets, and a silver seal, which was given by Jing Tai for three years.

古文：顺天、应天二府俱正三品，银印，方二寸九分，厚六分五厘。
现代文：顺天、应天二府都是正三品，银印，二寸九分见方；厚六分五厘。
English: Shuntian and Yingtian of the two prefectures are all Zheng Sanpin, silver seal, two inches and nine minutes square; thickness six points and five percent.

古文：其馀正三品、从三品官，俱铜印，方二寸七分，厚六分。
现代文：其余的正三品、从三品官，都是钢印，二寸七分见方，厚六分。
English: The rest of the official stamps are steel stamps, two-and-a-half centimeters square and six-tenths thick.

古文：惟太仆、光禄寺并在外盐运司，俱从三品，铜印，方减一分，厚减五厘。
现代文：只有太仆、光禄寺和在外盐运司，都是从三品，钢印，长宽各减少一分，厚度减少五厘。
English: Only Taifu, Koroku-ji Temple and the Salt Transporting Department were upgraded from three products, steel stamp, length and width were reduced by one point each, and thickness was reduced by five percent.

古文：正四品、从四品，俱铜印，方二寸五分，厚五分。
现代文：正四品、从四品，都是钢印，二寸五分见方，厚五分。
English: The regular four-course meal and the reduced four-course meal are both made of steel, two inches and five minutes square, and five minutes thick.

古文：正五品、从五品，俱铜印，方二寸四分，厚四分五厘。
现代文：正五品、从五品，都是铜印，二寸四分见方，厚四分五厘。
English: Genuine five products, from five products, are copper stamped, two inches and four minutes square, thickness four and a half percent.

古文：惟在外各州从五品，铜印，方减一分，厚减五厘。
现代文：只有在外各州从五品，铜印，长宽各减少一分，厚度减少五厘。
English: Only in the outlying prefectures will the five grades, copper seal, length and width be reduced by one point each, and the thickness be reduced by five percent.

古文：正六品、从六品，俱铜印，方二寸二分，厚三分五厘。
现代文：正六品、从六品，都是钢印，二寸二分见方，厚三分五厘。
English: Genuine six products, from six products, are steel stamps, two inches and two minutes square, three points and five percent thick.

古文：正七品、从七品，铜印，方二寸一分，厚三分。正从八品，俱铜印，方二寸，厚二分五厘。正从九品，俱铜印，方一寸九分，厚二分二厘。
现代文：正七品、从七品，铜印，二寸一分见方，厚三分正从八品，都是铜印，二寸见方，厚二分五厘，正、从九品，都是钢印，一寸九分见方，厚二分二厘。
English: Genuine seven-grade, from seven-grade, copper stamp, two-inch one-point square, thick three-point positive from eight-grade, are copper stamp, two-inch square, thickness two-point-five, positive, from nine-grade, are steel stamp, one-inch nine-point square, thickness two-point-two.

古文：未入流者，铜条记，阔一寸三分，长二寸五分，厚二分一厘。
现代文：九品官以外，没有入流内的官员，用铜制绦记，宽一寸三分，长二寸五分，厚二分一厘。
English: Apart from the officials of the ninth grade, the officials who did not enter the stream were inscribed with copper, with a width of one inch and three minutes, a length of two inches and five minutes, and a thickness of two minutes and one minute.

古文：以上俱直纽，九叠篆文。
现代文：以上都是直形印纽，刻九迭篆文。
English: All of the above are straight-shaped seals, engraved with nine lines of Chinese characters.

古文：初，杂职亦方印，至洪武十三年始改条记。
现代文：起初，杂职人员也是方印，到洪武十三年纔改为条记。
English: At first, the clerks were also Fangyin, but in the thirteenth year of Hongwu, they were changed to Zeki.

古文：凡百官之印，惟文渊阁银印，直纽，方一寸七分，厚六分，玉箸篆文，诚重之也。
现代文：所有百官的印信，只有文渊阁为银印，直形印纽，一寸七分见方，厚六分，刻以小篆篆文，确实推重它。
English: Of all the hundred officials' seal letters, only Wen Yuan Ge's silver seal, straight-shaped seal, one-inch-seven-centimeter-square, six-centimeter-thick, engraved with a small seal, really pushes it.

古文：武臣受重寄者，征西、镇朔、平蛮诸将军，银印，虎纽，方三寸三分，厚九分，柳叶篆文。
现代文：武将中被委以重任的，征西、镇朔、平蛮等将军，用银印，虎形印纽，三寸三分见方，厚九分，刻以柳叶形篆文。
English: The generals who were entrusted with heavy responsibilities, such as Qixi, Zhenshuo, and Pingman, were engraved with silver seals, tiger-shaped seals, three-centimeter-square, nine-centimeter-thick, and willow-leaf-shaped seals.

古文：洪武中，尝用上公佩将军印，后以公、侯、伯及都督充总兵官，名曰 挂印将军 。
现代文：洪武年间，曾经用上公佩带将军印，后来以公、侯、伯以及都督充任总兵官，称马 挂印将军 。
English: During the Hongwu era, he used to wear the general's seal in public, and later served as the commander-in-chief with the title of prince, lord, count, and governor. He was called the horse-mounted general.

古文：有事征伐，则命总兵佩印以往，旋师则上所佩印于朝。
现代文：有战争征伐，就命令总兵佩印前往，凯旋回师就把所佩的大印上交给朝廷。
English: If there is a war expedition, he will order the general soldiers to go there with the seal, and the triumphal return division will hand over the seal to the imperial court.

古文：此外，惟漕运总兵印同将军。
现代文：此外，只有漕运总兵，印信和将军印相同。
English: In addition, only the rowing transport soldiers have the same seal as the generals.

古文：其在外镇守总兵、参将挂印，则洪熙元年始也。
现代文：那些在外地镇守的总兵，参将挂印，是洪熙元年开始的。
English: Those soldiers who are guarding towns in other places will wear the seal, which was started in the first year of Hongxi.

古文：有文臣挂将军印者，王骥以兵部尚书征湖、贵苗，挂平蛮将军印；王越以左都御史守大同，挂征西将军印。
现代文：有挂将军印的文臣，王骥以兵部尚书征讨湖、贵苗人，挂平蛮将军印；王越以左都御史镇守大同，挂征西将军印。
English: There are scholars with the seal of generals, Wang Qian with the seal of the military department, Shang Shu with the seal of the lake, Guiaowen with the seal of the general; Wang Yue with the seal of the left capital, Zhengu, Datong with the seal of the west general.

古文：其他文武大臣，有领敕而权重者，或给以铜关防，直纽，广一寸九分五厘，长二寸九分，厚三分，九叠篆文，虽宰相行边，与部曹无异。
现代文：其它文武大臣，有接受皇上敕令而权力大的，有的人赐予铜制关防，直形纽，宽一寸九分五厘，长二寸九分，厚三分，用九叠篆文镑刻，即使宰相巡行边疆，与部曹官没有差异。
English: Other ministers of culture and armed forces, some of whom received imperial edicts and wielded great power, and some of whom were given copper-made keffiyehs, straight-shaped neckties, one-inch-nine-and-a-half wide, two-inch-nine-and-a-half long, and three-and-a-half thick, engraved with a nine-layered shengwen pound, even though the prime minister patrolled the frontier, there was no difference between them and the officials.

古文：惟正德时，张永征安化王，用金铸，嘉靖中，顾鼎臣居守，用牙镂关防，皆特赐也。
现代文：只有正德时期，张永征伐安化王，用金铸印，嘉靖年间，顾鼎臣留守京城，用象牙雕刻关防，都是特赐。
English: Only during the Zhengde period, Zhang Yongzheng conquered Anhua Wang and used gold to cast seals, and during the Jiajing period, Gu Dingchen stayed in Beijing and carved Guanbo with ivory, all of which were special gifts.

古文：初，太祖重御史之职，分河南等十三道，每道铸二印，文曰 绳愆纠缪 ，守院御史掌其一，其一藏内府，有事则受以出，复命则纳之。
现代文：当初，太祖重视御史一职，分河南等为十三道，每道铸造二颗印，印上文字为 绳愆纠缪 ，守院御史掌管其中一颗，另一颗藏在内府，有事就受印而出京，复命时就交回它。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu attached importance to the post of Imperial Historian. He divided Henan and other provinces into thirteen provinces, casting two seals for each province and printing the characters "绳 entwined," with the Imperial Historian in charge of one of the provinces and the other one hidden in Neifu. If something happened, he would receive the seal and leave for Beijing. When he was ordered to return, he would return it.

古文：洪武二十三年，都御史袁泰言各道印篆相类。
现代文：洪武二十三年，都御史袁泰说各道的印信篆文相同。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu, Yuan Tai, the governor of the capital, said that the seal script of each province was the same.

古文：乃命改制某道监察御史，其奉差者，则曰 巡按某处监察御史 ，铜印直纽，有眼，方一寸五分，厚三分，八叠篆文。
现代文：于是皇上下令改制成某道监察御史，那些接受差遣的，就为 巡按某处监察御史 ，铜印直形印纽，有孔，一寸五分见方，厚三分，刻以八叠篆文。
English: As a result, the emperor's orders were changed into a certain supervisory history, and those who accepted the assignment were sent to inspect a certain supervisory history, copper direct printing, with holes, one inch and five minutes square, three minutes thick, engraved with eight stacked inscriptions.

古文：成祖初幸北京，有一官署二三印者，夏原吉至兼掌九卿印，诸曹并于朝房取裁，其任重矣。
现代文：成祖初次临幸北京时，有一个官署拥有二三颗印的，夏原吉更是兼掌九卿印信，众分曹官都在朝房裁定，他的责任很重。
English: When Cheng Zu visited Beijing for the first time, there was a government office that had two or three seals, and Xia Yuanji was also in charge of nine royal seals. All the sub-officers ruled in the imperial court that his responsibility was very heavy.

古文：明初，赐高丽金印，龟纽，方三寸，文曰 高丽国王之印 ，赐安南镀金银印，驼纽，方三寸，文曰 安南国王之印 。
现代文：明朝初年，赐给高丽金印，龟形印纽，三寸见方，刻文为 高丽国王之印 。赐给安南镀金银印，驼形印纽，三寸见方，刻文为 安南国王之印 。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, a gold seal, a tortoise-shaped seal, three centimeters square, engraved with the seal of King Goryeo, was given to Goryeo, and a gold-plated silver seal, a camel-shaped seal, three centimeters square, engraved with the seal of King Annan, was given to Annan.

古文：赐占城镀金银印，驼纽，方三寸，文曰 占城国王之印 。
现代文：赐给占城镀金银印，驼形印纽，三寸见方，刻文为 占城国王之印 。
English: A gold-plated silver seal, a camel-shaped seal, three inches square, engraved with the words "Seal of the King of Zhancheng," was given to Zhancheng.

古文：赐吐蕃金印，驼纽，方五寸，文曰 白兰王印 。
现代文：赐给吐蕃金印，驼形印纽，五寸见方，刻文为 白兰王印 。
English: He gave a gold seal to Tubo, a camel-shaped seal, five centimeters square, engraved with the seal of King Bran.

古文：符牌：凡宣召亲王，必遣官赍金符以往。
现代文：符牌。凡是宣召亲王时，必定派遣官员拿着金符前往。
English: Whenever a prince is proclaimed, officials are always sent with golden amulets.

古文：亲王之藩及镇守、巡抚诸官奏请符验，俱从兵部奏，行尚宝司领之。
现代文：亲王到藩王府以及出京镇守、巡抚诸官奏请验核符牌，都听从兵部所奏，行文尚宝司领取符牌。
English: When the prince went to the palace of the lord of the domain, as well as when he went to the town guard and the governor of the capital, he asked the officials to play the verification tokens. They all listened to the performance of the military department, and the treasurer received the tokens.

古文：洪武二十六年定制：凡公差，以军情重务及奉旨差遣给驿者，兵部既给勘合，即赴内府，关领符验，给驿而去，事竣则缴。
现代文：洪武二十六年定下制度：凡有公务差遣，把军情重要事务以及奉旨差遣供给驿者，兵部已经给予验对的符契，就到内府，领取符牌，供给驿马前去，事完上缴。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, a system was established: all those who had been sent on official business, and who had provided horses for important military affairs, as well as those who had been sent by order, and the Ministry of Military Affairs had given them a match certificate, should go to Neifu, receive the badge, provide the horse, and then hand it over.

古文：嘉靖三十七年定制：南京、凤阳守备内外官，并各处镇守总兵、巡抚，及各守一方不受镇守节制内外守备，并领符验奏事。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年制定制度：南京、凤阳守备的内外官员，和各处镇守总兵、巡抚，以及各守一方不受镇守统辖指挥的内外守备，一并领取符牌上奏政事。
English: The system was established in the 37th year of Jiajing: the officials at home and abroad from the garrisons of Nanjing and Fengyang, and the garrison commanders and governors of the garrisons everywhere, as well as the garrisons at home and abroad that are not under the command of the garrisons, together receive the badges for reporting political affairs.

古文：凡监枪、整饬兵备，并一城一堡守备官，不许关领符验。
现代文：凡是监枪、整饬兵备，和一城一堡的守备官，不准领取符牌。
English: Anyone who is in charge of guarding the guns, preparing the troops, and the garrison of a city or a castle is not allowed to receive a badge.

古文：其制，上织船马之状，起马者用马字号，起船者水字号，起双马者达字号，起单马者通字号，起站船者信字号。
现代文：它的形制是，上面织有船马的形状，骑马出行用马字号，坐船出行用水字号，骑两匹马出行用达字号，骑一匹马出行用通字号，用航程有驿站依次接待的官船出行的用信字号。
English: Its form is that it has the shape of a ship's horse woven on it, riding a horse to travel with a horse sign, traveling by boat with a water sign, riding two horses to travel with a sign, riding a horse to travel with a pass sign, and traveling by official ship with a station reception.

古文：洪武四年，始制用宝金牌。
现代文：洪武四年开始制作宝金牌。
English: Hongwu started making Bao gold medals four years ago.

古文：凡军机文书，自都督府、中书省长官而外，不许擅奏。
现代文：凡是军事机要文书，从都督府、中书省长官以外，不准擅自上奏。
English: All important military documents, except those from the governor's office and the provincial governor, are not allowed to be played without authorization.

古文：有诏调军，中书省同都督府覆奏，乃各出所藏金牌，入请用宝。
现代文：有诏令调动军队，中书省同都督府同时审察上奏，然后各自拿出所藏的金牌，入朝请求用宝玺。
English: There was a decree to mobilize the army, and the People's Commissariat of Literature and Calligraphy and the Governor-General's Office simultaneously reviewed the report, and then each of them took out the gold medals they had hidden and went to the court to request the use of the treasure.

古文：又造军中调发符牌，用铁，长五寸，阔半之，上鈒二飞龙，下鈒二麒麟，首为圜窍，贯以红丝绦。尝遣官赍金牌、信符诣西番，以茶易马。
现代文：又制造军中调动征发军队的符牌，用铁制成，长五寸，宽是长的一半，上面嵌两条飞龙图案，下面嵌两头麒麟图案，头部为圆孔，用红丝带贯穿曾经派遣官员拿着金牌、信符到西番，用茶换马。
English: They also made signs for mobilizing and conscripting troops in the middle of the army, made of iron, five inches long and half as wide as long, with two flying dragons on the top and two unicorns on the bottom, with a round hole for the head, and a red ribbon running through it. They used to send officials to Xiban with gold medals and letters to exchange tea for horses.

古文：其牌四十一，上号藏内府，下号降各番，篆文曰 皇帝圣旨 ，左曰 合当差发 ，右曰 不信者斩 。二十二年又颁西番金牌、信符。
现代文：这种牌有四十一块，上号藏于内府，下号交给各番，用篆文铸刻 皇帝圣旨 ，左面是 合当差发 ，右面是 不信者斩 二十二年，又颁发给西番金牌、信符。
English: There are forty-one pieces of this kind of card. The upper number is kept in Neifu, and the lower number is given to each Ban. The Emperor's Will is engraved with a seal. On the left is the date of issue, and on the right is the year of the non-believer's death. It is also awarded to the West Ban gold medal and letter.

古文：其后番官款塞，皆赍原降牌符而至。
现代文：这之后番官前来通好，都拿着原来颁发给的符牌而来。
English: After that, the guards came to visit, and they all came with the badges they were originally given.

古文：永乐二年制信符、金字红牌给云南诸蛮。
现代文：永乐二年，制造信符、金字红牌赐给云南众蛮族。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the barbarians of Yunnan were given gold and red cards.

古文：凡历代改元，则所颁外国信符、金牌，必更铸新年号给之。
现代文：凡是历代国君改用新的年号，颁发给外国的信符、金牌，必定重新铸造新的年号给予他们。
English: All the emperors throughout the ages who changed to a new era and issued letters and gold medals to foreign countries had to recast the new era and give it to them.

古文：此符信之达于四裔者也。
现代文：这是符信得以通达于四方的原因。
English: This is the reason why the letter was able to reach the four directions.

古文：其武臣悬带金牌，则洪武四年所造。
现代文：武将的悬带金牌，是洪武四年所造。
English: The military commander's hanging gold medal was made by Hong Wu in four years.

古文：阔二寸，长一尺，上鈒双龙，下鈒二伏虎，牌首尾为圆窍，贯以红丝绦。
现代文：宽二寸，长一尺，上面嵌有双龙，下面嵌两只伏虎，金牌的首尾为圆孔，用红丝带相贯通。
English: It is two inches wide and one foot long, with two dragons on the top and two tigers on the bottom. The gold medal has a round hole at the beginning and end, and is connected with a red ribbon.

古文：指挥佩金牌，双云龙，双虎符。
现代文：指挥佩金牌，双云龙，双虎符。
English: Conductor Pei gold medal, double cloud dragon, double tiger symbol.

古文：千户佩镀金银牌，独云龙，独虎符。
现代文：千户佩镀金银牌，一只云龙，一只虎符。
English: Thousands of households wear gold-plated silver medals, a cloud dragon, and a tiger emblem.

古文：百户素云银牌符。
现代文：百户佩只有云的银牌符。
English: There are only a few silver medals in a hundred households.

古文：太祖亲为文鈒之曰： 上天祐民，朕乃率抚。
现代文：太祖亲自拟文，然后嵌在上面，是： 上天保佑人民，朕纔能够统率安抚。
English: The great-grandfather personally drafted the text, and then embedded it above, is: Heaven bless the people, I can lead and pacify.

古文：威加华夏，实凭虎臣。
现代文：威武加于华夏，实在是凭借你们这些勇猛的大臣。
English: It is really thanks to you, these brave ministers, that China has become so powerful.

古文：赐尔金符，永传后嗣。 
现代文：赐给你们金符，永世传给后代。 
English: I will give you a golden sword to pass down to your descendants forever.

古文：天子祀郊庙，若视学、耤田，勋卫扈从及公侯、驸马、五府都督日直、锦衣卫当直，及都督率诸卫千百户夜巡内皇城，金吾诸卫各轮官随朝巡绰，俱给金牌，有龙者、虎者、麒麟者、狮者、云者，以官为差。
现代文：天子在郊庙祭祀，以及巡视学校、举行藉田礼，勋臣侍卫跟从之人以及公侯、驸马、五府都督值日官、锦衣卫值日官，以及都督率领众卫千户百户晚上巡视内皇城，金吾等卫各轮流值日官随朝巡枧，都给予金牌，有龙牌、虎牌、麒麟牌、狮牌、云牌，以官职的高低为不同的标准。
English: The heavenly son performs religious rites in the suburban temples, as well as inspecting schools and holding the rent rice field ceremony, the honorable retainers and attendants who follow him, as well as the princes, the horses, the five prefectural governors on duty, the brocade guards on duty, and the governor leading the guards of thousands and hundreds of households to inspect the inner imperial city in the evening, and the kings and other guards on duty in rotation with the morning patrol, are all given gold medals, including dragon, tiger, unicorn, lion and cloud, with different standards according to the level of official position.

古文：其扈驾金字银牌，则洪武六年所造。
现代文：跟随皇帝车驾的人佩的金字银牌，是洪武六年制造。
English: The gold and silver medals worn by those who followed the emperor's chauffeur were made by Hongwu for six years.

古文：寻改为守卫金牌，以铜为之，涂以金，高一尺，阔三寸，分字号凡五。
现代文：不久改焉守卫金牌，用铜制成，涂上金粉，高一尺，宽三寸，按字号共分焉五种。
English: The guarding gold medal, made of copper and coated with gold powder, is one foot high and three inches wide, and is divided into five types according to the font size.

古文：仁字号，上鈒独龙蟠云花，公、侯、伯、都督佩之。
现代文：仁字号，上面嵌有独龙蟠云花图案，公、侯、伯、都督佩带。
English: Inscribed with the Chinese character "仁" and a dragon and cloud pattern, it was worn by dukes, princes, magnates, and governors-general.

古文：义字号，鈒伏虎盘云花，指挥佩之。
现代文：义字号，嵌有伏虎盘云花图案，指挥佩带。
English: The word "Yi" is inscribed with a pattern of clouds and flowers in the shape of a sleeping tiger, and is worn by the conductor.

古文：礼字号，獬貂豸蟠云花，千户、卫镇抚佩之。
现代文：礼字号，嵌獬豸蟠云花图案，干户、卫镇抚佩带。
English: A ceremonial name, inlaid with a pattern of clouds and flowers, worn by the head of the family and the guardian of the town.

古文：智字号，鈒狮子蟠云花，百户、所镇抚佩之。
现代文：智字号，嵌狮子蟠云花图案，百户、所镇抚佩带。
English: Chi sign, embedded lion and cloud flower pattern, worn by hundreds of households and towns.

古文：信字号，鈒蟠云花，将军佩之。
现代文：信字号，嵌蟠云花图案，将军佩带。
English: Signet, inlaid with a cloud pattern, worn by a general.

古文：牌下铸 守卫 二篆字，背铸 凡守卫官军悬带此牌 等二十四字，牌首窍贯青丝。
现代文：牌的下面铸 守卫 两个篆字，背面铸 凡守卫官军悬带此牌 等二十四字，牌首端的孔贯以青丝。
English: At the bottom of the card, the word "guard" is cast with two swastikas; on the back, the word "all guards of the official army should carry this card" is cast with 24 swastikas; and the hole at the first end of the card is pierced with a blue thread.

古文：镇抚及将军随驾直宿卫者佩之，下直则纳之。
现代文：镇抚以及将军跟随皇帝当值保护的人佩带，不当值就归还。
English: Those who are on duty to protect the emperor wear the placemats and generals, and the improper value will be returned.

古文：凡夜巡官，于尚宝司领令牌，禁城各门、金吾等卫指挥、千户，分领申字号牌，午门自一至四，长安左右门、东华门自五至八，西华门自九至十二，玄武门自十三至十六。
现代文：凡是夜巡官，在尚宝司领取令牌，紫禁城各门、金吾等卫指挥、千户，分别领取申字号牌，午门从一到四，长安左右门、束华门从五到八，西华门从九到十二，玄武门徒十三到十六。
English: All night inspectors will receive tokens at the Shangbao Division, and each gate of the Forbidden City, King Wu and other guards, and thousands of households will separately receive the Shen number plates, from one to four at the noon gate, from five to eight at the Chang'an left and right gates, from nine to twelve at the West China Gate, and from thirteen to sixteen at the Xuanwu disciples.

古文：五城兵马指挥亦日领令牌，东西南北中城，分领木、金、火、水、土五字号。
现代文：五城兵马指挥也每天领取令牌，东西南北中五城，分别领取木、金、火、水、土五字号。
English: The commanders of troops and horses in the five cities also receive tokens every day, and the commanders of the middle five cities in the east, west, south, and north respectively receive wood, gold, fire, water, and earth five-character numbers.

古文：留守五卫、巡城官并金吾等卫守卫官，俱领铜符。
现代文：留守五卫、巡城官和金吾等卫守卫官，都领取铜符。
English: The remaining five guards, the patrol officers and Kingo and other guards and guardsmen all received bronze certificates.

古文：留守卫指挥所领承字及东西北字号牌，俱左半字阳文，左比。
现代文：留守卫指挥所领取承字以及东西北字号牌，都是左半字焉阳文，向左边。
English: The left-behind guard command post receives the letter "承" as well as the east-west and north-west name plates, both of which are written in the left half of the Chinese character "焉yang" and face to the left.

古文：金吾等卫，端门、承天门、东西北安门指挥千户所领承字及东西北字号，俱右半字阴文，右比。
现代文：金吾等卫，端门、承天门、东西北安门指挥千户所领取承字以及东西北字号，都是右半字阴文，向右边。
English: King Wu and other guards, Tuanmen, Chengtianmen, East and West Beianmen, commanding thousands of households to receive the Cheng characters, as well as the East and West Beian characters, are the right half of the characters in Yin, to the right.

古文：铜符字号比对相同，方许巡行。
现代文：铜符字号比并核对相同，纔准许巡行。
English: The ratio of the bronze characters is the same as that of the checks, and the parade is permitted.

古文：内官、内使之出，亦须守门官比对铜符而后行。
现代文：内官、内使出行，也必须守门官比并核对铜符然后放行。
English: When an inner official or an inner envoy travels, the gatekeeper must also compare and check the bronze certificates and then release them.

古文：皇城九门守卫军与围子手，各领勇字号铜牌。
现代文：皇城九门的守卫军与围子手，各领取勇字号铜牌。
English: The guards of the nine gates of the imperial city and the wardsmen each received a bronze medal with the number of courage.

古文：锦衣校尉上直及光禄寺吏典厨役，遇大祀，俱佩双鱼铜牌。
现代文：锦衣校尉值班以及光禄寺吏掌管厨役，遇到大型祭祀，都佩双鱼铜牌。
English: Lieutenant Kaneko, who was on duty, and officials from Koroku-ji Temple, who were in charge of the kitchen, both received bronze fish medals when they encountered a large-scale religious service.

古文：永乐六年驾幸北京，扈从官俱带牙牌；五府、六部、都察院、大理寺、锦衣卫各铸印信，通政司、鸿胪寺各铸关防，谓之行在卫门印信关防。
现代文：永乐六年，皇上到北京，跟从侍卫的官员都佩带牙牌；五府、六部、都察院、大理寺、锦衣卫各自铸造印信，通政司、鸿胪寺各自铸造关防，称为行在衙门印信关防。
English: In the sixth year of Yongle, the emperor went to Beijing, and the officials who followed the guards all wore dental plates; the five prefectures, the six departments, the Duka Academy, the Dali Temple, and the Jinwei each cast a seal, and the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and the Hongyu Temple each cast a seal, known as the line at the gate seal seal.

古文：其后命内府印绶监收贮。
现代文：此后，皇上命令内府印绶监收藏。
English: After that, the emperor ordered the Naifu seal inspector to collect them.

古文：嘉靖十八年南巡，礼部领出，以给扈从者焉。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，皇帝到南方巡行，礼部从内府取出来，把牌发给跟从的官员。
English: In the 18th year of Jiajing, the emperor went on a tour to the south. The ceremonial department was taken out of the inner palace and the plaques were given to the officials who followed him.

古文：凡郊庙诸祭陪祀供事官及执事者，入坛俱领牙牌，洪武八年始也。
现代文：凡是郊庙各种祭祀陪祀供事官以及主持事务的人，进入祭坛都要领取牙牌，这是洪武八年开始的。
English: Anyone who accompanies the sacrificial offering officials and those who preside over the affairs of the various rituals of the suburban temples must receive a dental license to enter the altar, which was started by Hongwu eight years ago.

古文：圆花牌，陪祀官领之。
现代文：圆花牌，陪祀官领用。
English: A round flower plate, used for accompanying the officiant.

古文：长花牌，供事官领之。
现代文：长花牌，供事官领用。
English: A long flower card, for officials to use.

古文：长素牌，执事人领之。
现代文：长素牌，主持事务的人领用。
English: Chang Su card, the person in charge of the affairs can use it.

古文：又谓之祀牌。
现代文：又称为祀牌。
English: It is also known as a worship plate.

古文：凡驾诣陵寝，扈从官俱于尚宝司领小牙牌。
现代文：凡是皇上祭扫先王陵墓，侍从官都在尚宝司那裹领取小牙牌。
English: Whenever the emperor sweeps the tomb of the previous king, the attendants receive the small dental plaque at the Imperial Treasures Division.

古文：嘉靖九年，皇后行亲蚕礼，文官四品以上、武官三品以上命妇及使人，俱于尚宝司领牙牌，有云花圜牌、鸟形长牌之异。
现代文：嘉靖九年，皇后举行亲蚕礼，文官四品以上、武官三品以上命妇以及使人，都在尚宝司领取牙牌，有云花圆牌、鸟形长牌的不同。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the empress held a sibling ceremony. Civil servants with four or more titles and military officers with three or more titles, as well as their wives and concubines, received their dental plates at the Shangbao Division. There are differences between the cloud-shaped round plate and the bird-shaped long plate.

古文：凡文武朝参官、锦衣卫当驾官，亦领牙牌，以防奸伪，洪武十一年始也。
现代文：凡是文武朝参官、锦衣卫当驾官，也领取牙牌，以防止奸恶伪诈之人，这是洪武十一年开始的。
English: In the 11th year of Hongwu, all officials of the Wenwu Dynasty and Jin Rongwei, who was a driver, also received a dental license to prevent those who were treacherous and deceitful.

古文：其制，以象牙为之，刻官职于上。
现代文：它的形制是：用象牙制成，上面刻有官职。
English: It takes the following form: it is made of ivory and has an official title engraved on it.

古文：不佩则门者却之，私相借者论如律。
现代文：如果不佩带，守门官便拒绝他进入，私自借给别人按法律论处。
English: If he does not wear it, the gatekeeper will refuse him entry, and he will be punished according to the law for lending it to others.

古文：牙牌字号，公、侯、伯以勋字，驸马都尉以亲字，文官以文字，武官以武字，教坊官以乐字，入内官以官字。
现代文：牙牌的字号，公、侯、伯用勋字，驸马都尉用亲字，文官用文字，武官用武字，教坊官用乐字，入内官用官字。
English: The name of the tooth plate, the title of honor, the title of lord, and the title of honor are used, the title of lieutenant of the horse is used, the title of civil servant is used, the title of military attaché is used, the title of music is used by the teacher, and the title of civil servant is used.

古文：正德十六年，礼科邢寰言： 牙牌惟常朝职官得悬。
现代文：正德十六年，礼科邢寰说： 牙牌只有常入朝任职官可以佩带。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, Li Keqiang said: Only officials who frequently enter the country can wear dental plates.

古文：比来权奸侵柄，传旨升官者辄佩牙牌，宜清核以重名器。 
现代文：近来有权势的奸诈之徒侵权由内宫传旨升官的人便佩带牙牌，应该清理查核以严明等级名分。 
English: Recently, those who have been promoted by order of the Inner Court have been wearing badges, which should be checked and graded with strictness.

古文：乃命文职不朝参者，毋得滥给牙牌；武官进御侍班、佩刀、执金炉者给与。
现代文：于是命令不入朝参拜的文职官员，不得滥给牙牌；进御侍班、佩、执金炉的武官，给予牙牌。
English: As a result, it was ordered that civil officials who did not enter the court to pay homage to the emperor should not be given a dental license; military attachés who entered the palace to serve, serve, and handle the gold furnace should be given a dental license.

古文：嘉靖二十八年，内府供事匠作、武职官皆带朝参牙牌，尝奉旨革夺，旋复给之。
现代文：嘉靖二十八年，内府供事匠作、武职官，都带入朝参拜牙牌，曾奉旨革除，不久又给予。
English: In the 28th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, officials from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Works and Crafts, and the Ministry of Military Affairs all brought the tooth plaque to the Imperial Court. They were ordered to remove it, but it was soon restored.

古文：给事中陈邦修以为言，礼部覆奏： 《会典》所载，文武官出入禁门带牙牌，有执事、供事、朝参之别。
现代文：给事中陈邦修以此进言，礼部核查上奏： 《会典》所记，文武官员出入禁门佩带牙牌，有执事、供事、朝参的区别。
English: During the presentation, Chen Bangxiu used this as input, and the verification by the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was played up: According to the "Canon," civil and military officials wear a dental badge to enter and exit the forbidden door, and there is a difference between deacons, attendants, and attendants.

古文：执事、供事者，皆届期而领，如期而缴。
现代文：执事、供事官，都到期领取，到期交还。
English: Both the deacon and the steward are due to be received and returned by the due date.

古文：惟朝参牙牌，得朝夕悬之，非徒为关防之具，亦以示等威之辨也。
现代文：只有朝参牙牌，应该早晚佩带，不只是作为关防的器具，也以此来分辨等级尊卑。
English: Only the morning ginseng tooth plate should be worn sooner or later, not only as a guarding device, but also to distinguish the level of superiority and inferiority.

古文：虚衔带俸、供事、执事者，不宜概领。
现代文：虚职带俸禄者，供事、执事者，不应一概领取。
English: Those who have fake jobs with salaries, such as servants and clerks, should not receive them all.

古文：第出入禁闼，若一切革夺，何由讥察？
现代文：只是出入官禁，如一切革除，凭什么来稽察奸邪之人呢？
English: Only the ban on entering and leaving the office, such as all expulsions, on what basis to inspect the evil-doers?

古文：尚宝司所贮旧牌数百，上有 入内府 字号，请以给之。
现代文：尚宝司贮藏的旧牌有几百个，上面刻有 入内府，字号的，请发给他们。
English: Shang Baoji has hundreds of old cards in storage. Please give them the ones with "Renai-fu" engraved on them.

古文：至于卫所武官，掌印、佥书侍卫之外，非属朝参供役者，尽革夺之。
现代文：至于卫所的武官，掌印、愈书侍卫之外，不属于朝参供役之人，全部革除夺去牙牌。
English: As for the military attachés of the Guard, in addition to the palm seal, healing book attendants, those who do not belong to the participants of the imperial court, are all dismissed and deprived of the dental plaque.

古文：其纳粟、填注冒赐牙牌及罢退闲住官旧所关领不缴者，俱逮问。 
现代文：那些纳粟为官、填注假冒赐予牙牌及被罢职闲住的官员中以前关领不上缴的，一并逮捕查办。 
English: Those officials who took the poppy, filled in false dental cards, and those who were dismissed from their posts and lived idly, who were previously unable to pay the fine, were also arrested and investigated.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇上回复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：洪武十五年，制使节，黄色三檐宝盖，长二尺，黄纱袋笼之。
现代文：洪武十五年，制作出使符节，黄色的三檐宝盖，长二尺，用黄纱袋笼罩。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, an envoy knot was made, a yellow three-hoop treasure lid, two feet long, covered with a yellow gauze bag.

古文：又制丹漆架一，以节置其上。
现代文：又制丹漆架一个，把使节放在它上面。
English: And he made a frame of acacia wood, and set the ark of the testimony thereon.

古文：使者受命，则载以行；使归，则持之以复命。
现代文：使者接受使命，就把它载着出行；使者回来时，就拿着它来复命。
English: When a messenger receives a mission, he carries it with him on his journey; when the messenger returns, he takes it with him to answer for his mission.

古文：二十三年，诏考定使节之制，礼部奏： 汉光武时，以竹为节，柄长八尺，其毛三重。
现代文：二十三年，皇上下诏考查确定使节的制度，礼部奏称： 汉光武时期，用竹作成符节，柄长八尺，它的毛三重。
English: In 233, the Emperor's imperial edict examination determined the envoy system, and the Ministry of Ceremonies reported: During the Han and Guangwu Dynasties, the bamboo was used to make the symbols, the handle was eight feet long, and it had three layers of hair.

古文：而黄公绍《韵会》注：汉节柄长三尺，毛三重，以旄牛为之。 
现代文：然而黄公绍《韵会》注：汉代符节柄长三尺，毛三重，用耗牛尾制成。 
English: However, Huang Gongshao's "Rhyme Meeting" Note: The Han Dynasty Fu Jie's handle is three feet long, three layers of hair, and made from the tail of a cow.

古文：诏从三尺之制。
现代文：皇上下诏依从三尺的制度。
English: Imperial edicts followed the system of three shaku.

古文：宫室之制：吴元年作新内。
现代文：宫室的规格制度。昊元年建造新的内官。
English: The specification system of the imperial chamber. The new inner chamber was built in the first year of Hao.

古文：正殿曰奉天殿，后曰华盖殿，又后曰谨身殿，皆翼以廊庑。
现代文：正殿叫奉天殿，后面叫华盖殿，再后面叫谨身殿，都用廊庶作为侧室。
English: The main hall is called the Bongten hall, the back hall is called the Huagai hall, and the back hall is called the Genshin hall, all of which use the corridor as a side room.

古文：奉天殿之前曰奉天门，殿左曰文楼，右曰武楼。
现代文：奉天殿前面叫奉天门，殿左叫文楼，殿右是武楼。
English: The front of the Bongten Hall is called the Bongten Gate, the left side of the hall is called the Literature Hall, and the right side of the hall is the Martial Arts Hall.

古文：谨身殿之后为宫，前曰乾清，后曰坤宁，六宫以次列。
现代文：谨身殿后面是官，前面是干清官，后面是坤宁宫，六宫依次排列。
English: Behind the hall of honor is the official, in front is the dry-cleaning official, behind is the Kunning Palace, and the six palaces are arranged in order.

古文：宫殿之外，周以皇城，城之门，南曰午门，东曰东华，西曰西华，北曰玄武。
现代文：宫殿的外面，以皇城围绕，城门，南面的叫午门，柬面的叫柬华门，西面的叫西华门，北面的叫玄武门。
English: Outside the palace, surrounded by the imperial city, are the city gates. The southern gate is called the Midday Gate, the Cambodian gate is called the Cambodian Gate, the western gate is called the West China Gate, and the northern gate is called the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：时有言瑞州文石可甃地者。
现代文：当时有人说瑞州文石可以砌地。
English: At that time, some people said that Ruizhou Wenshi could build land.

古文：太祖曰： 敦崇俭朴，犹恐习于奢华，尔乃导予奢丽乎？ 
现代文：太祖说： 敦促崇尚俭朴，还担心流于奢侈豪华，你却耍引导我奢侈华丽吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "You urge me to be frugal, but you are worried about indulging in luxury. Are you trying to lead me to be extravagant?

古文：言者惭而退。
现代文：进言的人惭愧而告退。
English: Those who had advised him to leave were ashamed.

古文：洪武八年，改建大内宫殿，十年告成。
现代文：洪武八年，改建内官的官殿，洪武十年告成。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, the official palace of the Inner Palace was rebuilt, and it was completed in the tenth year of Hongwu.

古文：阙门曰午门，翼以两观。
现代文：阙门叫午门，用两观作为侧翼。
English: The main gate is called the noon gate, with the two views as the flanks.

古文：中三门，东西为左、右掖门。
现代文：中间三座门，东西为左右掖门。
English: There are three doors in the middle, with the left and right gates on the east and west sides.

古文：午门内曰奉天门，门内奉天殿，尝御以受朝贺者也。
现代文：午门内是奉天门，门内是奉天殿，曾经是皇帝到那里接受大臣朝贺的地方。
English: Inside the gate is the Gate of Heaven, and inside the gate is the Hall of Heaven, which was once the place where the emperor received greetings from his ministers.

古文：门左右为东、西角门，奉天殿左、右门，左曰中左，右曰中右，两庑之间，左曰文楼，右曰武楼。
现代文：门的左右为东西角门，奉天殿左、右雨门，左边叫中左门，右边叫中右门，两廊庶之间，左边是文楼，右边是武楼。
English: The left and right sides of the door are the east and west corner doors, the left and right rain doors of the Bonten hall, the left side is called the middle left door, the right side is called the middle right door, between the two corridors, the left side is the literary building, and the right side is the military building.

古文：奉天殿之后曰华盖殿，华盖殿之后曰谨身殿，殿后则乾清宫之正门也。
现代文：奉天殿后面是华盖殿，华盖殿的后面是谨身殿，殿后就是干清官的正门。
English: Behind the Fengtian Hall is the Huagai Hall, behind the Huagai Hall is the Zhi Mian Hall, and behind the hall is the main gate of the dry cleaners.

古文：奉天门外两庑间有门，左曰左顺，右曰右顺。
现代文：奉天门外两庶之间有门，左面是左顺门，右面是右顺门。
English: There is a door between the two houses outside the Bokcheon Gate. The left side is the left-hand door, and the right side is the right-hand door.

古文：左顺门外有殿曰文华，为东宫视事之所。
现代文：左顺门外有殿叫文华殿，是束官处理政事的地方。
English: Outside Zuoshun Gate, there is a hall called Wenhua Hall. It is the place where magistrates deal with political affairs.

古文：右顺门外有殿曰武英，为皇帝斋戒时所居。
现代文：右顺门外有殿叫武英殿，是皇帝斋戒时居住的地方。
English: Right outside the main gate, there is a hall called the Wuying Hall, where the emperor lived when he was fasting.

古文：制度如旧，规模益宏。
现代文：制度和以前一样，规模更加宏大。
English: The system is the same as before, just on a grander scale.

古文：二十五年改建大内金水桥，又建端门、承天门楼各五间，及长安东、西二门。
现代文：洪武二十五年，改建内宫金水桥，又建造端门、承天门楼各五间，以及长安东西二门。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, the Inner Palace Jinshui Bridge was rebuilt, and five each of the Gate and the Gate of Heaven were built, as well as two east-west gates of Chang'an.

古文：永乐十五年，作西宫于北京。
现代文：永乐十五年，在北京建造西宫。
English: Yongle spent 15 years building the West Palace in Beijing.

古文：中为奉天殿，侧为左右二殿，南为奉天门，左右为东、西角门。
现代文：中间为奉天殿，两边为左右二殿，南面是奉天门，左右为东西角门。
English: The middle is the Bokuten-den, the two sides are the left and right two halls, the south is the Bokuten-mon, and the left and right are the east and west corner doors.

古文：其南为午门，又南为承天门。
现代文：它的南面是午门，又往南为承天门。
English: To the south is the Meridian Gate, and to the south is the Gate of Heaven.

古文：殿北有后殿、凉殿、暖殿及仁寿、景福、仁和、万春、永寿、长春等宫，凡为屋千六百三十馀楹。
现代文：殿的北面有后殿、凉殿、暖殿以及仁寿、景福、仁和、万春、永寿、长春等宫，所有房屋共一千六百三十多间。
English: On the north side of the hall, there are the back hall, the cool hall, the warm hall, and the palaces of Renju, Jingfu, Renhe, Banshun, Yongju, and Changchun, with a total of more than 1,630 houses.

古文：十八年，建北京，凡宫殿、门阙规制，悉如南京，壮丽过之。
现代文：永乐十八年建造北京，凡官殿、门阙的规格形制，和南京完全相同，比南京更壮丽。
English: Beijing was built in the 18th year of Yongle's reign. The standard shape of the Great Hall of the People and the lintel is exactly the same as that of Nanjing, and it is more magnificent than Nanjing.

古文：中朝曰奉天殿，通为屋八千三百五十楹。
现代文：中间朝拜之处是奉天殿，总共有屋子八千三百五十间。
English: The middle place of worship is the Bongten Hall, with a total of 8,350 rooms.

古文：殿左曰中左门，右曰中右门。
现代文：殿左是中左门，殿右是中右门。
English: To the left of the hall is the middle left door, to the right of the hall is the middle right door.

古文：丹墀东曰文楼，西曰武楼，南曰奉天门，常朝所御也。
现代文：丹墀的东面是文楼，西面是武楼，南面是奉天门，是常朝时皇帝驾临的地方。
English: The east side of Danyang is Wenlou, the west side is Wulou, and the south side is Bongtianmen. It is the place where the emperor visited during the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：左曰东角门，右曰西角门，东庑曰左顺门，西庑曰右顺门，正南曰午门。
现代文：左面是柬角门，右面是西角门，束面廊廉是左顺门，西面廊庶是右顺门，正南面是午门。
English: To the left is the Camden Corner Gate, to the right is the West Corner Gate, to the left is the Bund Side Corridor, to the right is the West Side Corridor, and to the south is the South Gate.

古文：中三门，翼以两观，观各有楼，左曰左掖门，右曰右掖门。
现代文：中间三道门，以两观作为两翼，每座观都有楼，左面是左掖门，右面是右掖门。
English: The middle three doors, with two views as two wings, each view has a building, the left side is the left door, and the right side is the right door.

古文：午门左稍南，曰阙左门，曰神厨门，内为太庙。
现代文：午门左面稍偏南，叫阙左门、神厨门，里面是太庙。
English: The left side of the noon gate is slightly south, called the left gate, the kitchen door, and inside is the temple.

古文：右稍南，曰阙右门，曰社左门，内为太社稷。
现代文：右面稍南，是阙右门、社左门，里面是太社稷。
English: Slightly to the south on the right are the right door and the left door of the shrine, and inside is Taisha Shrine.

古文：又正南曰端门，东曰庙街门，即太庙右门也。
现代文：又正南面是端门，东面称庙街门，就是太庙的右门。
English: On the south side is the end gate, and on the east side is the temple street gate, which is the right gate of the Great Temple.

古文：西曰社街门，即太社稷坛南左门也。
现代文：西面是社街门，就是太社稷坛南的左门。
English: To the west is the Shajie Gate, which is the left gate of the south side of the Taisha Shrine.

古文：又正南曰承天门，又折而东曰长安左门，折而西曰长安右门。
现代文：又正南称承天门，又折向东叫长安左门，折向西叫长支右门。
English: It is also called "Chang'an Left Gate" when facing south, "Chang'an Left Gate" when facing east, and "Chang'an Right Gate" when facing west.

古文：东后曰东安门，西后曰西安门，北后曰北安门。
现代文：东面背后叫束安门，西面背后叫西安门，北面背后是北安门。
English: The back of the east side is called Sokuanmen, the back of the west side is called Xi'anmen, and the back of the north side is Bei'anmen.

古文：正南曰大明门，中为驰道，东西长廊各千步。
现代文：正南叫大明门，中间为驰道，东西长廊各一千步。
English: The south-facing one is called the Daming Gate, the middle one is the galloping road, and the east and west promenades are each a thousand paces long.

古文：奉天殿之后曰华盖殿，又后曰谨身殿。
现代文：奉天殿的后面叫华盖殿，再往后叫谨身殿。
English: The back of the Bongten Hall is called the Huagai Hall, and the back is called the Chijimi Hall.

古文：谨身殿左曰后左门，右曰后右门。
现代文：谨身殿左面叫后左门，右面叫后右门。
English: The left side of the main hall is called the back left door and the right side is called the back right door.

古文：正北曰乾清门，内为乾清宫，是曰正寝。
现代文：正北面叫干清门，里面是干清官，就是正寝。
English: The north-facing side is called the dry-cleaning door, and the inside is the dry-cleaning officer, that is, the sleeping.

古文：后曰交泰殿。
现代文：后面叫交泰殿。
English: In the back is called Kōtai-den.

古文：又后曰坤宁宫，为中宫所居。
现代文：再往后叫坤宁宫，是中宫皇后居住的地方。
English: Further back is Kunning Palace, where the Empress of the Middle Court lives.

古文：东曰仁寿宫，西曰清宁宫，以奉太后。
现代文：东面叫仁寿宫，西面叫清宁宫，用以侍奉太后。
English: The east side is called Renshou Palace, and the west side is called Qingning Palace, which was used to serve the empress dowager.

古文：左顺门之东曰文华殿。
现代文：左顺门的束面叫文华殿。
English: The facade of the Zuoshun Gate is called the Wenhua Hall.

古文：右顺门之西曰武英殿。
现代文：右顺门的西面叫武英殿。
English: The west side of the right-hand door is called Takeyoden.

古文：文华殿东南曰东华门，武英殿西南曰西华门。
现代文：文华殿的东南叫东华门，武英殿的西南面叫西华门。
English: The southeast side of the Wenhua Hall is called the East China Gate, and the southwest side of the Wuying Hall is called the West China Gate.

古文：坤宁宫后曰坤宁门，门之后曰玄武门。
现代文：坤宁官后面叫坤宁门，门的后面叫玄武门。
English: The back of Kunning official is called Kunning Gate, and the back of the gate is called Xuanwu Gate.

古文：其他宫殿，名号繁多，不能尽列，所谓千门万户也。
现代文：其它宫殿，名号繁多，不能一一罗列，这就是所说的千门万户。
English: Other palaces have so many names that it would be impossible to list them all. This is the so-called "thousand doors, thousands of households."

古文：皇城内宫城外，凡十有二门：曰东上门、东上北门、东上南门、东中门、西上门、西上北门、西上南门、西中门、北上门、北上东门、北上西门、北中门。
现代文：皇城内宫城外，共有十二道门，它们是：束上门、束上北门、东上南门、束中门、西上门、西上北门、西上南门、西中门、北上门、北上束门、北上西尸弓、北中门。
English: There are a total of twelve gates inside and outside the Imperial City, which are: Sokujo-mon Gate, Sokujo-kita-mon Gate, Higashi-jo-minami-mon Gate, Sokuchu-mon Gate, Nishi-jo-mon Gate, Nishi-jo-kita-mon Gate, Nishi-jo-minami-mon Gate, Nishi-jo-minami-mon Gate, Nishi-jo-minami-mon Gate, Kitakami-jo-mon Gate, Kitakami-jo-mon Gate, Kitakami-jo-mon Gate.

古文：复于皇城东南建皇太孙宫，东安门外东南建十王街。
现代文：又在皇城东南建造皇太孙宫，东安门外东南建十王街。
English: In addition, the Crown Prince's Palace was built in the southeast of the Imperial City, and Shihwang Street was built in the southeast outside Dongan Gate.

古文：宣宗留意文雅，建广寒、清暑二殿，及东、西琼岛，游观所至，悉置经籍。
现代文：宣宗注重追求文雅，建造广寒、清暑二殿，以及东西琼岛，观赏游玩所到之处，都设置经书典籍。
English: Xuan Zong paid attention to the pursuit of elegance, built the Guanghan, Qingxiao two halls, as well as the east and west Qiongdao, and set up scriptures and classics everywhere you go.

古文：正统六年重建三殿。
现代文：正统六年，重建三殿。
English: After six years of orthodoxy, the third hall was rebuilt.

古文：嘉靖中，于清宁宫后地建慈庆宫，于仁寿宫故基建慈宁宫。
现代文：嘉靖年间，在清宁宫后面地上建慈庆宫，在仁寿宫旧地基上建造慈宁宫。
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, the Cixing Palace was built on the ground behind the Qingning Palace, and the Cining Palace was built on the old foundation of the Renju Palace.

古文：三十六年，三殿门楼灾，帝以殿名奉天，非题扁所宜用，敕礼部议之。
现代文：嘉靖三十六年，三殿门楼发生火灾，皇帝认为殿名奉天，不是题匾所应采用的，敕令礼部商议。
English: In the 36th year of Jiajing, a fire broke out in the gatehouse of the third hall. The emperor believed that the name of the hall was given by heaven and should not be used for the inscription. He ordered the ceremonial department to discuss it.

古文：部臣会议言： 皇祖肇造之初，名曰奉天者，昭揭以示虔尔。
现代文：部臣集中商议说： 皇祖开始建造之时，取名为奉天，宣扬以显示虔诚亲近。
English: The ministers discussed intensively and said: When the emperor's ancestors began to build, they named it "Mongtian" and promoted it to show their piety and closeness.

古文：既以名，则是昊天监临，俨然在上，临御之际，坐以视朝，似未安也。
现代文：既已命名，就是上天监临，俨然在上，临朝之际，坐着处理朝政，似乎不妥。
English: As soon as it was named, it meant that it was overseen by heaven, and it seemed inappropriate to sit and deal with the affairs of the imperial court on the eve of the imperial court.

古文：今乃修复之始，宜更定，以答天庥。 
现代文：如今是修复的开始，应重新命名，以答谢上天的恩德。 
English: Now is the beginning of the restoration, it should be renamed, to thank God's grace.

古文：明年重建奉天门，更名曰大朝门。
现代文：第二年，重建奉天门，改名为大朝门。
English: In the following year, the Bong Tianmen Gate was rebuilt and renamed the Grand Dynasty Gate.

古文：四十一年更名奉天殿曰皇极，华盖殿曰中极，谨身殿曰建极，文楼曰文昭阁，武楼曰武成阁，左顺门曰会极，右顺门曰归极，大朝门曰皇极，东角门曰弘政，西角门曰宣治。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年，改奉天殿为皇极殿，华盖殿焉中极殿，谨身殿为建极殿，文楼为文昭阁，武楼为武成阁，左顺门为会极门，右顺门焉归极门，大朝门为皇极门，柬角门为弘政门，西角门焉宣治门。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing, the Temple of Heaven was changed to the Temple of the Emperor, the Temple of Huagai was changed to the Temple of the Middle Pole, the Temple of the Body was changed to the Temple of the Builder, the Palace of Literature was changed to the Palace of Literature, the Palace of Martial Arts was changed to the Palace of Martial Arts, the Gate of the Left Shun was changed to the Gate of the Meeting, the Gate of the Right Shun was changed to the Gate of the Return, the Gate of the Great Court was changed to the Gate of the Emperor, the Gate of the Cape of Cambodia was changed to the Gate of the Administration, and the Gate of

古文：又改乾清宫右小阁名曰道心，旁左门曰仁荡，右门曰义平。
现代文：又改干清官右边的小门为道心门，旁边的左门为仁荡门，右门为义平门。
English: In addition, the small door on the right side of the Qing official was changed to the Daoshin door, the left door next to it was the Renhuang door, and the right door was the Yiping door.

古文：世宗初，垦西苑隙地为田，建殿曰无逸，亭曰豳风，又建亭曰省耕，曰省敛，每岁耕获，帝辄临观。
现代文：世宗初年，开垦西苑的闲地为田，建造殿名无逸，亭名豳风，又建亭名省耕，名省敛，每年耕种收获季节，皇帝总是亲临观看。
English: In the first year of King Sejong's reign, the idle land of Xi Yuan was turned into fields. The construction of the hall was well-received, the pavilion was well-received, and the pavilion was well-received. Every year during the farming and harvest season, the emperor always came to watch.

古文：十三年，西苑河东亭榭成，亲定名曰天鹅房，北曰飞霭亭，迎翠殿前曰浮香亭，宝月亭前曰秋辉亭，昭和殿前曰澄渊亭，后曰〈走瞿〉台坡，临漪亭前曰水云榭，西苑门外二亭曰左临海亭、右临海亭，北闸口曰涌玉亭，河之东曰聚景亭，改吕梁洪之亭曰吕梁，前曰檥金亭，翠玉馆前曰撷秀亭。
现代文：嘉靖十三年，西苑河东亭榭建成，皇上亲自定名为天鹅房，北面是飞霭亭，迎翠殿前面是浮香亭，实月亭前面是秋辉亭，昭和殿前面是澄渊亭，后面是超台坡，临漪亭前面是水云榭，西苑门外二亭为左临海亭、右临海亭，北闸口名涌玉亭，河东是聚景亭，改吕梁洪之亭焉吕梁，前面为牺金亭，翠玉馆前是撷秀亭。
English: In the 13th year of Jiajing, the West Garden Hedong Pavilion was completed. The emperor himself named it the Swan House. To the north is the Fei Yao Pavilion. In front of the Ying Cui Hall is the Fu Xiang Pavilion. In front of the Real Moon Pavilion is the Qiu Hui Pavilion. In front of the Showa Hall is the Cheng Yuan Pavilion. Behind is the Super Taipo. In front of the Lin Yao Pavilion is the Shuiyun Pavilion. The two pavilions outside the West Garden gate are the Left Sea Pavilion and the Right Sea Pavilion. In front of the North Gate is the Ming Yong Yu Pavilion. In front of the Hedong Pavilion is the

古文：亲王府制：洪武四年定，城高二丈九尺，正殿基高六尺九寸，正门、前后殿、四门城楼，饰以青绿点金，廊房饰以青黛。
现代文：亲王府制度。洪武四年制定，城高二丈九尺，正殿地基高六尺九寸，正门、前后殿、四门城楼，用青绿色点金装饰，廊房用青黑色装饰。
English: Prince's residence system. Established in the 4th year of Hongwu, the height of the castle is 2.09 meters, the foundation of the main hall is 6.09 meters high, the main gate, the front and back halls, and the four gate towers are decorated with blue-green dots, and the corridor is decorated with blue-black.

古文：四城正门，以丹漆，金涂铜钉。
现代文：四城正门，用红漆，涂金铜钉。
English: The main gate of the four cities, painted with red lacquer, with gold-plated copper nails.

古文：宫殿窠栱攒顶，中画蟠螭，饰以金，边画八吉祥花。
现代文：宫殿窠聚斗棋垂脊交会于顶，中间画有蟠螭图案，用黄金装饰，旁边画有八种吉祥花。
English: At the top, there is a palace dragonfly gathering, a dragonfly pattern is painted in the middle, decorated with gold, and eight kinds of auspicious flowers are painted next to it.

古文：前后殿座，用红漆金蟠螭，帐用红销金蟠螭。
现代文：前后殿座，用红漆金色蟠螭，帷帐用红色嵌金残的蟠螭图案。
English: Front and back of the throne, with red lacquer gold enamel, curtain with red inlaid gold remnant enamel pattern.

古文：座后壁则画蟠螭、彩云，后改为龙。
现代文：座后墙壁便昼有蟠螭、彩云图案，后来改为龙形图案。
English: During the day, the wall behind the pavilion was decorated with patterns of dragonflies and colorful clouds, but was later changed to a dragon-shaped pattern.

古文：立山川、社稷、宗庙于王城内。
现代文：在王城内建立山川坛、社稷坛、宗庙。
English: In the royal city, a mountain and river altar, a shrine altar, and a family temple were built.

古文：七年定亲王所居殿，前曰承运，中曰圜殿，后曰存心；四城门，南曰端礼，北曰广智，东曰体仁，西曰遵义。
现代文：洪武七年，规定亲王所居住的宫殿，前面叫承运殿，中间叫圜殿，后面叫存心殿；四道城门，南面是端礼门，北面是广智门，束面是体仁门，西面是遵义门。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu, it was decided that the palace where the prince would live would be called the Palace of Transportation in the front, the Palace of Reclamation in the middle, and the Palace of Conscience in the back. There were four gates to the palace: the Gate of Commendation in the south, the Gate of Wisdom in the north, the Gate of Dignity in the center, and the Gate of Zunyi in the west.

古文：太祖曰： 使诸王睹名思义，以藩屏帝室。 
现代文：太祖说： 让诸位亲王见名思义，以作为皇室的屏障。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Let the princes make a name for themselves and serve as a barrier for the imperial family.

古文：九年定亲王宫殿、门庑及城门楼，皆覆以青色琉璃瓦。
现代文：洪武九年，规定亲王宫殿、宫门廊糜以及城门楼，都用青色琉璃瓦覆盖。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, it was decreed that the Prince's Palace, the palace portico and the gate tower would all be covered with blue glazed tiles.

古文：又命中书省臣，惟亲王宫得饰朱红、大青绿，其他居室止饰丹碧。
现代文：又命令中书省大臣，惟独亲王宫殿得以用朱红、大青绿装饰，其它居室只用红绿色装饰。
English: He also ordered the Minister of the Ministry of Literature to decorate only the prince's palace with vermilion and turquoise, and to decorate other rooms only with red and green.

古文：十二年，诸王府告成。
现代文：十二年，诸王府宣告完工。
English: In the twelfth year, the palace was declared complete.

古文：其制，中曰承运殿，十一间，后为圜殿，次曰存心殿，各九间。
现代文：它的形制，中间是承运殿十一间，后面是圜殿，其次是存心殿各九间。
English: Its shape, in the middle is the carriage hall with eleven rooms, behind is the hall of the coffin, followed by the hall of the heart with nine rooms each.

古文：承运殿两庑为左右二殿，自存心、承运，周回两庑，至承运门，为屋百三十八间。
现代文：承运殿两庶廊为左右二殿，从存心殿、承运殿，围绕两庶廊，到承运门，共有房屋一百三十八间。
English: The two side corridors of the carriage hall are the left and right two halls, from the heart hall and the carriage hall, around the two side corridors, to the carriage door, there are a total of 138 houses.

古文：殿后为前、中、后三宫，各九间。
现代文：殿后为前、中、后三宫，各九间。
English: At the back of the hall are the front, middle and back three halls, each with nine rooms.

古文：宫门两厢等室九十九间。
现代文：宫门两厢等地有房室九十丸间。
English: There are ninety rooms between the two wings of the palace gate.

古文：王城之外，周垣、西门、堂库等室在其间，凡为宫殿室屋八百间有奇。
现代文：王城之外，四周城墙、四座城门、堂殿库房等室在其中，总共宫殿房室八百多间。
English: In addition to the royal city, the surrounding city walls, four city gates, and halls and storerooms are among the rooms. In total, there are more than 800 palace rooms.

古文：弘治八年更定王府之制，颇有所增损。
现代文：弘治八年，重新规定王府的制度，略有增加或减损。
English: In the eighth year of Konji, the system of the royal palace was re-defined, with a slight increase or decrease.

古文：郡王府制：天顺四年定。
现代文：郡王府制：天顺四年定。
English: Guanwangfu system: Tianshun four-year fixed.

古文：门楼、厅厢、厨库、米仓等，共数十间而已。
现代文：门楼、厅厢、厨库、米仓等，共数十间而已。
English: There are only a few dozen gatehouses, halls, kitchens, rice storehouses, etc.

古文：公主府第：洪武五年，礼部言： 唐、宋公主视正一品，府第并用正一品制度。
现代文：公主的府第。洪武五年，礼部进言： 唐、宋时期公主比照正一品官位，府第并用正一品的制度。
English: In the 5th year of Hongwu, the Ministry of Ceremonies issued the following advice: In the Tang and Song dynasties, princesses were accorded the official rank of First Class, and the system of First Class was also used at the provincial level.

古文：今拟公主第，厅堂九间，十一架，施花样兽脊，梁、栋、斗栱、檐桷彩色绘饰，惟不用金。
现代文：如今拟建公主府，厅堂九问，十一架，施以花样为兽脊，梁、栋、斗棋、檐桷用彩色绘饰，只是不用涂金。
English: Now it is planned to build a princess's palace, with a hall of nine bells and eleven frames, with patterns as the animal's spine, and beams, towers, battlements, and piers decorated with colors, but without gold.

古文：正门五间，七架。
现代文：正门五问，七架。
English: Five questions at the main entrance, seven at the exit.

古文：大门，绿油，铜环。
现代文：大门，绿油色，用铜环。
English: Gate, greenish-brown, with a copper ring.

古文：石础、墙砖，镌凿玲珑花样。 
现代文：房柱下的基石、砌墙砖，雕刻上玲珑花样。 
English: The foundation stone under the pillar and the bricks of the walls are carved with exquisite patterns.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：百官第宅：明初，禁官民房屋不许雕刻古帝后、圣贤人物及日月、龙凤、狻猊、麒麟、犀象之形。
现代文：百官的宅第。明朝初年，禁令官员平民房屋，不准雕刻古代的帝后、圣贤人物以及日月、龙凤、狻猊、麒麟、犀象的图形。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, civil servants were prohibited from carving ancient empresses, sages and figures of the sun, moon, dragon, phoenix, dragonfly, unicorn and rhinoceros.

古文：凡官员任满致仕，与见任同。
现代文：凡是官员任职期满退休，房屋规制与现任时相同。
English: When an official retires at the end of his term of office, the housing regulations are the same as when he was in office.

古文：其父祖有官，身殁，子孙许居父祖房舍。
现代文：父亲、祖父如有官职，身死，后代子孙可以居住父亲、祖父的房屋。
English: If the father or grandfather has an official position, after his death, the descendants can live in the father's or grandfather's house.

古文：洪武二十六年定制，官员营造房屋，不许歇山转角，重檐重栱，及绘藻井，惟楼居重檐不禁。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定制度，官员营造房屋，不准用歇山式转角房，不准用重檐重棋，以及彩饰藻井，祇有楼居的重檐不禁止。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu, officials were allowed to build houses, but they were not allowed to use mountain-style corner houses, heavy gates, and decorated algae wells. Only the heavy gates of buildings were not prohibited.

古文：公侯，前厅七间、两厦，九架。
现代文：公侯的房宅，前厅七间、两厦，九架。
English: The prince's residence has seven anterooms, two buildings, and nine floors.

古文：中堂七间，九架。
现代文：中堂七间，九架。
English: There are seven rooms in the middle hall and nine stalls.

古文：后堂七间，七架。
现代文：后堂七间，七架。
English: There are seven rooms in the back hall, with seven beds.

古文：门三间，五架，用金漆及兽面锡环。
现代文：门三间，五架，用涂金漆以及兽面锡环。
English: There are three doors and five frames, with gold-painted hinges and animal-skin tin rings.

古文：家庙三间，五架。
现代文：家庙三间，五架。
English: There are three family temples and five shrines.

古文：覆以黑板瓦，脊用花样瓦兽，梁、栋、斗栱、檐桷彩绘饰。
现代文：用黑板瓦盖房顶，屋脊用花样瓦兽，梁、栋、斗棋、檐桷用彩色绘饰。
English: The roof is covered with blackboard tiles, the roof ridge is decorated with patterned tiles, and the beams, towers, battlements, and rafters are painted in color.

古文：门窗、枋柱金漆饰。
现代文：门窗、枋柱用涂金漆装饰。
English: The doors, windows and pillars are decorated with gold paint.

古文：廊、庑、庖、库从屋，不得过五间，七架。
现代文：廊房、厢房、厨房、库房等附属房屋，不得超过五间，七架。
English: The number of ancillary buildings, such as corridors, rooms, kitchens, and storerooms, shall not exceed five, with seven floors.

古文：一品、二品，厅堂五间，九架，屋脊用瓦兽，梁、栋、斗栱、檐桷青碧绘饰。
现代文：一品、二品官，厅堂五间，九架，屋脊用瓦兽，梁、栋、斗棋、檐桷用青绿色绘饰。
English: There are one-piece and two-piece officials, five rooms and nine shelves in the hall, the roof is decorated with tile beasts, and the beams, pillars, chess pieces, and rafters are decorated with blue-green.

古文：门三间，五架，绿油，兽面锡环。
现代文：门三间，五架，绿色油漆，兽面锡环。
English: Three doors, five frames, green paint, animal-skin tin rings.

古文：三品至五品，厅堂五间，七架，屋脊用瓦兽，梁、栋、檐桷青碧绘饰。
现代文：三品至五品，厅堂五间，七架，屋脊用瓦兽，梁、栋、檐桷用青绿色绘饰。
English: There are five rooms and seven shelves in the hall, the roof is decorated with tile animals, and the beams, columns, and rafters are decorated with teal.

古文：门三间，三架，黑油，锡环。
现代文：门三间，三架，黑色油漆，锡做门环。
English: Three doors, three frames, black paint, tin doorknobs.

古文：六品至九品，厅堂三间，七架，梁、栋饰以土黄。
现代文：六品至九品，厅堂三问，七架，梁、栋用土黄色绘饰。
English: From the sixth floor to the ninth floor, the hall is decorated with three panels, seven frames, beams, and beams painted in earthy yellow.

古文：门一间，三架，黑门，铁环。
现代文：门一间，三架，黑门，铁制门环。
English: One door, three frames, black door, iron knocker.

古文：品官房舍，门窗、户牖不得用丹漆。
现代文：有品级官员的房屋，门窗、户牖不准使用红漆。
English: Red paint is not allowed to be used on the doors, windows and eaves of the houses of officials with rank.

古文：功臣宅舍之后，留空地十丈，左右皆五丈。
现代文：功臣住宅的后面，留空地十丈，左右都是五丈。
English: Behind the residence of the meritorious person, there is a vacant space of 10 jo, and the left and right sides are 5 jo.

古文：不许那移军民居止，更不许于宅前后左右多占地，构亭馆，开池塘，以资游眺。
现代文：不准移动军民的住房，更不准在住宅前后左右多侵占土地，建造亭馆，开挖池塘，用来观赏眺望。
English: It is not allowed to move military and civilian housing, and it is not allowed to occupy more land around the front and back of the house, build pavilions, dig ponds, and use them to enjoy the view.

古文：三十五年，申明禁制，一品、三品厅堂各七间，六品至九品厅堂梁栋祗用粉青饰之。
现代文：洪武三十五年，申明禁令制度，一品、三品官厅堂各七间，六品至九品官厅堂的梁栋祇用粉青色装饰。
English: In the thirty-fifth year of Hongwu, the ban system was affirmed, with seven rooms in each of the first-class and third-class government halls, and the beams of the sixth-class to ninth-class government halls were only decorated with pink and blue.

古文：庶民庐舍：洪武二十六年定制，不过三间，五架，不许用斗栱，饰彩色。
现代文：平民的住宅，洪武二十六年规定制度，不超过三间，五架，不准使用斗棋，不准用彩色装饰。
English: According to the regulations of the 26th year of Hongwu, the number of rooms in civilian residences should not exceed three, and the number of tables should not exceed five. The use of board games and color decoration is not allowed.

古文：三十五年复申禁饬，不许造九五间数，房屋虽至一二十所，随基物力，但不许过三间。
现代文：洪武三十五年又申明禁令，不准建造九五间数，房屋即使达到一二十所，据其物力，但不准超过三间。
English: In the 35th year of Hongwu's reign, he also declared a ban on the construction of buildings with more than ninety-five rooms. Even if the number of houses reached ten or twenty, they were not allowed to build more than three, depending on their material resources.

古文：正统十二年令稍变通之，庶民房屋架多而间少者，不在禁限。
现代文：正统十二年，下令稍稍变通，平民房屋架敷多而间敷少的，不在禁令限制之列。
English: In the 12th year of the orthodoxy, the order was slightly flexible. Civilian houses with more frames and fewer spaces were not included in the ban restrictions.

古文：器用之禁：洪武二十六年定，公侯、一品、二品，酒注、酒盏金，馀用银。
现代文：器用的禁令。洪武二十六年规定，公侯、一品、二品官，酒注、酒杯用黄金制作，其余用银。
English: In the 26th year of the Hongwu Emperor, it was stipulated that princes, first-rank and second-rank officials, wine jugs and wine glasses should be made of gold, and the rest should be made of silver.

古文：三品至五品，酒注银，酒盏金，六品至九品，酒注、酒盏银，馀皆磁、漆。
现代文：三品至五品，酒注用银制作，酒杯用黄金，六品至九品，酒注、酒杯用银制造，其余都为瓷器、漆器。
English: Three to five dishes, wine jugs made of silver, wine glasses made of gold, six to nine dishes, wine jugs and wine glasses made of silver, the rest are porcelain and lacquerware.

古文：木器不许用朱红及抹金、描金、雕琢龙凤文。
现代文：木器不准用朱红色以及涂抹金粉、用金粉描画、雕刻龙凤图案。
English: It is not allowed to use red vermilion on wooden utensils, apply gold powder, draw with gold powder or carve dragon and phoenix patterns.

古文：庶民，酒注锡，酒盏银，馀用磁、漆。
现代文：平民百姓，酒注用锡，酒杯用银，其余器物用瓷、漆器。
English: The common people used tin for wine jugs, silver for wine glasses, and porcelain and lacquerware for other utensils.

古文：百官，床面、屏风、槅子，杂色漆饰，不许雕刻龙文，并金饰朱漆。
现代文：百官，床面、屏风、桶子，用杂色油漆装饰，不准雕刻龙形图案，以及用金装饰漆红漆。
English: The bed, the screen, and the bucket are decorated with variegated paint. It is not allowed to carve dragon-shaped patterns, and use gold to decorate the red paint.

古文：军官、军士，弓矢黑漆，弓袋、箭囊，不许用朱漆描金装饰。
现代文：军官，军士，弓箭用黑漆，弓袋、箭囊，不准用朱红色漆和用金粉描画。
English: Officers, non-commissioned officers, bows and arrows with black paint, bow bags, quiver bags, are not allowed to use vermilion paint and paint with gold powder.

古文：建文四年申饬官民，不许僣用金酒爵，其椅棹木器亦不许朱红金饰。
现代文：建文四年，告诚官民，不准越分擅用金酒器，桌椅木器也不准用朱红色和黄色修饰。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwen, officials and citizens were told that they were not allowed to use gin vessels without permission, and wooden table and chairs were not allowed to be decorated with vermilion and yellow.

古文：正德十六年定，一品、二品，器皿不用玉，止许用金。
现代文：正德十六年规定，一品、二品官员，器皿不用玉，只允许用金。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, it was stipulated that officials of the first and second grade should not use jade for utensils, but only gold.

古文：商贾、技艺家器皿不许用银。
现代文：商人、技艺家器皿不许用银。
English: Merchants and craftsmen are not allowed to use silver.

古文：馀与庶民同。
现代文：其余的和平民百姓相同。
English: The rest are the same as the civilian population.

