古文：十有二年春，薛伯定卒。
现代文：十二年春季，薛襄公去世。
English: In the spring of the 12th year, Xue Xiangong passed away.

古文：夏，葬薛襄公。
现代文：夏季，安葬薛襄公。
English: In summer, the funeral of Xue Xianggong.

古文：叔孙州仇帅师堕郈。
现代文：叔孙州仇率领军队攻打堕郈。
English: Uncle Sun Zhou Quan led the army to attack the fallen soldiers.

古文：卫公孟彄帅师伐曹。
现代文：卫国的公孟彄水灵军队攻打曹国。
English: The army of Meng Xun Shui Ling, the public defender of the country, attacked Cao.

古文：季孙斯、仲孙何忌帅师堕费。
现代文：季孙斯、仲孙何忌率领军队攻打堕费。
English: Qisuns and Zhongsun He Gui led the army to attack the Caofei.

古文：秋，大雩。
现代文：秋季，鲁国举行大的秋雨祭祀活动。
English: In autumn, the country of Lu holds a large autumn rain ritual.

古文：冬十月癸亥，公会齐侯，盟于黄。
现代文：冬季十月癸亥日，定公与齐侯会见，在黄地结盟。
English: In the winter of October, on the Day of the Boar, Ding Gong met with Qi Hou and formed an alliance in Huangdi.

古文：十有一月丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月丙寅初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：公至自黄。
现代文：定公从黄地回来。
English: Sadaharu returns from the wasteland.

古文：十有二月，公围成。
现代文：十二月，定公领兵包围成邑。
English: In December, Dingong led his troops to encircle Chengyong.

古文：公至自围成。
现代文：定公从成邑回来。
English: Sadamasa is back from Chengdu.

古文：十二年夏，卫公孟彄伐曹，克郊。
现代文：十二年夏季，卫国的公孟彄领兵攻打曹国，攻下郊地。
English: In the summer of the twelfth year, the public defender of the country, Meng Xuan, led the troops to attack Cao Guo and conquered the suburbs.

古文：还，滑罗殿。
现代文：军队回国，滑罗走在最后。
English: Troops return home, skid row comes in last.

古文：未出，不退于列。
现代文：没有离开曹国，滑罗并不从队伍里退到最后。
English: Without leaving Cao, Xiluo did not withdraw from the team until the end.

古文：其御曰： 殿而在列，其为无勇乎？ 
现代文：他的御者说： 殿后而待在队列里，恐怕是缺乏勇气吧！ 
English: His driver said: "I'm afraid it's a lack of courage to stay in the queue behind the palace."

古文：罗曰： 与其素厉，宁为无勇。 
现代文：滑罗说： 与其空有勇猛之名，宁可让人说我没有勇气。 
English: "I'd rather have people say I don't have courage than have the reputation of being brave," he said.

古文：仲由为季氏宰，将堕三都。于是叔孙氏堕郈。
现代文：仲由做季氏的家臣之长，准备减低三都城墙高度，因此叔孙氏减低了郈邑的城墙高度。
English: As the leader of the Ji clan's vassals, Zhongyu was ready to reduce the height of the three city walls, so the Shousun clan reduced the height of the city walls in Ye.

古文：季氏将堕费，公山不狃、叔孙辄帅费人以袭鲁。
现代文：季氏准备减低费邑的城墙高度，公山不狃、叔孙辄率领费邑人袭击鲁国国都。
English: The Ji clan prepared to lower the height of the city wall of Feiyu, and the Feiyu people led by Gongshan Buyei and Sun Yat-sen attacked the capital of Lu.

古文：公与三子入于季氏之宫，登武子之台。
现代文：鲁定公和季孙等三个人躲进季氏的宫室，登上武子之台。
English: Lu Ding Gong, Qisun, Meng Sun, and the three uncles hid in Qisun's house and ascended to the high altar of Qisun Takeshi.

古文：费人攻之，弗克。
现代文：费邑人进攻，没有攻下。
English: The Fayurs attacked, but did not take it.

古文：入及公侧。
现代文：费邑人已经攻到了定公的附近。
English: The Fei's have reached the vicinity of Dingong.

古文：仲尼命申句须、乐颀下伐之，费人北。
现代文：孔子命令申句须、乐颀下台反击，费邑人战败。
English: Confucius ordered Shen Gu to step down and Le Yao to counterattack, and the Fei people were defeated.

古文：国人追之，败诸姑蔑。
现代文：国内的人们追上去，在姑蔑打败了他们。
English: The people of the country caught up with them and defeated them in a landslide.

古文：二子奔齐。遂堕费。
现代文：公山不狃、叔孙辄逃亡齐国，于是就毁掉了费邑。
English: His father-in-law died, his uncle and grandson fled Qi, and Feiyu was destroyed.

古文：将堕成，公敛处父谓孟孙： 堕成，齐人必至于北门。
现代文：将要毁掉成邑，公敛处父对孟孙说： 毁掉成邑，齐国人必定可以直抵国境北门。
English: Chengyur was about to be destroyed, and the father of public austerity said to Meng Sun: If Chengyur is destroyed, the people of Qi will certainly be able to reach the north gate of the border.

古文：且成，孟氏之保障也，无成，是无孟氏也。
现代文：而且成邑是孟氏的保障，没有成邑，这就是没有孟氏。
English: Moreover, Chengyi is Meng's guarantee. Without Chengyi, there is no Meng.

古文：子伪不知，我将不堕。 
现代文：您假装不知道，我不准备毁掉。 
English: Pretend you don't know. I'm not going to ruin it.

古文：冬十二月，公围成，弗克。
现代文：冬季，十二月，定公领兵包围成邑，没有攻下。
English: In winter, in December, Dingong led his troops to surround Chengyun, but failed to capture it.

