古文：世祖光武皇帝讳秀，字文叔，南阳蔡阳人，高祖九世之孙也，出自景帝生长沙定王发。
现代文：东汉世祖光武皇帝刘秀，字文叔，南阳蔡阳人，是汉高祖刘邦第九代孙。出自景帝所生长沙定王刘发。
English: Emperor Liu Xiu, the Eastern Han Dynasty ancestor of Emperor Guangwu, was the ninth generation grandson of Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：发生舂陵节侯买，买生郁林太守外，外生巨鹿都尉回，回生南顿令钦，钦生光武。
现代文：刘发生舂陵节侯刘买，刘买生郁林太守刘外，刘外生巨鹿都尉刘回，刘回生南顿令刘钦，刘钦生光武。
English: Liu Bei was born in the Fuling Festival, Liu Bei was the son of Yulin Taishu Liu Bei, Liu Bei was the son of Liu Bei's giant deer captain Liu Hui, Liu Hui was the son of Nandong Ling Liu Qin, and Liu Qin was the son of Guangwu.

古文：光武年九岁而孤，养于叔父良。
现代文：光武九岁丧父，为叔父刘良抚养。
English: Guangwu lost his father at the age of nine and was raised by his uncle Liu Liang.

古文：身长七尺三寸，美须眉，大口，隆准，日角。
现代文：身高七尺三寸，须眉浓密，嘴宽鼻隆，额角饱满。
English: He is seven feet three inches tall, with bushy eyebrows, a wide mouth, a high nose, and a full forehead.

古文：性勤于稼穑，而兄伯升好侠养士，常非笑光武事田业，比之高祖兄仲。
现代文：他天性勤劳，乐于耕种。他哥哥伯升却好侠养士，常常讥笑光武只知在田间劳作，把他和刘邦的二哥刘仲相比较。
English: He is hardworking by nature and enjoys farming. His older brother, Bo Sheng, however, is a good-natured man. He often mocks Guangwu for only knowing how to work in the fields, and compares him to Liu Bang's second brother, Liu Zhong.

古文：王莽天凤中，乃之长安，受《尚书》，略通大义。
现代文：直到王莽天凤年间，光武才来到长安，拜师学习《尚书》，粗略领会了经书的要旨。
English: It was not until Wang Mang Tianfeng's time that Guangwu came to Chang'an to study "Shang Shu" with a teacher, and roughly understood the gist of the scripture.

古文：莽末，天下连岁灾蝗，寇盗锋起。
现代文：王莽末年，国内连年蝗灾，寇匪强盗肆虐。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, locusts plagued the country for years on end, and bandits and robbers raged.

古文：地皇三年，南阳荒饥，诸家宾客多为小盗。
现代文：地皇三年，南阳饥荒很严重，各家门客大都出外打劫行盗。
English: In the third year of the Earth Emperor, the Nanyang famine was very serious, and most of the guests went out to rob and steal.

古文：光武避吏新野，因卖谷于宛。
现代文：光武为了躲避官府逃到新野县，将收获的谷物运到宛城出卖。
English: In order to evade the government, Mitsutake fled to Nino County and transported the harvested grain to Wancheng to sell it.

古文：宛人李通等以图谶说光武云： 刘氏复起，李氏为辅。 光武初不敢当，然独念兄伯升素结轻客，必举大事，且王莽败亡已兆，天下方乱，遂与定谋，于是乃市兵弩。
现代文：宛人李通等以谶纬符命对光武说： 刘氏复起，李氏为辅。 光武起初不敢轻举妄动，但转念哥哥伯升广交食客，必举大事。况且王莽政权已露出衰败灭亡的迹象，天下动荡不安，便与李氏合计谋划，决定举兵起事，于是着手购置各种兵器。
English: Addressees such as Li Tong said to Guangwu with the help of the oracle: "The Liu clan is resurgent, and the Li clan is supplementary. At first, Guangwu did not dare to make any rash moves, but when he thought about his brother Bo Shengguang meeting diners, he had to make a big move. Moreover, Wang Mang's regime had already shown signs of decay and death, and the world was in turmoil, so he and the Li clan planned together and decided to raise an army to rise up, and then proceeded to purchase various weapons.

古文：十月，与李通从弟轶等起于宛，时年二十八。
现代文：十月，与李通堂弟李轶等在宛城起兵，时年二十八岁。
English: In October, at the age of twenty-eight, he and Li Tong's cousin Li Yao and others raised an army in Wancheng.

古文：十一月，有星孛于张。
现代文：十一月，彗星出现于南方张宿。
English: In November, the comet appeared in the south of Zhangshu.

古文：光武遂将宾客还舂陵。
现代文：光武便带领门客回到舂陵。
English: Guangwu then led his guests back to Fuling.

古文：时伯升已会众起兵。
现代文：这时伯升已会众起兵。
English: By this time, the congregation had raised an army.

古文：初，诸家子弟恐惧，皆亡逃自匿，曰 伯升杀我 。
现代文：起始，各家子弟都十分惊恐，跑的跑，躲的躲，说： 伯升想要杀我们！ 
English: At the beginning, all the children were very frightened, running and hiding, saying: "Bo Sheng wants to kill us!"

古文：及见光武绛衣大冠，皆惊曰 谨厚者亦复为之 ，乃稍自安。
现代文：等到看见光武绛衣武冠，都惊异地说： 谨慎厚道的文叔也起兵了啊！ 
English: When they saw Guangwu wearing the crown, they were surprised and said, "Cautious and virtuous Uncle Wen has also raised an army!

古文：伯升于是招新市、平林兵，与其帅王凤、陈牧西击长聚。
现代文：大家才安定下来。伯升于是招新市、平林兵，与其首领王凤、陈牧向西攻打长聚。
English: It was only then that everyone settled down. So Bo Sheng recruited soldiers from Xincheng and Pinglin, and he and his leaders Wang Feng and Chen Mu went west to attack Changzhu.

古文：光武初骑牛，杀新野尉乃得马。
现代文：光武先骑牛，杀新野尉才得以骑马。
English: Mitsutake was the first to ride a bull, but it was Lieutenant Kishinono who was able to ride a horse.

古文：进屠唐子乡，又杀湖阳尉。
现代文：进屠唐子乡，又杀掉了湖阳县尉。
English: He went to Tu Tangzi Township and killed the lieutenant of Hoyang County.

古文：军中分财物不均，众恚恨，欲反攻诸刘。
现代文：军中所获财物分配不均，大家都愤怒难平，将士们想要反攻刘氏家族。
English: The unequal distribution of the wealth gained in the army made everyone angry and uneasy. The soldiers wanted to fight back against the Liu family.

古文：光武敛宗人所得物，悉以与之，众乃悦。
现代文：光武便收本宗人所得财物，全部分给将士，众人这才满意。
English: Guangwu then collected all the money and property that the clan members had earned, and gave all of it to the soldiers. Everyone was satisfied with this.

古文：进拔棘阳，与王莽前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐战于小长安，汉军大败，还保棘阳。
现代文：便进攻拔取棘阳，与王莽前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐战于小长安，结果汉军大败，只能退守棘阳。
English: He then attacked and took Spineyang, and fought with Wang Mang's former team doctor Zhenfu and subordinate Zheng Liangqiu in Xiaochang'an. As a result, the Chinese army was defeated and could only retreat to Spineyang.

古文：更始元年正月甲子朔，汉军复与甄阜、梁丘赐战于沘水西，大破之。斩阜、赐。
现代文：更始元年正月初一，汉军又与甄阜、梁丘赐战于沘水西，大破敌军，杀掉了甄阜、梁丘赐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the new year, the Chinese army also fought with Yanfu and Liang Qiuqi in the west of Surabaya, defeating the enemy army and killing Yanfu and Liang Qiuqi.

古文：伯升又破王莽纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂于淯阳，进围宛城。
现代文：伯升在淯阳又打败王莽纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂，进而围攻宛城。
English: Bo Sheng defeated Wang Mangnagon General Yan Yu and Chichizong General Chen Mao in Shenyang, and then besieged Wancheng.

古文：二月辛巳，立刘圣公为天子，以伯升为大司徒，光武为太常偏将军。
现代文：二月初一，刘玄被拥立为天子，刘玄任命伯升为大司徒，光武为太常偏将军。
English: On the first day of February, Liu Xuan was enthroned as the Son of Heaven, Liu Xuan appointed Bo Sheng as the Grand Scholar, and Guangwu as the General of Taizhong.

古文：三月，光武别与诸将徇昆阳、定陵、郾，皆下之。
现代文：三月，光武另与诸将攻打昆阳、定陵、郾，都攻打下来了。
English: In March, Guangwu and other generals attacked Kunyang, Dingling and Handan, and they were all defeated.

古文：多得牛、马、财物，谷数十万斛，转以馈宛下。
现代文：缴获的牛马财物很多，粮食几十万斛，转运供给宛城下部队。
English: The captured cattle, horses, and many other items of property, including hundreds of thousands of bushels of grain, were transported and supplied to the troops outside the city.

古文：莽闻阜、赐死，汉帝立，大惧，遣大司徒王寻、大司空王邑将兵百万，其甲士四十二万人，五月，到颍川，复与严尤、陈茂合。
现代文：王莽得知甄阜、梁丘赐被杀，汉帝已立，十分恐惧，于是派大司徒王寻、大司空王邑领兵百万，其中披甲将士四十二万。五月，到达颍川，又与严尤、陈茂部队汇合。
English: Wang Mang was very frightened when he learned that Yan Fu and Liang Qiu Zi had been killed and that the Han Empire had been established, so he sent the grand steward Wang Xun and the grand steward Kuang Yip to lead a million soldiers, including 420,000 armored soldiers. In May, they arrived in Luochuan and met with Yan You and Chen Mao's troops.

古文：初，光武为舂陵侯家讼逋租于尤，尤见而奇之。
现代文：起初，光武曾为舂陵侯佃户欠租投诉于严尤，严尤见光武就对他另眼看待。
English: At first, Guangwu had complained to Yan You about the rent arrears of Fuling Houxian, but Yan You saw Guangwu with a different eye.

古文：及是时，城中出降尤者言光武不取财物，但会兵计策。
现代文：如今，严尤又听从城里掏出来投降自己的人说光武并不敛取财物，只操练士兵出谋定策。
English: Nowadays, Yan You also listens to the people who have come out of the city to surrender themselves, saying that Guangwu does not accumulate wealth, but only trains soldiers to come up with strategies.

古文：尤笑曰： 是美须眉者邪？
现代文：严尤笑着说： 就是那个须眉浓密的汉子吗？
English: Yan You said with a smile: Is that the man with the bushy eyebrows?

古文：何为乃如是！ 
现代文：他为什么要这么做！ 
English: Why would he do that!

古文：初，王莽征天下能为兵法者六十三家数百人，并以为军吏；选练武卫，招募猛士，旌旗辎重，千里不绝。
现代文：初始，王莽征集天下能懂兵法的六十三家共数百人，并任为军吏；挑选训练警卫，招募猛士，旌旗辎重，千里不绝。
English: At the beginning, Wang Mang recruited a total of hundreds of people from 63 families around the world who could understand the art of war, and appointed them as military officials; selected guards for training, recruited warriors, raised flags, and traveled thousands of miles.

古文：时有长人巨无霸，长一丈，大十围，以为垒尉；又驱诸猛兽虎豹犀象之属，以助威武。
现代文：当时有个巨人叫巨无霸，身高一丈，腰粗十围，被任命为军垒尉官；驱使猛兽虎豹犀象，以助军威。
English: At that time, there was a giant named Big Mac, who was a foot taller and had a waist ten times thicker. He was appointed as a military base officer; he drove the ferocious beasts, the tiger, the leopard and the rhinoceros, to help the military prestige.

古文：自秦、汉出师之盛，未尝有也。
现代文：出师的盛况，为秦汉以来所没有过的。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, this kind of pomp at the time of dispatching troops is unprecedented.

古文：光武将数千兵，徼之于阳关。
现代文：光武统兵数千，在阳关拦截王莽军。
English: Thousands of soldiers led by Guangwu intercepted Wang Mang's army at Yangguan.

古文：诸将见寻、邑兵盛，反走，驰入昆阳，皆惶怖，忧念妻孥，欲散归诸城。
现代文：诸将见王寻、王邑军队强大，掉头逃跑，奔回昆阳，都很害怕，担心妻室儿女，想分散返回各自的城邑。
English: When the generals saw that Wang Huan's and Wang Yu's armies were strong, they turned their backs and fled back to Kunyang. They were very afraid, worried about their wives, children, and wanted to return to their respective cities.

古文：光武议曰： 今兵谷既少，而外寇强大，并力御之，功庶可立；如欲分散，势无俱全。
现代文：光武提议说： 现在我们兵力和粮草都少，而外寇强大，合力抵抗，功绩或许可以建立；如果分散开来，势必都不能保全。
English: Guangwu proposed, "Now that we have fewer soldiers and less grain and grass, but the foreign invaders are strong, we may be able to make joint efforts to resist, and our achievements may be established; if they are dispersed, they will not be preserved.

古文：且宛城未拔，不能相救，昆阳即破，一日之间，诸部亦灭矣。
现代文：而且宛城没有攻下，那边的部队不能救助我们，昆阳一旦攻破，一天之内，我们所有各部都将被消灭掉。
English: Moreover, Wancheng has not been taken, and the troops over there cannot help us. Once Kunyang is broken, all of our departments will be wiped out within a day.

古文：今不同心胆共举功名，反欲守妻子财物邪？ 诸将怒曰： 刘将军何敢如是！ 光武笑而起。
现代文：现在我们不同心合力共举功名，反而想守住妻子儿女和财物吗？ 诸将领愤怒地说： 刘将军何以竟然说这种话！ 光武含笑起立。
English: Now, instead of working together to win glory, do we want to keep our wives, children and property? The generals said angrily: "How could General Liu say such a thing! Guangwu stood up with a smile.

古文：会候骑还，言大兵且至城北，军陈数百里，不见其后。
现代文：这时恰好了望敌人的骑兵回来，说大量的敌人将到城北，军马队列数百里，看不到队尾。
English: At this time, he was just waiting for the enemy cavalry to return, saying that a large number of enemies would come to the north of the city. The horses were hundreds of miles in line, and the tail of the line could not be seen.

古文：诸将遽相谓曰： 更请刘将军计之。 光武复为图画成败。
现代文：诸将连忙相互说道： 还是请刘将军出主意对付。 光武又为大家谋划成败策略。
English: The generals hurriedly said to each other: "Let's ask General Liu to come up with a plan to deal with it." Guangwu also planned a success or failure strategy for everyone.

古文：诸将忧迫，皆曰： 诺 。
现代文：诸将领忧愁窘迫，都说： 就照这样办！ 
English: All the generals, in their grief and distress, said: Let it be so!

古文：时城中唯有八九千人，光武乃使成国上公王凤、廷尉大将军王常留守，夜自与骠骑大将军宗佻、五威将军李轶等十三骑，出城南门，于外收兵。
现代文：这时，城中只有八九千人，光武便叫成国上公王凤、廷尉大将军王常守城，自己与骠骑大将军宗佻、五威将军李轶等十三人骑马夜出城南门，在外面组织兵力。
English: At this time, there were only 89,000 people in the city. Guangwu then summoned the country's last prince, Wang Feng, and the imperial lieutenant, Wang Chang, to guard the city. He and thirteen others, including the cavalry general, Zong Jun, and the general of the Five Kingdoms, Li Jun, rode out of the south gate of the city at night to organize troops outside.

古文：时莽军到城下者且十万，光武几不得出。
现代文：这时王莽军队已有近十万到了城下，光武差点儿走不出城。
English: At this time, Wang Mang's army had nearly one hundred thousand under the city, and Guangwu almost could not get out of the city.

古文：既至郾、定陵，悉发诸营兵，而诸将贪惜财货，欲分留守之。
现代文：到了郾、定陵，将各兵营军队悉数调发，而诸将贪惜财货想分兵留守。
English: When they arrived at Shun and Dingling, they transferred all the troops from each barracks, but the generals were so greedy for money and goods that they wanted to leave some soldiers behind.

古文：光武曰： 今若破敌，珍珤万倍，大功可成；如为所败，首领无余，何财物之有！ 众乃从。
现代文：光武说： 现在假如打败了敌人，珍宝万倍，大功可成；假如被敌人打败，我们的头颅也保不住，哪还有什么财物呢？ 
English: Guangwu said, "Now, if we defeat the enemy, the treasure will be multiplied ten thousand times, and great achievements can be made; if we are defeated by the enemy, our heads cannot be saved, and what kind of wealth is left?

古文：严尤说王邑曰： 昆阳城小而坚，今假号者在宛，亟进大兵，彼必奔走；宛败，昆阳自服。 邑曰： 吾昔以虎牙将军围翟义，坐不生得，以见责让。
现代文：大家才依从了光武的意见。严尤劝王邑说： 昆阳城小而坚固，现僭称帝王的刘玄在宛城，我们快速派遣大军攻击，他们必定逃跑；宛城兵败，昆阳自然归服。 王邑说： 过去我以虎牙将军身份围攻翟义，因不曾活捉他而受到责备。
English: Everyone followed Guangwu's advice. Wang Yu was strongly advised to say: Kunyang City is small and strong. Liu Xuan, who is now called the emperor, is in Wancheng. We quickly sent a large army to attack, and they must have fled. Wancheng was defeated, and Kunyang naturally surrendered. Wang Yu said: In the past, I besieged Zhai Yi as General Huya, and I was blamed for not capturing him alive.

古文：今将百万之众，遇城而不能下，何谓邪？ 遂围之数十重，列营百数，云车十余丈，瞰临城中，旗帜蔽野，埃尘连天，钲鼓之声闻数百里。
现代文：现在率百万大军，碰上城池不能拿下来，怎么说得过去呢？ 于是将昆阳包围几十重，扎营数百个，立起云车，高十余丈，俯视城中，旗帜遍野，尘埃满天，金鼓之声闻数百里。
English: Now he is leading a million-strong army, and when it comes to the city, it cannot be taken down, how can it be said to have passed? So he surrounded Kunyang with dozens of layers, set up hundreds of camps, erected a cloud car, more than ten meters high, looked down on the city, flags everywhere, dust all over the sky, and the sound of the golden drum was heard for hundreds of miles.

古文：或为地道，冲輣橦城。
现代文：有的部队挖掘地道，有的部队用木童车楼车攻城。
English: Some troops were digging tunnels, while others were attacking the city with wooden wagons.

古文：积弩乱发，矢下如雨，城中负户而汲。
现代文：弓弩乱发，箭下如雨，城中人背着门板才能打水。
English: Bows and arrows are flying everywhere, arrows are falling like rain, and people in the city can only fetch water with their backs to the door.

古文：王凤等乞降，不许。
现代文：王凤等求降，未得允许。
English: Wang Feng and others asked to be demoted, but were not allowed.

古文：寻、邑自以为功在漏刻，意气甚逸。夜有流星坠营中，昼有云如坏山，当营而陨，不及地尺而散，吏士皆厌伏。
现代文：王寻王邑自以为成功在顷刻之间，意气闲逸自得，夜有流星坠落兵营，白天有云团，如崩塌的山般当营陨落，离地不到一尺才散，军吏士卒都趴伏在地上。
English: Wang Huan Wangyue thought that success would come in an instant, and his spirit was idle and self-satisfied. At night, meteors fell on the barracks, and during the day there were clouds. When the camp fell like a collapsed mountain, it was less than a foot from the ground before it was scattered, and the officers and men were lying on the ground.

古文：六月己卯，光武遂与营部俱进，自将步骑千余，前去大军四五里而陈。寻、邑亦遣兵数千合战。
现代文：六月初一，光武便与军队一同前进，自己带领着千余名步骑兵，在王莽大军前四五里布阵，王寻、王邑也派了几千名的兵士应战。
English: On the first day of June, Guangwu marched forward with the army. He led more than a thousand infantry and cavalry, and set up a battle line four or five miles ahead of Wang Mang's army. Wang Xun and Wang Yup also sent several thousand soldiers to fight.

古文：光武奔之，斩首数十级。
现代文：光武冲杀敌军，杀敌数十人。
English: Guangwu charged the enemy troops and killed dozens of them.

古文：诸部喜曰： 刘将军平生见小敌怯，今见大敌勇，甚可怪也，且复居前。
现代文：众部下高兴地说： 刘将军平生看到弱小的敌人就害怕，今天遇上强敌反而勇不可当，很是奇怪，而且又到前面去了。
English: His subordinates said happily, "In his life, General Liu was always afraid when he saw a weak enemy, but today, when he encountered a strong enemy, he was very brave. It was very strange, and he went to the front again."

古文：请助将军！ 光武复进、寻、邑兵却，诸部共乘之，斩首数百千级。
现代文：我们也来协助将军吧！ 光武向敌人冲去，王邑、王寻部队退却，部众乘胜进击，斩敌成百上千。
English: Let us also come to assist the general! Guangwu rushed to the enemy, Wang Yue and Wang Huan's troops retreated, and the subordinates advanced with victory, killing hundreds and thousands of enemies.

古文：连胜，遂前。
现代文：屡战屡胜，队伍又向前推进。
English: After repeated battles and victories, the team pushed forward again.

古文：时，伯升拔宛已三日，而光武尚未知。乃伪使持书报城中，云 宛下兵到 ，而阳墯其书。
现代文：这时，伯升已攻克宛城三日，而光武还不知道，他便派人假装成宛城下部队使者，带书报告城中，说 宛城下援军开到 ，却假意不小心将书信遗失。
English: At this time, Bo Sheng had already conquered Wancheng for three days, but Guangwu did not know it yet, so he sent someone pretending to be an emissary of the troops under Wancheng to report to the city with a letter, saying that reinforcements under Wancheng had arrived, but he accidentally lost the letter.

古文：寻、邑得之，不憙。
现代文：王寻、王邑得信，心中不快。
English: Wang Huan and Wang Yip were believed, but their hearts were not happy.

古文：诸将既经累捷，胆气益壮，无不一当百。
现代文：汉军几次告捷，胆气更壮，无不以一当百。
English: The Chinese army has been victorious several times, and its courage is stronger.

古文：光武乃与敢死者三千人，从城西水上冲其中坚，寻、邑陈乱，乘锐崩之，遂杀王寻。
现代文：光武又带上敢死队三千人，从城西水上冲敌中坚，王寻、王邑军阵紊乱，光武乘锐气摧垮敌阵，杀了王寻。
English: Guangwu also took 3,000 death squads with him and stormed the enemy's stronghold from the west of the city on the water. Wang Huan and Wangyi's army was in disarray. Guangwu used his strength to destroy the enemy's army and killed Wang Huan.

古文：城中亦鼓噪而出，中外合势，震呼动天地，莽兵大溃，走者相腾践，奔殪百余里间。
现代文：昆阳城中也击鼓呐喊冲杀而出，内外合击，声震天地，莽军大败，奔逃的兵士互相践踏，死伤者遍布百余里。
English: In Kunyang City, they also went out to fight with drums and shouts, colliding inside and outside, the sound shook the world, the reckless army was defeated, the fleeing soldiers trampled each other, and the dead and injured were spread over more than a hundred miles.

古文：会大雷风，屋瓦皆飞，雨下如注，滍川盛溢，虎豹皆股战，士卒争赴，溺死者以万数，水为不流。王邑、严尤、陈茂轻骑乘死人度水逃去。尽获其军实辎重、车甲珍宝，不可胜算，举之连月不尽，或燔烧其余。
现代文：天空恰巧大雷狂风，屋瓦都刮飞了。大雨倾盆，滍川河水暴涨，虎豹都吓得浑身发抖，士兵们争相渡水逃命，溺死的以万数，河水为之不流，王邑、严尤、陈茂轻装骑马，踏着死人渡河逃走，光武尽得莽军粮草器械，战车、盔甲、珍宝不计其数，几个月都搬不完，有的只好烧毁了。
English: The sky coincided with a thunderstorm and wind, and the roof tiles were blown away. Heavy rain poured down, the Lugu River water soared, the tigers and leopards were scared and shivered, the soldiers scrambled to cross the water to escape, thousands drowned, the river was not flowing, Wang Yiwu, Yan You, Chen Mao lightly loaded on horseback, crossed the river and fled on foot, the military grain and grass equipment, chariots, armor, and treasures were countless, and they could not be moved for months, and some had to be burned.

古文：光武因复徇下颍阳。
现代文：光武乘势攻下了颍阳县。
English: Guangwu took advantage of the situation and captured Fenyang County.

古文：会伯升为更始所害，光武自父城驰诣宛谢。
现代文：这时刘伯升被更始帝刘玄杀死，光武立即从父城赶到宛城谢罪。
English: At this time, Liu Bo Sheng was killed by Emperor Liu Xuan, and Guangwu immediately rushed from his father's city to Wancheng to apologize.

古文：司徒官属迎吊光武，光武难交私语，深引过而已。
现代文：司徒府的属官们都来慰问光武，光武不便和他们私下议论什么，只是深深地自责。
English: The subordinate officials of Szeto Palace all came to offer their condolences to Guangwu. Guangwu was inconvenienced and did not discuss anything with them in private, but he deeply blamed himself.

古文：未尝自伐昆阳之功，又不敢为伯升服丧，饮食言笑如平常。
现代文：他从没有自夸昆阳之战的功勋，也不敢为伯升服丧，饮食谈笑都如平常一样自然。
English: He never boasted about the merits of the Battle of Kunyang, nor did he dare to attend the funeral of Baosheng. Eating and talking were as natural as usual.

古文：更始以是惭，拜光武为破虏大将军，封武信侯。
现代文：更始帝对此感到内疚，拜光武为破虏大将军，封他为武信侯。
English: Emperor Gensho felt guilty about this, and named Baikongwu as the general who defeated the invaders, and made him the prince of Wuxin.

古文：九月庚戌，三辅豪杰共诛王莽，传首诣宛。
现代文：九月初三，长安三辅豪杰合力杀了王莽，并将他头颅送到宛城。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, the three heroes of Chang'an jointly killed Wang Mang and sent his head to Wancheng.

古文：更始将北都洛阳，以光武行司隶校尉，使前整修宫府。
现代文：更始帝于是准备北上定都洛阳，便让光武代理司隶校尉，要他先行前往洛阳修整皇宫官府。
English: Emperor Kangxi then prepared to go north to Luoyang, the capital of Ding, and asked Guangwu, the acting lieutenant, to go to Luoyang first to repair the imperial palace.

古文：于是置僚属，作文移，从事司察，一如旧章。
现代文：光武于是设置下属官吏，起草公文，以从事史察举非法，一切照汉代旧有制度办事。
English: Guangwu then set up subordinate officials to draft official documents in order to illegally engage in historical research, and everything was done according to the old system of the Han Dynasty.

古文：时三辅吏士东迎更始，见诸将过，皆冠帻，而服妇人衣，诸于绣镼，莫不笑之，或有畏而走者。
现代文：这时三辅官员东迎更始帝，见诸将走过，都戴平民头巾，穿女人衣服，大掖衣加上绣花的半臂衣，没有不笑话他们的。
English: At this time, the officials of the Three Auxiliary Departments of the Eastern and Western Regions welcomed the Emperor, and when they saw the dignitaries passing by, they all wore civilian headscarves, women's clothes, coats with embroidered half-sleeves, and laughed at them.

古文：及见司隶僚属，皆欢喜不自胜。
现代文：有的还因为他们所服 不祥 而畏惧患祸逃开。及至见到光武的僚属，都不胜欣喜。
English: Some also fled in fear of the evil they had been subjected to, and were overjoyed to see Guangwu's colleagues.

古文：老吏或垂涕曰： 不图今日复见汉官威仪！ 由是识者皆属心焉。
现代文：年老的官员有的掉泪说： 想不到今天又见到我大汉官吏的威仪风采！ 从此有见识的人都归心于光武了。
English: Some of the old officials shed tears and said, "I can't believe I'm seeing the dignified demeanor of Han officials again today! From now on, people with insight have come to rely on Guangwu."

古文：及更始至洛阳，乃遣光武以破虏将军行大司马事。
现代文：及至更始到了洛阳，便任光武为破虏将军代行大司马的职务。
English: When he finally arrived in Luoyang, he appointed Guangwu as the general who defeated the invaders to act as the grand steward.

古文：十月，持节北度河，镇慰州郡。
现代文：十月，光武拿着符节渡黄河北上，安定抚慰州郡官民。
English: In October, Guangwu took the festival to cross the Yellow River to the north, bringing stability and comfort to the officials and people of Suzhou County.

古文：所到部县，辄见二千石、长吏、三老、官属，下至佐史，考察黜陟，如州牧行部事。
现代文：所到郡县，就会见郡守、长吏、三老、官属，下至佐史，考察升降事宜，好像州牧巡视郡国办事一样。
English: When they arrive at the county, they will meet with the county governor, chief officials, elders, and officials, and go down to Sashi to investigate promotion and demotion matters, just like the state pastoral inspection of county affairs.

古文：辄平遣囚徒，除王莽苛政，复汉官名。吏人喜悦，争持牛、酒迎劳。
现代文：平反错案，遣放囚犯，除掉王莽时的苛政，恢复汉室官名，官民喜悦，争以牛酒迎接慰劳。
English: The wrongful case was rectified, the prisoners were released, the harsh government of Wang Mangchu was removed, the official name of the Han Dynasty was restored, the officials and the people were happy, and they were eager to welcome the consolation with cow wine.

古文：进至邯郸，故赵缪王子林说光武曰： 赤眉今在河东，但决水灌之，百万之众可使为鱼。 光武不答，去之真定。
现代文：到了邯郸，已故赵缪王的儿子刘林向光武献策说： 赤眉军现在河东，只要决开黄河淹灌他们，赤眉百万军队顷刻就可成为鱼虾。 光武不答，离开邯郸去了真定。
English: When they arrived in Handan, Liu Lin, the son of the late King Zhao Mui, offered advice to Guangwu: The Red Eyebrow Army is now east of the river, as long as the Yellow River is opened to flood them, the Red Eyebrow million army can become fish and shrimp in an instant. Guangwu did not answer, and left Handan for Zhending.

古文：林于是乃诈以卜者王郎为成帝子子舆，十二月，立郎为天子，都邯郸，遂遣使者降下郡国。
现代文：赵林便让从事占卜的王郎伪装为成帝的儿子刘子舆，十二月，拥立王郎为天子，定都邯郸，并派使者说服各郡国归降。
English: Zhao Lin then had Wang Lang, who was engaged in divination, disguised as Emperor Cheng's son Liu Zi Yu. In December, he proclaimed Wang Lang to be the Son of Heaven and set up the capital, and sent an envoy to persuade all counties and countries to surrender.

古文：二年正月，光武以王郎新盛，乃北徇蓟。
现代文：更始二年正月，光武因为王郎新起势盛，便北上巡视蓟地。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Heian period, Mitsutake went to the north to inspect Shikoku due to the new rise of Wangro.

古文：王郎移檄购光武十万户，而故广阳王子刘接起兵蓟中以应郎，城内扰乱，转相惊恐，言邯郸使者方到，二千石以下皆出迎。
现代文：王郎发布檄文，许诺捕杀到光武的封以十万户的爵位。而已故广阳王刘嘉的儿子刘接，起兵蓟中以策应王郎，蓟城城内扰乱，百姓惊恐，并传说邯郸派来的使者刚到，二千石以下的官员都出去欢迎。
English: Wang Lang issued an imperial edict, promising to capture and kill Guangwu, and to bestow the title of nobility on 100,000 households. However, Liu Jie, the son of the late Guangyang King Liu Jia, responded to Wang Lang by raising an army and stirring up trouble in the city. The people were terrified, and it was rumored that an envoy sent by Wang Lang had just arrived, and officials of less than 2,000 koku went out to welcome him.

古文：于是光武趣驾南辕，晨夜不敢入城邑，舍食道傍。
现代文：于是光武急忙驾车南奔，早晨夜晚都不敢进城，连吃饭睡觉也只是在路边停留。
English: As a result, Guangwu hurriedly drove south. In the morning and at night, he did not dare to enter the city. Even when eating and sleeping, he only stopped by the roadside.

古文：至饶阳，官属皆乏食。
现代文：到达饶阳，官兵都没有东西吃了。
English: Arriving in Raoyang, the officers and soldiers had nothing to eat.

古文：光武乃自称邯郸使者，入传舍。
现代文：光武就自称是邯郸派来的使者，到驿站休息。
English: Guangwu claimed to be a messenger sent by the dragonfly and went to the dragonfly station to rest.

古文：传吏方进食，从者饥，争夺之。
现代文：管理驿站的人刚送上饭来，光武手下的人饥饿难忍，争着抢饭吃。
English: The person in charge of the station had just served the meal, but the people under Guangwu's command were starving and scrambling for food.

古文：传吏疑其伪，乃椎鼓数十通，绐言邯郸将军至，官属皆失色。
现代文：客栈的小吏怀疑光武是假冒，便击鼓数十通，谎称邯郸将军到，官属都吓得变了脸色。
English: The inn's clerk suspected that Guangwu was a fake, so he beat the drums dozens of times, falsely claiming that General Gong had arrived. The officials were scared and turned pale.

古文：光武升车欲驰，既而惧不免，徐还坐，曰： 请邯郸将军人。 久乃驾去。
现代文：光武上车想要奔逃，但转念怕跑不了，便从容坐到原位，说： 请邯郸将军进来！ 等了许久才驾车离开。
English: Guangwu got on the bus and wanted to run away, but he was afraid he wouldn't be able to, so he calmly sat down in the same place and said, "Please, General Zou, come in!" He waited for a long time before driving away.

古文：传中人遥语门者闭之。
现代文：客栈的人远远地叫守门者不放行。
English: The innkeeper called from a distance for the gatekeeper not to let them through.

古文：门长曰： 天下讵可知，而闭长者乎？ 遂得南出。
现代文：守门的官长说： 天下大局岂可预知？怎敢将尊贵的人困在城中？ 
English: And the captain of the guard said, Who can tell what will be in the future? for how can a prince be shut up in the midst of the city?

古文：晨夜兼行，蒙犯霜雪，天时寒，面皆破裂。
现代文：光武于是从南门出了城。日夜兼程，蒙霜冒雪，时正天寒，脸面都冻裂了。
English: So Guangwu went out of the city from the South Gate. He walked day and night, covered in frost and snow, and it was cold all the time. His face was frozen.

古文：至呼沱河，无船，适遇冰合，得过，未毕数车而陷。
现代文：到了呼沱河，没有船，恰值河面封冻，车子得以通过，几乎不等最后几辆车完全通过，冰面就塌了。
English: When we arrived at the Hulun River, there were no boats. Just as the surface of the river froze, the car was able to pass. Almost as soon as the last few cars had completely passed, the ice surface collapsed.

古文：信都郡为长安守，去此八十里。 光武即驰赴之，信都太守任光开门出迎。
现代文：到达下博城西，他们正彷徨困惑，不知往哪里走为好。路旁有个白衣老人指点他们说：努力啊，信都郡的人还在为长安政守着，离这里还有八十里。 光武马上赶去，太守任光开门迎接。
English: When they reached the west side of Shimo-bo Castle, they were confused and did not know where to go. An old man in a white robe on the side of the road pointed to them and said, "Make an effort, the people of Xindu County are still guarding Chang'an, it's still eighty miles from here." Guangwu immediately rushed to meet them and opened the door for them.

古文：世祖因发旁县，得四千人，先击堂阳、贳县，皆降之。
现代文：光武便征发周围各县兵马，共得四千人，首先攻打堂阳、贳县，两地都投降了光武。
English: Guangwu then conscripted soldiers and horses from the surrounding counties, gaining a total of four thousand. He first attacked Doyang and Min County, and both places surrendered to Guangwu.

古文：王莽和成卒正邳彤亦举郡降。
现代文：王莽和成卒正邳彤也领全郡投降。
English: Wang Mang and Cheng's subordinate Zhengyi also led the entire county to surrender.

古文：又昌城人刘植，宋子人耿纯，各率宗亲子弟，据其县邑，以奉光武。于是北降下曲阳，众稍合，乐附者至有数万人。
现代文：又有昌城人刘植、宋子人耿纯带领宗亲子弟，占领了所在县城，奉献给光武，于是往北攻下曲阳，部众渐渐地集聚起来，乐意依附光武的达到数万人。
English: In addition, Liu Zhi from Changcheng and Geng Chun from the Song Dynasty, led by their sons and sons, occupied the county seat and dedicated it to Guangwu, so they went north to conquer Quyang. The followers gradually gathered, and tens of thousands of people were willing to follow Guangwu.

古文：复北击中山，拔卢奴。所过发奔命兵，移檄边部，共击邯郸，郡县还复响应。
现代文：光武又向北攻击中山国，占领了卢奴县，所到之处，征发 奔命兵 ，发送檄文到边境各部，要他们一同攻打邯郸，各郡县纷纷回复响应。
English: Guangwu also attacked Zhongshan Province to the north and occupied Lunu County. Wherever he went, he conscripted soldiers to run for their lives and sent letters to the border ministries, asking them to fight together. The counties responded in succession.

古文：南击新市、真定、元氏、防子，皆下之，因入赵界。
现代文：南向攻克新市、真定、元氏、防子，于是进入赵地境界。
English: To the south, they conquered Xinshi, Zhending, Yuan, and Bozi, and thus entered the Zhao territory.

古文：时，王郎大将李育屯柏人，汉兵不知而进，前部偏将朱浮、邓禹为育所破，亡失辎重。
现代文：当时，王郎的大将李育在柏人县屯驻，汉军没探到敌情，进军此地，先遣部队偏将朱浮、邓禹被李育击败，军中的物资都丢失了。
English: At that time, Wang Lang's general Li Yu was stationed in Pak Rong County. The Chinese army did not find the enemy situation and marched into this place. The advance troops, Zhu Fu and Deng Yu, were defeated by Li Yu, and the materials in the army were lost.

古文：光武在后闻之，收浮、禹散卒，与育战于郭门，大破之，尽得其所获。
现代文：光武在后面得知消息，收聚了朱浮、邓禹的散兵败将，与李育在外城门激战，大败李育，收缴了李育同朱、邓交战时所获得的粮草和物资。
English: When Guangwu learned the news later, he gathered the defeated scattered soldiers of Zhu Fu and Deng Yu and fought a fierce battle with Li Yu at the outer city gate. He defeated Li Yu and confiscated the grain and materials that Li Yu had obtained during the war with Zhu and Deng.

古文：育还保城，攻之不下，于是引兵拔广阿。
现代文：李育退守小城，光武攻不下来，于是带兵攻下广阿县。
English: Li Yu retreated to defend the small city, Guangwu could not attack, so he led an army to attack Guanga County.

古文：会上谷大守耿况、渔阳太守彭宠各遣其将吴汉、寇恂等将突骑来助击王郎，更始亦遣尚书仆射谢躬讨郎，光武因大飨士卒，遂东围巨鹿。
现代文：此时恰逢上谷太守耿况、渔阳太守彭宠分别派吴汉、寇恂等将军率领精锐骑兵前来协助攻击王郎，更始帝也派尚书仆射谢躬前来讨伐王郎，光武于是好好地犒劳了士兵，然后东进包围了钜鹿城。
English: This coincided with the time when Uetani Taishu Geng Zhou and Yuyang Taishu Peng Jiao respectively sent Wu Han, Kou Qi and other generals to lead the elite cavalry to help attack Wang Lang. Moreover, the first emperor also sent Shang Shubu to fight Wang Lang. Therefore, Guangwu rewarded the soldiers well, and then marched east to encircle Elk City.

古文：王郎守将王饶坚守，月余不下。
现代文：王郎的将军王饶坚守城中，光武一个多月也没攻下。
English: Wang Rao, Wang Lang's general, held out in the city, and did not capture Guangwu for more than a month.

古文：郎遣将倪宏、刘奉率数万人救钜鹿，光武逆战于南䜌，斩首数千级。
现代文：王郎又派遣倪宏、刘奉率数万兵马解救钜鹿，光武到南县迎头痛击，斩杀敌军数千人。
English: Wang Lang also dispatched Ni Hong and Liu Bong to lead tens of thousands of soldiers and horses to rescue Mule Deer, and Guangwu went to Nan County to strike hard, killing thousands of enemy troops.

古文：四月，进围邯郸，连战破之。
现代文：四月，又进军围攻邯郸，连战连胜。
English: In April, they marched to besiege Handan again and won back-to-back victories.

古文：五月甲辰，拔其城，诛王郎。
现代文：五月甲辰日，攻破邯郸，杀了王郎。
English: On the first day of the fifth month, he broke through the fence and killed Wang Lang.

古文：收文书，得吏人与郎交关谤毁者数千章。
现代文：缴获文书，发现汉军官吏与王郎勾结毁谤光武的信函数千章。
English: Documents were seized, and it was discovered that Han military officials had colluded with Wang Lang to defame Guangwu.

古文：光武不省，会诸将军烧之，曰： 令反侧子自安。 
现代文：光武看也不看，召集众将军烧掉它们，说： 让那些辗转反侧的人安下心来吧。 
English: Guangwu didn't even look at them, so he called in the generals to burn them, saying, "Let those who have turned their backs come to their senses."

古文：更始遣侍御史持节立光武为萧王，悉令罢兵诣行在所。
现代文：更始帝派侍御史持符节立光武为萧王，要他停战回到更始帝所在地。
English: Emperor Qian Shi dispatched his attendant Shi Shi to hold a ceremony to install Guangwu as King Xiao and ask him to end the war and return to Emperor Qian's residence.

古文：光武辞以河北未平，不就征。
现代文：光武推辞说河北尚未平定，不接受命令。
English: Guangwu retorted that Hebei had not yet been pacified and did not accept the order.

古文：自是始贰于更始。
现代文：从此光武开始对更始帝存有二心。
English: From this time on, Mitsutake began to have second thoughts about Emperor Genshin.

古文：是时，长安政乱，四方背叛。
现代文：当时长安政事混乱，各方面纷纷叛离更始帝。
English: At that time, the political situation in Chang'an was chaotic, and various parties were defecting from Emperor Kangxi.

古文：梁王刘永擅命睢阳，公孙述称王巴蜀，李宪自立为淮南王，秦丰自号楚黎王，张步起琅邪，董宪起东海，延岑起汉中，田戎起夷陵，并置将帅，侵略郡县。
现代文：梁王刘永在睢阳县专权行事，公孙述在巴蜀称王，李宪则自立为淮南王，秦丰自称楚黎王，张步在琅邪起兵，董宪在东海起兵，延岑在汉中起兵，田戎在夷陵起兵，都委任将帅，侵占各郡县。
English: Liang Wang Liu Yong acted with absolute power in Puyang County, Gongsun Su declared himself king in Bashu, Li Xian declared himself king of Huainan, Qin Feng claimed to be king of Zuri, Zhang Bu raised an army in Shiyan, Dong Xian raised an army in the East China Sea, Yan Hui raised an army in Hanzhong, and Tian Rong raised an army in Yiling. They all appointed generals and occupied various counties.

古文：又别号诸贼铜马、大肜、高湖、重连、铁胫、大抢、尤来、上江、青犊、五校、檀乡、五幡、五楼、富平、获索等，各领部曲，众合数百万人，所在寇掠。
现代文：又有别号为铜马、大肜、高湖、重连、铁胫、大抢、尤来、上江、青犊、五校、檀乡、五幡、五楼、富平、获索等的各地盗匪，各自领着手下的部队，总数多达数百万人，在各自所在的郡县掠夺。
English: There were also bandits from various regions with aliases such as the Bronze Horse, Dalat, Gaohu, Chonglian, Spade, Great Robbery, Youlai, Shangjiang, Qingdao, Five Schools, Dangxiang, Wuchang, Fifth Floor, Fuping, and Wuso, each of whom led their troops, totaling up to several million people, to plunder in their respective counties.

古文：光武将击之，先遣吴汉北发十郡兵。
现代文：光武准备讨伐这些盗贼，先派遣吴汉征发十郡的兵马北进。
English: Guangwu prepared to fight these thieves, first sending Wu Han to send ten counties of soldiers and horses to the north.

古文：幽州牧苗曾不从，汉遂斩曾而发其众。
现代文：幽州的长官苗曾不服从，吴汉便杀了他，调发了他的部队。
English: Miao, the governor of Yuzhou, once disobeyed, and Wu Han killed him and dispatched his troops.

古文：秋，光武击铜马于鄡，吴汉将突骑来会清阳。
现代文：秋天，光武在县攻打铜马军，吴汉率领精锐骑兵来到清阳县与光武会合。
English: In autumn, Guangwu attacked the Bronze Horse Army in the county, and Wu Han led the elite cavalry to Qingyang County to meet with Guangwu.

古文：贼数挑战，光武坚营自守；有出卤掠者，辄击取之，绝其粮道。
现代文：铜马军屡次挑战，光武坚守军营不予还击，而铜马军一旦有人外出抢掠财物，光武就派人截击他们，断绝铜马军的粮草通道。
English: The Bronze Horse Army repeatedly challenged, Guangwu insisted on defending the camp and did not return fire, and once the Bronze Horse Army went out to loot property, Guangwu sent people to intercept them and cut off the Bronze Horse Army's grain and grass channel.

古文：积月余日，贼食尽，夜遁去，追至馆陶，大破之。
现代文：如此过了一个多月，铜马军粮食吃尽，半夜逃离，光武率军追至馆陶县，大败铜马军。
English: After more than a month, the Bronze Horse Army ran out of food and fled in the middle of the night. Guangwu and his army chased them to Guantao County and defeated the Bronze Horse Army.

古文：受降未尽，而高湖、重连从东南来，与铜马余众合，光武复与大战于蒲阳，悉破降之，封其渠帅为列侯。
现代文：未等铜马军全部投降，从东南方向又来了高湖、重连两路人马，与剩余的铜马军会合，光武于是又与他们在蒲阳激战，全线攻破敌军并使他们归降，封他们的将领为列侯。
English: Not waiting for the entire Bronze Horse Army to surrender, Gao Wu again came from the southeast to join the remaining Bronze Horse Army. Guangwu then fought with them fiercely in Puyang, broke the enemy army across the entire line and made them surrender, and made their generals lieutenants.

古文：降者犹不自安，光武知其意，敕令各归营勒兵，乃自乘轻骑按行部陈。
现代文：投降的将领心里还是不踏实，光武知道他们的疑虑，令他们回到各自的军队管理士兵，然后自己悠闲地骑马视察各营部队。
English: The surrendering generals were still unsure in their hearts. Guangwu knew their doubts and ordered them to return to their respective armies to manage the soldiers, and then leisurely ride on horseback to inspect the battalions.

古文：降者更相语曰： 萧王推赤心置人腹中，安得不投死乎！ 由是皆服。
现代文：投降的人互相议论说： 萧王对我们推心置腹，我们怎么能不以死相报呢？ 从此他们都心悦诚服。
English: Those who surrendered discussed with each other, saying, "King Xiao has put his heart and soul into us, how can we not repay him with our death?" From then on, they were all sincerely convinced.

古文：悉将降人分配诸将，众遂数十万，故关西号光武为 铜马帝 。
现代文：光武把投降的人马全部分配给诸位将领，他的部队也扩充至数十万人，关西的人因此称光武为 铜马帝 。
English: Guangwu distributed all the surrendered men and horses to the generals, and his troops also expanded to hundreds of thousands, so people in Kansai called Guangwu the Bronze Horse Emperor.

古文：赤眉别帅与大肜、青犊十余万众在射犬，光武进击，大破之，众皆散走。
现代文：赤眉军别部将领和大肜、青犊的十多万人马聚集在射犬，光武率兵攻击，大败赤眉军，各路人马都逃散了。
English: The generals of the other departments of the Red Eyebrows Army and more than one hundred thousand people gathered in the shooting dogs, led by Guangwu, defeated the Red Eyebrows Army, and all the people fled.

古文：使吴汉、岑彭袭杀谢躬于邺。
现代文：光武又派吴汉、岑彭袭击邺城，杀了谢躬。
English: Guangwu also sent Wu Han and Yao Peng to attack Handan and killed Xie Mu.

古文：青犊、赤眉贼人函谷关，攻更始。
现代文：青犊、赤眉军进入函谷关，攻打更始帝。
English: The Qingcheng and Red Eyebrow armies entered the Hanzhong Pass and attacked Emperor Qianshih.

古文：光武乃遣邓禹率六裨将引兵而西，以更始、赤眉之乱。
现代文：光武便派邓禹带领六路副将率兵西进，以利用更始帝与赤眉战乱的时机。
English: Guangwu then sent Deng Yu to lead the Sixth Route Vice-Commander and lead the soldiers westward to take advantage of the opportunity of the war between Emperor Kangxi and Red Eyebrows.

古文：时，更始使大司马朱鲔、舞阴王李轶等屯洛阳，光武亦令冯异守孟津以拒之。
现代文：更始帝此时派大司马朱鲔、舞阴王李轶等屯驻洛阳，光武也命令冯异坚守孟津对抗他们。
English: At this time, Emperor Kangxi sent the Grand Master Ma Zhulun and the King of Wuyin Li Xi to stay in Luoyang, and Guangwu also ordered Feng Yi to stay in Mengjin to oppose them.

古文：建武元年春正月，平陵人方望立前孺子刘婴为天子，更始遣丞相李松击斩之。
现代文：建武元年春天正月，平陵人方望立前汉孺子刘婴为天子，更始派丞相李松击之，把刘婴杀了。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Jianwu era, the Pingling people hoped to establish the former Han prince Liu Jiao as the son of heaven, and initially sent the prime minister Li Song to strike him and kill Liu Jiao.

古文：光武北击尤来、大抢、五幡于元氏，追至右北平，连破之。
现代文：光武向北击尤来、大抢、五幡于元氏，追至右北平，连连告捷。
English: Guangwu attacked Yu Lai to the north, made a great rush, and chased Ehuan Yu Yuan to the right of Beiping, and won success after success.

古文：又战于顺水北，乘胜轻进，反为所败。
现代文：又战于顺水北，乘胜轻易进军，反为所败。
English: He also fought in the north of Shunshui. He easily marched into the army after winning, but was defeated.

古文：贼追急，短兵接，光武自投高岸，遇突骑王丰，下马授光武，光武抚其肩而上，顾笑谓耿弇曰： 几为虏嗤。 弇频射却贼，得免。
现代文：贼兵追得紧，短兵相接，光武跳到高岸上，碰着突骑王丰，王丰下马将马让给光武，光武按着王丰的肩膀上马，回头笑对耿弇说： 差点儿让强盗们讥笑了！ 
English: The thief-soldier chased closely, the short soldiers met, Guangwu jumped onto the high bank, bumped into the charge of Wang Feng, Wang Feng dismounted and gave the horse to Guangwu, Guangwu pressed Wang Feng's shoulder to mount the horse, smiled back and said to Geng Yao: I almost made the robbers laugh!

古文：士卒死者数千人，散兵归保范阳。
现代文：耿弇连连射击把敌人打退，才免除遭难。士卒死了数千人，余部退守范阳。
English: Geng Biao fired repeatedly to drive the enemy back, only to be spared from disaster. Thousands of soldiers died, and the rest retreated to defend Fanyang.

古文：军中不见光武，或云已殁，诸将不知所为。
现代文：部队见不到光武，有人说光武已死，诸将领不知该怎么办。
English: The troops can't see Guangwu, some say that Guangwu is dead, and the generals don't know what to do.

古文：吴汉曰： 卿曹努力！王兄子在南阳，何忧无主？ 众恐惧，数日乃定。
现代文：吴汉说： 各位要勉力干，萧王哥哥的儿子在南阳，何必担忧无主呢！ 大家惶恐害怕，好几天才安定。
English: Wu Han said: Everyone should work hard, Xiao Wang's brother's son is in Nanyang, why worry about having no master! Everyone was panicked and scared, and it took several days to stabilize.

古文：贼虽战胜，而素慑大威，客主不相知，夜遂引去。
现代文：贼虽打了胜仗，而素来惧怕光武声威，彼此形势不了解，夜里就带兵走了。
English: Although the thieves had won the battle, they had always been afraid of the light and the sound of the guns. They did not understand each other's situation, so they took the soldiers away in the night.

古文：大军复进至安交，与战，破之，斩首三千余级。
现代文：光武又进军到安次，与敌交战，打败敌军，斩三千余人。
English: Guangwu marched to Anji again, fought with the enemy, defeated the enemy army, and killed more than three thousand people.

古文：贼人渔阳，乃遣吴汉率耿弇、陈俊、马武等十二将军追战于潞东，及平谷，大破灭之。
现代文：敌军退入渔阳，光武便派吴汉统领耿弇、陈俊、马武等十二将军追击于潞城之东，追至平谷，消灭了尤来等部。
English: When the enemy army retreated to Yuyang, Guangwu sent twelve generals, including the Wu Han leaders Geng Pi, Chen Jun, and Ma Wu, to pursue them to the east of Lucheng and as far as Pinggu, annihilating Yulai and other provinces.

古文：朱鲔遣讨难将军苏茂攻温，冯异、寇恂与战，大破之，斩其将贾彊。
现代文：朱鲔派讨难将军苏茂攻温城，冯异、寇恂迎战，大败苏茂军，杀了苏茂的大将贾强。
English: Zhu Xi sent the troublesome general Sumo to attack Wencheng, Feng Yi and Guo Xi went to war, defeated the Sumo army, and killed Sumo's general Jia Qiang.

古文：于是诸将议上尊号。
现代文：于是众将开始商议光武称帝之事。
English: As a result, the generals began to discuss the succession of Emperor Guangwu.

古文：马武先进曰： 天下无主。如有圣人承敝而起，虽仲尼为相，孙子为将，犹恐无能有益。
现代文：马武首先进言说： 天下无主，如果有圣人趁衰败的局面兴起，您即便让孔子做丞相，孙子做大将，恐怕还是难以挽回。
English: Mabu first said: There is no master in the world. If a saint takes advantage of the situation of decline and rises, even if you let Confucius be the prime minister and his grandson be the general, I am afraid it will be difficult to recover.

古文：反水不收，后悔无及。
现代文：现在谁是贼人，我们驰骋战斗去攻击他呢？ 
English: Now who is the thief, that we should run and fight against him?

古文：大王虽执谦退，奈宗庙社稷何！
现代文：光武惊异地说： 将军怎么说这样的话？该杀头的呀！ 
English: Surprised, Guangwu said, "How could the general say such a thing? He should be beheaded!"

古文：宜且还蓟即尊位，乃议征伐。
现代文：马武说： 所有的将领都是这种看法呢！ 
English: Mabu said: All generals are of this opinion!

古文：今此谁贼而驰骛击之乎？ 光武惊曰： 何将军出是言？ 可斩也！ 武曰： 诸将尽然。 光武使出晓之，乃引军还至蓟。
现代文：光武使马武晓谕其他各将领，便率领部队回蓟城。
English: Mabu, the envoy of Guangwu, told the other generals and led the troops back to Lushan.

古文：夏四月，公孙述自称天子。
现代文：夏四月，公孙述自称天子。
English: In the summer of April, his great-grandson began to call himself the Son of Heaven.

古文：光武从蓟还，过范阳，命收葬吏士。
现代文：光武从蓟县返回，途经范阳，下令收埋官兵的遗体。
English: When Guangwu returned from Min County, he passed through Fanyang and ordered the bodies of officers and soldiers to be buried.

古文：至中山，诸将复上奏曰： 汉遭王莽，宗庙废绝，豪杰愤怒，兆人涂炭。
现代文：到达中山国，众将领又上奏说： 汉朝遭遇王莽之乱，宗庙祭祀废弃断绝，豪杰愤慨恼怒，黎民百姓正处在水深火热之中。
English: When they arrived in Zhongshan, the generals made another report: "The Han Dynasty has suffered the Wang Mang Rebellion, the ancestral temple sacrifices have been abandoned, the heroes are indignant and angry, and the Li people are in deep water.

古文：王与伯升首举义兵，更始因其资以据帝位，而不能奉承大统，败乱纲纪，盗贼日多，群生危蹙。
现代文：大王和伯升首起义兵，更始帝凭借资历占据了帝位，却不能奉承汉朝大统，败乱纲常法纪，致使盗匪滋生，天下危急。
English: The Great King and Baosheng were the first insurgents, and the first emperor occupied the imperial throne by virtue of his qualifications, but he could not flatter the Han Dynasty general, and he destroyed the normal legal discipline, causing bandits to breed, and the world was in a critical situation.

古文：大王初征昆阳，王莽自溃；后拔邯郸，北州弭定；参分天下而有其二，跨州据土，带甲百万。
现代文：而大王您昆阳初战，就让王莽溃不成军；后来又攻取邯郸，平定了北方各州；您占有了天下的三分之二，占据各州县的领地，拥有百万精兵。
English: But you, the great king, in the first battle of Kunyang, let Wang Mangru fail to form an army; later, you conquered Yunnan and leveled the northern states; you occupied two-thirds of the world, occupied the territory of each state and county, and had one million elite soldiers.

古文：言武力则莫之敢抗，论文德则无所与辞。
现代文：若论武力，没有谁能与您抗衡；若论文采仁德，没有人能与您相提并论。
English: When it comes to strength, no one can match you; when it comes to kindness, no one can match you.

古文：臣闻帝王不可以久旷，天命不可以谦拒，惟大王以社稷为计，万姓为心。 光武又不听。
现代文：臣下听说帝王之位不可长期空缺，天意不可谦虚辞让，真诚地希望大王您能以社稷大计为重，把黎民百姓放在心上。 光武还是没有听从。
English: His subjects heard that the throne of the emperor should not be vacant for a long time, and that the will of heaven should not be humbly conceded, and sincerely hoped that the great king could give priority to social and economic plans and keep the people of Li in mind. Guangwu still did not obey.

古文：行到南平棘，诸将复固请之。光武曰： 寇贼未平，四面受敌，何遽欲正号位乎？
现代文：进军到南平棘，诸将领又坚决请光武称帝，光武说： 寇贼没有剿灭，四面受敌，何必匆匆称帝呢？
English: After marching to Nanping Thorn, the generals again firmly asked Guangwu to proclaim the emperor. Guangwu said: The bandits have not been annihilated, they have enemies on all sides, why should they hastily proclaim the emperor?

古文：诸将且出。 耿纯进曰： 天下士大夫捐亲戚，弃土壤，从大王于矢石之间者，其计固望其攀龙鳞，附凤翼，以成其所志耳。
现代文：将军们请回去吧！ 耿纯却进一步说： 天下士大夫抛弃亲属背井离乡，跟着大王冲杀在刀箭之间，他们的打算本来就是希望攀龙附凤，来实现自己的志向罢了。
English: Generals, please go back! However, Geng Chun went further and said: The junior officers abandoned their relatives and left their hometowns, and followed the great king to fight among swords and arrows. Their original intention was to climb the dragon and attach the phoenix to realize their ambition.

古文：今功业即定，天人亦应，而大王留时逆众，不正号位，纯恐士大夫望绝计穷，则有去归之思，无为久自苦也。大众一散，难可复合。
现代文：现在功业即将告成，天象人事相应，而大王拖延时间，违背众人心意，不登帝位，我担心士大夫们绝望，打算落空，就产生离去的思想，认为不必久留而自讨苦吃，大众一散，很难再聚。
English: Now that the work is about to be completed, the celestial appearance and personnel are corresponding, and the great king is delaying the time, violating the will of the people, and not ascending to the throne, I am worried that the scholars and doctors are desperate, planning to fail, and have the idea of leaving, thinking that it is not necessary to stay for a long time and suffer hardships, the public is scattered, and it is difficult to reunite.

古文：时不可留，众不可逆。 纯言甚诚切，光武深感，曰： 吾将思之。 
现代文：时机不可延误，群众的意愿不可违背啊！ 耿纯的话十分恳切，光武深为感动，便说： 我再考虑考虑。 
English: The time must not be delayed, the will of the masses must not be violated! Geng Chun's words were very sincere, and Guangwu was deeply moved and said: I will reconsider.

古文：行至鄗，光武先在长安时同舍生彊华自关中奉《赤伏符》，曰 刘秀发兵捕不道，四夷云集龙斗野，四七之际火为主。
现代文：行军到鄗县，光武以前在长安学习时同住一室的强华从关中拿来《赤伏符》，其中说： 刘秀发兵收拾无道的人，四方各族云集，像群龙搏斗于野，二百二十八年之际，火德为主。 
English: Marching to Lixian County, Guangwu Qianghua, who used to live in the same room as Guangwu when he was studying in Chang'an, brought the "Red Flag" from Guanzhong, which said: Liu Xiu sent soldiers to collect the wayless people, and all ethnic groups gathered in all directions, like dragons fighting in the field. On the occasion of the 228th year, fire virtue was the main.

古文：群臣因复奏曰： 受命之符，人应为大，万里合信，不议同情，周之白鱼，曷足比焉？
现代文：群臣乘机又进言说： 接受天命符瑞，以应顺人事为大，现在万里以外的符命，与事物正相切合，不约而同，即便是周武王的白鱼之应，又怎能和这相比呢？
English: The courtiers took the opportunity to say: Accepting the fury of fate and responding to people is great. The fury of fate, which is now thousands of miles away, is in line with things and coincides with things. Even if it is the response of the white fish of King Zhouwu, how can it be compared with this?

古文：今上无天子，海内淆乱，符瑞之应，昭然著闻，宜答天神，以塞群望。 光武于是命有司设坛场于鄗南千秋亭五成陌。
现代文：现在上面没有皇帝，海内混乱，符瑞的应验，明明白白，应回报天上神明，以满足大家的愿望。 光武于是命令官吏在镐城南面千秋亭五成陌，设建祭天的坛场。
English: Now that there is no emperor above, there is chaos at home and abroad, and the fulfillment of Fu Rui is clear, and it should be returned to the gods in the sky to satisfy everyone's wishes. Guangwu then ordered the officials to set up an altar for the worship of heaven at Qianqiu Pavilion, 50 meters south of Handan City.

古文：六月己未，即皇帝位。
现代文：六月二十二，光武登皇帝位。
English: On June 22, Guangwu was enthroned as emperor.

古文：燔燎告天，禋于六宗，望于群神。
现代文：烧柴祭天，祀水火雷风山泽六宗，望祭山林川谷诸神。
English: It is a firewood-burning festival, which worships the gods of water, fire, thunder, wind, mountains and lakes of six sects, as well as the gods of mountains, forests, rivers and valleys.

古文：其祝文曰： 皇天上帝，后土神祇，眷顾降命，属秀黎元，为人父母，秀不敢当。
现代文：祝文说： 皇天上帝，后土神祗，关怀人间，降卜符命，把平民百姓托付刘秀，为民父母，我刘秀实不敢当。
English: The congratulatory message said: Emperor Heaven God, Emperor Earth God, caring for the human world, surrendering life, entrusting the common people to Liu Xiu, as the people's parents, I, Liu Xiu, dare not be.

古文：群下百辟，不谋同辞，咸曰： 王莽篡位，秀发愤兴兵，破王寻、王邑于昆阳，诛王郎、铜马于河北，平定天下，海内蒙恩。
现代文：而部属百官，不约而同，都说： 王莽篡夺帝位，刘秀发愤起兵，破王寻、王邑于昆阳；诛王郎、铜马于河北，平定天下，海内蒙恩。
English: And the subordinates of hundreds of officials, without exception, all said: Wang Mang usurped the imperial throne, Liu Xiu was angry and raised an army to defeat Wang Xun and Wang Wu in Kunyang; Zou Wang Lang and Bronze Horse in Hebei, pacified the world, and received grace at sea.

古文：上当天地之心，下为元元所归。
现代文：上符天地之心，下为百姓归心拥戴。 
English: The top symbolizes the heart of heaven and earth, and the bottom symbolizes the people's heartfelt embrace.

古文：谶记曰： 刘秀发兵捕不道，卯金修德为天子。
现代文：谶记说 ：刘秀发兵捉拿无道的人，卯金修德刘氏为天子。 
English: The Analects of Confucius said: Liu Xiufa sent soldiers to capture those who had no way out, and Utkin Shude Liu was the son of heaven.

古文：秀犹固辞，至于再，至于三。
现代文：我还是坚决推辞，一辞再辞，以至三次推辞。
English: I still resolutely refused, one refusal after another, up to three refusals.

古文：群下佥曰： 皇天大命，不可稽留。
现代文：部属都说： 皇天的大命，不可稽延。 
English: His subordinates all said, "The Emperor's great command cannot be delayed.

古文：敢不敬承。 于是建元为建武，大赦天下，改鄗为高邑。
现代文：刘秀怎么敢不敬奉天命。 于是立年号为建武，大赦天下，改高阝县为高邑。
English: How dare Liu Xiu not respect the mandate of heaven, so he changed the name of the founding year to Jianwu and the name of the county to Gaowu.

古文：是月，赤眉立刘盆子为天子。
现代文：同月，赤眉立刘盆子为天子。
English: In the same month, Akamei raised Liu Bonsi to the status of heavenly son.

古文：甲子，前将军邓禹击更始定国公王匡于安邑，大破之，斩其将刘均。
现代文：二十七日，前将军邓禹在安邑进攻更始定国公王匡，大破王匡军，杀掉他的将领刘均。
English: On the 27th, Deng Yu, a former general, launched an attack on Wang Kuang, the Prince of Ding Province, in Anyi, and defeated Wang Kuang's army, killing his general Liu Jun.

古文：秋七月辛未，拜前将军邓禹为大司徒。
现代文：秋七月初五，拜前将军邓禹为大司徒。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Deng Yu, a former general, became the grand disciple.

古文：丁丑，以野王令王梁为大司空。
现代文：十一日，任命野王令王梁为大司空。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed Wang Liang as the chief secretary of the Air Force.

古文：壬午，以大将军吴汉为大司马，偏将军景丹为骠骑大将军，大将军耿弇为建威大将军，偏将军盖延为虎牙大将军，偏将军朱祐为建义大将军，中坚将军杜茂为大将军。
现代文：十六日，任命大将军吴汉为大司马，偏将军景丹为骠骑大将军，大将军耿弇为建威大将军，偏将军盖延为虎牙大将军，偏将军朱佑为建义大将军，中坚将军杜茂为大将军。
English: On the 16th, he appointed General Wu Han as the chief of the Horse Division, General Jing Dan as the cavalry general, General Geng Wei as General Jian Wei, General Gaien as General Hu Ya, General Zhu You as General Jian Yi, and General Du Mao as the general.

古文：时，宗室刘茂自号 厌新将军 ，率众降，封为中山王。
现代文：这时，皇室亲族刘茂自称 厌新将军 ，率部投降，封为中山王。
English: At this time, Liu Mao, a relative of the imperial family, declared himself to be "tired of the new general," led his troops to surrender, and was crowned King of Zhongshan.

古文：己亥，幸怀。遣耿弇率强弩将军陈俊军五社津，备荥阳以东。
现代文：八月初三，光武到怀县，派耿弇率强弩将军陈俊驻扎五社津，戒备荥阳以东。
English: At the beginning of August 3, Guangwu went to Huai County and sent Geng Yao and the strong general Chen Jun to be stationed in Wushejin, east of Luoyang.

古文：使吴汉率朱祐及廷尉岑彭、执金吾贾复、扬化将军坚镡等十一将军围朱鲔于洛阳。
现代文：派吴汉率朱佑及廷尉岑彭、执金吾贾复、扬化将军坚镡等十一将军在洛阳围攻朱鲔。
English: Wu Han sent eleven generals, including Zhu You, the imperial lieutenant Yu Peng, the regent Jin Wujiafu, and the Yanghua general Jian Qi, to besiege Zhu Xi in Luoyang.

古文：八月壬子，祭社稷。
现代文：八月十六，祭社稷。
English: August 16th, the festival is over.

古文：癸丑，祠高祖、太宗、世宗于怀宫。
现代文：八月十七，在怀宫祭祀高祖、太宗、世宗。
English: On August 17th, a memorial service was held for Gaozu, Taizong, and Shizong at the Imperial Palace.

古文：进幸河阳。更始廪丘王田立降。
现代文：光武行进到河阳，更始廪丘王田立投降。
English: Guangwu marched to Hayao, and at the beginning of the march, Wangdianli surrendered.

古文：九月，赤眉入长安，更始奔高陵。
现代文：九月，赤眉军入长安，更始逃奔高陵。
English: In September, the Red Eyebrow Army entered Chang'an and fled to Gaoling.

古文：辛未，诏曰： 更始破败，弃城逃走，妻子裸袒，流冗道路。
现代文：初六，光武下诏令说： 更始破败，放弃城池逃跑，妻室儿女赤身露体，流散道路，我很怜悯他们。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Guangwu issued the following edict: I am very sorry for the people who have been devastated, who have abandoned the city and fled, and whose wives, children, and relatives are naked and wandering the streets.

古文：朕甚愍之。今封更始为淮阳王。吏人敢有贼害者，罪同大逆。 
现代文：现封更始为淮阴王，官吏平民有敢杀害他的，以大逆罪论处。 
English: He is now known as King Huaiyin. If any officials or civilians dare to kill him, they will be punished for high treason.

古文：甲申，以前密令卓茂为太傅。
现代文：十九日，任平帝时高密令卓茂为太傅。
English: On the 19th, Gaomi ordered Zhuo Mao to be the Taifu.

古文：辛卯，朱鲔举城降。
现代文：二十六日，朱鲔率洛阳全城人马投降。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Xi led the entire city of Luoyang to surrender.

古文：冬十月癸丑，车驾入洛阳，幸南宫却非殿，遂定都焉。
现代文：冬十月十八日，光武进入洛阳，临幸南宫却非殿，于是定都洛阳。
English: In the winter of October 18th, Guangwu entered Luoyang, but the Southern Palace was not the palace, so Luoyang was designated as the capital.

古文：遣岑彭击荆州群贼。
现代文：辛卯日，派岑彭打击荆州群贼。
English: On the day of Xinwu, he sent Yu Peng to crack down on the Jingzhou bandits.

古文：十一月甲午，幸怀。
现代文：十一月三十日，光武到怀县。
English: On November 30, Guangwu went to Huai County.

古文：刘永自称天子。
现代文：刘永自称天子。
English: Liu Yong claimed to be the son of heaven.

古文：十二月丙戌，至自怀。
现代文：十二月丙戌，光武从怀县回洛阳。
English: In December, Guangwu returned to Luoyang from Huai County.

古文：赤眉杀更始，而隗嚣据陇右，卢芳起安定。破虏大将军叔寿击五校贼于曲梁，战殁。
现代文：赤眉军杀更始。隗嚣占据陇右，卢芳在安定起兵，破虏大将军叔寿在曲梁进攻五校贼，叔寿战死。
English: The Red Eyebrows began to kill again. The clamor occupied the right flank, Lu Fang raised an army in the stable, and the defeated general, Uncle Shou, attacked the Five Thieves in Qu Liang. Uncle Shou was killed in the battle.

古文：二年春正月甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二年春正月初一，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the second year of spring.

古文：大司马吴汉率九将军击檀乡贼于邺东，大破降之。
现代文：大司马吴汉率九位将军在邺东进攻檀乡寇贼，大败檀乡贼军，迫使他们投降。
English: Major-General Ma Wuhan led nine generals to attack the Dangxiang bandits in Shandong, defeated the Dangxiang bandits, and forced them to surrender.

古文：庚辰，封功臣皆为列侯，大国四县，余各有差。
现代文：十七日，把功臣都分封为列侯，大的封国四县，其余多少不一。
English: On the seventeenth day, the meritorious vassals were all divided into vassals, the largest vassal state was divided into four counties, and the rest were more or less different.

古文：下诏曰： 人情得足，苦于放纵，快须臾之欲，忘慎罚之义。
现代文：诏令说： 人的欲望满足以后，最怕的是放荡不羁，只求一时的快乐，忘却慎于刑罚的道理。
English: The edict said: "After one's desires are satisfied, what one fears the most is to indulge in debauchery, to seek only momentary happiness, and to forget the principle of restraint in punishment.

古文：惟诸将业远功大，诚欲传于无穷，宜如临深渊，如履薄冰，战战栗栗，日慎一日。
现代文：想到各位将军功业远大，的确想代代相传，应当像站临深潭边、在薄冰上行走一样，战战兢兢，一天比一天更谨慎。
English: When you think that your generals have made great achievements and truly want to pass them down from generation to generation, you should be like standing on the edge of a deep pool and walking on thin ice, trembling and becoming more cautious day by day.

古文：其显效未詶，各籍未立者，大鸿胪趣上，朕将差而录之。 博士丁恭议曰： 古帝王封诸侯不过百里，故利以建侯，取法于雷，强干弱枝，所以为治也。
现代文：有些有显著功绩，没有得到报酬，名未扬、官未封的人，大鸿胪赶快报上，我将分别录用。 博士丁恭提议说： 古代帝王封诸侯地不过百里，以 利建侯 、 雷震百里 为准则，中央强大，地方弱小，这是用来治理国家的方法。
English: Some people who have remarkable achievements and have not been paid, those who are not well-known and those who have not been appointed officials, I will recruit them separately.Dr. Ding Qiong proposed that: ancient emperors had only a hundred miles of fiefdoms, with the principle of building a hundred miles of profit and a hundred miles of thunder and lightning, the central government was strong, and the local government was weak.This was a method used to govern the country.

古文：今封诸侯四县，不合法制。 帝曰： 古之亡国，皆以无道，未尝闻功臣地多而灭亡者。 乃遣谒者即授印绶，策曰： 在上不骄，高而不危；制节谨度，满而不溢。
现代文：现在封诸侯大到四县，不合法制。 光武帝说： 古代国家的灭亡，都是由于国君无道，没有听说过功臣封地大而遭灭亡的。 于是派谒者马上授予列侯印绶，策书上说： 在上面不骄傲，虽高也不危险；节制谨守法度，虽满也不漫出。
English: Emperor Guangwu said, "The downfall of ancient countries was all due to the fact that the sovereigns had no morals and did not hear about the great deeds of the vassals and the great fiefdoms, so the envoys immediately awarded the vassals with the vassal seal, and the policy book said, "There is no pride in the above, although it is high, it is not dangerous; moderation abides by the law, although it is full, it does not overflow."

古文：敬之戒之。传尔子孙，长为汉藩。 
现代文：敬肃戒慎，传给你们子孙后代，永远做汉家的藩属。 
English: Be respectful and prudent, pass it on to your children and grandchildren, and always be a member of the Han family.

古文：壬午，更始复汉将军邓晔、辅汉将军于匡降，皆复爵位。
现代文：十九日，更始复汉将军邓晔、辅汉将军于匡投降，都恢复了他们原来的爵位。
English: On the 19th, Fuxin Han general Deng Qian and Fu Han general Yu Kuang surrendered, and both were restored to their original ranks.

古文：壬子，起高庙，建社稷于洛阳，立郊兆于城南，始正火德，色尚赤。
现代文：壬子，修高帝庙堂，建社稷坛于洛阳，立郊兆坛于城南，开始明确汉主火德，崇尚赤色。
English: Ren Zi, built the Emperor Gao's temple, built a shrine in Luoyang, and erected a suburban Zhaotan in the south of the city, began to clarify the Han master fire virtue and advocate the red color.

古文：是月，赤眉焚西京宫室，发掘园陵，寇掠关中。
现代文：同月，赤眉烧长安宫室，挖掘帝王园陵，寇掠关中。
English: In the same month, the Red Eyebrows set fire to the Chang'an Palace Room, excavated the imperial garden mausoleum, and raided Guanzhong.

古文：大司徒邓禹入长安，遣府掾奉十一帝神主，纳于高庙。
现代文：大司徒邓禹进长安，派府掾捧着十一帝的神主，供于高庙。
English: Deng Yu, the chief disciple, entered Chang'an and sent a gong holding the god of the 11th emperor to the high temple.

古文：真定王杨、临邑侯让谋反，遣前将军耿纯诛之。
现代文：真定王刘扬、临邑侯刘让谋反，光武派前将军耿纯把他们杀掉。
English: Liu Yang, the king of Zhending, and Liu Zhan, the lord of Linyi, plotted a rebellion, and Geng Chun, the former general of the Kuomintang faction, killed them.

古文：二月己酉，幸修武。
现代文：二月十六日，光武到修武。
English: On February 16th, Guangwu went to the martial arts.

古文：大司空王梁免。
现代文：大司空王梁免职。
English: Director Ku Wang Liang has been relieved of his duties.

古文：壬子，以太中大夫宋弘为大司空。
现代文：十九日，任太中大夫宋弘为大司空。
English: On the 19th, Song Hong, who was appointed as the acting junior high school teacher, became the chief secretary.

古文：遣骠骑大将军景丹率征虏将军祭遵等二将军击弘农贼，破之，因遣祭遵围蛮中贼张满。
现代文：派骠骑大将军景丹率征虏将军祭遵等二将军攻打弘农寇贼，把他们打败，趁势又派祭遵围攻蛮中寇贼张满。
English: He sent his cavalry general Jing Dan and two other generals to attack the Hong peasants and bandits, and defeated them. He also took advantage of the situation to send his soldiers to besiege the barbarians and bandits.

古文：渔阳太守彭宠反，攻幽州牧朱浮于蓟。
现代文：渔阳太守彭宠反叛，在蓟城攻打幽州牧朱浮。
English: Peng Ji, the governor of Yuyang, rebelled and attacked Yuzhou, Mugu and Zhufu in Lucheng.

古文：延岑自称武安王于汉中。
现代文：延岑在汉中自称武安王。
English: Yan Xuan called himself King Wu'an in the Han Dynasty.

古文：辛卯，至自修武。
现代文：辛卯，光武自修武回洛阳。
English: Xinwu, Guangwu returned to Luoyang after self-cultivation.

古文：三月乙未，大赦天下，诏曰： 顷狱多冤人，用刑深刻，朕甚愍之。
现代文：三月乙未，大赦天下，诏令说： 近来狱中多有冤屈的人，用刑残酷，我很哀怜他们。
English: In March, shortly after the amnesty, the emperor issued the following edict: "Recently, there have been many people in prison who have been wronged, and their punishment was cruel. I feel very sorry for them.

古文：孔子云： 刑罚不中，则民无所措手足。
现代文：孔子说： 刑罚不得当，老百姓就不知怎样才好。 
English: Confucius said: If punishment is not appropriate, the common people will not know what to do.

古文：其与中二千石、诸大夫、博士、议郎议省刑法。 
现代文：应当和中二千石、诸大夫、博士、议郎共同讨论省免刑罚的事。 
English: It is necessary to discuss the matter of exempting the province from criminal punishment with the 2,000-koku people, doctors, scholars, and leaders.

古文：遣执金吾贾复率二将军击更始郾王尹遵，破降之。
现代文：派执金吾贾复率二将军攻打更始郾王尹遵，打败他，迫他投降。
English: He sent two generals led by King Wujia Fu Fu to attack Wang Yin Zun, the first warlord, to defeat him and force him to surrender.

古文：骁骑将军刘植击密贼，战殁。
现代文：骁骑将军刘植攻打密地寇贼，战死。
English: General Liu Ue, who rode on horseback to attack and fight the clandestine bandits, was killed in the battle.

古文：遣虎牙大将军盖延率四将军伐刘永。
现代文：派虎牙大将军盖延率四将军讨伐刘永。
English: He sent General Huya and four generals to fight Liu Yong.

古文：夏四月，围永于睢阳。
现代文：夏四月，在睢阳围攻他。
English: In the summer of April, they besieged him in Fenyang.

古文：更始将苏茂杀淮阳太守潘蹇而附刘永。
现代文：更始将苏茂杀淮阳太守潘蹇，依附刘永。
English: At the beginning of the war, Su Mao killed Huaiyang's grand marshal, Pan Ye, and attached himself to Liu Yong.

古文：甲午，封叔父良为广阳王，兄子章为太原王，章弟兴为鲁王，舂陵侯嫡子祉为城阳王。
现代文：四月初二，封叔父刘良为广阳王，兄子刘章为太原王，刘章弟刘兴为鲁王，舂陵侯嫡子刘祉为城阳王。
English: On the second day of the fourth month, Liu Liang, the uncle of Feng, became the king of Guangyang, Liu Zhang, the elder brother, became the king of Taiyuan, Liu Xing, the younger brother of Liu Zhang, became the king of Lu, and Liu Zhi, the legitimate son of Fuling, became the king of Chengyang.

古文：五月庚辰，封更始元氏王歙为泗水王，故真定王杨子得为真定王，周后姬常为周承休公。
现代文：五月十九日，封更始元氏王歙为泗水王，故真定王刘杨子刘得为真定王，周朝后代姬常为周承休公。
English: On May 19th, Wang Xi, the founder of the Yuan Dynasty, was crowned as the King of Surabaya. Therefore, Liu Yangzi Liu, the King of Zhending, was crowned as the King of Zhending, and the descendants of the Zhou Dynasty, Himeji, were crowned as the King of Zhoucheng.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 民有嫁妻卖子欲归父母者，恣听之。敢拘执，论如律。 
现代文：二十二日，诏令说： 老百姓有不得已出嫁的妻子、卖掉的儿女，想要回归丈夫、父母身旁的，都要听任他们的意愿，谁敢拘禁逮捕他们，依法论处。 
English: On the 22nd, the edict said: "The common people have wives who have been forced to marry, children who have been sold, and those who want to return to their husbands and parents should be subject to their wishes. Anyone who dares to detain and arrest them will be dealt with according to law."

古文：六月戊戌，立贵人郭氏为皇后，子彊为皇太子，大赦天下。
现代文：六月初七，封贵人郭氏为皇后，子刘强为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, Guo Guo, a noble person, was crowned empress, and his son Liu Qiang was crown prince.

古文：增郎、谒者、从官秩各一等。
现代文：增加郎官、谒者、从官俸禄各一等。
English: The salaries of retainers, retired officers, and ex-officers will be raised by one grade each.

古文：丙午，封宗子刘终为淄川王。
现代文：十五日，封宗族子刘终为淄川王。
English: On the fifteenth day, Liu, the son of the Fuzong clan, finally became the king of Shichuan.

古文：秋八月，帝自将征五校。丙辰，幸内黄，大破五校于羛阳，降之。
现代文：秋八月，光武帝亲自统兵讨伐五校，二十六日，帝到内黄，在戏阳大败五校军，使之投降。
English: In autumn and August, Emperor Guangwu personally led an army to fight against the five schools. On the 26th, the emperor went to Neihuang and defeated the five-school army in Xiangyang, forcing it to surrender.

古文：遣游击将军邓隆救朱浮，与彭宠战于潞，隆军败绩。
现代文：派游击将军邓隆援救朱浮，与彭宠战于潞城，邓隆军队吃了大败仗。
English: He sent the guerrilla general Deng Long to rescue Zhu Fu, and fought with Peng Cai in Lucheng. Deng Long's army suffered a great defeat.

古文：盖延拔睢阳，刘永奔谯。
现代文：盖延攻克睢阳，刘永逃奔谯城。
English: Gai Yan conquered Shenyang, Liu Yong fled Shencheng.

古文：破虏将军邓奉据淯阳反。
现代文：破虏将军邓奉占据氵育阳反叛。
English: The defeated general Deng Bong occupied the capital of Yuyang and rebelled.

古文：九月壬戌，至自内黄。
现代文：九月初二，光武帝从内黄回洛阳。
English: On the second day of September, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang from Inner Huang.

古文：骠骑大将军景丹薨。
现代文：骠骑大将军景丹去世。
English: General of Horse Cavalry Jing Dan passed away.

古文：延岑大破赤眉于杜陵。
现代文：延岑在杜陵大败赤眉军。
English: Yancheng defeated the Red Eyebrows in Douring.

古文：关中饥，民相食。
现代文：关中饥荒，发生了人吃人的现象。
English: There was a famine in Guanzhong, and cannibalism occurred.

古文：冬十一月，以廷尉岑彭为征南大将军，率八将军讨邓奉于堵乡。
现代文：冬十一月，任廷尉岑彭为征南大将军，率八将军在堵乡讨伐邓奉。
English: In the winter of November, he was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition, and led the eight generals to fight against Deng Bong in the township of Dongxiang.

古文：铜马、青犊、尤来余贼共立孙登为天子于上郡。
现代文：铜马、青犊、尤来残部在上郡共立孙登为天子。
English: The Bronze Horse, the Blue Heron, and the remnants of You Lai all established Sun Deng as the Son of Heaven in Shang County.

古文：登将乐玄杀登，以其众五万余人降。
现代文：孙登将领乐玄杀孙登，率领部众五万余人投降。
English: Sun Deng's general Le Xuan killed Sun Deng and led more than 50,000 people to surrender.

古文：遣偏将军冯异代邓禹伐赤眉。
现代文：派偏将军冯异代理邓禹讨伐赤眉。
English: Deng Yu sent General Feng Yi to fight the Red Eyebrows as his deputy.

古文：使太中大夫伏隆持节安辑青、徐二州，招张步降之。
现代文：派太中大夫伏隆拿着符节安抚青、徐二州，招降了张步。
English: He sent Lieutenant-Colonel Furong to pacify Qing and Xu Erzhou with a rune, and invited Zhang Bu to surrender.

古文：十二月戊午，诏曰： 惟宗室列侯为王莽所废，先灵无所依归，朕甚愍之。其并复故国。
现代文：十二月三十日，诏令说： 想到宗室列侯被王莽所废，先人神灵无所归宿，我非常哀怜他们，一并恢复他们的封国。
English: On December 30th, the imperial edict said: "Thinking that the ancestral house of the feudal lords has been abolished by Wang Mang, and the ancestors' gods have no place to return, I feel very sorry for them and restore their fief together.

古文：若侯身已殁，属所上其子孙见名尚书，封拜。 
现代文：若列侯本人已去世，由列侯子孙所属的郡县记录列侯子孙的现名上交尚书，封爵授官。 
English: If the feudal lord himself has passed away, the current names of the feudal lord's descendants shall be recorded in the records of the counties and counties to which the descendants of the feudal lord belong.

古文：是岁，盖延等大破刘永于沛西。
现代文：这年，盖延等在沛西大败刘永。
English: This year, Gai Yan and others defeated Liu Yong in Peixi.

古文：初，王莽末，天下旱蝗，黄金一斤易粟一斛；至是野穀旅生，麻尤盛，野蚕成茧，被于山阜，人收其利焉。
现代文：以前，王莽末年，国家旱灾蝗灾，五斗粟要卖一斤黄金，到现在野生的谷子不播而长，麻、豆长得尤其茂盛，野蚕结茧，散布在山岗上，人们便去收取其利。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, when the country was plagued by drought and locusts, people used to sell one kilogram of gold for five dowels of millet. Nowadays, wild millet grows without sowing, hemp and beans grow especially luxuriantly, and wild silkworms scab and scatter on the hills, and people go to collect their profits.

古文：三年春正月甲子，以偏将军冯异为征西大将军，杜茂为骠骑大将军。
现代文：三年春正月初六，任偏将军冯异为征西大将军，杜茂为骠骑大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Spring, Ren Chuan General Feng Yi became the general of the Western Expedition, and Du Mao became the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：大司徒邓禹及冯异与赤眉战于回溪，禹、异败绩。
现代文：大司徒邓禹及冯异与赤眉军在回溪交战，邓禹、冯异大败。
English: Deng Yu and Feng Yiyi, the two chief monks, fought against the Red Eyebrows in Huixi. Deng Yu and Feng Yiyi were soundly defeated.

古文：征虏将军祭遵破蛮中，斩张满。
现代文：征虏将军祭遵打败蛮中寇贼，杀张满。
English: Conquering the general's festival, Zun defeated the barbarian bandits and killed Zhang Man.

古文：辛巳，立皇考南顿君已上四庙。
现代文：二十三日，立亡父南顿君上四庙。
English: On the 23rd, his late father, Nanton Jun, established four temples.

古文：壬午，大赦天下。
现代文：二十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：闰月乙巳，大司徒邓禹免。
现代文：闰月初一，大司徒邓禹免职。
English: On the first day of the leap month, Chief Secretary Deng Yu was relieved of his duties.

古文：冯异与赤眉战于崤底，大破之，余众南向宜阳，帝自将征之。
现代文：冯异与赤眉军在崤底交战，将赤眉军打得大败，残部南逃宜阳，光武亲自领兵征伐。
English: Feng Yi fought with the Red Eyebrows in Loudi, and defeated the Red Eyebrows. The remnants fled south to Yiyang, and Guangwu personally led the army.

古文：己亥，幸宜阳。
现代文：己亥，光武帝到宜阳。
English: Ji Hai, Emperor Guangwu to Yiyang.

古文：甲辰，亲勒六军，大陈戎马，大司马吴汉精卒当前，中军次之，骁骑、武卫分陈左右。
现代文：甲辰，帝亲统六军，大摆兵阵，大司马吴汉的精锐排列在前面，中军排列第二，骁骑、武卫分列左右。
English: Jia Chen, the emperor's relatives, the six armies, the large array of soldiers, and the elite of the great secretary Ma Wuhan are arranged in the front, the Chinese army is arranged second, and the cavalry and military guards are arranged around.

古文：赤眉望见震怖，遣使乞降。
现代文：赤眉军望而生畏，派人求降。
English: The Red Eyebrows were daunted and sent someone to beg for surrender.

古文：丙午，赤眉君臣面缚，奉高皇帝玺绶，诏以属城门校尉。
现代文：丙午，赤眉君臣反绑双手，奉献高祖刘邦传下的玺绶投降，诏令城门校尉办理受降事宜。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the red-browed princes and courtiers tied their hands, dedicated the imperial edict of surrender handed down by the great ancestor Liu Bang, and ordered the captain of the city gate to handle the surrender.

古文：戊申，至自宜阳。
现代文：戊申，光武从宜阳回洛阳。
English: Wushin, Guangwu from Yiyang back to Luoyang.

古文：己酉，诏曰： 群盗纵横，贼害元元，盆子窃尊号，乱惑天下。
现代文：己酉，诏令说： 群盗横冲直闯，残害人民，刘盆子窃取皇帝尊号，惑乱天下。
English: The imperial edict said: "Thieves are on the rampage, destroying the people. Liu Bonsi has stolen the emperor's honorific title and confused the world."

古文：朕奋兵讨击，应时崩解，十余万众束手降服，先帝玺绶归之王府。
现代文：我领兵奋起讨伐，顷刻土崩瓦解，十多万部众束手降附，先帝玺绶归还王府。
English: I led the troops in a crusade, and the country collapsed in an instant. More than a hundred thousand troops surrendered, and the former emperor returned the royal palace.

古文：斯皆祖宗之灵，士人之力，朕曷足以享斯哉！
现代文：这都是靠祖宗的威灵，将士的力量，我怎能够格享此殊荣呢！
English: All of this is thanks to the spirit of our ancestors and the strength of our soldiers. How can I be so privileged?

古文：其择吉日祠高庙，赐天下长子当为父后者爵，人一级。 
现代文：应选择吉日祷告高庙，赏给天下应当继承父后的长子爵位，每人一级。 
English: You should choose a good day to pray for a high temple, and give the world the eldest viscount who should inherit his father's throne, one level per person.

古文：二月己未，祠高庙，受传国玺。
现代文：二月初一，祭祠高庙，光武接受传国玺。
English: On the first day of February, at the high temple, Guangwu received the imperial edict.

古文：刘永立董宪为海西王，张步为齐王。
现代文：刘永妄封董宪为海西王，张步为齐王。
English: Liu Yonglian crowned Dong Xian as the King of Haixi and Zhang Bu as the King of Qi.

古文：步杀光禄大夫伏隆而反。
现代文：张步杀光禄大夫伏隆反叛。
English: Zhang Bu kills Guanglu's doctor, Furong rebels.

古文：幸怀，遣吴汉率二将军击青犊于轵西，大破降之。
现代文：光武帝到怀县，派吴汉率二将军在轵西进攻青犊，大败青犊军，使之降服。
English: Emperor Guangwu went to Huai County and sent Wu Han and two generals to attack the Qing Dynasty in western Shaanxi, defeating the Qing Dynasty army and forcing it to surrender.

古文：三月壬寅，以大司徒司直伏湛为大司徒。
现代文：三月十六日，任大司徒司直伏湛为大司徒。
English: On March 16th, the newly-appointed Grand Master of the Disciples, Fuzhou Tan, became the Grand Master of the Disciples.

古文：彭宠陷蓟城，宠自立为燕王。
现代文：彭宠占领蓟城，并自立为燕王。
English: Peng Jia occupied Lucheng and established himself as the King of Swallows.

古文：帝自将征邓奉，幸堵阳。
现代文：光武亲自统兵征讨邓奉，到达堵阳。
English: Guangwu personally led the soldiers to recruit Deng Bong and arrived in Doyang.

古文：夏四月，大破邓奉于小长安，斩之。
现代文：夏四月，在小长安大败邓奉，并杀了他。
English: In the summer of April, he defeated Deng Bong in Xiaochang'an and killed him.

古文：冯异与延岑战于上林，破之。
现代文：冯异与延岑战于上林，把延岑打败。
English: Feng Yi and Yan Xun fought in Shanglin and defeated Yan Xun.

古文：吴汉率七将军与刘永将苏茂战于广东，大破之。
现代文：吴汉率领七将军与刘永将苏茂战于广乐，大败苏茂。
English: Wu Han led seven generals and Liu Yong fought Sumo in Guangle, defeating Sumo.

古文：虎牙大将军盖延围刘永于睢阳。
现代文：虎牙大将军盖延在睢阳包围了刘永。
English: General Huya Guiyan surrounded Liu Yong in Fenyang.

古文：五月己酉，车驾不宫。
现代文：五月二十四日，光武帝回洛阳。
English: On May 24, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：乙卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，晦，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：六月壬戌，大赦天下。
现代文：六月初七，大赦天下。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：耿弇与延岑战于穰，大破之。
现代文：耿弇与延岑在穰县交战，大败延岑。
English: Geng Qi and Yan Qi fought in Jixian County, and Yan Qi suffered a great defeat.

古文：秋七月，征南大将军岑彭率三将军伐秦丰，战于黎丘，大破之，获其将蔡宏。
现代文：秋七月，征南大将军岑彭率领三将军讨伐秦丰，战于黎丘，大败秦丰，活捉了他的将领蔡宏。
English: In autumn and July, the general of the Southern Expedition, Zou Peng, led three generals to fight against Qin Feng, fought in Lichu, defeated Qin Feng, and captured his general Cai Hong alive.

古文：庚辰，诏曰： 吏不满六百石，下至墨绶长、相，有罪先请。
现代文：二十六日，光武帝诏令说： 俸禄不满六百石的县令，下至县长，侯国之相有罪，都先请示再处治。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict: County officials with a salary of less than 600 koku, down to the county magistrate and the lord of the manor, who are found guilty, must first be reprimanded.

古文：男子八十以上，十岁以下，及妇人从坐者，自非不道、诏所名捕，皆不得系。
现代文：男子八十以上，十岁以下，及妇女因亲属犯罪连坐的，只要不是犯有 不道 罪，诏书点名逮捕的，都不得扣押。
English: Men over the age of eighty, children under the age of ten, and women who sit together because of a crime committed by a relative may not be detained, as long as they have not committed a crime and have been arrested by name in accordance with the edict.

古文：当验问者即就验。
现代文：应当对证的马上对证，女子判刑，可让她出钱雇人伐木抵罪，放回家。 
English: The evidence should be cross-examined immediately, and the woman should be sentenced. She can pay someone to cut down trees to pay off the crime, and then be allowed to go home.

古文：女徒雇山归家。 盖延拔睢阳，获刘永，而苏茂、周建立永子纡为梁王。
现代文：盖延攻克睢阳，捉了刘永，但苏茂、周建又立刘永子刘纡为梁王。冬十月十九日，光武帝到舂陵。
English: Gai Yan conquered Fenyang and captured Liu Yong, but Sumo and Zhou Jian also established Liu Yong's son Liu Wei as the King of Liang. In winter, on October 19, Emperor Guangwu arrived at Fuling.

古文：冬十月壬申，幸舂陵，祠园庙，因置酒旧宅，大会故人父老。
现代文：告祀园寝宗庙，在旧宅设置酒宴，款待众多故旧与父老乡亲。
English: The memorial garden was turned into a temple, a wine banquet was held in the old house, and many old friends and relatives were entertained.

古文：十一月乙未，至自舂陵。
现代文：十一月已末，自舂陵回洛阳。
English: At the end of November, he returned to Luoyang from Fuling.

古文：涿郡太守张丰反。
现代文：涿郡太守张丰反叛。
English: Zhang Feng, the governor of Handan County, rebelled.

古文：是岁，李宪自称天子。
现代文：这年，李宪自称天子。
English: That year, Li Xian called himself the Son of Heaven.

古文：西州大将军隗嚣奉奏。
现代文：西州大将军隗嚣呈上奏书。
English: The Seishu grand marshal arrogantly submitted his report.

古文：建义大将军朱祐率祭遵与延岑战于东阳，斩其将张成。
现代文：建义大将军朱率领祭遵与延岑战于东阳，杀延岑将张成。
English: Zhu, the general of Jianyi, led the war between Zong and Yan in Dongyang, and killed Yan.

古文：四年春正月甲申，大赦天下。
现代文：四年春正月初二，大赦天下。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the general amnesty began.

古文：二月壬子，幸怀。
现代文：二月初一，光武帝到怀县。
English: On the first day of February, Emperor Guangwu went to Huai County.

古文：壬申，至自怀。
现代文：二十一日，从怀县回洛阳。
English: On the 21st, he returned to Luoyang from Huai County.

古文：遣右将军邓禹率二将军与延岑战于武当，破之。
现代文：派右将军邓禹率领二将军与延岑战于武当，打败了延岑。
English: Deng Yu, the right-wing general, led two generals to fight against Yan Kun in Wudang and defeated Yan Kun.

古文：夏四月丁巳，幸邺。
现代文：夏四月初七，光武帝到达邺城。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Guangwu arrived in Handan.

古文：己巳，进幸临平。
现代文：十九日，行进到临平。
English: On the 19th, they marched to Linping.

古文：遣大司马吴汉击五校贼于箕山，大破之。
现代文：派大司马吴汉在箕山攻击五校贼，贼大败。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Wuhan was sent to attack the five school thieves in Shaoshan, and the thieves were defeated.

古文：五月，进幸元氏。辛巳，进幸卢奴。
现代文：五月，光武帝行进到元氏，初二，又行进到卢奴。
English: In May, Emperor Guangwu marched to the Yuan Dynasty, and on the second day of the first month, he marched to Lunu.

古文：遣征虏将军祭遵率四将军讨张丰于涿郡，斩丰。
现代文：派征虏将军祭遵率领四将军在涿郡讨伐张丰，杀掉了张丰。
English: He dispatched four generals under the command of the conscript General Zai Zun to fight against Zhang Feng in Jixian County and killed Zhang Feng.

古文：六月辛亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：六月初二，光武帝返回洛阳。
English: On June 2, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：七月丁亥，幸谯。
现代文：七月十四日，光武帝至谯县。
English: On July 14th, Emperor Guangwu went to Handan County.

古文：遣捕虏将军马武、偏将军王霸围刘纡于垂惠。
现代文：派捕虏将军马武、偏将军王霸在垂惠围攻刘纡。
English: He sent the captive general Ma Wu and the partial general Wang Ba to besiege Liu Bei in the Huizhou Province.

古文：董宪将贲休以兰陵城降，宪围之。
现代文：董宪将领贲休率兰陵城兵马投降光武，董宪围攻贲休。
English: General Dong Xian led the troops and horses of Lanling City to surrender to Guangwu, and Dong Xian besieged Yan Hui.

古文：虎牙大将军盖延率平狄将军庞萌救贲休，不克，兰陵为宪所陷。
现代文：虎牙大将军盖延率领平狄将军庞萌援救贲休，没有成功，兰陵为董宪所攻陷。
English: Hu Ya's General Gaien led the Ping Di General Pang Meng to rescue Yu Xiu, but without success, Lanling was captured by Dong Xian.

古文：秋八月戊午，进幸寿春。
现代文：秋八月初十，光武帝到寿春。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month of the autumn, Emperor Guangwu arrived in Shuchun.

古文：太中大夫徐惲擅杀临淮太守刘度，惲坐诛。
现代文：太中大夫徐恽擅自杀临淮太守刘度，徐恽因此犯法被诛。
English: The Taizhong doctor Xu Yao committed suicide in front of the Huai Emperor Liu Du, and Xu Yao was arrested for breaking the law.

古文：遣扬武将军马成率三将军伐李宪。
现代文：派扬武将军马成率领三将军讨伐李宪。
English: Yangwu sent General Ma Cheng to lead three generals to fight against Li Xian.

古文：九月，围宪于舒。
现代文：九月，在舒县包围了李宪。
English: In September, it encircled Li Xian in Shu County.

古文：冬十月甲寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十月初七，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On the seventh day of the tenth month of winter, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：太傅卓茂薨。
现代文：太傅卓茂去世。
English: Taifu Zhuo Mao passed away.

古文：十一月丙申，幸宛。遣建义大将军朱祐率二将军围秦丰于黎丘。
现代文：十一月十九日，光武帝到宛城，派建义大将军朱祐率领二将军在黎丘围攻秦丰。
English: On November 19th, Emperor Guangwu arrived at Wancheng and sent General Zhu Yu to besiege Qin Feng at Lichu.

古文：十二月丙寅，进幸黎丘。
现代文：十二月二十日，光武帝到黎丘。
English: On December 20, Emperor Guangwu went to Lichu.

古文：是岁，征西大将军冯异与公孙述将程焉战于陈仓，破之。
现代文：这年，征西大将军冯异与公孙述将领程焉在陈仓战斗，打败程焉。
English: In that year, the general of the Western Conquest, Feng Yi, and the general of Gongsun Sui led Cheng Yan in the battle of Chen Cang and defeated Cheng Yan.

古文：五年春正月癸己，车驾还宫。
现代文：五年春正月十七日，光武帝还洛阳。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the fifth year of Spring, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：二月丙午，大赦天下。
现代文：二月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of February, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：捕虏将军马武、偏将军王霸拔垂惠。
现代文：捕虏将军马武、偏将军王霸攻克垂惠。
English: Captured general Ma Wu and partial general Wang Ba defeated Tuli Hui.

古文：乙丑，幸魏郡。
现代文：二十日，光武帝到魏郡。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Guangwu arrived in Wei County.

古文：壬申，封殷后孔安为殷绍嘉公。
现代文：二十七日，封殷商后代孔安为殷绍嘉公。
English: On the 27th, Kong An, a descendant of the Yin merchants, became the Duke of Yin Shao Jia.

古文：彭宠为其苍头所杀，渔阳平。
现代文：彭宠被奴仆所杀，渔阳平定。
English: Pengcai was killed by a slave, and Yuyang was pacified.

古文：大司马吴汉率建威大将军耿弇击富平、获索贼于平原，大破降之。
现代文：大司马吴汉率领建威大将军耿弇在平原攻击富平、获索贼，大败贼军，迫使其投降。
English: Major General Ma Wu Han led the Jianwei General Geng Yao to attack Buping in the plain, captured the bandits, defeated the bandit army, and forced it to surrender.

古文：夏遣耿弇率二将军讨张步。
现代文：又派耿弇率领二将军讨伐张步。
English: He also sent Geng Yao to lead two generals to fight against Zhang Bu.

古文：三月癸未，徙广阳王良为赵王，始就国。
现代文：三月初八，调广阳王刘良为赵王，刘良始进入封国。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Liu Liang, the king of Guangyang, was changed to Zhao Wang, and Liu Liang first entered the fief.

古文：平狄将军庞萌反，杀楚郡太守孙萌而东附董宪。
现代文：平狄将军庞萌反叛，杀楚郡太守孙萌而东附董宪。
English: General Ping Di Pang Meng rebelled and killed Sun Meng, the grand marshal of Chu County, and was succeeded by Dong Xian.

古文：遣征南大将军岑彭率二将军伐田戎于津乡，大破之。
现代文：派征南大将军岑彭率领二将军在津乡讨伐田戎，大败田戎。
English: Zou Peng, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, led two generals to fight Tian Rong in Tsu Township and defeated Tian Rong.

古文：夏四月，旱，蝗。
现代文：夏四月，天旱，蝗灾。
English: Summer in April, drought, locusts.

古文：河西大将军窦融始遣使贡献。
现代文：河西大将军窦融开始派人进贡。
English: Dou Rong, the general of Hexi, began to send people to pay tribute.

古文：五月丙子，诏曰： 久旱伤麦，秋种未下，朕甚忧之。
现代文：五月初二，光武帝下诏令说： 久旱，麦子受害，秋播没有下种，我十分担忧。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying, "I am very worried about the long drought, the suffering of wheat, and the failure of autumn sowing.

古文：将残吏未胜，狱多冤结，元元愁恨，感动天气乎？
现代文：莫非是残酷的官吏不称职，狱多冤案，老百姓愁苦怨恨，触怒了天神吗？
English: Could it be that the cruel and incompetent officials, the many unjust cases in prison, and the grief and resentment of the common people have angered the gods?

古文：其令中都官、三辅、郡、国出系囚，罪非犯殊死一切勿案，见徒免为庶人。
现代文：现命令中都官、三辅、郡国放出在押囚犯，除了非处死不可者外一律免除查办，徒刑免为平民。
English: It is hereby ordered that the Central Government, the three provincial governments, and the county governments shall release the prisoners in custody, and all of them shall be exempted from investigation and prosecution except those who must be executed, and the imprisonment shall be exempted for civilians.

古文：务进柔良，退贪酷，各正厥事焉。 
现代文：务必进用温良的人，罢免贪婪残酷的人，各部门整顿好自己的职事。 
English: It is imperative to promote gentle people, dismiss greedy and cruel people, and all departments should rectify their duties.

古文：六月，建义大将军朱祐拔黎丘，获秦丰；而庞荫、苏茂围桃城。
现代文：六月，建义大将军朱祐攻克黎丘，活捉秦丰；庞萌、苏茂围攻桃城。
English: In June, General Zhu Yu of Jianyi attacked Keliqiu and captured Qin Feng alive; Pang Meng and Sumo besieged Taocheng.

古文：帝时幸蒙，因自将征之。
现代文：这时，光武帝刚好到了蒙县，于是亲自领兵征伐庞萌、苏茂。
English: At this time, Emperor Guangwu just arrived in Meng County, so he personally led the army to conquer Pang Meng and Sumo.

古文：先理兵任城，乃进救桃城，大破萌等。
现代文：先在任城整顿军队，然后救援桃城，大败庞萌等。
English: First, he reorganized the army in Rencheng, then rescued Taocheng, defeated Pangmeng and so on.

古文：秋七月丁丑，幸沛，祠高原庙。
现代文：秋七月初四，光武帝到沛县，告祭高帝庙。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Emperor Guangwu came to Peixian and announced the dedication of the Emperor Gao Temple.

古文：诏修复西京园陵。
现代文：诏令修复长安的帝王陵墓。
English: The imperial edict ordered the restoration of the imperial tombs in Chang'an.

古文：进幸湖陵，征董宪。又幸蕃，遂攻董宪于昌虑，大破之。
现代文：行进到湖陵，征讨董宪，又到蕃县，在昌虑攻打董宪，获大胜。
English: They marched to Huling to solicit Dong Xian, and then to Jixian to attack Dong Xian in Changxian, and won a great victory.

古文：八月己酉，进幸郯，留吴汉攻刘纡、董宪等，车驾转徇彭城、下邳。
现代文：八月初六，光武帝行进到郯县，留下吴汉攻打刘纡、董宪等。光武帝转而巡视彭城、下邳。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Emperor Guangwu marched to Min County, leaving Wu Han to attack Liu Bei, Dong Xian and others. Emperor Guangwu turned to inspect Pengcheng and Jiaozuo.

古文：吴汉拔郯，获刘纡；汉进围董宪、庞萌于朐。
现代文：吴汉攻下郯县，捉到刘纡；吴汉又进军在朐县围攻董宪、庞萌。
English: Wu Han conquered Min County and captured Liu Ye; Wu Han also marched into Min County to besiege Dong Xian and Pang Meng.

古文：冬十月，还，幸鲁，使大司空祠孔子。
现代文：冬十月，光武帝还洛阳途中，经过鲁地。派大司空祭祀孔子。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Guangwu passed through Ludi on his way to Luoyang. He sent Daishi Kuo to worship Confucius.

古文：耿弇等与张步战于临淄，大破之。
现代文：耿弇等在临淄和张步战斗，大败张步。
English: Geng Yao and others fought in Linyi and Zhangbu, and were soundly defeated by Zhangbu.

古文：帝幸临淄，进幸剧。
现代文：光武帝到临淄，行进到剧县。
English: Emperor Guangwu went to Linyi and marched to Yuanshan.

古文：张步斩苏茂以降，齐地平。
现代文：张步杀苏茂投降，齐地平定。
English: Zhang Bu kills Sumo, surrenders, and the two are reconciled.

古文：初起太学。
现代文：开始设立太学。
English: Taigakko began to be established.

古文：车驾还宫，幸太学，赐博士弟子各有差。
现代文：光武帝回到洛阳，巡视太学，分别赏赐博士弟子。
English: Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang, inspected Taixue, and rewarded the doctoral students respectively.

古文：十一月壬寅，大司徒状湛免，尚书令侯霸为大司徒。
现代文：十一月初一，大司徒伏湛免职，任尚书令侯霸为大司徒。
English: On the first day of November, the grand steward Fu T'an was relieved of his duties, and Shang Shuling appointed Houba as the grand steward.

古文：十二月，卢苏自称天子于九原。
现代文：十二月，卢芳在九原自称天子。
English: In December, Lu Fang claimed to be the son of heaven in Jiuhara.

古文：西州大将军隗嚣遣子恂入侍。
现代文：西州大将军隗嚣派遣儿子隗恂入宫侍卫光武帝。
English: The general of Xizhou sent his son into the palace to guard Emperor Guangwu.

古文：交阯牧邓让率七郡太守遣使奉贡。
现代文：交阯牧邓让率领七郡太守派人进京进贡。
English: Deng Zhan, the leader of the seven county governors, sent people to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：诏复济阳二年徭役。
现代文：诏令免除济阳县二年的徭役。
English: The imperial edict exempted Jiyang County from two years of forced labor.

古文：是岁，野谷渐少，田亩益广焉。
现代文：这年，野生的谷物逐渐减少，耕种的田地越来越多了。
English: This year, wild cereals are gradually decreasing, and cultivated fields are increasing.

