古文：○高昌高昌国者，则汉车师前王庭也，去敦煌十三日行。
现代文：高昌国，是汉代的车师前王庭，距离敦煌有十三日的路程。
English: Gaochang, the former imperial court of the Han Dynasty, is 13 days away from Dunhuang.

古文：其境东西三百里，南北五百里，四面多大山。
现代文：这里东西宽三百里，南北长五百里，四面多有大山。
English: It is 300 miles wide from east to west and 500 miles long from north to south, with mountains on all sides.

古文：昔汉武帝遣兵西讨，师旅顿敝，其中尤困者因住焉。
现代文：从前，汉武帝派遣军队向西讨伐，师旅疲劳，其中特别困乏的兵士就在这里定居下来。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Hanwu sent troops to the west to fight. The division and brigade were tired, and the soldiers who were particularly tired settled down here.

古文：其地有汉时高昌垒，故以为国号。
现代文：这地方有汉代的高昌垒，所以就用它作为国名。
English: This place had Gaochang Fort in the Han Dynasty, so it was used as the country's name.

古文：初，蠕蠕立阚伯周为高昌王。
现代文：当初，蠕蠕立阚伯周做高昌王。
English: At the beginning, Cormorant Cormorant made Zou Bo Zhou the king of Gaochang.

古文：伯周死，子义成立，为从兄首归所杀，首归自立为高昌王，又为高车阿伏至罗所杀，以敦煌人张孟明为主。
现代文：阚伯周死后，立他的儿子阚义成当高昌王。义成被他的堂兄首归所杀，首归自立为高昌王，首归又被高车的阿伏至罗所杀，就把敦煌人张孟明立做高昌王。
English: After the death of Zibo Zhou, he appointed his son Zou Yicheng as the king of Gaochang. Yicheng was killed by his cousin Shugui, Shugui became the king of Gaochang, and Shugui was killed by the cart driver Avu Ziro, so he appointed the Dunhuang man Zhang Mengming as the king of Gaochang.

古文：孟明为国人所杀，更以马儒为王，以巩顾、麹嘉二人为左右长史。
现代文：张孟明被国人所杀，又换用马儒做王，用巩顾、曲嘉两人做左右长史。
English: Zhang Mengming was killed by compatriots, and Ma Ru was used as the king, and Gong Gu and Qu Jia were used as the left and right long history.

古文：儒又通使后魏，请内属。
现代文：马儒又派大使到后魏，请求内附。
English: Maru also sent an ambassador to the Later Wei Dynasty to request the annexation.

古文：内属人皆恋土，不顾东迁，相与杀儒，立嘉为王。
现代文：内附后，他们都眷念故土，不愿意向东迁徙，就合伙杀了马儒，并推举曲嘉做高昌王。
English: After the annexation, they all thought of their homeland and did not want to migrate to the east, so they jointly killed Maru and promoted Qu Jia to be the king of Gaochang.

古文：嘉字灵凤，金城榆中人，既立，又臣于茹茹。
现代文：曲嘉，字灵凤，是金城榆中人。曲嘉被立做高昌王后，又对蠕蠕称臣。
English: Qu Jia, also known as Lingfeng, was from Jincheng Yizhong Middle School. Qu Jia was made the queen of Gaochang, and she was also a courtier of Cormac.

古文：及茹茹主为高车所杀，嘉又臣于高车。
现代文：到了后来，蠕蠕国王被高车人所杀，曲嘉又对高车称臣。
English: Later, King Creep was killed by the Chariot People, and Qu Jia became a vassal of the Chariot People.

古文：属焉耆为挹怛所破，众不能自统，请主于嘉。
现代文：适值焉耆国被挹怛攻破，国家残破，不能统率，就请曲嘉作主，曲嘉就派遣他的第二个儿子做焉耆王。
English: At the right time, Yan Xuan's country was invaded and conquered, the country was left in ruins, and unable to lead, he asked Qu Jia to be the master, and Qu Jia sent his second son to be the king of Yan Xuan.

古文：嘉遣其第二子为焉耆王，由是始大，益为国人所服。
现代文：从此，高昌国开始壮大起来，曲嘉更为国人所信服。
English: Since then, Gaochang has begun to grow, and Qujia has been more convinced by the local people.

古文：嘉死，子坚立。
现代文：曲嘉死后，就立他的儿子曲坚做高昌王。
English: After the death of Qu Jia, he appointed his son Qu Jian as the King of Gaochang.

古文：其都城周回一千八百四十步，于坐室画鲁哀公问政于孔子之像。
现代文：高昌国都城周围长一千八百四十步，在坐室里画有鲁哀公向孔子问政的像。
English: The perimeter of the capital city of Gaochang is eighteen hundred and forty paces long, and in the sitting room there is a portrait of Lu Aigong asking Confucius about politics.

古文：国内有城十八。
现代文：国内有十八个小城。
English: There are eighteen small towns in the country.

古文：官有令尹一人，次公二人，次左右卫，次八长史，次五将军，次八司马，次侍郎、校郎、主簿、从事、省事。
现代文：国王下设的官从大到小依次有令尹一人、公爵二人、左右卫各一人，长史八人、将军五人、司马八人，下面还设有侍郎、校郎、主簿、从事、省事等。
English: The officials subordinate to the king, from the highest to the lowest, included one Rong Yin, two dukes, one left and right guards, eight Changshi, five generals, and eight Sima. There were also chamberlains, schoolmasters, chief clerks, clerks, and administrators.

古文：大事决之于王，小事长子及公评断，不立文记。
现代文：凡国家大事都由国王决断，小事由长子和公爵决断，不作文字记载。
English: All important matters of state are decided by the king, minor matters are decided by the eldest son and the duke, and are not recorded in writing.

古文：男子胡服，妇人裙襦，头上作髻。
现代文：国中男人穿胡服，妇人穿裙子和短裤，头顶打上髻子。
English: In the country, men wear Hu clothing, and women wear skirts and shorts, with braids on the top of their heads.

古文：其风俗政令与华夏略同。
现代文：那里的风尚、习俗及政令与华夏略同。
English: The fashion, customs and government decrees there are similar to those in China.

古文：地多石碛，气候温暖，谷麦再熟，宜蚕，多五果。
现代文：土地多沙石，气候温暖，谷物、小麦均一年两熟，适宜养蚕，多有水果。
English: Its land is mostly sand and stone, the climate is warm, the grain and wheat have two seasons, it is suitable for raising silkworms, and there are more fruits.

古文：有草名为羊刺，其上生蜜，而味甚佳。
现代文：有一种草，名叫羊刺，它上面生有蜜，味道很好。
English: There is a kind of grass called goat thorn, which has honey on it and tastes very good.

古文：出赤盐如硃，白盐如玉。
现代文：这里，出产红色的盐，像朱砂；白色的盐像璧玉。
English: Here, produce red salt, like cinnabar; white salt like jasper.

古文：多蒲陶酒。
现代文：还盛产葡萄酒。
English: It also produces a lot of wine.

古文：俗事天神，兼信佛法。
现代文：其俗敬奉天神，还信奉佛教。
English: They venerate celestial deities and believe in Buddhism.

古文：国中羊马牧于隐僻之处，以避外寇，非贵人不知其所。
现代文：高昌国中的羊、马在隐蔽偏僻的地方放牧，以躲避外寇的侵袭，不是贵人就不知它们所在的地方。
English: The sheep and horses in Gaochang country graze in secluded and remote places to avoid the invasion of foreign invaders. Even the nobles do not know where they are.

古文：北有赤石山，山北七十里有贪汗山，夏有积雪。
现代文：高昌国北面有座赤石山，赤石山以北七十里有座贪汗山，夏天还有积雪。
English: In the north of Gaochang Province, there is a Chaksan Mountain, and in the north of Chaksan Mountain, there is a Khan Mountain, and there is snow in the summer.

古文：此山之北，铁勒界也。
现代文：这座山的北面，是铁勒的边界。
English: To the north of this mountain is the border of Thiele.

古文：从武威西北，有捷路，度沙碛千余里，四面茫然，无有蹊径。
现代文：从武威向西北方向有条近路，但要经过千余里的沙漠，周围茫茫一片，无路可走。
English: There is a short way from Wuwei to the northwest, but it passes through more than a thousand miles of desert, surrounded by a vast expanse, with no way to go.

古文：欲往者，寻有人畜骸骨而去。路中或闻歌哭之声，行人寻之，多致亡失，盖魑魅魍魉也。
现代文：想去的人，寻有人畜骸骨的路走，路上有时听到唱歌和哭泣的声音，行路的人去寻找它们，多半失踪，这大概是鬼魅在作怪。
English: Those who want to go, go in search of human and animal skeletons. On the way, they sometimes hear the sounds of singing and crying. Those who go in search of them, mostly disappear. This is probably the work of ghosts.

古文：故商客往来，多取伊吾路。
现代文：所以，来往的客商，大多选择伊吾这条路。
English: Therefore, most of the merchants who come and go choose the Igu route.

古文：开皇十年，突厥破其四城，有二千人来归中国。
现代文：隋文帝开皇十年，突厥人攻破了高昌国的四座城，有二千人来归中原。
English: In the first ten years of the Sui Dynasty, the Turks conquered four cities in Gaochang, and two thousand people returned to the Central Plains.

古文：坚死，子伯雅立。
现代文：曲坚死后，他的儿子伯雅继位。
English: After Qu Jian's death, his son, Boya, succeeded him.

古文：其大母本突厥可汗女，其父死，突厥令依其俗，伯雅不从者久之。突厥逼之，不得已而从。
现代文：伯雅的大母本来是突厥可汗的女儿，他父亲死后，突厥人命令他顺应突厥族的风俗，娶母为妻，伯雅很久没有依从他们，突厥人逼迫他，不得已就顺从了他们。
English: Boya's great-grandmother was originally the daughter of a Turkic khan. After his father's death, the Turks ordered him to follow the customs of the Turkic people and marry his mother. Boya did not obey them for a long time. The Turks persecuted him, and he had no choice but to obey them.

古文：炀帝嗣位，引致诸蕃。
现代文：隋炀帝登基后，召致各个小国。
English: After the Sui Dynasty ascended to the throne, it summoned all the small states.

古文：大业四年，遣使贡献，帝待其使甚厚。
现代文：大业四年，伯雅派遣使者向隋朝廷进贡，炀帝很优厚地招待了他们。
English: In the fourth year of the Taiei era, Baoya sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Sui Dynasty, and Emperor Qian generously invited them.

古文：明年，伯雅来朝。因从击高丽，还尚宗女华容公主。
现代文：第二年，伯雅亲自来朝拜炀帝，因此追随炀帝攻打高丽，回京后让他娶了华容公主。
English: In the following year, Baoya himself came to pay homage to Emperor Gong, so he followed Emperor Gong to attack Goryeo. After returning to Beijing, he married Princess Hua Rong.

古文：八年冬归蕃，下令国中曰： 夫经国字人，以保存为贵，宁邦缉政，以全济为大。
现代文：大业八年冬回到高昌，在国中下令说： 治理国家，养育人民，要以保国安家为重，使国家安宁、政事畅通，把保全、赈济老百姓作为第一要义。
English: In the winter of the eighth year, Daye returned to Gaochang and issued an order in the middle of the country, saying: "To govern the country and nurture the people, it is important to protect the country and secure the family, to make the country peaceful and smooth, and to preserve and help the people as the first priority.

古文：先者以国处边荒，境连猛狄，同人无咎，被发左衽。
现代文：以前，因为国家处在边远的荒野，边境连着勇猛的北方各族，我们与他们相处没有过错，和他们一样，保持着披散发辫、以左为襟的习俗。
English: In the past, because the country was in the remote wilderness, and the border was connected with the brave northern tribes, we had no fault with them, and like them, we maintained the custom of wearing a wide-brimmed hat and wearing it on the left.

古文：今大隋统御，宇宙平一，普天率土，莫不齐向。孤既沐浴和风，庶均大化，其庶人以上皆宜解辫削衽。 
现代文：如今，大隋朝一统天下，天下和平统一。普天之下，四海以内，无不心向着隋朝，我已经沐浴到和煦的春风，庶经大化，凡是平民以上的大小官吏，都应当解辫削衽。 
English: Today, the great Sui Dynasty rules the world, and the world is peacefully unified. All over the world, within the four seas, there is no hard feelings towards the Sui Dynasty. I have been bathed in the spring breeze of peace and harmony. With the development of civilization, all officials, big and small, who are above the level of the common people, should solve the problem of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝闻而甚善之，下诏曰： 彰德嘉善，圣哲所隆，显诚遂良，典谟贻则。
现代文：隋炀帝听说这件事后，认为很好，就下诏书说： 显扬美德，嘉奖善良之人，为圣哲所推崇；张扬真诚，推荐良才，这是经典上的法则。
English: After hearing about this, Emperor Sui Xuan thought it was very good, and issued an edict saying: "Promoting virtue and praising good people is revered by sages; promoting sincerity and recommending talents is a classic rule.

古文：光禄大夫、弁国公、高昌王伯雅识量经远，器怀温裕，丹款夙著，亮节遐宣。
现代文：光禄大夫、弁国公、高昌王伯雅见识远大，胸怀才能，温和宽宏，心地赤诚，贤德昭著，节操坚贞，美名远扬。
English: Dr. Guanglu, Governor of Guizhou Province, and Gaochang Wangbaiya were far-sighted, talented, gentle, broad-minded, sincere, virtuous, disciplined, and famous.

古文：本自诸华，历祚西壤，昔因多难，沦迫獯戎，数穷毁冕，翦为胡服。
现代文：他们本来从属于华夏，而几代生活于西域，当初由于多灾多难，被迫沦落到北方，多次因困窘而毁礼帽，把衣服改为胡服。
English: They originally belonged to China, but lived in the western region for several generations. At first, due to many disasters and difficulties, they were forced to fall to the north. Due to embarrassment, they repeatedly destroyed their ceremonial hats and changed their clothes to Hu clothing.

古文：自我皇隋平一宇宙，化偃九围，德加四表，伯雅逾沙忘阻，奉 来庭，观礼容于旧章，慕威仪之盛典。于是袭缨解辫，削衽曳裾，变夷从夏，义光前载。
现代文：自从我朝统一天下以来，教化九州，加德四表。伯雅逾沙忘阻，进贡朝廷，在典籍中看到礼义，仰慕我朝之盛典，于是，取下帽带，解开发辫，削衽曳裾，改变了本族的风俗，顺应了华夏的习惯，义光前载。
English: Since the unification of my dynasty, Kyushu has been enlightened, and the four watches of the Garde have been made. Boya has forgotten the sand, and paid tribute to the imperial court. He saw the etiquette in the classics, and admired the grand ceremony of my dynasty. Therefore, he took off the hat band, untied the cuffs, cut the cuffs, changed the customs of his tribe, conformed to the habits of China, and advanced the light of righteousness.

古文：可赐衣冠之具，仍班制造之式。
现代文：可赐给他们衣冠的样式，让他们仿照这些样子制造。
English: And let them give them the patterns of the chaplets, that they may make them after their pattern.

古文：并遣使人部领将送。被以采章，复见车服之美，弃彼氈毛，还为冠带之国。 
现代文：并派遣使者用车马护送，车上用彩绸披盖，要显现出车服之美，舍去他们的毡和毳衣，还为冠带之国。 
English: And he sent messengers on horses and chariots, with a train covered with a covering of fine linen, to make the beauty of the chariots and horsemen appear, and to take away the ephod and breastplate from them, and to make them a crown of glory.

古文：然伯雅先臣铁勒，而铁勒恆遣重臣在高昌国，有商胡往来者，则税之送于铁勒。虽有此令取悦中华，然竟畏铁勒而不敢改也。
现代文：但是，伯雅原先对铁勒称臣，而铁勒又长期派遣重臣住在高昌国，有来往胡地的商客，就征税交向铁勒，虽有此令取悦中华，然而，伯雅到底怕铁勒，而不敢改当初。
English: However, Baoya had previously praised Tiller as a minister, and Tiller had long sent senior ministers to live in Gaochang. Merchants who traveled to and from the Huts paid taxes to Tiller. Although this made China happy, however, Baoya was afraid of Tiller and did not dare to change it at first.

古文：自是岁令使人贡其方物。
现代文：从此以后，每年都派使者给隋朝上贡地方特产。
English: From then on, emissaries were sent every year to pay tribute to the Sui Dynasty for local special products.

