古文：公孟子谓子墨子曰： 君子共己以待，问焉则言，不问焉则止，譬若钟然，扣则鸣，不扣则不鸣。 
现代文：译文公孟子对墨子说： 君子自己抱着两手而等待，问到他就说，不问他就不说。好象钟一样：敲击它就响，不敲就不响。 
English: Translation: Prince Mencius said to Mozi, "The gentleman waits with folded arms. If you ask him, he will tell you; if you don't ask him, he won't tell you. It's like a bell: if you strike it, it will ring; if you don't strike it, it won't ring."

古文：墨子曰： 是言有三物焉，子乃今知其一身也，又未知其所谓也。
现代文：墨子说： 这话有三种情形，你现在只知其中之二罢了，并且又不知这二者所说的是什么。
English: Mozi said, "There are three cases of this saying. You only know two of them now, and you don't know what these two are saying.

古文：若大人行淫暴于国家，进而谏，则谓之不逊；因左右而献谏，则谓之言议。此君子之所疑惑也。
现代文：如果王公大人在国家荒淫暴虐，君子前去劝谏，就会说他不恭顺；依靠近臣献上自己的意见，则又叫做私下议论，这是君子所疑惑的事情。
English: If a prince commits an outrageous act in the country, and a gentleman goes to persuade him, it will be said that he is insubordinate; if he relies on a close retainer to offer his opinion, it is also called private discussion, which is a matter of doubt for a gentleman.

古文：若大人为政，将因于国家之难，譬若机之将发也然，君子之必以谏，然而大人之利。
现代文：如果王公大人执政，国家因而将发生灾难，好象弩机将要发射一样急迫，君子一定要劝谏，这是王公大人的利益。
English: If Wang Gongde is in power, the country will suffer a disaster as a result. It is as urgent as if a plane were about to take off. A gentleman must persuade others. This is Wang Gongde's interest.

古文：若此者，虽不扣必鸣者也。
现代文：如此紧急，如钟一样，虽不敲也会发出声音来。
English: So urgent that, like a bell, it will ring even if it doesn't strike.

古文：若大人举不义之异行，虽得大巧之经，可行于军旅之事，欲攻伐无罪之国，有之也，君得之，则必用之矣。
现代文：如果王公大人从事邪行，做不义的事，得到十分巧妙的兵书，一定会用于行军打仗，想攻打无罪的国家并据有它。国君得到这样的兵书，必定使用无疑。
English: If a prince engages in evil deeds, does unjust things, and obtains a very clever military manual, he will certainly use it to march and fight, and want to attack an innocent country and possess it. If a sovereign gets such a military manual, there is no doubt that he will use it.

古文：以广辟土地，著税伪材，出必见辱，所攻者不利，而攻者亦不利，是两不利也。
现代文：王公大人用战事扩充领土，聚集货物、钱财，但是出师却一定受辱，对被攻打的国家不利，对攻打别人的自己的国家也不利，两个都不利。
English: Wang Gong used war to expand his territory and collect goods and money, but he was humiliated when he sent out his army. This was not good for the country that was attacked, nor was it good for him to attack someone else's country. Both were not good.

古文：若此者，虽不扣，必鸣者也。
现代文：象这样，如钟虽不敲，一定会发出声音来。
English: In this way, even if the bell does not strike, it will certainly make a sound.

古文：且子曰： 君子共己以待，问焉则言，不问焉则止，譬若钟然，扣则鸣，不扣则不鸣。 
现代文：况且你说： 君子自己抱着两手而等待，问到他就说，不问他就不说。好象钟一样：敲击它就响，不敲就不响。 
English: Moreover, thou hast said, A gentleman waits with folded hands, and when he is asked, he speaks, and when he is not asked, he does not speak; and like a bell, when it is struck, it rings, and when it is not struck, it does not ring.

古文：今未有扣，子而言，是子之谓不扣而鸣邪？
现代文：现在没有人敲击你，你却说话了，这是你说的 不敲而鸣 吧？
English: Now that no one is knocking you down, you are talking. Is that what you mean by knocking down?

古文：是子之所谓非君子邪？ 
现代文：这是你说的 非君子的行为 吧？ 
English: Is this what you mean by ungentlemanly conduct?

古文：公孟子谓子墨子曰： 实为善，人孰不知？
现代文：公孟子对墨子说： 真正行善谁人不知道呢。
English: Prince Mencius said to Mozi, "Who does not know how to truly do good deeds?

古文：譬若良玉，处而不出有余糈。
现代文：好比美玉隐藏不出，仍然有异常的光彩。
English: It's like a gem that can't be hidden, but still has an extraordinary brilliance.

古文：譬若美女，处而不出，人争求之，行而自炫，人莫之取也。
现代文：好比美女隐住不出，人们争相追求；但如果她自己进行自我炫耀，人们就不娶她了。
English: It is like a beautiful woman who cannot hide herself and is sought after by men, but if she flaunts herself, men will not marry her.

古文：今子遍从人而说之，何其劳也！ 
现代文：现在您到处跟随别人，用话劝说他们，怎么这么劳苦啊！ 
English: Now you are following others everywhere, persuading them with words, what a lot of work!

古文：子墨子曰： 今夫世乱，求美女者众，美女虽不出，人多求之；今求善者寡，不强说人，人莫之知也。
现代文：墨子说： 现在世间混乱，追求美女的人多，美女即使隐住不出，而人多追求她们；现在追求善的人太少了，不努力劝说人，人就不知道了。
English: Mozi said, "Nowadays, the world is chaotic, and there are many people who pursue beautiful women. Even if beautiful women can't hide, many people pursue them. There are too few people who pursue goodness now. If you don't try to persuade people, they won't know.

古文：且有二生于此，善筮，一行为人筮者，一处而不出者，行为人筮者，与处而不出者，其糈孰多？ 
现代文：假如这里有两个人，都善于占卜，一个人出门给别人占卜，另一个人隐住不出，出门给人占卜的与隐住不出的，哪一个所得的赠粮多呢？ 
English: If there are two people here, both of whom are good at divination, one of whom goes out and divines for others, while the other cannot live in secret, and the one who goes out and divines for others and the one who cannot live in secret, which one will receive more donated grain?

古文：公孟子曰： 行为人筮者，其糈多。 
现代文：公孟子说： 出门给人占卜的赠粮多。 
English: Public Mencius said: There are more gifts of grain for people to go out and tell fortunes.

古文：子墨子曰： 仁义钧。
现代文：墨子说： 主张仁义相同，出门向人们劝说的，他的功绩和益处多。
English: Mozi said, "Those who advocate benevolence and righteousness are the same, and those who go out to persuade people have more merits and benefits."

古文：行说人者，其功善亦多，何故不行说人也！ 公孟子戴章甫，忽，儒服，而以见子墨子，曰： 君子服然后行乎？
现代文：为什么不出来劝说人们呢？ 公孟子戴着礼帽，腰间插着笏，穿着儒者的服饰，前来会见墨子，说： 君子穿戴一定的服饰，然后有一定的作为呢？
English: Why didn't he come out to persuade people? Mengzi, a gentleman, wearing a ceremonial hat, with a sash around his waist, and dressed in Confucian attire, came to meet Mozi and said, "A gentleman wears certain clothes, and then does certain things?

古文：其行然后服乎？ 子墨子曰： 行不在服。 
现代文：还是有一定的作为，再穿戴一定的服饰？ 墨子说： 有作为并不在于服饰。 
English: Or do you have to do certain things and then wear certain clothes? Mozi said: It's not the clothes that make the difference.

古文：公孟子曰： 何以知其然也？ 
现代文：公孟子问道： 您为什么知道这样呢？ 
English: Mencius asked, "How do you know this?"

古文：子墨子曰： 昔者齐桓公高冠博带，金剑木盾，以治其国，其国治。昔者晋文公大布之衣，羊之裘，韦以带剑，以治其国，其国治。昔者楚庄王鲜冠组缨，衣博袍，以治其国，其国治。昔者越王勾践剪发文身，以治其国，其国治。
现代文：墨子回答说： 从前齐桓公戴着高帽子，系着大带，佩着金剑木盾，治理国家，国家的政治得到了治理；从前晋文公穿着粗布衣服，披着母羊皮的大衣，佩着带剑，治理国家，国家的政治得到了治理；从前楚庄王戴着鲜冠，系着系冠的丝带，穿着大红长袍，治理他的国家，国家得到了治理；从前越王勾践剪断头发，用针在身上刺了花纹，治理他的国家，国家得到了治理。
English: Mozi replied, "Once upon a time, Prince Qi Huan, wearing a tall hat, a large belt, and a golden sword and wooden shield, governed the country, and the country's politics were governed; once upon a time, Prince Jinwen, wearing a coarse cloth, a coat of ewe's skin, and a sword, governed the country, and the country's politics were governed; once upon a time, King Chu Zhuang, wearing a crown, a ribbon for a crown, and a long red robe, governed his country, and the country was governed; once upon a time, King Yue cut off his hair, and pierced his body with a needle, and

古文：此四君者其服不同，其行犹一也。
现代文：这四位国君，他们的服饰不同，但作为却是一样的。
English: These four sovereigns, their costumes are different, but their actions are the same.

古文：翟以是知行之不在服也。 
现代文：我因此知道有作为不在服饰。 
English: That's how I know it's about the performance and not the clothes.

古文：公孟子曰： 善！
现代文：公孟子说： 说得真好！
English: Prince Mencius said, "How well said!

古文：吾闻之曰：宿善者不祥。
现代文：我听人说过： 使好事停止不行的人，是不吉利的。 
English: I've heard it said that it's bad luck to stop a good thing from happening.

古文：请舍忽、易章甫，复见夫子，可乎？ 
现代文：让我丢弃笏，换了礼帽，再来见您，可以吗？ 
English: Let me discard my skullcap and replace it with a ceremonial hat, and then I'll see you again, okay?

古文：子墨子曰： 请因以相见也。若必将舍忽、易章甫而后相见，然则行果在服也。 
现代文：墨子说： 希望就这样见你，如果一定要丢弃笏，换了礼帽，然后再见面，那么是有作为果真在于服饰了。 
English: Mozi said, "I hope that's how I'll see you. If I have to discard my hakama and replace it with a ceremonial hat before we meet again, then it's really because of the dress."

古文：公孟子曰： 君子必古言服，然后仁。 
现代文：公孟子说： 君子一定要说古言、穿古服，然后才称得上具有仁德修养。 
English: Public Mencius said: A gentleman must speak ancient words and wear ancient clothes before he can be said to have benevolent cultivation.

古文：子墨子曰： 昔者商王纣，卿士费仲，为天下之暴人；箕子、微子，为天下之圣人。
现代文：墨子说： 从前商纣王的卿士费仲，是天下有名的暴虐之人；箕子、微子，是天下有名的圣人。
English: Mozi said: Feizhong, a noble and scholar who was once the king of merchants, was a famous tyrant in the world; Zizi and Weizi were famous saints in the world.

古文：此同言，而或仁不仁也。
现代文：这是同说古言而或仁德或不仁德的例子。
English: This is an example of saying the same old thing and changing it to benevolence or inhumanity.

古文：周公旦为天下之圣人，关叔为天下之暴人，此同服，或仁或不仁。
现代文：周公旦是天下有名的圣人；关叔是天下有名的暴虐之人，这又是同穿古服而或仁德或不仁德的例子。
English: Zhou Gongdan is a world-renowned saint; Guan Uncle is a world-renowned tyrant. This is another example of wearing the same old clothes and being either benevolent or inhumane.

古文：然则不在古服与古言矣。
现代文：具有仁德修养，不在于古言古服！
English: Having a benevolent moral upbringing does not depend on old sayings and old clothes!

古文：且子法周而未法夏也，子之古，非古也。 
现代文：况且你效法周而没有效法夏，你的古，其实并不古。 
English: Moreover, you follow Zhou but not Xia, your Gu is actually not ancient.

古文：公孟子谓子墨子曰： 昔者圣王之列也，上圣立为天子，其次立为卿大夫。
现代文：公孟子对墨子说： 从前圣王安排位次，道德智能最高的上圣立作天子，其次的立作卿大夫。
English: Prince Mencius said to Mozi: In the past, the holy king arranged the ranks, and the highest moral intelligence was set up as the heavenly son, and the second was set up as the doctor.

古文：今孔子博于《诗》、《书》，察于礼乐，详于万物，若使孔子当圣王，则岂不以孔子为天子哉！ 
现代文：现在孔子博通《诗》、《书》，明察礼、乐之制，备知天下万物。如果让孔子当上圣，岂不是可以让孔子作天子了吗？ 
English: Now, Confucius is well-versed in "Poetry," "Books," and the systems of observation, ritual, and music, and knows everything in the world. If we allow Confucius to become a saint, can we not allow Confucius to become a heavenly son?

古文：子墨子曰： 夫知者，必尊天事鬼，爱人节用，合焉为知矣。
现代文：墨子说： 所谓智者，一定尊重上天，侍奉鬼神，爱护百姓，节约财用，合于这些要求，才可以称得上智者。
English: Mozi said: So-called wise people must respect heaven, serve ghosts and gods, love the people, and save money. Only those who meet these requirements can be called wise.

古文：今子曰 知孔子博于《诗》、《书》，察于礼乐，详于万物 ，而曰可以为天子，是数人之齿，而以为富。 
现代文：现在你说孔子博通《诗》、《书》，明察礼、乐之制，备知天下万物，而认为他可以作天子。这是数别人契据上的刻数，却自以为富裕了。 
English: Now you say that Confucius is well-versed in "Poetry" and "Scripture," observes rituals and music, knows everything in the world, and thinks he can be the son of heaven. This is the number of hours on someone else's deed, but he thinks he is rich.

古文：公孟子曰： 贫富寿夭，然在天，不可损益。 
现代文：公孟子说： 贫困、富裕、长寿、夭折，确实由天注定，不能够增减它们。 
English: "Poverty, affluence, longevity, and premature death are indeed predestined by heaven, and they cannot be increased or decreased," said Prince Mencius.

古文：又曰： 君子必学。 
现代文：又说： 君子一定要学习。 
English: He also said: A gentleman must study.

古文：子墨子曰： 教人学而执有命，是犹命人葆而去其冠也。 
现代文：墨子说： 教人学习却宣扬 有命 的观念，就好象让人包裹头发，现在却拿去了他的帽子一样。 
English: Mozi said, "Teaching people to study while promoting the concept of life is like having someone wrap their hair and then taking away their hat."

古文：公孟子谓子墨子曰： 有义不义，无祥不祥。 
现代文：公孟子对墨子说： 人存在义与不义的情况，但不存在因人的义与不义而得福得祸的情况。 
English: Public Mencius said to Mozi: There are situations in which people are righteous and unrighteous, but there are no situations in which people are blessed and cursed because of their righteousness and unrighteousness.

古文：子墨子曰： 古圣王皆以鬼神为神明，而为祸福，执有祥不祥，是以政治而国安也。
现代文：墨子说： 古代的圣王都认为鬼神是神明的，能带来祸福，主张 因人的义与不义而得福得祸 的观点，因此政治清明，国家安宁。
English: Mozi said, "Ancient sages and kings all believed that ghosts and gods were divine and could bring misfortune and good fortune, and advocated the view that people's righteousness and unrighteousness could bring good fortune and misfortune. As a result, politics was clear and the country was peaceful.

古文：自桀纣以下皆以鬼神为不神明，不能为祸辐，执无祥不祥，是以政乱而国危也。
现代文：自从桀、纣以来，都认为鬼神不神明，不能带来祸福，主张 人的不义得不了祸 的观点，因此政治混乱，国家一个个灭亡了。
English: Since ancient times, people have believed that ghosts and gods are not gods and cannot bring misfortune and good fortune, and advocated the view that man's injustice cannot bring misfortune. As a result, there has been political chaos, and countries have perished one by one.

古文：故先王之书子亦有之曰： 其傲也出，于子不祥。 
现代文：先王的书你也有，那书上讲： 言行傲慢，对你不吉祥。 
English: You also have the previous king's book, which says: Arrogant words and deeds are not good for you.

古文：此言为不善之有罚，为善之有赏。 
现代文：这话是对不善的惩罚，又是对从善的奖赏。 
English: This is both a punishment for bad behavior and a reward for good behavior.

古文：子墨子谓公孟子曰： 丧礼，君与父母、妻、后子死，三年丧服；伯父、叔父、兄弟期；族人五月；姑、姊、舅、甥有数月之丧。
现代文：墨子对公孟子说： 按照丧礼：国君与父母、妻子、长子死了，要穿戴三年丧服；伯父、叔父、兄弟死了，只一年；族人死了，五个月；姑、姐、舅、甥死了，也都有几个月的服丧期。
English: Mozi said to his father-in-law Mencius, "According to the funeral rites, when the sovereign, his parents, his wife, and his eldest son die, they should wear mourning clothes for three years; when their uncles, uncles, and brothers die, they should wear mourning clothes for only one year; when their relatives die, they should wear mourning clothes for five months; when their aunts, sisters, uncles, and nephews die, they should also wear mourning clothes for several months.

古文：或以不丧之间，诵《诗》三百，弦《诗》三百，歌《诗》三百，舞《诗》三百。
现代文：又在不办丧事的间隙，诵《诗三百》，又配以舞蹈。如果用你的言论，那么国君哪一天可以从事政治呢？
English: And in the intervals between funerals, the "Three Hundred Poems" is recited and accompanied by a dance. If you use your words, then when can the sovereign engage in politics?

古文：若用子之言，则君子何日以听治？
现代文：百姓又哪一天可以从事事务呢？ 
English: On what day can the people go about their business?

古文：庶人何日以从事？ 公孟子曰： 国乱则治之，国治则为礼乐；国治则从事，国富则为礼乐。 
现代文：公孟子答道： 国家混乱就从事政治，国家安宁就从事礼、乐；国家贫困就从事事务，国家富裕就从事礼、乐。 
English: Gongmenzi replied, "When a country is in chaos, it engages in politics; when a country is at peace, it engages in rituals and pleasures; when a country is poor, it engages in affairs; when a country is rich, it engages in rituals and pleasures.

古文：子墨子曰： 国之治，治之废，则国之治亦废。
现代文：墨子说： 国家安宁，如果治理废弃了，国家的安宁也就废弃了。
English: Mozi said: National tranquility, if governance is abandoned, national tranquility is also abandoned.

古文：国之富也，从事故富也；从事废，则国之富亦废。
现代文：国家富裕，由于百姓从事事务才富裕；百姓的从事废弃了，国家的富裕也就废弃了。
English: If the country is rich, it is because the people are engaged in business; if the people's business is abandoned, the country's wealth is also abandoned.

古文：故虽治国，劝之无餍，然后可也。
现代文：所以治国的事，必须勤勉不止，才可以治好。
English: Therefore, the matter of governing the country must be diligently continued before it can be cured.

古文：今子曰，国治则为礼乐，乱则治之，是譬犹噎而穿井也，死而求医也。
现代文：现在你说： 国家安宁就从事礼、乐，国家混乱就从事政治。 就如同吃饭噎住了才凿井，人死了才求医一样。
English: Now you say, "When the country is at peace, it engages in rituals and music; when the country is in chaos, it engages in politics," just as a man who chokes on his food has to dig a well, and a man who dies has to seek medical treatment.

古文：古者三代暴王桀、纣、幽、厉，为声乐，不顾其民，是以身为刑戮，国为戾虚者，皆从此道也。 
现代文：古时候，三代的暴虐之王夏桀、商纣、周幽王、周厉王大搞声乐，不顾老百姓的死活，因而自身成了刑戮之人，国家也遭到了灭亡，都是由于这种主张造成的。 
English: In ancient times, three generations of tyrannical kings, Xia Yao, Shang Yao, Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang, engaged in vocal music, disregarding the lives and deaths of the common people. As a result, they themselves became torturers, and the country was also destroyed. All of this was caused by such a claim.

古文：公孟子曰： 无鬼神。 
现代文：公孟子说： 没有鬼神。 
English: Prince Mencius said, "There are no ghosts and gods."

古文：又曰： 君子必学祭祀。 
现代文：又说： 君子一定要学习祭礼。 
English: He also said: A gentleman must learn the rites.

古文：子墨子曰： 执无鬼而学祭礼，是犹无客而学客礼也，是犹无鱼而为鱼罟也。 
现代文：墨子说： 主张 没有鬼神 的观点却劝人学习祭礼，这就象没有宾客却学习接待宾客的礼节，没有鱼却结鱼网一样。 
English: Mozi said, "Advocating the view that there are no ghosts and gods, but persuading people to study rituals, is like having no guests, but learning the etiquette of receiving guests, and having no fish, but making a fish net.

古文：公孟子谓子墨子曰： 子以三年之丧为非，子之三日之丧亦非也。 
现代文：公孟子对墨子说： 您认为守三年丧期是错的，那么您主张的守三日丧期也不对。 
English: Gongmenzi said to Mozi: If you think that the three-year mourning period is wrong, then the three-day mourning period you advocate is also wrong.

古文：子墨子曰： 子以三年之丧非三日之丧，是犹裸谓撅者不恭也。 
现代文：墨子说： 你用三年的丧期攻击三日的丧期，就好象的人说掀衣露体的人不恭敬一样。 
English: Mozi said, "If you use the three-year mourning period to attack the three-day mourning period, it's like people saying that people who are naked are disrespectful.

古文：公孟子谓子墨子曰： 知有贤于人，则可谓知乎？ 
现代文：公孟子对墨子说： 某人的所知，有胜过人家的地方，那么，可以说他是智慧聪明的人吗？ 
English: Public Mencius said to Mozi: If a person's knowledge surpasses that of others, can it be said that he is a wise and intelligent person?

古文：子墨子曰： 愚之知有以贤于人，而愚岂可谓知矣哉？ 
现代文：墨子答道： 愚者的所知，有胜过他人的地方，然而难道能说愚者是智慧聪明的人吗？ 
English: Mozi replied, "The knowledge of a fool is superior to that of others, but can it be said that a fool is a wise and intelligent person?

古文：公孟子曰： 三年之丧，学吾之慕父母。 
现代文：公孟子说： 守三年的丧期，这是仿效孩子依恋父母的情意。 
English: Public Mencius said: To observe a three-year mourning period is to emulate the attachment of children to their parents.

古文：子墨子曰： 夫婴儿子之知，独慕父母而已，父母不可得也，然号而不止，此其故何也？
现代文：墨子说： 婴儿的智慧，唯独希慕自己的父母而已，父母不见了，就大哭不止。这是什么缘故呢？
English: Mozi said, "The wisdom of babies is that they only yearn for their parents. When their parents are gone, they cry endlessly. What is the reason for this?

古文：即愚之至也。
现代文：这是愚笨到了极点。
English: This is stupidity to the nth degree.

古文：然则儒者之知，岂有以贤于婴儿子哉？ 
现代文：那么儒者的智慧，难道有胜过小孩子的地方吗？ 
English: So is there a place for the wisdom of Confucians over that of children?

古文：子墨子曰问于儒者： 何故为乐？ 
现代文：墨子问一个儒者说： 为什么从事音乐？ 
English: Mozi asked a Confucian: Why do you engage in music?

古文：曰： 乐以为乐也。 
现代文：儒者回答说： 以音乐作为娱乐。 
English: He replied: Music as entertainment.

古文：子墨子曰： 子未我应也。
现代文：墨子说： 你没有回答我。
English: Mozi said, "You didn't answer me."

古文：今我问曰： 何故为室？ 
现代文：现在我问： 为什么建造房屋？ 
English: Now I ask: why build houses?

古文：曰： 冬避寒焉，夏避暑焉，室以为男女之别也。 
现代文：回答说： 冬天避寒，夏天避暑，建造房屋也用来分别男女。 
English: He replied, "It is used to keep out the cold in winter and the heat in summer, and it is also used to separate men and women when building houses.

古文：则子告我为室之故矣。今我问曰： 何故为乐？ 
现代文：那么，是你告诉了我造房屋的原因。现在我问： 为什么从事音乐？ 
English: Well, you told me the reason for building the house. Now I ask: Why music?

古文：曰： 乐以为乐也。 
现代文：回答说： 以音乐作为娱乐。 
English: He replied: Music as entertainment.

古文：是犹曰： 何故为室？ 
现代文：如同问： 为什么建造房屋？ 
English: As if to ask: why build houses?

古文：曰： 室以为室也。  
现代文：回答说： 建造房屋是建造房屋 一样。 
English: And he answered, To build a house is to build a house.

古文：子墨子谓程子曰： 儒之道足以丧天下者四政焉。
现代文：墨子对程子说： 儒家的学说足以丧亡天下的有四种。
English: Mozi said to Chengzi: There are four Confucian doctrines that are enough to ruin the world.

古文：儒以天为不明，以鬼为不神，天、鬼不说，此足以丧天下。
现代文：儒家认为天不明察，认为鬼神不神明。天、鬼神不高兴，这足以丧亡天下了。
English: Confucians believe that heaven does not notice, that ghosts and gods are not gods. Heaven and ghosts are not happy, which is enough to ruin the world.

古文：又厚葬久丧，重为棺椁，多为衣衾，送死若徙，三年哭泣，扶后起，杖后行，耳无闻，目无见，此足以丧天下。
现代文：又加上厚葬久丧：做几层的套棺，制很多的衣服、被子，送葬就象搬家一样，哭泣三年，人扶才能起来，拄了拐杖才能行走，耳朵不听外事，眼睛不见外物，这足以丧亡天下了。
English: Then there is the long funeral: the coffin is made of several layers of coffins, many clothes and quilts are made, the funeral is like moving a house, three years of weeping, people can only get up with help, they can only walk with crutches, their ears do not listen to outsiders, their eyes do not see outsiders, this is enough to ruin the world.

古文：又弦歌鼓舞，习为声乐，此足以丧天下。
现代文：又加以弦歌、击鼓、舞蹈，以声乐之事作为常习，这足以丧亡天下了。
English: And they sing with stringed instruments, and beat upon the drums, and dance, and make melody with their voices continually: for this is vanity unto the ends of the earth.

古文：又以命为有，贫富寿夭，治乱安危有极矣，不可损益也。
现代文：同时又认为有命，说贫困、富裕、长寿、夭折、治乱安危有一个定数，不可增减变化。
English: At the same time, they also believe that there is life, saying that poverty, wealth, longevity, premature death, chaos control and security have a constant, which cannot be increased or decreased.

古文：为上者行之，必不听治矣；为下者行之，必不从事矣。此足以丧天下。 
现代文：统治天下的人实行他们的学说，一定就不从事政治了；被统治的人实行他们的学说，一定就不从事事务了，这足以丧亡天下。 
English: If those who rule the world put their doctrines into practice, they will not engage in politics; if those who are ruled put their doctrines into practice, they will not engage in business. This is enough to ruin the world.

古文：程子曰： 甚矣，先生之毁儒也。 
现代文：程子说： 太过分了！先生诋毁儒家。 
English: Cheng Zi said, "That's too much! You are slandering Confucianism."

古文：子墨子曰： 儒固无此若四政者，而我言之，则是毁也。
现代文：墨子说： 假如儒家本来没有这四种学说，而我却说有，这就是诋毁了。
English: Mozi said, "If Confucianism does not have these four doctrines, but I say that it does, this is slander.

古文：今儒固有此四政者，而我言之，则非毁也，告闻也。 
现代文：现在儒家本来就有这四种学说，而我说了出来，这就不是诋毁了，是就我所知告诉你罢了。 
English: Now, Confucianism already has these four doctrines, and if I mention them, it's not slander, it's just telling you what I know.

古文：程子无辞而出。
现代文：程子没有告辞退了出来。
English: Cheng Zi did not bow out.

古文：子墨子曰： 迷之！ 
现代文：墨子说： 回来！ 
English: Mozi said: Come back!

古文：反，后坐。进复曰： 乡者先生之言有可闻者焉。
现代文：程子返了回来，又坐下了，他再告诉墨子说： 从前，先生您的言论有可以听的地方。
English: Cheng Zi came back and sat down again. He then told Mo Zi, "Once upon a time, sir, there was a place where your words could be heard.

古文：若先生之言，则是不誉禹，不毁桀、纣也。 子墨子曰： 不然。
现代文：先生象这样谈论，还不是诋毁禹，连桀纣也都不诋毁了。 墨子说： 不是这样。
English: To speak of the teacher in this way is not to denigrate Yu, or even Zou. Mozi said, "It's not like that.

古文：夫应孰辞，称议而为之，敏也。
现代文：能用常习的言词作回答，又切合事理，可见他的敏达。
English: His sensitivity can be seen in the fact that he can answer questions using familiar words and make them relevant.

古文：厚攻则厚吾，薄攻则薄吾。应孰辞而称议，是犹荷辕而击蛾也。 
现代文：对方严词相辩，我也一定严词应敌，对方缓言相让，我也一定缓言以对。如果平时应酬的言词，一定要求切合事理，那就象举着车辕去敲击蛾子一样了。 
English: If the other side argues harshly, I must also respond harshly, and if the other side concedes, I must also concede. If the words of entertainment in ordinary times must be reasonable, it will be like holding a rickshaw to hit a moth.

古文：子墨子与程子辩，称于孔子。
现代文：墨子与程子辩论，称赞孔子。
English: Mozi debates with Chengzi and praises Confucius.

古文：程子曰： 非儒，何故称于孔子也？ 
现代文：程子问： 您一向攻击儒家的学说，为什么又称赞孔子呢？ 
English: Cheng Zi asked: You have always attacked the teachings of Confucianism, why do you praise Confucius?

古文：子墨子曰： 是亦当而不可易者也。
现代文：墨子答道： 孔子也有合理而不可改变的地方。
English: Mozi replied, "Confucius also has some reasonable and unchangeable points.

古文：今鸟闻热旱之忧则高，鱼闻热旱之忧则下，当此，虽禹、汤为之谋，必不能易矣。
现代文：现在鸟有热旱之患就向高处飞，鱼有热旱之患则向水下游，遇到这种情况，即使禹、汤为它们谋划，也一定不能改变。
English: Now, when birds are affected by heat and drought, they fly to high altitudes, and when fish are affected by heat and drought, they swim downstream. In this situation, even if Yu and Tang plan for them, they must not change.

古文：鱼鸟可谓愚矣，禹、汤犹云因焉。
现代文：鸟、鱼可说是够无知的了，禹、汤有时还要因循习俗。
English: Birds and fish can be said to be ignorant enough, Yu and Tang sometimes have to follow customs.

古文：今翟曾无称于孔子乎？ 
现代文：难道我还不能有称赞孔子的地方吗？ 
English: Can't I still have a place to praise Confucius?

古文：有游于子墨子之门者，身体强良，思虑徇通，欲使随而学。
现代文：有一人来到墨子门下，身体健壮，思虑敏捷，墨子想让他跟随自己学习。
English: There was a person who came under Mozi's tutelage. He was physically strong and quick-witted. Mozi wanted him to learn from him.

古文：子墨子曰： 姑学乎，吾将仕子。 
现代文：于是说： 暂且学习吧，我将要让你出仕做官。 
English: So he said, "Let's study for a while, I'm going to make you an official."

古文：劝于善言而学。
现代文：用好话勉励他而学习了。
English: She encouraged him with kind words and he began to study.

古文：其年，而责仕于子墨子。
现代文：过了一年，那人向墨子求出仕。墨子说： 我不想让你出仕。
English: A year later, the man asked Mozi to serve him. Mozi said, "I don't want you to serve me."

古文：子墨子曰： 不仕子，子亦闻夫鲁语乎？鲁有昆弟五人者，其父死，其长子嗜酒而不葬，其四弟曰： 子与我葬，当为子沽酒。 
现代文：你应该听过鲁国的故事吧？鲁国有兄弟五人，父亲死了，长子嗜酒不葬。四个弟弟对他说： 你和我们一起安葬父亲，我们将给你买酒。 
English: You must have heard the story of the five brothers in Russia. The father died, but the eldest son, who loved to drink, did not want to be buried. The four brothers said to him: "Bury your father with us, and we will buy you wine."

古文：劝于善言而葬。
现代文：用好言劝他葬了父亲。
English: He was well-advised to bury his father.

古文：已葬而责酒于其四弟。
现代文：葬后，长子向四个弟弟要酒。
English: After the funeral, the eldest son asked his four younger brothers for wine.

古文：四弟曰： 吾未予子酒矣。
现代文：弟弟们说： 我们不给你酒了。
English: The brothers said, "We won't give you any more wine.

古文：子葬子父，我葬吾父，岂独吾父哉？
现代文：你葬你的父亲，我们葬我们的父亲，怎么能说只是我们的父亲呢？
English: You buried your father, we buried our father, how can we say it's just our father?

古文：子不葬则人将笑子，故劝子葬也。 
现代文：你不葬别人将笑话你，所以劝你葬。 
English: If you don't bury it, people will laugh at you, so I advise you to bury it.

古文：今子为义，我亦为义，岂独我义也哉？
现代文：现在你行义，我也行义，怎么能说只是我的义呢？
English: But now that you have done what is right and I have done what is right, how can it be said that I alone am right?

古文：子不学，则人将笑子，故劝子于学。 
现代文：你不学别人将要笑话你，所以劝你学习。 
English: If you don't learn, people will laugh at you, so I advise you to learn.

古文：有游于子墨子之门者，子墨子曰： 盍学乎？ 
现代文：有一个人来到墨子门下，墨子说： 何不学习呢？ 
English: A man came to Mozi's door, and Mozi said, "Why don't you study?

古文：对曰： 吾族人无学者。 
现代文：那人回答说： 我家族中没有学习的人。 
English: The man replied, "No one in my family is a scholar.

古文：子墨子曰： 不然。
现代文：墨子说： 不是这样。
English: Mozi said, "That's not true.

古文：夫妤美者，岂曰吾族人莫之好，故不妤哉？
现代文：喜爱美的人，难道会说我家族中没有人喜爱美，所以不喜爱吗？
English: Would a person who loves beauty say that no one in my family loves beauty, so I don't like it?

古文：夫欲富贵者，岂曰我族人莫之欲，故不欲哉？
现代文：打算富贵的人，难道会说我家族中没有人这么打算，所以不打算吗？
English: Will those who want to be rich say that no one in my family wants to be rich, so they won't do it?

古文：好美、欲富贵者，不视人犹强为之，夫义，天下之大器也，何以视人？
现代文：喜欢美的人、打算富贵的人，不用看他人行事，仍然努力去做。义，是天下最贵重的宝器，为什么看他人呢？
English: People who like beauty, people who plan to be rich, do not need to watch others act, they still try to do it. Righteousness is the most precious treasure in the world, why look at others?

古文：必强为之? 
现代文：一定努力去从事。 
English: One must make an effort to engage in singing.

古文：有游于子墨子之门者，谓子墨子曰： 先生以鬼神为明知，能为祸人哉福，为善者福之，为暴者祸之。
现代文：有一个在墨子门下求学的人，对墨子说： 先生认为鬼神明智，能给人带来祸福，给从善的人富裕，给施暴的人祸患。
English: A student under Mozi's tutelage said to Mozi: "The teacher thinks that ghosts and gods are wise and can bring misfortune and good fortune to people, wealth to those who are good, and misfortune to those who are violent."

古文：今吾事先生久矣，而福不至，意者先生之言有不善乎，鬼神不明乎？
现代文：现在我侍奉先生已经很久了，但福却不到来。或许先生的话有不精确的地方？鬼神也许不明智？
English: Now I have been serving my master for a long time, but the blessing has not come. Perhaps there is something inaccurate in my master's words? Perhaps ghosts and gods are not wise?

古文：我何故不得福也？ 
现代文：要不，我为什么得不到福呢？ 
English: Otherwise, why am I not blessed?

古文：子墨子曰： 虽子不得福，吾言何遽不善，而鬼神何遽不明？
现代文：墨子说： 即使你得不到福，我的话为什么不精确呢？而鬼神又为什么不明智呢？
English: Mozi said, "Even if you don't receive blessings, why aren't my words precise? And why aren't ghosts and gods wise?

古文：子亦闻乎匿徒之刑之有刑乎？ 
现代文：你可听说过隐藏犯人是有罪的吗？ 这人回答说： 没听说过。 
English: Have you ever heard that it is a crime to hide a criminal? The man replied that he had not.

古文：对曰： 未之得闻也。 子墨子曰： 今有人于此，什子，子能什誉之，而一自誉乎？ 对曰： 不能。 
现代文：墨子说： 现在有一个人，他的贤能胜过你的十倍，你能十倍地称誉他，而只是一次称誉自己吗？ 这人回答说： 不能。 
English: Mozi said, "Now there is a man who is ten times wiser than you. Can you praise him ten times, but only praise yourself once?" The man replied, "No."

古文： 有人于此，百子，子能终身誉其善，而子无一乎？ 对曰： 不能。 
现代文：墨子又问： 现在有人的贤能胜过你百倍，你能终身称誉他的长处，而一次也不称誉自己吗？ 这人回答说： 不能。 
English: Mozi also asked, "Nowadays, there is a man who is a hundred times more capable than you. Can you praise his strengths for the rest of your life without praising yourself once?" The man replied, "No."

古文：子墨子曰： 匿一人者犹有罪，今子所匿者，若此亓多，将有厚罪者也，何福之求！ 子墨子有疾，跌鼻进而问曰： 先生以鬼神为明，能为祸福，为善者赏之，为不善者罚之。
现代文：墨子说： 隐藏一个都有罪，现你所隐藏的这么多，将有重罪，还求什么福？ 墨子有病，跌鼻进来问他说： 先生认为鬼神是明智的，能造成祸福，从事善事的就奖赏他，从事不善事的就惩罚他。
English: Mozi said, "Hiding everyone is a sin. Now that you have hidden so much, there will be a serious crime. What kind of blessing are you asking for?" Mozi, who was ill, came in with a runny nose and asked him, "My teacher thinks that ghosts and gods are wise and can cause misfortune and good fortune. If you do good deeds, you will be rewarded, and if you do bad deeds, you will be punished.

古文：今先生圣人也，何故有疾？
现代文：共：读为 拱 。一：疑作 二 ；身： 耳 字之误。
English: Total: Read as 拱. I: Doubtful composition II; Body: Mistake in pronunciation.

古文：意者先生之言有不善乎？
现代文：著：当读 赋 ；伪： ■ 字之误，古 货 字。
English: Author: Dangyodong Fu; Forgery: ■ Typo, outdated characters.

古文：鬼神不明知乎？ 
现代文：僇：通 戮 。祀： 礼 字之误。
English: :通 戮.祀: 礼 字之误.

古文：子墨子曰： 虽使我有病，何遽不明？
现代文：倮：通 裸 。 吾 字后脱一 子 字，吾子：孩子。 曰 字当在 问于儒者 后。
English: : 通 裸. 吾 字後脱一子 字,吾子:孩子. 曰 字当在問於儒者后.

古文：人之所得于病者多方，有得之寒暑，有得之劳苦。
现代文：四政：四种学说。迷：疑为 还 字之误。后：繁体为 ■ ，当为 復 字之误。闻：应作 间 ，指责。孰：同 熟 。
English: Four governments: four doctrines. MYTH: Doubt is a grammatical error. LATER: Traditional is ■, should be a grammatical error. HEARING: should be 間, blame. HEARING: the same.

古文：百门而闭一门焉，则盗何遽无从入？ 
现代文：议：旧本或作 义 ，当从。吾：通 御 。徇： 侚 字之误，疾速。责：求。未：勿。
English: Suggestion: The old book, or the work of righteousness, should be followed. I: Tong You. : Mistake of, haste. Responsibility: Ask. Failure: Do not.

古文：请弃之。 
现代文：未： 夫 字之误。
English: 未: Mistake in husband's name.

古文：子墨子曰： 不可，称我言以毁我行，俞于亡。有人于此： 翟甚不仁，尊天、事鬼、爱人，甚不仁 。犹愈于亡也。
现代文：能为祸人哉福：当作 能为祸福 。 言 字前脱一 子 字。 有人于此 后应补一 曰 字。隐：疑 偃 之误。 治 字前似当有 能 字。亡： 防 之音讹。
English: It is a blessing to be able to do harm: it is considered to be a blessing to be able to do harm. The first letter of the word is removed. Someone should then add a second letter. Hidden: Mistake of doubt. There seems to be a word of power before the word of cure. Death: The sound of prevention.

