古文：安禄山，营州柳城杂种胡人也，本无姓氏，名轧荦山。
现代文：安禄山，营州柳城杂种胡人。他原来没有姓氏，名字叫轧荦山。
English: Anlu Mountain, Yingzhou Liucheng mongrel Hu people. He originally did not have a surname, his name was Zhuozhuang Mountain.

古文：母阿史德氏，亦突厥巫师，以卜为业。
现代文：母亲阿史德氏，是突厥的一个巫师，以占卜为业。
English: His mother, Ashide, was a Turkic sorcerer whose profession was divination.

古文：突厥呼斗战为轧荦山，遂以名之。
现代文：突厥人 斗战 一词的发音是轧荦山，就用它作为安禄山的名字。
English: The Turks, who pronounced the word "Doucheng" as "Rolling Mountain," used it as the name of Mount Anlu.

古文：少孤，随母在突厥中，将军安波至兄延偃妻其母。
现代文：他小时候失去了父亲，跟着母亲在突厥族里生活，将军安波至的哥哥安延偃娶他母亲为妻。
English: He lost his father when he was a child and lived with his mother in the Turkic tribe. General Anbo's brother Anyan married his mother.

古文：开元初，与将军安道买男俱逃出突厥中。
现代文：玄宗开元初年，他跟将军安道买的儿子一起逃离了突厥。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, he escaped from the Turks together with the son of the general Ando Ma.

古文：道买次男贞节为岚州别驾，收获之。
现代文：安道买的第二个儿子安贞节任岚州别驾，把他们两个人抓回来了。
English: Ando's second son, Ahn Jung-seok, was detained in Yeonju and the two were recaptured.

古文：年十余岁，以与其兄及延偃相携而出，感愧之，约与思顺等并为兄弟，冒姓为安。
现代文：他年纪到了十多岁，认为和他的哥哥以及后父安延偃生活在一起，感到惭愧。约定同安思顺等人结为兄弟，就定为姓安。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he felt ashamed to think that he was living with his older brother and his father-in-law, An Yanjun. He agreed to be a brother with An Sishun and others, and his surname was changed to An.

古文：及长，解六蕃语，为互市牙郎。
现代文：长大成人后，懂多种少数民族语言，当了个为买卖人协议物价的牙郎。
English: After he grew up, he understood many ethnic minority languages and became a price negotiator for merchants.

古文：二十年，张守珪为幽州节度，禄山盗羊事觉，守珪剥坐，欲棒杀之，大呼曰： 大夫不欲灭两蕃耶？
现代文：开元二十年，张守王圭任幽州节度，安禄山偷羊被抓住，张守王圭拷问他，准备乱棍打死，他高声喊叫说： 大夫难道不想消灭两个蕃族啊？
English: On the 20th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Zhang Shou Wang Gui was in charge of the Yuzhou Festival. He was caught stealing sheep in Anlu Mountain. Zhang Shou Wang Gui tortured him and prepared to beat him to death with a club. He shouted loudly, "Doesn't the doctor want to exterminate two Yi people?"

古文：何为打杀禄山！ 
现代文：为什么要打死我！ 
English: Why do you want to kill me!

古文：守珪见其肥白，壮其言而释之。
现代文：张守王圭见他长得白白胖胖，语言豪壮，就放了他。
English: Zhang Shou Wang Gui saw that he was white, fat and strong-willed, so he released him.

古文：令与乡人史思明同捉生，行必克获，拔为偏将。
现代文：命令他跟同乡史思明一起抓活俘虏，他们只要出去就一定能够按时抓到，就把安禄山提拔为偏将。
English: He ordered him to capture the prisoners alive together with his countryman Shi Siming. As long as they go out, they will be able to catch them on time. He promoted Anlu Shan to general.

古文：常嫌其肥，以守珪威风素高，畏惧不敢饱食。
现代文：张守王圭老是嫌安禄山过于肥胖，此人又一向令人敬畏，安禄山感到害怕就不敢多吃食物。
English: Zhang Shou Wang Gui has always disliked Anlu Shan for being too fat. This person has always been awe-inspiring. When Anlu Shan feels afraid, he does not dare to eat more food.

古文：以骁勇闻，遂养为子。
现代文：安禄山以骁勇出名，张守王圭就把他收为义子。
English: An Lushan was famous for his bravery. Zhang Shou Wang Gui adopted him as his son-in-law.

古文：二十八年，为平卢兵马使。
现代文：开元二十八年，安禄山任平卢兵马使。
English: In the 28th year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, An Lushan was appointed as the envoy to Pinglu.

古文：性巧黠，人多誉之。
现代文：他秉性机灵聪慧，人们大多称赞他。
English: He is quick-witted and intelligent, and people mostly praise him.

古文：授营州都督、平卢军使。
现代文：朝廷授予他营州都督、平卢军使官衔。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of Yingzhou governor and Pinglu military envoy.

古文：厚赂往来者，乞为好言，玄宗益信响之。
现代文：他用厚礼贿赂往来官员，要求在朝廷为他多说好话，玄宗更加信任喜爱他。
English: He bribed officials he had dealings with with lavish gifts and asked them to say more good things about him at court, which made Xuanzong trust and love him even more.

古文：天宝元年，以平卢为节度，以禄山摄中丞为使。
现代文：玄宗天宝元年，在平卢设置节度，任命安禄山为代理御史中丞、平卢节度使。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, a festival was held in Pinglu, and An Lushan was appointed as the acting vice-president of history and the deputy of the Pinglu festival.

古文：入朝奏事，玄宗益宠之。
现代文：此后便可到朝廷上奏议事，玄宗更加宠信他。
English: After that, he could go to the Imperial Court to present his case, and Emperor Xuanzong trusted him even more.

古文：三载，代裴宽为范阳节度，河北采访、平卢军等使如故。
现代文：天宝三年，他接替裴宽任范阳节度，河北采访、平卢军等使一一照旧。
English: In the third year of Tianbao, he succeeded Pei Kuan as Fan Yang Festival, Hebei interview, Pinglu army and so on.

古文：采访使张利贞常受其赂；数载之后，黜陟使席建侯又言其公直无私；裴宽受代，及李林甫顺旨，并言其美。
现代文：采访使张利贞经常接受他的贿赂；几年之后，黜陟使席建侯又说他公正无私；裴宽又因安禄山接替而离职，至于李林甫又一味迎合玄宗，都一齐说安禄山的好话。
English: The interview caused Zhang Lizhen to often accept his bribes; a few years later, the chief envoy, Jian Hou, also said that he was fair and selfless; Pei Kuan also left his post because of An Lushan's succession, and as for Li Linfu, he also pandered to Xuanzong, they all said good things about An Lushan.

古文：数公皆信臣，玄宗意益坚不摇矣。
现代文：这几位都是玄宗信赖的朝臣，玄宗对安禄山的好感更加坚定不移了。
English: These are the trusted courtiers of Xuanzong, and Xuanzong's liking for Anlu Mountain has become more unwavering.

古文：后请为贵妃养兒，入对皆先拜太真。玄宗怪而问之，对曰： 臣是蕃人，蕃人先母而后父。 
现代文：后来安禄山请求当了杨贵妃的养子，进宫朝见玄宗都先拜望杨贵妃，玄宗觉得奇怪就问原因，安禄山回答说： 臣是胡人，胡人把母亲放在前头而把父亲放在后头。 
English: Later, An Lushan asked to be Yang Guifei's adopted son. When they entered the palace and met Xuanzong, they all visited Yang Guifei first. Xuanzong thought it was strange and asked the reason. An Lushan replied: "The minister is a Hu person. Hu people put their mother in front and their father behind.

古文：玄宗大悦，遂命杨銛已下并约为兄弟姊妹。
现代文：玄宗听了非常高兴，于是命令杨钅舌以下的杨家兄妹们一起同安禄山结为兄弟姐妹。
English: Xuanzong was very happy to hear this, so he ordered the brothers and sisters of the Yang family below Yang Xizhong to become brothers and sisters together with Anlu Shan.

古文：六载，加大夫。
现代文：天宝六年，安禄山提升为大夫。
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, An Lushan was promoted to doctor.

古文：常令刘骆谷奏事。
现代文：他经常委派刘骆谷进宫禀奏政务。
English: He often appointed Liu Luogu to enter the palace and play a role in government affairs.

古文：与王鉷俱为大夫。
现代文：安禄山和王钅共都是大夫。
English: Both An Lushan and Wang Yao are doctors.

古文：李林甫为相，朝臣莫敢抗礼，禄山承恩深。入谒不甚罄折。
现代文：李林甫担任宰相，朝臣中没有谁敢违背宫廷礼仪，安禄山仗着深得玄宗宠爱，进宫朝见玄宗不大弯腰。
English: Li Linfu served as prime minister, and none of the courtiers dared to violate the palace etiquette. Anlu Mountain was deeply loved by Xuanzong, and Xuanzong did not bend down when he entered the palace.

古文：林甫命王鉷，鉷趋拜谨甚，禄山悚息，腰渐曲。
现代文：李林甫命令王钅共好好礼拜，王钅共快步上前弯腰作揖恭敬得很，安禄山这才吓得直喘粗气，腰渐渐地弯下去了。
English: Li Linfu ordered Wang Qigong to make a good prostration. Wang Qigong quickly stepped forward and bent down to make prostration, which was very respectful. This made Anlu Shan gasp in fear and his waist gradually bent down.

古文：每与语，皆揣知其情而先言之。禄山以为神明，每见林甫，虽盛冬亦汗洽。
现代文：每当同李林甫交谈，李林甫总摸准了安禄山的心思并先说了出来，安禄山认为他像神仙一样无所不知，每次见到李林甫，即使是隆冬天气也惶恐得汗流浃背。
English: Whenever he talked with Li Linfu, Li Linfu always guessed what Anlu Shan was thinking and said it first. Anlu Shan thought he knew everything like a god. Every time he saw Li Linfu, even in the middle of winter, he was so scared that he was sweating.

古文：林甫接以温言，中书引坐，以己披袍覆之，禄山欣荷，无所隐，呼为十郎。
现代文：李林甫用温和的语言接待他，带领他到中书厅就座，用自己的披袍盖在他的身上，安禄山欣然接受，没有顾忌，喊李林甫十郎。
English: Li Linfu received him with a gentle language, led him to the middle library to take a seat, and covered him with his own cloak. An Lushan gladly accepted, without scruples, and called Li Linfu Jiro.

古文：骆谷奏事，先问： 十郎何言？ 
现代文：刘骆谷从宫廷回来向他汇报情况，他先问： 十郎说了些什么？ 
English: When Liu Luogu returned from the court to report to him, he first asked: What did Juro say?

古文：有好言则喜跃，若但言 大夫须好检校 ，则反手据床曰： 阿与，我死也！ 
现代文：有好话就喜得蹦跳，如果只是说 大夫必须好好地查核一下 ，他就反手撑着床说： 哎呀，我死定了！ 
English: If you say something nice, he jumps for joy, but if you just say that the doctor has to check it out properly, he holds the bed with his back and says: Oh, I'm dead!

古文：李龟年尝敩其说，玄宗以为笑乐。
现代文：李龟年曾经模仿表演了这般情景，玄宗拿这事逗笑取乐。
English: Li Kuchennian once imitated and performed such a scene, and Xuanzong made fun of it.

古文：晚年益肥壮，腹垂过膝，重三百三十斤，每行以肩膊左右抬挽其身，方能移步。
现代文：安禄山晚年更加肥胖，肚子掉到了膝头下边，体重三百三十斤，每当走路只有用两个肩膀向上提起自己的身子，才能动脚。
English: In his later years, Anlu Shan became even fatter. His stomach fell to below his knees. He weighed 330 pounds. Whenever he walked, he could only move his feet by lifting his body up with his two shoulders.

古文：至玄宗前，作胡旋舞，疾如风焉。
现代文：而在玄宗面前跳胡旋舞，动作却快得像旋风一样。
English: But in front of Xuanzong, they danced a whirlwind dance, but the movements were as fast as a whirlwind.

古文：为置第宇，穷极壮丽，以金银为篣筐笊篱等。
现代文：他建造的住宅，宏伟华丽到了极点，用金银做笼子筐子筲箕等物。
English: The house he built was magnificent to the extreme, with cages, baskets and other things made of gold and silver.

古文：上御勤政楼，于御坐东为设一大金鸡障，前置一榻坐之，卷去其帘。
现代文：玄宗来到勤政楼，座位左边竖立一块用金鸡羽毛做装饰的大屏风，屏风左边放张木榻让安禄山坐，卷起或干脆拿掉屏风上的帘子。
English: When Xuanzong came to the Gongzheng Building, a large screen decorated with gold chicken feathers was erected on the left side of the seat. A wooden cot was placed on the left side of the screen for Anlu Shan to sit on, and the curtains on the screen were rolled up or simply removed.

古文：十载入朝，又求为河东节度，因拜之。
现代文：天宝十年，安禄山进宫朝拜玄宗，又请求担任河东节度，玄宗就授给了他。
English: In the tenth year of Tianbao, Anlu Mountain entered the palace to worship Xuanzong, and also requested to serve as the Hedong Festival, and Xuanzong awarded him.

古文：男十一人：长子庆宗，太仆卿，少子庆绪，鸿胪卿。
现代文：他有十一个儿子：大儿子安庆宗，任太仆卿；小儿子安庆绪，任鸿胪卿。
English: He had eleven sons: the eldest son, An Qingzong, was named Taiguqing; the youngest son, An Qingxu, was named Hongyuqing.

古文：庆宗又尚郡主。
现代文：安庆宗又娶皇太子的女儿为妻。
English: An Qingzong also married the daughter of the crown prince.

古文：禄山阴有逆谋，于范阳北筑雄武城，外示御寇，内贮兵器，积谷为保守之计，战马万五千匹，牛羊称是。
现代文：安禄山暗地准备叛乱，在范阳州城北边筑起了雄武城，表面上看来是防御侵略，实际上是储藏兵器、粮食做坚守范阳的部署，战马有一万五千匹，牛羊也相当于这个数目。
English: Anlu Mountain secretly prepared for the rebellion, and built Xiongwu City on the north side of Fanyang Prefecture. On the surface, it seemed to be a defense against aggression, but in fact it was a storage of weapons and grain to defend Fanyang. There were 15,000 horses, and the number of cattle and sheep was also equivalent to this number.

古文：兼三道节度，进奏无不允。
现代文：他一身兼任平卢、范阳、河东三镇节度，进朝奏请没有不答应的。
English: He also serves as the festival director of Pinglu, Fanyang and Hedong three towns. There is no reason why he would not accept the invitation to perform in the morning.

古文：引张通儒、李庭坚、平冽、李史鱼、独孤问俗在幕下，高尚掌书记，刘骆谷留居西京为耳目，安守忠、李归仁、蔡希德、牛庭玠、向润客、崔乾祐、尹子奇、何千年、武令珣、能元皓、田承嗣、田乾真，皆拔于行间。
现代文：他把张通儒、李庭坚、平冽、李史鱼、独孤问俗罗致身边，让高尚主持书记工作，刘骆谷留在长安当情报人员，安守忠、李归仁、蔡希德、牛庭、向润客、崔乾、尹子奇、何千年、武令王旬、能元皓、田承嗣、田乾真，都是从军队里选拔出来的。
English: He brought Zhang Tongru, Li Tingjian, Pingyao, Li Shifu, and Dukuan Luo to his side, and let Gaosheng preside over the secretarial work. Liu Luogu stayed in Chang'an as an intelligence officer. An Shouzhong, Li Guiren, Cai Xide, Niu Ting, Xiang Runke, Cui Qian, Yin Ziqi, Thousand Years, Wuling Wang Shun, Neng Yuanqi, Tian Chengzhi, and Tian Qianzhen were all selected from the army.

古文：每月进奉生口驼马鹰犬不绝，人无聊矣。
现代文：每个月向他进献驴子骆驼战马猎鹰猎犬的络绎不绝，人们弄得无以为生。
English: Donkeys, camels, war horses, falcons and hounds are presented to him every month in an endless stream, and people have nothing to live on.

古文：既肥大不任战，前后十余度欺诱契丹，宴设酒中著莨菪子，预掘一坑，待其昏醉，斩首埋之，皆不觉死，每度数十人。
现代文：安禄山过于肥胖不能打仗，前后十多次诱骗契丹人，设宴款待时在酒里放入麻醉草药莨菪子，预先挖好土坑，等到契丹人昏迷了，砍下头来就埋掉，都在不知不觉中送命，每次几十人。
English: Mount Anlu was too fat to fight, and they tricked the Khitans more than ten times. When they held a banquet, they put narcotic herbal lice in the wine, and dug a pit in advance. When the Khitans fell into a coma, they cut off their heads and buried them. They all unknowingly killed dozens of people each time.

古文：十一载八月，禄山并率河东等军五六万，号十五万，以讨契丹。
现代文：天宝十一年八月，安禄山一共统率河东等镇兵马五六万，号称十五万人，讨伐契丹。
English: In August of the 11th year of Tianbao, Anlu Shan led a total of 560,000 soldiers and horses from the towns of Hedong and other towns, known as 150,000 people, to fight against the Khitan.

古文：去平卢千余里，至土护真河，即北黄河也。
现代文：队伍离开平卢一千多里，开到了土护真河，就是北黄河。
English: The team left Pinglu more than a thousand miles away and drove to the Tuo Zhenhe River, which is the North Yellow River.

古文：又倍程三百里，奄至契丹牙帐。
现代文：又加快速度日行三百里，猛然间开到了契丹统帅的军帐跟前。
English: He also accelerated his speed to 300 miles per day and suddenly drove up to the military account of General Qidan.

古文：属久雨，弓箭皆涨湿，将士困极，奚又夹攻之，杀伤略尽。
现代文：一连下了很长时间的雨，弓箭都被浸湿，部队经过长途跋涉疲惫不堪，契丹人又夹攻他们，安禄山的部队伤亡殆尽。
English: It rained for a long time, the bows and arrows were soaked, the troops were exhausted after a long trek, the Khitans attacked them again, and the troops on Mount Anlu were exhausted.

古文：禄山被射，折其玉簪，以麾下奚小兒二十余人走上山，坠坑中，其男庆绪等扶持之。
现代文：安禄山本人被射中一箭，射断了他头上的玉簪，他带着手下奚族杂役二十多人跑上山头，掉进了坑洞。他的儿子安庆绪等人搀扶着他。
English: An Lushan himself was hit by an arrow, which broke the jade bracelet on his head. He ran up the mountain with more than twenty of his subordinates, who were Dong people, and fell into a pit. His son, An Qingxu, and others supported him.

古文：会夜，解走，投平卢城。
现代文：恰巧到了夜晚，他们就分散逃跑，奔向平卢城。
English: Just as night fell, they scattered and ran away, heading for the city of Pinglu.

古文：杨国忠屡奏禄山必反。
现代文：杨国忠多次对玄宗说安禄山一定会叛乱。
English: Yang Guozhong repeatedly told Xuanzong that Anlu Mountain would definitely rebel.

古文：十二载，玄宗使中官辅璆琳觇之，得其贿赂，盛言其忠。
现代文：天宝十二年，玄宗派中官辅趚琳去侦察，他接受了安禄山的贿赂，回来后大讲安禄山忠心耿耿。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianbao, Xuanzong sent Vice Admiral Fu Yulin to investigate. He accepted the bribe from Anlu Mountain, and after returning, he spoke highly of Anlu Mountain's loyalty.

古文：国忠又云 召必不至 ，洎召之而至。
现代文：杨国忠又对玄宗说： 召他进京，他一定不会来。 
English: Yang Guozhong also said to Xuanzong: If you invite him to Beijing, he will definitely not come.

古文：十三载正月，谒于华清宫，因涕泣言： 臣蕃人，不识字，陛下擢臣不次，被杨国忠欲得杀臣。 
现代文：下令召见，他却来了。天宝十三年正月，他到华清宫拜见玄宗，乘机哭着说： 我是奚族人，不识汉字，皇上越级提拔我，以致杨国忠想要杀我。 
English: In the first month of the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasures, he went to the Huaqing Palace to visit Xuanzong, and took the opportunity to cry and say: I am a Yi people, I do not know Chinese characters, the emperor promoted me to a higher level, so that Yang Guozhong wanted to kill me.

古文：玄宗益亲厚之，遂以为左仆射，却回。
现代文：玄宗对他更加亲密宽厚，于是任命他为左仆射的高官，才让他离去。
English: Xuanzong was more intimate and generous to him, so he appointed him as a left-handed high-ranking official, only to let him leave.

古文：其月，又请为闲厩、陇右群牧等都使，奏吉温为武部侍郎、兼中丞，为其副，又请知总监事。
现代文：当月，安禄山又呈奏章请求任命自己为闲厩使、陇右群牧等都使，任命吉温为武部侍郎、兼中丞，当他的副手，又请求主持总监事务。
English: In the same month, An Lushan also submitted a petition requesting to appoint himself as the idle stables envoy, the right-hand herd herdsmen and other envoys, to appoint Ji Wen as the attendant of Takebe and the junior middle officer, to be his deputy, and to request to preside over the director's affairs.

古文：既为闲厩、群牧等使，上筋脚马，皆阴选择之，夺得楼烦监牧及夺张文俨马牧。
现代文：他当了闲厩使、群牧等使之后，上等好马都暗地挑选出来，夺得了楼烦的监牧之后接着夺取张文俨的马牧。
English: After he became the idle stable steward and herd herdsman, he secretly selected the best horses. After he won over the troublesome overseer, he went on to win over Zhang Wenyi's herdsmen.

古文：三月一日，归范阳，疾行出关，日行三四百里，至范阳，人言反者，玄宗必大怒，缚送与之。
现代文：这年三月一日，他离开长安回范阳，急忙出了潼关，每天赶路三四百里，到了范阳。这时只要有人说安禄山要造反，玄宗一定会大发雷霆，把他捆绑起来送交安禄山。
English: On March 1 of this year, he left Chang'an to return to Fanyang. He hurried out of Shaoguan and traveled three or four hundred miles every day to arrive in Fanyang. At this time, as long as someone said that Anlu Mountain would rebel, Xuanzong would be furious, tie him up and send him to Anlu Mountain.

古文：十四载，玄宗又召之，托疾不至。
现代文：天宝十四年，玄宗又召他进京，他推说生病没有来。
English: In the 14th year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Xuanzong summoned him to Beijing again, but he pretended to be ill and did not come.

古文：赐其子婚，令就观礼，又辞。
现代文：给他的大儿子安庆宗赐婚，命令他出席观礼，又推辞了。
English: He married his eldest son, An Qingzong, and ordered him to attend the ceremony, but he refused.

古文：十一月，反于范阳，矫称奉恩命以兵讨逆贼杨国忠。
现代文：这年十一月，安禄山从范阳起兵造反，诈称奉玄宗旨意率领部队讨伐忤逆朝臣杨国忠。
English: In November of the same year, An Lushan rebelled against Fan Yang, falsely claiming that he would lead the troops to fight the rebellious courtier Yang Guozhong.

古文：以诸蕃马步十五万，夜半行，平明食，日六十里。
现代文：他率领各族骑兵、步兵十五万，半夜行军，黎明吃饭，一天前进六十里。
English: He led 150,000 cavalry and infantry from all ethnic groups, marching in the middle of the night, eating at dawn, and marching sixty miles a day.

古文：以高尚、严庄为谋主，孙孝哲、高邈、何千年为腹心。
现代文：决定高尚、严庄为谋主，孙孝哲、高邈、何千年为骨干。
English: The decision is noble and solemn as the mastermind, and Sun Xiao Zhe and Gao Yao are the backbone for thousands of years.

古文：天下承平日久，人不知战，闻其兵起，朝廷震惊。
现代文：天下太平的日子太长了，人们不懂战争，听到安禄山叛乱爆发，朝廷一片动荡惧怕。
English: The days of peace and tranquility have been too long. People do not understand war. When they hear that the Anlu Mountain Rebellion has broken out, the imperial court is afraid of turmoil.

古文：禁卫皆市井商贩之人，乃开左藏库出锦帛召募。
现代文：宫廷警卫部队都是由集市商贩组成的，只得打开皇家仓库拿出绫罗绸缎召募兵卒。
English: The palace guard force was made up of market traders, so they had to open the royal storehouse, take out the silk scarves and call for recruits.

古文：因以高仙芝、封常清等相次为大将以击之。
现代文：于是先后任命高仙芝、封常清等人为大将抵抗。
English: As a result, Gao Xianzhi, Feng Changqing and others were successively appointed as generals to resist.

古文：禄山令严肃，得士死力，无不一当百，遇之必败。
现代文：安禄山号令严厉整肃，有一班以死相拼的将士，没有谁不是以一当百，朝廷军队碰上必然会吃败仗。
English: Mount Anlu was ordered to be severely cleaned up. There was a group of soldiers who fought to the death, and no one was not a hundred, and the imperial army would inevitably be defeated.

古文：十二月，度河至陈留郡，河南节度张介然城陷死之，传首河北。
现代文：十二月，叛军渡过黄河开到陈留郡，河南节度张介然州城失守殉难，首级传到了河北。
English: In December, the rebels crossed the Yellow River and drove to Chenliu County. Henan's national hero Zhang Jieran was martyred in Zhucheng, and his head was brought to Hebei.

古文：陈留郭门禄山男庆绪见诛庆宗榜，泣告禄山，禄山在舆中惊哭曰： 吾子何罪而杀之！ 
现代文：在安禄山的小儿子安庆绪陈留郭门看到哥哥安庆宗被杀的布告，哭着告诉安禄山，安禄山在战车上震惊大哭说： 我儿有什么罪过要杀死他！ 
English: When Anlu Shan's youngest son, An Qingxu Chen Liu Guo Men, saw the announcement that his brother, An Qingzong, had been killed, he cried and told Anlu Shan. Anlu Shan was shocked and cried on the chariot and said, "What is my son's sin to kill him!"

古文：狂而怒，官军之降者夹道，命交相斫焉，死者六七千人，遂入陈留郡。
现代文：他狂乱愤怒，见投降的官军挤满大路两边，就命令他们自相砍杀，杀死了六七千人，才进陈留城。
English: He was furious. When he saw the surrendering government troops crowding both sides of the main road, he ordered them to kill each other. They killed six or seven thousand people before entering Chen's city.

古文：太守郭纳初拒战，至是出降。
现代文：陈留太守郭纳开始还抵抗了一阵，到这时出城投降。
English: Chen Liu Taishu Guona initially resisted for a while, at which time he left the city and surrendered.

古文：至荥阳，太守崔无诐拒战，城陷死之。
现代文：叛军开到荥阳，荥阳太守崔无讠皮奋力抵抗，州城失守殉难。
English: The rebels drove to Fenyang. Fenyang's governor, Cui Wuxi, fought hard to resist, and the state capital was lost to martyrdom.

古文：次于泥水罂子谷，将军荔非守瑜蹲而射之，杀数百人，矢及禄山舆。禄山不敢过，乃取谷南而过。
现代文：叛军驻扎在泥水子谷，官军将军荔非守瑜蹲在地上射箭，射死叛军几百人，箭还射到了安禄山的战车上，安禄山不敢通过，就绕道泥水子谷的南边过去了。
English: The rebels were stationed in Muddy Waters Valley, and the general of the government army, Lai Fei Shou Yu, squatted on the ground and shot arrows, killing hundreds of rebels. The arrows also hit the chariot of Anlu Mountain. Anlu Mountain did not dare to pass, so it took a detour to the south of Muddy Waters Valley.

古文：守瑜箭尽，投河而死。
现代文：荔非守瑜的箭射光了，投河自尽。
English: Lai Fei Shou Yu's arrow was shot out, and he threw himself into the river.

古文：东京留守李忄妻、中丞卢奕、采访使判官蒋清烧绝河阳桥。
现代文：东京洛阳留守李忄登、中丞卢奕、采访使判官蒋清烧断了河阳桥。
English: In Luoyang, Tokyo, the judge Jiang Qing burned and cut off the Heyang Bridge.

古文：禄山怒，率军大至。
现代文：安禄山怒气冲冲，率领部队浩浩荡荡挺进。
English: Enraged, An Lushan led his troops in a massive advance.

古文：封常清自苑西隤墙，使伐树塞路而奔。
现代文：官军将领封常清布置从苑西断墙缺口上砍伐树木堵塞道路后就逃走了。
English: The generals of the government army sealed the Changqing layout by cutting trees from the west broken wall gap to block the road and then fled.

古文：禄山入东京，杀李忄妻、卢奕、蒋清，召河南尹达奚珣，使之莅事。
现代文：安禄山进了洛阳，杀了李忄登、卢奕、蒋清，召见河南尹达奚王旬，让他任职理事。
English: An Lushan entered Luoyang, killed Li Yuden, Lu Yi, Jiang Qing, summoned Henan Yin Dacun Wang Shun, and made him a director.

古文：初，常清欲杀珣，恐应贼，忄妻、奕谏止之。
现代文：当初，封常清要杀达奚王旬，担心他做安禄山的内应，李忄登、卢奕规劝制止了。
English: At first, Fong Changqing wanted to kill Wang Shun, fearing that he would do Anlu Mountain's internal correspondence, Li Yuden and Lu Yi persuaded him to stop.

古文：常清既败，唯与数骑走至陕郡，高仙芝率兵守陕城，皆弃甲西走潼关，惧贼追蹑，相蹂藉而死者塞路。
现代文：封常清失败后，只跟几个人逃到陕郡，高仙芝率兵守卫陕城，都丢盔弃甲向西逃到潼关，害怕安禄山追赶上来，互相践踏而死的士卒充塞道路。
English: After the failure of sealing Changqing, he fled to Shaanxi County with only a few people. Gao Xianzhi led the soldiers to guard Shaanxi City. They all abandoned their armor and fled westward to Shaoguan. They were afraid of Anlu Mountain catching up, and the soldiers who trampled each other to death clogged the road.

古文：陕郡太守窦庭芝走投河东。
现代文：陕郡太守窦庭芝投奔河东。
English: Dou Tianzhi, the governor of Shaanxi County, fled to the east of the river.

古文：贼使崔乾祐守陕郡。
现代文：安禄山派崔乾驻守陕郡。
English: Anlu Mountain stationed Cui Jian in Shaanxi County.

古文：临汝太守韦斌降于贼。
现代文：临汝太守韦斌向安禄山投降。
English: Emperor Linwu and Empress Dowager Wei Bin surrendered to Anlu Mountain.

古文：十五年正月，贼窃号燕国，立年圣武，达奚珣已下署为丞相，五月，南阳节度鲁炅率荆、襄、黔中、岭南子弟十万余，与贼将武令珣战于叶县城北枌河，王师尽没。
现代文：天宝十五年正月，安禄山僭越称帝，国号叫燕国，年号叫圣武，达奚王旬以下数人暂任丞相各职。五月，南阳节度鲁炅率领荆州、襄州、黔中、岭南兵卒十万多人，在叶县城北边的氵蚩河跟叛军将领武令王旬作战，官军全军覆没。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of the Heavenly Treasure, An Lushan Xing Yue proclaimed himself emperor, the country was called Yan Guo, the year was called Shengwu, and several people from King Dadu to King Jun temporarily held the posts of prime minister. In May, Nanyang Jiedu Lu Wei led more than 100,000 soldiers from Jingzhou, Xiangzhou, Yuzhong and Lingnan to fight the rebel general Wuling Wang Jun in the north of the city of Ye County, and the entire army of the government army was destroyed.

古文：六月，李光弼、郭子仪出土门路，大破贼众于常山郡东嘉山，河北诸郡归降者十余。禄山窘急，图欲却投范阳。
现代文：六月，李光弼、郭子仪从土门路出征，在常山郡东部的嘉山大败叛军，叛军控制的河北各州郡中有十多个归降朝廷，安禄山处境困迫、心绪惶急，打算退兵回范阳。
English: In June, Li Guangyao and Guo Ziyi went to the front from Tumen Road and defeated the rebels in Jiashan Mountain in the eastern part of Changshan County. More than ten counties in each prefecture of Hebei controlled by the rebels surrendered to the imperial court. Anlu Mountain was in a difficult situation and anxious. They planned to withdraw to Fanyang.

古文：会哥舒翰自潼关领马步八万，与贼将崔乾祐战于灵宝西，为贼覆败，翰西奔潼关，为其帐下执送于贼。
现代文：碰上哥舒翰从潼关率领骑兵步兵八万人，在灵宝以西跟叛军将领崔乾作战，被叛军打得几乎全军覆没，哥舒翰转身向潼关逃跑，被自己的部下抓住送给了叛军。
English: When he met Goshukhan, who led 80,000 cavalry and infantry from Shaoguan and fought against the rebel general Cui Qian west of Lingbao, he was defeated by the rebels and almost lost his entire army. Goshukhan turned around and fled to Shaoguan, where he was caught by his own men and sent to the rebels.

古文：关门不守，玄宗幸蜀，太子收兵灵武。
现代文：潼关守不住，玄宗逃往西蜀避难，太子李亨把平叛部队召集到灵武设防。
English: Unable to defend Shaoguan, Xuanzong fled to Xishu for refuge, and the prince Li Heng called the counter-rebel forces to Lingwu to set up defenses.

古文：贼乃遣张通儒为西京留守，田乾真为京兆尹，安守忠屯兵苑中。
现代文：安禄山就派遣张通儒任西京长安留守，田乾真任京兆尹，安守忠在唐廷禁苑里驻兵守卫。
English: An Lushan sent Zhang Tong Ru to stay in the West Beijing Chang'an, Tian Qian Zhen to stay in the West Beijing Chang'an, Tian Qian Zhen to stay in the West Beijing Chang'an, Tian Qian Zhen to stay in the West Beijing Chang'an, Tian Qian Zhen to stay in the West Beijing Chang'an, Tian Qian Zhen to stay in the West Beijing Chang'an.

古文：十一月，遣阿史那承庆攻陷颍川，屠之。
现代文：十一月，派遣阿史那承庆打下颍川，满城烧杀。
English: In November, Ashina dispatched Chengqing to lay siege to Shichuan and burn down the entire city.

古文：禄山以体肥，长带疮。及造逆后而眼渐昏，至是不见物。
现代文：安禄山由于身体肥胖，长年长疮疖，到起兵叛乱之后视力渐渐模糊，这时完全失明。
English: Due to his fat body and long-standing scars, Anlu Shan's eyesight gradually faded after the mutiny, and he was completely blind.

古文：又著疽疾。
现代文：加上全身长满块状毒疮。
English: In addition, the whole body was covered with massive poisonous sores.

古文：俄及至德二年正月朔受朝，疮甚而中罢。
现代文：肃宗至德二年正月初一，安禄山接受臣子们朝拜，疮痛发作就中途结束了。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Su Zong's reign, Anlu Mountain received the worship of the courtiers, and the sore attack ended halfway.

古文：以疾加躁急，动用斧钺。严庄亦被捶挞，庄乃日夜谋之。
现代文：他由于病痛更加暴躁烦乱，动辄使用刑罚，连身为谋主的大臣严庄也遭鞭棍抽打，严庄于是日夜伺机干掉安禄山。
English: Due to his illness, he became even more irritable and agitated, frequently using punishments. Even the minister Yan Zhuang, who was the mastermind, was also beaten with a whip. Yan Zhuang therefore waited day and night to kill Anlu Mountain.

古文：立庆绪于户外，庄持刀领竖李猪兒同入禄山帐内，猪兒以大刀斫其腹。
现代文：他让安禄山的儿子安庆绪站在门外，自己握着刀带着阉人李猪儿一起走进安禄山的营帐，李猪儿挥起大刀砍安禄山的腹部。
English: He had the son of Anlu Mountain, An Qingxu, stand outside the door. He walked into the camp of Anlu Mountain holding a knife and took the eunuch Li Xuer with him. Li Xuer swung the big knife and cut the abdomen of Anlu Mountain.

古文：禄山眼无所见，床头常有一刀，及觉难作，扪床头不得，但撼幄帐大呼曰： 是我家贼！ 
现代文：安禄山双目失明，床头经常挂着一把刀，等他发觉刺客时已经难得起身，床头上的刀又拿不到手，只是摇着帐幔大喊道： 这人是我的家贼呀！ 
English: An Lushan was blind in both eyes, and often had a knife hanging over his bed. By the time he discovered the assassin, it was already difficult for him to get up. He could not reach the knife on the bedhead, but he shook the curtain and shouted, "This man is my house thief!"

古文：腹肠已数斗流在床上，言讫气绝。因掘床下深数尺为坑，以氈罽包其尸埋之。
现代文：喊罢就断气了。于是在床下挖了一个好几尺深的洞穴，用毛毯包着安禄山的尸体埋了。
English: So they dug a cave several feet deep under the bed, wrapped Anlu Shan's body in a blanket and buried it.

古文：又无哭泣之仪。
现代文：全无哭丧之类的安葬礼仪。
English: There was no mourning or funeral rites.

古文：庄即宣言于外，言禄山传位于晋王庆绪，尊禄山为太上皇。
现代文：严庄立即向外宣告，说是安禄山传位给晋王安庆绪，尊称安禄山为太上皇。
English: Yan Zhuang immediately announced to the outside world that it was An Lushan who passed the throne to the Jin king An Qingxu, and he called An Lushan the great emperor.

古文：庆绪纵乐饮酒无度，呼庄为兄，事之大小必咨之。
现代文：安庆绪淫乐宴饮没有节制，把严庄喊为兄长，事无大小都要征求他的意见。
English: An Qingxu feasted without restraint, calling Yan Zhuang his elder brother and seeking his advice in all matters.

古文：初，猪兒出契丹部落，十数岁事禄山，甚黠慧。
现代文：当初，李猪儿离开契丹部落，十几岁开始伺候安禄山，很聪明。
English: At first, Li Yuer left the Khitan tribe and began to serve Anlu Mountain in his teens. He was very smart.

古文：禄山持刃尽去其势，血流数升，欲死，禄山以灰火傅之，尽日而苏，因为阉人。
现代文：安禄山用刀把他的生殖器全部割掉，鲜血流了好几升，昏死过去，安禄山用火灰敷住他的伤口，过了整整一天才苏醒过来。
English: Anlu Shan used a knife to cut off all of his genitals, and several liters of blood flowed. He fainted, and Anlu Shan covered his wound with fire ash. It took him a whole day to wake up.

古文：禄山颇宠之，最见信用。
现代文：李猪儿由于成了阉人，安禄山很宠爱他，最受信任和重用。
English: Since Li Xuer became a disciple, Anlu Mountain loved him very much, and he was the most trusted and reused.

古文：禄山肚大，每著衣带，三四人助之，两人抬起肚，猪兒以头戴之，始取裙裤带及系腰带。
现代文：安禄山肚子大，每次穿衣系带，需要三四个人帮忙，两个人抬起肚子，李猪儿用头顶住，才拿来裙裤腰带穿系上。
English: Anlu Shan has a big belly. Every time she has to wear a dress and tie a belt, she needs the help of three or four people. Two people lift up her belly, and Li Xuer holds it up with her head before she can take the skirt and trouser belt to tie it.

古文：玄宗宠禄山，赐华清宫汤浴，皆许猪兒等入助解著衣服，然终见刳者，猪兒也。
现代文：玄宗宠信安禄山，赐他到华清宫温泉洗澡，都允许李猪儿等人进去帮忙脱穿衣服。然而最终杀死他的，正是这个李猪儿。
English: Xuanzong favored Anlu Mountain, gave him a bath at Huaqing Palace Hot Spring, and allowed Li Shier and others to help him undress. However, it was Li Shier who eventually killed him.

古文：庆绪，禄山第二子也。
现代文：安庆绪是安禄山的第二个儿子。
English: An Qingxu is the second son of An Lushan.

古文：母康氏，禄山糟糠之妻。
现代文：母亲康氏是安禄山的元配妻子。
English: His mother, Yasuuji, was the former wife of Anrokuyama.

古文：庆绪善骑射，禄山偏爱之。
现代文：安庆绪善于骑马射箭，得到安禄山的偏爱。
English: An Qingxu is good at horse riding and archery, and is favored by Anlu Mountain.

古文：未二十，拜鸿胪卿，兼广阳太守。
现代文：还不满二十岁，就获得鸿胪卿官衔，兼任广阳太守。
English: He was not yet twenty years old when he received the official title of Hongyuqing and concurrently served as the governor of Guangyang.

古文：初名仁执，玄宗赐名庆绪，为禄山都知兵马使。
现代文：他原名叫仁执，玄宗赐名叫庆绪，安排在安禄山手下当都知兵马使。
English: His original name was Rincei, but he was given the name Qingxu by Emperor Xuanzong, who arranged for him to serve as an envoy to the capital under Anlu Shan.

古文：严庄、高尚立为伪主。庆绪素懦弱，言词无序，庄恐众不伏，不令见人。
现代文：肃宗至德二年，他伙同严庄等人谋杀安禄山后，严庄、高尚把他立为安伪朝廷的君主。安庆绪一向懦弱，说话颠三倒四，严庄担心人们不服，不让他跟外人见面。
English: In the second year of Su Zong's reign, after he and Yan Zhuang and others murdered An Lushan, Yan Zhuang, dignified and noble, appointed him as the monarch of the An pseudo-court. An Qingxu had always been cowardly, his speech was all over the place, and Yan Zhuang was worried that people would not accept him and would not let him meet with outsiders.

古文：庄为伪御史大夫、冯翊郡王，以专其政。
现代文：严庄任安伪朝廷的御史大夫，封冯翊郡王，独揽军政大权。
English: Yan solemnly served as the chief historian of the An pseudo-imperial court, and was named the king of Fengye County. He monopolized military and political power.

古文：厚其军将官秩，以固其心。
现代文：他大力提升那些将领的官职，以此笼络人心。
English: He wooed the generals by promoting them to high-ranking posts.

古文：二月，肃宗南幸凤翔郡，始知禄山死，使仆固怀恩使于回纥，结婚请兵讨逆。
现代文：这年二月，肃宗南巡凤翔郡，才知道安禄山已死，派遣仆固怀恩出使回纥，跟回纥缔结婚姻并要求他们出兵讨伐叛军。
English: In February of that year, Su Zong was on a southern tour of Fengxiang County when he learned that An Lushan was dead. He sent his servant Gu Wai En to Hui Xuan to conclude a marriage with Hui Xuan and asked them to send troops to fight the rebels.

古文：其月，郭子仪拔河东郡，崔乾祐南遁。
现代文：同月，郭子仪攻克河东郡，叛军将领崔乾悄悄向南逃跑了。
English: In the same month, Guo Ziyi conquered Hedong County, and the rebel general Cui Qian quietly fled south.

古文：八月，回纥三千骑至。
现代文：八月，回纥三千骑兵到了。
English: In August, three thousand cavalrymen arrived.

古文：九月，广平王领蕃汉之众收西京，走安守忠，贼之死者积如山阜。
现代文：九月，广平王率领各少数民族、汉族人马收复西京长安，放跑了安守忠，叛军尸体堆积如山。
English: In September, Guangping Wang led the ethnic minorities and Han people to recapture West Beijing Chang'an, and released An Shou Zhong. The bodies of the rebels piled up like a mountain.

古文：十月，贼将尹子奇攻陷睢阳郡，杀张巡、姚摐等。
现代文：十月，叛军将领尹子奇攻陷睢阳郡，杀死张巡、姚门言等人。
English: In October, the rebel general Yin Ziqi invaded Suiyang County, killing Zhang Jun, Yao Menyan and others.

古文：王师乘胜至陕郡，贼惧，令严庄倾其骁勇而来拒。
现代文：官军乘胜到陕郡，敌人害怕，命令严庄把骁勇善战的精锐兵力全部派来抵御。
English: The government army took advantage of the victory to arrive at Shaanxi County. The enemy was afraid and ordered Yan Zhuang to send all the brave and skillful elite troops to resist.

古文：广平王遣副元帅郭子仪等与贼战于陕西曲沃，大破之于新店，逐北二十里，斩首十余万，伏尸三十里。
现代文：广平王派遣副元帅郭子仪等在陕州西边的曲沃跟叛军作战，在新店击溃了叛军，追杀了二十里，杀敌十多万，尸体摆了三十里。
English: Guangping Wang sent Vice-Marshal Guo Ziyi and others to fight the rebels in Quwo on the west side of Shaanxi Province. They defeated the rebels in Xindian, chased them for twenty li, killed more than one hundred thousand of the enemy, and laid out the bodies for thirty li.

古文：严庄奔至东京，告庆绪，庆绪率其余众奔河北，保鄴郡。
现代文：严庄跑到东京洛阳，告诉安庆绪，安庆绪率领他的残存人马跑到河北，保全邺郡。
English: Yan Zhuang ran to Luoyang, Tokyo, and told An Qingxu. An Qingxu led his remaining men and horses to run to Hebei to protect Jixian County.

古文：严庄至河内，南来归顺。
现代文：严庄到河内，向南归顺了朝廷。
English: Yan solemnly went to Hanoi and went south to submit to the imperial court.

古文：贼将阿史那承庆等麾下三万余人，悉奔恆、赵、范阳。
现代文：叛军将领阿史那承庆等军中三万多人，都跑到了恒州、赵州、范阳。
English: More than 30,000 people in the army, including rebel general Ashina Chengqing, fled to Hengzhou, Zhaozhou, and Fanyang.

古文：从庆绪者，唯疲卒一千三百而已。
现代文：跟随安庆绪当扈从的，只有一千三百名疲惫不堪的士卒而已。
English: There were only 1,300 exhausted soldiers who followed An Qingxu.

古文：伪中书令张通儒秉政，改相州为成安府，署置百官。
现代文：安伪朝廷的中书令张通儒主持朝政，改相州为成安府，设置机构任命官员。
English: Zhang Tongru presided over the imperial government according to the imperial edict of the Anpu Dynasty, changed the county seat to Cheng'an, and set up an agency to appoint officials.

古文：旬日之内，贼将各以众至者六万余，凶威复振。
现代文：十天之内，各地叛将带来的人马六万多人，士气又振作起来。
English: Within ten days, more than sixty thousand people were brought in by traitors from all over the country, and morale picked up again.

古文：伪青、齐节度能元皓独率众归顺，明年，改乾元元年，伪德州刺史王暕、贝州刺史宇文宽等皆归顺，河北诸军各以城守累月，贼使蔡希德、安太清急击，复陷于贼，虏之以归，脔食其肉。
现代文：安伪朝廷的青州、齐州节度能元皓一人率领兵马归顺李唐朝廷。第二年，李唐朝廷改年号为肃宗乾元元年，安伪朝廷的德州刺史王日柬、贝州刺史宇文宽等都归顺了李唐朝廷，河北各镇部队都已守城多月，安伪朝廷命令蔡希德、安太清猛攻，又被叛军攻陷，把守城将士抓去，剁成血块吃掉。
English: In the second year, the name of the year of the Li Tang Dynasty was changed to Su Zong Qian in the first year of the year. The troops of the Qingzhou and Qizhou Jiedu Nengyuan of the Anjou Dynasty surrendered to the Li Tang Dynasty. The troops of all the towns in Hebei Province had been defending the city for more than a month. The Anjou Dynasty ordered Cai Xide and the Anta Qing Dynasty to attack fiercely, and they were attacked by the rebels, who captured the defenders and ate them into blood clots.

古文：其下潜谋归顺者众矣，贼皆易置之，以纵屠戮，人心始离。
现代文：安伪朝廷发觉下面的很多官兵秘密商议归顺李唐朝廷，就把各级将领和士卒全部进行调换，纵容他们自相屠杀，归顺的念头才瓦解了。
English: When the An Dynasty discovered that many officers and soldiers were secretly negotiating to surrender to the Li and Tang Dynasties, they replaced all generals and soldiers at all levels, and allowed them to massacre each other. The idea of surrendering collapsed.

古文：又不亲政事，缮治亭沼楼船，为长夜之饮。
现代文：安庆绪不理政事，只是修建亭榭楼船，通宵宴饮。
English: An Qingxu did not care about politics, he just built pavilions, pavilions, pavilions, and all-night banquets.

古文：高尚等各不相叶。
现代文：高尚等大臣之间各不同心。
English: Ministers such as Mr Nobles are at loggerheads.

古文：蔡希德兵最锐，性刚直，张通儒谮而缢杀之，三军冤痛不为用。
现代文：蔡希德部队最精锐，他秉性又刚直，张通儒进谗言诬陷就绞死了他，三军将士因蔡希德不被重用横遭冤屈而愤恨沉痛。
English: Cai Xide's troops were the most elite. He was honest and upright. Zhang Tong, a Confucian scholar, falsely accused him and hanged him. The three generals were angry and bitter because Cai Xide was not reused and suffered grievances.

古文：以崔乾祐为天下兵马使，权领中外兵。
现代文：任命崔乾为天下兵马使，代理统帅安伪朝廷内外的部队。
English: Appointed Cui Qian as the world's military envoy, acting commander of the troops inside and outside the Anpu court.

古文：乾祐性愎戾，士卒不附。
现代文：崔乾秉性执拗乖僻，士卒们不服从他。
English: Cui Qianbing is obstinately eccentric, and the soldiers disobey him.

古文：九月，肃宗遣郭子仪等九节度率步骑二十万攻之，以鱼朝恩为军容使。
现代文：这年九月，肃宗派遣郭子仪等九位节度率领步兵骑兵二十万进攻安庆绪盘踞的相州，任命鱼朝恩为军容使。
English: In September of that year, Su Zong dispatched Guo Ziyi and nine other military commanders to lead 200,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Anqing and Xiangzhou, and appointed Yu Chaon as military envoy.

古文：初，子仪之列陈也，使善射者三千人伏于垒垣内。
现代文：开始，郭子仪的战术是，派三千名弓箭手埋伏在壁垒背后。
English: Initially, Guo Ziyi's tactic was to send three thousand archers to ambush behind the barrier.

古文：明日接战，子仪麾其属伪奔，庆绪逐之，伏者齐发，贼党大溃。
现代文：第二天交战，他指挥自己的部队佯装溃逃，叛军追赶他们，弓箭手一齐射击，叛军全军溃败。
English: On the second day of the battle, he commanded his troops to pretend to flee, the rebels chased them, the archers fired together, and the entire rebel army was defeated.

古文：使薛嵩求救于史思明，言禅让之礼。
现代文：安庆绪派薛嵩向史思明搬救兵，说要把燕国帝位禅让给他。
English: An Qingxu sent Xue Song to rescue Shi Siming, saying that he would give him the imperial throne of Yan.

古文：思明先遣李归仁以步卒一万、马军三千，先往滏阳以应。
现代文：史思明先派李归仁率领步兵一万人、骑兵三千人，尽早到滏阳接应。
English: Shi Siming first sent Li Guiren, leading 10,000 infantry and 3,000 cavalry, to Poyang as soon as possible.

古文：及至滏阳，子仪之围已固，筑城穿壕各三重，楼橹之盛，古所未有。
现代文：等李归仁到了滏阳，郭子仪的包围圈已很坚固，筑了三道城墙，挖了三道战壕，望台的雄伟气势，自古以来不曾有过。
English: By the time Li Guiren arrived in Poyang, Guo Ziyi's encirclement was already very strong. He had built three city walls, dug three trenches, and the grandeur of the watchtower had not been seen since ancient times.

古文：又引水以灌城下，城中水泉大上，井皆满溢。
现代文：又放水去灌城脚，相州城内地下水猛涨，口口井都大水横流。
English: Water was also released to irrigate the foot of the city, and the groundwater in the city of Sangju soared, with large amounts of water flowing from well to well.

古文：以安太清代乾祐为都知兵马使。
现代文：安庆绪让安太清接替崔乾任都知兵马使。
English: An Qingxu allowed An Taiching to succeed Cui Qian as the envoy of the Central Military Commission.

古文：思明南攻魏州，节度使崔光远南走，思明据其城数日，即乾元二年正月一日也。
现代文：史思明到相州南边攻打魏州，魏州节度使崔光远向南逃跑，史思明占领魏州城几天之后，就是肃宗乾元二年正月初一。
English: Shi Siming went to the south of Xiangzhou to attack Weizhou. The Weizhou Festival made Cui Guang run away to the south. A few days after Shi Siming occupied Weizhou City, it was the first day of the first month of the second year of Su Zong Qian Yuan.

古文：思明伪称燕王，立年号。
现代文：史思明自称燕王，立年号。
English: Shi Siming calls himself the King of Swallows.

古文：庆绪自十月被围至二月，城中人相食，米斗钱七万余，鼠一头直数千，马食隤墙麦鞬及马粪濯而饲之。
现代文：安庆绪从乾元元年十月被围到乾元二年二月，相州城里的人相杀而食，一斗米的价钱七万多，一只老鼠值好几千钱，人们把塌墙下的麦谷壳和马粪洗一洗就像喂马一样地吃掉。
English: Anqingxu was besieged from October of the first year of the Qianlong Dynasty to February of the second year of the Qianlong Dynasty. People in the city of Xiangzhou killed and ate each other. The price of a bucket of rice was more than seventy thousand yuan, and a mouse was worth several thousand yuan. People washed the wheat husks and horse manure under the collapsed wall and ate them as if they were feeding horses.

古文：思明引众来救，三月六日，子仪等战败，遂解围而南，断河阳桥以守谷水。
现代文：史思明带领人马援救相州。这年三月六日，郭子仪等围城部队吃了败仗，撇下相州向南撤退。他们毁掉河阳桥以便据守谷水。
English: On March 6 of that year, Guo Ziyi and other besieging troops were defeated and withdrew southward, abandoning Sangzhou. They destroyed the Kheyang Bridge in order to defend Gansu.

古文：思明领其众营于鄴县南。
现代文：史思明带领部队到邺县南边筑起营垒驻下。
English: Shi Siming led the troops to the south of Handan County to build a camp and stay there.

古文：庆绪使收子仪等营中粮，尚六七万石，复与孙孝哲、乾祐谋闭门自守，议更拒思明。诸将曰 今日安可更背史王乎！ 
现代文：安庆绪派人收缴了郭子仪等人军营中丢下的粮食超过六七万石，又跟孙孝哲、崔乾商议紧关相州城门固守，提出回头抵御史思明，将领们说： 眼下这种情况哪里能够对燕王史思明背信弃义呀！ 
English: An Qingxu sent people to collect more than 670,000 kilos of grain left behind by Guo Ziyi and others in the military camp, and also discussed with Sun Xiaozhe and Cui Qian to firmly defend the gate of the city of Guanzhong, and proposed to turn back to resist Shi Siming. The generals said: Where can this situation betray Yan Wang Siming?

古文：张通儒、高尚、平冽谓庆绪曰： 史王远来，臣等皆合迎谢。 
现代文：张通儒、高尚、平冽对安庆绪说： 史王远道而来，我们都应该去迎接，道歉。 
English: Zhang Tongru, Gaoshang and Pingyao said to An Qingxu: Shi Wang has come a long way, we should all go to meet him and apologize.

古文：对曰： 任公暂往见思明。 
现代文：安庆绪答复说： 随你们各位去看看他。 
English: An Qingxu replied, "Go and see him, all of you.

古文：思明与之涕泗，厚其礼，复命归城。
现代文：史思明见张通儒等人来了，一块儿抱头痛哭，送给他们丰厚的礼物，又催他们回相州城去。
English: When Shi Siming saw Zhang Tongru and others coming, he hugged his head and cried together, gave them rich gifts, and urged them to go back to Xiangzhou City.

古文：经三日，庆绪不至。
现代文：整整过了三天时间，安庆绪还是不到史思明那里去。
English: After exactly three days, An Qingxu still did not go to Shi Siming.

古文：思明密召安太清令诱之。
现代文：史思明秘密召见安太清，要他引诱安庆绪。
English: Shi Siming secretly summoned An Taiching and asked him to seduce An Qingxu.

古文：庆绪不获已，以三百骑诣思明。
现代文：安庆绪不得已，只好带着三百骑兵去见史思明。
English: As a last resort, An Qingxu had no choice but to take three hundred cavalrymen to see Shi Siming.

古文：思明引入，令三军擐甲执兵待之。
现代文：史思明把他领进军营，命令全体将士穿甲戴盔握着武器等待他。
English: Shi Siming led him into the military camp and ordered all the soldiers to wear armor and helmets and hold weapons to wait for him.

古文：及诸弟领至于庭，再拜稽首曰： 臣不克负荷，弃失两都，久陷重围，不意大王以太上皇故，将兵远救。 
现代文：直到他的几个弟弟被带到庭前，安庆绪这才拜了两拜跪下叩头称臣说： 我不能担当重任，丢失了长安洛阳，长时间陷入重重包围，没想到燕王您看在我父亲的面上，率领部队远道而来援救。 
English: It wasn't until several of his younger brothers were brought before the court that An Qingxu bowed twice, knelt and prostrated himself before his minister and said, "I can't take on such a heavy responsibility. I lost Chang'an and Luoyang, and I was besieged for a long time. I didn't expect King Yan, in my father's eyes, to lead troops all the way to the rescue."

古文：思明曰： 弃失两都，用兵不利，亦何事也！
现代文：史思明说： 丢失长安洛阳，打仗失利，那又算得了什么。
English: Shi Siming said, "Losing Chang'an and Luoyang and losing the war, what does that matter?

古文：尔为人子，杀汝父以求位，庸非大逆乎？
现代文：你作为儿子，杀死自己的父亲夺取王位，难道不是大逆不孝吗？
English: As a son, isn't it a great act of disloyalty to kill your father and seize the throne?

古文：吾为太上皇讨贼。 
现代文：我替你父亲来惩罚你这个奸贼。 
English: I'm punishing you for your father, you traitor.

古文：即牵出，并其四弟及高尚、孙孝哲、崔乾祐，皆缢杀之。
现代文：说罢就把安庆绪拉出去，连同他的四个弟弟以及高尚、孙孝哲、崔乾，都处以绞刑。
English: An Qingxu was dragged out as soon as he said this, and he and his four younger brothers, as well as Gaoshang, Sun Xiaozhe, and Cui Qian, were all hanged.

古文：卒如其言。高尚，幽州雍奴人也，本名不危。
现代文：安禄山父子另立朝廷犯上作乱，三年时间就被消灭了。高尚，是幽州雍奴县人，原名不危。
English: An Lushan father and son set up another court to commit a riot, and it took three years to be eliminated. Noble, is from Yuzhou Yongnu County, the original name is not dangerous.

古文：母老，乞食于人，尚周游不归侍养。
现代文：母亲年老，乞讨度日，高尚四出游说不回家奉养。
English: My mother is old, begs for a living, and nobly goes out to persuade people not to return home to look after her.

古文：寓居河朔县界，与令狐潮邻里，通其婢，生一女，遂收之。
现代文：他暂住河朔县边境时，跟令狐潮相邻，和令狐潮的使女私通，生了一个女儿，就收留了她。
English: When he temporarily lived on the border of Hexuo County, he lived next to Ling Fuchao and had an affair with Ling Fuchao's maid. He gave birth to a daughter and took her in.

古文：尚颇笃学，赡文词。
现代文：高尚很爱读书，文章词采丰富。
English: Gaosheng loves to read, and his articles are rich in vocabulary.

古文：尝叹息谓汝南周铣曰： 高不危宁当举事而死，终不能咬草根以求活耳！ 
现代文：他曾经叹息着对汝南郡的周铣说： 我高不危宁可造反而死，终究不会吃着草根活下去！ 
English: He once said with a sigh to Zhou Yong of Runan County: I would rather die than be in danger, after all, I will not live by eating grass!

古文：县尉有姓高者，以其宗盟，引置门下，遂以尚入籍为兄弟。
现代文：有个姓高的县尉，因为高尚跟他同宗而结拜，领到家里当食客，于是就用高尚的名字作为高县尉的兄弟入了户籍。
English: There was a prefectural lieutenant with the surname Gao who, because Gao Shangnang was from the same family as him, was introduced to the family as a diner, so he entered the household register with the noble name as the brother of Gao Shangnang.

古文：李齐物为怀州刺史，举高尚不仕，送京师，并助钱三万。
现代文：李齐物任怀州刺史，举荐高尚任职而高尚没有同意，送高尚到京城去，并且资助他三万钱。
English: Li Qichen was appointed as the chief historian of Waizhou, recommended Gao Gao for the post, but Gao Gao did not agree, sent Gao Gao to Beijing, and funded him with 30,000 yuan.

古文：齐物寓书于中官将军吴怀实以托之。
现代文：李齐物寄信给中官将军吴怀实把高尚托付给他。
English: Li Qi sent a letter to Lieutenant General Wu Huai Si to entrust Gao Shang to him.

古文：怀实引见高力士，置宾馆中，令与男丞相锡为学，无问家事，一以委之。
现代文：吴怀实带着他去拜见高力士，把他安排在宾馆里住下，叫他跟男丞相锡学习，无论大小事情，全都委托给了他。
English: Wu Huai Si took him to meet Gao Lixiong, arranged for him to stay in a hotel, and told him to study with the male prime minister Xi. No matter how big or small, everything was entrusted to him.

古文：无何，令妻父吕令皓特表荐之。
现代文：没过多久，吴怀实又请自己的岳父吕令皓特地呈表向朝廷推荐高尚。
English: Not long after, Wu Huai Si also asked his father-in-law, Lü Lingyun, to submit a special form to the imperial court to recommend Gaosheng.

古文：天宝元年，拜左领军仓曹参军同正员。
现代文：玄宗天宝元年，授予高尚左领军仓曹参军同正员职务。
English: In the first year of the Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Cang Cao, a high-ranking left-wing military leader, was awarded the post of military officer.

古文：六载，安禄山奏为平卢掌书记，出入禄山卧内。
现代文：天宝六年，安禄山奏请朝廷任命高尚为平卢掌书记，经常出进安禄山的内室。
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, An Lushan asked the imperial court to appoint Gao Shang as the secretary of Pinglu, and often went to the inner room of An Lushan.

古文：禄山肥多睡，尚执笔在旁或通宵焉，由是浸亲厚之。
现代文：安禄山肥胖爱睡，高尚有时通宵握着笔坐在他的身边，因此安禄山对他逐渐亲密宽厚。
English: Anlu Mountain is fat and loves to sleep. Noble sometimes sits by his side all night holding a pen. Therefore, Anlu Mountain gradually becomes intimate and generous to him.

古文：遂与禄山解图谶，劝其反。
现代文：于是运用给安禄山讲解符命占验的方法，鼓动他造反。
English: Therefore, he used the method of using a talisman to test An Lushan's life and encouraged him to rebel.

古文：天宝十一年，禄山表为屯田员外郎。
现代文：天宝十一年，安禄山奏请朝廷任命他为屯田员外郎。
English: In the eleventh year of the Tenpo era, An Lushanxiao asked the imperial court to appoint him as Tondenkangairo.

古文：及随禄山寇陷东京，伪授中书侍郎。
现代文：到了跟随安禄山叛乱攻陷东京洛阳时，安禄山授予他中书侍郎头衔。
English: When he followed Anrokuyama's rebellion to capture Tokyo's Luoyang, Anrokuyama awarded him the title of Chusho-jirō.

古文：伪赦书制敕多出其手。
现代文：安伪朝廷的赦书、法制、诏命多半由他起草。
English: He drafted most of the amnesty, legal system, and imperial edict of the Anpu Dynasty.

古文：始，尚与严庄、孙孝哲计画，白禄山以为事必成。
现代文：开始，高尚同严庄、孙孝哲谋划，告诉安禄山造反一定成功。
English: At the beginning, Gao Shangdong plotted with Yan Zhuang and Sun Xiaozhe to tell An Lushan that the rebellion would be successful.

古文：及颜杲卿杀李钦凑于土门，扬声言荣王琬、哥舒翰二十万众徇河北，十七郡皆归顺。
现代文：后来颜杲卿在土门杀了李钦凑，社会上流传说荣王李琬、哥舒翰二十万人攻占河北，十七个郡都归顺了朝廷。
English: Later, Yan Xuanqing killed Li Qinqip in Tuomen, and the upper-class legends of Rongwang Li Qian and Goshukhan claimed that 200,000 people conquered Hebei, and all seventeen counties surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：颜真卿破袁知奉三万众于堂邑，贺兰进明再拔信都，李光弼、郭子仪继收常山、赵郡，河北路绝者再。
现代文：颜真卿在堂邑打败了袁知泰三万人马，贺兰进明两次打下信都，李光弼、郭子仪相继收复了常山、赵郡，河北的交通音讯中断了两次。
English: Yan Zhenqing defeated Yuan Zhitai's 30,000-strong army in Dongyue, Helan Jinming twice defeated the capital of Xinyi, Li Guangyao and Guo Ziyi successively recovered Changshan and Zhao County, and Hebei's traffic and communications were interrupted twice.

古文：河南诸郡皆有防御，潼关有哥舒翰之师。
现代文：河南各郡都有官军防御，潼关有哥舒翰的部队把守。
English: All counties in Henan Province were defended by government troops, and Shaoguan was guarded by troops from Goshukhan.

古文：禄山大惧，怒尚等曰： 汝元向我道万全，必无所畏。
现代文：安禄山恐慌极了，对高尚等人发怒说： 你们原先对我说起兵万无一失，完全没有什么可担心的。
English: An Lushan was in a panic, and said angrily to Gaozhong and the others, "You told me before that starting an army was foolproof, and there was absolutely nothing to worry about.

古文：今四边若此，赖郑、汴数州尚存，向西至关，一步不通，河北并已无矣，万全何在？
现代文：如今四方形势到了这种地步，只有郑、汴几州还在我们手里，向西到潼关，一步也走不通，河北各郡都已丢失，万无一失在哪里？
English: Now the situation in the four directions has reached this stage. Only the Zheng and Min provinces are still in our hands. To the west, there is no way to get to Shaoguan. All the counties in Hebei have been lost. Where is the foolproof way?

古文：更不须见我。 
现代文：你们再别来见我。 
English: Don't come to see me again.

古文：尚等遂数日不得见禄山，忧闷不知所为。
现代文：高尚等人从此好几天没能去见安禄山，忧愁烦闷不知怎么办才好。
English: Gao Gao and others have not been able to go to see Anlu Mountain for several days, and they are sad and do not know what to do.

古文：会田乾真自潼关至，晓谕禄山曰： 自古帝王，皆有胜败，然后成大事，岂有一举而得之者乎！
现代文：恰好田乾真从潼关来了，开导安禄山说： 自古以来成为帝王的，都有暂时的失利和挫折，最后才成就大业，哪有一次行动就达到目标的呀！
English: It just so happened that Tian Qianzhen came from Shaoguan, enlightening An Lushan and saying: Since ancient times, those who became emperors had temporary failures and setbacks, and finally achieved a great cause. No single action would achieve the goal!

古文：今四边兵马虽多，皆非精锐，岂我之比。
现代文：眼下四方官军兵马虽然很多，但都不是精锐部队，哪能同我们相比。
English: Right now, although there are many officers and soldiers from the four directions, they are not elite troops, which can be compared with us.

古文：纵事不成，收取数万众，横行天下，为一盗跖，亦十年五岁矣，岂有人能制我耶！
现代文：即使大事不能成功，集中几万人马，四海为家，当个强盗，也可以过他十年五载了，哪有人能阻止我呢！
English: Even if the big event does not succeed, if tens of thousands of people are concentrated, if all the four seas are home, and if I become a robber, I can get away with it for ten or fifteen years. Who can stop me?

古文：尚、庄等皆佐命元勋，何得隔绝不与相见，令其忧惧？
现代文：高尚、严庄等都是辅佐您开创帝业有特殊功勋的人，怎能断绝往来不见他们，让他们忧愁恐惧。
English: Noble, solemn, etc. are all people who have special merits to assist you in creating an empire, how can you cut off contacts and not see them, leaving them sad and afraid.

古文：只此数人，岂不能为患乎？
现代文：仅仅这几个人，难道不能造成祸患吗？
English: Couldn't just a few people have caused the disaster?

古文：外间闻之，必心摇动。 
现代文：外面的将士听到这事，必然人心浮动。 
English: When the soldiers outside heard this, their hearts must have swelled.

古文：禄山喜曰： 阿浩，非汝谁能开豁我心里事，今无忧矣！
现代文：安禄山听罢欣喜地说： 阿浩，不是你谁能让我的心情豁然开朗，现在没有忧虑了。
English: After listening, An Lushan said with joy: Ah Hao, you are not the one who can make my heart suddenly brighten, now I have no worries.

古文：为之奈何？ 
现代文：如何处理这事？ 
English: If I let you go, I'll lose a meal.

古文：乾真曰： 不如唤取慰劳之。 
现代文：田乾真说： 不如叫来抚慰犒劳他们。 
English: Tian Xianzhen said, "It would be better to call them to comfort and reward them."

古文：遂召尚等饮宴作乐，禄山自唱歌以送酒，待之如初。
现代文：于是召集高尚等人饮酒作乐，安禄山亲自唱歌来劝酒，像当初一样对待他们。
English: Therefore, he called up high-ranking people to drink and make music, and An Lushan himself sang to persuade them to drink, and treated them as he did at the beginning.

古文：阿浩，乾真小字也。
现代文：阿浩，是田乾真的小名。
English: Ah Hao is a nickname of Tian Qianxin.

古文：及庆绪至相州，伪授侍中。
现代文：安庆绪驻守相州的时候，授予他侍中头衔。
English: When An Qingxu was stationed in Xiangzhou, he was awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：孙孝哲，契丹人也。
现代文：孙孝哲，是契丹人。
English: Sun Xiaozhe is a Khitan.

古文：母为禄山所通，因得狎近。
现代文：母亲与安禄山私通，因此安禄山对他亲密随便。
English: His mother had an affair with An Lushan, so An Lushan was very close to him.

古文：及禄山僭逆，伪授殿中监、闲厩使，封王。
现代文：安禄山忤逆造反后，任命他为殿中监、闲厩使，封为王。
English: After the rebellion of Anlu Shanshu, he was appointed as the palace overseer, the idle stable servant, and crowned as the king.

古文：孝哲尤用事，亚于严庄。
现代文：孙孝哲很有权势，仅次严庄。
English: Sun Xiao Zhe is very powerful, second only to Yan Zhuang.

古文：裘马华侈，颇事豪贵，每食皆备珍馔。
现代文：他衣轻裘、骑肥马，豪华奢侈，很会摆豪门贵族的排场，每餐饭都有珍贵的菜肴。
English: He dresses lightly, rides a fat horse, is luxurious and extravagant, and is very good at putting on the pomp of the aristocracy. Every meal has precious dishes.

古文：性残忍，果于杀戮，闻者畏之。
现代文：他秉性残忍，杀人从不犹豫，了解他的人都怕他。
English: He is cruel by nature, never hesitates to kill, and everyone who knows him is afraid of him.

古文：禄山使孝哲与张通儒同守西京，妃王宗枝皆罹其酷。
现代文：安禄山派孙孝哲和张通儒一起守卫西京长安，李唐朝廷的族人亲友都遭受他残害。
English: An Lushan sent Sun Xiaozhe and Zhang Tongru to guard West Beijing Chang'an together, and the relatives and friends of Li Tang's court all suffered from him.

古文：与严庄争权不睦。及禄山死，夺其使，以邓季阳代之。
现代文：孙孝哲与严庄争权夺利不和睦，安禄山死后，严庄剥夺了孙孝哲的殿中监、闲厩使官职，用邓季阳替代了他。
English: Sun Xiaozhu and Yan Zhuang did not get along well as they competed for power and profit. After An Lushan's death, Yan Zhuang deprived Sun Xiaozhuang of his position as palace overseer, and replaced him with Deng Jiyang.

古文：庆绪之奔，庄惧为所图，因而来奔。
现代文：安庆绪离开洛阳奔往邺郡后，严庄怕遭孙孝哲暗算，因而归顺了朝廷。
English: After An Qingxu left Luoyang and rushed to Handan County, Yan Zhuang was afraid of being plotted by Sun Xiao Zhe, so he submitted to the imperial court.

古文：史思明，本名窣干。营州宁夷州突厥杂种胡人也。
现代文：史思明，原名干，是营州宁夷州突厥杂胡人。
English: Shi Siming, whose original name was Gan, was a Turkic hybrid from Ningyizhou, Yingzhou.

古文：姿瘦，少须发，鸢肩伛背，钦目侧鼻。
现代文：面容瘦削，胡须头发稀疏，耸肩驼背，凹眼睛歪鼻梁。
English: His face is thin, his beard is thinning, his shoulders are hunched, his eyes are sunken and his nose is crooked.

古文：性急躁。
现代文：性情急躁。
English: He has a quick temper.

古文：与安禄山同乡里，先禄山一日生，思明除日生，禄山岁日生。
现代文：他跟安禄山是同乡，比安禄山早一天出生，史思明 除日 生，安禄山 岁日 生。
English: He is a fellow villager of Anlu Shan. He was born one day earlier than Anlu Shan. Shi Siming was born the day before, while Anlu Shan was born the day after.

古文：及长，相善，俱以骁勇闻。
现代文：长大成人后，成为好友，都以骁勇出名。
English: After growing up, they became good friends and were both famous for their bravery.

古文：初事特进乌知义，每令骑觇贼，必生擒以归。
现代文：开始伺奉特进乌知义，每次派他们骑马侦察敌情，一定会活捉敌人回来。
English: He began to serve as a special envoy to Uchi, and every time he sent them out on horseback to reconnoitre the enemy situation, he was sure to catch the enemy alive and bring them back.

古文：又解六蕃语，与禄山同为互市郎。
现代文：又懂多种民族语言，跟安禄山一起当过为买卖人协议物价的牙郎。
English: He also understands a variety of ethnic languages. Together with An Lushan, he was the negotiator of the price for the buyer and seller.

古文：张守珪为幽州节度，奏为折冲。
现代文：张守王圭任幽州节度时，奏请朝廷任命他为折冲。
English: When Zhang Shou Wang Gui was appointed to Yuzhou Festival, he petitioned the imperial court to appoint him as Zengchong.

古文：天宝初，频立战功，至将军，知平卢军事。
现代文：玄宗天宝初年，多次立下战功，得到将军头衔，主持平卢军事务。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenpo, Xuanzong repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, received the title of general, and presided over the affairs of the Pinglu Army.

古文：尝入奏，玄宗赐坐，与语，甚奇之。问其年，曰 四十矣 。
现代文：曾到朝廷奏事，玄宗赐给他座位，跟他交谈，对他的才干非常惊奇。问他的年龄，回答说： 四十岁了。 
English: Once, when he came to the Imperial Court to make a report, Emperor Xuanzong gave him a seat and talked with him. He was very surprised at his talent. When asked his age, he replied: "Forty years old."

古文：玄宗抚其背曰： 卿贵在后，勉之。 
现代文：玄宗轻轻拍着他的背说： 你的显贵还在后头，努力干吧。 
English: Xuanzong patted him lightly on the back and said, "Your nobility is still ahead of you, work hard."

古文：迁大将军、北平太守。
现代文：提升为大将军、北平太守。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general and Beiping governor.

古文：十一载，禄山奏授平卢节度都知兵马使。
现代文：天宝十一年，安禄山奏请朝廷授予史思明平卢节度都知兵马使。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianbao, Anlu Shansong asked the imperial court to award Shi Siming Pinglu the title of "Duch Terracotta Warriors and Horses."

古文：十四载，安禄山反，命思明讨饶阳等诸郡，陷之。
现代文：天宝十四年，安禄山叛乱，命令史思明征讨饶阳等各个州郡，都攻破了。
English: In the 14th year of Tianbao, the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, ordered Shi Siming to enlist Raoyang and other states and counties, all broke through.

古文：十五载正月六日，思明与蔡希德围颜杲卿于常山，九日拔之。
现代文：天宝十五年正月六日，史思明和蔡希德在常山围困了颜杲卿，九日就攻克了。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 15th year of Tianbao, Shi Siming and Cai Xide besieged Yan Yuqing in Changshan, and conquered him on the 9th day.

古文：又围饶阳，二十九日不能拔。
现代文：又围饶阳，二十九天还没有攻克。
English: They also besieged Raoyang, but did not conquer it for 29 days.

古文：李光弼出土门，拔常山郡，思明解围而拒光弼。
现代文：官军将领李光弼从土门出兵，攻克了常山郡，史思明放弃饶阳到常山抵御李光弼。
English: The general of the government army, Li Guangyao, sent troops from Tu Men and conquered Changshan County. Shi Siming abandoned Raoyang and went to Changshan to resist Li Guangyao.

古文：光弼列兵于城南，相持累月。
现代文：李光弼在常山城南边布兵设防，两军相持好几个月。
English: Li Guangyao set up fortifications on the south side of Changshan City, and the two armies clashed for several months.

古文：光弼草尽，使精卒以车数乘于旁县取草，辄被击之，其后率十匹唯共得两束草，至剉蒿荐以饲之。
现代文：李光弼部队喂马的草料吃光了，派遣精悍士卒带上几乘马车到邻县收集草料，一连几次遭到袭击，最后的十匹马一共才弄到两捆草，以致铡碎草垫给马吃。
English: Li Guangyao's troops had run out of grass to feed their horses, so they sent several horsemen to the neighboring counties to collect grass. They were attacked several times in a row, and the last ten horses only managed to get two bundles of grass in total, so they had to chop up grass mats for the horses to eat.

古文：初，禄山以贾循为范阳留后，谋归顺，为副留守向润客所杀，以思明代之。
现代文：原先，安禄山派贾循为范阳留后，贾循准备归顺朝廷，被副留守向润客杀死，派史思明替代贾循。
English: Originally, after An Lushan sent Jia Xun to stay with Fan Yang, Jia Xun prepared to surrender to the imperial court, but was killed by the deputy left-behind Xiang Runke, and sent Shi Siming to replace Jia Xun.

古文：又以征战在外，令向润客代其任。
现代文：又因史思明在外征战，命令向润客代理史思明的职务。
English: Also, because of Shi Siming's overseas campaign, he ordered Xiang Runke to act as Shi Siming's representative.

古文：四月，朔方节度郭子仪以朔方蕃、汉二万人自土门而至常山，军威遂振，南拔赵郡，思明退保博陵。
现代文：当年四月，朔方节度郭子仪率领朔方少数民族、汉族士卒两万人从土门开赴常山，官军士气于是振作起来，在南边攻克了赵郡，史思明退兵守卫博陵。
English: In April of that year, Guo Ziyi, the commander of the Shuo ethnic minority and Han soldiers of the Shuo ethnic minority, led 20,000 soldiers from Tumen to Changshan. The morale of the officers and soldiers was thus boosted, and they conquered Zhao County in the south, and the retired soldiers of Shishiming guarded Bo Ling.

古文：五月十日，子仪、光弼击之，败思明于沙河上。
现代文：五月十日，郭子仪、李光弼追击，在沙河打败了史思明。
English: On May 10th, Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao chased and defeated Shi Siming in Shahe.

古文：又攻之，思明以骑卒奔嘉山，光弼击之，思明大败，走入博陵郡。
现代文：继续进攻，史思明率领骑兵逃往嘉山，李光弼追击，史思明大败，逃进了博陵郡。
English: Continuing the attack, Shi Siming led the cavalry to flee to Jiashan, Li Guangyao pursued, Shi Siming was defeated and fled into Boling County.

古文：光弼围之，城几拔。
现代文：李光弼包围博陵，州城差点儿被攻克。
English: Li Guangyao encircled Boling, and the state capital was almost conquered.

古文：属潼关失守，肃宗理兵于朔方，使中官邢廷恩追朔方、河东兵马。
现代文：不巧潼关失守，肃宗到朔方指挥作战，派遣中官邢廷恩追回朔方、河东兵马。
English: Unluckily, Shiguan was lost, Su Zong went to the Shuo side to command the battle, and sent Lieutenant-General Yu Ting'en to chase back the Shuo side and the soldiers and horses from Hedong.

古文：光弼入土门，思明随后徼击之。已而回军并行击刘正臣，正臣易之。初不设备，遂弃军保北平，正臣妻子及军资二千乘尽没。
现代文：李光弼撤军进入土门，史思明紧跟在后边截击，之后回师进攻刘正臣，刘正臣把事情看得太容易，一点也不设防，此时只得抛下部队赶去部署守卫北平，刘正臣的妻子儿女以及两千辆马车的军需物资全被史思明截获。
English: Li Guangyao's retreating army entered the gate, Shi Siming followed closely behind to intercept, after which the return division attacked Liu Zhengcheng. Liu Zhengcheng saw things too easily and did not set up a defense at all. At this time, he had to leave the troops to deploy to guard Beiping. Liu Zhengcheng's wife and children and two thousand wagons of military supplies were all intercepted by Shi Siming.

古文：思明将卒颇精锐，皆平卢战士，南拔常山、赵郡，又攻河间。
现代文：史思明的部队很精锐，都是平卢州的士兵，向南攻克了常山、赵郡。
English: Shi Siming's troops were very elite, they were all soldiers from Pinglu Prefecture, and they conquered Changshan and Zhao County to the south.

古文：为尹子奇所围，已四十余日。
现代文：又进攻河间帮忙解围，河间被官军将领尹子奇包围四十多天了。
English: He also attacked Hama to help relieve the siege. Hama had been besieged by the government army general Yin Ziqi for more than forty days.

古文：颜真卿使和琳以一万二千人、马百匹以救之。至河间二十余里，北风劲烈，鼓声不相闻，贼纵击之，擒和琳以至城下。
现代文：颜真卿派遣和琳率领一万二千人、一百匹马去增援尹子奇，走到离河间还有二十多里的地方，北风又大又猛，听不见进军的鼓角声，叛军正面堵截，捉住和琳带到河间城下。
English: Yan Zhenqing sent He Lin leading twelve thousand people and one hundred horses to reinforce Yin Ziqi, and went to a place more than twenty miles away from the river. The north wind was big and fierce, and the sound of the marching drums could not be heard. The rebels blocked the front, caught He Lin and brought him to the city of Hema.

古文：思明既全，合势，贼军益盛。
现代文：史思明的部队来了后，同被尹子奇包围的城内叛军里应外合，叛军的斗志更加高涨。
English: After Shi Siming's troops arrived, they clashed with the rebels inside the city who were surrounded by Yin Ziqi, and the rebels' fighting spirit became even higher.

古文：李奂为贼所擒，送东京。
现代文：官军将领李奂被叛军捉住，押送到了东京洛阳。
English: The rebel army captured the general of the government army, Li Qian, and escorted him to Luoyang, Tokyo.

古文：又攻景城，擒李暐，暐投河而死。
现代文：史思明又进攻景城，捉住了李日韦，李日韦投河而死。
English: Shi Siming attacked Jingcheng again, captured Li Rihwei, and Li Rihwei drowned in the river.

古文：遂使康没野波攻平原。真卿觉之，兵马既尽，渡河而南。
现代文：于是派遣康没野波进攻平原城，颜真卿发觉了，因人马已丧失殆尽，就渡过黄河朝南跑。
English: Therefore, Kang Miao sent wild waves to attack Pingyuan City. Yan Zhengying found out that all the men and horses had been lost, so he crossed the Yellow River and ran southward.

古文：攻清河，粮尽城陷，擒太守王怀忠以献禄山。
现代文：史思明进攻清河，粮食光了城被攻破，捉住太守王怀忠向安禄山献功。
English: Shishiming attacked Qinghe, the grain ran out and the city was breached, capturing the governor Wang Huaizhong and offering his services to Anlu Mountain.

古文：将军庄嗣贤围乌承恩于信都。承恩母、妻先为安禄山所获，思明获其男从则，使谕承恩，承恩遂降，思明与之把臂饮酒。
现代文：叛军将领庄嗣贤在信都包围了乌承恩，乌承恩的母亲、妻子先被安禄山抓走，史思明又捉住了他的儿子乌从则，叫乌从则去劝说他的父亲，乌承恩就投降了，史思明跟乌承恩手挽手地喝酒。
English: The rebel general Zhuang Zixian surrounded Ucheng in Xindu. Ucheng's mother and wife were first taken away by Anlu Mountain. Shi Siming also captured his son, Wu Congzhe, and ordered Wu Congzhe to persuade his father. Ucheng surrendered, and Shi Siming and Ucheng drank arm-in-arm.

古文：饶阳陷，李系投火死。
现代文：饶阳被攻破，李系自焚而死。
English: Raoyang was breached, and Li Jie set himself on fire and died.

古文：河北悉陷。
现代文：河北各州郡全部沦陷。
English: All of Hebei's prefectures and counties have fallen.

古文：尹子奇以五万众渡河至青州，欲便向江、淮。
现代文：尹子奇率领五万人马渡过黄河到了青州，打算伺机到江、淮一带去。
English: Yin Ziqi led fifty thousand people to cross the Yellow River to Qingzhou, intending to wait for an opportunity to go to the Jiang and Huaiyu areas.

古文：会回纥二千骑奄至范阳，范阳闭门二日，然后向太原，子奇行千里以救之。
现代文：恰在这时，朝廷请来的回纥两千骑兵忽然到了范阳，范阳的叛军紧闭城门两天不应战，他们就开向太原，尹子奇又行军千里去援助回纥骑兵。
English: Just at this time, two thousand Uighur cavalrymen invited by the imperial court suddenly arrived in Fanyang. The rebels of Fanyang closed the city gate for two days and did not fight. They drove to Taiyuan, and Yin Ziqi marched thousands of miles to assist the Uighur cavalry.

古文：二年正月，思明以蔡希德合范阳、上党兵马十万，围李光弼于太原。
现代文：肃宗至德二年正月，史思明命令蔡希德会合范阳、上党的兵马共十万，在太原包围李光弼。
English: In the first month of the second year of Su Zong's reign, Shi Siming ordered Cai Xide to gather Fan Yang and the soldiers and horses of the upper party, a total of 100,000, to surround Li Guangya in Taiyuan.

古文：光弼使为地道，至贼阵前。
现代文：李光弼布置从城内挖掘地道，通到了城外叛军的军营跟前。
English: Lee Kuan Yew arranged for a tunnel to be dug from inside the city, which led to a rebel army camp outside the city.

古文：骁贼方戏弄城中人，地道中人出擒之。敌以为神，呼为 地藏菩萨 。
现代文：一个凶猛的敌兵正在调戏玩弄城里的妇女，地道里的官军战士冲出地道抓住了他，敌兵把他当作了神仙，喊他 地藏菩萨 。
English: A fierce enemy soldier was flirting with the women of the city. The government soldiers in the tunnel rushed out of the tunnel and caught him. The enemy soldiers took him for a god and called him Jizang Bodhisattva.

古文：思明留十月，会安禄山死，庆绪令归范阳，希德留百余日，皆不能拔而归。
现代文：史思明在太原呆了十个月，直到安禄山死去，安庆绪要他返回范阳防守，蔡希德在太原又呆了一百多天，都没能攻下太原，就回范阳去了。
English: Shi Siming stayed in Taiyuan for ten months until An Lushan died. An Qingxu asked him to return to Fanyang for defense. Cai Xide stayed in Taiyuan for more than a hundred days, but failed to capture Taiyuan and went back to Fanyang.

古文：自禄山陷两京，常以骆驼运两京御府珍宝于范阳，不知纪极。
现代文：自从安禄山攻占洛阳、长安后，经常用骆驼把两京皇宫库府的珍宝运到范阳，没有限度。
English: Since Anlu Mountain conquered Luoyang and Chang'an, camels have often been used to transport the treasures of the imperial palaces and treasuries of the two capitals to Fanyang.

古文：由是恣其逆谋。思明转骄，不用庆绪之命。
现代文：范阳的这些珍宝更加激发了他叛离安家的企图，史思明变得骄横了，不听安庆绪的命令。
English: These treasures of Fan Yang further inspired his attempt to leave home. Shi Siming became arrogant and disobeyed An Qingxu's orders.

古文：安庆绪为王师所败，投鄴郡，其下蕃、汉兵三万人，初不知所从，思明击杀三千人，然后降之。
现代文：安庆绪被官军打败，逃到邺郡。他手下少数民族、汉族将士三万人，开始不知道跟着谁好，史思明打死了他们三千人后，他们就投降了史思明。
English: An Qingxu was defeated by the government army and fled to Shixian County. His 30,000 ethnic minority and Han soldiers did not know who to follow at first. After Shi Siming killed 3,000 of them, they surrendered to him.

古文：庆绪使阿史那承庆、安守忠征兵于思明，且欲图之。
现代文：安庆绪派阿史那承庆、安守忠向史思明要求归还他的人马，并且准备干掉史思明。
English: An Qingxu sent Ashina Chengqing and An Shou Zhong to Shi Siming to demand the return of his men and horses and to prepare to kill Shi Siming.

古文：判官耿仁智，忠谋之士，谓思明曰： 大夫崇重，人不敢言，仁智请一言而死。 
现代文：判官耿仁智是个忠诚而有谋略的人，对史思明说： 您高贵威严，人们不敢多话，我请求说一句话死也甘心。 
English: The judge, Geng Renzhi, was a loyal and strategic person. He said to Shi Siming, "Your highness, people dare not say too much. If I ask you to say one word, I am willing to die."

古文：思明曰： 试言之。 
现代文：史思明说： 你说说看。 
English: Shi Siming said: You tell me.

古文：对曰： 大夫久事禄山，禄山兵权若此，谁敢不服！
现代文：耿仁智回答说： 您长时间侍奉安禄山，安禄山武力、权力那么强大，谁敢不听他的。
English: Geng Renzhi replied, "You have served Anlu Mountain for a long time. Anlu Mountain is so powerful, who would dare not to listen to him?"

古文：如大夫比者，逼于凶威耳，固亦无罪。
现代文：像您虽然跟随过他，但只是被他的凶暴权势逼迫罢了，本来是没有过错的。
English: Like you, although you followed him, you were only forced to do so by his violent power. There was nothing wrong with you.

古文：今闻孝感皇帝聪明勇智，有少康、周宣之略，大夫发使输诚，必开怀见纳，此转祸为福之上策也。 思明曰： 善。 
现代文：如今听说肃宗皇帝聪明勇敢智慧，具有夏禹七世孙少康、周宣王姬静复国中兴的谋略。您派遣使者去向皇上表示忠心，一定会让他放心地接受您，这是把祸患变成平安的最好办法。 史思明说： 好吧。 
English: Now I have heard that Emperor Su Zong is clever, brave and wise, and has the strategy of Xia Yu VII's grandson Shao Kang and Zhou Xuan Wang Hizhong's restoration of the country. If you send an envoy to express your loyalty to the emperor, he will surely accept you with confidence. This is the best way to turn disaster into peace. Shi Siming said: Okay.

古文：承庆等以五千骑至范阳，思明悉众介胄以逆之。众且数万，去之一里，使谓之曰： 相公及王远至，将士等不胜喜跃。
现代文：阿史那承庆等人带领五千骑兵到了范阳，史思明布置全军将士披甲戴盔去迎接他们，人马足有好几万，离阿史那承庆的队伍还有一里路，派人去对他们说： 相公和王爷远道而来，我们全体将士欣喜雀跃得不得了。
English: Ashina Chengqing and others led five thousand cavalry to Fanyang. Shi Siming arranged the entire army of soldiers to wear armor and helmets to meet them. There were tens of thousands of people, and there was still a mile away from Ashina Chengqing's team. He sent someone to say to them: Father-in-law and prince have come a long way. All of us soldiers were overjoyed.

古文：此皆边兵怯懦，颇惧相公之来，莫敢进也。
现代文：但这些守卫边地的士卒胆子小，对相公的到来非常敬畏，不敢再向前走。
English: However, these soldiers guarding the borderlands are timid, and are very much in awe of the arrival of their brother-in-law, and dare not go any further.

古文：请弛弓以安之。 
现代文：请求相公收起武器让他们安下心来。 
English: He asked them to put down their weapons and calm down.

古文：从之。
现代文：阿史那承庆等照办了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：思明遂以承庆、守忠入内，饮乐之。
现代文：史思明于是把阿史那承庆、安守忠带进内厅，设宴奏乐款待他们。
English: Shi Siming then brought Ashina Chengqing and Anshou Zhong into the inner hall and entertained them with a banquet and music.

古文：别令诸将于其所分收其甲仗。
现代文：另外命令各个将领按照原来的分工收缴了阿史那承庆队伍的武器。
English: In addition, the generals were ordered to collect the weapons of Ashina Chengqing's team in accordance with the original division of labor.

古文：其诸郡兵皆给粮，恣归之，欲留者分隶诸营。
现代文：部队中的各地兵卒都发给足够的路费，鼓励他们回家，要留下的分配到史思明部队的各个兵营。
English: The soldiers from various parts of the army were given enough travel expenses to encourage them to go home, and those who wanted to stay were assigned to various barracks of the Shishiming army.

古文：遂拘承庆，斩守忠、李立节之首。
现代文：接着拘留了阿史那承庆，斩杀了安守忠、李立节。
English: Next, they detained Ashina Chengqing and killed An Shou Zhong and Li Lijie.

古文：李光弼使衙官敬俛招之。遂令衙官窦子昂奉表，以所管兵众八万人，及以伪河东节度高秀岩来降。
现代文：李光弼派遣衙官敬亻免招抚史思明，史思明于是命令衙官窦子昂呈递奏章，带领他所管辖的八万人马以及安伪朝廷的河东节度高秀岩归降。
English: Lee Kuan Yew dispatched eunuch Keun Yee to appease Shi Siming. Shi Siming then ordered eunuch Dou Zi Ang to submit a report, leading the eighty thousand people under his jurisdiction and the Anpu imperial court to surrender to Gaoxiuyan.

古文：肃宗大悦，封归义王、范阳长史、御史大夫、河北节度使，朝义已下并为列卿，秀岩云中太守，以其男如岳等七人为大官。
现代文：肃宗非常高兴，封史思明为归义王、范阳长史、御史大夫、河北节度使，史朝义以下各个将领一起授予高级官职，高秀岩任云中太守，把他的儿子高如岳等七人任命为大官。
English: Su Zong was very pleased. He appointed Fong Shiming as the King of Guiyi, Fan Yang Changshi, the Grand Historian, and the Hebei Festival Delegate, and the generals including Shi Chaoyi as high-ranking officials, Gao Xiuyan as the Governor of Yunnan Province, and his son Gao Rongyue and seven others as high-ranking officials.

古文：使内侍李思敬、将军乌承恩宣慰使，令讨残贼。
现代文：任命内侍李思敬、将军乌承恩为宣慰使，命令他们讨伐残余的叛军。
English: He appointed his personal attendant, Li Sijing, and General Wu Cheng'en as emissaries of consolation, and ordered them to fight the remaining rebels.

古文：明年，改乾元元年，四月，肃宗使乌承恩为副使，候伺其过而杀之。
现代文：第二年改年号为乾元元年。四月，肃宗任命乌承恩为副使，命他窥伺史思明的过错伺机杀掉他。
English: In the second year, the name of the year was changed to the first year of Qianyuan. In April, Su Zong appointed Wu Cheng'en as deputy envoy and ordered him to spy on Shi Siming's mistakes and kill him.

古文：初，承恩父知义为节度，思明常事知义，亦有开奖之恩，以此李光弼冀其无疑，因谋杀之。
现代文：当年，乌承恩的父亲乌知义任节度，史思明曾经侍奉乌知义，并且有着为乌承恩开释罪责的恩惠。李光弼凭这些断定史思明对乌承恩不会猜疑，就想靠这设置圈套杀掉史思明。
English: At that time, Wu Cheng'en's father, Wu Chih-yi, was the regent, and Shi Siming had once served Wu Chih-yi, and had the privilege of exonerating Wu Cheng'en. Based on these assumptions that Shi Siming would not suspect Wu Cheng'en, Li Guangyao wanted to kill Shi Siming by setting a trap.

古文：承恩至范阳，数漏其情，夜取妇人衣衣之，诣诸将家，以翻动之意谕之。
现代文：乌承恩到范阳后，多次流露自己的野心，趁黑夜穿上女人的衣裳乔装自己，到史思明的各将领家里去，劝说他们背叛史思明。
English: After Wu Cheng'en arrived in Fanyang, he repeatedly revealed his ambition, taking advantage of the darkness to dress in women's clothes and disguise himself to go to the homes of the generals of Shi Siming to persuade them to betray Shi Siming.

古文：诸将以白思明，甚惧，无以为验。
现代文：各将领把这事告诉了史思明，史思明非常害怕，又没有什么证据。
English: The generals told this to Shi Siming, who was very scared and had no evidence.

古文：有顷，承恩与思敬从上京来，宣恩命毕，将归私第。
现代文：过了一段时间，乌承恩和李思敬从上京来了，宣读完圣旨后，乌承恩准备回家。
English: After some time, Wu Cheng'en and Li Sijing came from Shangjing. After reading the edict, Wu Cheng'en was ready to go home.

古文：思明留承恩且于馆中，明当有所议。
现代文：史思明留住乌承恩暂住客店，说第二天有事商议。
English: Shi Siming retained Wu Cheng'en to stay at the inn temporarily, saying that there was something to discuss the next day.

古文：已令帏其所寝之床，伏二人于其下。
现代文：他已预先安排在乌承恩睡觉的床上挂起帷帐，派两个人埋伏在床铺底下。
English: He had already arranged in advance to hang up the curtains on the bed where Wu Cheng'en was sleeping, and sent two men to lie in wait under the bed.

古文：承恩有小男，先留范阳，思明令省其父。
现代文：乌承恩有个小儿子，原先留在范阳，史思明这时叫他去客店探望他的父亲。
English: Wu Cheng'en had a young son who had stayed in Fanyang. Shi Siming told him to go to the inn to visit his father.

古文：夜后，私于其子曰： 吾受命除此逆，明便授吾节度矣！ 
现代文：深夜，乌承恩私下对儿子说： 我受朝廷委派除掉史思明，日后就授予我节度的官职了。 
English: In the middle of the night, Wu Cheng'en said to his son in private: I was appointed by the imperial court to get rid of Shi Siming, and in the future I will be awarded the official post of the festival.

古文：床下二人叫呼而出，以告思明。
现代文：埋伏在床底下的两个人喊叫着冲出客店，把这话告诉了史思明。
English: The two people hiding under the bed shouted and rushed out of the inn and told Shi Siming.

古文：思明令执之，搜其衣曩，得朝廷所与阿史那承庆铁券及光弼与承恩之牒，云： 承庆事了，即付铁券；不了，不可付之。 
现代文：史思明下令抓起乌承恩，搜查他的衣袋，查获朝廷颁赐给阿史那承庆世代享受特权的铁制契约凭证以及李光弼给乌承恩的书札，书札上写着： 承庆事了，即付铁券；不了，不可付之。 
English: Shi Siming gave the order to arrest Wu Cheng'en, search his pockets, and seize the iron contract certificate issued by the imperial court to Ashina Chengqing's generation to enjoy privileges, as well as Li Guangyao's bookmark to Wu Cheng'en, which read: "When it comes to Chengqing, immediately pay the iron coupon; no, it cannot be paid."

古文：又得簿书数百纸，皆载先所从反军将名。
现代文：还查获档案资料几百页，记的都是先前跟随安禄山造反的部队将领的名单。
English: Hundreds of pages of archival materials were also seized, listing the names of army generals who had previously followed Anlu Shan's rebellion.

古文：思明语之曰： 我何负于汝而至是耶？ 
现代文：史思明对他说： 我在什么地方对不起你，落到这步田地呢？ 
English: Shi Siming said to him, "In what way am I sorry to you that I have ended up here?

古文：承恩称： 死罪，此太尉光弼之谋也！ 
现代文：乌承恩声明： 判你死罪，这是太尉李光弼的主意。 
English: Wu Cheng'en's statement: It was Lieutenant Li Guangyao's idea to sentence you to death.

古文：思明集军将官吏百姓，西向大哭曰： 臣以十三州之地、十万众之兵降国家，赤心不负陛下，何至杀臣！ 
现代文：史思明召集武将文官以及百姓，向西对着朝廷大声哭着说： 我用十三州的地盘、十万人的队伍归降朝廷，忠心赤胆并没辜负皇上，为什么要杀我！ 
English: Shi Siming called together military commanders, civilian officials, and common people, and headed west toward the imperial court, crying loudly and saying, "I used the thirteen states and a hundred thousand troops to surrender to the imperial court, I was loyal and daring and did not fail the emperor, why kill me!

古文：因搒杀承恩父子，囚李思敬，遣使表其事。
现代文：于是乱棍打死乌承恩和他的儿子，关押了李思敬，派人上表朝廷奏明这件事情。
English: So they beat Wu Cheng'en and his son to death, arrested Li Sijing, and sent someone to report the matter to the imperial court.

古文：朝廷又令中使慰谕云： 国家与光弼无此事，乃承恩所为，杀之善也。 
现代文：朝廷又派中使告慰说： 朝廷和李光弼都没做这种事，而是乌承恩干的，打死他们是好事。 
English: The imperial court also sent a Chinese envoy to offer condolences, saying: "Neither the imperial court nor Li Guangyao did such a thing, but Wu Cheng'en did it. It is a good thing to kill them."

古文：又有使从京至，执三司议罪人状。
现代文：又有使者从京城来，拿着司法部门御史大夫、中书、门下三司审议罪犯的文书 议罪人状 。
English: Envoys also came from the capital, bearing documents from the judicial departments, including the Chief Historian, the General Secretary, and the three departments under his command that reviewed criminals, to discuss criminal charges.

古文：思明曰： 陈希烈已下，皆重臣，上皇弃之幸蜀，既收复天下，此辈当慰劳之。
现代文：史思明说： 陈希烈以下，都是身居重要职位的大臣，太上皇丢下他们到蜀州去了，收复天下之后，应当抚慰赏赐他们。
English: Shi Siming said, "From Chen Xilei downwards, they were all ministers holding important positions. The Emperor left them behind and went to Shuzhou. After recovering the country, they should be consoled and rewarded.

古文：今尚见杀，况我本从禄山反乎！ 
现代文：现在这些人尚且被杀掉，何况我原来跟随安禄山造过反呢！ 
English: Now these people have been killed, and what's more, I used to rebel with Anlu Shan!

古文：诸将皆云： 乌承恩之前事，情状可知，光弼尚在，忧不细也。
现代文：将领们都说： 乌承恩那件事，情况已经很清楚，李光弼还活着，祸害就不会小。
English: The generals all said: The situation of the Wu Cheng'en incident is already very clear, Li Guangyao is still alive, the disaster will not be small.

古文：大夫何不取诸将状以诛光弼，以谢河北百姓！
现代文：您为什么不根据我们反映的事实请求处死李光弼，来向河北的百姓认错道歉。
English: Why don't you admit your mistake and apologize to the people of Hebei for requesting the execution of Li Guangyao based on the facts we have reported?

古文：主上若不惜光弼，为大夫诛之，大夫乃安；不然，为患未已。 
现代文：皇上如果不吝惜李光弼，替您杀了他，您就算安全了；不这样，后患无穷。 
English: If the emperor does not begrudge Li Guangyao and kills him for you, you will be safe; otherwise, the consequences will be endless.

古文：思明曰： 公等言是。 
现代文：史思明说： 诸位说得很对。 
English: Shi Siming said: You are quite right.

古文：乃令耿仁智、张不矜修表： 请诛光弼以谢河北。
现代文：于是命令耿仁智、张不矜主持撰写奏章： 请求朝廷处死李光弼来向河北的百姓认错道歉。
English: Therefore, he ordered Geng Renzhi and Zhang Buxuan to write a petition: Request the imperial court to execute Li Guangyao and apologize to the people of Hebei.

古文：若不从臣请，臣则自领兵往太原诛光弼。 
现代文：如果不答应我们的请求，我们就自己带兵到太原杀掉李光弼。 
English: If you do not agree to our request, we will take our own soldiers to Taiyuan to kill Li Guangyao.

古文：不矜初以表示思明，及封入函，耿仁智尽削去之。
现代文：张不矜先让史思明浏览一下奏表，到装进封套的时候，耿仁智把奏章上的字都涂掉了。
English: Zhang Buyao first asked Shi Siming to look over the score, and by the time it was put into the envelope, Geng Renshi had erased all the words on the score.

古文：写表者密告思明，思明大怒，执二人于庭曰： 汝等何得负我？ 
现代文：执笔撰写奏章的人秘密报告史思明，史思明大发脾气，把耿仁智、张不矜抓到厅堂前面说： 你们为什么要辜负我？ 
English: The person who wrote the score secretly reported to Shi Siming. Shi Siming lost his temper and dragged Geng Renzhi and Zhang Buxuan to the front of the hall and said, "Why did you fail me?

古文：命斩之。
现代文：下令处斩他们。
English: The order was given to execute them.

古文：仁智事思明颇久，意欲活之，却令召入，谓之曰： 我任使汝向三十年，今日之事，我不负汝。 
现代文：耿仁智侍奉史思明多年，史思明想不杀他，收回处斩命令把他叫到室内，对他说： 我任用你快三十年，今天的事，我没有对不起你。 
English: Geng Renzhi had served Shi Siming for many years. When Shi Siming did not want to kill him, he called him into the room and told him: "I have appointed you for nearly thirty years. I did not feel sorry for you today.

古文：仁智大呼曰： 人生固有一死，须存忠节。
现代文：耿仁智大声喊起来： 人生本来不免一死，但应保持忠孝气节。
English: Geng Renzhi shouted loudly: Life is not inevitable, but we should maintain loyalty and filial piety.

古文：今大夫纳邪说，为反逆之计，纵延旬月，不如早死，请速加斧钺！ 
现代文：如果您听从错误的意见，考虑背叛朝廷，即使多活十天一月，不如早点死去，请快点杀死我。 
English: If you listen to the wrong advice, consider betraying the court, even if you live ten days or a month longer, it is better to die earlier, please kill me quickly.

古文：思明大怒，乱捶杀之，脑流于地。
现代文：史思明怒火万丈，乱棍打死了他，脑浆流在地上。
English: Shi Siming was so angry that he was beaten to death with a club, and his brains fell to the ground.

古文：十月，郭子仪领九节度围相州，安庆绪偷道求救于思明，思明惧军威之盛，不敢进。
现代文：这年十月，郭子仪率领九镇部队围攻相州，安庆绪派人溜出城去向史思明请求援救，史思明害怕官军的强大兵力，不敢发兵。
English: In October of that year, Guo Ziyi led a nine-town army to besiege Xiangzhou. An Qingxu sent someone to sneak out of the city to ask Shi Siming for help. Shi Siming was afraid of the powerful army of the government army and did not dare to send troops.

古文：十二月，萧华以魏州归顺，诏遣崔光远替之。
现代文：十二月，萧华领着魏州人马归顺朝廷，朝廷派遣崔光远接替萧华镇守魏州。
English: In December, Xiao Hua led the people of Weizhou to surrender to the imperial court, and the imperial court sent Cui Guangyuan to succeed Xiao Hua in the defense of Weizhou.

古文：思明击而拔其城，光远脱身南渡。
现代文：史思明进攻魏州夺取了州城，崔光远逃到黄河以南。
English: Shi Siming attacked Weizhou and captured the state capital, while Cui Guangyuan fled south of the Yellow River.

古文：思明于魏州杀三万人，平地流血数日，既乾元二年正月一日也。
现代文：史思明在魏州屠杀了三万人，平地上的血水流了好几天，就是肃宗乾元二年正月初一。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Su Zong Qian Yuan, Shi Siming slaughtered thirty thousand people in Weizhou, and blood flowed on the plain for several days.

古文：思明于魏州北设坛，僭称为大圣燕王，以周贽为行军司马。
现代文：史思明在魏州城北边筑起祭坛，盗用帝号叫大圣燕王，任命周贽为行军司马。
English: Shi Siming built an altar on the north side of the city of Weizhou, plagiarized the imperial title called the Great Saint Yan Wang, and appointed Zhou Qi as the marching steward.

古文：三月，引众救相州，官军败而引退。
现代文：三月，带领部队援救相州，官军被打败就撤走了。
English: In March, he led the troops to rescue Xiangzhou. The government troops were defeated and withdrew.

古文：思明召庆绪等杀之，并有其众。
现代文：史思明把安庆绪等人弄去杀掉后，吞并了他的人马。
English: After killing An Qingxu and others, Shi Siming absorbed his men.

古文：四月，僭称大号，以周贽为相，以范阳为燕京。
现代文：四月，堂而皇之地称起帝号来了，任命周贽为宰相，把范阳作为京城，名叫燕京。
English: In April, the emperor came to be called the emperor, Zhou Qi was appointed as the prime minister, and Fanyang was named the capital city, which was called Yanjing.

古文：九月，寇汴州，节度使许叔冀合于思明，思明益振。
现代文：九月，攻打汴州，汴州节度使许叔冀被史思明收编，史思明士气更加高昂。
English: In September, the attack on Bozhou and the Bozhou Festival made Xu Shuji be compiled by Shi Siming, and Shi Siming's morale was even higher.

古文：又陷洛阳，与太尉光弼相拒。
现代文：又攻下了洛阳，跟太尉李光弼相抗衡。
English: He also captured Luoyang and competed with Lieutenant Li Guangyao.

古文：思明恣行凶暴，下无聊矣！
现代文：史思明大干杀人放火的坏事，老百姓无法生活。
English: Shi Siming did a lot of bad things, such as murder and arson, which made it impossible for ordinary people to live.

古文：上元二年，潜遣人反说官军曰： 洛中将士，皆幽、朔人，咸思归。 
现代文：肃宗上元二年，史思明暗地派人向官军传递假情报说： 洛阳城里的将士，都是幽州、朔方人，全都想回家。 
English: In the second year of Su Zong's reign in the first century, Shi Siming secretly sent someone to pass on false information to the government army, saying: The soldiers in Luoyang City are all from Yuzhou and Shuo Fang, and they all want to go home.

古文：鱼朝恩以为然，告光弼及诸节度仆固怀恩、卫伯玉等： 可速出兵以讨残贼。 
现代文：鱼朝恩信以为真，告诉李光弼以及各节度仆固怀恩、卫伯玉等人： 可以赶快出兵去打洛阳城里的残余叛军。 
English: Yu Chao Enxin believed it to be true, and told Li Guangyao, as well as the servants of all the states, Gu Wai Yan, Wei Bo Yu and others: You can quickly send troops to fight the remaining rebels in Luoyang City.

古文：光弼等然之，乃出师两道齐进。
现代文：李光弼等人同意他的意见，就兵分两路一齐出发。
English: Li Guangyao and others agreed with his opinion and set out together in two groups.

古文：次榆林，贼委物伪遁，将士等不复设备，皆入城虏掠。
现代文：当官军途经榆林暂时驻下时，叛军丢下一些东西伪造偷逃迹象，官军将士们不再提防，都放心大胆地开进洛阳抓人抢东西。
English: When the government army was temporarily stationed in Yulin, the rebels left some things to forge signs of escape. The government soldiers were no longer wary and boldly drove into Luoyang to seize people and things.

古文：贼伏兵在北邙山下，因大下，士卒咸弃甲奔散。
现代文：埋伏在北邙山下的叛军趁机一齐杀进城去，官军士卒都逃奔溃散了。
English: The rebels, who had been lying in wait at the foot of Beilun Mountain, took advantage of the opportunity to enter the city together, and the officers and men fled and dispersed.

古文：鱼朝恩、卫伯玉退保陕州，光弼、怀恩弃河阳城，退居闻喜。
现代文：鱼朝恩、卫伯玉撤退守卫陕州，李光弼、仆固怀恩放弃河阳城，退兵守卫闻喜。
English: Yu Chao'en and Wei Bo'yu withdrew to guard Shaanxi, Li Guangyao and Gu Gui Wai'en gave up Heyang City, and retired guards were happy.

古文：步兵散死者数千人，军资器械尽为贼所有，河阳、怀州尽陷于贼。
现代文：步兵零零碎碎死去几千人，军需物资装备全都丢给了叛军，河阳、怀州都被叛军占领。
English: Several thousand infantrymen died piecemeal, all military supplies and equipment were lost to the rebels, and both Heyang and Waizhou were occupied by the rebels.

古文：思明至陕州，为官军所拒于姜子坂，战不利，退归永宁。
现代文：史思明进军陕州，被官军阻击在姜子坂，战斗不利，退守永宁。
English: Shi Siming marched into Shaanxi Province, but was blocked by the government army at Jiangzi Slope. The battle was unfavorable, and he retreated to Yongning.

古文：筑三角城，约一月内毕，以贮军粮。
现代文：要筑一座三角城，限定一天时间筑好，以便贮备军粮。
English: He wanted to build a triangular city, and set a time limit of one day for it to be completed, so that he could store grain for the army.

古文：朝义筑城毕，未泥，思明至，诟之。
现代文：史朝义负责筑起了城，还没来得及糊上泥巴，史思明就来检查验收，将儿子大骂了一顿。
English: Shi Chaoyi was responsible for building the city, and before he had time to mix the mud, Shi Siming came to check the acceptance and scolded his son.

古文：对曰： 缘兵士疲乏，暂歇耳！ 
现代文：史朝义说： 由于兵士们疲乏，不过是暂时休息一下。 
English: Shi Chouyi said: Because the soldiers are tired, it's just a temporary break.

古文：又怒曰： 汝惜部下兵，违我处分。 
现代文：史思明又发火说： 你心疼你的部下，就违背我的吩咐！ 
English: Shi Siming got angry again and said, "If you feel sorry for your subordinates, then disobey my order!"

古文：令随身数十人立马看泥，斯须而毕。
现代文：命令自己的几十名随从人员马上泥墙，一会儿就泥好了。
English: He ordered his dozens of entourage members to immediately build a mud wall, and the mud was gone in no time.

古文：又曰： 待收陕州，斩却此贼。 
现代文：史思明又说： 等打下陕州，杀死你这杂种！ 
English: Shi Siming also said: Wait until we hit Shaanxi, then kill you, you bastard!

古文：朝义大惧。
现代文：史朝义非常害怕。
English: Shi Chaoyi was very scared.

古文：思明居驿，朝义在店中。思明令腹心曹将军总中军兵严卫，朝义将骆悦并许叔冀男季常等言： 主上欲害王，悦与王死无日矣！ 
现代文：史思明居住在驿站，史朝义居住在客店，史思明命令心腹曹将军集中全部警卫士卒严加防卫，史朝义的部将骆悦和许叔冀的儿子许季常等人对史朝义说： 主上要害您，我骆悦和您活不到几天了。 
English: Shi Siming lived in a post station, Shi Chaoyi lived in a guest house, Shi Siming ordered the adjutant general to gather all the guards and put up a strict defense, Shi Chaoyi's subordinate Luo Yue and Xu Shuji's son Xu Qizang and others said to Shi Chaoyi: The Lord wants to harm you, I Luo Yue and you will not live for a few days.

古文：因言： 废兴之事，古来有之，欲唤取曹将军举大事，可乎？ 
现代文：接着试探说： 皇子废掉老皇的事，自古以来都有，要是喊来曹将军一起办理这事，行吗？ 
English: Then he probed and said: Since ancient times, there has always been the matter of the prince abolishing the old emperor. Would it be alright to call General Cao to handle this matter together?

古文：朝义回面不应。
现代文：史朝义背过脸去不置可否。
English: Whether or not to turn a blind eye to history.

古文：悦曰： 若不应，悦等即归李家，王亦不全矣！ 
现代文：骆悦说： 您不答应，我们就归顺李家朝廷，您也不忠不孝了。 
English: Luo Yue said, "If you don't agree, we will submit to the Li Dynasty. You are being disloyal."

古文：朝义然之，令许季常命曹将军至。
现代文：史朝义答应了，派许季常叫曹将军来。
English: Shi Chao Yi agreed and sent Xu Ji Chang to call General Cao.

古文：悦等告之，不敢拒。
现代文：骆悦等人把这事告诉曹将军，曹将军不敢拒绝。
English: Luo Yue and others told this to General Cao, who did not dare to refuse.

古文：其夜，思明梦而惊悟，据床惆怅。
现代文：当夜，史思明被噩梦惊醒，靠在床上一阵伤感。
English: That night, Shi Siming was awakened by a nightmare and leaned on the bed for a moment of sadness.

古文：每好伶人，寝食置左右，以其残忍，皆恨之。
现代文：史思明贪爱音乐歌舞艺人，睡觉吃饭都带在自己身边，由于史思明残忍，艺人们都愤恨他。
English: Shi Siming loves music, singing and dancing artists, and sleeps and eats with them. Because of Shi Siming's cruelty, artists are angry with him.

古文：及此，问其故，曰： 吾向梦见水中沙上群鹿渡水而至，鹿死水乾。 
现代文：这时，问史思明怎么了，史思明说： 我刚才梦见河中那边沙滩上一群鹿渡河过来，鹿也死了，水也干了。 
English: At this time, asked what happened to Shi Siming, Shi Siming said: I just dreamed of a group of deer crossing the river on the beach on the other side of the river. The deer also died, and the water dried up.

古文：言毕如厕。
现代文：说完去上厕所。
English: After that, I went to the toilet.

古文：伶人相谓曰： 鹿者，禄也；水者，命也。
现代文：艺人们一起议论： 鹿嘛，就是福禄的 禄 字；水嘛，就是寿命的 命 字。
English: The artists discussed together: Deer is the symbol of prosperity; water is the symbol of longevity.

古文：胡禄命俱尽矣！ 
现代文：这个杂种福禄寿命都完了。 
English: This mongrel has reached the end of his useful life.

古文：骆悦入，问思明所在，未及对，杀数人，因指在厕。
现代文：骆悦闯了进来，问史思明在哪里，还没等回答，就杀死了几个艺人，艺人赶紧指出他在厕所。
English: Luo Yue broke in, asked where Shi Siming was, and killed several entertainers before waiting for an answer. The entertainers quickly pointed out that he was in the toilet.

古文：思明觉变，逾墙出，至马槽，备马骑之。
现代文：史思明发觉产生变故，翻墙跳出屋子，跑进马棚，牵马骑上。
English: Sensing that something was wrong, Shi Siming jumped out of the house over the wall, ran into the stable, and rode up on the horse.

古文：悦等至，令傔人周子俊射，中其臂，落马。曰： 是何事？ 
现代文：骆悦等人追来，命令副官周子俊射箭，射中史思明的臂膀，他摔下马来，问： 这是怎么回事？ 
English: Luo Yue and others chased after him and ordered his aide-de-camp Zhou Zijun to shoot an arrow, which hit Shi Siming in the arm. He fell off his horse and asked, "What's going on?"

古文：悦等告以怀王。
现代文：骆悦等人告诉他，这是他儿子的命令。
English: Luo Yue and others told him that this was his son's order.

古文：思明曰： 我朝来语错，今有此事。
现代文：史思明说： 我昨天话语失误，今天才出了这事。
English: Shi Siming said, "I made a slip of the tongue yesterday, and this only happened today.

古文：然汝杀我太疾，何不待我收长安？
现代文：不过你杀我太心急了，为什么不等我夺取了长安再杀？
English: But you are too anxious to kill me. Why not wait until I have captured Chang'an before you kill me?

古文：终事不成矣！ 
现代文：君临天下的事业最终干不成了。 
English: The cause of dominating the world cannot be accomplished in the end.

古文：因急呼怀王者三，曰： 莫杀我！ 
现代文：接着再三呼喊怀王，说： 不要杀我！ 
English: He then repeatedly called out for Wa Wang, saying: "Don't kill me!

古文：却骂曹将军曰： 这胡误我，这胡误我！ 
现代文：边退边骂曹将军说： 这个杂种害我！这个杂种害我！ 
English: While retreating, he cursed General Cao and said, "This bastard has harmed me! This bastard has harmed me!

古文：悦遂令心腹擒思明赴柳泉驿，曰： 事已成矣！ 
现代文：骆悦于是命令心腹捆绑史思明赶到柳泉驿，说： 事情已办成了。 
English: Luo Yue then ordered Shi Siming to be bound hand and foot and rushed to Liuquan, saying: "The matter has been settled.

古文：朝义曰： 莫惊圣人否？
现代文：史朝义问： 没有惊吓他老人家吧？
English: Shi Chao Yi asked: You didn't scare him, did you?

古文：莫损圣人否？ 悦曰： 无有。 
现代文：没有伤害他老人家吧？ 骆悦回答： 没有。 
English: You didn't hurt the old man, did you? Luo Yue replied: No.

古文：时周贽、许叔冀统后军在福昌，朝义令许季常往告之。
现代文：当时周贽、许叔冀在福昌统帅后续部队，史朝义派许季常去告诉他们。
English: At that time, Zhou Qi and Xu Shuji were in Fukuchang commanding the follow-up troops, and Shi Chaoyi often sent Xu Qi to tell them.

古文：贽闻，惊欲仰倒。
现代文：周贽听到这事，震惊得差点仰面倒地。
English: Hearing this, Zhou Ye was so shocked that he almost fell on his face.

古文：朝义却领兵回，贽等来迎，因杀贽。
现代文：史朝义率领队伍往回走，周贽等人前来迎接，趁机杀掉了周贽。
English: Shi Chaoyi led the team to go back, Zhou Qi and others came to meet, and took the opportunity to kill Zhou Qi.

古文：思明至柳泉驿，缢杀之。
现代文：史思明被带到柳泉驿后，绞死了。
English: Shi Siming was taken to Liuquan County and hanged.

古文：朝义便僭伪位。
现代文：史朝义就登上了伪燕国的王位。
English: Shi Chaoyi ascended the throne of the pseudo-Yan Kingdom.

古文：朝义，思明孽子也。
现代文：史朝义是史思明的小老婆生的儿子。
English: Shi Chao Yi is the son of Shi Siming's younger wife.

古文：宽厚，人附之，使人往范阳，杀伪太子朝英等。
现代文：他为人宽容厚道，人们都亲近他。他派人到范阳，杀掉了伪燕国的太子史朝英等人。
English: He was tolerant and kind, and people were close to him. He sent people to Fanyang and killed Prince Shi Chaoying and others of the pseudo-Yan Kingdom.

古文：伪留守张通儒觉之，战于城中。数日，死者数千人，始斩之。
现代文：范阳留守张通儒发觉后，在城里打起来了，几天之内，死了好几千人，才斩杀张通儒。
English: After Fan Yang, who was left behind, discovered Zhang Tongru, a fight broke out in the city. Within a few days, several thousand people died before Zhang Tongru was killed.

古文：时洛阳四面数百里，人相食，州县为墟。
现代文：当时洛阳周围几百里，人们相杀而食，州城县城变成了废墟。
English: At that time, several hundred miles around Luoyang, people were killing and eating each other, and the county seat was in ruins.

古文：诸节度使皆禄山旧将，与思明等夷，朝义征召不至。
现代文：各节度使都是安禄山的老将，跟史思明地位平等，史朝义征求召集都不肯来。
English: All the section leaders were veterans of Anlu Mountain, equal in status to Shi Siming, and they refused to come when Shi Chao solicited and summoned them.

古文：宝应元年十月，遣元帅雍王领河东朔方诸节度、回纥兵马赴陕。
现代文：代宗宝应元年十月，朝廷派遣元帅雍王率领河东、朔方各节度和回纥兵马开赴陕地。
English: In October of the first year of King Bao's reign, the imperial court dispatched Marshal Yong Wang to lead the troops of the Eastern and Southern Dynasties and the Hui Dynasty to Shaanxi.

古文：仆固怀恩与回纥左杀为先锋，鱼朝恩、郭英乂为后殿，自渑池入；李抱玉自河阳入；副元帅李光弼自陈留入；雍王留陕州。
现代文：仆固怀恩与回纥援军打先锋，鱼朝恩、郭英当后卫，从渑池开进去；李抱玉从河阳开进去；副元帅李光弼从陈留开进去；雍王留驻陕州。
English: Minion Gu Wai'en and Hui's reinforcements played the vanguard, while Yu Chaon and Guo Ying played the rearguard, driving in from Dianchi; Li Baoyu drove in from Heyang; Vice Marshal Li Guangyao drove in from Chenliu; and Yong Wang stayed in Shaanxi.

古文：二十九日，与朝义战于邙山之下。逆贼败绩，走渡河，斩首万六千，生擒四千六百，降三万二千人，器械不可胜数。
现代文：十月二十九日，在邙山下边跟史朝义交锋，叛军被打败，要渡过黄河逃跑，斩杀一万六千人，活捉四千六百人，投降的三万二千人，武器装备无法统计。
English: On October 29, at the foot of Lushan Mountain, the rebels clashed with Shi Chao Yi. The rebels were defeated and fled across the Yellow River. Sixteen thousand people were killed, 4,600 were captured alive, and 32,000 surrendered. The number of weapons and equipment cannot be counted.

古文：朝义走投汴州，汴州伪将张献诚拒之，乃渡河北投幽州。
现代文：史朝义投奔汴州，汴州的叛军将领张献诚拒绝他进城，他只得渡过黄河向北投奔幽州。
English: Shi Chongyi went to Yuzhou. Zhang Xiancheng, the rebel general of Yuzhou, refused to let him enter the city. He had to cross the Yellow River to go to Yuzhou.

古文：二年正月，贼伪范阳节度李怀仙于莫州生擒之，送款来降，枭首至阙下。
现代文：宝应二年正月，叛军范阳节度李怀仙在莫州活捉史朝义，把他押送朝廷作为诚心服罪的凭证表示归顺，朝廷将史朝义绑赴宫门之外斩首示众。
English: In the first month of the second year of Baoying, the rebel Fanyang commander Li Huaixian captured Shichao Yi alive in Mozhou and sent him to the imperial court as a proof of sincerity to express his surrender. The imperial court tied Shichao Yi outside the palace gate and beheaded him.

古文：又以伪官以城降者恆州刺史、成德军节度张忠志为礼部尚书，余如故。赵州刺史卢淑、定州程元胜、徐州刘如伶、相州节度薛嵩、幽州李怀仙、郑州田承嗣并加封爵，领旧职。
现代文：又任命献城投降的叛军官员恒州刺史、成德军节度张忠志为礼部尚书，其他头衔一一照旧；赵州刺史卢淑、定州刺史程元胜、徐州刺史刘如伶、相州节度薛嵩、幽州节度李怀仙、郑州节度田承嗣一起加封爵位，担任原来职务。
English: He also appointed the rebel officials Hengzhou Zhishi and Chengde Army commander Zhang Zhongzhi, who surrendered the city, as ceremonial officials, and the other titles remained unchanged; Zhao Zhou Zhishi Lu Shu, Dingzhou Zhishi Cheng Yuan Sheng, Xuzhou Zhishi Liu Ruzhen, Xiangzhou Zhidi Xue Song, Yuzhou Zhidi Li Huai Xian, and Zhengzhou Zhidi Tian Cheng Zhi were all knighted and held their original positions.

古文：思明乾元二年僭号，至朝义宝应元年灭，凡四年。
现代文：史思明于肃宗乾元二年僭称燕王，到史朝义于代宗宝应二年被消灭，一共四年时间。
English: In the second year of Su Zong Qian Yuan, Shi Siming was nicknamed Yan Wang, and in the second year of Su Zong's reign, he was eliminated, a total of four years.

