古文：公都子曰： 告子曰： 性无善无不善也。 
现代文：公都子说： 告子认为： 人性本没有善与不善。 
English: Koudouko said, "In my opinion, there is no such thing as good or bad in human nature.

古文：或曰： 性可以为善，可以为不善；是故文武兴，则民好善；幽厉兴，则民好暴。 
现代文：有人说： 人性可以为善，也可以为不为善；所以文王、武王在位，人民就喜好善；幽王、厉王在位，人民就喜好暴行。 
English: Some people say: Human nature can be good or not good. Therefore, when King Wen and King Wu are on the throne, the people like goodness; when King You and King Li are on the throne, the people like violence.

古文：或曰： 有性善，有性不善；是故以尧为君而有象，以瞽瞍为父而有舜；以纣为兄之子且以为君，而有微子启、王子比干。 
现代文：还有人说： 有的人本性善，有的人本性不善；所以当尧为君主时就有像这样的坏人；有瞽瞍这样坏的父亲时就有舜这样好的儿子；以纣这样暴虐的侄子，而且做了君主，却有微子启、王子比干这样仁德的贤人。 
English: Others said: Some people are good by nature, and some people are bad by nature. Therefore, when there is a king, there will be a bad person like this; when there is a bad father like this, there will be a good son like this; when there is a tyrannical nephew like this, and he becomes a king, there will be a benevolent sage like Micron and Prince Bi Gan.

古文：今曰 性善 ，然则彼皆非与？ 
现代文：如今说 人性本善 ，那么他们说的都不对吗？ 
English: Now that they say that human nature is basically good, are they all wrong?

古文：孟子曰： 乃若其情，则可以为善矣，乃所谓善也。
现代文：孟子说： 要说人本来的性情，则是可以为善的，这就是我所说的人性本善。
English: Mencius said: If you want to say that man's original disposition is good, this is what I mean by human nature being inherently good.

古文：若夫为不善，非才之罪也。
现代文：至于有的人行为不善，不是人本质的过错。
English: As for some people behaving badly, it is not the fault of human nature.

古文：恻隐之心，人皆有之；羞恶之心，人皆有之；恭敬之心，人皆有之；是非之心，人皆有之。
现代文：同情之心，人人都有；羞耻之心，人人都有；恭敬之心，人人都有；是非曲直之心，人人都有。
English: Everyone has a heart of compassion; everyone has a heart of shame; everyone has a heart of respect; everyone has a heart of right and wrong.

古文：恻隐之心，仁也；羞恶之心，义也；恭敬之心，礼也；是非之心，智也。
现代文：同情之心，就是表现为相互亲爱；羞耻之心，就是表现为行为方式；恭敬之心，就是表现为社会行为规范；是非曲直之心，就是表现为人的智慧。
English: The heart of compassion is expressed as mutual love; the heart of shame is expressed as a way of behavior; the heart of respect is expressed as a social behavioral norm; the heart of right and wrong is expressed as human wisdom.

古文：仁义礼智，非由外铄我也，我固有之也，弗思耳矣。
现代文：与人建立相互亲爱的关系、选择最佳行为方式、遵守社会行为规范，都要用智慧，不是由外面渗入到我内心的，是我本来就有的，只是未曾思考罢了。
English: To establish a mutually dear relationship with people, choose the best way of behavior, and abide by social behavioral norms, we must use wisdom, not from the outside into my heart, I already have, but I have not thought about it.

古文：故曰： 求则得之，舍则失之。 
现代文：所以说： 探求就可以获得，放弃就是失去。 
English: Therefore it is said: To seek is to find, to give up is to lose.

古文：或相倍蓰而无算者，不能尽其才者也。诗曰： 天生蒸民，有物有则。
现代文：有的人相差一倍、五倍乃至无数倍，他们就是没有发挥出善的本质的人。《诗经》上说： 上天生育了众多的人民，有万物就会有准则。
English: Some people are twice, five times or even countless times different, they are just people who have not brought out the essence of goodness. "The Book of Songs" says: Heaven has given birth to many people, and everything will have a standard.

古文：民之秉彝，好是懿德。 
现代文：人民掌握常道和法度，崇尚那修美的规律。 
English: The people have mastered the common ways and laws, and advocate the rules of beauty.

古文：孔子曰： 为此诗者，其知道乎！故有物必有则，民之秉彝也，故好是懿德。  
现代文：孔子说： 作这首诗的人，大概已经知晓事物的道路了，所以他说有万物必然有其准则；民众掌握常道和法度，所以才崇尚那优美的德行。  
English: Confucius said: The author of this poem probably already knew the way of things, so he said that everything must have its standard; the people have the common way and the law, so they worship the graceful virtue.

