古文：韦仙翁杨越公弟阳平谪仙卖药翁严士则
现代文：韦仙翁杨越公弟阳平谪仙卖药翁严士则
English: Wei Xian, Weng Yang Yue's brother-in-law, Yang Ping, Shixian, selling medicine, Weng Yan Shi,

古文：韦仙翁
现代文：韦仙翁
English: Wei Xianweng

古文：唐代宗皇帝大历中，因昼寝，常梦一人谓曰： 西岳太华山中，有皇帝坛，何不遣人求访，封而拜之，当获大福。 
现代文：唐朝大历年间，代宗皇帝在白天睡觉，梦见一个人对他说： 西岳太华山中，有一个皇帝坛，你为什么不派人去寻访，而祭它拜它呢？那样就能得到极大的福荫。 
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Daizong was sleeping during the day. He dreamed that a man said to him, "There is an emperor's altar in the Taihua Mountains of Xiyue. Why don't you send someone to look for it, and then sacrifice it and worship it? In that way, you will receive great blessings."

古文：即日诏遣监察御史韦君，驰驿诣山寻访。
现代文：代宗当天就派监察御史韦君，骑马到太华山寻访。
English: On the same day, the daimyō sent an inspector, Mishi Wei, on horseback to Mount Taihua to investigate.

古文：至山下，州县陈设一店，具饭店中，所有行客，悉令移之。
现代文：韦君来到山下，州县把山下一个客店摆设齐整，在店中准备了饭，其他客人全部被赶走。
English: Wei Jun came to the foot of the mountain, the prefectural government set up the inn at the foot of the mountain, prepared meals in the shop, and all other guests were driven away.

古文：有一老翁谓店主曰： 韦侍御一餐即过，吾老病不能远去，但于房中坐，得否？ 
现代文：有一个老人对店主说： 韦侍御吃一顿饭就走，我又老又病不能远去，我只在屋里坐着不出来，可以吗？ 
English: An old man said to the shopkeeper: "Waitress Wei, you can't leave after eating a meal. I'm too old and sick to go far. I can only sit in the room and can't get out. Is that okay?

古文：店主从之。
现代文：店主答应了他。
English: The owner agreed.

古文：少顷韦君到店，良久，忽闻房中嗽声。韦问 有何人在此 ，遣人视之。
现代文：不多时韦君来到店中。过了一会儿，忽然听到屋里有咳嗽的声音，韦君便问有什么人在这里，并派人去看。
English: Not long after, Wei Jun came to the store. After a while, he suddenly heard the sound of coughing in the room. Wei Jun asked if anyone was here and sent someone to look.

古文：乃曰： 有一老父。 
现代文：看的人说： 有一个老人。 
English: Onlookers said: 'There's an old man.

古文：韦君访老父何姓。答曰： 姓韦。 
现代文：韦君就问老头姓什么。老头说： 姓韦。 
English: Wei Jun asked the old man what his surname was. The old man said: "Surname Wei."

古文：韦君曰： 相与宗盟，合有继叙。 
现代文：韦君说： 咱们是同一宗姓，应该叙一叙辈份继承。 
English: Wei Jun said: We have the same family name, we should have the same line of succession.

古文：邀与同席。
现代文：于是请老头和自己同席而坐。
English: So he invited the old man to sit with him.

古文：老父因访韦公祖父官讳；又访高祖为谁。
现代文：老头就问韦君的祖父叫什么名字。又问他的高祖是谁。
English: The old man then asked Wei Jun what his grandfather's name was. He also asked who his great-grandfather was.

古文：韦君曰： 曾祖讳某，任某官。高祖奉道不仕，隋朝入此山中，不知所在。 
现代文：韦君说出祖父叫什么名，做什么官，又说高祖信奉道教不做官，隋朝时进到这山里，不知哪儿去了。
English: Wei Jun said what his grandfather's name was and what kind of official he was. He also said that Gao Zu believed in Taoism and did not hold any official position. He came to this mountain during the Sui Dynasty and I don't know where he went.

古文：老父喟然叹曰： 吾即尔之高祖也。
现代文：老头感慨地叹道： 我就是你的高祖。
English: The old man sighed with emotion: I am your great-grandfather.

古文：吾名集，有二子，尔即吾之小子曾孙也。
现代文：我叫韦集，有两个儿子，你就是我小儿子的重孙子。
English: My name is Wei Xi. I have two sons. You are my youngest son's great-grandson.

古文：岂知于此与尔相遇。
现代文：哪知道能在这儿与你相遇！ 
English: Who knew I would meet you here!

古文：韦君涕泣载拜。
现代文：韦君泪流满面地跪拜。
English: Wei Jun knelt down with tears streaming down his face.

古文：老父止之，谓曰： 尔祖母见在。尔有二祖姑，亦在山中。今遇寒食，故入郭，与渠辈求少脂粉耳。
现代文：老头制止他，对他说： 你奶奶还在，你有两个姑奶奶也在山中，现在遇上寒食节，所以我就进城，给她们弄点脂粉。
English: The old man stopped him and said to him, "Your grandmother is still alive, and your two aunts are also in the mountains. It's the Cold Food Festival, so I'll go to the city and get them some powdered fat.

古文：有一布幞，幞内有茯苓粉片，欲货此市买。 
现代文：我这里有一个布包，包里有茯苓粉片，想卖了这些茯苓片再买脂粉。 
English: I have a cloth bag here, there are bran flakes in the bag, I want to sell these bran flakes and then buy fat powder.

古文：问韦君： 尔令何之？ 
现代文：老头又问韦君： 你现在要到哪儿去？ 
English: The old man also asked Wei Jun: Where are you going now?

古文：韦君曰： 奉敕于此山中求真坛。州县及山中人，莫有知者。不审翁能知此处否？ 
现代文：韦君说： 我奉皇帝的诏令在这山里找一个真坛，州县和山里的人没有知道的，不知道您老人家是不是知道这个地方？ 
English: Wei Jun said: I have been ordered by the emperor to find a real altar in this mountain. The people in the prefecture and in the mountains do not know about it. I wonder if your old man knows about this place?

古文：老父曰： 莲花中峰西南上，有一古坛，彷佛余址。此当是也；但不定耳。 
现代文：老头说 莲花中峰西南上边，有一个古坛，好像是个遗址，这应当就是真坛，只是不一定罢了。 
English: The old man said that there is an ancient altar on the upper southwest side of the Lotus Middle Peak, which seems to be a site. This should be the real altar, but it may not be.

古文：遂与韦君同宿。
现代文：于是老头和韦君住在一起。
English: So the old man lived with Wei Jun.

古文：老父绝粮不食，但饮少酒及人参茯苓汤。
现代文：老头不吃粮食，只喝少量的酒和人参茯苓汤。
English: The old man does not eat food, only drinks a small amount of wine and ginseng soup.

古文：明日，韦君将入山。老父曰： 吾与尔同去。 
现代文：第二天，韦君要进山，老头说 我和你一块去。 
English: The next day, Wei Jun wanted to go into the mountains. The old man said, "I'll go with you."

古文：韦君乃以乘马让之。
现代文：韦君就要把马让给老头骑。
English: Wei Jun is about to give the horse to the old man to ride.

古文：老父曰： 尔自骑，吾当杖策先去。 
现代文：老头说 你自己骑吧，我得拄着棍儿先走。 
English: The old man said, "You can ride by yourself. I have to walk ahead with a stick."

古文：韦君乘马奔驰，竟不能及，常在马前三十步。
现代文：韦君骑着马奔跑，竟追不上老头，老头总是在马前三十步的地方。
English: Wei Jun rode a horse and ran, but he couldn't catch up with the old man, who was always thirty paces ahead of the horse.

古文：至山足，道路险阻，马不能进。韦君遂下，随老父入谷。
现代文：到了山脚下，道路险阻，马不能行进了，韦君就下了马，跟着老头走进山谷。
English: When they reached the foot of the mountain, the road was dangerous and the horse could not travel. Wei Jun dismounted and followed the old man into the valley.

古文：行不里许，到室，见三妪。
现代文：走了一里来地。来到一个屋里，看见三个老太太。
English: I walked for a mile and came to a house where I saw three old ladies.

古文：老父曰： 此乃尔之祖母及尔之二祖姑也。 
现代文：老头说 这就是你的奶奶和你的两个姑奶奶。 
English: The old man said, "That's your grandmother and your two aunts."

古文：韦君悲涕载拜。
现代文：韦君洒泪跪拜。
English: Wei Jun shed tears and bowed down.

古文：祖母年可七八十，姑各四十余，俱垂发，皆以木叶为衣。
现代文：他的奶奶有七八十岁，姑奶奶各都四十多岁的样子，都披散着头发，穿着用树叶做的衣服。
English: His grandmother, in her 70s and 80s, and his aunts, both in their 40s, wore their hair loose and wore clothes made of leaves.

古文：相见甚喜。谓曰： 年代迁变，一朝遂见玄孙。 
现代文：她们见了韦君非常高兴，对他说 年代变迁了，到现在还见到了重孙子！ 
English: They were very happy to see Wei Jun, and told him that times have changed, and now they have seen their second grandchild!

古文：欣慰久之，遂与老父上山访坛，登攀险峻。韦君始不可堪，老父行步若飞，回顾韦君而笑。
现代文：她们高兴了许久。于是韦君与老头上山访真坛。攀登险山峻岭，韦君几乎支持不住，老头却行步如飞，老头回头看着韦君微笑。
English: They were happy for a long time. So Wei Jun and the old man went to the top of the mountain to visit the real altar. Climbing the dangerous mountain, Wei Jun could hardly support himself, but the old man walked like a bird. The old man looked back at Wei Jun and smiled.

古文：直至中峰西南隅，果有一坛，韦君洒扫拜谒，立标记而回。
现代文：二人迳直来到中峰西南隅，果然有一个坛。韦君把坛洒扫一番，拜祭一番，立上标志就回来了。
English: The two of them went straight to the southwest corner of the middle peak, and sure enough, there was an altar. Wei Jun swept the altar, worshiped, and returned with the sign.

古文：却到老父石室，辞出谷。韦君曰： 到京奏报毕，当请假却来请觐。 老父曰： 努力，好事君主。 
现代文：回到老头的石屋，告别走出山谷，韦君说 到京城奏报完了，我就请假回来看你， 老头说： 你要努力，好好辅佐皇帝。 
English: Returning to the old man's stone house and bidding farewell, Wei Jun said, "When the report is finished in Beijing, I will take a leave of absence and come back to see you." The old man said, "You must work hard and support the emperor well."

古文：韦君遂下山，返到阙庭，具以事奏。
现代文：韦君就下了山，回到京城，详细地向皇帝奏报。
English: Wei Jun went down the mountain, returned to the capital, and reported to the emperor in detail.

古文：代宗叹异，乃遣韦君赍手诏入山，令刺史以礼邀致。
现代文：代宗惊异感叹，就派韦君带着他的亲笔诏书入山，让韦君按照礼仪把仙人请来。
English: Daizong was surprised and sighed, so he sent Wei Jun into the mountain with his autograph edict, and asked Wei Jun to invite the hermit according to the etiquette.

古文：韦君到山中求觅，遂失旧路，数日寻访不获。
现代文：韦君到山里寻找，就迷失了原来的道路，好几天也没有找到。
English: When Wei Jun went to the mountains to search, he lost the original path and did not find it for several days.

古文：访山下故老，皆云： 自少年已来，三二年则见此老父一到城郭，颜状只如旧，不知其所居。 
现代文：访问山下的老人，老人们都说： 从年轻的时候以来，每隔二三年就看到这个老头进一趟城，相貌总是不变，不知他住在哪里。 
English: When they visited the old man at the foot of the mountain, the old people all said, "Since I was young, I have seen this old man enter the city every two or three years. His appearance is always the same. I don't know where he lives.

古文：韦君望山恸哭而返。
现代文：韦君望着山峰恸哭一场就回来了。
English: Wei Jun looked at the mountain peak, cried and came back.

古文：代宗怅恨，具以事迹宣付史馆。
现代文：代宗怅惘悔恨，让史官把这件事详细地记了下来。
English: On behalf of Zonglu, he felt remorse and asked the historian to write down the incident in detail.

古文：杨越公弟
现代文：杨越公弟
English: Yang Yue's brother-in-law

古文：唐建中初。楚州司马杨集，自京之任，至华阴宿。
现代文：唐德宗建中初年，楚州司马杨集，从京城前往楚州上任，走到华阴住宿。
English: In the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School, Chuzhou Sima Yangji went from Beijing to Chuzhou to take office, and went to Huayin to stay.

古文：夜有老人，戴大帽，到店。就炉向火。
现代文：夜里有一个戴大帽子的老人来到店里，凑近火炉烤火。
English: In the evening, an old man in a large hat came into the shop, approached the stove and lit a fire.

古文：杨君见其耆耄，因与酒食。问姓氏。
现代文：杨集见他老迈，就送给他酒饭，问他的姓名。
English: When Yang Jie saw that he was old, he gave him wine and rice and asked his name.

古文：曰： 姓杨。 又诘其祖先。
现代文：他说姓杨，就又问他的祖先是谁。
English: He said his surname was Yang and asked who his ancestors were.

古文：云： 越公最近。 
现代文：他说： 我和杨越公最近。 
English: He said, "Yang Yue Gong and I are newlyweds.

古文：杨公乃越侄孙，复重问。
现代文：杨集是杨越的叔伯孙子，就又继续问。
English: Yang Ji is Yang Yue's great-uncle's grandson, he continued to ask.

古文：曰： 为君所迫，我乃尽言。
现代文：他说： 被你逼得没法，我全告诉你吧！
English: He said: "You've pushed me beyond my limits, I'll tell you everything!

古文：我是越公季弟也，遭兄亡命，遂遇道真。 
现代文：我是杨越的小弟弟，赶上哥哥遭难逃命，就遇上了仙人。 
English: I am Yang Yue's little brother. When I caught up with my brother who was fleeing for his life, I met a fairy godmother.

古文：集闻姓氏，再拜复坐。
现代文：杨集听说了姓名，连连下拜，又坐下来。
English: Yang Ji heard the name, bowed repeatedly, and sat down again.

古文：曰： 吾亦知汝过此，故来相看。
现代文：老人说： 我也知道你从此路过，所以来看看你。
English: The old man said, "I also know that you have been passing by, so I came to see you."

古文：祖母与姑数人悉在，汝欲见否？
现代文：你的奶奶和姑姑几个人都在，你要见她们吗？
English: Your grandmother and several of your aunts are here. Do you want to see them?

古文：吾先报去。 
现代文：我先去告诉她们。 
English: I'll go and tell them first.

古文：少顷复至。
现代文：不一会儿他又回来了。
English: Soon he was back again.

古文：明旦，与杨君入山，约里余，有大涧，阔数丈。老父超然而越。回首谓杨君曰： 当止此。吾与汝唤阿婆去。 
现代文：第二天，他和杨集一块入山。大约走了一里多，出现一条大山涧，有几丈宽，老头很轻松地就跨了过去，回头对杨集说： 你先等在这儿，我给你喊你奶奶去。 
English: The next day, he and Yang Jie went into the mountains together. After walking for more than a mile, a large ridge appeared, several feet wide. The old man easily stepped over it and turned to Yang Jie and said, "Wait here first, I'll call your grandmother."

古文：逡巡间，老母及女与六七人，绕岩而至。
现代文：不多时，一位老太太和女儿以及其他六七个人，从岩后绕过来。
English: Every so often, an old lady and her daughter, along with six or seven other people, come round the back of the rock.

古文：杨君望拜，隔水与语，皆嗟叹，亦有泣者。
现代文：杨集望着她们下拜，隔着水和她们说话。大家都很慨叹，也有哭泣的。
English: Yang Ji looked at them, bowed down, and spoke to them across the water. Everyone was lamenting, and some were crying.

古文：良久曰： 且去。
现代文：好久她们才说： 走吧，别耽误你赶路了！ 
English: It took them a long time to say: Let's go, don't delay, you're in a hurry!

古文：妨汝行役。 杨君乃拜。回数十步却望，犹有挥袖者。
现代文：杨集就再拜，往回走了几十步再回头望，看见还有人挥手致意。
English: Yang Ji bowed again, walked back a few dozen steps and then looked back and saw someone else waving.

古文：明日复来，深水高峰。并不见矣。
现代文：第二天他又来了，只有深水高峰，别的什么都不见了。
English: The next day he came again, only the deep water peak, everything else was gone.

古文：阳平谪仙
现代文：阳平谪仙
English: Yangping Yuxian

古文：阳平谪仙，不言姓氏。
现代文：阳平谪仙，不说他姓什么叫什么。
English: Yangping Shuxian, no matter what his surname is.

古文：初，九陇人张守珪，仙君山有茶园。每岁召采茶人力百余人，男女佣功者杂处园中。
现代文：当初，九陇人张守珪在仙君山有一个茶园，每年都要雇用一百余名采茶人，男男女女杂处在茶园里。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Shouyi, a man from Jiuzhaigou, had a tea garden in Xianjun Mountain. Every year, he employed more than a hundred tea pickers. Men, women and children were all over the tea garden.

古文：有一少年，自言无亲族，赁为摘茶，甚勤愿了慧。
现代文：有一个年轻人，自己说没有亲族，雇来采茶，很肯干也很聪明。
English: One young man, who said he had no relatives, was hired to pick tea. He was very willing and clever.

古文：守珪怜之，以为义儿。
现代文：张守珪很喜欢他，认他做了干儿子。
English: Zhang Shoukun liked him very much and thought he was a good son.

古文：又一女子，年二十，亦云无亲族，愿为义儿之妻。
现代文：又有一位女子，二十岁，也说没有亲族，愿意嫁给干儿子为妻。
English: Another woman, 20 years old, also said she had no relatives and wanted to marry her son.

古文：孝义端恪。守珪甚善之。
现代文：这女子孝顺贤惠，张守珪对她很好。
English: This woman is filial and obedient, and Zhang Shouwen treats her very well.

古文：一旦山水泛溢，市井路隔，盐酪既缺，守珪甚忧之。
现代文：有一天山水泛滥，街市上道路被隔断，食盐、奶酪等吃的东西短缺；张守珪很担心。
English: One day, the landscape was flooded, the roads in the market were cut off, and there was a shortage of salt, cheese and other foodstuffs; Zhang Shouyu was very worried.

古文：新妇曰： 此可买耳。 
现代文：新媳妇说： 这是能买到的。 
English: The new daughter-in-law said: This is something you can buy.

古文：取钱出门十数步，置钱于树下，以杖叩树，得盐酪而归。
现代文：她便拿着钱走出门十几步，把钱放到树下，用木棍敲树，得到食盐和奶酪拿回来。
English: She took the money and walked out of the door a dozen steps, put the money under the tree, hit the tree with a wooden stick, and got the salt and cheese back.

古文：后或有所需，但令叩树取之，无不得者。
现代文：后来如果要用什么，就让她敲树求取，没有得不到的。
English: Later, if she wanted to use something, she had to knock on a tree to get it. There was nothing she could not get.

古文：其术夫亦能之。
现代文：她的这种道术，她丈夫也会。
English: Her husband can do the same.

古文：因与邻妇十数人，于塴口市相遇，为买酒一碗，与妇饮之，皆大醉，而碗中酒不减。
现代文：因为他和十几个邻居的妇女在塴口的市场上相遇，他就买了一碗酒给妇女们喝，她们都喝得大醉，而碗里的酒并没减少。
English: Because he and more than a dozen neighboring women met at the market in Hekou, he bought a bowl of wine for the women to drink. They were all very drunk, but the wine in the bowl did not decrease.

古文：远近传说，人皆异之。
现代文：这件事远近都在传说，人们都感到惊奇。
English: This event is legendary far and wide, and people are surprised.

古文：守珪问其术受于何人。少年曰： 我阳平洞中仙人耳。因有小过，谪于人间。不久当去。 
现代文：张守珪问干儿子的道术是跟谁学的，年轻人说： 我是阳平洞中的仙人，因为有一点小的过错，被谪贬到人间来，不久就得回去。 
English: When Zhang Shoujun asked the young man who he had learned the martial arts from, the young man said, "I am a fairy in the Yangping Cave. Because of a small mistake, I was relegated to the human world and will soon have to go back.

古文：守珪曰： 洞府大小与人间城阙相类否？ 
现代文：张守珪说 洞府的大小，和人间的城郭差不多吗？ 
English: Zhang Shouyi said, "Is the size of Dongfu similar to that of a human city?"

古文：对曰： 二十四化，各有一大洞，或方千里、五百里、三百里。
现代文：年轻人回答说： 洞府有二十四种，各有一个大洞，或方圆一千里，或方圆五百里，或方圆三百里。
English: The young man replied, "There are twenty-four kinds of caves, each of which has a large hole, or a radius of a thousand miles, or a radius of five hundred miles, or a radius of three hundred miles.

古文：其中皆有日月飞精，谓之伏晨之根，下照洞中，与世间无异。
现代文：其中都有日月那样飞在空中的光华，叫作 伏晨之根 ，向下照着洞中，和人世间没什么两样。
English: Among them, there is a radiance flying in the sky like the sun and moon, called the morning root, shining down into the cave, no different from the human world.

古文：其中皆有仙王仙官、卿相辅佐，如世之职司。
现代文：洞中都有仙王仙官和辅佐的卿相，和人世间的官署职位一样。
English: In the cave, there are celestial kings, celestial officials and assistant ministers, just like the positions of government offices in the human world.

古文：有得道之人，及积功迁神返生之士，皆居其中，以为民庶。
现代文：有得道成仙的人，以及积功德升天复生的人们，都居住在里面，就是这里的民众。
English: People who have attained immortality, as well as those who have made merit and have been reincarnated, all live in it, that is, the people here.

古文：每年三元大节，诸天各有上真，下游洞天，以观其所为善恶。
现代文：每年正月十五、七月十五、十月十五三大节日，各洞天都有上界的仙人下来，来观察他们的所作所为是善的还是恶的。
English: Every year, on the fifteenth day of the first month, the fifteenth day of the seventh month, and the fifteenth day of the tenth month, there are celestial beings who come down from heaven to observe whether their actions are good or evil.

古文：人世生死兴废，水旱风雨，预关于洞中焉。
现代文：人世的生死兴废和水旱风雨，事先就在洞中确定。
English: The life and death of the human world, as well as water, drought, wind and rain, are determined in advance in the cave.

古文：龙神祠庙，血食之司，皆为洞府所统。
现代文：龙神祠庙，祭祀的管理，都受洞府统管。
English: The management of the Dragon God's ancestral temple and the sacrificial rites are all under the control of Dongfu.

古文：二十四化之外，青城、峨嵋、益登、慈母、繁阳、嶓冢，皆亦有洞，不在十大洞天三十六小洞天之数。
现代文：二十四种之外，青城山、峨嵋山、益登山、慈母山、繁阳山、嶓冢山，也都有洞，不在十大洞天三十六小洞天数内。
English: In addition to the 24 types, Qingcheng Mountain, Emei Mountain, Yizhong Mountain, Cimos Mountain, Shengyang Mountain, and Lushan Mountain also have caves, but they are not in the top ten cave days or the 36 small cave days.

古文：洞中仙曹，如人间郡县聚落耳，不可一一详记也。
现代文：洞中的神仙官署，像人间的郡县村落一样，不能一一详细记述。 
English: The supernatural government office in the cave, like counties and villages on earth, cannot be described in detail.

古文：旬日之间，忽失其夫妇。
现代文：十多天之后，忽然不见了这夫妻二人。
English: More than ten days later, the couple suddenly disappeared.

古文：卖药翁
现代文：卖药翁
English: Drug peddler

古文：卖药翁，莫知其姓名。
现代文：有一个卖药的老头，不知道他的姓名。
English: There's an old guy who sells drugs. I don't know his name.

古文：人或诘之，称只此是真姓名。
现代文：有人问他的姓名叫什么，他说卖药老头就是他的真实姓名。
English: When someone asked him what his name was, he said that "old man selling drugs" was his real name.

古文：有童稚见之，逮之暮齿，复见，其颜状不改。
现代文：有的人孩提时期见过他，到了老年又见到他，他的模样还没改变。
English: Some people have seen him as a child, and have seen him again in old age, and his appearance has not changed.

古文：常提一大葫芦卖药，人告疾求药，得钱不得钱，皆与之无阻，药皆称有效。
现代文：他经常提着一只大葫芦卖药。有人到他那儿讨药治病，给钱不给钱他都给药，都说药很有效。
English: He often carries a large gourd to sell medicine. If someone comes to him for medicine to cure a disease, he will give them medicine whether they pay or not, and they all say that the medicine is very effective.

古文：或无疾戏而求药者，得药，寻必失之。
现代文：有的人没有病开玩笑把药拿去，过一会儿肯定丢失。
English: Some people do not joke about being ill and take the medicine, and after a while they are sure to lose it.

古文：由是人不敢妄求，敬如神明。
现代文：因此人们不敢胡乱向他求药，对他敬如神明。
English: Therefore, people do not dare to ask him for medicine, and they respect him like a god.

古文：常醉于城市间，得钱亦与贫人。
现代文：他常常喝醉在城市之中，得了钱也送给穷人。
English: He often got drunk in the city and gave money to the poor.

古文：或戏问之： 有大还丹卖否？ 
现代文：有的人和他开玩笑，问道： 你有大还丹卖吗？ 
English: Some people joked with him and asked, "Do you have a large amount to sell?"

古文：曰： 有，一粒一千贯钱。 
现代文：他说： 有。一粒一千贯钱。 
English: He said, "Yes. One grain is worth a thousand kroner."

古文：人皆笑之以为狂。
现代文：人们都笑他，认为他癫狂。
English: People laughed at him and thought he was mad.

古文：多于城市笑骂人曰： 有钱不买药吃，尽作土馒头去！ 
现代文：后来他在长安卖药，正有许多买药的人，他抖了抖葫芦说已经空了，里面只有一丸倒出来。这丸药极大，有亮光。
English: Later, when he was selling medicine in Chang'an and there were many people buying medicine, he shook the gourd and said that it was empty and only one pill had been poured out. The pill was huge and shiny.

古文：人莫晓其意，益笑之。后于长安卖药，方买药者多，抖擞葫芦已空，内只有一丸出，极大光明，安于掌中，谓人曰： 百余年人间卖药，过却亿兆之人，无一人肯把钱买药吃，深可哀哉！
现代文：他把这丸药放在掌上，对人说： 我在人间卖药一百多年，见过成亿成兆的人，没有一个人肯把钱买这药吃，太可悲啦！
English: He put the pill in his palm and said to the man: "I have been selling medicine for more than a hundred years, and I have seen billions and billions of people, but no one is willing to spend the money to buy this medicine. How sad!

古文：今之自吃却。 
现代文：现在我自己吃掉它吧！ 
English: Now I'll eat it myself!

古文：药才入口，足下五色云生，风起飘飘，飞腾而去。
现代文：药刚入口，他脚下生出五色云，飘飘然飞腾而去。
English: At the entrance of Yuegang, a five-colored cloud was born at his feet, and it floated away.

古文：严士则
现代文：严士则
English: Yan Shi Zeng

古文：宋文宗末，建州刺史严士则，本穆宗朝为尚衣奉御。
现代文：唐文宗末年，建州刺史严士则，本是穆宗朝的尚衣奉御。
English: In the last years of the Tang and Wen Dynasties, Jianzhou was ruled by Jian Shi Yan Shi, who was originally a disciple of Shang Yi of the Mu Zong Dynasty.

古文：颇好真道。
现代文：他非常喜欢神仙道术。
English: He is very fond of the Immortal Taoism.

古文：因午日，于终南山采药迷路，徘徊岩嶂之间。
现代文：由于端午在终南山采药迷了路，徘徊在岩石之间。
English: As the Dragon Boat Festival in the end of Nanshan lost its way, wandering between the rocks.

古文：数日，所赍粮糗既尽，四望无居人，计其道路，去京不啻五六百里，然而林岫深僻，风景明丽。
现代文：几天之后，带来的干粮吃光了，向四下望望没有居民。估计那路程，离京城不少于五六百里。然而这里的树林、山峰幽静。风景明丽。
English: A few days later, the dry grain they had brought ran out, and looking around, there were no residents. It is estimated that the distance is no less than five or six hundred miles from the capital. However, the woods and peaks here are quiet. The scenery is beautiful.

古文：忽有茅屋数间，出于松竹之下。烟萝四合，才通小径。
现代文：忽然有几间茅屋出现在松竹之下，烟气绕绕，藤萝掩映，曲径通幽。
English: Suddenly, a few huts appeared under the pine and bamboo trees. The smoke wafted around them, the wisteria hid them, and the path curved gently.

古文：士则连扣其门，良久竟无出者。
现代文：严士则连连敲门，敲了很久，竟然没人出来。
English: Yan Shi kept knocking on the door. He knocked for a long time, but no one came out.

古文：因窥篱隙内，见有一人，于石榻偃卧看书。
现代文：于是他从篱笆的空隙往院里窥视，看到有一个人仰卧在石床上看书。
English: So he peered into the courtyard through a gap in the fence and saw a man lying on his back on a stone bed, reading a book.

古文：士则推户，直造其前。
现代文：严士则推开院门，直接来到他的面前。
English: Yan Shi pushed open the door of the courtyard and came directly in front of him.

古文：方乃摄衣而起。
现代文：那人这才整整衣服站起来。
English: That's when the man stood up fully clothed.

古文：士则拜罢，自陈行止。
现代文：于是那人让他坐在一块磐石上。
English: So the man made him sit on a rock.

古文：因遣坐于盘石之上，亦问京华近事，复问天子嗣位几年，云： 自安史犯阙居此，迄至今日。 
现代文：那人也向他打听京城里的事。又问天子继位几年了。那人说，他从安史之乱到这里，直到现在。
English: The man also asked him about the situation in Kyoto. He also asked him how many years it had been since the enthronement of the Son of Heaven. The man said that he had been here since the Anshi Rebellion until now.

古文：士则具陈奔驰陟历，资粮已绝，迫于枵腹，请以饮馔救之。
现代文：严士则详细陈述自己奔驰攀登的过程，说自己干粮用尽，正在挨饿，希望能给一些吃的救助一下。
English: Yan Shi described in detail the process of climbing his Mercedes, saying that he had run out of dry food and was starving, hoping to give some food to the rescue.

古文：隐者曰： 自居山谷，且无烟爨，有一物可以疗饥。
现代文：那人说： 自从住进山谷，就没有生过火、煮过饭，只有一种东西可以解饿。
English: The man said, "Since I came to live in the valley, I haven't made a fire or cooked a meal. There is only one thing that can relieve my hunger.

古文：念君远来相过，自起于栋梁间。 
现代文：念你打老远路过这里不容易。 自己从栋梁之间去取。 
English: It's not easy to get here if you've come a long way. You have to get it yourself from between the beams.

古文：脱纸囊，开启，其中有百余颗，如褊豆之形。
现代文：拿出一个纸袋，打开，里边有一百多颗扁豆形状的东西。
English: Take out a paper bag, open it, and inside are more than a hundred lentil-shaped things.

古文：曰： 可以食矣。渴即取铛中余水饮之。 
现代文：他让严士则到药室拿来一个锅，拾柴打水，把一粒放在锅里煮了好久，略有香味，一看，已经象手掌那样大了。那人说： 可以吃了，渴了就喝锅里的汤。
English: He asked Yan Shih to go to the pharmacy to get a pot, collect firewood and water, put one grain in the pot and boiled it for a long time. It had a slight fragrance, and at a glance, it was as big as a hand. The man said: "You can eat it. If you are thirsty, drink the soup in the pot."

古文：士则方啗其半，自觉丰饱。
现代文：严士则刚吃了一半，自己觉得饱了。
English: Yan Shi had just eaten half of the cucumber and felt full.

古文：复曰： 汝得至此，当有宿分。自兹三十年间，无复饥渴。
现代文：那人又说： 你能到这儿来，是由于缘分，从现在起，三十年内，你不会再觉得饥渴了。
English: The man continued, "You are here because of fate. From now on, for the next thirty years, you will never be hungry or thirsty again.

古文：俗虑尘情，将澹泊也。
现代文：俗人的杂念尘世的感情。也将逐渐要淡泊。
English: The mundane thoughts and earthly feelings of the laity will also gradually fade away.

古文：他时位至方伯，当于罗浮相近。
现代文：以后你的官位将到一方的长官，那地方离罗浮山不远。
English: From now on, your official rank will go to a superior officer on the other side, which is not far from Mt. Luofu.

古文：倘能脱去尘华，兼获长生之道。
现代文：如果你能摆脱尘世的荣华，还能获得长生之道。
English: If you can get rid of earthly glory, you can also get the way of longevity.

古文：辞家日久，可以还矣。 
现代文：你离开家已经很久了，可以回去了。 
English: You've been away from home for a long time, you can go back.

古文：士则将欲告归，且恐迷失道路。
现代文：严士则想要告别回家，却又怕迷失道路。
English: Yan Shi wanted to say goodbye to home, but he was afraid of losing his way.

古文：曰： 匆忧，去此三二里，与采薪者相值，可随之而去。
现代文：那人说： 不要担心，你离开这二三里，就能遇上打柴的，可以跟着他们回去。
English: The man said, "Don't worry, if you leave these two or three miles, you will meet some woodcutters and you can follow them back."

古文：此至国门不远。 
现代文：从这到京城不远。 
English: It's not far from here to the capital.

古文：既出，果有人采薪路侧。因问隐者姓名，竟返山无所对。
现代文：严士则出来之后，路边果然有个打柴的，于是他就向打柴的打听那个人的姓名，打柴的竟返回山中不作回答。
English: After Yan Shi came out, there was indeed a woodcutter on the roadside, so he asked the woodcutter the name of that person. The woodcutter actually returned to the mountains without answering.

古文：才经信宿，已及樊川村野。
现代文：严士则才经过两宿，已经到了樊川的村野。
English: Yanshi, on the other hand, has only passed through two lodgings and has already arrived in the village of Shukawa.

古文：既还辇毂，不喜更尝滋味，日觉气壮神清，有骖鸾驭鹤之意。
现代文：回到天子身边之后，他就不喜欢吃东西，一天比一天觉得气壮神清，有驾驭鸾鹤的念头。
English: After returning to the heavenly son's side, he didn't like to eat, felt more and more invigorated day by day, and had the idea of riding a crane.

古文：衣褐杖藜，多依岩岫。
现代文：他穿短衣，挂着用藤茎做成的手杖，经常依傍在岩崖边。
English: He wears a short jacket and hangs a cane made of rattan, often leaning on the edge of the cliff.

古文：居守卢仆射，耽味玄默，思睹异人。
现代文：他身为守卢仆射，却深入体味沉静无为，想见到神异之人。
English: As a guard of Lu Fuya, he was deeply affected by the stillness and wanted to see the supernatural.

古文：有道流具述其由，遂致之门下。
现代文：他向一位道士详细述说了来由，道士就把他收归门下做了弟子。
English: He detailed his reasons to a Taoist priest, who took him under his wing and made him a disciple.

古文：及闻方伯之说，因以处士奏官。自梓州别驾，作牧建溪，时年已九十。
现代文：等到听说他还有做一方长官的说法，便把他以处士的身份奏报到宫中，于是他就又开始做官，从梓州别驾，做到建溪太守。当时他已经九十岁了。
English: When he heard that he was still a governor, he reported him to the imperial court as a clerk, so he began to work as an official again, driving from Zizhou to become the governor of Jianxi. At that time he was already ninety years old.

古文：到郡才周岁，即解印归罗浮。
现代文：他做郡守才一周年，就辞官回到罗浮山。
English: He had only been county governor for a year when he resigned and returned to Lopu Mountain.

古文：及韦宙相公出镇江南，使人访之，犹在山谷。
现代文：等到韦宙相公出任江南太守，派人访他，他还在山谷中。
English: He was still in the valley when Wei Zhaoxiang became the governor of the south of the Yangtze River and sent someone to visit him.

古文：大中十四年，之任建安，路由江表。时萧相公观风浙右，于桂楼开宴召之，唯饮酒数杯，他无所食也。
现代文：宣宗皇帝大中十四年，严士则到建安上任时，路过江南，当时萧相公正在浙东观察民风，在桂楼设宴招待他，他只喝了几杯酒，别的什么也没吃。
English: In the 14th year of Emperor Xuanzong's middle school, Yan Shi passed through the south of the Yangtze River when he went to Jian'an to take office. At that time, Xiao Xianggong was observing the people's customs in eastern Zhejiang and held a banquet in Guilou to invite him. He only drank a few glasses of wine and ate nothing else.

