古文：子西叹于朝，蓝尹亹曰： 吾闻君子唯独居思念前世之崇替，与哀殡丧，于是有叹，其余则否。
现代文：子西在朝廷上叹息，蓝尹亹说： 我听说君子只有在独居思考前代的兴衰成败，或者殡殓发丧悲伤时，才发出叹息，在其他时候并不叹息。
English: Zixi sighed at the imperial court, and Lan Yunyuan said: I heard that a gentleman only sighs when he lives alone and thinks about the success or failure of the previous generation, or when he is sad at the funeral, and does not sigh at other times.

古文：君子临政思义，饮食思礼，同宴思乐，在乐思善，无有叹焉。
现代文：君子处理政事时想到道义，饮食时想到礼仪，共同宴会时想到欢乐，在欢乐时想到要做善事，没有可叹息的。
English: A gentleman thinks of morality when he is dealing with politics, of etiquette when he is eating, of joy when he is sharing a banquet, and of doing good deeds when he is happy. There is nothing to lament.

古文：今吾子临政而叹，何也？ 
现代文：现在您临朝理政而发出叹息，是什么缘故呢？ 
English: Now that you are ruling the country, you are sighing. Why is that?

古文：子西曰： 阖庐能败吾师。阖庐即世，吾闻其嗣又甚焉。
现代文：子西说： 吴王阖闾能打败我们的军队，阖闾去世了，我听说他的继承人比他还厉害。
English: Zixi said, "Wu Wangyao is the only one who can defeat our army. He passed away, and I heard that his successor is even more powerful than him."

古文：吾是以叹。 
现代文：我因此叹息。 
English: It makes me sigh.

古文：对曰： 子患政德之不修，无患吴矣。
现代文：蓝尹亹回答说： 您应该担心自己的政事德行没有搞好，不必担心吴国。
English: Lan Yunyun replied: You should be worried about your own political and moral conduct not doing well, do not worry about Wu.

古文：夫阖庐口不贪嘉味，耳不乐逸声，目不淫于色，身不怀于安，朝夕勤志，恤民之羸，闻一善若惊，得一士若赏，有过必悛，有不善必惧，是故得民以济其志。
现代文：阖闾嘴不贪美味佳肴，耳不喜欢听靡靡之音，眼睛不贪恋美色，身体不贪图安逸，从早到晚勤劳国事，体恤百姓的疾苦。听到一句有益的话就很惊喜，得到一位贤士如同得到了赏赐，犯了过失必定改正，有不好的行为必然感到担忧，所以得到百姓的支持，实现了战胜楚国的志愿。
English: The lips are not greedy for delicious food, the ears do not like to listen to the sound of defeat, the eyes are not greedy for beauty, the body is not greedy for comfort, from morning to night they work diligently on state affairs and sympathize with the sufferings of the people. It is very surprising to hear a beneficial word. Getting a wise man is like getting a reward. If you make a mistake, you must correct it. If you have bad behavior, you must feel worried. So you get the support of the people and realize the will to defeat Chu.

古文：今吾闻夫差好罢民力以成私好，纵过而翳谏，一夕之宿，台榭陂池必成，六畜玩好必从。
现代文：如今我听说夫差喜欢滥用民力来满足个人的爱好，纵容自己的过失，拒绝别人的进谏，即使是在某处只住一夜，台榭园池等都必须建好，声色狗马之类的玩物也必须随行。
English: Now I have heard that husbands like to abuse people's power to satisfy their personal hobbies, indulge their own faults, and refuse to let others enter. Even if you only live in a certain place for one night, the pond and other facilities must be built, and toys such as dogs and horses must accompany you.

古文：夫差先自败也已，焉能败人。
现代文：夫差这样做首先搞垮了自己，又怎么能打败别人呢。
English: In doing so, Husband first of all defeated himself, but how can he defeat others?

古文：子修德以待吴，吴将毙矣。 
现代文：您修治德行对付吴国，吴国就要灭亡了。 
English: If you deal with the state of Wu by cultivating virtue, the state of Wu will perish.

