古文：孔子之先，宋之后也。
现代文：孔子的祖先，是宋国的后裔。
English: The ancestors of Confucius were the descendants of the Song Dynasty.

古文：微子启，帝乙之元子，纣之庶兄，以圻内诸侯，入为王卿士。
现代文：微子启，是帝乙的长子，纣的同父异母哥哥，以都城千里之内诸侯的身份，进入朝廷为君主的卿士。
English: Micro Zi Kai, the eldest son of Emperor Wu and the half-brother of Emperor Gong, entered the imperial court as a nobleman of the monarch with the status of a prince within a thousand miles of the capital.

古文：微，国名，子爵。
现代文：微，是诸侯国名，属于子爵。
English: 微, is the name of the vassal state, belongs to the viscount.

古文：初，武王克殷，封纣之子武庚于朝歌，使奉汤祀。
现代文：当初，武王征服了殷国，封纣的儿子武庚于朝歌，让他奉行商汤的祭祀。
English: At the beginning, King Wu conquered Yin Province, and the son of Emperor Feng, Wu Geng, sent him to Morning Song to perform the ritual of Shang Tang.

古文：武王崩，而与管、蔡、霍三叔作难，周公相成王东征之。
现代文：武王死后，武庚与管叔、蔡叔、霍叔共同谋反，周公辅佐成王东征讨伐他们。
English: After the death of King Wu, Wu Geng, Uncle Guan, Uncle Cai, and Uncle Huo jointly plotted a rebellion, and Zhou Gongsu assisted King Wucheng in his eastward expedition to fight them.

古文：二年，罪人斯得，乃命微子代殷后，作《微子之命》申之。
现代文：第二年擒获了罪人，于是命令微子启代替武庚为殷的后裔，作《微子之命》申告此事。
English: The next year, the culprit was caught, so he ordered the descendant of Wu Geng and Yin to declare the matter in "The Life of a Microbe."

古文：与国于宋，徙殷之子孙，唯微子先往仕周，故封之贤。
现代文：封微子于宋国，迁徙殷人的子孙到此地，唯有微子先到周朝去做官，被周朝封为贤人。
English: In Song Dynasty, the descendants of the Yin people migrated to this place. Only the Micron first went to the Zhou Dynasty to become an official, and was named a wise man by the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：其弟曰仲思，名衍，或名泄。嗣微子之后，故号微仲。
现代文：微子的弟弟仲思，名衍，或名泄，继承了微子的爵位，因此又称微仲。
English: Micron's younger brother Zhong Si, also known as Mei Yan or Mei Jue, inherited Micron's peerage, and was therefore also known as Weizhong.

古文：生宋公稽，胄子虽迁爵易位，而班级不及其故者，得以故官为称。
现代文：仲思生宋公稽，后代虽然爵位变迁，但等级都没有祖辈高，仍然以旧的爵位称呼。
English: Although the titles of the descendants of Zhong Sisheng and Song Gongqi have changed, their ranks are not higher than that of their ancestors, and they are still called by the old titles.

古文：故二微虽为宋公，而犹以微之号自终。至于稽乃称公焉。
现代文：所以微子和微仲虽然是宋公，但始终都用微子称号。到了稽即位，才开始称公。
English: Therefore, although Micron and Weizhong were Song officials, they always used the title of Micron. It was only when Ji ascended the throne that they began to call themselves officials.

古文：宋公生丁公申，申生缗公共及炀公熙，熙生弗父何及厉公方祀。
现代文：宋公稽生丁公申，申生缗公共和襄公熙，熙公生弗父何及厉公方祀。
English: Song Gongren's disciple Ding Gongren, Shenren's disciple Zongongren and Xiang Gongren's disciple He, and Xi Gongren's disciple Fei He and Li Gongren are enshrined.

古文：方祀以下，世为宋卿。
现代文：从方祀以下，世世代代为宋国卿。
English: From Emperor Zongfang to the present, he has been the Lord of Song for generations.

古文：弗父何生宋父周，周生世子胜，胜生正考甫，考甫生孔父嘉。
现代文：弗父何生宋父周，宋父周生世子胜，世子胜生正考甫，正考甫生孔父嘉。
English: Fufu is the son of Songfuzhou, Songfuzhou is the son of Hezongsheng, Hezongsheng is the son of Zhengkaofu, Zhengkaofu is the son of Kongfujia.

古文：五世亲尽，别为公族，故后以孔为氏焉。
现代文：传到五代以后，分出同族，所以后来有一支以孔作为姓氏的族亲。
English: After five generations, the same tribe was separated, so later there was a tribe of relatives with Kong as their surname.

古文：一曰孔父者，生时所赐号也，是以子孙遂以氏族。
现代文：孔父这一名号，是出生的时候君王所赐予的名号，因此世代子孙就以此作为姓氏。
English: The name "Confucius" was given by the king at the time of his birth, so generations of descendants have used it as a surname.

古文：孔父生子木金父，金父生睪夷，睪夷生防叔，避华氏之祸而奔鲁。
现代文：孔父生子木金父，金父生睪夷，睪夷生防叔，防叔逃亡到了鲁国。
English: Confucius father and son had a gold father, gold father had a Qianyi, Qianyi had a Fang uncle, Fang uncle fled to Lu.

古文：防叔生伯夏，伯夏生叔梁纥。
现代文：为了躲避华氏之祸，防叔生伯夏，伯夏生叔梁纥。
English: The defense uncle gave birth to Bixia, and Bixia gave birth to uncle Liang Yao.

古文：纥虽有九女而无子。
现代文：叔梁纥没有儿子只有九个女儿。
English: Shu Liangyao had no sons, only nine daughters.

古文：其妾生孟皮，孟皮一字伯尼，有足病。于是乃求婚于颜氏。
现代文：叔梁纥的妾生孟皮，孟皮字伯尼，脚不方便，于是叔梁纥向颜氏求婚。
English: Shu Liangyao's concubine's son Mengpi, Mengpi's character Bernie, has bad feet, so Shu Liangyao proposed to Yan.

古文：颜氏有三女，其小曰征在。
现代文：颜氏有三个女儿，小女儿叫征在。
English: Yan has three daughters, the youngest of whom is called Zheng Zhen.

古文：颜父问三女曰： 陬大夫虽父祖为士，然其先圣王之裔。
现代文：颜父问他的三个女儿： 陬大夫叔梁纥他的父辈和祖辈虽是士，但是他的祖先却是圣王的后代。
English: Father Yan asked his three daughters: Dr. Uncle Liang Although his parents and grandparents were scholars, his ancestors were descendants of the holy king.

古文：今其人身长十尺，武力绝伦，吾甚贪之。虽年长性严，不足为疑。三子孰能为之妻？ 
现代文：叔梁纥现在身高十尺，武功非常厉害，对他我很看好，他的年龄虽然有点大而且性子也急，但是你们不用担心，你们当中谁愿意做他的妻子啊？ 
English: Shu Liangyao is now ten feet tall, and his martial arts are very powerful. I am very optimistic about him. Although he is a little older and impatient, you don't have to worry. Who among you would like to be his wife?

古文：二女莫对。
现代文：大女儿二女儿都不说话。
English: The eldest daughter and the two younger ones don't speak.

古文：征在进曰： 从父所制，将何问焉？ 
现代文：征在走上前说： 一切都听从父亲做主，有什么事情可以询问的呢？ 
English: Before leaving, Zheng said, "Everything is up to my father. Is there anything I can ask?

古文：父曰： 即尔能矣。 遂以妻之。
现代文：她父亲说： 你可以做他的妻子。 
English: Her father said, "You can be my wife."

古文：征在既往，庙见。
现代文：于是就将他的小女儿征在嫁给了叔梁纥做妻子。
English: So he conscripted his youngest daughter to marry his uncle Liang Jun.

古文：以夫之年大，惧不时有男，而私祷尼丘之山以祈焉。
现代文：征在去叔梁纥家时，首先约在宗庙会面。由于丈夫的年龄比较大，担心不能够赶快生个儿子，于是就私自到尼丘山去祈祷。
English: When Zheng went to Shu Liangyao's home, they first met at the ancestral temple. Because her husband was older, she was worried that she would not be able to have a son soon, so she went to Mount Nichiu to pray.

古文：生孔子，故名丘而字仲尼。
现代文：后来生下孔子，名丘字仲尼。
English: Later, she gave birth to Confucius, also known as Zhong Ni.

古文：孔子三岁而叔梁纥卒，葬于防。
现代文：孔子三岁时叔梁纥去世，葬在防山。
English: When Confucius was three years old, his uncle Liang Kun died and was buried in Fangshan.

古文：至十九，娶于宋之亓官氏，一岁而生伯鱼。
现代文：孔子十九岁，娶了宋国亓官氏的女儿为妻，一年后生下伯鱼。
English: At the age of nineteen, Confucius married a daughter of a Song dynasty eunuch. A year later, she gave birth to a son.

古文：鱼之生也，鲁昭公以鲤鱼赐孔子。
现代文：伯鱼出生的时候，鲁昭公送给孔子一条鲤鱼。
English: When Bo Yu was born, Lu Zhaogong gave Confucius a catfish.

古文：荣君之贶，故因以名曰鲤，而字伯鱼。
现代文：孔子得到国君的赏赐感到很荣耀，所以给儿子取名鲤，字伯鱼。
English: Confucius felt very honored to be rewarded by the sovereign, so he named his son Zhai, the word for fish.

古文：鱼年五十，先孔子卒。
现代文：伯鱼活到五十岁，比孔子先去世。
English: He lived to the age of fifty and died before Confucius.

古文：齐太史子与适鲁，见孔子，孔子与之言道。
现代文：齐国的太史子与来到鲁国，见到孔子。
English: The Grand Historian of Qi came to Lu and met Confucius.

古文：子与悦，曰： 吾鄙人也，闻子之名，不睹子之形久矣，而求知宝贵也。
现代文：孔子和他谈论道，子与很高兴，说： 我是浅陋无知的人，久闻您的大名，而没能和您见面，而求知的机会是很宝贵的。
English: Confucius talked with him, and the son was very happy, saying: I am a shallow and ignorant person, I have heard your name for a long time, but I have not been able to meet you, and the opportunity to seek knowledge is very precious.

古文：乃今而后知泰山之为高，渊海之为大。
现代文：从今以后我知道了泰山的高大，大海的广阔。
English: From now on, I know the height of Mount Tai and the vastness of the sea.

古文：惜乎夫子之不逢明王，道德不加于民，而将垂宝以贻后世。 
现代文：只可惜啊，先生没有遇到圣明的君主。道德不能在百姓中施行，只能把这些宝贵的东西留给后世了。 
English: It's just a pity, sir, that you didn't meet a saintly monarch. Morality can't be enforced among the people, we can only leave these precious things to future generations.

古文：遂退而谓南宫敬叔曰： 今孔子先圣之嗣，自弗父何以来，世有德让，天所祚也。
现代文：子与辞别孔子后对南宫敬叔说： 现今的孔子是先圣的后代，从弗父何以来，孔氏后代世世有德谦让，这是上天所赐的福分。
English: After bidding farewell to Confucius, his son said to Namgong Jingran: Today's Confucius is the descendant of the first saint. Since the time of his father, the descendants of the Confucius family have always had the virtue of humility. This is a blessing given by heaven.

古文：成汤以武德王天下，其配在文。
现代文：成汤以武德称王天下，用礼乐相配合。
English: Cheng Tang is said to be the king of the world in martial arts, with the accompaniment of ceremonial music.

古文：殷宗以下，未始有也。
现代文：殷商以下，就没有这样的情况了。
English: Below the level of wealthy merchants, there is no such situation.

古文：孔子生于衰周，先王典籍，错乱无纪，而乃论百家之遗记，考正其义，祖述尧舜，宪章文武，删《诗》述《书》，定礼理乐，制作《春秋》，赞明《易》道，垂训后嗣，以为法式，其文德着矣。
现代文：孔子生在周朝衰败的时代，先王的典籍错乱无序，孔子就整理论述百家遗留的记录，考证其正确的含义，师法和陈说尧舜的盛德，效法周文王、周武王的文功武治，删定《诗》整理《书》，制定礼，理清乐，制作《春秋》，阐明《易》道，给后世留下训诫，作为法则，孔子的文德是何等显著啊！
English: Confucius was born in the era of the decline of the Zhou Dynasty. The classics of the former king were disordered and chaotic. Confucius set out to integrate the records left behind by hundreds of families and verify their correct meanings. He studied the teaching methods and the prevailing virtues of Chen Wei, emulated the literary achievements of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu, deleted the "Poetry" and organized the "Book," formulated the "Rite," analyzed the "Music," produced the "Spring and Autumn," clarified the "Yi" way, and left admonitions for future generations. As a rule, Confucius's literary virtues are so remarkable!

古文：然凡所教诲，束修已上三千余人，或者天将欲与素王之乎？
现代文：他所教诲的弟子，奉上束脩的就有三千多人，或许是上天要他成为无冕的素王吧？
English: The disciples he taught had more than three thousand followers. Perhaps the heavens wanted him to become the uncrowned king?

古文：夫何其盛也！ 
现代文：为什么如此兴盛呢！ 
English: Why is it so prosperous?

古文：敬叔曰： 殆如吾子之言，夫物莫能两大。
现代文：南宫敬叔说： 如果像你说得那样，事物不会两全其美。
English: Namgong Jingshu said: If it is as you say, things will not be perfect.

古文：吾闻圣人之后，而非继世之统，其必有兴者焉。
现代文：我听说圣人的后代，如果不是继承王位的统系，也必然会有兴盛的人。
English: I have heard that the descendants of saints, if not the line of succession to the throne, will certainly have prosperous people.

古文：今夫子之道至矣，乃将施之无穷，虽欲辞天之祚，故未得耳。 
现代文：现在孔子之道已非常完美，并将长久地施行于后世，即使想推却上天赐予的福分，也不可能。 
English: Now that the way of Confucius has been perfected and will be practiced for a long time in the future, even if you want to reject the blessings given by heaven, it is impossible.

古文：子贡闻之，以二子之言告孔子。
现代文：子贡听了这些话，把他们二人的议论都告诉了孔子。
English: When Zigong heard these words, he told Confucius everything the two of them had discussed.

古文：子曰： 岂若是哉？
现代文：孔子说： 哪是这样的呢？
English: Confucius said, "What is this?

古文：乱而治之，滞而起之，自吾志，天何与焉？ 
现代文：乱了就要治理，停滞就要兴起，这是我的志向，和天有什么关系呢？ 
English: When there is chaos, there must be governance, when there is stagnation, there must be growth. This is my aspiration. What does it have to do with heaven?

