古文：浑瑊，本铁勒九姓之浑部也。
现代文：浑瑊本来是铁勒部族九姓中的浑姓。
English: "Hun" was originally one of the nine surnames of the Tiele tribe.

古文：世为皋兰都督。父释之，有才武，从朔方军，积战多，迁累开府仪同三司、试太常卿、宁朔郡王。
现代文：世代任皋兰都督，父亲浑释之，有文才武艺，参加朔方军，战功多，经多次提升，官至开府仪同三司、试太常卿、宁朔郡王。
English: He served as the governor of Ulan for generations. His father, Hunjie, was a man of great literary talent and martial arts. He participated in the Shuo Fang Army and had many military exploits. After several promotions, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Jidai Changqing, and Ningshuo County King.

古文：广德中与吐蕃战没。
现代文：广德年间，与吐蕃作战阵亡。
English: During the Guangde era, he was killed in battle with the Tubo.

古文：瑊年十一，善骑射，随释之防秋，朔方节度使张齐丘戏曰： 与乳媪俱来邪？ 
现代文：浑瑊十一岁就很会骑马射箭，跟随父亲释之秋天防卫边塞，朔方节度使张齐丘开玩笑说 ：你与奶妈一起来的吗？ 
English: At the age of eleven, he was very good at riding horses and archery. He followed his father to defend the border fortress in the autumn of the year of release. The sudden square degree made Zhang Qiqiu joke: Did you come with your wet nurse?

古文：是岁立跳荡功。
现代文：这年立下临阵破敌的功劳。
English: This year, it is the merit of standing down and breaking the enemy.

古文：后二年，从破贺鲁部，拔石堡城、龙驹岛，其勇常冠军。
现代文：这之后两年，随军打败贺鲁部族，攻占石堡城、龙驹岛，勇冠全军。
English: Two years after this, the following army defeated the Horu tribe, captured Shibako Castle and Yongpyeong Island, and bravely defeated the whole army.

古文：署折冲果毅。
现代文：任折冲果毅。
English: Resolute and resolute.

古文：节度使安思顺授瑊偏师，入葛禄部，略特罗斯山，破阿布思，与诸军城永清及天安军。
现代文：节度使安思顺交给浑瑊一支侧翼部队，攻入葛禄部族，攻下特罗斯山，占领阿布思，与各路部队在永清和天安军修筑城墙。
English: The festival made An Shishun hand over a flank force to Mudan, invade the Gelu tribe, conquer the Tros Mountain, occupy Abusi, and build city walls with various troops in Yongqing and Tian'an Army.

古文：迁中郎将。
现代文：升中郎将。
English: Promoted to middle school captain.

古文：禄山反，从李光弼定河北，射贼骁将李立节，贯其左肩，死之。
现代文：安禄山反叛，跟随李光弼平定河北，箭射叛军将领李立节，射穿他的左肩，使他重伤而死。
English: Li Lijie, general of the rebel army, was shot through the left shoulder with an arrow, and he was seriously wounded and died.

古文：肃宗即位，瑊以兵趋行在。至天德，与虏军遇，败之。
现代文：肃宗即位，浑瑊带兵奔向皇帝避乱的行宫，到天德县时，与叛军相遇，打败了他们。
English: When Emperor Sozong ascended the throne, Han Xuan led his soldiers to the imperial palace to escape the turmoil. When they arrived at Tiande County, they encountered the rebels and defeated them.

古文：从郭子仪复两京，讨安庆绪，胜之新乡，擢武锋军使。
现代文：跟随郭子仪收复京都长安和东都洛阳，征讨安庆绪，在新乡战胜了他。升任武锋军使。
English: He followed Guo Ziyi to recover Kyoto Chang'an and the eastern capital Luoyang, and fought against An Qingxu, defeating him in Xinxiang. He was promoted to the post of military envoy.

古文：从仆固怀恩平史朝义，大小数十战，功最，改太常卿，实封二百户。
现代文：跟随仆固怀恩平定史朝义，经历大小几十次战役，功劳最多，改任太常卿，实封二百户。
English: He followed his servant Gu Wai Yan to pacify the historical dynasty, experienced dozens of battles large and small, and made the most merit. He was reappointed as Tai Changqing and given 200 households.

古文：怀恩反，瑊以所部归子仪，会释之丧，起复朔方行营兵马使。
现代文：仆固怀恩叛变，浑瑊带自己的部队归属郭子仪，碰到父亲释之逝世，守丧期未满被征召为朔方行营兵马使。
English: His servant Gu Wai'en mutinied and took his troops to Guo Ziyi. When his father died, Gu Wai'en was conscripted into the Shuo army before the mourning period was over.

古文：从子仪击吐蕃邠州，留屯邠。
现代文：跟随郭子仪在州反击吐蕃入侵，留驻州。
English: He followed Guo Ziyi in countering the invasion of Tibetans in the prefecture and stayed in the prefecture.

古文：虏复入，至奉天，瑊战漠谷，有功，迁太子宾客，屯奉天。
现代文：敌军又入侵，攻至奉天县，浑瑊在漠谷作战有功劳，升为太子宾客，驻军奉天。
English: The enemy invaded again and attacked Bongtian County. Hun Ye, who had distinguished himself in the battle in the valley, was promoted to the prince's guest and garrisoned in Bongtian.

古文：周智光反，子仪令瑊以步骑万人下同州。
现代文：周智光反叛，郭子仪命令浑瑊带领步骑兵一万人攻下同州。
English: Zhou Zhiguang rebelled, and Guo Ziyi ordered Dunya to lead ten thousand infantry cavalry to capture Tongzhou.

古文：智光平，以邠宁隶朔方军，瑊屯宜禄。
现代文：平定周智光叛乱后，把宁隶属于朔方军，浑瑊驻扎在宜禄。
English: After the rebellion of Zhou Zhiguang was put down, Ning was subordinated to the Shuo army, and Tanggu was stationed in Yilu.

古文：大历七年，吐蕃盗塞深入，瑊会泾原节度使马璘讨之。
现代文：大历七年，吐蕃偷越边塞深入边境，浑瑊会合泾原节度使马瞞征讨吐蕃，驻扎在黄菩原。
English: In the seventh year of the lunar calendar, the Tibetan mastiff stole across the border and deep into the border. The Tibetan mastiff met the Tibetan mastiff to make the horse steal the Tibetan mastiff and was stationed in Huangpuyuan.

古文：次黄菩原，瑊引众据险，设枪垒自营，遏贼奔突。
现代文：浑瑊带领军队据守险要，用长枪设立壁垒自守，阻止敌军冲击。
English: He led the army to defend the perilous point, and set up a barrier with a long gun to defend himself and prevent the enemy from attacking.

古文：旧将史抗等内轻瑊，顾左右去枪，叱骑驰贼。既还，虏蹑而入，遂大败，死者十八。
现代文：原任守将史抗等人心里看不起浑瑊，招呼随从撤去长枪，喝令骑兵冲击敌军，还兵回营，敌军跟踪冲入壁垒，于是被敌军大败，士兵被杀死十分之八。
English: Former guard commander Shi Rong and others looked down on him, called his followers to remove their long guns, shouted for the cavalry to attack the enemy army, returned the soldiers to the camp, and the enemy army followed and rushed into the barrier, so they were defeated by the enemy army, and eight out of ten soldiers were killed.

古文：子仪召诸将曰： 朔方军高天下，今败于虏，奈何？ 
现代文：郭子仪召集众将说 ：朔方军是国家最强的军队，现在被敌军打败了，怎么办？ 
English: Guo Ziyi gathered the generals and said, "The Shuo Fang Army is the strongest army in the country. Now it has been defeated by the enemy army. What should we do?"

古文：瑊曰： 愿再战。 
现代文：浑瑊说 ：愿意第二次作战。 
English: "I'm willing to fight a second time," he said.

古文：乃驰朝那，与盐州刺史李国臣趋秦原。吐蕃引去，瑊邀击破之，悉夺所掠而还。
现代文：于是带领军队奔向朝那，与盐州刺史李国臣向秦原急进，吐蕃军退走，浑瑊拦腰攻击，打败了敌军，全部夺回敌军掳掠的人畜财物回营。
English: Therefore, he led the army to rush to the north, and rushed to Qinhuangdao with Li Guoqin, the governor of Yanzhou Province, to retreat from the Tuyun army, attacked the enemy, defeated the enemy, and recaptured all the human and animal property plundered by the enemy back to the camp.

古文：自是岁防长武城盛秋，领邠州刺史。
现代文：从这以后，每年在盛秋收获时驻防灵武城，兼任州刺史。
English: Since then, the crane has been stationed in Lingwu City every year at the time of the harvest in the autumn, and has also served as the state crane.

古文：吐蕃入方渠、怀安，瑊击走之。
现代文：吐蕃入侵方渠、怀安，浑瑊打退了他们。
English: The spade invades the square canal and Huai'an, and the muddy raft repels them.

古文：子仪入朝，留知邠宁庆兵马后务。
现代文：郭子仪回京朝见皇帝，留浑瑊主持宁庆兵马善后工作。
English: Guo Ziyi returned to Beijing to see the emperor, and Ru Hunyu presided over the post-mortem work of the Ningqing soldiers and horses.

古文：回纥侵太原，破鲍防军。
现代文：回纥侵犯太原，打败了鲍防的军队。
English: Hui Xuan invaded Taiyuan and defeated Bao's army.

古文：拜瑊都知兵马使，自石岭关而南，督诸军掎角，虏引去。
现代文：朝廷拜浑瑊为都知兵马使，从石岭关向南，督令各路部队夹击敌军，敌军退走。
English: The imperial court paid homage to him as the envoy of the Tudor soldiers and horses. From Shilingguan to the south, he ordered the troops on all sides to attack the enemy army, and the enemy army retreated.

古文：进兼单于副都护、振武军使。
现代文：升兼单于副都护，振武军使。
English: He rose to the rank of vice-governor of the capital, and served as military attaché to Zhenwu.

古文：子仪为太尉，德宗析所部为三节度，以瑊兼单于大都护，振武、东受降城、镇北大都护府、绥银麟胜州节度副大使。
现代文：郭子仪任太尉，德宗把他统帅的军队分为三个节度使统领。命浑瑊兼任单于大都护，振武、东受降城、镇北大都护府、绥银麟胜州节度副大使。
English: Guo Ziyi was appointed as the first lieutenant, and Dezong divided the army he commanded into three sections and made him the commander. He also served as the deputy ambassador of the section in Dadu, Zhenwu, Dongshu, Zhenbei, Yinlin and Shengzhou.

古文：未几，崔宁领朔方，故召为左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：不久崔宁统帅朔方军，所以命浑瑊任左金吾卫大将军。
English: Soon, Cui Ning was the commander of the Shuo Fang Army, so he was appointed General Zuo Jinwu.

古文：建中中，李希烈诈为瑊书，若同乱者，帝识其谍，用不疑，更赐良马、锦币。
现代文：建中年间，李希烈假冒浑瑊的名义写信，好与他一同叛乱，皇帝识破了他的奸谋，信用浑瑊，不加猜疑，还赐良马、锦缎和钱。
English: In the middle of the Jianming period, Li Xili wrote a letter pretending to be Tangyuan, so that he could rebel with him. The emperor saw through his treacherous plot, trusted Tangyuan without suspicion, and gave him a good horse, brocade and money.

古文：普王为荆襄元帅讨希烈也，以瑊为中军都虞候。
现代文：普王任荆襄元帅征讨李希烈，任浑瑊做中军都虞候。
English: King Pu appointed Jing Xiang as the marshal to recruit Li Xili, and appointed Hun Ye as the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：帝狩奉天，瑊率家人子弟以从，授行在都虞候、京畿渭北节度使。
现代文：皇帝到奉天避乱，浑瑊率领童仆和兄弟儿子随从护卫，任命为行宫都虞候、京畿渭北节度使。
English: When the emperor fled to Bongtian to escape the turmoil, Hunhyun led the servants and his brothers and sons to escort him. He was appointed as the governor of the palace and the envoy of the Northern Song Festival of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：硃泚兵薄城，战谯门，晨至日中不解。或以刍车至，瑊曳车塞门，焚以战，贼乃解。
现代文：朱氵此的叛军逼近城墙，浑瑊与敌军在城门拼杀，从早晨到中午，敌人不解围，有兵推草料车来了，浑瑊拉过草料车堵住城门，点燃草料车用来作战，敌人才解围退开。
English: The rebels of Zhu Xi here approached the city wall, and the muddy people fought with the enemy army at the city gate. From morning to noon, the enemy did not break the siege. Some soldiers came to push the grass wagon, and the muddy people pulled the grass wagon to block the city gate, and lit the grass wagon to fight. Only then did the enemy break the siege and retreat.

古文：泚治攻具，矢石四集如雨，昼夜不息，凡浃日，凿堑圜城。
现代文：朱氵此整备攻城器具，箭矢石头从四面像雨点般攻向城头，日夜不停，共十天，开凿壕沟围住城，城中死的人躺得到处都是，人心惊惶。
English: Zhu Xi thus prepared the siege equipment, and the arrows and stones attacked the city from all sides like raindrops. Day and night, non-stop, for a total of ten days, they dug trenches to surround the city. The dead people in the city were lying everywhere, and people were terrified.

古文：城中死者可藉，人心危惴，或夜缒出掇蔬本供御，帝与瑊相泣。
现代文：有人夜晚用绳从城上缒出城外，采菜根供皇帝食用，皇帝与浑瑊相对哭泣。
English: Some people used ropes to pull themselves out of the city at night, to pick vegetable roots for the emperor to eat. The emperor wept in front of him.

古文：泚方据乾陵下瞰城，翠翟红袍，左右宦人趋走，宴赐拜舞，又纵慢辞戏斥天子，以为胜在景刻。
现代文：朱氵此刚占据乾陵，向下俯瞰城中，头饰翠雉尾，身穿红袍，左右宦官奔走侍奉，宴乐赏赐，舞蹈跪拜，呼喊侮辱性的话戏弄皇帝，认为取胜只旦夕间的事情。
English: Zhu Xi has just occupied the Qianling, looking down on the city. His headdress is green and white, and he is wearing a red robe. Eunuchs are running around and serving him. They are offering banquets, dancing, kneeling, shouting insulting words, and teasing the emperor. They think that winning is only a matter of the evening.

古文：使骑环驰，责大臣不识天命。造云梁，广数十丈，施大轮，濡氈及革冒之，周布水囊为鄣，指城东北；构木庐，蒙革周置之，运薪土其下，将塞隍。
现代文：派骑兵围绕城墙奔驰，斥责大臣不懂天命；制造云桥，宽几十丈，装上大轮子，用湿毡、生牛皮蒙着，周围挂着水袋作为屏障，推向城的东北面；又造木屋，蒙上生牛皮放在城墙的四周，运柴草和土填在木屋下面，准备用它来填塞护城河。
English: He sent cavalry to gallop around the city wall, scolding the minister for not understanding the fate of the world; he made a cloud bridge, dozens of feet wide, mounted on large wheels, covered with wet straw and raw cowhide, with water bags hanging around as a barrier, and pushed it to the northeast of the city; he also built a wooden house, covered with raw cowhide and placed around the city wall, and transported firewood and soil to fill the bottom of the wooden house, ready to use it to fill the moat.

古文：帝召瑊，授以诏书千余，自御史大夫、实封五百户而下，募突将死士当贼，赐瑊笔，使量功署诏，不足则署衣以授，因曰： 朕与公诀矣，令马承倩往，有急可奏。 
现代文：皇帝召来浑瑊，交给他一千多道诏书，从御史大夫、实封五百户以下的官吏中，招募敢死突击队抵挡叛军，赐给浑瑊一支笔，让他根据功劳大小写诏书，不够用就写在衣服上交给参战的人。在这危急的时刻，皇帝说： 我与你诀别了，派马承倩随你去，有紧急军情可以报告。 
English: The emperor summoned him and gave him more than a thousand imperial edicts. He recruited a death-defying commando team to resist the rebel army from the imperial historian and officials with a real estate of less than 500 households. He gave him a pen to write imperial edicts according to his merits. If he did not have enough, he would write them on his clothes and give them to those who participated in the war. At this critical moment, the emperor said: I bid you farewell. Send Ma Chengjun with you. He can report an emergency military situation.

古文：瑊俯伏呜咽，帝抚而遣之。
现代文：浑瑊俯伏在地呜呜咽咽地哭，皇帝抚慰着他，派他上前线。
English: He fell to the ground, whimpering and crying. The emperor soothed him and sent him to the front.

古文：瑊前与防城使侯仲庄揣云梁所道，掘大隧，积马矢及薪然之。贼乘风推梁以进，载数千人。
现代文：浑瑊到前线与防城使侯仲庄预计云桥是必经之路，在下面挖掘很大的地道，堆积马粪柴草烧着，叛军乘风推云桥攻城，上载几千人。
English: The muddiness of the front line and the defense of the city made Hou Zhongzhuang expect Yunqiao to be a must-pass road. A large tunnel was dug below, horse manure was piled up, firewood and grass were burned, and the rebels took advantage of the wind to push Yunqiao to attack the city, loading several thousand people.

古文：王师乘城者皆冻馁，甲弊兵盬，瑊但以忠义感率使当贼，人忧不支，群臣号天以祷。
现代文：官军上城防守的人又冻又饿，甲衣破旧，兵器损坏，浑瑊只用忠义做表率，感召将士抵挡叛军进攻，人们担心守不住，群臣呼天祈祷。
English: The defenders of the official army who went to the city were cold and hungry, their armor was worn out, their weapons were damaged, and they only used loyalty as a model, inspiring the soldiers to resist the rebel attack. People were worried that they could not defend themselves, and the ministers cried out to the heavens in prayer.

古文：瑊中矢，自揠去，被血而战愈厉。
现代文：浑瑊中箭，自己拔去，披着浑身鲜血，作战更加勇猛。
English: The arrows in the mud, pulled out by themselves, covered with blood, fought more bravely.

古文：云梁及隧而陷，风返悉焚，贼皆死，举城欢噪。
现代文：云桥到地道处，塌陷洞中，风助火势，云桥全部烧毁，叛军都死了。全城欢呼鼓噪。
English: The cloud bridge reached the tunnel, collapsed into the hole, the wind helped the fire, the cloud bridge was all burned, the rebels were all dead. The whole city cheered and clapped.

古文：是日诏授瑊二子官，乃第赏将校。
现代文：这天，皇帝下诏书，委任浑瑊两个儿子的官职，又依次赏赐将校。
English: On this day, the emperor issued an imperial edict, appointing his two sons to official positions, and awarding officers in turn.

古文：泚攻城益急，会李怀光奔难，贼乃去。
现代文：朱氵此攻城更加紧急，逢李怀光奔赴奉天解救皇帝危难，叛军才退走。
English: Zhu Xi's attack on the city was even more urgent, and the rebels retreated only after Li Huai Guang rushed to the heavens to save the emperor from danger.

古文：进行在都知兵马使，实封五百户。
现代文：浑瑊升任行宫都知兵马使，实封五百户。
English: He was promoted to the post of the Imperial Palace's official envoy of the Chichibu Terracotta Warriors and Horses, with 500 households actually enclosing him.

古文：乘舆进狩山南，瑊以诸军卫入谷口，怀光追骑至，后军击却之。
现代文：皇帝车驾到山南避乱，浑瑊率各路军马和侍卫队进入谷口，叛将李怀光的骑兵追来，后卫部队打退了他。
English: The emperor's carriage drove to Shannan to avoid the turmoil, and Hun Rong led all the horses and bodyguards into Taniguchi. He chased Li Huai Guang's cavalry, and the rearguard repulsed him.

古文：迁检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，兼灵盐丰夏定远西城天德军节度、朔方邠宁振武道永平军奉天行营副元帅。
现代文：升为检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，兼任灵盐丰夏定远西城天德军节度使、朔方宁振武道永平军奉天行营副元帅。
English: He was promoted to the position of inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school, inspector of the school.

古文：帝临轩授钺，用汉拜韩信故事，制曰： 寇贼干纪，授尔节钺，以戡多难，往钦哉！ 
现代文：皇帝亲临行宫前平台赐给斧钺，沿用汉高祖筑坛拜韩信为大将的先例，皇帝命令说 ：叛贼冲犯纲纪，赐给你符节斧，用它平定叛乱！去执行我的命令！ 
English: The emperor personally visited the platform in front of the palace and gave the axe to the eunuch, following the precedent of the Han Gao ancestor building the altar to worship Han Xin as the general. The emperor ordered: "Traitor, break the discipline, give you the festival axe, use it to quell the rebellion! Go carry out my order!"

古文：瑊顿首曰： 敢不毕力以对扬天子休命？ 
现代文：浑瑊叩头说 ：敢不竭尽全力，来对答称扬天子的美好命令。 
English: The muddled worshippers said, "Don't you dare try your best to answer the beautiful command of praising the heavenly son."

古文：乃率诸军趋京师。
现代文：于是率领各路部队向京师急进。
English: As a result, he led all the troops to rush to the capital.

古文：贼韩旻拒武功，瑊率吐蕃论莽罗兵破之武亭川，斩首万级，遂屯奉天，以抗西面。
现代文：叛贼韩在武功抗拒官军，浑瑊率领吐蕃论莽罗的部队在武亭川打败了他，斩了一万多颗首级，于是驻扎在奉天，来抵抗西面的敌军。
English: The traitor Han resisted the government army with martial arts, and the troops led by Hunchun defeated him at the Wuting River, beheaded more than ten thousand heads, and then stationed in Mukden to resist the enemy army in the west.

古文：李晟自东渭桥破贼，瑊与韩游瑰、戴休颜以西军收咸阳，进屯延秋门。
现代文：李晟从东渭桥打败叛军，浑瑊与韩游瑰、戴休颜用西部的军队收复咸阳，进驻延秋门。
English: Li Qian defeated the rebels from the East Fenqiao, and Han Youkui and Dai Xuan used the western army to recover Xianyang and enter Yanqiu Gate.

古文：泚平，论功，以瑊兼侍中，实封户八百。
现代文：朱氵此叛乱平定后，评定功劳，用浑瑊兼任侍中，实封八百户。
English: After the suppression of this rebellion, Zhu Xi appraised the merit, and concurrently served as an attendant with muddiness, and sealed eight hundred households.

古文：天子还宫，授河中绛慈隰节度使、河中同陕虢行营副元帅，繇楼烦郡王徙咸宁；赐大宁里甲第，女乐五人，将相送归第，与李晟钧礼。
现代文：天子回到皇宫，委任他为河中绛隰慈节度使、河中同陕虢行营副元帅，由楼烦郡王迁为咸宁郡王，赐给大宁里的显贵府第、五名女乐伎，将相送他回府第，与李晟同等礼遇。
English: When Tianzi returned to the imperial palace, he appointed him as the envoy of the Henan-Shanxi Friendship Festival and the deputy field marshal of the Henan-Shanxi Friendship Campaign. He transferred him from the county king of Loudui to the county king of Xianning, and gave him the first and fifth female musicians of the prestigious prefecture in Daning, who would accompany him back to the prefecture, and treated him with the same courtesy as Li Xi.

古文：俄加朔方行营副元帅，与马燧同讨李怀光。
现代文：不久加封为朔方行营副元帅，与马燧一起征讨李怀光。
English: He was soon promoted to vice-marshal of the Shuo-Fangxing Battalion and, together with Ma Jun, recruited Li Huaiguang.

古文：怀光平，检校司空，任一子五品官。
现代文：李怀光叛乱平定后，封检校司空，委任他的一个儿子做五品官。
English: After the suppression of Li Huai Guang's rebellion, Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：还屯河中。
现代文：回军驻扎在河中郡。
English: Hui troops are stationed in the county of Hezhong.

古文：吐蕃相尚结赞陷盐、夏，阴窥京师，而畏瑊与李晟、马燧，欲以计胜之。
现代文：吐蕃丞相尚结赞攻陷盐、夏两州，暗中图谋进犯京师，但害怕浑瑊与李晟、马燧，想用诡计战胜他们。
English: Minister Tu Youcheng was still in favor of invading the two states of Yan and Xia, and secretly plotted to attack the Beijing Division, but he was afraid of Tanggu and Li Yu and Ma Yu, and wanted to use trickery to defeat them.

古文：乃诡辞重礼，请燧讲好，燧苦赞，帝乃诏约盟平凉川，以瑊为会盟使。
现代文：于是用花言巧语和重礼，请求马燧准许讲和。马燧一力坚持赞成讲和，皇帝才命令在平凉州会盟订约，用浑瑊做会盟使。
English: Therefore, he asked Ma Xuan for permission to declare peace, using flowery language and heavy salutations. Ma Xuan insisted on approving the declaration of peace, and only then did the emperor order the treaty to be signed in the Pingliangzhou League, with Dunya as the League's envoy.

古文：为结赞所劫，副使崔汉衡以下皆陷，惟瑊得免。
现代文：使团被尚结赞劫持，副使崔汉衡以下的人都陷入敌手，只浑瑊脱身免祸。
English: The mission was hijacked by Shang Jizan, and vice-envoy Cui Hanheng and his subordinates fell into the hands of the enemy, barely escaping with their lives.

古文：自奉天入朝，羸服待罪，诏释之。
现代文：从奉天回到朝廷，穿着贫民服，等朝廷治罪。
English: He returned to the imperial court from Mukden, dressed in a pauper's uniform, and waited for the imperial court to punish him.

古文：会吐蕃复入盗，使瑊镇奉天。虏罢，还河中。
现代文：朝廷下令释放他。碰到吐蕃又入侵，朝廷派浑瑊镇守奉天，与吐蕃战事结束后，浑瑊回到河中郡。
English: The imperial court ordered him to be released. When Tubo invaded again, the imperial court sent Mudan to guard Mukden. After the war with Tubo ended, Mudan returned to Hedong County.

古文：贞元四年，虏入泾、邠，授邠宁庆副元帅。
现代文：贞元四年，吐蕃军又入侵泾两州，朝廷委任浑瑊为宁庆副元帅。
English: In the fourth year of the Zhengyuan era, the Tubo army invaded the two states of Yunnan and Shandong again, and the imperial court appointed Dunyao as the deputy marshal of Ningqing.

古文：进检校司徒，兼中书令。
现代文：升任检校司徒兼中书令。
English: Promoted to school inspector and middle school secretary.

古文：十五年卒，年六十四。群臣奉慰延英，赠太师，谥曰忠武。
现代文：贞元十五年去世，享年六十四岁，群臣在延英殿慰问，追封为太师，谥号 忠武 。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Sadamoto, who died at the age of sixty-four, a group of courtiers offered their condolences at Yan'ei-den, and he was posthumously granted the title of Taishi (Grand Master), with the posthumous title of Chubu.

古文：丧车至自镇，帝复废朝。
现代文：灵车送到浑瑊自己的军镇，皇帝又因此伤感而罢朝。
English: The hearse was sent to his own military town, and the emperor was so saddened that he resigned.

古文：瑊好书，通《春秋》、《汉书》。尝慕《司马迁自叙》，著《行纪》一篇，其辞一不矜大。
现代文：浑瑊爱好读书，通晓《春秋》、《汉书》，曾仰慕《司马迁自叙》，自己写了一篇《行纪》，它的语言全不夸张。
English: He loves reading, knows "Spring and Autumn" and "Chinese Classics," once admired "Sima Qian's Autobiography," and wrote a "Code of Conduct" himself. Its language is not exaggerated.

古文：天性忠谨，功高而志益下，岁时贡奉，必躬阅视。
现代文：性格忠诚谨慎，功劳越高但性情更谦虚。逢年过节献给朝廷的财物，必定亲自过目。
English: Character loyal and prudent, the higher the merit but the more humble the disposition. He is sure to personally inspect the property dedicated to the Imperial Court every year.

古文：每有赐予，下拜跽受，常若在帝前，世方之金日磾，故帝终始信待。
现代文：每有赏赐，就下拜，跪着直着上身接受，常常像在皇帝跟前一样，世人把他比作汉朝的金日石单。所以皇帝始终信任他，厚待他。
English: Whenever he received a reward, he would bow down, kneel and stand up straight to receive it, often as if he were in front of the emperor. The world likened him to the Han Dynasty's gold sun stone tablets. Therefore, the emperor always trusted him and treated him well.

古文：贞元后，天子常恐籓侯生事，稍桀骜则姑息之，惟瑊有所奏论不尽从可，辄私喜曰： 上不疑我。 
现代文：贞元后期，天子常怕藩镇叛乱，稍不驯顺的就姑息他们，只有浑瑊有上奏的事不全部批准，浑瑊就私下高兴地说 ：皇帝不怀疑我。 
English: In the latter half of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor was often afraid of the rebellion of the provinces and towns. If they were a little disobedient, he would tolerate them. However, if he did not approve all of the things that had been proposed, he would privately say with pleasure: The emperor does not doubt me.

古文：故治蒲十六年，常持军，猜间不能入。
现代文：所以治理蒲州十六年，常常主持军务，君臣间不猜疑，不受奸臣离间。
English: Therefore, he governed Bushu for 16 years and often presided over military affairs. There was no suspicion between him and his ministers, and he was not divided by treacherous ministers.

古文：君子贤之。
现代文：君子认为浑瑊是贤才。
English: The gentleman thinks that muddiness is the beginning of wisdom.

古文：本名日进，稍显改焉。
现代文：本名叫日进，稍显贵就改了名。
English: His real name was Nisshin, but he changed it when he became slightly more prominent.

古文：五子，镐、钅岁为达官。
现代文：有五个儿子，浑镐、浑钅岁都是显贵的官。
English: They have five sons, all of them high-ranking officials.

古文：镐谦谨，喜交士大夫，历邓、唐二州刺史，有政誉。
现代文：浑镐谦虚谨慎，喜欢交结士大夫，历任邓、唐二州刺史，有政绩声誉。
English: Humble and prudent, he likes to associate with scholar-doctors. Successive leaders of the Deng and Tang dynasties have made history in the two states. He has a reputation for political achievements.

古文：元和中，延州沙陀部苦边吏贪，震扰不安。
现代文：元和年间，延州沙陀部痛恨边防官员贪婪，骚扰边境不得安宁。
English: During the Yuan and He years, the Yanzhou Shatou Department abhorred the greed of border officials and harassed the border without peace.

古文：李绛建言，宜选才职称者为刺史。
现代文：李绛建议朝廷，应当挑才能职位相称的人任刺史。
English: Li Xi suggested that the imperial court should select a person with a position commensurate with the position to be appointed.

古文：乃任镐延州。
现代文：于是任命浑镐任延州刺史。
English: Therefore, he appointed Hunhyun as the chief historian of Yanzhou.

古文：会讨王承宗，而义武节度使任迪简病不能军，以镐将家可用，乃迁检校右散骑常侍、义武军节度副使，俄代迪简为使。
现代文：碰到征讨王承宗，但义武节度使任迪简病重不能统率军队，认为浑镐是将领家的儿子可以任用，就升浑镐任检校右散骑常侍、义武军节度副使。不久代替任迪简任节度使。
English: When Wang Chengzong was conscripted, but the Yiwu Festival made Ren Dijian seriously ill and unable to lead the army, he thought that Hunhyun was the son of the leader of the family and could be appointed, so he promoted Hunhyun to the position of the right cavalryman of the school inspection and the vice-minister of the festival of the Yiwu Army. He soon replaced Ren Dijian as the minister of the festival.

古文：治兵颇有法，然短于计略，不持重。
现代文：统率军队很有法度，但不会用计谋，不稳重。
English: He is very disciplined in commanding the army, but he does not use stratagems and is unstable.

古文：镇、定二军间不百里，镐引兵压镇境而屯，距贼三十里，鼓角声相闻。
现代文：镇州、定州二军中间不到百里，浑镐领兵压着镇州边境驻扎部队，距离叛军三十里，鼓角的声音双方都能听到。
English: The distance between the two armies of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou is less than a hundred miles, and the muddy soldiers are crushing the Zhenzhou border garrison troops, thirty miles away from the rebels, and the sound of the drum can be heard by both sides.

古文：贼始亦畏，见镐无斥候，乃潜师入定境，焚廥蓄，屠乡聚，镐军遂摇。
现代文：叛军开始很害怕，看见浑镐没有派出侦察兵，于是军队暗中开进定州境内，焚烧粮草库，屠杀乡野百姓，浑镐的部队于是动摇不稳了。
English: The rebels began to be very afraid when they saw that Mudou did not send scouts, so the army secretly drove into the territory of Dingzhou, burned grain and grass storehouses, and massacred the villagers. Mudou's troops were shaken and unstable.

古文：亦会中人督战，乃出薄贼，大败而还。
现代文：也碰到宦官督战，于是出兵逼近叛军，大败而回。
English: He also encountered the Eunuch's War, so he sent troops to approach the rebels, but they were defeated and turned back.

古文：诏以陈楚代之。
现代文：朝廷命令陈楚代替浑镐。
English: The imperial court ordered Chen Chu to replace him.

古文：时师饥冻，闻镐方罢，遂乱，劫镐之家，至裸辱。
现代文：当时部队又冻又饿，刚听到浑镐罢官，就发动兵变，抢劫了浑镐的家，到了脱光他衣服来羞辱他的地步。
English: At that time, the troops were cold and hungry, and as soon as they heard of Hun Rong's dismissal, they launched a mutiny and robbed Hun Rong's home to the point of stripping him naked to humiliate him.

古文：楚闻，驰入城，乃定。
现代文：陈楚听到消息，骑马奔进城中，才安定下来。
English: Chen Chu heard the news and rode into the city to settle down.

古文：令军中敛所剽归镐，以兵卫出之。
现代文：命令军中收集抢夺的财物归还浑镐，派兵保护着送出城。
English: He ordered the troops to collect the looted property and return it to him, and sent soldiers to escort them out of the city.

古文：贬韶州刺史。
现代文：浑镐被贬为韶州刺史。
English: The turbid fish was relegated to the status of a fish in the history of Luzhou.

古文：后代州刺史韩重华奏收镐供军金币十余万，乃复贬循州。
现代文：后来代州刺史韩重华上奏朝廷没收浑镐私占的军饷十多万，就又降到循州任刺史。
English: Later, the imperial court confiscated more than one hundred thousand war booty that had been illegally appropriated by Han Chonghua, the acting governor of the state, and it was reduced to the governor of the state.

古文：卒，赠工部尚书。
现代文：死后，追封为工部尚书。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shang Shu of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：钅岁以廕补诸卫参军，累拟至丰州刺史。
现代文：浑钅岁因是功臣的儿子补诸卫参军，经多次提升，官至丰州刺史。
English: He joined the army at an early age because he was the son of a meritorious soldier, and after several promotions, he rose through the ranks to become the governor of Toyosu.

古文：坐赃七百万，文宗以勋臣子，贬袁州司马。
现代文：犯贪污七百万的罪，文宗因为是功臣的儿子，降职为袁州司马。
English: For committing the crime of embezzling seven million yuan, Wenzong was demoted to Yuanzhou Sima because he was the son of a meritorious subject.

古文：还为袁王傅，至太子詹事。
现代文：回朝任袁王的师傅，官至太子詹事。
English: He returned to the imperial court to serve as Yuan Wang's master, and was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：训、注乱，或言钅岁匿贾餗，为百骑所捕，苦辨乃免，然家为兵剽皆尽。
现代文：李训、郑注叛乱，有人说浑钅岁留藏了贾饣束，被一百名骑兵逮捕，苦苦辩解才免罪，但家财被乱兵抢劫干净。
English: Li Hun and Zheng Zhu rebelled. Some people say that Hun Huan kept Jia's bundles and was arrested by a hundred cavalrymen. He was exonerated after a hard-fought defense, but his family's wealth was robbed clean by the soldiers.

古文：文宗怜之，授少府监，迁殿中。
现代文：文宗怜惜他，任命为少府监，升殿中。
English: Wenzong took pity on him and appointed him as a junior magistrate, and he was promoted to the middle of the court.

古文：宰相以瑊之裔，擢刺史，帝曰： 是岂可以牧民？念其父功，富之可也。 
现代文：宰相因为他是浑瑊的后代，准备让他出任刺史。皇帝说： 这人怎么能治理百姓，念他父亲的功劳，使他富足就行了。 
English: The emperor said, "How can this man govern the people? All he has to do is to remember his father's merits and make him rich."

古文：宰相言钅岁尝治郡有绩，从之，拜寿州刺史。
现代文：宰相说浑钅岁曾经治理郡有政绩，皇帝答应了宰相的提议，任命为寿州刺史。
English: The prime minister said that Hunhyun used to govern the county and had political achievements. The emperor agreed to the prime minister's proposal and appointed him as the chief historian of Shoushu.

古文：终诸卫大将军。
现代文：死时职务是诸卫大将军。
English: His position at the time of his death was General of the Imperial Guards.

