古文：刘藻傅永傅竖眼李神
现代文：刘藻，字彦先，广平易阳人。
English: Liu So, Aza Hixian, Guangping and Yangren.

古文：刘藻，字彦先，广平易阳人也。六世祖遐，从司马叡南渡。
现代文：六世祖刘遐，随司马睿南渡。
English: The sixth-generation ancestor Liu Ye followed Sima Rui to Nandu.

古文：父宗之，刘裕庐江太守。
现代文：父刘宗元，任刘裕政权的庐江太守。
English: His father, Liu Zongyuan, became the governor of Minjiang Province during Liu Yu's regime.

古文：藻涉猎群籍，美谈笑，善与人交，饮酒至一石不乱。
现代文：刘藻涉猎群书，美于谈笑，善于与人交往，饮酒至一石而方寸不乱。
English: He was not good at managing civil administration, so he did not have much political achievements in office. Later, Ren Nanxizhou, who was over 80 years old, could also ride a horse, shoot arrows, ride a horse, and was full of energy. He often said that others said he was old, and claimed to be 69 years old.

古文：永安中，与姊夫李嶷俱来归国，赐爵易阳子。
现代文：永安年间，与姐夫李嶷一起归顺，朝廷赐予爵位易阳子。
English: During the Yong'an era, together with his brother-in-law Li Xi, he surrendered, and the imperial court granted a peerage to Yi Yangzi.

古文：擢拜南部主书，号为称职。
现代文：擢拜南部主书，很是称职。
English: It is very competent to worship the Southern Master.

古文：时北地诸羌数万家，恃险作乱，前后牧守不能制。奸暴之徒，并无名实，朝廷患之，以藻为北地太守。
现代文：当时北方诸羌数万家，凭借天险作乱，前后牧守都不能制止，奸暴之徒，名声很坏，朝廷十分担心，任命刘藻为北地太守。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of herdsmen in the north, who, by virtue of natural hazards, caused chaos, which could not be stopped by pastors before and after. They were ruffians with a bad reputation. The imperial court was very worried and appointed Liu Mo as the northern governor.

古文：藻推诚布信，诸羌咸来归附。
现代文：刘藻推诚布信，众羌人都来归附。
English: Liu Mo sincerely published the letter, and many people came to subscribe to it.

古文：藻书其名籍，收其赋税，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：刘藻记下他们的姓名籍贯，收取他们的赋税，朝廷很赞赏这个举动。
English: Liu Mo wrote down their names and hometowns, collected their taxes, and the court appreciated this move.

古文：迁龙骧将军、雍城镇将。
现代文：迁升龙骧将军、雍州城镇将。
English: He was promoted to the general of Longyu and the general of Yongzhou Town.

古文：先是氐豪徐成、杨黑等驱逐镇将，故以藻代之。
现代文：这以前，氐族豪绅徐成、杨黑等人驱逐镇守将领，朝廷便以刘藻代任其职。
English: Prior to this, the powerful Yi gentry Xu Cheng, Yang Hei and others expelled the town guard generals, and the imperial court replaced them with Liu Mo.

古文：至镇，擒获成、黑等，斩之以徇，群氐震慑。
现代文：到镇之后，刘藻擒获徐成、杨黑等人斩首示众，群氐人害怕起刘藻的威势来。
English: After arriving in the town, Liu Moxuan was beheaded by Xu Cheng, Yang Hei and others, and the crowd was afraid of Liu Moxuan's power.

古文：雍州人王叔保等三百人表乞藻为騃奴戍主。
现代文：雍州人王叔保等三百人上表请求刘藻为马矣奴戍主。
English: Three hundred people, including Wang Shubao from Yongzhou, petitioned for Liu Zhao to become the leader of the Mayon Rebellion.

古文：诏曰： 选曹已用人，藻有惠政，自宜他叙。 
现代文：帝诏说： 选官部门已经任用他人，刘藻有惠政，而应另行叙用。 
English: The imperial edict said: the election department has already appointed others, and Liu Mo has favorable policies, and should be promoted separately.

古文：在任八年，迁离城镇将。
现代文：刘藻在任上八年，迁任离城镇将。
English: Ms. Feng gave birth to a son by relying on herself, and was arrogant and rude to Mr. Jia. Mr. Jia was often very angry.

古文：太和中，改镇为岐州，以藻为岐州刺史。
现代文：太和年间，朝廷改镇为岐州，任命刘藻为岐州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu, the imperial court changed the town to Qizhou and appointed Liu Samo as the crown prince of Qizhou.

古文：转秦州刺史。
现代文：转任秦州刺史。
English: Transferred to the post of Qinzhou magistrate.

古文：秦人恃嶮，率多粗暴，或拒课输，或害长吏，自前守宰，率皆依州遥领，不入郡县。
现代文：秦人凭借险阻，大多粗鲁暴烈，或拒绝赋役，或加害令长县吏，自此以前各任守宰，大都在州遥领，从不入州中郡县。
English: The Qin people took advantage of the obstacles, most of them were rude and violent, or refused to serve, or harmed the county officials. Since then, most of them have been in the distant counties of the state, and have never entered the middle counties of the state.

古文：藻开示恩信，诛戮豪横，羌氐惮之，守宰于是始得居其旧所。
现代文：刘藻昭示恩惠诚信，诛戮豪强骄横之士，羌、氐之人都很惧怕，守宰于是便开始居守以前治所了。
English: Liu Mo showed his benevolence and integrity, and defeated the strong and arrogant people. The people who were lazy and lazy were very afraid, so the governor began to live in the former governor's residence.

古文：遇车驾南伐，以藻为东道都督。
现代文：恰逢皇驾南伐，帝命刘藻为东道都督。
English: Fu Yong's relatives could not stop him. Fu Yong's parents had been buried for decades. The coffin was wrapped in mulberry roots and was more than a foot off the ground. It was very strong.

古文：秦人纷扰，诏藻还州，人情乃定。
现代文：秦州民众又开始蠢蠢欲动，帝下诏命刘藻还州，人心方才安定下来。
English: People found it strange that the coffin was removed from the grave only after the roots of the tree were cut with an axe.

古文：仍与安南将军元英征汉中，频破贼军，长驱至南郑，垂平梁州，奉诏还军，乃不果克。
现代文：又与安南将军元英征讨汉中，频频破败敌军，大军长驱直入到了南郑，眼看快要平定梁州，奉帝诏撤军，于是不能达到目的。
English: In addition, with Annan's general Yuan Yingzheng in the Han Dynasty, he frequently defeated the enemy army, drove the great army straight into Nan Zheng, and was about to pacify Liangzhou, and withdrew the army according to the emperor's edict, so he could not achieve his goal.

古文：后车驾南伐，以藻为征虏将军，督统军高聪等四军为东道别将。
现代文：后来皇驾南伐，任命刘藻为征虏将军，督统军高聪等四支军队为东道别将。
English: Later, the emperor led the Southern Expedition, and appointed Liu Zhao as the general of the conscript army, and Gao Cong, the commander of the general army, and other four armies as the host generals.

古文：辞于洛水之南，高祖曰： 与卿石头相见。 
现代文：刘藻与皇帝在洛水南边辞别，高祖说： 朕与卿在石头城相见。 
English: Liu Mo said goodbye to the emperor on the south side of Luoshui. Gao Zu said: I will meet you in Stone City.

古文：藻对曰： 臣虽才非古人，庶亦不留贼虏而遗陛下，辄当酾曲阿之酒以待百官。 
现代文：刘藻回答说： 为臣虽然才能不敌古人，但也不留下敌人而交给陛下应付，臣当滤曲河之酒以待百官。 
English: Liu Mo replied, "As a vassal, although I am able to defeat the ancients, I will not leave the enemy to be dealt with by His Majesty. The vassal should filter the wine of the Quhe River for the officials."

古文：高祖大笑曰： 今未至曲阿，且以河东数石赐卿。 
现代文：高祖大笑说： 而今未到曲河，朕姑且用河东酒数石赐给你吧。 
English: Gao Zu laughed loudly and said, "But you haven't reached Quhe yet. Let me give you a few kilos of wine from Hedong.

古文：后与高聪等战败，俱徙平州。
现代文：后来与高聪等人打了败仗，二人都被贬迁到平州。
English: Later, he lost the battle with Gao Cong and others, and both of them were deported to Pingzhou.

古文：景明初，世宗追录旧功，以藻为太尉司马。
现代文：景明初年，世宗追录其旧功，任命刘藻为太尉司马。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingming, King Sejong recorded his old exploits and appointed Liu Miao as Tai Lai Sima.

古文：是年六月卒，年六十七、赠钱六万。
现代文：这年六月，刘藻去世，享年六十七岁，朝廷赠钱六万。
English: In June of that year, Liu Mo died at the age of sixty-seven, and the imperial court gave him sixty thousand yuan.

古文：子绍珍，无他才用，善附会，好饮酒。
现代文：子绍珍，没有别的才干，善于拍马附会，喜好饮酒。
English: Zi Shaozhen, no other talent, good at patting horses, likes to drink.

古文：结托刘腾，腾启为其国郎中令。
现代文：巴结刘腾，刘腾推荐他为国郎中令。
English: He befriended Liu Teng, and Liu Teng recommended him as the second-in-command of Guolang.

古文：袭子爵。
现代文：绍珍继承父亲的子爵。
English: Shaozhen succeeds his father as viscount.

古文：稍迁本州别驾、司空属，以事免官。
现代文：渐迁本州别驾、司空等官，因事免官。
English: Officials such as Honshu Beidou and Sihong gradually moved away, and were dismissed due to the incident.

古文：建义初，诏复，寻除太中大夫。
现代文：建义初年，帝诏复官，不久除授太中大夫。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Emperor Xuanzong was reinstated, and soon after he was awarded the title of Vice-Middle Doctor.

古文：永安二年，除安西将军、河北太守。
现代文：永安二年，除授安西将军、河北太守。
English: In the second year of Yongan, he was awarded the title of General of Anxi Province and Governor of Hebei Province.

古文：还朝，久之，拜车骑将军、左光禄大夫，出为黎阳太守。
现代文：回到朝中，过了很长时间，朝廷拜授他为车骑将军、左光禄大夫，出任黎阳太守。
English: After returning to the court, it took a long time for the court to bestow upon him the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry, Doctor of the Left Hand, and Governor of Liyang.

古文：所在无政绩。
现代文：所任没有政绩。
English: The appointment has no political merit.

古文：天平中，坐子尚书郎洪业入于关中，率众侵扰，伏法。
现代文：天平年间，因子尚书郎刘洪业入于关中率众侵扰，伏法而死。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Liu Hongye, the factor of Shang Shulang, entered the Guanzhong rate of public intrusion, and died in the process.

古文：傅永，字修期，清河人也。
现代文：傅永，字修期，清河人氏。
English: Fu Yong, a member of the Qinghe people.

古文：幼随叔父洪仲与张幸自青州入国，寻复南奔。
现代文：幼年随叔父傅洪仲与张幸从青州入魏国，不久又南归。
English: In his childhood, he followed his uncle Fu Hongzhong and Zhang Xing from Qingzhou to Wei, and soon returned to the south.

古文：有气干，拳勇过人，能手执鞍桥，倒立驰骋。
现代文：傅永有力气胆量，拳脚功夫过人，能够手执鞍桥，倒立驰骋。
English: Fu Yong has strong courage, excellent boxing and footwork, can hold the saddle bridge in his hand, and can gallop upside down.

古文：年二十余，有友人与之书而不能答，请于洪仲，洪仲深让之而不为报。
现代文：二十多岁，有位友人给他写了封信而他不能写信回答，请求洪仲帮忙，洪仲深深责怪他而不为他代笔。
English: In his twenties, a friend wrote him a letter and he couldn't write back, asking Hong Zhong for help. Hong Zhong deeply blamed him for not writing for him.

古文：永乃发愤读书，涉猎经史，兼有才笔。
现代文：傅永于是发愤读书，涉猎经史，练就好文笔。
English: Fu Yong then read furiously, dabbled in history, and practiced good writing.

古文：自东阳禁防为崔道固城局参军，与道固俱降，入为平齐民。
现代文：从东阳禁防转任崔道固城局参军，与道固一起降归朝廷，在平齐当百姓。
English: He was transferred from the Dongyang Forbidden City to the Cui Daogu City Bureau to join the army, and together with Daogu, he returned to the imperial court and became a commoner in Pingqi.

古文：父母并老，饥寒十数年。赖其强于人事，戮力佣丐，得以存立。
现代文：父母都已年老，家中饥寒交迫达十几年，依仗其强于人事，勉力受雇于别人得以养家糊口。
English: Both parents are old, and the family has been suffering from hunger and cold for more than a dozen years. They rely on their strength in personnel, and are barely employed by others to feed their families.

古文：晚乃被召，兼治礼郎，诣长安，拜文明太后父燕宣王庙，赐爵贝丘男，加伏波将军。
现代文：很晚才被朝廷征召，兼治礼郎，往长安拜文明太后父燕宣王庙，朝廷赐爵贝丘男，加授伏波将军。
English: He was called up by the imperial court at a very late date. He served concurrently as Jireiro and went to Chang'an to pay homage to Yan Xuan Wang Miao, the father of the Empress Dowager Wenming. The imperial court gave him the title of Becchuan and the additional title of General Fubo.

古文：未几，除中书博士，又改为议郎。
现代文：没多久，朝廷任他为中书博士，又改任议郎。
English: Not long after, the Imperial Court appointed him Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy, and he was also reappointed as Heiro.

古文：转尚书考功郎中，为大司马从事中郎。
现代文：转任尚书考功郎中，为大司马从事中郎。
English: He was transferred to Shang Shuko, a meritorious student, and worked as a junior high school teacher for Oshima.

古文：寻转都督、任城王澄长史，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：不久又转任都督、任城王元澄长史，兼任尚书左丞。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of the governor of the capital, the post of the king of the city, Yuancheng Changshi, and concurrently the post of the secretary of the left.

古文：王肃之为豫州，以永为建武将军、平南长史。
现代文：王肃任职豫州，任命傅永为建武将军、平南长史。
English: Wang Su served in Yuzhou, appointed Fu Yong as Jianwu General, and Pingnan Changshi.

古文：咸阳王禧虑肃难信，言于高祖。
现代文：咸阳王元禧考虑王肃不可靠，在高祖面前说了他的看法。
English: Xianyang Wang Yuanxi considered Wang Su to be unreliable and expressed his opinion in front of Gao Zu.

古文：高祖曰： 已选傅修期为其长史，虽威仪不足，而文武有余矣。 
现代文：高祖说： 朕已选了傅修期为其长史，虽然他威仪不够，但文武才干足够了。 
English: Gao Zu said: I have chosen Fu Xiu period as its long history. Although his dignity is not enough, his literary and military ability is enough.

古文：肃以永宿士，礼之甚厚。
现代文：王肃认为傅永是有资格的人，很优厚地对待他。
English: Wang Su thought that Fu Yong was a qualified person and treated him very generously.

古文：永亦以肃为高祖眷遇，尽心事之，情义至穆。
现代文：傅永也以王肃被高祖宠爱，尽心侍奉，情义至厚。
English: Fu Yong, also known as Wang Su, was loved by Gao Zu, served him wholeheartedly, and was very affectionate.

古文：萧鸾遣将鲁康祚、赵公政众号一万，侵豫州之太仓口。
现代文：萧鸾派将鲁康祚、赵公政领军号称一万，侵犯豫州的太仓口。
English: The Xiao Yu faction led by Lu Kangtao and Zhao Gongzheng claimed to have 10,000 soldiers and invaded Taicangkou in Yuzhou.

古文：肃令永勒甲士三千击之。
现代文：王肃指令傅永统军三千迎击。
English: Wang Su ordered Fu Yongtong's army of three thousand to counterattack.

古文：时康祚等军于淮南，永舍淮北十有余里。
现代文：当时鲁康祚等驻军淮水以南，傅永在离淮十里的北岸扎营。
English: At that time, Lu Kangjun and other garrisons were stationed south of Huai Shui, and Fu Yong was encamped on the north bank ten miles from Huai Shui.

古文：永量吴楚之兵，好以斫营为事，即夜分兵二部，出于营外。
现代文：傅永思量吴楚之兵，喜欢干斫砍营帐的事，便在晚上分兵两股，出于大营之外。
English: Fu Yong thought about Wu Chu's soldiers and liked the idea of chopping down camp tents, so in the evening he divided the soldiers into two groups and marched out of the camp.

古文：又以贼若夜来，必应渡淮之所，以火记其浅处。
现代文：又考虑敌人如晚上前来，必定要渡淮河的地点，用火标记其浅的地方。
English: They also considered that if the enemy came at night, they would have to cross the Huaihe River and mark its shallow areas with fire.

古文：永既设伏，乃密令人以瓠盛火，渡淮南岸，当深处置之。教之云： 若有火起，即亦然之。 
现代文：傅永既已设下埋伏，又秘密令人用瓢盛火，渡到淮河南岸，要他们深深埋伏起来，教他们说： 如有火起，即要如何如何。 
English: Fu Yong had already set up an ambush, and secretly had people cross to the south bank of the Huai River with a large bonfire. He wanted them to set up a deep ambush and taught them: "If there is a fire, that's what you should do."

古文：其夜，康祚、公政等果亲率领，来斫永营。
现代文：这天夜里，鲁康祚、赵公政等人果然亲率人马，前来斫营。
English: On this night, Lu Kangyao, Zhao Gongzheng and others came to camp with their families.

古文：东西二伏夹击之，康祚等奔趋淮水。
现代文：傅永东西两面伏军夹攻敌军，康祚等奔往淮河。
English: Fu Yong attacked the enemy army from both the east and west, and Kang Xi and others rushed to the Huaihe River.

古文：火既竞起，不能记其本济，遂望永所置之火而争渡焉。
现代文：火既群起，他们便不记得本来应该渡河的位置，于是直奔傅永所设置的燃火地方争渡淮河。
English: When the fire broke out, they did not remember where they were supposed to cross the river, so they went straight to the fire place set up by Fu Yong to cross the Huai River.

古文：水深，溺死、斩首者数千级，生擒公政。
现代文：水很深，敌军淹死，被杀的有数千人，生捉赵公政。
English: The water was very deep, the enemy drowned, thousands of people were killed, and Zhao Gongzheng was captured alive.

古文：康祚人马坠淮，晓而获其尸，斩首，并公政送京师。
现代文：鲁康祚的人马都坠入淮河，天亮后找到他的尸体，砍下脑袋，与赵公政一起送到京城。
English: Lu Kangyao's men all fell into the Huai River. After dawn, his body was found, his head was chopped off, and he and Zhao Gongzheng were sent to Beijing.

古文：公政，岐州刺史超宗之从兄也。
现代文：赵公政，是岐州刺史赵超宗的堂兄。
English: Zhao Gongzheng is the cousin of the famous Qizhou poet Zhao Chaozong.

古文：时裴叔业率王茂先、李定等来侵楚王戍。
现代文：当时，裴叔业率领王茂先、李定等人前来侵犯楚王戍营。
English: At that time, Pei Shuhei led Wang Maoxian, Li Ding and others to invade the camp of King Chu.

古文：永适还州，肃复令大讨之。
现代文：傅永刚好回到豫州，王肃又令傅永前去讨伐。
English: Fu Yong just happened to return to Yuzhou, and Wang Su ordered Fu Yong to go and fight.

古文：永将心腹一人驰诣楚王戍，至即令填塞外堑，夜伏战士一千人于城外。
现代文：傅永令心腹一名驰马楚王戍，到那之后即令填塞外壕沟，夜晚在城外埋伏一千名将士。
English: Fu Yong ordered his henchman, a horse-riding Chu Wang Qi, to go there, and then ordered the outer trenches to be filled, and a thousand soldiers were ambushed outside the city at night.

古文：晓而叔业等至江，于城东列陈，将置长围。
现代文：天亮后，裴叔业等来到，在城池东面屯军，摆开阵势，准备长围楚王戍。
English: After daybreak, Pei Shuhei and others arrived and set up a garrison on the east side of the city, set up a position, and prepared to encircle Chu Wangtao.

古文：永所伏兵于左道击其后军，破之。
现代文：傅永所派的伏军在左道打击叔业的后军，攻破敌阵。
English: The ambush force sent by Fu Yong attacked Shudi's rearguard on the left and broke through the enemy line.

古文：叔业乃令将佐守所列之陈，自率精甲数千救之。
现代文：裴叔业于是令将佐把守所列之阵，自己率领精兵数千救危。
English: Pei Shuhei then ordered the generals to guard the listed positions, and he himself led thousands of elite soldiers to save the day.

古文：永上门楼，观叔业南行五六里许，更开门奋击，遂摧破之。
现代文：傅永登上门楼，看见裴叔业已南行五、六里，便开门奋击，于是攻破敌阵。
English: Fu Yong boarded the gate tower, saw that Uncle Pei had already traveled five or six miles south, opened the door and fought hard, thus breaking through the enemy line.

古文：叔业进退失图，于是奔走。
现代文：裴叔业不知如何进退才好，于是奔逃而去。
English: Uncle Pei did not know how to advance or retreat, so he ran away.

古文：左右欲追之，永曰： 弱卒不满三千，彼精甲犹盛，非力屈而败，自堕吾计中耳。
现代文：傅永左右准备追击，傅永说： 我们弱卒不满三千，敌人精兵犹多，并不是力量不足而被打败，他们是中了我的计策才逃散的。
English: Fu Yong was preparing to pursue. Fu Yong said, "Our weak pawns are less than three thousand, and the enemy's elite soldiers are few. It's not that they were defeated for lack of strength. They were only able to escape because of my strategy."

古文：既不测我之虚实，足丧其胆。
现代文：敌人既然不知我军虚实，这就足以丧敌之胆了。
English: Since the enemy does not know whether our army is real or fake, this is enough to discourage the enemy.

古文：存此足矣，何假逐之？ 
现代文：俘虏了这些敌人足够了，何必再去追呢。 
English: Capturing these enemies is enough, why do we have to chase them again?

古文：获叔业伞扇鼓幕甲仗万余。
现代文：俘获叔业伞扇鼓幕甲仗万余。
English: Captured Shuhei umbrella fan drum curtain battle more than ten thousand.

古文：两月之中，遂献再捷，高祖嘉之，遣谒者就豫州策拜永安远将军、镇南府长史、汝南太守、贝丘县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：两个月中，两次大捷，高祖很是高兴，派使者在豫州就地拜授傅永为安远将军、镇南府长史、汝南太守、贝丘县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: In two months, two great victories, Gao Zu was very happy. He sent envoys to pay homage to Fu Yong as General Anyuan, the governor of Zhenan Prefecture, the governor of Yunnan Province, the founder of Beiqiu County, and 200 households in Shiyou.

古文：高祖每叹曰： 上马能击贼，下马作露布，唯傅修期耳。 
现代文：高祖每每感叹说： 上马能击贼，下马作露布，只有傅修期啊。 
English: Gaozhu lamented, "Getting on a horse can defeat a thief, getting off a horse can be used as a disguise, and there is only a period of cultivation.

古文：裴叔业又围涡阳，时高祖在豫州，遣永为统军，与高聪、刘藻、成道益、任莫问等往救之。
现代文：裴叔业又围攻涡阳，当时高祖在豫州，派傅永统军，与高聪、刘藻、成道益、任莫问等人前往救助。
English: Pei Shuhei also besieged Wuyang. At that time, Gao Zu was in Yuzhou and sent Fu Yongtong, Gao Cong, Liu Mo, Cheng Daoyi, Ren Mo Qian and others to the rescue.

古文：军将逼贼，永曰： 先深沟固垒，然后图之。 
现代文：军队逼近敌人，傅永说： 先深挖壕沟，加固壁垒，然后图取敌人。 
English: The army is approaching the enemy, Fu Yong said: First dig a deep trench, strengthen the barrier, and then take the enemy.

古文：聪等不从，裁营辎重，便击之，一战而败。
现代文：高聪等不听，刚刚安顿好辎重，便攻击敌人，一战而败。
English: Gao Cong didn't listen, and just after settling down, he attacked the enemy and was defeated in a single battle.

古文：聪等弃甲，径奔悬瓠。
现代文：高聪等弃甲而逃，经奔悬瓠。
English: Gao Cong and the others abandoned their armor and fled.

古文：永独收散卒徐还，贼追至，又设伏击之，挫其锋锐。
现代文：傅永独收拾散落兵卒徐徐还退，敌人追到，又设下埋伏打败敌人，挫其锋锐。
English: Fu Yongdul picked up the scattered soldiers and slowly retreated, the enemy chased him, and set up an ambush to defeat the enemy and frustrate his sharpness.

古文：四军之兵，多赖之以免。
现代文：四支军马，多赖他才得以幸免。
English: He was spared only by the intervention of four army horses.

古文：永至悬瓠，高祖俱锁之。
现代文：傅永到了悬瓠，高祖把他们都锁闭起来。
English: When Fu Yong arrived at the gallows, Gao Zu locked them all up.

古文：聪、藻徙为边民，永免官爵而已。
现代文：高聪、刘藻贬为边民。傅永仅仅被免去了官爵。
English: Gao Cong and Liu Mo were downgraded to border residents. Fu Yong was only stripped of his title.

古文：不经旬日，诏曰： 修期在后少有擒杀，可扬武将军、汝阴镇将，带汝阴太守。 
现代文：没过十天，帝下诏书说： 修期前番督后，使我军少有擒杀，可任扬武将军、汝阴镇将，带领汝阴太守。 
English: Less than ten days later, the imperial edict said: "Since the former governor has been rehabilitated, our army has rarely fought, and he can be appointed as Yangwu General, Ruyin Town General, and lead Ruyin Province.

古文：景明初，裴叔业将以寿春归国，密通于永，永具表闻。
现代文：景明初年，裴叔业打算以寿春归顺朝廷，秘密通报傅永，傅永上表报告。
English: In the first year of Jingming, Pei Shuhei planned to return to the imperial court with Shuchun, secretly informed Fu Yong, and Fu Yong submitted a report.

古文：及将迎纳，诏永为统军，与杨大眼、奚康生等诸军俱入寿春。
现代文：等到准备迎降，帝诏傅永为统军，与杨大眼、奚康生等诸路军马一起进入寿春。
English: When it was time to prepare for the surrender, Emperor Fu Yong was the unifying force, and he entered Shouchun together with Yang Dajian, Yao Kangsheng and other soldiers and horses.

古文：同日而永在后，故康生、大眼二人并赏列土，永唯清河男。
现代文：同日进城而傅永在后，所以奚康生、杨大眼二人都受封邑之赏，而傅永只是被授清河男爵位。
English: He entered the city on the same day, while Fu Yong was behind him. Therefore, Yan Kangsheng and Yang Dajian were both rewarded with fiefs, while Fu Yong was only awarded the title of Baron of Qinghe.

古文：萧宝卷将陈伯之侵逼寿春，沿淮为寇。
现代文：萧宝卷将领陈伯之侵逼寿春，沿淮寇犯。
English: Xiao Bao rolled the invasion of General Chen Bo to force Shuchun, along the Huai River.

古文：时司徒、彭城王勰，广陵侯元衍同镇寿春，以九江初附，人情未洽，兼台援不至，深以为忧。
现代文：当时司徒、彭城王元勰，广陵侯元衍等同镇寿春，因九江刚刚归附，人心不稳，加上援兵不至，形势十分危急。
English: At that time, Szeto, Pengcheng Wangyuanqian, Guangling Houyuanqian and others were in the same town of Shuchun. Because Jiujiang had just been annexed, people's minds were unstable, and reinforcements were not coming, the situation was very critical.

古文：诏遣永为统军，领汝阴之兵三千人先援之。
现代文：帝下诏派遣傅永为统军，领汝阴之兵三千人先行援救。
English: Emperor Yao dispatched Fu Yong as the unified army and led the three thousand soldiers of Ruyin to rescue first.

古文：永总勒士卒，水陆俱下，而淮水口伯之防之甚固。
现代文：傅永总勒兵士，水陆并进，但淮水口被陈伯之防守得十分坚固。
English: Fu Yong, General Le's soldier, advanced by land and sea, but Huai Shuikou was defended very firmly by Chen Bo.

古文：永去二十余里，牵船上汝南岸，以水牛挽之，直南超淮，下船便渡。
现代文：傅永在离淮水口二十里的地方，牵船上了汝水南岸，用水牛挽拖船只，径直向南奔淮河而来，下船便渡。
English: Twenty miles from the mouth of the Huai River, Fu Yong took the boat to the south bank of the Ru Shui River, towed the boat with a water ox, went straight to the south of the Huai River, disembarked and then crossed.

古文：适上南岸，贼军亦及。
现代文：刚刚上了淮河南岸，敌人也赶到。
English: Just after reaching the south bank of the Huai River, the enemy also arrived.

古文：会时已夜，永乃潜进，晓达寿春城下。
现代文：正好当时已入夜，傅永于是悄悄前进，天明军队到了寿春城下。
English: At that time, it was already night, so Fu Yong quietly advanced, and the Tianming army arrived at the foot of Shouchun Castle.

古文：勰、衍闻外有军，共上门楼观望，然不意永至。永免胄，乃信之，遂引永上。
现代文：元勰、元衍听说城外有军队，一起登上城门观看，但没想到傅永到了，傅永脱下盔甲，这才相信，于是引傅永上城。
English: Yuan Li and Yuan Yan heard that there was an army outside the city, and they went up to the city gate together to watch, but they did not expect Fu Yong to arrive. Fu Yong took off his armor, which they believed, so they led Fu Yong to the city.

古文：勰谓永曰： 北望以久，恐洛阳难复可见。不意卿能至也。 
现代文：元勰对傅永说： 我们北望已久，正担心难以再次见到洛阳城，没想到卿你就来了。 
English: Yuan Xuan said to Fu Yong: "We have been looking north for a long time and are worried that it will be difficult to see Luoyang City again. I didn't expect you to come."

古文：勰令永引军入城。
现代文：元勰下令让军队进城。
English: Yuan Shao ordered the army to enter the city.

古文：永曰： 执兵被甲，固敌是求，若如教旨，便共殿下同被围守，岂是救援之意？ 
现代文：傅永说： 执兵披甲，为的是克敌，如像您所教示的，便会与殿下一起被围困，这哪是救援本意？ 
English: Fu Yong said, "When a soldier puts on armor in order to defeat the enemy, if he does as you have instructed, he will be besieged together with His Imperial Highness. What is the intention of rescue?

古文：遂孤军城外，与勰并势以击伯之，频有克捷。
现代文：于是孤军驻扎城外，与元勰一起合势打击伯之，屡有胜仗。
English: Liang's army around Xiaojian and Dajian also abandoned the city and fled to the west, and Yizhou was pacified. The Empress Dowager herself wrote a letter of condolence to Jianye, giving him a horse and a sword. Later, he was transferred to Qizhou Jishi, and then to Liangzhou Jishi.

古文：中山王英之征义阳，永为宁朔将军、统军、当长围遏其南门。
现代文：中山王元英征伐义阳，傅永任宁朔将军、统军，当长围堵其南门。
English: Wang Yuanying of Zhongshan conquered Yiyang, Fu Yong was appointed general of Ningshuo, unified the army, and became the leader of the siege of its southern gate.

古文：萧衍将马仙卑连营稍进，规解城围。
现代文：萧衍将马仙王卑连营渐进，试图解除城围。
English: Xiao Yan gradually marched Ma Xian Wang Bei to the camp and tried to lift the siege.

古文：永谓英曰： 凶竖豕突，意在决战。
现代文：傅永对元英说： 敌人疯狂往来，意图决战。
English: Fu Yong said to Yuan Ying: The enemy is making frantic contacts, intending to fight a decisive battle.

古文：雅山形要，宜早据之。 
现代文：雅山地形险要，应早点占据。 
English: The terrain of Yashan is precarious and should be occupied early.

古文：英沉吟未决，永曰： 机者如神，难遇易失，今日不往，明朝必为贼有，虽悔无及。 
现代文：元英沉吟未决，傅永说： 机者如神，难遇易失，今天不去，明朝必定被敌人占有，那时后悔都来不及。 
English: Yuan Ying was pensive and undecided. Fu Yong said, "Craftsmen are like gods. Difficult times are easy to lose. If you don't go today, tomorrow morning you will surely be occupied by the enemy. At that time, it will be too late to regret."

古文：英乃分兵，通夜筑城于山上，遣统军张怀等列陈于山下以防之。
现代文：元英于是分兵，彻夜不眠在山上筑城，派统军张怀等陈兵山下以防敌人。
English: As a result, Yuan Ying divided his troops, stayed up all night building a city on the mountain, and sent Zhang Huai and other Chen soldiers down the mountain to prevent the enemy.

古文：至晓，仙琕果至，怀等战败，筑城者悉皆奔退，仙琕乘胜直趋长围，义阳城人复出挑战。
现代文：到天亮，仙王卑果然领兵前来，张怀等战败，筑城士兵全都奔散而去，仙王卑乘胜直趋长围，义阳城人又出城挑战。
English: At dawn, Emperor Xianwangbei led the troops to come, Zhang Huai and others were defeated, the soldiers who built the city all dispersed, Emperor Xianwangbei continued to win, and the people of Yiyang City went out of the city to challenge.

古文：永乃分兵付长史贾思祖，令守营垒，自将马步千人南逆仙琕。
现代文：傅永于是分出兵力交付长史贾思祖，令他守住营垒，自统马步兵千余人南迎仙王卑。
English: Fu Yong then dispatched troops to the commander Shi Jia Szu, ordered him to hold the camp, and more than a thousand infantrymen from Tongma marched south to confront Xian Wangbei.

古文：擐甲挥戈，单骑先入，唯有军主蔡三虎副之，余人无有及者。
现代文：傅永披甲挥戈，单骑先自冲敌阵，只有军主蔡三虎紧随其后，其余人都被甩在后面。
English: Fu Yong, wearing armor and brandishing a sword, charged into the enemy ranks alone. Only the commander Cai Sanhu followed, the rest were left behind.

古文：突陈横过，贼射永洞其左股，永拔箭复入，遂大破之，斩仙琕子。
现代文：突阵横过，敌人射穿了傅永的左腿，傅永拔出箭又冲入敌阵，大破敌军，斩杀马仙王卑儿子。
English: The enemy shot through Fu Yong's left leg. Fu Yong pulled out an arrow and rushed into the enemy line, smashing the enemy army and killing Ma Xian Wang Bi's son.

古文：仙琕烧营席卷而遁。
现代文：仙王卑烧了营帐席卷而去。
English: The fairy king burned down the camp and swept away.

古文：英于陈谓永曰： 公伤矣，且还营。 
现代文：元英在阵前对傅永说： 公伤了，暂且还营去吧。 
English: Before the battle, Yuan Ying said to Fu Yong, "I'm injured, let's go back to the camp for the time being."

古文：永曰： 昔汉祖扪足，不欲人知。
现代文：傅永说： 过去汉祖扪足，不想人知自己受伤。
English: Fu Yong said: In the past, the Han ancestors were lame and did not want people to know that they were injured.

古文：下官虽微，国家一帅，奈何使虏有伤将之名！ 
现代文：下官虽然算不上什么，但也是国家一帅，怎能让敌人有伤我将的名声！ 
English: Although a subordinate officer is nothing, he is also a national hero. How can I let the enemy damage my reputation?

古文：遂与诸军追之，极夜而返，时年七十余矣。
现代文：便与诸军一道追杀敌人，到深更半夜才回来，当时傅永已经七十多岁了。
English: He then chased and killed the enemy together with the troops, and only returned in the middle of the night, when Fu Yong was more than seventy years old.

古文：三军莫不壮之。
现代文：三军人马无不以之为壮。
English: The three soldiers all think of him as strong.

古文：义阳既平，英使司马陆希道为露板，意谓不可，令永改之。
现代文：义阳既平之后，元英让司马陆希道写露板，不满意，令傅永修改。
English: After the fall of Yiyang, Yuan Ying let Sima Lu Xi Dao write the dewboard, but he was not satisfied, so he ordered Fu Yong to revise it.

古文：永亦不增文彩，直与之改陈列军仪，处置形要而已。
现代文：傅永也不增文采，只改写阵列军仪，处置形要而已。
English: Fu Yong did not add to the literature, only rewrote the array of military etiquette, and only dealt with the essentials.

古文：而英深赏之，叹曰： 观此经算，虽有金城汤池亦不能守矣。 
现代文：而元英十分赞赏，赞叹说： 观此谋划，敌人即使有全城汤池也不能守住。 
English: However, Yuan Ying was very appreciative and said with admiration: "Looking at this plan, even if the enemy has the whole city of Tangchi, they can't hold it.

古文：还京复封，永先有男爵，至是以品不累加，赐帛二千匹。
现代文：还京之后，复傅永封号，傅永先有男爵封号，至此也不累加，皇上赐帛二千匹。
English: After returning to Beijing, Fu Yongfu was restored, and Fu Yongfu was first given the title of baron. The emperor gave him two thousand horses.

古文：除太中大夫，行秦梁二州事，代邢峦镇汉中。
现代文：除授太中大夫，行秦、梁二州事，代替邢峦镇守汉中。
English: In addition to conferring the title of grandmaster, he carried out the affairs of Qin and Liang in the two states, and took the place of Zhang Zhen as the governor of Hanzhong.

古文：后还京师，于路除恆农太守，非心所乐。
现代文：后还归京师，在路途中被除任为恒农太守，他有些不高兴。
English: Later, he returned to Beijing and was removed from his post as governor of Hengnong Province on the way, which made him somewhat unhappy.

古文：时英东征钟离，连表请永，求以为将，朝廷不听。
现代文：当时元英东征钟离，连连上表请授傅永为将，朝廷没有答应。
English: At that time, Yuan Ying's eastward expedition was in full swing, and the imperial court did not agree to award Fu Yong as a general.

古文：永每言曰： 文渊、充国竟何人哉！
现代文：傅永每每说： 文渊、光国究竟是什么人呢！
English: Fu Yongbei said, "Wen Yuan, what kind of person is Guanggu Ma?

古文：吾独白首见拘此郡。 
现代文：我傅永白发苍苍竟见拘于此郡。 
English: I've never seen so many white-haired people in this county.

古文：深用扼腕。
现代文：扼腕叹惜。
English: I almost feel sorry for them.

古文：然于治民非其所长，故在任无多声称。
现代文：但是治理民众并不是他的长处，所以在任没有多少治绩。
English: But governing the people is not his forte, so he has little to show for his time in office.

古文：未几，解郡，还为太中大夫，行南青州事，迁左将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：不久，解除郡职，还为太中大夫，行南青州事务，迁任左将军、南兖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was relieved of his county post, and he also served as the Vice-Minister of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China, and was transferred to the post of the Left General of the People's Republic of China and the Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：犹能驰射，盘马奋槊。
现代文：他还能驰马射箭，盘马奋戈。
English: He can also ride a horse, shoot arrows, and fight on horseback.

古文：时年逾八十，常讳言老，每自称六十九。
现代文：时年已过八十，常忌讳人说他老，经常自称六十九岁。
English: Now in his eighties, he is not afraid to say he is old, and often claims to be 69.

古文：还京，拜平东将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：还京之后，拜授平东将军、光禄大夫。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the titles of General Pingdong and Doctor Guanglu.

古文：熙平元年卒，年八十三。
现代文：熙平元年去世，享年八十三岁。
English: Heiping died in 1981, at the age of eighty-three.

古文：赠安东将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：朝廷赠他为安东将军、齐州刺史。
English: The imperial court presented him with the titles of General Anton and Chief Historian of Qizhou.

古文：永尝登北邙，于平坦处奋槊跃马，盘旋瞻望，有终焉之志。
现代文：傅永曾经登临北邙，在平坦的地方奋戈跃马，盘旋瞻望，有终老于此的想法。
English: Fu Yong once went to Beilun, struggled in a flat place, circled and looked around, and had the idea of staying here forever.

古文：远慕杜预，近好李冲、王肃，欲葬附其墓，遂买左右地数顷，遗敕子叔伟曰： 此吾之永宅也。 
现代文：他远慕杜预，近好李冲、王肃，想葬附其墓，于是买下左右地数顷，遗嘱儿子傅叔伟说： 这是我的永住之宅。 
English: He admired Du Yuan from afar, and liked Li Chong and Wang Su from nearby. He wanted to have their tombs annexed, so he bought several hectares of land to the left and right. He told his son Fu Shuwei in his will: "This is my permanent residence."

古文：永妻贾氏留于本乡，永至代都，娶妾冯氏，生叔伟及数女。
现代文：傅永妻贾氏留于家乡，傅永到了代都，娶妾冯氏，生下叔伟及几个女儿。
English: Fu Yong's wife Jia stayed in his hometown, Fu Yong went to the capital, married his concubine Feng, and gave birth to Shu Wei and several daughters.

古文：贾后归平城，无男，唯一女。
现代文：贾氏后归彭城，没儿子，只生一个女儿。
English: Mr. Jia later returned to Pengcheng. He had no son and only one daughter.

古文：冯恃子事贾无礼，叔伟亦奉贾不顺，贾常忿之。
现代文：冯氏凭借儿子侍奉贾氏无礼，叔伟侍奉贾氏也不孝顺，贾氏常常忿忿不平。
English: Mr. Feng was rude to serve Mr. Jia with his son, and Uncle Wei was not obedient to serve Mr. Jia. Mr. Jia was often angry.

古文：冯先永亡，及永之卒，叔伟称父命欲葬北邙。
现代文：冯氏先于傅永而亡，等傅永去世，叔伟称父命想葬于北邙。
English: Feng died before Fu Yong, and when Fu Yong died, Shu Wei said that his father wanted to be buried in Beilun.

古文：贾疑叔伟将以冯合葬，贾遂求归葬永于所封贝丘县。
现代文：贾氏怀疑叔伟想把他与冯氏一起合葬，贾氏于是请求将傅永归葬于所封的贝丘县。
English: Mr. Jia suspected that Mr. Shuwei wanted to bury him together with Mr. Feng. Mr. Jia then requested that Fu Yong be buried in the fenced Beichu County.

古文：事经司徒，司徒胡国珍本与永同经征役，感其所慕，许叔伟葬焉。
现代文：事情闹到了司徒那里，司徒胡国珍本与傅永同经征战，感其所慕，答应叔伟把他葬在北邙。
English: The matter was brought to the attention of Szeto. Szeto, who had been conscripted into the war together with Hu Guozhenben and Fu Yong, admired him and agreed to let Shu Wei bury him in Beilun.

古文：贾乃邀诉灵太后，灵太后遂从贾意。
现代文：贾氏于是上诉到了灵太后那里，灵太后又听从了贾氏想法。
English: Mr. Jia then appealed to the Empress Dowager, who listened to Mr. Jia's idea.

古文：事经朝堂，国珍理不能得，乃葬于东清河。
现代文：事经朝堂，胡国珍的想法得不到响应，于是葬傅永于东清河。
English: After going through the court, Hu Guozhen's idea did not get a response, so he buried Fu Yong in the East Qing River.

古文：又永昔营宅兆，葬父母于旧乡，贾于此强徙之，与永同处，永宗亲不能抑。
现代文：又傅永过去建造墓基，葬父母于旧乡，贾氏于此强行移葬，与傅永同处一墓，傅永宗亲不能抑止。
English: Yuancheng appointed as Yongzhou chief historian, hired him to join the army for the prefectural record. Soon, he assumed the position of managing Fengye County.

古文：葬已数十年矣，棺为桑枣根所绕束，去地尺余，甚为周固，以斧斩斫，出之于坎，时人咸怪。
现代文：这时傅永下葬已经数十年了，棺木被桑枣树根所缠绕，离地面一尺多，很是坚固，便用斧砍去根茎，挖出棺木，上面都已坑坑坎坎了，当时人都很奇怪。
English: At this time, Fu Yong had been buried for decades. The coffin was wrapped by the roots of the mulberry jujube tree. It was more than a foot off the ground and very strong. They used an axe to cut the rhizome and dig out the coffin. The top of the coffin was full of holes. At that time, everyone was very strange.

古文：未三年而叔伟亡。
现代文：不到三年，叔伟也死了。
English: Less than three years later, Shu Wei also died.

古文：叔伟，九岁为州主簿。
现代文：叔伟，九岁任州主簿。
English: Shu Wei, the nine-year-old state chief registrar.

古文：及长，膂力过人，弯弓三百斤，左右驰射，又能立马上与人角骋。见者以为得永之武而不得永文也。
现代文：长大以后，臂力过人，可弯三百斤力气的弓，左右驰射，又能立于马上与人竞驰，见到的人都认为他得到傅永之武而不得他的文。
English: After he grew up, his arm strength was superior to others, he could bend a bow with three hundred pounds of strength, he could shoot left and right, and he could stand on the horse and race with others. People who saw him thought that he got Fu Yong's martial arts but not his writing.

古文：正光中，叔伟子丰生袭封。
现代文：正光年间，叔伟子丰生袭其爵位。
English: During the reign of Masamitsu, Shuheiko Hosho succeeded to his peerage.

古文：傅竖眼，本清河人。
现代文：傅竖眼，籍贯本是清河。
English: Fu Jianye is originally from Qinghe.

古文：七世祖伷。
现代文：七世祖傅亻由。
English: After returning to the capital, he continued to work as a ranger.

古文：伷子遘，石虎太常。
现代文：亻由子傅遘，任石虎的太常卿。
English: He was succeeded by his son Fu Xi, who was appointed as the Tai Changqing of Shihu.

古文：祖父融南徙渡河，家于磐阳，为乡闾所重。
现代文：祖父傅融南迁渡过黄河，定居磐阳，为乡里所尊重。
English: His grandfather, Fu Rongnan, migrated across the Yellow River and settled in Iwayang, and was respected by the township.

古文：性豪爽。
现代文：傅融性格豪爽。
English: Fu Rong has a strong character.

古文：有三子，灵庆、灵根、灵越，并有才力。
现代文：生有三个儿子，灵庆、灵根、灵越，都有才干勇力。
English: He has three sons, Lingqing, Linggen and Lingyue, all of whom are talented and courageous.

古文：融以此自负，谓足为一时之雄。
现代文：傅融以此为自豪，称凭这一点便足以为一时英雄。
English: Fu Rong is proud of this and considers himself a hero for the moment.

古文：尝谓人曰： 吾昨夜梦有一骏马，无堪乘者，人曰： 何由得人乘之？ 
现代文：曾经跟别人说： 我昨晚做了一个梦：有一匹骏马，无人敢骑，人们说： 到哪里去找骑这匹骏马的人呢？ 
English: I had a dream last night: there was a great horse that no one dared to ride, and the people said, "Where can we find a rider for this great horse?"

古文：有一人对曰： 唯有傅灵庆堪乘此马。 
现代文：有一人说： 只有傅灵庆可以乘坐此马。 
English: One person said: Only Fu Lingqing can ride this horse.

古文：又有弓一张，亦无人堪引，人曰： 唯有傅灵根可以弯此弓。 
现代文：又有弓一张，也无人能拉开，人们说： 只有傅灵根可以使唤这弓。 
English: There is also a bow, which no one can draw, and people say, "Only Fulingren can use this bow."

古文：又有数纸文书，人皆读不能解，人曰： 唯傅灵越可解此文。 
现代文：又有数张纸的书，人们都读不懂其中的文意，人们说： 只有傅灵越可以解释。  
English: There are also several paper books, people can not read the meaning of the text, people say: Only Fu Ling Yue can explain.

古文：融意谓其三子文武才干，堪以驾驭当世。
现代文：傅融的意思是说他的三个儿子文才武艺足可为当世之先。
English: Fu Rong's meaning is that his three sons can be ahead of the times in literature and martial arts.

古文：常密谓乡人曰： 汝闻之不？
现代文：他还常常贴着别人的耳朵说： 你听说过没有？
English: He would also often whisper in other people's ears: Have you heard of it?

古文：鬲虫之子有三灵，此图谶之文也。 
现代文：融的儿子有三灵，这是图谶上的文字。 
English: Rong's son has three spirits, which is the writing on the picture frame.

古文：好事者然之，故豪勇之士多相归附。
现代文：好道听途说的人信以为真，这一造声势，当世豪杰纷纷前来依附。
English: Good hearsay is believed to be true, and today's heroes have come to adhere to this momentum.

古文：刘骏将萧斌、王玄谟寇碻磝，时融始死，玄谟强引灵庆为军主。
现代文：刘骏部将萧斌、王玄谟侵犯郂，当时傅融刚死，王玄谟硬是要让灵庆当他的军主。
English: Liu Xibe invaded Yunnan with Xiao Bin and Wang Xuan Mu. At that time, Fu Rong had just died, and Wang Xuan Mu insisted that Ling Qing should be his commander.

古文：将攻城，攻车为城内所烧，灵庆惧军法，诈云伤重，令左右舆之还营，遂与壮士数十骑遁还。
现代文：部队准备攻城，攻城车辆被守城士兵焚烧干净，攻城计划落空，傅灵庆害怕军法惩治，谎称自己伤势严重，命令部下用担架抬着返回大本营，半路上与跟随他的数十名勇士悄悄逃走了。
English: The troops prepared to attack the city, the attacking vehicles were burned clean by the soldiers defending the city, the siege plan failed, Fu Lingqing was afraid of military law punishment, falsely claimed that he was seriously injured, ordered his subordinates to carry him back to the base camp on a stretcher, and quietly fled halfway with dozens of warriors following him.

古文：斌、玄谟命追之。
现代文：萧斌、王玄谟下令追捕。
English: Xiao Bin and Wang Xuan Mu ordered the pursuit.

古文：左右谏曰： 灵庆兄弟并有雄才，兼其部曲多是壮勇，如彭超、户生之徒，皆一当数十人，援不虚发，不可逼也。
现代文：身边的人劝阻他们说： 傅灵庆兄弟都有雄才，加上部下都是亡命的勇士，诸如彭超、户生等人，他们都可以以一当十，弓不虚发，千万不可逼他太狠。
English: People around him tried to dissuade them, saying, "Fulingqing's brothers are all talented, and his subordinates are also warriors who have lost their lives, such as Peng Chao, Housheng, and others. They can all play one against ten, and their bows will not fail. You must not force him too hard."

古文：不如缓之。 
现代文：不如就此作罢。 
English: Let's just leave it at that.

古文：玄谟乃止。
现代文：玄谟便不追了。
English: Xuan Mu did not chase after him.

古文：灵庆至家，遂与二弟匿于山泽之间，时灵庆从叔乾爱为斌法曹参军。斌遣乾爱诱呼之，以腰刀为信，密令壮健者随之，而乾爱不知斌之欲图灵庆也。
现代文：灵庆跑回家之后，便与两个弟弟藏在山间野外。当时灵庆堂叔傅乾爱任萧斌的法曹参军，萧斌让乾爱诱骗灵庆出来，称保证不会杀他，并且给他腰刀以作凭证，但秘密地命令壮健武士跟随乾爱，而当时乾爱一点都不知道萧斌要杀灵庆的意图。
English: After Lingqing ran home, he and his two younger brothers hid in the mountains. At that time, Lingqing's uncle Qian Ai, Xiao Bin's legal officer, joined the army. Xiao Bin let Qian Ai lure Lingqing out, saying that he would not kill him, and gave him a waist knife as proof, but secretly ordered the strong samurai to follow Qian Ai. At that time, Qian Ai did not know anything about Xiao Bin's intention to kill Lingqing.

古文：既至灵庆间，对坐未久，斌所遣壮士执灵庆杀之。
现代文：到了灵庆藏匿的地方，叔侄落座不久，萧斌派来的武士一拥而上，拿住灵庆乱刀砍倒。
English: When they arrived at the place where Lingqing was hiding, not long after the uncle and nephew were seated, the samurai sent by Xiao Bin rushed up, grabbed Lingqing's rattlesnake and cut it down.

古文：灵庆将死，与母崔诀，言： 法曹杀人，不可忘也。 
现代文：灵庆快死时，与母亲崔氏诀别，说 法曹杀人，不可忘记 。
English: When Lingqing was about to die, he said goodbye to his mother, Cui, and said, "You must not forget the murder committed by Fa Cao."

古文：灵根、灵越奔河北。
现代文：灵根、灵越奔逃黄河以北。
English: Ministers on both sides are too scared to echo his words.

古文：灵越至京师，高宗见而奇之。
现代文：灵越到了京师，高宗见到他，十分惊奇。
English: When Ling Yue arrived in Beijing, Gao Zong was very surprised to see him.

古文：灵越因说齐民慕化，青州可平，高宗大悦。
现代文：灵越借此又说齐地百姓思求教化，青州可以平定，高宗一听，大为高兴。
English: Taking advantage of this, Ling Yue also said that all the people are seeking enlightenment, Qingzhou can be pacified, Gaozong listened and was very happy.

古文：拜灵越镇远将军、青州刺史、贝丘子，镇羊兰城；灵根为临齐副将，镇明潜垒。
现代文：拜授灵越为镇远将军、青州刺史、贝丘子爵位，镇守羊兰城；任命灵根为临齐副将，镇守明潜垒。
English: Lingyue was awarded the title of Zhenyuan General, Qingzhou Shizhu, and Beichu Viscount, and appointed the town guard of Yanglan City; Linggen was appointed the vice-general of Linqi, and the town guard of Ming Submarine Base.

古文：灵越北入之后，母崔氏遇赦免。
现代文：灵越驻防北地之后，母崔氏遇赦免罪。
English: Therefore, for his great contribution to the world, the imperial court rewarded him with the nine most valuable gifts, and even praised him with the flag used on the celestial chariot.

古文：刘骏恐灵越在边，扰动三齐，乃以灵越叔父琰为冀州治中，乾爱为乐陵太守。
现代文：刘骏担心灵越身在边地，骚扰三齐，于是任命灵越的叔父傅琰为冀州治中，乾爱为乐陵太守。
English: Liu Ye was worried that Ling Yue was on the periphery, harassing San Qi, so he appointed Ling Yue's uncle Fu Ye as the governor of Jizhou, and Qian Ai as the governor of Le Ling.

古文：乐陵与羊兰隔河相对，命琰遣其门生与灵越婢诈为夫妇投化以招之。
现代文：乐陵与羊兰隔黄河相望，刘骏又命令傅琰派遣其门生与灵越先前奴婢装做夫妻投奔灵越以图感化他投归自己。
English: Le Ling and Yang Lan were across the Yellow River from each other, and Liu Bei also ordered Fu Bei to send his protégé and Ling Yue, who had previously dressed up as a husband and wife, to Ling Yue in an attempt to persuade him to join him.

古文：灵越与母分离思积，遂与灵根相要南走。
现代文：灵越跟他的母亲分离已久，思念不已，于是便与灵根相邀南逃。
English: Ling Yue had been separated from his mother for a long time and missed her very much, so he and Ling Gen were invited to flee south.

古文：灵越与羊兰奋兵相击，乾爱遣船迎之，得免。
现代文：灵越与羊兰短兵相接，发生战斗，乾爱派船迎接，灵越免于灾难。
English: Ling Yue and Yang Lan's short soldiers met, a battle occurred, Qian Ai sent a ship to meet, and Ling Yue was spared from disaster.

古文：灵根差期，不得俱渡，临齐人觉知，剉斩杀之。
现代文：灵根错过日期，未能一起渡河，临齐人发现他的动向，就地把他斩杀。
English: Linggen missed the date and failed to cross the river together. Linqi people discovered his movement and killed him on the spot.

古文：乾爱出郡迎灵越，问灵根愆期之状，而灵越殊不应答，但言不知而已。
现代文：乾爱出郡治迎接灵越，询问他灵根延迟日期的情况，而灵越不好正面回答，只声称他不知道具体情况。
English: Qian Ai went out of the county to meet Ling Yue and asked him about the situation of the delay of the date, but Ling Yue replied positively, only claiming that he did not know the specific situation.

古文：乾爱不以为恶，敕左右出匣中乌皮裤褶，令灵越代所常服。
现代文：乾爱并不觉得这有什么，招呼左右拿中小箱中的乌皮裤子夹衣，让灵越脱下身上衣服，把它换上。
English: Qian Ai didn't think there was anything wrong with this. She said, "Take the black leather trouser jacket in the small and medium boxes, and let Ling Yue take off his clothes and put them on."

古文：灵越言不须。乾爱云： 汝岂可著体上衣服见垣公也？ 
现代文：灵越说没有必要，乾爱说： 你怎么能够穿着这身衣服去见垣公呢？ 
English: Ling Yue said it was not necessary, Qian Ai said: How can you wear this dress to see King Kakigami?

古文：时垣护之为刺史。
现代文：当时垣护之为刺史。
English: At that time, Kakiwago was a ghost town.

古文：灵越奋声言： 垣公！
现代文：灵越高声说： 垣公！
English: You may know a thing or two about the little tricks of carving insects, but what do you know about the big things when it comes to etiquette?

古文：垣公！
现代文：垣公！
English: Kakiko!

古文：著此当见南方国主，岂垣公也！ 
现代文：著此当见南方国主，哪是垣公呢。 
English: With this, the Lord of the Southern Kingdom is to be seen, but who is Lord Kaki?

古文：竟不肯著。
现代文：终于不肯换衣。
English: He finally refused to change his clothes.

古文：及至丹阳，刘骏见而礼之，拜员外郎、兗州司马，带鲁郡，而乾爱亦迁青、冀司马，带魏郡。
现代文：等到来到丹阳，刘骏见到灵越，以礼相待，拜授他为员外郎、兖州司马，带领鲁郡，而乾爱也升任青、冀二州司马，带领魏郡。
English: After arriving in Danyang, Liu Yao met Ling Yue, treated him with courtesy, and gave him the title of "foreign minister" and "state secretary of Zhangzhou" to lead Lu County, while Qian Ai was also promoted to "state secretary of Qing Dynasty" and "state secretary of Hebei Erzhou" to lead Wei County.

古文：后二人俱还建康。
现代文：后来，两人都回到建康。
English: Later, both of them returned to Jiankang.

古文：灵越意恆欲为兄复仇，而乾爱初不疑防，知乾爱嗜鸡肉葵菜食，乃为作之，下以毒药，乾爱饭还而卒。
现代文：灵越心中经常盘算为兄长报仇，而乾爱开始并不怀疑设防，灵越知道乾爱喜欢吃鸡肉葵菜之类，便为他煮烹此类菜肴，偷偷下毒，乾爱吃完，回家之后就死了。
English: Ling Yue knew that Qian Ai liked to eat chicken, sunflower and other dishes, so she cooked such dishes for him and secretly poisoned him. After Qian Ai finished eating, she died after returning home.

古文：后数年而灵越为太原太守，戍升城。
现代文：几年之后，灵越任太原太守，戍守升城。
English: A few years later, Ling Yue was appointed the governor of Taiyuan and became the governor of Shengcheng.

古文：后举兵同刘骏子子勋，子勋以灵越为前军将军。
现代文：后来与刘骏子的儿子子勋一同举兵，子勋让灵越为前军将军。
English: Later, he raised an army together with Liu Xunzi's son Zixun, and Zixun made Lingyue a former army general.

古文：子勋败，灵越军众散亡，为刘彧将王广之军人所擒，厉声曰： 我傅灵越也，汝得贼何不即杀！ 
现代文：子勋失败后，灵越的部下也纷纷散逃，灵越本人也被刘将领王广之的士兵捉住，傅灵越厉声说： 我是傅灵越，你们抓住贼首为何不立即斩杀！ 
English: After Zi Xun's defeat, Ling Yue's subordinates also fled in droves. Ling Yue himself was also caught by Liu General Wang Guangzhi's soldiers. Fu Ling Yue said sharply: I am Fu Ling Yue, why don't you seize the thief's head and immediately behead him!

古文：广之生送诣彧辅国府司马刘勔。
现代文：广之绑缚他送往刘辅国府司马刘面力那里。
English: After Guangzhi tied him up, he sent him to Liu Minli, Liu Fu's secretary of state.

古文：勔躬自慰劳，诘其叛逆，对曰： 九州唱义，岂独在我？ 
现代文：刘面力亲自慰劳，批评他依附叛逆，傅灵越回答说： 九州之内，义旗纷纷，叛逆之说，岂能独指我灵越？ 
English: Liu Mianli consoled him in person, criticizing him for clinging to rebellion, Fu Ling Yue replied: Within Kyushu, banners of righteousness abound, and speaking of rebellion, can I alone be referred to as Ling Yue?

古文：勔又问： 四方阻逆，无战不擒，主上皆加以大恩，即其才用，卿何不早归天阙，乃逃命草间乎？ 
现代文：刘面力又说： 四方叛贼，没有不战而被擒的，皇上都慈加大恩，量才任用，卿你为何不早归圣上，而却逃命混迹于草莽之间，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Liu Mianli also said, "There are no traitors in the four directions who were captured without a fight. The emperor is merciful and gracious, and only appoints those who are worthy of appointment. Sir, why did you not return to the holy land earlier, but fled for your life and wandered among the weeds? Why is this?

古文：灵越答曰： 薛公举兵淮北，威震天下，不能专任智勇，委付子侄，致败之由，实在于此。
现代文：灵越回答说： 薛公举兵淮北，威震天下，却不能专任智勇之士，而是委任于子侄，招致失败的原因，实在于此。
English: Only because he could not trust the wise and brave hero, he entrusted the important task to his sons and nephews.

古文：然事之始末，备皆参预，人生归于一死，实无面求活。 
现代文：然而，他举事首尾，我都参预，人生终究难免一死，今天被擒，实在无脸求生，只求一死。 
English: However, he raised the matter from beginning to end, and I participated in advance. After all, one death is inevitable in life. Today, I was arrested. I really have no face to survive, and I just want to die.

古文：勔壮其意，送诣建康。
现代文：面力为他义举深深感动，又把他送到建康。
English: They were deeply moved by his act of charity and sent him to Jiankang.

古文：刘彧欲加原宥，灵越辞对如一，终不回改，乃杀之。
现代文：刘面力想要原谅保护他，可是傅灵越口气一如先前，终不改初衷，只好把他杀了。
English: Liu Mianli wanted to forgive and protect him, but Fu Lingyue, as before, did not change his original intention and had to kill him.

古文：竖眼，即灵越子也。
现代文：傅竖眼，即是灵越的儿子。
English: Fu Hangye, that is, the son of Ling Yue.

古文：沉毅壮烈，少有父风。
现代文：沉着坚毅、性格刚烈，少年便有父亲气象。
English: Calm and resolute, with a strong character, the boy has his father's temperament.

古文：入国，镇南王肃见而异之，且奇其父节，倾心礼敬，表为参军。
现代文：入朝之后，镇南王肃一见即视为异人，并奇其父节，爱其父及其子，倾心礼遇厚待傅竖眼，表奏他为参军。
English: After entering the imperial court, Zhenan Wang Su was regarded as a stranger at first sight, and he was surprised by his father's birthday, loved his father and his son, and treated Fu Zhizhen with great courtesy, showing him to join the army.

古文：从肃征伐，累有战功，稍迁给事中、步兵校尉、左中郎将，常为统军，东西征伐。
现代文：跟随王肃征战，累建战功，渐渐迁任给事中、步兵校尉、左中郎将，经常为统军，率军东征西伐。
English: He followed Wang Su to go to war, accumulated military exploits, and was gradually transferred to the middle, infantry lieutenant, and left middle commander. He was often the unified army and led the army to the east and west.

古文：世宗时为建武将军，讨扬州贼。破之，仍镇于合肥，萧衍民归之者数千户。
现代文：世宗时任建武将军，讨伐扬州贼寇，平定扬州，仍然镇守合肥，萧衍属下百姓归附的有数千户。
English: At that time, Sejong held the position of General Jianwu, fought against the Yangzhou bandits, pacified Yangzhou, and still guarded Hefei. There are thousands of households attached to the people under Xiao Yan.

古文：后武兴氐杨集义反叛，推其兄子绍先为主，攻围关城。
现代文：后来武兴氐人杨集义反叛，推举竖眼兄子绍先为主帅，攻打围困关城。
English: Later, Wu Xing's subordinate, Yang Jiyi, rebelled and promoted his brother, Shao Xian, to the position of commander, and attacked and besieged Guancheng.

古文：梁州刺史邢峦遣竖眼讨之。
现代文：梁州刺史邢峦派遣竖眼讨伐他们。
English: Liangzhou Zhishu dispatched troops to fight them.

古文：集义众逆战，频破走之，乘胜追北，仍克武兴。
现代文：集义部下迎战。集义的军队频频战败逃走，竖眼乘胜追击，又攻克武兴军马。
English: The armies of the collectivists were frequently defeated and fled, pursued by the victors, and defeated by the horses of the Wu Xing army.

古文：还洛，诏假节，行南兗州事。
现代文：兵还洛阳，皇帝下诏他代持节，行使治南兖州事务。
English: The soldiers returned to Luoyang, and the emperor issued an edict to hold the festival on his behalf, exercising the power to govern the affairs of southern Luzhou.

古文：竖眼善于绥抚，南人多归之。
现代文：竖眼长于安定抚慰民心，南方百姓纷纷归附。
English: The people of the south have flocked to the party, which is more concerned with appeasing people's hearts than with stability.

古文：转昭武将军、益州刺史。
现代文：后转任昭武将军、益州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of General Akitake, and then to the post of Ikshu sashimi.

古文：以州初置，境逼巴獠，给羽林虎贲三百人，进号冠军将军。
现代文：朝廷以益州刚刚设置，治境逼近巴、獠，拨给他羽林虎贲三百人，加授傅竖眼冠军将军，统领此军。
English: The imperial court had just set up Yizhou, and the situation was approaching Ba and Handan. It assigned him 300 men from the Hualin Tiger Regiment, plus the champion general Fu Zhizhen, to lead this army.

古文：及高肇伐蜀，假竖眼征虏将军、持节，领步兵三万先讨北巴。
现代文：等到高肇征讨蜀州，假竖眼为征虏将军、持节，带领三万步兵先期征讨北巴。
English: Waiting for Gao Zhao to invade Shuzhou, he pretended to be a conquering general and held a festival, leading 30,000 infantry to invade Beiba in advance.

古文：萧衍闻大军西伐，遣其宁州刺史任太洪从阴平偷路入益州北境，欲扰动氐蜀，以绝运路。乘国讳班师，遂扇诱土民，奄破东洛、除口二戍，因此诈言南军继至，氐蜀信之，翕然从逆。
现代文：萧衍听说竖眼大军西行征伐去了，派他属下宁州刺史任太洪从阴平偷偷进入益州北境，意欲骚扰氐、蜀，以断绝竖眼运粮道路，并且乘国家有事，班师回本州，于是煽动诱使土居百姓，很快拿下东洛、除口两处关隘，这样，萧衍又散布南军很快会来的谣言，氐、蜀之人信以为真，纷纷归附叛军。
English: When Xiao Yan heard that the Jiaogan army had gone to the west to conquer, he sent his subordinate, Ningzhou Jishi Ren Taihong, from Yinping to sneak into the northern border of Yizhou. He wanted to harass Shao and Shu to cut off the Jiaogan grain transportation route, and take advantage of the country to return to Honshu. Therefore, he incited and enticed the local people to quickly take down Dongluo and the two passages at the mouth. In this way, Xiao Yan also spread the rumor that the southern army would soon come. The people of Shao and Shu believed it to be true and joined the rebels one after another.

古文：太洪率氐蜀数千围逼关城，竖眼遣宁朔将军成兴孙讨之。
现代文：任太洪率领氐、蜀人数千名围逼关城，傅竖眼派宁朔将军成兴孙征伐。
English: Ren Taihong led thousands of people from Shao and Shu to surround and force Guancheng, and Fu Zhizhong sent Ningshuo General Cheng Xingsun to invade.

古文：军次白护，太洪遣其辅国将军任硕北等率众一千，邀险拒战，在虎径南山连置三营。
现代文：军队驻扎白护，太洪派遣其辅国将军任硕北等人率领一千人马，凭借险要地势，抵挡竖眼兵卒，在虎径南山连设三座大营。
English: The army was stationed in Baigu, and Taihong dispatched his auxiliary general Ren Shuobei and others, led by a thousand horses, to resist the soldiers with the help of the precarious situation, and set up three large camps in Nanshan, Kopei.

古文：兴孙分遣诸统，随便掩击，皆破之。
现代文：兴孙分遣人马，随之分头向营帐围盖过去，三座营都被攻破了。
English: Xingsun dispatched men and horses, and then the detachment moved to encircle the camp, and all three camps were breached.

古文：太洪又遣军主边昭等率氐蜀三千，攻逼兴孙栅，兴孙力战，为流矢所中，死。
现代文：任太洪又派遣军主边昭等率领氐、蜀军马三千，攻打逼近军队辕栅，兴孙出阵迎战，被流矢击中，牺牲。
English: In addition, Ren Taihong dispatched general Bian Zhao and other generals to lead 3,000 horses of the Shao and Shu armies to attack the approaching army. Xingsun went out to fight, was hit by a stray arrow, and died.

古文：竖眼又遣统军姜喜、季元度从东嵠潜入，回出西岗，邀贼之后，表里合击，大破之，斩边昭及太洪前部王隆护首。
现代文：傅竖眼又派遣统军姜喜、季之度从东山奚潜入敌后，回出西岗，堵住敌人后路，竖眼率军正面攻击，表里合击，大破敌军，斩除边昭及任太洪前部将领王隆护首级。
English: Fu Zhizhen also dispatched the allied forces of Jiang Xi and Ji Zhidu to sneak into the enemy's rear from the East Mountain Pass, return to the West Hill, block the enemy's back road, Zhizhen led the frontal attack, the front and the rear collided, broke the enemy army, and eliminated Bian Zhao and the front commander Wang Longguo.

古文：于是太洪及关城五栅一时逃散。
现代文：于是任太洪以及关城五栅军队，一时纷纷逃散。
English: As a result, Ren Taihong and the Guancheng Wuzhong army all fled at once.

古文：竖眼性既清素，不营产业，衣食之外，俸禄粟帛皆以飨赐夷首，赈恤士卒。
现代文：竖眼性好清素，不营产业，衣食之外，俸禄诸如粮食布帛之类都拿来送给治下少数民族首领，或是拿来赈济士兵。
English: In addition to non-operating industries, clothing and food, the salary, such as grain cloth, is used to send to the leaders of ethnic minorities under the rule, or to support soldiers.

古文：抚蜀人以恩信为本，保境安民，不以小利侵窃。
现代文：抚慰蜀地百姓以慈爱信义为根本，保境安民，不以细小的利益侵害黎民百姓。
English: To comfort the people of Shou with love and faith as the foundation, to keep the country and the people safe, and not to infringe upon the people of Lai with petty interests.

古文：有掠蜀民入境者，皆移送还本土。
现代文：有人掠夺蜀民入其治境，都被他转移送还本土。
English: Some people who plundered the Shu people into his domain were transferred back to the mainland by him.

古文：捡勒部下，守宰肃然。
现代文：整肃军纪，从严要求部下，太守县宰肃然敬职。
English: We should rectify military discipline, strictly require our subordinates, and earnestly perform our duties as the grand marshal of the county.

古文：远近杂夷相率款谒，仰其德化，思为魏民矣。
现代文：远近各族百姓纷纷归诚拜谒，仰慕竖眼的道德教化，思念成为魏朝国民。
English: People of all ethnic groups from near and far have come to sincerely worship Yao, admire his moral enlightenment, and yearn to become citizens of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：是以蜀民请军者旬月相继，世宗甚嘉之。
现代文：所以蜀民请求参军的连旬累月，相继不绝。世宗对竖眼的治绩十分嘉赏。
English: Therefore, the Shu people have been requesting to join the army for months and months, one after another. The Sejong highly appreciates the performance of the treatment of the vertical eye.

古文：肃宗初，屡请解州，乃以元法僧代之。
现代文：肃宗初年，竖眼屡屡请求解除他的州职，皇帝以元法僧代替他。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, Zhixian repeatedly requested that he be relieved of his state post, and the emperor replaced him with a former Buddhist monk.

古文：益州民追随恋泣者数百里。
现代文：益州百姓追随竖眼，留恋哭泣者，随行数百里。
English: The people of Yizhou follow the cross-eyed, nostalgic weepers for hundreds of miles.

古文：至洛，拜征虏将军、太中大夫。
现代文：到了洛阳，拜竖眼为征虏将军、太中大夫。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, Bai Jianye became the conscript general and the grand vice-minister.

古文：萧衍遣将赵祖悦入屯硖石，以逼寿春。
现代文：萧衍派遣部将赵祖悦带军入屯硖石，以逼迫寿春。
English: The dispatching department of Xiao Yan sent Zhao Zuyue and his army into the town of Jinshi to persecute Shuchun.

古文：镇南将军崔亮讨之，以竖眼为持节、镇南军司。
现代文：镇南将军崔亮奉命讨伐，朝廷又任命竖眼为持节、镇南军司。
English: Zhenan General Cui Liang was ordered to fight, and the imperial court also appointed Jianye as the military commander of Zhenan.

古文：法僧既至，大失民和。
现代文：法僧任职益州之后，大失民心。
English: After the Buddhist monk took office in Yizhou, he lost the people's heart.

古文：萧衍遣其信武将军、衡州刺史张齐，因民心之怨，入寇晋寿，频陷葭萌、小剑诸戍，进围州城。
现代文：萧衍派遣他的信武将军、衡州刺史张齐乘着益州民怨纷起，入侵晋寿，频频攻陷诸如葭萌、小剑等关寨，进而围困益州城。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his general Xinwu, and Zhang Qi, the Hengzhou assassin, took advantage of the rising popular resentment in Yizhou to invade Jinzhou, frequently attacking and besieging such villages as Gongmeng and Xiaojian, and then besieging Yizhou City.

古文：朝廷以西南为忧，乃驿征竖眼于淮南。
现代文：朝廷担心西南的局势，于是驿马驰征竖眼于淮南。
English: The imperial court was worried about the situation in the southwest, so it set its sights on Huainan.

古文：既至，以为右将军、益州刺史，寻加散骑常侍、平西将军、假安西将军、西征都督，率步骑三千以讨张齐。
现代文：竖眼到了京师，朝廷命其为右将军、益州刺史，很快又加授散骑常侍、平西将军、假安西将军、西征都督，率领步骑兵三千人以讨伐张齐。
English: When Zhizhen arrived at the Beijing Division, the imperial court appointed him as the right general and the governor of Yizhou, and soon he was also awarded the title of straggler, the general of Pingxi, the false general of Anxi, and the governor of the Western Expedition, leading three thousand infantry cavalry to fight against Zhangqi.

古文：给铜印千余，须有假职者，听六品以下板之。
现代文：皇帝又交给他铜印千余只，需要有授予官职的，六品以下都可算数。
English: The emperor also gave him more than a thousand copper seals. If there is a need to grant an official post, anything less than six can be counted.

古文：竖眼既出梁州，衍冠军将军勾道侍、梁州刺史王太洪等十余将所在拒塞，竖眼三日之中，转战二百余里，甲不去身，频致九捷。
现代文：竖眼既出梁州，萧衍冠军将军勾道侍、梁州刺史王太洪等十余名将军率军在竖眼必经之路上阻挡大军西进，傅竖眼三天之内，转战二百余里，盔甲不离身，连捷九战。
English: After the battle of Hanzhong came to Liangzhou, more than ten generals, including the champion general Xiao Yan, and the general of Liangzhou, Wang Taihong, led the army to block the westward advance of the great army on the road through which the battle of Hanzhong must pass. Within three days of the battle of Hanzhong, the army fought more than two hundred miles, the armor did not leave the body, and the army won nine consecutive battles.

古文：土民统军席广度等处处邀击，斩太洪及衍征虏将军杨伏锡等首。
现代文：少数民族统军席广度等又四处打击敌军，斩下王太洪以及萧衍征虏将军杨伏锡等人首级。
English: The United Front of Ethnic Minorities attacked the enemy forces in all directions, cutting off the heads of Wang Taihong and Xiao Yan's conscript general Yang Fuxi.

古文：张齐引兵西退，遂奔葭萌。
现代文：张齐带兵向西退去，投往葭萌。
English: Zhang Qi and his soldiers retreated to the west and threw themselves into the battle at Qimeng.

古文：蜀民闻竖眼复为刺史，人人喜悦，迎于路者日有百数。
现代文：蜀民听说傅竖眼又任益州刺史，人人高兴万分，每天在竖眼所经道路迎接的都有百余人。
English: The people of Shu heard that Fu Zhizhen had been appointed to write the history of Yizhou, and everyone was overjoyed. More than a hundred people greeted Fu Zhizhen on the road every day.

古文：竖眼至州，白水以东，民皆宁业。
现代文：竖眼到州，白水以东的益州境内，百姓都安居乐业了。
English: As far as the eye can see, the people in Yizhou, east of Baishui, are living and working in peace.

古文：先是，萧衍信义将军、都统白水诸军事杨兴起，征虏将军李光宗袭据白水旧城。
现代文：在此之前，萧衍的信义将军、都统白水诸军事杨兴起，征虏将军李光宗偷偷占据白水旧城。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan's General Xinyi and the military Yang of the Baishui Dynasties arose, and the conscript general Li Guangzong secretly occupied the old city of Baishui.

古文：竖眼遣虎威将军强虬与阴平王杨太赤率众千余，夜渡白水，旦而交战，大败贼军，斩兴起首，克复旧城。
现代文：傅竖眼派虎威将军强虬与阴平王杨太赤率领数千名军士，夜渡白水，天明交战，大败贼军，斩下兴起头颅，收复旧城。
English: Fu Zhixian sent General Qiang Wei and Yin Ping Wang Yang Taicang to lead thousands of soldiers to cross the white water at night, fight in the morning, defeat the rebel army, cut off the heads of the rebels, and recover the old city.

古文：又遣统军傅昙表等大破衍宁朔将军王光昭于阴平。
现代文：竖眼又派统军傅昙表等在阴平大破萧衍的宁朔将军王光昭。
English: Wang Guangzhao, the general of Ningshuo, who was defeated at Yinping, was also sent to the United Front.

古文：军主许暢斩衍雄信将军牟兴祖，军主孔领周射齐中足，于是大破贼军，斩获甚众。
现代文：张齐这时仍然在白水阻拦，屯兵侵犯葭萌。傅竖眼分遣诸将由水陆两路合进讨伐。张齐派他的宁朔将军费忻督领骑步兵二千人前来抵挡，竖眼的军主陈洪起上前力战，破了敌军，接着，乘胜追击，又追到地处夹谷的三处军寨。
English: At this time, Zhang Qi was still holding back at the White Water, and the garrison was encroaching on Qimeng. Fu Qian was sent to join the crusade by land and water. Zhang Qi sent his Ningshuo general Fe Bingdu to lead two thousand cavalry and infantry to resist, and the commander Chen Hong, who had a keen eye, went to the front and defeated the enemy army, and then, after the victory, chased and chased to three military camps in the valley.

古文：齐乃栅于虎头山下，贼帅任令崇屯据西郡。
现代文：竖眼统军胡小虎四面攻击，三个军寨全都溃垮。
English: Hu Xiaohu's troops attacked from all directions, and all three encampments collapsed.

古文：竖眼复遣讨之，令崇弃众夜遁。
现代文：张齐又亲自率领骁勇军士二万多人与竖眼各路大军交战，竖眼命令各路统帅同时奋起迎敌。
English: Zhang Qi also personally led more than 20,000 soldiers of the Qinyong Army to fight against the armies of all the provinces of Zhizhong. Zhizhong ordered the commanders of all provinces to rise up to meet the enemy at the same time.

古文：乃进讨齐，破其二栅，斩首万余，齐被重创，奔窜而退。
现代文：军主许畅斩杀萧衍雄信将军牟兴祖，军主孔领周射中张齐的脚，这样敌军乘着夜黑，逃走了。竖眼各路大军，一齐并进，讨伐张齐，破其两寨，杀了两万多军士，张齐也受了重伤，鼠窜奔逃而退。
English: The commander Xu Chang killed General Mu Xing Zu of Xiao Yan Xiongxin, and the commander Kong Zhou shot Zhang Qi in the foot, so the enemy army took advantage of the darkness of the night and fled. Huge armies from all directions marched side by side to fight Zhang Qi, broke through his two camps, and killed more than 20,000 sergeants. Zhang Qi was also seriously injured, and fled.

古文：小剑、大剑贼亦捐城西走，益州平。
现代文：小剑、大剑的驻守敌军也弃城西逃，益州终于被平定。
English: The enemy forces garrisoned in Xiaojian and Dajian also abandoned the city and fled to the west, and Yizhou was finally pacified.

古文：灵太后玺书慰劳，赐骅骝马一匹、宝剑一口。
现代文：灵太后下书慰劳竖眼，赐给他骅骝马一匹、宝剑一口。
English: Empress Dowager Ling sent him a letter of consolation for his hard work, and gave him a horse and a sword.

古文：竖眼表求解州，不许，复转安西将军、岐州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：傅竖眼上表，请求解去州职，朝廷不许，又转任他为安西将军、岐州刺史，常侍职照旧。
English: Fu Zhizhen went to the table and requested to be dismissed from the state post, but the court did not allow him to do so, and he was transferred to the post of Anxi General, the governor of Qizhou, and the position of the regular attendant as before.

古文：仍转梁州刺史，常侍、将军如故。
现代文：又转梁州刺史，常侍、将军如故。
English: He also became a member of the Liangzhou Military Academy, and remained a regular attendant and general.

古文：梁州之人既得竖眼为牧，人咸自贺。
现代文：梁州百姓既然得到傅竖眼为州长官，人人都很高兴。
English: Since the people of Liangzhou got Fu Zhizhen as governor, everyone is very happy.

古文：而竖眼至州，遇患不堪综理，其子敬绍险暴不仁，聚货耽色，甚为民害，远近怨望焉。
现代文：但傅竖眼到州之后，碰到州患不能综合治理，他的儿子傅敬绍又凶险暴戾，横行乡里，聚敛财货，沉湎美色，为民大害，远近百姓怨怒纷纷。
English: However, after Fu Jiaxuan came to the county, the county's problems could not be comprehensively controlled. His son Fu Jingshao was also dangerous and violent, rampaging through the countryside, collecting wealth and goods, ruining beauty, causing great harm to the people, and causing resentment among the people near and far.

古文：寻假镇军将军、都督梁西益巴三州诸军事。
现代文：不久，朝廷又命他为假镇军将军，都督梁、西益、巴三州诸军事。
English: Soon, the imperial court also appointed him as the general of the fake town army, the military of the governor Liang, Xiyi, and Bazhanzhou.

古文：萧衍遣其北梁州长史锡休儒、司马鱼和、上庸太守姜平洛等十军，率众三万，入寇直城。
现代文：萧衍派遣他的北梁州长史锡休儒、司马鱼和、上庸太守姜平洛等十支军马，人数三万，侵犯直城。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his governor of Beiliang, Shi Xiuyuru, Sima Yuhua, Shangyong governor Jiang Pingluo and other ten army horses, numbering thirty thousand, to invade Zhi Cheng.

古文：竖眼遣敬绍总众赴之，倍道而进，至直城，而贼袭据直口。
现代文：傅竖眼派儿子敬绍总领军马前去迎战，军队快步如飞，行至直城，而敌人已经袭据直口。
English: Fu Zhigen sent his son Jing Shao, the general leader of the army, to meet the battle. The army quickly marched to Zhucheng, but the enemy had already attacked Zhucheng.

古文：敬绍以贼断归路，督兼统军高彻、吴和等与贼决战，大破之，擒斩三千余人，休儒等走还魏兴。
现代文：傅敬绍以敌人已断自己归路，督兼统军高彻、吴和等人与敌人决战，大破敌军，擒获斩首敌人三千余人，锡休儒等率部奔逃魏兴。
English: Fu Jingshao said that the enemy had cut off his way back, and Gaocher, Wu He, the governor and commander of the unified army, and others fought a decisive battle with the enemy, defeated the enemy army, captured and beheaded more than 3,000 enemies, and Xixiu Ru and other leaders fled to Wei Xing.

古文：敬绍颇览书传，微有胆力，而奢淫倜傥，轻为残害。
现代文：傅敬绍很读了些书，有些胆识力气，但却奢侈淫逸，倜傥不群，草菅人命。
English: Fu Jingshao read some books very well, had some courage and strength, but he was extravagant and lascivious, disliked by others, and feared for his life.

古文：又见天下多事，阴怀异图，欲杜绝四方，擅据南郑。令其妾兄唐崐仑扇搅于外，聚众围城，敬绍谋为内应。
现代文：他又眼见天下正处在多事之秋，私下里图谋不轨，意欲杜绝四方，另立王国，擅自占据南郑，命令他的妾的兄长唐昆仑在外骚扰，聚众围城，敬绍在里谋为内应。
English: He also saw that the world was in the autumn of many things, and he plotted secretly, wanting to put an end to the four parties and establish a separate kingdom, occupy Nan Zheng without authorization, order his concubine's brother Tang Kunlun to harass outside, gather a crowd to besiege the city, and Jing Shao to mediate inside.

古文：贼围既合，其事泄露，在城兵武执敬绍，白竖眼而杀之。
现代文：叛军围住城池，事情也便败露，城中兵将捉住敬绍，禀告竖眼之后便把他杀了。
English: The rebels surrounded the city, and the affair was exposed. The soldiers in the city captured Jing Shao, and killed him after a sharp rebuke.

古文：竖眼耻恚发疾，遂卒。
现代文：竖眼耻辱愤怒难当，疾病发作，死于任上。
English: Eye-gouging, humiliation, anger, illness, and death in office.

