古文：熙宗二子斜卯阿里突合速乌延蒲卢浑赤盏晖大抃磐阿离补
现代文：金熙宗有二个儿子，即：悼平皇后生的太子完颜济安，贤妃生的魏王完颜道济。
English: Kim Hee-jong had two sons, namely: Prince Wan Yan Ji-an, born to Empress Muiping, and Wei King Wan Yan Daojie, born to Empress Yeonmi.

古文：熙宗诸子：悼平皇后生太子济安，贤妃生魏王道济。济安，皇统二年二月戊子生于天开殿。
现代文：济安，于皇统二年二月二十四生于天开殿。
English: Jian was born on February 24 of the second year of imperial rule in Tiankaiden.

古文：上年二十四始有皇子，喜甚，遣使驰报明德宫太皇太后。
现代文：金熙宗皇帝二十四岁喜得皇子，很高兴，于是派人立即报告明得宫里的太皇和太后。
English: The twenty-four-year-old Emperor Kim Hee-jong was overjoyed to see the prince, so he immediately sent someone to report the arrival of the emperor and empress in the palace.

古文：五日命名，大赦天下。
现代文：五天后给太子取名字济安，并大赦天下。
English: Five days later, he gave the prince the name Jian and pardoned him.

古文：三月甲寅，告天地宗庙。
现代文：三月二十一日，祭告天地宗庙。
English: On March 21st, it was announced that the temple would be closed.

古文：丁巳，剪鬌，奏告天地宗庙。
现代文：三月二十四日，给济安理满月头，奏告天地宗庙。
English: On March 24th, the full moon was sighted in Jianli, and the Temple of Heaven and Earth was announced.

古文：戊午，册为皇太子。
现代文：三月二十五日，封济安为皇太子。
English: On March 25, Fong Jian became crown prince.

古文：封皇后父太尉胡塔为王，赐人口、马牛五百、驼五十、羊五千。
现代文：同时悼平皇后的父亲胡塔太尉也被封为王，并赐予人口、马牛五百头、骆驼五十匹、羊五千只。
English: At the same time, Captain Huta, the father of the mourning Empress Ping, was also crowned king and given a population, five hundred horses and cattle, fifty camels, and five thousand sheep.

古文：随朝职官并迁一资，皆有赐。
现代文：当时在朝的官员普遍晋升一级官禄，并且都给予赏赐。
English: At that time, officials in the DPRK were generally promoted to the first-level official rank, and they were all rewarded.

古文：已未，诏天下。
现代文：三月二十六，诏知天下百姓。
English: On the 26th of March, the people of the world heard the news.

古文：十二月，济安病剧，上与皇后幸佛寺焚香，流涕哀祷，曲赦五百里内罪囚。
现代文：十二月，济安太子病情加重，金熙宗皇帝和悼平太后到佛寺去烧香，痛哭流涕地为太子济安祈祷平安，并大赦方圆五百里内的罪犯囚徒。
English: In December, when Prince Jian's condition worsened, Emperor Kim Xizong and Empress Dowager Muiping went to a Buddhist temple to burn incense, pray for Prince Jian's safety with tears streaming down their faces, and grant amnesty to criminals and prisoners within a 500-mile radius.

古文：是夜，薨。谥英悼太子，葬兴陵之侧，上送至乌只黑水而还。
现代文：当天夜里，太子济安死去，谥号英悼太子，埋在兴陵的一边，皇帝金熙宗送太子的灵柩到乌只黑水才返朝。
English: On the night of the same day, Prince Jian died, and Emperor Jin Xizong sent the casket of Prince Jian to Wudang Blackwater before returning to the imperial court.

古文：命工塑其像于储庆寺，上与皇后幸寺安置之。
现代文：随后皇帝熙宗命令工匠在储庆寺中塑太子的像，他和太后亲自去安放塑像。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Xizong ordered craftsmen to build a statue of the prince in the Zuoqing Temple, and he and the empress dowager personally went to place the statue.

古文：海陵毁上京宫室，寺亦随毁。
现代文：后金皇帝海陵王毁了上京的宫室，储庆寺也一同被毁坏。
English: After Emperor Hailing destroyed the imperial palace in Kyoto, Zuoqing Temple was also destroyed.

古文：道济，皇统三年，命为中京留守，以直学士阿懒为都提点，张玄素为同提点，左右辅导之。
现代文：道济，皇统三年，被任命为中京留守，同时任命直学士完颜阿懒为都提点，张玄素为同提点，帮助辅佐道济。
English: Doji, three years of imperial unification, was appointed to stay in Beijing. At the same time, he appointed Zhi Gao Gan Alo as the point of reference, and Zhang Xuan Su as the same point of reference, to help assist Doji.

古文：俄封魏王，封其母为贤妃。
现代文：不久道济被封为魏王，并封他的母亲为贤妃。
English: Soon, Doji was named the king of Wei, and his mother was named the virtuous empress.

古文：初居外，至是养之宫中。
现代文：始初他住在皇宫外边，到此时他才进到宫中居住休养。
English: At first he lived outside the palace, but then he moved into the palace to live and recuperate.

古文：未几，熙宗怒杀之。
现代文：没过多久，金熙宗愤怒地杀了道济。
English: Not long after, Kim Hee-jong killed Doji in a rage.

古文：赞曰：国初制度未立，太宗、熙宗皆自谙班勃极烈即帝位。
现代文：金史撰稿者评论说：建国之初，规章制度还未建立，金朝皇帝太宗、熙宗都是从谙班勃极烈走上皇帝的宝座的。
English: A writer on the history of the Kim dynasty commented: At the beginning of the founding of the country, rules and regulations had not yet been established. The emperors of the Kim dynasty, Taizong and Xizong, both ascended to the throne of the emperor from Zhibangbo.

古文：谙班勃极烈者，汉语云最尊官也。
现代文：谙班勃极烈汉语意为地位最高的官。
English: He was the highest-ranking official.

古文：熙宗立济安为皇太子，始正名位，定制度焉。
现代文：金熙宗立济安为皇太子，才开始正名位，制定制度。
English: It was only after Kim Hee-song established Ji'an as the crown prince that he began to legitimize the position and establish a system.

古文：斜卯阿里，父浑坦，穆宗时内附，数有战功。
现代文：斜卯阿里，其父斜卯浑坦，穆宗时内附，多有战功。
English: Shao Ali, his father Shao Hun Tan, and Mu Zong Shi, all had distinguished war service.

古文：阿里年十七，从其伯父胡麻谷讨诈都，获其弟沙里只。
现代文：斜卯阿里十七岁时跟从伯父斜卯胡麻谷攻打辽国诈都，得到他的弟弟沙里只。
English: At the age of seventeen, Shiwu Ali followed his uncle Shiwu Humatani to attack the capital of Liao Province, only to be defeated by his younger brother, Shari.

古文：高丽筑九城于曷懒甸，浑坦攻之，遇敌于木里门甸，力战久之，阿里挺枪驰刺其将于阵中，敌遂溃。
现代文：高丽在曷懒甸建起九座城池，斜卯浑坦去攻打它，在木里门甸遇上敌军，双方激战了很长时间，斜卯阿里挺枪驰马在战场上刺死了敌方大将，敌军立即溃败。
English: Goryeo built nine citadels in Loudian, and Shao Hun Tan went to attack it. He met the enemy army in Muli Mendean, and the two sides fought fiercely for a long time. Shao Ali stabbed the enemy general on the battlefield, and the enemy army was immediately defeated.

古文：浑坦与石适欢合兵于徒门水，阿里首败敌兵，取其二城。
现代文：斜卯浑坦与石适欢在徒门水会师，斜卯阿里首败敌兵，夺下敌方二座城。
English: Shiawu Hun-tan and Shi Shih-hwan met at the gate of the water division, Shiawu Ali defeated the enemy soldiers for the first time, and captured two enemy cities.

古文：高丽入寇，以我兵屯守要害，不得进，乃还。
现代文：高丽入侵，金兵守卫要塞，高丽没有攻进来，于是罢兵回国。
English: Goryeo invaded, the gold soldiers guarded the fortress, Goryeo did not invade, so the soldiers returned home.

古文：阿里追及于曷懒水，高丽人争走冰上，阿里乘之，杀略几尽，遂合兵于石适欢。
现代文：斜卯阿里在后面追到曷懒水，高丽军争着从冰上逃跑，斜卯阿里乘胜追击，几乎杀光了高丽军，于是同石适欢会师。
English: Xiangwu Ali chased behind to the lazy water, the Goryeo army fought to escape from the ice, Xiangwu Ali took advantage of the victory and chased, almost killing the Goryeo army, so the same stone had a party.

古文：道遇敌兵五万，击走之。
现代文：在行军路上他们遇到五万敌兵并打跑了敌兵。
English: On their march, they encountered 50,000 enemy soldiers and routed them.

古文：又与石适欢遇敌七万，阿里先登，奋击大败之。
现代文：行军时斜卯阿里与石适欢又遇到了七万敌兵，斜卯阿里首当其战，奋力击败了敌兵。
English: When marching, Shiwu Ali and Shi Shiguang encountered another 70,000 enemy soldiers. Shiwu Ali was the first to fight and fought hard to defeat the enemy soldiers.

古文：石适欢曰： 汝一日之间，三破重敌，功岂可忘。 
现代文：石适欢说 ：你一日之中，三次打败重敌，功劳不能忘。 
English: Shi Shihuan said, "In one day, you have defeated your archenemy three times. You should not forget this achievement."

古文：乃厚赐之。
现代文：于是重重地赏赐斜卯阿里。
English: As a result, Shiwu Ali was rewarded heavily.

古文：斡塞、乌睹本攻驼吉城，阿里凿墉为门，日已暮，不可入，以兵守之，旦日遂取其城。
现代文：斡塞、乌睹本进攻驼吉城，斜卯阿里把城墙凿个洞，此时天已黑，不能进城，就用兵守住洞口，第二天早上将士从洞口入城，夺下了城池。
English: Uthman and Uthman attacked the city of Camel City, and Ali dug a hole in the city wall. At this time, it was already dark and they could not enter the city, so they used soldiers to guard the cave entrance. The next morning, they entered the city from the cave entrance and captured the city.

古文：乌睹本以被甲并乘马赐之。
现代文：乌睹本用自己穿的铠甲和坐骑赏赐给斜卯阿里。
English: Ujimoto rewarded Shiau Ali with armor and a horse that he himself had worn.

古文：从攻下宁江州，授猛安。
现代文：随后，斜卯阿里跟随乌睹本攻下宁江州，被任命为猛安。
English: Subsequently, Shabu Ali followed Ujimoto in conquering Ningjiang Province and was appointed as the leader of Meng'an.

古文：又从攻信州、宾州，皆克之。
现代文：后来斜卯阿里又跟随乌睹本进攻信州、宾州，都攻下了。
English: Later, Shabu Ali followed Ujimoto in attacking Shinshu and Pennsylvania, which were both conquered.

古文：敌围之数重，守者粮刍俱尽，牛马相食其鬃尾，人易子而食。夜，缒二人出，告急于阿里。
现代文：辽国军队来进攻孛堇忽沙里城，斜卯阿里率领一百多骑兵前去解围。当时辽国军队几万人，而斜卯阿里兵少，于是他命令士兵把衣服撕成旗帜状，从山谷冲出，辽国军队看见后，立即撤逃。
English: At that time, the Liao army had tens of thousands of soldiers, while Xiangwu Ali had fewer soldiers. Therefore, he ordered the soldiers to tear their clothes into a flag shape and rush out of the valley. When the Liao army saw this, they immediately fled.

古文：阿里赴之，内外合击之，破其众于辟离密罕水上，剿杀几尽，水为之不流。
现代文：苏州、复州叛乱，叛军人数多达十万。两地附近的女真人都被保护在太尉胡沙家，胡沙家周围建成城垒用以抵抗叛军。叛军把胡沙家层层包围，守军弹尽粮绝，牛马互相以马鬃马尾为食，人们互相交换着吃孩子。
English: In the Suzhou and Fuzhou rebellions, the number of rebels was as high as 100,000. The Jurchen people in the vicinity of both places were protected in the house of Captain Hoosha. A fortress was built around the house of Hoosha to resist the rebels. The rebels surrounded the house of Hoosha layer by layer, the defenders ran out of food, the cattle and horses fed on each other's manes and tails, and people exchanged children.

古文：蒲离古胡什吉水、马韩岛凡十余战，破数十万众。
现代文：一天夜里，守军用绳子从城墙上系出两个人，向斜卯阿里告急。斜卯阿里带兵前往，内外合击，打败几十万叛军。
English: One night, the defenders tied two men with ropes from the city wall and hurried to Shao Ali. Shao Ali led the soldiers to fight inside and outside the city, defeating hundreds of thousands of rebels.

古文：契丹、奚人聚舟千艘，将入于海。
现代文：契丹、奚人聚集船只一千艘，将进入海上。
English: The Khitans and the Salafis have gathered a thousand ships and will sail to the sea.

古文：阿里以二十七舟邀之，中流矢，卧舟中，中夜始苏。
现代文：斜卯阿里用二十七艘船半路拦截他们，不幸中流箭，躺在船仓中，半夜才苏醒过来。
English: Shao Ali intercepted them halfway with twenty-seven ships. Unfortunately, he was caught in the middle and lay in the hold until he woke up in the middle of the night.

古文：敌船已入王家岛，即夜取海路追及之，敌走险以拒，阿里以骑兵邀击，再中流矢，力战不退，竟破之，尽获其舟。
现代文：敌船已进入王家岛，当夜斜卯阿里取海路追击他们，敌军跑到险要地势抵抗，斜卯阿里率领骑兵迎头攻击，第二次被流箭射中，但他尽力作战不撤退，竟然打败了敌军，获得了他们所有的船只。
English: The enemy ships had entered Wangjiashima. That night, Shao Ali took the sea route to pursue them. The enemy army ran to a precarious position to resist. Shao Ali led the cavalry to attack head-on. He was shot a second time by a stray arrow, but he tried his best to fight and not retreat. He actually defeated the enemy army and gained all their ships.

古文：于是，苏、复州、婆速路皆平。
现代文：于是，苏州、复州、婆速路都被平定。
English: As a result, Suzhou, Fuzhou, and Baotou Expressway were all pacified.

古文：攻显州，下灵山县，取梁鱼务，败余睹兵，功皆最。
现代文：攻显州，下灵山县，取梁鱼务，败余睹兵，斜卯阿里功劳都是第一。
English: Attacking Xianzhou, descending Lingshan County, taking Liang Yishu, defeating Yu Jianbing, Shao Ali's achievements are all the first.

古文：后与散睹鲁屯高州，契丹昭古牙、九斤合兴中兵数万攻胡里特寨，阿里以八谋克兵救之。
现代文：后来他与散睹鲁屯兵高州，契丹昭古牙、九斤联合兴中兵几万人攻打胡里特寨，斜卯阿里用八谋克的兵力前去解救。
English: Later, he and tens of thousands of soldiers from Gaozhou, Qidan, Zhaogu, and Jiuqin jointly attacked Hulite Village, and Shao Ali went to the rescue with a force of eight mucks.

古文：胡里特先往，败于城下。
现代文：胡里特先去，在城下被打败。
English: Huret went first and was defeated at the foot of the castle.

古文：阿里指阵前绯衣者二十余人曰： 此必贼酋也。 
现代文：斜卯阿里指着阵前二十几个穿红色衣服的人说 ：这些人肯定是贼兵的头。 
English: Shao Ali pointed to the first two dozen people in red clothing and said, "These people must be the heads of the bandits."

古文：麾兵奋击，皆杀之，余众大溃。
现代文：指挥兵士奋力攻击他们，并把他们全部杀死，其余的军队都溃败了。
English: The commanding officer attacked them fiercely and killed them all, and the rest of the army was routed.

古文：来州、隰州兵围胡里特城，闻阿里来救，即解围去。
现代文：来州、隰州的军队围攻胡里特城，听说斜卯阿里来解围，即刻撤兵而去。
English: The troops from Cangzhou and Zhangzhou besieged the city of Hulit. When they heard that Shao Ali had come to relieve the siege, they immediately withdrew.

古文：阇母讨张觉，有兵出楼峰口山谷间，阿里、散笃鲁、忽卢补三猛安击败之。
现代文：完颜母讨伐张觉，有军队从楼峰口山谷中出来，斜卯阿里、散睹鲁、忽卢补三猛安打败了他。
English: After Zhang Jue was defeated, an army came out of the Loufengkou Valley. Shao Ali, Sanjian Lu, and Hu Lu Bi defeated him.

古文：宗望代阇母讨张觉，阿里再败平州兵。
现代文：完颜宗望代完颜母讨伐张觉，斜卯阿里再次打败平州的军队。
English: After Yan Zongwang and Yan Mu fought against Zhang Jue, Shao Ali once again defeated the army of Pingzhou.

古文：及伐宋，阿里别击宋兵，败之。
现代文：等到攻打宋朝，斜卯阿里另外攻击宋朝军队，打败了他们。
English: After attacking the Song Dynasty, Shantou Ali also attacked the Song Dynasty army and defeated them.

古文：孟阳之役，阿里扼桥渡力战。
现代文：孟阳战役，斜卯阿里把守桥梁渡口奋力作战。
English: In the Battle of Mengyang, Xiangwu Ali fought hard to defend the bridge crossing.

古文：明年，再伐宋，至保州、中山，累破之。
现代文：第二年，金朝再次攻打宋朝，兵至保州、中山，斜卯阿里攻下了两地。
English: In the second year, the Kim Dynasty attacked the Song Dynasty again, and the soldiers went as far as Bozhou and Zhongshan, and Shao Ali conquered the two places.

古文：进围真定，阿里与娄室、豁鲁乘风纵火，焚其楼橹，诸军毕登，克其城。
现代文：进而围攻真定，斜卯阿里与娄室、豁鲁乘着风势放火，烧了守军的城楼和望塔，各路军队都迅速登上城墙，攻克了真定城。
English: Then, they besieged Zhending. Shiwu Ali, Shishimuro, and Huanlu took advantage of the wind and set fire to it, burning the towers and watchtowers of the defenders. All the armies quickly ascended the city wall and conquered Zhending.

古文：师至河上，粘割胡撒击走宋人，扼河津，兵数千遂渡河。
现代文：金军到黄河上，粘割胡撒打跑了宋军，把守黄河渡口，于是几千金军渡过黄河。
English: When the Golden Army arrived at the Yellow River, the Song Army was routed by the Qixia Huasa and guarded the Yellow River ferry, so several thousand of the Golden Army crossed the Yellow River.

古文：诸将分出大名境，阿里破敌四百尽殪，遂围汴。
现代文：各路将士分别出击大名境内，斜卯阿里打败四百敌军并杀死了他们，于是围攻宋朝汴京。
English: The soldiers from all directions separately attacked the territory of the daimyo, and Shao Ali defeated four hundred enemy troops and killed them, and then besieged the Song Dynasty's Beijing.

古文：汴中夜出兵来焚攻具，阿里与谋克常孙阳阿御之，其众大溃。
现代文：汴京半夜出兵去焚烧金军攻城工具，斜卯阿里与谋克常孙阳阿进行抵抗还击，宋兵大败。
English: In the middle of the night in Beijing, troops were sent out to burn the siege tools of the Golden Army, and Shao Ali and Mokke Changsunyang carried out resistance and counterattack, and the Song soldiers were defeated.

古文：还攻赵州，降之。
现代文：撤军回金时斜卯阿里攻打赵州，打得守军投降。
English: When withdrawing troops to Huijin, Shantou Ali attacked Zhaozhou and forced the defenders to surrender.

古文：天会六年，伐宋主，取阳谷、莘县，败海州兵八万人，海州降。
现代文：天会六年，金军攻打宋朝，夺取阳谷、莘县，打败了海州军队八万人，海州城投降。
English: In the sixth year of the Heian period, the Golden Army attacked the Song Dynasty, captured Yanggu and Jixian, defeated 80,000 Haizhou troops, and surrendered Haizhou City.

古文：破贼船万余于梁山泊。招降滕阳、东平、泰山群盗。
现代文：在梁山泊打败了宋军船只一万多艘。招降了滕阳、东平、泰山的强盗。
English: He defeated more than ten thousand ships of the Song Army in Liangshanpo, and invited the bandits from Tengyang, Dongping and Taishan to surrender.

古文：盗攻范县，击走之，获船七百艘。
现代文：强盗攻打范县，被击败而逃，金军获船七百艘。
English: The bandits attacked Fan County, were defeated and fled, and the Golden Army captured seven hundred ships.

古文：宗弼攻下睢阳，与乌延蒲卢浑先以二千人往招寿春，具舟淮水上。
现代文：完颜宗弼攻下睢阳，与乌延蒲卢浑先用二千人前往招安寿春城，把准备好的船放在淮河上。
English: After Yan Zonglu conquered Fenyang, he and Wu Yanbulu went to Zhaan Shoushun City with two thousand people and placed the prepared boat on the Huai River.

古文：时康民聚贾船四百与寿春相近，术列速以骑四百破康民，斩馘数千。
现代文：时康民聚集了商船四百艘与寿春城相距很近，术列速用四百骑兵打败了时康民，割下了几千只时康民士兵的耳朵。
English: Jikangmin gathered four hundred merchant ships and sailed very close to Shuchun City. The cavalry quickly defeated Jikangmin with four hundred cavalrymen and cut off the ears of several thousand Jikangmin soldiers.

古文：与当海、大抃破贼十万于淮南。
现代文：斜卯阿里与当海、大白大在淮南打败宋军十万。
English: Xiangwu Ali, together with Danghai and Dabai, defeated 100,000 Song troops in Huainan.

古文：比至江，连破宋兵，获舟二百艘。
现代文：等到到了长江，又接连打败宋军，缴获船只二百艘。
English: When they reached the Yangtze River, they defeated the Song army one after another and captured 200 ships.

古文：宗弼至江宁，阿里、蒲卢浑别降广德军，先趣杭州。
现代文：完颜宗弼到江宁，斜卯阿里、蒲卢浑另外降服了广德军，首先攻下杭州。
English: After Yan Zonglu went to Jiangning, Shao Ali and Pu Luhun also subdued the Guang German army, and first captured Hangzhou.

古文：去杭十余里，遇宋伏兵二千，取我前驱甲士三十人。
现代文：金军追击宋军才离开杭州十多里，遇到宋军二千伏兵，掳杀金军先头部队士兵三十人。
English: The Chinese army chased the Song army for more than ten miles before leaving Hangzhou, encountered two thousand soldiers of the Song army, and captured and killed thirty soldiers of the leading troops of the Chinese army.

古文：阿里使诸军去马搏战，伏兵败，皆逼死于水。宗弼至余杭，而宋主走明州，阿里与蒲卢浑以精骑四千袭之，破东关兵，济曹娥江，败宋兵于高桥镇。
现代文：斜卯阿里命令诸军弃马搏战，宋军伏兵被打败，都被逼进水中淹死，完颜宗弼到了余杭，宋朝皇帝逃跑到明州，斜卯阿里与蒲卢浑用四千精锐骑兵攻击宋朝皇帝，打败东关宋军，接着斜卯阿里率兵渡过曹娥江，在高桥镇打败宋军。
English: Xiangwu Ali ordered the armies to abandon horses and fight. The Song army ambush was defeated and all of them were forced into the water and drowned. After Yan Zonglu arrived at Yuhang, the Song emperor fled to Mingzhou. Xiangwu Ali and Buluhun attacked the Song emperor with four thousand elite cavalrymen and defeated the Dongguan Song army. Then Xiangwu Ali led the soldiers across the Cao'e River and defeated the Song army in Gaoqiao Town.

古文：至明州，颇失利。
现代文：金军到达明州，很为失望。
English: The gold army arrived in Mingzhou, very disappointed.

古文：宋主已入于海，乃退军余姚。
现代文：宋朝皇帝已经进到海上，金军于是退兵余姚。
English: The Emperor of the Song Dynasty had already entered the sea, so the Jin Army withdrew from Yuyao.

古文：宗弼使当海济师，遂下明州，执宋守臣赵伯谔，进至昌国县。
现代文：完颜宗弼命令沿海增援部队，于是金军攻下明州，拘捕了宋朝守臣赵伯谔，然后进军昌国县。
English: After Yan Zongxuan ordered reinforcements along the coast, the Jin army captured Mingzhou, arrested Zhao Boqin, the Song Dynasty's vassal, and then marched into Changguo County.

古文：宋主自昌国走温州，由海路追三百余里，弗及。
现代文：宋朝皇帝从昌国县逃跑到温州，金军从海上追了三百多里，没能追上。
English: The Emperor of the Song Dynasty fled from Changguo County to Wenzhou, and the Jin Army chased him more than three hundred miles from the sea, but could not catch up with him.

古文：遂隳明州，与宗弼俱北归。
现代文：于是金军毁坏明州，然后与宗弼一起北还。
English: As a result, the Golden Army destroyed Mingzhou, and then returned north together with Zonglu.

古文：睿宗经略陕西，驻泾州，阿里先取渭州。
现代文：金睿宗巡视陕西，驻在泾州，斜卯阿里先攻下渭州。
English: Jin Ruizong toured Shaanxi, stationed in Bozhou, and Shao Ali first captured Bozhou.

古文：睿宗趋熙河，阿里、斜喝、韩常三猛安为前军。
现代文：金睿宗到熙河，斜卯阿里、斜喝、韩常三猛安作为先头部队。
English: Jin Ruizong went to Heihe, and Shiwu Ali, Shiwakai, and Han Changsan Mengyuan took the lead.

古文：十二年，与高彪监护水运。
现代文：天会十二年，斜卯阿里与高彪监督保护水运。
English: In the twelfth year of the Heavenly Assembly, Shiwu Ali and Gao Biao supervised and protected water transportation.

古文：宋以舟师阻亳州河路，击败之，追杀六十余里，获其将萧通。
现代文：宋朝用水兵阻止亳州河道，斜卯阿里打败了他们，并追杀六十多里，俘获宋军大将萧通。
English: The Song Dynasty used sailors to block the Bozhou River, and Shiwu Ali defeated them and chased them for more than sixty miles, capturing the Song general Xiao Tong.

古文：破涟水水寨贼，尽得其大船，遂取涟水军，招徕安辑之。
现代文：不久斜卯阿里打破涟水水寨的贼寇，全部缴获了他们的大船，接着又打败了涟水军，并招安了他们。
English: Soon after, Xiangwu Ali broke the bandits of the Surabaya water village, captured all their large ships, and then defeated the Surabaya army and recruited them.

古文：天眷间，盗据石州，阿里讨之。
现代文：天眷年间，盗寇占据了石州，斜卯阿里前去讨伐。
English: As fate would have it, robbers occupied Shishu, and Shiu Ali went to fight them.

古文：粘割胡撒与所部先登，遂克其城，石州平。
现代文：粘割胡撒所属部队首先登城，于是攻下了石州城，石州得以平安。
English: The troops belonging to Kikukawa Husa were the first to enter the city, so they captured Sekishu City, and Sekishu was safe.

古文：宗弼再伐宋，阿里已老，督造战船。
现代文：金人完颜宗弼再次攻打宋朝时，斜卯阿里年纪已大，只能监督打造战船。
English: When the Jin emperor Yan Zongxuan attacked the Song Dynasty again, Shao Ali was already old and could only supervise the building of warships.

古文：宋称臣，诏赐阿里钱千万。
现代文：宋朝向金朝称臣，金皇帝下诏赏赐给斜卯阿里钱千万。
English: The Song Dynasty praised the Kim Dynasty as a vassal, and the Kim Emperor issued an edict awarding Shao Ali ten million yuan.

古文：自结发从军，大小数十战，尤习舟楫，江、淮用兵，无役不从，时人以水星目之。
现代文：斜卯阿里自结发年龄当兵，经历大小几十次战斗，尤其熟悉水上作战，在长江、淮河战斗，金军每次战斗都听从他指挥，当时的人把他视为水星。
English: Shiwu Ali was a soldier from a young age, experienced dozens of battles, especially familiar with water combat, fighting in the Yangtze River and Huaihe River. The Golden Army obeyed his command in every battle. People at that time regarded him as Mercury.

古文：为迭里部节度使，历顺义、泰宁军，归德、济南尹。
现代文：斜卯阿里后来做了迭里部节度使，历任顺义、泰宁军、归德、济南尹。
English: Later, Shabu Ali was made the chief of the Second Division, successively Shunyi, Taining Army, Gui De, Jinan Yin.

古文：天德初，致仕，加特进，封王。
现代文：天德初，斜卯阿里退休，加为特进，封为王。
English: At the beginning of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, Shiwu Ali retired, was promoted to special promotion, and was crowned king.

古文：正隆例封韩国公，召赴阙，命造战船。
现代文：正隆年间依例封为韩国公，召到宫中，命令他制造战船。
English: During the reign of Jeongryong, he was appointed as a Korean prince, summoned to the palace, and ordered to build a warship.

古文：以疾薨，年七十八，谥智敏。
现代文：斜卯阿里因病去世，终年七十八岁，谥号智敏。
English: Shiwu Ali died of illness at the age of seventy-eight. He was nicknamed Zhimin.

古文：阿里性忠直，多智略。
现代文：斜卯阿里性情忠直，多智慧谋略。
English: Xiangwu Ali has a loyal and upright disposition, and is more intelligent and strategic.

古文：兄弟相友爱，家故饶财，以己猛安及财物尽与弟爱拔里。
现代文：他们兄弟之间相互友爱，家里本来很富有，他把自己的猛安和财物全部送给弟弟斜卯爱拔里。
English: Their brothers loved each other, and the family was originally very wealthy. He gave all of his wealth and possessions to his younger brother, Shabu Aibari.

古文：爱拔里不肯受，逃避岁余，阿里终与之。
现代文：斜卯爱拔里不肯接受，逃走躲避了一年多，斜卯阿里最终还是把它们给了弟弟。
English: Shabu Aibari refused to accept it and evaded it for more than a year, but Shabu Ali eventually gave it to his brother.

