古文：何腾蛟瞿式耜何腾蛟，字云从，贵州黎平卫人。
现代文：何腾蛟，字云从，贵州黎平卫人。
English: He Tengyu, Ziyun Cong, Guizhou Liping Wei Ren.

古文：天启元年举于乡。
现代文：天启元年在乡试中中举。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was selected in the middle of the township examination.

古文：崇祯中授南阳知县。
现代文：崇祯年间授官南阳知县。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Nanyang County was awarded the title of county.

古文：地四达，贼出没其间，数被挫去。
现代文：当地道路四通八达，贼寇经常在那里出没，多次被打败离去。
English: Local roads lead to all directions. Thieves and robbers often haunt the area, and many times they are defeated and leave.

古文：已，从巡抚陈必谦破贼安皋山，斩首四百余级，又讨平土寇，益知名。迁兵部主事，进员外郎，出为怀来兵备佥事，调口北道。
现代文：后来，跟从巡抚陈必谦在安皋山击破贼兵，斩获四百多首级，又讨伐削平当地贼寇，因此更加出名，升为兵部主事，又升为员外郎，然后外放出任怀来兵备佥事，后来调往口北道。
English: Later, Chen Biqian, a follower of the governor, defeated the bandit soldiers in Anhui Mountain and won more than 400 heads. He also fought and defeated the bandits in the plain, so he became more famous. He was promoted to the head of the military department, and was promoted to a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, and then he was sent out to train soldiers, and was later transferred to North Kuching.

古文：才谞精敏，所在见称。
现代文：腾蛟才智敏锐，所到之处都受人称赞。
English: He has a keen intellect and is praised everywhere he goes.

古文：遭母忧，巡抚刘永祚荐其贤，乞夺情任事。
现代文：在他为母亲守丧期间，巡抚刘永祚向朝廷推荐他有本领，请让他放弃自己的孝心，出来担任职务。
English: During his mother's funeral, the procurator Liu Yongyao recommended to the imperial court that he had the ability, please let him give up his filial piety and come out to take office.

古文：腾蛟不可，固辞归。
现代文：腾蛟没有同意，坚决谢绝，回家去了。
English: Teng Yao did not agree, firmly declined, and went home.

古文：服除，起淮徐兵备佥事。讨平土寇，部内宴然。
现代文：除去丧服后，得到起用担任淮徐兵备佥事，削平了当地的贼寇，使自己的辖区内一无战事，格外平静。
English: After removing the mourning clothes, he was appointed to serve as Huai Xu's military commander, leveled the local thieves and robbers, so that there was no war in his jurisdiction, and it was extremely calm.

古文：十六年冬，拜右佥都御史，代王聚奎巡抚湖广。
现代文：崇祯十六年冬天，担任右佥都御史，代替王聚奎巡视湖广。
English: In the winter of the 16th year of Chongzheng, he served as the right-hand magistrate of the capital and replaced Wang Jiukui to inspect the lake.

古文：时湖北地尽失，止存武昌，屯左良玉大军，军横甚。
现代文：这时湖北地盘大多失陷，只有武昌在手，驻扎着左良玉的大批部队，骄横不法。
English: At this time, most of the Hubei sites were lost, only Wuchang was in hand, and a large number of troops of Zuo Liangyu were stationed, arrogant and illegal.

古文：腾蛟与良玉交欢，得相安。
现代文：腾蛟同良玉友好相处，双方总算相安无事。
English: Tengya and Liangyu get along amicably, and the two sides are finally safe and sound.

古文：明年春，遣将惠登相、毛宪文复德安、随州。
现代文：第二年春天，他们两个派遣将领惠登相、毛宪文收复了德安、随州。
English: In the spring of the following year, they sent two generals, Hui Dengxiang and Mao Xianwen, to recover De'an and Suizhou.

古文：五月，福王立。
现代文：五月，福王即位。
English: In May, King Fook ascended the throne.

古文：诏至，良玉驻汉阳，其部下有异议，不欲开读。
现代文：诏书传到时，良玉正驻守汉阳，他的部下对此有异议，不想宣读诏书。
English: When the edict arrived, Liang Yu was stationed in Hanyang. His subordinates objected and did not want to read the edict.

古文：腾蛟曰： 社稷安危，系此一举。
现代文：腾蛟说 ：国家的安危全在这一下了。
English: Teng Rong said, "The security of the country depends on this."

古文：倘不奉诏，吾以死殉之。 
现代文：如果大家不接受诏书，我就只好以死殉国了。 
English: If everyone does not accept the edict, I will have no choice but to die as a martyr.

古文：抵良玉所，而良玉已听正纪卢鼎言，开读如礼。
现代文：他抵达良玉的驻所，良玉已经听了正纪卢鼎的话，按照礼仪宣读了诏书。
English: He arrived at Liangyu's residence. Liangyu had already listened to Zhengji Lu Ding's words and read out the edict in accordance with etiquette.

古文：正纪者，良玉所置官名也。
现代文：正纪是良玉设置的官名。
English: Zhengji is the official name of the good ball set.

古文：八月，福王命加腾蛟兵部右侍郎，兼抚湖南，代李乾德。
现代文：八月，福王命令加封腾蛟兵部右侍郎，兼管巡视湖南，取代了李乾德。
English: In August, King Fu ordered to add Feng Tengyu, the right-hand man of the military department, to supervise the inspection of Hunan, replacing Li Qiande.

古文：寻以故官总督湖广、四川、云南、贵州、广西军务，召总督杨鹗还。
现代文：不多久朝廷又让他以原先的身份总管湖广、四川、云南、贵州、广西的军务，把总管杨鄂召了回去。
English: It did not take long for the imperial court to let him return to his former position as the chief of military affairs for Hougang, Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, and Guangxi, and to recall the chief, Yang E.

古文：明年三月，南京有北来太子事，中外以为真，朝臣皆曰伪。
现代文：第二年三月，南京发生了北来太子一事，京城内外都以为是真太子，朝中大臣都认为是假的。
English: In March of the following year, the crown prince came to Nanjing from the north. People in and out of the capital thought he was the real crown prince, but the ministers in the imperial court thought he was a fake.

古文：腾蛟力言不可杀，与当国者大忤。
现代文：腾蛟极力说不能杀他，同当权的人大相违背。
English: Teng Xuan tried his best to say that he couldn't kill him, which went against the people in power.

古文：无何，良玉举兵反，邀腾蛟偕行，不可，则尽杀城中人以劫之。士民争匿其署中，腾蛟坐大门纵之入。
现代文：没多久，良玉率兵造反，邀请腾蛟同行。腾蛟没有同意，良玉就以杀尽城中百姓相威胁，士民都争着隐藏到他的官署中，腾蛟坐守在大门口让他们进去躲避。
English: Before long, Liang Yu and his soldiers rebelled and invited Teng Quan to accompany them. When Teng Quan did not agree, Liang Yu threatened to kill all the people in the city. The officials and the people all fought to hide in his government office, and Teng Quan sat guard at the gate to let them enter and hide.

古文：良玉破垣举火，避难者悉焚死。
现代文：良玉毁坏院墙放了一把火，避难的人们全部被烧死了。
English: Liangyu destroyed the courtyard wall and set a fire, and all the people who had taken refuge were burned to death.

古文：腾蛟急解印付家人，令速走，将自刭，为良玉部将拥去。
现代文：腾蛟赶紧解下官印给家人，命令他们迅速逃走，自己打算自杀，被良玉的部将劫持走了。
English: Teng Yao hurriedly released the official seal to his family members and ordered them to quickly escape. He planned to commit suicide, but was kidnapped by Liang Yu's subordinates.

古文：良玉欲与同舟，不从，乃置之别舟，以副将四人守之。
现代文：良玉想同他坐同一条船，腾蛟不答应，就把他放在别的船上，让四个副将守住他。
English: Liang Yu wanted to ride in the same boat with him, but Teng Yao did not agree, so he put him on another boat and let four vice captains hold him.

古文：舟次汉阳门，乘间跌入江水。
现代文：船行到汉阳门，腾蛟乘机跳入江中。
English: The boat went to Hanyangmen, and Tengyu took the opportunity to jump into the river.

古文：四人惧诛，亦赴水。
现代文：那四个副将怕被杀头，也跳入水中。
English: The four lieutenants, afraid of being beheaded, also jumped into the water.

古文：腾蛟漂十余里，渔舟救之起，则汉前将军关壮缪侯庙前也。
现代文：腾蛟在水上漂了十几里，被渔船上的人救了起来，上岸正好就到了汉前将军关北缪侯的庙前。
English: The paddlefish drifted more than ten miles on the water, was rescued by the people on the fishing boat, and came ashore right in front of the temple of the former Han general Guanbei Miao.

古文：家人怀印者亦至，相视大惊。
现代文：带着他的官印的家人正好这时也到了，相互见面后都非常吃惊。
English: His family members, bearing his official seal, also arrived at the same time and were very surprised to see each other.

古文：觅渔舟，忽不见。
现代文：回头寻找渔船，也忽然不见了。
English: He turned back to look for the fishing boat, but it had suddenly disappeared.

古文：远近谓腾蛟忠诚得神佑，益归心焉。
现代文：远近各地的人们都说是因为腾蛟为人忠诚得到了神的保佑，从此对他更加归附了。
English: People from far and wide say that because of Teng Xuan's loyalty as a man, he was blessed by God, and since then, they have become more attached to him.

古文：腾蛟乃从宁州转浏阳，抵长沙。
现代文：腾蛟于是从宁州转浏阳，抵达长沙。
English: Therefore, Tengyu changed from Ningzhou to Liuyang and arrived at Changsha.

古文：集诸属吏堵胤锡、傅上瑞、严起恒、章旷、周大启、吴晋锡等，痛哭盟誓。
现代文：聚集过去手下的僚属堵胤锡、傅上瑞、严起恒、章旷、周大启、吴晋锡等，大家痛苦地订立盟约、誓言。
English: He gathered his former colleagues and subordinates, such as Du Yanshi, Fu Shangrui, Yan Qiheng, Zhang Kuang, Zhou Daqi, and Wu Jinshi, and they painfully signed a covenant and oath.

古文：分士马舟舰糗粮，各任其一。
现代文：他们分配马匹、船只、粮草，建立几支武装分别担任首领。
English: They allocated horses, ships, grain and grass, established several armed forces and served as leaders.

古文：令胤锡摄湖北巡抚，上瑞摄湖南巡抚，旷为总督监军，大启提督学政。起恒故衡永道，即督二郡军食，晋锡以长沙推官摄郴桂道事。
现代文：命令胤锡代理湖北巡抚，上瑞代理湖南巡抚，章旷为总督监军，大启监管学政，起恒原本是衡、永道官员，就让他督管二郡的军粮，晋锡以长沙推官的身份代理郴、桂道的职务。
English: He ordered Yansi to be the acting governor of Hubei Province, Shangrui to be the acting governor of Hunan Province, Zhang Kuang to be the governor supervising the army, and Daqi to supervise the school administration. Since Heng and Yongdao were originally officials, he was put in charge of the military food in the two counties, and Jin Xi acted as the governor of Changsha and Gui Province.

古文：即遣旷调副将黄朝宣、张先璧、刘承胤兵。
现代文：接着就派章旷调遣副将黄朝宣、张先璧、刘承胤的兵力。
English: Next, Zhang Kuang dispatched the troops of Vice Generals Huang Chaoxuan, Zhang Xianbi and Liu Chengyin.

古文：朝宣自燕子窝，先璧自溆浦，承胤自武冈，先后至，兵势稍振。
现代文：朝宣从燕子窝，先譬从溆浦，承胤从武冈先后到来，军威稍稍振作起来。
English: Asanobu arrived successively from the Swallow's Nest, first from Kajiura, and then from Takeoka, and the military power was slightly invigorated.

古文：而是时良玉已死。
现代文：而这时良玉已经死掉了。
English: By this time, Ryotama was already dead.

古文：顺治二年五月，大兵下南都。唐王聿键自立于福州。
现代文：顺治二年五月，大清兵攻克南都，唐王朱聿键在福州自立为王。
English: In May of the second year of Shunzhi, the Qing soldiers conquered Nandu, and the Tang king Zhu Rongji became king in Fuzhou.

古文：王居南阳时，素知腾蛟贤，委任益至。
现代文：福王居住在南阳时，本来知道腾蛟能干，这时就更加重用他了。
English: When Fu Wang lived in Nanyang, he knew that Teng Yao was capable, so he used him more.

古文：李自成毙于九宫山，其将刘体仁、郝摇旗等以众无主，议归腾蛟。
现代文：李自成在九宫山被打死以后，他的将领刘体仁、郝摇旗等因为没了主帅，打算归附腾蛟。
English: After Li Zicheng was killed in Jiuyuan Mountain, his generals Liu Tizhen and Zou Jiaqi, etc., because they did not have a coach, planned to be attached to Tengcheng.

古文：率四五万人骤入湘阴，距长沙百余里。
现代文：他们率领四五万人突然间进入湘阴，与长沙相距只一百多里。
English: They led 450,000 people suddenly into Hunan, only a hundred miles away from Changsha.

古文：城中人不知其求归也，惧甚。
现代文：城中的人们不知道他们是来归顺的，非常害怕。
English: The people of the city did not know that they had come to submit, and they were very afraid.

古文：朝宣即引兵还燕子窝。
现代文：朝宣就率兵回燕子窝去了。
English: In the morning, Xuan Xuan led his soldiers back to the Swallow's Nest.

古文：上瑞请腾蛟出避，腾蛟曰： 死于左，死于贼，一也，何避焉。 
现代文：上瑞请求腾蛟出去避一时，腾蛟说 ：死在左良玉的手中，同死在贼手，是一样的，为什么要逃避呢？ 
English: Shangrui asked Tenzin to go out and hide for a while. Tenzin said, "Dying at the hands of Zuo Liangyu is the same as dying at the hands of a thief. Why run away?"

古文：长沙知府周二南请往侦之，以千人护行。
现代文：长沙知府周二南请求前往侦察他们，腾蛟派了一千人为他护行。
English: On Tuesday, the Changsha prefectural government asked Nan to go and investigate them, and Tengyu sent a thousand people to escort him.

古文：贼谓其迎敌也，射杀之，从行者尽死。
现代文：贼兵认为他们是来迎战的，就用箭射死了他，随行的士兵也都死了。
English: The bandits thought they were coming to fight, so they shot him with arrows, and the soldiers who were with him also died.

古文：城中益惧，士女悉窜。
现代文：这下城中更加惧怕，士绅百姓、男男女女全都逃跑了。
English: So there was great fear in the city, and all the people, both men and women, fled.

古文：腾蛟与旷谋，遣部将万人鹏等二人往抚。
现代文：腾蛟同章旷谋划，派遣部将万大鹏等两个人前去招安。
English: Teng Yao and Zhang Kuang made a plan, and dispatched two people including Wan Dapeng, the head of the dispatching department, to recruit An.

古文：贼见止二骑，迎入演武场，饮之酒。
现代文：贼寇见只有二匹马，就迎接他们进入演武场，用酒肉招待他们。
English: When the thief saw that there were only two horses, he welcomed them into the arena and offered them wine and meat.

古文：二人不交一言，与痛饮。
现代文：他们两个没有说一句话，只跟贼寇痛饮。
English: The two of them didn't say a word, just drank with the thief.

古文：饮毕，贼问来意，答言督师以湘阴褊小，不足容大军，请即移长沙。
现代文：饮酒完毕，贼寇问他们的来意，二人回答说，督师认为淮阴狭小不能够容纳大军，请你们就移驻长沙好了。
English: After drinking, the thief asked them what they wanted to do, and the two replied that the inspector thought that Huaiyin was too small to accommodate a large army, so please move to Changsha.

古文：因致腾蛟手书召之曰： 公等归朝，誓永保富贵。 
现代文：于是拿出腾蛟的手信招请他们说： 何先生等待着你们归顺的那一天，他发誓永远保证你们享受富贵。 
English: So he took out a handwritten letter from Tengyu and invited them to say: Mr. He is waiting for the day you submit, and he swears to always guarantee your enjoyment of wealth.

古文：摇旗等大喜，与大鹏至长沙。
现代文：摇旗等人非常高兴，立刻同大鹏一道到了长沙。
English: Waving flags and others were very happy and immediately went to Changsha with Dapeng.

古文：腾蛟开诚抚慰，宴饮尽欢，犒从官牛酒。
现代文：腾蛟开诚布公地对他们加以安抚和慰问，设宴饮酒狂欢，并且用牛肉和酒犒劳了他的随行官员。
English: Tenzin openly appeased and comforted them, held a banquet and drinking binge, and lavished his accompanying officials with beef and wine.

古文：命先璧以卒三万驰射，旌旗蔽天。
现代文：腾蛟命令先璧率领三万士兵演习骑射，大小军旗遮天蔽日。
English: Teng Xuan ordered Xian Bi to lead thirty thousand soldiers to practice horse shooting, and the flags of large and small armies covered the sky and the sun.

古文：摇旗等大悦，招其党袁宗第、蔺养成、王进才、牛有勇皆来归，骤增兵十余万，声威大震。
现代文：摇旗等又非常高兴，招集他的党羽袁宗第、蔺养成、王进才、牛有勇等都来归顺，一下子增加了十多万士兵，军威大振。
English: He was also very happy to wave the flag, and summoned his followers Yuan Zongdi, Zou Yucheng, Wang Jincai, Niu Youyong, and so on to surrender, suddenly increasing the number of soldiers by more than one hundred thousand and greatly boosting the military's prestige.

古文：未几，自成将李锦、高必正拥众数十万逼常德。
现代文：不多久，李自成的将领李锦、高必正带领几十万部队逼近常德。
English: Not long after, Li Zicheng's generals Li Jin and Gao Bi led hundreds of thousands of troops to approach Changde.

古文：腾蛟令胤锡抚降之，置之荆州。
现代文：腾蛟命令胤锡把他们招安了，安置在荆州。
English: Teng Yu ordered Yin Xi to recruit them and place them in Jingzhou.

古文：锦，自成从子，后赐名赤心。
现代文：李锦是李自成的侄子，后来朝廷赐给他的名字叫赤心。
English: Li Jin was the nephew of Li Zicheng, and later the name given to him by the imperial court was Chakxin.

古文：必正则自成妻高氏弟也。
现代文：必正是自成的妻子高氏的弟弟。
English: He must be the younger brother of Mr. Gao's self-made wife.

古文：高氏语锦曰： 汝愿为无赖贼，抑愿为大将邪？ 
现代文：高氏对李锦说 ：你愿意当一个无赖的贼呢，还是愿意做大将军呢？ 
English: Gao said to Li Jin, "Do you want to be a rogue thief, or do you want to be a great general?"

古文：锦曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：李锦说： 这话什么意思呢？ 
English: Li Jin said: What does this mean?

古文：曰： 为贼无论，既以身许国，当爱民，受主将节制，有死无二，吾所愿也。 锦曰： 诺。 
现代文：高氏说： 要做贼就不说了，假如要以身许国的话，就应当爱护人民，受主将节制，就是死也不能有二心，这就是我所希望于你的。 李锦说： 是。 
English: Gao said, "If you want to be a thief, don't say it. If you want to be a leader, you should love the people and be controlled by the Lord. Even if you die, you can't have two hearts. That's what I hope for you." Li Jin said, "Yes."

古文：腾蛟虑锦跋扈，他日过其营，请见高氏，再拜，执礼恭。
现代文：腾蛟害怕李锦骄横不法，后来有一天经过他的军营，就拜见高氏，拜了两拜，礼节很是恭敬。
English: Teng Yao was afraid of Li Jin's arrogance and lawlessness. Later, one day, he passed his military camp and paid a visit to Gao Shi. He prayed for two days. The etiquette was very respectful.

古文：高氏悦，戒其子毋忘何公，锦自是无异志。
现代文：高氏十分高兴，告诫他的侄子不要忘记何先生。李锦从这以后不曾有过不规矩的动机。
English: Mr Gao was very happy and told his nephew not to forget Mr He. From then on, Li Jin never had any ulterior motives.

古文：自成乱天下二十年，陷帝都，覆庙社，其众数十万悉归腾蛟。
现代文：自成在天下造反二十年，攻陷皇都，颠覆庙社，他的几十万士兵最终全归附了腾蛟。
English: He rebelled in the world for twenty years, captured the imperial capital, and subverted temples and shrines. His hundreds of thousands of soldiers were eventually all attached to Tengku.

古文：而腾蛟上疏，但言元凶已除，稍泄神人愤，宜告谢郊庙，卒不言己功。
现代文：而腾蛟上书只说罪魁祸首已除掉，稍微发泄了神灵的一口怨气，应该到郊庙去祭告神灵，始终不谈自己的功劳。
English: However, Teng Xuan's letter only said that the culprit had been eliminated, slightly venting the god's bitterness, and that he should go to the suburban temple to worship the god, but never talked about his own merits.

古文：唐王大喜，立拜东阁大学士兼兵部尚书，封定兴伯，仍督师。而疑自成死未实。
现代文：唐王非常高兴，立刻任命他为东阁大学士兼兵部尚书，加封他为定兴伯，仍然统帅军队，但是心中怀疑自成之死不真实。
English: Tang Wang was very happy and immediately appointed him as the Dongge University Scholar and the Secretary of the Military Department. He was also given the title of Ding Xing Bo. He still commanded the army, but he suspected in his heart that Zicheng's death was not true.

古文：腾蛟言自成定死，身首已糜烂。
现代文：腾蛟肯定自成死了，尸体都已经腐烂了。
English: Teng Yao must have died of natural causes, his body must have rotted away.

古文：不敢居功，因固辞封爵。
现代文：腾蛟不敢以有功自居，因而坚决辞谢给自己加封的爵位。
English: Teng Yao did not dare to regard himself as a meritorious person, so he resolutely declined the knighthood awarded to him.

古文：不允，令规取江西及南都。
现代文：唐王不准他辞谢，命令他谋划攻取江西以及南都。
English: The Tang king did not allow him to resign and ordered him to plan the capture of Jiangxi Province and the southern capital.

古文：当是时，降卒既众，腾蛟欲以旧军参之，乃题授朝宣、先璧为总兵官，与承胤、赤心、郝永忠、宗第、进才及董英、马进忠、马士秀、曹志建、王允成、卢鼎并开镇湖南、北，时所谓十三镇者也。
现代文：在这个时候，投诚的士兵已经很多了，腾蛟打算把原有的部队掺进他们中间去，于是题写、授予朝宣、先璧为总兵官，与承胤、赤心、郝永忠、宗第、进才以及董英、马进忠、马士秀、曹志建、王允成、卢鼎等一并在湖南、湖北开设军镇，这就是当时所说的十三镇。
English: At this time, there were already a lot of soldiers who had surrendered, and Teng Xuan planned to mix the original troops with them. Therefore, he inscribed and awarded the Imperial proclamation, made Xian Bi the chief military officer, and opened military towns in Hunan and Hubei together with Cheng Yan, Chixin, Zou Yongzhong, Zong Di, Jincai, Dong Ying, Ma Jizhong, Ma Shixiu, Cao Zhijian, Wang Yuncheng, Lu Ding, etc. These were the so-called thirteen towns at that time.

古文：永忠即摇旗，英，腾蛟中军，志建则故巡按刘熙祚中军，余皆良玉旧将也。
现代文：永忠就是摇旗，董英是腾蛟的中军，志建是以前的巡抚刘熙祚的中军，其余的都是良玉的旧将领。
English: Yongzhong is the flag-waver, Dongying is the Chinese army of Tengyu, Zhijian is the Chinese army of the former inspector Liu Xijin, and the rest are good old generals.

古文：腾蛟锐意东下，拜表出师。
现代文：腾蛟态度坚决地想举兵东下，就上表给唐王要求出兵作战。
English: With a rebellious attitude, he resolutely wanted to raise an army to go to the east, so he sent a request to Tang Wang to send troops to fight.

古文：明年正月与监军御史李膺品先赴湘阴，期大会岳州。
现代文：第二年正月与监军御史李鹰品率先开赴湘阴，约定时期与其他将领在岳州大会合。
English: In the first month of the second year, he took the lead in going to Hunan with the inspector of the army, Li Yingpin, and met with other generals at the Yuezhou General Assembly during the agreed period.

古文：先璧逗遛，诸营亦观望，独赤心自湖北至，为大兵所败而还，诸镇兵遂罢，腾蛟威望由此损。
现代文：先璧在原地逗留不肯赶来，其他的各军也在相互观望，只有赤心从湖北到来，被大清兵打败，然后返回，各镇的出兵于是都成了泡影了，腾蛟的威望也因此受到损害。
English: Xianbi stayed in place and refused to come, and the other armies were also watching each other. Only Chixin came from Hubei, was defeated by the Qing soldiers, and then returned. As a result, the soldiers from all towns became a shadow, and the prestige of Tengkun was also damaged.

古文：时诸将皆骄且贪残，朝宣尤甚，劫人而剥其皮。永忠效之，杀民无虚日。腾蛟不能制。
现代文：当时各位将领都骄横贪婪而且残忍，朝宣尤其突出，他抢劫了人还要剥掉人皮，永忠也仿效他，没有一天不杀人，腾蛟不能制止他们。
English: At that time, all the generals were arrogant, greedy and cruel. The leader of the Imperial Court was particularly outstanding. He robbed people and even skinned them. Yongzhong also followed his example. There was never a day when he didn't kill people. Tengyu couldn't stop them.

古文：故总督杨鹗者，克饷失军心，至是复夤缘为偏沅总督。
现代文：旧总督杨鹗过去因克扣军饷失去军心，现在又向上巴结当了偏沅总督。
English: In the past, the former Governor Yang Mi lost his military spirit due to his refusal to accept military pay, but now he has become a partisan governor.

古文：腾蛟以为言，乃召鹗还。
现代文：腾蛟对此说了话，朝廷才把杨鹗召回。
English: It was only after Teng Yu had spoken about this that the imperial court recalled Yang Hui.

古文：王数议出关，为郑氏所阻。
现代文：唐王多次讨论出关，被郑氏阻止。
English: Tang Wang repeatedly discussed leaving the customs, but was stopped by Zheng Zang.

古文：腾蛟屡请幸赣，协力取江西。
现代文：腾蛟屡次请求唐王亲临江西，以便联合力量攻取江西。
English: Teng Xuan repeatedly asked Tang Wang to come to Jiangxi so that they could join forces to conquer Jiangxi.

古文：王遣使征兵，腾蛟发永忠精骑五千往。
现代文：唐王派遣使者来征集兵力，腾蛟派永忠的精锐骑兵五千人前去应征。
English: Emperor Tang sent an envoy to recruit troops, and Emperor Xuanzong sent 5,000 of Yongzhong's elite cavalry to enlist.

古文：永忠不肯前，五月始抵郴州。
现代文：永忠不肯前去，五月份才抵达郴州。
English: Yongzhong refused to go and only arrived in Ganzhou in May.

古文：会大兵破汀州，聿键被执死，赣州亦失。
现代文：恰好大清兵攻下汀州，聿键被俘而死，赣州也失陷了。
English: It just so happened that the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty conquered Tingzhou, Zou Kian was captured and died, and Zouzhou also fell.

古文：腾蛟闻王死，大恸，厉兵保境如平时。
现代文：腾蛟听说唐王去世，非常悲恸，但还是像平常一样整治军队保守边境。
English: When Teng Xuan heard that Tang Wang had passed away, he was very sad, but he still organized the army and protected the border as usual.

古文：已，闻永明王立，乃稍自安。
现代文：后来听说永明王即位，心里才稍稍安静下来。
English: Later, when I heard that King Yongming ascended to the throne, my heart calmed down a little.

古文：王寻以腾蛟为武英殿大学士，加太子太保。
现代文：不久永明王让腾蛟做武英殿大学士，加封太子太保。
English: Soon after, King Yongming made Teng Yao a member of the court of Emperor Wuying, as well as the prince's father-in-law.

古文：王进才故守益阳，闻大兵渐逼，还长沙。
现代文：王进才本来在把守益阳，听说大清兵渐渐逼近，竟然回到长沙去了。
English: Wang Jin was originally guarding Yiyang, but when he heard that the Qing soldiers were gradually approaching, he went back to Changsha.

古文：四年春，进才扬言乏饷，大掠，并及湘阴。
现代文：四年春天，进才扬言缺乏军饷，在当地大肆抢劫，并且一直抢到湘阴。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Jin Cai threatened the lack of military pay, looted extensively in the local area, and robbed all the way to Hunan.

古文：适大兵至长沙，进才走湖北。
现代文：恰好大清兵到达长沙，进才逃往湖北。
English: Just as the Great Qing soldiers arrived in Changsha, Jin fled to Hubei.

古文：腾蛟不能守，单骑走衡州，长沙、湘阴并失。
现代文：腾蛟不能把守，单枪匹马逃往衡州，长沙、湘阴一同失陷。
English: Unable to hold Tengchong, he fled to Hengzhou single-handed. Changsha and Hunan fell together.

古文：卢鼎时守衡州，而先璧兵突至，大掠。
现代文：卢鼎此时把守衡州，而先璧的军队突然到来，大肆掳掠。
English: At this time, Lu Ding was guarding Hengzhou, and the first army suddenly arrived and plundered.

古文：鼎不能抗，走永州。
现代文：卢鼎不能抵抗，逃到永州。
English: Lu Ding could not resist and fled to Yongzhou.

古文：先璧遂挟腾蛟走祁阳，又间道走辰州。
现代文：先璧于是挟持腾蛟到祁阳，又从小路到辰州。
English: Xian Bi then took Tengqian to Fenyang, and from the small road to Chenzhou.

古文：腾蛟脱还，走永州。
现代文：腾蛟半道逃脱回来，到了永州。
English: After escaping from Tengchong halfway, he returned to Yongzhou.

古文：甫至，鼎部将复大掠。
现代文：立足未稳，卢鼎部下的将领也开始大肆抢劫。
English: Their footing was not stable, and the generals under Lu Ding also began to plunder.

古文：鼎走道州，腾蛟与侍郎严起恒走白牙市，大兵遂下衡、永。
现代文：卢鼎逃往道州，腾蛟与侍郎严起恒跑到了白牙市，大清兵于是拿下了衡州和永州。
English: Lu Ding fled to Daozhou, Teng Quan and his attendant Yan Qi Heng ran to Baiya City, and the Great Qing soldiers then took Hengzhou and Yongzhou.

古文：初，腾蛟建十三镇以卫长沙，至是皆自为盗贼。
现代文：当初，腾蛟建立十三个军镇用来保卫长沙，到现在各军都自己做了盗贼，谈什么保卫国家呢？
English: At the beginning, Tengye established thirteen military towns to defend Changsha, but now all the armies have become thieves themselves. How can we talk about defending the country?

古文：大兵入衡州，守将黄朝宣降。
现代文：大清兵进入衡州，守将黄朝宣投降了。
English: The Qing soldiers entered Hengzhou, and the garrison commander, Huang Chaoxuan, surrendered.

古文：数其罪，支解之，远近大快。
现代文：大清兵列举他的罪行，把他肢解了，周围地区的人民都拍手称快。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty enumerated his crimes and dismembered him, and the people in the surrounding areas applauded.

古文：大清以一知府守永州，副将周金汤瞷城虚，夜鼓噪而登，知府出走，金汤遂入永。
现代文：大清政府让一个知府把守永州，副将周金汤探察到守城力量薄弱，夜间率兵击鼓大喊着登上城墙，知府弃城逃跑，金汤于是进入了永州。
English: The Qing Dynasty government assigned a prefectural governor to guard Yongzhou. Vice-commander Zhou Jintang discovered that the city's defenses were weak. At night, he led soldiers to the city walls, beating drums and shouting. The prefectural governor abandoned the city and fled. Jintang then entered Yongzhou.

古文：六月，腾蛟在白牙。
现代文：六月，腾蛟在白牙。
English: In June, Tenzin appeared in White Fang.

古文：王密遣中使告以刘承胤罪，令入武冈除之。
现代文：永明王暗中派遣中使告诉他刘承胤的罪行，命令他到武冈除掉他。
English: King Yongming secretly sent an envoy to tell him about Liu Chengyin's crime and ordered him to go to Wookang to get rid of him.

古文：腾蛟乃走谒王，王及太后皆召见。
现代文：腾蛟于是前去拜见永明王，永明王和王太后都召见了他。
English: Teng Yao then went to see King Yongming. Both King Yongming and the Empress Dowager summoned him.

古文：承胤由小校，以腾蛟荐至大将，已渐倨。
现代文：承胤起初是一个小校，凭腾蛟推荐做到了大将，现在已经渐渐地骄傲起来。
English: At the beginning, Choei was a small school, but thanks to the recommendation of Tengyu, he made it to the top, and now he is gradually becoming proud.

古文：腾蛟在长沙征其兵，承胤大怒，言： 先调朝宣、先璧军，皆章旷亲行，今乃折箠使我。 
现代文：腾蛟在长沙征调他的兵力，承胤非常愤怒，说： 你以前调遣朝宣、先璧的军队时，都是章旷亲自过去说好话，现在倒来军令使唤我。 
English: When Teng Xuan conscripted his troops in Changsha, Zhe Lin was very angry and said, "In the past, when you conscripted the army of the imperial proclamation and Xian Bi, it was Zhang Guang himself who came to say good words, but now the military order has summoned me.

古文：遂驰至黎平，执腾蛟子，索饷数万。
现代文：于是派骑兵到黎平，抓住腾蛟的儿子做人质，向他勒索了几万饷银。
English: So he sent cavalry to Liping, seized Tengyu's son as a hostage, and extorted tens of thousands of taels of silver from him.

古文：子走诉腾蛟，腾蛟遣旷行，承胤乃以众至。
现代文：腾蛟的儿子逃跑回来告诉他，腾蛟派遣章旷去，承胤才会率领军队来。
English: Tengyu's son ran away and came back to tell him that Tengyu had sent Zhang Kuai away, and only then would He Jian lead the army.

古文：腾蛟为请于王，得封定蛮伯，且与为姻，承胤益骄。
现代文：腾蛟并且同他约为儿女亲家，承胤这一来更加骄横。
English: He has become more and more proud of his son-in-law, with whom he has raised a family of children.

古文：至是爵安国公，勋上柱国，赐尚方剑，益坐大。
现代文：到这时加封爵号为安国公，勋阶为上柱国，赐了他尚方宝剑，他更加坐地自大。
English: At this time, he was given the title of An Guogong and the order of Shangzhuang, and he was given the Shangfang Sword, which made him even more arrogant.

古文：忌腾蛟出己上，欲夺其权，请用为户部尚书，专领饷务，王不许。
现代文：承胤忌妒腾蛟位置在自己之上，想夺取他的权力，请求朝廷封他做户部尚书，专门管理粮饷，永明王没有同意他的建议。
English: He envied the king's position over him, wanted to seize his power, and asked the court to appoint him as the head of the household, specifically to manage the granary. King Yongming did not agree to his suggestion.

古文：王召腾蛟图承胤，腾蛟无兵，命以云南援将赵印选、胡一青兵隶之。
现代文：永明王召见腾蛟谋划收拾承胤，但腾蛟没有兵力，永明王就命令把云南援将赵印选、胡一青兵力交给他管。
English: King Yongming summoned Tengku to make a plan to settle the succession, but Tengku had no troops, so King Yongming ordered that the troops of Yunnan Aid, Zhao Yingxuan and Hu Yixing be handed over to him.

古文：及辞朝，赐银币，命廷臣郊饯。
现代文：等到他辞别时，又赐给他银币，命令朝廷大臣在郊外为他饯行。
English: When he was leaving, he gave him another silver coin and ordered the minister of the court to walk for him in the suburbs.

古文：承胤伏千骑袭腾蛟，印选卒力战，尽歼之，腾蛟乃还驻白牙。
现代文：承胤埋伏了一千骑兵袭击腾蛟，印选的士兵奋力作战，全部歼灭了他们，腾蛟才得以返回到白牙驻守。
English: Chengyin ambushed a thousand cavalry to attack Tengku, and the soldiers fought hard and annihilated them all, so that Tengku could return to the White Fang garrison.

古文：八月，大兵破武冈，承胤降。
现代文：八月，大清兵打下武冈，承胤投降了。
English: In August, the soldiers of the Great Qing Army laid siege to Takeoka, and Shoin surrendered.

古文：王走靖州，又走柳州。
现代文：永明王先逃往靖州，后来又到了柳州。
English: Yongming Wang first fled to Jingzhou, and later to Liuzhou.

古文：时常德、宝庆已失，永亦再失。
现代文：当时常德、宝庆已经丢掉了，永州也再次陷落。
English: At that time, Changde and Baoqing had already been lost, and Yongzhou also fell again.

古文：乃遣琏、永忠、鼎、印选、一青分扼兴安、灵川、永宁、义宁诸州县。十一月，大兵逼全州，腾蛟督五将合御。
现代文：永明王打算返回桂林，而桂林城中只有焦琏的微弱兵力，腾蛟率领印选、一青的部队进城支援他们。可是南安侯郝永忠也突然带着一万多兵力到来，打算同焦琏的军队作战，恰好宜章伯卢鼎的军队也到了，腾蛟三下里为他们相互调剂，桂林才安定下来。于是腾蛟派遣焦琏、永忠、卢鼎、印选、一青分别把守兴安、灵川、永宁、义宁各州县，腾蛟率领五位将领联合抵御。
English: King Yongming planned to return to Guilin, but only Jiao Tong's weak troops were in the city of Guilin. Teng Quan led the troops of Ying Zheng and Ying Qing into the city to support them. However, Nan'an lord Yong Zhong also suddenly arrived with more than ten thousand troops, planning to fight with Jiao Tong's army. Just at that time, Zhang Bo Lu Ding's army also arrived. It took Teng Quan three days to adjust for them, and Guilin was able to settle down. Therefore, Teng Quan sent Jiao Tong, Yong Zhong, Lu Ding, Ying Zheng and Ying Qing to guard the counties of Xing'an,

古文：五年正月，王居桂林，加腾蛟太师，进爵为侯，子孙世袭。
现代文：五年正月，永明王居住在桂林，加封腾蛟为太师、进爵为侯，子孙世袭。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, King Yongming lived in Guilin. He was given the title of Grand Master and the title of Marquis, and his descendants followed in his footsteps.

古文：二月，大兵破全州，至兴安。
现代文：二月，大清兵打下全州，到达兴安。
English: In February, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty conquered Jeonju and arrived at Xing'an.

古文：永忠兵大溃，奔桂林，逼王西，纵兵大掠。
现代文：永忠的军队大败，逃往桂林，逼迫永明王西走，纵使士兵在桂林大肆抢劫。
English: Yongzhong's army was badly defeated and fled to Guilin, forcing Yongming Wang Xi to leave, even though the soldiers looted heavily in Guilin.

古文：腾蛟自永福至。
现代文：腾蛟从永福赶到桂林。
English: Tengya rushed from Yongfu to Guilin.

古文：大兵知桂林有变，直抵北门。
现代文：大清兵知道桂林发生事变，直抵北门。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty knew that there was an incident in Guilin and went straight to the North Gate.

古文：腾蛟督琏、一青等分三门拒守，大兵乃还全州。
现代文：腾蛟督使焦琏、一青等人分别把守三道城门，大清兵才返回到全州。
English: The governor of Tengboche sent Jiaojun, Yixing and others to guard the three gates of the city, and the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty returned to Quanzhou.

古文：会金声桓、李成栋叛大清，以兵附。
现代文：恰好金声恒、李成栋背叛大清兵，率领军队归附了永明王。
English: It just so happened that Jin Sheng Heng and Li Chengdong betrayed the Qing soldiers and led the army to annex Yongming Wang.

古文：大兵在湖南者姑退，腾蛟遂取全州。
现代文：在湖南的大清兵只好暂时退回，腾蛟于是占领了全州。
English: The Qing soldiers in Hunan had to retreat temporarily, and Tengchong then occupied the whole province.

古文：复遣保昌侯曹志建、宜章侯卢鼎、新兴侯焦琏、新宁侯赵印选攻永州，围城三月，大小三十六战，十一月朔克之。
现代文：又派保昌侯曹志建、宜章侯卢鼎、新兴侯焦琏、新宁侯赵印选攻打永州，围困了三个月，经过大大小小三十六次战斗，十一月初攻下了永州。
English: He also sent Baochang marquis Cao Zhijian, Yizhang marquis Lu Ding, Xinxing marquis Jiaxuan, and Xinning marquis Zhao Yinxuan to attack Yongzhou. They besieged Yongzhou for three months, and after 36 battles, large and small, they captured Yongzhou in early November.

古文：未几，监军御史余鲲起、职方主事李甲春取宝庆，诸将亦取衡州，马进忠取常德，所失地多复。
现代文：不久，监军御史余鲲起和职方主事李甲春攻取宝庆，别的将领们也攻占了衡州，马进忠打下了常德，丢失的地盘大多又恢复了。
English: Soon, the supervisor of the army, Gu Shi Yu Xuanqi, and the leader of the workers' side, Li Jiachun, captured Baoqing. Other generals also captured Hengzhou, Ma Jinzhong defeated Changde, and most of the lost territory was restored.

古文：腾蛟议进兵长沙。
现代文：腾蛟打算进兵长沙。
English: Teng Rong plans to invade Changsha.

古文：会督师堵胤锡恶进忠，招忠贞营李赤心军自夔州至，令进忠让常德与之。
现代文：恰好督师堵胤锡讨厌进忠，招忠贞营李赤心的军队从夔州到来，让进忠把常德让给他。
English: It just so happened that the superintendent Dou Yinshi disliked Jinzhong, and the army of Zhao Zhongzheng and Li Chixin arrived from Zhangzhou to persuade Jinzhong to cede Changde to him.

古文：进忠大怒，尽驱居民出城，焚庐舍，走武冈。
现代文：进忠非常愤怒，把居民全部驱逐出城，烧毁房舍，移驻武冈去了。
English: Jinzhong was so angry that he drove all the residents out of the city, burned their houses, and moved to Wookang.

古文：宝庆守将王进才亦弃城走，他守将皆溃。
现代文：宝庆守将王进才也弃城出走，其他守将都战败而退。
English: The governor of Baoqing, Wang Jincai, also abandoned the city and fled, and the other governors were defeated and retreated.

古文：赤心等所至皆空城，旋弃走，东趋长沙。
现代文：赤心等将领所到之处都把城镇扫荡一空，接着就弃城而去，向东直趋长沙。
English: Chikushin and other generals swept the town clean everywhere they went, and then they abandoned the town and headed straight east to Changsha.

古文：腾蛟时驻衡州，大骇。
现代文：腾蛟当时驻军衡州，听说这些后非常吃惊。
English: Teng Xuan was stationed in Hengzhou at the time, and was very surprised when he heard about this.

古文：六年正月檄进忠由益阳出长沙，期诸将毕会，而亲诣忠贞营，邀赤心入衡。
现代文：六年正月，传令让进忠从益阳出军长沙，约定各位将领前往会合，然后亲自到忠贞营去，邀请赤心入驻衡州。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, an order was issued to let Jinzhong march from Yiyang to Changsha, and it was agreed that the generals would go to the meeting, and then personally go to the camp of Zhongzheng to invite Chixin to settle in Hengzhou.

古文：部下卒六千人，惧忠贞营掩袭，不护行，止携吏卒三十人往。将至，闻其军已东，即尾之至湘潭。
现代文：腾蛟部下六千名士兵，因为害怕忠贞营合力袭击，不敢让他们为自己护行，只携带了三十名属吏和士兵一同前往，眼看快到了，听说赤心率兵东去，就跟着他到了湘潭。
English: The six thousand soldiers under Teng Xuan were afraid of the combined attack of the loyal battalions and did not dare to let them escort themselves. They only carried thirty subordinate officers and soldiers to go together. They saw that it was almost time, and when they heard that the soldiers were going east, they followed him to Xiangtan.

古文：湘潭空城也，赤心不守而去，腾蛟乃入居之。
现代文：湘潭是一座空城，赤心未加防守就离开了，腾蛟于是进去暂停。
English: Xiangtan is an empty city. Chixin left without putting up a defense, so Tengya went in and paused.

古文：大兵知腾蛟入空城，遣将徐勇引军入。
现代文：大清兵得知腾蛟进入这座空城，就派遣将领李勇引兵进城。
English: When the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty learned that Teng Xuan had entered the empty city, they sent the general Li Yong to lead the troops into the city.

古文：勇，腾蛟旧部将也，率其卒罗拜，劝腾蛟降。
现代文：李勇过去是腾蛟部下的将领，他进城后就率领他的士兵围住腾蛟行礼，劝腾蛟投降。
English: In the past, Ri Yong was a general under Teng Huan. After he entered the city, he led his soldiers to surround Teng Huan, made a salute, and persuaded Teng Huan to surrender.

古文：腾蛟大叱，勇遂拥之去。
现代文：腾蛟破口大骂，李勇于是把他劫持走了。
English: Teng Yao cursed loudly and Li Yong took him away.

古文：绝食七日，乃杀之。
现代文：腾蛟绝食七天，大清兵只好杀了他。
English: Teng Yao went on a seven-day hunger strike, and the Qing soldiers had no choice but to kill him.

古文：逾年，与刘承胤并诛死。瞿式耜，字起田，常熟人。
现代文：永明王得知这个消息后痛加哀悼，多次予以祭奠，追赠给他中湘王，谥文烈，让他的儿子文瑞做了佥都御史。瞿式耜，字起田，常熟人。
English: After learning this news, King Yongming expressed his deep condolences and made many tributes to him. He also gave him the posthumous gift of the King of Zhongxiang, Gong Wen Rong, and had his son, Wen Rui, made the Grand Historian of the Capital. Gong Shik Xuan, also known as Kida, was a frequent acquaintance.

古文：礼部侍郎景淳孙，湖广参议汝说子也。
现代文：是礼部侍郎瞿景淳的孙子，湖广参议瞿汝说的儿子。
English: He is the grandson of the chamberlain of the ceremonial department, Gong Jing Jun, and the son of the Hukang Councilor, Gong Ru.

古文：举万历四十四年进士。
现代文：他考中万历四十四年榜进士。
English: He was a top-ranked student in the 44th year of the Wanli Middle School Examination.

古文：授吉安永丰知县，有惠政。
现代文：授吉安永丰知县，任职期间实施利民政策。
English: He was awarded the Jia'an Yongfeng County, and implemented the policy of benefiting the people during his tenure.

古文：天启元年调江陵。
现代文：天启元年朝廷要调他到江陵。
English: At the beginning of the year, the imperial court wanted to transfer him to Gangneung.

古文：永丰民乞留，命再任。
现代文：永丰县百姓请求让他留下来，朝廷任命他继续担任永丰知县。
English: The people of Yongfeng County asked him to stay, and the imperial court appointed him to continue to serve as the leader of Yongfeng County.

古文：以忧归。
现代文：后来因为守丧回家去了。
English: He came back to his hometown because of his father's death.

古文：崇祯元年，擢户科给事中，疏言李国〈木普〉宜留内阁，王永光宜典铨，曹于汴宜秉宪，郑三俊、毕懋良宜总版曹，李邦华宜主戎政。
现代文：崇祯元年他提升为户部给事中，上书说李国木普应该留在内阁，王永光应该主管选拔官吏，曹于汴应该掌管宪令，郑三俊、毕懋良应掌管户部事务，李邦华应主管军事。
English: When he was promoted to the household department in the first year of Chongzhen, the letter said that Li Guomup should remain in the cabinet, Wang Yongguang should be in charge of selecting officials, Cao Yuxuan should be in charge of constitutional orders, Zheng Sanjun and Bi Yuliang should be in charge of household department affairs, and Li Banghua should be in charge of military affairs.

古文：帝多采其言。
现代文：崇祯皇帝多半采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Chongzhen mostly adopted his suggestion.

古文：俄陈朝政不平，为王之寀请恤，孙慎行讼冤，速杨镐、王化贞之诛，白杨涟、左光斗结毒之谤，追论故相魏广微、顾秉谦、冯铨、黄立极之罪。因言夺情建祠之朱童蒙不可宽，积愆久废之汤宾尹不可用。
现代文：不久他上书叙说朝政不公正，为王之肕请求抚恤，为孙慎行诉冤，请求立即杀掉杨镐、王化贞，澄清杨涟、左光斗勾结害人的不白之冤，追论原任辅臣魏广微、顾秉谦、冯铨、黄立极的罪过，进而又说到放弃守丧出任并为自己建祠的朱童蒙不可宽恕，罪恶累累长期免职的汤宾严不可使用。
English: Soon, he wrote a letter describing the injustice of the imperial government, requesting a pension for Wang Zhiqi, suing for Sun Shengxing, requesting the immediate killing of Yang Hui and Wang Huazhen, clarifying the injustice of Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou colluding to harm people, tracing the sins of the former aides Wei Guangwei, Gu Bingqian, Feng Yu and Huang Lijiao, and then saying that Zhu Tong, who gave up his post as a mourner and built a shrine for himself, could not be forgiven, and that Tang Bin, who had been removed from his post for a long time due to his accumulated sins, could not be used.

古文：帝亦纳之。
现代文：崇祯皇帝也采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Chongzhen also adopted his suggestion.

古文：又极论来宗道、杨景辰附逆不可居政府，二人旋罢去。
现代文：又极力论述来宗道、杨景辰曾追随逆党不能让他们在政府任职。
English: It was also forcefully argued that those who had followed the rebel party such as Lai Zongdao and Yang Jingchen should not be allowed to serve in the government.

古文：御史袁弘勋劾大学士刘鸿训，逆党徐大化实主之。
现代文：他们俩不久也被罢免离去。御史袁弘弹劾大学士刘鸿川，实际上是逆党徐大化在主使他。
English: Both of them were soon removed from their posts. The impeachment of Liu Hongchuan, a university professor, by Yuan Hong, the chief historian, was actually instigated by Xu Dahua, a member of the opposite party.

古文：川贵总督张鹤鸣先已被废，其复用由魏忠贤。
现代文：川贵总督张鹤鸣以先曾被罢免，他重新得到起用是由于魏忠贤的帮助。
English: The governor of Sichuan Guizhou, Zhang Heming, had previously been dismissed, but he was reinstated with the help of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：式耜并疏论。
现代文：式耜一并上书诉说。
English: Shikizaki also wrote a letter to complain.

古文：已，颂杨涟、魏大中、周顺昌为清中之清，忠中之忠，三人遂赐谥。
现代文：后来，他又赞扬杨莲、魏大中、周顺昌是清官中的清官，忠臣中的忠臣，这三个人因而得到追赠和加谥。
English: Later, he praised Yang Lian, Wei Dazhong and Zhou Shunchang as "the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best."

古文：未几，陈时务七事，言： 起废不可不核，升迁不可不渐，会推不可不慎。
现代文：没多久，上书对时事提出了七点建议： 起用废除官吏不能不审核，官吏提升不能不循序进行，选举官吏不能不谨慎。
English: Not long after, the petition put forward seven suggestions on current affairs: the appointment and abolition of officials should not be without review, the promotion of officials should not be carried out in a non-sequential manner, and the election of officials should not be careless.

古文：谥典宜严，刑章宜饬，论人宜审，附珰者宜区分。 
现代文：谥典应该严格把关，法纪应当整顿，评价人物应该仔细，对依附宦官的人应当加以区分。 
English: Eunuchs should be strictly controlled, legal discipline should be rectified, people should be carefully evaluated, and people who rely on eunuchs should be distinguished.

古文：又极论馆选奔竞之弊，请临轩亲试。
现代文：又极力论述了馆阁用人中存在的奔走请告的弊端，要求崇祯皇帝亲临现场加以考试。
English: He also forcefully expounded the drawbacks of rushing to complain that exist among the pavilion's employers, and required Emperor Chongzhen to come to the scene to be examined.

古文：末言： 古有左右史，记天子言动。
现代文：最后说： 古代帝王身边设有左、右史记录天子的言行举止。
English: Finally, he said: Ancient emperors had left and right chronicles around them to record the words and deeds of the heavenly son.

古文：今召对时勤，宜令史官入侍纪录，昭示朝野。 
现代文：现在陛下经常召集大臣问话，应该让史官在身边加以记录，向朝野公布。 
English: Now that His Majesty often convenes ministers to ask questions, he should have a historian around to record them and announce them to the court.

古文：事多议行。
现代文：他所说的事经过讨论大多得以实施。
English: Most of what he said was discussed and implemented.

古文：时将定逆案，请尽发红本，定其情罪轻重。又言宣府巡抚徐良彦不附逆奄，为崔呈秀诬劾遣戍，亟当登用。
现代文：当时朝廷即将议论逆党一案，他请求把红本下发给大臣，以便确定这些罪行的轻重，又说宣府巡抚徐良彦没有追随谋逆的阉党，被崔呈秀诬陷弹劾贬到边疆充军，应当立即加以提拔任用。
English: At that time, the imperial court was about to discuss the case of treason, and he requested that the red book be sent to the minister in order to determine the severity of these crimes. He also said that Xu Liangyan, the procurator of the Xuanwu government, did not follow the treasonous Kuomintang, and was framed by Cui Xianxiu for impeachment and demoted to the frontier to fill the army. He should be promoted and appointed immediately.

古文：良彦遂获起。
现代文：良彦于是得到起用。
English: As a result, Yoshihiko was appointed to the post.

古文：式耜矫矫立名，所建白多当帝意，然搏击权豪，大臣多畏其口。
现代文：式耜胆大口直地建功立名。所提出的建议大多符合皇上的心意，但是他敢于攻击豪门权臣，大臣们都害怕他的一张嘴巴。
English: Most of his proposals were in line with the emperor's wishes, but he dared to attack the high-ranking dignitaries. The ministers were afraid of his mouth.

古文：十月诏会推阁臣，礼部侍郎钱谦益以同官周延儒方言事蒙眷，虑并推则己绌，谋沮之。
现代文：十月崇祯皇帝下诏让朝廷推选内阁大臣，礼部侍郎钱谦益因为同事周延儒正因为论事受到皇上的宠爱，担心和自己一起推荐上去自己就会落选，于是打算阻止他被推荐的可能性。
English: In October, Emperor Chongzhen issued an edict to have the imperial court nominate a cabinet minister, and the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Qian Qianyun, because his colleague, Zhou Yan Rong, was favored by the emperor because of his arguments. He was worried that if he was recommended together with him, he would lose the election, so he intended to prevent the possibility of being recommended.

古文：式耜，谦益门人也，言于当事者，摈延儒弗推，而列谦益第二。
现代文：式耜是谦益的门人，就为谦益向当权者游说，要大家把延儒排斥不予推选。而把谦益排在第二位。
English: Shih Chun was a disciple of Qian Yi, so he lobbied those in power on behalf of Qian Yi, asking everyone to exclude Yan Ru from being elected, and put Qian Yi in second place.

古文：温体仁遂发难，延儒助之。
现代文：温体仁于是首先告发了他们，延儒也帮着他说话。
English: Wen Tianzhen was the first to denounce them, and Yan Rong also helped him to speak.

古文：谦益夺官闲住，式耜坐贬谪。
现代文：谦益被免除官职，式耜因此被贬了官。
English: Qian Yi was relieved of his post, and Shih Ju was demoted as a result.

古文：式耜尝颂贵宁参政胡平表杀贼功，请优擢。
现代文：式耜曾经颂扬过贵宁参政胡平表杀贼的功绩，请求提升他。
English: Shikibu had once praised the achievements of Guining's participation in politics and Hu Ping's killing of thieves, and requested that he be promoted.

古文：其后平表为贵州布政使，坐不谨罢。
现代文：后来平表做贵州布政便，因办事不谨慎被罢官。
English: Later, it was convenient for Ping table to do Guizhou government, but he was dismissed for imprudence.

古文：式耜再贬二秩，遂废于家。
现代文：式耜因此又被贬官二级，也就是罢官在家了。
English: As a result, Shikizaki was demoted to the second level, that is, he was dismissed from his post.

古文：久之，常熟奸民张汉儒希体仁指，讦谦益、式耜贪肆不法。
现代文：很久以后，常熟的一个奸民张汉儒迎合温体仁心思，攻击谦益、式耜贪婪、放肆、不守法。
English: A long time later, Zhang Hanru, a villain of Changshu, pandered to the warm-hearted and benevolent thoughts, attacking modesty, greed, arrogance, and lawlessness.

古文：体仁主之，下法司逮治。
现代文：体仁在朝中做主，下令法司逮捕他们治罪。
English: Tetsujin took the lead in the court and ordered the legal department to arrest and punish them.

古文：巡抚张国维、巡按路振飞交章白其冤，不听。
现代文：巡抚张国维、巡按路振飞先后上书为他申冤，崇祯皇帝没有听取他们的意见。
English: Zhang Guowei, the procurator, and Zhenfei, the procurator, successively sent letters to redress his grievances, but Emperor Chongzhen did not listen to their opinions.

古文：比两人就狱，则体仁已去位，狱稍解。
现代文：等到他们两人下狱后，体仁已经罢官，案件稍稍缓解。
English: By the time the two of them were released from prison, Tetsujin had resigned from his post, and the case had eased slightly.

古文：谦益坐削籍，式耜赎徒。
现代文：谦益因此削去了官籍。式耜用钱赎罪出狱。
English: As a result, Qian Yi lost his official registration. He was released from prison with money to atone for his crime.

古文：言官疏荐，不纳。
现代文：谏官上书推荐式耜，崇祯皇帝没有采纳。
English: Emperor Chongzhen did not adopt the eunuch's letter of recommendation.

古文：十七年，福王立于南京。
现代文：十七年，福王在南京即位。
English: Seventeen years later, King Fu ascended the throne in Nanjing.

古文：八月起式耜应天府丞。
现代文：八月起用式耜做应天府的府丞。
English: Starting in August, a ceremonial gong will be used to designate the prefectural governor.

古文：已，擢右佥都御史，代方震孺巡抚广西。
现代文：后来，提升为右佥都御史，代替方震孺巡抚广西。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Right Hand of the Capital, replacing Fang Zhenxun as the governor of Guangxi.

古文：明年夏，甫抵梧州，闻南京破。
现代文：第二年夏天，他刚抵达梧州，就听到南京城被打下。
English: In the summer of the following year, he had just arrived in Wuzhou when he heard that Nanjing City had been taken.

古文：靖江王亨嘉谋僣号，召式耜。拒不往，而檄思恩参将陈邦传助防。止狼兵，勿应亨嘉调。
现代文：靖江王亨嘉打算僭取皇位，召式耜见他，式耜拒绝了他没有去，而且传檄文给思恩的参将陈邦传要他帮助把守，阻止了狼兵过去，不要听从亨嘉的调遣。
English: Heng Jia, the king of the Jingjiang River, planned to seize the imperial throne. He called for an audience with the emperor, but the emperor refused to meet him. He did not go. Moreover, Chen Bang, the general who passed on the imperial edict to Xiong Xian, asked him to help guard the palace. He stopped the wolf soldiers from passing by and not to follow Heng Jia's orders.

古文：亨嘉至梧，劫式耜，幽之桂林，遣入取其敕印。
现代文：亨嘉到梧州，劫持了式耜，把他囚禁在桂林，并派人去取回他的敕印。
English: Heng Jia went to Wuzhou, hijacked the seal, imprisoned him in Guilin, and sent someone to retrieve his seal.

古文：初，式耜议立桂端王子安仁王。
现代文：开始，式耜主张立桂端王的儿子安仁王。
English: At first, Shikizaki advocated the establishment of King Anin, the son of King Katsura.

古文：及唐王监国，式耜以为伦序不当立，不奉表劝进。至是为亨嘉所幽，乃遣使贺王，因乞援。
现代文：等到唐王监国后，式耜认为按照辈份、排行他不应该立为皇帝，就没有奉表劝进，到现在被亨嘉囚禁在这里了，就派遣使者前去为唐王祝贺，并请求帮助。
English: After Tang Wang became the overseer of the country, Shih Chien thought that he should not be made the emperor according to the lineage and ranking, so he did not ask for advice, and now he is imprisoned here by Heng Jia. He sent an envoy to congratulate Tang Wang and ask for help.

古文：王喜，而亨嘉为丁魁楚所攻，势窘，乃释式耜。
现代文：唐王高兴起来，而这时亨嘉遭受丁魁楚的攻击，形势难堪，就只好释放了式耜。
English: Tang Wang became happy, and at this time Heng Jia was attacked by Ding Kui Chu, the situation was embarrassing, so he had no choice but to release Shichihong.

古文：式耜与中军官焦琏召邦传共执亨嘉，乱遂定。
现代文：式耜与中军官焦琏召邦传一同捉拿了亨嘉，叛乱才平定下来。
English: It was not until the rebellion was quelled that Shih-tao, together with the middle-ranking military officer Jiao Han Zhao Bangchuan, captured Heng Jia.

古文：唐王擢式耜兵部右侍郎，协理戎政，以晏日曙来代。
现代文：唐王提升式耜为兵部右侍郎，协助管理军事，暂时由晏日曙代理着。
English: Emperor Tang promoted Xing to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, assisting in the management of the military, and temporarily acting on Xing's behalf.

古文：式耜不入朝，退居广东。
现代文：式耜没有入朝，而是退居广东去了。
English: Shikibu did not enter the imperial court, but retreated to Guangdong.

古文：顺治三年九月，大兵破汀州。
现代文：顺治三年九月，大清兵打下了汀州。
English: In September of the third year of Shunzhi, the Great Qing soldiers conquered Tingzhou.

古文：式耜与魁楚等议立永明王由榔，乃迎王梧州，以十月十日监国肇庆。
现代文：式耜与丁魁楚等人决定立永明王由榔为皇帝，于是到梧州迎接永明王，于十月十日在肇庆监国。
English: Shih Chun and Ding Kui Chu and others decided to establish Yongming Wang as the emperor, so they went to Wuzhou to meet Yongming Wang and supervise the country in Zhaoqing on October 10.

古文：进式耜吏部右侍郎、东阁大学士，兼掌吏部事。
现代文：永明王晋升式耜为吏部右侍郎、东阁大学士，兼管吏部事务。
English: Yongming Wang was promoted to the right hand man of the personnel department, a scholar of Donggak University, and also in charge of personnel department affairs.

古文：未几，赣州败报至，司礼王坤迫王赴梧州。
现代文：不多久，赣州失败的消息传来，司礼王坤逼迫永明王前去梧州。
English: Not long after, the news of Zhangzhou's defeat came, and Wang Kun, the eunuch, forced Yongming Wang to go to Wuzhou.

古文：式耜力争，不得。
现代文：式耜竭力阻止，没有成功。
English: The police tried to stop it, but were unsuccessful.

古文：十一月朔，苏观生立唐王聿于广州。
现代文：十一月初一，苏观生在广州拥立唐王聿钅粤。
English: On the first day of November, Su Guansheng was in Guangzhou to support the establishment of Tang Wangye Guangdong.

古文：式耜乃与魁楚等定议迎王还肇庆，遣总督林佳鼎御观生兵，败殁。
现代文：式耜于是同丁魁楚等约定迎接永明王回肇庆，派遣总督林佳鼎抵御苏观生的部队，林佳鼎战败死了。
English: Therefore, he made an agreement with Ding Kui Chu and others to welcome King Yongming back to Zhaoqing, and sent Governor Lin Jia Ding to resist the troops of Su Guansheng. Lin Jia Ding was defeated and died.

古文：式耜视师峡口。
现代文：式耜到峡口检阅部队去了。
English: The ceremonial gong went to the gorge to review the troops.

古文：十二月望，大兵破广州。
现代文：十二月十五日，大清兵打下了广州。
English: On December 15th, the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty conquered Guangzhou.

古文：王坤趣王西走。
现代文：王坤催促永明王西逃。
English: Wang Kun urged Yongming Wang Xi to escape.

古文：式耜趋赴王，王已越梧而西。
现代文：式耜前往追赶永明王，永明王已越过梧州向西去了。
English: Shikibu went to catch up with King Yongming, who had already crossed Wuzhou and headed west.

古文：四年正月，大兵破肇庆，逼梧州，巡抚曹晔迎降。
现代文：四年正月，大清兵打下了肇庆，逼近梧州，巡抚曹晔迎降。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the Qing soldiers defeated Zhaoqing, approached Wuzhou, and the inspector Cao Wei surrendered.

古文：王欲走依何腾蛟于湖广，丁魁楚、吕大器、王化澄皆弃王去，止式耜及吴炳、吴贞毓等从，乃由平乐抵桂林。
现代文：永明王请求前去湖广依靠何腾蛟。丁楚魁、吕大器、王化澄都离开永明王各自走散，只有式耜以及吴炳、吴贞毓等跟从在身边，于是从平乐抵达桂林。
English: King Yongming asked to go to Hukang to rely on He Tengyu. Ding Chukui, Ludaqi and Wang Huasheng all left King Yongming and went their separate ways. Only Shikunyu, Wu Xi and Wu Zhenyu stayed with him, so he arrived in Guilin from Pingle.

古文：二月，大兵袭平乐，分兵趋桂林。
现代文：二月，大清兵袭击平乐，同时分出兵力奔赴桂林。
English: In February, the Great Qing soldiers attacked Pingle, and at the same time sent troops to Guilin.

古文：王将走全州，式耜极陈桂林形势，请留，不许。
现代文：永明王打算逃往全州，式耜极力陈述桂林的形势，请求永明王留下来，永明王不听。
English: King Yongming planned to flee to Quanzhou. He tried his best to explain the situation in Guilin and asked King Yongming to stay, but King Yongming would not listen.

古文：自请留守，许之。
现代文：式耜请求让自己留下来守卫桂林，永明王同意了。
English: The Yongming King consented to the request to stay and guard Guilin.

古文：进文渊阁大学士，兼兵部尚书，赐剑，便宜从事。
现代文：同时提拔他为文渊阁大学士，兼兵部尚书，赐给他尚方宝剑，给了他便宜行事的权力。
English: At the same time, he promoted him to be a scholar of the Wenyuan Pavilion University, and also a member of the military department, gave him the Shangfang sword, and gave him the power to act cheaply.

古文：平乐、浔州相继破，桂林危甚。
现代文：平乐、涛州相继被打下，桂林的形势很危险。
English: Pingle and Taozhou were successively defeated, and the situation in Guilin is very dangerous.

古文：总督侍郎朱盛浓走灵川，巡按御史辜延泰走融县，布政使朱盛氵调、副使杨垂云、桂林知府王惠卿以下皆遁，惟式耜与通判郑国藩，县丞李世荣及都司林应昌、李当瑞、沈煌在焉。
现代文：总督侍郎朱盛浓逃往灵州，巡抚御使秦延泰逃往融县，布政使朱盛氵调、副使杨垂云、桂林知府王惠卿以下的官员都逃跑了，只有式耜与通判郑国藩、县丞李世荣以及都司林应昌、李当瑞、沈煌仍然留在这里。
English: The governor's valet Zhu Shengnu fled to Lingshou, the governor's envoy Qin Yantai fled to Rong County, the cloth minister Zhu Shengjun, the vice-envoy Yang Trieyun, the Guilin governor Wang Huiqing and other officials fled, only the official and the judge of Zheng Guofan, the county magistrate Li Shirong, and the governor of Lin Yingchang, Li Dangrui and Shenhuang remained here.

古文：王令兵部右侍郎丁元晔代盛浓，御史鲁可藻代延泰。
现代文：永明王任命兵部侍郎丁元晔接替盛浓，御史鲁可藻取代延泰。
English: King Yongming appointed Ding Yuanxuan, the attendant of the military department, to succeed Sheng Nang, and Gu Shuluko to replace Yan Tai.

古文：未赴而大兵已于三月薄桂林，以骑数十突入文昌门，登城楼瞰式耜公署。
现代文：他们还未动身，大清兵已于三月逼近桂林，派几十个骑兵突然进入了文昌门，登上城楼俯视式耜的公署。
English: Before they set off, the Qing soldiers had already approached Guilin in March, sending dozens of cavalrymen to suddenly enter Wenchang Gate and board the public office of the city tower overlooking the city.

古文：式耜急令援将焦琏拒战。
现代文：式耜赶忙命令援将焦琏抵御。
English: Shikizaki hastily ordered reinforcements to defend against Jiaozhou.

古文：初，永明王为贼执，琏率众攀城上，破械出之。
现代文：当初，永明王有一次被贼兵捉住，焦琏率领队伍攀上爬墙，进去砸坏枷锁把他救了出来。
English: At the beginning, King Yongming was once captured by bandits. Jiao Tong led the team to climb the climbing wall, broke the shackles and rescued him.

古文：王病不能行，琏负王以行。
现代文：永明王病得不能走路，焦琏就背着他走。
English: King Yongming was too ill to walk, so Jiao Tong carried him on his back.

古文：王以此德琏，用破靖江王功，命为参将。
现代文：永明王因此感激焦琏，就借他打败清江王的战功，让他做了参将。
English: As a result, King Yongming was grateful to Jiao Tong, and he used his military exploits to defeat the King of Qingjiang, and made him a general.

古文：及是战守三月，琏功最多，元晔、可藻亦尽力。
现代文：到这个时候焦琏在桂林守御作战达三个月，功绩最大，元晔、可藻也尽了力。
English: By this time, Jiaozuo had been fighting in Guilin for three months, with the greatest achievements, and Yuan Zheng and Kemao had also done their best.

古文：式耜身立矢石中，与士卒同甘苦。
现代文：式耜冒着敌人射来的箭和打来的木雷石，与士兵们同甘共苦。
English: He braved the arrows shot by the enemy and the thunderbolts, and shared the hardships with the soldiers.

古文：积雨城坏，吏士无人色，式耜督城守自如，故人无叛志。
现代文：老天连续下雨，城墙被浇坏了，官兵们面无人色，式耜仍然平静地监督守城，所以官兵们没有投降的想法。
English: It rained incessantly, the city walls were damaged by watering, the officers and soldiers were unimpressed, and the Shih Tzu still calmly supervised the defense of the city, so the officers and soldiers had no idea of surrender.

古文：援兵索饷而哗，式耜括库不足，妻邵捐簪珥佐之。
现代文：援兵来讨军饷，趁机起哄，式耜把仓库中的东西全拿出来还不够，他的妻子邵氏捐出簪珥帮助凑。
English: When the reinforcements came to collect the pay, they took advantage of the opportunity to take advantage of the situation. It was not enough for them to take everything out of the warehouse. His wife, Ms. Shao, donated money to help them.

古文：既而琏兵主客不和，噪而去，城几破者数矣。
现代文：不久焦琏的部下官兵不和，一哄而散，桂林城几次差点被打下来。
English: Not long after, the subordinate officers and soldiers of Jiaozhou did not get along and dispersed. Guilin City was almost knocked down several times.

古文：会陈邦彦等攻广州，大兵引而东，桂林获全。
现代文：正好这时陈邦彦等人攻打广州，大清兵退出向东去了，桂林才得以保全。
English: It was just at this time that Chen Bangyan and others attacked Guangzhou, the Qing soldiers withdrew to the east, and Guilin was preserved.

古文：琏亦复阳朔及平乐，陈邦传亦由浔复梧州。
现代文：焦琏也收复了阳朔和平乐，陈邦传也从浔州出兵收复了梧州。
English: Jiao Wei also recovered Yangshuo and Pingle, and Chen Bangchuan also sent troops from Zhangzhou to recover Wuzhou.

古文：王闻捷，封式耜临桂伯，琏新兴伯，元晔等进秩有差。
现代文：永明王听到捷报，封式耜为临桂伯，焦琏为新兴伯，元晔等人也不同程度地升了官。
English: King Yongming heard the good news. Fong Shih-tao was promoted to Lin Gui-bo, Jiao-tao to Xinxing-bo, and Yuan-tao and others were also promoted to different levels.

古文：式耜初请王返全州，不听。
现代文：式耜当初请永明王返回仓州，永明王不听。
English: At the beginning of the ceremony, King Yongming was asked to return to Cangzhou, but he did not listen.

古文：已，请还桂林。
现代文：后来，请求他回到桂林。
English: Later, he was asked to return to Guilin.

古文：王已许之，会武冈破，王由靖州走柳州，式耜复请还桂林。
现代文：永明王已经答应，碰上武冈失守，永明王从靖州逃往柳州，式耜又请永明王回到桂林。
English: King Yongming had already agreed, and when he encountered the defeat of Wuyang, King Yongming fled from Jingzhou to Liuzhou, and the ceremony also invited King Yongming to return to Guilin.

古文：十一月，大兵自湖南逼全州，式耜偕腾蛟拒却。
现代文：十一月，大清兵从湖南逼近全州，式耜同腾蛟一起打退了我军。
English: In November, the Qing soldiers from Hunan approached Jeonju, and Shikotsu together with Tengye repulsed our army.

古文：已，梧州复破，王方在象州，欲走南宁。
现代文：后来，梧州又被打下来，当时永明王正在象州，打算逃往南宁。
English: Later, when Wuzhou was defeated again, King Yongming was in Xiangzhou, planning to flee to Nanning.

古文：以大臣力争，乃以十二月还桂林。
现代文：因为大臣的竭力劝阻，才在十二月份回到桂林。
English: Due to the minister's efforts to dissuade him, he only returned to Guilin in December.

古文：五年二月，南安侯郝永忠驻桂林，恶城外团练兵，尽破水东十八村，杀戮无算，与式耜构难。
现代文：五年二月，南安侯郝永忠驻守桂林，厌恶城外的团练兵，就把护城河东的十八个村庄全部攻打下来了。
English: In February of the fifth year, Nan'an marquis Yongzhong stationed in Guilin, detested the regimental drill outside the city, and attacked all eighteen villages east of the moat.

古文：式耜力调剂，永忠乃驻兴安。
现代文：杀死无数的百姓，并且同式耜制造矛盾。式耜极力和解，永忠才驻军兴安。
English: He killed countless people, and created conflicts with the Shih Tzu. The Shih Tzu was resolved by force, and Yongzhong was able to garrison Xing'an.

古文：大兵前驱至灵川，永忠战败，奔入桂林，请王即夕西走。
现代文：大清兵前进到达灵州，永忠战败，跑回桂林，请求永明王当晚上就向西逃。
English: The Qing soldiers advanced to Lingzhou, Yongzhong was defeated, ran back to Guilin, and asked King Yongming to flee west that night.

古文：式耜力争，不听。
现代文：式耜竭力劝阻，永明王没有听他。
English: He tried his best to dissuade him, but King Yongming did not listen to him.

古文：左右皆请速驾，式耜又争。
现代文：周围的人都请求永明王立即出发，式耜又极力争辩。
English: The people around him pleaded with King Yongming to leave immediately, and the ceremony was vigorously disputed.

古文：王曰： 卿不过欲予死社稷尔。 
现代文：永明王说 ：你只不过是想让我为国家捐躯罢了。 
English: King Yongming said, "You just want me to die for the country."

古文：式耜为泣下沾衣。
现代文：式耜为劝说永明王流下的泪都沾湿了衣襟。
English: The tears shed by King Yongming to persuade him were soaked into his clothes.

古文：王甫行，永忠即大掠，捶杀太常卿黄太元。式耜家亦被掠，家人矫腾蛟令箭，乃出城。
现代文：结果还是没有用。永明王刚走，永忠就大肆抢劫，用棍子打死了太常卿黄太元，式耜家里也被抢劫了，家人假借腾蛟的令箭才得以出城逃命。
English: The result was still useless. As soon as King Yongming left, Yongzhong went on a rampage of robberies. He killed the Tai Changqing Huang Taiyuan with a stick. The family of the Shih Chuan was also robbed, and the family members were only able to escape from the city by pretending to borrow the arrows of the Tengchong.

古文：日中，赵印选诸营自灵川至，亦大掠，城内外如洗。
现代文：中午，赵印选的军队从灵川到来，也大肆抢劫，桂林城内外被一洗而空。
English: At noon, Zhao Yinxuan's army arrived from Lingchuan, and they also looted extensively. Guilin city and its surroundings were swept away.

古文：永忠走柳州，印选等走永宁。
现代文：永忠逃到柳州，印选等逃往永宁。
English: Yongzhong fled to Liuzhou, while Yinxuan and others fled to Yongning.

古文：明日，式耜息城中余烬，安抚远近。
现代文：第二天，式耜灭掉城中还在烧着的火灰，安抚周围地区的人民。
English: The next day, the firemen extinguished the ashes of the fire that was still burning in the city and pacified the people in the surrounding areas.

古文：焦琏及诸镇周金、汤兆佐、胡一青等各率所部至，腾蛟军亦至。
现代文：焦琏以及周金、汤兆佐、胡一青等各自率领的部队到来，何腾蛟的部队也到了。
English: The troops led by Jiao Tong, Zhou Jin, Tong Zhaoza, Hu Yixing and others arrived, and the troops led by He Tengyu also arrived.

古文：三月，大兵知桂林有变，来袭，抵北门。
现代文：三月，大清兵得知桂林发生兵变，前来袭击，抵达北门。
English: In March, the Qing soldiers learned that there was a mutiny in Guilin, came to attack, and arrived at the north gate.

古文：腾蛟督诸将拒战，城获全。
现代文：腾蛟率领各位将领防御作战，桂林城得以保全。
English: Teng Xuan led the generals in defensive operations, and Guilin City was preserved.

古文：时王驻南宁，式耜遣使慰三宫起居。王始知式耜无恙，为泣下。
现代文：当时永明王驻在南宁，式耜派遣使者过去慰问三宫起居的情况，永明王才知道式耜没有什么危险，并为他流下了眼泪。
English: At that time, King Yongming was stationed in Nanning, and the Empress Dowager sent an envoy to commiserate with the situation of the Three Kingdoms. Only then did King Yongming know that the Empress Dowager was not in any danger, and shed tears for him.

古文：闰三月，广东李成栋、江西金声桓皆叛大清，据地归，式耜请王还桂林。
现代文：闰三月，广东李成栋、江西金声恒都背叛大清，占据着当地归附永明王。式耜请求永明王回到桂林。
English: In March, Li Chengdong of Guangdong Province and Jin Sheng Heng of Jiangxi Province both betrayed the Qing Dynasty and occupied the region to be annexed by Yongming Wang. The emperor asked Yongming Wang to return to Guilin.

古文：王从成栋请，将赴广州。
现代文：永明王听从成栋的请求，打算前往广州。
English: Yongming Wang listened to Chengdong's request and planned to go to Guangzhou.

古文：式耜虑成栋挟王自专，如刘承胤事，力争之，乃驻肇庆。
现代文：式耜担心成栋挟持天子，自我尊大，像刘承胤所做过的那样，就极力劝阻，于是永明王驻在了肇庆。
English: Fearing that Chengdong would hold Tianzi hostage and become arrogant, he tried his best to dissuade him, just as Liu Chengyin had done, so King Yongming stayed in Zhaoqing.

古文：十一月，永州、宝庆、衡州并复。
现代文：十一月，永州、宝庆、衡州都得到收复。
English: In November, Yongzhou, Baoqing and Hengzhou were all recovered.

古文：式耜以机会可乘，请王还桂林，图出楚之计，不纳。
现代文：式耜认为有机会可乘，请求永明王回到桂林，谋划出兵湖北的计划，永明王没有采纳他的建议。
English: Shih Ju thought that he could take advantage of the opportunity and asked King Yongming to return to Guilin and plan a plan to send soldiers to Hubei. King Yongming did not accept his suggestion.

古文：庆国公陈邦传守浔州，自称世守广西，欲如黔国公例。
现代文：庆国公陈邦传把守浔州，自称陈家也要守广西，想仿效黔国公的事例。
English: Qing Guo Gong Chen Bang passed down the tradition of guarding Zhangzhou, and claimed that the Chen family should also guard Guangxi, and wanted to follow the example of Zhang Guo Gong.

古文：式耜特疏劾之，会中外多争者，邦传乃止。
现代文：式耜特意上书弹劾他，正好朝廷内外有许多人争论此事，邦传才罢休了。
English: Shikibuchi specifically wrote a letter to impeach him, just as many people inside and outside the Imperial Court were arguing about the matter, and it was only then that the rumor was put to rest.

古文：广西巡抚鲁可藻自署衔巡抚两广，式耜亦疏驳之。
现代文：广西巡抚鲁可藻自署官衔巡抚两广，式耜也上疏批驳了他。
English: Lu Kexiao, the governor of Guangxi, held the rank of deputy governor of the two provinces, and the court also dismissed him.

古文：式耜身在外，政有阙，必疏谏。
现代文：式耜虽然在地方上，朝廷有什么过失，他一定会上书进谏。
English: Although the imperial court has made some mistakes in local affairs, he will certainly be written up and punished.

古文：尝曰： 臣与主上患难相随，休戚与共，不同他臣。
现代文：他曾说过： 我与主上患难相随，休戚与共，不同于其他大臣。
English: He once said: I follow the Lord in his tribulations, and stand with him in solidarity, unlike other ministers.

古文：一切大政，自得与闻。 
现代文：朝中的一切大事，我应当知道。 
English: I should know all the important events of the morning.

古文：王为褒纳。
现代文：永明王为此表扬、采纳了他的上书。
English: King Yongming praised him for this and accepted his petition.

古文：而是时成栋子元胤专朝政，知敬式耜，袁彭年、丁时魁、金堡等遂争相倚附。
现代文：而这时成栋的儿子元胤专制朝政，懂得尊敬式耜，袁彭年、丁时魁、金堡等于是就争着追随式耜。
English: At this time, however, Chengdong's son, Yuan Yatian, who was in charge of the autocratic imperial government, knew how to respect the imperial edict, and Yuan Pengnian, Ding Shikui, and Jinbao were all vying to follow the imperial edict.

古文：六年正月，时魁等逐朱天麟，不欲何吾驺为首辅。召式耜入直，以文渊印畀之，式耜终不入也。
现代文：六年正月，时魁等人驱逐朱时麟，不想让何吾驺做首辅大臣，召式耜入朝值勤，把文渊东阁大学士的官印给了他，但式耜最终还是没有入朝。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Shikui and others expelled Zhu Shilin, and did not want He Urong to be the first assistant minister. They called Shikizaki to enter the imperial court on duty, and gave him the official seal of Wenyuan Dongge University, but Shikizaki ultimately did not enter the imperial court.

古文：未几，腾蛟、声桓、成栋相继败殁，国势大危。
现代文：不多久，腾蛟、声恒、成栋相继战败身亡，国家形势危急。
English: Not long after, Teng Xuan, Sheng Heng and Cheng Dong were defeated and killed one after another, and the national situation was critical.

古文：朝士方植党相角，式耜不能禁。
现代文：可是朝廷中间的官员都还在扶植党羽相互争斗，式耜也不能够制止他们。
English: However, the officials in the middle of the imperial court were still supporting the faction and fighting with each other, and the imperial edict could not stop them.

古文：七年正月，南雄破。
现代文：七年正月，南雄被打了下来。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Nanxiong was defeated.

古文：王惧，走梧州。
现代文：永明王害怕了，逃往梧州。
English: King Yongming got scared and fled to Wuzhou.

古文：诸大臣讦时魁等下狱，式耜七疏论救。
现代文：大臣们攻击时魁等人，把他们打入监狱中，式耜七次上书挽救他们。
English: The ministers attacked Shikui and the others, put them in prison, and wrote seven times to save them.

古文：胡执恭之擅封孙可望也，式耜疏请斩之。
现代文：胡执恭擅自封赏孙可望，式耜上书请求斩了他，永明王都没有听取他的建议。
English: Hu Cixiong arbitrarily awarded his son the title of Sun Kecheng, and the King of Yongming did not listen to his suggestion.

古文：皆不纳。
现代文：九月，全州被攻占。
English: The emperor did not accept their criticism.

古文：九月，全州破。开国公赵印选居桂林，卫国公胡一青守榕江，与宁远伯王永祚皆惧不出兵，大兵遂入严关。
现代文：开国公赵印选居住在桂林，卫国公胡一清请把守榕江，与宁远伯王永祚都害怕得不敢出兵，大清兵于是进入严关。
English: The founding father, Zhao Yingxuan, lived in Guilin, and the protecting father, Hu Yiching, was asked to guard the Li River. Both he and his distant uncle, King Yongxuan, were too afraid to send out troops, and the soldiers of the Great Qing Army thus entered a critical situation.

古文：十月，一青、永祚入桂林分饷，榕江无戍兵，大兵益深入。
现代文：十月，一青、永祚到桂林分取粮饷，榕江没有防守的军队，大清兵得以更加深入。
English: In October, a young man, Yongzheng, went to Guilin to collect grain, and there was no army to defend the Minjiang River, so the Qing soldiers were able to go deeper.

古文：十一月五日，式耜檄印选出，不肯行，再趣之，则尽室逃。
现代文：十一月五日，式耜传令印选出战，他却不肯出兵，二次催促他后，他就带领全家逃跑了。
English: On November 5th, when the imperial edict was issued to go to war, he refused to send troops. After urging him twice, he led his whole family to flee.

古文：一青及武陵侯杨国栋、绥宁伯蒲缨、宁武伯马养麟亦逃去。
现代文：一青及武陵侯杨国栋、绥宁伯蒲缨、宁武伯马养麟也逃跑了。
English: Yang Guodong, a middle-aged man from Wuling County, Bao Ningbo, and Yang Lin, a middle-aged man from Ningbo, also ran away.

古文：永祚迎降，城中无一兵。
现代文：永祚向大清兵迎降，桂林城中没有一个士兵守护。
English: Yongzheng surrendered to the Qing soldiers, and there was not a single soldier guarding Guilin City.

古文：式耜端坐府中，家人亦散。
现代文：式耜孤单地端坐在府邸中，他的家人也疏散了。
English: Shikizaki sits alone in the mansion, his family evacuated.

古文：部将戚良勋请式耜上马速走，式耜坚不听，叱退之。
现代文：他的部将戚良勋请求他迅速上马离开，式耜坚决不听，把他喝退回去。
English: His subordinate general Qi Liangxun asked him to quickly get on his horse and leave, but Shijie resolutely refused to listen and drove him back.

古文：俄总督张同敞至，誓偕死，乃相对饮酒，一老兵侍。
现代文：过了一会儿总督张同敞来了，发誓要和他一同死，两个人开始相对饮酒，一个老兵在一旁侍候他们。
English: After a while, Governor Zhang Tongcang came and vowed to die with him, and the two began to drink together. An old soldier was waiting for them.

古文：召中军徐高付以敕印，属驰送王。
现代文：式耜召来中军徐高把敕文、官印交给他，嘱托他骑马送到永明王那儿去。
English: Xu Gao of the Chinese army was summoned by the eunuch to give him the imperial edict and official seal, and instructed him to ride to Yongming Wang.

古文：是夕，两人秉烛危坐。
现代文：这天晚上，他们两人点上蜡烛在室内正襟危坐。
English: That night, the two of them lit candles and sat in the room.

古文：黎明，数骑至。
现代文：黎明时分，大清部队的几个骑兵来了。
English: At dawn, several cavalrymen from the Great Qing Army arrived.

古文：式耜曰： 吾两人待死久矣 ，遂与偕行，至则踞坐于地。
现代文：式耜说 ：我们等死已经等很久了。 接着就跟着他们走了，到达清兵营部就叉着腿坐在地上。
English: "We've been waiting for death for a long time," Shikizaki said, "so we followed them and sat cross-legged on the ground when we reached the Qing camp."

古文：谕之降，不听，幽于民舍。
现代文：叫他们投降，他们不肯听从，就被囚禁在民房中。
English: They were told to surrender, but refused to do so and were imprisoned in a private house.

古文：两人日赋诗倡和，得百余首。
现代文：他们两人每天赋诗相唱和，总共写了一百多首诗。
English: The two of them wrote more than a hundred poems in total, composing and singing together every day.

古文：至闰十一月十有七日，将就刑，天大雷电，空中震击者三，远近称异，遂与同敞俱死。
现代文：到闰十一月十七日，他们即将被执行死刑时，苍天忽然电闪雷鸣，半空中传来三声巨响，周围的人都感觉到奇怪。式耜就这样与同敞一起死了。
English: On the 17th day of the 11th lunar month, when they were about to be executed, the sky suddenly flashed with lightning and thunder, and three loud noises were heard in the middle of the sky. People around them felt strange. Thus, Shih Chien died together with his roommate.

古文：同敞，大学士居正曾孙，事见《居正传》。
现代文：同敞是大学士张居正的曾孙，他的事迹详见于《张居正传》。
English: He was also the great-grandson of the university scholar Zhang Jizheng. His story is detailed in "The Biography of Zhang Jizheng."

