古文：梁惠王曰： 晋国，天下莫强焉，叟之所知也。
现代文：惠王说： 晋国曾一度在天下称强，这是老先生您所知道的。
English: Hui Wang said, "Jin State was once the strongest in the world, as you know, old man.

古文：及寡人之身，东败于齐，长子死焉；西丧地于秦七百里；南辱于楚。
现代文：可是到了我这一代，东边被齐国打败，连我的大儿子都死掉了；西边被秦国夺去七百里国土；南边又受楚国的羞辱。
English: However, in my generation, the East was defeated by Qi, and even my eldest son died; the West was deprived of seven hundred miles of land by Qin; and the South was humiliated by Chu.

古文：寡人耻之，愿比死者一洒之，如之何则可？ 
现代文：我为这些事感到非常羞耻，希望替战死沙场的将士们报仇雪恨，应该怎么做才好呢？ 
English: I am very ashamed of these things. I hope to avenge the soldiers who died in the battlefield. What should I do?

古文：孟子对曰： 地方百里而可以王。
现代文：孟子回答说： 只要拥有百里土地就可以使天下归服。
English: Mencius replied, "As long as you have a hundred li of land, you can subjugate the whole world."

古文：王如施仁政于民，省刑罚，薄税敛，深耕易耨。壮者以暇日修其孝悌忠信，入以事其父兄，出以事其长上，可使制梃以挞秦楚之坚甲利兵矣。
现代文：大王如果对老百姓施行仁政，减免刑罚，少收赋税，督促人们深耕细作，及时除草；让身强力壮的青壮年抽出时间修养孝顺、尊敬、忠诚、守信的品德，在家侍奉父母兄长，出门尊敬长辈上级。这样就可以让他们即使拿着木棒也足以打败秦、楚这种装备精良的军队了。
English: If the great king implements benevolent policies for the people, reduces and exempts punishments, reduces taxes, and urges people to cultivate deeply and weed in a timely manner, let the strong young adults take time to cultivate the virtues of filial piety, respect, loyalty, and trustworthiness, serve their parents and brothers at home, and respect their elders and superiors when they go out. This will allow them to defeat the well-equipped army of Qin and Chu even with a wooden stick.

古文：彼夺其民时，使不得耕耨以养其父母，父母冻饿，兄弟妻子离散。
现代文：因为那些秦国、楚国的执政者剥夺了他们的生产时间，使他们不能够深耕细作来养活自己的父母。父母受冻挨饿，兄弟妻子离散。
English: Because the rulers of Qin and Chu robbed them of their productive time, so that they could not work hard to feed their parents. Parents were freezing and starving, brothers and wives were separated.

古文：彼陷溺其民，王往而征之，夫谁与王敌？故曰： 仁者无敌。 
现代文：他们使老百姓陷入深渊之中，大王去征伐他们，有谁来和您抵抗呢？所以说： 施行仁政的人天下无敌。 
English: They have plunged the common people into the abyss. The great king has come out to fight them. Who will stand up against you? Therefore, it is said: Those who practice benevolent government are invincible.

古文：王请勿疑！ 
现代文：大王请不要再怀疑了！ 
English: Great King, please stop doubting!

