古文：起阏逢敦牂，尽柔兆涒滩四月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢敦牂，尽柔兆涒滩四月，凡二年有奇。
English: Every two years there is something strange about the month of April.

古文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝下之下
现代文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝下之下
English: Xuanzong, the great sage of Taoism, under Emperor Mingxiao

古文：天宝十三年甲午，公元七五四年
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十三载春季，正月己亥，安禄山入朝。
English: In the 13th year of the Tang Xuan Zong Heavenly Treasure, in the spring, in the first month of the year of the boar, Anlu Mountain entered the imperial court.

古文：春，正月，己亥，安禄山入朝。
现代文：当时杨国忠进言说安禄山必反，并说： 陛下试召他入朝，他一定不来。 
English: At that time, Yang Guozhong said that Anlu Mountain would surely rebel, and said: His Majesty tried to call him to the imperial court, but he would not come.

古文：是时杨国忠言禄山必反，且曰： 陛下试召之，必不来。 
现代文：于是玄宗就派人召见安禄山，安禄山听见命令立刻来朝。
English: As a result, Xuanzong sent someone to summon Anlu Mountain. Hearing the order, Anlu Mountain immediately came to the morning.

古文：上使召之，禄山闻命即至。庚子，见上于华清宫，泣曰： 臣本胡人，陛下宠擢至此，为国忠所疾，臣死无日矣！ 
现代文：庚子，安禄山晋见玄宗于华清宫，哭诉说： 我本是一名胡人，只是受到陛下的信任才有今天的地位，但却不为杨国忠所容，恐怕难以活命了！ 
English: Geng Zi, An Lushan Jin, saw Xuanzong at the Huaqing Palace and cried and said: I was originally a Hu person, but only received the trust of His Majesty to have today's status, but was not tolerated by Yang Guozhong, I am afraid it is difficult to live!

古文：上怜之，赏赐巨万，由是益亲信禄山，国忠之言不能入矣。
现代文：玄宗听后十分怜爱，重加赏赐，因此更加信任安禄山，杨国忠的话一点也听不进去。
English: After listening to him, Xuanzong was very sympathetic and rewarded him heavily. Therefore, he trusted Anlu Mountain more. Yang Guozhong's words did not enter his mind at all.

古文：太子亦知禄山必反，言于上，上不听。
现代文：太子李亨也知道安禄山要谋反，告诉玄宗，玄宗不听。
English: Prince Li Heng also knew that Anlu Mountain was plotting a rebellion and told Xuanzong about it, but Xuanzong did not listen.

古文：甲辰，太清宫奏： 学士李琪见玄元皇帝乘紫云，告以国祚延昌。 
现代文：甲辰，太清宫上奏说： 崇玄馆学士李琪看见玄元皇帝老子乘紫云，告诉他说大唐王朝昌盛长久。 
English: Jia Chen, the prefect of the Taiqing Palace, said: Li Qi, the scholar of the Chong Xuan Museum, saw the Emperor Xuan Yuan, Laozi, riding on the purple cloud, and told him that the Great Tang Dynasty would be prosperous for a long time.

古文：唐初，诏敕皆书、门下官有文者为之。
现代文：唐朝初年，皇上所下的诏书制敕都由中书省和门下省官吏中善于作文章的人撰写。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, all the imperial edicts issued by the emperor were written by people who were good at writing articles from the Central Literature Department and the provincial officials under the emperor.

古文：乾封以后，始召文士元万顷、范履冰等草诸文辞，常于北门候进止，时人谓之 北门学士 。
现代文：乾封年以后，开始召文士元万顷、范履冰等人草写文告，这些人常常在北门值班等候命令，所以当时的人把他们称为 北门学士 。
English: After the Year of the Dry Seal, scribes such as Yuan Wanhao and Fan Libing were summoned to scribble messages. These people often waited for orders on duty at the North Gate, so people at the time called them the North Gate Scholars.

古文：中宗之世，上官昭容专其事。
现代文：中宗在位时，由上官昭容专门管这些事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhongzong, the superior officer Zhaorong was in charge of these matters.

古文：上即位，始置翰林院，密迩禁廷，延文章之士，下至僧、道、书、画、琴、棋、数术之工皆处之，谓之 待诏 。
现代文：玄宗即位以后，开始设置翰林院，靠近宫廷，延揽天下能文之士，下至佛僧、道士以及精通书、画、琴、棋、卜、祝的人，都召进去，这些人被称为 翰林待诏 。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he began to set up the Hanlin Academy, close to the court, to recruit the world's literati, down to Buddhist monks, Taoists, and people who are proficient in books, paintings, pianos, chess, divination, and congratulation, are all called in. These people are called Hanlin to wait for the edict.

古文：刑部尚书张均及弟太常卿垍皆翰林院供奉。
现代文：刑部尚书张均和他的弟弟太常卿张都在翰林院供奉皇上。
English: The head of the criminal department, Shang Shuxu Zhang Jun, and his younger brother, Zhang Taizhongqing, both went to pay their respects to the emperor at the Hanlin Academy.

古文：上欲加安禄山同平章事，已令张垍草制。
现代文：玄宗想要加封安禄山同平章事，已经令张草写了制书。
English: Xuanzong wanted to seal Anlu Mountain with the same title, and had already ordered Zhang Cao to write a book.

古文：杨国忠谏曰： 禄山虽有军功，目不知书，岂可为宰相！
现代文：这时，杨国忠进谏说： 安禄山虽然有战功，但是目不识丁，怎么能够做宰相呢？
English: At this time, Yang Guozhong said: Although An Lushan has war exploits, but he is illiterate, how can he be the prime minister?

古文：制书若下，恐四夷轻唐。 
现代文：如果制书颁布，恐怕周边的夷人会轻视我们大唐王朝。 
English: If book production is promulgated, I am afraid that the surrounding barbarians will despise our Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：玄宗只好取消了这一任命。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：乙巳，加禄山左仆射，赐一子三品、一子四品官。
现代文：乙巳，玄宗加封安禄山左仆射，赐给他的一个儿子三品官，另一个儿子四品官。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong bestowed the title of Anlu Shan Zuopu Yao to one of his sons, giving him the rank of Third Rank Officer, and the other son the rank of Fourth Rank Officer.

古文：丙午，上还宫。
现代文：丙午，玄宗返回宫中。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：安禄山求兼领闲厩、群牧；庚申，以禄山为闲厩、陇右群牧等使。
现代文：安禄山请求兼任闲厩使、群牧使等职。庚申，玄宗任命安禄山为闲厩、陇右群牧等使。
English: At the request of An Lushan, An Lushan was also appointed to the posts of idle stables and herdsmen. Goshun and Xuanzong appointed An Lushan to the posts of idle stables and herdsmen.

古文：禄山又求兼总监；壬戌，兼知总监事。
现代文：安禄山又请求兼任群牧总监，壬戌，玄宗又任命安禄山兼任总监。
English: An Lushan also requested to concurrently serve as the group pastoral superintendent, and Ren Xi and Xuanzong also appointed An Lushan to concurrently serve as the superintendent.

古文：禄山奏以御史中丞吉温为武部侍郎，充闲厩逼使，杨国忠由是恶温。
现代文：安禄山又上奏请求任命御史中丞吉温为武部侍郎，充任闲厩副使，杨国忠因此恨吉温。
English: An Lushan also petitioned for the appointment of Goshi Chujo Jiwen as Takebe's chamberlain, and Yang Guozhong hated Jiwen because of this.

古文：禄山密遣亲信选健马堪战者数千匹，别饲之。
现代文：安禄山暗中派亲信挑选能征善战的健壮军马数千匹，另选地方饲养。
English: Anlu Mountain secretly sent his close confidants to select thousands of robust war horses that could fight well, and also selected local breeding horses.

古文：二月，壬申，上朝献太清宫，上圣祖尊号曰大圣祖高上大道金阙玄元大皇太帝。
现代文：二月壬申，玄宗向太清宫献食，上圣祖老子尊号为大圣祖高上大道金阙玄元大皇太帝。
English: In February of Jinshin, Emperor Xuanzong offered food to the Taiqing Palace, and Emperor Xuanzong was given the honorary title of "Great Emperor Xuanzong of the Great Emperor Xuanzong."

古文：癸酉，享太庙，上高祖谥曰神尧大圣光孝皇帝，太宗谥曰文武大圣大广孝皇帝，高宗谥曰天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝，中宗谥曰孝和大圣大昭孝皇帝，睿宗谥曰玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝，以汉家诸帝皆谥孝故也。
现代文：癸酉，玄宗祭祀太庙，上高祖李渊谥号为神尧大圣光孝皇帝，太宗李世民谥号为文武大圣大广孝皇帝，高宗李治谥号为天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝，中宗李显谥号为孝和大圣大昭孝皇帝，睿宗李旦谥号为玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝，因为汉朝的皇帝的谥号都有 孝 字，所以都加谥号为 孝 。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong made offerings to the Great Temple. The name of the high-ranking ancestor Li Yuanjun was Shenshan Daisheng Guangxiao Emperor, the name of the great ancestor Li Shiminjun was Wenwu Daisheng Guangxiao Emperor, the name of the high-ranking ancestor Li Zhijun was Emperor Daisheng Hongxiao Emperor, the name of the high-ranking ancestor Li Xianjun was Xiao and Daisheng Dazhao Xiao Emperor, the name of the high-ranking ancestor Li Danjun was Xuanzhen Daisheng Xing Xiao Emperor, and the name of the high-ranking ancestor

古文：甲戌，群臣上尊号曰开元天地大宝圣文神武证道孝德皇帝。
现代文：甲戌，群臣上玄宗尊号为开元天地大宝圣文神武证道孝德皇帝。
English: Armor-plated, the vassals of Emperor Xuanzong honor him as the great treasure of heaven and earth, the holy text, the god of war, and the emperor of filial piety.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：丁丑，杨国忠进位司空；甲申，临轩册命。
现代文：丁丑，玄宗晋升杨国忠为司空。甲申，杨国忠在殿前的平台上接受玄宗的册命。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Xuanzong promoted Yang Guozhong to the position of Siku. Jia Shen, Yang Guozhong accepted Xuanzong's appointment on the platform in front of the hall.

古文：己丑，安禄山奏： 臣所部将士讨奚、契丹、九姓、同罗等，勋效甚多，乞不拘常格，超资加赏，仍好写告身付臣军授之。 
现代文：己丑，安禄山上奏说： 我所率领的部下将士讨伐奚、契丹、九姓胡、同罗等，功勋卓著，乞望陛下能够打破常规，越级封官赏赐，并希望写好委任状，让我在军中授与他们。 
English: Ashamed of himself, Anlu said on the mountain: The subordinates I led, including the soldiers of the crusade, Khitan, nine surnames Hu, and Tongluo, have outstanding merits. I beg Your Majesty to break the norm and reward them with a higher rank, and I hope to write a letter of appointment so that I can confer with them in the army.

古文：于是除将军者五百馀人，中郎将者二千馀人。
现代文：因此安禄山部将被任命为将军的有五百多人，中郎将的有二千多人。
English: Therefore, there are more than five hundred people who will be appointed as generals and more than two thousand people who will be appointed as junior generals.

古文：禄山欲反，故先以此收众心也。
现代文：安禄山要谋反，所以借此收买人心。
English: Anlu Mountain wants to rebel, so they use this to win people's hearts.

古文：三月，丁酉朔，禄山辞归范阳。
现代文：三月丁酉朔，安禄山向玄宗告辞，要回范阳。
English: In March, An Lushan bid farewell to Xuanzong and returned to Fanyang.

古文：上解御衣以赐之，禄山受之惊喜。
现代文：玄宗脱下自己的衣服赐给他，安禄山十分惊喜。
English: Xuanzong took off his clothes and gave them to him. Anlu Shan was very surprised.

古文：恐杨国忠奏留之，疾驱出关。
现代文：安禄山恐怕杨国忠向玄宗上奏把他留在朝中，所以急忙出潼关。
English: An Lushan was afraid that Yang Guozhong's appeal to Xuanzong would leave him in the middle of the court, so he hurried out of Shaoguan.

古文：乘船沿河而下，令船夫执绳板立于岸侧，十五里一更，昼夜兼行，日数百里，过郡县不下船。
现代文：然后乘船沿黄河而下，命令船夫手执挽船用的绳板立在岸边，十五里一换，昼夜兼程，日行数百里，经过郡县也不下船。
English: Then he took a boat along the Yellow River and ordered the boatman to stand on the shore holding the rope board used to hold the boat, changing every 15 miles, traveling day and night, traveling hundreds of miles a day, and passing through counties without getting off the boat.

古文：自是有言禄山反者，上皆缚送之。由是人皆知其将反，无敢言者。
现代文：从此有说安禄山谋反的人，玄宗都把他们捆绑起来送给安禄山，因此人们都知道安禄山要谋反，但没有人敢说。
English: From then on, there were people who said that Anlu Mountain was plotting a rebellion, and Xuanzong tied them up and sent them to Anlu Mountain. Therefore, people knew that Anlu Mountain was plotting a rebellion, but no one dared to say it.

古文：禄山之发长安也，上令高力士饯之长乐坡，及还，上问： 禄山慰意乎？ 
现代文：安禄山从长安离去时，玄宗命令高力士在长乐坡为安禄山饯行，高力士回来后，玄宗问道： 安禄山满意吗？ 
English: When An Lushan left Chang'an, Xuanzong ordered Gao Lixin to go to Changlepo for An Lushan. After Gao Lixin returned, Xuanzong asked: Is An Lushan satisfied?

古文：对曰： 观其意怏怏，必知欲命为相而中止故也。 
现代文：高力士回答说： 我看到他心中不愉快，一定是知道了想要任命他为宰相，后来又改变的缘故。 
English: "I saw that he was not happy in his heart, because he must have known that they wanted to appoint him as prime minister, and then change it," he said.

古文：上以告国忠，曰： 此议他人不知，必张垍兄弟告之也。 
现代文：玄宗把此事告诉了杨国忠，杨国忠说： 这件事别人都不知道，一定是张兄弟告诉安禄山的。 
English: Xuanzong told Yang Guozhong about this. Yang Guozhong said, "No one else knows about this, Brother Zhang must have told Anlu Mountain."

古文：上怒，贬张均为建安太守，垍为卢溪司马，垍弟给事中埱为宜春司马。
现代文：玄宗大为愤怒，就贬张均为建安郡太守，张为卢溪郡司马，张的弟弟给事中张为宜春郡司马。
English: Xuanzong was very angry, so he denigrated Zhang as the governor of Jian'an County, Zhang as the county magistrate of Luxi County, and Zhang's brother as the county magistrate of Yichun County.

古文：哥舒翰亦为其部将论功，敕以陇右十将、特进、火拔州都督、燕山郡王火拔归仁为骠骑大将军，河源军使王思礼加特进，临洮太守成如璆、讨击副使范阳鲁炅、皋兰府都督浑惟明并加云麾将军，陇右讨击副使郭英乂为左羽林将军。
现代文：哥舒翰也为他的部将请功，玄宗就下敕任命陇右十将、特进、火拔州都督、燕山郡王火拔归仁为骠骑大将军，河源军使王思礼为特进，临洮太守成如、讨击副使范阳人鲁灵、皋兰府都督浑惟明等为云麾将军，陇右讨击副使郭英又为左羽林将军。
English: Goshukhan also asked for merit for his subordinate generals, and Xuanzong appointed the 10th general of the right wing, the special envoy, the governor of Hebei Province, and the governor of Yanshan County, Wang Hebei Guiren, as the cavalry general, the envoy of the Heyuan Army, Wang Sili, as the special envoy, the deputy envoy of Linyi Province, Fan Yangren Luling, and the governor of Yilan Province, Hun Weiming, as the general of Yunnan Province, and the deputy envoy of the right wing, Guo Ying, as the general of the left wing.

古文：英乂，知运之子也。
现代文：郭英又是郭知运的儿子。
English: Guo Ying is also the son of Guo Zhiyun.

古文：翰又奏严挺之之子武为节度判官，河东吕諲为度支判官，前封丘尉高适为掌书记，安邑曲环为别将。
现代文：哥舒翰又上奏任命严挺之的儿子严武为节度判官，河东人吕为支度判官，前封丘县尉高适为掌书记，安邑人曲环为别将。
English: Goshukhan also announced the appointment of Yan Tingzhi's son Yan Wu as the judge of the festival, Lyu from the east of the river as the judge of the preparation, the former Fenyu County lieutenant Gaoshu as the secretary, and the An'yur people's Quhuan as the other general.

古文：程千里执阿布思，献于阙下，斩之。
现代文：程千里俘获了阿布思，献于朝廷，被斩首。
English: Cheng Qianli captured Abusi, presented him to the imperial court, and he was beheaded.

古文：甲子，以千里为金吾大将军，以封常清权北庭都护、伊西节度使。
现代文：甲子，玄宗任命程千里为金吾大将军，封常清暂时代理北庭都护、伊西节度使。
English: At the same time, Xuanzong appointed Cheng Qianli as the Kingu Great General, and he was temporarily appointed as the North Court Protector and the Isi Festival Envoy during the Qing Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，癸巳，安禄山奏击奚破之，虏其王李日越。
现代文：夏季，四月癸巳，安禄山上奏说了打败了奚族，俘虏了奚王李日越。
English: In the summer, in April, Anlu defeated the Yao tribe and captured the Yao king, Li Riyue.

古文：六月，乙丑朔，日有食之，不尽如钩。
现代文：六月乙丑朔，出现日食，是形状如钩的日环食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred. It was a hook-shaped annular solar eclipse.

古文：侍御史、俞南留后李宓将兵七万击南诏。
现代文：侍御史、剑南留后李宓率兵七万攻打南诏。
English: After serving Emperor Go-Shi and staying in Jianan, Li Xi led 70,000 soldiers to attack Nanzhao.

古文：阁罗凤诱之深入，至太和城，闭壁不战。
现代文：南诏王罗凤采用诱敌深入的战术，把唐军引到大和城下，坚壁不战。
English: Luo Feng, the king of Nanzhao, used the tactic of luring the enemy deeper and led the Tang army to the foot of Yamato Castle.

古文：宓粮尽，士卒罹瘴疫及饥死什七八，乃引还；蛮追击之，宓被擒，全军皆没。
现代文：李宓粮尽，所率领的士卒因为瘴疫和饥饿死了十分之七八，遂领兵撤退，这时南诏才出兵追击，李宓被俘，全军覆没。
English: Li Shao ran out of food, and the soldiers he led died of plague and starvation seven or eight times out of ten, so he led the troops to retreat. At this time, Nanzhao sent troops to pursue, Li Shao was captured, and the whole army was wiped out.

古文：杨国忠隐其败，更以捷闻，益发中国兵讨之，前后死者几二十万人，无敢言者。
现代文：而杨国忠不但隐瞒败状，还假报获胜，并增兵去讨伐，前后战死的达二十万人，没有人敢说这件事。
English: However, Yang Guozhong not only concealed his defeat, but also falsely claimed victory and sent more troops to fight. As many as 200,000 people died in the war, and no one dared to talk about it.

古文：上尝谓高力士曰： 朕今老矣，朝事付之宰相，边事付之诸将，夫复何忧！ 
现代文：玄宗曾经对高力士说： 朕已经老了，把朝中政事委托给宰相处理，边防军事委托给诸位边将，还有什么可忧愁的呢！ 
English: Xuanzong once said to Gao Lixi: I am already old, I entrust the political affairs of the DPRK and China to the Prime Minister, and the border defense military affairs to you border generals, what else is there to worry about!

古文：力士对曰： 臣闻云南数丧师，又边将拥兵太盛，陛下将何以制之！
现代文：高力士回答说： 我听说唐军在云南多次战败，还有边将拥兵自重，不知道陛下如何处置！
English: Colossus replied, "I have heard that the Tang army was defeated many times in Yunnan, and there are generals who are proud of their soldiers. I don't know what your majesty will do!"

古文：臣恐一旦祸发，不可复救，何谓无忧也！ 
现代文：我深怕一朝祸发，难以挽救，怎么能说可以高枕无忧呢！ 
English: I am deeply afraid of a disaster, which is difficult to save, how can I say that I can sleep well!

古文：上曰： 卿勿言，朕徐思之。 
现代文：玄宗说： 你不要说了，让我仔细考虑一下。 
English: Xuanzong said, "Don't say it, let me think about it carefully."

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，哥舒翰奏，于所开九曲之地置洮阳、浇河二郡及神策军，以临洮太守成如璆兼洮阳太守，充神策军使。
现代文：秋季，七月癸丑，哥舒翰奏请在所开拓的九曲地方设置洮阳、浇河二郡及神策军，任命临洮太守成如兼洮阳太守，充任神策军使。
English: In the autumn, in July of the year of the Ugly Goat, Goshukhanso requested to set up Shenyang, Gehe two counties and Shinsaka troops in the nine-song region, and appointed Linyi Taishou Chengru and Shinyang Taishou to serve as Shinsaka military envoys.

古文：杨国忠忌陈希烈，希烈累表辞位；上欲以武部侍郎吉温代之，国忠以温附安禄山，奏言不可；以文部侍郎韦见素和雅易制，荐之。
现代文：杨国忠忌恨陈希烈，所以陈希烈多次上表请求辞职。玄宗想任命武部侍郎吉温代陈希烈，而杨国忠因为吉温依附于安禄山，就上奏说不可。他认为文部侍郎韦见素性情温和易于控制，就推荐他代替陈希烈。
English: Yang Guozhong hated Chen Xilai, so Chen Xilai repeatedly petitioned for his resignation. Xuanzong wanted to appoint Ji Wen, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, to replace Chen Xilai, but Yang Guozhong could not do so because Ji Wen was attached to Anlu Mountain. He thought that Wei Mingsu, the attendant of the Ministry of Education, was gentle and easy to control, so he recommended him to replace Chen Xilai.

古文：八月，丙戌，以希烈为太子太师，罢政事；以见素为武部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：八月丙戌，玄宗任命陈希烈为太子太师，罢免参知政事。同时任命韦见素为武部尚书、同平章事。
English: In August, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Chen Xilei as the Prince of the Grand Prince, and dismissed the councillor of state affairs. At the same time, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Wei Jinsu as the secretary of the Ministry of the Armed Forces and the secretary of Tongping.

古文：自去岁水旱相继，关中大饥。
现代文：从去年以来，水灾与旱灾不断，关中地区闹饥荒。
English: Since last year, floods and droughts have continued, leading to famine in the Guanzhong region.

古文：杨国忠恶京兆尹李岘不附己，以灾沴归咎于岘，九月，贬长沙太守。
现代文：杨国忠因为憎恨京兆尹李岘不听自己的话，就把这些天灾归咎于李岘，九月，贬李岘为长沙太守。
English: Yang Guozhong, because he hated Jing Zhao Yin and Li Gan, did not listen to his own words, he blamed these natural disasters on Li Gan. In September, he demoted Li Gan to the governor of Changsha.

古文：岘，祎之子也。
现代文：李岘是信安王李的儿子。
English: Li Xuan was the son of King Li of Xin'an.

古文：上忧雨伤稼，国忠取禾之善者献之，曰： 雨虽多，不害稼也。 
现代文：玄宗担忧雨多损害庄稼，杨国忠就拿一些长势良好的禾苗献给玄宗说： 虽然雨多，但没有损害庄稼。 
English: Xuan Zong was worried that more rain would damage the crops. Yang Guozhong took some good-growing seedlings to Xuan Zong and said: Although there was more rain, there was no damage to the crops.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：玄宗信以为然。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：扶风太守房琯言所部水灾，国忠使御史推之。
现代文：扶风太守房说本郡遭受水灾，杨国忠就派御史去调查。
English: When Fufeng Taishoufang said that the county had suffered from floods, Yang Guozhong sent his historian to investigate.

古文：是岁，天下无敢言灾者。
现代文：这一年，天下没有人再敢于说遭受天灾。
English: In this year, no one in the world dared to say that they had suffered from natural disasters.

古文：高力士侍侧，上曰： 淫雨不已，卿可尽言。 
现代文：高力士侍候玄宗，玄宗说： 大雨连绵不断，你可以把所知道的都告诉我。 
English: Koryoshi waited for Hyunjong. Hyunjong said, "It's been raining incessantly. You can tell me everything you know."

古文：对曰： 自陛下以权假宰相，赏罚无章，阴阳失度，臣何敢言！ 
现代文：高力士回答说： 自陛下把大权委托给宰相以来，赏罚不当，以致上天阴阳失调，我怎么敢说什么呢！ 
English: Colossus replied: "Since Your Majesty delegated the power to the Prime Minister, the rewards and punishments have been improper, resulting in the imbalance of heaven and earth. How dare I say anything!

古文：上默然。
现代文：玄宗沉默不语。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月乙酉，玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In the winter, in October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月，己未，置内侍监二员，正三品。
现代文：十一月己未，设置宦官内侍监二名，正三品级。
English: In November, two eunuchs in the eunuch's personal attendants were set up, and they were promoted to the third grade.

古文：河东太守兼本道采访使韦陟，斌之兄也，文雅有盛名，杨国忠恐其入相，使人告陟赃污事，下御史按问。
现代文：河东太守兼本道采访使韦陟是韦斌的哥哥，风度文雅，负有盛名，杨国忠恐怕他入朝为宰相，就让人告他有贪污行为，并下到御史台去调查。
English: The governor of the eastern province of Hedong and the interviewer of this province made Wei Kun, the elder brother of Wei Bin, elegant and famous. Yang Guozhong was afraid that if he became the prime minister, he would be accused of corruption and went down to the History Channel to investigate.

古文：陟赂中丞吉温，使求救于安禄山，复为国忠所发。
现代文：韦陟贿赂御史中丞吉温，让吉温向安禄山求援，又被杨国忠揭发。
English: Wei Xuan bribed Gu Shizhongzheng Ji Wen, so that Ji Wen asked An Lushan for help, and was exposed by Yang Guozhong.

古文：闰月，壬寅，贬陟桂岭尉，温澧阳长史。
现代文：闰月壬寅，贬韦陟为桂岭县尉，吉温为澧阳郡长史。
English: Leap month Ren Yin, demote Wei Wei to Guiling County Lieutenant, Ji Wen to Shenyang County Governor.

古文：安禄山为温讼冤，且言国忠谗疾。
现代文：安禄山又为吉温拆冤，并说这是杨国忠故意陷害。
English: An Lushan also cleared up the wrongdoing for Ji Wen, and said that this was a deliberate frame-up by Yang Guozhong.

古文：上两无所问。
现代文：玄宗都不问罪。
English: Neither Xuanzong was charged with a crime.

古文：戊午，上还宫。
现代文：戊午，玄宗返回宫中。
English: In the afternoon, Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：是岁，户部奏天下郡三百二十一，县千五百三十八，乡万六千八百二十九，户九百六万九千一百五十四，口五千二百八十八万四百八十八。
现代文：这一年，户部上奏唐朝统辖的郡有三百二十一，县一千五百三十八，乡一万六千八百二十九，户数九百六万九千一百五十四，人口五千二百八十八万四百八十八。
English: In that year, there were 321 counties, 1,538 counties, 16,829 townships, 9,691,154 households, and 52,884,888 people under the jurisdiction of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：天宝十四年乙未，公元七五五年春，正月，苏毘王子悉诺逻去吐蕃来降。
现代文：十四载春季，正月，苏毗王子悉诺逻脱离吐蕃来归附唐朝。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, in the first month, the prince of Suvi, Sino Luo, left Tubo to join the Tang Dynasty.

古文：二月，辛亥，安禄山使副将何千年入奏，请以蕃将三十二人代汉将，上命立进画，给告身。
现代文：二月辛亥，安禄山派副将何千年入朝奏事，请求用蕃人将领三十二人代替汉人将领，玄宗命令中书省立刻下敕书，由自己签署实行，并发给委任状。
English: In February of Xinhai, the vice-commander of the An Lushan faction made a report to the imperial court, requesting that thirty-two Han generals be replaced with Han generals. Xuanzong ordered the Chinese Ministry of Education to immediately issue an imperial edict, signed by himself, and issued a letter of appointment.

古文：韦见素谓杨国忠曰： 禄山久有异志，今又有此请，其反明矣。
现代文：韦见素对杨国忠说： 安禄山早就怀有反心，现在又请求以蕃将代替汉将，谋反的迹象已经很明确了。
English: Wei Jian Su said to Yang Guozhong: An Lushan has long harbored antipathy, and now he is requesting that Han Zheng be replaced with Zhai Zheng. The signs of plotting a rebellion are already very clear.

古文：明日见素当极言；上未允，公其继之。 
现代文：明天我一定尽力向皇上说这件事，如果皇上不听，请您继后劝说。 
English: Tomorrow I will certainly do my best to tell the Emperor about this matter. If the Emperor does not listen, please try to persuade him.

古文：国忠许诺。
现代文：杨国忠答应。
English: Yang Guozhong agreed.

古文：壬子，国忠、见素入见，上迎谓曰： 卿等有疑禄山之意邪？ 
现代文：壬子，杨国忠与韦见素入宫晋见玄宗，玄宗迎接他们，并说： 你们是怀疑安禄山要谋反吗？ 
English: When Jin Zi, Yang Guozhong and Wei Mingsu entered the palace to see Xuanzong, Xuanzong greeted them and said, "Do you suspect that Anlu Mountain is plotting a rebellion?

古文：见素因极言禄山反已有迹，所请不可许，上不悦，国忠逡巡不敢言，上竟从禄山之请。
现代文：韦见素因此极力说安禄山反迹已露，对于他的请求千万不能答应，玄宗不高兴。这时杨国忠竟因有顾虑而不敢说话，玄宗便答应了安禄山的请求。
English: As a result, Wei Mingsu insisted that Anlu Mountain's trace had already been revealed, and that his request must not be granted. Xuanzong was not happy. At this time, Yang Guozhong was afraid to speak because of his concerns. Xuanzong then granted Anlu Mountain's request.

古文：他日，国忠、见素言于上曰： 臣有策可坐消禄山之谋。
现代文：有一天，杨国忠和韦见素对玄宗说： 我们有计策可以消除安禄山的阴谋。
English: One day, Yang Guozhong and Wei Mingsu said to Xuanzong: We have a strategy to eliminate the conspiracy of Anlu Mountain.

古文：今若除禄山平章事，召诣阙，以贾循为范阳节度使，吕知诲为平卢节度使，杨光翙为河东节度使，则势自分矣。 
现代文：现在如果任命安禄山为平章事，召他入朝，然后任命贾循为范阳节度使，吕知诲为平卢节度使，杨光为河东节度使，这样安禄山的势力就会分化瓦解。 
English: Now, if Anlu Shan were to be appointed as a member of the Taira clan and summoned to the imperial court, and then Jia Xun were to be appointed as an envoy to the Phanyang festival, Lu Zhiyou as an envoy to the Pinglu festival, and Yang Guang as an envoy to the Hedong festival, then the power of Anlu Shan would be divided and disintegrated.

古文：上从之。
现代文：玄宗同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：已草制，上留不发，更遣中使辅璆琳以珍果赐禄山，潜察其变。
现代文：制书已经写好，但玄宗却留在朝中不发，而又派宦官辅琳拿着珍果去赐给安禄山，并让他暗中观察形势的变化。
English: The book had already been written, but Xuanzong remained in the court and did not publish it. Instead, he sent the eunuch Fu Lin to take the precious fruit and give it to Anlu Shan, and let him secretly observe the changes in the situation.

古文：璆琳受禄山厚赂，还，盛言禄山竭忠奉国，无有二心。
现代文：辅琳受了安禄山的重赂，还朝后极力说安禄山忠诚奉国，没有二心。
English: Fu Lin was heavily bribed by Anlu Shan, and also insisted to the emperor that Anlu Shan was loyal to the country and had no second thoughts.

古文：上谓国忠等曰： 禄山，朕推心待之，必无异志。
现代文：唐玄宗对杨国忠等人说： 我推心置腹地对待安禄山，他必不会有异心。
English: Tang Xuan Zong said to Yang Guozhong and others: I treat Anlu Mountain with all my heart, and he will not have a different heart.

古文：东北二虏，藉其镇遏。
现代文：再说东北地区的奚与契丹还要靠他镇抚。
English: In addition, it is up to him to pacify the Shias and Khitans in the northeastern region.

古文：朕自保之，卿等勿忧也！ 
现代文：朕可以保证他不会谋反，你们不要担忧！ 
English: I can guarantee that he won't rebel. Don't worry!

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：这件事就这样平息了。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：循，华原人也，时为节度副使。
现代文：贾循是华原人，当时是范阳节度副使。
English: Jia Xun is a native of Hua Yuan. At that time, he was the vice-envoy of Fan Yang Jiedu.

古文：陇右、河西节度使哥舒翰入朝，道得风疾，遂留京师，家居不出。
现代文：陇右、河西节度使哥舒翰入朝，在路上中风，于是就留在了京师，住在家里，不出来活动。
English: The festivals in Handan and Hexi made Goshukhan enter the imperial court. He had a stroke on the way, so he stayed in Beijing and stayed at home and did not go out for activities.

古文：三月，辛巳，命给事中裴士淹宣慰河北。
现代文：三月辛巳，玄宗命令给事中裴士淹代表朝廷去河北安慰军民。
English: In March, Xuanzong ordered Baishuang to go to Hebei to comfort the soldiers and civilians on behalf of the imperial court.

古文：夏，四月，安禄山奏破奚、契丹。
现代文：夏季，四月，安禄山上奏说打败了奚与契丹。
English: In the summer, in April, Anlu played on the mountain and defeated Zou and Qidan.

古文：癸巳，以苏毘王子悉诺逻为怀义王，赐姓名李忠信。
现代文：癸巳，玄宗封苏毗王子悉诺逻为怀义王，赐姓名为李忠信。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuanzong bestowed the title of Prince of Suvi to King Huaiyi and gave him the name Li Zhongxin.

古文：安禄山归至范阳，朝廷每遣使者至，皆称疾不出迎，盛陈武备，然后见之。
现代文：安禄山回到范阳后，每当朝廷有使者来，总是假装有病不出来迎接。有时布置好兵力，然后才出来接见。
English: After Anlu Shan returned to Fanyang, whenever an emissary of the imperial court came, he always pretended to be ill and could not come out to meet him. Sometimes he arranged his troops well before coming out to meet him.

古文：裴士淹至范阳，二十馀日乃得见，无复人臣礼。
现代文：裴士淹来到范阳后二十多天才见安禄山，安禄山一点臣下的礼节都不讲。
English: More than twenty days after Bae Shih-wan came to Fanyang, he saw Anlu Mountain. Anlu Mountain did not pay any attention to the etiquette of his vassals.

古文：杨国忠日夜求禄山反状，使京兆尹围其第，捕禄山客李超等，送御史台狱，潜杀之。
现代文：杨国忠日夜搜集安禄山谋反的证据，派京兆尹包围了安禄山在京城的任宅，逮捕了安禄山的门客李超等，送到御史台狱中，然后秘密地杀了他们。
English: Yang Guozhong collected evidence of Anlu Mountain's rebellion day and night, sent Jing Zhaoyun to surround Anlu Mountain's residence in Beijing, arrested Anlu Mountain's protégé Li Chao and others, sent them to Gushidai Prison, and then secretly killed them.

古文：禄山子庆宗尚宗女荣义郡主，供奉在京师，密报禄山，禄山愈惧。
现代文：安禄山的儿子安庆宗婚匹皇室女荣义郡主，在京师为太仆卿，他把这件事密报给了安禄山，安禄山更加恐惧。
English: An Lushan's son, An Qingzong, married the princess Rongyi, a member of the imperial family, and became a servant of the emperor in Beijing. He reported this to An Lushan in secret, which made An Lushan even more afraid.

古文：六月，上以其子成婚，于诏召禄山观礼，禄山辞疾不至。
现代文：六月，玄宗以安庆宗成婚为由，下手诏让安禄山来京城参加婚礼，安禄山称病不来。
English: In June, Xuanzong, citing the marriage of An Qingzong, issued a decree to let An Lushan come to the capital to attend the wedding, but An Lushan said he was ill and would not come.

古文：秋，七月，禄山表献马三千匹，每匹执控夫二人，遣蕃将二十二人部送。
现代文：秋季，七月，安禄山上表请求献给朝廷马三千匹，每匹马马夫二人，并派蕃人将领二十二人护送。
English: In the autumn, in July, Anlu Mountain requested 3,000 horses to be dedicated to the imperial court, with two grooms for each horse, and dispatched twenty-two people to escort them.

古文：河南尹达奚珣疑有变，奏请 谕禄山以进车马宜俟至冬，官自给夫，无烦本军。 
现代文：河南尹达奚怀疑其中有诈，就上奏说： 请告谕安禄山应等到冬天再献车马，由朝廷供给马夫，不用烦劳他部下的军士。 
English: Yin Dajuan of Henan suspected that there was fraud, so he sent a report saying: Please tell Anlu Mountain to wait until winter to donate horses and carriages. The imperial court will provide the groom, and there is no need to bother the sergeants under his command.

古文：于是上稍寤，始有疑禄山之意。
现代文：于是玄宗才有所省悟，开始怀疑安禄山有反心。
English: As a result, Xuanzong had second thoughts and began to suspect that Anlu Mountain had a grudge against him.

古文：会辅璆琳受赂事亦泄，上托以他事扑杀之。
现代文：这时辅琳接受安禄山贿赂的事被揭发，玄宗就假托其他罪用扑刑处死了辅琳。
English: At this time, it was revealed that Fuolin had accepted bribes from Anlu Shan. Xuanzong sentenced Fuolin to death by beating on the pretext of other crimes.

古文：上遣中使冯神威赍手诏谕禄山，如珣策；且曰：朕新为卿作一汤，十月于华清宫待卿。 
现代文：玄宗又派宦官冯神威拿着自己的手诏，按照达奚的计策，去告谕安禄山，并且说： 朕刚为你在华清宫造了一座温汤池，十月在那里等待你。 
English: Xuanzong also sent eunuch Feng Shenwei with his own hand signal, in accordance with Dadu's strategy, to tell Anlu Mountain, and said: I just built a hot spring pool for you in Huaqing Palace, and I'll be waiting for you there in October.

古文：神威至范阳宣旨，禄山踞床微起，亦不拜，曰： 圣人安隐。 
现代文：神威到范阳宣读了玄宗的诏书，安禄山坐在床上略微起了一下身子，也不伏拜，只是说： 皇上可好。 
English: Shen Wei went to Fanyang and read out the edict of Emperor Xuanzong. An Lushan sat on the bed and slightly raised his body. He did not bow, but said, "How good the emperor is."

古文：又曰： 马不献亦可，十月灼然诣京师。 
现代文：又说： 不让献马也行，我到十月份一定去京师。 
English: He also said, "I don't mind if you don't let me offer my horse, I will definitely go to Beijing in October."

古文：即令左右引神威置馆舍，不复见；数日，遣还，亦无表。
现代文：然后就命令左右的人把冯神威安置在馆舍，不再接见。过了数天，才让神威回朝，也没有奏表。
English: Then he ordered the people around him to place Feng Shenwei in the museum building and not to receive him any more. It took several days before Shenwei was allowed to return to China, and there was no report.

古文：神威还，见上，泣曰： 臣几不得见大家！ 
现代文：神威回朝后，见到玄宗哭泣着说： 我差一点见不到陛下！ 
English: After returning to the Imperial Palace, Shen Wei saw Xuanzong crying and said, "I almost didn't get to see Your Majesty!"

古文：八月，辛卯，免今载百姓租庸。
现代文：八月辛卯，玄宗下令免去百姓今年的租庸。
English: In August, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the people to be exempted from this year's rent.

古文：冬，十月，庚寅，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月庚寅，玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In the winter, in October, Geng Yin and Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：安禄山专制三道，阴蓄异志，殆将十年，以上待之厚，欲俟上晏驾然后作乱。
现代文：安禄山一身兼任三道节度使，阴谋作乱已将近十年，只是因为玄宗待他很好，所以想等到玄宗死后再反叛。
English: An Lushan, who also served as the envoy of the three festivals, had been plotting for nearly ten years, but because Xuanzong treated him well, he wanted to wait until Xuanzong died before rebelling.

古文：会杨国忠与禄山不相悦，屡言禄山且反，上不听；国忠数以事激之，欲其速反以取信于上。
现代文：这时杨国忠因为与安禄山不和，多次上言说他要谋反，玄宗不信。杨国忠又多次以事激怒安禄山，想让他立刻反叛以取信于玄宗。
English: At this time, Yang Guozhong, because of his discord with Anlu Shan, repeatedly said that he wanted to rebel and did not trust Xuanzong. Yang Guozhong also repeatedly angered Anlu Shan with things and wanted him to rebel immediately to gain confidence in Xuanzong.

古文：禄山由是决意遽反，独与孔目官、太仆丞严庄、掌书记、屯田员外郎高尚、将军阿史那承庆密谋，自馀将佐皆莫之知，但怪其自八月以来，屡飨士卒，秣马厉兵而已。
现代文：安禄山于是决意举兵反叛，只与孔目官、太仆丞严庄和掌书记、屯田员外郎高尚以及将军阿史那承庆等人密谋，其他将领都不让知道。其他将领只是觉得奇怪，不知道安禄山为什么从八月份以来多次招待士卒，秣马厉兵，准备打仗。
English: As a result, An Lushan decided to raise an army to rebel. He only conspired with Confucius, the eunuch, Yan Zhuang, the secretary, the field marshal, Wei Lang Gao Shang, and the general, Ashina Chengqing. The other generals did not let them know. The other generals just thought it was strange and did not know why An Lushan had repeatedly invited soldiers since August to prepare for war.

古文：会有奏事官自京师还，禄山诈为敕书，悉召诸将示之曰： 有密旨，令禄山将兵入朝讨杨国忠，诸君宜即从军。 
现代文：这时有入朝奏事官从京师回来，安禄山就假造敕书，把将领都召来告诉他们说： 皇上有密诏给我，让我率兵入朝讨杨国忠，你们应该听我指挥随军行动。 
English: At this time, an imperial envoy came back from Beijing. An Lushan forged an imperial edict and summoned the generals to tell them, "The emperor has given me a secret edict to lead an army into the imperial court to fight against Yang Guotong. You should listen to my command and follow the army."

古文：众愕然相顾，莫敢异言。
现代文：众将领听完后都十分惊愕，相看而不敢反对。
English: After listening to the generals, they were very surprised and did not dare to object.

古文：十一月，甲子，禄山发所部兵及同罗、奚、契丹、室韦凡十五万众，号二十万，反于范阳。
现代文：十一月甲子，安禄山率领所统辖的三镇军队及同罗、奚、契丹、室韦兵共十五万人，号称二十万，在范阳起兵反叛。
English: On November 1st, An Lushan led the troops of the three towns under his jurisdiction and the soldiers of Tongluo, Yao, Khitan, and Shumway, a total of 150,000 people, reputed to be 200,000, revolted in Fanyang.

古文：命范阳节度副使贾循守范阳，平卢节度副使吕知诲守平卢，别将高秀岩守大同；诸将皆引兵夜发。
现代文：安禄山又命令范阳节度副使贾循留守范阳，平卢节度副使吕知诲留守平卢，别将高秀岩守卫大同，其余的将领都率兵深夜出发。
English: An Lushan also ordered Fan Yang's deputy commander Jia Xun to stay in Fan Yang, and Pinglu's deputy commander Lü Chihai to stay in Pinglu, and not to leave Gaoshuiyan to guard Datong. The remaining generals led the troops and set out in the middle of the night.

古文：诘朝，禄山出蓟城南，大阅誓众，以讨杨国忠为名，榜军中曰： 有异议扇动军人者，斩及三族！ 
现代文：第二天早晨，安禄山出蓟城南门，召集全军检阅誓师，以讨伐杨国忠为名，在军中发文告说： 谁要是煽动军人反对这一行动，灭杀他的三族！ 
English: The next morning, An Lushan went to the south gate of the city and called the whole army to review the oath. In the name of fighting against Yang Guozhong, he sent a message to the army saying, "If anyone incites the soldiers to oppose this action, exterminate his three tribes!"

古文：于是引兵而南。
现代文：然后率兵向南进军。
English: He then marched south with his army.

古文：禄山乘铁舆，步骑精锐，烟尘千里，鼓噪震地。
现代文：安禄山坐着铁车，精锐步骑兵浩浩荡荡，战尘千里，鼓角震地。
English: Anlu Mountain sits on an iron chariot, elite infantry and cavalry swarming, thousands of miles of dust, and the sound of drums.

古文：时海内久承平，百姓累世不识兵革，猝闻范阳兵起，远近震骇。
现代文：当时唐朝国内长治久安，老百姓几代没有经过战争，猛然得知范阳兵起，远近惊骇。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty had a long period of domestic peace and stability, and the common people had not experienced war for several generations. When they suddenly learned of Fan Yang's military uprising, they were shocked.

古文：河北皆禄山统内，所过州县，望风瓦解。守令或开门出迎，或弃城窜匿，或为所擒戮，无敢拒之者。
现代文：河北地区都在安禄山的统辖之内，所以叛军经过的州县望风瓦解，郡守与县令有的大开城门迎接敌人，有的弃城逃命，有的被叛军俘虏杀害，没有人敢于抵抗。
English: The Hebei region is under the jurisdiction of Anlu Mountain, so the state and county that the rebels passed through collapsed. Some county governors and county magistrates opened the gates to welcome the enemy, some abandoned the city to escape, and some were killed by rebel prisoners. No one dared to resist.

古文：禄山先遣将军何千年、高邈将奚骑二十，声言献射生手，乘驿诣太原。
现代文：安禄山先派将军何千年与高邈率领奚族骑兵二十名，声称是向朝廷献射生手，乘驿马到太原。
English: Anlu Shanshan sent a general for thousands of years to Taiyuan with twenty Yao cavalrymen led by Gao Yao, claiming that they were to offer fresh shooters to the imperial court and ride horses to Taiyuan.

古文：乙丑，北京副留守杨光翙出迎，因劫之以去。
现代文：乙丑，北京副留守杨光出城迎接，被动持而去。
English: Second ugly, Beijing deputy left Yang Guang out of the city to meet, passively carried away.

古文：太原具言其状。东受降城亦奏禄山反。
现代文：太原向朝廷报告了这一情况，东受降城也上奏说安禄山反叛。
English: Taiyuan reported the situation to the imperial court, and Dongju also reported the rebellion in Anlu Mountain.

古文：上犹以为恶禄山者诈为之，未之信也。
现代文：玄宗还认为这是恨安禄山的人故意捏造事实，不相信真有其事。
English: Xuanzong also believes that this is a deliberate fabrication of facts by people who hate Anlu Mountain and do not believe that it is true.

古文：庚午，上闻禄山定反，乃召宰相谋之。
现代文：庚午，玄宗得知安禄山确实率兵造反，才召来宰相商议应变之策。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, when Xuanzong learned that An Lushan had indeed led the soldiers to rebel, he summoned the prime minister to discuss the best strategy.

古文：杨国忠扬扬有得色，曰： 今反者独禄山耳，将士皆不欲也。
现代文：杨国忠得意洋洋地说： 现在要反叛的只有安禄山一个人，所部将士都不想反叛。
English: Yang Guozhong said triumphantly, "Only An Lushan wants to rebel now. None of the officers and men in the headquarters want to rebel.

古文：不过旬日，必传首诣行在。 
现代文：不过十天，一定会把安禄山的头颅割下来送到行在。 
English: However, in ten days, they will surely cut off the head of Anlu Mountain and send it to Zhou.

古文：上以为然，大臣相顾失色。
现代文：玄宗信以为然，大臣们听后则大惊失色。
English: Xuanzongxin thought so, but the ministers were shocked and disgraced.

古文：上遣特进毕思琛诣东京，金吾将军程千里诣河东，各简募数万人，随便团结以拒之。
现代文：玄宗派特进毕思琛往东京，金吾将军程千里往河东，各召募数万人，各随便利，编组教练，以便抗拒叛军。
English: Xuanzong sent special envoy Bi Si to Tokyo, and General Kingo traveled thousands of miles to the east of the river, each recruiting tens of thousands of people, each with convenience, marshalling coaches, in order to resist the rebels.

古文：辛未，安西节度使封常清入朝，上问以讨贼方略，常清大言曰： 今太平积久，故人望风惮贼。
现代文：辛未，安西节度使封常清入朝，玄宗向他问平叛之计，常清夸大其辞地说： 现在因为天下太平已久，所以人人看见叛军都十分害怕。
English: On the eve of Xin Wei, the Anxi Festival brought Feng Changqing to the imperial court. Xuanzong asked him about the plan to quell the rebellion. Changqing exaggerated his words and said, "Nowadays, because the world has been at peace for a long time, everyone is very afraid when they see the rebels.

古文：然事有逆顺，势有奇变，臣请走马诣东京，开府库，募骁勇，挑马棰渡河，计日取逆胡之首献阙下！ 
现代文：但事情有逆顺，形势会突变。我请求立刻到东京，打开府库，召募勇士，然后跃马挥师渡过黄河，用不了几天就会把逆贼安禄山的头颅取下献给陛下！ 
English: I request you to go to Tokyo immediately, open the government treasury, recruit warriors, and then cross the Yellow River on a galloping horse. In a few days, you will remove the head of the traitor An Lushan and offer it to His Majesty!

古文：上悦。
现代文：玄宗大喜。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：壬申，以常清为范阳、平卢节度使。
现代文：壬申，任命封常清为范阳、平卢节度使。
English: Jinshin, appointed Feng Changqing as Fan Yang, Ping Lu as the chief envoy.

古文：常清即日乘驿诣东京募兵，旬日，得六万人；乃断河阳桥，为守御之备。
现代文：封常清当天即乘驿马到东京募兵，十天募得六万人。然后毁坏河阳桥，准备抵御叛军的进攻。
English: On the same day, Fong Changqing rode a steed to Tokyo to recruit soldiers, and in ten days he recruited sixty thousand people. He then destroyed the Heyang Bridge in preparation for resisting the rebel attack.

古文：甲戌，禄山至博陵南，何千年等执杨光翙见禄山，责光翙以附杨国忠，斩之以徇。
现代文：甲戌，安禄山来到博陵郡南，何千年等人带着杨光来见，安禄山责备杨光依附杨国忠，然后杀了他示众。
English: In Jiajing, Anlu Mountain came to the south of Boling County. Thousands of people brought Yang Guang to see him. Anlu Mountain accused Yang Guang of clinging to Yang Guozhong, and then killed him in public.

古文：禄山使其将安忠志将精兵军土门，忠志，奚人，禄山养为假子；又以张献诚摄博陵太守，献诚，守珪之子也。
现代文：安禄山让部将安忠志率领精兵驻扎在土门，安忠志是奚族人，安禄山的养子。又委任张献诚代理博陵太守，张献诚是张守的儿子。
English: An Lushan stationed his subordinate An Zhongzhi and his elite soldiers in Tu Men. An Zhongzhi was a member of the Yi ethnic group and the adopted son of An Lushan. He also appointed Zhang Xiancheng, the son of Zhang Xiancheng, as acting governor of Boling.

古文：禄山至藁城，常山太守颜杲卿力不能拒，与长史袁履谦往迎之。
现代文：安禄山到了藁城，常山太守颜杲卿兵少不能拒敌，就与长史袁履谦去迎接安禄山。
English: When Mount Anlu arrived at Lucheng, the commander of the Changshan Taishu, Yan Xuanqing, could not resist the enemy due to the small number of soldiers, so he went to meet Mount Anlu with Changshi Yuan Luqian.

古文：禄山辄赐杲卿金紫，质其子弟，使仍守常山；又使其将李钦凑将兵数千人守井陉口，以备西来诸军。
现代文：安禄山当即赐颜杲卿金鱼袋紫衣服，把他的子弟带走作为人质，仍让他守常山。又派部将李钦凑率兵数千守卫井陉关，防备从西面来进攻的唐军。
English: Anlu Mountain immediately gave Yan Qianqing goldfish bag purple clothes, took his son away as a hostage, and still let him guard Changshan. He also sent the general Li Qin and several thousand soldiers to guard Jinghuaguan, to guard against the Tang army attacking from the west.

古文：杲卿归，途中指其衣谓履谦曰： 何为著此？ 
现代文：颜杲卿在回来的路上指着安禄山所赐的金鱼袋紫衣服对袁履谦说： 我为什么要穿这样的衣服呢？ 
English: On the way back, Yan Xuanqing pointed to the goldfish bag purple clothes given by Anlu Mountain and said to Yuan Lucheng: Why should I wear such clothes?

古文：履谦悟其意，乃阴与杲卿谋起兵讨禄山。
现代文：袁履谦领悟了他的意思，于是就暗中与颜杲卿谋划起兵讨伐安禄山。
English: Yuan Luqian understood his meaning, so he secretly plotted with Yan Yuqing to raise an army to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：杲卿，思鲁之玄孙也。
现代文：颜杲卿是颜思鲁的玄孙。
English: Yan Xuanqing is the great-great-grandson of Yan Silu.

古文：丙子，上还宫。
现代文：丙子，玄宗返回宫中。
English: Hyunjo and Hyunjong return to the palace.

古文：斩太仆卿安庆宗，赐荣义郡主自尽。
现代文：先杀了安禄山的儿子太仆卿安庆宗，赐荣义郡主自杀。
English: First, he killed An Lushan's son, the great retainer An Qingzong, and forced Princess Rongyi to commit suicide.

古文：以朔方节度使安思顺为户部尚书，思顺弟元贞为太仆卿。
现代文：任命朔方节度使安思顺为户部尚书，安思顺的弟弟安元贞为太仆卿。
English: The appointment of Shuo Fang Jie Dao made An Sishun the head of the household, and An Sishun's younger brother, An Yuanzhen, became the great servant.

古文：以朔方右厢兵马使、九原太守郭子仪为朔方节度使，右羽林大将军王承业为太原尹。
现代文：任命朔方右厢兵马使、九原太守郭子仪为朔方节度使，右羽林大将军王承业为太原尹。
English: He appointed the right wing of the Shuo faction as the envoy of the soldiers and horses, Kuyuan governor Guo Ziyi as the envoy of the Shuo faction, and the right wing Lin general Wang Chengye as the Taiyuan Yin.

古文：置河南节度使，领陈留等十三郡，以卫尉卿猗氏张介然为之。
现代文：设置河南节度使，统一指挥陈留等十三郡的军队，任命卫尉卿猗氏人张介然为节度使。
English: Set up Henan Festival Envoy, unified command of the army of thirteen counties such as Chen Liu, and appointed Lieutenant Zhang Jieran as the Festival Envoy.

古文：以程千里为潞州长史。
现代文：又任命程千里为潞州长史。
English: He also appointed Cheng Qianli as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：诸郡当贼冲者，始置防御使。
现代文：开始在各郡的战略要地设置防御使。
English: They began to set up defensive posts at strategic points in the counties.

古文：丁丑，以荣王琬为元帅，右金吾大将军高仙芝副之，统诸军东征。
现代文：丁丑，玄宗任命荣王李琬为元帅，右金吾大将军高仙芝为副元帅，统帅各路军队东征。
English: Ding Gou, Xuanzong appointed Rong Wang Lijun as a marshal, Right Kingu General Gao Xianzhi as a deputy marshal, and commanded the armies of all roads to the east.

古文：出内府钱帛，于京师募兵十一万，号曰天武军，旬日而集，皆市井子弟也。
现代文：又拿出内府中的金钱布帛，在京师招募军队十一万，号为天武军，十天便集合起来，成员都是市民子弟。
English: He also took out the money cloth in the inner palace and recruited an army of 110,000 in the Beijing division, called the Tianwu Army. Ten days later, they assembled, and the members were all citizens' children.

古文：十二月，丙戌，高仙芝将飞骑、彍骑及新募兵、边兵在京师者合五万人，发长安。
现代文：十二月丙戌，副元帅高仙芝率领飞骑、骑及新招募的兵，再加上留在京师的边镇兵共五万人，从长安出发。
English: In December, Vice-Marshal Gao Xianzhi led the newly recruited soldiers on horseback and horseback, together with a total of 50,000 soldiers from the border towns who remained in the Beijing Division, and set off from Chang'an.

古文：上遣宦者监门将军边令诚监其军，屯于陕。
现代文：玄宗及派监门将军宦官边令诚去监军，屯于陕郡。
English: Xuanzong sent the eunuch Bian Rongcheng to supervise the troops and stationed him in Shaanxi.

古文：丁亥，安禄山自灵昌渡河，以絙约败船及草木横绝河流，一夕，冰合如浮梁，遂陷炅昌郡。
现代文：丁亥，安禄山从灵昌渡过黄河，用绳子捆系破船和杂草树木，横断河流，一个晚上即结冰如浮桥，于是大军过河攻陷了灵昌郡。
English: Dinghai, Anlu Mountain crossed the Yellow River from Lingchang, using ropes to tie up broken boats and weed trees, crossing rivers, and one night it froze like a pontoon, so the army crossed the river and captured Lingchang County.

古文：禄山步骑散漫，人莫知其数，所过残灭。
现代文：安禄山所率领的步骑叛军散漫不成队伍，人们难以计其数，所经过的地方被烧杀抢掠，一片残败。
English: The cavalry and infantry rebels led by An Lushan were scattered and did not form a line, and it was difficult to count the number of people. The places they passed through were burned, looted, and destroyed.

古文：张介然至陈留才数日，禄山至，授兵乘城。众忷惧，不能守。
现代文：河南节度使张介然到陈留才几天，安禄山即率叛军来到，张介然命令士兵登城守卫，士兵惊恐，不能作战。
English: It was only a few days after the Henan Festival that Zhang Jieran came to stay in Chen. Anlu Mountain immediately led the rebels to come. Zhang Jieran ordered the soldiers to guard the city. The soldiers were terrified and could not fight.

古文：庚寅，太守郭纳以城降。
现代文：庚寅，陈留太守郭纳献城投降。
English: Geng Yin and Chen Liu, the governor of Guo Na, surrendered the city.

古文：禄山入北郭，闻安庆宗死，恸哭曰： 我何罪，而杀我子！ 
现代文：安禄山从城北进入，得知安庆宗已死，痛哭说： 我有什么罪，而把我的儿子杀死！ 
English: When Mount Anlu entered from the north of the city and learned that An Qingzong had died, he wept bitterly and said, "What crime have I committed by killing my son!"

古文：时陈留将士降者夹道近万人，禄山皆杀之以快其忿；斩张介然于军门。
现代文：当时投降的陈留将士在路两旁将近一万人，安禄山把他们全部杀死以泄其愤。又在军门杀了张介然。
English: At that time, there were nearly ten thousand Chen left-behind soldiers who surrendered on both sides of the road. An Lushan killed all of them to vent his anger. He also killed Zhang Jieran at the military gate.

古文：以其将李庭望为节度使，守陈留。
现代文：任命他的部将李庭望为节度使，守卫陈留。
English: He appointed his subordinate, Li Tingwang, as the festival envoy to guard Chen Zu.

古文：壬辰，上下制欲亲征，其朔方、河西、陇右兵留守城堡之外，皆赴行营，令节度使自将之，期二十日毕集。
现代文：壬辰，玄宗颁下制书说要亲自率兵去征讨安禄山，命令朔方、河西、陇右的镇兵除留守城堡以外，全部开赴行营，并命令各镇节度使亲自率领，限二十天内全部到齐。
English: In Imjin, Xuanzong issued a document stating that he would personally lead the troops to conquer Anlu Mountain, ordered the town soldiers of Shuofang, Hexi and Shiyu to all go to the camp except for the remaining castle, and ordered the town festivals to be led by himself, all within twenty days.

古文：初，平原太守颜真卿知禄山且反，因霖雨，完城浚壕，料丁壮，实仓廪。
现代文：起初，平原太守颜真卿知道安禄山要举兵反叛，就借下大雨之机，修筑城壕，统计能作战的成年人，并充实仓库。
English: At first, Yan Zhenqing, the governor of the plain, knew that Anlu Mountain would raise an army to rebel, so he borrowed the opportunity of heavy rain to build trenches, count adults who could fight, and replenish warehouses.

古文：禄山以其书生，易之。
现代文：安禄山认为颜真卿不过是一介书生，没有注意他。
English: An Lushan thought Yan Zhenqing was just a student and did not pay attention to him.

古文：及禄山反，牒真卿以平原、博平兵七千人防河津，真卿遣平原司兵李平间道奏之。
现代文：等到安禄山起兵谋反，就发公文让颜真卿率领平原和博平二郡的七千兵守卫黄河渡口，颜真卿即派平原司兵李平从小路去报告朝廷。
English: When Mount Anlu rebelled, he issued an official document to let Yan Zhenqing lead seven thousand soldiers from the plain and two counties of Boping to guard the Yellow River ferry. Yan Zhenqing sent the plain soldier Li Ping to report to the court from the path.

古文：上始闻禄山反，河北郡县皆风靡，叹曰： 二十四郡，曾无一人义士邪！ 
现代文：玄宗最初得知安禄山举兵反叛，河北地区的郡县都纷纷投降的消息时，感叹说： 河北地区的二十四郡中难道就没有一位仁义之士吗！ 
English: When Xuanzong first learned of the news that Anlu Mountain had raised an army to rebel and that counties in Hebei Province had surrendered one after another, he lamented, "Isn't there a single person of benevolence and righteousness among the twenty-four counties in Hebei Province?"

古文：及平至，大喜，曰： 朕不识颜真卿作何状，乃能如是！ 
现代文：李平到后，玄宗高兴地说： 朕不认识颜真卿是什么样子，竟如此忠义！ 
English: After Li Ping arrived, Xuanzong said happily: "I don't know what Yan Zhenqing looks like, he is so loyal!

古文：真卿使亲客密怀购贼牒诣诸郡，由是诸郡多应者。
现代文：颜真卿又派亲信暗藏悬赏捕杀叛军的文告到其他州郡联络，因此有许多州郡纷纷响应。
English: Yan Zhenqing also sent his cronies to secretly hide the announcement of the reward for the capture and killing of the rebels to contact other states and counties, so many states and counties have responded.

古文：真卿，杲卿之从弟也。
现代文：颜真卿是颜杲卿的堂弟。
English: Yan Zhenqing is the cousin of Yan Xuanqing.

古文：安禄山引兵向荥阳，太守崔无诐拒之；士卒乘城者，闻鼓角声，自坠如雨。
现代文：安禄山率兵进军荥阳，太守崔无率官兵拒守，登上城头的士兵听见叛军的鼓角之声，吓得直往下掉。
English: An Lushan led the troops to march into Fenyang, the governor Cui Meng led the officers and soldiers to refuse to defend, and the soldiers who climbed to the top of the city heard the sound of the rebel's drum, and were so scared that they fell straight down.

古文：癸巳，禄山陷荥阳，杀无诐，以其将武令珣守之。
现代文：癸巳，安禄山攻陷荥阳，杀了崔无，让部将武令守卫。
English: Soon after, An Lushan invaded Fenyang, killed Cui Wu, and sent the general to guard it.

古文：禄山声势益张，以其将田承嗣、安忠志、张孝忠为前锋。
现代文：安禄山叛军的声势更加浩大，他命令部将田承嗣、安忠志、张孝忠为先锋进攻东京。
English: The rebels of Mt. Anroku became more powerful, and he ordered Generals Tian Chengzi, An Zhongzhi and Zhang Xiaozhong to attack Tokyo as the vanguard.

古文：封常清所募兵皆白徒，未更训练，屯武牢以拒贼；贼以铁骑蹂之，官军大败。
现代文：封常清所招募的兵都是一些没有经过军事训练而临时被招来的平民，他率领这些兵屯驻武牢关以抵御叛军。叛军的精锐骑兵一阵冲锋，官军大败。
English: The soldiers recruited by Feng Changqing were all civilians who had not undergone military training and were called in on a temporary basis. He led these soldiers to camp at Wudongguan to fend off the rebels. The rebels' elite cavalry made a charge, and the government army was defeated.

古文：常清收馀众，战于葵园，又败；战上东门内，又败。
现代文：封常清收罗残兵，与叛军战于葵园，又被打败。战于上东门内，官军又败。
English: The remnants of the Qing conquered Luo, fought with the rebels in Kwai Yuen, and were defeated again. The battle was in Shangdongmen, and the government army was defeated again.

古文：丁酉，禄山陷东京，贼鼓噪自四门入，纵兵杀掠。
现代文：丁酉，安禄山攻陷东京，叛军呐喊着从四面的城门涌入城内，纵兵烧杀抢掠。
English: In the twinkling of an eye, Mount Anroku fell on Tokyo, and the rebels, shouting, poured into the city from the gates on all sides, burning and looting as they went.

古文：常清战于都亭驿，又败；退守宣仁门，又败；乃自苑西坏墙西走。
现代文：封常清与叛军战于都亭驿，又被打败；只好退守宣仁门，又败于叛军；于是就推倒禁苑的西墙向西逃走。
English: Fong Changqing fought with the rebels at Du Ting, and was defeated again; he had to retreat to Xuanren Gate, and was defeated by the rebels again; so he tore down the west wall of the Forbidden City and fled to the west.

古文：河南尹达奚珣降于禄山。
现代文：河南尹达奚向安禄山投降。
English: Henan Yin Dacao surrenders to Anlu Mountain.

古文：留守李憕谓御史中丞卢奕曰： 吾曹荷国重任，虽知力不敌，必死之！ 
现代文：留守李对御史中丞卢奕说： 我们负肩着国家的重任，虽然自知力量微薄不能抵抗叛军，但也要为国家而死！ 
English: Li, who was left behind, said to Lu Yi, the Grand Historian: We are shouldering the heavy responsibility of the country. Although we know that we are too weak to resist the rebels, we must also die for the country!

古文：奕许诺。
现代文：卢奕同意。
English: Lu Yi agreed.

古文：憕收残兵数百，欲战，皆弃憕溃去；憕独坐府中。
现代文：李收罗了数百兵残兵，想与叛军交战，这些士兵都离他而逃溃，只有李一人坐在府中。
English: Li gathered hundreds of soldiers and wanted to fight the rebels, but they all ran away from him. Li was the only one sitting in the palace.

古文：弈先遣妻子怀印间道走长安，朝服坐台中，左右皆散。
现代文：卢奕先派他的妻子怀藏大印从小路往长安，自己则穿着朝服坐在御史台中，左右的人都已逃散。
English: Lu Yixian sent his wife, Huizang Dayin, to walk along the path to Chang'an, while he sat in his imperial robes in the throne room. Everyone around him had already fled.

古文：禄山屯于闲厩，使人执憕、奕及采访判官蒋清，皆杀之。
现代文：安禄山率兵驻扎在闲厩之中，派人把李、卢奕及采访判官蒋清抓来，然后把他们杀掉。
English: An Lushan and his soldiers were stationed in the middle of the idle stables, and sent people to arrest Li, Lu Yi and the interview judge Jiang Qing, and then kill them.

古文：奕骂禄山，数其罪，顾贼党曰： 凡为人当知逆顺。
现代文：卢奕大骂安禄山，数落他忘恩负义的罪行，并对叛军党羽说： 凡是人类都应该知道事情有逆顺的道理。
English: Lu Yi scolded An Lushan, enumerated his crimes of ingratitude, and said to the rebel party members: All human beings should know that there is a reason for things to go wrong.

古文：我死不失节，夫复何恨！ 
现代文：我死也不失臣节，还有什么遗憾的呢！ 
English: Even if I die, I won't miss Succession Day, so what's there to regret?

古文：憕，文水人；奕，怀慎之子；清，钦绪之子也。
现代文：李是文水人。卢奕是卢怀慎的儿子。蒋清是蒋钦绪的儿子。
English: Li was a literati. Lu Yi was the son of Lu Huaishen. Jiang Qing was the son of Jiang Qingsu.

古文：禄山以其党张万顷为河南尹。
现代文：安禄山任命他的亲信张万顷为河南尹。
English: An Lushan appointed his close confidant Zhang Wanhao as Henan Yin.

古文：封常清帅馀众至峡，陕郡太守窦廷芝已奔河东，吏民皆散。
现代文：封常清率领残兵逃到陕郡，陕郡太守窦廷芝已逃往河东，官吏和民众也都已逃跑。
English: Feng Changqing led the remnants of the army to flee to Shaanxi County, the governor of Shaanxi County Dou Tingzhi has fled to Hedong, and the officials and people have also fled.

古文：常清谓高仙芝曰： 常清连日血战，贼锋不可当。
现代文：封常清对高仙芝说： 我连日与叛军血战，叛军锐不可当。
English: Feng Changqing said to Gao Xianzhi: I have been in a bloody battle with the rebels for several days. The rebels cannot be trusted.

古文：且潼关无兵，若贼豕突入关，则长安危矣。
现代文：再说潼关无兵守卫，如果叛军突入关中，京城长安就危险了。
English: Furthermore, there are no soldiers guarding Shinguan. If the rebels break into Shinguan, the capital Chang'an will be in danger.

古文：陕不可守，不如引兵先据潼关以拒之。 
现代文：陕郡不能守，不如率兵先占据潼关以抗御叛军。 
English: If Shaanxi can't be defended, it's better to occupy Shaoguan first to resist the rebels.

古文：仙芝乃帅见兵西趣潼关。
现代文：于是高仙芝就率领所有的兵西向潼关。
English: As a result, Gao Xianzhi led all the soldiers westward to Shaoguan.

古文：贼寻至，官军狼狈走，无复部伍，士马相腾践，死者甚众。
现代文：不久叛军追至，官军狼狈而逃，不成队伍，士卒与战马互相践踏，死了许多。
English: Soon the rebels were in pursuit, the government army fled in disarray, unable to form a line, soldiers and horses trampled each other, and many died.

古文：至潼关，修完守备，贼至，不得入而去。
现代文：退到了潼关，整饬防守器械，叛军追兵赶到，不能够入关而退去。
English: Retreated to Shaoguan, rectified the defensive equipment, the rebels chased the soldiers to catch up, unable to enter the pass and retreat.

古文：禄山使其将崔乾祐屯陕，临汝、弘农、济阴、濮阳、云中郡皆降于禄山。
现代文：安禄山派部将崔乾率兵屯于陕郡，临汝、弘农、济阴、濮阳、云中等郡都降于安禄山。
English: The Anlu Mountain faction stationed Cui Qian and his troops in Shaanxi County, and the middle counties of Linwu, Hongnong, Jiyin, Shenyang, and Yunnan were all in Anlu Mountain.

古文：是时，朝廷征兵诸道，皆未至，关中忷惧。
现代文：这时朝廷向诸道所征的兵都还没有赶到，关中民众十分惊慌。
English: At this time, the soldiers recruited by the imperial court from various provinces had not yet arrived, and the people of Guanzhong were very panicked.

古文：会禄山方谋称帝，留东京不进，故朝廷得为之备，兵亦稍集。
现代文：正好安禄山谋划着称帝，留在东京不再进攻，所以朝廷才得到喘息的时间备战，所征的兵也陆续赶到。
English: It was just as Anrokuyama was planning to proclaim himself emperor and stay in Tokyo and not attack, so the imperial court got a breather to prepare for war, and the conscripted soldiers also arrived one after another.

古文：禄山以张通儒之弟通晤为睢阳太守，与陈留长史杨朝宗将胡骑千馀东略地，郡县官多望风降走，惟东平太守嗣吴王祗、济南太守李随起兵拒之。
现代文：安禄山任命张通儒的弟弟张通晤为睢阳太守，与陈留长史杨朝宗一起率领胡人骑兵一千余人向东攻城掠地，郡县官闻风或降或逃，只有东平太守嗣吴王李祗、济南太守李随起兵反抗。
English: An Lushan appointed Zhang Tongru's younger brother Zhang Tonghem as the governor of Shenyang. Together with Chen Luchang Shi and Yang Chaozong, he led more than a thousand Hu cavalry to the east to attack the city and plunder the land. County officials heard the wind and either surrendered or fled. Only Dongping's governor Wu Wang Lijun and Jinan's governor Li Xizhi rebelled.

古文：祗，祎之弟也。
现代文：李祗是李的弟弟。
English: Li Xuan is Li's younger brother.

古文：郡县之不从贼者，皆倚吴王为名。
现代文：于是各郡县不愿意投降叛军的官吏民众都借吴王李祗的名义起兵。
English: As a result, the officials and people of all counties who did not want to surrender to the rebels raised an army in the name of Wu Wang Lijun.

古文：单父尉贾贲帅吏民南击睢阳，斩张通晤。
现代文：单父县尉贾贲率领官吏民众向南攻打睢阳，杀了叛军将领张通晤。
English: The single father county lieutenant Jia Jun led the officials and people to attack Fenyang to the south and killed the rebel general Zhang Tongyu.

古文：李庭望引兵欲东徇地，闻之，不敢进而还。
现代文：安禄山大将李庭望想率兵向兵掠地，得知此事后，不敢进军而回。
English: Anlu Mountain sent Li Tingwang to lead the troops to raid the soldiers. After learning of this, he did not dare to march and returned.

古文：庚子，以永王璘为山南节度使，江陵长史源洧为之副；颍王璬为剑南节度使，蜀郡长史崔圆为之副。
现代文：庚子，玄宗任命永王李为山南节度使，江陵长史源洧为副使；颍王李为剑南节度使，蜀郡长史崔圆为副使。
English: Geng Zi and Xuanzong appointed Yong Wang Li as the envoy to the Shannan Festival, and Jiangling Governor Shiyuan Zang as the deputy envoy; Zang Wang Li as the envoy to the Jianan Festival, and Shu County Governor Shi Cui Yuan as the deputy envoy.

古文：二王皆不出阁。
现代文：二王都不亲自到职。
English: Both kings did not take up their duties in person.

古文：洧，光裕之子也。
现代文：源洧是源光裕的儿子。
English: Genko was the son of Genko Mitsuhiro.

古文：上议亲征，辛丑，制太子临国，谓宰相曰： 朕在位垂五十载，倦于忧勤，去秋已欲传位太子；值水旱相仍，不欲以馀灾遗子孙，淹留俟稍丰。
现代文：玄宗想要亲自挂帅去征讨安禄山，辛丑，下制书令太子监国，对宰相们说： 朕在皇帝位快五十年了，懒于处理政事，去年秋天就想传位给太子，又逢水灾旱灾不断，朕不想把这些灾祸留给子孙去承担，想等到形势好转后再传位。
English: Xuanzong wanted to personally lead the charge to conquer Anlu Mountain, Xinwu Mountain, and Xinwu Mountain, and issued a document ordering the prince to supervise the country. He said to the prime ministers: I have been on the throne for nearly 50 years, I am lazy in handling government affairs, I wanted to pass the throne to the prince last autumn, and floods and droughts continue. I don't want to leave these disasters to my children and grandchildren to bear, I want to wait until the situation improves before passing the throne.

古文：不意逆胡横发，朕当亲征，且使之监国。
现代文：不料逆胡安禄山举兵谋反，朕一定要亲自去征讨，让太子监国。
English: Unexpectedly, he raised an army to rebel against Juan Lushan, I must personally go to collect, and let the prince supervise the country.

古文：事平之日，朕将高枕无为矣。 
现代文：侍叛乱平定后，朕将高枕无忧地退位。 
English: After the samurai rebellion is quelled, I will abdicate with peace of mind.

古文：杨国忠大惧，退谓韩、虢、秦三夫人曰： 太子素恶吾家专横久矣，若一旦得天下，吾与姊妹并命在旦暮矣！ 
现代文：杨国忠听后大为恐惧，退朝后对韩国、虢国和秦国三夫人说： 太子早就恨我们杨家专权，如果让他当皇帝得天下，我与姊妹们的生命将会危在旦夕！ 
English: Yang Guozhong was very frightened after listening to this, and said to the three wives of South Korea, Shandong and Qin after the abdication: The prince has long hated our Yang family's exclusive power. If he were to become emperor and rule the world, my life and the lives of my sisters would be in danger!

古文：相与聚哭，使三夫人说贵妃，衔土请命于上；事遂寝。
现代文：杨家诸姊妹相聚哭泣。杨国忠就让三夫人去劝说杨贵妃，杨贵妃又死命地阻拦玄宗，这件事遂不能实行。
English: All the sisters of the Yang family gathered together and cried. Yang Guozhong let the three wives go to persuade Yang Guifei, and Yang Guifei desperately blocked Xuanzong, and the matter could not be implemented.

古文：颜真卿召募勇士，旬日至万馀人，谕以举兵讨安禄山，继以涕泣，士皆感愤。
现代文：平原太守颜真卿招募勇士，十天即募得一万多人，告诉他们要举兵讨伐安禄山，并失声痛哭，勇士们都被感动。
English: Yan Zhenqing, the governor of the plain, recruited warriors, and in ten days, more than ten thousand people were recruited. He told them to raise an army to fight against Anlu Mountain, and they lost their voices and cried bitterly. The warriors were all moved.

古文：禄山使其党段子光赍李憕、卢奕、蒋清首徇河北诸郡，至平原，壬寅，真卿执子光，腰斩以徇；取三人首，续以蒲身，棺敛葬之，祭哭受吊。
现代文：安禄山命令他的亲信段子光拿着李、卢奕和蒋清三人的头颅宣示河北地区各郡县，到了平原，壬寅，颜真卿抓了段子光，将他腰斩示众。又取下李等三人的头颅，用蒲草作人身续接在头上，入敛装入棺材，然后祭奠哭泣接受吊唁埋葬了他们。
English: An Lushan ordered his close confidant Duan Ziguang to take the heads of Li, Lu Yi and Jiang Qing and proclaim them to all counties in Hebei Province. When they reached the plain, Ren Yin and Yan Zhenqing captured Duan Ziguang and beheaded him. They also took down the heads of Li and the other three, attached them to their heads with papyrus dolls, placed them in a coffin, and then buried them, weeping and accepting condolences.

古文：禄山以海运使刘道玄摄景城太守，清池尉贾载、盐山尉河内穆宁共斩道玄，得其甲仗五十馀船；携道玄首谒长史李，收严庄宗族，悉诛之。
现代文：安禄山任命海运使刘道玄代理景城太守，清池县尉贾载和盐山县尉河内人穆宁一起杀了刘道玄，获得盔甲器仗共五十多船，然后持着刘道玄的头颅去见长史李，李逮捕了严庄的宗族，把他们全部杀掉。
English: An Lushan appointed the naval envoy Liu Daoxuan to act as the acting governor of Jingcheng. The Qingchi County lieutenant Jia Zai and the Yanshan County lieutenant Muning, a native of Hanoi, killed Liu Daoxuan together and obtained a total of more than fifty ships of armored equipment. Then they took Liu Daoxuan's head to meet Changshi Li. Li arrested Yan Zhuang's clan and killed them all.

古文：是日，送道玄首至平原，真卿召载、宁及清河尉张澹诣平原计事。
现代文：同日把刘道玄的头颅送到平原。颜真卿把贾载、穆宁及清河县尉张澹召到平原谋划联兵抵抗叛军的事。
English: On the same day, Liu Daoxuan's head was sent to the plain. Yan Zhenqing summoned Jia Zhai, Muning and Qinghe County Lieutenant Zhang Ye to the plain to plan a joint force to resist the rebels.

古文：饶阳太守卢全诚据城不受代；河间司法李奂杀禄山所署长史王怀忠；李随遣游弈将訾嗣贤济河，杀禄山所署博平太守马冀；各有众数千或万人，共推真卿为盟主，军事皆禀焉。
现代文：饶阳太守卢全诚占据郡城不接受安禄山的招降；河间郡司法李奂杀了安禄山所任命的和长史王怀忠；李随派游弈将訾嗣贤渡过黄河杀了安禄山所任命的博平太守马冀。这些忠义之士各有兵数千或一万人，共同推举颜真卿为盟主，军事行动都听从他的指挥。
English: Lu Quancheng, the governor of Raoyang, occupied the county seat and refused to accept Anlu Shan's offer of surrender; Li Xuan, the magistrate of Kawama County, killed both Anlu Shan's appointee and Wang Huaizhong, the governor of Changshi; Li Yuying sent his subordinate across the Yellow River to kill Ma Ji, the governor of Bo Ping, who had been appointed by Anlu Shan. Each of these loyal men had thousands or tens of thousands of soldiers, and together they elected Yan Zhenqing as the commander, and all military operations were under his command.

古文：禄山使张献诚将上谷、博陵、常山、赵郡、文安五郡团结兵万人围饶阳。
现代文：安禄山派部将张献诚率领上谷、博陵、常山、赵郡、文安等五郡的集结兵共一万人包围饶阳。
English: The Anlu Mountain faction led by Zhang Xiancheng led a total of ten thousand soldiers from Shanggu, Boling, Changshan, Zhao County, Wen'an and other five counties to surround Raoyang.

古文：高仙芝之东征也，监军边令诚数以事干之，仙芝多不从。
现代文：高仙芝率兵东征，监军宦官边令诚多次因事求他，高仙芝大都不听。
English: Gao Xianzhi led the troops to march eastward. The overseer of the troops, the eunuch Bian Rongcheng, repeatedly asked him for things, but Gao Xianzhi mostly did not listen.

古文：令诚入奏事，具言仙芝、常清桡败之状，且云： 常清以贼摇众，而仙芝弃陕地数百里，又盗减军士粮赐。 
现代文：边令诚入朝奏事，向玄宗报告了高仙芝、封常清战败的情况，并且说： 封常清借叛军的强大势力动摇军心，高仙芝无故丧失陕郡数百里之地，还盗减军士的粮食和物资。 
English: The envoy, Sheng Rong, reported to Emperor Xuanzong about the defeat of Gao Xianzhi and Feng Changqing, and said: "Feng Changqing borrowed the powerful forces of the rebels to shake the military spirit, Gao Xianzhi lost hundreds of miles of land in Shaanxi County for no reason, and also stole the grain and materials of the sergeants.

古文：上大怒，癸卯，遣令诚赍敕即军中斩仙芝及常清。
现代文：玄宗大为愤怒，癸卯，派边令诚手持敕书到军中杀高仙芝及封常清。
English: Xuanzong was very angry, so he sent Bian Rongcheng armed with a letter to the army to kill Gao Xianzhi and seal Changqing.

古文：初，常清既败，三遣使奉表陈贼形势，上皆不之见。
现代文：起初封常清兵败后，三次派使者入朝上表陈述叛军的形势，玄宗都不见。
English: At first, after the defeat of the Qing soldiers, he sent envoys to the imperial court three times to report the situation of the rebels, but Xuanzong was nowhere to be found.

古文：常清乃自驰诣阙，至渭南，敕削其官爵，令还仙芝军，白衣自效。
现代文：于是封常清就亲自骑马入朝报告，到了渭南，玄宗下敕书剥夺了他的官职和爵位，让他回到高仙芝的军中作为一名普通的士卒去效命。
English: As a result, Feng Changqing personally rode into the imperial court to report. When he arrived in southern Fujian, Xuanzong stripped him of his official position and peerage, and let him return to the army of Gao Xianzhi to serve as an ordinary soldier.

古文：常清草遗表曰： 臣死之后，望陛下不轻此贼，无忘臣言！ 
现代文：封常清草写了上给玄宗的遗表说： 我死了以后，希望陛下千万不要轻视逆贼安禄山，不要忘记我说的话！ 
English: He wrote a last will and testament to Emperor Xuanzong, saying, "After my death, I hope that Your Majesty will not despise the traitor Anlu Mountain, and will not forget what I said!

古文：时朝议皆以为禄山狂悖，不日授首，故常清云然。
现代文：当时朝臣都认为安禄山狂傲叛逆，用不了多长时间就会失败，所以封常清这样告诫玄宗。
English: At that time, the courtiers all thought that Anlu Mountain was arrogant and rebellious, and it would not take long for it to fail, so Fong Changqing warned Xuanzong in this way.

古文：令诚至潼关，先引常清，宣敕示之；常清以表附令诚上之。
现代文：边令诚到了潼关，先把封常清叫来，向他宣示了敕书。封常清把自己草写的遗表交给边令诚呈送玄宗。
English: When Bian Rongcheng arrived at Shaoguan, he first called Fong Changqing and declared to him the imperial edict. Fong Changqing handed his handwritten will to Bian Rongcheng and presented it to Xuanzong.

古文：常清既死，陈尸蘧蒢。
现代文：封常清被杀后，尸体陈放在一张粗席子上面。
English: After Feng Changqing was killed, Chen's body was placed on a thick mat.

古文：仙芝还，至听事，令诚索陌刀手百馀人自随，乃谓仙芝曰： 大夫亦有恩命。 
现代文：高仙芝回到官署后，边令诚带领着陌刀手一百余人，对高仙芝说： 皇帝也有恩命给高大夫。 
English: After Gao Xianzhi returned to the government office, Bian Rongcheng led more than a hundred people who were unfamiliar with the sword and said to Gao Xianzhi: The emperor also has a favor for Dr. Gao.

古文：仙芝遽下，令诚宣敕。
现代文：高仙芝听后立刻下厅，边令诚遂宣示敕书。
English: After listening to Gao Xianzhi, he immediately went down to the hall, and the border guard Cheng finally declared the imperial edict.

古文：仙芝曰： 我遇敌而退，死则宜矣。
现代文：高仙芝说： 我遇到叛军没有抵抗而退却，死了是应该的。
English: Gao Xianzhi said: I encountered no resistance from the rebels and retreated. I deserved to die.

古文：今上戴天，下履地，谓我盗减粮赐则诬也。 
现代文：但是现在上有天下有地，说我盗减士兵的军粮和物资实在是冤枉。 
English: But now that there is a world and a country, it is really unfair to say that I stole the soldiers' rations and supplies.

古文：时士卒在前，皆大呼称枉，其声振地；遂斩之，以将军李承光摄领其众。
现代文：当时高仙芝部下的士卒都在场，大呼高仙芝冤枉，吼声震地，但边令诚还是杀了他。然后命令将军李承光代理统领军队。
English: At that time, Gao Xianzhi's subordinates were all present, shouting that Gao Xianzhi had been wronged, and the roar was earth-shattering, but Bianlingcheng still killed him. Then he ordered General Li Chengguang to act as acting commander of the army.

古文：河西、陇右节度使哥舒翰病废在家，上藉其威名，且素与禄山不协，召见，拜兵马副元帅，将兵八万以讨禄山；仍敕天下四面进兵，会攻洛阳。
现代文：河西、陇右节度使哥舒翰因病在家中休养，玄宗因为他有威名，而且素来与安禄山关系不和，于是就召见他，拜为兵马副元帅，率兵八万去征讨安禄山。还下敕让各地进军，集兵收复洛阳。
English: Xuan Zong, because he had a prestigious name and had always been at odds with Anlu Mountain, summoned him to serve as deputy field marshal and lead 80,000 soldiers to conquer Anlu Mountain. He also ordered him to march across the country to gather troops and recapture Luoyang.

古文：翰以病固辞，上不许，以田良丘为御史中丞，充行军司马，起居郎萧昕为判官，蕃将火拔归仁等各将部落以从，并仙芝旧卒，号二十万，军于潼关。
现代文：哥舒翰因病坚辞不受，玄宗不答应，并任命田良丘为御史中丞兼行军司马，起居郎萧昕为判官，蕃人将领火拔归仁等都率领部落军队归哥舒翰指挥，再加上高仙芝原来的军队，号为二十万，守卫潼头。
English: Because of his illness, Goshukhan was adamant that he would not accept the resignation, but Xuanzong did not agree, and appointed Tian Liangqiu as goshi chujo and marching steward, Kijiro Xiaoqi as adjudicator, and Xingren as commander of the tribal army under the command of Goshukhan, plus Gao Xianzhi's original army, numbering two hundred thousand, to guard Shantou.

古文：翰病，不能治事，悉以军政委田良丘；良丘复不敢专决，使王思礼主骑，李承光主步，二人争长，无所统一。
现代文：哥舒翰因病不能料理军务，就把军玫大事都委托给田良丘处理。田良丘又不敢一人决定大事，于是就让王思礼统领骑兵，李承光统领步兵，又因为这二人争权，军令无法统一。
English: Goshukhan was unable to attend to military affairs due to illness, so he entrusted all military affairs to Tian Liangqiu. Tian Liangqiu did not dare to decide on major matters alone, so he let Wang Sili lead the cavalry, and Li Chengguang lead the infantry, and because these two fought for power, the military orders could not be unified.

古文：翰用法严而不恤，士卒皆懈弛，无斗志。
现代文：哥舒翰用法严厉而不体恤士卒，所以士卒们意志松懈，士气低落，没有战斗力。
English: Goshukhan's methods were harsh and not sympathetic to the soldiers, so the soldiers were weak-willed, demoralized, and had no fighting power.

古文：安禄山大同军使高秀岩寇振武军，朔方节度使郭子仪击败之，子仪乘胜拔静边军。
现代文：安禄山的部将大同军使高秀岩率兵侵略振武军，被朔方节度使郭子仪击退打败，郭子仪又乘胜攻克了静边军。
English: The commander of Anlu Mountain, Datong Army, sent Gao Xiuyan and his soldiers to invade the Zhenwu Army. Guo Ziyi was repulsed and defeated by Shuo Fang, and Guo Ziyi defeated the Jingbian Army.

古文：大同兵马使薛忠义寇静边军，子仪使左兵马使李光弼、右兵马使高浚、左武锋使仆固怀恩、右武锋使浑释之等逆击，大破之，坑其骑七千。
现代文：安禄山的大同兵马使薛忠义侵略静边军，郭子仪派左兵马使李光弼、右兵马使高浚、左武锋使仆固怀恩、右武锋使浑释之等率兵去迎战，大败叛军，七千骑兵被坑杀。
English: The Datong soldiers and horses of Anlu Mountain sent Xue Zhongyi to invade the Jingbian Army, and Guo Ziyi sent the left soldiers and horses to send Li Guangyao, the right soldiers and horses to send Gao Jun, the left soldiers and horses to send Dugu Huai'en, and the right soldiers and horses to send Hun Xie to lead the soldiers to fight. They defeated the rebels, and seven thousand cavalrymen were killed.

古文：进围云中，使别将公孙琼岩将二千骑击马邑，拔之，开东陉关。
现代文：然后又进军包围了云中郡，郭子仪派别将公孙琼岩率领二千骑兵攻克了马邑，打开了东陉关的通路。
English: Guo Ziyi's faction then marched into and encircled Yunzhong County. Guo Ziyi's faction led Gongsun Qiongyan and two thousand cavalry to conquer Ma'i and open the passage to Dongshiguan.

古文：甲辰，加子仪御史大夫。
现代文：甲辰，玄宗加封郭子仪为御史大夫。
English: Jia Chen, Xuanzong and Guo Ziyi were appointed as goshi daifu.

古文：怀恩，哥滥拔延之曾孙也，世为金微都督。
现代文：仆固怀恩是哥滥拔延的曾孙，世代为金微都督。
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan is the great-grandson of the elder brother, and he was the governor of Jinwei.

古文：释之，浑部酋长，世为皋兰都督。
现代文：浑释之是浑族部落酋长，世代为皋兰都督。
English: Hunjizhi was a tribal chief of the Hun ethnic group, and was the governor of Ulan for generations.

古文：颜杲卿将起兵，参军冯虔、前真定令贾深、藁城尉崔安石、郡人翟万德、内丘丞张通幽等皆预其谋；又遣人语太原尹王承业，密与相应。
现代文：颜杲卿将要起兵讨叛，参军冯虔、前真定县令贾深、藁城县尉崔安石、常山人翟万德、内丘县丞张通幽等人都参预谋划。颜杲卿又派人联络太原尹王承业，让他也起兵响应。
English: Yan Xuan was going to raise an army to rebel, and Feng Qian, the former commander of Zhending County, Jia Sheng, the lieutenant of Lucheng County, Cui Anshi, the man of Changshan, Xuan Wande, the governor of Neiqiu County, Zhang Tongyu, and others all participated in the pre-planning. Yan Xuan also sent someone to contact Taiyuan Yin Wang Chengye, so that he could also raise an army in response.

古文：会颜真卿自平原遣杲卿甥卢逖潜告杲卿，欲连兵断禄山归路，以缓其西入之谋。
现代文：这时颜真卿从平原派颜杲卿的外甥卢逖暗中与颜杲卿联系，想与他连兵断绝安禄山的后路，阻止向西进攻长安的阴谋。
English: At this time, Yan Zhenqing from the plains sent his nephew Lu Yingru to secretly contact Yan Yuqing, hoping to join forces with him to cut off the back route of Anlu Mountain and prevent the westward attack on Chang'an.

古文：时禄山遣其金吾将军高邈诣幽州征兵，未还，杲卿以禄山命召李钦凑，使帅众诣群受犒赉；丙午，薄暮，钦凑至，杲卿使袁履谦、冯虔等携酒食妓乐往劳之，并其党皆大醉，乃断钦凑首，收其甲兵，尽缚其党，明日，斩之，悉散井陉之众。
现代文：这时安禄山派遣他的金吾将军高邈往幽州征兵，还没有回来，颜杲卿就假借安禄山的命令召李钦凑，让他率部下到郡城接受犒赏。丙午，天刚黑，李钦凑来到常山，颜杲卿让袁屡谦与冯虔等人拿着酒食妓乐去慰劳，连同他的党羽都被灌得大醉，于是袁履谦等就割下李钦凑的头颅，缴获了他的武器，并把他的部将全部捆绑起来，第二天把他们全部杀掉，遣散了叛军守卫井陉关的兵众。
English: At this time, An Lushan sent his Jinwu General Gao Wei to Yuzhou to recruit soldiers, and before he returned, Yan Shuxian called Li Qinqip on the pretext of An Lushan's order, and asked him to lead his subordinates to the county seat to receive the reward. In the afternoon, it was dark, Li Qinqip came to Changshan, and Yan Shuxian asked Yuan Shikian and Feng Qian and others to take wine, food, and prostitutes to comfort them. Together with his party members, they were all very drunk, so Yuan Shikian and others cut off Li Qinqip's head, seized his

古文：有顷，高邈自幽州还，且至藁城，杲卿使冯虔往擒之。
现代文：不久，高邈从幽州返回，快要到藁城，颜杲卿派冯虔去抓获了高邈。
English: Soon after, Gao Yao returned from Yuzhou and was about to arrive in Lucheng. Yan Yaoqing sent Feng Qian to capture Gao Yao.

古文：南境又白何千年自东京来，崔安石与崔万德驰诣醴泉驿迎千年，又擒之，同日致于郡下。
现代文：南面又报告何千年从东京来到，崔安石与翟万德骑马到醴泉驿去迎接，又抓获了何千年，同一天被押到郡城。
English: The south side also reported that thousands of people came from Tokyo, and Cui Anshi and Zou Wande rode to Shiquan to meet them. They also captured thousands of people and were taken to Guzheng on the same day.

古文：千年谓杲卿曰： 今太守欲输力王室，既善其始，当慎其终。
现代文：何千年对颜杲卿说： 现在您要全力维护唐朝的天下，即然已经有了好的开头，也应当一有个好的结果。
English: Thousands of years said to Yan Xuanqing: Now you should make every effort to maintain the world of the Tang Dynasty. Even if you have a good start, you should also have a good result.

古文：此郡应募乌合，难以临敌，宜深沟高垒，勿与争锋。
现代文：在常山郡所召募的士卒都是一帮乌合之众，难以抵挡叛军，所以应该深沟高垒，以逸待劳，不要与叛军的精锐直接交锋。
English: The soldiers recruited in Changshan County are all a bunch of rabble, it is difficult to resist the rebels, so they should dig a deep ditch, wait for labor, and do not directly confront the elite of the rebels.

古文：俟朔方军至，并力齐进，传檄赵、魏、断燕、蓟要膂，彼则成擒矣。
现代文：等到朔方镇的兵到后，并力齐进，传檄赵郡、魏郡，让他们同时进攻，分割断绝范阳叛军的联系。
English: After the arrival of the soldiers from Shuofang Town, they marched forward in unison to encircle Zhao County and Wei County, so that they could attack at the same time and cut off the contact of the rebels from Fanyang.

古文：今且宜声云 李光弼引步骑一万出井陉 ，因使人说张献诚云： 足下所将多团练之人，无坚甲利兵，难以当山西劲兵 ，献诚必解围遁去。
现代文：现在应该声言说： 李光弼率领步、骑兵一万已出井陉关。 并让人告诉张献诚说： 您所统领的大多是没有多少战斗力的团练兵，没有坚甲快刀，难以抵挡山西来的劲兵。 这样张献诚就会自动解围撤退。
English: Now it is time to say: Li Guangyao led the way, and ten thousand cavalrymen have come out of the well. And let people tell Zhang Xiancheng that: Most of the regiments you command have little combat effectiveness, do not have strong armor and swords, and it is difficult to resist the strong soldiers from Shanxi. In this way, Zhang Xiancheng will automatically lift the siege and retreat.

古文：此亦一奇也。 
现代文：这也是一大奇计。 
English: This is also a great trick.

古文：杲卿悦，用其策，献诚果遁去，其团练兵皆溃。
现代文：颜杲卿听后大喜，就按照何千年的计谋行事，张献诚果然撤退，所率领的团练兵也都溃败。
English: After hearing this, Yan Xuanqing was overjoyed and acted according to the strategy of thousands of years. Zhang Xiancheng withdrew successfully, and the regimental drill soldiers he led were also defeated.

古文：杲卿乃使人入饶阳城，慰劳将士。
现代文：于是颜杲卿就派人进入饶阳城，慰劳将士。
English: As a result, Yan Xuanqing sent someone into Raoyang City to console the soldiers.

古文：命崔安石等徇诸郡云： 大军已下井陉，朝夕当至，先平河北诸郡。
现代文：又命令崔安石告诉其他州郡说： 朝廷大军已下井陉关，不久就到，先平定河北的州郡。
English: He also ordered Cui Anshi to tell the other prefectures and counties that: The imperial army has gone down to Jing and Shaoguan, and will arrive soon, and will first pacify the prefectures and counties in Hebei.

古文：先下者赏，后至者诛！ 
现代文：先归顺的有赏，后到的杀！ 
English: Those who surrender first will be rewarded, those who come later will be killed!

古文：于是河北诸郡响应，凡十七郡皆归朝廷，兵合二十馀万；其附禄山者，惟范阳、卢龙、密云、渔阳、汲、鄴六郡而已。
现代文：因此河北地区的州郡纷纷响应，共有十七郡归顺朝廷，合兵二十多万。其余依附安禄山叛军的只有范阳、卢龙、密云、渔阳、汲郡和邺郡等六郡。
English: Therefore, the prefectures and counties in Hebei region responded one after another. A total of 17 counties surrendered to the imperial court, with more than 200,000 soldiers. The remaining six counties, including Fanyang, Lulong, Miyun, Yuyang, Kui County and Handan County, were attached to the rebels in Anlu Mountain.

古文：杲卿又密使人入渔阳招贾循，郏城人马燧说循曰： 禄山负恩悖逆，虽得洛阳，终归夷灭。
现代文：颜杲卿又秘密地派人入范阳城去招降贾循，这时郏城人马燧劝告贾循说： 安禄山忘恩负义，举兵反叛，道行逆施，虽然占据了洛阳，但终究会败亡。
English: Yan Xuanqing also secretly sent someone into Fanyang City to recruit and surrender Jia Xun. At this time, Ma Xuan, a resident of Fanyang City, advised Jia Xun, saying: "Anlu Mountain is ungrateful, raising an army to rebel, and going against the law. Although it occupies Luoyang, it will eventually be defeated.

古文：公若诛诸将之不从命者，以范阳归国，倾其根柢，此不世之功也。 
现代文：您如果能够杀掉不愿意归附朝廷的将领，以范阳归顺朝廷，倾覆安禄山叛军的巢穴，就等于建立了千古不朽的功勋。 
English: If you can kill the generals who do not want to join the imperial court, make Fan Yang surrender to the imperial court, and overthrow the lair of the rebels in Anlu Mountain, you will have established immortal merits for thousands of years.

古文：循然之，犹豫不时发。
现代文：贾循认为他说的对，但因犹豫不决还没有行动。
English: Jia Xun thought he was right, but hesitated and did not act.

古文：别将牛润容知之，以告禄山，禄山使其党韩朝阳召循。
现代文：这件事被别将牛润客知道了，就报告了安禄山，安禄山就派他的亲信韩朝阳去召贾循。
English: This matter was reported to An Lushan by the other cattle ranchers, and An Lushan sent his close confidant Han Chaoyang to summon Jia Xun.

古文：朝阳至渔阳，引循屏语，使壮士缢杀之，灭其族；以别将牛廷玠知范阳军事。
现代文：韩朝阳到了范阳，叫来贾循密谈，乘机让壮士勒死了他，并灭杀了他的家族，然后任命别将牛廷统领范阳的军队。
English: When Han Chaoyang arrived in Fanyang, he summoned Lai Jiaxun for secret talks. He took the opportunity to have the strongman strangle him and kill his family, and then appointed General Niu Ting to lead Fanyang's army.

古文：史思明、李立节将蕃、汉步骑万人击博陵、常山。
现代文：叛军将领史思明与李立节率领蕃汉步、骑兵一万攻打博陵、常山二郡。
English: The rebel generals Shi Siming and Li Lijie led a force of 10,000 cavalry to attack Boling and the two counties of Changshan.

古文：马燧亡入西山；隐者徐遇匿之，得免。
现代文：马燧逃入西山，被隐士徐遇藏匿，才免于一死。
English: The horse escaped into the West Mountain and was hidden by a hermit, only to be saved from death.

古文：初，禄山自将欲攻潼关，至新安，闻河北有变而还。
现代文：起初，安禄山想要亲自率兵攻打潼关，到了新安，得知河北发生变故而返回。
English: At first, An Lushan wanted to personally lead the troops to attack Shaoguan. When he arrived in Xin'an, he learned that there had been a change in Hebei and returned.

古文：蔡希德将兵万人自河内北击常山。
现代文：叛将蔡希德率兵一万从河内向北进攻常山。
English: The renegade general Cai Xide led ten thousand soldiers from Hanoi to the north to attack Changshan.

古文：戊申，荣王琬薨，赠谥靖恭太子。
现代文：戊申，荣王李琬去世，玄宗赠谥号为靖恭太子。
English: Wushin, Rongwang Lijun passed away, and Xuanzong gave him the posthumous title of Prince Jingyong.

古文：是岁，吐蕃赞普乞梨苏笼猎赞卒，子娑悉笼猎赞立。
现代文：这一年，吐蕃赞普乞梨苏笼猎赞去世，他的儿子娑悉笼猎赞继立。
English: In the same year, Tsenzang Pu Qili Su Kenghuanzan of Tubo died, and his son, Tsenzang Pu Qili Su Kenghuanzan, succeeded him.

古文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝上之上
现代文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝上之上
English: Su Zong, the great saint, the great scholar, the great scholar, the great scholar,

古文：至德元年丙申，公元七五六年
现代文：唐肃宗至德元载
English: From Tang Su Zong to De Yuan Zang

古文：春，正月，乙卯朔，禄山自称大燕皇帝，改元圣武，以达奚珣为侍中，张通儒为中书令，高尚、严庄为中书侍郎。
现代文：春季，正月乙卯朔，安禄山自封为大燕皇帝，改年号为圣武，并任命达奚为侍中，张通儒为中书令，高尚、严庄为中书侍郎。
English: In the spring, on the first day of the second lunar month, An Lushan proclaimed himself Emperor Dayan, changed his era name to Shengwu, and appointed Daju as the chamberlain, Zhang Tongru as the secretary, and Gaozhong and Yan Zhuang as the attendants.

古文：李随至睢阳，有众数万。
现代文：李随到睢阳，共有兵数万。
English: Li went to Shenyang with tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：丙辰，以随为河南节度使，以前高要尉许远为睢阳太守兼防御使。
现代文：丙辰，玄宗任命李随为河南节度使，前高要县尉许远为睢阳太守兼防御使。
English: Xu Chen and Xuanzong appointed Li Sui as the Henan Festival envoy, and the former high-ranking county official Xu Yuan as the Poyang governor and defense envoy.

古文：濮阳客尚衡起兵讨禄山，以郡人王栖曜为衙前总管，攻拔济阴，杀禄山将邢超然。
现代文：濮阳人尚衡起兵讨伐安禄山，任命同郡人王栖曜为衙前总管，攻克了济阴，杀了安禄山的部将邢超然。
English: Shang Heng, a native of Shiyang, raised an army to fight against Anlu Mountain, appointed Wang Qiyou, a native of the same county, as the commander-in-chief of Shiyan, conquered Jiyin, and killed the commander of Anlu Mountain, Zou Chao Ran.

古文：颜杲卿使其子泉明、贾深、翟万德献李钦凑首及何千年、高邈于京师。
现代文：颜杲卿派他的儿子颜泉明与贾深、翟万德一起到京师向朝廷进献李钦凑的头颅及何千年与高邈。
English: Yan Xuanqing sent his son Yan Quanming, together with Jia Sheng and Xuan Wande, to Beijing to present the head of Li Qinqiao and thousands of years and sorghum to the imperial court.

古文：张通幽泣请曰： 通幽兄陷贼，乞与泉明偕行，以救宗族。 
现代文：张通幽哭泣着请求说： 我的哥哥张通儒是叛军的将领，我恳求与颜泉明一起入京，以救我们家族人的性命。 
English: Zhang Tongyu wept and pleaded: My brother Zhang Tongru is a rebel general. I begged him to go to Beijing with Yan Quanming to save the lives of our family members.

古文：杲卿哀而许之。
现代文：颜杲卿被感动就答应了他的请求。
English: Yan Xuanqing was moved and agreed to his request.

古文：至太原，通幽欲自托于王承业，乃教之留泉明等，更其表，多自为功，毁短杲卿，别遣使献之。
现代文：到了太原，张通幽想要依附于太原尹王承业，于是就让王承业扣留了颜泉明等人，另作了表书，夸大自己的功劳，而贬低颜杲卿，然后另派使者去献给朝廷。
English: When he arrived in Taiyuan, Zhang Tongyu wanted to attach himself to the Taiyuan Yin Wang Shengye, so he asked Wang Shengye to detain Yan Quanming and others, made another report, exaggerated his own merits, and belittled Yan Xuanqing, and then sent another envoy to present to the imperial court.

古文：杲卿起兵才八日，守备未完，史思明、蔡希德引兵皆至城下。杲卿告急于承业。承业既窃其功，利于城陷，遂拥兵不救。
现代文：颜杲卿起兵才八天，还没有作好守卫的准备，叛将史思明和蔡希德就率兵到了城下，颜杲卿急忙向王承业求援，王承业即已窃取其功，又希望叛军攻陷常山，于是拥兵不救。
English: It had only been eight days since Lord Yan Xuan raised his army, and he had not yet made preparations for the guard. The renegade generals Shi Siming and Cai Xide led the troops to the foot of the castle. Lord Yan Xuan hurriedly asked Wang Chengye for help. Wang Chengye had already stolen his achievement and hoped that the rebels would capture Changshan, so he did not save the soldiers.

古文：杲卿昼夜拒战，粮尽矢竭；壬戌，城陷。
现代文：颜杲卿率兵昼夜苦战，箭尽粮绝，壬戌，叛军攻陷了常山城。
English: Yan Xuanqing and his soldiers fought hard day and night. The rebels captured the city of Changshan.

古文：贼纵兵杀万馀人，执杲卿及袁履谦等送洛阳。
现代文：叛军放纵士兵杀了一万余人，抓住了颜杲卿与袁履谦等人送往洛阳。
English: The rebels allowed the soldiers to kill more than ten thousand people, captured Yan Yuqing and Yuan Lucheng, and sent them to Luoyang.

古文：王承业使者至京师，玄宗大喜，拜承业羽林大将军，麾下受官爵者以百数。
现代文：王承业所派的使者到了京师，玄宗十分高兴，就拜王承业为羽林大将军，部下被封官进爵的达一百多人。
English: The envoy sent by Wang Chengye arrived in Beijing, and Xuanzong was very happy. He worshipped Wang Chengye as the Great General Ulin, and more than a hundred of his subordinates were knighted.

古文：征颜杲卿为卫尉卿，朝命未至，常山已陷。
现代文：朝廷又征颜杲卿为卫尉卿。任命还未到达，常山城已被叛军攻陷。
English: The imperial court also appointed Yan Zhenqing as the Lord of the Guards. The appointment had not yet arrived, and Changshan City had already been captured by the rebels.

古文：杲卿至洛阳，禄山数之曰： 汝自范阳户曹，我奏汝为判官，不数年超至太守，何负于汝而反邪？ 
现代文：颜杲卿被押送到洛阳，安禄山责备他说： 你原是范阳户曹，我上奏朝廷任命你为判官，不几年又越级提升为太守，有什么地方负于你，而你竟起兵反对我？ 
English: Yan Xuanqing was escorted to Luoyang, and An Lushan scolded him: "You were Fan Yang Huzo. I petitioned the imperial court to appoint you as a judge, and a few years later I was promoted to the position of governor-general. What do you owe to me that you raised an army against me?

古文：杲卿瞋目骂曰： 汝本营州牧羊羯奴，天子擢汝为三道节度使，恩幸无比，何负于汝而反？
现代文：颜杲卿怒目大骂安禄山说： 你原本是营州的一个牧羊胡奴，天子提升你为三道节度使，恩情深厚，宠信无比，有什么地方负于你，而你却起兵反叛？
English: Yan Xuanqing angrily scolded An Lushan and said: You were originally a sheep herder in Yingzhou. The Son of Heaven elevated you to the position of the three-way ruler. Your kindness is profound and your trust is beyond compare. Is there any place that is beneath you, and yet you rebel?

古文：我世为唐臣，禄位皆唐有，虽为汝所奏，岂从汝反邪！
现代文：我世世代代为唐朝的臣子，利禄官位都是唐朝所给予的，虽然是你上奏朝廷任命的，我怎么能够跟随你反叛呢！
English: I have been a vassal of the Tang Dynasty for generations. I was given the title of Liluo by the Tang Dynasty. Even though you were appointed by the imperial court, how can I follow you and rebel?

古文：我为国讨贼，恨不斩汝，何谓反也！
现代文：我是为国家讨伐叛贼，可恨的是没有杀掉你，怎么能说是反叛呢？
English: I'm fighting for my country against traitors, but I'm sorry I didn't kill you. How can that be called rebellion?

古文：臊羯狗，何不速杀我！ 
现代文：你这个臭胡狗，为何还不快一点杀我！ 
English: You stinking dog, why don't you hurry up and kill me!

古文：禄山大怒，并袁履谦等缚于中桥之柱而剐之。
现代文：安禄山十分恼怒，把颜杲卿与袁履谦捆绑在中桥的桥柱上面，用刀将他们刮死。
English: An Lushan was so angry that he tied Yan Xuanqing and Yuan Lucheng to the pillars of the middle bridge and killed them with a knife.

古文：杲卿、履谦比死，骂不虚口。
现代文：颜杲卿与袁履谦到死还骂不绝口。
English: Yan Xuanqing and Yuan Lucheng continued to curse each other until their deaths.

古文：颜氏一门死于刀锯者三十馀人。
现代文：颜杲卿一家被安禄山杀掉的有三十余人。
English: More than 30 members of Yan Xuanqing's family were killed by Anlu Mountain.

古文：史思明、李立节、蔡希德既克常山，引兵击诸郡之不从者，所过残灭，于是鄴、广平、巨鹿、赵、上谷、博陵、文安、魏、信都等郡复为贼守。
现代文：叛军将领史思明、李立节与蔡希德攻克了常山后，又率兵攻打不投降的州郡，在所经过的地方大肆杀戮，邺郡、广平、巨鹿、赵郡、上谷、博陵、文安、魏郡、信都等郡又相继落入敌手。
English: After the rebel generals Shi Siming, Li Lijie and Cai Xide conquered Changshan, they led their troops to attack the counties that did not surrender, and killed a lot of people in the places they passed. The counties of Zou County, Guangping, Julu, Zhao County, Shanggu, Boling, Wen'an, Wei County and Xindu also fell into the enemy's hands.

古文：饶阳太守卢全诚独不从，思明等围之。
现代文：只有饶阳太守卢全诚不投降，史思明等人就率兵包围了饶阳。
English: Only the governor of Raoyang, Lu Quancheng, did not surrender, and Shi Siming and others led the troops to surround Raoyang.

古文：河间司法李奂将七千人、景城长史李遣其子祀将八千人救之，皆为思明所败。
现代文：河间司法李奂率兵七千、景城长史李派他的儿子李祀率兵八千去援救，都被史思明打败。
English: The Kawama magistrate, Li Ye, led seven thousand soldiers, and the governor of Jingcheng, Shi Li, sent his son, Li Xi, and eight thousand soldiers to rescue them, but both were defeated by Shi Siming.

古文：上命郭子仪罢围云中，还朔方，益发兵进取东京；选良将一人分兵先出井陉，定河北。
现代文：玄宗命令郭子仪撤去包围云中的军队，回军朔方，更增兵准备收复东京。并且另选一名战将带领一部分军队出井陉关，平定河北。
English: Xuanzong ordered Guo Ziyi to withdraw the encircled troops and return to the front, and to increase the number of troops to prepare for the recovery of Tokyo. He also selected another soldier to lead a part of the army out of Jinghuangguan and pacify Hebei.

古文：子仪荐李光弼，癸亥，以光弼为河东节度使，分朔方兵万人与之。
现代文：郭子仪推荐李光弼，癸亥，玄宗任命李光弼为河东节度使，分出朔方兵一万交他指挥。
English: Guo Ziyi recommended Li Guangyao, Zhai Hai, and Xuanzong appointed Li Guangyao as the Hedong Festival envoy, and dispatched ten thousand soldiers from Shuo Fang to him for command.

古文：甲子，加哥舒翰左仆射、同平章事，馀如故。
现代文：甲子，玄宗加封哥舒翰为左仆射、同平章事，原任的官职如旧。
English: His elder son, Emperor Xuanzong, and his younger brother, Emperor Shuhan, were appointed to the posts of Zuoying, Zhao, and Tongping, and their original posts remained the same.

古文：置南阳节度使，以南阳太守鲁炅为之，将岭南、黔中、襄阳子弟五万人屯叶北，以备安禄山。
现代文：玄宗设置南阳节度使，任命南阳太守鲁炅担任此职，率领岭南、黔中、襄阳各地子弟兵五万人驻扎于叶县北面，防备安禄山南侵。
English: Xuanzong set up the Nanyang Festival Envoy, appointed Nanyang Governor Lu Wei to serve in this position, and led 50,000 soldiers from Lingnan, Luzhong and Xiangyang to be stationed in the north of Ye County to guard against the invasion of Anlu Mountain.

古文：炅表薛愿为颍川太守兼防御使，庞坚为副使。
现代文：鲁炅上表，请任命薛愿为颍川太守兼防御史，庞坚为副使。
English: Lu Yao, please appoint Xue Zhen as the governor of Xichuan and the defense historian, and Pang Jian as the deputy envoy.

古文：愿，故太子瑛之妃兄；坚，玉之玄孙也。
现代文：薛愿是原来的太子李瑛妃子的哥哥，庞坚是庞玉的曾孙。
English: Xue Jian is the older brother of the original crown prince Li Yingfei, and Pang Jian is the great-grandson of Pang Yu.

古文：乙丑，安禄山遣其子庆绪寇潼关，哥舒翰击却之。
现代文：乙丑，安禄山派遣他的儿子安庆绪率兵进攻潼关，被哥舒翰击退。
English: Second Ugly, An Lushan sent his son An Qingxu to attack Shaoguan, but was repulsed by his brother Shuhan.

古文：己巳，加颜真卿户部侍郎兼本郡防御使；真卿以李为副。
现代文：己巳，朝廷加封颜真卿为户部侍郎兼本郡防御使，颜真卿又任命李为副防御使。
English: At this time, Yan Zhenqing was appointed by the imperial court as the head of the household and the county's defense envoy, and Yan Zhenqing also appointed Li as the deputy defense envoy.

古文：二月，丙戌，加李光弼魏郡太守、河北道采访史。
现代文：二月丙戌，朝廷加封李光弼为魏郡太守、河北道采访使。
English: In February, the imperial court confirmed Li Guangyao as the governor of Wei County and the chief envoy of Hebei Province.

古文：史思明等围饶阳二十九日，不下，李光弼将蕃、汉步骑万馀人、太原弩手三千人出井陉。
现代文：史思明等叛将已经将饶阳城包围了二十九天，还没有攻下，李光弼率领蕃汉步、骑兵一万余人，再加上太原弩机手三千人出井陉关。
English: Shi Siming and other rebel generals have surrounded Raoyang City for 29 days, and have not yet captured it. Li Guangyao led more than 10,000 soldiers and cavalrymen, plus 3,000 Taiyuan crane operators, out of the mine.

古文：己亥，至常山，常山团练兵三千人杀胡兵，执安思义出降。
现代文：己亥，李光弼兵到常山，常山团练兵三千人杀死反叛的胡兵，抓住安思义出城投降。
English: In Ji Hai, Li Guangya's soldiers went to Changshan, and the Changshan group of three thousand soldiers killed the rebel Hu soldiers, and captured An Siyi to surrender.

古文：光弼谓思义曰： 汝自知当死否？ 
现代文：李光弼对安思义说： 你知道你的罪该死吗？ 
English: Li Guangyao said to An Siyi: Do you know that your crime deserves death?

古文：思义不应。
现代文：安思义不说话。
English: An Siyi did not speak.

古文：光弼曰： 汝久更陈行，视吾此众，可敌思明否？
现代文：李光弼又说： 你久经沙场，看我的这些部队能否打败史思明？
English: Li Guangyao also said: You have been in the battlefield for a long time, see if my troops can defeat Shi Siming?

古文：今为我计当如何？
现代文：如今为我打算，我应该怎么办才好？
English: Now think for me, what should I do?

古文：汝策可取，当不杀汝。 
现代文：如果你的计策可取，我就不杀死你。 
English: If your plan works, I won't kill you.

古文：思义曰： 大夫士马远来疲弊，猝遇大敌，恐未易当；不如移军入城，早为备御，先料胜负，然后出兵。
现代文：安思义说： 您的兵马远道而来，士卒疲劳，猝然与强敌交锋，恐怕难以抵挡，不如率兵入城，早做准备，先为部署，然后再出兵。
English: An Siyi said: Your soldiers and horses have come from far away, the soldiers are tired, and suddenly they are confronted with a strong enemy, I am afraid it is difficult to resist, it is better to lead the soldiers into the city, prepare early, first for deployment, and then send troops.

古文：胡骑虽锐，不能持重，苟不获利，气沮心离，于时乃可图矣。
现代文：叛军虽然精锐，但难以持久，如果一旦失利，就会气丧心离，到那时就可以打败他们。
English: Although the rebels are elite, they are not durable, and if they lose, they will be discouraged, and then they can be defeated.

古文：思明今在饶阳，去此不二百里。
现代文：史思明现在饶阳，距离此地不到二百里路程。
English: Shi Siming is now in Raoyang, less than 200 miles away.

古文：昨暮羽书已去，计其先锋来晨必至，而大军继之，不可不留意也。 
现代文：昨天晚上已向他发出了求援信，估计先锋部队明天早上一定会到达，紧接着后面就是大部队，一定要留意才是。 
English: A letter of request had been sent to him yesterday evening, and it was expected that the vanguard would certainly arrive tomorrow morning, immediately followed by a large force, so it was important to be on the lookout.

古文：光弼悦，释其缚，即移军入城。
现代文：李光弼听后很高兴，就为安思义松了绑，当即移军入城。
English: Li Guangyao was very happy to hear this, so he loosened the tie for An Siyi and immediately moved the army into the city.

古文：史思明闻常山不守，立解饶阳之围；明日未旦，先锋已至，思明等继之，合二万馀骑，直抵城下。
现代文：史思明得知常山失守，立刻解除对饶阳的包围来救常山。次日天未亮，前锋部队已到达常山，史思明等率大军紧随其后，共二万多名骑兵，直逼城下。
English: When Shi Siming learned that Changshan was out of defense, he immediately lifted the siege of Raoyang to save Changshan. The next day, before dawn, the forward troops had reached Changshan, followed by Shi Siming and other large armies, a total of more than 20,000 cavalrymen, right under the city.

古文：光弼遣步卒五千自东门出战，贼守门不退。
现代文：李光弼派步兵五千从东门出击迎战，叛军死命地堵住城门不退。
English: Li Guangyao sent five thousand infantrymen to attack from the east gate to meet the battle, and the rebels desperately blocked the gate and did not retreat.

古文：光弼命五百弩于城上齐发射之，贼稍却；乃出弩手千人分为四队，使其矢发发相继，贼不能当，敛军道北。
现代文：李光弼命五百名弩机手从城头上一齐射击，叛军被迫后撤。然后李光弼又把一千名弩机手分为四队，一队接一队地不停地发射，叛军不能抵挡，收军退于道北。
English: The rebels were forced to retreat after Li Guangya ordered 500 of his soldiers to fire from the top of the city. Li Guangya then divided the 1,000 soldiers into four groups and fired them one after another. The rebels were unable to resist and withdrew to the north of the province.

古文：光弼出兵五千为枪城于道南，夹呼沱水而陈；贼数以骑兵搏战，光弼之兵射之，人马中矢者太半，乃退，小憩以俟步兵。
现代文：李光弼派五千手持矛枪排成方形的队伍出于道南，在呼沱河两岸列阵。叛军多次用骑兵来进攻，都被李光弼的弩机手射退，大半人马被射中，只好停止进攻，退下去休战，以等待步兵。
English: Lee Kuan Yew sent five thousand men armed with spears and guns in a square formation from the south of the province to line up on both sides of the Hulun River. The rebels repeatedly attacked with cavalry, but were shot back by Lee Kuan Yew's gunners. Most of the men and horses were shot, so they had to stop the attack and retreat to a truce to wait for the infantry.

古文：有村民告贼步兵五千自饶阳来，昼夜行百七十里，至九门南逢壁，度憩息。
现代文：这时有村民报告说叛军的五千步兵从饶阳向常山进军，昼夜兼程，行走一百七十里，已到了九门南面的逢壁，估计正在那里休息。
English: At this time, some villagers reported that the rebel army's five thousand infantrymen marched from Raoyang to Changshan, traveling day and night, walking one hundred and seventy miles, and had reached the south side of Jiumen, where they were estimated to be resting.

古文：光弼遣步骑各二千，匿旗鼓，并水潜行，至逢壁，贼方饭，纵兵掩击，杀之无遗。
现代文：李光弼立刻派出步、骑兵各二千，偃旗息鼓，沿呼沱河悄悄地进军，到了逢壁，叛军正在吃饭，官军突然袭击，叛军被全部歼灭。
English: Li Guangyao immediately sent out two thousand infantry and cavalry, waving flags and drums, and quietly marched along the Hulun River. When he reached Fengbei, the rebels were eating, the government army suddenly attacked, and the rebels were all annihilated.

古文：思明闻之，失势，退入九门。
现代文：史思明得知步兵被消灭，形势不妙，遂率兵退入九门。
English: When Shi Siming learned that the infantry had been wiped out and that the situation was not good, he and his soldiers retreated to Jiumen.

古文：时常山九县，七附官军，惟九门、藁城为贼所据。
现代文：当时常山郡九个县，有七个归顺了官军，只有九门与藁城还被叛军占据着。
English: At that time, seven out of nine counties in Changshan County had surrendered to the government army, and only Jiumen and Handan were still occupied by the rebels.

古文：光弼遣裨将张奉璋以兵五百戍石邑，馀皆三百人戍之。
现代文：李光弼派裨将张奉璋率兵五百驻守石邑，其余的县都派三百人守卫。
English: Li Guangya sent Zhang Fengya and five hundred soldiers to guard Shiyi, and the remaining counties sent three hundred guards.

古文：上以吴王祗为灵昌太守、河南都知兵马使。
现代文：玄宗任命吴王李祗为灵昌太守、河南都知兵马使。
English: Xuanzong appointed Wu Wang Lijun as the governor of Lingchang and the envoy to Henan.

古文：贾贲前至雍丘，有众二千。
现代文：贾贲先到了雍丘，有兵二千。
English: Jia Wei arrived at Yongqiu first, with two thousand soldiers.

古文：先是谯郡太守杨万石以郡降安禄山，逼真源令河东张巡使为长史，西迎贼。
现代文：先前谯郡太守杨万石献城投降了安禄山，又逼着让真源县令河东人张巡为他的长史，向西去迎接叛军。
English: Earlier, Yang Wanshi, the former governor of Min County, surrendered the city to Anlu Mountain, and forced Zhang Jun, the governor of Zhenyuan County and a man from the east of the river, to go west to meet the rebels.

古文：巡至真源，帅吏民哭于玄元皇帝庙，起兵讨贼，吏民乐从者数千人；巡选精兵千人西至雍丘，与贾贲合。
现代文：张巡到了真源，率领官吏民众哭于玄元皇帝庙中，然后起兵讨伐叛军，响应他的有数千人，张巡挑选了精兵一千人向西到达雍丘，与贾贲合兵。
English: Zhang Jun went to Zhenyuan, led the officials and people to cry in the temple of Emperor Xuan Yuan, and then raised an army to fight the rebels. Thousands of people responded to him. Zhang Jun selected one thousand elite soldiers to go west to Yongqiu and join Jia Yu.

古文：初，雍丘令令狐潮以县降贼，贼以为将，使东击淮阳救兵于襄邑，破之，俘百馀人，拘于雍丘，将杀之，往见李庭望；淮阳兵遂杀守者，潮弃妻子走，故贾贲得以其间入雍丘。
现代文：起初，雍丘县令令狐潮率县投降了叛军，叛军任命他为军将，让他率兵到襄邑攻打淮阳来的官军，令狐潮战胜，俘虏了一百余人，关在雍丘县城，准备杀掉他们，然后去见叛军大将李庭望。淮阳兵乘机杀掉看守的士兵，令狐潮丢下妻子和儿子逃走，所以贾贲得以趁乱进入雍丘。
English: At first, Yongqiu County ordered Fox Tide to lead the county to surrender to the rebels. The rebels appointed him as a general and asked him to lead the troops to Xiangyue to attack the government troops coming from Huaiyang. Fox Tide defeated and captured more than a hundred people, locked them up in Yongqiu County, prepared to kill them, and then went to see the rebel general Li Tingwang. Huaiyang soldiers took the opportunity to kill the guard soldiers, causing Fox Tide to leave his wife and son to escape, so Jia Wei was able to take advantage of the turmoil to enter Yongqiu.

古文：庚子，潮引贼精兵攻雍丘；贲出战，败死。
现代文：庚子，令狐潮带领叛军精兵来攻打雍丘，贾贲出战，兵败而死。
English: Geng Zi, let the fox tide lead the rebel elite soldiers to attack Yongqiu, Jia Wei went to war, and died in defeat.

古文：张巡力战却贼，因兼领贲众，自称吴王先锋使。
现代文：张巡奋战击退了叛军，因此兼领贾贲的部队，自称为吴王先锋使。
English: Zhang Junfeng repulsed the rebels, so he also led Jia Wei's troops and called himself Wu Wang's vanguard.

古文：三月，乙卯，潮复与贼将李怀仙、杨朝宗、谢元同等四万馀众奄至城下；众惧，莫有固志。
现代文：三月乙卯，令狐潮又与叛军大将李怀仙、杨朝宗、谢元同等率兵四万余人蜂拥来到城下，准备攻城。
English: On the second day of March, more than 40,000 soldiers led by the rebel generals Li Huaixian, Yang Chaozong and Xie Yuan rushed to the city to prepare to attack the city.

古文：巡曰： 贼兵精锐，有轻我心。
现代文：城中的士兵十分害怕，没有固守决心。
English: The soldiers in the city were very scared and did not keep their resolve.

古文：今出其不意击之，彼必惊溃。
现代文：张巡对他们说： 叛军兵强马壮，有轻我之心。我们如果出其不意突然袭击，叛军必定会因惊慌而溃败。
English: Zhang Jun said to them, "The rebel soldiers are strong and have a light heart. If we make a surprise attack, the rebels will surely panic and collapse.

古文：贼势小折，然后城可守也。 
现代文：叛军攻城受挫，我们就可以坚守。 
English: If the rebel attack on the city is thwarted, we will be able to hold out.

古文：乃使千人乘城；自帅千人，分数队，开门突出。
现代文：于是就派一千人登上城墙守卫，自己另率一千人，分为数小队，打开城门，突然冲出。
English: So he set a thousand men on the wall to guard it, and he himself with a thousand more, divided into companies, opened the gates and went out in haste.

古文：巡身先士卒，直冲贼陈，人马辟易，贼遂退。
现代文：张巡身先士卒，直冲叛军阵中，叛军人马惊慌躲避，然后退去。
English: Zhang Jun, the first soldier, charged straight into the rebel army, and the rebel soldiers panicked and hid, and then retreated.

古文：明日，复进攻城，设百砲环城，楼堞皆尽；巡于城上立木栅以拒之。
现代文：第二天，叛军又集兵来攻城，环城架设了石炮，向城头发射，城楼和矮墙都被摧毁。张巡又于城上架立木栅抵御叛军的进攻。
English: The next day, the rebels gathered more soldiers to attack the city. They set up stone cannons around the city and fired them at the city. The city tower and low wall were destroyed. Zhang Jun also erected a wooden fence on the city to resist the rebel attack.

古文：贼蚁附而登，巡束蒿灌脂，焚而投之，贼不得上。
现代文：叛军蜂拥登城，张巡教士兵扎起蒿草灌入油脂，然后点火投向敌人，使叛军不能登城。
English: The rebels swarmed into the city, and Zhang's patrol soldiers dug up rushes, poured grease into them, and then set fire to the enemy, so that the rebels could not enter the city.

古文：时同贼隙，出兵击之，或夜縋斫营。积六十馀日，大小三百馀战，带甲而食，裹疮复战，贼遂败走。
现代文：又乘叛军出漏洞，出兵袭击，或趁夜晚，从城头用绳子把士兵放下，夜袭敌营，共守城六十余天，大小三百余战，张巡连吃饭时也不解甲胄，负伤后还继续作战。叛军不能攻克，只好退兵。
English: He also took advantage of the rebels to find loopholes and send out troops to attack, or took advantage of the night to lower the soldiers with a rope from the top of the city, attacked the enemy camp at night, defended the city for more than 60 days, and fought more than 300 battles. Zhang Junlian did not remove his armor when eating, and continued to fight after being injured. The rebels could not be defeated, so they had to retreat.

古文：巡乘胜追之，获胡兵二千人而还，军声大振。
现代文：张巡又乘胜追击，俘虏胡兵二千多人而回，军势大振。
English: Zhang Jun also took advantage of the victory to pursue, captured more than two thousand Hu soldiers and returned, and the army was greatly shaken.

古文：初，户部尚书安思顺知禄山反谋，因入朝奏之。
现代文：起初，户部尚书安思顺得知安禄山要谋反，借入朝之机向玄宗奏报了此事。
English: At first, the head of the household, Shangshu An Shishun, learned that An Lushan was planning to rebel, and borrowed the opportunity to report the matter to Xuanzong.

古文：及禄山反，上以思顺先奏，不之罪也。
现代文：安禄山起兵反叛后，玄宗因为安思顺先已奏报，所以不加问罪。
English: After An Lushan rebelled, Xuanzong was not charged because An Shishun had already reported it.

古文：哥舒翰素与之有隙，使人诈为禄山遗思顺书，于关门擒之以献，且数思顺七罪，请诛之。
现代文：哥舒翰素来与安思顺有矛盾，于是就故意伪造了一封安禄山给安思顺的信，让人假装送信，然后在潼关城门口抓住此人，献给朝廷，而且列举了安思顺的七条罪状，请求玄宗杀了他。
English: Goshukhan had always been at odds with An Shishun, so he deliberately forged a letter from An Lushan to An Shishun, had someone pretend to send it, and then seized this person at the gate of Shaoguan, dedicated it to the imperial court, and enumerated seven crimes of An Shishun and asked Xuanzong to kill him.

古文：丙辰，思顺及弟太仆卿元贞皆坐死，家属徙岭外。
现代文：丙辰，安思顺和他的弟弟太仆卿安元贞都因此事被处死。家人被流放到岭南。
English: Bing Chen, An Sishun and his younger brother, the eunuch An Yuanzhen, were all executed for this, and their families were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：杨国忠不能救，由是始畏翰。
现代文：杨国忠无法救他们，因此开始畏惧哥舒翰。
English: Unable to save them, Yang Guozhong began to fear his brother Shu Han.

古文：郭子仪至朔方，益选精兵，戊午，进军于代。
现代文：郭子仪回到朔方，增加了精兵强将。戊午，进军于伐州。
English: Guo Ziyi returned to the Shuo side and increased the number of elite soldiers. In the afternoon, he marched into Huazhou.

古文：戊辰，吴王祗击谢元同，走之，拜陈留太守、河南节度使。
现代文：戊辰，吴王李祗击退了叛军将领谢元同，玄宗任命他为陈留太守、河南节度使。
English: Wu King Lihong defeated the rebel general Xie Yuantong in Wucheng, and Emperor Xuanzong appointed him as Chenliu Taizhou and Henan Festival envoy.

古文：壬午，以河东节度使李光弼为范阳长史、河北节度使，加颜真卿河北采访使。
现代文：壬午，玄宗任命河东节度使李光弼为范阳长史、河北节度使。又加封颜真卿为河北采访使。
English: In Ren'ao, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Li Guangyao as Fan Yang Changshi, Hebei Festival Envoy, and Yan Zhenqing as Hebei Interview Envoy.

古文：真卿以张澹为支使。
现代文：颜真卿遂任命张澹为支使。
English: Yan Zhenqing then appointed Zhang Ye as his envoy.

古文：先是清河客李萼，年二十馀，为郡人乞师于真卿曰： 公首唱大义，河北诸郡恃公以为长城。
现代文：当初，有个清河人李萼，二十多岁，代表清河郡人来向颜真卿借兵，对颜真卿说： 您大义凛然，首先号召大家来反抗叛军，河北地区的郡县都把您看作是国家的长城。
English: At the beginning, there was Li Cale, a Qinghe man in his twenties, who came to borrow soldiers from Yan Zhenqing on behalf of the people of Qinghe County. He said to Yan Zhenqing: You are a man of great integrity. First of all, you called on everyone to resist the rebels. The counties in Hebei all regard you as the Great Wall of the country.

古文：今清河，公之西邻，国家平日聚江、淮、河南钱帛于彼以赡北军，谓之 天下北库 ；今有布三百馀万匹，帛八十馀万匹，钱三十馀万缗，粮三十馀万斛。
现代文：现在清河是您西面的邻郡，国家平常把江、淮以及河南地区的金钱布帛都积聚于那里以供赡北方的军队，被人们称为 天下北仓库 。现在那里有布三百余万匹，帛八十余万匹，钱三十余万缗，粮三十余万斛。
English: Now Qinghe is your neighboring county to the west. The country usually accumulates the money cloth of the Jiangsu, Huai and Henan regions there to support the northern army. It is known as the northern warehouse. Now there are more than three million pieces of cloth, more than eighty million bags, more than three million bags of money, and more than three million bags of grain.

古文：昔讨默啜，甲兵皆贮清河库，今有五十馀万事；户七万，口十馀万。
现代文：过去征讨突厥默啜可汗时，把兵器都贮藏在清河郡的武库中，现在还有五十余万件。清河郡有户数七万，人口十余万。
English: In the past, when conquering the Turkic mute khan, all the weapons were stored in the arsenal of Qinghe County, and now there are more than half a million pieces. Qinghe County has 70,000 households and a population of more than 100,000.

古文：窃计财足以三平原之富，兵足以倍平原之强。
现代文：我计算它的财物足可以抵得上三个平原郡，兵马足可以抵得上两个平原郡。
English: I calculate that its wealth is equal to that of three plains counties, and its manpower is equal to that of two plains counties.

古文：公诚资以士卒，抚而有之，以二郡为腹心，则馀郡如四支，无不随所使矣。 
现代文：您如果真能够借兵给清河郡，并控制这一地区，以平原、清河二郡作为核心力量，那么周围的其他州郡就会如人体的四肢一样，听从您的指挥。 
English: If you can really lend soldiers to Qinghe County and control this area, with the plain and Qinghe County as the core force, then the other surrounding counties will follow your command like the limbs of the human body.

古文：真卿曰： 平原兵新集，尚未训练，自保恐不足，何暇及邻！
现代文：颜真卿说： 平原郡的兵是刚则召集在一起的，没有经过任何训练，自保还觉得兵力不够，那里顾得上邻郡呢！
English: Yan Zhenqing said: The soldiers of Pingyuan County were just gathered together, without any training, self-protection still felt that the troops were not enough, where should the neighboring counties be concerned!

古文：虽然，借若诺子之请，则将何为乎？ 
现代文：但是，我如果答应了您的请求，那将会怎么样呢？ 
English: But what would happen if I agreed to your request?

古文：萼曰： 清河遣仆衔命于公者，非力不足而借公之师以尝寇也，亦欲观大贤之明义耳。
现代文：李萼说： 清河郡派我来向您借兵，并不是兵力不足而借您的兵去与叛军血战，只是想借此看一下您这位贤明之士的雅量。
English: Li Cale said: Qinghe County sent me to borrow soldiers from you, not because of a shortage of troops, but to borrow your soldiers to fight a bloody battle with the rebels. I just wanted to take this opportunity to see the elegance of you, a wise man.

古文：今仰瞻高意，未有决辞定色，仆何敢遽言所为哉！ 
现代文：现在看您的意思还没有下定决心，我怎么敢鲁莽地说出下一步的计划呢！ 
English: Now I see what you mean, I haven't made up my mind yet, how dare I say what I'm going to do next!

古文：真卿奇之，欲与之兵。
现代文：颜真卿听后很惊奇，就想借兵与他。
English: Yan Zhenqing was surprised to hear this and wanted to borrow soldiers from him.

古文：众以为萼年少轻虏，徒分兵力，必无所成，真卿不得已辞之。
现代文：但其他的人都认为李萼年轻气盛，没有看到叛军力量的强大，借兵只能分散兵力，将会一事无成，颜真卿只好拒绝。
English: But other people thought that Li Cale was young and full of vigor, and did not see the strong power of the rebel army. The borrowed soldiers could only disperse the troops, and nothing would be accomplished. Yan Zhenqing had no choice but to refuse.

古文：萼就馆，复为书说真卿，以为： 清河去逆效顺，奉粟帛器械以资军，公乃不纳而疑之。
现代文：李萼住到馆舍后，又给颜真卿写信，指出： 清河郡脱离叛军，归顺朝廷，奉献粮食、布帛和武器帮助官军，您不但拒绝接受，而且还心存疑问。
English: After Li Caly lived in the mansion, he also wrote to Yan Zhenqing, pointing out: Qinghe County broke away from the rebel army, surrendered to the imperial court, and donated grain, cloth and weapons to help the official army. You not only refused to accept, but also had doubts.

古文：仆回辕之后，清河不能孤立，必有所系托，将为公西面之强敌，公能无悔乎？ 
现代文：我回去复命之后，清河郡不能孤立存在，必定要有所依靠，如果投向叛军，就会成为您西面的强敌，到那时您能不后悔吗？ 
English: After I go back to answer the call, Qinghe County cannot exist in isolation, it must have something to rely on. If you join the rebels, it will become your strong enemy in the west. At that time, won't you regret it?

古文：真卿大惊，遽诣其馆，以兵六千借之；送至境，执手别。
现代文：颜真卿大为震惊，立刻到馆舍去见李萼，答应借兵六千，一直送到边境，握手而别。
English: Yan Zhenqing was very shocked. He immediately went to the embassy to meet Li Cale, promised to borrow six thousand soldiers, sent them all the way to the border, shook hands and left.

古文：真卿问曰： 兵已行矣，可以言子之所为乎？ 
现代文：这时颜真卿又问道： 所借给的兵已经出发，你可以告诉我你的下一步计划吗？ 
English: At this time, Yan Zhenqing also asked: The borrowed soldiers have already set off, can you tell me your next plan?

古文：萼曰： 闻朝廷遣程千里将精兵十万出崞口讨贼，贼据险拒之，不得前。
现代文：李萼说： 听说朝廷派程千里率领精兵十万出崞口讨伐叛军，被占据险要地形的叛军阻击，不能前进。
English: Li Cale said: I heard that the imperial court dispatched thousands of miles to lead 100,000 elite soldiers out of the city to fight the rebels, and was blocked by the rebels occupying the critical terrain, and could not advance.

古文：今当引兵先击魏郡，执禄山所署太守袁之泰，纳旧太守司马垂，使为西南主人；分兵开崞口，出千里之师，因讨汲、鄴以北至于幽陵郡县之未下者；平原、清河帅诸同盟，合兵十万，南临孟津，分兵循河，据守要害，制其北走之路。
现代文：现在应当先率兵攻打魏郡，抓住安禄山所任命的太守袁知泰，恢复原来的太守司马垂的职位，让他做西南的主将，分出一部分兵力打开崞口，让程千里的军队出来，共同讨伐汲郡、邺郡以北一直到幽陵被叛军占领的郡县。平原与清河二郡率领其他的同盟郡兵，合兵十万，向南进临孟津，然后分兵沿着黄河占领战略要地，控制叛军向北逃跑的退路。
English: Now it is time to lead the troops to attack Wei County, seize the eunuch Yuan Zhitai appointed by An Lushan, restore the original position of the eunuch Simatli, let him be the commander of the southwest, allocate a part of the troops to open the gate, let the army of Cheng Qili come out, and jointly fight the counties occupied by the rebels from the north of Kui County and Shixian County to Yuling. The plains and the two counties of Qinghe led the other allied county soldiers, together with 100,000 soldiers, to the south to enter Mengjin, and then the detachment of soldiers along the Yellow River to occupy the strategic location and control the

古文：计官军东讨者不下二十万，河南义兵西向者亦不减十万。
现代文：估计官军东征的军队不少于二十万，河南地区忠于朝廷的西征军队不少于十万。
English: It is estimated that the army of the eastward expedition of the government army is not less than 200,000, and the westward expedition army loyal to the imperial court in Henan Province is not less than 100,000.

古文：公但当表朝廷坚壁勿战，不过月馀，贼必有内溃相图之变矣。 
现代文：您只要上表朝廷请求东征的军队固守，不要轻易出战。这样用不了一个多月，叛军必然会发生内乱。 颜真卿说： 你说的好！ 
English: All you have to do is to petition the Imperial Court to ask the troops of the Eastern Expedition to hold fast and not to go to war so easily. If this continues for more than a month, there will inevitably be civil unrest among the rebels. Yan Zhenqing said: What you said is good!

古文：真卿曰 善！ 命录事参军李择交及平原令范冬馥将其兵，会清河兵四千及博平兵千人军于堂邑西南。
现代文：于是就命令录事参军李择交与平原县令范冬馥率领这些军队，会同清河兵四千及博平兵一千，驻扎在堂邑县西南。
English: He then ordered Li Zhengjia, who had joined the army, and Fan Dongyu, the commander of Pingyuan County, to lead these troops, together with four thousand Qinghe soldiers and one thousand Bo Ping soldiers, stationed in the southwest of Dongyi County.

古文：袁知泰遣其将白嗣恭等将二万馀人来逆战，三郡兵力战尽日，魏兵大败，斩首万馀级，捕虏千馀人，得马千匹，军资甚众，知泰奔汲郡。
现代文：袁知泰派部将白嗣恭等率兵二万余人来迎战，三郡兵与魏郡兵血战一天，魏郡兵大败，被杀一万多人，被俘一千多人，缴获战马一千匹，还有许多其他的军用物资。
English: Yuan Zhitai sent Baizhigong and more than 20,000 soldiers to fight. The soldiers of the three counties fought a bloody battle with the soldiers of Wei County for one day. The soldiers of Wei County were defeated, more than 10,000 people were killed, more than 1,000 people were captured, a thousand horses were captured, and there were many other military supplies.

古文：遂克魏郡，军声大振。
现代文：袁知泰逃往汲郡，于是官军收复了魏郡，军势大振。
English: Yuan Zhitai fled to Kui County, whereupon the government army recaptured Wei County, and the army was greatly strengthened.

古文：时北海太守贺兰进明亦起兵，真卿以书召之并力，进明将步骑五千渡河，真卿陈兵逆之，相揖，哭于马上，哀动行伍。
现代文：这时北海太守贺兰进明也起兵讨伐叛军，颜真卿就写信召他来合兵行动，贺兰进明遂率领步、骑兵五千渡过黄河，颜真卿率兵去迎接，二人互相作揖行礼，在马上痛哭，以至感动了队伍中的士兵。
English: At this time, the governor of the North Sea, Horan Jinming, also raised an army to fight against the rebels. Yan Zhenqing wrote to him and called him to join the army. Horan Jinming led 5,000 cavalry across the Yellow River, and Yan Zhenqing led the soldiers to greet him. The two men bowed to each other and cried bitterly at the same time, which moved the soldiers in the line.

古文：进明屯平原城南，休养士马，真卿每事咨之，由是军权稍移于进明矣，真卿不以为嫌。
现代文：贺兰进明率兵驻扎在平原城南，休养兵马，颜真卿遇到问题都与他商量，因此军权逐渐归于贺兰进明，而颜真卿却不以为疑。
English: He Lan Jinming and his soldiers were stationed in the plain south of the city, resting and recuperating. Yan Zhenqing consulted with him whenever he encountered problems. As a result, military power gradually fell to He Lan Jinming, but Yan Zhenqing did not suspect.

古文：真卿以堂邑之功让进明，进明奏其状，取舍任意。
现代文：颜真卿把堂邑之战的功劳让给贺兰进明，于是贺兰进明就向朝廷上奏表功，任意增减事实。
English: Yan Zhenqing gave the credit for the victory in the Battle of Dongyi to Helan Jinming, so Helan Jinming presented the Imperial Court with a certificate of merit, arbitrarily adding and subtracting facts.

古文：敕加进明河北招讨使，择交、冬馥微进资级，清河、博平有功者皆不录。
现代文：玄宗就下敕书加封贺兰进明为河北招讨使，李择交与范冬馥略微有所升迁，而清河与博平的有功将士都没有得到奖赏。
English: Xuanzong added He Lan Jinming to the Hebei Recruiting Envoy, Li Zengjia and Fan Dongyao were slightly promoted, and the heroes in Qinghe and Boping were not rewarded.

古文：进明攻信都郡，久之，不克；录事参军长安第五琦劝进明厚以金帛募勇士，遂克之。
现代文：贺兰进明又率兵进攻信都郡，很久不能攻克，录事参军长安人第五琦劝贺兰进明用重金招募敢死之士，于是攻克了信都。
English: Helan Jinming again led his troops to attack Xindu County, but they were unable to conquer it for a long time. On the fifth day, the Chang'an people, who had joined the army, advised Helan Jinming to use heavy money to recruit death-defying soldiers, and then conquered Xindu.

古文：李光弼与史思明相守四十馀日，思明绝常山粮道。
现代文：李光弼与史思明相持了四十余天，史思明断绝了向常山运粮的道路。
English: Li Guangyao and Shi Siming held each other for more than forty days, and Shi Siming cut off the road for transporting grain to Changshan.

古文：城中乏草，马食荐籍。
现代文：常山城中饲草已尽，战马只好吃草垫子。
English: The forage grass in the city of Changshan was exhausted, so the horses had to eat grass mats.

古文：光弼以车五百乘之石邑取草，将车者皆衣甲，弩手千人卫之，为方陈而行，贼不能夺。
现代文：李光弼派车五百辆到石邑去取草，赶车的人都穿着甲胄，并派弩机手一千人护卫，结成方阵而行，叛军无法抢夺。
English: Li Guangyao sent five hundred cars to Shiyou to collect grass. The people who drove the cars were wearing armor, and he sent a thousand guards to form a phalanx. The rebels could not snatch them.

古文：蔡希德引兵攻石邑，张奉璋拒却之。
现代文：叛将蔡希德率兵攻打石邑，被张奉璋击退。
English: The rebel general Cai Xide led an army to attack Shiyi and was repulsed by Zhang Bongyu.

古文：光弼遣使告急于郭子仪，子仪引兵自井陉出，夏，四月，壬辰，至常山，与光弼合，蕃、汉步骑共十馀万。
现代文：李光弼派人向郭子仪求救，郭子仪率兵出井陉关，夏季，四月壬辰，到了常山，与李光弼合兵，共有蕃汉步、骑兵十余万。
English: Li Guangyao sent a man to Guo Ziyi for help. Guo Ziyi led his troops out of Jing'an Pass. In the summer, in April, he went to Changshan and joined forces with Li Guangyao. They had a total of more than 100,000 soldiers and cavalry.

古文：甲午，子仪、光弼与史思明等战于九门城南，思明大败。
现代文：甲午，郭子仪、李光弼与史思明交战于九门县城南，史思明被打得大败。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Guo Ziyi, Li Guangyao and Shi Siming fought in the south of Jiumen County, and Shi Siming was defeated.

古文：中郎将浑瑊射李立节，杀之。
现代文：中郎将浑射死了叛将李立节。
English: The middle brother shot dead the traitor Li Lijie.

古文：瑊，释之之子也。
现代文：浑是浑释之的儿子。
English: Hun is the son of Hunjong.

古文：思明收馀众奔赵郡，蔡希德奔钜鹿。
现代文：史思明收罗残兵逃奔赵郡，蔡希德逃奔巨鹿。
English: Shi Siming collected the remnants and fled to Zhao County, Cai Xide fled to the Deer.

古文：思明自赵郡如博陵，时博陵已降官军，思明尽杀郡官。
现代文：史思明从赵郡又逃到博陵，当时博陵已经归顺了官军，史思明就把郡官全部杀死。
English: Shi Siming fled from Zhao County to Boling again. At that time, Boling had already surrendered to the government army, and Shi Siming killed all the county officials.

古文：河朔之民苦贼残暴，所在屯结，多至二万人，少者万人，各为营以拒贼；及郭、李军至，争出自效。
现代文：河朔地区的民众不堪忍受叛军的残暴行为，纷纷起兵反抗，各郡县都有抵抗的军队聚结，多的达二万人，少的也有一万人，各自与叛军战斗。郭子仪与李光弼的大军一到，这些军队都自动来助战。
English: Unable to tolerate the rebels' brutality, the people of the Hexuo region rose up against the rebels one after another. There were resistance armies in every county and county, with as many as twenty thousand and as few as ten thousand fighting against the rebels. As soon as Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao's army arrived, these armies all volunteered to help in the battle.

古文：庚子，攻赵郡；一日，城降。
现代文：庚子，进攻赵郡，打了一天，全城投降。
English: Geng Zi attacked Zhao County, fought for a day, and the whole city surrendered.

古文：士卒多虏掠，光弼坐城门，收所获，悉归之，民大悦。
现代文：入城的官军士卒大肆抢掠，李光弼坐在城门上，收缴了所有被抢掠的物品，全部归还了城民，民众十分高兴。
English: The officers and men who entered the city looted extensively. Li Guangyao sat on the city gate, collected all the looted items, and returned everything to the citizens. The people were very happy.

古文：子仪生擒四千人，皆舍之，斩禄山太守郭献璆。
现代文：郭子仪俘虏了四千余人，都释放了他们，杀了安禄山所任命的太守郭献。
English: Guo Ziyi captured more than four thousand people, released them all, and killed Guo Ruochen, the grand marshal appointed by An Lushan.

古文：光弼进围博陵，十日，不拔，引兵还恒阳就食。
现代文：李光弼又率兵包围了博陵，攻了十天没有攻克，于是就退兵回恒阳补充粮草。
English: Li Guangyao and his soldiers besieged Boling again, but failed to conquer it for ten days, so he withdrew back to Hengyang to replenish grain and grass.

古文：杨国忠问士之可为将者于左拾遗博平张镐及萧昕，镐、昕荐左赞善大夫永寿来瑱。丙午，以瑱为颍川太守。
现代文：杨国忠问左拾遗博平人张镐与萧昕，官吏中谁可以为将率兵讨叛，张镐与萧昕就推荐了左赞善大夫永寿人来，丙午，朝廷任命来为颍川太守。
English: Yang Guozhong asked Zhang Xuan and Xiao Yao, who were left-leaning Bo-Ping people, who among the officials could lead the soldiers to rebel. Zhang Xuan and Xiao Yao recommended Zuo Zanshen Doctor Yong Shouren, and in the afternoon, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Lu River.

古文：贼屡攻之，瑱前后破贼甚众，加本郡防御使，人谓之 来嚼铁 。
现代文：叛军多次来攻城，来前后击退甚多，于是加封为本郡防御使，人们称他为 来嚼铁 。
English: Rebels attacked the city many times, and many were repulsed back and forth, so Gaofen was appointed as the county's defense envoy. People called him the Iron Chew.

古文：安禄山使平卢节度使吕知诲诱安东副大都护马灵察，杀之。
现代文：安禄山让部将平卢节度使吕知诲诱杀了安东副大都护马灵。
English: An Lushan allowed the commander Pinglu Jiedu to induce Lu Zhiya to kill the vice-governor of Andong, Ma Ling.

古文：平卢游弈使武陟刘客奴、先锋使董秦及安东将王玄志同谋讨诛知诲，遣使逾海与颜真卿相闻，请取范阳以自效。
现代文：平卢游弈使武陟人刘客奴、先锋使董秦与安东将领王玄志合谋杀了吕知诲，并派使者通过海路去告知平原太守颜真卿，主动请求攻取范阳以效力。
English: The game of Pinglu Yu caused the warrior Liu Keknu and the pioneer Dong Qin to murder Lu Chihai together with the Anton general Wang Xuanzhi, and sent an envoy by sea to inform the Plains Tai Shou Yan Zhenqing, and actively requested to capture Fan Yang.

古文：真卿遣判官贾载赍粮及战士衣助之。
现代文：颜真卿派判官贾载运送了一批粮食和士卒所穿的衣服去助战。
English: Yan Zhenqing sent the judge Jia Zha to deliver a batch of grain and the clothes worn by the soldiers to help the war.

古文：真卿时惟一子颇，才十馀岁，使诣客奴为质。
现代文：颜真卿只有一个儿子名叫颜颇，当时才十多岁，颜真卿就把他送给刘客奴作为人质。
English: Yan Zhenqing had only one son named Yan Po, who was just over ten years old at the time, and Yan Zhenqing gave him to Liu Hakka as a hostage.

古文：朝廷闻之，以客奴为平卢节度使，赐名正臣；玄志为安东副大都护，董秦为平卢兵马使。
现代文：朝廷得知此事后，就任命刘客奴为平卢节度使，赐名正臣，任命王玄志为安东副大都护，董秦为平卢兵马使。
English: After learning of the matter, the imperial court appointed Liu Ketu as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty to Pinglu and gave him the title of senior minister, appointed Wang Xuanzhi as the deputy governor of Andong, and Dong Qin as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty to Pinglu.

古文：南阳节度使鲁炅立栅于滍水之南，安禄山将武令珣、毕思琛攻之。
现代文：南阳节度使鲁炅于水南岸架设木栅，安禄山的部将武令与毕思琛率兵来攻。
English: Nanyang Jiedu ordered Lu Wei to erect a wooden fence on the south bank of the water, and the commander of Anlu Mountain, Wu Ling and Bi Siyu, led an army to attack.

