古文：吉翰、刘道产、杜骥、申恬
现代文：吉翰，字休文，冯翊池阳人。
English: Jihan, the characters of Huwen, Fengchongchi Yangren.

古文：吉翰，字休文，冯翊池阳人也。初为龙骧将军道怜参军，随府转征虏左军参军，员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：始任龙骧将军道怜的参军，随即转任征虏左军参军、员外散骑侍郎。
English: He first joined the army as a general of Longjing, and then transferred to the army of the Left Army, and became a non-commissioned officer.

古文：随道怜北征广固，赐爵建城县五等男。
现代文：随道怜北征广固，赐封爵为建成县五等男。
English: Along the way, he pitied the Northern Expedition of Guanggu, and was given a knighthood as the fifth-ranking man in Jiancheng County.

古文：转道怜骠骑中兵参军，从事中郎。
现代文：转任道怜骠骑中兵参军、从事中郎。
English: He was transferred to join the army as a middle-ranked cavalryman of the Doreishan cavalry and became a middle-ranked soldier.

古文：为将佐十余年，清谨刚正，甚为高祖所知赏。
现代文：吉翰任将佐十几年，清廉严谨，刚正不阿，很为高祖知遇赏识。
English: Jihan has served as a general for more than ten years. He is clean, rigorous, and upright. He is well known and appreciated by Gao Zu.

古文：永初三年，转道怜太尉司马。
现代文：永初三年，转任道怜太尉司马。
English: In the third year of the Yongchu era, he was transferred to the post of Daorei Lieutenant Sima.

古文：太祖元嘉元年，出督梁、南秦二州诸军事、龙骧将军、西戎校尉、梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：太祖元嘉元年出朝督梁、南秦两州的军事，任龙骧将军、西戎校尉、梁和南秦两州的刺史。
English: Grandfather Yuan Jia was born in the first year of the dynasty as the military governor of Liang and the two states of Southern Qin, and served as the general of Longyu, the lieutenant of Xirong, and the historian of Liang and the two states of Southern Qin.

古文：三年，仇池氐杨兴平遣使归顺，并兒弟为质，翰遣始平太守庞咨据武兴。
现代文：元嘉三年，仇池氐族杨兴平派使者来表达归顺之意，并且愿意让儿子、弟弟作人质。吉翰派始平太守庞咨据守武兴。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, Yang Xingping of the Quchi Yi tribe sent an envoy to express his willingness to surrender, and was willing to let his son and younger brother be held hostage. Jihan sent Shi Pingtao to guard Pang Zi to guard Wu Xing.

古文：仇池大帅杨玄遣弟难当率众拒咨，又遣将强鹿皮向白水。
现代文：仇池的大帅杨玄派遣他的弟弟杨难当率军抵抗庞咨，又派将领强鹿皮去白水。
English: Yang Xuan, the general of the enemy pond, sent his brother Yang Nantang to lead the army to resist Pang Zi, and also sent the general Qiang Yuxi to Bai Shui.

古文：咨击破，难当等并退走。
现代文：庞打败了难当，难当退走了。
English: Pang defeated Hardang, and Hardang retreated.

古文：其年，徙督益、宁二州、梁州之巴西、梓潼、宕渠、南汉中、秦州之安固、怀宁六郡诸军事、益州刺史，将军如故。在益州著美绩，甚得方伯之体，论者称之。
现代文：这年吉翰被调到益、宁两州。他在益州留下了美好的政绩，十分称职，时论都为此称赞他。元嘉六年吉翰因年老多病被召回内地，任彭诚王刘义康的司徒司马，加辅国将军。
English: This year, Jihan was transferred to the two prefectures of Yek and Ning. He left behind a good political record in Yek, and was very competent, which was praised by historians. In the sixth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Jihan was recalled to the mainland due to old age and illness, and served as the King of Pengcheng, Liu Yikang's Stusma, and the general of Gafu Province.

古文：六年，以老疾征还，除彭城王义康司徒司马，加辅国将军。时太祖经略河南，以翰为持节、监司、雍、并三州诸军事、司州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：当时太祖经略河南，让吉翰任持节、监察司、雍、并三州的军事，司州刺史、将军不变。
English: At that time, the great-great-grandfather ruled Henan, and allowed Jihan to be appointed as the military commander of Zhijie, the supervision department, Yong, and the three states, as well as the secretary of the state and the general.

古文：会前锋诸军到彦之等败退，明年，复为司徒司马，将军如故。
现代文：恰逢前锋诸军到彦之等失败退却，次年吉翰又任司徒司马，将军不变。
English: It coincided with the failed retreat of the vanguard troops such as Zuihiko, and the following year, Jihan was appointed as Suma, the general remained unchanged.

古文：其年，又假节、监徐、兗二州、豫州之梁郡诸军事、徐州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：这一年又假节、监察徐兖两州及豫州的梁郡诸军事、徐州刺史，将军不变。
English: This year is also a holiday, and the inspectors of the two states of Xuhui and Liang County of Yuzhou are military, and the history of Xuzhou is engraved, and the generals remain unchanged.

古文：时有死罪囚，典签意欲活之，因翰入关赍呈其事。
现代文：当时有一犯死罪的囚犯，典签想救他一命，去八关斋向吉翰求情。
English: At that time, there was a prisoner who had committed a capital crime, and the warden wanted to save his life, so he went to Hachikanzai to plead with Jihan.

古文：翰省讫，语 今且去，明可便呈 。
现代文：吉翰看完呈文后，告诉典签说： 今天暂且回去，明天可再来报告此事。 
English: After reading the submission, Jihan told the notary: Let's go back today for the time being. You can come back tomorrow to report the matter.

古文：明旦，典签不敢复入，呼之乃来，取昨所呈事视讫，谓之曰： 卿意当欲宥此囚死命。昨于斋坐见其事，亦有心活之。
现代文：第二天典签不敢再进去，吉翰喊了几次才进去。吉翰取过头一天的呈文看毕，对典签说： 你的意思该是要宽宥这个死囚，昨天我看到关于这事的呈文，心里也想救他不死。
English: The next day, the notary did not dare to re-enter, and Gihon had to shout several times before he could get in. Gihon took the first day's submission, read it, and said to the notary: You must mean to pardon this death row inmate. Yesterday, I saw the submission on this matter, and in my heart, I also wanted to save him from dying.

古文：但此囚罪重，不可全贷，既欲加恩，卿便当代任其罪。 
现代文：但他罪情严重，不能全赦免。既然你要施恩于他，你可以替他伏罪！ 
English: But his crime is serious and cannot be completely pardoned. Since you want to be kind to him, you can lie in wait for him!

古文：因命左右收典签付狱杀之，原此囚生命。
现代文：就命令左右拿下典签投进监狱杀了，也原宥了那个囚犯的死罪。
English: He was ordered to take down the signature on the left and right and throw it into the prison to kill, and he also pardoned the prisoner's capital crime.

古文：从之。二十一年，迁扬烈将军、广州刺史。
现代文：吉翰的刑法治理就是这样，所以手下的人全都十分害怕、信服他，不敢犯禁令。次年吉翰死于任上，时年六十岁。
English: This was the way in which he administered criminal law, and all his subordinates were so afraid and convinced of him that they did not dare to violate the injunction. The following year, he died in office, at the age of sixty.

古文：二十七年，坐贪纵过度，自杖治中荀齐文垂死，乘舆出城行，与阿尼同载，为有司所纠。值赦，明年散征。又以赦后余赃，收下廷尉，被宥病卒。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为征虏将军，持节、监、刺史不变。
English: The imperial court posthumously presented him as a conscript general, and his record of imprisonment, imprisonment, and assassination remains unchanged.

古文：杜骥，字度世，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：杜骥，字度世，京兆杜陵人。
English: Dujuan, the character of the world, the Jingzha Durying people.

古文：高祖预，晋征南将军。
现代文：高祖杜预，晋征南将军。
English: Gao Zu Du Yuan was a general of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：曾祖耽，避难河西，因仕张氏。
现代文：曾祖杜耽，因避难到河西，任职于张氏。
English: Zengzu Du Tan took refuge in Hexi, so he worked as an official for the former Liang Zhang clan.

古文：苻坚平凉州，父祖始还关中。
现代文：苻坚攻占凉州时，他的祖父、父亲才从河西回到关中。
English: Grandfather and father returned to Guanzhong only after Yu Jian had pacified Liangzhou.

古文：兄坦，颇涉史传。
现代文：杜骥的哥哥杜坦对史传很有研究。
English: Cuckoo's brother, Dutan, is a keen student of historical legends.

古文：高祖征长安，席卷随从南还。
现代文：高祖征战长安时，杜坦率领手下人全部到了南方。
English: When Gaozhu was conquering Chang'an, Du Tan led all his subordinates to the south.

古文：太祖元嘉中，任遇甚厚，历后军将军，龙骧将军，青、冀二州刺史，南平王铄右将军司马。
现代文：太祖元嘉年间，皇帝对坦非常器重，历任后军将军，龙骧将军，青冀两州刺史，南平王刘铄的右将军司马。
English: During the time of the great-great-grandfather Yuan Jia, the emperor attached great importance to Tang. Successive generals of the rear army, General Long Jiao, the Qinghai and Hebei states, and the right general of the Nanping King Liu Bei, Sima.

古文：晚度北人，朝廷常以伧荒遇之，虽复人才可施，每为清涂所隔，坦以此慨然。
现代文：当时迁居南方时间较晚的北方人，总遭到朝廷的歧视，被看作不体面、寒伧；即使其中有的人才能杰出，也总不能担任要职，杜坦对此非常愤慨。
English: At that time, northerners who had migrated to the south relatively late were always discriminated against by the imperial court, and were regarded as unseemly and cold-hearted; even if some of them were outstanding, they could not hold important positions, and Dutan was very indignant about this.

古文：尝与太祖言及史籍，上曰： 金日磾忠孝淳深，汉朝莫及，恨今世无复如此辈人。 
现代文：他曾经和太祖谈到历史，太祖说： 金日石单忠孝真淳，汉代没有谁赶得上他，真遗憾如今没有像他那样的人。 
English: He once talked about history with his great-grandfather. The great-grandfather said: Kim Il-sung was loyal, filial and honest. No one in the Han Dynasty could match him. It is a pity that there is no one like him today.

古文：坦曰： 日磾之美，诚如圣诏。
现代文：杜坦说： 金日石单的美德确实如皇上所说。
English: Dutan said: Kim Il Sung's virtues are indeed as the emperor said.

古文：假使生乎今世，养马不暇，岂办见知。 
现代文：但假若他生在今世，定然忙于养马，哪有机会被您赏识。 
English: But if he had been born in this world, he would have been busy raising horses, and you would not have had a chance to appreciate him.

古文：上变色曰： 卿何量朝廷之薄也。 
现代文：高祖一下子变了脸色，说： 你对朝廷为何如此刻薄？ 
English: Emperor Wen changed his face and said, "How can you see the imperial court as so narrow and mean?

古文：直以南度不早，便以荒伧赐隔。日磾胡人，身为牧圉，便超入内侍，齿列名贤。
现代文：杜坦说： 请听臣解释，我本是朝廷尊贵之族，曾祖在晋朝混乱时远迁凉州，世代相承都没有忘记我们的根本，就因为我们回到南方较晚而被轻视。金日石单是胡人，本不过是养马放牧之人，就能跃居朝中，位列名贤。
English: Dutan said, "Please listen to my explanation. I am originally from a noble family of the imperial court. My great-grandfathers moved to Liangzhou during the chaos of the Jin Dynasty. Generations have not forgotten our roots. Just because we returned to the south late, we were despised. Kim Il-sung was a Hu man, but he was just a man who raised horses and herded cattle. He was able to leap into the middle of the dynasty and rank among the great sages.

古文：圣朝虽复拔才，臣恐未必能也。 
现代文：圣明的宋朝即使要再选拔人才，臣认为恐怕未必能做到。 
English: Although we can promote talent this morning, I'm afraid we may not be able to have such a thing as a Kim Il Sung list.

古文：上默然。
现代文：高祖听后默不作声。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：北土旧法，问疾必遣子弟。
现代文：北方有一习惯，要派儿子去问候病人。
English: It is a traditional custom in the north for people to send their children to inquire after the sick.

古文：骥年十三，父使候同郡韦华。华子玄有高名，见而异之，以女妻焉。
现代文：杜骥十三岁时，父亲让他去问候同郡人韦华，韦华的儿子韦玄当时有很高的名望，一见到杜骥非常惊奇，将女儿许配给他。
English: When Du Juan was thirteen years old, his father asked him to greet Wei Hua, a fellow county resident. Wei Hua's son, Wei Xuan, was very famous at the time. Upon seeing Du Juan, he was very surprised and promised his daughter to him.

古文：桂阳公义真镇长安，辟为州主簿，后为义真车骑行参军，员外散骑侍郎，江夏王义恭抚军刑狱参军，尚书都官郎，长沙王义欣后军录事参军。
现代文：杜阳公刘义真镇守长安，征召杜骥为州主簿。后任义真的军骑行参军、员外散骑侍郎，江夏王刘义恭抚军刑狱参军、尚书都郎官，长沙王刘义欣的后军录事参军。
English: Duyang Liu Yizhen, the town guard of Chang'an, conscripted Duyun as the state chief record keeper. Later, he was appointed as the riding record keeper of the Yizhen Army, the riding record keeper of the non-commissioned officers, the prison record keeper of the Jiangxia King Liu Yigongfu Army, the official record keeper of the Shang Shudu Army, and the record keeper of the rear army of the Changsha King Liu Yixin.

古文：元嘉七年，随到彦之入河南，加建武将军。
现代文：元嘉七年，他跟随到彦之到河南，加封建武将军。
English: In the seventh year of Yuan Jia, he followed Zhu Yan into Henan, and added the feudal general Jianwu.

古文：索虏撤河南戍悉归河北，彦之使骥守洛阳。
现代文：索虏撤去在河南的防卫部队回到河北，到彦之派杜骥守洛阳。
English: Sorukuru withdrew the defense forces in Henan and returned to Hebei, and sent Du Xi to defend Luoyang.

古文：洛阳城不治既久，又无粮食，及彦之败退，骥欲弃城走，虑为太祖所诛。
现代文：洛阳已长时间处于混乱凋敝状态，又无粮食，到了彦之败退时杜骥想弃城逃跑，但害怕太祖因此杀了他而未果。
English: Luoyang had been in a state of chaos and decay for a long time, and there was no food. When Hikone was defeated, Du Xuan wanted to abandon the city and flee, but he was afraid that Taizu would kill him and failed.

古文：初，高祖平关洛，致钟虡旧器南还，一大钟坠洛水。
现代文：当初，高祖平定关洛时，得到一批钟鼎古物并带回南方，其中有一口大钟坠入洛水。
English: At first, when Gaozhu was subduing Guanluo, he obtained a batch of Zhongding antiques and brought them back to the south. Among them, a large bell fell into the Luoshui River.

古文：至是太祖遣将姚耸夫领千五百人迎致之。
现代文：到这当儿，太祖派将军姚耸夫带着一千五百士兵来到洛阳取这口大钟。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizu sent General Yao Shengfu with fifteen hundred soldiers to Luoyang to retrieve the bell.

古文：时耸夫政率所领牵钟于洛水，骥乃诳之曰： 虏既南渡，洛城势弱，今修理城池，并已坚固，军粮又足，所乏者人耳。
现代文：当时耸夫正率领人马在洛水拖钟，杜骥就欺骗他说： 敌虏南渡以后洛阳城形势危弱，如今城池已修好，坚固异常，另外军粮充足，而所缺的正是人。
English: At that time, Shifu was leading a troop of men to drag a bell in Luoshui, and Du Juan deceived him and said: Luoyang City is in a critical situation after the enemy's capture of Nandu. Now the city has been repaired and is unusually strong. In addition, there is plenty of military food, but what is lacking is people.

古文：君率众见就，共守此城，大功既立，取钟无晚。 
现代文：你把士兵带进城来，我们共守洛阳，建立大功后去取钟不晚。 
English: If you bring soldiers into the city, we will jointly defend Luoyang. It is not too late to retrieve the bell after achieving great success.

古文：耸夫信之，率所领就骥。
现代文：耸夫信了他的话，率众人去杜骥那里。
English: Shoufu believed his words and led the people he had brought to Cuckoo.

古文：既至，见城不可守，又无粮食，于是引众去。
现代文：一进城，却发现城不可守，更无粮食，耸夫就率众人走了。
English: As soon as they entered the city, however, they discovered that the city could not be defended and, what's more, there was no food. Shukhov led the people away.

古文：骥亦委城南奔，白太祖曰： 本欲以死固守，姚耸夫及城便走，人情沮败，不可复禁。 
现代文：杜骥随即弃城往南逃回，并对太祖说： 我本欲以一死坚守洛阳，姚耸夫一进城就撤走，城内的人心情沮丧，士气低落，都要走禁也禁不住。 
English: Du Wei immediately abandoned the city and fled back south, and said to the patriarch: I originally wanted to hold on to Luoyang with my life, but Yao Shengfu withdrew as soon as he entered the city. The people in the city were depressed and demoralized, and they couldn't help but leave the city.

古文：上大怒，使建威将军郑顺之杀耸夫于寿阳。
现代文：皇上大怒，派建威将军郑顺元在寿阳杀了耸夫。
English: The emperor was so angry that he sent General Zheng Shun Yuan to Shouyang to kill Shao.

古文：耸夫，吴兴武康人。勇果有气力，宋世偏裨小将莫及。始随到彦之北伐，与虏遇，耸夫手斩托跋焘叔父英文特勒首，焘以马百匹赎之。
现代文：耸夫，吴兴武康人，勇猛果断，有气力，宋代的那些小将领无人能赶得上他，当初随到彦之北伐时与敌虏相遇，耸夫亲自斩了拓跋焘的叔父英文特勒，拓跋焘用百匹马赎回叔父头颅。
English: Shoufu, Wu Xingwu Kangren, brave, decisive, powerful, those young generals in the Song Dynasty, no one can catch up with him. At the beginning, when he came to the northward march of Yan Zi, he encountered the enemy. Shoufu personally cut off Tuobao's uncle, English Teller, and Tuobao used a hundred horses to redeem his uncle's head.

古文：以骥为通直郎，射声校尉，世祖征虏咨议参军。
现代文：杜骥接着担任通直郎、射击校尉、世祖征虏谘议参军。
English: Du Wei then served as Tsunenaorong, a firing lieutenant, and the ancestor of the conscript army.

古文：十七年，出督青、冀二州、徐州之东莞、东安二郡诸军事、宁远将军、青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：元嘉十七年，他出朝督察青、冀两州，徐州的东莞、东安二郡的军事、宁远将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: In the 17th year of Yuan Jia, he went to the imperial court to inspect the military of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, Dongguan of Xuzhou, the two counties of Dongan, the general of Ningyuan, and the history of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：在任八年，惠化著于齐土。
现代文：他在任八年，有好的政绩留在齐地。
English: He has been in office for eight years and has left behind a good political record.

古文：自义熙至于宋末，刺史唯羊穆之及骥，为吏民所称咏。
现代文：从义熙年间到宋末年，刺史中只有羊穆之和杜骥被老百姓所称道。
English: From the Yixi period to the end of the Song Dynasty, only Yang Muzhi and Du Xi were praised by the common people.

古文：二十四年，征左军将军，兄坦代为刺史，北土以为荣焉。
现代文：元嘉二十四年，他任左军参军，哥哥杜坦任刺史，北方人都以此为荣。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Yuan Jia, he joined the army as a left-wing soldier, and his brother Du Tan was appointed as a historian. People in the north are proud of this.

古文：坦长子琬为员外散骑侍郎，太祖尝有函诏敕坦，琬辄开视。
现代文：杜坦的长子杜琬任员外散骑侍郎，太祖曾有信函给杜坦，杜琬拆开看了。
English: Dutan's eldest son, Dujuan, was appointed as a horseback riding attendant. The great-grandfather once had a letter for Dutan, which Dujuan opened and read.

古文：信未发又追取之，敕函已发，大相推检。
现代文：信还未送走，太祖又追回，发现信已打开，就要严加追查。
English: Before the letter was sent away, the great-grandfather retrieved it. When he found that the letter had been opened, he had to make a strict investigation.

古文：丞都答云： 诸郎开视。 
现代文：丞都回报说： 是杜家的子弟拆开的。 
English: "It was Du Jia's son who took it apart," Zheng Du replied.

古文：上遣主书诘责，骥答曰： 开函是臣第四子季文，伏待刑坐。 
现代文：太祖派主书诘问此事，杜骥禀告说： 拆信的是我的四儿子季文，恳请皇上按刑法处置。 
English: The great-grandfather sent his chief scribe to inquire about the matter, and Du Xi said: It was my fourth son Jiwen who opened the letter, and I implore the emperor to dispose of it according to criminal law.

古文：上特原不问。
现代文：太祖破例原宥不问。
English: The great-grandfather made an exception and did not ask.

古文：二十七年，卒，时年六十四。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，杜骥去世，时年六十四岁。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, Du Xi died at the age of 64.

