古文：孙子曰：昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。
现代文：孙子说：从前，善于指挥作战的人，首先要创造条件，使自己不致被敌人战胜，然后等待和寻求敌人可能被我战胜的时机。
English: Sun Tzu said: In the past, a person who was good at commanding a battle had to first create conditions so that he would not be defeated by the enemy, and then wait and seek an opportunity for the enemy to be defeated by me.

古文：不可胜在己，可胜在敌。故善战者，能为不可胜，不能使敌之必可胜。
现代文：做到不会被敌人战胜的关键，在于自己创造充分的条件；战胜敌人则关键在于敌人出现可乘之隙。所以，善于指挥作战的人，先要做到不会被敌人所战胜，然后待机战胜敌人。
English: The key to not being defeated by the enemy is to create sufficient conditions oneself; the key to defeating the enemy is to take advantage of the enemy. Therefore, those who are good at commanding operations must first ensure that they will not be defeated by the enemy, and then stand by to defeat the enemy.

古文：故曰：胜可知，而不可为。
现代文：所以说，胜利可以预测，但不可强求。
English: So, victory can be predicted, but it cannot be demanded.

古文：不可胜者，守也；可胜者，攻也。
现代文：想要不被敌人战胜，在于防守；想战胜敌人，在于进攻。
English: If you want to avoid being defeated by the enemy, you must defend; if you want to defeat the enemy, you must attack.

古文：守则不足，攻则有余。
现代文：实行防守，是因为兵力不足；采取进攻，是因为兵力足够而敌人相对弱小。
English: The defense is carried out because of insufficient troops; the attack is carried out because of sufficient troops and the enemy is relatively weak.

古文：善守者，藏于九地之下，善攻者，动于九天之上，故能自保而全胜也。
现代文：善于防守的，隐蔽自己的兵力如同深藏于地底，使敌人无形可窥；善于进攻的，展开自己的兵力如同神兵天降。因而，既能有效地保全自己，又能获取全面的胜利。
English: The defensive man conceals his forces as if they were hidden in the depths of the earth, so that the enemy cannot be seen; the offensive man deploys his forces as if they were divine, so that he can effectively protect himself and achieve complete victory.

古文：见胜不过众人之所知，非善之善者也；战胜而天下曰善，非善之善者也。
现代文：预见胜利不超过一般人的见识，并不算是最高明的。经过力战而取得胜利，即使天下人都称赞，也算不上是高明中最高明的。
English: It is not the highest wisdom to foresee a victory beyond the scope of common sense. It is not the highest wisdom to win a victory after a hard-fought battle, even if the whole world praises it.

古文：故举秋毫不为多力，见日月不为明目，闻雷霆不为聪耳。
现代文：就像举起秋天鸟兽新长的毫毛不算力大，能看见太阳、月亮算不上眼睛明亮，能听见雷霆的声音算不上耳朵灵敏一样。
English: Just as lifting up the newly grown hairs of autumn birds and beasts is not considered to be strong, being able to see the sun and moon is not considered to be bright eyes, and being able to hear thunder is not considered to be sensitive ears.

古文：古之所谓善战者，胜于易胜者也。
现代文：古代善于用兵打仗的人，只是战胜了容易战胜的敌人。
English: In ancient times, people who were good at fighting with soldiers only defeated enemies that were easy to defeat.

古文：故善战者之胜也，无智名，无勇功。
现代文：因而，这些善于打仗的人的胜利，既没有智谋的名声，也没有勇武的战功。
English: Therefore, the victories of these skilled warriors have neither the reputation of wisdom nor the military exploits of bravery.

古文：故其战胜不忒，不忒者，其所措必胜，胜已败者也。
现代文：但他们所取得的胜利是不会有丝毫误差的。之所以没有误差，是因为他们所采取的制胜措施都建立在必胜的基础上，战胜的是那些已处于失败境地的敌人。
English: But their victory will not have the slightest margin of error. The reason why there is no margin of error is that the victory measures they have taken are all based on victory, and they are defeating enemies who are already in a losing situation.

古文：故善战者，立于不败之地，而不失敌之败也。
现代文：善于打仗的人，总是让自己先处于不败之地，同时，也绝不会放过任何一个打败敌人的时机。
English: Those who are good at war always put themselves in an invincible position first, and at the same time, they will never miss any opportunity to defeat the enemy.

古文：是故胜兵先胜而后求战，败兵先战而后求胜。
现代文：所以，胜利之师是先创造必胜条件然后再去交战，失败之师总是先盲目地同敌人交战，然后期求从苦战中侥幸取胜。
English: Therefore, the winning division is to first create a win-win situation and then go to war, and the losing division is always to blindly fight the enemy first, and then hope to win a fluke victory from the hard battle.

古文：善用兵者，修道而保法，故能为胜败之政。
现代文：善于用兵的人，总是注意修明政治，确保治军法度，所以能成为战争胜负的主宰。
English: A person who is good at using soldiers always pays attention to clarifying politics and ensuring the rules of war, so he can become the master of war victory and defeat.

古文：兵法：一曰度，二曰量，三曰数，四曰称，五曰胜。
现代文：用兵必须注意：一是 度 ，土地幅员；二是 量 ，军赋物资；三是 数 ，部队兵员战斗实力；四是 称 ，双方的军事综合实力对比；五是 胜 ，胜负优劣的判断。
English: The use of troops must pay attention to: first, degree, land area; second, quantity, military supplies; third, number, combat strength of troops and soldiers; fourth, comparison of the military comprehensive strength of the two sides; fifth, victory, judgment of the merits and demerits.

古文：地生度，度生量，量生数，数生称，称生胜。故胜兵若以镒称铢，败兵若以铢称镒。
现代文：敌我双方所处地域的广狭，决定着土地幅员大小；敌我土地幅员的大小，决定着双方军赋物资的贫富；军赋物资的不同，决定着双方军队和兵员多寡；敌我军队和兵员的不同，决定着双方军事实力的强弱；敌我军事实力的不同，最终决定了战争的胜负。
English: The vastness and narrowness of the regions where the two sides are located determine the size of the land area; the size of the enemy's land area determines the richness and poverty of the two sides' military supplies; the difference in military supplies determines the number of troops and soldiers on both sides; the difference between the enemy's troops and soldiers determines the strength and weakness of the two sides' military strength; the difference in the strength of the enemy's troops ultimately determines the victory or defeat of the war.

古文：胜者之战民也，若决积水于千仞之溪者，形也。
现代文：所以胜利之师如同以镒对铢，是以强大的军事实力取胜于弱小的敌方，败亡之师如同以铢对镒，是以弱小的军事实力对抗强大的敌方。
English: Therefore, the division of victory is to win over a weak enemy with a strong military power, just as the division of victory is to win over a weak enemy with a strong military power. The division of defeat is to win over a strong enemy with a weak military power, just as the division of defeat is to win over a strong enemy with a weak military power.

