古文：唐穆宗长庆元年，礼部侍郎钱徽知举，放进士郑郎等三十三人，后以段文昌言其不公，诏中书舍人王起、知制诰白居易重试，驳放卢公亮等十人，贬徽江州刺史。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆元年，礼部侍郎钱徽任主考官，选中进士郑朗等三十三人。后因段文昌说他不公，皇帝又诏中书舍人王起、知制诰白居易重新考试，驳下卢公亮等十人，贬钱徽为江州刺史。
English: In the first year of Tang Mu Zong's reign, Qian Hui, the attendant of the etiquette department, was appointed as the chief examiner, and thirty-three people, including Zheng Lang, were selected. Later, because Duan Wenchang said that he was unfair, the emperor also ordered the re-examination of Wang Qi, a scholar, and Bai Ju Yi, a scholar, and dismissed Lu Gongliang and ten others, and denigrated Qian Hui as the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：白公集有奏状论此事，大略云： 伏料自欲重试进士以来论奏者甚众。
现代文：白东天集有奏状评论这件事，大略说： 自从朝廷要重新考试进士以来，上书评论的很多。
English: Baidong Tianji wrote a report to comment on this matter, roughly saying: Since the imperial court wants to re-examine the candidates, there have been a lot of written comments.

古文：盖以礼部试进士，例许用书策，兼得通宵，得通宵则思虑必周，用书册则文字不错。
现代文：旧例，礼部考试进士，允许使用书籍。还准许达到通宵。达到通宵，考虑问题就一定周到，使用书籍写出文字就不出差错。
English: In the old example, the use of books is allowed for the entrance examination of the etiquette department. It is also allowed to reach the all-night. If it reaches the all-night, the consideration of the problem must be thoughtful, and there will be no error in writing the text using books.

古文：昨重试之日，书策不容一字，木烛只许两条，迫促惊忙，幸皆成就，若比礼部所试事校不同。 
现代文：昨天重新考试，不许查看书籍，时间也只给两条木烛，迫促惊慌，勉强完成，和礼部的考试相比，事清有很大的不同。 
English: Re-exam yesterday, not allowed to check the books, time is only given to two wooden candles, urgent panic, barely completed, and compared with the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies, things are very different.

古文：及驳放公亮等敕文，以为《孤竹管赋》出于《周礼》正经，阅其程试之文，多是不知本末。
现代文：说到驳下卢公亮等的敕文，以为《孤竹管赋》出自《周礼》正经上，读他们的考试文章，大多不知道它的来龙去脉。
English: When it comes to rejecting Lu Gongliang's and others' essays, they think that "Lone Bamboo Pipe" comes from "Zhou Li," and most of them don't know the ins and outs of it when they read their exam essays.

古文：乃知唐试进士许挟书及见烛如此。
现代文：从此才知道唐朝考试进士，许可带书和燃烛。
English: Since then, it has been known that the Tang Dynasty examination for admission to the priesthood permitted the carrying of books and lighted candles.

古文：国朝淳化三年，太宗试进士，出《卮言日出赋》题，孙何等不知所出，相率扣殿槛乞上指示之，上为陈大义。
现代文：本朝太宗淳化三年，太宗考试进士，出《卮言日出赋》试题，孙何等不知道出自何处，考生都到殿上求皇上指示，皇帝告诉了他们大意。
English: This morning, three years after the enthronement of Emperor Taizong, the examination of Emperor Taizong was held, and the exam questions of "The Tale of the Rising Sun" were published. Sun He did not know where they came from, and the candidates all went to the palace to ask the emperor for instructions. The emperor told them the gist.

古文：景德二年，御试《天道犹张弓赋》。
现代文：真宗景德二年，皇帝考试《天道犹张弓赋》。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jingde, the emperor's examination on "The Way of Heaven and the Bow" was held.

古文：后礼部贡院言，近年进士惟钞略古今文赋，怀挟入试，昨者御试以正经命题，多懵所出，则知题目不示以出处也。
现代文：后未礼部考试院上书，说：近来进士只抄取古今的文章诗赋，昨天御试，出正经上题目，大多茫然不知道出处，从此可知试题是不告诉出处的。
English: Afterward, the Ministry of Propriety submitted a letter to the examination hall, saying: Recently, the scholars only copy the ancient and modern articles of poetry, yesterday's exam, out of the serious questions, most of them do not know the source, from now on, the test questions do not tell the source.

古文：大中祥符元年，试礼部进士，内出《清明象天赋》等题，仍录题解，摹印以示之。
现代文：真宗大中祥符元年，考试礼部进士，由宫中出《清明象天赋》等题目，仍旧钞录解题，纂写刻印好，让考官看。
English: In the first year of Xiangfu, the first year of Shinshu University, the examination of the etiquette department, from the palace, "Clear and bright like talent" and other topics, still banknote record solutions, compiling and engraving are good, let the examiner see.

古文：至景祐元年，始诏御药院，御试日进士题目，具经史所出，摹印给之，更不许上清。
现代文：仁宗景佑元年，才令御药院，御试进士的题目，都从经史所出，摹写刻印好，交给士子，不许再问皇帝。
English: It was only in the first year of the reign of Emperor Nanzong Jingyou that the topics of the Imperial Pharmacy and the imperial examination for entering the priesthood were all derived from the scriptures, copied and engraved well, and handed over to the priests, not to be asked again by the emperor.

