古文：李建及，许州人。
现代文：李建及，许州人。
English: Li Jianji, a native of Xuzhou.

古文：本姓王，父质。
现代文：原姓王，父亲叫王质。
English: His original family name was Wang, and his father's name was Wang Xiaowu.

古文：建及少事李罕之为纪纲，光启中，罕之谒武皇于晋阳，因选部下骁勇者百人以献，建及在籍中。
现代文：李建及年轻时在李罕之手下做奴仆，光启年中，李罕之到晋阳拜见武皇，挑选了一百名骁勇的部下献给武皇，李建及在其中。
English: When he was young, Li Jianyi worked as a slave under Li Han. In the middle of the Qing Dynasty, Li Hanyi went to Jinyang to visit Emperor Wu and selected one hundred brave subordinates to dedicate to Emperor Wu. Li Jianyi was among them.

古文：后以功署牙职，典义兒军，及赐姓名。
现代文：后来因立功任武职，主管义儿军，并赐给姓名。
English: Later, for meritorious service, he was appointed to a military post, in charge of the Children's Army, and given a name.

古文：天祐七年，改匡卫军都校。
现代文：天祐七年，改任匡卫军都校。
English: In 1877, it was renamed Kuangwei Army Capital School.

古文：柏乡之役，汴将韩勍追周德威至高邑南野河上，镇、定兵扼桥道，韩勍选精兵先夺之。
现代文：柏乡之战，梁将韩京力追击周德威到高邑南边的野河上，镇州、定州的士兵把守着桥道，韩京力选精兵先夺取桥道。
English: In the Battle of Baixiang, Liang sent Han Jingli to chase Zhou Dewi to the wild river south of Gaoyou. Soldiers from Zhenzhou and Dingzhou guarded the bridge, and Han Jingli selected elite soldiers to seize the bridge first.

古文：庄宗登高而望，镇、定兵将衄，谓建及曰： 如贼过桥，则势不可遏，卿计若何？ 
现代文：唐庄宗站在高处望去，见镇州、定州士兵快守不住了，就对李建及说 ：如敌军过桥，就会势不可挡，你有什么办法吗？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong stood on a high place and looked down. When he saw that the soldiers in Zhenzhou and Dingzhou could not hold out any longer, he said to Li Jianji, "If the enemy army crosses the bridge, it will be unstoppable. Do you have any solution?"

古文：建及于部选士二百，挺枪大噪，御汴军，却之于桥下。
现代文：李建及在自己部队中选了二百人，横枪大喊，抗御梁军，将他们阻止在桥下。
English: Li Jian and selected two hundred people from his own troops, shouted across the gun, resisted the Guoliang army, and stopped them under the bridge.

古文：二月，王师攻魏，魏人夜出犯我营，建及设伏待之，扼其归路，尽殪之。
现代文：二月，晋军攻打魏州，魏人夜里出来袭击晋军营地，李建及设下埋伏等待，切断他们的回路，全部消灭了他们。
English: In February, the Jin army attacked Weizhou, and the Wei people came out at night to attack the Jin army camp. Li Jianyi set up an ambush and waited, cut off their circuit, and completely eliminated them.

古文：刘鄩之营莘县，月余不出，忽一旦纵兵攻镇、定之营，军中腾乱，建及率银枪劲兵千人赴之，击败汴军，追奔至其垒。
现代文：刘寻阝在莘县扎营时，一个多月不出战，突然一天发兵攻打镇州、定州的晋军营地，晋军军中混乱，李建及率一千多银枪劲兵赶去，击败梁军，追击到他们的营地。
English: When Liu Huanqian was encamped in Lixian County, he had not fought for more than a month. One day, he suddenly sent troops to attack the Jin camp in Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. There was chaos in the Jin army, and Li Jian and his more than one thousand strong soldiers with silver guns rushed to defeat Liang's army and chase them to their camp.

古文：元城之战，建及首陷其阵，授天雄军教练使。
现代文：元城之战，李建及带头冲锋陷阵，授天雄军教练使。
English: In the Battle of Yuancheng, Li Jian and others took the lead in storming the enemy lines, and were awarded the title of "Coach of Tianxiong Army."

古文：八月，迁辽州刺史。
现代文：八月，任辽州刺史。
English: In August, he was appointed Liaozhou chief historian.

古文：十四年，从击契丹于幽州，破之。
现代文：天祐十四年，随从庄宗在幽州攻击契丹，打败了他们。
English: In the 14th year of Tianyu, Zhuangzong's followers attacked the Khitan in Yuzhou and defeated them.

古文：十二月，从攻杨刘，自寅至午，汴军婴城拒守，建及自负葭苇堙堑，率先登梯，遂拔之。
现代文：十二月，随从攻打杨刘，从早上到中午，梁军环城拒守，李建及亲自背负芦苇填塞沟堑，率先登梯，遂攻下城垒。
English: In December, following Yang Liu's attack, from morning to noon, Liang's army refused to defend the ring city, and Li Jian and himself carried reeds to fill the gully, took the lead in climbing the stairs, and then captured the fortress.

古文：胡柳之役，前军逗挠，际晚，汴军登土山，建及一战夺之。
现代文：胡柳之战，前军停滞不前，将近天黑，梁军登上土山，李建及一战就夺下阵地。
English: In the Battle of Hu Liu, the front army stagnated, and it was almost dark. Liang's army ascended the hill, and Li Jianyi took the position in the first battle.

古文：庄宗欲收军，诘朝合战。
现代文：这时庄宗想收军回营，明早决战。
English: At this time, Zhuangzong wanted to gather the troops back to the camp and fight a decisive battle in the morning.

古文：建及横槊当前，曰： 贼大将已亡，乘此易击，王但登山，观臣破贼！ 
现代文：李建及横枪挡着庄宗说 ：敌人大将已死，乘此机会容易攻击，您只管上山，看我杀敌！ 
English: Li Jian and the crossbow blocked Zhuangzong and said: The enemy general is dead, take this opportunity to attack easily, you just go up the mountain and watch me kill the enemy!

古文：即引银枪效节大呼奋击，三军增气，由是王师复振，以功授检校司空、魏博内外衙都将。
现代文：即带银枪效节军大喊奋击，三军士气倍增，于是晋军又振作起来，以军功授检校司空、魏博内外衙都将。
English: With the silver gun effect, the festival troops shouted and fought hard, and the morale of the three armies doubled. Therefore, the Jin army cheered up again, and awarded the school inspector, Wei Bo, with military merit.

古文：十六年，汴将贺瑰攻德胜南城，以战船十余艘，竹笮维之，扼断津路，王师不得渡。
现代文：天祐十六年，梁将贺瑰攻打德胜南城，用竹索把十多艘战船系住，扼断航路，晋军不能渡河。
English: In the 16th year of Tianyu, Liang sent He Jiu to attack the southern city of Desheng, and tied more than ten warships with bamboo ropes to cut off the shipping route, so that the Jin army could not cross the river.

古文：城中矢石将尽，守城将氏延赏危急，庄宗令积帛军门，召能破贼船者。
现代文：城中箭石将要用完，守城将领氏延赏很危急，庄宗下令在军门堆积帛绢，招募能击破敌船的人。
English: The arrow stones in the city were about to be used up, and it was very critical for the general of the city to extend the reward. Zhuang Zong ordered to pile up anchors at the military gate and recruit people who could break the enemy ship.

古文：津人有马破龙者，能水游，乃令往见延赏，延赏言： 危窘极矣，所争晷刻。 
现代文：有个叫马破龙的摆渡人，善于游水，令他去见氏延赏，氏延赏说： 十分危急了，危在旦夕了。 
English: A ferryman named Maraborong, who was good at swimming, told him to go to see Mr. Yanbo. Mr. Yanbo said, "It's very critical, the danger is imminent."

古文：时棹船满河，流矢雨集，建及被重铠，执槊呼曰： 岂有一衣带水，纵贼如此！ 
现代文：这时满河都是船，流矢像雨点般密集，李建及披了很厚的铠甲，拿着武器喊道 ：哪能在这衣带宽的水面上让敌人这样猖狂！ 
English: At this time, the river was full of boats, and the stream of arrows was as dense as raindrops. Li Jianyi, wearing thick armor, shouted with weapons: How can the enemy be so rampant on this wide water surface!

古文：乃以二船实甲士，皆短兵持斧，径抵梁之战舰，斧其笮；又令上流具甕，积薪其上，顺流纵火，以攻其舰。
现代文：用二只船装满甲士，都拿短兵器和斧头，直接抵近梁军的战舰，砍断竹索，又让上流放瓮，堆上柴草，顺流放火，攻打敌舰。
English: With two boats filled with soldiers, all with short weapons and axes, they arrived directly at the warships of the Liang Army, cut the bamboo ropes, and let the rafts be exiled, piled up firewood, set fire to the river, and attacked the enemy ships.

古文：须臾，烟焰腾炽，梁军断缆而遁；建及乃入南城，贺瑰解围而去。
现代文：不一会儿，烟火腾炽，梁军砍断缆绳逃走，李建及才进入南城，贺瑰解除围城而去。
English: In a short time, the fireworks were blazing, Liang's army cut the cable and fled, Li Jian and Cai entered Nancheng, and He Jie lifted the siege and left.

古文：其年十二月，与汴将王瓚战于戚城，建及伤手，庄宗解御衣金带赐之。
现代文：这年十二月，和梁将王瓒在戚城交战，李建及手受伤，庄宗脱下衣服金带赏给他。
English: In December of that year, Li Jian and Zhuang Zong got into a fight with Liang's general Wang Qian in Qicheng. Li Jian's hand was injured, and Zhuang Zong took off his clothes and rewarded him with a gold belt.

古文：建及有胆气，慷慨不群，临阵鞠旅，意气横壮，自庄宗至魏州，建及都总内外衙银枪效节帐前亲军，善于抚御，所得赏赐，皆分给部下，绝甘分少，颇洽军情。
现代文：李建及有胆量，慷慨不群，临阵治军，意气雄壮。自庄宗到魏州，李建及都总内外衙银枪效节帐前亲军。善于统御部下，所得到的赏赐都分给部下，很得军心。
English: Li Jianhe is courageous, generous, and strong-willed. From Zhuangzong to Weizhou, Li Jianhe has been in and out of the General Headquarters collecting money and guns. He is good at leading his subordinates, and the rewards he receives are distributed to his subordinates. He is very military-minded.

古文：又累立战功，雄勇冠绝，雌劣者忌谗之。
现代文：又屡立战功，雄勇超群，谗言小人忌妒他。
English: He has repeatedly made great achievements in war, and is extremely brave. The small talkers envy him.

古文：时宦官韦令图监建及军，每于庄宗前言： 建及以家财骤施，其趋向志意不小，不可令典衙兵。 
现代文：这时宦官韦令图监理李建及的军队，常在庄宗跟前说： 李建及把家财突然散发出去，他的志向目标不小，不可让他掌管衙兵。 
English: At this time, Wei Lingtu, the eunuch who supervised Li Jianyi's army, often said in front of Zhuangzong: Li Jianyi suddenly distributed his family wealth, his ambition was not small, and he should not be allowed to control the eunuchs.

古文：庄宗因猜之。
现代文：庄宗因而猜疑他。
English: As a result, Shouzong became suspicious of him.

古文：建及性既忠荩，虽知谗构，不改其操。
现代文：李建及生性忠诚，虽知道有人陷害他，仍不改他的操守。
English: Li Jian, who is loyal by nature, did not change his behavior even though he knew he was being set up.

古文：十七年三月，授代州刺史。
现代文：天祐十七年三月，授代州刺史。
English: In March of the seventeenth year of Tenyu, he was awarded the history of the state.

古文：塞上多事，廷裕无控制之术，边鄙常耸。
现代文：八月，与李存审赴河中，解除同州的围困。
English: In August, he went to Hezhong with Li Cunxin to lift the siege of Hezhong.

古文：天成三年，卒于治所。诏赠太保。
现代文：李建及年少时遇祸乱，长久作战，被箭石击伤，身体没一处完整的地方，还因有功受猜疑，内心郁闷。
English: When Li Jianyi was young, he was in a calamity, fought for a long time, was wounded by a flechette, and his body did not have a complete place. He was also suspected of being meritorious, and his heart was depressed.

古文：王思同，幽州人也。
现代文：这一年，死于太原，终年五十七岁。王思同，幽州人。
English: This year, he died in Taiyuan, at the age of fifty-seven. Wang Sitong, from Yuzhou.

古文：父敬柔，历瀛、平、儒、檀、营五州刺史。
现代文：父亲王敬柔，历任瀛、平、儒、檀、营五州刺史。
English: Her father, Wang Jingru, successively held the posts of Min, Ping, Confucius, Dan, and Ying in the Five Provinces.

古文：思同母即刘仁恭之女也，故思同初事仁恭为帐下军校。
现代文：王思同的母亲就是刘仁恭的女儿，所以王思同起初在刘仁恭手下当帐下军校。
English: Wang Sitong's mother is Liu Rinkong's daughter, so Wang Sitong initially worked under Liu Rinkong as an undercover military school.

古文：会刘守光攻仁恭于大安山，思同以部下兵归太原，时年十六，武皇命为飞腾指挥使。
现代文：遇上刘守光在大安山攻打刘仁恭，王思同带部下士兵投奔太原，当时十六岁，武皇任他为飞腾指挥使。
English: When Liu Shouguang attacked Liu Rengong on the Da'an Mountain, Wang Si and his soldiers rushed to Taiyuan. At the age of sixteen, Emperor Wu appointed him as a high-flying commander.

古文：从庄宗平定山东，累典诸军。
现代文：跟从庄宗平定山东，多次主管各军。
English: He followed Zhuang Zong in pacifying Shandong and was in charge of several armies.

古文：思同性疏俊，粗有文，性喜为诗什，与人唱和，自称蓟门战客。
现代文：王思同性格疏放，稍通文字，喜做诗，与人唱和，自称蓟门战客。
English: Wang Sitong is a free-spirited person, has a little knowledge of literature, likes to write poetry, sings with others, and calls himself a "warrior of the gate."

古文：魏王继岌待之若子。
现代文：魏王李继岌把他当儿子看待。
English: The Wei king, Li Jie, treated him like a son.

古文：时内养吕知柔侍兴圣宫，颇用事，思同不平之。
现代文：这时吕知柔在兴圣宫做事，比较有权，王思同心中不平。
English: At this time, Lu Zhirong was working at the Xing Sheng Gong and had more power. Wang Sido was not happy about this.

古文：吕为终南山诗，末句有 头 字，思同和曰： 料伊直拟冲霄汉，赖有青天压著头。 
现代文：吕知柔写《终南山》一诗，末句有 头 字，王思同和道： 料伊直拟冲霄汉，赖有青天压着头。 
English: Lu Zhirong wrote a poem "The End of Nanshan," the last sentence has the first letter, Wang Sitonghe said: "I want to be a mountain man, but I need the blue sky to press my head."

古文：其所为诗句，皆此类也。
现代文：他写的诗句，都如此类。
English: All his poetry is like that.

古文：每从征，必在兴圣帐下，然同光朝，位止郑州刺史。
现代文：每次出征，必在兴圣宫使明宗帐下当差，然而在同光朝，官位只当到郑州刺史。
English: Every time he went out to fight, he had to serve under the account of Mingzong, the envoy of Xing Sheng Palace. However, in the Tongguang Dynasty, the official position was only to go to Zhengzhou to make history.

古文：明宗在军时，素知之，即位后，用为同州节度使，未几，移镇陇右。
现代文：明宗在军中时，一直了解他，即皇帝位后，用为同州节度使，没多久，移镇陇右。
English: When Mingzong was in the army, he always knew him, that is, after the emperor's enthronement, he used him as an envoy for the festival of the same state. Not long after, he moved the town to the right.

古文：思同好文士，无贤不肖，必馆接贿遗，岁费数十万。
现代文：王思同爱好文士，无论贤与不肖，必在馆舍招待送给钱物，每年花费几十万。
English: Wang Sitong loves scribes, whether they are good or bad, and always invites them to the library to give them money, spending hundreds of thousands every year.

古文：在秦州累年，边民怀惠，华戎宁息。
现代文：在秦州多年，边疆百姓得到实惠，汉族与少数民族平安相处。
English: For many years in Qinzhou, the people in the border areas have received tangible benefits, and the Han people and ethnic minorities have coexisted peacefully.

古文：长兴元年，入朝，见于中兴殿。
现代文：长兴元年，入朝廷，在中兴殿进见。
English: In the first year of Changxing, he entered the imperial court and was received at the Zhongxing Palace.

古文：明宗问秦州边事，对曰： 秦州与吐蕃接境，蕃部多违法度。
现代文：明宗问秦州边事，答道： 秦州和吐蕃相邻，蕃部常违犯法度。
English: Mingzong asked Qinzhou about border affairs and replied: Qinzhou and Tubo are adjacent, and Hebe often violates laws and regulations.

古文：臣设法招怀，沿边置寨四十余所，控其要害。
现代文：我设法招抚怀柔，沿边境设置营寨四十多所，控制要害。
English: I tried to appease Huairou and set up more than forty camps along the border to control the key areas.

古文：每蕃人互市、饮食之界上，令纳器械。 
现代文：每当蕃人交易、饮食到边界上，要他们交出武器。 
English: Every time they come to the border to trade or eat, they are asked to hand over their weapons.

古文：因手指画秦州山川要害控扼处。
现代文：用手指画秦州山川要害控制处。
English: Use your finger to draw the key control points of Qinzhou's mountains and rivers.

古文：明宗曰： 人言思同不管事，岂及此耶！ 
现代文：明宗说 ：有人说王思同不管事，怎么能做到这样呢！ 
English: Mingzong said: Some people say that Wang Sitong does not care about things, how can he do this!

古文：时两川叛，欲用之，且留左右，故授右武卫将军。
现代文：这时两川叛乱，明宗想使用他，暂且留在身边，所以授右武卫将军。
English: At this time, the two rivers rebelled, and Mingzong wanted to use him and stay with him for the time being, so he gave him the title of General of the Right Division.

古文：八月，授西南面行营马步都虞候。
现代文：八月，授西南面行营马步军都虞候。
English: In August, the horse-mounted infantry marching south-west was given the go-ahead.

古文：九月，迁京兆尹、西京留守。
现代文：九月，任京兆尹、西京留守。
English: In September, he was appointed to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, but remained in West Beijing.

古文：伐蜀之役，为先锋指挥使。
现代文：讨伐川蜀地时，任先锋指挥使。
English: When the Sichuan-Shu District Crusade was launched, he served as the vanguard commander.

古文：石敬瑭入大散关。思同恃勇先入剑门，大军未相继，复被董璋兵逐出之。
现代文：石敬瑭入大散关时，王思同恃勇先入剑门，大军没有相继跟上，又被董璋军队赶出来。
English: When Shijian entered the Great Sankuan Pass, Wang Sijian entered the Jianmen Gate first. The large army did not keep up, and was driven out by Dong Xi's army.

古文：及敬瑭班师，思同以曾获剑门之功，移镇山南西道。
现代文：石敬瑭回师时，王思同因曾攻下剑门之功，移镇山南西道。
English: When Shi Jingyao returned to his division, Wang Sitong was transferred to Shannan West Road due to his achievement in capturing Jianmen.

古文：三年，两川交兵，明宗虑并在一人，则朝廷难制，密诏思同相度形势，即乘间用军，事未行而董璋败。
现代文：三年，东西两川交战，明宗担心如合并到一人手中，朝廷更难制服，密诏要王思同分析形势，乘两川有间隙用兵，事情还没实行，董璋就失败了。
English: In the third year, the East and the West were at war with each other. Mingzong was worried that if the merger fell into the hands of one person, the imperial court would be more difficult to subdue. He secretly ordered Wang Sitong to analyze the situation and take advantage of the gap between the two rivers to use troops. However, the matter had not yet been implemented, and Dong Xi failed.

古文：八月，复为京兆尹兼西京留守。
现代文：八月，再次任京兆尹兼西京留守。
English: In August, he was reappointed to the post of Keizhoin and stayed in Saikyo.

古文：时潞王镇凤翔，与之邻境，及潞王不禀朝旨，致书于秦、泾、雍、梁、邠诸帅，言： 贼臣乱政，属先帝疾笃，谋害秦王，迎立嗣君，自擅权柄，以致残害骨肉，摇动籓垣。
现代文：这时潞王李从厚镇守凤翔，和他相邻，潞王不接受朝廷旨令，写信给秦、泾、雍、梁、各地主帅，说： 贼臣搞乱朝政，趁先帝病重时，谋害秦王，迎立嗣君，自己掌握权力，以致残害骨肉，动摇国家。
English: At this time, Shao Wang Li from Houzhen guarded Fengxiang, and was adjacent to him. Shao Wang did not accept the order of the imperial court, and wrote to Qin, Yao, Yong, Liang, and the commanders of various regions, saying: Thief-vassals messed up the imperial government, took advantage of the former emperor when he was seriously ill, plotted to kill Qin Wang, ushered in the successor, and seized power themselves, so that they destroyed the flesh and bones, and shook the country.

古文：惧先人基业，忽焉坠地，故誓心入朝，以除君侧，事济之后，谢病归籓。
现代文：我担心先人创立的基业，忽然坍塌，所以发誓入朝廷以便清除君王旁边奸贼，事情完成后，病退回藩。
English: I was worried that the foundation created by my ancestors would suddenly collapse, so I swore to enter the imperial court in order to remove the traitors next to the king. After the matter was completed, I returned to the domain.

古文：然籓邸素贫。兵力俱困，欲希国士，共济急难。 
现代文：然而藩邸一直贫困，兵力又少，希望国士们共同救济国难。 
English: However, the residence of the clan has always been poor, and the number of soldiers is small. It is hoped that the nationalists will work together to relieve the national difficulties.

古文：乃令小伶女十人以五弦技见思同，因欢讽动，又令军校宋审温者，请使于雍，若不从命，即独图之。
现代文：令小伶安十十带五弦妓见王思同，让他取乐并劝说他。又令军校宋审温出使到雍州，如不听从命令，便独自行事。
English: He ordered Xiao Yu'an to bring ten five-stringed prostitutes to see Wang Sido, let him have fun and persuade him. He also ordered the military school Song Xiuwen to send an envoy to Yongzhou, and if he did not obey the order, he would act alone.

古文：又令推官郝昭、府吏硃延乂以书檄起兵。
现代文：又令推官郝昭、府吏朱延繧发檄文起兵。
English: In addition, he ordered the magistrate, Zou Zhao, and the government official, Zhu Yanzhong, to raise an army.

古文：会副部署药彦稠至，方宴，而妓、使适至，乃击之于狱。
现代文：碰上副部署药彦稠来到，宴会没停，而妓女、使者正好前来，便关在狱中。
English: When the vice-delegate Yakuhiko Choshi arrived, the banquet did not stop, but the prostitute and the messenger just came, and they were locked up in prison.

古文：彦稠请诛审温，拘送昭赴阙。
现代文：药彦稠请求杀宋审温，押送郝昭去朝廷。
English: Yakuhiko thickly requested to kill Song Xiuwen and escort Zou Zhao to the imperial court.

古文：时思同已遣其子入朝言事，朝廷嘉之，乃以思同为凤翔行营都部署，起军营于扶风。
现代文：这时王思同已派儿子到朝廷说事，朝廷嘉奖他，便任王思同为凤翔行营都部署，在扶风起军营。
English: At this time, Wang Sitong had sent his son to the imperial court to discuss the matter, and the imperial court commended him, and then ordered Wang Sitong to set up a camp for Fengxiang, and set up a military camp in Fufeng.

古文：三月十四日，与张虔钊会于岐下，梯冲大集。
现代文：三月十四日，与张虔钊在岐下会兵进攻凤翔，攻城战梯和冲车大量聚集。
English: On March 14th, with Zhang Qianqian in Qishie, the soldiers attacked Fengxiang, and a large number of siege ladders and rushing vehicles gathered.

古文：十五日，进收东西关城，城中战备不完，然死力御捍，外兵伤夷者十二三。
现代文：十五日，收取东西关城，城中战备不充分，但死力抵抗，外兵死伤的占十分之二到十分之三。
English: On the 15th, the East and West Gates of the city were captured. The city was not fully prepared for battle, but it put up a desperate resistance. Foreign soldiers accounted for two-tenths to three-tenths of the dead and wounded.

古文：十六日，复进攻其城，潞王登陴泣谕于外，闻者悲之。
现代文：十六日，又进攻凤翔府城，潞王登上城墙哭着对城外人说话，听的人很可怜他。
English: On the sixteenth day, they attacked Fengxiangfu City again. King Yao climbed onto the city wall and wept as he spoke to people outside the city. The listeners pitied him.

古文：张虔钊性褊，诘旦，西南用军，与都监皆血刃以督军士，军士齐诟，反攻虔钊，虔钊跃马避之。
现代文：张虔钊生性狭隘，天亮在西南用兵，和都监一起砍杀人以督促军士，军士都骂他们，反过来攻打张虔钊，张虔钊跃马避开。
English: Zhang Qianqian was a narrow-minded person. At dawn, he used soldiers in the southwest, and together with the governor, he killed people to urge the sergeants. The sergeants all scolded them, and in turn attacked Zhang Qianqian, and Zhang Qianqian avoided the horse.

古文：时羽林指挥使杨思权引军自西门先入，思同未之知，犹督士登城。
现代文：这时羽林指挥使杨思权带军队从西门先入城，王思同不知道，还在督促士兵登城。
English: At this time, Commander Ulin ordered Yang Siquan to lead the army into the city from the west gate. Wang Sitong did not know that he was still urging the soldiers to enter the city.

古文：俄而严卫指挥使尹晖呼曰： 西城军已入城受赏矣，军士可解甲！ 
现代文：一会儿严卫指挥使尹晖喊道： 西城军已进城受赏了，军士可以脱去甲衣！ 
English: After a while, Yan Wei's commanding officer made Yin Qi shout: The Xicheng Army has entered the city and been rewarded, the sergeant can take off his armor!

古文：弃仗之声，振动天地。
现代文：丢弃甲仗的声音振动天地。
English: The sound of discarded armor shakes the heavens and earth.

古文：日午，乱军毕集，泾州张从宾、邠州康福、河中安彦威皆遁去。
现代文：中午，乱军全都会合，泾州张从宾、州康福、河中安彦威都逃走。
English: At noon, the rebels all gathered in the city, and Zhang Zizhou fled from Bin, Kangfu, and Hezhong Anyanwei.

古文：十七日，思同与药彦稠、苌从简俱至长安，刘遂雍闭关不内，乃奔潼关。
现代文：十七日，王思同和药彦稠、苌从简都到长安，刘遂雍闭关不接纳，于是奔往潼关。
English: On the seventeenth day, Wang Sitong and Yakuhiko Tsuchiya and Shun traveled from Jiandu to Chang'an. Liu Suiyong did not accept the closed gate, so they rushed to Shiguan.

古文：二十二日，潞王至昭应，前锋执思同来献。
现代文：二十二日，潞王到昭应，前锋绑着王思同献上。
English: On the twenty-second day, King Zhai arrived in Zhaoying, and the forwards tied up Wang Sitong and presented him.

古文：王谓左右曰： 思同计乖于事，然尽心于所奉，亦可嘉也。 
现代文：潞王对左右的人说 ：王思同计谋与时事不合，然而对所尊奉的主人很尽心，也很可嘉的。 
English: Shao Wang said to the people around him: Wang Si's complicity is not in line with the current situation, but he is very devoted to the master he worships and is also very commendable.

古文：顾谓赵守钧曰： 思同尔之故人，可行迓之于路，达予抚慰之意。 
现代文：对赵守钧说： 思同是你的故人，可以到路上迎接他，表达我的安慰之意。 
English: To Zhao Shouyi, he said: "Sidong is your deceased, you can meet him on the road and express my consolation.

古文：思同至，潞王让之曰： 贼臣倾我国家，残害骨肉，非予弟之过。
现代文：王思同到，潞王责备他说 ：贼臣倾覆我们国家，残害骨肉，不是我弟弟的过错。
English: Wang Xitong arrived, and Shao Wang scolded him, saying, "It is not my brother's fault that the vassal overturned our country and destroyed our bones and flesh.

古文：我起兵岐山，盖诛一二贼臣耳，尔何首鼠两端，多方误我，今日之罪，其可逃乎！ 
现代文：我从岐山起兵，只为杀一二个贼臣，你怎么在两者之间动摇不定，多次误我的事，今日之罪可以逃脱吗？ 
English: I raised an army from Qishan, just to kill one or two traitorous retainers. How can you vacillate between the two, misjudge me so many times, and get away with today's crime?

古文：思同曰： 臣起自行间，受先朝爵命，秉旄仗钺，累历重籓，终无显效以答殊遇。
现代文：王思同说： 我出身行伍，受先朝爵位任命，秉持旄钺，历任重要藩镇官职，最终没有显著的功劳报答特殊的待遇。
English: Wang Sitong said: I came from the military, was appointed to a peerage by the previous dynasty, upheld the imperial edict, and successively served as an important official of the domain and town. In the end, there was no significant merit to reward special treatment.

古文：臣非不知攀龙附凤则福多，扶衰救弱则祸速，但恐瞑目之后，无面见先帝。
现代文：我不是不知道攀龙附凤就会多福，扶衰救弱就会添祸，只怕死了以后没脸见先帝。
English: I am not unaware that if you climb the dragon and attach the phoenix, you will be blessed, and if you help the weak, you will be cursed. I'm just afraid that I won't have the face to meet the former emperor after I die.

古文：衅鼓膏原，缧囚之常分也。 
现代文：用鲜血祭鼓用骨肉肥地，是被俘者的常分。 
English: The blood of the sacrificial drum is used to fertilize the ground with the bones and flesh of the captives.

古文：潞王为之改容，徐谓之曰： 且憩歇。 
现代文：潞王听了变了脸色，慢慢对他说 ：暂且休息吧。 
English: After listening to this, the king changed his face and slowly said to him, "Let's take a break for a while."

古文：潞王欲用之，而杨思权之徒耻见其面，屡启刘延朗，言 思同不可留，虑失士心。 
现代文：潞王想起用他，但杨思权之类羞见王思同，多次告诉刘延朗，说 ：王思同不可留，否则将会失去军心。 
English: Wang Shitong thought of using him, but Yang Shiquan and others were ashamed of Wang Shitong and repeatedly told Liu Yanlang that Wang Shitong could not stay, otherwise he would lose his military spirit.

古文：又，潞王入长安时，尹晖尽得思同家财及诸妓女，故尤恶思同，与刘延朗亟言之。
现代文：又潞王进入长安时，尹晖得到了王思同家全部财产和妓女，所以特别害怕王思同，对刘延朗多次提到此事。
English: When Wang Shitong entered Chang'an, Yin Qi got all the property and prostitutes of Wang Shitong's family, so he was particularly afraid of Wang Shitong and mentioned this to Liu Yanlang many times.

古文：属王醉，不待报，杀思同并其子德胜。
现代文：趁潞王醉了时，不向上报告，就杀了王思同及其儿子王德胜。
English: He took advantage of Wang Shitong being drunk and killed Wang Sitong and his son Wang Desheng without reporting it to the higher-ups.

古文：潞王醒，召思同，左右报已诛之矣。
现代文：潞王醒了后，召见王思同，左右的人报告说已杀掉。
English: After Gong Wang woke up, he summoned Wang Sitong. People around him reported that Wang Sitong had been killed.

古文：潞王怒延朗，累日嗟惜之。
现代文：潞王对刘延朗发怒，多日叹惜。
English: Shao Wang was angry with Liu Yanlang and lamented for many days.

古文：及汉高祖即位，诏赠侍中。
现代文：汉高祖即位后，下诏赠侍中。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he issued an imperial edict to bestow the title of "chamberlain."

