古文：霸王之形；象天则地，化人易代，创制天下，等列诸侯，宾属四海，时匡天下；大国小之，曲国正之，强国弱之，重国轻之；乱国并之，暴工残之：僇其罪，卑其列，维其民，然后王之。
现代文：霸业和王业的规模形势是这样的。它模仿上天，效法大地，教化世人，改换朝代，创立天下法制，分列诸侯等次，使四海宾服归属，并乘时匡正天下；它可以缩小大国的版图，纠正邪曲的国家，削弱强国，降低权重之国的地位，兼并乱国，摧残暴虐的国君：处分其罪恶，降低其地位，保护其人民，然后就统治其国家。
English: The scale situation of hegemony and kingship is as follows. It imitates heaven, imitates the earth, enlightens the world, changes dynasties, establishes the legal system of the world, ranks the princes, subordinates the four seas, and rectifies the world in time. It can reduce the territory of the great powers, correct the evil countries, weaken the powerful countries, reduce the status of the weight countries, annex the chaotic countries, and destroy the brutal tyrants: punish their sins, reduce their status, protect their people, and then rule their countries.

古文：夫丰国之谓霸，兼正之国之谓王。
现代文：本国富强叫作 霸 ，兼正诸侯国叫作 王 。
English: The rich and powerful of the country are called the oppressors, and the vassal states are called kings.

古文：夫王者有所独明。
现代文：所谓王者，总有其独明之处。
English: The so-called king always has his own uniqueness.

古文：德共者不取也，道同者不王也。
现代文：德义相同的国家，他不去攻取；道义一致的国家，他不去统治。
English: A country with the same moral values, he will not invade; a country with the same moral values, he will not rule.

古文：夫争天下者，以威易危暴，王之常也。
现代文：历来争夺天下，以威力推翻危乱的暴君，是王者的常事。
English: It has always been the king's business to fight for the world and to overthrow tyrants by force in times of crisis.

古文：君人者有道，霸王者有时。
现代文：统治人民必须有道，称王称霸必须合于时机。
English: There must be morality in ruling the people, and it must be opportune to proclaim the king and hegemony.

古文：国修而邻国无道，霸王之资也。
现代文：国政修明而邻国无道，是成就霸王之业的有利条件。
English: It is a favorable condition to achieve the cause of hegemony when the national policy is clear and the neighboring countries have no way.

古文：夫国之存也，邻国有焉；国之亡也，邻国有焉。
现代文：因为国家的存在与邻国有关，国家的败亡也与邻国有关。
English: Because the existence of a country is related to its neighbors, and the downfall of a country is also related to its neighbors.

古文：邻国有事，邻国得焉；邻国有事，邻国亡焉。
现代文：邻国有事，邻国可以有所得；邻国有事，邻国也可以有所失。
English: When a neighboring country has an issue, the neighboring country can gain something; when a neighboring country has an issue, the neighboring country can also lose something.

古文：天下有事，则圣王利也。国危，则圣人知矣。
现代文：天下有事变？总是对圣王有利；国家危殆的时候，才显出圣人的明智。
English: When there is a change in the world, it is always to the advantage of the saintly king; when the country is in danger, the sage's wisdom is revealed.

古文：夫先王所以王者，资邻国之举不当也。
现代文：先代圣王之所以成其王业，往往是利用邻国的举措不当。
English: The reason why the previous holy king became king was often due to improper use of neighboring countries' measures.

古文：举而不当，此邻敌之所以得意也。
现代文：举措不当，是邻国敌人所以得意的原因。
English: Inappropriate measures are the reason why the enemies of neighboring countries are so good at it.

古文：夫欲用天下之权者，必先布德诸侯。
现代文：想要掌握天下的权力，首先必须施德于诸侯。
English: If you want to hold the power of the world, you must first be kind to the princes.

古文：是故先王有所取，有所与，有所诎，有所信，然后能用天下之权。
现代文：因此，先王总是有所取，有所予，有所屈，有所伸然后才能掌握天下的大权。
English: Therefore, the former king always had to take something, give something, bend something, and stretch something before he could grasp the power of the world.

古文：夫兵幸于权，权幸于地。
现代文：兵胜在于有权，权胜在于得地利。
English: Military victory lies in power, power victory lies in gaining territory.

古文：故诸侯之得地利者，权从之；失地利者，权去之，夫争天下者，必先争人。
现代文：所以，诸侯得有地利的，跟着有权力；失地利的，权就跟着丧失了。争夺天下，还必须先得人心。
English: Therefore, when lords gain power, they gain power; when they lose power, they lose power. In order to conquer the world, they must first win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：明大数者得人，审小计者失人。
现代文：懂得天下大计的，得人；只打小算盘的，失人。
English: He who understands the great scheme of the world is a winner; he who only makes small calculations is a loser.

古文：得天下之众者王，得其半者霸。
现代文：得天下大多数拥护的，能成王业；得半数拥护的，能成霸业。
English: If you win the majority of the world's support, you can become a king; if you win half of the world's support, you can become a hegemon.

古文：是故圣王卑礼以下天下之贤而王之，均分以钓天下之众而臣之。
现代文：因此，圣明君主总是谦恭卑礼来对待天下贤士而加以任用，均分禄食来吸引天下民众而使为臣属。
English: Therefore, the Sage Monarch always treats the world's sages with humility and humbleness and appoints them, and distributes the stipend equally to attract the world's people and make them subordinates.

古文：故贵为天子，富有天下，而伐不谓贪者，其大计存也。
现代文：所以，贵为天子，富有天下，而世人不认为贪，就是因为他顺乎天下大计的原故。
English: Therefore, You are the Son of Heaven, rich in the world, and the world does not think of greed, because He conforms to the world's plan.

古文：以天下之财，利天下之人；以明威之振，合天下之权；以遂德之行，结诸侯之亲；以好佞之罪，刑天下之心；因天下之威，以广明王之伐；攻逆乱之国，赏有功之劳；封贤圣之德，明一人之行，而百姓定矣。
现代文：用天下的财物，来谋利于天下人；用巨大威力的震慑，来集中天下的权力；用施行德政的行动，来取得诸侯的亲附；用惩治奸佞的罪行，来规、范天下人的思想；借助天下的兵威，来扩大明王的功绩；攻下逆乱的国家，来赏赐有功的劳臣；封树圣贤的德望，来宣示天子的行状，这样，百姓就安定了。
English: Use the wealth of the world to benefit the people of the world; use the shock of great power to concentrate the power of the world; use the action of exercising moral government to obtain the attachment of the princes; use the punishment of the crime of treachery to regulate and model the thoughts of the people of the world; use the military power of the world to expand the merits of the king of Ming; conquer the rebellious countries to reward the meritorious laborers; seal the virtues of the sages to proclaim the deeds of the heavenly son, so that the people will be stable.

古文：夫先王取天下也，术术乎大德哉，物利之谓也。
现代文：先王之取天下，那真是丰盛的大德呵！也就是以物利人的意思。
English: The previous king's conquest of the world was truly a great and bountiful virtue! That is, in the materialist's sense.

古文：夫使国常无患，而名利并至者，神圣也；国在危亡，而能寿者，明圣也。
现代文：使国家经常没有忧患而名利兼得的，可称神圣；国家在危亡之中而能使之保全的，可称明圣。
English: That which enables a country to gain both fame and fortune without sorrow may be called sacred; that which enables a country to be preserved in the midst of peril may be called sacred.

古文：是故先王之所师者，神圣也；其所赏者，明圣也。
现代文：所以，先王所师法的，是神圣；所尊祟的，是明圣。
English: Therefore, what the former king taught was sacred; what he venerated and cursed was clearly holy.

古文：夫一言而寿国，不听而国亡，若此者，大圣之言也。
现代文：一句话而能保全国家，不听而国即亡，这样的话就是大圣人的话。
English: A word can save a country, but if it is not heeded, the country will perish. Such words are the words of a great sage.

古文：夫明王之所轻者马与玉，其所重者政与军。
现代文：一个英明君主总是看轻骏马与宝玉，而看重政权与军队。
English: A wise monarch always regards horses and jewels with contempt, but power and the army with importance.

古文：若失主不然，轻予人政，而重予人马；轻予人军，而重与人玉；重宫门之营，而轻四境之守，所以削也。
现代文：至于失天下的君主就不这样了，他轻视予人政权，而重视予人骏马；轻视予人军队，而重视予人宝玉；重视宫门的营治，而轻视四境的防守，所以国家就削弱了。
English: This is not the case with a monarch who has lost the whole world. He despised giving people political power, but valued giving people horses; despised giving people an army, but valued giving people precious stones; valued the administration of the palace gate, but despised the defense of the four borders, so the country was weakened.

古文：夫权者，神圣之所资也；独明者，天下之利器也；独断者，微密之营垒也。
现代文：权谋，是神圣君主所依赖的。独到的明智，好比天下的利器；独到的判断，好比一座精密的营垒。
English: The divine monarch relies on the strategy of power. Unique wisdom is like the sharpest weapon in the world; unique judgment is like a precise fortress.

古文：此三者，圣人之所则也，圣人畏微，而愚人畏明；圣人之憎恶也内，愚人之憎恶也外；圣人将动必知，愚人至危易辞。
现代文：这二者是圣人所要效法的。圣人总是戒慎事物细小的苗头，而愚人只看到事物暴露以后；圣人憎恶内心的恶劣，愚人憎恶外形的恶劣；圣人一动就知其安危，愚人至死也不肯改变。
English: The sage is always on the lookout for the small seeds of things, while the fool sees things only after they are exposed; the sage abhors what is evil in the heart, the fool abhors what is evil in appearance; the sage knows his safety at every move, and the fool refuses to change until death.

古文：圣人能辅时，不能违时。
现代文：圣人都是能捕捉时机的，但不能违背时机。
English: All sages can seize the opportunity, but they cannot go against the opportunity.

古文：知者善谋，不如当时。
现代文：智者善于谋事，但不如抓好时机。
English: A wise man is good at planning, but it is better to seize the opportunity.

古文：精时者，日少而功多。
现代文：精于时机，总是费力少而成果大。
English: Good at timing, always with less effort and greater results.

古文：夫谋无主则困，事无备则废。
现代文：谋事无主见则陷于困境，举事无准备则归于失败。
English: If you do not have a strong opinion, you will be in a difficult situation, and if you do not prepare, you will fail.

古文：是以圣王务具其备。而慎守其时。
现代文：所以，圣王务求做好准备而慎守时机。
English: For this reason, the Holy Father wishes to be prepared and to be opportunistic.

古文：以备待时，以时兴事，时至而举兵。
现代文：以有所准备等待时机，按适当时机兴举大事，时机一到而开始兴兵。
English: To be prepared, to wait for the right time, to do the right thing at the right time, and to begin to raise an army when the time comes.

古文：绝坚而攻国，破大而制地，大本而小标，埊近而攻远。以大牵小，以强使弱，以众致寡，德利百姓，威振天下；令行诸侯而不拂，近无不服，远无不听。
现代文：绝坚壁而攻下敌国，破大城而控制敌地，根本雄厚而目标很小，保全近国而攻伐远敌，用大国牵制小国，用强国役使弱国，用人多招取人少，德利百姓，威震天下；令行于诸侯而不遭反抗，近的无不服从，远的也无不听命了。
English: To conquer an enemy country by breaking through its impenetrable walls, to control an enemy territory by breaching a large city, to have a strong foundation but a small target, to preserve a nearby country while attacking a distant enemy, to use a large country to contain a small country, to use a strong country to serve a weak country, to use more people to recruit fewer people, to benefit the people, and to dominate the world; to issue orders to the princes without encountering resistance, and there is no disobedience near, and there is no disobedience far away.

古文：夫明王为天下正，理也。
现代文：本来一个明王担当天下的领导者，是合理的。
English: Originally, it was reasonable for a bright king to be in charge of the leader of the world.

古文：按强助弱，圉暴止贪，存亡定危，继绝世，此天下之所载也，诸侯之所与也，百姓之所利也，是故天下王之。
现代文：抑强助弱，禁暴国而阻贪君，保全亡国而安定危局，继承绝世，这都是天下拥戴，诸侯亲附，百姓称利的事，所以天下乐推以为王。
English: Suppressing the strong and helping the weak, prohibiting the tyranny of the country and preventing the greed of the prince, preserving the ruined country and stabilizing the dangerous situation, inheriting the world, these are all things that are supported by the world, supported by the princes, and praised by the people, so the world is happy.

古文：知盖天下，继最一世，材振四海，王之佐也。
现代文：至于智谋盖天下，断事冠一世，才能震四海的人，这便是王业的佐臣了。
English: As for the person who can make the world tremble with his wisdom and strategy, the person who can make the world tremble with his wisdom and strategy, this is the royal Sasone.

古文：千乘之国得其守，诸侯可得而臣，天下可得而有也。
现代文：千乘之国，只要具备应守的条件，也可以臣服诸侯，据有天下。
English: A country of a thousand horsemen, as long as it has the necessary conditions, can also submit to the lords, as long as there is a world.

古文：万乘之国失其守，国非其国也。
现代文：万乘之国，如果失其应守的条件，就不能保有其国。
English: If a Manchukuo country fails to live up to its obligations, it cannot remain a Manchukuo country.

古文：天下皆理己独乱，国非其国也；诸侯皆令己独孤，国非其国也；邻国皆险己独易，国非其国也。
现代文：天下皆治而自己独乱，就不能保有其国；诸侯都和好而自己孤立，就不能保有其国；邻国都有险可守而自己平易不备，也不能保有其国。
English: If you want to rule the whole world, but are yourself disorderly, you cannot keep your country; if you want to keep your country, but are yourself isolated, you cannot keep your country; if you want to keep your country, you cannot keep your country, and if you want to keep your country, you cannot keep your country.

古文：此三者，亡国之徵也。
现代文：这三者都是亡国的征象。
English: All three are signs of a dying country.

古文：夫国大而政小者，国从其政；国小而政大者，国益大。
现代文：国大而政绩小，国家地位也会跟着政绩一样小；国小而政绩大，国家也跟着强大。
English: If the country is large and the political achievements are small, the national status will be as small as the political achievements; if the country is small and the political achievements are large, the country will also be strong.

古文：大而不为者，复小；强而不理者，复弱；众而不理者，复寡；贵而无礼者，复贱；重而凌节者，复轻，富而骄肆者，复贫。
现代文：国大而无所作为，可以变为小；国强而不加治理，可以变为弱；人众而不加治理，可以变为少；地位高贵而无礼，可以变为贱；权重而超越范围，可以变为轻；家富而骄奢放肆，可以变为贫。
English: A big country without doing anything can become small; a strong country without governance can become weak; the people without governance can become few; the status of nobility and rudeness can become low; the weight and beyond the scope can become light; the family wealth and arrogance can become poor.

古文：故观国者观君，观军者观将，观备者观野。
现代文：所以看一个国家，要看国君如何；看一个军队，要看将领如何；看一国战备，要看农田如何。
English: Therefore, when looking at a country, it is necessary to look at how the sovereign is doing; when looking at an army, it is necessary to look at how the generals are doing; when looking at a country's combat readiness, it is necessary to look at how the farmland is doing.

古文：其君如明而非明也，其将如贤而非贤也，其人如耕者而非耕也，三守既失，国非其国也。
现代文：如果国君似明而不明，将领似贤而不贤，人民好似耕者而不耕种土地，失掉这三个应守的条件，国家就不能保有了。
English: If the sovereign is clear but not clear, the generals are wise but not wise, and the people are like cultivators but do not cultivate the land, if these three conditions are lost, the country cannot be preserved.

古文：地大而不为，命曰土满；人众而不理，命曰人满；兵威而不止，命曰武满。
现代文：地大而不耕，叫作 地满 ；人多而不治，叫作 人满 ；兵威而不正，叫作 武满 。
English: A large land that is not cultivated is called a full land; a large number of people that is not cultivated is called a full people; a powerful army that is not right is called a full army.

古文：三满而不止，国非其国也。
现代文：不制止这 三满 ，国家也就不能保住了。
English: Without stopping this Sanman, the country cannot be saved.

古文：地大而不耕，非其地也；卿贵而不臣，非其卿也；人众而不亲，非其人也。
现代文：地大而不耕，就不是他的土地；卿贵而不行臣道，就不是他的卿相；人多而不亲附，就不是他的人民。
English: If the land is large and uncultivated, it is not his land; if he is noble and does not behave like a vassal, it is not his nobles; if he is numerous but not intimate, it is not his people.

古文：夫无土而欲富者忧，无德而欲王者危，施薄而求厚者孤。
现代文：无地而求富有者，忧伤；无德而想称王者，危险；施予薄而求报答厚重者，孤立。
English: He who seeks riches without land is sad; he who wants to be a king without virtue is dangerous; he who gives little and asks for much is lonely.

古文：夫上夹而下苴、国小而都大者弑。
现代文：上面权小而下面权重，国土小而都城大，就将有被弑之祸。
English: If the power above is small but the weight below is large, if the country is small but the capital is large, there will be the calamity of being captured.

古文：主尊臣卑，上威下敬，令行人服，理之至也。
现代文：做到主尊臣卑，上威下敬，令行人服的，才是治国的最高水平。
English: It is the highest level of statecraft to achieve the principle of "superiority over inferiority," "superiority over inferiority," "superiority over inferiority," "superiority over inferiority" and "superiority over inferiority."

古文：使天下两天子，天下不可理也：一国而两君，一国不可理也；一家而两父，一家不可理也。
现代文：如果天下有两个天子，天下就不能治理；一国而有两君，一国就不能治理；一家而有两父，一家就不能治理。
English: If there are two heavenly sons in the world, the world cannot be governed; if there are two princes in a country, the country cannot be governed; if there are two fathers in a family, the family cannot be governed.

古文：夫令，不高不行，不抟不听。
现代文：法令，不发自上层就不能推行，不集中权力，就无人听从。
English: Laws cannot be implemented without being issued from the top, and no one will obey them without the centralization of power.

古文：尧舜之人，非生而理也；桀纣之人，非生而乱也。
现代文：尧舜之民，不是生来就是好百姓；桀纣之民，不是生来就要作乱的。
English: The people of Yao were not born to be good; the people of Yao were not born to make trouble.

古文：故理乱在上也。
现代文：所以治乱的根源都在上面。
English: Therefore, the root causes of the turmoil are above.

古文：夫霸王之所始也，以人为本。
现代文：霸王之业的开始，也是以人民为本。
English: The beginning of the Overlord's career was also people-oriented.

古文：本理则国固，本乱则国危。
现代文：本治则国家巩固，本乱则国家危亡。
English: When there is genuine governance, the country is consolidated; when there is genuine chaos, the country is in danger of collapse.

古文：故上明则下敬，政平则人安，士教和则兵胜敌，使能则百事理，亲仁则上不危，任贤则诸侯服。
现代文：所以，上面英明则下面敬服，政事平易则人心安定，战士训练好则战争取胜，使用能臣则百事皆治，亲近仁人则君主不危，任用贤相诸侯就信服了。
English: Therefore, if the above is wise, the below will respect it, if the government is easy, the people will be stable, if the soldiers are well trained, the war will be won, if the able ministers are used, everything will be governed, if the benevolent people are close, the monarch will not be in danger, and if the wise princes are appointed, the people will be convinced.

古文：霸王之形，德义胜之，智谋胜之，兵战胜之，地形胜之，动作胜之，故王之。
现代文：霸业和王业的形势是这样的，它的德义处于优势，智谋处于优势，兵战处于优势，地形处于优势，动作处于优势，所以能统治天下。
English: The situation of hegemony and kingship is as follows. Its virtue and righteousness are superior, its wisdom and strategy are superior, its military warfare is superior, its terrain is superior, and its action is superior, so it can rule the world.

古文：夫善用国者，因其大国之重，以其势小之；因强国之权，以其势弱之；因重国之形，以其势轻之。
现代文：善于治国的，往往利用大国的力量，依势而缩小别国；利用强国权威，依势而削弱别国；利用重国的地位，依势而压低别国。
English: Those who are good at governing a country often use the power of a big country to shrink another country according to the situation; use the authority of a strong country to weaken another country according to the situation; use the status of a big country to suppress another country according to the situation.

古文：强国众，合强以攻弱，以图霸。强国少，合小以攻大，以图王。
现代文：强国多，就联合强国攻击弱国以图霸业；强国少，就联合小国攻击大国以图王业。
English: If there are many powerful countries, they will join the powerful countries to attack the weak countries in order to dominate the industry; if there are few powerful countries, they will join the small countries to attack the big countries in order to dominate the industry.

古文：强国众，而言王势者，愚人之智也；强国少，而施霸道者，败事之谋也。
现代文：强国多，而谈统一的王业，是愚人之见；强国少，而行联合称霸的办法，是败事之谋。
English: There are many powerful countries, and it is foolish to talk about the royal cause of unification; there are few powerful countries, and the method of joint hegemony is a losing strategy.

古文：夫神圣，视天下之形，知动静之时；视先后之称，知祸福之门。
现代文：神圣的君主，都是看天下的形势，了解动静时机；看先后机宜，了解祸福的道路。
English: All divine sovereigns look at the situation of the world to understand the dynamic and dynamic opportunities; look at the opportunities in succession to understand the path of calamity and blessing.

古文：强国众，先举者危，后举者利。强国少，先举者王，后举者亡。
现代文：强国多，先举事者危险，后举事者得利；强国少，先举事者成王，后举事者失败。
English: There are many powerful countries. Those who raise the issue first will be in danger, and those who raise the issue later will benefit. There are few powerful countries. Those who raise the issue first will become kings, and those who raise the issue later will fail.

古文：战国众，后举可以霸；战国少，先举可以王。
现代文：参战国多，后举事者可以成霸；参战国少，先举事者就可以成王。
English: If there are more countries participating in the war, the one who raises the issue later can become the hegemon; if there are fewer countries participating in the war, the one who raises the issue first can become the king.

古文：夫王者之心，方而不最，列不让贤，贤不齿第择众，是贪大物也。
现代文：王者之心，方正而不走极端。列爵不排斥贤人，选贤不择年齿地位，这是为贪更大的利益。
English: The king's heart is upright and does not go to extremes. The lords do not exclude the wise, and the choice of the wise does not depend on age or status. This is for the greater good of greed.

古文：是以王之形大也。
现代文：所以王业的形势是伟大的。
English: So the royal situation is great.

古文：夫先王之争天下也以方心，其立之也以整齐，其理之也以平易。
现代文：先王在争夺天下的时候，坚持方正的原则；在建立天下的时候，实行整齐划一的措施；在治理天下的时候，则实行平和简易的方针。
English: When conquering the world, the forefathers adhered to the principle of rectitude; when establishing the world, they implemented uniform measures; when governing the world, they implemented a peaceful and simple policy.

古文：立政出令用人道，施爵禄用地道，举大事用天道。
现代文：立政出令用人道，施爵禄用地道，兴举大事用天道。
English: When issuing a decree to establish a government, humanity should be used, when granting a stipend, the natural way should be used, and when calling for an event, the heavenly way should be used.

古文：是故先王之伐也，伐逆不伐顺，伐险不伐易，伐过不伐及。
现代文：因此，先王从事征伐，都是伐逆而不伐顺，伐险恶而不伐平易，伐太过头的而不伐落后的。
English: Therefore, the first king engaged in logging, but not logging, logging is dangerous but not logging is easy, logging is too much but not logging is lagging behind.

古文：四封之内，以正使之；诸侯之会，以权致之。
现代文：本国之内，通过政令来驾驭；国外会集诸侯，运用权力来召集。
English: Domestically, through decrees to drive; abroad, the princes will gather and use power to convene.

古文：近而不服者，以地患之；远而不听者，以刑危之。
现代文：对就近而不服从的国家，用侵削土地加害它；对离远而不听命的国家，用强大形势威胁它。
English: For a nearby country that does not obey, it is inflicted with land invasion; for a distant country that does not obey, it is threatened with a strong situation.

古文：一而伐之，武也；服而舍之，文也；文武具满，德也。
现代文：背叛则征伐之，这是武；服从则赦免之，这是文。文武兼备，这才是德。
English: To betray is to conquer, which is martial arts; to obey is to forgive, which is literature. To have both literature and martial arts is virtue.

古文：夫轻重强弱之形，诸侯合则强，孤则弱。
现代文：关于国家轻重强弱的形势问题，各诸侯国联合起来则强，孤立则弱。
English: On the question of the relative importance and strength of countries, states are stronger when united and weaker when isolated.

古文：骥之材，而百马伐之，骥必罢矣。强最一伐，而天下共之，国必弱矣。
现代文：骐骥之材，用百马轮流与它竟逐，它也一定疲惫；冠绝一代的强国，举天下者去攻它，也一定会弱下来。
English: If a hundred horses are used to chase a dragon, it will surely be exhausted. If the strongest country in the world is attacked, it will surely be weakened.

古文：强国得之也以收小，其失之也以恃强。小国得之也以制节，其失之也以离强。
现代文：强国的正确作法是容纳小国，其失误在于自恃其强；小国的正确作法是折节事强，其失误在摆脱强国。
English: The correct way for a strong country is to accommodate a small country, and its mistake is to think that it is stronger than it is; the correct way for a small country is to compromise, and its mistake is to get rid of a strong country.

古文：夫国小大有谋，强弱有形。
现代文：国家无论大小，都有自己的谋算；无论强弱，都有自己的形势。
English: No matter how big or small a country is, it has its own strategy; no matter how strong or weak, it has its own situation.

古文：服近而强远，王国之形也；合小以攻大，敌国之形也；以负海攻负海，中国之形也；折节事强以避罪，小国之形也。
现代文：征服近国而威胁远国，是保持王国的形势；联合小国以攻击大国，是保持势均力敌国家的形势；以负海之国攻伐负海之国，是保持中原国家的形势；折节事奉强国以避罪，是保持小国的形势。
English: Conquering nearby countries and threatening distant countries is the situation of maintaining a kingdom; uniting small countries to attack large countries is the situation of maintaining an enemy country with equal strength; attacking a country with a negative sea and attacking a country with a negative sea is the situation of maintaining a Central Plains country; serving a strong country to avoid crime is the situation of maintaining a small country.

古文：自古以至今，未尝有先能作难，违时易形，以立功名者；无有常先作难，违时易形，无不败者也。
现代文：从古到今，没有首先起事，违背时机，变更形势，而能建立功业的；也没有经常首先起事，违背时机，变更形势，而不失败的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been a first-mover, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer, a first-timer

古文：夫欲臣伐君，正四海者，不可以兵独攻而取也。
现代文：凡是要以臣伐君征服四海的，不可只依靠举兵进攻取胜。
English: Anyone who wants to conquer the four seas as a vassal can't just rely on raising an army to attack and win.

古文：必先定谋虑，便地形，利权称，亲与国，视时而动，王者之术也。
现代文：必须首先定好规划，占据有利地形，权衡有利的结局，密切盟国的关系，然后再待机而动，才是王者的策略。
English: It is the king's strategy to first set a good plan, occupy the favorable terrain, weigh the favorable outcome, close the relationship between the allies, and then wait and move.

古文：夫先王之伐也，举之必义，用之必暴，相形而知可，量力而知攻，攻得而知时。
现代文：先王的征伐，举兵必合于正义，用兵必须迅猛，看形势而断定可否举兵，量实力而断定能否进攻，考虑得失而断定行动时机。
English: For the former king's expedition, the raising of troops must be in accordance with justice, and the use of troops must be swift. The situation determines whether to raise troops, the amount of strength determines whether to attack, and the time to act is determined by considering gains and losses.

古文：是故先王之伐也，必先战而后攻，先攻而后取地。
现代文：因此，先王从事征伐，必须先战斗而后进攻，先进攻而后取地。
English: Therefore, the first king to engage in conquest must first fight and then attack, and first attack and then take land.

古文：故善攻者料众以攻众，料食以攻食，料备以攻备。
现代文：所以善于进攻的，都要算计好我军人数以针对敌军人数，算计好我军粮草以针对敌军粮草，算计好我军装备以针对敌军装备。
English: Therefore, those who are good at attacking should calculate the number of our troops to target the number of enemy troops, calculate the grain and grass of our troops to target the grain and grass of the enemy troops, and calculate the equipment of our troops to target the equipment of the enemy troops.

古文：以众攻众，众存不攻；以食攻食，食存不攻；以备攻备，备存不攻。
现代文：以人对人，如敌军兵众有余，则不可以进攻；以粮对粮，如敌军存粮有余，则不可以进攻；以装备对装备，如敌军装备有余，则不可以进攻。
English: Man to man, if the enemy has too many soldiers, he must not attack; grain to grain, if the enemy has too much grain, he must not attack; equipment to equipment, if the enemy has too much equipment, he must not attack.

古文：释实而攻虚，释坚而攻膬，释难而攻易。
现代文：应该避开实力而击其空虚，避开坚固而击其脆弱，避开难攻之地而击其易被摧毁的地方。
English: One should shun strength and strike at its emptiness, shun firmness and strike at its fragility, shun hard places and strike at its destructibility.

古文：夫抟国不在敦古，理世不在善攻，霸王不在成曲。
现代文：掌握国家不在于敦敬古道，治世不在于精通旧事，成王成霸不在于抄袭典故。
English: Mastering the country does not lie in honoring the ancient way, ruling the world does not lie in mastering the old things, and becoming a king does not lie in copying allusions.

古文：夫举失而国危，刑过而权倒，谋易而祸反，计得而强信，功得而名从，权重而令行，固其数也。
现代文：举措失当国家就会危险，错过形势权力就会倾倒，谋事轻率则招祸，计划得宜则发挥强力，功得则名誉随之而来，权重则命令容易推行，这些都是规律性。
English: The country will be in danger if the measure is improper, if the situation is missed, the power will be overturned, if the plan is imprudent, it will bring disaster, if the plan is appropriate, it will play a strong role, if the achievement is honorable, if the weight is weight, the order is easy to implement, these are regularities.

古文：夫争强之国，必先争谋，争刑，争权。
现代文：凡是争强的国家，必先竞争谋略，竞争形势，竟争权力。
English: All countries that are competitive must first compete for strategies, competitive situations, and compete for power.

古文：令人主一喜一怒者，谋也；令国一轻一重者，刑也；令兵一进一退者，权也。
现代文：使人君有喜有怒，在谋略；使国家有轻有重，在形势；使军队有进有退，在权力。
English: To make a ruler have joy and anger is strategy; to make a country have lightness and weight is situation; to make an army have advance and retreat is power.

古文：故精于谋，则人主之愿可得，而令可行也；精干刑，则大国之地可夺，强国之兵可圉也；精于权，则天下之兵可齐，诸侯之君可朝也。
现代文：所以，精于谋略则人君的愿望可以实现，而号令可以推行；精于形势则大国土地可以夺取，而强国之兵可以包围；精于权力则天下的兵力可剪除，诸侯国的君主可以召见了。
English: Therefore, if you are good at strategy, your wishes can be realized, and your orders can be implemented; if you are good at the situation, the land of a big country can be seized, and the soldiers of a strong country can be surrounded; if you are good at power, the forces of the world can be cut off, and the monarch of the principality can be summoned.

古文：夫神圣视天下之刑，知世之所谋，知兵之所攻，知地之所归，知令之所加矣。
现代文：神圣的君主，都是根据天下的形势，了解当代的谋算，了解兵力的攻向，了解土地的归属，了解政令所加的对象。
English: The divine monarch, according to the situation of the world, understands the contemporary strategy, understands the offensive direction of the troops, understands the ownership of the land, and understands the objects imposed by the decree.

古文：夫兵攻所憎而利之，此邻国之所不亲也。
现代文：凡是攻伐所憎之国而以利归己的，这就会造成邻国的不亲。
English: Anyone who invades a hated country and takes advantage of it for his own gain will alienate his neighbors.

古文：权动所恶，而实寡归者强。
现代文：威权侵犯所恶之国而利少归己的，就可以图强。
English: If a country that has been violated by an authoritarian power is evil, but gains little for itself, it can try to become stronger.

古文：擅破一国，强在后世者王。
现代文：专破一国，造成后世的强盛，可成王业。
English: Dominating a country and creating prosperity for future generations can be a crowning achievement.

古文：擅破一国，强在邻国者亡。
现代文：专破一国，造成邻国的强盛，那就要败亡了。
English: If you dominate a country and cause the prosperity of a neighboring country, then you will be defeated.

