古文：十有三年春，齐侯、卫侯次于垂葭。
现代文：十三年春季，齐侯、卫侯在垂葭驻军。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Qi Hou and Wei Hou garrisoned troops in Talian.

古文：夏，筑蛇渊囿。
现代文：夏季，鲁国建筑蛇渊囿。
English: In the summer, the construction industry in Russia is in full swing.

古文：大蒐于比蒲。
现代文：鲁国在比蒲举行大规模阅兵仪式。
English: Russia held a large military parade in Bibo.

古文：卫公孟彄帅师伐曹。
现代文：卫国的公孟彄率领军队攻打曹国。
English: The army of Meng Xun Shui Ling, the public defender of the country, attacked Cao.

古文：秋，晋赵鞅入于晋阳以叛。
现代文：秋季，晋国的赵鞅逃到晋阳，发动叛乱。
English: In the autumn, Zhao Wei of Jin fled to Jinyang and launched a rebellion.

古文：冬，晋荀寅、士吉射入于朝歌以叛。
现代文：冬季，晋国的荀寅、士吉射逃到朝歌这个地方，发动叛乱。
English: In winter, the Jurchen and Shijiazhuang of Jin fled to this place of morning song and launched a rebellion.

古文：晋赵鞅归于晋。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅回到晋国。
English: Zhao Wei of Jin returned to Jin.

古文：薛弑其君比。
现代文：薛国弑杀了它的国君比。
English: Xue Guozhen killed its sovereign.

古文：十三年春，齐侯、卫侯次于垂葭，实郹氏。
现代文：十三年春季，齐景公、卫灵公住在垂葭，垂葭就是郹氏。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Qi Jing Gong and Wei Ling Gong lived in the saliva, and the saliva was the Luo clan.

古文：使师伐晋，将济河。诸大夫皆曰： 不可。 邴意兹曰： 可。锐师伐河内，传必数日而后及绛。
现代文：派军队进攻晋国，将要渡过黄河，大夫们都说不行，邴意兹说： 可以，用精兵攻打河内，传车一定需要几天才能到达绛邑。
English: The doctors all said it was impossible to send an army to attack Jin Province and cross the Yellow River. Lu Yizi said, "Yes, it is possible to attack Hanoi with elite soldiers. It will take several days for the train to arrive in Handan."

古文：绛不三月，不能出河，则我既济水矣。 乃伐河内。
现代文：绛邑兵马不到三个月不能到达黄河，到那时我军已经回兵渡河了。 
English: It took less than three months for the soldiers and horses from Qinyi to reach the Yellow River. By that time, our army had already returned to cross the river.

古文：齐侯皆敛诸大夫之轩，唯邴意兹乘轩。
现代文：于是就进攻河内。齐景公把大夫们的车子都收起来，只有邴意兹可以坐车。
English: So they attacked Hanoi. Lord Qi Jing took away all the doctors' cars, and only Xun Yizi was allowed to travel by car.

古文：齐侯欲与卫侯乘，与之宴，而驾乘广，载甲焉。
现代文：齐景公想和卫灵公同坐一辆车，跟他一起饮宴而命令乘广套车，载上甲兵。
English: Qi Jing Gong wanted to sit in a car with Wei Ling Gong and have a banquet with him, so he ordered to take a wide carriage and carry armored soldiers.

古文：使告曰： 晋师至矣。 
现代文：派人报告说： 晋军到了！ 
English: They sent someone to report: The Jin army has arrived!

古文：齐侯曰： 比君之驾也，寡人请摄。 
现代文：齐景公说： 等到君王的车子套好，寡人就代您的御者驾车。 
English: Lord Qi Jing said: Wait until the king's carriage is ready, and someone else will drive in place of your driver.

古文：乃介而与之乘，驱之。或告曰： 无晋师。 
现代文：于是就披甲和卫灵公一起登年，驱车向前。有人报告说： 没有晋军。 
English: So he put on his armor and rode into the new year with Wei Linggong and drove forward. Someone reported: There is no Jin army.

古文：乃止。
现代文：这才把车停下。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：晋赵鞅谓邯郸午曰： 归我卫贡五百家，吾舍诸晋阳。 
现代文：晋国的赵鞅对邯郸午说： 把卫国进贡的五百家还给我，我要把他们安置到晋阳去。 
English: Zhao Yao of Jin said to Gong Bao: Give me back the five hundred families who paid tribute to defend the country, and I will resettle them in Jinyang.

古文：午许诺。
现代文：邯郸午答应了。
English: At noon, he agreed.

古文：归告其父兄，父兄皆曰： 不可。
现代文：回去告诉他的父老兄长。父老兄长都说： 不行。
English: He went back and told his father and his brothers, but they said, "We can't do that.

古文：卫是以为邯郸，而寘诸晋阳，绝卫之道也。
现代文：卫国是用这五百家来帮助邯郸午的，要安置在晋阳，这就是断绝和卫国的友好之路。
English: The five hundred households that were used to help the midday meal should be resettled in Jinyang. This is the way to break off the friendship with the motherland.

古文：不如侵齐而谋之。 
现代文：不如用侵袭齐国的办法来解决。 
English: It is better to use the method of invading Qi to solve it.

古文：乃如之，而归之于晋阳。
现代文：于是就照着父兄的说法办，然后把五百家迁到晋阳。
English: So he did what his father and brother said, and moved 500 families to Jinyang.

古文：赵孟怒，召午而囚诸晋阳。
现代文：赵鞅发怒，把邯郸午找来，囚禁在晋阳。
English: Enraged, Zhao Jun sought out Gong Bao and imprisoned him in Jinyang.

古文：使其从者说剑而入，涉宾不可。
现代文：赵鞅让邯郸午的随从解除佩剑再进来，涉宾不同意。
English: Zhao Yao asked Gong Bao's attendant to take off his sword and come in again, but the guest did not agree.

古文：乃使告邯郸人曰： 吾私有讨于午也，二三子唯所欲立。 
现代文：赵鞅就派人告诉邯郸人说： 我私人对午进行惩罚，您几位可以按自己的愿望立继承人。 
English: Zhao Yao sent someone to tell Xuan, "I will personally punish Wu, and you two can appoint successors as you wish."

古文：遂杀午。
现代文：就杀了邯郸午。
English: So he killed Zhao Wu.

古文：赵稷、涉宾以邯郸叛。
现代文：赵稷、涉宾领着邯郸人叛变。
English: Zhao Wei and Zhan Bin led the Wei people to rebel.

古文：夏六月，上军司马籍秦围邯郸。
现代文：夏季，六月，上军司马籍秦包围邯郸。
English: In the summer, in June, Qin was besieged by the upper army division of Ma nationality.

古文：邯郸午，荀寅之甥也；荀寅，范吉射之姻也。而相与睦，故不与围邯郸，将作乱。
现代文：邯郸午，是荀寅的外甥；荀寅，是范吉射女婿的父亲，彼此和睦，所以不参与包围邯郸，准备发动叛乱。
English: Xiang Wu, the nephew of Xing Yin, and Xing Yin, the father of Fan Jisha's son-in-law, were in harmony with each other, so they did not participate in the encirclement of Xiang Yu and prepared to launch a rebellion.

古文：董安于闻之，告赵孟曰： 先备诸。 
现代文：董安于听到了消息，报告赵鞅说： 先作好准备吗？ 
English: When Dong Anyu heard the news, he reported to Zhao Wei: "Should we prepare first?

古文：赵孟曰： 晋国有命，始祸者死，为后可也。 
现代文：赵鞅说： 晋国有一条法令，开始发动祸乱的人处死。我们后发制人就行了。 
English: Zhao Wei said, "There is a law in Jin Province that those who start the calamity will be put to death. We can stop them later."

古文：安于曰： 与其害于民，宁我独死。
现代文：董安于说： 与其危害百姓，宁可我一个人去死。
English: Dong Anyu said: I would rather die alone than endanger the people.

古文：请以我说。 
现代文：请用我作为解释。 
English: Please use me as an explanation.

古文：赵孟不可。
现代文：赵鞅不答应。
English: Zhao Wei did not agree.

古文：秋七月，范氏、中行氏伐赵氏之宫，赵鞅奔晋阳。晋人围之。
现代文：秋季七月，范氏、中行氏进攻赵氏的宫室，赵鞅逃亡到晋阳，晋国人包围晋阳。
English: In the autumn of July, the Fan and Zhongxing clans attacked the palace of the Zhao clan, Zhao Wei fled to Jinyang, and the people of Jinyang surrounded Jinyang.

古文：范皋夷无宠于范吉射，而欲为乱于范氏。
现代文：范皋夷不受范吉射的宠信，想要在范氏族中发动叛乱。
English: Fan Xiyi was not favored by Fan Jisha and wanted to start a rebellion among the Fan clan.

古文：梁婴父嬖于知文子，文子欲以为卿。
现代文：梁婴父受到知文子的宠信，知文子想让他做卿。
English: Liang's father was favored by Zhifengzi, who wanted to make him a lord.

古文：韩简子与中行文子相恶，魏襄子亦与范昭子相恶。故五子谋，将逐荀寅而以梁婴父代之，逐范吉射而以范皋夷代之。
现代文：韩简子和荀寅互相不和，魏襄子也和范吉射互相不和，所以五个人策划，准备驱逐荀寅而用梁婴父代替他，驱逐范吉射而用范皋夷代替他。
English: Han Jianzi and Fan Yin are at odds with each other, and Wei Xiangzi and Fan Ji Ya are also at odds with each other, so the five people are planning to expel Fan Jianzi and replace him with Fan Jianyi.

古文：荀跞言于晋侯曰： 君命大臣，始祸者死，载书在河。
现代文：荀跞对晋定公说： 君王命令大臣，开始发动祸乱的人处死，盟书沉在黄河里。
English: Zou said to Jin Ding Gong: The king ordered the minister to execute the person who started the calamity, and the treaty was sunk in the Yellow River.

古文：今三臣始祸，而独逐鞅，刑已不钧矣。
现代文：现在三个大臣开始发动祸乱，而唯独驱逐赵鞅，处罚已经不公正了。
English: Now that three ministers have begun to wreak havoc, and Zhao Wei is the only one to be expelled, the punishment is already unfair.

古文：请皆逐之。 
现代文：请把他们都驱逐。 
English: Please expel them all.

古文：冬十一月，荀跞、韩不信、魏曼多奉公以伐范氏、中行氏，弗克。
现代文：冬季，十一月，荀跞、韩不信、魏曼多事奉晋定公而攻打范氏、中行氏，没有攻下。
English: In the winter, in November, Zou, Han Kui and Wei Mengduo, who served the Jin Dynasty, attacked the Fan and Zhongxing clans, but failed to capture them.

古文：二子将伐公，齐高彊曰： 三折肱知为良医。
现代文：这两个人准备进攻晋定公。齐国的高强说： 久病成良医。
English: These two men are preparing to attack King Jinding. Gao Qiang of Qi said, "Long illness makes a good doctor."

古文：唯伐君为不可，民弗与也。
现代文：唯有攻打国君是不行的。百姓是不赞成的。
English: It is not enough to attack the sovereign. The people do not approve.

古文：我以伐君在此矣。
现代文：我正是因为攻打国君才待在这里了啊。
English: I'm here precisely because I want to attack the sovereign.

古文：三家未睦，可尽克也。
现代文：三家不和睦，可以全部战胜他们。
English: The three families do not get along, you can defeat them all.

古文：克之，君将谁与？
现代文：战胜他们，国君还去倚靠谁？
English: Who will the sovereign rely on to defeat them?

古文：若先伐君，是使睦也。 
现代文：如果先攻打国君，这是促使他们和睦。 
English: If you attack the sovereign first, it is to promote their harmony.

古文：弗听，遂伐公。
现代文：两个人不听，于是就攻打晋定公。
English: Two people did not listen, so they attacked Jin Ding.

古文：国人助公，二子败，从而伐之。
现代文：国内的人们帮助晋定公，两个人战败，三家跟着就去攻打他们。
English: People in the country helped Jin Ding Gong, two people were defeated, and three families followed to attack them.

古文：丁未，荀寅、士吉射奔朝歌，韩、魏以赵氏为请。
现代文：十八日，荀寅、范吉射逃亡朝歌，韩氏、魏氏替赵氏请求。
English: On the 18th, Yu Yin and Fan Ji shot the morning song as they fled, and Han Zhao and Wei Zhao made a request for Zhao.

古文：十二月辛未，赵鞅入于绛，盟于公宫。
现代文：十二月十二日，赵鞅进入绛邑，在公宫盟誓。
English: On December 12th, Zhao Zhen entered the county and swore an oath at the palace.

古文：初，卫公叔文子朝而请享灵公，退，见史而告之。
现代文：当初，卫国的公孙文子上朝请求设享礼招待卫灵公。退朝后，见到史并将这件事告诉了他。
English: At first, Emperor Wen, the great-grandson of Emperor Wei, requested that a ceremony be held to invite Emperor Wei Ling. After he retired, he met Shi Xuan and told him about the matter.

古文：史曰： 子必祸矣，子富而君贪，罪其及子乎。 文子曰： 然。
现代文：史说： 您必然招来祸患了！您富有而国君贪婪，祸患恐怕要到您身上吧！ 文子说： 是这样。
English: Shi Yan said, "You have certainly invited disaster! You are rich and the sovereign is greedy, I'm afraid disaster will befall you!" Fumiko said, "That's right."

古文：吾不先告子，是吾罪也。
现代文：我没有先告诉您，这是我的罪过。
English: It's my fault for not telling you first.

古文：君既许我矣，其若之何？ 
现代文：国君已经答应我了，应该怎么办？ 
English: The sovereign has already promised me, so what should I do?

古文：史曰： 无害。
现代文：史说： 没有关系。
English: Shi Yan said, "It doesn't matter.

古文：子臣，可以免。
现代文：您谨守臣道，可以免祸。
English: If you keep to the path of a vassal, you can avoid disaster.

古文：富而能臣，必免于难，上下同之。
现代文：富有而能谨守臣道，一定能免于祸难。
English: If you are rich and can keep to the path of a vassal, you will surely be able to avoid misfortune.

古文：戌也骄，其亡乎。
现代文：无论尊卑都适用这一原则的。戌骄傲，恐怕要逃亡吧！
English: This principle applies regardless of rank. If you are proud, I'm afraid you should run away!

古文：富而不骄者鲜，吾唯子之见。
现代文：富有而不骄傲的人很少，我只见到您一个。
English: There are very few people who are rich and not proud. I only see you.

古文：骄而不亡者，未之有也。
现代文：骄傲而不逃亡的人，我还没有见过。
English: I've never met a proud man who didn't run away.

古文：戌必与焉。 
现代文：戌必定要成为其中一个的。 
English: He's bound to be one of them.

古文：及文子卒，卫侯始恶于公叔戌，以其富也。
现代文：等到公叔文子死了，卫灵公才开始讨厌公叔戌，因为他富有。
English: It wasn't until Uncle Fumiko died that Wei Ling started to hate Uncle Min because he was rich.

古文：公叔戌又将去夫人之党，夫人愬之曰： 戌将为乱。 
现代文：公叔戌又准备除掉夫人的党羽，夫人向卫灵公控告说： 戌将要发动叛乱。 
English: Uncle Gong was also preparing to eliminate his wife's followers. His wife complained to Wei Ling that Gong was about to start a rebellion.

