古文：薛仁贵，绛州龙门人。
现代文：薛仁贵，绛州龙门人。
English: Xue Rengui, Longmen of Zhangzhou.

古文：少贫贱，以田为业。
现代文：青年时代家境贫寒地位卑微，以种田为业。
English: In his youth, he came from a poor family and had a lowly status. His occupation was farming.

古文：将改葬其先，妻柳曰： 夫有高世之材，要须遇时乃发。
现代文：他准备迁葬先辈的坟墓，妻子柳氏说： 有出众的才干，要等到机遇才能发挥。
English: He is preparing to move the graves of his ancestors. His wife, Ms. Liu, said: "He has outstanding talent, and he has to wait until he has the opportunity to use it.

古文：今天子自征辽东，求猛将，此难得之时，君盍图功名以自显？
现代文：现在皇帝御驾亲征辽东，招募骁勇的将领，这是难得的时机，您何不争取立功扬名？
English: Now that the emperor is personally leading the conquest of Liaodong and recruiting brave generals, this is a rare opportunity. Why don't you strive for glory?

古文：富贵还乡，葬未晚。 
现代文：富贵之后回家，再迁葬也不算迟。 
English: It's not too late to go home after being rich, and then relocate and bury.

古文：仁贵乃往见将军张士贵应募。
现代文：薛仁贵这才去见将军张士贵应征。
English: It was only then that Xue Rengui went to see General Zhang Shigui to enlist.

古文：至安地，会郎将刘君邛为贼所围，仁贵驰救之，斩贼将，系首马鞍，贼皆慑伏，由是知名。
现代文：部队到安地，郎将刘君昂正被敌军包围，薛仁贵赶去援救，斩杀敌军将领，把他的首级拴在马鞍上，敌人都畏惧降服，从此就出了名。
English: When the troops arrived in Andi, Liu Jun'ang, the general's brother-in-arms, was surrounded by the enemy. Xue Rengui rushed to the rescue, killed the enemy general, and tied his head to the saddle. The enemy was afraid to surrender. From then on, he became famous.

古文：王师攻安市城，高丽莫离支遣将高延寿等率兵二十万拒战，倚山结屯，太宗命诸将分击之。
现代文：朝廷的军队攻打安市城，高丽的莫离支派将领高延寿等人率领二十万人马抵御，靠山扎营，太宗命令各部队将敌军分割开来各个击破。
English: The army of the imperial court attacked the city of An, and the general of the Morya tribe of Korea, Gao Yanshou, and others led 200,000 people to resist and camped on the mountainside. Taizong ordered the troops to separate the enemy forces and break them down.

古文：仁贵恃骁悍，欲立奇功，乃著白衣自标显，持戟，腰鞬两弓，呼而驰，所向披靡；军乘之，贼遂奔溃。
现代文：薛仁贵依仗自己骁勇强悍，想立奇功，就穿上白色服装引人注目，手持戟枪，腰上带着两张弓，大吼着驱马冲锋，所向披靡；部队乘势冲锋，敌军于是逃散。
English: Xue Rengui, relying on his own courage and strength, wanted to perform a miracle, so he put on a white costume to attract attention, holding a shotgun, with two bows on his waist, roaring and driving a horse to charge, which was overwhelming; the troops took advantage of the momentum to charge, and the enemy army fled.

古文：帝望见，遣使驰问： 先锋白衣者谁？ 曰： 薛仁贵。 
现代文：太宗远远看到，派人驱马前去询问： 那个穿白色服装的先锋是谁？ 回答说 ：薛仁贵。 
English: Taizong saw from a distance and sent someone to drive the horse forward to inquire: Who is that vanguard in white clothing? He replied: Xue Rengui.

古文：帝召见，嗟异，赐金帛、口马甚众，授游击将军、云泉府果毅，令北门长上。
现代文：太宗召见他，赞叹惊异，赏赐了很多金银布帛、丁口马匹，任命他为游击将军、云泉府果毅，派他到羽林军做长上。
English: Taizong summoned him, admired and surprised, rewarded him with a lot of gold and silver cloths, Dingkou horses, appointed him as a guerrilla general, Yunquan Fu Guoyi, and sent him to the Ulin Army as a commander.

古文：师还，帝谓曰： 朕旧将皆老，欲擢骁勇付阃外事，莫如卿者。
现代文：军队凯旋，太宗对他说： 我原有的将领都老了，打算提拔骁勇的人担负在外统领军队的重任，没有比你更合适的。
English: When the army returned in triumph, Emperor Taizong said to him, "All of my former generals are old, and there is no one more suitable than you to promote the brave men to shoulder the heavy responsibility of leading the army abroad.

古文：朕不喜得辽东，喜得皦将。 
现代文：我不为得到辽东高兴，而为得到你这位猛将高兴。 
English: I'm not happy to get Liaodong, but I'm happy to get you, the fierce general.

古文：迁右领军中郎将。
现代文：提升他为右领军中郎将。
English: He was promoted to the right leader of the middle rank.

古文：高宗幸万年宫，山水暴至，夜突玄武门，宿卫皆散走，仁贵曰： 当天子缓急，安可惧死？ 
现代文：高宗到麟游县西边的万年宫休养，山洪暴发，半夜冲进了玄武门，值班的卫兵都逃散了，薛仁贵说： 在天子遇到危险时，怎能怕死？ 
English: Gao Zong went to the Palace of Ten Thousand Years on the west side of Linyou County to recuperate. Flash floods broke out, and rushed into the Xuanwu Gate in the middle of the night. The guards on duty all fled. Xue Rengui said: When the Son of Heaven is in danger, how can he be afraid of death?

古文：遂登门大呼，以警宫内，帝遽出乘高。
现代文：于是登上宫门大声呼喊，向内宫报警，高宗迅速出宫登上高地。
English: So he went up to the palace gate and shouted loudly, alerting the police to the inner palace. Gaozong quickly left the palace and went up to the highlands.

古文：俄而水入帝寝，帝曰： 赖卿以免，始知有忠臣也。 
现代文：顷刻之间洪水冲进高宗的卧室，高宗说 ：全靠你才避免危险，方知真是忠臣啊！ 
English: All of a sudden, the floodwaters rushed into Gaozong's bedroom. Gaozong said, "It's all up to you to avoid the danger. You're such a loyal subject!"

古文：赐以御马。
现代文：赏给了他御马。
English: He was rewarded with a horse.

古文：苏定方讨贺鲁，仁贵上疏曰： 臣闻兵出无名，事故不成，明其为贼，敌乃可服。
现代文：苏定方讨伐贺鲁，薛仁贵呈递奏疏说 ：我听说无故出兵，打不了胜仗，事实证明了人家是贼寇，敌人才能打败。
English: Su Dingfang fought against Heru, and Xue Rengui presented a report saying: I heard that soldiers were sent out without reason and could not win the war. The facts proved that they were thieves and robbers, and the enemy could only be defeated.

古文：今泥熟不事贺鲁，为其所破，虏系妻子。
现代文：现在泥熟不侍奉贺鲁，被贺鲁打败，绑走了他的老婆孩子。
English: Now he is not serving Horu, but has been defeated by Horu, who has kidnapped his wife and child.

古文：王师有于贺鲁部落转得其家口者，宜悉取以还，厚加赉遣，使百姓知贺鲁为暴而陛下至德也。 
现代文：我军有人在贺鲁部落转手得到了泥熟的家属，应该都带回来，给予丰厚赏赐让他们回家，使百姓知道是贺鲁残暴而陛下最仁慈。 
English: Someone in our army changed hands in the Horu tribe and got the relatives of the mud, they should all be brought back, given a rich reward to let them go home, so that the people know that Horu is cruel and His Majesty is the most merciful.

古文：帝纳之，遂还其家属，泥熟请随军效死。
现代文：高宗采纳了这个意见，于是送去泥熟的家属，泥熟要求跟随朝廷军队尽死效力。
English: Gaozong accepted this opinion, so he sent his close relatives, who demanded to follow the imperial army to the death.

古文：显庆三年，诏副程名振经略辽东，破高丽于贵端城，斩首三千级。
现代文：高宗显庆三年，诏令薛仁贵做程名振的副将治理辽东，在贵端城打败了高丽，斩杀了三千敌人。
English: In the third year of Gao Zongxian's reign, he ordered Xue Rengui to become the vice-commander of Liaodong Province, defeating Goryeo and killing three thousand enemies in Guidan.

古文：明年，与梁建方、契苾何力遇高丽大将温沙多门，战横山，仁贵独驰入，所射皆应弦仆。
现代文：第二年，同梁建方、契必艹何力遇上高丽大将温莎多门，在横山作战，薛仁贵单人独骑冲进敌阵，射箭杀敌百发百中。
English: In the second year, Tong Liang Jianfang and Qi Bijun Ho Li met the Korean general Windsor Domen and fought in Hengshan. Xue Rengui single-handedly rushed into the enemy line and shot arrows to kill 100 enemies.

古文：又战石城，有善射者，杀官军十余人，仁贵怒，单骑突击，贼弓矢俱废，遂生擒之。
现代文：又在石城作战，有一个善于射箭的敌人，杀死了十多名官军士卒，薛仁贵愤怒了，一个人骑马冲上去，将那个敌人的弓箭射落，于是活捉了他。
English: He also fought in Shicheng. There was an enemy who was good at archery, and he killed more than ten officers and men. Xue Rengui was angry, and a man on horseback rushed up, shot down the enemy's bow and arrow, and then captured him alive.

古文：俄与辛文陵破契丹于黑山，执其王阿卜固献东都。
现代文：不久同辛文陵在黑山打败了契丹，擒获契丹王阿卜固到东都洛阳献功。
English: Soon, Tong Xin Wenling defeated Khitan in Montenegro and captured the Khitan king Abgu to the eastern capital Luoyang to offer his services.

古文：拜左武卫将军，封河东县男。
现代文：授予他左武卫将军头衔，封给河东县男爵位。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards and given the title of Baron of Hedong County.

古文：诏副郑仁泰为铁勒道行军总管。
现代文：诏令薛仁贵做郑仁泰的副将任铁勒道行军总管。
English: He ordered Xue Rengui to be the vice-general of Zheng Rintai and the general manager of the Tieluo Road march.

古文：将行，宴内殿，帝曰： 古善射有穿七札者，卿试以五甲射焉。 
现代文：将要出发，在内殿设宴饯行，高宗说： 古代有一箭射穿七层铠甲的弓箭手，你射五层试试看。 
English: Gaozong said, "In ancient times, there was an archer who shot an arrow through seven layers of armor. Try shooting through five layers.

古文：仁贵一发洞贯，帝大惊，更取坚甲赐之。
现代文：薛仁贵一箭射穿了五层，高宗大为惊讶，又拿坚固的铠甲赏赐给他。
English: Xue Rengui shot an arrow through five layers, Gao Zong was very surprised and gave him a solid armor award.

古文：时九姓众十余万，令骁骑数十来挑战，仁贵发三矢，辄杀三人，于是虏气慑，皆降。
现代文：当时九姓铁勒有十多万兵众，派几十名骁勇的骑兵来挑战，薛仁贵射了三箭，一连射死了三个人，因而震慑了敌人的气焰，都投降了。
English: At that time, there were more than one hundred thousand soldiers of nine surnames Tiele, and sent dozens of brave cavalry to challenge. Xue Rengui shot three arrows and shot three people in a row, thus deterring the enemy's pride, and they all surrendered.

古文：仁贵虑为后患，悉坑之。
现代文：薛仁贵担心后患，全部活埋。
English: Xue Rengui worried about after-effects and buried them all alive.

古文：转讨碛北余众，擒伪叶护兄弟三人以归。
现代文：调转部队讨伐漠北剩余的敌人，捉回了敌方任叶护高官的兄弟三人。
English: The diversionary force fought the remaining enemy in the north of the desert and recaptured the three brothers of the enemy high-ranking official Ye Guo.

古文：军中歌曰： 将军三箭定天山，壮士长歌入汉关。 
现代文：部队传出歌谣说 ：将军三箭定天山，壮士长歌入汉关。 
English: The troops spread a ballad saying: General Sanjia Ding Tianshan, strong man Changge into Han Guan.

古文：九姓遂衰。
现代文：九姓铁勒从此衰落。
English: Since then, the nine surnames of Tiele have been in decline.

古文：铁勒有思结、多览葛等部，先保天山，及仁泰至，惧而降，仁泰不纳，虏其家以赏军，贼相率遁去。
现代文：铁勒有思结、多览葛等九个部族，原先据守天山，等郑仁泰率领部队来后，他们恐惧投降，郑仁泰不接纳，俘虏他们的家室来赏给将士，敌人陆续逃走。
English: Nine tribes, including the Tieler, the Zhengrenthai, and other clans, had originally guarded Tianshan, but after Zhengrenthai led the troops, they were afraid to surrender, Zhengrenthai did not accept them, captured their families to reward the soldiers, and the enemies fled one after another.

古文：有候骑言： 虏辎重畜牧被野，可往取。 
现代文：有个骑兵侦察员报告 ：敌人的军需物资牛羊马匹遍布原野，可以去夺回来。 
English: A cavalry scout reported: the enemy's munitions, cattle, sheep and horses are all over the field and can be recaptured.

古文：仁泰选骑万四千卷甲驰，绝大漠，至仙萼河，不见虏，粮尽还。
现代文：郑仁泰挑选了一万四千名骑兵，脱掉铠甲轻装奔驰，穿过大沙漠，到了仙萼河，没有看到敌人，粮食吃光才往回撤。
English: Zheng Rintai selected fourteen thousand cavalrymen, took off their armor and lightly loaded Mercedes, crossed the desert, reached the Xian calyx river, did not see the enemy, and ate all the grain before retreating.

古文：人饥相食，比入塞，余兵才二十之一。
现代文：人们饿得相互厮杀吞食，等回到军营时，剩下的骑兵只有二十分之一。
English: People were so hungry that they fought and ate each other, and by the time they returned to the camp, only one-twentieth of the cavalry remained.

古文：仁贵亦取所部为妾，多纳赇遣，为有司劾奏，以功见原。
现代文：薛仁贵也把他部下抓来的铁勒族女人当作妾，接受了很多贿赂赠送的财物，被有关官员向高宗检举弹劾，因立大功而受宽恕。
English: Xue Rengui also treated a Tiele woman captured by his subordinates as a concubine, accepted many bribes and gifts of property, was impeached by the relevant officials to Gao Zong, and was pardoned for his great service.

古文：乾封初，高丽泉男生内附，遣将军庞同善、高偘往慰纳，弟男建率国人拒弗纳，乃诏仁贵率师援送同善。
现代文：高宗乾封初年，高丽的泉男生归附朝廷，朝廷派遣将军庞同善、高亻品前去慰劳接收，他的弟弟泉男建带领民众抵抗不让接收，就诏令薛仁贵率领军队护送庞同善。
English: In the first year of Gaozong Qianfeng, the Goryeo Quan boys were annexed to the imperial court. The imperial court sent general Pang Tongzheng and Gao Yibang to comfort and receive them. His brother Quan Nangjian led the people to resist and refuse to accept them, and ordered Xue Rengui to lead the army to escort Pang Tongzheng.

古文：至新城，夜为虏袭，仁贵击之，斩数百级。
现代文：到了新城，夜晚被敌人偷袭，薛仁贵还击，斩杀了几百个敌人。
English: When he arrived in Xincheng, he was attacked by the enemy at night. Xue Rengui fought back and killed hundreds of enemies.

古文：同善进次金山，衄虏不敢前，高丽乘胜进，仁贵击虏断为二，众即溃，斩馘五千，拔南苏、木底、苍岩三城，遂会男生军。
现代文：庞同善进军到金山暂时驻下，泉男建不敢上前，泉男生就乘胜进军，薛仁贵把敌军分割成两个部分，敌军当即溃散，斩杀割下敌五千首级，攻克南苏、木底、苍岩三座城镇，于是同泉男生的部队会合。
English: Pang Tongshan marched into Jinshan and temporarily stayed there. Quan Nian Jian did not dare to advance, so Quan Nian took advantage of the victory and marched into the army. Xue Rengui divided the enemy army into two parts. The enemy army immediately dispersed, killed and cut off five thousand enemy heads, and conquered the three towns of Nansu, Moudi and Cangyan. Then the troops of Quan Nian joined.

古文：手诏劳勉。
现代文：高宗亲书诏令慰劳奖赏。
English: Gao Zongxin's edict decreed a consolation prize.

古文：仁贵负锐，提卒二千进攻扶余城，诸将以兵寡劝止。
现代文：薛仁贵自负精锐，挑选两千名士卒进攻扶余城，各将领说是兵员太少劝他别去。
English: Xue Rengui, boasting that he was an elite, selected two thousand soldiers to attack Fuyu City. The generals said that the number of soldiers was too small and advised him not to go.

古文：仁贵曰： 在善用，不在众。 
现代文：薛仁贵说 ：兵员在于会用，不在人多。 
English: Xue Rengui said, "The soldiers are useful because there are not many of them."

古文：身帅士，遇贼辄破，杀万余人，拔其城，因旁海略地，与李勣军合。
现代文：他亲自带领士卒，遇上敌人一打就胜，杀敌一万多人，攻克扶余城，依傍大海扩大地盘，跟李责力的部队会合。
English: He personally led his soldiers to victory in a dozen encounters with the enemy, killed more than ten thousand of the enemy, conquered Buyeo City, expanded the territory along the coast, and rallied with Li Ruili's troops.

古文：扶余既降，它四十城相率送款，威震辽海。
现代文：扶余城投降后，其他四十座城池接连送来降书，威力震慑辽海。
English: After the surrender of Buyeo City, the other forty cities and towns successively sent letters of surrender, the power of which shocked the Liaohai.

古文：有诏仁贵率兵二万与刘仁轨镇平壤，拜本卫大将军，封平阳郡公，检校安东都护，移治新城。
现代文：高宗诏令薛仁贵率领两万人马和刘仁轨镇守平壤，授予本卫大将军官衔，封平阳郡公爵号，任检校安东都护，官署迁到新城。
English: Gao Zongzhao ordered Xue Rengui to lead 20,000 men and Liu Rengui to defend Pyongyang, conferred the official title of General Benwei, the title of Duke of Pingyang County, the post of school inspector Anton Dugu, and the government office moved to Xincheng.

古文：抚孤存老，检制盗贼，随才任职，褒崇节义，高丽士众皆欣然忘亡。
现代文：他抚养孤儿救济老人，约束盗贼，按照才能任命官职，表彰推崇节义，高丽的士民百姓都高兴得忘掉了亡国的事。
English: He raised orphans, helped the elderly, restrained thieves, appointed officials according to their abilities, commended and promoted righteousness, and the people of Goryeo were so happy that they forgot about the country's downfall.

古文：咸亨元年，吐蕃入寇，命为逻娑道行军大总管，率将军阿史那道真、郭待封击之，以援吐谷浑。
现代文：高宗咸亨元年，吐蕃入侵，薛仁贵被任命为逻娑道行军大总管，统领将军阿史那道真、郭待封抗击，以援助属国吐谷浑。
English: In the first year of Gao Zong's reign, Xue Rengui was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the troops marching along the Luoyang Road. He led the generals Ashina Daozhen and Guo Jifeng to fight back and help the vassal state of Tuyugun.

古文：侍封尝为鄯城镇守，与仁贵等夷，及是，耻居其下，颇违节度。
现代文：郭待封曾任鄯城镇守，跟薛仁贵官阶相同，到这时，为当薛仁贵的部下感到羞耻，非常不听指挥。
English: Guo Zhifeng was once the governor of Handan Town, the same rank as Xue Rengui. At that time, he was ashamed of being Xue Rengui's subordinate and did not listen to orders.

古文：初，军次大非川，将趋乌海，仁贵曰： 乌海地险而瘴，吾入死地，可谓危道，然速则有功，迟则败。
现代文：开始，部队暂驻大非川，准备赴乌海城，薛仁贵说： 乌海地势险要毒气又多，我军进必死之地，真是条险路，但是行军迅速就会成功，缓慢就会失败。
English: At the beginning, the troops were temporarily stationed in Daya Fuchuan, preparing to go to Wuhai City. Xue Rengui said: Wuhai is dangerous and requires a lot of poison gas. It is a dangerous road for our army to enter the land of death, but a quick march will be successful, and a slow one will fail.

古文：今大非岭宽平，可置二栅，悉内辎重，留万人守之，吾倍道掩贼不整，灭之矣。 
现代文：这里大非岭宽阔平坦，可以设置两座营栅，把全部军需物资藏在营栅里，留下一万人守卫，我军快速挺进，乘敌人没有准备去袭击他，就可消灭了。 
English: Here, the Great Afrin Range is wide and flat. Two camp fences can be set up, and all the military supplies can be hidden in the camp fences, leaving ten thousand people to guard. Our army advances quickly, taking advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness to attack him, and can be eliminated.

古文：乃约赍，至河口，遇贼，破之，多所杀掠，获牛羊万计。
现代文：于是轻装，到河口遇上敌人，打败了他们，杀死、俘虏了不少敌人，夺到的牛羊数以万计。
English: As a result, lightly armed, they met the enemy at the mouth of the river, defeated them, killed and captured many enemies, and captured tens of thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：进至乌海城，以待后援。
现代文：部队开到乌海城，等待后头的援军。
English: The troops drove to Wuhai City and waited for reinforcements.

古文：待封初不从，领辎重踵进，吐蕃率众二十万邀击取之，粮仗尽没，待封保险。仁贵退军大非川，吐蕃益兵四十万来战，王师大败。
现代文：郭待封完全不服从安排，带着军需物资跟随，吐蕃率领二十万人马阻截，粮队丢得干干净净，郭待封凭借险要地形才保全性命，薛仁贵退守大非山，吐蕃兵马增加到四十万追击官军，官军大败。
English: Guo Zhifeng completely disobeyed the arrangement and followed with military supplies. Tujun led 200,000 soldiers and horses to intercept, and the grain team was thrown cleanly. Guo Zhifeng saved his life by virtue of the dangerous terrain. Xue Rengui retreated to Dafu Mountain. Tujun's soldiers and horses increased to 400,000 and chased the official army, and the official army was defeated.

古文：仁贵与吐蕃将论钦陵约和，乃得还，吐谷浑遂没。
现代文：薛仁贵跟吐蕃将领论钦陵缔结和约，才脱身回来，吐谷浑国被吐蕃吞并。
English: Xue Rengui concluded a peace treaty with the Tubo generals on Qinling, only to escape and return, and Tubo was annexed by Tubo.

古文：仁贵叹曰： 今岁在庚午，星在降娄，不应有事西方，邓艾所以死于蜀，吾固知必败。 
现代文：薛仁贵叹息说： 今年是庚午年，降娄星当值，不应该到西方打仗，当年魏国的邓艾因此死在蜀国，我本来就知道必然失败。 
English: Xue Rengui sighed and said, "This year is the year of the Rooster and the Horse, and it is time to lower the value of the sign of the Rooster. I should not have gone to the West to fight. When Deng Ai of Wei died in Shu, I knew that I would fail.

古文：有诏原死，除名为庶人。
现代文：下诏免除他死罪，革职除名为平民。
English: The following edict exempted him from the death penalty, dismissed him from his post and renamed him a commoner.

古文：未几，高丽余众叛，起为鸡林道总管。
现代文：没过多久，高丽留下的军队叛乱，薛仁贵被起用为鸡林道总管。
English: Not long after, the troops left behind by Goryeo rebelled, and Xue Rengui was appointed as the general manager of the chicken forest road.

古文：复坐事贬象州，会赦还。
现代文：又因事获罪流放到象州，碰上朝廷大赦才回家。
English: He was also exiled to Xiangzhou for a crime, and only returned home when he received an amnesty from the imperial court.

古文：帝思其功，乃召见曰： 畴岁万年宫，微卿，我且为鱼。
现代文：高宗念他建立过大功，就召见他说： 那年在万年宫，不是你，我将变成鱼。
English: Gaozong thought that he had established great merit, so he summoned him and said: "That year in the Palace of Ten Thousand Years, it wasn't you, I will turn into a fish.

古文：前日殄九姓，破高丽，尔功居多。
现代文：前些年消灭九姓铁勒，打败高丽，你的功劳最多。
English: In the past few years, you have done the most to eliminate Jiu Xiang Tie Le and defeat Goryeo.

古文：人有言向在乌海城下纵虏不击，以至失利，此朕所恨而疑也。
现代文：有人说以前你在乌海城下放掉吐蕃军队不攻打，因此招致失利，这是我既遗憾又疑惑的事。
English: Some people say that in the past you did not attack the Tuvan army when it was under the city of Wuhai, thus incurring defeat, which is something I both regret and doubt.

古文：今辽西不宁，瓜、沙路绝，卿安得高枕不为朕指麾邪？
现代文：如今辽西不安宁，瓜州、沙州交通断绝，你怎能高枕无忧不替我指挥打仗呢？ 
English: Nowadays, the west of Liaoning is restless, Guazhou and Shazhou are cut off from traffic, how can you sleep peacefully without commanding the war for me?

古文：于是拜瓜州长史、右领军卫将军、检校代州都督，率兵击突厥元珍于云州。
现代文：于是任命他为瓜州长史、右领军卫将军、检校代州都督，率领军队在云州攻打突厥的元珍。
English: Therefore, he appointed him as the governor of Gua Prefecture, the right-hand leader of the army, the general of the guards, the inspector of the school and the governor of the state, and led the army to attack the Turkic Yuan Zhen in Yunnan.

古文：突厥问曰： 唐将为谁？ 
现代文：突厥人问 ：唐朝的将领是谁？ 
English: Turks ask: Who are the generals of the Tang Dynasty?

古文：曰： 薛仁贵。 
现代文：回答说 ：薛仁贵。 
English: He replied: "Xue Rengui."

古文：突厥曰： 吾闻薛将军流象州死矣，安得复生？ 
现代文：突厥人说 ：我听说薛将军流放到象州已经死了，怎能复生？ 
English: The Turk said: I heard that General Xue, who was exiled to Xiangzhou, has died. How can he be revived?

古文：仁贵脱兜鍪见之，突厥相视失色，下马罗拜，稍稍遁去。
现代文：薛仁贵脱掉头盔去见他们，突厥人仔细一看大惊失色，都下马排队拜揖，渐渐逃走。
English: Xue Rengui took off his helmet and went to meet them. The Turks were shocked and disgraced when they took a closer look. They all dismounted, lined up to pay homage, and gradually fled.

古文：仁贵因进击，大破之，斩首万级，获生口三万，牛马称是。
现代文：薛仁贵乘势追击，大败突厥，斩杀敌军上万人，俘虏三万人，夺取的牛马相当于这个数目。
English: Taking advantage of the situation, Xue Rengui chased and defeated the Turks, killed tens of thousands of enemy troops, captured thirty thousand people, and captured the equivalent number of cattle and horses.

古文：终左领军卫上将军。
现代文：高宗永淳二年，薛仁贵去世，终年七十岁。
English: In the second year of Gaozong Yongjun, Xue Rengui died at the age of 70.

古文：赠工部尚书。程务挺，洺州平恩人。
现代文：追认为左骁卫大将军、幽州都督，官府提供车马，护送灵柩返回故乡。程务挺，洺州平恩人。
English: After the funeral, the government provided a car and horse to escort the coffin back to his hometown. Cheng Mu Ting, the benefactor of Binzhou.

古文：父名振，隋大业末，仕窦建德为普乐令，盗不迹境。
现代文：他的父亲程名振，隋朝大业末年，在窦建德手下任普乐县令，盗贼不敢涉足县境。
English: His father, Cheng Naming Zhen, was the governor of Ple County under Dou Jiande at the end of the Sui Dynasty. Thieves dared not set foot in the county.

古文：俄弃贼自归，高祖诏授永宁令，使率兵经略河北，即夜袭鄴县，俘男女千余人以归，去数舍，阅妇人方乳者九十余人，还之，鄴人感其仁。
现代文：不久离开窦建德主动投奔唐朝，高祖诏令授予永宁县令，让他带领部队在河北扩展地盘。乘夜晚袭击邺县，俘虏了一千多个男女向回走，离开邺县几十里，发现九十多名妇女正在哺育婴儿，放她们回家去了，邺县的人们感激他的仁慈。
English: Soon after leaving Dou Jiande, he took the initiative to join the Tang Dynasty. The Emperor Gaozhu issued the Yongning County Order, allowing him to lead the troops to expand the territory in Hebei. He attacked Minxian County at night, captured more than a thousand men and women and walked back. After leaving Minxian County for dozens of miles, he found that more than ninety women were nursing babies and let them go home. The people of Minxian County were grateful for his kindness.

古文：刘黑闼陷洺州，名振与刺史陈君宾自拔归，母妻为贼所得。
现代文：刘黑闼攻陷了氵名州，程名振和氵名州刺史陈君宾主动撤退，母亲妻子被刘黑闼抓去了。
English: Liu Hefei attacked and occupied Renmeizhou. Cheng Nanzhen and Chen Junbin, the chief of Renmeizhou, retreated on their own initiative. Liu Hefei's mother and wife were captured.

古文：名振率众千余，掠冀、贝、沧、瀛等州，邀击粮道，悉毁贼水陆饷具。
现代文：程名振带领一千多兵卒，攻占冀、贝、沧、瀛等州，阻击运粮通道，毁掉了刘黑闼的全部水陆运粮工具。
English: Cheng Mianzhen led more than a thousand soldiers to occupy the provinces of Hebei, Bei, Cang and Handan, block the grain transport channel, and destroy all the water and land grain transport tools of Liu Hefei.

古文：黑闼怒，杀其母妻。
现代文：刘黑闼发怒，杀掉了程名振的母亲妻子。
English: Liu Hecai got angry and killed Cheng Naing Zhen's mother and wife.

古文：贼平，请手斩黑闼，以其首祭母。
现代文：打败刘黑闼后，要求亲手杀了他，用他的首级祭奠母亲。
English: After defeating Liu Heyao, he asked to kill him with his own hands and use his head to pay tribute to his mother.

古文：拜营州长史，封东平郡公，赐物二千段、黄金三百两。
现代文：授予营州长史，封东平郡公，赏赐绢帛两千段、黄金三百两。
English: He was awarded the history of the battalion commander, the title of Dongping County, and the rewards of two thousand taels of tungsten and three hundred taels of gold.

古文：转洺州刺史。
现代文：后改任氵名州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Shizuoka prefectural governor.

古文：太宗征辽东，召问方略，不合旨，帝勃然诘之，名振辩对益详，帝意解，谓左右曰： 房玄龄常在朕前，见朕嗔余人，色不能主。
现代文：太宗征讨辽东，召见他咨询方略，不赞成太宗的想法，太宗满脸怒气地责问他，程名振的辩解更是周密细致，太宗的怒气才消释了，对身边的人说 ：房玄龄一直在我跟前，看到我责怪别人时，就大惊失色。
English: Taizong inquired about Liaodong, summoned him to consult the strategy, disapproved of Taizong's idea, Taizong angrily scolded him, Cheng Nanzhen's defense was more thorough and meticulous, Taizong's anger was released, and said to the people around him: Fang Xuanling has been with me, and when he saw me blame others, he was shocked.

古文：名振生平未识我，一旦诮让，而辞吐不屈，奇士哉！ 
现代文：程名振从来没有见过我，我一责怪他，他却侃侃而谈不愿屈服，真是个才能出众的人啊！ 
English: Cheng Nanzhen has never met me. I blame him, but he talks freely and does not want to give in. What a talented person!

古文：拜右骁卫将军，平壤道行军总管。
现代文：授予右骁卫将军头衔、平壤道行军总管官职。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Right Division and the post of the chief marshal of Pyongyang Province.

古文：攻沙卑城，破独山阵，皆以少击众，号为名将。
现代文：攻占沙卑城，在独山打败敌军，都是以少胜多，被称为名将。
English: He conquered the city of Sabi and defeated the enemy army in Doksan, both of which were won by a few, and was called a great general.

古文：迁营州都督，兼东夷都护。
现代文：升任营州都督，兼任东夷都护。
English: He was promoted to the governor of Yingzhou and concurrently served as the guardian of the East Yiwu Capital.

古文：击高丽于贵端水，焚其新城。
现代文：在贵端水进攻高丽，焚烧了新城。
English: He attacked Goryeo at Gudang Water and burned Sinchon.

古文：历晋、蒲二州刺史，镂方道总管。
现代文：历任晋州、蒲州刺史，镂方道总管。
English: Successively held the posts of Jinzhou and Puzhou chief magistrate, and chief magistrate of Shifang Road.

古文：卒，赠右卫大将军，谥曰烈。
现代文：去世后，追认为右卫大将军，谥号为 烈 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously known as the Great General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and his nickname was 烈.

古文：务挺少从父征讨，以勇力闻，拜右领军卫中郎将。
现代文：程务挺年轻时跟随父亲征战，以果敢有力闻名，被任命为右领军卫中郎将。
English: When he was young, Cheng Mu Ting followed his father to war. He was known for his courage and strength, and was appointed as the right-hand leader of the Wei Zhong Lang general.

古文：破突厥六万骑于云州。
现代文：在云州打败了突厥六万人马的骑兵队伍。
English: In Yunnan, they defeated a Turkish cavalry force of sixty thousand men.

古文：会伪可汗阿史那伏念叛，总管李文暕等三将以次奔败。
现代文：碰上非法的可汗阿史那伏念叛乱，总管李文日柬等三位将领依次地吃了败仗。
English: Faced with the illegal rebellion of Khan Ashinafune, the three generals, including the general manager, Li Wen, were defeated one after another.

古文：诏裴行俭讨之，以务挺副，检校丰州都督。
现代文：朝廷命令裴行俭讨伐，任命程务挺做裴行俭的副将，兼任检校丰州都督。
English: The imperial court ordered Pei Xingjian to fight, and appointed Cheng Mu Ting as vice-general of Pei Xingjian, and concurrently as the inspector of the school and the governor of Fongzhou.

古文：时伏念屯金牙山，务挺与副总管唐玄表引兵赴之，伏念惧，乃间道降于行俭，故裴炎以为非行俭功，迁务挺右武卫将军，封平原郡公。
现代文：这时阿史那伏念驻扎在金牙山，程务挺和副总管唐玄表带领部队猛扑过去，阿史那伏念害怕，就走小路归降了裴行俭，所以裴炎认为不是裴行俭的功劳，提升程务挺为右武卫将军，封他为平原郡公。
English: At this time, Ashina Funei was stationed in Jinsha Mountain. Cheng Mu Ting and Vice-Commander-in-Chief Tang Xuanbo led the troops to swoop in. Ashina Funei was afraid, so he took a side road and surrendered to Pei Xuanjian. Therefore, Pei Yan believed that it was not the merit of Pei Xuanjian. He promoted Cheng Mu Ting to the Right Wuwei General and made him the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：绥州部落稽白铁余据城平叛，建伪号，署置百官，进攻绥德、大斌，杀官吏，火区舍。
现代文：绥州部落稽的白铁余盘踞城平叛乱，建立伪朝政权，设立各种官吏，进攻绥德、大斌，屠杀唐朝官吏，焚烧官府房屋。
English: The white iron remnants of the Bozhou tribal council instigated the Chengping Rebellion, established a pseudo-diplomatic regime, set up various officials, attacked Shunde and Dabin, massacred Tang Dynasty officials, and burned government buildings.

古文：诏务挺与夏州都督王方翼讨之，务挺生擒白铁余。
现代文：朝廷命令程务挺和夏州都督王方翼讨伐，程务挺活捉了白铁余。
English: The imperial court ordered Cheng Mu Ting and Xiazhou Governor Wang Fangyi to fight, and Cheng Mu Ting captured Bai Tieyu alive.

古文：进左骁卫大将军，检校左羽林军。
现代文：升任左骁卫大将军，兼管左羽林军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and was also in charge of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：嗣圣初，与右领军大将军张虔勖等豫废中宗、立豫王为皇帝，累被褒赉。
现代文：中宗嗣圣元年，和右领军大将军张虔曰助等人参与废除中宗李显、拥立豫王李旦登上帝位的活动，多次受到表彰奖赏。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongzong, he and the right-wing leading general Zhang Qianyao and others participated in the activities of abolishing the Chinese Emperor Li Xian and supporting the enthronement of King Li Dan of the Yu Dynasty, and were repeatedly commended and rewarded.

古文：以左武卫大将军为单于道安抚大使，御突厥。
现代文：以左武卫大将军的头衔任单于道安抚大使，防御突厥。
English: With the title of General Zuo Wuwei, Ren Shan sent an ambassador to pacify Dao and defend against the Turks.

古文：务挺善绥御，士服其威爱，突厥惮之，不敢盗边。
现代文：程务挺善于安抚征讨，将士们佩服他的威严慈爱，突厥怕他，不敢侵犯边境。
English: Cheng Mu-tong was good at pacifying and negotiating. The generals admired his majesty and mercy. The Turks feared him and did not dare to encroach on the border.

古文：乃赠夏官尚书、耿国公，以其子无择为朝散大夫。遣使者斩宏晖，使未至而宏晖已立功，遂赎罪。唐璿，字休璟，以字行，京兆始平人。
现代文：裴炎进了监狱，程务挺呈递密封奏表为他申辩冤屈。他又一向同唐之奇、杜求仁友好，有人说程务挺和裴炎以及徐敬业暗中勾结互相照应，则天皇后派左鹰扬将军裴绍业到军营去处斩了他，没收了他的家人财产。突厥听说程务挺死了，一块儿庆祝，为他建了祠庙，每当出兵打仗，就向他祈祷。唐休璟字休璟，名璿，别名更有影响，京兆始平人。
English: When Pei Yan went to prison, Cheng Mu Ting submitted a sealed report form to defend his grievances. He had always been friendly with Tang Zhiqi and Du Qiren. Some people said that Cheng Mu Ting and Pei Yan and Xu Jingye secretly colluded to take care of each other. Then the empress sent General Zuo Ying Yang Pei Shao Ye to the military camp to kill him and confiscate his family's property. Turks heard that Cheng Mu Ting had died, celebrated together, built a temple for him, and prayed to him whenever they went to war. Tang Xiu Xuan was called Xiu Xuan, Mei Xuan, alias was more influential,

古文：曾祖规，为后周骠骑大将军。
现代文：曾祖父名规，在北周官至骠骑大将军。
English: His great-grandfather, Meitu, rose through the ranks of the Northern Zhou government to become the general of the imperial cavalry.

古文：休璟少孤，授《易》于马嘉运，传《礼》于贾公彦，举明经高第。
现代文：唐休璟幼年丧父，向马嘉运学习《周易》，向贾公彦学习《礼记》，参加明经科考试以优良成绩中选。
English: Tang Xiuqi lost his father at an early age, studied "Zhou Yi" from Ma Jiayun and "Li Ji" from Jia Gongyan, and was selected to participate in the Mingjing Science Examination with excellent results.

古文：为吴王府典签，改营州户曹参军。
现代文：任吴王府典签，后调任营州户曹参军。
English: He was appointed as Wu Wangfu's signature, and later transferred to Yingzhou Household Cao to join the army.

古文：会突厥诱奚、契丹叛，都督周道务以兵授休璟，破之于独护山，数馘多，迁朔州长史。
现代文：遇上突厥引诱奚族、契丹叛乱，营州都督周道务把部队交给唐休璟，在独护山打败了叛军，屡次俘获大量敌人，升任朔州长史。
English: When the Turks lured the Yi people and the Khitans to revolt, Zhou Daowu, the governor of Yingzhou, handed over the troops to Tang Xiuqi, defeated the rebels in the Dugou Mountains, repeatedly captured a large number of enemies, and was promoted to the governor of Shuo.

古文：永淳中，突厥围丰州，都督崔智辩战死，朝廷议弃丰保灵、夏。
现代文：高宗永淳年间，突厥围攻丰州，丰州都督崔智辩阵亡，朝廷商议放弃丰州退守灵州、夏州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao Zongyongjun, the Turks besieged Fengzhou, the governor of Fengzhou, Cui Zhibeng, was killed in battle, and the imperial court discussed abandoning Fengzhou and retreating to Lingzhou and Xiazhou.

古文：休璟以为不可，上疏曰： 丰州控河遏寇，号为襟带，自秦、汉以来，常郡县之。
现代文：唐休璟认为不能这样，呈递奏疏说： 丰州控制黄河阻止敌人，被称为山川屏障环绕的军事要地，从秦朝、汉朝以来，一直在那里设置郡县。
English: Tang Hsiu-tao thought that this could not be the case, and made a report saying: "Fengzhou controls the Yellow River to stop the enemy. It is known as a military important place surrounded by mountain and river barriers. Since the Qin and Han dynasties, counties have been set up there.

古文：土田良美，宜耕牧。
现代文：那里土地肥沃，适合农牧业生产。
English: The land there is fertile and suitable for agriculture and animal husbandry.

古文：隋季丧乱，不能坚守，乃迁就宁、庆，戎羯得以乘利而交侵，始以灵、夏为边。
现代文：隋朝末年百姓死于战乱，无法坚持守卫，就迁移到了宁州、庆州，西部边境的戎族羯族就趁便一起进犯，才把灵州、夏州当作了边境。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, the people died in the war, and unable to keep guard, they migrated to Ningzhou and Gyeongju. The Yongzhu and Qiang people on the western border took advantage of the opportunity to attack together, and only then did Lingshou and Xiazhou become the border.

古文：唐初，募人以实之，西北一隅得以完固。
现代文：大唐初年，招集百姓充实丰州，西北边境得到稳固。
English: In the first year of the Great Tang Dynasty, the people were summoned to enrich Fengzhou, and the northwest border was stabilized.

古文：今而废之，则河傍地复为贼有，而灵、夏亦不足自安，非国家利也。 
现代文：现在要放弃丰州，那么黄河附近的土地全部被异族占领，灵州、夏州也不会安全，是对国家不利的。 
English: If we were to give up Fongzhou now, then all the land near the Yellow River would be occupied by foreigners, and Lingzhou and Xiazhou would not be safe, which would be detrimental to the country.

古文：高宗从其言。
现代文：高宗听从了他的意见。
English: Gaozong followed his advice.

古文：垂拱中，迁安西副都护。
现代文：武则天垂拱年间，调任安西副都护。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian, he was transferred to the post of Anxi Deputy Capital Protector.

古文：会吐蕃破焉耆，安息道大总管韦待价等败，休璟收其溃亡，以定西土，授灵州都督。
现代文：恰逢吐蕃打败了焉耆，安息道大总管韦待价等人战败，唐休璟招集逃散士卒，使西部边境安定下来，被任命为灵州都督。
English: At the same time that Tubo defeated Yan Zheng, and Sabbatao's general-in-chief Wei Biwa and others were defeated, Tang Xiu Zheng gathered fugitive soldiers, stabilized the western border, and was appointed the governor of Lingzhou.

古文：乃陈方略，请复四镇。
现代文：于是陈述方略，请求收复龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶四镇。
English: He then presented a strategy, requesting the recovery of the four towns of Guzezi, Yuqi, Shule and Chiba.

古文：武后遣王孝杰拔龟兹等城，自休璟倡之。
现代文：则天皇后派遣王孝杰攻取龟兹等镇，就是唐休璟倡导的成果。
English: Then, the empress sent Wang Xiaojie to capture Gezi and other towns, which was the result of Tang Xiuyao's advocacy.

古文：圣历中，授凉州都督、右肃政御史大夫、持节陇右诸军副大使。
现代文：武则天圣历年间，他被任命为凉州都督、右肃政御史大夫、持节陇右诸军副大使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian, he was appointed the governor of Liangzhou, the chief historian of the Sui Dynasty, and the vice-ambassador to the armies of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：吐蕃大将曲莽布支率骑数万寇凉州，入洪源谷，休璟以兵数千临高望之，见贼旗铠鲜明，谓麾下曰： 吐蕃自钦陵死，赞婆降，莽布支新将兵，欲以示武，且其下皆贵臣酋豪子弟，骑虽精，不习战，吾为诸君取之。 
现代文：吐蕃大将麴莽布支率领几万骑兵侵犯凉州，进入了洪源谷，唐休璟带着几千名士卒登高望，看到敌军旗帜铠甲五彩缤纷，对部下说： 吐蕃从钦陵死去，赞婆降生，麴莽布支开始统帅军队，希望显示武力，而他的部将都是高级官员部族首领的子弟，骑术虽然精湛，但不熟悉打仗，我替诸位打败他！ 
English: Tang Xiuyong led several thousand cavalrymen to invade Liangzhou and entered the Hongyuan Valley. Tang Xiuyong took several thousand dignitaries to the top of the mountain. When he saw the enemy's colorful banners and armor, he said to his subordinates: "Tu Xiu died in Qinling and Zhan Bao was born. Xiu Mengbu began to command the army, hoping to show force. His subordinates were all sons of high-ranking officials and tribal leaders. Although he was an excellent horseman, he was not familiar with war. I will defeat him for you!"

古文：乃被甲先登，六战皆克，斩二将，获首二千五百，筑京观而还。
现代文：于是披甲戴盔身先士卒，六战六捷，斩杀了两名敌军将领，杀死了二千五百个敌人，筑起埋葬敌人尸体的高坟才班师回朝。
English: So he put on his armor and helmet and became a vanguard soldier. He fought six battles and achieved six victories, killed two enemy generals, killed 2,500 enemies, and built a high grave to bury the enemy's bodies before the division returned to the empire.

古文：吐蕃来请和，既宴，使者屡觇休璟，后问焉，对曰： 洪源之战，是将军多杀臣士卒，其勇无比，今愿识之。 
现代文：吐蕃进京求和，宴会过后，吐蕃使者多次窥视唐休璟，则天皇后问他为何这样，他回答说： 洪源谷一仗，他带兵杀死了我们很多士卒，英勇无比，现在希望认识他。 
English: After the banquet, the emissaries from Tubo peered at Tang Hsiu-tao several times. When the empress asked him why, he replied, "During the Battle of Hongyuan Valley, he led soldiers and killed many of our soldiers. He was very brave. Now I would like to get to know him."

古文：后嗟异，擢为右武威、金吾二卫大将军。
现代文：则天皇后赞叹惊诧，提升他为右武威卫大将军、金吾卫大将军。
English: The Empress was surprised and impressed, and he was promoted to the rank of General Ubuiwei and General Kinguwei.

古文：西突厥乌质勒失诸蕃和，举兵相攻，安西道闭。
现代文：西突厥的乌质勒跟唐朝各附属国关系破裂，发兵互相攻战，安西的交通断绝。
English: Relations between the Western Turkic city of Ujile and the Tang Dynasty's vassal states broke down, sending troops to fight each other, and communications with Anxi were cut off.

古文：武后诏休璟与宰相计议，不少选，画所当施行者。
现代文：则天皇后诏令唐休璟和宰相们商议对策，没有多久，谋划出了应该实施的策略。
English: The emperor then ordered Tang Xiuqi and the prime ministers to discuss countermeasures, and it did not take long to plan out the strategy that should be implemented.

古文：既而边州建请屯置，尽如休璟策。
现代文：接着边境州县建议设置农垦部队，完全是唐休璟的计谋。
English: Next, the border counties and prefectures proposed to set up a peasant army, which was entirely a trick of Tang Hsiu-tao.

古文：后曰： 恨用卿晚。 
现代文：则天皇后说 ：遗憾的是重用你太晚了。 
English: The empress dowager then said, "Unfortunately, it's too late to reuse you."

古文：进拜夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：提升他为夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: He was promoted to Xia Guan Shangshu, Tongfengge Xingtai Sanpin.

古文：后诮杨再思、李峤、姚元崇等曰： 休璟谏知边事，卿辈十不当一。 
现代文：则天皇后责备杨再思、李峤、姚崇等人说 ：唐休璟熟知边境的征战防守，你们十个人抵不上他一个人。 
English: On the other hand, the Empress Dowager scolded Yang Jieshi, Li Xi, Yao Chong and others, saying, "Tang Xiuqi is familiar with the frontier campaign and defense, and ten of you cannot match him alone.

古文：改太子右庶子，仍知政事。
现代文：改任太子右庶子，仍旧参与处理朝政。
English: He was reappointed as the Prince's right illegitimate son and continued to be involved in the administration of the Imperial Court.

古文：会契丹入塞，复以夏官尚书检校幽营等州都督、安东都护。
现代文：当契丹进犯边境时，他又以夏官尚书身份兼任检校幽、营等州都督、安东都护。
English: When the Khitan invaded the border, he also served as the summer official, Shangshu, and concurrently served as the provincial governor of Qianshuyu, Ying and other provinces, and the protector of Andong.

古文：时中宗为皇太子，休璟将行，进启曰： 易之兄弟恩宠过幸，数入禁阃，非人臣所宜，愿加防察。 
现代文：当时中宗李显退位后当皇太子，唐休璟出发之前，进言开导说： 张易之、张昌宗兄弟受到的优待宠幸太过分了，多次进入后宫，这不是朝臣应该做的，希望防备观察。 
English: At that time, after the abdication of Emperor Lixian of the Middle Dynasty, when he was crown prince, before the departure of Tang Xiuqi, he said: Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong's brothers were favored too much, and they entered the harem many times. This is not what a courtier should do. I hope you can be prepared for observation.

古文：帝复位，召授辅国大将军、同中书门下三品、酒泉郡公。
现代文：中宗重登帝位后，调他回京授予辅国大将军、同中书门下三品、酒泉郡公。
English: After Chuzo regained the imperial throne, he was transferred back to Kyoto and awarded the title of Grand General of the Auxiliary Provinces, the three prizes of the same title, and the title of Jiuquan County.

古文：谓曰： 初欲召公计事，以有北狄忧，前日直言，今未忘也。 
现代文：对他说： 原来就想请您商议政务，因为北方异族侵扰就没能如愿，从前对我的直言开导，到现在还没有忘记。 
English: He said to him: Originally, I wanted to ask you to discuss government affairs, but because of the invasion of foreigners from the north, I was not able to do so. In the past, I was enlightened by your straightforward speech, and I have not forgotten it until now.

古文：加特进、尚书右仆射，赐邑户三百，封宋国公。
现代文：任命他为特进、尚书右仆射，赐给收纳三百户租税，封为宋国公。
English: He appointed him as a special envoy and the right-hand man of Shang Shu, granted him the right to collect taxes from 300 households, and made him the prince of Song.

古文：是岁大水，上疏自劾免，不许。
现代文：这年发生洪涝灾害，他呈递奏疏要求处分免职，中宗没有答应。
English: When the flood disaster occurred this year, he submitted a petition requesting that he be removed from his post, but Zhongzong did not agree.

古文：累迁检校吏部尚书。
现代文：连续提升到检校吏部尚书。
English: Continuously promoted to the school inspection officer department.

古文：景龙二年致仕。
现代文：中宗景龙二年，退休。
English: Zhongzong Jinglong two years, retired.

古文：未几，复起为太子少师、同中书门下三品，监脩国史。
现代文：没过多久，又起用为太子少师、同中书门下三品，主管撰写本朝历史。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as the prince's young teacher, the third grade of the same middle school, and the person in charge of writing the history of this dynasty.

古文：景云初，以特进为朔方行军大总管，备突厥；停旧封，别赐百户。
现代文：睿宗景云初年，以特进身份任朔方行军大总管，防御突厥；停止原有封号，另外赐给收纳一百户租税。
English: In the first year of Ruizong Jingyun, he was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Shuo side with the status of special advance to defend against the Turks; the original sealing number was stopped, and a hundred households were given tax collection.

古文：明年，复请老，给一品全禄。
现代文：第二年，再次请求退休，给足一品官员的全部俸禄。
English: The following year, he again asked to retire and was given the full salary of a full-fledged official.

古文：延和元年卒，年八十六，赠荆州大都督，谥曰忠。
现代文：于睿宗延和元年去世，享年八十六岁，追认为荆州大都督，谥号为 忠 。
English: Yu Ruizong Yanhe died in the first year of the year, at the age of eighty-six. He was regarded as the great governor of Jingzhou, and his nickname was Zhuangzhong.

古文：休璟以儒者号知兵，自碣石逾四镇，其间绵地几万里，山川夷坦，障塞之要，皆能言之，故行师料敌未尝败。
现代文：唐休璟被称为儒将，东自碣石西到龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶四镇，中间连绵近万里，山河的平坦险峻，险要的障壁关隘，都能谈得清清楚楚，所以指挥作战预料敌情还不曾失误。
English: Tang Xiuqi was known as a Confucian general. He was able to speak clearly about the east and west from Shaoshi to the four towns of Guizi, Yuqi, Shule and Chibi, with nearly ten thousand miles in between, the flatness and steepness of the mountains and rivers, and the impending barriers. Therefore, he never made a mistake in commanding the battle and anticipating the enemy situation.

古文：初得封，以赋绢数千散赒其族，又出财数十万大为茔墓，尽葬其五服亲，当时称重。
现代文：刚刚获得封赐时，他拿出几千段收纳的绢帛分送给亲族，还拿出几十万钱大造坟墓，全部安葬了五服以内的祖先，人们都赞扬推重他。
English: When he was just awarded the title, he took out several thousand rupees to give to his relatives, and also took out hundreds of thousands of rupees to build a large tomb, all of which buried his ancestors within five years. People praised and respected him.

古文：惟张仁愿议筑受降城，而休璟独谓不可，卒就之，而漠南无虏患。
现代文：只是张仁愿建议修筑受降城时，唐休璟一个人说不行，后来还是筑成了，而北部边境并无异族侵扰。
English: However, when Zhang Renzhong proposed to rebuild the fallen city, Tang Xiuyong alone said no. Later, it was built, and there was no foreign intrusion on the northern border.

古文：始老，已逾八十，犹托倚权近求复用。
现代文：唐休璟第一次退休时，已经过了八十岁，还投靠皇帝宠信的权贵要求再次起用。
English: When Tang Hsiu-tao retired for the first time, he was already over eighty years old, and he was reappointed at the request of the magnates who relied on the emperor's favor.

古文：于是贺娄尚宫方用事，附者辄荣赫，休璟乃为子娶其义女，故复起宰相，颇为时讥訾。
现代文：这时候贺娄尚宫正当权，投靠他的都荣耀显赫，唐休璟就为儿子娶他的义女为妻，所以又被起用为宰相，大受人们非议。
English: At this time, the legitimate power of He Bing Shang Palace and the glory of those who supported him were all prominent. Tang Xiuyong married his daughter-in-law for his son, so he was appointed as prime minister, which was highly criticized by people.

古文：其当国，亦无它毘益云。
现代文：在他主持政务时，对朝廷也没有别的帮助。
English: When he presided over government affairs, there was no other help for the imperial court.

