古文：黄帝问曰：人有四经，十二从，何谓？
现代文：黄帝问道：人有四经十二从，这是什麽意思？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What does it mean that there are twelve followers of the Four Classics?"

古文：岐伯对曰：四经应四时；十二从应十二月；十二月应十二脉。
现代文：歧伯回答说：四经，是指与四时相应的正常脉象，十二从，是指与十二个月相应的十二经脉。
English: "Four meridians" refers to the normal pulse corresponding to 4 o'clock, and "twelve meridians" refers to the twelve meridians corresponding to the twelve months.

古文：脉有阴阳，知阳者知阴，知阴者知阳。
现代文：脉有阴有阳，能了解什麽是阳脉，就能知道什么是阴脉，能了解什么是阴脉，就能知道什么是阳脉。
English: Veins have yin and yang. If you can understand what the yang vein is, you can know what the yin vein is. If you can understand what the yin vein is, you can know what the yang vein is.

古文：凡阳有五，五五二十五阳。
现代文：阳脉有五种，就是春微弦，夏微钩，长夏微缓，秋微毛，冬微石。
English: There are five kinds of yang veins, namely, spring micro-string, summer micro-hook, long summer micro-slow, autumn micro-hair, and winter micro-stone.

古文：所谓阴者，真脏也。见则为败，败必死也。
现代文：五时各有五脏的阳脉，所以五时配合五脏，则为二十五种阳脉。
English: At five o'clock, each has the yang vein of the five internal organs, so at five o'clock, with the five internal organs, there are twenty-five yang veins.

古文：所谓阳者，胃脘之阳也。别于阳者，知病处也，别于阴者，知生死之期。
现代文：所谓阴脉，就是脉没有胃气，称为真脏脉象真脏脉是胃气已经败坏的象征，败象已见，就可以断其必死。所谓阳脉，就是指有胃气之脉。辨别阳脉的情况，就可以知道病变的所在；辨别真脏脉的情况，就可以知道死亡的时期。
English: The so-called yin vein, that is, the vein without gastric gas, is called the real vein. The real vein is a symbol that the gastric gas has been corrupted. If the defeat has been seen, it can be broken and it will die. The so-called yang vein, that is, the vein with gastric gas. By distinguishing the yang vein, it is possible to know the location of the lesion; by distinguishing the true vein, it is possible to know the time of death.

古文：三阳在头，三阴在手，所谓一也。
现代文：三阳经脉的诊察部位在头部的人迎；三阴经脉的诊察部位在手腕部的寸口动脉。
English: The diagnosis site of the three yang meridians is in the head; the diagnosis site of the three yin meridians is in the carotid artery of the wrist.

古文：别于阳者，知病忌时，别于阴者，知死生之期。
现代文：一般在健康状态之下，人迎与寸口的脉象是一致的。辨别属阳的胃脉，能知道时令气候和疾病的宜忌；辨别属阴的真脏脉，能知道病人的死生时期。
English: Generally, in a healthy state, the pulse of the person and the inch of the mouth are the same. Distinguishing the yang stomach vein can know the seasonal climate and the appropriate taboo of the disease; distinguishing the yin artery can know the patient's life and death period.

古文：谨熟阴阳，无与众谋。
现代文：临证时应谨慎而熟练地辨别阴脉与阳脉，就不致疑惑不绝而众议纷纭了。
English: In the presence of evidence, it is necessary to carefully and skillfully distinguish between the yin and yang veins, so that there will be no doubt and no controversy.

古文：所谓阴阳者，去者为阴，至者为阳；静者为阴，动者为阳；迟者为阴，数者为阳。
现代文：所谓脉象的阴阳，脉去为阴，脉来为阳；脉静为阴，脉动为阳；脉数迟为阴，脉数急为阳。
English: The so-called pulse image is yin and yang, the pulse going is yin, the pulse coming is yang; the pulse static is yin, the pulse moving is yang; the pulse late is yin, the pulse fast is yang.

古文：凡持真脉之藏脉者，肝至悬绝急，十八日死；心至悬绝，九日死；肺至悬绝，十二日死；肾至悬绝，七日死；脾至悬绝，四日死。
现代文：凡诊得无胃气的真藏脉，例如：肝脉来的形象，如一线孤悬，似断似绝，或者来得弦急而硬，十八日当死；心脉来时，孤悬断绝，九日当死；肺脉来时，孤悬断绝，十二日当死；肾脉来时，孤悬断绝，七日当死；脾脉来时，孤悬断绝，四日当死。
English: For example, if the image from the liver vein is like a line hanging by itself and seems to be severed, or if it comes hard and fast, the patient should die on the 18th day; if the heart vein comes, it should be severed and die on the 9th day; if the lung vein comes, it should be severed and die on the 12th day; if the kidney vein comes, it should be severed and die on the 7th day; if the spleen vein comes, it should be severed and die on the 4th day.

古文：曰：二阳之病发心脾，有不得隐曲，女子不月；其传为风消，其传为息贲者，死不治。
现代文：一般地说：胃肠有病，则可影响心脾，病人往往有难以告人的隐情，如果是女子就会月经不调，甚至经闭。若病久传变，或者形体逐渐消瘦，成为 风消 ，或者呼吸短促，气息上逆，成为 息贲 ，就不可治疗了。
English: Generally speaking: if there is a gastrointestinal disease, it can affect the heart and spleen. Patients often have hidden feelings that are difficult to reveal. If it is a woman, she will have irregular menstruation, or even amenorrhea. If the disease is transmitted for a long time, or the body gradually loses weight and becomes winded, or shortness of breath, the opposite of breath, becomes shortness of breath, it cannot be treated.

古文：曰：三阳为病发寒热，下为痈肿，及为痿厥，腨㾓；其传为索泽，其传为㿗疝。
现代文：一般地说：太阳经发病，多有寒热的症状，或者下部发生痈肿，或者两足痿弱无力而逆冷，腿肚酸痛。若病久传化，或为皮肤干燥而不润泽，或变为颓疝。
English: Generally speaking: the onset of solar palsy, often with cold and fever symptoms, or the lower part of the abscess occurs, or the legs are weak and weak and cold, and the legs and belly are sore. If the disease is long-term, or the skin is dry and not moist, or it becomes itchy.

古文：曰：一阳发病，少气，善咳，善泄；其传为心掣，其传为隔。
现代文：一般的说：少阳经发病，生发之气即减少，或易患咳嗽，或易患泄泻。若病久传变，或为心虚掣痛，或为饮食不下，阻塞不通。
English: Generally speaking: if the disease is caused by the deficiency of yang, the amount of qi produced will decrease, or you will be prone to cough, or prone to diarrhea. If the disease has been transmitted for a long time, it may be due to heart deficiency and pain, or it may be due to poor diet and obstruction.

古文：二阳一阴发病，主惊骇、背痛、善噫、善欠，名曰风厥。
现代文：阳明与厥阴发病，主病惊骇，背痛，常常嗳气、呵欠，名曰风厥。
English: Yangming and Jueyin disease, the main disease is shock, back pain, often shortness of breath, yawning, called wind jue.

古文：二阴一阳发病，善胀、心满善气。
现代文：少阴和少阳发病，腹部作胀，心下满闷，时欲叹气。
English: Yin deficiency and yang deficiency, the abdomen is distended, the bottom of the heart is stuffy, and it is tempting to sigh.

古文：三阴三阳发病，为偏枯萎易，四肢不举。
现代文：太阳和太阴发病，则为半身不遂的偏枯症，或者变易常用而痿弱无力，或者四肢不能举动。
English: The sun and the yin and yang disease is a partial withering of the body, or it is easy to be used but weak and weak, or the limbs cannot move.

古文：鼓一阳曰钩，鼓一阴曰毛，鼓阳胜急曰弦，鼓阳至而绝曰石，阴阳相过曰溜。
现代文：脉搏鼓动于指下，来时有力，去时力衰，叫做钩脉；稍无力，来势轻虚而浮，叫做毛脉；有力而紧张，如按琴瑟的弦，叫做弦脉；有力而必须重按，轻按不足，叫做石脉；既非无力，又不过于有力，一来一去，脉象和缓，流通平顺，叫做滑脉。
English: The pulse pulsates under the finger, it is strong when it comes, it is weak when it goes, it is called the hook vein; it is slightly weak, it is light and floating when it comes, it is called the hair vein; it is strong and tense, such as pressing the strings of a harp, it is called the string vein; it is strong and must be pressed hard, and it is not pressed hard enough, it is called the stone vein; it is neither weak nor too strong, it comes and goes, the pulse is gentle, the circulation is smooth, it is called the glide vein.

古文：阴争于内，阳扰于外，魄汗未藏，四逆而起，起则熏肺，使人喘鸣。
现代文：阴阳失去平衡，以致阴气争胜于内，阳气扰乱于外，汗出不止，四肢厥冷，下厥上逆，浮阳熏肺，发生喘鸣。
English: Yin and yang are out of balance, so that yin prevails over yang, yang disturbs the outside, perspiration is incessant, the limbs are cold, down is up, the sun burns the lungs, and wheezing occurs.

古文：阴之所生，和本曰和。
现代文：阴之所以不能生化，由于阴阳的平衡，是谓正常。
English: The reason why yin cannot be biochemical is due to the balance of yin and yang, which is called normal.

古文：是故刚与刚，阳气破散，阴气乃消亡。
现代文：如果以刚与刚，则阳气破散，阴气亦必随之消亡。
English: If you take just and just, then the yang will be dispersed, and the yin will also disappear.

古文：淖则刚柔不和，经气乃绝。
现代文：倘若阴气独盛，则寒湿偏胜，亦为刚柔不和，经脉气血亦致败绝。
English: If yin is predominant, then cold and dampness will win, and stiffness and softness will not get along, and the meridians of qi and blood will also be defeated.

古文：死阴之属，不过三日而死，生阳之属，不过四日而死。
现代文：属于死阴的病，不过三日就要死；属于生阳的病，不过四日就要死。
English: It is a disease of the yin and yang, but it takes three days to die. It is a disease of the yang and yin, but it takes four days to die.

古文：所谓生阳死阴者，肝之心谓之生阳，心之肺谓之死阴，肺之肾谓之重阴，肾之脾谓之辟阴，死不治。
现代文：所谓生阳、死阴：例如肝病传心，为木生火，得其生气，叫做生阳；心病传肺，为火克金，金被火消亡，叫做死阴，肺病传肾，以饮传阴，无阳之候，叫做重阴；肾病传脾，水反侮土，叫做辟阴，是不治的死症。
English: The so-called "birth yang" and "death yang": for example, liver disease transmits to the heart, making fire for wood, getting its anger, is called "birth yang"; heart disease transmits to the lungs, for fire to gold, gold being extinguished by fire, is called "death yang"; lung disease transmits to the kidneys, with drinking, is called "death yang"; no sun, is called "heavy yang"; kidney disease transmits to the spleen, water against earth, is called "pick up yang," is an incurable death disease.

古文：结阳者，肿四支。
现代文：邪气郁结于阳经，则四肢浮肿。
English: Yangjing is associated with evil spirits, while the limbs are swollen.

古文：结阴者，便血一升，再结二升，三结三升。
现代文：以四肢为诸阳之本；邪气郁结于阴经，则大便下血，以阴络伤则血下溢，初结一升，再结二升，三结三升。
English: The four limbs are the source of all the suns; if the evil spirit is rooted in the yin, the blood will flow in the stool, and if the evil spirit is rooted in the yin, the blood will flow in the stool; if the evil spirit is rooted in the yin, the blood will flow in the stool; if the evil spirit is rooted in the yin, the blood will flow in the stool; if the evil spirit is rooted in the yin, the blood will flow in the stool.

古文：阴阳结斜，多阴少阳曰石水，少腹肿。
现代文：阴经阳经都有邪气郁结，而偏重于阴经方面的，就会发生 石水 之病，少腹肿胀。
English: Both yin and yang have evil spirits, and if the focus is on the yin and yang aspects, it will cause stone-water sickness and swelling of the abdomen.

古文：二阳结，谓之消。
现代文：邪气郁结于二阳，则肠胃俱热，多为消渴之症。
English: If the evil spirit is deeply rooted in the two suns, then the intestines and stomach are feverish, which is mostly a thirst-quenching disease.

古文：三阳结，谓之隔。
现代文：邪气郁结于三阳，则多为上下不通的隔症。
English: If the evil spirit is deeply rooted in Sanyang, it is mostly a gap between the upper and lower levels.

古文：三阴结，谓之水。
现代文：邪气郁结于三阴，多为水肿膨胀的病。
English: The evil spirit is rooted in the three yin, and is mostly a disease of swelling and edema.

古文：一阴一阳结，谓之喉痹。
现代文：邪气郁结于一阴一阳多为喉痹之病。
English: The evil spirit is tied to the yin and yang, and is mostly a disease of sore throat.

古文：阴搏阳别，谓之有子。
现代文：阴脉搏动有力，与阳脉有明显的区别，这是怀孕的现象。
English: The pulsation of the anus is strong, and there is a clear difference between it and the anus. This is a phenomenon of pregnancy.

古文：阴阳虚，肠澼死。
现代文：阴阳脉具虚而患痢疾的，是为死症。
English: If the yin and yang veins are deficient and suffer from dysentery, it is a fatal disease.

古文：阳加于阴，谓之汗。
现代文：阳脉加倍于阴脉，当有汗出。
English: The yang vein is twice as large as the yin vein, when there is sweating.

古文：阴虚阳搏，谓之崩。
现代文：阴脉虚而阳脉搏击，火迫血行，在妇人为血崩。
English: The yin vein is weak, but the yang pulse beats, the fire forces the blood to flow, and the woman is overwhelmed with blood.

古文：三阴俱搏，二十日夜半死；二阴俱搏，十三日夕时死；一阴俱搏，十日平旦死；三阳俱搏且鼓，三日死；三阴三阳俱搏，心腹满，发尽不得隐曲，五日死；二阳俱搏，其病温，死不治，不过十日死。
现代文：三阴之脉，俱搏击于指下，大约到二十天半夜时死亡；二阴就之脉俱搏击于指下，大约到十三天傍晚时死亡；一阴之脉俱搏击于指下，而鼓动过甚的，三天就要死亡；三阴三阳之脉俱搏，心腹胀满，阴阳之气发泄已尽，大小便不通，则五日死；三阳之脉俱搏击于指下，患有温病的，无法治疗，不过十日就要死了。
English: The pulse of the three yin beats under the finger and dies at about midnight on the 20th day; the pulse of the two yin beats under the finger and dies at about the evening of the 13th day; the pulse of the one yin beats under the finger, and if it is too agitated, it will die in three days; the pulse of the three yin and three yang beats, the heart is full, the air of the yin and yang is exhausted, and the urine and feces do not pass, then it dies in five days; the pulse of the three yang beats under the finger, suffers from fever, cannot be treated, but it will die on the 10th day.

