古文：杜周，南阳杜衍人也。
现代文：杜周，南阳郡杜衍县人。
English: Du Zhou, from Duyan County, Nanyang County.

古文：义纵为南阳太守，以周为爪牙，荐之张汤，为廷尉史。
现代文：义纵担任南阳郡太守时，把他当作得力助手，后来推荐给张汤，担任廷尉史。
English: When Yizhong served as the governor of Nanyang County, he treated him as his right-hand man, and later recommended him to Zhang Tang to serve as a courtier.

古文：使案边失亡，所论杀甚多。
现代文：派遣他查办边境郡县的损失情况，判罪处决的人很多。
English: He was sent to investigate the losses in the border counties, and many people were convicted and executed.

古文：奏事中意，任用，与减宣更为中丞者十余岁。
现代文：上奏的事情合乎皇上的心意，受到信任，与减宣相互接替，先后担任中丞十几年。
English: It was the emperor's wish that the matter be played up, and he was trusted. He took over from Shigenobu, and successively served as chujo for more than ten years.

古文：周少言重迟，而内深次骨。
现代文：杜周寡言少语，性情缓慢，但内心严酷。
English: Du Zhou is taciturn, slow-moving, but tough at heart.

古文：宣为左内史，周为廷尉，其治大抵放张汤，而善候司。
现代文：减宣担任左内史，杜周担任廷尉，他的治理大多仿效张汤而善于窥察皇上的意图。
English: Yan Xuan served as the left internal historian, Du Zhou served as a courtier, and most of his governance emulated Zhang Tang and was good at spying on the emperor's intentions.

古文：上所欲挤者，因而陷之；上所欲释，久系待问而微见其冤状。
现代文：皇上想要排除的，就顺势陷害他；皇上想要宽恕的，让他久囚待审，并暗中察访，显露他的冤情。
English: If the emperor wanted to expel someone, he would set him up; if the emperor wanted to pardon someone, he would keep him in prison for a long time awaiting trial, and secretly visit him to reveal his grievances.

古文：客有谓周曰： 君为天下决平，不循三尺法，专以人主意指为狱，狱者固如是乎？ 
现代文：门客中有人责备杜周说： 您替天子判决案件，不遵循既定的法律，专门按照君主的意旨办理案件，司法官吏应该是这样吗？ 
English: One of Du Zhou's guests reproached him, saying: You judge cases for the Son of Heaven, do not follow established laws, and handle cases exclusively in accordance with the will of the monarch. Is this how judicial officials should be?

古文：周曰： 三尺安出哉？
现代文：杜周说： 法令怎么产生的呢？
English: Du Zhou said: How did the three-feet law come about?

古文：前主所是著为律，后主所是疏为令；当时为是，何古之法乎！ 
现代文：从前君主认为正确的就制定成为法律，后来的君主认为正确的写下来为法令；适合当时情况就是正确的，何必运用过去的法律呢？ 
English: What the monarch of the past thought right he made into a law, and what the monarch of the future thought right he wrote down as a decree; what suited the situation at the time was right, so why should the laws of the past be applied?

古文：至周为廷尉，诏狱亦益多矣。
现代文：到杜周担任廷尉，皇帝交办的案件也更加多了。
English: By the time Du Zhou became a courtier, there were more and more cases ordered by the emperor.

古文：二千石系者新故相因，不减百余人。
现代文：二千石官吏被关押的新旧相连，不少于一百多人。
English: More than a hundred officials of 2,000 koku were detained, old and new, together.

古文：郡吏大府举之廷尉，一岁至千余章。
现代文：郡太守、丞相和御史府的案件都送交廷尉，一年达到一千多个案件。
English: The cases of the county governor, the prime minister and the governor of Goseifu were all sent to the court lieutenant, reaching more than a thousand cases a year.

古文：章大者连逮证案数百，小者数十人；远者数千里，近者数百里。
现代文：一个大案件牵连逮捕证人数百，小案件数十；这些人远的有数千里，近的有数百里。
English: A large case involves hundreds of people with arrest warrants, and dozens of small cases; these people are thousands of miles away, and hundreds of miles away.

古文：会狱，吏因责如章告劾，不服，以掠笞定之。
现代文：会审时，法官便责成这些人按照起诉书来认罪，不服罪，则严刑拷打逼供定罪。
English: At the hearing, the judge ordered these people to plead guilty in accordance with the indictment, and if they did not plead guilty, they were tortured to force them to confess and be convicted.

古文：于是闻有逮证，皆亡匿。
现代文：当时人们一听到要逮捕人的消息，都逃跑或躲藏起来。
English: At the time, people fled or went into hiding when they heard about the arrests.

古文：狱久者至更数赦十余岁而相告言，大氐尽诋以不道，以上延尉及中都官，诏狱逮至六七万人，吏所增加十有余万。
现代文：案件拖得久的历经几次大赦，为时十多年还会被告发，大致都用 不道 以上的罪名加以诬陷。廷尉和京师各官府的监狱关押到的罪犯六七万人，一般官吏所增加的罪犯多达十万多人。
English: The long-delayed cases have gone through several amnesties, and it took more than ten years for the defendants to be indicted, and they were generally framed with the above-mentioned charges. There are 670,000 criminals detained in the prisons of the court officials and various government agencies in Beijing, and the number of criminals added by general officials is as high as more than 100,000 people.

古文：周中废，后为执金吾，逐捕桑弘羊、卫皇后昆弟子刻深，上以为尽力无私，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：杜周中途被废黜，后来担任执金吾，追捕盗贼，逮捕审理桑弘羊和卫皇后兄弟的儿子苛刻阴狠，皇帝认为他办事尽力没有私心，升任御史大夫。
English: Du Zhou was dethroned in the middle of his reign. Later, he served as acting King Wu, pursued thieves, arrested and tried the sons of Kuang Hongyang and the brothers of Empress Wei. He was harsh and malicious. The emperor believed that he did his best without selfishness and promoted him to the post of imperial historian.

古文：始周为廷史，有一马，及久任事，列三公，而两子夹河为郡守，家訾累巨万矣。
现代文：杜周起初担任廷尉史，有一匹马，等到他自己做官子久了，升到三公的位置，两个儿子一是河内郡守，一是河南郡守，家财累计上亿。
English: At first, Du Zhou served as a courtier and had a horse. After he had been an official for a long time, he rose to the position of the three princes. One of his two sons is the county governor of Hanoi and the other is the county governor of Henan. The family's wealth totals hundreds of millions.

古文：治皆酷暴，唯少子延年行宽厚云。
现代文：办案都很酷暴，衹有少子延年为人宽厚。
English: The handling of the case was very violent, but he was a generous person for many years.

古文：延年字幼公，亦明法律。
现代文：杜延年，字幼公，亦通晓法律。
English: Du Yannian, nicknamed "young master," is also familiar with the law.

古文：昭帝初立，大将军霍光秉政，以延年三公子，吏材有余，补军司空。
现代文：昭帝即位，大将军霍光执政，因为杜延年是三公之子，有作官的才能补军司空。
English: Emperor Zhao ascended to the throne, and General Huo Guang took over the government, because Du Yan Nian was the son of the three princes and had the ability to fill the post of military secretary.

古文：始元四年，益州蛮夷反，延年以校尉将南阳士击益州，还，为谏大夫。
现代文：始元四年，益州蛮夷造，延年以校尉的身份率南阳士卒进击益州叛乱，还军，任谏大夫。
English: In the fourth year of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was made a barbarian in Yizhou, led the Nanyang soldiers to attack the Yizhou rebellion as a lieutenant for many years, returned to the army, and was appointed as a doctor.

古文：左将军上官桀父子与盖主、燕王谋为逆乱。假稻田使者燕仓知其谋，以告大司农杨敞。
现代文：左将军上官桀父子与盖主、燕王谋乱，代理稻田使者燕仓知道其谋，报告给大司农杨敞。
English: The left-wing general Shangguan Zou and his son conspired with the landlord, Yan Wang, to start a riot. The acting rice field emissary, Yan Cang, knew of the conspiracy and reported it to the chief farmer, Yang Chang.

古文：敞惶惧，移病，以语延年。
现代文：杨敞惶惧，称病移居，报告给延年。
English: Yang Zhang panicked, said he was ill and had to move, and reported it to Yan Nian.

古文：延年以闻，桀等伏辜。
现代文：延年报告皇帝，上官桀等被诛杀。
English: According to the report, the emperor, senior officials and so on were killed.

古文：延年封为建平侯。
现代文：延年封为建平侯。
English: He was given the title of Jianping Hou for another year.

古文：延年本大将军霍光吏，首发大奸，有忠节，由是擢为太仆、右曹、给事中。
现代文：杜延年原为大将军霍光属吏，首先告发大奸，有忠节之名，因此升任太仆右曹给事中。
English: Du Yan Nian was originally a subordinate officer of the great general Huo Guang. He was the first to denounce the great traitor, and had the name of Loyalty Festival. Therefore, he was promoted to the position of the Great Servant of the Right Cao.

古文：光持刑罚严，延年辅之以宽。
现代文：霍光持刑罚严，延年辅之以宽。
English: Huo Guang holds a severe punishment, and the extension of years is supplemented by a wide range.

古文：治燕王狱时，御史大夫桑弘羊子迁亡，过父故吏侯史吴。
现代文：办燕王案件时，御史大夫桑弘羊之子桑迁逃跑时，曾留宿于父亲旧下属侯史吴家中。
English: During the handling of the Yan Wang case, when the son of the chief historian, Sang Hongyang, Sang Qian fled, he stayed at the home of his father's former subordinate, Hou Shi Wu.

古文：后迁捕得，伏法。
现代文：桑迁被捕后，被处死。
English: After Sangqian was arrested, he was executed.

古文：会赦，侯史吴自出系狱，廷尉王平与少府徐仁杂治反事，皆以为桑迁坐父谋反而侯史吴臧之，非匿反者，乃匿为随者也。即以赦令除吴罪。
现代文：适逢大赦，侯史吴出监狱，廷尉王子与少府徐仁审理反叛案件中，都认为桑迁因父谋反受牵连，而侯史吴衹是留宿了桑迁不是藏匿反叛者，而是藏匿随从，即以赦令免侯史吴罪。
English: At the time of the amnesty, Hou Shih Wu was released from prison. In the trial of the rebellion case, both the prince of the imperial lieutenant and the minor prefect Xu Ren thought that Sang Qian was implicated because of his father's rebellion, and Hou Shih Wu Ye stayed at Sang Qian not to hide the rebel, but to hide the follower, that is, to pardon Hou Shih Wu.

古文：后侍御史治实，以桑迁通经术，知父谋反而不谏争，与反者身无异；侯史吴故三百石吏，首匿迁，不与庶人匿随从者等，吴不得赦。
现代文：后侍御史查验，以桑迁通经术，知父谋反而不谏争，与反者无异；侯史吴原为三百石吏，首匿桑迁，不应与庶人匿随从者相等，侯史吴不得赦免。
English: According to the post-servant history investigation, it is no different from the opposite to use Sangqian to pass the sutra, to know the father to conspire against and not to fight; Hou Shi Wu was originally a three-hundred-stone official, the head of Sangqian should not be equal to the follower of the commoner, and Hou Shi Wu should not be pardoned.

古文：奏请复治，劾廷尉、少府纵反者。
现代文：奏请覆审，举劾廷尉、少府放纵反者。
English: Submit a petition for a retrial, and impeach the imperial lieutenant and the minor prefect who indulge the opposition.

古文：少府徐仁即丞相车千秋女婿也，故千秋数为侯史吴言。
现代文：少府徐仁是丞相车千秋女婿，因此千秋多次为侯史吴解说。
English: Xiaofu Xu Ren was the son-in-law of the chancellor of the imperial court, Che Qianqiu. Therefore, Qianqiu was the interpreter of Hou Shi Wu many times.

古文：恐光不听，千秋即召中二千石、博士会公车门，议问吴法。
现代文：恐怕霍光不听，千秋即召中二千石、博士会公车门，议论侯史吴当如何处理。
English: I'm afraid that Huo Guang didn't listen, and immediately summoned the middle-aged man of 2,000 koku and the doctor's association bus gate to discuss how to deal with Hou Shi Wudang.

古文：议者知大将军指，皆执吴为不道。
现代文：议者都知大将军意旨，皆坚持侯史吴为违法。
English: The legislators all knew the general's intention, and they all insisted that Hou Shiu Wu was illegal.

古文：明日，千秋封上众议，光于是以千秋擅召中二千石以下，外内异言，遂下延尉平、少府仁狱。
现代文：次日，千秋上报众议，霍光于是以千秋擅召中二千石以下开会议事，朝廷内外异议，遂将廷尉王平、少府徐仁下狱。
English: The next day, Qianqiu reported to the press for public discussion, and Huo Guang then summoned Qianqiu to open a meeting with less than 2,000 koku. The court and outside the court objected, and then Wang Ping, a courtier, and Xu Ren, a minor prefect, were sent to prison.

古文：朝廷皆恐丞相坐之。
现代文：朝廷皆恐丞相受牵连。
English: Everyone in the Imperial Court was implicated.

古文：延年乃奏记光争，以为 吏纵罪人，有常法，今更诋吴为不道，恐于法深。
现代文：延年便上奏与霍光争辩，认为 官吏纵罪人，有常法为据，今改为诬指侯史吴为大逆不道，恐怕过于严重了。
English: Yan Nian then argued with Huo Guang, saying that the officials had used the common law as a basis for inciting criminals. Now, they have changed it to falsely accuse Hou Shi Wu of high treason. I am afraid it is too serious.

古文：又丞相素无所守持，而为好言于下，尽其素行也。
现代文：丞相一向无所守持，而对下吏常说好话，一向行为即是如此。
English: The prime minister has never kept anything back, and has always spoken well of subordinate officials, and has always acted accordingly.

古文：至擅召中二千石，甚无状。
现代文：至于说擅召中二千石，无甚根据。
English: As for the claim that 2,000 koku of rice was illegally seized, there is little basis for this.

古文：延年愚，以为丞相久故，及先帝用事，非有大故，不可弃也。
现代文：延年愚钝，认为丞相居位已久，又曾在先帝时任职，非有大变故，不可抛弃。
English: Yan Nian was stupid and thought that the position of chancellor had been in place for a long time and had been held by the previous emperor, and therefore could not be abandoned without a major change.

古文：间者民颇言狱深，吏为峻诋，今丞相所议，又狱事也，如是以及丞相，恐不合众心。
现代文：近来百姓多言治狱深苛，狱吏严厉凶狠，今丞相所议又是狱事，如果这事也连及丞相，恐不合众心。
English: Recently, the people have been talking a lot about how the prison is harsh, the prison officers are harsh and cruel, and now the minister of justice is talking about prison affairs. If this also involves the minister of justice, I'm afraid there won't be a lot of sympathy.

古文：群下讠雚哗，庶人私议，流言四布，延年窃重将军失此名于天下也！ 
现代文：群下哗然，庶人私相议论，流言四起，延年担心将军会因此事丧失名誉于天下！ 
English: The crowd is in an uproar, the commoners are arguing with each other, rumors are flying everywhere, and there is a long-standing fear that the general will lose his reputation in the world because of this!

古文：光以廷尉、少府弄法轻重，皆论弃市，而不以及丞相，终与相竟。
现代文：霍光以廷尉、少府弄法轻重，皆判处弃市死刑，而不连及丞相，无所贬黜。
English: Huo Guang was sentenced to death for abandoning the city, with the rank of courtier and minor magistrate being given more weight, but he was not demoted, even though he became chancellor.

古文：延年论议持平，合和朝廷，皆此类也。
现代文：延年论议持平，使朝廷和谐，都是这样。
English: This is the way to keep the discussion on the extension of the year flat, and to make the imperial court harmonious.

古文：见国家承武帝奢侈师旅之后，数为大将军光言： 年岁比不登，流民未尽还，宜修孝文明政，示以俭约宽和，顺天心，说民意，年岁宜应。 
现代文：看到国家是继汉武帝奢侈用兵之后，杜延年几次对大将军霍光说： 连年不丰收，流民未尽返乡，应行文帝时政，昭示俭约宽和，顺天心，悦民意，年岁当有丰收相报应。 
English: Seeing that the country was following Han Emperor Wu's extravagant use of soldiers, Du Yan said to General Huo Guang several times in the following years: The harvest has not been good for years, the exiles have not returned to their hometowns, it is necessary to carry out the policy of Emperor Wen, show thrift and generosity, follow the will of heaven, please the public opinion, and every year should be rewarded with a good harvest.

古文：光纳其言，举贤良，议罢酒榷、盐、铁，皆自延年发之。
现代文：霍光纳其言，举贤良，议论废除专卖酒、盐铁，皆从延年发起。
English: Huo Guangna's speech, the promotion of the virtuous, and the discussion on the abolition of the monopoly of liquor and salt iron were all initiated by Yan Nian.

古文：吏民上书言便宜，有异，辄下延年平处复奏。
现代文：吏民上书言事，有异议，立即交延年平衡处理复奏。
English: If there is any objection, the officials and the people shall make a written statement, and the balance of the year shall be immediately postponed.

古文：言可官试者，至为县令，或丞相、御史除用，满岁以状闻，或抵其罪法，常与两府及廷尉分章。
现代文：建议可以由官府实行的，推荐到县令，有的由丞相、御史任用，满一年再报告任职情况，言事者有奸妄者抵罪，常常是由两府及廷尉分别处理。
English: Suggestions can be implemented by the government, recommended to the prefectural government, some are appointed by the prime minister and the imperial historian, and report the status of the appointment after one year. If the speaker has committed treason, it is often handled separately by the two governments and the courtier.

古文：昭帝末，寝疾，征天下名医，延年典领方药。
现代文：昭帝末年，卧病，征召天下名医，杜延年主管方药。
English: At the end of his life, Emperor Zhao was bedridden and summoned a world-renowned doctor, Du Yanren, to be in charge of prescribing medicine.

古文：帝崩，昌邑王即位，废，大将军光、车骑将军张安世与大臣议所立。
现代文：帝驾崩，昌邑王即位，废，大将军霍光、车骑将军张安世与大臣议立帝事。
English: Emperor died, King Changyi ascended to the throne, and General Huo Guang, Cavalry General Zhang Anshi and the minister discussed the matter of establishing an empire.

古文：时，宣帝养于掖廷，号皇曾孙，与延年中子佗相爱善，延年知曾孙德美，劝光、安世立焉。
现代文：当时宣帝抚养在掖庭，号皇曾孙，与延年中子杜佗相友善，延年知曾孙德美，劝霍光、安世立帝。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan was raised in the Summer Palace and was called the emperor's great-grandson. He was friendly with Du Xi, the middle son of Yan, and knew his great-grandson Demi for many years. He advised Huo Guang and An Shili to become emperor.

古文：宣帝即位，褒赏大臣，延年以定策安宗庙，益户二千三百，与始封所食邑凡四千三百户。
现代文：宣帝即位，褒赏大臣，延年以定策安宗庙，增户二千三百，与始封食邑共四千三百户。
English: Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne, rewarded the ministers, extended the year with a decision to secure the ancestral temple, increased the number of households by 2,300, and a total of 4,300 households in Shifeng Food Town.

古文：诏有司论定策功：大司马大将军光功德过太尉绛侯周勃；车骑将军安世、丞相杨敞功比丞相陈平；前将军韩增、御史大夫蔡谊功比颍阴侯灌婴；太仆杜延年功比朱虚侯刘章；后将军赵充国、大司农田延年、少府史乐成功比典客刘揭，皆封侯益土。
现代文：下诏有司论功封赏，大司马大将军霍光功德超过太尉绛侯周勃，车骑将军安世、丞相杨敞功比丞相陈平，前将军韩增、御史大夫蔡谊功比颖阴侯灌婴，太仆杜延年功比朱虚侯刘章，后将军趟充国、大司农田延年、少府史乐成功比典客刘揭，皆封侯益土。
English: According to the following imperial edict, the general secretary Ma Da Gen. Huo Guang's meritorious service was higher than that of the lieutenant general Zhou Bo, the cavalry general Ansi, the chancellor Yang Cang's meritorious service was higher than that of the chancellor Chen Ping, the former general Han Zeng, the minister of history Cai Rui's meritorious service was higher than that of Ying Yin, the lord of the manor Gan Zi, the eunuch Du Yan's meritorious service was higher than that of Zhu Hui, the lord of the manor Liu Zhang, the later general Wuchang Guo, the general secretary

古文：延年为人安和，备于诸事，久典朝政，上任信之，出即奉驾，入给事中，居九卿位十余年，赏赐赂遗，訾数千万。
现代文：延年为人安和，善于处理各项政务，长期主管朝政，皇上信任他，出即陪奉车驾，入给事中，居九卿位十余年，赏赐馈赠，家资数千万。
English: He has been a man of peace for many years. He is good at handling various government affairs. He has been in charge of court politics for a long time, and the emperor trusts him. He is accompanied by a chauffeur when he goes out, when he comes in, he stays in nine ranks for more than ten years, he is rewarded with gifts, and his family capital is tens of millions.

古文：霍光薨后，子禹与宗族谋反，诛。
现代文：霍光死后，子霍禹与宗族谋反，被诛。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, his son Huo Yu plotted a rebellion with the clan and was arrested.

古文：上以延年霍氏旧人，欲退之，而丞相魏相奏延年素贵用事，官职多奸。
现代文：皇上以杜延年为霍氏旧人，想免退，而丞相魏相奏延年向来尊贵受信任，所任官吏多不法。
English: The emperor considered Du Yan to be an old member of the Huo clan and wanted to keep him, while the prime minister, Wei Xiangso, had always been respected and trusted, and many of the officials he appointed were illegitimate.

古文：遣吏考案，但得苑马多死，官奴婢乏衣食，延年坐免官，削户二千。
现代文：遣吏立案审查，衹是查出苑马多死，官奴婢缺乏衣食，延年受到牵连犯法免官，削户二千。
English: The review of the appointment of officials was carried out, and it was found that many officials died, officials and servants lacked food and clothing, and officials who were implicated in crimes for many years were removed from office, and 2,000 households were reduced.

古文：后数月，复召拜为北地太守。
现代文：数月后，又召任北地太守。
English: A few months later, he was also appointed as the Governor of Hokkaidō.

古文：延年以故九卿外为边吏，治郡不进，上以玺书让延年。
现代文：延年以原九卿任作边地官吏，治郡政绩不明显，皇上用玺书责备延年。
English: Ennennen was appointed as a border official with the original nine nobles, and his performance in governing the county was not obvious. The emperor reproached Ennennen in a letter.

古文：延年乃选用良吏，捕击豪强，郡中清静。
现代文：延年便选良吏，捕击豪强，郡中清静。
English: Over the years, good officials have been elected, the attack has been strong, and the county has been calm.

古文：居岁余，上使谒者赐延年玺书，黄金二十斤，徙为西河太守，治甚有名。
现代文：过了一年多，皇帝派谒者赐延年玺书，黄金二十斤，徙为西河太守，治绩有名声。
English: After more than a year, the emperor sent an envoy to give Yan Nian Zang Shu, twenty pounds of gold, and he was appointed as the governor of the West River, with a reputation for his achievements.

古文：五凤中，征入为御史大夫。
现代文：五凤年间，调进朝廷任御史大夫。
English: During the Wufeng era, he was transferred to the Imperial Court to serve as the Imperial Historian.

古文：延年居父官府，不敢当旧位，坐卧皆易其处。
现代文：他住在原父亲的官府中，不敢使用父亲所用席位，坐卧都另换地方。
English: He lives in his father's former government office, dares not use his father's seat, and always changes his place of residence.

古文：是时，四夷和，海内平，延年视事三岁，以老病乞骸骨，天子优之，使光禄大夫持节赐延年黄金百斤、酒，加致医药，延年遂称病笃。赐安车驷马，罢就第。
现代文：这时四夷和睦，海内平安，他任职三年，因老病辞职。皇帝优待他，派光禄大夫持节赐给他黄金百斤和酒，又给医药。杜延年病重，皇帝又赐他安车驷马，免官就第。
English: At this time, the four Yi were at peace and the sea was safe. He served for three years and resigned due to old age. The emperor treated him favorably and sent Dr. Guanglu to give him a hundred catties of gold, wine, and medicine. When Du Yan was seriously ill, the emperor also gave him a horse and carriage and relieved him of his duties.

古文：后数月薨，谥曰敬侯，子缓嗣。
现代文：数月后去世。谧号敬侯，子杜缓继侯爵。
English: He died a few months later. His posthumous name was Revered Marquis, and his son Du Xuan succeeded him as Marquis.

古文：缓少为郎，本始中以校尉从蒲类将军击匈奴，还为谏大夫，迁上谷都尉，雁门太守。
现代文：杜缓少年时任郎官，本始年间以校尉身份跟从蒲类将军出击匈奴，还朝任谏大夫，改迁上谷都尉，雁门太守。
English: When he was a young boy, Du Xuan served as a vassal, and during the first years of the war, he went out to fight against the Xiongnu as a captain following General Putuo. He was also appointed to the position of Shao Daifu, transferred to the position of Shanggui Duifu, and became the governor of Ganmen.

古文：父延年薨，征视丧事，拜为太常，治诸陵县，每冬月封具狱日，常去酒省食，官属称其有恩。
现代文：父延年去世，治理丧事，后拜为太常，治理各陵墓所在之县，每当冬月判决定案之时，常常去酒省食，下属官员都称颂他有恩德。
English: My father passed away many years ago. He was in charge of funerals, and later he was in charge of the counties where the mausoleums were located. Whenever there was a verdict in the winter months, he often went to save food and drink. The subordinate officials all praised him for his kindness.

古文：元帝初即位，谷贵民流，永光中西羌反，缓辄上书入钱、谷以助用，前后数百万。
现代文：元帝初即位，谷价昂贵，百姓流散，永光年间西羌反，杜缓就上书入钱谷助军用，前后数百万。
English: At the beginning of Yuan Emperor's reign, grain prices were expensive, the people were scattered, and the West rebelled during the Yongguang era. Du Huan wrote to the emperor to send money to the valley to help the military, amounting to millions.

古文：缓六弟，五人至大官，少弟熊历五郡二千石、三州牧刺史，有能名，唯中弟钦官不至而最知名。
现代文：杜缓有六弟，五人至大官，少弟杜熊历任五郡二千石官职，三州牧刺史，以干练闻名。衹有中弟杜钦不为官而最知名。
English: Du Xuan had six brothers, five of whom were high-ranking officials. The youngest brother, Du Xiong, served as an official in five counties with a total of 2,000 koku of land. He was a herdsman in three provinces and was known for his ability. The middle brother, Du Qin, was not an official and was the most famous.

古文：钦字子夏，少好经书，家富而目偏盲，故不好为吏。
现代文：杜钦，字王夏，年少好经书，家富有而一目盲，故不好为吏。
English: Du Qin, also known as Wang Xia, was a good student of scripture when he was young. His family was rich, but he was blind, so he was not a good official.

古文：茂陵杜邺与钦同姓字，俱以材能称京师，故衣冠谓钦为 盲杜子夏 以相别。
现代文：茂陵杜邺与杜钦同姓字，都以才能闻名京师，所以士大夫们称杜钦为 盲杜子夏 以相区别。
English: Maoling Duzhen and Duqin have the same surname, and both are famous for their talents in the Beijing division, so the scholars and doctors called Duqin "Rong Zixia" to distinguish them.

古文：钦恶以疾见诋，乃为小冠，高广财二寸，由是京师更谓钦为 小冠杜子夏 ，而邺为 大冠杜子夏 云。
现代文：可是杜钦忌讳因自己有病而被人看不起，就头戴小帽，高宽才二寸，因此京师的人改称杜钦为 小冠杜子夏 ，杜邺谓 大冠杜子夏 。
English: However, Duqin taboo was despised because of his illness, and he wore a small cap, only two inches high and wide, so the people of Beijing Division changed the name of Duqin to Xiaoguan Duzixia, and the cuckoo was called Daoguan Duzixia.

古文：时，帝舅大将军王凤以外戚辅政，求贤知自助。
现代文：当时帝舅大将军王凤以外戚辅政，正想寻求品德好又有学问的人以协助自己。
English: At that time, Emperor's uncle, General Wang Feng, who had relatives in the government, was looking for a person with good moral character and knowledge to assist him.

古文：凤父顷侯禁与钦兄缓相善，故凤深知钦能，奏请钦为大将军军武库令。
现代文：王凤的父亲顷侯王禁与杜钦的哥哥杜缓是好朋友，故王凤深知杜钦有才能，于是奏请杜钦为大将军军武库令。
English: Wang Feng's father, Wang Han, was a good friend of Du Qin's brother, Du Xuan. Wang Feng knew that Du Qin had talent, so he asked Du Qin to be the general of the army's arsenal.

古文：职闲无事，钦所好也。
现代文：职闲无事，正合杜钦的心意。
English: Du Qin's desire to have nothing to do in his free time.

古文：钦为人深博有谋。
现代文：杜钦为人博学有谋略。
English: Duchin was an erudite and resourceful man.

古文：自上为太子时，以好色闻，及即位，皇太后诏采良家女。
现代文：皇上为太子时，好色，即位后，皇太后下令选良家女。
English: When the emperor was crown prince, he was a womanizer. After his accession to the throne, the empress dowager ordered the selection of a daughter from a good family.

古文：钦因是说大将军凤曰： 礼壹娶九女，所以极阳数，广嗣重祖也；必乡举求窈窕，不问华色，所以助德理内也；娣侄虽缺不复补，所以养寿塞争也。
现代文：杜钦因此事对大将军王凤说： 天子一次要娶九女，是阳数的极限，旨在广嗣敬祖，弘扬帝业；九女应从乡里挑选窈窕之女，不问姿色华艳，衹求能助德政，管理后宫；小妾虽缺可以不补，这有助于养寿命杜绝争宠。
English: Duqin therefore said to the general Wang Feng: The heavenly son wants to marry nine women at a time, which is the limit of the number of virgins, aiming to honor the ancestors and promote the imperial cause; the nine women should select the most beautiful women from the countryside, regardless of their appearance, so that they can help the government and manage the harem; although there is a shortage of concubines, it can not be replenished, which helps to maintain life expectancy and eliminate competition for favor.

古文：故后妃有贞淑之行，则胤嗣有贤圣之君；制度有威仪之节，则人君有寿考之福。
现代文：后妃贤惠，后继人就会出现贤圣之君；制订威严仪表制度，君主就有长寿之福。
English: If the empress is virtuous, the successor will be a virtuous and holy monarch; if a dignified system of etiquette is established, the monarch will have the blessing of a long life.

古文：废而不由，则女德不厌；女德不厌，则寿命不究于高年。
现代文：废弃礼仪而不用，就好色无厌；好色无厌，寿命就不会达到高寿。
English: Abandon etiquette and do not use it, and you will become an insatiable womanizer; if you are an insatiable womanizer, you will not live to a ripe old age.

古文：《书》云： 或四三年 ，言失欲之生害也。
现代文：《书》说 有的三四年就丧生 ，说的就是淫乐失控就损害生命。
English: "The Book" says that some people have lost their lives in the past three or four years, which means that when lust gets out of control, it damages lives.

古文：男子五十，好色未衰；妇人四十，容貌改前。
现代文：男子五十，好色未衰；妇人四十，容貌改变。
English: A man of fifty is still a lecher, but a woman of forty is a changed woman.

古文：以改前之容侍于未衰之年，而不以礼为制，则其原不可救而后徕异态；后徕异态，则正后自疑而支庶有间適之心。
现代文：以改变之容待未衰之年，又不以礼节制，那么原来不可挽回的容貌就会变为异常心态；异常心态出现了，那么正后自生疑心便会与姬妾产生隔阂，进而生出废嫡之心。
English: If you treat the year of change with tolerance and do not use etiquette, then the original irreparable appearance will become an abnormal state of mind; if an abnormal state of mind appears, then the self-generated suspicion will create a gap with the concubine, resulting in a wasteful heart.

古文：是以晋献被纳谗之谤，申生蒙无罪之辜。
现代文：所以晋献公接受浅言毁谤，申生蒙无罪之冤。
English: As a result, Shinken accepted the slanderous insinuation and Shen Sheng was found not guilty.

古文：今圣主富于春秋，未有適嗣，方乡术入学，未亲后妃之议。
现代文：今圣主年少，未有嫡嗣，正在心向学术，没有亲近后妃之议。
English: The current patron saint is young, has no legitimate heir, is pursuing an academic career, and has no intention of becoming a consort.

古文：将军辅政，宜因始初之隆，建九女之制，详择有行义之家，求淑女之质，毋必有色声音技能，为万世大法。
现代文：将军辅政，应沿袭始初隆重礼仪，建立九女之制，慎重选择礼仪之家，求贤女之品质，不必具有色声技能，便可以为万世树立榜样。
English: The generals who assist the government should follow the grand etiquette from the beginning, establish a system of nine women, carefully choose the home of etiquette, and seek the qualities of virtuous women. They do not need to have color voice skills, they can set an example for all ages.

古文：夫少，戒之在色，《小卞》之作，可为寒心。
现代文：少年，戒备的东西是色，《诗。小卞》之作，刺幽王废黜申后、太子，可为寒心。
English: A boy, the thing to be wary of is color. The work of "Poetry. Xiaojun," after the dethronement of the king and the crown prince, can be cold-hearted.

古文：唯将军常以为忧。 
现代文：望将军常要引以为忧。 
English: General Noh is often a cause for concern.

古文：凤白之太后，太后以为故事无有。
现代文：王凤告诉太后，太后认为没有这种制度。
English: Wang Feng told the empress dowager that the empress dowager believed that there was no such system.

古文：钦复重言： 《诗》云： 殷监不远，在夏后氏之世 。刺戒者至迫近，而省听者常怠忽，可不慎哉！
现代文：杜钦又说： 《诗》云， 殷朝借鉴不远，就在夏后氏时代，讽刺劝诫者认为事情紧迫，听者却常常不注意，能不慎重吗！
English: Duchin also said: "Poetry" is cloudy, the Yin Dynasty is not far from the reference, just in Xia Hou's era, the ironic exhortator thinks that things are urgent, but the listener often does not pay attention, can not be careful!

古文：前言九女，略陈其祸福，甚可悼惧，窃恐将军不深留意。
现代文：前面讲的九女制度，衹略加陈述利害，便令人畏惧，恐怕将军还未留意。
English: The aforementioned nine-woman system, with a slight statement of interests, is daunting, and I'm afraid the general hasn't noticed.

古文：后妃之制，夭寿治乱存亡之端也。
现代文：后妃之制，关系到天寿、治乱、存亡。
English: The empress dowry system is related to longevity, conflict management, and survival.

古文：迹三代之季世，览宗、宣之飨国，察近属之符验，祸败曷常不由女德？
现代文：考查三代末世的事迹，观察殷高宗、周宣王在位的长短，看看汉家的祸福预兆和应验，败亡何尝不由女色？
English: Examine the deeds of the three generations of the last days, observe the length of the reigns of Yin Gaozong and Zhou Xuan Wang, and look at the omens and fulfillment of the Han family. Why can't the defeat be caused by a woman?

古文：是以佩玉晏鸣，《关雎》叹之，知好色之伐性短年，离制度之生无厌，天下将蒙化，陵夷而成俗也。
现代文：所以《诗经》讲鸡鸣时佩戴玉饰前去拜见君王，周康王王后废除了晨拜之礼，《诗。关雎》为之叹息，应该懂得好色就会减少寿命，离开制度的约束，就会贪色无厌，风俗受到损害，渐成恶习。
English: Therefore, "The Book of Songs" talks about the rooster crowing when wearing jade ornaments to visit the king, Queen Zhou Kang abolished the morning prayer, and "Poetry. Guan Yu" sighs for it. It should be understood that lechery will reduce life expectancy, leaving the constraints of the system will lead to insatiable greed, and customs will be damaged and gradually become bad habits.

古文：故咏淑女，几以配上，忠孝之笃，仁厚之作也。
现代文：夸奖贤美之女，希望配与君王，忠孝品性着实就在其中，仁厚的诗人为此而作出了如此美诗。
English: The praise of a virtuous and beautiful woman, the hope of being matched with a king, and the loyalty and filial piety are truly among them, and the benevolent poet has made such a beautiful poem for this reason.

古文：夫君亲寿尊，国家治安，诚臣子至愿，所当勉之也。
现代文：君亲长寿，国家长治久安，实为臣子之最高愿望，这些也正是所以应当勉力的。
English: The longevity of your relatives and the long-term stability of the country are indeed the highest aspirations of your subjects, which is precisely why you should strive for them.

古文：《易》曰： 正其本，万物理。 凡事论有疑未可立行者，求之往古则典刑无，考之来今则吉凶同，卒摇易之则民心惑，若是者诚难施也。
现代文：《易》说： 正其本，万事通顺协调，凡论事或许有无法立即实行的，求之古代没有记载，考查今天则吉凶相同，上面意志摇动民心就惑乱，要是这样制度就实在难以行得通。
English: "Yi" said: everything is in its original form, everything is smooth and coordinated, everything may not be implemented immediately, there is no record of it in ancient times, the examination today is the same, the will of the above will shake the people's hearts and confuse them, if such a system is really difficult to work.

古文：今九女之制，合于往古，无害于今，不逆于民心，至易行也，行之至有福也，将军辅政而不蚤定，非天下之所望也。
现代文：今九女之制，合于往古，无害于今，不逆于民心，最易实行，实行之后就是国家的最大福气，将军辅政而不早定，非天下人的愿望。
English: Today's nine-woman system is consistent with the past, harmless to the present, not contrary to the people's hearts, the easiest to implement, and the country's greatest blessing after implementation. The general assists the government without early decision, and is not the desire of the world.

古文：唯将军信臣子之愿，念《关雎》之思，逮委政之隆，及始初清明，为汉家建无穷之基，诚难以忽，不可以遴。 
现代文：希望将军相信臣子的愿望，体察《关雎》之思虑，对得起委托执政的隆盛礼遇，实现天子即位始初之清明，为汉家建无穷之基业，实在不可以忽略，不可以迟疑。 
English: It is indeed impossible to ignore or hesitate to hope that the general will believe the wishes of his vassals, take into account the thoughts of Guan Yu, be worthy of the grandeur and courtesy of entrusting power, realize the clarity of the beginning of the enthronement of the Son of Heaven, and build an endless foundation for the Han family.

古文：凤不能自立法度，循故事而已。
现代文：王凤不能自立法度，衹因循旧制而已。
English: Wang Feng can't make laws by himself, so he just follows the old system.

古文：会皇太后女弟司马君力与钦兄子私通，事上闻，钦惭惧，乞骸骨去。
现代文：正好皇太后妹司马君力与杜钦兄子私通，事上报，杜钦惭惧，乞求离职而去。
English: Just as the empress dowager's sister Sima Junli and Duchin's brother and son were having an affair, the matter was reported, and Duchin was ashamed and begged to leave his post.

古文：后有日蚀、地震之变，诏举贤良方正能直言士，合阳侯梁放举钦。
现代文：后有日食、地震之变，下令推举贤良方正能直言进谏之士，合阳侯梁放推荐杜钦。
English: After the solar eclipse and earthquake, he ordered the promotion of the virtuous Fang Zheng, who could speak frankly, and Du Qin was recommended by Heyang Hou Liang Fang.

古文：钦上对曰： 陛下畏天命，悼变异，延见公卿，举直言之士，将以求天心，迹得失也。
现代文：杜钦上对说： 陛下畏天命，惧灾变，引见公卿，推举直言之士，将以求天意，观得失踪迹。
English: Duchin replied, "Your Majesty fears the fate of the world, is afraid of calamity, introduces nobles, chooses outspoken people, seeks the will of heaven, and sees the signs of disappearance.

古文：臣钦愚戆，经术浅薄，不足以奉大对。
现代文：臣杜钦愚笨，经术浅薄，不足以回答皇上的提问。
English: Du Qin was stupid and not good enough to answer the emperor's questions.

古文：臣闻日蚀、地震，阳微阴盛也。
现代文：臣闻日食、地震，是阳微阴盛的迹象。
English: It is said that eclipses and earthquakes are signs of the rising of yin and yang.

古文：臣者，君之阴也；子者，父之阴也；妻者，夫之阴也；夷狄者，中国之阴也。
现代文：臣是君的阴面；子是父的阴面；妻是夫的阴面；夷狄是中原之阴面。
English: The vassal is the shadow of the prince; the son is the shadow of the father; the wife is the shadow of the husband; the eunuch is the shadow of the cow.

古文：《春秋》日蚀三十六，地震五，或夷狄侵中国，或政权在臣下，或妇乘夫，或臣子背君父，事虽不同，其类一也。
现代文：《春秋》记载日食三十六次，地震五次，或者有夷狄侵扰中原，或者大权在臣下，或者有妇凌驾夫，或者是臣子背叛君父，事虽不同，其类相同。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records thirty-six solar eclipses, five earthquakes, or a barbarian invading the Central Plains, or a vassal holding great power, or a woman overpowering her husband, or a vassal betraying his father. Although the events are different, they are all the same.

古文：臣窃观人事以考变异，则本朝大臣无不自安之人，外戚亲属无乖刺之心，关东诸侯无强大之国，三垂蛮夷无逆理之节；殆为后宫。
现代文：臣私下观察人事考究变异，本朝大臣没有不安分守己之人，外戚没有贪狠之心，关东诸侯没有强大之国，边远民族没有逆理之为；危险在后宫。
English: The vassal privately observes the changes in personnel, the minister of this dynasty does not have a person who is anxious to protect himself, the relative does not have a greedy heart, the Kanto princes do not have a powerful country, and the outlying ethnic groups do not have a perverse reason; the danger is in the harem.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：日以戊申蚀。时加未。
现代文：曰在戊申食，时加未。
English: He said that he would eat in Wushen when the time was right.

古文：戊未，土也。
现代文：戊未属土。
English: It does not belong to the soil.

古文：土者，中宫之部也。
现代文：土是中宫之部。
English: The earth is the part of the middle palace.

古文：其夜地震未央宫殿中，此必適妾将有争宠相害而为患者，唯陛下深戒之。
现代文：在夜间地震于未央宫殿中，这表明嫡、妾将有争宠相害为患之事，望陛下深戒。
English: In the middle of the night, there was an earthquake in the Miyang Palace, which indicated that the heir and the concubine would have the misfortune of competing for favors and harming each other.

古文：变感以类相应，人事失于下，变象见于上。
现代文：变化感应是以类相应，人事先于下，变化之象见于上。
English: Sensation of change corresponds to the class, with the person in front at the bottom and the image of change at the top.

古文：能应之以德，则异咎消亡；不能应之以善，则祸败至。
现代文：能够以德去对应，那么灾难就会消亡；不能用善政去应和，祸败就会到来。
English: If you can respond with virtue, then disaster will disappear; if you can't respond with good governance, then disaster will come.

古文：高宗遭雊雉之戒，饬己正事，享百年之寿，殷道复兴，要在所以应之。
现代文：殷高宗遇到雉鸡之谴告，便端正品行，整治政事，享受了百年寿命，殷朝得到复兴，关键在善于应付灾变。
English: When Yin Gaozong was reprimanded by Yanqi, he took the initiative to rectify his moral conduct and political affairs, and enjoyed a hundred-year lifespan. The Yin Dynasty was revived, and the key was to be good at coping with disasters.

古文：应之非诚不立，非信不行。
现代文：对应之不够诚心就不能成功，非信就不能实行。
English: Without sincerity, there can be no success, and without faith, there can be no practice.

古文：宋景公，小国之诸侯耳，有不忍移祸之诚，出人君之言三，荧惑为之退舍。
现代文：宋景公是小国诸侯，有不忍转嫁灾祸的至诚之心，出入君之言再三，荧惑星便从心宿退走。
English: Song Jing Gong was a small country lord, with a sincere heart that could not bear to pass on the calamity. He repeatedly said, "Go in and out," and the fluorescent planet retreated from the heart.

古文：以陛下圣明，内推至诚，深思天变，何应而不感？
现代文：以陛下圣明，内推至诚之心，深思天变，有什么响应不感动上天？
English: With your majesty's holy mind, pushing inward to the heart of sincerity, pondering the changes of the heavens, what response does not move the heavens?

古文：何摇而不动？
现代文：有什么可以摇而不动呢？
English: What can you shake and not move?

古文：孔子曰： 仁远乎哉！ 
现代文：孑子曰： 仁是这样遥远呀！ 
English: Zou Zi said: "Ren is so far away!

古文：唯陛下正后妾，抑女宠，防奢泰，去佚游，躬节俭，亲万事，数御安车，由辇道，亲二宫之饔膳，致晨昏之定省。
现代文：望陛下正后妾，抑止女宠，防止奢侈太遇，去逸游，亲自节俭，亲临万事，多御安车，从辇道而行，亲问太后两宫饮食，行早晚问安之礼。
English: Hope that your majesty is being followed by a concubine, restrain a female favorite, prevent extravagant encounters, go on a getaway, be frugal in person, attend everything in person, take a safe car, walk along a narrow road, ask the empress dowager about the diet of the two palaces, and make morning and evening greetings.

古文：如此，即尧、舜不足与比隆，咎异何足消灭？
现代文：这样，就是尧、舜也不足以比兴旺，灾变何惧不消除！
English: In this way, even  and  are not enough to compete with prosperity, and the fear of disaster cannot be eliminated!

古文：如不留听于庶事，不论材而授位，殚天下之财以奉淫侈，匮万姓之力以从耳目，近谄谀之人而远公方，信谗贼之臣以诛忠良，贤俊失在岩穴，大臣怨于不以，虽无变异、社稷之忧也。
现代文：如果不留听庶事，不论才能而授官职，尽天下之财以奉淫侈，竭尽万民之力以放纵耳目之乐，近谄谀之入而远方正奉公之士，信谗贼之臣而诛忠良，贤士隐居在山穴，大臣怨于不用，虽无变异，也是社稷的忧患。
English: If ordinary affairs are not listened to, if officials are appointed regardless of their abilities, if the wealth of the world is used to indulge in luxury, if the power of all the people is used to indulge in the pleasures of the eyes and ears, if those who serve the public are near and those who serve the public are far away, if those who trust the thief are loyal, if the wise man lives in seclusion in a mountain cave, and if the minister resents not being used, although there is no variation, it is also the sorrow of the society.

古文：天下至大，万事至众，祖业至重，诚不可以佚豫为，不可以奢泰持也。
现代文：天下至大，万事至众，祖业至重，实在不可以行淫佚之乐，不可以坚持奢侈享受。
English: The world is supreme, all things are supreme, ancestral lineage is supreme, it is really not permissible to indulge in lewd pleasures, it is not permissible to insist on luxurious enjoyment.

古文：唯陛下忍无益之欲，以全众庶之命。
现代文：望陛下忍无益处的欲望，以便保全百姓之命。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will be able to tolerate the useless desires in order to save the lives of the people.

古文：臣钦愚戆，言不足采。 
现代文：臣杜钦愚笨，言论不足采纳。 
English: Du Qin was stupid, and his inadequate speech was adopted.

古文：其夏，上尽召直言之士诣白虎殿对策，策曰： 天地之道何贵？
现代文：夏季，天子尽召直言之士到白虎殿对策，策问： 天地之道什么为贵？
English: In the summer, the Son of Heaven calls forthright people to the White Tiger Hall for countermeasures, asking: What is the preciousness of the way of heaven and earth?

古文：王者之法何如？
现代文：王者之法怎样？
English: What is the king's law?

古文：《六经》之义何上？
现代文：《六经》之义什么为上？
English: What is the meaning of the Six Classics?

古文：人之行何先？
现代文：人的行为什么在先？
English: What comes first in human behaviour?

古文：取人之术何以？
现代文：用人之术是什么？
English: What is the recruitment strategy?

古文：当世之治何务？
现代文：当世治国以何为急务？
English: What is the most urgent task of contemporary governance?

古文：各以经对。 
现代文：各用经典对答。 
English: Each answered with a classic.

古文：钦对曰： 臣闻天道贵信，地道贵贞；不信不贞，万物不生。
现代文：杜钦对答说： 臣闻天道以信为贵重，地道以正为贵重；不信不正，万物不生。
English: Du Qin said in reply: Subordinates know that in the heavenly way, belief is precious, and that in the earthly way, righteousness is precious; if you don't believe in righteousness, nothing will come into being.

古文：生，天地之所贵也。
现代文：生是天地所贵重的。
English: Life is precious.

古文：王者承天地之所生，理而成之，昆虫草木靡不得其所。
现代文：王者承受天地所生，统理而成，昆虫草木各得其所。
English: The king is born of heaven and earth, and is made up of all things. Insects and plants each have their own place.

古文：王者法天地，非仁无以广施，非义无以正身；克己就义，恕以及人，《六经》之所上也。
现代文：王者效法天地，不仁就不能广施，不义就不能正身；克制自己去服从义，内省己志而及于人，这是《六经》所崇尚的。
English: A king should follow the example of heaven and earth. If he is not kind, he cannot be generous, and if he is not righteous, he cannot be upright. He should restrain himself to obey righteousness, and reflect on his own will before reaching out to others. This is what the "Six Classics" advocate.

古文：不孝，则事君不忠，莅官不敬，战陈无勇，朋友不信。
现代文：不孝，就不会效忠于君，为官不敬，交战不勇，朋友不信。
English: If you are not filial, you will not be loyal to you. If you do not respect officials, you will not fight bravely, and you will not trust friends.

古文：孔子曰： 孝无终始，而患不及者，未之有也。 
现代文：孔子说： 把孝贯彻到始终，担心达不到道义，那是没有的事。 
English: Confucius said: To carry out filial piety to the end, to worry about not reaching morality, that is nothing.

古文：孝，人行之所先也。
现代文：孝，是人们首先表现出来的品德。
English: Filial piety is the first virtue that people show.

古文：观本行于乡党，考功能于官职，达观其所举，富观其所予，穷观其所不为，乏观其所不取，近观其所为主，远观其所主。
现代文：在家乡观察本来的行为，在官位上考核办事能力，在高位者要观其推荐什么人，富裕者要观其给予什么，贫穷者要观其不干什么事，困乏者要观其索取什么，亲近者要观其托人为自己干什么，疏远者要观其被人所托帮助他人干什么。
English: In the hometown, observe the original behavior. In the official position, examine the ability to do things. Those in high positions should watch who they recommend, the rich should watch what they give, the poor should watch what they don't do, the needy should watch what they ask for, the close ones should watch what their trustees do for themselves, and the alienated ones should watch what their trustees do to help others.

古文：孔子曰： 视其所以，观其所由，察其所安，人焉瘦哉？ 取人之术也。
现代文：孔子说： 看他使用什么人，观其追随什么人，察其安心喜好什么，便可知其善恶而无所隐藏。 这是知人用人之术。
English: Confucius said, "If you look at who he uses, who he follows, and what he likes and dislikes, you will know his good and evil, and there is nothing to hide.

古文：殷因于夏尚质，周因于殷尚文，今汉家承周、秦之敝，宜抑文尚质，废奢长俭，表实去伪。
现代文：殷朝世风因袭夏而崇尚质朴，周因袭殷而崇尚文雅，今汉家承周、秦之弊端，应限制文彩而崇尚质朴，废弃奢侈提倡节俭，表彰诚实除去虚伪。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, the world style advocated simplicity because of the summer, and the Zhou Dynasty advocated elegance because of the Yin Dynasty. Now, the Han Dynasty, inheriting the drawbacks of the Zhou Dynasty and the Qin Dynasty, should limit the decoration and promote simplicity, abandon luxury and promote frugality, and commend honesty and remove hypocrisy.

古文：孔子曰 恶紫之夺朱 ，当世治之所务也。
现代文：孔子说 厌恶杂紫邪色侵夺纯正色，是当世治国之要务。
English: Confucius said that it is the most important task of contemporary governance to abhor the invasion of pure colors by the evil purple.

古文：臣窃有所忧，言之则拂心逆指，不言则渐日长，为祸不细，然小臣不敢废道而求从，违忠而耦意。
现代文：臣自认为所担忧的是讲出来会有所冒犯，不讲出来邪气曰增，为祸不小，然而小臣不敢废道而求顺从，违背忠义而符合私意。
English: The vassal thinks that what he is worried about is that speaking out will offend, and if he does not speak out, the evil spirit will increase, which is not a small disaster. However, the vassal does not dare to waste his way and seek obedience, violate loyalty and conform to his own will.

古文：臣闻玩色无厌，必生好憎之心；好憎之心生，则爱宠偏于一人；爱宠偏于一人，则继嗣之路不广，而嫉妒之心兴矣。
现代文：臣闻玩色无厌，必生好憎之心；好憎之心产生，爱宠就偏于一人；爱宠偏于一人，选择继嗣之路就狭窄，而嫉妒之心兴起。
English: If a vassal has an insatiable taste for sex, hatred will be born; if hatred is born, favor will be given to one person; if favor is given to one person, the way to choose a successor will be narrow, and jealousy will arise.

古文：如此，则匹妇之说，不可胜也。
现代文：这样，一妇之悦也不能满足。
English: In this way, a woman's pleasure can not be satisfied.

古文：唯陛下纯德普施，无欲是从，此则众庶咸说，继嗣日广，而海内长安。
现代文：望陛下普施纯正之德，不纵心所欲，这样则众庶皆大欢喜，选择后继入之路广，而海内长安。
English: I hope that His Majesty will spread the virtue of purity and not indulge in whatever his heart desires. In this way, all the commoners will be very happy, there will be a wide choice of successors, and the country will be safe.

古文：万事之是非何足备言！ 
现代文：万事之是非何足忧虑！ 
English: There is no need to worry about anything!

古文：钦以前事病，赐帛罢，后为议郎，复以病免。
现代文：杜钦因策对而生病，赐帛免官，后为议郎，又因病免官。
English: Duqin fell ill as a result of his strategy, and was given the title of minister and removed from office. Later, he was made minister and removed from office due to his illness.

古文：征诣大将军莫府，国家政谋，凤常与钦虑之。
现代文：征召至大将军幕府，国家政事谋议，王凤常与杜钦一起谋划。
English: Conscripted to the general of the shogunate, Wang Feng often planned together with Du Qin.

古文：数称达名士王骏、韦安世、王延世等，救解冯野王、王尊、胡常之罪过，及继功臣绝世，填抚四夷，当世善政，多出于钦者。
现代文：多次称道贤达名士王骏、韦安世、王延世等，救解冯野王、王尊、胡常之罪过，还有延续绝世功臣之后，镇抚四边民族，当世善政，多出于杜钦谋议。
English: He repeatedly praised the sages of Taoism, such as Wang Xi, Wei Anshi, and Wang Yanzhi, and absolved the sins of King Fengye, Wang Zong, and Hu Chang. He also continued to be a great hero, pacified the four-sided ethnic groups, and promoted good governance in the world. This was mostly due to Du Qin's advice.

古文：见凤专政泰重，戒之曰： 昔周公身有至圣之德，属有叔父之亲，而成王有独见之明，无信谗之听，然管、蔡流言而周公惧。
现代文：看到王凤专政太重，告诫说： 以前周公身有大圣之德，宗属有叔父之亲，而成王有独见之明，无信谗之听，然而管、蔡散布流言而周公畏惧。
English: Seeing that Wang Feng's dictatorship was too heavy, he cautioned, "Previously, Zhou Gongtang had the virtue of a great saint, and his ancestor was a relative of his uncle. However, Cheng Wang had a unique point of view and was not trustworthy. However, he and Cai spread rumors, and Zhou Gong was afraid of him.

古文：穰侯，昭王之舅也，权重于秦，威震邻敌，有旦莫偃伏之爱，心不介然有间，然范雎起徒步，由异国，无雅信，开一朝之说，而穰侯就封。
现代文：穣侯是昭王之舅，权力在秦国为最重，威震邻国，对昭王有旦夕起居戏弄之爱，从无存异心，然而范雎起平民，由异国而来，素无相互信任，一旦就任丞相，而穣侯就遣归封国。
English: Yan Hou was the uncle of King Zhao. He wielded the most power in Qin and dominated the neighboring countries. He loved to tease King Zhao from day to day. There was never any animosity between them. However, Fan Rong was a commoner who came from a foreign country and there was never any mutual trust. Once he was appointed as chancellor, Yan Hou was sent back to the feudal state.

古文：及近者武安侯之见退，三事之迹，相去各数百岁，若合符节，甚不可不察。
现代文：近世武安侯请求封地被斥退，三事之迹，相去各几百年，似乎很类似，不可不察。
English: In modern times, Wu'an Hou requested that his fiefdom be expelled. The traces of the three events, each several hundred years apart, seem to be very similar and cannot be ignored.

古文：愿将军由周公之谦惧，损穰侯之威，放武安之欲，毋使范雎之徒得间其说。 
现代文：愿将军由周公之谦虚恭谨，损穣侯之威，抑制武安之私欲，不让范雎之徒得逞。 
English: May the general be humble and respectful of Zhou Gong, undermine the authority of Zhou Hou, restrain the selfish desires of Wu An, and not allow the followers of Fan Ye to succeed.

古文：顷之，复日蚀，京兆尹王章上封事求见，果言凤专权蔽主之过，宜废勿用，以应天变。
现代文：不久，又食，京兆尹王章上书求见，果然言王凤专权蒙蔽君主之过，应废去不用，以应天变。
English: Not long after, King Jingzhao and King Yin wrote to the emperor to ask for his opinion, and the emperor said that Wang Feng's exclusive power had blinded the monarch, and that it should be abolished and no longer used in response to the changes in the heavens.

古文：于是天子感悟，召见章，与议，欲退凤。
现代文：于是天子感悟，召见王章，与王章议论，想免退王凤。
English: Then the Son of Heaven was impressed, summoned Wang Zhang, and discussed with Wang Zhang, and wanted to avoid sending Wang Feng back.

古文：凤甚忧惧，钦令凤上疏谢罪，乞骸骨，文指甚哀。
现代文：王凤十分忧惧，杜钦令王凤上书谢罪，乞求赐归故里，文意甚哀。
English: Wang Feng was very worried. Du Qin ordered Wang Feng to write a letter thanking him for his sin and begging him to return to his hometown. The letter was very sad.

古文：太后涕泣为不食。
现代文：太后涕泣不食。
English: The Empress Dowager sobbed and refused to eat.

古文：上少而亲倚凤，亦不忍废，复起凤就位。
现代文：皇上年少而亲倚王凤，也不忍废免，又让王凤就位。
English: The emperor, being young and fond of Wang Feng, could not bear to dismiss him, so he allowed Wang Feng to take his place.

古文：凤心惭，称病笃，欲遂退。
现代文：王凤心中惭愧，称病重，想立即退归。
English: Embarrassed, Wang Feng said he was seriously ill and wanted to return home immediately.

古文：钦复说之曰： 将军深悼辅政十年，变异不已，故乞骸骨，归咎于身，刻己自责，至诚动众，愚知莫不感伤。
现代文：杜钦又说： 将军辅政十年，变异不已，因此求归故里，归咎于身，刻己自责，真诚动人，无论愚者智者莫不伤感。
English: Duchin also said: The generals have been in power for ten years, and the changes have not stopped. Therefore, they seek to return to their roots, blame themselves, blame themselves, and sincerely move people. No matter if they are fools or wise, they are sad.

古文：虽然，是无属之臣，执进退之分，絜其去就之节者耳，非主上所以待将军，非将军所以报主上也。
现代文：虽然受到责难，但王章是无根基之臣，衹是掌握进退之分，拿着去就之节而已，不是主上对待将军的心意，也不是将军来报答主上的办法。
English: Although he was reprimanded, Wang Zhang was a baseless vassal. It was only a matter of grasping the point of advance and retreat, and taking it and going. It was not the Lord's intention to treat the general, nor was it the general's way of repaying the Lord.

古文：昔周公虽老，犹在京师，明不离成周，示不忘王室也。
现代文：以前周公虽老，犹在京师，表明不离成周，昭示不忘王室之心。
English: In the past, although Zhou Gong was old, he was still teaching in Beijing, showing that he would not leave Cheng Zhou, and that he would not forget the heart of the royal family.

古文：仲山父异姓之臣，无亲于宣，就封于齐，犹叹息永怀，宿夜徘徊，不忍远去，况将军之于主上，主上之与将军哉！
现代文：仲山父异姓之臣，无亲于宣王，被封于齐，尚且叹息永远怀念，日夜徘徊，不忍远去，何况将军对于主上，主上对于将军啊！
English: Zhongshan's father's vassal with a different surname, no relation to King Xuan, was sealed together, yet sighed forever, wandered day and night, could not bear to go far, not to mention the general to the Lord, the Lord to the general!

古文：夫欲天下治安变异之意，莫有将军，主上照然知之，故攀援不遣，《书》称 公毋困我！ 
现代文：想让天下治安变异，没有超过将军力量的，主上十分清楚，因此迟疑不遣，《书》称： 公不要困我！ 
English: The Lord is very clear that He does not want the world's peace and security to change beyond the power of the generals, so He hesitates. "The Book" says: Don't embarrass me!

古文：唯将军不为四国流言自疑于成王，以固至忠。 
现代文：说的是成王不许周公离去的事。望将军不因流言而自我怀疑，以坚固至忠之心。 
English: It was about Cheng Wang not allowing Zhou Gong to leave. General Wang did not doubt himself because of the rumor, but was firm and loyal.

古文：凤复起视事。
现代文：王凤复起用。
English: Wang Feng was reinstated.

古文：上令尚书劾奏京兆尹章，章死诏狱。
现代文：皇上令尚书举劾京兆尹王章，王章死于韶狱。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shu to impeach Jing Zhaoying Wang Zhang, and Wang Zhang died in prison.

古文：语在《元后传》。
现代文：事在《元后传》。
English: It's in "Tale of Genji."

古文：章既死，众庶冤之，以讥朝廷。
现代文：王章已死，众百姓认为他冤枉，以此讥刺朝廷。
English: Wang Zhang had died, and the people thought he had been wronged, and used this to taunt the imperial court.

古文：钦欲救其过，复说凤曰： 京兆尹章所坐事密，吏民见章素好言事，以为不坐官职，疑其以日蚀见对有所言也。
现代文：杜钦想补救其过，又劝王凤说： 京兆尹王章犯法之事是很机密的，吏民们见王章一向好为民讲话，以为不会因此犯法以致免官，怀疑日食与王凤有关便上奏天子。
English: Du Qin wanted to make up for his mistake, and advised Wang Feng to say: The matter of Wang Zhang's violation of the law is very confidential. The officials and the people saw that Wang Zhang had always been good at speaking for the people, and thought that he would not violate the law and be dismissed. They suspected that the solar eclipse was related to Wang Feng, so they played the role of the son of heaven.

古文：假令章内有所犯，虽陷正法，事不暴扬，自京师不晓，况于远方。
现代文：假如王章另有内情犯罪，虽然正法。事不揭发出来，在京师无人知晓，何况边远之地。
English: If Wang Zhang is guilty of another secret crime, although it is legal, it will not be revealed, and no one will know about it in Beijing, let alone in a remote place.

古文：恐天下不知章实有罪，而以为坐言事也。
现代文：恐怕天下不知王章实在有罪，而认为是因上书言事而犯罪。
English: I'm afraid the world doesn't know that Wang Zhang is really guilty, but thinks that he committed a crime because of what he said in the letter.

古文：如是，塞争引之原，损宽明之德。
现代文：这样，就掩盖了引事争谏的真正原因，损害丫宽宏大量的圣明之德。
English: In this way, the real cause of the dispute is covered up, and the sacred virtue of magnanimity is damaged.

古文：钦愚以为宜因章事举直言极谏，并见郎从官展尽其章，加于往前，以明示四方，使天下咸知主上圣明，不以言罪下也。
现代文：杜钦自以为应就王章一事进行一次直言极谏，并召郎属官讲清楚意图，加上以前上奏日食的事，以便向四方表明真意，让天下人都知道主上圣明，不是根据言论定罪的。
English: Duchin thought that he should make a blunt statement about Wang Zhang, and called on his subordinate officials to make their intentions clear, adding that they had previously played the eclipse, in order to show the truth to the four parties, so that the whole world would know that the Lord is holy and is not convicted on the basis of speech.

古文：若此，则流言消释，疑惑著明。 
现代文：这样，流言就消释，疑惑自解。 
English: In this way, rumours are dispelled and doubts are resolved.

古文：凤白行其策。
现代文：王凤向皇上陈述了杜钦的计策。
English: Wang Feng explained Du Qin's stratagem to the emperor.

古文：钦之补过将美，皆此类也。
现代文：杜钦补过助美的事，就是如此。
English: That's how Duchin made up for helping the United States.

古文：优游不仕，以寿终。
现代文：杜钦优游不为官，以寿终。
English: Du Qin Youyou did not become an official and ended his life.

古文：钦子及昆弟支属至二千石者且十人。
现代文：杜钦子及兄弟旁支官至二千石的近十人。
English: Du Qin's son and his brother's second-in-command to nearly ten people of two thousand stone.

古文：钦兄缓前免太常，以列侯奉朝请，成帝时乃薨，子业嗣。
现代文：杜钦兄杜缓先前免太常，以列侯身份上朝请安，成帝时去世，子杜业继承侯爵。
English: Du Qin's brother Du Xuan had previously been pardoned from being a marquis, and went to the court as a vassal to ask for peace. When he became emperor, he died, and his son Duye inherited the marquisate.

古文：业有材能，以列侯选，复为太常。
现代文：杜业有才能，以列侯身份选举为官，又任太常。
English: Du Ye was talented, and he was elected as a vassal lord, and he was also appointed to the highest post.

古文：数言得失，不事权贵，与丞相翟方进、卫尉定陵侯淳于长不平。
现代文：多次上书言时政得失，不为权贵效力，与丞相翟方进、卫尉定陵侯淳于长不和。
English: He wrote many times about the ups and downs of politics at the time, and did not work for the powerful. He was at odds with the chancellor, Shifangjin, and the lieutenant of the imperial guard, Dingling, Jun and Chang.

古文：后业坐法免官，复为函谷关都尉。
现代文：后来杜业因犯法免官，又任函谷关都尉。
English: Later, Du Ye was removed from his post for violating the law, and he was appointed as the captain of the Hanyu Pass.

古文：会定陵侯长有罪，当就国，长舅红阳侯立与业书曰： 诚哀老姊垂白，随无状子出关，愿勿复用前事相侵。 
现代文：正遇定陵侯淳于长有罪，应当回封国，其舅红阳侯立给杜业写信说： 实在伤痛老姐白发下垂，随不肖儿子出关，望不要用以往不和的事欺侮定陵侯。 
English: Just as Dingling Hou Chun Yuchang was found guilty and ordered to return to the country, his uncle Hongyang Hou Li wrote a letter to Duye, saying, "It is really painful that my elder sister's white hair is drooping and she is going out with her son. I hope you will not use the past discord to bully Dingling Hou."

古文：定陵侯既出关，伏罪复发，下洛阳狱。
现代文：定陵侯出关后，犯过的罪案又发，关到雒阳狱。
English: After Dinglinghou was released, the crimes he had committed occurred again, and he was sent to Fenyang Prison.

古文：丞相史搜得红阳侯书，奏业听请，不敬，坐免就国。
现代文：丞相史搜到了红阳侯的信，上奏杜业听任请托，犯了不敬法，坐免去封国。
English: Chosho Shishi found the letter from Hongyang Hou, and reported that Duye had violated the Law of Disrespect and was excused from ruling the country.

古文：其春，丞相方进薨，业上书言： 方进本与长深结厚，更相称荐，长陷大恶，独得不坐，苟欲障塞前过，不为陛下广持平例，又无恐惧之心，反因时信其邪辟，报睚眦怨。
现代文：春季，丞相方进去世，杜业上书说： 方进本与淳于长有深厚交情，互相称颂推荐，淳于长犯大罪，惟独丞相没有受牵连，假如想阻止揭发以前的遇错，不为陛下广施持平之法，又无恐惧之心，反而不时继续延伸邪恶，报瞪一瞪眼睛而结下的怨恨。
English: In the spring, Minister of Justice Fang Jin passed away, Du Ye wrote: Fang Jin Ben and Chun Yuchang had a deep friendship, praised and recommended each other, and Chun Yuchang committed a serious crime. However, only the Minister of Justice was not implicated. If you want to prevent the exposure of previous mistakes, do not widely apply the law of equanimity for His Majesty, and do not have fear, but continue to extend evil from time to time, and report the resentment formed by staring eyes.

古文：故事，大逆朋友坐免官，无归故郡者，今坐长者归故郡，已深一等；红阳侯立坐子受长货赂故就国耳，非大逆也，而方进复奏立党友后将军朱博、巨鹿太守孙宏、故少府陈咸，皆免官，归咸故郡。
现代文：制度规定，因大逆罪的朋友而犯罪免官，可以不归故郡。今天因淳于长而犯罪回故郡，已严重一等；红阳侯王立因儿子受淳于长贿赂而犯罪因此遣归封国，不是大逆罪，而方进又奏红阳侯王立与后将军朱博、钜鹿太守孙宏、故少府陈咸结为朋党，都免了官，遣陈咸回故里。
English: The system stipulates that a friend who commits a crime of high treason and is removed from office may not return to the former county. Today, the crime of returning to the former county because of Jun Yuchang is a serious one; Hongyang Hou Wang Li, whose son was bribed by Jun Yuchang and was sent back to the feudal state because of the crime, is not a high treason, and Fangjin also played the role of Hongyang Hou Wang Li and the general Zhu Bo, the Elu Daju Sun Hong, and the late Shoufu Chen Xian Jie as friends. They were all removed from office and sent back to Chen Xian.

古文：刑罚无平，在方进之笔端，众庶莫不疑惑，皆言孙宏不与红阳侯相爱。
现代文：刑罚如此不公平，在方进之笔端，众人莫不疑惑，都说孙宏不与红阳侯相和。
English: The punishment was so unfair that at the end of Fang Jin's writing, there was no doubt in anyone's mind that Sun Hong did not get along with Hongyang Hou.

古文：宏前为中丞时，方进为御史大夫，举掾隆可侍御史，宏奉隆前奉使欺谩，不宜执法近侍，方进以此怨宏。
现代文：孙宏曾任中丞，方进为御史大夫，举长吏隆可任侍御史，孙宏奏隆以前奉使欺诳，不适合执法任近侍官，方进以此怨恨孙宏。
English: Sun Hong was once a vice-commander, Fang Jin was a magistrate, Long, the chief of cadres, could be appointed as an attendant magistrate, and Sun Hong had previously served as a bully, and was not suitable to serve as a law enforcement officer, Fang Jin resented Sun Hong.

古文：又方进为京兆尹时，陈咸为少府，在九卿高弟，陛下所自知也。
现代文：还有方进任京兆尹时，陈咸任少府，位在九卿高位，陛下是清楚的。
English: There is also the fact that when Fang was appointed to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, Chen Xian was appointed to the minor prefecture and was in the high position of the nine nobles. His Majesty is clear.

古文：方进素与司直师丹相善，临御史大夫缺，使丹奏咸为奸利，请案验，卒不能有所得，而方进果自得御史大夫。
现代文：方进一向与司直师丹友好，正值御史大夫空缺，让师丹上奏陈咸有奸利，请求审查，始终查不出问题，而方进果然乘机得到御史大夫职位。
English: Fang Jin has always been friendly with Shi Nao and Shi Dan. When there was a vacancy for the position of the chief historian, he asked Shi Dan to promote Chen Xian to the post of the chief historian, which was considered to be a lucrative move. He requested a review, but no problems could be found. Fang Jin took the opportunity to get the position of the chief historian.

古文：为丞相，即时诋欺，奏免咸，复因红阳侯事归咸故郡。
现代文：作为丞相，立即进行诋毁，奏免陈咸官，又因红阳侯事遣陈咸归故郡。
English: As chancellor, he immediately denigrated and dismissed Chen Xian, and also sent Chen Xian back to his old county because of the Hongyang incident.

古文：众人皆言国家假方进权太甚。
现代文：众人都说国家授给方进的权力太大。
English: Many say Fangjin has been given too much power by the state.

古文：案师丹行能无异，及光禄勋许商被病残人，皆但以附从方进，尝获尊官。
现代文：实际上师丹没有本事，还有光禄勋许商是带病的残疾人，都是以阿附方进，得到尊官。
English: In fact, Shidan did not have the ability, and there was also a disabled person with a disease named Guanglu Xun Xu Shang. All of them were promoted to dignitaries by attaching Fangjin.

古文：丹前亲荐邑子丞相史能使巫下神，为国求福，几获大利。
现代文：师丹先前推荐同乡人丞相史能使巫师下神，为国求福，想获大利。
English: Shidan had previously recommended a fellow villager, Prime Minister Joseph Shi, to be able to make the sorcerer worship God, seek blessings for the country, and want to win Italy.

古文：幸赖陛下至明，遣使者毛莫如先考验，卒得其奸，皆坐死。
现代文：幸赖陛下明察，派使者毛莫如事先加以考验，终于识破其奸，都被处死。
English: Fortunately, His Majesty saw it clearly and sent an emissary to test them in advance, and they were all put to death.

古文：假令丹知而白之，此诬罔罪也；不知而白之，是背经术惑左道也：二者皆在大辟，重于朱博、孙宏、陈咸所坐。
现代文：假使师丹知情而推荐，这是诬枉之罪；不知而推荐，这是背离经术被左道所迷惑。二者犯的都是杀头罪，比朱博、孙宏、陈咸所犯罪严重得多。
English: If the teacher and disciple knowingly make a recommendation, this is the sin of falsification; if they unknowingly make a recommendation, this is the sin of deviating from the sutras and being deceived by the left path. Both of them commit the sin of beheading, which is much more serious than the crimes committed by Zhu Bo, Sun Hong and Chen Xian.

古文：方进终不举白，专作威福，阿党所厚，排挤英俊，托公报私，横厉无所畏忌，欲以熏轑天下。
现代文：方进始终不举发报告，专作威福，偏厚党羽，排挤英俊，藉公报私，纵横凌厉无所顾忌，想毒害天下。
English: Fangjin has never issued a report. He is a bully, favors the strongest party members, pushes out the good-looking ones, and uses the communique as a weapon. He is ruthless and wants to poison the world.

古文：天下莫不望风而靡，自尚书近臣皆结舌杜口，骨肉亲属莫不股栗。
现代文：天下无不望风而止，自尚书近臣都结舌杜，骨肉亲属莫不战栗。
English: The whole world is waiting for the wind to die down. Even Shang Shu's closest vassals are tongue-tied, and there is no reason for his flesh and blood relatives to tremble.

古文：威权泰盛而不忠信，非所以安国家也。
现代文：威权太重而不忠信，是不会安定国家的。
English: If the authority is too heavy and not loyal, the country will not be stable.

古文：今闻方进卒病死，不以尉示天下，反复赏赐厚葬，唯陛下深思往事，以戒来今。 
现代文：今闻方进暴病而死，不以此安慰天下，反而又赏赐厚葬，望陛下深思往事，以警戒未来。 
English: Now that Emperor Wenfang has died of a violent illness, instead of consoling the world with this, he has been rewarded with a lavish funeral. I hope that His Majesty will reflect on the past to guard against the future.

古文：会成帝崩，哀帝即位，业复上书言： 王氏世权日久，朝无骨鲠之臣，宗室诸侯微弱，与系囚无异，自佐史以上至于大吏皆权臣之党。
现代文：遇成帝驾崩，哀帝即位，杜业又上书说： 王氏世代掌权为时太久，朝无鲠直之臣，宗室诸侯微弱，与囚徒无异，自佐史以上至大吏都是权臣党羽。
English: When Emperor Chengxing passed away and Emperor Pai ascended to the throne, Duye wrote again: The Wang generation has been in power for too long. There are no direct vassals of the dynasty, the lineage of the princes is weak, and they are no different from prisoners. From Sashi and above to the highest officials, they are all vassals of the party.

古文：曲阳侯根前为三公辅政，知赵昭仪杀皇子，不辄白奏，反与赵氏比周，恣意妄行，谮诉故许后，被加以非罪，诛破诸许族，败元帝外家。
现代文：曲阳侯王根前为三公辅政，知道赵昭仪杀皇子，不立即上奏，反而与赵氏结为朋党，恣意妄行，陷害故许后，横加非罪，诛杀诸许家族，摧毁元帝外家。
English: Quyang marquis Wang Gen, formerly the Third Prince and Vice-regent, knew that Zhao Zhaoyi had killed the prince, but he did not report it immediately. Instead, he allied himself with the Zhao clan, acted arbitrarily, framed the former empress, arbitrarily punished, killed many families, and destroyed the former emperor's foreign family.

古文：内嫉妒同产兄姊红阳侯立及淳于氏，皆老被放弃。
现代文：内嫉妒同母兄、姐红阳侯王立及淳于氏，都在年老时废弃。
English: He was jealous of his older brother and sister, Hongyang Hou Wangli and Jun Yu, and abandoned them in their old age.

古文：新喋血京师，威权可畏。
现代文：新近又喋血京师，威权可畏。
English: Recently, the blood-curdling Beijing division has come up again, and the authoritarian power is formidable.

古文：高阳侯薛宣有不养母之名，安昌侯张禹奸人之雄，惑乱朝廷，使先帝负谤于海内，尤不可不慎。
现代文：高阳侯薛宣有不养母之名，安昌侯张禹是奸入之首，惑乱朝廷，让先帝背上海内怨谤之名，尤其不可不慎。
English: Gaoyang Hou Xue Xuan had the reputation of not being a foster mother, Anchang Hou Zhang Yu was the head of infiltration, confusing the imperial court, and it was especially imprudent to let the former emperor bear the name of Shanghai's internal slander.

古文：陛下初即位，谦让未皇，孤独特立，莫可据杖，权臣易世，意若探汤。
现代文：陛下初即位，未暇谦让，孤独特立，没有辅佐依仗，权臣换代，有如以手探试沸水。
English: His Majesty's accession to the throne at the beginning of his reign, his untimely concession, his isolated position, his reliance on war without support, and the succession of powerful ministers are like testing boiling water with a hand probe.

古文：宜蚤以义割恩，安百姓心。
现代文：应早以大义施恩，安慰百姓之心。
English: He should have shown mercy and consoled the hearts of the people with great justice.

古文：窃见朱博忠信勇猛，材略不世出，诚国家雄俊之宝臣也，宜征博置左右，以填天下。
现代文：臣私下看到朱博忠信勇猛，才略近世罕见，实为国家雄俊瑰宝之臣，应征召朱博安置在左右，以镇抚天下。
English: Privately, the minister saw Zhu Bo's loyalty and bravery, which was rare in modern times. He was indeed a national hero and treasure. Zhu Bo was conscripted and placed on the right and left to pacify the world.

古文：此人在朝，则陛下可高枕而卧矣。
现代文：此人在朝，陛下便可以高枕无忧了。
English: If this person arrives in the morning, His Majesty will be able to sleep soundly.

古文：昔诸吕欲危刘氏，赖有高祖遗臣周勃、陈平尚存，不者，几为奸臣笑。 
现代文：以前诸吕想危害刘氏，赖有高祖遣臣周勃、陈平尚在，不然的话，几乎要被奸臣所讥笑。 
English: In the past, if Zhu Lyu wanted to harm the Liu clan, he had to rely on the fact that Gao Zu's emissaries Zhou Bo and Chen Ping were still alive. Otherwise, he would almost be ridiculed by his treacherous vassals.

古文：业又言宜为恭王立庙京师，以章孝道。
现代文：杜业又说应为恭王在京师立庙，以显示孝道。
English: Duye also said that a temple should be built for King Gong in Beijing to show filial piety.

古文：时，高昌侯董宏亦言宜尊帝母定陶王丁后为帝太后。
现代文：当时高昌侯董宏也说应尊帝母定陶王丁后为帝太后。
English: At that time, Gaochang Hou Donghong also said that the Emperor's mother Ding Tao Wangding should be revered as the Empress Dowager.

古文：大司空师丹等劾宏误朝不道，坐免为庶人，业复上书讼宏。
现代文：大司空师丹等举劾董宏误朝不道，因此获罪被免为庶人，杜业又上书为董宏申辩。
English: Dong Hong was wrongly impeached by Daishi Ku Shi Dan and others, so he was acquitted of being a commoner, and Du Ye also submitted a petition to defend Dong Hong.

古文：前后所言皆合指施行，朱博果见拔用。
现代文：杜业前后所言皆合旨意因而得以施行，朱博果然被提拔重用。
English: Du Ye's words before and after were all in accordance with the will and thus were able to be implemented, and Zhu Bo was indeed promoted and reused.

古文：业由是征，复为太常。
现代文：杜业由此被征召，又任太常。
English: Due to this, Du Ye was conscripted and assigned to Taizhong.

古文：岁余，左迁上党都尉。
现代文：一年多，降任上党都尉。
English: More than a year later, he was demoted to lieutenant of the party.

古文：会司隶奏业为太常选举不实，业坐免官，复就国。
现代文：遇司隶奏杜业任太常选举不实，杜业因此犯罪免官，又归封国。
English: The election of Duye Ren Taizhong was falsified, and Duye was removed from office for the crime and returned to the feudal state.

古文：哀帝崩，王莽秉政，诸前议立庙尊号者皆免，徙合浦。
现代文：哀帝驾崩，王莽执政，以前各位议立庙尊号者全部免官，徙往合浦。
English: Emperor Aye passed away, Wang Mang came to power, and all those who had previously proposed the establishment of a temple were dismissed and moved to Hapu.

古文：业以前罢黜，故见阔略，忧恐，发病死。
现代文：杜业此前已被罢黜，因此对他宽纵不问，但因忧惧，发病而死。
English: Duye had already been ousted, so they did not question his clemency, but he died of fear and illness.

古文：业成帝初尚帝妹颍邑公主，主无子，薨，业家上书求还京师与主合葬，不许，而赐谥曰荒侯，传子至孙绝。
现代文：杜业在成帝初年娶帝妹颖邑公主，公主无子已去，杜业家上书请求灵柩运还京师与公主合葬，朝廷不许，而赐谧号荒侯，传子至孙绝封。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chengdu, Duye married the imperial sister, Princess Yingyi, but the princess had no child. Duye's family sent a letter requesting that the casket be returned to the capital to be buried with the princess. The court did not allow it, but gave the casket to the prince, and the child was passed down to the grandson.

古文：初，杜周武帝时徙茂陵，至延年徙杜陵云。
现代文：当初，杜周在武帝时迁徙茂陵，到延年迁至杜陵。
English: At first, Du Zhou moved to Muling during the reign of Emperor Wu, and later moved to Du Ling.

古文：赞曰：张汤、杜周并起文墨小吏，致位三公，列于酷吏。
现代文：赞曰：张汤、杜周并起于文墨小吏，进位到三公，列为酷吏。
English: Zang said: Zhang Tang and Du Zhou were both promoted from minor officials of the Ministry of Literature and Art to minor officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and were classified as "cruel officials."

古文：而俱有良子，德器自过，爵位尊显，继世立朝，相与提衡，至于建武，杜氏爵乃独绝，迹其福祚、元功儒林之后莫能及也。
现代文：然而都有贤良儿子，德才都超过父辈，爵位尊显，继承父辈，在朝为官，两家不相上下。至束汉建武时，杜氏爵位才断绝。追考他们的福运踪迹，元勋功臣及儒林之后，没有谁能比得上。
English: However, they both had virtuous sons, whose virtues exceeded their fathers' generation, who were honored with noble titles, who succeeded their fathers, and who served as officials in the imperial court. The two families were on an equal footing. When Han Jianwu was executed, the peerage of the Du clan was cut off. After tracing their fortunes, there is no one who can match the original heroes and martyrs.

古文：自谓唐杜苗裔，岂其然乎？
现代文：自称是周代唐杜氏苗裔，难道是这样吗？
English: Is it true that he claims to be a descendant of the Zhou Dynasty Tang Du Shi Miao?

古文：及钦浮沉当世，好谋而成，以建始之初深陈女戒，终如其言，庶几乎《关雎》之见微，非夫浮华博习之徒所能规也。
现代文：到杜钦浮沉当世，好谋划而成功，在建始之初深刻陈述女戒，事实终于证实了他的话，《关雎》差不多是微妙的，不是那种浮夸华丽杂而不专之徒所能窥视到的。
English: To Duchin, who lived in a world of ups and downs, who was good at planning and successful, and who made a profound statement about the ring at the beginning of the construction, the facts finally confirmed his words. "Guanzhang" is almost subtle, not the kind of pompous ornate and non-specialist can peep.

古文：业因势而抵陒，称朱博，毁师丹，爱憎之议可不畏哉！
现代文：杜业顺势乘人之危而加以抨击，竟然称颂朱博，诋毁师丹，爱憎之议多么可怕呀！
English: Duye took advantage of the dangerous situation to criticize Zhu Bo, praising Zhu Bo and slandering Shi Dan. How terrible is the discussion of love and hate!

