古文：天子之义必纯取法天地而观于先圣。
现代文：天子正确的思想行为，应当是取法天地，借鉴古代圣王。
English: The correct thoughts and actions of the Son of Heaven should be based on the laws of heaven and earth, and learn from the ancient holy kings.

古文：士庶之义，必奉于父母而正于君长。
现代文：士氏的正确思想行为，应当是遵从父母教训，不偏离君主和长辈的教导。
English: The correct thoughts and actions of a scholar should be to follow the teachings of his parents and not to deviate from the teachings of the monarch and elders.

古文：故虽有明君，士不先教，不可用也。
现代文：所以虽有贤明的君主，如果对士民不事先教育，也是不能使用他们的。
English: Therefore, although there are wise monarchs, if they do not educate the people in advance, they cannot use them.

古文：古之教民，必立贵贱之伦经，使不相陵。德义不相逾，材技不相掩，勇力不相犯，故力同而意和也。
现代文：古代教育民众，必须制定上、下、尊、卑的人伦道德规范，使上下尊卑之间彼此不相欺凌，德和义不互相踰越，有才技的人不被埋没，有勇力的人不敢违抗命令，这样，大家就会同心协力了。
English: In order to educate the people in ancient times, it is necessary to formulate the upper, lower, honorable and inferior human ethics and moral norms, so that the upper and lower dignitaries do not bully each other, morality and righteousness do not surpass each other, talented people are not buried, and courageous people do not dare to disobey orders. In this way, everyone will work together.

古文：古者，国容不入军，军容不入国，故德义不相逾。
现代文：古时候，朝廷的礼仪法度，不能用于军队，军队的礼仪法度，不能用于朝廷。所以德和义就不会互相踰越。
English: In ancient times, the etiquette and laws of the imperial court could not be applied to the army, and the etiquette and laws of the army could not be applied to the imperial court. Therefore, virtue and righteousness would not surpass each other.

古文：上贵不伐之士，不伐之士，上之器也，苟不伐则无求，无求则不争。
现代文：君主必须敬重不自夸的人，因为不自夸的人，是君主所宝贵的人才，如能不自夸，就说明他没有奢望，没有奢望就不会和别人相争。
English: The monarch must respect those who do not boast, because those who do not boast are the valuable talents of the monarch. If they can not boast, it means that they do not have high hopes. Without high hopes, they will not compete with others.

古文：国中之听，必得其情，军旅之听，必得其宜，故材技不相掩。
现代文：朝廷听取这些人的意见，一定会掌握真实情况，军队里能听取这些人的意见，事情就会得到妥善处理，这样，有才技的人就不致被埋没了。
English: If the imperial court listens to the opinions of these people, it will certainly grasp the real situation. If the army can listen to the opinions of these people, things will be handled properly. In this way, talented people will not be buried.

古文：从命为士上赏，犯命为士上戮，故勇力不相犯。
现代文：对服从命令的人，上级要给予奖励，对违抗命令的人，上级要给予制裁，这样，有勇力的人就不敢违抗命令了。
English: Those who obey orders will be rewarded by their superiors, and those who disobey orders will be punished by their superiors. In this way, those who have courage will not dare to disobey orders.

古文：既致教其民，然后谨选而使之。
现代文：民众经受了这些教育，然后再慎重选拔任用他们。
English: The public undergoes these educations and then carefully selects and appoints them.

古文：事极修，则百官给矣，教极省，则民兴良矣，习惯成，则民体俗矣，教化之至也。
现代文：各项事业都治理得很好，各级官吏就尽到职责了。教育内容简明扼要，民众就容易学得好，习惯一经养成，民众就会按习俗行事了。这就是教育的最大成效。
English: If all undertakings are well managed, officials at all levels will perform their duties. If the content of education is concise and to the point, the people will easily learn well, and once the habit is formed, the people will act according to the custom. This is the greatest effect of education.

古文：古者，逐奔不远，纵绥不及，不远则难诱，不及则难，陷。
现代文：古人用兵，追击溃逃的敌人不过远，追踪主动退却的敌人不迫近。不过远就不易被敌人诱骗，不迫近就不易陷入敌人的图套。
English: The ancients used soldiers to pursue the fleeing enemy, but not too far, and to pursue the actively retreating enemy, but not too close. However, it is not easy to be deceived by the enemy if it is far away, and it is not easy to fall into the enemy's trap if it is not close.

古文：以礼为固，以仁为胜，既胜之后，其教可复，是以君子贵之也。
现代文：以礼制为规范，军队就能巩固，用仁爱为宗旨，就能战胜敌人。用这种方法，取胜以后，还可以反复运用，因而贤德的人都很重视这种方法。
English: With etiquette as the standard, the army can be consolidated, and with benevolence as the purpose, the enemy can be defeated. With this method, after winning, it can be used repeatedly, so virtuous people attach great importance to this method.

古文：有虞氏戒于国中，欲民体其命也。
现代文：虞舜在国内告诫民众，是为了使人们理解他的命令。
English: In order to make people understand his order, Yu Gan admonished the people at home.

古文：夏后氏誓于军中，欲民先成其虑也。
现代文：夏启在军中誓师，是为了使军队事先有思想准备。
English: Xia Qi swore to be a teacher in the army in order to prepare the army in advance.

古文：殷誓于军门之外，欲民先意以行事也。
现代文：商汤在军门之外誓师，是为了使军队事先了解他的意图以便行动。
English: Shang Tang swore an oath outside the military gate in order to let the army know his intentions in advance so that they could act.

古文：周将交刃而誓之，以致民志也。
现代文：周武王在两军将要交锋的时候誓师，是为了激励士卒的战斗意志。
English: When the two armies were about to clash, King Zhou Wu swore an oath of allegiance in order to encourage the soldiers' will to fight.

古文：夏后氏正其德也，未用兵之刃，故其兵不杂。
现代文：夏禹用德取天下，没有使用武力，所以当时兵器种类比较简单。
English: Xia Yu used virtue to conquer the world, without using force, so the types of weapons at that time were relatively simple.

古文：殷义也，始用兵之刃矣。
现代文：商汤用义取天下，开始使用武力和兵器。
English: Shang Tang used charity to conquer the world and began to use force and weapons.

古文：周力也，尽用兵之刃矣。
现代文：周武王用武力取天下，使用了各种各样的兵器。
English: King Zhou Wu took over the country by force, using a variety of weapons.

古文：夏赏于朝，贵善也。
现代文：夏代在朝廷上奖励有功的人，是为了鼓励好人。
English: Natsushiro rewarded meritorious people at court in order to encourage good people.

古文：殷戮于市，威不善也。
现代文：商代在集市上杀戮有罪的人，是为了警告坏人。
English: Traders used to kill the guilty at fairs as a warning to the wicked.

古文：周赏于朝，戮于市，劝君子惧小人也。
现代文：周代在朝廷上奖励有功的人，在集市上杀戮有罪的人，是为了勉励 君子 ，震骇 小人 。
English: Zhou Dynasty rewarded the meritorious at the court and killed the guilty at the market in order to encourage the gentleman and shock the villain.

古文：三王彰其德一也。
现代文：三王的办法虽有不同，但是鼓励人们为善的精神是一致的。
English: Although the methods of the three kings are different, the spirit of encouraging people to do good is the same.

古文：兵不杂则不利。
现代文：各种兵器不配合使用，就不能发挥威力。
English: If various weapons are not used together, they cannot exert their power.

古文：长兵以卫，短兵以守，太长则难犯太短则不及。
现代文：长兵器用以掩护短兵器，短兵器用以抵近战斗。兵器太长就不便使用，太短就打击不到敌人。
English: Long weapons are used to cover short weapons, and short weapons are used to get close to battle. Weapons that are too long are not convenient to use, and weapons that are too short cannot hit the enemy.

古文：太轻则锐，锐则易乱。
现代文：太轻就脆弱，脆弱就容易折毁。
English: If it is too light, it will be fragile, and if it is fragile, it will be easily broken.

古文：太重则钝，钝则不济。
现代文：太重就不锋利，不锋利就不中用。
English: If it's too heavy, it won't be sharp. If it's not sharp, it won't be of much use.

古文：戎车：夏后氏曰钩车，先正也；殷曰寅车，先疾也；周日元戎，先良也。
现代文：兵车：夏代叫钩车，注重行驶平稳；殷代叫寅车，注重行动迟速；周代叫元戎，注重结构精良。
English: Chariots: the Xia Dynasty called them hook chariots, emphasizing smooth driving; the Yin Dynasty called them yang chariots, emphasizing slow movement; the Zhou Dynasty called them yang chariots, emphasizing fine structure.

古文：旗：夏后氏玄，首人之孰也，殷白，天之义也；周黄，地之道也。
现代文：旗帜：夏代用黑色，取其像手持人头那样威武；殷代用白色，取其像天体那样皎洁；周代用黄色，取其像大地那样深厚。
English: Flag: The Xia Dynasty used black, which was as powerful as holding a human head; the Yin Dynasty used white, which was as pure as the heavenly bodies; the Zhou Dynasty used yellow, which was as deep as the earth.

古文：章：夏后氏以日月，尚明也；殷以虎，尚威也；周以龙，尚文也。
现代文：徽章：夏代用日月，表示光明；殷代用虎，表示威武；周代用龙，表示文采。
English: Emblem: The Xia Dynasty used the sun and moon to represent light; the Yin Dynasty used the tiger to represent power; the Zhou Dynasty used the dragon to represent literature.

古文：师多务威则民诎，少威则民不胜。
现代文：治军过于威严，士气就会受到压抑，缺少威信，就难以指挥士卒克敌制胜。
English: If the army is governed with too much authority, morale will be suppressed. If there is a lack of authority, it will be difficult for the commander to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：上使民不得其义，百姓不得其叙，技用不得其利，牛马不得其任，有司陵之，此谓多威。
现代文：上级使用民力不适宜，任用官吏不恰当，有技能的人不能发挥其作用，牛马也不能合理地使用，主管者又盛气凌人地去强迫人们服从，这就是过于威严。
English: The use of people's power by superiors is inappropriate, the appointment of officials is inappropriate, skilled people can not play their role, cattle and horses can not be used reasonably, and the supervisor is arrogant to force people to obey, which is too dignified.

古文：多威则民诎。
现代文：过于威严，士气就感到受压抑。
English: If it is too dignified, morale will feel depressed.

古文：上不尊德而任诈匿，不尊道而任勇力，不贵用命而贵犯命，不贵善行而贵暴行，陵之有司，此谓少威，少威则民不胜。
现代文：君主不尊重有德行的人而信任奸诈邪恶的人，不尊重有道义的人而任用恃勇逞强的人，不重用服从命令的人，而重用专横武断的人，不重用善良的人，而重用残暴的人，以致引起民众反抗官吏，这就会降低威信。缺少威信，就不能指挥士卒去战胜敌人。
English: Monarchs do not respect the virtuous, but trust the treacherous and evil; do not respect the moral, but appoint the brave and strong; do not respect the obedient, but respect the arbitrary; do not respect the kind, but respect the cruel, so that the people will rebel against the officials. This will reduce the prestige. Without prestige, the commander cannot defeat the enemy.

古文：军旅以舒为主，舒则民力足。
现代文：军队行动，以从容不迫为主，从容不迫就能保持士卒力量的充沛。
English: The army's actions are mainly leisurely, and leisurely can keep the soldiers' strength plentiful.

古文：虽交兵致刃，徒不趋，车不驰，逐奔不逾列，是以不乱。
现代文：虽各冲锋陷阵中，步兵也不要快步走，兵车也不要奔驰，追击敌人也不准超越行列，这样才不至扰乱战斗队形。
English: Although each charge is caught in the middle, the infantry should not walk briskly, nor should the chariots gallop, nor should the pursuit of the enemy exceed the ranks, so as not to disturb the battle formation.

古文：军旅之固，不失行列之政，不绝人马之力，迟速不过诫命。
现代文：军队的稳固性，就在于不打乱行列的秩序，不用尽人、马的力量，行动的快慢决不许超出命令的规定。
English: The stability of the army lies in the fact that the order of the ranks is not disrupted, the strength of men and horses is not exhausted, and the speed of action must not exceed the provisions of the order.

古文：古者，国容不入军，军容不入国。
现代文：古时候，朝廷的礼仪法度不用在军队中，军队的礼仪法度，不用在朝廷内。
English: In ancient times, the etiquette and laws of the imperial court did not apply to the army, and the etiquette and laws of the army did not apply to the imperial court.

古文：军容入国，则民德废；国容入军，则民德弱。
现代文：如果把军队的礼仪法度用在朝廷内，民众的礼仪风气就会被废弛，把朝廷的礼仪法度用在军队中，军队的尚武精神就会被削弱。
English: If the army's etiquette and laws were applied to the imperial court, the people's etiquette and customs would be weakened. If the imperial court's etiquette and laws were applied to the army, the army's martial spirit would be weakened.

古文：故在国言文而语温，在朝恭以逊，修己以待人，不召不至，不问不言，难进易退，在军抗而立，在行遂而果，介者不拜，兵车不式，城不上趋，危事不齿。
现代文：因为在朝廷上说话要温文尔雅，在朝见君主时态度要恭敬谦逊，严以律己，宽以待人，国君不召不来，不问不说，朝见时礼节隆重，辞退时礼节简单。在军队中要昂首直立，在战阵中要行动果断，穿着铠甲不跪拜，在兵车上不行礼，在城上不急走，以免惊扰士众，遇危险不惧怕以免惑乱军心。
English: Because it is necessary to be mild-mannered when speaking at the court, to be respectful and humble when meeting the monarch, to be strict with oneself, and to be lenient with others. The sovereign does not call, does not ask, does not speak, and the etiquette is grand when meeting, and the etiquette is simple when declining. In the army, it is necessary to stand tall, in the battle to act decisively, in armor it is not necessary to kneel, in the chariot it is not polite, in the city it is not necessary to hurry, so as not to disturb the soldiers, and in case of danger it is not afraid, so as not to

古文：故礼与法表里也，文与武左右也。
现代文：所以礼和法是相互为用的，文和武是不可偏废的。
English: Therefore, etiquette and law are mutually beneficial, and literature and martial arts are inseparable.

古文：古者贤王，明民之德，尽民之善，故无废德，无简民，赏无所生，罚无所试。
现代文：古代贤明的君王，表彰民众的美德，鼓励民众的善行，所以没有败坏道德的事，也没有不遵守法度的人，因而无须用赏也无须用罚。
English: The wise kings of ancient times praised the virtues of the people and encouraged the good deeds of the people, so there was no corruption of morality, and there were no people who did not abide by the law, so there was no need to reward or punish.

古文：有虞氏不赏不罚，而民可用，至德也。
现代文：虞舜不用赏也不用罚，民众都能听他使用，这是由于有了高尚的道德。
English: There is no need to reward or punish him, and the public can listen to his use. This is due to his high morals.

古文：夏赏而不罚，至教也。
现代文：夏代只用赏而不用罚，这是由于有了良好的教育。
English: Natsushiro only uses rewards and not punishments, which is due to a good education.

古文：殷罚而不赏，至威也。
现代文：商代只用罚，而不用赏，这是由于有了强大的威势。
English: Shang Dynasty only used punishment, but not reward, this is due to the strong power.

古文：周以赏罚，德衰也。
现代文：周代赏罚并用，这是由于道德已经衰败了。
English: Zhou Dynasty used both rewards and punishments, which is due to the fact that morality has decayed.

古文：赏不逾时，欲民速得为善之利也。
现代文：奖赏不要过时，为的是使民众迅速得到做好事的利益。
English: Rewards should not be outdated, so that people can quickly get the benefits of doing good.

古文：罚不迁列，欲民速规为不善之害也。
现代文：惩罚要就地执行，为的是使民众迅速看到做坏事的恶果。
English: Punishments should be carried out on the spot, so that the people can quickly see the evil consequences of doing bad things.

古文：大捷不赏，上下皆不伐善。上苟不伐善，则不骄矣，下苟不伐善，必亡等矣。
现代文：大胜之后不颁发奖赏，上下就不会夸功，上级如果不夸功，就不会骄傲了；下级如果不夸功，就不会向上比了。
English: After a great victory, if no reward is awarded, there will be no praise from the upper and lower levels, if the superior level does not praise, there will be no pride; if the lower level does not praise, there will be no upward comparison.

古文：上下不伐善若此，让之至也。
现代文：上下都能这样不夸功，这是最好的谦让风气。
English: Everyone can do this without boasting, this is the best culture of modesty.

古文：大败不诛，上下皆以不善在己，上苟以不善在己，必悔其过，下苟以不善在己，必远其罪。
现代文：大败之后不执行惩罚，上下都会认为错误是在自己。上级如果认为错误在自己，必定决心改正错误，下级如果认为错误在自己，必定决心不再犯错误。
English: After a big defeat, if the punishment is not carried out, the superiors and subordinates will think that the mistake is in themselves. If the superiors think that the mistake is in themselves, they must be determined to correct the mistake. If the subordinates think that the mistake is in themselves, they must be determined not to make the mistake again.

古文：上下分恶若此，让之至也。
现代文：上下都像这样争着分担错误的责任，也是最好的谦让风气。
English: Up and down the country, people are fighting to share the blame for mistakes like this, and it is also the best culture of modesty.

