古文：初十日晨起饭于香山寺，云气勃勃未已，遂别慧庵行，西随龙溪半里，逾其北，即西门外街之尽外也。
现代文：初十日早晨起床在香山寺吃饭，云气浓郁滚滚不停，于是辞别慧庵上路，向西取道去南丹州。顺着龙溪走半里，越到溪北，就是西门外街的尽头处。
English: On the morning of the 10th day of the first month, I got up to eat at Xiangshan Temple, and the clouds were thick and rolling, so I left Huian and went west to Nantanzhou. I walked half a mile along Longxi and went to the north of Ximen, which is the end of Ximen Wai Jie.

古文：又半里，见又一溪反自西来，乃九龙之流散诸田壑，北经西道堂之前东折而来。
现代文：又走半里，见又有一条溪水反从西南流来，是九龙潭的水流散流在田间的诸条沟壑中，往北流经西道堂的前边向东折后流来。
English: Half a mile further on, there was another stream flowing in the opposite direction from the south-west. It was the water of the Jiulong Lake, which flowed through the various gullies in the fields. It flowed northwards through the front of the West Taoist Temple and turned eastwards.

古文：龙溪又西流而合，两水合于西街尽处，即从路下北入石穴而注于江。
现代文：龙溪又向西流去会合，两条溪水在西街的尽头处合流，立即从路下边向北流入石穴中然后注入江中。
English: Longxi also flows westward to meet, and the two streams meet at the end of West Street, immediately flowing northward from the roadside into the stone cave and then into the river.

古文：又半里，过西道堂，又西五里，过前小观还所过石桥架于石壑间者，其水乃小观所出之支也。
现代文：又走半里，经过西道堂，又向西五里，走过从前去小观时返回来经过的架在石壑间的石桥，桥下的水是小观流出来的支流。
English: I walked another half-mile, past the West Taoist Hall, and another five miles to the west, past the stone bridge between the stone pillars that I used to pass when I went to Xiao Guan and returned. The water under the bridge is a tributary flowing out of Xiao Guan.

古文：过桥，西南有岐，即前小观所来大路，从桥西直行，乃怀远大道也。
现代文：过桥后，西南方有条岔道，就是从前由小观来时的大路，从桥西头一直走，是去怀远镇的大道。
English: After crossing the bridge, there is a branch road in the southwest, which is the road that used to come from Xiao Guan, and it goes all the way from the west end of the bridge. It is the road to Huaiyuan Town.

古文：直西行又三里，望见西北江流从北山下一曲，盖自郡西来，皆循江南岸行，而江深不可见，至是一曲，始得而见之。
现代文：一直往西又行三里，望见西北方江流从北山下转了一道弯，大概是从府城西边流来，我都是沿江南岸走，而江流深在谷底不可见，到了这里拐了一个弯，这才得以见到它。
English: I walked another three miles to the west and saw that the northwest river flow turned a bend under the north mountain, probably flowing from the west of the capital. I always walked along the south bank of the river, but the river flow was not visible deep in the valley bottom. I turned a bend here, and only then was I able to see it.

古文：江北岸之山，自宜山之西连峰至此，突而西尽，曰鸡鸣山。
现代文：江北岸的山，自宜山的西面峰峰相连延到此处，突立起来向西边到了头，叫做鸡鸣山。
English: The mountain on the north bank of the Yangtze River, the west peak of Mount Ziyi, extends to this place, protruding to the west to the top, called Jining Mountain.

古文：其西之连峰，又从鸡呜后环而去者也。
现代文：它西面连接的山峰，又是从鸡鸣山后面环绕而去的了。
English: The mountain peaks connected to it on the west side have been encircled from behind Mt. Chiming.

古文：忆前从小观来，误涉水畦；既得大道后，即涉一石壑，有石架壑上，其下流水潺潺，深不可晰。
现代文：回忆从前从小观来时，错涉过水田；随即找到大道后，马上涉过一个石壑，有石桥架在壑谷上，桥下流水潺潺，深得不能看清楚。
English: I remember that when I came from Xiao Guan in the past, I wandered into a paddy field by mistake. After I found the main road, I immediately wandered into a rock crevice. There was a stone bridge over the crevasse, and water was flowing under the bridge, so deep that I couldn't see it clearly.

古文：又东二里，复过一石壑，其架石亦如之。
现代文：又向东二里，再经过一个石壑，它上边架有石桥也如前边一样。
English: Another two miles to the east, and then past a cairn with a stone bridge over it, just like the previous one.

古文：今所过止东壑石桥一所，其西壑者，路己出其北，桥应在其南，但桥下北注之水，不知竟从何出，岂亦入穴而不可睹耶？
现代文：今天所经过的只有东面石壑上的一座石桥，那在西面石壑的桥，路已经走到它的北面，桥应它南边，但桥下往北流注的水，不知究竟从哪里流出去，莫非也是流入洞穴中不能见到吗？
English: The only thing I passed today was a stone bridge on the east stone pier. The bridge on the west stone pier, the road has reached its north side, the bridge should be on its south side, but the water flowing north under the bridge, I don't know where it flows out from, is it not also flowing into the cave and can't be seen?

古文：向疑二桥之水，一为小观，一为九龙，以今观之，当俱为小观，非九龙也。
现代文：从前怀疑两座桥下的水，一处是源于小观，一处是九龙潭，按今天观察的看，应当都是源于小观，不是九龙潭。
English: Previously, it was suspected that the water under the two bridges, one originated from Xiaoguan and the other from Jiulongtan. According to today's observation, they should all originate from Xiaoguan, not Jiulongtan.

古文：于是两界石山俱渐转西北。
现代文：从这里起，两面的石山都渐渐转向西北。
English: From here, the stone mountains on both sides gradually turn to the northwest.

古文：从中坞行，又十里，有山中峙于两界之间，曰独山，峭削孤耸，亦独秀之流也。
现代文：从中间的山坞走，又是十里，有座山屹立在两列山之间，叫独山，峻峭陡削，独自耸立，也是独秀峰之类的山。
English: Walking from the dock in the middle, it is another ten miles, and there is a mountain standing between two rows of mountains, called Dokusan, steep and steep, standing alone, and it is also a mountain like Dokushuofen.

古文：独山南有村数十家，在南山下，曰中火铺。
现代文：独山南边有个数十家人的村庄，在南山下，叫中火铺。
English: On the south side of Doksan, there is a village of dozens of families, called Zhonghuabu, at the foot of the mountain.

古文：又西北一里逾土冈，复望见西北大江一曲，自西而东。
现代文：又向西北走一里越过山冈，又望见西北方大江转了一个弯，自西流向东。
English: I also walked one mile to the northwest, crossing the mountains and hills. I could also see that the big river in the northwest had turned a corner and was flowing from west to east.

古文：又西北一里，直逼南界石山而行。
现代文：又向西北一里，直逼南面一列石山而行。
English: Another mile to the northwest, straight to the south of a row of stone mountains.

古文：路北则土阜高下，江北复石峰蜿蜒，路濒南峰，江濒北峰，而上山盘界其间，复不见江焉。
现代文：路北是高低起伏的土阜，江北又有蜿蜒的石峰，路紧靠南峰，江紧靠北峰，而土山盘绕隔在其间，又看不见江水了。
English: The north of the road is high and low undulating soil, the north of the river has winding stone peaks, the road is close to the south peak, the river is close to the north peak, and the earth and mountains are coiled in between, and the river water can not be seen.

古文：是时山雨大至，如倾盆倒峡，溪流之北入江者，声不绝也。
现代文：此时山雨猛降，如倾盆一样倒入峡中，向北流入江中的溪流，响声不绝。
English: At this time, the mountain rain fell heavily, pouring into the gorge like a downpour, flowing north into the stream in the river, and the noise was incessant.

古文：又五里，两界之中，又起石峰一支，路遂界其北，江遂界其南。
现代文：又走五里，两列山之中，又耸起一座石峰，路便被隔在山北，江便被隔在山南。
English: After walking another five miles, a stone peak rose up in the middle of the two rows of mountains. The road was separated in the north of the mountain, and the river was separated in the south of the mountain.

古文：雨虽渐止，而泥滑不堪着足，行甚蹇ｊｉｎ通 艰 也。
现代文：雨虽然慢慢停了，但泥地滑得不能落脚，行走非常艰难。
English: Although the rain slowly stopped, the mud was so slippery that it was difficult to walk on.

古文：又三里，转南界石嘴，有泉一泓，独止石窞间，甚澄碧。
现代文：又走三里，转过南面的石山嘴，有一乱泉水，独独停积在石坑间，十分澄澈碧绿。
English: After walking another three miles, I turned around the southern tip of the stone mountain, and there was a tangle of spring water, which stood alone between the stone pits, and was very clear and green.

古文：其西有岩北向，前有大石屏门而峙，洞深五丈，中高外閟，后壁如莲花，叶蕊层层相叠，而缀隙扁狭，可窥而不可入焉。
现代文：它西边有个向北的岩洞，前边有块大石头屏障样矗立在洞口，洞深五丈，中间高外边闭塞，后洞壁如莲花，叶片花蕊一层层，相叠连缀，缝隙又扁又窄，可以窥视却不能进去。
English: On the west side of it, there is a rock cave facing north. In front of it, there is a large stone barrier standing like a barrier at the mouth of the cave. The cave is five meters deep, the middle is high and the outside is blocked. The back wall of the cave is like a lotus flower, the petals of the petals are layered and interlaced, the gap is flat and narrow, you can peep but you can't go in.

古文：又西北二里，南山后逊外攒，中开一宕北向，数家倚之，曰大峒堡。
现代文：又向西北二里，南山往后退进去，外边聚在一起，中间开阔，一处向北的空地，几家人依傍着它，叫大炯堡。
English: Another two miles to the northwest, Nanshan retreated into it, gathered together on the outside, open in the middle, an open space to the north, several families leaning against it, called a large bunker.

古文：入而炊于栏，问： 洞何在？ 
现代文：进村在竹楼中烧饭，问道： 洞在哪里？ 
English: "Where is the hole?" asked a villager who was cooking in a bamboo building.

古文：曰： 在南山之背。
现代文：答： 在南山山脊上。
English: A: On the ridge of Nanshan Mountain.

古文：从堡后南入峡，尚三四里而至，一曰大洞，一曰天门洞，有楚氓开垦其内焉。 
现代文：从堡后往南走入峡中，还有三四里便到了，一个叫大洞，一个叫天门洞，有楚地的百姓在峡内开荒种地。 
English: After leaving the castle, they walked south into the gorge, and after another three or four miles, they arrived at a cave, one called the Great Cave and the other called the Heaven's Gate Cave.

古文：盖自堡北望之，则南峰回环如玦，人至堡后，又如莲瓣自裂，可披而入也。
现代文：从大洞堡北望过去，就见南峰回绕如像玉块，进到堡后、又如莲花瓣自然裂开，可钻进去。
English: Looking north from the Big Cave Castle, you can see the south peak winding around like a jade block. After entering the castle, it will naturally split like a lotus petal and can be drilled into.

古文：过大洞堡，升降陂陀，又十里，逾土山而下，则江流自南而北横天堑焉。
现代文：过了大洞堡，升降在山坡间，又走十里，翻过土山下走，就见江流自南往北横流，成为天堑。
English: After passing through the Great Cave Castle, ascending and descending between the hillsides, walking another ten miles, turning over the soil and going down, you will see the river flow from south to north and become a skyscraper.

古文：其西岸即为怀远镇。
现代文：江西岸就是怀远镇。
English: On the west bank of the river is Huaiyuan Town.

古文：时随夫挑担不胜重，匍匐不前，待久之而后渡。
现代文：此时随行的脚夫挑担子不能承受重担，趴在地下不能前走，等了他很久然后渡江。
English: At this time, the porter accompanying him couldn't bear the heavy load, so he lay on the ground and couldn't walk forward. He waited for a long time and then crossed the river.

古文：江阔半于庆远，乃怀远镇之南江也。
现代文：江面宽度有庆远府的一半，是怀远镇的南江。
English: The width of the river is half of Qingyuanfu, and it is the Nanjiang of Huaiyuan Town.

古文：其江自荔波来，至河池州东境为金城江，又南至东江合思恩县西来水，南抵永顺北境入山穴中，暗伏屈曲数里，而东出于永泰里，又东北至中里，经屏风而东，黄村、都田之水入焉。
现代文：此江自荔波县流来，流到河池州东境称为金城江，又往南流到东江镇会合思恩县向西流来的江水，向南流抵永顺司北境流入山间洞穴中，暗流潜伏曲曲折折几里，而后在东边的永泰里流出来，又向东北流到中里，流经屏风山往东流，黄村、都田村的水流流入其中。
English: This river flows from Libo County and flows to the eastern border of Hechi State, known as the Jincheng River. It flows south to Dongjiang Town and meets the west-flowing river water from Shine County. It flows south to the northern border of Yongshun and flows into a mountain cave. The undercurrent lurks and twists for several miles, and then flows out of Yongtaili in the east. It flows northeast to Zhongli and flows eastward through Bifeng Mountain. The water from Huangcun and Duta Village flows into it.

古文：又东北过此，又北而东五里，则北江自西北来合，前谓自屏风山入穴者，讹也。
现代文：又向东北经过此地，又流向北后转向东五里，就有北江自西北流来会合，就是龙江了。从前认为自屏风山流入洞穴的看法，错了。
English: Passing through this place to the northeast, flowing to the north and then turning to the east for five miles, there is a meeting of the Beiji River from the northwest, which is the Longjiang River. Previously, the view that it flowed into the cave from the Pingfeng Mountain was wrong.

古文：屏风未尝流穴中，入穴处在永顺司永泰里之间，土人亦放巨板浮穴中下。
现代文：水在屏风山未曾流入洞穴中，流入洞穴之处在永顺司永泰里之间，当地人也放了大木板漂浮在洞穴中流下来。
English: The water did not flow into the cave on Mount Byobu, it flowed into the cave between Yongshunji and Yongtairi. Locals also placed large wooden boards to float down the cave.

古文：由是观之，永顺司有三大流焉。
现代文：由此看来，加项司有三大水流。
English: From this point of view, there are three major currents in the Division of Additions.

古文：其上则滩高水浅，不能上矣。北江通小舟，三四日至中州。
现代文：这是北面的支流；而司城北边五里的，又是都泥江北面的支流；司城南面与思恩府九司交界相隔的，是都泥江南面的支流。八桐、石壁村的水流，流入金城江下游可想而知。
English: This is the northern tributary; and the tributary five miles north of Shicheng is also the northern tributary of the Doulu River; the tributary south of Shicheng, which is separated from the junction of Shienfu and Jiuji, is the southern tributary of the Doulu River. It is conceivable that the water flow of Hatong and Shikibi Village flows into the lower reaches of the Jincheng River.

古文：是晚宿怀远镇之保正家，而送夫之取于堡中者，尚在其西土山上。
现代文：怀远镇在江的西岸，江北还有北江自思恩县北面的总州流来，与南江在怀远镇的下游合流，船溯南江到达怀远镇便停下来。这天晚上住宿在怀远镇的保正家中，可送行的脚夫要从军营中差遣，这人还在西边的土山上。
English: Huaiyuan Town is on the west bank of the river, the north of the river and the Beijiang River flow from Chongzhou in the north of Shine County, and join the Nanjiang River in the downstream of Huaiyuan Town. The boat stops when it reaches Huaiyuan Town. This evening, the accommodation is in the Baozheng family in Huaiyuan Town. The porter who can escort the journey should be sent from the military camp. This person is still on the west hill.

古文：盖是处民供府县，而军送武差。
现代文：原来此处民间应府县的差，而军人负责武差。
English: Originally, civilians were responsible for prefectural duties, while military personnel were in charge of military duties.

古文：十一日晨起，保正以二夫送至安远堡换兵夫，久之后行。
现代文：十一日清晨起床，保正派两名脚夫送到安远堡换兵夫，很久后才上路。
English: On the morning of the 11th day of the month, Bao Zheng sent two porters to Anyuan Fort to change soldiers, and it was a long time before they set out.

古文：于是石山遥列，或断或续，中俱土山盘错矣。
现代文：这里石山远远排列，时断时续，中间全是土山盘绕错杂。
English: Here, the stone mountains are arranged far apart, intermittently, and in the middle there is a tangle of earth and mountains.

古文：西北五里，上土山，转而北，已乃复西北升降坡陇，每有小水，皆北流。
现代文：向西北走五里，登上土山，转向北，不久就又向西北上下在山坡土陇之间，常常有小溪，都是往北流。
English: Walk northwest for five miles, climb a dirt hill, turn north, and soon you're up and down northwest again. Between the mounds on the hillside, there are often creeks, all of which flow north.

古文：共二十里，过中火铺，又西北三里，为谢表堡。
现代文：共二十里，路过中火铺，又向西北三里，是谢表堡。
English: A total of twenty miles, passing through the middle fire shop, and three miles to the northwest, is the Xie watch fort.

古文：其堡当土山夹中，一阜孤悬，惟前面可上，后乃汇水山谷，浸麓为塘，东西两腋，亦水环之。
现代文：这座土堡正当土山相夹之中，一座土山孤悬着，只有前面可以上去，后面是水积在山谷中，浸着山麓成为水塘，东西两侧，也有水环绕着它。
English: This earth castle is right in the middle of the earth mountain, a earth mountain hangs alone, only the front can go up, behind is water accumulated in the valley, soaking the foot of the mountain to become a pond, on both sides of the east and west, there is also water surrounding it.

古文：堡在山上，数家而已。
现代文：土堡在山上，只有数家人而已。
English: The hilltop castle is home to just a few families.

古文：候夫久而行。
现代文：等派夫等了很久才上路。
English: The waiters waited a long time to get on the road.

古文：又北逾一岭，五里，有数十家在东山下，曰旧军。
现代文：又向北越过一道岭，五里，有数十家人在东山下，叫旧军。
English: We also crossed a ridge to the north, five miles, and there were dozens of families at the foot of the east mountain, called the old army.

古文：时已过午，贳酒一壶，酌于路隅石上。
现代文：此时已过中午，买了一壶酒，在路旁的石头上饮。
English: By this time it was past midday, I bought a jug of wine and drank it on a stone by the roadside.

古文：石间有小水乱。
现代文：岩石间有小溪乱流。
English: Between the rocks there is a turbulent stream.

古文：其南一穴伏石窞下，喷流而出，独清洌殊甚。
现代文：溪南一个洞穴隐伏在石坑下，水流喷涌而出，显得格外清冽。
English: A cave in South China's Hainan Province hides under a stone pit, and water gushes out, appearing exceptionally clear.

古文：又西北，坞中皆成平畴，望见西北石山横列于前，共八里，循南界石峰之麓，于是与西北石山又夹而成东西坞。
现代文：又往西北行，坞中全是平坦的田野，望见西北方石山横列在前方，共八里，沿南面一列石峰的山麓走，在这里与西北的石山又夹成东西向的山坞。
English: I drove to the northwest again. In the dock, there were all flat fields. I could see the stone mountains in the northwest lined up in front of me for a total of eight miles. I walked along the foot of a row of stone peaks in the south. Here, I was sandwiched between the northwest stone mountains and the east-west dock.

古文：路由其中，转向西行，逾一横亘土脊，则此小水之分界也。
现代文：路经由其中，转向西行，越过一条横亘的土山山脊，就是此处小溪的分界处了。
English: The road passes through it, turns to the west, and crosses a wide ridge of earth and mountains, which is the boundary of the creek here.

古文：由此西望，则羊角山湾竖于两界之中，此叱石之最大者也。
现代文：由此向西望去，就见羊角山湾竖立在两面群山之中，这是羊状岩石中最大的。
English: Looking westward from here, you can see the Sheep's Horn Bay, which is the largest of the sheep-shaped rocks, standing in the mountains on both sides.

古文：又西二里，抵德胜镇之东营。
现代文：又向西二里，抵达德胜镇的东营。
English: Another two miles to the west, arriving at the East Camp of Desheng Town.

古文：问韦家山、街南金刚山。
现代文：此时还是下午，等营中的头目不见来到，便自己煮饭吃了。
English: At this time, it was still afternoon, and when the leader of the camp did not show up, they cooked and ate the rice themselves.

古文：袁家山、街北狮子洞。
现代文：饭后，打算去河池所，问知相距还有五里。
English: After dinner, he planned to go to Hechi-so, but found out that it was still five miles away.

古文：莲花塘，诸俱在德胜。
现代文：问知韦家山、袁家山、莲花塘，诸处都在德胜镇。
English: Ask to know Wei Jia Shan, Yuan Jia Shan, Lotus Pond, everywhere is in Desheng Town.

古文：遂散步镇间，还宿于东营。
现代文：于是在镇上散步，返回来住宿在东营。
English: So I went for a walk in the town and came back to stay in Dongying.

古文：是日下午已霁，余以为久晴兆；及中夜，雨复作。
现代文：这天下午天已转晴，我以为是长期天晴的征兆；到半夜时，雨又下起来。
English: The sky had cleared that afternoon, and I thought it was a sign of long-term sunny weather; by midnight, the rain began to fall again.

古文：十二日晨起，饭毕而雨不止。
现代文：十二日早晨起床，饭吃完但雨不停。
English: I got up in the morning on the 12th, finished eating, but it kept raining.

古文：令顾奴押营夫担行李，先往德胜西营。
现代文：命令顾仆押着营中的兵夫挑行李，先去德胜镇西营。
English: He ordered Gu Min to lead the soldiers in the battalion to pick up their luggage and go to the West Camp of Desheng Town first.

古文：余入德胜东巷门，一里，折而北，半里，抵北山下。
现代文：我进入德胜镇东巷门，一里，折向北，半里，到达北山下。
English: I entered the East Lane Gate of Desheng Town, one mile, turned north, half a mile, and arrived at the foot of the North Mountain.

古文：袁家山。过观音庵，不入，由庵左自庵登山。
现代文：路过观音庵，没进去，由庵左从庵开始登山。
English: I passed by the Guanyin hermitage, but didn't go inside. I started climbing from the left side of the hermitage.

古文：有洞在山椒山巅也，其门南向，高约五丈，后有巨柱中屏，穿东西隙，俱可入，则稍下而暗。
现代文：有洞在山顶，洞口向南，高约五丈，后面有巨大的石柱屏风样挡在中央，穿过东西两边的缝隙，都可以进去，只是稍下走就暗下来。
English: There is a cave at the top of the mountain, the mouth of the cave faces south, about five meters high, behind there is a huge stone pillar screen in the center, through the cracks on both sides of the east and west, you can go in, just go down a little and it will be dark.

古文：余先读观音庵碑，云庵后为狮子洞，故知此洞为狮子。
现代文：我先读过观音庵的碑，说到庵后是狮子洞，所以知道此洞是狮子洞。
English: I first read the monument of the Guanyin Hermitage, and when it said that the hermitage was followed by a lion cave, I knew that this cave was a lion cave.

古文：又闻之土人云： 袁家山有洞，深透山后。 
现代文：又从当地人那里听说： 袁家山有山洞，深深穿透到山背后。 
English: I also heard from the locals: Yuanjia Mountain has a cave that penetrates deep into the back of the mountain.

古文：窥此洞深杳，亦必此山。
现代文：窥见此洞深远，也必定是此山。
English: If you see the depth of this hole, it must be this mountain.

古文：时洞外雨潺潺，山顶有玉皇阁，欲上索炬入洞，而阁僧适下山，其中无人。
现代文：此时洞外雨声潺潺，山顶上有玉皇阁，打算上去找火把入洞，但阁中的僧人恰好下山了，阁中无人。
English: At this time, there was the sound of rain outside the cave. On the top of the mountain, there was the Jade Emperor's pavilion. He intended to go up to find a torch to enter the cave, but the monk in the pavilion happened to go down the mountain, and there was no one in the pavilion.

古文：乃令随夫王贵。下观音庵索炬，余持伞登山。
现代文：于是命令随行的脚夫下山去观音阁要火把，我打着伞登山。
English: So I ordered the porter accompanying me to go down the mountain to the Guanyin Pavilion to get a torch. I climbed the mountain with an umbrella.

古文：石磴曲缀石崖间，甚峻，数曲而上，则阁上为僧所扃，阁下置薪可为炬。
现代文：石瞪曲曲折折点缀在石崖间，十分陡峻，拐了几个弯上去后，就见阁上被僧人关锁着，阁下放有柴火可以做成火把。
English: The rocky crags are dotted with twists and turns between the cliffs, which are very steep. After going up a few bends, you will see that the monks have locked the attic, and you can put firewood to make torches.

古文：余亟取之，投崖下。
现代文：我急忙取了柴火，把柴扔下山崖。
English: I hurriedly fetched firewood and threw it down the cliff.

古文：历崖两层，见两僧在洞口，余疑为上玉皇阁僧也，及至，则随夫亦在焉。
现代文：经过两层山崖，见两个和尚在洞口，我怀疑是上边玉皇阁的僧人，及走到时，就见随行的脚夫也在其中。
English: After passing through two layers of cliffs, I saw two monks at the mouth of the cave, I suspect they were monks from the Jade Emperor's Palace on the upper edge, and when I got there, I saw the accompanying porters were also among them.

古文：僧乃观音庵者，一曰禅一，一曰映玉，乃奉主僧满室命以茶来迎，且导余入洞者。
现代文：僧人是观音庵的，一个叫禅一，一个叫映玉，是奉住持和尚满室的命令拿着茶来迎接，并且领我进洞的和尚。
English: The monks are from the Guanyin Monastery. One is called Zen I and the other is called Ying Yu. They are monks who have been ordered by the abbot to greet me with tea and lead me into the cave.

古文：遂同之，更取前投崖下薪，多束炬入。
现代文：于是随同他们，再取来先前扔下山崖的柴火，多捆了些火把入洞。
English: So he went with them, retrieved the firewood that had been thrown down the cliff, and bundled more torches into the cave.

古文：遂由屏柱东隙，又北进数丈，则洞遂高拓，中有擎天柱、犀牛望月、莺嘴、石船诸名状。
现代文：于是由屏风样石柱东边的缝隙，又向北走进去几丈，就见洞高高拓展开，其中有擎天柱、犀牛望月、莺嘴、石船诸般名称与形状。
English: Therefore, from the gap on the east side of the screen-like stone pillar, and a few steps to the north, you can see the height of the cave expanding. Among them, there are various names and shapes of the tower pillar, the rhinoceros moon, the beak, and the stone ship.

古文：更东折数丈，则北面有光熠熠自上倒影，以为此出洞之所也；然东去尚有道杳黑，乃益张炬东觅之，又约五丈而止。
现代文：再向东折进去数丈，就见北面有光影闪闪发亮从上方倒射进来，以为这里是出洞的地方；然而向东去还有深黑的通道，就更加高举火把向东找过去，又约走五丈便断了。
English: Then he turned to the east and went a few paces, and saw a glittering light and shadow on the north side, reflected from above, and thought that this was the place where the hole came out; however, there was a deep dark passage to the east, so he held the torch higher to the east to find it, and then went about five paces and broke it.

古文：乃仍出北去，向明而投。
现代文：于是仍出来向北去，向着明亮处奔过去。
English: So he went out again to the north, and ran as far as the light.

古文：抵其下，则悬石巉岨，光透其上，如数月并引。
现代文：到达那下边，就见悬石高险阻隔，光线从那上边透入，如同几个月亮并排引进亮光。
English: When you reach the lower side, you will see a high-risk barrier of hanging stones, and the light penetrates from the upper side, like a few moons side by side introducing light.

古文：余疑，将攀石以登，忽有平峡绕其左而转，遂北透出，其门北向，又在前所望透明之下也。
现代文：我疑惑，将攀岩石上登，忽然见有平坦的峡谷绕过它左边转出去，于是向北钻出来，这里洞口向北，又在先前望见的透进亮光之处的下边了。
English: I doubted that I would climb the rock, suddenly see a flat canyon, turn around it to the left, and then drill out to the north, here the hole is to the north, and below the previously seen light penetration.

古文：出洞，南向攀丛崖而上，则石萼攒沓，如从莲花族瓣上行，缘透明穴外过，又如垂帘隔幕也。
现代文：出洞来，向南攀着成丛的石崖上登，就见石片攒聚杂沓，如像从成簇的莲花花瓣上行走，沿透光的洞穴外走过，又如布帘下垂筛幕相隔了。
English: Coming out of the cave and climbing up the cliff to the south through the clumps of rocks, you can see the pieces of stone gather into a hodgepodge, like walking on clusters of lotus petals, walking along the outside of the cave through the light, and separated by a curtain.

古文：南向上山顶，遂从玉皇阁后入，则阁僧已归。
现代文：向南上到山顶，就从玉皇阁后面进去，阁中的僧人却已归来了。
English: He went south to the top of the mountain and entered from behind the Jade Emperor Pavilion, but the monks in the pavilion had already returned.

古文：登阁凭眺，则德胜千家鳞次，众峰排簇，尽在目中也。
现代文：登上楼阁凭眺，就见德胜镇千家万户鳞次栉比，群峰排列簇拥，全在眼中。
English: If you go up to the attic, you can see thousands of households in Desheng Town. The peaks are lined up, all in front of your eyes.

古文：仍从二导僧下山，过狮了洞前，下入观音庵，谢满室而别。
现代文：仍跟随两个领路的僧人下山，曲折在石瞪山崖间，一共下走了几个弯，出来经过狮子洞前，下山进入观音庵，谢过满室的人便告别了。
English: They still followed the two monks leading the way down the mountain, zigzagged between the rocky cliffs, and went down a total of several bends. They came out before the lion cave, went down the mountain and entered the Guanyin hermitage. After thanking everyone, they said goodbye.

古文：遂出，南半里，过德胜街，其街东西二里余。
现代文：于是出庵来，往南半里，走过德胜街，街上正在赶集。
English: So I came out of the hermitage, half a mile to the south, and walked through Desheng Street, where people were gathering.

古文：街方墟集为市。雨中截街而南，又半里抵韦家山。
现代文：在雨中横穿过街往南走，又行半里抵达韦家山。
English: In the rain, I walked across the street to the south and walked another half mile to Wei Jia Shan.

古文：从山之西麓攀级而登，崖悬峡转，有树倒垂其上，如虬龙舞空。
现代文：从山的西麓攀石阶上登，山崖高悬山峡回转，有树倒垂在山崖上，如屈曲的神龙飞舞在空中。
English: Climbing up the stone steps from the western foot of the mountain, the cliff of the high-hanging mountain canyon rotates, and there are trees hanging upside down on the cliff, like curving dragons flying in the air.

古文：上有别柯，从岩门横架巨树之杪，合而为一，同为纠连翔坠之势。
现代文：上方有另外的树枝，从洞口横架在巨树的树梢上，合二为一，一同作出缠绕相连翔空下坠的姿态。
English: Above there are other branches, from the mouth of the cave on the treetops of the giant tree, twined together, and together they make a twisted and connected swooping gesture.

古文：其横架处，独枝体穿漏，効仗耷希频耧纬芍摺？
现代文：那横架之处，只有树干穿通，挖空剔窍，似雕凿成的样子。
English: In the place of the cross-beam, only the tree trunk penetrates, and the hollowed-out grooves look like they have been carved.

古文：岩门在上下削崖间，其门西向，前瞰树杪，就隘为门。
现代文：洞口在上下悬崖之间，洞口向西，前方俯瞩树梢，靠近险要之处辟为洞口。
English: The mouth of the cave is between the upper and lower cliffs, the mouth of the cave is to the west, the treetops are looking down in front, and the mouth of the cave is near the critical point.

古文：前有小台，石横卧崖端，若栏之护险。
现代文：前边有个小石台，石横卧在石崖前端，好像栏杆一样护着险要之处。
English: There is a small stone platform in front, the stone lies horizontally at the front end of the cliff, protecting the dangerous place like a railing.

古文：再上，有观音阁当洞门。
现代文：再上走，有观音阁挡在洞口。
English: Going up again, there is a Guanyin Pavilion blocking the entrance to the cave.

古文：由其右入洞，洞分两支：一从阁后东向入，转而南，遂暗，秉炬穷之，五丈而止，无他窦也；一从阁西东向入，下一级，转而北，亦暗，秉炬穷之，十丈而止，亦无他窦也。
现代文：由它右边入洞，洞分为两个支洞：一个从阁后向东进去，转向南，便暗下来，举着火把穷究它，五丈后到了头，没有其他洞穴；一个从阁西向东进去，走下一个台阶，转向北，也暗下来，举着火把穷究它，十丈后到了头，也没有其他洞穴。
English: Entering the cave from its right side, the cave is divided into two subsidiary caves: one enters from the back of the pavilion to the east, turns south, and then darkens down, holding a torch to explore it, after five meters to the head, there is no other cave; one enters from the west of the pavilion to the east, walks down a step, turns north, and also darkens down, holding a torch to explore it, after ten meters to the head, there is no other cave.

古文：大抵此洞虽嵌空，而实无深入处，不若狮子洞之直透山后。
现代文：大抵此洞虽然嵌空了，可实际无深入之处，不如狮子洞一直穿透到山后面。
English: Most of the time, although the hole is hollow, there is no real depth to it. It is not as good as the lion's cave, which penetrates all the way to the back of the mountain.

古文：然狮子胜在中通，而此洞胜在外嵌，凭虚临深，上下削崖，离披掩映，此为胜绝矣。
现代文：不过狮子洞的优美之处在于中间相通，而此洞的优美之处在于外边深嵌，凭临虚空下临深渊，上下是悬崖，散乱掩映，这算是绝顶优美之处了。
English: However, the beauty of the lion's cave is that it is connected in the middle, and the beauty of this cave is that it is deeply embedded on the outside, with the void below the abyss, the cliff above and below, and the scattered reflection. This is an extremely beautiful place.

古文：观音阁之左为僧卧龛，上下皆峭岩，僧以竹扉外障；而南尽处余隙丈余，亦若台榭空悬，僧亦将并障。
现代文：观音阁的左边是僧人睡觉的石完，上下都是陡峭的岩石，僧人用竹门挡在外边；而南边的尽头处剩下一丈多的空隙，也是如台榭一样悬在空中，僧人也将一并挡起来。
English: On the left side of the Guanyin Pavilion is the end of the stone where the monks sleep, with steep rocks above and below, which the monks block off with a bamboo gate; while at the southern end there is a much longer gap, which also hangs in the air like a platform, which the monks will also block off.

古文：余劝其横木于前，栏而不障以临眺，僧从之。
现代文：我劝他在前边横架木头，建成栏杆而不是堵起来，以便凭眺，僧人听从了这个意见。
English: I advised him to set up a wooden cross in front of him and build a railing instead of blocking it, so that it would be visible. The monk followed this advice.

古文：此僧本停锡未几，传闻此洞亦深透于后，正欲一穷，余以钱畀之，令多置火炬以从，其僧欣然。
现代文：这个僧人原来也是停住在这里不多久，传闻此洞也是深深钻透到后山，正打算去穷究一次，我拿钱交给他，命令他多购置些火把跟随我进洞，这个僧人欣然领命。
English: Originally, this monk had also stopped here for a short time. It was rumored that this cave was also drilled deep into the back of the mountain, and he was planning to explore it once. I gave him the money and ordered him to buy more torches to follow me into the cave. The monk gladly accepted the order.

古文：时有广东客二人闻之，亦追随入。
现代文：此时有两个广东的客商听说此事，也跟随着进洞。
English: At this time, two Guangdong merchants heard about this and followed suit.

古文：及入而遍索，竟无深透之穴，乃止。
现代文：到进洞后四处搜索，竟然没有通到深处的洞穴，只得停下来。
English: After entering the cave, they searched everywhere, but they couldn't find a way into the deep cave, so they had to stop.

古文：洞门下悬级之端，亦有一门，入之深不过四丈，而又甚狭，遂下山，山下雨犹潺潺也。
现代文：洞口下方石阶高悬的顶端，也有一个洞口，进洞后深处不超过四丈，而且又十分狭窄。于是下山，山下雨还在哗哗下着。
English: At the top of the high stone steps below the cave entrance, there is also a cave entrance, the depth after entering the cave does not exceed four feet, and it is very narrow. So I went down the mountain, and the rain was still falling.

古文：向有二府，今裁革，以河池州同摄镇事。又一里，出德胜西街门，又西一里，有营在路北，是为德胜营。
现代文：仍是半里，出来到德胜街的中段，顺着街道向西行，走过分司衙门前。又走一里，出了德胜镇的西街门，又向西一里，有营房在路北，这是德胜营。
English: It's still half a mile, come out to the middle of Desheng Street, follow the street to the west, and walk in front of the Priest's Gate. Another mile, out of the West Street Gate of Desheng Town, and another mile west, there is a barracks in the north of the road, this is Desheng Camp.

古文：往问行李，又挑而送至河池所矣。
现代文：去打听行李，又挑了送到河池所去了。
English: I went to inquire about the luggage, picked it up again and took it to Kappa.

古文：仍出至大路，稍西，遂从岐南过一小溪。
现代文：仍出来走到大路上，稍向西走，就从岔道向南涉过一条小溪。
English: I still walked out to the main road, walked a little to the west, and waded through a stream from the side road to the south.

古文：半里，平原中乱石丛簇，中有潴水一泓，石尖之上，亦有跨树盘络，如香山寺前状。
现代文：半里，平原中乱石成丛成簇，分离迸裂不一而足，其中有一乱积水，澄澈没有一根草，石尖之上，也有横跨的树枝盘绕着，如香山寺前的形状。
English: Half a mile away, on the plain, there are jumbled piles of rocks in clusters, separated by uneven cracks, among which there is a jumble of standing water, clear and without a single blade of grass, and on the top of the rocks, there are also transverse branches coiled, like the shape in front of Xiangshan Temple.

古文：潭西又有一石峡，内亦潴水，想下与潭通。
现代文：石片更加稠密闭合，间或杂以水潭小洲，尤为奇异。水潭西边又有一个石峡，里边也积着水，推想下边与水潭相通。
English: The stone plates are more densely closed, occasionally interspersed with small ponds, which is particularly strange. There is also a stone gorge on the west side of the pond, with water also accumulating inside, suggesting that the lower side is connected to the pond.

古文：其上则石分峡转，不一其胜也。
现代文：它上面就见山石分开峡谷转向，其中优美之处不一而足了。
English: Above it, you can see the mountains and rocks separating into canyons, some of which are quite beautiful.

古文：其南有石独高而巨，僧结茅于上，是为莲花庵，亦如香山寺前之梵室。
现代文：它南边唯独有块岩石又高又大，僧人在上面建了茅屋，这是莲花庵，也像香山寺前的佛宇。
English: On its southern side, there is only a high and large rock, on which the monks built a thatched hut, this is the Lotus Flower Hermitage, also like the Buddha in front of Xiangshan Temple.

古文：但僧就峡壁间畜猪聚秽，不免唐突冒犯灵区耳。
现代文：庵门就着石缝建成，东、西、北三面都有小水流环绕着它，环境与香山寺比较，幽静清丽特别优美。
English: The hermitage gate was built along a stone seam, and small streams of water surround it on the east, west, and north sides. Compared with Xiangshan Temple, the environment is particularly quiet and beautiful.

古文：峡水之西，又有古庙三楹，扃而无人。
现代文：只是和尚就着峡谷的石壁在其间养猪积满了污物，不免冒犯风光灵秀的地方了。峡中积水的西边，又有三处古庙，锁着无人。
English: However, the stone walls of the canyon, where the monk raised pigs, are filled with filth, which inevitably offends the beautiful scenery. On the west side of the water in the canyon, there are three ancient temples, locked and empty.

古文：前有庵已半圮，有木几、巨凳满其内，而竟无栖守。
现代文：前边有座寺庵已有一半坍塌，有木茶几、大木凳堆满了庵中，可居然无人住守。
English: In front, there is a half-collapsed temple hermitage, with a wooden coffee table and a large wooden stool piled up in the hermitage, but there is no one to guard it.

古文：石虚云冷，为之怃然，乃返。
现代文：石空云冷，为此忧然惋惜，这才返回来。
English: The stone sky was cloudy and cold, for which I was saddened and sorry, and only then did I return.

古文：北出大路，又西过一石梁，其下水颇小，自北而南，又东环莲花庵之东，又西绕其前而南去，此乃南入南江之流也。
现代文：向北出到大路上，又往西过了一座石桥，桥下的水很小，自北流向南，又向东环绕在莲花庵的东边，又向西绕到庵前而后往南流去，这是向南流入南江的溪流。
English: The water under the bridge is very small. It flows from the north to the south, then to the east around the east side of the Lotus Hermitage, then to the west around the front of the hermitage and then to the south. This is a stream flowing south into the Nanjiang River.

古文：所有砖城，中开四门，而所署倾尽，居舍无几，则戊午岁凶，为寇所焚劫，荡为草莽也。
现代文：又向西经过一处古台门，就见道路全是砖砌的，但路旁房屋稀疏冷落，不如德胜镇了。
English: After passing an ancient gate to the west, we saw that the road was all brick, but the roadside houses were sparse and cold, not as good as Desheng Town.

古文：德胜镇皆客民，雇东兰、那地土兵守御，得保无虞；而此城军士，反不能御而受燹。
现代文：又往西一里，走入河池所的东门。周围有砖墙，中间开有四道城门，可所衙倒塌光了，居民的房屋不多，是戊午年年成歉收，被盗贼焚烧抢劫，荡为荒地了。
English: Another mile to the west, walk into the east gate of Hechisho. There are brick walls all around, with four gates opening in the middle. However, all the gates have collapsed, and there are not many houses for residents. It is because of poor harvests every year in the middle of the year. It was burned and robbed by thieves and turned into a wasteland.

古文：担停于所西军舍，秽陋不堪。
现代文：把担子停放在所西的军营中，污秽简陋不堪。
English: The load is parked in a military camp on the outskirts of Sochi. It is filthy and shabby.

古文：乃易衣履至东街叩杜实徵，不在舍。
现代文：于是换了衣服鞋子到东街去叩见杜实微，不在屋中。
English: So he changed his clothes and shoes and went to Dong Jie to knock on Du Shih-wei's door, but he was not in the house.

古文：返寓，之东门，实徵引至其书室，则所土阜上福山庵后楹也。
现代文：返回寓所，走到东门，实徽领到他的书房中，就是所衙土山上福山庵的后殿了。
English: He returned to his apartment, walked to the east gate, and took the real emblem to his study, which was the back hall of the Fukuyama hermitage on Mt. Shoto.

古文：庵僧穷甚，无薪以炊，仍炊于军家军户人家，移食于庵，并行李移入。
现代文：庵中僧人极为穷困，没有柴火煮饭，仍在军户人家煮好饭，搬到庵中进食，连同行李也搬入庵中。
English: The monks in the hermitage were extremely poor. They had no firewood to cook their meals, so they still cooked their meals at the homes of the soldiers and moved to the hermitage to eat. Even their companion Li moved into the hermitage.

古文：下午，令顾仆及随夫以书及军符白告知管所挥使刘君，适他出，抵暮归曰： 当即奉叩，以晚，须凌晨至也。 
现代文：下午，命令顾仆及随行的脚夫拿着信及兵符去告知管理此所的指挥使刘君。恰好刘君出门去了，到傍晚时归来，说： 应当马上来看望，因为天晚了，必须明天凌晨来了。 
English: In the afternoon, he ordered the attendant and the footman to take the letter and the military insignia to inform Liu Jun, the commanding officer who manages this place. It happened that Liu Jun went out and returned in the evening, saying: You should visit immediately, because it is late, you must come in the early morning tomorrow.

古文：所城与所后福山寺，皆永乐中中使雷春所创，乃往孟英山开矿者。
现代文：所城与所后的福山寺，都是永乐年间去孟英山开矿的宦官雷春创建的。
English: Sokocho and Fukuyama-ji Temple behind it were both founded by Lei Chun, a eunuch who went to open a mine in Mengying Mountain during the Yongle Dynasty.

古文：今年春，郡遣戚指挥往其州，与之调解，三弟得不死，而四弟之在上司者，犹各眈眈也。下司路不通；与荔波行，路近而山险，瑶僮时出没。
现代文：十三日早晨起床后想去拜见刘君，正要前往市上找柬贴，而刘君已先来到。馈赠的路费十分丰厚，我只收下他的米肉两种东西。不久柬贴来到，就到他的官署去答拜，官署是新近用茅草覆盖成的。商议所走的道，刘君说： 去南丹州的路大而远，只是土司家中出变乱，去下司的路不通；经由荔波县走，路近但山险，瑶人憧人时常出没。
English: On the morning of the 13th, after getting up, the camel wanted to visit Liu Jun. It was about to go to the market to find the camel sticker, but Liu Jun had already arrived first. The gift of travel expenses was very rich, and I only received two kinds of his rice meat. Soon after the camel sticker arrived, he went to his government office to answer. The government office was recently covered with thatch. The path taken by the consultation, Liu Jun said: The road to Nantanzhou is long and far, but there is a turmoil in the house of Tusi, and the road to the lower division is impassable; walking through Libo County, the

古文：思恩西界有河背岭，极高峻，为畏途，竟日无人，西抵茅滥而后入荔波境，始可起夫去。
现代文：思恩县西部边界上有个河背岭，极高峻，是艰险可怕的道路，终日无人，往西走到茅滥然后进入荔波县境内，才能征用脚夫前去。
English: There is a ridge on the western border of Xiong County. It is very high and steep. It is a difficult and dangerous road. There is no one there all day. You have to walk westward through the scrub and then enter the territory of Libo County before you can commandeer a porter.

古文：但此路须众人，乃行。 先是，戚指挥以护送牌惠余，曰： 如由荔波，令目军房玉洁送。 盖荔波诸土蛮素慑服于戚，而房乃其影，尝包送客货往来。
现代文：但这条路必须人多才能走。 这之前，戚指挥使把护送牌惠赠给我，说： 如果经由荔波，令目军房玉洁相送。 原来荔波县本地的诸蛮族素来慑服于姓戚的，而姓房的是他的影子，曾经包送客货往来。
English: But this road requires a large number of people to walk.Before that, the commander of the cousins presented the escort card to me, saying: If you go through Libo, let me send you to the military house Yu Jie.Originally, the local barbarians in Libo County used to intimidate those who obeyed the surname relatives, but the surname house was his shadow, and used to send goods and passengers.

古文：刘君命房至，亲谕之送，房唯唯，而实无行意，将以索重贿也。
现代文：刘君命令房玉洁来，亲自告诉他送行，姓房的是是是的，可实际上没有送行的意思，将以此索取厚重的贿赂。
English: Liu Jun ordered Fang Yu Jie to come and personally tell him to see him off. The surname of the room is Yes Yes, but in fact there is no intention of seeing him off. He will use this to solicit heavy bribes.

古文：从署中望北山岩，如屏端嵌一粟。
现代文：从官署中远望北山的岩洞，如屏风上头嵌着一颗小米。
English: From the rock cave of Beishan, which can be seen from the middle of the government office, there is a millet embedded on the top of the screen.

古文：既出欲游北山，有王君以柬来拜，名冕，号宪周。且为刘君致留款意。
现代文：出来后想去游北山，有个王君拿了柬贴来拜见，并且为刘君传达了挽留款待的意思。
English: After he came out, he wanted to visit Beishan. A prince came to visit him with a post-it note and conveyed to Liu Jun the meaning of withholding hospitality.

古文：已刘君以柬来招，余乃不游北岩而酌于刘署。
现代文：不久刘君送柬贴来招唤，我于是不去游北岩而在刘君的官署中饮酒。
English: Soon, Liu Jun sent a postcard inviting me, so I did not go to Beiyan but drank alcohol in Liu Jun's government office.

古文：同酌者为王宪周、杜实徵及实徵之兄杜体乾，皆河池所学生也。
现代文：一同饮酒的是王宪周、杜实微及实微的兄长杜体乾，都是河池所的学生。
English: Wang Xizhou, Du Shihwei, and Du Tiexian, Du Shihwei's older brother, were all students at the Hechi Institute.

古文：曾生独后至。
现代文：姓曾的儒生是后来才到。
English: Confucius, whose family name was Zeng, came later.

古文：席间实徵言其岳陈梦熊将往南丹，曰： 此地独岧夫难，若同之行，当无宵人之儆。 
现代文：酒席上实微讲起他的岳父陈梦熊将前去南丹州，说： 此地独有蠢人难，如果与他同行，将无须防备坏人。 
English: At the banquet, he said of his father-in-law, Chen Mengxiong, who was going to Nantan, "There is no shortage of stupid people here. If you go with him, you won't have to be wary of bad people."

古文：刘君命童子往招之，不至。
现代文：刘君命令一名儿童去招唤他，不来。
English: Liu ordered a child to summon him, but he did not come.

古文：余持两端，心惑焉。
现代文：我徘徊在两可之间，心中疑惑。
English: I'm torn between the two, and I'm confused.

古文：十四日以月忌一种不吉利的日子：初五，十四，二十三，姑缓陈君行。余卜之，则南丹吉而荔波有阻。
现代文：十四日因为是月忌日，姑且让陈君推迟上路。我就此事占卜，是去南丹州吉利而走荔波县有阻挠。
English: On the 14th, because it was the day of the month of death, I let Chen Jun postpone his trip. I divined that he would go to Geely, Nantan Province, but would be prevented from going to Libo County.

古文：及再占，又取荔波。
现代文：到第二次占卜时，又是取道荔波县。
English: By the time of the second divination, it was time to take the road to Libo County.

古文：余惑终不解。
现代文：我的疑惑始终解不开。
English: My suspicions remain unresolved.

古文：乃出北门，为北山之游。
现代文：于是走出北门，去北山游览。
English: So I walked out of the north gate and went to visit Kitayama.

古文：北山者，在城北一里余；拾级而上者，亦几一里。
现代文：北山，在城北一里多处；沿石阶上登，也将近一里。
English: Kitayama, more than a mile north of the city; along the stone steps, it will be nearly a mile.

古文：削崖三层，而置佛宇于二层之上、上层之下。
现代文：悬崖三层，而在第二层之上、上层之下建了佛寺。
English: The cliff has three levels, and a Buddhist temple was built above the second level and below the upper level.

古文：出北门，先由平壑行，不半里，有乱石耸立路隅，为门为标，为屏为梁，为笋为芝，奇秀不一，更巧于莲花塘、香山寺者。
现代文：出了北门，先经由平坦的壑谷前行，不到半里，有乱石耸立在路旁，如像门面、标杆，如像屏风、桥梁，如像竹笋、灵芝，奇秀不一，更比莲花塘、香山寺的巧妙。
English: Out of the north gate, first go through the flat Shibuya valley, less than half a mile, there are jumbled stones standing by the roadside, such as the facade, the benchmark, such as the screen, the bridge, such as the bamboo shoots, the Ganoderma lucidum, the eccentricity is different, and it is more ingenious than the lotus pond and the fragrant mountain temple.

古文：又北几一里，北向陟山，危磴倚云崖而上，曲折亦几一里。
现代文：又向北近一里，向北登山，高险的石瞪斜靠在入云的山崖上，由此上登，曲曲折折也将近一里。
English: And nearly a mile northward, climbing northward, the high-risk stone gazelle leans against the mountain cliff into the clouds, from which it climbs, and the twists and turns will also be nearly a mile.

古文：进隘门，有殿宇三楹，僧以索食先下掩其扉，自下望之，以为不得入矣，及排之，则掩而不扃也。
现代文：走进隘门，有殿宇三处，僧人因为去找食物先下山去掩上了寺门，从下边望去，以为不能进去了，到推门时，原来是虚掩着却没上锁。
English: Entering the narrow gate, there are three halls. The monk went down the mountain first to hide the temple gate because he was looking for food. Looking from below, he thought he couldn't get in. When he opened the door, it was actually hidden but not locked.

古文：入其中，上扁为 云深阁 ，右扁有记一篇，乃春元即 春闱 贡士第一名董其英者，即所中人。言尝读书此中，觅阁东音石，为置茅亭。
现代文：进入寺中，上方的匾是 云深阁 ，右边的匾写有一篇记文，是春元董其英撰写的，说曾经在这里边读书，在阁东找到音石，为此建了座茅草亭。
English: Entering the temple, the urn on the top is Yun Sheng Pavilion, and the urn on the right is inscribed with an article written by Chun Yuan Dong Qiying, saying that he used to study here and found a musical stone in the east of the pavilion, and built a thatched pavilion for this purpose.

古文：今从庵来，觅亭址，不可得。
现代文：现在从庵中来，寻找亭址，找不到。
English: Now I'm coming from the hermitage, looking for the pavilion, but I can't find it.

古文：而庵之西，凌削崖而去，上下皆绝壁，而丝路若痕。
现代文：但寺庵的西边，凌驾在悬崖上走去，上下都是绝壁，而丝线一样的路如石痕似的。
English: However, on the west side of the temple and hermitage, walking over the cliff, the top and bottom are cliffs, and the silk-like road is like a stone trace.

古文：已从绝壁下汇水一坎，乃凿堰而壅，壅者有滴沥，从倒崖垂下汇之，以供晨夕而已。
现代文：不久从绝壁下走。一坑积水，是凿坝拦堵而成的，有水滴从倒悬的石崖上滴下来，积成水塘以供早晚用水而已。
English: After a short while, we went under the cliff. A puddle of stagnant water, created by a dam, dripped down from the overhanging cliff and accumulated into a pond for drinking water in the morning and evening.

古文：庵无他奇异，惟临深凭远，眺擥甚遥。
现代文：庵中无其他奇异之处，唯有面临深渊凭眺远方，眺望得非常远。
English: There is nothing strange about the hermitage, except that it faces the abyss and looks into the distance, very far away.

古文：南望多灵山在第二重石峰之外，正当庵前；西之羊角山，东之韦家山，则庵下东西两标也。
现代文：远望南方的多灵山在第二重石峰之外，正在庵前；西面的羊角山，东面的韦家山，则如庵下东西两面的座标了。
English: Looking far to the south, Doringshan Mountain, beyond the second stone peak, is in front of the hermitage; Yangjiao Mountain in the west, and Weijia Mountain in the east, are like the coordinates of the east and west sides of the hermitage.

古文：徙倚久之，仍下山至所城北门外，东循大路行。
现代文：徘徊了很久，仍下山来到所城的北门外，往东沿大路行。
English: After wandering for a long time, I still came down the mountain to the north gate of the city and went east along the main road.

古文：已岐而东北，共一里，入寿山寺。
现代文：不久岔向东北，共一里，走入寿山寺。
English: Soon, I walked northeast, a total of one mile, and entered Shoushan Temple.

古文：乱石一区，水纵横汇其中，从石巅构室三四处，以奉神佛，高下不一。
现代文：乱石一片，水纵横流淌积在其中，在岩石顶上建了三四处小屋，以供奉神佛，高低不一。
English: A jumble of rocks, in which water flows vertically and horizontally. On the top of the rock, three or four huts were built to worship gods and Buddhas, varying in height.

古文：先从石端得室一楹，中置金仙。
现代文：先在岩石顶上找到一间小屋，中间放着佛像。
English: First, they found a hut on top of a rock, with a Buddha statue in the middle.

古文：其西则石隙南北横坠，澄流潴焉，若鸿沟之界者。
现代文：它西边有石缝南北横向下陷，澄澈的清流积在其间，好似鸿沟分界的样子。
English: On the west side of it, there is a stone seam sinking horizontally from north to south, with a clear stream between them, like the appearance of a divide.

古文：以石板为桥，渡而西，有侧石一队，亦南北屏列，其上下有穴如门。
现代文：用石板作为桥，渡到西面，有一队侧立的岩石，也是南北向屏风样排列着，它上下有洞穴如门一样。
English: A stone plate is used as a bridge to the west, and there is a group of sideways rocks, also arranged in a north-south screen pattern, with caves like doors above and below.

古文：又穿而西，有庵北向，前汇为塘，亦石所拥而成者。
现代文：又穿到西边，有座向北的寺庵，前边积水成塘，也是岩石围抱而成的。
English: Further to the west, there is a temple and hermitage facing north, with a pond of standing water in front, also surrounded by rocks.

古文：庵后耸石独高，上有室三楹，中置一像，衣冠伟然，一老人指为张总爷，而所中诸生皆谓之文昌像。
现代文：庵后耸立的岩石独自高耸，上边有三间屋子，中间放着一尊塑像，衣冠华美，一个老人说是张总爷，可所中的众儒生都说它是文昌帝君像。
English: The rock towering behind the hermitage stands alone. There are three rooms on the top. In the middle, there is a statue with an ornate robe. An old man says that it is Zhang Zongye, but all the Confucianists in the monastery say that it is the statue of Emperor Wenchang.

古文：余于福山寺阅《河阳八景诗》，有征蛮将军张澡《跋》，谓得之寿山藓石间，乃万历戊子阅师过此，则此像为张君无疑。
现代文：我在福山寺读过《河阳八景诗》，有个征蛮将军张澡跋，在万历戊子年阅兵经过此地，说是在寿山长满苔醉的岩石间找到此像，那么此像无疑应是张君。
English: I read "The Eight Scenes of the River Yang" in Fukuyama Temple. There was a barbarian general Zhang Badu, who passed through this place during a military parade in the year of Wanli Wuzi. He said that he found this image among the moss-covered rocks of Shoushan. Then this image should undoubtedly be Zhang Jun.

古文：以无文记，后生莫识，遂以文昌事之，而不知为张也。
现代文：由于没有文字记载，后辈无人认识，便把它当文昌帝君来侍奉，却不知是姓张的了。
English: Since there is no written record, no one knows the descendants, they serve it as Emperor Wenchang, but they do not know the surname Zhang.

古文：凭吊既久，西南一里，入所城东门，返福山寓。
现代文：凭吊了很久之后，向西南一里，进入所城的东门，返回福山寺寓所。
English: After hanging for a long time, I walked one mile southwest, entered the east gate of Sojo, and returned to the Fukuyama-ji Temple residence.

古文：令奴子买盐觅夫于德胜，为明日行计。
现代文：命令奴仆去德胜镇买盐找脚夫，为明天上路做准备。
English: He ordered his servant to go to Desheng Town to buy salt, find a porter and prepare for the journey tomorrow.

古文：余作记寓中。
现代文：我在寓所中作日记。
English: I keep a diary in my apartment.

古文：已而杜实徵同其岳陈生至，为余觅夫，汝明日同为南丹行。
现代文：随即杜实微同他岳父姓陈的儒生来，为我找脚夫，决定明天一同上路去南丹州。
English: Soon after, Du Shih-wei and his father-in-law, a Confucian named Chen, came to find a porter for me and decided to go on the road to Nantan tomorrow.

古文：是日午后霁，至晚而碧空如洗，冰轮东上，神思跃然。
现代文：这天午后晴开，到晚上便碧空如洗，明月跃上东方，神思敏捷跃然纸上。
English: On this day, it was sunny in the afternoon, and in the evening, the sky was clear and blue. The bright moon leapt to the east, and my thoughts quickly leapt onto the paper.

