古文：神武齐高祖神武皇帝，姓高名欢，字贺六浑，渤海蓚人也。
现代文：齐高祖神武皇帝，姓高名欢，字贺六浑，渤海蓨地人氏。
English: Qi Gao is the ancestor of Emperor Shenwu. His family name is Gao Minghuan and his family name is He Liuhun.

古文：六世祖隐，晋玄菟太守。
现代文：其六世祖隐，晋时为玄菟太守。
English: The sixth generation, Zouyin, became the governor of Xuanzang at the time of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：隐生庆，庆生泰，泰生湖，三世仕慕容氏。
现代文：隐生庆，庆生泰，泰生湖，三代都在慕容氏朝为官。
English: The three generations of Kinsheng Qing, Kinsheng Tai, and Taisheng Lake all served as officials in the Murong Dynasty.

古文：及慕容宝败，国乱，湖率众归魏，为右将军。
现代文：当慕容宝败亡之际，国家大乱，高湖便率领部分民众归顺了魏氏，因此被委任为右将军。
English: When Murongbao was defeated and the country was in turmoil, Gao Hu led some of the people to submit to the Wei clan, and was appointed as the right general.

古文：湖生四子，第三子谧，仕魏，位至侍御史，坐法徙居怀朔镇。
现代文：高湖生有四个儿子，第三子为谧，在魏做官至侍御史，由于犯法获罪，遭流放而定居到了怀朔镇。
English: Gao Huxiang had four sons, the third son was Ren, who served as an official in Wei Dynasty and was exiled to Wai Shuo Town after being convicted of a crime.

古文：谧生皇考树，性通率，不事家业。
现代文：谧生高欢的父亲树，树性格旷达坦率，不理家业。
English: The father of twins Gao Huan and Shu, Shu's personality is open and frank, and he does not care about the family business.

古文：住居白道南，数有赤光紫气之异，邻人以为怪，劝徙居以避之。皇考曰： 安知非吉？ 
现代文：居住在白道的南侧，这里曾多次出现过赤光紫气，邻近的人们认为是灾祸作怪，劝他搬家避害，可他却说： 这难道不是吉兆？ 
English: Living on the south side of Baidoa, the reddish-purple gas has appeared here many times. Neighbors thought it was a natural disaster and advised him to move to avoid harm, but he said: Isn't this a good omen?

古文：居之自若。
现代文：依然住在此地未动。
English: He posthumously called his father Emperor Wenjing and his mother Empress Yang.

古文：及神武生而皇妣韩氏殂，养于同产姊婿镇狱队尉景家。
现代文：高欢生后，其母韩氏死了，父亲便把他寄养在姐夫镇狱队尉景的家里。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was promoted to chancellor of the imperial court, vice-premier of the imperial court, governor of the Chinese and foreign armies, and was recorded in the records of the imperial court. He was appointed as the governor of the stable county. He was appointed as the guardian of the imperial court, and Guangping Wanzan was appointed as the guardian of the imperial court. In the eighth year of junior high school, he was appointed as the empress of Wangfei Yi and the crown prince of the imperial court.

古文：神武既累世北边，故习其俗，遂同鲜卑。
现代文：神武帝的家世代定居在北方边地，所以习惯了当地的风俗，成了地道的鲜卑人。
English: On the 17th, Guangling Wang Xin was appointed as Taifu, and Yi Tong and Sanji Manju Shulekgan were appointed as Siku.

古文：长而深沉有大度，轻财重士，为豪侠所宗。
现代文：年岁稍长，显得深沉稳重、豁达大度，轻财重友，被豪侠们所尊崇。
English: Slightly older, he appears to be deep and stable, open-minded and generous, a friend of light wealth, and is revered by heroes.

古文：目有精光，长头高颧，齿白如玉，少有人杰表。
现代文：两眼炯炯有神，长脖子高颧骨，齿白如玉石，少有的俊杰伟人风度。
English: His eyelids are bright, his long neck has high cheekbones, his teeth are as white as jade, and he has the rare demeanor of a great man.

古文：家贫，及聘武明皇后，始有马，得给镇为队主。
现代文：家境贫寒，到与武明皇后行定婚礼时，才开始有马，当兵入镇做了队主。
English: His family was poor, and he only started to have horses when he was married to Empress Wu Ming. When he entered the town, he became the team leader.

古文：镇将辽西段长常奇神武貌，谓曰： 君有康济才，终不徒然。 
现代文：镇将辽西人段长时常惊叹神武帝的容貌，对他说： 君有济世安民之才，不会虚度一生的。 
English: In September, the relevant departments reported that the preparation of the balsam used in the palace required a lot of money.

古文：便以子孙为托。
现代文：并且将子孙托付给他照顾。
English: The emperor stopped the expenditure because the army was fighting abroad.

古文：及贵，追赠长司空，擢其子宁用之。
现代文：当神武大富大贵之时，追赠段长为司空，提拔他的儿子段宁做了官。
English: When Shenwu became very rich and powerful, he posthumously promoted his son, Duan Ning, to the position of Siku.

古文：神武自队主转为函使。
现代文：神武帝从队主升任函使。
English: In December, Taibao Nianxian was appointed as Taifu, and Liang Jingrui, the governor of Hebei Province, was appointed as Taifu.

古文：尝乘驿过建兴，云雾昼晦，雷声随之，半日乃绝，若有神应者。
现代文：有一次乘驿马经过建兴，这里顿时云遮雾障，随之雷声隆隆，许久才停息下来，好像是神灵在相互应和。
English: There was a time when I rode through Jianxing on a pack horse. Suddenly, clouds and fog rolled in, followed by thunder. It took a long time for the thunder to subside, as if the gods were harmonizing with each other.

古文：每行道路，往来无风尘之色。
现代文：每当他骑马上路，去去来来却没有风尘升腾。
English: In February, Liang Ding, a member of the Yi Tong and the Third Division, who fought against the rebels, was pacified.

古文：又尝梦履众星而行，觉而内喜。
现代文：又曾经梦见自己穿着很多星辰做成的鞋在赶路，醒来时暗自高兴。
English: In March, Li Shujen, the governor of Liangzhou, was appointed as the tutor, and the tutor Wan Xun Shule was appointed as Dazai. In the summer of May, the tutor Kuyue Lulu passed away.

古文：为函使六年，每至洛阳，给令史麻祥使。
现代文：做了六年的函使，每次到洛阳，都被令史麻祥驱使。
English: Qin Zhou Zishi, Jianzhong Wang Wanzhong Pu Zhi and his son Dazai Wanzhong Shulekang led the troops to join the Eastern Wei Dynasty. In autumn and September, he appointed Fu Feng Wang Fu as Siku and Taibao Wanzhong as Taifu.

古文：详尝以肉啖神武，神武性不立食，坐而进之。
现代文：祥曾经让神武吃肉，神武没有站着吃的习惯，便坐下来吃了。
English: Xiang once asked Shenwu to eat meat. Shenwu did not have the habit of eating standing up, so he sat down to eat.

古文：祥以为慢己，笞神武四十。
现代文：祥认为神武坐着吃是大不恭敬，用鞭子狠狠地将他抽打了四十多下。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, he was awarded the title of shinran and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：及自洛阳还，倾产以结客。
现代文：从洛阳回来后，神武倾尽所有来网罗人才，亲戚朋友无法理解这种行为，就向他打听。
English: In the summer of April, Taifu Jinszqin passed away.

古文：亲故怪问之，答曰： 吾至洛阳，宿卫羽林相率焚领军张彝宅，朝廷惧其乱而不问。为政若此，事可知也。
现代文：神武回答说： 我到洛阳，看到宿卫、羽林的兵士接连几次放火焚烧领军张彝的住宅，朝廷害怕兵变不敢惩办凶手，像这样执掌国政，事情的结果就可想而知了。
English: Shenwu replied, "When I went to Luoyang, I saw soldiers from Suiwei and Hualin set fire to the residence of the army leader Zhang Ye several times in succession. The imperial court was afraid of a mutiny and did not dare to punish the murderer. This is how they run state affairs. The outcome of the matter can be imagined.

古文：财物岂可常守邪？ 
现代文：钱财物品难道可以永远归自己所有？ 
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain with the approval of King Sitoru and King Guangping, and to the rank of sous-lieutenant with the approval of King Meng of the Three Departments with the approval of King Kaifu.

古文：自是乃有澄清天下之志。
现代文：从此开始，便有了澄清天下的志向。
English: In the winter of October, the Eastern Wei army was heavily defeated by the Steady Gong U Wentai in Shayuan, and U Wentai was named the general of the pillar country.

古文：与怀朔省事云中司马子如及秀容人刘贵、中山人贾显智为奔走之友，怀朔户曹史孙腾、外兵史侯景亦相友结。
现代文：同怀朔镇省事云中人司马子如、秀容人刘贵、中山人贾显智成了奔走之友，怀朔镇户曹史孙腾、外兵史侯景也成了神武的好朋友。
English: Sima Ziru, the handsome Liu Gui, and Jia Xian Zhi, the man from Zhongshan, who lived in the province of Huai Shuo, also became Shenwu's good friends. Cao Shisun Teng, a resident of Huai Shuo, and Shi Houjing, a foreign soldier, also became Shenwu's good friends.

古文：刘贵尝得一白鹰，与神武及尉景、蔡俊、子如、贾显智等猎于沃野。
现代文：刘贵搞到过一只白猎鹰，和神武以及尉景、蔡俊、子如、贾显智等一块到沃野打猎。
English: Liu Gui once got hold of a white falcon, and went hunting in Wo Ye with Shenwu, as well as Ye Jing, Cai Jun, Zi Ru, Jia Xian Zhi and others.

古文：见一赤兔，每搏辄逸，遂至回泽。泽中有茅屋，将奔入，有狗自屋中出，噬之，鹰兔俱死。
现代文：看见一只赤兔，纵鹰追赶，兔子却逃跑了，他们循着兔子跑的方向，追到了深泽之中，深泽里有座茅屋，兔、鹰正想跑进去的时候，有条狗突然从屋里冲了出来，咬死了赤兔白鹰。
English: Seeing a red hare, the long-tailed eagle chased it, but the hare ran away. They followed the direction in which the hare was running and chased it into the depths of the lake. There was a hut in the depths of the lake. While the hare and the eagle were trying to run inside, a dog suddenly rushed out of the house and bit the red hare and the white eagle to death.

古文：神武怒，以鸣镝射之，狗毙。
现代文：神武见此大怒，用响箭射死了狗。
English: In the autumn and July, the Eastern Wei generals such as Hou Jing besieged Luoyang, and the emperor and the stable official Wentei went to the east. In September, he returned from the east by car.

古文：屋中有二人出，持神武襟甚急。
现代文：见狗被杀，屋内一下子跳出两个人，抓着了神武的衣领，扭着不放。
English: Seeing the dog being killed, two people jumped out of the house at once, grabbed Shenwu's collar and twisted it.

古文：其母两目盲，曳杖呵其二子曰： 何故触大家！ 
现代文：这两个人的母亲双目失明，拖着拐杖喝斥道： 为何触犯大家？ 
English: The mother of the two, who is blind and uses crutches, shouted at them: "Why are you offending everyone?

古文：出瓮中酒，烹羊以饭客。
现代文：令二子取出瓮中好酒，杀猪宰羊，盛情款待神武一行。
English: He ordered the two sons to take out the good wine from the gourd, kill the pig and slaughter the sheep, and treat the Shenwu party with hospitality.

古文：因自言善暗相，遍扪诸人皆贵，而指麾俱由神武。
现代文：又自称会相面，将来人一一抚摸，结论都是大贵之相，不过，均得由神武统领节制。
English: He also claimed that he would meet face to face and touch people one by one in the future. The conclusions were all very noble, but they all had to be controlled by the Divine Military Commander.

古文：又曰： 子如历位，显智不善终。 
现代文：还说： 司马子如居官显赫，贾显智却不能善终。 
English: He also said: Sima Zi is a prominent official, but Jia Xian Zhi cannot end well.

古文：饭竟出，行数里还，更访之，则本无人居，乃向非人也。
现代文：饭毕出门，行了几里地后再返原地时，哪里还见人烟屋舍，原来那老妇是个神灵仙人。
English: When I went out after dinner, walked a few miles, and then returned to the same place, I still saw houses full of people. It turned out that the old woman was a spirit fairy.

古文：由是诸人益加敬异。
现代文：因此，朋友们越发尊崇神武。
English: In the winter of November, Grand Master Nian Xian passed away.

古文：孝昌元年，柔玄镇人杜洛周反于上谷，神武乃与同志从之。
现代文：孝昌元年，柔玄镇人杜洛周在上谷扯旗造反，神武便和志同道合者参加了他的队伍。
English: In the spring and February of the seventh year, the governor of Yuzhou, Shunyang Wang Zhongjing, was sentenced to death for his crime. In March, the governor of Xiazhou, Liu Ping, plotted a rebellion, and the grand governor Yuzheng fought and captured him alive. In the autumn and July, six decrees on government affairs were promulgated.

古文：丑其行事，私与尉景、段荣、蔡俊图之。不果而逃，为其骑所追。
现代文：由于瞧不起杜洛周的行事，私自与尉景、段荣、蔡俊等谋划，试图杀死杜洛周，没有成功，而遭杜氏的骑兵追捕。
English: As he looked down on Du Luo Zhou's actions, he plotted with Iu Jing, Duan Rong, Cai Jun and others to kill Du Luo Zhou, but failed, and was pursued by Du's cavalry.

古文：文襄及魏永熙后皆幼，武明后于牛上抱负之。
现代文：文襄帝及魏永熙皇后两人年纪都小，武明皇后坐在牛背上抱着这两个孩子。
English: In December, the emperor came to Fengyun, met with the princes, recited the etiquette of the family to each other, and personally wrote the ten commandments of the clan to give to everyone. In March of the spring of the eighth year, he began to set up the six armies.

古文：文襄屡落牛，神武弯弓将射之以决去。
现代文：文襄几次从牛背上滑落下来，神武准备射死这个儿子好快些逃走。
English: Wen Xiang slipped off the cow's back several times, and Shenwu prepared to shoot the son to escape faster.

古文：后呼荣求救，赖荣遽下取之以免。
现代文：武明皇后恳求段荣救助，多亏段荣夺下神武手中的弓箭，文襄才幸免于死。
English: Empress Wu Ming pleaded with Duan Rong for help. Thanks to Duan Rong winning the bow and arrow from the divine warrior, Wen Xiang was spared from death.

古文：遂奔葛荣，又亡归尔朱荣于秀容。
现代文：神武投奔葛荣，又逃亡到秀容，归顺了尔朱荣。
English: Shenwu rushed to Ge Rong, fled to Xiu Rong, and surrendered to Er Zhu Rong.

古文：先是，刘贵事荣，盛言神武美，至是始得见，以憔悴故，未之奇也。
现代文：早些时候，刘贵服事尔朱荣，极力赞誉神武之美，此时才得见面，由于疲劳憔悴，没有引起尔朱荣的惊奇。
English: Earlier, Liu Gui had served Er Zhu Rong and praised the beauty of the divine martial arts. It was only at this time that they met. Due to fatigue, there was no surprise from Er Zhu Rong.

古文：贵乃为神武更衣，复求见焉。
现代文：刘贵便帮神武更衣换鞋，又一次见了面。
English: Liu Gui then helped Shenwu change clothes and shoes, and they met again.

古文：因随荣之厩。厩有恶马，荣命翦之。
现代文：继而跟着尔朱荣进到了马厩，厩中关着匹烈马，尔朱荣命令神武将它绑缚起来。
English: Next, he followed Er Zhurong into the stables. There was a horse in the stables, and Er Zhurong ordered Shenwu to tie it up.

古文：神武乃不加羁绊而翦，竟不蹄啮，已而起曰： 御恶人亦如此马矣。 
现代文：神武未用马络头就捆绑住了，而且马一直是服服贴贴的。完事后，站起身来说： 制服恶人就像降服这匹马一样。 
English: Shenwu tied up the horse without using a halter, and the horse was always dressed. After the event, he stood up and said: To subdue the wicked is like subduing this horse.

古文：荣遂坐神武于床下，屏左右而访时事。
现代文：尔朱荣便请神武坐于椅子上，摈除左右向他请教时事。
English: In autumn and July, the system of degrees, measures and weighing instruments was changed. In summer and May of the eleventh year, Taifu Wang Meng passed away.

古文：神武曰： 闻公有马十二谷，色别为群，将此竟何用也？ 
现代文：神武说： 听说您在十二座山谷里喂养着马匹，以马的颜色划分为群，如此做有何用意？ 
English: It was decreed that all death-row prisoners who had committed major crimes would be reviewed by the three public procurators and then sentenced.

古文：荣曰： 但言尔意。 
现代文：尔朱荣说： 你尽管谈你的高见吧。 
English: In winter, the construction of a round mound began in the south of the city.

古文：神武曰： 方今天子愚弱，太后淫乱，孽宠擅命，朝政不行。以明公雄武，乘时奋发，讨郑俨、徐纥而清帝侧，霸业可举鞭而成。
现代文：神武说： 当今天子愚笨懦弱，太后淫乱，小人专权，朝政混乱，以您的雄才武略，乘此良机作为一番，讨伐郑俨、徐纥，清除帝侧，成就霸王之业不过是举手之劳。
English: Shenwu said: Today, when the emperor is stupid and cowardly, the empress dowager is promiscuous, the villain has absolute power, and the imperial government is in disarray, you should take advantage of this good opportunity to fight against Zheng He and Xu Xi, clean up the imperial side, and achieve the cause of overpowering the king is just a matter of raising your hand.

古文：此贺六浑之意也。 
现代文：这便是我贺六浑的看法。 
English: In the first month of spring in the 13th year, a white canal was dug to irrigate the fields.

古文：荣大悦，语自日中至夜半，乃出。
现代文：尔朱荣大喜过望，从中午一直谈到深夜，神武才告辞离去。
English: Le Zhu Rong was overjoyed. He talked about it from noon until late at night, and only then did Shenwu leave.

古文：自是每参军谋。
现代文：从此之后多次参预机密。
English: If a fugitive slave should escape, only the crime of escape should be prosecuted.

古文：后从荣徙据并州，抵扬州邑人庞苍鹰，止团焦中。
现代文：后随尔朱荣移据并州，入扬州邑人庞苍鹰宅，住在圆形草屋中。
English: Later, he moved to Yangzhou with Zhu Rong, and lived in a round grass hut in the Panganghawk House in Yangzhou.

古文：每从外归，主人遥闻行响动地。
现代文：每次从外边回来，即使他还在很远的地方行走，屋主人都能听到十分响亮的脚步声。
English: Every time he came back from outside, even if he was still walking far away, the owner could hear very loud footsteps.

古文：苍鹰母数见团焦赤气赫然属天。
现代文：苍鹰的母亲多次看到草屋顶上赤气冲天。
English: Goshawk's mother repeatedly saw red gas billowing from the grass roof.

古文：又苍鹰尝夜欲入，有青衣人拔刀叱曰： 何故触王！ 
现代文：有次苍鹰打算潜入神武的草屋，却被一执刀的青衣人拦住，叱问道： 为何触犯大王？ 
English: Once, a goshawk tried to sneak into a sacred grass hut, but was stopped by a sword-wielding young man in blue. The scold asked, "Why did you offend the great king?"

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完，便没了身影。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：始以为异，密觇之，唯见赤蛇蟠床上，乃益惊异。
现代文：苍鹰开始惊异了，曾密密地窥视，只见一条赤蛇蟠卧在床上，因而更加惊讶。
English: The goshawk began to be surprised. He peered closely and saw a red snake lying on the bed, which made him even more surprised.

古文：因杀牛分肉，厚以相奉。
现代文：于是宰牛割肉，以厚礼相待。
English: So they slaughtered and cut the meat, and treated each other with great courtesy.

古文：苍鹰母求以神武为义子。
现代文：苍鹰之母请求神武做自己的义子。
English: The mother of the eagle asked the god to be her son-in-law.

古文：及得志，以其宅为第，号为南宅。
现代文：到神武得志，将苍鹰的住屋作为寝宫，唤作 南宅 。
English: According to Shenwu Deshi, the residence of the goshawk was used as a sleeping palace and was called the South House.

古文：虽门巷开广，堂宇崇丽，其本所住团焦，以石垩涂之，留而不毁，至文宣时，遂为宫。既而荣以神武为亲信都督。
现代文：宽门大户，屋室高敞，他曾经居住过的茅草屋，其墙则用石灰涂抹，认真加以保护，到文宣帝时便成了宫殿一一一不久，尔朱荣便任命神武做了亲信都督。
English: A large house with a wide door, a spacious room, a thatched cottage where he once lived, the walls of which were coated with lime and carefully protected, became a palace when Emperor Wen Xuan arrived. Shortly after, Er Zhurong appointed Shenwu as a trusted governor.

古文：于时魏明帝衔郑俨、徐纥，逼灵太后，未敢制，私使荣举兵内向。
现代文：此时，北魏孝明帝不满郑俨、徐纥等人逼迫灵太后的行为，但却不敢下诏制裁，就偷偷下令尔朱荣举兵围攻都城。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty was dissatisfied with the actions of Zheng Qi, Xu Xi and others to persecute the Empress Dowager, but he did not dare to issue an edict of sanction, so he secretly ordered Er Zhurong to raise an army to besiege the capital.

古文：荣以神武为前锋。
现代文：尔朱荣指派神武为前锋。
English: Le Zhurong assigned Shenwu as the striker.

古文：至上党，明帝又私诏停之。
现代文：军队抵达上党，明帝又秘密下诏，命令停止前进。
English: When the troops arrived at Shangdang, Emperor Ming secretly issued an edict ordering them to stop advancing.

古文：及帝暴崩，荣遂入洛，因将篡位。
现代文：到明帝突然驾崩时，尔朱荣才举兵进入洛阳，准备趁机篡政。
English: When Emperor Ming died suddenly, Er Zhu Rong raised an army and entered Luoyang, preparing to take the opportunity to usurp power.

古文：神武谏，恐不听，请铸像卜之，铸不成，乃止。
现代文：神武进谏，怕他不听，就请铸铜像卜其吉凶，铜像没有铸成，因此尔朱荣也就停止了篡权活动。
English: Shenwu Jinjun, fearing that he would not listen, asked for a bronze statue of Bu Qi to be cast. The bronze statue was not cast, so Er Zhu Rong also stopped the usurpation activities.

古文：孝庄帝立，以定策勋，封铜鞮伯。
现代文：魏孝庄帝即位，由于定策的功劳，封神武为铜伯。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, Shenwu was awarded the title of "Dongbaku" for his contribution to policy-making.

古文：及尔朱荣击葛荣，令神武喻下贼别称王者七人。
现代文：尔朱荣攻打葛荣，命令神武开导晓谕七个称王的盗贼归服。
English: Er Zhurong attacked Ge Rong and ordered Shenwu to tell the seven thieves to surrender.

古文：后与行台于晖破羊侃于泰山，寻与元天穆破邢杲于济南。
现代文：后同行台于晖在泰山打垮了羊侃，又很快在济南与天元穆一块大败邢杲。
English: After that, his colleague, Tai Yu Wei, defeated Yang Kan in Taishan, and soon defeated Tianyuan Mu in Jinan.

古文：累迁第三镇人酋长，常在荣帐内。
现代文：升官为第三镇人酋长，经常出入于尔朱荣的军帐。
English: He was promoted to the position of the third chief of the townspeople, and often entered and exited the military account of Erzhurong.

古文：荣尝问左右曰： 一日无我，谁可主军？ 
现代文：尔朱荣曾向左右打听说： 假如哪天没了我，谁可顶替我统帅军队？ 
English: Le Zhu Rong had heard from all sides: If one day I am gone, who can replace me as commander of the army?

古文：皆称尔朱兆。
现代文：众人都推尔朱兆。
English: Everyone is pushing Zhu Zhao.

古文：曰： 此正可统三千骑以还，堪代我主众者，唯贺六浑耳。 
现代文：尔朱荣说： 这正好可以让我带领三千骑兵返归，能够代我主大事的只有贺六浑这个人。 
English: Er Zhurong said, "This is just the right time for me to return with three thousand cavalry. Only He Liuhun can do the important work on behalf of my master."

古文：因诫兆曰： 尔非其匹，终当为其穿鼻。 
现代文：并告诫尔朱兆： 你不是他的对手，最终你会被人家制服的。 
English: He also admonished Lzhu Zhao: You are not his rival, and eventually you will be subdued by others.

古文：乃以神武为晋州刺史。
现代文：就任命神武做了晋州刺史。
English: He made history in Jinzhou with the appointment of Shenwu.

古文：于是大聚敛，因刘贵货荣下要人，尽得其意。
现代文：神武为刺史后大力集聚财粮，安排刘贵贿赂收买尔朱荣手下的重要人物，目标一个接一个地实现。
English: Shenwu vigorously collected wealth and grain for the sake of history, arranged for Liu Gui to bribe and bribe important figures under Zhu Rong, and achieved the goals one by one.

古文：时州库角无故自鸣，神武异之，无几而孝庄诛荣。
现代文：这时州库的屋角无缘无故地发出声响，神武为此惊异，不多时日，孝庄帝诛杀了尔朱荣。
English: At this time, the corner of the roof of the state treasury made a noise for no reason, which surprised Shenwu. It didn't take long for Xiaozhuang to kill Zhu Rong.

古文：及尔朱兆自晋阳将举兵赴洛，召神武。
现代文：尔朱兆率兵从晋阳赶赴洛阳，征召神武。
English: Er Zhu Zhao and his soldiers rushed from Jinyang to Luoyang to recruit Shenwu.

古文：神武使长史孙腾辞以绛蜀、汾胡欲反，不可委去。兆恨焉。
现代文：神武打发长史孙腾借口绛蜀、汾胡诸地将要反叛，情况危急而予以推辞，尔朱兆就怀恨在心了。
English: On the pretext that the provinces of Shenshu and Yanhu were about to rebel and the situation was critical, Shenwu dismissed Sunteng, the chief historian, and rejected him. Er Shuzhao held a grudge.

古文：腾复命，神武曰： 兆举兵犯上，此大贼也，吾不能久事之。 
现代文：孙腾回来向神武作了报告。神武说： 尔朱兆领兵犯上，是最大的盗贼，我不能长期侍奉他。 
English: Sun Teng came back and reported to Shenwu. Shenwu said: "Er Zhu Zhao is the biggest thief, I can't serve him for a long time.

古文：自是始有图兆计。
现代文：从此开始便有了图谋尔朱兆的打算。
English: From this point on, Zhu Zhao's plan to conspire began.

古文：及兆入洛，执庄帝以北，神武闻之，大惊。
现代文：尔朱兆一进入洛阳，押解着孝庄帝往北而去，听到这个消息，神武大吃一惊。
English: When Zhu Zhaoyi entered Luoyang and escorted Emperor Xiaozhuang to the north, Shenwu was very surprised to hear this news.

古文：又使孙腾伪贺兆，因密觇孝庄所在，将劫以举义，不果。
现代文：又派孙腾假装成祝贺尔朱兆的使者，趁机秘密打听孝庄帝的囚拘之所，准备偷抢出来，以举大事，却没有成功。
English: He also sent Sun Teng to pretend to be an envoy to congratulate Er Zhu Zhao, and took the opportunity to secretly inquire about Emperor Xiaozhuang's place of detention, preparing to secretly snatch it out to make a big event, but it was not successful.

古文：乃以书喻之，言不宜执天子以受恶名于海内。
现代文：于是写信向尔朱兆晓以大义，说不应当拘押天子而让天下人唾骂。
English: Therefore, he wrote a letter to Er Zhu Zhaoxiao, saying that he should not detain the heavenly son and let the world swear at him.

古文：兆不纳，杀帝，而与尔朱世隆等立长广王晔，改元建明。
现代文：尔朱兆置之不理，杀了孝庄帝，同尔朱世隆等人立长广王晔为帝，改年号为建明。
English: He ignored Zhu Zhaoqi and killed Emperor Xiaozhuang, and together with Zhu Shilong and others, he made Changguang Wang Qian emperor and changed the era name to Jianming.

古文：封神武为平阳郡公。
现代文：封神武为平阳郡公。
English: Fong Shenwu became the governor of Pingyang County.

古文：及费也头纥豆陵步藩入秀容，逼晋阳，兆征神武。
现代文：当费也头纥豆陵步藩侵占秀容，紧逼晋阳时，尔朱兆召唤神武。
English: When Fei also invaded and occupied Xiu Rong and Jinyang, Er Zhu Zhao summoned Shen Wu.

古文：神武将往，贺拔焉过儿请缓行以弊之。
现代文：神武准备前往，贺拔焉过儿请求不要赴命好使尔朱兆陷入疲困。
English: As Shenwu prepared to leave, He Baian pleaded with him not to go so as not to exhaust Er Zhu Zhao.

古文：神武乃往往逗遛，辞以河无桥不得渡。
现代文：神武就故意延滞逗留，还借口河上无桥没法渡过。
English: Shenwu deliberately delayed his stay, and also used the excuse that there was no bridge over the river.

古文：步藩军盛，兆败走。
现代文：步藩兵强马壮，尔朱兆大败逃跑。
English: The foot soldiers of the domain were strong and powerful, and Er Zhuzhao was defeated and fled.

古文：初，孝庄之诛尔朱荣，知其党必有逆谋，乃密敕步藩令袭其后。
现代文：当初，孝庄帝处死尔朱荣，预料到他的党徒一定会有反叛之心，就秘密诏令步藩偷袭他的后部。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaozhuang executed Er Zhu Rong, expecting that his party members would certainly have a rebellious heart, and secretly ordered the Foot Clan to attack his rear.

古文：步藩既败兆等，以兵势日盛，兆又请救于神武。神武内图兆，复虑步藩后之难除，乃与兆悉力破之。
现代文：步藩打败尔朱兆后，于是军队人数增多，力量更大，尔朱兆又向神武求救，神武暗地里想谋取尔朱兆，又考虑到步藩在后部的祸患难以消除，于是就同他配合，竭尽全力打败了步藩。
English: After the Bu clan defeated Er Zhu Zhao, the number of troops increased and their strength increased. Er Zhu Zhao then appealed to Shenwu for help. Shenwu secretly wanted to seek out Er Zhu Zhao, and considering that the evil of the Bu clan in the rear was difficult to eliminate, he cooperated with him and did his best to defeat the Bu clan.

古文：藩死，深德神武，誓为兄弟。
现代文：步藩死后，尔朱兆十分感恩戴德，两人便结拜成了兄弟。
English: After the death of Bu Han, Lzhu Zhao was very grateful, and the two became brothers.

古文：时世隆、度律、彦伯共执朝政，天光据关右，兆据并州，仲远据东郡，各拥兵为暴，天下苦之。
现代文：这时世隆、度律、彦伯共同执掌朝政。天光占据关右，尔朱兆盘踞并州，仲远领有东都，各自拥兵为暴，却害苦了老百姓。
English: At this time, Shilong, Du Lu, and Yan Bo jointly presided over the imperial government. Tian Guang occupied Guan Yu, Er Zhu Zhao occupied and annexed Shizhou, Zhongyuan controlled Dongdu, and each of them supported the soldiers to be violent, but they harmed the people.

古文：葛荣众流入并、肆者二十余万，为契胡陵暴，皆不聊生，大小二十六反，诛夷者半，犹草窃不止。
现代文：葛荣部众流亡入并、肆两地者达二十多万，却遭契胡凌辱残害，无法生活，被迫举行了大小二十六次反叛，受屠戮者过半，但他们依然处于无休止的被掠夺之中。
English: There are more than two hundred thousand people in Ge Rong's group who have been exiled to and settled in the two places, but they have been abused and brutalized by Qi Hu, unable to live, forced to hold twenty-six large and small rebellions, and more than half of them have been slaughtered, but they are still in the midst of endless plunder.

古文：兆患之，问计于神武。
现代文：尔朱兆对此十分担扰，就向神武请教处置的办法。
English: Le Zhu Zhao was very worried about this and asked Shenwu for advice on how to deal with it.

古文：神武曰： 六镇反残，不可尽杀，宜选王素腹心者私使统焉。
现代文：神武说： 六镇造反留下来的人，不能全部杀掉，应该挑选您的心腹之人悄悄地统领起来。
English: Shenwu said, "You can't kill all the people who stayed behind after the rebellion in the six towns. You should choose someone who is your confidant and lead them quietly.

古文：若有犯者，直罪其帅，则所罪者寡。 兆曰： 善，谁可行也？ 
现代文：如再造反，只向其头目问罪，那么想造反的人就减少了。 尔朱兆说： 是呀，谁可担当此项任务？ 
English: If there is another rebellion, and only its leader is accused, then the number of people who want to rebel will decrease.Er Zhu Zhao said: Yes, who can take on this task?

古文：贺拔允时在坐，请神武。
现代文：当时坐在旁边的贺拔允听说后，马上向神武请求这个差事。
English: When He Bajun, who was sitting next to him at the time, heard about it, he immediately asked Shenwu for the job.

古文：神武拳殴之，折其一齿，曰： 生平天柱时，奴辈伏处分如鹰犬，今日天下安置在王，而阿鞠泥敢诬下罔上，请杀之。 
现代文：神武向其猛击几拳，打断了他的一颗牙齿，数落说： 天柱在世时，我辈老老实实，像鹰犬一样地听使唤。那么今天的安排全在大王。你阿鞠泥胆敢诬下欺上，我请求大王杀了你！ 
English: Shenwu punched him several times, broke one of his teeth, and said: "When Tenshu was alive, we were all honest and obedient, like hawk-dogs. So today's arrangement is all up to the king. If you dare to lie and deceive, I beg the king to kill you!"

古文：兆以神武为诚，遂以委焉。
现代文：尔朱兆以为神武忠诚，就委以这项重任。
English: Lzhu Zhao believed that Shenwu was loyal and entrusted him with this important task.

古文：神武以兆醉，恐醒后或致疑贰，遂出，宣言受委统州镇兵，可集汾东受令。
现代文：神武感觉到尔朱兆喝醉了，担心他酒醒后起疑心而生反悔，马上出门，向人们宣布自己受尔朱兆之托统领本州镇兵，可以聚集汾东待命。
English: Shenwu sensed that Lr Zhuzhao was drunk, and worried that he would wake up after drinking and become suspicious and repent, he immediately went out and announced to the people that he was entrusted by Lr Zhuzhao to command the Honshu town soldiers and could gather Shandong on standby.

古文：乃建牙阳曲川，陈部分。
现代文：接着在阳曲川建立军旗，布置战阵。
English: As a result, the shogunate established the resettlement department in Yangqu River.

古文：有款军门者，绛巾袍，自称梗杨驿子，愿厕左右。
现代文：有个叩击军门的男子，头裹红巾身著红袍，自称是梗杨驿站的人，愿意服侍左右。
English: There is a man who knocks on the military gate, his head wrapped in a red scarf and dressed in a red robe, claiming to be a person from Yangshuo Station, willing to serve the left and right.

古文：访之，则以力闻，常于并州市搭杀人者，乃署为亲信。
现代文：神武问他有何特长，答曰力大无比，常在并州城里殴打那些杀人凶手，因此留他做了亲信。
English: Shenwu asked him what he was good at, and he replied that he was very strong, and he often beat up those murderers in the city of Bianzhou, so he kept him as a close friend.

古文：兵士素恶兆而乐神武，于是莫不皆至。
现代文：兵士们一向讨厌尔朱兆而喜欢神武，在这个时候纷纷前来投靠。
English: The soldiers, who had always disliked Lzhu Zhao and liked Shenwu, came to take refuge at this time.

古文：居无何，又使刘贵请兆，以并、肆频岁霜旱，降户掘黄鼠而食之，皆面无谷色，徒污人国土，请令就食山东，待温饱而处分之。兆从其议。
现代文：过了不长时间，神武再次派遣刘贵向尔朱兆提出请求，以并、肆等地连年天灾，迫使降户挖掘黄鼠作为充饥之食，所以人人面有菜色，白白玷污了人家的土地，希望让这批人前往山东谋生，等待温饱之后再作安置，尔朱兆接受了神武的建议。
English: After a short period of time, Shenwu sent Liu Gui to Er Zhuzhao again to make a request. With the consecutive years of natural disasters such as floods and landslides, the downgraded households were forced to dig weasels as food to satisfy their hunger. Therefore, everyone was ashamed, and the land of others was polluted in vain. He hoped to let this group of people go to Shandong to earn a living, wait for food and clothing, and then resettle. Er Zhuzhao accepted Shenwu's suggestion.

古文：其长史慕容绍宗谏曰： 不可，今四方扰扰，人怀异望，况高公雄略，又握大兵，将不可为。 
现代文：可是尔朱兆的长史慕容绍宗不同意，进谏说： 这样不妥吧？如今天下大乱，人人都有野心，何况高公雄才大略，又手握重兵，您将无法驾驭。 
English: However, Murong Shaosong, the chief historian of the Zhu Zhao Dynasty, disagreed. He said, "Isn't that right? If there is a big turmoil today, everyone has ambitions, not to mention that Gao Gongxiong is very talented and has a heavy army, you will not be able to control it.

古文：兆曰： 香火重誓，何所虑也。 
现代文：尔朱兆说： 我们是结拜兄弟，没有什么担忧的。 
English: Lzhu Zhao said: We are fraternal brothers, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：绍宗曰： 亲兄弟尚尔难信，何论香火！ 
现代文：绍宗说： 亲兄弟都会互相猜疑，结拜兄弟就更加难免了。 
English: Shaozong said: Brothers will be suspicious of each other, and it is even more inevitable for brothers to fight.

古文：时兆左右已受神武金，因谮绍宗与神武旧有隙，兆乃禁绍宗而催神武发。
现代文：此时尔朱兆的左右都接受过神武的贿赂，便乘机攻击绍宗与神武早有矛盾，这样尔朱兆就拘捕了绍宗，并催神武赶快上路。
English: At this time, both Zhu Zhao's right and left sides had accepted Shenwu's bribe, and they took the opportunity to attack Shaosong and Shenwu, who had long been in conflict, so Zhu Zhao arrested Shaosong and urged Shenwu to hurry up and get on the road.

古文：神武乃自晋阳出滏口。
现代文：神武从晋阳动身出了滏口。
English: Shenwu started from Jinyang and went out of Hekou.

古文：路逢尔朱荣妻北乡长公主，自洛阳来，马三百匹，尽夺易之。
现代文：途中碰到了尔朱荣寡妻乡郡长公主，长公主从洛阳带了三百匹马来，神武全部夺归己有。
English: On the way, they met the eldest princess of Er Zhu Rong's widowed county. The eldest princess brought three hundred horses from Luoyang, and all of them were taken by Shenwu.

古文：兆闻，乃释绍宗而问焉。
现代文：尔朱兆听到这个消息，马上释放绍宗，并向他请教对付神武的办法。
English: Upon hearing this news, Er Zhu Zhao immediately released Shaozong and asked him for advice on how to deal with Shenwu.

古文：绍宗曰： 犹掌握中物也。 
现代文：绍宗说： 他还是大王的掌中之物。 
English: Shaozong said: He is still in the hands of the great king.

古文：于是自追神武。至襄垣，会漳水暴长，桥坏。
现代文：尔朱兆亲自追赶神武，抵达襄垣，恰逢漳水暴涨，桥被冲坏。
English: Er Zhuzhao personally chased after Shenwu and arrived at Xiangyuan, just as the floodwaters surged and the bridge was washed away.

古文：神武隔水拜曰： 所以借公主马，非有他故，备山东盗耳。
现代文：神武在漳河对岸解释说： 我借用长公主的马匹，没有别的企图，只是为了防备山东的盗贼而已。
English: On the other side of the Li River, Shenwu explained: I borrowed the princess's horses with no other intention than to guard against thieves from Shandong.

古文：王受公主言，自来赐追，今渡河而死不辞，此众便叛。 
现代文：大王您听了公主的话，亲自追我，眼下不渡过河来狠狠给以训斥的话，兵众便生叛离之心。 
English: Great King, you have listened to the words of the princess, you have personally chased me, and if you do not cross the river right now and severely reprimand me, the soldiers will have a rebellious heart.

古文：兆自陈无此意，因轻马渡，与神武坐幕下，陈谢，遂授刀引头，使神武斫己。
现代文：尔朱兆自称没有这种想法，便骑着马渡过河来，与神武一同坐于军帐之下，道歉后，拔出刀还伸过头来，请求神武砍杀。
English: Lzhu Zhao said that he did not have such an idea, so he rode across the river on a horse and sat with Shenwu under the military account. After apologizing, he pulled out a knife and stretched his head, asking Shenwu to kill him.

古文：神武大哭曰： 自天柱薨背，贺六浑更何所仰，愿大家千万岁，以申力用。
现代文：神武号哭着说： 自从天柱遇难后，我贺六浑再也没有靠山了。我祝愿大王您千岁万岁，好让我永远为您服务。
English: Shenwu cried and said, "Since Tianzhu was killed, I no longer have any support from He Liuhun. I wish you a long life, so that I can serve you forever."

古文：今旁人构间至此，大家何忍复出此言！ 
现代文：如今有人这样挑拨离间，大王您为什么还要讲出这样的话来？ 
English: Now that someone is sowing discord in this way, Your Majesty, why would you say such a thing?

古文：兆投刀于地，遂刑白马而盟，誓为兄弟，留宿夜饮。
现代文：尔朱兆掷刀于地。于是杀白马结盟，再为兄弟。神武留尔朱兆住下，还设宴款待。
English: Zhu Zhao threw his sword to the ground. So he killed the white horse, made an alliance, and then became a brother. Shen Wu stayed with Zhu Zhao, and also set up a banquet.

古文：尉景伏壮士欲执兆，神武啮臂止之曰： 今杀之，其党必奔归聚结。
现代文：尉景事前埋伏兵士试图将其生擒。神武咬破胳膊制止说： 现在杀死他，他的部众一定要跑回去聚集兵马报复的。
English: Before the ambush, the soldiers tried to capture him. Shenwu bit off his arm to stop them and said, "Kill him now, his subordinates must run back to gather soldiers and horses to take revenge."

古文：兵饥马瘦，不可相支，若英雄崛起，则为害滋甚。
现代文：我们的士兵饥饿，战马羸弱，不可抗衡，倘若此时英雄豪杰振臂一呼，那么祸害就会更加厉害。
English: Our soldiers are starving, our horses are weak and unable to compete, and if at this time the hero hero shakes his arm, then the disaster will be even worse.

古文：不如且置之。
现代文：不如姑且让他多活几天。
English: Might as well let him live a few more days.

古文：兆虽劲捷，而凶狡无谋，不足图也。 
现代文：尔朱兆虽然力大敏捷、凶残却无谋略，不是我们的对手。 
English: Although Lzhu Zhao is powerful, agile and ferocious, he has no strategy and is not our opponent.

古文：旦日，兆归营，又召神武，神武将上马诣之，孙腾牵衣，乃止。
现代文：第二天，尔朱兆返回军营后，又召请神武，神武准备骑马前往，孙腾拉了拉他的衣服，神武就没有上道。
English: The next day, after Er Zhu Zhao returned to the military camp, he summoned Shenwu again. Shenwu was ready to go on horseback. Sun Teng pulled his clothes, and Shenwu did not go.

古文：兆隔水肆骂，驰还晋阳。
现代文：尔朱兆隔着漳水大声谩骂，之后跑回了晋阳。
English: He scolded Gao Huan across the river, and then went back to Jinyang.

古文：兆心腹念贤领降户家累别为营，神武伪与之善，观其佩刀，因取之以杀其从者，从者尽散。
现代文：尔朱兆的心腹念贤带领降户人家分别组成营伍，神武假装亲近，借口观看他的佩刀，顺势杀掉了他和几个随从，其余的侍卫吓得赶快逃走。
English: Er Zhu Zhao's confidant, Nian Xian, led the families to form separate battalions. Shenwu pretended to be close and killed him and several of his followers on the pretext of looking at his sword. The rest of the guards were so scared that they quickly fled.

古文：于是士众咸悦，倍愿附从。
现代文：因而士众都十分喜悦，更加希望跟从神武。
English: As a result, all the samurai were very happy and even more eager to follow Shintoku.

古文：初，魏真君内学者奏言上党有天子气，云在壶关大王山。
现代文：当初，魏真君的侍从文人上书，说上党有天子气，位居壶关大王山。
English: At first, Wei Zhenjun's attendant literati wrote a letter, saying that the upper party had the spirit of a son of heaven, ranking in the Kuguan Great King Mountain.

古文：太武帝于是南巡以厌当之，累石为三封，斩其北凤凰山，以毁其形。
现代文：太武帝南巡抵制压迫这种天子气，垒积石块成为三堆，截断北侧的凤凰山，破坏了它的形体。
English: Emperor Taibu's southern tour resisted the oppression of this heavenly son, and the stone blocks became three piles, cutting off the north side of the Phoenix Mountain and destroying its shape.

古文：后上党人居晋阳者，号上党坊，神武实居之。
现代文：后来定居于晋阳的上党人，称自己的住地叫 上党坊 ，事实上，神武就住在这里。
English: Later, Shangtang people who settled in Jinyang called their place of residence Shangtangfang. In fact, Shenwu lived here.

古文：及是行，舍大王山六旬而进。
现代文：等到行进到大王山，驻扎了六十多天才开拔。
English: They waited until they had marched to Mount Taiwang, where they were stationed for more than sixty days before they left.

古文：将出滏口，倍加约束，纤毫之物，不听侵犯。
现代文：快出滏口时，更是注意约束部众，力争丝毫不犯。
English: When coming out of the gate, it is even more important to pay attention to the discipline of the subordinates, and strive to commit no offense.

古文：将过麦地，神武辄步牵马。
现代文：从麦地边走过，神武则步行牵马。
English: Walking from the edge of the wheat field, Jinwu leads the horse on foot.

古文：远近闻之，皆称高仪同将兵整肃，归心焉。
现代文：远近的民众听说这些事后，都称赞高仪同治兵严整，更是心悦诚服地归顺了过来。
English: After hearing these things, the people near and far all praised Gao Yi for his strict military discipline, and even more sincerely submitted to him.

古文：遂前行，屯邺，求粮相州刺史刘诞，诞不供。有军营租米，神武自取之。
现代文：继续前进，屯驻邺地，向相州刺史刘诞借粮，诞不给，神武就将车营租米夺了过来。
English: They continued to move forward, stationed themselves in Handan, and borrowed grain from Liu Xing, the governor of Xiangzhou, but when Liu Xing refused to give it to them, Shenwu took over the camp's rent rice.

古文：魏普泰元年二月，神武自军次信都，高乾、封隆之开门以待，遂据冀州。
现代文：魏普泰元年二月，神武率军驻扎信都，高乾、封隆之大开城门等候着，很快就占领了冀州。
English: In February of the first year of Weiputai, Shenwu led the army stationed in Xindu, Gaoqian and Fenlong waited for the gate to be opened, and soon occupied Jizhou.

古文：是月，尔朱度律废元晔而立节闵帝，欲羁縻神武。
现代文：本月，尔朱度律废元晔立节闵为皇帝，想羁縻住神武。
English: This month, Er Zhu Du Rui became the emperor, and he wanted to control Shenwu.

古文：三月，乃白节闵帝，封神武为渤海王，征使入觐。
现代文：三月，请求节闵帝封神武为渤海王，征召使其入朝觐见。
English: In March, he asked the Emperor to appoint Shenwu as the king of the Bohai Sea and to summon him to the imperial court.

古文：神武辞。
现代文：神武推辞未去。
English: Shenwu's refusal has not gone away.

古文：四月癸巳，又加授东道大行台、第一镇人酋长。
现代文：四月，又加授神武东道大行台、第一镇人酋长。
English: In April, he was also awarded the title of the First Townspeople Chief of Jinwu Host Grand Marching Band.

古文：庞苍鹰自太原来奔，神武以为行台郎，寻以为安州刺史。
现代文：庞苍鹰从太原跑来投奔，神武任命他做行台郎，不久升任安州刺史。
English: Pang Cang Ying ran from Taiyuan to join the army. Shenwu appointed him as a hawker, and he was soon promoted to the post of Anzhou chief historian.

古文：神武自向山东，养士缮甲，禁侵掠，百姓归心。
现代文：神武率众挺进山东，养育兵士，修理武器，禁止侵占掠夺，更赢得了百姓的归附。
English: Shenwu led the people to advance into Shandong, raised soldiers, repaired weapons, prohibited encroachment and plunder, and won the people's attachment.

古文：乃诈为书，言尔朱兆将以六镇人配契胡为部曲，众皆愁怨。
现代文：神武伪造书信，说尔朱兆拟将六镇人分配给契胡为部曲，因此使这些人十分愁苦怨恨。
English: Shenwu forged a letter, saying that Er Zhu Zhao intended to assign the six townsmen to Che Hu as a unit, thus making these people very sad and resentful.

古文：又为并州符，征兵讨步落稽。
现代文：又制成并州符节，征兵讨伐步落稽。
English: It was also made into a festival of merging state symbols, and the conscription campaign was completed.

古文：发万人，将遣之，孙腾、尉景为请留五日，如此者再。
现代文：发动万人，准备派遣出去，孙腾、尉景假意请求延缓五天动身，这样反复了几次。
English: After mobilizing ten thousand people and preparing to send them out, Sun Teng and Fei Jing made a request to delay the departure for five days, and this was repeated several times.

古文：神武亲送之郊，雪涕执别，人皆号恸，哭声动地。
现代文：神武亲自送到郊外，流着泪向六镇人道别，人们都十分悲痛，哭声震天。
English: Shenwu himself was sent to the suburbs, and bade farewell to the six towns in tears. People were very sad, and their cries shook the heavens.

古文：神武乃喻之曰： 与尔俱失乡客，义同一家，不意在上乃尔征召。
现代文：神武开导说： 我和你们一样，同是流离失所之人，正因为如此，我们就是一家人，想不到大王突然有此征召。
English: Shenwu Kaidou said, "Like you, I am also a displaced person. Because of this, we are a family. I couldn't imagine that the king would suddenly have this conscription.

古文：直向西已当死，后军期又当死，配国人又当死，奈何！ 
现代文：一直向西吧，按法令规定该杀；延迟军期吧，也是被杀；分配给契胡人吧，还是死，怎么办啦？ 
English: Go all the way to the west and you will be killed according to the law; postpone your military service and you will be killed; be assigned to the Chechens or die, what should you do?

古文：众曰： 唯有反耳！ 
现代文：六镇人说： 只有反了。 
English: The crowd said in unison: There can only be a revolt!

古文：神武曰： 反是急计，须推一人为主。 
现代文：神武说： 造反是最好的办法，但应推举一人主持。 
English: Shenwu said: Rebellion is the best way, but one person should be elected to preside over it.

古文：众愿奉神武。
现代文：众人都愿意听从神武指挥。
English: Everyone is willing to follow the divine command.

古文：神武曰： 尔乡里难制，不见葛荣乎？
现代文：神武又说： 我们乡下人难以约束，葛荣的下场大家看到过吧？
English: Shenwu also said, "We country people are difficult to control. Have you all seen what happened to Ge Rong?

古文：虽百万众，无刑法，终自灰灭。
现代文：虽拥众百万，无条令法律，结果便是自取灭亡。
English: Although it has millions of supporters, there is no law, and the result is self-destruction.

古文：今以吾为主，当与前异，不得欺汉儿，不得犯军令，生死任吾则可，不尔不能为，取笑天下。 
现代文：眼下大家推我为主，应当与以前有所区别，即不得欺侮汉人，不得触犯军令，死生均听任我安排才行，否则，就会被天下人耻笑。 
English: Right now, everyone is pushing me as the leader, and it should be different from before, that is, they must not bully Han people, they must not violate military orders, and they must leave everything to me. Otherwise, they will be ridiculed by the world.

古文：众皆顿颡，死生唯命。
现代文：众皆诺诺，死生听命。
English: Everyone is obedient, obeying orders.

古文：神武曰若不得已。明日，椎牛飨士，喻以讨尔朱之意。
现代文：神武佯装无可奈何，次日，杀牛犒劳士卒，宣布攻讨尔朱兆的用意。
English: Unable to resist, the next day, Shenwu declared his intention to attack Juzhao.

古文：封隆之进曰： 千载一时，普天幸甚。 
现代文：封隆之进言说： 真是千载一时的好机会，天下所有人的大幸。 
English: Feng Longzhi said: This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a great opportunity for everyone in the world.

古文：神武曰： 讨贼，大顺也；拯时，大业也。
现代文：神武回答说： 讨伐盗贼，大顺民心；拯救时局，大功伟业。
English: Shenwu replied, "Fighting against thieves is of great benefit to the people; saving the situation is a great achievement.

古文：吾虽不武，以死继之，何敢让焉！ 
现代文：我虽不武，以死继之，哪敢推辞呢。 
English: Though I do not fight, I will follow it up with death. How can I refuse?

古文：六月庚子，建义于信都，尚未显背尔朱氏。
现代文：六月，在信都举起义旗，但还没有公开背叛尔朱氏。
English: In June, he raised the banner of righteousness in Xindu, but he has not yet openly betrayed the Lzhu clan.

古文：及李元忠与高乾平殷州，斩尔朱羽生首来谒，神武抚膺曰： 今日反决矣。 
现代文：到李元忠与高乾平定殷州，斩尔朱羽生头颅前来拜谒，神武捶胸道： 今天反叛定了！ 
English: When Li Yuanzhong and Gao Qian conquered Yinzhou and cut off Zhu Yansheng's head, they came to pay homage. Shenwu said, "Today, the rebellion is decided!"

古文：乃以元忠为殷州刺史。
现代文：于是便委元忠为殷州刺史。
English: As a result, Yuan Zhong was appointed to write the history of Yinzhou.

古文：是时兵威既振，乃抗表罪状尔朱氏。世隆等秘表不通。
现代文：此时，军力猛增，乃上书揭发尔朱氏罪行，但世隆等人扣压上书没有向节闵帝禀告。
English: At this time, the military strength soared, and a letter was sent to denounce the crimes of the Zhu clan, but Shilong and others withheld the letter and did not inform Emperor Jiechi.

古文：八月，尔朱兆攻陷殷州，李元忠来奔。
现代文：八月，尔朱兆攻克殷州，李元忠逃到了神武驻地。
English: In August, Er Zhu Zhao conquered Yinzhou, and Li Yuanzhong fled to the Shenwu garrison.

古文：孙腾以为朝廷隔绝，不权立天子，则众望无所系。
现代文：孙腾认为朝廷隔绝，不临时立一天子，那么众望就无所归依。
English: Sun Teng believed that if the imperial court was isolated and did not set up a one-day son, then the public would have nowhere to turn.

古文：十月壬寅，奉章武王融子渤海太守朗为皇帝，年号中兴，是为废帝。
现代文：十月，奉章武王融之子渤海太守朗为皇帝，年号中兴，这便是魏朝的废帝。
English: In October, Zhangwu Wang Rong's son, Erhai Taizhulang, was proclaimed emperor, and the year was named Zhongxing. This was the dethronement of the emperor of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：时度律、仲远军次阳平，尔朱兆会之。
现代文：时度律、仲远军队驻扎在阳平，尔朱兆与他们见了面。
English: According to the laws of time and distance, Zhongyuan's army was stationed in Yangping, and Er Zhuzhao met with them.

古文：神武用窦泰策，纵反间，度律、仲远不战而还。神武乃败兆于广阿。
现代文：神武采用窦泰计策，实行反间，度律、仲远不战而返，神武便在广阿打败了尔朱兆。
English: Shenwu adopted Dou Tai's stratagem, implemented the anti-intervention, punishment, and distancing without a fight, and Shenwu defeated Lzhu Zhao in Guang'a.

古文：十一月，攻邺，相州刺史刘诞婴城固守。神武起土山，为地道，往往建大柱，一时焚之，城陷入地。
现代文：十一月，进攻邺城，相州刺史刘诞闭城固守，神武命令兵士堆起土山，挖掘地道，并到处立起大木柱，之后一齐点火焚烧这些柱子，城陷到了地下。
English: In November, during the attack on Lucheng, Liu Xizhong, the governor of Xiangzhou, ordered the soldiers to pile up the mounds of earth, dig tunnels, and erect large wooden pillars everywhere. After that, they set fire to all these pillars, and the city fell to the ground.

古文：麻祥时为汤阴令，神武呼之曰： 麻都！ 祥惭而逃。
现代文：这时麻祥为汤阴县令，神武喊他 麻都 ，麻祥羞愧，逃走了。
English: At this time, Ma Xiang was the Tangyin County magistrate. Shenwu called him "Madu." Ashamed, Ma Xiang fled.

古文：永熙元年正月壬午，拔邺城，据之。
现代文：永熙元年正月，攻克邺城，并占领了它。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yongxi, he attacked and occupied Shicheng.

古文：废帝进神武大丞相、柱国大将军、太师。
现代文：废帝晋升神武为大丞相、柱国大将军、太师。
English: The deposed emperor promoted Shenwu to grand chancellor, general of the pillar country, and grand master.

古文：是时青州建义，大都督崔灵珍、大都督耿翔皆遣使归附。行汾州事刘贵弃城来降。
现代文：与此同时，青州树起义旗的大都督崔灵珍、大都督耿翔均派遣使者请求归附，行汾州刺史事刘贵弃城前来投降。
English: At the same time, the Grand Governor of Qingzhou Tree Uprising, Cui Lingzhen, and the Grand Governor of Qingzhou Tree Uprising, Geng Xiang, both sent envoys to request annexation, and Liu Guizhou abandoned the city to surrender.

古文：闰三月，尔朱天光自长安、兆自并州、度律自洛阳、仲远自东郡同会邺，众号二十万，挟洹水而军，节闵以长孙承业为大行台总督焉。
现代文：闰三月，尔朱天光从长安，尔朱兆由并州，度律从洛阳，仲远由东都出发会合邺城，号称兵众二十万，依洹水布置战阵，节闵帝委派长孙承业为大行台总督其事。
English: In leap March, Lzhu Tianguang from Chang'an, Lzhu Zhaoyuan from Nianzhou, DuLu from Luoyang, and Zhongyuan from Dongdu set off for a meeting in Lucheng, boasting 200,000 soldiers and arranging battle lines along the Yunnan River. The Imperial Committee of the Festival of Dynasties appointed the eldest grandson, Chengye, as the governor of Dagangdai.

古文：神武令封隆之守邺，自出顿紫陌。
现代文：神武命令封隆之固守邺城，自己率兵离邺屯驻紫陌。
English: Shenwu ordered Fenglong to hold fast to Lucheng, and led his own troops to leave Lucheng and stay in Zhimo.

古文：时马不满二千，步兵不至三万，众寡不敌。
现代文：此时神武拥有的战马不足二千，步兵不满三万，众寡悬殊。
English: At this time, Shenwu had less than two thousand horses and less than thirty thousand foot soldiers.

古文：乃于韩陵为圆阵，连牛驴以塞归道，于是将士皆有死志，四面赴击之。
现代文：神武在韩陵布置圆形军阵，连结牛驴阻塞了归路，使得将士都有了决一死战的斗志，四面八方攻打敌人。
English: Shenwu arranged a circular army formation in Hanling, and linked the oxen and donkeys to block the way back, so that the soldiers had the fighting spirit to fight to the death, and attacked the enemy in all directions.

古文：尔朱兆责神武以背己，神武曰： 本戮力者，共辅王室，今帝何在？ 
现代文：尔朱兆谴责神武叛逆。神武称： 戮力同心，为的是共同辅佐王室，如今皇帝在哪？ 
English: Zhu Zhao denounced Shenwu's rebellion. Shenwu said: "We have joined forces to jointly support the royal family. Where is the emperor now?"

古文：兆曰： 永安枉害天柱，我报仇耳。 
现代文：尔朱兆答： 永安皇帝冤杀天柱，我只不过是替他报仇罢了。 
English: Er Hao Zhao said: Xiaozhuangdi unjustly killed General Tianzhu, I just wanted to take revenge.

古文：神武曰： 我昔日亲闻天柱计，汝在户前立，岂得言不反邪？
现代文：神武道： 我往昔亲耳聆听了天柱的大计，当时你就站在门前，难道能讲不反的话吗？
English: Shenmudo: In the past, I listened to Tenshu's grand plan with my own ears. At that time, you were standing in front of the door. Can you say something that is not contradictory?

古文：且以君杀臣，何报之有？今日义绝矣。 
现代文：再说君杀臣，有何仇可报，今天我们就断绝关系吧。 
English: Besides, if you kill a minister, what vengeance can you expect? Let's break off relations today.

古文：乃合战，大败之。
现代文：言毕，双方交战，神武大胜。
English: After that, the two sides fought, and Shenwu won a great victory.

古文：尔朱兆对慕容绍宗叩心曰： 不用公言，以至于此！ 
现代文：尔朱兆对着慕容绍宗拍打着胸脯说： 我不听您的话，终于得到了如此下场。 
English: To Murong Shaosong, Er Zhuzhao beat his chest and said, "I didn't listen to you, and this is how it ended up.

古文：将轻走。
现代文：说着就想轻装逃跑。
English: As he spoke, he wanted to flee lightly.

古文：绍宗反旗鸣角，收聚散卒，成军容而西上。
现代文：绍宗将前军旗帜移后，吹响鼓角，收聚残兵，组成军队的阵势向西撤去。
English: After Shaozong moved the flags of the former army, he blew the horns of the drums, gathered the remnants of the army, and withdrew the army to the west.

古文：高季式以七骑追奔，度野马岗，与兆遇。
现代文：高季式率七骑追击，翻过野马岗，碰到了尔朱兆。
English: The high-season rate of seven-horse pursuit, over the Mustang Hill, met with Lzhu Zhao.

古文：高昂望之不见，哭曰： 丧吾弟矣！ 
现代文：高昂在很高的地方都看不到季式，哭泣着说： 我失掉了亲弟弟啦！ 
English: Gao'ang, who could not see Ji Shifu from a great height, wept and said, "I have lost my own brother!"

古文：夜久，季式还，血满袖。
现代文：夜很深了，季式才回来，血流满衣。
English: It was late in the evening when Ji came back, covered in blood.

古文：斛斯椿倍道先据河桥。
现代文：斛斯椿兼程而行先占据了河桥。
English: The river bridge was occupied by the troops marching to and from Jinshchiming.

古文：初，普泰元年十月，岁星、荧惑、镇星、太白聚于觜，参色甚明。
现代文：当初，即普泰元年十月，岁星、荧惑、镇星、太白相聚于觜，亮灿灿的。
English: At the beginning, that is, in October of the first year of Putai, the year star, the fluorescence star, the town star, and the white star gathered in the cocoon, shining brightly.

古文：太史占云当有王者兴。
现代文：太史占卜后说： 这是王者兴起之兆。 
English: After divination, Taishi said, "This is a sign of the rise of a king."

古文：是时神武起于信都，至是而破兆等。
现代文：此时神武从信都起军，到这个时候便打败了尔朱兆等部。
English: At this time, Shenwu from Xindu raised an army, and by this time he had defeated Er Zhuzhao and other units.

古文：四月，斛斯椿执天光、度律送洛阳。
现代文：四月，斛斯椿捉住天光、度律解送到了神武那里。
English: In April, Jing Shizhu captured Tian Guang and sent him to Shenwu.

古文：长孙承业遣都督贾显智、张欢入洛阳，执世隆、彦伯斩之。
现代文：长孙承业派遣都督贾显智、张欢入洛阳，活捉了世隆、彦伯，并开刀问斩。
English: Chengye's eldest grandson dispatched the governor Jia Xianzhi and Zhang Huan to Luoyang, captured Shilong and Yanbo alive, and beheaded them with a sword.

古文：兆奔并州。
现代文：尔朱兆逃到并州。
English: Lzhu Zhao fled to Wenzhou.

古文：仲远奔梁州，遂死焉。
现代文：仲远跑往梁州，很快就死在了这里。
English: He ran to Liangzhou and soon died there.

古文：时凶蠹既除，朝廷庆悦。
现代文：是时凶暴已除，朝廷喜悦。
English: By that time, the violence had subsided, to the delight of the imperial court.

古文：初，未战之前月，章武人张绍夜中忽被数骑将逾城，至一大将军前，敕绍为军导向邺，云佐受命者除残贼。
现代文：当初战事未起的前一个月，章武人张绍半夜里突然被几位骑士挟持翻过城墙，来到一大将军面前。大将军命令张绍做向导，领兵往邺，为的是辅佐朝廷除去残贼。
English: One month before the outbreak of the war, Zhang Shao, a military commander, was suddenly taken hostage by several knights and forced to climb over the city wall in the middle of the night to come before a great general. The great general ordered Zhang Shao to act as a guide and lead the troops to Lushan in order to assist the court in removing the remnants of the enemy.

古文：绍回视之，兵不测，整疾无声。
现代文：张绍回过头来看时，士卒极多，但却异常整肃没有一点声响。
English: When Zhang Shao looked back, there were a lot of soldiers, but there was no sound at all.

古文：将至邺，乃放焉。
现代文：快到邺城了，才放他回家。
English: It was almost time to get to Penang before they let him go home.

古文：及战之日，尔朱氏军人见阵外士马四合，盖神助也。
现代文：到交战这天，尔朱氏军人见军阵外神武的骑兵步卒四面逼近，大概是得到了天神的帮助。
English: On the day of the battle, the soldiers of the Erju clan saw the divine cavalry approaching from all directions, probably with the help of the gods.

古文：既而神武至洛阳，废节闵及中兴主而立孝武。
现代文：紧接着神武就进入了洛阳，废掉节闵帝和中兴主而立孝武。
English: Immediately after that, Shenwu entered Luoyang, abolishing the emperor and reviving the principle of filial piety.

古文：孝武既即位，授神武大丞相、天柱大将军、太师、世袭定州刺史，增封并前十五万户。
现代文：孝武即位，授神武大丞相、天柱大将军、太师、世袭定州刺史，增加封地连前累计十五万户。
English: Xiaowu ascended the throne, bestowed the titles of Shenwu Grand Minister, Tianzhu Grand General, Grand Master, and Hereditary Prince of Dingzhou, and increased the number of fiefs to a total of 150,000 households.

古文：神武辞天柱，减户五万。
现代文：神武不接受天柱大将军之职，还请求减少五万封户。
English: Shenwu did not accept the post of Tianzhu General, and also requested a reduction of fifty thousand households.

古文：壬辰，还邺，魏帝饯于乾脯山，执手而别。
现代文：过了几天，还邺，魏帝在乾脯山摆设宴席，同神武手拉手相互道别。
English: A few days later, the Emperor Wei held a banquet in Mount Qianlong and bade farewell to the god, hand in hand.

古文：七月壬寅，神武帅师北伐尔朱兆。
现代文：七月，神武率部北伐尔朱兆。
English: In July, Shenwu led the Northern War against Zhu Zhao.

古文：封隆之言： 侍中斛斯椿、贺拔胜、贾显智等往事尔朱，普皆反噬，今在京师，宠任，必构祸隙。 
现代文：封隆之说： 侍中斛斯椿、贺拔胜、贾显智等人以前服侍尔朱氏，都是忘恩负义之徒，现在住在京城，受宠遇，一定会制造事端的。 
English: Feng Longzhi said: The chamberlains, such as Gongs Tzin, He Baxing, and Jia Xianzhi, who previously served the Lzhu clan, were all ungrateful. Now they live in Beijing. If they are favored, they are sure to cause trouble.

古文：神武深以为然，乃归天光、度律于京师，斩之。
现代文：神武很是赞同这一看法，押解天光、度律来京师后，就处死了他们。
English: Shenwu very much agreed with this view. After escorting Tian Guang and Du Li to Beijing, he executed them.

古文：遂自滏口入。
现代文：于是神武从滏口进入。
English: As a result, Shenwu entered through the gate.

古文：尔朱兆大掠晋阳，北保秀容。并州平。
现代文：尔朱兆大肆抢掠晋阳，北保秀容，平定并州。
English: Le Zhu Zhao plundered and pillaged Jinyang, Bei Bao Xiu Rong, and subdued and annexed the prefecture.

古文：神武以晋阳四塞，乃建大丞相府而定居焉。
现代文：神武认为晋阳四周阻塞，就将大丞相府安置到了这里。
English: Shenwu thought that the area around Jinyang was congested, so he moved the Prime Minister's Office here.

古文：尔朱兆既至秀容，分兵守险，出入寇抄。
现代文：尔朱兆已经到了秀容，分兵把守险要之处，时常派兵出去抢劫骚扰。
English: Lzhu Zhao has arrived at Xiu Rong, and the detachment of soldiers has guarded the important places, often sending soldiers out to rob and harass.

古文：神武扬声讨之，师出止者数四，兆意怠。
现代文：神武公开宣言讨伐，却是干打雷不下雨，因此尔朱兆便放松了警惕。
English: Shenwu openly declared a crusade, but it was all talk and no action, so Er Zhu Zhao relaxed his vigilance.

古文：神武揣其岁首当宴会，遣窦泰以精骑驰之，一日一夜行三百里，神武以大军继之。
现代文：神武估摸到新年时尔朱兆要宴会，就派遣窦泰率领最精锐的骑兵急奔秀容，一天一夜跑了三百多里，接着神武又派出主力紧随其后。
English: Shenwu guessed that Zhu Zhao would have a banquet on New Year's Day, so he sent Dou Tai to lead the most elite cavalry to rush to show off, running more than three hundred miles a day and night, and then Shenwu sent the main force to follow.

古文：二年正月，窦泰奄至尔朱兆庭。
现代文：二年正月，窦泰悄悄地进到了尔朱兆的庭院之中。
English: In the first month of the second year, Dou Tai quietly entered the courtyard of Er Zhu Zhao.

古文：军人因宴休惰，忽见泰军，惊走。追破之于赤洪岭。
现代文：尔朱兆的兵士由于大吃猛喝十分庸懒，猛然看到窦泰的骑兵，都惊慌而逃，追赶到赤洪岭，打垮了他们。
English: The soldiers of Lzhu Zhao were very lazy due to heavy eating and drinking. When they suddenly saw Dou Tai's cavalry, they all panicked and fled. They chased them to Chihongling and defeated them.

古文：兆自缢，神武亲临厚葬之。
现代文：尔朱兆上吊自杀，神武亲临丧场，用厚礼安葬。
English: Er Zhu Zhao hanged himself, and Shenwu personally attended the funeral and buried him with a heavy tribute.

古文：慕容绍宗以尔朱荣妻子及余众自保乌突城，降，神武以义故，待之甚厚。
现代文：慕容绍宗带着尔朱荣的妻、子和剩余的部众固守乌突城，投降后，神武认为他有义，待其十分厚重。
English: Murong Shaosong, together with Er Zhurong's wife, son, and the rest of his retainers, held fast to Wutu City. After surrendering, Shenwu considered him to be righteous and treated him very generously.

古文：神武之入洛也，尔朱仲远部下都督桥宁、张子期自滑台归命，神武以其助乱，且数反覆，皆斩之。
现代文：神武占据洛阳后，尔朱仲远部下都督桥宁、张子期从滑台赶来归附，神武认为他们助纣为虐，而且反复无常，就杀掉了他们。
English: After Shenwu occupied Luoyang, Er Zhu Zhongyuan's distant subordinates, the governors Qiaoning and Zhang Ziqi, came from the slide to join him. Shenwu thought that they were helping and abusing, and they were capricious, so he killed them.

古文：斛斯椿由是内不自安，乃与南阳王宝炬及武卫将军元毗、魏光、王思政构神武于魏帝。
现代文：斛斯椿因此内心恐惧，就与南阳王宝炬及武卫将军元毗、魏光、王思政在魏帝面前诬陷神武。
English: Because of this, his heart was afraid, so he slandered Shenwu in front of Emperor Wei together with Nanyang Wang Baotong and Wuwei generals Yuan Bei, Wei Guang and Wang Sizheng.

古文：舍人元士弼又奏神武受敕大不敬。
现代文：舍人元士弼又奏报神武接受诏书时极不恭敬。
English: However, Yuan Shizhen also reported that Shenwu was extremely disrespectful when he accepted the edict.

古文：故魏帝心贰于贺拔岳。
现代文：先前魏帝对贺拔岳有疑心。
English: Previously, Emperor Wei was suspicious of He Batur.

古文：初，孝明之时，洛下以两拔相击，谣言曰： 铜拔打铁拔，元家世将末。 
现代文：孝明帝时，洛阳城中两拔互相搏击，谣言说： 铜拔打铁拔，元家将败亡。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaoming, the two factions in Luoyang City fought against each other. Rumors said, "If the copper faction beats the iron faction, the Yuan faction will be defeated."

古文：好事者以二拔谓拓拔、贺拔，言俱将衰败之兆。
现代文：好事者附会二拔为拓拔、贺拔，讲的是这两家都即将衰败的征兆。
English: The good thing is that the second plucking is a plucking and a plucking, which is a sign that both of them are about to decline.

古文：时司空高乾密启神武，言魏帝之贰，神武封呈。
现代文：此时司空高乾密函告知神武，称魏帝贰心，神武就将此密信上呈。
English: At this time, Siku Gaoqian informed Shenwu in a confidential letter that Emperor Wei had changed his mind, and Shenwu presented this confidential letter to the emperor.

古文：魏帝杀之，又遣东徐州刺史潘绍业密敕长乐太守庞苍鹰令杀其弟昂。
现代文：魏帝就杀了高乾，又遣东徐州刺史潘绍业密令长乐太守庞苍鹰杀掉高乾的弟弟昂。
English: Emperor Wei then killed Gao Qian, and sent the East Xuzhou Grand Vizier Pan Shaoye to secretly order the Changle Emperor to kill Gao Qian's younger brother, An.

古文：昂先闻其兄死，以槊刺柱，伏壮士执绍业于路，得敕书于袍领，来奔。
现代文：昂早就听到兄遇害的消息，用长矛刺柱，在路旁埋伏壮士活捉了潘绍业，并从其身上搜到了魏帝的敕书，然后前来投奔神武。
English: Long before Ang heard the news of his brother's murder, he stabbed a pillar with a spear, and the roadside ambush captured Pan Shaoye alive, and found Emperor Wei's imperial edict from his body, and then came to join Shenwu.

古文：神武抱其首，哭曰： 天子枉害司空！ 
现代文：神武抱着高乾的头颅，哭着说： 天子冤枉杀了我们的司空！ 
English: Shenwu cradled Gao Gan's head and cried, "Heaven's Son has unjustly killed our Sifu!"

古文：遽使以白武幡劳其家属。
现代文：马上让人用白武幡安慰其家属。
English: Immediately let someone use the white flag to comfort their families.

古文：时乾次弟慎在光州，为政严猛，又从部下取纳，魏帝使代之。
现代文：这时高乾的另一个弟弟高慎在光州，为政严猛，又纵容部下巧取豪夺，魏帝撤了他的职。
English: At this time, Gao Qian's other brother, Gao Sheng, was in Gwangju. He was a strict politician who allowed his subordinates to take advantage of him. Emperor Wei removed him from his post.

古文：慎闻难，将奔梁。
现代文：高慎听到这不好的消息，打算逃亡梁州。
English: When Gao Shen heard the bad news, he planned to flee to Liangzhou.

古文：其属曰： 公家勋重，必不兄弟相及。 
现代文：其部将劝慰道： 您有大功于国，不一定受株连。 
English: His subordinate will offer consolation: You have made a great contribution to the country, you don't have to be punished.

古文：乃弊衣推鹿车归渤海。
现代文：高慎就穿着破衣推着小车回到渤海。
English: Gao Sheng returned to Bohai wearing tattered clothes and pushing a cart.

古文：逢使者，亦来奔。
现代文：路上遇到使者，就跟着投奔了神武。
English: Encountering an envoy on the road, he followed the messenger to Shenwu.

古文：于是魏帝与神武隙矣。
现代文：于是魏帝与神武有了隔阂。
English: As a result, Emperor Wei became estranged from Shenwu.

古文：阿至罗虏正光以前常称藩，自魏朝多事，皆叛。
现代文：阿至罗人正光年前常对魏称臣，自从朝廷多事，都叛变了。
English: A Zhi Luo people used to call themselves Wei's vassals just a few years ago, but since there have been many troubles in the imperial court, they have all mutinied.

古文：神武遣使招纳，便附款。
现代文：神武派遣使者招纳，他们就归顺了。
English: The gods sent messengers to recruit them, and they submitted.

古文：先是，诏以寇贼平，罢行台。
现代文：先前，魏帝诏令平定贼寇后，罢除行台。
English: Previously, after the Wei Emperor issued the edict to quell the banditry, he abolished the guild.

古文：至是，以殊俗归降，复授神武大行台，随机处分。
现代文：到那个时候，异族纷纷归附，又授神武大行台，给予相机处事的权力。
English: By that time, the foreign tribes had joined in, and they also granted Shenwu Dajangdai to give the camera the power to do things.

古文：神武常赉其粟帛，议者以为徒费无益，神武不从，抚慰如初。
现代文：神武送给异族人粮食衣服，旁人认为这是浪费，得不到益处，神武不听，一如既往地进行安抚。
English: Shenwu sent food and clothing to the foreigners, but others thought that this was a waste and would not be beneficial. Shenwu did not listen and continued to appease as before.

古文：其酋帅吐陈等感恩，皆从指麾，救曹泥，取万俟受洛干，大收其用。
现代文：酋帅吐陈等人感恩不尽，都愿意听从指挥，救曹泥，取万俟受洛干，起了极大作用。
English: Superintendent Tu Chen and others are grateful beyond measure. They are willing to follow orders, save Cao Di, take Wan Xuan and accept Luo Gan, which has played a great role.

古文：河西费也头虏纥豆陵伊利居河池，恃险拥众，神武遣长史侯景屡招不从。
现代文：河西费也头人纥豆陵伊利盘踞于河池，拥众恃险，神武虽多次派遣长史侯景招附，但他却不顺从。
English: Eri, the leader of the Feiyatou people in the west of the river, was entrenched in Hechi and supported the crowd. Although Shenwu repeatedly dispatched the chief historian Houjing to invite him, he did not obey.

