古文：谢朏弟子览谢朏，字敬冲，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：谢肶，字敬冲，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Xie Yao, Zi Jing Chong, Chen Gu Yang Xia Ren.

古文：祖弘微，宋太常卿，父庄，右光禄大夫，并有名前代。
现代文：祖父弘微，宋代的太常卿，父亲谢庄，右光禄大夫，两人在前代都很有名。
English: Grandfather Hong Wei, Song Dynasty's Tai Changqing, father Xie Zhuang, Doctor Uguanglu, both were famous in the previous generation.

古文：朏幼聪慧，庄器之，常置左右。
现代文：谢绌小时候聪明慧敏，谢庄很看重他，常常把他带在身边。
English: When Xie Jun was a child, he was clever and sensitive. Xie Zhuang valued him very much and often took him with him.

古文：年十岁，能属文。
现代文：他十岁就能写文章。
English: He could write articles at the age of ten.

古文：庄游土山赋诗，使朏命篇，朏揽笔便就。
现代文：谢庄在土山游玩赋诗，让谢肋命题，谢肶提起笔就写好了。
English: Xie Zhuang played fuxi in Tsuchiyama, and let Xie Li pose the question, and Xie Yao picked up the pen to write it.

古文：琅邪王景文谓庄曰： 贤子足称神童，复为后来特达。 
现代文：琅邪的王景文对谢庄说： 你儿子足以称为神童，更会成为后人中特别有出息的人。 
English: Wang Jingwen, the evil-doer, said to Xie Zhuang: Your son is enough to be called a prodigy, and will become a particularly promising person in the future.

古文：庄笑，因抚朏背曰： 真吾家千金。 
现代文：谢庄笑了，就轻拍着谢肋的背说： 你真是我们家的宝贝。 
English: Xie Zhuang smiled, patted Xie Li on the back and said, "You really are the darling of our family."

古文：孝武帝游姑孰，敕庄携朏从驾，诏使为《洞井赞》，于坐奏之。
现代文：孝武帝在姑孰游玩，敕令谢庄带谢绌跟随车驾出行，下诏令让谢础作《洞井赞》，在坐处就将《洞井赞》奏上。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was on a tour of Guzheng. He ordered Xie Zhuang and Xie Yao to travel with him by car. He issued a decree that Xie should compose "Dongjing Zhan" and play "Dongjing Zhan" at his seat.

古文：帝曰： 虽小，奇童也。 
现代文：孝武帝说： 他虽然年纪小，却是个神童。 
English: Xiaowu Di said: Although he is young, he is a child prodigy.

古文：起家抚军法曹行参军，迁太子舍人，以父忧去职。
现代文：谢肋初仕任抚军法曹行参军，升迁为太子舍人，因父亲去世而离职。
English: Xie Li initially served as a military legal officer, joined the army, was promoted to the position of crown prince, and left the position due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，复为舍人，历中书郎，卫将军袁粲长史。
现代文：服完丧事，又做舍人，历任中书郎，卫将军袁粲的长史。
English: After serving the funeral, he also became a layman, a long history of successive Chushiro, Wei General Yuan Qi.

古文：粲性简峻，罕通宾客，时人方之李膺。
现代文：袁粲生性简慢严厉，极少交往宾客，当时的人们将他舆李膺类比。
English: Yuan Shansheng's nature was simple, slow and severe, and he rarely interacted with guests. People at the time compared him to a pigeon.

古文：朏谒既退，粲曰： 谢令不死。 
现代文：谢肋拜见他已退下，袁粲说道： 这是谢令不死啊。 
English: When Xie Li Bai saw that he had retreated, Yuan Qi said: This is Xie Ling's immortality.

古文：寻迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久调迁为给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to be a waiter at the Yellow Gate.

古文：出为临川内史，以贿见劾，案经袁粲，粲寝之。
现代文：出任临川内史，因为贿赂的事情被弹劾，案子经过袁粲处，袁粲搁置了此事。
English: He was impeached for bribery. The case went through Yuan Shao's office, and Yuan Shao shelved the matter.

古文：齐高帝为骠骑将军辅政，选朏为长史，敕与河南褚炫、济阳江斅、彭城刘俣俱入侍宋帝，时号为天子四友。
现代文：齐高帝做骠骑将军辅政，选举谢肶做长史，敕令与河南的褚炫、济阳的江敩、彭城的刘俣一起入朝侍奉宋帝，当时号称为天子四友。
English: Emperor Qigong made Xie Jian general assistant to the government, and elected Xie Jian as long-term leader. Xie Jian, along with Xian Xian from Henan, Jiang Jian from Jiyang, and Liu Mata from Pengcheng, entered the imperial court to serve Emperor Song. At that time, they were known as the Heavenly Four Friends.

古文：续拜侍中，并掌中书、散骑二省诏册。
现代文：接着又拜授为侍中，并且掌管中书、散骑两省的韶册文书。
English: Next, he was appointed as a chamberlain, and was in charge of the official documents of the two provinces of Zhongshu and Sanzhong.

古文：高帝进太尉，又以朏为长史，带南东海太守。
现代文：高帝升为太尉，又用谢助做长史，兼任南束涂太守。
English: Gao Di was promoted to the rank of captain, and he also used Xie Su to make a long history, concurrently serving as the governor of Nanzuku.

古文：高帝方图禅代，思佐命之臣，以朏有重名，深所钦属。
现代文：产童正要图谋帝位的惮让接替。考虑辅佐他创业的大臣，认为谢肶名望重，深为钦敬瞩目于他。
English: The emperor's son-in-law was planning to succeed the emperor. The minister, who was considering assisting him in starting a business, thought that Xie Jun was well-respected and admired him.

古文：论魏、晋故事，因曰： 晋革命时事久兆，石苞不早劝晋文，死方恸哭，方之冯异，非知机也。 
现代文：与谢脑谈论魏、置的故事，就说： 置代改革天命时运的变故很久以来就有预兆了，互苞不早些鼓励晋文帝即帝位，死了才痛哭他，与冯异相比，是不知道时机啊。 
English: Talking about the stories of Wei and Jie with Xie Meng, he said: The vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of

古文：朏答曰： 昔魏臣有劝魏武即帝位者，魏武曰： 如有用我，其为周文王乎！ 
现代文：谢础回答道： 原来魏国有鼓动魏武帝即帝位的大臣，魏武帝对他们说： 如果天命有用得上我的，大概就是做个周文王吧!
English: Xie Zuo replied, "Originally, the State of Wei instigated Emperor Wu of Wei, that is, the minister of the imperial throne. Emperor Wu of Wei said to them, "If it is God's will to use me, I will probably become King Zhouwen!"

古文：晋文世事魏氏，将必身终北面；假使魏早依唐虞故事，亦当三让弥高。 
现代文：晋文帝一生侍奉魏氏，必将是一生面北称臣；假如魏早先依了唐虞撵让的故事，那么晋文帝也该多次辞让才更显其高风亮节。 
English: Emperor Jinwen served the Wei clan for his entire life, and he will surely be a great statesman for the rest of his life. If Wei had earlier followed the story of Emperor Tang's resignation, then Emperor Jinwen should have resigned many times to make it more obvious that he was a great statesman.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：高帝听了逭话很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：更引王俭为左长史，以朏侍中，领秘书监。
现代文：就转而引荐王俭做左长史，让谢助做诗中，领秘书监职。
English: Instead, he recommended Wang Jian to be the left long history, and let Xie Zu to be the middle of the poem, and supervise the secretary.

古文：及齐受禅，朏当日在直，百僚陪位，侍中当解玺，朏佯不知，曰： 有何公事？ 
现代文：到了齐接受禅让，谢助当天轮值，百官陪坐，侍中应当去解下玉玺，谢肋假装不懂，问： 有什么公事? 
English: When they arrived, they all accepted the offer of Zen. Xie Sui was on duty that day, and was accompanied by a hundred officials. The chambermaid was supposed to take off the jade bracelet. Xie Lei pretended not to understand and asked: "What business?"

古文：传诏云： 解玺授齐王。 
现代文：传韶的人说： 解下玉玺授予齐王。 
English: The courier of the imperial edict said, "Cancel the imperial edict and award the imperial edict to King Qi."

古文：朏曰： 齐自应有侍中。 
现代文：谢础说： 齐自己应当有侍中。 
English: Xie Zuo said: Qi himself should have an attendant.

古文：乃引枕卧。
现代文：就拉过枕头睡觉。
English: I just pull over the pillow and go to sleep.

古文：传诏惧，乃使称疾，欲取兼人。
现代文：傅诏的人惧怕，就让他声称有病，想另找别人代替。
English: Fu Zhao's people were afraid, so they made him claim that he was ill and wanted to find someone else to take his place.

古文：朏曰： 我无疾，何所道。 
现代文：谢肶说： 我没有病，说的是什么话。 
English: Xie Qi said, "I'm not sick, what are you talking about?"

古文：遂朝服，步出东掖门，乃得车，仍还宅。
现代文：就穿上朝服，走出东掖门，然后坐上车，就回了住处。
English: He put on his imperial robes, walked out of the East Gate of the Imperial Palace, then got into a car and drove back to his residence.

古文：是日遂以王俭为侍中解玺。
现代文：遣一天就用王俭作为侍中负责解玉玺。
English: Wang Jian was appointed as an attendant to be in charge of untying the jade necklace.

古文：既而武帝言于高帝，请诛朏。
现代文：不久武帝对高帝说，请求杀掉谢肶。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wu said to Emperor Gao, "I request you to kill Xie Xuan."

古文：帝曰： 杀之则遂成其名，正应容之度外耳。 
现代文：高帝说： 杀了他那就成就了他的名声，正应当纵容他而排斥他在法度之外。 
English: Gao Di said, "If you kill him, then you have made his reputation, so you should indulge him and exclude him from the law."

古文：遂废于家。
现代文：于是将他罢官在家。
English: So he dismissed him at home.

古文：永明元年，起家拜通直散骑常侍，累迁侍中，领国子博士。
现代文：永明元年，从家中召谢础授通直散骑常侍，连续调迁为侍中，领国子博士。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was summoned from his home to serve as a regular attendant, and was successively transferred to be an attendant, leading Dr. Kuniko.

古文：五年，出为冠军将军、义兴太守，加秩中二千石。
现代文：五年，出任为冠军将军、义兴太守，加俸禄中二千石。
English: Five years later, he became the champion general and the governor of Yixing, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：在郡不省杂事，悉付纲纪，曰： 吾不能作主者吏，但能作太守耳。 
现代文：他在郡任职时不察看闲杂事，凡事都交付纲纪，说： 我不能做主子的低级小官吏，祇能做太守。 
English: When he served in the county, he did not pay attention to trifles, and everything was handed over to the discipline, saying: I cannot be a low-level minor official of the master, only I can be the governor.

古文：视事三年，征都官尚书、中书令。
现代文：办公三年，征为都官尚书、中书令。
English: He worked in the office for three years, and was appointed to the post of the city official responsible for official documents.

古文：隆昌元年，复为侍中，领新安王师。未拜，固求外出。
现代文：隆昌元年，又做诗中，领新安王师傅职，谢助没有拜授，就坚持请求外出任职。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, and in a poem, he was given the position of Xin'an Wang's teacher. However, he did not bow to the teacher, and insisted on going out to work.

古文：仍为征虏将军、吴兴太守，受召便述职。
现代文：于是就做了征虏将军、吴兴太守，受召见后就到职了。
English: As a result, he became a conscript general, Wu Xing Taizhou, and arrived at his post after being summoned.

古文：时明帝谋入嗣位，朝之旧臣皆引参谋策。
现代文：遣时明帝谋求进而继承君位，朝廷的旧臣们都被召引来参议谋划策略。
English: When Emperor Ming sought to succeed to the throne, the old courtiers of the imperial court were summoned to advise and plan the strategy.

古文：朏内图止足，且实避事。
现代文：谢肋内心考虑止足，而实际上也是为避开遣事。
English: Xie Li considered stopping in her heart, but in fact it was also to avoid sending things.

古文：弟綍，时为吏部尚书。
现代文：弟弟谢满，逭时是吏部尚书。
English: His younger brother, Xie Man, was an official at the time.

古文：朏至郡，致綍数斛酒，遗书曰： 可力饮此，勿豫人事。 
现代文：谢肋到郡，送给谢满几斛酒，留下字条说： 可以尽力喝下，不要参与人事纠葛。 
English: Xie Li went to the county, gave Xie Man several bottles of wine, and left a note saying: You can drink as much as you can, don't get involved in personnel entanglements.

古文：朏居郡每不治，而常务聚敛，众颇讥之，亦不屑也。
现代文：谢肶在郡任上往往不理公事，却常常致力于积聚财货，人们对此很讥嘲，他也不加理睬。
English: In his position as county magistrate, Xie Jun often neglected his official duties, but often devoted himself to the accumulation of wealth. People scoffed at this, and he ignored it.

古文：建武四年，诏征为侍中、中书令，遂抗表不应召。
现代文：建武四年，下韶征召谢肶为侍中、中书令，他向皇帝上奏章不愿应韶。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, the lower court summoned Xie Jun to serve as an attendant and official, but he did not want to obey the emperor.

古文：遣诸子还京师，独与母留，筑室郡之西郭。
现代文：他差遣诸子回京城，惟独自己与母亲留下来，在郡的西城建起房屋。
English: He sent his sons back to the capital, but he and his mother stayed behind to build a house in the west of the county.

古文：明帝下诏曰： 夫超然荣观，风流自远；蹈彼幽人，英华罕值。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 超然荣誉之上，风流卓越的人物自然远去；追循那位隐士的足迹，出众的光彩罕有的价值。
English: Emperor Ming decreed: Above the transcendent honor, the distinguished personage naturally goes far away; follow the footsteps of the hermit, outstanding brilliance rare value.

古文：故长揖楚相，见称南国；高谢汉臣，取贵良史。
现代文：所以对在南方被称颂的楚相拱手长揖致敬；高声地感谢贵在选用好史官的漠臣。
English: Therefore, he paid tribute to Chu Xiang, who was praised in the south, and loudly thanked you for choosing a good historian.

古文：新除侍中、中书令朏，早藉羽仪，夙标清尚，登朝树绩，出守驰声。
现代文：刚任命的侍中、中书令谢绌，早年朝廷就凭藉着他的辅翼，平素他显现出清白高尚，登上朝廷树立政绩，出任守官声名驰骋。
English: The newly-appointed chamberlain, Chusho Rei Chieko, gained the support of the imperial court in the early years. He always showed his innocence and nobility, ascended to the imperial court to establish his political achievements, and served as a guard officer.

古文：遂敛迹康衢，拂衣林沚，抱箕颍之余芳，甘憔悴而无闷。
现代文：接着收束足迹走向康庄通达的田野大道，振衣归隐山林水洲之间，拥抱着箕山、颖水的余芳，甘愿憔悴也不苦恼。
English: Next, we retrace our steps to Tianye Avenue, which leads to Kangzhuang. We shake off our clothes and return to the seclusion of the mountains, forests and islands, embracing the afterglow of Lushan and Yingshui. I am willing to say that I am not distressed.

古文：抚事怀人，载留钦想。
现代文：追思往事怀念旧人，存留了钦敬的想往。
English: I think about the past and miss the old people, and I have a reverent longing.

古文：宜加优礼，用旌素概。
现代文：应该加以优待礼遇，用来表彰他清白的节操。
English: He should be given preferential treatment in recognition of his sterling integrity.

古文：可赐床帐褥席，俸以卿禄，常出在所。 
现代文：可以赐给床帐褥席，给他卿的俸禄，长期送到他所在的地方。 
English: You can give him a bedside table, give him a noble salary, and send him where he belongs for a long time.

古文：时国子祭酒庐江何胤亦抗表还会稽。
现代文：遣时国子祭酒庐江的何胤也向皇帝上奏章返回了会擅。
English: At the time of the Emperor's visit, He Jian of the National Children's Festival also returned to the emperor to recite the imperial rescript.

古文：永元二年，诏征朏为散骑常侍、中书监，胤为散骑常侍、太常卿，并不屈。
现代文：永元二年，下韶征召谢础为散骑常侍、中书监，何胤为散骑常侍、太常卿，两人都不屈就。
English: In the second year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, Xie Jizhe was called up by the Lower Han Dynasty to serve as a knight errant, a middle school librarian, and He Yin was a knight errant, a grand marshal. Both of them were unyielding.

古文：三年，又诏征朏为侍中、太子少傅，胤散骑常侍、太子詹事。
现代文：三年，又下韶征召谢肋为侍中、太子少傅，鱼腿为散骑常侍、太子詹事。
English: Three years later, the emperor summoned Xie Li to be a chambermaid and the prince's sous-chef, and Fu Feng to be a horseback riding chambermaid and the prince's steward.

古文：时东昏皆下在所，使迫遣之，值义师已近，故并得不到。
现代文：这时塞昼堡都下临他们所在之地，派遣人强迫差遣他们，遣时正值义军已迫近，所以两个人都得不到。
English: At this time, the soldiers came down to the place where they were, and sent people to force them to send them. The time of sending was when the rebels were approaching, so they couldn't get both of them.

古文：及高祖平京邑，进位相国，表请朏、胤曰： 夫穷则独善，达以兼济。
现代文：及至直祖平定京城，进职属相国，上表请求任用谢肶、何胤说： 不得志就独善其身，得志就应兼助天下。
English: As far back as the time of Emperor Naosuke's subjugation of the capital and his promotion to a position in the same country, the above table requested the appointment of Xie Jun and Ho Yin, saying, "If you don't have the will to be good, you should help the world."

古文：虽出处之道，其揆不同，用舍惟时，贤哲是蹈。
现代文：虽说出仕和隐退的道理，他们的考虑不同，但朝廷任用还是舍弃祇应看时势需要，衹要才德超群就任用。
English: Although they have different considerations when it comes to the reasons for serving and retiring, the imperial court still only makes appointments according to the needs of the time, and only those with superior moral qualities are appointed.

古文：前新除侍中、太子少傅朏，前新除散骑常侍、太子詹事、都亭侯胤，羽仪世胄，徽猷冠冕，道业德声，康济雅俗。
现代文：前朝刚任命的侍中、太子少傅谢拙，前朝刚任命的散骑常侍、太子詹事、都亭侯坦凰，是朝廷辅翼、世家后代，道行美好、出身仕宦，才能政续、道德声望，可以安抚天下、救助雅俗。
English: The newly-appointed chamberlain of the former imperial court, the young prince Fu Xiemou, and the newly-appointed equestrian equerry of the former imperial court, the young prince Zhan Zhi, and the prince of the capital Tantai, are the auxiliary wings of the imperial court, the descendants of the family, the virtuous conduct, the noble birth, the ability to continue the government, the moral prestige, can appease the world, and save the elegant and vulgar.

古文：昔居朝列，素无宦情，宾客简通，公卿罕预，簪绂未褫，而风尘摆落。
现代文：过去虽然位居朝廷，一向却没有做官的心思，很少交往宾客，很少参与公卿的事情，冠簪和缨带虽未脱去，却能摆脱世俗风气。
English: In the past, although he was in the imperial court, he always had no thought of being an official. He rarely interacted with guests, rarely participated in the affairs of nobles. Although he did not take off his crown and sash, he was able to get rid of the secular style.

古文：且文宗儒肆，互居其长；清规雅裁，兼擅其美。
现代文：况且文章宗伯儒学修养，互有其长处；可遵循的清雅的规范，兼擅其各自好的地方。
English: Moreover, the articles of Zongbo's cultivation of Confucianism have their own strengths; the elegant norms that can be followed are also good at their respective areas.

古文：并达照深识，预睹乱萌，见庸质之如初，知贻厥之无寄。
现代文：并且通达明了深透的事理，预见萌生的祸乱，而最初就能发现庸才，懂得子孙的无所寄托。
English: Moreover, he is well-versed in the profound principles, foresees the emerging disaster, and can initially discover mediocrity, and understand the hopelessness of his descendants.

古文：拂衣东山，眇绝尘轨。
现代文：归隐东山，绝迹于尘世。
English: He went into seclusion in Higashiyama and disappeared from the face of the earth.

古文：虽解组昌运，实避昏时。
现代文：虽然在命运昌盛时解下印绶，其实是为了避开昏暗混乱的时世。
English: Although the printing money was released when the fortunes were prosperous, it was actually to avoid the dark and chaotic times.

古文：家膺鼎食，而甘兹橡艾；世袭青紫，而安此悬鹑。
现代文：家庭承受着丰足的食物，却甘愿吃这些橡栗、野蒿般的粗食，世代承袭着华美的衣物，却安心穿遣鹌鹑般的陋衣。
English: Families are burdened with plentiful food, but they are willing to eat these oak chestnuts, wild grasshopper-like coarse food, and inherit gorgeous clothes from generation to generation, but it is safe to wear coarse clothes like sandals.

古文：自浇风肇扇，用南成俗，淳流素轨，余烈颇存。
现代文：自从浮薄的社会风气开始吹拂，作用于南方形成流俗，质朴敦厚纯洁的风尚，其遣存的功绩还稍有一些。
English: Since the social atmosphere began to blow, it has affected the south to form a vulgar, simple, thick and pure style, and there are still some merits in its preservation.

古文：谁其激贪，功归有道，康俗振民，朝野一致。
现代文：谁能抑制贪婪呢，功绩应归于道的存在，安宁的风俗能救助百姓，在朝在野都一样。
English: Who can restrain greed? Merit should be attributed to the existence of the Tao. Peaceful customs can help the people, both in the government and in the countryside.

古文：虽在江海，而勋同魏阙。
现代文：隐士们虽然身在江海，但其功勋却同在朝廷是一样的。
English: Although the hermits are on the river, their merits are the same as those of the imperial court.

古文：今泰运甫开，贱贫为耻；况乎久蕴瑚琏，暂厌承明，而可得求志海隅，永追松子。
现代文：当今国家的气数才开始，以贫贱为耻辱；况且长久地蕴藏着贵重的瑚琏，暂时满足处于承明，而能够到天涯海角去寻求大志向，永远追循神仙松子吗?
English: Today's national spirit is just beginning, taking poverty as a disgrace; moreover, there has long been a precious firefly, temporarily satisfied in Chengming, but can it go to the ends of the earth to seek great ambitions, and forever follow the immortal pine?

古文：臣负荷殊重，参赞万机，实赖群才，共成栋干。
现代文：我负担特别重，众多事务的参谋协助，实在是有赖于众多人才，来共同成为国家的栋梁。
English: I have a particularly heavy burden, and I really rely on many talented people to assist me as a staff officer in many matters, so that we can jointly become the backbone of the country.

古文：思挹清源，取镜止水。
现代文：思慕引来清泉，在静止不流的水中鉴照自己。
English: The yearning for a clear spring, to look at oneself in the still, still water.

古文：愚欲屈居僚首，朝夕谘诹，庶足以翼宣寡薄，式是王度。
现代文：我想屈居于群僚的首位，早晚咨询，希望足以用来辅佐并补益寡薄之处，规范王者的政教。
English: I want to be at the head of the group of colleagues, consult sooner or later, and hope to be enough to assist and supplement the weak points, and standardize the king's politics and religion.

古文：请并补臣府军谘祭酒，朏加后将军。 
现代文：请一并补为我府上的军谘祭酒，谢肶加后将军。 
English: Please also replenish the army's sacrificial liquor at my house, thank you, General.

古文：并不至。
现代文：一并不来。
English: One doesn't come along.

古文：高祖践阼，征朏为侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，胤散骑常侍、特进、右光禄大夫，又并不屈。
现代文：高祖即位，征召谢肶为侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，何胤为散骑常侍、特进、右光禄大夫，两人又都不屈就。
English: When Gaozu ascended the throne, he summoned Xie Yao as a chamberlain, Zuo Guanglu doctor, and Kaifu Yi and three officers, and He Yin as a horseback riding attendant, special envoy, and Uguanglu doctor, and both of them did not give in.

古文：仍遣领军司马王果宣旨敦譬。
现代文：又派领军司马王果去宣读旨令规劝晓谕。
English: He also sent the leader of the army, Sima Wangguo, to read out the edict.

古文：明年六月，朏轻舟出，诣阙自陈。
现代文：第二年六月，谢肋坐一叶轻舟出城，赴高祖的殿庭自去回话。
English: In June of the following year, Xie Li took a light boat out of the city and went to Gao Zu's palace to talk to him.

古文：既至，诏以为侍中、司徒、尚书令。
现代文：抵达后，下韶征他为侍中、司徒、尚书令。
English: After his arrival, he was enlisted as a chamberlain, an attendant, and a secretary.

古文：朏辞脚疾不堪拜谒，乃角巾肩舆，诣云龙门谢。
现代文：谢肶藉口脚有病不能步行去拜见高祖，就戴着角巾，坐着轿子，到云龙门去谢恩。
English: Using the excuse that he had a foot disease and could not walk to visit Gao Zu, Xie Yan wore a kerchief and sat on a palanquin to go to Yunlongmen to visit Gao Zu.

古文：诏见于华林园，乘小车就席。
现代文：高祖下韶在华林园召见，谢拙乘坐小车赴宴。
English: Gao Zu Jie met Gao Zu Jie at the Hualin Garden, and took a carriage ride to the banquet.

古文：明旦，舆驾出幸朏宅，宴语尽欢。
现代文：第二天早上，高祖驾临谢础住宅，设宴闲聊尽情欢乐。
English: The next morning, Gao Zu drove to Xie Jun's residence, set up a banquet, and had a good time chatting.

古文：朏固陈本志，不许；因请自还东迎母，乃许之。
现代文：谢础再三陈述自己本来的志向不愿做官，不允许；于是就请求回束边把母亲接来，逭才允许。
English: Xie repeatedly stated that he did not want to be an official and was not allowed to do so. He then requested that his mother be brought to him, but was only allowed to do so.

古文：临发，舆驾复临幸，赋诗饯别。
现代文：出发前，高祖又驾临，赋诗饯别。
English: Before departure, Gao Zu arrived again and said farewell with a poem.

古文：王人送迎，相望于道。
现代文：使臣送迎，不绝于道。
English: Envoys are always on the road to welcome them.

古文：到京师，敕材官起府于旧宅，高祖临轩，遣谒者于府拜授，诏停诸公事及朔望朝谒。
现代文：到了京城，敕令材官在他的旧宅上建府第，高祖亲到殿前，派遣谒者到府上去拜授，下诏停下各类公事以及朔望的朝见。
English: When he arrived in the capital, he ordered the magistrate to build a government office on his old house, Gao Zuo to go to the front of the palace, and dispatched the magistrate to go to the palace to pay homage, and then stopped all kinds of official business and the morning meeting.

古文：三年元会，诏朏乘小舆升殿。
现代文：三年元会群臣朝见时，下诏让谢绌乘坐小车登殿。
English: In the morning of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the group of courtiers met, the emperor ordered Xie Jun to take a carriage to the palace.

古文：其年，遭母忧，寻有诏摄职如故。
现代文：第二年，遭遇母亲死亡，不久有韶让他摄过去所摄官职。
English: The following year, after the death of his mother, he was soon asked to take on the post of official photographer.

古文：后五年，改授中书监、司徒、卫将军，并固让不受。
现代文：此后五年，改授中书监、司徒、卫将军，他一并坚决辞让不接受。
English: In the following five years, he was awarded the titles of the middle school's librarian, teacher, and general, but he refused to accept any concessions.

古文：遣谒者敦授，乃拜受焉。
现代文：派谒者敦促授职，才拜受了。
English: The petitioner urged that the appointment be made, but it was not accepted.

古文：是冬薨于府，时年六十六。
现代文：遣年冬天在府上去世，当时六十六岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty-six in the winter of the following year.

古文：舆驾出临哭，诏给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱十万，布百匹，蜡百斤。
现代文：高祖驾车降临来哭丧，下韶供给棺木，一套朝服，一套衣，十万钱，一百匹布，一百斤蜡。
English: Gao Zu drove down to mourn, and provided a coffin, a set of imperial robes, a set of clothes, 100,000 yuan, 100 pieces of cloth, and 100 catties of wax.

古文：赠侍中、司徒。
现代文：追赠为侍中、司徒。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer and Master of the Horse.

古文：谥曰靖孝。
现代文：谧号为堕耋。
English: His posthumous name was 堕落.

古文：朏所著书及文章，并行于世。
现代文：邀壁所著的书和文章，同时在世上刊行。
English: At the same time, the books and articles written by the invited guests were published around the world.

古文：子谖，官至司徒右长史，坐杀牛免官，卒于家。
现代文：儿子邀墨，官职升到司徒右长史，因犯杀牛罪而免官，在家中去世。
English: Invited by his son, he was promoted to the official post of Shtu-U-Changshi, was dismissed for the crime of killing a cow, and died at home.

古文：次子絪，颇有文才，仕至晋安太守，卒官。
现代文：次子邀箜，很有文才，官做到置昼太守，在任上去世。
English: His second son, Zhaojun, was a very talented writer. He was appointed to the position of the afternoon governor and died in office.

古文：览字景涤，朏弟綍之子也。
现代文：谢览字景涤，谢肶弟弟谢满的儿子。
English: Xie Yan is the son of Xie Yan's brother, Xie Man.

古文：选尚齐钱唐公主，拜驸马都尉、秘书郎、太子舍人。
现代文：被选中娶了齐钱唐公主，拜驸马都尉、秘书郎、太子舍人。
English: He was chosen to marry Princess Qiqian of Tang, and became a captain, a secretary, and a prince's concubine.

古文：高祖为大司马，召补东阁祭酒，迁相国户曹。
现代文：高祖做了大司马，召用谢览补东合祭酒，迁相国户曹。
English: Gao Zu made a grand steed, summoned Xie Xiang to replenish the Donghe Festival wine, and transferred the imperial family to Cao.

古文：天监元年，为中书侍郎，掌吏部事，顷之即真。
现代文：天监元年，做中书侍郎，执掌吏部事，不久就获实授正式官职。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, he served as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and was in charge of the personnel department. He was soon given an official post.

古文：览为人美风神，善辞令，高祖深器之。
现代文：谢览有美好的风度神态，善于辞令，高祖很器重他。
English: Xie Xuan had a beautiful demeanor and was good at making speeches. Gao Zu held him in high regard.

古文：尝侍座，受敕与侍中王暕为诗答赠。其文甚工。
现代文：曾经陪侍坐在一旁，受敕命舆侍中王陈作诗互为赠答，他的文章很精当。
English: Once, while sitting with an attendant, he was ordered by the attendant to write a poem as a gift for each other. His essay was very clever.

古文：高祖善之，仍使重作，复合旨。
现代文：高祖认为很好，又让他重作，又符合高祖旨意。
English: Gaozu thought it was very good, and asked him to remake it, and it was in line with Gaozu's will.

古文：乃赐诗云： 双文既后进，二少实名家；岂伊止栋隆，信乃俱国华。 
现代文：就赐诗道： 两篇文章已是出自后辈，两位少年的确是名家手笔；哪裹就仅仅是一房的屋梁高大厚实呢，实在就都是国家的精华啊。 
English: Just give the poem: Two articles have come from the younger generation, and the two teenagers are indeed famous writers; which is just a tall and thick roof beam of a room, it is really the essence of the country.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：谢览因为母亲去世而离职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：服阕，除中庶子，又掌吏部郎事，寻除吏部郎，迁侍中。
现代文：服丧完毕，任中庶子，又执掌吏部郎事，不久任吏部郎，升迁为侍中。
English: After the funeral, he was appointed as the middle child, and also took charge of the secretary, and soon he was appointed as the secretary, and was promoted to the chamberlain.

古文：览颇乐酒，因宴席与散骑常侍萧琛辞相诋毁，为有司所奏。
现代文：谢览很喜欢饮酒，因为宴席中与散骑常侍萧琛言辞相互诋毁，被有司奏报。
English: Xie Chan liked drinking very much, because during the banquet, he and the horseback riding attendant Xiao Jun slandered each other's words, which was reported by a reporter.

古文：高祖以览年少不直，出为中权长史。
现代文：高祖认为谢览年轻不正，让他出任中权长史。
English: Gaozu thought that Xie Chan was too young and unfair, so he appointed him as the Central Power Chief Historian.

古文：顷之，敕掌东宫管记，迁明威将军、新安太守。
现代文：不久，敕令掌东宫管记，迁为明威将军、新安太守。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to be in charge of the East Palace Administration, and was transferred to the position of Mingwei general and Xin'an governor.

古文：九年夏，山贼吴承伯破宣城郡，余党散入新安，叛吏鲍叙等与合，攻没黟、歙诸县，进兵击览。
现代文：九年夏，山贼吴承伯攻破宣城郡，余党分散进入新安，反叛的小吏鲍叙等与之会合，攻占墨、麸各县，进军攻击谢堕。
English: In the summer of the ninth year, the bandit Wu Chengbo broke through Xuancheng County, the remaining party dispersed into Xin'an, and the rebel petty officials Bao Xiu and others met with them, captured the counties of Mo and Lu, and marched to attack Xie Pu.

古文：览遣郡丞周兴嗣于锦沙立坞拒战，不敌，遂弃郡奔会稽。
现代文：谢篓派遣郡丞且兴嗣在钟丝建起土堡屏障迎战，不能抵御，就丢弃郡逃到盒稽。
English: Xie Han dispatched the county magistrate and Xing Ci built a mud castle barrier in Zhongsi to meet the battle. Unable to resist, he abandoned the county and fled to Boxi.

古文：台军平山寇，览复还郡，左迁司徒谘议参军、仁威长史、行南徐州事，五兵尚书。
现代文：官军平定山寇后，谢览重回到郡，降职为司徒谘议参军、仁威长史、兼代南徐州事，五兵尚书。
English: After the government army had quelled the mountain invasion, Xie Qian returned to the county, and was demoted to the position of Sito to advise on joining the army, Ren Wei Changshi, concurrently acting for the South Xuzhou affairs, and five soldiers Shang Shu.

古文：寻迁吏部尚书。
现代文：不久迁调为吏部尚书。
English: He was soon transferred to the personnel department of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：览自祖至孙，三世居选部，当世以为荣。
现代文：谢览从祖辈到孙辈，三代居官吏部，当世都以此为荣。
English: From the ancestors to the grandchildren, three generations of officials have been proud of this.

古文：十二年春，出为吴兴太守。
现代文：十二年春，谢览出任吴兴太守。
English: In the spring of the 12th year, Xie Chan became Wu Xing's governor.

古文：中书舍人黄睦之家居乌程，子弟专横，前太守皆折节事之。
现代文：中书舍人黄睦之家住乌程，子弟们专横，前任太守都折节事奉他们。
English: The Huang Mutu family, who owned the Chinese Academy of Letters, lived in Wucheng. Their children were domineering, and the previous governor had served them.

古文：览未到郡，睦之子弟来迎，览逐去其船，杖吏为通者。
现代文：谢览还没有到郡，睦之的子弟们来迎接，谢览赶走他们的船，对为其通报消息的小吏用了杖刑。
English: Before Xie Xuan arrived in the county, Mutsu's sons came to meet him, Xie Xuan drove away their boat, and used a cane on the minor official who reported the news.

古文：自是睦之家杜门不出，不敢与公私关通。
现代文：自此以后睦之家人闭门不出，不敢舆公私各方交通往来。
English: Since then, Mutsu's family members have not been able to leave the house and have not dared to make public or private contacts.

古文：郡境多劫，为东道患，览下车肃然，一境清谧。
现代文：郡境内抢劫多，成为东方道路上的祸患，谢览一下车秩序就安定良好，全境清静。
English: There are a lot of robberies in the county, which has become a scourge on Dongfang Road. The order of the cars is stable and good, and the whole area is quiet.

古文：初，齐明帝及览父綍、东海徐孝嗣，并为吴兴，号称名守，览皆欲过之。昔览在新安颇聚敛，至是遂称廉洁，时人方之王怀祖。
现代文：当初，查旦瞳和谢鉴父亲邀遭、塞渔的途孝嗣，都曾做过吴兴太守，号称著名的太守，而谢览都要超过他们过去谢览在新安比较积聚财富，到这裹就被称为廉洁，当时的人把他比为王怀祖。
English: At first, Chadan Hitomi and Xie Jian, who were invited by their father and were the sons and heirs of the fisherman, had both served as Wu Xing's eunuchs, and were known as famous eunuchs. But Xie Jian was wealthier than they had been in the past, and Xie Jian had accumulated more wealth in Xin'an. He was known as incorruptible, and people at the time compared him to Wang Huaizu.

古文：卒于官，时年三十七。
现代文：在任上去世，当时三十七岁。
English: He died in office at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：诏赠中书令。
现代文：下诏追赠为中书令。
English: The posthumous issue of the following Imperial Edict is the Chinese Calligraphy Order.

古文：子罕，早卒。
现代文：儿子谢罕，早年去世。
English: His son, Shekhan, died at an early age.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：谢朏之于宋代，盖忠义者欤？
现代文：陈的吏部尚书姚察说：谢础对于宋代，大概算得上忠义者吧?
English: Chen's cadre, Shangshu Yao-cha, said: "For the Song Dynasty, Xie Zong is probably a loyal person, right?

古文：当齐建武之世，拂衣止足，永元多难，确然独善，其疏、蒋之流乎。
现代文：在齐的建武时代，振衣止足，永元年间多磨难，坚定不移独善其身，大概属于疏、蒋这类人吧。
English: In the Jianwu era of Qi, the clothes were shaken and the feet were stopped, the Yongyuan years were more difficult, and he was unswervingly self-sufficient. He probably belonged to the type of people like Shuo and Jiang.

古文：洎高祖龙兴，旁求物色，角巾来仕，首陟台司，极出处之致矣！
现代文：到了高祖龙运兴起，搜求物色，于是角巾隐士来做官，首先走进台司，逭也是出仕隐退的极限了。
English: At the time of the rise of Gaozulongyun, there was a search for a suitable candidate. Therefore, when the kerchiefed hermit came to be an official, he first entered the Taiji, and this was also the limit of his service and retirement.

古文：览终能善政，君子韪之。
现代文：谢览始终能善于理政，所以君子要赞美他。
English: Xie Chan has always been good at governance, so the gentleman should praise him.

