古文：三十有一年春，王正月，公在乾侯。
现代文：二十一年春季，周历正月，昭公在乾侯。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Shoko was in the dry.

古文：季孙意如会晋荀跞于適历。
现代文：季孙意如与晋国的荀跞在適历会见。
English: Ji Sun Yiru and Jin Guo's Zhuge Liang met in Suixian.

古文：夏四月丁巳，薛伯穀卒。
现代文：夏季四月丁巳日，薛伯穀去世。
English: In the summer of April, on April Fool's Day, Xue Bo Gu passed away.

古文：晋侯使荀跞唁公于乾侯。
现代文：晋侯派遣荀跞来乾侯慰问昭公。
English: Jin Hou dispatched his envoy to Qian Hou to offer condolences to Shoko.

古文：秋，葬薛献公。
现代文：秋季，安葬薛献公。
English: In autumn, the funeral of Xue Xianguo was held.

古文：冬，黑肱以滥来奔。
现代文：冬季，邾国的黑肱带着滥地逃亡来鲁国。
English: In the winter, the black storks of Shandong flee to Lu with their chicks.

古文：十有二月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：十有二月辛亥初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the tenth day of the second month, the first day of Xinhai, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：三十一年春，王正月，公在乾侯，言不能外内也。
现代文：三十一年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁昭公在乾侯，这是说他既不能去国外，又不能回国内。
English: In the spring of the 31st year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Lu Zhaogong was in the dry season, which meant that he could neither go abroad nor return to China.

古文：晋侯将以师纳公。
现代文：晋定公准备用兵力送昭公回国。
English: Jin Ding Gong prepared to send troops to escort Zhao Gong back to the country.

古文：范献子曰： 若召季孙而不来，则信不臣矣。然后伐之，若何？ 
现代文：范献子说： 如果召见季孙而他不来，那么确实是有失臣道了，然后再攻打他，怎么样？ 
English: Fan Xianzi said: If Ji Sun is summoned and he does not come, then he has indeed lost the way of a vassal. How about attacking him again?

古文：晋人召季孙，献子使私焉，曰： 子必来，我受其无咎。 
现代文：晋国人召见季孙，范献子派人私下告诉他说： 您一定要来，我保证您不会有罪。 
English: The people of Jin summoned Ji Sun, and Fan Xianzi sent someone to tell him in private: "You must come, I guarantee that you will not be guilty."

古文：季孙意如会晋荀跞于適历。
现代文：季孙意如和晋国的荀砾在適历会见。
English: Ji Sun Yiru and Jin Guo's Zhuge Liang met in Suixian.

古文：荀跞曰： 寡君使跞谓吾子，何故出君？
现代文：荀跞说： 寡君让跞对您说：为什么赶走国君？
English: Zou said, "Your majesty, let me ask you: Why did you drive out the sovereign?

古文：有君不事，周有常刑。
现代文：有国君而不事奉，周朝有一定的刑罚。
English: If there is a sovereign who does not serve, the Zhou Dynasty has a certain penalty.

古文：子其图之！ 
现代文：您还是考虑一下！ 
English: Think about it.

古文：季孙练冠麻衣跣行，伏而对曰： 事君，臣之所不得也，敢逃刑命？
现代文：季孙头戴练冠、身穿麻衣，光着脚走路，俯伏而回答说： 事奉国君，这是下臣求之不得的，岂敢逃避判刑的命令？
English: Qisun, wearing a ceremonial crown on his head, a sackcloth robe, and bare feet, prostrated himself and answered: "To serve the sovereign, this is what subordinates should not ask for. Would you dare to evade the order of sentencing?

古文：君若以臣为有罪，请囚于费，以待君之察也，亦唯君。
现代文：君王如果认为下臣有罪，就请把下臣囚禁在费地，以等待君王的查问，也唯君王之命是听。
English: If the king thinks that a vassal is guilty, please imprison the vassal in Feidi to await the king's inquiry, but the king's order is to listen.

古文：若以先臣之故，不绝季氏，而赐之死。
现代文：如果由于先君的缘故，不断绝季氏的后代，而赐下臣一死。
English: If, for the sake of the previous lord, the descendants of the Ji clan continue to die out, the vassal will be given one death.

古文：若弗杀弗亡，君之惠也，死且不朽。
现代文：如果不杀，也不让逃亡，这是君王的恩惠，死而不敢忘记恩德。
English: If you don't kill them, and don't let them escape, this is the king's favor.

古文：若得从君而归，则固臣之愿也。敢有异心？ 
现代文：如果能跟随君王一同回去，那么本来就是下臣的愿望，岂敢有别的念头？ 
English: If you can go back with the king, then it is the desire of the vassal, how dare you have any other thoughts?

古文：夏四月，季孙从知伯如乾侯。
现代文：夏季，四月，季孙跟随荀跞到了乾侯。
English: In the summer, in April, Qisun followed Zou to Qianhou.

古文：子家子曰： 君与之归，一惭之不忍，而终身惭乎？ 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：子家子说： 君王和他一起回去，一次羞耻不能忍受，终身的羞耻反而能忍受吗？ 昭公说： 对。 
English: Zhi Jia Zi said, "If the king goes back with him, he can't bear the shame for once, but can he bear the shame for life?" Zhao Gong said, "That's right."

古文：众曰： 在一言矣，君必逐之。 
现代文：大家说： 这就在一句话了，君王一定要赶走他！ 
English: Everyone said: That's it in one sentence, the king must drive him away!

古文：荀跞以晋侯之命唁公，且曰： 寡君使跞以君命讨于意如，意如不敢逃死，君其入也！ 
现代文：荀跞以晋定公的名义慰问昭公，而且说： 寡君派跞以国君的名义责备意如，意如不敢逃避死亡，君王还是回国吧！ 
English: In the name of Emperor Jin, Emperor Ding, he offered his condolences to Emperor Zhao, and said, "If you dare not escape death, you may as well return to your country!"

古文：公曰： 君惠顾先君之好，施及亡人，将使归粪除宗祧以事君，则不能见夫人。己所能见夫人者，有如河！ 
现代文：昭公说： 君王赐惠照顾到先君的友好，延续到逃亡的人身上，准备让我回去扫除宗庙以事奉君王，那就不能见那个人，我要是能见那个人，有河神为证！ 
English: Zhao Gong said: "The king has given favor to take care of the friendship of the former king, extending it to the fugitive, and preparing for me to return to sweep away the ancestral temple to serve the king, then I can't see that person. If I can see that person, I have the river god as proof!"

古文：荀跞掩耳而走，曰： 寡君其罪之恐，敢与知鲁国之难？
现代文：荀跞捂上耳朵跑开，说： 寡君诚惶诚恐，岂敢预闻鲁国的祸难！
English: He covered his ears and ran away, saying, "You tyrants, full of fear and trembling, how dare you foretell the calamity of Lu!

古文：臣请复于寡君。 
现代文：下臣请求去回复寡君。 
English: The vassal requested to reply to the widower.

古文：退而谓季孙： 君怒未怠，子姑归祭。 
现代文：退出去告诉季孙，说： 国君的怒气没有平息，您姑且回去主持祭祀。 
English: Go back and tell Qisun, saying: The anger of the sovereign has not subsided, please go back and preside over the sacrificial rites.

古文：子家子曰： 君以一乘入于鲁师，季孙必与君归。 
现代文：子家子说： 君王驾一辆车进入鲁军，季孙一定和君王一起回去。 
English: Zi Jia Zi said: The king drove a car into the Lu army, Qisun must go back with the king.

古文：公欲从之，众从者胁公，不得归。
现代文：昭公想要听从。跟随的人们胁迫昭公，就没有能回去。
English: He wanted to obey, but the people who were following him threatened him and he was not able to go back.

古文：薛伯穀卒，同盟故书。
现代文：薛伯穀死了，由于是同盟国，所以《春秋》加以记载。
English: Xue Bo Gu died, and since he was an ally, "Spring and Autumn" recorded his death.

古文：秋，吴人侵楚，伐夷，侵潜、六。
现代文：秋季，吴军侵袭楚国，进攻夷地，又侵袭潜地、六地。
English: In the autumn, the Wu army invaded Chu, attacked the Yidi, and invaded the latent land and the six lands.

古文：楚沈尹戌帅师救潜，吴师还。
现代文：楚国沈尹戌带兵救援潜地，吴军退走。
English: Chu's Shen Yunyuan led troops to rescue the submarine, and the Wu army retreated.

古文：楚师迁潜于南冈而还。
现代文：楚军把潜地人迁移到南岗然后回去。
English: The Chu army moved the infiltrators to Nangang and then back.

古文：吴师围弦。左司马戌、右司马稽帅师救弦，及豫章。吴师还。
现代文：吴军包围弦地，左司马戌、右司马稽带兵救援弦地，到达豫章，吴军撤走。
English: The Wu army encircled Zhendi. Left Sima Wei and right Sima Qian led soldiers to rescue Zhendi, arrived at Yuzhang, and the Wu army withdrew.

古文：始用子胥之谋也。
现代文：这是吴王开始使用伍子胥的计谋了。
English: This was the time when King Wu began to use Wu Zixuan's stratagem.

古文：冬，邾黑肱以滥来奔。
现代文：冬季，邾国的黑肱带着滥地逃亡前来。
English: In winter, the black storks of Shan State come with their fledglings.

古文：贱而书名，重地故也。
现代文：这个人低贱而《春秋》记载他的名字，这是由于重视土地的缘故。
English: This man is lowly and "Spring and Autumn" records his name, which is due to the importance of the land.

古文：君子曰： 名之不可不慎也如是。夫有所有名，而不如其已。
现代文：君子说： 名声的不能不慎重就像这样：有时有了名声，反而不如没有名声。
English: The nobleman said, "It is necessary to be cautious about fame. It is like this: Sometimes having a reputation is better than not having a reputation.

古文：以地叛，虽贱，必书地，以名其人。终为不义，弗可灭已。
现代文：带了土地背叛，即使这个人地位低贱，也一定要记载地名，以此来记载这个人，结果成为不义，不能磨灭。
English: With land betrayal, even if the person's status is low, it is necessary to record the name of the place to record the person. The result is injustice and cannot be erased.

古文：是故君子动则思礼，行则思义，不为利回，不为义疚。或求名而不得，或欲盖而名章，惩不义也。
现代文：因此君子行动就想到礼，办事就想到义，不做图利而失去礼的事，不做不符合义而感到内疚的事，有人求名而得不到，有人想要掩盖反而明白地记下了名字，这是惩罚不义的人。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman acts, he thinks of propriety; when he acts, he thinks of righteousness; when he does not do things for profit, he loses propriety; when he does not do things that are not in accordance with righteousness, he feels guilty; when someone asks for a name, he does not get it; when someone wants to cover up, he clearly writes down the name. This is the punishment of an unjust person.

古文：齐豹为卫司寇，守嗣大夫，作而不义，其书为 盗 。
现代文：齐豹做卫国的司寇，是世袭大夫，做事情不义，就被记载为 盗 。
English: Qipao was a guard of the country, a hereditary doctor, and if he did something unjust, he was recorded as a thief.

古文：邾庶其、莒牟夷、邾黑肱以土地出，求食而已，不求其名，贱而必书。
现代文：邾国的庶其、莒国的牟夷，邾国的黑肱带着领地逃亡，只是为了谋求生活而已，不求什么名义，即使地位低贱也必定加以记载。
English: The bastard of Min, the Muyi of Min, and the black stork of Min fled with their territories, only to seek a living. They did not ask for any name, and even if their status was low, they would certainly be recorded.

古文：此二物者，所以惩肆而去贪也。
现代文：这两件事情，是用来惩罚放肆而除去贪婪的。
English: These two things are used to punish impudence and eliminate greed.

古文：若艰难其身，以险危大人，而有名章彻，攻难之士，将奔走之。
现代文：如果经历艰苦，使上面的人陷入危险，反而名声显扬，发动祸难的人就要为此而奔走。
English: If, through hardships, those at the top are in danger, and if, on the other hand, they become famous, those who caused the calamity should run for it.

古文：若窃邑叛君，以徼大利而无名，贪冒之民，将寘力焉。
现代文：如果盗窃城邑背叛国君去追求大利而不记下他的名字，贪婪的人就会卖力去干。
English: If one steals a city, betrays a sovereign, and pursues Italy without recording his name, the greedy man will do his best.

古文：是以《春秋》书齐豹曰 盗 ，三叛人名，以惩不义，数恶无礼，其善志也。
现代文：因此《春秋》记载齐豹叫做 盗 ，也记载三个叛逆的名字，用来惩戒不义，斥责无礼，这真是善于记述啊。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" records that Qi Leopard is called "Thief," and also records three rebellious names, which are used to punish injustice and reprimand rudeness. This is really good at recording.

古文：故曰，《春秋》之称：微而显，婉而辨。
现代文：所以说，《春秋》的记载文字隐微文雅而意义显著，言辞委婉而各有分寸。
English: Therefore, the recorded text of "Spring and Autumn" is subtly elegant and significant, and the words are euphemistic and have their own proportion.

古文：上之人能使昭明，善人劝焉，淫人惧焉，是以君子贵之。 
现代文：上面的人能够发扬《春秋》大义，就使善人得到劝勉，恶人有所畏惧，因此君子重视《春秋》。 
English: If the above people can carry forward the great cause of "Spring and Autumn," the good people will be encouraged and the evil people will be afraid. Therefore, the gentleman attaches importance to "Spring and Autumn."

古文：十二月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一日，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the Chinese New Year in December.

古文：是夜也，赵简子梦童子臝而转以歌。旦占诸史墨，曰： 吾梦如是，今而日食，何也？ 
现代文：这天夜里，赵简子梦见一个孩子光着身子按着节拍唱歌跳舞，早晨让史墨占卜，说： 我梦见这样，现在发生日食，是什么意思？ 
English: That night, Zhao Jianzi dreamed of a naked child singing and dancing to a beat. In the morning, he asked Shi Mo to do some divination, saying, "I dreamed of this, and now there is a solar eclipse. What does it mean?"

古文：对曰： 六年及此月也，吴其入郢乎！
现代文：史墨回答说： 六年以后到这个月，吴国恐怕要进入郢都吧！
English: Shi Mo replied, "From six years later to this month, I'm afraid that the State of Wuxi will have to enter the capital city of Shandong.

古文：终亦弗克。
现代文：但结果还是不能胜利。
English: But the result is still not a victory.

古文：入郢，必以庚辰。
现代文：进入郢都，一定在庚辰那一天。
English: Entering the capital, it must be on the day of Gengchen.

古文：日月在辰尾，庚午之日，日始有谪。
现代文：日月在苍龙之尾，庚午那天，太阳开始有灾。
English: The sun and the moon are at the tail of the dragon. On the morning of the seventh day, the sun began to wane.

古文：火胜金，故弗克。 
现代文：火能战胜金，所以不能胜利。 
English: Fire can beat gold, so you can't win.

