古文：黄帝令力黑浸行伏匿，周流四国，以观无恒，善之法则，力黑视象，见黑则黑，见白则白。
现代文：黄帝委派大臣力黑微服出访，巡视各国，考察人们品德上有否不合规范的地方，并为之制定准则。
English: The Yellow Emperor appointed the Minister of Lihai Micro-Clothing to visit foreign countries, inspect countries, investigate whether there are any non-standard places in people's moral character, and formulate guidelines for them.

古文：地之所德则善，天之所刑则恶。
现代文：力黑仔细考察各种事物现象，发现丑恶的品行便加以惩罚，发现善良的品行便加以褒奖。
English: Li Hei carefully examined all kinds of things and phenomena, found that the ugly behavior would be punished, and found that the good behavior would be praised.

古文：人视则镜：人静则静，人作则作。
现代文：凡属天道所养护的便善待之，属天道所诛伐的则唾弃之。对于人们所显示出的取舍好恶则用以作为借鉴参照。
English: Whatever is nurtured by the heavenly way is treated with kindness, and whatever is cut down by the heavenly way is rejected. People's demonstrated willingness to give up likes and dislikes is used as a reference.

古文：力黑已布制建极，而正之。
现代文：人们冬闲时需要静息则听其自便，农忙时需要劳作便任其自为。
English: When people need to rest in the winter, they do as they please, and when they need to work in the farm, they do as they please.

古文：力黑曰：天地已成而民生，逆顺无纪，德虐之刑，静作之时，先后之名，以为天下正。
现代文：当力黑已建立并颁布了各项规章制度要以此顺正民情时，便对黄帝说：大自然已经形成，人类也随之诞生，但此时是非善恶尚无区分的标准，奖赏惩罚也因之没有定则，闲息忙作尚缺乏规律性，贵贱尊卑还没有确定的名分。
English: When Li Hei had established and promulgated various rules and regulations in order to conform to the people's will, he said to the Yellow Emperor: Nature has been formed and human beings have been born, but at this time, there is no standard for distinguishing between good and evil, and there is no standard for reward and punishment. There is still a lack of regularity in leisure and busy work, and there is still no fixed rank for nobility and lowliness.

古文：因而勒之，为之若何？黄帝曰：群群囗囗，窈窈冥冥，为一囷。
现代文：现在我想使这些都变得恰当得体，使是非善恶能有分界，使奖赏惩罚能有准度，闲息忙作能有规律，贵贱尊卑有确定的名分，使之成为矫正天下的范式，并以此来规范人们的行为。这样做怎么样呢？
English: Now I want to make all of these things appropriate and decent, so that there can be a demarcation between good and evil, so that rewards and punishments can be accurate, leisure and busyness can be regular, and nobility and inferiority can have a definite place, so that it can become a paradigm for correcting the world and regulating people's behavior. How about doing this?

古文：无晦无明，未有阴阳。阴阳未定，吾未有以名。
现代文：黄帝说：天地未生之前，先天一气，看去混混沌沌，窈窈冥冥，浑聚昏暗，如一谷仓。此时阴气阳气未分，无所谓明暗昼夜。阴气阳气聚散未定，所以一切都无法称名。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: Before heaven and earth were born, there was only one qi a priori, which was chaotic and chaotic, dark and gloomy, and dark and gloomy, like a barn. At this time, the yin and yang qi were not separated, and there was no matter of light and dark, day and night. The yin and yang qi were not dispersed, so everything could not be named.

古文：今始判为两，分为阴阳，离为四时，刚柔相成，万物乃生，德虐之行，因以为常。其明者以为法，而微道是行。行法循道，是为牝牡。
现代文：现在天地既分，阴阳有别，离析而为春、夏、秋、冬四季，刚柔的相互更迭推衍便有了万物的生成，因此奖惩赏罚须兼行并举，并要将其作为一项制度确定下来，而奖惩赏罚的施行，要取法自然规律，二者须相互配合。顺行取法自然规律，遵循天道，这便是阴阳的全部道理。
English: Now that heaven and earth are separate, yin and yang are different, and spring, summer, autumn, and winter are spring, summer, autumn, and winter, respectively. The strong and soft mutual alternation and deduction have led to the creation of all things. Therefore, reward and punishment must be carried out simultaneously, and it must be determined as a system. And the implementation of reward and punishment must adopt the law of nature, and the two must cooperate with each other. Adopting the law of nature and following the way of heaven is the whole reason for yin and yang.

古文：牝牡相求，会刚与柔。柔刚相成，牝牡若形。
现代文：阴阳聚合，刚柔相济；刚柔的相辅相成，阴阳的融会贯通，便成就了万物。
English: Yin and yang coalesce, and hard and soft complement each other; hard and soft complement each other, and the integration of yin and yang penetrates, and all things are achieved.

古文：下会于地，上会于天。得天之微，若时者时而恒者恒，地因而养之；恃地气之发也，乃梦者梦而兹者兹，天因而成之。
现代文：轻清的阳气向下与重浊的阴气合会于地而生就了五谷草木，重浊的阴气向上与轻清的阳气会合于天而生成了日月星辰。因为得到了天气的精微，于是该合时序的便合时序，该孳长的便孳长了，万事因此得到了上天的成就。
English: Light and clear yang downwards and heavy and gloomy yang met on the ground and gave birth to grain and plants, while heavy and gloomy yang upwards and light and clear yang met in the sky and gave birth to the sun, moon and stars. Because the weather was subtle, the timing of the timing sequence was convenient, and the long string of notes was long, so everything was a heavenly achievement.

古文：弗因则不成，弗养则不生。
现代文：不因循天道万事便不会成功，没有地道的养护万物便不会生长。
English: All things will not succeed without following the heavenly way, and all things will not grow without the protection of the natural way.

古文：夫民之生也，规规生食与继。
现代文：人类刚一降生，便本能地懂得饮食生育的道理。
English: As soon as human beings are born, they instinctively understand the reason for eating and giving birth.

古文：不会不继，无与守地；不食不人，无与守天。
现代文：不婚娶交配人类便得不到繁衍，这样也就谈不上持守地道；无饮食来源人便不重养育，这样也就谈不上持守天道。
English: If humans do not marry and mate, they will not be able to reproduce, so there can be no talk of adhering to the natural way; if people do not have a source of food, they will not be reared, so there can be no talk of adhering to the heavenly way.

古文：是故赢阴布德，重阳长，昼气开民功者，所以食之也；宿阳修刑，童阴长，夜气闭地绳者，所以继之也。
现代文：阴气满盛时阳气便开始萌生，所以此时长养之德开始布散；阳气逐渐积累，昼气发动，成就事功，人类因此而得到饮食养育。阳气积久时阴气便开始萌动，所以此时肃杀之气开始酝酿；阴气逐渐积累，夜气闭合，孕育生机，人类因此而得到后继繁衍。
English: When yin is in full bloom, yang begins to germinate, so at this time the virtue of longevity begins to spread; yang gradually accumulates, daytime gas is launched, achievements are made, and human beings are thus nurtured by diet. When yang accumulates for a long time, yin begins to germinate, so at this time the killing gas begins to brew; yin gradually accumulates, nighttime gas is closed, giving birth to life, and human beings are thus able to reproduce.

古文：不靡不黑，而正之以刑与德。春夏为德，秋冬为刑。
现代文：在治理百姓时不要人为强制性地去对人民约束，要因顺取法刑德生杀的自然规律去布施赏罚而使民情归于正道。
English: When governing the people, do not artificially and forcibly restrain the people, and reward and punish them according to the law, morality and natural laws of life and death, so that the people's sentiments will return to the right path.

古文：先得后刑以养生。姓生已定，而敌者生争，不谌不定。凡谌之极，在刑与德。
现代文：四时节序，春夏之长养在先，而秋冬之肃杀在后，人事亦当取法此自然法则，始于德教，而继之以刑罚，四时节序之交替更迭而长养万物，人事之德赏刑罚相互为用以教化众生。
English: According to the order of the four seasons, spring and summer nurture first, and autumn and winter persecute later. People should also adopt this natural law, starting with moral education and followed by punishment. The alternation of the order of the four seasons nurtures all things. People's moral reward and punishment are mutually used to educate all beings.

古文：刑德皇皇，日月相望，以明其当，而盈屈无匡。
现代文：能够区别婚姻和贵贱的氏族社会已经形成，其中相互敌对的部落和阶级之间便不断发生战争和争斗，对这种斗争不予伐正社会就不会安定。
English: A society of clans that can distinguish between marriage and nobility has already been formed, in which wars and struggles are constantly taking place between mutually hostile tribes and classes. If this struggle is not addressed, society will not be stable.

古文：夫是故使民毋人执，举事毋阳察，力地无阴敝。
现代文：而刑与德、诛伐与文教并作，便是对其予以伐正的准则。
English: However, the combination of punishment and virtue, of discipline and education, is the criterion for correcting them.

古文：阴敝者土荒，阳察者夺光，人执者摐兵。
现代文：刑与德相互配合使用的道理是极为简单显明的，这就如同日月交替运行一样，懂得了恰当地使用刑德的道理，那么进退动静就不会有什么偏颇了。
English: The principle of using chastisement and virtue in conjunction with each other is extremely simple and obvious. This is like the sun and moon running alternately. If you understand the principle of using chastisement and virtue appropriately, then there will be no bias in moving forward or backward.

古文：是故为人主者，时适三乐，毋乱民功，毋逆天时。
现代文：统治人民时不要人为地偏执一己之私，征战伐国时不要从存生护养的角度考虑问题，务农息养时不要从刑杀的角度考虑问题。
English: When governing the people, don't be artificially paranoid and selfish, when invading and conquering a country, don't consider the issue from the perspective of survival and care, and when farming, don't consider the issue from the perspective of killing.

古文：然则五谷溜熟，民乃蕃滋。
现代文：以刑杀斩伐的思想指导务农则土地荒芜，以存生护养的思想指导征讨则功名丧失。
English: If farming is guided by the ideology of killing and cutting down, the land will be deserted, and if it is guided by the ideology of survival and conservation, it will lose its reputation.

古文：君臣上下，交得其志。
现代文：偏执一己之私欲会有兵祸的惩罚。
English: Paranoia and selfishness will be punished by military disaster.

古文：天因而成之。夫并时以养民功，先德后刑，顺于天。
现代文：作为一个统治者，应在春夏秋农作物生长收获之时恰当地节制逸乐，使播种收获适时，不在农忙时兴役兵戎，这样的话农作物就能正常地生长成熟，人民也会不断地繁衍庶足。
English: As a ruler, he should properly control pleasure at the time of spring, summer and autumn crop growth and harvest, make the sowing and harvesting timely, and not raise troops during the agricultural rush. In this way, the crops can grow and mature normally, and the people will continue to breed.

古文：其时赢而事屈，阴节复次，地尤复收。
现代文：君臣上下和谐融洽，这样的话也会得到上天的护佑。顺应天时以助民事，按照春夏德养在前，秋冬刑杀在后的自然规律而先行德政后施刑罚。
English: Monarchs and ministers should be harmonious and harmonious, in which case they will also receive the blessing of heaven. Obey the weather to help civil affairs, in accordance with the natural laws of spring and summer, moral upbringing first, autumn and winter, and execution first, and punishment after.

古文：正名修刑，蛰虫不出，雪霜复清，孟谷乃萧，此灾乃生，如此者举事将不成。其时屈而事赢，阳节复次，地尤不收。正名施刑，蛰虫发声，草苴复荣，已阳而又阳，重时而无光，如此者举事将不行。
现代文：在万物长养的春夏季节却实行肃杀严厉的政令，那么就会造成节令混乱，秋冬乖违次序而重复出现，地气不能发动长养万物反而再次敛缩，在政令上不顺应春夏长养的法则而布德施赏却违逆决狱刑罪，这样的话，就会造成蛰虫春眠，雪霜复至，百谷枯萎等一系列灾异的出现，在这样的政令下做任何事情都会失败。反之，在肃杀的秋冬季节却布德施赏，违逆天时那么也会造成节令混乱，春夏乖违次序而重复出现，地气不能适时收缩敛肃万物，在政令上不施刑伐诛而反行德赏，这样就会造成蛰虫冬鸣，枯草秋茂，春夏重复等一系列灾异的出现。而长养万物的春夏虽然重复出现却因乖逆天时而无长养之功可言。在这样的政令下做任何事情都是行不通的。
English: In the spring and summer seasons, when all things are long-nourished, but a strict order to suppress the insects is implemented, then the seasons will be chaotic. Autumn and winter will appear repeatedly in violation of the order. The earth's atmosphere cannot initiate the long-nourishment of all things, but it will contract again. In the government order, it does not conform to the law of spring and summer long-nourishment, but it is a crime of treason. In this case, it will cause a series of disasters such as the spring sleep of aphids, the return of snow and frost, and the withering of grain. Under such a government order, anything will fail.

古文：天道已既，地物乃备。散流乡成，圣人之事。
现代文：上有既定的天道，下有周备的万物，中有阴阳二气聚散流动、相因相成地创生一切，圣人只需要顺因其事就可以了。
English: There is an established heavenly path above, all things are prepared below, there are yin and yang and two qi converge and flow, and everything is created by mutual cause and effect. The sage only needs to obey his cause.

古文：圣人不巧，时反是守。
现代文：圣人不设机心智巧，但知静候天道而持守之。
English: The sage does not rely on cunning or cleverness, but knows how to quietly wait for the heavenly way and keep it.

古文：优未爱民，与天同道。
现代文：同时惠爱人民，如天地一样德泽广被。
English: At the same time, he loved the people and was as virtuous as heaven and earth.

古文：圣人正以待之，静以须人。
现代文：圣人以公正的态度守候天道，以虚静的心灵对待人事。
English: The sage observes the heavenly way with a fair attitude, and treats people with a tranquil mind.

古文：不达天刑，不襦不传。
现代文：恭行天意对有罪之人及国家予以惩罚征讨，在处理这些事情量重诺不违信。
English: It is the will of heaven to punish the guilty and the country, and it is not a breach of faith to deal with these matters.

古文：当天时，与之皆断；当断不断，反受其乱。
现代文：顺应天时，抓住时机，当机立断。时当决断而优柔寡断，错过时机，不但福吉失去，反会自取其祸。
English: When the time is right, seize the opportunity and make a decision. When the time is right, make a decision but be indecisive. If you miss the opportunity, not only will you lose Fudge, but you will bring misfortune on yourself.

