古文：孙思邈司马承祯尹君
现代文：孙思邈司马承祯尹君
English: Sun Siwei, Sima Chengyu, Yin Jun

古文：孙思邈
现代文：孙思邈
English: Sung Si-soo

古文：孙思邈，雍州华原人也。
现代文：孙思邈是雍州华原人。
English: Sun Siyu is a native of Huayuan, Yongzhou.

古文：七岁就学，日诵千余言。
现代文：七岁上学，每天读书大约一千字左右。
English: He went to school at the age of seven and read about a thousand words a day.

古文：弱冠，善谈庄、老及百家之说，亦好释典。
现代文：他成年之后，喜欢谈论庄、老及百家的学说，也喜欢佛经。
English: After he became an adult, he liked to talk about the teachings of Zhuang, Lao and Baekje, and also liked Buddhist scriptures.

古文：洛阳总管独孤信，见而叹曰： 此圣童也，但恨其器大识小，难为用也。 
现代文：洛阳总管独孤信，见了他之后便感叹地说： 这是一个圣童，只怕他器量大见识少，很难任用。 
English: Luoyang's general manager had no faith in him, and after seeing him, he said with regret: "This is a saintly boy. Even if he has great ability but little insight, it would be difficult to appoint him."

古文：后周宣帝时，思逊以王室多故，遂隐居太白山。
现代文：后周宣帝的时候，孙思邈因为王室发生了许多变故，就隐居到太白山里。
English: When Emperor Xuan was proclaimed later that week, Sun Siyu went into seclusion in the Taibai Mountains because of the many changes that had taken place in the royal family.

古文：隋文帝辅政，徵为国子博士，称疾不起。
现代文：隋文帝辅政的时候，让他做国子博士。他称病不起。
English: When Sui Emperor Wen was a vice-president, he asked him to be a national doctor. He said he was too sick to do it.

古文：常谓所亲曰： 过是五十年，当有圣人出，吾方助之以济人。 
现代文：他常常对亲近的人说： 再过五十年，应当有一个圣人出世，那时候我才能帮他救济世人。 
English: He often said to those close to him: In another fifty years, a saint should be born, and then I will be able to help him relieve the world.

古文：及唐太宗即位，召诣京师，嗟其容色甚少。谓曰： 故知有道者诚可尊重，羡门、广成，岂虚言哉。 
现代文：到唐太宗即位，把他召到京城，慨叹他的模样很年轻，对他说： 我因此知道有道术的人实在应当受到尊重，羡门、广成等神人确实不是虚传。 
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he summoned him to the capital, lamented that he looked very young, and said to him: I know that people with Taoism should really be respected, and Enmen, Guangcheng and other gods are really not fictitious.

古文：将授以爵位，固辞不受。
现代文：皇上要授给他爵位，他坚决推辞，不肯接受。
English: The emperor wanted to bestow a title of nobility on him, but he resolutely refused to accept it.

古文：唐显庆四年，高宗召见，拜谏议大夫，又固辞不受。
现代文：唐显庆四年，唐高宗召见他，请他做谏议大夫，他又坚决推辞不接受。
English: In the fourth year of Tang Xianqing, Tang Gaozong summoned him and asked him to be a doctor of debate, but he resolutely refused to accept.

古文：上元元年，辞疾请归，特赐良马及鄱阳公主邑司以居焉。
现代文：上元元年，他托病请求回乡，皇上特意赐好马给他，并且把鄱阳公主的城邑赐给他居住。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he requested to return to his hometown on the pretext of illness. The emperor specially gave him a good horse, and gave him the city of Princess Poyang to live in.

古文：当时名士，如宋之问、孟诜、卢照邻等，皆执师弟之礼以事焉。
现代文：当时的名士，像宋之问、孟诜、卢照邻等，都用老师弟子的礼节对待他。
English: The celebrities of that time, such as Song Zhiwen, Meng Yao, Lu Zhao neighbor, etc., all treated him with the etiquette of a teacher's disciple.

古文：思邈尝从幸九成宫。
现代文：孙思邈曾经和皇帝一起到过九成宫。
English: Sun Siwei once went to the Jiu Chenggong Palace with the emperor.

古文：照邻病，留在其宅，时庭前有大梨树，照邻为之赋。其序曰： 癸酉之岁，余卧疾长安光德坊之官舍，户老云，是鄱阳公主邑司，昔公主未嫁而卒，故其邑废。
现代文：卢照邻病了，住在他的住宅里，当时院子里有一棵大梨树，卢照邻就为那梨树作了一篇辞赋，赋的序言说： 癸酉这年，我卧病在长安光德坊的官舍里，这里的老人说，这是鄱阳公主的城邑。从前鄱阳公主没有出嫁就死了，所以她的城邑一直荒废着。
English: Lu Zhaozhong fell ill and lived in his residence. At that time, there was a large pear tree in the courtyard. Lu Zhaozhong made a speech for the pear tree. The preamble of the speech said: "This year, I was sick in the official residence of Chang'an Guangdefang. The old people here said that this is the city of Princess Poyang. Princess Poyang died without marrying, so her city has been deserted.

古文：时有处士孙思邈，道洽古今，学殚数术，高谈正一，则古之蒙庄子。深入不二，则今之维摩诘。至于推步甲乙，度量乾坤，则洛下闳、安期先生之俦也。
现代文：当时有一位处士叫孙思邈，他通晓古今，学尽各种数术。他谈论起道家的理论来，就像古代的蒙县庄子；他的学问深入不二，就像当今的维摩诘；至于推算天文历法量度天地，则可以与洛下闳、安期先生相提并论。
English: At that time, there was an official named Sun Sijian, who was familiar with the ancient and modern times and learned all kinds of mathematics. He talked about the theory of Taoism, just like the ancient Mengxian Zhuangzi; his knowledge was profound, just like today's Vermeer; as for the calculation of the astronomical calendar and the measurement of heaven and earth, it can be compared with Mr. Luo Jiajie and Mr. Anji.

古文：自云开皇辛酉岁生，年九十三矣。
现代文：他自己说生于开皇辛酉年，已经九十三岁了。
English: He himself said that he was born in the year of Emperor Xinzhuang, and is already ninety-three years old.

古文：察之乡里，咸云数百岁。
现代文：到乡间打听他，人们都说他已经几百岁了。
English: Ask anyone in the countryside and they'll tell you he's hundreds of years old.

古文：又共话周齐间事，历历如目见。
现代文：另外，他和人们一起谈论起周、齐之间事来，记得清清楚楚，就像亲眼见过。
English: In addition, he talked with people about the events between Zhouzhou and Qi, and remembered them clearly, as if he had seen them with his own eyes.

古文：以此参之，不啻百岁人矣。
现代文：以此检验他，就不止是一百岁的人了。
English: By this test, he is more than a hundred years old.

古文：然犹视听不衰，神彩甚茂，可谓古之聪明博达不死者也。
现代文：然而他的耳不聋，眼不花，神采奕奕。可以说是古代的聪明傅达长寿之人了。
English: However, his ears are not deaf, his eyes are not dilated, and he is full of vigor. It can be said that he is an ancient man of wisdom and longevity.

古文：时照邻有盛名，而染恶疾，嗟禀受之不同，昧遐夭之殊致。
现代文：当时卢照邻很有名气，他得了重病，他嗟叹每个人的承受不同，不知道人长寿短命如此悬殊。
English: At that time, Lu Zhao's neighbor was very famous. He fell seriously ill. He lamented that everyone's suffering was different, and he did not know that there was such a disparity between people's long and short lives.

古文：因问思邈曰： 名医愈疾，其道如何？ 
现代文：于是他问孙思邈： 名医治病，它的道理如何呢？ 
English: So he asked Sun Siyu: What is the reason for famous doctors to cure diseases?

古文：对曰： 吾闻善言天者，必质于人；善言人者，必本于天。
现代文：孙思邈回答说： 我听说善于谈论天的人，一定要向人打听；善于谈论人的人，一定要以天的道理为依据。
English: Sun Siyu replied: I have heard that those who are good at talking about heaven must ask people; those who are good at talking about people must be based on the truth of heaven.

古文：天有四时五行，寒暑迭代。
现代文：天有四时的变化，五行的运转，寒暑交替。
English: There is a four o'clock change in the sky, the movement of the five elements, and the alternation of cold and hot.

古文：其转运也，和而为雨，怒而为风，凝而为霜雪，张而为虹霓。
现代文：它的运转，和就下雨；怒就刮风；凝结就是霜雪；张扬就是虹霓。
English: Its operation, harmony is rain; anger is wind; condensation is frost and snow; publicity is a rainbow.

古文：此天地之常数也。
现代文：这是天地的规律。
English: This is the law of heaven and earth.

古文：人有四肢五脏，一觉一寐，呼吸吐纳，循而为往来，流而为荣卫，彰而为气色，发而为音声。
现代文：人有四肢和五脏，有醒有睡，有呼有吸，循环往复。流动，就形成人体的营养作用、卫外机能和血气循环；明显，就成为人的气色；发声，就有了人的声音。
English: People have four limbs and five internal organs, wake and sleep, breathe and inhale, and cycle back and forth. Flow forms the human body's nutritional role, external health function and blood gas cycle; obviously, it becomes a human complexion; vocalization, there is a human voice.

古文：此人之常数也。
现代文：这是人的规律。阳性，用它的精神；阴性，用它的形体。
English: This is the law of man. The masculine, with its spirit; the feminine, with its form.

古文：阳用其精，阴用其形，天人之所同也。及其失也，蒸则生热，否则生寒，结而为疣赘，陷而为痈疽，奔而为喘乏，竭而为焦枯，诊发乎面，变动乎形。
现代文：这是天和人相同的地方。等到失去这种正常现象，热气上升则生热；不然就生寒；凝结就成为肿瘤；凹陷就成为痈疽；奔跃就成为喘息、困乏；竭尽就成为焦枯。病情呈现在表面，病变动却在形体内。
English: This is the place where heaven and man are the same. When this normal phenomenon is lost, the rising of hot air will produce heat; otherwise, it will produce cold; condensation will become a tumor; depression will become gangrene; running will become wheezing, fatigue; exhaustion will become scorched. The disease appears on the surface, but the disease changes are in the body.

古文：推此以及天地，则亦如之。
现代文：把这种道理推及到天地方面，也是这样的。
English: It is the same when we extend this principle to heaven and earth.

古文：故五纬盈缩，星辰失度，日月错行，彗孛流飞，此天地之危疹也。
现代文：所以，金、木、水、火、土，五大行星有盈有缩，星辰失去了常度，日月的运行出现错乱，慧星离开轨道飞行，这是天地的大病。
English: Therefore, gold, wood, water, fire and earth, the five major planets have waxed and waned, the stars have lost their constancy, the movement of the sun and moon has become disordered, and comets have left their orbits. This is a serious illness of heaven and earth.

古文：寒暑不时，此天地之蒸否也。石立土踊，此天地之疣赘也。山崩地陷，此天地之痈疽也。奔风暴雨，此天地之喘乏也。
现代文：寒暑不正常，这是天地热气上升与否的表现；岩石泥土耸起，这是天地的肿瘤；山崩地陷，这是天地的痈疽；狂奔的风，狂暴的雨，这是天地的喘息和困乏；雨露润泽不及时。
English: Abnormal cold and heat, which is the manifestation of whether the heat of heaven and earth rises or not; rock and dirt rising, which is the tumor of heaven and earth; landslide and landslide, which is the gangrene of heaven and earth; rushing wind, raging rain, which is the respite and fatigue of heaven and earth; rain and dew are not timely.

古文：雨泽不时，川源涸竭，此天地之焦枯也。良医导之以药石，救之以针剂；圣人和之以道德，辅之以政事。
现代文：江河干涸，这是天地的焦枯。良医治病，用药疏导，用针剂拯救；圣人济世，用道德调和，用政事辅助。
English: The rivers have dried up, which is the scorched earth of heaven and earth. Good medicine cures diseases, medicine guides, and injections save; saints benefit the world, harmonize with morality, and assist with politics.

古文：故体有可愈之疾，天地有可消之灾。 
现代文：所以，人身上有可以治好的病，天地有可以消除的灾。 
English: Therefore, there are diseases in the human body that can be cured, and there are disasters in heaven and earth that can be eliminated.

古文：又曰： 胆欲大而心欲小，智欲圆而行欲方。
现代文：他又说： 胆子要大，而用心要细；心智要圆活，行为要方正。
English: He also said: "Be bold, but be careful; the mind should be rounded, and the behavior should be square.

古文：诗曰： 如临深渊，如履薄冰？谓小心也。 赳赳武夫，公侯干城？谓大胆也。 不为利回，不为义疚 。行之方也。 见机而作，不俟终日 。智之圆也。 
现代文：《诗经》说， 如临深渊，如履薄冰 ，说的是小心； 赳赳武夫，公侯干城 ，说的是大胆； 不为利回，不为义疚 ，这是行为的方正； 见机而作，不俟终日 ，这是心智的圆活。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "If you are approaching the abyss, if you are treading on thin ice, it is said to be careful; if you are a warrior, Prince Gancheng, it is said to be bold; not for profit, not for guilt, this is the foundation of behavior; if you do it at the right time, do not stay all day, this is the round work of the mind.

古文：其文学也，颖出如是。其道术也，不可胜纪焉。
现代文：他的文学，如此超拔突出；他的道术也不可胜纪。
English: His literature is so outstanding; his Taoism is unsurpassed.

古文：初魏徵等受诏修齐梁周隋等五代史，恐有遗漏，屡访于思邈，口以传授，有如目睹。
现代文：当初魏徵等人受命编修齐、梁、周、隋等五代史，恐怕有遗漏，多次向孙思邈请教。他用口传授，就像亲眼所见一样。
English: At the beginning, Wei Zheng and others were ordered to compile the history of the five dynasties of Qi, Liang, Zhou, Sui and so on. Afraid that there might be omissions, they repeatedly asked Sun Shizhen for advice. He taught by word of mouth, just as he saw with his own eyes.

古文：东台侍郎孙处约，尝将其五子侹、儆、俊、侑、佺，以谒思邈。
现代文：东台侍郎孙处约，曾经带着五个儿子孙侹、孙儆、孙俊、孙侑、孙侹去拜见孙思邈。
English: He once took his five sons, Sun Ying, Sun Ying, Sun Jun, Sun Ying, and Sun Ying, to pay homage to Sun Shih.

古文：思邈曰： 俊当先贵，侑当晚达，佺最居重位，祸在执兵。 
现代文：孙思邈说： 孙俊应当首先显贵；孙侑应当显达得较晚；孙侹的地位最高，灾祸出在执掌兵权上。 
English: Sun Siyu said: Sun Jun should be the first to be distinguished; Sun Yat-sen should be distinguished later; Sun Yat-sen's status is the highest, and the disaster is in holding the military power.

古文：后皆如其言。
现代文：后来都像他说的一样。
English: It all turned out like he said.

古文：太子詹事卢齐卿，自幼时请问人伦之事，思邈曰： 汝后五十年，位登方伯。吾孙当为属吏，可自保也。 
现代文：太子詹事卢齐卿，小时候向孙思邈请教人伦的事情，孙思邈说： 你今后五十年，地位可达到一方诸侯之长，我的孙子应当是你属下的官吏，你应当自己保重才是。 
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Luqi, when he was a child, asked Sun Siyi for advice on human relations. Sun Siyi said: In the next fifty years, your status can reach the highest of a prince. My grandson should be an official under you. You should take care of yourself.

古文：齐卿后为徐州刺史，思邈孙溥，果为徐州萧县丞。
现代文：卢齐卿后来做了徐州刺史，孙思邈的孙子孙溥，果然是徐州萧县的县令。
English: Lu Qiqing later became the county magistrate of Xiao County in Xuzhou, the grandson of Sun Siyi.

古文：邈初谓齐卿言时，溥犹未生，而预知其事。
现代文：孙思邈当初对卢齐卿说这话的时候，孙溥还没有出生，而预先知道了他的事情。
English: When Sun Siyu first said this to Lord Lu Qi, Sun Yat-sen had not yet been born and knew about him in advance.

古文：凡诸异迹，多如此焉。
现代文：凡是各种奇异的事情，大多如此。
English: All sorts of strange things, mostly.

古文：永淳元年卒。遗令薄葬，不藏冥器，不奠生牢，经月余，颜貌不改。
现代文：永淳元年，孙思邈死去，死前留下话要薄葬，不准在墓中埋藏殉葬品，不准用活着的牛羊祭奠。经过一个多月，他的脸色没变。
English: In the first year of Yongchun, Sun Siyu died. Before his death, he left a message to be buried thinly, not allowed to bury funerary objects in the grave, and not allowed to use living cattle and sheep to worship. After more than a month, his face did not change.

古文：举尸就木，空衣而已，时人异之。
现代文：举起他的尸体往棺材里装的时候，他只剩下空空的衣服而已，当时的人都感到奇怪。
English: When his body was lifted into the coffin, all that was left of him were his empty clothes, to the surprise of everyone present.

古文：自注《老子》、《庄子》。撰《千金方》三十卷、《福禄论》三十卷、《摄生真箓》、《枕中素书》、《会三教论》，各一卷。
现代文：他亲自注释了《老子》、《庄子》，撰写了《千金方》三十卷、《福禄论》三十卷、《摄生真箓》、《枕中素书》、《会三教论》各一卷。
English: He personally annotated "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi" and wrote 30 volumes of "The Art of Money," 30 volumes of "On Fortune," 30 volumes of "The True Meaning of Life," one volume of "The Pillow Book" and one volume of "On the Three Teachings."

古文：开元中，复有人见隐于终南山，与宣律师相接，每来往参请宗旨。
现代文：开元年间，又有人发现他隐居在终南山，与宣律师相来往，宣律师常常来来往往地向他参学请教佛教宗旨。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, it was discovered that he had been living in seclusion in Zhennanshan, and had been in contact with Xuan Bao, who often came and went to ask him for advice on the tenets of Buddhism.

古文：时大旱，西域僧请于昆明池结坛祈雨，诏有司备香灯，凡七日，缩水数尺，忽有老人夜诣宣律师求救曰： 弟子昆明池龙也。
现代文：当时天大旱，有一个西域的僧人请求在昆明池筑坛求雨，皇上下诏让有关部门准备香灯。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought, and a monk from the western region requested to build an altar to pray for rain in Kunming Lake. The emperor ordered the relevant departments to prepare incense lamps.

古文：无雨时久，匪由弟子，胡僧利弟子脑将为药，欺天子言祈雨，命在旦夕。乞和尚法力救护。 
现代文：一共七天，水缩下去几尺。忽然有一位老人夜里到宣律师那里求救，说： 我是昆明池里的龙，很久没下雨，不是因为我。一个胡僧要用我的脑子做药，欺骗天子说求雨，我的命危在旦夕，请和尚用法力救护于我。 
English: For a total of seven days, the water shrank down a few feet. Suddenly, an old man came to Xuan lawyer in the night to ask for help, saying: I am the dragon in the Kunming pond, it has not rained for a long time, not because of me. A monk wants to use my brain to make medicine, deceive the heavenly son and say that I am begging for rain. My life is in danger, please use the monk's magic to save me.

古文：宣公辞曰： 贫道持律而已，可求孙先生。 
现代文：宣公推辞说： 贫僧操守戒律罢了，你可以去求孙思邈老先生。 
English: The proclamation said, "Poor monk, all you have to do is to observe the precepts. You can go and ask Sun Siwei, an old man.

古文：老人因至，思邈谓曰： 我知昆明龙宫有仙方三十首，若能示予，予将救汝。 
现代文：老人于是就来到孙思邈那里。孙思邈说： 我知道昆明池龙宫里有神仙药方三十个，如果能让我看看，我就救你。 
English: The old man then came to Sun Siyu. Sun Siyu said, "I know that there are thirty immortals' prescriptions in the Dragon Palace of Kunming Lake. If you can let me see them, I will save you."

古文：老人曰： 此方上帝不许妄传，今急矣，固无所吝。 
现代文：老人说： 这些药方天帝不准随便外传，现在紧急了，丝毫无所吝啬！ 
English: The old man said, "God does not allow these prescriptions to be casually passed on to others. This is an emergency, and there is no need to be stingy!

古文：有顷，捧方而至。
现代文：过了一会儿，老人捧着药方来了。
English: After a while, the old man came back with a prescription.

古文：思邈曰： 尔但还，无虑胡僧也。 
现代文：孙思邈说： 你天明回去，不用担心胡僧。 
English: Sun Siyu said, "You can go back as soon as tomorrow, don't worry, monk.

古文：自是池水忽涨，数日溢岸，胡僧羞恚而死。
现代文：从此池水忽然暴涨，几天便漫上岸来，胡僧羞怒而死。
English: From then on, the water of the pond suddenly surged, and after a few days, it overflowed onto the shore. The monk died of shame and anger.

古文：又尝有神仙降，谓思邈曰： 尔所著《千金方》，济人之功，亦已广矣。
现代文：另外，曾经有一个神仙从天而降，对孙思邈说： 你所著的《千金方》，济人的功效也很广了。
English: In addition, once upon a time, a god descended from the sky and said to Sun Siyi, "Your book, "The Book of a Thousand Cubes," has a wide range of effectiveness in helping people.

古文：而以物命为药，害物亦多。必为尸解之仙，不得白日轻举矣。
现代文：而用生物做药，残害的生物也太多了，你一定会成为一个尸解的神仙，不能白天升天成仙了。
English: But if you use living things to make medicine, you will destroy too many living things. You will definitely become a dissected immortal. You can't become an immortal during the day.

古文：昔真人桓闿谓陶贞白，事亦如之，固吾子所知也。 
现代文：从前，一位真人桓闿告诉陶贞白，事情也是这样，本来你是知道的。 
English: Once upon a time, a real person, Huan Qi, told Tao Zhenbai that this was also the case, which you already knew.

古文：其后思邈取草木之药，以代虻虫水蛭之命，作《千金方翼》三十篇。每篇有龙宫仙方一首，行之于世。
现代文：此后孙思邈采用草木做药，以代替虻虫、水蛭的性命，作《千金方翼》三十篇，每篇有《龙宫仙方》一个行世。
English: After that, Sun Siyu used plants and trees to make medicine to replace the lives of aphids and leeches, and wrote thirty "Thousand Golden Square Wings," each of which has a "Dragon Palace Immortal Square."

古文：及玄宗避羯胡之乱，西幸蜀。既至蜀，梦一叟须鬓尽白，衣黄襦，再拜于前，已而奏曰： 臣孙思邈也，庐于峨眉山有年矣。
现代文：等到唐玄宗躲避安史之乱，向西到达蜀地之后，梦见一位老汉须发皆白，穿黄色衣服，再三在面前参拜，然后奏道： 我是孙思邈，在峨嵋山结庐居住多年了。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong escaped the Anshi Rebellion and headed west to Shu, he dreamed of an old man with white hair, wearing yellow clothes, repeatedly worshiping in front of him, and then said: I am Sun Siyi, I have lived in Mount Emei for many years.

古文：今闻銮驾幸成都，臣故候谒。 
现代文：现在听说皇上的銮驾来到成都，我所以等候在这里拜谒。 
English: Now I have heard that the emperor is coming to Chengdu, so I am waiting here to pay my respects.

古文：玄宗曰： 我熟识先生名久矣。今先生不远而至，亦将有所求乎？ 
现代文：唐玄宗说： 我熟悉你的名字很久了，现在你不怕道路遥远来到这里，也是有所求吗？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "I have known your name for a long time. Now, aren't you afraid of the long journey to come here, and do you have something to ask for?"

古文：思邈对曰： 臣隐居云泉，好饵金石药，闻此地出雄黄，愿以八十两为赐。
现代文：孙思邈说： 我隐居在云泉之间，喜欢吃金石之药，听说这个地方出雄黄，希望赐给我八十两。
English: Sun Siyu said: I live in seclusion between the clouds and springs, I like to eat the medicine of gems and stones, I heard that this place is very beautiful, I hope to be given eighty-two.

古文：脱遂臣请，幸降使赍至峨眉山。 
现代文：如果能满足我的要求，请派使者到峨嵋山来。 
English: If you can meet my request, please send an emissary to Mount Emei.

古文：玄宗诺之，悸然而寤。即诏寺臣陈忠盛挈雄黄八十两，往峨眉宣赐思邈。
现代文：唐玄宗答应了，心大跳而醒来，立即就令侍臣陈忠盛带八十两雄黄，到峨嵋山去赐给孙思邈。
English: Tang Xuan Zong consented, woke up with a pounding heart, and immediately ordered his attendant Chen Zhongsheng to take eighty-two male elephants to Mount Emei to give them to Sun Siyu.

古文：忠盛既奉诏，入峨眉，至屏风岭，见一叟貌甚俊古，衣黄襦，立于岭下。
现代文：陈忠盛奉诏之后来到峨嵋山，走到屏风岭，遇见一位容貌很俊逸古朴的老头，穿黄色衣服立在岭下。
English: After receiving the edict, Chen Zhongsheng came to Mount Emei, walked to the Fenfeng Ridge, and met a very handsome and simple-looking old man, wearing yellow clothes, standing under the ridge.

古文：谓忠盛曰： 汝非天子使乎？
现代文：老头对陈忠盛说： 你莫非是天子的使者吗？
English: The old man said to Chen Zhongsheng: Aren't you the messenger of the Son of Heaven?

古文：我即孙思邈也。 
现代文：我就是孙思邈。 
English: I am Sun Siwei.

古文：忠盛曰： 上命以雄黄赐先生。 
现代文：陈忠盛说： 皇上让我把雄黄赐给你。 
English: Chen Zhongsheng said, "Your Majesty, let me give you the male yellow horse."

古文：其叟偻而受。既而曰： 吾蒙天子赐雄黄，今有表谢，属山居无翰墨，天使命笔札传写以进也。 
现代文：那老头躬身接受，然后说： 我承蒙天子赐给我雄黄，现在有表章致谢，但这里是山野之居，没有笔墨，请您执笔转抄送进宫中。 
English: The old man bowed down and accepted, and then said, "I have been blessed by the Son of Heaven with great wealth, and now I have a medal to express my gratitude, but this is the home of mountains and fields, and there is no pen and ink. Please write and send it to the palace."

古文：忠盛即召吏执牍染翰。
现代文：陈忠盛立即让官吏拿来笔墨之类。
English: Chen Zhongsheng immediately asked the officials to bring pen and ink.

古文：叟指一石曰： 表本在石上。君可录焉。 
现代文：老头指着一块石头说： 表章在那石头上，您可以抄录下来。 
English: The old man pointed to a rock and said, "The seal is on that rock, you can copy it."

古文：忠盛目其石，果有朱字百余，实表本也。
现代文：陈忠盛看那石块，果然有一百多个红字，确实是表章。
English: Chen Zhongsheng looked at the stone, and sure enough, there were more than a hundred red characters, which were indeed the seal.

古文：遂誊写其字，写毕。
现代文：于是就把那些字抄录下来。
English: So he copied the words down.

古文：视其叟与石，俱亡见矣。
现代文：写完之后，再看老头和石头，全都不见了。
English: After I finished writing, I looked again at the old man and the stone, and they were all gone.

古文：于是具以其事闻于玄宗，玄宗因问忠盛，叟之貌与梦者果同，由是益奇之。
现代文：于是陈忠盛把这事详细地奏明唐玄宗。唐玄宗于是问陈忠盛，老头的相貌与梦中的果然一样，因此更感惊奇。
English: So Chen Zhongsheng reported the matter in detail to Tang Xuanzong. Tang Xuanzong then asked Chen Zhongsheng, the old man's appearance was indeed the same as in the dream, so he was even more surprised.

古文：自是或隐或见。
现代文：从此，孙思邈有时候隐没，有时候出现。
English: Since then, Sun Siyu has sometimes disappeared and sometimes reappeared.

古文：咸通末，山下民家，有几十余岁，不食荤血，父母以其好善，使于白水僧院为童子。
现代文：咸通末年，山下的一家百姓，有一个十几岁的男孩，不吃荤血，父母认为他喜欢善行，让他到白水僧院做了童子。
English: At the end of the year in Hamdang, a family in the mountains had a teenage boy who did not eat blood sausage. His parents thought he liked to do good deeds, so they sent him to the Baishui Monastery as a boy.

古文：忽有游客称孙处士，周游院中讫，袖中出汤末以授童子，曰： 为我如茶法煎来。 
现代文：忽然有一位游客自称孙处士，在院中游了一周之后，从袖中取出一包汤药碎末交给童子说： 为我像烹茶那样煎好。 
English: Suddenly, a tourist who called himself Sun Chengzhi, after swimming for a week in the middle of the hospital, took out a packet of powdered soup from his sleeve and handed it to the boy, saying: "Fry it for me like cooking tea."

古文：处士呷少许，以余汤与之，觉汤极美，愿赐一碗。
现代文：煎好之后，处士饮了一些，把剩下的汤汁给了童子。童子觉得汤汁的味道极美，希望再给他一碗。
English: After frying, the clerk drank some and gave the rest of the soup to the boy. The boy thought the soup was delicious and wanted to have another bowl.

古文：处士曰： 此汤为汝来耳。 
现代文：处士说： 这药就是为你来的！ 
English: The clerk said, "This medicine is for you!"

古文：即以末方寸匕，更令煎吃，因与同侣话之，出门，处士已去矣。
现代文：就把方寸这样大的一匙药沫再让他煎着吃。于是他便向同伴们说了。出门一看，处士已离去了。
English: So he took a spoonful of powder the size of a square inch and let him fry it and eat it. So he told his companions. When he went out, he saw that the official had already left.

古文：童子亦乘空而飞，众方惊异。顾视煎汤铫子，已成金矣。
现代文：童子也乘空飞起来。众人正在惊异，一看那煎药的锅子，已变成金的了。
English: The boy also flew into the air, and everyone was amazed to see that the frying pan had turned into gold.

古文：其后亦时有人见思邈者。
现代文：这以后也时常有见到孙思邈的人。
English: Since then, people have often seen Sun Siyu.

古文：司马承祯
现代文：司马承祯
English: Sima Chengyao

古文：司马承祯，字子微。
现代文：司马承祯，字子微，博学多才，善长文学。
English: Sima Chengyao, the character is weak, erudite and versatile, good at literature.

古文：博学能文，攻篆，迥为一体，号曰金剪刀书。
现代文：他钻研篆书。他写的篆书，自成一体，叫作 金剪刀书 。
English: He studied calligraphy. The calligraphy book he wrote is called the Golden Scissors Book.

古文：隐于天台山玉霄峰，自号白云子。
现代文：他隐居在天台山玉霄峰，自号 白云子 ，有服用丹药的道术。
English: He lived in seclusion on Tiantai Mountain's Jade Mountain Peak, called himself Baiyunzi, and was skilled in the art of taking herbal medicine.

古文：有服饵之术，则天累征之不起。
现代文：武则天多次征召他，他都不应。
English: Wu Zetian repeatedly conscripted him, but he refused to go.

古文：睿宗雅尚道教，屡加尊异，承祯方赴召。
现代文：唐睿宗崇尚道教，对他屡次给予特别的尊敬。
English: Tang Ruizong advocated Taoism and repeatedly gave him special respect.

古文：睿宗问阴阳术数之事。
现代文：他刚应召赴京，睿宗就向他问起推断人事吉凶祸福的事。
English: As soon as he was summoned to Beijing, Ruizong asked him about inferring personal fortune.

古文：承祯对曰： 老子经云： 损之又损，以至于无为。 
现代文：他回答说： 《老子》上说： 削弱权力，再削弱权力，以达到顺应自然。 
English: He replied: "Lao Zi" said: "Weaken the power, and then weaken the power to achieve compliance with nature."

古文：且心目所见知，每损之尚未能已，岂复攻乎异端而增智虑哉？ 
现代文：心中想到的，眼里看到的事物，常常削弱欲望尚且不能做到不想不看，难道还要再钻研异端而增加心智上的忧虑吗？ 
English: What is in the mind, what is seen by the eyes, often weakens the desire, and yet it is not possible not to want to look, is it necessary to delve into heresy again and increase mental anxiety?

古文：睿宗曰： 理身无为，则清高矣；理国无为，如之何？ 
现代文：睿宗说： 以顺应自然的方法治理自身，就可以做到清高；用顺应自然的方法治理国家，怎样呢？ 
English: Ruizong said: Governing oneself in a way that conforms to nature can achieve clarity; how about governing the country in a way that conforms to nature?

古文：对曰： 国犹身也。
现代文：他回答说： 国家就像自身一样。
English: He replied: A country is like itself.

古文：老子曰： 留心于淡，合气于漠，顺物自然，乃无私焉，而天下理。 
现代文：《老子》上说： 在淡泊上多注意，在寂静处聚会真气，顺应事物的自然规律，就没有私欲了，那么天下也就治理了。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: Pay more attention to light sleep, gather true energy in silence, conform to the natural laws of things, there is no selfishness, then the world will be governed.

古文：易曰： 圣人者与天地合其德。 是知天不言而信，无为而成。
现代文：《易经》上说： 圣人应当按照天地的规律去修养自己的道德，使自己的言行符合自然规律。 
English: "I Ching" says: A sage should cultivate his morality according to the laws of heaven and earth, and make his words and deeds conform to the laws of nature.

古文：无为之旨，理国之要。 
现代文：因此知道天不讲话而守信，顺应自然就能成功。顺应自然的要旨就是治理国家的要旨。 
English: Therefore, knowing that God does not speak but keeps his word, we can succeed by obeying nature. The essence of obeying nature is the essence of governing the country.

古文：睿宗深赏异，留之欲加宠位。固辞。
现代文：睿宗深深赞赏他奇特见解，要把他留在宫中，封他做大官，他坚决推辞。
English: Ruizong deeply appreciated his strange opinion and wanted to keep him in the palace and make him a high official, but he firmly refused.

古文：无何告归山。
现代文：不久他告别回山。
English: Soon he said goodbye and went back to the mountain.

古文：乃赐宝琴花帔以遣之。
现代文：皇上就赐给他宝琴和花披肩，派人送他。
English: The emperor gave him a Baoqin and a flower shawl, and sent someone to see him off.

古文：公卿多赋诗以送。
现代文：很多公卿都作诗送他。
English: Many nobles sent him poems.

古文：常侍徐彦伯，撮其美者三十余篇，为制序，名曰《白云记》，见传于世。
现代文：有一个叫徐彦伯的常侍，选择了其中三十首最好的，结成一个集子，还为诗集写了序言，命名为《白云记》。
English: An attendant named Xu Yanbo selected thirty of the best poems and compiled them into a collection. He also wrote a preface for the poetry collection, which he named "The Story of Baiyun."

古文：时卢藏用早隐终南山，后登朝，居要官，见承祯将还天台，藏用指终南谓之曰： 此中大有佳处，何必在天台。 
现代文：当时有一个叫卢藏用的人，他早年隐居在终南山，后来登上朝廷，身居显要职位。他见司马承祯要回天台山，就用手指着终南山对司马承祯说： 这终南山里就有不少佳处，何必非回天台山不可呢？ 
English: At that time, there was a man named Lu Zangyong, who had lived in seclusion in the final Nanshan in his early years, and later ascended to the imperial court and held a prominent position. When he saw Sima Chengyao wanted to return to Tiantai Mountain, he pointed to the final Nanshan and said to Sima Chengyao: There are many good places in this final Nanshan, why do you have to return to Tiantai Mountain?

古文：承祯徐对曰： 以仆所观，乃仕途之捷径耳。 
现代文：司马承祯不慌不忙地说： 依我所见，终南山是当官的捷径而已。 
English: Sima Chengyao said unhurriedly: As far as I can see, Nanshan is just a shortcut for officials.

古文：藏用有惭色。
现代文：卢藏用有羞惭的表情。
English: Luzang has a bashful expression.

古文：玄宗有天下，深好道术，累征承祯到京，留于内殿，颇加礼敬，问以延年度世之事。
现代文：唐玄宗坐了天下，也深深爱好道术，多次征召，把司马承祯召到京城，留在殿内，对他很有礼貌，十分尊敬他，向他请教延寿度世的事。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong became emperor, he was also deeply fond of Taoism. He summoned Sima Chengyu to the capital several times and kept him in the palace. He was very polite to him, respected him very much, and asked him for advice on how to prolong his life.

古文：承祯隐而微言。
现代文：司马承祯讲得很隐晦，没有直说。
English: Sima Chengyao spoke very vaguely, not directly.

古文：玄宗亦传而秘之，故人莫得知也。
现代文：唐玄宗秘密地记录，又秘密地收藏，所以世人无法得知他们谈话的内容。
English: Tang Xuan Zong secretly recorded and secretly collected, so the world could not know the content of their conversation.

古文：由是玄宗理国四十余年，虽禄山犯关，銮舆幸蜀，及为上皇，回，又七年，方始晏驾，诚由天数，岂非道力之助延长耶！
现代文：从此，唐玄宗治理国家四十多年，虽然有安禄山侵犯潼关，皇帝避难去到蜀地，但是他终究回京继续做太上皇。回来之后又过了七年才死去。他的死实在是因为天数，难道不是道力帮他延长的吗？
English: From then on, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang ruled the country for more than forty years. Although Anlu Mountain invaded Shaoguan and the emperor took refuge in Shoudi, he eventually returned to Beijing to continue as the last emperor. After returning, it took another seven years before he died. His death was really due to the number of days, wasn't it Daoli that helped him prolong it?

古文：初玄宗登封太岳回，问承祯： 五岳何神主之？ 
现代文：当初，唐玄宗登封太岳回来，问司马承祯： 五岳是什么神主宰的？ 
English: At first, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty came back from conquering Mount Tai and asked Sima Chengyu: What god ruled the five mountains?

古文：对曰： 岳者山之巨，能出云雨，潜储神仙，国之望者为之；然山林之神也，亦有仙官主之。 
现代文：司马承祯说： 岳是山中最大的，能生出云雨，能潜藏各种神仙，国中有声望的人管理它。虽然是山林之神，但是也有仙官主管。 
English: Sima Chengyao said: "Dake is the largest of the mountains, can produce clouds and rain, and can hide all kinds of immortals. There are prestigious people in the country who manage it. Although it is the god of the mountains and forests, there are also officials in charge of immortals.

古文：于是诏五岳于山顶列置仙官庙，自承祯始也。
现代文：是从司马承祯开始的。另外，有一位蜀地的女真人谢自然，她乘船过海，要到蓬莱去求师。
English: It started with Sima Chengyu. In addition, there was a woman from Shu who crossed the sea by boat to go to Penglai to seek a teacher.

古文：又蜀女真谢自然泛海，将诣蓬莱求师，船为风飘，到一山，见道人指言： 天台山司马承祯，名在丹台，身居赤城，此真良师也。 蓬莱隔弱水三十万里，非舟楫可行，非飞仙无以到。
现代文：船被风刮，来到一座山前，见到一位道人，指点她说： 天台山的司马承祯，名在丹台，身居赤城，他是真正的良师。 蓬莱离弱水三十万里，不是坐船可去的，不是飞天的神仙是无法到达的。
English: The boat was blown by the wind and came to a mountain, where she saw a Taoist pointing to her and saying, "Tiantai Mountain's Sima Chengyu, who is famous in Dantai and lives in Akechi, is a truly good teacher. Penglai is 300,000 miles away from shallow water, and cannot be reached by boat or flying gods.

古文：自然乃回求承祯受度。后白日上升而去。
现代文：谢自然就回去求司马承祯，受到超度，于是后来她得道成仙，飞升而去。
English: Xie naturally went back to ask Sima Chengyao, and was overpowered, so later she became immortal and flew away.

古文：承祯居山，修行勤苦，年一百余岁，重颜轻健，若三十许人。
现代文：司马承祯久居深山，勤苦修行，活到一百多岁，面色像儿童那样红润，步履像年轻人那样轻捷，好像三十多岁的人。
English: Sima Chengyu lived in the mountains for a long time, practised diligently, and lived to be over a hundred years old. His face was as rosy as a child's, and he walked as lightly as a young man, like a man in his thirties.

古文：有弟子七十余人，一旦告弟子曰： 吾自居玉霄峰，东望蓬莱，常有真灵降驾。
现代文：一天早晨，他告诉弟子们说： 我自从居住玉霄峰，向东望蓬莱，常常有真正的神灵降下来。
English: One morning, he told his disciples, "Since I have lived on Jade Mountain, looking east to Penglai, I have often seen true gods descend.

古文：今为东海青童君、东华君所召，必须去人间。 
现代文：现在我受到东海青童君、东华君的召请，必须离开人间。 
English: Now, I have been summoned by the East China Sea Youth and the East China Youth, and I must leave this world.

古文：俄顷气绝，若蝉蜕然解化矣。弟子葬其衣冠尔。
现代文：不一会儿他就咽气了，像蝉蜕那样分解消散了，弟子们只好埋葬了他的衣服帽子。
English: In a short time, he choked to death, disintegrated and disappeared like a cicada, and his disciples had to bury his clothes and hat.

古文：尹君
现代文：尹君
English: Yin Jun

古文：唐故尚书李公诜，镇北门时。
现代文：唐朝时，前任尚书李公诜镇守北门时，有一位叫尹君的道士在晋山隐居，他不吃粮食，常吃柏树叶。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Shangshu's predecessor, Li Gongyuan, was guarding the North Gate, there was a Taoist monk named Yin Jun who lived in seclusion in Jinshan. He did not eat grain, but often ate cypress leaves.

古文：有道士尹君者，隐晋山，不食粟，常饵柏叶，虽发尽白，而容状若童子，往往独游城市。
现代文：虽然他的头发全白了，但是他的脸色和儿童一样。
English: Although his hair is completely white, his complexion is that of a child.

古文：里中有老父年八十余者，顾谓人曰： 吾孩提时，尝见李翁言，李翁吾外祖也。 
现代文：他常常单独到城中游逛。乡里中有一位八十多岁的老汉，对周围人们说： 我小时候，曾听李老汉说过。李老汉是我的外祖父。
English: He often wandered alone in the city. In the countryside, there was an octogenarian old man who said to the people around him: When I was a child, I once heard Li Laohan say: Li Laohan is my grandfather.

古文：且曰： 我年七岁，已识尹君矣；迨今七十余年，而尹君容状如旧，得非神仙乎。
现代文：他说： 我七岁那年，就认识尹君。到现在七十多年了，而尹君的模样和过去一样，他大概是神仙吧？
English: He said, "I knew Yin Jun when I was seven years old. It's been more than seventy years now, and the appearance of Yin Jun is the same as in the past. He's probably a god, right?

古文：吾且老，自度能几何为人间人；汝方壮，当志尹君之容状。 
现代文：我要老了，自己估计能在人世上再活几年呢？你正年轻，应当记住尹君的容颜。 
English: I am getting old, how many more years can I expect to live on earth? You are young, you should remember Yin Jun's face.

古文：自是及今，七十余岁矣，而尹君曾无老色，岂非以千百岁为瞬息耶。
现代文：从那时到现在，又七十多年了，而尹君竟没有衰老的表现，难道是把千百岁当作瞬息吗？ 
English: From then to now, it has been more than seventy years, and Yin Jun has not shown any signs of aging. Is it possible to treat thousands of years as a blink of an eye?

古文：北门从事冯翊严公绶，好奇者，慕尹之得道，每旬休，即驱驾而诣焉。
现代文：北门的从事冯诩严公绶是好奇的人，他敬慕尹君是得道的人，常常在休假日驱车到尹君那里去拜访。
English: Feng Xuan Yan Gonglu, who works at the North Gate, is a curious person. He admires Yin Jun, a man of virtue, and often drives to visit him on his days off.

古文：其后严公自军司马为北门帅，遂迎尹君至府庭，馆于公署，终日与同席，常有异香自肌中发，公益重之。
现代文：后来，严公绶从军司马升为北门帅，就把尹君接到府中，住在公署，整天与他坐在一起。严公绶发现常常有一种异香从尹君的肌肉中散发出来，就更加敬重他。
English: Later, when Yan Gongyao was promoted from the military commander to the north gate commander, he brought Yin Jun to the capital, lived in the public office, and sat with him all day. Yan Gongyao found that there was often a strange fragrance emanating from Yin Jun's muscles, and he respected him even more.

古文：公有女弟学浮图氏，尝曰： 佛氏与黄老固殊致。 
现代文：严公绶有一个妹妹，学佛教，曾说： 佛教与道教根本不同！ 
English: Yan Gongtao had a younger sister who studied Buddhism and once said: "Buddhism is fundamentally different from Taoism!

古文：且怒其兄与道士游。
现代文：而且她对哥哥与道士交往很生气。
English: And she was angry at her brother for associating with a Taoist.

古文：后一日，密以堇斟致汤中，命尹君饮之。
现代文：后来有一天，她秘密把苦堇放在汤里，让尹君喝。
English: Later, one day, she secretly put bitter gourd in the soup for Yin Jun to drink.

古文：尹君即饮，惊而起曰： 吾其死乎！ 
现代文：尹君喝完，吃惊地站起来说： 我大概要死了！ 
English: After drinking, Yin stood up in surprise and said, "I'm probably dead!"

古文：俄吐出一物甚坚，有异香发其中。
现代文：一会儿，他吐出一块很硬东西，并有奇异的香味从中散发出来。
English: In a moment he vomited up a hard lump, and a strange smell came out of it.

古文：公命剖而视之，真麝脐也。
现代文：严公绶让人解剖一看，原来是一块麝香。
English: Yan Gongjun let people dissect a look, it turned out to be a piece of musk.

古文：自是尹君貌衰齿堕，其夕卒于馆中。
现代文：从此尹君容颜衰老，牙齿脱落，那天晚上便死在严公绶的公馆中。
English: Since then, Yin Jun's face has aged and his teeth have fallen out. That night, he died in a public house.

古文：严公既知女弟之所为也，怒且甚，即命部将治其丧。
现代文：严公绶知道是妹妹干的之后，非常生气，立即让部下为尹君办理丧事。
English: After Yan Gongyao knew that it was his sister who did it, he was very angry and immediately asked his subordinates to handle the funeral for Yin Jun.

古文：后二日，葬尹君于汾水西二十里。
现代文：过了两天，把尹君葬在汾水西二十里的地方。
English: Two days later, they buried Yin Jun in a place 20 miles west of Surabaya.

古文：明年秋，有照圣观道士朱太虚，因投龙至晋山，忽遇尹君在山中，太虚惊而问曰： 师何为至此耶？ 
现代文：第二年秋天，有一位叫朱太虚的照圣观的道士，到晋山去投放一条龙，忽然在山中遇见尹君。朱太虚吃惊地问道： 师父为什么来到这里？
English: In the autumn of the following year, a Taoist named Zhu Taihu, who followed the teachings of Confucianism, went to Mount Jin to cast a dragon. Suddenly, he met Yin Jun in the mountains. Zhu Taihu was surprised and asked, "Why did Master come here?"

古文：尹君笑曰： 吾去岁在北门，有人以堇斟饮我者，我故示之以死，然则堇斟安能败吾真耶！ 
现代文：尹君说： 去年我在北门，有人把苦堇放在汤里让我喝，我故意装死给他们看。可是，堇汤怎么能败坏我的真功呢？ 
English: Yin Jun said: Last year I was at the North Gate. Someone put bitter gourd in the soup for me to drink, so I pretended to be dead on purpose to show them. But how can making soup corrupt my true gong?

古文：言讫，忽亡所见。
现代文：说完，他忽然不知哪儿去了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly did not know where to go.

古文：太虚窃异其事，及归，具白严公。
现代文：朱太虚心里感到很怪，等回到北门，详细向严公绶作了汇报。
English: Zhu Taihu felt very strange in his heart, so he returned to the north gate and reported in detail to Yan Gongjun.

古文：曰： 吾闻仙人不死，脱有死者，乃尸解也；不然何变异之如是耶。 
现代文：严公绶说： 我听说仙人是死不了的，如果有死的，也只不过是尸解罢了，不然怎么会变异成这种样子呢？ 
English: Yan Gongyao said: I heard that immortals can't die. If they do, it's just a necropsy. Otherwise, how could they mutate into this?

古文：将命发其墓以验之，然虑惑于人，遂止其事。
现代文：他要让人打开坟墓检验一下，但是担心会让人迷惑，就停止了这件事。
English: He was going to have the grave opened and examined, but stopped that for fear of upsetting people.

