古文：懿宗懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝漼，宣宗长子，母曰元昭皇太后晁氏。
现代文：懿宗，谥号 昭圣恭惠孝皇帝 ，名叫李氵崔，是宣宗的长子，母亲为元昭皇太后晁氏。
English: Emperor Zhaozong, also known as Emperor Zhaosheng, was the eldest son of Emperor Xuanzong and the mother of Empress Dowager Zhaozong.

古文：大和七年十一月十四日，生于籓邸。
现代文：懿宗于大和七年十一月十四日出生于藩王府邸。
English: Shoson was born on November 14th, Yamato year 7 at the residence of the lord of the domain.

古文：会昌六年十月，封郓王，本名温。
现代文：会昌六年十月被封为郓王。
English: In October of the 6th year of Huichang, he was crowned as the King of Wushu.

古文：大中十三年八月七日，宣遗诏立为皇太子监国，改今名。
现代文：懿宗本名李温，大中十三年八月七日，宣布宣宗的遗诏，被立为皇太子，监摄国政，改为现在的名字。
English: On August 7, the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of

古文：十三日，柩前即帝位，年二十七。
现代文：同月十三日，在宣宗的灵柩前即皇帝位，时年二十七岁。
English: On the 13th of the same month, before the coffin of Emperor Xuanzong, he ascended the throne at the age of 27.

古文：帝姿貌雄杰，有异稠人。
现代文：懿宗皇帝的相貌雄壮威武，不同于常人。
English: Emperor Shanzong's appearance was majestic and powerful, unlike that of ordinary people.

古文：籓邸时常经重疾，郭淑妃侍医药，见黄龙出入于卧内。
现代文：任藩王的时候曾患重病，郭淑妃侍奉医药，见有黄龙从卧室出入。
English: When he was the king of the domain, he was seriously ill. Guo Shufei was in charge of medicine, and he saw Huanglong coming and going from his bedroom.

古文：既间，妃以异告，帝曰： 慎勿复言。
现代文：郭淑妃趁左右无人时把所见异常现象告诉他，皇帝当时说： 千万不要再提起这件事。 
English: Guo Shufei took advantage of the fact that there was no one around to tell him about the abnormal phenomenon he had seen. The emperor said at the time: Do not mention this matter again.

古文：又尝大雪数尺，而帝寝室之上独无，人皆异之。
现代文：又有一次，下了几尺深的大雪，惟独皇帝的住屋上面没有雪，人们都感到奇怪。
English: On another occasion, when several feet of snow fell, people were surprised to see that there was no snow on the roof of the emperor's residence.

古文：宣宗制《泰边陲乐曲词》有 海岳晏咸通 之句。
现代文：宣宗创作的《泰边陲乐曲词》有 海岳晏咸通 的句子。
English: "Thai Border Music" composed by Xuanzong has sentences sung by Haiyue Qixian Tong.

古文：又大中末，京城小兒叠布渍水，纽之向日，谓之拔晕。
现代文：另外，大中末年，京城的小孩子把布叠起来浸透水，绞干之后对着太阳，称之为 拔晕 。
English: In addition, at the end of junior high and high school, children in Beijing pile up cloth and soak it in water. After drying it, they hang it in front of the sun, which is called "pulling dizziness."

古文：帝果以郓王即大位，以咸通为年号。
现代文：皇帝果然凭郓王的封号登上了皇帝位，并以咸通为年号。
English: The emperor indeed ascended to the imperial throne with the seal of King Gong, and took Hamdang as his era name.

古文：九月，释服，追尊母后晁氏为太后，谥曰元昭。
现代文：九月，除去丧服，追封母后晁氏为太后，加谥号为元昭。
English: In September, after removing her mourning clothes, she was given the title of empress dowager after the death of her mother, and her posthumous name was changed to Yuan Zhao.

古文：十月癸未，制以门下侍郎、守左仆射、同平章事令狐綯守司空，门下侍郎、兵部尚书、同平章事萧鄴兼尚书右仆射，中书侍郎、礼部尚书、平章事夏侯孜兼兵部尚书，中书侍郎、平章事蒋伸兼工部尚书，并依前知政事。
现代文：十月初一，决定任命门下侍郎、守左仆射、同平章事令狐守司空，任命门下侍郎、兵部尚书、同平章事萧邺兼任尚书右仆射，任命中书侍郎、礼部尚书、平章政事夏侯孜兼任兵部尚书，任命中书侍郎、平章政事蒋伸兼任工部尚书，并依旧执掌政务。
English: On the first day of October, it was decided to appoint his subordinate attendant, Shou Zuoxia, and his subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate

古文：又以兵部侍郎郑颢为河南尹。
现代文：又任命兵部侍郎郑颢为河南尹。
English: He also appointed the attendant of the military department, Zheng Qi, as Henan Yin.

古文：以昭义军节度、潞邢磁洺观察等使、光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、兼潞州大都督府长史、上柱国、河东县开国子、食邑五百户裴休为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度管内观察处置等使；以河中节度使、检校尚书左仆射毕諴为汴州刺史，充宣武军节度、宋亳观察等使。
现代文：任命昭义军节度使、潞邢磁氵名等州观察使、光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、兼潞州大都督府长史、上柱国、河东县开国子、食邑五百户裴休为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使辖区内观察处置使等；任命河中节度使、检校尚书左仆射毕讠咸为汴州刺史，并充任宣武军节度使、宋亳州观察使等。
English: He appointed the provincial observers of the Shouyijun Army, such as the provincial observer of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial observer of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial inspector of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial inspector of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun Army, the provincial governor of the Shouyijun

古文：以中书舍人裴坦权知礼部贡举。
现代文：命中书舍人裴坦暂时主持礼部贡举的事务。
English: The hit scholar Pei Tan temporarily presided over the affairs of the ceremonial tribute.

古文：十二月，以户部侍郎、翰林学士杜审权为检校礼部尚书、河中晋绛节度等使。
现代文：十二月，任命户部侍郎、翰林学士杜审权为检校礼部尚书、河中、晋、绛节度使。
English: In December, the Household Attendant and Hanlin Scholar Du Xianquan were appointed as the inspection of the school's etiquette department, and Shangshu, Kechu, Jin, and Zou were appointed as the inspectors.

古文：咸通元年春正月，上御紫宸殿受朝，对室韦使。
现代文：咸通元年春，正月，皇上临幸紫宸殿接受百官朝拜，召见室韦部的使节。
English: In the spring of the first year of Hamitsu and the first month of the year, the Emperor Rinzai Shishinden received hundreds of officials to worship, and summoned the envoys of Murobe.

古文：二月，葬宣宗皇帝于贞陵。
现代文：二月，将宣宗皇帝安葬于贞陵。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanzong was buried in Zhengrong Mausoleum.

古文：以右拾遗刘鄴充翰林学士。
现代文：任命右拾遗刘邺充任翰林学士。
English: Appointed the Right Reverend Liu Xizhong as the Hanlin Scholar.

古文：以河中节度使杜审权为兵部侍郎、判度支，寻以本官同平章事；以门下侍郎、守司徒、同平章事令狐綯检校司徒、同平章事，出镇河中；尚书左仆射、诸道盐铁转运使杜忭同平章事。
现代文：任命河中节度使杜审权为兵部侍郎，兼领度支使，随即又以本职任同平章事。任命门下侍郎、代理司徒、同平章事令狐为检校司徒同平章事，出京镇守河中。任命尚书左仆射、诸道盐铁转运使杜为同平章事。
English: Kawanaka Setsudo appointed Du Xianquan as the attendant of the military department, and also as the assistant of the leader of the military department, and then appointed him as the official of the peerage. Appointed his disciple as the attendant, acting as the official of the peerage, and the official of the peerage as the official of the peerage, and went to the capital to guard Kawanaka. Appointed Shosho Zuoyu and Du as the official of the peerage, and the official of the peerage as the official of the peerage.

古文：浙东观察使王式斩草贼仇甫，浙东郡邑皆平。
现代文：浙东观察使王式诛杀草贼仇甫，浙东的各郡县都平定了。
English: The observation of eastern Zhejiang has made Wang Shijian kill the grass thief Qufu, and all counties and counties in eastern Zhejiang have been leveled.

古文：八月，以河东节度使裴休为凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使，以凤翔陇右节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书卢简求为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：八月，任命河东节度使裴休为凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使。任命凤翔陇右节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书卢简求为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: In August, Pei Xiu was appointed as Feng Xiang Yin and Feng Xiang Zhe Zui Festival Envoy of the Hedong Festival, Feng Xiang Zhe Zui Festival Envoy, Yin Qing Guanglu Doctor, Shang Shulu Jian Kui of the School Inspection and Punishment Department was appointed as Taiyuan Yin, and Beidou Leftover was appointed as the Hedong Festival Envoy.

古文：十一月丙午朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丙午日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is C noon.

古文：丁未，上有事于郊庙，礼毕，御丹凤门，大赦，改元。
现代文：十一月初二，皇上在郊庙举行祭祀大典，典礼完毕后驾临丹凤门，下诏大赦天下，改用新年号。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the emperor held a grand ceremony of sacrifice in the suburban temple. After the ceremony, he drove to the Danfeng Gate, issued an edict of amnesty to the world, and changed to the new year.

古文：以中书舍人薛耽权知贡举。
现代文：命中书舍人薛耽暂时掌管贡举事。
English: Hit scribe Xue Tan is temporarily in charge of the tribute.

古文：二年春二月，吏部尚书萧鄴检校尚书右仆射、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度观察等使。
现代文：咸通二年春，二月，吏部尚书萧邺任检校尚书右仆射、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使、观察使等。
English: In the spring and February of the second year of Hamdang, Shangshu Xiao Wei, the head of the personnel department, was appointed as the inspector of the school, Shangshu Ubu Sha, Taiyuan Yin, Beidou left, Hedong Festival envoy, observation envoy and so on.

古文：郑滑节度使、检校工部尚书李福奏： 属郡颍州去年夏大雨，沈丘、汝阴、颍上等县平地水深一丈，田稼、屋宇淹没皆尽，乞蠲租赋。 
现代文：郑滑节度使、检校工部尚书李福上奏说： 臣属下的颍州郡去年夏天下大雨，沈丘、汝阴、颍上等县平地水深一丈，庄稼、房屋全部淹没，请朝廷免除赋税。 
English: Zheng Niu's envoy to the festival, Shang Shu Li Fu of the inspection and engineering department, said: Last summer, there was heavy rain in Zhangzhou County, which belongs to the subject, and the flat land in Shenqiu, Ruyin, and Shishang counties was flooded to a depth of one meter, and all crops and houses were flooded. Please exempt the tax from the imperial court.

古文：寻改银青光禄大夫、检校礼部尚书，兼滑州刺史、御史大夫、驸马都尉，充义成军节度、郑滑颍观察处置等使。
现代文：皇上同意。任命中书侍郎兼工部尚书蒋伸兼任刑部尚书。任命右仆射、门下侍郎杜为左仆射，执掌政务仍和原来一样。四月，任命中书舍人卫洙为工部侍郎。不久又改任银青光禄大夫、检校礼部尚书，兼任滑州刺史、御史大夫、驸马都尉，并充任义成军节度使、郑滑颍等九州观察处置使等。
English: The emperor agreed. Appointed the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat

古文：洙奏状称： 蒙恩除授滑州刺史，官号内一字与臣家讳音同，虽文字有殊，而声韵难别，请改授闲官者。 
现代文：卫洙的奏状称 ：承蒙皇上的恩典，授臣滑州刺史之职，官职的名号有一个字与我家人的名字读音相同，虽然文字并不一样，但声韵难以区分，臣请求另授一个闲职。 
English: Wei Xuan's petition said: By the grace of the emperor, I was given the post of Slanting History of Slanting Province. The title of the official post has a word that has the same pronunciation as my family's name. Although the text is not the same, the phonology is indistinguishable. The minister requested to be given another vacant post.

古文：敕曰： 嫌名不讳，著在礼文，成命已行，固难依允。 
现代文：敕令说： 声音相近的名字不避讳，这是著明在礼仪制度上的。成命已经下达，势必难以同意。 
English: The imperial edict said: Names with a similar sound should not be avoided, which is significant in the etiquette system. The order has been issued, and it is bound to be difficult to agree.

古文：以兵部侍郎曹确判度支，以兵部员外郎杨知远、司勋员外郎穆仁裕试吏部宏词选人。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎曹确兼领度支使，任命兵部员外郎杨知远、司勋员外郎穆仁裕主持吏部博学宏词科考试以选拔人才。
English: He appointed the attendant of the military department, Cao Jizhen, as well as the dispatching officer, and appointed the attendant of the military department, Yang Zhiyuan, and the attendant of the military department, Mu Renyu, to preside over the erudition and vocabulary examination of the personnel department to select talents.

古文：九月，以前兵部侍郎、判度支毕諴为工部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：九月，任命前兵部侍郎、兼度支使毕讠咸任工部尚书、同平章事。
English: In September, Bi Yuxian, a former attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs and concurrently a supporting envoy, was appointed to the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

古文：蒋伸罢知政事。
现代文：蒋伸停止执掌政务。
English: Chiang Shin ceased to be in charge of government affairs.

古文：林邑蛮寇安南府，遣神策将军康承训率禁军及江西、湖南之兵赴援。
现代文：林邑的蛮寇骚扰安南府，朝廷派神策将军康承训率领禁军及江西、湖南的军队前往救援。
English: Barbarian invaders from Lin'e harassed Annan Prefecture, and the imperial court sent the strategist General Kang Chengxun to lead the Imperial Army and the armies of Jiangxi and Hunan to the rescue.

古文：三年春正月，左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事杜忭率百僚上徽号曰睿文明圣孝德皇帝。
现代文：咸通三年春，正月，左仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事杜率领百官向皇上敬献尊号为：睿文明圣孝德皇帝。
English: In the spring of the third year of Hamdang, the first month of the year, Zuo Shuai, his attendants, and Pingzhang Zhengji Du led hundreds of officials to pay tribute to the emperor with the name: Emperor Rui Wenming Sheng Xiao De.

古文：五月，敕： 岭南分为五管，诚已多年。
现代文：五月，皇上的敕令说： 把岭南划分为五个区域管辖已经多年。
English: In May, the emperor's edict said: It has been many years since Lingnan was divided into five regional jurisdictions.

古文：比以委人太轻，军威不振，境连内地，不并海南。
现代文：平常一般情况下，各地区互相援助，防御敌人，保卫地方；发生变乱的时候，则做另外的安排。
English: Under normal circumstances, all regions help each other, defend the enemy, and defend the localities; in the event of turmoil, other arrangements are made.

古文：宜分岭南为东、西道节度观察处置等使，以广州为岭南东道，邕州为岭南西道，别择良吏，付以节旄。
现代文：和邕州的西面相连的南蛮，占据着深邃的黄洞，控制着两江粗犷的百姓，集中了几道的游食之民。近来，由于向该地委派的官员品级太低，军威不能振作，辖境连着内地，却不与海南相接。应当划分岭南为东、西两道，另选能干的官员，授予权柄。
English: Nanban, which is connected to the west of Zhangzhou, occupies the deep Yellow Cave, controls the rough-hewn people of the two rivers, and concentrates the wandering people of several rivers. Recently, due to the low grade of the officials appointed to this place, the military prestige cannot be invigorated, and the jurisdiction is connected to the mainland, but does not touch Hainan. Lingnan should be divided into East and West, and competent officials should be selected to grant authority.

古文：其所管八州，俗无耕桑，地极边远，近罹盗扰，尤甚凋残。
现代文：这个地区管辖下的八个州郡没有耕织的习惯，地方又极其边远，近来遭到盗贼骚扰，更加凋敝衰落。
English: The eight states and counties under the jurisdiction of this region do not have the habit of farming and weaving, and the place is extremely remote. Recently, they have been harassed by thieves, and their decline has become even worse.

古文：将盛籓垣，宜添州县。
现代文：既然要加强藩镇，就应当增设州县。
English: Since it is necessary to strengthen han towns, it is necessary to add prefectures and counties.

古文：宜割桂州管内龚州、象州，容州管内藤州、岩州，并隶岭南西道收管。 
现代文：应当分出桂州管辖的龚州、象州，容州管辖下的藤州、岩州，让它们都隶属于岭南西道收管。 
English: It is necessary to separate Zhangzhou and Xiangzhou, which are under the jurisdiction of Guizhou, and Fujishu and Iwashu, which are under the jurisdiction of Yongzhou, so that they are all under the administration of Lingnan West Road.

古文：宰臣杜忭兼司空，毕諴兼兵部尚书。
现代文：宰相杜兼任司空，毕讠咸兼任兵部尚书。
English: Prime Minister Du concurrently served as Siku, Bi Yuxian concurrently served as Hyobu Shangshu.

古文：驾部郎中、知制诰王铎为中书舍人。
现代文：驾部郎中、知制诰王铎担任中书舍人。
English: He was a driver's apprentice, and served as a tutor to Chisei Shoko Wangyo.

古文：以邕管经略使郑愚为广州刺史，充岭南东道节度、观察处置等使；将军宋戎为岭南西道节度使。
现代文：任命邕管经略使郑愚担任广州刺史，并充任岭南东道节度使、观察处置使；任命将军宋戎担任岭南西道节度使。
English: Zheng Yu was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou, and served as the host festival envoy and observation and disposition envoy of Lingnan; General Song Rong was appointed as the west festival envoy of Lingnan.

古文：夏，淮南、河南蝗旱，民饥。
现代文：这年夏天，淮南、河南发生蝗灾和旱灾，百姓饥馑。
English: This summer, locust plagues and droughts occurred in Huainan and Henan, and the people were starving.

古文：南蛮陷交址，征诸道兵赴岭南。
现代文：南蛮攻陷安南，朝廷征调各道军队前往岭南地区。
English: Nanban attacked and occupied Annan, and the imperial court sent troops from various provinces to the Lingnan region.

古文：诏湖南水运，自湘江入澪渠，江西造切麦粥以馈行营。
现代文：皇上诏令湖南的水上运输从湘江入灵渠，江西制成切面粥赠送给军营。
English: The emperor decreed that Hunan's water transport from the Hunan River into the Lingshu, and Jiangxi made sliced porridge and presented it to the military camp.

古文：湘、漓溯运，功役艰难，军屯广州乏食。
现代文：湘江、漓江的运输逆流而上，完成任务十分艰巨，因而屯驻在广州的军队缺少粮食。
English: The transportation of the Xiangjiang River and the Minjiang River upstream is a very arduous task, so the troops stationed in Guangzhou are short of grain.

古文：润州人陈磻石诣阙上书，言： 江西、湖南，溯流运粮，不济军师，士卒食尽则散，此宜深虑。
现代文：有一个叫陈石番石的润州人向朝廷上书说： 江西、湖南逆水运粮，不能满足军队的需求，而粮食一完，士兵们就会离散，这是应当深切忧虑的。
English: A man from Renzhou named Chen Shihuangshi wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: It is a matter of deep concern that Jiangxi and Hunan cannot meet the needs of the army by transporting grain against the water, and once the grain is finished, the soldiers will disperse.

古文：臣有奇计，以馈南军。
现代文：我有一条妙计，可以满足南方军旅的需要。 
English: I have a brilliant plan to meet the needs of the Southern Expedition.

古文：天子召见，磻石因奏： 臣弟听思曾任雷州刺史，家人随海船至福建，往来大船一只，可致千石，自福建装船，不一月至广州。
现代文：天子召见了陈石番石，陈石番石便上奏说： 我弟弟陈听思担任过雷州刺史，家里又曾经坐海船到福建，一只大船往返一次可以运去一千石粮食；从福建装上船，不到一个月就可以到广州。
English: Heaven's Son summoned Chen Shih-peng, and Chen Shih-peng began to recite: My brother Chen Huan-si served as the chief historian of Leizhou, and the family once took a sea ship to Fujian. A large ship can transport a thousand stones of grain at a time; loaded on a ship from Fujian, it can reach Guangzhou in less than a month.

古文：得船数十艘，便可致三万石至广府矣。 
现代文：如果有几十艘这样的船，就可以运三万石粮食到广州了。 
English: If there are dozens of such ships, it will be possible to transport thirty thousand koku of grain to Guangzhou.

古文：又引刘裕海路进军破卢循故事。
现代文：他又援引了刘裕当年从海路进军击败卢循的旧例。
English: He also cited the old example of Liu Yu marching by sea to defeat Lu Xun.

古文：执政是之，以磻石为盐铁巡官，往杨子院专督海运。
现代文：执掌政务的人肯定了这个意见，任命陈石番石担任盐铁巡官，前往杨子院专门监督海路运输的事务。
English: The person in charge of government affairs affirmed this opinion and appointed Chen Shifangshi as a salt and iron inspector to go to Yangzi Yuan to specifically supervise the affairs of sea transport.

古文：于是康承训之军皆不阙供。
现代文：从此以后康承训所率领的军队都不缺少给养了。
English: Since then, the troops led by Kangcheng Training Institute have never been short of supplies.

古文：七月，徐州军乱，以浙东观察使王式检校工部尚书、徐州刺史、御史大夫、武宁军节度、徐泗濠观察等使。
现代文：七月，徐州的军队发生叛乱，朝廷任命浙东观察使王式为检校工部尚书、徐州刺史、御史大夫、武宁军节度使及徐、泗、濠等州观察使。
English: In July, the army of Xuzhou rebelled, and the imperial court appointed the eastern Zhejiang observation envoy Wang Shih as the inspector of the school inspection department Shang Shu, the Xuzhou inspector of the history, the inspector of the history, the military governor of the Wu Ning Army, and the state observation envoys of Xu, Zou and Zou.

古文：初，王智兴得徐州，召募凶豪之卒二千人，号曰银刀、雕旗、门枪、挟马等军，番宿衙城。
现代文：当初，王智兴占据徐州，召募凶悍豪强的士兵二千人，用 银刀 、 雕旗 、 门枪 、 挟马 等名目作为各军的名号，轮番宿卫署衙和城垣。
English: At the beginning, Wang Zhixing occupied Xuzhou, recruited two thousand fierce and powerful soldiers, and used the names of silver swords, carved flags, guns, horses and other names as the names of each army, and took turns to stay at the National Guard Bureau and the city wall.

古文：自后浸骄，节度使姑息不暇。
现代文：从此以后日渐骄横，节度使对他们姑息迁就，自顾不暇。
English: Since then, they have become more and more arrogant. Moderation has made them more and more accommodating, and they have no time to take care of themselves.

古文：田牟镇徐日，每与骄卒杂坐，酒酣抚背，时把板为之唱歌。其徒日费万计。
现代文：田牟镇守徐州的时期，经常和那些骄横的士兵们混坐在一起，喝醉了酒，抚摸士兵的背，有时还打着节拍为他们唱歌，他的部属每天消耗的钱数以万计。
English: During the period when Tamuzhen was guarding Xuzhou, he often sat with those arrogant soldiers, got drunk, stroked the soldiers' backs, and sometimes sang for them. His subordinates spent tens of thousands of money every day.

古文：每有宾宴，必先厌食饫酒，祁寒暑雨，卮酒盈前，然犹喧噪邀求，动谋逐帅。
现代文：每当田牟宴请宾客，士兵们总要先吃喝一个够，无论严冬酷暑，面前总摆着盛满酒的杯子。即使这样，士兵们还是喧闹鼓噪，希求赏赐，动不动就策划驱逐主帅。
English: Whenever guests were invited to Tamu's banquets, the soldiers always had to eat and drink enough first. No matter how severe the winter or how hot it was, there was always a glass full of wine in front of them. Even so, the soldiers still made a lot of noise, hoped for rewards, and plotted to expel the coach at every turn.

古文：前年寿州刺史温璋为节度使，骄卒素知璋严酷，深负忧疑。
现代文：头一年寿州刺史温璋担任徐州节度使，骄横的士兵们早就知道温璋待人严酷，内心十分担忧、疑虑。
English: In the first year of Shoushu stabber Wen Xuan serving as Xuzhou festival envoy, the arrogant soldiers had long known that Wen Xuan treated people harshly, and they were very worried and doubtful.

古文：璋开怀抚谕，终为猜贰，给与酒食，未尝沥口，不期月而逐璋。
现代文：温璋开诚布公地进行安抚，士卒始终怀着猜疑之心，赐给他们的酒食，一点儿都不进口，不到一个月就把温璋赶走了。
English: Wen Jiabao openly appeased them, but the officials were always suspicious. They gave them wine and food, and did not import anything, and drove Wen Jiabao away in less than a month.

古文：上是以式代璋。
现代文：皇上这才用王式代替温璋。
English: It was only then that the emperor used the imperial style to replace the warm style.

古文：时式以忠武、义成之师三千平定仇甫，便诏式率二镇之师渡淮。
现代文：当时王式率领忠武军、义成军的士兵三千人平定了仇甫，便下诏，命王式率领该两镇军队渡过淮河。
English: At that time, Wang Shih led 3,000 soldiers from the Loyalist Army and the Volunteer Army to quell the feud, and then issued an edict ordering Wang Shih to lead the two towns' armies across the Huai River.

古文：徐卒闻之，惧其势，无如之何。
现代文：徐州士兵听到这个消息，害怕王式的势力，不知道用什么办法对付。
English: When the Xuzhou soldiers heard this news, they were afraid of Wang-style forces and did not know how to deal with them.

古文：至大彭馆，方来迎谒。
现代文：王式的军队到了大彭馆，徐州的士兵才来迎接、拜见。
English: When the royal army arrived at Dapeng Pavilion, the soldiers from Xuzhou came to meet and greet them.

古文：居三日，犒劳两镇兵令还，既擐甲执兵，即命环骄卒杀之。
现代文：在当地停留了三天，徐州士兵犒劳了王式两镇的部卒，叫他们回去。王式的部下都身穿铠甲，手执武器，王式便命令他们把骄横的徐州士兵包围起来杀掉。
English: After staying in the area for three days, the Xuzhou soldiers forced Wang Shiguang's subordinates from the two towns to go back. Wang Shiguang's subordinates were wearing armor and holding weapons, and Wang Shiguang ordered them to surround the arrogant Xuzhou soldiers and kill them.

古文：徐卒三千余人，是日尽诛，由是凶徒悉殄。
现代文：徐州兵三千多人这天都被杀光，从此凶横的暴徒被全部消灭了。
English: More than three thousand Xuzhou soldiers were killed that day, and from then on, the ferocious rioters were all eliminated.

古文：九月，以户部侍郎李晦检校工部尚书，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：九月，任命户部侍郎李晦为检校工部尚书，并兼任兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: In September, Li Gui, the head of the Household Department, was appointed as the inspector of the School Inspection Department, and concurrently served as the Xingyuan Yin and the West Shannan Road festival envoy.

古文：十一月，遣将军蔡袭率禁军三千，会诸道之师赴援安南。
现代文：十一月，派遣将军蔡袭率领三千名禁军，会同各道的军队驰援安南。
English: In November, General Cai Wei was dispatched to lead three thousand forbidden soldiers, and together with the armies of various provinces, they rushed to aid Annan.

古文：以吏部侍郎郑处诲萧仿、吏部员外郎杨俨、户部员外郎崔彦昭等试宏词选人。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎郑处诲、萧亻放、吏部员外郎杨俨、户部员外郎崔彦昭等主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: Appointed Zheng Shizhen, Xiao Qifang, Yang Jian, and Cui Yan Zhao, the secretary of the administrative department, and the secretary of the household department, respectively, to preside over the selection of talents for the erudition and vocabulary examination.

古文：十二月，以吏部侍郎萧仿权知礼部贡举。
现代文：十二月，任命吏部侍郎萧亻放暂时掌管礼部贡举考试的事务。
English: In December, Xiao Yifang, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed to temporarily take charge of the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：四年春正月甲子朔。
现代文：咸通四年春，正月初一为甲子日。
English: Hamdang is in the spring of the fourth year, and the first day of the first month is the first day of the year.

古文：庚午，上有事于圆丘，礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦。
现代文：正月初七，皇上在天坛举行祭天大典，典礼结束，驾临丹凤楼，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the emperor held a grand ceremony of sacrificing to the heavens at the Temple of Heaven. After the ceremony, he arrived at the Danfeng Tower and issued an edict of amnesty to the world.

古文：中外官宜准建中元年敕，授官后三日举一人自代。
现代文：中央和地方的官员应当按照建中元年发布的敕令：朝廷授予官职之后三日可以举荐一人代替自己。
English: Central and local officials should follow the imperial edict issued in the first year of Jianzhong: three days after the imperial court grants an official post, they can recommend one person to replace themselves.

古文：州牧令录上佐官，在任须终三考。
现代文：指令将州府的令官载入上品佐官的册籍，任职期间必须通过三次考绩。
English: The order listed the governor of the prefecture into the register of the superior adjutant, and he had to pass three performance appraisals during his tenure.

古文：河东节度使、检校刑部尚书卢简求以病求罢，诏以太子少师致仕归东都。
现代文：河东节度使、检校刑部尚书卢简求因病请求辞职，皇上下诏，命他以太子少师衔退休回归东都。
English: Shangshu Lu Jian, the head of the Hedong Festival and the Criminal Investigation Department, requested to resign due to illness, and the emperor issued a decree ordering him to retire and return to Dongdu with a lower rank.

古文：以昭义节度使、检校礼部尚书、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘潼为太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫，充河东节度观察处置等使。
现代文：任命昭义军节度使、检校礼部尚书、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘潼担任太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫，并充任河东节度使、观察处置使等。
English: Appointed the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army, the inspection of the school's ceremonial department, Shangshu, Shangzhu Guo, and gave the purple gold fish bag to Liu Wei to serve as Taiyuan Yin, Beidou left-behind, and Goshi Daifu, and served as the festival envoy of Hedong and the observation and disposal envoy.

古文：二月，以左散骑常侍李荀检校工部尚书、滑州刺史、义成军节度、郑滑观察等使。
现代文：二月，任命左散骑常侍李荀为检校工部尚书、滑州刺史、义成军节度使、郑滑观察使等。
English: In February, he appointed Zuo Sanzhong's personal attendant Li Wei as the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the

古文：三月，以兵中侍郎、判度支杨收本官同平章事；以刑部侍郎曹汾为河南尹；以户部侍郎李蠙检校礼部尚书、潞州大都督府长史，充昭义节度、观察处置等使。
现代文：三月，任命兵部侍郎、掌度支事杨收以本职任同平章事；任命刑部侍郎曹汾为河南尹，任命户部侍郎李虫宾为检校礼部尚书、潞州大都督府长史，并充任昭义军节度使、观察处置使。
English: In March, Yang Hui, the attendant of the military department and the staff of the administrative department, was appointed as the official of the same rank; Cao Wei, the attendant of the criminal department, was appointed as the Henan Yin; Li Zhibin, the attendant of the household department, was appointed as the inspector of the school, the official of the ceremonial department, and the governor of the prefectural capital of Zhangzhou, and also served as the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army and the observation and disposition envoy.

古文：四月，敕徐州罢防御使，为支郡，隶兗州。
现代文：四月，敕令撤销徐州防御使之职，将其降格为支郡，隶属于兖州管辖。
English: In April, the imperial edict revoked Xuzhou's defense and demoted it to a sub-county under the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou.

古文：七月朔，制： 安南寇陷之初，流人多寄溪洞。
现代文：七月初一，制令： 安南被贼寇攻陷的初期，流离失所的人大都寄住在溪洞中。
English: On the first day of July, the order was issued: In the early days of Annan's fall to the bandits, most of the displaced people lived in caves.

古文：其安南将吏官健走至海门者人数不少，宜令宋戎、李良瑍察访人数，量事救恤。
现代文：安南的那些军官、吏员、士卒逃到海门的人数不少，应当指示宋戎、李良王奂查明他们的人数，根据情况，给予救济、安抚。
English: Annan's officers, officials, and soldiers fled to Haimen in large numbers. Song Rong and Li Liang Wangtao should be instructed to find out their numbers and provide relief and appeasement according to the situation.

古文：安南管内被蛮贼驱劫处，本户两税、丁钱等量放二年，候收复后别有指挥。
现代文：安南辖区内凡是被蛮贼驱赶、劫掠的地方，当地住户春秋两税和丁口钱等赋税均酌情免收两年，待收复该地方后另做安排。
English: In all the places in Annan Bailiwick that were driven out and plundered by the bandits, the local households will be exempted from taxes such as spring and autumn taxes and Dingkou money for two years as appropriate, and other arrangements will be made after the recovery of the place.

古文：其安南溪洞首领，素推诚节，虽蛮寇窃据城壁，而酋豪各守土疆。
现代文：那些安南溪洞的部族首领，一向被认为忠诚不二，即使蛮贼非法占领城堡时，他们仍各自守卫自己的地盘。
English: The tribal chiefs of the Annam Cave have always been considered loyal, and even when the barbarians illegally occupied the castle, they still guarded their own territory.

古文：如闻溪洞之间，悉藉岭北茶药，宜令诸道一任商人兴贩，不得禁止往来。
现代文：如果听说各溪洞之间都依靠岭北的茶叶、药材谋生，就应当指示各道的官府任凭商人们进行贩运，不得禁止他们互相来往。
English: If it is heard that all of the caves rely on tea leaves and medicinal materials from Lingbei to make a living, the authorities of each province should be instructed to allow merchants to carry out trafficking, and they should not prohibit them from interacting with each other.

古文：廉州珠池，与人共利。
现代文：廉州产珠的水域，是本地人和外地人共利的。
English: The pearl-producing waters of Lianzhou are beneficial to both locals and foreigners.

古文：近闻本道禁断，遂绝通商，宜令本州任百姓采取，不得止约。
现代文：近来听说被本道的官府禁止采集，商业来往就断绝了，应当指示本州的官府允许百姓采集，不得禁止、限制。
English: Recently, I heard that the government of this province has banned the collection, and commercial contacts have been cut off. The government of this state should be instructed to allow the people to collect, and must not prohibit or restrict.

古文：其徐州银刀官健，其中先有逃窜者，累降敕旨，不令捕逐。
现代文：徐州银刀军的官兵，有些是早先逃跑到外地的，朝廷曾多次下令不得进行追捕。
English: Some of the officers and soldiers of the Xuzhou Silver Sword Army had fled abroad earlier, and the imperial court had repeatedly ordered that they should not be pursued.

古文：其今年四月十八日，草贼头首已抵极法，其余徒党各自奔逃，所在更勿捕逐。 
现代文：今年四月十八日，草贼的首领已经依法处死，其余的党徒也各自逃走，各地更不要再行追捕。 
English: On April 18 this year, the leader of the grass thieves was executed in accordance with the law, and the rest of the party members also fled separately. All regions should not pursue them any further.

古文：是月，东都、许、汝、徐、泗等州大水，伤稼。
现代文：当月，东都、许州、汝州、徐州、泗州等州发生大水，毁坏庄稼。
English: In the same month, heavy water occurred in Dongdu, Huzhou, Ruzhou, Xuzhou, Ganzhou and other provinces, destroying crops.

古文：初，大中末，安南都护李琢贪暴，侵刻獠民，群獠引林邑蛮攻安南府。
现代文：早先，大中末年时，安南都护李琢贪婪残暴，侵扰虐害獠民，獠民们便引来林邑蛮部攻打安南府。
English: Earlier, at the end of junior high school, Annan tutelary Li Taku became greedy and cruel, harassing and abusing the local people. The local people then attracted the barbarians from Linyi to attack Annan Prefecture.

古文：三年，大征兵赴援，天下骚动。
现代文：咸通三年，朝廷大规模征兵增援安南，引起全国性骚动。
English: In the third year of Hamdang Tong, the imperial court recruited large-scale troops to reinforce Annan, causing nationwide turmoil.

古文：其年冬，蛮竟陷交州，赴安南诸军并令抽退，分保岭南东、西道。
现代文：这年冬天，蛮兵竟攻陷交州，开往安南的各军同时奉命撤退，分头保卫岭南东道和岭南西道。
English: In the winter of that year, the barbarians invaded and occupied Jiaozhou. All the armies heading for Annan were ordered to retreat at the same time and split up to defend Lingnan Host and Lingnan West Road.

古文：十一月，长安县尉、集贤校理令狐滈为左拾遗。
现代文：十一月，长安县尉、集贤殿校理令狐氵高担任左拾遗。
English: In November, the magistrate of Chang'an County and the principal of Jixian Palace ordered the fox Jiao Gao to serve as the left relic collector.

古文：制出，左拾遗刘蜕、起居郎张云上疏，论滈父綯秉权之日，广纳赂遗，受李琢贿，除安南，致生蛮寇，滈不宜居谏诤之列。
现代文：诏令一出，左拾遗刘蜕、起居郎张云就向皇帝上疏，谈到令狐氵高的父亲令狐掌权的时候，到处收取贿赂馈赠，接受李琢的贿赂，将他授职到安南，以致引发蛮民叛乱的事，令狐氵高不宜于列在谏诤官员的行列。
English: As soon as the imperial edict was issued, Liu Bei's widow Liu Hui and Zhang Yun, his son-in-law, distanced themselves from the emperor. When it came to Ling Fuxun Gao's father, Ling Fuxun Gao, when he was in power, he received bribes and gifts everywhere, accepted Li Tuo's bribes, and appointed him to Annan, which led to the rebellion of the barbarians. Ling Fuxun Gao was not suitable to be listed in the ranks of the imperial officials.

古文：时綯在淮南，上表论诉，乃贬云兴元少尹，蜕华阴令，氵高改詹事司直。
现代文：当时令狐在淮南，上表论辩、控告，竟把张云贬为兴元少尹，刘蜕贬为华阴县令，令狐氵高改任詹事司直。
English: At that time, Lingfuxu was in Huainan, arguing and complaining on the table, and he actually demoted Zhang Yun to Xingyuan Shoyun, Liu Wei to Huayin County, and Lingfuxu Gao to Zhanji Sizhi.

古文：以中书舍人王铎权知礼部贡举，以兵部侍郎、判度支曹确同平章事，以中书侍郎、平章事毕諴检校吏部尚书、河中尹、晋绛慈隰节度使。
现代文：任命中书舍人王铎暂时掌管礼部贡举事务，任命兵部侍郎、署理度支使曹确为同平章事，任命中书侍郎、平章政事毕讠咸为检校吏部尚书、河中尹、晋绛慈隰等州节度使。
English: Appointed the secretary of the middle school, Wang Qian, to temporarily take charge of the tribute affairs of the ceremonial department, appointed the attendant of the military department and the acting chief of staff, Cao Ji, to be the deputy chief of staff, and appointed the attendant of the middle school and the deputy chief of staff, Bi Yuxian, to be the chief of staff of the school inspection department, Shang Shu, Kechu Yin, Jintao Cixi and other state festival officials.

古文：就加幽州张允伸检校司徒。
现代文：就地加授张允伸为幽州检校司徒。
English: Zhang Yunshen was locally awarded the title of Yuzhou school inspector.

古文：以兵部侍郎高璩本官同平章事，以户部侍郎裴寅判本司事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎高璩以本职任同平章事，任命户部侍郎裴寅暂时执掌本司事务。
English: He appointed Gao Yao, the attendant of the Military Department, as the official of the same rank, and appointed Pei Yin, the attendant of the Household Department, to temporarily take charge of the affairs of this department.

古文：五年春正月戊午朔，以用兵罢元会。
现代文：咸通五年春，正月初一，因为正处于战争时期，取消元旦朝会。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Hamdang, on the first day of the first month of the year, the New Year's Day morning meeting was canceled because it was in a period of war.

古文：谏议大夫裴坦上疏，论天下征兵，财赋方匮，不宜过兴佛寺，以困国力。
现代文：谏议大夫裴坦上疏，认为全国征兵，财政正处于困乏中，不应当大肆兴建佛寺，以增加国家财政的困难。
English: On the other hand, Dr. Pei Tan Shang So, who was in charge of the deliberation, believed that the national conscription was too high, and that the country's finances were in a difficult situation. Therefore, it was not appropriate to build Buddhist temples in order to increase the country's financial difficulties.

古文：优诏答之。
现代文：皇上特颁优诏答复。
English: The Emperor specially granted the Imperial Rescript.

古文：二月，以兵部尚书牛丛检校兵部尚书，兼成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：二月，任命兵部尚书牛丛为检校兵部尚书，兼任成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使，掌管节度使事务。
English: In February, he appointed Yang Shuxiu Niu Cong of the Military Department as the inspector of the Military Department, and concurrently served as the deputy ambassador of the Chengdu Yin and Jianan Nishikawa Festival, in charge of the festival affairs.

古文：徐州处置观察防御使。
现代文：徐州设置观察防御使。
English: Xuzhou has set up a defense observation post.

古文：以门下侍郎、兵部尚书、平章事杜审权为润州刺史、浙江西道节度使。
现代文：任命门下侍郎、兵部尚书、平章政事杜审权担任润州刺史、浙江西道节度使。
English: He appointed his subordinate chamberlains, Hyobu Shosho, and Pingzhang Zhengji Du Xianquan to serve as Renzhou Shishi and Zhejiang West Road Festival Envoy.

古文：三月，以兵部郎中高湜、员外于怀试吏部，平判选人。
现代文：三月，任命兵部郎中高氵是、员外郎于怀主持吏部考试、品评，选拔人才。
English: In March, he appointed Hyobusho-ro junior high school students Gao Zhen and member Wairo Yu Huai to preside over the examination and evaluation of cadres and select talents.

古文：四月，右仆射、平章事夏侯孜增爵五百户。
现代文：四月，右仆射、平章政事夏侯孜增加爵禄五百户。
English: In April, the Right-Hand Servant Sho and the Right-Hand Servant Politician Xia Houzhi increased the stipend of 500 households.

古文：以中书舍人王铎为礼部侍郎，以晋州刺史孟球检校工部尚书，兼徐州刺史。
现代文：任命中书舍人王铎担任礼部侍郎，任命晋州刺史孟球为检校工部尚书，并兼任徐州刺史。
English: Appointed the middle school librarian Wang Qian as the attendant of the ceremony department, appointed the Jinzhou librarian Meng Qiu as the librarian of the school inspection department, and also served as the librarian of Xuzhou.

古文：南蛮寇邕管，以秦州经略使高骈率禁军五千赴邕管，会诸道之师御之。
现代文：南蛮侵犯邕管地区，派秦州经略使高骈率领五千禁军前往邕管，会同各道军队抵御南蛮。
English: The Southern Barbarians invaded the Shiguan area, and the Qin State Councilor sent Gao Jun to lead five thousand forbidden troops to Shiguan to resist the Southern Barbarians together with the armies of various provinces.

古文：五月丁酉，制：
现代文：五月十二日，敕令：
English: On May 12th, the Royal Decree:

古文：朕以寡昧，获承高祖、太宗之丕构，六载于兹矣。
现代文： 朕凭借着寡德昏昧，得以继承高祖、太宗的大业，到现在已经六年了。
English: It has been six years since I was able to inherit the great cause of Gaozu and Taizong by virtue of my widowhood.

古文：罔畋游是娱，罔声色是纵，罔刑戮是滥，罔邪佞是惑。
现代文：朕不享乐于游猎，不纵情于声色，不滥施刑罚、杀戮，不受奸邪鄙佞之徒迷惑。
English: I do not enjoy hunting, do not indulge in gossip, do not abuse punishment and killing, and do not get fooled by traitors and scoundrels.

古文：夙夜悚惕，以忧以勤，庶几乎八表用康，兆人以泰。
现代文：从早到晚都惶恐、警惕着，担忧、勤谨，希望最边远的地方都因此而得以安定，亿兆人民也因此而获得太平。
English: From morning to night, they are fearful, vigilant, worried, and diligent, hoping that the most remote places will be stabilized and the billions of people will be peaceful.

古文：而西戎款附，北狄怀柔，独惟南蛮，奸宄不率。
现代文：如今西戎归附，北狄顺从，惟独南蛮犯法作乱，不肯驯服。
English: Nowadays, Xi Rong has been annexed, North Di has obeyed, but South Baran has violated the law and made trouble, refusing to be tamed.

古文：侵陷交趾，突犯朗宁，爰及隽州，亦用攘寇。
现代文：他们攻陷安南，侵犯朗宁，也因此累及辒州遭受盗寇之害。
English: They invaded Annan and encroached on Langning, and as a result, Zhangzhou suffered from the damage caused by the bandits.

古文：劳我士卒，兴吾甲兵，骚动黎元，役力飞輓，每一轸念，闵然疚怀。
现代文：劳乏我的士兵，动用我的武备，惊动我的百姓，派役夫飞速运送粮草，每当辗转怀想这些的时候，忧伤、内疚之情便充满了心中。
English: When I think of the fatigue of my soldiers, the use of my weapons, the alarm of my people, and the dispatch of my servants to transport grain and grass at high speed, sorrow and guilt fill my heart.

古文：顾惟生人，罹此愁苦，宜布自天之泽，俾垂及物之仁。
现代文：顾念百姓们遭受这样的愁苦，应当广施朝廷的恩泽，使仁惠降临于万物。
English: Bearing in mind that the people have suffered such hardships, it is necessary to spread the grace of the imperial court, so that benevolence comes to all things.

古文：如闻湖南、桂州，是岭路系口，诸道兵马纲运，无不经过，顿递供承，动多差配，凋伤转甚，宜有特恩。
现代文：例如，听说湖南、桂州是通往岭南的要道，各路军马的运输都必须经过这里，驻扎、传送、供应、接待，经常要增加许多差役、供给，比其他地方的凋敝、损伤更加严重，应当给以特别的照顾。
English: For example, I heard that Hunan and Guizhou are the main routes to Lingnan, and the transportation of military horses from all directions must pass through here, and they must be stationed, transported, supplied and received. It is often necessary to increase the number of dispatchers and supplies. This is more serious than the withering and damage in other places, and special care should be taken.

古文：潭、桂两道各赐钱三万贯文，以助军钱，亦以充馆驿息利本钱。
现代文：潭州、桂州两道各赏钱三万贯，用以补贴军费，也用来补充宾馆、驿站的开销。
English: The two provinces of Tanzhou and Guizhou were each awarded 30,000 yuan to subsidize military expenses, and also to supplement the expenses of hotels and stations.

古文：其江陵、江西、鄂州三道，比于潭、桂，徭配稍简，宜令本道观察使详其闲剧，准此例与置本钱。
现代文：江陵、江西、鄂州三道，与潭州、桂州相比，差役、供给稍微少一点，应当指示各道观察使了解其轻重程度，按照此先例给予津贴。
English: The three provinces of Gangneung, Jiangxi and Ezhou have slightly fewer dispatched workers and supplies compared to the three provinces of Tanzhou and Guizhou. It is necessary to instruct the observers of each province to understand their relative importance, and grant subsidies according to this precedent.

古文：邕州已西黎、隽界内，昨因蛮寇，互有杀伤，宜令本道收拾埋瘗，量设祭酹。
现代文：邕州以西的黎州、辒州境界之内，前时因蛮族骚扰，双方都有死伤的人，应当指示其本道收拾、掩埋尸体，酌情安排祭奠。
English: Within the boundaries of Luzhou to the west of Luzhou and Luzhou to the west of Luzhou, if there are casualties on both sides due to barbarian harassment, they should be instructed to collect and bury the bodies, and arrange for a memorial service as appropriate.

古文：徐州土风雄劲，甲士精强，比以制驭乖方，频致骚扰。
现代文： 徐州的民俗雄杰劲健，士卒精锐强壮，近来由于驾驭不得其法，多次引起骚乱。
English: The folk custom of Xuzhou is that the hero is strong and vigorous, and the warrior is strong and vigorous. Recently, due to the lack of control, it has caused riots many times.

古文：近者再置使额，却领四州，劳逸既均，人心甚泰。
现代文：最近重新设置观察防御使的职务，管辖四个州，劳逸既已平均，人心也就很安定了。
English: Recently, the post of observation and defense commander has been re-established, with jurisdiction over four states. The work-life balance is already average, and the people's hearts are very stable.

古文：但闻比因罢节之日，或有被罪奔逃，虽朝廷频下诏书，并令一切不问，犹恐尚怀疑惧，未委招携，结聚山林，终成诖误。
现代文：但是听说前不久因为废置节镇，有的士兵负罪出逃。虽然朝廷多次颁发诏书并指示各地方政府，所有的事情一概不予追究，还是担心他们依旧心怀疑虑恐惧。由于没有委派地方上招安，致使他们结伙聚集于山林为盗，终于酿成错误。
English: However, I heard that not long ago, because of the abandonment of the festival town, some soldiers committed a crime and fled. Although the imperial court has repeatedly issued an edict and instructed local governments not to investigate all matters, I am worried that they are still suspicious and afraid. Because they did not appoint local recruiting officers, they gathered in groups to steal in the mountains and forests, and finally made a mistake.

古文：况边方未静，深藉人才，宜令徐泗团练使选拣召募官健三千人，赴邕管防戍。
现代文：况且边地并未平静，正须借重于人才，应当指示徐、泗团练使挑选、招募兵卒三千人前往邕管地区驻防守卫。
English: Moreover, the border areas are not calm, and it is necessary to rely more on talents. Xu and Zou should instruct the regimental drill sergeant to select and recruit three thousand soldiers to go to the Zengguan area to stand guard.

古文：待岭外事宁之后，即与替代归还。
现代文：等到岭外一带事态平静之后，立即派军队去替换，让他们回来。
English: Wait until the situation around Lingwai is calm, and immediately send troops to replace them and let them return.

古文：仍令每召满五百人，即差军将押送，其粮料赏给，所司准例处分。
现代文：并指示，每招满五百人之数，就派一名军官遣送前往；粮食、草料、赏赐及供给的物资，主管部门均按照旧例处置。
English: He also instructed that every time the number of recruits reached 500, an officer would be sent to the area; grain, fodder, rewards and supplies were handled by the competent departments in accordance with the old practice.

古文：淮南、两浙海运，虏隔舟船，访闻商徒，失业颇甚，所由纵舍，为弊实深。
现代文： 淮南、两浙的海上运输，由于盗寇阻隔了舟船，从商人那儿访知，失去生计的人很多，这是放纵盗贼所造成的，为害确实很深。
English: In the maritime transport of Huainan and the two Zhejiang Provinces, many people lost their livelihoods due to the thefts of ships and visits from merchants. This was caused by the indulgence of thieves, and the damage was indeed very deep.

古文：亦有搬货财委于水次，无人看守，多至散亡，嗟怨之声，盈于道路。
现代文：也有运送的货物丢弃在水边没有人看守，大部分都散失了。叹息、怨恨的声音充满了道路。
English: There were also shipments of goods dumped on the water's edge, unguarded, most of them lost. The sound of sighs, of resentment, filled the road.

古文：宜令三道据所搬米石数，牒报所在盐铁巡院，令和雇入海同船，分付所司。
现代文：应当指示这三道根据所运送的米粮石数，行文上报给当地的盐铁巡院，命令他们出资征雇海船。
English: The three provinces should be instructed to report to the local salt and iron inspectorate in writing according to the number of rice grains and stones transported, and they should be ordered to fund the recruitment of seagoing vessels.

古文：通计载米数足外，辄不更有隔夺，妄称贮备。
现代文：吩咐有关部门全面统计运载米粮的实足数额，不得再有被盗寇阻拦抢掠而谎称贮藏的事。
English: He ordered the relevant departments to comprehensively count the actual amount of rice grain transported, and there must be no more thefts and robberies while falsely claiming to be stored.

古文：其小舸短船到江口，使司自有船，不在更取商人舟船之限。
现代文：那些短小的船只能到江口，有关府署如有自备的船就不再限定雇取商人的舟船了。
English: Those short and small boats can only go to the mouth of the river. If the relevant prefectural departments have their own boats, they are no longer limited to hiring merchants' boats.

古文：如官吏妄行威福，必议痛刑。
现代文：如果官吏中有随意作威作福的，必须议处重刑。
English: If there are any officials who wantonly make threats, they must be severely punished.

古文：于戏！万方靡安，宁忘于罪己；百姓不足，敢怠于责躬。
现代文：唉，到处都不安定，我怎能忘记自己的罪过呢！百姓不富足，我怎能不责备自己呢！
English: Alas, how shall I forget my iniquity? For the people is not rich, and I am full of heaviness.

古文：用伸钦恤之怀，式表忧勤之旨。
现代文：谨在此表示钦敬、抚恤的情怀，表示忧虑、殷勤的心意。 
English: I would like to express my admiration and sympathy, as well as my concern and diligence.

古文：壬寅，制以中书侍郎、平章事杨收为门下侍郎、兼刑部尚书，以中书侍郎、平章事曹确兼工部尚书，兵部侍郎、平章事高璩为中书侍郎、知政事，余并如故。
现代文：五月十七日，决定任命中书侍郎、平章政事杨收担任门下侍郎，并兼任刑部尚书；任命中书侍郎、平章政事曹确兼任工部尚书；任命兵部侍郎、平章政事高璩担任中书侍郎、执掌政务。其余一切照旧。
English: On May 17th, it was decided to appoint Yang Hui, Chusho-sajiro and Taira-sho-seiji, to serve as a disciple-sajiro, and concurrently to serve as Shosho of the Department of Criminal Law; to appoint Chusho-sajiro and Taira-sojo-seiji, Cao Ji, to serve as Shosho of the Department of Engineering; to appoint Hyobusu-sajiro and Taira-sojo-seiji, Gaojun, to serve as Shosajiro of the Department of Engineering, and to be in charge of government affairs. Everything else remained as before.

古文：秋七月壬子，延资库使夏侯孜奏：
现代文：秋七月二十八日，延资库使夏侯孜奏说：
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, Xia Houzze, the envoy of the Enrichment Fund, said:

古文：盐铁户部先积欠当使咸通四年已前延资库钱绢三百六十九万余贯匹。
现代文： 咸通四年以前，户部所积欠本官主管的延资库盐铁钱绢共达三百六十九万余贯匹。
English: Four years ago in Hamdang-dong, the accumulated debts owed by households to their supervisors totaled more than 3.69 million won.

古文：内户部每年合送钱二十六万四千一百八十贯匹，从大中十二年至咸通四年九月已前，除纳外，欠一百五十万五千七百一十四万贯匹。
现代文：其中户部每年应交的钱为二十六万四千一百八十贯匹，从大中十二年至咸通四年九月以前，除已交纳的以外，尚欠一百五十万五千七百一十四贯匹。
English: Of this, the amount payable annually by the Household Department is 264,180 kanpits, and from the 12th year of junior high school to September of 2004, in addition to what has already been paid, there is still a debt of 1,557,114 kanpits.

古文：当使缘户部积欠数多，先具申奏，请于诸道州府场盐院合纳户部所收八十文除陌钱内，割一十五文，属当使自收管。
现代文：本官因户部积欠的数额较多，早先曾具本上奏，请求在州、府、场、监、院共同交纳给户部的除陌钱中，每八十文中分出十五文，归属本官自行收管。
English: Due to the large amount of arrears accumulated by the household department, this official had earlier submitted a written appeal, requesting that of the total amount of money paid to the household department by the state, prefecture, field, supervision and hospital, 15 out of every 80 monies should be allocated to this official for collection.

古文：敕命虽行，送纳稽缓。
现代文：敕命虽然已经颁行，但交纳却迁延迟缓。
English: Although the order has been issued, the payment has been delayed.

古文：今得户部牒称，所收管除陌钱绢外，更有诸杂物货，延资库征收不便，请起今年合纳延资库钱绢一时便足。
现代文：现在收得的户部公文说，所收取的除陌钱，除了银钱绢帛之外，还有各种杂货物资，延资库征收起来不方便。请准予从今年起，应该交给延资库的钱绢一次交足。
English: The document from the Ministry of Household Affairs, which has now been received, says that in addition to foreign money, in addition to silver money, there are various miscellaneous goods that are collected, and it is inconvenient to collect the reserve fund. Please allow from this year, the money that should be handed over to the reserve fund should be paid once.

古文：其已前积欠，候物力稍充，积渐填纳。
现代文：以前所积欠的，待物力稍微充足以后，再逐步补交。
English: The previously accumulated arrears will be gradually made up after the material resources are slightly sufficient.

古文：其所割一十五文钱，即当司仍旧收管。
现代文：那除陌钱中分出的十五文钱，即仍旧由本官收管。
English: The fifteen-cents-worth of money that was distributed in addition to the strange money is still managed by this officer.

古文：又缘累岁以来，岭南用兵，多支户部钱物。
现代文：又因为连年以来在岭南打仗，过多地支取了户部的钱物。
English: In addition, because of the war in Lingnan for many years, too much money and goods were withdrawn from the household.

古文：当使不欲坚论旧欠，请依户部商量，合纳今年一年额色钱绢须足，明年即依旧制，三月、九月两限送纳毕。
现代文：本官不打算坚持立即讨取原来的积欠，请允准按照户部的意见办理，应当交纳的今年全年钱绢的数额、品类必须充足，明年即按照旧制实行，三月、九月分两次交纳完毕。
English: I do not intend to insist on immediately collecting the original arrears. Please allow me to proceed in accordance with the opinions of the Household Department. The amount and category of money that should be paid this year must be sufficient. Next year, it will be implemented in accordance with the old system. Payment will be completed in two installments in March and September.

古文：其以前积欠，仍令户部自立填纳期限者。
现代文：那以前所积欠的，请陛下仍旧诏令户部自行确定补交的期限。 
English: As for the arrears accumulated before, Your Majesty is requested to still issue an edict to the head office to determine the deadline for making up the arrears.

古文：敕旨依之。
现代文：皇上下敕旨同意。
English: The Emperor's edict was unanimously approved.

古文：十月丙辰，以中书舍人李蔚权知礼部贡举。
现代文：十月初三，任命中书舍人李蔚暂时掌管礼部贡举的事务。
English: On the 3rd of October, Li Wei, a scholar of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was appointed to temporarily take charge of the affairs of the ceremonial tribute.

古文：十一月乙酉，以大同军防御使卢简方检校工部尚书、沧州刺史、御史大夫，充义昌军节度、沧济德观察等使。
现代文：十一月初二，任命大同军防御使卢简方为检校工部尚书、沧州刺史、御史大夫，并充任义昌军节度使、沧济德等州观察使。
English: At the beginning of November 2nd, Lu Jianfang, the defense envoy of Datong Army, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of Cangzhou, and the inspector of history. He also served as the inspector of the Yichang Army and the observer of Cangzhou and other states.

古文：乙未，以兵部侍郎萧寘本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月十二日，任命兵部侍郎萧蜫以本职任中书门下同平章事。
English: On December 12th, Xiao Jie, the attendant of the military department, was appointed to the post of the second-highest-ranking official.

古文：六年正月癸未朔。
现代文：咸通六年正月初一为癸未日。
English: The first day of the first month of the sixth year of Hamdang is the last day of the month.

古文：丁亥，制以河东节度使、检校刑部尚书孔温裕为郓州刺史、天平军节度、郓曹棣观察处置等使。
现代文：正月初五，决定任命河东节度使、检校刑部尚书孔温裕为郓州刺史、天平军节度使、郓、曹、棣等州观察处置使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint the Hedong Festival Delegate, Shang Shuxu Kong Wenyu of the School Inspection and Punishment Department as the Zhangzhou stabbing history, the Tianping Army Festival Delegate, and the Zou, Cao, Zou and other state observation and disposal envoys.

古文：二月，制以御史中丞徐商为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二月，决定任命御史中丞徐商为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: In February, it was decided to appoint Goshi Chujo (Minister of History) Xu Shang as Hyobushirou (Minister of War) and Tongping Shoji (Minister of War).

古文：高璩罢知政事。
现代文：停止高璩执掌政务。
English: Stop Gao Rong from taking charge of government affairs.

古文：以吏部尚书崔慎由、吏部侍郎郑从谠、吏部侍郎王铎、兵部员外郎崔谨张彦远等考宏词选人；金部员外郎张乂思、大理少卿董赓试拔萃选人。
现代文：任命吏部尚书崔慎由、吏部侍郎郑从谠、吏部侍郎王铎、兵部员外郎崔谨、张彦远等主持博学宏词科考试，选拔人才；令金部员外郎张思、大理寺少卿董赓主持拔萃科考试选拔人才。
English: Appointed cadres Shangshu Cui Shanyu, cadres chamberlain Zheng Zongyao, cadres chamberlain Wang Yao, military cadres Wai Lang Cui Ji, Zhang Yanyuan, etc. to preside over the erudition and vocabulary examination and select talents; ordered the financial department member Wai Lang Zhang Si, and the junior secretary of Dali Temple Dong Yao to preside over the selection examination and select talents.

古文：以给事中杨严为工部侍郎，寻召为翰林学士。
现代文：任命给事中杨严为工部侍郎，随即又召任为翰林学士。
English: Yang Yan was appointed as a chamberlain of the engineering department, and then he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：四月，西川节度使牛丛奏于蛮界筑新城、安城、遏戎州功毕。
现代文：四月，西川节度使牛丛奏报：在蛮部边界筑成新城、安城遏戎州的任务已经完成。
English: In April, the Nishikawa Festival made the cattle thicket report: the task of building a new city and a safe city on the border of the barbarian provinces and containing Wonshu has been completed.

古文：时南诏蛮入寇姚、隽，陈许大将颜复戍隽州新筑二城。
现代文：当时南诏蛮侵犯姚州、辒州，陈许大将颜复戍守辒州新筑的两座城池。
English: At that time, Nanzhao brutally invaded Yaozhou and Ganzhou, and Chen Xu general Yan Fuqian guarded the two newly built cities in Ganzhou.

古文：其年秋，六姓蛮攻遏戎州，为复所败，退去。
现代文：这年秋天，六姓蛮进攻遏戎州，被颜复击败，退兵回去。
English: In the autumn of that year, the six clans launched a brutal attack to contain Wonshu, were defeated by Yan Fu, and withdrew.

古文：兵部侍郎、平章事徐商、萧寘转中书侍郎、知政事。
现代文：兵部侍郎、平章政事徐商、萧蜫调任中书侍郎，执掌政务。
English: Hyobushojiro, Taira no Shojijiji, Xu Shang, and Xiao Wei were transferred to the position of Chushojiro to take charge of government affairs.

古文：五月，以左丞杨知温为河南尹，以神策大将军马举为秦州经略招讨使，以右金吾大将军李宴元为夏州刺史、朔方节度等使。
现代文：五月，任命左丞杨知温为河南尹。任命神策大将军马举为秦州经略招讨使。任命右金吾大将军李宴元为夏州刺史、朔方节度使。
English: In May, he appointed the left general, Yang Zhiyuan, as Henan Yin, the right general, Li Yanyuan, as Xiazhou Zhishi, and the right general, Ma Jiu, as Qinzhou Jingliao Zhaotongshi.

古文：安南都护高骈奏于邕管大败林邑蛮。
现代文：安南都护高骈奏报，在邕管地区大败林邑蛮部。
English: According to the report, Annan's capital, Gaoqiao, was the first to suffer a major defeat in the Yunnan region.

古文：七月，以右卫大将军薛绾检校工部尚书、徐州刺史，充徐泗团练观察防御等使。
现代文：七月，任命右卫大将军薛绾为检校工部尚书、徐州刺史，充任徐泗团练使、观察使、防御使。
English: In July, he appointed the right guard general Xue Qi as the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department.

古文：九月，以中书舍人赵骘权知礼部贡举；以吏部侍郎萧仿检校礼部尚书、滑州刺史、御史大夫，充义成军节度、判滑颍观察等使。
现代文：九月，以中书舍人赵骘暂掌礼部贡举事务。任命吏部侍郎萧亻放为检校礼部尚书、滑州刺史、御史大夫，充任义成军节度使，郑、滑、颍等州观察使。
English: In September, the person in charge of the middle school library, Zhao Jun, was temporarily put in charge of the tribute affairs of the ceremonial department. Xiao Yifang, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school.

古文：十二月，太皇太后郑氏崩，谥曰孝明。
现代文：十二月，太皇太后郑氏驾崩，加谥号为 孝明 。
English: In December, Empress Dowager Zheng passed away, and her posthumous name was changed to Xiaoming.

古文：是岁秋，高骈自海门进军破蛮军，收复安南府。
现代文：这年秋天，高骈从海门进军，击败蛮军，收复安南府。
English: In the autumn of that year, Gao Gan marched from Haimen, defeated the barbarian army, and recovered Annan Prefecture.

古文：自李琢失政，交趾湮没十年，蛮军北寇邕容界，人不聊生，至是方复故地。
现代文：自从李琢主政失误，安南陷落达十年之久，蛮军向北边侵犯邕管辖境，百姓无法生活，到这时才返回原来的地方。
English: It has been ten years since the failure of the Li Taku administration and the fall of Annan, when the barbarian army invaded the territory under the jurisdiction of Shao to the north, and the people were unable to live. It was only then that they returned to their original place.

古文：七年春正月戊寅朔，以太皇太后丧罢元会。
现代文：咸通七年春，正月初一，因为太皇太后的丧事而取消了元旦的朝会。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Hamdang, on the first day of the first month, the New Year's Day imperial meeting was cancelled because of the funeral of the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：三月，成德军节度、镇冀深赵等州观察处置等使、金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、镇州大都督府长史、御史大夫、太原县开国伯、食邑七百户、袭食实封一百户王绍懿卒，赠司徒。
现代文：三月，成德军节度使、镇冀深赵等州观察处置使、金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、镇州大都督府长史、御史大夫、太原县开国伯、食邑七百户、袭食实封一百户王绍懿去世，追封为司徒。
English: In March, Wang Shaoqi, the festival envoy of the Chengde Army, the observation and disposition envoy of the Zhenjiang-Hebei-Shenzhen-Zhao and other prefectures, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the school inspection secretary, the prefect of the Zhenjiang-Hebei-Shenzhen-Zhao, the governor of Taiyuan County, the founder of the county, the 700 households of the food village, and the 100 households of the food siege, passed away, and was posthumously awarded the title of the scholar.

古文：绍鼎之弟，俱寿安公主之子也。
现代文：王绍懿是王绍鼎的弟弟，他们都是寿安公主的儿子。
English: Wang Shaoqi is the younger brother of Wang Shao Ding. They are both sons of Princess Shouan.

古文：三军推绍鼎子景崇知兵马留后事。
现代文：三军推举王绍鼎的儿子王景崇执掌兵马留后事务。
English: The three armies nominated Wang Jing Chong, the son of Wang Shao Ding, to take charge of the affairs after the soldiers and horses left.

古文：就加幽州张允伸兼太保、平章事，进封燕国公。
现代文：就地加授幽州张允伸兼任太保、平章政事，晋封为燕国公。
English: Yuzhou Zhang Yunshen was awarded the title of Tai Po and Ping Zhang Zhengji, and was promoted to the title of Yan Guo Gong.

古文：以吏部侍郎郑从谠检校礼部尚书、兼太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户，充河东节度管内观察处置等使。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎郑从谠为检校礼部尚书，兼任太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户，充任河东节度使、辖区内观察处置使。
English: Zheng Conglu, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the school inspection, and concurrently served as the Taiyuan Yin, the Beidou left-behind, the goshi taifu, the Shangzhu country, the founding father of Shenyang County, and the 300 households of the food village, and served as the Hedong Festival envoy and the observation and disposal envoy in the jurisdiction area.

古文：四月，寿安公主上表请入朝，诏曰： 志兴奏汝以景崇未降恩命，欲来朝觐事，具悉。
现代文：四月，寿安公主进奉表章请求入朝，皇帝下诏说 ：志兴上奏说你因王景崇没有得到朝廷下达加恩的诏命，想要来京觐见之事，朕都已经知道了。
English: In April, Princess Shouan submitted a request to enter the imperial court, and the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "I already know that Shixing reported to me that you wanted to come to Beijing to see me because you did not receive the imperial edict of Dagarn from the imperial court because of Wang Jingsong.

古文：景崇素闻孝悌，颇有义方，洽三军爱戴之情，荷千里折冲之寄。
现代文：一向听说景崇孝敬友爱，极懂得规矩法度，深得三军爱戴的情分，担负着千里御敌的重托。
English: I have always heard that Jing Chong cherished filial piety, respected and loved his friends, was very knowledgeable about rules and regulations, was deeply loved by the three armies, and shouldered the heavy burden of thousands of miles away from the enemy.

古文：缵乃旧服，绰有令猷，朝廷奖能，续有处分。
现代文：继续担任旧职，善谋极多，朝廷的奖励提拔会陆续有所安排。
English: He continued to serve in his old position, and was very resourceful. The reward and promotion meetings of the Imperial Court were successively arranged.

古文：缘孝明太后园寝有日，庶事且停，候祔庙礼成，当允诚请。 
现代文：但因为孝明太后的陵墓还需要一段时间才能建成，一般性的事务只好暂且停下，等到祭祀大典完成之后，一定会答应你的请求。 
English: However, since the mausoleum of Empress Dowager Xiaoming will take some time to be completed, general affairs will have to be suspended for the time being. We will certainly grant your request after the grand ritual is completed.

古文：七月，沙州节度使张义潮进甘峻山青鹰四联、延庆节马二匹、吐蕃女子二人。
现代文：七月，沙州节度使张义潮进献甘峻山的青骨交鹰四对，庆典用的仪仗马二匹、吐蕃女子二人。
English: In July, the Shazhou Festival made Zhang Yichao present four pairs of eagles, two ceremonial horses, and two women from Tujia.

古文：僧昙延进《大乘百法门明论》等。
现代文：和尚昙延进献佛书《大乘百法门明论》等。
English: Monk Zou Yanjin's book of dedication to Buddhism, "A Clear Explanation of the Hundred-Way Path of the Mahayana" and others.

古文：八月，镇州王景崇起复忠武将军、左金吾卫将军同正、检校右散骑常侍，兼镇州大都督府左司马、知府事、御史中丞，充成德军节度观察留后。
现代文：八月，镇州王景崇居丧中被任命为忠武将军、左金吾卫将军同正、检校右散骑常侍，兼任镇州大都督府左司马，掌州府事务，御史中丞，充任成德军节度使、观察使留后。
English: In August, in the funeral of Zhenzhou Wang Jingsong, he was appointed as the general of Zhongwu, the general of the left King Wuwei, the general of the right King Wuwei, and the attendant of the right cavalry of the school inspection. He also served as the left secretary of the Zhenzhou grand governor's office, in charge of the affairs of the prefecture, the vice-president of the history, and served as the festival envoy of the German army and the observation envoy.

古文：上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋、中书侍郎、平章事徐商兼工部尚书。
现代文：上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋、中书侍郎、平章政事徐商兼任工部尚书。
English: Shangzhu Guo, Zhe Zi Jin Yu Bao, Zhongshu Zhilong, and Pingzhang Zhengji Xu Shang also served as Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：十月，沙州张义潮奏：差回鹘首领仆固俊与吐蕃大将尚恐热交战，大败蕃寇，斩尚恐热，传首京师。
现代文：十月，沙州张义潮奏报：派回鹘首领仆固俊与吐蕃大将尚恐热交战，大败吐蕃贼寇，斩尚恐热，将他的首级传送到京师。
English: In October, Zhang Yichao of Shazhou reported that he had sent back the leader of the Xiongnu, his servant Gu Jun, to fight with the general of the Tuyun, Shang Xianre. He defeated the Tuyun bandits and killed Shang Xianre, and sent his head to the capital.

古文：右仆射、门下侍郎、平章事夏侯孜检校司空、平章事，兼成都尹、剑南西川节度等副大使、知节度使。
现代文：右仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事夏侯孜任检校司空、平章政事，兼任成都尹、剑南西川节度副使，掌管节度使事务。
English: His right-hand man Sho, his manservant-servant, and his subordinate, Taira no Sho Seiji, were appointed as school-inspection officers Ku, Taira no Sho Seiji, Chengdu Yin, and Jianan Nishikawa, and also served as vice-envoys for the festival, in charge of the festival affairs.

古文：安南高骈奏蛮寇悉平。
现代文：安南都护高骈奏报蛮部贼寇已经全部平定。
English: The bandits in the Barbarian Division have all been subdued.

古文：十一月十日，御宣政殿，大赦，以复安南故也。
现代文：十一月十日，皇上驾临宣政殿，大赦天下一一一因为收复安南的缘故。
English: On November 10th, the emperor arrived at the Xuan Zheng Palace and pardoned the whole country for the sake of recovering Annan.

古文：以翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎路岩为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎路岩为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zong Ji and Household Attendant Lu Yan were appointed as Hyobu Attendant and Tongping Officer respectively.

古文：义成军节度萧仿就加检校兵部尚书，褒能政也。
现代文：就地加授义成军节度使萧亻放为检校兵部尚书，以表彰他善于主持政务。
English: In recognition of his ability to preside over government affairs, the Yicheng Army Festival was awarded to Xiao Yifang to be the inspector of the school military department.

古文：以礼部郎中李景温、吏部员外郎高湘试拔萃选人。
现代文：任命礼部郎中李景温、吏部员外郎高湘主持拔萃科考选人才事务。
English: Appointed Li Jingwen, Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Gao Xiang, Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, to preside over the selection of talents.

古文：八年春正月壬寅朔。丁未，河中、晋、绛地大震，卢舍压仆伤人，有死者。
现代文：咸通八年春，正月初一，河中、晋州、绛州一带发生大地震，房屋倒塌压伤了人，也有死的。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Hamdang, on the first day of the first month of the year, a major earthquake occurred in the areas of Hechu, Jinzhou and Luzhou. Houses collapsed, crushing people and killing some.

古文：三月，安南高骈奏： 南至邕管，水路湍险，巨石梗途，令工人开凿讫，漕船无滞者。 
现代文：三月，安南的高骈上奏说： 到南方的邕管去，水路湍急、艰险，巨石梗塞在途中，派役夫前去开凿已经完毕，运输物资的船只再也不受阻滞了。 
English: In March, Annan's high-level speech said: Go to the south of the canal, the waterway is fast and difficult, the boulder is blocked on the way, the excavation has been completed, and the ships transporting goods will no longer be blocked.

古文：降诏褒之。
现代文：皇上颁发诏令给予褒奖。
English: The Emperor issued a decree to give the award.

古文：制以门下侍郎、兼户部尚书平章事、上柱国、晋阳县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋杨收检校兵部尚书，充浙江西道观察使；以浙西观察使杜审权守尚书左仆射；以兵部侍郎于忭本官同平章事。
现代文：决定任命门下侍郎、兼户部尚书、平章政事、上柱国、晋阳县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋杨收为检校兵部尚书，并充任浙江西道观察使。任命浙西观察使杜审权代理尚书左仆射。任命兵部侍郎于以本职任同平章事。
English: It was decided to appoint his subordinate attendant, concurrently with the head of the household, Shangshu, Pingzhang Zhengji, Shangzhu Guo, the founder of Jinyang County, and 300 households of the food village, to give the purple goldfish bag to Yang Rui as the school inspection of the military department, and to serve as the observer of the West Zhejiang Province.

古文：九月丁酉，延资库使曹确奏：
现代文：九月初一，延资库使曹确上奏说：
English: On the first day of September, Cao Jizhen, the envoy of the extension fund, made a report:

古文：户部每年合送当使三月、九月两限绢二十一万四千一百匹，钱万贯，自大中八年已后，至咸通四年，积欠一百五十万五千七百余贯匹。
现代文： 户部应在每年三月、九月分两次送交给本使的绢是二十一万四千一百匹，钱一万贯，从大中八年以后直到咸通四年共积欠一百五十万五千七百余贯匹。
English: The sum of money that should be sent to the envoy twice a year, in March and September, by the household department is 214,100 baht and 10,000 kan. From the eighth year of junior high school until the fourth year of Hamdangdong, the total accumulated debt is more than 1,557,700 kan.

古文：前使杜忭申奏，请起咸通五年正月以后，于诸道州府场监院合送户部八十文除陌钱内，割十五文当使收管，以填积欠。
现代文：前任延资库使杜曾经上奏，请求从咸通五年正月以后，从各道、州、府、场、监、院应上交给户部的除陌钱中，每八十文中分出十五文交给本使收管，以抵销积欠的钱绢。
English: Du, the previous envoy of the Enrichment Fund, once made a report, requesting that from the first month of the fifth year of Hamdantong, 15 out of every 80 monies from the provinces, prefectures, counties, fields, supervisors and hospitals should be handed over to the Envoy for collection, to offset the accumulated arrears of money.

古文：续据户部牒称，州府除陌钱有折色零碎，请起咸通五年所合送延资库钱绢，逐年两限须足，其除陌十五文，当司仍旧收管。
现代文：据户部陆续发出的公文说，州府上交的除陌钱里有各种零碎的折物，请求从咸通五年起，应当交送延资库的钱绢每年都按三月、九月分两次交足，另外的除陌钱十五文，则仍由本部门收管。
English: According to the official documents successively issued by the Household Department, there are all kinds of fragmentary objects in the stolen money handed over by the prefectural government. The request is that from Hamdong five years, the money that should be handed over to the extension fund should be paid in two installments in March and September every year. The other 15 stolen money will still be managed by this department.

古文：前使夏侯孜具事由申奏，且请依户部论请期限。
现代文：前任延资库使夏侯孜列举事由上奏说：暂且请按照户部所提请的期限办理。
English: Xia Houzeh, the previous envoy of the Yanji Fund, listed the reasons for the report and said: For the time being, please follow the deadline requested by the Household Department.

古文：其咸通五年钱绢，户部已送纳。
现代文：咸通五年的钱绢，户部已经交纳给本使。
English: Hamdang Tong five years of money, the household has been paid to the envoy.

古文：自六年至八年，其钱绢依前不旋送纳，又积欠三十六万五千五百七贯匹者。
现代文：从咸通五年到八年的钱绢仍旧和原来一样没有及时交纳，又积欠三十六万五千五百零七贯匹。
English: From the fifth to the eighth year of Hamdangdong, Qianlong still did not pay in time as before, and accumulated a debt of 365,507 kanpi.

古文：伏以所置延资库，初以备边为名，至大中三年始改今号。
现代文：朝廷所设置的延资库，开始是以备边为名的，到大中三年才改成现在的名义。
English: The endowment fund set up by the imperial court was initially called the reserve side, and only changed to its current name three years into the middle school.

古文：若财货不充，则名额虚设。
现代文：如果库里的钱财物资不充足，就等于虚设名义。
English: If the money and materials in the treasury are not sufficient, it is tantamount to creating a false name.

古文：当制置之时，所令三司逐年分减送当使收管。
现代文：当制度拟定的时候，三司使受命逐年分出既定的钱额送交本使收管。
English: When the system was drawn up, the three departments were ordered to allocate the established amount of money year by year and send it to the collection department.

古文：元敕只有钱数，但令本司减割送库，不定色目。
现代文：最初的敕命仅仅规定了钱数，只令主管部门分出除陌钱的一部分送交延资库，不规定物资的种类。
English: The initial decree only specified the amount of money, only ordered the competent departments to allocate a part of the stolen money and send it to the reserve fund, and did not specify the type of material.

古文：以此因循，渐隳旧制，年月既久，积欠渐多。
现代文：照此沿袭下来，就逐渐破坏了旧规，时间久了之后，积欠渐渐又多起来。
English: Following this tradition, the old rules were gradually destroyed, and after a long time, the backlog gradually increased.

古文：既无计以征收，乃指色以取济，稍称备边名号，得遵元敕指挥。
现代文：既然没有合适的办法征收，就只好迁就物类以求取一定的救助，以便和 备边 的名义略微相符，得以遵奉最初那道敕令的规定。
English: Since there is no suitable way to collect, we had to accommodate the goods to get some relief, so as to slightly match the name of the reserve side and comply with the provisions of the original royal decree.

古文：乃割户部除陌八十文内十五文收管，及户部请逐年送库，须且禀从。
现代文：于是从户部收取的除陌钱中，每八十文分出十五文由本库收管，并要求户部每年送交延资库，必须按照敕令办。
English: As a result, out of every eighty monies collected from the Household Department for the removal of foreign money, fifteen monies were allocated to be collected by this fund, and the Household Department was required to submit to the reserve fund every year, which must be done in accordance with the imperial order.

古文：今既积欠又多，终虑不及期限。
现代文：现在既然积欠又多了，终究要虑及不能按期交送。
English: Now that the backlog has increased again, we have to take into account the fact that we will not be able to deliver on time.

古文：臣今酌量诸道州府场监院合送户部钱绢内分配，令勒留下合送延资库数目，令本处别为纲运，与户部纲同送上都，直纳延资库，则户部免有逋悬，不至累年积欠。
现代文：臣如今打算从各道、州、府、场、监、院应交纳给户部的钱绢内，勒令留出应当交纳给延资库的数目，让本处的官员另造纲目清册，与户部的纲目清册一起送到上都，直接交给延资库，这样，户部就可以免于拖欠，不至于连年积欠了。 
English: The minister now intends to order that the amount to be paid to the reserve fund should be set aside from the amount of money that should be paid to the reserve fund from each province, prefecture, prefecture, field, prison and hospital, and that the officials of this department should make another program inventory, send it to Shangdu together with the program inventory of the reserve fund, and directly hand it over to the reserve fund. In this way, the reserve fund can be exempted from arrears, so that the reserve fund will not be accumulated for years.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依从这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十月丙寅，户部侍郎、判度支崔彦昭奏：当司应收管江、淮诸道州府咸通八年已前两税榷酒及支米价，并二十文除陌诸色属省钱，准旧例逐年商人投状便换。
现代文：十月初一，户部侍郎、署理度支使崔彦昭上奏说： 本司应当收管江淮各道、州、府咸通八年以前春秋两季的赋税、酒的专卖利税钱以及支付米价的钱，加上从各除陌钱中扣下的二十文以各种名目节省的钱，按照旧例商人逐年以投状存入飞钱。
English: On the first day of October, Cui Yan Zhao, the head of the Household Department and the acting provincial party secretary, said in his report: "This department should take charge of the spring and autumn taxes of the provinces, prefectures and prefectures of Jianghuai eight years ago, as well as the monopoly sales tax money and the money to pay the price of rice, plus the twenty-cents deducted from each foreign money and the money saved in various names. According to the old example, merchants should deposit fly money year by year.

古文：自南蛮用兵已来，置供军使，当司在诸州府场监钱，犹有商人便换，赍省司便换文牒至本州府请领，皆被诸州府称准供军使指挥占留。
现代文：自从和南蛮开战以来，设置了供军使，本司在各州、府、场、监的钱款，还有商人的飞钱，带着省司有关飞钱的文牒到本州府请求领取，都被各州府以遵照供军使的指令为由而占用截留。
English: Since the start of the war with South Africa, there has been a provision for military envoys, and the department's money in the states, prefectures, fields, and supervisors, as well as the merchants' fly money, with the provincial department's letter about the fly money to the Honshu prefecture to request collection, have all been occupied and intercepted by the state prefectures on the grounds of complying with the instructions of the military envoys.

古文：以此商人疑惑，乃致当司支用不充。
现代文：因此商人产生疑虑，竟导致本司的经费不足。
English: As a result, businessmen have doubts, which has led to a shortage of funds for this department.

古文：乞下诸道州府场监院依限送纳及给还商人，不得托称占留者。 
现代文：请下属各道、州、府、场、监、院按照规定的期限把税钱送交本府，并将飞钱发还商人，不得托辞借故占用、截留。 
English: All subordinate provinces, counties, prefectures, workplaces, inspectorates and courts are requested to send the tax money to this prefecture in accordance with the prescribed time limit, and to return the flying money to the merchant, and not to occupy or retain it under any pretext.

古文：敕旨从之。
现代文：皇上颁发敕旨同意。
English: The emperor complied with the order.

古文：宰相、门下侍郎、户部尚书曹确兼吏部尚书，门下侍郎、礼部尚书路岩兼户部尚书，中书侍郎、工部尚书徐商兼刑部尚书，兵部侍郎、平章事于忭为中书侍郎。
现代文：宰相、门下侍郎、户部尚书曹确兼任吏部尚书。门下侍郎、礼部尚书路岩兼任户部尚书。中书侍郎、工部尚书徐商兼刑部尚书。兵部侍郎、平章政事于任中书侍郎。
English: The prime minister, the under-secretary, and the chief secretary of the household also served as the secretary of the personnel department; the under-secretary, the secretary of the etiquette department, and the road rock also served as the secretary of the household; the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the engineering department, and the secretary of the criminal department; the secretary of the military department, and the secretary of the administrative department of the middle school.

古文：以中书舍人刘允章权知礼部贡举，以吏部侍郎卢匡、吏部侍郎李蔚、兵部员外郎薛崇、司勋员外郎崔殷梦考吏部宏词选人。
现代文：任命中书舍人刘允章暂时掌管礼部贡举事务，任命吏部侍郎卢匡、吏部侍郎李蔚、兵部员外郎薛崇、司勋员外郎崔殷梦主持吏部博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: Liu Yunzhang, the librarian, was appointed to temporarily take charge of the tribute affairs of the ceremonial department, and Lu Kuang, the attendant of the official department, Li Wei, the attendant of the official department, Xue Chong, the attendant of the military department, and Cui Yinmeng, the attendant of the official department, were appointed to preside over the erudition and vocabulary examination of the official department and select talents.

古文：九年春正月丙申，以吏部侍郎李蔚检校刑部尚书、汴州刺史、御史大夫，充宣武节度、汴宋亳观察处置等使。
现代文：咸通九年春，正月初一，任命吏部侍郎李蔚为检校刑部尚书、汴州刺史、御史大夫，并充任宣武节度使及汴、宋、亳等州观察处置使。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Hamdang, on the first day of the first month of the year, Li Wei, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school, and served as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school.

古文：幽州节度使张允伸就加检校太傅。
现代文：幽州节度使张允伸就地加授为检校太傅。
English: At the Yuzhou Festival, Zhang Yunshen was awarded the title of school inspector on the spot.

古文：以兵部员外郎焦渎、司勋员外郎李岳考宏词选人。
现代文：任命兵部员外郎焦渎、司勋员外郎李岳主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: He appointed Wei Lang Jia Rong, a member of the Military Department, and Wei Lang Li Yue, a member of the Department of Honors, to preside over the Erudition and Grammar Examination to select talents.

古文：七月戊戌，白虹横亘西方。
现代文：七月初七，一道白虹横贯西面的天空。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of July, a white rainbow streaked across the western sky.

古文：其月，徐州赴桂林戍卒五百人，官健许佶、赵可立杀其将王仲甫，以粮料判官庞勋为都头，剽掠湘潭、衡山两县，有众千人，擅还本镇。
现代文：当月，徐州前往桂林的戍卒五百人在军官许佶、赵可立的带领下杀掉主持王仲甫，拥戴粮科判官庞勋为头目，抢劫湘潭、衡山两县，拥有部众上千人，擅自返回本镇徐州。
English: That month, 500 soldiers from Xuzhou headed to Guilin and, under the leadership of officers Xu Zeng and Zhao Keli, killed the presiding officer Wang Zhongfu, supported the judge of grain science Pang Xun as the leader, robbed Xiangtan and Hengshan counties, possessed thousands of people, and returned to the town of Xuzhou without authorization.

古文：九月辛卯朔。
现代文：九月初一为辛卯日。
English: The first day of September is a bad day.

古文：甲午，庞勋陷宿州，知州判官焦潞奔归于徐。
现代文：九月初四，庞勋攻占宿州，知州判官焦潞逃回徐州。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Pang Xun occupied Suizhou, and Jiao Wei, the judge of Chizhou, fled back to Xuzhou.

古文：乙未，庞勋陷徐州，杀节度使崔彦曾、判官焦潞、李税温延皓、崔蕴、韦廷乂，惟免监军张道谨。
现代文：九月初五，庞勋攻下徐州，杀死节度使崔彦曾、判官焦潞、李税、温延皓、崔蕴、韦廷，只有监军张道谨免于被杀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, Pang Xun conquered Xuzhou, and the killing of Jie Duong made Cui Yan Zeng, the judge Jiao Jun, Li Jian, Wen Yanzhong, Cui Yun, and Wei Ting, and only the supervisor Zhang Daojin were spared from being killed.

古文：遂出徐、宿官库钱帛，召募凶徒，不旬日其徒五万。
现代文：于是抢出徐州、宿州官库的钱财，招募凶横之徒，不到十天徒众就达到五万人。
English: He then robbed the treasuries of Xuzhou and Shuzhou, and recruited thugs. In less than ten days, the number of thugs reached fifty thousand.

古文：勋抗表请罪，仍命群凶邀求节钺。
现代文：庞勋上表直言认罪，并指使他的徒众要求朝廷授予节旄斧钺。
English: Pang Xun openly confessed his guilt and ordered his followers to demand that the imperial court award him the title of Grand Prince.

古文：上遣中使因而抚之。
现代文：皇上派出朝廷使臣趁此机会安抚他们。
English: The emperor sent an imperial envoy to take advantage of this opportunity to appease them.

古文：贼令别将梁伾守宿州，以姚周为柳子寨主，又遣刘行及、丁景琮、吴玫迥攻围泗州。
现代文：叛军命令偏将梁亻丕守宿州，任命姚周为柳子寨守将，又派遣刘行及、丁景琮、吴迥攻打、围困泗州。
English: The rebel army ordered Liang Qian to defend Suzhou, appointed Yao Zhou as Liu Zizhai's commander, and dispatched Liu Xinghe, Ding Jingyao, and Wu Xi to attack and besiege Suzhou.

古文：十月，诏征河南、河东、山南诸道之师。
现代文：十月，皇帝下诏征调河南、山东、山南各道的军队。
English: In October, the emperor issued an edict to transfer troops from Henan, Shandong and Shannan provinces.

古文：贬浙西观察使杨收为端州司马同正，收弟前浙东观察使、越州刺史、御史中丞严为韶州刺史，检校工部尚书、洪州刺史、镇南节度、江南西道观察处置等使严譔长流岭南。
现代文：浙西观察使杨收降职为端州司马同正，杨收之弟、前浙东观察使、越州刺史、御史中丞杨严为韶州刺史。将检校工部尚书、洪州刺史、镇南节度使、江南西道观察处置使严讠巽流放到岭南。
English: The West Zhejiang Observer demoted Yang Hui to Danzhou Sima Tongzheng, Yang Hui's younger brother, the former East Zhejiang Observer, Yuezhou Zhishi, and Grand Historian Yang Yan to Shanzhou Zhishi, and exiled Shang Shu of the Inspection Department, Hongzhou Zhishi, Zhenan Jiedu, and Jiangnan West Road Observer to Lingnan.

古文：贼攻泗州势急，淮南节度使令狐綯虑失泗口，为贼奔冲，乃令大将李湘赴援，为贼所诱，示弱乞降，乘其无备，为贼所袭，举军皆没。
现代文：贼军围困泗州的形势危急，淮南节度使令狐担心失陷泗口，受到贼军冲击，命令大将李湘前去救援。李湘受到贼军诱惑，表现软弱，乞求投降，贼军乘他不防备进行偷袭，结果全军覆没。
English: The situation of the invaders besieging Luzhou was critical. The Huainan Festival made Linghu worry about losing Hekou and being attacked by the invaders, and ordered General Li Xiang to go to the rescue. Li Xiang was tempted by the invaders, showed weakness, begged for surrender, and the invaders took advantage of his unpreparedness to make a sneak attack. As a result, the entire army was wiped out.

古文：湘与都监郭厚本俱为贼所执，送徐州。
现代文：李湘与都监郭厚本都被贼军俘获，被押送到徐州。
English: Both Li Xiang and the city supervisor Guo Atsumoto were captured by the bandits and taken to Xuzhou.

古文：十一月庚寅朔。
现代文：十一月初一为庚寅日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Geng Yin Day.

古文：丁酉戌时，妖星初出，如匹练亘空，化为云，没在楚分。
现代文：十一月初八戊时，妖星荧惑星开始出现，像一条带子横过天空，变成云气，隐没在楚地的分野。
English: At 8:00 a.m. in early November, a strange star-fluorescent planet began to appear, like a ribbon across the sky, turning into a cloud and disappearing into the fields of Chu Di.

古文：吴迥既执李湘，乃令小将张行简、吴约攻滁州。
现代文：吴迥捕获李湘以后，就命令小将张行简、吴约攻打滁州。
English: After Wu Gan captured Li Xiang, he ordered minor generals Zhang Xingjian and Wu You to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：城内无兵，有淮南游奕兵三百人在州界，见贼至，径来奔郡，贼乘之，遂陷滁州。
现代文：城内没有守军，有三百名淮南的巡逻兵在滁州境内，见贼军来了，便直接奔入城中，贼军便乘机进入滁州。
English: There was no garrison in the city. There were three hundred patrol soldiers from Huainan in the territory of Ganzhou. When they saw the invaders coming, they rushed directly into the city. The invaders took the opportunity to enter Ganzhou.

古文：张行简执刺史高锡望，手刃之，屠其城而去。
现代文：张行简抓住了刺史高锡望，亲手把他杀死，屠杀城中百姓后离去。
English: Zhang Xingjian caught the assassin Gao Xibang, killed him with his own hands, slaughtered the people in the city and left.

古文：行简又进攻和州，刺史崔雍登城楼谓吴迥曰： 城中玉帛、女子不敢惜，只勿取天子城池。 
现代文：张行简又进攻和州。刺史崔雍登上城楼对吴迥说 ：城里面的钱财、女子我不敢吝惜，只希望你不要占据天子的城池。 
English: Zhang Xingjian then attacked and besieged the city. The assassin, Cui Yong, climbed onto the city tower and said to Wu Gan, "I don't dare to be stingy with the money and women in the city. I only hope that you don't occupy the city of the Son of Heaven."

古文：贼许之，遂剽城中居民，杀判官张琢，以琢浚城壕故也。
现代文：贼军答应了他，就劫掠城中的居民，杀了判官张琢一一一因为张琢疏浚了城外壕堑的缘故。
English: The bandits agreed to this, robbed the residents of the city, and killed the judge Zhang Tuo, because Zhang Tuo had dredged a trench outside the city.

古文：庞勋又令将刘贽攻濠州，陷之，囚刺史卢望回于回车馆，望回郁愤而死，仆妾数人皆为贼蒸而食之。
现代文：庞勋又命令部将刘贽进攻濠州，攻了下来，把濠州刺史卢望回囚禁在车馆，卢望回忧愤而死，几个男女奴仆都被贼兵蒸来吃了。
English: Pang Xun also ordered the ministry to attack Liu Bei in Ganzhou, attacked it, and imprisoned the Ganzhou assassin Lu Wangwei in a garage. Lu Wangwei died of grief and anger, and several male and female slaves were steamed and eaten by the thieves.

古文：十二月庚辰朔，将军戴可师率沙陀、吐浑部落二万人，于淮南与贼转战，贼党屡败，尽弃淮南之守。
现代文：十二月初一，将军戴可师率领沙陀、吐谷浑部落的军队二万人，在淮南与贼军辗转作战，贼军屡次战败，把淮南地区的防地全部放弃了。
English: On the first day of December, General Dai Ke's division led 20,000 troops from the Shatou and Tugugun tribes to fight against the invaders in Huainan. The invaders were repeatedly defeated and gave up all their defenses in the Huainan region.

古文：是岁，江、淮蝗食稼，大旱。
现代文：这一年，江、淮一带蝗虫吞食庄稼，还发生了大旱灾。
English: This year, locusts devoured crops in the Jiang and Huai regions, and a major drought occurred.

古文：庞勋奏： 当道先发戍岭南兵士三千人春冬衣，今欲差人送赴邕管。 
现代文：庞勋上奏说 ：朝廷原先发给戍守岭南的三千名士兵春季和冬季的衣服，现在我打算派人送到邕管去。 
English: Pang Xun said: The imperial court had previously issued spring and winter clothes to the three thousand soldiers who guarded Lingnan, and now I plan to send someone to Shiguan.

古文：鄂岳观察使刘允章上书言； 庞勋聚徒十万，今若遣人达岭表，如戍卒与勋合势，则祸难非细。 
现代文：鄂岳观察使刘允章上书说 ：庞勋聚集了十万人，现在派人到了岭南，如果当地的守军和庞勋合成一股势力，那灾难是不会小的。 
English: Liu Yunzhang was prompted by his observation of the Battle of Mount E to write: Pang Xun had gathered a hundred thousand men, and now he was sending men to Lingnan. If the local defenders and Pang Xun were to combine into a single force, the disaster would not be small.

古文：寻诏庞勋止绝，兼令江、淮诸道纪纲捕之。
现代文：皇帝随即下诏，令庞勋不许前往，同时命令江、淮各道按朝廷的命令进行追捕。
English: The emperor immediately issued an edict, ordering Pang Xun not to go, and ordered Jiang and Huai provinces to hunt him down according to the order of the imperial court.

古文：十年春正月己未朔，以徐州用兵罢元会。
现代文：咸通十年，正月初一，因为徐州正在打仗而停止元旦的朝会。
English: In the tenth year of Hamdang, on the first day of the first month, because Xuzhou was at war, the New Year's meeting was stopped.

古文：癸亥，以右拾遗韦保衡为银青光禄大夫、守起居郎、驸马都尉，尚皇女同昌公主，出降之日，礼仪甚盛。
现代文：正月初五，任命右拾遗韦保衡为银青光禄大夫、署理起居郎、驸马都尉，娶皇女同昌公主，公主出嫁的那天，礼仪非常隆重。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wei Boheng was appointed as the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu, the acting kijiro, and the captain of the horse. He married the princess Tongchang. On the day of the princess's wedding, the etiquette was very grand.

古文：以神武大将军王晏权检校工部尚书、徐州刺史、御史大夫，充武宁军节度、徐泗濠观察，兼徐州北路行营招讨等使，智兴之从子也；以将军硃克诚充北路招讨都虞候；王宥北路招讨前军使。
现代文：任命神武大将军王晏权任检校工部尚书、徐州刺史、御史大夫，充任武宁军节度使及徐、泗、濠等州观察使，兼任徐州北路行营招讨使，他是王智兴的侄儿；任命将军朱克诚充任北路招讨都虞候；任命王宥任北路招讨前军使。
English: Appointed Shenwu Major General Wang Bingquan as the inspector of the inspection department of Shangshu, Xuzhou, and the chief historian; appointed as the festival envoy of the Wu Ning Army and the observation envoy of the states of Xu, Shan, and Shan; also appointed as the envoy of the Xuzhou North Road Campaign; he is the nephew of Wang Zhixing; appointed General Zhu Kecheng as the envoy of the North Road Campaign; appointed Wang Yu as the envoy of the North Road Campaign.

古文：以翰林学士、户部侍郎刘瞻守本官同平章事。
现代文：任命翰林学士、户部侍郎刘瞻以本职署理同平章事。
English: To appoint Liu Zhan, Hanlin Scholar and Household Attendant, as acting deputy of this post.

古文：中书侍郎、兼户部尚书、平章事蒋伸为太子太保，罢知政事，病免也。
现代文：任命中书侍郎、兼户部尚书、平章政事蒋伸担任太子太保，停止执掌政务一一一是因为生病而罢免的。
English: Appointed Zhongshu Zhilong, concurrently the head of the household, Shangshu, and Pingzhang Zhengji, Jiang Sheng, to serve as the prince's eunuch, and ceased to be in charge of government affairs - one was dismissed due to illness.

古文：以门下侍郎、兼刑部尚书、同平章事徐商检校兵部尚书、江陵尹、荆南节度使。
现代文：任命门下侍郎、兼刑部尚书、同平章事徐商为检校兵部尚书、江陵尹、荆南节度使。
English: He appointed his subordinate chamberlains, concurrently the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, Tongping Zhangji Xu Shang as the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, Jiangling Yin and Jingnan Jiedu.

古文：以右神策大将军、知军使、兼御史大夫、上柱国、龙阳县开国伯、食邑一千户康承训可金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书、兼右神策大将军、御史大夫、上柱国、扶风郡开国公、食邑一千五百户，充徐泗行营都招讨使；又以将军李邵为徐州南路行营招讨都虞候；以将军史忠用为颍州行营都知兵马使；将军马澹为徐州行营都知兵马使；将军董涛充卢州行营都知兵马使；将军戴可师充曹州行营招讨使；将军硃邪赤心充太原行营招讨使、沙陀三部落等军使；将军王建充淮泗行营招讨使；将军曹翔充兗海节度行营招讨使；将军马举为扬州都督府司马，充淮南行营招讨使；将军高罗锐为楚州刺史，本州行营招讨使；将军秦匡谟为濠州刺吏，本州行营如讨使，李播为宿州刺史，赴卢州行营招讨使；以将军孟彪为太仆卿，充都粮料使。
现代文：任命右神策大将军、知军使、兼御史大夫、上柱国、龙阳县开国伯、食邑一千户康承训任金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书，兼右神策大将军、御史大夫、上柱国、扶风郡开国公、食邑一千五百户，充任徐泗行营都招讨使；又任命将军李邵担任徐州南路行营招讨都虞候；任命将军史忠用担任颍州行营都知兵马使；任命将军马澹担任徐州行营都知兵马使；任命将军董涛充任庐州行营都知兵马使；任命将军戴可师充任曹州行营招讨使；任命将军朱邪赤心充任太原行营招讨使、沙陀三部落军使；任命将军王建充任淮泗行营招讨使；任命将军曹翔充任兖海节度使、行营招讨使；任命将军马举担任扬州都督府司马，充任淮南行营招讨使；任命将军高罗锐担任楚州刺史，并任本州行营招讨使；任命将军罗匡谟担任濠州刺史，并任本州行营招讨使；任命将军李播担任宿州刺史，并赴庐州任行营招讨使；任命将军孟彪为太仆寺卿，充任都粮料使。
English: Appointed Yu Shenshe General, Zhijun envoy, concurrently Mi Shi doctor, Shangzhuang Province, Longyang County Kaifu Bo, 1,000 households in Shueyi Kangcheng Training as Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, Shangshu of the school inspection and punishment department, Yu Shenshe General, Zhijun envoy, Shangzhuang Province, Fufeng County Kaifu Bo, 1,500 households in Shueyi, and appointed as Xu Yingdu envoy; appointed General Li Shao as Xuzhou South Road campaign envoy; appointed General Shi Zhongyong as Xuzhou campaign envoy; appointed General Ma Jun as Xuzhou campaign envoy;

古文：凡十八将，分董诸道之兵七万三千一十五人，正月一日进军攻徐州。
现代文：总共十八名将军，分监各道的军队七万三千零一十五人，正月初一进军攻打徐州。
English: A total of 18 generals and 73,015 troops from all provinces marched to attack Xuzhou on the first day of the first month.

古文：魏博何弘敬奏当道点检兵马一万三千赴行营。
现代文：魏博的何弘敬上奏皇上，本道检点一万三千兵马前往军营。
English: Wei Bo's He Hongjing appealed to the emperor, and thirteen thousand soldiers and horses went to the military camp.

古文：时贼将刘行及、丁景琮、吴迥攻围泗州，可师乘胜救之，屯于石梁驿。
现代文：当时贼将刘行及、丁景琮、吴迥进攻、围困泗州，戴可师乘胜救援它，驻扎在石梁驿。
English: At that time, the bandits attacked and besieged Luzhou with Liu Xinghe, Ding Jingyao and Wu Gan. Dai Ke Division took advantage of the victory to rescue it and stationed in Shiliangyuan.

古文：贼自退去，可师追击，生擒刘行及，贼保都梁城，乃断行及之指，悬于城下以示贼。
现代文：贼军自行退去，戴可师追击，活捉了刘行及。贼军保卫都梁城，戴可师就斩断刘行及的手指，悬挂在城下给贼兵看。
English: The bandits retreated on their own, and the Dai Ke Division pursued and captured Liu Xinghe alive. The bandits defended the capital city, and the Dai Ke Division cut off Liu Xinghe's fingers and hung them under the city for the bandits to see.

古文：贼登城拜曰： 见与都头谋归朝。 
现代文：贼兵登上城楼叩拜说： 我们马上就和头领商量归顺朝廷。 
English: The robber-soldiers went up to the tower and said, "We will immediately consult with the leader and submit to the imperial court."

古文：可师既知其窘，乃退军五里。
现代文：戴可师知道敌军窘迫的情况之后，便退兵五里。
English: After Daike's division learned of the enemy's predicament, it withdrew five miles.

古文：其城西面有水，三面大军，贼乃夜中涉水而遁。
现代文：那座城池的西面有水道，另三面围着朝廷大军，贼军竟在夜色中涉水逃跑了。
English: There is a waterway on the west side of the city, and the other three sides are surrounded by the imperial army. The thief army actually waded into the water in the night and fled.

古文：明早开城门，惟病妪数人而已。
现代文：第二天早上打开城门，只剩下几个生病的老太婆而已。
English: When the gates were opened the next morning, only a few sick old women remained.

古文：王师入垒未整，翌日诘旦重雾，贼军大至，可师方大醉，单马奔出，为虹县人郭真所杀，一军尽没，惟忠武、太原、沙陀之骑军保全而退。
现代文：官军入城之后没有进行整治，第二天早晨下着浓雾，贼兵大批攻至，戴可师正大醉，独自骑马逃出，被虹县人郭真杀死，全军覆没，只有忠武、太原、沙陀的骑兵得以保全而退走。
English: After the government army entered the city, it did not carry out the rectification. The next morning, a thick fog fell, and a large number of robber soldiers attacked. Dai Ke's division was very drunk and fled alone on horseback. He was killed by Guo Zhen, a person from Hong County. The whole army was destroyed. Only the cavalry of Zhongwu, Taiyuan and Shatou were saved and retreated.

古文：副将王健为贼所擒，刘行及却为贼将吴迥所得，吴迥乃进军复围泗州。
现代文：副将王健被贼兵俘获，刘行及反被贼将吴迥所救，吴迥便进军再次围困泗州。
English: Vice-commander Wang Jian was captured by the bandits, Liu Xing and vice-commander Wu Gan were rescued by the bandits, and Wu Gan marched to besiege Ganzhou again.

古文：自是梯冲云合，内外不通。
现代文：自此，云梯和冲车像云雾一般围住城池，城内城外不能互通声气。
English: Since then, cloud ladders and rushing cars have surrounded the city like a fog, and there is no sound between the city and outside the city.

古文：庞勋恃其骤胜，遣人上表，词语不恭，又与康承训书，指斥朝政。
现代文：庞勋仗着他这次突然的胜利，派人向皇帝送上表章，语气很不恭敬。又送信给康承训指责朝政。
English: Taking advantage of his sudden victory, Pang Xun sent someone to present the emperor with a badge, the tone of which was very disrespectful. He also sent a letter to Kang Chengxun criticizing the government.

古文：王晏权者，智兴之犹子也，故授以武宁节制以招之，以冀招怀。
现代文：王晏权是王智兴的侄子，原先授予他武宁军节度使是为了招抚他，希望他归附怀恩。
English: Wang Xuanquan is the nephew of Wang Zhixing. He was originally awarded the Military Division of the People's Liberation Army in order to appease him and hope that he would join Huai'en.

古文：徐人怨王式之诛，相扇构乱，数月招携，啖之以利，民阙卒无革心者。
现代文：徐州百姓怨恨王式被杀之事，互相煽动作乱，经过几个月招引携带，以利相诱，百姓终究没有洗心革面。
English: The people of Xuzhou resented the killing of Wang Shih and instigated chaos among each other. After several months of being lured and enticed by each other, the people eventually did not change their minds.

古文：康承训大军攻宿州，贼将梁伾出战屡败，乃授承训检校尚书右仆射，灵滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：康承训率领大军进攻宿州，贼军将领梁亻丕出战屡次被击败，朝廷便授予康承训检校尚书右仆射，并兼任滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: Kang Chengxun led a large army to attack Shuzhou, and the general of the thief army, Liang Jun, was repeatedly defeated in battle. The imperial court awarded Kang Chengxun the inspection school of Shangshu right-hand shooting, and also served as the secretary of the history of Leshou and the festival of the Yicheng Army.

古文：责授端州司马杨收长流驩州，与严譔并赐死于路；其党杨公庆、严季实、杨全益、史明、廉遂、何师玄、李孟勋、马全祐、李羽、王彦复等长流儋、崖、播等州；判官硃偘、常濆、阎均等配流岭南。
现代文：被贬为端州司马的杨收被流放到州，和严讠巽一起在途中被赐死；他的余党杨公庆、严季实、杨全益、史明、廉遂、何师玄、李孟勋、马全、李羽、王彦复等被流放到儋州、崖州、播州等地；判官朱亻品、常氵、阎均等流放到岭南。
English: Yang Jie, who was demoted to the position of Sima of Danzhou, was exiled to Danzhou, and was sentenced to death on the way together with Yan Hui; his remaining party members Yang Gongqing, Yan Qiushi, Yang Quan Yik, Shi Ming, Lian Sui, He Shixuan, Li Meng Xun, Ma Quan, Li Yu, Wang Yan Fu, etc. were exiled to Fuzhou, Yalangzhou, Banzhou and other places; judges Zhu Yibin, Chang Hui, and Yan were equally exiled to Lingnan.

古文：以河中节度使、开府仪同三司、检校司徒、平章事、上柱国、谯郡开国公、食邑二千户夏候孜为太子少保，分司东都。
现代文：任命河中节度使、开府仪同三司、检校司徒、平章政事、上柱国、谯郡开国公、食邑二千户夏侯孜为太子少保，分管东都的事务。
English: He appointed Kawakuchu Setsudoshi, Kaifu Ritsudon Sansei, Kanko Sesshuto, Taira no Shosho Seiji, Joshu no Kuni, Shishigun Kaikokuko, and Shokui 2,000 households Natsuhozu as Taishi shoho, in charge of the affairs of the eastern capital.

古文：时南平蛮寇西川，责孜在蜀日失政也。
现代文：这时南平蛮部骚扰西川，指责夏侯孜在蜀时主政失误。
English: At this time, Nanping's barbarians harassed Nishikawa, accusing Xia Houzhe of making a mistake in his leadership of Shu.

古文：二月己丑，庞勋急攻泗州，遣牙将李员入城见刺史杜慆曰： 留后知中丞名族，不敢令军士失礼，但开城门，令百姓存活，无相疑也。 
现代文：二月初二，庞勋急攻泗州。派部将李员进城去见刺史杜忄舀说： 庞大人知道中丞出身于名门望族，不敢使部下的士兵有失礼的行为，只要打开城门，就让城里的百姓存活下来，大人不要产生怀疑。 
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month, Pang Xun suddenly attacked Zhangzhou. He sent his subordinate Li into the city to see Zhishi Duyun and said: Pang knew that Zhongzheng was born into a prestigious family and did not dare to make his soldiers behave disrespectfully. As long as you open the city gate, let the people in the city survive. Adults should not have any doubts.

古文：慆执而杀之。
现代文：杜忄舀把李员抓起来杀了。
English: Du Juan grabbed Li Jian and killed him.

古文：诏司农卿薛琼使淮南卢、寿、楚等州，点集乡兵以自固。
现代文：皇上下诏给司农卿薛琼，命令淮南地区的庐州、寿州、楚州等州征集当地民兵以保全地方。
English: The emperor issued an edict to the Secretary of Agriculture, Xue Qiong, ordering the states of Bozhou, Shoushou, and Chuzhou in the Huainan region to conscript local militias to protect the region.

古文：四月，康承训奏大败柳子寨贼，诏监军杨玄价与康承训商量，拔汴河水以灌宿州。
现代文：四月，康承训上奏说在柳子寨大败贼军，皇上诏令监军杨玄价和康承训一起商量，引汴河水以淹没宿州。
English: In April, Kang Chengxun made a report at the drill that the rebel army had been soundly defeated at Liuzizhai, and the emperor ordered Yang Xuanquan, the supervisor of the troops, to discuss with Kang Chengxun and divert the river water to flood Shuzhou.

古文：六月丁亥朔。
现代文：六月初一为丁亥日。
English: The first day of June is Dinghai Day.

古文：戊戌，制曰：
现代文：六月十二日，制令说：
English: On June 12, the order said:

古文：动天地者莫若精诚，致和平者莫若修政。
现代文： 要感动天地，没有比至诚更重要的了；要达到和平，没有比修明政治更重要的了。
English: To move heaven and earth, nothing is more important than sincerity; to achieve peace, nothing is more important than rectifying politics.

古文：朕顾惟庸昧，托于王公之上，于兹十一年矣。
现代文：我仅仅凭着平庸、暗昧，而托身于众位王公之上，到现在已经十一年了。
English: It's been eleven years now that I've been basking in mediocrity and obscurity and holding myself up as a prince among princes.

古文：祗荷丕构，寅畏小心，慕唐尧之钦若昊天，遵周王之昭事上帝。
现代文：恭奉宏宇，敬畏又小心。仰慕唐尧的钦敬上天，遵循周文王的显扬上天。
English: Admire the magnificence of the universe, fear and be careful. Admire the admiration of Tang Xuan, and follow the appearance of King Zhouwen.

古文：念兹夙夜，靡替虔恭，同驭朽之忧勤，思纳隍之轸虑。
现代文：白天黑夜都想着这一点，不能不怀着恭敬虔诚，就像用朽绳驾驭车马一般的忧劳，又像渴望水流进干涸的濠沟一样忧虑。
English: I think of it night and day, and cannot but regard it with reverence and devotion, like the toil of a cart-horse harnessed to a rotten rope, or like the longing for water to flow into a dry furrow.

古文：内戒奢靡，外罢畋游，匪敢期于雍熙，所自得于清净，止望寰区无事，稼穑有年。
现代文：在内警惕着奢侈靡费，在外停止了田猎冶游。不敢期待天下太平，在清静中自得其乐；只希望全国不生事端，农事得到丰收。
English: They are wary of extravagant extravagance at home, and have stopped field hunting and smelting tours abroad. They dare not expect the world to be peaceful, and enjoy themselves in tranquility; they only hope that the whole country will not cause trouble, and that farming will have a good harvest.

古文：然而烛理不明，涉道唯浅，气多堙郁，诚未感通。
现代文：然而，我洞察事理不明，涉足世事太浅，精神总是郁结不展，实在没有感悟通达。
English: However, my insight into the matter is unclear, my involvement in the world is too shallow, my spirit is always stagnant, and I really have no insight.

古文：旱是虞，虫螟为害，蛮蜒未宾于遐裔，寇盗复蠹于中原。
现代文：干旱使人忧虑，蝗虫成为灾害。远方的蛮夷还没有臣服，盗贼又作乱于中原。
English: Drought is a cause for concern, locusts are a scourge, barbarians in distant lands have yet to be subdued, and thieves are once again wreaking havoc in the Central Plains.

古文：尚驾戎车，益调兵食，俾黎元之重困，每宵旰而忘安。
现代文：战争还在继续，军粮还在增调，这成了百姓们沉重的困厄，操劳也每使我忘记了安歇。
English: The war is still going on, the military rations are still being increased, which has become a heavy hardship for the people, and the toil has always made me forget to rest.

古文：今盛夏骄阳，时雨久旷，忧勤兆庶，旦夕焦劳。
现代文：如今正当盛夏骄阳，好久不见下雨，使得亿万百姓忧愁勤苦，从早到晚地焦灼辛劳。
English: Now, just as the summer is in full bloom, the sun is blazing, and there has been no rain for a long time, making hundreds of millions of people sad and diligent, and working hard from morning to night.

古文：内修香火以虔祈，外罄牲玉以精祷。仰俟玄贶，必致甘滋。
现代文：我内进香烛而虔诚地祈求，外奉牺牲玉帛以诚挚地祷祝，仰首等待苍天的恩赐，一定会降下甘美滋润的雨露。
English: I pray devoutly with the incense candle in my heart, and sincerely pray with the sacrificial jade bowl outside, and wait for the gift of heaven with my head bowed, and the sweet and moisturizing rain will surely fall.

古文：而油云未兴，秋稼阙望，因兹愆亢，轸于诚怀。
现代文：然而浓云还没有兴聚，秋粮失去了希望，因为这些反常失序，忧急充满了我的心中。
English: However, the thick clouds have not yet gathered, and the autumn grain has lost hope, because these abnormal disorders and anxieties have filled my heart.

古文：矧复暴政烦刑，强官酷吏，侵渔蠹耗，陷害孤茕，致有冤抑之人，构成灾沴之气。
现代文： 况且还有暴虐的政令，繁苛的刑罚，强横的官员，残酷的胥吏，侵夺耗费百姓的资财，陷害孤立无助的人，导致产生受冤被压的人，造成灾难的气氛。
English: Moreover, there are tyrannical decrees, onerous punishments, domineering officials, cruel bailiffs, the plundering of resources that consume the people, the framing of isolated and helpless people, leading to the creation of people who are wronged and oppressed, creating a disastrous atmosphere.

古文：主守长吏，无忘奉公。
现代文：主管的官吏，不要忘记克己奉公。
English: Officials in charge, don't forget to serve selflessly.

古文：伐叛兴师，盖非获已，除奸讨逆，必使当辜，苟或陷及平人，自然风雨愆候。
现代文：讨伐叛军，调集军队，是不得已的事；剪除奸邪，声讨逆贼，一定要使他们受到惩处。如果损害到无关的人，大自然的风雨就会发生错乱。
English: It is a matter of last resort to fight the rebels and mobilize the army; to cut off the evil and punish the traitors, they must be punished. If people who are not related are harmed, the natural wind and rain will be disorderly.

古文：凡行营将帅，切在审详，昭示恻悯之心，敬听勤恤之旨。
现代文：所有军营中的将帅，千万要审察精详，显示恻隐、怜悯的心肠，恭敬地听取恳切、体恤的宗旨。
English: The generals in all the military camps must scrutinize them carefully, show a humble and compassionate heart, and respectfully listen to the earnest and compassionate purpose.

古文：应京城天下诸州府见禁囚徒，除十恶忤逆、官典犯赃、故意杀人、合造毒药、放火持仗、开劫坟墓及关连徐州逆党外，并宜量罪轻重，速令决遣，无久系留。
现代文：所有京城及全国各州府在押的囚犯，除了十恶不赦的忤逆大罪、官吏贪赃、故意杀人、聚造毒药、放火抢劫、挖掘坟墓，以及牵涉到徐州叛贼的罪犯之外，都应该根据罪行的轻重，迅速地判决或释放，不要长期关押。
English: All prisoners in custody in Beijing and state capitals across the country, except for the most heinous and unforgivable crimes of high treason, official corruption, intentional homicide, concoction of poison, arson and robbery, excavation of graves, and criminals involved in the Xuzhou traitors, should be quickly sentenced or released according to the severity of the crime, and should not be detained for a long time.

古文：雷雨不同，田畴方瘁，诚宜愍物，以示好生。
现代文：雨水不均匀，田地正遭到毁坏，确实应当哀怜百姓，以示爱护生灵。
English: The rain is not uniform, the fields are being destroyed, and we should really mourn for the people to show our love and protect the living.

古文：其京城未降雨间，宜令坊市权断屠宰。
现代文：京城地区没有下雨的时日，应当着令市场上暂时停止屠宰牲畜。
English: When there is no rain in the capital area, the slaughter of livestock should be temporarily suspended in the market.

古文：昨陕虢中使回，方知蝗旱有损处，诸道长史，分忧共理，宜各推公，共思济物。
现代文：昨天去陕州、虢州的钦使回来，才知道蝗灾和旱灾造成损失的情况。各道的官员应当分担忧患，共同尽责，各自赞助公益，共思救济百姓的对策。
English: The envoys who went to Shaanxi and Ganzhou yesterday came back only to learn about the losses caused by locusts and droughts. Officials from all provinces should share their concerns, jointly perform their duties, individually sponsor public welfare, and jointly think about relief measures for the people.

古文：内有饥歉，切在慰安，哀此蒸人，毋俾艰食。
现代文：其中有饥荒歉收的地方，千万要慰问安抚，哀怜这些百姓，不要让他们饮食艰难。
English: Among them, there are places with famine and poor harvests. We must by all means comfort, appease, and pity these people, and not make it difficult for them to eat and drink.

古文：徐方寇孽未殄，师旅有征，凡合诛锄，审分淑慝，无令胁从横死，元恶偷生。
现代文：徐州地区盗贼还没有消灭，军队还在讨伐，凡是应当诛杀的，要准确地区别善恶，不要让胁从分子死于非命，首恶分子得以脱逃。
English: Thieves in Xuzhou have not been eliminated, and the army is still fighting against them. It is necessary to accurately distinguish between good and evil in everything that should be fought and killed. Don't let the instigator and follower die a violent death, and let the chief villain escape.

古文：宜申告伐之文，使知逆顺之理。
现代文：应当发布告知讨伐他们叛逆的檄文，使他们懂得反叛和归顺的不同结果。
English: A fatwa should be issued to tell them to fight against their rebellion, so that they understand the different results of rebellion and submission.

古文：于戏！每思禹、汤之罪己，其庶成、康之措刑。
现代文：唉，每想到禹、汤归罪于自己，是希望成王、康王废置刑罚。
English: Alas, every time I think of Yu and Tang blaming themselves, I hope that Chengwang and Kangwang will abolish the punishment.

古文：孰谓德信未孚，教化犹梗。
现代文：谁说德行和信义不令人信服，教化还没有开通？
English: Who says that virtue and righteousness are not convincing, and that enlightenment has not yet begun?

古文：咨尔多士，俾予一人，既引过在躬，亦渐几于理。
现代文：让我一人咨询于你们大家，既引咎自责于身，也为了使国家逐渐得到治理。
English: Let me, for one, consult you all, both for self-reproach and for the gradual governance of the country.

古文：布告中外，称朕意焉。
现代文：宣告于朝内朝外，这才符合我的愿望。 
English: It is in line with my wish to make this announcement both inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：贼将郑镒急攻寿州，诏南面招讨使马举救之，贼解围而去。
现代文：贼将郑镒急攻寿州，皇上诏令南面招讨使马举救援寿州，贼军解围离去。
English: The bandits rushed Zheng He to attack Shoushou, and the emperor sent an imperial edict to the south to summon the horse to rescue Shoushou, and the bandits broke the siege and left.

古文：康承训悉兵攻贼小睢寨，不利而退。
现代文：康承训以全部兵力攻击贼军占领的小睢寨，因战斗失利而退却。
English: Kang Chengxun attacked the small village occupied by the thief army with all his forces, but retreated because of the defeat in battle.

古文：七月，康承训攻贼柳子寨，垂克而贼将王弘立救至，王师大败，承训退保宋州。
现代文：七月，康承训进攻贼军占据的柳子寨，快要攻下而贼将王弘立的救兵到了，官军被打得大败，康承训退守宋州。
English: In July, Kang Chengxun attacked Liu Zi Zhai, which was occupied by the thief army, and was about to be captured, but the thief Wang Hongli's rescuers arrived. The government army was defeated, and Kang Chengxun retreated to Songzhou.

古文：庞勋乘胜自率徐州劲卒并攻泗州，留其都将许佶守徐州。
现代文：庞勋乘胜亲自率领徐州的强兵并力攻打泗州，留下他的大将许佶镇守徐州。
English: Pang Xun Yensheng personally led the strong soldiers of Xuzhou and attacked Zhangzhou, leaving his general Xu Junzhen to defend Xuzhou.

古文：诏南面招讨使马举为行营都招讨使，代承训率诸军以援泗州。
现代文：皇上诏令南面招讨使马举任行营都招讨使，取代康承训率领各军以驰援泗州。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to summon envoys to the south, and the envoys were summoned to every camp, replacing Kang Chengxun's training to lead the armies to rush to the aid of Bozhou.

古文：八月，和州防虞行官石侔等一百三十人状诉刺史崔雍，称： 贼初劫乌江县，雍令步奏官二人探知，雍犹不信，二人并被枷杻。
现代文：八月，和州防虞行官石侔等一百三十人具状控告和州刺史崔雍，说： 贼军刚威胁到乌江县，崔雍派出的两名步奏官探察到了，崔雍还不相信，两个人都被他戴上枷锁。
English: In August, a hundred and thirty people, including the state anti-crisis official Shi Hao, filed a formal complaint against the state assassin, Cui Yong, saying: The bandits had just threatened Wujiang County. Cui Yong sent two foot soldiers to investigate. Cui Yong still did not believe it. He put both of them in shackles.

古文：续差人探见贼已去州十里。
现代文：又连续派人探察，发现贼军离州城已经只有十里了。
English: He also continuously sent people to investigate and found that the bandits were only ten miles away from the state capital.

古文：贼寻逼州城，崔雍与贼头吴约于鼓角楼上饮酒，许与贼州。
现代文：紧接着贼军就逼近了州城，崔雍和贼军首领吴约一起在鼓角楼上饮酒，答应把州城献给贼军。
English: Immediately after that, the Kleptocratic Army approached the State Capital. Cui Yong and the leader of the Kleptocratic Army, Wu You, drank alcohol together on the Drum Tower and promised to dedicate the State Capital to the Kleptocratic Army.

古文：又认军事判官李谯为亲弟，表状驱使官张立为男，只乞二人并身，其余将士一任处置。
现代文：又把军事判官李醮认作自己的亲弟弟，把表状驱使官张立认作儿子，只求饶了这两个人和自身的性命，其余的将士全由他处置。
English: He also recognized the military judge Li Xi as his own brother, and the official Zhang Li as his son. He only begged for the forgiveness of these two people and his own life, and the rest of the soldiers were all at his disposal.

古文：便令押衙李词等各脱下衣甲，防虞官健束手被斩者八百余人。
现代文：便命令押衙差役李词等各自脱下衣甲，防御官兵捆着手被斩首的共八百多人。
English: He then ordered Li Zhi, the official in charge of detaining and arresting, and others to take off their coats and armor, and the defense officers and soldiers tied up a total of more than eight hundred people who had been beheaded.

古文：行官石琼脱衣甲稍迟，便被崔雍遣贼处斩。
现代文：行官石琼脱衣甲稍微慢了一点，就被崔雍送到贼军那里去处斩。
English: The steward, Shi Qiong, was a little slow in stripping his armor, and was sent by Cui Yong to the bandits to be beheaded.

古文：其崔雍所有料钱并家口，累差人押送往采石，今在润州。
现代文：崔雍所有的钱财和家属都派人一批批地押送到采石去，如今在润州。
English: All of Cui Yong's money and family members were sent to the quarry in batches and are now in Runzhou.

古文：岂有将一千人兵士之命，赎拔己之一身，不惟辜其神明，实亦生负圣主。
现代文：哪有把一千名士兵的生命，用来赎取、开脱自己一个人的呢！不仅在神明面前有罪，实在也对不起皇上。
English: How could he use the lives of a thousand soldiers to redeem and absolve himself! Not only was he guilty before the gods, but he was also truly sorry to the Emperor.

古文：兼科配军州官吏修葺城池，妄称出料钱修城者。 
现代文：再加上他额外征收赋税命军州的官吏们用来修葺城池，还假说是州府拨出津贴来修城。 
English: In addition, he levied an additional tax for the officials of the military state to use to repair the castle, and also assumed that the state government allocated subsidies to repair the city.

古文：敕曰： 臣子之节，无如尽忠；士人之风，宜当远耻。
现代文：敕令说 ：臣子的节操，没有比尽忠更重要的了；读书人的风尚，应当是远避耻辱。
English: The imperial edict said: There is nothing more important for the discipline of a courtier than to be loyal; the etiquette of a scholar should be to avoid disgrace.

古文：崔雍任居牧守，贼犯州城，御捍曾不发言，从容乃与命酒。
现代文：崔雍担任着州城的主管，贼军进犯州城时，竟不说一句有关防御的话，还镇静自若地和贼人一起饮酒。
English: Cui Yong was in charge of the state capital. When the thief army attacked the state capital, he did not say a word about defense, but calmly drank with the thieves.

古文：况石琼未脱衣甲，志在当锋，不能奖其赤诚，翻令擒送贼所。
现代文：更何况石琼不脱下衣甲，是有着抵抗的意图；不但不嘉奖他的一片忠心，反而派人把他押送到贼军那里去。
English: Moreover, Shi Qiong did not take off his armor, he had the intention to resist; instead of commending him for his loyalty, he sent someone to escort him to the bandits.

古文：原其深意，与贼通和，臣节全亏，情状可见，欲行朝典，宜更推穷。
现代文：追究他内心的想法，已经完全和贼人通为一气了，他的臣节已经完全丧失，由他的表现已经完全可以看出。要执行朝廷的刑典，还应当进一步彻底追查。
English: The pursuit of his inner thoughts has been completely in line with the thieves, his vassalage has been completely lost, and it can be fully seen from his performance. In order to implement the imperial criminal code, further thorough investigation should be carried out.

古文：其崔雍家口并在宣州，宜令宣歙观察使追崔雍收禁速勘，逐具事由申奏。 
现代文：崔雍的家口都在宣州，着令宣歙观察使追捕崔雍，将他收容于监中，迅速审讯明白，逐条列犯罪事实向朝廷申奏。 
English: All of Cui Yong's family members were in Xuanzhou. He was tracked down by the Xuancheng Observation Corps, detained in a prison, quickly interrogated, and the facts of the crime were reported to the imperial court.

古文：是月，马举率师解泗州之围，贼党遁去。
现代文：当月，马举率军解除了泗州的围困，贼党逃跑了。
English: That month, Ma He and his army lifted the siege of Ganzhou, and the bandits fled.

古文：敕曰： 当崔雍守郡之日，是庞勋肆逆之初。
现代文：敕令说 ：当崔雍防守郡城的时候，正值庞勋叛乱的开始。
English: The imperial edict said: When Cui Yong defended the county seat, it was the beginning of the Pang Xun rebellion.

古文：属狂寇奔冲，望风和好，置酒以邀贼将，启关而纳凶徒。
现代文：近时狂贼奔突冲陷，崔雍望风与敌人和好，摆酒邀请贼将，打开城门接纳凶徒。
English: Recently, mad thieves rushed in, and Cui Yongwang reconciled with the enemy, offered wine to invite the thieves, and opened the gate to receive the criminals.

古文：城内不许持兵，皆令解甲，致使三军百姓，抆血相视，连头受诛。
现代文：不许城内的人手执武器抵抗，却命令他们全都解下衣甲投降，致使三军和百姓们擦拭着鲜血，面面相觑，一个接一个地遭到杀害。
English: The people in the city were not allowed to take up arms to resist, but they were all ordered to take off their armor and surrender, causing the three armies and the people to wipe the blood, face each other, and be killed one by one.

古文：初闻奏陈，深骇观听。
现代文：刚听到奏章的陈述，令我深感骇人听闻。
English: When I first heard the transcript, I was appalled.

古文：锡望守城而死，已有追荣；杜慆孤垒获全，寻加殊奖。
现代文：高锡望坚守城池而死，已经有了追加的荣宠；杜忄舀以孤垒而获得保全，不久就追授了特别的奖励。
English: Gao Xibang, who died defending the city, has already received additional honors; Du Xi, who was protected by a lone bastion, was awarded a special award soon after.

古文：既褒忠节，难赦罪人，玉石固分，惩劝斯在。
现代文：既然要表彰忠诚的节操，就难以赦免有罪之人，美玉和石头本来就要分清，惩罚和勉励正应当表现在这里。
English: Since it is necessary to commend the loyalty and integrity, it is difficult to pardon the guilty. The gems and stones should be distinguished, and the punishment and encouragement should be manifested here.

古文：将垂诫于四海，当何爱于一夫。其崔雍宜差内养孟公度专往宣州，赐自尽。 
现代文：即将向四海的臣民下达训诫，一个贼臣又有什么可吝惜的呢！应当派遣内官孟公度专门去宣州，赐崔雍自尽。 
English: He is about to issue an admonition to the subjects of the four seas. What is there to be grudging about for a vassal of a thief? He should send Meng Gundo, an inner official, to Xuanzhou specifically, and give Cui Yong the power to commit suicide.

古文：公度至，雍死于陵阳馆，其男党兒、归僧配流康州，锢身递送。
现代文：孟公度到宣州之后，崔雍死于陵阳馆，他的儿子崔党儿、归僧发配流放到康州，加刑枷解送前去。
English: After Meng Gongdu arrived in Xuanzhou, Cui Yong died in Lingyang Pavilion, and his son Cui Dang'er, who had returned to the monkhood, was exiled to Kangzhou and sent there in chains.

古文：司勋郎中崔原贬柳州司户，比部员外郎崔福昭州司户，长安县令崔朗澧州司户，左拾遗崔庚连州司户，荆南观察支使崔序衡州司户，皆雍之亲党也。
现代文：司勋郎中崔原贬为柳州司户，比部员外郎崔福贬为昭州司户，长安县令崔朗贬为澧州司户，左拾遗崔庚贬为连州司户，荆南观察支使崔序贬为衡州司户一一一他们都是崔雍的亲族党羽。
English: Cui Yuan, a member of the Party Central Committee, was demoted to the position of Liuzhou Party Secretary, Cui Fu, a member of the Party Central Committee, was demoted to the position of Zhaozhou Party Secretary, Cui Lang, a member of the Party Central Committee of Chang'an County, was demoted to the position of Zhangzhou Party Secretary, Zuozhuyi Cui Geng was demoted to the position of Lianzhou Party Secretary, and Cui Xuan, a member of the Party Central Committee of Jingnan County, was demoted to the position of Hengzhou Party Secretary - all of them were relatives of Cui Yong.

古文：九月，贼宿州守将张玄稔以城降，有兵万人，马举率师赴之。
现代文：九月，贼军宿州守将张玄稔以宿州城投降，有军队一万人，马举率领军队前往。
English: In September, Zhang Xuanlian, the commander of the Kleptocracy's Shuzhou garrison, surrendered in Shuzhou City. He had an army of ten thousand men, and Ma He led the army.

古文：庞勋闻之，以其众将攻玄稔。
现代文：庞勋听到这个消息，派他部下的将领们进攻张玄稔。
English: When Pang Hun heard the news, he sent his generals to attack Zhang Xuanzang.

古文：玄稔，贼之劲将也，遂与举合势，急围徐州。
现代文：张玄稔是贼军的一员强将，就和马举合为一部，迅速围困徐州。
English: Zhang Xuanqian was a strong general in the bandit army. He joined forces with Ma He and quickly besieged Xuzhou.

古文：许佶登城拒守者三日，佶败走出。
现代文：许佶登上城墙抵抗了三天。许佶战败逃跑出城，张玄稔收复了徐州。
English: Xu Rong climbed the city wall and resisted for three days. Xu Rong was defeated and fled the city. Zhang Xuan Rong recovered Xuzhou.

古文：玄稔收复徐州，庞勋方来赴援，闻城已拔，欲南趋濠州，马举追及涣河，击败之，勋溺水而死。
现代文：这时庞勋正来救援徐州，听说城已失守，便想往南到濠州去，马举追击到涣河，将他击败，庞勋溺水而死。
English: At this time, Pang Xun was coming to the rescue of Xuzhou. When he heard that the city had been lost, he wanted to go south to Zhangzhou. He chased the horse to Zhanghe and defeated him. Pang Xun drowned and died.

古文：萧县主将又斩许佶首来降，徐寇悉平。
现代文：萧县的贼军主将又将许佶斩首前来投降，徐州的贼寇便全部平定了。
English: The leader of the bandits in Xiao County also beheaded Xu Xi and came to surrender, and the bandits in Xuzhou were all subdued.

古文：初，庞勋据徐州，仓库素无贮蓄，乃令群凶四出，于扬、楚、卢、寿、滁、和、兗、海、沂、密、曹、濮等州界剽牛马輓运粮糗，以夜继昼。
现代文：当初庞勋占据徐州时，因仓库里一向没有储藏、积蓄，便命令凶徒们四出抢劫，在扬州、楚州、庐州、寿州、滁州、和州、兖州、海州、沂州、密州、曹州、濮州等州界内窃取牛马拉运粮食，达到夜以继日的程度。
English: At first, when Pang Xun occupied Xuzhou, because there was no storage or savings in the warehouse, he ordered the thugs to rob everywhere, stealing grain transported by oxen and horses in Yangzhou, Chuzhou, Zhangzhou, Shuzhou, Zhangzhou, Hezhou, Zhangzhou, Haizhou, Zhangzhou, Mizhou, Caozhou, Zhangzhou and other states, reaching a level of day and night.

古文：招致亡命，有众二十万，男女十五已上，皆令执兵，其人皆舒锄钩为兵，号曰 霍锥 。
现代文：他还招纳亡命之徒，有部众二十万，十五岁以上的男女都命令他们拿起武器，那些人都举起锄头、铁钩当武器，号称 霍锥。 
English: He also recruited the outlaws, who numbered two hundred thousand. All men and women over the age of fifteen were ordered to take up arms, and all of them raised their hoes and iron hooks as weapons, known as hawks.

古文：首尾周岁，十余郡生灵，受其酷毒，至是尽平。
现代文：从头到尾一整年，十多郡的百姓遭受他的残酷蹂躏，这时才全部平定。
English: From the beginning to the end of a whole year, the people of more than ten counties suffered his cruel ravages, and only then were they all pacified.

古文：与玄稔诏曰： 去岁灾兴分野，毒起徐方，蕞尔庸夫，称兵犯命，招谕不复，猖狂罔悛，胁从三州之人，污染万姓之俗。
现代文：皇上向张玄稔下诏说： 去年灾难兴起于割据的区域，祸害发生在徐州地方，小小的凡人竟起兵冒犯皇命，对朝廷招安的命令不理睬，猖狂而不思悔过，胁迫三个州的人民，败坏百姓们的风气。
English: The emperor issued an edict to Zhang Xuanqian, saying: Last year, the disaster occurred in the region of the separatist strongholds, the scourge occurred in Xuzhou, the small mortals actually raised an army to offend the imperial order, ignored the order of the imperial court to recruit security, rampant and unrepentant, coerced the people of the three states, and corrupted the customs of the people.

古文：逆顺之理，邪正坐分，果有忠臣，悉歼逆党，再清郡邑，不举干戈。
现代文：逆和顺的道理，邪和正的界限，因为得到了区分，果然有忠臣全歼叛逆的贼党，命郡邑再得清净，不再发生战乱。
English: The principle of reciprocity and harmony, and the boundary between evil and good, have been distinguished. As a result, the loyal subjects have completely wiped out the traitorous bandits, and the county and town have been cleansed, and there will be no more war.

古文：此皆众人协心，合州受福。
现代文：这都是因为众人齐心协力，才使得全州的人享受了福分。
English: It is because of everyone's concerted efforts that the people of the whole state have enjoyed the blessings.

古文：但以首尾周岁，取制凶威，里闾不安，农桑失业，言念于此，倍积忧怀。
现代文：但因前后历时一整年，才制伏凶恶的势力，百姓不能安居于闾巷，农桑的生产荒废。想到这些，加倍地郁结着忧愁。
English: However, because it took a whole year to subdue the evil forces, the people could not live in peace in Shuxiang, and the production of agricultural mulberry was abandoned. Thinking of these, I was doubly saddened.

古文：已有诏指挥，今授玄稔银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、兼右骁卫大将军、御史大夫，赐分帛五千匹、金榼一枚、盖碗一具、金腰带一条。
现代文：已经下令颁发诏书，如今授予张玄稔为银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、右骁卫大将军、御史大夫，赐予绢帛五千匹、金木盍一枚、盖碗一具、金腰带一条。
English: An imperial edict has been issued, awarding Zhang Xuancheng with the titles of "Silver Qingguanglu Doctor," "School Inspection Right-Handed Cavalryman," "Right-Handed Guards General" and "Master of History," as well as five thousand yams, one gold wooden bowl, one bowl lid and one gold belt.

古文：军将张皋已下二十人，等第优给。
现代文：自将军张皋以下二十人，按等级从优赐给。
English: Twenty people from General Zhang Ye on down were promoted from superior to inferior according to their ranks.

古文：今差高品李志承押领宣赐。 
现代文：现在派高品官李志承押解赏赐的物品前往宣布奖赏。 
English: Now, the high-ranking official, Li Zhicheng, sent the reward items to announce the reward.

古文：制曰：
现代文：制令说：
English: The release said:

古文：朕以眇身，获承丕业，虔恭惕厉，十一载于兹。
现代文： 我以渺小之身，得以继承大业，怀着虔诚恭敬、警觉勤勉的心情，到现在已经十一年了。
English: It is now eleven years since I, a small man, was able to inherit the great cause, with a pious, respectful, alert and diligent mood.

古文：况荷十七圣之鸿休，绍三百年之庆祚，将求理本，敢忘宵衣。
现代文：更何况蒙受着十七位先圣的宏荫，继承着三百年吉祥的福祚，想要探求治理国家的根本，怎敢忘记勤于政事。
English: What's more, under the magnificent shadow of seventeen pre-eminent saints, inheriting three hundred years of auspicious blessings, if you want to explore the fundamentals of governing the country, how dare you forget to be diligent in politics.

古文：虽诚信未孚，而寅畏不怠，既绝意于苑囿，固无心于畋游，业业兢兢，日慎一日。
现代文：虽然诚信还没有使人信服，在恭肃戒惧方面却不敢松懈，既无意在苑囿中玩赏，更无心去狩猎游乐，只是兢兢业业地一天比一天谨慎。
English: Although the sincerity has not yet convinced people, they dare not relax in terms of respect and fear. They have no intention of playing in the garden, nor do they want to go hunting. They are just more and more cautious day by day.

古文：休征罔应，沴气潜生，南蛮将罢于战争，徐寇忽孤于惠养。
现代文：朝廷停止征兵，百姓也不应募，灾祸却暗暗滋生起来。南蛮正要停止战争，徐州的贼寇又忽然做那辜负朝廷恩惠的事。
English: The imperial court stopped conscription, the people should not be conscripted, but the scourge was secretly bred. Nanban was about to stop the war, and the bandits in Xuzhou suddenly did something that betrayed the favor of the imperial court.

古文：招谕不至，虐暴滋深，窃弄干戈，擅攻州镇。
现代文：他们不接受朝廷招安的诏谕，凌虐残暴更加严重，暗中挑起战争，擅自攻占城镇。
English: They did not accept the imperial edict of inviting peace from the imperial court, the abuse and brutality were even more serious, they secretly provoked a war, and occupied towns without authorization.

古文：将邀符印，辄恣凶歼，不畏神祗，自贻覆灭。
现代文：武将求得了朝廷的符印，便更加横行凶残，不怕神灵，自己埋下灭亡的后果。
English: Having obtained the seal of the imperial court, the military commander became even more violent, not fearing the gods and burying the consequences of his own demise.

古文：股肱之臣，以罪恶之难舍；腹心之众，谓悖逆之可诛。
现代文：辅佐的大臣认为他们的罪恶难以宽赦；与我心腹相通的人都说叛逆的人应当诛灭。
English: The vice-chancellor thinks their crimes are unforgivable; my confidants say the traitors should be exterminated.

古文：爰征甲兵，用救涂炭，上将宣力，内臣协心。
现代文：于是征召军队，以拯救苦难中的百姓，猛将显示力量，内臣齐心相助，选用的都是国家的栋梁之材。
English: As a result, the army was conscripted to save the people in distress, the army showed its strength, and the ministers of the interior cooperated wholeheartedly, all of whom were chosen as pillars of the country.

古文：选用皆得于良材，扫荡才及于周岁，诛干纪反常之噍类，惩乱臣贼子之奸谋。
现代文：扫荡贼军才一周年，便诛杀了犯法纪反纲常的人，惩办了乱臣贼子的奸谋。
English: It was only the first anniversary of the sweeping of the thief army, and they killed those who violated the law and discipline, and punished the treachery of the ruffian thief.

古文：今则已及偃戈，重康黎庶。
现代文： 如今已经平息了战乱，使百姓重享太平。
English: Now the war has been calmed down and the people can enjoy peace again.

古文：畴庸之典，在丝发以无私；懋赏之时，贵纤毫之必当。
现代文：录用人才的典制，应当做到没有一丝一毫的私心；颁行重大奖赏，贵在一纤一毫也要恰当。
English: The award system for hiring talents should be without any selfishness; the awarding of major awards should also be appropriate.

古文：其四面行营节度使，既成茂勋，宜加酬奖，并取别敕处分。
现代文：其四面行营节度使，既然建立了重大的功勋，就应当给予酬劳奖赏。并颁发特别的敕令处理。
English: Since he has established great merits, he should be rewarded and rewarded, and a special order should be issued.

古文：应诸道行营都将已下节级军将，各委本道具功劳名衔，分析闻奏，当续有处分。
现代文：所有各道行营中各都将以下的节级军官，则委托他们本道列具其功劳、名字、职衔，分门别类地上报，必当继续进行处置。
English: The following section-level officers will be assigned to each of the military camps in each province, and they will be entrusted to list their merits, names, and titles in this province, and will be reported on a branch-by-branch basis, and must continue to be dealt with.

古文：被坚执锐，冒涉寒暄，解甲橐弓，还乡复业，颁缯帛之赐，免差役之征。
现代文：披着坚固的铠甲，手执锐利的武器，冒着严寒和酷热的将士，如今脱下征衣，解下弓囊，回乡恢复旧业，应当颁发命令赐给他们缯帛，对他们免征差役。
English: The soldiers, clad in sturdy armor and armed with sharp weapons, who have braved the bitter cold and scorching heat, should now take off their uniforms, remove their bows and arrows, and return to their hometowns to resume their old jobs. An order should be issued to give them shackles and exempt them from compulsory service.

古文：应四面行营将士，今既平宁，宜令次第放归本道。
现代文：允诺在四面军营中的将士们，如今既已太平安宁，应当逐步按顺序放他们回返家乡。
English: He promised that the soldiers in the military camps on all sides, now that peace and tranquility have been restored, should be allowed to return to their hometowns in a phased manner.

古文：其赏赐匹段，已从别敕处分，到本道后，仍令节度使各犒宴放归私第，便令歇息，未用差使。
现代文：那赏赐的布匹缎帛，已经按照特别的敕令处置，回到本乡之后，仍着令节度使对他们分别犒赏、宴请，放他们回家，让他们休息，不要再差遣他们服役。
English: After returning to their hometowns, they were still ordered to give them separate rewards and banquets, let them go home, let them rest, and do not send them to serve again.

古文：如行营人，并免差科色役；如本厢本将，今后有节级员阙，且以行营军健量材差置，用酬征伐之勤。
现代文：如果是行营中的士兵，免去各项差役；如果是本地本镇的军将，今后行营中有了缺位的节级军官，就暂且用行营中的军健量材录用，以酬谢他们征战的辛劳。
English: If it is a soldier in the camp, he will be exempted from all kinds of errands; if it is a local general in the town, the section-level officers who have vacancies in the camp in the future will be hired temporarily with the military talent in the camp as a reward for their hard work in the war.

古文：临敌用命，力屈殒身，须慰伤魂，以彰忠节。
现代文：与敌人拼命作战，力尽而牺牲的人，应当抚慰他们的灵魂，以表彰忠诚和节操。
English: Those who fought hard against the enemy and sacrificed themselves should have their souls soothed in recognition of their loyalty and self-restraint.

古文：超与职事，仍加任使。
现代文：需要越级授予官职的，仍然给予任命。
English: If it is necessary to confer an official position beyond the ranks, they will still be appointed.

古文：如无父兄子弟，即有妻女者，即委州使厚加赠恤，常令安抚。
现代文：如果没有父兄子弟而有妻女的，立即委托州使给予丰厚的馈赠抚恤，并常常去安抚他们。
English: If there are no brothers and sisters, but there is a wife and daughter, immediately entrust the state envoy to give a generous gift allowance, and often go to appease them.

古文：如是都将至都虞候阵亡者，与赠官。
现代文：如果是都将或都虞候而阵亡的，则追赠官职。
English: If both or all of them died in battle, they were posthumously awarded an official post.

古文：应阵亡将士有父兄子弟愿入军者，便令本道填替。
现代文：允诺阵亡将士的父兄子弟，愿意参军的，立即令本道填补他们的名字。
English: He promised the parents and children of the fallen soldiers, who were willing to join the army, that he would immediately fill in their names.

古文：如无父兄子弟，仍且与给衣粮三年。
现代文：如果没有父兄子弟而有妻女的，仍然发给衣粮三年。
English: If there is no father, brother or child, but there is a wife and daughter, they will still be given clothing and food for three years.

古文：因战阵伤损手足永废者，终身不得停给。如将士被贼杀害者，委所在州县量事救接，重与改瘗，勿令暴露，兼与设祭。
现代文：因在战场上手脚受伤而残废的，终生不停止发给衣粮；如果有被贼寇杀害的将士，委托他们所在的州县政府，酌情给予他们的家属救助、接济，重新改葬，不让他们的尸骸暴露在外，并为他们设祭追悼。
English: For those who are disabled due to injuries to their hands and feet on the battlefield, they will receive clothing and food for life; if there are soldiers killed by bandits, entrust the state and county governments where they are located to give their families assistance, assistance, re-burial, not to allow their remains to be exposed, and to set up a memorial for them.

古文：王者以仁恕为本，拯济是谋，元恶既已诛锄，胁从宜从宽宥。
现代文： 治理天下的人以仁爱宽厚为根本，用以谋求拯救、帮助百姓的办法。元凶大恶既然已经被铲除，胁从者就应当从宽处理。
English: The people who govern the world take benevolence and generosity as the fundamental principles, and use them to seek ways to save and help the people. Since the root cause of the great evil has been eradicated, those who threaten others should be dealt with leniently.

古文：除宠勋亲属及桂州回戈逆党，为贼胁从及因战阵拒敌官军，招谕不悛，惧法逃走，皆非本恶，盖锋刃所驱，今并释放，一切不问。
现代文：除了庞勋的亲属，以及桂州倒戈投敌的叛逆之外，被敌人胁从和因在战场上对阵而与官军作战的人、接到招安的诏令而不改悔的人、畏惧法律而逃跑的人，都不是本人的罪恶，大概都是被武力所驱使，现在全部释放，一概不予追究。
English: In addition to the relatives of Pang Hun and the traitors of Guizhou who defected to the enemy, those who were coerced by the enemy and fought against the government army because of the confrontation on the battlefield, those who did not repent after receiving the edict of peace, and those who fled in fear of the law, are not their own sins, and are probably driven by force. All of them are now released and will not be investigated.

古文：应旧军将军吏节级所由，既已归还，征赋先宜蠲免。
现代文：所有原来被军将、军吏、节级所差遣的人，现在既已返回，捐税应当先行免除。
English: All those who were originally sent by generals, military officials and section levels have now returned, and they should be exempted from paying taxes in advance.

古文：其徐、宿、濠、泗等州应合征秋夏两税及诸色差科色役，一事已上，宜放十年，已后蠲放三年，待三年后续议条疏处分。
现代文：徐州、宿州、濠州、泗州等州应当合征的秋夏两季税收，以及各项差役，一项以上的，应当免征十年，以后的免征三年。等三年以后再继续商议各项条款的处理办法。
English: The autumn and summer taxes that should be jointly collected by Xuzhou, Suizhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and other provinces, as well as more than one item of duties, should be exempted for ten years, and exempted for the next three years. After three years, we will continue to discuss the treatment of each clause.

古文：编甿失业，丘井无人，桑柘枌榆，鞠为茂草，应行营处百姓田宅产业为贼残毁烧焚者，今既平宁，并许识认，各还本主，诸色人不得妄有侵占。
现代文：百姓失业，村室无人居住，原来生长着桑柘木分榆树木的地方，现在长满了荒草。现在既然已经太平安宁，所有百姓做过军营的田宅产业，被贼军毁坏焚烧的，都允许他们认领，各归原主，无论何种人都不得随意侵占。
English: The people are unemployed, the village is uninhabited, the place where the mulberry trees used to grow is now overgrown with weeds. Now that there is peace and tranquility, all the people have done the military camp's cottage industry, which was destroyed and burned by the thief army, they are allowed to claim it, each to the original owner, no matter what kind of people are allowed to occupy it at will.

古文：九原可作，千载不忘，尚禁樵苏，宁伤丘垅。
现代文：九原可以振作，千年以后也不会被遗忘，还须禁止砍柴割草，以免伤害农田。
English: Kyushu can cheer up, and will not be forgotten after a thousand years. It is also necessary to prohibit cutting firewood and mowing grass, so as not to harm farmland.

古文：应有先贤坟墓碑记为人所知，被贼毁废者，即与掩藏，仍量致祭。
现代文：有广为人知的先贤坟墓碑刻而被贼军毁坏了的，立即为其掩埋，并酌情致祭。
English: If there are well-known tombstones of sages that have been destroyed by the bandits, they should be buried immediately and sacrificed as appropriate.

古文：自用兵已来，郡邑皆罹攻劫，远念惊挠，尤在慰安。
现代文：自从用兵以来，各郡县都遭受了攻伐的劫难，远远地怀想，那些受惊扰的人们特别需要安慰。
English: Since the introduction of conscription, every county and prefecture has suffered the calamities of the offensive, and it is far from conceiving that those who are alarmed are particularly in need of consolation.

古文：今遣右散骑常侍刘异、兵部郎中薛崇等往彼宣抚。
现代文：现在派右散骑常侍刘异、兵部郎中薛崇等到那些地方进行抚慰。
English: Right now, they have sent Liu Yi, the right-hand rider, and Xue Chong, a member of the military department, to those places to offer consolation.

古文：于戏！朕以四海为家，兆人为子。
现代文：唉，我以四海为家，以亿万人民为子。
English: Alas, I regard the four seas as my home and hundreds of millions of people as my children.

古文：一物失所，每轸纳隍之忧；一方未宁，常负阽危之戒。
现代文：只要有一个人流离失所，总是怀着沉痛的忧虑，就像敌人已经进了护城河一样；一处地方没有安宁，便常常承担着身处危殆的警戒。
English: Whenever a man is displaced, there is always a gloomy apprehension, as if the enemy had entered the moat; when there is no peace in a place, there is often a precarious vigil.

古文：今元凶就戮，逆党诛夷，载戢干戈，永销氛昆，庶平妖气，允洽嘉祥。
现代文：如今元凶已被诛杀，逆党已被铲除；兵乱止息，阴氛永消。妖气差不多平定了，充满了融洽和吉祥。
English: Now, the culprit has been killed, and the rebel party has been eradicated; the war has ended, and the gloomy atmosphere has disappeared forever. The evil spirits have almost been calmed, and they are full of harmony and auspiciousness.

古文：遐迩臣僚，当体予意。
现代文：远近的臣民们都应当体察我的心意。
English: My subjects, near and far, should understand my will.

古文：制以徐州南面招讨使、检校尚书左仆射、右神武大将军、权知淮南节度事、扶风县开国伯、食邑一千户马举可检校司空，兼扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、知节度事；以右武卫大将军、徐州东南面招讨使曹翔检校兵部尚书，兼徐州刺史、御史大夫、徐泗濠团练防御等使；以前淮南节度使、检校司空、平章事、上柱国、凉国公、食邑三千户令狐綯为太子太保，分司东都。
现代文：决定任命徐州南面招讨使、检校尚书左仆射、右神武大将军、暂掌淮南节度使事、扶风县开国伯、食邑一千户马举为检校司空，兼扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使，掌节度使事；任命右武卫大将军、徐州东南面招讨使曹翔为检校兵部尚书，兼任徐州刺史、御史大夫、徐泗濠等州团练使、防御使等；任命前淮南节度使、检校司空、平章政事、上柱国、凉国公、食邑三千户令狐为太子太保，分管东都洛阳。
English: It was decided to appoint Xuzhou south-facing recruiting envoy, inspecting school Shangshu Zuo Muxia, right-facing Shenwu general, temporarily in charge of Huainan Festival envoy, Fufeng County Kaigong Bo, Shueyi County Qianhuangma to be the inspecting school secretary, and Yangzhou governor Shi, Huainan Festival deputy ambassador, to be in charge of festival envoy; appoint Yu Wuwei general, Xuzhou southeast-facing recruiting envoy Cao Xiang to be the inspecting school military department Shangshu, and also serve as Xuzhou stabbing history, history doctor, Xu Wei and other state regimental

古文：魏博节度使、检校太傅、同平章事何弘敬卒，三军立其子全皞为兵马留后。
现代文：魏博节度使、检校太傅、同平章事何弘敬去世，三军拥立他的儿子何全白皋为兵马留后。 
English: After the death of He Hongjing, Wei Bo's ceremonial envoy, school inspector, and Tongping's subordinate, his son, He Quanzhong, who was supported by the three armies, remained as a soldier.

古文：十一月，南诏蛮骠信坦绰酋龙率众二万寇隽州。
现代文：十一月，南诏蛮部的首领酋龙率领部众两万人侵犯辒州。
English: In November, the leader of the Southern Zhao barbarians, Chailong, led 20,000 people to invade Zhangzhou.

古文：定边军节度都头安再荣守清溪关，为贼所攻，再荣退保大渡河，北去清溪关二百里，隔水相射，凡九日八夜。
现代文：定边军节度都头安再荣镇守清溪关，遭到贼军进攻，安再荣退守大渡河，北距清溪关二百里，双方隔河以弓箭互射，相持了九天八夜。
English: On the day of the festival, An Chie Rong, the commander of the Daming Frontier Army, was attacked by the bandits. An Chie Rong retreated to guard the Dadu River, 200 miles north of Chie Rong, and the two sides exchanged bows and arrows across the river, holding each other for nine days and eight nights.

古文：定边军节度使窦滂勒兵拒之。
现代文：定边军节度使窦滂统领士卒抵抗蛮军。
English: The determination of the Sino-Japanese border troops made Dou Yu, the leader of the troops, resist the barbarians.

古文：十二月，骠信遣清平官十余人来伪和，与窦滂语次，蛮军船筏竞渡，忠武、武宁军兵士结阵抗之，接战自午及申，蛮军稍却。
现代文：十二月，酋龙派十几个清平官假装前来议和，正和窦滂交谈之际，蛮军乘着船筏竞相渡河，忠武军和武宁军的战士们结成战阵进行抵抗，双方交战从中午到下午，蛮军稍稍退却。
English: In December, Chief Long sent more than a dozen Qing peace officials to pretend to come to discuss peace. While they were talking with Dou Yu, the barbarians were racing to cross the river on rafts. The soldiers of the Loyalist Army and the Wu Ning Army formed battle lines to resist. The two sides fought from noon to afternoon, and the barbarians retreated slightly.

古文：窦滂自缢于帐中，徐州将苗全绪解之，谓滂曰： 都统何至于是，但安心，全绪与再荣、弘节等血战取胜。 
现代文：窦滂在军帐中上吊自杀，徐州将领苗全绪把他解了下来，对窦滂说： 都统何至于到这个地步呢！只要安心，我和安再荣、弘节会浴血战斗，取得胜利。 
English: Dou Rong hanged himself in the military account. The Xuzhou general Miao Quanxu untied him and said to Dou Rong, "How did it come to this? As long as you are at ease, I and An Zhaerong and Hongjie will fight bloody battles and achieve victory."

古文：全绪三人率兵而出，滂乃单骑宵遁。
现代文：苗全绪等三个率军出去了，窦滂却独自骑马乘着黑夜逃走了。
English: Miao Quanxu and three others led the army out, but Dou Ying escaped alone on horseback in the dark.

古文：其夜，蛮军营于山下。
现代文：那天夜晚，蛮军在山下扎下营寨。
English: That night, the barbarians set up camp at the foot of the mountain.

古文：全绪等谋曰： 彼众我寡，若明日对阵，吾属败矣。可夜击之，令其军乱，自解去。 
现代文：苗全绪等商量说 ：他们兵多，我们兵少，如果明天对阵厮杀，我们就会战败，可以乘着黑夜袭击他们，让他们的队伍产生混乱，自然就会解围离去了。 
English: Miao Quanxu and others discussed and said: They have more soldiers, we have fewer soldiers. If we fight tomorrow, we will be defeated. We can take advantage of the darkness to attack them, cause chaos in their ranks, and naturally break the siege and leave.

古文：忠武、武宁之师乃夜入蛮军，弓弩乱发，蛮众大骇，全绪等三将保军而去。
现代文：忠武军、武宁军的军队便夜间攻入蛮军营寨，以弓弩乱射，蛮军部众大惊，苗全绪等三将便保全了军队而离去。
English: The troops of the Zhongwu Army and the Wu Ning Army entered the barbarian camp at night and shot wildly with bows and arrows. The barbarian army was shocked. Miao Quanxu and the other three generals saved the army and left.

古文：蛮军乘胜进攻西川平，朝廷以颜庆复为大渡河制置、剑南应接等使，宋威为行营都知兵马使，将兵数万，与忠武、武宁之师合，与蛮军战于汉州之毗桥，大捷，解西川之围。
现代文：蛮军乘胜进攻西川城，朝廷任命颜庆复为大渡河制置使、剑南应接使，任命宋威为行营都知兵马使，领军数万，和忠武军、武宁军的部队会合，与蛮军在汉州的毗桥交战，取得大胜，解除了蛮军对西川的围困。
English: The barbarian army took advantage of the victory to attack Xichuan City. The imperial court appointed Yan Qingfu as the Dadu River Construction Envoy and the Jianan Vice-Envoy, and appointed Song Wei as the Dadu River Campaigning Envoy, leading tens of thousands of troops. He met with the troops of the Zhongwu Army and the Wu Ning Army, and fought with the barbarian army in Bibi Bridge, Hanzhou. He won a great victory and relieved the siege of Xichuan by the barbarian army.

古文：明日，蛮军遁走，西川平。
现代文：第二天，蛮军逃跑，西川平定。
English: The next day, the barbarians fled, and Saikawa was pacified.

古文：以蜀王佶为开府仪同三司、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事，不出阁；以卢耽知节度事。
现代文：任命蜀王李佶为开府仪同三司、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使，掌节度使事，不离开台阁；任命卢耽执掌节度使事务。
English: Appointed Shu Wang Lijun as the deputy ambassador of the Kaifu Yi Tong Three Departments, Chengdu Yin, and Jianan Nishikawa, and appointed him to be in charge of the festival and not leave the cabinet; appointed Lu Tan to be in charge of the festival and affairs.

古文：诏河东节度使郑从赴阙。
现代文：诏令河东节度使郑从谠前来朝廷。
English: The edict of the Hedong Festival made Zheng Zonglu come to the imperial court.

古文：以义成军节度使、光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、滑州刺史、上柱国、会稽县开国伯、食邑二千户康承训以本官兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东军节度使。
现代文：任命义成军节度使、光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、滑州刺史、上柱国、会稽县开国伯、食邑二千户康承训以本职兼任太原尹、北都留守，充任河东军节度使。
English: He appointed the Yicheng Army Festival Delegate, the Guanglu Doctor, the school inspector Shangshu Zuopuzha, Tongping Zhangji, the governor of Luzhou, Shangzhuang Province, the founding governor of Hui County, and the food village of 2,000 households Kangcheng Training to concurrently serve as Taiyuan Yin. He stayed in Beijing and served as the Hedong Army Festival Delegate.

古文：以吏部侍郎杨知温、吏部侍郎于德孙李玄考官；司封员外郎卢荛、刑部侍郎杨戴考试宏词选人；以虞部郎中宋震、前昭应主簿胡德融考科目举人。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎杨知温、吏部侍郎于德孙、李玄考核官吏，司封员外郎卢荛、刑部侍郎杨戴主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才；以虞部郎中宋震、前昭应县主簿胡德融主考各科目荐举的人才。
English: He appointed Yang Chih-Wen, Yang Chih-Wen, Yu Desun, and Li Xuan, officials of the Ministry of Personnel, as examiners, and Lu Wei, secretary of the Ministry of Finance, and Yang Dai, minister of the Ministry of Justice, as examiners of the Erudition and Grammar Examination. He also appointed Song Zhen, vice-minister of the Ministry of Youth, and Hu De Rong, former chief accountant of Shaoying County, as examiners of the recommended candidates of each subject.

古文：诏以兵戈才罢，且务抚宁，其礼部贡举，宜权停一年，付中书行敕指挥，其两省官等，不用论奏。
现代文：诏令： 因为战事刚刚停止，暂时只求安宁，礼部贡举的考试，应当暂时停止一年，此事交给中书省发布敕令执行，中书门下两省的官员不必为此事议论上奏。 
English: Imperial edict: Because the war has just stopped, and only peace is sought for the time being, the examination for the tribute of the Ministry of Ceremonies should be temporarily suspended for one year, and the matter should be handed over to the Ministry of Culture and Literature to issue a royal decree for implementation. The officials of the two provinces under the Ministry of Culture and Literature do not need to discuss and report on this matter.

古文：敕荆南节度使杜忭： 据司天奏，有小孛星气经历分野，恐有外夷兵水之患。
现代文：敕令荆南节度使杜 ：据司天监奏报，有小彗星的云气经过星域的分野，恐怕有外族的兵患。
English: Jingnan, the commander of the Southern Song Dynasty, said, "According to the report of the Division of the Celestial Observatory, there is a cloud of small comets passing through the star field, and I am afraid that there will be foreign soldiers.

古文：缘边籓镇，最要提防，宜训习师徒，增筑城堡。
现代文：靠近边疆的藩镇最要提防，应当训练军兵，增修城堡。
English: The towns close to the frontier should be on their guard. They should train soldiers and build more castles.

古文：凡关制置，具事以闻。 
现代文：凡是关系到边塞的建置，应当列具事实上奏。 
English: All matters relating to the construction of border fortifications should be set forth in a factual manner.

古文：制以魏博节度使何全皞起复检校司空、同平章事。
现代文：命令因守父丧未满的魏博节度使何全白皋为检校司空、同平章事。
English: The Wei Bo Festival, which was incomplete due to the father's death, was ordered to make He Quanbai as the school inspector.

古文：十一年春正月甲寅朔，制尚书右仆射杜审权为检校司徒、河中尹、绛慈隰节度观察处置等使。
现代文：咸通十一年春，正月初一，决定由尚书右仆射杜审权担任检校司徒、河中尹、绛慈隰等州节度使、观察处置使。
English: In the spring of the 11th year of Hamdang and the first day of the first month of the year, it was decided that Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Du, would serve as the inspector of the school, as well as the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the state festival and the inspector of the observation and disposition.

古文：丙午，制宰相、门下侍郎、吏部尚书曹确可兼尚书左仆射，门下侍郎、户部尚书路岩可兼右仆射，中书侍郎于忭可兼户部尚书，平章事刘瞻可中书侍郎、知政事。
现代文：二月二十四日，决定以宰相、门下侍郎、吏部尚书曹确兼任尚书左仆射，以门下侍郎、户部尚书路岩兼任右仆射，以中书侍郎于琮兼任户部尚书，以平章政事刘瞻任中书侍郎、知政事。
English: On February 24th, it was decided that the prime minister, the under secretary, and the secretary of the personnel department, Shang Shuxiao, would also serve as the left assistant of Shang Shuxiao, the under secretary, and the head of the household, Shang Shuxiao Luyan, would also serve as the right assistant of Shang Shuxiao, the secretary of the middle office, Yu Qi, would also serve as the head of the household, and the secretary of the middle office, Liu Zhan, would serve as the secretary of the middle office and the secretary of the government.

古文：余并如故。
现代文：其余的均和原来一样。
English: The rest is the same as before.

古文：己酉，制： 河东节度使康承训，将门琐质，戎垒微才，曾不知兵，谬膺重禄。
现代文：二月二十七日，敕令： 河东节度使康承训，只具有将门中卑琐的资质，是军营中一个渺小的人物，并不懂得军事，却不恰当地享受着优厚的俸禄。
English: February 27th, the imperial edict: the commander of the Hedong Festival sent Kang to receive training, but he only had the humble qualification of a general, was a small figure in the military camp, did not understand military, but inappropriately enjoyed a generous salary.

古文：忧韬钤以效任，畜奸恶以事君，几授钺于戎籓，尝执金以徼道，谓其尽节，委以专征。
现代文：带着因为不懂韬略的担忧而效力，心藏着奸恶的事奉国君，几次向他授予藩镇的权柄，他也曾执掌兵权，巡察地方，朝廷以为他能尽守臣节，故而委派他执行专门的军务。
English: He served the sovereign with treachery in his heart, fearing that he did not know the details, and was given the authority of the domain and town several times. He also held the military power and inspected the localities. The court thought that he could keep the vassal day, so he was assigned to carry out special military affairs.

古文：属者徐部匪宁，敢干纪律，俾护诸将，坐覆危巢。
现代文：近来徐州的军队不安守本分，竟敢违犯纪纲法令，致使其庇护下的诸将，坐待危城倾覆。
English: Recently, the army of Xuzhou has not been anxious to keep its duty, and has dared to violate the laws of discipline, causing the generals under its protection to wait for the fall of the dangerous city.

古文：罄国币以佐军，颁王爵而赏士，而玩寇莫战，按甲不前，立法未学于穰苴，申令顿亏于孙子。
现代文：朝廷尽国库所有的帮助军队，颁赐王爵而奖赏将士，而他们却以寇盗为儿戏，不进行战斗，按兵不动。既不能像司马穰苴那样建立军法，也不像孙武那样严申军令。
English: The imperial court did everything in its treasury to help the army, awarding knighthoods to reward the soldiers, but they used robbery as a child's play, did not fight, and did not move according to the soldiers. Neither could they establish military law like Sima Qian, nor did they strictly enforce military orders like Sun Wu.

古文：况部伍不战，逼挠无谋，人数空多，军威何振。
现代文：更何况队伍不会作战，进逼和骚扰敌军均无谋略，空有那么多军队，军威却不能振作。
English: Moreover, the team will not fight, there is no strategy to push and harass the enemy army, there are so many empty troops, but the military prestige can not cheer up.

古文：使农夫释耒，工女下机，始凝望于天诛，翻有思于贼至。
现代文：直到兵乱使得农民无法耕田，织女无法织布，才指望皇天诛戮叛贼，反过来又忧愁贼军来到。
English: It wasn't until the war made it impossible for farmers to farm and weavers to weave cloth that the emperor expected the heavens to smite the rebels, which in turn brought sorrow to the rebels.

古文：洎元凶自溃，玄稔效忠，彭门洞开，尔功何有！
现代文：待到贼首自行溃败，张玄稔向朝廷效忠，徐州被收复，他又有什么功劳！
English: When the thief-in-chief was self-defeated, Zhang Xuanlian was loyal to the imperial court, and Xuzhou was recovered, what did he have to show for it?

古文：而负恩已甚，渎货是求，叨荣苟幸于一时，遗患遂逾于积岁。
现代文：而他负恩于朝廷却实在太严重，只想求财货；为了侥幸地求取一时的荣耀，便留下不止一年的祸患。
English: But his ungratefulness to the imperial court was too serious. He only wanted to seek wealth and goods. In order to seek a momentary glory by chance, he left more than a year of misfortune.

古文：爰行国典，俾傅戎籓，可蜀王傅，分司东都。 
现代文：现在只能执行国法，让他去做外藩的太傅。可担任蜀王的太傅，分管东都的事务。 
English: Now he can only implement the national law, let him be the Taifu of foreign domains. He can serve as the Taifu of Shu Wang and be in charge of the affairs of Dongdu.

古文：再贬恩州司马同正，驰驿发遣。
现代文：接着又贬为恩州司马同正，由驿传遣发上路。
English: Then he was relegated to the position of Enzhou Sima Tongzheng, and sent on his way by Yu Chuan.

古文：以检校左散骑常侍、泗州刺史杜慆检校工部尚书、滑州刺史、义成军节度、郑滑观察等使。
现代文：任命检校左散骑常侍、泗州刺史杜忄舀为检校工部尚书、滑州刺史、义成军节度使、郑滑观察使。
English: Appointed school inspection left straggler attendant, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Du Wei as school inspection engineering department Shangshu, Nanzhou Zhi Shi, Yicheng Army Festival Envoy, Zhenglu Observation Envoy.

古文：以河东行营沙陀三部落羌浑诸部招讨使、检校太子宾客、监察御史硃邪赤心为检校工部尚书、单于大都护、御史大夫、振武节度、麟胜等州观察等使，仍赐姓名曰李国昌。
现代文：任命河东行营沙陀三部落羌、浑诸部招讨使、检校太子宾客、监察御史朱邪赤心为检校工部尚书、单于大都护、御史大夫、振武军节度使、麟胜等州观察使，并赐姓名为李国昌。
English: He appointed the governor of the three provinces of Shatou, the envoy to invite and discuss various ministries, the guest of the prince of the inspection of the school, the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the inspector of the

古文：以吏部尚书萧鄴、吏部侍郎于德孙、吏部侍郎杨知温考官；司勋员外郎李耀、礼部员外郎崔澹等考试应宏词选人。
现代文：任命吏部尚书萧邺、吏部侍郎于德孙、吏部侍郎杨知温考核官员；任命司勋员外郎李耀、礼部员外郎崔澹等主持博学宏词科考试以选拔人才。
English: Appointed the examination officials of the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, Shangshu Xiaoqi, the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, Yu Desun, and the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, Yang Zhiwen; appointed the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, Wairo Li Yao, and the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, Wairo Cui Yao, to preside over the examination of erudition and vocabulary to select talents.

古文：以河阳三城节度、孟怀泽观察使、中散大夫、检校礼部尚书、孟州刺史、御史大夫崔彦昭为金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度观察等使。
现代文：任命河阳三城节度使、孟怀泽等州观察使、中散大夫、检校礼部尚书、孟州刺史、御史大夫崔彦昭为金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使、观察使。
English: Appointed Heyang Sancheng Festival Envoy, Meng Huizer and other state observation envoys, Zhong San doctor, school inspection ceremonial department inspector, Meng Zhou stabbing history, Goshi doctor Cui Yan Zhao as Jin Ziguanglu doctor, school inspection criminal department inspector, Taiyuan Yin, Beidou left-behind, Hedong Festival Envoy, observation envoy.

古文：以兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨、扶风县开国子、食邑五百户、驸马都尉韦保衡本官同平章事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨、扶风县开国子、食邑五百户、驸马都尉韦保衡以本职任同平章事。
English: He appointed the attendant of the military department, the scholar of Hanlin, the son of the founder of Fufeng County, the five hundred households of the food village, and the horse captain Wei Baoheng to be appointed to the same position.

古文：以兵部侍郎刘鄴判度支。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎刘邺掌管度支事。
English: He appointed Liu Xuan, the attendant of the Military Department, to be in charge of the administrative affairs.

古文：左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事曹确以病求免，授检校司空、同平章事，兼润州刺史，充浙江西道观察等使。
现代文：左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事曹确因病请求免职，授予他检校司空、同平章事，兼润州刺史，充任浙江西道观察使。
English: Zuo Fuxia, his manservant, Tongping Zhangji Cao Zhengyi requested to be relieved of duty due to illness, and he was granted the post of school inspector, Tongping Zhangji, and Renzhou historian, and served as the Zhejiang West Road Observation Envoy.

古文：魏博节度使何全皞酷政，为衙军所杀，推其大将韩君雄为留后。
现代文：魏博节度使何全白皋政令苛酷，被衙军杀害，他的大将韩君雄被推为节度留后。
English: Wei Bo's festival made He Quanbai's government decree harsh, and he was killed by Wei's army. His general Han Junxiong was pushed to stay behind as a festival.

古文：四月癸未朔。
现代文：四月初一为癸未日。
English: The first day of April is a leap day.

古文：戊子，敕： 去年属以用军之际，权停贡举一年，今既去戈，却宜仍旧。
现代文：四月初六，敕令 ：去年适值打仗期间，暂时停止贡举考试一年，现在既然已经消除了兵乱，便应当照旧举行贡举考试。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the year, the imperial edict was issued: During the war last year, the tribute examination was temporarily suspended for one year. Now that the war has been eliminated, the tribute examination should be held as usual.

古文：来年宜别许三十人及第，进士十人，明经二十人，已后不得援例。 
现代文：明年应当另外增录三十名，其中进士科十名，明经科二十名，但以后不得援引为常例。 
English: Next year, another 30 names should be added, including 10 in the advanced subject and 20 in the classics subject, but this should not be used as a general rule in the future.

古文：八月辛巳朔。
现代文：八月初一为辛巳日。
English: The first day of August is Shinshi Day.

古文：己酉，同昌公主薨，追赠卫国公主，谥曰文懿。
现代文：八月二十九日，同昌公主薨，追赠为卫国公主，谥号文懿。
English: On August 29th, Princess Tongchang was posthumously awarded the title of Princess of the Great Patriotic War, with the posthumous title of Princess Wen.

古文：主，郭淑妃所生，主以大中三年七月三日生，咸通九年二月二日下降。
现代文：公主是郭淑妃所生，生于大中三年七月初三，咸通九年二月二日下嫁。
English: The princess was born to Guo Shufei. She was born on the third day of the third month of the third year of high school in July, and married on February 2, 1997.

古文：上尤钟念，悲惜异常。
现代文：皇上特别钟爱、想念公主，非常悲哀痛惜。
English: The emperor especially loved and missed the princess, and was very sad and sorry.

古文：以待诏韩宗绍等医药不效，杀之，收捕其亲族三百余人，系京兆府。
现代文：因太医韩宗绍等人的医药不能奏效，将他们处死，逮捕他们的亲族三百多人，拘押在京兆府。
English: Because the medicine of the great doctor Han Zongshao and others could not work, they were put to death, and more than three hundred of their relatives were arrested and detained in Beijing.

古文：宰相刘瞻、京兆尹温璋上疏论谏行法太过，上怒，叱出之。
现代文：宰相刘瞻、京兆尹温璋上疏，认为执法过于严厉，皇上发怒，将他们叱骂出去。
English: Prime Minister Liu Zhan and Emperor Jingzhao thought that the enforcement of the law was too strict, and the emperor became angry and scolded them.

古文：九月丙辰，制以正议大夫、守中书侍郎、兼刑部尚书、同平章事、充集贤殿大学士、上柱国、彭城县开国侯、食邑一千户、赐紫金鱼袋刘瞻检校刑部尚书、同平章事，兼江陵尹，充荆南节度等使。
现代文：九月初七，决定任命正议大夫、署理中书侍郎、兼刑部尚书、同平章事、充集贤殿大学士、上柱国、彭城县开国侯、食邑一千户、赐紫金鱼袋刘瞻为检校刑部尚书、同平章事，兼任江陵尹，充任荆南节度使等。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, it was decided to appoint Zheng Rong Daifu, the acting junior secretary of the middle school, Shang Shu of the criminal department, Tong Ping Zhangji, Zhuji Xian Dian Daibiao, Shang Zhuo Guo, Kaifuo of Pengcheng County, 1000 households of the food village, and Liu Zhan of the purple gold fish bag as Shang Shu of the school inspection department, Tong Ping Zhangji, concurrently serving as Jiang Ling Yin, serving as Jingnan Festival envoy, etc.

古文：翰林学士、户部侍郎、知制诰、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑畋为梧州刺史；正议大夫、御史中丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋孙瑝为汀州刺史；将仕郎、右谏议大夫、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋高湘为高州刺史；中散大夫、比部郎中、知制诰、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杨知至为琼州司马；将仕郎、守礼部郎中魏筜为春州司马；朝议大夫、行兵部员外郎、判度支案、柱国张颜为播州司户；朝议大夫、行刑部员外郎、柱国崔颜融为雷州司户；并坐刘瞻亲善，为韦保衡所逐也。
现代文：任命翰林学士、户部侍郎、知制诰、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑畋为梧州刺史；任命正议大夫、御史中丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋孙王皇为汀州刺史；任命将仕郎、右谏议大夫、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋高湘为高州刺史；任命中散大夫、比部郎中、知制诰、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杨知至为琼州司马；任命将仕郎、署理礼部郎中魏階为春州司马；任命朝议大夫、署理兵部员外郎、暂掌度支司文案、上柱国张颜为播州司户；任命朝议大夫、署理刑部员外郎、上柱国崔颜融为雷州司户一一一他们都因为和刘瞻亲近友善而获罪，被韦保衡所驱逐。
English: He appointed Hanlin Baozhong, Hubei Jiuzhaiguan, Zhisheng Zhuang, Shangzhuang Guo, and Zheng Yao to be the Wuzhou scribe; he appointed Zheng He, the chief adviser, Goshi Zhongzheng, Shangzhuang Guo, and Sun Wang, the chief adviser, to be the Tingzhou scribe; he appointed Shou Shiro, the right-hand adviser, Shou Guo, and Gao Xiang, the high-ranking adviser, to be the Gaozhou scribe; he appointed Zhong San, the middle-ranking adviser, Zhisheng Zhuang, the middle-ranking adviser, Zh

古文：京兆尹温璋贬振州司马，制出之夜，璋仰药而死。
现代文：京兆尹温璋被贬为振州司马，命令发出的那天夜晚，温璋服毒而死。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Wenqi was degraded to Zhenzhou Sima. On the night when the order was issued, Wenqi took poison and died.

古文：刘瞻再贬康州刺史。
现代文：刘瞻被再贬为康州刺史。
English: Liu Zhan was relegated to the back pages of the history of Kangzhou.

古文：十月，以给事中薛能为京兆尹，以中书舍人高湜权知礼部贡举。
现代文：十月，任命给事中薛能为京兆尹，任命中书舍人高氵是暂掌礼部贡举事务。
English: In October, the appointment of Xue Jian for the Beijing Zhaoyun and the appointment of Gao Jian for the Beijing Shushou were temporarily entrusted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：十一月己酉朔。
现代文：十一月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is a national holiday.

古文：辛亥，制以礼部尚书王铎本官同平章事。
现代文：十一月初三，决定礼部尚书王铎以本职任同平章事。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, it was decided that the Rector of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies would be promoted to the same rank.

古文：丁卯，敕： 徐州地当沛野，军本骁雄，实为壮国之都，固协建侯之制。
现代文：十一月十九日，敕命： 徐州地处于沛郡地区，军兵本来就骁勇豪雄，确实是强国的都城，从来都有助于建立诸侯国的制度。
English: On November 19th, he died: Xuzhou is located in the Pei County area. The soldiers were originally brave and heroic. It is indeed the capital of a powerful country. It has always helped to establish the system of vassal states.

古文：况山河素异，土俗甚殷，岂欲削卑，挫其繁盛。
现代文：更何况它的山川一向异于别处，当地的人民十分富足，难道朝廷会削弱它、降低它、损害它的繁荣昌盛吗！
English: What's more, its mountains and rivers have always been different from those elsewhere, and the local people are very rich. Will the imperial court weaken it, lower it, and damage its prosperity?

古文：盖缘比因稔祸，或至乱常，罪由己招，孽非天作。
现代文：大概由于积福太深，有时到了淆乱纲常的地步，罪过是由他们自己招来的，孽债不是上苍造成的。
English: Probably due to the accumulation of too much good fortune, sometimes to the point of confusion, the sin is caused by themselves, and the debt is not caused by God.

古文：桂林叛卒，继有逆谋，涂炭生灵，首尾周岁。
现代文：接着桂林的叛军又有悖逆的阴谋，生灵涂炭，前后达一整年之久。
English: Then the Guilin rebels hatched another treacherous plot, which lasted for a whole year.

古文：杀伤黎庶，污染忠良，所不忍言，寻加翦灭，是以卑其镇额，隶彼籓方。
现代文：杀死伤害百姓，污蔑忠良之士，是人们不忍说出口的，随后加以剪除、消灭，因而才降低它军镇的等级，让它隶属于别的藩镇。
English: Killing and injuring the people, slandering the loyal and good men, are things that people can't bear to say out loud, and then they are cut off and eliminated, thus lowering the level of its military town and making it subordinate to other towns.

古文：近属大兵已来，饥年荐至，且闻军人百姓，深耻前非，愿行旧规，却希建节。
现代文：最近，归属于朝廷大军管辖以来，连年发生饥荒，而且听说军人和百姓都深以过去的错误为耻，愿意奉行旧的规章，却希望能建立节镇。
English: Recently, since it has been under the jurisdiction of the imperial army, famine has occurred year after year, and it is said that the soldiers and the people are deeply ashamed of the past mistakes, willing to abide by the old regulations, but hope to establish a festival town.

古文：朕每深轸念，思致小康，特示渥恩，复其军额。
现代文：我屡屡深切地怀念，希望他们能达到小康之治，特地表示优渥恩宠，恢复他们军镇的等级。
English: I have repeatedly and deeply remembered and hoped that they could achieve a well-off life, and specially expressed my gratitude and grace to restore the rank of their military town.

古文：宜赐宣徽库绫绢十万匹，助其宴犒，必获周丰。
现代文：应当赐给他们宣徽库的绫绢十万匹，以资助他们用于宴享犒劳，必定能做到普遍丰厚的施与。
English: They should be given 100,000 yakitori from the Imperial Emblem Collection to help them enjoy the festivities. This would surely be a generous donation.

古文：其徐州都团练使改为感化军节度、徐宿濠泗等州观察处置等使。 
现代文：徐州都团练使改为感化军节度使，徐、宿、濠、泗等州则设立观察处置使等。 
English: The Xuzhou Capital Rehearsal Envoy was changed to the Influencing Military Festival Envoy, and the states of Xu, Shukou, Handan and Handan set up observation and disposition envoys.

古文：以吏部侍郎郑从谠检校户部尚书，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫，充宣武军节度使，代李蔚；以蔚检校吏部尚书、扬州大都督府长史，兼淮南节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎郑从谠为检校户部尚书，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫，充任宣武军节度使，以代替李蔚；任命李蔚为检校吏部尚书、扬州大都督府长史，兼任淮南节度副大使，掌节度使事务。
English: Appointed Zheng Zonglu, the attendant of the cadre department, as the inspector of the school, and concurrently as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school, to replace Li Wei; appointed Li Wei as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the governor of the Yangzhou Grand Duchy, and concurrently as the vice-ambassador of Huainan Festival, in charge of the festival affairs.

古文：十二年春正月戊申，宰相路岩率文武百僚上徽号曰睿文英武明德至仁大圣广孝皇帝，御含元殿。
现代文：咸通十二年春，正月初一，宰相路岩率领文武百官向皇帝敬奉尊号为睿文英武明德至仁大圣广孝皇帝。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year of Hamdang, on the first day of the first month of the year, Prime Minister Lu Yan led hundreds of officers and men to pay tribute to the emperor as the Emperor Rui, Wen, Ying, Wu, Ming and De, the most benevolent Great Saint Guangxiao.

古文：册礼毕，大赦。
现代文：皇上驾临含元殿，册封典礼完毕，大赦天下。
English: The Emperor arrived at the Hongyuan Hall, the enthronement ceremony was completed, and the nation was amnestied.

古文：辛酉，葬卫国公主于少陵原。
现代文：正月十四日，把卫国公主安葬在少陵原。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the year, Princess Eikoku was buried in Shoryobara.

古文：先是，诏百僚为挽歌词，仍令韦保衡自撰神道碑，京兆尹薛能为外监护，供奉杨复璟为内监护，威仪甚盛，上与郭淑妃御延兴门哭送。
现代文：在此之前曾下诏，命百官制挽歌歌词，并命驸马韦保衡自己撰写神道碑，京兆尹薛能为外监护，供奉杨复瞡为内监护，威仪十分盛大，皇上和郭淑妃到延兴门哭送公主的灵柩。
English: Prior to this, an edict had been issued, ordering 100 officials to compose elegy lyrics, and ordering Ma Wei Bo Heng to write a Shinto monument for himself, Jing Zhao Yin Xue Can to be the external guardian, and Yang Fuxi to be the internal guardian. The ceremony was very grand, and the emperor and Guo Shu Fei went to the Yanxing Gate to cry and send the princess's coffin.

古文：幽州节度使张允伸病，请以子简会为节度副大使、权知兵马事，诏从之。
现代文：幽州节度使张允伸患病，请求任命儿子张简会为节度副大使，暂时掌管军务，诏命允准。
English: The Yuzhou Festival caused Zhang Yunshen to fall ill, and he requested that his son, Zhang Jianhui, be appointed deputy ambassador of the festival, temporarily in charge of military affairs. The imperial command was approved.

古文：三月，以吏部尚书萧鄴、吏部侍郎归仁晦李当考官；司封郎中郑绍业、兵部员外郎陆勋等考试宏词选人。
现代文：三月，任命吏部尚书萧邺、吏部侍郎归仁晦、李当考核官员；命司封郎中郑绍业、兵部员外郎陆勋等主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: In March, appointed officials Shangshu Xiao Jun, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, the attendant of the Ministry of Personnel, Gui Renge, and Li Dang as assessment officials; the secretary of the Ministry of Life, Fangzhong Zheng Shaye, and the member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Wai Lang Lu Xun, presided over the erudition and vocabulary examination to select talents.

古文：四月，以左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事路岩检校司徒，兼成都尹、剑南西川节度等使。
现代文：四月，任命左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事路岩为检校司徒，兼成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
English: In April, he appointed Zuo Shuai, his attendant, Tongping Zhang Zhiluyan as the school inspector, and Chengdu Yin and Jianan Nishikawa as the festival envoys.

古文：五月庚申，敕： 慎恤刑狱，大《易》格言。
现代文：五月十五日，敕命： 慎重地处理狱讼，这是《易经》上的格言。
English: On the 15th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar: "Handle prison cases prudently" is the motto of the "I Ching."

古文：《语》曰：如得其情，即哀矜而勿喜。
现代文：《论语》说：如果察知了狱讼的真情，就应当哀怜而不要高兴。
English: "The Analects" says: If you perceive the truth of the prison proceedings, you should be pitiful and not happy.

古文：而狱吏苛刻，务在舞文，守臣因循，罕闻视事。
现代文：狱吏待犯人苛刻，一心只在舞文弄墨作弊；官吏们照章办事，很少听说有认真核查事实的。
English: The prison guards treat the prisoners harshly and are only interested in cheating; the officials act according to the rules, and it is rare to hear of a serious verification of the facts.

古文：以此械系之辈，溢于狴牢；追捕之徒，系于简牍。
现代文：因此上了械具的重刑犯人多到监狱都关不下了；被追捕的逃犯，案卷也十分繁杂。
English: As a result, the number of felons who have been fitted with the devices is so large that they cannot be locked up in prison; fugitives who are being pursued have very complicated case files.

古文：实伤和气，因致沴氛。
现代文：这实在有伤于国家的祥和元气，因此而导致于灾祸的氛围。
English: This has really hurt the peace and morale of the country, thus leading to an atmosphere of calamity.

古文：况时属熇蒸，化先茂育，并赦罪戾，式顺生成。
现代文：何况时令正值暑热，造化以茂盛滋育万物为首要，同时也宽容罪犯，以顺应万物的生长。
English: What's more, it's a hot season, and nature's priority is to nurture all things, while at the same time tolerating criminals in order to accommodate the growth of all things.

古文：应天下所禁系罪人，除十恶忤逆、故意杀人、合造毒药、持仗行劫、开发坟墓外，余并宜疏理释放。
现代文：除了十恶不赦的忤逆大罪、故意杀人、制造毒药、持仗抢劫、挖坟盗墓的之外，应将全国所拘捕监禁的罪囚，全都清查释放。
English: With the exception of the most heinous crimes of high treason, intentional homicide, manufacturing poison, armed robbery, and grave robbing, all criminals arrested and imprisoned throughout the country should be investigated and released.

古文：或信任人吏，多有生情系留，续察访得知，本道观察使判官、州府本曹官必加惩谴，以诫慢易。
现代文：有些随意、任性的官吏，多有凭一己私怨逮捕拘留人犯的情况，事后查访清楚，本道的观察使判官、州府的本曹官一定要加以惩办、谴责，以告诫其怠慢、忽略的过失。
English: There are some arbitrary and capricious officials, most of whom arrest and detain offenders based on their own personal grudges. After the fact, the inspection is clear, and the observation of this way makes the judge and the state capital's bailiff must be punished and condemned to warn them of negligence and negligence.

古文：到后十日内，速疏理分析闻奏。 
现代文：敕令送达后的十天之内，必须迅速清理，分类列举上奏。 
English: Within ten days after the delivery of the imperial edict, it must be quickly cleaned up and classified and enumerated.

古文：上幸安国寺，赐讲经僧沉香高座。
现代文：皇上驾临安国寺，赐给讲经的僧人沉香高座。
English: The emperor arrived at Ankoku-ji Temple and bestowed the high seat of the incense burner on a monk who was giving a sermon.

古文：七月辛丑，中书门下奏：准今年六月十二日敕，厘革诸道及在京诸司奏官并请章服事者。
现代文：七月初七，中书门下省上奏说： 按照今年六月十二日的敕令，矨定、革除各道及在京的各司奏报官员和请求章服事项的人。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, the provincial chief reporter said: "According to the royal decree of June 12 this year, the officials of the newspaper and the people who requested the chapter to obey the matter will be determined and removed from all provinces and all departments in Beijing.

古文：其诸道奏州县官司录、县令、录事、参军，或见任公事，败阙不理，切要替换，及前任实有劳效，并见有阙员，即任各举所知。
现代文：各道奏报州县官府的司录、县令、录事、参军，有些是现有的公务，因败坏失误而无法治理，急需替换办事的官员，有些则是前任确有劳绩实效，现在有了缺员，即可任由各人举荐自己了解的人员。
English: Each province reported to the state and county government office's records, county ordinances, records, and military enlistment. Some are existing civil servants who cannot be managed due to corruption and mistakes and urgently need to be replaced. Others are former officials who have proven their performance and effectiveness. Now that there is a vacancy, it is up to each person to recommend people they know.

古文：每道奏请，仍不得过两人。
现代文：每道报请批准的人，仍旧不得超过两人。
English: The number of persons to be approved by each newspaper shall still not exceed two.

古文：其河东、潞府、邠宁、泾原、灵武、盐夏、振武、天德、鄜坊、沧德、易定、三川等道观察防御等使及岭南五管，每道每年除令、录外，许量奏簿、尉及中下州判司及县丞共三人。
现代文：其中河东道、潞府道、宁道、泾原道、灵武道、盐夏道、振武道、天德道、坊道、沧德道、易定道、三川道等道的观察使、防御使以及岭南五管，各道每年除县令、录事之外，允许酌量奏报主簿、县尉，以及中、下州的判司、县丞共三人。
English: Among them, the observation envoys, defense envoys, and the five commissioners of Lingnan of Hedao, Shifu-do, Ning-do, Qianyuan-do, Lingwu-do, Yanxia-do, Zhenwu-do, Tiande-do, Fang-do, Cangde-do, Yiding-do, and Sanchuan-do, each province is allowed to send the master book and the county lieutenant, as well as the judges and county commissioners of the middle and lower provinces, in addition to the county orders and records.

古文：福州不在奏县官限。
现代文：福州不在奏报州县官员的范围之内。
English: Fuzhou is not within the scope of the report to the state and county officials.

古文：其黔中所奏州县官及大将管内官，即任准旧例处分。
现代文：黔中道所奏报的州县官员以及大将军管辖的官员，则任凭其按照旧例处理。
English: The officials of the prefectures and counties and the officials under the jurisdiction of the commander-in-chief who received the report submitted by the Jianzhong Road were allowed to deal with it in accordance with the old practice.

古文：在京诸司及诸道带职奏官，或非时佥替，考限未满，并却与本资官。
现代文：在京各司以及各道带现职被奏报的官员，或者不到更换时间，考核时限未满，全部退还给本资官。
English: The officials who have been reported in their current positions in various departments in Beijing and various provinces, or who have not been replaced by the time, and the assessment time limit has not expired, will all be returned to the original officials.

古文：诸道节度及都团练防御使下将校奏转试官及宪御等，令诸节度事每年量许五人，都团练防御量许三人为定，不得更于其外奏请。
现代文：各道节度使，以及都团练防御使属下的将校，通过试官及宪台御史等转奏的，令各节度使每年酌量允许奏报五人，都团练防御使允许奏报三人为准，不得更在此名额以外奏请。
English: If the officers of the provincial festival commissioners and the subordinate officers of the provincial regimental defense drill commissioners are transferred by the probation officer and the gendarme, the festival commissioners shall be allowed to report five people each year, and the provincial regimental defense drill commissioners shall be allowed to report three people, and shall not be requested to report beyond this quota.

古文：其御史中丞已下，即准敕文条疏，须有军功，方可授任。
现代文：其中御史中丞以下的官职，即按照朝廷的敕令公文条例，必须立有军功才可以授给。
English: According to the Imperial Court's edict, official posts below the rank of goshi chujo must have military merit before they can be awarded.

古文：自今后如显立战伐功劳者，任具事绩申奏，如检勘不虚，当别与商量处分，以外辄不得更有奏请。
现代文：从今以后如果明显立下战功的，可以任其列具事迹申报，如果核查属实，当另外做商量处理，除此之外不得再有奏请。
English: From now on, if a person has obviously made war exploits, he can be allowed to list and declare his deeds. If the verification is true, it should be discussed separately. In addition, there must be no further requests.

古文：其幽、镇、魏三道望且准承前旧例处分。
现代文：其幽州、镇州、魏州三道希望一并按照原来的旧例处理。 
English: Yuzhou, Zhenzhou and Weizhou hope to be dealt with in accordance with the original old cases.

古文：敕旨从之。
现代文：皇上敕命依允。
English: The emperor complied with the order.

古文：十二月，以检校户部尚书、汴州刺史、御史大夫、宣武军节度使郑从谠为广州刺史、岭南东道节度观察处置等使。
现代文：十二月，任命检校户部尚书、汴州刺史、御史大夫、宣武军节度使郑从谠为广州刺史、岭南东道节度使、观察处置使等。
English: In December, Zheng Conglu was appointed as the inspector of schools, the inspector of households, the inspector of Zhangzhou, the inspector of history, the inspector of history, the inspector of the Xuanwu Festival, the inspector of Guangzhou, the inspector of the Lingnan Host Festival, the inspector of observation and disposal, and so on.

古文：十三年春正月壬寅朔。
现代文：咸通十三年春，正月初一为壬申日。
English: Hamdang Thirteenth Spring, the first day of the first month is Jinshin Day.

古文：甲戌，制以兵部侍郎、判度支刘鄴本官同平章事。
现代文：正月初三，决定兵部侍郎、兼度支使刘邺以本职任同平章事。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, it was decided that Liu Ye, the attendant of the military department and the part-time deputy, would be promoted to the same level as his position.

古文：幽州卢龙等军节度使、检校司徒、同平章事、幽州大都督府长史、上柱国、燕国公、食邑三千户张允伸卒，赠太尉，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：幽州卢龙军节度使、检校司徒、同平章事、幽州大都督府长史、上柱国、燕国公、食邑三千户张允伸去世，追赠为太尉，加谥号忠烈。
English: Zhang Yunshen, the festival envoy of the Lulong Army of Yuzhou, the school inspector, Tongping Zhang, the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Shangzhuang, the governor of Yan, and the 3,000 households of the food village, died and was posthumously promoted to the rank of lieutenant and given the honorary title of loyal.

古文：允伸镇幽州二十三年。
现代文：张允伸镇守幽州达二十三年。
English: Zhang Yunshen has been the town guard of Yuzhou for 23 years.

古文：二月，幽州牙将张公素夺留后张简会军政，自称留后。
现代文：二月，幽州偏将张公素夺取节度留后张简会的兵权，自称节度留后。
English: In February, Yuzhou biased Zhang Gongsu to seize the military power of Zhang Jianhui after the stay of the festival, claiming to stay after the festival.

古文：丁巳，制以尚书右仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事于琮检校司空、襄州刺史，充山南东道节度观察处置等使；以御史中丞赵隐为户部侍郎、本官同平章事。
现代文：二月十七日，决定以尚书右仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事于琮任检校司空、襄州刺史，并充任山南东道节度使、观察处置使；任命御史中丞赵隐为户部侍郎、以本职任同平章事。
English: On February 17th, it was decided to appoint Shangshu's right-hand servant Sha, his subordinate Zhi Rong, and Tongping Zhang to the posts of school inspector Ku, Yangzhou Zhi Shi, and to serve as Shannan host festival envoy, observation and disposition envoy; and to appoint Zhao Ying as household attendant and Tongping Zhang to this post.

古文：三月，以吏部尚书萧鄴、吏部侍郎独孤云考官，职方郎中赵蒙、驾部员外郎李超考试宏词选人。
现代文：三月，任命吏部尚书萧邺、吏部侍郎独孤云考核官员，由职方郎中赵蒙、驾部员外郎李超，主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: In March, appointed the evaluation officer of the personnel department, Shangshu Xiaoqi, and the attendant of the personnel department, Zhuo Guoyun, and the staff member, Zhao Meng, and the driver, Li Chao, to preside over the erudition and vocabulary examination and select talents.

古文：试日，萧鄴替，差右丞孔温裕权判。
现代文：考试的那一天，萧邺的替差由右丞孔温裕暂时掌管。
English: On the day of the exam, Xiao Yao's stand-in was temporarily taken over by the right-hand man, Kong Wenyu.

古文：五月庚午朔。
现代文：五月初一为庚午日。
English: The first day of May is Geng Wu Day.

古文：辛未，敕检校尚书左仆射、守左羽林军统军、御史大夫张直方贬康州司马同正，以其部下为盗故也。
现代文：五月初二，敕令：检校尚书左仆射、兼左羽林军统军、御史大夫张直方贬职为康州司马同正一一一因为他的部下为盗的缘故。
English: On the second day of the month of May, the imperial edict was issued: Zhang Naofang, the inspector of the school, the left-hand gunner of the inspection, and the general of the left-wing forest army, was demoted to the position of Kangzhou Sima Tongzheng because his subordinates were thieves.

古文：乙亥，国子司业韦殷裕于阁门进状，论淑妃弟郭敬述阴事。
现代文：五月初六，国子司业韦殷裕在阁门进奉文状，陈奏郭淑妃的弟弟郭敬述隐私之事。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Wei Yinyu, the Secretary of State for Industry and Commerce, presented a letter at the mansion gate. Chen Guo, Guo Shufei's younger brother, described the matter of privacy.

古文：上怒甚，即日下京兆府决杀殷裕，籍没其家。殷裕妻崔氏，音声人郑羽客、王燕客，婢微娘、红子等九人配入掖庭。
现代文：皇上非常生气，当天就把韦殷裕抓进京兆府处死，韦殷裕的妻子崔氏，歌伎郑羽客、王燕客，婢女微娘、红子等九人被发配到宫中掖庭为奴。
English: The emperor was very angry. On the same day, he arrested Wei Yin Yu and sent him to Beijing to be executed. Nine people, including Wei Yin Yu's wife Cui, the kabuki actors Zheng Yuake and Wang Yanake, the maid Weizhong, and Hongzi, were sent to the imperial court as slaves.

古文：阁门使田献銛夺紫，配于桥陵，阁门司阎敬直决十五，配南衙，为受殷裕文状故也。
现代文：阁门使田献钅舌剥夺紫袍，发配到桥陵，阁门司阎敬直处杖刑十五下，发配到南衙一一一因为接受了韦殷裕文状的缘故。
English: The palace gate ordered Tian Xian to be stripped of his purple robe and sent to Qiaoling. The palace gatekeeper Yan Jing was sentenced to 15 strokes of the cane and sent to Nanlu for accepting Wei Yinyu's letter.

古文：给事中杜裔休贬端州司马。
现代文：给事中杜裔休贬职为端州司马。
English: As a result of the incident, Du Zihong was dismissed and demoted to the position of Danzhou Sima.

古文：中书舍人崔沆循州司户，殷裕妻兄也；太仆少卿崔元应州司户，殷裕妻父也；前河阴院官韦君卿为爱州崇平尉，殷裕季父也。
现代文：中书舍人崔沆贬职为循州司户一一一他是韦殷裕的妻兄；太仆少卿崔元应贬为州司户，他是韦殷裕的岳父；前河阴院官韦君卿贬为爱州崇平县尉一一一他是韦殷裕的叔父。
English: Cui Yan, the chief of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was demoted to the position of county magistrate of Xuzhou County - he was Wei Yinyu's brother-in-law; Cui Yuan, Wei Yinyu's father-in-law, was demoted to the position of county magistrate of Xuzhou County - he was Wei Yinyu's brother-in-law; and Wei Junqing, a former member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was demoted to the position of lieutenant of Aizhou County - he was Wei Yinyu's uncle.

古文：以前大理正万俟镕为国子司业，前兴元少尹冯彭为普州刺史，前大理正阳琯为昌州刺史。
现代文：任命前大理正万俟为国子司业，前兴元少尹冯彭为普州刺史，前大理正阳王官为昌州刺史。
English: Former Grand Prince Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan was appointed as the Secretary of State for Industry, former Grand Prince Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan as the Secretary of State for Industry, former Grand Prince Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan as the Secretary of State for Industry, former Grand Prince Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan as the Secretary of State for Industry, former Grand Duke Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan as the Secretary of State for Industry, former Grand Duke Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan as the Secretary of State for Industry, and former Grand Duke Zheng Zhengyang Wangguan as the Secretary of State for Industry.

古文：丙子，制开府仪同三司、检校尚书左仆射、兼襄州刺史、御史大夫、充山南西道节度观察等使于琮可正议大夫、守普王傅，分司东都。
现代文：五月初七，决定开府仪同三司、检校尚书左仆射、兼襄州刺史、御史大夫、充任山南西道节度使、观察使于琮任正议大夫、署理普王太傅，分管东都事务。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, it was decided to set up the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the

古文：辛巳，敕尚书左丞李当贬道州刺史，吏部侍郎王珮贬漳州刺史，左散骑常侍李郁贬贺州刺史，前中书舍人封彦卿贬潮州司户，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰张裼贬封州司马，右谏议大夫杨塾贬和州司户，工部尚书严祁贬郴州刺史，给事中李贶蕲州刺史，给事中张铎藤州刺史，左金吾卫大将军、充左街使李敬伸儋州司户，前青州刺史、平卢军节度使于涓为凉王府长史，分司东都；前湖南观察使于瑰为袁州刺史。
现代文：五月十二日，敕令：尚书左丞李当贬为道州刺史，吏部侍郎王王风贬为漳州刺史；左散骑常侍李郁贬为贺州刺史；前中书舍人封彦卿贬为潮州司户 翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰张裼贬为封州司马；右谏议大夫杨塾贬为和州司户；工部尚书严祁贬为郴州刺史；给事中李贶贬为蕲州刺史；给事中张铎贬为藤州刺史，左金吾卫大将军、充任左街使李敬伸贬为儋州司户。前青州刺史、平卢军节度使于涓任凉王府长史，分掌东都事务。前湖南观察使于腢任袁州刺史。
English: On May 12th, the imperial edict was issued: Shangshu Zu Rong Li Dang was demoted to Daozhou sashimi, and Wang Wang Feng, the attendant of the cadre department, was demoted to the sashimi of Daozhou; Zuo Zangjia, the attendant of the cavalry department, Li Yu, was demoted to the sashimi of Hezhou; the former middle school scribe, Fuhiko-kyo, was demoted to the sashimi of Chaozhou; Hanlin Baccalaureate, Zongji, the attendant of the military department, and Zhizhi Zang, were demoted to

古文：涓、瑰，琮之兄也。
现代文：于涓、于腢都是于琮的哥哥。
English: Yu Yao and Yu Yao are both Yu Yao's brothers.

古文：于蔼、于蔇亦配流。
现代文：于蔼、于艹既也被发配、流放。
English: Both Yu A-Ren and Yu Yao-Chen were also exiled.

古文：自李当已下，皆于琮之亲党也，为韦保衡所逐。
现代文：以上从李当以下都是于琮的同党，是被韦保衡赶走的。
English: All of the above, from Li Dang on down, were Yu Yao's fellow party members who were driven out by Wei Baoheng.

古文：以天德防御使、检校左散骑常侍段文楚为云州刺史、大同军防御使。
现代文：任命天德防御使、检校左散骑常侍段文楚为云州刺史、大同军防御使。
English: Appointed the Tiande defense envoy, the inspection of the school left the straggler, the regular attendant, Duan Wenchu, as the history of Yunnan, and the defense envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：六月，义成军节度使、检校工部尚书杜慆奏：当管颍州僧道百姓举留刺史宗回，敕曰： 回清干临人，自有月限，方藉绥辑，未议替移。 
现代文：六月，义成军节度使、检校工部尚书杜蝕上奏说：所管辖的颍州僧、道、百姓挽留刺史宗回。敕令说 ：宗回治理百姓公正干练，任期自有时限，正要借助他，使地方安定和睦，还没有考虑替换他。 
English: In June, the festival envoy of the Yicheng Army and the inspection department of the inspection department, Shangshu Du Xi, said in his report: the monks, Taoists and people of Zhangzhou under his jurisdiction should retain Zongbei. The imperial decree said: Zongbei is a fair and capable ruler of the people, his term of office is time-limited, he is to be used to stabilize and harmonize the region, and he has not yet been considered to replace him.

古文：六月，中书门下奏：
现代文：六月，中书门下省奏说：
English: In June, China's Ministry of Education said:

古文：今月十七日，延英面奉圣旨，令诫约天下州府，应有逃亡户口，其赋税差科，不得摊配见在人户上者。
现代文： 本月十七日，在延英殿当面奉皇上圣旨，令我们告诫约束天下的州府，所有逃亡在外的人口，他们的赋税、徭役不得向现在在籍的人户摊派。
English: On the 17th of this month, in the presence of Emperor Yan Ying, we presented the Emperor's edict, ordering us to admonish and restrain the state capitals of the world, and all the people who have fled abroad, that their taxes and forced labor may not be apportioned to the households of those who are currently registered.

古文：伏以诸道州府，或兵戈之后，灾沴之余，户口逃亡，田畴荒废，天不敷佑，人多艰危。
现代文：因各道的州府，有的经过兵乱，遭受灾祸之后，人口逃亡在外，田地荒芜。天不护佑，人们的艰难很多。
English: Due to the provincial capitals of various provinces, some of which have suffered disasters after military conflicts, the population has fled abroad, and the fields have been deserted.

古文：乡闾屡困于征徭，帑藏因兹而耗竭，遂使从来经费色额，太半空系簿书。
现代文：乡间百姓屡屡被赋税徭役所困扰，钱物因此而消耗殆尽，便使得一向有的经费名目，大半只是空写在簿册文书上。
English: Rural people are often plagued by tax collectors, and money and goods are exhausted as a result. As a result, the names of funds that have always existed are mostly just written in blank on books and documents.

古文：缓征敛则阙于供须，促期限则迫于贫苦。
现代文：征收宽缓则供给缺乏，期限急促又逼使人民陷于贫苦。
English: If the levy is relaxed, there will be a lack of supply, and the time limit will be too short, forcing the people to fall into poverty.

古文：言念凋弊，劳乃忧勤，不降明文，孰知圣念。
现代文：想到国家的凋敝，辛劳中却更增忧虑，不颁降明文，谁又能察知圣上的心情呢！
English: To think of the withering away of the country, but to increase anxiety in the midst of toil, and not to issue a decree, who can detect the holy heart?

古文：其亡户口赋税及杂差科等，须有承佃户人，方可依前应役。
现代文：那些逃亡在外的人口的赋税及各种差役，必须有了承租的佃户，才能按原先一样征收相应的赋役。
English: In order to collect the taxes and all kinds of taxes from those who have fled abroad, it is necessary to have a tenant in order to collect the corresponding taxes as before.

古文：如将阙税课额，摊于见在人户，则转成逋债，重困黎元。
现代文：如果把缺交的赋税数额，分摊到现在的人户身上，就会变成拖欠的债务，给百姓带来严重的困扰。
English: If the amount of unpaid taxes is distributed among the current households, it will become delinquent debt, bringing serious troubles to the people.

古文：或富者有连阡之田，贫者无立锥之地，欲令均一，固在公平。
现代文：有的富人拥有阡陌相连的大片田地，穷人却连立锥之地都没有。想让他们平均些，当然是公平合理的。
English: Some rich people own vast tracts of land connected to each other, while poor people do not even have enough land to erect a cone. It is, of course, fair and reasonable to want them to be more equal.

古文：若令狡猾之徒，得以升降由己，望其完葺，不亦难乎！
现代文：如果让狡猾的人能够由着自己来决定贫富，想要把事情办好不是太难了吗！
English: Wouldn't it be too difficult to get things done if cunning people were allowed to decide for themselves whether to be rich or poor?

古文：全由长吏竭诚，方使疲甿渐泰。
现代文：全要由官吏们竭诚办事，才能使疲惫的农民逐渐安定。
English: It is up to the officials to do their best in order to gradually stabilize the exhausted farmers.

古文：臣等商量，令诸道州府准此条疏，应有逃亡户口税赋并杂色差科等，并不得辄更摊配于见存人户之上。
现代文：臣等商量，命令各道的州府按照这个条令，所有逃亡在外的人，他们的赋税和各种差役，不得随意摊派给现存的人户身上。
English: The ministers discussed and ordered the prefectural governments of all provinces to follow this regulation. All fugitives, their taxes and all kinds of dispatches should not be arbitrarily apportioned to existing households.

古文：务设法招携，多方抚御，乘兹丰稔，重获昭苏。
现代文：必须设法招引逃亡者回来，从各方面抚慰、安置他们，乘着这丰收的年成，重新获得生机。
English: We must try to lure the fugitives back, soothe and settle them in all aspects, and take advantage of this bumper harvest to regain vitality.

古文：苟致安宁，自当迁陟，不遵诏令，必举典刑。
现代文：如能达到地方安宁，自然应当提拔有关的官员；如果不按照诏令办事，必须处以刑罚。 
English: If local tranquility can be achieved, the relevant officials should naturally be promoted; if they do not act in accordance with the edict, they must be punished.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从所奏。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七月，以前义昌军节度使卢简方为太仆卿。
现代文：七月，任命前昌义军节度使卢简方为太仆卿。
English: In July, the Qianchang Rebel Army Festival was appointed to make Lu Jianfang the Great Servant of the Emperor.

古文：十二月，以振武节度李国昌为检校右仆射、云州刺史、大同军防御等使。
现代文：十二月，任命振武军节度使李国昌为检校右仆射、云州刺史、大同军防御使等职。
English: In December, the Zhenwu Army appointed Li Guochang as the school inspector's right-hand man, the governor of Yunnan Province, and the defense officer of the Datong Army.

古文：国昌恃功颇横，专杀长吏，朝廷不能平，乃移镇云中。
现代文：李国昌仗恃功劳，颇为骄横。随便杀害官吏，朝廷无法驾驭，才调他去镇守云中。
English: Li Guochang was proud of his achievements. He killed officials at will, and the imperial court could not control him, so he was transferred to the town of Yunzhong.

古文：国昌称病辞军务，乃以太仆卿卢简方检校刑部尚书、云州刺史，充大同军防御等使。
现代文：李国昌以患病为借口辞去军职，朝廷便派太仆卿卢简方为检校刑部尚书、云州刺史，充任大同军防御使。
English: When Li Guochang resigned from the military on the pretext of illness, the imperial court sent his manservant, Lu Jianfang, to serve as the inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department, the inspector of Yunnan Province, and the defense envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：上召简方于思政殿，谓之曰： 卿以沧州节镇，屈转大同。
现代文：皇上在思政殿召见卢简方，对他说： 你以沧州节度使的地位，调动而屈任大同的官职。
English: The emperor summoned Lu Jianfang at Shizheng Palace and said to him: You have been transferred to Datong's official position as the Cangzhou governor.

古文：然朕以沙陀、羌、浑挠乱边鄙，以卿曾在云中，惠及部落，且忍屈为朕此行，具达朕旨，安慰国昌，勿令有所猜嫌也。 
现代文：然而我国沙陀、羌、浑等族扰乱边境，考虑到你曾在云中任职，给过这些部落好处，暂时忍受委屈为我走这一遭，全面地传达我的意图，安慰李国昌，不要令他有什么猜忌嫌隙。 
English: However, considering that you once served in the clouds and gave benefits to these tribes, temporarily bear the wrongs and take this trouble for me, comprehensively convey my intentions, comfort Li Guochang, and do not let him have any suspicions.

古文：是月，李国昌小男克用杀云中防御使段文楚，据云州，自称防御留后。
现代文：当月，李国昌的幼子李克用杀害云中防御使段文楚，占据云州，自称为防御留后。
English: In the same month, Li Guochang's youngest son Li Ke used to kill the defense commander of Yunzhong, Duan Wenchu, to occupy Yunnan, and claimed to be the defender.

古文：制追谥宣宗为元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝。
现代文：决定为宣宗追加谥号为元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝。
English: It was decided that Emperor Xuanzong's additional title would be Yuan Sheng Zi Ming Chengwu Xianwen Rui Zhi Zhang Ren Shencong Xing Da Da Xiao Emperor.

古文：十四年春正月丙寅朔。
现代文：咸通十四年春，正月初一为丙寅日。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of Hamdang Tong, the first day of the first month was Hsin Yin Day.

古文：御史中丞韦蟾奏：应诸州刺史除授，正衙辞谢后托故陈牒请假，实为容易。
现代文：御史中丞韦蟾上奏说 ：所有各州的刺史授官，在正殿拜受谢恩之后，再借故陈文请假实在是容易。
English: Senior Vice-Minister of History Wei Wei said, "It is very easy to take leave of absence from the office of Vice-Minister of History in all the prefectures after receiving thanks in the main hall.

古文：近日多因请假，便归私家，既犯条章，颇乖礼敬。
现代文：从今以后如果确有大家都知道缘故，请假三日以上，不在陈文告假的范围之内。
English: From now on, if there is indeed a reason that everyone knows, taking more than three days off is not within the scope of Chen Wen's notice.

古文：自今已后，望准故事，如未朝谢，须于都亭驿。
现代文：所有朝内外在京师授官的官员，都应该立即向朝廷谢恩上任；如果遇到假日，应当暂时在都亭驿住下等候。
English: All officials, both inside and outside the imperial court, who were appointed in Beijing, should immediately thank the imperial court for their appointment; if there is a holiday, they should temporarily stay in the capital and wait.

古文：如违越，台司勘当申奏。 
现代文：如果违反期限超过期限，台司查明后应当向朝廷申奏。 
English: If the violation of the time limit exceeds the time limit, the directorate shall report to the Imperial Court after investigation.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛未，以云、朔暴乱，代北骚动，赐卢简方诏曰： 李国昌久怀忠赤，显著功劳，朝廷亦三授土疆，两移旄节，其为宠遇，实寡比伦。
现代文：正月初六，因为云中、朔方发生暴乱，引起代北骚动，皇上向卢简方下达诏令说 ：李国昌久怀赤胆忠心，功劳显著，朝廷也三次授予他管辖疆土的大权，两次征调他的军队，他所受到的恩宠，能和他相比的确实少见。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because of the riots that occurred in Yunzhong and Shuo, causing turmoil in the north of the country, the emperor issued a decree to Lu Jian saying: Li Guochang has been loyal for a long time and has made remarkable achievements. The court has also granted him the power to govern the territory three times, and twice conscripted his army. The grace he has received is truly rare compared to him.

古文：昨者征发兵师，又令克让将领，惟嘉节义，同绝嫌疑。
现代文：昨日征调他的军队，又命令李克让率领，希望嘉奖他的节义，双方都弃绝嫌隙猜忌。
English: Yesterday, he conscripted his troops and ordered Li Kejian to lead them, hoping to reward him for his bravery. Both sides renounced suspicion.

古文：近知大同军不安，杀害段文楚，推国昌小男克用主领兵权。
现代文：近来知道大同军不安定，杀害了段文楚，推戴李国昌的小儿子李克用执掌兵权。
English: Recently, knowing that the Datong army was unstable, he killed Duan Wenchu and promoted Li Kejun, the youngest son of Li Guochang, to hold military power.

古文：事虽出于一时，心岂忘于长久？
现代文：事情虽然发生在一时之间，难道心中是长久忘得了的？
English: Although it happened in an instant, is it long forgotten in the heart?

古文：段文楚若实刻剥，自结怨嫌，但可申论，必行朝典。
现代文：段文楚如果确实苛刻、侵夺，自己结下了仇怨嫌隙，只能向朝廷申奏，一定会按照朝廷的刑典处置。
English: If Duan Wenchu is indeed harsh and usurping, and he has forged a grudge, he can only complain to the court, and he will be dealt with according to the court's criminal code.

古文：遽至伤残性命，刳剔肌肤，惨毒凭凌，殊可惊骇。
现代文：竟至于残害性命，挖剥肌肤，惨遭凌虐，极可惊骇。
English: As for the brutalization of life, the gouging of skin, the brutal abuse, it is very shocking.

古文：况忠烈之后，节义之门，致兹横亡，尤悚观听。
现代文：何况段文楚这样的横死，视听中尤其令人恐怖。
English: What's more, such a violent death of Duan Wenchu is especially terrifying in audio-visual.

古文：若克用暂勿主兵务，束手待朝廷除人，则事出权宜，不足猜虑。
现代文：如果李克用暂时不主持军事，束手等待朝廷派人前往，则事情只是偶然临时发生，不值得做别的猜疑忧虑。
English: If Li Ke did not preside over the military for the time being, and waited for the imperial court to send someone, then the matter was just a coincidence, and it was not worth worrying about.

古文：若便图军柄，欲奄有大同，则患系久长，故难依允。
现代文：如果马上就图谋军权，想要占据大同，就会带来长久的祸患，因而也是难以依从的。
English: If you immediately seek military power and want to occupy Datong, it will bring long-term disaster, so it is difficult to follow.

古文：料国昌输忠效节，必当已有指挥。
现代文：估计李国昌献纳忠诚，效命节义，必定已经有所安排。
English: It is estimated that Li Guochang has already made some arrangements to offer loyalty, efficiency and sacrifice.

古文：知卿两任云中，恩及国昌爷子，敬惮怀感，不同常人。
现代文：知道你两次在云中任职，恩惠施及于李国昌父子，他们对你恭敬畏惧，心怀感激，不同于对待一般人。
English: Knowing that you have served in the clouds twice, you have bestowed favors on Li Guochang and his son. They treat you with respect, awe and gratitude, which is different from how you treat ordinary people.

古文：宜悚与书题，深陈祸福，殷勤晓喻，劈析指宜。切令大节无亏，勿使前功并弃。 
现代文：应当严肃地写信给他，深刻地指出利害祸福，恳切地让他明白道理，分析应该怎么做才是正确的，千万叫他不要做有损于大节的事，不要使前功尽弃。 
English: It is necessary to write to him seriously, profoundly point out the advantages and disadvantages, earnestly let him understand the truth, analyze what should be done is correct, and never ask him not to do things that are detrimental to the festival, and not to abandon his previous achievements.

古文：简方准诏谕之，国昌不奉诏。
现代文：卢简方遵照诏书的意思晓谕李国昌，李国昌不接受诏令。
English: Lu Jianfang instructed Li Guochang in accordance with the intention of the edict, and Li Guochang did not accept the edict.

古文：乃诏太原节度使崔彦昭、幽州节度使张公素帅师讨之。
现代文：皇上便下诏，令太原节度使崔彦昭、幽州节度使张公素率军讨伐李国昌。
English: The emperor then issued an edict, ordering the Taiyuan Sect to send Cui Yan Zhao and the Yuzhou Sect to send Zhang Gongsu to lead an army to fight Li Guochang.

古文：三月，以新除大同军使卢简方为单于大都护、振武节度、麟胜等州观察等使。
现代文：三月，任命新授大同军防御使卢简方为单于大都护、振武军节度使、麟胜等州观察使。
English: In March, Lu Jianfang, the newly-awarded defense envoy of the Datong Army, was appointed as the provincial observation envoy of Datu Protection, Zhenwu Army and Lin Sheng.

古文：时李国昌据振武。
现代文：当时李国昌据有振武军。
English: At that time, Li Guochang had the Zhenwu army.

古文：简方至岚州而卒。
现代文：卢简方到达岚州而去世。
English: Lu Jianfang died after arriving in Zhangzhou.

古文：自是沙陀侵掠代北诸军镇。
现代文：从此以后，沙陀族侵占、掠夺代北地区各军镇。
English: From then on, the Shado people invaded and plundered all the military towns in the northern region of Dai.

古文：庚午，诏两街僧于凤翔法门寺迎佛骨，是日天雨黄土遍地。
现代文：三月初六，皇上诏令两街司的僧侣在凤翔法门寺迎接佛骨。这天，天上散落黄土，遍地都是。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the emperor ordered the monks of the two streets to meet the Buddhist bones at Fengxiang Famen Temple. On this day, the sky was scattered with loess, and it was everywhere.

古文：四月八日，佛骨至京，自开远门达安福门，彩棚夹道，念佛之音震地。
现代文：四月八日，佛骨到达京师，从开远门到安福门，道路两边都是彩棚，念佛的声音震动大地。
English: On April 8th, the Buddha's bones arrived in Beijing. From Kaiyuan Gate to Anfu Gate, both sides of the road were full of stalls. The sound of chanting the Buddha's name shook the earth.

古文：上登安福门迎礼之，迎入内道场三日，出于京城诸寺。
现代文：皇上登上安福门顶礼迎接，迎入皇宫内道场供奉三天，然后出宫在京城各寺庙供奉。
English: The emperor ascended the Anfu Gate to be greeted with a grand salute, welcomed into the dojo in the imperial palace for three days of worship, and then left the palace to worship at various temples in the capital.

古文：士女云合，威仪盛饰，古无其比。
现代文：士女多如云彩，威严的礼仪、隆盛的装饰，即使古代也比不上。
English: The number of men and women is as numerous as the clouds. The dignified etiquette and rich decoration, even in ancient times, cannot be matched.

古文：制曰： 朕以寡德，缵承鸿业，十有四年。
现代文：皇上敕令说： 我以寡德之人，继承宏伟的基业，已经十四年。
English: The Emperor's edict said: I have been a widower for fourteen years, inheriting a magnificent inheritance.

古文：顷属寇猖狂，王师未息。
现代文：近年贼寇猖狂，王师战斗不息。
English: In recent years, banditry has been rampant, and Wang Shih has been fighting ceaselessly.

古文：朕忧勤在位，爱育生灵，遂乃尊崇释教，至重玄门，迎请真身，为万姓祈福。
现代文：我在皇位上深感忧虑，为爱护百姓，于是尊崇佛教；极其重视佛门，因而迎请佛祖真身，为万千百姓祈求幸福。
English: When I was on the throne, I was deeply worried. In order to love and protect the people, I revered Buddhism. I attached great importance to the gate of Buddha, so I welcomed the true body of Buddha and prayed for the happiness of thousands of people.

古文：今观睹之众，隘塞路歧。
现代文：今日观看的人群充塞了道路。
English: Crowds watching today clogged the roads.

古文：载念狴牢，寝兴在虑，嗟我黎人，陷于刑辟。
现代文：念及牢狱中的囚徒。昼夜都在忧虑，叹惜我的黎民，竟陷身于刑罚之中。
English: Remember them that are in prison, and them that are mistreated night and day: spare my people, which are in the midst of their punishment.

古文：况渐当暑毒，系于缧绁，或积幽凝滞，有伤和气，或关连追扰，有妨农务。
现代文：何况现在逐渐处于酷暑，被绳索拘系着。有的长期幽禁，和人们阻隔，有伤祥和之气；有的受株连而被追究、困扰，有碍农务。
English: What's more, they are now gradually in the sweltering heat and are being restrained by ropes. Some of them have been confined for a long time, separated from the people, and have hurtful feelings; some have been investigated and troubled by the company, and have hindered agricultural work.

古文：京畿及天下州府见禁囚徒，除十恶忤逆、故意杀人、官典犯赃、合造毒药、放火持仗、开发坟墓外，余罪轻重节级递减一等。
现代文：京师地区以及天下各州府被囚禁的罪犯，除了十恶不赦的忤逆大罪、故意杀人、官员贪赃、制造毒药、放火抢劫、挖坟盗墓的之外，其余的罪犯按照情节的轻重依次递减一等。
English: Criminals imprisoned in the Beijing-Shi'an region and all the world's prefectures, except for the most heinous crimes of high treason, intentional homicide, official corruption, making poison, arson and robbery, and grave robbing, the rest of the criminals are ranked in descending order according to the severity of the circumstances.

古文：其京城军镇，限两日内疏理讫闻奏；天下州府，敕到三日内疏理闻奏。 
现代文：京城地区的那些军镇，限两天之内清查完毕上奏；全国其他州府，敕令到达后三天之内清查上奏。 
English: Those military towns in the capital region must complete the investigation within two days; other state capitals across the country must complete the investigation within three days after the royal order arrives.

古文：以吏部侍郎萧仿为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎萧亻放为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Xiao Yifang, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the attendant of the military department and given the title of Tongping.

古文：六月，帝不豫。
现代文：六月，皇上身体不适。
English: In June, the Emperor became unwell.

古文：七月癸亥朔。
现代文：七月初一为癸亥日。
English: The first day of July is the day of the boar.

古文：戊寅，疾大渐。
现代文：七月十六日，皇上病势沉重。
English: On July 16, the Emperor fell seriously ill.

古文：庚午，制立普王俨为皇太子，权勾当军国政事。
现代文：七月十八日，决定立普王李俨为皇太子，暂时处理军国政务。
English: On July 18th, it was decided to make King Lihong of Pu the crown prince and temporarily handle military affairs.

古文：辛巳，遗诏曰：
现代文：七月十九日，颁发遗诏说：
English: On July 19, he issued a posthumous edict saying:

古文：朕祗事九庙，君临四海，夕惕如厉，宵分靡宁，必求政化之源，思建大中之道。
现代文： 我恭敬地事奉宗庙，统治四海，勤勉谨慎如同随时会有祸患一样，连深夜都不得安宁，一心要寻求政令教化的根本，想建立正大中庸的王道。
English: I respectfully serve the ancestral temple, rule the four seas, diligently and cautiously, as if there will be a disaster at any time, even late at night, I am not at peace, I am determined to seek the root of the edification of the edict, and I want to establish the royal road of moderation.

古文：至于怀柔夷貊，偃戢干戈，皆以德绥，亦自驯致，冀清净之为理，庶治平之可臻。
现代文：至于对外夷实行怀柔，平息战乱，都是以德政实行安抚，也是因他们自己驯顺而得，希望清静无为地进行治理，希望达到国家有序，天下太平。
English: As for appeasing the foreign invaders and quelling the war, they were pacified by the German government, and they were also pacified by their own obedience. They hoped to govern quietly and without doing anything, and hoped to achieve a well-ordered country and a peaceful world.

古文：自秋已来，忽尔婴疹，坐朝既阙，逾旬未瘳。
现代文：自从入秋以来，我忽然染病，不能按时上朝理事，十多天仍不见好。
English: Since the beginning of autumn, I suddenly fell ill and was unable to attend the meeting of the board of directors on time. I have not been well for more than ten days.

古文：六疾斯侵，万机多旷，医和无验，以至弥留。
现代文：六气太旺引发的疾病侵害身体，致使各种事务大多荒废，医生的治疗没有效果，致使即将辞世。唉！
English: Illnesses caused by excessive qi invade the body, causing all kinds of affairs to be mostly wasted, and doctors' treatments to be ineffective, leading to imminent death. Alas!

古文：呜呼！数哉有穷，圣贤之所必同，明于斯言，是为达节。
现代文：人的运数是有限度的，圣贤也必定一样，明白了这句话，这就叫作有通达的气概度量。
English: There is a limit to the number of operations a person can perform, and sages must also do the same. Understand this sentence, and this is called a comprehensive temperament measurement.

古文：载申顾命，式叶典谟。
现代文：再次申令临终的遗命，这形式合于典则。
English: Once again, it is in accordance with canon law to issue a last will and testament.

古文：皇太子权勾当军国事俨，性禀宽和，生知忠孝，德苞睿哲，圣表徇齐，必能扬祖宗之重光，荷邦家之丕构。
现代文：暂时处理军国事务的皇太子李俨，性情、禀赋宽厚和平，生来就懂得忠孝，德行中包含着智慧明哲，聪明早慧表现在外表上，必定能发扬祖宗日月一般的光辉，承担国家的大业。
English: The crown prince Li Lan, who is temporarily in charge of military affairs, is generous and peaceful by nature and endowment. He is loyal and filial by nature. His virtue contains wisdom and sagacity, and his wisdom and sagacity are manifested on the outside. He will surely be able to carry forward the brilliance of the sun and moon of his ancestors and undertake the great cause of the country.

古文：宜令所司具礼，于柩前即皇帝位。
现代文：应当命令主管的府衙准备礼仪大典，在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: The prefect in charge should be ordered to prepare a grand ceremony, and the emperor should be enthroned in front of the coffin.

古文：以司空、门下侍郎、平章事韦保衡摄冢宰。
现代文：任命司空、门下侍郎、平章政事韦保衡代行宰相职权。
English: He appointed Siku, his attendant, and Taira no Sho Seiji Wei Boheng as acting chancellors.

古文：军国务殷，岂可久旷，况易月之制，行之自古，皇帝宜三日而听政，二十七日释服。
现代文：军国的事务繁重，怎能长久空缺。何况年中由新皇即位的事，自古以来就实行过。皇帝应当三天以后处理朝政，二十七天以后除去丧服。
English: The affairs of the military state are onerous, so how can there be a long vacancy? What's more, the enthronement of a new emperor in the middle of the year has been practiced since ancient times. The emperor should deal with the government of the dynasty after three days, and remove the mourning clothes after 27 days.

古文：诸道节度、观察、团练、防御等使，及监军、诸州刺史，受寄至重，并不得离任赴哀。
现代文：各道的节度使、观察使、团练使、防御使等，以及监军、各州刺史，所受的托付极其重大，都不得离职前来奔丧。
English: The envoys of each province, the envoys of observation, the envoys of regimental training, and the envoys of defense, as well as the supervisors of the army and the historians of each province, are entrusted with extremely important tasks, and they are not allowed to leave their posts and come to the funeral.

古文：文武常参官朝晡之临，十五举音。宫中当临者，非时无得擅哭。
现代文：文武常参官员朝暮哭吊，举哀乐十五日，宫中前往吊祭的人，不到一定的时候不得随便啼哭。
English: On the fifteenth day of the mourning, those who go to the hanging ceremony in the palace are not allowed to cry until a certain time.

古文：天下人吏百姓告哀后出临三日，皆释服，勿禁食肉、饮酒、婚姻、祭祀，释服之后无禁当举。
现代文：全国各地的官员百姓，在朝廷宣布皇帝归天的消息以后出门吊唁三日，然后除去丧服。不得禁止吃肉、饮酒、婚嫁、祭祀的事。除下丧服以后，不要禁止该做的事。
English: Officials and people from all over the country, after the imperial court announced the news of the emperor's death, went out to mourn for three days, and then removed the mourning clothes. It is not forbidden to eat meat, drink alcohol, get married, or perform religious rites. After removing the mourning clothes, do not prohibit what should be done.

古文：薄葬之礼，宜遵汉魏之文。
现代文：应当遵照汉、魏的制度举行薄葬的丧礼。
English: A light funeral should be held in accordance with the Han and Wei systems.

古文：其山陵制度，切在俭约，并不得以金银锦绣文饰丧具。
现代文：陵墓的体制规模，重要的是节俭，不得用金银锦绣装饰丧葬用物。
English: The system scale of the mausoleum, it is important to be frugal, not to use gold and silver brocade to decorate funerary objects.

古文：五坊鹰犬等，除搜狩外，余并解放。
现代文：五坊的鹰犬，除了狩猎用的，其余的全部放掉。
English: The eagle dogs in Wufang, except those used for hunting, should all be released.

古文：其医官段璲、赵、苻虔休、马及等并释放。
现代文：医官段王遂、赵王己、苻虔休、马及等人，均予释放。
English: Medical officers Duan Wang Sui, Zhao Wang Ji, Zou Qianxiu, Ma and others were all released.

古文：恭惠骄奢，贤良贬窜。凶竖当国，憸人满朝。
现代文：你们这些将相卿士、朝内朝外的官员，应当竭力尽忠，辅佐我的继承人，送走旧君，侍奉新皇，不要违背我的心愿。
English: Those of you who will be ministers, nobles, and officials inside and outside the court, should do your best to be loyal, assist my successor, send away the old prince, and serve the new emperor, and do not go against my wishes.

古文：奸雄乘衅，贻谋道消。僖宗僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝讳儇，懿宗第五子，母曰惠安皇后王氏。
现代文：当天，皇上在咸宁殿驾崩，享年四十一岁，百官奉上谥号为睿文昭圣恭惠孝皇帝，庙号懿宗。咸通十五年二月，安葬于简陵。僖宗，谥号惠圣恭定孝皇帝，名李儇，是懿宗皇帝的第五个儿子，母亲惠安皇后，姓王。
English: On the same day, the emperor passed away at the age of forty-one at Xianning Palace. The officials gave him the posthumous name of Emperor Rui Wen Zhao Sheng Gong Hui Xiao, and the temple name of Emperor Xizong. In February of the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Xian Tong, he was buried in the Jianling Mausoleum. Emperor Xizong, posthumous name of Emperor Hui Sheng Gong Ding Xiao, surnamed Li Xi, was the fifth son of Emperor Xizong, and his mother was Empress Hui An, surnamed Wang.

古文：咸通三年五月八日生于东内。
现代文：咸通三年五月八日生于东内。
English: Hamdong was born on May 8th, 2003 in Dong Nai.

古文：初封普王，名俨。
现代文：最初封普王，原名李俨。
English: Originally named Fong Pu Wang, his original name was Li Yu.

古文：十四年七月，懿宗大渐。
现代文：咸通十四年七月，懿宗皇帝病势沉重。
English: In July of the 14th year of Hamdang, Emperor Yeongjong fell seriously ill.

古文：其月十八日，制曰： 朕守大器之重，居兆人之上，日慎一日，如履如临。
现代文：当月十八日，懿宗下诏： 我以守护宗庙神器的重任，居于亿兆人民之上，一天比一天小心谨慎，如履薄冰，如临深渊。
English: On the 18th day of that month, Emperor Taizong issued the following edict: I, with the important duty of guarding the sacred treasures of the ancestral temple, stand above the billions and trillions of people, and I am more and more cautious every day, as if I were treading on thin ice, as if I were approaching the abyss.

古文：旰昃劳怀，寝兴思理，涉道犹浅，导代未孚。
现代文：我夜以继日地劳神怀想，白天黑夜都在考虑治理国家的事，但涉足于治道还浅，疏导、教化还没有被人们所信赖。
English: Day and night, I have been thinking about the governance of the country, but I have not yet set foot on the path of governance, and people have not yet trusted my guidance and enlightenment.

古文：而摄养乖方，寒暑成疠，实有虑于阙政，且无暇于怡神。
现代文：而保养自己却不合于良法，冷热交感使我患了重病，实在是因为忧虑着政务的缺失，没有时间来使精神怡悦。
English: But taking care of myself is not in accordance with the good law. Cold and hot sympathies have made me seriously ill. It is really because I am worried about the lack of government affairs and have no time to make my spirit happy.

古文：恙未少瘳，日加浸剧，万务凡总，须有主张。
现代文：病情没有一点儿好转，只是一天比一天严重，而所有事情堆积在一起，必须有人主持。
English: It's not getting any better, it's just getting worse day by day, and everything's piling up and someone has to be in charge.

古文：考思旧章，谋于卿士，思阐鸿业，式建皇储。
现代文：考虑、思索旧的规章，需要向大臣们请教；想要开拓大业，必须确定皇帝的继承人。
English: To consider and reflect on the old regulations, it is necessary to consult the ministers; to open up the great cause, it is necessary to determine the emperor's successor.

古文：第五男普王俨改名儇，孝敬温恭，宽和博厚，日新令德，天假英姿，言皆中规，动必由礼。
现代文：朕的第五个儿子普王李俨改名为李儇，他孝顺庄重，温良谦恭，宽容和蔼，博爱仁厚，美德一天天长进，皇天赋予他英姿，说话都合乎规矩，举止必定以礼节为依据。
English: My fifth son, Pu Wang Lijun, changed his name to Lijun. He was dutiful and dignified, gentle and courteous, tolerant and kind, benevolent and benevolent, and his virtues grew day by day. The emperor gave him a heroic appearance, spoke according to rules, and his behavior must be based on etiquette.

古文：俾崇邦本，允协人心，宜立为皇太子，权勾当军国政事。
现代文：为了尊崇国家的根本，使人心融洽和谐，应当立普王为皇太子，暂时处理军国政务。
English: In order to respect the fundamentals of the country and make people's hearts harmonious and harmonious, King Lipu should be the crown prince and temporarily deal with military affairs.

古文：咨尔中外卿士，洎于腹心之臣，敬保予胤，辅成予志，各竭乃心，以安黎庶。
现代文：你们这些朝内朝外的官员，以至于心腹的大臣，都应当认真地保护我的继承人，辅佐他完成我的志向，各自竭尽你们的心力，以安定黎民百姓。
English: All of you officials inside and outside the government, including ministers who are close to him, should earnestly protect my successor, assist him in fulfilling my aspirations, and each of you should do your best to stabilize the people of Lebanon.

古文：布告中外，知朕意焉。 是日，懿宗崩。
现代文：特向朝廷内外公布、告知，让大家都了解我的心意。 当天，懿宗驾崩。
English: On that day, Emperor Taizong passed away, and I made a special announcement and announcement to the imperial court and beyond, so that everyone could understand my will.

古文：二十日，即皇帝位于柩前，时年十二。
现代文：七月二十日，普王在灵柩前即皇帝位，时年十二岁。
English: On July 20, King Pu ascended to the throne in front of the coffin at the age of 12.

古文：左军中尉刘行深、右军中尉韩文约居中执政，并封国公。
现代文：左军中尉刘行深、右军中尉韩文约住在宫中执掌朝政，都封为国公。
English: Liu Xingshen, the lieutenant of the left army, and Han Wen, the lieutenant of the right army, lived in the palace and presided over the government of the dynasty, and were both appointed as princes.

古文：八月，皇帝释服。册圣母王氏为皇太后。
现代文：八月，皇帝除去丧服，册封母亲王氏为皇太后。
English: In August, the emperor removed the mourning clothes and made Wang's mother the empress dowager.

古文：河南大水，自七月雨不止，至释服后方霁。
现代文：河南发生大水，从七月开始不停地下雨，直到皇上除下丧服之后才放晴。
English: There was a flood in Henan, and it rained incessantly from July until the emperor removed his mourning clothes.

古文：九月，守司空、门下侍郎、平章事韦保衡贬贺州刺史。
现代文：九月，暂署司空、门下侍郎、平章政事韦保衡被贬职为贺州刺史。
English: In September, Wei Baoheng, the provisional secretary of the Ku, the servant of the disciple, and the political secretary of the Taira chapter, was demoted to the position of Hezhou sashimi.

古文：以岳州刺史于琮为太子少傅，缘琮贬逐者并放还。
现代文：任命岳州刺史于琮为太子少傅，因受于琮株连而遭到贬谪放逐的全部放回。
English: He appointed Yue Zhou's son, Yu Xi, as the prince's younger brother, and all the princes who had been humiliated and exiled because of their association with Yu Xi were allowed to return.

古文：循州司户崔沆复为中书舍人，前户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士承旨郑畋为左散骑常侍，前兵部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士张裼为太子宾客，前谏议大夫高湘复为谏议大夫，前宣歙观察使杨严复为给事中。
现代文：循州司户崔沆复官为中书舍人，前户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士承旨郑畋任左散骑常侍，前兵部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士张裼为太子宾客，前谏议大夫高湘重新担任谏议大夫，前宣歙观察使杨严重新担任给事中。
English: Cui Wei, former Secretary of the State Council, was reinstated as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters; Zheng Wei, former Chamberlain of the Household, Chancellor of the Court, and Scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as the Left-Handed Cavalryman; Zhang Wei, former Chamberlain of the Household, Chancellor of the Court, and Scholar of Hanlin, was a guest of the Crown Prince; Gao Xiang, former Doctor of the Court, was reappointed as the Doctor of the Court; and Yang He, former Supervisor of the Court, was newly appointed as a member of the Court.

古文：十月，左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事刘鄴检校左仆射、同平章事，兼扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度观察副大使、知节度事。
现代文：十月，左仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事刘邺任检校左仆射、同平章事，兼扬州大都督府长史，充任淮南节度观察副大使，执掌节度使事务。
English: In October, Zuo Fuxia, a subordinate attendant, and Ping Zhang, a political officer, appointed Liu Wei as the head of the inspection of Zuo Fuxia, Tongping Zhang, and the governor of Yangzhou, and served as the deputy ambassador of Huainan Festival observation, and took charge of the festival affairs.

古文：十一月，以光禄大夫、守太子少傅、驸马都尉于琮检校尚书左仆射，兼襄州刺史、御史大夫，充山南东道节度观察等使。
现代文：十一月，任命光禄大夫、署理太子少傅、驸马都尉于琮为检校尚书左仆射，兼任襄州刺史、御史大夫，充任山南东道节度使、观察使等。
English: In November, he appointed Dr. Guang Lu, Acting Prince Junior Vice-Minister, and Lieutenant Yu Zhenma as inspectors of the school. He also served as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school.

古文：十二月，雷震。
现代文：十二月，发生雷震。
English: In December, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：义成军节度使、检校刑部尚书杜慆就加兵部尚书。
现代文：义成军节度使、检校刑部尚书杜蝕就地加授为兵部尚书。
English: The Yicheng Army's commander-in-chief ordered the inspection of the school, and the disciplinary department's disciplinary book was added to the military department's disciplinary book.

古文：乾符元年春正月辛酉朔。
现代文：乾符元年春，正月初一为辛酉日。
English: In the spring of the first year, the first day of the first month is the first day of the new year.

古文：乙丑，左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事萧仿兼右仆射。
现代文：正月初五，左仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事萧亻放兼任右仆射。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, Xiao Yifang, the left-hand servant, the servant of the disciple, and the political affairs of the Taira clan, also served as the right-hand servant.

古文：门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章事王铎检校吏部尚书、同平章事，兼汴州刺史，充宣武军节度、宋亳观察等使。
现代文：门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事王铎任检校吏部尚书、同平章事，兼任汴州刺史，充任宣武军节度使、宋亳观察使等。
English: He served as a subordinate attendant, an official of the personnel department, an official of the inspection department of the Pingzhang government, an official of the Pingzhang government, an official of the Tongping government, and also served as a scribe of Zhangzhou, a festival envoy of the Xuanwu army, a Song Dynasty observation envoy, and so on.

古文：二月，葬懿宗于简陵。
现代文：二月，把懿宗安葬在简陵。
English: In February, Emperor Taizong was buried in a simple mausoleum.

古文：三月，以河东节度使、检校尚书右仆射崔彦昭为尚书兵部侍即，充诸道盐铁转运等使。
现代文：三月，任命河东节度使、检校尚书右仆射崔彦昭为尚书兵部侍郎，充任诸道盐铁转运使等。
English: In March, he appointed Cui Yan Zhao, the envoy to the Hedong Festival and the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu during the inspection of schools, as the attendant of Shang Shuxu's military department, and served as the envoy to transport salt and iron from various provinces.

古文：以银青光禄大夫、京兆尹、上柱国、岐山郡开国公、食邑三千户窦浣检校户部尚书、太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫，充河东节度管内观察处置等使。
现代文：任命银青光禄大夫、京兆尹、上柱国、岐山郡开国公、食邑三千户窦浣为检校户部尚书、太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫，充任河东节度使管辖内州郡观察处置使等。
English: Appointed Yin Qingguanglu doctor, Jing Zhaoyun, Shangzhuang Guo, Qishan County founding father, three thousand households of food villages as the inspection department, Shangshu, Taiyuan Yin, Beidou left-behind, Goshi doctor, and served as the Hedong section to supervise the observation and disposal of counties in the jurisdiction.

古文：以中书侍郎、刑部尚书、同平章事赵隐检校吏部尚书、润州刺史、浙江西道都团练观察等使。
现代文：任命中书侍郎、刑部尚书、同平章事赵隐为检校吏部尚书、润州刺史、浙江西道都团练使、观察使等。
English: Zhao Yin was appointed as the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the criminal investigation department, the secretary of the Tongping chapter, the secretary of the inspection department, the secretary of the Renzhou district, the training envoy of the West Zhejiang Province and the observation envoy.

古文：四月，崔彦昭本官同平章事，领使如故。
现代文：四月，崔彦昭以本职任同平章事，仍旧和原来一样担任节度使。
English: In April, Cui Yan Zhao was promoted to the same rank as his previous position, and continued to serve as the chief of the festival.

古文：以前淮南节度使李蔚为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命前淮南节度使李蔚为吏部尚书。
English: Prior to his appointment, the Huainan Festival made Li Wei a member of the cadre.

古文：以天平军节度使、检校尚书右仆射、兼郓州刺史高骈检校司空，兼成都尹，充剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：任命天平军节度使、检校尚书右仆射、兼任郓州刺史高骈为检校司空，兼成都尹，充任剑南西川节度副使，执掌节度使事务。
English: He appointed Tianping Jun to be the festival envoy, Shang Shuxu to be the right-hand man for the inspection of the school, Gao Jian to be the inspector of the school, and Chengdu Yin to be the vice-envoy of the Jian'an and Xichuan festival to be in charge of the affairs of the festival.

古文：以右散骑常侍韦荷为吏部侍郎。
现代文：任命右散骑常侍韦荷为吏部侍郎。
English: He appointed Wei He, the right rider of the cavalry, as the attendant of the cadre department.

古文：前同州刺史崔璞为右散骑常侍。
现代文：任命前同州刺史崔璞为散骑常侍。
English: Appointed the former dongzhou thorn Cui Wei as the straggler's equerry.

古文：右领军卫上将军浑僖检校吏部尚书、左千牛卫上将军。
现代文：右领军卫上将军浑僖任检校吏部尚书、左千牛卫上将军。
English: On the right, the leader of the army, Admiral Hideyoshi, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and on the left, Admiral Chigusa.

古文：以侍御史卢胤征为司封员外郎，判户部案。
现代文：任命侍御史卢胤征为司封员外郎，掌管户部的案卷。
English: He appointed the chamberlain, Shilou Tansei, as the secretary, in charge of the household's files.

古文：五月，以吏部侍郎郑畋为兵部侍郎、同平章事，户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士、赐紫金鱼袋卢携本官同平章事。
现代文：五月，任命吏部侍郎郑畋为兵部侍郎、同平章事，任命户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士、赐紫金鱼袋卢携以本职任同平章事。
English: In May, Zheng Hao, the attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the attendant of the military department and the same level of official, and the attendant of the household department, Zhizhe Yao, Hanlin Baoshi, and Zhe Zijin Yubagul Lu were appointed as the same level of official.

古文：太子右庶子李峄为太仆卿，侍御史裴渥为起居郎。
现代文：以太子右庶子李峄任太仆卿，侍御史裴渥任起居郎。
English: He appointed the prince's right illegitimate son, Li Xi, as his chief footman, and the chamberlain, Shi Peiwo, as his chief retainer.

古文：以岭南东道节度使、检校刑部尚书郑从谠为刑部尚书，以吏部侍郎韦荷检校礼部尚书、广州刺史、岭南东道节度使。
现代文：任命岭南东道节度使、检校刑部尚书郑从谠为刑部尚书。任命吏部侍郎韦荷为检校礼部尚书、广州刺史、岭南东道节度使。
English: He appointed Zheng Zongya, the host of the Lingnan Festival, as the host of the Lingnan Festival, and Zheng Zongya, the chancellor of the Criminal Investigation Department, as the chancellor of the Criminal Investigation Department. He appointed Wei He, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, as the host of the Lingnan Festival, Guangzhou, and Lingnan.

古文：七月，以礼部侍郎裴瓚为检校左散骑常侍、潭州刺史、御史大夫、湖南观察使；故湖南观察使李庾赠礼部尚书。
现代文：七月，任命礼部侍郎裴瓒为检校左散骑常侍、潭州刺史、御史大夫、湖南观察使，追赠已故湖南观察使李庾为礼部尚书。
English: In July, he appointed the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Pei Jun, as the attendant of the left horseback riding of the inspection of the school, the history of Tanzhou, the doctor of history, and the observer of Hunan Province, and posthumously presented the deceased observer of Hunan Province, Li Jun, as the official book of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：十月，以中书舍人崔沆为中书侍郎，右谏议大夫崔胤为给事中。
现代文：十月，任命中书舍人崔沆为中书侍郎，任命右谏议大夫崔胤为给事中。
English: In October, he appointed Cui Jian, the person in charge of the Central Library, as the Secretary of the Central Library, and appointed Cui Yan, the Right Reviewer, as the Deputy Secretary of the Central Library.

古文：十一月丙戌朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丙戌日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is the New Year's Day.

古文：庚寅，上有事于宗庙，礼毕，御丹凤门，大赦，改元为乾符。
现代文：十一月初五，皇上在宗庙举行祭祀，礼仪结束之后，驾临丹凤门，宣布大赦天下，改年号为乾符。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the emperor held a ritual in the ancestral temple. After the end of the ceremony, he arrived at the Danfeng Gate and announced that he would grant amnesty to the whole world and change the year name to the dry sign.

古文：宰相萧仿兼司空、弘文馆大学士、太清宫使，兵部侍郎崔彦昭为中书侍郎，兵部侍郎郑畋为集贤殿大学士。
现代文：任命宰相萧亻放兼任司空、弘文馆大学士、太清宫使。任命兵部侍郎崔彦昭为中书侍郎，任命兵部侍郎郑畋为集贤殿大学士。
English: The prime minister, Xiao Yifang, was appointed concurrently as the Secretary of the Air Force, the Correspondent of the Hongwen Museum, and the Envoy of the Taiqing Imperial Palace; the attendant of the military department, Cui Yan Zhao, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the attendant of the military department, Zheng Qi, was appointed as the attendant of the Jixian Palace.

古文：以宣慰沙陀六州部落、检校兵部尚书李钧为灵武节度，制曰： 朕以沙陀骁勇，重累战功，六州蕃、浑，沐浴王化。
现代文：任命沙陀六州部落宣慰使、检校兵部尚书李钧为灵武节度使，命令说 ：朕以为沙陀部族骁勇善战，积累了许多战功，六州的吐蕃、吐谷浑等部落也都受到了王道教化的薰沐、影响。
English: Appointed Shatou Six-State Tribal Consolation Envoy, and the inspection of the military department, Shangshu Li, as the spiritual and military festival envoy. The order said: "I think that the Shatou tribe is brave and good at war, and has accumulated many war exploits. The six-state tribes such as Tubo and Tuyugun have also been influenced and influenced by the king's way of education.

古文：念其出于猜贰，互有伤残，而克璋报仇，其意未已。
现代文：想到你们由于互相猜忌而产生二心，互有伤亡残损，而李克璋报仇的心思并没有停止。
English: It comes to my mind that due to mutual suspicion, you have two hearts, there are casualties and damage to each other, and Li Keqiang's thoughts of revenge have not stopped.

古文：被我君临之德，轸吾子育之心，爰择良能，俾之宣抚。
现代文：受到朕统治的恩德，感念朕哺育的心意，于是选择具有良知的人，令他安慰、抚恤你们。
English: You have chosen a man of conscience to comfort and care for you, because of the kindness you have received under my rule, and because of the affection I have nurtured in you.

古文：惟尔先正，尝镇北门，待国昌以雄杰之才，置国昌于济活之地。
现代文：你们前代的君王，曾经镇守过北门，待到李国昌时，因为他有雄放杰出的才能，把他安置到有利于生存的地方。
English: Your previous monarchs once guarded the North Gate, and stayed until Li Guochang, because he had outstanding talent, and placed him in a place conducive to survival.

古文：既藉奕叶之旧，又怀任土之观。是用付以封疆，委之军旅，必集王事，无坠家声。 
现代文：既借助代代相传的旧交，又怀着按土取赋的希望，因此把封疆大吏的官职授予给他，把军旅的大权托付给他，一定能成就王业，不会败坏家族的名声。 
English: Both with the help of old friends passed down from generation to generation, and with the hope of land acquisition, he was awarded the official post of the great official of the fiefdom, and the great power of the military brigade was entrusted to him. He will surely be able to achieve the king's career and will not ruin the reputation of the family.

古文：初钧父业镇太原，能安集代北部落。
现代文：当初，李钧的父亲李业镇守太原，能够安定代北的部落。
English: At first, Li Ye's father, Li Ye Zhen, guarded Taiyuan and was able to stabilize the tribes in the north.

古文：时李国昌父子据大同、振武，吐浑、契苾、幽州诸道之军攻之不利，故假钧灵武节钺，率师招谕之。
现代文：当时李国昌父子占据着大同军、振武军，而吐谷浑、契艹必、幽州各部的军队进攻他失利，因此朝廷授予李钧灵武军镇的兵权，命他率军招降李国昌父子。
English: At that time, Li Guochang and his son occupied the Datong Army and the Zhenwu Army, and the armies of the various departments of Tuyugun, Qibin and Yuzhou attacked him unsuccessfully. Therefore, the imperial court granted Li Yuling the military power of Wujin Town and ordered him to lead the army to recruit Li Guochang and his son.

古文：以长安令李壁为谏议大夫，以吏部员外郎徐彦若为长安令。
现代文：任命长安县令李壁为谏议大夫，任命吏部员外郎徐彦若为长安县令。
English: Li Bi, the governor of Chang'an County, was appointed as the chairman of the advisory committee, and Wei Lang Xu, a member of the administrative department, was appointed as the governor of Chang'an County.

古文：兵部郎中卢鄯为楚州刺史。
现代文：兵部郎中卢鄯担任楚州刺史。
English: Lu Wei, the son of the Minister of Military Affairs, served as the chief historian of Chuzhou.

古文：十二月，党项、回鹘寇边。
现代文：十二月，党项、回鹘族侵扰边境。
English: In December, the Kuomintang and the Hui people invaded the border.

古文：以左司郎中崔原为兵部郎中，江州刺史李可仁为右司郎中。
现代文：任命左司郎中崔原为兵部郎中、江州刺史李可仁为右司郎中。
English: He appointed Choe Won, the middle-ranking left-hand sergeant, as the middle-ranking military officer, and Lee Ke Jin, the middle-ranking right-hand sergeant, as the middle-ranking military officer.

古文：权知工部尚书牛蔚为礼部尚书，太子宾客于浱为工部尚书。
现代文：暂掌工部尚书事的牛蔚担任礼部尚书，太子宾客于氵辰任兵部尚书。
English: Niu Wei, who is temporarily in charge of the calligraphy of the Ministry of Industry, served as the calligraphy of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the prince's guests at the time served as the calligraphy of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：是冬，南诏蛮寇蜀，诏河西、河东、山南西道、东川征兵赴援。
现代文：这年冬天，南诏蛮部侵扰蜀州，诏令河西、河东、山南西道、东川等道征召军队前去援助蜀州。
English: In the winter of that year, the Southern Zhao barbarians invaded Shuzhou, and the Zhao ordered Hexi, Hedong, Shannan West Road, Dongchuan and other roads to conscript troops to go to the aid of Shuzhou.

古文：西川节度使高骈奏： 奉敕抽发长武、鄜州、河东等道兵士赴剑南行营者。
现代文：西川节度使高骈上奏说： 奉朝廷敕令，已抽调长武、州、河东等道的士兵前往剑南军营。
English: Nishikawa Setsudo made Takahata report: According to the imperial edict, soldiers from Changwu, Suzhou, and Hedong have been transferred to the Jiannan military camp.

古文：伏以西川新军旧军差到已众，况蛮蜒小丑，必可枝梧。
现代文：因为西川派来的新军和旧军已经很多，何况只是蛮夷小丑，一定可以对付。
English: Because there are already a lot of new troops and old troops sent by Saikawa, not to mention just barbarian clowns, they can certainly be dealt with.

古文：今以道路崎岖，馆驿穷困，更有军顿，立见流移，所谓望一处完全而百处俱破。
现代文：现在因为道路崎岖难行，沿途的馆舍和驿站贫困，更加上有军队驻扎，立即就会出现百姓流散到别处去的事，这就会像人们所说的那样，只指望一处完整，而百处都破坏了。
English: Now, because the road is rough and difficult to travel, the buildings and stations along the way are poor, and there are more troops stationed, there will immediately be people scattered to other places. This will be, as people say, only one place is expected to be complete, and a hundred places are destroyed.

古文：且兵不在众而在于和，其左右神策长武镇、鄜州、河东所抽甲马兵士，人数不少，况备办军食，费损尤多。
现代文：再说军队并不在于人多而在于和谐，那些驻扎在长武镇、州、河东的左、右神策军，抽调的甲仗战马、武器士兵，人数已经不少，何况备办军粮，耗费、损失更是特别大。
English: Moreover, the army is not about the number of people, but about harmony. The Left and Right Divisions stationed in Changwu Town, Prefecture and Hedong, and the dispatched armored war horses and soldiers with weapons, are already quite numerous. Not to mention the preparation of military rations, the cost and loss are particularly large.

古文：又缘三道籓镇，尽扼羌戎，边鄙未宁，望不差发。
现代文：又由于这三道的藩镇人马，全部都用于防守羌戎部族，边境地区尚未安宁，希望再不要派兵前去。
English: In addition, since all the men and horses of the three provinces are used for the defense of the Qiongwu tribe, the border area is not yet peaceful, and it is hoped that troops will not be sent forward again.

古文：如已在道路，并请降敕勒回。 
现代文：如果已经在前往的路途中，希望一并颁降敕命让他们返回。 
English: If they are already on their way, I hope that they will also be ordered to return.

古文：诏答曰： 蛮蜒如尚凭凌，固须倍兵御敌；若已奔退，即要并力追擒。
现代文：皇上以诏令答复说： 蛮夷如果仍然强横，固然必须加倍增加兵力抵抗敌军；如果已经逃跑退却，也要合力追赶、捉拿。
English: The emperor replied with a decree: "If the barbarians are still strong, it is true that we must double the number of troops to resist the enemy; if they have already fled and retreated, we must also make joint efforts to pursue and capture them.

古文：方藉北军，助平南寇，其三处兵士，宜委高骈候到蜀日分布驱使。
现代文：如今正要借助于北方的军队，协助平定南方的贼寇，那三处节镇的军队，应当委托高骈，待他们到达蜀州的时候分别派遣他们作战。
English: Now it is time to use the northern army to help pacify the southern bandits. The army of the three festival towns should be entrusted to Gao Qi, and when they arrive in Shuzhou, they should be sent to fight separately.

古文：具务多多之办，宁乱整整之师。
现代文：务必多做一些事情，宁可把完整的师旅分拨开。
English: It is imperative to do more things, and it is better to set aside a complete division.

古文：其河东一千二百人，令窦浣不要差发。 
现代文：河东的那一千二百人，则命令窦浣不要派出了。 
English: The twelve hundred people from the east of the river were ordered by Dou Yu not to be sent out.

古文：时骈捍蛮已退，长武兵士竟至蜀而还，议者惜其劳费而虚邀出入之赏也。
现代文：当时高骈已经把蛮军击退，长武镇的士兵竟一到达蜀州就回去了。发表议论的人惋惜他们只是白白地耗费物资而凭空请求出师回师的赏赐。
English: At that time, Gaocheng had already repulsed the barbarian army, and the soldiers from Changwu Town actually went back as soon as they arrived in Shuzhou. The commentators lamented that they just wasted materials and asked for the reward of the division from the air.

古文：右军中尉韩文约以疾乞休致，从之。
现代文：右军中尉韩文约因为患病而请求离任退休，皇上允从。
English: Han Wenjo, a lieutenant of the Right Army, requested to retire due to illness, and the emperor agreed.

古文：二年春正月乙酉朔。
现代文：乾符二年春，正月初一为乙酉日。
English: In the spring of the second year, the first day of the first month is the acetylene day.

古文：己丑，宰相崔彦昭率文武百僚上尊号，上御正殿受册。
现代文：宰相崔彦昭率领文武百官向皇帝献上尊号，皇上驾临正殿接受册书。
English: Prime Minister Choe Heon-soo led hundreds of civil and military officials to present the honorary title to the emperor, and the emperor came to the main hall to receive the record book.

古文：以知内枢密田令孜为右军中尉。
现代文：任命掌管内枢密府的田令孜为右军中尉。
English: He appointed Tian Lingzi, who was in charge of the Inner Privy Council, as a lieutenant of the Right Army.

古文：南蛮骠信遣使乞盟，许之。
现代文：南蛮部族的首领派使臣前来请求结盟，皇上许诺了他们。
English: The chiefs of the Southern Barbarian tribes sent envoys to ask for an alliance, and the emperor promised them one.

古文：以凤州刺史郭弘业为左金吾卫将军。
现代文：任命凤州刺史郭弘业为左金吾卫将军。
English: He appointed Fengzhou assassin Guo Hongye as General Zuo Kinguwei.

古文：库部郎中韦岫为泗州刺史，都官员外郎李频为建州刺史。
现代文：库部郎中韦岫担任泗州刺史，都官员外郎李频担任建州刺史。
English: The son-in-law of the treasury, Wei Wei, served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the son-in-law of the capital official, Li Ping, served as the governor of Jianzhou.

古文：二月，以兵部侍即、充诸道盐铁转运使王凝为秘书监，以所补吏职罪也。
现代文：二月，以兵部侍郎、充任诸道盐铁转运使王凝为秘书监，以此弥补他任吏职时的罪过。
English: In February, Wang Rong was promoted to the position of secretary-supervisor with the title of military commissary and assigned to the transportation of salt and iron in all directions, in order to make up for his sins when he was an official.

古文：以吏部侍郎裴坦为兵部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎裴坦为兵部侍郎，充任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: He appointed Pei Tan, the attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and appointed him as the transfer envoy of salt and iron to all provinces.

古文：以翰林学士崔澹为中书舍人；翰林学士徐仁嗣为司封郎中，学士如故。
现代文：任命翰林学士崔澹为中书舍人；翰林学士徐仁嗣为司封郎中，仍然和原来一样担任翰林学士。
English: Hanlin Scholar Cui Jun was appointed as the scribe; Hanlin Scholar Xu Renzhi was appointed as the secretary, still serving as Hanlin Scholar as before.

古文：以容管经略招讨使高秦检校户部尚书，太府卿李峄为宗正卿，湖州刺史张搏为卢州刺史，库部员外郎杨堪为吏部员外郎。
现代文：任命容管经略招讨使高秦为检校户部尚书，太府卿李峄为宗正卿，湖州刺史张搏为庐州刺史，库部员外郎杨堪为吏部员外郎。
English: Gao Qin was appointed as the head of the inspection department, Shang Shu as the head of the inspection department, Li Yu as the head of the inspection department, Zong Zhengqing as the head of the inspection department, Zhang Bo as the head of the inspection department, and Yang Kan as the head of the inspection department.

古文：三月，以右补阙郑勤为起居郎，度支推官牛徽为右补阙。
现代文：三月，任命右补阙郑勤为起居郎，任命度支司推官牛徽为右补阙。
English: In March, Zheng Qin, the Right Auxiliary Bishop, was appointed as the curate, and Niu Hui, the procurator of the Diocese, was appointed as the Right Auxiliary Bishop.

古文：以户部郎中崔彦融为长安令，都官郎中杨知退为户部郎中。
现代文：任命户部郎中崔彦融为长安县令，都官郎中杨知退为户部郎中。
English: He appointed Choi Hikonryu, a retainer of the Household Division, as a magistrate of Chang'an County, and Yang Chihui, a retainer of the Metropolitan Government, as a retainer of the Household Division.

古文：左司员外郎唐峤为刑部郎中，刑部员外郎毕绍颜为左司员外郎，侍御史郑顼为刑部员外郎。
现代文：任命左司员外郎唐峤为刑部郎中，刑部员外郎毕绍颜为左司员外郎，侍御史郑顼任刑部员外郎。
English: He appointed the left-hand officer, Tang Jun, as the vice-minister of the criminal investigation department, the left-hand officer, Bi Shaoyan, as the vice-minister of the criminal investigation department, and the chamberlain, Zheng Jun, as the vice-minister of the criminal investigation department.

古文：四月，海贼王郢攻剽浙西郡邑。
现代文：四月，海盗王郢攻掠浙西一带的郡县。
English: In April, the pirate Wang Yao attacked and plundered counties in western Zhejiang.

古文：以殿中侍御史李烛为礼部员外郎。
现代文：任命殿中侍御史李烛担任礼部员外郎。
English: He appointed the court chamber attendant and historian, Li Zeng, as the member of the etiquette club, Wairo.

古文：以太子宾客张裼为吏部侍郎。
现代文：任命太子宾客张裼担任吏部侍郎。
English: Appointed the prince's guest, Zhang Ye, as the attendant of the personnel department.

古文：前淮南节度使李蔚为太常卿，成德军节度使王景崇加开府仪同三司。
现代文：前淮南节度使李蔚担任太常卿，成德军节度使王景崇加授开府仪同三司。
English: The former Huainan Festival made Li Wei serve as Tai Changqing, and the Chengde Army Festival made Wang Jing Chong award the opening ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：秘书监萧岘为国子祭酒。
现代文：秘书监萧岘担任国子祭酒。
English: Secretary Supervisor Xiao Yao served as the national son festival wine.

古文：汝州刺史崔彦冲为太子宾客分司。
现代文：汝州刺史崔彦冲担任太子宾客分司。
English: Cui Yanchong, the governor of Ruzhou, served as the prince's guest division.

古文：新除吏部侍郎张裼为京兆尹。
现代文：新授任的吏部侍郎张裼任京兆尹。
English: Zhang Xuan, the newly-appointed attendant of the cadre department, was renamed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：东川点检兵马使吴行鲁可金紫光禄大夫、检校兵部尚书，兼梓州刺史、御史大夫，充剑南东川节度等使。
现代文：东川点检兵马使吴行鲁任金紫光禄大夫、检校兵部尚书，并兼任梓州刺史、御史大夫，充任剑南东川节度使。
English: Wu Xinglu, the military inspector of Dongchuan, was appointed as the doctor of Jinziguanglu, the inspector of the military department of the school, and also served as the doctor of history of Zizhou and the doctor of history, and served as the festival envoy of Jianan Dongchuan.

古文：以东川节度使、检校户部尚书崔充为河南尹；河南尹李晦检校左散骑常侍，兼福州刺史、福建都团练观察使。
现代文：任命东川节度使、检校户部尚书崔充为河南尹，河南尹李晦任检校左散骑常侍，兼任福州刺史、福建都团练观察使。
English: Dongchuan Setsudou envoy and inspector of schools, Shangshu Cui Chong, was appointed as Henan Yin, Henan Yin Li Yu was appointed as inspector of schools, and also served as inspector of Fuzhou and Fujian.

古文：以凤翔陇西节度使、检校司徒、同平章事、上柱国、凉国公、食邑三千户令狐綯进封赵国公。
现代文：把凤翔陇西节度使、检校司徒、同平章事、上柱国、凉国公、食邑三千户令狐晋封为赵国公。
English: Feng Xiang was appointed as the Western Festival Delegate, the Inspector of Schools, Tongping Zhangji, Shangzhuang Province, Liang Province, and 3,000 households in the food villages were appointed as the Zhao Province.

古文：五月，濮州贼首王仙芝聚于长垣县，其众三千，剽掠闾井，进陷濮州，俘丁壮万人。
现代文：五月，濮州贼首王仙芝在长垣县聚集人众，他的部下有三千人，他们抢掠市井百姓，进而攻陷濮州，俘获丁壮一万人。
English: In May, Wang Xianzhi, the leader of the Zhangzhou bandits, gathered a crowd in Nagagaki County. His subordinates numbered three thousand. They robbed the common people, and then invaded Zhangzhou, capturing ten thousand Dingzhuang.

古文：郓州节度使李种出兵击之，为贼所败。
现代文：郓州节度使李种出兵攻击他，被贼军击败。
English: Zhangzhou Jiedu made Li Zong send troops to attack him, and was defeated by the bandits.

古文：以殿中少监薛珰为卫州刺史，国子司业裴拙为洋州刺史，中书舍人崔沆为礼部侍郎，兵部郎中裴虔余为太常少卿。
现代文：任命殿中少监薛担任卫州刺史，国子司业裴拙任洋州刺史，中书舍人崔沆任礼部侍郎，兵部郎中裴虔余任太常少卿。
English: He appointed Xue, the Junior Warden of the Middle School, as the Grand Historian of the Western Regions, Ye Pei Shou, the Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, as the Grand Historian of the Western Regions, Cui Yan, the Senior Clerk of the Middle School, as the Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and Pei Qian Yu, the Junior Clerk of the Military Department, as the Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：六月，以司勋员外郎薛迈为兵部郎中，户部员外郎郑就为司勋员外郎，仓部员外郎郑綮为户部员外郎，主客员外郎王镣为仓部员外郎。
现代文：六月，任命司勋员外郎薛迈为兵部郎中，户部员外郎郑就为司勋员外郎，仓部员外郎郑綮为户部员外郎，主客员外郎王镣为仓部员外郎。
English: In June, he appointed his son-in-law, Xue Mai, as the junior member of the military department, his son-in-law, Zheng, as the son-in-law of the military department, his son-in-law, Zheng Yao, as the son-in-law of the warehouse department, and his son-in-law, Wang Yao, as the son-in-law of the warehouse department.

古文：秋七月，以大理卿蔡行为丰州刺史、天德军都防御使，大理卿张彦远为大理卿。
现代文：秋，七月，任命大理寺卿蔡行为丰州刺史、天德军都防御使，大理寺少卿张彦远任大理寺卿。
English: In the autumn and July, Cai, the head priest of Dali Temple, was appointed as the chief priest of the temple, and Zhang Yan, the junior priest of Dali Temple, was appointed as the head priest of the temple.

古文：以京兆尹张裼检校户部尚书，兼郓州刺史、御史大夫，充天平军节度、郓曹濮观察等使。
现代文：任命京兆尹张裼任检校户部尚书，兼任郓州刺史、御史大夫，充任天平军节度使、郓曹濮观察使。
English: Appointed Jingzha Yin Zhangye as the inspector of the school's household department, concurrently served as the inspector of Zhangzhou and the inspector of the history department, and served as the inspector of the Tianping Army and the inspector of the Zhang Cao Army.

古文：以左司勋员外郎杜贞符为都官郎中，吏部员外郎牛循为金州刺史，司封员外郎卢胤征为吏部员外郎。
现代文：任命左司勋员外郎杜贞符为都官郎中，吏部员外郎牛循为金州刺史，司封员外郎卢胤征为吏部员外郎。
English: He appointed the left-hand officer and member of the Order of the Eastern Star, Wairo Du Zhenfu, as the middle-ranking official, the officer and member of the Imperial Household Agency, Wairo Niu Xuan, as the official of Jinzhou, and the officer and member of the Imperial Household Agency, Wairo Lu Yan Zheng, as the officer and member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：十月，以秘书少监李贶为谏议大夫。
现代文：十月，任命秘书少监李贝兄为谏议大夫。
English: In October, the secretary of the juvenile detention center, Li Bei'er, was appointed as the doctor of consultation.

古文：以前大同军及云朔都防御营田供军等使李珰检校左散骑常侍、丰州刺史，充天德军丰州西城中城都防御使、本管押蕃落等使。
现代文：任命前大同军及云中朔方都防御使、营田供军使李为检校左散骑常侍、丰州刺史，充任天德军丰州、西城、中城都防御使、本管区的押蕃落使等。
English: The former Datong Army and Yunzhong Shuo Fangdu Defense Envoy, Yingtian Supply Envoy Li was appointed as the left straggler of the inspection of the school, the history of Toyosu, the defense envoy of the Tiande Army in Toyosu, Xicheng, and Zhongcheng, and the escorting and unseating envoy of the region.

古文：以考功员外郎赵蕴为吏部员外郎，户部员外郎卢庄为起居员外郎，礼部员外郎萧遘为考功员外郎。
现代文：任命考功员外郎赵蕴为吏部员外郎，户部员外郎卢庄为起居员外郎，礼部员外郎萧遘为考功员外郎。
English: He appointed Gaorong Zhao Yun, a meritorious scholar, as Gaorong of the personnel department, Gaorong Lu Zhuang, a member of the household department, as Gaorong of the living quarters department, and Gaorong Xiao Jun, a member of the etiquette department, as Gaorong of the meritorious scholar department.

古文：十一月，以起居郎刘崇龟为礼部员外郎，殿中侍御史孔纶为户部员外郎。
现代文：十一月，任命起居郎刘崇龟为礼部员外郎，殿中侍御史孔纶为户部员外郎。
English: In November, he appointed Liu Chongke, the master of ceremonies, as the vice-master of the etiquette club, and Kong Hao, the palace attendant, as the vice-master of the etiquette club.

古文：是月，雷震电。
现代文：当月，发生雷电大震。
English: In the same month, a thunder and lightning earthquake occurred.

古文：左仆射王铎兼门下侍郎、同平章事，复辅政。
现代文：左仆射王铎兼任门下侍郎、同平章事，恢复辅佐政务的官职。
English: His left-hand man, Sho Wangsheng, also served as a footman, Tongping Zhangji, and resumed the official position of assistant to government affairs.

古文：三年春正月己卯朔，司空、门下侍郎、同平章事萧仿以病求免，罢为太子太傅。
现代文：乾符三年春，正月初一，司空、门下侍郎、同平章事萧亻放因病请求离任退休，被免去原职担任太子太傅。
English: On the first day of the first month of the new year, in the spring of the third year of the Kianpu era, Siku, his servant and subordinate, and Tongping Zhang Zhi Xiao, requested to retire due to illness, and was removed from his original position as the prince's daifu.

古文：浙西奏诛王郢徒党。
现代文：浙西奏报，将贼首王郢的徒众处死。
English: According to the Western Zhejiang Daily, the followers of the thief Wang Xi were executed.

古文：以左金吾卫大将军、右街使齐克让检校兵部尚书，兼衮兗沂海等州节度使。
现代文：任命左金吾卫大将军、右街使齐克让为检校兵部尚书，兼任兖州、沂州、海州等州节度使。
English: He appointed General Zuo Kinguwei and Right Street Envoy Qi Kejan as inspectors of the school inspection military department, and concurrently served as envoys to the state festivals in Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Haizhou.

古文：三月，以吏部尚书归仁晦、吏部侍郎孔晦、吏部侍郎崔荛试宏词选人，考功郎中崔庾、考功员外郎周仁举为考官。
现代文：三月，任命吏部尚书归仁晦、吏部侍郎孔晦、吏部侍郎崔荛主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才，考功员外郎崔庾、考功员外郎周仁举担任考官。
English: In March, he appointed the secretary of the personnel department, Shangshu Guirenwei, the secretary of the personnel department, Kongwei, and the secretary of the personnel department, Cui Jun, to preside over the selection of talents for the erudite and broad vocabulary examination, and the examiner, Wai Lang Cui Jun, and the examiner, Wai Lang Zhou Ren, to serve as examiners.

古文：以太常卿李蔚本官同平章事。
现代文：任命太常寺卿李蔚以本官任同平章事。
English: The appointment of Li Wei, the chief priest of Taizhoji Temple, to the post of Tongping chapter.

古文：奉天镇上言金龙昼见，自河升天。
现代文：奉天镇上奏说白天出现了金龙，从黄河升上天空。
English: It is said that a golden dragon appeared in the daytime and rose from the Yellow River to the sky.

古文：门下侍郎崔彦昭太清宫使、弘文馆大学士，中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章事郑畋监修国史。
现代文：门下侍郎崔彦昭担任太清宫使、弘文馆大学士，中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章政事郑畋监修国史。
English: His disciple Choi Hiko-sho, a chamberlain, served as an envoy to the palace of the Taiqing Emperor, a scholar of the Hongwen Academy, a chamberlain of the Middle School, a courtier of the Criminal Investigation Department, and a political officer of the Taijing Chapter, Zheng Qi, supervised the national history.

古文：以右武卫大将军墨冲谦为左金吾卫大将军，以黎州刺史杜冈为雅州刺史。
现代文：任命右武卫大将军墨冲谦为左金吾卫大将军，任命黎州刺史杜冈为雅州刺史。
English: He appointed General Mochong Qian of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards as the General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and appointed Du Gang of the Lishu Division of the Middle Palace Guards as the General of the Yashu Division.

古文：五月，以江西观察使独孤云为太子少傅，金州刺史束乡励为嘉州刺史。
现代文：五月，任命江西观察使独孤云为太子少傅，金州刺史束乡励为嘉州刺史。
English: In May, Jiangxi Observation named Du Guoyun as the young prince, and Jinzhou historian Sokxiang Li as the historian of Jiazhou.

古文：六月，敕福建观察使李播、荆州刺史杨权古、蔚州刺史王龟范、璧州刺史张贽、濮州刺史韦浦、施州刺史娄傅会、刑州刺史王回、抚州刺史崔理、黄州刺史计信卿等： 刺史亲人之官，苟不谙详，岂宜除授。
现代文：六月，向福建观察使李播、荆州刺史杨权古、蔚州刺史王龟范、璧州刺史张贽、濮州刺史韦浦、施州刺史娄傅会、邢州刺史王回、抚州刺史崔理、黄州刺史计信卿等下达敕令 ：刺史是亲近百姓的官员，如果不熟悉、不细察民情，怎么适于授给这样的官职？
English: In June, the Fujian Observation Commission issued the following orders to Li Banning, Jingzhou Zhishi Yang Quanguo, Ulshu Zhishi Wang Guifan, Bizhou Zhishi Zhang Rong, Zhangzhou Zhishi Weipu, Shizhou Zhishi Shifu Association, Zhangzhou Zhishi Wang Hui, Fuzhou Zhishi Cui Li, and Huangzhou Zhishi Jianxin: Zhishi is an official who is close to the people. If he is not familiar with and does not carefully examine the people's conditions, how is he suitable to be awarded such an official position?

古文：比为朕养百姓，非独荣尔一身，每念疲羸，实所伤叹。
现代文：这都是为我养育百姓，并不是让你们一个人荣耀，每想到百姓们疲困贫瘠，实在令人伤心叹息。
English: It's all for me to raise the people, not to glorify you alone. Every time I think of the people who are tired and poor, it's really sad and sighing.

古文：李播等九人授官之时，众词不可；王回等三人到郡无政，惟务贪求。实污方州，并宜停任。 
现代文：李播等九个人授予官职的时候，众口一辞都说不行；王回等三人到郡府任职之后没有政绩，只是拼命贪求财富，实在是污损了地方州府的名声，都应该免职。 
English: When nine people, including Li Biao, were appointed to official positions, everyone said it was unacceptable; three people, including Wang Hui, had no political achievements after serving in the county government, but were desperately greedy for wealth, which really tarnished the reputation of the local state government. All of them should be removed from office.

古文：以检校右散骑常侍、卫尉卿李铎为太府卿，以凉王傅分司裴思谦为卫尉卿，抚王府长史刘允章凉王傅。
现代文：任命检校右散骑常侍、卫尉卿李铎为太府卿，任命凉王太傅分司裴思谦为卫尉卿，抚王府长史刘允章任凉王太傅。
English: He appointed Li Jiong, a regular attendant of the Right-Handed Cavalry of the Inspection of Schools and an officer of the Imperial Guard, as an officer of the Imperial Guard, Pei Siqian, a divisional officer of the Prince of Liang's Imperial Guard, as an officer of the Prince of Liang's Imperial Guard, and Liu Yunzhang, the prefect of the Prince of Liang's Imperial Guard, as an officer of the Prince of Liang's Imperial Guard.

古文：主客郎中崔福为汾州刺史，荆南节度副使王慥为主客郎中。
现代文：主客郎中崔福任汾州刺史，荆南节度副使王忄造任主客郎中。
English: Among the chief guests, Cui Fu was appointed as the governor of Luzhou, and Wang Shuzo, the vice-minister of Jingnan Festival, was appointed as the chief guest.

古文：六月，以门下侍郎、刑部尚书、平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、判度支崔彦昭兼左仆射，中书侍郎郑畋兼门下侍郎，太常卿、平章事李蔚为中书侍郎。
现代文：六月，任命门下侍郎、刑部尚书、平章政事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、署理度支使崔彦昭兼左仆射，中书侍郎郑畋兼门下侍郎，太常卿、平章政事李蔚任中书侍郎。
English: In June, he appointed his servant, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Taira no Shoji, the political secretary of the Taiqing Imperial Court, the scholar of the Korean Literature Museum, the acting vice-minister of the Korean Literature Museum, Choi Hiko Akira, the deputy secretary of the Korean Literature Museum, Zheng Hao, the secretary of the Korean Literature Museum, and the political secretary of the Korean Literature Museum, Li Wei as the secretary of the Korean Literature Museum.

古文：以歙州刺史萧骞为右司员外郎，右司员外郎崔潼为歙州刺史。
现代文：任命歙州刺史萧骞为右司员外郎，右司员外郎崔潼任歙州刺史。
English: Appointed the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right

古文：七月，草贼王仙芝寇掠河南十五州，其众数万。
现代文：七月，起于草莽的贼寇王仙芝侵扰劫掠河南十五个州，其部众有几万人。
English: In July, Wang Xianzhi, a reckless thief and robber who started from the grass, invaded and plundered fifteen states in Henan Province, with tens of thousands of followers.

古文：是月，贼逼颍、许，攻汝州，下之，虏刺史王镣。
现代文：当月，贼军逼近颍州、许州，进攻汝州，攻了下来，俘虏了刺史王镣。
English: That month, the invaders approached Zhangzhou and Huzhou, and attacked Ruzhou. They captured and took prisoner Zishi Wangye.

古文：刑部侍郎刘承雍在郡，为贼所害。
现代文：刑部侍郎刘承雍正在该郡，遭到贼军杀害。
English: Liu Chengyong, the head of the criminal investigation department, was in the county and was killed by the bandits.

古文：贼遂南攻唐、邓、安、黄等州。
现代文：贼军便向南进攻唐州、邓州、安州、黄州等州。
English: The invaders then moved south to attack Tangzhou, Dengzhou, Anzhou, Huangzhou and other provinces.

古文：时关东诸州府兵不能讨贼，但守城而已。
现代文：当时关东各州的官兵不能讨伐贼军，只能够守城而已。
English: At that time, the officers and soldiers of the Kanto states could not fight the bandits, but could only defend the city.

古文：以户部郎中李节为驾部郎中，金部郎中王慥为户部郎中，主客郎中郑諴为金部郎中，金部员外郎张谯为主客郎中，屯田员外郎窦珝为金部员外郎，京兆司录赵晔为屯田员外郎。工部侍郎崔朗为同州刺史，左军擗仗使、左监门卫上将军西门思恭为右威卫上将军。
现代文：任命户部郎中李节为驾部郎中，金部郎中王忄造为户部郎中，主客郎中郑讠咸为金部郎中，金部员外郎张谯为主客郎中，屯田员外郎窦王羽为金部员外郎，京兆府司录赵晔为屯田员外郎，工部侍郎崔朗任同州刺史，左军擗仗使、左监门卫上将军西门思恭任右威卫上将军。
English: He appointed Li Jie, a retainer of the household department, as a retainer of the driver department, Wang Shuzo, a retainer of the money department, as a retainer of the household department, Zheng Yuxian, a retainer of the host department, as a retainer of the money department, Zhang Wei, a retainer of the host department, as a retainer of the host department, Dou Wang Yu, a retainer of the garrison department, as a retainer of the money department, Zhao Wei, a secretary of the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal Government, as a retainer of the garrison department, Cui Lang, a retainer of the work department, as a

古文：以右谏议大夫、知制诰魏筜为中书舍人。
现代文：任命右谏议大夫、知制诰魏階为中书舍人。
English: Appointed the right-hand man of the right-hand man, and the intellectual system of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man.

古文：九月，以右丞崔荛权知吏部侍郎，礼部侍郎崔沆为尚书右丞，中书舍人高湘权知礼部侍郎，京兆尹杨知至为工部侍郎。
现代文：九月，任命右丞崔荛暂时署理吏部侍郎，礼部侍郎崔沆任尚书右丞，中书舍人高湘暂时署理礼部侍郎，京兆尹杨知至任工部侍郎。
English: In September, he appointed Choe Son, the right-hand man of Choe Son, as the acting secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service, Choe Son, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, as the acting secretary of the Ministry of Education, Choe Son, the secretary of the Ministry of Culture and Sports, Gao Xiang, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, as the acting secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Kyong Son, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：兵部尚书、兼太常卿李榼检校尚书右仆射、太常；卫尉卿萧宽为鸿胪卿，充闲厩使。
现代文：兵部尚书、兼太常卿李王当任检校尚书右仆射、太常寺卿；卫尉卿萧宽任鸿胪寺卿，充任闲厩使。
English: Li Wang was appointed as inspector of schools, Shang Shou Yu Fu Sha as secretary of the general staff, and Tai Changji as secretary of the general staff; Wei Wei Xiao Kuan was appointed as secretary of the general staff of the general staff of the general staff of the army, and was also appointed as secretary of the general staff of the army.

古文：以宰相崔彦昭男保谦为秘书省校书郎。
现代文：任命宰相崔彦昭的儿子崔保谦为秘书省校书郎。
English: Choi Bao-him, the son of Prime Minister Choi Hon-soo, was appointed secretary of the provincial education bureau.

古文：右仆射、门下侍郎、平章事崔彦昭加特进；门下侍郎、礼部尚书、平章事郑畋可特进。
现代文：右仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事崔彦昭加授特进；门下侍郎、礼部尚书、平章政事郑畋可授特进衔。
English: His right-hand manservant, underling chamberlain, and Taira no Shosho political officer, Choi Hikoaki, was also given a special promotion; and his underling chamberlain, Reibu no Shosho, and Taira no Shosho political officer, Zheng Yi, was given a special promotion.

古文：太中大夫、平章事卢携可银青光禄大夫；银青光禄大夫、平章事李蔚可金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：太中大夫、平章政事卢携授银青光禄大夫；银青光禄大夫、平章政事李蔚授金紫光禄大夫。
English: Taizhong Doctor and Pingzhang Political Secretary Lu jointly awarded Silver to Qingguanglu Doctor; Silver to Qingguanglu Doctor and Pingzhang Political Secretary Li Wei jointly awarded Gold to Qingguanglu Doctor.

古文：以太府卿李峄检校工部尚书、滑州刺史、御史大夫，充义成军节度、郑滑颍观察处置等使。
现代文：任命太府卿李峄为检校工部尚书、滑州刺史、御史大夫，充任义成军节度使及郑、滑、颍观察处置使。
English: He appointed Li Jie, the Grand Mufu, as the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, and the inspector of the inspection department.

古文：雅州自六月地震至七月未止，压伤人颇众。
现代文：雅州从六月发生地震，到七月还没有停止，压伤的人很多。
English: Since the earthquake occurred in Yazhou in June, it has not stopped in July, and there are many people with pressure injuries.

古文：诏河南籓镇举兵讨贼。
现代文：皇上诏令河南藩镇发兵讨伐贼军。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the towns of Henan Province to send troops to fight the invaders.

古文：以刑部郎中李磎为户部郎中，分司东都；户部郎中郑諴为刑部郎中。
现代文：任命刑部郎中李石奚为户部郎中，分管东都的事务；任命户部郎中郑讠咸为刑部郎中。
English: Li Shijun, a vice-minister of the Department of Justice, was appointed as a vice-minister of the Department of Household Affairs, in charge of the affairs of Dongdu; Zheng Yuxian, a vice-minister of the Department of Household Affairs, was appointed as a vice-minister of the Department of Justice.

古文：户部郎中、知制诰、翰林学士王徽为中书舍人，户部员外郎、翰林学士萧遘为户部郎中，学士并如故。
现代文：任命户部郎中、知制诰、翰林学士王徽为中书舍人，任命户部员外郎、翰林学士萧遘为户部郎中，两人均和原来一样担任翰林学士。
English: He appointed Wang Hui, the Vice-Minister of the Household Department, Zhizhe Xuan and Hanlin Scholar, as the Vice-Dean of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and appointed Wei Lang, the Vice-Minister of the Household Department, and Xiao Jun, the Vice-Minister of the Household Department, as the Vice-Minister of the Household Department. Both of them served as the Vice-Minister of the Chinese Academy of Letters as before.

古文：谏议大夫赵蒙为给事中，商州刺史张同为谏议大夫。
现代文：任命谏议大夫赵蒙为给事中，商州刺史张同为谏议大夫。
English: Zhao Meng was appointed as the presiding judge, and Zhang Tong, the sheriff of Shangzhou, was also appointed as the presiding judge.

古文：十一月，以司门员外郎郑荛为池州刺史，水部员外郎樊充为工部员外郎，汴宋度支使杜孺休为水部员外郎。
现代文：十一月，任命司门员外郎郑荛为池州刺史，水部员外郎樊充为工部员外郎，汴宋度支使杜孺休为水部员外郎。
English: In November, he appointed Wai Lang Zheng, the gatekeeper, as the chief historian of Chizhou, Wai Lang Yuchong, the member of the Ministry of Water Resources, as the member of the Ministry of Industry, and Du Yuxiu, the vice-minister of the Song Dynasty, as the member of the Ministry of Water Resources.

古文：太常少卿崔浑贬康州刺史，扬州左司马郑祥为澧州刺史，度支分巡院使李仲章为建州刺史。
现代文：太常少卿崔浑降职为康州刺史，扬州左司马郑祥任澧州刺史，度支分巡院使李仲章任建州刺史。
English: Cui Hun, the too-frequent junior secretary, was demoted to the post of Kangzhou chief secretary, Zheng Xiang, the Yangzhou left secretary, was appointed as the Zhangzhou chief secretary, and Li Zhongzhang, the provincial branch inspector, was appointed as the Jianzhou chief secretary.

古文：十二月，以右金吾卫将军张简会为左金吾大将军，充右街使；右龙武将军李弢为右金吾将军。
现代文：十二月，任命右金吾卫将军张简会为左金吾大将军，充任右街使；右龙武将军李为右金吾将军。
English: In December, Zhang Jianhui, the Right Kinguwei General, was appointed as the Left Kingu Major General and served as the Right Street Envoy; the Right Longwu General Li was appointed as the Right Kingu General.

古文：前陕西虢观察使陆墉为太子宾客。
现代文：前陕西虢州观察使陆墉任太子宾客。
English: The former Shaanxi Bozhou observation envoy Lu Wei was the guest of the crown prince.

古文：四年春正月癸酉朔。
现代文：乾符四年春，正月初一为癸酉日。
English: In the fourth year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the first day of the first month is a leap day.

古文：丁丑，降制赦天下系囚及徒流人放还。
现代文：正月初五，颁降敕旨，赦免天下的囚徒，并将发配流放的人放回来。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he issued a decree of abdication, pardoned prisoners around the world, and returned those who had been exiled.

古文：以谏议大夫李汤为给事中，以兵部郎中崔厚为谏议大夫。
现代文：任命谏议大夫李汤为给事中，任命兵部郎中崔厚为谏议大夫。
English: He appointed Li Tang, the doctor of consultation, as the middle-ranking official, and appointed Choi Hou, the son-in-law of the Minister of Military Affairs, as the doctor of consultation.

古文：大理少卿王承颜为盐州刺史，明州刺史殷僧辩为大理卿。
现代文：大理寺少卿王承颜担任盐州刺史，明州刺史殷僧辩担任大理寺卿。
English: Wang Chengyan, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, served as the secretary of Yanzhou, and the secretary of Mingzhou served as the secretary of Dali Temple.

古文：以吏部尚书郑从谠、吏部侍郎孔晦、吏部侍郎崔荛考宏词选人。
现代文：任命吏部尚书郑从谠、吏部侍郎孔晦、吏部侍郎崔荛主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: Appointed the secretary of the department, Zheng Conglu, the secretary of the department, Kong Hui, and the secretary of the department, Cui Wei, to preside over the erudition and vocabulary examination and select talents.

古文：三月，以开府、行内侍监致仕刘行深为内侍省观军容、守内侍监致仕。
现代文：三月，任命离任退休的开府仪同三司、署理内侍监刘行深为内侍省观军容使，署理内侍监，然后离任退休。
English: In March, he appointed the retiring Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the acting inner chamberlain Liu Xingshen as the inner chamberlain, the acting inner chamberlain, and then retired.

古文：以判盐铁案、检校考功郎中郑溵为司封员外郎，充转运判官。
现代文：任命执掌盐铁案卷、检校考功郎中郑氵殷为司封员外郎，充任转运判官。
English: Zheng Yuyin, who was in charge of the salt and iron case file and a school inspection examination winner, was appointed as the external secretary of the department and served as the transfer judge.

古文：兵部员外郎裴渥为蕲州刺史，职方员外郎卢澄为兵部员外郎。
现代文：兵部员外郎裴渥担任蕲州刺史，职方员外郎卢澄担任兵部员外郎。
English: Warlord Geiro Peiwo served as the scribe of Zhangzhou, and Warlord Geiro Ruchem served as the warlord.

古文：以草贼大寇河南、山南，诏曰：
现代文：因为草贼大肆侵扰河南、山南，皇上下诏说：
English: Because the weed thieves were aggressively invading Henan and Shannan, the emperor issued an edict:

古文：乱常干纪，天地所不容；伐罪吊人，帝王之大典。
现代文： 淆伦乱常，干纪犯纲是天地所不能容忍的；讨伐罪人，慰问百姓，是皇帝的重大使命。
English: Confusion and disorder are commonplace, and discipline-breakers are intolerable by heaven and earth; fighting criminals and consoling the people is the emperor's important mission.

古文：历观往代，遍数前朝，其有怙众称兵，凭凶构孽，或疑迷于郡县，或残害于生灵。
现代文：纵观古代，遍数前朝，都有凭借人多起兵，依靠凶横犯罪的人，他们有的欺骗蒙哄郡县的百姓，有的残害无辜的生灵。
English: Throughout the ancient times and several previous dynasties, there were people who relied on more than one person to raise an army and rely on heinous crimes. Some of them deceived the people of counties and counties, and some killed innocent beings.

古文：初则狐假鸱张，自谓骁雄莫敌；旋则鸟焚鱼烂，无非破败而终。
现代文：开始时狐假虎威，气焰嚣张，自以为骁勇雄强，天下无敌；不久就如鸟焚，如鱼烂，无非以灭亡失败而告终。
English: At the beginning, the fox pretended to be a tiger, was arrogant, and thought that it was brave and powerful, and invincible in the world; soon it was like a bird burning, like a fish rotting, and ended in nothing but defeat.

古文：盖以逆顺相悬，幽明共怒。
现代文：只因为他们和朝廷逆顺悬殊，以至于神人共怒。
English: It was only because of the disparity between them and the imperial court that the gods and mortals were angry.

古文：近者庞勋拒命，王郢挻灾，结聚至多，猖狂颇甚，寻则身膏原野，家受诛夷。
现代文：近来庞勋抗拒皇命，王郢诱民为祸，结党聚众极多，达到十分猖狂的地步，然而不久就毙命在原野上，家族也受到诛杀。
English: Recently, Pang Xun resisted the order of the emperor, Wang Xuan misled the people and gathered a large number of people, reaching a very rampant level. However, he soon died in the field, and his family was also killed.

古文：亦有方从叛乱，能自徊翔，移吉凶于反掌之间，变祸福于立谈之际。
现代文：也有刚开始胁从叛乱，就能够自己返回正道，化凶为吉犹如反掌一般容易，变祸为福就像站着谈话一样简单。
English: There are also those who have just begun to resist the rebellion and are able to return to the right path on their own. It is as easy to turn evil into good as it is to turn evil into good, and it is as simple as standing and talking.

古文：则诸葛爽今为刺史，硃实见存将军，弘霸郎受职于禁营，宋再雄策名于淮海，莫不身名光显，家族辉荣。
现代文：例如诸葛爽如今当了刺史，朱实现在做了将军，弘霸郎在禁军任职，宋再雄在淮海做官，没有一个不是声名光耀显赫，家族辉煌荣宠。
English: For example, Zhuge Shuang is now a famous historian, Zhu Xi is now a general, Hong Bao Lang is serving in the Imperial Army, Song Zaixiong is an official in Huaihai, and none of them is not famous, and the family is glorious.

古文：近准诸道奏报，草贼稍多，江西、淮南，宋、亳、曹、颍，或攻郡县，或掠乡村。
现代文：最近根据各道的奏报，草贼逐渐增多，江西道、淮南道、宋州、亳州、曹州、颍州这些地方，有的进攻郡县，有的劫掠乡村。
English: Recently, according to reports from various provinces, the number of grass thieves has gradually increased. In Jiangxi Province, Huainan Province, Songzhou, Zhangzhou, Caozhou, and Zhangzhou, some have attacked counties and counties, and some have looted villages.

古文：虽命兵师，且令招抚。
现代文：尽管派出军队剿杀，也还是加以招抚。
English: Even though they sent troops to fight and kill, they still pandered to them.

古文：朕以宽弘为理，慈愍居心，每念苍生，皆同赤子。
现代文：朕以宽洪大量为原则，心存慈爱怜悯，总想到百姓们都同样是我的赤子。
English: I am guided by the principle of generosity and abundance. I have mercy and compassion in my heart, and always think that the people are also my babies.

古文：恨不能均其衣食，令致荒饥，宁忍迫以锋芒，断其身首。
现代文：只恨不能使他们的衣食平均，致使他们遭受饥荒，难道忍心用刀剑去逼迫他们，使他们身首分离？
English: If I have fed them to the full, and if I have not stretched out my hand against them to bring a famine upon them; if I have not pursued them with the sword, and delivered their necks from under them?

古文：如王仙芝及诸贼头领能洗心悔过，散卒休兵，所在州府投降，便令具名闻奏，朝廷当议奖升。
现代文：如果王仙芝和各个贼军头领能够洗心革面，悔过自新，解散士卒，停止叛乱，向所在的州府投降，就叫他们列出姓名上报朝廷，必当会决定奖赏封官。
English: If Wang Xianzhi and the various leaders of the bandit army can purify their hearts and faces, repent and reform, disband the soldiers, stop the rebellion, and surrender to the state capital, they will be asked to list their names and report to the court, and the committee will decide to reward and seal the officials.

古文：如诸贼顽傲不悛，凶强自恃，即宜令诸道兵师掎角诛剪。
现代文：如果各个贼首顽固骄纵，不思悔改，以凶横强暴自恃，就应当命令各道军队互相配合诛杀剪灭。
English: If each bandit leader is stubborn and arrogant, does not repent, and kills himself with ferocity and violence, the armies of all provinces should be ordered to cooperate with each other to kill and destroy.

古文：若诸军全捕得一火草贼数至三百人已上者，超授将军，赏钱一千贯。
现代文：如果诸军能够全部捕获一伙草贼，达到数人以至三百人以上的，破格授予将军，赏钱一千贯。
English: If the armies can all capture a group of grass thieves, reaching several people to more than three hundred people, it will be awarded to the general in an unprecedented way, with a reward of one thousand crowns.

古文：如乡材有干勇才略，而能率合义徒，驱除草寇者，本处以闻，亦与重赏。
现代文：如果乡村中勇敢干练而富于才略的人能够率领义士们驱除草寇，本地方的官府知道了，也给予重赏。
English: If a brave, capable and talented person in the village can lead the righteous to drive away the grasshopper, the local government will know and give a heavy reward.

古文：如郑镒、汤群之辈，已为刺史，朝廷故不食言。
现代文：如郑镒、汤群这类人，已经做了刺史，朝廷仍旧不食言。
English: People such as Zheng Qi and Tang Qun have already made history, and the imperial court still does not eat its words.

古文：敕到，宜令诸道明行宣谕，令知朕意。
现代文：敕令下达以后，应当令各道府公开进行宣布，让大家知道朕的意思。 
English: After the imperial order is issued, each prefecture should be ordered to publicly announce it, so that everyone knows what I mean.

古文：青州节度使宋威上表： 请步骑五千，特为一使，兼率本道兵士，所在讨贼，必立微功以酬圣奖。 
现代文：青州节度使宋威上表说 ：请求派步兵骑兵共五千人，特授一项使职，兼率本道的兵卒。所到之处讨伐贼兵，一定能立下微薄的功劳以报答圣上的奖掖。 
English: The Qingzhou Festival made Song Wei make a request: to send a total of five thousand infantry and cavalry, to be specially assigned a duty, and to also lead the genuine soldiers. Wherever he went to fight the bandits, he would surely be able to make a small contribution to repay the sacred award.

古文：优诏嘉之，乃授威诸道招讨草贼使，仍给禁兵三千，甲马五百匹。
现代文：皇上特下诏令嘉奖，便授予宋威诸道招讨草贼使之职，并拨给他禁军三千名，甲马五百匹。
English: The emperor issued a special decree of commendation, and Song Wei was awarded the post of grass thief, and he was assigned three thousand soldiers and five hundred horses.

古文：仍谕河南方镇曰： 王仙芝本为盐贼，自号草军，南至寿、卢，北经曹、宋。
现代文：又下谕令给河南方镇说 ：王仙芝本是一个贩私盐的贼徒，自己号称 草军 ，南到寿州、庐州，北经曹州、宋州。
English: He also issued an order to the town in the south of the river, saying: Wang Xianzhi was originally a salt-trafficking bandit, who called himself the Grass Army, and went south to Shoushou and Zhangzhou, and north to Caozhou and Songzhou.

古文：半年烧劫，仅十五州；两火转斗，逾七千众。
现代文：半年的烧抢，几近于蔓延到十五个州；分两部转战，部众超过七千人。
English: Six months of burning and looting nearly spread to fifteen states; it was divided into two parts, with more than seven thousand members.

古文：诸道发遣将士，同共讨除，日月渐深，烟尘未息。
现代文：各道派出将士共同讨伐剪除，时间逐渐久了，战火却并未平息。
English: Soldiers from various provinces were dispatched to jointly fight and eliminate them. The time has gradually passed, but the war has not subsided.

古文：盖以递相观望，虚费糇粮，州县罄于供承，乡材泣于侵暴。
现代文：由于互相观望，虚耗粮食，各州县官府已经拿不出东西供应，乡村的百姓为官军的侵扰暴行而哭泣。
English: As a result of watching each other and wasting grain, the state and county governments have been unable to supply things, and the villagers are crying for the intrusion and violence of the government army.

古文：今平卢军节度使宋威深愤萑蒲，请行诛讨。
现代文：现在平卢军节度使宋威为盗贼横行而深感愤怒，请旨进行诛杀征讨。
English: Now that the Pinglu Military Festival is in full swing, Song Wei is deeply angered by the rampant thefts and has been ordered to fight and kill.

古文：朕以威前时蜀部，破南诏之全军；比岁徐州，摧庞勋之大阵。
现代文：朕知道宋威前一段时间在蜀州的军旅中，击败了南诏蛮部的全军；近年在徐州又摧毁了庞勋的大阵。
English: I know that Song Wei defeated the whole army of the Southern Zhao barbarians in the military expedition in Shuzhou some time ago; in recent years, he also destroyed the large army of Pang Xun in Xuzhou.

古文：官阶甚贵，可以统诸道之都头；骁勇素彰，足以破伏戎之草寇。
现代文：他的官阶很高，可以统率各道军队的将领；他骁勇善战一向名声在外，完全可以击败潜伏在军戎草莽的盗贼。
English: His rank is high, and he can command the generals of various armies; he has always been famous for his bravery and skill in battle, and he can completely defeat the thieves lurking in the army.

古文：今已授指挥诸道兵马招讨草贼使，侯宋威到本道日，供给犒设，并取上供钱支给。
现代文：现在已授予他指挥诸道兵马招讨草贼使之职，等宋威到达本道的时候，对他的部众供给饮食，犒劳安置，均从上交给朝廷的税赋中支付。
English: Now he has been given the position of commanding the soldiers and horses of all the provinces to recruit grass thieves, and when Song Wei arrives in his own province, he will provide food and accommodation for his subordinates, all of which will be paid from the taxes handed over to the imperial court.

古文：仍命指挥都头，凡攻讨进退，取宋威处分。 
现代文：并命令宋威指挥各道主将，凡是攻击、讨伐、前进、退却的事，都由宋威决定。 
English: He also ordered Song Wei to command the commanders of each province, and all matters of attack, crusade, advance and retreat would be decided by Song Wei.

古文：时贼渠王仙芝、尚君长在安州，宋威自青州与副使曹全晸进军攻讨，所在破贼。
现代文：当时贼首王仙芝、尚君长在安州，宋威从青州出发，与副使曹全曰政一起进军讨伐贼兵，所到之处都击败了贼军。
English: At that time, the leader of the bandits Wang Xianzhi and Shang Junlong were in Anzhou, Song Wei set out from Qingzhou, and marched together with the deputy envoy Cao Quan Baizheng to fight the bandits. They defeated the bandits everywhere they went.

古文：是月，冤朐贼黄巢聚万人攻郓州，陷之，逐节度使薛崇。
现代文：当月，冤朐贼寇黄巢聚集一万人攻打郓州，攻下了州城，赶走了节度使薛崇。
English: In the same month, the bandits of the Yellow Nest gathered ten thousand people to attack Zhangzhou, captured the state capital, and drove away the commander of the festival, Xue Chong.

古文：五月，幽州节度使李茂勋上表乞致仕，以其男可举权知兵马事。
现代文：五月，幽州节度使李茂勋上表请求离任退休，任命他的儿子李可举暂时执掌军务。
English: In May, the Yuzhou Festival made Li Maoxun request to retire from office, and appointed his son Li Keju to temporarily take charge of military affairs.

古文：制以寿王杰为开府仪同三司、幽州经略卢龙等军节度观察押奚契丹等使；以幽州节度副使、权知兵马事李可举检校左散骑常侍、幽州大都督府左司马，充幽州兵马留后。
现代文：决定任命寿王李杰为开府仪同三司，幽州、经略、卢龙等军镇节度使、观察使、押奚契丹使；任命幽州节度副使、暂时执掌军务的李可举为检校左散骑常侍、幽州大都督府左司马，充任幽州兵马留后。
English: It was decided to appoint Shou Wang Li Jie as the Kaifu Ceremonial and Three Departments, Yuzhou, Economic Affairs, Lulong and other military towns as the festival envoy, observation envoy, and escorting Khitan envoy; appointed Yuzhou festival deputy envoy, Li Kegui, who was temporarily in charge of military affairs, as the inspection of the school's left horseback riding attendant, Yuzhou Dadufu left Sima, after serving as Yuzhou soldiers and horses.

古文：制以幽州卢龙节度使、检校工部尚书李茂勋守尚书左仆射致仕。
现代文：决定任命幽州、卢龙节度使、检校工部尚书李茂勋署理尚书左仆射离任退休。
English: It was decided to appoint Yuzhou, Lulong as the secretary of the festival, and Shangshu Li Maoxun, the director of the inspection department of the school, to retire.

古文：以前绵州刺史皇甫镛为秘书少监，以陈州刺史许珂为睦州刺史，以右卫将军程可复为左卫大将军。
现代文：任命前绵州刺史皇甫镛为秘书少监，任命陈州刺史许珂为睦州刺史，任命右卫将军程可复为左卫大将军。
English: Appointed former Mianzhou admiral Wang Fuxi as secretary and junior inspector, appointed Chenzhou admiral Xu Ke as admiral of Mianzhou, and appointed the right guard general Cheng Kefu as the left guard general.

古文：黄巢贼陷沂州。
现代文：黄巢贼军攻陷沂州。
English: Huang Chao's army of thieves invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：六月，以宣歙观察使高骈检校司空，兼润州刺史、镇海军节度、苏常杭润观察处置、江淮盐铁转运、江西招讨等使。
现代文：六月，任命宣歙观察使高骈为检校司空，兼润州刺史、镇海军节度使、苏常杭润观察处置使、江淮盐铁转运使、江西招讨使等。
English: In June, Gao Wei was appointed as the chief inspector of Xuanqian observation and inspection, as well as the chief inspector of Renzhou history, the chief inspector of town navy, the chief inspector of Su Changhang Run observation and disposal, the chief inspector of Jianghuai salt and iron transportation, and the chief inspector of Jiangxi recruitment, etc.

古文：以汝州防御使李钧检校尚书右仆射、潞州大都督府长史，充昭义军节度、潞刑洺磁观察等使。
现代文：任命汝州防御使李钧为检校尚书右仆射、潞州大都督府长史，充任昭义军节度使、潞邢氵名磁观察使等。
English: Appointed as the defense envoy of Ruzhou, Li Xi served as the inspector of the school, the right-hand man of the inspector of the school, the governor of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture.

古文：幽州留后李可举请以本军讨沙陀三部落，从之。
现代文：幽州留后李可举请求率领本军征讨沙陀族三部落，皇上允从。
English: After staying in Yuzhou, Li Ke requested to lead the army to conquer the three tribes of the Shatou people, and the emperor agreed.

古文：七月，黄巢自沂、海，其徒数万，趋颍、蔡，入查牙山，遂与王仙芝合。
现代文：七月，黄巢从沂州、海州出发，其部众有几万人，前往颍州、蔡州，进入查牙山，于是和王仙芝会合。
English: In July, the Yellow Nest set out from Luzhou and Haizhou, with tens of thousands of followers, and went to Luzhou and Caizhou, and entered Chaga Mountain, where it met with Wang Xianzhi.

古文：八月，贼陷随州，执刺史崔休征。
现代文：八月，贼军攻陷随州，捉住刺史崔休征。
English: In August, the bandits invaded Suizhou and captured the assassin, Cui Xuejun.

古文：群贼屯于白洑。
现代文：贼军们屯驻在白氵伏。
English: The bandits are stationed in Baiyubo.

古文：是月，江州贼首柳彦璋聚徒陷江州，杀刺史陶祥。
现代文：当月，江州贼首柳彦璋聚集徒众攻陷江州，杀害刺史陶祥。
English: In the same month, the leader of the Jiangzhou bandits, Yanukovych, gathered followers to invade Jiangzhou and killed the assassin, Tao Xiang.

古文：九月，以中书舍人崔澹权知贡举。
现代文：九月，任命中书舍人崔澹暂时掌管科举事务。
English: In September, Cui Wei, a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was appointed to temporarily take charge of the examination affairs.

古文：沙陀大寇云、朔。
现代文：沙陀族大举进犯云中郡、朔方郡。
English: The Shado people invaded Yunzhong County and Shuofang County on a large scale.

古文：十月，诏昭义节度李钧、幽州李可举、吐浑赫连铎白义诚、沙陀安庆薛葛部落合兵讨李国昌父子于蔚州。
现代文：十月，诏命昭义军节度使李钧、幽州兵马留后李可举、吐谷浑族的赫连铎、白义诚部、沙陀族的安庆、薛葛部合兵在蔚州讨伐李国昌父子。
English: In October, the imperial edict ordering the pro-rebel troops to stay in Ulsan during the festival led Li Kuo-chang and his son, Li Keju, to join forces with soldiers from the Hun, Baiyi, Shatou, Anqing, and Xuege tribes to fight against Li Guochang and his son in Ulsan.

古文：十一月，贼王仙芝率众渡汉，攻江陵，节度使杨知温婴城拒守。
现代文：十一月，贼首王仙芝率领部众渡过汉水，攻打江陵，节度使杨知温据城抵抗。
English: In November, the leader of the bandits, Wang Xianzhi, led his troops across the Han River and attacked Jiangling. Yang Zhiwen was forced to resist.

古文：知温本非御侮之才，城无宿备，贼急攻之。
现代文：杨知温本来就不是善于御敌的人才，城内没有隔宿的粮食备用，贼军急迫地攻打。
English: Yang Zhiwen was not a talented person who was good at resisting the enemy. There was no grain reserve in the city, and the thief army urgently attacked.

古文：十二月，贼陷江陵之郛，知温穷蹙，求援于襄阳，山南东道节度使李福悉其师援之。
现代文：十二月，贼军攻破江陵的外城，杨知温穷途忧急，向襄阳求救，山南东道节度使李福率领全军来救援他。
English: In December, the bandit army broke through the outer city of Gangneung. Yang Zhiyuan was in a desperate situation and asked for help from Xiangyang. The host festival of Shannan made Li Fu lead the whole army to rescue him.

古文：时沙陀军五百骑在襄阳，军次荆门，骑军击贼，败之。
现代文：当时沙陀军有五百名骑兵在襄阳，驻扎在荆门，骑兵袭击贼军，打败了他们。
English: At that time, Shatou's army had five hundred horsemen in Xiangyang, stationed at Jingmen. The horsemen attacked the invaders and defeated them.

古文：贼尽焚荆南郛郭而去。
现代文：贼军把荆南外城全部烧毁而离去。
English: The bandits burned down the entire Jingnan Outer City and left.

古文：五年春正月丁酉朔，沙陀首领李尽忠陷遮虏军。
现代文：乾符五年春，正月初一，沙陀族首领李尽忠攻陷遮虏军。
English: On the first day of the first month in the spring of the fifth year of the Kianfu era, Li Jianzhong, the leader of the Shatou tribe, invaded the Qarun army.

古文：太原节度使窦浣遣都押衙康传圭率河东土团二千人屯代州，将发，求赏呼噪，杀马步军使邓虔。
现代文：太原节度使窦浣派遣都押衙康传圭率领河东的地方团丁二千人屯驻于代州，将要出发的时候，团丁们要求奖赏，叫喊鼓噪，杀死马步军使邓虔。
English: The Taiyuan Festival made Dou Qian send 2,000 local soldiers to Daizhou, who were led by the general Kang Chuan Gui. When they were about to leave, the soldiers demanded a reward, shouted and beat drums, and killed the horse-marching envoy Deng Qian.

古文：窦浣自入军中安慰，仍借率富户钱五万贯以赏之。
现代文：窦浣亲自到军中去安抚、慰问，便向富家借取五万贯钱赏赐他们。
English: Dou Xuan himself went to the army to appease and console them, and then borrowed fifty thousand congruent money from the rich to reward them.

古文：朝廷以浣非御侮才，以前昭义节度使曹翔检校尚书右仆射，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使；又以左散骑常侍支谟为河东节度副使。
现代文：朝廷认为窦浣不是御敌之才，任命前昭义军节度使曹翔为检校尚书右仆射，兼任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使；又任命左散骑常侍支谟担任河东节度副使。
English: The imperial court believed that Dou Xuan was not an enemy of talent, and appointed Cao Xiang, the former Shouyi Army's festival envoy, as the right-hand man for the inspection of the school, and concurrently served as Taiyuan Yin, the Hokuto left-behind, and the Hedong festival envoy; he also appointed Zhimo, the left-handed cavalryman, as the deputy envoy for the Hedong festival.

古文：二月，王仙芝余党攻江西，招讨使宋威出军屡败之，仍宣诏书谕仙芝。
现代文：二月，王仙芝的余党进攻江西，招讨使宋威出兵屡次击败他，皇上仍旧发布诏书谕令王仙芝接受招安。
English: In February, Wang Xianzhi's remnant party attacked Jiangxi, and Song Wei sent troops to defeat him several times. The emperor still issued an imperial edict ordering Wang Xianzhi to accept the invitation.

古文：仙芝致书于威，求节钺，威伪许之。
现代文：王仙芝写信给宋威，请求朝廷授予他符节斧钺，宋威假意许诺了他。
English: Wang Xianzhi wrote a letter to Song Wei, asking the court to grant him the Fu Jie Axe, and Song Wei pretended to promise him.

古文：仙芝令其大将尚君长、蔡温玉奉表入朝，威乃斩君长、温玉以徇。
现代文：王仙芝命令他的大将尚君长、蔡温玉奉表入朝表示投降，宋威却杀害尚君长、蔡温玉公开示众。
English: Wang Xianzhi ordered his generals Shang Junchang and Cai Wenyu to go to the North to surrender, but Song Wei killed Shang Junchang and Cai Wenyu in public.

古文：仙芝怒，急攻洪州，陷其郛。
现代文：王仙芝大怒，急速进攻洪州，攻破了外城。
English: Enraged, Wang Xianzhi quickly attacked Hongzhou and broke through the outer city.

古文：宋威赴援，与贼战，大败之，杀仙芝，传首京师。
现代文：宋威前去救援，与贼军作战，将贼军打得大败，杀死王仙芝，把他的头颅砍下传送到京师。
English: Song Wei went to the rescue, fought with the bandits, defeated the bandits, killed Wang Xianzhi, and cut off his head and sent it to the Beijing Division.

古文：尚君长弟尚让为黄巢党，以兄遇害，乃大驱河南、山南之民，其众十万，大掠淮南，其锋甚锐。
现代文：尚君长的弟弟尚让是黄巢一党，因为哥哥遭杀害，便大量驱遣河南、山南的百姓，共十万部众，大肆劫掠淮南，其锋芒十分逼人。
English: Shang Jian, the younger brother of Shang Jian, was a member of the Yellow Nest Party. Because his brother was killed, he drove a large number of people from Henan and Shannan, a total of one hundred thousand people, and plundered Huainan. His sharpness was very compelling.

古文：侍中、晋国公王铎请自督众讨贼，天子以宋威失策杀君长，乃以王铎检校司徒、兼侍中、门下侍郎、江陵尹、荆南节度使，充诸道兵马都统。
现代文：侍中、晋国公王铎请求亲自督率部众讨伐贼军，皇上因为宋威失策杀了尚君长，便任命王铎为检校司徒、兼侍中、门下侍郎、江陵尹、荆南节度使，充任诸道兵马都统。
English: At the request of Wang Qian, a chamberlain and prince of Jin, he personally led the troops to fight against the bandits. The emperor killed Shang Qianlong because of Song Wei's blunder, and then appointed Wang Qian as a school inspector, concurrent chamberlain, subordinate chamberlain, Jiangling Yin, Jingnan festival envoy, and served as the general of soldiers and horses of all realms.

古文：三月，王铎奏兗州节度使李系为统府左司马，兼潭州刺史，充湖南都团练观察使。
现代文：三月，王铎奏请任命兖州节度使李系为统府左司马，兼任潭州刺史，充任湖南都团练观察使。
English: In March, Wang Yingxiao asked the Zhangzhou Festival to appoint Li Jie as the Left Secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee, concurrently served as the Tangzhou historian, and served as the observer of the Hunan Capital Rehearsal.

古文：黄巢之众再攻江西，陷虔、吉、饶、信等州，自宣州渡江，由浙东欲趋福建，以无舟船，乃开山洞五百里，由陆趋建州，遂陷闽中诸州。
现代文：黄巢的部众再度进攻江西，攻陷虔州、吉州、饶州、信州等州，随即从宣州渡过长江，想经由浙江前往福建，因为没有舟船，便开通山洞五百里，从陆路前去建州，于是攻陷了闽中各州。
English: Huang Chao's subordinates attacked Jiangxi again, and conquered Qianzhou, Jizhou, Raozhou, Shinshou and other provinces. They then crossed the Yangtze River from Xuanzhou, and wanted to go to Fujian via Zhejiang. Since they didn't have a boat, they opened a cave five hundred miles away and went to Jianzhou by land. They then conquered all the provinces in Central Yunnan.

古文：以吏部尚书郑从谠、吏部侍郎崔沆考宏词选人。
现代文：朝廷任命吏部尚书郑从谠、吏部侍郎崔沆主持博学宏词科考试选拔人才。
English: The imperial court appointed Zheng Zongqi, the secretary of the personnel department, and Cui Yao, the secretary of the personnel department, to preside over the erudite and broad vocabulary examination to select talents.

古文：七月，滑州、忠武、昭义诸道之师会于太原，大同军副使支谟为前锋，先趋行营。
现代文：七月，滑州、忠武军、昭义军各道的军队在太原会合，大同军副使支谟为前锋，先行前往巡视营地。
English: In July, the armies of all the provinces, including those of Luzhou, Zhongwu Army, and Shouyi Army, met in Taiyuan. The deputy envoy of Datong Army, Zhimo, was the foreman and went ahead to inspect the camp.

古文：八月，沙陀陷岢岚军，曹翔自率军赴忻州。
现代文：八月，沙陀军攻陷岢岚军，曹翔亲自率军前去沂州。
English: In August, the Satao army attacked and defeated the Shao army, and Cao Xiang personally led the army to Zhangzhou.

古文：翔至军，中风而卒，诸军皆退。
现代文：曹翔到达军中中风而死，各军都退回。
English: Cao Xiang died of a stroke in the arrival army, and all the armies retreated.

古文：太原大惧，闭城门，昭义兵士为乱，劫坊市。
现代文：太原守军非常害怕，关闭城门，昭义军士兵发生动乱，抢劫街市的百姓。
English: The defenders of Taiyuan were very afraid and closed the city gates. The soldiers of the Shao Yi Army rioted and robbed the people in the streets.

古文：九月，门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章事李蔚检校尚书左仆射，充东都留守；以吏部尚书郑从谠本官同平章事。
现代文：九月，门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事李蔚任检校尚书左仆射，充任东都留守；任命吏部尚书郑从谠以本职任同平章事。
English: In September, Li Wei, the servant of his disciple, the secretary of the administrative department and the political secretary of the administrative department, was appointed as the left-hand man of the inspector of the school, and the secretary of the administrative department, and the secretary of the administrative department, and the secretary of the administrative department, and the secretary of the administrative department, and the secretary of the administrative department, and the secretary of the administrative department.

古文：十月，司空、平章事崔彦昭罢为太子太傅。
现代文：十月，司空、平章政事崔彦昭被免职，任太子太傅。
English: In October, Siku and Pingzhang's political officer, Cui Yan Zhao, was removed from his post and appointed as the prince's daifu.

古文：十一月，制以河东宣尉使、权知代北行营招讨崔季康检校户部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度、代北行营招讨使。
现代文：十一月，决定任命河东宣慰使、暂署代北行营招讨使崔季康为检校户部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使、代北行营招讨使。
English: In November, it was decided to appoint Cui Jikang, the Hedong propaganda and consolation envoy and the temporary envoy to the North Camp, as the chief of the school inspection department, and Taiyuan Yin, who stayed in the North, as the Hedong festival envoy and the envoy to the North Camp.

古文：沙陀攻右州，崔季康救之。
现代文：沙陀军进攻石州，崔季康救援石州。
English: Shado's army attacked Shizhou, and Cui Jikang came to Shizhou's rescue.

古文：十二月，季康与北面行营招讨使李钧，与沙陀李克用战于岢岚军之洪谷，王师大败，钧中流矢而卒。
现代文：十二月，崔季康和北面行营招讨使李钧一起在岢岚军的洪谷和沙陀军李克用部作战，朝廷官军大败，李钧被流矢射中而死。
English: In December, Cui Jikang and the north side of the camp invited Li Qian to fight together in the Honggu of the Han army and the Li Ke army of the Shatou army. The imperial army was defeated, and Li Qian was shot dead.

古文：戊戌，至代州，昭义军乱，为代州百姓所杀殆尽。
现代文：十二月二十五日，官军抵达代州，昭义军士兵作乱，被代州百姓全部杀光。
English: On December 25th, the government army arrived in Daizhou. The soldiers of the Shao Yi Army rioted and were all killed by the people of Daizhou.

古文：以中书舍人张读权知礼部贡举。
现代文：任命中书舍人张读暂时主管礼部的贡举事务。
English: Zhang Yue, a middle school teacher, was appointed to be in charge of the tribute affairs of the ceremonial department.

古文：六年春正月辛卯朔，河东节度使崔季康自静乐县收合余众回军，军乱，杀孔目官石裕。
现代文：乾符六年春，正月初一，河南节度使崔季康从静乐县收聚余部返回军中，军队发生动乱，杀死了孔目官石裕。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Qianfu Spring, the Henan Festival made Cui Jikang gather the rest of the army from Jingle County and return to the army. The army was in turmoil and killed Kongme official Shi Yu.

古文：季康委众遁归行营，衙将张锴、郭朏率其众归太原，兵士鼓噪，攻东阳门，入使衙，季康父子皆被害。
现代文：崔季康委婉劝告部众返回军营，衙将张锴、郭月出率领自己的部下返回太原，兵士鼓噪起哄，攻打东阳门，进入使署衙门，崔季康父子都被杀害。
English: Cui Jikang euphemistically advised his subordinates to return to the military camp. General Zhang Ye and Guo Yuexie led their subordinates back to Taiyuan. The soldiers made a lot of noise and attacked Dongyang Gate and entered the Foreign Affairs Office Gate. Both Cui Jikang and his son were killed.

古文：三月，以吏部侍郎崔沆、崔澹试宏词选人，驾部郎中卢蕰、刑部郎中郑顼为考官。
现代文：三月，任命吏部侍郎崔沆、崔澹主试博学宏词科选拔人才，驾部郎中卢、刑部郎中郑王页任考官。
English: In March, he appointed Choi Hao, secretary of the Department of Personnel, and Choi Hao, chief examiner of the Department of Erudition and Grammar, as examiners, and Choi Chung-lu, secretary of the Department of Driving, and Choi Chung-wang, secretary of the Department of Justice, as examiners.

古文：制以邠宁节度使李偘检校户部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度等使。
现代文：决定任命宁节度使李亻品为检校户部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使等。
English: It was decided to appoint Ning Jiedu to make Li Yupin the inspector of the school, and Taiyuan Yin and Beidou to stay behind and serve as the inspector of the festival in Hedong.

古文：四月，黄巢陷桂管。
现代文：四月，黄巢攻陷桂管。
English: In April, Huang Chao captured Guizhou Province.

古文：五月，贼围广州，仍与广南节度使李岩、浙东观察使崔璆书，求保荐，乞天平节钺。
现代文：五月，贼军包围广州，并致函广南节度使李岩、浙东观察使崔霮，请求他们向朝廷保举、推荐自己，想得到天平军节度使的节杖斧钺。
English: In May, the Kleptocratic Army surrounded Guangzhou, and sent a letter to Li Yan, the chief of the Guangnan Military Division, and Cui Yao, the chief of the East Zhejiang Military Division, asking them to recommend and recommend themselves to the imperial court. They wanted to get the scepter and axe of the chief of the Tianping Army.

古文：璆岩上表论之，诏公卿议其可否。
现代文：崔霮、李岩奉上表章分析这件事，皇上下诏，要公卿们商议可否这样做。
English: Cui Wei and Li Yan were sent to analyze the matter, and the emperor issued an edict to the nobles to discuss whether or not to do so.

古文：宰相郑畋、卢携争论于中书，词语不逊，俱罢为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：宰相郑畋、卢携在中书省争论，说话时对皇上不够尊重，都被免职，担任太子宾客，分管东都事务。
English: Prime Minister Zheng Rong and Lu Zeng together argued in the Chinese Book Ministry, and when speaking, they did not respect the emperor enough. They were all dismissed from their duties, and served as guests of the prince, in charge of Dongdu affairs.

古文：以吏部侍郎崔沆为户部侍郎，户部侍郎、翰林学士豆卢彖为兵部侍郎，并本官同平章事。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎崔沆为户部侍郎，户部侍郎、翰林学士豆卢王彖任兵部侍郎，都以本职任同平章事。
English: He appointed Choe Son, the attendant of the cadre department, as the attendant of the household department, and the attendant of the household department, and the scholar of the Hanlin school, Doru Wang Ye, as the attendant of the military department, all of which were appointed with the same rank.

古文：黄巢陷广州，大掠岭南郡邑。
现代文：黄巢攻陷广州，大肆劫掠岭南各郡县。
English: Huang Chao captured Guangzhou and plundered all the counties in southern Lingnan.

古文：八月，制以特进、检校司空、东都留守李蔚为检校司徒、同平章事，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度观察，兼代北行营招讨供军等使。
现代文：八月，决定任命特进、检校司空、东都留守李蔚为检校司徒、同平章事，兼任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使、观察使，兼代北行营招讨供军使等。
English: In August, it was decided to appoint Li Wei, who was a special envoy, a school inspector, and a member of the Dongdu detachment, as a school inspector and a member of the Dongdu detachment, as well as Taiyuan Yin, a member of the Beidou detachment, an envoy to the Hedong Festival, an observation envoy, and an envoy to the Beigang Camp to recruit and supply troops.

古文：十月，制以镇海军节度、浙江西道观察处置等使高骈检校司徒、同平章事、扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度副大使、知节度事、江淮盐铁转运、江南行营招讨等使，进封燕国公，食邑三千户。
现代文：十月，决定任命镇海军节度使、浙江西道观察处置使高骈任检校司徒、同平章事、扬州大都督府长史，充任淮南节度副大使，掌管节度使事务，并任江淮盐铁转运使、江南行营招讨使，晋封为燕国公，食邑三千户。
English: In October, it was decided to appoint Zhen Navy Festival Envoy, Zhejiang West Road Observation and Disposal Envoy Gao Jun as School Inspection Officer, Tongping Secretary, Yangzhou Grand Governor, Deputy Ambassador of Huainan Festival, in charge of Festival Envoy affairs, and also appointed as Jianghuai Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy, Jiangnan Campaign Envoy, and promoted to Yan Guo Gong, with 3,000 households.

古文：初，骈在浙西，遣大将张璘、梁绩等大破黄巢于浙东，贼进寇福建，逾岭表，故移镇扬州。
现代文：当初，高骈在浙西派大将张瞞、梁绩等在浙东把黄巢打得大败，贼军进犯福建，越过岭表一带，因此，高骈移军镇守扬州。
English: At first, Gao Kun sent generals Zhang Xie and Liang Pi to western Zhejiang, and they defeated Huang Chao in eastern Zhejiang. The invading army invaded Fujian and crossed the Ling table region. Therefore, Gao Kun moved his army to defend Yangzhou.

古文：时贼北逾大庾岭，朝廷授骈诸道行营兵马都统。
现代文：当时贼军北过大庾岭，朝廷授予高骈诸道行营兵马都统之职。
English: At that time, the invading army passed north of Dalatling, and the imperial court awarded Gao Jun the post of commander of all the armies and horses in the campaign.

古文：太原节度使李蔚卒。
现代文：太原节度使李蔚去世。
English: Li Wei passed away at the Taiyuan Festival.

古文：以礼部侍郎张读权知左丞事。
现代文：任命礼部侍郎张读暂时掌管左丞事务。
English: He appointed Zhang Yue, an attendant of the Ceremonial Department, to be in charge of the affairs of the Left Hand for the time being.

古文：十一月，制以银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、河东行军司马、雁门代北制置等使、石岭镇北兵马、代北军等使、上柱国康传圭检校工部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：十一月，决定任命银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、河东行军司马、雁门代北制置使、石岭镇北兵马使、代北军使、上柱国康传圭任检校工部尚书，兼任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: In November, it was decided to appoint Yin Qingguanglu as the doctor, Guan Qiao as the right rider, Guan Qiao as the cavalryman, Guan Qiao as the cavalryman, Guan Qiao as the northern army, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern army, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Qiao as the northern soldiers, Guan Q

古文：时传圭已率兵在代州，是月自行营赴任，两都虞候张锴、郭朏迎于鸟城驿，并杀之，军中震悚。
现代文：当时康传圭已经率兵在代州，当月从行营前去任职，两都虞候张锴、郭月出在乌城驿迎接他，都被杀掉，军中震惊惶惧。
English: At that time, Kang Chuan Gui had already led the soldiers in Daizhou. That month, he left the camp to go to his post. Zhang Ye and Guo Yueyue, both of whom were waiting to meet him in Wucheng, were killed. The army was shocked and frightened.

古文：又制以神策大将军周宝检校尚书左仆射，兼润州刺史、镇海军节度、浙江西道观察等使。
现代文：又决定任命神策大将军周宝为检校尚书左仆射，兼润州刺史、镇海军节度使、浙江西道观察使等。
English: It was also decided to appoint the great general Zhou Bao as the inspector of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection.

古文：以定州已来制置内闲厩宫苑等使、金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书、上柱国、太原县开国伯、食邑七百户王处存检校户部尚书，兼定州刺史，充义武军节度、易定观察处置、北平军等使。
现代文：命令定州以来制置内闲厩宫苑使、金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书、上柱国、太原县开国伯、食邑七百户王处存为检校户部尚书，兼定州刺史，充任义武军节度使、易定观察处置使、北平军使等。
English: Since the order of Dingzhou, the Palace Envoy of Inner Leisure Stables, the Doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the Inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangzhu Guo, the Founding Father of Taiyuan County, and the King of 700 Households of Shuhei have been set up as the Inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department, and also the Historian of Dingzhou, and have been appointed as the Festival Envoy of the Volunteer Army, the Observation and Disposition Envoy of Yiding, and the Beiping Envoy, etc.

古文：十二月，制以河东马步军都虞候硃玫为代州刺史。
现代文：十二月，决定任命河东马步军都虞候朱玫为代州刺史。
English: In December, it was decided to appoint Zhu Mei, the leader of the horse cavalry in the capital of Hedong Province, as the official historian of Daizhou.

古文：以太子宾客分司卢携为兵部尚书、同平章事；太子宾客郑畋检校左仆射、凤翔尹，充凤翔节度使。
现代文：任命太子宾客分司卢携为兵部尚书、同平章事；太子宾客郑畋任检校左仆射、凤翔尹，充任凤翔节度使。
English: Appointed the prince's guest branch secretary Lu Jie as the military department Shang Shu and Tong Ping Zhangji; the prince's guest Zheng Wei as the school inspector Zuopu Ya and Feng Xiang Yin as the Feng Xiang festival envoy.

古文：广明元年春正月乙卯朔，上御宣政殿，制曰：
现代文：广明元年春，正月初一，皇上驾临宣政殿，颁发制命说：
English: In the spring of the first year of the Guangming Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor arrived at the Xuanzheng Palace, issued an order and said:

古文：朕祗膺宝祚，嗣守宗祧，夙夜一心，勤劳八载，实欲驱黎元于仁寿，致华夏之升平。
现代文： 我恭敬地承受了宝贵的福祚，继守着宗庙，昼夜专心，勤苦劳碌了八年，实在想把百姓们引向仁惠长寿的境界，使华夏达到太平。
English: I have respectfully received precious blessings. I have been guarding the ancestral temple, concentrating day and night, and working hard for eight years. I really want to lead the people to the realm of benevolence and longevity, and make China peaceful.

古文：而国步犹艰，群生寡遂，灾迍荐起，寇孽仍臻。
现代文：但国家举步还很艰难，众生难以满足，灾祸困厄连续发生，以至于寇盗兴起。
English: However, it is still very difficult for the country to move forward, it is difficult for sentient beings to be satisfied, and disasters and hardships continue to occur, so much so that banditry is on the rise.

古文：窃弄干戈，连攻郡邑，虽输降款，未息狂谋。
现代文：他们偷偷地准备武装，连续攻击城镇，虽然送来了投降的条款，却没有停止猖狂的图谋。
English: They secretly prepared weapons, attacked towns one after another, and although they sent terms of surrender, they did not stop their furious plotting.

古文：江右、海南，疮痍既甚，湖湘荆汉，耕织屡空。
现代文：江右海南的疮痍既很严重，湖湘荆汉的农耕纺织又屡遭破坏。
English: The devastation in the south of the Yangtze River and Hainan is very serious, and the agricultural textiles in Jinghan, Hunan, have been repeatedly damaged.

古文：言念疲赢，良深轸恻。我心未济，天道如何。
现代文：想到那些疲困衰弱的百姓，着实感到深沉的悲哀和凄恻，我心中无计可施，天道又能怎么样呢！
English: When I think of those tired and weak people, I really feel deep sorrow and desolation. In my heart, there is nothing I can do. What can the heavenly way do?

古文：赖近者严敕师徒，稍闻胜捷，皆明圣之潜祐，宁菲德以言功。
现代文：幸而最近严令军队剿捕，逐渐听到一些捷传。这都是因为圣贤在暗中保佑，并不是我凭着自己的薄德炫耀功劳。
English: Fortunately, recently the army has been strictly ordered to hunt and capture, and gradually I have heard some legends of success. This is all due to the blessing of the sages in the dark, and it is not that I show off my merits with my own weak virtue.

古文：属节变三阳，日当首岁，乃御正殿，爰命改元，况及发生，是宜在宥。
现代文：适值季节变换，时当年初，我便来到正殿，决定改换年号，这正是应当宽恕一切的时候，更何况处在万物发育生长之中呢！
English: At the beginning of the year, I came to the main hall at the right time for the change of seasons and decided to change the year number. This is exactly the time when everything should be forgiven, not to mention that everything is in the process of development and growth!

古文：自古继业守文之主，握图御宇之君，必自正月吉辰，发号施令。所以垂千年之懿范，固万代之洪基，莫不由斯道也。
现代文：自古以来继承大业遵守成法的人主，掌握图牒驾驭寰宇的国君，必然在每年正月的吉日发号施令，之所以能留下千年不朽的美德，巩固万代传承的伟大基业，无不是由于这个做法。
English: Since ancient times, those who have inherited the great cause of abiding by the law, and the sovereigns who have mastered the map and mastered the world, are bound to issue orders on the auspicious day of the first month of each year. The reason why they can leave a thousand years of immortal virtue and consolidate the great heritage passed down from generation to generation is due to this practice.

古文：可改乾符七年为广明元年。
现代文：可改乾符七年为广明元年。
English: It can be changed to Guangming Yuan for seven years.

古文：近日东南州府，频奏草贼结连。
现代文： 近来东南地区各州府不断上奏草贼结帮连伙。
English: Recently, the state governments in the southeastern region have been constantly playing up the idea of gangs of grass thieves.

古文：本是平人，迫于饥馑，驱之为盗，情不愿为。
现代文：他们本是一些普通百姓，迫于饥饿的驱使成为盗贼，其本心是不愿意的。
English: They were ordinary people who were forced by hunger to become thieves, which they did not want to do.

古文：委所在长吏子细晓谕，如自首归降，保非诈伪，便须抚纳，不要勘问。
现代文：现在委托所有地方的官员仔细告诉他们，如果自首归降朝廷，并保证不是欺骗做假，就一定会安抚接纳他们，不要再追究审问。
English: Now, officials in all places are instructed to carefully tell them that if they surrender to the imperial court and guarantee that they are not cheating or faking, they will definitely be appeased and accepted, and they will no longer be investigated and interrogated.

古文：如未倒戈，即登时剪扑。
现代文：如果不肯放下武器投降，就立即剪除扑灭。
English: If they refuse to lay down their weapons and surrender, they will be eliminated immediately.

古文：东南州府遭贼之处，农桑失业，耕种不时。
现代文：东南一带的州府遭受贼军破坏的地方，农夫织妇丧失生计，耕种误了农时。
English: In the southeastern part of the country, where state capitals were destroyed by the bandits, farmers and weavers lost their livelihoods and lost their farming time.

古文：其河中府、太原府遭贼寇掠处，亦宜准此。
现代文：其中广州、荆南、湖南，盗贼停留驻扎下来，人口逃亡，伤害最为严重。
English: Among them, Guangzhou, Jingnan and Hunan suffered the most serious damage as the thieves stayed and settled down, while the population fled.

古文：吏部选人粟错及除驳放者，除身名渝滥欠考外，并以比远残阙收注。
现代文：广明以前的各项赋税，可以让百姓减少四成交纳。河中府、太原府遭受贼寇劫掠的地方，也应该照这个原则处理。
English: The various taxes before Guangming can allow the people to reduce the transaction fee by 40%. The places in Hechu Prefecture and Taiyuan Prefecture that have been plundered by bandits should also be dealt with according to this principle.

古文：入仕之门，兵部最滥，全无根本，颇坏纪纲。近者武官多转入文官，依资除授，宜惩僭幸，以辨品流。
现代文： 吏部所铨选的人才，因曲意奉承而夹杂其中以及被驳回免官的人，除了名声过于败坏失于考察者外，都因大比之期尚远，人员空缺而收入册籍。入仕做官的途径，依据资历授予官职，应当惩处超越本分和只图侥幸的人，以分清品级流别。
English: The talent selected by the cadre department, the one who was flattered by flattery, and the one who was dismissed from office, in addition to the reputation that was too corrupt and lost to the inspectors, were all included in the register due to the long waiting period and the vacancy of personnel. The way to enter the civil service, according to the seniority awarded to the civil service, should punish those who exceed their duties and those who are just lucky, in order to distinguish the grade level.

古文：自今后武官不得转入文官选改，所冀轮辕各适，秩序区分，其内司不在此限。
现代文：从今以后武官不得转入文官任职，所希望的是各有所适，规矩明确，但宫内的侍臣不受这限制。 
English: From now on, military attachés are not allowed to be transferred to civilian positions. What is desired is that each is appropriate and the rules are clear, but palace retainers are not subject to this restriction.

古文：沙陀部落逾鹰门关，进逼忻州。
现代文：沙陀部落越过雁门关，进而逼近忻州。
English: The Shado tribe crossed the Wild Goose Gate and then approached Zhangzhou.

古文：二月，沙陀逼太原，陷大谷。
现代文：二月，沙陀军逼近太原，攻陷太谷。
English: In February, Shado's army approached Taiyuan and captured Taiyuan.

古文：康传圭遣大将伊钊、张彦球、苏弘轸分兵拒之于秦城驿，为沙陀所败。
现代文：康传圭派大将伊钊、张彦球、苏弘轸在秦城驿分兵抵抗，被沙陀军击败。
English: Kang Chuan Kei sent generals I Chun, Zhang Yanqiu, and Su Hongtao to split the army and resist in Qincheng, but they were defeated by Shatou's army.

古文：传圭怒，斩苏弘轸。
现代文：康传圭发怒，斩了苏弘轸。
English: Kang Chuan-gyu became enraged and beheaded Su Hongtao.

古文：张彦球部下兵士为乱，倒戈攻太原，杀传圭，监军使周从寓安慰方定。
现代文：张彦球部下的士兵作乱，倒戈进攻太原，杀害康传圭，监军使周从寓对士兵们安抚慰问，才安定了下来。
English: The soldiers under Zhang Yanqiu's division caused a riot, attacked Taiyuan in a counter-insurgency, killed Kang Chuan Gui, and the supervising general Zhou Congye comforted and consoled the soldiers, before things settled down.

古文：是月，制以开府仪同三司、门下侍郎、兼兵部尚书、同平章事、充太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公、食邑三千户郑从谠检校司空、同平章事，兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度、管内观察处置兼行营招讨供军等使。
现代文：当月，决定任命开府仪同三司、门下侍郎、兼职兵部尚书、同平章事、充任太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公、食邑三千户郑从谠为检校司空、同平章事，兼任太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使、辖区内观察处置使兼行营招讨供军使等。
English: In the same month, it was decided to appoint Zheng Congyi, the third secretary of Kaifu, his attendant, the part-time Hyobu Shangshu, the part-time Tongping Zhangji, the full-time Taiqing palace envoy, the scholar of the Hongwen Museum, the envoy of the Enrichment Fund, Shangzhuo Province, the founding father of Shenyang County, the three thousand households of the food village as the school inspection officer, the part-time Tongping Zhangji, the part-time Taiyuan Yin, the part-time Beidou, the part-time Hedong Festival envoy, the part-time observation and disposal envoy in the

古文：黄巢贼军自衡、永州下，频陷湖南、江西属郡。
现代文：黄巢的贼军从衡州、永州南下，频频攻陷湖南、江西所属郡县。
English: Huang Chao's army of thieves went south from Hengzhou and Yongzhou, and frequently invaded counties in Hunan and Jiangxi.

古文：时都统王铎前锋都将李系守潭州，有众五万，并诸团结军号十万。
现代文：当时都统王铎的前锋都将李亻系镇守潭州，有部众五万人，加上各地方团练组合而成的部队号称十万人。
English: At that time, the forwards of Wang Qian, the governor of the capital city, were all from the Li Qian line, guarding Tanzhou, with a total of fifty thousand people, plus the troops combined from the local group training, known as one hundred thousand people.

古文：贼自桂阳编木为筏数千，其众乘暴水沿湘而下，径至潭州，急攻其城，一日而陷。
现代文：贼军在桂阳编成了几千只木筏，贼兵乘河水暴涨沿湘江顺流而下，直到潭州，急忙攻城，一天就攻下了。
English: In Guiyang, the bandit army made thousands of wooden rafts. The bandits took advantage of the rapid rise of the river and went down the Hunan River until they reached Tanzhou. They hurriedly attacked the city and captured it in one day.

古文：李系仅以身免，兵士五万皆为贼所杀，流尸塞江。
现代文：李亻系仅只身脱逃，五万士兵都被贼军杀死，漂浮的尸体把江流都阻塞了。
English: Li Qiye was the only one to escape. Fifty thousand soldiers were killed by the bandits, and the floating bodies blocked the river.

古文：贼将尚让乘胜沿流而下，进逼江陵。
现代文：贼将尚让乘胜沿江顺流而下，进而逼近江陵。
English: The thief let Shang Yongsheng float down the river, and then approached Gangneung.

古文：王铎闻系军败，乃弃城奔襄阳。
现代文：王铎听说李亻系的军队失败，便放弃江陵城池逃往襄阳。
English: When Wang Hui heard that the Li Hui army had failed, he abandoned the city of Jiangling and fled to Yangyang.

古文：别将刘汉宏大掠江陵之民，剽肃不胜其酷，士民亡窜山谷，江陵焚剽殆尽。
现代文：偏将刘汉宏大肆劫掠江陵的百姓，抢劫搜刮极其残酷，士民们逃亡奔窜到山谷中，江陵几乎被焚烧抢劫得精光。
English: Liu Hanhong, the warlord, plundered the people of Gangneung on a large scale, and the looting was extremely cruel. The people fled to the valley, and Gangneung was almost completely burned and looted.

古文：半月余，贼众方至江陵。
现代文：过了半个多月，贼军才到江陵。
English: It took more than half a month for the bandits to reach Gangneung.

古文：三月，贼悉众欲寇襄阳，江西招讨使曹全晸与襄阳节度使刘巨容谋拒之。
现代文：三月，贼军打算全军进犯襄阳，江西招讨使曹全曰政与襄阳节度使刘巨容商议拒战。
English: In March, the Kleptocrats planned to invade Xiangyang with their entire army. Jiangxi invited Cao Quanzhong to negotiate with Xiangyang Governor Liu Jiurong to refuse to fight.

古文：时营于荆门，贼军一万屯于团林驿。全晸命巨容悉以精甲阵于林薄之中，自以骑军挑战，伪不胜而遁。
现代文：当时他们驻军于荆门，贼军一万屯驻于团林驿，曹全曰政命令刘巨容把精兵全部列阵于密林中，亲自率领骑兵去挑战，假意不能取胜而逃跑。
English: At that time, their troops were stationed in Jingmen, and the bandits' army of ten thousand troops was stationed in Linyi. Cao Quan said that the government ordered Liu Jirong to line up all the elite soldiers in the dense forest, personally led the cavalry to challenge, pretended that he could not win and fled.

古文：贼大乘之，比至荆门，其徒不成列，巨容发伏击之，贼大溃而走。
现代文：贼军乘机大进，等他们到达荆门时，他们的队伍已经涣散得不能成列，刘巨容便指挥伏兵进行攻击，贼军全面崩溃而逃。
English: The thief army took advantage of the opportunity to advance. By the time they arrived at Jingmen, their team had dispersed so much that they could not form a line. Liu Jirong then commanded the ambush to attack. The thief army completely collapsed and fled.

古文：全晸铁骑急追之，比至江陵，十俘七八。
现代文：曹全曰政以铁骑迅速追赶，等追到江陵时，敌人十之七八都被俘虏了。
English: Cao Quan said that Zheng quickly chased them with an iron horse, and by the time they reached Jiangling, seventy-eight out of ten of the enemy had been captured.

古文：黄巢、尚让以余众徒济江。
现代文：黄巢、尚让命余下的部众徒身渡过长江。
English: Huang Chao let the remaining members of his party cross the Yangtze River.

古文：全晸方渡江袭贼，遽诏至，以段彦谟为江西节度使，全晸乃还。
现代文：曹全曰政正渡长江袭击贼军，突然圣旨到了，任命段彦谟为江西节度使，曹全曰政即返回。
English: Cao Quan said that Zheng Zheng had crossed the Yangtze River to attack the rebel army. Suddenly, the imperial edict arrived, appointing Duan Yanmu as the envoy to the Jiangxi Festival. Cao Quan said that Zheng Zheng would return.

古文：贼遂率舟军东下，攻鄂州，陷其郛。
现代文：贼首便率领水军沿江东下，进攻鄂州，攻进其外城。
English: The thief-in-chief then led the navy eastward along the river, attacked Ezhou, and entered its outer city.

古文：全晸救至，贼遂转战江西，陷江西饶、信、杭、衢、宣、歙、池等十五州。
现代文：曹全曰政的救兵来到，贼军便转战到江西，攻下江西的饶州、信州、杭州、衢州、宣州、歙州、池州等十五个州城。
English: Cao Quan said that the government's rescuers had arrived, and the thief army then turned to fight in Jiangxi, capturing 15 provincial capitals in Jiangxi, including Raozhou, Xinshou, Hangzhou, Ganzhou, Xuanzhou, Ganzhou, and Chizhou.

古文：全晸在江西。
现代文：曹全曰政留在江西。
English: Cao Quan said that the government would remain in Jiangxi.

古文：朝廷以王铎统众无功，乃授淮南节度使高骈为诸道兵马行营都统。
现代文：朝廷因为王铎统领众将未建功绩，便授予淮南节度使高骈诸道兵马行营都统之职。
English: The imperial court awarded Huainan Jiedu the position of Gaochun as the commander-in-chief of the army and cavalry of all the provinces, because Wang Yao did not perform any outstanding feats as the leader of the people.

古文：骈令大将张璘渡江讨贼，屡捷。
现代文：高骈命大将张王渡过长江讨伐贼军，屡次取胜。
English: Zhang Wang, the general of the Gaochun army, crossed the Yangtze River to fight against the invaders and won many victories.

古文：贼众疫疠，其将李罕之以一军投淮南，其众稍沮。
现代文：贼军中发生传染疫病，其将领李罕之率领一支军队投向淮南，黄巢的部众士气逐渐沮丧。
English: When an infectious disease broke out among the bandits, their general Li Hanzhi led an army to Huainan, and the morale of the Yellow Nest troops gradually sank.

古文：是月，沙陀寇忻、代，诏以汝州防御使诸葛爽为北面行营副招讨，率东都防御兵士赴代州。
现代文：当月，沙陀族进犯忻州、代州，诏令任命汝州防御使诸葛爽为北面行营副招讨，率领在东都防御贼军的士卒前往代州。
English: In the same month, the Shado people invaded Bozhou and Daizhou, and the imperial edict appointed Zhuge Shuang as the deputy commander of the north side of the defense of Ruzhou, and led the soldiers who defended the thief army in Dongdu to Daizhou.

古文：四月甲申朔，大雨雹，大风拔两京街树十二三，东都长夏门内古槐十拔七八，宫殿鸱尾皆落。
现代文：四月初一，天降大雨、大风夹杂冰雹，两京街上的树木十之二三被拔起，东都长夏门内的古槐十之七八被拔起，宫殿屋脊上的鸱尾都落了下来。
English: On the first day of April, heavy rain, wind and hail fell. Two-thirds of the trees on the streets of Beijing were uprooted, and seven-eighths of the ancient gates in the eastern capital Changxiamen were uprooted. The irises on the roof of the palace all fell down.

古文：丁酉，制以检校吏部尚书、前太常卿、上柱国、陇西郡开国公、食邑三千户李琢为光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、御史大夫，充蔚朔等州诸道行营都招讨使；应东北面行营李孝昌、李元礼、诸葛爽、王重盈、硃玫等兵马及忻、代州土团，并取琢处分。
现代文：四月十四日，决定任命检校吏部尚书、前太常卿、上柱国、陇西郡开国公、食邑三千户李琢为光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、御史大夫，充任蔚州、朔州等州诸道行营都招讨使；策应东北面行营李孝昌、李元礼、诸葛爽、王重盈、朱玫等人的兵马及忻州、代州的本地团练，全部趋赴琢州听调遣。
English: On April 14, it was decided to appoint Li Tuo, the inspector of the inspection department, Shang Shu, the former Taizhongqing, Shangzhu Guo, the founding father of Shaanxi County, and the three thousand households of the food village, as the doctor of Guanglu, the inspector of the inspection department, Shang Shu, the right-hand man, and the doctor of history, and to serve as the envoy to all the campaigns in Ulshu and Shuozhou; the soldiers and horses of Li Xiaochang, Li Yuanli, Zhuge Shuang, Wang Chung Ying, Zhu Mei and others who should go to the northeastern campaign, and the local

古文：以内常侍张存礼充都粮料使，判官崔鋋充制置副使。
现代文：任命内常侍张存礼充任都粮料使，判官崔钅延充任制置使。
English: He appointed Zhang Cunli, the inner chamberlain, as the official grain envoy to the capital, and the judge, Cui Jian, as the official envoy.

古文：六月，代北行营招讨使李琢、幽州节度使李可举、吐浑首领赫连铎等军讨李克用于云州。
现代文：六月，代北行营招讨使李琢、幽州节度使李可举、吐谷浑部族首领赫连铎等的军队在云州讨伐李克用。
English: In June, on behalf of the northbound battalion, the army of Li Tuo, the Yuzhou festival, Li Keju, and the leader of the Tuyugun tribe, Khelieng, fought against Li Ke in Yunnan.

古文：时克用令其大将军傅文达守蔚州，高文集守朔州。
现代文：当时李克用命令他的大将军傅文达守御蔚州，高文集守御朔州。
English: At that time, Li Ke ordered his general Fu Wenda to guard Ulshu and Gao Wenshu to guard Yangshuo.

古文：吐浑赫连铎遣人说高文集令归国，文集与沙陀首领李友金、萨葛都督米海万、安庆都督史敬存以前蔚州归款于李琢。
现代文：吐谷浑赫连铎派人劝说高文集，让他归附朝廷，高文集和沙陀族首领李友金、萨葛都督米海万、安庆都督史敬存一起，把蔚州的前沿归向李琢。
English: Tugu Hunkhelian sent people to persuade Gao Wenshu to attach him to the imperial court. Gao Wenshu, together with the leader of the Satoru tribe, Li Youjin, the governor of Sagat, Mai Haiwan, and the governor of Anqing, Shi Jingxuan, turned the forefront of Ulshu to Li Tuo.

古文：时克用率众御燕军于雄武军。
现代文：当时李克用率领部众正在雄武军抵抗燕军。
English: At that time, Li Ke used to lead the troops to resist the Yan army.

古文：七月，沙陀三部落李友金等开门迎大军，克用闻之，亟来赴援，为李可举之追击，大败于药兒岭。
现代文：七月，沙陀族李友金等三部落打开城门迎接朝廷大军，李克用听到这个消息，急忙赶来增援，但是被李可举的军队追击，在药儿岭被打得大败。
English: In July, Li Youjin and other three tribes of the Shado tribe opened the city gate to welcome the imperial army. Li Ke used the news to rush to reinforce, but he was chased by Li Keju's army and was defeated in Yaliling.

古文：李琢、赫连铎又击败于蔚州，降文达，李克用部下皆溃，独与国昌及诸兄弟北入达靼部。
现代文：李琢、赫连铎又在蔚州击败他，使傅文达投降，李克用的部下都溃散了，惟独他和李国昌以及各位兄弟向北逃入鞑靼部。
English: Li Taku and Helianthus defeated him again in Ulshu, forcing Fu Wenda to surrender. Li Ke's subordinates scattered, but he, Li Guochang, and the other brothers fled north to Tartary.

古文：乃以吐浑都督赫连铎为云州刺史、大同军防御使，吐浑白义诚为蔚州刺史，萨葛米海万为朔州刺史，加李可举检校司徒、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷便任命吐谷浑都督赫连铎为云州刺史、大同军防御使，吐谷浑的白义诚为蔚州刺史，萨葛首领米海万为朔州刺史，加授李可举为检校司徒、同平章事。
English: The imperial court then appointed Hereng Yao, the governor of Tugu Hun, as the historian of Yunnan and the defense envoy of Datong Army, Bai Yicheng, the governor of Tugu Hun, as the historian of Ulsan, the leader of Sagat, Mai Hai Wan, as the historian of Shuozhou, and Li Kegui as the inspector of schools and the same rank.

古文：八月，黄巢之众渡江寇淮南。
现代文：八月，黄巢的部众渡过长江进犯淮南。
English: In August, Huang Chao's troops crossed the Yangtze River to invade Huainan.

古文：是岁春末，贼在信州疫疠，其徒多丧。淮南将张璘急击之，贼惧，以金啖璘，仍致书高骈乞保命归国。
现代文：这年春末，贼军在信州流行传染疫病，其士卒大多丧失，淮南将领张王急速攻击贼军，贼军畏惧，以钱财献给张王，并写信给高骈请求保命回乡。
English: At the end of the spring of that year, the bandit army in Xinshou was plagued by an infectious disease, and most of its soldiers were lost. Zhang Wang, the general of Huainan, quickly attacked the bandit army. The bandit army was afraid and offered money and treasure to Zhang Wang, and wrote to Gao Gan to request that he return to his hometown to save his life.

古文：骈信之，厚待其使，许求节钺。
现代文：高骈相信了他们，优待了他们的使者，答应为他们向朝廷请求节仗斧钺。
English: Gao Yao believed them, treated their envoys well, and promised to ask the imperial court for a knighthood for them.

古文：时昭义、武宁、义武等军兵马数万赴淮南，骈欲收功于己，乃奏贼已将殄，不假诸道之师，并遣还北。贼知诸军已退，以求节钺不获，暴怒，与骈绝，请战。
现代文：当时昭义军、武宁军、义武军的几万兵马正前往淮南，高骈想把功劳都归于自己，便上奏说贼军已即将消灭，不用借助于各道的军队了，让他们全部回到北方去，贼军知道其他各军已退，便以请求节仗斧钺没有得到为借口，大发雷霆，和高骈绝交请求交战。
English: At that time, tens of thousands of soldiers and horses of the Shouyi Army, the Wu Ning Army, and the Yi Wu Army were heading to Huainan. Gao Gan wanted to take all the credit for himself, so he made a report saying that the thief army was about to be eliminated, and there was no need to rely on the armies of various provinces. Let them all go back to the north. The thief army knew that the other armies had retreated, and they were furious with the excuse that they did not get the request for the festival battle axe, and Gao Gan broke off diplomatic relations and requested to fight.

古文：骈怒，令张璘整军击之，为贼所败，临阵杀璘。
现代文：高骈大怒，命令张王整顿军卒攻击贼军，结果被贼军打退了，在阵前杀了张王。
English: Gao Gan was furious and ordered Zhang Wang's rectification soldiers to attack the thief army. As a result, the thief army was repulsed and killed Zhang Wang before the battle.

古文：贼遂乘胜渡江，攻天长、六合等县，骈不能拒，但决陈登水自固而已。
现代文：贼军便乘胜渡过长江，攻打天长、六合等县，高骈不能抵抗，只有挖开陈登水固守自己的营地而已。
English: The bandit army took advantage of the victory to cross the Yangtze River and attack Tianchang, Liuhe and other counties. Gao Gan could not resist, and only dug up Chen Dengshui to defend his camp.

古文：朝廷闻贼复振，大恐，诏河南诸道之师屯于溵水。
现代文：朝廷听说贼军又重振旗鼓，非常恐慌；诏命河南各道的军队屯驻在氵殷水。
English: The imperial court was very alarmed to hear that the bandit army had been reinvigorated; the imperial edict ordered the armies of all provinces in Henan to be stationed in Shuangshui.

古文：官军大集，贼未北渡。
现代文：官军大量集中，贼军未能渡水北上。
English: The government army was heavily concentrated, and the rebel army was unable to cross the water to the north.

古文：时兗州节度使齐克让屯汝州。
现代文：当时兖州节度使齐克让屯驻在汝州。
English: At that time, the Zhangzhou Festival made Zikezhan stationed in Ruzhou.

古文：九月，徐州兵三千人赴溵水，途经许。
现代文：九月，徐州三千名士兵前往氵殷水，途中经过许州。
English: In September, 3,000 soldiers from Xuzhou passed through Huzhou on their way to Yan'an.

古文：许州节度使薛能前为徐帅，得军民情。
现代文：许州节度使薛能原先是徐州主帅，颇得军民之心。
English: The Xuzhou Festival made Xue Neng, who was originally the head coach of Xuzhou, win the hearts of the military and the people.

古文：徐军吏至，请馆，能以徐军怀惠，令馆于州内。
现代文：徐州军吏到达，请求安排馆舍，薛能以为徐州军队怀念他的恩惠，令他们住在州府内。
English: Xuzhou military officials arrived and requested to arrange a museum building. Xue Neng thought that the Xuzhou army would miss his favor and let them live in the state capital.

古文：许军惧徐人见袭，许州大将周岌自溵水以其戍卒还，逐薛能，自据其城。
现代文：许州军人害怕被徐州军队袭击，许州军大将周岌从氵殷水率领他的戍卒回到州城，赶走了薛能，自己占据了州城。
English: The soldiers of Xuzhou were afraid of being attacked by the Xuzhou army. The general of the Xuzhou army, Zhou Rui, led his subordinates back to the state capital from Yan'an, drove Xue Neng away, and occupied the state capital himself.

古文：徐军已至河阴，闻许军乱，徐将时溥亦以戍兵还徐，逐节度使支详。
现代文：徐州军队已经到了河阴，听说许州军队动乱，徐州将领时溥也率领戍兵返回徐州，赶走了节度使支详。
English: The Xuzhou army had already arrived in Hexin. Hearing that the Xuzhou army was in turmoil, the Xuzhou general, Shijie, also led the soldiers to return to Xuzhou and drove away the military attaché.

古文：齐克让惧兵见袭，亦还兗州。
现代文：齐克让害怕士兵袭击他，也回到兖州。
English: Zeke also returned to Luzhou, fearing that the soldiers would attack him.

古文：溵水诸军皆散。
现代文：至此，氵殷州各军都解散了。
English: At this point, all the armies in Shuangyin County were disbanded.

古文：贼闻之，十月，乃悉众渡淮。
现代文：贼军知道了这些情况，便在十月全部渡过淮河。
English: Knowing this, the bandits crossed the Huai River completely in October.

古文：黄巢自号率土大将军，其众富足，自淮已北整众而行，不剽财货，惟驱丁壮为兵耳。
现代文：黄巢自称为率土大将军，他的部众很富足，从淮河以北整顿部队前进，不抢掠钱财，只驱赶青壮年男子当兵。
English: Huang Chao claimed to be the leader of the local great generals. His subordinates were very wealthy. They advanced from the north of the Huai River to rectify the troops. They did not loot money, but only drove young men to become soldiers.

古文：十一月辛亥朔。
现代文：十一月初一为辛亥日。
English: The first day of November is Xinhai Day.

古文：己巳，贼陷东都，留守刘允章率分司官属迎谒之，贼供顿而去，坊市晏然。
现代文：十一月十九日，贼军攻破东都，东都留守刘允章率领分掌东都的官员部属迎接、拜见贼首，供应了饮食及行李之物之后，贼军就离去了，街市中秩序井然。
English: On November 19th, the thief army broke through Dongdu. Liu Yunzhang, the leader of Dongdu, stayed behind to lead the officials and subordinates in charge of Dongdu to meet and greet the thief, and after providing food and luggage, the thief army left, and the streets and markets were in good order.

古文：壬申，陷虢州。
现代文：十一月二十二日，贼军攻陷虢州。
English: On November 22nd, the bandits invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：丙子，攻潼关，守关诸将望风自溃。
现代文：十一月二十六日，贼军进攻潼关，守关的将军们一看局势，不战而自溃。
English: On November 26th, the bandits attacked Shaoguan. The generals guarding Shaoguan saw the situation and self-destructed without a fight.

古文：十二月庚辰朔。
现代文：十二月初一为庚辰日。
English: The first day of December is Geng Chen Day.

古文：辛巳，贼据潼关。
现代文：十二月初一，贼军占据潼关。
English: On the first day of December, the bandits occupied Shaoguan.

古文：时左军中尉田令孜专政，宰相卢携曲事之，相与误谋，以至倾败。
现代文：当时，左军中尉田令孜专权，宰相卢携曲意奉承他，两人互相导致谋划失误，以至于倾覆失败。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Tian Lingzi of the Left Army had absolute power, Prime Minister Lu Zhiqu flattered him, and the two of them caused each other to make mistakes in planning, so that the overthrow failed.

古文：令孜恐众罪加己，请贬携官，命学士王徽、裴彻为相。
现代文：田令孜担心大家把罪名加在自己身上，请求把卢携免职，任命翰林学士王徽、裴彻担任宰相。
English: Tian Lingze was worried that everyone would blame him, so he asked for Lu Jian to be removed from office, and appointed Hanlin Scholar Wang Hui and Pei Che Rong as prime ministers.

古文：甲申，宣制以户部侍郎、翰林学士王徽、裴彻本官同平章事。
现代文：十二月初五，宣布敕令，任命户部侍郎、翰林学士王徽、裴彻以本官任同平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, the imperial edict was announced, appointing the household attendant, the scholar Wang Hui, and the scholar Pei Che to the same rank.

古文：贬右仆射、门下侍郎、平章事卢携为太子宾客。
现代文：贬谪右仆射、门下侍郎、平章事卢携为太子宾客。
English: The prince's guests included his right-hand manservant, his manservant, and his footman, Taira no Akechi.

古文：携闻贼至，仰药而死。
现代文：卢携听说贼军来到，服毒而死。
English: Lu Zhui heard that the bandits were coming and took poison and died.

古文：是日，上与诸王、妃、后数百骑，自子城由含光殿金光门出幸山南，文武百官僚不之知，并无从行者，京城晏然。
现代文：这一天，皇上和诸侯王、王妃、皇后共几百骑，从子城出含光殿金光门前往山南，文武百官都不知道他们的行动，因而没有随行的人，京城十分宁静。
English: On this day, the emperor and the princes, kings, queens and empresses, a total of several hundred horsemen, went from Zicheng to the Golden Gate of the Hall of Illumination to Shannan. All the civil and military officials did not know their actions, so there were no accompanying people, and Beijing was very quiet.

古文：是日晡晚，贼入京城，时右骁卫大将张直方率武官十余迎黄巢于坡头。
现代文：当天傍晚，贼军进入京城，当时右骁卫大将军张直方率领十余名武官在坡头迎接黄巢。
English: In the evening of the same day, the thief army entered Beijing. At that time, Zhang Naifang, the right guard general, led more than ten military attachés to meet Huang Chao at the slope.

古文：壬辰，黄巢据大内，僭号大齐，称年号金统。悉陈文物，据丹凤门伪赦。
现代文：十二月十三日，黄巢入据皇宫，建伪号为大齐，年号为金统，将典章礼乐全部陈列出来，在丹凤门发布伪大赦令。
English: On December 13th, Huang Chao entered the imperial palace, the fake name was Dazhi, the year was Jintong, the ceremonial music was all displayed, and a fake amnesty order was issued at the Danfeng Gate.

古文：以太常博士皮日休、进士沈云翔为学士。
现代文：任命太常博士皮日休、进士沈云翔为学士。
English: Appointed Dr. Taizang Pei as a day off, and promoted Shen Yunxiang as a bachelor.

古文：为伪赦书云： 揖让之仪，废已久矣，窜遁之迹，良用怃然。
现代文：所作的伪赦书说 ：谦恭地禅让天下的礼仪，已经废除很久了，鼠窜逃跑的形迹，实在让人同情。
English: The fake apology said: "The etiquette of humbly surrendering to the world has been abolished for a long time, and the image of the rat escaping is really sympathetic.

古文：朝臣三品已上并停见任，四品已下宜复旧位。 
现代文：三品的朝臣全部停止现任的职务，四品以下的官员应当恢复旧职。 
English: All courtiers with three pins should stop their current duties, and officials with four pins or less should resume their old duties.

古文：以赵章为中书令，尚让为太尉，崔璆为中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：任命赵章为中书令，尚让为太尉，崔霮为中书侍郎、平章政事。
English: He appointed Zhao Zhang as the Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Shang Zhan as the Second Lieutenant, Cui Wei as the Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and Ping Zhang as the Secretary of State.

古文：时宰相豆卢彖崔沆、故相左仆射刘鄴、太子少师裴谂、御史中丞赵蒙、刑部侍郎李溥、故相于琮皆从驾不及，匿于闾里，为贼所捕，皆遇害。
现代文：当时宰相豆卢王彖、崔沆、原宰相左仆射刘邺、太子少师裴谂、御史中丞赵蒙、刑部侍郎李溥、原宰相于琮都来不及追随圣驾，躲藏在民居中、被贼军捕获，全都被杀害。
English: At that time, the Prime Minister Dou Lu Wang Ye, Cui Ye, the former Prime Minister Zuoying Liu Ye, the Prince's younger brother Pei Ye, the Minister of History Zhao Meng, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department Li Ye, and the former Prime Minister Yu Ye were all too late to follow the holy driver, hiding in private homes, and were captured by the bandits. All of them were killed.

古文：将作监郑綦、库部郎中郑系义不臣贼，举家雉经而死。
现代文：将作监郑綦、库部郎中郑亻系坚守大义不向贼军称臣，全家自缢而死。
English: Zheng Yao, who would become the warden, and Zheng Yao, the son-in-law of the treasurer, adhered to the great cause of justice and did not praise the thief army, and the whole family committed suicide.

古文：中和元年春正月庚戌朔，车驾在兴元。
现代文：中和元年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾在兴元。
English: On the first day of the first month in the spring of the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the emperor's chariot arrived in Xingyuan.

古文：以翰林学士承旨、尚书户部侍郎、知制诰萧遘为兵部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运等使；寻以本官同平章事，领使如故。
现代文：任命翰林学士承旨、尚书户部侍郎，知制诰萧遘为兵部侍郎，充任诸道盐铁转运使；随即又任命他以本官任同平章事，仍和原来一样担任使职。
English: He appointed Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi, Shang Shuxu the Attendant of the Household Department, and Zhizhe Zou Xiaoqi as the Attendant of the Military Department, to serve as the salt and iron transport envoy to various provinces; he then appointed him as his own official to serve as a peer, and he still held the same duties as before.

古文：以宿州刺史刘汉宏为越州刺史、镇东军节度、浙江东道观察处置等使。
现代文：任命宿州刺史刘汉宏为越州刺史、镇东军节度使、浙江东道观察处置使等。
English: Liu Hanhong, the military historian of Cangzhou, was appointed as the military historian of Yuezhou, the military historian of Zhendong, the military historian of Zhejiang, and so on.

古文：诏太原节度使郑从谠发本道之师，与北面行营招讨副使诸葛爽、代州刺史北面行营马步都虞候硃玫、夏州将李思恭等行营诸军，并赴京师讨贼。
现代文：下诏令太原节度使郑从谠调遣本道的军队，和北面行营招讨副使诸葛爽，代州刺史、北面行营马步都虞候朱玫，夏州将军李思恭等行辕下属的军队，一起前往京师讨伐贼军。
English: Taiyuan Jiedu ordered Zheng Conglu to dispatch the troops of Hongdao, and the troops of the subordinates of Jiedu, such as Zhu Ge Shuang, the deputy envoy Zhu Ge Shuang, the commander of the northern campaign, the commander of the northern campaign, Zhu Mei, the commander of the northern campaign, and the commander of the northern campaign, Li Sikyong, went to the Beijing division to fight the invaders.

古文：河中马步都虞候王重荣逐其帅李都，自称留后。
现代文：河中马步都虞候王重荣赶走他的主帅李都，自称为留后。
English: In the middle of the river, Wang Chong Rong chased away his coach, Li Du, and said that he would stay behind.

古文：二月，代州北面行营都监押陈景思率沙陀、萨葛、安庆等三部落与吐浑之众三万赴援关中，次绛州。
现代文：二月，代州北面行营都监押陈景思率领沙陀、萨葛、安庆等三个部落和吐谷浑部落的三万人前往增援关中，驻扎在绛州。
English: In February, Chen Jingshi led 30,000 people from three tribes including Shato, Sagat and Anqing and the Tugugun tribe to reinforce Guanzhong and stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：沙陀首领翟稽俘掠绛州叛还，景思知不可用，遣使诣行在，请赦李国昌父子，令讨贼以赎罪，从之。
现代文：沙陀部首领翟稽掳掠绛州的人口财物叛变，返回原地，陈景思知道该部不可利用，就派了一个使者到皇上的驻地，请求赦免李国昌父子，命令他们讨伐贼军以立功赎罪，皇上依从。
English: The leader of the Shatou Department, Zou Ji, who plundered the people and property of Zhangzhou, rebelled and returned to his original place. Chen Jingsi knew that the department could not be used, so he sent an envoy to the emperor's residence to ask for the pardon of Li Guochang and his son, and ordered them to fight the thief army to make merit and atone for their sins. The emperor complied.

古文：三月，陈景思赍诏入达靼，召李克用军屯蔚州，克用因大掠雁门已北军镇。
现代文：三月，陈景思带着皇上的诏书进入鞑靼部，要求李克用的军队屯驻在蔚州，李克用趁机大肆劫掠雁门关以北的军镇。
English: In March, Chen Jingsi entered Tartary with the imperial edict, demanding that Li Ke used the army stationed in Ulshu, and Li Ke used the opportunity to plunder the military town north of Ganmen Pass.

古文：以凤翔节度使郑畋守司空、门下侍郎、同平章事，充京西诸道行营都统，与泾原节度使程宗楚、秦州经略使仇公遇、鄜延节度使李孝昌、夏州节度使拓拔思恭等同盟起兵，传檄天下。
现代文：任命凤翔节度使郑畋暂署司空、门下侍郎、同平章事，充任京西诸道行营都统与泾原节度使程宗楚、秦州经略使仇公遇、延节度使李孝昌、夏州节度使拓拔思恭等结成同盟军起兵，向全国发布讨贼檄文。
English: He appointed Fengxiang Jiedu to make Zheng Jie temporarily the second-in-command of the air force, his subordinate Jiedu, and Tongping Jiedu, and appointed Cheng Zongchu, Qinzhou Jiedu, Li Xiaochang, and Xiazhou Jiedu to form an allied army and launch an army, and issued anti-bandit proclamations to the whole country.

古文：黄巢遣大将林言、尚让率众数万寇凤翔，郑畋率师逆击，大败贼众于龙尾陂。
现代文：黄巢派大将林言、尚让率领几万部众进犯凤翔，郑畋率军迎击，在龙尾陂将贼军打得大败。
English: Huang Chao sent generals Lin Yan and Shang Zhan to lead tens of thousands of troops to invade Fengxiang, and Zheng Jun led the army to counterattack, defeating the thief army in Longwei.

古文：四月，以前大同军防御使李克用检校工部尚书，兼代州刺史、雁门已北行营兵马节度等使。
现代文：四月，任命前大同军防御使李克用为检校工部尚书，兼任代州刺史、雁门以北行营兵马节度使等。
English: In April, Li Kexin was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department of the former Datong Army Defense Force, and concurrently served as the deputy governor of the state, and the envoy to the North of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：五月，李克用赴代州，遂率蕃、汉兵万人南出石岭关，称准诏赴难长安。
现代文：五月，李克用前往代州，于是率领蕃族和汉族士兵一万人南出石岭关，宣称遵照皇上的诏命前往长安平乱。
English: In May, Li Ke used to go to Daizhou, so he led ten thousand soldiers of the Yi and Han ethnic groups south of Shilingguan and declared that he would go to Chang'an to quell the rebellion in accordance with the emperor's edict.

古文：丁巳，沙陀军至太原，郑从谠供给粮料。
现代文：五月十日，沙陀军到达太原，郑从谠供给他们粮食草料。
English: On May 10, Shado's army arrived in Taiyuan. Zheng Conglu provided them with grain and herbs.

古文：辛酉，沙陀求发军赏钱，从谠与钱千贯，米千石。
现代文：五月十四日，沙陀军要求发给军队赏钱，郑从谠只给了一千贯钱、一千石米。
English: On May 14th, the Shatou Army demanded that the army be rewarded with money, but Zheng Conglu only gave one thousand crowns and one thousand koku meters.

古文：克用怒，纵兵大掠。
现代文：李克用发怒，放纵自己的士兵大肆抢劫。
English: Li Ke used his anger to indulge his soldiers to loot wildly.

古文：从谠求援于振武，契苾通自率兵来赴，与沙陀战于晋王岭。
现代文：郑从谠向振武军求救，契艹必通亲自率军前来增援，和沙陀军在晋王岭交战。
English: Zheng Conglu called for help from Zhenwu's army, and Qie Bingtong personally led the army to come to reinforce, and fought with Shado's army in Jinwangling.

古文：沙陀败走，陷榆次、阳曲而退。
现代文：沙陀军战败逃走，攻下榆次、阳曲之后退走。
English: The Shatou army was defeated and fled, and retreated after capturing Shantou and Yangqu.

古文：是日大风，天雨土。
现代文：这天刮大风，天上降尘土下来。
English: The wind was blowing hard that day, and dust was falling from the sky.

古文：特进、尚书右仆射赵隐卒，赠司空。
现代文：特进、尚书右仆射赵隐去世，追赠为司空。
English: Zhao Ying, the special envoy and right-hand man of Shang Shu, passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Sifu.

古文：六月，沙陀退还代州。
现代文：六月，沙陀军退回代州。
English: In June, Shado's army retreated to Daishu.

古文：车驾幸成都府，西川节度使阵敬瑄自来迎奉。
现代文：皇上的车驾到达成都府，西川节度使陈敬王宣亲自前来迎接。
English: The emperor's car drove to the capital, and the Saikawa Shogunate sent Chen Kei Wang Xuan to come to meet him in person.

古文：七月丁未朔。
现代文：七月初一为丁未日。
English: The first day of July is a Sunday.

古文：乙卯，车驾至西蜀。
现代文：七月初九，皇上的车驾到达西蜀。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, the emperor's carriage arrived in Xishu.

古文：丁巳，御成都府廨，改广明二年为中和元年，大赦天下。
现代文：七月十一日，皇上驾临成都衙署，改广明二年为中和元年，下诏大赦天下罪囚。
English: On July 11th, the emperor arrived at the Chengdu Probation Office, changed the year of Guangming 2 to Zhonghe 1, and issued an edict to pardon all prisoners.

古文：以兵部侍郎、判度支韦昭度本官同平章事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎、暂署度支使韦昭度以本官署理同平章事。
English: He appointed Wei Zhaodu, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the temporary chief of staff, as the acting deputy of this office.

古文：以侍中王铎检校太尉、中书令，兼滑州刺史、义成军节度、郑滑观察处置，兼充京城四面行营都统；以太子太保崔安潜为副。
现代文：任命侍中王铎为检校太尉、中书令，兼任滑州刺史、义成军节度使、郑滑观察处置使，兼充京城四面行营都统，任命太子太保崔安潜为副都统。
English: He appointed the Vice-Chamberlain Wang Qian as the Inspector of Schools and the Secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and concurrently served as the Secretary of the History of the State of Nanzhou, the Secretary of the Festival of the Yicheng Army, and the Secretary of the Observation and Disposition of Zheng Nanzhuang, and also served as the Governor of the Capital in all directions, and appointed the Prince's bodyguard Cui Anqian as the Vice-Chamberlain.

古文：观军容使西门思恭为天下行营兵马都监押；中书侍郎、平章事、诸道盐铁转运等使韦昭度为供军使。
现代文：观军容使西门思恭担任天下行营兵马都监押；中书侍郎、平章政事、诸道盐铁转运使韦昭度担任供军使。
English: Guan Junrong made Simon Sikyong serve as the commander of the army and cavalry in charge of the world campaign; Wei Zhaodu served as the envoy for the war, who was the attendant of the Chinese book, the political affairs of Pingzhang, and the transportation of salt and iron in all directions.

古文：时淮南节度使高骈为诸道行营都统，自车驾出幸，中使相继促骈起军，骈托以周宝、刘汉宏不利于己，迁延半岁，竟不出军，乃以铎为都统。
现代文：当时本来是淮南节度使的高骈任诸道行营都统，从皇上的车驾离京出走开始，宫中内使一个个地催促高骈发兵攻击贼军，高骈以周宝、刘汉宏对自己不利为托词拖延了半年，终究不出兵，朝廷才任命王铎为都统。
English: At that time, Gao Jiong, who was originally sent by the Huainan Festival, was appointed as the leader of the troops to march to the capital. From the time the emperor's car left Beijing, the palace urged Gao Jiong to send troops to attack the rebel army. Gao Jiong used Zhou Bao and Liu Hanhong as excuses to delay for half a year. After all, he did not go to war, and the imperial court appointed Wang Jiong as the leader of the troops.

古文：以河中节度使王重荣为京城北面都统，义武军节度使王处存为京城东面都统，鄜延节度使李孝昌为京城西面都统，朔方军节度使拓拔思恭为京城南面都统。
现代文：任命河中节度使王重荣担任京城北面都统，义武军节度使王处存担任京城东面都统，延节度使李孝昌担任京城西面都统，朔方军节度使拓拔思恭担任京城南面都统。
English: He appointed Wang Chong Rong as the governor of the north side of the capital, Wang Shuxuan as the governor of the east side of the capital, Li Xiaochang as the governor of the west side of the capital, and Tuoba Siyong as the governor of the south side of the capital.

古文：以忠武监军使杨复光为天下行营兵马都监，代西门思恭。
现代文：任命忠武军监军使杨复光担任天下行营兵马都监，以顶替西门思恭。
English: Appointed Yang Fuguang, the military inspector of the Loyalist Army, to serve as the inspector of the world's marching troops and horses, to replace Simon Sikyong.

古文：许王铎以便宜从事。
现代文：允许王铎可视情况自行处置事务，不必奏报允准。
English: Wang Yao is allowed to handle affairs on his own as the situation requires, and does not need to report to the government for approval.

古文：遣郎官、御史分行天下，征兵赴关内。
现代文：派遣郎官、御史分别巡行天下，征召军队前往关内。
English: He dispatched his vassals and ministers to tour the country separately, and called up troops to go to Kansai.

古文：八月，代北行营兵马使诸葛爽、硃玫、拓拔思恭等军屯渭桥。
现代文：八月，代北行营兵马使诸葛爽、朱玫、拓拔思恭等军队屯驻在渭桥。
English: In August, Zhuge Shuang, Zhu Mei, Tuoba Sikyong and other troops were stationed in Qianqiao on behalf of the Northbound Battalion.

古文：硃玫屯兴平，为贼将王璠所击，退保奉天。
现代文：朱玫屯驻兴平，被贼将王攻击，退守奉天。
English: Zhu Mei was stationed in Xingping, attacked by thieves, and retreated to Mukden.

古文：诸葛爽降贼，伪署爽河阳节度使。
现代文：诸葛爽投降贼军，贼伪任命诸葛爽为河阳节度使。
English: Zhuge Shuang surrendered to the bandits, and the bandits falsely appointed Zhuge Shuang as the Kheyang Festival envoy.

古文：许州牙将秦宗权奏破贼于汝州，乃授宗权察州防御使。
现代文：许州偏将秦宗权奏报在汝州击败贼军，便授予秦宗权蔡州防御使之职。
English: Xu Zhou sent Qin Zongquan to report the defeat of the bandit army in Ruzhou, and then awarded Qin Zongquan the defense of Caizhou.

古文：昭义节度使高浔与贼将李详战于石桥，为贼所败，退归河中。
现代文：昭义军节度使高浔和贼将李详在石桥交战，被贼军击败，退回河中。
English: During the festival of the Shouyi Army, Gao Yao and the thief Li Zhao fought on the stone bridge. The thief army defeated Gao Yao and sent him back to the river.

古文：贼乘胜陷同州。
现代文：贼军乘胜攻陷同州。
English: The bandits took advantage of the victory to invade Tongzhou.

古文：九月，泽潞高浔牙将刘广擅还据潞州。
现代文：九月，泽潞节度使高浔的偏将刘广擅自回军占据潞州。
English: In September, the Zeyu Festival made the high-ranking general Liu Guang return to the army to occupy Zhangzhou without authorization.

古文：是月，浔天井关戍将孟方立率戍卒攻刘广，杀之。
现代文：当月，高浔的部下天井关守将孟方立率领守兵进攻刘广，杀死了他。
English: That month, Gao Jun's subordinate, the guard of the ceiling, Meng Fangli, led the guards to attack Liu Guang and killed him.

古文：方立遂自称留后，仍移军镇于邢州。
现代文：孟方立便自称留后，并把军镇使署迁移到邢州。
English: Meng Fangli then claimed to stay behind and moved the military town envoy office to Ganzhou.

古文：制以京城四面催阵使、守兵部尚书王徽检校左仆射，兼潞州大都督府长史、昭义节度、潞邢洺磁观察等使。
现代文：决定任命京城四面催阵使、代理兵部尚书王徽为检校左仆射，兼任潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度使、潞邢氵名、磁等州观察使等。
English: It was decided to appoint the Beijing four-faceted urging envoy, acting military commander Shang Shuxu Wang Hui as the school inspection left-hand man, concurrently serving as the governor of Zhangzhou, the commander of the Shouyi Army, and the state observation envoys such as Xuanming and Magnetism.

古文：贬高浔端州刺史。
现代文：把高浔贬职为端州刺史。
English: The demotion of Gao Qi to the position of a subordinate was a turning point in Danzhou history.

古文：杨复光、王重荣以河西、昭义、忠武、义成之师屯武功。
现代文：杨复光、王重荣把河西、昭义、忠武、义成等军镇的军队屯驻在武功。
English: Yang Fuguang and Wang Chungrong stationed troops from the military towns of Hexi, Zhao Yi, Zhongwu and Yicheng in Wugong.

古文：凤翔节度使郑畋以病征还行在，以凤翔大将李昌言代畋为节度使，兼京城西面行营都统。
现代文：凤翔节度使郑畋因病被召回到皇帝驻跸之地，任命凤翔大将李昌言代替郑畋任节度使，并兼任京城西面行营都统。
English: Due to illness, Fengxiang appointed General Li Changyan to replace Zhengxiang as the envoy of the festival, and he also served as the commander of the Western Camp of Beijing.

古文：十月，青州军乱，逐节度使安师儒，立其行营将王敬武为留后。
现代文：十月，青州的军队发生动乱，驱逐节度使安师儒，拥立青州行营将领王敬武为节度留后。
English: In October, the army of Qingzhou was in turmoil, the festival was expelled, and Wang Jingwu, the general of the Qingzhou Campaign, was appointed as the festival's successor.

古文：十二月，行营都统王铎率禁军、山南东川之师三万至京畿，屯于盩厔。
现代文：十二月，行营都统王铎率领禁军和山南、东川的军队三万人到京师附近地区，屯驻在銩稨。
English: In December, Wang Xi, the commander-in-chief of the imperial army, led the imperial army and 30,000 troops from Shannan and Dongchuan to the area near the Beijing Division and stationed in Xi'an.

古文：二年春正月甲辰朔，天下勤王之师，云会京畿，京师食尽。
现代文：中和二年春，正月初一，全国救援朝廷的军队聚集在京师附近的地区，京师的粮食吃光了。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the second year of the Sino-Japanese War, the national rescue army of the imperial court gathered in the area near the Beijing Division. The Beijing Division had run out of grain.

古文：贼食树皮，以金玉买人于行营之师，人获数百万。
现代文：贼军吃树皮，用金玉到行营的军旅中买人，每个人都可卖得几百万钱。
English: Rogue soldiers eat tree bark, and use gold and jade to buy soldiers during military campaigns. Each one can be sold for millions of dollars.

古文：山谷避乱百姓，多为诸军之所执卖。
现代文：逃到山谷中避乱的百姓，许多都被各军抓去卖了。
English: Many of the people who fled to the valley to escape the turmoil were captured and sold by various armies.

古文：二月，泾原大将唐弘夫大败贼将林言于兴平，俘斩万计。
现代文：二月，泾原大将唐弘夫在兴平把贼将林言打得大败，俘获斩杀数以万计。
English: In February, the former general Tang Hongfu defeated the thief Lin Yan in Xingping, capturing and killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：王处存率军二万，径入京城，贼伪遁去。
现代文：王处存率领两万人马直接进入京城，贼伪逃走。
English: Wang Shicun led twenty thousand horses directly into the capital, and the thieves fled.

古文：京师百姓迎处存，欢呼叫噪。
现代文：京师百姓迎接王处存，欢呼叫喊鼓噪。
English: The people of Beijing welcomed Wang Shizhen with shouts and drums.

古文：是日军士无部伍，分占第宅，俘掠妓妾。
现代文：这天军队不成队伍，分头强占百姓住宅、抢劫娼妓民女。
English: On this day, the army did not form a line, but split up to occupy people's houses and rob prostitutes.

古文：贼自灞上分门复入，处存之众苍黄溃乱，为贼所败。
现代文：贼军从灞上又分别从几座城门重新进城，王处存的部众仓皇失措，崩溃逃散，被贼军击败。
English: The bandit army re-entered the city from several gates from the top of the moat. The remaining soldiers panicked, collapsed and fled, and were defeated by the bandit army.

古文：黄巢怒百姓欢迎处存，凡丁壮皆杀之，坊市为之流血。
现代文：黄巢因百姓欢迎王处存而发怒，凡壮年男子全部杀掉，街市上到处流着血。
English: Huang Chao was enraged by the fact that the people welcomed the king's presence, killed all the men of prime age, and blood flowed everywhere in the streets.

古文：自是诸军退舍，贼锋愈炽。
现代文：从此朝廷各军退走，贼军的锋芒更盛。
English: Since then, all the imperial armies have retreated, and the Kleptocratic army has become more powerful.

古文：三月，前蔚州刺史苏祐为沙陀所败，弃郡投镇州，至灵寿，部人为盗，祐为王景崇所杀。
现代文：三月，前蔚州刺史苏被沙陀军击败，放弃郡城投奔镇州，到灵寿，部下的人沦为盗贼，苏被王景崇杀死。
English: In March, the former Ulshu chief Su was defeated by the Shatou army, abandoned the county seat and fled to Zhenzhou. In Lingshou, his subordinates were turned into thieves, and Su was killed by Wang Jingsong.

古文：七月辛丑朔。
现代文：七月初一为辛丑日。
English: The first day of July is always a bad day.

古文：丙午夜，西北方赤气，如绛虹竟天。
现代文：七月初六夜间，西北方有赤气如绛色的虹，满天都是。
English: On the night of the 6th day of the 7th month, in the northwest, there was red gas like a scarlet rainbow all over the sky.

古文：贼将尚让攻宜君砦，雨雪盈尺，甚寒，贼兵冻死者十二三。
现代文：贼军将领尚让进攻宜君寨，雨雪积一尺深，非常寒冷，贼军士兵十之二三被冻死。
English: The general of the thief army still let the attack Yijun Village, the rain and snow accumulated a foot deep, very cold, and two-thirds of the thief army soldiers froze to death.

古文：八月庚子，贼同州防御使硃温杀其监军严实，与大将胡真、谢瞳等来降，王铎承制拜华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：八月初一，贼军的同州防御使朱温杀死他的监军严实，和大将胡真、谢瞳等前来投降，王铎按照定制把他们分别封为华州刺史、潼关防御使和镇国军军使。
English: On the first day of August, Zhu Wen's defense of Tongzhou caused the Kleptocratic Army to kill his overseer Yan Si, and generals Hu Zhen and Xie Hitomi came to surrender. According to the custom, Wang Xi separately appointed them as the envoy of Huazhou, the envoy of Shiguan defense and the envoy of the Zhenguo Army.

古文：魏博节度韩简自率军三万攻河阳，伪署节度使诸葛爽弃城而去，简遣大将守河桥而还。
现代文：魏博节度使韩简自己率领三万军队进攻河阳，贼伪所封的节度使诸葛爽弃城逃走，韩简派遣大将防守黄河上的桥梁之后回师。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian himself lead thirty thousand troops to attack Heyang, the festival sealed by the thieves made Zhuge Shuang abandon the city and flee, Han Jian sent a general to defend the bridges on the Yellow River and then returned to the division.

古文：九月，贼以黄鄴为华州刺史。
现代文：九月，贼伪任命黄邺为华州刺史。
English: In September, the bandits falsely appointed Huang Qi as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：初，贼以李详守华州，详与硃温素善，及温归河中，黄巢遣阉官后冗率功臣马千匹至华杀详，以鄴代归。
现代文：原先，贼伪命李详守华州，李详与朱温一向友善，等到朱温回到河中之后，黄巢派太监后冗率领功臣和马一千匹到华州杀死李详，命黄邺代替他。
English: Originally, the thief falsely ordered Li Zhaozhou to guard Huazhou, and Li Zhaozhou and Zhu Wenling had always been friendly. After Zhu Wen returned to the river, the Yellow Nest sent the eunuch Hou Yi to lead the meritorious minister and a thousand horses to Huazhou to kill Li Zhaozhou, and ordered Huang Qi to replace him.

古文：太原诸山桃杏有花实。
现代文：太原各山的桃杏有的开花结了果。
English: Some peach and apricot trees in the mountains of Taiyuan have blossomed and borne fruit.

古文：十月，西北方无云而雷，名 天狗坠 。
现代文：十月，西北方天上没有云而有雷声，名为 天狗坠 。
English: In October, there was no cloud in the northwestern sky, but thunder, called "Tengu pendant."

古文：以岚州刺史汤群为怀州刺史，时群倚沙陀为援，朝廷疑而易之。
现代文：任命岚州刺史汤群为怀州刺史，当时汤群依靠沙陀军为后援，朝廷怀疑他而把他撤换了。
English: Tang Qun, the governor of Bozhou, was appointed governor of Waizhou. At that time, Tang Qun relied on the Shatou Army for support. The imperial court suspected him and replaced him.

古文：郑从谠遣人传官告授群，群怒，杀使者，据城，内沙陀。
现代文：郑从谠派人传达官方的文告给汤群，汤群发怒，杀掉了使者，占据了城池，交给了沙陀军。
English: Zheng Zonglu sent someone to convey the official message to Tangqun. Tangqun became angry, killed the messenger, occupied the city, and handed it over to Shatou's army.

古文：魏博节度使韩简以兵攻郓州，节度使曹全晸拒之，为简所败，执而杀之。
现代文：魏博节度使韩简派兵攻打郓州，郓州节度使曹全曰政抵抗他，被韩简击败，韩简把他捉住杀死。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian send troops to attack Zhangzhou, and the Zhangzhou Festival made Cao Quanzhong resist him. He was defeated by Han Jian, and Han Jian caught and killed him.

古文：全晸大将硃瑄以余众保郓州，乞和于简，简舍之而去。
现代文：曹全曰政的大将朱王宣用余下的部众保卫郓州，向韩简求和，韩简舍弃郓州而离去。
English: Cao Quan said that Zhu Wang, the general of the government, used the remaining subordinates to defend Bozhou and sued Han Jian for peace. Han Jian abandoned Bozhou and left.

古文：十一月，沙陀李克用监军陈景思以部落之众一万七千骑自岚石州路赴河中。
现代文：十一月，沙陀族李克用的监军陈景思率领部落的队伍一万七千名骑兵从岚州石州取道前往河中。
English: In November, Chen Jingsi, the overseer of Li Ke of the Shatou tribe, led the tribe's 17,000 cavalry from Shishu, Zhangzhou, to the middle of the river.

古文：贼将李详下牙队斩华州守将归明，王铎用其部将王遇为华州刺史。
现代文：贼将李详部下的亲军杀死华州守将归附朝廷，王铎任用其部将王遇担任华州刺史。
English: The thief killed the pro-army of Li Jia's subordinates, the governor of Huazhou will be attached to the imperial court, and Wang Xi will appoint his subordinate Wang Yu to serve as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：十二月己亥朔。
现代文：十二月初一为己亥日。
English: The first day of December is the start of the Chinese New Year.

古文：庚戌，成德军节度、镇冀深赵观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、中书令、上柱国、常山郡王、食邑六千户王景崇卒，赠太傅，谥曰忠穆。
现代文：十二月十二日，成德军节度使、镇冀深赵等州观察处置使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、中书令、上柱国、常山郡王、食邑六千户王景崇去世，追赠太傅之职，追加谥号为忠穆。
English: On December 12th, Wang Jingsong, the festival envoy of the Chengde Army, the observation and disposition envoy of Zhenji, Jinshan, Zhao and other prefectures, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the school inspector, the Chinese book order, the king of Shangzhu, Changshan County and 6,000 households in the food village passed away. He was posthumously awarded the post of Taifu, and the additional nickname was Zhongmu.

古文：遗表请以子镕缵继戎事，遂以镕为兵马留后。
现代文：遗下表章请求让儿子王继承兵戎之事，于是任命王为成德军兵马留后。
English: He left a request for his son Wang to inherit the military affairs, so he appointed Wang as the successor of the Chengde Army.

古文：三年春正月戊辰朔，车驾在成都府。
现代文：中和三年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸于成都府。
English: In the spring of the middle and third years, on the first day of the first month, the emperor's chauffeur arrived in Chengdu.

古文：雁门节度使、检校工部尚书李克用率师至河中。
现代文：雁门节度使、检校工部尚书李克用率军到河中。
English: Ganmen Festival, Shangshu Li Ke of the School Inspection Department led the troops to the middle of the river.

古文：己巳，沙陀军进屯沙苑之乾坑。
现代文：正月初二，沙陀军进驻于沙苑的乾坑。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Shado army entered the dry pit of Sha Yuan.

古文：二月，沙陀攻华州，刺史黄鄴出奔至石堤谷，追擒之。
现代文：二月，沙陀军进攻华州，刺史黄邺出逃。到石堤谷，被沙陀军追上擒获。
English: In February, Shado's army attacked Huazhou, and Huang Qi fled to Shidi Valley, where he was caught by Shado's army.

古文：魏博节度使韩简再兴兵讨河阳，诸葛爽遣大将李罕之拒之于武陟，逆击之，魏军大败而还。
现代文：魏博节度使韩简再次出兵讨伐河阳，诸葛爽派大将李罕之在武陟抵抗，迎击魏博军，魏博军被打得大败而回。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian once again send troops to fight against Heyang. Zhuge Shuang sent General Li Hanzhi to resist in Wuyi and meet the Wei Bo army. The Wei Bo army was defeated and returned.

古文：大将乐彦祯先据魏州，韩简为部下所杀，推彦祯为留后。
现代文：大将乐彦祯先占据了魏州，韩简被自己的部下杀害，乐彦祯被推举为留后。
English: General Le Yanyan occupied Weizhou first, Han Jian was killed by his own subordinates, and Le Yanyan was elected to stay behind.

古文：就加李克用检校尚书左仆射、忻代云蔚等州观察处置等使。
现代文：就地加授李克用为检校尚书左仆射、忻代云蔚等州观察处置使。
English: Li Ke used the on-the-spot award to observe and deal with the school inspection of Shangshu Zuopu Jia, Zou Daiyun Wei and other states.

古文：三月丁卯朔。
现代文：三月初一为丁卯日。
English: The first day of March is Dingwu Day.

古文：壬申，沙陀军与贼将赵章、尚让战于成店，贼军大败，追奔至良天坡，横尸三十里；王重荣筑尸为京观。
现代文：三月初六，沙陀军在成店和贼将赵章、尚让交战，把贼军打得大败，贼军被追击，奔逃到良天坡，死尸横陈三十里，王重荣堆积尸体，筑成一座小山。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the Shatou army fought against the thieves Zhao Zhang and Shang Zhang in Chengdian, and defeated the thieves. The thieves were chased and fled to the Liangtian slope. The dead bodies were scattered for 30 miles. Wang Chongrong piled up the corpses and built a hill.

古文：四月丁酉朔。
现代文：四月初一为丁酉日。
English: The first day of April is Ding Xi Day.

古文：庚子，沙陀、忠武、义成、义武等军趋长安，贼悉众拒之于渭桥，大败而还；李克用乘胜追之。
现代文：四月初四，沙陀、忠武、义成、义武等军进军长安，贼军以全部人马在渭桥进行抵抗，被打得大败而退回长安，李克用乘胜追击贼军。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：己卯，黄巢收其残众，由蓝田关而遁。
现代文：四月十九日，黄巢收拾他的残余部队，由蓝田关逃走。
English: On April 19, Huang Chao gathered his remaining troops and fled from Lantian Pass.

古文：庚辰，收复京城。
现代文：四月二十四日，收复京城。
English: On April 24th, the capital was recaptured.

古文：天下行营兵马都监杨复光上章告捷行在，曰：
现代文：天下行营兵马都监杨复光上表章到皇帝驻跸的所在告捷，说：
English: Yang Fuguang, the military and equestrian inspector of the capital, who went to the emperor's residence, said:

古文：顷者妖兴雾市，啸聚丛祠，而岳牧籓侯，备盗不谨。
现代文： 近来妖孽兴起于市曹，啸聚于荒郊野外的祠庙中，而州官藩镇却很不注意防备盗贼。
English: Recently, witches have arisen in the city of Cao and gathered in temples and shrines outside the wild countryside, while state officials and towns have not paid much attention to guarding against thieves.

古文：谓大同之运，常可容奸；谓无事之秋，纵其长恶。
现代文：以为大同社会的机运，总是可以容纳奸恶之人，以为现在是太平无事的时代，因而任其滋生恶人。
English: They thought that the great social opportunity would always be able to accommodate evil-doers. They thought that this was a time of peace and tranquility, so they allowed it to breed evil-doers.

古文：贼首黄巢，因得充盈窟穴，蔓延萑蒲，驱我蒸黎，徇其凶逆。
现代文：贼首黄巢的势力，因而能够充盈于人群聚集的地方，蔓延到滋生盗贼的处所，强迫着我们的百姓，俯顺他们的凶暴。
English: The power of the Yellow Nest, the head of the thieves, can therefore fill the places where people gather, spread to the places where thieves breed, forcing our people to submit to their violence.

古文：展鉏鹤以成锋刃，杀耕牛以恣燔砲，魑魅昼行，虺蜴夜噬。
现代文：毁坏农具以制成武器，宰杀耕牛以任意烹食，鬼怪白昼横行，毒虫夜间食人。
English: Agricultural tools are destroyed to make weapons, cattle are slaughtered and cooked at will, ghosts run rampant during the day, and poisonous insects prey on people at night.

古文：自南海失守，湖外丧师，养虎灾深，驯枭逆大。
现代文：自从南海失守，湖外丧失师旅，养虎成患的灾难深重，驯枭而使其成为大逆。
English: Since the loss of the South China Sea and the loss of the lake, the disaster of raising tigers has been profound, and the taming of tigers has become a great reversal.

古文：物无不害，恶靡不为，豺狼贻朝市之忧，疮磐及腹心之痛。
现代文：无人不害，无恶不作，豺狼带来了朝野的忧患，疮痍引起了腹心的痛苦。
English: No one is harmful, no evil is done, the jackal has brought sorrow to the morning and the field, and the scourge has caused pain to the confidant.

古文：遂至毒流万姓，盗污两京，衣冠衔涂炭之悲，郡邑起丘墟之叹。
现代文：于是使得毒害遍及于万民，盗贼玷污了两京，读书人含着身遭涂炭的悲伤，城镇里的废墟发出哀叹。
English: As a result, the poison spread to all the people, the thieves defiled the two capitals, the readers were saddened by the charcoal, and the ruins in the town lamented.

古文：万方共怒，十道齐攻，仗九庙之威灵，殄积年之凶丑。
现代文：万方同样愤怒，十道一齐进攻，仗着王朝宗庙的威灵，消灭了连年作乱的凶顽丑类。
English: All sides were equally angry, and all ten provinces attacked together. With the help of the spirit of the dynasty's ancestral temple, they eliminated the vicious monsters who had been causing trouble for years.

古文：河中节度使王重荣神资壮烈，天赋机谋，誓立功名，志安家国。
现代文：河中节度使王重荣有着壮烈的精神，天赋予他机变的谋略，发誓要建立功名，志在安定家邦。
English: The mid-river festival made Wang Chongrong have a strong spirit. Heaven gave him a strategy of change, vowed to build a reputation, and aspired to stabilize the country.

古文：至于屯田待敌，率士当冲，收百姓十万余家，降贼党三万余众。
现代文：甚至屯田以等待敌军，亲率士卒以守卫要冲，接纳百姓十几万家，收降贼党三万多人。
English: He even set up a garrison to wait for the enemy, and led his relatives and subordinates as guards to attack, receiving more than one hundred thousand people and more than thirty thousand people of the Kuomintang.

古文：法能持重，功遂晚成，久稽原野之刑，未决雷霆之怒。
现代文：执法能够持重，功名成就于晚年，很久就停止判处人死刑，从不发出雷霆一般的震怒。
English: Law enforcement can be held in high esteem, achievements are made late in life, the death penalty has long been suspended, and thunderous anger is never expressed.

古文：自收同、华，进逼京师，夕烽高照于国门，游骑频临于灞岸。
现代文：自从收复同州、华州，进逼京师，他的晚岁如同夕阳的光芒高照着国门，派出的游骑频频出现在灞河岸上。
English: Since the recovery of Tongzhou and Huazhou and the advance into the Beijing Division, his old age has shone like the sunset on the national gate, and the sent out rangers have frequently appeared on the bank of the Bohai River.

古文：既知四隅断绝，百计奔冲，如穷鸟触笼，似飞蛾赴焰。
现代文：贼军既已知道四面被阻断隔绝，便千方百计地奔突冲撞，犹如关闭笼中的鸟儿以头触笼毫无出路，又像飞蛾扑火一样自取灭亡。
English: The bandits knew that they were cut off on all sides, so they rushed to attack in every possible way. It was like a bird closing its cage with its beak, with no way out, and like a moth to a flame, it destroyed itself.

古文：雁门节度使李克用神传将略，天付忠贞，机谋与武艺皆优，臣节共本心相称。
现代文：雁门节度使李克用的将才得自神授，他的忠贞源于天赋，谋略和武艺都很优秀，为臣的节操和做人的本心两者相称。
English: The Geese Gate Festival made Li Ke's use of generalship a gift from the gods. His loyalty stemmed from his natural talent. His strategy and martial arts were excellent. His discipline as a vassal was commensurate with his true heart.

古文：杀贼无非手刃，入阵率以身先，可谓雄才，得名飞将。
现代文：杀贼没有不亲自动手的，冲锋陷阵总是一马当先，真是一个雄才，有 飞将 的名声。
English: There is no thief who does not take matters into his own hands. He is always the first to charge into the fray. He is truly a great talent and has the reputation of a "flying captain."

古文：统领本军南下，与臣同力前驱，虽在寝兴，不忘寇孽。
现代文：他统领自己的军队南下，和我齐心合力地作为前驱，即使在睡梦中，也不忘记贼寇的存在。
English: He led his army to the south and rode with me as a forerunner. Even in his sleep, he did not forget the existence of the bandits.

古文：今月八日，遣衙队将前锋杨守宗、河中骑将白志迁、横野军使满存、蹑云都将丁行存、朝邑镇将康师贞、忠武黄头军使庞从等三十二都，随李克用自光泰门先入京师，力摧凶逆。
现代文：本月八日派遣衙队将前锋杨守宗、河中骑将白志迁、横野军军使满存、蹑云都将丁行存、朝邑的镇将康师贞、忠武的黄头军使庞从等三十二都，跟随李克用从光泰门首先进入京师，合力摧毁逆贼。
English: On the 8th day of this month, they dispatched a detachment of troops to relocate the forward Yang Shuzong, the middle-of-the-river cavalry commander Bai Zhi, the commander of the Yokono army, Ding Xingxing, the town commander of the morning village, Kang Shizhen, and the loyal Yellow Army commander, Pang Cong, to the thirty-two capital cities. They followed Li Ke for the first time from Guangtaimen to enter the Beijing division and work together to destroy the traitors.

古文：又遣河中将刘让王瑰冀君武孙珙、忠武大将乔从遇、郑滑将韩从威、荆南大将申屠忭、沧州大将贾滔、易定大将张仲庆、寿州大将张行方、天德大将顾彦朗、左神策弩手甄君楚公孙佐、横冲军使杨守亮、蹑云都将高周彝、忠顺都将胡贞、绛州监军毛宣伯聂弘裕等七十都继进。
现代文：又派河中将领刘让、王腢、冀君武、孙珙，忠武军的大将乔从遇、郑滑的将领韩从威、荆南的大将申屠、沧州的大将贾滔、易定的大将张仲庆、寿州的大将张行方、天德的大将顾彦朗，左神策弩手甄君楚、公孙佐，横冲军军使杨守亮、蹑云都将领高周彝、忠顺都将胡贞、绛州监军毛宣伯、聂弘裕等七十都随后进入京师。
English: He also sent generals Liu Zhan, Wang Qian, Ji Junwu, and Sun Qian to the Middle River, general Qiao Congyu to the Loyal Army, general Han Congwei to the Zhengslip Army, general Shen Tu to the Jingnan Army, general Jia Tao to the Cangzhou Army, general Zhang Zhongqing to the Yi Ding Army, general Zhang Xiangfang to the Shoushou Army, general Gu Yanlang to the Tiande Army, Zuo Shen Zhe to the Zhen Junwu Army, Gong Sun Zuo to the Yangchong Army, Yang Shuliang to the Gaozhou Army, Gao Yunwu to the Gaozhou Army

古文：贼尚为坚阵，来抗官军。
现代文：贼军还能组织坚牢的阵地来和官军相抗。
English: The Kleptocratic Army can also organize strong positions to resist the government army.

古文：李克用率励骁雄，整齐金革，叫噪而声将动瓦，喑呜而气欲吞沙。
现代文：李克用率领着振奋、勇敢、雄壮的军队，敲击着整齐的金鼓声，叫喊的声音几乎震动了屋瓦，怒喝的气息直要吞下沙莽。
English: Li Ke used to lead the ardent, brave and majestic army, beating the neat golden drums. The sound of shouting almost shook the roof tiles, and the breath of shouting was swallowed by the sand.

古文：宽列戈矛，麾军夹击，自卯至申，凶徒大败。
现代文：摆开广阔的战阵，挥军夹击敌人，从清晨直战斗到下午，将凶贼打得大败。
English: They set up a vast battle line, waved the army to pin down the enemy, and fought from the early morning to the afternoon, defeating the thieves.

古文：自望春宫蹙杀，至升阳殿合围，戈不滥挥，矢无虚发。
现代文：从望春宫夹击，到升阳殿合围，挥戈定有所毙，弓矢必无虚发。
English: From the clash at the Spring Palace to the encirclement of the Palace of the Rising Sun, there is sure to be a kill, and the bow and arrow will not be wasted.

古文：其贼即时奔遁，散入商山，徒延漏刃之生，伫作饮头之器。
现代文：贼军立即奔逃，分散入商山，只是无益地苟延从刀下脱逃的残生、迟早等着被砍头罢了。
English: The bandits immediately fled and dispersed into the hills of Shangshan. It was only the remnants of those who had vainly tried to escape from the sword, waiting to be beheaded sooner or later.

古文：伏自收平京国，三面皆立大功，若破敌摧锋，雁门实居其首。
现代文：自从收复京师，三方面都立下了大功，如果以击破敌军，摧毁其锋芒而论，实以李克用居于首功。
English: Since the recovery of the Beijing Division, great achievements have been made in three aspects. If we talk about defeating the enemy army and destroying its cutting edge, Li Ke used to be the first achievement.

古文：其余将佐，同效驱驰，兼臣所部二万余人，数岁栉风沐雨，既兹荡定，并录以闻。
现代文：其余的将官们，都一起效命于疆场，加上我部下的二万多人，也是几年顶风冒雨。既然已经扫荡平定，记载全部的情况以报告皇上。 
English: The rest of the generals have all served on the battlefield together, together with more than twenty thousand of my subordinates, and have also braved the wind and rain for several years. Since the sweep has been settled, record the entire situation to report to the emperor.

古文：报至，从官称贺。
现代文：奏报送到，随从的官员都向皇上表示祝贺。
English: When the report was delivered, the officials accompanying the emperor all congratulated him.

古文：五月，制以河中节度使、检校尚书右仆射王重荣检校司空、同平章事，余如故。
现代文：五月，决定任命河中节度使、检校尚书右仆射王重荣为检校司空、同平章事，其他职务仍同原来一样。
English: In May, it was decided to appoint Shao Wang Chong Rong, the Vice-Minister of Education of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the right-hand man of Shao Shou, the inspector of schools, as the inspector of schools, and other positions remained the same as before.

古文：雁门已北行营节度、忻代蔚朔等州观察处置等使、检校尚书左仆射、代州刺史、上柱国、食邑七百户李克用检校司空、同平章事，兼太原尹、北京留守，充河东节度、管内观察处置等使。
现代文：雁门以北行营节度使及忻、代、蔚、朔等州观察使、检校尚书左仆射、代州刺史、上柱国、食邑七百户李克用任检校司空、同平章事，兼任太原尹、北京留守，充任河东节度使、辖区内观察处置使。
English: To the north of the Wild Goose Gate, Li Ke used to serve as the inspector of the inspection of the school, and he also served as the inspector of the inspection of the school, the inspector of the inspection of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school

古文：义武军节度使、检校司空王处存检校司徒、同平章事，余如故。
现代文：义武军节度使、检校司空王处存任检校司徒、同平章事，其余职务仍同原来一样。
English: The volunteer army's festival envoy and the school inspector of the Kuo Office will continue to serve as school inspectors, and the rest of the positions will remain the same as before.

古文：以检校尚书右仆射、华州刺史、潼关防御等使硃温检校司空，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫，充宣武节度观察等使，仍赐名全忠。
现代文：任命检校尚书右仆射、华州刺史、潼关防御使朱温为检校司空，兼任汴州刺史、御史大夫，充任宣武军节度使、观察使，并赐名朱全忠。
English: He appointed Zhu Wen, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools, inspector of schools.

古文：京城西北面行营都统、金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、邠宁节度使硃玫就加同平章事，进封吴兴县侯，食邑一千户。
现代文：京城西北面行营都统、金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、州刺史、宁节度使朱玫就地加授同平章事，晋封吴兴县侯，食邑一千户。
English: On the northwest side of the capital city, Zhu Mei was awarded the title of Tongping, promoted to Wuxing County, and a thousand households in the food village.

古文：鄜坊节度使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射东方逵就加同平章事。
现代文：坊节度使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射东方逵就地加授同平章事。
English: The Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Culture, Sports, Science and Technology,

古文：王铎罢行营都统，依前检校太师、中书令，进封晋国公，加食邑二千户，节度观察使如故。
现代文：免去王铎行营都统，仍旧担任检校太师、中书令，晋封晋国公，加封食邑二千户，仍和原来一样任节度使、观察使。
English: Although Wang Xi Xingying was exempted from the imperial edict, he still served as the chief inspector of schools, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the prince of Jin Province, and the prince of 2,000 households, and he still served as the festival envoy and observation envoy as before.

古文：时中尉田令孜用事，自负帷幄之功，以铎用兵无功，而由杨复光建策召沙陀成破贼之效，欲权归北司，乃黜王而悦复光也。
现代文：当时中尉田令孜执掌政柄，他自负主持内政的功劳，认为王铎带兵没有立下战功，而是由杨复光提出建议，召来沙陀军才成就了击败贼军的功业，想把权力回归北司由宦官掌管，于是罢黜王铎而悦宠杨复光。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Tian Ling Ze was in charge of the government. He was proud of his achievements in presiding over domestic affairs. He believed that Wang Xi did not do any military exploits, but was advised by Yang Fuguang. It was only by summoning the Satao Army that he achieved the feat of defeating the rebel army. He wanted to return power to the North Division under the control of eunuchs. Therefore, he dismissed Wang Xi and favored Yang Fuguang.

古文：就加诸道行营兵马都监杨复光开府仪同三司、弘农郡开国公，食邑三千户，充同华等州管内制置使，仍赐号 资忠耀武匡国平难功臣。 
现代文：就地加授诸道行营兵马都监杨复光为开府仪同三司、弘农郡开国公、食邑三千户，充任同、华等州辖区内制置使，并赐给 资忠耀武匡国平难功臣 的尊号。
English: Yang Fuguang, the military and equestrian governor of Zhuodu Xingyuan, was awarded the honorary titles of the third division of the Kaifu ceremony, the founding father of Hongnong County, and the three thousand households of the food village. He also served as the ambassador of Tong and Hua in the state-controlled area, and was given the honorary title of the loyal and glorious military governor of the country.

古文：六月乙未朔。
现代文：六月初一为乙未日。
English: The first day of June is the eve of the second day of the third month.

古文：甲子，杨复光卒于河中，其部下忠武八都都头鹿晏弘、晋晖、王建、韩建等各以其众散去。
现代文：六月三十日，杨复光在河中去世，他的部下忠武军八个都的都头鹿晏弘、晋晖、王建、韩建等各自带着自己的队伍散去。
English: On June 30, Yang Fuguang died in the middle of the river. His subordinates, the loyal troops of the eight capitals, such as Doutoulu Shihong, Jinqi, Wang Jian and Han Jian, each took their own team and dispersed.

古文：时复光兄复恭知内枢密，田令孜以复光立破贼功，惮而恶之，故贼平赏薄。
现代文：当时杨复光的哥哥杨复恭掌管内枢密，田令孜因为杨复光立下了击败贼军的战功，对他又害怕又嫌恶，因而贼军平定之后赏赐很薄。
English: At that time, Yang Fuguang's brother, Yang Fuguang, was in charge of the inner privy council. Tian Lingzi feared and loathed Yang Fuguang because of his war exploits in defeating the bandits, so the reward was very thin after the bandits were subdued.

古文：及闻复光死，甚悦，复摈复恭，罢枢密为飞龙使。
现代文：等听到杨复光死去的消息，心里很高兴，又排斥杨复恭，罢免了他的枢密使而任其为飞龙使。
English: When he heard the news of Yang Fuguang's death, he was very happy, but he also ostracized Yang Fuguang, dismissed his confidential envoy and allowed him to be the flying dragon envoy.

古文：是月，黄巢围陈州，营于州北五里。
现代文：当月，黄巢围困陈州，在州城以北五里的地方扎营。
English: That month, the Yellow Nest besieged Chenzhou and encamped five miles north of the city.

古文：初，贼出蓝田关，遣前锋将孟楷攻蔡州，刺史秦宗权以兵逆战，为楷所败，宗权势窘，与贼通和。
现代文：当初，贼军出蓝田关，派前锋将领孟楷进攻蔡州，蔡州刺史秦宗权率军迎战，被孟楷击败，秦宗权的处境困窘，就和贼军暗中讲和。
English: At the beginning, the bandit army went out of Lantian Pass and sent the forward general Meng Kai to attack Caizhou. Caizhou sent the general Qin Zongquan to lead the army to fight. He was defeated by Meng Kai. Qin Zongquan was in a difficult situation, so he secretly made peace with the bandit army.

古文：孟楷移兵攻陈州，刺史赵犨示弱，伏兵击之，临阵斩楷。
现代文：孟楷转移人马去进攻陈州，陈州刺史赵韜做出力量很弱的样子，用伏兵攻击贼军，在阵前斩了孟楷。
English: Meng Kai transferred men and horses to attack Chen Zhou. Chen Zhou's aide-de-camp Zhao Yao made a weak appearance, attacked the thief army with ambushes, and beheaded Meng Kai before the battle.

古文：楷，贼之爱将，深惜之。
现代文：孟楷是贼首黄巢的爱将，他对孟楷的死深感痛惜。
English: Meng Kai is the favorite of the thief Huang Chao. He deeply regrets Meng Kai's death.

古文：黄巢怒，悉众攻陈州。
现代文：黄巢发怒，用他的全部兵力进攻陈州。
English: Huang Chao was enraged and attacked Chenzhou with all his forces.

古文：时黄巢与宗权合从，纵兵四掠，远近皆罹其酷。
现代文：当时黄巢和秦宗权联合行动，放纵士兵到处抢劫，远近的人民都遭受了他们的暴行。
English: At that time, Huang Chao and Qin Zongquan jointly acted, indulging soldiers to rob everywhere, and people near and far suffered from their violence.

古文：时仍岁大饥，民无积聚，贼俘人为食，其砲炙处谓之 舂磨寨 ，白骨山积，丧乱之极，无甚于斯。
现代文：当时连年大饥荒，老百姓没有积存的粮食，贼军把人抓去吃，他们烹烤人肉的地方称为 舂磨寨 ，白骨堆得像山一样高，就是丧乱到极点的年月也没有比这更严重的了。
English: At that time, there was a great famine for years on end, the people had no stored grain, the bandits captured people to eat, and the place where they cooked human flesh was called the "Kang Ma Zhai," and the white bones were piled as high as a mountain. Even the years of chaos to the extreme were not more serious than this.

古文：贼攻城急，徐州节度使时溥、许州周岌、汴州硃全忠皆出师护援之。
现代文：贼军攻城很急，徐州节度使时溥、许州的周岌、汴州的朱全忠都出兵保护，救援陈州。
English: The invading army attacked the city in a hurry. Xuzhou Jiedu sent Zhisheng, Xuzhou Zhou Rui, and Zhangzhou Zhu Quanzhong to protect and rescue Chenzhou.

古文：七月，制以西川节度使、开府仪同三司、守太尉、同平章事、成都尹、上柱国、颍川郡王、食邑三千户、实封四百户陈敬瑄赐铁券。
现代文：七月，决定赐予西川节度使、开府仪同三司、署理太尉、同平章事、成都尹、上柱国、颍川郡王、食邑三千户、实封四百户陈敬王宣铁券。
English: In July, it was decided to grant Chen Jingwang Xuan Iron Coupons to the West River Festival Delegate, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, Acting Lieutenant, Tongping Zhangji, Chengdu Yin, Shangzhuang Guo, Xichuan Guo, 3,000 households in food villages, and 400 households in real estate.

古文：诏郑从谠赴行在。
现代文：诏令郑从谠前来皇上驻跸处。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zheng to come from Handan to the emperor's residence in Handan.

古文：八月，李克用赴镇太原。
现代文：八月，李克用前往镇守太原。
English: In August, Li Ke used it to travel to the town of Taiyuan.

古文：制以前振武节度、检校司空、兼单于都护、御史大夫李国昌为检校司徒、代州刺史、雁门已北行营节度、蔚朔等州观察等使。
现代文：决定任命前振武军节度使、检校司空、兼单于都护、御史大夫李国昌为检校司徒、代州刺史、雁门以北行营节度使、蔚朔等州观察使等。
English: It was decided to appoint Qian Zhenwu Jun's festival envoy, school inspection officer Kuang, concurrently in Duogu, goshi doctor Li Guochang as school inspection officer, Daizhou sashimi, camp festival envoy to the north of Ganmen, Ulshuo and other state observation envoys, etc.

古文：十月，李国昌卒。
现代文：十月，李国昌去世。
English: In October, Li Guochang passed away.

古文：十一月，蔡贼秦宗权围许州。
现代文：十一月，蔡州贼将秦宗权围困许州。
English: In November, the Caizhou bandits besieged Qin Zongquan in Huzhou.

古文：十二月，诏河东李克用赴援陈许。
现代文：十二月，皇上诏命河东节度使李克用前往援救陈州、许州。
English: In December, the emperor decreed that Li Ke used the Hedong Festival to go to rescue Chenzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：忠武大将鹿晏弘陷兴元，逐节度使牛勖，自为留后。
现代文：忠武军大将鹿晏弘攻下兴元，驱逐节度使牛勖，自任节度留后。
English: The general of the loyal army, Luk Yinghong, conquered Xingyuan, drove out the commander of the festival, Niu Yao, and appointed himself as the commander of the festival.

古文：四年春正月癸亥朔，车驾在成都府。
现代文：中和四年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸于成都府。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Middle Ages, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor's chauffeur arrived in Chengdu.

古文：二月，河东节度使李克用将出师援陈许，河阳节度使诸葛爽以兵屯泽州拒之。
现代文：二月，河东节度使李克用将出兵救援陈州和许州，河阳节度使诸葛爽率领人马屯驻在泽州抗拒李克用。
English: In February, the festival of Hedong made Li Kejun send troops to rescue Chenzhou and Huzhou, and the festival of Heyang made Zhuge Shuang and his leader Ma Tun stay in Zhezhou to resist Li Kejun.

古文：三月壬戌朔。
现代文：三月初一为壬戌日。
English: The first day of March is Jinshan Day.

古文：甲戌，克用移军自河中南渡，东下洛阳。
现代文：三月十三日，李克用调动军队，从河中向南渡过黄河，再向东前往洛阳。
English: On March 13, Li Ke used mobilized troops to cross the Yellow River from the middle of the river to the south, and then headed east to Luoyang.

古文：四月辛卯朔。
现代文：四月初一为辛卯日。
English: The first day of April is a bad day.

古文：甲寅，沙陀军次许州，节度使周岌、监军田从异以兵会战。
现代文：四月二十四日，沙陀军停驻在许州，节度使周岌、监军田从异率兵前来协同作战。
English: On April 24th, the Satao army was stationed in Xuzhou, and the festival made Zhou Rui and Guan Yu Tian come from the soldiers of different ranks to fight together.

古文：贼将尚让屯太康，黄鄴屯西华，稍有刍粟。
现代文：贼将尚让屯驻在太康，黄邺屯驻在西华，有少量的粮草。
English: The thief general Shang Zhan's garrison was stationed in Taikang, the thief general Huang Qi's garrison was stationed in Xihua, and there was a small amount of grain and grass.

古文：己未，沙陀分兵攻太康、西华贼砦。
现代文：四月二十九日，沙陀军分兵进攻太康和西华贼军的营寨。
English: On April 29, a detachment of soldiers from the Shatou Army attacked the camp of Taikang and the West China Thief Army.

古文：庚申，尚让、黄鄴遁去，官军得其刍粟，黄巢亦退保郾城。
现代文：四月三十日，尚让、黄邺从太康和西华逃走，官军得到了他们的粮草，黄巢也退兵保卫郾城。
English: On April 30, Shang Zhan and Huang Qi fled from Taikang and Xihua, the government army got their grain and grass, and Huang Chao also withdrew to defend Lucheng.

古文：以兵部侍郎、判度支郑昌图以本官同平章事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎、署理度支使郑昌图以本职任同平章事。
English: The appointment of Zheng Changtu, the attendant of the military department and the acting chief of staff, to this position is a matter of equal importance.

古文：五月辛酉朔。
现代文：五月初一为辛酉日。
English: The first day of May is a very busy day.

古文：癸亥，沙陀追黄巢而北。
现代文：五月初三，沙陀军向北追击黄巢。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the Shatou army marched north in pursuit of the Yellow Nest.

古文：丁卯，次尉氏。
现代文：五月初七，驻扎在尉氏县。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the year, he was stationed in Sui County.

古文：戊辰，大雨，平地水深三尺，沟河涨溢。
现代文：五月初八，天降大雨，平地积水达三尺深，沟堑江河的水上涨溢出。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth lunar month, heavy rain fell, and the water accumulated on the flat land was three feet deep. The water of the Gulou River rose and overflowed.

古文：贼至中牟，临汴河欲渡，沙陀遽至，贼大骇，其党分溃，杀伤溺死殆半。
现代文：贼军抵达中牟县，来到汴河边，想要渡过去，沙陀军突然来到，贼军极其惊骇，其部众分崩离析而溃散，被杀伤和淹死的几乎占一半。
English: The bandit army arrived in Zhongmou County, came to the bank of the Min River, and wanted to cross it. The Shatou army suddenly arrived. The bandit army was extremely shocked. Its members fell apart and broke up, and almost half of them were killed or drowned.

古文：尚让一军降时溥，别将杨能、李谠、霍存、葛从周、张归霸等降硃全忠，李周、杨景彪以残众走封丘。
现代文：尚让那支贼军投降了时溥，偏将杨能、李谠、霍存、葛从周、张归霸等投降朱全忠，李周、杨景彪率领残余的部众逃到封丘。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong allowed the bandit army to surrender, Yang Neng, Li Yu, Huo Cun, Ge Cong Zhou, Zhang Guiba and others surrendered to Zhu Quanzhong. Li Zhou and Yang Jing Biao led the remaining soldiers to flee to Fengqiu.

古文：己巳，沙陀渡汴河，趋封丘，黄巢兄弟悉力拒战，李克用击败之。
现代文：五月初九，沙陀军渡过汴河，进军封丘，黄巢和他的弟兄们全力进行抵抗，李克用击败了他们。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, Shado's army crossed the Li River and marched into Fengqiu. Huang Niu and his brothers resisted with all their might, but Li Ke used his magic to defeat them.

古文：获所俘男女五万口，牛马万余，并伪乘舆、法物、符印、宝货、戎仗等三万计。
现代文：获取了贼军掳掠的男女五万人，牛马一万多头，以及非法制造的皇帝舆车、祭祀用的法器、符节印信、宝物、兵戎器仗等三万件。
English: They obtained 50,000 men and women, more than 10,000 heads of cattle and horses, and 30,000 pieces of illegally manufactured imperial carriages, ritual instruments, seal letters, treasures, military equipment, etc. that had been captured and plundered by the invaders.

古文：得巢幼子，年六岁。
现代文：抓到了黄巢年方六岁的幼子。
English: He caught the six-year-old child of Huang Nong Fang.

古文：黄巢既败，以其残众东走。
现代文：黄巢战败之后，带着他残余的部众向东逃走。
English: After the defeat of Huang Chao, he fled to the east with his remaining followers.

古文：庚午，李克用急蹑黄巢，一日夜行二百里，马疲乏死者殆半。
现代文：五月初十，李克用急追黄巢，一天一夜行军二百里。将近一半的马匹都因疲劳过度而死。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month, Li Ke chased Huang Chao in a hurry, marching 200 miles a day and night. Nearly half of the horses died from overwork.

古文：宿冤朐，粮运不及，骑军至寡，乃与忠武监军田从异班师。
现代文：军队宿在冤朐，粮草来不及运到，骑兵又极少，李克用便和忠武军监军田从异一起收兵回去。
English: The army was encamped at Wenchuan, the grain and grass could not be transported in time, and there were very few cavalrymen. Li Ke used the post to collect the soldiers together with the loyal military overseer Tian Zongyi.

古文：甲戌，次汴州，节度使硃全忠馆克用于上源驿。
现代文：五月十四日，李克用停驻在汴州时，汴州节度使朱全忠招待李克用住在上源驿。
English: On May 14, when Li Kegui was stationed in Ganzhou, the Ganzhou Festival made Zhu Quanzhong invite Li Kegui to live in Shangyuanlu.

古文：全忠以克用兵力寡弱，大军在远，乃图之。
现代文：朱全忠认为李克用身边的兵力人少势弱，大军在远地，便想下手暗算他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong thought that Li Ke was using the small number of soldiers around him as a sign of weakness, and that the large army was in a distant land, so he wanted to set about plotting against him.

古文：是夜，置酒邮舍，克用既醉，全忠以兵围驿，纵火烧之。
现代文：当天晚上，在驿舍里摆酒宴请李克用，李克用喝醉以后，朱全忠便派兵围住驿舍，放火烧屋。
English: In the evening of the same day, a wine banquet was held in the hermitage for Li Ke, and after Li Ke got drunk, Zhu Quanzhong sent soldiers to surround the hermitage and set fire to the house.

古文：雷雨骤作，平地水深尺余，克用逾垣仅免。
现代文：突然天降雷雨，平地积水达一尺多深，李克用仅一个人跳墙得以幸免。
English: A thunderstorm suddenly fell from the sky, and the standing water on the flat ground was more than a foot deep. Li Ke used only one person to jump over the wall to escape.

古文：其部下三百余人及监军使史敬思、书记任珪皆被害。
现代文：他的部下三百多人以及监军使史敬思、书记任王圭都被杀害。
English: More than three hundred of his subordinates were killed, as well as the supervising envoy Shi Jingsi and the secretary Ren Wang Gui.

古文：丙子，克用至许州，率本军还太原。
现代文：五月十六日，李克用来到许州，率领大军返回太原。
English: On May 16, Li Ke went to Xuzhou and led a large army back to Taiyuan.

古文：庚辰，徐州将李师悦、陈景思率兵万人追黄巢于兗州。
现代文：五月二十日，徐州将领李师悦、陈景思率领一万名士兵追赶黄巢到兖州。
English: On May 20, Xuzhou generals Li Shiyue and Chen Jingsi led ten thousand soldiers to chase Huang Chao to Ganzhou.

古文：六月，郓州节度使硃瑄奏大败贼于合乡。
现代文：六月，郓州节度使朱王宣奏报，在合乡将贼军打得大败。
English: In June, the Bozhou Festival made Zhu Wang issue a proclamation and defeated the bandits in He Township.

古文：秋七月己未朔。
现代文：秋，七月初一为己未日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is the last day of the year.

古文：癸酉，贼将林言斩黄巢、黄揆、黄秉三人首级降时溥。
现代文：七月十五日，贼将林言砍下黄巢、黄揆、黄秉三个人的脑袋投降了时溥。
English: On July 15th, the thieves cut off the heads of three people, Huang Xizhe, Huang Qi, and Huang Bing from Lin Yan and surrendered to Shi Yao.

古文：初，徐将李师悦与贼战于瑕丘，贼殊死战，其众殆尽。
现代文：起初，徐州将领李师悦和贼军在瑕丘接战，贼军做拼死的战斗，贼兵们几乎全都战死了。
English: At first, the Xuzhou general Li Shiyue and the thief army fought in Kejiu, the thief army fought to the death, and the thief soldiers almost all died in battle.

古文：林言与巢走至太山狼虎谷之襄王村，惧追至并命，乃斩贼降师悦。
现代文：林言和黄巢一起逃到太山狼虎谷的襄王村，因为害怕追兵到了会一起送命，便杀死黄巢等投降了李师悦。
English: Lin Yan and Huang Chao fled together to Xiang Wang Village in Taishan Wolf Tiger Valley. Because they were afraid that if they chased the soldiers, they would die together, they killed Huang Chao and surrendered to Li Shiyue.

古文：壬午，捷书至行在，从官称贺。
现代文：七月二十四日，报捷的文书送到皇上驻跸的地方，随从的官员们都表示祝贺。
English: On July 24, the document announcing the victory was sent to the place where the emperor was stationed, and the officials accompanying him expressed their congratulations.

古文：河东节度使李克用累表诉屈，请讨汴州。
现代文：河东节度使李克用多次上表申诉委屈，请求讨伐汴州节度使朱全忠。
English: The Hedong Festival made Li Ke repeatedly appeal for grievances on the above list, and request the crusade against the Zhangzhou Festival to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：天子优诏和解之，就加克用阶特进，封陇西郡王以悦之。
现代文：皇帝特颁诏命为他们调解，就地加授李克用阶官特进，晋封为陇西郡王以让他高兴。
English: The emperor issued a special edict to mediate for them, and Li Ke was given a special promotion to the rank of officer on the spot, and was promoted to the king of Shaanxi County to make him happy.

古文：自是全忠、克用有寻戈之怨。
现代文：从此朱全忠、李克用之间有了以武力相向的仇恨。
English: Since then, Zhu Quanzhong and Li Kegui have been at war with each other.

古文：九月，山南西道节度使鹿晏弘为禁军所讨，弃城拥众东出襄、邓，大掠许州。
现代文：九月，山南西道节度使鹿晏弘因被禁军讨伐，放弃城池，被部下簇拥着到襄州、邓州去，大肆劫掠许州。
English: In September, the festival of Shannan West Road made Lu Yinghong abandon the city due to the crusade of the forbidden army, and he was surrounded by his subordinates to go to Xiangzhou and Dengzhou to plunder Huzhou.

古文：晏弘大将王建、韩建、张造、晋晖、李师泰各率本军归朝，田令孜以建等杨复光故将，薄之，皆授诸卫将军，惟以王建为壁州刺史。
现代文：鹿晏弘的大将王建、韩建、张造、晋晖、李师泰各自率领自己的军队归附朝廷，田令孜因为韩建等人都是杨复光的旧将，便薄待他们，都只授予诸卫将军，只任命王建为壁州刺史。
English: The generals Wang Jian, Han Jian, Zhang Zong, Jintao, and Li Shitai of Lu Yinghong each led his own army to attach to the imperial court. Since Han Jian and others were former generals of Yang Fuguang, Tian Lingzi treated them poorly, only awarded them to the generals of Zhuwei, and only appointed Wang Jian as the governor of Bishu.

古文：十月，关东诸镇上章请车驾还京。
现代文：十月，关东各镇的将领们奉上表章，请求皇上的车驾返回京师。
English: In October, the generals of the towns in the Kanto region sent a request for the emperor's chariot to return to the capital.

古文：十一月，鹿晏弘陷许州，杀周岌，自称留后，寻为秦宗权所攻。
现代文：十一月，鹿晏弘攻陷许州，杀死周岌，自称为许州留后，不久又遭到秦宗权的进攻。
English: In November, Lu Xunhong invaded Huzhou, killed Zhou Rui, and claimed to stay in Huzhou. Soon after, he was attacked by the Qin Dynasty.

古文：制以义成军节度、检校太师、中书令、上柱国、晋国公王铎为沧州刺史、义昌军节度、沧德观察处置等使。
现代文：决定任命义成军节度使、检校太师、中书令、上柱国、晋国公王铎为沧州刺史、义昌军节度使、沧德观察处置使等。
English: It was decided to appoint the Yicheng Military Festival Envoy, the Inspection and Inspection Officer, the Cangde Chinese Calligraphy Envoy, the Shangzhu Country Envoy, and the Prince of Jin Province Envoy as the Cangzhou Historian, the Yichang Military Festival Envoy, and the Cangde Observation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：十二月丁亥朔，大明宫留守、权知京兆尹、御史大夫、京畿制置等使王徽与留司百官上表，请车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月初一，大明宫留守、暂署京兆尹、御史大夫、京畿制置使王徽和留守京师的百官奉上表章，请求皇上车驾返回皇宫。
English: On the first day of December, the hundred officials who were left behind at Daming Palace, including the temporary envoy, Jing Zhaoyun, the imperial historian, the envoy of the Gyeonggi system, Wang Hui, and the remaining Beijing division, sent a letter to the emperor, requesting the emperor to drive back to the imperial palace.

古文：诏以来年正月还京。
现代文：皇上下诏确定明年正月返回京师。
English: The Emperor's edict confirmed that he would return to the capital in the first month of the following year.

古文：新除沧德节度使王铎，为魏博节度使乐彦祯害之于漳南县之高鸡泊，行从三百余人皆遇害。
现代文：新授沧德节度使的王铎，在漳南县的高鸡泊被魏博节度使乐彦祯杀死，随行的三百多人都遭杀害。
English: Wang Qi, who was newly awarded the Cangde Festival, was killed by Wei Bo Festival in Gaoji Po of Yinan County, and more than three hundred people who accompanied him were killed.

古文：光启元年春正月丁巳朔，车驾在成都府。
现代文：光启元年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸在成都府。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Guangqi, the emperor's chauffeur arrived in Chengdu.

古文：己卯，僖宗自蜀还京。
现代文：正月二十三日，僖宗从蜀州返回京师。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Shuzhou.

古文：二月丁亥朔。
现代文：二月初一为丁亥日。
English: The first day of February is Dinghai Day.

古文：丙申，车驾次凤翔。
现代文：二月初十，皇上的车驾停驻在凤翔。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, the emperor's car was parked in Fengxiang.

古文：三月丙辰朔。
现代文：三月初一为丙辰日。
English: The first day of March is Hsinchu Day.

古文：丁卯，车驾至京师。
现代文：三月十二日，皇上的车驾抵达京师。
English: On March 12th, the Emperor's carriage arrived in Kyoto.

古文：己巳，御宣政殿，大赦，改元光启。
现代文：三月十四日，皇上驾临宣政殿，下诏大赦天下，改年号为光启。
English: On March 14th, the emperor arrived at the Xuan Zheng Palace, issued a decree to pardon the world, and changed the year name to Guangqi.

古文：时李昌符据凤翔，王重荣据蒲、陕，诸葛爽据河阳、洛阳，孟方立据邢、洺，李克用据太原、上党，硃全忠据汴、滑，秦宗权据许、蔡，时溥据徐、泗，硃宣据郓、齐曹、濮，王敬武据淄、青，高骈据淮南八州，秦彦据宣、歙，刘汉宏据浙东，皆自擅兵赋，迭相吞噬，朝廷不能制。
现代文：当时李昌符据有凤翔，王重荣据有蒲州、陕州，诸葛爽据有河阳、洛阳，孟方立据有邢州、氵名州，李克用据有太原、上党，朱全忠据有汴州、滑州，秦宗权据有许州、蔡州，时溥据有徐州、泗州，朱王宣据有郓州、齐州、曹州、濮州，王敬武据有淄州、青州，高骈据有淮南八州，秦彦据有宣州、歙州，刘汉宏据有浙东，都是擅自收取兵税，层层相吞没，朝廷无法控制。
English: At that time, Li Changfu received Fengxiang, Wang Chung Rong received Puzhou and Shaanxi, Zhuge Shuang received Heyang and Luoyang, Meng Fang received Zhangzhou and Yaoming, Li Kegui received Taiyuan and Shangdang, Zhu Quanzhong received Zhangzhou and Luzhou, Qin Zongquan received Huzhou and Caizhou, Shijiazhuang received Xuzhou and Luzhou, Zhu Wangxuan received Zhangzhou, Qizhou, Caozhou and Luzhou, Wang Jingwu received Zhangzhou and Qingzhou, Gaoqun received Huainan and Baxian, Qin Yan received

古文：江淮转运路绝，两河、江淮赋不上供，但岁时献奉而已。
现代文：江淮平常转运物资的通道断绝，两河、江淮地区的赋税不能供奉朝廷，只是逢年过节奉献一点而已。
English: The channels for the usual transfer of materials between the Yangtze River and the Huai River were cut off, and the taxes of the two rivers and the Yangtze River and the Huai River region could not be donated to the imperial court, but only a little was donated every year for the festival.

古文：国命所能制者，河西、山南、剑南、岭南四道数十州。
现代文：朝廷的敕命所能控制的，只有河西、山南、剑南、岭南西道的几十个州。
English: Only dozens of prefectures in Hexi, Shannan, Jian'nan and Lingnan Xi Dao could be controlled by the imperial court.

古文：大约郡将自擅，常赋殆绝，籓侯废置，不自朝廷，王业于是荡然。
现代文：大体上是各郡将领自行其是，日常的赋税几近断绝，藩镇主将的罢免和设置，都不能由朝廷决定，朝廷的基业这时已荡然无存了。
English: For the most part, the generals of each county did as they pleased, the daily taxation was almost cut off, and the dismissal and establishment of the lord of the domain could not be decided by the imperial court. The imperial inheritance was completely gone at this time.

古文：蔡贼秦宗权侵寇籓邻，制以徐州节度使时溥为钜鹿王，充蔡州四面行营兵马都统。
现代文：蔡州逆贼秦宗权侵害滋扰相邻的藩镇，朝廷决定任命徐州节度使时溥为巨鹿王，充任蔡州四面行营兵马都统。
English: When the invader Qin Zongquan invaded and harassed the neighboring towns in Caizhou, the imperial court decided to appoint the Xuzhou festival delegate Shijie as the king of the giant deer, acting as the commander of the soldiers and horses in the four sides of Caizhou.

古文：宗权将秦贤攻汴、郑不已，以汴州刺史硃全忠为沛郡王，充蔡州西北面行营都统。
现代文：秦宗权的部将秦贤不停地攻打汴州、郑州，朝廷便任命汴州刺史朱全忠为沛郡王，充任蔡州西北面行营都统。
English: Qin Emperor Qin's general Qin Xian constantly attacked Zhangzhou and Zhengzhou, and the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong, the governor of Zhangzhou, as the king of Pei County, and he served as the governor of the northwestern part of Caizhou.

古文：杭州刺史董昌大败刘汉宏之众，进攻越、婺、台、明等州，下之。
现代文：杭州刺史董昌大败刘汉宏的部众，进攻越州、婺州、台州、明州等州。
English: Hangzhou stabber Dong Chang defeated Liu Hanhong's troops and attacked Yuezhou, Zhangzhou, Taizhou, Mingzhou and other provinces.

古文：遂以昌为越州刺史、镇东军节度、浙江东道观察等使，以杭州大将钱镠为杭州刺史。
现代文：都攻了下来。朝廷便任命董昌为越州刺史、镇东军节度使、浙江东道观察使等，任命杭州大将钱霮为杭州刺史。
English: The imperial court then appointed Dong Chang as the viceroy of Yuezhou, Zhendong Army Festival Envoy, Zhejiang Host Observation Envoy, etc., and appointed Hangzhou General Qian Qian as the viceroy of Hangzhou.

古文：闰三月，镇冀节度使王镕献耕牛千头，农具九千，兵仗十万。
现代文：闰三月，镇冀节度使王献上耕牛一千头，农具九千件，兵甲器仗十万件。
English: In the intercalary month of March, the Zhenji Festival made the king offer a thousand head of oxen, nine thousand pieces of agricultural tools, and one hundred thousand pieces of armor.

古文：四月乙卯朔，以开府仪同三司、右金吾卫上将军、左街功德使、齐国公田令孜为左右神策十军使。
现代文：四月初一，任命开府仪同三司、右金吾卫上将军、左街功德使、齐国公田令孜为左右神策十军使。
English: On the first day of April, he appointed Kaifu Yidong Sanji, Right King Wuwei Shangzheng, Zuo Jie Gongde Shi, and Qigong Konda Lingzi as the ten military envoys of the left and right divine policies.

古文：时自蜀中护驾，令孜招募新军五十四都，都千人，左右神策各二十七都，分为五军，令孜总领其权。
现代文：在蜀中护驾时，田令孜共招募新军五十四都，每都一千人，左右神策各军各有二十七都，分为五军，由田令孜总管其兵权。
English: When he was escorting Shu Zhong, Tian Rongze recruited new troops from fifty-four capitals, each with a thousand people, and each of the armies of the left and right divine policies had twenty-seven capitals, divided into five armies, with Tian Rongze in charge of their military power.

古文：时军旅既众，南衙北司官属万余，三司转运无调发之所，度支惟以关畿税赋，支给不充，赏劳不时，军情咨怨。
现代文：当时军旅既很多，南衙和北司所属的官员又有一万多人，度支、户部及盐铁转运使没有征调财赋的地方，财务支出只靠关内京畿一带地方的赋税，财源很不充足，奖赏酬劳都不能按时发给，军队中产生怨恨的情绪。
English: At that time, there were a large number of military brigades, more than 10,000 officials belonging to the Nanzhang and the North Division, and there was no place to collect and transfer funds from the Department of State Revenue and Expenditure, the Department of Household Affairs, and the Department of Salt and Iron Transportation, and the financial expenditure only relied on local taxes in Guanai, Gyeonggi Province. The financial resources were very insufficient, and rewards and remuneration could not be paid on time, and resentment arose in the army.

古文：旧日安邑、解县两池榷盐税课，盐铁使特置盐官以总其事。
现代文：原先安邑、解县两处盐池食盐的专卖赋税，盐铁使专门设置盐官以总管其有关事务。
English: Originally, two salt ponds in An'yun and Jie County had a monopoly on the sale of salt, and the Salt and Iron Ministry set up a special salt official to be in charge of its related affairs.

古文：自黄巢乱离，河中节度使王重荣兼领榷务，岁出课盐三千车以献朝廷。
现代文：自从黄巢之乱发生，河中节度使王重荣兼管食盐专卖事务，每一年拿出三千车盐的税银献给朝廷。
English: Since the outbreak of the Yellow Nest Rebellion, the Mid-Heaven Festival has made Wang Chung-Rong take charge of the salt monopoly business, and every year he takes out three thousand carts of salt tax money to donate to the imperial court.

古文：至是令孜以亲军阙供，计无从出，乃举广明前旧事，请以两池榷务归盐铁使，收利以赡禁军。
现代文：至此，田令孜因为是自己直辖的亲军缺少供给，想不出解决的办法，便举出广明年以前的旧例，请求把安邑、解县两处盐池的专卖事务归还给盐铁使管辖，以便收取利益以赡养禁军。
English: At this point, Tian Lingzi could not think of a solution to the shortage of supplies for the pro-army under his direct jurisdiction, so he cited the old case before Guangyi, requesting that the monopoly business of the two salt ponds in Anyi and Xie County be returned to the jurisdiction of the Salt and Iron Minister in order to collect profits to support the forbidden army.

古文：诏下，重荣上章论诉，言河中地窘，悉籍盐课供军。
现代文：皇上的诏令下达以后，王重荣呈上表章分析、申诉，说河中地区经济困难，全靠着盐税来供给军用。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, Wang Chong Rong submitted the above analysis and complaint, saying that the economic difficulties in the middle of the river depended entirely on the salt tax to supply the military.

古文：五月，制以河中节度使、检校司徒、同平章事、河中尹、上柱国、琅邪郡王王重荣为检校太傅、同平章事，兼兗州刺史、兗沂海节度观察处置等使，代齐克让。
现代文：五月，决定任命河中节度使、检校司徒、同平章事、河中尹、上柱国、琅笽郡王王重荣为检校太傅、同平章事，并兼任兖州刺史及兖、沂、海等州节度观察处置使，以代替齐克让。
English: In May, it was decided to appoint Wang Chong Rong, the deputy governor of Hanzhong, the inspector of schools, Tongping Zhangji, Hanzhong Yin, Shangzhuang Guo, and Qiu County, as the deputy governor of schools, Tongping Zhangji, and also as the deputy governor of Hanzhong, and the deputy governor of Hanzhong, Hanzhong, and Hai, to replace Zikzang.

古文：以克让检校司徒，兼定州刺史御史大夫，充义武节度观察、北平军等使，代王处存。
现代文：任命齐克让为检校司徒，兼定州刺史、御史大夫，充任义武军节度使、观察使、北平军军使等，以代替王处存。
English: Appointed Zikzang as the school inspector, concurrently appointed as the governor of Dingzhou and the chief historian, and served as the festival envoy of the Volunteer Army, the observation envoy, the military envoy of the Peiping Army, etc. to replace Wang.

古文：以处存依前检校太傅、同平章事、河中尹、河中晋慈隰节度观察等使。
现代文：王处存照旧担任检校太傅、同平章事、河中尹及河中、晋、慈、隰等州节度使、观察使等。
English: The King's Office will continue to serve as the inspector of schools, Tongping Zhangji, Kechu Yin, and Kechu, Jin, Cici, Zou and other state festival envoys and observation envoys.

古文：是月，宰臣萧遘率文武百僚上徽号曰至德光烈孝皇帝，御宣政殿受册，大赦。
现代文：当月，宰臣萧遘率领文武百官向皇帝敬奉徽号为：至德光烈孝皇帝，皇上驾临宣政殿接受册书，大赦天下。
English: In the same month, the Vice-Minister Xiao Wei led 100 military and civilian officials to pay homage to the emperor with the emblem: To Emperor De Guang Li Xiao, the emperor came to the Xuan Zheng Palace to accept the record book, and granted amnesty to the world.

古文：六月甲寅朔。
现代文：六月初一为甲寅日。
English: The first day of the first month of June is "Kato-in" day.

古文：丙辰，定州王处存奏： 幽州节度使李可举、镇州节度使王镕各令大将率领兵士侵攻当道，臣并已杀退。 
现代文：六月初三，定州王处存上奏说： 幽州节度使李可举、镇州节度使王各自命大将率领士兵侵占进攻朝廷控制的地区，我已经将他们全部杀退。 
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the Dingzhou King's Office issued a report saying: The Yuzhou Festival made Li Keqiu, and the Zhenzhou Festival made Wang and his generals lead soldiers to invade and occupy the areas controlled by the imperial court. I have killed them all.

古文：时李可举乘天子播越，中原大乱，以河朔三镇，休戚事同，惟易、定二郡为朝廷所有，乃同议攻处存以分其地。
现代文：当时李可举乘天子流亡在外，中原大乱的机会，认为河朔三镇休戚相关，只有易州和定州这两个州郡属于朝廷所有，便一起商量进攻王处存以瓜分他的地盘。
English: At that time, Li Ke took advantage of the opportunity of the Central Plains Rebellion, believing that the three towns of Heshuo were closely related. Only the two counties of Yizhou and Dingzhou belonged to the imperial court, and they discussed attacking the king's residence to divide his territory.

古文：会燕将李全忠有夺帅之志，军情相疑。
现代文：正碰着燕州将领李全忠有夺取帅印的意图，军中有互相疑忌的情绪。
English: Li Quanzhong, the general of Yanzhou, was about to capture Shuaiyin, and there was mutual suspicion in the army.

古文：全忠方围易州，处存出奇骑以击之，燕军大败。
现代文：李全忠正围困了易州，王处存出其不意地派出骑兵对他进行攻击，燕州军大败。
English: Li Quanzhong was besieging Yizhou, and the king unexpectedly sent cavalry to attack him, resulting in a crushing defeat for the Yan army.

古文：是月，全忠收合残众攻幽州，李可举举室登楼自焚而死，全忠自称留后。
现代文：当月，李全忠又收罗残余的队伍攻打幽州，李可举全家登楼放火自焚而死，李全忠自称为节度留后。
English: In the same month, Li Quanzhong also gathered the remnants of Luo's army to attack Yuzhou. Li Ke held his whole family upstairs and set fire to himself, and died. Li Quanzhong called himself the heir to the festival.

古文：沧州军乱，逐其帅杨全玫，立衙将卢彦威为留后。
现代文：沧州的军人发生动乱，驱逐他们的主帅杨全玫，拥立亲军衙将卢彦威为沧州留后。
English: The soldiers of Cangzhou were in turmoil, their commander Yang Quanmei was expelled, and Lu Yanwei, a pro-army general, was left in charge of Cangzhou.

古文：制以保銮都将、检校司徒，兼黔州刺史、黔中节度观察等使曹诚检校太保，兼沧州刺史，充义昌军节度、沧德观察等使。
现代文：决定任命保銮都将、检校司徒、兼黔州刺史、黔中节度使、观察使曹诚为检校太保，兼任沧州刺史，充任义昌军节度使、沧德观察使等。
English: It was decided to appoint Cao Cheng as a school inspector, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection, inspector of the school inspection.

古文：河中王重荣累表论列，数令孜离间方镇，令孜遣邠宁节度使硃玫会合鄜、延、灵、夏之师讨河中。
现代文：河中节度使王重荣多次上表分析议论，列举田令孜在方镇之间挑拨离间的事实，田令孜派宁节度使朱玫会同州、延州、灵州、夏州的军队讨伐王重荣。
English: The mid-river festival made Wang Chung Rong repeatedly analyze and discuss the above table, listing the facts that Tian Ling Zi sowed discord between Fang Town, and the Tian Ling Zi sent Zhu Mei to fight Wang Chung Rong with the armies of Zhou, Yanzhou, Lingzhou, and Xiazhou.

古文：九月，硃玫屯沙苑。
现代文：九月，朱玫屯驻在沙苑。
English: In September, Zhu Mei Tun was stationed in Sha Yuan.

古文：王重荣求援于太原。
现代文：王重荣向太原李克用求援。
English: Wang Chong Rong asked for help from Taiyuan Li Kegui.

古文：十月，李克用率太原军南出阴地关。
现代文：十月，李克用率领太原的军队南出阴地关。
English: In October, Li Keqiang led the troops of Taiyuan southward.

古文：十一月，河中、太原之师与禁军对垒于沙苑。
现代文：十一月，河中、太原的军队和朝廷的禁军在沙苑筑垒对峙。
English: In November, the armies of Hezhong and Taiyuan and the imperial army confronted each other in Shayuan.

古文：十二月辛亥朔。
现代文：十二月初一为辛亥日。
English: The first day of December is Xinhai Day.

古文：癸酉，官军合战，为沙陀所败，硃玫走还邠州。
现代文：十二月二十三日，官军各部队联合作战，被沙陀军击败，朱玫逃回州。
English: On December 23rd, the various units of the government army fought together and were defeated by the Shado army. Zhu Mei fled back to the state.

古文：神策军溃散，遂入京师肆掠。
现代文：神策军溃散，便进入京师大肆抢劫。
English: Shinsaka's army broke up and went into the capital to loot.

古文：乙亥，沙陀逼京师，田令孜奉僖宗出幸凤翔。
现代文：十二月二十五日，沙陀军进逼京师，田令孜侍奉着僖宗，抵达凤翔。
English: On December 25th, Shado's army entered and forced the Beijing division, and Tian Lingzi served Shizong and arrived at Fengxiang.

古文：初，黄巢据京师，九衢三内，宫室宛然。
现代文：原来黄巢占领京师的时候，所有街市和皇宫内的屋舍、保存得和原来一样完好。
English: Originally, when the Yellow Nest occupied the capital, all the streets and houses in the imperial palace were preserved as well as before.

古文：及诸道兵破贼，争货相攻，纵火焚剽，宫室居市闾里，十焚六七。
现代文：等到各地的官军击败黄巢的贼军，为了争夺财物而互相攻杀，放火焚烧、抢劫，皇宫中的屋舍、街市上百姓的住宅，十之六七都被烧毁了。
English: By the time the government troops from all over the country defeated the bandits from the Yellow Nest, and they fought and killed each other in order to compete for property, they set fire to, burned, and robbed. Sixty-seven out of ten houses in the imperial palace and the houses of the people in the streets and markets were burned down.

古文：贼平之后，令京兆尹王徽经年补葺，仅复安堵。至是，乱兵复焚，宫阙萧条，鞠为茂草矣。
现代文：贼人被平定以后，令京兆尹王徽用了一整年的时间进行修整，仅仅恢复了安居而已，到这时，乱兵又再次放火焚烧，宫室变得一片萧条，长出茂盛的野草了。
English: After the thieves were subdued, it took Jing Zhaoyin Wang Hui a whole year to renovate the palace, and he only restored a safe residence. At this time, the soldiers set fire to the palace again, and the palace became a depression, and lush weeds grew out.

古文：二年春正月辛巳朔，车驾在凤翔。
现代文：光启二年春，正月初一，皇帝的车驾驻跸在凤翔。
English: In the spring of the second year of Guangqi, on the first day of the first month, the emperor's chauffeur was stationed in Fengxiang.

古文：李克用旋师河中，与硃玫、王重荣同上表，请驾驻跸凤翔，仍数田令孜之罪。
现代文：李克用随即率领军队到河中，和朱玫、王重荣共同奉上表章，请求圣驾留驻在凤翔，并列举田令孜的罪状。
English: Li Kegui immediately led the army to the middle of the river, and together with Zhu Mei and Wang Chung Rong, they presented the medal, requested the saint to stay in Fengxiang, and listed Tian Lingzi's crimes.

古文：乃以飞龙使杨复恭复知内枢密事。
现代文：皇上便任用飞龙使杨复恭仍然掌管内枢密使事务。
English: The emperor then appointed Yang Fookong, a high-ranking official, to remain in charge of the inner privy council affairs.

古文：戊子，田令孜迫乘舆请幸兴元。
现代文：正月初八，田令孜迫使圣驾去兴元。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Tian Lingzi forced the holy driver to go to Xingyuan.

古文：庚寅，车驾次宝鸡。
现代文：正月初十，皇上的车驾驻跸在宝鸡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the emperor's chauffeur was stationed in Baoji.

古文：授刑部尚书孔纬兼御史大夫，令率从官赴行在。
现代文：朝廷授命刑部尚书孔纬兼任御史大夫，命令他率领随从官员前来皇上驻跸处。
English: The Imperial Court appointed the head of the Penal Department, Shang Shuxu Kong Wei, to also serve as the Imperial Historian, and ordered him to lead the officials to come to the Emperor's residence.

古文：时车驾夜出，宰相萧遘、裴彻、郑昌图及文武百僚不之知，扈从不及，故令孔纬促之。
现代文：当时皇上的车驾是夜间出发的，宰相萧遘、裴彻、郑昌图以及文武百官都不知道这件事，来不及跟随前往，故此命令孔纬前去追随。
English: At that time, the emperor's chariot set off at night. The prime ministers Xiao Yuan, Pei Che, Zheng Changtu, and all the civil and military officials did not know about this, and they did not have time to follow, so they ordered Kong Wei to follow.

古文：萧遘恶令孜弄权，再乱京国，因邠州奏事判官李松年至凤翔，乃令亟召硃玫迎奉。
现代文：萧遘厌恶田令孜玩弄权术，再次使京师产生动乱，便利用州奏事判官李松年去凤翔的机会，令他立即召朱玫去凤翔迎奉圣驾。
English: Xiao Yan was disgusted by Tian Lingzi's power play, which once again caused turmoil in Beijing, so he took advantage of the opportunity of the state judge Li Songnian to go to Fengxiang, and ordered him to immediately summon Zhu Mei to Fengxiang to welcome the saint.

古文：癸巳，硃玫引步骑五千至凤翔。
现代文：正月十三日，朱玫带领步骑士兵五千人到达凤翔。
English: On the 13th day of the first month, Zhu Mei led 5,000 cavalry soldiers to Fengxiang.

古文：令孜闻邠州军至，奉帝入散关，令禁军守灵璧。
现代文：田令孜听说州的军队来了，便侍奉皇帝进入散关，命令禁军守卫灵璧。
English: When Tian Lingzi heard that the state army was coming, he served the emperor to enter Sankuan and ordered the Imperial Army to guard Lingbi.

古文：玫至，禁军溃散，遂长驱追驾至尊途驿。
现代文：朱玫的军队一到，禁军便溃散了，朱玫便长驱直入，追赶圣驾到尊途驿。
English: As soon as Zhu Mei's army arrived, the forbidden army broke up, and Zhu Mei drove straight in, chasing the holy driver to Zunfutuan.

古文：嗣襄王煴疾，为玫所得。
现代文：嗣子襄王李誰患病，落到了朱玫手中。
English: When his heir, Xiang Wang Li, fell ill, he fell into the hands of Zhu Mei.

古文：时兴元节度使石君涉闻车驾入关，乃毁彻栈道，栅绝险要，车驾由他道仅达，为邠州军踵后，崎岖危殆者数四。
现代文：当时兴元节度使石君涉听说皇上的车驾进入散关，便拆毁了架设在峭崖陡壁上的栈道，用栅栏断绝险要的通道，皇上的车驾只能从别的道路抵达，被州的军队在后面追赶，有四次都因为道路崎岖而发生危险。
English: At that time, the Xingyuan Festival caused Shi Junbo to hear that the emperor's car had entered Sankuan, so he demolished the footbridge erected on the steep cliff and used the fence to cut off the dangerous passage. The emperor's car could only be reached from other roads and was chased by the state army. There were four times when the road was rough and dangerous.

古文：二月辛亥朔，以十军观军容使、开府田令孜为剑南西川节度监军，以内枢密使杨复恭为神策左军中尉。
现代文：二月初一，任命十军观察使、开府仪同三司田令孜为剑南西川节度监军，任命内枢密使杨复恭为神策左军中尉。
English: On the first day of February, he appointed the observer of the Ten Armies, Kaifu Goto, and Mitsuda Ryoze as the supervisors of the Jianan West River Festival, and appointed the Inner Privy Councilor Yang Fuzhong as the lieutenant of the Left Army.

古文：三月庚辰朔。
现代文：三月初一为庚辰日。
English: The first day of March is Geng Chen Day.

古文：壬午，兴元李度使石君涉弃城入硃玫军内。
现代文：三月初三，兴元节度使石君涉弃城进入朱玫的军营内。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the Xingyuan Festival made Shi Jun leave the city and enter Zhu Mei's military camp.

古文：丙申，车驾至兴元。
现代文：三月十七日，皇帝的车驾到达兴元。
English: On March 17th, the emperor's carriage arrived in Xingyuan.

古文：戊辰，以翰林学士承旨、兵部尚书、知制诰杜让能为兵部侍郎；刑部尚书、御只大夫孔纬为兵部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运等使：并以本官同平章事。
现代文：三月二十九日，任命翰林学士承旨、兵部尚书、知制诰杜让能为兵部侍郎；任命刑部尚书、御史大夫孔纬为兵部侍郎，充任诸道盐铁转运使，并以本职任同平章事。
English: On March 29th, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi, Hyobusho Shangshu, and Zhizhe Zhidujang were appointed as attendants of the military department; and Gyobusho Shangshu and Goshi Doctor Kong Wei were appointed as attendants of the military department. They were appointed as envoys for the transportation of salt and iron from one province to another, and were appointed to the same post.

古文：保銮都将李鋋、杨守亮、杨守宗等败邠州军于凤州。
现代文：保銮都将李钅延、杨守亮、杨守宗等在凤州击败州的军队。
English: Li Jianyan, Yang Shouliang, Yang Shouzong and others were all defeated by the state army in Fengzhou.

古文：四月庚戌朔，是夜荧惑犯月角。
现代文：四月初一，当夜荧惑星干犯月角。
English: On the first day of April, that night, the fluorescent planet interrupts the crescent.

古文：壬子，硃玫、李昌符迫宰相萧遘等于凤翔驿舍，请嗣襄王煴权监军国事。
现代文：四月初三，朱玫、李昌符在凤翔驿舍逼迫宰相萧遘，请求让嗣子襄王李誰暂时监督军国事务。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Zhu Mei and Li Changfu in Fengxiang's house forced the prime minister Xiao Wei to request that his heir, Xiang Wang Lijian, temporarily supervise military affairs.

古文：玫自为大丞相，兼左右神策十军使。
现代文：朱玫自任大丞相，兼任左、右神策十军使。
English: Zhu Mei appointed himself as the grand chancellor, and also served as the left and right ten military envoys of the divine policy.

古文：遂驱率文武百僚奉襄王还京师。
现代文：于是逼迫、率领文武百官侍奉襄王回到京师。
English: As a result, he forced and led hundreds of civil and military officials to serve Xiang Wang back to Beijing.

古文：五月己卯朔。
现代文：五月初一为己卯日。
English: The first day of May is a holiday.

古文：庚辰，襄王僭即皇帝位，年号建贞。
现代文：五月初二，襄王非法僭越即皇帝位，年号为建贞。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, King Xiang illegally usurped the throne of the emperor, and the year was Jianzhen.

古文：以萧遘初沮襄王监国之命，罢知政事，为太子少师。
现代文：因为萧遘起初曾阻止襄王接受监国的使命，罢免了他掌管政务的官职，任太子少师。
English: Because Xiao Yan initially prevented Xiang Wang from accepting the mission of supervising the country, he dismissed him from the official position in charge of government affairs and appointed him as the prince's apprentice.

古文：以硃玫为侍中、诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：伪命任朱玫为侍中、诸道盐铁转运使。
English: The false appointment of Zhu Mei as a chamberlain and envoy for the transfer of salt and iron to various regions.

古文：以裴彻为门下侍郎、右仆射、同平章事、判度支。
现代文：伪命任裴彻为门下侍郎、右仆射、同平章事、署理度支使。
English: By false orders, Pei Che was appointed as a footman, a right-hand man, a subordinate, a subordinate, a subordinate, and a subordinate.

古文：中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章事郑昌图判户部事。
现代文：伪命任中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章政事郑昌图署理户部事务。
English: He was falsely appointed as the secretary of the middle office, the secretary of the criminal department, and the administrative secretary of the administrative department of Pingzhang, Zheng Changtu.

古文：萧遘移疾归河中之永乐。
现代文：萧遘称病辞职，回到河中府的永乐县。
English: Mr. Xiao resigned, saying he was ill, and returned to Yongle County in central Henan Province.

古文：伪制加诸侯官爵。
现代文：伪朝决定给各地方大吏加授官爵。
English: The pseudo-Dynasty decided to give additional titles and ranks to all local officials.

古文：以淮南节度使、检校太尉、兼侍中高骈为太师、中书令、江淮盐铁转运、诸道行营兵马都统。
现代文：伪命任淮南节度使、检校太尉、兼侍中高骈为太师、中书令、江淮盐铁转运使、诸道行营兵马都统。
English: He was falsely appointed as the Huainan Festival Delegate, the Inspector of Schools, the Vice-Commander of the Middle School, the Vice-Commander of the Middle School, the Vice-Commander of the Jianghuai Salt and Iron Conveyance, and the Commander of the Armies of the Three Provinces.

古文：又以淮南右都押衙、和州刺史吕用之检校兵部尚书，兼广州刺史、岭南东道节度使。
现代文：又伪命任淮南右都押衙、和州刺史吕用之为检校兵部尚书，并兼广州刺史、岭南东道节度使。
English: In addition, he was appointed as the deputy of Huainan Uddu and the inspector of the military department of the inspection of the school, and also served as the inspector of Guangzhou Uddu and the host of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：令户部侍郎柳涉往江淮宣谕，户部侍郎夏侯潭河北宣谕，诸籓节将多授其伪署，惟定州、太原、宣武、河中拒而不受。
现代文：令户部侍郎柳涉往江淮宣布伪令，令户部侍郎夏侯潭往河北宣布伪令，各藩镇节度使大多数接受了他们非法宣布的任命，只有定州、太原、宣武、河中拒绝而不接受。
English: He had the Household Secretary Liu Watan to go to Jianghuai to announce the fake order, and the Household Secretary Xia Houtan to go to Hebei to announce the fake order, so that the majority of the festivals in each town accepted the appointment they illegally announced, only Dingzhou, Taiyuan, Xuanwu and Hezhong refused and did not accept.

古文：是月，星孛于箕尾，历北斗摄提。
现代文：当月，彗星出现在箕宿天区之尾，经过北斗星座和摄提星座。
English: That month, the comet appeared at the end of the Pleiades, passing through the constellations of the Big Dipper and the Pictor.

古文：荆南、襄阳仍岁蝗旱，米斗三十千，人多相食。
现代文：荆南、襄阳连年发生蝗灾和旱灾，一斗米卖到三十贯钱，人多互相烹吃。
English: Locust plagues and droughts have occurred year after year in Jingnan and Xiangyang. A barrel of rice sells for up to 30 yuan, and many people cook and eat together.

古文：杨复恭兄弟于河中、太原有破贼连衡之旧，乃奏遣谏议大夫刘崇望赍诏宣谕，达复恭之旨。
现代文：杨复恭兄弟和河中节度使王重荣、太原刺史李克用有联兵击败黄巢贼军的旧谊，便上奏，请求派遣谏议大夫刘崇望带着圣旨前去王重荣、李克用处宣布谕令，表示杨复恭再次与他们联兵破贼的意思。
English: Yang Fookong's brothers and Hezhong Jiedu asked Wang Chung Rong and Li Ke, the Taiyuan Grand Vizier, to use their old friendship to defeat the Yellow Nest Thief Army with a joint force. They then played a tune and requested that Liu Chongwang, the doctor of the imperial court, be sent to go to Wang Chung Rong and Li Ke to announce the edict, indicating Yang Fookong's intention to once again join forces with them to defeat the thieves.

古文：王重荣、李克用欣然听命，寻遣使贡奉，献缣十万匹，愿杀硃玫自赎。
现代文：王重荣、李克用很高兴地接受了命令，立即派使者前去向皇上进奉贡礼，献上缣十万匹，愿意杀朱玫以赎自己的过错。
English: Wang Chong Rong and Li Kejun gladly accepted the order, and immediately sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, offering one hundred thousand yakitori, willing to kill Zhu Mei to atone for their mistakes.

古文：崇望使还，君臣相贺。
现代文：刘崇望出使回去之后，君臣都互相祝贺。
English: After Liu Chongwang returned from his mission, the monarchs and ministers congratulated each other.

古文：六月己酉朔，以扈跸都将杨守亮为金州刺史、金商节度、京畿制置使。
现代文：六月初一，任命扈从皇上驻跸的都将杨守亮为金州刺史、金商节度使、京畿制置使。
English: On the first day of June, Yang Shouliang, who was appointed by the emperor to be stationed in Gyeongju, was appointed as the governor of Gyeongju, the envoy to the Golden Commercial Festival, and the envoy to the Gyeonggi system.

古文：守亮率师二万趋金州，与王重荣、李克用掎角进军。
现代文：杨守亮率领两万名士兵前往金州，和王重荣、李克用形成夹击态势进军。
English: Yang Shouliang led twenty thousand soldiers to Jinzhou, and Wang Chung Rong and Li Ke used the formation of a pincer attack to advance.

古文：时硃玫遣将王行瑜率邠宁、河西之师五万屯凤州，保銮都将李鋋、李茂贞、陈珮等抗之于大唐峰。
现代文：当时朱玫派遣将领王行瑜率领宁、河西的五万军队屯驻在凤州，保銮都将领李钅延、李茂真、陈等在大唐峰抗击他们。
English: At that time, Zhu Mei dispatched the general Wang Xingyu to lead the fifty thousand troops from Ning and Hexi to be stationed in Fengzhou, and the bodyguards would lead Li Qianyan, Li Maozhen, Chen, etc. to resist them in Datangfeng.

古文：七月戊寅朔，蔡贼秦宗权陷许州，杀鹿晏弘。
现代文：七月初一，蔡州贼将秦宗权攻陷许州，杀死鹿晏弘。
English: On the first day of July, the bandits of Caizhou captured Qin Zongquan in Huzhou and killed Lu Xunhong.

古文：以金商节度使杨守亮检校司徒，兼兴元尹，充山南西道节度等使。
现代文：任命金商节度使杨守亮为检校司徒，兼兴元尹，充任山南西道节度使。
English: Jin Shang appointed Yang Shouliang as the inspector of the school, and also appointed Xing Yuanyin as the inspector of Shannan West Road.

古文：王行瑜急攻兴州，守亮出师击败之。
现代文：王行瑜急速进攻兴州，杨守亮出兵将他击败。
English: Wang Xingyu quickly attacked Xingzhou, and Yang Shouliang defeated him.

古文：八月，幽州节度使李全忠卒，三军立其子匡威为留后。
现代文：八月，幽州节度使李全忠去世，三军拥立他的儿子李匡威为幽州留后。
English: In August, the Yuzhou Festival caused the death of Li Quanzhong, and the three armies supported his son Li Kuangwei to stay in Yuzhou.

古文：九月，杨守亮复败邠州军于凤州，军容杨复恭密遣人说王行瑜，令谋归国。
现代文：九月，杨守亮在凤州再次击败州军，观军容使杨复恭秘密派人去劝说王行瑜，叫他设法回归朝廷。
English: In September, Yang Shouliang defeated the state army again in Fengzhou. Yang Fookong secretly sent someone to persuade Wang Xingyu to try to return to the imperial court.

古文：十月壬子朔，滑州军乱，逐其帅安师儒，推衙将张骁主留后军务。
现代文：十月初七，滑州军人发生动乱，驱逐他们的主帅安师儒，推举亲军衙将张骁主持留后的军务。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of October, there was a riot among the soldiers in Slate. Their commander, An Shiru, was expelled, and the pro-army general Zhang Ye was elected to take charge of the military affairs.

古文：师儒奔汴州，硃全忠杀之，遂以兵攻滑，斩张骁以告行在，朝廷以汴帅全忠兼领义成军节度使。
现代文：安师儒投奔汴州，朱全忠把他杀了，便派兵攻打滑州，将张骁斩首以向皇上驻跸的地方报告，朝廷任命汴州主帅朱全忠兼任义成军节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong, An's master, went to Bozhou, but Zhu Quanzhong killed him. He then sent troops to attack Nianzhou and beheaded Zhang Jun to report to the emperor in Bozhou. The imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong, the commander of Bozhou, as the envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：壬辰夜，白虹见西方。
现代文：十一月十七日，白虹出现在西方。
English: On November 17th, the white rainbow appeared in the west.

古文：十一月，蔡贼孙儒陷郑州，刺史李璠遁免。
现代文：十一月，蔡州贼将孙儒攻陷郑州，刺史李逃走而免于一死。
English: In November, Caizhou thieves captured Sun Ru in Zhengzhou, and stabbed Shi Li to escape from death.

古文：儒引军攻河阳。
现代文：孙儒率军进攻河阳。
English: Sun Ju led an army to attack Hebei.

古文：十二月乙巳朔。
现代文：十二月初一。
English: The first day of December.

古文：是月，硃玫爱将王行瑜受密诏，自凤州率众还长安。
现代文：当月，朱玫的爱将王行瑜接受密诏，从凤州率领部下返回长安。
English: That month, Zhu Mei's love interest Wang Xingyu accepted the secret edict and led his subordinates from Fengzhou back to Chang'an.

古文：辛酉，行瑜斩硃玫及其党与数百人，纵兵大掠。
现代文：十二月十七日，王行瑜杀死朱玫和他的党羽九百人，听任士兵大肆抢劫。
English: On December 17th, Wang Xingyu killed Zhu Mei and 900 of his followers, and allowed the soldiers to carry out a large-scale robbery.

古文：是冬苦寒，九衢积雪，兵入之夜，寒冽尤剧，民吏剽剥之后，僵冻而死蔽地。
现代文：这年冬天极为寒冷，大街上积满了雪，士兵们入城的那天夜晚，严寒凛冽尤其厉害，遭到抢劫的百姓和官吏，冻僵之后死在地上，尸体盖满了地面。
English: This winter was extremely cold, the streets were covered with snow, the night the soldiers entered the city, the cold was particularly severe, the robbed people and officials froze to death and died on the ground, and the bodies covered the ground.

古文：裴彻、郑昌图及百官奉襄王奔河中，王重荣绐称迎奉，执李煴斩之，械裴彻、郑昌图于狱，文武官僚遭戮者殆半。
现代文：裴彻、郑昌图和百官侍奉着襄王逃往河中府，王重荣起初说是迎接襄王，抓住襄王李誰却把他杀了，把裴彻、郑昌图上了刑具关进了监狱，文武百官遭到杀害的几乎有一半。
English: Pei Che, Zheng Changtu, and the hundred officials serving Xiang Wang fled to Hezhongfu. Wang Chung Rong initially said that he was welcoming Xiang Wang, but Li, who caught Xiang Wang, killed him, put Pei Che and Zheng Changtu on the torture device and put them in prison. Almost half of the civil and military officials were killed.

古文：重荣函襄王首赴行在。
现代文：王重荣用木匣装着襄王的头颅前往皇帝驻跸的地方。
English: Wang Chong Rong used a wooden box to carry the head of King Xiang to the place where the emperor resided.

古文：刑部奏请御兴元城南门，阅俘馘受贺，下礼院定仪注。
现代文：刑部上奏，请求皇上驾临兴元城南门城楼，检阅献俘并接受朝贺，请皇上下诏给太常寺礼院确定有关礼仪。
English: The Criminal Investigation Department made a report, requesting the emperor to come to the South Gate of Xingyuan Castle, inspect the prisoners and accept morning greetings, and ask the emperor to issue an edict to the Taijō-ji Temple Ceremonial Hall to determine the relevant etiquette.

古文：博士殷盈孙奏曰：
现代文：博士殷盈孙上奏说：
English: Dr. Yin Yingsun said:

古文：伏以伪煴违背宗社，僭窃乘舆，欺天之祸既盈，盗国之罪斯重，果至覆败，以就诛夷。
现代文： 因伪皇李誰违背宗庙社稷的制度，非法窃取皇帝之位，欺骗皇天的祸乱既已满盈，盗窃国柄的罪行如此严重，果然达到覆灭败亡的地步，因而遭到诛杀。
English: Because the pseudo-emperor Li Who violated the system of family, temple and society, illegally stole the emperor's position, and deceived the emperor's heaven, the calamity was already overflowing, and the crime of stealing the national character was so serious that it really reached the point of overthrow and defeat, and was killed.

古文：九重之妖既除，万国之生灵共庆，宜陈贺礼，以显皇猷。
现代文：九重宫阙中的妖氛既然已经扫除，万方的百姓便共庆太平，应当举行祝贺的礼仪，以显示辉煌的谋略。
English: Now that the evil atmosphere in the nine-storied palace has been swept away, the people of all parts of the country will celebrate the peace. A congratulatory ceremony should be held to show the brilliant strategy.

古文：然物议之间，有所未允。
现代文：然而人们的议论之中，还有不够公允恰当的地方。
English: However, there is still a lack of fairness and appropriateness in people's discussions.

古文：臣按礼经，公族有罪，狱既具，有司闻于公曰： 某之罪在大辟。 君曰： 赦之。 
现代文：臣根据礼仪经典的记载，公室的族人犯了罪，刑司做了判决之后，官员报告国君说 ：某某人的罪行应当处以极刑。 国君说 ：赦免了他吧。 
English: According to the records of the etiquette classics, the official's relative committed a crime, and after the criminal investigation department made a judgment, the official reported to the sovereign and said, "The crime of so-and-so should be punished by capital punishment." The sovereign said, "Let him be pardoned."

古文：如是者三，有司走出致刑，君复使谓之曰： 虽然，固当赦之。 
现代文：像这样重复了三次，官员才走出去执行死刑，国君又派人去对他说 ：虽然他犯了这样的罪，还是应当赦免了他。 
English: This was repeated three times, and then the magistrate went out to execute the sentence, and the sovereign sent another to say to him, "Though he has committed such a crime, he ought to be pardoned."

古文：有司曰： 不及矣！ 
现代文：官员说 ：已经来不及了。 
English: Officials say: It's too late.

古文：君为之素服不乐三月。
现代文：为此，国君穿着素服，三个月没有演奏音乐。
English: For this reason, the sovereign wore plain clothes and did not play music for three months.

古文：《左传》：卫君在晋，卫臣元咺立卫君之弟叔武，卫君入国，叔武为前驱所杀，卫君哭之，左氏书焉。
现代文：又据《左传》记载：当卫国的君主在晋国的时候，卫国的大臣元口亘拥立卫君的弟弟叔武做了国君，卫君回到国内，叔武被先行回国的部队所杀，卫君为此而哭泣，左丘明记下了这件事。
English: In addition, according to "Zo Zhuan," it is recorded that: when the monarch of the defending country was in Jin, the minister of the defending country, Motokuchi, supported and supported the younger brother of the prince, Shu Wu, and made him the prince. The prince returned to the country. Shu Wu was killed by the troops who returned to the country first. The prince cried because of this, and Zuo Qiuming recorded this event.

古文：今伪煴，皇族也，虽犯殊死之罪，宜就屠戮，其可以朝群臣而受贺乎？
现代文：如今非法称帝的李誰，正是一个皇族，虽然犯下了该当斩首的罪行，理应被处死，难道陛下就可以受到群臣的朝拜，接受群臣的祝贺吗？
English: Li Deng, who is now illegally proclaimed emperor, is a member of the imperial family, and although he committed a crime worthy of beheading, he deserved to be executed. Is it possible for His Majesty to be worshipped by the courtiers and receive congratulations from them?

古文：臣以为煴胤系金枝，名标玉牒，迫胁之际，不能守节效死，而乃甘心逆谋，罪实滔天，刑不可赦。
现代文：臣认为李誰属于皇族的后代，名字写在皇家的族谱上，当受到逼迫威胁时不能坚守臣节以死效忠陛下，却甘心参与谋反，确实罪恶滔天，刑罚不可宽赦。
English: The vassal thought that Li Who belonged to the descendants of the royal family, whose name was written on the royal genealogy, when threatened with persecution, could not adhere to the vassal day to be loyal to His Majesty with death, but was willing to participate in the rebellion, was indeed a heinous crime, and the punishment was unforgivable.

古文：已为军前处置，宜即黜为庶人，绝其属籍，其首级仍委所在以庶礼收葬。
现代文：已经在军阵之前做了处置，应当立即贬黜为庶民，取消他所属的皇家族籍，而他的首级仍然应当委派当地官府按照庶民的礼节收葬。
English: If the disposition has already been made before the military parade, he should be immediately demoted to a commoner, and the imperial family to which he belongs should be cancelled, while his head should still be appointed by the local government to receive the funeral in accordance with the etiquette of the commoners.

古文：大捷之庆，当以硃玫首级到日称贺，为得其宜。
现代文：取得大捷的庆典，应当用朱玫的首级在皇上到达的日子表示祝贺，这样比较相宜。
English: For the celebration of a great victory, it is appropriate to use Zhu Mei's head to express congratulations on the day of the emperor's arrival.

古文：上不轸于宸衷，下无伤于物体，协礼经之旨，祛中外之疑。
现代文：这样，皇上不至于怀着悲痛的心情，臣下也不会伤害做人的体统，既符合于礼经的主旨，又除去了朝内外的疑忌。 
English: In this way, the emperor would not come with a sad mood, and the vassals would not hurt the dignity of being human, which is in line with the main purpose of the etiquette, and removes the doubts inside and outside the court.

古文：遂罢贺礼。
现代文：于是便取消了祝贺的仪式。
English: So the congratulatory ceremony was cancelled.

古文：及硃玫传首至，乃御楼受俘馘。
现代文：等到朱玫的首级传送到皇上驻跸处，皇上才驾临城楼接受献俘。
English: It was not until Zhu Mei's head was sent to the emperor's residence that the emperor came to the castle to accept the tribute.

古文：是月，蔡贼孙儒陷河阳，诸葛仲方奔归汴州，别将李罕之出据泽州，张全义据怀州。
现代文：当月，蔡州贼将孙儒攻陷河阳，诸葛仲方逃出去归附于汴州，偏将李罕之逃出，占据泽州，张全义占据怀州。
English: That month, Cai Zhou's bandits captured Sun Ru in Heyang, Zhuge Zhongfang escaped and attached himself to Zhang Zhou, Li Han Zhi escaped and occupied Ze Zhou, and Zhang Quan Yi occupied Huai Zhou.

古文：三年春正月乙亥朔，车驾在兴元府。
现代文：光启三年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸在兴元府。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Guangqi Spring, the emperor's chauffeur arrived in Xingyuanfu.

古文：制以邠州都将王行瑜检校刑部尚书，兼邠州刺史、邠宁庆节度使。
现代文：决定任命州都将王行瑜为检校刑部尚书，兼任州刺史、宁庆等州节度使。
English: It was decided to appoint Wang Xingyu, the prefect of the prefecture, as the inspector of the criminal investigation department of the school, and also as the prefect of the prefecture, Ningqing and other prefectures.

古文：保銮都将李鋋检校司空、黔州刺史、黔中节度观察使；扈跸都头李茂贞为检校尚书左仆射、洋州刺史、武定军节度使；扈跸都头杨守宗为金州刺史、金商节度等使；保銮都将陈珮检校尚书右仆射，为宣州刺史、宣歙观察使。
现代文：保銮都将领李钅延任检校司空、黔州刺史、黔中节度使、观察使；扈跸都头领李茂贞担任检校尚书左仆射、洋州刺史、武定军节度使；扈跸都将杨守宗担任金州刺史、金商节度使等；保銮都将陈任检校尚书右仆射，实授宣州刺史、宣歙观察使。
English: Li Shuzhen, the leader of the bodyguards, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of

古文：兵部侍郎、诸道租庸使张浚本官同平章事。
现代文：兵部侍郎、诸道租庸使张浚以本职任同平章事。
English: Zhang Jun, the attendant of the military department and the tenant of all roads, was promoted to the same level as his position.

古文：二月乙巳朔，润州牙将刘浩、度支使薛朗同谋逐其帅周宝，刘浩自称留后。
现代文：二月初一，润州偏将刘浩和度支使薛朗二人合谋驱逐其主帅周宝，刘浩自称为节度留后。
English: On the first day of February, Liu Hao, the governor of Rongzhou, and Xue Lang, the governor of Shidu, conspired to expel his boss, Zhou Bao. Liu Hao claimed to be the governor's successor.

古文：三月乙亥朔。
现代文：三月初一为己亥日。
English: The first day of March is Ji Hai Day.

古文：甲申，车驾还京，次凤翔。
现代文：三月初十，皇上的车驾出发回京师，驻跸在凤翔。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the emperor's car set off back to Beijing and stayed in Fengxiang.

古文：以宫室未完，节度使李昌符请驻跸，以俟毕工。
现代文：因为宫室修葺没有完工，所以节度使李昌符请求皇上驻跸在凤翔，以等待完工。
English: Because the repair of the palace was not completed, Li Changfu asked the emperor to stay in Fengxiang to wait for the completion.

古文：河中械送伪宰相裴彻、郑昌图，命斩之于岐山县。
现代文：河中府以刑具械系伪宰相裴彻、郑昌图到达，皇上下令将他们在岐山县斩首。
English: Pseudo-prime ministers Pei Che and Zheng Changtu arrived in Huanchu with instruments of torture, and the emperor ordered them to be beheaded in Qishan County.

古文：太子少师致仕萧遘赐死于永乐县。
现代文：离任退休的太子少师萧遘在永乐县令其自尽。
English: Retired young prince Xiao Wei was ordered to commit suicide in Yongle County.

古文：以特进、监修国史、门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章事孔纬领诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：任命特进、监修国史、门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事孔纬担任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: He appointed Tejin, the supervisor of the national history, the attendant of his disciple, the head of the personnel department, and the political affairs officer, Pingzhang, to serve as the salt and iron transportation envoys.

古文：以集贤殿大学士、中书侍郎、兵部尚书、平章事杜让能进封襄阳郡公，增食邑三千户。
现代文：把集贤殿大学士、中书侍郎、兵部尚书、平章政事杜让能晋封为襄阳郡公，增加食邑三千户。
English: He promoted Shi Xian Dian University Scholar, Zhongshu Zhi Rong, Heibe Shangshu, and Pingzhang Zhengji Du Jian Neng to Xiangyang County, increasing the number of food villages by 3,000 households.

古文：四月甲辰朔，扬州牙将毕师铎自高邮率戍兵攻扬州，下之，囚高骈于别室，自总军政。
现代文：四月初一，扬州偏将毕师铎从高邮率领戍守的士兵攻打扬州，攻下之后，把高骈囚禁在偏屋中，自己总管军政大事。
English: On the first day of April, Yangzhou attacked Yangzhou with soldiers led by Bi Shizhao from Gaoyou. After the attack, he imprisoned Gaoyou in a side room, and was in charge of military and political affairs.

古文：蔡贼秦贤攻汴州，周列三十六砦。
现代文：蔡州贼将秦贤进攻汴州，在汴州城四周列下三十六座营寨。
English: Cai Zhou's bandits attacked Quanzhou with Qin Xian and set up 36 encampments around Quanzhou.

古文：硃全忠乞师于兗郓，硃瑾率师来赴，屯封禅寺，硃瑄屯静戎镇。
现代文：朱全忠向兖州、郓州请求救兵，朱瑾率军前来增援，屯驻在封禅寺，朱王宣屯驻在静戎镇。
English: Zhu Quanzhong requested rescue from Bozhou and Bozhou, Zhu Xi led the army to reinforce, stationed in Fengzen Temple, and Zhu Wangxuan stationed in Jing Rong Town.

古文：五月甲戌朔。
现代文：五月初一为甲戌日。
English: The first day of May is Armor Day.

古文：乙亥，秦宗权自率众来应秦贤。
现代文：五月初二，秦宗权亲自率领部众来接应秦贤。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, Qin Zongquan personally led his subordinates to meet Qin Xian.

古文：壬午，郓、兗、汴三镇之师大破蔡贼于边孝村，宗权退走。
现代文：五月初九，郓州、兖州、汴州三镇的军队在边孝村把蔡州贼军打得大败，秦宗权败退逃走。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, the armies of the three towns of Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou defeated the Caizhou thief army in Bianxiao Village, and Qin Zongquan retreated in defeat and fled.

古文：孙儒闻秦贤败，尽驱河阳之人杀之，投尸于河，焚烧闾井而去。
现代文：孙儒听说秦贤打了败仗，驱赶所有的河阳人，把他们杀死，尸体投进黄河，烧毁了市井民宅而离去。
English: Sun Ru heard that Qin Xian lost the battle, drove out all the people of Heyang, killed them, threw their bodies into the Yellow River, burned the homes of the people in the city and left.

古文：王师收孟、洛、许、汝、怀、郑、陕、虢等州。
现代文：官兵收复了孟州、洛州、许州、汝州、怀州、郑州、陕州、虢州等地。
English: The officers and soldiers recovered Mengzhou, Lozhou, Huzhou, Ruzhou, Huizhou, Zhengzhou, Shaanxi, Zhangzhou and other places.

古文：诏以扈驾都头杨守宗权知许州事，汴将孟从益权知郑州事。
现代文：皇上下诏，任命扈驾都头领杨守宗暂时掌管许州事务，汴州将领孟从益暂时掌管郑州事务。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, appointing Yang Shouzong, the leader of Zhangye, to temporarily control the affairs of Huzhou, and Meng Congyi, the general of Zhangzhou, to temporarily control the affairs of Zhengzhou.

古文：诸葛爽旧将李罕之自泽州收河阳，怀州刺史张全义收洛阳。
现代文：诸葛爽的旧部李罕之从泽州出兵收复河阳，怀州刺史张全义收复洛阳。
English: Zhuge Shuang's former subordinate Li Han Zhi sent troops from Zezhou to recapture Heyang, and Zhang Quan Yi from Huizhou sent troops to recapture Luoyang.

古文：扬州牙将毕师铎召宣州观察使秦彦入扬州，推为节度使。
现代文：扬州偏将毕师铎把宣州观察使秦彦召到扬州来，推举他为节度使。
English: Yangzhou commander Bi Shizhen called Qin Yan to Yangzhou for the observation of Xuanzhou and appointed him as the chief envoy of the festival.

古文：六月癸卯朔。
现代文：六月初一为癸卯日。
English: The first day of June is a leap day.

古文：戊申，天威军都头杨守立与李昌符争道，麾下相欧。
现代文：六月初六，天威军都头杨守立和李昌符争道，部下互相殴打。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month, Yang Shouli, the head of the Tianwei Army, and Li Changfu quarreled, and their subordinates beat each other.

古文：上命中使谕之，不止，是夜严兵为备。
现代文：皇上派中使去谕令他们停止互殴，不能制止，当夜严整军队以作戒备。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to order them to stop fighting each other, but they could not stop. That night, the army was put on high alert.

古文：己酉，守立以兵攻昌符，战于通衢。
现代文：六月初七，杨守立率领士兵进攻李昌符，在大街上交战。
English: On the seventh day of the sixth month, Yang Shouli led soldiers to attack Li Changfu and fought on the street.

古文：昌符兵败，出保陇州，命扈驾都将李茂贞攻之。
现代文：李昌符的军队战败，退出京师守陇州，皇上命令扈驾都将领李茂贞进攻他。
English: Li Changfu's army was defeated and withdrew from Beijing to defend Zhangzhou. The emperor ordered his general Li Maozhen to attack him.

古文：甲寅，河中牙将常行儒杀其帅王重荣，推重荣兄重盈为兵马留后。
现代文：六月十二日，河中府偏将常行儒杀死他的主帅王重荣，推举王重荣的哥哥王重盈为兵马留后。
English: On June 12th, the prefectural government of Henan Province killed his commander, Wang Chong Rong, and promoted Wang Chong Rong's brother, Wang Chong Ying, to be the commander of the troops.

古文：丙辰，太常礼院奏： 太庙十一室，并祧庙八室，孝明太后等别庙三室，自车驾再幸山南，并经焚毁，神主失坠。
现代文：六月十四日，太常寺礼院上奏说： 太庙的十一个祭室，和远祖庙的八个祭室，以及孝明太后等别庙的三个祭室，自从皇上的车驾第二次临幸山南道以后，全部都被烧毁，先皇的神主牌位失落。
English: On June 14th, a report was made at the ceremony hall of Taejō-ji Temple, saying: The eleven ritual rooms of Taejō-ji Temple, the eight ritual rooms of Distant Ancestor Temple, and the three ritual rooms of other temples including Empress Dowager Xiaoming's, have all been burned since the Emperor's car drove through Shennan-dō for the second time, and the position of God's representative has been lost.

古文：今大驾还京，宜先葺宗庙神主，然后还宫。 
现代文：现在圣驾返回京师，应当首先修葺宗庙的神主，然后再回皇宫。 
English: Now that the saint is returning to the capital, he should first repair the main shrine of the ancestral temple, and then return to the imperial palace.

古文：遂诏修奉太庙使宰相郑延昌修奉。
现代文：皇上便下诏，命修奉太庙使、宰相郑延昌承修。
English: The emperor then issued an edict, ordering the imperial envoy and prime minister Zheng Yanchang to undertake the ritual.

古文：是时，宫室未完，国力方困，未暇举行旧制，延昌请权以少府监大为太庙。
现代文：当时，宫室尚未修葺完毕，国力正处于困顿之中，来不及按照旧日礼制举行祭祀大典，郑延昌请求暂时以少府监的大厅作为太庙。
English: At that time, the palace room had not yet been renovated, and the national strength was in a difficult situation. It was too late to hold a grand ritual ceremony according to the old ritual system. Zheng Yanchang requested that the hall of the minor prefect be temporarily used as a grand temple.

古文：太庙凡十一室，二十三间，间十一架，今监五间，请添造成十一间，以备十一室之数。
现代文：太庙共十一个祭室、二十三间，每间十一架，现今的少府监有五间，希望能够增造成十一间，以具备十一个祭室的数目。
English: The original temple had a total of eleven ritual rooms, twenty-three in total, with eleven shelves in each room. Today's Shofu-jyo has five rooms, and it is hoped that eleven rooms can be added, so that there will be eleven ritual rooms.

古文：敕曰： 敬依典礼。 
现代文：皇上的敕命说 ：敬依典章礼仪制度执行。 
English: The Emperor's dying words: Respectfully execute the ceremonial system.

古文：七月壬申朔，陇州刺史薛知筹以城降李茂贞，遂拔陇州，斩李昌符、昌仁等，传首献于行在。
现代文：七月初一，陇州刺史薛知筹，以陇州城投降了李茂贞，官军便占据了陇州，将李昌符、李昌仁等斩首，把首级传送到皇上驻跸的地方。
English: On the first day of July, Xue Zhichou, the governor of Zhangzhou, surrendered Li Maozhen in Zhangzhou City, and the government army occupied Zhangzhou, beheaded Li Changfu and Li Changren, and sent the heads to the emperor's residence in Zhangzhou.

古文：丙子，制以武定军节度使、检校尚书左仆射，兼洋州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、陇西郡公、食邑一千五百户李茂贞检校司空、同平章事，兼凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度等使。
现代文：七月初五，决定任命武定军节度使、检校尚书左仆射，兼洋州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、陇西郡公，食邑一千五百户李茂贞为检校司空、同平章事，兼凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, it was decided to appoint Li Maozhen as the military envoy of the Wuding Army, inspector of the school, Shangshu Zuopuzha, as well as the governor of Yangzhou, minister of history, Shangzhuang Province, and Shaanxi County, and the inspector of the school, Tongping Zhangji, as well as Fengxiang Yin and Fengxiang Zouyu.

古文：九月辛未朔，淮南节度使高骈为其牙将毕师铎所杀。
现代文：九月初一，淮南节度使高骈被他部下的偏将毕师铎杀害。
English: On the first day of September, the Huainan Festival caused Gao Jun to be killed by his subordinate Bi Shi Jun.

古文：杨行密急攻广陵，蔡贼秦宗权遣其将孙儒将兵三万渡淮，争扬州，城中食尽。
现代文：杨行密急攻广陵，蔡州贼将秦宗权派他的部将孙儒率领三万名士兵渡过淮河争夺扬州，扬州城内粮食断绝。
English: Yang Xingmi rushed to attack Guangling, Caizhou thief Qin Zongquan sent his subordinate Sun Ru to lead 30,000 soldiers across the Huai River to fight for Yangzhou, and Yangzhou was cut off from food.

古文：十一月，秦彦、毕师铎溃围奔于孙儒军，行密入据扬州。
现代文：十一月，秦彦、毕师铎突围投奔到孙儒的军营中，杨行密占领了扬州。
English: In November, Qin and Bi broke through the encirclement and rushed to Sun Ru's military camp, and Yang Xingmi occupied Yangzhou.

古文：秦彦引孙儒之兵攻广陵，行密遣使求援于硃全忠。
现代文：秦彦引导着孙儒的士兵攻打广陵，杨行密派遣使者向朱全忠求援。
English: Qin Yan led Sun Ru's soldiers to attack Guangling, Yang Xingmi sent an envoy to Zhu Quanzhong for help.

古文：制授全忠检校太尉、侍中，兼扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度观察等使、行营兵马都统。
现代文：决定任命朱全忠为检校太尉、侍中，兼任扬州大都督府长史，充任淮南节度使、观察使、行营兵马都统。
English: It was decided to appoint Zhu Quanzhong as the captain of the inspection team and the chamberlain, concurrently serving as the governor of Yangzhou, and serving as the Huainan festival envoy, observation envoy, and general of the cavalry.

古文：汴将李璠率师至淮口以援之。
现代文：汴州将领李率领军队到淮口以援救杨行密。
English: Zhangzhou General Li led the army to Huaikou to rescue Yang Xingmi.

古文：十二月己巳朔，东川节度使顾彦朗、壁州刺史王建连兵五万攻成都，陈敬瑄告难于朝，诏中使谕之。
现代文：十二月初一，东川节度使顾彦朗、壁州刺史王建组成五万联军进攻成都，陈敬王宣向朝廷告急，皇上下诏，命中使向他下达谕旨。
English: On the first day of December, the Dongchuan Festival ordered Gu Yanlang and Wang Jian, the governor of Bishu, to form a 50,000-strong allied army to attack Chengdu. Chen Jingwang announced to the imperial court that he was in a hurry, and the emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering the envoy to issue an edict to him.

古文：文德元年春正月己亥朔，车驾在凤翔。
现代文：文德元年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾到达凤翔。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Emperor Wende, the emperor's car arrived at Fengxiang.

古文：制故凤翔陇右节度观察处置等使、检校司徒、同平章事，兼凤翔尹、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公、食邑三千户郑畋赠司徒，谥曰文昭。
现代文：决定追赠已故凤翔陇右节度使、观察处置使、检校司徒、同平章事，兼凤翔尹、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公、食邑三千户郑畋为司徒，追加谥号为文昭。
English: It was decided to posthumously bestow the deceased Feng Xiangyun with the titles of Right-hand Festival Delegate, Observation and Disposition Delegate, School Inspection Officer, and Tongping Insignia, as well as the titles of Feng Xiangyun, Shangzhu Province, Founding Father of Shenyang County, and Three Thousand Households of Zhiyang County, and the additional title of Wen Zhao.

古文：蔡贼孙儒斩秦彦、毕师铎于高邮。
现代文：蔡州贼将孙儒在高邮将秦彦、毕师铎斩首。
English: Caizhou thieves beheaded Sun Ru, Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan in Gaoyou.

古文：二月己巳朔。
现代文：二月初一为己巳日。
English: The first day of February is the Day of the Snake.

古文：壬午，车驾在凤翔至京师。
现代文：二月十四日，皇上的车驾从凤翔抵达京师。
English: On February 14th, the emperor's carriage drove from Fengxiang to Beijing.

古文：魏博军乱。逐其帅乐彦祯。
现代文：魏博军人发生动乱，驱逐其主帅乐彦祯。
English: Riots broke out among Wei Bo soldiers, and their commander, Le Yanyu, was expelled.

古文：彦祯子相州刺史从训率众攻魏州，牙军立其小校罗宗弁为留后，出兵拒之。
现代文：乐彦祯的儿子、相州刺史乐从训率领部众进攻魏州。他部下的亲军拥立一个叫作罗宗弁的小军官为留后，出兵抗拒他。
English: Le's son, Songzhou Jishile, led the troops under his tutelage to attack Weizhou. After the pro-army of his subordinates supported a petty officer named Luo Zongwen, they sent troops to resist him.

古文：从训求援于汴，硃全忠遣将硃珍渡河赴之。
现代文：乐从训向汴州求援，朱全忠派遣部将朱珍渡过黄河前去救援。
English: Le Congxun asked for help from Ganzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong's dispatching department sent Zhu Zhen across the Yellow River to the rescue.

古文：戊子，上御承天门，大赦，改元文德。
现代文：二月二十日，皇上驾临承天门，下诏大赦天下，改年号为文德。
English: On February 20th, the emperor arrived at the Gate of Heaven, issued a decree to pardon the whole world, and changed the year name to Wende.

古文：宰相韦昭度兼司空，孔纬、杜让能加左右仆射，进阶开府仪同三司，并赐号 持危启运保乂功臣 。
现代文：宰相韦昭度兼任司空，孔纬、杜让能加授左、右仆射，晋封阶官开府仪同三司，并赐尊号为 持危启运保功臣 。
English: Prime Minister Wei Zhaodu concurrently served as the Secretary of the Air Force, Kong Wei and Du Zhaneng were awarded the Left and Right Hand of the Air Force, and the promotion officer Kaifu Yi and the three officers were promoted, and the honorific title was given to the hero of holding the danger and starting the transport.

古文：张浚兼兵部尚书，进阶开府仪同三司。
现代文：张浚兼任兵部尚书，晋封阶官开府仪同三司。
English: Zhang Jun also served as the secretary of the military department, and the official of the order of promotion and opening ceremony was the same as the three departments.

古文：左右神策十军观军容使、左金吾卫上将军、左右街功德使、上柱国、弘农郡开国公杨复恭进封魏国公，加食邑七千户，赐号 忠贞启圣定国功臣。 
现代文：左、右神策十军观军容使、左金吾卫上将军、左右街功德使、上柱国、弘农郡开国公杨复恭晋封魏国公，加授食邑七千户，赐尊号为 忠贞启圣定国功臣 。
English: On the left and on the right, the Ten Heavenly Armies were led by Guanjunjun Rongshi, on the left by King Wuwei Shangzheng, on the right and on the left by Guanjun Rongshi, on the right and on the left by Guanjun Rongshi, on the right and on the left by Guanjun Rongshi, on the left and on the right by Guanjun Rongshi, on the left and on the right by Guanjun Rongshi, on the right by Guanjun Rongshi, on the right by Guanjun Rongshi, on the left by Guanjun Rongshi, on the right by Gu

古文：以保銮都将、黔中节度使李鋋检校司徒、平章事，保銮都将陈珮检校司空、广州刺史、岭南东道节度使。
现代文：任命保銮都将领、黔中节度使李钅延任检校司徒、平章政事，保銮都将领陈为检校司空、广州刺史、岭南东道节度使。
English: The appointment of bodyguards will lead, and the Mid-Autumn Festival will extend the appointment of Li Yan as the school inspection officer and Ping Zhang as the government official, and the bodyguards will lead Chen to be the school inspection officer of the sky, Guangzhou Zhishi, and Lingnan host festival.

古文：籓镇诸侯，进秩有差。
现代文：各藩镇封疆大吏，升职和加俸各不相同。
English: The promotion and salary of the officials of the fiefdoms of each province and town are different.

古文：宰臣韦昭度率文武百僚上徽号曰圣文睿德光武弘孝皇帝。
现代文：宰臣韦昭度率领文武百官向皇帝敬奉徽号，称为 圣文睿德光武弘孝皇帝 。
English: Vice-Minister Wei Zhaodu led hundreds of civil and military officials to pay homage to the emperor, known as Emperor Shengwenrei Deguangwu Hongxiao.

古文：三月戊戌朔，正殿受册。
现代文：三月初一，皇上在正殿接受册书。
English: On the first day of March, the Emperor received the register in the main hall.

古文：庚子，上暴疾。
现代文：三月初三，皇上患暴病。
English: On the third day of March, the Emperor fell violently ill.

古文：壬寅，大渐。
现代文：三月初五，病情严重。
English: He became seriously ill on March 5.

古文：癸卯，宣制立弟寿王杰为皇太弟，勾当军国事。
现代文：三月初六，宣布：决定册立皇弟寿王李杰为皇太弟，处理军国大事。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, it was announced that it was decided to appoint the emperor's younger brother, Shouwang Lijie, as the emperor's younger brother to deal with military affairs.

古文：是夕，崩于武德殿，圣寿二十七，群臣上谥曰惠圣恭定孝皇帝，庙号僖宗。
现代文：当天傍晚，皇上在武德殿驾崩，享年二十七岁，群臣敬奉谥号为惠圣恭定孝皇帝，庙号僖宗。
English: In the evening of the same day, the Emperor passed away at the age of 27 at the Wude Hall. A group of courtiers paid their respects to Emperor Hui Sheng and Emperor Yongzong.

古文：其年十二月，葬于靖陵。
现代文：当年十二月安葬于靖陵。
English: He was buried in Jingling Mausoleum in December of that year.

