古文：凡礼之大体，体天地，法四时，则阴阳，顺人情，故谓之礼。
现代文：凡是礼的大纲，都是依据天地，取法四季，顺乎阴阳，顺应人情的，所以才叫做礼。
English: The outline of any etiquette is based on heaven and earth, taking the four seasons, following the yin and yang, and conforming to people's feelings. That is why it is called etiquette.

古文：訾之者，是不知礼之所由生也。
现代文：那些低毁礼的人，是因为他们不知道礼是从哪里产生的。
English: Those who are disrespectful because they don't know where respect comes from.

古文：夫礼，吉凶异道，不得相干，取之阴阳也。
现代文：礼有吉礼、凶礼各不相同、互不牵连，这是取法阴阳互不相干而设置的。
English: There are auspicious and inauspicious rites, which are different and do not involve each other. This is because the yin and yang are not related to each other.

古文：丧有四制，变而从宜，取之四时也。
现代文：丧服有四条原则，因时制宜地采取其中某条原则，就是取法于四时。
English: There are four principles of mourning, and one of the principles that should be adopted according to the time is to adopt the method at four o'clock.

古文：有恩有理，有节有权，取之人情也。
现代文：在四条原则中，有恩情的原则，有义理的原则，有节限的原则，有变通的原则，就是取法于人情。
English: Among the four principles, the principle of benevolence, the principle of righteousness, the principle of restraint, and the principle of flexibility are all based on human feelings.

古文：恩者仁也，理者义也，节者礼也，权者知也。
现代文：有恩情，是仁的表现；有义理，是义的表现；有节限，是知礼的表现；有变通，是智的表现。
English: To be gracious is an expression of benevolence; to be just is an expression of righteousness; to be restrained is an expression of courtesy; to be flexible is an expression of wisdom.

古文：仁义礼智，人道具矣。
现代文：仁义礼智都有了，做人的道德也就齐备了。
English: If you have all the virtues, righteousness, etiquette and wisdom, your morality is complete.

古文：其恩厚者，其服重；故为父斩衰三年，以恩制者也。
现代文：对自己恩情深厚的人，为他服重丧,所以为父亲服斩衰三年，这就是从恩情上来规定的。
English: For those who have deep feelings of gratitude for themselves, they will serve the funeral for him, so they will serve the father for three years, which is stipulated from the point of view of gratitude.

古文：门内之治，恩掩义；门外之治，义断恩。
现代文：为有血缘关系的人服丧，恩情掩盖了义理；在社会关系中，义理制约了恩情。
English: For those who are related by blood, the feeling of gratitude hides the sense of duty; in social relations, the sense of duty restricts the feeling of gratitude.

古文：资于事父以事君，而敬同，贵贵尊尊，义之大者也。
现代文：以侍奉父亲的态度来侍奉君，把对二者的敬爱拉平。家臣尊敬卿大夫，臣民尊敬天子、诸侯，这是义中的头等大事。
English: Serve your father with the attitude of serving your father, and level out the respect for both of them. Vassals respect the lord, and subjects respect the emperor and princes. This is the top priority in righteousness.

古文：故为君亦斩衰三年，以义制者也。
现代文：所以，天子、诸侯、卿大夫死了，作为他的臣民或家臣也要服斩衰，守丧三年。这是以理智原则为依据的。
English: Therefore, when a prince, vassal, or high-ranking official dies, his subjects or vassals should observe a three-year mourning period. This is based on the principle of reason.

古文：三日而食，三月而沐，期而练，毁不灭性，不以死伤生也。
现代文：父母之丧，三天以后才吃粥，三个月后才洗头，一年以后就可以改戴练冠，悲伤憔悴但不能危急生命，不能因为死者而伤害生存的人。
English: After the death of a parent, it takes three days to eat porridge, three months to wash your hair, and a year to change your hairstyle. You can grieve, but you can't endanger your life, and you can't hurt the living because of the dead.

古文：丧不过三年，苴衰不补，坟墓不培；祥之日，鼓素琴，告民有终也；以节制者也。
现代文：丧期最长也不超过三年，斩衰丧服破了也不再补，坟头不再添土，到了大祥就可以弹奏素琴，用来告诉人们守丧结束了，这表示有一定的节制。
English: The longest period of mourning does not exceed three years. If the mourning clothes are worn out, they will not be replaced, and the grave will no longer be filled with soil. At the end of the mourning period, you can play the suqin, which is used to tell people that the mourning period is over. This indicates a certain restraint.

古文：资于事父以事母，而爱同。
现代文：以侍奉父亲的态度来侍奉母亲，对二者的亲爱程度是相同的。
English: To serve one's mother as one serves one's father is equally dear to both.

古文：天无二日，土无二王，国无二君，家无二尊，以一治之也。故父在，为母齐衰期者，见无二尊也。
现代文：但是因为天无二曰，地无二王，国无二君，家无二主，都由一人统一治理，所以父亲健在时母亲去世，那就只能降服齐衰，丧期一年，表明家无二主的道理。
English: However, since there is no second heaven, no second king on earth, no second prince in the country, and no second master in the family, they are all governed by one person. Therefore, if the father is still alive and the mother dies, then they can only submit to the same decline, and the period of death is one year, which shows that there is no second master in the family.

古文：杖者何也？
现代文：服丧者为什么要拄着丧杖呢？
English: Why do mourners dance with their canes?

古文：爵也。
现代文：因为服丧者是有爵位的人。
English: Because the mourners are people with titles.

古文：三日授子杖，五日授大夫杖，七日授士杖。
现代文：国君去世，第三天授给太子丧杖，第五天授给大夫丧杖，第七天授给士丧杖。
English: When a sovereign dies, the sceptre is given to the crown prince on the third day, the sceptre to the doctor on the fifth day, and the sceptre to the scholar on the seventh day.

古文：或曰担主；或曰辅病，妇人、童子不杖，不能病也。
现代文：有的人没有爵位为什么也拄着丧杖呢？据说是因为他是嫡子，担任丧主，须要主持丧礼。有的人不是嫡子为什么也拄着丧杖呢？
English: Some people do not have a title, so why do they also carry a funeral stick? It is said that because he is the eldest son, he is the chief mourner and must preside over the funeral. Some people are not the eldest son, so why do they also carry a funeral stick?

古文：百官备，百物具，不言而事行者，扶而起；言而后事行者，杖而起；身自执事而后行者，面垢而已。
现代文：据说是，他们虽然不是嫡子，但为父母之丧哀痛太甚，因而致病，须要用杖来扶持病体。女孩子、男孩子不用拄杖，因为他们年龄还小，哀痛不深，不会生病。
English: It is said that although they are not legitimate children, their grief over the loss of their parents is so great that it causes illness and they have to be supported with a cane. Girls and boys do not need a cane because they are still young, their grief is not deep, and they do not get sick.

古文：秃者不髽，伛者不袒，跛者不踊。老病不止酒肉。凡此八者，以权制者也。
现代文：办丧事所需要的各色人等一应齐备，所需要的各种物品也应有尽有，丧主不用发话就把事情办了，这样的丧主可以哀痛得厉害些，哀痛到别人搀扶才能站起。
English: All kinds of people needed to carry out the funeral should be prepared, and all kinds of items needed should be available. The bereaved should do things without having to speak. Such a bereaved person can grieve more severely, and can only stand up with the help of others.

古文：始死，三日不怠，三月不解，期悲哀，三年忧恩之杀也。
现代文：其次一等，事事都要等待丧主发话才能办理，这样的丧主哀痛就要减轻些，哀痛到自己拄着丧杖站起。
English: Secondly, everything has to wait for the bereaved to speak before it can be dealt with. The grief of such a bereavement has to be alleviated, so that the bereaved can stand up with a cane.

古文：圣人因杀以制节，此丧之所以三年。
现代文：再次一等，事事都要丧主亲自动手才能办理，这样的丧主哀痛就要更轻些，只要蓬头垢面就够意思了。
English: Again, first of all, everything has to be done by hand, such a bereavement will be lighter, as long as the unkempt face is interesting enough.

古文：贤者不得过，不肖者不得不及，此丧之中庸也，王者之所常行也。
现代文：圣人就根据这哀痛的逐渐递减来制定礼，这就是为什么丧期一定要规定成三年。这个限度，孝心再重的人也不准超过，忤逆不孝的人也不准达不到限度。这是丧礼中的折衷之处，历代君王也都是照此实行的。
English: That is why the period of mourning must be fixed at three years, a limit which neither the most pious nor the most unpious may exceed, and which neither the most pious nor the most unpious may fail to reach. This is the compromise in funerals, and it has been observed by all kings.

古文：《书》曰： 高宗谅闇，三年不言 ，善之也；王者莫不行此礼。
现代文：《尚书》上说： 殷高宗居庐守丧，三年不过问政事。 这是赞美他。
English: "Shangshu" said: "Ying Gao Zong lived in seclusion and attended funerals, but did not ask about politics for three years.

古文：何以独善之也？
现代文：历代君王，莫不照此规矩办事，为什么唯独赞美他呢？
English: All the kings of the past followed this rule, so why do we only praise him?

古文：曰：高宗者武丁；武丁者，殷之贤王也。
现代文：回答是：殷高宗就是武丁，武丁是殷代的贤王，即位以后就专心守丧。
English: The answer is: Yin Gaozong is Wuding, and Wuding is the wise king of the Yin Dynasty. After he ascended the throne, he devoted himself to mourning.

古文：继世即位而慈良于丧，当此之时，殷衰而复兴，礼废而复起，故善之。
现代文：在他即位期间，殷族才由衰败转为兴盛，礼也由废弛转向盛行，所以夸奖他。
English: During his accession to the throne, the Yin people only turned from decline to prosperity, and the ceremony also turned from waste to prevalence, so praise him.

古文：善之，故载之书中而高之，故谓之高宗。
现代文：因为要赞美他，所以特地在《尚书》中记载此事并加以赞扬，所以称他为 高宗 。
English: Because he wanted to praise him, he specifically recorded this matter in the "Shang Shu" and praised it, so he was called Gaozong.

古文：三年之丧，君不言，《书》云，此之谓也。然而曰 言不文 者，谓臣下也。
现代文：守丧三年，天子、 殷高宗居庐守丧，诸侯不用发话就把事情办了，三年不谈国事 ，说的就是这个意思。然而《孝经》却说 孝子在居丧期间，说话不讲究修辞 ，似乎和《尚书》讲的有点矛盾，那是针对臣下而说的。
English: During the three years of mourning, Emperor Gaozong and Empress Dowager Yin Gaozong stayed at home to attend the funeral, and the princes did not need to speak to do things. For three years, they did not talk about state affairs, which is what they meant. However, "The Book of Filial Piety" said that during the mourning period, the filial son did not pay attention to rhetoric, which seems to be a bit contradictory to what "The Book of Reverence" said, which was said for the subjects.

古文：礼：斩衰之丧，唯而不对；齐衰之丧，对而不言；大功之丧，言而不议；缌小功之丧，议而不及乐。
现代文：按照礼的规定，居丧的人在和他人交往时，如果是斩衰之丧，那就只发出 欸欸 的声音而不回答别人的问话；如果是齐衰之丧，那就可以回答别人的问话，但不可主动说话；如果是大功之丧，那就可以主动问人，但不可以发表议论；如果是绍麻、小功之丧，那就可以发表议论，但还不可谈笑风生。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, when a bereaved person interacts with others, if it is the death of a great man, then he will only make a chirping sound and not answer the questions of others; if it is the death of a great man, then he can answer the questions of others, but he should not take the initiative to speak; if it is the death of a great man, then he can take the initiative to ask people, but he should not make a discussion; if it is the death of a great man or a small man, then he can make a discussion, but he should not make jokes.

古文：父母之丧，衰冠绳缨菅屦，三日而食粥，三月而沐，期十三月而练冠，三年而祥。
现代文：为父母服丧，要身穿孝服，头戴孝帽，帽带用麻绳编成，脚穿草鞋，三天以后才能喝点粥，三个月后才能洗头，满一年后的第十三个月才戴练过的麻布冠，满了两年举行了大祥祭以后才过正常的生活。
English: To mourn one's parents, it is necessary to wear filial piety clothes, a filial piety cap, a hat band made of hemp rope, and straw sandals. It takes three days to drink some porridge, three months to wash one's hair, one year to wear a well-trained linen crown in the thirteenth month, and two years to live a normal life after the Taisho Festival.

古文：比终兹三节者，仁者可以观其爱焉，知者可以观其理焉，强者可以观其志焉。
现代文：到了这三个阶段都完成以后，是仁者就可看到他的爱心，是智者就能看到他的理性，是强者就能看到他的毅力。
English: After these three stages have been completed, the benevolent can see his love, the wise can see his reason, and the strong can see his perseverance.

古文：礼以治之，义以正之，孝子弟弟贞妇，皆可得而察焉。
现代文：用礼来治理丧事，用义来指导守丧的行动，是否是孝顺的儿子，仁爱的兄弟，贞洁的妇女，都可以从中看出来。
English: Whether one is a dutiful son, a benevolent brother, or a chaste woman, can all be seen from this.

