古文：姓氏所出，后世茫不可考，不过证以史传，然要为难晓，自姚、虞、唐、杜、姜、田、范、刘之外，余盖纷然杂出。
现代文：姓氏到底是怎么来的？后世真是茫茫然不可考究，就是以史书传记来加以考证，也难以搞得十分清楚，在众多的姓氏中，除了姚、虞、唐、杜、姜、田、范、刘几姓之外，其余的根源出处，都很复杂混乱。
English: How did surnames come about in the first place? Future generations are really at a loss to investigate. Even if they use historical biographies to verify, it is difficult to get a clear picture. Among the many surnames, except for Yao, Yu, Tang, Du, Jiang, Tian, Fan and Liu, the remaining root sources are very complex and confusing.

古文：且以《左传》言之，申氏出于四岳，周有申伯，然郑又有申侯，楚有申舟，又有申公巫臣，鲁有申繻、申枨，晋有申书，亦有申鲜虞。
现代文：就以《左传》中的记载来说吧：申姓原出于四岳，系黄帝后援的后代，以后周朝有申伯，可是郑国又有申侯，楚国有申舟，有申公巫臣，鲁国有申繻，申帐，晋国有申书，齐国有申鲜虞。
English: Let's take the records in "Zo Zhuan": Shen's surname originally came from Shigatake, a descendant of the Yellow Emperor's support. Later, the Zhou Dynasty had Shen Bo, but Zheng Province also had Shen Hou, Chu Province had Shen Zhou, there was Shen Gong Wuxin, Ru Province had Shen Yi, Shen Jie, Jin Province had Shen Shu, Qi Province had Shen Xiang.

古文：贾氏，姬姓之国，以国氏，然晋有贾华，又狐射姑亦曰贾季，齐有贾举。
现代文：姓贾的源出于姬姓国家、以国名为姓氏，可是晋国有贾华，一个叫狐射姑的人也叫贾季，齐国有贾举。
English: The origin of the surname Jia is from the country of the family name, and the surname is based on the country name. However, Jiahua is from Jin Province, a person named Fuxiaigu is also called Jiaji, and Jiaju is from Qi Province.

古文：黄氏，嬴姓之国，然金天氏之后，又有沈、姒、蓐、黄之黄、晋有黄渊。
现代文：姓黄的属于嬴姓国家的人，可是金天氏的后代中有沈、姒、蓐、黄四姓，里面也有姓黄的，晋国又有黄渊。
English: The surname Huang belongs to the people of the country with the surname Zou, but among the descendants of the Jin Tian clan, there are four surnames: Shen, Zou, Zou and Huang. Among them, there are also surnames Huang, and Jin has Huangyuan.

古文：孔氏出于商，孔子其后也。然卫有孔达，宋有孔父，郑有孔叔，陈有孔宁，齐有孔虺，而郑子孔之孙又为孔张。
现代文：孔姓源出于商部落，孔子就是商的后代，可是卫国有孔达，宋国有孔父，郑国有孔叔，陈国有孔宁，齐国有孔虺，而且郑国子孔的孙子又叫孔张。
English: The surname "Kong" originates from the merchant tribe, and Confucius is the descendant of a merchant. However, there are Kongda in the state of Wei, Confucius in the state of Song, Confucius in the state of Zheng, Confucius in the state of Chen, Confucius in the state of Qi, and the grandson of Confucius in the state of Zheng is also called Confucius Zhang.

古文：高氏有出于齐，然子尾之后又为高强，郑有高克，宋有高哀。
现代文：姓高的源出于齐国，可是子尾的后代也叫高强，郑国有高克，宋国有高哀。
English: The surname Gao originated in Qi, but the descendants of Ziwei are also called Gao Qiang, Zheng Guo Gao Ke, and Song Guo Gao Ai.

古文：国氏亦出于齐，然邢有国子，郑子国之孙又为国参。
现代文：姓国的也是源出于齐国，可是邢国有国子，郑国子国的孙子名叫国参。
English: The surname Guo was also derived from Qi, but the grandson of Guo Guo and the grandson of Zheng Guo were both named Guo San.

古文：晋有庆郑，齐有庆克，陈有庆虎。
现代文：晋国有庆郑，然而齐国有庆克、陈国有庆虎。
English: Jin has Qing Zheng, while Qi has Qing Ke and Chen has Qing Hu.

古文：卫有石碏，齐有石之纷如，郑有石，周有石尚，宋有石彄。
现代文：卫国有石碏，可是齐国也有石之纷如，郑国有石，周地有石尚，宋国有石彄。
English: The State of Wei had Shih Tso, but the State of Qi also had Shih Tso, the State of Zheng had Shih Tso, the State of Zhou had Shishang, and the State of Song had Shih Tso.

古文：晋有阳处父，楚有阳丐，鲁有阳虎。孙氏出于卫，而楚有叔敖，齐有孙书，吴有孙武。
现代文：晋国有阳处父，然而楚国又有阳丐，粤国有阳虎姓孙的源出于卫，于是楚国却有孙叔敖，齐国有孙书，吴国有孙武。
English: In Jin, there was a yang ancestor, but in Chu, there was a yang beggar. In Guangdong, the yang tiger surnamed Sun originated from Wei. Therefore, in Chu, there was Sun Shuxuan, in Qi, Sun Shu, and in Wu, Sun Wu.

古文：郭氏出于虢，而晋有郭偃，齐有郭最，又有所谓郭公者。
现代文：姓郭的源出虢，可是晋国则有郭偃，齐国有郭最，还有个叫郭公的人。
English: The origin of the surname Guo is unknown, but there is Guo Zhen in Jin Province, Guo Ma in Qi Province, and a person called Guo Gong.

古文：千载之下，遥遥世祚，将安所质究乎？
现代文：几千年来，各个姓氏世代相传，源远流长，又怎么能搞得清楚呢？
English: For thousands of years, the various surnames have been passed down from generation to generation, and have a long history. How can we figure it out?

