古文：古未有天地之时，惟像无形，窈窈冥冥，芒芠漠闵，澒濛鸿洞，莫知其门。
现代文：上古还没有形成天地的时候，只有模糊不清的状态而无具体形状，这种状态是昏暗幽深、混沌不清，无法知道它的门道。
English: In ancient times, when heaven and earth had not yet been formed, there was only a vague and indistinct state without a specific shape. This state was dim and deep, chaotic and indistinct, and its doorway could not be known.

古文：有二神混生，经天营地；孔乎莫知其所终极，滔乎莫知其所止息；于是乃别为阴阳，离为八极；刚柔相成，万物乃形；烦气为虫，精气为人。
现代文：那时有阴阳二神同时产生，一起营造天地；其深远得不知它的尽头，宽广得不知它的边缘。这时便分出天地阴阳，散离成四方八极，阴阳二气互相作用，万物才从中产生形成。这里，杂乱的气产生鱼鸟禽兽和昆虫，而纯精的气则产生人类。
English: At that time, two gods, Yin and Yang, came into being at the same time, and together they created heaven and earth. They were so far-reaching that no one knew where they ended, and so wide that no one knew where they ended. At that time, heaven and earth, Yin and Yang, were separated and scattered to the four corners of the earth. Yin and Yang and the two qi interacted with each other, and everything came into being. Here, the chaotic qi gave rise to fish, birds, beasts and insects, while the pure qi gave rise to human beings.

古文：是故精神，天之有也，而骨骸者，地之有也，精神入其门而骨骸反其根，我尚何存？
现代文：因此，人的精神归属于上天，而形骸归属于大地。如果人死以后，精神归属于上天、形骸归属于大地，那 我 还有什么存剩呢？
English: Therefore, a person's spirit belongs to the heavens, and his body belongs to the earth. If, after death, a person's spirit belongs to the heavens and his body belongs to the earth, then what is left of me?

古文：是故圣人法天顺情，不拘于俗，不诱于人；以天为父，以地为母；阴阳为纲，四时为纪；天静以清，地定以宁；万物失之者死，法之者生。
现代文：所以圣人遵循天地的运行规则、顺应人的本性，不为世俗所拘束、不被人欲所诱惑，以天为父，以地为母，以阴阳变化、四时运行为准则。天清澈而洁静、地平定而安宁，万物离开它就死亡，依附它就生存。
English: Therefore, sages follow the rules of heaven and earth, conform to human nature, are not constrained by the world, and are not tempted by human desires. They take heaven as their father, earth as their mother, and the changes of yin and yang and the four seasons as their code of conduct. Heaven is clear and tranquil, calm and peaceful. All things die if they leave it, and live if they cling to it.

古文：夫静漠者，神明之宅也；虚无者，道之所居也。
现代文：静漠，是神明的住宅；虚无，是道的居所。
English: Silence is the abode of the gods; nothingness is the home of the Tao.

古文：是故或求之于外者，失之于内；有守之于内者，失之于外。
现代文：因此，只追求身外之物，就会失去对内心精神世界的保养持守，反过来对某些事情一直耿耿于怀，就会影响人体外形的健康。
English: Therefore, only the pursuit of things outside the body will lose the maintenance of the inner spiritual world, and in turn, it will affect the health of the human body.

古文：譬犹本与末也，从本引之，干枝万叶，莫不随也。
现代文：这就好比树根与树梢的关系，从根本上牵引着树根主干，树的千枝万叶也就无不随之摇动。
English: This is like the relationship between the roots and the treetops. The roots are fundamentally pulling the trunk, and the thousands of leaves of the tree are also shaking.

古文：夫精神者，所受于天也，而形体者，所禀于地也。
现代文：人的精神是从上天那里得到的；而形体则是从大地那里得到的。
English: The spirit of man is from heaven; the body is from the earth.

古文：故曰： 一生二，二生三，三生万物。 
现代文：所以说 道生阴阳二气，阴阳二气产生出中和之气，万物均从中和之气中产生。
English: Therefore, it is said that the Tao produces yin and yang, yin and yang produce neutralization, and all things are created from neutralization.

古文：万物背阴而抱阳，冲气以为和，故曰一月而膏，二月而胅，三月而胎，四月而肌，五月而筋，六月而骨，七月而成，八月而动，九月而躁，十月而生。
现代文：万物背阴而抱阳，阴阳激荡而成和气 。所以说人的生命体产生的过程是：一个月成脂膏状态，二个月变成肿块形状，三个月成胎，四个月生肌肉，五个月长筋络，六个月长骨骼，七个月成人形，八个月胎儿会动弹，九个月则躁动于母腹，十个月就呱呱落地。
English: Therefore, it is said that the process of human life is: one month into a fat paste state, two months into a lump shape, three months into a fetus, four months of muscle, five months of long sinews, six months of long bones, seven months of adult shape, eight months of fetal movement, nine months of restlessness in the mother's abdomen, and ten months on the ground.

古文：形体以成，五藏乃形，是故肺主目，肾主鼻，胆主口，肝主耳，外为表而内为里，开闭张歙，各有经纪，故头之圆也象天，足之方也象地。
现代文：人之形体一旦形成后，内在五脏也随之形成。
English: Once the human body is formed, the internal organs are also formed.

古文：天有四时五行九解三百六十六日，人亦有四支五藏九窍三百六十六节。
现代文：所以是肺主管眼，肾主管鼻，胆主管口，肝主管耳。外表五官和内部五脏，开闭张合，各自互相联系着。所以人的脑袋呈圆形，象天，脚呈方形，象地。天有四季、五行、九大分野、三百六十六天，人则也有四肢、五脏、九窍和三百六十经脉。
English: Therefore, the lungs are in charge of the eyes, the kidneys are in charge of the nose, the gallbladder is in charge of the mouth, and the liver is in charge of the ears. The five external organs and the five internal organs are open and closed, and they are connected to each other. Therefore, the human head is round, like the sky, and the feet are square, like the earth. The sky has four seasons, five elements, nine major fields, and three hundred and sixty-six days, while humans also have four limbs, five organs, nine points, and three hundred and sixty meridians.

古文：天有风雨寒暑，人亦有取与喜怒。
现代文：天有风雨寒暑，人则也有取予喜怒。
English: There are ups and downs, cold and heat, but people also have their joys and sorrows.

古文：故胆为云，肺力气，肝为风，肾为雨，脾为雷，以与天地相参也，而心为之主。
现代文：所以这样又可将胆配云，肺配气，肝配风，肾配雨，脾配雷，以此来与天地自然相参验伍配，而这当中心脏是主宰物。
English: Therefore, in this way, the gallbladder can be matched with the clouds, the lungs with the air, the liver with the wind, the kidneys with the rain, and the spleen with the thunder, so as to match with the natural world, and this is when the heart is the dominant object.

古文：是故耳目者，日月也；血气者，风雨也。
现代文：因此人的耳目如同天上的日月，气血如同自然之风雨。
English: Therefore, human ears and eyes are like the sun and moon in the sky, and qi and blood are like the wind and rain of nature.

古文：日中有踆乌，而月中有蟾蜍。
现代文：日中有三足乌，而月中有蟾蜍。
English: During the day, there are blackbirds, and during the month, there are crickets.

古文：日月失其行，薄蚀无光；风雨非其时，毁折生灾；五星失其行，州国受殃。
现代文：日月如果不按常规运行，就会出现昏淡无光的日月蚀；风雨如果不合时令降临，就会毁折农作物而生灾害；五星如果失常运行，它所对应的国家就会遭殃。
English: If the sun and the moon do not operate normally, there will be a dim eclipse of the sun and the moon; if the wind and rain do not come at the right time, it will destroy crops and cause disasters; if the five stars operate abnormally, the country it corresponds to will suffer.

古文：夫天地之到至纮以大，尚犹节其章光，爱其神明，人之耳目曷能久熏劳而不息乎？
现代文：天地之道宏大深邃，尚且还要节制，珍惜其光彩，人的耳目又怎能长久劳累而不休息呢？
English: The way of heaven and earth is vast and profound, yet it requires restraint and cherishing its brilliance. How can human eyes and ears work for a long time without rest?

古文：精神何能久驰骋而不既乎？
现代文：人的精神又怎能长久驰骋而不耗尽呢？
English: How can the human spirit gallop for a long time without exhaustion?

古文：是故血气者，人之华也；而五脏者，人之精也。
现代文：所以说人的气血和五脏是人的精华。
English: Therefore, it is said that a person's qi, blood and five internal organs are the essence of a person.

古文：夫血气能专于五脏而不外越，则胸腹充而嗜欲省矣。
现代文：血气如能专注聚集在五脏之内而不外溢，那么这胸腹内的五脏就充实而嗜欲也随之减少。
English: If the blood qi can concentrate within the five viscera without overflowing, then the five viscera within the chest and abdomen will be full and the craving will decrease.

古文：胸腹充而嗜欲省，则耳目清、听视达矣。
现代文：五脏充实而嗜欲减少，就能使耳目清明、视听就畅达。
English: If the five viscera are plentiful and the appetite is reduced, the ears and eyes will be clear and the audio-visual will be unimpeded.

古文：耳目清、听视达，谓之明。
现代文：耳目清明、视听畅达，叫做 明 。
English: Clear eyes and ears, and smooth audio-visual performance are called "Ming."

古文：五脏能属于心而无乖，则教志胜而行不之僻矣。教志胜而行之不僻，则精神盛而气不散矣。
现代文：五脏能归属于心而不与心违逆，这样旺盛之气占优势而使人行为不乖悖、怪僻，人的精神就旺盛而精气不散泄。
English: The five viscera can belong to the heart without going against the heart. Such a vigorous spirit prevails and makes people behave unruly and eccentric. The human spirit is vigorous and the energy is not dissipated.

古文：精神盛而气不散则理，理则均，均则通，通则神，神则以视无不见，以听无不闻也，以为无不成也。
现代文：精神旺盛和精气不散泄则顺畅，顺畅就调匀，调匀则通达无阻，通达无阻就能产生出神奇的能力。这种能力能使人视无不见、听无不闻，没有什么事办不成的。
English: If the spirit is strong and the energy is not dissipated, it will be smooth. If it is smooth, it will be balanced. If it is balanced, it will be unimpeded. If it is unimpeded, it will produce a magical ability. This ability can make people see nothing, hear nothing, and hear nothing, and nothing can be done.

古文：是故忧患不能入也，而邪气不能袭。
现代文：这样，忧患祸害就不会侵入，邪气歪风也无法侵扰。
English: In this way, afflictions and calamities will not invade, and evil spirits and evil winds will not invade.

古文：故事有求之于四海之外而不能遇，或守之于形骸之内而不见也。
现代文：因此有些事情到四海之外去追求寻找却不能得到，有些则持守在身体之内却不能见效。
English: Therefore, there are some things that can't be obtained by seeking outside the four seas, and some things can't be obtained by keeping them within the body.

古文：故所求多者所得少，所见大者所知小。
现代文：所以贪多则反而获得少，看见大的反而所知甚少。
English: Therefore, those who covet more obtain less, and those who see more know less.

古文：夫孔窍者，精神之户牖也；而气志者，五藏之使候也。
现代文：人的五官七窍是精神的门窗，而气血则是五脏的使者。
English: The human body's five senses and seven acupoints are the doors and windows of the spirit, while the qi and blood are the messengers of the internal organs.

古文：耳目淫于声色之乐，则五藏摇动而不定矣。
现代文：如果耳目沉溺在声色当中，那么五脏就会动荡不安。
English: If the ears and eyes indulge in the sound and color, then the internal organs will be restless.

古文：五藏摇动而不定，则血气滔荡而不休矣。
现代文：五脏动荡不安，那么血气就会激荡不休。
English: If the internal organs are restless, the blood will be agitated.

古文：血气滔荡而不休，则精神驰骋于外而不守矣。
现代文：血气激荡不休，那么精神就会驰骋在外而不能内守。
English: If one's spirit is constantly agitated, then one's spirit will gallop outside and not be able to stay inside.

古文：精神驰骋于外而不守，则祸福之至虽如丘山，无由识之矣。
现代文：精神驰骋在外不能持守，那么灾祸就会来临，即使祸大如山丘，你也没法感觉得到。
English: If you can't keep your spiritual gallop outside, then disaster will come, even if the disaster is as big as a hill, you won't be able to feel it.

古文：使耳目精明玄达而无诱慕，气志虚静恬愉而省嗜欲，五藏定宁充盈而不泄，精神内守形骸而不外越，则望于往世之前而视于来事之后，犹未足为也，岂直祸福之间哉！
现代文：所以，如果让耳目精明通畅而不受外界的诱惑、气志虚静恬愉而省却嗜欲、五脏安宁充盈而不外泄、精神持守于内心而不外越，那么即使是遥远的往事和未来的事情也不够你所认识的，更何况只是觉察眼前一些祸福之间的事情呢！
English: Therefore, if you let your ears and eyes be shrewd and smooth without being tempted by the outside world, if you let your spirit be calm and happy without being greedy, if you let your peace and tranquility fill your internal organs without leaking out, and if you keep your spirit in your heart without overflowing, then even the distant past and the future are not enough for you to know, let alone just be aware of the things between misfortune and blessing in front of you!

古文：故曰，其出弥远者其知弥少，以言夫精神之不可使外淫也。
现代文：所以说 精神逸出内心越远，所知道的就越少 。这就充分说明精神是不能外泄散逸的。
English: Therefore, the farther the spirit escapes from the heart, the less it knows, which fully demonstrates that the spirit cannot escape.

古文：是故五色乱目，使目不明；五声哗耳，使耳不聪；五味乱口，使口爽伤；趣舍滑心，使行飞扬。
现代文：所以，五色迷乱眼睛，使双目昏暗不明；五声哗乱耳朵，使双耳堵塞不聪；五味扰乱舌味，使口舌麻木无味；追逐名利而惑乱心性，使人行为放荡不羁。
English: Therefore, the five colors confuse the eyes, making the eyes dim and unclear; the five sounds confuse the ears, making the ears plugged and deaf; the five tastes disturb the taste of the tongue, making the tongue numb and tasteless; the pursuit of fame and fortune disturbs the mind, making people behave debauched and uninhibited.

古文：此四者，天下之所养性也，然皆人累也。
现代文：这四样东西，世间一般性的人是用来养生的，但实际上却是人生的累赘。
English: These four things are used by the average person in the world to maintain health, but in fact they are a burden on life.

古文：故曰：嗜欲者使人之气越，而好憎者使人之心劳，弗疾去则志气日秏。
现代文：所以说，嗜欲使人精气散逸，而爱憎之情则使人心力疲惫，假如不赶快清除它们，就会使人气血日耗殆尽。
English: For this reason, lusts drain one's energy, while love and hate exhaust one's strength. If they are not quickly eliminated, one's strength will be exhausted.

古文：夫人之所以不能终其寿命而中道夭于刑戮者何也？
现代文：人之所以不能享尽天年长寿而被刑戮夭折于中途，这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason why people are not able to enjoy a long and healthy life and are killed in the middle of their lives?

古文：以其生生之厚，夫惟能无以生为者，则所以修得生也。夫天地运而相通，万物总而为一。
现代文：是因为这些人养生的条件太优厚。也只有那些不过分追求生活条件优厚的人，才能长生。天地运行相通，万物归属总汇于天道。
English: It is because these people's health conditions are too good. And only those who do not excessively pursue good living conditions can live forever. Heaven and earth are interconnected, and all things belong to Heaven.

古文：能知一，则无一之不知也，不能知一，则无一之能知也。譬吾处于天下也，亦为一物矣。
现代文：能懂得道的人，也就能无所不懂；不懂得道的人，也就什么都不懂。譬如我们处在天地之间，实际上也是万物中的一物种。
English: Those who can understand the Way can also understand everything; those who do not understand the Way do not understand anything. For example, we are located between heaven and earth, and are actually a species among all things.

古文：不识天下之以我备其物与？
现代文：不知天下万物是特为我们准备的呢？
English: Don't you know that everything in the world is specially prepared for us?

古文：且惟无我而物无不备者乎？
现代文：还是在没有我们之前万物就已具备了呢？
English: Or did everything exist before us?

古文：然则我变物也，物亦物也。物之与物也，又何以相物也？
现代文：然而，我们人也是 物 ，其他事物也是 物 ， 物 与 物 之间，有必要互称对方为 物 吗？
English: However, we are also things, other things are also things, between things and things, is it necessary to call each other things?

古文：虽然，其生我也，将以何益？其杀我也。
现代文：正因为这样，所以天下生出我们，也不增加什么，杀灭我们，也不减少什么。
English: It is for this reason that the world produces us and adds nothing to us, and destroys us and takes nothing from us.

古文：将以何损？夫造化者既以我为坯矣，将无所违之矣。
现代文：天地既然将我们造化成人，我们也就没有必要违逆天地的造化。
English: Since heaven and earth created us as human beings, there is no need for us to go against the creation of heaven and earth.

古文：吾安知夫刺灸而欲生者之非惑也？
现代文：我怎么知道用针灸治疗想活命不是糊涂？
English: How do I know that it is not foolish to try to survive with acupuncture treatment?

古文：又安知夫绞经而求死者之非福也？
现代文：我又怎么知道用绳上吊自缢轻生不是福气？
English: How do I know that hanging myself with a rope is not a blessing?

古文：或者生乃徭役也，而死乃休息也？
现代文：也许活着的人倒是像在服苦役，而死去的人倒像是在休息。
English: It may be that the living seem to toil, and the dead to rest.

古文：天下茫茫，孰知之哉？
现代文：真是天下茫然，谁能明白这其中的奥秘。
English: The world is at a loss, who can understand the mystery of this.

古文：其生我也，不强求已；其杀我也，不强求止。
现代文：所以，天地造化生出我，我也不会硬去阻止，天地造化灭杀我，我也不会硬去阻止。
English: Therefore, the creation of heaven and earth gave birth to me, and I will not try to stop it. If the creation of heaven and earth kills me, I will not try to stop it.

古文：欲生而不事，憎死而不辞，贱之而弗憎，贵之而弗喜，随其天资而安之不极。
现代文：企盼活命，人之常情，只是不必为此而费事钻营；厌恶死亡，人之常理，但死到临头却谁又能推辞得掉？受到贬斥，不必怀恨在心，受到褒奖，也不必沾沾自喜。
English: It is human nature to long for life, but it is not necessary to go to all the trouble of fighting for it; it is human nature to hate death, but who can refuse death when it is at hand? It is not necessary to hold a grudge if you are belittled, and it is not necessary to be smug if you are praised.

古文：吾生也有七尺之形，吾死也有一棺之土。
现代文：任随天意时运本性安然悠闲而不必着急。我辈生有七尺身躯，死能入棺下地。
English: Let nature take its course in accordance with the will of heaven, and enjoy peace and leisure without having to be in a hurry. All my life I have been seven feet tall, and when I die, I will go to the ground in a coffin.

古文：吾生之比于有形之类，犹吾死之沦于无形之中也。
现代文：生时并列于有形事物一类，死后则沦落为无形事物一类。
English: While alive, they are classified as tangible things, but after death, they fall into the category of intangible things.

古文：然则吾生也物不以益众，吾死也土不以加厚，吾又安知所喜憎利害其间者乎？
现代文：这样，我活着，世界物质也不会因此显多，我死去，大地土壤也不会因此加厚；由此我又怎么知道这中间到底是该高兴呢还是该憎恶呢、是利呢还是害呢？
English: In this way, if I live, the material of the world will not increase, and if I die, the soil of the earth will not thicken. So how do I know whether to be happy or disgusted, beneficial or harmful?

古文：夫造化者之攫援物也，譬犹陶人之埏埴也，其取之地而已为盆盎也，与其未离于地也无以异，其已成器而破碎漫澜而复归其故也，与其为盆盎亦无以异矣。
现代文：造化者制作物体，就像陶匠制作陶器一样，那些从地里取土和泥做成盆盎器物的，和它还在地里没被挖出制成时没有什么不同；那些已经制成器具后又被敲碎散离回到泥土里去的，和制成的盆盎也没有什么不同。
English: Creators make objects, just as potters make pottery, those who take earth and mud from the ground to make pottery are no different from when it was not dug out of the ground; those who have been made into utensils and then broken up and scattered back into the earth are no different from the pots made.

古文：夫临江之乡，居人汲水以浸其园；江水弗憎也；苦洿之家，决洿而注之江，洿水弗乐也。
现代文：临江生活的百姓汲取江水灌溉菜园，江水也决不会因此怀恨在心；受低洼污水侵袭的人家，将污水引入江里，污水也决不会因此高兴。
English: The people who live near the river draw river water to irrigate their vegetable gardens, and the river water will never hold a grudge; the people who are attacked by low-lying sewage will introduce sewage into the river, and the sewage will never be happy about it.

古文：是故其中江也，无以异其浸园也；其在洿也，亦无以异其在江也。
现代文：因为当水用来灌溉和水在江中时，这二者没有什么差别；同样当水在污沟里和水在江中时，这二者也没有什么差别。
English: Because when the water is used for irrigation and the water is in the river, there is no difference between the two; likewise, when the water is in the sewer and the water is in the river, there is no difference between the two.

古文：是故圣人因时以安其位，当世而乐其业。
现代文：所以圣人顺应时势而安于自己的位置，适合时世而乐于自己的事业。
English: Therefore, sages conform to the times and are comfortable in their own position, suitable for the times and happy in their own business.

古文：夫悲乐者，德之邪也；而喜怒者，道之过也；好憎者，心之暴也。
现代文：或悲或乐，是对德的偏离；喜怒无常，是对道的损坏；好恶分明，是对心的暴踏。
English: To be either sad or happy is to deviate from virtue; to be moody is to damage virtue; to have clear-cut likes and dislikes is to trample on one's heart.

古文：故曰：其生也天行，其死也物化；静则与阴俱闭，动则与阳俱开；精神澹然无极，不与物散而天下自服。
现代文：所以说 生就像天地自然运行，死就像物质自然变化，静时和阴气一同闭藏，动时和阳气一起开启 。精神澹泊无执，不随物质世界散逸，这样天下就会自然归服。
English: Therefore, it is said that life is like the natural movement of heaven and earth, and death is like the natural change of matter. Static time is closed with yin and yang, and dynamic time is opened with yang. The spirit is free from attachment and does not dissipate with the material world, so the world will naturally submit.

古文：故心者形之主也，而神者心之宝也。
现代文：所以心是形体的主宰；而精神又是心的宝贝。
English: Therefore, the mind is the master of the body, and the spirit is the treasure of the mind.

古文：形劳而不休则蹶，精用而不已则竭，是故圣人贵而尊之，不敢越也。
现代文：形体劳累而不休息就会损伤，精神使用而过度就会衰竭。因此，圣人很看重并遵循这一原则，不敢违背它。
English: If the body is overworked without rest, it will be damaged, and if the mind is overworked, it will be exhausted. Therefore, sages value and follow this principle and dare not violate it.

古文：夫有夏后氏之璜者，匣匮而藏之，宝之至也。
现代文：人一旦拥有夏后氏的璜玉，就会用匣子来珍藏它，因为璜玉是最珍贵的珍宝。
English: Once a person owns a Xia Guo's orbs, they will use the box to treasure it, because the orbs are the most precious treasures.

古文：夫精神之可宝也，非直夏后氏之璜也。
现代文：而精神的珍贵，就远非是夏后氏的璜玉所能相比的。
English: The preciousness of the spirit, however, is far from being comparable to that of Natsuo's ornaments.

古文：是故圣人以无应有，必究其理；以虚受实，必穷其节；恬愉虚静，以终其命。
现代文：所以圣人用虚无的精神来应对有形的物质，就必定能穷究其中的道理；以虚静来接纳实有，就必定能探究其中的真相细节；圣人恬愉虚静，以尽天年。
English: Therefore, if a sage uses the spirit of nothingness to deal with tangible matter, he must be able to exhaust the truth in it; if he uses the spirit of nothingness to accept reality, he must be able to explore the details of the truth in it; if a sage enjoys the spirit of nothingness, he will live to the full.

古文：是故无所甚疏，而无所甚亲；抱德炀和，以顺于天；与道为际，与德为邻；不为福始，不为祸先；魂魄处其宅，而精神守其根；死生无变于己，故曰至神。
现代文：因此他对外界事物没有什么特别的疏远，也没有什么特别的亲近；他只是持守天德怀拥中和，以顺随天性，与 道 一体，和 德 相伴；不为福始，不为祸先，魂魄安处于形骸之内，精神持守着它的根本，死生都无法扰乱他的精神。
English: Therefore, he does not have any special alienation from the outside world, nor does he have any special closeness; he just holds the heavenly virtues, embraces the middle way, follows the nature, is one with the Tao, and is accompanied by virtue; he is not a blessing, not a scourge, the soul is safe within the skeleton, the spirit holds its foundation, and neither death nor life can disturb his spirit.

古文：所谓真人者，性合于道也。
现代文：所以说他达到了神的境界。所谓真人，其本性与道融合一体。
English: Therefore, he has reached the realm of God. The so-called true man, whose nature is one with the Way.

古文：故有而若无，实而若虚；处其一不知其二，治其内不识其外；明白太素，无为复朴；体本抱神，以游于天地之樊，芒然仿佯于尘垢之外而消摇于无事之业。
现代文：所以他既有形而又无形，既实有而又虚无；他精神专一而不问其他，注重内心修养而不受外物诱惑；他洁明纯素，无为而归返朴质，体本抱神，遨游于天地之间，茫然徘徊于尘世之外，逍遥于宇宙初始混沌状态。
English: Therefore, he is both tangible and intangible, both real and nonexistent; his spirit is single-minded without asking others, focusing on inner cultivation and not being tempted by external things; he is clean and pure, returning to simplicity without doing anything, embracing God, wandering between heaven and earth, wandering beyond the earthly world, and escaping the initial chaotic state of the universe.

古文：浩浩荡荡乎，机械知巧弗载于心。
现代文：他心胸浩荡，任何机巧奸诈不藏心内。
English: He's got a big heart, and he's got all sorts of tricks up his sleeve.

古文：是故死生亦大矣，而不为变，虽天地覆育，亦不与之掺抱矣。
现代文：所以就是生死这样的大事都不能使他有所变化；就是天翻地覆也都不能使他有所变动。
English: Therefore, even such a big thing as life and death cannot change him; even the heavens and the earth cannot change him.

古文：若然者，正肝胆，遗耳目；心志专于内，通达耦于一；居不知所为，行不知所之；浑然而往，逮然而来；形若槁木，心若死灰；忘其五藏，损其形骸；不学而知，不视而见：不为而成，不治而辩；感而应，迫而动，不得已而往，如光之耀，如景之放；以道为紃，有待而然；抱其太清之本而无所容与，而物无能营；廓惝而虚，清靖而无思虑、大泽焚而不能热，河汉涸而不能寒也，大雷毁山而不能惊也，大风晦日而不能伤也。
现代文：他审慎看待无瑕的本性，不与外物杂糅，面对纷乱的世事而持守根本。就是如此，他忘其肝胆，遗其耳目，心志专于内心修养，使自己的精神和道融为一体。他居住时不知自己在做什么，行动时不知自己所往何处，浑浑然而去，恍恍惚而来。他形如槁木，心如死灰，忘其五脏，损其形骸；不用学就能懂，不用看就能见，不用做就能成，不用管就能治。他受感触才反应，受逼迫才行动，不得已才前往，如光之闪耀，像影仿物形。他以道为准绳，依凭 道体 才有如此表现。他抱守这天道根本而不放纵，因而外物无法扰乱他的心神。他开阔虚空，清静安宁而无思无虑。所以大泽焚烧而不能使他感到热气，河水冰冻而不能使他感到寒冷，雷炸山峰而不能使他受惊，天昏地暗的狂风也不能使他受伤害。
English: He is circumspect about his flawless nature, does not mix with external things, and adheres to the fundamentals in the face of chaotic world affairs. That is, he forgets his heart and soul, forgets his ears and eyes, and his mind is dedicated to inner cultivation, so that his spirit and way are integrated. When he lives, he does not know what he is doing, when he acts, he does not know where he is going, he goes in a daze, he comes in a daze. He is shaped like a beech tree, his heart is like dead ash, he forgets his five organs, and damages his skeleton; he can understand without learning, see without seeing,

古文：是故视珍宝珠玉犹石砾也，视至尊穷宠犹行客也，视毛嫱西施犹丑也。
现代文：因此，他视珍宝珠玉如石块，看至尊帝王像过客，视毛嫱西施似丑女。
English: Therefore, he regards precious jewels and gems as stones, the supreme emperor as a passer-by, and Mao Tse-tung as an ugly woman.

古文：以死生为一化，以万物为一方，同精于太清之本，而游于忽区之旁。
现代文：他将死生视为一种变化，将万物看作同一物类，将精神同合于天道根本而遨游在恍惚无际的区域里。
English: He sees life and death as a kind of change, sees all things as the same kind of thing, and identifies the spirit with the fundamental way of heaven, wandering in the boundless region of trance.

古文：有精而不使，有神而不行，契大浑之朴而立至清之中。
现代文：他有精气而不使用，有神功而不显示，与浑然质朴大道融合一体而立足于清静太虚之境地。
English: He has energy but does not use it, he has skill but does not show it, he blends in with the dull and simple streets and is based in a state of serenity and emptiness.

古文：是故其寝不梦，其智不萌；其魄不抑，其魂不腾；反覆终始，不知其端绪；甘螟太宵之宅，而觉视于昭昭之宇；休息于无委曲之隅，而游敖于无形埒之野；居而无容，处而无所：其动无形，其静无体；存而若亡，生而若死；出入无间，役使鬼神；沦于不测，入于无间，以不同形相嬗也；终始若环，莫得其伦，此精神之所以能登假于道也，是故真人之所游。
现代文：所以真人是睡时不做梦，智巧不萌生，阴魄不抑制，阳魂不腾升。他周而复始，不知开端和终结。他尽管安睡于漫漫的长夜之中，却能明察到光明世界的一切；他能够在没有边涯的区域里休息，在没有形状的界域里遨游。他居处时没有具体的形貌，住下时没有具体的居所；他形动不留痕迹，静止不见形体；存而若亡，生而若死；他能出入于没有间隙的地方，也能役使魔鬼天神；他既能进入于不可测度的地方，也能处身于没有空间的地方。真人就是这样以不同的形态幻化着，从开始到结束像圆环转圈，无法弄清这其中的道理。这就是真人精神能够通达于 道 的奥秘所在。
English: Therefore, the real man does not dream when he sleeps, does not grow clever, does not suppress the gloom, and does not ascend. He repeats the beginning and does not know the beginning and the end. Although he sleeps peacefully in the long night, he can clearly see everything in the bright world; he can rest in the borderless area and travel in the borderless area. He has no specific shape when he lives and no specific residence when he lives; he leaves no trace of movement and no shape when he is still; he exists but does not die, he is born but does not die; he can go in and out of places without gaps, and can also serve the devil and the gods; he can enter

古文：若吹呴呼吸，吐故内新，熊经鸟伸，凫浴蝯躩，鸱视虎顾，是养形之人也，不以滑心，使神滔荡而不失其充，日夜无伤而与物为春，则是合而生时干心也。
现代文：以上这些就是真人的行为表现。吹嘘呼吸，吐出污秽之气吸入新鲜空气，像熊悬吊、像鸟伸颈，如鸭浮水、如猿跳跃，像鹰环视、像虎回顾，做些动作的人只是想保养自己的身体，而真人却不必为这些导引之术烦恼。因为真人他即使精神飞扬激荡也不会丧失充实的精气，昼夜变化也不会伤害他，与万物一样有青春活力，这是在于他的品性合于道体，内心有着感应四时变化的能力。
English: The above are the behaviors of a real person. Boasting of breathing, exhaling filthy air, inhaling fresh air, hanging like a bear, stretching the neck like a bird, floating like a duck, jumping like a monkey, looking around like an eagle, looking back like a tiger, people who do some actions just want to maintain their bodies, but real people don't have to worry about these guiding techniques. Because a real person, even if his spirit is soaring, he will not lose his full essence. Day and night changes will not hurt him. Like everything else, he has youthful vitality. This is because his character fits the moral body and his heart has the ability to sense the four

古文：且人有戒形而无损于心，有缀宅而无秏精。
现代文：有的人形体变化了，但内在心神却无损，有的人生命结束了，但精神无损且永存；这就像生癞疮的人虽然形体受损但精神却无损、志趣也不变。
English: Some people's body changes, but their inner spirit remains intact; some people's life ends, but their spirit remains intact and eternal; this is like a person with acne, although his body is damaged, his spirit remains intact and his interests remain unchanged.

古文：夫癞者趋不变，狂者形不亏，神将有所远徙，孰暇知其所为？
现代文：反过来说，有些癫狂患者虽然看上去外形完好，但他的精神却已远离其身躯，谁有闲功夫去弄清他干了些什么！
English: On the other hand, some maniacs, although they appear to be in good shape, but his spirit is far away from his body, who has the leisure to find out what he did!

古文：故形有摩而神未尝化者，以不化应化，千变万抮而未始有极。
现代文：所以，如果有人形体尽管受磨损而精神未曾变化，那么这样的人就能以不变去应对变化；就是外物千变万化而变得没有结果，他还是能对应自如。
English: Therefore, if there is a person whose body is worn out but whose spirit has not changed, then such a person can respond to changes with constancy; even if external things are ever-changing and become fruitless, he can still respond freely.

古文：化者复归于无形也，不化者与天地俱生也。
现代文：所以能变化的形体最终要复归于无形，而精神不死倒能与天地同存。
English: Therefore, the shape that can change will eventually return to the formless, but the spirit that does not die can coexist with heaven and earth.

古文：夫木之死也，青青去之也，夫使木生者岂木也，犹充形者之非形也。
现代文：树木死后，其绿色的颜色也随之消失。能让树木生存下来的哪里就是树木本身？
English: When trees die, their green color also disappears. What is it about the trees themselves that allows them to survive?

古文：故生生者未尝死也，其所生则死矣；化物者未尝化也，其所化则化矣。
现代文：这就像使形体充实的不是形体本身一样。因此，产生生命的东西是不死的，而它所产生的生命则会死去；化育万物的东西是不变的，而它所化育的万物则会变化。
English: It is as if it is not the body itself that gives substance to the form, so that what produces life does not die, but the life that it produces dies; what produces things does not change, but the things that it produces change.

古文：轻天下，则神无累矣；细万物，则心不惑矣；齐死生，则志不慑矣；同变化，则明不眩矣。
现代文：所以，看轻天下，你的精神就不会劳累；看小万物，你的心神就不会惑乱；将生死看得相同，那你就会无所畏惧；将变化看成没变化，那你的眼睛就不会昏花。
English: Therefore, if you look down on the world, your spirit will not be tired; if you look at small things, your mind will not be confused; if you see life and death as the same, then you will not be afraid; if you see change as no change, then your eyes will not be dizzy.

古文：众人以为虚言，吾将举类而实之。
现代文：平庸之辈或许认为我讲的都是虚狂的话，但我会举出这类事例来说明的。
English: The average person might think that what I'm saying is completely bonkers, but I'll give you some examples to illustrate this.

古文：人之所以乐为人主者，以其穷耳目之欲，而适躬体之便也。
现代文：人之所以热衷于做天子君主，是因为天子君主可以穷极耳目的欲望，并能让身体舒舒服服。
English: The reason why people are so keen to be the son of heaven is because the son of heaven can exhaust the desires of the eye and can make the body comfortable.

古文：今高台层榭，人之所丽也，而尧朴桷不斲，素题不枅。珍怪奇异，人之所美也，而尧粝粢之饭，藜藿之羹。文绣狐白，人之所好也，而尧布衣掩形，鹿裘御寒。
现代文：那些高耸的楼台层叠的榭房，一般人都认为是壮丽的，但是尧帝住房却用不加砍削加工的树木做椽木，梁柱的端头也不加雕饰，更没有斗拱之类的复杂结构；还有那些珍奇的食品，一般人都认为是味道佳美的，但是尧帝却吃粗糙的饭菜，喝用野菜熬成的汤羹；再有那些绣有纹彩的锦衣和纯白狐皮裘衣，一般人都喜爱的，但是尧帝却用麻布遮裹身体，用鹿皮御寒保暖。
English: The towering, multi-storied imperial residences were considered magnificent by the general public, but the emperor's residences were made of wood from trees that had not been chopped or processed, the ends of the beams and columns were not carved, and there was no complex structure such as a battlement; there were also those rare foods that were considered delicious by the general public, but the emperor ate coarse meals and drank soup made from vegetables; there were also those embroidered brocades and pure white fox fur coats that were popular with the general public, but the emperor covered his body with linen and kept warm with deerskin.

古文：养性之具不加厚，而增之以任重之忧，故举天下而传之于舜，若解重负然，非直辞让，诚无以为也。此轻天下之具也。
现代文：尧帝的养生条件并不比一般人来得优厚，却有着比一般人多得多的繁重事务所带来的忧虑，所以尧就将天下禅让给舜，就像卸下了重担一样，这实在不是出于一种谦让美德的名声，而是君主王位在尧看来不值什么，实在没有什么可留恋的。这便是 轻天下 的具体事例。
English: Emperor Zou's health condition was not better than that of the average person, but he had the worries brought about by much more burdensome affairs than the average person. Therefore, Zou gave up the world of Zen to Zou, as if he had relieved a heavy burden. This was really not out of a reputation for the virtue of modesty, but the monarch's throne did not seem to be worth anything to Zou, and there was really nothing to be nostalgic about. This was a specific example of lightening the world.

古文：禹南省方，济于江，黄龙负舟，舟中之人五色无主，禹乃熙笑而称曰： 我受命于天，竭力而劳万民，生寄也，死归也，何足以滑和？ 
现代文：夏禹到南方巡视，渡过长江时，一条黄龙游出水面并将夏禹他们所乘坐的船托起，船上的人都吓得神色大变，可禹却恬然地笑着说： 我受命于天，竭尽全力为百姓操劳。我活着是寄寓天地之间，死后是回归自然大地。
English: When Xia Yu went on inspection to the south and crossed the Yangtze River, a yellow dragon swam out of the water and held up the boat they were on. The people on board were so scared that their faces changed dramatically, but Yu smiled and said: I was ordered by heaven to do my best for the people. I live between heaven and earth, and after death I will return to the natural earth.

古文：视龙犹蝘蜓，颜色不变，龙乃弭耳掉尾而逃。
现代文：哪里值得我为生死而来搅乱平静的心境！ 在夏禹的眼里，这黄龙就像一条小小的蜥蜴，所以神色不变，而那黄龙最终耷拉着耳朵、掉转尾巴逃走了。
English: In Xia Yu's eyes, this yellow dragon is like a small lizard, so it looks the same, and the yellow dragon eventually pulled its ears and turned its tail to escape.

古文：禹之视物亦细矣。
现代文：这便是 细万物 的具体事例。
English: This is a concrete example of the interdependence of all things.

古文：郑之神巫相壶子林，见其征，告列子。
现代文：郑国的神巫给壶子林看相，看到了壶子林脸上显示的凶兆，并将此事告诉了列子。
English: The sorcerer of Zhengzhou looked at Huzilin, saw the ominous signs on his face, and told the matter to Reiko.

古文：列子行泣报壶子，壶子持以天壤，名实不入，机发于踵，壶子之视死生亦齐矣。
现代文：列子哭着前去报告老师壶子。谁知壶子却向列子谈起人之生命起源于天地复归于自然的道理来；在这种人生哲学下 名利 根本不可能被放在心里，死亡之箭突然射来，害怕也没用。这就是壶子 齐死生 的具体事例。
English: Layzi went crying to report to her teacher about the pot. Who knows, but the pot talked to Layzi about the principle that human life originates from heaven and earth and returns to nature; under this philosophy of life, fame and fortune can not be kept in mind at all, the arrow of death suddenly shot, and fear is useless. This is a concrete example of the pot being both dead and alive.

古文：子求行年五十有四而病伛偻，脊管高于顶，臈下迫颐，两脾在上，烛营指天，匍匐自窥于井曰： 伟哉！
现代文：子求已有五十四岁了，得了伛偻病，脊椎骨高于头顶，胸前骨头贴近腮帮，大腿向上，下阴朝天；子求爬到井边照视自己的模样，然后说道： 伟大啊！
English: Ziguo was fifty-four years old. He had rickets. His vertebrae were higher than the top of his head, and his frontal bones were close to the skull. His thighs were up, and his shadow was as high as the sky. Ziguo climbed to the edge of the well to look at his appearance, and then said: "Great!

古文：造化者其以我为此拘拘耶！ 
现代文：造化者怎么将我变成这么奇妙的弯曲之形？ 
English: How did the creator turn me into such a strange, twisted shape?

古文：此其视变化亦同矣。
现代文：这就是子求 同变化 的具体事例。
English: This is a concrete example of seeking the same change.

古文：故睹尧之道，乃知天下之轻也；观禹之志，乃知天下之细也；原壶子之论，乃知死生之齐也；见子求之行，乃知变化之同也。
现代文：所以，看看尧让帝位，就可知道天子君位的轻微；看看禹的志向，就可知道万物的细小；推断壶子的言论，就可知道生死的相同；看了子求的行为，就可知道变与不变是一样的。
English: Therefore, if you look at the emperor's abdication, you can know the lightness of the emperor's throne; if you look at Yu's ambition, you can know the smallness of all things; if you infer the speech of the pot, you can know that life and death are the same; if you look at the behavior of Ziguo, you can know that change is the same as unchanging.

古文：夫至人倚不拔之柱，行不关之途；禀不竭之府，学不死之师；无往而不遂，无至而不通；生不足以挂志，死不足以幽神；屈伸俛仰，抱命而婉转；祸福利害，千变万紾，孰足以患心？
现代文：至人倚靠着不可动摇的柱子，走在没有关隘的路上；受用着取之不尽的宝库，从学于长生不老的老师；所以是无论往哪里都顺利，不管到哪里都通畅；不为生存而烦恼，不为死亡而伤神；屈、伸，俯、仰，持守天命而自然变化；祸、福，利、害，不管怎样千变万化，都不能使他伤神患心！
English: The most perfect man leans on the unshakable pillar and walks on the path that has no narrowness; he uses the inexhaustible treasure from the teacher who learned from immortality; therefore, no matter where he goes, it is smooth, no matter where he goes, it is smooth; he does not worry about survival, he does not grieve for death; he bends, stretches, bends, and rises, he keeps his destiny and naturally changes; evil, blessing, benefit, and harm, no matter how ever-changing, can not make him grieve!

古文：若此人者，抱素守精；蝉蜕蛇解，游于太清；轻举独住，忽然入冥；凤皇不能与之俪，而况斥鷃乎？
现代文：像这样的人，拥抱纯素持守精神，如同蝉脱壳蛇蜕皮那样，从世俗中解脱而遨游于太清天道之中，轻飘升逸、独来独往，恍惚间进入那幽深冥暗处。凤凰也不能和他媲美，更何况那平庸的小鸟？
English: Such a person, embracing the spirit of veganism, is like a cicada shedding its shell, like a snake shedding its skin, freeing itself from the mundane and wandering in the too-clear heavenly path, floating up and away, wandering alone, and entering the dark and gloomy place in a trance. The phoenix cannot be compared to him, let alone the mediocre bird?

古文：势位爵禄，何足以概志也！
现代文：权势地位、爵号利禄哪值得他牵绕心头。
English: The position of power and the title of knight are not worth worrying about.

古文：晏子与崔杼盟，临死地而不易其义，殖、华将战而死，莒君厚赂而止之，不改其行。
现代文：齐国的晏子和崔杼在祖庙盟誓，晏子面对死亡的威胁也不改变他不屈从弑君贼臣而忠于社稷的正义气节。
English: Zizi and Cui Rong of Qi swore in the ancestral temple that even if Zizi faced the threat of death, he would not change his righteous spirit of not succumbing to the tyrant and being loyal to the society.

古文：故晏子可迫以仁，而不可劫以兵；殖、华可止以义，而不可县以利；君子义死而不可以富贵留也，义为而不可以死亡恐也。
现代文：杞梁和华周替齐国攻打莒国，被包围而身陷绝境，莒国君主念他们勇武，出重金想收买他们以便停止战斗，但他们两位至死都不改变效忠齐国的行为。所以，对晏子这样的人可以用 仁 来规劝，但不可以兵器武力来胁迫；对杞梁和华周这样的人可以用 义 来制约，但不可以财物来引诱。君子为义而死，是不能用富贵利禄来诱使他们偷生；为 义 而行动的人，是无法用死亡来恐吓他们的。
English: Hao Liang and Hua Zhou attacked and besieged Qi on behalf of Qi, and found themselves in a desperate situation. The monarch of Qi praised their bravery and tried to bribe them with a large sum of money to stop the fighting, but neither of them would change their behavior of loyalty to Qi until death. Therefore, people like Hao Zi can be persuaded by benevolence, but cannot be coerced by force of arms; people like Hao Liang and Hua Zhou can be constrained by righteousness, but cannot be enticed by wealth. A gentleman who dies for righteousness cannot use wealth and riches to entice them to steal a living; people who act for righteousness cannot use death to

古文：彼则直为义耳，而尚犹不拘于物，又况无为者矣。
现代文：这些为 义 而行动的人都尚且不受物欲的制约拘束，更何况那些什么都不为的人呢！
English: Those who act for the sake of righteousness are not constrained by material desires, let alone those who do nothing!

古文：尧不以有天下为贵，故授舜；公子札不以有国为尊，故让位；子罕不以玉为富，故不受宝；务光不以生害义，故自投于渊。
现代文：尧不以占有天下为显贵，所以把君位禅让给舜；吴国公子季札不以拥有国家为尊贵，所以坚辞不受长兄让给他的王位；子罕不以拥有宝玉为富有，所以不接受别人送他的宝玉；务光不想用活命贪生而损害忠义，所以情愿自投深渊淹死。
English: Zang did not regard possession of the whole world as prestigious, so he ceded the royal throne of Zen to Zang; the prince of Wu, Ji Zha, did not regard possession of the country as prestigious, so he did not accept the throne given to him by his eldest brother; Zi Han did not regard possession of precious stones as rich, so he did not accept the precious stones sent to him by others; Mu Guang did not want to harm loyalty with his greed for life, so he was willing to drown himself in the abyss.

古文：由此观之，至贵不待爵，至富不待财。
现代文：由此看来，最高的尊贵获得不是靠爵位来完成的，最大的财富占有不是以金钱来衡量的。
English: From this point of view, the highest honor is not achieved by a knighthood, and the greatest wealth is not measured by money.

古文：天下至大矣，而以与佗人；身至亲矣，而弃之渊；此外，其余无足利矣。
现代文：天下够大的了，但尧却将天下让给他人；身躯生命够珍贵的了，但务光却将自身生命投入深渊。
English: The world is big enough, but you give up the world to others; the body and life are precious enough, but you throw your own life into the abyss.

古文：此之谓无累之人。无累之人，不以天下为贵矣。
现代文：除了天下和生命，还有什么比它们更珍贵而值得留恋的，而尧和务光却不惜舍弃这些，真正做到不为物累。因为不为物累，所以他们也就不把天下看得无上珍贵的了。
English: In addition to the world and life, there is something more precious and worth remembering than them, but the world and the world are willing to give up these things and truly do not become burdensome. Because they are not burdensome, they do not see the world as extremely precious.

古文：上观至人之论，深原道德之意，以下考世俗之行，乃足羞也。
现代文：由此来考察上述真人或至人的那些理论，深入探究道德旨意，并将这种理论和旨意作标准来考察衡量尘世间世俗的很多行为，就会为这些世俗的所作所为感到羞愧。
English: Therefore, if we examine the theories of the above-mentioned real or real-human beings, deeply explore the moral will, and use this theory and will as a standard to examine and measure many worldly actions, we will be ashamed of these worldly actions.

古文：故通许由之意，金縢、豹韬废矣；延陵季子不受吴国，而讼闲田者惭矣；子罕不利宝玉，而争券契者愧矣；务光不污于世，而贪利偷生者闷矣。
现代文：所以如果通晓许由让天下的思想，那么像《金縢》《豹韬》之类的治国谋取天下的书籍就可以废弃；相比延陵季子不肯接受吴国君位，那些为夺得封余土地而争讼的人就该感到惭愧；同样，相比子罕不贪宝玉，那些争夺券契的人就显得很低级丑陋；想到务光不愿受到世俗玷污的气节，那些贪生图利的人就会感到不安。
English: Therefore, if one is familiar with the thought of letting the world go by any means, then books on governing the country and seeking the world, such as "Crane" and "Leopard," can be discarded; compared to Yanling Ji Zi's refusal to accept the throne of Wu, those who fought to win the remaining land should be ashamed; similarly, compared to Zi Xuan, who did not covet precious stones, those who fought for the deed appear to be very low-level and ugly; those who are greedy for profit will feel uneasy when they think of Mu Guang's temperament of not wanting to be tarnished by the world.

古文：故不观大义者，不知生之不足贪也；不闻大言者，不知天下之不足利也。
现代文：所以那些不懂持守伟大气节的人，也就不知道苟且偷生是不值得贪求的；那些从来没有接受过崇高思想、言论的人，也就不知道天下也是不值得留恋的。
English: Therefore, those who do not know how to maintain a great temperament do not know that it is not worth coveting; those who have never accepted lofty thoughts and words do not know that the world is not worth nostalgia.

古文：今夫穷鄙之社也，叩盆拊瓴，相和而歌，自以为乐矣。
现代文：如今那些穷乡僻壤的地方祭祀社神，当地人敲盆击瓶而奏乐，相和而歌，自娱自乐。
English: Nowadays, in those poor and remote places, the gods of the community are worshipped, and the local people play music by banging pots and bottles, sing songs in harmony, and entertain themselves.

古文：尝试为之击建鼓，撞巨钟，乃性仍仍然知其盆瓴之足羞也。
现代文：反过来，如果为这些人敲起大鼓、撞击大钟，他们就会感到不自在而茫然万分，并会认为自己所敲击的盆瓶是如此微不足道、丢人现眼。
English: On the other hand, if you beat a big drum and a big clock for these people, they will feel uncomfortable and dazed, and will think that the pot they are beating is so insignificant and embarrassing.

古文：藏诗书，修文学，而不知至论之旨，则拊盆叩瓴之徒也。
现代文：那些尽管藏有《诗》《书》，修行文学理论，却不懂大道宏旨的人，就跟这些敲盆击瓶者差不多。
English: Those who, despite possessing "poetry" and "books" and practicing literary theory, do not understand the grand meaning of the road, are similar to these bottle-throwers.

古文：夫以天下为者，学之建鼓矣。
现代文：而那些不以天下为尊为贵者，就像这些敲鼓撞钟的人。
English: And those who are not honored by the world are like these drummers and bell-ringers.

古文：尊势厚利，人之所贪也。使之左据天下图，而右手刎其喉，愚夫不为。
现代文：尊贵的权势和丰厚的利禄，是一般人所贪求的；假若让某人左手掌握着代表他所占有的天下版图，而右手却拿着刀来刎颈自杀，那么即使是最愚蠢者也是不肯这么做的。
English: Noble power and rich rewards are what the common people crave; if someone were to hold in his left hand the map of the world on his behalf, and in his right hand a knife to kill himself, even the most stupid would not do it.

古文：由此观之，生尊于天下也。
现代文：由此可见，生命还是要比占据天下来得重要。
English: This shows that life is still more important than dominating the world.

古文：圣人食足以接气，衣足以盖形，适情不求余，无天下不亏其性，有天下不羡其和，有天下无天下一实也。
现代文：所以圣人进食只求维持生命，衣着只求遮蔽身体，满足人的基本需求而不求多余的东西。天下对他来说，不占有也不会亏损他的天性，占有也不会扰乱他的平和本性，真的是占有天下和不占有天下对圣人来说是一样的。
English: Therefore, the sage eats only to sustain life, wears clothes only to cover his body, and satisfies people's basic needs without asking for superfluous things. For him, the world does not possess and will not lose his nature, and possession will not disturb his peaceful nature. It is really the same for the sage to possess the world and not possess the world.

古文：今赣人敖仓，予人河水，饥而餐之，渴而饮之，其入腹者，不过箪食瓢浆，则身饱而敖仓不为之减也，腹满面河水不为之竭也。有之不加饱，无之不为之饥，与守其篅、有其井一实也。
现代文：假如现在赐给某人一座粮仓、一条大河，使他能在饿时去吃、渴时能喝，但是这吃进肚中、喝入腹内的，只不过是一竹筒饭和一瓢勺水，粮仓和河水也不因他吃饱喝足而减少涸竭。所以有无粮仓、河水与他的饥饱没有关系；有了粮仓河水，他也不会硬撑、死灌，没了粮仓河水，他也不会挨饿、受竭，有无粮仓、水井对他来说是一样的。
English: If someone is now given a granary and a large river, so that he can eat when he is hungry and drink when he is thirsty, but what he eats into his stomach and drinks into his stomach is nothing more than a bamboo tube of rice and a spoonful of water. The granary and the river water will not be depleted because he is full. Therefore, whether there is a granary or a river water has nothing to do with his hunger. With a granary and river water, he will not be hard-pressed or drowned. Without a granary and river water, he will not starve or be exhausted. It is the same for him whether there is a granary or a well.

古文：人大怒破阴，大喜坠阳；大忧内崩，大怖生狂。
现代文：人大怒就会破坏阴气、大喜就会损伤阳气、大忧就会摧残内脏、惊恐就会使人发狂。
English: A person's great anger will destroy the yin, great joy will damage the yang, great sorrow will destroy the internal organs, and panic will make people mad.

古文：除秽去累，莫若未始出其宗，乃为大通。
现代文：要想消除上述这些精神忧虑和负担，最好的方法是不偏离 道 体这个根本，如能做到这点，就称作为彻底的 通达 。
English: The best way to eliminate the above-mentioned mental worries and burdens is not to deviate from the essence of the body, and if this can be done, it is called thorough understanding.

古文：清目而不以视，静耳而不以听；钳口而不以言，委心而不以虑；弃聪明而反太素，休精神而弃知故；觉而若眛，以生而若死；终则反本未生之时，而与化为一体。
现代文：所以，要使双眼明亮就最好是别看五光十色、要使耳朵清静就最好是别听靡淫之音、紧闭嘴巴最好是别多嘴多舌、要使心体坦荡就最好是别滋生忧虑邪念。抛弃聪明智巧而返朴到清洁纯素的境界，休养精神而摒弃智诈。醒着如同梦中、活着就像死去，最终返回到自然初始阶段，使人和造化者融为一体。
English: Therefore, to keep the eyes bright, it is best not to look at the dazzling colors; to keep the ears clear, it is best not to listen to the sounds of lust; to keep the mouth closed, it is best not to talk too much; to keep the mind and body calm, it is best not to breed worries and evil thoughts; to abandon cleverness and cleverness and return to the realm of pure veganism; to recuperate the spirit and abandon cleverness; to be awake as in a dream, to live as if to die, and finally to return to the initial stage of nature, to integrate man and creation.

古文：死之与生一体也。
现代文：因为生与死原本就相随相依不可分。
English: Because life and death are inherently inseparable.

古文：今夫繇者，揭臿，负笼土，盐汗交流，喘息薄喉，当此之时，得茠越下，则脱然而喜矣。
现代文：那些服劳役的人，高举头铁锹挖土，背着笼筐运土，做得汗流浃背、气喘吁吁、喉咙生烟干痛。这个时候，能够在树荫下歇息片刻，他就会感到舒服而高兴。
English: The labourers, digging with picks and shovels, carrying baskets of earth, are sweating, panting, their throats are dry and sore. At this time, he feels comfortable and happy to be able to rest in the shade for a while.

古文：岩穴之间，非直越下之休也。
现代文：而要是能在洞穴里休息，那种快乐舒坦就不只是在树荫下休息的那点了。
English: But if you can rest in a cave, that happiness and comfort is not just about resting in the shade.

古文：病疵瘕者，捧心抑腹，膝上叩头，蜷跼而谛，通夕不寐，当此之时，哙然得卧，则亲戚兄弟欢然而喜，夫修夜之宁，非直一哙之乐也。
现代文：一个腹部长肿瘤的病人，痛得捧心按腹、弓身头膝相碰、卷曲着身子呼号呻吟、通宵达旦不能入睡。这种时候，如能畅快地安睡下来，那么他的父母兄弟就会欢天喜地。而要是能够彻夜安宁，侍候他的父母兄弟的欢乐轻松就不是那么一点儿了。
English: A patient with a tumour in his abdomen, painfully pressing his heart to his stomach, bowing his head, bumping his knees, curling his body, moaning and groaning, and unable to sleep all night long. At such times, if he can sleep peacefully, then his parents and brothers will be overjoyed. But if he can stay up all night peacefully, the joy of serving his parents and brothers is not so easy.

古文：故知宇宙之大，则不可劫以死生；知养生之和，则不可县以天下；知未生之乐，则不可畏以死；知许由之贵于舜，则不贪物。
现代文：所以，知晓宇宙之广大的人，是不能用生死来胁迫他的；知道以中和之气来养生的人，是不能拿天下权势利禄来引诱他的；懂得未降生时的快乐的人，是不能以死亡来吓唬他的；明白许由比虞舜高贵的人，是不会贪图物质享受的。
English: Therefore, a person who knows the vastness of the universe cannot be coerced by life and death; a person who knows how to nurture life with the spirit of neutrality cannot be seduced by the power of the world; a person who knows the joy of not being born cannot be frightened by death; a person who knows that reason is nobler than wealth will not covet material enjoyment.

古文：墙之立不若其偃也，又况不为墙乎？
现代文：墙竖立着不若倒塌了为好，更何况压根儿就没有墙呢！
English: It is better for a wall to stand than to fall, especially if there is no wall at all!

古文：冰之凝不若其释也，又况不为冰乎？
现代文：凝结了的冰不若融化了为好，更何况根本就没有冰呢！
English: Condensed ice would be better if it melted, let alone if there was no ice at all!

古文：自无蹠有，自有蹠无；终始无端，莫知其所萌；非通于外内，孰能无好憎？
现代文：从无到有，从有到无，这种生死有无的转化没有穷尽，没有人知道它是怎样发生的。不通晓 内外 的人，怎能做到无爱憎呢？
English: From nothing to something, from something to nothing, there is no end to this transformation of life and death into something and nothing. No one knows how it happened. How can a person who does not know the inside and outside be without love and hate?

古文：无外之外，至大也；无内之内，至贵也。
现代文：没有外界边缘的外界区域，是无限大的；没有内部极限的内部微妙，是珍贵的。
English: Without the outer edge, the outer region is infinitely large; without the inner limit, the inner subtlety is precious.

古文：能知大贵，何往而不遂？
现代文：如果能知晓这无限大和无限细微，还有什么不能遂心如意的！
English: If one can know the infinitely great and the infinitely small, what is there not to be fulfilled?

古文：衰世凑学，不知原心反本，直雕琢其性，矫拂其情，以与世交，故目虽欲之，禁之以度；心虽乐之，节之以礼；趋翔周旋，诎节卑拜；肉凝而不食，酒澄而不饮；外束其形，内总其德；钳阴阳之和，而迫性命之情；故终身为悲人。
现代文：近世道德衰败，人们趋附那些舍本逐末的学说，不懂得推究天性、返朴根本，只是刻意雕琢、掩饰违逆人的本性，以此来与世俗交往。所以，他们眼睛本想观看五颜六色，却因为有法度禁止而不能不敢；内心虽然有所爱好，却因为有礼节制约而不敢不能；使人们只能左右趋附、上下周旋，卑躬屈膝。肉凝冻了不敢食、酒澄淀了不敢喝。束缚了正常的行为举止，捆束了内在的德性，钳制阴阳二气的调和、压抑生命的真情，所以最终成为一个悲剧人物。
English: With the decline of morality in modern times, people tend to adhere to those doctrines that abandon the basics step by step, do not know how to investigate nature and return to simplicity, but deliberately carve and disguise the rebellious nature of man, in order to communicate with the world. Therefore, their eyes originally wanted to watch the colorful, but because of the legal prohibition, they could not dare; although they had hobbies, they did not dare because of the restrictions of etiquette; so that people could only adhere to the left and right, swing up and down, and grovel. The flesh froze and did not dare to eat, the wine was stagnant and did not dare to drink. The normal behavior

古文：达至道者则不然，理情性，治心术；养以和，持以适；乐道而忘贱，安德而忘贫；性有不欲，无欲而不得，心有不乐，无乐而不为；无益情者不以累德，而便性者不以滑和，故纵体大肆意，而度制可以为天下仪。
现代文：而通达道体的人就不是这样。他们理顺自己的性情，整理修治好自己的心术；用平和之气来保养心性，以闲适安宁来持守本性。他们乐于道而忘其贱，安于德而忘其贫；他们生性无欲，因而没有什么不能实现的；他们本心不追求快乐，因而没有什么不快乐；那些无益于本性的事他不拿来累及德性，那些不适宜纯洁天性的事他也不拿来扰乱内心的平和。所以通达道性的人是放松身体、舒缓意念，这种修养身性的法则可以成为天下人的示范。
English: However, this is not the case with those who have attained the Daoist nature. They rationalize their dispositions, sort out and improve their mental skills; maintain their mental nature with a peaceful spirit, and keep their nature with leisure and tranquility. They are happy with the Dao and forget their lowliness, and forget their poverty with peace and tranquility; they are born without desires, so there is nothing they cannot achieve; they do not pursue happiness in their hearts, so there is nothing unhappy; they do not burden their moral nature with things that are not beneficial to their nature, and they do not disturb their inner peace with things that are not suitable for a pure nature. Therefore, those who have attained the Da

古文：今夫儒者，不本其所以欲，而禁其所欲；不原其所以乐，而闭其所乐；是犹决江河之源，而障之以手也。
现代文：今天的儒家就是这样不探究人们产生欲望的原缘而只是一味禁止人们的欲望，不探寻人们追求享乐的由来而只是一味阻止人们的享乐。这种做法就像挖开了江河的源头，而却又用手掌去阻挡江流一样。
English: In this way, today's Confucianism does not investigate the origin of people's desires, but only prohibits people's desires; it does not investigate the origin of people's pursuit of pleasure, but only prevents people's enjoyment. This approach is like digging up the source of a river, but using the palm of the hand to block the flow of the river.

古文：夫牧民者，犹畜禽兽也，不塞其囿垣，使不野心，系绊其足，以禁其动，而欲修生寿终，岂可得乎？
现代文：同样，管理百姓如同畜养禽兽，不好好地去堵塞苑囿围墙的缺口，让禽兽产生了逃走的野心，然后却去羁绊这些禽兽的腿脚不让逃跑，这样还想使他们修身养性得以长寿，哪能行呢？
English: In the same way, managing the people is like raising livestock and animals. It is not good to plug the gaps in the fence of the courtyard, so that the animals have the ambition to escape, and then to bind the legs and feet of these animals to prevent them from escaping. In this way, they also want to improve their physical fitness and longevity. How can it be done?

古文：夫颜回、季路、子夏、冉伯牛，孔子之通学也。然颜渊夭死，季路葅于卫，子夏失明，冉伯牛为厉，此皆迫性拂情，而不得其和也。
现代文：所以，尽管颜回、季路、子夏、冉伯牛都是孔子的高足，通晓学问的弟子，可是颜回早死、子路在卫国被砍成肉酱、子夏丧子悲哭导致失明、冉伯牛得了恶疾，他们之所以这样是因为逼迫本性违逆性情而损伤了中和之气。
English: Therefore, although Yan Hui, Qilu, Zixia, and Ran Bo Niu were all high-footed and learned disciples of Confucius, but Yan Hui died early, Zilu was chopped into meat sauce in the defense of the country, Zixia lost her son and cried, leading to blindness, and Ran Bo Niu got a bad disease. The reason for this is that they persecuted their natural rebellious disposition and damaged the spirit of neutralization.

古文：故子夏见曾子，一臞一肥，曾子问其故，曰： 出见富贵之乐而欲之，入见先王之道又说之。
现代文：因此子夏见曾子，一时瘦一时胖，曾子感到奇怪问子夏什么原因，子夏回答说： 我外出见富贵能带来很多快乐，所以也想富贵快乐；回家后学习先王之道，又喜欢上了先王之道。
English: Therefore, when Zixia saw Zengzi, he was thin and fat at the same time. Zengzi felt strange and asked Zixia what the reason was. Zixia replied: I went out to see that wealth can bring a lot of happiness, so I also want to be rich and happy; after returning home, I learned the way of the first king, and I liked the way of the first king.

古文：两者心战，故臞；先王之道胜，故肥。 
现代文：这二者在内心世界经常交锋，所以被折腾得瘦削不堪；最后是先王之道取得胜利，所以又胖了。 
English: These two often fight in the inner world, so they are tossed and turned until they are too thin; in the end, the former king's way is victorious, so they are fat again.

古文：推此志，非能贪富贵之位，不便侈靡之乐，直宜迫性闭欲，以义自防也。
现代文：推究一下子夏的话的意思，就可知道子夏并不是不贪图富贵、不喜欢侈糜享受，只是在压抑自己的情感、封闭自己的欲望，用 义 来防范自我。
English: If we investigate the meaning of Zixia's words, we can know that Zixia is not a person who does not covet wealth, does not like luxury and enjoyment, but only suppresses his emotions, closes his desires, and uses righteousness to guard himself.

古文：虽情心郁殪，形性屈竭，犹不得已自强也，故莫能终其天年。
现代文：这样心情忧闷压抑、人体本性扭曲畸形，就是这样还是不停强制压抑自我，所以不能享尽天年。
English: Such a depressed and depressed mood, the distorted and deformed nature of the human body, is still forced to suppress the self, so you can't enjoy life to the full.

古文：若夫至人，量腹而食，度形而衣；容身而游，适情而行；余天下而不贪，委万物而不利；处大廓之宇，游无极之野；登太皇，冯太一，玩天地于掌握之中，夫岂为贫富肥臞哉！
现代文：而通达道体的至人就不是这样了，他们是根据饭量来进食，衡量体形来穿衣，容身而游、适情而行，遗弃天下而不贪得、抛弃万物而不求利，身处空旷无垠的天宇、遨游无边无际的区域，登上太空、凭藉天道，玩天地于手掌之中，哪里还会为贫富而伤神得一会儿瘦一会儿胖！
English: However, this is not the case for those who are well-versed in the Dao and Bodhisattvas. They eat according to the amount of food they eat, dress according to their body shape, swim according to their body shape, walk according to their moods, abandon the world without greed, abandon all things without seeking profit, live in the boundless sky, travel in the boundless region, ascend into space, use the Tao of Heaven, and play with the world in the palm of their hands. Where else will they grieve for the rich and become thin and fat for a while!

古文：故儒者非能使人弗欲，而能止之；非能使人勿乐，而能禁之。
现代文：所以儒家是不能使人没有欲念，而只会禁止人的欲念；不能使人没有享乐的念头，而只会禁止人的享乐。
English: Therefore, Confucianism cannot make people free from desires, but only prohibit people's desires; it cannot make people free from the idea of enjoyment, but only prohibit people's enjoyment.

古文：夫使天下畏刑而不敢盗，岂若能使无有盗心哉！
现代文：这种让天下人只是因畏惧刑罚才不敢偷盗的做法，哪比得上使人从根本上不萌生偷盗念头的做法。
English: This practice of making people in the world afraid to steal only because of the fear of punishment is nothing compared to the practice of making people fundamentally not have the idea of stealing.

古文：越人得髯蛇，以为上肴，中国得而弃之无用。
现代文：越人得到一条大蛇，会当成一顿上等的佳肴，而中原人得到一条大蛇，会因无吃蛇的习惯而将其扔弃掉。
English: If the Viets get a big snake, they will treat it as a first-class delicacy, while if the Central Plains people get a big snake, they will throw it away because they are not used to eating snakes.

古文：故知其无所用，贪者能辞之；不知其无所用，廉者不能让也。
现代文：所以，如果知道一种东西没有用处的话，即使是一位相当贪婪的人也会推辞不要的；如果不知道一种东西没有用处的话，即使是一位相当廉洁的人也不能辞让给他人。
English: Therefore, if you know that something is not useful, even a very greedy person will refuse to take it; if you do not know that something is not useful, even a very clean person cannot give it to others.

古文：夫人主之所以残亡其国家，损弃其社稷，身死于人手，为天下笑，未尝非为非欲也。
现代文：有些国君之所以弄到国破家亡、毁掉社稷、身死于他人之手、被人耻笑的地步，没有不是因为过分追求非分的欲望而造成的。
English: The reason why some sovereigns brought their countries to ruin, destroyed the social order, died at the hands of others, and were ridiculed, was not caused by the desire to excessively pursue non-division.

古文：夫仇由贪大钟之赂而亡其国，虞君利垂棘之壁而擒其身，献公艳骊姬之美而乱四世，桓公甘易牙之和而不以时葬，胡王淫女乐之娱而亡上地。
现代文：仇由贪得大钟的贿赂而亡了自己的国家；虞国国君贪得垂棘之璧而被晋军俘虏；晋献公贪恋骊姬的美貌而导致晋国四世动乱；齐桓公贪食易牙奉献的美味佳肴而死后尸体腐烂不能按时下葬；胡王沉溺于女乐之娱而丢失了大批上好的土地。
English: Enmity killed his own country by coveting the bribe of the big clock; Yu Guo Guojun coveted the thorny gem and was captured by the Jin army; Jin Xiangong coveted the beauty of Huan Hui and led to the turmoil of the fourth generation of Jin; Qi Huangong devoured the delicious delicacies of I Chao Xian and the corpse rotted after death and could not be buried on time; King Hu indulged in the entertainment of women and lost a large number of good land.

古文：使此五君者，适情辞余，以己为度，不随物而动，岂有此大患哉？
现代文：假如这五位君主都能安适自己的本性，辞弃那些非分的欲望，以自己正常的本性需求为限度，不随外界物质的诱惑而动贪心，哪会造成这样大的祸害？
English: If these five sovereigns could all be at ease with their own natures, give up those unreasonable desires, limit themselves to their normal natural needs, and not be tempted by external material temptations to greed, what would cause such a great disaster?

古文：故射者非矢不中也，学射者不治矢也，御者非辔不行，学御者不为辔也。
现代文：所以说，射击没有箭就射不中目标，但学射箭者的根本不在于制箭；驾御没有辔就驾不了御，但学驾御者的根本不在于制辔。
English: Therefore, shooting without arrows will not hit the target, but learning archery is not at all about controlling arrows; driving without a crossbow will not drive, but learning to drive is not at all about controlling crossbows.

古文：知冬日之箑、夏日之裘，无用于己，则万物之变为尘埃矣。
现代文：懂得扇子在冬天、皮衣在夏天对自己没有用处的道理，那么没有用的万物在你看来也变得像尘埃一样渺小，微不足道。
English: If you understand the reason why a fan is of no use to you in winter and a fur coat in summer, then all useless things become as small and insignificant as dust in your eyes.

古文：故以汤止沸，沸乃不止，诚知其本，则去火而已矣。
现代文：所以舀汤来制止水沸，水是仍然会沸腾不止的；而只有懂得 根本 这词的含意，才能使水停止沸腾，那就是只需撤去炉膛里的火，即抽去火源，这水沸就停止了。
English: Therefore, if you make soup to stop water from boiling, the water will continue to boil; but only if you understand the meaning of the word "fundamental" can you stop the water from boiling, that is, you only need to remove the fire in the furnace, that is, remove the fire source, and the water will stop boiling.

