古文：昔者，梁君将攻邯郸，使将军庞涓，带甲八万至于茬丘。
现代文：从前，魏国国君惠王准备攻打赵国都城邯郸，便派出大将庞涓统领八万大军到达卫国的茬丘。
English: Once upon a time, King Hui of the State of Wei was preparing to attack the capital of the State of Zhao, Chengdu, and he sent General Pang Jun to lead an army of 80,000 to the defense of the State of Zhao.

古文：齐君闻之，使将军忌子，带甲八万至竞。庞子攻卫□□□。
现代文：齐国国君威王得到消息后，立即派大将田忌带领八万军兵开到齐国和卫国边境。庞涓攻打卫国，形势十分危急。
English: After receiving the news, the king of the State of Qi, King Wei, immediately sent General Tian Qi to lead 80,000 soldiers to the border of the State of Qi and the State of Wei. Pang Yi attacked the State of Wei, and the situation was very critical.

古文：将军忌卫□□，救与曰： 若不救卫，将何为？ 
现代文：田忌将军要救卫国，但有种种难以克服的困难，一时无计可施，便和谋士孙膑商议。孙膑指出，不能直接去救卫国。
English: General Tagi wanted to save the country, but there were various difficulties that were difficult to overcome, and there was nothing that could be done at the time, so he discussed it with his adviser Sun Yat-sen. Sun Yat-sen pointed out that it was not possible to go directly to save the country.

古文：孙子曰： 请南攻平陵。
现代文：田忌一听，十分着急，便问道： 如果不去救卫国，那怎么办呢？ 
English: Upon hearing this, Tabi was very anxious and asked, "If we don't go to save the country, what should we do?"

古文：平陵，其城小而县大，人众甲兵盛，东阳战邑，难攻也。
现代文：孙膑说： 请将军南下攻打魏国的平陵。平陵城池虽小，但管辖的地区很大，人口众多，兵力很强，是东阳地区的战略要地，艰难攻克。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Ask the general to go south to attack Pingling in Wei. Although Pingling is small, the area under its jurisdiction is large, the population is large, and the military force is strong. It is a strategic place in the Dongyang region, and it is difficult to conquer.

古文：吾将示之疑。
现代文：我军可以故意在这里用兵，以便迷惑敌军。
English: Our army can deliberately use soldiers here in order to confuse the enemy.

古文：吾攻平陵，南有宋，北有卫，当途有市丘，是吾粮途绝也，吾将示之不知事。 
现代文：我军攻打平陵，平陵南面是宋国，北面是卫国，进军途中还要经过魏国的市丘，我军的运粮通道很容易被切断。
English: Our army attacked Pingling. To the south of Pingling is the Song Dynasty, to the north is the Qing Dynasty. On the way into the army, we had to pass through the city hill of Wei. Our army's grain transportation channel was easily cut off.

古文：于是徙舍而走平陵。
现代文：我们要故意装出不知道这种危险。 
English: We have to pretend that we don't know about this danger.

古文：陵，忌子召孙子而问曰： 事将何为？ 
现代文：田忌接受了孙膑的计谋，拔营向平陵进军。
English: Tabi accepted Sun Yat-sen's stratagem and marched to Pingling.

古文：孙子曰： 都大夫孰为不识事？ 
现代文：接近平陵时，田忌又请来孙膑，问道： 该怎么攻打平陵呢？ 孙膑说： 大将军，您难道还不明白我们的计谋吗？ 
English: When approaching Pingling, Tian Bo invited Sun Yat-sen and asked, "How should we attack Pingling?" Sun Yat-sen said, "General, do you still not understand our strategy?"

古文：曰： 齐城、高唐。 
现代文：田忌说： 分兵齐城、高唐。 
English: Tabi said, "Split the army and go to Qicheng and Gaotang."

古文：孙子曰： 请取所二大夫□以□□□臧□□都横卷四达环涂□横卷所□阵也。
现代文：孙膑说： 请派两位将领带兵从齐城、高唐攻击环涂地区魏军。环涂是魏军屯驻之地。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Please send two generals and their troops from Qicheng and Gaotang to attack the Wei army in the Huantui region. Huantui is the place where the Wei army is stationed."

古文：环涂甲之所处也。吾未甲劲，本甲不断。环涂击柀其后，二大夫可杀也。 
现代文：我军派出前锋发起猛烈进攻，主力部队却按兵不动。环涂的魏军必定会反击，两位将军可能打败仗，甚至牺牲。 
English: Our army sent out the forwards to launch a fierce attack, but the main force did not move. The encircled Wei army will certainly counterattack, and the two generals may lose the battle or even die.

古文：于是段齐城、高唐为两，直将蚁附平陵。
现代文：于是，田忌分兵两路，从齐城、高唐直向平陵进击。
English: As a result, Tianmei's soldiers split into two groups, marching from Qicheng and Gaotang straight to Pingling.

古文：夹环涂夹击其后，齐城、高唐当术而大败。
现代文：果然不出孙膑所料，夹、环涂两处魏军从后面夹击齐军，两路齐军大败。
English: As expected by Sun Yat-sen, the Wei army clamped and encircled the Qi army from behind in two places, and the Qi army suffered a major defeat in both directions.

古文：将军忌子召孙子问曰： 吾攻平陵不得而亡齐城、高唐，当术而厥。
现代文：田忌急忙召孙膑问计： 我军没攻下平陵，反而失去齐城、高唐，遭受很大损失，现在该怎么办呢？ 
English: Tian Bo hurriedly summoned Sun Yat-sen to inquire: Our army did not capture Pingling, but lost Qicheng and Gaotang, and suffered great losses. What should we do now?

古文：事将何为？ 孙子曰： 请遣轻车西驰梁郊，以怒其气。
现代文：孙膑说： 请立即派出轻装战车，往西直捣魏国都城城郊，激怒庞涓。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Please immediately dispatch light-armed chariots to the west and ram into the outskirts of the capital city of Wei to infuriate Pang Yong."

古文：分卒而从之，示之寡。 
现代文：庞涓必定回兵救魏国国都。
English: Pang Xuan must return to save the capital of Wei.

古文：于是为之。庞子果弃其辎重，兼趣舍而至。
现代文：我军只需分出少数兵力和庞涓交战，显出我军兵力单薄的样子。 
English: Our army only needs to separate a small number of troops and a huge number of combatants, which shows that our army's strength is thin.

古文：孙子弗息而击之桂陵，而擒庞涓。
现代文：田忌一一照办。庞涓果然丢掉辎重，昼夜兼程回救魏都。孙膑带领主力部队在桂陵埋伏，一举战胜庞涓。
English: Tianyi did the same. Pang Xuan really threw away his heavy baggage and made the round-the-clock trip back to save the Wei capital. Sun Xuan led the main force to ambush in Guilin and defeated Pang Xuan in one fell swoop.

古文：故曰，孙子之所以为者尽矣。
现代文：所以，人们都赞叹孙膑如此用兵，真是绝妙到极致了。
English: Therefore, people all admire Sun Yat-sen's use of soldiers in this way, which is really the ultimate in excellence.

