古文：皇后列传汉因秦制，帝之祖母曰太皇太后，母曰皇太后，妃曰皇后，余则多称夫人，随世增损，非如《周礼》有夫人、嫔妇、御妻之定数焉。
现代文：汉代因袭秦代制度，皇帝的祖母称太皇太后，母亲称皇太后，妃子称皇后，其余的多称为夫人，随着时代增减，不像《周礼》有夫人、嫔妇、御妻的固定数额。
English: In the Han Dynasty, which followed the Qin Dynasty system, the emperor's grandmother was called the grand empress dowager, his mother was called the empress dowager, his concubine was called the empress, and the rest were mostly called the wife. They increased and decreased with the times, unlike the fixed number of wives, concubines, and wives in the Zhouli.

古文：魏晋相因，时有升降，前史言之具矣。
现代文：魏晋相因循，时而有升降，前朝史书记载得很详细了。
English: The Wei and Jin dynasties followed suit, with occasional promotions and demotions. The records of the former dynasty are very detailed.

古文：魏氏王业之兆虽始于神元，至于昭成之前，世崇俭质，妃嫱嫔御，率多阙焉，惟以次第为称。
现代文：魏氏帝王业绩的起点虽然从神元皇帝开始，但直到昭成皇帝以前，世代崇尚俭约质朴，妃嫔宫女，大都缺略，仅以次序加以称呼。
English: Although the starting point of the performance of the Wei Dynasty emperors began with the Emperor Shenyuan, but until the Emperor Zhaoxing, the generation advocated frugality and simplicity, and the concubines were mostly omitted, and were only called in order.

古文：而章、平、思、昭、穆、惠、炀、烈八帝，妃后无闻。
现代文：而章、平、思、昭、穆、惠、炀、烈八位皇帝，妃后没有记载。
English: However, there is no record of the eight emperors and empresses Zhang, Ping, Si, Zhao, Mu, Hui, Yan, and Li.

古文：太祖追尊祖妣，皆从帝谥谥为皇后，始立中宫，余妾或称夫人，多少无限，然皆有品次。
现代文：太祖追尊祖母，都依皇帝谧号称为皇后，开始设立中宫，其余侍妾有的称为夫人，多少没有限额，但都有品级。
English: The great-grandfather and great-grandmother were both called empress according to the emperor's posthumous name, and began to set up the middle palace. Some of the remaining concubines were called the wife, and there was no limit, but they all had a rank.

古文：世祖稍增左右昭仪及贵人、椒房、中式数等，后庭渐已多矣。
现代文：世祖逐渐增加左右昭仪和贵人、椒房、中式几个等级，后宫的人已渐渐多了。
English: The founder of the world gradually increased the ranks of Zhao Yi, Guijin, Jiao Fang, and Chinese style, and the number of people in the harem has gradually increased.

古文：又魏故事，将立皇后必令手铸金人，以成者为吉，不成则不得立也。
现代文：另外魏国旧例，将要立皇后必定使预立者亲手铸造金人，以铸成的为吉利，不能铸成的就不能立。
English: In addition, in the old case of the Wei Dynasty, those who wanted to establish a queen must make the pre-established person cast a golden man with their own hands. It was lucky to be cast, and if it could not be cast, it could not be established.

古文：又世祖、高宗缘保母劬劳之恩，并极尊崇之义，虽事乖典礼，而观过知仁。
现代文：又世祖、高宗因乳母辛勤抚养的恩德，都奉上尊崇的名义，虽然事情违背礼制，但看其错误的性质可以知道其为人很仁义。
English: In addition, the grandfather of the world, Gaozong, because of the nanny's hard work to raise him, are all honored in the name of respect. Although the matter is against the etiquette, it can be seen from its wrong nature that he is a very benevolent person.

古文：高祖改定内官，左右昭仪位视大司马，三夫人视三公，三嫔视三卿，六嫔视六卿，世妇视中大夫，御女视元士。
现代文：高祖修改规定内官，左右昭仪地位比照大司马，三夫人比照三公，三嫔比照三卿，六嫔比照六卿，世妇比照中大夫，御女比照元士。
English: Gao Zu revised the regulations of the inner officer, the status of the left and right Zhaoyi was compared with that of the grand steward, the third wife was compared with that of the third prince, the third concubine was compared with that of the third noble, the sixth concubine was compared with that of the sixth noble, the concubine was compared with that of the middle doctor, and the concubine was compared with that of the first noble.

古文：后置女职，以典内事。
现代文：后来设置女官，掌管宫内事务。
English: Later, a lady-in-waiting was put in charge of the palace affairs.

古文：内司视尚书令、仆。
现代文：内司比照尚书令、仆射。
English: The secretary of the interior followed Shang's orders and fired.

古文：作司、大监、女侍中三官视二品。
现代文：作司、大监、女侍中三个官职比照二品官。
English: Of the three official posts, that of secretary, superintendent, and chambermaid, the second-class post is the most important.

古文：监，女尚书，美人，女史、女贤人、书史、书女、小书女五官，视三品。
现代文：监，女尚书，美人，女史、女贤人、书史、书女、小书女五个官职，比照三品官。
English: Supervisor, woman scholar, beauty, woman historian, woman sage, book historian, book woman, small book woman are the five official posts, according to the three grade officials.

古文：中才人、供人、中使女生、才人、恭使宫人视四品，春衣、女酒、女飨、女食、奚官女奴视五品。
现代文：中才人、供人、中使女生、才人、恭使宫人比照四品官，春衣、女酒、女飨、女食、奚宫女奴比照五品官。
English: The middle-ranking person, the serving person, the middle-ranking girl, the high-ranking person, and the high-ranking palace person are compared according to four grades, and the spring dress, the female wine, the female eunuch, the female food, and the female slave of the imperial palace are compared according to five grades.

古文：神元皇后窦氏，没鹿回部大人宾之女也。
现代文：神元皇后窦氏，是没鹿回部大人窦宾的女儿。
English: Dou, the divine empress, is the daughter of Dou Bin, an adult from Muxu District.

古文：宾临终，诫其二子速侯、回题，令善事帝。
现代文：窦宾去世前，告诫他的两个儿子速侯、回题，命二人好好地侍奉皇帝。
English: Before Dou Bin died, he admonished his two sons to hasten and retrace their steps, and ordered them to serve the emperor well.

古文：及宾卒，速侯等欲因帝会丧为变，语颇漏泄。帝闻之，知其终不奉顺，乃先图之。
现代文：等窦宾去世，速侯等人想利用皇帝参加丧礼时发动变乱，计谋稍有泄露，皇帝听到后，知道他们终究不会驯服顺从，就先设法对付他们。
English: After Doubin's death, some people, such as Suo Hou, wanted to use the emperor's participation in the funeral to start a riot. The plot was slightly leaked, and after the emperor heard it, he knew that they would not be tamed and obedient after all, so he tried to deal with them first.

古文：于是伏勇士于宫中，晨起以佩刀杀后，驰使告速侯等，言后暴崩。
现代文：于是在宫中埋伏勇士，早晨起来用佩刀杀死皇后，派使者乘快马告诉速侯等人，说皇后突然逝世。
English: So he ambushed the warriors in the palace, got up in the morning to kill the queen with a saber, and sent an envoy on a fast horse to tell the vassals and others that the queen had died suddenly.

古文：速侯等惊走来赴，因执而杀之。
现代文：速侯等人惊讶赶来奔丧，乘机拘捕而杀了他们。
English: Hayakawa and others were surprised and rushed to the funeral, taking the opportunity to arrest and kill them.

古文：文帝皇后封氏，生桓、穆二帝，早崩。
现代文：文帝皇后封氏，生桓、穆二位皇帝，逝世很早。
English: Emperor Wen and Empress Fu, two emperors in their lifetimes, died early.

古文：桓帝立，乃葬焉。
现代文：桓帝即位，才加以安葬。
English: Emperor Kante ascended to the throne, and only then was he buried.

古文：高宗初，穿天渊池，获一石铭，称桓帝葬母封氏，远近赴会二十余万人。
现代文：高宗初年，挖掘天渊池，获得一方石碑铭文，其中称桓帝安葬母亲封氏，远近奔赴会葬的有二十多万人。
English: In the first year of Gaozong's reign, he excavated Tianyuan Pond and obtained a stone inscription, which said that Emperor Huan had buried his mother, Fu, and that more than 200,000 people from near and far had rushed to attend the funeral.

古文：有司以闻，命藏之太庙。
现代文：有关官员禀报后，高宗命令收藏到太庙。
English: After receiving a false report from the officials concerned, Gaozong ordered the collection to be taken to the Grand Temple.

古文：次妃兰氏，生二子，长子曰蓝，早卒；次子，思帝也。
现代文：次妃兰氏，生下两个儿子，长子叫做元蓝，死得很早；次子，就是思帝。
English: The second wife, Lan, gave birth to two sons. The first son, named Yuan Lan, died very early; the second son, named Sidi.

古文：桓帝皇后祁氏，生三子，长曰普根，次惠帝，次炀帝。
现代文：担童皇后空陋，生下三个儿子，长子叫萱担，第二个是盘查，第三个是握童。
English: The child-carrying queen, Emptiness, gave birth to three sons. The eldest son was called Shitan, the second was Inventory, and the third was Grip.

古文：平文崩，后摄国事，时人谓之女国。
现代文：平文皇帝逝世，皇后代理国家事务，当时人称之为女国。
English: After the death of Emperor Pingwen, the empress acted as the representative of state affairs. At that time, it was called a woman's country.

古文：后性猛忌，平文之崩，后所为也。
现代文：皇后性情凶猛猜忌，芒塞皇童的逝世，就是皇后下的毒手。
English: The queen's temperament is fiercely suspicious, and the death of Mengsai Wang Tong is the evil hand of the queen.

古文：平文皇后王氏，广宁人也。
现代文：平文皇后王氏，是广宁人。
English: The Wang clan, the Empress of Pingwen, is from Guangning.

古文：年十三，因事入宫，得幸于平文，生昭成帝。
现代文：十三岁时，因事进入宫廷，受到平文皇帝的宠幸，生下昭成帝。
English: At the age of thirteen, he entered the court due to an accident, and was favored by Emperor Pingwen, and was born Emperor Zhaoxing.

古文：平文崩，昭成在衤强衤保。
现代文：平文皇帝逝世，昭成帝还是婴儿。
English: Emperor Pingwen passed away, Emperor Zhaocheng was still a baby.

古文：时国有内难，将害诸皇子。
现代文：当时国家有内难，将要杀害众皇子。
English: At that time, the country was in an internal crisis, and the princes were about to be killed.

古文：后匿帝于裤中，惧人知，咒曰： 若天祚未终者，汝便无声。 
现代文：皇后将皇帝藏在裤子中，担，人知道，祷告说： 如果天运没有完结，你就不要出声。 
English: The empress hid the emperor in her trousers, worried that people would find out, and prayed: "If the heavenly fortune is not complete, you should not speak out.

古文：遂良久不啼，得免于难。
现代文：于是长时间不哭，得以避免祸难。
English: As a result, she did not cry for a long time and was able to avoid disaster.

古文：昭成初欲定都于氵垒源川，筑城郭，起宫室，议不决。
现代文：昭成帝起初想在堡则定都，修筑城墙，建造宫室，议而未决。
English: At first, Emperor Zhaocheng wanted to establish the capital in the castle, build the city walls, and construct the palace, but the matter was not resolved.

古文：后闻之，曰： 国自上世，迁徙为业。
现代文：皇后听说后，说： 国家自从前代，以游牧为生。
English: When the Empress heard about this, she said, "Since the previous generation, the country has made a living from nomadism.

古文：今事难之后，基业未固。
现代文：现在处于国事变乱之后，基业不稳固。
English: Now, after the national upheaval, the foundation is not stable.

古文：若城郭而居，一旦寇来，难卒迁动。 
现代文：如果筑城池居住，一旦敌寇前来，难以仓猝转移。 
English: If you live in Tsukushiike, once the enemy comes, it is difficult to make a sudden transfer.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：烈帝之崩，国祚殆危，兴复大业，后之力也。
现代文：烈帝逝世后，国运危险，复兴宏大业绩，是皇后的力量。
English: After the death of the emperor, the national movement was in danger, and the grand performance of revival was the strength of the empress.

古文：十八年崩，葬云中金陵。
现代文：十八年逝世，安葬在书生金堕。
English: He died at the age of eighteen and was buried in Shousheng Jinpo.

古文：太祖即位，配飨太庙。
现代文：左担即位后，让她在太庙配祭。
English: After her great-grandfather ascended the throne, she was allowed to serve as a sacrificial offering at the Imperial Temple.

古文：昭成皇后慕容氏，元真之女也。
现代文：昭成皇后慕容氏，是元真的女儿。
English: Akechi's Empress Murong is the daughter of Motozane.

古文：初，帝纳元真妹为妃，未几而崩。
现代文：当初，皇帝娶元真的妹妹为妃，没过多久就逝世了。
English: At first, the emperor married Yuan Zhen's younger sister as his concubine, but she died not long after.

古文：元真复请继好。遣大人长孙秩逆后，元真送于境上。
现代文：元真又请求继续和好，派遣大人长孙秩迎接皇后，元真送到边境。
English: Motozane also requested to continue the reconciliation, sending his eldest grandson, Chichibu, to meet the Empress, while Motozane was sent to the border.

古文：后至，有宠，生献明帝及秦明王。
现代文：皇后到达，得到宠爱，生下献明帝和秦明王。
English: The empress arrived, was favored, and gave birth to Emperor Xianming and King Qinming.

古文：后性聪敏多知，沉厚善决断，专理内事，每事多从。
现代文：皇后禀性聪明敏捷知识丰富，沉着宽厚善于决断，专门处理宫内事务，每种主张多被采纳。
English: The empress is tenacious, clever, quick, knowledgeable, calm, generous, and good at making decisions. She specializes in handling internal affairs, and most of her proposals have been adopted.

古文：初，昭成遣卫辰兄悉勿祈还部落也，后戒之曰： 汝还，必深防卫辰。辰奸猾，终当灭汝。 
现代文：当初，昭成帝派遣卫辰的哥哥悉勿祈返回部落，皇后告诫悉勿祈说： 你回去，一定要高度防备卫辰，卫辰奸诈狡猾，终究要消灭你。 
English: At first, Emperor Zhao Chengde sent Wei Chen's elder brother Shishuo to return to the tribe. The empress warned Shishuo, saying: "If you go back, you must be highly guarded against Wei Chen. Wei Chen is treacherous and cunning and will eventually destroy you."

古文：悉勿祈死，其子果为卫辰所杀，卒如后言。
现代文：悉勿祈死后，他的儿子果然被卫辰杀死，结果如皇后所说。
English: After Shibuseki's death, his son was indeed killed by Wei Chen, and the result was as the empress said.

古文：建国二十三年崩。
现代文：建国二十三年逝世。
English: He died in the 23rd year after the founding of the nation.

古文：太祖即位，配飨太庙。
现代文：太祖即位后，让她在太庙配祭。
English: After her great-grandfather ascended the throne, she was allowed to serve as a sacrificial offering at the Imperial Temple.

古文：献明皇后贺氏，父野于，东部大人。
现代文：献明皇后贺氏，父亲叫野干，是东部大人。
English: The queen of the dedication, He, whose father is called Nogan, is an eastern adult.

古文：后少以容仪选入东宫，生太祖。
现代文：皇后年轻时以容貌仪表选进束宫，生下太祖。
English: When she was young, the empress was chosen to enter the dowry palace based on her appearance, and gave birth to her great-grandfather.

古文：苻洛之内侮也，后与太祖及故臣吏避难北徙。
现代文：苻洛侵入境内，皇后和太祖以及旧臣属避难向北迁徙。
English: Xiaoluo invaded the territory, and the empress and the great-grandfather as well as the former vassals took refuge and migrated north.

古文：俄而，高车奄来抄掠，后乘车与太祖避贼而南。
现代文：不久，高车突然来掳掠，皇后坐车和太祖躲避贼寇向南走。
English: Not long after, the cart suddenly came to plunder, and the queen took the cart and the great-grandfather to avoid the bandits and go south.

古文：中路失辖，后惧，仰天而告曰： 国家胤胄，岂止尔绝灭也！惟神灵扶助。 
现代文：中途车子失去销钉，皇后畏惧，朝天祷告说： 国家的后裔，难道在遣裹灭绝吗希望神灵扶助。 
English: Halfway through the journey, the car lost its pins, and the queen was afraid. She prayed to the heavens, saying: "O descendants of the nation, are you being sent into extinction? I hope the gods will help you."

古文：遂驰，轮正不倾。
现代文：于是奔驰，车轮端正而不倾倒。
English: As a result, the vehicle continued to drive without tipping over.

古文：行百余里，至七介山南而得免难。
现代文：行走一百多里，到七介山南面而得以避免祸难。
English: He walked more than a hundred miles to the south of Qizhe Mountain and was able to avoid the calamity.

古文：后刘显使人将害太祖，帝姑为显弟亢泥妻，知之，密以告后，梁眷亦来告难。
现代文：后来刘显派人将要谋害太祖，皇帝的姑姑是刘显弟弟亢垄的妻子，知道逭件事，秘密地告诉皇后，梁眷也来报告祸难。
English: Later, Liu Xian sent someone to assassinate his grandfather. The emperor's aunt, who was the wife of Liu Xian's younger brother Yan Reng, knew about this and secretly told the empress. Liang's relatives also came to report the calamity.

古文：后乃令太祖去之。
现代文：皇后于是命令太祖离开。
English: The empress then ordered the great-grandfather to leave.

古文：后夜饮显使醉。
现代文：皇后夜晚请刘显喝酒使他醉倒。
English: On the night of the Queen's birthday, Liu Xian was invited to drink and he got drunk.

古文：向晨，故惊厩中群马，显使起视马。
现代文：到天亮，故意惊动圈中的马匹，刘显派人起来看马。
English: At dawn, he purposely startled the horses in the ring, and Liu Xian sent someone to watch the horses.

古文：后泣而谓曰： 吾诸子始皆在此，今尽亡失。
现代文：皇后哭着对他说： 我的几个儿子开始都在逭裹，现在都不见了。
English: The queen wept and said to him, "All my sons were born in swaddling clothes, and now they are no more.

古文：汝等谁杀之？ 
现代文：你们谁杀了他们? 
English: Which one of you killed them?

古文：故显不使急追。太祖得至贺兰部，群情未甚归附。
现代文：所以刘显不许派人急追，太祖得以到达贺兰部。
English: Therefore, Liu Xian was not allowed to send someone in hot pursuit, and the great-grandfather was able to reach Helanbu.

古文：后从弟外朝大人悦，举部随从，供奉尽礼。
现代文：人心不很归附，皇后的堂弟外朝大人贺悦率领部落跟随，每事以礼供奉。
English: People's hearts are not very attached, and the queen's cousin, He Yue, an adult of the Outer Court, led the tribe to follow, offering everything with courtesy.

古文：显怒，将害后。后夜奔亢泥家，匿神车中三日。亢泥举室请救，乃得免。
现代文：刘显发怒，将要杀害皇后，皇后夜晚投奔亢婆家中，在神车中躲藏了三天，亢垄全家求情，才得以免除祸难。
English: Liu Xian was so angry that he was about to kill the empress. The empress rushed to the house of Zhou Bao in the evening and hid in the holy carriage for three days. The whole family of Zhou Reng pleaded for mercy before they could be spared from the disaster.

古文：会刘显部乱，始得亡归。
现代文：遇到刘显部落混乱，才得以逃回。
English: Just as Liu Xian's tribe was experiencing civil unrest, He took the opportunity to flee back.

古文：后后弟染干忌太祖之得人心，举兵围逼行宫。后出谓染干曰： 汝等今安所置我，而欲杀吾子也？ 
现代文：后来皇后的弟弟染干忌惮太祖得人心，起兵围困行宫，皇后出来对染干说： 你们现在将我放在什么位置上，而要杀我的儿子? 
English: Later, Empress Dowager's younger brother, Emperor Dogen, won the hearts of the people and besieged the palace. Empress Dowager came out and said to Emperor Dogen, "What kind of position are you putting me in now, wanting to kill my son?

古文：染干惭而去。
现代文：染干惭愧地离去。
English: Somesho left very ashamed.

古文：后后少子秦王觚使于燕，慕容垂止之。
现代文：后来皇后的小儿子秦王元觚出使燕国，慕容垂留下了他。
English: Later, the queen's youngest son, Qin Wang Rong, sent an envoy to Yan Province, but Murong Du left him in Yan Province.

古文：后以觚不返，忧念寝疾，皇始元年崩，时年四十六，祔葬于盛乐金陵。
现代文：皇后因元觚不返回，忧虑挂念而患病，皇始元年逝世，这年四十六岁，合葬在盛乐的金陵。
English: The empress did not return to Yuancheng due to her worries, and fell ill. She died in the first year of the Emperor's reign, at the age of forty-six, and was buried together with her husband in the Golden Mausoleum in Shenle.

古文：后追加尊谥，配飨焉。
现代文：后来追加尊谧，配祭太庙。
English: Later, the honorific title "Son" was added, and it became part of the temple's offerings.

古文：道武皇后慕容氏，宝之季女也。
现代文：巡皇后基查旦，是基查宜的小女儿。
English: The patrol queen, Kichadan, is the youngest daughter of Kichayi.

古文：中山平，入充掖庭，得幸。
现代文：土山平定后，进入后宫，得到宠幸。
English: After Tsuchiyama was pacified, he entered the harem and became a favorite.

古文：左丞相卫王仪等奏请立皇后，帝从群臣议，令后铸金人，成，乃立之，告于郊庙。
现代文：左丞相旺五堡等人奏请立皇后，皇帝依从群臣的商议，命皇后铸造金人，铸成后，就立了她，到郊庙祭告。
English: Zuojo (Minister of the Left) Wang Wubo and others petitioned for the appointment of an empress. The emperor followed the advice of his ministers and ordered the empress to cast a golden man. After casting, he appointed her and went to the suburban temple to make the announcement.

古文：封后母孟为漂阳君。
现代文：封皇后的母亲垂旦为迁荡星。
English: The mother of the crowned empress has become a wandering star.

古文：后崩。
现代文：后来逝世。
English: He later died.

古文：道武宣穆皇后刘氏，刘眷女也。
现代文：道武宣穆皇后刘氏，是刘眷的女儿。
English: Dowager Empress Dowager Liu is the daughter of Liu Yan.

古文：登国初，纳为夫人，生华阴公主，后生太宗。
现代文：登国初年，娶为夫人，生下华阴公主，后来生太宗。
English: In the first year after his arrival in Japan, he married and gave birth to Princess Hua Yin, and later to Taizong.

古文：后专理内事，宠待有加，以铸金人不成，故不得登后位。
现代文：皇后专门处理宫内事务，很得恩宠优待，因铸造金人不成功，所以不能登上皇后位。
English: The empress dealt exclusively with the affairs of the palace, and was treated very favourably. However, she was not able to ascend the throne because the casting of the gold was not successful.

古文：魏故事，后宫产子将为储贰，其母皆赐死。
现代文：魏国旧例，后宫生下儿子将要立为储君，储君的母亲都被赐令自杀。
English: In the old case of Wei, the son born in the harem would be appointed as the crown prince, and the mother of the crown prince was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：太祖末年，后以旧法薨。
现代文：太祖末年，皇后因旧法令逝世。
English: In the last years of her grandfather's life, the empress died because of the old law.

古文：太宗即位，追尊谥号，配飨太庙。
现代文：太宗即位，追尊谧号，在太庙配祭。
English: Emperor Taizong's enthronement, the celebration of Emperor Taizong's posthumous name, and the festival at the Imperial Temple.

古文：自此后宫人为帝母，皆正位配飨焉。
现代文：从此以后宫女做了皇帝的母亲，都以皇后地位配祭。
English: From then on, the concubine became the mother of the emperor, and all of them received offerings as empresses.

古文：明元昭哀皇后姚氏，姚兴女也，兴封西平长公主。
现代文：明元昭哀皇后姚氏，是姚兴的女儿，姚兴封她为西平长公主。
English: Queen Yao of Mingyuan Zhaoyuan is the daughter of Yao Xing. Yao Xing crowned her as the eldest princess of Xiping.

古文：太宗以后礼纳之，后为夫人。
现代文：太宗用皇后的礼仪娶她，后来做夫人。
English: Emperor Taizong married her with the etiquette of an empress, and she later became his wife.

古文：后以铸金人不成，未升尊位，然帝宠幸之，出入居处，礼秩如后焉。
现代文：皇后因为铸造金人不成功，没有升上尊位，然而皇帝宠爱她，出入居住，礼仪级别如同皇后。
English: The empress did not succeed in minting gold and did not rise to the highest rank, but the emperor loved her, went in and out of the residence, and the etiquette level was the same as the empress.

古文：是后犹欲正位，而后谦让不当。
现代文：此后皇帝还想让她登皇后位，而皇后谦让不担任。
English: After that, the emperor also wanted her to ascend to the throne of empress, but the empress humbly refused to serve.

古文：泰常五年薨，帝追恨之，赠皇后玺绶，而后加谥焉。
现代文：泰常五年逝世，皇帝追悔，赠予皇后玉玺丝带，然后加授谧号。
English: Five years after the death of Emperor Taizang, the emperor repented and presented the empress with a jade ribbon, after which she was given the title of empress.

古文：葬云中金陵。
现代文：将她安葬在云中的金陵。
English: She was buried in a golden mausoleum in the clouds.

古文：明元密皇后杜氏，魏郡鄴人，阳平王超之妹也。
现代文：明元密皇后杜氏，魏郡邺县人，是阳平王杜超的妹妹。
English: Mingyuanmi Queen Du, a native of Weixian County, is the younger sister of Yangping King Du Chao.

古文：初以良家子选入太子宫，有宠，生世祖。
现代文：起初以清白人家的子女选进太子宫，得到宠幸，生下世祖。
English: At first, the children of the Qing and white families were selected to enter the prince's womb, were favored, and gave birth to the ancestor.

古文：及太宗即位，拜贵嫔。
现代文：等到太宗即位，任命为贵嫔。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a noble.

古文：泰常五年薨，谥曰密贵嫔，葬云中金陵。
现代文：泰常五年逝世，谧号为密贵嫔，安葬在云中的金陵。
English: Taizang died five years later, his posthumous name was Miguiguo, and he was buried in the golden mausoleum in the clouds.

古文：世祖即位，追尊号谥，配飨太庙。
现代文：世祖即位，追尊名位谧号，在太庙配祭。
English: The ancestor of the world ascends the throne, the name of the emperor is celebrated, and a festival is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：又立后庙于鄴，刺史四时荐祀。
现代文：又在邺县立太后庙，刺史四季祭祀。
English: In addition, the Empress Dowager's Temple was established in Handan County, and the four seasons of the four seasons were worshiped.

古文：以魏郡太后所生之邑，复其调役。
现代文：因魏郡是太后出生的地区，免除租调徭役。
English: Yingwei County is the region where the empress dowager was born, and is exempt from the rent transfer duty.

古文：后甘露降于庙庭。
现代文：后来甘美的雨露降落庙庭。
English: Later, the luscious rain and dew fell on the temple courtyard.

古文：高祖时，相州刺史高闾表修后庙。诏曰： 妇人外成，理无独祀，阴必配阳以成天地，未闻有莘之国，立太姒之飨。
现代文：高祖时，相州刺史高闾上奏疏修建皇后庙，下诏说： 妇人由外姓而入，没有单独祭祀的道理，阴一定要配合阳来成就天地，没听说有莘的国家，设立了太姒的祭祀。
English: At the time of Gao Zu, the Emperor Gaozong of the State Council of the People's Republic of China ordered the construction of a temple for the empress. The next edict said: "Women enter the temple by virtue of their maiden names. There is no reason for a separate sacrifice. Yin must cooperate with Yang to achieve heaven and earth. Countries that have not heard of Yao have set up a sacrifice for Tai Yao."

古文：此乃先皇所立，一时之至感，非经世之远制。便可罢祀。 
现代文：这是先帝所立的庙，是一时之间的真实情感，不是治理国家的长远制度，可以罢除祭祀。 
English: This is a temple built by the former emperor. It is a moment of true emotion, not a long-term system for governing the country. The sacrificial rites can be abolished.

古文：先是，世祖保母窦氏，初以夫家坐事诛，与二女俱入宫。
现代文：在这以前，世祖的乳母宝氏，当初由于丈夫家人因事获罪受死刑，和二个女儿一起入宫。
English: Prior to this, the grandfather's wet nurse, Bao, who was originally sentenced to death for the crimes of her husband's family, entered the palace with her two daughters.

古文：操行纯备，进退以礼。
现代文：她操行纯洁周全，以礼节进退。
English: She is pure and perfect in her ways, and goes forth and returns with propriety.

古文：太宗命为世祖保母。
现代文：太宗命令她做世祖的乳母。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered her to be the nanny of the ancestor.

古文：性仁慈，勤抚导。
现代文：她性格仁厚慈爱，善于抚养引导。
English: Her character is kind and loving, and she is good at raising and guiding.

古文：世祖感其恩训，奉养不异所生。
现代文：世祖感激她的恩情教导，侍奉她与亲生母亲没有不同。
English: The patriarch was grateful for her kind teaching, and served her no differently than his own mother.

古文：及即位，尊为保太后，后尊为皇太后，封其弟漏头为辽东王。
现代文：等到即位，尊崇她为保太后，后来尊崇为皇太后，封她的弟弟漏头为辽东王。
English: When she ascended the throne, she was revered as the Dowager Empress Dowager, later revered as the Empress Dowager, and her brother was crowned as the King of Liaodong.

古文：太后训厘内外，甚有声称。
现代文：太后训导内外，十分有声望。
English: The Empress Dowager's teachings are very popular both at home and abroad.

古文：性恬素寡欲，喜怒不形于色，好扬人之善，隐人之过。
现代文：性情恬静朴素少欲望，喜怒不显露在脸色上，喜爱称扬别人的善行，隐匿别人的过失。
English: His disposition is quiet and simple, he has few desires, his emotions do not show on his face, he likes to praise the good deeds of others and hide the mistakes of others.

古文：世祖征凉州，蠕蠕吴提入寇，太后命诸将击走之。
现代文：世祖征讨凉州，蠕蠕吴提进犯，太后命令众将领出击赶走他。
English: The ancestor conquered Liangzhou, and Wu Ti invaded, and the empress dowager ordered the generals to drive him away.

古文：真君元年崩，时年六十三。
现代文：真君元年逝世，遣年六十三岁。
English: Mankun died in the first year of the year, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：诏天下大临三日，太保卢鲁元监护丧事，谥曰惠，葬崞山，从后意也。
现代文：韶令天下哭吊三天，太保卢鲁元督察料理丧事，谧号为惠，安葬在崞山，是依从太后的意愿。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered the whole country to mourn for three days. Grandpa Lu Luyuan, the inspector of the Imperial Household Agency, prepared the funeral, and was buried in Shaoshan, in accordance with the wishes of the Empress Dowager.

古文：初，后尝登崞山，顾谓左右曰： 吾母养帝躬，敬神而爱人，若死而不灭，必不为贱鬼。
现代文：当初，太后曾登上崞山，回头对左右的人说： 我抚养皇帝，敬重神灵而热爱人民，如果死后灵魂不灭，必定不会做低贱的鬼。
English: At the beginning, the empress dowager once ascended Lushan Mountain, turned around and said to the people around her: I raised the emperor, respected the gods and loved the people. If the soul does not die after death, it will certainly not be a lowly ghost.

古文：然于先朝本无位次，不可违礼以从园陵。
现代文：但我在先朝本来没有名位次第，不能违背礼仪跟随进陵园。
English: However, I did not have a position in the previous government, so I could not follow the etiquette into the cemetery.

古文：此山之上，可以终托。 
现代文：造座山上，可以安葬。 
English: He can be buried on the mountain.

古文：故葬焉。
现代文：所以葬在遣裹。
English: That's why he was buried in a coffin.

古文：别立后寝庙于崞山，建碑颂德。
现代文：另外在崞山建立太后的陵寝庙宇，树碑称颂功德。
English: In addition, a mausoleum for the empress dowager was built in Shaoshan, and a tree monument was erected to praise her merits.

古文：太武皇后赫连氏，赫连屈丐女也。
现代文：太武皇后赫连氏，是赫连屈丐的女儿。
English: The Taiwu Empress Heren is the daughter of Heren Kugyeong.

古文：世祖平统万，纳后及二妹俱为贵人，后立为皇后。
现代文：世祖平定铲堕，娶皇后和她两个妹妹都为贵人，后来立为皇后。
English: The founder of the world put down the rebellion, married the empress and her two younger sisters, both of whom were nobles, and later became the empress.

古文：高宗初崩，祔葬金陵。
现代文：直塞初年逝世，合葬在金堕。
English: He died in the first year of Naosei and was buried in Jinpu.

古文：太武敬哀皇后贺氏，代人也。
现代文：太武敬哀皇后贺氏，是代郡人。
English: Emperor Taibu paid tribute to Empress He, a representative of the county.

古文：初为夫人，生恭宗。
现代文：起初是夫人，生下尽塞。
English: At first it was my wife, who was exhausted after giving birth.

古文：神元年薨，追赠贵嫔，葬云中金陵。
现代文：妪元年逝世，追赠为贵嫔，安葬在云生的金建。
English: He died in the first year of the Heian period, was posthumously awarded the title of noble, and was buried in Jinjian, Yunnan.

古文：后追加号谥，配飨太庙。
现代文：后来追加名位谧号，在太庙配祭。
English: Later, the name of the place was added, and the festival was held in the Great Temple.

古文：景穆恭皇后郁久闾氏，河东王毗妹也。
现代文：常氏量垄恭皇后郁久闾氏，是回墓王郁久间毗的妹妹。
English: She was a younger sister of Ikuhisa, the queen of the Jō clan, and a close relative of Ikuhisa, the king of tomb raiding.

古文：少以选入东宫，有宠。
现代文：年轻时因选拔进入东宫，受到宠幸。
English: When he was young, he was selected to enter the East Palace and was favored.

古文：真君元年，生高宗。
现代文：真叁元年，生下直塞。
English: In the first year of the year of the Rooster, Naosetsu was born.

古文：世祖末年薨。
现代文：坐垦末年逝世。
English: He died at the end of his term.

古文：高宗即位，追尊号谥。
现代文：产塞即位，追尊名位谧号。
English: The enthronement of the Empress Dowager Cixi and the enthronement of the Emperor of China.

古文：葬云中金陵，配飨太庙。
现代文：安葬在云中的金陵，在太庙配祭
English: Buried in the clouds of Jinling, enshrined in the Great Temple

古文：高宗乳母常氏，本辽西人。
现代文：高宗的乳母常氏，本来是辽西人。
English: Gao Zong's wet nurse, Ms. Chang, was originally from western Liaoning.

古文：太延中，以事入宫，世祖选乳高宗。
现代文：太延年间，因事进入宫廷，世祖挑选她哺育高宗。
English: During the Taiyan era, she entered the court due to an incident, and the ancestor selected her to nurse Gaozong.

古文：慈和履顺，有劬劳保护之功。
现代文：她慈祥和顺，有辛勤保护的功劳。
English: She is kind and gentle, and is credited with diligent protection.

古文：高宗即位，尊为保太后，寻为皇太后，谒于郊庙。
现代文：高宗即位后，尊崇她为保太后，不久尊崇为皇太后，在郊庙晋见。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, she was revered as the Protector of the Empress Dowager, and soon revered as the Empress Dowager. They met at a suburb temple.

古文：和平元年崩，诏天下大临三日，谥曰昭，葬于广宁磨笄山，俗谓之鸣鸡山，太后遗志也。
现代文：和平元年逝世，诏令天下哭吊三日，谧号为昭，安葬在广宁磨笄山，俗语称为鸣鸡山，是太后的遗愿。
English: She died in the first year of the Heian period, and the imperial edict ordered the world to mourn her for three days. Her posthumous name was Zhao, and she was buried in Muzang Mountain in Guangning, known as Mingji Mountain. This was the last wish of the empress dowager.

古文：依惠太后故事，别立寝庙，置守陵二百家，树碑颂德。
现代文：依照惠太后的旧例，另外建立陵寝庙宇，设置守卫陵园人户二百家，树立石碑颂扬功德
English: In accordance with the old practice of Empress Dowager Hui, a mausoleum-temple was also built, 200 households were set up to guard the mausoleum garden, and a stone monument was erected to praise the merits

古文：文成文明皇后冯氏，长乐信都人也。
现代文：文成文明皇后冯氏，是长乐信都人。
English: Ms. Feng, the Empress of Wencheng Civilization, is a native of Changle Xindu.

古文：父朗，秦、雍二州刺史、西城郡公。母乐浪王氏。
现代文：父亲冯朗，是秦、雍二州刺史、西城郡公，母亲是乐浪人王氏。
English: His father, Feng Lang, was a member of the Qin, Yong Erzhou and Xicheng dynasties, and his mother was a member of the Wang clan.

古文：后生于长安，有神光之异。
现代文：皇后出生在长安，有神光的异彩。
English: Mr. Feng was born in Chang'an. When he was born, the whole house was filled with divine light.

古文：朗坐事诛，后遂入宫。
现代文：冯朗因事获罪被诛杀，皇后于是进宫。
English: Feng Lang was beaten to death for his crime, and the empress then entered the palace.

古文：世祖左昭仪，后之姑也，雅有母德，抚养教训。
现代文：世祖的左昭仪，是皇后的姑姑，一向有女性美德，对皇后抚养教导。
English: Zuo Zhaoyi, the ancestor of the world, is the aunt of the empress. She has always had feminine virtues and taught the empress how to raise children.

古文：年十四，高宗践极，以选为贵人，后立为皇后。
现代文：十四岁时，高宗登位，被选为贵人，后来立为皇后。
English: At the age of fourteen, Gao Zong ascended to the throne, was selected as a noble, and later became the empress.

古文：高宗崩，故事：国有大丧，三日之后，御服器物一以烧焚，百官及中宫皆号泣而临之。
现代文：高宗逝世，按旧例：国家有大丧事，三天以后，皇帝穿戴使用的车马器物全部加以焚烧，百官和皇后都围绕着火堆痛哭流涕。
English: Gaozong died, according to the old example: the country had a great funeral. Three days later, all the chariots and horses used by the emperor were burned, and all the officials and queens were crying bitterly around the fire.

古文：后悲叫自投火中，左右救之，良久乃苏。
现代文：皇后悲伤地呼叫着自己投入火中，左右的人救出她，很久才苏醒过来。
English: The Empress cried out sadly and threw herself into the fire. People around her rescued her, but it took a long time for her to wake up.

古文：显祖即位，尊为皇太后。
现代文：显祖即位，尊崇皇后为皇太后。
English: Emperor Xianzu ascended the throne, and the empress was revered as empress dowager.

古文：丞相乙浑谋逆，显祖年十二，居于谅暗，太后密定大策，诛浑，遂临朝听政。
现代文：丞相乙浑谋反，显祖年仅十二岁，居住在守丧的小屋中，太后秘密定下大计，诛杀乙浑，于是临朝听政。
English: The chancellor, Yi Hun, plotted a rebellion. Emperor Xuanzong was only twelve years old and lived in a hut for mourners. The empress dowager secretly made a plan to kill Yi Hun, and thus the imperial court listened to the government.

古文：及高祖生，太后躬亲抚养。
现代文：等到高祖出生，太后亲自抚养。
English: When Gao Zu was born, the empress dowager personally raised him.

古文：是后罢令，不听政事。
现代文：此后免除制令，不处理政事。
English: After that, he was exempted from making orders and did not deal with political affairs.

古文：太后行不正，内宠李弈。显祖因事诛之，太后不得意。
现代文：太后行为不端正，在宫内宠爱李弈，显祖藉故诛杀李弈，太后不满意。
English: The empress dowager behaved improperly, she favored Li Yi in the palace, Xian Zu killed Li Yi by force, and the empress dowager was not satisfied.

古文：显祖暴崩，时言太后为之也。
现代文：显祖突然逝世，当时人说是太后谋害的。
English: When Emperor Xianzu died suddenly, it was said that the Empress Dowager had plotted his death.

古文：承明元年，尊曰太皇太后，复临朝听政。
现代文：承明元年，尊崇太后为太皇太后，又临朝听政。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen honored Feng as the great empress dowager, and she again came to the imperial court to listen to politics.

古文：太后性聪达，自入宫掖，粗学书计。
现代文：太后禀性聪颖练达，自进宫后，粗通文墨计算。
English: The empress dowager was very clever and accomplished, and after she entered the imperial court, she became fluent in writing and calculating.

古文：及登尊极，省决万机。
现代文：等到登上尊位，处理各种事务。
English: Wait until you ascend the throne to deal with various matters.

古文：高祖诏曰： 朕以虚寡，幼纂宝历，仰恃慈明，缉宁四海。欲报之德，正觉是凭，诸鸷鸟伤生之类，宜放之山林。
现代文：高祖下诏说： 我德行才能薄弱，幼年继承大位，依赖太后的仁慈圣明，安定四海，要报答她的恩德，凭藉着洞达佛理，所有伤害生灵的猛禽，应该放回山林。
English: Emperor Gaozong said: I am weak in virtue, I am too young to inherit the throne, I rely on the benevolence of the empress dowager to keep the four seas stable, I want to repay her kindness, with the help of the Buddha, all the birds of prey that harm living beings should be released back into the mountains and forests.

古文：其以此地为太皇太后经始灵塔。 
现代文：在这片土地上为太皇太后修建佛塔。 
English: On this land, a pagoda was built for the great empress dowager.

古文：于是罢鹰师曹，以其地为报德佛寺。
现代文：于是罢除鹰师曹，以其地域建报德佛寺。
English: As a result, he dismissed the eagle teacher and built a Buddhist temple in his area.

古文：太后与高祖游于方山，顾瞻川阜，有终焉之志。因谓群臣曰： 舜葬苍梧，二妃不从。
现代文：太后和高担在友山游览，观望山，有死后安葬在这裹的心愿，于是对群臣说： 舜安葬在苍梧山，两个妃子不随从。
English: The empress dowager and Gaotang toured Yu Mountain and looked at the mountain, and had a wish to be buried here after death, so they said to the courtiers:  buried in Gowu Mountain, two concubines do not follow.

古文：岂必远祔山陵，然后为贵哉！
现代文：难道一定要远远地合葬在陵墓，然后方显得尊贵吗?
English: Do they have to be buried together in a mausoleum far away, so that the emperor can look dignified?

古文：吾百年之后，神其安此。 
现代文：我死之后，坟就建在逭裹。 
English: After my death, the grave was built in a cocoon.

古文：高祖乃诏有司营建寿陵于方山，又起永固石室，将终为清庙焉。
现代文：高祖于是诏令有关官员在方山修筑陵墓，又建永固石室，将最终作为祭庙。
English: Gaozu then issued an imperial edict ordering the relevant officials to build a mausoleum in Fangshan, and also built a permanent stone room, which will eventually serve as a temple.

古文：太和五年起作，八年而成，刊石立碑，颂太后功德。
现代文：太和五年开始修建，八年修成，刻石立碑，颂扬太后的功德。
English: It was built in five years and completed in eight years, and a stone monument was carved here to praise the merits of the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后以高祖富于春秋，乃作《劝戒歌》三百余章，又作《皇诰》十八篇，文多不载。
现代文：太后因高祖年纪尚轻，于是撰写《劝戒歌》三百多篇，又撰写《皇诰》十八篇，文字多不收载。
English: Due to Gaozu's young age, the empress dowager wrote more than three hundred "exhortation songs" and eighteen "imperial edicts."

古文：太后立文宣王庙于长安，又立思燕佛图于龙城，皆刊石立碑。
现代文：太后在长安建立燕宣王庙，又在龙城建立思燕佛图，都刻石立碑。
English: The empress dowager built a temple of King Wenxuan in Chang'an and "Siyan Buddha" in Longcheng, both of which are inscribed on stone monuments.

古文：太后又制：内属五庙之孙，外戚六亲缌麻，皆受复除。
现代文：太后又定令，家族内五庙的子孙，外戚中服总麻丧服的亲属，都得以免除赋役。
English: The empress dowager also decreed that the descendants of the five temples in the family, and the relatives of the general funeral service in the maternal relatives, were all exempted from the service.

古文：性俭素，不好华饰，躬御缦缯而已。
现代文：性情俭约朴素，不喜好华丽的服饰，仅穿素色的丝织品而已。
English: She is frugal and simple-minded, dislikes flashy clothing, and only wears plain-colored silk.

古文：宰人上膳，案裁径尺，羞膳滋味减于故事十分之八。
现代文：掌管膳食的官员送上膳食，几案不过直径一尺，膳食品类比旧例减少了十分之八。
English: The officials in charge of meals have increased the number of meals sent. Some cases are only one foot in diameter, and the number of meals has been reduced by eight-tenths compared to the previous case.

古文：太后尝以体不安，服庵子。
现代文：太后曾经因身体不适，服用青蒿的籽。
English: The empress dowager once took artemisia seeds for physical discomfort.

古文：宰人昏而进粥，有蝘蜓在焉，后举匕得之。
现代文：膳食官员昏乱而送上稀粥，有只壁虎在裹面，太后举起羹,舀出来。
English: The diet officer was in a daze and served thin gruel. A gecko was wrapping the noodles. The empress dowager scooped up the soup and scooped it out.

古文：高祖侍侧，大怒，将加极罚。太后笑而释之。
现代文：高祖在旁边侍奉，大发脾气，将要动用死刑，太后笑着释放了膳食官员。
English: Gaozu, who was serving next to her, lost his temper and threatened to use the death penalty. The empress dowager laughed and released the meal officer.

古文：自太后临朝专政，高祖雅性孝谨，不欲参决，事无巨细，一禀于太后。
现代文：自从太后临朝专擅朝政，高祖性情孝顺谨慎，不参与决断，事情不分大小，全部禀报给太后。
English: Since the empress dowager was exclusively in charge of the imperial government, Gao Zu's disposition was filial and prudent, he did not participate in decision-making, and reported all matters, big and small, to the empress dowager.

古文：太后多智略，猜忍，能行大事，生杀赏罚，决之俄顷，多有不关高祖者。
现代文：太后很有智慧谋略，猜忌残忍，能够做大事，生杀赏罚，在片刻之间就决断，多不征求高担的意见。
English: The empress dowager is very wise in strategy, suspicious of cruelty, able to do great things, reward and punish life and death, decide in a moment, and do not solicit high-burden opinions.

古文：是以威福兼作，震动内外。
现代文：所以作威作福，震动宫廷内外。
English: Therefore, arrogance is a blessing, shaking both inside and outside the court.

古文：故杞道德、王遇、张祐、苻承祖等拔自微阉，岁中而至王公；王叡出入卧内，数年便为宰辅，赏赉财帛以千万亿计，金书铁券，许以不死之诏。
现代文：因此杞道德、王遇、退茧、董丞塑等人从低贱的宦官中提拔，一年之中就到王公；王散出入于宫中，数年间就成为宰辅，赏赐财物布帛以千万上亿计数，赐予金书铁券，给与不受死刑的韶书。
English: As a result, Zou Daode, Wang Yu, Wu Zi, Dong Zhengpu and others were promoted from low-ranking eunuchs and became princes within a year; Wang San entered and left the palace, and became the chief aide in a few years. He was rewarded with tens of millions of yuan in cloth and property, and was given gold and iron certificates, and was given a rare book that was not subject to the death penalty.

古文：李冲虽以器能受任，亦由见宠帷幄，密加锡赉，不可胜数。
现代文：李冲虽然以才能受任用，也由于在宫内受宠，秘密给予他赏赐，不计其数。
English: Although Li Chong was appointed for his talent, he was also favored by the palace, which secretly gave him countless rewards.

古文：后性严明，假有宠待，亦无所纵。
现代文：皇后性情严厉精明，她对所宠爱的人，也不加以放纵。
English: The empress is stern and shrewd, and she does not indulge her favorites.

古文：左右纤介之愆，动加捶楚，多至百余，少亦数十。
现代文：左右的人犯了很小的过错，动不动就责打，多至一百多棒，少也几十棒。
English: People around him made very small mistakes, and were beaten at every turn, up to more than a hundred lashes, and sometimes even dozens of lashes.

古文：然性不宿憾，寻亦待之如初，或因此更加富贵。
现代文：然而仝陆不记仇，不久又对待别人如当初一样，有的因此更加富有尊贵。
English: However, Hao Lu did not take revenge and soon treated others the same way as before, and some of them became more honorable as a result.

古文：是以人人怀于利欲，至死而不思退。
现代文：所以人人怀着获利的欲望，到死都不想退避。
English: So everyone, with the desire to make a profit, does not want to retreat until death.

古文：太后曾与高祖幸灵泉池，燕群臣及籓国使人、诸方渠帅，各令为其方舞。高祖帅群臣上寿，太后忻然作歌，帝亦和歌。遂命群臣各言其志，于是和歌者九十人。
现代文：太后曾和直担前往灵泉池，宴请群臣和藩国的使者、各地的魁首，各让他们表演地方舞蹈直祖率领群臣祝寿，太后欣然吟诗作歌，皇帝也作歌相和，于是命群臣各谈自己的心意，这时作歌相和的有九十人。
English: The empress dowager once went to the Lingquan Pool with the emperor to invite the courtiers and the envoys of the domain and the leaders of various regions to a banquet. Each of them was asked to perform a local dance to celebrate the birthday of the direct ancestor and lead the courtiers. The empress dowager was happy to sing a song, and the emperor also sang a song harmony. Therefore, she ordered the courtiers to talk about their own thoughts. At that time, there were ninety people who sang a song harmony.

古文：太后外礼民望元丕、游明根等，颁赐金帛舆马。每至褒美叡等，皆引丕等参之，以示无私。
现代文：太后对外尊重深孚众望的元丕、游明根等人，颁发赏赐金银布帛和车马，每到褒扬王敬等人时，都招来元丕等人参与其中，以显示没有私心。
English: The empress dowager respected the likes of Yuan Xuan and You Minggen, who were popular with the people of Shenfu, and rewarded them with gold and silver cloth and chariots and horses. Whenever she came to praise Wang Jing and others, she invited Yuan Xuan and others to participate, to show that she was not selfish.

古文：又自以过失，惧人议己，小有疑忌，便见诛戮。
现代文：又自以为有过失，畏惧别人议论自己，稍微有猜疑顾忌，就被杀戮。
English: She also knows that she is at fault, she is afraid that others will talk about her, so as long as there is a little doubt about others, she will immediately kill that person.

古文：迄后之崩，高祖不知所生。
现代文：直到太后逝世，高祖不知自己的生母。
English: Until the death of the empress dowager, Gao Zu did not know his birth mother.

古文：至如李、李惠之徒，猜嫌覆灭者十余家，死者数百人，率多枉滥，天下冤之。
现代文：至于如李欣、李惠之类，受猜疑嫌隙而灭亡的有十多家，死的几百人，大都冤枉，天下人为他们感到冤屈。
English: As for people like Li Shujin and Li Hui, more than a dozen of their entire families were exterminated because of suspicion, and hundreds of people died, most of whom were innocent people who were wrongfully killed, so the whole world felt wronged for them.

古文：十四年，崩于太和殿，时年四十九。
现代文：十四年，在太和殿逝世，这年四十九岁。
English: Fourteen years later, at the age of forty-nine, he passed away in Taihe-den.

古文：其日，有雄雉集于太华殿。
现代文：遣天，有些雄性野鸡聚集在太华殿。
English: Some male pheasants gathered at the Taihua Hall.

古文：高祖酌饮不入口五日，毁慕过礼。
现代文：高祖五天茶饭不进口，悲哀思念超过礼仪。
English: Gao Zu did not import tea and rice for five days, and his sad thoughts exceeded etiquette.

古文：谥曰文明太皇太后，葬于永固陵。日中而反，虞于鉴玄殿。
现代文：谧号为文明太皇太后。安葬在永固陵，高祖中午返回，在鉴玄殿祭奠。
English: Her posthumous name was the Great Empress Dowager of Civilization. She was buried in the Yonggu Mausoleum, and Gaozu returned at noon to pay his respects at the Jianyuan Hall.

古文：诏曰： 尊旨从俭，不申罔极之痛；称情允礼，仰损俭训之德。
现代文：下诏说： 如遵从旨意丧事从简，不能表达我无穷的哀思；如尽情依礼，则损伤节俭办丧事的德行。
English: The next edict said: "If you follow the will and make the funeral simple, you cannot express my infinite sorrow; if you follow the etiquette to the best of your ability, you will damage the virtue of frugality in handling the funeral.

古文：进退思惟，倍用崩感。
现代文：反复思考，倍加悲痛。
English: Repeated thoughts, doubled sorrow.

古文：又山陵之节，亦有成命：内则方丈，外裁掩坎；脱于孝子之心有所不尽者，室中可二丈，坟不得过三十余步。
现代文：另外陵墓的规格，也有既定的规定，内层一丈见方，外部仅仅遮住墓室，遣对孝子的心是不能满足的，墓室中可达到二丈。坟墓不能超过三十多步。
English: In addition to the specifications of the mausoleum, there are also established regulations. The inner layer is one-story square, and the outside only covers the burial chamber. The heart of the deceased cannot be satisfied, and the burial chamber can reach two-story height. The grave cannot exceed more than thirty steps.

古文：今以山陵万世所仰，复广为六十步。
现代文：现在因陵墓是万代所景仰，再增为六十步。
English: Now, because the mausoleum is admired by all generations, it has been increased to sixty steps.

古文：辜负遗旨，益以痛绝。
现代文：辜负临终旨意，更加悲痛欲绝。
English: He lived up to his dying wish, and became even more grief-stricken.

古文：其幽房大小，棺椁质约，不设明器。至于素帐、缦茵、瓷瓦之物，亦皆不置。
现代文：墓室的大小，棺椁的质朴俭约，不设陪葬物品，以至素帐、坐褥、瓷器瓦器之类物品，也都不设置。
English: The size of the burial chamber, the simplicity of the coffin, the lack of funerary objects, and even the absence of items such as caskets, cushions, and porcelain crockery.

古文：此则遵先志，从册令，俱奉遗事。
现代文：这都遵照先人志愿，依从册令，一起奉行丧事。
English: All of this is in accordance with the wishes of the ancestors, in accordance with the regulations, and in accordance with the funeral rites.

古文：而有从有违，未达者或以致怪。
现代文：遣愿有依从的有违背的，不理解的人或许感到奇怪。
English: There is obedience and disobedience in making vows, which may seem strange to those who do not understand.

古文：梓宫之里，玄堂之内，圣灵所凭，是以一一奉遵，仰昭俭德。
现代文：棺椁的裹面，墓室的内部，是圣明灵魂的居所，所以一一奉行遵守，昭明俭约的德行。
English: The shroud of the coffin, the interior of the burial chamber, is the abode of the holy soul, so one by one, they observe and practice the virtue of frugality.

古文：其余外事，有所不从，以尽痛慕之情。
现代文：其余外部的事，有的不依从，是表达悲痛思念的心情。
English: The rest of the external things, some non-compliance, is to express the mood of grief and longing.

古文：其宣示远近，著告群司，上明俭诲之善，下彰违命之失。 
现代文：现宣告远近，遍告各官府，上表明教诲节俭的美德，下显示违背遣令的过失。 
English: It is now being announced far and wide, all government offices are being notified, the virtue of teaching and thrift is shown on the top, and the fault of violating the dispatch order is shown on the bottom.

古文：及卒哭，孝文服衰，近臣从服，三司已下外臣衰服者，变服就练，七品已下尽除即吉。
现代文：等到百日祭礼后，孝文帝穿丧服，左右的侍臣跟着穿，三公以下穿丧服的朝廷官员，改穿一周年祭礼时所穿的白绢丧服，七品以下官员除去丧服穿平服装。
English: After the hundred-day festival, Emperor Xiaowen wore mourning clothes, and the attendants on his right and left followed suit. The court officials under the three princes who wore mourning clothes changed to the white mourning clothes worn at the first anniversary festival, and the officials under the seventh grade removed the mourning clothes and wore plain clothes.

古文：设祔祭于太和殿，公卿已下始亲公事。
现代文：在太和殿设置合祭，公卿以下官员开始料理公事。
English: The closing ceremony was held at Taiwa-den, and officials from court nobles on down began their official duties.

古文：高祖毁瘠，绝酒肉，不内御者三年。
现代文：高祖哀伤过度而消瘦，断绝酒肉，三年不与后妃同房。
English: Gao Zu was sad and excessively thin, cut off meat and wine, and did not share a room with the empress for three years.

古文：初，高祖孝于太后，乃于永固陵东北里余，豫营寿宫，有终焉瞻望之志。
现代文：当初，高祖孝顺太后，就在永固陵东北一百多里的地方，预先营建陵墓，有死后陪伴太后的心愿。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu Xiaojun, the empress dowager, built a mausoleum in advance in a place more than a hundred miles northeast of Yonggu Mausoleum, with the wish to accompany the empress dowager after death.

古文：及迁洛阳，乃自表缠西以为山园之所，而方山虚宫至今犹存，号曰 万年堂 云。
现代文：等到迁往洛阳，就自己指定湣水西面作为建筑陵墓的地方，而方山空着的陵墓至今还保存着，称作 万年堂 。
English: When he moved to Luoyang, he designated the west side of Surabaya as the place to build a mausoleum, and the empty mausoleum in Fangshan has been preserved to this day, known as the Hall of a Thousand Years.

古文：文成元皇后李氏，梁国蒙县人，顿丘王峻之妹也。
现代文：主盛元皇后奎旦，梁周墓瑟人，是堕旦王李峻的妹妹。
English: The main Sheng Yuan Queen Kuidang, Liang Zhou tomb seer, is the sister of the fallen King Li Jun.

古文：后之生也，有异于常，父方叔恆言此女当大贵。
现代文：皇后出生时，有别于常人，父亲方叔常说这女儿将要大贵。
English: When the Empress was born, she was different from ordinary people. Her father, Fang Xiu, often said that this daughter would be very precious.

古文：及长，姿质美丽。
现代文：等到成人，姿容美丽。
English: By the time they are adults, their appearance is beautiful.

古文：世祖南征，永昌王仁出寿春，军至后宅，因得后。
现代文：世祖向南征讨，永昌王元仁出兵到寿春，军队到皇后的家，因之得到皇后。
English: The ancestor went to the south to fight, Yongchang Wang Yuanren sent troops to Shuchun, the army went to the queen's home, and thus got the queen.

古文：及仁镇长安，遇事诛，后与其家人送平城宫。
现代文：等到元仁镇守长安，遇事被杀，皇后和他家的人被押送到平城宫。
English: When the governor of Chang'an, Yuanren, was killed in an accident, the empress and her family were escorted to the Heijo Palace.

古文：高宗登白楼望见，美之，谓左右曰： 此妇人佳乎？ 
现代文：高宗登上白楼看见她，认为她很美丽，对身边的人说： 这个妇人美吗? 
English: Gao Zong went up to the White Tower, saw her, thought she was very beautiful, and said to the people around him: Is this woman beautiful?

古文：左右咸曰 然 。
现代文：身边的人都说： 美。 
English: People around me say: Beauty.

古文：乃下台，后得幸于斋库中，遂有娠。
现代文：就下楼台，皇后在旁室中得到高宗的宠幸，于是怀孕。
English: She went downstairs, and in the next room, the empress fell in love with Gao Zong, and became pregnant.

古文：常太后后问后，后云： 为帝所幸，仍有娠。 
现代文：常太后后来询问皇后，皇后说： 得到皇帝的宠幸，随后怀孕。 
English: The Empress Dowager later asked the Empress, and the Empress said, "I was favored by the Emperor, and then I became pregnant."

古文：时守库者亦私书壁记之，别加验问，皆相符同。
现代文：当时守护库房的人也私下在墙壁上记下遣件事，另外加以检验查问，都相符合。
English: At that time, the person guarding the warehouse also secretly wrote down the transfer matter on the wall, and also checked and questioned it, all of which were consistent.

古文：及生显祖，拜贵人。
现代文：等到生下显祖，任命为贵人。
English: When he was born, he was named a noble.

古文：太安二年，太后令依故事，令后具条记在南兄弟及引所结宗兄洪之，悉以付托。
现代文：太安二年，太后下令依照旧例赐令自杀，命皇后详细列举在南方的兄弟和所结拜的同宗的哥哥洪之，都加以托付。
English: In the second year of Taian, the empress dowager ordered him to commit suicide according to the old custom, and ordered the empress to enumerate in detail the brothers in the south and the brother of the same clan, Hong Zhi, whom he worshipped, and to entrust them to her.

古文：临诀，每一称兄弟，辄拊胸恸泣，遂薨。
现代文：到诀别时，每一称述兄弟，就捶胸痛哭，于是逝世。
English: When it was time to say goodbye, each of the brothers wept bitterly and died.

古文：后谥曰元皇后，葬金陵，配飨太庙。
现代文：后来追谧为元皇后，安葬在金陵，在太庙配祭。
English: Later, she became the former empress and was buried in the Jinling Mausoleum and enshrined in the Imperial Temple.

古文：献文思皇后李氏，中山安喜人，南郡王惠之女也。
现代文：卢这思皇后奎旦，土山叁喜人，是直登王奎蛊的女儿。
English: Lu Xun thought that Queen Quidan, the daughter of King Juntang, was a good person.

古文：姿德婉淑，年十八，以选入东宫。
现代文：她姿容美丽德行善良，十八岁时，被挑选进东宫。
English: She was beautiful, virtuous and kind. At the age of eighteen, she was selected to enter the Eastern Palace.

古文：显祖即位，为夫人，生高祖。
现代文：题担即位，任命为夫人，生下直狙。
English: Teitan ascended the throne, was appointed as his wife, and gave birth to Jitsugami.

古文：皇兴三年薨，上下莫不悼惜。
现代文：皇垒三年逝世，上下无不哀悼惋惜。
English: Emperor He died three years ago, and everyone was saddened and grieved.

古文：葬金陵。
现代文：安葬在金陆。
English: He was buried in Jinlu.

古文：承明元年追崇号谥，配飨太庙。
现代文：丞塱元年追尊名位谧号，在太庙配祭。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, a memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple in honor of His Eminence.

古文：孝文贞皇后林氏，平原人也。
现代文：孝文贞皇后林氏，是平原人。
English: Empress Xiaowenzheng of the Lin clan was from the plains.

古文：叔父金闾，起自阉官，有宠于常太后，官至尚书、平凉公。
现代文：叔父金阎，从宦官中得到提拔，得到常太后的宠信，官位到尚书、王凉公。
English: Uncle Jin Yan was promoted from the eunuchs and received the favor of the empress dowager, and his official rank was Shangshu and Wang Lianggong.

古文：金闾兄胜为平凉太守。
现代文：金闾的哥哥林胜担任平凉太守。
English: His brother Lin Sheng served as the governor of Pingliang.

古文：金闾，显祖初为定州刺史。
现代文：金间，显祖初年担任定州刺史。
English: Kinma, Henzo served as the first year of the history of Dingzhou.

古文：未几为乙浑所诛，兄弟皆死。
现代文：不久被乙浑诛杀，兄弟都死了。
English: Soon after, he was killed by Yihong, and his brothers all died.

古文：胜无子，有二女，入掖庭。
现代文：林胜没有儿子，有两个女儿，进入后宫。
English: Lin Sheng did not have a son, but had two daughters, who entered the harem.

古文：后容色美丽，得幸于高祖，生皇子恂。
现代文：皇后姿色美丽，受到高祖的宠幸，生下皇子五恂。
English: The beautiful queen was favored by Emperor Gaozu and gave birth to Prince Wuzhong.

古文：以恂将为储贰，太和七年后依旧制薨。
现代文：因元恂将立为太子，太和七年皇后依旧制度当自杀。
English: Due to the fact that Yuan Xuan will be crowned as the prince, the empress dowager and the seven-year-old empress still have to commit suicide.

古文：高祖仁恕，不欲袭前事，而禀文明太后意，故不果行。
现代文：高祖仁慈，不想因循前代旧例，而禀报文明太后，结果没如愿。
English: Gao Zu was benevolent and did not want to follow the precedent of the previous generation. However, he did not succeed in informing the Empress Dowager of the civilization.

古文：谥曰贞皇后，葬金陵。
现代文：谧号为贞皇后，安葬在金壁。
English: Her posthumous name was Empress Zhen, and she was buried in Jinbi.

古文：及恂以罪赐死，有司奏追废后为庶人。
现代文：等到五恂因罪被赐自杀，有关官员奏请追废皇后为平民。
English: After Wu Yao was sentenced to suicide for her crime, the relevant officials petitioned to expel the empress as a commoner.

古文：孝文废皇后冯氏，太师熙之女也。
现代文：芝塞废皇后遇氐，是太师蝎的女儿。
English: Zhisai, the former empress, was killed. She was the daughter of the grandmaster.

古文：太和十七年，高祖既终丧，太尉元丕等表以长秋未建，六宫无主，请正内位。
现代文：去和十七年，高祖完成丧礼后，太尉元丕等人上奏因长秋宫没建立，六宫没有主宰，请求确定皇后地位。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Heian period, after the funeral of Emperor Gaozu, Taiji Geng and others petitioned to confirm the status of the empress, because the Choshu Palace had not been established and the Rokugo Palace did not dominate.

古文：高祖从之，立后为皇后。
现代文：高祖听从建议，立冯氏为皇后。
English: Gao Zu listened to the suggestion and made Ms. Feng the empress.

古文：高祖每遵典礼，后及夫、嫔以下接御皆以次进。
现代文：高祖每事遵循典章礼制，皇后和夫人、嫔妃以下侍寝都按次序进宫。
English: Gao Zu followed the ceremonial system in everything. The empress, her consort, and concubines all entered the palace in order.

古文：车驾南伐，后留京师。
现代文：皇帝向南征伐，皇后留在京城。
English: The emperor marched south, but the empress stayed in the capital.

古文：高祖又南征，后率六宫迁洛阳。
现代文：高祖又向南征伐，皇后率领六宫迁移到洛阳。
English: Gao Zu marched south again, and the empress led the six palaces to Luoyang.

古文：及后父熙、兄诞薨，高祖为书慰以叙哀情。
现代文：到皇后的父亲冯熙、哥哥冯诞逝世后，高祖写信慰问来叙述哀伤的心情。
English: After the death of the empress's father, Feng Xi, and brother, Feng Guo, Gaozu wrote a letter of condolence to describe his sorrow.

古文：及车驾还洛，恩遇甚厚。
现代文：等到皇帝回到洛阳，恩遇十分优厚。
English: When the emperor returned to Luoyang, he was treated very well.

古文：高祖后重引后姊昭仪至洛，稍有宠，后礼爱渐衰。
现代文：高祖后来又招引皇后的姐姐昭仪到洛阳，逐渐受宠爱，对皇后的礼遇喜爱逐渐衰减。
English: Gaozhu later invited the queen's sister Zhao Yi to Luoyang, and she gradually fell in love with him. However, Gaozhu's love for the queen's courtesy gradually waned.

古文：昭仪自以年长，且前入宫掖，素见待念，轻后而不率妾礼。
现代文：昭仪自认为年岁大，而且先入宫廷，一向受到恩宠顾念，轻视皇后而不履行侍妾礼节。
English: Zhaoyi thought she was too old, and entered the court first. She had always been favored and cared for, despised the empress and did not perform the etiquette of a concubine.

古文：后虽性不妒忌，时有愧恨之色。
现代文：皇后虽然禀性不忌妒，但是时而有惭愧遣憾的神色。
English: Although the empress is not jealous, she sometimes has a look of shame and regret.

古文：昭仪规为内主，谮构百端。
现代文：昭仪谋划做皇后，千方百计地诬陷离间。
English: Shouyi schemed to become empress and did everything she could to sow discord.

古文：寻废后为庶人。
现代文：不久废黜皇后为平民。
English: Soon after, the deposed empress became a commoner.

古文：后贞谨有德操，遂为练行尼。
现代文：皇后忠贞谨慎有德操，于是做修行学佛的女尼。
English: Empress Zhongzheng was prudent and virtuous, so she became a nun to practice Buddhism.

古文：后终于瑶光佛寺。
现代文：后来死在瑶光佛寺。
English: He later died at the Luguang Buddhist Temple.

古文：孝文幽皇后，亦冯熙女。
现代文：垄塞幽皇后，也是遇墨的女儿。
English: Renzetsayu Queen, is also the daughter of Yume.

古文：母曰常氏，本微贱，得幸于熙，熙元妃公主薨后，遂主家事。
现代文：母亲是鲎垦，本来出身低贱，得到蛆的宠幸，蛆的元妃公主逝世后，就主管家中事务。
English: His mother was a concubine, originally from a lowly background, and was favored by the concubine. After the death of the concubine, the former princess of the concubine, she was in charge of family affairs.

古文：生后与北平公夙。
现代文：生下皇后和北王公遇垦。
English: After giving birth, the Empress and the North King met with death.

古文：文明太皇太后欲家世贵宠，乃简熙二女俱入掖庭，时年十四。
现代文：文明太皇太后想要家庭世代尊贵宠信，就挑选冯熙的两个女儿一起入宫，遣年十四岁。
English: When Empress Dowager Civilius wanted a family member to be a cherished favorite for generations, she chose Feng Xi's two daughters to enter the imperial palace together at the age of fourteen.

古文：其一早卒。
现代文：其中一个死得早。
English: One of their daughters died long ago.

古文：后有姿媚，偏见爱幸。未几疾病，文明太后乃遣还家为尼。高祖犹留念焉。
现代文：皇后有姿容媚态，格外受宠幸不久患病，文明太后于是派她回家为尼姑，宣祖还是留恋着她。
English: The empress had a graceful appearance and was especially favored, but fortunately she soon fell ill, so the Empress Dowager sent her home as a nun. Emperor Xuanzou still pined for her.

古文：岁余而太后崩。
现代文：一年多后太后逝世。
English: More than a year later, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：高祖服终，颇存访之。又闻后素疹痊除，遣阉官双三念玺书劳问，遂迎赴洛阳。
现代文：高担服丧期满，很是存心地访求她，又听说皇后过去的病已痊愈，派遣宦官双三念带皇帝书信慰问，于是迎往盗屋。
English: When Gaotang's mourning period was over, he very deliberately visited her, and when he heard that the empress's past illness had been cured, he sent two or three eunuchs to take the emperor's letter of condolence, and then went to the thief's house.

古文：及至，宠爱过初，专寝当夕，宫人稀复进见。
现代文：到达后，宠爱超过当初，当晚独自侍寝，宫女很少再进宫侍奉。
English: After her arrival, she was loved more than at first, and that night she slept alone. It was rare for a lady-in-waiting to enter the palace again.

古文：拜为左昭仪，后立为皇后。
现代文：任命为左昭仪，后来立为皇后。
English: She was named Zuo Zhaoyi and later became the empress.

古文：始以疾归，颇有失德之闻。高祖频岁南征，后遂与中官高菩萨私乱。
现代文：开始因病归来，颇有失去妇德的传闻，高祖连年南征，皇后就和宫廷官员高菩萨私下淫乱。
English: At the beginning of her return due to illness, there were rumors that she had lost her virtue. Gao Zu had been on the Southern Expedition for several years, and the empress had a private affair with the court official Gao Bodhisattva.

古文：及高祖在汝南不豫，后便公然丑恣，中常侍双蒙等为其心腹。
现代文：等到直担在边卢患病，皇后便公然露出丑态，中常侍双苤等人做她的心腹。
English: When Zhitang fell ill in Benlu, the empress openly showed her ugliness, and the middle attendant Shuangyao and others became her confidants.

古文：中常侍剧鹏谏而不从，愤惧致死。
现代文：中常侍剧鹏规劝不听从，愤恨畏惧而死。
English: Peng Jie did not listen to the advice of the middle-ranking attendant, and died of indignation and fear.

古文：是时，彭城公主，宋王刘昶子妇也，年少嫠居。
现代文：这时，彭城公主，是宋王窒她的儿媳妇，年轻寡居。
English: At this time, Princess Pengcheng, the daughter-in-law of King Song, was a young widow.

古文：北平公冯夙，后之同母弟也，后求婚于高祖，高祖许之。公主志不愿，后欲强之。
现代文：北平公冯夙，是皇后的同母弟弟，皇后向高祖为他求婚，高祖准许了公主立志不愿意，皇后要强迫她。
English: The Duke of Beiping, Feng Xuan, was the younger half-brother of the empress. The empress asked Gao Zu to marry him. Gao Zu allowed the princess to make up her mind, but the empress wanted to force her.

古文：婚有日矣，公主密与侍婢及家僮十余人，乘轻车，冒霖雨，赴悬瓠奉谒高祖，自陈本意，因言后与菩萨乱状。
现代文：离成婚仅几天了，公主秘密和侍婢以及家中仆人十多人，乘坐轻便车，冒着大雨，赶赴悬瓠晋见高祖，自述自己的心意，乘便说起皇后和菩萨淫乱的情状。
English: Only a few days after the divorce, Princess Secret, her maidservants and maidservants, as well as more than a dozen servants in the family, took a light car, braved the heavy rain, rushed to Hanging Rock to see Gao Zu, told her own mind, and took the opportunity to talk about the adulterous situation of the queen and the bodhisattva.

古文：高祖闻而骇愕，未之全信而秘匿之，惟彭城王侍疾左右，具知其事。
现代文：高祖听说后震骇惊讶，没有全信而封锁这件事密而不发，惟独彭城王在左右侍奉疾病，全部知道这件事。
English: Gaozu was shocked and surprised when he heard about it. He didn't believe it and sealed the matter behind closed doors. Only King Pengcheng, who was suffering from illness, knew all about it.

古文：此后，后渐忧惧，与母常氏求托女巫，祷厌无所不至，愿高祖疾不起，一旦得如文明太后辅少主称命者，赏报不赀。
现代文：此后，皇后渐渐忧虑恐惧，和母亲常氏请求女巫，祷告厌胜没有什么不做，希望高祖一病不起，一旦今后能像文明太后辅佐少主称制命那样，赏赐报答不计其数。
English: After that, the empress gradually worried and feared, and her mother often begged the witch, praying that there was nothing to do, hoping that Gao Zu would not be able to afford to be ill, and that once she could control her life in the future, like the Empress Dowager of Civilization and the Assistant to the Minor Lord, there would be countless rewards and rewards.

古文：又取三牲宫中妖祠，假言祈福，专为左导。
现代文：又取马牛羊在宫中做妖邪的祭祀，假称祈求福祉，实际上专做旁门左道。
English: They also took horses, cattle, and sheep to make sacrifices to evil spirits in the palace, pretending to pray for welfare, but in fact, they only did side-hustles.

古文：母常或自诣宫中，或遣侍婢与相报答。
现代文：母亲常氏有时自己前往宫中，有时派遣侍婢和女巫相来往。
English: Her mother, Tsuneuji, sometimes went to the Imperial Palace herself, and sometimes sent servants to exchange information.

古文：高祖自豫州北幸鄴，后虑还见治检，弥怀危怖，骤令阉人托参起居，皆赐之衣裳，殷勤托寄，勿使漏泄。
现代文：高祖从豫州向北前往邺城，皇后担心高祖返回被整治检查，更加心怀恐怖，急派宦官前去托称询问病情，都赐给衣服，殷勤地拜托，不要使丑事泄露。
English: Gao Zu traveled north from Yuzhou to Lucheng. The empress, fearing that Gao Zu would be subjected to rectification and inspection upon his return, was even more terrified. She sent eunuchs to ask for his condition, gave him clothes, and earnestly begged him not to reveal the scandal.

古文：亦令双蒙充行，省其信不。
现代文：也派双蒙同行，观察所派人是否可信。
English: They also sent two Mongolian colleagues to observe whether the person sent was credible.

古文：然惟小黄门苏兴寿密陈委曲。高祖问其本末，敕以勿泄。
现代文：然而仅有小黄门苏兴寿秘密陈述事情经过，高祖询问清原委，下令他不要泄露。
English: However, only Xiao Huangmen Su Xing Shou made a secret statement about what happened, Gao Zu inquired about the Qingyuan Committee and ordered him not to divulge.

古文：至洛，执问菩萨、双蒙等六人，迭相证举，具得情状。
现代文：到达洛阳，拘捕拷问菩萨、双蒙等六人，互相验证检举，全部获知皇后的事情。
English: Arrived in Luoyang, arrested and interrogated six people including Bodhisattva and Shuang Meng, verified each other's reports, and learned everything about the queen.

古文：高祖以疾卧含温室，夜引后，并列菩萨等于户外。
现代文：高祖因病睡在含温室，夜晚召唤皇后，并排列菩萨等人在门外。
English: Due to illness, Gao Zu slept in a greenhouse. At night, he summoned the empress and lined up the bodhisattvas and others outside the door.

古文：后临入，令阉人搜衣中，稍有寸刃便斩。
现代文：皇后要进去时，命宦官搜索她的衣服，衹要有一寸的刀子就杀头。
English: When the queen wanted to enter, she ordered the eunuch to search her clothes, and if the eunuch wanted a one-inch knife, he had to kill her.

古文：后顿首泣谢，乃赐坐东楹，去御筵二丈余。
现代文：皇后叩头哭泣认罪，于是赐她坐在束楹边，离皇帝的坐具二丈多。
English: The empress kneeled on the ground, prostrated herself and wept, and asked for forgiveness. It was only then that Emperor Xiaowen gave her the throne under the eastern yoke, two steps away from the throne.

古文：高祖令菩萨等陈状，又让后曰： 汝母有妖术，可具言之。 
现代文：高祖命令菩萨等人陈述事情，又责备皇后说： 你的母亲有妖术，可详细讲出来。 
English: Gaozu ordered Bodhisattvas and others to report the matter, and scolded the empress, saying, "Your mother has magic, and she can tell you in detail.

古文：后乞屏左右，有所密启。
现代文：皇后请求屏退左右的人，有事情密告。
English: The empress asked the people around her to step back from the screen. They had something to tell her.

古文：高祖敕中侍悉出，唯令长秋卿白整在侧，取卫直刀柱之。后犹不言。
现代文：高祖命宫中侍臣全部出去，仅命长秋卿白整在旁边，取出卫直刀指着她，皇后还不讲。
English: Gao Zu ordered all the courtiers in the palace to go out, only to order the eldest, Qiuqing Bai Jie, to take out the Wei Zhi knife and point it at her. The queen did not speak.

古文：高祖乃以绵坚塞整耳，自小语呼整再三，无所应，乃令后言。
现代文：高祖于是用绵严实地堵住直整的耳朵，亲自小声再三地呼唤白整，没有反应，就命皇后讲。
English: Gao Zu then tightly plugged the ears of Zhi Zhe, and repeatedly called Bai Zhe in a low voice. When there was no response, he ordered the queen to speak.

古文：事隐，人莫知之。
现代文：事情隐秘，人们不能得知。
English: So these things are hidden, and no one knows.

古文：高祖乃唤彭城、北海二王令入坐，言： 昔是汝嫂，今乃他人，但入勿避。 
现代文：高担于是呼唤堑城？随二王让他们进去坐，说： 她从前是你们的嫂子，现在是旁人，尽管进来不要回避。 
English: Gaotan then called out to the two kings to let them enter and sit down, saying, "She used to be your sister-in-law, but now she is a stranger. Come in, but don't avoid her."

古文：二王固辞，不获命。
现代文：二王执意推辞，不准许。
English: The two kings stubbornly refused and did not allow it.

古文：及入，高祖云： 此老妪乃欲白刃插我肋上！可穷问本末，勿有所难。 
现代文：等到进去，宣祖说： 这个老婆娘竟要用白刀子插在我的肋骨上可以推究事情的始终，不要有所畏难。 
English: When he got inside, Xuanzu said, "This old woman wants to stick a white knife in my ribs so that she can find out the whole story. Don't be afraid.

古文：高祖深自引过，致愧二王。
现代文：直担深深地承认自己的过失，向二王表示歉意。
English: Zhongsang deeply admitted his fault and apologized to the two kings.

古文：又云： 冯家女不能复相废逐，且使在宫中空坐，有心乃能自死，汝等勿谓吾犹有情也。 
现代文：又说： 冯家女子不能又加以废黜，暂且让她在宫中空坐，有，就能自己寻死，你们不要说我还对她有情意。 
English: Finally, he said, "The Feng family's daughter can no longer be banished one after another. Let her sit empty in the palace for the time being. If she has a heart, she will seek her own death. Don't think that I still have old feelings."

古文：高祖素至孝，犹以文明太后故，未便行废。
现代文：高祖一向至诚孝顺，还以文明太后的缘故，没有马上废黜。
English: Gao Zu has always been very honest and dutiful, and he did not immediately abdicate for the sake of the civilized empress.

古文：良久，二王出，乃赐后辞死诀。
现代文：很久后，二王出来，于是赐令皇后告辞誓不再见。
English: After a long time, the two kings came out and ordered the queen to take an oath never to see them again.

古文：再拜稽首，涕泣歔欷。
现代文：皇后两次叩头至地，哭泣叹息。
English: Twice the empress prostrated herself to the ground, weeping and sighing.

古文：令入东房。
现代文：命皇后进入束房。
English: The empress enters the delivery room.

古文：及入宫后，帝命阉人有所问于后。后骂曰： 天子妇，亲面对，岂令汝传也！ 
现代文：等到进宫后，皇帝命宦官对皇后询问一些事情，皇后骂宦官说： 天子的媳妇，亲自面谈，难道让你传话? 
English: After entering the palace, the emperor ordered the eunuch to ask the empress some questions. The empress scolded the eunuch and said: Daughter-in-law of the son of heaven, interview in person, do you want me to send you a message?

古文：高祖怒，敕后母常入，示与后状，常挞之百余乃止。
现代文：高祖发怒，命令皇后的母亲常氏进宫，给予皇后棍棒，常氏打了一百多棒才住手。
English: Gaozhu became angry and ordered the queen's mother, Chang, to enter the palace and give the queen a club. Chang had to beat her with more than a hundred clubs before she stopped.

古文：高祖寻南伐，后留京师。虽以罪失宠，而夫人嫔妾奉之如法。惟令世宗在东宫，无朝谒之事。
现代文：高祖不久向南征伐，皇后留在京城，虽然因犯罪失去宠信，但夫人嫔妾仍依法度侍奉她，仅命令世宗在束宫，没有朝见拜谒的事。
English: Gaozu soon went on a campaign to the south, and the empress remained in the capital. Although she lost her favor due to her crime, her wife and concubine still served her in accordance with the law. She only ordered Shizong to stay at Sok Palace, and there was no such thing as going to the court to pay homage.

古文：高祖疾甚，谓彭城王勰曰： 后宫久乖阴德，自绝于天。
现代文：高祖病重，对彭城王元勰说： 后宫长久违背妇德，自绝于天道。
English: Gao Zu was seriously ill and said to Pengcheng Wang Yuanqi: The harem has long violated women's morality and cut itself off from the heavenly way.

古文：若不早为之所，恐成汉末故事。
现代文：如不早处置她，恐怕酿成汉朝末年的旧局面。
English: If she is not dealt with early, I am afraid it will lead to the old situation of the last years of the Han Dynasty.

古文：吾死之后，可赐自尽别宫，葬以后礼，庶掩冯门之大过。 
现代文：我死之后，可赐令她在另外的宫室自尽，以皇后礼仪安葬，希望掩藏冯家的大过失。 
English: After my death, I may order her to commit suicide in another palace room and be buried with the queen's etiquette, hoping to hide the great fault of the Feng family.

古文：高祖崩，梓宫达鲁阳，乃行遗诏。
现代文：高祖逝世，棺材到鲁阳，才执行遣诏。
English: Gaozu passed away, and the coffin was sent to Luyang before the imperial edict was carried out.

古文：北海王详奉宣遗旨，长秋卿白整等入授后药。后走呼不肯引决，曰： 官岂有此也，是诸王辈杀我耳！ 
现代文：北海王元详奉令宣读遗诏，长秋卿白整等人进宫授予毒药给皇后，皇后跑着呼叫不肯自杀，说： 皇帝哪有这个遣令?这是一些侯王杀我而已! 
English: Wang Yuan of the North Sea was ordered to read out his will in detail, and Chang Qiuqing Baizheng and others entered the palace to grant poison to the queen. The queen ran and called out, refusing to commit suicide, saying: "Why does the emperor have this order? This is just some princes killing me!"

古文：整等执持，强之，乃含椒而尽。
现代文：白整等人捉住她，强迫她，才含酒药而自尽。
English: Bai Zhengyi and others caught her and forced her to drink alcohol before she committed suicide.

古文：殡以后礼。
现代文：以皇后礼仪安葬。
English: She was buried according to the queen's etiquette.

古文：梓宫次洛南，咸阳王禧等知审死，相视曰： 若无遗诏，我兄弟亦当作计去之，岂可令失行妇人宰制天下，杀我辈也。 
现代文：棺材停在洛水南，咸阳王元禧等人知道皇后的确已死，相互望着说： 如果没有遣诏，我们兄弟也将想办法除掉她，哪能让失去德行的妇人统治天下，杀死我们呢? 
English: The coffin was parked in the south of Luoshui. Xianyang King Yuanxi and others knew that the empress was indeed dead. They looked at each other and said: If there is no imperial edict, our brothers will also find a way to get rid of her. How can a woman who has lost her virtue rule the world and kill us?

古文：谥曰幽皇后，葬长陵茔内。
现代文：定谧号为幽皇后，安葬在长陵的墓地内。
English: Her posthumous name was Empress Yu, and she was buried in the Changling Cemetery.

古文：孝文昭皇后高氏，司徒公肇之妹也。
现代文：孝文昭皇后高氏，是司徒公高肇的妹妹。
English: Empress Gao of Xiaowen Zhao was the younger sister of Prince Gao Zhao.

古文：父扬，母盖氏，凡四男三女，皆生于东裔。
现代文：父亲高飏，母亲盖氏，共有四男三女，都出生在东方疆域。
English: His father, Gao Jun, and his mother, Gaishi, had a total of four sons and three daughters, all of whom were born in the Far East.

古文：高祖初，乃举室西归，达龙城镇，镇表后德色婉艳，任充宫掖。
现代文：高祖初年，才全家向西归附，到达龙城镇，镇将上奏皇后德行善良姿色艳丽，可进入后宫。
English: In the first year of Gao Zu, the whole family moved westward and arrived in Long Town. The town will play the queen's virtue, kindness, and bright color, and can enter the harem.

古文：及至，文明太后亲幸北部曹，见后姿貌，奇之，遂入掖庭，时年十三。
现代文：等到达后，文明太后亲自前往北部曹，看到皇后的姿容，认为她很奇特，于是进入宫廷，这年十三岁。
English: After arriving, the Empress Dowager Wenming personally went to the Northern Cao, saw the queen's appearance and thought she was very strange, so she entered the court, this year thirteen years old.

古文：初，后幼曾梦在堂内立，而日光自窗中照之，灼灼而热，后东西避之，光犹斜照不已。
现代文：当初，皇后幼小时曾经梦见站在堂屋内，而太阳光从窗户中照耀她，鲜明而炙热，皇后东西躲避，阳光还是斜照不止。
English: At first, when she was a child, the Empress used to dream of standing in the hall, while the sun shone on her from the window, bright and hot. The Empress avoided everything, but the sun continued to shine diagonally.

古文：如是数夕，后自怪之，以白其父扬，扬以问辽东人闵宗。
现代文：如此几个晚上，皇后自己感到奇怪，就告诉父亲高飏，高飏就这事询问辽东人闵宗。
English: On several such evenings, the empress herself felt strange and told her father Gao Yao. Gao Yao asked the Liaodong man Shuo Zong about this.

古文：宗曰： 此奇徵也，贵不可言。 
现代文：闵宗说： 这是奇特的征兆，尊贵不可言说。 
English: Shanzong said, "This is a strange omen, it cannot be said to be noble.

古文：扬曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：高飏说： 凭什么知道呢? 
English: Gao Yao said: How do you know?

古文：宗曰： 夫日者，君人之德，帝王之象也。
现代文：闵宗说： 太阳，是君主的德性，帝王的象征。
English: Sun Zong said: The sun is the virtue of the monarch, the symbol of the emperor.

古文：光照女身，必有恩命及之。女避犹照者，主上来求，女不获已也。
现代文：光芒照在女儿身上，一定有恩德册命加在她身上女儿避让还照耀，是君主前来求婚，女儿不得已。
English: The light shines on the daughter, there must be a benevolence book ordered to be placed on her body. The daughter avoids giving in and still shines. It was the monarch who came to propose marriage, and the daughter had no choice.

古文：昔有梦月入怀，犹生天子，况日照之徵。
现代文：从前有人梦见月亮进入怀中，还生下天子，何况是太阳照耀的征兆呢?
English: Once upon a time, someone dreamed that the moon entered the womb and gave birth to a son, and what is the sign of the sun shining?

古文：此女必将被帝命，诞育人君之象也。 
现代文：这个女儿必将接受皇帝册命，有生育君主的迹象。 
English: This daughter will certainly accept the emperor's order, and there are signs of the birth of a monarch.

古文：遂生世宗。
现代文：于是生下世宗。
English: As a result, Sejong was born.

古文：后生广平王怀，次长乐公主。
现代文：后来生下广平王元怀，又生长乐公主。
English: Later, she gave birth to Guangping Wangyuanhuai, and grew up to become Princess Le.

古文：及冯昭仪宠盛，密有母养世宗之意。后自代如洛阳，暴薨于汲郡之共县，或云昭仪遣人贼后也。
现代文：等到冯昭仪极为受宠时，秘密地有抚养世宗的心意，皇后从代京到洛阳，在汲郡的共县突然逝世，有人说是昭仪派人杀害了皇后。
English: When Feng Zhaoyi was extremely favored, she secretly had the intention of raising Shizong. The empress went from Daijing to Luoyang and died suddenly in Gongxian, Kyu County. Some people said that Zhaoyi sent someone to kill the empress.

古文：世宗之为皇太子，三日一朝幽后，后拊念慈爱有加。
现代文：世宗做皇太子时，三天朝见一次幽后，皇后对她极为爱护。
English: When Sejong was crown prince, after seeing her once in the morning for three days, the empress was extremely fond of her.

古文：高祖出征，世宗入朝，必久留后宫，亲视栉沐，母导隆备。
现代文：高祖出征，世宗入宫朝见，一定长久留在后宫，皇后亲自看护梳洗，做母亲的道义很完备。
English: Gao Zu went to the front, Shizong went to the palace to see the emperor, and must have stayed in the harem for a long time. The empress personally took care of combing and washing. The morality of being a mother is very complete.

古文：其后有司奏请加昭仪号，谥曰文昭贵人，高祖从之。
现代文：其后有关官员奏请加授昭仪名号，定谧号为文昭贵人，高祖听从奏议。
English: After that, the relevant officials made a report requesting that Zhaoyi's name be added, and his posthumous name be changed to Wen Zhao Guiren. Gao Zu heeded the report.

古文：世宗践阼，追尊配飨。
现代文：世宗即位，追尊名位谧号并入太庙配祭。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and the posthumous name and posthumous name were incorporated into the temple festival.

古文：后先葬城西长陵东南，陵制卑局。
现代文：皇后先安葬在城西长陵的东南，陵墓规格卑下局促。
English: The empress was first buried in the south-east of the west city mausoleum. The mausoleum is small and cramped.

古文：因就起山陵，号终宁陵，置邑户五百家。
现代文：于是在原地建陵园，称为终宁陵，设置守陵人户五百家。
English: As a result, a cemetery was built in its place, known as Zhenning Mausoleum, and 500 households were set up to guard the mausoleum.

古文：肃宗诏曰： 文昭皇太后，德协坤仪，美符文姒，作合高祖，实诞英圣，而夙世沦晖，孤茔弗祔。
现代文：尽塞下韶说： 文昭皇太后，德行协和妇道，美好同于塞蛆，婚配壶担哺育英才，而前世光辉沉沦，孤墓不合葬。
English: The lower coffin said: Empress Dowager Wen Zhao, virtue, harmony and womanhood, beauty are the same as the coffin, marriage, carrying the pot, nurturing talent, but the previous life was glorious and sunk, the lonely grave is not buried together.

古文：先帝孝感自衷，迁奉未遂，永言哀恨，义结幽明。
现代文：先帝孝道感应发自内心，迁移未完成，言念哀伤遣憾，道义连结阴阳两界。
English: The previous emperor's filial piety was inspired from the heart, the migration was not completed, the words were sorrowful and regretful, and the morality linked the yin and yang worlds.

古文：废吕尊薄，礼伸汉代。 
现代文：废吕氏尊薄氏，礼仪已显明于汉代。 
English: After the fall of the Lv clan and the rise of the Zon Bo clan, etiquette was already evident in the Han Dynasty.

古文：又诏曰： 文昭皇太后尊配高祖，祔庙定号，促令迁奉，自终及始，太后当主，可更上尊号称太皇太后，以同汉晋之典，正姑妇之礼。
现代文：又下诏说： 文昭皇太后尊崇与高祖相配，合祭庙庭议定名号，现命令赶快迁移，自始至终，太后当为主妇，可重上尊号为太皇太后，以同于汉晋的典章，端正婆媳的礼仪。
English: He also issued the following edict: The respected title of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is in line with that of Emperor Gao, and the agreed upon title of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is in line with that of Emperor Gao, and the name of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is in line with that of Emperor Gao, and the name of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is in line with that of Emperor Gao, and the name of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is in line with that of Emperor Gao, and the name of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is in line with that of Emperor Gao, and the name of Empress Dowager Wen Zhao is

古文：庙号如旧。 
现代文：庙号照旧。 
English: The temple's name remains the same.

古文：文昭迁灵榇于长陵兆西北六十步。
现代文：文昭迁棺椁到长陵墓域西北六十步。
English: Wen Zhaoxiang's coffin is sixty paces northwest of the Changling Cemetery.

古文：初开终宁陵数丈，于梓宫上获大蛇长丈余，黑色，头有 王 字，蛰而不动。
现代文：起初挖开终宁陵几丈，在棺材上获取一条长一丈多长的大蛇，黑颜色，头上有 王 字，蛰伏着不动。
English: At first, they dug up a few feet of the final Ningling Mausoleum, and on the coffin they obtained a large snake, black in color, with the word "Wang" on its head, lying motionless.

古文：灵榇既迁，置蛇旧处。
现代文：棺椁迁移后，将蛇放回原处。
English: After the coffin was moved, the snake was put back in its original place.

古文：宣武顺皇后于氏，太尉烈弟劲之女也。
现代文：宣武顺皇后于氏，是太尉于烈的弟弟于劲的女儿。
English: Empress Xuanwu Shun of the Yu clan was the daughter of Yu Jian, the younger brother of Lieutenant Yu Lie.

古文：世宗始亲政事，烈时为领军，总心膂之任，以嫔御未备，因左右讽谕，称后有容德，世宗乃迎入为贵人。
现代文：世宗开始亲自处理政事，于烈当时任领军，总管心腹的重任，因妃嫔侍妾不充足，利用左右的人委婉劝说，称皇后有姿色德行，世宗于是迎入宫中为贵人。
English: Shizong began to deal with political affairs personally. Yu Rong was the leader of the army at that time, and he was in charge of the important duties of the heart and soul. Since there were not enough concubines, he used the people around him to persuade her gently, saying that the queen had a dignified demeanor. Shizong was then welcomed into the palace as a noble.

古文：时年十四，甚见宠爱，立为皇后，谒于太庙。
现代文：这年十四岁，十分受宠爱，立为皇后，到太庙拜谒。
English: At the age of fourteen, she was very much loved. She was made empress and worshipped at the Imperial Temple.

古文：后静默宽容，性不妒忌，生皇子昌，三岁夭殁。
现代文：皇后沉静宽容，性情不忌妒，生下皇子元昌，三岁时夭折。
English: The empress was calm and tolerant, and did not have a jealous nature. She gave birth to Prince Motomachi, who died at the age of three.

古文：其后暴崩，宫禁事秘，莫能知悉，而世议归咎于高夫人。
现代文：皇后后来突然逝世，宫内事情秘密，不能全知，而世人议论归咎于高夫人。
English: The empress later died suddenly, and the palace was shrouded in secrecy. It was impossible to know everything, and the world blamed Mrs. Gao.

古文：葬永泰陵，谥曰顺皇后。
现代文：安葬在永泰陵，谧号为顺皇后。
English: She was buried in Yongtai Mausoleum, and her posthumous name was the Empress Shun.

古文：宣武皇后高氏，文昭皇后弟偃之女也。
现代文：宣武皇后高氏，足文昭皇后的弟弟高偃的女儿。
English: She was the daughter of Emperor Xuanwu's queen Gao and Empress Ashifumi's brother Gao Yao.

古文：世宗纳为贵人，生皇子，早夭，又生建德公主。
现代文：世宗娶为贵人，生下皇子，早死，又生建德公主。
English: Sejong married a noble, gave birth to a prince, died early, and gave birth to Princess Jian De.

古文：后拜为皇后，甚见礼重。
现代文：后来册命为皇后，十分受礼待重视。
English: Later, she was appointed as empress and was highly respected.

古文：性妒忌，宫人希得进御。
现代文：性格忌妒，宫人很少能进宫侍奉皇帝。
English: Because of their jealous nature, courtiers were rarely able to enter the palace to serve the emperor.

古文：及肃宗即位，上尊号曰皇太后。寻为尼，居瑶光寺，非大节庆，不入宫中。
现代文：等肃宗即位，上尊号为皇太后不久做尼姑，住在瑶光寺，不是大节，不进入宫中。
English: Such as Su Zong's accession to the throne, His Eminence became a nun shortly after becoming the empress dowager, and lived at Rongguang Temple. It was not a major festival, and he did not enter the palace.

古文：建德公主始五六岁，灵太后恆置左右，抚爱之。
现代文：建德公主刚五六岁，灵太后时常放在身边，抚养喜爱她。
English: Princess Jian De was just five or six years old. She was often kept by the Dowager Empress, who raised and loved her.

古文：神龟元年，太后出觐母武邑君。
现代文：神龟元年，太后出宫拜见母亲武邑君。
English: In the first year of Jingu, the empress dowager came out of the palace to visit her mother, Bui Jun.

古文：时天文有变，灵太后欲以后当祸，是夜暴崩，天下冤之。
现代文：当时天象有变化，灵太后想以皇后承受祸患，这夜突然逝世，天下人为她感到冤屈。
English: At that time, there was a change in the celestial body. The Empress Dowager wanted to bear the misfortune as the empress, but she died suddenly that night, and the whole world felt wronged by her.

古文：丧还瑶光佛寺，嫔葬皆以尼礼。
现代文：尸体送回瑶光佛寺，出殡安葬都用尼姑的礼节。
English: The body was sent back to the Luguang Buddhist Temple, and the funeral and burial followed the nun's etiquette.

古文：初，高祖幽后之宠也，欲专其爱，后宫接御，多见阻遏。
现代文：当初，高祖幽后受宠时，想独受喜爱，后宫妃妾与皇帝同房，多被阻止。
English: At first, when Gao Zu was favored by the Empress Dowager, he wanted to be loved alone, and the concubine of the harem and the emperor were in the same room, but they were mostly prevented.

古文：高祖时言于近臣，称妇人妒防，虽王者亦不能免，况士庶乎？
现代文：高祖当时对侍臣谈话，称妇人忌妒提防，即使帝王也不能免除，何况是士人平民呢?
English: At that time, Gaozu was talking to his courtiers, saying that women should beware of jealousy, even if the emperor could not be exempted, let alone the commoners?

古文：世宗暮年，高后悍忌，夫人嫔御有至帝崩不蒙侍接者。
现代文：世宗晚年，高后强悍忌妒，夫人侍妾有到皇帝逝世还不获侍寝机会的。
English: In his later years, Emperor Sejong was jealous that his wife and concubine did not have the opportunity to sleep with the emperor after his death.

古文：由是在洛二世，二十余年，皇子全育者，惟肃宗而已。
现代文：因此在洛阳二代，二十多年，长大成人的皇子，仅有肃宗一人而已。
English: Therefore, in Luoyang, the second generation, more than twenty years, the grown-up prince, only Su Zong is the only one.

古文：宣武灵皇后胡氏，安定临泾人，司徒国珍女也。
现代文：宣武灵皇后直巡，塞宣堕迳人，是司徒凰趁的女儿。
English: Empress Xuanwuling, the daughter of Emperor Xuanzang, is the daughter of Emperor Xuanzang.

古文：母皇甫氏，产后之日，赤光四照。
现代文：母亲皇直旦，生皇后的那天，红光四射。
English: After giving birth to Hu, his mother, the Empress Fu, was radiant.

古文：京兆山北县有赵胡者，善于卜相，国珍问之。
现代文：塞韭山北县有个叫赵翅的人，善于卜卦相面，凰壁询问他。
English: There is a man named Zhao Ying in the North County of the Selangor Mountains, who is good at divination, and the phoenix asked him about it.

古文：胡云： 贤女有大贵之表，方为天地母，生天地主。
现代文：趟塑说： 令爱有大贵的相貌，将要成为天地之母，生下天地的主宰。
English: The statue said: Let love have a noble appearance, it will become the mother of heaven and earth, and give birth to the master of heaven and earth.

古文：勿过三人知也。 后姑为尼，颇能讲道，世宗初，入讲禁中。
现代文：不要超过三个人知道 皇后的姑姑做尼姑，很能讲解佛理，吐塞初年，进入宫廷讲授。
English: Don't let more than three people know that the Queen's aunt was a nun who was very good at explaining Buddhist principles, and she entered the palace to teach in her first year.

古文：积数岁，讽左右称后姿行，世宗闻之，乃召入掖庭为承华世妇。
现代文：过了几年，暗示左右的人称说皇后的容貌德行，世宗听说后，就召进后宫做承华世妇。
English: After a few years, suggesting that people on both sides said that the empress's appearance was virtuous, Shizong heard about it and was called into the harem to be Chenghua's concubine.

古文：而椒掖之中，以国旧制，相与祈祝，皆愿生诸王、公主，不愿生太子。
现代文：而宫廷之中，按照国家的旧日制度，相互祈求祝祷，都希望生诸王、公主，不希望生太子。
English: But in the court, according to the old Japanese system of the country, they all pray and wish for the birth of kings and princesses, but do not wish to have a prince.

古文：唯后每谓夫人等言： 天子岂可独无兒子，何缘畏一身之死而令皇家不育冢嫡乎？ 
现代文：仅皇后常对夫人等说： 天子怎可独独没有儿子，为什么畏惧自己的死而使皇家不养育嫡长子呢? 
English: Only the empress often said to her wife and others: How can the Son of God be alone without a son, why is he afraid of his own death, so that the royal family does not raise the eldest son?

古文：及肃宗在孕，同列犹以故事相恐，劝为诸计。
现代文：等到怀上肃宗，同伴们还因旧例为她恐惧，劝她想办法打掉。
English: When Su Zong became pregnant, her companions were still afraid of her because of the old custom, and advised her to find a way to break it off.

古文：后固意确然，幽夜独誓云： 但使所怀是男，次第当长子，子生身死，所不辞也。 
现代文：皇后拿定主意不动摇，半夜一个人发誓说： 但愿所怀的是男孩，按次序将成为长子，儿子生下我被处死，我也在所不辞。 
English: The queen held her resolve and did not waver. In the middle of the night, one of them swore: "May it be that the child I am carrying is a boy, who will become the firstborn in the order of succession, and that I will be put to death if I give birth to a son.

古文：既诞肃宗，进为充华嫔。
现代文：生下肃宗后，升为充华嫔。
English: After the birth of Su Zong, he was promoted to the position of Chonghua Zong.

古文：先是，世宗频丧皇子，自以春秋长矣，深加慎护。
现代文：在这以前，世塞频繁地夭折皇子，自认为年纪已大，特别加以谨慎照料。
English: Prior to this, emperors frequently died young in the past, and they were treated with special care because they were considered to be old.

古文：为择乳保，皆取良家宜子者，养于别宫，皇后及充华嫔皆莫得而抚视焉。
现代文：为肃宗选乳母保姆，都选取良家善养男孩的妇女。在另外的宫室中抚养，皇后和充华嫔都不能抚育看护。
English: For Su Zong's selection of nannies, women from good families who are good at raising boys are chosen. They are raised in a separate palace room, and neither the queen nor the chonghua nanny can take care of them.

古文：及肃宗践阼，尊后为皇太妃，后尊为皇太后。
现代文：等到肃宗登位，尊崇皇后为皇太妃，后来尊崇为皇太后。
English: When Emperor Sojong ascended the throne, the queen was revered as the crown princess, and later revered as the empress dowager.

古文：临朝听政，犹称殿下，下令行事。
现代文：临朝听政，大臣还称她为殿下，下令处理事务。
English: As a member of the Privy Council, the minister also called her His Royal Highness and ordered her to handle affairs.

古文：后改令称诏，群臣上书曰陛下，自称曰朕。
现代文：后来改令称为诏，群臣上奏疏称陛下，她自称为朕。
English: Later, the order was renamed the edict, the ministers referred to themselves as "your majesty" and referred to themselves as "we."

古文：太后以肃宗冲幼，未堪亲祭，欲傍《周礼》夫人与君交献之义，代行祭礼，访寻故式。
现代文：太后因肃宗幼小，不能亲自祭祀，想依照《周礼》中夫人与君主交相奉献的义理，代肃宗进行祭礼，寻访过去的样板。
English: The empress dowager could not personally perform the ritual because Su Zong was too young, and she wanted to follow the principle of the devotion of the wife to the monarch in the "Weekly Rituals" and perform the ritual on behalf of Su Zong and search for past models.

古文：门下召礼官、博士议，以为不可。
现代文：门下省召集礼官、博士商议，认为不可以。
English: It is considered unacceptable for a subordinate province to convene ceremonial officials and doctors for deliberation.

古文：而太后欲以帏幔自鄣，观三公行事，重问侍中崔光。光便据汉和熹邓后荐祭故事，太后大悦，遂摄行初祀。
现代文：而太后想用缯帛遮住自己，观看三公料理事情，再询问侍中崔光崔光就依据汉朝和熹邓后进献祭品的旧例赞同，太后大喜，于是代行最初的祭祀。
English: However, the empress dowager wanted to cover herself with a cocoon, watch the situation of the three public goods, and then ask the chamberlain Cui Guang. Cui Guang agreed with the old example of offering sacrifices according to the Han Dynasty and the Deng Dynasty. The empress dowager was overjoyed, so she performed the initial sacrifice.

古文：太后性聪悟，多才艺，姑既为尼，幼相依托，略得佛经大义。
现代文：人后禀性聪颖有悟性，多才多艺，姑姑做尼姑，太后幼年依托她，粗略得知佛经大义。
English: The empress dowager is naturally intelligent, good at comprehension, and versatile. Her aunt is a nun, and she has relied on her aunt's teachings since she was a child, and she can also know the gist of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：亲览万机，手笔断决。
现代文：亲自处理纷繁事务，亲笔批阅公文。
English: When it comes to taking care of things personally, it's all about taking matters into one's own hands.

古文：幸西林园法流堂，命侍臣射，不能者罚之。
现代文：前往西林园法皑，命令侍臣射箭，不能射中的加以惩罚。
English: When she went to the West Forest Garden Falun Hall, she let the bodyguards and retainers play archery. If they did not shoot well, they would be punished.

古文：又自射针孔，中之。
现代文：又自己射针孔，射中了。
English: He shot a pinhole again and hit it.

古文：大悦，赐左右布帛有差。
现代文：大喜，赏赐左右的人布帛多少不等。
English: Greatly pleased, the number of cloth bags given to those on the right and left varies.

古文：先是，太后敕造申讼车，时御焉，出自云龙大司马门，从宫西北，入自千秋门，以纳冤讼。
现代文：在这以前，太后下令造申讼车，这时乘坐着，从云龙大司马门出宫，从宫廷西北，进入千秋门，以接受投诉的冤情。
English: Prior to this, the empress dowager had ordered the construction of a complaint carriage, in which she rode out of the palace from Yunlong Daishi Ma Gate and from the northwest of the palace into Qianqiu Gate to receive complaints of grievances.

古文：又亲策孝秀、州郡计吏于朝堂。
现代文：又在朝堂亲自策试孝廉秀才、州郡上计簿的官吏。
English: In addition, in the morning hall, he personally tried and tested the filial piety and talent, and the government officials of the state and county.

古文：太后与肃宗幸华林园，宴群臣于都亭曲水，令王公已下各赋七言诗。
现代文：太后和盛塞前往茎并图，在都亭水流拐弯处宴请群臣，命令王公以下各赋一首七言诗。
English: The empress dowager and Emperor Shengzai went to the junction of the stems and the map, and held a banquet for the courtiers at the corner of Du Ting Shui Lu, and ordered the princes to each compose a seven-character poem.

古文：太后诗曰： 化光造物含气贞。 
现代文：太后的诗句说： 天地造化含气贞。 
English: The empress dowager's poem said: Heaven and earth are created with qi and virtue.

古文：帝诗曰： 恭己无为赖慈英。 
现代文：皇帝的诗句说： 无为而治赖母明。 
English: The emperor's poem said, "Relying on my mother without doing anything."

古文：王公已下赐帛有差。
现代文：王公以下赐予布帛多少不等。
English: Princes and below were given varying amounts of cloth.

古文：太后父薨，百僚表请公除，太后不许。
现代文：太后的父亲逝世，百官上奏太后请因公除去丧服，太后不准许。
English: When the Empress Dowager's father passed away, hundreds of officials petitioned the Empress Dowager to remove her clothes for official reasons, but the Empress Dowager refused.

古文：寻幸永宁寺，亲建刹于九级之基，僧尼士女赴者数万人。
现代文：不久前往永宁寺，亲自在九级台基上建佛塔，僧尼男女赶去的有几万人。
English: Soon he went to Yongning Temple and personally built a stupa on a nine-level foundation. Tens of thousands of monks and nuns rushed there.

古文：及改葬文昭高后，太后不欲令肃宗主事，乃自为丧主，出至终宁陵，亲奠遣事，还哭于太极殿。至于讫事，皆自主焉。
现代文：到改葬文昭高后时，太后不想让肃宗主持这件事，就亲自做丧事主持人，出城到终宁陵，亲自祭奠安排事务，回来后在太极殿哭祭，直到事情结束，都是自己主管。
English: When it came to the reburial of Wenzhao Gao, the empress dowager did not want Su Zong to preside over the matter, so she personally presided over the funeral, went out of the city to the final Ningling Mausoleum, personally arranged the memorial service, and after returning, she was in charge of the wailing ceremony at the Taiji Temple until the end of the matter.

古文：后幸嵩高山，夫人、九嫔、公主已下从者数百人，升于顶中。
现代文：后来前往嵩直山，夫人、九嫔、公主以下随从的有几百人，登上山顶。
English: Later, he went to Songzhuang Mountain, and several hundred people, including his wife, Jiuzhaigou, and the princess, climbed to the top of the mountain.

古文：废诸淫祀，而胡天神不在其列。
现代文：废除各种不合礼制的祭祀，而胡人天神不在废除之列。
English: Abolish all kinds of sacrificial rites that do not conform to the ritual system, and Hu Ren Tenjin is not included in the abolition.

古文：后幸左藏，王公、嫔、主已下从者百余人，皆令任力负布绢，即以赐之，多者过二百匹，少者百余匹。
现代文：后来前往左藏库，王公、妃嫔、公主以下随从的有一百多人，都命凭力气扛布帛，就用来赏赐他们，多的过二百匹，少的一百多匹。
English: Later, they went to the left-hand storeroom. There were more than a hundred attendants, including the prince, the concubine, and the princess, all of whom had to carry the cloths by their own strength. The cloths were used to reward them, more than two hundred and less than a hundred.

古文：唯长乐公主手持绢二十匹而出，示不异众而无劳也。
现代文：仅长乐公主手拿二十匹绢出来，表示不与众人相异而没空手而回。
English: Only Changle Princess took out twenty horses with her hands, indicating that she was not different from the others and did not return empty-handed.

古文：世称共廉。
现代文：世人称赞她的廉洁。
English: The world praised her for her integrity.

古文：仪同、陈留公李崇，章武王融并以所负过多，颠仆于地，崇乃伤腰，融至损脚。
现代文：仪同、陈留公李崇，章武王元融都因所扛的过多，倒仆在地，李崇竟然伤了腰，元融为之伤了脚。
English: Yi Tong, Chen Liu Gong, Li Chong, Zhang Wu Wang, and Yuan Rong all fell to the ground due to the excessive weight they were carrying. Li Chong even injured his waist, and Yuan Rong injured his foot.

古文：时人为之语曰： 陈留、章武，伤腰折股。
现代文：当时人为此编出谣谚说： 陈留公、章武王，摔得腰痛腿也伤。
English: At that time, people made up a rumor saying: Chen Liu Gong, Zhang Wu Wang, fell and hurt his lower back and leg.

古文：贪人败类，秽我明主。 
现代文：贪婪败德一类人，污我明主好声望。 
English: Greedy and immoral people tarnish our good reputation.

古文：寻幸阙口温水，登鸡头山，自射象牙簪，一发中之，敕示文武。
现代文：太后不久前往阙温丞，登上鸡头山，自己发射象牙簪，一次发射就中靶，命令拿给文武官员看。
English: Not long after, he went to the hot springs in Ilukou, climbed the Jitou Mountain, and shot ivory dice with his own hands. As soon as he hit the target, he ordered the military and civilian officials to pass it on.

古文：时太后得志，逼幸清河王怿，淫乱肆情，为天下所恶。
现代文：这时太后得其所欲，逼迫清河王元惮与她同房，淫乱纵情，为天下人所厌恶。
English: At this time, the empress dowager got what she wanted, forcing Qinghe Wang Yuan Zhuo to share a room with her and indulge in sexual promiscuity, which was detested by the whole world.

古文：领军元叉、长秋卿刘腾等奉肃宗于显阳殿，幽太后于北宫，于禁中杀怿。
现代文：领军元叉、长秋卿刘腾等人拥戴肃宗到显阳殿，把太后软禁在北宫，在宫中杀死元惮。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Zha, and Chang Qiuqing Liu Teng and others took Suizong to the Xianyang Palace, put the empress dowager under house arrest in the North Palace, and killed Yuan Shuo in the palace.

古文：其后太后从子都统僧敬与备身左右张车渠等数十人，谋杀叉，复奉太后临朝。事不克，僧敬坐徙边，车渠等死，胡氏多免黜。
现代文：随后太后的侄儿都统道邀和在身边保卫的亟车猩等几十人，谋划杀死五呈，再拥戴太后临朝听政，事情没成功，僧敬因事获罪流放边境，车渠等人死去，胡氏宗族人员多被免职。
English: Subsequently, the nieces and nephews of the empress dowager all invited dozens of people, including the chariot orangutans who were guarding them, and planned to kill five of them, and then hold the empress dowager to listen to the government. The matter did not succeed, the monk Jing was exiled to the border for the crime, the chariot and other people died, and most of the Hu clan members were dismissed.

古文：后肃宗朝太后于西林园，宴文武侍臣，饮至日夕。
现代文：后来肃宗在西林园朝见太后，宴请文武侍臣，饮酒到天黑。
English: Later, Su Zong met the empress dowager in the morning in the West Forest Garden, invited Wenwu's attendants to a banquet, and drank alcohol until dark.

古文：叉乃起至太后前，自陈外云太后欲害己及腾。
现代文：元叉于是起身到太后面前，自述外面传言太后想谋害自己和刘腾。
English: Yuan Zha then stood up in front of the empress dowager and recounted the rumor that the empress dowager wanted to kill herself and Liu Teng.

古文：太后答云 无此语 。
现代文：太后回答说 没有这种话 。
English: The Empress Dowager replied that there was no such word.

古文：遂至于极昏。
现代文：于是到了很晚的时候。
English: The party went on until late into the night.

古文：太后乃起执肃宗手下堂，言： 母子不聚久，今暮共一宿，诸大臣送我入。 
现代文：太后就起身拉着肃宗的手走下殿堂，说： 母子不相聚已经很久，今晚共住一宿，各位大臣送我进去。 
English: The empress dowager got up, took Su Zong's hand and walked down the hall, saying, "It's been a long time since mother and son have been apart. Tonight we'll spend the night together, and the ministers will escort me inside."

古文：太后与肃宗向东北小阁，左卫将军奚康生谋欲杀叉，不果。
现代文：太后和蛊塞走进东合，左卫将军奚康生谋划要杀死元叉，没成功。
English: The empress dowager and Yu Xie walked into Donghe, and the left guard general Yu Kangsheng plotted to kill Yuan Zha, but failed.

古文：自刘腾死，叉又宽怠。
现代文：自从型膛死后，五星对太后的防范松懈。
English: Since the death of Tippo, the Five Stars have been lax in their protection of the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后与肃宗及高阳王雍为计，解叉领军。
现代文：太后和虚塞以及高阳王互雍定下计策，解除元叉的领军职务。
English: The empress dowager, Huisei, and Goyang Wang mutually agreed on a strategy to relieve Yuan Xuan of his leading position.

古文：太后复临朝，大赦改元。
现代文：太后又临朝听政，大赦天下改年号。
English: The empress dowager also came to the imperial court to listen to the government. She declared a general amnesty and changed the era name.

古文：自是朝政疏缓，威恩不立，在下牧守，所在贪惏。
现代文：从此朝政荒废，威信恩德不能树立，天下的州牧郡守，处处贪婪。
English: Since then, the imperial government has been in ruins, prestige and virtue cannot be established, and the world's state and county governors are greedy everywhere.

古文：郑俨污乱宫掖，势倾海内；李神轨、徐纥并见亲侍，一二年中，位总禁要，手握王爵，轻重在心，宣淫于朝，为四方之所厌秽。
现代文：郑俨在宫廷淫乱，权势遍天下；李神轨、俭丝都被亲近侍奉。一二年之间，位居宫禁要职，手中握着王爵，大小事出自心中，淫乱传遍朝廷，为四方的人所厌恶鄙视。
English: Zheng Xuan committed adultery in the court, and his power spread all over the world; Li Shenlu and Jian Si were both closely served by him. For a year or two, he held an important position in the court, holding a peerage in his hand, and things big and small came from his heart. The adultery spread all over the court, and was detested and despised by people in all directions.

古文：文武解体，所在乱逆，土崩鱼烂，由于此矣。
现代文：文武官员人心涣散，各地叛逆作乱，国家的土崩瓦解，源起于此。
English: As a result, civil and military officials were unrestrained, rebellions occurred everywhere, and the process of the country's collapse began.

古文：僧敬又因聚集亲族，遂涕泣谏曰： 陛下母仪海内，岂宜轻脱如此！ 
现代文：僧敬又利用聚集亲属的机会，哭泣规劝说： 陛下为海内母亲的仪表，哪应如此轻佻呢? 
English: Hu Xiangjing then gathered all his relatives and, with tears streaming down his face, said to the Empress Dowager Hu, "Your Majesty is a role model for the mothers of the world. How can you do whatever you want so carelessly?"

古文：后大怒，自是不召僧敬。
现代文：太后大怒，从此不召见僧敬。
English: The empress dowager was furious, and never summoned the monk again.

古文：太后自以行不修，惧宗室所嫌，于是内为朋党，防蔽耳目。肃宗所亲幸者，太后多以事害焉。
现代文：太后自以为行为不检点，畏惧被宗室所憎恨，于是在宫内培植党羽，掩人耳目，凡肃宗所亲近宠爱的，太后多藉故谋害。
English: The empress dowager thought she was behaving improperly and was afraid of being hated by the imperial family, so she cultivated party members in the palace and hid them from the public. The empress dowager often plotted to kill those who were close to and favored by Emperor Su.

古文：有蜜多道人，能胡语，肃宗置于左右。
现代文：有位蜜多道人。能说胡人语言，肃宗把他安置在身边。
English: There was a honey-loving Taoist who could speak the language of the Wu people, and Su Zong placed him by his side.

古文：太后虑其传致消息，三月三日于城南大巷中杀之。
现代文：太后担心他传递消息，三月三日在城南的大巷中杀了他。
English: The empress dowager, fearing that he was passing on information, killed him on March 3rd in an alley in the south of the city.

古文：方悬赏募贼，又于禁中杀领左右、鸿胪少卿谷会、绍达，并帝所亲也。母子之间，嫌隙屡起。
现代文：正要悬赏募取杀人犯，太后又在宫中杀死领左右、鸿胪少卿谷会、绍达，都是皇帝所亲近的人母子之间，猜疑屡次发生。
English: Suspicions repeatedly arose between the mother and son, who were about to offer a reward for the capture of the murderer, and the empress dowager, who had killed in the palace the leaders of the Left and Right Divisions, as well as Hung Yan, Shao Jing, Gu Hui, and Suo Da, all of whom were close to the emperor.

古文：郑俨虑祸，乃与太后计，因潘充华生女，太后诈以为男，便大赦改年。
现代文：郑俨担心祸患，就和太后定计，利用潘充华生女儿，太后诈称是男孩，就大赦天下改年号。
English: Worried about the calamity, Zheng Yi made a plan with the empress dowager, using the daughter of Panchong Watson, the empress dowager fraudulently claimed to be a boy, and changed the name of the year.

古文：肃宗之崩，事出仓卒，时论咸言郑俨、徐纥之计。
现代文：肃宗的逝世，事情突然，当时人议论都说是郑俨、徐纥的主意。
English: Su Zong's death was sudden. At the time, people said that it was Zheng Yao and Xu Yao's idea.

古文：于是朝野愤叹。
现代文：于是朝野愤怒感叹。
English: As a result, Asano was furious and lamented.

古文：太后乃奉潘嫔女言太子即位。
现代文：太后于是拥戴潘嫔生的女儿说是太子登位。
English: The empress dowager then told her daughter, who supported Pan Xinsheng, that the crown prince had ascended to the throne.

古文：经数日，见人心已安，始言潘嫔本实生女，今宜更择嗣君。
现代文：经过几天，见人心已经安定，才说潘嫔本是生的女儿，现在应另选择接位的君主。
English: After a few days, seeing that the hearts of the people had stabilized, it was said that Pan Ye was a natural daughter, and now another monarch should be chosen to take the throne.

古文：遂立临洮王子钊为主，年始三岁，天下愕然。
现代文：于是立临洮王的儿子元钊为君主，这年刚三岁，天下惊讶不已。
English: Therefore, King Linyi's son, the three-year-old Yuan Shao, was installed as the monarch, and the whole world was astonished.

古文：及武泰元年，尔朱荣称兵渡河，太后尽召肃宗六宫皆令入道，太后亦自落发。
现代文：等到武泰元年，尔朱荣起兵渡过黄河，太后召集肃宗六宫所有宫女都令进入寺院，太后自己也剃光头发。
English: In the first year of the Wu-tai Dynasty, when Er Zhu Rong raised an army and crossed the Yellow River, the empress dowager summoned all the courtesans of the six palaces of Su Zong and ordered them to enter the temple. The empress dowager herself also shaved her hair.

古文：荣遣骑拘送太后及幼主于河阴。
现代文：水朱荣派遣骑兵拘捕押送太后以及幼主到河阴。
English: Er Zhurong sent cavalry to arrest the empress dowager and the little emperor and sent them to Huayin.

古文：太后对荣多所陈说，荣拂衣而起。
现代文：太后对尔朱荣多方辩解自己的行为，尔朱荣拂袖起身。
English: The empress dowager repeatedly said to Le Zhu Rong, and Le Zhu Rong angrily whipped off her clothes.

古文：太后及幼主并沉于河。
现代文：太后和幼主都被沉入黄河。
English: Both the empress dowager and the young lord were drowned in the Yellow River.

古文：太后妹冯翊君收瘗于双灵佛寺。
现代文：太后的妹妹冯翊君将她收殓埋葬在双灵佛寺。
English: The empress dowager's sister, Feng Yijun, buried her in the Shuangling Buddhist Temple.

古文：出帝时，始葬以后礼而追加谥。
现代文：出帝时，才以皇后的礼仪安葬并追加谧号。
English: When he became emperor, he was buried according to the etiquette of an empress, and his posthumous name was added.

古文：孝明皇后胡氏，灵太后从兄冀州刺史盛之女。
现代文：孝明皇后胡氏，是灵太后的堂兄冀州刺史胡盛的女儿。
English: Empress Xiaoming Hu is the daughter of the Empress Dowager's cousin, Jizhou Prince Hu Sheng.

古文：灵太后欲荣重门族，故立为皇后。
现代文：灵太后想荣耀敬重家族，所以立她为皇后。
English: The Queen Mother wanted to honor and respect her family, so she made her queen.

古文：肃宗颇有酒德，专嬖充华潘氏，后及嫔御并无过宠。
现代文：肃宗很有酒性，一意宠幸充华潘氏，皇后和侍妾都没受过分的宠爱。
English: Su Zong was very fond of wine, and he was the favorite of Geng Hua Pan. Neither the empress nor her attendants were particularly fond of him.

古文：太后为肃宗选纳，抑屈人流。
现代文：太后为肃宗选妃嫔，抑制有声望的家庭。
English: The empress dowager selected concubines for Su Zong, suppressing prestigious families.

古文：时博陵崔孝芬、范阳卢道约、陇西李瓚等女，但为世妇。
现代文：当时博陵人崔孝芬、范阳人卢道约、陇西人李瓒等人的女儿，仅为世妇。
English: At that time, the daughters of Boring's Cui Xiaofeng, Fanyang's Lu Daoyo, and Shaanxi's Li Yao were only worldly women.

古文：诸人诉讼，咸见忿责。
现代文：各人申诉，都被愤怒地斥责。
English: Each complained and was angrily rebuked.

古文：武泰初，后既入道遂居于瑶光寺。
现代文：武泰初年。皇后进佛门，于是住在瑶光寺。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Tai, the empress entered the Buddhist gate and lived in the Jiguang Temple.

古文：孝静皇后高氏，齐献武王之第二女也。
现代文：孝静皇后高氏，是齐献武王的第二个女儿。
English: Empress Xiaojing Gao is the second daughter of King Qi Xianwu.

古文：天平四年，娉以为皇后。王前后固辞，帝不许。
现代文：天平四年，下诏娉为皇后，献武王先后执意推辞，皇帝不准许。
English: In the fourth year of the balance of power, the next Empress Zhaozhang became the Empress. King Xianwu persistently refused to abdicate, and the emperor did not allow it.

古文：兴和初，诏侍中、司徒公孙腾，司空公、襄城王旭，兼尚书令、司州牧、西河王忭，兼太常卿及宗正卿元孝友等奉诏致礼，并备宫官侍卫，以后驾迎于晋阳之丞相第。
现代文：兴和初年，诏令侍中、司徒公孙腾，司空公、襄城王元旭，兼尚书令、司州牧、西河王元惊，兼太常卿以及宗正卿元孝友等人带卜诏书送上礼品，并备齐宫官和侍卫人员，以皇后的车辆到晋阳的丞相府第迎接。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the attendants of Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress

古文：五月，立为皇后，大赦天下。
现代文：五月，立为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In May, she was enthroned as empress and granted amnesty.

古文：齐受禅，降为中山王妃。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，皇后降为中山王妃。
English: Qi accepted Zen's resignation, and the empress was demoted to Princess Zhongshan.

古文：后降于尚书左仆射杨遵彦。
现代文：后来嫁给尚书左仆射杨遵彦。
English: Later, she married Sho Sho Sho's left-hand man Sho Yang Junhiko.

古文：史臣曰：始祖生自天女，克昌后叶。
现代文：史臣曰：始祖由天女而生，后代昌盛。
English: Shichen said, "The founder was born of a celestial maiden, and his descendants prospered."

古文：灵后淫恣，卒亡天下。
现代文：灵后淫乱恣肆，终于失去天下。
English: After his death, he indulged in debauchery and finally lost the world.

古文：倾城之戒，其在兹乎？
现代文：美女倾覆邦国的告诫，就在于此吧?
English: Is this the beauty's warning to overthrow the state?

古文：钩弋年稚子幼，汉武所以行权，魏世遂为常制。
现代文：钩弋夫人年轻而儿子幼小，莲武帝所以采用变通办法，魏国却成为通常的制度。
English: Since Lady Hook-Beak was young and her son was small, Emperor Lingwu adopted a workaround, but the Wei state became the usual system.

古文：子贵母死，矫枉之义不亦过哉！
现代文：儿子尊贵母亲赐死，矫正枉曲的意义不也太过分了吗?
English: Isn't the significance of rectifying the injustice of a son's death at the hands of his revered mother too great?

古文：高祖终革其失，良有以也。
现代文：高祖最终革除这个错误，实在是有道理的。
English: It really makes sense for Gaozu to finally eradicate this mistake.

