古文：文王问太公曰： 圣人何守？ 
现代文：文王询问太公说： 圣人治理天下应遵循什么样的治国原则呢？ 
English: King Wen asked the Grand Duke, "What principles of statecraft should be followed when a sage governs the world?"

古文：太公曰： 何忧何啬，万物皆得。
现代文：太公答道： 无需忧虑什么，也不必抑制什么，天下万物就能各得其所；不去制止，也不去忧虑，天下万物就会繁荣滋长。
English: The father-in-law replied, "There is no need to worry about anything, and there is no need to restrain anything. Everything in the world can have its own place. If you don't stop or worry, everything in the world will flourish and grow."

古文：政之所施，莫知其化；时之所在，莫知其移。
现代文：政令的推行，要使民众在不知不觉中受到感化，就如同时间在不知不觉中自然推移那样。
English: The implementation of the decree should make the people unconsciously influenced, just as time unconsciously passes naturally.

古文：圣人守此而万物化，何穷之有，终而复始。
现代文：圣人遵循这一原则，则天下万物就会被潜移默化，周而复始，永无止境。
English: If a saint follows this principle, then all things in the world will be imperceptibly transmuted, recurring, and never ending.

古文：优而游之，展转求之；求而得之，不可不藏；既以藏之，不可不行；既以行之，勿复明之。
现代文：这种从容悠闲无为而治的政治，君主必须反复探求。既已探求到了，就不可不藏于心中；既已藏于心中，就不可不贯彻执行；既已贯彻执行，就不必将其中的奥秘明告世人。
English: This kind of politics of leisurely doing nothing, the monarch must explore again and again. Once it has been explored, it must be hidden in the heart; once it has been hidden in the heart, it must be implemented; once it has been implemented, there is no need to reveal its secrets to the world.

古文：夫天地不自明，故能长生；圣人不自明，故能明彰。
现代文：天地不宣告自己的规律，而万物自会按其规律生长；圣人不炫耀自己的英明，而自能成就辉煌的功业。
English: Heaven and earth do not proclaim their own laws, but all things will grow according to their own laws; sages do not show off their wisdom, but are able to achieve brilliant work.

古文： 古之圣人聚人而为家，聚家而为国，聚国而为天下；分封贤人以为万国，命之曰大纪。
现代文： 古代圣人把人们聚集起来组成家庭，把许多家庭聚集起来组成国家，把许多国家聚集起来组成天下。分封贤人让他们成为天下诸侯，把这一切叫做治理国家的纲纪。
English: Ancient sages gathered people together to form a family, gathered many families together to form a country, and gathered many countries together to form the world. The wise men of the Han Dynasty made them princes of the world, and called all of this the discipline of governing the country.

古文：陈其政教，顺其民俗；群曲化直，变于形容；万国不通，各乐其所；人爱其上，命之曰大定。
现代文：宣传弘扬教化，顺应民俗民情，移风易俗，把邪僻转化为正直，尽管各国的风俗不同，但能使民众安居乐业，人人尊敬爱戴君主，这就叫做天下大定。唉！
English: Propaganda promotes enlightenment, conforms to folk customs, changes customs, transforms eccentricity into honesty. Although the customs of various countries are different, it can make the people live and work in peace, and everyone respects and loves the monarch. This is called world peace. Alas!

古文：呜呼！圣人务静之，贤人务正之，愚人不能正，故与人争；上劳则刑繁，刑繁则民忧，民忧则流亡。
现代文：圣人致力于清静无为，贤君致力于端正身心，愚昧的君主不能端正身心，所以会与民众抗争。君主政令烦多，就会导致刑罚繁苛，刑罚繁苛就会造成民众忧俱；民众忧惧，就会流散逃亡。
English: A saint is devoted to tranquility and inaction, a wise ruler is devoted to rectifying the mind and body, a foolish ruler cannot rectify the mind and body, so he will fight with the people. Monarchical government is tiresome, it will lead to harsh punishment, harsh punishment will cause the people to worry; the people are worried, they will disperse and flee.

古文：上下不安其生，累世不休，命之曰大失。
现代文：上下不安生业，社会长期动乱不休，这就叫做政治大失。
English: Uneasy livelihoods up and down, long-term social turmoil, this is called a political blunder.

古文： 天下之人如流水，障之则止。启之则行，静之则清。
现代文：天下人心的向背就如同流水，阻塞它就会停止，开启它就会流动，保持静止状态时它就很清澈。唉！
English: The backward movement of the human heart is like flowing water. If it is blocked, it will stop. If it is turned on, it will flow. When it is at rest, it is very clear. Alas!

古文：呜呼！神哉！
现代文：真是太神奇了！
English: It's amazing!

古文：圣人见其所始，则知其所终。 
现代文：圣人知道了它从哪里开始，就能推断出它在哪里终止。 
English: The sage, knowing where it begins, can deduce where it ends.

古文：文王曰： 静之奈何？ 
现代文：文王问： 怎样才能使天下安静呢？ 
English: King Wen asked: How can we make the world quiet?

古文：太公曰： 天有常形，民有常生，与天下共其生而天静矣。
现代文：太公答道： 天有一定的变化规律，老百姓有经常从事的生业。君主能同民众共安生业，天下就会太平。
English: Taigong replied: The sky has a certain pattern of change, and the common people have their regular livelihoods. If the monarch can coexist peacefully with the people, the world will be peaceful.

古文：太上因之，其次化之。
现代文：所以说最好的政治是顺应民心进行治理，其次是教育感化进行治理。
English: Therefore, the best politics is to govern in accordance with the people's will, and the second is to govern through the influence of education.

古文：夫民化而从政，是以天无为而成事，民无与而自富，此圣人之德也。 
现代文：百姓被感化就会服从政令。所以，天道无为而能生长万物，民众无需施舍就能丰衣足食、这就是圣人的德治。 
English: If the people are influenced, they will obey government orders. Therefore, the heavenly way can grow all things without doing anything, and the people can be well-fed and clothed without charity. This is the virtue of a saint.

古文：文王曰： 公言乃协予怀，夙夜念之不忘，以用为常。 
现代文：文王说： 您的话深合我意，我将朝思夕念，时刻不忘，把它作为治理天下的根本原则。 
English: King Wen said: Your words resonate deeply with me. I will think about them day and night, and never forget them. I will take them as the fundamental principles for governing the world.

