古文：孙子曰：凡用兵之法，将受命于君，合军聚众。圮地无舍，衢地交合，绝地无留，围地则谋，死地则战，途有所不由，军有所不击，城有所不攻，地有所不争，君命有所不受。
现代文：孙子说：用兵的原则，将帅接受国君的命令，召集民众组建军队，出征后遇到山林险阻、沼泽水洼等难以通行的 圮地 ，慎勿驻扎；在几国交界、四通八达的 衢地 ，则注意结交邻国诸侯；在难以生存的地区千万不可停留；在四周有险阻容易被包围的地区要设法避免，误入死地则须坚决作战。有的道路不要走，有的敌军可以不去阻击，有些城池可以不去攻占，有的地域可以不去争夺，甚至君主的某些不合理的命令也可以不接受。
English: Sun Tzu said: "The principle of using soldiers is that the general accepts the order of the sovereign, gathers the people to form an army, and when encountering mountains, forests, obstacles, swamps, and waterholes that are difficult to pass, be careful not to stop; in the border areas of several countries and in the far-reaching areas, be careful not to make friends with neighboring princes; in areas where it is difficult to survive, do not stay; in areas where there are obstacles that are easy to be surrounded, you must try to avoid, and you must fight to the death. Some roads should not be taken, some enemy troops can not be blocked, some cities can not be occupied, some areas

古文：故将通于九变之利者，知用兵矣；将不通九变之利，虽知地形，不能得地之利矣；治兵不知九变之术，虽知五利，不能得而用之矣。
现代文：所以将帅精通 九变 的具体运用，就算是真正懂得用兵了；将帅不精通 九变 的具体运用，就算熟悉地形，也不能发挥其有利作用。将帅指挥作战如果不懂 九变 的方法，即使知道五种地形的利与弊，也不能充分发挥部队的战斗力。
English: Therefore, if the commander is proficient in the specific application of the nine transformations, even if he really knows how to use soldiers; if the commander is not proficient in the specific application of the nine transformations, even if he is familiar with the terrain, he cannot play its beneficial role. If the commander does not understand the method of the nine transformations, even if he knows the advantages and disadvantages of the five terrains, he cannot fully exert the combat effectiveness of the troops.

古文：是故智者之虑，必杂于利害，杂于利而务可信也，杂于害而患可解也。
现代文：智慧的将帅考虑问题，必定兼顾到利与害这两方面的条件。在考虑不利条件时，同时考虑有利条件，战事就能顺利进行；在看到有利因素时同时考虑到不利因素，各种可能发生的祸患就可以预先排除。
English: When a wise general considers a problem, he must take into account both the conditions of benefit and harm. When considering the unfavorable conditions, he will also consider the favorable conditions, and the war will proceed smoothly; when he sees the favorable factors, he will also consider the unfavorable factors, and all kinds of possible disasters can be eliminated in advance.

古文：是故屈诸侯者以害，役诸侯者以业，趋诸侯者以利。
现代文：因此，用最令人头痛的事去使敌国屈服，用复杂的事去使敌国穷于应付，以利益为钓饵引诱敌国疲于奔命。
English: Therefore, use the most troublesome thing to make the enemy country succumb, use complex things to make the enemy country overwhelmed, and use profit as a bait to lure the enemy country into running for their lives.

古文：故用兵之法，无恃其不来，恃吾有以待之；无恃其不攻，恃吾有所不可攻也。
现代文：所以用兵的原则是：不要侥幸指望敌人不来侵犯，而要依靠自己应付敌人侵犯的充分准备；不要侥幸指望敌人不来进攻，而要依靠自己有着使敌人不敢进攻的强大实力。
English: Therefore, the principle of the use of troops is: do not hope that the enemy will not invade, but rely on yourself to fully prepare for the invasion of the enemy; do not hope that the enemy will not attack, but rely on yourself to have a strong strength that makes the enemy dare not attack.

古文：故将有五危，必死可杀，必生可虏，忿速可侮，廉洁可辱，爱民可烦。
现代文：所以，将领有五种致命的弱点：蛮干死拼，可能招致杀身之祸；贪生怕死，则可能被敌军俘；性情急躁易怒，可能受敌轻侮而失去理智；过分廉洁好名，矜于名节，可能会被羞辱引发冲动；爱民过甚，受不了敌方的扰民行动而不能采取相应的对敌行动。
English: Therefore, there are five fatal weaknesses of generals: if they fight to the death, they may be killed; if they are greedy for life and afraid of death, they may be captured by the enemy; if they are quick-tempered and quick to anger, they may be despised by the enemy and lose their reason; if they are too honest and honorable, they may be humiliated and become impulsive; if they love the people too much, they cannot tolerate the enemy's actions to disturb the people and cannot take corresponding actions against the enemy.

古文：凡此五者，将之过也，用兵之灾也。
现代文：这五种情况，是将帅的性格大忌，也是用兵的灾难。
English: These five situations are a big taboo for the general's character and a disaster for the use of soldiers.

古文：覆军杀将，必以五危，不可不察也。
现代文：军队覆没，将领牺牲，必定是因为这五种危害，因此一定要认识到这五种危害的严重性。
English: The destruction of the army and the sacrifice of generals must be due to these five harms, so we must recognize the seriousness of these five harms.

