古文：儒者说凤皇、骐驎为圣王来，以为凤皇、骐仁圣禽也，思虑深，避害远，中国有道则来，无道则隐。
现代文：俗儒说凤凰、麒麟是为圣人而出现的，认为凤凰、麒麟是仁圣的禽兽。它们思虑深远，远避祸害，中国政治清明就出现，政治昏暗就隐藏不出。
English: Confucianists say that the phoenix and the unicorn appear for the saints, and that the phoenix and the unicorn are benevolent beasts. They are far-sighted and avoid evil. When China's politics are clear, they appear, and when they are dark, they cannot be hidden.

古文：称凤皇、骐驎之仁知者，欲以褒圣人也，非圣人之德不能致凤皇、骐驎。
现代文：称颂凤凰、麒麟如此仁智，是想用它们来颂扬圣人。因为不具备圣人的道德，就不能招来凤凰、麒麟，这种说法是荒谬的。
English: To praise the phoenix and the unicorn for being so benevolent and wise is to use them to praise a saint. It is absurd to say that the phoenix and the unicorn cannot be summoned because they do not have the morality of a saint.

古文：夫凤皇、骐驎圣，圣人亦圣。
现代文：凤凰、麒麟仁圣，圣人也仁圣。
English: The phoenix and the unicorn are benevolent, and the saint is also benevolent.

古文：圣人恓恓忧世，凤皇、骐驎亦宜率教。
现代文：圣人忙碌不安为天下操心，凤凰、麒麟也应当遵循圣人的教化去做。
English: The sage is busy and anxious worrying about the world, and the phoenix and the unicorn should also follow the enlightenment of the sage.

古文：圣人游於世间，凤皇、骐亦宜与鸟兽会。
现代文：圣人在人世间来往，凤凰、麒麟也应当与鸟兽聚集在一起。
English: The saints come and go in the human world, and the phoenix and the unicorn should also gather together with the birds and beasts.

古文：何故远去中国，处於边外，岂圣人浊，凤皇、骐驎清哉？
现代文：为什么要远远离开中国，处在边远地区呢？难道是圣人的道德不高尚，凤凰、麒麟的道德清高吗？
English: Why do they have to be far away from China, in remote areas? Is it because the morality of saints is not noble, and the morality of phoenixes and unicorns is high?

古文：何其圣德俱而操不同也？
现代文：为什么它们的品德如此相同而行为却又如此不同呢？
English: Why are their characters so much alike, and yet their actions so different?

古文：如以圣人者当隐乎，十二圣宜隐；如以圣者当见，凤、驎亦宜见。
现代文：如果认为圣人应当隐藏，那么十二圣就应当隐藏起来；如果认为圣人应当出现，那么凤凰、麒麟也就应当出现。
English: If it is thought that a saint should be hidden, then the Twelve Saints should be hidden; if it is thought that a saint should appear, then the phoenix and the unicorn should also appear.

古文：如以仁圣之禽，思虑深，避害远，则文王拘於羑里，孔子厄於陈、蔡，非也。
现代文：如果认为它们是仁圣的禽兽，思虑深远，应该远避祸害，那么周文王被拘禁在羑里，孔子在陈国、蔡国间遭难，就不对了。
English: If you think that they are benevolent beasts, far-sighted, and should avoid harm, then it is not right that King Zhou Wen was detained in a shack, and Confucius suffered in Chen and Cai.

古文：文王、孔子，仁圣之人，忧世悯民，不图利害，故其有仁圣之知，遭拘厄之患。
现代文：周文王和孔子，都是仁圣的人，操心天下爱惜百姓，不计较个人得失，所以他们具有仁圣的才智，才遭受拘禁困穷的祸患。
English: King Zhouwen and Confucius were both benevolent people, concerned about the world and caring for the people, regardless of personal gains and losses. Therefore, they had the wisdom of benevolence, only to suffer the scourge of detention and poverty.

古文：凡人操行能修身正节，不能禁人加非於己。
现代文：凡个人进行修养，能够修养身心端正节操，却不能够阻止别人把非议加在自己的头上。
English: Any individual who cultivates himself can cultivate a sound mind and body, but he cannot prevent others from placing criticism on his head.

古文：案人操行莫能过圣人，圣人不能自免於厄，而凤、驎独能自全於世，是鸟兽之操，贤於圣人也。
现代文：考察人的道德行为，谁也超不过圣人，圣人都不能使自己免受灾难，而凤凰、麒麟偏偏能自我保全在世上，这样说来，鸟兽的操行比圣人的还要好了。
English: When examining people's moral behavior, no one is better than a saint. A saint cannot save himself from disaster, but a phoenix and a unicorn can save themselves in the world. In this way, the behavior of birds and beasts is even better than that of a saint.

古文：且鸟兽之知，不与人通，何以能知国有道与无道也？
现代文：鸟兽的思想，不与人相通，凭什么能知道中国政治的好坏呢？
English: The thoughts of birds and beasts do not communicate with people, so how can we know whether Chinese politics are good or bad?

古文：人同性类，好恶均等，尚不相知；鸟兽与人异性，何能知之？
现代文：人与人的禀性和种类是相同的，好恶也是相等的，尚且不能相互了解，鸟兽与人的禀性不同，怎么能够了解人呢？
English: People and animals are of the same toughness and species, and they have the same likes and dislikes, yet they cannot understand each other. How can we understand people when the toughness of animals and birds is different from that of humans?

古文：人不能知鸟兽，鸟兽亦不能知人，两不能相知；鸟兽为愚於人，何以反能知之？
现代文：人不能了解鸟兽，鸟兽也不能了解人，两方面互相不了解，鸟兽比人愚蠢，为什么反而能够了解人呢？
English: People cannot understand birds and beasts, and birds and beasts cannot understand people. The two sides do not understand each other. Birds and beasts are more stupid than people. Why can they understand people?

古文：儒者咸称凤皇之德，欲以表明王之治，反令人有不及鸟兽，论事过情，使实不著。
现代文：俗儒都称赞凤凰的品德，想用它来表彰圣王的统治，反而使人有圣王不及鸟兽的感觉，论事超过实情，反而使实情不明显了。
English: Confucianism lauds the virtue of the phoenix, and wants to use it to commend the rule of the holy king, but it makes people feel that the holy king is inferior to birds and beasts. The discussion exceeds the truth, but makes the truth less obvious.

古文：且凤、驎岂独为圣王至哉？
现代文：而且凤凰、麒麟难道是单为圣王才出现的吗？
English: Moreover, did the phoenix and the unicorn appear only for the holy king?

古文：孝宣皇帝之时，凤皇五至，骐驎一至，神雀、黄龙，甘露、醴泉，莫不毕见，故有五凤、神雀、甘露、黄龙之纪。
现代文：孝宣皇帝的时候，凤凰五次出现，麒麟一次出现，神雀、黄龙、甘露、醴泉，全都出现过，所以才有五凤、神雀、甘露、黄龙这些年号。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaoxuan, the phoenix appeared five times, the unicorn appeared once, and the divine sparrow, the yellow dragon, the nectar of nectar, and the spring of fresh water all appeared, which is why there are five phoenixes, the divine sparrow, the nectar of nectar, and the yellow dragon.

古文：使凤、驎审为圣王见，则孝宣皇帝圣人也；如孝宣帝非圣，则凤、驎为贤来也。
现代文：假如凤凰、麒麟确实是为了圣王而出现的，那么孝宣皇帝也是圣人了；如果孝宣皇帝不是圣人，那么凤凰、麒麟是为贤人而出现的了。
English: If the phoenix and the unicorn really appeared for the holy king, then Emperor Xiaoxuan is also a saint; if Emperor Xiaoxuan is not a saint, then the phoenix and the unicorn appeared for the sage.

古文：为贤来，则儒者称凤皇、骐驎，失其实也。
现代文：凤、麟为贤人而出现，那么俗儒称赞凤凰、麒麟，就失去它的实际意义了。
English: If the phoenix and the unicorn appear as sages, then the laity's praise of the phoenix and the unicorn loses its practical significance.

古文：凤皇、骐为尧、舜来，亦为宣帝来矣。
现代文：凤凰、麒麟为尧、舜而出现，同样也为孝宣皇帝而出现。
English: The phoenix and the unicorn appear for the dragon and the dragonfly, as well as for Emperor Xiaoxuan.

古文：夫如是，为圣且贤也。
现代文：如此说来，凤凰、麒麟既为圣王出现也为贤人而出现。
English: Thus, the phoenix and the unicorn appear both as holy kings and as wise men.

古文：儒者说圣太隆，则论凤、驎亦过其实。
现代文：俗儒颂扬圣人太过分，而称赞凤凰、麒麟也言过其实了。
English: The laity extol the saints too much, and praise the phoenix and the unicorn too much.

古文：《春秋》曰： 西狩获死驎。 
现代文：《春秋》上说： 有人在鲁国西部打猎，获得一头死麒麟，有人把这件事告诉了孔子。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: Someone was hunting in the west of Lu and got a dead unicorn. Someone told this to Confucius.

古文：人以示孔子，孔子曰： 孰为来哉？
现代文：孔子说： 它为谁而来啊！它为谁而来啊！ 
English: Confucius said: For whom did it come? For whom did it come?

古文：孰为来哉？ 反袂拭面，泣涕沾襟。
现代文：把袖口翻过来擦脸，泪水打湿了衣襟。 
English: He turned his cuffs inside out and wiped his face, tears wetting his shirt collar.

古文：儒者说之，以为天以命孔子，孔子不王之圣也。
现代文：俗儒解释这件事，认为是上天用麒麟来授命于孔子，因为孔子是没有当君王的圣人。
English: Confucianists explain this event by saying that heaven used the unicorn to give orders to Confucius, because Confucius was not a saint who became a king.

古文：夫驎为圣王来，孔子自以不王，而时王鲁君无感驎之德，怪其来而不知所为，故曰： 孰为来哉？孰为来哉？ 
现代文：麒麟是为圣王出现的，孔子因为自己不是君王，而当时的周王和鲁君又都没有能感召麒麟的德行，对麒麟的出现感到奇怪而不知道它为什么会出现，所以就说 它为谁而来啊！它为谁而来啊！ 
English: Kirin appeared for the holy king, Confucius because he was not a king, and the king of Zhou and Lu at that time were not able to inspire the virtue of Kirin. He was surprised by the appearance of Kirin and did not know why it appeared, so he said, "Who did it come for! Who did it come for!"

古文：知其不为治平而至，为己道穷而来，望绝心感，故涕泣沾襟。
现代文：孔子知道它不是为政治贤明而出现，是为自己到了穷途末路而出现，希望破灭内心伤感，因此泪水打湿了衣襟。
English: Confucius knew that it did not appear for the sake of political wisdom, but for the sake of his own desperate situation, hoping to break the sadness in his heart, so tears wet his collar.

古文：以孔子言 孰为来哉 ，知驎为圣王来也。
现代文：从孔子说 它为谁而来啊 这句话，可知麒麟是为圣王而出现的。
English: From the words of Confucius, "For whom did it come?," we know that the Kirin appeared for the holy king.

古文：曰：前孔子之时，世儒已传此说，孔子闻此说而希见其物也，见驎之至，怪所为来。
现代文：我说：在孔子以前，俗儒已经流传着关于麒麟是为圣王而出现的这种说法了，孔子听见了这种传说而又很少见到这种动物，所以见到麒麟出现，就奇怪它为什么到来。
English: I said, "Before Confucius, there was already a popular saying among laymen that the unicorn appeared for the holy king. Confucius heard this legend but rarely saw this animal, so when he saw the unicorn appear, he wondered why it had come.

古文：实者，驎至，无所为来，常有之物也，行迈鲁泽之中，而鲁国见其物遭获之也。
现代文：实际上，麒麟出现是没有任何目的的，它也是一种常见的动物。它行经鲁国的草泽之中，鲁国人见到这种动物，碰上就捕获住它了。
English: In fact, the appearance of the unicorn is not for any purpose, it is also a common animal. It travels through the grasses of Lu. Lu people saw this animal and caught it.

古文：孔子见驎之获，获而又死，则自比於驎，自谓道绝不复行，将为小人所蹊获也。
现代文：孔子看见麒麟被捕捉，捉到后又死了，就以麒麟自比，自认为治世的主张到了穷途末路不能再继续施行，将会被小人所拘禁了。
English: When Confucius saw that Kirin was captured and died after being caught, he compared himself to Kirin, and thought that the idea of ruling the world could not be continued to the bitter end, and that he would be detained by villains.

古文：故孔子见驎而自泣者，据其见得而死也，非据其本所为来也。
现代文：所以孔子见到麒麟而自己哭起来，是由于见到麒麟被捉住并且死了，并不是根据它原本是为什么来而哭的。
English: Therefore, when Confucius saw the unicorn, he cried because he saw the unicorn was caught and died, not because of what the unicorn had come for.

古文：然则驎之至也，自与兽会聚也。其死，人杀之也。
现代文：然而麒麟的出现，是它自己与兽类相聚会；它的死，是人杀了它。
English: However, the appearance of the unicorn is its own meeting with the beast; its death is man killing it.

古文：使驎有知，为圣王来，时无圣主，何为来乎？
现代文：假如麒麟有神智，是为圣王而出现，当时并没有圣王，它为什么出现呢？
English: If the unicorn had divine wisdom and appeared for the sake of the holy king, why did it appear when there was no holy king?

古文：思虑深，避害远，何故为鲁所获杀乎？
现代文：它能思虑深邃，远避祸害，为什么会被鲁国人捕获而杀死呢？
English: It can think deeply and avoid harm, so why would it be captured and killed by the Lu people?

古文：夫以时无圣王而驎至，知不为圣王来也；为鲁所获杀，知其避害不能远也。
现代文：从当时没有圣王而麒麟出现来看，可知麒麟不是为圣王而出现的；从它被鲁国人捕获杀死来看，可知它并不能远远地避开祸害。
English: Judging from the fact that there was no holy king at that time and Kirin appeared, it can be seen that Kirin did not appear for the sake of the holy king; judging from the fact that it was captured and killed by the Lu people, it can be seen that it cannot avoid the evil far away.

古文：圣兽不能自免於难。圣人亦不能自免於祸。
现代文：圣兽不能自免于灾难，圣人也就不能自免于祸患。
English: A holy beast cannot free itself from disaster, and a holy man cannot free himself from evil.

古文：祸难之事，圣者所不能避，而云凤、驎思虑深，避害远，妄也。
现代文：祸患灾难的事件，圣者不能避开，而说凤凰、麒麟能思虑深邃，远避祸害，太荒诞了。
English: The events of calamity and disaster cannot be avoided by the saint, but it is too absurd to say that the phoenix and the unicorn can think deeply and avoid the calamity.

古文：且凤、驎非生外国也，中国有圣王乃来至也。
现代文：而且凤凰、麒麟并不是产生在边远地区，中原有了圣王才来出现的。
English: Moreover, the phoenix and the unicorn did not originate in remote areas, but only appeared in the Central Plains when there was a holy king.

古文：生於中国，长於山林之间，性廉见希，人不得害也，则谓之思虑深，避害远矣。
现代文：它们生于中原，长于山林之中，性情清高很少出现，人们不能够伤害它们，就说它们思虑深远，能远避祸害了。
English: They are born in the Central Plains and grow in the mountains and forests. They rarely have a pure temperament. People can't hurt them, so they are said to be far-sighted and able to avoid harm.

古文：生与圣王同时，行与治平相遇，世间谓之圣王之瑞，为圣来矣。
现代文：它们与圣王同时产生，活动正与政治清明时期相遇，世上的人就说它们是圣王的祥瑞，是为了圣王才出现的。
English: They came into being at the same time as the holy king, and their activities coincided with a period of political clarity. People around the world say that they are the blessings of the holy king, that they came into being for the sake of the holy king.

古文：剥巢破卵，凤皇为之不翔；焚林而畋，漉池而渔，龟、龙为之不游。
现代文：捣毁凤凰巢，打破凤凰卵，凤凰因此会不飞翔；烧毁森林来打猎，放干池水来打鱼，龟、龙因此会不游动。
English: Destroy the phoenix's nest, break the phoenix's eggs, so the phoenix will not fly; burn the forest to hunt, let the pond water dry to fish, so the turtle and dragon will not swim.

古文：凤皇，龟、龙之类也，皆生中国，与人相近。
现代文：凤凰，是龟、龙的同类，都产生在中原，与人相接近。
English: The phoenix is the same species as the turtle and the dragon, both of which originated in the Central Plains and are close to humans.

古文：巢剥卵破，屏窜不翔；林焚池漉，伏匿不游，无远去之文，何以知其在外国也？
现代文：巢被毁卵被打破，凤凰就躲避起来不飞翔；林被焚烧池被放干，龟、龙就隐藏起来不再游动。并没有它们远远离去的文字记载，怎么知道它们存在于边远地区呢？
English: If the nest is destroyed and the eggs are broken, the phoenix will hide and not fly; if the forest is burned and the pond is drained, the turtle and the dragon will hide and no longer swim. If there is no written record of them being far away, how can we know that they exist in remote areas?

古文：龟、龙、凤皇，同一类也。
现代文：龟、龙、凤凰、麒麟，同属一类。
English: Turtle, dragon, phoenix, and unicorn all belong to the same class.

古文：希见不害，谓在外国；龟、龙希见，亦在外国矣。
现代文：凤、麟很少出现不受伤害，就说它们存在于边远地区，龟、龙很少出现，也存在于边远地区了。
English: The phoenix and the unicorn rarely appear unharmed, so it can be said that they exist in remote areas. The turtle and the dragon rarely appear, but they also exist in remote areas.

古文：孝宣皇帝之时，凤皇、骐驎、黄龙、神雀皆至，其至同时，则其性行相似类，则其生出宜同处矣。
现代文：孝宣皇帝的时候，凤凰、麒麟、黄龙、神雀都出现。它们都同时出现，那么它们的本性和行为是相同的，它们的产生和出没也应当在同一个地区了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaoxuan, the phoenix, the unicorn, the yellow dragon, and the divine sparrow all appeared. They all appeared at the same time, so their nature and behavior are the same, and their origin and appearance should also be in the same area.

古文：龙不生於外国，外国亦有龙。凤、驎不生外国，外国亦有凤、驎。
现代文：龙不产生于边远地区，边远地区也有龙；凤凰、麒麟不产生在边远地区，边远地区也有凤凰、麒麟。
English: Dragons do not originate in remote areas, and there are also dragons in remote areas; phoenixes and unicorns do not originate in remote areas, and there are also phoenixes and unicorns in remote areas.

古文：然则中国亦有，未必外国之凤、驎也。
现代文：然而中原也有的凤、麟，未必就是边远地区的凤、麟。
English: However, there are also phoenixes and unicorns in the Central Plains, but they are not necessarily phoenixes and unicorns in remote areas.

古文：人见凤、驎希见，则曰在外国；见遇太平，则曰为圣王来。
现代文：人们见凤凰、麒麟很少出现，就说它们存在于边远地区，看到它们正巧在太平的时候出现，就说它们是为圣王而出现的。
English: When people see that phoenixes and unicorns rarely appear, they say that they exist in remote areas. When they happen to appear in times of peace, they say that they appear for the holy king.

古文：夫凤皇、骐驎之至也，犹醴泉之出、硃草之生也。
现代文：凤凰，麒麟的出现，就和醴泉的出现、朱草的产生一样。
English: The emergence of the phoenix and the unicorn is the same as the emergence of the fountain and the emergence of the primrose.

古文：谓凤皇在外国，闻有道而来，醴泉、硃草何知，而生於太平之时？
现代文：说凤凰存在于边远地区，听见中原的政治清明而出现，那么醴泉、朱草知道什么，怎么会产生在太平的时候呢？
English: It is said that phoenixes exist in remote areas, and they appear when the politics of the Central Plains are clear. So, what do the springs of radium and vermiculite know, and how are they produced in times of peace?

古文：醴泉、硃草，和气所生，然则凤皇、骐驎，亦和气所生也。
现代文：醴泉、朱草，是由和气所产生的，同样，凤凰、麒麟也是由和气所产生的。
English: Dragonfly spring and vermilion grass are produced by harmony. Similarly, phoenix and unicorn are also produced by harmony.

古文：和气生圣人，圣人生於衰世。物生为瑞，人生为圣，同时俱然，时其长大，相逢遇矣。
现代文：事物产生就是祥瑞，人物产生就是圣人，同时产生本性相同，等到他们长大后，自然就相遇在一起了。
English: When things come into being, they are auspicious, and when people come into being, they are saints. At the same time, they have the same nature. When they grow up, they will naturally meet each other.

古文：衰世亦有和气，和气时生圣人。
现代文：衰世也有和气，和气有时也产生圣人。
English: Decadence also has harmony, and harmony sometimes produces saints.

古文：圣人生於衰世，衰世亦时有凤、驎也。
现代文：圣人在衰世产生，衰世中也不时会有凤凰、麒麟出现。
English: Saints are born in declining years, and phoenixes and unicorns appear from time to time in declining years.

古文：孔子生於周之末世，骐驎见於鲁之西泽。
现代文：孔子出生在周代的末世，麒麟就在鲁国的西部水泽中出现。
English: Confucius was born at the end of the Zhou Dynasty, and the unicorn appeared in the western part of China.

古文：光武皇帝生於成、哀之际，凤皇集於济阳之地。
现代文：汉光武帝出生在西汉成、哀之际，就有凤凰在济阳那个地方停落。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu was born in the Western Han Dynasty in Chengdu, and on the occasion of his death, there was a phoenix landing in Jiyang.

古文：圣人圣物，生於衰世。
现代文：圣人圣物，生于衰世。
English: A saint, a holy relic, born in a decadent age.

古文：圣王遭见圣物，犹吉命之人逢吉祥之类也，其实相遇，非相为出也。
现代文：圣王恰好出生，圣物恰好出现，遇到圣物，好比有好命的人遇上吉祥之物一样，他们实在是偶然碰在一起了，并不是互相为了对方才产生出来的。
English: The holy king happened to be born, the holy object happened to appear, and encountering the holy object is like a lucky person encountering an auspicious object. They really came into contact with each other by chance, and did not come into being for the sake of each other.

古文：夫凤、驎之来，与白鱼、赤乌之至，无以异也。
现代文：凤凰、麒麟的出现，与白鱼、赤乌的出现一样，并没有什么奇异。
English: The appearance of the phoenix and the unicorn is no more strange than the appearance of the white fish and the scarlet ibis.

古文：鱼遭自跃，王舟逢之；火偶为乌，王仰见之。
现代文：白鱼正好自己往上跳，武王的船也正好碰上它；火偶然变成乌鸦，武王抬头就看见了它。
English: The white fish just happened to jump up by itself, and King Wu's boat just happened to hit it; the fire accidentally turned into a crow, and King Wu looked up and saw it.

古文：非鱼闻武王之德，而入其舟；乌知周家当起，集於王屋也。
现代文：并不是白鱼知道了武王的德行而跳入他的船中，赤乌知道周朝要兴盛才在武王的屋顶上停落。
English: It was not the white fish that knew the virtue of King Wu and jumped into his boat, but the red fish that knew that the Zhou Dynasty would prosper and stopped on the roof of King Wu.

古文：谓凤、驎为圣王来，是谓鱼、乌为武王至也。
现代文：说凤凰、麒麟为圣王而出现，这就是说白鱼、赤乌也是为武王才出现的了。
English: To say that the phoenix and the unicorn appeared for the holy king means that the white fish and the scarlet ibis also appeared for King Wu.

古文：王者受富贵之命，故其动出见吉祥异物，见则谓之瑞。
现代文：当君王的人承受了富贵之命，所以他行动外出时总会看到些吉祥珍奇的东西，看见了就称之为祥瑞。
English: When a king's man has inherited a rich and noble life, he always sees something auspicious and rare when he goes out. When he sees it, he calls it Xiang Rui.

古文：瑞有小大，各以所见，定德薄厚。
现代文：祥瑞之物有小有大，各人以见到的瑞物的大小来判断它所象征的功德的大小。
English: There are small and large auspicious objects, and each person judges the size of the merit it symbolizes by the size of the auspicious object they see.

古文：若夫白鱼、赤乌小物，小安之兆也；凤皇、骐驎大物，太平之象也。
现代文：白鱼、赤乌是小瑞物，是小安的征兆；凤凰、麒麟是大瑞物，是天下太平的征兆。
English: The white fish and the scarlet ibis are minor auspicious objects, and are signs of minor peace; the phoenix and the unicorn are major auspicious objects, and are signs of world peace.

古文：故孔子曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：所以孔子说： 凤鸟不飞来了，黄河也没有图出现，我这一生可能是完了。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "If the phoenix does not fly and the yellow river does not appear, my life may be over."

古文：不见太平之象，自知不遇太平之时矣。
现代文：孔子看不到太平盛世的征兆，自知遇不上天下太平的时候了。
English: Confucius could not see the signs of a prosperous and peaceful world, and he knew that it was not the time for the world to be peaceful.

古文：且凤皇、骐驎，何以为太平之象？
现代文：而且凤凰、麒麟为什么是太平盛世的征兆呢？
English: Moreover, why are the phoenix and the unicorn the signs of a prosperous and peaceful world?

古文：凤皇、骐驎，仁圣之禽也，仁圣之物至，天下将为仁圣之行矣。
现代文：因为凤凰、麒麟是仁圣的禽兽。这种仁圣之物出现，象征着天下将要出现仁圣的教化了。
English: Because the phoenix and the unicorn are benevolent beasts. The appearance of such benevolent things symbolizes that benevolent enlightenment will appear in the world.

古文：《尚书大传》曰： 高宗祭成汤之庙，有雉升鼎耳而鸣。
现代文：《尚书大传》上说： 殷高宗祭祀成汤的宗庙，有野鸡飞到鼎的把手上鸣叫。
English: "Shangshu Daquan" said: "Ying Gao's ancestral temple, where sacrifices were made into soup, had pheasants flying to the handle of the tripod and singing.

古文：高宗问祖乙，祖乙曰： 远方君子殆有至者。 
现代文：高宗问祖己这预兆什么，祖己回答说： 远方的君子大概有要来朝贡的。  
English: Gaozong asked his ancestor what the omen was, and his ancestor replied: A gentleman from far away is probably coming to pay tribute.

古文：祖乙见雉有似君子之行，今从外来，则曰 远方君子将有至者 矣。
现代文：祖己看到野鸡的性情具有和君子的操行相类似之处，现在又从外面飞来，就说 远方的君子将有要来朝贡的 了。
English: The ancestor saw that the nature of the pheasant was similar to that of the gentleman, and now that it was flying from outside, he said that the gentleman from afar would come to pay tribute.

古文：夫凤皇、骐驎犹雉也，其来之象，亦与雉同。
现代文：凤凰、麒麟同野鸡一样，它们出现时的征兆，也与野鸡相同。
English: The phoenix and the unicorn are the same as the pheasants, and the signs when they appear are also the same as the pheasants.

古文：孝武皇帝西巡狩，得白驎，一角而五趾，又有木，枝出复合於本。
现代文：汉武帝到西部巡狩，获得一头白麟，长有一只角，每个蹄子上有五只脚趾，又有一棵树，树枝长出来又合并到树干上。
English: Emperor Hanwu went on a hunting tour to the west and obtained a white unicorn, which had one horn, five toes on each hoof, and a tree, the branches of which grew out and merged into the trunk.

古文：武帝议问群臣，谒者终军曰： 野禽并角，明同本也；众枝内附，示无外也。
现代文：汉武帝询问群臣，谒者终军说： 野兽的角两只合并长成一只，象征天下归附西汉；所有的枝条内附树干，象征没有背离的人。
English: Emperor Hanwu asked his courtiers, and the last one to die said: The two horns of the beast merge and grow into one, symbolizing that the whole world belongs to Western Han; all the branches are attached to the trunk, symbolizing those who have not deviated.

古文：如此瑞者，外国宜有降者。
现代文：像这种祥瑞出现，边远地区应该有来归附的人。
English: When a good fortune like this appears, remote areas should have people who want to join.

古文：若应，殆且有解编发、削左衽、袭冠带而蒙化焉。 
现代文：这个祥瑞如果应验的话，大概将会有解散发辫、改掉向左开襟的衣服，头上戴帽，腰间系上带子而来接受教化的人了。 
English: If Xiang Rui's dream comes true, there will probably be people who will have their hair braided, change out of their left-facing clothes, wear a cap on their head, and tie a ribbon around their waist to receive enlightenment.

古文：其後数月，越地有降者，匈奴名王亦将数千人来降，竟如终军之言。
现代文：说这话后的几个月之内，越地就有来归降的，匈奴的名王也率领数千人来归降，竟然和终军所说的符合。
English: Within a few months of saying this, the Viet Minh came to surrender, and the famous king of the Xiongnu also led thousands of people to surrender, which was in line with what the final army said.

古文：终军之言，得瑞应之实矣。
现代文：终军所说的话，得到了祥瑞应验的证实。
English: What the finalists said was confirmed by Xiang Rui.

古文：推此以况白鱼、赤乌，犹此类也。
现代文：用这种事实来推论白鱼、赤乌的出现，仍然属于这一类情况。
English: The use of this fact to infer the appearance of whitefish and sooty mullet still falls into this category.

古文：鱼，精；白者，殷之色也；乌者，孝鸟；赤者，周之应气也。
现代文：鱼，是水中精气所生；白色是殷朝的服色。乌鸦是孝鸟；红色是周朝的瑞应之气。
English: Fish is born from the essence of water; white is the dress color of the Yin Dynasty; crow is the filial bird; red is the spirit of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：先得白鱼，後得赤乌，殷之统绝，色移在周矣。
现代文：武王先得白鱼，后得赤乌，殷朝世代相传的国统已经断绝，服色已经移到周朝崇尚的红色上来了。
English: King Wu first won the white fish, and then the red fish. The national unity that had been passed down from generation to generation in the Yin Dynasty had been broken, and the color of clothing had shifted to the red that was revered in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：据鱼、乌之见以占武王，则知周之必得天下也。
现代文：根据白鱼、赤鸟的出现，以此推测武王的命运，就知道周朝必然统治天下了。
English: Based on the appearance of the white fish and the red bird, we can predict the fate of King Wu, and know that the Zhou Dynasty will inevitably rule the world.

古文：世见武王诛纣，出遇鱼、乌，则谓天用鱼、乌命使武王诛纣，事相似类，其实非也。
现代文：世人看到武王诛灭纣王，出行时遇上白鱼、赤乌，就说上天用白鱼、赤乌来授命武王诛灭纣王，事情有点相象，但实际上并不是这么回事。
English: When the world sees King Wu wiping out King Wuchang and encounters white fish and red cormorants while traveling, they say that Heaven uses white fish and red cormorants to command King Wuchang to wipe out King Wuchang. Things are a bit similar, but this is not actually the case.

古文：春秋之时，瞿鹆来巢，占者以为凶。
现代文：春秋的时候，有鸜鹆飞到鲁国来筑巢，占卜的人认为是凶兆。
English: In spring and autumn, there are storks flying to Lu to build nests, which is considered to be a bad omen by soothsayers.

古文：夫野鸟来巢，鲁国之都且为丘墟，昭公之身且出奔也。
现代文：野鸟飞来筑巢，预兆鲁国的都城将要变成废墟，鲁昭公将要离开国土去逃难。
English: Wild birds come to build nests, foreshadowing that the capital city of Lu will turn into ruins, and Lu Zhaogong will leave the country to escape.

古文：後昭公为季氏所攻，出奔於齐，死不归鲁。
现代文：后来，昭公被季氏所驱逐，逃难到齐国，至死也没有回到鲁国。
English: Later, Akihito was expelled by the Ji clan, fled to Qi, and did not return to Lu until his death.

古文：贾谊为长沙太傅，服鸟集舍，发书占之，云： 服鸟入室，主人当去 。
现代文：贾谊任长沙王太傅时，服鸟停落在他的房舍上，他打开策书占卜这件事，书上说： 服鸟飞入房内，主人应当离去 。
English: When Jia Yiyi was the Tai Fu of Changsha Wang, a bird of prey landed on his house. He opened a book of divination about this matter. The book said: If a bird of prey flies into the house, the owner should leave.

古文：其後贾谊竟去。
现代文：事后，贾谊果然离开长沙国了。
English: After the incident, Jia Yi did indeed leave Changsha.

古文：野鸟虽殊，其占不异。
现代文：野鸟的种类虽然不同，但占卜的结果并没有什么两样。
English: Although the types of wild birds are different, the results of divination are no different.

古文：夫凤、驎之来，与野鸟之巢、服鸟之集，无以异也。
现代文：凤凰、麒麟的出现，与野鸟的筑巢，服鸟的停落，并没有什么不同。
English: The appearance of the phoenix and the unicorn is no different from the nesting of wild birds and the halting of clothing birds.

古文：是瞿鹆之巢，服鸟之集，偶巢适集，占者因其野泽之物，巢集城宫之内，则见鲁国且凶、传人不吉之瑞矣。
现代文：这些鸜鹆的筑巢，服鸟的停落，只是偶然来鲁国搭窝和恰巧停在贾谊的屋顶上，占卜的人因为它们是生长在野泽中的飞禽，筑巢停落在都城宫室里面，就看出鲁国将有凶险、传舍人不吉利的征兆了。
English: These storks build their nests and dress birds, but only by chance do they come to Russia to build nests and just happen to stop on the roof of Jaya. Because they are birds that grow in the fields, and because they build their nests inside the palace of the capital, soothsayers can see the signs of danger and bad luck in Russia.

古文：非瞿鹆、服鸟知二国祸将至，而故为之巢集也。
现代文：并不是鸜鹆、服鸟知道长沙国和鲁国的祸害将要发生，而故意为它们筑巢停落表示预兆。
English: It is not that the warblers and service birds know that the disasters of Changsha and Lu countries will occur, and deliberately stop building nests for them to show an omen.

古文：王者以天下为家，家人将有吉凶之事，而吉凶之兆豫见於人，知者占之，则知吉凶将至。非吉凶之物有知，故为吉凶之人来也。
现代文：做君王的人以天下为家。家里人将要发生或吉或凶的事情，吉凶的征兆对人事先表现出来，有才智的人占卜它，就知道吉凶将要到来，并不是吉凶之物事前有知，故意为吉凶之人而来的。
English: Those who are kings take the whole world as their home. People in their family will have either good or bad things happen to them. The signs of good or bad will be shown to them in advance. If a person has the ability to foretell it, they will know that good or bad things will come. It is not that the good or bad things know in advance and deliberately come for the good or bad people.

古文：犹蓍龟之有兆数矣。龟兆蓍数，常有吉凶，吉人卜筮与吉相遇，凶人与凶相逢，非蓍龟神灵知人吉凶，出兆见数以告之也。
现代文：好比蓍草有数，龟甲有兆一样，龟兆蓍数预示的，经常有吉有凶，吉利的人去占卜，正好碰上吉兆，不吉利的人去占卜，正好遇到凶兆，并不是蓍草龟甲有神灵，知道人的吉凶，显出龟兆出现蓍数用以告知人们。
English: Just as there is a number for the thistle and a sign for the tortoise shell, there is often good luck and bad luck foretold by the number of the thistle and the tortoise shell. Lucky people go to divination when they happen to encounter good luck, and unlucky people go to divination when they happen to encounter bad luck. It is not that the thistle and the tortoise shell have gods, know people's good luck and bad luck, and show the number of the appearance of the tortoise shell to inform people.

古文：虚居卜筮，前无过客，犹得吉凶。
现代文：无事时空坐家中占卜，面前没有来求占卜的客人，仍然会得出凶兆或吉兆。
English: There is nothing wrong with sitting at home and divining, and guests who have not come to ask for divination will still get bad omens or good omens.

古文：然则天地之间，常有吉凶，吉凶之物来至，自当与吉凶之人相逢遇矣。
现代文：然而天地之间，经常有吉有凶，吉凶之物出现，自然应当跟吉凶之人相遇到一起了。
English: However, between heaven and earth, there are often auspicious and inauspicious things. When auspicious and inauspicious things appear, they should naturally meet with auspicious and inauspicious people.

古文：或言天使之所为也。
现代文：有人说这是上天指使它们这么做的。
English: Some say that this is what God told them to do.

古文：夫巨大之天使，细小之物，音语不通，情指不达，何能使物？
现代文：巨大无比的天，指使细小的东西，声音言语不相通，思想感情无法表达，怎么能支使吉凶之物呢？
English: How can a huge and incomparable sky, which directs tiny things, whose voices and words are incoherent, and whose thoughts and feelings cannot be expressed, support auspicious and inauspicious things?

古文：物亦不为天使，其来神怪，若天使之，则谓天使矣。
现代文：吉凶之物也不会被天所指使，它出现的神奇怪异，若是上天指使它的，那么就可以说是上天指使的了。
English: Neither are auspicious and inauspicious things caused by the heavens. The appearance of such things is miraculous. If the heavens caused it, then it can be said to be caused by the heavens.

古文：夏後孔甲畋於首山，天雨晦冥，入於民家，主人方乳。
现代文：夏朝君王孔甲在首山打猎。下雨了天色阴暗，孔甲进入一位百姓家，这家主人正在生孩子。
English: Kong Jia, the king of the Summer Dynasty, was hunting in Shoushan. It rained and the sky was gloomy. Kong Jia entered the house of a commoner who was giving birth to a child.

古文：或曰： 後来，之子必大贵。 
现代文：有人说： 君王到来，这个孩子将来必定会大富大贵。 
English: Some people said: When the king comes, this child will certainly be very rich and valuable in the future.

古文：或曰： 不胜，之子必有殃。 
现代文：也有人说： 不能承受这种福气，这个孩子将来必有祸殃。 
English: Others said: "If he can't bear this blessing, this child will surely have misfortune in the future."

古文：夫孔甲之入民室也，偶遭雨而廕庇也，非知民家将生子，而其子必凶，为之至也。
现代文：孔甲进入老百姓的家里，是偶然遇雨而去躲雨，并不是知道老百姓家将要生孩子，而他家孩子将来必定有凶险，才为此到他家的。
English: When Kong Jia entered the people's home, it was by chance that he was caught in the rain and went to hide from the rain. He did not know that the people's family was going to have a child, and that his child would certainly be in danger in the future, so he went to his home for this reason.

古文：既至，人占则有吉凶矣。
现代文：既来之后，人们加以预测就会出现吉凶两种不同的说法了。
English: After that, people will predict that there will be two different sayings of good luck and bad luck.

古文：夫吉凶之物见於王朝，若入民家，犹孔甲遭雨入民室也。
现代文：吉凶之物在王朝中出现，或者进入老百姓家，好比孔甲遇雨进入百姓家一样。
English: Lucky and unlucky things appear in the dynasty, or enter the people's home, just as the hole armor enters the people's home in the rain.

古文：孔甲不知其将生子，为之故到。谓凤皇诸瑞有知，应吉而至，误矣。
现代文：孔甲不知道他家将要生小孩，而因为这个缘故才到他家的，说凤凰等各种瑞物有预知，是应和吉祥而出现的，这就错了。
English: Kong Jia didn't know that his family was going to have a baby, and only came to his house for this reason. It's wrong to say that various auspicious things such as the phoenix had foreknowledge and appeared due to auspiciousness.

