古文：东海之外大壑，少昊之国。
现代文：东海之外有一个大壑，少昊建国于此。
English: Beyond the East China Sea, there is a big estuary, and Shao Hao founded the country here.

古文：少昊孺帝颛顼于此，弃其琴瑟。
现代文：少昊在这里养育颛顼，并把琴瑟丢在这里。
English: Xiao Hao raised the dragonfly here, and left the lyre here.

古文：有甘山者，甘水出焉，生甘渊。
现代文：有一座甘山，是甘水发源的地方；甘水流出后，形成了一个渊，名叫甘渊。
English: There is a mountain of licorice, which is the place where the sweet water originated. After the sweet water flowed out, it formed an abyss, called Gam Yuan.

古文：大荒东南隅有，名皮母地丘。
现代文：最荒远之地的东南角有一座山，名叫皮母地丘。
English: In the south-east corner of the most desolate land, there is a mountain called Pima Mound.

古文：东海之外，大荒之中，有山名曰大言，日月所出。
现代文：东海以外，最荒远之地中，有座山叫做大言山，是太阳和月亮初出升起的地方。
English: Outside the East China Sea, in the most desolate land, there is a mountain called Dajinshan, which is the place where the sun and the moon first rise.

古文：有波谷山者，有大人之国。
现代文：有座波谷山，是大人国所在的地方。
English: There is a mountain called Hatanoyama, which is where the adult country is located.

古文：有大人之市，名曰大人之堂。
现代文：国中有大人做买卖的集市，名叫大人堂。
English: There is a bazaar in the country where adults do business, called the Great Hall.

古文：有一大人踆其上，张其两耳。
现代文：有一个大人张着两只手臂蹲在大人堂的上面。
English: An adult squatted at the top of the hall with his arms outstretched.

古文：有小人国，名靖人。
现代文：有个小人国，那里的人被称作靖人。
English: There is a Lilliputian country, and the people there are called Yasujin.

古文：有神，人面兽身，名曰犂。
现代文：有一个神人，长着人的面孔野兽的身子，叫做犂。
English: There was a man of God, whose face was like the face of a man, but whose body was like the body of a wild beast, called a jackal.

古文：有潏山，杨水出焉。
现代文：有座潏山，杨水就是从这座山发源的。
English: There is a Lushan Mountain, and the Yangshuo River originates from this mountain.

古文：有蒍国，黍食，使四鸟：虎、豹、熊、罴。
现代文：有一个蒍国，那里的人以黄米为食物，能驯化驱使四种野兽：老虎、豹子、熊、罴。
English: There is a Yunnan country, where people use yellow rice as food and can domesticate and drive four kinds of beasts: tigers, leopards, bears and baboons.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰合虚，日月所出。
现代文：最荒远之地中有一座山，叫做合虚山，是太阳和月亮初出升起的地方。
English: In the remotest part of the country, there is a mountain called Mount Haku, where the sun and moon rise for the first time.

古文：有中容之国。
现代文：有一个国家叫中容国。
English: There is also a middle-income country.

古文：帝俊生中容，中容人食兽、木实，使四鸟：豹、虎、熊、罴。
现代文：帝俊生了中容，中容国的人吃野兽的肉、树木的果实，能驯化驱使四种野兽：豹子、老虎、熊、罴。
English: Emperor Jun was born in Zhongrong. The people of Zhongrong eat the meat of wild animals and the fruits of trees. They can domesticate and drive four kinds of wild animals: leopards, tigers, bears and baboons.

古文：有东口之山。
现代文：有一座东口山。
English: There is a mountain called Higashikuchiyama.

古文：有君子之国，其人衣冠带剑。
现代文：有个君子国就在东口山，那里的人穿衣戴帽而且腰间佩带宝剑。
English: There is a gentleman's country in Dongkou Mountain, where people wear clothes and hats and wear swords around their waists.

古文：有司幽之国。
现代文：有个国家叫司幽国。
English: There is a country called Siyu country.

古文：帝俊生晏龙，晏龙生司幽，司幽生思土，不妻；思女，不夫。
现代文：帝俊生了晏龙，晏龙生了司幽，司幽生了思土，而思土不娶妻子；司幽还生了思女，而思女不嫁丈夫。
English: Emperor Jun gave birth to Jiaolong, Jiaolong gave birth to Siyu, Siyu gave birth to Sidi, but Sidi did not marry a wife; Siyu also gave birth to Sidi, but Sidi did not marry a husband.

古文：食黍，食兽，是使四鸟。
现代文：司幽国的人吃黄米饭，也吃野兽肉，能驯化驱使四种野兽。
English: The people of Siyu eat yellow rice and also eat wild animal meat. They can domesticate and drive four kinds of wild animals.

古文：有大阿之山者。
现代文：有一座山叫做大阿山。
English: There is a mountain called Mt. Daisen.

古文：大荒中有山，名曰明星，日月所出。
现代文：大荒当中有一座高山，叫做明星山，是太阳和月亮初出升起的地方。
English: Amidst the desolation, there is a high mountain called Star Mountain, where the sun and moon rise for the first time.

古文：有白民之国。
现代文：有个国家叫白民国。
English: There is a country called Belarus.

古文：帝俊生帝鸿，帝鸿生白民，白民销姓，黍食，使四鸟：豹、虎、熊、罴。
现代文：帝俊生了帝鸿，帝鸿的后代是白民，白民国的人姓销，以黄米为食物，能驯化驱使四种野兽：老虎、豹子、熊、罴。
English: Tijun gave birth to Tihong, and Tihong's descendants are Baimin, the surname of the people of the Republic of Belarus. They eat yellow rice and are able to domesticate and drive four kinds of beasts: tigers, leopards, bears, and baboons.

古文：有青丘之国，有狐，九尾。
现代文：有个国家叫青丘国。青丘国有一种狐狸，长着九条尾巴。
English: There is a country called Qingqiu. In Qingqiu, there is a fox with nine tails.

古文：有柔仆民，是维嬴土之国。
现代文：有一群人被称作柔仆民，他们所在的国土很肥沃。
English: There is a group of people known as the Jiu Min Min, and their land is very fertile.

古文：有黑齿之国。
现代文：有个国家叫黑齿国。
English: There is a country called the Black Tooth Country.

古文：帝俊生黑齿，姜姓，黍食，使四鸟。
现代文：帝俊的后代是黑齿，姓姜，那里的人吃黄米饭，能驯化驱使四种野兽。
English: Emperor Jun's descendant is Black Tooth, surnamed Jiang. The people there eat yellow rice and can domesticate and drive four kinds of beasts.

古文：有夏州之国。
现代文：有个国家叫夏州国。
English: There is a country called Xiazhou.

古文：有盖余之国。
现代文：在夏州国附近又有一个盖余国。
English: In the vicinity of Xiazhou Province, there is another landlocked country.

古文：有神人，八首人面，虎身十尾，名曰天吴。
现代文：有个神人，长着八颗头而都是人的脸面，老虎身子而十条尾巴，名叫天吴。
English: There was a god-man with eight heads and a human face, a tiger's body and ten tails, named Tianwu.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰鞠陵于天、东极、离瞀，日月所出。
现代文：最荒远之地有三座山，分别是鞠陵于天、东极和离瞀，那里是日月升起的地方。
English: In the most remote place, there are three mountains, namely, Juling in the sky, East Pole and Yixing, where the sun and moon rise.

古文：名曰折丹－－东方曰折，来风曰俊－－处东极以出入风。
现代文：有个神人名叫折丹，东方人单称他为折，从东方吹来的风称作俊，他就处在大地的东极主管风起风停。
English: There was a god-man named Oridan. The people of the East simply called him Oridan, and the wind that blew from the East was called Jun. He was located at the eastern pole of the earth, in charge of the wind's rising and setting.

古文：东海之渚中，有神，人面鸟身，珥两黄蛇，践两黄蛇，名曰禺䝞。
现代文：东海的岛屿上，有一个神人，长着人的面孔鸟的身子，耳朵上穿挂着两条黄色的蛇，脚底下踩踏着两条黄色的蛇，名叫禺猇。
English: On an island in the East China Sea, there is a god-man with a human face and a bird's body, with two yellow snakes hanging from his ears and two yellow snakes under his feet. His name is Dragonfly.

古文：黄帝生禺䝞，禺䝞生禺京。
现代文：黄帝生了禺猇，禺猇生了禺京。
English: The Yellow Emperor had a son, and the son had a son.

古文：禺京处北海，禺䝞处东海，是惟海神。
现代文：禺京住在北海，禺猇住在东海，都是海神。
English: Hao Jing lives in the North Sea, Hao lives in the East Sea, both are sea gods.

古文：有招摇山，融水出焉。
现代文：有一座招摇山，融水发源于此。
English: There is a towering mountain where the meltwater originates.

古文：有国曰玄股，黍食，使四鸟。
现代文：有一个名叫玄股的国家，国中之人以黍为食物，会驱使虎、豹、熊、罴四种野兽。
English: There is a country called Xuanzang. The people in the country use donkeys as food, and will drive four kinds of beasts: tigers, leopards, bears, and donkeys.

古文：有困民国，勾姓而食。
现代文：有一个困民国，国中之人姓勾，以黍为食物。
English: There is a poor country in China. The people in the country are surnamed Guo, and they eat grasshoppers.

古文：有人曰王亥，两手操鸟，方食其头。
现代文：有一个名叫王亥的人，两只手抓着鸟，正在吃鸟的头。
English: A man named Wang Hai was holding a bird in both hands and eating the bird's head.

古文：王亥托于有易、河伯仆牛。有易杀王亥，取仆牛。
现代文：王亥把一大群牛寄养在有易国和河伯那里，有易国的人杀了王亥，夺走了这群牛。
English: Wang Hai fostered a large herd of cattle with Yi Guo and Hebe. Yi Guo killed Wang Hai and took away the herd of cattle.

古文：河念有易，有易潜出，为国于兽，方食之，名曰摇民。
现代文：后来，殷主为王亥报仇，杀了有易国的国君，河伯顾念与有易国的交情，帮助有易国的人偷偷跑了出来，有易国的人在野兽成群出没的地方以食兽为生，并重新建立了一个国家，名叫摇民。
English: Later, Yin took revenge for Wang Hai and killed the king of a powerful country. Hebo thought about his friendship with the powerful country and helped the powerful country to secretly escape. The powerful country's people made a living by eating animals in places where wild animals roamed, and re-established a country called Shaken.

古文：帝舜生戏，戏生摇民。
现代文：帝舜生了戏，戏生了摇民。
English: Emperors beget dramas, dramas beget popular movements.

古文：海内有两人，名曰女丑。
现代文：海内有两个神人，其中的一个名叫女丑。
English: There are two divine beings in the sea, one of whom is called the Ugly Woman.

古文：女丑有大蟹。
现代文：女丑有一只听使唤的大螃蟹。
English: The clown has a large crab at her beck and call.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰孽摇頵羝。
现代文：在大荒当中，有一座山名叫孽摇頵羝。
English: In the middle of the desert, there is a mountain called Inoki Shaka.

古文：上有扶木，柱三百里，其叶如芥。
现代文：上面长着扶木，直立高耸达三百里，树叶像芥菜的叶子。
English: Above it grows a buttress, standing upright and towering three hundred miles high, with leaves like mustard leaves.

古文：有谷曰温源谷。汤谷上有扶木，一曰方至，一曰方出，皆载于乌。
现代文：那里有一个山谷，名叫温源谷或汤谷，谷上长着扶木，一个太阳刚接近扶木，一个太阳就离开扶木上升，它们都载在三足乌的身上。
English: There is a valley there, called the Valley of the Hot Springs or the Valley of the Soups, and on the valley there are supporting trees. As soon as one sun approaches the supporting trees, another sun rises from the supporting trees, and they are all carried on the body of the three-legged owl.

古文：有神，人面、犬耳、兽身，珥两青蛇，名曰奢比尸。
现代文：有一个神人，长着人的面孔、大大的耳朵、野兽的身子，耳朵上穿挂着两条青色的蛇，名叫奢比尸。
English: There was a god-man with a human face, big ears, a beast's body, and two blue snakes hanging from his ears. He was called Shabibi.

古文：有五采之鸟，相乡弃沙。惟帝俊下友。
现代文：有一群长着五彩羽毛的鸟，相对而舞，天帝帝俊从天上下来和它们交友。
English: There is a group of birds with multicolored feathers, dancing opposite, and the Heavenly Emperor descends from heaven to make friends with them.

古文：帝下两坛，采鸟是司。
现代文：帝俊在下界的两座祭坛，由这群五彩鸟掌管着。
English: The two altars of Emperor Jun in the netherworld are presided over by this group of colorful birds.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰猗天苏山，日月所生。
现代文：在大荒当中，有一座山名叫猗天苏门山，是太阳和月亮初出升起的地方。
English: In the midst of the desert, there is a mountain called Mount Shantian Sumen, where the sun and the moon first rise.

古文：有壎民之国。
现代文：有个国家叫壎民国。
English: There is a country called the Republic of Korea.

古文：有綦山。
现代文：有座綦山。
English: There is a mountain of straw.

古文：又有摇山。
现代文：又有座摇山。
English: There is another rocking mountain.

古文：有䰝山，又有门户山，又有盛山。
现代文：又有座䰝山。又有座门户山。又有座盛山。
English: There is also a Lushan. There is also a Portal Mountain. There is also a Prosperous Mountain.

古文：又有待山。
现代文：又有座待山。
English: There's another mountain to climb.

古文：有五采之鸟。
现代文：还有一群五彩鸟。
English: There is also a flock of colourful birds.

古文：东荒之中，有山名曰壑明俊疾，日月所出。
现代文：在东荒当中，有座山名叫壑明俊疾山，是太阳和月亮初出升起的地方。
English: In the middle of the Eastern Desert, there is a mountain called Juming Mountain, which is the place where the sun and the moon first rise.

古文：有中容之国。
现代文：这里还有个中容国。
English: There is also a middle-income country.

古文：东北海中，又有三青马、三骓、甘华。
现代文：东北海外，又有三青马、三骓马、甘华树。
English: In the northeastern overseas, there are also three young horses, three young horses, and camphor trees.

古文：爱有遗玉、三青鸟、三骓、视肉、甘华、甘柤。
现代文：这里还有遗玉、三青鸟、三骓马、视肉怪兽、甘华树、甘柤树。
English: There are also relics of jade, the three blue birds, the three horses, the carnivorous monster, the camphor tree and the neem tree.

古文：百谷所在。
现代文：是各种庄稼生长的地方。
English: It is a place where all kinds of crops grow.

古文：有女和月母之国。
现代文：有个国家叫女和月母国。
English: There is a country called the home country of the female and the moon.

古文：有人名曰𪂧一一北方曰𪂧，来之风曰𤟇－－是处东极隅以止日月，使无相间出没，司其短长。
现代文：有一个神人名叫鹓，北方人称作鹓，从那里吹来的风称作𤟇，他就处在大地的东北角以便控制太阳和月亮，使不要交相错乱地出没，掌握它们升起落下时间的长短。
English: There was a god-man named Ketu, called Ketu by the northerners, and the wind that blew from there was called Ketu. He was located in the northeast corner of the earth in order to control the sun and the moon, so that they would not intermingle, and to control the length of their rise and fall.

古文：大荒东北隅中，有山名曰凶犁土丘。
现代文：在大荒的东北角上，有一座山名叫凶犁土丘山。
English: In the north-east corner of the wasteland, there is a mountain called the fierce mound mountain.

古文：应龙处南极，杀蚩尤与夸父，不得复上，故下数旱。
现代文：应龙住在这座山的最南端，他杀了蚩尤和夸父，不能再回到天界，因此下界多次发生旱灾。
English: Yinglong lived at the southernmost tip of the mountain. He killed Qiuyou and Quafu and could not return to the Heaven Realm. As a result, droughts occurred many times in the Nether Realm.

古文：旱而为应龙之状，乃得大雨。
现代文：每当发生旱灾时，人们便模仿应龙的形状，天上就会下大雨。
English: Whenever there is a drought, people imitate the shape of a dragon and the sky rains heavily.

古文：东海中有流波山，入海七千里。
现代文：东海当中有座流波山，这座山在进入东海七千里的地方。
English: In the East China Sea, there is a wave mountain. This mountain is located seven thousand miles into the East China Sea.

古文：其上有兽，状如牛，苍身而无角，一足，出入水则必风雨，其光如日月，其声如雷，其名曰夔。
现代文：山上有一种兽，形状像牛，苍色的身子，没有角，只有一条腿，它从水中出入时必会伴以风雨，它放射出的光芒像日月一样明亮，发出的声音像打雷一样巨大，它的名字叫夔。
English: There is a beast on the mountain, shaped like a cow, with a pale body, no horns, and only one leg. When it comes in and out of the water, it is accompanied by wind and rain. The light it emits is as bright as the sun and moon, and the sound it makes is as loud as thunder. Its name is Dragonfly.

古文：黄帝得之，以其皮为鼓，橛以雷兽之骨，声闻五百里，以威天下。
现代文：黄帝得到它，便用它的皮蒙鼓，再拿雷兽的骨头敲打这鼓，响声传到五百里以外，用来威震天下。
English: When the Yellow Emperor got it, he used its skin and drum, and then took the bones of the thunder beast to beat the drum. The sound was heard five hundred miles away, and it was used to shake the world.

