古文：天祚皇帝四五年春正月辛巳，党项小斛禄遣人请临其地。
现代文：五年春正月初九，党项小斛禄派人请皇上前往其辖地。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Spring, Dangxiang Xiaobanglu sent someone to invite the emperor to go to his jurisdiction.

古文：戊子，趋天德，过沙漠，金兵忽至。
现代文：十六日，皇上前往天德，过沙漠时，金兵突然到来。
English: On the sixteenth day, the emperor went to Tiantai, and when he was crossing the desert, the golden soldiers suddenly arrived.

古文：上徒步出走，近侍进珠帽，却之，乘张仁贵马得脱，至天德。
现代文：皇上徒步出逃，近侍进献珠帽，没有接受，乘坐张仁贵之马得以逃脱，到达天德。
English: The emperor fled on foot, his attendants presented him with a pearl hat, but he did not accept it. He was able to escape on Zhang Rengui's horse and reached Tiantai.

古文：己丑，遇雪，无御寒具，术者以貂裘帽进，途次绝粮，术者进珝与枣；欲憩，术者即跪坐，倚而假寐。
现代文：十七日，遇到下雪，没有御寒之物，术者进献貂裘帽；途中绝粮，术者进献麦和枣子；皇上想休息，术者便跪坐下来，让皇上靠在身上和衣打盹。
English: On the seventeenth day, when it snowed and there was nothing to protect against the cold, the healer brought a straw hat; when there was no food on the way, the healer brought wheat and dates; when the emperor wanted to rest, the healer knelt down and let the emperor rest on his body and clothes.

古文：术者辈惟啮冰雪以济饥。
现代文：术者等人则只好啃食冰雪以缓解饥饿。
English: The surgeons and others had to eat ice and snow to ease their hunger.

古文：过天德。
现代文：经过天德。
English: By the grace of God.

古文：至夜，将宿民家，绐曰侦骑，其家知之，乃叩马首，跪而大恸，潜宿其家。
现代文：到夜里，准备歇宿于百姓家中，诳称是侦骑，那一家人知道是皇上，便在马前叩头，跪在地上失声痛哭，偷偷地住在他家中。
English: At night, preparing to rest in the homes of the common people, pretending to be scouts, the family knew it was the emperor, bowed before the horse, knelt on the ground and wept bitterly, secretly living in his home.

古文：居数日，嘉其忠，遥授以节度使，遂趋党项。
现代文：过了几天，嘉许其忠心，遥授为节度使，于是赶往党项。
English: A few days later, he was commended for his loyalty and given the title of "distant envoy," so he rushed to the party.

古文：以小斛禄为西南面招讨使，总知军事，仍赐其子及诸校爵赏有差。
现代文：任命小斛禄为西南面招讨使，总知军事，又赐予其子及众将校爵位赏赐各有等差。
English: He appointed Xiao Binglu as the envoy of the southwestern region, and gave him military knowledge. He also gave his son and other generals military ranks.

古文：二月，至应州新城东六十里，为金人完颜娄室等所获。
现代文：二月，皇上来到应州新城以东六十里，为金人完颜娄室等人所俘获。
English: In February, the emperor came to Yingzhou, sixty miles east of Xincheng, and was captured by Jinren Kanyan and others.

古文：八月癸卯，至金。
现代文：八月初四，皇上到金国。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth lunar month, the emperor arrived in Jin.

古文：丙午，降封海滨王。
现代文：初七，降封为海滨王。
English: In the seventh year of his junior high school career, he was demoted to the title of Seaside King.

古文：以疾终，年五十有四，在位二十四年。
现代文：因病去世，年五十四岁，在位二十四年。
English: He died of illness at the age of fifty-four, after reigning for twenty-four years.

古文：金皇统元年二月，改封豫王。
现代文：金皇统元年二月，改封为豫王。
English: In February of the first year of the Golden Emperor's reign, his title was changed to Prince Yu.

古文：五年，葬于广宁府闾阳县乾陵傍。
现代文：五年，安葬于广宁府闾阳县乾陵旁。
English: Five years later, he was buried next to the Qianling Mausoleum in Puyang County, Guangning Prefecture.

古文：耶律淳者，世号为北辽。
现代文：耶律淳所建之国，后世称之为北辽。
English: The country founded by Yeluchun was later known as Northern Liao.

古文：淳小字涅里，兴宗第四孙，南京留守、宋魏王和鲁斡之子。
现代文：淳乳名涅里，兴宗第四孙，南京留守、宋魏王和鲁斡之子。
English: He was the fourth grandson of Emperor Xingzong, the son of King Song of Wei and King Lu of Wei, who stayed in Nanjing.

古文：清宁初，太后鞠育之。
现代文：清宁初，太后收养了他。
English: In the early Qing Dynasty, the empress dowager adopted him.

古文：既长，笃好文学。
现代文：成年之后，十分爱好文学。
English: After he became an adult, he became very fond of literature.

古文：昭怀太子得罪，上欲以淳为嗣。
现代文：昭怀太子获罪之后，道宗皇上想以耶律淳为继承人。
English: After Prince Akihai was found guilty, Emperor Daozong wanted to make Jeruchun the heir.

古文：上怒耶律白斯不，知与淳善，出淳为彰圣等军节度使。
现代文：后来皇上恼怒耶律白斯不，得知他与耶律淳交好，便出贬耶律淳为彰圣等军节度使。
English: Later, the emperor became angry with Yerubetsu, and when he learned that Yerubetsu was a friend of his, he denounced Yerubetsu as an emissary of military festivals such as Shoshen.

古文：天祚即位，进王郑。
现代文：天祚即位，耶律淳进位为郑王。
English: Tensho ascended to the throne, and Jeruchun was promoted to King Zheng.

古文：乾统二年，加越王。
现代文：乾统二年，升为越王。
English: In the second year of Emperor Qian's reign, he was promoted to King of Yue.

古文：六年，拜南府宰相。首议制两府礼仪。
现代文：六年，拜为南府宰相，首倡制定两府礼仪。
English: Six years later, Bae became the prime minister of the southern prefecture and took the lead in establishing the etiquette of the two prefectures.

古文：上喜，徙王魏。
现代文：皇上很高兴，迁封他为魏王。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and he became the king of Wei.

古文：其父和鲁斡薨，即以淳袭父守南京。
现代文：其父和鲁斡逝世，皇上当即让他承袭父亲的南京留守一职。
English: After the death of his father and Lu Yu, the emperor immediately asked him to take over his father's position in Nanjing.

古文：冬夏入朝，宠冠诸王。
现代文：每逢冬、夏，两次进京朝见皇上，宠幸冠于诸王之上。
English: Every winter and summer, the imperial court visits Kyoto twice to see the emperor, making the crane the favorite of all kings.

古文：天庆五年，东征，都监章奴济鸭子河，与淳子阿撒等三百余人亡归，先遣敌里等以废立之谋报淳，淳斩敌里首以献，进封秦晋国王，拜都元帅，赐金券，免汉拜礼，不名。
现代文：天庆五年，皇上东征，都监耶律章奴渡鸭子河，与耶律淳之子阿撒等三百余人逃回，先派敌里等人以废天祚立淳之谋划向耶律淳报告，耶律淳斩下敌里之首进献于皇上，进封为秦晋国王，拜为都元帅，赐给金券，免除依汉仪的三跪九叩首之拜礼，不直呼其名。
English: In the 5th year of Tianqing, the emperor's eastward expedition, the governor of the capital, Ye Luo Zhang Nong, crossed the Duck River, and more than 300 people, including Ye Luo Jun's son, Asa, fled back. First, he sent the enemy and others to report to Ye Luo Jun with the plan of abolishing the emperor. Ye Luo Jun cut off the enemy's head and presented it to the emperor. He was enthroned as the king of Qin and Jin, worshipped as the capital's marshal, and was given gold certificates. He was exempted from the three kneels and nine prostrations according to Han rites. He

古文：许自择将士，乃募燕、云精兵。
现代文：准予自择将士，于是召募燕、云一带的精兵。
English: He was allowed to choose his own generals, so he called for elite soldiers from Yan and Yun regions.

古文：东至锦州，队长武朝彦作乱，劫淳。
现代文：东下锦州，队长武朝彦作乱，劫持耶律淳。
English: Heading east to Jinzhou, captain Take Asahiko causes a riot and kidnaps Ye Lu Jun.

古文：淳匿而免，收朝彦诛之。
现代文：耶律淳躲藏起来，得免被劫，收捕朝彦诛杀之。
English: Yeluchun hid to avoid being robbed, but Asahiko caught him and killed him.

古文：会金兵至，聚兵战于阿里轸斗，败绩，收亡卒数千人拒之。
现代文：适逢金兵前来，耶律淳会集兵马与之交战于阿里轸斗，失败，收集逃散之兵数千人再行抵御。
English: When the golden soldiers came, Yelu Jun would gather soldiers and horses to fight with them in the Battle of Ali, fail, and gather thousands of scattered soldiers to defend themselves.

古文：淳入朝，释其罪，诏南京刻石纪功。
现代文：耶律淳入京朝见，皇上释免其罪，诏令在南京刻石纪功。
English: Ye Lu Jun went to the imperial court in Beijing, the emperor pardoned him, and the imperial edict was engraved in stone in Nanjing.

古文：保大二年，天祚入夹山，奚王回离保、林牙耶律大石等引唐灵武故事，议欲立淳。
现代文：保大二年，天祚进入夹山，奚王回离保、林牙耶律大石等人援引唐朝肃宗灵武即位之旧例，商议准备扶立耶律淳。
English: In the second year of Bao Dai, Tianzhu entered Jiashan, King Yao withdrew from Bao, and Lin Ya Yerut Daishi and others invoked the old example of the enthronement of the Tang Dynasty's Su Zong Lingwu to discuss preparations for the enthronement of Yerut Jun.

古文：淳不从，官属劝进曰： 主上蒙尘，中原扰攘，若不立王，百姓何归？
现代文：耶律淳不听从，属吏们劝进说： 主上蒙尘在外，中原混乱不堪，如果不扶立王爷您，百姓到哪里去找归宿呢？
English: Ye Luochun did not listen, and his subordinate officials persuaded him, saying, "The Lord is covered with dust, and the Central Plains are in chaos. If we do not support you, prince, where will the people go to find a home?

古文：宜熟计之。 
现代文：应该好好考虑一下。 
English: You should think about it.

古文：遂即位。
现代文：耶律淳于是即位。
English: Jeruchun then ascended to the throne.

古文：百官上号天锡皇帝，改保大二年为建福元年，大赦。
现代文：百官奉上帝号曰天锡皇帝，改保大二年为建福元年，大赦天下。
English: A hundred officials said Tianxi Emperor in the name of God, the second year of reform and opening up was the first year of Jianfu, and the whole world was pardoned.

古文：放进士李宝信等一十九人，遥降天祚为湘阴王。
现代文：放榜录进士李宝信等一十九人，遥降天祚为湘阴王。
English: Nineteen people, including Li Baoxin, who was included in the list, have been relegated to the position of the King of Xiangyin.

古文：以燕、云、平、上京、中京、辽西六路淳主之，沙漠以北、南北路两都招讨府、诸蕃部族等仍隶天祚。
现代文：燕、云、平、上京、中京、辽西六路，归耶律淳管辖；沙漠以北、南北路两都招讨府、诸蕃部族等，仍隶属于天祚。
English: Yan, Yun, Ping, Shangjing, Zhongjing and West Liaoning six roads are under the jurisdiction of Ye Lu Jun; the north of the desert and the north and south roads are still under the jurisdiction of Zhaotongfu and Zhuye tribes.

古文：自此辽国分矣。
现代文：从此辽国分裂了。
English: Since then, Liaoning has been divided.

古文：封其妻普贤女为德妃，以回离保知北院枢密使事，军旅之事悉委大石。
现代文：耶律淳封其妻普贤女为德妃，以回离保为知北院枢密使事，军旅作战事务全部委托于耶律大石。
English: Yelu Jun designated his wife, Pu Xianwen, as the Empress of Germany, and appointed Hui Li Bao as the Privy Envoy of the Northern Capital, entrusting all military affairs to Yelu Daishi.

古文：又遣使报宋，免岁币，结好。
现代文：又派使者访宋，免除其应缴的岁币，结为友好。
English: He also sent an envoy to visit Song, exempted it from the annual fee, and established a friendly relationship.

古文：宋人发兵问罪，击败之。
现代文：宋人派兵前来问罪，耶律淳击败之。
English: The Song Dynasty sent soldiers to question him, but he was defeated by Ye Lu Jun.

古文：寻遣使奉表于金，乞为附庸。
现代文：不久派使者向金国上表，请求做附庸国。
English: He soon sent an envoy to petition Kim to become a vassal state.

古文：事未决，淳病死，年六十。
现代文：事情还没有决定下来，耶律淳病死了，年六十岁。
English: The matter was still undecided, and Jeruchun died of illness at the age of sixty.

古文：百官伪谥曰孝章皇帝，庙号宣宗，葬燕西香山永安陵。
现代文：百官伪谥之曰孝章皇帝，庙号宣宗，安葬于燕京西面香山永安陵。
English: Emperor Xiaozhang, also known as Emperor Xuanzong, was buried in Yong'an Mausoleum on Xiangshan Mountain on the west side of Yanjing.

古文：遗命遥立秦王定以存社稷，德妃为皇太后，称制，改建福为德兴元年，放进士李球等百八人。
现代文：遗命遥立秦王耶律定以保全社稷，德妃为皇太后，称制摄国政，改建福为德兴元年，放榜录进士李球等一百零八人。
English: Qin King Yeludong decreed the preservation of social status, the German empress was named the empress dowager, the regency was established, Fu was rebuilt as the first year of the rejuvenation of virtue, and 108 people, including Li Qiu, were promoted.

古文：时宋兵来攻，战败之，由是人心大悦，兵势日振。
现代文：时逢宋军前来进攻，我军击败之，因此人心大为悦服，士气日益高涨。
English: When the Song army came to attack, our army defeated it, so the people were greatly pleased and morale was rising.

古文：宰相李纯等潜纳宋兵，居民内应，抱关者被杀甚众。
现代文：宰相李纯等人暗中接纳宋兵，居民也自城内响应，守城士兵被杀的很多。
English: Prime Minister Li Chun and others secretly accepted Song soldiers, residents also responded from within the city, and many soldiers defending the city were killed.

古文：翌日，攻内东门，卫兵力战，宋军大溃，逾城而走，死者相藉。
现代文：次日，宋军攻内东门，卫兵全力作战，宋军全盘溃退，翻越城墙逃走，死者互相枕藉。
English: The next day, the Song Army attacked the Inner East Gate, the guards fought with all their might, the Song Army completely retreated, climbed over the city wall and fled, and the dead slept next to each other.

古文：五表于金，求立秦王，不从。
现代文：德妃五次向金国上表，请求册立秦王，金人不从。
English: Tefui petitioned the state of Qin five times to set up a Qin king, but the state of Qin did not comply.

古文：而金兵大至，德妃奔天德军，见天祚。
现代文：既而金兵大举前来，德妃投奔天德军，见天祚。
English: As soon as the gold soldiers arrived en masse, the German empress defected to the German army.

古文：天祚怒，诛德妃，降淳庶人，除其属籍。
现代文：天祚发怒，诛杀了德妃，降耶律淳为庶人，将他从宗室谱籍中除名。
English: Tensho got angry, killed Tokuhi, demoted Yeruchun to a commoner, and removed him from the family tree.

古文：耶律雅里者，天祚皇帝第二子也，字撒鸾。
现代文：耶律雅里，天祚皇帝第二子，字撒鸾。
English: Yeludyar, the second son of Emperor Tianyao, was nicknamed "Satan."

古文：七岁，欲立为皇太子，别置禁卫，封梁王。
现代文：七岁时，皇上想立他为太子，另外为他设置禁卫，封梁王。
English: When he was seven years old, the emperor wanted to make him crown prince, and set up a royal guard to protect him.

古文：保大三年，金师围青冢寨，雅里在军中。
现代文：保大三年，金军包围了青冢寨，雅里当时在军中。
English: In the third year of Bao Dai, the Golden Army surrounded Qingyuzhai. At that time, Yali was in the army.

古文：太保特母哥挟之出走，间道行至阴山。
现代文：太保特母哥带着他出逃，抄小路来到阴山。
English: His mother's brother, a special guardian, fled with him, taking a back road to Yinshan.

古文：闻天祚失利趋云内，雅里驰赴。
现代文：听说天祚帝兵败后已前往云内，雅里赶紧前往。
English: Hearing that Emperor Tianyao's soldiers had gone to Yunnan after their defeat, Yali hurried to the scene.

古文：时扈从者千余人，多于天祚。
现代文：当时雅里有随从千余人，多于天祚。
English: At that time, Yari had more than a thousand followers, more than Tianyao.

古文：天祚虑特母哥生变，欲诛之。
现代文：天祚担心特母哥发生变乱，想诛杀他。
English: Tianyao was worried about her brother's mutiny and wanted to kill him.

古文：责以不能全救诸王，将讯之。
现代文：指责他不能将诸王全部救出，准备审讯他。
English: accusing him of not being able to save all the kings and preparing to put him on trial.

古文：仗剑召雅里问曰： 特母哥教汝何为？ 
现代文：天祚手持利剑召来雅里问道 ：特母哥教你怎么做？ 
English: Tenjyo, sword in hand, summoned Yari and asked, "What did your special mother teach you to do?"

古文：雅里对曰： 无他言。 
现代文：雅里回答说 ：没有说什么。 
English: Yari replied: "I didn't say anything."

古文：乃释之。
现代文：于是释免了特母哥。
English: As a result, the brother was released.

古文：天祚渡河奔夏，队帅耶律敌列等劫雅里北走。
现代文：天祚渡黄河投奔夏国，队帅耶律敌列等人劫持雅里北逃。
English: Tianyao crossed the Yellow River and rushed to Xia, and the team leader Ye Lu and others kidnapped and fled to the north of Yali.

古文：至沙岭，见蛇横道而过，识者以为不祥。从三日，群僚共立雅里为主。
现代文：到沙岭，见到一条蛇横穿道路而过，有见识者认为不吉利，三日之后，百官一同商议立雅里为帝。
English: When he arrived at Shaling, he saw a snake crossing the road. Some people thought it was unlucky. Three days later, hundreds of officials discussed making Yali emperor.

古文：雅里遂即位，改元神历，命士庶上便宜。
现代文：雅里于是即位，改元神历，命令官吏百姓上奏陈说应当采行之事。
English: Yali then ascended to the throne, changed the era of the calendar, and ordered the officials to report to the people on what should be done.

古文：雅里性宽大，恶诛杀。
现代文：雅里生性宽厚，讨厌杀人。
English: Yali has a generous nature and hates killing.

古文：获亡者，笞之而已。
现代文：捉住逃亡者，笞击一下就算了。
English: If you catch a fugitive, you don't have to shoot him.

古文：有自归者，即官之。
现代文：如有自动归附的，就授给官职。
English: If there is automatic affiliation, they will be given official positions.

古文：因谓左右曰： 欲附来归，不附则去，何须威逼耶？ 
现代文：顺便对左右说： 想依附于我的就来；不想附从我的就可离开。
English: By the way, he said to both sides: If you want to follow me, come; if you don't want to follow me, you can leave.

古文：每取唐《贞观政要》及林牙资忠所作《治国诗》，令侍从读之。
现代文：何必要强行逼迫他们呢？ 每每取出唐朝的《贞观政要》以及林牙资忠所做的《治国诗》，命令侍从诵读。
English: Why is it necessary to forcibly persecute them? He took out the Tang Dynasty's "Zhenguan Zhengyao" and Lin Ya Zizhong's "State Governance Poem" and ordered the attendants to recite them.

古文：乌古部节度使糺哲、迭烈部统军挞不也、都监突里不等各率其众来附。
现代文：乌古部节度使纠哲、迭烈部统军挞不也、都监突里不等人分别率领部众前来归附。
English: Wu Guobin, the head of the Department of Antiquities, sent Guozhe, the head of the Department of Martyrs, Shun Niuya, and the head of the Department of City Supervisors, Tuli Niu, to lead the members of the department to return to the capital.

古文：自是诸部继至。
现代文：从此诸部相继到来。
English: From then on, other choirs came one after another.

古文：而雅里日渐荒怠，好击鞠。
现代文：然而雅里日渐纵逸怠惰，喜欢击鞠。
English: However, Yari gradually became lazy and liked to play bowls.

古文：特母哥切谏，乃不复出。
现代文：特母哥直言极谏，雅里于是不再出游。
English: The special mother's brother was very outspoken, so Yali no longer traveled.

古文：以耶律敌烈为枢密使，特母哥副之。
现代文：任命耶律敌列为枢密使，特母哥为枢密副使。
English: He appointed Ye Lujie as a special envoy and his elder brother as a special deputy envoy.

古文：敌列劾西北路招讨使萧糺里荧惑众心，志有不臣，与其子麻涅并诛之。
现代文：敌列弹劾西北路招讨使萧纠里炫惑众心，有不再称臣屈服之心，于是将他连同其子麻涅一同处死。
English: The enemy's line of impeachment of the Northwest Road instigated Xiao Qili to seduce the hearts of the public, and he no longer had the heart to surrender, so he was executed together with his son Ashne.

古文：以遥设为招讨使，与诸蕃战，数败，杖免官。
现代文：任命遥设为招讨使，与诸部交战，多次败绩，皇上杖击遥设并罢免其官职。
English: He was appointed as a recruiting envoy, fought with various ministries, and was defeated many times. The emperor struck him with a cane and dismissed him from his post.

古文：从行有疲困者，辄振给之。
现代文：随从之人有疲乏困顿者，便赈济给养之。
English: If any of his followers is tired or in need, he will provide for them.

古文：直长保德谏曰： 今国家空虚，赐赉若此，将何以相给耶？ 
现代文：直长保德劝谏说 ：现在国家财力空虚，像这样赏赐，将拿什么来给养呢？ 
English: Naochang Baode advised Zou, saying, "Now that the country's financial resources are empty, with such a reward, what will you use to support yourself?"

古文：雅里怒曰： 昔畋于福山，卿诬猎官，今复有此言。
现代文：雅里恼怒地说： 从前在福山田猎时，你诬陷猎官，现在又说这种话。
English: Yari said angrily, "You used to frame the huntsman when you were hunting in Fukuyamada, and now you're saying such things again.

古文：若无诸部，我将何取？ 
现代文：要是没有诸部，我将从何处征取赋税呢？ 
English: If there were no ministries, where would I collect taxes from?

古文：不纳。
现代文：不肯采纳他的劝谏。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：初，令群牧运盐泺仓粟，而民盗之，议籍以偿。
现代文：当初，命令群牧运送盐泊仓库之粟米，而有百姓盗取之，商议登记其数量责令他们赔偿。
English: At first, he ordered the herdsmen to transport the poppy seeds from the warehouse in Yanbo, but some people stole them, and he discussed registering their quantity and ordered them to pay compensation.

古文：雅里乃自为直：每粟一车偿一羊，三车一牛，五车一马，八车一驼。
现代文：雅里便自己拟定其价值：每盗一车粟米，赔偿一只羊；三车赔偿一头牛；五车赔偿一匹马；八车赔偿一头骆驼。
English: Yari worked out his own value: for each stolen cart of corn, he would compensate a sheep; three carts would compensate a cow; five carts would compensate a horse; eight carts would compensate a camel.

古文：左右曰： 今一羊易粟二斗且不可得，乃偿一车！ 
现代文：左右说 ：现在一只羊想换两斗粟都做不到，竟然可以用来赔偿一车粟！ 
English: Some people said, "Nowadays, a sheep can't even exchange two buckets of poppies, but it can be used to compensate for one cart of poppies!"

古文：雅里曰： 民有则我有。
现代文：雅里说 ：民有就是我有。
English: Yari said: What the people have is what I have.

古文：若令尽偿，民何堪？ 
现代文：如果让他们全部赔出来，老百姓怎么受得了呢？ 
English: If they were to lose everything, how could the people bear it?

古文：后猎查剌山，一日而射黄羊四十，狼二十一，因致疾，卒，年三十。
现代文：后来在查剌山狩猎，一天之内射得黄羊四十只，狼二十一只，因此得了病，去世，年三十岁。
English: Later, he went hunting in the Jialu Mountains and shot forty yellow sheep and twenty-one wolves in one day. As a result, he fell ill and died at the age of thirty.

古文：耶律大石者，世号为西辽。
现代文：耶律大石所建，后世称为西辽。
English: It was built by Ye Lu Daishi and later known as Xiliiao.

古文：大石字重德，太祖八代孙也。
现代文：大石字重德，太祖第八代孙。
English: Daishi Zi Chongde, the eighth grandchild of the great-grandfather.

古文：通辽、汉字，善骑射，登天庆五年进士第，擢翰林应奉，寻升承旨。
现代文：通晓辽、汉文字，擅长骑射，天庆五年中进士，提升为翰林应奉，不久升任承旨。
English: He is familiar with Liao and Chinese characters, and is good at riding and shooting. He was promoted to Hanlin Ying Bong in the fifth year of Tianqing Middle School, and was soon promoted to Zheng Ji.

古文：辽以翰林为林牙，故称大石林牙。
现代文：辽以翰林为林牙，所以称之大石林牙。
English: Liao took Hanlin as Lin Fang, so it is called Daishi Lin Fang.

古文：历泰、祥二州刺史，辽兴军节度使。
现代文：历任泰、祥二州刺史，辽兴军节度使。
English: Successive Tai, Xiang Erzhou stabbing history, Liao Xingjun Festival envoy.

古文：保大二年，金兵日逼，天祚播越，与诸大臣立秦晋王淳为帝。
现代文：保大二年，金兵日益逼近，天祚帝流亡，大石与众大臣立秦晋王耶律淳为帝。
English: In the second year of Bao Dai, the golden soldiers were getting closer and closer, Emperor Tianyao went into exile, and Daishi and his ministers installed Qin and Jin King Yerutun as emperor.

古文：淳死，立其妻萧德妃为太后，以守燕。
现代文：淳死，立其妻萧德妃为太后，以守卫燕京。
English: After Jun's death, his wife Xiao Defei was appointed empress dowager to guard Yanjing.

古文：及金兵至，萧德妃归天祚。天祚怒诛德妃而责大石曰： 我在，汝何敢立淳？ 
现代文：及至金兵到来，萧德妃回到天祚处，天祚恼怒，诛杀德妃并责备大石说 ：我还没死，你怎么敢立耶律淳？ 
English: When the gold soldiers arrived, Xiao Defei returned to the Heavenly Palace. The Heavenly Palace was angry, killed Defei and scolded Daishi, saying, "I'm not dead yet, how dare you set up Ye Lu Jun?"

古文：对曰： 陛下以全国之势，不能一拒敌，弃国远遁，使黎民涂炭。
现代文：大石回答说： 陛下拥有全国的力量，不能去阻挡一下敌人，抛弃了国家社稷远远逃遁，致使百姓生活在水深火热之中。
English: Oishi replied, "Your majesty has the power of the whole country, but you can't stop the enemy for a moment. You have abandoned the national community and fled far away, causing the people to live in the heat of the moment.

古文：即立十淳，皆太祖子孙，岂不胜乞命于他人耶？ 
现代文：即使立十个耶律淳，都是太祖的子孙，岂不强似去乞求别人来宽宥性命？ 
English: Would it not be better to beg for the forgiveness of one's life, even if one were to have ten sons, all of whom would be descendants of one's forefathers?

古文：上无以答，赐酒食，赦其罪。
现代文：皇上无言以对，赐给酒食，赦免其罪。
English: The emperor was speechless, gave him food and drink, and forgave his sins.

古文：大石不自安，遂杀萧乙薛、坡里括，自立为王，率铁骑二百宵遁。
现代文：大石心中不能自安，于是杀死萧乙薛、坡里括，自立为王，率领铁骑二百乘夜逃遁。
English: Daishi couldn't calm down, so he killed Xiao Yixue and Po Liguo, set himself up as king, and led 200 cavalrymen on a night escape.

古文：北行三日，过黑水，见白达达详稳床古儿。
现代文：向北走了三天，过黑水，见到白达达详稳床古儿。
English: Walked north for three days, crossed the Black Water, and saw Bai Dada's old bedstead.

古文：床古儿献马四百，驼二十，羊若干。
现代文：床古儿进献马匹四百只、驼二十只、羊若干。
English: Four hundred horses, twenty camels and a number of sheep were brought in by the Bedouins.

古文：西至可敦城，驻北庭都护府，会威武、崇德、会蕃、新、大林、紫河、驼等七州及大黄室韦、敌剌、王纪剌、茶赤剌、也喜、鼻古德、尼剌、达剌乖、达密里、密儿纪、合主、乌古里、阻卜、普速完、唐古、忽母思、奚的、糺而毕十八部王众，谕曰： 我祖宗艰难创业，历世九主，历年二百。
现代文：向西行至可敦城，驻军于北庭都护府，会集威武、崇德、会蕃、新、大林、紫河、驼等七州以及大黄室韦、敌剌、王纪剌、茶赤剌、也喜、鼻古德、尼剌、达剌乖、达密里、密儿纪、合主、乌古里、阻卜、普速完、唐古、忽母思、奚的、纠而毕十八部王之众，晓谕他们说： 我祖宗历经艰难创下大业，经历了九代二百年。
English: He marched westward to the city of Kedun, and stationed his troops at the Bei Ting Capital Guarding Post. He gathered the seven states including Weiwu, Chongde, Huiyang, Xin, Dalin, Zihe, and Camel, as well as the eighteen kings including Dahuang Muxuwei, Zhisheng, Wang Jizhong, Cha Chiaqi, Ya Xi, Nanzhongde, Ni Jizhong, Dazhonggui, Damiri, Mi Rongji, Heshuan, Uguri, Diao Bo, Pu Hao Gan, Tanggu, Huan Muxi, Zi Di, and Gu

古文：金以臣属，逼我国家，残我黎庶，屠翦我州邑，使我天祚皇帝蒙尘于外，日夜痛心疾首。
现代文：金人作为臣属，逼迫我国家，残杀我黎民，屠杀毁灭我城邑，使我们的天祚皇帝陛下逃难于外，想到这些我日夜都痛心疾首。
English: As a subject, the goldsmiths persecuted my country, killed my people, massacred and destroyed my cities, and made it difficult for our Emperor Tianyao to escape. I think of these things day and night with a heavy heart.

古文：我今仗义而西，欲借力诸蕃，翦我仇敌，复我疆宇，惟尔众亦有轸我国家，忧我社稷，思共救君父，济生民于难者乎？ 
现代文：我现在仗义西行，想借助众蕃部的力量，翦灭我们的仇敌，恢复我国的领土疆域。你们众人之中也有顾念痛惜我们国家，忧虑我们的社稷，思量共同救出君父，济助生民于苦难之中的人吗？ 
English: I am now heading west with the banner of righteousness, hoping to destroy our enemies and recover our country's territory and borders with the help of the power of all my subordinates. Do any of you also have thoughts of pity for our country, worry about our society, and think about rescuing the emperor and father together, and helping those who are suffering?

古文：遂得精兵万余，置官吏，立排甲，具器仗。
现代文：于是得到精兵一万余人，设置官吏，编列排甲，准备仪仗器具。
English: As a result, more than 10,000 elite soldiers were obtained, officials were set up, armor platoons were organized, and ceremonial equipment was prepared.

古文：明年二月甲午，以青牛白马祭天地、祖宗，整旅而西。
现代文：次年二月初十，以青牛、白马祭祀天地、祖宗，整顿队伍向西进发。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the following year, a rectification team headed west with a young ox and a white horse to worship heaven, earth and ancestors.

古文：先遣书回鹘王毕勒哥曰： 昔我太祖皇帝北征，过卜古罕城，即遣使至甘州，诏尔祖乌母主曰： 汝思故国耶，朕即为汝复之；汝不能返耶，朕则有之。
现代文：先写信给回鹘王毕勒哥说 ：从前我国太祖皇帝北征，经过卜古罕城，就曾派遣使者到甘州，下诏给你们祖先乌母主说： 你思念故国吗，朕马上就可以为你恢复，你担心不能回去吗，我已经拥有这片土地了。
English: First, he wrote a letter to the Uighur king Bilko, saying, "Once upon a time, our great-great-grandfather, the emperor Bilko, started his Northern Expedition and passed through the city of Bokuhan. He then sent an envoy to Ganzhou to issue an edict to your ancestors, the Umayyads, saying, 'Do you miss your homeland? I can immediately restore it for you. Are you worried that you won't be able to return? I already own this land.

古文：在朕犹在尔也。 
现代文：我拥有，也就是你拥有了。 
English: I have, which means you have.

古文：尔祖即表谢，以为迁国于此，十有余世，军民皆安土重迁，不能复返矣。
现代文：你的祖先当即上表致谢，认为国家迁来此地，已有十几代人，军民都留恋现有国王，不愿迁居异地，所以我也就不能重返故国了。
English: Your ancestors immediately expressed their gratitude, saying that the country had moved here for more than a dozen generations, and the military and the people were nostalgic for the current king and did not want to move to a different place, so I could not return to my homeland.

古文：是与尔国非一日之好也。
现代文：这表明我国与你们国家的交好已有多年历史了。
English: This shows that the friendship between our country and your country has a long history.

古文：今我将西至大食，假道尔国，其勿致疑。 
现代文：现在我准备向西前往大食，向你们国家借道，你们切不可生疑。 
English: Now I am preparing to go west to the great food, to take a detour to your country, you must not be suspicious.

古文：毕勒哥得书，即迎至邸，大宴三日。临行，献马六百，驼百，羊三千，愿质子孙为附庸，送至境外。
现代文：毕勒哥接到书信，当即到客舍迎接，大宴三日，临走之前，又进献六百匹马、一百只骆驼、三千只羊，并愿以子孙为人质做附庸，送至境外。
English: Upon receiving the letter, Bieleko immediately went to the guest house to welcome him, and on the third day of the banquet, before leaving, he offered another 600 horses, 100 camels, and 3,000 sheep, and was willing to take his children and grandchildren as hostages to be sent abroad as vassals.

古文：所过，敌者胜之，降者安之。
现代文：所经过之处，为敌的击败之，降附的安抚之。
English: Wherever he went, he was defeated by the enemy and pacified by the conquered.

古文：兵行万里，归者数国，获驼、马、牛、羊、财物，不可胜计。
现代文：行军万里，有好几个国家归附，获得的骆驼、马匹、牛、羊、财物，不可胜数。
English: They marched thousands of miles, conquered several countries, and acquired countless camels, horses, cattle, sheep, and property.

古文：军势日盛，锐气日倍。
现代文：兵力日益强大，士气日益高涨。
English: The troops are getting stronger and stronger, and morale is rising.

古文：至寻思干，西域诸国举兵十万，号忽儿珊，来拒战。
现代文：到寻思干，西域各国合力举兵十万，号称忽儿珊，前来拒战。
English: At the time of the Sino-Japanese War, the countries of the western region jointly raised a hundred thousand soldiers, known as the Huershan, to oppose the war.

古文：两军相望二里许。
现代文：两军相距大约两里。
English: The two armies are about two miles apart.

古文：谕将士曰： 彼军虽多而无谋，攻之则首尾不救，我师必胜。 
现代文：大石晓谕将士说 ：敌军虽多但是没有谋划，攻击它，便会首尾不能相救，我军必定会获胜。 
English: Daishi told the commander, "Although there are many enemy troops, they have no plan. If we attack them, we will not be able to save ourselves. Our army will definitely win."

古文：遣六院司大王萧斡里剌、招讨副使耶律松山等将兵二千五百攻其右；枢密副使萧剌阿不、招讨使耶律术薛等将兵二千五百攻其左；自以众攻其中。
现代文：派六院司大王萧斡里剌、招讨副使耶律松山等率兵两千五百人攻击其右路，枢密副使萧剌阿不、招讨使耶律术薛等人率兵两千五百人攻其左路；自己率众进攻其中路。
English: He sent the six-in-charge of the imperial court, the great king Xiao Yuling, and the vice-envoy Yelut Songshan to attack the right-hand road with 2,500 soldiers; the vice-envoy of the imperial court, Xiao Zhaafu, and the vice-envoy of the imperial court, Yelut Xue, led 2,500 soldiers to attack the left-hand road; and he led the people to attack the middle road.

古文：三军俱进，忽儿珊大败，僵尸数十里。
现代文：三军一齐攻击，忽儿珊大败，伏尸数十里。
English: The three armies attacked together, suffered a crushing defeat, and lay dead for dozens of miles.

古文：驻军寻思干凡九十日，回回国王来降，贡方物。
现代文：大石驻军于寻思干共九十日，回回国王前来降附，贡献土产。
English: Oishi garrisoned in Shansi for a total of ninety days, returning to the king to surrender and contribute to local production.

古文：又西至起儿漫，文武百官册立大石为帝，以甲辰岁二月五日即位，年三十八，号葛儿罕。
现代文：又西行至起儿漫，文武百官册立大石为皇帝，以甲辰岁二月五日即位，年三十八岁，号称葛儿罕。
English: He also traveled westward until he was thirty-eight years old. A hundred civil and military officials appointed Daishi as emperor, and he ascended to the throne on February 5 at the age of thirty-eight. He was known as Gerhan.

古文：复上汉尊号曰天佑皇帝，改元延庆。
现代文：又奉上汉制尊号曰天佑皇帝，改元延庆。
English: It was also given the honorific name of Shanghan system, saying "God bless the emperor," and changed its name to Yanqing.

古文：追谥祖父为嗣元皇帝，祖母为宣义皇后，册元妃萧氏为昭德皇后。
现代文：追谥祖父为嗣元皇帝，祖母为宣义皇后，册立元妃萧氏为昭德皇后。
English: His grandfather was the Heir Apparent Emperor, his grandmother was the Empress of Xuan Yi, and his great-grandmother was the Empress of Zhao De.

古文：因谓百官曰： 朕与卿等行三万里，跋涉沙漠，夙夜艰勤。
现代文：于是对百官说 ：我与你们行程三万里，跋山涉水过沙漠，日夜艰辛前行。
English: So he said to the centurions, "I have come with you on a journey of thirty thousand miles, over mountains and through deserts, toiling night and day.

古文：赖祖宗之福，卿等之力，冒登大位。
现代文：仰赖祖宗之福佑，你等众人之力，我冒昧地登了大位。
English: Relying on the blessings of my ancestors and the strength of all of you, I ventured to ascend to the throne.

古文：尔祖尔父宜加恤典，共享尊荣。 
现代文：你们的祖、父都应该加以存恤善后，以共享荣耀。 
English: Your fathers and grandfathers should have preserved and improved it, so that they could share the glory.

古文：自萧斡里剌等四十九人祖父封爵有差。
现代文：从萧斡里剌以下四十九人的祖父和父亲，封号爵赏各有等差。
English: The grandfathers and fathers of the forty-nine people from Xiao Yu to Lijun have different titles.

古文：延庆三年，班师东归，马行二十日，得善地，遂建都城，号虎思斡耳朵，改延庆为康国元年。
现代文：延庆三年，班师向东返回，马行二十日，得到一块好地方，于是建立了都城，称为虎思斡耳朵。改延庆为康国元年。
English: In the third year of Yanqing, the class teacher returned to the east, and on the 20th day of Ma Xing, he got a good place, so he established the capital city, called the Tiger's Ear. Yanqing was changed to the first year of Kangguo.

古文：三月，以六院司大王萧斡里剌为兵马都元帅，敌剌部前同知枢密院事萧查剌阿不副之，茶赤剌部秃鲁耶律燕山为都部署，护卫耶律铁哥为都监，率七万骑东征。
现代文：三月，以六院司大王萧斡里剌为兵马都元帅，敌剌部前同知枢密院事萧查剌阿不为副元帅，以茶赤剌部秃鲁耶律燕山为都部署，护卫耶律铁哥为都监，率领七万骑兵东征。
English: In March, with the sixth director of the Imperial Household Agency, Xiao Yulian, as the marshal of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, with the former comrade-in-arms of the Imperial Household Agency, Xiao Zhaobao, as the deputy marshal, with the former comrade-in-arms of the Imperial Household Agency, Zhang Rui of Yanshan of the Cha Chakou Department, as the commander of the capital, and with the guardian of the capital, Ye Lu Tiege, as the inspector of the capital, he led 70,000 cavalrymen to the eastward expedition.

古文：以青牛白马祭天，树旗以誓于众曰： 我大辽自太祖、太宗艰难而成帝业，其后嗣君耽乐无厌，不恤国政，盗贼蜂起，天下土崩。
现代文：以青牛白马祭天，树立旗帜向众人立誓说： 我大辽自从太祖、太宗艰难地创立大业，后来即位之君王沉溺于享乐，毫无节制，不顾念国家政事，以致盗贼纷起，天下土崩瓦解。
English: With a young bull and a white horse, he offered sacrifices to heaven, and set up a banner to swear to the people: I, the Great Liao, since the time of my great-grandfather and great-grandfather, have worked hard to create a great cause. Later, the reigning monarch indulged in pleasure, without restraint, without regard to national politics, so that thieves arose and the world fell apart.

古文：朕率尔众，远至朔漠，期复大业，以光中兴。
现代文：朕如今率领你们众人，远远来到朔北沙漠，以期恢复大业，以光大中兴。
English: Today, I am leading all of you far away to the Shuo Bei Desert, with a view to resuming the great cause and achieving great rejuvenation.

古文：此非朕与尔世居之地。 
现代文：这里并不是朕与你等世代居住之地。 
English: This is not where you and I have lived for generations.

古文：申命元帅斡里剌曰： 今汝其往，信赏必罚，与士卒同甘苦，择善水草以立营，量敌而进，毋自取祸败也。 
现代文：向元帅斡里剌下达命令道： 现在你努力前去，要赏罚分明，与士卒同甘共苦，选择肥美的水草之地扎营，估量好敌人的实力再进军与之交战，不要自己招来祸患和失败。 
English: Issuing an order to the marshal Yuliya, he said, "Now that you have made the effort to go forward, you must be aware of the rewards and punishments, share the joys and sorrows with your soldiers, choose a fertile water and grassland to set up camp, assess the strength of the enemy and then march into battle with them, and do not bring misfortune and failure on yourself.

古文：行万余里无所得，牛马多死，勒兵而还。
现代文：斡里剌等人行军一万余里，一无所获，牛马死去很多，只好整顿兵马回来。
English: Yuliya and others marched more than ten thousand miles, gained nothing, many cattle and horses died, and had to return to rectify the soldiers and horses.

古文：大石曰： 皇天弗顺，数也！ 
现代文：大石说： 皇天不顺我们的心意，此乃天数！ 
English: Oishi said, "If the Emperor does not comply with our wishes, this is the number of days!

古文：康国十年殁，在位二十年，庙号德宗。
现代文：康国十年去世，在位二十年，庙号德宗。
English: Kangguo died ten years later, after twenty years on the throne, and the name of the temple was changed to Dezong.

古文：子夷列年幼，遣命皇后权国。
现代文：子夷列年幼，遗命由皇后临时执掌国政。
English: His children were young, and he was temporarily appointed by the empress to take charge of state affairs.

古文：后名塔不烟，号感天皇后，称制，改元咸清，在位七年，子夷列即位，改元绍兴。
现代文：皇后名塔不烟，号感天皇后，称制，改元咸清，在位七年。子夷列即位，改元绍兴。
English: Empress Mei-ta did not smoke, called herself the Empress, praised the system, changed the era to Han and Qing, and reigned for seven years. Zi Er was enthroned, and changed the era to Shaoxing.

古文：籍民十八岁以上，得八万四千五百户。
现代文：将百姓十八岁以上登记造册，得到八万四千五百户。
English: The registration of people over the age of 18 was completed, resulting in 84,500 households.

古文：在位十三年殁，庙号仁宗。
现代文：在位十三年后去世，庙号仁宗。
English: He died after reigning for thirteen years, and his temple name was changed to Rinzong.

古文：子幼，遗诏以妹普速完权国，称制，改元崇福，号承天太后。
现代文：其子年幼，遗诏由胞妹普速完临时执政，称制，改元崇福，号承天太后。
English: His son was young, and he decreed that his brother and sister, Pu He, should temporarily govern the country, and changed the name of the reigning emperor to Chongfu, and the title of Empress Dowager of Heaven.

古文：后与驸马萧朵鲁不弟朴古只沙里通，出驸马为东平王，罗织杀之。
现代文：后来与驸马萧朵鲁不之弟朴古只沙里私通，出贬驸马为东平王，罗织罪名杀之。
English: Later, he had an adulterous affair with Baima Xiaodoru, the younger brother of Baima Xiaodoru's brother, Pak Gu, but only with Shari. Baima was denounced as the King of Dongping, and Luo Wei was accused of killing him.

古文：驸马父斡里剌以兵围其宫，射杀普速完及朴古只沙里。
现代文：驸马之父斡里剌率兵包围皇宫，射杀普速完及朴古只沙里。
English: Yuma's father, Yuri, led an army to surround the imperial palace, shooting down Pu Hao and Pak Gu.

古文：普速完在位十四年。
现代文：普速完在位十四年。
English: He has been on the throne for 14 years.

古文：仁宗次子直鲁古即位，改元天禧，在位三十四年。
现代文：仁宗次子直鲁古即位，改元天禧，在位三十四年。
English: The second son of Emperor Jinzong, Emperor Jokulugu, ascended to the throne, the year was changed to the Year of Jubilee, and he reigned for thirty-four years.

古文：时秋出猎，乃蛮王屈出律以伏兵八千擒之，而据其位。
现代文：时逢秋天，出猎，乃蛮王屈出律以伏兵八千活捉了他，从而夺了皇位。
English: Every autumn, when he went out hunting, the barbarian king bent the rules and captured him alive with an ambush of eight thousand soldiers, thus seizing the throne.

古文：遂袭辽衣冠，尊直鲁古为太上皇，皇后为皇太后，朝夕问起居，以侍终焉。
现代文：于是袭用辽之衣冠制度，尊直鲁古为太上皇，皇后为皇太后，早晚问候起居，一直侍奉到他们去世。
English: As a result, they adopted Liao's system of clothing and crowns, and respected Zhu Ronggu as the emperor and the empress as the empress dowager, greeting them in the morning and evening, and serving them until their death.

古文：直鲁古死，辽绝。
现代文：直鲁古死，辽之世系便断绝了。
English: When Naoru died, Liao's lineage was cut off.

古文：耶律淳在天祚之世，历王大国，受赐金券，赞拜不名，一时恩遇，无与为比。
现代文：耶律淳在天祚之世，历封大国之王，受赐金券，参拜皇上时赞礼之人不直呼其名。所享受的恩遇，一时无与伦比。
English: In the heavenly world, Jeruchon was the king of all great nations. He was given gold certificates, and people did not call him by his first name when they came to pay homage to the emperor. The favors he enjoyed were unparalleled.

古文：当天祚播越，以都元帅留守南京，独不可奋大义以激燕民及诸大臣，兴勤王之师，东拒金而迎天祚乎？
现代文：当天祚帝流亡之时，耶律淳作为都元帅留守南京，难道就不能愤激大义以激励燕京百姓及众大臣，兴勤王之师，东拒金人从而迎回天祚吗？
English: On the day of Emperor Qianlong's exile, Ye Lu Jun stayed behind in Nanjing as the capital's marshal. Couldn't he have aroused the people of Yanjing and the ministers with his indignation to encourage them to welcome back Emperor Qianlong?

古文：乃自取之，是篡也。
现代文：竟然自取帝位，是之谓篡。
English: To actually take the throne himself is called usurpation.

古文：况忍王天祚哉？
现代文：何况忍心贬天祚为王呢？
English: What's more, how could he bear to dethrone Tianyao as king?

古文：大石既帝淳而王天祚矣，复归天祚。
现代文：大石既已立耶律淳为帝而贬天祚为王，后又回归天祚身边。
English: Even though Oishi had made Jeruchun emperor and dethroned Amaterasu as king, he later returned to Amaterasu's side.

古文：天祚责以大义，乃自立为王而去之。
现代文：天祚以大义责备他，他竟自立为王而出走了。
English: The gods rebuked him with great justice, but he went off to become king.

古文：幸藉祖宗余威遗智，建号万里之外。
现代文：有幸凭借祖宗之余威及余智，在万里之外建号立国。
English: We are fortunate to have been able to establish our country thousands of miles away thanks to the influence and wisdom of our ancestors.

古文：虽寡母弱子，更继迭承，几九十年，亦可谓难矣。
现代文：尽管是寡母弱子，互相更迭继承，将近九十年，也实在是难能可贵了。
English: Despite being a single mother and a weakling, inheriting each other over and over, for nearly ninety years, it is really precious.

古文：然淳与雅里、大石之立，皆在天祚之世。
现代文：然而耶律淳与雅里、大石之自立为帝，均在天祚之时。
English: However, Jeruchon, along with Jari and Oishi, became independent emperors at the time of the earthquake.

古文：有君而复君之，其可乎哉？
现代文：有君王而又自立为君，怎么可行呢？
English: How is it possible to have a king and be self-sufficient?

古文：诸葛武侯为献帝发丧，而后立先主为帝者，不可同年语矣。
现代文：诸葛武侯为汉献帝发丧，然后再立先主为帝，此举比起三人所为，真是不可同日而语了。
English: Zhuge Wuhou mourned the death of Emperor Han Xian and then reinstated his predecessor as emperor. Compared to what the three of them did, this is truly a day to remember.

古文：故著以为戒云。
现代文：故此记下他们的行事以为鉴戒。
English: Therefore, take note of their actions as a warning.

