古文：同光二年夏五月己亥，帝御文明殿，册齐王张全义为太尉。
现代文：同光二年五月二日，庄宗到文明殿，册封齐王张全义为太尉。
English: On May 2nd of the same year, Zhuo Zong went to the Palace of Civilization and made Zhang Quanyi, the Prince of Qi, a first lieutenant.

古文：礼毕，全义赴尚书省领事，左谏议大夫窦专不降阶，为御史所劾，专援引旧典，宰相不能诘，寝而不行。
现代文：礼仪结束，张全义到尚书省接任，左谏议大夫窦专不下台阶，被御史弹劾，窦专引用旧典，宰相不能责问他，事情放下不论。
English: At the end of the ceremony, Zhang Quanyi took over the post of the Minister of Education and Culture. The left-wing doctor Dou Xuan did not step down and was impeached by the imperial historian. Dou Xuan quoted the old book. The prime minister could not reproach him, regardless of the matter.

古文：庚子，太常卿李燕卒。
现代文：三日，太常卿李燕死。
English: On the third day, First Secretary Li Yan passed away.

古文：壬寅，以教坊使陈俊为景州刺史，内园使储德源为宪州刺史，皆梁之伶人也。
现代文：五日，任教坊使陈俊为景州刺史、内园使，任储德源为宪州刺史，都是梁朝演戏的优伶。
English: On the fifth day, Chen Jun was appointed as the secretary of the school for the history of Jingzhou and the secretary of the inner garden, and Deyuan was appointed as the secretary for the history of Gyeongju, all of which were excellent performances of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：丙午，以福建节度使、闽王王审知依前检校太师、守中书令、福建节度使。戊申，幸郭崇韬第。己酉，诏天下收拆防城之具，不得修浚池隍。
现代文：起初，庄宗平定梁朝，陈俊与储德源都被宠伶周匝推荐，庄宗因此答应让他们当郡官，郭崇韬以为不可以，很多优伶都谈此事，庄宗秘密召见郭崇韬对他说 ：我已答应了授予他俩郡官，很多年没兑现，我不好意思见这两个人，你应委屈一下听从我的。 
English: At first, Zhuangzong recommended the favored sons of the Liang Dynasty, Chen Jun and Zhu Deyuan. Therefore, Zhuangzong agreed to make them county magistrates. Guo Chongyi thought it was not possible. Many eminent men talked about the matter. Zhuangzong secretly summoned Guo Chongyi and said to him, "I have agreed to grant county magistrates to the two of them. I have not honored it for many years. I am embarrassed to see these two people. You should be offended and listen to me."

古文：以西都留守、京兆尹张筠依前检校太保，充西都留守。
现代文：所以有这次的任命。十一日，庄宗驾临郭崇韬府第。十二日，诏令天下收回拆除城防器具，不得修理疏浚护城河。
English: On the 11th day, Zhuozong arrived at Guo Chongyi's residence. On the 12th day, he ordered the world to withdraw the dismantling of city defense equipment and not to repair the dredged moat.

古文：甲寅，以沧州节度使李绍斌充东北面招讨使，以兗州节度李绍钦为副招讨使，以宣徽使李绍宏为招讨都监，率大军渡河而北，时幽州上言契丹将寇河朔故也。
现代文：十七日，任沧州节度使李绍斌充东北面招讨使，任兖州节度李绍钦为副招讨使，任宣徽使李绍宏为招讨都监，率大军渡过黄河向北，因为这时幽州报告说契丹将侵犯河朔。
English: On the 17th, the Cangzhou Festival appointed Li Shaobin as the northeastern recruiting envoy, the Zhangzhou Festival appointed Li Shaoqin as the deputy recruiting envoy, the Xuanhui Festival appointed Li Shaohong as the recruiting supervisor, and led a large army across the Yellow River to the north, because at this time Yuzhou reported that the Khitan would invade the river.

古文：乙卯，潞州叛将杨立遣使健步奉表乞行赦宥，帝令枢密副使宋唐玉赍敕书招抚。
现代文：十八日，潞州叛将杨立派使者步行献上表章请求宽恕，庄宗令枢密副使宋唐玉带诏书招抚杨立。
English: On the 18th, the Yang Rongli envoy of the Zhangzhou rebel Yang Rongli presented his badge on foot to ask for forgiveness, and Zhuang Zong ordered the vice-envoy of Song Tangyu to take the imperial rescript to persuade Yang Rongli.

古文：乙丑，以权知归义军留后曹义金为归义军节度使、沙州刺史、检校司空。
现代文：幽州报告：契丹在幽州东南扎营。十九日，渤海国王大讠巽派使者进贡土产。二十四日，下诏将复州划作荆州的一个郡。
English: Yuzhou report: The Khitan camped in the southeast of Yuzhou. On the 19th, King Dagon of the Bohai Sea sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products. On the 24th, the next edict designated Fuzhou as a county of Jingzhou.

古文：丙寅，李嗣源奏收复潞州。
现代文：二十九日，李嗣源报告收复潞州。
English: On the 29th, Li Siyuan reported the recovery of Ganzhou.

古文：幽州上言，新授宣武军节度使李存审卒。
现代文：幽州上奏，新任宣武军节度使李存审死。
English: In Yuzhou, the newly-appointed Xuanwu Army commander ordered Li Cunxin to be put on trial for his death.

古文：六月甲戌，中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、平章事、宏文馆大学士豆卢革加右仆射，余如故；侍中、监修国史、兼枢密使、镇州节度使郭崇韬进爵邑，加功臣号；中书侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士赵光允加兼户部尚书；礼部侍郎、平章事韦说加中书侍郎。
现代文：六月七日，中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、平章事、弘文馆大学士豆卢革加授右仆射，其余如旧；侍中、监修国史、兼枢密使、镇州节度使郭崇韬进爵邑，加功臣名号；中书侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士赵光裔加兼户部尚书；礼部侍郎、平章事韦说加中书侍郎。
English: On June 7th, the attendants and officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters were Shang Shu, Ping Zhang Jie, and Zhuo Lu Ge, a scholar of the Hongwen Hall University, and the other members were the same as before; the attendants and officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters were Shang Shu, Ping Zhang Jie, and Zhuo Lu Ge, also a scholar of the Hongwen Hall University, and the other members were the same as before; the attendants and officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters were Shang Shu, Ping Zhang Jie, and the scholar of the Jixian Palace University, Zhao Guang Rong, and the attendants and officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters were the same

古文：宋州奏，节度使李绍安卒。
现代文：宋州上奏，节度使李绍安死。
English: Song Zhou ascended the throne, and Li Shao died peacefully.

古文：丙子，李嗣源遣使部送潞州叛将杨立等到阙，并磔于市。
现代文：九日，李嗣源派人押送潞州叛将杨立等人到首都，一起在街市上凌迟处死。
English: On the 9th, Li Siyuan sent someone to escort Yang Li, the traitor of Zhangzhou, and others to the capital, and they were executed together in the street market.

古文：潞州城峻而隍深，至是帝命刬平之，因诏诸方镇撤防城之备焉。
现代文：潞州城高池深，这时庄宗下令铲平，并诏令各方镇撤除防城的装备。
English: At that time, Zhuangzong ordered the city to be razed to the ground, and ordered all towns to remove their city defense equipment.

古文：丁丑，有司上言： 洛阳已建宗庙，其北京太庙请停。 
现代文：十日，有官员上奏 ：洛阳已经建了宗庙，北京的太庙请停建。 
English: On the 10th, an official announced: Luoyang has already built a patriarchal temple, Beijing's Great Temple, please stop construction.

古文：诏改辉州为单州。
现代文：庄宗同意了。
English: Zhuangzong agreed.

古文：庚寅，故左仆射裴枢，右仆射裴贽、崔远并赠司徒；故静海军节度使独孤损赠司空；故吏部尚书陆扆赠右仆射；故工部尚书王溥赠右仆射。
现代文：十七日，封卫国夫人韩氏为淑妃，封燕国夫人伊氏为德妃，又令有关机构选择日期册封。二十一日，汝州防御使张继孙在本郡被赐死。张继孙是齐王张全义的义子，本姓郝，因为他哥哥张继业告发了他的阴谋，所以被杀。
English: On the 17th, Han, the wife of Wei Guo, was named Shufei, and Yi, the wife of Yan Guo, was named Defei, and the relevant agencies were ordered to select the date for the official seal. On the 21st, the defense of Ruzhou caused Zhang Jisun to be given death in this county. Zhang Jisun was the son-in-law of Zhang Quanyi, the king of Qi. His real surname was Zou, and he was killed because his brother Zhang Jiye had denounced his plot.

古文：裴枢等六人皆前朝宰辅，为梁祖所害于白马驿，至是追赠焉。
现代文：二十二日，封回鹘可汗仁美为英义可汗。下诏改辉州为单州。
English: On the 22nd, the official seal of the Khan of Renmei was sealed as the Khan of Yingyi. The next edict changed Huizhou into a single state.

古文：壬辰，以天平军节度使、蕃汉总管副使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、兼中书令李嗣源为宣武军节度使、蕃汉马步总管，余如故。
现代文：二十五日，任天平军节度使、蕃汉总管副使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、兼中书令李嗣源为宣武军节度使、蕃汉马步军总管，其余如旧。
English: On the 25th, Li Siyuan was appointed as the Tianping Army's Festival Delegate, the Shihhan General Manager's Deputy Delegate, the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies Third Division, the Inspector Lieutenant, and the Chinese Calligrapher Li Siyuan was appointed as the Xuanwu Army's Festival Delegate, the Shihhan Horse-marching Army's General Manager, and the rest as before.

古文：甲午，以枢密使、特进、左领军卫上将军、知内侍省事张居翰为骠骑大将军、守左骁卫上将军，进封开国伯，赐功臣号。
现代文：二十七日，任枢密使、特进、左领军卫上将军、知内侍省事张居翰为骠骑大将军、守左骁卫上将军，进封开国伯，赐功臣名号。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Juhan, who was appointed as the Privy Councilor, the Special Envoy, the Left-Led Army General of the Guard, and the Minister of the Interior, was appointed as the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Left-Led Guard, and was awarded the title of meritorious subject.

古文：秋七月戊戌朔，故宣武军节度使李存审男彦超进其父牙兵八千七百人。
现代文：七月一日，已故宣武军节度使李存审之子李彦超向上交出他父亲的牙兵八千七百人。
English: On July 1, the late Xuanwu Jun's festival made Li Yanchao, the son of Li Cunxi, surrender 8,700 of his father's soldiers.

古文：乙酉，幸龙门之雷山，祭天神，从北俗之旧事也。
现代文：二日，中书门下上奏： 每年在南郊祭坛祭祀四次，在太微宫献祭五次，宰臣代理太尉行事，只有太庙是派一般官员行事，以后太庙祭祀，也希望派宰臣行事。 
English: On the second day, the following was recited under the Chinese Book Gate: Every year, there are four sacrifices at the Southern Suburbs Altar and five sacrifices at the Grand Imperial Palace, and the vice-minister acts as acting captain. Only the Grand Imperial Temple sends general officials to act, and after the Grand Imperial Temple sacrifices, it is hoped that the vice-minister will be sent to act.

古文：辛亥，以郓州副使李绍珙为襄州留后，以前泽州刺史董璋为邠州留后。
现代文：庄宗同意了。八日，汴州雍丘县刮大风，拔树木毁庄稼。曹州下大雨，平地水深三尺。
English: Zhuang Zong agreed. On the 8th, a strong wind blew in Yongqiu County, Zhangzhou, uprooting trees and destroying crops. It rained heavily in Caozhou, and the flat land was three feet deep in water.

古文：戊午，西川王衍遣伪署户部侍郎欧阳彬来朝贡，称 大蜀皇帝上书大唐皇帝 。
现代文：十二日，庄宗到龙门的雷山，祭天神，这是按北方习俗的旧例。二十一日，西川王衍派伪户部侍郎欧阳彬来朝贡庆贺，称 大蜀皇帝上书大唐皇帝 。
English: On the twelfth day, Zhuangzong went to the Thunder Mountain of Longmen and held a festival for the gods of heaven, which was the old custom in the north. On the twenty-first day, Wang Yan of the West River sent Ouyang Bin, a pseudo-household attendant, to pay tribute to the emperor and celebrate, saying that the Emperor of Great Shu had sent a letter to the Emperor of Great Tang.

古文：庚申，以应州为云州属郡，升新州为威塞军节度使，以妫、儒、武等州为属郡。
现代文：二十三日，将应州作为云州的属郡，升新州为威塞军节度使，以妫、儒、武等州为其属郡。
English: On the 23rd, Yingzhou was made a subordinate county of Yunnan, and Xinzhou was promoted to the military commander of Wuxi, and its subordinate counties were Zou, Confucius, and Wu.

古文：壬戌，皇子继岌妻王氏封魏国夫人。
现代文：二十五日，皇子李继岌的妻子王氏被封为魏国夫人。
English: On the 25th, Wang, the wife of Prince Li Jigu, was named the Empress of Wei.

古文：幽州奏，契丹安巴坚东攻渤海。
现代文：幽州上奏，契丹阿保机往东进攻渤海。
English: With Yuzhou in the ascendant, Khitan Abo attacked the Bohai Sea to the east.

古文：八月己巳，诏洛京应有隙地，任人请射修造，有主者限半年，令本主自修盖，如过限不见屋宇，许他人占射。
现代文：八月三日，诏令洛京凡有空地，任人竞占营造，有主的地限半年内令主人自己修盖房屋，如过期不见房屋，允许别人占地。
English: On August 3, it was decreed that if there is any vacant land in Luojing, the owner of the land would be allowed to compete for the construction. The owner would be required to repair the house within half a year. If the owner did not find the house within the time limit, others would be allowed to occupy the land.

古文：《五代会要》载此诏云：籓方侯伯，内外臣僚，于京邑之中，无安居之所，亦可请射，各自修营。辛未，北京副留守、太原尹孟知祥加检校太傅，增邑，赐功臣号。
现代文：五日，北京副留守、太原尹孟知祥加授检校太傅，增加封邑，赐功臣名号。
English: On the 5th, the deputy governor of Beijing, Taiyuan Yin Meng Zhixiang, added the title of Taifu, increased the fief, and bestowed the title of meritorious subject.

古文：帝畋于西苑。
现代文：庄宗在西苑打猎。
English: Zhuozong is hunting in the West Garden.

古文：爰自伪梁，颇乖斯义，皆从除授，以佐籓宣。
现代文：七日，任租庸副使、守卫尉卿孔谦为租庸使，任右威卫将军孔循为租庸副使。十一日，枢密使郭崇韬上表章请求退职，庄宗不同意。
English: On the seventh day, Kong Qian was appointed as deputy envoy of the Yeongyeon and guard lieutenant general Kong Qian was appointed as deputy envoy of the Yeongyeon. On the eleventh day, the confidential envoy Guo Chongyi requested to retire from the post, but Zhuangzong did not agree.

古文：因缘多事之秋，虑爽得人之选，将期推择，式示更张。
现代文：十二日，租庸使、守礼部尚书王正言免去租庸使职务，守本官。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Shang Shou Wang Zhengyan, the Rent-a-Servant and Keeper of Ceremonies, was relieved of his duties as a Rent-a-Servant and became a Keeper of Ceremonies.

古文：今后诸道，除节度副使、判官两使除授外，其余职员并诸州军事判官等，并任本道本州，各当辟举，其军事判官，仍不在奏官之限。 
现代文：十五日，诏令各道节度、观察、防御、团练使、刺史，一并在洛阳修住宅一所。中书门下上奏 ：请今后各道除节度副使、两使判官外，其余职员以及各州军事判官，各由本处上报任命。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, an imperial edict was issued to each province to set up a residence in Luoyang, and to set up a headquarters, an observation post, a defense post, a regimental training post, and a historical research station. A report was made at the gate of the Chinese Academy of Sciences: In the future, in addition to the deputy headquarters and the judges of the two embassies, the remaining staffs and the military judges of each province are requested to report to this office for appointment.

古文：汴州奏，大水损稼。
现代文：庄宗同意。汴州报告，大水毁坏庄稼。
English: Zhuang Zong agreed. Zhangzhou reported that heavy water destroyed crops.

古文：癸未，租庸使孔谦进封会稽县男，仍赐丰财赡国功臣。
现代文：十七日，租庸使孔谦进封会稽县男爵位，又赐给丰财赡国功臣名号。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the tribune promoted Kong Qian to the title of baron of Fuxi County, and gave him the title of meritorious servant of the country.

古文：淮南杨溥遣使贡方物。
现代文：淮南杨溥派使者进贡土产。
English: Huainan Yang Di sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products.

古文：望差权判尚书省铨左丞崔沂、吏部侍郎崔贻孙、给事中郑韬光、李光序、吏部员外郎卢损等，同详定旧长定格、循资格、十道图，务令简要，可久施行。 
现代文：宋州大水，郓、曹等州大风大雨，损坏庄稼。二十一日，中书门下侍郎上奏 ：请派左丞崔沂，吏部尚书崔贻孙，给事中郑韬光、李光序，吏部员外郎卢损等人一同详细制定选拔官员的长定格、循资格、十道图。 庄宗同意。
English: On the 21st, the attendant at the door of Zhongshu made the following report: Please send Zuo Zheng Cui, Shangshu Cui Yansun of the personnel department, Zheng Yuguang, Li Guangzhu of the personnel department, and Wai Lang Lu Ji, a member of the personnel department, to work out the length scale, qualifications, and ten-way map of the selection of officials. Zhuang Zong agreed.

古文：从之。癸巳，放朝参三日，以霖雨故也。
现代文：二十七日，停止朝拜三天，因为下了连绵大雨的缘故。
English: On the 27th, the worship was suspended for three days due to continuous heavy rain.

古文：陕州奏，河水溢岸。
现代文：陕州上奏，黄河水漫过堤岸。
English: In Shaanxi Province, the waters of the Yellow River flowed over the embankment.

古文：乙未，中书门下上言： 诸陵台令丞请停，以本县令知陵台事。 
现代文：二十九日，中书门下上奏： 请停罢各陵台令丞，由所在县令主管陵台事务。 
English: On the 29th, the following announcement was made at the door of the Chinese Academy of Letters: Please suspend all mausoleums, and let the county magistrate be in charge of mausoleum affairs.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九月癸卯，畋于西北郊。
现代文：九月七日，在西北郊打猎。
English: On September 7, he went hunting in the northwestern suburbs.

古文：幽州上言，契丹安巴坚自渤海国回军。
现代文：幽州报告，契丹阿保机从渤海国回师。
English: According to the Yuzhou report, Khitan Ahboji returned from Bohai Province.

古文：内园新殿成，名曰长春殿。
现代文：内园新殿建成，取名叫长春殿。
English: The new inner garden hall was completed and named the Changchun Hall.

古文：侍中郭崇韬奏： 应三铨注授官员等，内有自无出身入仕，买觅鬼名告敕；今将骨肉文书，揩改姓名；或历任不足，妄称失坠；或假人廕绪，托形势论属，安排参选，所司随例注官。
现代文：十二日，侍中郭崇韬上奏： 凡三铨载录任命的官员，里面有从没有出身而做官的，购买死人名字身份；现将骨肉亲人的身份证明，涂改姓名；或历任资格不足，随便说弄丢了；或假托别人荫庇，看形势论属，安排参选，有关部门应随例注销其官位。
English: On the 12th, Guo Chongtao, the Vice-President of the Chamber of Deputies, made the following report: For every three officials listed in the record of appointment, among whom there are officials who have never been born, buy the dead person's name identity; now the identity certificate of the flesh and blood relatives, alter the name; or the qualifications of the previous incumbents are insufficient, casually lost; or the shadow of others, depending on the situation, arrange to participate in the election, the relevant departments should cancel their official position as a rule.

古文：如有人陈告，特议超奖；其所犯人，检格处分；若同保人内有伪滥者，并当驳放。
现代文：如有人告发，特别予以奖励；犯以上罪行的人，按规定处置；如果同一保人里面有作伪滥保的，应一同驳回停职。
English: If someone denounces, they will be specially rewarded; those who commit the above crimes will be dealt with in accordance with the regulations; if there is a false and abusive insurance in the same insurer, the suspension should be rejected together.

古文：应有人身死之处，今后并须申报本州，于告身上批书身死月日分明付子孙。
现代文：凡有人死去的地方，今后均须向本州申报，在死人身份证明书上写死去月日，弄清楚后交给子孙。
English: In the future, all places where someone died must be reported to the state, and the date of death must be written on the identity certificate of the deceased, and then handed over to the descendants.

古文：今后铨司公事，至春末并须了毕。 
现代文：今后考核公事，到春末应一并完毕。 
English: In the future, the assessment of public affairs should be completed by the end of spring.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：铨综之司，伪滥日久，及崇韬条奏之后，澄汰甚严，放弃者十有七八，众情亦怨之。
现代文：考查官员的部门，虚假失真的事已很久就有，到郭崇韬上奏之后，澄清淘汰非常严格，罢停官职的十个里面就有七八个，众人也有不满的。
English: In the official examination department, there have been false and distorted things for a long time. After Guo Chongyong's report, the clarification and elimination were very strict. Among the ten officials who were suspended, there were seven or eight, and everyone was dissatisfied.

古文：己酉，司天台请禁私历日，从之。
现代文：十三日，司天台请禁止使用私造历日，庄宗同意。
English: On the 13th, S Tiantai requested that the use of privately made calendars be prohibited, and Zhuangzong agreed.

古文：庚戌，有司自契丹至者，言女真、回鹘、黄头室韦合势侵契丹。
现代文：十四日，从契丹回来的有关官员，说女真、回鹘、黄头室韦联合势力侵犯契丹。
English: On the 14th, the relevant officials who returned from Khitan said that the combined forces of Nyanzhen, Huixuan and Huangdoushong violated Khitan.

古文：壬子，有司上言： 八月二十二日夜，荧惑犯星二度，星周分也，请依法禳之。
现代文：十六日，有关官员上奏： 八月二十二日晚上，火星二次侵犯柳星张，柳星张是春秋周朝的分野，请依法术禳除。
English: On the 16th, the relevant officials made a report: On the evening of August 22nd, Mars invaded Liu Xing Zhang for the second time. Liu Xing Zhang is the field of spring, autumn and morning, please remove it according to the law.

古文：于京城四门悬东流水一罂，兼令都市严备盗火，止绝夜行。 
现代文：在京城四门悬一瓮东流水，并令城里严防盗火，严禁夜里行走。 
English: In the four gates of the capital, a curtain of east-flowing water hangs, and the city is strictly prevented from theft and fire, and it is strictly forbidden to walk at night.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲寅，幸郭崇韬第，置酒作乐。
现代文：十八日，驾临郭崇韬府第，摆酒作乐。
English: On the 18th, he arrived at Guo Chongyi's residence, where he served wine and played music.

古文：乙卯，以前振武节度使、安北都护马存可依前检校太尉、兼侍中，充宁远军节度、容管观察使。存，湖南马殷之弟也。丙辰，黑水国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十日，黑水国派使者来朝贡。
English: On the 20th, the Black Water Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：契丹寇幽州。
现代文：契丹侵犯幽州。
English: Khitan invade Yuzhou.

古文：戊午，宣宰臣于中书，磨勘吏部选人，谬滥者焚毁告敕。
现代文：二十二日，在中书省召见宰臣，考核吏部选拔的官员，错误失真的便焚毁文书。
English: On the 22nd, the vice-minister was summoned to the Chinese Literature Department to assess the officials selected by the Personnel Department, and the documents were burned after being falsely distorted.

古文：冬十月戊辰，帝畋于西北郊。
现代文：十月三日，庄宗在西北郊打猎。
English: On October 3, Zhuangzong went hunting in the northwest suburbs.

古文：癸未，畋于石桥。甲戌，河南尹张全义上言： 万寿节日，请于嵩山开琉璃戒坛，度僧百人。 从之。
现代文：九日，河南尹张全义上奏： 万寿节这一天，请在嵩山开琉璃戒坛，剃度一百名和尚。 庄宗同意。
English: On the 9th, Yin Zhang Quanyi of Henan Province made a request: On the day of the Festival of Ten Thousand Years, please open a glass altar on Songshan Mountain and ordain one hundred monks. Zhuangzong agreed.

古文：乙亥，故守太师、尚书令、秦王李茂贞追封秦王，赐谥曰忠敬。
现代文：十日，追封已故守太师、尚书令、秦王李茂贞为秦王，赐忠敬谥号。
English: On the 10th, the late Shou Taishi, Shang Shuling, and Qin King Li Maozhen were posthumously crowned as Qin Kings, and given the title of Zhong Jian.

古文：丁丑，皇后差使赐兗州节度使李绍钦汤药。
现代文：十一日，皇后派使者赐兖州节度使李绍钦汤药。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the empress sent an envoy to give Li Shaoqin Tang medicine for the festival in Zhangzhou.

古文：时皇太后行诰命，皇后刘氏行教命，互遣使人宣达籓后，紊乱之弊，人不敢言。
现代文：此时皇太后行使诰命，皇后刘氏行使教命，互派使者送命令到藩镇，紊乱的弊端很多，人们不敢说。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager exercised the imperial command, the Empress Liu exercised the religious command, and sent envoys to each other to send orders to the towns. There are many drawbacks of the disorder, people dare not say.

古文：己卯，汴、郓二州奏，大水。
现代文：十三日，汴、郓二州报告有大水。
English: On the 13th, flooding was reported in the two prefectures of Handan and Handan.

古文：庚辰，以前太仆卿杨遘为大理卿。党项进白驴，奚王李绍威进驼马。幽州奏，契丹入寇，至近郊。
现代文：十四日，党项进贡白驴，奚族王李绍威进贡驼马。幽州报告，契丹入侵到近郊。
English: On the 14th, the party paid tribute to the white donkey, and the king of the Yi people, Li Shaowei, paid tribute to the camel. Yuzhou reported that the Khitan invaded the suburbs.

古文：辛巳，故天雄军节度副使王缄赠司空。壬午，以天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令、吴越国王钱镠可依前天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令，封吴越国王。
现代文：十六日，天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令、吴越国王钱可依前任天下兵马都元帅、尚父、守尚书令，封吴越国王。
English: On the 16th, the world's soldiers and horses were marshal, Shang father, Shou Shang, and King Qian of Wu Yue could be named King of Wu Yue in accordance with the previous world's soldiers and horses were marshal, Shang father, Shou Shang.

古文：癸未，幸小马坊阅马。
现代文：十七日，到小马坊阅马。
English: On the 17th, a horse parade was held at the Little Horse Square.

古文：甲申，以两浙兵马留后、清海军节度、岭南东道观察等使、守太尉、兼侍中、广州刺史钱元璙为检校太师、兼中书令，充两浙节度观察留后，余如故；以镇东军节度副大使、江南管内都招讨使、建武军节度、岭南西道观察等使、检校太傅、守侍中、知苏州中吴军军州事、行邕州刺史钱元璙为检校太尉、兼中书令，余如故。
现代文：十八日，任两浙兵马留后、清海军节度使、岭南东道观察使、守太尉、兼侍中。广州刺史钱元馞为检校太师、兼中书令、充两浙节度观察留后，其余如旧；任镇东军节度副大使、江南管内都招讨使、建武军节度、岭南西道观察等使、检校太傅、守侍中、知苏州中吴军军州事、行邕州刺史钱元馞为检校太尉、兼中书令，其余如旧。
English: On the 18th, after the two Zhejiang soldiers and horses stayed, the Qing Navy Festival Envoy, the Lingnan Host Observation Envoy, the Captain of the Guard, and the Vice-Commander of the Guard, Guangzhou Zhishi Qian Yuanqi was the Inspector of the School, and the Secretary of the Central Military Commission, and after the two Zhejiang soldiers and horses stayed, the rest were the same as before; the Deputy Ambassador of the Zhendong Army Festival, the Jiangnan Province Invitation Envoy, the Jianwu Army Festival, and the Lingnan West Road Observation Envoy, the Inspector of the School, the Vice-Commander of the Guard, and the Secretary of the Central Military

古文：辛卯，天平军监军使柴重厚可特进、右领卫将军同正，充凤翔监军使。甲午，以宣武军节度押牙李从温、李从璋、李从荣、李从厚、李从璨并银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍兼御史大夫，宣武军节度押牙李从臻可检校国子祭酒兼御史中丞。
现代文：二十八日，任宣武军节度押牙李从温、李从璋、李从荣、李从厚、李从璨一并为银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍兼御史大夫，任宣武军节度押牙李从臻可检校国子祭酒兼御史中丞。
English: On the 28th, Li Congwen, Li Congyi, Li Congrong, Li Congrong, Li Conghou and Li Congxuan, who were appointed as the festival guards of the Xuanwu Army, were appointed as the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the right horseman of the inspection school and the official historian, and Li Congzheng, who was appointed as the festival guards of the Xuanwu Army, was appointed as the official historian of the school and the official historian.

古文：自从温而下，皆李嗣源诸子也。
现代文：从李从温以下，都是李嗣源的儿子。
English: From Li Congwen down, they were all the sons of Li Siyuan.

古文：十一月丙申，灵武奏，甘州回鹘可汗仁美卒，其弟狄银权主国事。
现代文：十一月二日，灵武报告，甘州回鹘可汗仁美去世，他弟弟狄银暂时主管国事。
English: On November 2, Lingwu reported that Khan Renmei, the Uighur ruler of Gansu, had died, and that his brother Di Yin had temporarily taken charge of state affairs.

古文：吐浑白都督族帐移于代州东南。
现代文：吐谷浑白都督一族人移居到代州东南。
English: A member of the Tutani Hunbaidutoku clan migrated to the southeast of Daishu.

古文：己亥，幸六宅宴诸弟。
现代文：五日，庄宗到六宅宴请各位弟弟。
English: On the fifth day, Zhuo Zong went to the sixth house to invite the brothers to a banquet.

古文：壬寅，尚书左丞、判吏部尚书铨事崔沂贬麟州司马，吏部侍郎崔贻孙贬朔州司马，给事中郑韬光贬宁州司马，吏部员外卢损贬府州司户。
现代文：八日，贬尚书左丞、判吏部尚书铨事崔沂为麟州司马，贬吏部侍郎崔贻孙为朔州司马，贬给事中郑韬光为宁州司马，贬吏部员外卢损为府州司户。
English: On the 8th, Choi Hao, the left-hand man of the imperial secretary and the judge of the imperial secretary, was demoted to Linshou Sima, Choi Hao Sun, the waiter of the imperial secretary, was demoted to Shuozhou Sima, Zheng Bingguang was demoted to Ningzhou Sima, and the member of the imperial secretary, Wai Luzia, was demoted to Fuzhou Sima.

古文：时有选人吴延皓取亡叔告身故旧名求仕，事发，延皓付河南府处死，崔沂已下贬官。
现代文：当时有候选人吴延皓取他死去的叔叔的身份证明和旧名求官，事情揭露后，吴延皓交付河南府处死，崔沂以下的人贬官。
English: At that time, there was a candidate, Wu Yanxuan, who took his dead uncle's identity certificate and old name to seek office. After the matter was revealed, Wu Yanxuan was handed over to Henan Province to be executed, and people below Cui Wei were demoted.

古文：宰相豆卢革、赵光允、韦说诣阁门待罪，诏释之。
现代文：宰相豆卢革、赵光裔、韦说到阁门请罪，下诏释放了他们。
English: The prime ministers, Zhu Ruge, Zhao Guangxu, and Wei said that they would go to the pavilion to plead guilty, and then released them.

古文：癸卯，帝畋于伊阙，侍卫金枪马万余骑从，帝一发中大鹿。
现代文：九日，庄宗在伊阙打猎，一万多侍卫金枪骑兵随从，庄宗一箭射中大鹿。
English: On the 9th, Zhuangzong went hunting in Yili, accompanied by more than ten thousand guards and cavalry. Zhuangzong shot a deer with one arrow.

古文：是日，命从官拜梁祖之陵，物议非之。
现代文：这一天，命随从官吏拜祭梁太祖陵，舆论认为做得不对。
English: On this day, people followed the officials to pay homage to the mausoleum of Liang Taizong, and the public opinion was that it was not done properly.

古文：其夕，宿于张全义之别墅。
现代文：当晚，在张全义的别墅过夜。
English: That night, he spent the night at Zhang Quanyi's villa.

古文：甲辰，宿伊阙县。
现代文：十日，住在伊阙县。
English: On the 10th, he lived in Ili County.

古文：乙巳，宿椹涧。
现代文：十一日，住在椹石间。
English: On the eleventh day, he lived in a rock quarry.

古文：时骑士围山，会夜，颠坠崖谷，死伤甚众。
现代文：这时骑士围山打猎，到夜里摔下崖谷死伤的很多。
English: At this time, the knights were hunting around the mountain, and many of them fell down the cliff at night.

古文：丙午，复命卫兵分猎，杀获万计。
现代文：十二日，再令卫兵分头猎捕，杀获数以万计的猎物。
English: On the 12th, the guards were ordered to hunt separately, killing tens of thousands of prey.

古文：是夜，方归京城，六街火炬如昼。
现代文：这天夜晚才回京城，六街点上火炬如同白天。
English: On this day, the night returned to Beijing, and the torch was lit on Sixth Street as if it were daytime.

古文：丁未，赐群臣鹿肉有差。
现代文：十三日，按等级赐鹿肉给群臣。
English: On the 13th, he gave venison to his ministers according to their ranks.

古文：庚戌，制改节将一十一人功臣号。
现代文：十六日，发文赐改节将十一人功臣名号。
English: On the 16th, a document was issued to change the name of the eleven meritorious subjects.

古文：辛亥，以兵部侍郎李德休为吏部侍郎。壬子，日南至，百官拜表称贺。以昭仪侯氏为汧国夫人，昭容夏氏为虢国夫人，昭媛白氏为沛国夫人，出使美宣邓氏为魏国夫人，御正楚真张氏为凉国夫人，司簿德美周氏为宋国夫人，侍真吴氏为渤海郡夫人，其余并封郡夫人。丁巳，河中节度使、守太师、兼尚书令、西平王李继麟可依前守太师、兼尚书令、河中护国军节度使、西平王，仍赐铁券。
现代文：十八日，冬至，百官上表章称贺。封昭仪侯氏为氵开国夫人，封昭容夏氏为虢国夫人，封昭媛白氏为沛国夫人，封侍真吴氏为渤海郡夫人，其余的一并封为郡夫人。二十三日，河中节度使、守太师、兼尚书令、西平王李继麟依前任守太师、兼尚书令、河中护国军节度使、西平王，又赐给铁券。
English: On the 18th, the winter solstice, hundreds of officials congratulated on the watch badge. Fong Zhaoyi Hou was the wife of Lai Kai Guo, Fong Zhaoyong Xia was the wife of Lai Guo, Fong Zhaoyuan Bai was the wife of Pei Guo, Fong Zhi Zhen Wu was the wife of Bohai County, and the rest were jointly named as the county wife. On the 23rd, the deputy governor of the Middle River, the deputy governor of the Inner River, the deputy governor of the Inner River, the deputy governor of the Inner River, the deputy governor of the Inner River, the deputy governor of the Inner River

古文：戊午，幸李嗣源、李绍荣之第，纵酒作乐。
现代文：二十四日，到李嗣源、李绍荣的府第，纵酒作乐。
English: On the 24th, they went to the residence of Li Siyuan and Li Shaorong to drink and make music.

古文：是日，镇州地震；契丹寇蔚州。
现代文：这一天，镇州地震。契丹侵犯蔚州。
English: On this day, Zhenzhou earthquake. Khitan invasion of Ulsan.

古文：十二月戊辰，幸西苑校猎。
现代文：十二月四日，到西苑打猎。
English: On December 4th, I went hunting in the West Garden.

古文：庚午，帝与皇后刘氏幸张全义第，酒酣，帝命皇后拜全义为养父，全义惶恐致谢，复出珍货贡献。
现代文：五日，诏令汴州节度使李嗣源回到本镇。六日，庄宗与皇后刘氏到张全义府第，酒喝到高兴时，庄宗命令皇后拜张全义为养父，张全义惶恐致谢，再贡献上珍宝。
English: On the sixth day, Zhuang Zong and Empress Liu went to Zhang Quanyi's residence. When they had drunk wine to their hearts' content, Zhuang Zong ordered the Empress to pray to Zhang Quanyi as her adoptive father. Zhang Quanyi was terrified and thanked him, and then offered up the precious treasure.

古文：翼日，皇后传制，命学士草谢全义书，学士赵凤密疏，陈国后无拜人臣为父之礼，帝虽嘉之，竟不能已其事。
现代文：第二天，皇后传令，命学士起草答谢张全义的文书，学士赵凤秘密上书，陈说一国之后没有拜人臣为父的礼仪，庄宗虽称赞他，但也不能阻止这件事。
English: The next day, the empress sent a messenger to have a scholar draft a document thanking Zhang Quanyi, and the scholar Zhao Feng secretly sent a letter, saying that there was no etiquette of worshiping a minister as a father after a country. Although Zhuangzong praised him, he could not stop this.

古文：壬申，以教坊使王承颜为兴州刺史。
现代文：八日，任教坊使王承颜为兴州刺史。
English: On the 8th, Wang Chengyan, appointed by the teaching center, was appointed as the historian of Xingzhou.

古文：丙子，诏取来年正月七日幸魏州。
现代文：十二日，下诏定下明年一月七日到魏州。
English: On the 12th, it was decided to leave for Weizhou on the 7th of January next year.

古文：乙酉，幸龙门佛寺祈雪。
现代文：十六日，在近郊打猎，到晚上回宫。
English: On the 16th, he went hunting in the suburbs and returned to the palace in the evening.

古文：丙戌，以徐州节度使李绍真为北面行营副招讨使。
现代文：十八日，契丹侵犯岚州。党项派使者进贡土产。二十一日，到龙门佛寺祈求降雪。
English: On the 18th, Khitan invaded Zhangzhou. The party sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products. On the 21st, they went to Longmen Buddhist Temple to pray for snowfall.

古文：戊子，李嗣源奏，部署大军自宣武军北征。
现代文：二十四日，李嗣源上奏，部署大军跟从宣武军北征。
English: On the 24th, Li Siyuan made a speech and deployed a large army to follow the Northern Expedition of the Xuanwu Army.

古文：淮南杨溥遣使贡献。
现代文：淮南杨溥派使者进贡。
English: Huainan Yang Di sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，幸龙门。
现代文：二十五日，到龙门。
English: On the 25th, to Longmen.

古文：庚寅，诏河南尹张全义为洛京留守，判在京诸军事。
现代文：二十六日，下诏任河南尹张全义为洛京留守，掌管在京各军事务。
English: On the 26th, Yin Zhang Quan Yi of Henan Province left for Luojing and took charge of the military affairs in Beijing.

古文：是日，日傍有背气，凡十二。
现代文：这一天，太阳旁边有背气出现十二次。
English: On this day, the sun was accompanied by twelve evil spirits.

古文：同光三年春正月甲午朔，帝御明堂殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：同光三年一月一日，庄宗到明堂殿接受朝贺，仪仗戟卫排列严整。
English: On January 1 of the same year, Zhuo Zong went to the Ming Hall to receive morning greetings, and the ceremonial guards were lined up neatly.

古文：丙申，诏以昭宗、少帝山陵未备，宜令有司别选园陵改葬，寻以年饥财匮而止。
现代文：二日，下诏说因昭宗、少帝陵墓没做好，应令有关官员另外选园陵改葬，不久因饥荒缺钱而作罢。
English: On the second day, the next edict said that because the mausoleums of Emperor Zhaozong and the young emperor were not well done, the relevant officials should be ordered to choose another garden mausoleum for reburial, but this was soon abandoned due to famine and lack of money.

古文：契丹寇幽州。
现代文：契丹侵犯幽州。
English: Khitan invade Yuzhou.

古文：戊戌，诏： 起今后特恩授官及侍卫诸军将校、内诸司等官，其告身官给，旧例硃胶钱、台省礼钱并停，其余合征台省礼钱，比旧数五分中许征一分，特恩者不征。
现代文：五日，下诏说 ：从今往后特别恩赐授予的职官以及侍卫、各军将校、内廷各司等职官，他们的身份证明由官方签发，旧例朱胶钱、台省礼钱一并停发，其余应该征收的台省礼钱，按以前的数目五分中允许征一分，特别恩准者不征。
English: On the fifth day, the next edict said: From now on, officials who have been granted special gifts, as well as attendants, officers of various armies, and officials of various departments of the Inner Court, will have their identity certificates issued by the government. The old Zhu Jia Qian and Taiwan Provincial Gift Money will be suspended. The remaining Taiwan Provincial Gift Money that should be levied will be allowed to collect one point out of the previous five points, and those who are specially approved will not be levied.

古文：兵、吏部两司逐月各支钱四十贯文，充吏人食直。
现代文：兵部吏部两司按月各支付四十贯钱，充当官吏的饭钱。
English: The two divisions of the General Staff Department of the Ministry of Military Affairs each pay 40 manats per month, which serves as the meal money for officials.

古文：少府监铸钱造印文，今后不得征纳铜炭价直，其料物官给。 
现代文：少府监督铸造钱币印文，今后不得征收铜炭价值，其原料由官府提供。 
English: The government will supervise the minting of printed money. In the future, the value of copper and coal will not be levied. The raw materials will be provided by the government.

古文：庚戌，车驾至鄴。
现代文：七日，御驾从京师出发前往邺州。
English: On the 7th, the car set off from Beijing to Zhangzhou.

古文：命青州节度使符习修酸枣河堤。
现代文：十七日，御驾到达邺州。命令青州节度使符习修筑酸枣一带黄河大堤。
English: On the 17th, he arrived in Zhangzhou. He ordered the Qingzhou Festival to build a large dike along the Yellow River.

古文：先是，梁末帝决河隄，引水东注至郓、濮，以限我军，至是方修之。
现代文：以前，梁末帝挖开河堤，引水向东淹没郓州、濮州，用来阻止庄宗的军队，到现在才修复。
English: In the past, Emperor Liangmuei dug up the river dike and diverted the water to the east to flood Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, which was used to stop Zhuangzong's army. It has only been repaired now.

古文：丙辰，幽州上言，节度使李存贤卒。
现代文：二十三日，幽州报告，节度使李存贤去世。
English: On the 23rd, Yuzhou reported that Li Cunxian passed away.

古文：二月甲子朔，诏： 兴唐府管内有百姓随丝盐钱，每两与减五十文。
现代文：二月一日，下诏： 兴唐府管辖区域有百姓生产的蚕丝食盐，每两减税五十文钱。
English: On February 1st, the following edict was issued: In the area under the jurisdiction of Xingtang Prefecture, there are people who produce silkworm silk table salt, and the tax deduction is 50 yuan per two.

古文：逐年所亻表蚕盐，每斗与减五十文。
现代文：每年所散发的蚕盐，每斗减五十文钱。
English: The amount of silkworm salt distributed each year will be reduced by 50 mon per bucket.

古文：小菉豆税，每亩与减放三升。
现代文：小绿豆的税，每亩减少三升。
English: The tax on small green beans will be reduced by three liters per mu.

古文：都城内所征税丝，永与除放。 丙寅，定州节度使王都来朝。
现代文：城内所征丝税，永远免除。 三日，定州节度使王都来朝廷进见。
English: The silk tax levied in the city was forever exempted. On the third day, the Dingzhou Festival made the king come to the court.

古文：乙亥，幸王莽河射雁。
现代文：四日，在近郊打猎。六日，召集从臣在球场打球。
English: On the 4th, he went hunting in the suburbs. On the 6th, he summoned his vassals to play ball in the stadium.

古文：丙子，李嗣源奏，涿州东南杀败契丹，生擒首领三十人。
现代文：八日，许州上奏说 ：襄城、叶县按诏令划给汝州管辖，扶沟等县请仍归原来的州。 
English: On the 8th, Xu Zhou delivered a report saying: Xiangcheng and Ye County were transferred to the jurisdiction of Ruzhou according to the edict, and Fuguo and other counties should still return to the original state.

古文：符习奏，修堤役夫遇雪寒逃散。
现代文：庄宗同意。十二日，到王莽河射雁。十三日，符习上奏，修筑河堤的民工遇上大雪严寒都逃散了。
English: Zhuangzong agreed. On the 12th, they went to the Wangmang River to shoot geese. On the 13th, the music was played, and the migrant workers building the river embankment fled when they encountered heavy snow and severe cold.

古文：枢密使郭崇韬上表辞兼镇。
现代文：枢密使郭崇韬上表章辞退兼任的镇官。
English: Guo Chonglian was ordered by the privy council to resign from his post as town official.

古文：时帝命李绍斌镇幽州，以其时望未重，欲以李嗣源为镇帅，且为绍斌声援，移郭崇韬兼领汴州。
现代文：当时庄宗命李绍斌镇守幽州，因他的威信不够大，想让李嗣源为镇帅，暂且扶助声援李绍斌，调郭崇韬兼管汴州。
English: At that time, Zhuangzong ordered Li Shaobin to guard Yuzhou, because his prestige was not high enough, and he wanted Li Siyuan to be the commander of the town, temporarily supporting and supporting Li Shaobin, and transferring Chongzhen and managing Yuzhou.

古文：召崇韬议之，崇韬奏以为当，因恳辞兼领。
现代文：召郭崇韬议论此事，郭崇韬以表章相答，恳请辞去兼任官。
English: Guo Chongyao was summoned to discuss the matter. Guo Chongyao replied with a sign, imploring him to resign from his post.

古文：庚辰，以宣武军节度使李嗣源为镇州节度使。
现代文：十七日，任宣武军节度使李嗣源为镇州节度使。
English: On the 17th, Li Siyuan was appointed as the Zhenzhou Festival Envoy of the Xuanwu Army.

古文：辛巳，以皇子继潼、继嵩、继蟾、继峣并检校司徒，皆冲幼，未出阁。
现代文：十八日，任皇子李继潼、李继嵩、李继蟾、李继山尧一并为检校司徒，都还年幼，没出任现职。
English: On the 18th, the appointed princes Li Jizhe, Li Jisong, Li Jizhe, Li Jishan and Li Jizhe together became the inspectors of the school. They were still young and did not take up their current positions.

古文：突厥、渤海国皆遣使贡方物。
现代文：突厥、渤海国都派使者进贡土产。
English: The Turkic and Bohai states all sent emissaries to pay tribute to local products.

古文：帝幸近郊射雁。
现代文：庄宗到近郊射雁。
English: Zhuangzong went to the suburbs to shoot geese.

古文：甲申，以枢密使郭崇韬为依前守侍中、监修国史、兼枢密使，加食邑实封。
现代文：二十一日，任枢密使郭崇韬为守侍中、监修国史，依前兼枢密使，增加食邑实封。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Guo Chongyi, a Privy Councilor, was appointed as the Keeper of the Privy Seal and the Supervisor of the National History. He was also a Privy Councilor at the same time.

古文：广南刘岩遣使奉书于帝，称 大汉国王致书上大唐皇帝 。
现代文：广南刘岩派使者上书信给庄宗，称 大汉国王致书上大唐皇帝 。
English: Liu Yan of Guangnan sent an envoy to write a letter to Zhuangzong, saying that the King of the Han Dynasty sent a letter to the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：乙酉，帝射鸭于郭泊。
现代文：二十二日，庄宗在郭泊射鸭。
English: On the 22nd, Zhuang Zong shot a duck in Guo Po.

古文：丙戌，定州节度使、检校太尉、兼侍中王都进封开国公，加食邑实封。
现代文：二十三日，定州节度使、检校太尉、兼侍中王都进封为开国公，加食邑实封。
English: On the 23rd, Dingzhou's ceremonial envoy, school inspector, and vice-emperor were all enthroned as the founding father of the country, and the official seal was added.

古文：戊子，幸近郊射雁。
现代文：二十五日，到近郊射雁。
English: On the 25th, I went to the suburbs to shoot geese.

古文：工部尚书崔柅卒，赠右仆射。
现代文：工部尚书崔木尼去世，追赠他为右仆射。
English: Shangshu Cui Muni of the Ministry of Works passed away, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Right Servant.

古文：三月癸巳朔，赐扈从诸军将士优给，自二十千至一千。
现代文：三月一日，赐给随驾保卫的各军将士赏钱，从二十千到一千不等。
English: On the first day of March, rewards ranging from twenty thousand to one thousand were given to the soldiers of each army who accompanied and protected the horses.

古文：甲午，振武军节度使、洛京内外蕃汉马步使硃守殷奏，昨修月陂堤，至德宫南获玉玺一纽，献之。
现代文：二日，振武军节度使、洛京内外蕃汉马步军使朱守殷上报，昨天修月陂堤，在至德宫南边得到一纽玉玺，献上。
English: On the second day, Zhu Shouyin, the envoy of the Zhenwu Army to the festival and the envoy of the Han horse-marching army marching in and out of Luojing, reported that he had repaired the moon-shaped dike yesterday and got a new jade bowl on the south side of the German Palace and presented it.

古文：诏示百官，验其文，曰 皇帝行宝 四字，方圆八寸，厚二寸，背纽交龙，光莹精妙。
现代文：诏令给百官看，查验玉玺文字，上书 皇帝行宝 四字，方圆八寸，厚二寸，背面有纽结交绕的龙，光亮精妙。
English: The imperial edict was shown to hundreds of officials, who examined the script of the jade seal and issued a letter to Emperor Xingbao. The four characters, with a circumference of eight centimeters and a thickness of two centimeters, and a dragon with intertwined knots on the back, were exquisitely bright.

古文：盖史思明所铸钱也。丙子，寒食节，帝与皇后出近郊，遥飨代州亲庙。
现代文：朱守殷又在工地得到古文钱四百六十六枚，里面二十六枚上的文字是 得一元宝 ，四百四十枚上的文字是 顺天元宝 ，献上。四日，寒食节，庄宗与皇后出城到近郊，遥祭代州宗庙。
English: Zhu Shouyin also received 466 pieces of ancient money at the construction site, of which 26 pieces were inscribed with the words "Treasure of One Yuan" and 440 pieces were inscribed with the words "Treasure of One Yuan." On the 4th, the cold food festival, Zhuangzong and the empress went out of the city to the suburbs and held a remote festival at the Daizhou ancestral temple.

古文：庚子，诏取三月十七日车驾归洛京。
现代文：六日，下诏定于三月十七日御驾回洛京。
English: On the 6th, it was decided that he would return to Kyoto on the 17th of March.

古文：壬寅，符习奏，修河堤毕功。
现代文：八日，符习报告，黄河堤修好了。
English: On the 8th, Fuxi reported that the Yellow River dike had been repaired.

古文：戊申，帝召郭崇韬谓曰： 朕思在德胜寨时，霍彦威、段凝皆予之勍敌。终日格斗，战声相闻，安知二年之间，在吾庑下。
现代文：十四日，庄宗召见郭崇韬，说 ：我想起在德胜寨时，霍彦威、段凝都是我的劲敌，天天与他们格斗，战声相闻，哪会想到二年之内，他们就在我手下做事了。
English: On the 14th, Zhuang Zong summoned Guo Chongyi and said, "I remember when I was in Deshengzhai, Huo Yanwei and Duan Jian were my toughest opponents. I fought with them every day, and we heard each other's battle cries. Who would have thought that within two years, they would be working under me."

古文：吾无少康、光武之才，一旦重兴基构者，良由二三勋德同心辅翼故也。
现代文：我没有少康、汉光武帝的才能，一旦能重兴基业，实在是由两三位功勋之臣同心辅佐的缘故。
English: I do not have the talent of Emperor Shokang and Han Guangwu. Once I can revive the foundation, it is really because of the concerted assistance of two or three meritorious retainers.

古文：朕有时梦寝，如在戚城，思念曩时挑战鏖兵，劳则劳矣，然而扬旌伐鼓，差慰人心，残垒荒沟，依然在目。
现代文：我有时睡觉做梦，好像在戚城，思念以前挑战冲锋，虽然劳累，然而高扬旌旗猛击战鼓，更能安慰人心，残败的堡垒荒芜的战壕，依然浮现眼前。
English: I sometimes sleep and dream, as if I were in a kindred city, missing the challenge of the charge before. Although I am tired, it is more comforting to raise the flag and beat the drums of war. The ruined fortress and the deserted trenches still appear before my eyes.

古文：予欲按德胜故寨，与卿再陈旧事。 
现代文：我想重访德胜故寨，与你再叙旧事。 
English: I want to revisit Desheng Old Town and retell the old stories with you.

古文：崇韬曰： 此去澶州不远，陛下再观战地，益知王业之艰难，岂不韪哉！ 
现代文：郭崇韬说 ：这里离澶州不远，陛下想重访战地，更知建立王业的艰难，怎么不好呢！ 
English: Guo Chongyi said, "This place is not far from Zhangzhou. If His Majesty wants to revisit the battlefield, knowing how difficult it is to establish a royal career, why not!

古文：己酉，车驾发鄴宫。
现代文：十五日，御驾从邺宫出发。
English: On the 15th, the carriage set off from the Imperial Palace.

古文：辛亥，至德胜城。
现代文：十七日，到德胜城。
English: On the 17th, to Desheng City.

古文：登城四望，指战阵之处以谕宰臣。
现代文：登城四望，指点着战斗进行的地方告诉宰臣。
English: Go up to the city, look around, point out the place where the battle was fought, and tell the Vice-Minister.

古文：渡河南观废栅旧址，至杨村寨，沿河至戚城，置酒作乐而罢。
现代文：渡过黄河南边视察废弃的栅栏旧址，到杨村寨，沿黄河到戚城，摆酒宴作乐而罢。
English: Cross the south side of the Yellow River to inspect the old site of the abandoned fence, to Yangcunzhai, along the Yellow River to Cicheng, and enjoy a wine banquet.

古文：壬子，淮南杨溥遣使朝贡。
现代文：十八日，淮南杨溥派使者上朝进贡。
English: On the 18th, Yang Pi of Huainan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：东京副留守张宪奏，诸营家口一千二百人逃亡，以艰食故也。
现代文：东京副留守张宪上报，各军营家口一千二百人逃亡，因为吃饭艰难的缘故。
English: Tokyo Deputy Resident Zhang Xian reported that 1,200 people fled from each military camp because it was difficult to eat.

古文：时宫苑使王允平、伶人景进为帝广采宫人，不择良家委巷，殆千余人，车驾不给，载以牛车，累累于路焉。
现代文：此时宫苑使王允平、伶人景进为庄宗到处征集宫人，不管是良家妇女还是僻陋小巷里的，有一千多人，车驾不够用，用牛车运，在路上连绵不断。
English: At this time, the imperial court sent Wang Yunping and the eunuch Jing Jin everywhere to recruit courtiers for Zhuangzong. Whether they were women from good families or from remote alleys, there were more than a thousand people. There were not enough carriages, so they were transported by ox carts, and they were on the road continuously.

古文：庚辰，车驾至自鄴。
现代文：二十六日，御驾到邺州。
English: On the 26th, they drove to Ganzhou.

古文：辛酉，诏本朝以雍州为西京，洛州为东都，并州为北都。
现代文：二十七日，诏令本朝以雍州为西京，洛州为东都，并州为北都。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict decreed that Yongzhou would be the western capital, Lozhou would be the eastern capital, and Zhengzhou would be the northern capital.

古文：近以魏州为东京，宜依旧以洛京为东都，魏州改为鄴都，与北都并为次府。
现代文：近来以魏州为东京，应依旧以洛京为东都，魏州改为邺都，和北都一起作为次府。
English: In recent years, Tokyo has been located in Weizhou. It should still be based in the eastern capital of Beijing, and Weizhou should be changed to the capital city, and it should be combined with the northern capital as the second capital.

古文：夏四月癸亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月一日，日食。
English: April 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：以租庸副使孔循权知汴州军州事。
现代文：任租庸副使孔循暂知汴州军州事。
English: The vice-commander of the Yeongyeon, Kong Cyong, knew about the military affairs of Yeongju for a while.

古文：丙寅，淮南杨溥遣使贡方物。
现代文：四日，淮南杨溥派使者进贡土产。
English: On the 4th, Huainan Yang Di sent an envoy to collect tribute from local products.

古文：《五代会要》：时以新及第进士符蒙正等尚干浮议，故命卢质覆试。租庸使奏： 时雨久愆，请下诸道州府，依法祈祷。 
现代文：十日，到甘泉亭。十一日，诏令翰林学士承旨卢质复试新及第的进士。租庸使奏说： 现在总是下雨不正常，请下属各道州府，依法祈祷。 
English: On the tenth day, he went to Ganquan Pavilion. On the eleventh day, he ordered Hanlin Baccalaureate to carry out the order of Lu quality re-examination of new and first-ranked scholars. Zenyong envoy said: Now it is always raining is not normal, please subordinate to each province and prefecture, pray according to law.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙亥，帝与皇后幸郭崇韬第，又幸左龙武统军硃汉宾之第。
现代文：十三日，庄宗与皇后驾临郭崇韬的府第，又驾临左龙武统军朱汉宾的府第。
English: On the 13th, Zhuangzong and the empress drove to the capital of Guo Chongzhen, and also drove to the capital of Zhu Hanbin, the leader of the Left Dragon Military Unification Army.

古文：戊寅，以耀州为团练州，其顺义军额宜停。
现代文：十六日，设耀州为团练州，它的顺义军番号应废除。
English: On the 16th, Yaozhou was designated as a regimental training area, and its Shunyi Army number was to be abolished.

古文：庚辰，帝侍皇太后幸会节园，遂幸李绍荣之第。
现代文：十八日，庄宗陪皇太后到会节园，顺便驾临李绍荣的府第。
English: On the 18th, Zhuo Zong accompanied the empress dowager to the festival garden and drove by Li Shaorong's residence.

古文：辛巳，以旱甚，诏河南府徙市，造五方龙，集巫祷祭。
现代文：十九日，因天旱严重，下诏令河南府迁移府市，造五方龙，召集巫师祈祷。
English: On the 19th, due to the severe drought, the lower edict ordered Henan Prefecture to relocate its prefectures and cities, build five-sided dragons, and convene wizards to pray.

古文：丁亥，以镇州节度使李嗣源兼北面水陆转运使，以徐州节度使李绍真为副。
现代文：二十五日，任镇州节度使李嗣源兼北面水陆转运使，任徐州节度使李绍真为副使。
English: On the 25th, the Zhenzhou Festival appointed Li Siyuan as the Northern Water and Land Transportation Envoy, and the Xuzhou Festival appointed Li Shaozhen as the Deputy Envoy.

古文：礼部贡院新及第进士四人，其王澈改为第一，桑维翰第二，符蒙正第三，成僚第四。
现代文：礼部贡院新及第的进士有四人，其中王澈改为第一，桑维翰为第二，符蒙正为第三，成僚为第四。
English: There are four new and second-ranked recruits of the Rectification Department of the Tribute Academy, of which Wang Che is the first, San Weihan is the second, Fu Mengzheng is the third, and Cheng Liang is the fourth.

古文：礼部侍郎裴皞既无黜落，特议宽容。
现代文：礼部侍郎裴白皋既然没有排斥人才，特加宽容。
English: Since there is no exclusion of talent, the waitress of the ceremonial department, Pei Baiyao, is particularly tolerant.

古文：今后新及第人，候过堂日委中书门下精加详覆。
现代文：今后新及第的人，须等到过堂日委托中书门下详细加以复查。
English: In the future, those who are newly promoted must wait until the last day of the school year to have their transcripts reviewed in detail.

古文：陕州奏，木连理。
现代文：陕州报告，树木连着长在一起。
English: Shaanxi reported that the trees were growing together.

古文：庚寅，中书侍郎兼工部尚书、平章事赵光允卒，废朝三日。
现代文：二十八日，中书侍郎兼工部尚书、平章事赵光胤逝世，停止上朝三天。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Guangyin, the servant of the Chinese calligrapher and the head of the engineering department, passed away, and the ceremony was suspended for three days.

古文：五月壬辰朔，淮南杨溥贡端午节物。
现代文：五月一日，淮南杨溥进贡端午节用品。
English: On May 1, tributes to the Dragon Boat Festival were made in Yangshuo, Huainan.

古文：丁酉，皇太妃刘氏薨于晋阳，废朝五日，帝于兴安殿行服。
现代文：六日，皇太妃刘氏死于晋阳，停止上朝五天，庄宗在兴安殿服丧礼。
English: On the 6th, the Empress Dowager Liu died in Jinyang, and five days after she stopped being enthroned, Zhuangzong held a funeral at the Xing'an Hall.

古文：戊午，以凤州衙内马步军都指挥使李继昶为泾州节度使、检校太傅。
现代文：此时皇太后想到晋阳奔丧，百官上表章请留下，才没去。十七日，到龙门广化寺求雨。十八日，黑水、女真都派使者上朝进贡。
English: At this time, the empress dowager thought of going to Jinyang to mourn, and she did not go, but asked the officials to stay. On the 17th, she went to Longmen Guanghua Temple to pray for rain. On the 18th, Heishui and Jianzhen both sent envoys to the court to pay tribute.

古文：己未，诏天下见禁罪人，如无大过，速令疏放。
现代文：二十八日，诏令天下被关押的罪人，如没大过错，速令释放。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor issued an edict ordering that all the criminals in the world who had been imprisoned were to be released immediately if they had not committed a major offense.

古文：辛未，以宗正卿李纾充昭宗、少帝改卜园陵使。
现代文：到玄元庙求雨。六月二日，云州报告，去年契丹从碛北回去，鞑靼乘机攻击，鞑靼首领于越族帐从碛北带部族羊马三万来投降，已到南界，现在派人来朝廷报告。
English: On June 2, Yunnan reported that last year, the Khitan returned from northern Shandong, and the Tartars took advantage of the opportunity to attack. The Tartar leader, Yu Yue, surrendered 30,000 sheep and horses from tribes in northern Shandong. He has arrived at the southern border, and is now sending someone to report to the imperial court.

古文：时郭崇韬秉政，以为不可，枢密承旨段徊赞其事，故有是命。
现代文：三日，白日出现太白星。十一日，京师下雨丰足。从此下大雨，一直到九月，昼夜阴暗，没有晴过，江河泛滥，堤防崩溃，天下都报告说有水灾。
English: On the third day, a very white star appeared in the daytime. On the eleventh day, it rained heavily in Beijing. From then on, it rained heavily until September. Day and night were gloomy, there was no clear weather, rivers flooded, dikes collapsed, and the whole world reported that there was a flood.

古文：癸丑，以天德军节度使、管内蕃汉都知兵马使刘承训为天德军节度观察留后。丙戌，诏曰： 关内诸陵，顷因丧乱，例遭穿穴，多未掩修。
现代文：十六日，下诏为吴越王钱行册封礼，按礼制应该用竹册，而应令有关部门修制玉册。此时郭崇韬执政，认为不可以，枢密承旨段徊支持庄宗，所以有上述诏令。二十五日，下诏说： 关内的各个陵墓，刚因战乱，大多遭挖掘，没有修整。
English: On the 16th, the next edict was issued to seal the record of King Qian of Wuyue. According to the etiquette system, the bamboo book should be used, and the relevant departments should be ordered to amend the jade book. At this time, Guo Chongzhen was in power and thought it was unacceptable, and the Privy Council supported Zhuangzong, so there was the above-mentioned edict. On the 25th, the next edict said: Most of the mausoleums in Guanzhong had just been excavated due to the war, and had not been repaired.

古文：其下宫殿宇法物等，各令奉陵州府据所管陵园修制，仍四时各依旧例荐飨。
现代文：其中的宫殿庙宇法物等，令各奉守陵墓的州府据管内陵墓修缮整复，仍旧在一年四时各依旧例荐飨。
English: Among them, the palaces, temples, statues, etc. of the mausoleums were repaired and restored by the state governments in charge of the mausoleums, and they were still recommended at 4:00 a.m. every year.

古文：每陵仰差近陵百姓二十户充陵户，以备洒扫。
现代文：每个陵园派陵园附近百姓二十户充任陵户，以备洒扫之事。
English: Each cemetery assigns 20 households near the cemetery to serve as grave-sweepers in preparation for the sweeping.

古文：其寿陵等一十陵，亦一例修掩，量置陵户。 
现代文：其中寿陵等十陵，也应一起修理，按数设置陵户。 
English: Among them, Shuling and other ten mausoleums should also be repaired together, and mausoleums should be set up according to the number.

古文：戊子，以刑部尚书李琪充昭宗、少帝改卜园陵礼仪使。
现代文：二十七日，任刑部尚书李琪充昭宗、少帝改卜园陵礼仪使。
English: On the 27th, Li Qizhong Zhaozong of the Department of Criminal Law was appointed as the etiquette officer of the Young Emperor's Garden and Mausoleum.

古文：己丑，以工部郎中李途为京兆少尹，充修奉诸陵使。
现代文：二十八日，任工部郎中李途为京兆少尹，充修奉诸陵使。
English: On the 28th, Li Tu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Works, was appointed as the Jingzhao Shao Yin, and he was given the title of "Mausoleum Envoy."

古文：臣愿陛下释吴先蜀。 
现代文：三十日，下诏搜集天下私家所有的马，准备收复蜀地。
English: On the 30th, the emperor issued an edict to collect all the horses privately owned in the world, in preparation for the recapture of Shu.

