古文：周文君免士工师藉，相吕仓，国人不说也。
现代文：周文君免去了工师籍的职务，而改用吕仓做相国，周的百姓对这件事不高兴。
English: Zhou Wenjun was relieved of his duties as an engineer, and instead used Luchang as a neighboring country. Zhou's people were not happy about this.

古文：君有闵闵之心。
现代文：周文君为此感到很担心。
English: Zhou Wenjun was very worried about this.

古文：谓周文君曰： 国必有诽誉，忠臣令诽在己，誉在上。
现代文：有人对周文君说： 国家做出一个决策，人们必定会有诽谤和赞成两种态度，忠臣使诽谤全都加在自己的身上，而把赞美的话都加在君主的身上。
English: Someone said to Zhou Wenzhong: When the country makes a decision, people will certainly have two attitudes, slander and approval. Loyal subjects will make all the slander be applied to themselves, and all the praise be applied to the monarch.

古文：宋君夺民时以为台，而民非之，无忠臣以掩盖之也。
现代文：宋国的国君贻误农时来建造娱乐用的高台，因此百姓都非议这件事，这是因为没有忠臣来为君主掩盖过错罢了。
English: Song emperors encouraged farmers to build entertainment platforms by mistake, so the people complained about it. This was because there were no loyal subjects to cover up the mistake for the monarch.

古文：子罕释相为司空，民非子罕而善其君。
现代文：子罕辞掉了相位而改做司空，百姓非议子罕但褒扬他们的国君。
English: Zi Han resigned from his position and became the Empress Dowager. The people did not approve of Zi Han, but praised their sovereign.

古文：齐桓公宫中七市，女闾七百，国人非之。
现代文：齐桓公在宫中设立了七个市场和七百个国家妓院，国人非议这件事情。
English: Prince Qi Huan set up seven markets and seven hundred state brothels in the palace, and the Chinese people criticized this matter.

古文：管仲故为三归之家，以掩桓公，非自伤于民也?
现代文：管仲因此故意在家里筑 三归台 ，来掩盖齐桓公的过错，而不是自己有意伤害民心。
English: As a result, Guanzhong purposely built a three-way radio at home to cover up Qi Huan's mistake, rather than intentionally hurting the people's hearts.

古文：《春秋》记臣弑君者以百数，皆大臣见誉者也。
现代文：《春秋》所记载的臣子杀国君的事例数以百计，这些臣子都是很受赞誉的大臣。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records hundreds of cases of courtiers killing sovereigns, and these courtiers were all highly praised ministers.

古文：故大臣得誉，非国家之美也。
现代文：所以说大臣受到赞誉，并不是国家的好事。
English: Therefore, it is not a good thing for the country that the minister is praised.

古文：故众庶成疆，增积成山。 
现代文：由此看来，人越多力量就越大，积累微小的土石就能成为大山。 
English: From this point of view, the more people, the greater the power, and the accumulation of tiny earth and stone can become a large mountain.

古文：周君遂不免。
现代文：周君于是就没有免掉吕仓的职位。
English: As a result, Zhou Jun was not relieved of his post in Luchang.

