古文：王曰： 来！
现代文：王说： 来呀！
English: And the king said, Come and see.

古文：汝说。
现代文：你傅说。
English: You Fu said.

古文：台小子旧学于甘盘，既乃遯于荒野，入宅于河。自河徂亳，暨厥终罔显。
现代文：我以前向甘盘学习过，但就没过多久我就避到荒野，居住在河洲，后来又从河洲回到亳都，但是我的学业还是没有什么长进。
English: I used to learn from Ganpan, but it didn't take long for me to escape to the wilderness, live in Hezhou, and later return from Hezhou to Hando, but I still didn't make much progress in my studies.

古文：尔惟训于朕志，若作酒醴，尔惟麴糵；若作和羹，尔惟盐梅。
现代文：你当顺从我想学的志愿，比如作甜酒，你就是那曲蘖；比如作羹汤，你就是那盐和梅。
English: You should follow my desire to learn. For example, if you make sweet wine, you will be the one who can make sweet wine; for example, if you make soup, you will be the one who can make salt and plum.

古文：尔交修予，罔予弃，予惟克迈乃训。 
现代文：你要多方指正我，不要抛弃我；我也一定会按照你教导执行的去。 傅说说： 王！
English: Correct me in many things, and forsake me not; but I will walk in thy precepts, and do them.

古文：说曰： 王，人求多闻，时惟建事，学于古训乃有获。事不师古，以克永世，匪说攸闻。
现代文：人们要求增多知识，是想建立事业。要学习古训，才才会有所收获；建立事业却不效法古训，而能长治久安的，我傅说的是不赞同这种说法的。
English: People want to increase their knowledge, they want to build a business. They need to learn the ancient teachings before they can gain something; but building a business does not follow the ancient teachings, but can be stable for a long time. What I am saying is that I do not agree with this argument.

古文：惟学，逊志务时敏，厥修乃来。
现代文：学习要心志谦逊，务必时刻努力，如此学习方能有所进步。
English: You should be humble in your study and always work hard, so that you can make progress in your study.

古文：允怀于兹，道积于厥躬。
现代文：相信和记住这些，道德在自己身上将积累增多。
English: Believe and remember these, and morality will accumulate and increase in you.

古文：惟学学半，念终始典于学，厥德修罔觉。
现代文：教人是学习的一半，思念终和始取法于学习，道德的增长就会不知不觉了。
English: Teaching is half of learning. Thought ends and learning begins. The growth of morality will be imperceptible.

古文：监于先王成宪，其永无愆。惟说式克钦承，旁招俊乂，列于庶位。 王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：借鉴先王的成法，将永久没有失误；我傅说因此能够敬承你的意旨，广求贤俊，把他们安排在各种职位上。 王说： 啊！傅说。
English: Drawing on the precedent of the previous king, there will be no mistakes forever; therefore, I Fu said, I can respect your will, seek out talented people, and place them in various positions.

古文：说，四海之内，咸仰朕德，时乃风。
现代文：天下的人都敬仰我的德行，这都是你的教化所致。
English: People all over the world admire my virtue, which is all due to your enlightenment.

古文：股肱惟人，良臣惟圣。
现代文：手足完备就是成人，良臣具备就是圣君。
English: A complete set of limbs is an adult, and a good minister is a saint.

古文：昔先正保衡作我先王，乃曰： 予弗克俾厥后惟尧舜，其心愧耻，若挞于市。 
现代文：从前先贤伊尹使我的先王兴起，他这样说：我不能使我的君王做尧舜，我心惭愧耻辱，好比在闹市受到鞭打一样。
English: Once upon a time, the sage Yi Yin made my ancestor king rise up. He said, "I cannot make my king do bad things. My heart is ashamed and humiliated, just like being whipped in a busy city."

古文：一夫不获，则曰时予之辜。
现代文：一人不得其所，他就说：这是我的罪过。
English: If one is not found, he says, "It is my fault."

古文：佑我烈祖，格于皇天。
现代文：他辅助我的烈祖成汤受到皇天赞美。
English: He assisted my great-grandfather Cheng Tang to be praised by the emperor.

古文：尔尚明保予，罔俾阿衡专美有商。
现代文：你要勉力扶持我，不要让伊尹专美于我商家！
English: You should try your best to support me, don't let Yi Yin Gemi take over my business!

古文：惟后非贤不乂，惟贤非后不食。
现代文：君主得不到贤人就不会治理，贤人得不到君主就不会被录用。
English: If the monarch does not get wise men, they will not govern, and if the wise men do not get the monarch, they will not be hired.

古文：其尔克绍乃辟于先王，永绥民。 
现代文：你要能让你的君主继承先王，长久安定人民。 
English: You should be able to let your monarch succeed the previous king and keep the people stable for a long time.

古文：说拜稽首曰： 敢对扬天子之休命。 
现代文：说跪拜叩头，说： 请让我报答宣扬天子的美好教导！ 
English: and say, "Let me be rewarded for proclaiming the good news of the Son of God."

