古文：余闻藏书家有宋刻盖缺七卷云，其三卷考之得十之七，已付之梓。
现代文：余闻藏书家有宋刻盖缺七卷云，其三卷考之得十之七，已付之梓。
English: Yu Huan, a book collector, said that there were seven volumes missing from the Song engraved cover, and his three volumes scored seven out of ten in the examination, and have been published.

古文：其四卷仅十之二三。
现代文：其四卷仅十之二三。
English: Only two-thirds of the four volumes are complete.

古文：博洽君子其明以语我，庶几为全书云。
现代文：博洽君子其明以语我，庶几为全书云。
English: He is a scholar and a gentleman, and his words are clear, and his writings are full of wisdom.

古文：隆庆改元秋七月朔日十山谈恺志。
现代文：隆庆改元秋七月朔日十山谈恺志。
English: Longqing changed to the first year, autumn and July, and the ten mountains talked about their aspirations.

古文：刘祥刘孝绰许敬宗盈川令崔湜杜审言杜甫陈通方李贺李群玉冯涓温庭筠陈磻叟薛能高逢休汲师
现代文：刘祥刘孝绰许敬宗盈川令崔湜杜审言杜甫陈通方李贺李群玉冯涓温庭筠陈磻叟薛能高逢休汲师
English: Liu Xiang, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiang, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao, Liu Xiao

古文：崔骈西川人河中幕客崔昭符温定
现代文：崔骈西川人河中幕客崔昭符温定
English: Cui Zhaofu Wending, a guest of Cui Zhaofu in the West River

古文：刘祥
现代文：刘祥
English: Liu Xiang

古文：刘祥，东莞莒人也。
现代文：刘祥，东莞莒人。
English: Liu Xiang, from Dongguan.

古文：宋世，解褐为征西行参军。
现代文：南北朝宋代时，一开始就做了征西行参军。
English: When the Northern and Southern Dynasties were in the Song Dynasty, the first thing they did was to go west to join the army.

古文：少好文学，性韵刚疏，轻言肆行，不避高下。
现代文：从小喜欢文学，性情固执粗野，说话刻薄而又任意妄为，从来不避讳身份的高低尊卑。
English: He has loved literature since childhood, his temperament is stubborn and rough, he speaks harshly and acts arbitrarily, and he never shies away from the status of high and low.

古文：司徒褚渊入朝，以腰扇障日。祥从侧过曰：作如此举止，羞面见人，扇障何益？
现代文：有一次司徒褚渊上朝时用腰扇遮着日光走路，刘祥从他跟前过去，便说：你这样的举止，好像是害怕见人，用扇子遮挡对你有什么好处呢？
English: Once, when he was walking in the morning with a waist fan to cover the sunlight, Liu Xiang walked past him and said: "Your behavior seems to be afraid of seeing people. What good is it for you to cover yourself with a fan?

古文：渊曰：寒士不逊。
现代文：司徒褚渊道：读书人这样讲话可太放肆无礼了。
English: Shtu Shanyuan: It's too impudent and rude for a reader to talk like that.

古文：祥曰：不能杀袁刘，安得免寒士。
现代文：刘祥说：不杀死袁刘，读书人怎么能够显贵？
English: Liu Xiang said, "If you don't kill Yuan Liu, how can readers be dignified?

古文：永明初，迁长沙谘议参军。
现代文：齐朝永明初期，转任长沙谘议参军。
English: In the early days of the Yongming Dynasty of the Qi Dynasty, he was transferred to Changsha to consult on joining the army.

古文：撰《宋书》，讥斥禅代。
现代文：曾撰写《宋书》，书中对让出帝位的事加以讽刺贬斥。
English: He once wrote "Song Shu," in which he satirized and disparaged the abdication of the throne.

古文：王俭密以启闻，上衔而不问。
现代文：王俭把此事密告皇上，皇上虽怨恨在心但并未追问他。
English: Wang Jian reported the matter to the emperor, who did not question him, although he held a grudge.

古文：兄整，官广州卒，祥就整妻求还资。
现代文：刘祥的哥哥刘整在广州当官，死于任上，刘祥便去找刘整的妻子付债。
English: Liu Xiang's brother Liu Zhengyi was an official in Guangzhou and died in office. Liu Xiang then went to Liu Zhengyi's wife to pay the debt.

古文：撰连珠，多肆讥讪。
现代文：并写连珠体文章大加嘲弄诽谤。
English: He also wrote a rambling article full of mockery and slander.

古文：事闻，上别遣敕祥曰：卿素无行检，朝野所悉，轻弃骨肉，侮蔑兄嫂，此是卿家行不足，乃无关他人。
现代文：皇上听说此事后，才另下诏令对刘祥说：人向来不讲操行，朝野共知，随便的就遗弃骨肉，侮蔑自己的嫂子，这些都是你的不足之处，与他人并无关系。
English: After the emperor heard about this, he issued another edict to Liu Xiang Yu, saying, "People have always been careless in their behavior, they know everything about the court and the country, they casually abandon their own flesh and blood, and despise their own sisters-in-law. These are all your shortcomings and have nothing to do with others.

古文：卿才识所知，盖何足论。
现代文：你的才华识见，本不值一提。
English: Your talent and insight are not worth mentioning.

古文：位涉清途，于分非屈。何意轻肆口哕，诋目朝士，造席立言，必以贬裁为口实。
现代文：位列请要的仕途，并没有委屈你的身分，诋毁朝臣，著书立说，都是把史实进行删减篡改后作为材料。
English: The career that you want to be ranked, did not offend your status, slandered courtiers, and wrote a book, all of which were based on historical facts after being deleted and altered.

古文：冀卿年齿已大，能自感励，日望悛革。
现代文：你的年纪已不小了。希望你能以此受到感触而勉励自己，不断洗心革面。
English: Your age is not small. I hope you can be touched by this and encourage yourself to keep refreshing yourself.

古文：如此所闻，转更增甚，喧议朝廷，不避尊师，肆口极辞，彰暴物听。
现代文：近来又看到你的连珠体文章，其中的意思违逆傲慢，更不能令人容忍。
English: Recently, I saw your article in the form of a continuous bead, the meaning of which defies arrogance and is even more intolerable.

古文：近见卿连珠，寄意悖慢，弥不可长。原卿性命，令卿万里思諐，若能改革，当令卿还。
现代文：今原谅你给你一条性命，命令你到万里之外的地方去思过。如果你能改悔，自然会叫你回来。
English: Now forgive you for giving you a life, ordering you to go thousands of miles away to think about it. If you can repent, it will naturally call you back.

古文：后至广州，终日纵酒，病卒。
现代文：后来他到了广州，终日纵酒，病死。
English: Later, he went to Guangzhou, drank all day and died of illness.

古文：东莞刘祥，恃才傲物，尝谓一驴曰：汝努力如汝辈，已为令仆矣。
现代文：东莞人刘祥，依仗自己有才学而傲视一切，曾对一头驴说：你应该更加努力，就像你们所有的驴子那样，那才能去当尚书令或仆射。
English: Liu Xiang from Dongguan, who was proud of everything because of his talent in learning, once said to a donkey: You should work harder, like all of your donkeys, so that you can become a calligrapher or an archer.

古文：复作连珠讥讽朝廷，寻被诛。
现代文：后来又作连珠体文章讥讽朝廷，不久便被处死。
English: Later, he wrote a string of beads article to mock the imperial court, and was soon executed.

古文：刘孝绰
现代文：刘孝绰
English: Liu Xiaoqiao

古文：刘孝绰，彭城人。幼聪敏，七岁能属文。
现代文：刘孝绰，彭城人，从小就很聪明，七岁便能写文章。
English: Liu Xiaoqiao, a resident of Pengcheng, has been very smart since childhood. He was able to write articles at the age of seven.

古文：舅中书郎王融深赏异之，每言天下文章，若无我，当归阿士。阿士孝绰小字也。
现代文：他的舅舅中书侍郎王融十分赏识他，常说当今天下的文章，如果没有我，就要数阿士写的最好了，阿士是刘孝绰的小名。
English: His uncle, the chief secretary, Wang Rong, appreciated him very much. He often said that the current article, if not me, would be best written by Ashi. Ashi is Liu Xiaoqiao's nickname.

古文：与到洽友善，同侍东宫。
现代文：孝绰与到洽是好朋友，一起在东宫任职。
English: Xiaoqiao and Zhuochao are good friends and work together in the East Palace.

古文：孝绰自以才优于洽，每于宴坐，嗤鄙其文。洽衔之。
现代文：孝绰自以为才学优于到洽，因而每次宴会坐在一起，都要讥笑到洽的文章，到洽很怨恨他。
English: Filial piety believes that talent is superior to conformity, so every time they sit together at a banquet, they have to ridicule the articles of conformity. Conformity resents him.

古文：孝绰为廷尉正，携妾入官府，其母犹停私宅。
现代文：孝绰任廷尉正时，把小妾带进了官府，而把自己的母亲仍留在家里。
English: While serving as a courtier, he brought his concubine into the government office, but left his mother at home.

古文：洽为御史中丞，劾奏之，坐免官。
现代文：到洽当时任御史中丞，于是向皇上揭发了他的罪过，他因此获罪被免职。
English: He went to the emperor, who at the time held the title of Imperial Historian, and revealed his crime to the emperor. As a result, he was convicted and dismissed.

古文：高祖为藉用诗，奉诏作者数十人，孝绰尤工。即日敕起为谘议，后迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：后来梁高祖征集藉用诗，奉命参加的作者有数十人，孝绰是其中最优秀的，当时便下令起用他任谘议，后来又转任黄门侍郎。
English: Later, Liang Gaozu gathered dozens of authors who had been ordered to participate in the collection of poems, and Xiao Qi was the best of them. At that time, he was ordered to be appointed as a consultant, and later he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：坐受赇为饷者所讼，左迁。
现代文：又因收受贿赂被授贿人告发而获罪，受到降职处分。
English: He was also found guilty of accepting a bribe after being reported by the bribe-giver, and received a demotion.

古文：孝绰少有盛名，而仗气负才，多所凌忽。
现代文：孝绰少年时就很有名气，依仗有才学而十分任性，常常是盛气凌人。
English: When he was a boy, Xiao Yao was very famous. He was talented and very headstrong, and often bullied others.

古文：有不合意，极言诋訾。
现代文：凡有不合自己心意的人或事，便极力诋毁人家。
English: Whenever there is someone or something that is not to their liking, they try their best to defame others.

古文：领军臧盾、太府卿沈僧果等，并被时遇，孝绰尤轻之。
现代文：领军臧盾、太府卿沈僧果等，都是因赶上时机而得到官职的，孝绰尤其轻蔑他们，每次在朝中集合会面，虽然一起做官，但从不与他们说话。
English: The leader of the army, Xing Dun, and the grand prefect, Shen Sangguo, were all given official positions because they had the opportunity. Xiao Zhuo despised them in particular. Every time they met in the center of the country, although they worked together as officials, they never spoke to them.

古文：洽谓孝绰曰。某宅东家有好地。
现代文：反而称他们为马夫，询问些道路上的事，因此对他畏惧。
English: Instead, they call him a groom and ask him questions about the road, so they are afraid of him.

古文：拟买，被本主不肯，何计得之？孝绰曰：卿何不多辇其粪置其墉下以苦之？
现代文：梁朝的刘孝绰很瞧不起到洽，到洽原来是个浇园子的，有一次他问孝绰：我的房东有好地，我打算买下来，可是他不肯卖给我，你有什么妙计能让我得到这块好地？孝绰道：你何不多送些粪便堆在他的墙下让他吃些苦头呢？
English: Liu Xiaoqiao of the Liang Dynasty despised Zuo Jia very much. Zuo Jia was originally a gardener. Once he asked Xiaoqiao: My landlord has a good piece of land. I planned to buy it, but he refused to sell it to me. Do you have any clever plan to let me get this good piece of land? Xiaoqiao said: Why don't you send some excrement to pile up under his wall and let him suffer some hardships?

古文：洽怨恨。孝绰竟被伤害。
现代文：到洽十分怨恨他，结果后来孝绰受到他的报复。
English: Dacao resented him very much, and as a result, he later took revenge on Xiao Cao.

古文：许敬宗
现代文：许敬宗
English: Xu Jingzong

古文：许敬宗，新城人。
现代文：许敬宗，新城人。
English: Xu Jingzong, a resident of Xincheng.

古文：武德初、太宗闻其名，召补学士。
现代文：武德年初，唐太宗听到了他的名气，便招他入朝补授为学士。
English: At the beginning of the Wu De era, Tang Taizong heard of his fame and invited him to the imperial court to complete his bachelor's degree.

古文：文德皇后丧，百官衰经。率更令欧阳询，状貌丑异，众共指之，敬宗见而大笑，为御史所劾，左授洪州司马。
现代文：文德皇后死去时，文武百官都穿丧服系丧带，率更令欧阳询穿戴上后，样子十分难看怪异，人们都指责他，敬宗看见后却大笑，被御史检举，降职为洪州司马。
English: When Empress Wende died, all the civil and military officials wore mourning clothes and mourning belts. Ou Yangxun was even worse. When he put it on, his appearance was very ugly and strange. People blamed him. After seeing him, Jingzong laughed loudly. He was reported by the imperial historian and demoted to the position of Hongzhou Sima.

古文：累迁给事中，兼修国史礼部尚书。
现代文：他历任给事中、兼编写国史之任和礼部尚书之职。
English: He was in charge of writing the history of the country as well as the history of the etiquette.

古文：嫁女于蛮酋冯盎之子，多纳金宝，为有司所劾，左授郑州刺史。
现代文：他把女儿嫁给了蛮人酋长冯盎的儿子，接收了大量的金银财宝，被有关部门告发，又降职为郑州刺吏。
English: He married his daughter to the son of the barbarian chieftain Feng Ang, received a large amount of gold, silver and treasure, was denounced by the relevant departments, and was demoted to Zhengzhou assassin.

古文：永徽间，复拜礼部尚书。
现代文：永徽年间，复任礼部尚书。
English: During the Yonghui era, he was reappointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝将立昭仪、大臣切谏。敬宗阴揣帝私，好妄言曰：田舍子胜获十斛麦，尚欲更故妇。天子富有四海，立一后，谓之何哉？
现代文：皇帝想要立一个妃子为昭仪，大臣们都恳切地劝阻，许敬宗暗中揣摸到皇帝的心意，便胡说道：一个农夫要是剩余十斛麦子，还想换换原来的老婆呢，天子拥有一个国家，立一个后妃，有什么可说的？
English: The emperor wanted to appoint a concubine for Zhao Yi, and the ministers earnestly tried to dissuade him. Xu Jingzong secretly guessed the emperor's intention, and then said: If a farmer has ten mu of wheat remaining and still wants to change his former wife, the Son of Heaven owns a country and appoints a concubine, what can be said?

古文：帝意遂定。
现代文：于是皇帝拿定了主意。
English: So the emperor made up his mind.

古文：博士袁思古议曰：敬宗位以才升，历居清级。然弃长子于荒徼，嫁少女于夷落。闻诗学礼，事绝于趋庭。
现代文：到他死后，博士袁思古议论道：敬宗是以他的才能得到官位的，而且历居清贵枢要之职，但是他竟把自己的长子丢弃在荒凉的边疆，把自己的女儿嫁到蛮人的部落，他们本该学习些诗文和礼节，可是他却没有尽到父教的责任。
English: After his death, Dr. Yuan Shigu commented: "Jingzong was able to obtain his official position by his talent, and he has lived in a noble and important position, but he actually abandoned his eldest son to the desolate frontier and married his daughter to a tribe of barbarians. They should have learned some poetry and etiquette, but he did not fulfill his responsibility as a father.

古文：纳采问名，惟闻于黩货。请谥为 缪 。
现代文：对于女儿的婚姻大事，只是听人家用多少钱财来交换。请给他追加谥号为 缪 字吧。
English: As for his daughter's marriage, I'm just waiting to hear how much money people will exchange for it. Please give him the additional nickname of "Muse."

古文：唐许敬宗性轻，见人多忘之，或谓其不聪。曰：卿自难识，若是曹、刘、沈、谢，暗中摸索著亦可识。
现代文：唐朝人许敬宗性情十分轻薄狂傲，见到的人，多是说忘记是谁了，或者说自己耳朵不好使，常常说：你是很难记住的，如果你是曹植、刘桢、沈约、谢眺，即使在暗中摸索也可以认出来。
English: Xu Jingzong of the Tang Dynasty was very light-hearted and arrogant. People who saw him would often say that they had forgotten who he was, or that they were hard of hearing. They would often say, "You are hard to remember. If you are Cao Zhi, Liu Ye, Shen Yao, Xie Zhan, you can recognize you even if you grope around in the dark."

古文：盈川令
现代文：盈川令
English: Yingchuan Order

古文：杨炯，华阴人。
现代文：杨炯，华阴人。
English: Yang Mi, Hua Yin.

古文：幼聪敏博学。以神童举。
现代文：幼年时就很聪明博学，他是以神童而被举荐中第的。
English: Smart and erudite from an early age, he was touted as a child prodigy.

古文：与王勃、卢照邻、骆宾王齐名。尝谓人曰：吾愧在卢前，耻居王后。
现代文：他与王勃、卢照邻、骆宾王齐名，可他曾对人说：我排在卢照邻之前感到很羞愧，但排在王勃之后又觉得是一种耻辱。
English: He is on a par with Wang Bo, Lu Zhaojun and Luo Bin Wang, but he once said to people: I feel very ashamed to be ranked ahead of Lu Zhaojun, but I feel it is a shame to be ranked behind Wang Bo.

古文：当时以为然。
现代文：当时都认为是这样的。
English: At the time, everyone thought this was the case.

古文：拜校书郎，为崇文馆学士。
现代文：曾任校书郎，后任崇文馆学士。
English: He was once a school scribe, and later a scholar at the Chongwen Academy.

古文：则天初，坐事左转梓州司法参军，秩满，授盈川令。
现代文：武则天执政初期，因事获罪而降职为梓州司法参军。任职期满后，又被任命为盈川县令。
English: In the early days of Wu Zetian's administration, he was demoted to judicial officer of Zizhou and joined the army after being convicted of a crime. After his term of office expired, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Yingchuan County.

古文：炯为政残酷，人吏动不如意，辄榜杀之。
现代文：杨炯为政十分严酷，吏役们一旦不合他心意，动不动就下令用棍棒打死。
English: Yang Xuan's rule was very harsh. If the officials did not agree with him, he would order them to be clubbed to death.

古文：又所居府舍，多进士亭台，皆书牓额，为之美名，大为远近所笑。
现代文：在他居住的宅第中，修建了许多进士亭台，并都书写在匾额上，用来作为亭阁的美名，颇为人们所讥笑。
English: In the homestead where he lived, he built many kiosks for priests, and they were all written on plaques to be used as the name of the pavilion, which was quite ridiculed by people.

古文：唐衢州盈川令杨炯，词学优长，恃才简倨，不容于时。
现代文：唐朝的衢州盈川县令杨炯，颇有词学特长，依仗自己有才学而很傲慢，不与时事相合。
English: Yang Jie, the governor of Yingchuan County of Bozhou in the Tang Dynasty, was quite good at learning words. He was very arrogant, relying on his own talent, which was not in line with current affairs.

古文：每见朝官，目为麒麟楦许怨。
现代文：每次见到朝廷中的官员，都称他们是麒麟楦许怨。
English: Every time you see an official in the imperial court, they say they are the emperor.

古文：人问其故？杨曰：今餔乐假弄麒麟者，刻画头角，修饰皮毛，覆之驴上，巡场而走。
现代文：有人问他是什么原因，杨炯说：如今餔乐耍异假麒麟的人，就是刻画一个麒麟头和角，装饰一张麒麟的毛皮，然后披裹在驴身上，沿着场地而行走。
English: When asked why, Yang Wei said, "Nowadays, people who play the fake unicorn just draw a unicorn's head and horns, decorate a piece of unicorn fur, then wrap it around a donkey and walk along the field.

古文：及脱皮褐。还是驴马。
现代文：等到褪下了那层假皮，仍然还是驴马。
English: Wait until that layer of fake skin has faded, it's still a donkey.

古文：无德而衣朱紫者，与驴覆麟皮何别矣？崔湜
现代文：没有德行而穿着红色紫色官服的人，跟驴披裹上麒麟的皮有何区别？崔湜
English: What is the difference between a person with no virtue and wearing a red and purple official uniform and a donkey wrapped in the skin of a unicorn?

古文：崔湜，仁师之子。
现代文：崔湜，崔仁师之子。
English: Choe Ryong, Choe In's son.

古文：弟澄、液，兄莅，并有文翰，列居清要。
现代文：他的弟弟崔澄、崔液，哥哥崔莅，都很有文彩，先后得到清贵枢要的官职。
English: His younger brothers, Cui Cheng and Cui Yu, and his elder brother, Cui Yao, were all very literate, and successively obtained noble and important official posts.

古文：每私宴。自比王谢之家。
现代文：每次私下宴会，他都把自家比做六朝时的王、谢高门望族。
English: At every private banquet, he likened his family to the kings of the Six Dynasties, the Xie Gao family.

古文：谓人曰：吾门户及出身历官，未尝不为第一。
现代文：他对人说：我的家族，出身和所任官职的清贵，未尝不是第一。
English: He said to the people: My family, the purity of my birth and the dignity of the official position I hold, are not the first.

古文：大丈夫当先据要路以制人，岂能默默受制于人。
现代文：大丈夫就该先占据要害之地而掌握控制他人，怎能默默地受别人的控制？
English: No matter what, the husband should first occupy the key position and grasp and control others. How can he be silently controlled by others?

古文：湜执政时，年三十六。
现代文：崔湜任宰相时，才三十六岁。
English: He was only 36 years old when he was appointed prime minister.

古文：尝暮出端门，下天津，马上赋诗曰：春还上林苑，花满洛阳城。
现代文：有一次他曾在傍晚出了端午门，直下天津桥。在马背上咏诗道：春还上林苑，花满洛阳城。
English: Once, in the evening, he went out of the Dragon Gate and went straight down to Tianjin Bridge. On horseback, he recited a poem: In the spring, he went to Lin Court, and Luoyang City was full of flowers.

古文：张说见之叹曰：文与位固可致，其年不可及也。
现代文：张说见到他时感叹说：文彩和职位固然可以赶上他，可年龄不如他了！
English: Zhang said that when he saw him, he sighed and said: Although the culture and position can catch up with him, the age is not as good as him!

古文：后附韦后，比相，又附太平公主。
现代文：后来依附于韦后，相互勾结，再后又依附于太平公主。
English: Later, they attached themselves to Wei Hou, colluded with each other, and then attached themselves to Taiping Princess.

古文：门下客献《海鸥赋》以讽，湜称善而不悛。
现代文：有门客献了一篇《海鸥赋》讽刺他，崔湜说好，可是并未悔改。
English: A patron satirized him with a copy of "Sea Gourd" and Cui Yao said yes, but he did not repent.

古文：萧至忠诛，流岭外赐死。
现代文：萧至忠被杀后，崔湜也被流放岭南而下令让他自尽。
English: After Xiao Zhizhong was killed, Cui Gan was also exiled to Lingnan and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：崔湜之为中书令，张嘉真为舍人，湜轻之，常呼为张底。
现代文：崔湜任中书令时，张嘉真为中书舍人。崔湜很轻视他，常把他叫做张底。
English: When Cui Gan was appointed as the second secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Zhang Jiazhen was the second secretary of the CPC Central Committee. Cui Gan despised him very much and often called him Zhang Di.

古文：后曾量数事，意皆出人右。湜惊美久之，谓同列曰：知否张底乃我辈一般人，此终是其坐处。
现代文：后来崔湜用几件事来测试他，张嘉真的主意都在他人之上，崔湜惊异赞美了很长时间，他对同僚们说：你们知不知道，张底可是跟我们一样有才能的人！这个位置终将是他坐的地方！
English: Later, Cui Wei tested him with several things. Zhang Jiaxin's ideas were superior to others. Cui Wei was surprised and praised for a long time. He said to his colleagues: "Do you know, Zhang Di is a talented person like us! This position will eventually be where he sits!

古文：湜死后十余年，河东竟为中书令。
现代文：崔湜死后十多年，张嘉真便当了中书令。
English: More than ten years after Cui Yu's death, Zhang Jiazhen became the middle-ranking official.

古文：杜审言
现代文：杜审言
English: Du Zhengyin

古文：杜审言，襄阳人。
现代文：杜审言，襄阳人。
English: Du Zhengyan, from Xiangyang.

古文：擢进士，为隰城尉。
现代文：中了进士后，当了隰城县尉。
English: After he was promoted to sergeant, he became the lieutenant of Lucheng County.

古文：恃才高，以傲世见疾。
现代文：他依仗自己才学高深而傲岸自大，瞧不起别人，以至抑郁成病。
English: He relies on his own talent and arrogance, despises others, and becomes depressed.

古文：苏味道为天官侍郎，审言集判出，为人曰：味道必死。
现代文：苏味道任吏部侍郎时，杜审言参加铨选考试答完卷子一出来，便对人讲：味道必死！
English: When Su Sichuan was appointed as a waiter of the cadre department, as soon as Du Xuanyan finished taking part in the selection examination and the answer came out, he said to people: "Taste must die!"

古文：人惊问故，答曰：彼见吾判，必羞死？
现代文：人们很吃惊地问他什么原因，他说：他看了我的卷子，肯定会羞愧而死。
English: People were very surprised and asked him why. He said, "He's seen my film, he'll die of shame."

古文：又尝语人曰：吾文章当得屈、宋作衙官，吾笔当得王羲之北面。
现代文：又曾对人说：我的文章比得上屈原、宋玉而只当了个衙官，我的书法与王羲之相比也要在他之上。
English: He also once told people: My writing is comparable to that of Qu Yuan and Song Yu, but I only became a eunuch. My calligraphy is also superior to that of Wang Xizhi.

古文：其矜诞类此。
现代文：他竟是如此狂傲自大。
English: He was so arrogant.

古文：后病甚，宋之问等候之，答曰：甚为造化小儿相苦，尚何言？
现代文：后来病重，宋之问去问候他，他竟说：我很被那些走运的小儿们忌恨，还有什么可说的呢？
English: Later, seriously ill, Song Zhifu went to greet him, and he actually said: I am very hated by those lucky children, what else can I say?

古文：然吾在，久压公等。
现代文：然而由于我的存在，也把你们大家久久地压在了下边。
English: However, because of my existence, I have also kept you all down for a long time.

古文：今且死，固大慰，但恨不见替人云
现代文：如今我要死了，人们当然会感到快慰，但遗憾的是尚未见到能替代我的人出现
English: Now I am going to die, people will of course be happy, but unfortunately I haven't seen anyone who can replace me

古文：杜审言初举进士，恃才謇傲，甚为时辈所妬。
现代文：杜审言刚刚考中进士时，便依仗自己有才学而很狂傲，因而很为当时的人们所忌恨。
English: When Du Jianyan just passed the junior high school entrance examination, he relied on his own talent and was very arrogant, so he was very hated by the people at that time.

古文：苏味道为天官侍郎，审言参选试，判后谓人曰：苏味道必死。
现代文：苏味道任吏部侍郎时，审言参加铨选考试，答完卷子后便对人讲：苏味道必死！
English: When Su Sichuan was appointed as a waiter of the cadre department, the examiner took part in the selection examination, and after answering the paper, he said to the people: Su Sichuan must die!

古文：人问其故，审言曰：见吾判即当羞死矣。
现代文：人们问他原因，审言说：他看见我的卷子便会当即羞愧而死。
English: People asked him why, and the judge said, "He would die of shame if he saw my record."

古文：又问人曰：吾之文章合得屈宋作衙官，书迹合得王羲之北面。
现代文：又对人说：我的文章可以跟屈原、宋玉相比而只做了个衙官，我的书法跟王羲之比起来甚至在他之上。
English: He also told people: My articles can be compared with those of Qu Yuan and Song Yu, but I am only a eunuch. My calligraphy is even higher than that of Wang Xizhi.

古文：其矜诞如此。贬吉州司户。
现代文：他竟是如此狂傲，因而被贬为吉州司户。
English: He turned out to be so arrogant that he was demoted to the position of Jishu steward.

古文：司马周季重员外司户郭若讷共构审言罪状，系狱，将因事杀之。既而季重等酣宴，审言子并年十三，怀刃以击季重，重中创而死，并也为左右所杀。
现代文：后来司马周季重和员外司户郭若纳一起捏造杜审言的罪状而使他下狱，将要因罪杀他的时候，李季重等却在一次宴会上喝得大醉，杜审言的儿子杜并当时才十三岁，便在怀中藏着刀去刺杀他，李季重被刺中而死，杜并也被左右所杀。
English: Later, Sima Zhou Jishong and Guo Rongna, a member of the external secretary of the household, fabricated the crime of Du Xuanyan and put him in prison. When the crime was committed, Li Jishong and others were very drunk at a banquet. Du Xuanyan's son Du Gan, who was only thirteen years old at the time, hid a knife in his arms to assassinate him. Li Jishong was stabbed to death, and Du Gan was also killed by the left and right.

古文：杜甫
现代文：杜甫
English: Du Fu

古文：杜甫，审言之孙。
现代文：杜甫，杜审言的孙子。
English: Du Fu, the grandson of Du Zhenyan.

古文：少贫不自振，客吴越齐赵间。举进士不第。
现代文：少年时家贫不能维持生计，客游于吴越齐赵各地，曾去考进士但未中举。
English: When he was a young boy, his family was too poor to make ends meet, so he traveled to various places in Wuyue Qi Zhao. He took the entrance examination but did not pass.

古文：天宝间，奏赋三篇，帝奇之，使待制集贤院。
现代文：天宝年间，他向皇帝献赋三篇，皇帝对他的作品很惊奇，便让他到集贤院等待诏命。
English: During the Tenpo era, he presented three works to the emperor. The emperor was very surprised by his works, so he had him wait for the imperial decree at Jixianyuan.

古文：数上赋颂，因寓自称道，且言先臣恕、预以来，承儒守官十一世。
现代文：他曾多次献上自己的赋、颂，并寄言自述道：自先辈杜恕、杜预以来，十一代人都是遵奉儒教守职分的。
English: He has presented his fu and ode many times, and sent a message of his own saying: Since the ancestors Du Shou and Du Yuan, eleven generations have been following Confucianism and keeping their duties.

古文：迨审言以文章显，臣赖绪业，自七岁属辞，且四十年。然衣不盖体，常寄食于人，窃恐转死沟壑。
现代文：到杜审言时以文章而著称。我凭借着祖辈的遗业，从七岁开始写诗文，将近四十年了，然而一直是衣不遮体，经常寄食于他人。
English: I have been writing poetry since I was seven years old, relying on the legacy of my ancestors. I have been writing poetry for nearly forty years, but I have always been naked and often sent food to others.

古文：伏惟天子哀怜之，若令执先世故事，则臣之述作，虽不足鼓吹六经，至沈郁顿挫，随时敏给，杨雄、枚皋，可企及也。
现代文：私下里常想，不定哪天会在流浪中死于沟壑之中，承蒙天子对我的同情和怜爱。假如能让我从事先辈的事业，那么我的著作，虽然不能充分地宣扬六经，以至达到含蕴深刻、婉转曲折，敏锐地反映时事那样的程度，但是像杨雄、枚皋那样的水平还是有希望赶得上的。
English: Privately, I often thought that I might one day die in a ravine while wandering, thanks to the compassion and mercy of the Son of Heaven for me. If I can be allowed to engage in the work of my predecessors, then my works, although they cannot fully propagate the Six Classics, so as to reach the level of deep connotation, subtle twists and turns, and keen reflection of current affairs, but there is still hope to catch up with the level like Yang Xiong and Mizuo.

古文：有臣如此，陛下其忍弃之？
现代文：有这样的臣子，皇上还忍心抛弃了他吗？
English: With such a vassal, did the emperor have the heart to abandon him?

古文：禄山乱，天子入蜀，甫避走三川。
现代文：安禄山叛乱，皇帝到了蜀地，杜甫也因避乱去了三川。
English: An Lushan rebellion, the emperor went to Shoudi, Du Fu also went to Mikawa to escape the turmoil.

古文：会严武节度剑南，往依焉。
现代文：到严武作了剑南节度使后，便随他而去并做了他的幕僚。
English: After Yan Wu became the envoy of the Jiannan Festival, he followed him and became his staff.

古文：武以世旧，待甫甚善，亲至其家。
现代文：严武因与杜甫有世交，因而对待杜甫非常好，亲自去他家看望过。
English: Because Yan Wu had a friendship with Du Fu, he treated Du Fu very well and visited his home in person.

古文：甫见之，或时不中。
现代文：杜甫去见严武，有时连头巾都不戴。
English: Du Fu went to see Yan Wu, sometimes not even wearing a headscarf.

古文：而性褊躁傲诞。尝醉登武床。瞪视曰：严挺之乃有此儿。
现代文：杜甫的性情狭小急躁而狂傲放荡，有一次曾喝醉酒登上严武的案几，瞪起双目喊道：严挺之竟然有这样的儿子！
English: Du Fu's temperament was narrow, quick-tempered, and wildly debauched. Once, when he was drunk, he climbed onto Yan Wu's bed, stared into his eyes, and exclaimed: Yan Tingzhi actually has a son like this!

古文：武亦暴猛，外若不为忤，中衔之。
现代文：严武也是个性情暴烈的人，外表好像没什么抵触的，然而内心却很怨恨他。
English: Yan Wu is also a person with a violent personality. On the outside, there seems to be nothing to resist, but on the inside, there is a lot of resentment towards him.

古文：好论天下大事，高而不切。
现代文：杜甫好高谈阔论天下大事，水平很高而不切实际。
English: Du Fu likes to talk about the world's major events at a high level, which is unrealistic.

古文：然数尝寇乱，挺节无所污。
现代文：他曾多次饱尝过敌寇的战乱，一直坚守节操而没有任何污点。
English: He has repeatedly experienced the turmoil of war caused by enemy raiders, and has always adhered to discipline without any blemish.

古文：为诗歌，情不忘君。
现代文：他在诗歌创作中，从来没有忘记君主的恩情。
English: In his poetry, he never forgot the grace of the monarch.

古文：人怜其忠云。
现代文：人们都很怜惜他的忠贞。
English: People felt sorry for his loyalty.

古文：杜工部甫在蜀，醉后登严武之案，厉声问武曰：公是严挺之儿否？
现代文：工部员外郎杜甫在蜀地时，曾喝醉酒登上严武的案几，厉声问严武道：你是不是严挺之的儿子？
English: When Wei Lang Du Fu, a member of the engineering department, was in Shunde, he once drunkenly climbed onto Yan Wu's desk and asked Yan Wu Dao: "Are you Yan Tian Zhi's son?"

古文：武色变，甫复曰：仆乃杜审言儿。
现代文：严武色变，杜甫又说道：我乃是杜审言的儿子！
English: Yan Wu changed color, Du Fu also said: I am the son of Du Zhenyan!

古文：武少解矣。
现代文：严武才有些消怒。
English: It took Yanwu some time to defuse the anger.

古文：陈通方
现代文：陈通方
English: Chen Tongfang

古文：陈通方登正元进士第，与王播同年。
现代文：陈通方考中了正元进士，他是与王播同一年及第的，王播当时已五十六岁，而陈通方还很年轻。
English: Chen Tongfang was in the same year as Wang Biao, who was 56 years old at the time, and Chen Tongfang was still very young.

古文：播年五十六，通方甚少，因期集，抚播背曰：王老奉赠一第。
现代文：在复试时，陈通方拍着王播的后背说：王老奉赠一第。
English: During the retest, Chen Tongfang patted Wang Bo's back and said, "Wang Laobang was awarded a first place."

古文：言其日暮途穷，及第同赠官也。播恨之。
现代文：意思是说王播的年龄和学问已经到了日暮途穷的地步，才考中并授官。王播对他怀恨在心。
English: This meant that Wang Bo's age and knowledge had reached the point where he was too old to take the middle school entrance examination and be promoted. Wang Bo held a grudge against him.

古文：后通方丁家难，辛苦万状。播捷三科，为正郎，判盐铁。
现代文：后来陈通方遇上家难而归去，处境万般艰苦，而这期间王播连登三科，官已升至郎中，并兼任盐铁使。
English: Later, Chen Tongfang encountered family difficulties and returned home, in a very difficult situation, and during this period, Wang Boryan was promoted to the third grade, the official has been promoted to the middle son, and concurrently served as the salt iron envoy.

古文：方穷悴求助，不甚给之。
现代文：陈通方穷困憔悴来请求帮助，王播不愿帮他的忙。
English: Chen Tongfang, a poor man, came to ask for help, but Wang Biao did not want to help him.

古文：时李虚中为副使，通方以诗为汲引云：应念路傍憔悴翼，昔年乔木幸同迁。
现代文：此时李虚中为节度副使，陈通方便写诗给他表达提携之意，诗中写道：应念路傍憔悴翼，昔年乔木幸同迁。
English: At this time, Li Xizhong was the vice-envoy of the festival, and Chen Tong conveniently wrote a poem to him to express the meaning of the alliance. He wrote in the poem: "You should remember the road next to the wings, and the old trees moved together."

古文：播不得已，荐为江南院官。
现代文：王播不得已，举荐他当了江南院官。
English: Wang Huan had no choice but to recommend him to become the Jiangnan academician.

古文：陈通方，闽县人。
现代文：陈通方，闽县人。
English: Chen Tongfang, from Jixian County.

古文：贞元十年顾少连下进士第。
现代文：贞元十年登进士第，榜上排名在顾少连之后。
English: In the 10th year of the Zhengyuan era, he was promoted to the third rank, ranking behind Gu Shorian.

古文：时属公道大开，采掇孤俊。
现代文：当时选拔人才是大开公平之道，广招有独特才能的俊杰。
English: At that time, the selection of talents was a wide-open and fair way, and Junjie, who had unique talents, was widely recruited.

古文：通方年二十五，第四人及第。
现代文：陈通方当时只有二十五岁，在登第的进士中名列第四位。
English: Chen Tongfang was only twenty-five years old at the time, and he ranked fourth in the list of candidates.

古文：以其年少名高，轻薄自负。
现代文：因他年少名高，便很轻薄自负。
English: Because of his young age and high reputation, he was very vain and conceited.

古文：与王播同年。王时年五十六，通方薄其成事。
现代文：他与王播是同年考中的，王播当时已五十六岁，通方很看不起王播，觉得他不会成什么气候。
English: He was in the same year as Wang Biao in the middle of the examination. Wang Biao was fifty-six years old at that time. Tongfang looked down on Wang Biao and thought that he would not become a great man.

古文：后时，因期集戏附其背曰：王老王老，奉赠一第。
现代文：后来，在复试时他拍着王播的后背戏弄道：王老王老，再白送你一榜吧。
English: Later, during the re-examination, he patted Wang Huan's back and teased: "Wang Lao Wang Lao, let me give you another list for free."

古文：言其日暮途远，及第同赠官也。王曰：拟应三篇。
现代文：意思是说他年龄很大才能快尽了，可道路还很远，直到这时才登第登科。王播说：我可以应你三篇文章比一比。
English: It means that he is too old to be exhausted, but the road is still very far. It was not until this time that he became a doctor. Wang Bian said: I can compare your three articles.

古文：通方又曰：王老一之谓甚，其可再乎？
现代文：陈通方道：王老能写一篇就很不错了，怎可让你再写呢？
English: Chen Tong Fang Dao: It's great that Wang Lao can write an article, how can you write it again?

古文：王心每贮之。
现代文：王播把这些话都记在心里。
English: Wang Bo took these words to heart.

古文：通方寻值家难还归。王果累捷高科，官渐达矣。
现代文：陈通方不久遇上老人丧事而回家，此后王播却一直铨选中试，官位渐渐显达。
English: Chen Tongfang soon met with an old man's funeral and went home, but since then Wang Bo has been selected for the mid-term exam, and his official rank has gradually increased.

古文：通方后履人事入关，王已丞郎判监铁。
现代文：陈通方后来为求人做官来到关中时，王播已升任侍郎兼盐铁使。
English: When Chen Tongfang later came to Guanzhong to apply for a post, Wang Bo had already been promoted to the position of chamberlain and envoy of salt and iron.

古文：通方穷悴寡坐，不知王素衔其言，投之求救。
现代文：陈通方穷苦而孤独，他并不知王播平素已记恨他的话，便投到王播门上请求给予援助。
English: Chen Tongfang was poor and lonely. He did not know that Wang Huanping had already remembered his words of hatred, so he went to Wang Huanmen to ask for help.

古文：同年李虚中时为副使，通方亦有诗扣之，求为汲引云：应念路傍憔悴翼，昔年乔木幸同迁。
现代文：他们同一年考中进士的李虚中此时也当上节度副使，陈通方也有诗与他唱和，诗中有求他提拔之意：应念路傍憔悴翼，昔年乔木幸同迁。
English: At this time, Li Xizhong, who passed the junior high school entrance examination in the same year, also became the vice-envoy of the festival. Chen Tongfang also had a poem to sing with him. In the poem, there is a meaning to ask him for promotion: You should think about the roadside and the wings. In the past, Qiao Mu Xing also moved.

古文：王不得已，署之江西院官。
现代文：王播不得已，安排他去当江南院官。
English: As a last resort, Wang Huan arranged for him to become an official of the Southern Jiangsu Province.

古文：赴职未及其所，又改为浙东院。仅至半程，又改与南陵院。
现代文：陈通方去上任还未走到衙署，又让他改任浙东院官，可是仅仅行了一半路程，又改任南陵院官。
English: Chen Tongfang had not yet arrived at the Imperial Household Agency when he took office, so he was transferred to the East Zhejiang Academy. However, he was only halfway there when he was transferred to the South Mausoleum Academy.

古文：如是往复数四。困踬日甚。
现代文：如此往返多次，一天比一天困厄，难以前进，于是退回家中反省自己的过失。
English: He made this round trip many times, and each day became more and more difficult. It was difficult to move forward, so he returned home to reflect on his mistakes.

古文：退省其咎，谓甥侄曰：吾偶戏谑，不知王生遽为深憾。
现代文：后来他对外甥和侄子们说：我不过是偶尔的戏谑，不料王播竟然深深地怀恨在心。
English: Later, he told his nephews and nieces: "I was just an occasional prankster, but Wang Bo unexpectedly harbored a deep grudge.

古文：人之于言，岂合容易哉。
现代文：人们讲话，怎能够完全合意呢？
English: People are talking, how can there be complete agreement?

古文：寻值王真拜，礼分悬绝，追谢无地，怅望病终。
现代文：不久王播试官期满授予实官，地位礼分就相差悬殊了。想要去道歉都找不到地方。后来陈通方在怅然想望中病逝。
English: Soon after Wang Bo's probationary period expired, he was appointed as a real official, and there was a great disparity in the status and courtesy. He could not find a place to apologize. Later, Chen Tongfang died of illness in the midst of his longing.

古文：李贺
现代文：李贺
English: Li He

古文：李贺，唐诸王孙也。
现代文：李贺，唐宗室的后裔。
English: Li He, a descendant of the Tang family.

古文：年七岁，元和中，以歌诗著名。
现代文：七岁时，元和中期，便以诗歌而著名。
English: At the age of seven, during the Yuan and Middle Dynasties, he became famous for his poetry.

古文：韩退之、皇甫湜览贺所作奇之，相谓曰：若是古人，吾曹有不知者，若是今人，岂有不知之理。
现代文：韩愈、皇甫湜看到他的作品都感到很惊奇。他们说：假如是古人，我们不能去结识；如是今人，岂有不去结识的道理。
English: Han Yu and Wang Fuxi were both surprised to see his works. They said, "If they were ancient people, we couldn't get to know them; if they were modern people, there's no reason not to get to know them."

古文：因连骑造门请见。贺总角荷衣而出。
现代文：于是两人并马到李贺家去相见，尚未成年的李贺束着两个发角穿着用荷叶编的衣裳迎出来。
English: So the two of them went to Li He's house at the same time to meet. Li He, who was not yet an adult, came out wearing two hair buns and a dress made of lotus leaves.

古文：二公面试一篇。贺承命欣然，操觚染翰，傍若无人，题曰高轩过。
现代文：二公要当场让他写一篇，李贺欣然接受，拿起木简挥笔蘸墨，傍若无人，题目为《高轩过》，二公大为惊讶。
English: The two princes asked him to write an article on the spot, and Li He gladly accepted. He picked up a wooden block of paper, waved a pen and dipped it in ink, and no one was around. The title was "Gao Xuan passed away," and the two princes were surprised.

古文：二公大惊，以所乘马联镳而还。
现代文：他们把马连起嚼子，三人并骑而回。
English: They hitched up their horses and rode back three abreast.

古文：元稹以明经中第，愿与贺交。
现代文：元稹是以明经中第的，他很希望与李贺结交。
English: Yuan Xuan was a scholar of the Ming Dynasty, and he was eager to make friends with Li He.

古文：贺见刺曰：明经及第，何事来见李贺？
现代文：当李贺见到元稹递来的名帖时说道：一个考中明经科的人，有什么事来见我李贺！
English: When Li He saw the famous post delivered by Yuan Xuan, he said: A person who has passed the middle school entrance examination and knows the classics, what business do you have to see me, Li He!

古文：稹惭而退。
现代文：元稹惭愧而去。
English: Motonari was ashamed and left.

古文：未几制策登科，为礼部郎官，乃议贺父名晋，不合举进士，时辈从而排之，贺竟不第。
现代文：不久元稹便在由皇帝下诏举行的制科应试中登第，官授礼部郎中。后来当李贺应试时，元稹便说李贺父亲的名字晋与进士的进音同相讳，因而儿子不能中举为进士，当时其他人也顺从此话而一起排挤他，因此李贺竟然没有被录取。
English: Soon after, Yuan Shao won the first place in the entrance examination held by the emperor's edict. Later, when Li He was taking the entrance examination, Yuan Shao said that Li He's father's name, Jin, had the same pronunciation as that of the entrance examination, so his son could not be promoted to the entrance examination. At that time, other people also obeyed this and pushed him out together, so Li He was not admitted.

古文：按唐李公藩尝缀贺歌诗，为之叙未成，知贺有外兄，与贺有笔研旧，召见，托以搜采放失。
现代文：按：唐代的李公藩曾缀集过李贺的诗歌，想把他的诗编辑成卷而未成。他知道李贺有一个表兄，过去曾抄录过李贺的作品，于是召见了他，托付他帮助搜集失散的作品。
English: Press: The Li Gong clan of the Tang Dynasty once had a collection of poems by Li He, and wanted to compile his poems into a volume, but failed. He knew that Li He had a cousin who had copied Li He's works in the past, so he summoned him and entrusted him to help collect the lost works.

古文：其人诺，不且请曰：某尽记贺篇咏，然黵改处多，愿得公所辑视之，当为是正。
现代文：那个人答应后说道：我全部抄录了李贺的诗歌，但是涂改的地方太多，希望能把你所收集到的拿给我看看，以便以此来订正。
English: After agreeing, the man said, "I have copied all of Li He's poems, but there are too many changes. I hope you can show me what you have collected so that I can revise it."

古文：公喜，并付之，弥年绝迹。
现代文：李公藩大喜，全都拿给了他。
English: Li Gonghan was overjoyed and gave him everything.

古文：复召诘之，乃云：某与贺中表，自幼同处，恨其倨忽，常思报之。
现代文：可是整整一年也未见到那人送个脚印。于是又把他叫来追问，那个人道：我与李贺是表兄弟，从小便在一起。可是我很恨他太傲慢，常常想报复他。
English: However, he did not see the man leave any footprints for a whole year. So he called him in for questioning. The man said, "Li He and I are cousins and have been together since we were babies. However, I hate him because he is too arrogant, and I often want to take revenge on him."

古文：今幸得公所藏，并旧有者，悉投堰中矣。
现代文：如今正巧得到你所收藏的作品，连同我原有的，全部投进了河堤里。
English: Now it just so happens that the works you have collected, together with my original ones, have all been thrown into the river embankment.

古文：公大恚，叱出之。
现代文：李公藩大怒，将他喝斥出去。
English: Li Gonghan was furious and shouted him out.

古文：元和中，进士李贺善为歌篇，翰愈深所知重，于缙绅间每为延誉，由此声华藉甚。
现代文：元稹也钻研诗歌创作，常想与李贺交结，有一天元稹带着礼物去拜访李贺，李贺看过名帖后竟不准他进来。
English: Yuan Xuan also studied poetry, and often wanted to meet Li He. One day, Yuan Xuan went to visit Li He with a gift, but Li He did not allow him to come in after reading the famous poem.

古文：时元稹年少，以明经擢第一，攻篇什，常交结于贺。
现代文：仆人对元稹说：一个考中明经科的人，有什么事来见李贺啊？
English: The servant said to Yuan Xuan, "A person who has passed the middle school entrance examination and has a good grasp of the classics, what business do you have coming to see Li He?"

古文：一日执贽造门，贺览刺不容遽入，仆者谓曰：明经及第，何事来看李贺？稹无复致情，惭愤而退。
现代文：元稹没有再向他致以情意，羞愧愤恨而归。后来元稹从左拾遗的位置上再应试制策而登科，位居要害之地，当了礼部郎中。
English: Geng Yao did not show him any more affection, he was ashamed and angry. Later, from the position of collecting relics from the left, Geng Yao tried to make a plan and entered the academy. He was in a critical position and became a member of the ritual department.

古文：其后自左拾遗制策登科，日当要路，及为礼部郎中，因议贺祖讳晋，不合应举；贺亦以轻薄为时辈所排，遂致撼轲。
现代文：当李贺要参加应试的时候，元稹说李贺的父名晋肃的晋与进士的进相讳，不能参加应试，李贺也曾因为轻浮刻薄而被其他人所排斥，因而造成他一生不得志。
English: When Li He wanted to take the entrance examination, Yuan Zang said that Li He's father's name, Jin Su, had a secret relationship with Jin Shi, and could not take the entrance examination. Li He was also ostracized by others for being frivolous and mean, which caused him to be disheartened throughout his life.

古文：韩愈惜其才。为著《讳辩》录明之，然竟不成名。
现代文：韩愈爱惜他的才学，曾写《讳辩》为他明辩，然而终究不能登第。
English: Han Yu cherished his talent, and once wrote "Hidden Argument" as his explicit argument, but in the end he couldn't make it to the top.

古文：李群玉
现代文：李群玉
English: Li Qunyu

古文：群玉，澧州人。
现代文：李群玉，澧州人。
English: Li Qunyu, from Zhangzhou.

古文：好吹笙，常使家僮吹之。
现代文：喜欢吹笙，也常让家僮吹笙。
English: He likes to play the bagpipes and often lets his family members play them.

古文：性喜食鹅。
现代文：还喜欢吃鹅肉。
English: He also likes to eat goose meat.

古文：及授校书郎，即归故里。
现代文：官任校书郎，就回归故里了。
English: As a government-appointed school teacher, he returned to his hometown.

古文：卢肇送诗云：妙吹应诺凤，工书定得鹅。
现代文：卢肇赠他诗道：妙吹应诺凤，工书定得鹅。
English: Lu Zhaozhong gave him a poem saying: "A good blow is like a phoenix, but a good book is like a goose."

古文：题《黄陵庙》诗有曰：黄陵庙前春已空，子规啼血泪春风。
现代文：他曾写过一首诗《题黄陵庙》：黄陵庙前春已空，子规啼血泪春风。
English: He once wrote a poem "Theme Huangling Temple": Huangling Temple is empty before the spring, and the spring breeze is full of blood and tears.

古文：不知精爽落何处，疑是行云秋色中。
现代文：不知精爽何处落，疑是行云秋色中。
English: I don't know where I'll end up, but I suspect I'll end up somewhere in the autumn.

古文：群玉自以为春空便到秋色，踟蹰欲改，恍若有物，告以二年之兆。
现代文：群玉觉得春空便到秋色不妥，迟迟疑疑想要修改，恍然间好像眼前出现了一个东西，告诉他两年的预兆。
English: Qunyu felt that the spring sky was not appropriate to the autumn color, hesitantly wanted to modify it, and suddenly something appeared in front of his eyes, telling him the omen of two years.

古文：至浔阳，具述其事于段成式。
现代文：到了浔阳，他把此事从头至尾说给了段成式。
English: When he arrived in Shenyang, he recounted the whole story to Duan Chengshi.

古文：群玉亡后。成式哭之诗曰：酒里诗中三十年，纵横唐突世喧喧。
现代文：群玉死后，段成式写悼诗道：酒里诗里三十年，纵横唐突世喧喧。
English: After the death of Qunyu, Duan Chengxie wrote a eulogy poem: Thirty years of wine, poetry, and the hustle and bustle of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：明时不作祢衡死，傲尽公卿归九泉。
现代文：明时不作祢衡死，傲尽公卿归九泉。
English: If you do not die by tomorrow, you will return to the nine springs.

古文：李群玉字文山，性轻率，多侮戏人。
现代文：李群玉，字文山。性情很轻率，常侮辱戏谑他人。
English: Li Qunyu, surnamed Wenshan. He is very reckless and often insults and teases others.

古文：常假江陵幕客书求丐于澧州刺史艾乙。
现代文：曾假借江陵幕客写信给澧州刺史艾乙求要钱物。
English: A fake guest of Jiangling Maku once wrote to Zhangzhou Zishi Ai Yi to ask for money and goods.

古文：李谓艾曰：小生病且甚矣，幸使君痛救之。
现代文：他对艾乙说：小生病得很重啊，希望你能怜悯救济。
English: He said to Ai B: Xiao Xiao is very ill, I hope you can have mercy and relief.

古文：李以戏其性之僻也。
现代文：可是他还戏弄人家的性格孤僻。
English: But he also poked fun at his reclusive personality.

古文：群玉以其轻脱而济之不厚矣。
现代文：李群玉因为他的轻佻不稳重而没有得到很大的救济。
English: Li Qunyu did not get much relief because of his flightiness and instability.

古文：冯涓
现代文：冯涓
English: Feng Xuan

古文：大中四年，进士冯涓登第，榜中文誉最高。
现代文：唐朝大中四年，冯涓考中进士，在榜上所有的人中要数他的文章声誉最高了。
English: In the four years of the Tang Dynasty University and Middle School, Feng Junkao was promoted to the middle school. Among all the people on the list, his article has the highest reputation.

古文：是岁新罗国起楼，厚赍金帛，奏请撰记，时人荣之。
现代文：这一年新罗国修建大楼，赠送了许多金银绸缎，冯涓向皇帝请求后写了记叙文章，当时人们都很称赞他。
English: In this year, Silla built a building and presented a lot of gold, silver and silk to the emperor. After asking the emperor, Feng Jun wrote a narrative article. At that time, people praised him.

古文：初官京兆府参军，恩地即杜相审权也。
现代文：最初官任京北府参军。给予他恩惠的是宰相杜审权。
English: At first, he joined the army as an official of Beijing North Prefecture. He was given the privilege of being granted the right of examination by the Prime Minister.

古文：杜有江西之拜，制书未行，先召长乐公密话，垂延辟之命，欲以南昌牋奏任之，戒令勿泄。
现代文：杜审权将要被派往江西任职，皇帝的命令未下之前，杜审权先找来长乐公密谈，他很羡慕到新设置的幕府去任职，想要表奏皇帝去南昌任职，并告诫千万不要把此事泄漏出去。
English: Du Xianquan was about to be sent to Jiangxi to take office. Before the emperor's order was issued, Du Xianquan first sought out Changle Gong for a confidential discussion. He was very envious of taking office in the newly established shogunate, wanted to play the emperor to take office in Nanchang, and warned him not to leak the matter out.

古文：长乐公拜谢，辞出宅，速鞭而归。
现代文：长乐公拜谢，辞别出门，快马而归。
English: Changle Gong said thank you, said goodbye and left the house.

古文：于通衢遇友人郑賨，见其喜形于色，驻马恳诘。长乐遽以恩地之辟告之。
现代文：在回去的大路上，遇见了友人郑賨，郑賨见他喜形于色，便停住马恳切地追问有什么好事，长乐公竟把杜审权要去新辟的幕府任职一事告诉了他。
English: On the way back, he met his friend Zheng Yao. Zheng Yao saw him beaming with joy, so he stopped his horse and earnestly asked what was so good that Changle Gong had told him that Du Xianquan was going to work for the new shogunate.

古文：荥阳寻捧刺诣京兆门谒贺，具言得于冯先辈也。京兆嗟愤，而鄙其浅露。
现代文：很快便有荥阳县官拿着名帖到京兆府来拜访祝贺，称此事是从冯先辈那里得到的，京兆尹一听十分气愤，很鄙视冯涓的浅露。
English: Soon, an official from Shenyang County came to Jingzhao Prefecture with a famous postcard to visit and congratulate, saying that the matter was received from Feng's ancestors. Jingzhao Yin was very angry and despised Feng Yu's shallow dew.

古文：洎制下开幕，冯不预焉，心绪忧疑，莫知所以。
现代文：等到诏书下来开建幕府时，没有让冯涓参加。他心情很忧郁，不知道什么原因。
English: When the edict came down to begin the construction of the shogunate, he did not allow Feng Xuan to participate. He was in a gloomy mood and did not know why.

古文：廉车发日，自灞桥乘肩舆，门生咸在长乐拜别，京兆公长揖冯曰：勉旃！
现代文：启程的那天，从灞桥开始乘坐桥舆，门生都在长乐公邸拜别，京兆公拱手对冯涓道：还是多努力吧。
English: On the day of departure, the train started from the Qianqiao to the Qianwu Bridge, and the disciples all said goodbye at the Changle Mansion. Prince Jingzhao extended his hand to Feng Rongdao and said, "Let's work harder."

古文：由是嚣浮之誉，遍于搢绅，竟不通显。中间又涉交通中贵，愈招清议，官止祠部郎中、眉州刺史。
现代文：由此冯涓轻浮的名声，传遍了士大夫之间，竟然不能升任高官，后来又涉及到交结宫内显贵的宦官一事，更招致人们对他的指责议论，官止于祠部郎中、眉州刺史。
English: As a result, Feng Xuan's reputation of being frivolous spread all over the scholar-bureaucrats, to the extent that he could not be promoted to a high-ranking official. Later, he was also involved in a relationship with a prominent eunuch in the palace, which further attracted people's criticism and discussion of him. The official remained in the middle of the ancestral hall and in Meizhou.

古文：仕蜀，至御史大夫。
现代文：后来又为官于眂前蜀，官至御史大夫。
English: Later, he became a government official in Shizen Shu, and later, a government official and a doctor of history.

古文：温庭筠
现代文：温庭筠
English: Wen Tingyao

古文：温庭筠，太原人。
现代文：温庭筠，太原人。
English: Atsushi Niimi, from Taiyuan.

古文：大中初，应进士，苦心研席，长于诗赋。然士行尘杂，不修边幅，能逐吹弦之音，为测艳之词。
现代文：大中初年，去应考进士。他曾在书房里费尽了苦心，很擅长诗赋创作，但混行于尘俗琐事之中，不注意自己的穿着仪容。
English: In the first year of junior high school, he went to take the entrance examination. He had worked hard in the study and was very good at creating poems, but he mingled in mundane chores and did not pay attention to his appearance.

古文：公卿家无赖子弟裴诚、令狐缟之徒，相与蒲饮，酣醉终日，由是累年不第。
现代文：会使用各种器乐演奏乐曲，能创作清美艳丽的诗词。常与贵族家无赖子弟裴诚、令狐缟之徒，赌博酗饮，终日醉醺醺的。因此历年应试而不能及第。
English: He can play music using various instruments, and can compose beautiful and vivid poetry. He often associates with Pei Cheng, the scoundrel son of an aristocratic family, and the followers of Ling Fuxi. He gambles and drinks heavily, and is drunk all day long. As a result, he has taken the exam every year, but has not been able to reach the first place.

古文：徐商镇襄阳，往依之，署为巡官。
现代文：徐商缜守襄阳时，温庭筠去投依他，安排他为巡官。
English: When Xu Shangguan was in charge of Xiangyang, Wen Tingtao went to him and arranged for him to become an inspector.

古文：咸通中，失意归江东，路由广陵，心怨令狐绹在位时，不为成名。
现代文：咸通年中期，不得志而去江东，路经广陵时，心里怨恨令狐绹执政期间，不让自己登科。
English: In the middle of the year of Xian Tong, he could not make up his mind to go to the east of the Yangtze River. When he passed Guangling, his resentment prevented him from entering a university during the reign of the Fox Clan.

古文：既至，与新进少年狂游侠，愈久不刺谒，又乞索于扬子院。
现代文：来到这里后，便与新登科的青年人到处狂游，好长时间也不去拜访令狐绹，并向扬子院讨要救济。
English: After arriving here, he went on a wild goose chase with the young people who had just entered the academy. He did not visit Ling Xuchang for a long time and asked Yangzi Yuan for relief.

古文：醉而犯夜。为虞候所系，败面折齿，方迁扬州。
现代文：又因喝醉了酒而违犯宵禁，被虞候拘囚，结果落得脸破牙断，才回到扬州，将此事告诉了令狐绹。
English: He also violated the curfew because he was drunk and was taken into custody. As a result, his face was broken and his teeth were broken. He only returned to Yangzhou to tell Ling Fuxuan about this.

古文：诉之令狐绹，捕虞候治之，极言庭筠狭邪丑迹。
现代文：令狐绹立即下令拘捕了虞侯并将其治罪，而虞候却极力讲述了温庭筠当时的狎邪丑恶行为。
English: Ling Xuxuan immediately ordered the arrest of the magistrate and punished him, but the magistrate tried his best to describe the evil and ugly behavior of Wen Tingjun at that time.

古文：自是污行闻于京师。
现代文：从此温庭筠的污秽行为传遍了京都。
English: Since then, the filthy behavior of Onnitsubo has spread throughout Kyoto.

古文：开明中，温庭筠才名藉甚，然而罕拘细行，以文为货，识者鄙之。
现代文：开明中期，温庭筠的才气名声很大，然而他不拘小节，拿自己的诗文换钱，认识的人都很瞧不起他。
English: In the middle of the enlightened period, Wen Tingyao's talent and reputation were great. However, he was not a stickler for detail and traded his poems for money. People who knew him despised him.

古文：无何执政间复有恶奏庭筠搅扰场屋，出随州方城县尉。
现代文：不久朝官们又有恶奏说温庭筠搅闹考场。
English: Soon after, the imperial officials made another malicious accusation, saying that Wen Tingyu had disturbed the examination hall.

古文：何者？入策进士与望州长马齐资。
现代文：入策进士与望州长马的名望地位是一样的。
English: The prestige status of a strategist is the same as that of a governor.

古文：坦释然，故有泽畔长沙之比。
现代文：裴坦这才消除了疑虑。因此才有了泽畔长沙之比和对温庭筠的任命。
English: It was only then that Pei Tan dispelled his doubts. This is how the comparison between Ze'an Changsha and the appointment of Wen Tingjun came about.

古文：庭筠之任，文士争为词送，唯记唐夫得其尤曰：何事明时泣玉频，长安不见杏园春。
现代文：文人们争相写诗为他送行，这里只把写的最好的唐夫的诗记录下来：何事明时泣玉频，长安不见杏园春。
English: Writers scrambled to write poems to see him off, and only the best of Tangfu's poems have been recorded here: What things are weeping at all times, Chang'an does not see the spring of the apricot garden.

古文：凤凰诏下虽沾命，鹦鹉才高却累身。
现代文：凤凰诏下虽沾命，鹦鹉才高却累身。
English: Although the phoenix is doomed, the parrot is tall but tired.

古文：且饮醁醽消积恨。莫辞黄绶拂行尘。
现代文：且饮醁醽消积恨，莫辞黄绶拂行尘。
English: And drinking gourd to dissipate the accumulated hatred, we can't help but sweep away the dust.

古文：方城若比长沙远，游隔千山与万津。
现代文：方城若比长沙远，游隔千山与万津。
English: Fangcheng is farther away than Changsha, separated by thousands of mountains from Banzin.

古文：陈磻叟
现代文：陈磻叟
English: Chen Yao

古文：陈磻叟者，父名岵，当有词学，尤溺于内典。
现代文：陈磻叟，父亲陈岵，具有很高的文学水平，尤其沉溺于佛经的研究。
English: Chen Xi, the father of Chen Xi, has a high level of literature, especially indulging in the study of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：长庆中。尝注《维摩经》进上，有中旨，令与好官。
现代文：唐朝长庆年间，陈岵曾把自己注释的维摩经进献给皇帝，皇帝下旨，命令给他好官做。
English: During the Changqing period of the Tang Dynasty, Chen Xi dedicated his commentary on the Vedas to the emperor, and the emperor issued an order to make him a good official.

古文：执政谓岵因为道场僧进经，颇抑挫之，止授少列而已。
现代文：但宰臣认为陈岵是寺院中的和尚进献的经书，便极力压制他，只授予他簿尉之类的小官。
English: However, the aide-de-camp thought that Chen Qi was a book presented by a monk in the temple, so he tried his best to suppress him and only granted him a minor official such as a bookkeeper.

古文：磻叟形质短小，长喙疏齿。
现代文：磻叟身材矮小，嘴很长牙也很稀。
English: The cormorant is small in stature, with a long beak and sparse teeth.

古文：尤富文学。
现代文：有很丰富的文学知识。
English: He has a very rich knowledge of literature.

古文：自负王佐之才。
现代文：自己认为有辅佐帝王的才能。
English: He believes that he has the talent to assist the emperor.

古文：大言骋辩，虽接对相公，旁若无人。
现代文：滔滔不绝的论辩，即使与相国宰臣对话，也旁若无人。
English: Even if he were to hold a dialogue with the prime minister of his country, no one would listen to his endless arguments.

古文：复自料非名教之器，弱冠度为道士，隶名于昊天观。
现代文：然而他又觉得自己不是有名望有教化的人，因此二十岁便出家当了道士，隶属于昊天观。
English: However, he felt that he was not a famous and enlightened person, so he became a Taoist monk at the age of twenty and belonged to Haotian.

古文：咸通中，降圣之辰，二教论议，而黄衣屡奔。上小不怿。宣下，令后辈新入内道场，有能折冲浮图者，论以自荐。
现代文：咸通年间，皇帝寿辰之日，佛、道两教来论议，当时道教一方屡屡受挫，皇帝有些不悦，宣下圣旨，让那些晚辈的道士们进到这个讲经论议的场所来，如果有能辩倒佛教一方的人，可以自荐。
English: During the Hamintong era, on the day of the emperor's birthday, the two religions, Buddhism and Taoism, came to discuss. At that time, the Taoist side suffered repeated setbacks. The emperor was somewhat displeased and proclaimed a sacred edict, allowing those younger Taoists to enter this place of sermon and discussion. If there is someone who can refute the Buddhist side, they can recommend themselves.

古文：磻叟摄衣奉诏。
现代文：磻叟整理一下衣裳后响应诏命。
English: After sorting out her clothes, she responded to the imperial command.

古文：时释门为主论，自误引《涅槃经》疏，磻叟应声叱之曰：皇帝山呼大庆，阿师口称献寿，而经引《涅槃》，犯大不敬。
现代文：当时佛门为主论，他们错误地引用了涅磻经疏，磻叟随即驳斥道：今日是皇帝的大庆日，阿师也口口声声是来祝寿，然而引用的引典却是涅槃，这是犯了大不敬罪！
English: At that time, Buddhism was the main theory. They mistakenly quoted the Nirvana Sutra, and Yu immediately refuted: Today is the emperor's great anniversary. Ashi also said that he had come to celebrate his birthday, but the cited text was Nirvana. This was a great sin of disrespect!

古文：以其僧谓磻叟不通佛书，既而错愕，殆至颠坠。
现代文：那个和尚本以为磻叟不懂佛书，听了之后十分惊恐，几乎到了颠抖坠倒的地步。
English: The monk thought that the baboon did not understand the Buddhist scriptures, but after listening to it, he was very frightened, almost to the point of shaking and falling down.

古文：自是连挫数辈，圣颜大悦，左右呼万岁。其日帘前赐紫衣一袭。
现代文：磻叟自此连连挫败几个僧人，皇帝非常高兴左右高呼万岁，皇帝当天就在帘前赐给他一件紫衣。
English: Since then, he has defeated several monks in a row. The emperor was very pleased and shouted "long live." The emperor gave him a purple robe in front of the curtain that day.

古文：磻叟由是恣其轻侮，高流宿德多患之，潜闻上听，云：磻叟衣冠子弟，不愿在官帔，颇思理一邑以自效耳。
现代文：磻叟自此便很放纵而轻浮傲慢，一些高尚的德高望重人都很厌恨他。因此有人把他的事密奏皇帝，说：磻叟本是士大夫子弟。他不愿意仅仅穿件官服，很想自己去治理一个县。
English: From then on, Zou was very self-indulgent, frivolous and arrogant, and some high-minded people hated him very much. Therefore, some people played his case to the emperor, saying: Zou is the son of a scholar. He didn't want to just wear an official uniform, he wanted to govern a county by himself.

古文：于是中旨授至德县令。
现代文：于是皇帝下旨任命他去当至德县令。
English: So the emperor issued an order appointing him to be the county magistrate.

古文：磻叟莅事，未经考秩，抛官，诣阙上封事。
现代文：磻叟到位主事。未满任期，便抛弃官职，来到朝殿向皇帝递上密封的奏章。
English: Before his term of office was over, he gave up his official position and came to the Imperial Palace to present a sealed record to the emperor.

古文：通义刘公引为羽翼，非时召对数刻，磻叟所陈数十节，侵穷时病。
现代文：通义刘公推荐他做了辅佐之官，皇帝突然召见他对话数刻时间，磻叟所陈述的数十条，完全切中时弊。
English: Tongyi Liu Gong recommended him as an assistant officer, and the emperor suddenly summoned him for a few minutes of dialogue. The dozens of articles he stated were completely in line with the times.

古文：复曰：臣请破边瑊家，可以赡军一二年。
现代文：又说：臣请求抄边瑊的家，就可供养军队一两年。
English: He also said, "If a vassal requests to seize the house of a border official, it can be used to support the army for one or two years."

古文：上问：边瑊何人？
现代文：皇帝问边瑊是谁？
English: The emperor asked, "Who is Bentham?"

古文：对曰：宰相路岩亲吏。
现代文：磻叟答道：是宰相路岩最亲信的官吏。
English: Zou replied that he was the most trusted official of Prime Minister Lu Yan.

古文：既而大为岩恚怒。
现代文：因而路岩对他非常愤恨。
English: Therefore, Lu Yan was very angry with him.

古文：翌日，敕以磻叟诬罔上听，讦斥大臣。除名为民，流爱州。
现代文：第二天，下诏说磻叟欺骗皇上，攻击大臣，削职为民，流放爱州。
English: The next day, the imperial edict said that he had deceived the emperor, attacked the minister, cut jobs for the people, and exiled Aizhou.

古文：磻叟虽至颠蹶，不敢以其道自屈。
现代文：磻叟虽然从高处跌坠下来，但他没有顺着这条道屈服滑落下去。
English: Although the baboon fell from a height, he did not give in and slide down the path.

古文：素有重坠之疾，历聘藩后，率以肩舆造犀庑，所至无不仰止。
现代文：因为他平素多次吃过这种坠落之苦。他曾多次被请到各藩镇幕府，一般都是用轿舆抬到廊檐之下，所到之处无不敬仰期望。
English: He had been invited many times to visit the shogun's domains and towns, and he was usually carried in a palanquin under the portico. Everywhere he went, there was nothing but admiration and expectation.

古文：及岩贬，磻叟得量移为邓州司马。
现代文：等到路岩遭贬，磻叟得到赦免而酌情授与邓州司马，时间是广明庚子年之后，刘巨容起事不久。
English: It was not long after the year of Guangming Gengzi that Liu Juroong rebelled, when Luyan was dethroned and Zou was pardoned and awarded Dengzhou Sima as appropriate.

古文：时属广明庚子之后，刘巨容起徐将，得襄阳，不能知磻叟，待以巡属一州佐耳。磻叟沿汉南下，中途与巨容幕吏书云：已出无礼之乡，渐入逍遥之境。
现代文：刘巨容攻占襄阳，不知道磻叟的下落，要各地都寻找他这个州佐。此时磻叟已沿汉水南下，中途他写给了刘巨容的幕吏一封信说：已出无礼之乡，渐入逍遥之境。
English: Liu Jue Rong captured Yangyang, and did not know the whereabouts of Zhai, and asked all regions to look for him, the vice-governor of the state. At this time, Zhai had gone south along the Han River. Halfway, he wrote a letter to Liu Jue Rong's official of the shogunate, saying, "I have left the land of disrespect and gradually entered the land of freedom."

古文：巨容得之大怒，遣步健十余辈，移牒潭鄂，追捕磻叟。
现代文：刘巨容得到此信后大怒，派遣十几名善行的兵卒，赶到潭、鄂之地，去追捕磻叟。
English: After receiving this letter, Liu Juroong was furious and sent more than a dozen good soldiers to catch the cormorant.

古文：时天下丧乱，无人为堤防，既而为卒伍所凌。
现代文：当时天下大乱，处处都没有管束防卫，兵卒们很快便追近了他。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, there was no defense everywhere, and the soldiers soon caught up with him.

古文：全家泝汉，至贾垽后，门三十余口，无噍类矣。薛能
现代文：此时他的全家也逆汉水而上去迎他，行到贾垽后，共三十多口人，没有一个能活下来的。薛能
English: At this time, his whole family also went up against the Han River to meet him. After going to Jia Ye, a total of more than thirty people, none of whom could survive.

古文：薛能，会昌间进士，自负过高，从事西川日，每短诸葛功业，为诗曰：阵图谁许可，庙貌我揶揄。
现代文：薛能，会昌年间中的进士。自以为很了不起，在西川任从事时，经常诋毁诸葛亮的功业。他写诗道：阵图谁许可，庙貌我揶揄。
English: Xue Neng, a member of the middle years of Huichang. He thought he was very great, and when he was engaged in Nishikawa, he often slandered Zhuge Liang's work. He wrote a poem: "Whoever permits the formation, the temple looks like me."

古文：又云：焚却蜀书宜不读，武侯无可律吾身。
现代文：又写道：焚却蜀书宜不读，武侯无可律吾身。
English: He also wrote: it is better not to read books that have been burned, for the Wuhou cannot be disciplined.

古文：讥李白曰：我生若在开元日，争遣名为李翰林。
现代文：讥讽李白道：我生若在开元日，争遣名为李翰林。
English: Li Bai scoffed: If I were born on the first day of the year, my name would be Li Hanlin.

古文：又曰：李白终无取，陶潜固不刊。
现代文：又道：李白终无取，陶潜固不同。
English: He also said that Li Bai ultimately failed to win, and the pottery potential was different.

古文：自题其集云：诗源何代失澄清，处处狂波污后生。
现代文：在自己的诗文集上题诗道：诗源何代史澄清，处处狂波污后生。
English: On his poetry anthology, he inscribed the following poem: "How many generations of history have clarified the source of poetry, and how many waves of pollution have arisen everywhere."

古文：常感道孤吟有泪，却缘风坏语无情。
现代文：常感道孤吟有泪，却缘风坏语无情。
English: I often feel lonely singing with tears, but the wind and bad words are merciless.

古文：难甘恶少欺韩信，枉被诸侯杀祢衡。
现代文：难甘恶少欺韩信，枉被诸侯杀祢衡。
English: It is hard not to be deceived by Han Xin, who was unjustly killed by the princes.

古文：纵到缑山也无益，四方联络尽蛙声。
现代文：纵到缑山也无益，四方联络尽蛙声。
English: Even going as far as Lushan is of no use. All contacts between the four sides are futile.

古文：放诞如此。
现代文：竟然轻浮虚妄到如此地步。
English: It was so frivolous and pretentious.

古文：后军乱被害。
现代文：后来因军队叛乱而被杀。
English: He was later killed in an army mutiny.

古文：薛能以文章自负，而累出戎镇，常郁郁叹息，因有《谢诗淮南寄天柱茶》。其落句云：粗官乞与直抛却，赖有诗情合得尝。
现代文：薛能以其文章写的好而很自负，曾多次出任各地军府，经常抑郁寡欢叹息不已。他曾写过一首诗为《谢淮南寄天柱荣》，诗的最后两句写道：粗官乞与直抛却，赖有诗情合得尝。
English: Xue Neng was very proud of the quality of his writing. He had served in various military offices many times, and was often depressed and depressed. He once wrote a poem called "Xie Huainan Sending Tianzhu Rong," and the last two sentences of the poem read: "Bullish official begging and straight-up abandonment depend on the poetry to match."

古文：意以节将为粗官也。
现代文：意思是节度使也不过是粗官罢了。
English: It means that the person in charge is nothing more than a low-ranking official.

古文：镇许昌日，幕吏咸集，因令其子橐鞬参诸幕客，幕客惊怪。能曰：俾渠消灾。
现代文：在他镇守许昌时，把幕府的官吏们都召集在一起，于是命令他的儿子穿戴成武将的装束参拜各位幕客，幕客很觉惊异奇怪，薛能说：这是让他消灾。
English: When he was in charge of Xu Chang, he gathered together all the officials of the shogunate, and ordered his son to dress up as a military commander to pay homage to all the shogunate guests. The shogunate guests were very surprised and surprised, and Xue Neng said: This is for him to eliminate the disaster.

古文：时人以为轻薄。
现代文：当时人们认为他很轻薄。
English: At the time, people thought he was a lightweight.

古文：高逢休
现代文：高逢休
English: Mid-Autumn Festival

古文：顾云，大顺中，制同羊昭业等十人修史。
现代文：顾云，唐大顺年间，皇帝诏命他与羊昭业等十人撰写史书。
English: During the Gu Yun and Tang Daxun years, the emperor ordered him and ten other people, including Yang Zhaoye, to write a history book.

古文：云在江淮，遇高逢休谏议。时刘子长仆射清名雅誉，弃塞缙绅，其弟崇望复在中书。
现代文：顾云在江淮遇见谏议大夫高逢休，当时仆射刘子长高洁美好的声誉充满了整个士大夫阶层，他的弟弟崇望又在中书省。
English: Gu Yun met Dr. Gao Fenghuai in Jianghuai, when Liu Zichang's good reputation filled the entire scholar-doctor class, and his younger brother, Chongwang, was in China's Book Province.

古文：云以逢休与子长旧交，将造门，希致先容，逢休许之久矣。云临期请书，逢休授之一函，甚草创。云微有惑，因潜起阅之。
现代文：顾云因为知道高逢休与刘子长是老朋友，他想要去登门拜访刘子长，希望高逢休先给刘子长写封信引介一下，高逢休答应好长时间了，顾云临行前请他快把引介信写来，高逢休使给了他一封，但是很潦草不庄重，顾云有些疑惑，于是躲起来偷偷地阅读。
English: Because Gu Yun knew Gao Fengxiu and Liu Zichang were old friends, he wanted to visit Liu Zichang. He hoped Gao Fengxiu would first write a letter of introduction to Liu Zichang. Gao Fengxiu had promised for a long time. Before Gu Yun left, he asked him to quickly write a letter of introduction. Gao Fengxiu gave him a letter, but it was very scribbled and undignified. Gu Yun had some doubts, so he hid and secretly read it.

古文：凡一幅，并不言云，但曰：羊昭业拟将一尺三寸汗脚，踏他烧残龙尾道。
现代文：只见满篇信纸上，并未谈顾云，而只写道：羊昭业打算用他一尺三寸的汗脚，又去走那条已被他烧毁了的通向皇宫的龙尾道。
English: On a full sheet of letter paper, he did not talk about Gu Yun, but only wrote: Yang Zhaoye intends to use his one-foot-three-inch sweaty feet to walk the Dragon Trail to the Imperial Palace that he has burned.

古文：懿宗皇帝虽薄德，不任被前件人罗织。
现代文：懿宗皇帝虽然缺少德行，但也不能让上述那个人任意虚构罪名。
English: Although Emperor Yeongjong lacked virtue, he could not allow the above-mentioned person to fabricate charges arbitrarily.

古文：执大政者亦大悠悠。
现代文：掌大权的人也应该从大处去看。
English: Those in power should also look at the bigger picture.

古文：云吁叹而已。
现代文：顾云看后只能感叹而已。
English: Gu Yun could only sigh after watching it.

古文：汲师
现代文：汲师
English: Kushin-zome

古文：汲师，滑州人也。自溧水尉拜监察御史。
现代文：汲师，滑州人，是由漂水县尉提拔为监察御史的。
English: Kishi, a resident of Namerik, was promoted to inspector general of history by the lieutenant of Fusui County.

古文：时大夫李乾佑为万年令。师按县狱，乾佑差池而晚出，师怒，不顾而出。
现代文：当时大夫李乾佑任万年县令，汲师去巡视万年县的监狱，乾佑因出现差错而出迎迟了，汲师很生气，没有去看望他便走了。
English: At that time, doctor Li Qianyou was the county magistrate of Wannian County, and he went to inspect the prison of Wannian County. Qianyou was late to meet him due to an error, and he was very angry and left without visiting him.

古文：衔之。
现代文：乾佑记恨在心。
English: It's good to keep grudges in mind.

古文：乾佑寻巡察。
现代文：乾佑不久也到各地去巡察。
English: Soon, Qian You also went to inspect various places.

古文：韦务静与师乡里，充乾佑判官。
现代文：韦务静与汲师是同乡，他在乾佑手下任判官。
English: Wei Wujing was a fellow villager of Kui Shi, and he served as a judge under Qian You.

古文：会制书拜乾佑中丞，乾佑顾谓务静曰：邑子可出矣，足下可入矣。
现代文：这时正好皇帝下诏任命李乾佑为御史中丞，他对韦务静说：你的同乡该下去了，你应该上来了。
English: At this time, the emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Li Qianyou as the vice-chairman of the imperial history commission. He said to Wei Mujing: Your fellow countryman should go down, you should come up.

古文：遂左授新乐令。
现代文：于是汲师被降职为新乐县令。
English: As a result, Kishi was demoted to the post of Shinrae County magistrate.

古文：性躁率，时直长李冲寂，即高宗从弟也，微有犯。
现代文：汲师的性格浮躁而轻率，在他担任监察御史时，直长李冲寂，即唐高宗的从弟，犯了些小过错，汲师便要弹劾他并告诉他。
English: Ku Shi's character was impetuous and imprudent. When he was in charge of supervising the imperial history, the immediate chief Li Chongjia, the younger brother of Tang Gaozong, made some minor mistakes, and Ku Shi wanted to impeach him and tell him.

古文：师将弹而谓之，呼冲寂为弟。
现代文：他称呼冲寂为弟。
English: He called Chongjia his younger brother.

古文：冲寂为之曰：冲寂主上从弟，公姓汲，于皇家何亲，而见呼为弟？
现代文：冲寂对他说：我是皇上的从弟，你姓汲，与皇家是什么亲戚，见面就称我为弟呢？
English: Chongzhang said to him, "I am the emperor's younger brother. What is your surname, and what is your relation to the emperor? When you meet him, will you call me your younger brother?"

古文：师惭而止。
现代文：汲师很惭愧而不再弹劾冲寂了。
English: The teacher was very ashamed and no longer impeached.

古文：尝监享太庙，责署官，将弹之。
现代文：他还曾去监察过太庙的祭祀活动，他斥责了那里的官员，并要对他进行弹劾。
English: He had also gone to supervise the sacrificial activities of the Imperial Temple, he rebuked the officials there, and wanted to impeach him.

古文：署官彻晓伺其失，汲履赤舄如厕，共讦之，乃止。
现代文：那里的官员通宵侦查他的过失，汲师穿着红鞋去过厕所，太庙的官员一起揭发了此事，他才不得不停止对太庙官员的弹劾。
English: The officials there investigated his fault all night long, the teacher went to the toilet wearing red shoes, the officials of the Great Temple jointly exposed the matter, and he had to stop the impeachment of the officials of the Great Temple.

古文：崔骈
现代文：崔骈
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：李德裕退朝归第，多与亲表裴璟无间破体笑，与李多询以内外新事。
现代文：李德裕退朝回到家里，常常与表弟裴璟不时开怀谈笑，李德裕多是问一些朝野内外的新鲜事。
English: When Li Deyu returned home after retiring from the imperial court, he often talked and laughed with his cousin Pei Jun from time to time. Li Deyu mostly asked about some new things in and out of the court.

古文：李问更有何说，裴曰：别无新事，但昨日坡下郎官集送某郎官出牧江湖，饮饯邮亭，人客甚众。有仓部白员外末至，崔骈郎中作录事，下四筹。
现代文：这一天李又问还有什么事值得一说的，裴璟道：别的倒没什么新鲜事了，但是昨天坡下的郎官们一起欢送某郎官出任江湖刺史，他们在驿馆为他饯行，去的人很多，有个仓部的白员外迟到，当时郎中崔骈做监督大家饮酒的录事，便罚他连干四杯。
English: On this day, Li also asked what else was worth mentioning. Pei Xuan said, "Other than that, there is nothing new. However, yesterday, the vassals of the slope were together to send off a certain vassal to serve as a charlatan. They marched for him in the pavilion. There were many people who went. There was a white clerk from the warehouse who was late. At that time, the vassal Choi Xuan was supervising the recording of everyone's drinking, and he was fined four cups.

古文：白自以卑秩，人乘凌兢，更不敢固辞。
现代文：白本来觉得自己官职低，受到人们的欺压自然是战战兢兢，更不敢太推辞。
English: Bai originally felt that his official position was low, and he was naturally wary of being bullied by people, and he did not dare to refuse.

古文：上次酌四大器，白连引三器讫，余一持之，而请第四器名。
现代文：依次给他倒满了四大杯，白连饮三杯后，端起了剩余的一杯，请求说明罚这第四杯的含义。
English: He was given four cups in succession. After drinking three cups in succession, Bai took the remaining cup and asked for an explanation of the meaning of the fourth cup.

古文：崔郎中云。亦别无事，但何必要到处出脱。
现代文：崔郎中道：别的事倒也没有什么，可你何必要到处出卖自己呢？
English: Cui Langzhong: There is nothing else, but why do you have to sell yourself everywhere?

古文：时白踉跄仆于下座，竟不饮而去。
现代文：当时白员外便踉跄倒在座位上，没有喝这杯酒便走了。
English: At that time, the white employee fell down on the seat and left without drinking the glass of wine.

古文：坐上有笑者，有缩颈者，但不知此官人今日起得否？
现代文：在坐的人有的大笑，有的畏缩。只是不知这个官人今天还能不能挺得住。
English: Some of the people sitting there laughed out loud, others cringed. I just don't know if this official can stand it today.

古文：李闻之大怒，曰：何由何耐，不斯言必有之乎？
现代文：李德裕一听大怒道：还有什么能比此更难令人忍受的，不知道你所说的是否确有其事？裴璟道：确实。
English: Upon hearing this, Li Deyu said angrily, "What could be more unbearable than this, not knowing if what you said is true?" Pei Xin said, "It is true."

古文：曰：固然。又问弟知白员外所止否，璟曰：是人在某坊某曲。
现代文：他又问裴璟知不知白员外的住处，裴璟道：此人住在某坊某偏僻之处。
English: He also asked Pei Jun if he knew the whereabouts of the unknown white man. Pei Jun said: This person lives in a certain village in a certain remote place.

古文：李曰：为某传语白员外，请至宅。
现代文：李德裕道：你去把我的话告诉白员外，请他到我家来趟。
English: Li Deyu said, "Go and tell my words to the white man, and ask him to come to my house."

古文：白捧命又忧恐，比至，李曰：久欲从容，中外事併，然旬朔不要出人事。
现代文：白员外接到通知后很忧惧，等他到来时，李德裕道：很久就想要对官员作些调整调动了，朝内朝外要一併考虑，在十天或一个月之内便会有人事变动。
English: When he arrived, Li Deyu said: It has been a long time since I wanted to make some adjustments to the officials. It is necessary to consider both inside and outside the DPRK. There will be personnel changes within ten days or one month.

古文：既而白授翰林学士。崔骈汾州刺史，续改洺州刺史，流落外任，不复更游郎署。
现代文：不久白员外被授予翰林学士，崔骈被任命为洺州刺史，任满后又续任为洺州刺史，一直流落在外地任职，没有再回到郎官的官署。
English: Soon after, Bai Jianwei was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate, and Cui Jianwei was appointed as the official historian of Zhangzhou. After his term of office expired, he was reappointed as the official historian of Zhangzhou. He has been working abroad and has not returned to the official office of his stepfather.

古文：终鸿胪卿。
现代文：临终前任鸿胪卿。
English: On his deathbed, his predecessor, Lord Hung Hom, passed away.

古文：西川人
现代文：西川人
English: People from Nishikawa

古文：蜀东、西川之人，常互相轻薄。
现代文：在蜀地，东川西川的人经常互相轻视刻薄。
English: In Shunde, the people of the East River and the West River often despise each other.

古文：西川人言：梓州者，乃我东门之草市也，岂得与我为耦哉？
现代文：西川有人说：梓州不过是我东门之外的集市。怎么能与我西川相提并论呢？
English: Some people in Xichuan said: "Zizhou is just a bazaar outside my east gate. How can it be compared to my Xichuan?"

古文：节度柳仲郢闻之，为幕客曰：吾立朝三十年，清华备历，今日始得与西川作市令。
现代文：节度使柳仲郢听到此话后，对幕客说：我在朝中从政三十年。历任过各种清高显贵的官职，今日才有幸在西川做了个集市令。
English: After hearing this, the festival master, Liu Zhongyao, said to the audience: "I have been in politics for thirty years in the Joseon Dynasty. I have held various high-ranking official positions, and today I have the honor of serving as a market marshal in Nishikawa.

古文：闻者皆笑之。
现代文：听到人都一起大笑。
English: I heard everyone laughing together.

古文：故世言东、西两川人多轻薄。
现代文：所以世人都说东西两川人都很轻薄。
English: That's why people say that people from both sides of the river are very thin-skinned.

古文：河中幕客
现代文：河中幕客
English: A guest in the middle of the river

古文：相国刘瞻父景，连州人，少为汉南郑司徒掌牋奏，因题商山驿侧泉石，郑大奇之。
现代文：宰相刘瞻，父亲名景，连州人。年轻时在汉南郑司徒幕府执掌表奏之事。他曾在商山驿站旁的泉石上题词，郑司徒看见后十分惊异，勉励他不断进取，并换上朝服拿着礼品去驿站会见他。
English: Prime Minister Liu Zhan, whose father was a famous person from Lianzhou, when he was young, he was in charge of table music in the Han Nan Zheng Sittu Shogunate. He once wrote an inscription on the spring stone next to the Shangshan Railway Station. Zheng Sittu was very surprised when he saw it and encouraged him to continue to make progress. He also changed into a royal robe and took a gift to meet him at the railway station.

古文：勉以进修，俾前驿换麻衣执贽见之，后致解荐，擢进士第，历台省。
现代文：后来被推荐，考中了进士，先后在中书、门下、尚书等各台省任过职。
English: Later, he was recommended, passed the entrance examination, and successively held positions in various provinces such as Zhongshu, Menxia, and Shangshu.

古文：瞻孤平有艺，虽登第，不预急流。
现代文：刘瞻孤单贫寒但很有才能，他虽考中了进士，但并没有急流猛进。
English: Liu Zhan was lonely, poor, but very talented. Although he passed the entrance examination, he did not make rapid progress.

古文：任大理评事，日饘粥不给。尝于安国寺相识僧处求餐，留所业文数轴置在僧几。致仕军容刘玄翼游寺，见瞻文卷，甚奇之，怜其贫窭，厚有济恤。
现代文：在担任大理评事时，每天连顿稠一点的粥喝不上，曾到安国寺一个认识的和尚那里去求食，把自己写作的数卷文章放在了和尚的桌子上，已经退体的原观军容使刘玄翼来游寺，看见了刘瞻的作品，很惊奇。他很怜悯刘瞻的贫寒，给了他很多救济，又知他是连山人，年龄尚不到四十，朝廷还没有重用。
English: When he was a commentator of Dali, he couldn't even drink thicker porridge every day. He once went to a monk he knew at Anguo Temple to ask for food. He placed several volumes of articles he had written on the monk's table. Liu Xuan Ying was surprised to see the works of Liu Zhan when he visited the temple. He was very sympathetic to Liu Zhan's poverty and gave him a lot of relief. He also knew that he was a mountaineer, less than forty years old, and had not been used by the imperial court.

古文：一旦有命征人。府尹祖之，前之轻薄幕客呼瞻为尹公。曰：归朝作何官职？瞻对曰：得路即作宰相。
现代文：有一天突然皇帝下诏召他入朝做官，府尹为他举行了隆重饯行仪式，从前那些轻视他的幕客都称做为尹公，问他说：到朝廷里做什么官？刘瞻答道：得到官职就做宰相。
English: One day, the emperor suddenly issued an imperial edict summoning him to join the imperial court as an official, and the government held a grand welcoming ceremony for him. Former guests who despised him were called Yin Gong. They asked him, "What kind of official do you want to be in the imperial court?" Liu Zhan replied, "When I get an official post, I will be the prime minister."

古文：同舍郎大笑之，在席也有异其言者。
现代文：与他同住一起的人都大笑，在坐的人也有不相信他的话的。
English: People who live with him burst out laughing, and those who were sitting there didn't believe him either.

古文：瞻自是以水部员外知制诰，旋入翰林，以致大拜也。
现代文：刘瞻很快便从水部员外升任为知制诰，旋即又进入翰林院，直至授以大任。
English: Liu Zhan was quickly promoted from a member of the Ministry of Water Resources to the position of chief magistrate, and then immediately entered the Hanlin Academy, until he was given a higher position.

古文：崔昭符
现代文：崔昭符
English: Choi Chao-Fu

古文：皮日休，南海郑愚门生。
现代文：皮日休，是南海郑愚的门生。
English: Pi Rixiu is a disciple of Nanhai Zhengwu.

古文：春关内尝寓于曲江，醉寝于别榻。衣囊书笥，罗列傍侧，率皆新饰。
现代文：他去考进士尚未放榜发证之前，曾在曲江参加一次宴会，结果喝得大醉而睡在了别处，把装衣裳的袋子和装书的箱子都堆放在床上，这些东西都是他新置装饰品。
English: He went to a banquet in Qujiang before he took the entrance examination and got drunk and slept elsewhere, piling bags of clothes and boxes of books on the bed, all of which were his new decorations.

古文：同年崔昭符，镣之子，固蔑视之矣，亦醉。
现代文：同科进士崔昭符，即崔镣的儿子，因此很蔑视他，其实他也喝醉了。
English: His classmate Cui Zhaofu, Cui Yao's son, despised him for this, but he was also drunk.

古文：更衣见日休，谓其素所熟狎者，即伺问，且欲戏之。
现代文：他去换衣裳的时候看见了皮日休，他觉得皮日休是平素所熟悉亲密的人，就在那里守候，并想要戏弄他。
English: When he went to change his clothes, he saw Pih-hsiu. He thought that Pih-hsiu was someone he knew intimately. He was waiting there and wanted to tease him.

古文：日休僮仆遽前欲呼之。昭符之其日休也，曰：勿呼之，渠方宗会矣，以其囊笥皆皮也。
现代文：皮日休的僮信急忙上前要叫醒他，崔昭符走到日休跟前，说：不要叫他了，他正在与家人相会呢。
English: Kijikyu's messenger hurried forward to wake him, and Cui Zhaofu walked up to him and said, "Don't call him, he's meeting his family."

古文：时人传之以为口实。
现代文：你看他的衣囊书笥和他一样，全是一层皮囊了。
English: Look at his bag, it's the same as his, it's all a skin bag.

古文：日休尝游汉江间，时刘允章镇江夏。
现代文：那时的人们把此事当做了谈论资料流传开。日休曾游历于长江汉水之间，当时刘允章镇守江夏。
English: At that time, people talked about the matter as if they had done it, and the information was spread. Nichiyu had traveled between the Yangtze River and the Han River, when Liu Yunzhang was in charge of the Xia River.

古文：幕中有穆判官员，允章亲也，或谮日休薄焉。
现代文：幕府中有个穆判官，是刘允章的亲戚，他对刘允章说了日休的坏话，说他鄙薄自己。
English: There was a magistrate in the shogunate who was a relative of Liu Yunzhang. He spoke ill of Liu Yunzhang and said that he despised himself.

古文：允章素使酒，一日方宴，忽怒曰：君何以薄穆判官乎？
现代文：刘允章平时常饮酒，有一天刚刚开宴，忽然大怒道：你为什么看不起穆判官？
English: Liu Yunzhang usually drinks a lot. One day, just after a banquet, he suddenly became very angry and said, "Why do you look down on Judge Mu?

古文：君知身知所来否？
现代文：你知道你来的是什么地方吗？
English: Do you know where you came from?

古文：鹦鹉洲在此，即黄祖沈祢衡之所也。
现代文：鹦鹉洲就在此处，就是当年黄祖把祢衡推下水淹死的地方！
English: Parrot Island is right here, the place where Huang Zu pushed You Heng under the water and drowned him!

古文：一席为之惧，日休南涕而已。
现代文：全席人都脸露惧色，皮日休只好泣而南行了。
English: All the people in the audience were scared, and Pih-hiyu had no choice but to cry and go south.

古文：又一说东都留守刘允章，文学之宗，气颇高介。后进循常之士，罕有敢及门者。
现代文：又还有一种说法，说东都留守刘允章，是当时的文学泰斗，气度十分高傲，晚辈中平常的读书人，很少有敢去登门拜访的。
English: There is also a saying that Liu Yunzhang, who stayed in Dongdu, was a literary hero at that time. He was very proud. Among the younger generation, few ordinary readers dared to visit his house.

古文：咸通中，自礼部侍郎授鄂州观察使。
现代文：咸通年间，由礼部侍郎调任鄂州观察使。
English: During the Hamdong period, he was transferred from the etiquette officer to the Ezhou observation envoy.

古文：明年皮日休登第，将归觐于苏台。路由江夏，困投刺焉。刘待之甚厚，至于饔饩有加等。
现代文：第二年皮日休考中了进士，回家的路上想要去看看苏台，路经江夏时，便递上名帖去拜见刘允章，刘允章待他很宽厚，是以宰杀牲畜这样的大礼接待他的。
English: In the second year, he passed the entrance examination on the second day of the year, and on his way home, he wanted to visit the Sudai region. When he passed the Jiangxia River, he handed in a famous postcard to meet Liu Yunzhang. Liu Yunzhang treated him very generously, and received him with a great gift such as slaughtering livestock.

古文：留连累日。仍致宴于黄鹤楼以命之，监军使与参佐悉集后，日休方赴召，已酒酣矣。既登楼，刘以其末至，复乘酒应命，心薄之。
现代文：日休在这里逗留了些时间，有一天刘允章在黄鹤楼设宴并邀请他参加，监军使和参佐等人都到来后，日休才到，而且已经喝醉了，等他登上楼，刘允章便因他迟到，又带着酒气赴命，心里也很鄙视他。
English: Nichiyu stayed here for some time. One day, Liu Yunzhang held a banquet in Huanghe Tower and invited him to attend. After the supervising envoy and the staff officer and others arrived, Nichiyu arrived, and he was already drunk. When he got upstairs, Liu Yunzhang despised him because he was late and died with alcohol breath.

古文：及酒数行，而日休吐论纷扰，顿亡礼敬。
现代文：等到酒过数巡，日休便开始语无伦次，也立刻忘掉礼节。
English: By the time the wine has been drunk several times, they begin to be incoherent and immediately forget etiquette.

古文：刘作色谓曰：吴儿勿恃蕞尔之子，且可主席。
现代文：刘允章面露不悦地对他说道：吴地的小儿，不要仗着自己是那个小地方的才子，就要作这里的主席！
English: Liu Yunzhang looked displeased and said to him: "Younger son of Wu, don't rely on yourself as the talent of that small place, you should be the chairman here!

古文：日休答曰：大夫岂南岳诸刘乎。
现代文：日休回答说：大夫难道是南岳那个姓刘的吗？
English: Nichiyu replied, "Is the doctor Nangyue, surnamed Liu?"

古文：何倨贵如是。
现代文：为何这般显贵傲慢！
English: Why such pompous arrogance!

古文：刘大怒，戟手遥指而诟曰：皮日休，知鹦鹉洲是祢衡死处无？
现代文：刘允章大怒，用两个手指指点着他骂道：皮日休！你知不知道鹦鹉洲是祢衡死的地方？
English: Liu Yunzhang was furious, pointing at him with two fingers and cursing: "Fur days off! Don't you know that Cockatoo Island is the place where You died?

古文：日休不敢答，但嵬峨如醉，掌客者扶出。
现代文：日休不敢回答，只见他如喝醉了一样摇摇欲坠，掌管接待的人立即把他搀扶出去。
English: Daybreak didn't dare to answer, only to see him staggering as if he were drunk, and the person in charge of the reception immediately helped him out.

古文：翌日微服而遁于浙左。
现代文：第二天他便换了便装逃到浙江之左。
English: The next day, he changed into civilian clothes and fled to Zhejiang Province.

古文：温定
现代文：温定
English: Temperature control

古文：乾符四年，新进士曲江春宴。甲于常年。
现代文：唐朝乾符四年，新榜进士在曲江举行宴会，这次宴会要好于往年。
English: In the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty, the New Pan Jinji held a banquet in Qujiang. This banquet was better than in previous years.

古文：有温定者，久困场籍，坦率自恣，尤愤时之浮薄，因设奇以侮之。
现代文：有个叫温定的，已经多次困扰于科举考场了。此人坦直而无拘无束，尤其对当时的轻浮风气十分气愤，于是想出一个奇妙的办法想要羞辱一下那些轻浮者们。
English: There was a man named Wending, who had been troubled by the entrance examination for the imperial examinations many times. This man was straightforward and unrestrained, especially angry at the frivolous culture of the time, so he came up with a wonderful way to humiliate those frivolous people.

古文：至其日，蒙衣肩舆，金翠之饰，夐出于众，侍婢皆称是，徘徊于柳荫之下。
现代文：到了春宴那天，他穿上毛衣乘坐着轿舆，并用金银首饰装点了一番，便远远地出现在众人前方，带来的婢奴们也都应诺称是，在柳荫下漫步徘徊。
English: On the day of the spring banquet, he put on a sweater and rode in a sedan chair, and decorated it with gold and silver jewelry, and then appeared far in front of everyone. The servants he brought also promised to be there, and wandered around in the willow shade.

古文：俄顷诸公自露棚移乐登鷁首。
现代文：很快那些公子哥们都从露棚中出来登上了船头。
English: Soon all the boys came out of the pavilion and boarded the bow.

古文：既而谓是豪贵，其中姝丽必矣，因遣促舟而进，莫不注视于此，或肆调谑不已。
现代文：继而说轿舆必是来自豪门显贵之家，里边必定是坐着一个美人，于是催促船只快些向那里驶进，所有人的目光没有不注视着那里的，有的人甚至不住地调笑戏谑。
English: He went on to say that the saloon must have come from a great and illustrious family, and that a beautiful woman must be sitting inside, so he urged the ships to sail there faster. No one's eyes did not look there, and some people even kept joking and joking.

古文：群兴方酣，定乃于帘间垂足定膝，胫极伟而长毳，众忽睹之，皆掩袂亟命回舟避之。
现代文：正当他们兴致酣畅的时候，温定便把腿脚从帘子里伸出来，那截小腿极粗壮并长满了长毛，众人突然看到这样一条腿，都用衣袖掩起面孔并命令赶快调回船头躲避开。
English: Just when they were in high spirits, Wen Ding stretched out his legs and feet from the curtain. The calf was very thick and full of long hair. When everyone suddenly saw such a leg, they all covered their faces with their sleeves and ordered to quickly move back to the bow of the ship to avoid it.

古文：或曰：此必温定也。
现代文：有人说：这个人肯定是温定。
English: Some people say: This person must be a warmonger.

