古文：武王胜殷，杀受，立武庚，以箕子归。作《洪范》。
现代文：周武王战胜了殷纣王，杀了纣王，立武庚，把纣王的庶兄箕子迎接回来。作《洪范》。
English: King Zhou Wu defeated King Yin Zang, killed King Zang, and set up Wu Geng to welcome back Zang Wang's half-brother Zang Zang. For "Hong Fan."

古文：惟十有三祀，王访于箕子。
现代文：周武王十三年，武王询问箕子。
English: In the thirteenth year of King Zhou Wu, King Wu inquired about the mule.

古文：王乃言曰： 呜呼！
现代文：武王就说道： 啊！
English: King Wu said: Ah!

古文：箕子。惟天阴骘下民，相协厥居，我不知其彝伦攸叙。 
现代文：箕子，上天庇荫安定下民，使他们和谐共处，我不知道那治国的常理究竟有哪些？ 
English: I don't know what the common sense of governing a country is, but I do know that Heaven protects and stabilizes the people under Heaven so that they can coexist harmoniously.

古文：箕子乃言曰： 我闻在昔，鲧堙洪水，汩陈其五行。
现代文：箕子就回答说： 我听说从前，鲧采取堵塞方法治理洪水，结果将水、火、木、金、土的排列扰乱了。
English: The mule replied, "I have heard that in the past, the mule used a plugging method to control floods, and as a result, the arrangement of water, fire, wood, gold, and earth was disturbed.

古文：帝乃震怒，不畀 洪范 九畴，彝伦攸斁。
现代文：上天震怒，没有将治国的九种大法赐给鲧，治国的常理因此败坏了。
English: Heaven was outraged and did not bestow the nine great laws of governing the country on Yao, and the common sense of governing the country was thus corrupted.

古文：鲧则殛死，禹乃嗣兴，天乃锡禹 洪范 九畴，彝伦攸叙。
现代文：后来，鲧被流放后死了，禹便继承了他父亲的事业。上天就把九种大法赐给了禹，治国的常理因此定了下来。
English: Later, Zou died after being exiled, and Yu inherited his father's business. Heaven gave the nine great laws to Yu, and the principles for governing the country were thus established.

古文：初一曰五行，次二曰敬用五事，次三曰农用八政，次四曰协用五纪，次五曰建用皇极，次六曰乂用三德，次七曰明用稽疑，次八曰念用庶征，次九曰向用五福，威用六极。一、五行：一曰水，二曰火，三曰木，四曰金，五曰土。水曰润下，火曰炎上，木曰曲直，金曰从革，土爰稼穑。
现代文：第六是治理使用三种品德的人。第七是用卜筮来排除疑惑。第八是经常注意使用各种征兆。第九是凭五福鼓励臣民，凭六极警戒臣民。一、五行：一是水，二是火，三是木，四是金，五是土。水向下润湿，火向上燃烧，木可以弯曲伸直，金属可以顺从人的要求改变形状，土可以种植百谷。
English: The sixth is to govern those who use the three virtues. The seventh is to use divination to eliminate doubts. The eighth is to always pay attention to the use of various signs. The ninth is to use the five blessings to encourage subjects, and the six poles to alert subjects. One, five elements: one is water, two is fire, three is wood, four is gold, and five is earth. Water wets down, fire burns up, wood can bend and straighten, metal can change shape according to people's requirements, and earth can be planted.

古文：润下作咸，炎上作苦，曲直作酸，从革作辛，稼穑作甘。
现代文：向下润湿的水产生咸味，向上燃烧的火产生苦味，可曲可直的木产生酸味，顺从人意而改变形状的金属产生辣味，种植的百谷产生甜味。
English: Moisturizing the substrate to produce leeches have a salty taste, the fire rising from the charred object for the bitter taste, wood straight for the sour taste, the gold pins melted deformation has a spicy taste, the land reclamation hundred grains have a sweet taste.

古文：二、五事：一曰貌，二曰言，三曰视，四曰听，五曰思。
现代文：二、五事：一是态度，二是言论，三是观察，四是听闻，五是思考。
English: Two, five things: one is attitude, two is speech, three is observation, four is hearing, and five is thinking.

古文：貌曰恭，言曰从，视曰明，听曰聪，思曰睿。
现代文：态度要恭敬，言论要正当，观察要明白，听闻要广远，思考要通达。
English: Appearance is called qing, speech is called zhu, speech is called ming, hearing is called zhu, and thinking is called rui.

古文：恭作肃，从作乂，明作哲，聪作谋，睿作圣。
现代文：容貌恭敬就能严肃，言论正当就能治理，观察明白就能昭晰，听闻广远就能善谋，思考通达就能圣明。
English: Respectful and sober, from life and righteousness, bright and wise, clever and wise, wise and holy.

古文：三、八政：一曰食，二曰货，三曰祀，四曰司空，五曰司徒，六曰司寇，七曰宾，八曰师。
现代文：三、八种政务：一是管理粮食，二是管理财货，三是管理祭祀，四是管理居民，五是管理教育，六是治理盗贼，七是管理朝觐，八是管理军事。
English: Three, eight kinds of government affairs: the first is the management of grain, the second is the management of goods, the third is the management of sacrifices, the fourth is the management of residents, the fifth is the management of education, the sixth is the management of thieves, the seventh is the management of pilgrimage, and the eighth is the management of military affairs.

古文：四、五纪：一曰岁，二曰月，三曰日，四曰星辰，五曰历数。
现代文：四、五种记时方法：一是年，二是月，三是日，四是星辰的出现情况，五是日月运行所经历的周天度数。
English: There are four or five methods of recording time: the first is the year, the second is the month, the third is the day, the fourth is the appearance of stars, and the fifth is the number of days of the week experienced by the sun and moon.

古文：五、皇极：皇建其有极。
现代文：五、君王的统治准则：君王应该建立至高无上的原则。
English: Fifth, the rule of the king: the king should establish the principle of supremacy.

古文：敛时五福，用敷锡厥庶民。
现代文：掌握五福，用来普遍地赏赐给臣民。
English: Master the five blessings, and use them to reward your subjects universally.

古文：惟时厥庶民于汝极。
现代文：这样，臣民就会拥护最高的法则。
English: In this way, the subjects will uphold the highest law.

古文：锡汝保极：凡厥庶民，无有淫朋，人无有比德，惟皇作极。
现代文：向贡献您保持法则的方法：凡是臣下不允许结党营私，百官不能有私相比附的行为，必须将天子指定的法则视为最高准则。
English: The way to keep the law to your contribution: All subjects are not allowed to form a party to fight against me, and all officials must not behave like me, and must regard the law designated by the Son of Heaven as the highest standard.

古文：凡厥庶民，有猷有为有守，汝则念之。
现代文：凡是臣下有计谋有作为有操守的，您要记着他们。
English: You should keep in mind all your subordinates who have strategies and conduct themselves with integrity.

古文：不协于极，不罹于咎，皇则受之。而康而色，曰： 予攸好德。 
现代文：行为不合法则，但没有犯罪的人，你就宽恕他们；假若他们和悦温顺地说： 我遵行美德。 
English: But if any have done that which is not lawful, but have not sinned, forgive them; and if they say, I will do that which is lawful, forgive them.

古文：汝则锡之福。
现代文：您就赐给他们好处，于是，臣民就会想着最高法则。
English: You give them benefits, and then the subjects think about the supreme law.

古文：时人斯其惟皇之极。无虐茕独而畏高明，人之有能有为，使羞其行，而邦其昌。
现代文：不虐待无依无靠的人，而又不畏显贵，臣下这样有才能有作为，就要让他献出他的才能，国家就会繁荣昌盛。
English: Without mistreating the helpless, and without fearing the dignitaries, if a vassal has such talents and achievements, he must be allowed to offer his talents, and the country will prosper.

古文：凡厥正人，既富方谷，汝弗能使有好于而家，时人斯其辜。
现代文：凡那些百官之长，既然富有经常的俸禄，您不能使他们对国家有好处，于是臣民就要责怪您了。
English: All those centurions, rich as they are with regular salaries, you cannot make them good for the country, so the subjects will blame you.

古文：于其无好德，汝虽锡之福，其作汝用咎。
现代文：对于那些没有好德行的人，您即使赐给他们好处，将会使您受到危害。
English: For those who do not have good morals, even if you give them benefits, you will be harmed.

古文：无偏无陂，遵王之义；无有作好，遵王之道；无有作恶，遵王之路。
现代文：不要不平，不要不正，要遵守王令；不要作私好，要遵守王道；不要作威恶，要遵行正路。
English: Don't be unfair, don't be unjust, but obey the king's command. Don't be selfish, but obey the king's command. Don't be a bully, but follow the right path.

古文：无偏无党，王道荡荡；无党无偏，王道平平；无反无侧，王道正直。
现代文：不要行偏，不要结党，王道坦荡；不要结党，不要行偏，王道平平；不要违反，不要倾侧，王道正直。
English: Don't be biased, don't be partisan, the royal road is smooth; don't be partisan, don't be biased, the royal road is smooth; don't violate, don't be biased, the royal road is honest.

古文：会其有极，归其有极。
现代文：团结那些守法之臣，归附那些执法之君。
English: If you gather those who act according to principle, then your subjects will be able to return to your principles.

古文：曰：皇，极之敷言，是彝是训，于帝其训，凡厥庶民，极之敷言，是训是行，以近天子之光。
现代文：君王，对于皇极的广泛陈述，要宣扬教导，天帝就顺心了。凡是百官，对于皇极的敷言，要遵守实行，用来接近天子的光辉。
English: The king, for the extensive statement of the emperor, should preach and teach, and the emperor will follow his heart. All officials, for the imperial precepts, should abide by and implement, to be used to approach the glory of the heavenly son.

古文：曰：天子作民父母，以为天下王。
现代文：天子作臣民的父母，因此才做天下的君王。
English: The Son of Heaven is the parent of the subjects, and therefore he is the king of the world.

古文：六、三德：一曰正直，二曰刚克，三曰柔克。
现代文：六、三种品德：一是正直，二是过于刚强，三是过于柔弱。
English: Six, three virtues: one is honesty, the second is too strong, and the third is too weak.

古文：平康，正直；强弗友，刚克；燮友，柔克。
现代文：中正和平，就是正直；强不可亲就是刚克；和顺可亲就是柔克。
English: To be neutral and peaceful is to be honest; to be strong but not amiable is to be tough; to be agreeable and amiable is to be soft.

古文：沈潜，刚克；高明，柔克。
现代文：应当抑制刚强不可亲近的人，推崇和顺可亲的人。
English: Those who are tough and unapproachable should be restrained, and those who are agreeable and agreeable should be respected.

古文：惟辟作福，惟辟作威，惟辟玉食。
现代文：只有君王才能作福，只有君王才能作威，只有君王才能享用美物。
English: Only the king can bless, only the king can command, and only the king can enjoy good things.

古文：臣无有作福、作威、玉食。
现代文：臣子不许有作福、作威、美食的情况。
English: A courtier is not allowed to indulge in luxury, arrogance, and extravagant eating.

古文：臣之有作福、作威、玉食，其害于而家，凶于而国。
现代文：假若臣子有作福、作威、美食的情况，就会害及您的家，乱及您的国。
English: If your vassal is indulgent, arrogant, or fond of fine food, it will bring harm to your home and chaos to your country.

古文：人用侧颇僻，民用僭忒。
现代文：百官将因此倾侧不正，百姓也将因此发生差错和疑惑。
English: As a result, officials will be inclined to be dishonest, and people will make mistakes and have doubts.

古文：七、稽疑：择建立卜筮人，乃命卜筮。
现代文：七、用卜筮解决疑惑的方法：选择建立掌管卜筮的官员，教导他们卜筮的方法。
English: Seven, the method of using divination to resolve doubts: select and establish officials in charge of divination and teach them the method of divination.

古文：曰雨，曰霁，曰蒙，曰驿，曰克，曰贞，曰悔，凡七。
现代文：龟兆有的叫做雨，有的叫做霁，有的叫做蒙，有的叫做驿，有的叫做克；卦象有的叫做贞，有的叫做悔，共计有七种。
English: Some turtle signs are called rain, some are called hail, some are called monsoon, some are called hail, and some are called rain; some are called chastity, some are called repentance, and there are a total of seven types.

古文：卜五，占用二，衍忒。
现代文：龟兆用前五种，占筮用后两种，根据这些推演变化，决定吉凶。
English: According to these deduced changes, the first five kinds of gills are used, and the last two kinds are used.

古文：立时人作卜筮，三人占，则从二人之言。
现代文：设立这种官员进行卜筮。三个人占卜，就听从两个人的说法。
English: Let such an one be appointed to practice divination, and if three have divined, let two interpret.

古文：汝则有大疑，谋及乃心，谋及卿士，谋及庶人，谋及卜筮。
现代文：你若有重大的疑难，你自己要考虑，再与卿士商量，再与庶民商量，再与卜筮官员商量。
English: If you have serious doubts, you should think about it yourself, and then consult with the nobles, and then consult with the common people, and then consult with the officials of Buyeo.

古文：汝则从，龟从，筮从，卿士从，庶民从，是之谓大同。
现代文：你自己同意，龟卜同意，筮占同意，卿士同意，庶民同意，这就叫大同。
English: You yourself agree, the tortoise agrees, the hare agrees, the noble agrees, the common people agree, this is called Datong.

古文：身其康强，子孙其逢，吉。
现代文：样，自己的身体会健康强壮，子孙后代也会兴旺大吉。
English: In this way, your own body will be healthy and strong, and future generations will also prosper.

古文：汝则从，龟从，筮从，卿士逆，庶民逆吉。
现代文：你赞同，龟卜赞同，蓍筮赞同，而卿士反对，庶民反对，也吉利。
English: You approve, the turtle approves, the cormorant approves, and the nobles oppose, the common people oppose, it is also auspicious.

古文：卿士从，龟从，筮从，汝则逆，庶民逆，吉。
现代文：卿士赞同，龟卜赞同，蓍筮赞同，你反对，庶民反对，也吉利。
English: The nobles approve, the turtles approve, the cormorants approve, you disapprove, the common people disapprove, it is also auspicious.

古文：庶民从，龟从，筮从，汝则逆，卿士逆，吉。
现代文：庶民赞同，龟卜赞同，蓍筮赞同，你反对，卿士反对，也吉利。
English: The common people approve, the turtle approves, the cormorant approves, you oppose, the noblemen and women oppose, it is also auspicious.

古文：汝则从，龟从，筮逆，卿士逆，庶民逆，作内吉，作外凶。
现代文：你赞同，龟卜赞同，蓍筮反对，卿士反对，庶民反对，在国内行事就吉利，在国外行事就不吉利。
English: You approve, the turtle approves, the toad disapproves, the nobles disapprove, the common people disapprove. It is auspicious to act at home, but it is not auspicious to act abroad.

古文：龟筮共违于人，用静吉，用作凶。
现代文：龟卜、蓍筮都与人意相违，不做事就吉利，做事就凶险。
English: Turtle and tortoise, grass and people's opinions are contrary to each other. If you keep quiet, you will be lucky, but if you act, you will be in danger.

古文：八、庶征：曰雨，曰暘，曰燠，曰寒，曰风。
现代文：八、一些征兆：下雨，天晴，温暖，寒冷，刮风。
English: Eight, some signs: rain, sunny, warm, cold, windy.

古文：曰时五者来备，各以其叙，庶草蕃庑。
现代文：一年中这五种天气齐备，各自按照时序发生，百草与庄稼就会长得很茂盛。
English: These five types of weather are available throughout the year, each occurring in chronological order, and the grasses and crops will grow very lushly.

古文：一极备，凶；一极无，凶。
现代文：一种天气过多就不好；一种天气过少，也不好。
English: Too much of one kind of weather is not good; too little of another is not good.

古文：曰休征；曰肃、时雨若；曰乂，时暘若；曰晰，时燠若；曰谋，时寒若；曰圣，时风若。
现代文：君王行为美好的征兆：一种是严肃恭敬，就像及时降雨的喜人；天下治理得好就好比天气及时晴朗；一种叫做明智，就好比气候及时温暖；一种叫善谋，就像寒冷即将来到；一种叫圣明，就像风及时吹来。
English: The signs of a good king's behavior: one is serious and respectful, like a timely rain; a well-governed world is like a timely sunny weather; one is called wise, like a timely warm weather; one is called good strategy, like a cold is coming; one is called holy, like a timely wind.

古文：曰咎征：曰狂，恒雨若；曰僭，恒暘若；曰豫，恒燠若；曰急，恒寒若；曰蒙，恒风若。
现代文：君王行为坏的征兆：一叫狂妄，就象久雨的愁人；一叫不信，就象久晴的愁人；一叫逸豫，就象久暖的愁人；一叫严急，就象久寒的愁人；一叫昏昧，就象久风的愁人。
English: The signs of a ruler's bad behavior: one is arrogance, like a sad person with a long rain; one is disbelief, like a sad person with a long sunshine; one is hesitation, like a sad person with a long warmth; one is impatience, like a sad person with a long cold; one is dullness, like a sad person with a long wind.

古文：曰王省惟岁，卿士惟月，师尹惟日。
现代文：君王之所视察，就象一年包括四时；卿士就象月，统属于岁；众尹就象日，统属于月。
English: The king's inspection is like a year including four hours; the nobles are like the month, all belong to the year; the people are like the day, all belong to the month.

古文：岁月日时无易，百谷用成，乂用明，俊民用章，家用平康。
现代文：假若岁、月、日、时的关系没有改变，百谷就因此成熟，政治就因此清明，杰出的人才因此显扬，国家因此太平安宁。
English: If the relationship between the year, the month, the day, and the hour did not change, the world would be mature, politics would be clear, outstanding talents would be prominent, and the country would be peaceful.

古文：日月岁时既易，百谷用不成，乂用昏不明，俊民用微，家用不宁。
现代文：假若日、月、岁、时的关系全都改变，百谷就因此不能成熟，政治就因此昏暗不明，杰出的人才因此不能重用，国家因此不得安宁。
English: If the relationship between the sun, the moon, the year and the time were to change, the grain would not ripen, politics would be dark and unclear, outstanding talents would not be reused, and the country would not be at peace.

古文：庶民惟星，星有好风，星有好雨。
现代文：百姓好比星星，有的星喜欢风，有的星喜欢雨。
English: The common people are the stars, the stars have good wind, the stars have good rain.

古文：日月之行，则有冬有夏。
现代文：太阳和月亮的运行，就有冬天和夏天。
English: Only when the sun and the moon move can there be winter and summer.

古文：月之从星，则以风雨。
现代文：月亮顺从星星，就要用风和雨润泽他们。
English: If the moon follows the stars, sometimes it will be windy, sometimes it will rain.

古文：九、五福：一曰寿，二曰富，三曰康宁，四曰攸好德，五曰考终命。
现代文：九、五种幸福：一是长寿，二是富贵，三是健康平安，四是遵行美德，五是享尽天年。
English: Nine, five kinds of happiness: one is longevity, the second is wealth, the third is health and safety, the fourth is to follow virtue, and the fifth is to enjoy life to the full.

古文：六极：一曰凶、短、折，二曰疾，三曰忧，四曰贫，五曰恶，六曰弱。
现代文：六种不幸的事：一是短命早死，二是疾病，三是忧愁，四是贫穷，五是邪恶，六是懦弱。 
English: Six kinds of misfortune: one is short life and early death, the second is disease, the third is sorrow, the fourth is poverty, the fifth is evil, and the sixth is cowardice.

