古文：孝顺皇帝讳保，安帝之子也。
现代文：孝顺皇帝名保，安帝之子。
English: Filial obedience to Emperor Naypo, the son of Emperor An.

古文：母李氏，为阎皇后所害。
现代文：母李氏，为阎皇后所害。
English: His mother, Li Clan, was killed by Queen Yan.

古文：永宁元年，立为皇太子。延光三年，安帝乳母王圣、大长秋江京、中常侍樊丰谮太子乳母王男、厨监邴吉，杀之，太子数为叹息。
现代文：永宁元年，立为皇太子，延光三年，安帝乳母王圣、大长秋江京、中常侍樊丰诬陷太子乳母王男、厨监邴吉，王男、邴吉被杀，太子刘保几次为之叹息。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, he was established as the crown prince, and it lasted for three years. Emperor An's wet nurse, Wang Sheng, the grand chancellor, Qiu Jiangjing, and the vice chancellor, Yan Feng, framed the prince's wet nurse, Wang Nan, and the kitchen supervisor, Xing Ji. Wang Nan and Xing Ji were killed, and the prince, Liu Bao, sighed several times.

古文：王圣等惧有后祸，遂与丰、京共构陷太子，太子坐废为济阴王。
现代文：王圣等惧怕遗留后患，于是与樊丰、江京共同陷害太子刘保，太子刘保因而被废为济阴王。
English: Wang Sheng and others were afraid of being left behind, so they worked with Zifeng and Jiangjing to frame Prince Liu Bao. Prince Liu Bao was thus dethroned as the king of Jiyin.

古文：明年三月，安帝崩，北乡侯立，济阴王以废黜，不得上殿亲临梓宫，悲号不食，内外群僚莫不哀之。
现代文：延光四年三月，安帝逝世，北乡侯刘懿立为帝，济阴王刘保因为被废黜，不得上殿亲临安帝灵堂参与丧礼，悲号不食，内外百官都为之哀痛。
English: In March of the 4th year of Yan Guang, Emperor Ande passed away, and the northern township lord Liu Xizhang became the emperor. Because Liu Bao, the king of Jilin, was deposed, he was not allowed to go to the temple to attend the funeral in person at the Andean church. Hundreds of officials at home and abroad mourned for him.

古文：及北乡侯薨，车骑将军阎显及江京，与中常侍刘安、陈达等白太后，秘不发丧，而更征立诸国王子，乃闭宫门，屯兵自守。
现代文：及至少帝刘懿逝世，阎太后兄车骑将军阎显及江京与中常侍刘安、陈达等报请太后秘不发丧，而计划另征立诸国王子为帝，刘保把宫门紧闭，屯兵自守。
English: and at least the death of Emperor Liu Bei, Yan's brother, General Yan Xian, the chariot and cavalry commander of the Empress Dowager Yan, and Jiang Jing and the middle attendants Liu An and Chen Da reported that the Empress Dowager should not be secretly mourned, but that it was planned to recruit other princes as emperors, Liu Bao closed the palace gate tightly, and the troops defended themselves.

古文：十一月丁巳，京师及郡国十六地震。
现代文：十一月初四，京师及郡国十六处发生地震。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, an earthquake occurred in 16 places in Beijing and the county.

古文：是夜，中黄门孙程等十九人共斩江京、刘安、陈达等，迎济阴王于德阳殿西钟下，即皇帝位，年十一。
现代文：这天夜里，中黄门孙程等十九人合力斩江京、刘安、陈达等，迎济阴王刘保于德阳殿西钟下，登皇帝位，年十一岁。
English: On this night, 19 people, including Sun Cheng, a member of the Middle Yellow Gate, joined forces to slaughter Jiangjing, Liu An, Chen Da, and others, and welcomed the King of Jianyin, Liu Bao, to the Western Bell of Deyang Palace, where he ascended to the throne at the age of eleven.

古文：近臣尚书以下，从辇到南宫，登云台，召百官。
现代文：近臣尚书以下，跟乘舆到南宫，登上云台，召集百官。
English: His close vassals, including Shang Shu, followed him to the Southern Palace, ascended Yuntai, and gathered hundreds of officials.

古文：尚书令刘光等奏言： 孝安皇帝圣德明茂，早弃天下。
现代文：尚书令刘光等奏请说： 孝安皇帝，圣德明茂，过早地遗弃了天下。
English: Shang Shuling Liu Guang et al. Please say: Emperor Xiao'an, Shunde Mingmao, prematurely abandoned the world.

古文：陛下正统，当奉宗庙，而奸臣交构，遂令陛下龙潜蕃国，群僚远近莫不失望。
现代文：皇上是正统相承，理当继承宗庙社稷，只因奸臣交相构陷，使得皇上由太子而成藩王，天下文武百官，没有不失望的。
English: The emperor is the legitimate heir, he is supposed to succeed the family, temple and shrine, but because of the betrayal of the treacherous vassals, the emperor has become the king of the domain from the prince, and there are hundreds of officials in the world who are not disappointed.

古文：天命有常，北乡不永。汉德盛明，福祚孔章。
现代文：好在天命有正常的规律，北乡侯虽立为帝而不永年，汉家德泽盛明，福祚十分昭著。
English: Fortunately, there is a normal rule in the fate of heaven. Although Hokusho was established as an emperor, he did not live forever. The Han dynasty was prosperous, and his good fortune was well-known.

古文：近臣建策，左右扶翼，内外同心，稽合神明。
现代文：近臣献谋建策，左右扶翼，内外同心，合符天地神明的旨意。
English: The close vassal devotes himself to devising strategies, supports the left and right wings, and concentrates on the inside and outside, which is in line with the will of the gods of heaven and earth.

古文：陛下践祚，奉遵鸿绪，为郊庙主，承续祖宗无穷之烈，上当天心，下厌民望。
现代文：皇上继位，奉遵传统，为郊庙主，承续祖宗英烈，上当天心，下而满足了人民的愿望。
English: The emperor's succession to the throne, in accordance with tradition, is the master of the suburb temple, inherits the ancestors' heroic deeds, and satisfies the wishes of the people from top to bottom.

古文：而即位仓卒，典章多缺，请条案礼仪，分别具奏。 制曰： 可。 乃召公卿百僚，使虎贲、羽林士屯南、北宫诸门。
现代文：但即位仓促，典章多缺，请准许我们按条整理礼仪，分别具奏。 
English: However, the enthronement was hasty, and there were many missing regulations. Please allow us to organize the etiquette according to the article, and play it separately.

古文：阎显兄弟闻帝立，率兵入北宫，尚书郭镇与交锋刃，遂斩显弟卫尉景。
现代文：皇帝命令说： 可以！ 于是召集公卿百僚，派虎贲郎羽林士屯守南、北宫各门。阎显兄弟听到济阴王为帝，领兵入北宫，尚书郭镇与他们拚搏，斩阎显弟弟卫尉阎景。
English: The emperor gave the order: "Yes!" He then called together a hundred nobles and sent Tigress and Ulin to guard the southern and northern gates of the palace. When Yan Xian's brothers heard that King Jixin was the emperor, they led the soldiers into the northern palace. Shang Shuguo fought with them and killed Yan Xian's younger brother, Lieutenant Yan Jie.

古文：戊午，遣使者入省，夺得玺绶，乃幸嘉德殿，遣侍御史持节收阎显及其弟城门校尉耀、执金吾晏，并下狱诛。
现代文：初五，遣使者入宫中夺得玺印，帝到嘉德殿，派侍御史持节，逮捕阎显及其弟弟城门校尉阎耀、执金吾阎晏下狱处死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, an envoy was sent to the palace to seize the seal, and the emperor went to the Palace of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：己未，开门，罢屯兵。
现代文：初六，开宫门，撤去守门的重兵。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, open the palace gate and remove the heavy soldiers guarding the gate.

古文：壬戌，诏司隶校尉： 惟阎显、江京近亲当伏辜诛，其余务崇宽贷。 壬申，谒高庙。
现代文：初九，诏令司隶校尉： 只有阎显、江京近亲应当伏罪受诛，其余的务必宽恕贷免，不加追究。 
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the commanding officer Lieutenant Li said: Only Yan Xian and Jiang Jing's close relatives should be hanged for the crime of lying in ambush. The rest must be pardoned and not investigated.

古文：癸酉，谒光武庙。
现代文：十九日，拜谒高庙。二十日，拜谒光武庙。
English: On the 19th, he paid homage to Ying Gao Temple. On the 20th, he paid homage to Ying Guangwu Temple.

古文：乙亥，诏益州刺史罢子午道，通褒斜路。
现代文：二十二日，诏益州刺史，关中通汉中的通道，不走子午道，而走褒斜路。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Yizhou stabbed history, the passage of Guanzhong to Hanzhong, did not take the meridian, but took the slope.

古文：己卯，葬少帝以诸王礼。
现代文：二十六日，以王礼葬少帝北乡侯刘懿。
English: On the 26th, the young emperor was buried with great pomp and ceremony in the North Township of Liu Ye.

古文：司空刘授免。
现代文：司空刘授免职。
English: Siku Liu was relieved of his duties.

古文：赐公卿以下钱、谷各有差。
现代文：分别赏赐公卿以下钱谷各不等。
English: The rewards given to court nobles and lower-ranking officials varied.

古文：十二月甲申，以少府河南陶敦为司空。
现代文：十二月初一，任少府河南陶敦为司空。
English: On the first day of December, Tao Dun, the young prefect of Henan Province, was appointed as Siku.

古文：令郡国守、相视事未满岁者，一切得举孝廉吏。
现代文：命令郡国守相视事不满一年的，可以举荐孝廉吏。
English: If it has been less than one year since the county governor ordered the provincial governor to look into the matter, he may recommend a filial piety official.

古文：登卯，尚书奏请下有司，收还延光三年九月丁酉以皇太子为济阴王诏书。
现代文：二十日，尚书奏请责令管事人，收还延光三年九月初七日，废皇太子刘保为济阴王的诏书。
English: On the 20th, Shang Shuxiao requested and ordered the administrator to return the imperial rescript of the former crown prince Liu Bao as the king of Jiyin on the 7th day of the 9th month of the 3rd year of Yan Guang.

古文：奏可。
现代文：获得批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：京师大疫。
现代文：京师出现大的疫病。
English: A major epidemic broke out in Beijing.

古文：辛亥，诏公卿、郡守、国相，举贤良方正、能直言极谏之士各一人。
现代文：二十八日，诏令公卿、郡守、国相，举荐贤良方正、敢于批评说直话者各一人。
English: On the 28th, an imperial edict was issued to the court nobles, county governors, and ministers of state, recommending one each of the virtuous Fang Zheng and those who dared to criticize and speak the truth.

古文：尚书令以下从辇幸南宫者，皆增秩赐布各有差。
现代文：尚书令以下，跟随乘舆到南宫的，都增加官秩，赏赐布匹各不等。
English: According to the imperial edict, those who followed the empress to the Southern Palace were given higher official ranks and cloth prizes.

古文：永建元年春正月甲寅，诏曰： 先帝圣德，享祚未永，早弃鸿烈。
现代文：永建元年春正月初二，诏令说 ：先帝圣明高德，但享受皇位不长，过早地抛弃了伟大的功业。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongjian, the imperial edict said: the former emperor Shengming Gaode, although he did not enjoy the imperial throne for long, prematurely abandoned his great achievements.

古文：奸慝缘间，人庶怨讟，上干和气，疫疠为灾。
现代文：奸诈邪恶之徒，乘机作乱，以致平民百姓一片怨痛，上而干扰天地和气，疫疠流行。
English: Treacherous and evil people took advantage of the opportunity to create turmoil, so that the common people were full of bitterness, which disturbed the harmony of heaven and earth, and epidemics broke out.

古文：朕奉承大业，未能宁济。
现代文：我承继大业，没能使国家安定，度过难关。
English: I inherited a great cause and failed to stabilize the country and get through the difficulties.

古文：盖至理之本，稽弘德惠，荡涤宿恶，与人更始。
现代文：然而治国之本，最重要的在于考核弘扬德泽恩惠，扫荡涤除积怨恶习，开始新的生活。
English: However, the most important principle of governing the country is to promote virtue and benevolence, sweep away bad habits, and start a new life.

古文：其大赦天下。赐男子爵，人二级，为父后、三老、孝悌、力田人三级，流民欲自占者一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛；贞妇帛，人三匹。
现代文：现在大赦天下，赏赐男子爵位，每人二级，为父后、三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，流民自动归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、贫而无法生存的每人发粟五斛；守节的妇人每人发帛三匹。
English: Now, the general amnesty has been granted to the world, awarding men's peerage, two levels per person, three levels per person for the father, three elders, filial piety, and strength, and one level per person for the refugees to automatically return to the head; the widows, widowers, orphans, and the terminally ill, the poor and the poor who cannot survive each have five hairpins; the women who keep the festival each have three hairpins.

古文：坐法当徙，勿徙；亡徒当传，勿传。
现代文：犯法应当迁往边远地区的，不迁移；逃亡的囚徒应当通缉的不通缉。
English: Criminals should be moved to remote areas, not relocated; escaped prisoners should be wanted or not.

古文：宗室以罪绝，皆复属籍。
现代文：刘氏宗室因罪而断绝了关系的，都恢复旧的属籍。
English: If the Liu family severed ties because of the crime, they all resumed their old family names.

古文：其与阎显、江京等交通者，悉勿考。
现代文：与阎显、江京有来往牵连的，都不加追究。
English: Those who have had dealings with Yan Xian and Jiang Jing will not be investigated.

古文：勉修厥职，以康我民。 
现代文：希望大家做好本职工作，让老百姓过和平康乐的生活。 
English: I hope that everyone will do their job well and let the people live a peaceful and happy life.

古文：辛未，皇太后阎氏崩。
现代文：十九日，皇太后阎氏逝世。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Hou Yan died.

古文：辛巳，太傅冯石、太尉刘熹、司徒李郃免。
现代文：二十九日，太傅冯石、太尉刘熹、司徒李免职。
English: On the 29th, Taifu Fengshi, Taifu Liu Ye, and Szeto Li were relieved of their duties.

古文：二月甲申，葬安思皇后。
现代文：二月初二，葬安思皇后。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the funeral of Empress Anshi took place.

古文：丙戌，太常桓焉为太傅；大鸿胪朱宠为太尉，参录尚书事；长乐少府九江朱伥为司徒。
现代文：初四，任太常桓焉为太傅；任大鸿胪朱宠为太尉，参与总领尚书事；任长乐少府九江朱伥为司徒。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he was appointed as Taifu by Taizhang Huanyan, as Taifu by Da Hongzhu Zhu Ji, and participated in the general leadership of Shang Shuxi. He was also appointed as a tutor by Jiujiang Zhu Ji, the minor prefect of Changle.

古文：赐百官随辇宿卫及拜除者布各有差。
现代文：赏赐百官随乘舆值宿警卫以及任命授官的布匹各分别不等。
English: The reward for the hundred officials accompanying the public security guards and the cloth for the appointment vary.

古文：陇西钟羌叛，护羌校尉马贤讨破之。
现代文：陇西钟羌反叛，护羌校尉马贤讨伐打败了他们。
English: Shaanxi Zhongye rebelled, and the garrison captain Ma Xian fought and defeated them.

古文：夏五月丁丑，诏幽、并、凉州刺史，使各实二千石以下至黄绶，年老劣弱不任军事者，上名。
现代文：夏五月二十七日，诏令幽、并、凉州刺史，使各核实二千石以下至县丞、县尉，年老劣弱不能胜任军事的报上名单。
English: On the 27th day of the fifth month of the summer, the imperial edict Yu, and the history of Liangzhou, made each of them verify the military list of less than two thousand stones to the county magistrate, the county captain, the old and the weak.

古文：严敕障塞，缮设屯备，立秋之后，简习戎马。
现代文：严格整饬边防工事，修缮屯兵作战的一切设备，立秋之后，操练兵马。
English: Strictly rectify the border fortifications, repair all the equipment for the garrison to fight, and after the beginning of autumn, train the soldiers.

古文：六月己亥，封济南王错子显为济南王。
现代文：六月十九日，封济南王刘错子刘显为济南王。
English: On June 19th, Liu Xian, the illegitimate son of the King of Jinan, became the King of Jinan.

古文：秋七月庚午，卫尉来历为车骑将军。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，任卫尉来历为车骑将军。
English: On the 21st day of the 7th month of autumn, he was appointed as a lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and his background was that of a cavalry general.

古文：八月，鲜卑寇代郡，代郡太守李超战殁。
现代文：八月，鲜卑寇掠代郡，代郡太守李超战死。
English: In August, the Xianbei corsairs raided Dai County, and the Dai County Governor Li Chao died in the battle.

古文：九月辛亥，初令三公、尚书入奏事。
现代文：九月初三，开始命令三公、尚书入宫上奏国事。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, he began to order the three princes and Shang Shu to enter the palace to report on state affairs.

古文：冬十月辛巳，诏减死罪以下徙边；其亡命赎，各有差。
现代文：冬十月初三，诏令减免死罪以下的犯人迁移到边境地区；逃亡的可以赎罪，赎物分别不等。
English: On the third day of October in winter, the prisoners whose death sentences were commuted and pardoned by the imperial edict were relocated to the border areas; those who escaped could atone for their sins, and the ransom varied.

古文：丁亥，司空陶敦免。
现代文：初九，司空陶敦免职。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the new year, Sikuo Taodong was relieved of duty.

古文：鲜卑犯边。
现代文：鲜卑犯边境地区。
English: petty criminals in the border area.

古文：庚寅，遣黎阳营兵出屯中山北界。告幽州刺史，其令缘边郡增置步兵，死屯塞下。
现代文：十二日，派黎阳营兵出发屯守中山北界，告幽州刺史，命令靠近边境的郡增添步兵，分布屯守塞下。
English: On the 12th, Li Yang sent battalions to guard the northern border of Zhongshan, and ordered the counties near the border to increase the number of infantry and distribute the garrisons.

古文：调五营弩师，郡举五人，令教习战射。
现代文：选长水、步兵、射声、屯骑、车骑等五校尉弩师，每郡推举五人，使之教习战射技术。
English: Five lieutenant-commanding divisions, such as long water, infantry, shooting sound, camp riding, and car riding, were selected, and five people were selected from each county to teach shooting techniques.

古文：壬寅，廷尉张皓为司空。
现代文：二十四日，任廷尉张皓为司空。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the courtier Zhang Ye was appointed as Siku.

古文：甲辰，诏以疫疠水潦，令人半输今年田租；伤害什四以上，勿收责；不满者，以实除之。
现代文：二十六日，诏令因疫疠水潦，平民半输今年田租；被害达十分之四以上的，不收租；不满此数的，以实际数免除。
English: On the 26th, due to the epidemic, floods and landslides, the civil population lost half of this year's field rent; if more than four-tenths of the damage occurred, no rent would be collected; if this number was not enough, the actual number would be exempted.

古文：十二月辛巳，赐王、主、贵人、公卿以下布各有差。
现代文：十二月初四，赏赐王、主、贵人、公卿以下布匹分别不等。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, cloth was given to kings, lords, nobles, and courtiers.

古文：二年春正月戊申，乐安王鸿来朝。
现代文：二年春正月初一，乐安王刘鸿入宫朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Liu Hong, the king of Le'an, entered the palace to worship.

古文：丁卯，常山王章薨。
现代文：正月二十日，常山王刘章逝世。
English: On the 20th day of the first month, Liu Zhang, the king of Changshan, passed away.

古文：二月，鲜卑寇辽东、玄菟。
现代文：二月，鲜卑寇掠辽东、玄菟。
English: In February, the Xianbei army raided Liaodong and Xuanzang.

古文：甲辰，诏禀贷荆、豫、兖、冀四州流冗贫人，所在安业之；疾病致医药。
现代文：二十八日，诏令以廪粮赈贷荆、豫、兖、翼四州流散的贫民，所在官府进行安置就业，患疾病者给予医药。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict ordered that the poor people scattered in the four prefectures should be resettled and employed, and those who were ill should be given medicine.

古文：护乌桓校尉耿晔率南单于击鲜卑，破之。
现代文：护乌桓校尉耿晔率领南单于进击鲜卑，打败了他们。
English: Wuhuan's bodyguard, Captain Geng Yao, led Nan Shan to attack Xianbei and defeated them.

古文：三月，旱，遣使者录囚徒。
现代文：三月，天旱，遣使者省察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: In March, during a drought, envoys were sent to inspect and record the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：疏勒国遣使奉献。
现代文：疏勒国派使者来朝廷奉献礼物。
English: Sule State sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to present gifts.

古文：夏六月乙酉，追尊谥皇妣李氏为恭愍皇后，葬于恭北陵。
现代文：夏六月十一日，追尊谥皇妣李氏为恭愍皇后，葬于恭北陵。
English: On the 11th day of the 6th month of the summer, she was buried in the Gongbei Mausoleum as the Queen of Gongbei.

古文：西域长史班勇、敦煌太守张朗讨焉耆、尉犁、危须三国，破之；并遣子贡献。
现代文：西域长史班勇、敦煌太守张朗讨伐焉耆、尉犁、危须三国，打败他们，并派儿子来朝廷贡献礼物。
English: The governor of the western region, Ban Yong Shi, and the governor of Dunhuang, Zhang Lang, led a crusade against the Three Kingdoms, defeating them and sending their sons to the imperial court to offer gifts.

古文：秋七月甲戌朔，日有食之。壬午，太尉朱宠、司徒朱伥罢。
现代文：秋七月初一，日蚀。初九，太尉朱宠，司徒朱伥罢免。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the sun eclipsed. On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the Taiyi Zhu Zhao and the Sifu Zhu Xi were dismissed.

古文：庚子，太常刘光为太尉，录尚书事；光禄勋许敬为司徒。
现代文：二十七日，任太常刘光为太尉，领尚书事；任光禄勋许敬为司徒。
English: On the 27th, Liu Guang, who was appointed as the first lieutenant, was given the post of secretary, and Ren Guang, who was awarded the Distinguished Service Order, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：辛丑，下邳王成薨。
现代文：二十八日，下邳王刘成逝世。
English: On the 28th, Liu Cheng, the king of the Lower Han Dynasty, passed away.

古文：三年春正月丙子，京师地震，汉阳地陷裂。
现代文：三年春正月初六，京师地震，汉阳地陷裂。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the third year of spring, the Beijing earthquake and the Hanyang earthquake occurred.

古文：甲午，诏实核伤害者，赐年七岁以上钱，人二千；一家被害，郡县为收敛。
现代文：二十四日，诏令核实受伤害的，七岁以上每人赐钱二千；全家被害，郡县为之收殓。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict verified that each person over the age of seven who was injured would be given 2,000 yuan; the whole family was injured, and the county would collect the money.

古文：乙未，诏勿收汉阳今年田租、田赋。
现代文：二十五日，诏令不收汉阳今年田租、人口税。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that Hanyang would no longer collect this year's field rent and population tax.

古文：夏四月癸卯，遣光禄大夫案行汉阳及河内、魏郡、陈留、东郡，禀贷贫人。
现代文：夏四月初四，派光禄大夫巡视汉阳及河内、魏郡、陈留、东郡，以廪粮贷与贫人。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the fourth month of the summer, Dr. Guanglu was sent to inspect Hanyang and Hanoi, Wei County, Chenliu and Dong County, to provide grain loans to the poor.

古文：六月，旱。遣使者录囚徒，理轻系。
现代文：六月，天旱，派使者考察记录囚犯的罪状，处理轻罪人犯。
English: In June, due to drought, envoys were sent to inspect and record the crimes of prisoners and deal with petty criminals.

古文：甲寅，济南王显薨。
现代文：十五日，济南王刘显逝世。
English: On the 15th, Liu Xian, King of Jinan, passed away.

古文：秋七月丁酉，茂陵园寝灾，帝缟素避正殿。
现代文：秋七月二十九日，茂陵园寝遭火灾，帝穿白色衣服避正殿。
English: On the 29th day of the 7th month of the autumn, a fire broke out in the Mausoleum Garden, and the emperor wore white clothes to avoid the main hall.

古文：辛亥，使太常王龚持节告祠茂陵。
现代文：辛亥，派太常王龚持符节告祀茂陵。
English: At the turn of the year, King Taizong of Taizong was enshrined in the Mausoleum.

古文：九月，鲜卑寇渔阳。
现代文：九月，鲜卑寇掠渔阳。
English: In September, the fresh-faced peregrine falcon raids the fishing sun.

古文：冬十二月己亥，太傅桓焉免。
现代文：冬十二月初四，太傅桓焉免职。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month of winter, Taifu Kanen was dismissed.

古文：是岁，车骑将军来历罢。
现代文：这年，还罢免了车骑将军来历。
English: This year, he also dismissed the chariot and cavalry general Geng Yuan.

古文：四年春正月丙寅，诏曰： 朕托王公之上，涉道日寡，政失厥中，阴阳气隔，寇盗肆暴，庶狱弥繁，忧悴永叹，疢如疾首。
现代文：四年春正月初一，诏令说： 我高居王公之上，研求大道一天比一天少，因而国政失之中和，天地阴阳之气不顺畅，寇盗放肆暴虐，各种诉讼的案件，越搞越多，令我忧愁憔悴而长叹，如久患热病，头痛不已。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the imperial edict said: I am higher than the prince, and I study the avenue less and less every day. As a result, the national politics are lost, the yin and yang of heaven and earth are not smooth, the robbers and thieves are rampant, and the cases of various lawsuits are more and more, which makes me sad and sigh. I have been suffering from fever for a long time and have a headache.

古文：《诗》云： 君子如祉，乱庶遄已。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 君子福，贤者有爵禄，纷乱也将迅速得到停止。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "The nobles will be blessed, the wise will be rewarded, and the turmoil will be quickly stopped."

古文：三朝之会，朔旦立春，嘉与海内洗心自新。
现代文：正月初一是岁、月、日三朝的开始，初一的早上又当立春，这样的好时光奖励优待海内之士洗心自新。
English: The first day of the first month of the year is the beginning of the year, month and day, and the morning of the first day of the first month is also the beginning of spring. Such a good time rewards the preferential treatment of the people of the sea.

古文：其赦天下。
现代文：现在大赦天下。
English: Now he intends to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：从甲寅赦令已来复秩属籍，三年正月已来还赎。
现代文：从永建元年春正月初二赦令以来恢复官秩和属籍，三年正月以来还赎。
English: Since the amnesty decree on the second day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongjian, the official rank and status have been restored, and since the first month of the third year, they have been redeemed.

古文：其阎显、江京等知识婚姻禁锢，一原除之。
现代文：至于与阎显、江京等因社会交往或婚姻关系而遭株连禁锢的，一律免除。
English: As for those incarcerated with Yan Xian, Jiang Jing, etc. due to social interaction or marriage, they are all exempted.

古文：务崇宽和，敬顺时令，遵典去苛，以称朕意。 
现代文：务必讲求宽恕平和，虔诚地顺应时候节令，遵从法典去掉苛刻，做到称我的心意。 
English: It is imperative to seek forgiveness and peace, faithfully comply with the times and seasons, follow the code and remove the harshness, so as to honor my heart.

古文：丙子，帝加元服。
现代文：十一日，帝加冠于首。
English: On the eleventh day, Diga crowned his head.

古文：赐王、主、贵人、公卿以下金、帛各有差。
现代文：赏赐王、主、贵人、公卿以下金帛，分别不等。
English: The gold ingots awarded to kings, lords, nobles, and court nobles and below vary.

古文：赐男子爵及流民欲占者人一级。为父后、三老、孝悌、力田人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存帛，人一匹。
现代文：赏赐男子爵位及流民自觉归首的每人一级，为父后、三老、孝悌、力田每人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、贫不能生存的每人帛一匹。
English: A knighthood and a first-class medal will be awarded to each person who voluntarily surrenders, and a second-class medal will be awarded to each person who voluntarily surrenders; and a third-class medal will be awarded to each person who surrenders, and a second-class medal will be awarded to each person who surrenders, and a third-class medal will be awarded to each person who surrenders, and a second-class medal will be awarded to each person who surrenders, and a third-class medal will be awarded to each person who surrenders, and a third-class medal will be awarded to each person who surrenders, and a third-class medal

古文：二月戊戌，诏以民入山凿石，发泄藏气，敕有司检察所当禁绝，如建武、永平故事。
现代文：二月初四，诏令因平民入山凿石，发泄藏气，责成有司进行检察，应当禁绝的，照光武帝建武时代和明帝永平时代所做的一样。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the magistrate to carry out an inspection on the grounds that a commoner had ventured into the mountains to hew stones, which should be prohibited, just as it was done during the reign of Emperor Jianwu and the reign of Emperor Yongping.

古文：夏五月壬辰，诏曰： 海内颇有灾异，朝廷修政，太官减膳，珍玩不御。
现代文：夏五月二十九日，诏令说： 海内颇有灾异，朝廷把政务搞好，太官减省膳食，不佩带珍宝玩器。
English: On the 29th day of the 5th month of the summer, the imperial edict said: There are disasters at sea, the imperial court will do a good job in government affairs, and the eunuchs will cut down on meals and not wear precious toys.

古文：而桂阳太守文砻，不惟竭忠，宣畅本朝，而远献大珠，以求幸媚，今封以还之。 
现代文：而桂阳太守文砻，不思竭忠职守，宣扬本朝教化，反而远献大珠，希望获得宠幸而达到谄媚的目的，太不应该，现在封存退还他。 
English: However, Guiyang is too much of a stickler for propriety, and does not think about fulfilling his duties, and instead of promoting the enlightenment of this dynasty, he gives away the pearl, hoping to be favored and achieve the purpose of flattery. It is too improper, and it is now sealed and returned to him.

古文：五州雨水。
现代文：五州雨水。
English: Wuzhou rainwater.

古文：秋八月庚子，遣使实核死亡，收敛禀赐。
现代文：秋八月初八，派使者核实死亡的人，进行收殓并赐给其家属廪粮。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the autumn, an emissary was sent to verify the death of the person, collect the money and give the family members grain.

古文：丁巳，太尉刘光、司空张皓免。
现代文：二十五日，太尉刘光、司空张皓免职。
English: On the 25th, Second Lieutenant Liu Guang and First Officer Zhang Ye were relieved of their duties.

古文：九月，复安定、北地、上郡归旧土。
现代文：九月，恢复安定、北地、上郡归旧土。
English: In September, stability was restored, and Hokuchi and Kamigori returned to their former lands.

古文：癸酉，大鸿胪庞参为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：十二日，大鸿胪庞参为太尉，总领尚书事。
English: On the 12th, Dahongye Pangsan was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and he was in charge of general affairs.

古文：太常王龚为司空。
现代文：太常王龚为司空。
English: Too often, Wang Yao is the empty seat.

古文：冬十一月庚辰，司徒许敬免。
现代文：冬十一月二十日，司徒许敬免职。
English: In the winter, on November 20th, Stutts was relieved of his duties.

古文：鲜卑寇朔方。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠朔方。
English: A fresh pike swoops in from the east.

古文：十二月乙卯，宗正刘崎为司徒。
现代文：十二月二十五日，任宗正刘崎为司徒。
English: On December 25th, Zongzheng Liu Qi was appointed as a disciple.

古文：是岁，分会稽为吴郡。
现代文：这年，分会稽为吴郡。
English: This year, the branch office is in Wuxu County.

古文：拘弥国遣使贡献。
现代文：拘弥国遣使者来朝献礼。
English: An envoy from Tsuchiya Province came to present a gift to the Emperor.

古文：五年春正月，疏勒王遣侍子，及大宛、莎车王皆奉使贡献。
现代文：五年春正月，疏勒王派儿子入朝侍奉，大宛、莎车王都派使者来朝献礼。
English: In the first month of spring in the fifth year, King Sule sent his son to serve in the imperial court, and King Dawan and King Zakka both sent envoys to present gifts to the imperial court.

古文：夏四月，京师旱。
现代文：夏四月，京师天旱。
English: In the summer of April, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：辛巳，诏郡国贫人被灾者，勿收责今年过更。
现代文：二十四日，诏郡国贫民遭了灾的，不要责令收取今年戍边三日的钱物。
English: On the 24th, if the poor people of Zhao County suffered a disaster, they should not be ordered to collect the money and goods that were stolen on the 3rd of this year.

古文：京师及郡国十二蝗。
现代文：京师及郡国十二蝗灾。
English: Twelve locust plagues hit the capital and the county.

古文：冬十月丙辰，诏郡国中都官死罪系囚皆减罪一等，诣北地、上郡、安定戍。
现代文：冬十月初一，诏令郡国中都官对死罪在押囚犯一律减罪一等，送北地、上郡、安定戍守边防。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the county magistrate decreed that all prisoners in custody for capital crimes would be given a first-class reduction of their sentence, and sent to the north, the upper county, and the stable county to guard the border.

古文：乙亥，定远侯班始坐杀其妻阴城公主，腰斩，同产皆弃市。
现代文：二十日，定远侯班始因杀妻阴城公主遭腰斩，同母兄弟都被杀于闹市，并弃尸。
English: On the 20th, Dingyuan Hou Ban Shi was beheaded for killing his wife, Princess Yincheng, and his brothers and sisters were all killed in the city and their bodies abandoned.

古文：六年春二月庚午，河间王开薨。
现代文：六年春二月十七日，河间王刘开逝世。
English: On the 17th day of February in the spring of the sixth year, King Liu Kai of Kawama passed away.

古文：三月辛亥，复伊吾屯田，复置伊吾司马一人。
现代文：三月二十九日，恢复伊吾屯田，恢复设置伊吾司马一人。
English: On March 29th, Igo Tonden was reinstated, and Igo Sima was reinstated.

古文：秋九月辛巳，缮起太学。
现代文：秋九月初二，修整太学。
English: Autumn On the 2nd day of the 9th month, Shiseido Taigaku starts.

古文：护乌桓校尉耿晔遣兵击鲜卑，破之。
现代文：护乌桓校尉耿晔派兵攻击鲜卑，把他们打败。
English: Wuhuan's tutelary, Captain Geng Yao, sent troops to attack Xianbei and defeated them.

古文：丁酉，于阗王遣侍子贡献。
现代文：十八日，于阗王送儿子来朝廷侍奉并送礼。
English: On the 18th, King Yu sent his son to the imperial court to serve and present gifts.

古文：冬十一月辛亥，诏曰： 连年灾潦，冀部尤甚。
现代文：冬十一月辛亥，诏令说： 连年潦灾，冀地特别严重。
English: In the winter of Xinhai in November, the imperial edict said: "The floods have continued for years, and the Hebei region is particularly serious.

古文：比蠲除实伤，赡恤穷匮，而百姓犹有弃业，流亡不绝。
现代文：当即免除了受害处的田租，赈济抚恤了穷困的苦主。而百姓仍然丢下生产，流浪逃荒的不绝于途。
English: The farm rents of the affected areas were immediately exempted, and the poverty-stricken owners were supported by the relief fund. However, the people still abandoned production, and wandering to escape the famine was a constant occurrence.

古文：疑郡县用心怠惰，恩泽不宣。
现代文：我怀疑郡县用心怠惰，不关心群众，朝廷的恩泽没有得到宣扬。
English: I suspect that counties and prefectures are lazy and unconcerned about the masses, and the benefits of the imperial court have not been publicized.

古文：《易》美 损上益下 ，《书》称 安民则惠 。
现代文：《易经》上说 ：把上面多余的财物，拿来给予下面那些不够的，那人们便会欢喜无边。 《书经》上称： 安定人民生活，使他们受到实惠，黎民百姓便会永远怀念。 
English: "I Ching" said: Take the excess wealth from above and give it to those who are not enough below, then people will be overjoyed. "The Book" said: The people of Li will always miss the stable life of the people and the benefits they receive.

古文：其令冀部勿收今年田租、刍稿。 
现代文：现在命令冀地不收取今年田租、刍稿。 
English: Now, Jiidi has been ordered not to collect this year's field rent and land tax.

古文：十二月，日南徼外叶调国、掸国遣使贡献。
现代文：十二月，日南边外叶调国、掸国派使者献礼物。
English: In December, envoys from Japan's southern neighbors, Japan and Korea, came to present gifts.

古文：壬申，客星出牵牛。
现代文：二十四日，忽隐忽现的客星，出现于牵牛星的附近。
English: On the 24th, a fleeting guest star appeared in the vicinity of Altair.

古文：于阗王遣侍子诣阙贡献。
现代文：于阗王送儿子入朝侍奉，并送礼物。
English: King Yu Xi sent his son to serve in the imperial court and gave him a gift.

古文：阳嘉元年春正月乙巳，立皇后梁氏。
现代文：阳嘉元年春正月二十八日，立皇后梁氏。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of spring in the year of Yang Jia, the Empress Liang clan was established.

古文：赐爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田三级，爵过公乘，得移与子若同产、同产子，民无名数及流民欲占著者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赐爵位，每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，爵过公乘，得移与子或同母兄弟或同母兄弟的儿子，民无户籍及流民自动归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、贫不能生存者每人发粟五斛。
English: For conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the second level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the third level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the first level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the third level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the first level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the first level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the second level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will receive the second level; for conferring a title of nobility, each person will

古文：二月，海贼曾旌等寇会稽，杀句章、鄞、鄮三县长，攻会稽东部都尉。
现代文：二月，海贼曾旌等寇掠会稽，杀句章、鄞、贸阝三县长，进攻会稽东部都尉。
English: In February, the pirates, including Zeng Yao and others, attacked the raiding party and killed the three county chiefs, Zhang, Zheng and Miao, as well as the eastern captain of the raiding party.

古文：诏缘海县各屯兵戍。
现代文：诏令海边各县屯兵戍守。
English: The imperial edict ordered the garrisoning of all counties along the coast.

古文：丁巳，皇后谒高庙、光武庙，诏禀甘陵贫人，大小口各有差。
现代文：初十，皇后拜谒高庙、光武庙，诏令以廪粮给甘陵贫民，分别大人小孩数量不等。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the empress paid homage to the Gaogao Temple and the Guangwu Temple, and issued a decree to provide the poor people of Ganling with coarse grains. The number of adults and children varied.

古文：京师旱。
现代文：京师旱。
English: There is a drought in the capital.

古文：庚申，敕郡国二千石各祷名山岳渎，遣大夫、谒者诣嵩高、首阳山，并祠河、洛，请雨。
现代文：十三日，敕令郡国二千石分别祀祷名山岳渎，派大夫、谒者到嵩高、首阳山，并祀黄河、洛水，请降雨。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the county government ordered the county's 2,000-stone mountains to be worshiped separately, and sent doctors and priests to Songgao and Shouyang Mountain, and to worship the Yellow River and Luoshui, to pray for rain.

古文：戊辰，雩。
现代文：二十一日，举行祈雨的祭祀。
English: On the 21st, a ritual was held to pray for rain.

古文：以冀部比年水潦，民食不赡，诏案行禀贷，劝农功，赈乏绝。
现代文：以冀地连年水潦，民食不足，诏令巡视了解情况，以廪粮贷给，劝导农民勉力农功，赈济特别困难而无法生活的人。
English: In order to alleviate the shortage of food and water in Hebei Province, it was ordered to inspect and understand the situation, to give grain loans to farmers, to encourage farmers to work hard in agriculture, and to help those who are unable to live due to special difficulties.

古文：甲戌，诏曰： 政失厥和，阴阳隔并，冬鲜宿雪，春无澍雨。
现代文：甲戌，诏令说： 国政失之中和，阴阳也不协调。冬天很少下雪，春天没有好雨。
English: The imperial edict said, "In the midst of a national crisis, yin and yang are not in harmony. There is little snow in winter and no good rain in spring.

古文：分祷祈请，靡神不萗。
现代文：于是祈山川、日月星辰，禳除灾害。
English: So they prayed for mountains, rivers, the sun, the moon and the stars to drive away the disasters.

古文：深恐在所慢违 如在 之义，今遣侍中王辅等，持节分诣岱山、东海、荥阳、河、洛，尽心祈焉。 
现代文：深恐祭祀的场所过于简慢，有违 祭神如神在 之义，今派侍中王辅等持符节分别到岱山、东海、荥阳、黄河和洛水边，尽心祈祷，以祛灾降福。 
English: Deeply afraid that the place of worship is too short, which is contrary to the righteousness of worshipping God as God. Now, he sent the attendants, including Wang Fu, to hold the festival to Lushan, the East Sea, Shenyang, the Yellow River and the Luoshui River, respectively, and pray with all their hearts to alleviate the disaster and bring good fortune.

古文：三月，杨州六郡妖贼章河等寇四十九县，杀伤长吏。
现代文：三月，扬州六郡妖贼章河等寇掠四十九县，杀伤长吏。
English: In March, Zhang He, the thief of six counties in Yangzhou, plundered forty-nine counties, killing and wounding officials.

古文：庚寅，帝临辟雍飨射，大赦天下，改元阳嘉。
现代文：十三日，帝临辟雍，宴飨行大射礼，大赦天下，改元阳嘉。
English: On the thirteenth day, Emperor Lin pardoned Yong, held a banquet and performed a grand ceremony, pardoned the world, and changed the name to Yuanyang Jia.

古文：诏宗室绝属籍者，一切复籍；禀冀州尤贫民，勿收今年更、租、口赋。
现代文：诏令刘氏宗室断绝了所属属籍的，一切都恢复原来的属籍；对冀州特别穷困的以廪粮赈贷，不收今年更赋、田租、人口税。
English: The imperial edict ordered Liu's ancestral home to sever its affiliation, and everything was restored to the original affiliation; for the extremely poor in Jizhou to borrow grain and loans, they would not receive this year's land tax, field rent, and population tax.

古文：夏五月戊寅，阜陵王恢薨。
现代文：夏五月初二，阜陵王刘恢逝世。
English: On the second day of the fifth month of the summer, Liu Wei, King of Fulin, passed away.

古文：秋七月，史官始作候风地动铜仪。
现代文：秋七月，太史令张衡始作候风地动铜仪。
English: In the autumn and July, Zhang Heng, the Grand Historian, began to make the bronze weather vane.

古文：丙辰，以太学新成，试明经下第者补弟子，增甲、乙科员各十人。
现代文：丙辰，因太学新成，以明经下第者考试录补弟子，增甲、乙科名额各十人。
English: B Chen, because he is a new student, will take the exam to make up the number of students, and there will be ten students for each additional grade and grade.

古文：除郡国耆儒九十人补郎、舍人。
现代文：任郡国耆儒九十人为郎、舍人。
English: Ninety-one people were appointed as county governors.

古文：九月，诏郡国中都官系囚皆减死一等，亡命者赎，各有差。
现代文：九月，诏令郡国中都官对系囚都减死罪一等，逃亡的赎罪，分别不等。
English: In September, the county magistrate decreed that the death penalty would be reduced to the first degree for all prisoners of the same line, and the atonement for escape would be reduced to the second degree.

古文：鲜卑寇辽东。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠辽东。
English: A fresh Beringian cormorant raids Liaodong.

古文：冬十一月甲申，望都、蒲阴狼杀女子九十七人，诏赐狼所杀者钱，人三千。
现代文：冬十一月十一日，望都、蒲阴狼残食女子九十七人，诏令赐狼所杀者每人钱三千。
English: On the 11th day of November in winter, there were ninety-seven wolf-eating women in Bodu and Puyin, and the imperial edict gave each person killed by the wolf three thousand yuan.

古文：辛卯，初令郡国举孝廉，限年四十以上，诸生通章句，文吏能笺奏，乃得应选；其有茂才异行，若颜渊、子奇，不拘年齿。
现代文：十八日，开始命令郡国举荐孝廉，限年四十岁以上，诸生要通章句，文吏要能办笺奏，才能应选；有真才实学，有卓越的德行，像颜渊、子奇那样的人，就不拘年龄高低。
English: On the 18th, it began to order the county to nominate the filial piety, the age limit is more than forty years old, all the students should know the chapter and verse, the clerks should be able to play the harp, in order to be selected; there are real talents, real learning, and outstanding virtues, people like Yan Yuan and Ziqi, regardless of age.

古文：十二月丁未，东平王敞薨。
现代文：十二月初五，东平王刘敞逝世。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, King Liu Chang of Dongping passed away.

古文：庚戌，复置玄菟郡屯田六部。
现代文：初八，恢复设置玄菟郡屯田六部。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the setting up of the 6th district of Tonden, Xuanzang County was resumed.

古文：闰月丁亥，令诸以诏除为郎，年四十以上课试如孝廉科者，得参廉选，岁举一人。
现代文：闰十二月十五日，命令因诏任为郎，年龄在四十岁以上经过考查考核一如孝廉科的，可以参加孝廉选举，一年举一人。
English: On the 15th day of the intercalary month of December, it was ordered that anyone over the age of 40 who had passed the examination of filial piety could participate in the election of filial piety, one person per year.

古文：戊子，客星出天苑。
现代文：十六日，有客星出现于天苑。
English: On the 16th, a guest star appeared in Tianyuan.

古文：《书》歌股肱，《诗》刺三事。今刺史、二千石之选，归任三司。
现代文：《尚书》上歌颂英明的元首，得到股肱般的好助手。《诗经》上却讽刺那些大夫、诸侯都不肯夙夜不停地勤于政务的怠惰现象。现在规定刺史、二千石的人选，全由太尉、司空、司徒选遴委任。
English: The "Shoshu" praises the wise head of state and praises his good assistants. The "Shisho" satirizes the laziness of those doctors and lords who do not want to devote themselves to government affairs day and night. Now, it is stipulated that the candidates of 2,000 koku are all selected and appointed by the captain, the secretary, and the secretary.

古文：其简序先后，精核高下，岁月之次，文武之宜，务存厥衷。 庚子，恭陵百丈庑灾。
现代文：选择顺序的先后，仔细考核高下，岁月时间的次第，任文任武的定夺，一定要符合原来的本意。 二十八日，安帝恭陵百丈堂下周屋遭火灾。
English: The sequence of selection, the careful assessment of high and low, the passage of time, and the decision of Renwen Renwu must be consistent with the original intention.On the 28th, the next floor of the Andean Mausoleum Baizhang Hall was destroyed by fire.

古文：是岁，起西苑，修饰宫殿。
现代文：这年，起西苑，修饰宫殿。
English: In this year, the West Garden was built to decorate the palace.

古文：二年春二月甲申，诏以吴郡、会稽饥荒，贷人种粮。
现代文：二年春二月十三日，诏令因吴郡、会稽饥荒，贷给人民种子口粮。
English: On February 13, the spring of the second year, the imperial edict was issued to lend the people seed rations due to the famine in Wu County and Huaiqi.

古文：三月，使匈奴中郎将王稠率左骨都侯等击鲜卑，破之。
现代文：三月，使匈奴中郎将王稠率领左骨都侯等攻击鲜卑，把他们打败。
English: In March, he ordered the Xiongnu middlemen to attack the Xianbei, led by Wang Qiushu and the left-wing capitalists, and defeated them.

古文：辛酉，除京师耆儒年六十以上四十八人补郎、舍人及诸王国郎。
现代文：二十一日，任命京师年老博学的儒者六十岁以上的四十八人补郎、舍人及诸王国郎。
English: On the 21st, 48 old and erudite Confucianists over the age of 60 from Beijing were appointed as Miro, Shojin and other imperial princes.

古文：夏四月，复置陇西南部都尉官。
现代文：夏四月，恢复设置陇西南部都尉官。
English: In the summer of April, the post of lieutenant in the southwestern part of Gansu was restored.

古文：己亥，京师地震。
现代文：二十九日，京师地震。
English: On the 29th, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：五月庚子，诏曰： 朕以不德，统奉鸿业，无以奉顺乾坤，协序阴阳，灾眚屡见，咎征仍臻。
现代文：五月初一，诏令说 ：我以薄德之身，继承帝业，不足以顺应乾坤，协调阴阳，以致天灾屡见，咎戾惩罚相继而来。
English: On the first day of May, the imperial edict said, "I have inherited the imperial succession with a weak moral character, which is not enough to conform to the universe and coordinate the yin and yang, so that natural disasters are frequent, and blame and punishment come one after another.

古文：地动之异，发自京师，矜矜祗畏，不知所裁。
现代文：地动这样的特异变故，从京师开始，令我战栗恐惧，不知怎么办才好。
English: Such a strange change in the earth's movement, starting from the Beijing Division, made me tremble with fear, and I didn't know what to do.

古文：群公卿士将何以匡辅不逮，奉答戒异？
现代文：众多的公卿官员，你们应怎样来匡辅我的不够，以答谢上天对我的特别警告呢？
English: Many noble officials, how should you make up for my insufficiency, in response to God's special warning to me?

古文：异不空设，必有所应，其各悉心直言厥咎，靡有所讳。 戊午，司空王龚免。
现代文：特异的变故不是空幻的，一定有实际相应的事物存在，切望大家照直说出我的过错，不要顾忌隐瞒。 十九日，司空王龚免职。
English: Unusual changes are not illusory, there must be actual corresponding things. I sincerely hope that everyone will tell me what I did wrong, and not be afraid to hide it. On the 19th, Sikuo Wang Ye was relieved of his duties.

古文：六月辛未，太常鲁国孔扶为司空。
现代文：六月初二，任命太常鲁国孔扶为司空。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Kong Fu of Taizhonglu Province was appointed as the Air Vice Marshal.

古文：疏勒国献师子、封牛。
现代文：疏勒国献狮子、峰牛。
English: Shule offered a lion and a mountain ox.

古文：丁丑，洛阳地陷。
现代文：初八，洛阳地陷。
English: In the early eighties, Luoyang was submerged.

古文：是月，旱。
现代文：这月，天旱。
English: This month, the drought is over.

古文：秋七月己未，太尉庞参免。
现代文：秋七月二十日，太尉庞参免职。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, Lieutenant Pang Sang was relieved of his duties.

古文：八月己巳，大鸿胪沛国施延为太尉。
现代文：八月初一，任命太鸿胪沛国施延为太尉。
English: On the first day of August, Taihong Gongpei appointed Shi Yan to the rank of Second Lieutenant.

古文：鲜卑寇代郡。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯代郡。
English: It's a new low to invade our county.

古文：冬十月庚午，行礼辟雍，奏应钟，始复黄钟，作乐器随月律。
现代文：冬十月初三，在辟雍举行祭祀礼，奏应钟，开始恢复黄钟，从此作乐器，按《月令》的规定，修复旧典。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, a sacrificial ceremony was held in Biyong, and the bell was rung, and the restoration of the yellow bell began. From then on, it was used as a musical instrument, and the old book was restored according to the provisions of the "Monthly Regulation."

古文：三年春二月己丑，诏以久旱，京师诸狱无轻重皆且勿考竟，须得澍雨。
现代文：三年春二月二十四日，朝廷认为因久旱，京师各监狱囚犯，无分罪恶轻重，暂且都不考问追究，要得到大雨以后再办。
English: On February 24th, the third year of spring, the imperial court decided that due to the long drought, the prisoners in the prisons of the Beijing division had no distinction between the severity of the crime, and would not be investigated for the time being. It would be dealt with after the heavy rain.

古文：三月庚戌，益州盗贼劫质令长，杀列侯。
现代文：三月十五日，益州盗贼劫持令长为人质，杀列侯。
English: On March 15th, thieves in Yizhou took the governor hostage and killed him.

古文：夏四月丙寅，车师后部司马率后部王加特奴等掩击匈奴，大破之，获其季母。
现代文：夏四月初二，车师后部司马率领后部王加特奴等袭击匈奴，匈奴大败，获匈奴单于叔母。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the rear division Sima led by the rear division Wang Gatnu attacked the Xiongnu, the Xiongnu was defeated, and the Xiongnu was defeated.

古文：五月戊戌，制诏曰： 昔我太宗，丕显之德，假于上下，俭以恤民，政致康乂。
现代文：五月初四，帝诏令说： 从前我太宗皇帝，功德大明，嘉美于上下，俭约恤民，因而政局安治。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, the imperial edict said: "Once I was the emperor of Taizong, my merits were great, my beauty was above and below, I was frugal and compassionate to the people, so the political situation was stable.

古文：朕秉事不明，政失厥道，天地谴怒，大变仍见。
现代文：我呢，办理事情不精明，国家大事有失偏颇，天地愤怒而谴责我，巨大的变异一再发生。
English: I, on the other hand, have not been astute in handling affairs, have made mistakes in handling national affairs, and have been condemned by the wrath of heaven and earth. Huge changes have occurred again and again.

古文：春夏连旱，寇贼弥繁，元元被害，朕甚愍之。
现代文：春天夏天接连遭旱灾，盗贼越来越多，老百姓广为受害，我心里十分怜悯。
English: I feel very sorry for the people who are suffering from the droughts in spring and summer, the increasing number of thieves, and the widespread suffering of the people.

古文：嘉与海内洗心更始。
现代文：现在我奖励优待海内，洗心革面，自新振作，从头再来。
English: Now I reward preferential treatment at home, wash my heart and face, rejuvenate myself, and start over again.

古文：其大赦天下，自殊死以下谋反大逆诸犯不当得赦者，皆赦除之。
现代文：大赦天下，自斩首罪以下除谋反大逆不道不应当赦罪的以外，一律赦免。
English: Amnesty to the world, from the crime of beheading down, except for the crime of conspiring to commit high treason, which should not be pardoned, all are pardoned.

古文：赐民年八十以上米，人一斛，肉二十斤，酒五斗；九十以上加赐帛，人二匹，絮三斤。 
现代文：赏赐平民年八十以上的每人一斛米，肉二十斤，酒五斗；九十岁以上的，每人加帛二匹，棉花三斤。 
English: Civilians over the age of 80 will be rewarded with a bowl of rice, 20 catties of meat, and five barrels of wine; those over the age of 90 will receive two horses and three catties of cotton.

古文：秋七月庚戌，钟羌寇陇西、汉阳。
现代文：秋七月十七日，钟羌寇掠陇西、汉阳。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the bell-clanging bandits raided west Hunan and Hanyang.

古文：冬十月，护羌校尉马续击破之。
现代文：冬十月，护羌校尉冯续把他们打败。
English: In the winter of October, Lieutenant Feng Zhi defeated them.

古文：十一月壬寅，司徒刘崎、司空孔扶免。
现代文：十一月十一日，司徒刘崎、司空孔扶免职。
English: On November 11th, Liu Qi and Kong Fu were relieved of their duties.

古文：乙巳，大司农南郡黄尚为司徒，光禄勋河东王卓为司空。
现代文：十四日，任大司农南郡黄尚为司徒，任光禄勋河东王卓为司空。
English: On the 14th, Huang Shang, the director-general of Nongnan County, was appointed as the disciple, and Wang Zhuo, the director-general of Guanglu Xunhe East, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：丙午，武都塞上屯羌及外羌攻破屯官，驱略人畜。
现代文：十五日，武都塞上屯羌及外羌攻破屯官，赶走掳掠我人民及牲口。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Wudus besieged the camp and the outposts, defeated the camp officials, and drove away and plundered our people and livestock.

古文：四年春二月丙子，初听中官得以养子为后，世袭封爵。
现代文：四年春二月十六日，开始让宦官可以养子为后人，并世袭封爵。
English: On the 16th day of February in the spring of the fourth year, it began to allow eunuchs to adopt sons for posterity, and hereditary knighthood.

古文：自去冬旱，至于是月。
现代文：从去年冬干旱起，直至今年二月。
English: From last winter's drought until February of this year.

古文：谒者马贤击钟羌，大破之。
现代文：谒者马贤进击钟羌，把他们打得大败。
English: The eunuch Ma Xian entered the bell tower and defeated them.

古文：夏四月甲子，太尉施延免。
现代文：夏四月初五，太尉施延免职。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, Lieutenant Shi Yan was relieved of his duties.

古文：戊寅，执金吾梁商为大将军，前太尉庞参为太尉。
现代文：十四日，执金吾梁商为将军，前太尉庞参为太尉。
English: On the 14th, the regent, Wu Liang Shang, was promoted to general, and the former second lieutenant, Pang San, was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：六月己未，梁王匡薨。
现代文：六月初一，梁王刘匡逝世。
English: On the first day of June, Liang Wang Liu Kuang passed away.

古文：秋七月己亥，济北王登薨。
现代文：秋七月十二日，济北王刘登逝世。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Liu Deng, King of Northern Jilin, passed away.

古文：闰月丁亥朔，日有食之。冬十月，乌桓寇云中。
现代文：闰八月初一，日蚀。冬十月，乌桓寇掠云中。
English: On the first day of the leap month of August, a solar eclipse. In the winter of October, a black swan swoops through the clouds.

古文：十一月，围度辽将军耿晔于兰池，发诸郡兵救之，乌桓退走。
现代文：十一月，围度辽将军耿晔于兰池，开发诸郡兵往救，乌桓退走。
English: In November, General Geng Liao besieged Lanchi, mobilized soldiers from all counties to help, and Wu Huan retreated.

古文：十二月甲寅，京师地震。
现代文：十二月三十日，京师地震。
English: December 30th, Beijing earthquake.

古文：永和元年春正月，夫馀王来朝。
现代文：永和元年春正月，夫余王来朝拜。
English: In the first month of spring of the first year of Yonghe, her husband Yu Wang came to pay homage.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 朕秉政不明，灾眚屡臻。典籍所忌，震食为重。
现代文：初一，诏令说： 我的政治不清明，灾害经常发生，经典上所最忌讳的是地震与日食。
English: On the first day of the new year, the imperial edict said: My politics are unclear, disasters often occur, and the most taboo things in the classics are earthquakes and solar eclipses.

古文：今日变方远，地摇京师，咎征不虚，必有所应。
现代文：现在日蚀虽在远方，京师却发生地震。这种咎戾的征兆不是虚幻的，一定是实际事物的反应。
English: Although the eclipse is now in the distance, an earthquake has occurred in Beijing. This ominous sign is not illusory, but must be the reaction of real things.

古文：群公百僚其各上封事，指陈得失，靡有所讳。 己巳，宗祀明堂，登灵台，改元永和，大赦天下。
现代文：希望群公百僚都能秘密提出意见，指出利害得失，不要有什么顾忌隐瞒。 十五日，在明堂举行祭祀，登灵台，改元永和，大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a religious service will be held in the Ming Hall, the tomb will be opened, the era will be changed forever, and there will be a general amnesty.

古文：秋七月，偃师蝗。
现代文：秋七月，偃师蝗灾。
English: In the autumn and July, the locusts started to infest Kashi.

古文：冬十月丁亥，承福殿火，帝避御云台。
现代文：冬十月初七，承福殿火灾，帝避到云台。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, there was a fire at the Chengfu Hall, and the emperor fled to Yuntai.

古文：十一月丙子，太尉庞参罢。
现代文：十一月二十七日，太尉庞参免职。
English: On November 27th, Lieutenant Pang Sang was relieved of duty.

古文：十二月，象林蛮夷叛。
现代文：十二月，象林蛮夷反叛。
English: In December, the Xianglin barbarians rebelled.

古文：乙巳，以前司空王龚为太尉。
现代文：二十六日，以前司空王龚为太尉。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yao, the former Siku, was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：二年春正月，武陵蛮叛，围充县，又寇夷道。
现代文：二年春正月，武陵蛮叛乱，围充县，又寇扰夷道。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, Wuling rebelled violently, besieged the county, and encroached on the Yi Road.

古文：二月，广汉属国都尉击破白马羌。
现代文：二月，广汉属国都尉击破白马羌。
English: In February, the captain of the Guanghan vassal state defeated the White Horse.

古文：武陵太守李进击叛蛮，破之。
现代文：武陵太守李进进击叛蛮，把他们打败。
English: Wuling Governor Li Jinjin attacked the rebels and defeated them.

古文：三月辛亥，北海王翼薨。
现代文：三月初四，北海王刘翼逝世。
English: On March 4th, Liu Ying, the king of the North Sea, passed away.

古文：乙卯，司空王卓薨。
现代文：初八，司空王卓逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Sikuo Wangzhuo passed away.

古文：丁丑，光禄勋冯翊郭虔为司空。
现代文：三十日，任光禄勋冯翊郭虔为司空。
English: On the 30th, Ren Guanglu Honour Feng Yu Guoqian was appointed as the secretary.

古文：夏四月丙申，京师地震。
现代文：夏四月十九日，京师地震。
English: Summer, April 19th, Beijing earthquake.

古文：五月，日南叛蛮攻郡府。
现代文：五月，日南叛蛮攻打郡府。
English: In May, Nichinan rebels attacked the county seat.

古文：秋七月，九真、交阯二郡兵反。
现代文：秋七月，九真、交阝止二郡兵反叛。
English: In autumn and July, two county soldiers rebelled in Jiuzhen and Jiaozuo.

古文：八月庚子，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：八月二十五日，火星冲犯南斗六星。
English: On August 25th, Mars collided with the Southern Dipper.

古文：江夏盗贼杀邾长。
现代文：江夏盗贼杀邾县县长。
English: Thieves in Jiangxia kill the governor of Handan County.

古文：冬十月甲申，行幸长安，所过鳏、寡、孤、独、贫不能自存者赐粟，人五斛。
现代文：冬十月初十，帝到长安，所过之处，鳏、寡、孤、独、贫不能活命的每人赐粟五斛。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor arrived in Chang'an. Wherever he went, he gave five ears of millet to each of the destitute, widows, orphans, and those who were too poor to survive.

古文：庚子，幸未央宫，会三辅郡守、都尉及官属，劳赐作乐。
现代文：二十六日，帝到未央宫，会三辅郡守、都尉及官属，慰劳赏赐并作乐。
English: On the 26th, the emperor arrived at the Weiyang Palace, met with the governor of Sanshu County, the captain and the officials, and rewarded and entertained them.

古文：十一月丙午，祠高庙。
现代文：十一月初二，祭祀高庙。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the high temple will be held.

古文：丁未，遂有事十一陵。丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：初三，祭祀十一陵。二十三日，京师地震。
English: On the third day of the first month, the eleven mausoleums were dedicated. On the 23rd day, the Beijing earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月乙亥，至自长安。
现代文：十二月初二，帝自长安回洛阳。
English: On the second day of December, the emperor returned to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：三年春二月乙亥，京师及金城、陇西地震，二郡山岸崩，地陷。
现代文：三年春二月初三，京师及金城、陇西地震，二郡山岸崩裂，地下陷。
English: On the third day of the second month of the third year of spring, the earthquake in Beijing, Jincheng and Shaanxi caused the mountains in the two counties to collapse and sink underground.

古文：戊子，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：十六日，太白星冲犯火星。
English: On the 16th, Taibai Star collided with Mars.

古文：夏四月，九江贼蔡伯流寇郡界，及广陵，杀江都长。
现代文：夏四月，九江贼蔡伯流寇扰郡界，到广陵，杀江都县长。
English: In the summer of April, Cai Bo, the thief of Jiujiang, invaded the county boundary, went to Guangling, and killed the governor of Jiangdu County.

古文：戊戌，遣光禄大夫案行金城、陇西，赐压死者年七岁以上钱，人二千；一家皆被害，为收敛之。
现代文：二十七日，派光禄大夫巡视金城、陇西，赐被地震压死年在七岁以上的每人钱二千；一家都被害，便进行收殓。
English: On the 27th, Dr. Guanglu was sent to inspect Jincheng and Shaanxi Province. He gave 2,000 yuan to each person over the age of seven who was crushed to death by the earthquake.

古文：除今年田租，尤甚者勿收口赋。
现代文：免除今年田租。遭灾更严重的，不收人口税。
English: This year's rice field rent will be exempted. If the disaster is more serious, the population tax will not be collected.

古文：闰月，蔡伯流等率众诣徐州刺史应志降。
现代文：闰四月，蔡伯流等率领部众到徐州刺史应志跟前投降。
English: On leap April, Cai Bo-liu and others led the troops to Xuzhou to surrender to Ying Zhi.

古文：己酉，京师地震。
现代文：初八，京师地震。
English: Hatsuhachi, Kyoto earthquake.

古文：五月，吴郡丞羊珍反，攻郡府，太守王衡破斩之。
现代文：五月，吴郡丞羊珍反叛，攻郡府，太守王衡把他打败并杀掉。
English: In May, Wu County Governor Yang Zhen rebelled and attacked the county government. Governor Wang Heng defeated and killed him.

古文：六月辛丑，琅邪王遵薨。
现代文：六月初一，琅笽王刘遵逝世。
English: On the first day of June, Liu Zun passed away.

古文：九真太守祝良、交阯刺史张乔慰诱日南叛蛮，降之，岭外平。
现代文：九真太守祝良、交阝止刺史张乔慰问诱导日南叛变蛮人，使降附，岭外平息。
English: Zhu Liang, the guardian of the Nine Immortals, and Zhang Qiao, the consoler of the Jiaotong Emperor, induced the Japanese and South Korean rebels to turn into barbarians, which led to their subjugation and the subduing of Lingwai.

古文：秋七月丙戌，济北王多薨。
现代文：秋七月十七日，济北王刘多逝世。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Liu Duo, King of Jibei, passed away.

古文：八月己未，司徒黄尚免。
现代文：八月二十日，司徒黄尚免职。
English: On August 20, Stephen Huang was relieved of his duties.

古文：九月己酉，光禄勋长沙刘寿为司徒。
现代文：九月己酉，任光禄勋长沙刘寿为司徒。
English: In September, he was awarded the Order of the Star of the Republic of China (Order of the Star of the Republic of China) and became a disciple of Liu Shou.

古文：丙戌，令大将军、三公各举故刺史、二千石及见令、长、郎、谒者、四府掾属刚毅武猛有谋谟任将帅者各二人，特进、卿、校尉各一人。
现代文：十七日，命令大将军、三公各举荐前刺史、二千石及县令、长、郎、谒者、四府掾属刚毅武猛有谋略能任将帅者各二人，特进、卿、校尉各一人。
English: On the seventeenth day, he ordered the general and the three princes to each recommend two thousand koku, and the county magistrate, the chief, the vassal, and the eunuch, as well as two persons from each of the four prefectures who were strong, brave, and strategic, and who could be appointed as the general, and one person each from the special envoy, the lord, and the lieutenant.

古文：冬十月，烧当羌寇金城，护羌校尉马贤击破之，羌遂相招而叛。
现代文：冬十月，烧当羌寇金城，护羌校尉马贤把他们打败。羌人于是相互招引叛变。
English: In the winter of October, when the Qiang and Qiao attacked Jincheng, the garrison captain Ma Xian defeated them. The Qiang people then invited each other to mutiny.

古文：十二月戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：四年春正月庚辰，中常侍张逵、蘧政、杨定等有罪诛，连及弘农太守张凤、安平相杨晧，下狱死。
现代文：四年春正月十三日，中常侍张逵、蘧政、杨定有罪被诛，连及弘农太守张凤、安平相杨皓，监死狱中。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Spring, the middle-ranking attendants Zhang Xuan, Yan Zheng and Yang Ding were arrested as guilty, and even the governor of Hongnong, Zhang Feng, and the minister of Anping, Yang Xuan, were imprisoned.

古文：三月乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：三月初九，京师地震。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：夏四月癸卯，护羌校尉马贤讨烧当羌，大破之。
现代文：夏四月初八，护羌校尉马贤讨伐烧当羌，打得他们大败。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, Captain Ma Xian of the Minesweepers went to fight the logging and burning of the Minesweepers and defeated them.

古文：戊午，大赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：赐民爵及粟、帛各有差。
现代文：赏赐人民爵位及粟帛，分别不等。
English: People were awarded titles of nobility and poppy wreaths, but to varying degrees.

古文：五月戊辰，封故济北惠王寿子子安为济北王。
现代文：五月初三，封已故济北惠王刘寿子刘安为济北王。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Liu An, the son of Liu Shou, the late King Hui of Jibei, was enthroned as King of Jibei.

古文：秋八月，太原郡旱，民庶流冗。
现代文：秋八月，太原郡干旱，平民百姓流亡散失。
English: In autumn and August, Taiyuan County was hit by drought, and the common people were exiled and dispersed.

古文：癸丑，遣光禄大夫案行禀贷，除更赋。
现代文：二十日，遣光禄大夫巡视考察，以廪谷贷赈，免除戍边的赋税。
English: On the 20th, Dr. Quanguanglu was sent to inspect the situation, and he exempted the yakitori from tax with the help of the yakitori loan.

古文：冬十月戊午，校猎上林苑，历函谷关而还。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，围猎上林苑，经函谷关还宫。
English: On the 26th day of October in winter, they went hunting in Shanglinyuan and returned to the palace via Hakodate.

古文：十一月丙寅，幸广成苑。
现代文：十一月初四，帝到广成苑。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the emperor arrived at Guangcheng Courtyard.

古文：五年春二月戊申，京师地震。
现代文：五年春二月十七日，京师地震。
English: On the 17th day of February in the spring of the fifth year, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：夏四月庚子，中山王弘薨。
现代文：夏四月初十，中山王刘弘逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhongshan King Liu Hong passed away.

古文：南匈奴左部句龙大人吾斯、车纽等叛，围美稷。
现代文：南匈奴左部句龙大人吾斯、车纽等反叛，围美稷县。
English: Southern Xiongnu rebelled against the left-wing Qulong adults, such as Wus and Che Niu, and went to Waimei County.

古文：五月，度辽将军马续讨吾斯、车纽，破之，使匈奴中郎将陈龟迫杀南单于。
现代文：五月，度辽将军马续讨伐吾斯、车纽，把他们打败，派使匈奴中郎将陈龟进逼杀了南单于。
English: In May, General Du Liao continued to fight against Vargus and Chexiu, defeated them, and sent Xiong Nongzhong to force Chen Guijin to kill Nan Dan Yu.

古文：己丑晦，日有食之。目冻羌寇三辅，杀令长。
现代文：三十日，日蚀。且冻羌寇掠三辅，杀死县令和县长。
English: On the 30th, there was a solar eclipse. And the frosty cormorant raided Sansui, killing the county magistrate and the county governor.

古文：丁丑，令死罪以下及亡命赎，各有差。
现代文：丁丑，命令死罪以下及逃亡的囚犯赎罪，分别不同。
English: Ding Xi, ordered the death penalty or less and escaped prisoners to atone, respectively, are different.

古文：九月，令扶风、汉阳筑陇道坞三百所，置屯兵。
现代文：九月，命令扶风、汉阳，筑陇道防御用的土障三百所，并置兵屯守。
English: In September, Fu Feng and Hanyang were ordered to build 300 earthen barriers for the defense of Lushan Road, and soldiers were stationed there.

古文：辛未，太尉王龚罢。
现代文：十四日，太尉王龚罢免。
English: On the 14th, Lieutenant Wang Xi was dismissed.

古文：且冻羌寇武都，烧陇关。
现代文：且冻羌寇掠武都，烧陇关。
English: And the frozen invaders plundered the capital and burned Yingguan.

古文：壬午，太常桓焉为太尉。
现代文：二十五日，任太常桓焉为太尉。
English: On the 25th, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：丁亥，徙西河郡居离石，上郡居夏阳，朔方居五原。
现代文：三十日，迁西河郡首府于离石，上郡首府于夏阳，朔方首府于五原。
English: On the 30th, the capital of Xihe County was moved to Lishi, the capital of Shang County to Xiayang, and the capital of Shuofang County to Wuhuan.

古文：句龙吾斯等东引乌桓，西收羌胡，寇上郡，立车纽为单于。
现代文：南匈奴句龙吾斯等东引乌桓，西收羌胡，寇掠上郡，立车纽为单于。
English: Southern Xiongnu sayings such as "Dragon Wus" refer to Wu Huan in the east, Wu Hu in the west, and Koga in the upper county.

古文：冬十一月辛巳，遣使匈奴中郎将张耽击破之，车纽降。
现代文：冬十一月二十五日，遣使匈奴中郎将张耽把他们打败，车纽投降。
English: On the 25th day of the 11th month of winter, Zhang Tan was sent by the Xiongnu to defeat them, and he surrendered.

古文：六年春正月丙子，征西将军马贤与且冻羌战于射姑山，贤军败没，安定太守郭璜下狱死。
现代文：六年春正月二十一日，征西将军马贤与且冻羌战于射姑山，马贤军败没，安定太守郭璜下狱监死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, the Western Conquest General Ma Xian led his troops into battle with Kechi Jiehong on Shayu Mountain. Ma Xian's army was defeated, and Guo Jiehong, the governor-general of Anping, was imprisoned and died.

古文：诏贷王、侯国租一岁。
现代文：诏令宽免王、侯国田租一年。
English: The Emperor's edict pardoned Wang, and he was allowed to rent the farmland for one year.

古文：闰月，恐唐羌寇陇西，遂及三辅。
现代文：闰正月，巩唐羌寇掠陇西，波及三辅地区。
English: In the leap month, the Gong Tang raiders raided the west of Gansu, affecting the Sanfu area.

古文：二月丁巳，有星孛于营室。
现代文：二月初三，彗星见于二十八宿之一的营室星。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the comet was seen in Yingshu Star, one of the twenty-eight constellations.

古文：三月，武威太守赵冲讨巩唐羌，破之。
现代文：三月，武威太守赵冲讨伐巩唐羌，打败他们。
English: In March, Zhao Chong, the Wuwei daimyō, led a crusade against the Qagong of Tang and defeated them.

古文：庚子，司空郭虔免。
现代文：十六日，司空郭虔免职。
English: On the 16th, Secretary Guo Guoqian was relieved of his duties.

古文：乙巳，河间王政薨。
现代文：二十一日，河间王刘政逝世。
English: On the 21st, Liu Zheng, the king of Kawama, passed away.

古文：丙午，太仆赵戒为司空。
现代文：二十二日，任太仆赵戒为司空。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Jie was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：夏五月庚子，齐王无忌薨。
现代文：夏五月十七日，齐王刘无忌逝世。
English: On the 17th day of summer in May, King Liu of Qi passed away.

古文：使匈奴中郎将张耽大破乌桓、羌胡于天山。
现代文：使匈奴中郎将张耽大败乌桓、羌胡于天山。
English: So that Xiongnu Zhongro defeated Zhang Tan, Wu Kan, and Yan Hu in Tianshan.

古文：恐唐羌寇北地。
现代文：巩唐羌寇掠北地。
English: Gong Tang's raiding party raided the north.

古文：秋七月甲午，诏假民有赀者户钱一千。
现代文：秋七月十二日，诏老百姓有钱的每户借钱一千。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, it was decreed that every household with money could borrow one thousand yuan.

古文：八月丙辰，大将军梁商薨；壬戌，河南尹梁冀为大将军。
现代文：八月初四，大将军梁商逝世；初十，河南尹梁冀为大将军。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the great general Liang Shang passed away; on the 10th day of the month, Henan Yin Liang Jie became the great general.

古文：九月，诸种羌寇武威。
现代文：九月，诸种羌寇掠武威。
English: In September, all kinds of raiders came out in force.

古文：辛亥晦，日有食之。冬十月癸丑，徙安定居扶风，北地居冯翔。
现代文：三十日，日蚀。冬十月初二，迁安定首府于扶风，北地首府于冯翊。
English: On the 30th, the solar eclipse. In winter, on the second day of October, the capital of stability was moved to Fufeng, and the capital of the north was moved to Fengyuan.

古文：十一月庚子，以执金吾张乔行车骑将军事，将兵屯三辅。
现代文：十一月二十日，以执金吾张乔代理车骑将军工作，统兵屯驻三辅。
English: On November 20th, Zhang Qiao, acting as the acting chariot and cavalry general, arrived in Sanfu.

古文：汉安元年春正月癸巳，宗祀明堂，大赦天下，改元汉安。
现代文：汉安元年春正月十四日，宗祀明堂，大赦天下，改元汉安。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of spring in the first year of the Han dynasty, Seishimyodo was amnestied and renamed Hanan.

古文：二月丙辰，诏大将军、公、卿举贤良方正、能探赜索隐者各一人。
现代文：二月初七，诏令大将军、公、卿推举贤良方正、能深入研究精微奥妙、寻求事物隐僻之理的人各一个。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to the generals, princes, and nobles to nominate one person each who was a wise and upright person, a person who was able to thoroughly study the subtleties and mysteries, and a person who was able to seek the hidden truth of things.

古文：秋七月，始置承华厩。
现代文：秋七月，开始设置承华厩蓄马。
English: In autumn and July, the Chenghua stables were set up to keep horses.

古文：八月，南匈奴左部大人句龙吾斯与薁鞬台耆等反叛。
现代文：八月，南匈奴左部大人句龙吾斯与薁鞬台耆等反叛。
English: In August, the left wing of the Southern Xiongnu rebelled, led by Gu Longwu and Xingtai.

古文：丁卯，遣侍中杜乔，光禄大夫周举，守光禄大夫郭遵、冯羡、栾巴、张纲、周栩、刘班等八人分行州、郡，班宣风化，举实臧否。
现代文：二十一日，派侍中杜乔、光禄大夫周举、代理光禄大夫郭遵、冯羡、栾巴、张纲、周栩、刘班等八人分途巡视州郡，颁布宣示风俗教化，举出实际情况进行好坏评定。
English: On the twenty-first day, eight people, including Du Qiao, Guanglu doctor Zhou Ji, acting Guanglu doctor Guo Zun, Feng Qian, Dongba, Zhang Gang, Zhou Tuo, and Liu Ban, were sent to inspect the state and county, promulgated the declaration of customs and education, and raised the actual situation for good or bad evaluation.

古文：九月庚寅，广陵盗贼张婴等寇郡县。
现代文：九月十四日，广陵盗贼张婴等侵犯郡县。
English: On September 14th, Guangling thief Zhang Ying and others invaded the county.

古文：冬十月辛未，太尉桓焉、司徒刘寿免。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，太尉桓焉、司徒刘寿免职。
English: On the 26th day of winter in October, Taifu Kanen resigned and Sito Liu Shou was dismissed.

古文：甲戌，行车骑将军张乔罢。
现代文：二十九日，代车骑将军张乔罢去。
English: On the 29th, the substitute driver Zhang Qiao left.

古文：十一月壬午，司隶校尉赵峻为太尉，大司农胡广为司徒。
现代文：十一月初七，任司隶校尉赵峻为太尉，任大司农胡广为司徒。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Zhao Jun, who was appointed as the first lieutenant of the division, was promoted to the second lieutenant, and Nong Hu Guang, who was appointed as the chief of the division, was promoted to the second lieutenant.

古文：癸卯，诏大将军、三公选武猛试用有效验任为将校者各一人。
现代文：二十八日，诏令大将军、三公选择武猛试用表现很好能任用为将校的人各一个。
English: On the 28th, the commander-in-chief and the three princes selected one person each who had performed well in the military trial and could be appointed as an officer.

古文：是岁，广陵贼张婴等诣太守张纲降。
现代文：这年，广陵盗贼张婴等到太守张纲面前投降。
English: In this year, the Guangling thief Zhang Ying waited until he surrendered in front of the Tai Shou Zhang Gang.

古文：二年春二月丙辰，鄯善国遣使贡献。
现代文：二年春二月十三日，善阝善国派使者送礼。
English: On the 13th day of February in the spring of the second year, Zensho Zenkoku sent an envoy to present gifts.

古文：夏四月庚戌，护羌校尉赵冲与汉阳太守张贡击烧何羌于参，破之。
现代文：夏四月初八，护羌校尉赵冲与汉阳太守张贡攻击烧何羌于参，把他们打败。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhao Chong, the lieutenant of the garrison, and Zhang Gong, the governor of Hanyang, attacked and defeated the troops of He Xuan and Yuzhan.

古文：六月乙丑，荧惑犯镇星。
现代文：六月二十四日，荧惑星冲犯土星。
English: On June 24th, the fluorescent planet will collide with Saturn.

古文：丙寅，立南匈奴守义王兜楼储为南单于。
现代文：二十五日，立南匈奴守义王兜楼储为南单于。
English: On the 25th, the Southern Xiongnu Warlord Yiwang Pavilion was established in Nandan.

古文：冬十月辛丑，令郡国中都官系囚殊死以下出缣赎，各有差；其不能入赎者，遣诣临羌县居作二岁。
现代文：冬十月初二，令郡国中都官对系囚斩首者以下出缣赎罪，缣数各不等；不能入缣的，送遣临羌县当佣人从事劳作二年。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the county's vice-governor ordered the heads of the prisoners to be beheaded, and the number of beheadings varied. Those who could not be beheaded were sent to Linyi County to work as servants for two years.

古文：甲辰，减百官奉。
现代文：初五，减少百官薪俸。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, the salaries of all government officials will be reduced.

古文：丙午，禁沽酒，又贷王、侯国租一岁。
现代文：初七，禁止买卖酒，宽免王、侯国田租一年。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the sale and purchase of alcohol was prohibited, and the king and the lord of the manor were pardoned and their land was rented for one year.

古文：闰王，赵冲击烧当羌于阿阳，破之。
现代文：闰十月，赵冲在阿阳攻击烧当羌，把他们打败。
English: In leap October, Zhao Chong attacked and defeated the Burnt Donkeys in Ayang.

古文：十一月，使匈奴中郎将马寔遣人刺杀句龙吾斯。
现代文：十一月，使匈奴中郎将马萛派人刺杀句龙吾斯。
English: In November, he ordered the Xiongnu leader to send someone to assassinate Gu Rongwu.

古文：十二月，杨、徐盗贼攻烧城寺，杀略吏民。
现代文：十二月，杨、徐盗贼攻烧城邑官舍。杀掠吏民。
English: In December, thieves Yang and Xu set fire to the government office in the city and killed and plundered officials and citizens.

古文：是岁，凉州地百八十震。
现代文：这年，凉州地区发生一百八十处地震。
English: This year, 180 earthquakes occurred in the Liangzhou region.

古文：建康元年正月辛丑，诏曰： 陇西、汉阳、张掖、北地、武威、武都，自去年九月已来，地百八十震，山谷坼裂，坏败城寺，杀害民庶。
现代文：建康元年春正月初三，诏令说 ：陇西、汉阳、张掖、北地、武威、武都，自去年九月以来，有一百八十处地震，山谷坼裂，坏败城寺，伤害民众。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of Jiankang in the first year of Jiankang, the edict said: "From Shaanxi, Hanyang, Zhangye, Hebei, Wuwei and Wudu, since last September, there have been 180 earthquakes, the valley has been split, the city temple has been destroyed, and the people have been harmed.

古文：夷狄叛逆，赋役重数，内外怨旷，惟咎叹息。
现代文：边寇叛逆，田赋徭役繁重，旷夫怨女，内外抱恨。想到这些咎戾，不胜叹息。
English: Border raids and rebellions, arduous work in the rice paddies, a quarrelsome husband and a resentful wife, and hatred both at home and abroad. It is impossible not to sigh when thinking of these misdeeds.

古文：其遣光禄大夫案行，宣畅恩泽，惠此下民，勿为烦扰。 
现代文：今派光禄大夫巡视检查，宣示理畅朝廷恩泽，加惠下民，不要烦扰。 
English: Now send Dr. Guanglu to inspect and declare the benevolence of the rational court and benefit the people, and do not disturb him.

古文：三月庚子，沛王广薨。
现代文：三月初三，沛王刘广逝世。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Liu Guang passed away.

古文：领护羌校尉卫琚追讨叛羌，破之。
现代文：领护羌校尉卫琚追逐讨伐叛羌，打败他们。
English: The leading bodyguard, Lieutenant Wei Jun, chased after the counter-revolutionaries and defeated them.

古文：南郡、江夏盗贼寇掠城邑，州郡讨平之。
现代文：南郡、江夏盗贼寇掠城邑，州郡把他们讨平。
English: Nan County and Jiangxia robbers plundered the towns, and the county leveled them.

古文：夏四月，使匈奴中郎将马寔击南匈奴左部，破之，于是胡羌、乌桓悉诣寔降。
现代文：夏四月，使匈奴中郎将马萛进击南匈奴左部，把他们打败，于是胡羌、乌桓全部到马萛面前投降。
English: In the summer of April, he ordered the Xiongnu middlemen to drive the horseshoe into the left part of the Southern Xiongnu, defeating them, so Hu Yao and Wu Huan all surrendered to the horseshoe.

古文：辛巳，立皇子炳为皇太子，改年建康，大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，立皇子刘炳为皇太子，改元建康，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day, the crown prince Liu Ye was established as the crown prince, and the Yuan Dynasty was reformed to Jiankang, and the world was amnestied.

古文：赐人爵各有差。
现代文：分别不等赐人爵位。
English: They are not entitled to a peerage.

古文：秋七月丙午，清河王延平薨。
现代文：秋七月十一日，清河王刘延平逝世。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, Liu Yanping, the king of Qinghe, passed away.

古文：八月，杨、徐盗贼范容、周生等寇掠城邑，遣御史中丞冯赦督州郡兵讨之。
现代文：八月，扬、徐盗贼范容、周生等寇掠城邑，派御史中丞冯赦督促州郡兵进行讨伐。
English: In August, Yang, Xu thief Fan Rong, Zhou Sheng and other robbers pillaged the city, and sent the historian Feng Mengdu to urge the county soldiers to carry out the crusade.

古文：庚午，帝崩于玉堂前殿，时年三十。
现代文：初六，帝在玉堂前殿逝世，年三十岁。
English: At the age of six, the emperor died in the front hall of the Jade Hall at the age of thirty.

古文：遗诏无起寝庙，敛以故服，珠玉玩好皆不得下。
现代文：遗下诏书不要起寝庙，装殓现存衣服，珠玉玩好都不得陪葬。
English: If you leave an edict, don't go to the temple, don't decorate your existing clothes, don't play with jewels, and don't accompany the funeral.

古文：论曰：古之人君，离幽放而反国祚者有矣，莫不矫鉴前违，审识情伪，无忘在外之忧，故能中兴其业。
现代文：史家评论说：古时候的人君，遭到幽禁放逐而终于返回来登上皇位是有的，莫不矫正借鉴过去的经验教训，审察识别人情的真伪，而不忘记在外时的艰难险阻，故能中兴大业。
English: Historians commented: In ancient times, there were people who were banished and exiled and finally returned to ascend the throne. It is necessary to learn from past experience and lessons, examine and identify the truth and falsity of other people's sentiments, and not forget the difficulties and obstacles when they were abroad, so they can promote the cause.

古文：观夫顺朝之政，殆不然乎？何其效僻之多与？
现代文：孝顺帝由皇太子废为济阴王，几经周折，才继承帝业，和过去那些遭幽禁的人君大概不是差不多一样吗？
English: Emperor Xiaojun was dethroned by the crown prince and became the king of Jiyin. It took several twists and turns before he succeeded to the throne. Isn't he pretty much the same as those who were imprisoned in the past?

古文：孝冲皇帝讳炳，顺帝之子也。
现代文：考察顺帝朝政，却为何没有多大的成就，倒是仿效以前的弊端很多而不能改正呢？
English: Examine the Shun Emperor's reign, but why is there not much achievement, but there are many drawbacks of emulating the past and cannot be corrected?

古文：母曰虞贵人。
现代文：孝冲皇帝刘炳，顺帝的儿子。母虞贵人。
English: Emperor Xiaochong Liu Ye, the son of Emperor Shun, and his mother Gu Guiren.

古文：建康元年立为皇太子，其年八月庚午，即皇帝位，年二岁。
现代文：建康元年立为皇太子，这年八月初六，登皇帝位，时年二岁。
English: Jiankang became crown prince in the first year of the year, and ascended to the throne on the sixth day of the eighth month of that year, when he was two years old.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：太后临朝。
现代文：太后临朝处理国事。
English: The Empress Dowager is in charge of state affairs.

古文：丁丑，以太尉赵峻为太傅；大司农李固为太尉，参录尚书事。
现代文：十三日，任太尉赵峻为太傅；任大司农李固为太尉，参录尚书工作。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Jun, who was appointed as the first lieutenant, became the second lieutenant; and Nong Li Gu, who was appointed as the chief secretary, became the second lieutenant.

古文：九月丙午，葬孝顺皇帝于宪陵，庙曰敬宗。
现代文：九月十二日，葬孝顺皇帝于宪陵，庙号敬宗。
English: On September 12th, the funeral of Emperor Xiaozhun was held at the Mausoleum of Emperor Xian, and the temple's name was changed to Keizong.

古文：是日，京师及太原、雁门地震，三郡水涌土裂。
现代文：这天，京师及太原、雁门地震，三郡水涌土裂。
English: On this day, the earthquake in Beijing, Taiyuan, and Yanmen, and the landslide in Shuiyung in the three counties.

古文：庚戌，诏三公、特进、侯、卿、校尉，举贤良方正、幽逸修道之士各一人，百僚皆上封事。
现代文：十六日，诏令三公、特进、侯、卿、校尉，举荐贤良方正，深居隐逸修道者各一人，百官都上书秘密检举建议各方面问题。
English: On the 16th, the three princes, the special envoy, the marquess, the lord, and the lieutenant, recommended the wise and virtuous Fang Zheng, and each one of the monks who lived in seclusion, and all the officials submitted secret reports and suggestions on various issues.

古文：己未，九江太守丘腾有罪，下狱死。
现代文：二十五日，九江太守丘腾有罪，监死狱中。
English: On the 25th, the governor of Jiujiang, Quteng, was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：杨州刺史尹耀、九江太守邓显讨贼范容等于历阳，军败，耀、显为贼所殁。
现代文：扬州刺史尹耀、九江太守邓显讨伐盗贼范容等于历阳，军败，尹耀、邓显为贼所杀。
English: Yangzhou prefect Yin Yao and Jiujiang governor Deng Xian fought against the thieves with the same standard as Liyang, and were defeated. Yin Yao and Deng Xian were killed by the thieves.

古文：冬十月，日南蛮夷攻烧城邑，交阯刺史夏方招诱降之。
现代文：冬十月，日南蛮夷攻打烧掠城邑，交阝止刺史夏方把他招抚诱降了。
English: In the winter of October, the Japanese and South Korean barbarians attacked, burned and pillaged the city. Xia Fang coaxed and enticed him to surrender.

古文：壬申，常山王仪薨。
现代文：初九，常山王刘仪逝世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Liu Yi, the King of Changshan, passed away.

古文：己卯，零陵太守刘康坐杀无辜，下狱死。
现代文：十六日，零陵太守刘康因杀无辜，监死狱中。
English: On the 16th, Liu Kang, the governor of Luling, was sentenced to death in prison for killing an innocent person.

古文：十一月，九江盗贼徐凤、马勉等称 无上将军 ，攻烧城邑。
现代文：十一月，九江盗贼徐凤、马勉等称 无上将军 ，进攻烧掠城邑。
English: In November, the Jiujiang thieves Xu Feng, Ma Zhen and others, known as supreme generals, attacked and plundered cities.

古文：己酉，令郡国中都官系囚减死一等，徙边；谋反大逆，不用此令。
现代文：十六日，命令郡国中都官系囚减死罪一等，迁往边远地区；谋反大逆罪，不用此令。
English: On the 16th, an order was issued to commute the death penalty to the first degree for the metropolitan prisoners in the county and relocate them to a remote area; for the crime of conspiring to commit high treason, there was no need for this order.

古文：十二月，九江贼黄虎等攻合肥。
现代文：十二月，九江盗贼黄虎攻打合肥。
English: In December, the Yellow Tigers, the thieves of Jiujiang, attacked Hefei.

古文：是岁，群盗发宪陵。
现代文：这年，一群盗贼发掘宪陵。
English: This year, a group of thieves excavated the mausoleum.

古文：护羌校尉赵冲追击叛羌于鹯阴河，战役。
现代文：护羌校尉赵冲追击叛羌于鸟阴河，赵冲战死。
English: Zhao Chong, captain of the mule guards, chased the traitorous mule into the Bird Yin River. Zhao Chong was killed in the battle.

古文：永憙元年春正月戊戌，帝崩于玉堂前殿，年三岁。
现代文：永憙元年春正月初六，冲帝在玉堂前殿逝世，年三岁。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongle Emperor Chong died in the front hall of the Jade Hall at the age of three.

古文：清河王蒜征至京师。
现代文：清河王刘蒜征召至京师。
English: Liu Garlic, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was conscripted as a teacher in Beijing.

古文：孝质皇帝讳缵，肃宗玄孙。
现代文：孝质皇帝刘缵，肃宗玄孙。
English: He is the great-great-grandson of Emperor Liu Bei and Su Zong.

古文：曾祖父千乘贞王伉，祖父乐安夷王宠，父勃海孝王鸿，母陈夫人。
现代文：曾祖父千乘贞王刘伉，祖父乐安夷王刘宠，父勃海孝王刘鸿，母陈夫人。
English: His great-grandfather was Liu Zhen, King of the Thousand Immaculate Conception, his grandfather was Liu Jie, King of the Le An Yi Dynasty, his father was Liu Hong, King of the Bo Hai Dynasty, and his mother was Lady Chen.

古文：冲帝不豫，大将军梁冀征帝到洛阳都亭。
现代文：冲帝有病，大将军梁冀征刘缵到洛阳都亭。
English: Emperor Chong was ill, and General Liang Jizheng Liu Wei went to Du Ting in Luoyang.

古文：及冲帝崩，皇太后与冀定策禁中，丙辰，使冀持节，以王青盖车迎帝入南宫。
现代文：及冲帝逝世，皇太后与梁冀定策宫中，十八日，派梁冀持符节，以王青盖车迎帝入南宫。
English: When Emperor Chong died, the empress dowager and Liang Jie were in the palace making plans. On the 18th, Liang Jie was sent to welcome the emperor into the South Palace with a royal carriage.

古文：丁巳，封为建平侯，其日即皇帝位，年八岁。
现代文：十九日，封为建平侯，这一天即皇帝位，年八岁。
English: On the 19th, he was given the title of Jianping Hou (建平侯), and became emperor on this day, at the age of eight.

古文：己未，葬孝冲皇帝于怀陵。
现代文：二十一日，葬孝冲皇帝于怀陵。
English: On the 21st, Emperor Xiaochong was buried in Huairing Mausoleum.

古文：广陵贼张婴等复反，攻杀堂邑、江都长。
现代文：广陵盗贼张婴等再度反叛，攻打杀害堂邑、江都县长。
English: Guangling thief Zhang Ying and others rebelled again, attacking and killing Dongyue, the head of Jiangdu County.

古文：九江贼徐凤等攻杀曲阳、东城长。
现代文：九江盗贼徐凤攻打杀害曲阳、东城县长。
English: Jiujiang thief Xu Feng attacked and killed Qu Yang, the head of Dongcheng County.

古文：甲申，谒高庙。
现代文：甲申，拜谒高庙。
English: Gaoshin, worship Gao Gao Temple.

古文：乙酉，谒光武庙。
现代文：乙酉，拜谒光武庙。
English: Acetylene, worship the light of the temple.

古文：二月，豫章太守虞续坐赃，下狱死。
现代文：二月，豫章太守虞续因贪污受贿，监死狱中。
English: In February, Yu Zhang, the grand marshal, was sentenced to death in prison for corruption and bribery.

古文：乙酉，大赦天下。
现代文：十八日，大赦天下。
English: On April Fool's Day, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：赐人爵及粟、帛各有差。
现代文：赏赐民爵位及粟帛分别不等。
English: Awards of the title of people's peer and the poppy wreath vary.

古文：还王侯所削户、邑。
现代文：还复王侯所削减的户籍及邑地。
English: He also restored the household registration and the township, which had been reduced by the prince.

古文：彭城王道薨。
现代文：彭城王刘道逝世。
English: Liu Dao, the king of Pengcheng, passed away.

古文：叛羌诣左冯翊梁并降。
现代文：叛羌到左冯翊梁并处投降。
English: Traitors to the left of Feng Xuan Liang surrendered everywhere.

古文：三月，九江贼马勉称 黄帝 。
现代文：三月，九江盗贼马勉自称 黄帝 。
English: In March, the thief of Jiujiang, Ma Mian, proclaimed himself the Yellow Emperor.

古文：九江都尉滕抚讨马勉、范容、周生，大破斩之。
现代文：九江都尉滕抚讨伐马勉、范、周生，大败并杀掉了他们。
English: Teng Fu, the governor of Jiujiang Province, fought with Faba Tsunem, Fan, and Zhou Sheng, and defeated and killed them.

古文：夏四月壬申，雩。
现代文：夏四月十一日，雩祭求雨。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, the burnt offering is made for rain.

古文：庚辰，济北王安薨。
现代文：十九日，济北王刘安逝世。
English: On the 19th, Liu An, King of Jibei, passed away.

古文：丹阳贼陆宫等围城，烧亭寺，丹阳太守江汉击破之。
现代文：丹阳贼陆宫等围城，烧驿站房舍，丹阳太守江汉打败了他们。
English: The Danyang bandits besieged the Lugu Palace and other cities, burned down the station buildings, and Danyang Taishu Jianghan defeated them.

古文：五月甲午，诏曰： 朕以不德，托母天下，布政不明，每失厥中。
现代文：五月初四，诏令说： 我以薄德之身，靠太后治理天下，施布的政务不清明，每每失之中和。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the imperial edict said: "I, with my weak virtue, rely on the empress dowager to govern the world. Shibu's government affairs are not clear, and I am at peace with every loss."

古文：自春涉夏，大旱炎赫，忧心京京，故得祷祈明祀，冀蒙润泽。
现代文：自春入夏，大旱炎烈如火烧，忧心忡忡，所以向天举行祭祀，希得甘雨润泽。
English: From spring to summer, the drought is fierce and worrisome, so they hold sacrifices to the heavens, hoping for sweet rain and moisture.

古文：前虽得雨，而宿麦颇伤；比日阴云，还复开霁。
现代文：前些时虽然得了点雨，但麦已经受伤；这一晌有阴云，却又开天了。
English: Some time ago, although it rained a little, the wheat was already injured; this time there are clouds, but the sky has opened again.

古文：寤寐永叹，重怀惨结。
现代文：我睡着醒着都长吁短叹。郁结于怀。
English: I sleep and wake with a long sigh. I am depressed.

古文：将二千石、令、长不崇宽和。暴刻之为乎？
现代文：莫该是二千石、县令县长不讲究宽恕仁和，实行暴虐刻薄的结果吗？
English: Shouldn't it be the result of two thousand koku, the county magistrate not paying attention to forgiveness and benevolence, and the implementation of tyranny and vitriol?

古文：其令中都官系囚罪非殊死考未竟者，一切任出，以须立秋。
现代文：现在命令中都官对在押囚犯除非斩首不可又未考问完毕者外，一律保释出狱，等立秋以后再行判决。
English: Now, the central government has ordered all prisoners to be released on bail until the beginning of autumn, except for those who cannot be beheaded and have not been interrogated.

古文：郡国有名山大泽能兴云雨者，二千石长吏各洁齐请祷，谒诚尽礼。
现代文：郡国有名山大泽能兴云致雨的，二千石长吏都洁身斋戒进行祭祷，务必虔诚尽礼。
English: If the famous mountains and lakes in the county can cause clouds and rain, the two thousand stone chiefs should fast and pray, and they must be pious.

古文：又兵役连年，死亡流离，或支骸不敛，或停棺莫收，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：又连年因兵因役，流离失所，死亡枕藉，或支骸不殓，或停棺不收，我十分怜悯。
English: Year after year, due to military service, displacement, death, or the absence of a skeleton, or the absence of a coffin, I am very sorry.

古文：昔文王葬枯骨，人赖其德。
现代文：从前文王更葬枯骨的故事，人们永远颂德。
English: Ever since the story of King Wen burying his dead bones, people have been praising virtue forever.

古文：今遣使者案行，若无家属及贫无资者，随宜赐恤，以慰孤魂。 
现代文：现在派人检查巡视各方，发现死者没有家属或穷得无力为殓的，随时随地进行抚恤，以慰孤魂。 
English: Now, inspectors are sent to inspect all areas, and if it is found that the deceased has no family members or is too poor to support himself, he will be given alms at any time and place to comfort the lonely soul.

古文：是月，下邳人谢安应募击徐凤等，斩之。
现代文：这个月，下邳人谢安响应招募出击徐凤等，把徐凤杀掉。
English: This month, in response to being recruited, Xie An, a citizen of Hebei Province, attacked Xu Feng and others, killing Xu Feng.

古文：六月，鲜卑寇代郡。
现代文：六月，鲜卑寇扰代郡。
English: In June, the Xianbei army invaded Zhucheng County.

古文：秋七月庚寅，阜陵王代薨。
现代文：秋七月初一，阜陵王刘代逝世。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, King Liu of Fulin died.

古文：庐江盗贼攻寻阳，又攻盱台，滕抚遣司马王章击破之。
现代文：庐江盗贼攻寻阳，又攻盱台，滕抚派司马王章把他们打败。
English: The Lijiang River bandits attacked Huanyang and Xingtai. Teng Fu sent Sima Wangzhang to defeat them.

古文：九月庚戌，太傅赵峻薨。
现代文：九月二十二日，太傅赵峻逝世。
English: On September 22, Grand Master Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：冬十一月己丑，南阳太守韩昭坐赃下狱死。
现代文：冬十一月初二，南阳太守韩昭因贪污贿赂，监死狱中。
English: On the second day of the first month of November in winter, Nanyang Daju Han Zhao was sentenced to death in prison for corruption and bribery.

古文：丙午，中郎将滕抚击广陵贼张婴，破之。
现代文：十九日，中郎将滕抚击广陵贼张婴，把他打败。
English: On the 19th, Zhonglang patted Teng against the tomb robber Zhang Ying, and defeated him.

古文：丁未，中郎将赵序坐事弃市。
现代文：二十日，中郎将赵序因贪取钱缣，斩于闹市。
English: On the 20th, Zhong Lang beheaded Zhao Xiu in the downtown area for embezzling money.

古文：历阳贼华孟自称 黑帝 ，攻杀九江太守杨岑，滕抚率诸将击孟等，大破斩之。
现代文：历阳贼华孟自称 黑帝 ，攻杀九江太守杨岑，滕抚率领诸将攻击华孟，大败并杀掉了他。
English: The Liyang thief Hua Meng called himself the Black Emperor, attacked and killed the governor of Jiujiang, Yang Hui, Teng Fu led the generals to attack Hua Meng, defeated and killed him.

古文：本初元年春正月丙申，诏曰： 昔尧命四子，以钦天道，《鸿范》九畴，休咎有象。
现代文：本初元年春正月初十，诏令说 ：古时候尧命四子，钦敬皇天大道。天给大法《鸿范》于夏禹，禹把它排为九类，其中有美恶休咎不同的象征。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the current year, the imperial edict said: "In ancient times, the four sons of death were worshipped as the emperor's road. Heaven gave the great law "Hong Fan" to Xia Yu, and Yu ranked it into nine categories, among which there were different symbols of good and evil.

古文：夫瑞以和降，异因逆感，禁微应大，前圣所重。
现代文：祥瑞是因纯和才降临，灾异是因倒行逆施不合时令而感应。禁虽微小，应验却很显大。
English: The auspiciousness is due to the pure harmony, and the calamity is due to the retrograde and unseasonable. Although the prohibition is small, the fulfillment is very large.

古文：顷者，州郡轻慢宪防，竞逞残暴，造设科条，陷入无罪。
现代文：如尧帝、箕子所重视的一样。近来，州郡轻视怠慢于法令的推行和不法行为的防备，却互相逞快于残忍暴虐，制造设置一些条例，陷害无辜。
English: Recently, counties and prefectures have despised and neglected the enforcement of laws and the prevention of illegal activities, but they have been more cruel and tyrannical to each other, creating and setting up some regulations to frame the innocent.

古文：或以喜怒驱逐长吏，恩阿所私，罚枉仇隙，至令守阙诉讼，前后不绝。
现代文：或感情用事，随一己的喜怒，斥逐长吏，阿谀徇私，罚得不正，伺隙泄仇，以致官府衙门，诉讼纷纷不绝。
English: or emotional, following one's own joy and anger, expelling officials, admonishing me, punishing me unfairly, seeking an opportunity to take revenge, so that the government shuts the door, and the lawsuits are incessant.

古文：送故迎新，人离其害，怨气伤和，以致灾眚。
现代文：送走原来的旧人，迎来刚到的新人，人们遭到祸害，怨气伤了和气，因而招来灾难咎戾。
English: Send away the original old people, usher in the newly arrived newcomers, people are plagued, resentment hurt harmony, thus causing disaster and blame.

古文：《书》云： 明德慎罚。
现代文：《尚书》说的 要有完美的德性，要谨慎地进行惩罚。 
English: "Shangshu" said that one should have perfect virtue and be cautious in punishment.

古文：方春东作，育微敬始。
现代文：现在正是春耕生产的时候，万物发育微小，应当珍惜始生萌芽的状态。
English: Now is the time of spring ploughing production, the development of all things is small, and the state of germination should be cherished.

古文：其敕有司，罪非殊死，且勿案验，以崇在宽。 
现代文：今敕令管事人，罪犯如果不是要斩首的，暂且不要审讯，以示宽恕。 
English: The magistrate has now been ordered not to try the criminal for the time being, if he is not to be beheaded, as a gesture of forgiveness.

古文：壬子，广陵太守王喜坐讨贼逗留，下狱死。
现代文：二十六日，广陵太守王喜因讨贼不积极停留不前，监死狱中。
English: On the 26th, Wang Xi, the governor of Guangling, was sentenced to death in prison for not actively stopping the thieves.

古文：二月庚辰，诏曰： 九江、广陵二郡数离寇害，残夷最甚。
现代文：二月二十四日，诏令说： 九江、广陵二郡多次遭受张婴、华孟的寇害，摧残创伤最厉害。
English: On February 24th, the imperial edict said: "Two counties in Jiujiang and Guangling have been repeatedly attacked by Zhang Ying and Hua Meng, with the most severe injuries.

古文：生者失其资业。死者委尸原野。
现代文：生存的倾家荡产，死了的委尸原野。
English: Survive the collapse of the family and the death of the deceased.

古文：昔之为政，一物不得其所，若己为之，况我元元，婴此困毒。
现代文：古之为政者，一物没有得到它应有的合适的地位，当作是自己的过错所造成。
English: The ancients regarded it as one's own fault that a ruler did not obtain the proper position he deserved.

古文：方春戒节，赈济乏厄，掩骼埋胔之时。
现代文：而况是广大的黎民百姓，遭到这样困扰和毒害。现在正是孟春之月，为春耕作准备的时候，赈济贫乏和受难的，掩埋暴尸于野的枯骨和腐肉。
English: Now is the month of Mengchun, the time to prepare for spring farming, to feed the poor and suffering, to bury the dead bones and carrion of the dead in the field.

古文：其调比郡见谷，出禀穷弱，收葬枯骸，务加埋恤，以称朕意。 
现代文：应当调拨相近各郡的现谷，周济贫穷老幼，收葬枯骨残骸，加以抚恤，以称我的心意。 
English: It is my heart's desire that the money should be allocated to the present valleys of the counties in the vicinity, to help the poor, the old and the young, to collect and bury the remains of dead bones, and to give them alms.

古文：夏四月庚辰，令郡国举明经，年五十以上、七十以上诣太学。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，命令郡国荐举通晓经术，年龄在五十以上、七十以下的儒生送到太学。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, he ordered the county government to recommend that all Confucian students over the age of 50 and under the age of 70 who are proficient in scripture should be sent to Taigaku.

古文：自大将军至六百石，皆遣子受业，岁满课试，以高第五人补郎中，次五人太子舍人。
现代文：自大将军至六百石，都送子弟入学受业，年岁满了，进行考试，考试成绩好的前五名补任郎中，第六名到第十名任太子舍人。
English: From the grand general to the six hundred koku, they all send their children to school, and when they are old enough, they take the exam. The first five with good exam results are appointed as junior retainers, and the sixth to the tenth are appointed as prince's retainers.

古文：又千石、六百石、四府掾属、三署郎、四姓小侯先能通经者，各令随家法，其高第者上名牒，当以次赏进。
现代文：千石、六百石，大将军府、太尉府、司徒府、司空府四府掾属，五官署、左署、右署三署郎，外戚樊、郭、阴、马四姓小侯，先能通经的，为诗的谓之诗家，为礼的谓之礼家，各随家法，考得名次高的把名牒报上，当挨次赏赐进用。
English: Those with 1,000 koku and 600 koku, those who belong to the four prefectures of Taejongfu, Taejongfu, Shitofu, and Shikokufu, those who belong to the five government offices, the left office, and the right office, and those who have relatives with the surnames of Min, Guo, Yin, and Ma; those who can recite the sutras first, are called poets of poetry, those who can recite the sutras first, and those who can recite the sutras first, are called poets of poetry, those who can recite the sutras first, and those who can recite the sutras first,

古文：五月庚寅，徙乐安王为勃海王。
现代文：五月初六，调迁乐安王为勃海王。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth month, King Le An was transferred to King Bo Hai.

古文：海水溢。
现代文：海水溢漫为灾。
English: The disaster was caused by the overflowing seawater.

古文：戊申，使谒者案行，收葬乐安、北海人为水所漂没死者，又禀给贫羸。
现代文：二十四日，派谒者巡视考察，收殓埋葬乐安、北海为海水所漂没的死者，又将廪谷赈济贫苦老幼和体弱者。
English: On the 24th, people were sent to inspect and collect the dead who were buried in Le'an and drowned in the North Sea. They also went to Shugu Valley to help the poor, the elderly and the infirm.

古文：庚戌，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：二十六日，太白星冲犯荧惑星。
English: On the 26th, the Taibai Star collided with the fluorescent planet.

古文：六月丁巳，大赦天下，赐民爵及粟、帛各有差。
现代文：六月初三，大赦天下，赐民爵位、粟帛，分别不等。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the emperor pardoned the whole country, and conferred the title of nobility and the poppy, respectively.

古文：闰月甲申，大将军梁冀潜行鸩弑，帝崩于玉堂前殿，年九岁。
现代文：闰六月初一，大将军梁冀偷偷地下鸩毒弑杀质帝，帝在玉堂前殿逝世，年九岁。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, the general Liang Jie secretly went underground to poison and kill the emperor, who died in front of the Jade Hall at the age of nine.

古文：丁亥，太尉李固免。
现代文：初四，太尉李固免职。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Lieutenant Li Gu was dismissed.

古文：戊子，司徒胡广为太尉，司空赵戒为司徒，与梁冀参录尚书事。
现代文：初五，任司徒胡广为太尉，司空赵戒为司徒，与梁冀参与总领尚书职务。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the scholar Hu Guang was appointed as the first lieutenant, the scholar Siku Zhao Jie was appointed as the scholar, and the scholar Liang Ji was appointed as the chief scholar.

古文：太仆袁汤为司空。
现代文：任太仆袁汤为司空。
English: He appointed Yuan Tang, his manservant, as his subordinate.

古文：赞曰：孝顺初立，时髦允集。匪砥匪革，终沧嬖习。
现代文：史官颂赞说：顺帝刚立为帝时，俊杰之士都在他身边，可他不能砥砺而进行改革自新，最终沦溺于私嬖近习，依托苟安，贪货贿而增人邑。
English: The historian praised: "When Emperor Shun was just enthroned, the most brilliant men were all around him. However, he was unable to reform and renew himself, and eventually became addicted to self-indulgence, relying on corruption and bribery to increase the number of people.

古文：保阿传土，后家世及。
现代文：信任两代外戚，所以朝政不振。
English: Trusting two generations of maternal relatives, that is why the government is not flourishing.

古文：冲夭未识，质弑以聪。
现代文：冲帝夭殇，根本不懂事。
English: He doesn't know what he is doing.

古文：陵折在运，天绪三终。
现代文：质帝聪颖早慧，却遭梁冀鸩弑。
English: Qiu Di was bright and clever, but was bullied by Liang Jizhe.

