古文：帝王有出震向离之象，大臣有补天浴日之功。
现代文：圣明天子有 出震向离 的气象，大臣有 补天浴日 的功勋。
English: St. Peter's Day has the weather of "shock and departure," and the minister has the merit of "making up for the day of the heavenly bath."

古文：三公上应三台，郎官上应列宿。
现代文： 三公 对应天上的三台星， 郎官 对应天上的众星宿。
English: The three princes correspond to the three stars in the sky, and the vassals correspond to the stars in the sky.

古文：宰相位居台铉，吏部职掌铨衡。
现代文：宰相协助君王治理国家，地位极重要比喻为鼎铉。史部掌管天下官吏，选拔衡量人材。
English: The prime minister assisted the monarch in governing the country, and his position was extremely important. The history department was in charge of the world's officials, selecting and measuring talent.

古文：吏部天官大冢宰，户部地官大司徒。
现代文：吏部古名 天官 ，长官称 大豚宰 ；户部古名 地官 ，长官称 大司徒 。
English: The ancient name of the cadre department was Tenkan (天官), and the chief officer was called Dairinzai (大豚宰); the ancient name of the household department was Chikan (地官), and the chief officer was called Daisetsu.

古文：礼部春官大宗伯，兵部夏官大司马。
现代文：礼部古名 春官 ，长官称 大宗伯 ；兵部古名 夏官 ，长官称 大司马 。
English: The ancient name of the ceremonial department was Harukan, and the chief officer was called Daizongbo; the ancient name of the military department was Xiaukan, and the chief officer was called Daesima.

古文：刑部秋官大司寇，工部冬官大司空。
现代文：刑部古名 秋官 ，长官称 大司寇 ；工部古名 冬官 ，长官称 大司空 。
English: The old name of the Department of Criminal Justice was Akikan (秋官), and the director was called Daisikko (大司寇); the old name of the Department of Engineering was Dongguan (冬官), and the director was called Daisikku (大司空).

古文：都宪中丞，都御史之号；内翰学士，翰林院之称。
现代文： 司宪  中丞 是 都御史 的别称； 内翰  学士 是对 翰林院 的称呼。
English: Sikyon Chujo is another name for the Metropolitan Historian; Naehan Gakushi is another name for the Hanlin Academy.

古文：天使誉称行人，司成尊称祭酒。
现代文： 天使 是对 行人司 官员的美称， 司成 是对 国子监 祭酒的尊称。
English: "Angel" is a nickname for officials of the Pedestrian Division, and "Sicheng" is an honorific title for officials of the National Children's Bureau.

古文：称都堂曰大抚台，称巡按曰大柱史。
现代文：京官有六科给事和各道御史，总称叫做柱后惠文；外官有巡抚和总督，并称为中丞开府。
English: The general title of the officials in Beijing is "Zhu Hou Hui Wen" (柱后惠文) and they are in charge of six disciplines and the history of each province. The foreign officials are the governor and the governor-general, and they are called "Zhong Rong" (中丞) and "Kepu" (開府).

古文：方伯、藩侯，左右布政之号；宪台、廉宪，提刑按察之称。
现代文： 方伯 、 藩侯 都是左、右布政使的别号， 臬司 、 廉宪 是提刑按察使的别称。
English: Fangbo (方伯) and Hanbo (藩侯) are aliases for the left and right political envoys of Bu, and Weishi (司) and Renmin (廉憲) are aliases for the inspectors.

古文：刺史、州牧，乃知州之两号；豸史、台谏，即知县之以称。
现代文：学台听掌文学故号文术。运使总持监务故称鹾宪。邵侯刺史是太守的名号，极为尊贵；别驾、治中是知府的寮属，声望也很隆重。州牧邑长就是知州知县的别号；贰尹、少府乃是县丞县慰的古称。
English: Gakudai listened to and mastered literature, the old name for literature and art. The commander-in-chief of dispatching and supervising was known as Jian Xian. Shao Hou Zhishi was the title of the emperor, which was extremely noble; Bie Jiao and Jizhong were the dormitory of the prefectural government, and their reputation was also grand. Zhou Maki Mayor was another name for Zhou Zhixian; Jiu Yin and Shao Fu were the ancient names of the prefectural governors of counties.

古文：乡宦曰乡绅，农官曰田畯。
现代文：乡官叫做乡绅，管农业的官又名田畯。
English: The township official is called the country squire, and the official in charge of agriculture is also known as the farm manager.

古文：钧座、台座，皆称仕宦；帐下、麾下，并美武官。
现代文：钧座、台座都是对文官的敬称，宪辕、虎幄都是誉美品级尊荣的大僚。
English: Koza and Taiza are both honorifics for civil servants, and Gensho and Tigress are honorifics for senior officials.

古文：秩官既分九品，命妇亦有七阶。
现代文：初做官叫筮仕，初到任叫下车；故官任满叫及瓜，辞官归乡叫解组。
English: The first-time official is called the secretary, and the first-time official is called to get off the train; therefore, the first-time official is called the melon, and the resigning official is called the explanation group.

古文：一品曰夫人，二品亦夫人，三品曰淑人，四品曰恭人，五品曰宜人，六品曰安人，七品曰孺人。
现代文：管吏的等级共分为九等，受诰命的妇人也分为七等。一品称 夫人 ，二品也可以称 夫人 ，三品称 淑人 ，四品称 恭人 ，五品称 宜人 ，六品称 安人 ，七品称 孺人 。
English: The ranks of the officials were divided into nine grades, and the women who were killed were also divided into seven grades. The first grade was called "Madam," the second grade could also be called "Mrs.," the third grade was called "Lady," the fourth grade was called "Courteous," the fifth grade was called "Gentle," the sixth grade was called "Comfortable," and the seventh grade was called "Distinguished."

古文：妇人受封曰金花诰，状元报捷曰紫泥封。
现代文：妇人受皇帝的册封叫 金花诰 ，状元的捷报文书叫 紫泥封 。
English: The woman who received the emperor's seal is called Jinhua Yao, and the state-level victory announcement document is called Ziyi mud seal.

古文：唐玄宗以金瓯覆宰相之名，宋真宗以美珠箝谏臣之口。
现代文：唐玄宗用金瓯盖住写好的宰相名，以试太子之才；宋真宗用美珠堵住了谏臣的口，使他不再评议朝政。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty covered the written name of the prime minister with a golden scepter to test the prince's talent; Emperor Zhenzong of the Song Dynasty blocked the mouth of his vassal with a bead so that he would no longer comment on imperial politics.

古文：金马玉堂，羡翰林之声价；朱幡皂盖，仰郡守之威仪。
现代文： 金马  玉堂 都是对翰林的名声和地位的羡慕， 朱幡  皂盖 都是对郡守出行时煊赫威仪的敬仰。
English: Jinma and Gyokudo are both envious of Hanlin's fame and status, and Zhuhan and Sogai are both in admiration of the county magistrate when traveling.

古文：台辅曰紫阁名公，知府曰黄堂太守。
现代文：宰相又称 紫阁明公 ，知府也称 黄堂太守 。
English: The prime minister is also known as Ziqiao Minggong, and the governor is also known as Huangdong Dazhu.

古文：府尹之禄二千石，太守之马五花骢。
现代文：府尹的俸禄是两千石，拉太守的车的马是五花骢。
English: Fu Yin's salary was two thousand koku, and the chariot horse of La Taishou was a five-flowered horse.

古文：代天巡狩，赞称巡按；指日高升，预贺官僚。
现代文：代天巡狩是称赞巡按的话，代替皇帝巡行天下。
English: Touring the country on behalf of the emperor is a compliment to the emperor.

古文：初到任曰下车，告致仕曰解组。
现代文：指日高升是预祝官员即将升迁的贺辞。官员刚刚到任叫 下车 ，辞官归乡叫 解组 。
English: It is a congratulatory message to the officials who are about to be promoted. The officials who have just arrived are called to get off, and the resigning officials are called to the dissolution group when they return home.

古文：藩垣屏翰，方伯犹古诸侯之国；墨绶铜章，令尹即古子男之帮。
现代文：藩垣、屏翰称镇守一方的长官，如同方伯是古代诸侯国的长官一样；墨色的绶、铜铸的章就是县令所用的，县令的辖境类似古代子爵、男爵的小邦。
English: Hanzaki and Pinghan referred to the governor of the town guard side, just as Fangbo was the governor of the ancient vassal states; the dark-colored shovel and the copper-cast chapter were used by the county magistrate, and the jurisdiction of the county magistrate was similar to the small states of ancient viscounts and barons.

古文：太监掌阉门之禁令，故曰阉宦；朝臣皆缙笏于绅间，故曰缙绅。
现代文：太监掌管内廷出入的禁令，所以叫做阉宦；朝廷的大臣都把笏插在腰间的大带上，因此称作晋绅。
English: The eunuch was in charge of the ban on entering and leaving the inner court, so he was called the eunuch; the ministers of the court put the eunuch on the large belt around the waist, so he was called the eunuch.

古文：萧曹相汉高，曾为刀笔吏；汲黯相汉武，真是社稷臣。
现代文：萧何与曹参先后担任汉高祖的宰相，他们原先都做过沛县的 刀笔吏 ；汲黯是汉武帝的宰相，真可以说是治国安邦的 社稷臣 。
English: Xiao He and Cao San successively served as the prime minister of the founder of the Han Dynasty, and both of them had previously worked as the sword scribe of Pei County; Qiu Qian was the prime minister of Emperor Han Wudi, and can truly be said to be a social eunuch who governed the country.

古文：召伯布文王之政，尝合甘棠之下，后人思其遗爱，不忍伐其树；孔明有王佐之才，尝隐草庐之中，先主慕其令名，乃三顾其庐。
现代文：召伯展布周文王的德政，曾在甘棠树下休息，后人感念他的恩德，不忍心砍伐这棵树，召伯的教化遍行南国，墓碑名叫坠泪，羊佑的德泽被及里阳。
English: Zhao Bo exhibited the virtue of Zhouwen Wang. He used to rest under the sweet orange tree. Later generations were impressed by his kindness and could not bear to cut down the tree. Zhao Bo's enlightenment traveled throughout the south of the country. The tombstone is called "Falling into Tears." The sheep's blessing of De Ze has been extended to Liyang.

古文：鱼头参政，鲁宗道秉性骨鲠；伴食宰相，卢怀慎居位无能。王德用，人称黑王相公；赵清献，世号铁面御史。
现代文：鲁宗道秉性耿直、刚正不阿，任参政时人称鱼头参政；卢怀慎生性谦虚，当宰相时每事推让，人称伴食宰相。王德用，人称 黑王相公 ；赵清献，人称 铁面御史 。
English: Lu Zongdao was upright and upright, and when he was in politics, he was known as the fish-head politician; Lu Huaixen was modest, and when he was the prime minister, he was known as the minister of food. Wang Deyong was known as the black king; Zhao Qingken was known as the iron-faced historian.

古文：汉刘宽责民，蒲鞭示辱；项仲山洁己，饮马投钱。
现代文：汉朝刘宽待人宽厚，吏民有过错，仅用蒲鞭象征性地责罚；项仲山洁身自爱，每次到渭河饮马，都要投钱三枚。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Liu Kuan treated people generously. If officials or citizens made a mistake, they were only symbolically punished with a whip. Xiang Zhongshan loved to keep himself clean. Every time he went to the Li River to drink horse urine, he had to pay three coins.

古文：李善感直言不讳，竟称鸣凤朝阳；汉张纲弹劾无私，直斥豺狼当道。
现代文：李善感力谏皇帝直言不讳，时人竞相称道，誉为鸣凤朝阳；汉代张纲公正无私，弹劾权贵直斥为豺狼当道。
English: Li Shan sensed the power of the emperor's outspokenness, and was praised by contemporaries as Ming Feng Chaoyang; Zhang Gang of the Han Dynasty was fair and selfless, and the impeachment of power and nobility was directly condemned as the way of the wolf.

古文：民爱邓侯之政，挽之不留；人言谢令之贪，推之不去。
现代文：百姓爱戴郑侯的清廉，苦苦挽留而留不住；民众憎恨谢令的贪婪，不愿他在位却推也推不去。
English: The people loved Zheng Hou's integrity, and struggled to retain him, but couldn't; the people hated Xie Ling's greed, and didn't want him to reign, but couldn't push him out.

古文：廉范守蜀郡，民歌五裤；张堪守渔阳，麦穗两歧。
现代文：廉范任蜀郡太守政令便民，百姓因而唱五袴之歌；张堪为渔阳太守劝农耕稼，使麦子都长出两穗。
English: Liang Fan, the grand marshal of Shu County, issued an order to facilitate the people, so the people sang the five-syllable song; Zhang Kan, the grand marshal of Yuyang County, advised farmers to cultivate, so that the wheat would grow two ears.

古文：鲁恭为中牟令，桑下有驯雉之异；郭汲为并州守，儿童有竹马之迎。
现代文：鲁恭任中牟令时行仁政，桑树下的雉鸟见他都不躲；郭伋当并州太守时有贤德，儿童们骑着竹马欢迎他。
English: When Lu Qiong was appointed as Zhong Mouling, he carried out benevolent politics, and the ostriches under the mulberry tree did not hide when they saw him; when Guo Gan was appointed as the provincial governor, he was virtuous, and the children welcomed him on stilts.

古文：鲜于子骏，宁非一路福星；司马温公，真是万家生佛。
现代文：鲜于子骏去赈灭，的确是一位造福百姓的好官；司马光德惠及人，真是万家的活菩萨。
English: Sima Guangde is indeed a good official who benefits the people; Sima Guangde benefits the people and is truly a living bodhisattva for all.

古文：鸾凤不栖枳棘，羡仇香之为主簿；河阳遍种桃花，乃潘岳之为县官。
现代文：鸾凤是一种吉祥鸟，不应只栖息在枳棘树上。佷羡慕仇香在任主簿时，有个好上司送他去深造；河阳县遍植桃花，这是潘岳当县令时的德政。
English: The chrysanthemum phoenix is an auspicious bird, and should not only roost in thorn trees. When the chrysanthemum envied the chrysanthemum, there was a good boss who sent him to further study; peach blossoms were planted all over Kheyang County, which was Pan Yue's policy when he was the county magistrate.

古文：刘昆宰江陵，昔日反风灭火；龚遂守渤海，令民卖刀买牛。
现代文：刘昆任江陵知事时遇火灭，他向风叩头使风转向而灭了火；龚遂当渤海知州时，劝喻盗贼卖刀买牛，使他们改恶为善。
English: When Liu Kun was the governor of Gangneung, a fire was extinguished. He bowed to the wind to make the wind turn and extinguished the fire. Then, when he was in Bihai and Chizhou, he persuaded the thieves to sell their swords and buy cattle, so that they would turn evil into good.

古文：此皆德政可歌，是以令名攸著。
现代文：以上这些都是值得歌颂的官员的德政，因此他们的名声政绩卓著世代传扬。
English: All of the above are praiseworthy officials of the German government, so their fame and outstanding achievements are passed down from generation to generation.

