古文：第五伦字伯鱼，京兆长陵人也。
现代文：◆第五伦传，第五伦，字伯鱼，京兆长陵人。
English: ◆Fifth Lun Chuan, Fifth Lun, Zhabo Yu, Jingzha Changling Crab.

古文：其先齐诸田，诸田徙园陵者多，故以次第为氏。
现代文：他的祖先是齐国的田姓，后来姓田的迁到园陵的很多，所以用次第作为姓氏。
English: His ancestor was surnamed Tian from Qi Province. Later, many surnamed Tian moved to Yuanling, so he used Shizhu as his surname.

古文：伦少介然有义行。
现代文：第五伦年少时为人很耿直，有德行。
English: When he was young, he was very straightforward and virtuous.

古文：王莽末，盗贼起，宗族闾里争往附之。
现代文：王莽末年，盗贼蜂起，同宗族、同乡里的人争相趋附他。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, thieves rose up, and people of the same clan and from the same village flocked to him.

古文：伦乃依险固筑营壁，有贼，辄奋厉其众，引强持满以拒之，铜马、赤眉之属前后数十辈，皆不能下。
现代文：第五伦于是依据险要的地势修筑坚固的营垒，有贼人来，就激励动员部众乡民，带着强弩硬弓起来防卫。铜马、赤眉之类前后数十辈来进犯，都不能攻下。
English: Therefore, the fifth generation built a strong camp according to the critical terrain. If thieves came, they would encourage the villagers to mobilize and defend themselves with a strong and hard bow. Dozens of generations such as Bronze Horse and Red Eyebrow came to attack, but they could not attack.

古文：伦始以营长诣郡尹鲜于褒，褒见而异之，署为吏。
现代文：第五伦开始以营长身份到郡尹鲜于褒那里联系，鲜于褒见了觉得他与众不同，于是用他作吏。
English: The fifth ron began to contact the county's Yin Xian and Bao Bao as battalion commander. Xian Xian and Bao Bao saw that he was different, so they used him as an official.

古文：后褒坐事左转高唐令，临去，握伦臂诀曰 恨相知晚 
现代文：后来鲜于褒犯了错误贬职作高唐县令，临走时，握着第五伦的手说 ：只恨相见太迟了。 
English: Later, he rarely made mistakes other than praising and demeaning Gaotang County, and when he was about to leave, he held the hand of the fifth generation and said: It's too late to hate each other.

古文：伦后为乡啬夫，平徭赋，理怨结，得人欢心。
现代文：第五伦后来做了乡里的啬夫，公平地收赋税派差役，调理民事纠纷，很得人们的欢心。
English: Fifth Lun later became a miser in the village, collecting taxes fairly and settling civil disputes, which was very popular with people.

古文：自以为久宦不达，遂将家属客河东，变名姓，自称王伯齐，载盐往来太原、上党，所过辄为粪除而去，陌上号为道士，亲友故人莫知其处。
现代文：他自己认为很久不能做大官，就把家属迁往河东，改名换姓，自称王伯齐，运着盐往来在太原、上党之间，所经过的地方一定打扫干净才离开，乡里人叫他作道士，亲戚朋友都不知他的住处。
English: He himself thought that he would not be able to be a high-ranking official for a long time, so he moved his family to Hedong, changed his name, called himself Wang Boqi, transported salt between Taiyuan and Shangdang, and made sure to clean the places he passed before leaving. The villagers called him a Taoist, and his relatives and friends did not know where he lived.

古文：数年，鲜于褒荐之于京兆尹阎兴，兴即召伦为主簿。
现代文：过了数年，鲜于褒推荐第五伦给京兆尹阎兴，阎兴就召第五伦做主簿。
English: After a few years, the Fifth Lun was recommended to Jing Zhao Yin Yan Xing, and Yan Xing called the Fifth Lun to be the main book.

古文：时长安铸钱多奸巧，乃署伦为督铸钱掾，领长安市。
现代文：当时长安铸钱币的人多数弄虚作假，阎兴就命第五伦做督促铸钱的官吏，总管长安市场。
English: At that time, most of the people who minted coins in Chang'an were cheating and faking. Yan Xing ordered the fifth Lun to be the official who supervised the minting of money, the general manager of the Chang'an market.

古文：伦平铨衡，正斗斛，市无阿枉，百姓悦服。
现代文：第五伦就整顿不合规格的秤和斗，从此市场上公平交易，没有大秤小斗，百姓心悦诚服。
English: The Fifth Lun rectified the scales and buckets that did not meet the specifications, and from then on, the market traded fairly. There were no large scales and small buckets, which pleased the people.

古文：每读诏书，常叹息曰 此圣主也，一见决矣 等辈笑之曰 尔说将尚不下，安能动万乘乎 伦曰 未遇知己，道不同故耳 
现代文：第五伦每读诏书，常叹息道 ：这是英明的天子啊，能够见一面就决定我的命运了。 平辈人笑他道： 你说服州将还做不到，怎能感动万乘天子呢？ 伦说： 没有遇见知己，道不同的缘故罢了。 
English: Every time Fifth Lun read the edict, he often sighed and said, "This is a wise son of heaven. If I can see one side, it will decide my fate." His peers laughed at him and said, "If you can't convince the state, how can you move the Son of Heaven?" Lun said, "I haven't met a confidant, it's just because we have different paths."

古文：建武二十七年，举孝廉，补淮阳国医工长，随王之国。
现代文：建武二十七年，第五伦被举为孝廉，补为淮阳国医工长，随王到京都去。
English: In the 27th year of Jianwu, the fifth Lun was promoted to Xiaolian, and was appointed as the chief physician of Huaiyang Province. He went to Kyoto with the king.

古文：光武召见，甚异之。
现代文：光武帝召见后，很感到奇异。
English: After Emperor Guangwu summoned him, he felt very strange.

古文：二十九年，从王朝京师，随官属得会见，帝问以政事，伦因此酧对政道，帝大悦。
现代文：二十九年跟国王朝京师、随从官吏都有机会见驾，皇帝把政事问他们，第五伦借此机会对答为政之道，皇帝听了十分高兴。
English: In 1929, he had the opportunity to meet with the king, the imperial secretary, and the officials accompanying him. The emperor asked them about politics, and the fifth generation took this opportunity to answer about politics. The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：明日，复特召入，与语至夕。
现代文：第二天，又特地召入和第五伦从白天谈到晚上。
English: The next day, I was specially called in again to talk with the Fifth Ron from the daytime to the evening.

古文：帝戏谓伦曰 闻卿为吏篣妇公，不过从兄饭，宁有之邪 伦对曰 臣三娶妻皆无父。
现代文：皇帝开玩笑地对第五伦说 ：听说你做吏时曾殴打岳父，不给堂兄饭吃，有这回事吗？ 第五伦答道： 臣下三次娶妻，妻子都没有父亲。
English: The emperor jokingly said to the fifth prince, "I heard that when you were an official, you beat up your father-in-law and refused to give your cousin food. Is this true?" The fifth prince replied, "A subject marries a wife three times, but none of the wives have a father.

古文：少遭饑乱，实不敢妄过人食 帝大笑。
现代文：年轻时遭过饥荒，实在不敢随便请人吃饭。 皇帝大笑。
English: Having suffered famine in his youth, he did not dare to invite anyone to dinner. The emperor laughed loudly.

古文：伦出，有诏以为扶夷长，未到官，追拜会稽太守。
现代文：第五伦出来后，有诏书令他作扶夷长，没到官署，追着改派他作会稽太守。
English: After the fifth ron came out, there was an imperial edict ordering him to serve as Fuyi chief, but he did not go to the government office, so he was re-assigned to be the auditor of the association.

古文：虽为二千石，躬自斩刍养马，妻执炊爨。
现代文：虽然做了二千石，亲自割草喂马，妻子做饭吃。
English: Although he made 2,000 koku, he personally mowed the grass and fed the horses, while his wife cooked and ate.

古文：受俸裁留一月粮，馀皆贱贸与民之贫羸者。
现代文：领到薪俸只留一个月口粮，其余都贱价卖给贫苦老百姓。
English: After receiving their salaries, they only keep one month's worth of food rations, and the rest is sold to poor people at low prices.

古文：会稽俗多淫祀，好卜筮。
现代文：会稽风俗多祭鬼，喜欢卜卦算命。
English: They have a lot of ghost rituals, and they like to tell fortunes.

古文：民常以牛祭神，百姓财产以之困匮，其自食牛肉而不以荐祠者，发病且死先为牛鸣，前后郡将莫敢禁。
现代文：百姓经常杀牛祭神，百姓财产因此贫困，那些自己吃牛肉而不祭祀鬼神的人，生病将死时先作牛叫，前后几任郡守都不敢禁止。
English: The common people often kill cattle to sacrifice to the gods, and the common people's property is impoverished as a result. Those who eat beef themselves and do not sacrifice to the ghosts and gods will first make cow bells when they are sick and about to die. Several county governors have not dared to ban it.

古文：伦到宫，移书属县，晓告百姓。
现代文：第五伦上任后，下公文到县，晓谕百姓。
English: After the fifth Lun took office, he went to the county to explain to the people.

古文：其巫祝有依托鬼神诈怖愚民，皆案论之。
现代文：凡巫祝有假托鬼神诈骗百姓的，都依法论处。
English: All sorcerers and fortune-tellers who use ghosts and gods to defraud the people will be dealt with according to law.

古文：有妄屠牛者，吏辄行罚。
现代文：有乱杀耕牛的，官吏按律处罚。
English: If there is indiscriminate killing of farm cattle, officials will be punished according to the law.

古文：民初颇恐惧，或祝诅妄言，伦案之愈急，后遂断绝，百姓以安。
现代文：百姓开始有些害怕，有的巫祝谩骂胡说，第五伦追捕很紧，后来歪风就绝迹了，百姓得以安宁。
English: At first, the people were a little afraid. Some witches and magicians hurled insults and nonsense, and the Fifth Ron pursued them very closely. Later, the evil wind disappeared, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：永平五年，坐法征，老小攀车叩马，啼呼相随，日裁行数里，不得前，伦乃伪止亭舍，阴乘船去。
现代文：永平五年，第五伦因犯法调走，百姓不分老小都攀车叩马，啼哭相送，每天只走得几里，不能前进。他就装作到亭舍歇宿，暗地却坐船走了。
English: In the fifth year of Yongping, the fifth Lun was transferred away for violating the law, and the people, both old and young, climbed the car, beat the horse, cried and sent each other away, and only walked a few miles every day, unable to move forward. He pretended to go to the pavilion to rest, but secretly took the boat away.

古文：众知，复追之。
现代文：众人知道后，又追上去。
English: After everyone found out, they went after him again.

古文：及诣廷尉，吏民上书守阙者千馀人。
现代文：到达廷尉那里，官吏百姓上书守在衙门口的有千多人。
English: When they arrived at the palace, there were more than a thousand people, including officials and commoners, standing guard at the gate of the palace.

古文：是时，显宗方案梁松事，亦多为松讼者。
现代文：这时显宗正审理梁松的案件，也有很多人替梁松鸣不平的。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong was hearing Liang Song's case, and there were also many people who complained on Liang Song's behalf.

古文：帝患之，诏公车诸为梁氏及会稽太守上书者勿复受。
现代文：皇帝有些担心，命令公车，凡替梁氏和会稽太守上书的都不准收受。
English: The emperor was a little worried and ordered the buses not to accept anyone who wrote a letter on behalf of Mr. Liang and the auditor of the association.

古文：会帝幸廷尉录囚徒，得免归田里。
现代文：后来，碰上皇帝到廷尉那里审查并记录囚徒的罪状，第五伦得到免罪释放回归田里。
English: Later, when the emperor came to the courtier to review and record the prisoner's charges, the fifth Lun was acquitted and returned to the field.

古文：身自耕种，不交通人物。
现代文：亲自耕种，不和别人交往。
English: He cultivates the land himself and does not socialize with others.

古文：数岁，拜为宕渠令，显拔乡佐玄贺，贺后为九江、沛二郡守，以清洁称，所在化行，终于大司农。
现代文：几年以后，第五伦拜为宕渠县令，提拔了乡佐玄贺，玄贺后来做了九江、沛两郡太守，以清洁的官声著称，所到之处风气很好，官职做到大司农。
English: A few years later, the fifth Lumbai was the governor of Tagu County, and promoted the leader of the township, Sasenge. Genge later became the governor of Jiujiang and Pei two counties. He was known for his clean official reputation. The atmosphere was good everywhere he went, and he fulfilled his official duties as the chief of agriculture.

古文：伦在职四年，迁蜀郡太守。
现代文：第五伦在职四年，升为蜀郡太守。
English: For the fifth time in office for four years, he was promoted to Shuxi County Governor.

古文：蜀地肥饶，人吏富实，掾史家资多至千万，皆鲜车怒马，以财货自达。
现代文：四川土地肥沃，物产富饶，人民官吏都很富裕殷实，掾史的家产多至千万，都是坐着新车，骑着肥马，用财货作礼物表现自己。
English: Sichuan's land is fertile and its products are plentiful. The people's officials are all rich and affluent, and the family income of Zou Shi is as high as ten million. They are all sitting in new cars, riding fat horses, and using wealth as gifts to express themselves.

古文：伦悉简其丰赡者遣还之，更选孤贫志行之人以处曹任，于是争赇抑绝，文职修理。
现代文：第五伦选择那些富有的官吏罢免还家，再挑孤苦贫穷而有品行的人提任曹吏之职，从此贿赂之风得到杜绝，文职人员得以廉洁奉公。
English: The Fifth Ecumenical Council selected those rich officials to be dismissed and returned to their families, and then selected those who were destitute, poor and virtuous to be appointed as officials. From then on, the culture of bribery was eliminated, and civil servants were able to serve the public with integrity.

古文：所举吏多至九卿、二千石，时以为知人。
现代文：第五伦所举的官吏多数做到九卿、二千石，当时认为他知人善用。
English: Most of the officials listed in the fifth column were nine nobles and 2,000 koku, and it was believed at the time that they were well used by their acquaintances.

古文：视事七岁，肃宗初立，擢自远郡，代牟融为司空。
现代文：第五伦做太守第七年，肃宗即位，提拔一些远郡的人，第五伦代替牟融做了司空。
English: In the seventh year of his reign, Su Zong ascended to the throne and promoted some people from far away counties. Instead of Mu Rong, Wulun became Siku.

古文：帝以明德太后故，尊崇舅氏马廖，兄弟并居职任。
现代文：皇帝因为明德太后的关系，尊敬舅父马廖，马氏兄弟都居要职。
English: Because of the relationship between Emperor Mingde and Empress Dowager, Emperor Mingde respected his uncle Ma Liao. Ma's brothers all held important positions.

古文：廖等倾身交结，冠盖之士争赴趣之。
现代文：马廖等人放下身份交结朋友，一些头面人物争着趋附他们。
English: Maliau and others put aside their identities to make friends, and some leading figures vie to attach themselves to them.

古文：伦以后族过盛，欲令朝廷抑损其权，上疏曰：臣闻忠不隐讳，直不避害。
现代文：第五伦认为后族势力太盛，想使朝廷减损他们的权势，便上疏道 ：臣下听说忠臣不隐瞒观点，直臣不回避危险。
English: The Fifth Lune thought that the influence of the Hozoku was too strong, and he wanted the Imperial Court to reduce their power, so he said: The vassals have heard that the loyal vassals do not hide their views, and the direct vassals do not avoid danger.

古文：不胜愚狷，昧死自表。
现代文：因此不顾禺蠢狷急，冒着死罪上这份表。
English: Therefore, regardless of the haste, risking the death penalty on this watch.

古文：《书》曰 臣无作威作福，其害于而家，凶于而国 传曰 大夫无境外之交，束修之馈 近代光烈皇后，虽友爱天至，而卒使阴就归国，徙废阴兴宾客。其后梁、窦之家，互有非法，明帝即位，竟多诛之。
现代文：古书说 ：大夫不要越境交朋友，不搞束帛干肉的饣鬼送。 近代先烈皇后，虽然天性很友爱，但终于使阴就归国，迁徙遣散了阴兴的宾客；后来梁窦两家，都有一些非法之事，明帝即位，竟杀了许多人。
English: The ancient book said: "Doctors should not make friends across the border, and should not send packets of dried meat to the devil." The modern-day martyred empress, although she was very friendly by nature, finally sent Yin back to the country, and dismissed Yin's guests. Later, both the Liang and Dou families had some illegal things, and Emperor Ming ascended the throne and actually killed many people.

古文：自是洛中无复权威，书记请托一皆断绝。
现代文：从此洛阳不再有专权的外戚，书记请托之事一概绝迹。
English: Since then, Luoyang no longer has an autocratic relative, and all the things entrusted by the secretary have disappeared.

古文：又譬诸外戚曰 苦身待士，不如为国，戴盆望天，事不两施 臣常刻著五臧，书诸绅带。
现代文：又晓喻外戚道 ：苦身延揽人才，不如自己为国出力；戴盆不能望天，公私二者不能兼顾。 臣下常把这些教训铭记在心，写在衣带上经常念叨。
English: I also know my mother-in-law's way: if you work hard to recruit talent, it's better to contribute to the country yourself; you can't look up to the sky when you wear a tray, and you can't balance your private and public life. My subjects often keep these lessons in mind, and often recite them when they write them on their belts.

古文：而今之议者，复以马氏为言。
现代文：可现在议论最多的，都在马氏身上。
English: But right now, most of the talk is about Mr Ma.

古文：窃闻卫尉廖以布三千匹，城门校尉防以钱三百万，私赡三辅衣冠，知与不知，莫不毕给。
现代文：私下听闻卫尉马廖用三千匹布，城门校尉马防用三百万钱，私自补给京师附近的官员，不论认识不认识的人，没有一个不给。
English: Privately, I heard that the guard lieutenant Ma Liao used three thousand cloth horses, and the city gate captain Ma Bo used three million money to privately supply officials near the Beijing Division. Regardless of who knows or does not know, there is no one who does not give.

古文：又闻腊日亦遗其在洛中者钱各五千，越骑校尉光，腊用羊三百头，米四百斛，肉五千斤。
现代文：又听说腊月也发给在洛阳的官员每人钱五千。越骑校尉马光腊日用三百头羊，四百斛米，五千斤肉赏给他的亲信。
English: It was also heard that Lazyue also gave officials in Luoyang five thousand yuan each. The Vietcong cavalry captain Ma Guanglai rewarded his cronies with three hundred sheep, four hundred ounces of rice, and five thousand pounds of meat.

古文：臣愚以为不应经义，惶恐不敢不以闻。
现代文：臣下愚见认为这是反常的行为，害怕得很，不敢不来汇报。
English: His vassal Gudimin thought that this was abnormal behavior, and he was so scared that he did not dare not to report it.

古文：陛下情欲厚之，亦宜所以安之。
现代文：陛下如从私情上想厚待他们，也应设法使他们安于其位。
English: If His Majesty wants to be kind to them out of his personal feelings, he should also try to keep them in their positions.

古文：臣今言此，诚欲上忠陛下，下全后家，裁蒙省察。
现代文：臣下说到这些，的确是上叫于陛下，下保全皇后的家族，希望陛下省察。 
English: When our vassals say these things, they are really calling on His Majesty to protect the Queen's family. I hope His Majesty will reflect on this.

古文：及马防为车骑将军，当出征西羌，伦又上疏曰：臣愚以为贵戚可封侯以富之，不当职事以任之。
现代文：后来马防做了车骑将军，准备出征西羌，第五伦又上疏道 ：臣愚见认为贵戚可以封侯让他们富有，不应当交给他们重大任务。
English: Later, Ma Bao became the general of chariots and cavalry, preparing to go to the Western Wei, and the fifth Lun also went to the ditch: the vassals thought that the noble relatives could make them rich, and they should not be given important tasks.

古文：何者。
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：绳以法则伤恩，私以亲则违宪。
现代文：一旦出了问题，绳之以法就伤了恩宠，照顾私情就违背法制。
English: Once there is a problem, bringing it to justice will hurt grace, and taking care of personal affairs will violate the legal system.

古文：伏闻马防今当西征，臣以太后恩仁，陛下至孝，恐卒有纤介，难为意爱。
现代文：臣听说马防准备西征，以太后的恩德仁慈，陛下一片孝心，恐怕如果出点小问题，爱而不罚，有些为难。
English: The minister heard that the Horse Guards were preparing for the Western Expedition, and after the ethereal grace and mercy, His Majesty's filial piety, I am afraid that if there is a small problem, love without punishment, some difficulties.

古文：闻防请杜笃为从事中郎，多赐财帛。
现代文：听说马防请杜笃做从事中郎，赐了不少钱帛。
English: I heard that Ma Bao asked Du Du to be his middle man and gave him a lot of money.

古文：笃为乡里所废，客居美阳，女弟为马氏妻，恃此交通，在所县令苦其不法，收系论之。
现代文：杜笃曾被乡里罢免过，客居在美阳，他的妹妹是马防的妻子，依靠这层关系交结豪杰，当地县官很不好办，只好把他关了一下了事。
English: Du Du was once ousted from the village and lived as a guest in Meiyang. His sister was the wife of Ma Fang, and relied on this relationship to make a hero. The local county officials had a hard time dealing with him, so they had to lock him up.

古文：今来防所，议者咸致疑怪，况乃以为从事，将恐议及朝廷。
现代文：现在来到马防这里，议论的人都觉得很奇怪，何况还用他作从事，将来恐怕要议论到朝廷上来。
English: Now, when people come to the Horse Guards, they find it very strange to talk about horses. What's more, they still use horses as a means of transportation. In the future, I'm afraid the discussion will come to the Imperial Court.

古文：今宜为选贤能以辅助之，不可复今防自请人，有损事望。
现代文：现在应当选贤能之人辅助他，不可让马防私自请人，有损国家的威望。
English: Now it is time to choose a capable person to assist him, and not allow Ma Fang to invite people of his own accord, which would damage the country's prestige.

古文：苟有所怀，敢不自闻。
现代文：这是臣所想到的，敢不向上汇报。 
English: This is what the minister thought of, and he dared to report it to the higher-ups.

古文：并不见省用。
现代文：这些疏文并没有被皇上省察和采纳。
English: These epistles were not considered and adopted by the emperor.

古文：伦虽峭直，然常疾俗吏苛刻。
现代文：第五伦为人虽很严厉正直，但常恨俗吏太苛刻。
English: Although Fifth Ron is a very strict and honest person, he often hates secular officials for being too harsh.

古文：及为三公，值帝长者，屡有善政，乃上疏褒称盛美，因以劝成风德，曰：
现代文：后来做到三公，遇上皇帝贤明，屡次有善政，就上疏称赞，借以劝善成为风尚和美德。
English: Later, when the three princes were achieved, when the emperor was wise and repeatedly had good government, he praised them, so as to persuade good to become a fashion and virtue.

古文：陛下即位，躬天然之德，体晏晏之姿，以宽弘临下，出入四年，前岁诛刺史、二千石贪残者六人。
现代文：疏上说： 陛下在位，自身有天然的美德，体现出温和的姿态，用宽宏大量对待臣下，四年之中，前年杀了刺史、二千石贪污残酷者六人。
English: To put it mildly: His Majesty, who is on the throne, has his own natural virtues, embodies a gentle attitude, and treats his subjects with magnanimity. In four years, the year before last, he killed six people who were corrupt and cruel.

古文：斯皆明圣所鉴，非群下所及。
现代文：这都是英明远见，不是群下所能办得到的。
English: This is a wise foresight, not something that can be done by a subordinate.

古文：然诏书每下宽和而政急不解，务存节俭而奢侈不止者，咎在俗敝，群下不称故也。
现代文：但是每次诏书下来，总是宽和而不能解除急切的政事，强调节俭而奢侈之风不止，过失在于风俗败坏，群下不称职。
English: However, each time the edict came down, it was always conciliatory and could not relieve the urgent political affairs, emphasizing thrift and extravagance. The fault lay in the corruption of customs and the incompetence of the masses.

古文：光武承王莽之馀，颇以严猛为政，后代因之，遂成风化。
现代文：光武帝继承王莽的烂摊子，很用了一些严厉猛酷的政治措施，后代接着执行，于是成了风气。
English: Emperor Guangwu inherited Wang Mang's mess, and used some harsh and cruel political measures, which were then implemented by his descendants, and became a tradition.

古文：郡国所举，类多辩职俗吏。殊未有宽博之选以应上求者也。
现代文：现在郡国推荐的人，多半是只能辨析职务的俗吏，没有选出一些广有才干之人供上面的需要。
English: At present, the people recommended by the county government are mostly lay officials who can only distinguish positions, and have not selected some widely talented people for the above needs.

古文：陈留令刘豫，冠军令驷协，并以刻薄之姿，临人宰邑，专念掠杀，务为严苦，吏民愁怨，莫不疾之，而今之议者反以为能，违天心，失经义，诚不可不慎也。
现代文：陈留县令刘豫，冠军县令驷协，都以刻薄的手段，处理县政，一心只想掠杀，只会严刑拷打，官吏百姓忧愁埋怨，没有不恨之入骨，可现在的舆论反而认为勇士，这是违背天意，有失经典义理，不可不谨慎的事。
English: Liu Yu, the governor of Chenliu County, and the governor of Champion County, both dealt with county affairs with harsh means. They only wanted to plunder and kill, and would only torture. The officials and the people were sad and complained, and there was no hatred in their bones. However, the current public opinion believes that the warriors are against the will of heaven, and have lost the classic justice. It is a prudent thing.

古文：非徒应坐豫、协，亦当宜谴举者。
现代文：不止应惩罚刘豫和驷协，还应谴责提拔他们的人。
English: Not only should Liu Yu and Yu Xie be punished, but those who promoted them should also be condemned.

古文：务进仁贤以任时政，不过数人，则风俗自化矣。
现代文：今后必须选拔仁德贤能之人来担任职务，只要少数几个人，就可使风俗得到转化了。
English: In the future, people of benevolence, virtue and ability must be selected to hold positions. As long as there are only a few people, customs can be transformed.

古文：臣尝读书记，知秦以酷急亡国，又目见王莽亦以苛法自灭，故勤勤恳恳，实在于此，又闻诸王主贵戚，骄奢逾制，京师尚然，何以示远。
现代文：臣曾经读过古书，知道秦朝因残酷亡国，又亲眼看见王莽也因苛法自取灭亡，所以勤勤恳恳原因就在这里。又听说诸王主贵戚，骄傲奢侈超越制度，京师尚且如此，怎能给远方示范呢？
English: The minister had read ancient books, knew that the Qin Dynasty was destroyed by cruelty, and saw with his own eyes that Wang Mang also self-destructed due to harsh laws, so the diligent and sincere reason was here. He also heard that the princes were noble relatives, pride and luxury transcended the system, and the Beijing division was still the same, how could it be demonstrated to faraway places?

古文：故曰 其身不正，虽令下从 以身教者从，以言教者讼。
现代文：古人说： 他本身不走正道，即使发布命令也无人听从。 用身体示范的人就能叫人服从，用言语教训别人的人就能引起争论。
English: The ancients said: "He himself does not walk on the right path, even if he issues orders, no one will listen; those who use physical demonstration can make people obey, and those who teach others with words can cause disputes."

古文：夫阴阳和岁乃丰，君臣同心化乃成也。
现代文：天地之间阴阳二气中和就有雨泽降临，年成才能丰稔，君臣之间同心同德，才能化民成俗。
English: Between heaven and earth, between yin and yang, and between the two qi, there will be rain and rain, and the year will be prosperous, and the monarchs and ministers will be of the same mind and the same virtue, and the people will be able to become popular.

古文：其刺史、太守以下，拜除京师及道出洛阳者，宜皆召见，可因博问四方，兼以观察其人。
现代文：那些刺史、太守以下的官吏，到京师朝拜的，和经过洛阳的官吏，都应召见，借此了解四方的情况，同时观察他们的为人。
English: Those officials below the rank of Shishi and Dazhu who came to Beijing to worship, as well as those officials who passed through Luoyang, were all summoned to see, in order to understand the situation in the four directions, and to observe their personalities.

古文：诸上书言事有不合者，可但报归田里，不宜过加喜怒，以明在宽。
现代文：凡上书言事不合实际的，可让他们回归田里，不必过分喜怒，以表示宽厚。
English: If anything in the letter is unrealistic, they can be allowed to return to the fields, and there is no need for excessive joy and anger, so as to show clemency.

古文：臣愚不足采。
现代文：臣的愚见不一定对。 
English: The stupid opinion of a minister is not necessarily correct.

古文：及诸马得罪归国，而窦氏始贵，伦复上疏曰：臣得以空虚之质，当辅弼之任。素性驽怯，位尊爵重，抱迫大义，思自策厉，虽遭百死，不敢择地，又况亲遇危言之世哉。
现代文：后来，几个姓马的外戚得了罪回来，而窦氏开始得势，第五伦又上疏道： 臣凭空虚的本质，担当辅佐国家的重任，素性驽劣胆小，位高爵显，拘守大义，只想勉励自己，即使遭到死罪，也不敢选择地点，何况亲逢危言耸听的时世呢？
English: Later, several of Ma's maternal relatives came back from their crimes, and the Dou clan began to gain power, and the fifth Lun went on to say: "Vassals, by virtue of their empty nature, assume the important task of assisting the country. They are cowardly and cowardly. They are of high rank, stick to the great cause, and only want to encourage themselves. Even if they are sentenced to death, they do not dare to choose a place. What's more, they have lived through a time of alarmist rumors."

古文：今承百王之敝，人尚文巧，感趋邪路，莫能守正。
现代文：现在继承百王的弊政，人们喜欢文过取巧，争走邪路，不走正道。
English: Now that we have inherited the bad politics of the hundred kings, people like to copy others, take advantage of others, and go down the wrong path instead of the right one.

古文：伏见虎贲中郎将窦宪，椒房之亲，典司禁兵，出入省闼，年盛志美，卑谦乐善，此诚其好士交结之方。
现代文：臣看到虎贲中郎将窦宪，是皇后亲戚，掌握了禁兵大权，出入宫闱，年轻志美，谦恭待人，喜做好事，这的确是好士交友的方法。
English: The vassal saw that Vice Admiral Dou Xian, who was a relative of the queen, had the power to ban soldiers, enter and leave the palace, was young, courteous, and liked to do good deeds. This was indeed a way for a good man to make friends.

古文：然诸出入贵戚者，类多瑕衅禁锢之人，尤少守约安贫之节，士大夫无志之徒更相贩卖，云集其门。
现代文：但那些出入贵戚之门的人，好像多半是有缺点或被拘禁过的，特别少有安分守己、安贫乐道的气节，加上士大夫中一些无志之徒互相吹捧，云集在他的门下。
English: However, those who enter and leave the door of the noble relative seem to be mostly with shortcomings or have been detained, especially few have the temperament of keeping peace and tranquility, peace and poverty, and some of the unscrupulous people among the magistrates praise each other and gather under his door.

古文：众煦飘山，聚蚊成雷，盖骄佚所从生也。
现代文：风大了可以移动大山，蚊子多了可以叫声成雷，大概这就是骄奢淫佚滋生的土壤。
English: Strong winds can move mountains, more mosquitoes can make thunderous screams, and this is probably the soil in which the mongoose breeds.

古文：三辅论议者，至云以贵戚废锢，当复以贵戚浣濯之，犹解酲当以酒也。
现代文：京师近产儿议主化最多的，甚至说贵戚房用有罪之人，应该让贵戚自己去洗涤错误，犹如喝醉了的人用酒去解酒哩。
English: The Beijing scholars said that near-term infants were the most subject to the Lord, and even said that if a guilty person used a noble relative's house, the noble relative should be allowed to wash the mistake himself, just as a drunken person uses wine to sober up.

古文：诐险趣势之徒，诚不可亲近。
现代文：趋炎附势之徒，的确不可亲近。
English: It is true that you should not get close to those who are inflamed with power.

古文：臣愚愿陛下中宫严敕宪等闭门自守，无妄交通士大夫，防其未萌，虑于无形，令宪永保福禄，君臣交欢，无纤介之隙。此臣之至所愿也。
现代文：臣的愚见希望陛下在宫中严格命令窦宪等人闭门自守，不要随便与士大夫交往，防患于萌芽之时，消除顾虑于无形之中，使宪等永远保持富贵，君臣感情融洽，没有点滴的嫌隙，这是臣最大的愿望。 
English: The follies of the minister hope that His Majesty will strictly order Dou Xian and others in the palace to keep their doors closed, not to casually interact with scholars, prevent problems at the time of germination, eliminate concerns in the intangible, so that Xian and others will always remain rich and noble, the feelings of the monarch and the minister will be harmonious, and there will be no gaps. This is the greatest wish of the minister.

古文：伦奉公尽节，言事无所依违。
现代文：第五伦奉公守法，尽忠守节，讲什么事没有犹豫不决的。
English: Fifthly, they should be law-abiding, be loyal to the Constitution and the Constitution Day, and not hesitate to speak out.

古文：诸子或时谏止，辄叱遣之，吏人奏记及便宜者，亦并封上，其无私若此。
现代文：他的儿子们有时劝阻，常常遭到斥责，吏人奏记及有些事属于便宜从事的，他一并送上去，他的大公无私就是如此。
English: His sons were sometimes dissuaded, often rebuked, and sent up with him by the magistrates, and some things were done on the cheap, as was his great-uncle selflessness.

古文：性质悫，少文采，在位以贞白称，时人方之前朝贡禹。
现代文：他性格朴质诚实，少有文采，在位时以贞忠清白著称，当时人把他比为前朝的贡禹。
English: His character was simple and honest, with little literary flair. During his reign, he was known for his chastity, loyalty, and purity. At that time, people compared him to Gong Yu of the previous dynasty.

古文：然少蕴藉，不修威仪，亦以此见轻。
现代文：但是不够含蓄，不讲究仪表，也因这被人轻视。
English: However, it is not subtle enough, does not pay attention to appearance, and is also despised for this.

古文：或问伦曰 公有私乎 对曰 昔人有与吾千里马者，吾虽不受，每三公有所选举，心不能忘，而亦终不用也。
现代文：有人问他道 ：您有私心吗？ 答道 ：从前有人送我一匹千里马，我虽然没有接受，但是每逢三公选拔人才时，我心里总不能忘记那个送马的人，但也始终没有用他。
English: Someone asked him, "Do you have a selfish heart?" He replied, "Someone once gave me a prized horse. Although I didn't accept it, every time the Three Wise Men selected a person, I couldn't forget the person who gave me the horse, but I never used him.

古文：吾兄子常病，一夜十往，退而安寝。吾子有疾，虽不省视而竟夕不眠。
现代文：我的侄子生病，我一个晚上去过十次，回来才安心睡觉；我的儿子有病，虽然我没有去看他，但也通宵没有睡觉。
English: My nephew was ill, I visited him ten times in one night, and only returned to sleep peacefully; my son was ill, although I didn't go to see him, I didn't sleep all night.

古文：若是者，岂可谓无私乎 连以老病上疏乞身。
现代文：像这些事，难道说没有私心吗？ 后来连续因年老多病上疏请求退职。
English: Is there no selfishness in such things? Later, he repeatedly asked to be relieved of his duties due to old age and illness.

古文：种所坐以盗贼公负，筋力未就，罪至征徙，非有大恶。
现代文：元和三年，皇帝赐策让他退职，以二千石的俸禄养老，另外加赐钱五十万，公宅一区。
English: Yuan and three years later, the emperor gave him a plan to retire, with a salary of two thousand stone pension, plus a grant of five hundred thousand, and a public house.

古文：昔虞舜事亲，大杖则走。
现代文：后过了几年才死，时年八十多，皇上下诏赐给秘器、衣衾、钱布等物作为殡葬之用。
English: A few years later, when he was more than eighty years old, he died, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to give him secret utensils, coats of mail, money cloths, and other items for use in his funeral.

古文：故种逃亡，苟全性命，冀有朱家之路，以显季布之会，愿陛下无遗须臾之恩，令种有持忠入地之恨。会赦出，卒于家。钟离意字子阿，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：◆钟离意传，钟离意字子阿，会稽山阴人。
English: ◆ Zhongli Yiyi Zhuan, Zhongli Yiyi Ziwao ah, will check the Shanshin people.

古文：少为郡督邮。
现代文：少年时做过郡督邮。
English: He worked as a postmaster when he was a boy.

古文：时部县亭长有受人酒礼者，府下记案考之。
现代文：当时部县亭长有受人酒礼的，府下登记在案考察。
English: At that time, if the head of the prefectural pavilion received a drink from someone, it was registered with the prefecture for investigation.

古文：意封还记，入言于太守曰 《春秋》先内后外，《诗》云刑于寡妻，以御于家邦，明政化之本，由近及远。
现代文：钟离意封还记载时，进去对太守说； 《春秋》先内后外，《诗经》说： 刑于寡妻，以御于家邦 就是说应明政化的根本，由近到远。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," both inside and out, the "Song of Songs" says: "Punish the widowed wife, and the ruler of the family state" That is to say, it is necessary to clarify the fundamentals of politicalization, from near to far.

古文：今宜先清府内，且阔略远县细微之愆 太守甚贤之，遂任以县事。
现代文：今应先清理府内，暂且把远县细微的错失放松一些。 太守认为他很能干，于是委任他管县里的事。
English: Now it was time to clean up the palace and, for the time being, ease the minor missteps in the outlying counties. The governor thought he was very capable, so he appointed him to manage the affairs of the county.

古文：建武十四年，会稽大疫，死者万数，意独身自隐亲，经给医药，所部多蒙全济。
现代文：建武十四年，会稽大瘟疫，死了万数人，钟离意亲自隐恤，经常供给医药，所属各部多受了他的救济。
English: In the 14th year of the Jianwu era, there was a great plague that killed tens of thousands of people. Zhong Liang was personally involved and often supplied medicine. Most of the ministries he belonged to received relief from him.

古文：举孝廉，再迁，辟大司徒侯霸府。
现代文：钟离意被举为孝廉，再次升迁，提到大司徒侯霸府。
English: Zhong Liangyi was promoted to filial piety, promoted again, and mentioned to the grand secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：诏部送徒诣河内，时冬寒，徒病不能行。
现代文：朝廷下诏要送徒到河内，时值冬寒，徒病不能行走。
English: The imperial court decreed to send him to Hanoi, but it was winter and he was too ill to travel.

古文：路过弘农，意辄移属县使作徒衣，县不得已与之，而上书言状，意亦具以闻。
现代文：路过弘农，钟离意就移文给属县替徒作衣，县不得已给了他，但上书言明情况，钟离意也全部上报。
English: Passing through Hongnong, Zhong Liang intended to transfer the money to a county-owned substitute to make clothes. The county had no choice but to give it to him, but the letter stated the situation, and Zhong Liang also reported everything.

古文：光武得奏，以视霸，曰 君所使掾何乃仁于用心。
现代文：光武帝得奏后，把奏折给侯霸看，并说： 你所派的掾吏良心多好呀，的确是良吏。 
English: After Emperor Guangwu received the transcript, he showed it to Houba and said, "What a good conscience the censors you sent have. They are indeed good censors.

古文：诚良吏也 意遂于道解徒桎梏，恣所欲过，与克期俱至，无或违者。还，以病免。
现代文：钟离意在路上解除徒犯的枷锁，让他们走散，但是定期一定要到，没有一个违背的。回来后，因病免职。
English: Zhong Liang intended to break the chains of the prisoners on the way and let them disperse, but he had to come regularly, and no one disobeyed. After returning, he was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：后除瑕丘令。
现代文：后来授职为瑕丘令。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Kokeoka.

古文：吏有檀建者，盗窃县内，意屏人问状，建叩头服罪，不忍加刑，遣令长休。
现代文：吏有檀建其人，偷窃县里的东西，钟离意摒退左右私自问供，檀建叩头服罪，钟离意不忍心加刑罚，勒令他长期休息。
English: The officials suspected that Dangjian was stealing things from the county, but Zhong Liang refused to make a confession. Dangjian bowed down and accepted the punishment, but Zhong Liang didn't have the heart to impose a penalty and ordered him to take a long rest.

古文：建父闻之，为建设酒，谓曰 吾闻无道之君以刃残人，有道之君以义行诛。
现代文：檀建的父亲听说了，替建设了酒宴，对他说 ：我听说无道之君用刀杀人，有道之君用义代替杀人。
English: When Tang Jian's father heard about this, he held a banquet for the builder and said to him, "I have heard that the unscrupulous lord used a sword to kill people, while the scrupulous lord used righteousness instead of killing people.

古文：子罪，命也 遂令建进药而死。
现代文：你有罪，命该如此。 于是叫建进药而死。
English: You are guilty and deserve to die, so he had Jian Jin drugged to death.

古文：二十五年，迁堂邑令。
现代文：二十五年升为堂邑令。
English: Twenty-five years later, it was elevated to the rank of dōupi-rei.

古文：县人防广为父报仇，系狱，其母病死，广哭泣不食。
现代文：县人防广替父亲报仇，被捕下狱，他的母病死了，广哭泣不进食。
English: Guang was arrested and sent to prison by the county people's guards to avenge his father. His mother died of illness, and Guang wept and refused to eat.

古文：意怜伤之，乃听广归家，使得殡敛。
现代文：钟离意同情他，于是听任广还家，使他能为母殡殓。
English: Zhong Liang sympathized with him, so he allowed Ren Guang to return home so that he could attend his mother's funeral.

古文：丞掾皆争，意曰 罪自我归，义不累下 遂遣之。
现代文：丞掾都争论此事，钟离意说： 罪人由我放回，我不会连累你们。 
English: Both of them argued about it, and Zhong Liang said deliberately: "I will release the criminal, and I will not bother you."

古文：广敛母讫，果还入狱。
现代文：于是遣他走了。广殓母完毕，果然回来坐牢。
English: So they sent him away. When Guangyao's mother had finished, she did indeed return to prison.

古文：意密以状闻，广竟得以减死论。
现代文：钟离意秘密地上报其事，广竟减除死罪。
English: Zhong Liang secretly reported the case, and the death penalty was widely commuted.

古文：显宗即位，征为尚书。
现代文：显宗即位，征为尚书。
English: Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, and Shosho was conscripted.

古文：时交阯太守张恢，坐臧千金，征还伏法，以资物簿入大司农，诏班赐群臣。
现代文：这时交阝止太守张恢，因贪千金，召回伏法，用资物簿没收交大司农，朝廷下诏将赃物赐给群臣。
English: At this time, Zhang Huai, the Tai Shou of Jiaxing, because of his greed for money, recalled Fupo, confiscated the capital goods book and handed it to the farmer, and the court issued an edict to give the stolen goods to the ministers.

古文：意得珠玑，悉以委地而不拜赐。
现代文：钟离意得到一些珍珠，全部放在地上而不拜赐。
English: Zhong Liang wanted to get some pearls, so he put them all on the ground without offering them.

古文：帝怪而问其故。对曰 臣闻孔子忍渴于盗泉之水，曾参回车于胜母之闾，恶其名也。
现代文：皇上奇怪而问其缘故，对道 ：臣下听说孔子忍渴不饮盗泉之水，曾参听到胜母之名而回车，讨厌其名字哩。
English: The emperor was puzzled and asked the reason, to which the emperor replied, "Our vassals have heard that Confucius did not drink the water of the stolen spring because he was thirsty, and that he once heard the name of the mother of Confucius and returned to the carriage, hating her name."

古文：此臧秽之宝，诚不敢拜 帝嗟叹曰 清乎尚书之言 乃更以库钱三十万赐意。
现代文：这些肮脏的宝物，的确不敢拜受。 帝叹气道 ：尚书的话多么清廉啊！ 于是从库里取出三十万赐给钟离。
English: These dirty treasures, indeed, dare not be worshipped. The emperor sighed and said, "How corrupt the words of Shang Shu are!" So he took three hundred thousand yuan from the treasury and gave it to Zhong Li.

古文：转为尚书仆射。
现代文：并调升为尚书仆射。
English: And he was promoted to Shang Shufu Zhao.

古文：车驾数幸广成苑，意以为从禽废政，常当年阵谏般乐游田之事，天子即时还宫。
现代文：皇帝圣驾多次到广成苑，钟离意认为从禽废政，常挡住车陈谏般乐游猎之事，天子立刻回宫了。
English: Emperor Shennong drove to Guangcheng Yuan many times, and Zhong Liangyi thought that it was a waste of power from the birds, and often blocked the car of Chen Yao's pleasure hunting, and the heavenly son immediately returned to the palace.

古文：永平三年夏旱，而大起北宫，意诣阙免冤上疏曰：伏见陛下以天时小旱，忧念元元，降避正殿，躬自克责，而比日密云，遂无大润，岂政有未得应天心者邪。
现代文：永平三年夏天大旱，而朝廷大起北宫，钟离意到廷免冠上疏道： 伏见陛下因天时小旱，挂念百姓，降避正殿，身自责备，而连日密云不雨，没有大润，难道朝政有不得应天心的吗？
English: Yongping three years of drought in the summer, and the imperial court rose to the north palace, and the clock was willing to go to the court without a crown. He said: "I see that His Majesty is concerned about the people due to the small drought, avoids the main hall, and blames himself, but it does not rain for days, and there is no big profit. Is it possible for the imperial government to respond to the will of heaven?

古文：昔成汤遭旱，以六事自责曰 政不节邪。
现代文：从前成汤遭旱，用六件事自责道： 政不节约吗？
English: Once upon a time, Chengtang suffered from drought, and used six things to reproach himself: Isn't politics frugal?

古文：使人疾邪。
现代文：使人们生病吗？
English: Make people sick?

古文：宫室荣邪。
现代文：宫室太华丽吗？
English: Is the palace too ornate?

古文：女谒盛邪。
现代文：女谒太多了吗？
English: Are there too many bridesmaids?

古文：苞苴行邪。
现代文：有行贿的吗？
English: Was there a bribe involved?

古文：谗夫昌邪 窃见北宫大作，人失农时，此所谓宫室荣也。
现代文：进谗的太多了吗？ 臣下看到北宫大作，人失农时，这就是宫室华丽了。
English: Are there too many new arrivals? When subjects see the masterpiece of the Northern Palace, when people lose their farmers, this is the gorgeous palace room.

古文：自古非苦宫室小狭，但患人不安宁。
现代文：自古以来不是担心宫室太狭窄，只患人们不安宁。
English: Since ancient times, people have not been worried about the narrowness of the palace, but only about the lack of peace and quiet.

古文：宜且罢止，以应天心。
现代文：应该暂且停止修建，以应天心。
English: Construction should be suspended for the time being in order to respond to the will of heaven.

古文：臣意以匹夫之才，无有行能，久食重禄，擢备近臣，比受厚赐，喜惧相并，不胜愚戆征营，罪当万死
现代文：臣意凭着匹夫之才，没有品行才能，久食重禄，升为近臣，连受厚赐，喜惧交加，不尽愚笨之忱，罪该万死。 
English: A vassal who aspires to be a vassal by virtue of his ability as a vassal, but has no ability to conduct himself properly, who has long enjoyed great rewards, who has been promoted to vassal, who has received great gifts, who has been feared, and who has not exhausted his stupidity, is guilty of a crime worthy of death.

古文：帝策诏报曰 汤引六事，咎在一人。
现代文：皇帝策诏报道： 成汤引六事自责，罪过在于一人。
English: Emperor Zhao Zhao reported: Cheng Tang cited six things for self-condemnation, and the fault lies with one person.

古文：其冠履，勿谢。
现代文：你们都恢复冠履，不必谢。
English: You can all go back to your jackboots, thank you very much.

古文：比上天降旱，密云数会，朕戚然惭惧，思获嘉应，故分布祷请，窥候风云，北祈明堂，南设雩场。
现代文：近来上天降旱灾，密云几次会合而不下雨，我非常感到恐惧，想得到好的报应，所以分布祷请，窥候风云，北在明堂，南设雩场求雨。
English: Recently, droughts have fallen from the sky, and dense clouds have met several times without rain. I am very afraid and want to get a good reward, so please pray for distribution and watch the wind and clouds. In the north is Myeongdong, and in the south is Gyeongbokgung for rain.

古文：今又敕大匠止作诸宫，减省不急，庶消灾谴 诏因谢公卿百僚，遂应时澍雨焉。
现代文：现在又命令大匠停止修建诸宫，减省不急之务，希望消弭灾谴。 诏书于是谢公卿百僚，便应时下了雨。
English: Now he ordered the master builders to stop building palaces, to cut back on non-urgent tasks, and to hope for a reprieve from the disaster. The imperial edict then thanked the nobles and officials, and it duly rained.

古文：时，诏赐降胡子缣，尚书案事，误以十为百。
现代文：当时朝廷下诏用缣赐给降胡之子，尚书察觉此事，误以十为百。
English: At that time, the imperial court issued an imperial edict to give the imperial edict to the son of Zhuo Hu. Shangshu noticed this and miscalculated by ten to one hundred.

古文：帝见司农上簿，大怒，召郎，将笞之。
现代文：皇帝看见司农上簿，大发脾气，召郎将打他。
English: When the emperor saw that the farmer had been put on the register, he lost his temper and called his son-in-law to beat him.

古文：意因入叩头曰 过误之失，常人所容。
现代文：钟离意进来叩头道： 犯了错误，平常人能容忍。
English: Zhong Liang came in and kowtowed: I made a mistake, an ordinary person can tolerate it.

古文：若以懈慢为愆，则臣位大，罪重，郎位小，罪轻，咎皆在臣，臣当先坐 乃解衣就格。
现代文：如果因懈怠出错，那么臣位大，罪重，郎位小，罪轻，错误都在我身上，我当先受处分。 于是解开衣服伏在刑具上。
English: If I make a mistake due to slackness, then the position of vassal is great, the crime is heavy, the position of vassal is small, the crime is light, the mistakes are all on me, I should be punished first.

古文：帝意解，使复冠而贳郎。
现代文：皇帝醒悟过来，让他戴上帽子而赦免了他。
English: The emperor came to his senses, allowed him to wear the hat and pardoned him.

古文：帝性褊察，好以耳目隐发为明，故公卿大臣数被诋毁，近臣尚书以下至见提拽。
现代文：皇帝性情褊察，喜欢用耳目私自听取意思，所以公卿大夫多次被诋毁，近臣尚书以下甚至被提拽。
English: The emperor was a keen observer of character, and liked to use his eyes and ears to hear his own thoughts. Therefore, court noble doctors were repeatedly slandered, and close vassals such as Shangshu were even demoted.

古文：尝以事怒郎药崧，以杖撞之。
现代文：有一次因事对郎药崧发怒，用杖打了他。
English: On one occasion, he got angry with him and beat him with a cane.

古文：崧走入床下，帝怒甚，疾言曰 郎出。
现代文：药崧快跑到床下，帝大怒，快叫 ：郎出来！郎出来！ 
English: The druggist quickly ran under the bed, the emperor was furious, and shouted: "Come out, come out!"

古文：郎出 崧曰 天子穆穆，诸侯煌煌。
现代文：崧说 ：天子穆穆，诸侯煌煌。
English: Zou said, "Heaven's son Mu Mu, princes are brilliant."

古文：未闻入君自起撞郎 帝赦之。
现代文：未闻人君自起撞郎。 皇帝赦了他。
English: The unknown man took it upon himself to hit his brother, and the emperor forgave him.

古文：朝廷莫不悚栗，争为严切，以避诛责。惟意独敢谏争，数封还诏书，臣下过失辄救解之。
现代文：朝廷没有人不恐惧，争为严切，来避免责罚；只有钟离意敢于谏争，几次封还诏书，臣下有过失就出来救解。
English: There was no one in the court who did not fear and fight hard to avoid punishment; only Zhong Liang dared to fight, returned the imperial rescript several times, and his vassals came out to rescue him when he made mistakes.

古文：会连有变异，意复上疏曰：伏惟陛下躬行孝道，修明经术，郊祀天地，畏敬鬼神，忧恤黎元，劳心不怠。
现代文：碰上特殊情况，钟离意又上疏道 ：陛下亲行孝道，修明经术，郊祀天地，畏敬鬼神，关心百姓疾苦，劳心从不懈怠。
English: When faced with a special situation, Zhong Liangyi took the easy way out again: His Majesty personally practices filial piety, clarifies the scriptures, worships heaven and earth in the suburbs, reveres ghosts and gods, cares about the people's suffering, and never slackens his efforts.

古文：而天气未和，日月不明，水泉涌溢，寒暑违节者，咎在群臣不能宣化理职，而以苛刻为俗。
现代文：可是天气未和，日月不明，水泉涌溢，寒暑不正常，其原因在于群臣不能宣化理职，而以苛刻为风俗。
English: However, the weather is not harmonious, the sun and the moon are not clear, the water springs are overflowing, and the cold and hot weather are not normal. The reason is that the ministers cannot proclaim and perform their duties, and the custom is to be harsh.

古文：吏杀良人，继踵不绝。
现代文：官吏杀错好人，一个接着一个。
English: Officials are killing the wrong people, one after another.

古文：百官无相亲之心，吏人无雍雍之志。
现代文：官吏没有相亲之心，吏人没有和睦的意思。
English: Officials have no affinity for each other, and officials have no intention of reconciliation.

古文：至于骨肉相残，毒害弥深，感逆和气，以致天灾。
现代文：至于骨肉相残，毒害极深，威逆和气，以致上天降灾。
English: As for the flesh-and-bone, the poison is very deep, and the arrogance and arrogance are so strong that it is a disaster from heaven.

古文：百姓可以德胜，难以力服。
现代文：百姓可以道德教化，难用威力压服。
English: The people can be moralized, but it is difficult to use force to subdue them.

古文：先王要道，民用和睦，故能致天下和平，灾害不生，祸乱不作。
现代文：先王要道，百姓和睦，所以能使天下和平，灾害不发生，祸乱不起来。
English: The previous king wanted the people to live in harmony, so he was able to bring peace to the world, so that disasters would not occur and disorder would not arise.

古文：《鹿鸣》之诗必言宴乐者，以人神之心洽，然后天气和也。
现代文：《鹿鸣》之诗必言宴乐，就是认为人神之心相融洽，然后天气和顺。
English: The poem of "Deersong" must say banquet, which means that the hearts of people and gods are in harmony, and then the weather is harmonious.

古文：愿陛下垂圣德，揆万机，诏有司，慎人命，缓刑罚，顺时气，以调阴阳，垂之无极。
现代文：希望陛下垂圣德，理万机，下诏有司，慎重对待人命，缓刑罚，顺时气，调理阴阳，可以永垂后世。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will sanctify morality, rationalize all things, rule by decree, treat human life with prudence, postpone punishment, keep time, regulate yin and yang, and can live forever in the future.

古文：帝虽不能用，然知其至诚。
现代文：帝虽不能采用，然而知道他是一片至诚之心。
English: Although the emperor can not adopt, but know that he is a piece of sincerity.

古文：亦以此故不得久留，出为鲁相。
现代文：也因此缘故不得久留京师，不久出为鲁相。
English: As a result, he was forced to stay in Beijing for a long time, and soon became a disciple of Lu Xun.

古文：后德阳殿成，百官大会。
现代文：后来德阳殿建成，百官大会。
English: Later, the Deyang Palace was built, and the assembly of a hundred officials began.

古文：帝思意言，谓公卿曰 钟离尚书若在，此殿不立 
现代文：皇上想起钟离意的话，对公卿说： 钟离尚书如果在这里，此殿就建不成了。 
English: When the emperor thought of Zhong Liang's wish, he said to the nobleman: "If Zhong Liang Shangshu were here, this hall could not be built.

古文：意视事五年，以爱利为化，人多殷富。
现代文：钟离意做官五年，用爱民利民作为教化之本，百姓多富足。
English: Zhong Liang has been an official for five years, using love for the people and benefit for the people as the basis for enlightenment, and the people are more affluent.

古文：帝每夜入台，辄见崧，问其故，甚嘉之，自此诏太官赐尚书以下朝夕餐，给帷被阜袍，及侍史二人。崧官至南阳太守。宋均字叔庠，南阳安众人也。
现代文：因久病死在官位。遗言上书给皇上陈明太平之世，难以急化，应该稍为宽假。皇帝感伤他的意思，下诏嗟叹，赐钱二十万给他安家。◆宋均传，宋均字叔庠，南阳安众人。
English: He died in office due to a long illness. His last words were written to Emperor Chen Ming. In a peaceful world, it is difficult to be hasty, and it should be a little lenient. The emperor was saddened by his intention, sighed, and gave him 200,000 yuan to set up a home. ◆Song Jun Chuan, Song Jun Zi Shuxuan, Nanyang An Renmin.

古文：父伯，建武初为五官中郎将。
现代文：父亲宋伯，建武初年做五官中郎将。
English: His father, Song Bo, was a middle-ranking official in the first year of Jianwu.

古文：均以父任为郎，时年十五，好经书，每休沐日，辄受业博士，通《诗》、《礼》，善论难。
现代文：宋均因父任做了郎，当时正十五岁，好读经书，每逢休息假日，就向博士学习，因此通晓《诗》《礼》，会辩论问题。
English: Song Jun was 15 years old at the time, and he was good at reading scriptures. Whenever he had a day off, he would study with a doctor. As a result, he was familiar with "Poetry" and "Rite" and could debate issues.

古文：至二十馀，调补辰阳长。
现代文：二十多岁，调补辰阳长。
English: He is in his twenties and plays the role of Chenyang Chang.

古文：其俗少学者而信巫鬼，均为立学校，禁绝淫祀，人皆安之。
现代文：那里的风俗少学习而迷信巫鬼，宋均替他们立学校，禁绝不正当的祭祀，百姓都安居下来。
English: The custom there is to study less and to be superstitious about witches and ghosts. Song established schools for them, forbade improper sacrifices, and the people lived in peace.

古文：以祖母丧去官，客授颍川。
现代文：宋均因祖母去世而离官位，客授于颍川。
English: As a result of his grandmother's death, Song Jun left his official position and became a guest lecturer at Jechuan.

古文：后为谒者。
现代文：后来当了谒者。
English: Later he became a singer.

古文：会武陵蛮反，围武威将军刘尚，诏使均乘传发江夏奔命三千人往救之。
现代文：碰上武陵蛮人造，包围武威将军刘尚，朝廷命令宋均乘传调发江夏三千人往救援。
English: When the barbarians from Wuling encircled Wuwei's general Liu Shang, the imperial court ordered Song Jun to send 3,000 people from Jiangxia to the rescue.

古文：既至而尚已没。
现代文：到了那里刘尚已死。
English: By the time they got there, Liu Shang had already died.

古文：会伏波将军马援至，诏因令均监军，与诸将俱进，贼拒厄不得前。
现代文：恰逢伏波将军马援到了，诏书便令宋均作监军，与诸将一起前进，被贼人阻止不能前进。
English: Just as Fu Bo's General Ma arrived to help, the edict ordered Song Jun to supervise the army and advance together with the generals. He was prevented from advancing by the thieves.

古文：及马援卒于师，军士多温湿疾病，死者太半。
现代文：等到马援死后，军士多因温湿疾病，死了一大半。
English: After Ma Yuan's death, most of the non-commissioned officers died of warm and wet diseases.

古文：均虑军遂不反，乃与诸将议曰 今道远士病，不可以战，欲权承制降之何如 诸将皆伏地莫敢应。
现代文：宋均担心军队的安全就不回去，于是与诸将商议道 ：现在路远士病，不能作战，想用权宜之计承制降顺怎么样？ 诸将都伏在地上不敢答应。
English: Song Jun was worried about the safety of the army and would not go back, so he discussed with the generals, saying, "Now that the Long March soldiers are ill and cannot fight, what if you want to use a stopgap measure to accept the surrender? The generals are prostrate on the ground and dare not agree."

古文：均曰 夫忠臣出竟，有可以安国家，专之可也 乃矫制调伏波司马吕种守沅陵长，命种奉诏书入虏营，告以恩信，因勒兵随其后。
现代文：宋均说： 忠臣出了国境，有可以安定国家的办法，自己可以做主。 于是假传圣旨调马援部下司马吕种守沅陵长，命吕种捧诏书进入敌营，晓谕以朝廷的恩信，于是勒兵随在后面。
English: Song Jun said: "When a loyal subject leaves the country, he has the means to stabilize the country, and he can make his own decisions. Therefore, the head of the Ministry of Military Affairs and National Defense, Ma Liusong, ordered Liusong to enter the enemy's camp with an imperial edict and a letter of commendation from the imperial court, and the soldiers followed behind.

古文：蛮夷震怖，即共斩其大帅而降，于是入贼营，散其众，遣归本郡，为置长吏而还。
现代文：蛮夷害怕，便共斩其大帅而投降，于是进入贼营，驱散其众人，遣他们回本部，替他们设长吏才回。
English: The barbarians were afraid, so they cut off their general and surrendered. They then entered the bandits' camp, dispersed their men, sent them back to the headquarters, and only returned after appointing officials for them.

古文：均未至，先自劾矫制之罪。
现代文：宋均还未到达朝廷，自己劾实矫制的罪过。
English: Song Jun had not yet arrived at the imperial court, and he blamed himself for the crime of coercion.

古文：光武嘉其功，迎赐以金帛，令过家上冢。
现代文：光武帝嘉奖他的功勋，迎接并赐以金帛，令过家上坟。
English: Emperor Guangwu commended him for his merits, welcomed him and gave him a golden scepter, ordering him to go to his grave.

古文：其后每有四方异议，数访问焉。
现代文：以后每有四方异议，多次访问他。
English: After that, whenever there was any objection from the four parties, they visited him many times.

古文：迁上蔡令。
现代文：宋均升为上蔡令。
English: Song Junsheng was promoted to Shang Cai Ling.

古文：时府下记，禁人丧葬不得侈长。
现代文：当时府下有令，禁止人们丧葬奢侈浪费。
English: At that time, there was a government order prohibiting people from extravagant and wasteful funerals.

古文：均曰 夫送终逾制，失之轻者。
现代文：宋均说 ：人们送终超过规定，这是轻微过失。
English: Song Jun said: It is a minor fault that people are sent to the end of their lives in excess of the regulations.

古文：今有不义之民，尚未循化，而遽罚过礼，非政之先 竟不肯施行。
现代文：现有不义的百姓，还没有循化，而连忙处分那些过礼的人，不是政治的切务。 终于不肯施行。
English: The existing unjust people have not yet been reformed, and it is not a political imperative to hastily punish those who are rude.

古文：迁九江太守。
现代文：升为九江太守。
English: He was promoted to Governor of Jiujiang Province.

古文：郡多虎暴，数为民患，常募设槛阱而犹多伤害。
现代文：郡内多虎豹，多次成为民患，常募集兵士设置槛阱捕猎虎豹，但仍多有伤害之事。
English: There are many tigers and leopards in the county, and they have become a public health problem many times. Soldiers are often recruited to set a threshold trap to hunt tigers and leopards, but there are still many injuries.

古文：均到，下记属县曰 夫虎豹在山，鼋鼍在水，各有所托。
现代文：宋均到了，下公文给属县道 ：大凡虎豹在山，鼋鼍在水，各有所寄托的地方。
English: When Song Jun arrived, the following official document was given to the county road: the great tiger and leopard are in the mountains, the dragonfly is in the water, and each has a place to rest.

古文：且江淮之有猛兽，犹北土之有鸡豚也。
现代文：江淮之有猛兽，等于北方之有鸡豚一样。
English: The Jianghuai River has ferocious beasts, just as the North has chickens and pigs.

古文：今为民害，咎在残吏，而劳勤张捕，非忧恤之本也。
现代文：今成为民害，过错在于残酷的官吏，而劳勤捕猎，不是解除祸害的根本。
English: Now it has become a people's scourge, the fault lies with the cruel officials, and the laborious hunting is not the root cause of the scourge.

古文：其务退奸贪，思进忠善，可一去槛阱，除削课制 其后传言虎相与东游度江。
现代文：只有退除奸贪之官吏，思进忠善的计谋，可一概去掉槛阱，免除捐税。 后来听说老虎都东游渡江去了。
English: Only by getting rid of corrupt and greedy officials and devising loyal and virtuous strategies can we get rid of all traps and be exempt from paying taxes. Later, I heard that the tigers all traveled east to cross the river.

古文：中元元年，山阳、楚、沛多蝗，其飞至九江界者，辄东西散去，由是名称远近。
现代文：中元元年，山阳、楚、沛等地多蝗虫，那些飞至九江界的，就向东西方向散去，以此宋均的名声远近都听说了。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, there were many locusts in Shanyang, Chu, Pei and other places. Those that flew to the Jiujiang boundary dispersed in an east-west direction, and the fame of Songjun was heard far and wide.

古文：浚遒县有唐、后二山，民共祠之，众巫遂取百姓男女以为公妪，岁岁改易，既而不敢嫁娶，前后守令莫敢禁。
现代文：浚遒县有唐、后二山，百姓都去祭祀，众巫就取百姓中的男女做祭祀的尸主，年年有改变，不久，百姓不敢嫁娶，前后守令没有人敢去禁止。
English: Dredge County has the Tang Dynasty and the Hou Ershan Mountains. The people all go to the sacrifices, and the sorcerers take the men and women of the people to be the sacrificial hosts. It changes from year to year. Soon, the people dare not marry, and no one dares to forbid it.

古文：均乃下书曰 自今以后，为山娶者皆娶巫家，勿扰良民 于是遂绝。
现代文：宋均就下书道 ：从今以后为山娶者都娶巫家之女，不要扰乱良民。 于是这种歪风便断绝了。
English: Song Jun gave a sermon: From now on, whoever marries for the mountain should marry a sorcerer's daughter, so as not to disturb the good people.

古文：永平元年，迁东海相，在郡五年，坐法免官，客授颍川。
现代文：永平元年，升为东海相，在郡五年，后来犯法免官，客授于颍川。
English: In the first year of Yongping, he was promoted to the East Sea Minister, in the county for five years, later he was removed from office for violating the law, and he was guest-taught in Suichuan.

古文：而东海吏民思均恩化，为之作歌，诣阙乞还者数千人。
现代文：可是东海的官吏百姓想念宋均恩化，替他作歌，到朝廷请求让他回去的数千人。
English: However, thousands of officials and people in the East China Sea miss Song Jun'enhua, write songs for him, and go to the imperial court to ask him to return.

古文：显宗以其能，七年，征拜尚书令。
现代文：显宗认为他很能干，七年，征拜他做尚书令。
English: Emperor Xuanzong thought he was very capable, and for seven years, he recruited him to be Shang Shuling.

古文：每有驳议，多合上旨。
现代文：每有驳议，多合皇上的旨意。
English: Every objection is in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：均尝删剪疑事，帝以为有奸，大怒，收郎缚格之。
现代文：宋均曾经删减一些可疑之事，皇帝认为有奸，大发脾气，收郎缚格之。
English: Songjun once deleted some suspicious things, the emperor thought there was treason, lost his temper, and imprisoned him.

古文：诸尚书惶恐，皆叩头谢罪。
现代文：诸尚书都害怕，都叩头谢罪。
English: All the scholars were afraid and bowed their heads in repentance.

古文：均顾厉色曰 盖忠臣执义，无有二心。
现代文：宋均却厉色说道 ：忠臣坚持原则，没有二心。
English: Song Jun, however, said emphatically, "A loyal subject adheres to the principle and has no second thoughts."

古文：若畏威失正，均虽死，不易志 小黄门在傍，入具以闻。
现代文：如果畏威失去正义，我即使死了，也不改变初衷。 小黄门在旁边，进去报告情况。
English: If Daowei loses justice, I will not change my original intention even if I die. Xiao Huangmen is nearby, go in and report the situation.

古文：帝善其不挠，即令贳郎，迁均司隶校尉。
现代文：皇帝称赞他不屈服，即下令赦免了郎，调宋均作司隶校尉。
English: The emperor commended him for not giving in and pardoned his brother-in-law and promoted Song to the rank of captain.

古文：数月，出为河内太守，政化大行。
现代文：几月后，出来作河内太守，政化大行。
English: A few months later, he came out as the governor of Hanoi and carried out a large-scale political reform.

古文：均尝寝病，百姓耆老为祷请，旦夕问起居，其为民爱若此。
现代文：宋均曾经卧病，百姓耆老替他祈祷，早晚问他的起居，他被百姓爱戴像这样。
English: Song Jun used to be bedridden, and the people always prayed for him and asked him how he was doing. He was loved by the people like this.

古文：以疾上书乞免，诏除子条为太子舍人。
现代文：因病上书请求退职，朝廷下诏让其子宋条做太子舍人。
English: Due to illness, he wrote a letter requesting to retire, and the imperial court issued an edict to let his son Songzhe Rong become the crown prince.

古文：均自扶舆诣阙谢恩，帝使中黄门慰问，因留养疾。
现代文：宋均自己扶着车子到朝廷谢恩，皇帝派中黄门慰问，于是留在家中养病。
English: Song Jun himself drove his car to the imperial court to express his gratitude, and the emperor sent condolences to Zhonghuangmen, so he stayed at home to recover.

古文：司徒缺，帝以均才任宰相，召入视其疾，令两驺扶之。
现代文：司徒出缺，皇上认为宋均才任宰相，召进宫观察他的病情，派两个养马的人搀扶他。
English: When Sito became vacant, the emperor thought that Song Jianlu should be appointed as prime minister, summoned him to the palace to observe his condition, and sent two horse breeders to help him.

古文：均拜谢曰 天罚有罪，所苦浸笃，不复奉望帷幄 因流涕而辞。
现代文：宋均拜谢道 ：老天处分有罪之人，被病折磨太厉害，不再能奉侍在帷幄之中。 于是流着眼泪而告辞。
English: Song Jun prayed and gave thanks, saying, "God punishes the guilty, and those who have been afflicted by illness are too severely afflicted to be able to serve among the curtains any longer, so they bid farewell with tears streaming down their faces."

古文：帝甚伤之，召条扶侍均出，赐钱三十万。
现代文：皇帝十分同情他，召宋条扶着宋均出去，赐钱三十万。
English: The emperor was very sympathetic to him, called Songzhe to help Songjun go out, and gave him 300,000 yuan.

古文：均性宽和，不喜文法，常以为吏能弘厚，虽贪污放纵，犹无所害。至于苛察之人，身或廉法，而巧黠刻削，毒加百姓，灾害流亡所由而作。
现代文：宋均性格宽厚和蔼，不喜文法，常认为官吏能弘厚，即使贪污放纵，还没有害处；至于苛察之人，即令自身廉洁守法，可是巧黠刻薄，毒害百姓，灾害流亡都是由这些人起来的。
English: Song Jun had a generous and amiable personality, disliked grammar, and often thought that officials could be generous, even if they were corrupt and indulgent, there was no harm; as for the censors, they made themselves clean and law-abiding, but they were clever and mean, poisoned the people, and caused disasters and exile.

古文：孙俱，灵帝时为司空。
现代文：后来在尚书职时，常想叩头争辩，因为时间严切，所以不敢陈述。
English: Later, when I was still a clerk, I often wanted to argue with others, but I did not dare to make a statement because of the time constraint.

古文：寒朗字伯奇，鲁国薛人也。
现代文：帝后来听了他的话而感到悲伤。建初元年，死在家中。◆寒朗传，寒朗字伯奇，鲁国薛人。
English: The emperor later felt sad after listening to his words. He died at home in the first year of the Jian Dynasty. ◆Kang Lang Chuan, Kang Lang Zi Berchi, Lu Guo Xue Ren.

古文：生三日，遭天下乱，弃之荆刺。数日兵解，母往视，犹尚气息，遂收养之。
现代文：出生三日，遭天下大乱，抛在荆棘之中；几天之后兵祸解除，母亲去看他，还有气息，便收养起来。
English: He was three days old when he was caught up in the world's turmoil and left in the thorns. A few days later, when the war was over, his mother went to see him, and when he was still breathing, she took him in.

古文：及长，好经学，博通书传，以《尚书》教授。
现代文：等到长大，喜好经学，博通书传，用《尚书》教授门徒。
English: When he grew up, he liked to study the scriptures, read widely, and used "Shang Shu" to teach his disciples.

古文：举孝廉。
现代文：被举为孝廉。
English: He was raised as a filial son.

古文：永平中，以谒者守侍御史，与三府掾属共考案楚狱颜忠、王平等，辞连及隧乡侯耿建、朗陵侯臧信、护泽侯邓鲤、曲成侯刘建。
现代文：永平年间，用谒者身份做了守侍御史，与三府掾属共同审理楚狱的颜忠、王平等，供辞牵连到隧乡侯耿建、朗陵侯臧信、护泽侯邓鲤、曲成侯刘建。
English: During the Yongping era, he served as the guardian of imperial history with the status of an eunuch, and jointly tried Yan Zhong and Wang Pingrui of Chu Prison with the three provincial eunuchs. The confessions implicated Tongxiang Hou Geng Jian, Langling Hou Yuxin, Fuzerou Hou Deng Jian, and Qu Cheng Hou Liu Jian.

古文：建等辞未尝与忠、平相见。
现代文：刘建等人的供辞说不曾与颜忠、王平相见。
English: The confessions of Liu Jian and others said that they had never met Yan Zhong and Wang Ping.

古文：是时，显宗怒甚，吏皆惶恐，诸所连及，率一切陷入，无敢以情恕者。
现代文：这时显宗大怒，官吏都害怕，凡有牵连的人，一律陷入案中，没有敢以感情见谅的。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong was furious, officials were afraid, and everyone who was implicated was caught up in the case, and no one dared to forgive with emotion.

古文：朗心伤其冤，试以建等物色独问忠、平，而二人错愕不能对。
现代文：帝说 ：即使这样，四侯没有事，为什么不早奏明，让官司久拖至今呢？ 
English: The emperor said: Even so, there is nothing wrong with the four lords, why not report it earlier and let the lawsuit drag on until now?

古文：朗知其诈，乃上言建等无奸，专为忠、平所诬，疑天下无辜类多如此。
现代文：寒朗答道： 臣虽考查他们没有事，但是怕海内还有别人揭发他们的奸情的，所以不敢及时报上来。 帝发怒骂道 ：官吏竟这样打不定主意，赶快抓下。 
English: Lang Lang replied coldly, "Although it's no problem for the minister to investigate them, I'm afraid that there are others at sea who will expose their adulterous affair, so I don't dare to report it in time." Emperor Fa scolded angrily, "Officials can't make up their minds like this, hurry up and arrest them."

古文：帝乃召朗人，问曰 建等即如是，忠、平何故引之 朗对曰 忠、平自知所犯不道，故多有虚引，冀以自明 帝曰 即如是，四侯无事，何不早奏，狱竟而久系至今邪 郎对曰 臣虽考之无事，然恐海内别有发其奸者，故未敢时上 帝怒骂曰 吏持两端，促提下 左右方引去，朗曰 愿一言而死。
现代文：左右的人正要将寒朗抓下去，寒朗说： 愿说一句话去死。
English: The people around him were about to grab him, and he said, "I'll say one word and die."

古文：小臣不敢欺，欲助国耳 帝问曰 谁与共为章 对曰 臣自知当必族灭，不敢多污染人，诚冀陛下一觉悟而已。
现代文：小臣不敢欺君，想帮助国家罢了。 帝问道 ：谁和你一起商量？ 答道 ：臣自知应该灭族、不敢多污染别人，只诚恳希望陛下觉悟罢了。
English: The vassal did not dare to deceive the emperor, he only wanted to help the country. The emperor asked: "Who will consult with you?" The vassal replied: "The vassal knows that he should exterminate the race, he does not dare to contaminate others, he only sincerely hopes that his majesty will come to his senses."

古文：臣见考囚在事者，咸共言妖恶大故，臣子所宜同疾，今出之不如入之，可无后责。
现代文：臣看到考囚在案的，都说妖恶大故，臣子都应痛恨，现在出来的不如进来的，可以不追究责任。
English: When the courtiers saw that the examination prisoners were on the case, they all said that the devil was very evil, and the courtiers should all hate it, and now the ones who came out were not as good as the ones who came in, and they could not be held accountable.

古文：是以考一连十，考十连百。
现代文：因此考一个连累十个，考十个连累百个。
English: Therefore, one test in a row is worth ten, and ten tests in a row is worth a hundred.

古文：又公卿朝会，陛下问以得失，皆长跪言，旧制大罪祸及九族，陛下大恩，裁止于身，天下幸甚。
现代文：又公卿朝会时，陛下问到得失，都是长跪在地上说话，旧制大罪祸及九族，陛下大恩，才只办本人的罪，天下就幸运得很。
English: Also, when the court nobles met, His Majesty asked about the gains and losses, and they all kneeled on the ground and spoke. The great sins of the old system and the nine ethnic groups, His Majesty's great grace, only dealt with their own sins, and the world was very lucky.

古文：及其归舍，口虽不言，而仰屋窃叹，莫不知其多冤，无敢牾陛下者。
现代文：等到回到家乡，口里尽管不说，而是仰着头叹息，谁也不知有多冤枉，没有人敢忤逆陛下的。
English: When he returned to his hometown, he didn't say a word, but looked up and sighed. No one knew how much he had been wronged, and no one dared to defy his majesty.

古文：臣今所陈，诚死无悔 帝意解，诏遣朗出。
现代文：我现在所说的，的确是死而无悔。 帝明白了他的意思，下诏叫寒朗出去。
English: What I'm saying now is truly without regret. The emperor understood what he meant and ordered Kanro to leave.

古文：后二日，车驾自幸洛阳狱录囚徒，理出千馀人。
现代文：过了两天，帝自到洛阳审录囚徒，清理出千多人。
English: Two days later, the emperor went to Luoyang to interrogate the prisoners and cleared out more than a thousand people.

古文：后平、忠死狱中，朗乃自系。
现代文：后来平、忠死在狱中，寒朗于是自己囚系自己。
English: Later, Ping and Zhong died in prison, so Kanlang imprisoned himself.

古文：会赦，免官。
现代文：碰上大赦，免去官职。
English: If there is an amnesty, they will be removed from office.

古文：复举孝廉。
现代文：又举为孝廉。
English: He was also raised as a filial son.

古文：建初中，肃宗大会群臣，朗前谢恩，诏以朗纳忠先帝，拜为易长。
现代文：建初年间，肃宗大会群臣，寒朗上前谢恩，诏书认为寒朗向先帝进过忠言，拜为易州县长。
English: During the first year of construction, Su Zong's general assembly of ministers, Kan Lang came forward to express his gratitude. The imperial edict believed that Kan Lang had been a loyal counselor to the former emperor and became the governor of Yizhou County.

古文：岁馀，迁济阳令，以母丧去官，百姓追思之。
现代文：一年多，升为洛阳令，因母丧去官，百姓怀念他。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the post of Luoyang governor. He lost his position due to the death of his mother, and the people miss him.

古文：章和元年，上行东巡狩，过济阳，三老吏人上书陈朗前政治状。
现代文：章和元年，皇上东方出巡，经过济阳，三老吏人上书陈述寒朗以前的政治情况。
English: In the first year of the Zhanghe era, the emperor went on a tour to the East, passing through Jiyang, and the three old officials submitted a letter stating the political situation before the Cold War.

古文：帝至梁，召见朗，诏三府为辟首，由是辟司徒府。
现代文：帝到了梁，召见寒朗，诏三府为辟首，由此提拔寒朗为司徒府。
English: When the emperor arrived in Liang, he summoned Kanglang, and the three prefectures were abolished, and Kanglang was promoted to the position of Shitou Prefecture.

古文：永元中，再迁清河太守，坐法免。
现代文：永元年间，再升为清河太守，因犯法免职。
English: During the Yongyuan era, he was promoted to the position of the governor of Qinghe again, but was dismissed for violating the law.

古文：永初三年，太尉张禹荐朗为博士，征诣公车，会卒，时年八十四。
现代文：永初三年，太尉张禹荐寒朗为博士，征诣公车，遇上寒朗死了，时年八十四岁。
English: In the third year of the Yongchu era, Lieutenant Zhang Yu recommended Kanlang as a doctor, solicited a bus, met Kanlang and died, at the age of eighty-four.

