古文：伯乐教二人相踶马，相与之简子厩观马。
现代文：伯乐教授两个人识别会踢人的烈性马。这两个人，起到赵简子的马棚里去观察马。
English: Professor Bo Le and two other people identify a fierce horse that can kick people. These two people go to Zhao Jianzi's stable to observe the horse.

古文：一人举踶马。
现代文：一个人选中了一匹踢马。
English: One person picked a kicking horse.

古文：其一人从后而循之，三抚其尻而马不踢。
现代文：另一个人从后面去抚摸它，三次模马的屁股，马却不踢人。
English: Another man stroked the horse's rump three times from behind, but the horse did not kick him.

古文：此自以为失相。
现代文：选中马的人自以为识别错了。
English: The person who picked the horse thought they had made a mistake.

古文：其一人曰： 子非失相也，此其为马也，踒肩而肿膝。
现代文：另一个人说： 你没有识别错。这匹马，前腿摔伤，膝关节肿了起来。
English: Another said: 'You didn't get it wrong. The horse had a bad fall on its front leg and its knee was swollen.

古文：夫踢马也者，举后而任前，肿膝不可任也，故后不举。
现代文：凡是踢人的马，抬起后腿之后，就要靠前腿支撑全身；前膝肿了，无法承受全身重量，所以后腿抬不起来。
English: Whenever a horse kicks someone, after lifting the hind leg, it must support the whole body by the front leg; the front knee is swollen and cannot bear the weight of the whole body, so the hind leg cannot be lifted.

古文：子巧于相踢马拙于任肿膝。 
现代文：你善于识别踢人的马，却拙于了解前膝肿大所带来的影响。 
English: You are good at identifying a kicking horse, but bad at understanding the impact of a swollen front knee.

古文：夫事有所必归，而以有所肿膝而不任，智者之所独知也。
现代文：事情的发生都有一定的起因。然而由于前腿臃肿大而不能承受全身重量的道理，独有聪明人才会知道。
English: Everything happens for a reason, but only a smart person would know that the front legs are too big to bear the weight of the whole body.

古文：惠子曰： 置猿于柙中，则与豚同。 
现代文：惠子说： 把猿放到笼子里，就和小猪一样。 
English: Keiko said, "If you put a monkey in a cage, it's just like a piglet.

古文：故势不便，非所以逞能也。
现代文：所以形势不利就没有条件表现出才能。
English: Therefore, if the situation is unfavorable, there will be no conditions to show talent.

古文：卫将军文子见曾子，曾子不起而延于坐席，正身于奥。
现代文：卫国的将军文子去会见曾子，曾子没有起身就邀请文子入座，自己却端坐在西南角的尊位上。
English: The general guarding the country, Fumiko, went to meet Zonko. Zonko did not get up and invited Fumiko to sit down, but he himself sat on the throne in the southwest corner.

古文：文子谓其御曰： 曾子，愚人也哉！
现代文：文子对他的车夫说： 曾子是个愚蠢的人啊!
English: Fumiko said to his driver, "Zonko is a stupid man!

古文：以我为君子也，君子安可毋敬也？
现代文：把我当作君子吧，对君子怎么可以不加尊敬呢？
English: Think of me as a gentleman. How can you disrespect a gentleman?

古文：以我为暴人也，暴人安可侮也？
现代文：把我当作残暴的人吧，对残暴的人怎么可以侮辱呢？
English: Call me a brute, but how can you insult a brute?

古文：曾子不戮，命也。 
现代文：曾子不被杀，倒算他命大。 
English: If Zeng Zi is not killed, he will live a long life.

古文：鸟有翢翢者，重首而屈尾，将欲饮于河，则必颠，乃衔其羽而饮之，人之所有饮不足者，不可不索其羽也。
现代文：有一种叫的鸟，头大尾秃，如果要到河边饮水，就一定会栽到河里，就需要另一只鸟衔着它的羽毛它才能饮水。人们有了欲望，条件却还不成熟的话，就不能不寻求帮手了。
English: There is a bird with a large bald head and tail. If it wants to drink water at the river, it must be planted in the river. It needs another bird to hold its feathers to drink water. If people have a desire, but the conditions are not yet mature, they can't help but seek help.

古文：鳣似蛇，蚕似蠋，人见蛇则惊骇，见蠋，则毛起。
现代文：黄膳像蛇，蚕像毛虫。人们看见蛇就会惊恐害怕，看见毛虫就会汗毛竖起。
English: The yellow jujube is like a snake, and the silkworm is like a caterpillar. When people see a snake, they get scared, and when they see a caterpillar, their hair stands up.

古文：渔者持鳣，妇人拾蚕，利之所在，皆为贲、诸。
现代文：渔夫捕捉黄鳝，妇女拾蚕喂养，因利益所在，都能像孟贲、专诸一样勇敢。
English: Fishermen catch yellowtail, women gather silkworms and feed them. Because of their interests, they can be as brave as Meng Xi and Zong Zhu.

古文：伯乐教其所憎者相千里之马，教其所爱者相驭马。
现代文：伯乐教他所憎恶的人识别千里马，教他所喜爱的人识别普通马。
English: Bo Le taught those he hated to recognize a thoroughbred, and those he loved to recognize an ordinary horse.

古文：千里之马时一有，其利缓；驽马日售，其利急。
现代文：千里马偶尔才有一个，识别这种马得利慢，普通马每天都有人出售，识别这种马得利快。
English: A horse of a thousand miles has only one occasionally, identify this slow horse, an ordinary horse is sold every day, identify this fast horse.

古文：此《周书》所谓 下言而上用者，惑也。 
现代文：这就是《周书》上说的 把特殊条件下说的话当作普遍法则来引用，是一种迷惑 。
English: This is what "Weekly Review" said: "It is misleading to quote what is said under special conditions as a general rule."

古文：桓赫曰： 刻削之道，鼻莫如大，目莫如小。
现代文：桓赫说： 雕刻的原则是，鼻子不如先刻大一些，眼睛不如先刻小一些。
English: Kanhe said: The principle of carving is that the nose should be carved larger first, and the eyes should be carved smaller first.

古文：鼻大可小，小不可大也；目小可大，大不可小也。 
现代文：鼻子大了可以修小，小了就不能修大；眼睛小了可以修大，大了就不能修小。 
English: If the nose is big, it can be made smaller, but if it is small, it cannot be made bigger; if the eyes are small, they can be made bigger, but if they are big, they cannot be made smaller.

古文：举事亦然：为其后可复者也，则事寡败矣。
现代文：办事也是这样。做那种日后还能补救的事，办起来就很少会失败了。
English: It is the same with business. If you do something that can be remedied later, you will rarely fail.

古文：崇侯、恶来知不适纣之诛也，而不见武王之灭之也。
现代文：崇候、恶来知道不顺从纣王会遭诛杀，却看不到武王会灭掉约五。
English: The worshippers and evildoers knew that if they disobeyed King Wu, they would be killed, but they did not see that King Wu would kill about five of them.

古文：比干、子胥知其君之必亡也，而不知身之死也。
现代文：比干、子胥知道自己的君主必然败亡，却不知道自身会遭杀害。
English: Bi Gan and Zi Yao knew that their monarch would inevitably fall, but they did not know that they would be killed.

古文：故曰： 崇侯、恶来知心而不知事，比干、子胥知事而不知心。 
现代文：所以说： 崇侯、恶来懂得君主的心理，却不知道国事的兴废；比干、子胥知道国事的兴废，却不懂得君主的心理。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: Zonghou and Zibo understand the psychology of the monarch, but they do not know the rise and fall of state affairs; Bi Gan and Zixu know the rise and fall of state affairs, but they do not understand the psychology of the monarch.

古文：圣人其备矣。
现代文：大概只有圣人才能兼备二者吧。
English: Probably only a saint can have both.

古文：宋太宰贵而主断。
现代文：宋国的太宰地位尊贵而处事专断。
English: The Dazai of Song was held in high esteem and acted arbitrarily.

古文：季子将见宋君，梁子闻之曰： 语必可与太宰三坐乎，不然，将不免。 
现代文：季子将渴见宋君，梁子听到后说： 你和君主说话时，一定要像太宰也在场一样。不然的话，就难免要遭殃了。 
English: After hearing this, Liang Zi said: "When you talk to the monarch, you must act as if the grand vizier is also present. Otherwise, you will inevitably suffer.

古文：季子因说以贵主而轻国。
现代文：季子因此进说了一些尊重君主和少操劳国家事务的意见。
English: As a result, Yoshiko voiced some opinions about respecting the monarch and not meddling too much in state affairs.

古文：杨朱之弟杨布，衣素衣而出，天雨，解素衣，衣缁衣而反，其狗不知而吠之。
现代文：杨朱的弟弟杨布穿着白衣服出门。天下雨了，他脱掉白衣服，穿着黑衣服回到家里。他家的狗不知道，向他汪汪大叫。
English: Yang Zhu's younger brother, Yang Bu, went out in white clothes. When it rained, he took off his white clothes and returned home in black. His family dog didn't know and barked at him.

古文：杨布怒，将击之。
现代文：杨布生气了，就想打它。
English: Yang Bu got angry and wanted to hit it.

古文：杨硃曰： 子勿击也，子亦犹是。
现代文：杨朱说： 你不要打它，你自己也是这样。
English: Yang Zhu said, "Don't hit it, you are the same.

古文：曩者使女狗白而往，墨而来，子岂能毋怪哉？ 
现代文：假如前些时候你的狗白颜色出去，变成黑颜色回来，你难道能不奇怪吗？ 
English: If some time ago your dog went out white and came back black, wouldn't you be surprised?

古文：惠子曰：羿执鞅持扞，操弓关机，越人争为持的。
现代文：惠子说： 羿拿着拉弦工具带着皮质袖套，拉开弓来牵引扳机射箭时，连关系疏远的越人都敢争着为他举靶。
English: Keiko said, "When a yakitori player shoots an arrow with a string-pulling tool and a leather sleeve, and pulls the bow to pull the trigger, even people in Yue who are distant from him dare to compete to hold the target for him.

古文：弱子扞弓，慈母入室闭户。 
现代文：小孩子拉弓射箭时，连慈母都会躲进屋里关起门来。 
English: When a child draws a bow and shoots an arrow, even a loving mother will hide in the house and close the door.

古文：故曰： 可必，则越人不疑羿；不可必，则慈母逃弱子。 
现代文：所以说： 可以肯定没有危险时，就连越人也不怀疑界会射到自己；不能肯定没有危险时，就连慈母也要躲避张弓射箭的孩子。 
English: Therefore, he said: When it is certain that there is no danger, even the Yue people do not doubt that the world will shoot themselves; when it is not certain that there is no danger, even the loving mother should avoid the child who shoots arrows with a bow.

古文：桓公问管仲： 富有涯乎？ 答曰： 水之以涯，其无水者也；富之以涯，其富已足者也。
现代文：桓公问管仲： 富有边际吗？ 管仲回答说： 水有边际，就是不再需要水的地方了；富有边际，就是富到已经满足的时候了。
English: Kan Gong asked Guanzhong: Are you rich in margin? Guanzhong replied: Water has a margin, that is, where water is no longer needed; rich in margin, that is, rich enough to have been satisfied.

古文：人不能自止于足，而亡其富之涯乎！ 
现代文：人们不知道在足够富裕的时候就加收敛，那就失去了富裕的边际了吧! 
English: People don't know to tighten up when they're rich enough, then they'll lose the margin of affluence!

古文：宋之富贾有监止子者，与人争买百金之璞玉，因佯失而毁之，负其百金，而理其毁瑕，得千溢焉。
现代文：有个叫监止子的宋国富商，同别人争买一块价值百金的玉璞，就假装失手摔破了玉璞，赔了百金，而他修治了摔坏的痕迹，便又卖得了干金。
English: There was a wealthy merchant in the Song Dynasty named Guanzhizi, who was competing with others to buy a piece of jade ingot worth a hundred gold. He pretended to break the ingot by accident and lost a hundred gold, but he repaired the broken traces and then sold the dry gold.

古文：事有举之而有败，而贤其毋举之者，负之时也。
现代文：事情有做了而失败伪，因而认为不做的好，那是只看到赔钱的时候啊。
English: Things have been done and failed, so they think it's better not to do it. That's when they only see the loss of money.

古文：有欲以御见荆王者，众驺妒之。
现代文：有个想凭驾车技术求见楚王的人，好多马夫都嫉妒他。他就说： 我能追打奔鹿。 
English: There was a man who wanted to see King Chu by virtue of his driving skills, and many stablemen were jealous of him. He said, "I can chase a running deer."

古文：因曰： 臣能撽鹿 见王，王为御，不及鹿；自御，及之。
现代文：于是见到了楚王。楚王自己驾车，并没有追上奔鹿；他就自己驾车，结果追上了奔鹿。
English: Then he saw King Chu. King Chu himself was driving, but he did not catch up with the running deer; he was driving himself, but he caught up with the running deer.

古文：王善其御也，乃言众驺妒之。
现代文：楚王夸奖他驾车的技术，他才说明有许多马夫嫉妒他。
English: When King Chu praised his driving skills, he explained that many stablehands were jealous of him.

古文：荆令公子将伐陈。丈人送之曰： 晋强，不可不慎也。 
现代文：楚国命令公子统率军队去讨伐陈国，有个老年人送他时说： 晋国强大，你不能不谨慎些。 
English: Chu ordered his son to lead an army to fight against Chen. An old man sent him this message: "Jin is powerful, you must be careful."

古文：公子曰： 丈人奚忧！
现代文：公子说： 您忧虑什么？
English: He said, "What are you worried about?

古文：吾为丈人破晋。 
现代文：我替您攻破晋国吧。 
English: Let me conquer Jin Province for you.

古文：丈人曰： 可。
现代文：老年人说： 可以。
English: The old man said, "Yes."

古文：吾方庐陈南门之外。 公子曰： 是何也？ 曰： 我笑勾践也。
现代文：我将在陈国都城的南门外搭座小房子等着瞧了。 公子说： 这是为什么？ 老年人说： 我这是笑勾践呀。
English: I'm going to build a small house outside the south gate of the capital city of Chen Guozhen and wait. My husband said, "Why is that?" The old man said, "I'm just joking."

古文：为人之如是其易也，己独何为密密十年难乎？ 
现代文：做人像这样容易的话，他还何苦去经受谨慎勤恳的十年艰难呢？ 
English: If it was so easy to be a human being, why did he have to go through ten years of painstaking diligence?

古文：尧以天下让许由，许由逃之，舍于家人，家人藏其皮冠，夫弃天下而家人藏其皮冠，是不知许由者也。
现代文：尧把天下让给许由，许由逃避不接受，住到一个普通人家里。这家人把皮帽藏起来了，怕被许由偷走。许由连天下都抛弃了，而这家人却把皮帽藏起来，这是不了解许由的缘故啊。
English: He gave up the world to Xu Rong, but Xu Rong did not accept his escape and lived in an ordinary person's home. The family hid the fur hat, fearing that Xu Rong would steal it. Xu Rong even gave up the world, but the family hid the fur hat, because they did not understand Xu Rong.

古文：三虱食彘相与讼，一虱过之，曰： 讼者奚说？ 三虱曰： 争肥饶之地。 
现代文：三只虱子互相争吵，另一只虱子从旁经过，问道： 你们争吵些什么？ 三只虱子说： 争占猪身上肥腆的地方。 
English: Three mules were quarrelling with each other, and another mule, passing by, asked, "What are you quarrelling about?"

古文：一虱曰： 若亦不患腊之至而茅之燥耳，其又奚患？ 于是乃相与聚嘬其身而食之。
现代文：那只过路虱子说： 你们也不担心腊祭到了，人们要用茅草烤猪，火烧火燎的，你们又何必在这些小地方计较呢？这 些虱子便相互聚在一起吸食猪身上的血肉。
English: The passing mule said, "You don't have to worry about the arrival of the wax festival. People will roast pigs with thatch and cook them over a fire. Why should you worry about these small places? These mules then gather together to suck the flesh and blood from the pigs.

古文：彘臞，人乃弗杀。
现代文：母猪消瘦了，人们就没有杀它祭祀。
English: When a sow is emaciated, people don't kill it for sacrifice.

古文：虫有虺者，一身两口，争食相龁遂相杀也，人臣之争事而亡其国者，皆虺类也。
现代文：动物中有一种叫虺的毒蛇，一个身体上长着两张嘴巴，因为争食而相互咬斗。结果这两张嘴巴互相残杀，也就杀死了自己。臣子之间争权夺利致使国家灭亡的，都像旭蛇一样。
English: Among animals, there is a poisonous snake called the toad, a body with two mouths, because of the competition for food, they bite each other. As a result, the two mouths kill each other, and they also kill themselves. The competition between the courtiers for power and profit, which led to the destruction of the country, are all like the aspen snake.

古文：宫有垩，器有涤，则洁矣。
现代文：宫墙涂上白色，器具用水冲洗，就干净了。
English: The palace walls are painted white, the utensils are rinsed with water, and they are clean.

古文：行身亦然，其无垩之地则寡非矣。
现代文：做人也是这样，到不再需要洗涤和修饰的地步，过失就少有了。
English: It's the same with being human. Once you get to the point where you don't need to wash and groom anymore, there are fewer mistakes.

古文：公子纠将为乱，桓公使使者视之。
现代文：公子纠将作乱，桓公派使者前去察看动静。
English: Kinji Korematsu caused a disturbance, and Kanko sent an envoy to observe the situation.

古文：使者报曰： 笑不乐，视不见，必为乱。 
现代文：使者报告说： 公子纠笑得不乐，视若不见，一定是要作乱了。 
English: The emissary reported: "The boy is grinning with displeasure, and if he is not seen, he must be about to cause a disturbance."

古文：乃使鲁人杀之。
现代文：桓公就叫鲁人杀了他。
English: Lord Kan ordered Lu to kill him.

古文：公孙弘断发而为越王骑，公孙喜使人绝之曰： 吾不与子为昆弟矣。 
现代文：公孙弘改变中原礼俗，剪短了头发去做越王的骑士，公孙喜派人宣布和他断交，说： 我不再和你保持兄弟关系了。 
English: Gongsun Hong changed the customs of the Central Plains, cut his hair short and became a knight of King Yue. Gongsun Xi sent someone to break off relations with him, saying, "I will no longer maintain a brotherly relationship with you."

古文：公孙弘曰： 我断发，子断颈而为人用兵，我将谓之何？ 周南之战，公孙喜死焉。
现代文：公孙弘说： 我不过剪了头发，你却卖命去替人带兵打仗，我还能说你什么呢？ 周南之战时，公孙喜战死了。
English: Gongsun Hong said: I just cut my hair, but you worked hard to fight for others, what can I say about you? During the Zhou Nan War, Gongsun Xi died in battle.

古文：有与悍者邻，欲卖宅而避之。
现代文：有人和蛮横的人作邻居，想卖掉住宅加以躲避。
English: There are people who live next to violent people and want to sell their house to get away from them.

古文：人曰： 是其贯将满矣，子姑待之。 
现代文：有人劝他说： 这人将恶贯满盈了，你不妨姑且等待一下。 
English: Someone advised him: "This man is full of evil, you might as well wait a bit."

古文：答曰： 吾恐其以我满贯也。 
现代文：想卖住宅的人说： 我倒害怕他会用我来填满罪恶哩。 
English: The man who wants to sell his house says: "I'm afraid he'll use me to pay for his sins."

古文：遂去之。
现代文：于是就离开了。
English: So he left.

古文：故曰： 物之几者，非所靡也。 
现代文：所以说： 事情到了危急关头，再也不应该拖拉了。 
English: Therefore, he said, "Things have come to a critical juncture, and we should not delay any longer."

古文：孔子谓弟子曰： 孰能道子西之钓名也？ 子贡曰： 赐也能。 
现代文：孔子对弟子说： 谁能劝阻子西的沽名钓誉呢？ 子贡说： 我能。 
English: Confucius said to his disciple, "Who can dissuade Zixi from chasing fame?" Zigong said, "I can."

古文：乃导之，不复疑也。
现代文：于是前去开导了子西，无需乎再怀疑什么了。
English: So he went to enlighten his son, and there was no need to suspect anything.

古文：孔子曰： 宽哉，不被于利！
现代文：孔子说： 心胸宽广啊，不为利益所诱惑！
English: Confucius said: "Be broad-minded, and do not be tempted by profit!

古文：洁哉，民性有恆！
现代文：品德纯洁啊，人的本性是恒定不变的！
English: Purity of character, human nature is constant and unchanging!

古文：曲为曲，直为直。孔子曰子西不免。 
现代文：曲的就是曲的，直的就是宜的， 孔子又说： 子西不能免于灾祸。 
English: The crooked is crooked, and the straight is right. Confucius also said, "The west is not exempt from disaster."

古文：白公之难，子西死焉。
现代文：白公胜政变时，子西终于被杀了。
English: When Bai Gong won the coup, Zixi was finally killed.

古文：故曰： 直于行者曲于欲。 
现代文：所以说： 行为刚直的人同样会屈从于欲望。 
English: Therefore it is said: He who acts uprightly will also succumb to desires.

古文：晋中行文子出亡，过于县邑。
现代文：晋人中行文子出逃，路过县城。
English: Jin Zhongxing and Wenzi fled, passing through the county seat.

古文：从者曰： 此啬夫，公之故人。
现代文：随从说： 这里的乡官是您的旧人。
English: The attendant said, "The town official here is your old man Tsuru.

古文：公奚不休舍，且待后车？ 文子曰： 吾尝好音，此人遗我鸣琴；吾好佩，此人遗我玉环：是振我过者也。
现代文：您为何不去他家休息，暂时等待一下随后的车子？ 艾子说： 我曾经喜爱音乐，这个人就送给我响琴；我喜爱玉饰，这个人就送给我玉环；这些都是在助长我的过失。
English: Why don't you go to his house to rest and wait for the next bus? Ai Zi said: I once loved music, and this person gave me a glockenspiel; I loved jade ornaments, and this person gave me a jade ring; these are all contributing to my fault.

古文：以求容于我者，吾恐其以我求容于人也。 
现代文：以此求得我好感的人，我伯他会拿我去求得别人的好感。 
English: My uncle would use me to gain the goodwill of others.

古文：乃去之。
现代文：于是就离开了县城。
English: So he left the prefecture.

古文：果收文子后车二乘而献之其君矣。
现代文：这个乡官果然没收了中行文子后面随从的两辆车子，并进献给他的主子。
English: The township official did indeed confiscate the two cars of the entourage behind Zhong Xing Fanzi and presented them to his master.

古文：周趮谓宫他曰： 为我谓齐王曰： 以齐资我于魏，请以魏事王。 宫他曰： 不可，是示之无魏也，齐王必不资于无魏者，而以怨有魏者。
现代文：周对宫他说： 替我对齐王讲明，假如齐国大力帮助我在魏国掌权，我就会用魏国侍奉齐王。 
English: Zhou said to the palace: "Explain to King Qi for me that if the State of Qi vigorously helps me to take power in Wei, I will use Wei to serve King Qi."

古文：公不如曰： 以王之所欲，臣请以听魏听王。
现代文：宫他说： 不可以。这样就暴露了你在魏国无权。
English: He said, "No, you can't. This exposes your lack of authority in Wei.

古文：齐王必以公为有魏也，必因公。
现代文：齐王必定不帮助在魏无权的人，从而结怨在魏掌权的人。
English: King Qi would certainly not help those who had no power in Wei, thus causing resentment against those who held power in Wei.

古文：是公有齐也，因以有齐、魏矣。 
现代文：您不如说：按照大王的要求，我愿拿魏国听命于大王。
English: You might as well say: In accordance with the great king's request, I am willing to take Wei to obey the great king.

古文：白圭谓宋大尹曰： 君长，自知政，公无事矣。
现代文：齐王必定认为您是魏国掌权的，一定依从您。
English: King Qi must think that you are the ruler of Wei, and must obey you.

古文：今君少主也，而务名，不如令荆贺君之孝也，则君不寿公位而大敬重公，则公常用宋矣。 
现代文：这样您有了齐国的帮助，进而在齐、魏也都有了地位。 白圭对宋国大尹说： 君主长大后自己掌握政事，您就没事干了。现在君主年幼而追求名声，不如叫楚国来祝贺君主的孝顺，君主就不会剥夺您的权位，反会大大敬重您，这样，您就能长期在宋国掌权了。 
English: In this way, you have the help of Qi, and then both Qi and Wei have their own status. Bai Gui said to the Grand Yin of Song: When the monarch grows up and takes control of political affairs, you will have nothing to do. Now that the monarch is young and pursues fame, it is better to invite Chu to congratulate the monarch's filial piety. The monarch will not deprive you of your power, but will greatly respect you. In this way, you will be able to hold power in Song for a long time.

古文：管仲、鲍叔相谓曰： 不寿君乱甚矣，必失国。
现代文：管仲、鲍叔牙相互议论说： 君主昏乱极了，必定会丢掉国家。
English: Guanzhong and Bao Shuzha argued with each other and said: The monarch is extremely confused and will surely lose the country.

古文：齐国之诸公子其可辅者，非公子纠，则小白也。
现代文：齐国诸公子值得辅佐的，不是公子纠，就是小白。
English: The nobles of the State of Qi are worthy of support, whether they are nobles or petty nobles.

古文：与子人事一人焉，先达者相收。 
现代文：我和你每人侍奉一个公子，先成功的就收留另一个人。 
English: Each of you and I will serve one nobleman, and the first to succeed will take in another.

古文：管仲乃从公子纠，鲍叔从小白。
现代文：管仲就随从公子纠，鲍叔牙随从小白。
English: Guanzhong followed Guan Zi, and Bao Shuji followed Xiao Bai.

古文：国人果弑君。
现代文：国人果然杀了君主。
English: The countrymen did indeed kill the monarch.

古文：小白先人为君，鲁人拘管仲而效之，鲍叔言而相之。
现代文：小白先回齐国做了新君。鲁国人把管仲拘禁起来献给小白，在鲍叔牙的推荐下，管仲做了齐相。
English: Xiao Bai first returned to Qi to become the new prince. The people of Lu detained Guanzhong and dedicated him to Xiao Bai. On the recommendation of Bao Shuzha, Guanzhong became the new prince.

古文：故谚曰： 巫咸虽善祝，不能自祓也；秦医虽善除，不能自弹也。 
现代文：所以俗话说： 巫咸虽然善于祷告，却不能拔除自己的灾祸；秦医虽然善于治病，却不能针灸好自己的病。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: Although Wuxian is good at praying, he cannot remove his own disasters; although Qin doctors are good at curing diseases, they cannot cure their own diseases with acupuncture.

古文：以管仲之圣而待鲍叔之助，此鄙谚所谓 虏自卖裘而不售，士自誉辩而不信 者也。
现代文：凭管仲的英明，还要等待鲍叔牙的帮助，这就是俗谚所说的 奴隶自己出售裘衣是售大出的，士人自称善于辩说是没人信的 。
English: Relying on the wisdom of the mediator, but also waiting for the help of Bao Shuzhen, this is the proverbial saying: "Slaves who sell their own clothes are sold out, and nobles who claim to be good at arguing are not believed."

古文：荆王伐吴，吴使沮卫、蹶鬲犒于荆师，而将军曰： 缚之，杀以衅鼓。 
现代文：楚王伐吴，吴王派沮卫、蹙融用酒食慰劳楚军。而楚国将军说： 把他们捆起来，杀了来祭鼓。 
English: The king of Chu attacked Wu, and the king of Wu dispatched Chu Wei and Wu Rong to comfort the laboring Chu army with wine and food. And the general of Chu said: Tie them up and kill the sacrificial drum.

古文：问之曰： 汝来，卜乎？ 答曰： 卜。 
现代文：楚人问沮卫、蹙融说： 你们来时，占过吗？ 他们回答说： 占卜过。  是吉兆吗？ 
English: The Chu people asked De Wei and Hao Rong, "When you came, did you do any divination?" They replied, "I did some divination. Is it a good omen?"

古文： 卜吉乎？ 曰： 吉。 
现代文：他们说： 是吉兆。 
English: They said, "It is a good omen."

古文：荆人曰： 今荆将以汝衅鼓，其何也？ 答曰： 是故其所以吉也。
现代文：楚人说： 现在楚军将要用你们祭鼓，怎么说呢？ 他们回答说： 这正是吉利的所在了。
English: The Chu people said, "Now the Chu army is going to use your sacrificial drums. What should we say?" They answered, "This is where the luck lies."

古文：吴使臣来也，固视将军怒，将军怒，将深沟高垒；将军不怒，将懈怠。
现代文：吴王派我们来的时候，本来就等着将军发怒呐！将军发怒了，吴军将深沟高垒；将军不发怒呢，吴军将麻痹懈怠。
English: When the king of Wu sent us here, we were expecting the general to be angry. If the general is angry, the Wu army will dig a deeper trench; if the general is not angry, the Wu army will be paralyzed and slack.

古文：今也将军杀臣，则吴必警守矣。
现代文：现在将军杀了我们，吴军就一定会警惕起来严加防守了。
English: Now that the general has killed us, the Wu army will definitely be on the alert and on the defensive.

古文：且国之卜，非为一臣卜。
现代文：再说国家的占卜，不是为个人臣子占卜。
English: Furthermore, the divination of the state is not divination for individual vassals.

古文：夫杀一臣而存一国，其不言吉何也？
现代文：杀掉一个臣子而保存一个国家，这不叫吉利，叫什么呢？
English: To kill a vassal and save a country is not good luck, but what is it?

古文：且死者无知，则以臣衅鼓无益也；死者有知也，臣将当战之时，臣使鼓不鸣。 
现代文：再说死者无知的话。用我们祭鼓也就没有好处；死者有知的话，我们将在打仗的时候，让楚军战鼓敲不响。 
English: Moreover, if the dead are ignorant, it is no good to use our ceremonial drums; if the dead know, we will not let the Chu army's war drums sound during the war.

古文：荆人因不杀也。
现代文：楚人因而没杀他们。
English: The Chu people therefore did not kill them.

古文：知伯将伐仇由，而道难不通，乃铸大钟遗仇由之君。
现代文：智伯将要征伐仇由，但道路艰险难通，于是铸了一口大钟赠送给仇由国君。
English: Zhibo was going to conquer Qiuyu, but the road was difficult and dangerous, so he cast a large bell and presented it to the Qiuyu sovereign.

古文：仇由之君大说，除道将内之。赤章曼枝曰： 不可。
现代文：仇由国君非常高兴，准备修通道路把大钟接受下来。赤章曼枝说： 不行。
English: The feudal lord was very pleased and prepared to repair the road and accept the clock. Red-crowned Manju said, "No."

古文：此小之所以事大也，而今也大以来，卒必随之，不可内也。 
现代文：送钟本是小国侍奉大国的事情，现在大国反而来送了，他们的军队一定会跟随在后，大钟是不能接受的。 
English: Sending bells was originally a matter for small countries to serve big countries, but now the big countries have sent them instead, and their armies will surely follow. Big bells are unacceptable.

古文：仇由之君不听，遂内之。
现代文：仇由国君不听，于是接受了大钟。
English: However, the sovereign did not listen, so he accepted the large bell.

古文：赤章曼枝因断毂而驱，至于齐，七月而仇由亡矣。
现代文：赤章曼枝就截短车毅以便赶路，逃到了齐国。七个月后，仇由国就灭亡了。
English: Red Zhang Manzhi cut short his journey in order to make haste and fled to Qi Province. Seven months later, Qiyu Province was destroyed.

古文：越已胜吴，又索卒于荆而攻晋。
现代文：越已胜吴，又向楚借兵去攻打晋国。
English: Yue had already defeated Wu, and borrowed soldiers from Chu to attack Jin.

古文：左史倚相谓荆王曰： 夫越破吴，豪士死，锐卒尽，大甲伤。
现代文：史官倚相对楚王说： 越国攻占吴国，豪杰之士战死，精锐部队耗尽了，武器装备毁坏了。
English: The historian Lixi said to King Chu: Vietnam conquered Wu, the heroes died in battle, the elite troops were exhausted, and the weapons and equipment were destroyed.

古文：今又索卒以攻晋，示我不病也。
现代文：现在又来借兵去攻晋，是向我表示没有受损。
English: Now they have come to borrow soldiers to attack Jin, indicating to me that they are not damaged.

古文：不如起师与分吴。 
现代文：楚不如起兵和越共同瓜分吴国。 
English: It would be better for Chu to raise an army and divide Wuxia with the Viets.

古文：荆王曰： 善。 
现代文：楚王说： 好。 
English: Chu Wang said: Good.

古文：因起师而从越。
现代文：就起兵而跟踪越军。
English: They took up arms and followed the Vietnamese army.

古文：越王怒，将击之。
现代文：越王非常气愤，准备发动进攻。
English: Yue Wang was very angry and prepared to launch an attack.

古文：大夫种曰： 不可。
现代文：大夫种说： 不行。
English: The doctor said, "No."

古文：吾豪士尽，大甲伤。
现代文：我豪杰之士战死了，武器装备毁坏了。
English: My heroes died in battle, and our weapons and equipment were destroyed.

古文：我与战，必不克。不如赂之。 
现代文：我们和他们打，一定不能取胜，还不如贿赂他们。 
English: If we fight them, we can't win, so we might as well bribe them.

古文：乃割露山之阴五百里以赂之。
现代文：就把露山北面五百里的地方割让给了楚国。
English: He ceded the area five hundred miles north of Luzhan to the State of Chu.

古文：荆伐陈，吴救之，军间三十里，雨十日，夜星。
现代文：楚国攻打陈国，吴国去解救，楚吴两军相距三十里。下了十天雨后，晚上放晴了。
English: Chu attacked Chen, and Wu came to the rescue. The two armies of Chu and Wu were thirty miles apart. After ten days of rain, it cleared up in the evening.

古文：左史倚相谓子期曰： 雨十日，甲辑而兵聚。
现代文：史官倚相对子期说： 下了十天雨，盔甲和兵器都集中存放着。
English: The historian said to his son: "It rained for ten days, and the armor and weapons were all concentrated.

古文：吴人必至，不如备之。 
现代文：吴军一定会来，不如多加防备。 
English: The Wu army will definitely come, it is better to be more prepared.

古文：乃为陈。
现代文：于是摆好了战阵。
English: So the battle lines were drawn up.

古文：陈未成也而吴人至，见荆陈而反。
现代文：战阵还没摆好，吴军就到了。看到楚军布阵，吴军又折兵返回。
English: The battle lines were not yet set, and the Wu army arrived. Seeing the Chu army setting up battle lines, the Wu army turned back.

古文：左史曰： 吴反覆六十里，其君子必休，小人必食。
现代文：倚相说： 吴军来回六十里，当官的一定会在休息，当兵的一定会在吃饭。
English: Risso said: Wu's army travels sixty miles back and forth, officials will definitely take a break, and soldiers will definitely eat.

古文：我行三十里击之，必可败也。 
现代文：我们行军三十里去袭击他们，一定能把他们打败。 
English: We will march thirty miles to attack them, and we will surely defeat them.

古文：乃从之，遂破吴军。
现代文：于是跟随过去，并把吴军打败了。
English: So he followed the past and defeated the Wu army.

古文：韩、赵相与为难。
现代文：韩、赵相互为敌。
English: Han and Zhao become enemies.

古文：韩子索兵于魏，曰： 愿借师以伐赵。 
现代文：韩君向魏借兵说： 希望借兵去伐赵。 
English: Han Jun borrowed soldiers from Wei and said: I hope to borrow soldiers to go to Zhao.

古文：魏文侯曰： 寡人与赵兄弟，不可以从。 
现代文：魏文侯说： 我和赵是兄弟，没法听命。 
English: Wei Wenhou said: Zhao and I are brothers, we can't just follow orders.

古文：赵又索兵以攻韩。文侯曰： 寡人与韩兄弟，不敢从。 
现代文：赵又向魏借兵去攻韩，魏文侯说： 我和韩是兄弟，不敢从命。 
English: Zhao also borrowed soldiers from Wei to attack Han, Wei Wenhou said: I and Han are brothers, I dare not risk my life.

古文：二国不得兵，怒而反。
现代文：两国没有借到兵，愤怒地回去了。
English: Neither country was able to borrow troops, so they returned home very angry.

古文：已乃知文侯以构于已，乃皆朝魏。
现代文：事后才知道魏文侯是用这种方法让两国和解，于是都去朝见他。
English: It was only after the fact that Wei Wenhou used this method to reconcile the two countries, so they all went to see him in the morning.

古文：齐伐鲁，索谗鼎，鲁以其雁往。
现代文：齐国讨伐鲁国。索要谗鼎，鲁国就把赝品送去了。
English: Qi fought against Lu. Lu sent the fake to Qi when he asked for it.

古文：齐人曰： 雁也。 
现代文：齐人说： 这是赝品。 
English: Qi people said: This is a fake.

古文：鲁人曰： 真也。 
现代文：鲁人说： 是真的。 
English: Lu said, "It's true.

古文：齐曰： 使乐正子春来，吾将听子。 
现代文：齐人说： 叫乐正子春来证明，我就相信你。 
English: Qi said, "Ask Le Zhengyi to prove it in the spring, and I will believe you."

古文：鲁君请乐正子春，乐正子春曰： 胡不以其真往也？ 君曰： 我爱之。 
现代文：鲁君请求乐正子春，乐正子春说： 为什么不把真的送去？ 鲁君说 ： 我喜爱谗鼎。 
English: Lu Jun pleaded with Le Zhengyi Chun. Le Zhengyi Chun said, "Why not send the real one?" Lu Jun said, "I like Zhending."

古文：答曰： 臣亦爱臣之信。 
现代文：乐正子春回答说： 我也爱惜我的信誉。 
English: Le Zi Chun replied, "I also cherish my reputation."

古文：韩咎立为君，未定也。
现代文：韩咎立为国君，事情尚未最后确定。
English: Han Wei was installed as the country's ruler, but the matter has yet to be finalized.

古文：弟在周，周欲重之，而恐韩咎不立也。
现代文：他的弟弟在周国，周国想使其回国居于要位，但又伯韩咎最后不能立为国君。
English: His younger brother was in Zhou, and Zhou wanted to make his return to China a priority, but in the end, because of Bo Han, he was not able to become the king.

古文：綦毋恢曰： 不若以车百乘送之。
现代文：綦毋恢说： 不如用百辆兵车送他回国。
English: "It would be better to send him back home with a hundred troop cars," Zou said.

古文：得立，因曰 为戒 ；不立，则曰 来效贼 也。 
现代文：韩咎能立为国君，就说是给他弟弟做警卫的；不能立为国君，就说是来献贼的。 
English: If Han Wei could become the king, it was said that he was guarding his younger brother; if he could not become the king, it was said that he had come to sacrifice a thief.

古文：靖郭君将城薛，客多以谏者。
现代文：靖郭君田婴准备在薛地筑城，受到很多门客的劝阻。
English: Jingguo Jun Tianying prepared to build a city in Xue Di, but was dissuaded by many of his patrons.

古文：靖郭君谓谒者曰： 毋为客通。 
现代文：田婴对通报人员说： 不要替门客们通报了。 
English: Tian Yu said to the reporting officer: Don't report for the customers.

古文：齐人有请见者曰： 臣请三言而已。过三言，臣请烹。 
现代文：有个请求接见的齐国人说： 我只要求说三个字。超过三个字，就请把我煮死好了。 
English: A Qizhi who received a request said: "I only ask to say three words. If I say more than three words, please boil me to death."

古文：靖郭君因见之。
现代文：田婴就接见了他。
English: So Tianying went to see him.

古文：客趋进曰： 海，大，鱼。 
现代文：客人快步上前说： 海大鱼。 
English: The guest quickly stepped forward and said, "Big fish in the sea."

古文：因反走。
现代文：说罢回头就跑。
English: After saying this, he walked away.

古文：靖郭君曰：请闻其说。
现代文：田婴说： 请告诉我说的是什么意思。 
English: Tianying said, "Please tell me what you mean by that."

古文：客曰： 臣不敢以死为戏。 
现代文：客人说： 我不敢拿死当作儿戏。 
English: The guest said: I don't dare to play with death.

古文：靖郭君曰： 原为寡人言之。 
现代文：田婴说： 希望给我说说清楚。 
English: Tianying said, "I hope you can explain it to me clearly."

古文：答曰： 君闻大鱼乎？
现代文：客人回答说： 您听说过大鱼吗？
English: The guest replied, "Have you ever heard of a big fish?

古文：君长有齐，奚以薛为？君失齐，虽隆薛城至于天，犹无益也。 
现代文：网不能捕住它，绍缴不能拖住它但它要是任性乱游脱离了水，蝶蚁都可在它身上为所欲为哩。现在齐国也就是您的大海。您能长期掌握齐政，还要薛干什么？您失去了齐国大权，即使把薛城筑得够得着老天，也没有好处啊。 
English: The net can't catch it, the net can't hold it, but if it wanders out of the water, the butterflies can do whatever they want to it. Now Qi is your sea. If you can control Qi for a long time, what do you want Xue to do? You have lost the great power of Qi. Even if you build Xue City to reach the heavens, it's no good.

古文：靖郭君曰： 善。 乃辍，不城薛。
现代文：田婴说： 好。 就把在薛地筑城的事停了下来。
English: Tian Ying said, "Okay," and stopped the construction of the city in Xue Di.

古文：荆王弟在秦，秦不出也。
现代文：楚王的弟弟在秦国，秦国不放他回去。
English: King Chu's younger brother is in Qin, and Qin won't let him go back.

古文：中射之士曰： 资臣百金，臣能出之。 
现代文：侍卫武官说： 借给我百金，我能让他回国。 
English: The military attaché said: Lend me a hundred gold coins, I can get him to return to his country.

古文：因载百金之晋，见叔向，曰： 荆王弟在秦，秦不出也。
现代文：于是带上百金前往晋国，拜见叔向后，说： 楚王弟弟在秦国，秦国不放他回去。 
English: So he took the money with him and went to Jin Province to visit his uncle and said, "Chu Wang's younger brother is in Qin Province, and Qin Province won't let him go back."

古文：请以百金委叔向。 
现代文：并希望把百金送给叔向，委托他来办理这件事。
English: He also hoped to give the money to his uncle, entrusting him to handle the matter.

古文：叔向受金而以见之晋平公曰： 可以城壶丘矣。 
现代文：叔向接受了百金，就把它拿给晋平公说： 可以在壶丘筑城了。 ；平公说： 为什么？ 
English: My uncle accepted the one hundred gold coins, took it to Jinping Gong and said, "You can build a city on the mound."; Ping Gong said, "Why?

古文：平公曰： 何也？ 对曰： 荆王弟在秦，秦不出也，是秦恶荆也，必不敢禁我城壶丘。
现代文：叔向回答说： 楚王的弟弟在秦国，秦不放他走，这说明秦国憎恨楚国，秦国也就一定不敢阻拦我们在壶丘筑城。
English: Uncle Xiang replied: King Chu's younger brother is in Qin, and Qin will not let him go. This shows that Qin hates Chu, and Qin will not dare to stop us from building a city in Jugu.

古文：若禁之，我曰： 为我出荆王之弟，吾不城也。
现代文：如果前来阻拦，我们就说： 看在我们的面上，放出楚王的弟弟，我们就不筑城了。 
English: If they come to stop us, we will say: For our sake, let King Chu's younger brother go, and we will not build the city.

古文：彼如出之，可以德荆；彼不出，是卒恶也，必不敢禁我城壶丘矣。 公曰： 善。 
现代文：泰国如果放出楚王的弟弟，可以使楚国对我们感恩；如果不放，说明他们始终憎恨楚国，就一定不敢阻拦我们在壶丘筑城。 平公说： 好。 
English: If Thailand releases King Chu's younger brother, it can make Chu grateful to us; if they do not release him, it means that they have always hated Chu, and they will not dare to stop us from building a city in Hukduk.

古文：乃城壶丘。
现代文：于是就在壶且筑城。
English: So they built the city in a pot.

古文：谓秦公曰： 为我出荆王之弟，吾不城也。 
现代文：晋平公对秦景公说： 看在晋国面子上放出楚王的弟弟，我就不再筑城了。 
English: Jin Ping Gong said to Qin Jing Gong, "I will no longer build a city if I have to let go of King Chu's younger brother for the sake of Jin's reputation.

古文：秦因出之。
现代文：秦因而放走了楚王的弟弟。
English: As a result, Qin released Chu Wang's younger brother.

古文：荆王大说，以链金百镒遗晋。
现代文：楚王非常高兴，把一百镒纯金赠送给晋国。
English: King Chu was very pleased and presented the 100 baht of pure gold to Jin.

古文：阖庐攻郢，战三胜，问子胥曰： 可以退乎？ 子胥曰： 溺人者一饮而止，则无溺者，以其不休也。
现代文：吴王阖庐攻打郢都，多次取胜后，他问伍子胥说： 可以撤兵吗？ 伍子胥回答说； 想淹死他，让他喝一口水就住手，那是不会成功的，因为中途停止了。
English: After Wu Wangyao attacked and defeated Shidu several times, he asked Wu Zizhao, "Can I withdraw my troops?" Wu Zizhao replied, "If you want to drown him, let him drink a sip of water and stop, it will not succeed, because it will stop halfway."

古文：不如乘之以沉之。 
现代文：不如趁机把他沉入水底。 
English: Might as well take the opportunity to sink him to the bottom of the water.

古文：郑人有一子，将宦，谓其家曰： 必筑坏墙，是不善人将窃。 
现代文：郑国有个人，他的儿子将去做官，告诉他的家人说： 一定要把坏了的墙修建起来，这墙不修好，别人会来偷窃的。 
English: In Zhengzhou, a man whose son was going to be an official told his family, "We must build the broken wall. If the wall is not repaired, others will come to steal."

古文：其巷人亦云。
现代文：他邻居也这样说。
English: His neighbors say the same thing.

古文：不时筑，而人果窃之。
现代文：因为没有及时修建，别人果然偷了他家的东西。
English: Because it wasn't built in time, someone stole his family's things.

古文：以其子为智，以巷人告者为盗。
现代文：郑人认为他的儿子聪明，但却把说要修墙的邻居看作盗贼。
English: Zheng Ren thinks his son is clever, but he regards his neighbour, who says he wants to repair the wall, as a thief.

