古文：阳处父如卫，反，过宁，舍于逆旅宁嬴氏。
现代文：阳处父到卫国访问，返回晋国时，路过宁邑，住宿在宁嬴氏的旅店里。
English: Yang's father went to China for a visit, and when he returned to Jin Province, he passed through Ningyur and stayed at Ningyur's inn.

古文：嬴谓其妻曰： 吾求君子久矣，今乃得之。 
现代文：宁嬴氏对妻子说： 我很久以来一直在寻求有德行的君子，今天总算遇到了。 
English: Mr. Ning Xi said to his wife: I have been looking for a gentleman with virtue for a long time, and today I finally met him.

古文：举而从之，阳子道与之语，及山而还。
现代文：便起身跟他走了。阳处父在路上与宁嬴谈话，宁嬴到了河内温山又返回了家。
English: Yang's father talked to Ning Que on the way, and Ning Que went to Wenshan in Hanoi and then returned home.

古文：其妻曰： 子得所求而不从之，何其怀也！ 
现代文：他的妻子问道： 你得到了所求的人，却又不随从他，你为什么这样想家呀？ 
English: His wife asked, "You got the man you wanted, but you didn't follow him. Why are you so homesick?"

古文：曰： 吾见其貌而欲之，闻其言而恶之。
现代文：宁嬴回答说： 我看到他的外貌想跟他去，听到他的言辞后又厌恶他。
English: Ning Xuan replied, "I saw his appearance and wanted to follow him, but I heard his words and loathed him.

古文：夫貌，情之华也；言，貌之机也。
现代文：外貌，是人性情的华采；言辞，是外貌的枢机。
English: Appearance is the splendor of human nature; speech is the cardinal of appearance.

古文：身为情，成于中。
现代文：人的身体产生性情，是在心中形成的。
English: The human body produces temperament, which is formed in the mind.

古文：言，身之文也。
现代文：言辞，是身体的文饰。
English: Words are the decoration of the body.

古文：言文而发之，合而后行，离则有衅。
现代文：言辞文质彬彬才能说出来，和性情、外貌相符合才能办事，互相背离就会出毛病。
English: It is necessary to have a good speech, writing and appearance in order to be able to speak out, and it is necessary to have a good temperament and appearance in order to be able to work. If they deviate from each other, something will go wrong.

古文：今阳子之貌济，其言匮，非其实也。
现代文：现在阳子外貌堂堂，但是他的言辞贫乏，不副其实。
English: Now, Yoko has a handsome appearance, but his words are poor and not worthy of the truth.

古文：若中不济，而外强之，其卒将复，中以外易矣。
现代文：如果中情不足，而外貌硬要装得很足，最后仍将归于不足，因为中情和外貌不一致。
English: If the inside is not good enough and the outside has to be perfect, it will still be a failure in the end, because the inside is not the same as the outside.

古文：若内外类，而言反之，渎其信也。
现代文：如果中情和外貌相类，而言辞却与之相反，那就使诚信受到了亵渎。
English: If one's inner feelings are similar to one's outward appearance, but one's speech is contrary to it, then one's integrity will be violated.

古文：夫言以昭信，奉之如机，历时而发之，胡可渎也！
现代文：言辞是用来表明诚信的，应当奉它如枢机，思考成熟了才能说出来，怎么可以亵渎它呢！
English: Words are used to express sincerity. They should be treated as sacred. They should be spoken after mature reflection. How can they be desecrated?

古文：今阳子之情譓矣，以济盖也，且刚而主能，不本而犯，怨之所聚也。
现代文：如今阳子的中情是很辨察的，因此形成他的外貌掩盖了他的缺点，而且他的性情刚愎，自以为才能超群，不本着仁义办事而触犯别人，就会招致众人的怨恨。
English: Nowadays, the yangzi's true feelings are very discernible, so the formation of his appearance hides his shortcomings, and his temperament is stubborn, he thinks he is superior, and if he does not act with benevolence but offends others, he will incur the resentment of many people.

古文：吾惧未获其利而及其难，是故去之。 
现代文：我担心不但得不到他的好处，反而会蒙受他的祸害，所以才离开他。 
English: I left him because I was afraid that I would not only not receive his benefits, but would instead suffer his harm.

古文：期年，乃有贾季之难，阳子死之。
现代文：第二年，就发生了贾季发难的事件，阳子就死于这一事件。
English: In the following year, the Jaji Incident occurred, and Yoko died as a result.

