古文：变复之家谓虫食谷者，部吏所致也。
现代文：专门为消灾而祈祷的人，说虫子吃谷物是地方官吏侵夺人民造成的。
English: People who specifically prayed for disaster relief said that the insects eating grain were caused by local officials robbing the people.

古文：贪则侵渔，故虫食谷。
现代文：贪婪无比敲榨勒索百姓，所以虫子吃谷物。
English: Greed beyond compare squeezes and extorts the people, so the worms eat the grain.

古文：身黑头赤，则谓武官；头黑身赤，则谓文官。
现代文：身黑头赤的虫为灾，就称是武官造成的；头黑身赤的虫为灾，就称是文官造成的。
English: If an insect with a black body and red head causes a disaster, it is said to be caused by a military attaché; if an insect with a black body and red head causes a disaster, it is said to be caused by a civil servant.

古文：使加罚於虫所象类之吏，则虫灭息，不复见矣。
现代文：假使惩办虫子所象征的官吏，那么虫子就会消失，不再出现。
English: If the officials symbolized by the worm are punished, then the worm will disappear and no longer appear.

古文：夫头赤则谓武吏，头黑则谓文吏所致也。时或头赤身白，头黑身黄，或头身皆黄，或头身皆青，或皆白若鱼肉之虫，应何官吏？
现代文：如果头赤的虫为灾就说是武官造成的，头黑的虫为灾就说是文官造成的，有时为灾的虫或头赤身白，或头黑身黄，或头身都黄，或头身都青，或头身都白得像鱼、肉上生的蛆一样，它们应和哪一类官吏呢？
English: If red-headed worms are said to be caused by military officers, and black-headed worms are said to be caused by civil servants, and sometimes the worms are caused by the disaster or the head is naked and white, or the head is black and yellow, or the head and body are yellow, or the head and body are blue, or the head and body are white like fish and maggots on meat, what kind of officials should they be?

古文：时或白布豪民、猾吏被刑乞贷者，威胜於官，取多於吏，其虫形象何如状哉？
现代文：有时，那些没有官职的地方豪强和被判了刑而请求交钱赎罪的猾吏，他们的淫威胜过官吏，榨取的财物比官吏更多，应和这些人的虫子的形象又是什么样子呢？
English: Sometimes, those local strongmen who do not have official positions and cunning officials who have been sentenced to pay money to atone for their sins, they are more arrogant than officials, and they squeeze more wealth than officials. What should be the image of these people's worms?

古文：虫之灭也，皆因风雨。
现代文：虫子的消失，都是由于风雨的关系。
English: The disappearance of insects is all due to the relationship between wind and rain.

古文：案虫灭之时，则吏未必伏罚也。
现代文：考察虫子消失之时，那些官吏未必就受到惩罚。
English: When inspecting bugs disappear, those officials are not necessarily punished.

古文：陆田之中时有鼠，水田之中时有鱼，虾蟹之类，皆为谷害，或时希出而暂为害，或常有而为灾，等类众多，应何官吏？
现代文：旱田中经常有田鼠，水田中经常有鱼、虾、蟹之类动物，都造成谷物的灾害。有的虫子有时很少出现，而且为害的时间很短暂，有的经常出现而造成灾害，同类如此之多，它们应和什么样的官吏呢？
English: There are often field mice in dry fields, and there are often fish, shrimp, crabs and other animals in paddy fields, all of which cause grain disasters. Some insects sometimes appear rarely, and the time of harm is very short, and some often appear and cause disasters. There are so many of the same kind. What kind of officials should they be?

古文：鲁宣公履亩而税，应时而有蝝生者，或言若蝗。
现代文：鲁宣公时按田亩收税，马上有蝝虫产生，有人说像蝗虫。
English: At the time of Lu Xuan Gong, taxes were levied according to the number of mu of land. Immediately, maggots appeared. Some people said they looked like locusts.

古文：蝗时至，蔽天如雨，集地食物，不择谷草。
现代文：蝗虫不时飞来，遮天盖日像下大雨一样，停落在地上吃东西，不论是谷是草都吃。
English: Locusts fly from time to time, covering the sky like a heavy rain, stopping on the ground to eat, whether it is a valley or grass.

古文：察其头身，象类何吏？
现代文：察看蝗虫的头和身体的颜色，象征哪一种官吏呢？
English: Looking at the colour of the head and body of the locust, what kind of official does it symbolise?

古文：变复之家，谓蝗何应？
现代文：变复之家该说蝗虫应和什么官吏呢？
English: What officials should the House of Converts say that the locusts should be associated with?

古文：建武三十一年，蝗起太山郡，西南过陈留、河南，遂入夷狄，所集乡县以千百数。
现代文：建武三十一年，太山郡发生蝗灾，西南面蔓延到陈留、河南两郡，最终进入西北夷狄地区。
English: In the 31st year of Jianwu, a locust plague occurred in Taishan County, and spread to Chenliu and Henan counties in the southwest, and eventually entered the northwest Yidi region.

古文：当时乡县之吏，未皆履亩，蝗食谷草，连日老极，或蜚徙去，或止枯死。当时乡县之吏，未必皆伏罪也。
现代文：蝗虫停落的乡县，要以千百计，当时乡县的官吏，并没有都按亩收税。蝗虫吃谷草后，一天天衰竭下去，有的飞走离开了，有的停留下来老死了，当时乡县的官吏，未必都受到了惩罚。
English: In the townships and counties where locusts stopped, there were hundreds of thousands of locusts. At that time, the officials of the townships and counties did not all collect taxes by mu. After the locusts ate the grain grass, they became exhausted day by day. Some flew away, some stayed and died of old age. At that time, the officials of the townships and counties may not all have been punished.

古文：夫虫食谷，自有止期，犹蚕食桑，自有足时也。
现代文：蝗虫吃谷物，自然有它停止的时期，好比蚕吃桑叶，自然会有饱足的时候一样。
English: Locusts eat grain and naturally have a period when they stop, just as silkworms eat mulberry leaves and naturally have a period of satiety.

古文：生出有日，死极有月，期尽变化，不常为虫。
现代文：蝗虫产生出来有一定的时日，完全死掉有一定的月份，期限满了就会变化，不会永远是虫子。
English: Locusts take a certain amount of time to emerge, and a certain amount of months to die completely. When the time limit is over, they will change, and they will not always be insects.

古文：使人君不罪其吏，虫犹自亡。
现代文：即使君王不惩罚他下面的官吏，蝗虫仍然会自行消亡。
English: Even if the king does not punish the officials under him, the locusts will still die out on their own.

古文：夫虫，风气所生，苍颉知之，故 凡 、 虫 为 风 之字，取气於风，故八日而化，生春夏之物，或食五谷，或食众草。
现代文：蝗虫是承受风所含的气而产生的，苍颉了解了这一点，所以把 凡 和 虫 字合在一起作为 风 字。蝗虫从风那里取气而生，所以八天就发生变化。生活在春夏的虫类，有的吃五谷，有的吃各种草。
English: Locusts are produced by receiving the air contained in the wind. Herons understood this, so they combined Van and Insect as the wind. Locusts take air from the wind, so they change in eight days. Insects living in spring and summer, some eat grain, some eat various grasses.

古文：食五谷，吏受钱谷也，其食他草，受人何物？
现代文：虫吃五谷，是应和了官吏收刮钱财；吃其他的草，又应和官吏收受别人的什么东西呢？
English: If insects eat grain, should they collect money with officials? If they eat other grasses, should they collect other people's things with officials?

古文：倮虫三百，人为之长。
现代文： 三百种倮虫中，人是它们的首领。 
English: Of the three hundred aphid species, man is their leader.

古文：由此言之，人亦虫也。
现代文：因此说来，人也是虫了。
English: Therefore, man is also an insect.

古文：人食虫所食，虫亦食人所食，俱为虫而相食物，何为怪之？
现代文：人吃虫所吃的东西，虫也吃人所吃的东西，都是虫类而又彼此吃对方吃的东西，有什么奇怪的呢？
English: People eat what insects eat, and insects eat what people eat. They are all insects, and they eat each other's food. What's so strange about that?

古文：设虫有知，亦将非人曰： 女食天之所生，吾亦食之，谓我为变，不自谓为灾。 
现代文：假设虫有智慧，也会责备人说： 你们吃自然所生长的东西，我也吃这些东西，说我吃就是灾变，却不说你们自己吃是灾变。 
English: Assuming that insects are intelligent, they will also reproach people: You eat things that grow naturally, I also eat these things, saying that what I eat is a catastrophe, but not saying that what you eat is a catastrophe.

古文：凡含气之类，所甘嗜者，口腹不异。人甘五谷，恶虫之食；自生天地之间，恶虫之出。
现代文：凡是动物持别喜欢吃的东西，口味没有什么不同，人喜吃五谷，却憎恨虫吃五谷；自己出生在天地之间，却憎恨虫的出生。
English: There is no difference in taste between all the things that animals like to eat and those that they don't. People like to eat grain, but they hate insects eating grain. They were born between heaven and earth, but they hate the birth of insects.

古文：设虫能言，以此非人，亦无以诘也。
现代文：假设虫能说话，以此来责备人，人也毫无理由反驳。
English: Assuming that the insect can speak, it accuses the person, and the person has no reason to refute it.

古文：夫虫之在物间也，知者不怪，其食万物也不谓之灾。
现代文：虫生活在万物之间，有见识的人不以为怪；它们吃各种东西，不说它们是灾变。
English: Insects live among all things, and people with insight are not surprised; they eat all kinds of things, not to say that they are a catastrophe.

古文：甘香渥味之物，虫生常多，故谷之多虫者粢也。
现代文：甘甜清香味道浓厚的东西，经常多生虫，所以五谷中多生虫的是粟。
English: Sweet and fragrant things with a strong flavor often have more insects, so the grain with the most insects is millet.

古文：稻时有虫，麦与豆无虫。必以有虫责主者吏，是其粢乡部吏常伏罪也。
现代文：稻子有时生虫，麦与豆不生虫，如果一定要以庄稼生虫而责备主管的官吏，那么产粟的地方的官吏就经常要受惩罚了。
English: Rice sometimes has worms, but wheat and beans do not. If it is necessary to blame the official in charge for the crop having worms, then the official in the place where the poppy is grown will often have to be punished.

古文：神农、后稷藏种之方，煮马屎以汁渍种者，令禾不虫。
现代文：《神农》、《后稷》上记载的收藏种子的方法，是煮马屎用汁水浸泡种子，这样可以使禾苗不生虫。
English: The method of collecting seeds recorded in "Shennong" and "Houyi" is to boil horse manure and soak the seeds with juice, so that the seedlings do not grow insects.

古文：如或以马屎渍种，其乡部吏鲍焦、陈仲子也。
现代文：如果有的地方用马屎汁浸种，那里的地方官就都成了鲍焦、陈仲子一类的人了。
English: If some places were soaked in horse manure juice, the local officials there would all be people like Baojiao and Chen Zhongzi.

古文：是故后稷、神农之术用，则其乡吏免为奸。
现代文：所以《后稷》、《神农》上的方法被采用，那些地方官就可以免除为非作歹的罪名了。
English: Therefore, the method of "Hou Yi" and "Shennong" was adopted, and those local officials could be exempted from the crime of doing evil.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：虫无从生，上无以察也。
现代文：虫无从产生，君王和上司也就无法对他们进行考察了。
English: If the worms cannot be produced, the king and his superiors cannot inspect them.

古文：虫食他草，平事不怪，食五谷叶，乃谓之灾。
现代文：虫吃其他的草，被认为是平常的事情而不以为怪。吃五谷的叶子，才说成是灾变。
English: When insects eat other grasses, it is considered normal and not surprising; when they eat the leaves of cereals, it is called a catastrophe.

古文：桂有蠹，桑有蝎，桂中药而桑给蚕，其用亦急，与谷无异。
现代文：肉桂树上有蛀虫，桑树上有蛀虫，桂树适合做药材而桑叶可以喂蚕，它们的作用也很重要，与谷子没有什么差别。
English: There are aphids on the cinnamon tree, aphids on the mulberry tree, the cinnamon tree is suitable for making medicinal materials and mulberry leaves can feed silkworms, their role is also very important, and there is no difference with the millet.

古文：蠹蝎不为怪，独谓虫为灾，不通物类之实，暗於灾变之情也。
现代文：桂树桑树上生蠹、蝎不以为怪，偏偏说庄稼生虫就成灾变，这是不懂得物类的道理，不明白灾变的情况。
English: It is not surprising that there are aphids and scorpions on the mulberry trees of Guizhou, but it is said that crop pests will lead to disaster. This is because they do not understand the principle of species, and do not understand the situation of disaster.

古文：谷虫曰蛊，蛊若蛾矣。
现代文：谷生的虫叫蛊，蛊就像蛾一样。
English: Cereal worms are called maggots, and maggots are like moths.

古文：粟米饐热生蛊。
现代文：粟米腐臭发热就会生蛊。
English: If the millet is rancid and hot, it will go rancid.

古文：夫蛊食粟米，不谓之灾，虫食苗叶，归之於政。
现代文：蛊吃粟米，不说是灾变，虫吃禾苗的叶子造成灾害，却把它归结于政治方而的原因。
English: To eat corn is not to say that it is a disaster, but insects eat the leaves of the seedlings to cause disasters, but it is attributed to political reasons.

古文：如说虫之家，谓粟轻苗重也。
现代文：按照 说虫之家 的看法，这是说粟不重要禾苗反而重要了。
English: According to the view of the Insect House, this is to say that the millet is not important, but the seedling is important.

古文：虫之种类，众多非一。
现代文：虫的种类众多不止一种。
English: There is more than one kind of insect.

古文：鱼肉腐臭有虫，醯酱不闭有虫，饭温湿有虫，书卷不舒有虫，衣襞不悬有虫，蜗疽疮蝼症虾有虫。
现代文：鱼、肉腐臭会生虫，醋、酱不盖严会生虫，饭受温湿邪气会生虫，书经常卷起不打开会生虫，衣服折压不悬挂会生虫，蜗、疽、疮、蝼、症、蝦中会生虫。
English: Fish and meat with a rancid smell will give rise to worms, vinegar and sauces that are not well covered will give rise to worms, meals that are warm and moist will give rise to worms, books that are often rolled up and not opened will give rise to worms, clothes that are folded and not hung will give rise to worms, and maggots, gangrene, sores, warts, and diseases will give rise to worms in shrimp.

古文：或白或黑，或长或短，大小鸿杀，不相似类，皆风气所生，并连以死。
现代文：这些虫或白或黑，或长或短，或大或小，或粗或细，不属于同一种类，都是受风之气而产生的，并随着风的消失而死亡。
English: Whether white or black, long or short, large or small, thick or thin, these insects do not belong to the same species. They are all produced by the wind and die with the disappearance of the wind.

古文：生不择日，若生日短促，见而辄灭。变复之家，见其希出，出又食物，则谓之灾。
现代文：虫子产生并不选择时间，或者活着的时间很短促，出现不久就死了。 变复之家 看到虫子很少出现，出现了又吃东西，就把它说成是灾变。
English: Worms do not choose the time of their birth, or they live for a short time and die soon after they appear.The House of Transformation Seeing that worms rarely appear, they appear and eat, it is said to be a catastrophe.

古文：灾出当有所罪，则依所似类之吏，顺而说之。
现代文：灾变出现应当有所怪罪的人，于是就根据虫子所象征的官吏，顺着加以解释。
English: Those who should be blamed for the emergence of the cataclysm, therefore, interpreted it according to the officials symbolized by the insect.

古文：人腹中有三虫，下地之泽，其虫曰蛭，蛭食人足，三虫食肠。
现代文：人的腹中有三种寄生虫，低洼之处的水泽，里面的虫叫蛭。
English: There are three kinds of parasites in the human abdomen. The low-lying areas are moist, and the insects inside are called maggots.

古文：顺说之家，将谓三虫何似类乎？
现代文：蛭吃人脚上的血，三种寄生虫吃人肠子中的血。 顺说之家 将要说三种虫子象征哪一类官吏呢？
English: The centipede eats the blood from a person's feet, and the three parasites eat the blood from a person's intestines.

古文：凡天地之间，阴阳所生，蛟蛲之类，蜫蠕之属，含气而生，开口而食。
现代文：凡是在天地之间，由阴阳之气所产生的，用足爬行的小虫，蠕动爬行的小虫，承受 气 而产生，开口就能吃东西。
English: All the small insects that crawl with their feet, that creep and crawl between heaven and earth, that are produced by the yin and yang of the qi, are produced by bearing qi, and they can eat with their mouths open.

古文：食有甘不，同心等欲，强大食细弱，知慧反顿愚。
现代文：食物有可口的和不可口的，心思相同，欲望相等，强大的吃细弱的，聪明的侵侮愚笨的。
English: There is food for the palatable and the inedible, like minds, equal desires, the strong eat the weak, the clever abuse the stupid.

古文：他物小大连相啮噬，不谓之灾，独谓虫食谷物为应政事，失道理之实，不达物气之性也。
现代文：其也动物以大吃小交相残食，不称之为灾变，偏偏说虫吃谷物为了应和政事，这就失掉了道理的本质，不懂得构成事物的气的本性了。
English: It is also said that animals feed on each other's leftovers, and do not call it a catastrophe. On the contrary, it is said that insects eat grains in order to cope with political affairs. This has lost the essence of reason, and does not understand the nature of the qi that constitutes things.

古文：然夫虫之生也，必依温湿。
现代文：然而虫子的产生，必须依靠一定的温度和湿度。
English: However, the production of worms must rely on a certain temperature and humidity.

古文：温湿之气，常在春夏。
现代文：温湿之气，常常产生于春夏两季。
English: Warm and humid air, often produced in the spring and summer.

古文：秋冬之气，寒而干燥，虫未曾生。
现代文：秋冬两季的气，寒冷而干燥，虫子没有产生的条件。
English: In autumn and winter, the air is cold and dry, which is not conducive to the growth of insects.

古文：若以虫生，罪乡部吏，是则乡部吏贪於春夏，廉於秋冬。
现代文：如果以虫子产生而惩罚地方官吏，这样就是说地方官吏在春夏两季贪赃，在秋冬两季廉洁了。
English: If local officials are punished for producing worms, it means that local officials are corrupt in the spring and summer and clean in the autumn and winter.

古文：虽盗跖之吏以秋冬署，蒙伯夷之举矣。
现代文：即使像盗跖那样的官吏，如果在秋冬两季任职做官，也会受到如伯夷那般的称颂了。
English: Even a bureaucrat like the Thief, if he serves as an official in the autumn and winter, will be praised like the Baiyun.

古文：夫春夏非一，而虫时生者，温湿甚也，甚则阴阳不和。
现代文：春夏季节不止一个，而有时发生虫灾，是因为天气太热，太潮湿了。温度湿度过甚，阴阳之气就不调和。
English: Spring and summer have more than one season, and sometimes insect infestations occur because the weather is too hot and humid. The temperature is too humid, and the yin and yang are not reconciled.

古文：阴阳不和，政也，徒当归於政治，而指谓部吏为奸，失事实矣。
现代文：阴阳之气不调和，与政治有关系。只能归结于政治，指责说是地方官吏为非作歹，就失去了事实依据。
English: The imbalance of yin and yang is related to politics. It can only be attributed to politics, and the accusation that local officials have committed misdeeds has lost its factual basis.

古文：何知虫以温湿生也？
现代文：怎么知道虫子的产生要依靠一定的温度和湿度呢？
English: How do you know that the production of worms depends on a certain temperature and humidity?

古文：以蛊虫知之。
现代文：从蛊虫的产生就可以知道这个道理。
English: This can be seen from the emergence of aphids.

古文：谷干燥者，虫不生；温湿饐餲，虫生不禁。
现代文：干燥的谷子，不会产生虫子。温湿腐臭变味的谷子，虫子不停地产生。
English: Dry kernels do not produce worms. Warm, moist, rancid kernels produce worms all the time.

古文：藏宿麦之种，烈日干暴，投於燥器，则虫不生。
现代文：收藏冬小麦的种子，要在烈日下晒干，把麦种放在干燥的容器里，这样虫就不会产生。
English: Collect the seeds of winter wheat, dry them in the hot sun, and place the seeds in a dry container so that the worms do not grow.

古文：如不干暴，闸喋之虫，生如云烟。
现代文：如果不晒干，吃种子的虫，就会如云烟般滋生出来。
English: If it is not dried in the sun, the insects that eat the seeds will breed like clouds of smoke.

古文：以蛊闸喋，准况众虫，温湿所生，明矣。
现代文：从蛊虫的产生和吃谷种的情况，类推其他的虫子，依靠一定的温度湿度而产生的道理，就明白了。
English: From the production of aphids and the situation of eating cereals, by analogy with other insects, the reason for the dependence on a certain temperature and humidity is clear.

古文：《诗》云： 营营青蝇，止於籓。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 飞来飞去的苍蝇，停留在篱笆上。
English: The "Song of Songs" says: "The flies that fly here and there stay on the fence.

古文：恺悌君子，无信谗言。 谗言伤善，青蝇污白，同一祸败，《诗》以为兴。
现代文：和蔼友爱的君子，不相信毁谤的言语。 毁谤的言语伤害善良的人，苍蝇沾污洁白的东西，同是一样的祸害。《诗经》以苍蝇寄兴抒怀。
English: Gentle and friendly gentleman, do not believe in slanderous words. Slanderous words hurt good people, flies stain clean white things, the same is the scourge.

古文：昌邑王梦西阶下有积蝇矢，明旦召问郎中龚遂，遂对曰： 蝇者，谗人之象也。
现代文：昌邑王梦见西阶下有堆积着的苍蝇屎，第二天早上，召见并询问郎中令龚遂。龚遂回答说： 苍蝇，是毁谤者的象征。
English: The King of Chang'e dreamed that there was fly excrement piled up under the west staircase. The next morning, he summoned and questioned his vassal-in-chief Gong Sui. Gong Sui replied, "The fly is the symbol of the slanderer.

古文：夫矢积於阶下，王将用谗臣之言也。 
现代文：苍蝇屎堆积在台阶下，是君王将要任用奸臣的预兆。 
English: Fly droppings piled up at the bottom of the steps, a sign that the monarch was about to appoint a traitor.

古文：由此言之，蝇之为虫，应人君用谗。何故不谓蝇为灾乎？
现代文：由此说来，苍蝇这种虫子出现，应和君王任用奸臣，为什么不说苍蝇造成灾变呢？
English: Therefore, the appearance of a fly, a kind of worm, should be appointed as a traitor by the king. Why not say that the fly caused the catastrophe?

古文：如蝇可以为灾，夫蝇岁生，世间人君常用谗乎？
现代文：如果说苍蝇可以造成灾变，那么苍蝇年年出生在世上，难道是君王经常任用奸臣吗？
English: If a fly can cause a cataclysm, then flies are born every year in the world. Is it true that kings often appoint treacherous ministers?

古文：案虫害人者，莫如蚊虻，蚊虻岁生。
现代文：考察虫子祸害人，没有像蚊虻这样厉害的，而蚊虻年年出生。
English: When inspecting insect pests, there are none as powerful as mosquitoes, and mosquitoes are born every year.

古文：如以蚊虻应灾，世间常有害人之吏乎？
现代文：如果认为蚊虻出现是应和灾害，难道世间经常有祸害人的官吏吗？
English: If it is considered that the appearance of mosquito coils is a response to disasters, are there often officials in the world who harm people?

古文：必以食物乃为灾，人则物之最贵者也，蚊虻食人，尤当为灾。
现代文：如果一定要以虫子吃东西才算作灾变，那么人是万物中最尊贵的，蚊虻吸人血，更应当算作灾变了。
English: If it is necessary to eat insects to be considered a catastrophe, then humans are the most precious of all things, and mosquitoes sucking human blood should be considered a catastrophe.

古文：必以暴生害物乃为灾，夫岁生而食人，与时出而害物，灾孰为甚？
现代文：如果一定要以虫子突然出现祸害人物才算作灾变，那么年年出生，而吸人血的，与有时出现而祸害人物的，哪一个为灾更严重呢？
English: If it is necessary for the sudden appearance of a pest by means of a worm to be counted as a cataclysm, then which is the more serious calamity, those who are born every year and suck human blood, or those who appear from time to time and are a pest?

古文：人之病疥，亦希非常，疥虫何故不为灾？
现代文：人生疥疮也是少有而不常见的，疥虫为什么不造成灾变呢？
English: Scabies is also rare and uncommon in life. Why don't tapeworms cause a catastrophe?

古文：且天将雨，蚁出蚋蜚，为与气相应也。
现代文：而且天将要下雨，蚂蚁出洞，蚋虫飞舞，人们认为这是与当时的气相应和的缘故。
English: Moreover, it will rain, ants will come out of their burrows, and ladybugs will fly. People believe that this is due to the combination of the corresponding qi at that time.

古文：或时诸虫之生，自与时气相应，如何辄归罪於部吏乎？
现代文：也许各种虫的产生，是它们自己与当时的气相应和而生的，怎么往往归罪于地方官吏呢？
English: Perhaps the emergence of all kinds of worms is that they themselves are born in accordance with the prevailing qi, how often are they blamed on local officials?

古文：天道自然，吉凶偶会，非常之虫适生，贪吏遭署。人察贪吏之操，又见灾虫之生，则谓部吏之所为致也。
现代文：天道运行自有法则，吉凶因素偶然会合，不常见的虫子恰好出生，贪官污吏正好在那里做官，人们考察贪官污吏的行为，又发现造成灾害的虫子产生，就说这是由于地方官吏为非作歹造成的了。
English: Heaven and earth operate according to their own laws. Lucky and unlucky factors come together by chance. Unusual worms happen to be born. Corrupt officials happen to work there. When the actions of corrupt officials are investigated and the worms that cause disasters are found, it is said that this was caused by the misdeeds of local officials.

