古文：孔子闲居，子夏侍。
现代文：孔子在家休息，子夏在一旁陪侍。
English: Confucius is resting at home. Zixia is accompanying him.

古文：子夏曰： 敢问《诗》云： 凯弟君子，民之父母 ，何如斯可谓民之父母矣？ 
现代文：子夏说： 请问先生《诗》上所说的 凯弟君子，民之父母 ，怎样才可以称为民之父母呢？ 
English: Zixia said, "Excuse me, sir, how can you be called the parents of the people, the parents of the people, the parents of the people, the parents of the people, the parents of the people?"

古文：孔子曰： 夫民之父母乎，必达于礼乐之原，以致五至，而行三无，以横于天下。四方有败，必先知之。
现代文：孔子回答说： 民之父母吗？他必须通晓礼乐的本源，达到 五至 ，做到 三无 ，并用来普及子天下；不管任何地方出现了灾祸，他一定能够最早知道。
English: Confucius replied: Is he the people's father and mother? He must be familiar with the origin of the ritual music, reach the Five-Sixth, achieve the Three-None, and use it to popularize the world; no matter where there is a disaster, he must be able to know it first.

古文：此之谓民之父母矣。 
现代文：做到了这些，才算是百姓的父母啊！ 
English: Only when they have achieved these things can they be considered the people's parents!

古文：子夏曰： 民之父母，既得而闻之矣；敢问何谓 五至 ？ 
现代文：子夏说： 关于 民之父母 ，学生已经领教了。但您说的 五至 又是什么呢？ 
English: Zixia said: Regarding Min's parents, the students have already been taught. But what is the five-to-one you said?

古文：孔子曰： 志之所至，诗亦至焉。诗之所至，礼亦至焉。礼之所至，乐亦至焉。乐之所至，哀亦至焉。哀乐相生。
现代文：孔子回答说： 既有爱民之心至于百姓，就会有爱民的诗歌至于百姓；既有爱民的诗歌至于百姓奋就会有爱民的礼至于百姓；既有爱民的礼至于百姓，就会有爱民的乐至于百姓；既有爱民的乐至于百姓，就会有哀民不幸之心至于百姓。哀与乐是相生相成。
English: Confucius replied, "If there is love for the people, there will be love for the people's poetry; if there is love for the people's poetry, there will be love for the people's rites; if there is love for the people's rites, there will be love for the people's joy; if there is love for the people's joy, there will be love for the people's sorrow; if there is love for the people's joy, there will be love for the people's sorrow. Sorrow and joy go together.

古文：是故，正明目而视之，不可得而见也；倾耳而听之，不可得而闻也；志气塞乎天地，此之谓五至。 
现代文：这种道理，即使擦亮眼睛，也不可能看到；竖起耳朵，也不可能听到；但君王的这种思想却充塞于天地之间。这就叫做 五至 。 
English: This kind of truth, even if you shine your eyes, you can't see it; if you prick up your ears, you can't hear it; but this kind of thought of the king is stuffed between heaven and earth.

古文：子夏曰： 五至既得而闻之矣，敢问何谓三无？ 
现代文：子夏说： 什么是 五至 ，学生已经明白了。再请问什么叫做 三无 ？ 
English: Zixia said, "The students have already understood what five to seven is. What is three to nothing?

古文：孔子曰： 无声之乐，无体之礼，无服之丧，此之谓三无。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 无声的音乐，无形的礼仪，以及不穿丧服的丧事。这就叫做 三无 。 
English: Confucius said, "Silent music, no ceremonial etiquette, and a funeral without mourning clothes are called three nothings."

古文：子夏曰： 三无既得略而闻之矣，敢问何诗近之？ 
现代文：子夏说： 三无的大概意思我已经明白了，但请问什么诗句跟这三无的意思比较近似呢? 
English: Zixia said: I have already understood the general meaning of "three no's," but what kind of poem is more similar to the meaning of "three no's"?

古文：孔子曰：  夙夜其命宥密 ，无声之乐也。 威仪逮逮，不可选也 ，无体之礼也。 凡民有丧，匍匐救之 ，无服之丧也。 
现代文：孔子说：  日夜秉承天命，宽和而又宁静。 这就近似于无声的乐。 仪表威严宽和，没有挑剔之处。 这就近似于无形的礼。 看见人家有灾难，千方百计去救援。 这就近似于不穿丧服的服丧。 
English: Confucius said: "Day and night, upholding the destiny of heaven, are broad and tranquil. This is similar to silent music. The appearance is dignified and broad, without any fault. This is similar to invisible courtesy. Seeing people in distress, do everything possible to rescue them. This is similar to mourning without wearing mourning clothes.

古文：子夏曰： 言则大矣！美矣！
现代文：子夏说： 您这番话太伟大了，太美妙了，太有哲理了！
English: Zixia said: Your words are too great, too wonderful, too philosophical!

古文：盛矣！
现代文：要说的道理都在这里了吗？ 
English: Is that all there is to it?

古文：言尽于此而已乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 怎么会呢？
English: Confucius said: How come?

古文：孔子曰： 何为其然也！君子之服之也，犹有五起焉。 
现代文：君子在实行 三无 的时候，还有 五起 呢。 子夏说：  五起 怎么讲？ 
English: When a gentleman practices the three no's, there are still five no's. Zixia said, "How can there be five no's?"

古文：子夏曰： 何如？ 子曰： 无声之乐，气志不违；无体之礼，威仪迟迟；无服之丧，内恕孔悲。
现代文：孔子说： 第一，无声的音乐，不违背心志；无形的仪式，国君的态度从容不迫；没有丧服的丧事，设身处地地同样非常悲伤。
English: Confucius said: First, silent music does not violate the will of the heart; invisible ceremony, the attitude of the sovereign is unhurried; there is no mourning mourning, and it is also very sad to put yourself in the same situation.

古文：无声之乐，气志既得；无体之礼，威仪翼翼；无服之丧，施及四国。
现代文：第二，无声的音乐，心愿已经满足；没有形式的礼仪， 态度恭恭敬敬；没有丧服的服丧，爱心延及四方各国。
English: Second, silent music, the heart's desire has been satisfied; there is no formal etiquette, the attitude is respectful; there is no mourning dress, and the love extends to all four countries.

古文：无声之乐，气志既从；无体之礼，上下和同；无服之丧，以畜万邦。
现代文：第三，没有声音的音乐，上下心愿交融；没有形式的礼仪，上下和睦齐同；没有丧服的服丧，使万国之民竞相孝养。
English: Third, there is no sound of music, and the wishes of the upper and lower levels are blended; there is no formal etiquette, and the upper and lower levels are in harmony; there is no mourning dress, so that the people of all countries compete for filial piety.

古文：无声之乐，日闻四方；无体之礼，日就月将；无服之丧，纯德孔明。
现代文：第四，没有声音的音乐，四方闻者曰益增多；没有形式的礼仪， 天胜似一天，一月强过一月；没有丧服的服丧，使纯粹的道德曰益光明。
English: Fourthly, music without sound is heard by more and more people in all directions; without formal etiquette, the victory of heaven is like a day, and a month is better than a month; without mourning, pure morality is brighter and brighter.

古文：无声之乐，气志既起；无体之礼，施及四海；无服之丧，施于孙子。 
现代文：第五，没有声音的音乐，使响应之心纷纷而起；没有形式的礼仪，普及四海；没有丧服的服丧，传及后世子孙。 
English: Fifth, music without sound arouses the heart to respond; etiquette without form spreads all over the world; mourning without mourning clothes is passed on to future generations.

古文：子夏曰： 三王之德，参于天地，敢问：何如斯可谓参于天地矣？ 
现代文：子夏问道： 夏禹、商汤、文王的德行，与天地并列。请问怎样才能与天地并列呢？ 
English: Zi Xia asked: The virtues of Xia Yu, Shang Tang and King Wen are on a par with heaven and earth. How can they be on a par with heaven and earth?

古文：孔子曰： 奉三无私以劳天下。 
现代文：孔子答道： 要遵奉 三无私 的精神，以恩德招揽天下百姓。 
English: Confucius replied, "We should follow the three selfless spirits and invite the people of the world with benevolence.

古文：子夏曰： 敢问何谓三无私？ 
现代文：子夏接着问道： 什么叫做 三无私 呢？ 
English: Zoxia then asked: What is the "Three Selflessnesses"?

古文：孔子曰： 天无私覆，地无私载，日月无私照。
现代文：孔子答道： 就是像天那样无私地覆盖万物，像地那样无私地承载万物，像曰月那样无私地照耀万物。
English: Confucius said: There is no partiality in the heaven that covers all things, in the earth that bears all things, and in the sun and moon that shine all over the world.

古文：奉斯三者以劳天下，此之谓三无私。
现代文：按照这三条来招揽天下百姓，就叫做 三无私 。
English: In accordance with these three principles to attract the people of the world, it is called the Three Selflessness.

古文：其在《诗》曰： 帝命不违，至于汤齐。
现代文：这个意思在《诗经》里也有所反映： 奉行天命不敢违，至于成汤登君位。
English: This meaning is also reflected in the "Book of Songs": "Do not dare to go against the will of heaven, and as for Cheng Tongdengjun."

古文：汤降不迟，圣敬日齐。
现代文：降下政教不迟缓，聪明谨慎曰向上。
English: It is not slow to lower politics and religion, but it is wise and prudent to rise.

古文：昭假迟迟，上帝是祗。
现代文：明德长久照下民，恭恭敬敬事上帝，帝命九州效法汤。 
English: Mingde has long been inspired by the people, respectfully and reverently worship God, and the imperial command of Kyushu follows the soup.

古文：帝命式于九围。 
现代文：这就是商汤的德行。
English: This is the virtue of Shang Tang.

古文：是汤之德也。天有四时，春秋冬夏，风雨霜露，无非教也。
现代文：天有四季，春生夏长，秋收冬藏，既有刮风下雨，也有下露降霜。
English: There are four seasons, spring, summer, autumn and winter, with wind and rain, as well as dew and frost.

古文：地载神气，神气风霆，风霆流形，庶物露生，无非教也。
现代文：这些都是天所显示的教化，人君应当奉行以为政教。大地承载着神妙之气，风雷鼓荡，万物萌芽生长。这些都是地所显示的教化，人君应当奉行以为政教。
English: These are the teachings revealed by the heavens, which should be followed by the people as their religion and government. The earth carries a miraculous aura, wind and thunder are heard, and all things sprout and grow. These are the teachings revealed by the earth, which should be followed by the people as their religion and government.

古文：清明在躬，气志如神，嗜欲将至，有开必先。
现代文：圣人自身的德行极其清明，他的气志微妙如神。在他行将称王天下的时候，神灵有所预知，一定要为他生下贤能的辅佐之臣。
English: The saint's own virtue is extremely clear, and his spirit is as subtle as that of a god. When he is about to be crowned king, the gods foresaw that they must give birth to a virtuous assistant for him.

古文：天降时雨，山川出云。
现代文：就好像天降及时之雨，又好像山川飘出祥云。
English: It's just like the rain falling from the sky at the right time, and just like the mountains and rivers floating out of the clouds.

古文：其在《诗》曰： 嵩高惟岳，峻极于天。
现代文：有《诗》为证： 五岳居中是篙山，巍巍高耸入云天。
English: There is a "poem" as evidence: the middle of the five peaks is Mount Lushan, soaring high into the sky.

古文：惟岳降神，生甫及申。
现代文：中岳高山降神灵，生下甫侯和申伯。
English: A deity descended from the high mountains of Nakadake and gave birth to Fuhou and Shinbo.

古文：惟申及甫，惟周之翰。
现代文：只有甫侯和申伯，才是周朝栋染臣。
English: Only Fuhou and Shenbo are the Zhou Dynasty's most important vassals.

古文：四国于蕃，四方于宣。 
现代文：诸侯靠他作屏障，宣扬盛德遍四方。
English: The lords relied on him to act as a barrier and spread the message of prosperity and virtue far and wide.

古文：此文武之德也。
现代文：这就是文王、武王的德行。
English: This is the virtue of King Wen and King Wu.

古文：三代之王也，必先令闻，《诗》云： 明明天子，令闻不已。 
现代文：夏、商、周三代称王，在其称王之前就已经有了美好的名声。《诗》上说： 勤勉不倦的天子，美好名声千古传。
English: Xia, Shang, and the third generation of kings, had a good reputation before they were crowned. "Poem" said: "Diligent and tireless son of heaven, a good reputation has been passed down for thousands of years."

古文：三代之德也。 弛其文德，协此四国。 
现代文：这就是三代圣王的德行。《诗》上又说: 太王施其文德，团结四方各国。
English: This is the virtue of the three generations of holy kings. The "Poem" also says: Great King, grant virtue and unite the four countries.

古文：大王之德也。 
现代文：这就是太王的德行。 
English: This is the virtue of the great king.

古文：子夏蹶然而起，负墙而立曰： 弟子敢不承乎！ 
现代文：子夏听到这里，一跃而起，倚墙而立，说： 弟子敢不接受老师的这番教诲吗！ 
English: Hearing this, Zixia jumped up, leaned against the wall and stood up, saying: "How dare a disciple not accept this teaching from his teacher!

