古文：黄帝曰：经脉十二者，别为五行，分为四时，何失而乱？
现代文：黄帝说：人体的十二经脉，其属性分别与五行相合，又与四时相应，但不知因何失调而引起脉气运行的逆乱？
English: Huangdi said: The twelve meridians of the human body, whose attributes respectively coincide with the five elements and correspond to the four o'clock, but I don't know why they are out of kilter, causing a disturbance in the operation of the pulse and qi?

古文：何得而治？
现代文：又是什么原因能使它正常运行呢？
English: What is the reason for its normal operation?

古文：岐伯曰：五行有序，四时有分，相顺则治，相逆则乱。黄帝曰：何谓相顺？
现代文：岐伯说：木、火、土、金水五行的生克有一定的内在顺序，春、夏、秋、冬四季的变化也有一定的规律，而人体经脉的运行，也要与五行四季的规律相适应，才可以保持正常的活动，如果违反了这些规律就会引起经脉的运行紊乱。黄帝说：怎样才能做到相互顺应呢？
English: Qibo said: The five elements of wood, fire, earth and metal have a certain internal order, and the changes of the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter also have a certain law. The operation of the human meridians must also be compatible with the laws of the five elements of the four seasons in order to maintain normal activities. If these laws are violated, the operation of the meridians will be disturbed. Huangdi said: How can we achieve mutual compliance?

古文：岐伯曰：经脉十二者，以应十二月。
现代文：岐伯说：人身十二经脉与一年的十二个月相应。
English: Qi Bo said: The twelve meridians of the human body correspond to the twelve months of the year.

古文：十二月者，分为四时。四时者，春秋冬夏，其气各异，营卫相随，阴阳已和，清浊不相干，如是则顺之而治。
现代文：十二个月分为四季，就是春、夏、秋、冬四季，这四季的气候特点各不相同，人体与之相适应，也有相应的差别。人体营气与卫气是内外相随，运行有序，阴阳互相协调，清气与浊气的运行也不互相干扰侵犯，这样就能顺应自然界的变化而使经脉运行正常。
English: Twelve months are divided into four seasons, that is, spring, summer, autumn and winter. The climatic characteristics of these four seasons are different, and the human body adapts to them, and there are corresponding differences. The human body's internal and external aura and the aura follow each other, running in an orderly manner, yin and yang coordinate with each other, and the operation of the clear air and the miasma does not interfere with each other. In this way, it can conform to the changes in nature and make the meridians run normally.

古文：黄帝曰：何为逆而乱？
现代文：黄帝说：那逆乱的反常情况是什么样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: What is the abnormal situation of the rebellion?

古文：岐伯曰：清气在阴，浊气在阳，营气顺脉，卫气逆行，清浊相干，乱于胸中，是谓大悗。
现代文：岐伯说：清阳之气应上升居于上部外部，浊阴之气应沉降居于下部内部，如果清气不能上升反居于下部内部，浊气不能下降反居于上部外部，这就是经气逆乱。营气顺脉而行，而卫气运行却不循常规，这样清浊相扰，乱于胸中就叫做大悗。
English: Qi Bo said: The qi of the Qingyang should rise and reside outside the upper part, and the qi of the Yin should sink and reside inside the lower part. If the qi cannot rise but reside inside the lower part, and the qi cannot fall but reside outside the upper part, this is the qi reversal. The ying qi follows the line of the qi, but the qi of the Wei qi does not follow the routine, so the qi and the yin are disturbed, and the disturbance in the chest is called big qi.

古文：故气乱于心，则烦心密嘿，俛首静伏。
现代文：气乱于心，可见心中烦闷，沉默不言，低头静伏而不欲动。
English: Distraught in the heart, you can see the boredom in the heart, silent and silent, head down and not wanting to move.

古文：乱于肺，则俛仰喘喝，接手以呼。
现代文：气乱于肺，使人俯仰不安，喘息喝喝有声，需用两手按于胸前帮助呼吸。
English: The air is turbulent in the lungs, causing people to feel uneasy, and there is a wheezing sound. It is necessary to press the chest with both hands to help breathing.

古文：乱于肠胃，是为霍乱。
现代文：气乱于肠，就会发生吐泻交作的霍乱而上吐下泻。
English: If one's heart is not in the right place, vomiting and diarrhea will occur.

古文：乱于臂胫，则为四厥。
现代文：气乱于手臂、小腿，就会见四肢厥冷。
English: If the arms and lower legs are irritated, the extremities will feel cold.

古文：乱于头，则为厥逆，头重眩仆。
现代文：气乱于头，就会见厥气上逆，头重眩晕，甚至仆倒在地。
English: If one's head is in a turmoil, one will feel dizzy, dizzy, and even fall to the ground.

古文：黄帝曰：五乱者，刺之有道乎？
现代文：黄帝说：发生上述这五种乱症，针刺治疗有什么法则吗？
English: Huang Di said: If the above-mentioned five kinds of disorders occur, is there any rule for acupuncture treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：有道以来，有道以去，审知其道，是谓身宝。
现代文：岐伯说：病邪侵入，有它的脉路，祛除病邪，也有它的脉路，仔细观察掌握病邪来去的脉路，善于治疗疾病，这可称得上是养身之宝。
English: Qi Bo said: the invasion of the disease has its pulse, the eradication of the disease also has its pulse, carefully observe and grasp the pulse of the disease, and be good at treating the disease, which can be called the treasure of health care.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：愿闻其道。
现代文：我想听你讲讲关于治疗方面的法则。
English: I would like to hear these reasons.

古文：岐伯曰：气在于心者，取之手少阴心主之俞。
现代文：岐伯说：气乱于心的，应针刺手少阴心经的输穴，和手厥阴心包经的输穴。
English: Qi Bo said: When the mind is disturbed, it should be pricked with a needle at the anus of the less yin heart chakra, and at the anus of the more yin heart chakra.

古文：气在于肺者，取之手太阴荥、足少阴俞。
现代文：气乱于肺的，应针刺手太阴肺经的荥穴，和足少阴肾经的输穴。
English: If the qi is disturbed in the lungs, it should be pricked with a needle at the anus of the too-yin pulmonary meridian, and at the anus of the less-yin renal meridian.

古文：气在于肠胃者，取之足太阴、阳明；不下者，取之三里。
现代文：气乱于肠胃的，应针刺足太阴脾经，和足阳明胃经，如果不能治愈，可以再针刺足三里穴。
English: If the anger is in the intestines and stomach, the feet should be pricked with a needle for the yin spleen meridian, and the feet with a needle for the yang stomach meridian. If it cannot be cured, the feet can be pricked with a needle for the three-mile hole.

古文：气在于头者，取之天柱、大杼；不知，取足太阳荥、俞。
现代文：气乱于头的，应针刺足太阳膀胱经的天柱穴和大杼穴，如果不能奏效，可再针刺足太阳膀胱经的荥穴和输穴。
English: If irritation occurs in the head, a needle should be inserted into the supraorbital and supraclavicular cavities of the solar plexus. If this does not work, another needle can be inserted into the supraclavicular and infusional cavities of the solar plexus.

古文：气在于臂足，取之先去血脉，后取其阳明、少阳之荥、俞。黄帝曰：补泻奈何？
现代文：气乱于手臂足胫部的，如有瘀血可首先在相应部位的血脉上针刺放血，然后针刺取手阳明大肠经的荥穴、输穴，和手少阳三焦经的荥穴、输穴治疗上肢的病变；取足阳明胃经的荥穴、输穴，和足少阳胆经的荥穴、输穴治疗下肢的病变。黄帝说：如何运用补泻的手法呢？
English: If there is pus in the arms, feet and hips, if there is pus blood, you can first prick the blood vessels in the corresponding parts to release the blood, and then prick the puncture holes and infusion holes of the Hand Yang Ming Colorectal Sutra, and the puncture holes and infusion holes of the Hand Shao Yang Sanjiao Sutra to treat the lesions of the upper limbs; take the puncture holes and infusion holes of the Foot Yang Ming Stomach Sutra, and the puncture holes and infusion holes of the Foot Shao Yang Yang Gall Sutra to treat the lesions of the lower limbs. Huang Di said: How to use the method of making up

古文：岐伯曰：徐入徐出，谓之导气。
现代文：岐伯说：慢慢地进针慢慢地出针，这种手法叫做导气。
English: Qi Bo said, "Slowly the needle goes in and slowly the needle comes out. This method is called gas conduction."

古文：补泻无形，谓之同精。
现代文：在不运用明显的补泻手法的情况下，这称为同精。
English: In the absence of an obvious compensatory laxative, this is called conjugation.

古文：是非有余不足也，乱气之相逆也。
现代文：因为上述五乱病既不是邪气有余的实证，也不是正气不足的虚证，只是气机逆乱形成的病变，所以采用这种手法。
English: This method is used because the above-mentioned five disorders are neither positive evidence of excess evil energy nor false evidence of insufficient righteous energy, but only pathologies formed by the reversal of the qi mechanism.

古文：黄帝曰：允乎哉道！
现代文：黄帝说：你讲的治疗方法真是恰当！
English: Huang Di said: The treatment method you mentioned is really appropriate!

古文：明乎哉论！
现代文：你的分析真是明白确切啊！
English: Your analysis is so clear and precise!

古文：请著之玉版，命曰《治乱》也。
现代文：请允许我把这些内容刻录在玉版上，命名为《治乱》。
English: Please allow me to engrave these contents on a jade plate and name it "Civil Unrest."

