古文：太宗文德顺圣皇后长孙氏，河南洛阳人。
现代文：太宗文德顺圣皇后长孙氏，是河南府洛阳县人。
English: The eldest grandchild of Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager is from Luoyang County, Henan Province.

古文：其先魏拓拔氏，后为宗室长，因号长孙。
现代文：其祖先出自北魏拓拔氏，因后来成为魏宗室的长房子孙，故称之为长孙氏。
English: His ancestors came from the Northern Wei Tuoba clan, and because he later became the eldest grandson of the Wei family, he was called the eldest grandson.

古文：高祖稚，大丞相、冯翊王。
现代文：高祖长孙稚，任大丞相，封冯翊王。
English: His great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.

古文：曾祖裕，平原公。
现代文：曾祖长孙裕，封平原公。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Nagasunyu, was a vassal of the Taira clan.

古文：祖兕，左将军。
现代文：祖父长孙兕，任左将军。
English: His grandfather, Nagasunjo, was appointed as the Left General.

古文：父晟，字季，涉书史，趫〗鸷晓兵，仕隋为右骁卫将军。
现代文：父亲长孙晟，字季，涉猎书史，矫健勇猛，通晓兵法，出仕隋朝任职为右骁卫将军。
English: His father, Sun Yat-sen, surnamed Ji, dabbled in book history, was vigorous and courageous, and was well versed in military law. He served in the Sui Dynasty as a general of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：后喜图传，视古善恶以自鉴，矜尚礼法。
现代文：长孙皇后性喜图书史籍，观古往今来善恶之事作为自己的借鉴，视听言动严守礼法规范。
English: The eldest grandchild of the empress likes books and historical records, views good and evil things from ancient times to the present as his own reference, and strictly observes the norms of etiquette.

古文：晟兄炽，为周通道馆学士。
现代文：长孙晟之兄长孙炽，仕周为通道馆学士。
English: The eldest grandson of the eldest grandson of the eldest grandson of the eldest grandson of the eldest grandson of the eldest grandson, Shi Zhou, is a graduate of the passage hall.

古文：尝闻太穆劝抚突厥女，心志之。
现代文：曾闻知太穆皇后幼时劝北周武帝抚接突厥之女，暗暗记在心中。
English: I once heard that when Empress Taimu was a child, she advised the Northern Zhouwu Emperor to fondle a Turkic girl, and secretly kept this in her heart.

古文：每语晟曰： 此明睿人，必有奇子，不可以不图昏。 
现代文：常对长孙晟说： 这是聪明智慧之人，必生奇异之子，不可不考虑她的婚姻之事。 
English: She often said to her eldest grandchild Hao: This is a clever and wise person, who will give birth to a strange son. We must not forget to consider her marriage.

古文：故晟以女太宗。
现代文：因此长孙晟将其女嫁给太宗。
English: Therefore, the eldest grandson Min married his daughter to Taizong.

古文：后归宁，舅高士廉妾见大马二丈立后舍外，惧，占之，遇《坤》之《泰》。
现代文：长孙皇后回娘家省亲时，其舅高士廉之妾看见高达二丈的大马站立在长孙皇后的居舍之外，感到害怕，士廉命人占卦，得坤卦相逢泰卦。
English: When the queen's eldest grandchild returned to her mother's home in Guizhou Province, her uncle Gao Shilian's concubine saw the second-highest horse standing outside the queen's eldest grandchild's residence and felt afraid. Shilian's life was in danger, and she was in danger.

古文：卜者曰： 《坤》顺承天，载物无疆；马，地类也；之《泰》，是天地交而万物通也，又以辅相天地之宜。
现代文：卜筮者说： 坤卦之义，顺承上天，势厚载物，坤卦以母马为象征，属于象征地的一类；由单卦坤，溃化为泰卦，表示天地交感而万物畅通之意，还表示天地相宜之意。
English: The soothsayer said, "The meaning of the gonggua is that it is a powerful carrier, inheriting the power of heaven. The gonggua is symbolized by a mare, and belongs to the symbolic class. The gonggua is transformed from a single gonggua into a taiga gonggua, which indicates the sympathy of heaven and earth and the smooth flow of all things, and also indicates the compatibility of heaven and earth.

古文：繇协《归妹》，妇人事也。
现代文：其卜辞与归妹卦表示应出嫁之义相协和，表示妇人之事。
English: Its divination words and Gui Mei Gua indicate that the meaning of marriage should be harmonious, indicating women's affairs.

古文：女处尊位，履中而居顺，后妃象也。 
现代文：女子处于尊位，行为中正而举止温顺，这是后妃之象啊。 
English: A woman in a position of authority, behaving modestly and meekly, is the epitome of an empress.

古文：时隐太子衅阋已构，后内尽孝事高祖，谨承诸妃，消释嫌猜。
现代文：其后秦王与隐太子李建成嫌怨已成，长孙皇后内助秦王尽孝以侍奉高祖，谨慎地顺承高祖诸妃，以消除猜疑。
English: After that, King Qin and the hidden prince Li Jiancheng had a grudge, and the eldest grandson of the queen helped King Qin to serve Gao Zu with filial piety, and carefully obeyed Gao Zu's empresses to eliminate suspicion.

古文：及帝授甲宫中，后亲慰勉，士皆感奋。寻为皇太子妃，俄为皇后。
现代文：到太宗进入宫中分发将士铠甲兵器时，长孙皇后亲临其地慰劳勉励将士，大家无不为之感动振奋，不久成为皇太子妃，接着成为皇后。
English: When Emperor Taizong entered the palace to distribute armored weapons to the soldiers, the eldest grandchild of the empress personally consoled and encouraged the soldiers. Everyone was moved and excited. She soon became the crown princess and then the empress.

古文：性约素，服御取给则止。
现代文：长孙皇后性情俭节朴素，凡所服用之物，够用就行。
English: The eldest grandchild of the Empress is frugal, thrifty and simple. Whatever she takes is enough.

古文：益观书，虽容栉不少废。
现代文：愈益喜爱观览书籍，虽是梳妆时也不废止。
English: She likes to look at books more and more, even when she is putting on her makeup.

古文：与帝言，或及天下事，辞曰： 牝鸡司晨，家之穷也，可乎？ 
现代文：与太宗谈话，如涉及到国家大事时，就推辞说： 母鸡负责早晨打鸣，其家就会穷困，这怎么能行呢？ 
English: When talking with Taizong, if it involved national affairs, he would excuse himself by saying, "The hen is responsible for the morning crowing, and his family will be impoverished. How can this be done?"

古文：帝固要之，讫不对。
现代文：太宗一再问她的意见，她一直不回答。
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly asked her opinion, but she never answered.

古文：后廷有被罪者，必助帝怒请绳治，俟意解，徐为开治，终不令有冤；下嫔生豫章公主而死，后视如所生；媵侍疾病，辍所御饮药资之。下怀其仁。
现代文：后廷之中如有遭受罪责者，她必定助帝发威请求加以惩治，等太宗气头一过，再慢慢为之开脱，最终不使人受冤屈。下嫔生下豫章公主后死去，她视公主如同己出。媵侍宫人生病，她将自己所用的饮食药品转送给她们服用，其下都感怀其仁德。
English: If there were anyone in the back court who was guilty, she would certainly help the emperor to make a request for punishment, and when the emperor's temper passed, she would slowly excuse it, and eventually no one would be wronged. After the birth of Princess Yu Zhang, she died, and she regarded the princess as her own. When the palace attendants were sick, she sent the diet medicine she used to them to take, and they were all impressed by her benevolence.

古文：兄无忌，於帝本布衣交，以佐命为元功，出入卧内，帝将引以辅政，后固谓不可，乘间曰： 妾托体紫宫，尊贵已极，不愿私亲更据权於朝。
现代文：其兄长孙无忌，与太宗本是布衣之交，因是佐命元勋，常常出入内室，太宗打算任用他辅佐朝政，长孙皇后一再认为不妥，乘便对太宗说： 妾既已托身于紫宫，尊贵已到极点，实在不愿私亲再掌朝廷大权。
English: His older brother, the eldest grandson, must have been a close friend of Emperor Taizong. As he was the founder of the Sui Dynasty, he often visited the inner chamber. Emperor Taizong planned to appoint him as an assistant to the government. The eldest grandson of the empress repeatedly thought it was inappropriate, and said to Emperor Taizong: The concubine has already been in the Purple Palace, her dignity has reached the extreme, and she really does not want to personally hold the power of the imperial court again.

古文：汉之吕、霍，可以为诫。 
现代文：汉代的吕氏、霍氏，可以作为前车之鉴。 
English: The Lyu and Huo dynasties of the Han Dynasty can serve as a precedent.

古文：帝不听，自用无忌为尚书仆射。
现代文：太宗不听，自用长孙无忌为尚书仆射。
English: Emperor Taizong did not listen, so he used his eldest grandson as a scapegoat.

古文：后密谕令牢让，帝不获已，乃听，后喜见颜间。
现代文：她便暗地晓谕无忌坚辞其职，太宗没办法，只好同意其请，她才喜笑言开。
English: She then secretly told him that she would not hesitate to resign from her post. The Emperor had no choice but to agree to her request, which made her laugh.

古文：异母兄安业无行，父丧，逐后、无忌还外家。
现代文：异母兄长孙安业品行不良，父死之后，将她与无忌赶回外祖之家。
English: Her older half-brother, Sun Anye, had a bad character, and after his father's death, he forced her to return to her maternal grandfather's house.

古文：后贵，未尝以为言。
现代文：长孙皇后身贵之后，从来不提此事。
English: After the eldest grandchild of the Empress was born, she never mentioned it again.

古文：擢位将军。后与李孝常等谋反，将诛，后叩头曰： 安业罪死无赦。
现代文：安业擢升至将军职位，后来因与李孝常等人谋反，将被诛杀，长孙皇后为他叩头请命说： 安业之罪，罪该万死。
English: Anye was promoted to the position of general. Later, because he plotted a rebellion with Li Xiaozhang and others, he would be killed. The eldest grandchild of the empress bowed down to him and asked for an order, saying: "Anye's crime is a crime worthy of death."

古文：然向遇妾不以慈，户知之；今论如法，人必谓妾释憾於兄，无乃为帝累乎！ 
现代文：但从前对我不慈，天下皆知；如今按法处决，人们必说我报复兄长，岂不是会牵累陛下吗！ 
English: But the world knows that there was a time when there was no mercy for me; now that I have been executed in accordance with the law, people will say that I took revenge on my brother. Won't that implicate Your Majesty?

古文：遂得减流越巂。
现代文：结果安业得以免死流放越辒。
English: As a result, Anye escaped death and was exiled to Yuexiu.

古文：太子承乾乳媪请增东宫什器，后曰： 太子患无德与名，器何请为？ 
现代文：太子承乾乳母奏请增添东宫器物，长孙皇后说： 太子所担忧的是没有德行与名声，何须增添器物呢？ 
English: The eldest grandson of the empress said, "What the prince is worried about is that he has no virtue and reputation. Why does he need to add utensils?

古文：从幸九成宫，方属疾，会柴绍等急变闻，帝甲而起，后舆疾以从，宫司谏止，后曰： 上震惊，吾可自安？ 
现代文：后来随从临幸九成宫，当时正逢染疾在身，恰遇柴绍等人急变奏闻，太宗披甲而起，长孙皇后带病乘车跟从其后，宫中执事人员劝她不要随行，她却说： 皇上震惊，我怎能独自安逸呢？ 
English: Later, she followed Linhong Jiu Chenggong Palace. At that time, she was suffering from an infectious disease. Chai Shao and others happened to hear of the sudden change. Taizong put on armor and got up. The eldest grandchild of the queen was sick and followed her by car. The palace deacons advised her not to accompany her, but she said: The emperor was shocked. How can I be comfortable alone?

古文：疾稍亟，太子欲请大赦，汎度道人，祓塞灾会。
现代文：病情加重后，太子想奏请大赦，广渡俗人出家修行，以祈福免灾。
English: After his condition worsened, the prince wanted to appeal for a general amnesty, and Guandu laymen went into seclusion to pray for good luck and to be spared from disaster.

古文：后曰： 死生有命，非人力所支。
现代文：长孙皇后说： 死生自有天命，非人力所可支撑。
English: The eldest grandchild of the Empress said: Life and death have their own destiny, which cannot be supported by manpower.

古文：若修福可延，吾不为恶；使善无效，我尚何求？
现代文：如果修福可延寿命，我从未作恶；既然行善并无效验，我还希求什么呢！
English: If cultivating good fortune could prolong my life, I would never do evil; since doing good is not without effect, what more could I ask for!

古文：且赦令，国大事，佛、老异方教耳，皆上所不为，岂宜以吾乱天下法！ 
现代文：况且赦令是国家大事，佛、老都是异方之教，全是皇上不为之事，怎能因我之故搅乱天下之法！ 
English: Moreover, the pardoning order is a matter of national importance. Buddhism and Taoism have always been foreign religions, and the emperor did nothing. How could he disturb the laws of the world because of me!

古文：太子不敢奏，以告房玄龄，玄龄以闻，帝嗟美。
现代文：太子不敢奏闻太宗，便告知房玄龄，房玄龄奏闻此事，太宗很是嗟叹赞美。
English: The prince did not dare to report on Taizong, so he told Fong Xuanling. Fong Xuanling reported the matter, and Taizong was very impressed and praised.

古文：而群臣请遂赦，帝既许，后固争止。
现代文：群臣奏请大赦，太宗也表示同意，长孙皇后极力阻止，太宗只好作罢。
English: A group of ministers petitioned for amnesty, and Taizong agreed. The eldest grandson of the empress tried to stop it, but Taizong had no choice but to give up.

古文：及大渐，与帝决，时玄龄小谴就第，后曰： 玄龄久事陛下，预奇计秘谋，非大故，愿勿置也。
现代文：到临终时，与太宗诀别，当时房玄龄因受责斥免职归家，皇后说： 玄龄长期侍奉陛下，参预奇计秘谋，非有大过，不要抛弃他。
English: At the end of her life, when she was bidding farewell to Emperor Taizong, when Fong Xuanling returned home after being reprimanded and relieved of his duties, the empress said: "Xuanling has served His Majesty for a long time, and he has been involved in wonderful plans and schemes. Unless there is a big mistake, don't abandon him."

古文：妾家以恩泽进，无德而禄，易以取祸，无属枢柄，以外戚奉朝请足矣。
现代文：妾家因恩泽进用，无德行而任职，容易致祸，请不要交付权柄，只以外戚身份奉朝请就足够了。
English: A concubine is promoted because of favor, without virtue, and is likely to cause trouble. Please do not hand over power. It is enough to ask her to serve as a relative.

古文：妾生无益於时，死不可以厚葬，愿因山为垅，无起坟，无用棺椁，器以瓦木，约费送终，是妾不见忘也。 
现代文：妾生时无益于时，死后不可厚葬，希望借山为垅，不要起坟，不用棺椁，器具全用瓦木之物，节省费用以送终，这样做就是不忘妾了。 
English: When a concubine is of no use during her lifetime, she should not be given a lavish funeral after her death. If she wishes to be buried on a mountain, she should not dig a grave, she should not use a coffin, and all the utensils should be made of shingle, so as to save expenses for the funeral. In this way, she will not forget her concubine.

古文：又请帝纳忠容谏，勿受谗，省游畋作役，死无恨。
现代文：又奏请太宗纳忠容谏，别信谗言，减省出游行猎兴作工役之事，死而无憾。
English: He also asked Taizongna to be loyal, not to believe in gossip, and to cut out the parade of hunting for work. He did not regret his death.

古文：崩，年三十六。
现代文：随后逝世，时年三十六岁。
English: He later died at the age of 36.

古文：后尝采古妇人事著《女则》十篇，又为论斥汉之马后不能检抑外家，使与政事，乃戒其车马之侈，此谓开本源，恤末事。
现代文：长孙皇后曾选择古时妇人之事编撰《女则》十篇，又做论文指斥东汉马皇后不能抑退外戚，使其参预政事，只是戒其车马侈奢，这是开其祸源而防其末事。
English: The eldest grandchild of the Empress once chose the subject of ancient women to compile ten articles of "Women's Rules," and also wrote a paper criticizing the Empress of the Eastern Han Dynasty for not being able to restrain her relatives from participating in political affairs, but only forbidding their luxury cars and horses, which was the source of their misfortune and the prevention of their death.

古文：常诫守者： 吾以自检，故书无条理，勿令至尊见之。 
现代文：并告戒侍者说： 此书是自我检点防闲用的，因此记述并无条理，别让皇上看见。 
English: He also told the waiter: This book is for self-examination to prevent idleness, so the description is not organized. Don't let the emperor see it.

古文：及崩，宫司以闻，帝为之恸，示近臣曰： 后此书可用垂后，我岂不通天命而割情乎！
现代文：逝世后，宫中执事人员奏闻此事，太宗为此更为哀恸，对左右近臣说： 皇后此书可以传于后世，我难道是不知天命而不能割断私情吗！
English: After her death, the palace stewards heard about the affair, and Emperor Taizong was even more saddened by this, saying to his close vassals: "Empress, this book can be passed down to future generations. Is it possible that I cannot cut off my private life without knowing the fate of heaven?

古文：顾内失吾良佐，哀不可已已！ 
现代文：只因我丧失贤内助，哀痛无法抑止罢了！ 
English: Just because I lost my mentor, I can't stop grieving!

古文：谥曰文德，葬昭陵，因九嵕山，以成后志。
现代文：议定谥号为文德，葬于昭陵，借用九萯山势，以满足长孙皇后的愿望。
English: It was agreed that his posthumous name would be Wen De, and that he would be buried in Zhaoling, borrowing nine mountains to satisfy the wishes of his eldest grandchild, the Empress Dowager.

古文：帝自著表序始末，揭陵左。
现代文：太宗亲自撰文叙其始末，立碑于昭陵左侧。
English: Taizong personally wrote an article describing its beginning and end, and a monument was erected on the left side of Zhaoling.

古文：上元中，益谥文德圣皇后。
现代文：上元年间，加谥为文德顺圣皇后。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, she was crowned the Empress of the State of Shun.

古文：太宗贤妃徐惠，湖州长城人。
现代文：太宗贤妃徐惠，是湖州长城县人。
English: Taizong Xianfei Xu Hui is from Changcheng County in Hubei Province.

古文：生五月能言，四岁通《论语》、《诗》，八岁自晓属文。
现代文：出生后五个月就能说话，四岁就能通读《论语》、《诗经》，八岁就能自己做文。
English: Five months after birth, they can speak, at the age of four, they can read through "The Analects" and "The Book of Songs," and at the age of eight, they can write their own essays.

古文：父孝德，尝试使拟《离骚》为《小山篇》曰： 仰幽岩而流盼，抚桂枝以凝想。
现代文：其父徐孝德，曾试着要她模拟《离骚》做《小山篇》，其辞有： 仰望幽深岩谷而流目，抚摸桂树枝叶以凝想。
English: Her father, Xu Xiaode, once tried to get her to imitate the "Left Hand Woman" to do the "Little Mountain Chapter," with the words: Look up at the deep rock valley and drift eyes, touch the branches and leaves of the cinnamon tree to meditate.

古文：将千龄兮此遇，荃何为兮独往？ 
现代文：千秋万代啊难逢此遇，芳草何故啊独自前往？ 
English: It's rare for this to happen, so why did Fang Cao travel alone?

古文：孝德大惊，知不可掩，於是所论著遂盛传。
现代文：孝德大惊，知其文才不可掩盖，由此所做论著便盛传于世。
English: His filial piety was shocked, and he knew that his writings could not be covered up. As a result, his writings were passed down to the world.

古文：太宗闻之，召为才人。
现代文：太宗闻知，召纳她为才人。
English: Emperor Taizong heard about her and called her a talented person.

古文：手未尝废卷，而辞致赡蔚，文无淹思。
现代文：手中不曾放下书本，而文辞富丽华美，为文挥笔而成。
English: He never put down the book in his hand, and his words were rich and gorgeous, made for writing.

古文：帝益礼顾，擢孝德水部员外郎，惠再迁充容。
现代文：太宗更加礼重顾念，擢升孝德为水部员外郎，徐惠也累升至充容之位。
English: Taizong paid more attention to courtesy, promoted filial piety as the water minister, and Xu Hui also rose to the position of full capacity.

古文：贞观末，数调兵讨定四夷，稍稍治宫室，百姓劳怨。
现代文：贞观末年，太宗多次调集兵马讨伐平定四方夷狄，逐渐兴建宫馆楼台，百姓劳苦愁怨。
English: In the last years of Zhenguan, Taizong repeatedly mobilized soldiers and horses to fight against and subdue the Yidi in all directions, and gradually built the palace pavilion, and the people worked hard and complained.

古文：惠上疏极谏，且言： 东戍辽海，西讨昆丘，士马罢耗，漕饷漂没。捐有尽之农，趋无穷之壑；图未获之众，丧已成之军。
现代文：徐惠上疏极力劝谏，说： 东方戍守辽海，西部征讨昆丘，士马疲惫耗损，漕运之粮漂没；捐损有尽之农功，填塞无穷之巨壑；图谋未获之他众，丧损已成之我军。
English: Xu Huizhong tried his best to persuade him, saying: "In the east, you should defend the Liao Sea; in the west, you should collect quince; the horses are tired and worn out, and the grain of the rowing transport is lost; you should donate the exhausted agricultural work, and fill the endless giant rafts; you should try to gain what others have not gained, and lose what has become our army.

古文：故地广者，非常安之术也；人劳者，为易乱之符也。 
现代文：因此土地广阔，并非长治久安之术；人民劳累，才是易生祸乱的根源。 
English: Therefore, a vast territory is not the key to long-term stability; it is the fatigue of the people that is the root cause of disaster.

古文：又言： 翠微、玉华等宫，虽因山藉水，无筑构之苦，而工力和僦，不谓无烦。
现代文：还说： 翠微、玉华等宫殿，虽说因山借水，并非没有筑构之苦，而工力之费和雇取人，不能说没有烦扰之弊。
English: He also said: Although the palaces of Tsuiwei and Yuhua were built by borrowing water from the mountains, they were not without the pain of construction, and the cost of labor and employing people cannot be said to be without the drawbacks of disturbance.

古文：有道之君，以逸逸人；无道之君，以乐乐身。 
现代文：有道的君主，以己安逸来使人安逸；无道的君主，以己安乐来安乐自身。 
English: A virtuous ruler makes others happy by making himself happy; a vicious ruler makes himself happy by making himself happy.

古文：又言： 伎巧为丧国斧斤，珠玉为荡心鸠毒，侈丽纤美，不可以不遏。
现代文：并且还说： 技巧珍玩实为亡国之刀斧，珠玉锦绣实为荡心之毒药。侈奢华丽纤细奇美之作，不可不加以遏止。
English: He also said: "Skillful and rare play is the sword and axe of a ruined country, and gems and brocades are the poison of a swinging heart. Luxurious, delicate and wonderful works must not be suppressed.

古文：志骄於业泰，体逸於时安。 
现代文：心志骄盈于功成名就，身体安逸于时泰民安。 
English: The mind is proud of success and fame, and the body is at ease with the times and the people.

古文：其剀切精诣，大略如此。
现代文：其言辞恳切，其旨意精深，大抵诸如此类。
English: His words are earnest, his intentions are profound, and so on.

古文：帝善其言，优赐之。
现代文：太宗赞赏其言，奖赐甚厚。
English: Emperor Taizong appreciated his speech, and the award was very generous.

古文：帝崩，哀慕成疾，不肯进药，曰： 帝遇我厚，得先狗马侍园寝，吾志也。 
现代文：太宗逝世之后，徐惠因悲痛追思而生疾病，还不肯服药，说： 太宗待我甚厚，如能先为狗马侍奉园寝，就是我的愿望了。 
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, Xu Hui became ill due to grief and reflection, and refused to take medicine, saying, "Emperor Taizong treated me very generously. If I could first serve the dogs and horses and sleep in the garden, that would be my wish."

古文：复为诗、连珠以见意。
现代文：还用七言诗与连珠以表现其心愿。
English: They also use seven-character poems and beads to express their wishes.

古文：永徽元年卒，年二十四，赠贤妃，陪葬昭陵石室。
现代文：永徽元年去世，时年二十四岁，赠予贤妃，陪葬于昭陵石室。
English: Yonghui died in the first year of the year, at the age of twenty-four, presented to Xianfei, buried with him in the stone room of Zhaoling.

古文：惠之娣齐聃，齐聃子坚，皆以学闻，娣为高宗婕妤，亦有文藻，世以拟汉班氏。
现代文：徐惠之弟徐齐聃，齐聃之子徐坚，都以学问闻名，其妹为高宗婕妤，也有文才，世人比之为汉代班氏家族。
English: Xu Hui's brother, Xu Qichen, and Qichen's son, Xu Jian, were both famous for their learning. Their younger sister, Gao Zongchen, was also a talented writer. The world compared them to the Ban family of the Han Dynasty.

古文：高宗废后王氏，并州祁人，魏尚书左仆射思政之孙。
现代文：高宗废后王氏，是并州祁县人，北魏尚书左仆射王思政的孙女。
English: Gao Zong, the granddaughter of the deposed Empress Dowager Wang, was a native of Fengtu County, and the granddaughter of the Northern Wei Emperor's right-hand man, Emperor Xiaowang Shizheng.

古文：从祖母同安长公主以后婉淑，白太宗以为晋王妃。
现代文：堂伯母同安长公主因见王氏温顺善良，告知太宗娶为晋王之妃。
English: Seeing the gentleness and kindness of the Wang clan, his great-aunt, the eldest princess Tongan, told Emperor Taizong to marry the queen of Jin.

古文：王居东宫，妃亦进册，擢父仁祐陈州刺史。
现代文：晋王入居东宫后，她也进封为皇太子妃，并提升其父仁为陈州刺史。
English: After Jin Wang moved into the East Palace, she also moved into the palace as the crown princess, and promoted her father as the Chenzhou prince.

古文：帝即位，立为皇后。仁祐以特进封魏国公；母柳，本国夫人。
现代文：皇太子即位后，立王氏为皇后，以仁为特进，封魏国公；其母柳氏，封魏国夫人。
English: After the crown prince ascended the throne, the Wang clan was established as the empress, with Ren as the special envoy, and he was given the title of Duke of Wei; his mother, the Liu clan, was given the title of Lady of Wei.

古文：仁祐卒，赠司空。
现代文：仁逝世后，赠予司空。
English: After Jin's death, it was given to Siku.

古文：初，萧良娣有宠，而武才人贞观末以先帝宫人召为昭仪，俄与后、良娣争宠，更相毁短。
现代文：其初，萧良娣有恩宠，而武才人于贞观末年以先帝宫人出居感业寺，此时被召纳为高宗昭仪，不久就与王皇后、萧良娣争宠，互相诋毁揭短。
English: At first, Xiao Liangyao was favored, but in the last years of the Zhenguan period, the martial artist went to live in the Zengye Temple with the former imperial palace people. At this time, he was summoned as Gao Zongzhao Yi, and soon he competed with the queen and Xiao Liangyao for favor, slandering and belittling each other.

古文：而昭仪诡险，即诬后与母挟媚道蛊上，帝信之，解魏国夫人门籍，罢后舅柳奭中书令。
现代文：而武昭仪诡诈阴险，诬陷王皇后与其母挟媚道蛊惑皇上，高宗相信其言，解除魏国夫人门籍不许入宫，罢免王皇后之舅柳中书令之职。
English: However, Wu Zhaoyi was deceitful and insidious, framing the Empress Wang and her mother to seduce the Emperor. Gao Zong believed his words, removed Wei Guo's wife from being allowed to enter the palace, and removed the uncle of the Empress Wang from the post of Liu Zhongshirong.

古文：李义府等阴佐昭仪，以偏言怒帝，遂下诏废后、良娣皆为庶人，囚宫中。
现代文：李义府等人暗地佐助武昭仪，以偏邪之言激帝发怒，以致下诏废黜王皇后、萧良娣皆为庶人，囚禁于宫中。
English: Li Yifu and others secretly assisted Wu Zhaoyi, provoking the emperor's anger with words of deviation, so that Xiao Liangyao, the empress of the Han Dynasty, was dethroned and imprisoned in the palace.

古文：后母兄、良娣宗族悉流岭南。
现代文：王皇后同母兄、萧良娣族人全都流放于岭南。
English: The Empress Wang's older half-brother, Xiao Liang, and the Yi people were all exiled to Lingnan.

古文：许敬宗又奏： 仁祐无他功，以宫掖故，超列三事，今庶人谋乱宗社，罪宜夷宗，仁祐应斫棺，陛下不穷其诛，家止流窜，仁祐不宜引庇廕宥逆子孙。 
现代文：许敬宗又上奏说： 仁并无他功，以宫掖私恩之故，超列于三公，如今庶人阴谋扰乱宗社，其罪应当灭族，仁应当斫棺，陛下不穷尽其诛灭，只流放其家属，仁不应继续庇荫违逆子孙。 
English: Xu Jingzong also made a report, saying: "Ren has no other merit. He was ranked higher than the three princes because of the favor of the imperial court. Nowadays, commoners are plotting to disrupt the religious sect. Their crime should be to exterminate the tribe. Ren should burn the coffin. Your Majesty should not exhaust its annihilation, but only exile his family members. Ren should not continue to shield his traitorous children and grandchildren.

古文：有诏尽夺仁祐官爵。
现代文：下诏尽夺仁的官职爵号。
English: Below is the official rank and title of the emperor.

古文：而后及良娣俄为武后所杀，改后姓为 蟒 ，良娣为 枭 。
现代文：王皇后与萧良娣不久即被武后所杀，并追改后姓为 蟒 ，良娣为 枭 。
English: Empress Wang and Xiao Liangyao were soon killed by Empress Wu, and their surnames were subsequently changed to  and  respectively.

古文：初，帝念后，间行至囚所，见门禁锢严，进饮食窦中，恻然伤之，呼曰： 皇后、良娣无恙乎？
现代文：起初，高宗思念王皇后，乘空行至囚禁之处，见其门禁封闭严固，仅留一孔送进饮食，心中很是不忍，呼喊道： 皇后、良娣还好吗？
English: At first, Gao Zong thought about the queen and flew to the place where she was imprisoned. When he saw that the door was tightly closed, leaving only a hole for food, he was very impatient and shouted: "Is the queen and Liang Yao okay?"

古文：今安在？ 
现代文：如今在哪里？ 
English: Where is it now?

古文：二人同辞曰： 妾等以罪弃为婢，安得尊称耶？ 
现代文：两人共同回答说： 妾等因罪废弃为宫婢，哪敢再用尊称啊！ 
English: The two of them replied together: "A concubine was abandoned as a palace maid for a crime, how dare you use the honorific again!

古文：流泪呜咽。
现代文：说罢悲泣咽哽。
English: Saying this, she broke down in tears.

古文：又曰： 陛下幸念畴日，使妾死更生，复见日月，乞署此为 回心院 。 
现代文：还说： 陛下如念往日旧情，使妾等死而复生，重见天日，请把此处改名为 回心院 。 
English: He also said: Your Majesty, if you are thinking of the old days, reviving your concubines and seeing the light of day, please change the name of this place to Hexin Yuan.

古文：帝曰： 朕即有处置。 
现代文：高宗说： 我马上就有处置办法的。 
English: Gaozong said, "I'll have a solution right away."

古文：武后知之，促诏杖二人百，剔其手足，反接投酿甕中，曰： 令二妪骨醉！ 
现代文：武后闻知此事，赶紧下令杖责二人各一百板，截断其手足，反绑置于酒缸之中，说： 让两婆子骨醉！ 
English: When Empress Wu heard of this, she quickly ordered that each of the two men be punished with a hundred pieces of wood, their hands and feet were cut off, and they were tied upside down and placed in a wine vat, saying: "Let the two old women get drunk!

古文：数日死，殊其尸。
现代文：几天后死去，肢解其尸体。
English: He died a few days later and his body was dismembered.

古文：初，诏旨到，后再拜曰： 陛下万年！
现代文：起初，有诏旨到，王皇后叩头两次说： 陛下万岁！
English: At first, when the imperial edict arrived, the king and queen bowed twice and said, "Long live His Majesty!"

古文：昭仪承恩，死吾分也。 
现代文：武昭仪承受恩宠，我就死定了。 
English: If Wu Zhaoyi is favored, I'll be dead.

古文：至良娣，骂曰： 武氏狐媚，翻覆至此！
现代文：萧良娣大骂道： 武氏狐媚惑主，陷害我等到此地步！
English: Xiao Liangyao scolded loudly: "Wu's fox charms and deceives the master, trapping me to this point!

古文：我后为猫，使武氏为鼠，吾当扼其喉以报。 
现代文：我死后当作猫儿，让武氏变作老鼠，我要咬断其喉以报仇。 
English: When I die, I'll turn into a cat and let Takeuji turn into a mouse. I'll bite his throat to get revenge.

古文：后闻，诏六宫毋畜猫。
现代文：武后闻知，下令六宫不得喂猫。
English: Empress Wu Wenshi decreed that Liugong should not feed the cats.

古文：神龙元年，追谥妃曰恭皇后，赠瑰左卫大将军。中宗崩，蕆陵事，韦庶人不臣，不得祔，有司加上尊谥，以后祔定陵。中宗庶人韦氏，京兆万年人。
现代文：武后多次见到二人披散头发浑身流血作恶鬼形状，心中厌恶不快，命巫祝祈祷禳解，还移居于蓬莱宫，但仍然见到此形，以故常驻于东都。中宗即位之后，才恢复她们的姓氏。中宗的皇后、死后贬为平民的韦氏，京兆万年人。
English: Empress Wu repeatedly saw the two of them with their hair hanging loose, bleeding all over their bodies, in the shape of evil spirits. She was disgusted and unhappy in her heart, and wished and prayed for their release. She also moved to the Penglai Palace, but still saw this shape, which is why she remained in Dongdu. It was only after Emperor Zhongzong ascended the throne that their family name was restored. Empress of Emperor Zhongzong, and the Wei clan, who was reduced to a commoner after her death, have been around for thousands of years.

古文：祖弘表，贞观中曹王府典军。
现代文：祖父韦弘表，贞观年间任曹王府典军。
English: His grandfather, Wei Hongbei, was a member of Cao Wangfu's imperial army during the Zhenguan era.

古文：帝在东宫，后被选为妃。
现代文：中宗李显做太子时，韦氏被选为妃子。
English: When the Chinese emperor Li Xian was crown prince, Wei was chosen as his concubine.

古文：嗣圣初，立为皇后。
现代文：中宗嗣圣年初，她被立为皇后。
English: She was enthroned as empress at the beginning of the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhongzong.

古文：俄与帝处房陵，每使至，帝辄恐，欲自杀。
现代文：不久与被废黜的中宗一道幽居房陵，每有使臣到来，中宗都极恐惧，要自尽。
English: Soon he was living in seclusion with the deposed Chuzo in the mausoleum. Whenever an envoy arrived, Chuzo was terrified and wanted to commit suicide.

古文：后止曰： 祸福何常，早晚等死耳，无遽！ 
现代文：韦氏阻止说： 祸福哪有一定？横直一死罢了，不用匆忙！ 
English: Mr. Wei stopped him and said, "What is certain about misfortune and good fortune? It's just a straight death, no need to rush!

古文：及帝复即位，后居中宫。
现代文：待到中宗复位，韦氏仍为皇后，住中宫。
English: Until the restoration of the Chinese dynasty, the Wei clan was still the empress and lived in the Middle Palace.

古文：是时，上官昭容与政事，方敬晖等将尽诛诸武，武三思惧，乃因昭容入请，得幸於后，卒谋晖等诛之。
现代文：这时，上官昭容干政，当敬晖等人要杀尽武则天众亲族时，武三思恐惧，便通过上官昭容求见韦氏，得到韦氏宠爱，终于谋划杀了敬晖等人。
English: At this time, the superior officer Zhaorong was involved in politics, and when Jing Rong and others wanted to kill all of Wu Zetian's relatives, Wu San thought about fear, then through the superior officer Zhaorong asked to see Wei, got Wei's favor, and finally plotted to kill Jing Rong and others.

古文：初，帝幽废，与后约： 一朝见天日，不相制。 
现代文：当初，中宗被幽禁时，与韦氏约定： 一旦重见天日，对你不加制约。 
English: At first, when Zhongzong was confined, he made an agreement with Wei: Once you see the light of day again, there will be no restrictions on you.

古文：至是与三思升御床博戏，帝从旁典筹，不为忤。
现代文：到这时，她与武三思上到中宗卧榻上玩棋，中宗在旁计点筹码，不认为是冒犯自己。
English: At this time, she and Wu San thought of going to Zhongzong's bed to play chess. Zhongzong was counting the chips on the side, and did not think it was an offense to himself.

古文：三思讽群臣上后号为顺天皇后。
现代文：武三思示意群臣请求中宗加赐韦氏顺天皇后封号。
English: Wu Sansi signaled to his vassals to request the Central Government to grant the title of Empress Dowager to Wei Shun.

古文：乃亲谒宗庙，赠父玄贞上洛郡王。
现代文：于是韦氏亲自拜谒祖庙，追赠亡父韦玄贞上洛郡王封号。
English: As a result, the Wei clan personally paid homage to the ancestral temple and posthumously bestowed the title of King of Luo County on his deceased father, Wei Xuan Zhen.

古文：左拾遗贾虚已建言： 非李氏王者，盟书共弃之。
现代文：左拾遗贾虚己向中宗进言： 不是陛下本姓的藩王，盟约文书全会撇弃他。
English: Zuo Zhi Yi Jia Hui himself made a suggestion to Zhongzong: If he is not the lord of the domain with His Majesty's original surname, the plenary session of the covenant document should abandon him.

古文：今复国未几，遽私后家，且先朝祸鉴未远，甚可惧也。
现代文：现今李氏王朝刚复国，就急切偏宠皇后家的人，况且武后乱国的前鉴尚在眼前，后果非常可怕。
English: Now that the Li dynasty has just been restored to the country, it is eager to favor the people of the queen's family. Moreover, the forerunner of the post-war chaos is still in front of us, and the consequences are very terrible.

古文：如今皇后固辞，使天下知后宫谦让，不亦善乎？ 
现代文：若让皇后坚决推辞，使天下人知道后妃的谦让，不也很好吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be great if the empress could firmly refuse, so that the world would know of the empress dowager's meekness?

古文：不听。
现代文：中宗不从。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：神龙三年，节愍太子举兵败。
现代文：神龙三年，节愍太子李重俊起兵反韦失败。
English: In the third year of the reign of Shenlong, Prince Li Chongjun, the Prince of Jieyi, failed to lead an army against Wei.

古文：宗楚客率群臣请加号 翊圣 ，诏可。
现代文：太仆卿宗楚客带领群臣请中宗给韦氏加号 翊圣 ，中宗下诏许可。
English: The eunuch lord Zong Chuk led a group of courtiers to ask Zhongzong to grant Wei the title of "saint," and Zhongzong granted permission.

古文：禁中谬传有五色云起后衣笥，帝图以示诸朝，因大赦天下，赐百官母、妻封号。
现代文：内宫谬传韦氏衣箱有五色云彩升起，中宗命人绘图在朝堂展示，因而施行全国大赦，赐给文武百官的母亲、妻子封号。
English: According to the legend of the Inner Palace, Wei's suitcase had a five-colored cloud rising from it, and the Chinese Emperor ordered the drawing to be displayed in the imperial hall. As a result, a nationwide amnesty was implemented, and the mothers and wives of hundreds of civil and military officials were given seal names.

古文：太史迦叶志忠表上《桑条歌》十二篇，言后当受命，曰： 昔高祖时，天下歌《桃李》；太宗时，歌《秦王破阵》；高宗歌《堂堂》；天后世，歌《武媚娘》；皇帝受命，歌《英王石州》；后今受命，歌《桑条韦》，盖后妃之德专蚕桑，共宗庙事也。 
现代文：太史迦叶志忠上表进献《桑条歌》十二篇，声称韦皇后应受天命参政，说： 往日高祖时，天下同唱《桃李》歌；太宗时，唱《秦王破阵》；高宗时唱《堂堂》；则天皇后时唱《武媚娘》；陛下登基，唱《英王石州》；如今皇后承受天命，应唱《桑条韦》，因为后妃的德行在专掌蚕桑、供奉祖庙之事。 
English: Taishi Ka Yezhizhong presented twelve pieces of "Mulberry Stripe Song" at the table, claiming that Queen Wei should participate in politics by the mandate of heaven, saying: In the past, when Gao Zu, the whole world sang the "Peach and Plum" song; when Taizong, they sang "Qin King Breaks the Siege"; when Gao Zong, they sang "Court"; when the emperor was crowned, they sang "Wu Mei Niang" (武媚娘); when he ascended to the throne, they sang "King of England Stone"; today, the queen bears the mandate of heaven and should sing "Mulberry St

古文：乃赐志忠第一区，彩七百段。
现代文：于是中宗赏赐迦叶志忠府第一座、采绸七百段。
English: As a result, the Middle Sect rewarded the first seat of Kayechizhongfu with 700 silk-picking points.

古文：太常少卿郑愔因之被乐府。
现代文：太常少卿郑忄音随之给《桑条》配上曲谱。
English: Too often, Shaoqing Zheng Yueyin accompanied the "Mulberry" with a score.

古文：楚客又讽补阙赵延禧离释《桑条》为九十八代，帝大喜，擢延禧谏议大夫。
现代文：宗楚客又示意补阙赵延禧将《桑条》衍化为九十八段，中宗大喜，提升赵延禧为谏议大夫。
English: Zong Chu's guest also suggested that Zhao Yanxi, the compiler of "The Mulberry Tree," be expanded to ninety-eight paragraphs. Zhong Zong was overjoyed and promoted Zhao Yanxi to the position of the editor-in-chief.

古文：於是昭容以武氏事动后。
现代文：到这时，上官昭容用武则天的事打动韦氏。
English: At this time, the superior officer, Zhao Rong, used the matter of Wu Zetian to impress Wei.

古文：即表增出母服；民以二十三为丁，限五十九免；五品而上母、妻不繇夫、子封者，丧得用鼓吹。
现代文：韦氏立即奏请增立对被休生母的服丧制；定平民二十三岁为壮丁，五十九岁免服徭役；不是因丈夫、儿子而爵级在五品以上的母亲、妻子，丧礼须用乐队。屡屡改制，暗蓄声望。
English: Wei immediately requested the establishment of an additional mourning system for the mother who had been laid off; the 23 year-old civilian was designated as a young man, and the 59 year-old was exempted from military service; the mother and wife who did not have a peerage of five or more because of her husband and son had to use a band for the funeral. The system was repeatedly changed, and it gained popularity.

古文：数改制度，阴储人望。
现代文：逐渐宠立亲属，予以封官授爵。
English: He gradually favored his relatives and had them knighted.

古文：稍宠树亲属，封拜之。昭容与母及尚宫贺娄等多受金钱。封巫赵陇西夫人，出入禁中，势与上官埒。
现代文：上官昭容与其母以及尚宫贺娄等人大量收受金钱。女巫赵某被封为陇西夫人，出入内宫，权势与上官昭容等同。
English: Shangguan Zhao Rong, his mother, Shangguan He Yao and others received a large amount of money. The witch Zhao Mou was named the Lady of Shaanxi, entering and leaving the Inner Court, with the same power as Shangguan Zhao Rong.

古文：繇是墨敕斜封出矣。三年，帝亲郊，引后亚献。
现代文：景龙三年，中宗亲自郊祀，引韦氏做第二献祭。
English: In the third year of Jinglong, Zhongzong himself held a suburb worship, and invited Wei to be the second offering.

古文：明年，正月望夜，帝与后微服过市，彷徉观览，纵宫女出游，皆淫奔不还。
现代文：次年，正月十五夜，中宗与韦氏穿常人衣着上街，漫步观赏。宫女听其出游，全部逃走不归。
English: The following year, on the fifteenth night of the first month of the year, Zhongzong and Wei went out to the streets dressed as ordinary people and strolled around looking at the sights. When the princess heard that they were going out, they all ran away and never came back.

古文：国子祭酒叶静能善禁架，常侍马秦客高医，光禄少卿杨均善烹调，绵引入后廷。
现代文：国子祭酒叶静能惯弄符咒制鬼，常侍马秦客医术高明，光禄少卿杨均擅长烹调，都被引入后宫。
English: Kuniko-sai Sake Leaves Jing was able to manipulate spells and cast spells, the regular attendant Ma Qinhak was skilled in medicine, and Guanglu Shaoqing Yang was good at cooking, all of whom were brought into the harem.

古文：均、秦客蒸於后，尝丧免，不历旬辄起。
现代文：杨均、马秦客与韦氏私通，因服丧免职，不到十天即被召用。
English: Yang Jun, Ma Qin Ke and Wei Shi had a sexual relationship, but were dismissed due to mourning, and were called up less than ten days later.

古文：帝遇弑，议者裯咎秦客及安乐公主。
现代文：中宗遭毒死，舆论归罪马秦客与安乐公主。
English: Zhongzong was poisoned to death, and public opinion blamed Ma Qin and Princess Anle.

古文：后大惧，引所亲议计，乃以刑部尚书裴谈、工部尚书张锡辅政，留守东都，诏将军赵承福、薛简以兵五百卫谯王重福，与兄温定策，立温王重茂为皇太子，列府兵五万分二营屯京师，然后发丧。
现代文：韦氏极惊恐，召亲信商议，于是以刑部尚书裴谈、工部尚书张锡辅政，留守东都洛阳；诏令将军赵承福、薛简带兵五百护卫谯王李重福；又与其兄韦温决策，立温王李重茂为皇太子，调派五万府兵分两营屯驻京城，然后发布讣告。
English: The Wei clan was extremely alarmed and called their relatives to discuss, so they used the Criminal Investigation Department's Shang Shu Pei Dan and the Ministry of Industry's Shang Shu Zhang Xiyu Zheng to stay in the eastern capital of Luoyang; they ordered the generals Zhao Chengfu and Xue Jian to escort the 500 soldiers to protect the king, Li Chongfu; they also made a decision with their brother Wei Wen to make the king, Li Chongmao, the crown prince, and dispatched two battalions of soldiers from 50,000 prefectures to be stationed in Beijing, and then issued an obituary.

古文：太子即位，是为殇帝。
现代文：太子李重茂登皇位，即殇帝。
English: Prince Li Chongmao ascended to the throne, i.e. Emperor Xizong.

古文：皇太后临朝，温总内外兵，检护宫省。
现代文：皇太后韦氏临朝摄政，韦温总领宫廷内外军队，控制皇宫及朝廷官署。
English: Empress Dowager Wei was the regent of the imperial court, and Wei Wen was the commander of the troops inside and outside the court, controlling the imperial palace and the imperial office.

古文：族弟濯、播，宗子捷、璿，璿〗甥高崇及武延秀，分领左右屯营、羽林、飞骑、万骑。
现代文：韦氏族弟韦濯、韦播，皇族子弟韦捷、韦璇，韦璇的外甥高崇以及武延秀，分别统领左右屯营及羽林、飞骑、万骑诸禁军。
English: The brothers of the Wei clan, Wei Maosheng and Wei Fan, the royal children, Wei Jie and Wei Xuan, the nephew of Wei Xuan, Gao Chong, and Wu Yanxiu, respectively led the left and right camps and the Ulin, Fei Jie, and Wan Jie troops.

古文：京师大恐，传言且革命。
现代文：京城臣民极度惶恐，传言即将换姓改朝。
English: The citizens of Kyoto were extremely alarmed, and rumours spread that they were about to change their surnames and join the new dynasty.

古文：播、璿入军中，鞭督万骑欲立威，士怨不为用。
现代文：韦播、韦璇进入禁军营地，鞭打督责骁健军士想立权威，军士怨愤不听支派。
English: Wei Wei and Wei Wei entered the forbidden army camp and whipped the inspector and the sergeant who wanted to establish authority. The sergeant was angry and did not listen to the tribe.

古文：俄而临淄王引兵夜披玄武门入羽林，杀璿、播、崇於寝，斧关叩太极殿，后遁入飞骑营，为乱兵所杀。
现代文：旋即，临淄王李隆基带兵夜破玄武门闯进羽林军，在寝宫杀了韦璇、韦播、高崇，斧劈宫门进击太极殿，韦氏逃进飞骑营，被乱兵杀死。
English: Soon after, King Li Longji of Linyi led an army to break through the Xuanwu Gate at night and broke into the Ulin Army. He killed Wei Wei, Wei Wei and Gao Chong in the sleeping palace. He broke through the palace gate and attacked the Taiji Hall with an axe. Mr. Wei fled into the flying cavalry camp and was killed by the soldiers.

古文：斩延秀、安乐公主。
现代文：武延秀、安乐公主被斩。
English: Wu Yanxiu and Princess Anle were beheaded.

古文：分捕诸韦、诸武与其支党，悉诛之，枭后及安乐首东市。
现代文：又分头捉拿韦氏、武氏众亲族及其党羽，将他们全部杀掉，将韦氏和安乐公主首级悬挂东市示众。
English: They also separately captured all the relatives of the Wei and Wu clans and their followers, killed them all, and hung the heads of the Wei clan and Princess Anle in Dongshi for the public to see.

古文：翌日，追贬为庶人，葬以一品礼。
现代文：次日，韦氏被追贬为平民，按一品礼仪行葬。
English: The next day, Mr. Wei was relegated to the status of a commoner, and his funeral was conducted according to proper etiquette.

古文：上官昭容者，名婉儿，西台侍郎仪之孙。
现代文：上官昭容名叫婉儿，是西台侍郎上官仪的孙女。
English: Shangguan Zhaoyong's name was Wan'er, and she was the granddaughter of the West Taiwan chamberlain Shangguan Rong.

古文：父廷芝，与仪死武后时。
现代文：其父上官廷芝，与上官仪一道死于武后当政之时。
English: His father, Shangguan Tingzhi, died together with Shangguan Yi when Wu Wu was in power.

古文：母郑，太常少卿休远之姊。
现代文：其母郑氏，是太常少卿郑休远的姐姐。
English: His mother, Zheng, was the older sister of Zheng Xiurong, the First Lady of China.

古文：婉儿始生，与母配掖廷。
现代文：婉儿出生不久，就与其母一起没入掖廷为婢。
English: Soon after Wan Er was born, she and her mother were sent to the imperial court as maidservants.

古文：天性韶警，善文章。
现代文：她天性美丽机警，善写文章。
English: She is naturally beautiful, quick-witted and a good writer.

古文：年十四，武后召见，有所制作，若素构。
现代文：年仅十四岁时，武后就召见她，令她遣辞撰文，其敏捷如同事先撰成。
English: When she was only fourteen years old, Empress Wu summoned her and asked her to write a speech, which she did as quickly as her colleagues.

古文：自通天以来，内掌诏命，掞丽可观。
现代文：自从通天年间以后，她在宫内掌作诏命，铺张富丽，言辞可观。
English: Since the Tsuten period, she has been making imperial edicts in the Imperial Palace, making a lot of noise and saying a lot of things.

古文：尝忤旨当诛，后惜其才，止黥而不杀也。
现代文：她曾违背圣旨应受诛杀，武后惋惜其才，只黥其面孔而未杀她。
English: She had disobeyed the sacred edict that she should be killed, and Empress Wu was sorry for her talent, and only gouged her face, but did not kill her.

古文：然群臣奏议及天下事皆与之。
现代文：其后群臣所上奏议与天下事务她都参预议决。
English: After that, she took part in the pre-voting and voting of the report proposed by the ministers and the world affairs.

古文：帝即位，大被信任，进拜昭容，封郑沛国夫人。
现代文：中宗即位之后，极受信任，不久就进升为昭容，封其母郑氏为沛国夫人。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Zhongzong, he was highly trusted, and was soon promoted to Zhaorong, and his mother Zheng was given the title of Mrs. Pei Guo.

古文：婉儿通武三思，故诏书推右武氏，抑唐家，节愍太子不平。
现代文：婉儿与武三思私通，以故所撰诏书往往推崇武氏而排抑唐室，节愍太子愤愤不平。
English: Wan'er and Wuzan thought of themselves as equals, so the imperial edicts they wrote often promoted the Wu clan and excluded the Tang family. Prince Jie was indignant.

古文：及举兵，叩肃章门索婉儿，婉儿曰： 我死，当次索皇后、大家矣！ 
现代文：到举兵时，敲肃章门搜索婉儿，婉儿说： 我死之后，就要依次索取皇后与皇上了！ 
English: When it was time to raise an army, they knocked on the gate to search for Wan'er. Wan'er said, "After I die, I'm going to ask for the queen and the emperor in turn!"

古文：以激怒帝，帝与后挟婉儿登玄武门避之。
现代文：用这样的话激怒中宗，中宗与韦后便携同婉儿登上玄武门楼以躲避兵锋。
English: With these words, he infuriated Zhong Zong, and Zhong Zong and Wei Hou took Wan Er with them to board the Xuanwu Gate Tower to avoid the soldiers.

古文：会太子败，乃免。
现代文：待太子事败之后，才免脱此难。
English: It was not until after the crown prince's defeat that he was freed from this difficulty.

古文：婉儿劝帝侈大书馆，增学士员，引大臣名儒充选。
现代文：婉儿常劝中宗增广书馆，增置学士员额，引荐大臣名儒充任其职。
English: Wan Er often advised Zhongzong to expand the library, add a post for a bachelor, and recommend a famous Confucian scholar to serve as minister.

古文：数赐宴赋诗，群臣赓和，婉儿常代帝及后、长宁安乐二主，众篇并作，而采丽益新。
现代文：中宗多次赏赐酒宴，与群臣赋诗唱和，婉儿经常代中宗、韦后及常宁、安乐二位公主，数首并作，而辞采绮丽，更为新奇。
English: Zhongzong repeatedly awarded wine banquets, sang poems with the retainers, and Wan Er often stood in for Zhongzong, Wei Hou and Changning, and the two princesses of Anle, and wrote several poems together, and her words were beautiful, which was even more novel.

古文：又差第群臣所赋，赐金爵，故朝廷靡然成风。
现代文：还评品群臣所赋之诗，赐予金爵，以故朝廷之臣靡然成风。
English: He also judged the poems given by the courtiers, and gave them gold earrings, so that the courtiers of the imperial court became popular.

古文：当时属辞者，大抵虽浮靡，然所得皆有可观，婉儿力也。
现代文：当时遣辞赋诗之人，虽然所做大多为浮靡之音，但获定评者都有可观之处，这是婉儿之力使之然。
English: At that time, although most of the works of those who dictated and composed poems were mere drivel, those who were evaluated had something to be proud of. This was due to Wan Er's efforts.

古文：郑卒，谥节义夫人。
现代文：郑氏去世后，谥为节义夫人。
English: After Zheng's death, Zou became the wife of Xie Yi.

古文：婉儿请降秩行服，诏起为婕妤，俄还昭容。
现代文：婉儿奏请降其品秩以行丧服，下诏起复为婕妤，不久仍升为昭容。
English: Wan Erso asked that his rank be reduced to funeral attire, but the order was reinstated as an imperial edict, and he was soon promoted to Shao Rong.

古文：帝即婉儿居穿沼筑岩，穷饰胜趣，即引侍臣宴其所。
现代文：中宗在婉儿居处穿凿池沼垒筑山石，极力装饰名胜景致，并带领侍臣宴饮其处。
English: In Wan Er's residence, Zhong Zong drilled a pond, built a rock wall, and tried his best to decorate the scenic spot. He also led his retainers to feast there.

古文：是时，左右内职皆听出外，不何止。
现代文：当时宫中左右有职人员全都听任出外，不加以制止。
English: At that time, all officials in and around the palace were allowed to go out without being stopped.

古文：婉儿与近嬖至皆营外宅，邪人秽夫争候门下，肆狎昵，因以求剧职要官。
现代文：婉儿与其他得宠之人全都营建外宅，邪秽之徒争先侍候于门下，肆意亲昵狎戏，就便索求重要职位。
English: Wan'er and the other favorites all built outhouses, and the evil-doers vied with each other to wait at the door, indulged in intimate play, and then claimed important positions.

古文：与崔湜乱，遂引知政事。
现代文：婉儿与崔私通，便引荐他参预政事。
English: Wan Er and Cui Shizhong introduced him to participate in pre-election politics.

古文：湜开商山道，未半，因帝遗制，虚列其功，加甄赏。
现代文：崔开辟商山新路，工程还未过半，婉儿借撰中宗遗制之机，虚列其功加以奖赏。
English: Cui opened up the Shangshan New Road, the project is not yet half over, Wan Er borrowed the opportunity of the Chinese Confucianism heritage, and listed his merits to reward him.

古文：韦后之败，斩阙下。
现代文：韦后事败之后，婉儿被斩于阙下。
English: After Wei's defeat, Wan Er was beheaded.

古文：初，郑方妊，梦巨人畀大称曰： 持此称量天下。 
现代文：起初，其母郑氏怀孕之时，梦见巨人给予大秤一杆，说： 持此秤以称量天下。 
English: At first, when her mother Zheng was pregnant, she dreamed that a giant gave her a large scale and said, "Take this scale to weigh the world."

古文：婉儿生逾月，母戏曰： 称量者岂尔邪？ 
现代文：婉儿满月时，其母取笑说： 称量天下的怎能是你呢？ 
English: When Wan'er was full moon, her mother made fun of her and said, "How can you be the one to weigh the world?

古文：辄哑然应。
现代文：婉儿随声答应。
English: Wan Er readily agreed.

古文：后内秉机政，符其梦云。
现代文：后来在内廷秉持机务大政，果然与其梦相符。
English: Later, he adhered to the policy of "mechanism" in the Inner Court, which was in line with his dream.

古文：景云中，追复昭容，谥惠文。
现代文：景云年间，追复昭容之号，谥为惠文。
English: During Jingyun's reign, the restoration of Zhao Rong was called for, and it was called Huiwen.

古文：始，从母子王昱为拾遗，昱戒曰： 上往囚房陵，武氏得志矣，卒而中兴，天命所在，不可幸也。
现代文：起初，其姨母之子王昱任拾遗之职，告诫她说： 皇上从前囚居于房陵，武氏掌权得志，结果唐室中兴，这是因为有天命护，并非侥幸如此。
English: At first, her aunt's son, Wang Qi, who was in charge of collecting relics, admonished her: The emperor once lived in a mausoleum, the Wu clan gained power, and as a result, the Tang dynasty flourished. This was due to the protection of fate, and it was not by chance.

古文：三思虽乘衅，天下知必败，今昭容上所信，而附之，且灭族！ 
现代文：武三思虽然乘衅得势，天下之人都知道他必败无疑，如今昭容为皇上所信任，而依附于武氏，这会灭族的啊！ 
English: Although Wu Sansi gained power by provocation, people all over the world knew that he would undoubtedly fail. Now Zhaorong is trusted by the emperor and attached to the Wu clan. This will destroy the tribe!

古文：郑以责婉儿，不从。
现代文：郑氏因此责备婉儿，但婉儿不听其言。
English: Zheng blamed Wan'er for this, but Wan'er did not listen.

古文：节愍诛三思，果索之，始忧惧。
现代文：节愍太子诛杀武三思后，果然要收捕婉儿，这才感到忧虑恐惧。
English: After thinking twice about killing Wu, the prince finally decided to capture Wan'er, which made him feel worried and afraid.

古文：及草遗制，即引相王辅政。
现代文：到起草中宗遗制时，就引荐相王辅佐朝政。
English: When it came to drafting the legacy system of the Chinese Church, he recommended the introduction of the minister, Wang Fuxa, to the imperial government.

古文：肃宗即位，至德二载，太上皇自蜀诰有司 其议尊称 ，遂上册谥。宝应末，祔泰陵。
现代文：临淄王李隆基起兵后，婉儿被逮。婉儿拿出遗制草稿给刘幽求，刘幽求告知临淄王，临淄王不答应，结果被处死。
English: After Linyi King Li Longji raised an army, Wan'er was arrested. Wan'er took out a posthumous draft to Liu Yuzhu, Liu Yuzhu told Linyi King, Linyi King did not agree, and as a result was executed.

古文：玄宗贵妃杨氏，隋梁郡通守汪四世孙。
现代文：开元初年，收集编纂她所撰写的文章，下诏张说为之题写序言。玄宗贵妃杨氏名玉环，是隋代梁郡通守杨汪的四世孙女。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the articles she wrote were collected and compiled, and the preamble was inscribed with the following words: "Xuan Zong Guifei Yang's name is Yuhuan, and she is the fourth-generation granddaughter of Yang Wang, the governor of Liang County in the Sui Dynasty."

古文：徙籍蒲州，遂为永乐人。
现代文：其家后来徙居入籍蒲州，便成了永乐县人。
English: His family later migrated to Puzhou, where he was naturalized, and he became a native of Yongle County.

古文：幼孤，养叔父家。
现代文：杨氏幼孤，养于叔父家。
English: Mr. Yang was orphaned as a child and raised by his uncle.

古文：始为寿王妃。
现代文：起初成为寿王之妃。
English: At first, she became the wife of Shouwang.

古文：开元二十四年，武惠妃薨，后廷无当帝意者。
现代文：开元二十四年，武惠妃逝世，后廷妃嫔中没有合于玄宗心意的人。
English: In the 24th year of the first month of the year, Empress Wu Hui died, and there was no one in the imperial concubine line who was in accordance with the will of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：或言妃姿质天挺，宜充掖廷，遂召内禁中，异之，即为自出妃意者，丐籍女官，号 太真 ，更为寿王聘韦昭训女，而太真得幸。
现代文：有人上言说寿王妃容貌秀美，天生丽质，可以充入后宫，便召她进入禁中，玄宗大为称异，便命杨玉环自请度为女道士，给予宫中女官之职，号为 太真 。另为寿王娶韦昭训之女为妃，而太真从此得到玄宗的宠幸。
English: There was a rumor that Princess Shou was beautiful and could enter the harem, so she was summoned to the Forbidden City. Emperor Xuanzong was so impressed that he ordered Yang Yuhuan to become a Taoist priestess, and gave her the position of court lady, called Taizhen. In addition, Emperor Shou married Wei Zhaoxun's daughter, and Taizhen became Emperor Xuanzong's favorite.

古文：善歌舞，邃晓音律，且智算警颖，迎意辄悟。
现代文：她能歌善舞，精通音律，而且聪明颖悟，智算过人，先事迎逢，合于上意。
English: She can sing and dance well, is well-versed in musical notation, and is intelligent and insightful. She is an excellent planner, anticipates and meets the needs of others, and conforms to the will of God.

古文：帝大悦，遂专房宴，宫中号 娘子 ，仪体与皇后等。
现代文：玄宗大喜，于是受宠专房，宫中号称 娘子 ，礼仪与皇后相等。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was overjoyed, and the room became a favorite, known as "Daughter's Room" in the court. The etiquette was equal to that of the empress.

古文：天宝初，进册贵妃。
现代文：天宝初年，进册为贵妃。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, she was registered as a Guifei.

古文：追赠父玄琰太尉、齐国公。
现代文：追赠其父杨玄琰为太尉、齐国公。
English: He was posthumously promoted by his father, Yang Xuanqi, to the rank of lieutenant and became the Prince of Qi.

古文：擢叔玄珪光禄卿，宗兄铦鸿胪卿，锜侍御史，尚太华公主。
现代文：提拔其叔父杨玄王圭为光禄卿，族兄杨钅舌为鸿胪卿，杨钅奇为侍御史，并娶太华公主为妻。
English: He promoted his uncle Yang Xuan Wang Gui to the title of Guanglu Sir, his elder brother Yang Xizhi to the title of Honglu Sir, Yang Xizhi to the title of Zhi Guoshi, and married Princess Taihua.

古文：主，惠妃所生，最见宠遇。
现代文：公主是武惠妃所生，最受宠遇。
English: The princess was born to Princess Wu Hui and was the most favored.

古文：而钊亦浸显。钊，国忠也。
现代文：而杨钊也渐渐显赫起来，杨钊即杨国忠。
English: And Yang Kunlun also gradually became prominent, Yang Kunlun, that is, Yang Guozhong.

古文：三姊皆美劭，帝呼为姨，封韩、虢、秦三国，为夫人，出入宫掖，恩宠声焰震天下。
现代文：贵妃的三位姐姐都有才貌，玄宗称之为姨，封为韩、虢、秦三国夫人，出入宫廷，其恩宠声焰震动天下。
English: The three sisters of Guifei were all talented. Xuanzong called them aunts, and they were given the titles of the Three Kingdoms of Han, Qi, and Qin. They went in and out of the court, and the fame of their grace shook the world.

古文：每命妇入班，持盈公主等皆让不敢就位。
现代文：每逢命妇入班进见，持盈公主等人都谦让而不敢就位。
English: Every time the bride-to-be enters the classroom, Princess Mochiharu and the others are too shy to take their seats.

古文：台省、州县奉请托，奔走期会过诏敕。
现代文：台、省及州县长官承迎其请托，奔走照办甚过诏旨。
English: The governors of Taiwan, provinces and prefectures accepted his request and rushed to carry out the edict.

古文：四方献饷结纳，门若市然。
现代文：四方官员奉献财宝接交私恩，门庭如同市朝。
English: The officials of the four sides offered their treasure and received personal favors, and the court was like that of the imperial court.

古文：建平、信成二公主以与妃家忤，至追内封物，驸马都尉独孤明失官。
现代文：建平、信成二公主因与贵妃家族有嫌隙，竟被追缴封其财物，驸马都尉独孤明因此而罢官。
English: Princesses Jianping and Xincheng II had a rift with Guifei's family, and as a result, they were forced to hand over their property. As a result, Captain Xingma was dismissed from his post.

古文：它日，妃以谴还铦第，比中仄，帝尚不御食，笞怒左右。
现代文：有一天，杨贵妃因受责被送还杨钅舌居宅，到中午时分，玄宗仍不思饮食，怒笞左右。
English: One day, Yang Guifei was sent back to Yang Xizhong's home due to being reprimanded. By noon, Xuanzong still did not want to eat, and was furious.

古文：高力士欲验帝意，乃白以殿中供帐、司农酒饩百馀车送妃所，帝即以御膳分赐。
现代文：高力士想试探玄宗心意，便请求将殿中供帐以及司农酒食百余车送至贵妃处所，玄宗随即将御膳分赐给她。
English: In order to test the sincerity of Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Gaoli asked that the accounts of the palace and more than a hundred carts of wine and food be sent to the premises of the empress dowager. Emperor Xuanzong then gave her a portion of the imperial meal.

古文：力士知帝旨，是夕，请召妃还，下钥安兴坊门驰入。
现代文：高力士由此得知玄宗意图，这天晚上，奏请召贵妃还宫，打开安兴坊门驰车入宫。
English: From this, Goryeo learned of Emperor Xuanzong's intentions. That evening, he requested the emperor to summon the empress to return to the palace, open the Anxingfang gate, and enter the palace.

古文：妃见帝，伏地谢，帝释然，抚尉良渥。
现代文：贵妃一见玄宗，便伏地请罪，玄宗欢然抚慰了好一会儿。
English: When Guifei saw Xuanzong, she pleaded guilty, and Xuanzong consoled her joyfully for a long time.

古文：明日，诸姨上食，乐作，帝骤赐左右不可赀。
现代文：第二天，诸姨进献美食，玄宗作乐终日，大量赏赐财宝给左右近臣。
English: The next day, all the aunts presented delicious food, and Xuanzong entertained all day long, and gave a large amount of treasure to his right and left vassals.

古文：由是愈见宠，赐诸姨钱岁百万为脂粉费。
现代文：从此以后，所受恩宠更甚，赏赐诸姨每年一百万钱作为脂粉之费。
English: From then on, the favors were even greater, and the aunts were rewarded with one million money every year as the cost of powdered fat.

古文：铦以上柱国门列戟，与铦、国忠、诸姨五家第舍联亘，拟宪宫禁，率一堂费缗千万。
现代文：杨钅舌以上柱国身份列戟于门，与杨钅奇、杨国忠、诸姨五家宅第连亘，仿照宫禁之制，大抵一堂之费用钱一千万缗。
English: Yang Guozhong's status as a pillar of the country ranks first in the door, with Yang Guoqi, Yang Guozhong, and aunts of the five houses. According to the palace ban system, the cost of a hall is usually 10 million baht.

古文：见它第有胜者，辄坏复造，务以环侈相夸诩，土木工不息。
现代文：一见别家宅第胜过自己，就拆毁重建，务必以瑰丽豪华相夸耀，土木之工，昼夜不息。
English: If you see someone else's house that is better than your own, you must tear it down and rebuild it. Be sure to boast of the magnificence and luxury. Civil engineering works day and night.

古文：帝所得奇珍及贡献分赐之，使者相衔於道，五家如一。
现代文：玄宗所得奇珍异宝及四方进贡之物分赐各家，使者相继行于道上，五家如一。
English: Emperor Xuanzong gave each family a share of the treasures and tributes received from the four quarters. The emissaries successively walked on the road, and the five families became one.

古文：妃每从游幸，乘马则力士授辔策。
现代文：贵妃每逢随从游幸，乘马时则由高力士授予缰绳马鞭。
English: Whenever Guifei accompanied Yu for pleasure, she was given a bridle whip by Gao Lixi when she rode a horse.

古文：凡充锦绣官及冶彖金玉者，大抵千人，奉须索，奇服秘玩，变化若神。
现代文：总计为贵妃织锦刺绣及钅容造雕刻之工，就达到一千余人，以供其需索，其所用奇服秘玩，变化如神。
English: In total, there are more than a thousand people who work for Guifei brocade embroidery and Yulong carving to supply their needs, and the fancy clothes they use change like the wind.

古文：四方争为怪珍入贡，动骇耳目。
现代文：四方官员争先进贡奇珍异宝，动骇耳目。
English: The officials of the four parties competed for the most valuable and rare treasures, which was astounding.

古文：於是岭南节度使张九章、广陵长史王翼以所献最，进九章银青阶，擢翼户部侍郎，天下风靡。
现代文：其中，岭南节度使张九章、广陵长史王翼因贡献最多，因而提升张九章官阶为银青光禄大夫，提拔王翼为户部侍郎，由此天下靡然成风。
English: Among them, the Lingnan Festival made Zhang Jiuzhang and Wang Ying, the governor of Guangling, because they contributed the most. As a result, Zhang Jiuzhang was promoted to the official rank of silver Qingguanglu doctor, and Wang Ying was promoted to the household attendant, which became popular all over the world.

古文：妃嗜荔支，必欲生致之，乃置骑传送，走数千里，味未变已至京师。
现代文：贵妃嗜食荔枝，定要趁新鲜时送到手中，于是为她设置飞骑传递，奔驰数千里，味道没变就送到京师。
English: Guifei is a lover of lychees, and she must have them delivered to her when they are fresh. Therefore, she has arranged for them to be transported by flying horse and chariot for thousands of miles, and they will be delivered to Beijing without any change in taste.

古文：天宝九载，妃复得谴还外第，国忠谋於吉温。
现代文：天宝九载，贵妃又因违背旨意，被送归外家。
English: After nine years of heavenly treasure, Guifei was sent back to her foreign home for violating her will.

古文：温因见帝曰： 妇人过忤当死，然何惜宫中一席广为鈇钅质地，更使外辱乎？ 
现代文：杨国忠赶紧与吉温商议，吉温便入见玄宗说道： 妇人违抗旨意应当处死，但何惜宫中一席之地使其就死，何须使其外出受辱呢？ 
English: Yang Guozhong hurriedly discussed the matter with Ji Wen. Ji Wen then went to see Xuanzong and said, "A woman who defies the will of the emperor should be put to death. But why not give her a place in the palace so that she can die? Why should she be humiliated outside the palace?

古文：帝感动，辍食，诏中人张韬光赐之。
现代文：玄宗因此动心，停止进食，下诏中使张韬光将御食赐予贵妃。
English: Motivated by this, Emperor Xuanzong stopped eating and ordered Zhang Bingguang to give the imperial food to the empress.

古文：妃因韬光谢帝曰： 妾有罪当万诛，然肤发外皆上所赐，今且死，无以报。 
现代文：贵妃请韬光向玄宗请罪说： 妾有罪过，罪该万死，但除了身体头发之外尽是皇上所赐，如今将死，无以报答圣恩。 
English: Guifei asked Gongguang to plead guilty to Xuanzong, saying: "The concubine has sinned and deserves to die, but except for the hair on her body, it was all given to her by the emperor. Now she will die without being able to repay the grace."

古文：引刀断一缭发奏之，曰： 以此留诀。 
现代文：随即持刀断发一束附奏说： 将此留与皇上诀别。 
English: Then, holding a knife, he cut off a bunch of notes and said, "I'll leave this for my farewell to the Emperor."

古文：帝见骇惋，遽召入，礼遇如初。
现代文：玄宗见发后惊慌害怕，赶紧召入宫中，礼遇恩宠照旧。
English: Xuanzong panicked and was afraid after seeing the hair, and was quickly summoned to the palace, where he was treated with the same courtesy and grace.

古文：因又幸秦国及国忠第，赐两家钜万。
现代文：接着又临幸秦国夫人及杨国忠宅第，赐予两家钱财巨万。
English: Next, he also blessed the Qin and Yang families, bestowing huge amounts of money and wealth on both families.

古文：国忠既遥领剑南，每十月，帝幸华清宫，五宅车骑皆从，家别为队，队一色，俄五家队合，烂若万花，川谷成锦绣，国忠导以剑南旗节。
现代文：杨国忠随后遥领剑南节度使，每逢十月，玄宗临幸华清宫时，杨氏五宅车骑全都随同前往，每家为一队，每队穿一种颜色的服装，不一会儿五家队伍汇合，灿烂如万花之怒放，川谷皆成锦绣之色。杨国忠以剑南节度使旗节为先导。
English: Yang Guozhong then led the Jiannan Festival, and every October, when the Xuanzong visited the Huaqing Palace, Yang's five carriage rides all went along. Each family was a team, each team wore a color of clothing, and soon the five teams converged, brilliant as the rage of flowers, and the valley was embroidered. Yang Guozhong led the Flag Festival with the Jiannan Festival.

古文：遗钿堕舄，瑟瑟玑琲，狼藉於道，香闻数十里。
现代文：沿途珠玑作响，遗弃的首饰绣鞋不断，芳香闻于数十里外。
English: Beads rattle along the way, abandoned jewelry and embroidered shoes continue, and the fragrance can be smelled dozens of miles away.

古文：十载正月望夜，妃家与广宁主僮骑争阛门，鞭挺讠雚竞，主堕马，仅得去。
现代文：天宝十载正月十五日夜里，贵妃家人与广宁公主仆骑争过西市之门，杨氏家奴挥鞭喧闹，公主坠落马下，狼狈离去。
English: On the night of the fifteenth day of the first month of the tenth year of the Heavenly Treasure, Guifei's family members and Guangning Princess's servants rode through the west gate of the city, Yang's servants waved whips noisily, the princess fell under the horse and left in disarray.

古文：主见帝泣，乃诏杀杨氏奴，贬驸马都尉程昌裔官。
现代文：公主见帝哭诉，玄宗才下诏诛杀杨氏家奴，但又贬黜其驸马都尉程昌裔的官爵。
English: The princess cried when she saw the emperor, and it was only then that Xuanzong issued an edict to kill the Yang family slave, but he also demeaned the official title of his favorite horse captain Cheng Chang.

古文：国忠之辅政，其息昢尚万春公主，暄尚延和郡主；弟鉴尚承荣郡主。
现代文：杨国忠辅政专权，其子杨日出娶万春公主为妻，杨暄娶延和郡主；其弟杨鉴娶承荣郡主。
English: Yang Guozhong supported the political dictatorship, his son Yang Yatong married Princess Wanchun, Yang Jie married Prince Yanhe, and his brother Yang Jian married Prince Cheng Rong.

古文：又诏为玄琰立家庙，帝自书其碑。
现代文：还下诏为杨玄琰设立家庙，玄宗亲自书写其碑文。
English: He also issued an edict to set up a family temple for Yang Xuanzong, and Xuanzong personally wrote its inscription.

古文：铦、秦国早死，故韩、虢与国忠贵最久。
现代文：杨钅舌与秦国夫人早死，因此韩国、虢国二夫人与杨国忠享受富贵最久。
English: Yang Guozhong and Qin Guofei died early, so the second wife of South Korea, Ye Guofei and Yang Guozhong enjoyed the wealth for the longest time.

古文：而虢国素与国忠乱，颇为人知，不耻也。
现代文：而虢国夫人素与杨国忠私通，颇为人知，而不以为耻。
English: On the other hand, the wife of Min Guo used to have a personal relationship with Yang Guozhong, which is well-known and not considered shameful.

古文：每入谒，并驱道中，从监、侍姆百馀骑，炬蜜如尽，靓妆盈里，不施帏障，时人谓为 雄狐 。
现代文：每逢入谒皇上，乘马并驱于道上，随从百余骑，点燃蜡炬如昼，艳装盈巷，不施帏幔，时人称他为 雄狐 。
English: Every time the emperor entered the imperial palace, he rode a horse and drove on the road, followed by more than a hundred riders, lit a wax torch like day, dressed in bright clothes, and did not wear a beard. At that time, people called him a male fox.

古文：诸王子孙凡婚聘，必先因韩、虢以请，辄皆遂，至数百千金以谢。
现代文：诸王子孙凡遇嫁娶之事，必定先因韩国、虢国二夫人奏请，无不如愿，以致需用数百甚至千金来表示答谢。
English: When princes like Sun Fan got married, they had to ask the second lady of South Korea and Japan for permission first, so they had to spend hundreds or even thousands of dollars to say thank you.

古文：初，安禄山有边功，帝宠之，诏与诸姨约为兄弟，而禄山母事妃，来朝，必宴饯结欢。
现代文：起初，安禄山立有边功，玄宗很宠信他，下诏让他与诸姨结为兄弟，而禄山认贵妃为义母，每逢入朝，必定大摆酒宴结其欢好。
English: At first, An Lushan was a great military leader. Xuanzong was very fond of him, and issued an edict that he and his aunts should become brothers. Lu Shan considered Guifei to be his mother-in-law, and whenever he entered the imperial court, he would certainly hold a grand wine banquet to celebrate his favor.

古文：禄山反，以诛国忠为名，且指言妃及诸姨罪。
现代文：禄山造反时，以诛除杨国忠为名，而且指斥贵妃及诸姨之罪。
English: When Lushan rebelled, he did so in the name of eliminating Yang Guozhong, and also pointed out the sins of Guifei and his aunts.

古文：帝欲以皇太子抚军，因禅位，诸杨大惧，哭於廷。
现代文：玄宗想命皇太子监抚军国之事，借此禅让帝位。诸杨大惊失色，哭于朝廷。
English: Xuanzong wanted the crown prince to supervise the affairs of the military state, and used this opportunity to abdicate the throne. Zhu Yang was shocked and cried in the imperial court.

古文：国忠入白妃，妃衔塊请死，帝意沮，乃止。
现代文：国忠入告贵妃，贵妃口衔土块请死，玄宗之意受阻，才中止这样做。
English: Guozhong sued Guifei, Guifei sued the clod, and the intention of Xuanzong was blocked, only to stop doing so.

古文：及西幸至马嵬，陈玄礼等以天下计诛国忠，已死，军不解。
现代文：到后来西巡至马嵬坡时，陈玄礼等人为天下谋议诛杀国忠，但国忠死后，军士仍然不愿散开。
English: Later, when the westward patrol reached Ma'anpo, Chen Xuanli and others plotted to kill Guotong for the world, but after Guotong's death, the sergeant still did not want to disperse.

古文：帝遣力士问故，曰： 祸本尚在！ 
现代文：玄宗派遣高力士寻问原因，军士说： 祸源尚在！ 
English: Xuanzong sent Gao Lixi to inquire about the cause. The sergeant said, "The source of the disaster is still there!"

古文：帝不得已，与妃诀，引而去，缢路祠下，裹尸以紫茵，瘗道侧，年三十八。
现代文：玄宗无可奈何，只好与贵妃诀别，让人牵去，缢杀于路旁祠庙之下，用紫茵包裹其尸，埋于道旁，时年三十八岁。
English: Unable to do anything else, Xuanzong had no choice but to say goodbye to Guifei, let someone take her away, killed her under the roadside temple, wrapped her body in purple and buried it on the roadside, at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：帝至自蜀，道过其所，使祭之，且诏改葬。
现代文：事后玄宗从蜀地返回，路经其处，派遣中使祭奠，而且下诏将其改葬。
English: After the event, Xuanzong returned from Shudi, passing through the place, sent a memorial service, and the following edict changed his funeral.

古文：礼部侍郎李揆曰： 龙武将士以国忠负上速乱，为天下杀之。
现代文：礼部侍郎李揆说： 龙武将士因杨国忠辜负皇恩招致祸乱，为天下人杀之。
English: Li Yan, the attendant of the ceremonial department, said: Longwu generals were killed for the whole world because of Yang Guozhong's betrayal of the imperial grace.

古文：今葬妃，恐反仄自疑。 
现代文：如今要安葬贵妃，恐怕会导致反仄之人疑惧。 
English: I am afraid that burying the empress now would arouse suspicion among her opponents.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：玄宗只好作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：密遣中使者具棺椁它葬焉。
现代文：暗派中使备办棺椁将她重新下葬。
English: An order was issued to prepare a coffin and bury her again.

古文：启瘗，故香囊犹在，中人以献，帝视之，凄感流涕，命工貌妃於别殿，朝夕往，必为鲠欷。
现代文：启土发视时，从前所佩的香囊还在，中使将它献给玄宗，玄宗视之，百感交集，泪下不止，便命画工图其形貌挂于别殿，朝夕往视，哽咽欷虚欠。
English: At the time of the groundbreaking ceremony, the incense burner he used to wear was still there. The Chinese envoy dedicated it to Xuanzong. Xuanzong looked at it with mixed feelings and shed more than a few tears. He then ordered the artist to hang the image of it in the hall of residence. He gazed at it morning and evening, choking and choking.

古文：马嵬之难，虢国与国忠妻裴柔等奔陈仓，县令率吏追之，意以为贼，弃马走林。
现代文：马嵬坡发难时，虢国夫人与国忠之妻裴柔等人奔往陈仓，县令率领下属追捕，她们还认为是贼寇，弃马逃入林中。
English: When trouble broke out in Ma'anpo, Lady Yan Guo and Guotong's wife Pei Rong and others rushed to Chen Cang. The county magistrate led his subordinates in pursuit. They also thought it was a bandit and abandoned the horse and fled into the forest.

古文：虢国先杀其二子，柔曰： 丐我死！ 
现代文：虢国夫人先杀死二子，裴柔说： 请杀了我吧！ 
English: Mrs. Min first killed her two sons, and Pei Rong said, "Please kill me!"

古文：即并其女刺杀之，乃自刭，不殊，吏载置於狱，问曰： 国家乎？贼乎？ 
现代文：便连同其女一道杀死，随即自刎而未断气，县吏车载置于狱中，她还问人说： 这是朝廷的旨意呢，还是贼人的意图？ 
English: Then, together with his daughter, he killed her. He then hanged himself before dying. The county official was put in prison. She also asked: Was this the will of the court, or the intention of the thief?

古文：吏曰： 互有之。 
现代文：县吏回答说： 两者都有。 
English: The county clerk replied, "Both."

古文：乃死，瘗陈仓东郭外。
现代文：最终因血凝于喉而死，被埋于陈仓东郭之外。
English: He eventually died from blood clotting in his throat and was buried outside Chencang Dongguo.

