古文：春，正月，壬寅朔，帝加元服，皇太后下诏归政，复称崇德太后。
现代文：起，止，一共七年。晋纪二十六晋孝武帝太元元年春季，正月，壬寅朔，东晋孝武帝加冠，皇太后下达诏令，将朝政归还给他，自己恢复崇德太后的称号。
English: The 26th year of the Jin Dynasty began with Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty being crowned in the spring of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first

古文：甲辰，大赦，改元。
现代文：甲辰，实行大赦，改年号为太元。
English: On the third day of the new year, there will be a general amnesty, and the year will be changed.

古文：丙午，帝始临朝。
现代文：丙午，孝武帝开始临朝主持国政。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Rinzai came to listen to politics.

古文：以会稽内史郗愔为镇军大将军、都督浙江东五郡诸军事；徐州刺史桓冲为车骑将军、都督豫、江二州之六郡诸军事，自京口徙镇姑孰。
现代文：任命会稽内史郗为镇军大将军、都督浙江东五郡诸军事；任命徐州刺史桓冲为车骑将军、都督豫江二州之六郡诸军事，从京口调到姑孰镇守。
English: He appointed the internal auditor Shi Yan as the general of the town army and the military governor of the five counties in the east of Zhejiang Province; he appointed the military governor of the six counties in the two states of the Yangtze River as the cavalry general and the military governor of the six counties in the two states of the Yangtze River, and was transferred from Jingkou to the town guard of Guzhen.

古文：谢安欲以王蕴为方伯，故先解冲徐州。
现代文：谢安想让王蕴做地方长官，所以先解除桓冲在徐州的职务。
English: Xie An wanted Wang Yun to be the local governor, so he first dismissed Huan Chong from his post in Xuzhou.

古文：乙卯，加谢安中书监，录尚书事。
现代文：乙卯，让谢安担任中书监，录尚书事。
English: Second, let Xie An serve as the Chinese book supervisor and record the book affairs.

古文：二月，辛卯，秦王坚下诏曰： 朕闻王者劳于求贤，逸于得士，斯言何其验也！
现代文：二月，辛卯，前秦王苻坚下达诏令说： 朕听说作为帝王，应该在搜求贤能的人时辛劳，得到合适的人才后就省心省力了。
English: In February, Xinwu, the former Qin King He Jian issued an edict saying: I have heard that as an emperor, I should work hard when searching for capable people. Once I get the right talent, I will save my time and effort.

古文：往得丞相，常谓帝王易为。
现代文：这话多么符合实际呀！过去我得到了丞相王猛，经常说帝王非常容易做。
English: How true this is! In the past, I got the chancellor Wang Meng, and often said that the emperor was very easy to do.

古文：自丞相违世，须发中白，每一念之，不觉酸恸。
现代文：自从丞相去世以后，我已经操劳得胡须头发都半白了，每当想到王猛，酸楚悲痛就油然而生。
English: Since the death of the prime minister, I have worked so hard that my beard and hair have turned half-white. Whenever I think of Wang Meng, a sour sorrow arises.

古文：今天下既无丞相，或政教沦替，可分遣侍臣周巡郡县，问民疾苦。 
现代文：如今天下既然失去丞相，政事教化或许会陷于沦废，可以分派侍臣周游巡视各郡县，询问民间疾苦。 
English: For example, now that we have lost the prime minister, political education may fall into disuse. We can assign courtiers to travel around the counties and counties to inquire about people's illnesses.

古文：三月，秦兵寇南乡，拔之，山蛮三万户降秦。
现代文：三月，前秦的军队进犯南乡，攻下该地，山蛮民众三万户投降前秦。
English: In March, the troops of the former Qin invaded Nanxiang and conquered the area. Thirty thousand mountain barbarians surrendered to the former Qin.

古文：夏，五月，甲寅，大赦。
现代文：夏季，五月，甲寅，东晋实行大赦。
English: In the summer, in May, there was a general amnesty in Jiayin and Dongjin.

古文：初，张天锡之杀张邕也，刘肃及安定梁景皆有功，二人由是有宠，赐姓张氏，以为己子，使预政事。
现代文：当初，张天锡诛杀张邕的时候，刘肃以及安定人梁景全都有功，他们二人因此得宠，被赐姓张氏，张天锡把他们当作自己的儿子，让他们参与政事。
English: At the beginning, when Zhang Tianxi assassinated Zhang Ye, Liu Su and the stable person Liang Jingquan both contributed to it. As a result, the two of them were favored and given the surname Zhang. Zhang Tianxi treated them as his sons and let them participate in politics.

古文：天锡荒于酒色，不亲庶务，黜世子大怀而立嬖妾焦氏之子大豫，以焦氏为左夫人，人情愤怨。
现代文：张天锡沉湎于酒色，不亲自处理政务，废黜了世子张大怀，改立宠妾焦氏的儿子张大豫为世子，以焦氏作为左夫人，人们心里都很怨恨愤怒。
English: Zhang Tianxi indulged in wine, did not personally handle government affairs, dethroned the heir Zhang Dahui, and replaced the favorite concubine Jiao's son Zhang Dayu as the heir, with Jiao as the left wife, people are very resentful and angry.

古文：从弟从事中郎宪舆榇切谏，不听。
现代文：堂弟从事中郎张宪用车拉着棺材，以死劝谏，张天锡也不听从。
English: Zhang Tianxi did not listen to his cousin, Zhang Xian, who was engaged as a middle brother, who used a car to pull the coffin and advised him to die.

古文：秦王坚下诏曰： 张天锡虽称籓受位，然臣道未纯，可遣使持节、武卫将军武都苟苌、左将军毛盛、中书令梁熙、步兵校尉姚苌等将兵临西河，尚书郎阎负、梁殊奉诏征天锡入朝，若有违王命，即进师扑讨。 
现代文：前秦王苻坚下达诏书说： 张天锡虽然对我们称藩，接受了我们授予的官位，但他为臣之道不纯，可以派遣使持节、武卫将军苟苌和左将军毛盛、中书令梁熙、步兵校尉姚苌等人统领军队逼近西河驻扎，让尚书郎阎负、梁殊尊奉诏令，征召张天锡前来朝廷，如果他违背命令，马上进军讨伐。 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian issued an imperial decree saying: Although Zhang Tianxi called us a clan and accepted the official rank we awarded him, his way of being a vassal was not pure. He could send the envoy Jixie, the general of the armed forces Guo Jun and the general of the left Mao Sheng, the commander of the Chinese army Liang Xi, the infantry captain Yao Jun and others to lead the army to approach and camp near the West River, let Shang Shuro Yan and Liang Shuzhong obey the imperial decree and conscript Zhang Tianxi to come to the imperial court, and if he violated the order, he would immediately march into the army to fight.

古文：是时，秦步骑十三万，军司段铿谓周虓曰： 以此众战，谁能敌之！ 
现代文：这时，前秦的步、骑兵有十三万人，军司段铿对周说： 以这么多的兵众出战，有谁能抵挡！ 
English: At this time, there were 130,000 foot and cavalry soldiers in front of Qin, and the military commander Duan Yu said to Zhou: With so many soldiers going to war, who can resist!

古文：虓曰： 戎狄以来，未之有也。 
现代文：周说： 在戎狄之人这里，确实是从来也没有过的。 
English: Zhou said, "Here in Yongdian, it's really never happened before.

古文：坚又命秦州刺史苟池、河州刺史李辩、凉州刺史王统帅三州之众为苟苌后继。
现代文：苻坚又命令秦州刺史苟池、河州刺史史李辩、凉州刺史王统率领三州的兵众作为苟苌的后继部队。
English: Yu Jian also ordered Qinzhou Zhishigouchi, Hezhou Zhishigou Li Fen and Liangzhou Zhishigou Wang to lead the troops of the three states as the follow-up troops.

古文：秋，七月，阎负、梁殊至姑臧。
现代文：秋季，七月，阎负、梁殊抵达姑臧。
English: In the autumn, in July, Yan Rui and Liang Shu arrived in Gushan.

古文：张天锡会官属谋之，曰： 今入朝，必不返；如其不从，秦兵必至，将若之何？ 
现代文：张天锡召集手下的官员们商量，说： 如今前往朝廷，一定就无法返回了；如果不听从征召，前秦的军队一定会到来，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhang Tianxi called his officials together for consultation and said: "If you go to the imperial court now, you will not be able to return; if you do not obey the call, the former Qin army will surely come. What should you do?

古文：禁中录事席仂曰： 以爱子为质，赂以重宝，以退其师，然后徐为之计，此屈伸之术也。 
现代文：禁中录事席仂说： 以您心爱的儿子作为人质，再给他们奉赠贵重的宝物，以使他们的军队撤退，然后再从容计议，这是以屈求伸的办法。 
English: "Take your beloved son as a hostage, give them valuable treasures to make their army retreat, and then discuss things calmly. This is a way to get ahead by bending over," said the censors.

古文：众皆怒曰： 吾世事晋朝，忠节著于海内。
现代文：众人听后全都愤怒，说： 我们世世代代奉事晋朝，忠诚节气闻名海内。
English: After hearing this, everyone was furious, saying, "We have served the Jin Dynasty for generations, and our loyalty to the solar terms is well-known overseas.

古文：今一旦委身贼庭，辱及祖宗，丑莫大焉！
现代文：如今一旦委身于秦贼门下，耻辱殃及祖宗。再也没有比这更大的羞耻了！
English: Nowadays, once you commit yourself to the Qin thieves, the shame will affect your ancestors. There is no greater shame than this!

古文：且河西天险，百年无虞，若悉境内精兵，右招西域，北引匈奴，以拒之，何遽知其不捷也！ 
现代文：况且凭仗河西的天险，百年无患，如果出动境内的全部精兵，再向西延请西域、向北延请匈奴的兵力抵抗他们，怎么就知道不能取胜呢！ 
English: Moreover, by virtue of the natural danger in the west of the river, there is no danger for a hundred years. If all the elite soldiers in the territory are dispatched, and then the troops of the Western Regions are invited to the west, and the Huns are invited to the north to resist them, how can they know that they cannot win?

古文：天锡攘袂大言曰： 孤计决矣，言降者斩！ 
现代文：张天锡捋起袖子大声说： 我主意已定，说投降者斩首！ 
English: Zhang Tianxi rolled up his sleeves and said loudly: My mind is made up, I say behead those who surrender!

古文：使谓阎负、梁殊曰： 君欲生归乎，死归乎？ 
现代文：于是张天锡派人告诉阎负、梁殊说： 你们是想活着回去呢，还是死着回去？ 
English: So Zhang Tianxi sent someone to tell Yan Qi and Liang Shu: "Do you want to return alive, or do you want to return dead?"

古文：殊等辞气不屈，天锡怒，缚之军门，命军士交射之，曰： 射而不中，不与我同心者也。 
现代文：梁殊等人回答的语气毫不屈服，张天锡发怒，把他们捆绑在军营的门柱上，命令士兵乱箭射死他们，并说： 射不中的人，就是和我不一心。 
English: Liang Shu and others answered in an uncompromising tone. Zhang Tianxi flew into a rage, tied them to the gatepost of the military camp, ordered the soldiers to shoot them with random arrows, and said: "The one who can't be shot is the one with my heart."

古文：其母严氏泣曰： 秦主以一州之地，横制天下，东平鲜卑，南取巴、蜀，兵不留行，所向无敌。
现代文：张天锡的母亲严氏哭泣着说： 秦国主靠一州之地起家，横扫天下，向东平定了鲜卑，向南攻取了巴、蜀，军队丝毫没有被阻滞。
English: Zhang Tianxi's mother Yan said with tears: "Qin Guozhong relied on the land of Yizhou to start his family, swept across the world, leveled Xinbei to the east, and conquered Ba and Shu to the south. The army was not hindered at all.

古文：汝若降之，犹可延数年之命。
现代文：你如果投降了，还可以延长几年性命。
English: If you surrender, you can add a few years to your life.

古文：今以蕞尔一隅，抗衡大国，又杀其使者，亡无日矣！ 
现代文：如今以此一隅之地，抗衡大国，又杀掉了他们的使者，离灭亡没有几天了！ 
English: Now, in this corner of the world, they have defied the great powers, killed their emissaries, and are only a few days away from extinction!

古文：天锡使龙骧将军马建帅众二万拒秦。
现代文：张天锡派龙骧将军马建率领兵众二万人抵抗前秦。
English: Zhang Tianxi sent Longyu General Ma Jian to lead 20,000 soldiers to resist the former Qin.

古文：秦人闻天锡杀阎负、梁殊，八月，梁熙、姚苌、王统、李辩济自清石津，攻凉骁烈将军梁济于河会城，降之。
现代文：前秦人听说张天锡杀掉阎负、梁殊，八月，梁熙、姚苌、王统、李辩从清石津渡过西河，在河会城攻打前凉骁烈将军梁济，降服了他们。
English: Former Qin people heard that Zhang Tianxi killed Yan Gui and Liang Shu, and in August, Liang Xi, Yao Wei, Wang Tong and Li Ying crossed the West River from Qing Shijin and defeated Liang Ji, the great general of Liangbei, before attacking Hehui City.

古文：甲申，苟苌济自石城津，与梁熙等会攻缠缩城，拔之。
现代文：甲申，荀苌由石城津渡河，与梁熙会合，攻取了缠缩城。
English: Gaoshin, Zou crossed the river from Shichengjin, met with Liang Xi, and captured Tangled City.

古文：马建惧，自杨非退屯清塞。
现代文：马建畏惧，从杨非退守清塞。
English: Ma Jian was afraid and retreated from Yangfei to Qingce.

古文：天锡又遣征东将军掌据帅众三万军于洪池，天锡自将馀众五万，军于金昌城。
现代文：张天锡又派征东将军掌据率领三万兵众集结于洪池，张天锡亲自统领剩下的五万兵众，集结在金昌城。
English: Zhang Tianxi also sent a general to conquer the East and led 30,000 soldiers to assemble in Hongchi. Zhang Tianxi personally led the remaining 50,000 soldiers to assemble in Jinchang City.

古文：安西将军敦煌宋皓言于天锡曰： 臣昼察人事，夜观天文，秦兵不可敌也，不如降之。 
现代文：安西将军、敦煌人宋皓向张天锡进言说： 臣白天观察人际表现，晚上观察天文星象，秦国的军队不可抵挡，不如投降。 
English: Anxi general and Dunhuang native Song Xi gave Zhang Tianxi a piece of advice, saying: "Officer, observe interpersonal performance during the day, observe the astronomical stars at night, the army of Qin is irresistible, it is better to surrender."

古文：天锡怒，贬皓为宣威护军。
现代文：张天锡发怒，将宋皓贬为宣威护军。
English: Zhang Tianxi was enraged and belittled Song Tao as a propagandist.

古文：广武太守辛章曰： 马建出于行陈，必不为国家用。 
现代文：广武太守辛章说： 马建出身于行伍，一定不会为国家效力。 
English: Guangwu's grand marshal Xin Zhang said: Ma Jian was born in the military and will not serve the country.

古文：苟苌使姚苌帅甲士三千为前驱。
现代文：苟苌让姚苌率领三千甲士作为前锋部队。
English: He asked Yao Jun to lead the three thousand soldiers as the vanguard.

古文：庚寅，马建帅万人迎降，馀兵皆散走。
现代文：庚寅，马建率领一万人向苟苌投降，其余的兵众全都逃散。
English: Geng Ying, Ma Jian led ten thousand people to surrender to Gou Ye, and the rest of the troops all fled.

古文：辛卯，苟苌及掌据战于洪池，据兵败，马为乱兵所杀，其属董儒授之以马，据曰： 吾三督诸军，再秉节钺，八将禁旅，十总外兵，宠任极矣。
现代文：辛卯，苟苌与掌据在洪池交战，掌据的部队被打败，战马被乱兵杀死，属下董儒交给他一匹马，掌据说： 我三次督领各路军队，二次持符节斧钺，八次领宫中卫队，十次在外带兵，受到的重用宠信达到了顶峰。
English: Xinwu, Goujun and Pao Zheng fought in Hongchi. Pao Zheng's troops were defeated and his war horse was killed by ruffians. His subordinate, Dong Ru, gave him a horse. Pao reportedly said, "I have commanded the army of all directions three times, twice with a knotted axe, eight times with the central guard of the imperial palace, and ten times with soldiers outside. The favors I have received have reached their peak.

古文：今卒困于此，此吾之死地也，尚安之乎！ 
现代文：今天终于受困于此，这就是我的死亡之地，怎么还能安身活命呢！ 
English: Today I am finally trapped here, this is the place of my death, how can I still be alive!

古文：乃就帐免胄，西向稽首，伏剑而死。
现代文：于是进入军帐，褪下头盔甲胄，向西叩头，自刎而死。
English: So he entered the military tent, took off his helmet and armor, bowed to the West, and hanged himself to death.

古文：秦兵杀军司席仂。
现代文：前秦的士兵杀死军司席仂。
English: The soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty killed the military commander Qin Shi.

古文：癸巳，秦兵入清塞，天锡遣司兵赵充哲帅众拒之。
现代文：癸巳，前秦的军队进入清塞，张天锡派司兵赵充哲率领兵众抵抗。
English: At this time, the former Qin army entered Qingsi, and Zhang Tianxi sent the soldier Zhao Chongzhe to lead the soldiers to resist.

古文：秦兵与充哲战于赤岸，大破之，俘斩三万八千级，充哲死。
现代文：前秦的军队与赵充哲在赤岸交战，彻底攻破了他们，俘获并斩首三万八千人，赵充哲战死。
English: The army of the former Qin Dynasty fought against Zhao Chongzhe on the Red Bank, completely defeated them, captured and beheaded thirty-eight thousand people, and Zhao Chongzhe died in battle.

古文：天锡出城自战，城内又叛。
现代文：张天锡亲自出城迎战，城内又发生了反叛。
English: Zhang Tianxi personally went out of the city to meet the battle, and there was another rebellion in the city.

古文：天锡与数千骑奔还姑臧。
现代文：张天锡与数千骑兵逃回姑臧。
English: Zhang Tianxi fled back to Gushan with thousands of cavalry.

古文：甲午，秦兵至姑臧，天锡素车白马，面缚舆榇，降于军门。
现代文：甲午，前秦的军队抵达姑臧，张天锡以白车白马载着棺材，双手反绑于身后，在军营门前投降。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, the former Qin army arrived in Guzheng. Zhang Tianxi surrendered in front of the military camp with a white carriage and a white horse carrying a coffin, with his hands tied behind his back.

古文：苟苌释缚焚梓，送于长安。凉州郡县悉降于秦。
现代文：苟苌为他松绑，焚烧了棺材，送他到长安，凉州的郡县全都投降了前秦。
English: Goguryeo untied him, burned his coffin, and sent him to Chang'an. All the counties in Liangzhou surrendered to the former Qin.

古文：九月，秦王坚以梁熙为凉州刺史，镇姑臧。
现代文：九月，前秦王苻坚任命梁熙为凉州刺史，镇守姑臧。
English: In September, the former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Liang Xi as the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：徙豪右七千馀户于关中，馀皆按堵如故。
现代文：将七千多户豪强世族迁徙到关中，其余的全都让他们在原地安居。
English: He moved more than seven thousand powerful families to Guanzhong, and let the rest of them live safely in the same place.

古文：封天锡为归义侯，拜北部尚书。
现代文：封张天锡为归义侯，授官北部尚书。
English: Zhang Tianxi was given the title of Guiyi Hou, and Northern Shangshu was awarded the title.

古文：初，秦兵之出也，先为天锡筑第于长安，至则居之。
现代文：当初，前秦的军队出征的时候，就预先为张天锡在长安建造了宅第，张天锡到达长安后就住在这里。
English: At the beginning, when the former Qin army went to war, they built a house for Zhang Tianxi in Chang'an in advance. Zhang Tianxi lived here after arriving in Chang'an.

古文：以天锡晋兴太守陇西彭和正为黄门侍郎，治中从事武兴苏膺、敦煌太守张烈为尚书郎，西平太守金城赵凝为金城太守，高昌杨干为高昌太守；馀皆随才擢叙。
现代文：任命张天锡手下的晋兴太守、陇西人彭和正为黄门侍郎，治中从事武兴人苏膺、敦煌太守张烈为尚书郎，西平太守金城人赵凝为金城太守，高昌人杨为高昌太守，其余的人全都根据才能如以任用。
English: Zhang Tianxi's subordinates, the governor of Jinxing, and Peng Hezheng of Shaanxi Province, were appointed as the attendants of the Yellow Gate. Su Xi, the governor of Wu Xing Province, and Zhang Lie, the governor of Dunhuang Province, were appointed as the clerks of the Yellow Gate. Zhao Geng, the governor of Jincheng Province, and Yang, the governor of Gaochang Province, were appointed as the governors of Jincheng and Gaochang, respectively. All the others were appointed according to their abilities.

古文：梁熙清俭爱民，河右安之，以天锡武威太守敦煌索泮为别驾，宋皓为主簿。
现代文：梁熙清正节俭，爱护民众，黄河以西因此很安定。他任用张天锡手下的武威太守敦煌人索泮为别驾，宋皓为簿。
English: Liang Xiqing was frugal and cared for the people, so the west of the Yellow River was very stable. He appointed Zhang Tianxi's military commander, Dunhuang's warlord, Sorong, as his second-in-command, and Song Tao as his secretary.

古文：西平郭护起兵攻秦，熙以皓为折冲将军，讨平之。
现代文：西平人郭护起兵攻打前秦，梁熙任命宋皓为折冲将军，前去讨伐并平定了他们。
English: Guo Guo, a Xiping man, raised an army to attack the former Qin, and Liang Xi appointed Song Tao as the general of the counterattack, went to fight and pacified them.

古文：桓冲闻秦攻凉州，遣兗州刺史硃序、江州刺史桓石秀与荆州督护桓罴游军沔、汉，为凉州声援；又遣豫州刺史桓伊帅众向寿阳，淮南太守刘波泛舟淮、泗，欲桡秦以救凉。
现代文：桓冲听说前秦攻打凉州，派兖州刺史朱序、江州刺史桓石秀与荆州督护桓罴率兵在沔水、汉水一带游巡，声援凉州。又派豫州刺史桓伊率领兵众开向寿阳，淮南太守刘波的水军乘船在淮水、泗水巡游，想分散前秦的兵力，以救助凉州。
English: Huan Chong heard that the former Qin Dynasty had attacked Liangzhou, and sent the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to patrol around the areas of Lishui and Hanshui with the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to attack Liangzhou. He also sent the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to patrol around the areas of Lishui and Hanshui with the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to attack Liangzhou. He also sent the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to patrol around the areas of Lishui and Hanshui with the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to attack Liangzhou. He also sent the soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to patrol around the areas of Shou

古文：闻凉州败没，皆罢兵。
现代文：当听说凉州失败覆没以后，全部停止行动。
English: When they heard that the failure in Liangzhou had been reversed, they all stopped their operations.

古文：初，哀帝减田租，亩收二升。
现代文：当初，东晋哀帝减少田租，每亩收租二升。
English: At first, Emperor Ai of the Eastern Jin Dynasty reduced the field rent to two liters per mu.

古文：乙巳，除度田收租之制，王公以下，口税米三斛，蠲在役之身。
现代文：乙巳，废除了按田亩收租的制度，王公以下的人，每人交纳三斛米的赋税，对服兵役、劳役的人实行蠲免。
English: At the same time, the system of collecting rent per mu of farmland was abolished, and people below the rank of prince were required to pay a tax of three mu of rice per person, and those who performed military service or labor service were exempted.

古文：冬，十月，移淮北民于淮南。
现代文：冬季，十月，东晋将淮河以北的百姓迁移到淮河以南。
English: In winter, in October, the Eastern Jin Dynasty moved the people north of the Huaihe River to the south of the Huaihe River.

古文：刘卫辰为代所逼，求救于秦，秦王坚以幽州刺史行唐公洛为北讨大都督，帅幽、冀兵十万击代；使并州刺史俱难、镇军将军邓羌、尚书赵迁、李柔、前将军硃肜、前禁将军张蚝、右禁将军郭庆帅步骑二十万，东出和龙，西出上都，皆与洛会，以卫辰为乡导。
现代文：刘卫辰受到了代国的威胁，向前秦求救，前秦王苻坚任命幽州刺史、行唐公苻洛为北讨大都督，率领幽州、冀州的十万军队攻击代国，让并州刺史俱难、镇军将军邓羌、尚书赵迁、李柔、前将军朱肜、前禁将军张蚝、右禁将军郭庆率领步兵、骑兵二十万人，东出和龙，西出上郡，全都与苻洛会合，让刘卫辰作向导。
English: Liu Weichen was threatened by the representative of the country and appealed to the former Qin Dynasty for help. The former Qin King Yu Jian appointed the governor of Yuzhou, the general of the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Luo, as the grand governor of the Northern Expedition. He led 100,000 troops from Yuzhou and Jizhou to attack the representative of the country. It was difficult for the governor of the annexed province to attack the representative of the country. The township generals Deng Yu, Shang Shu Zhao Qian, Li Rou, the former general Zhu Yu, the former forbidden general Zhang Yu, and the right forbidden general Guo Qing led 200,000 infantry and cavalry. They went to the east

古文：洛，菁之弟也。
现代文：苻洛是苻菁的弟弟。
English: Gong Luo is Gong Jing's younger brother.

古文：苟苌之伐凉州也，遣扬武将军马晖、建武将军杜周帅八千骑西出恩宿，邀张天锡走路，期会姑臧。
现代文：苟苌讨伐凉州的时候，派扬武将军马晖、建武将军杜周率领八千骑兵西出恩宿，截断张天锡的退路，并让他们在一定的期限内到姑臧会合。
English: During the siege of Liangzhou, Yangwu sent General Ma Jun and General Jianwu Du Zhou, leading eight thousand cavalrymen, to break Zhang Tianxi's retreat, and let them meet in Guzhen within a certain period of time.

古文：晖等行泽中，值水失期，于法应斩，有司奏征下狱。
现代文：马晖等行进到洼池，遇上了大水，延误了期限，按照军法应当斩首，有关部门奏请召回投入牢狱。
English: Ma Jun and others marched to the pool, encountered heavy water, delayed the deadline, according to military law should be beheaded, the relevant departments requested to recall to prison.

古文：秦王坚曰： 水春冬耗竭。秋夏盛涨，此乃苟苌量事失宜，非晖等罪。
现代文：前秦王苻坚说： 河水春季、冬季枯竭，秋季、夏季暴涨，这是苟苌估计上的失误，不是马晖等人的罪过。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said: "River water is depleted in spring and winter, and surges in autumn and summer. This is a miscalculation, not the fault of Ma Yu and others.

古文：今天下方有事，宜宥过责功。
现代文：如今天下正有战事，应该宽恕罪过责成他们立功。
English: If there is a war today, their sins should be forgiven and they should be made to perform meritorious deeds.

古文：命晖等回赴北军，击索虏以自赎。 
现代文：命令马晖等人掉头奔赴北军，攻击代国的敌虏以自我赎罪。 
English: He ordered Ma Jun and others to turn around and rush to the Northern Army to attack the enemies of the motherland and atone for their sins.

古文：众咸以为万里召将，非所以应速。坚曰： 晖等喜于免死，不可以常事疑也。 
现代文：众人都认为相距万里征召战将，难以迅速响应，苻坚说： 马晖等人对免于一死感到高兴，不能按常规去怀疑他们。 
English: Many people think that it is difficult to respond quickly to a conscription battle thousands of miles away, said Yu Jian: Ma Jun and others are happy to be spared from death, and they cannot be suspected as usual.

古文：晖等果倍道疾驱，遂及东军。
现代文：马晖等人果然日夜兼程，迅速行进，于是赶上了东军。
English: As expected, Ma Jun and others traveled both day and night, marching rapidly, and thus caught up with the Eastern Army.

古文：十一月，己巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，己巳朔，出现日食。
English: In November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：代王什翼犍使白部、独孤部南御秦兵，皆不胜，又使南部大人刘库仁将十万骑御之。
现代文：代王拓跋什翼犍让白部、独孤部在南面抵御前秦的军队，都没有取胜。又让南部大人刘库仁统领十万骑兵去抵御。
English: The king of Tuoba Shijiang let the White and Solitary Divisions resist the former Qin army in the south, but they did not win. He also let the southern adult Liu Kuren lead a hundred thousand cavalry to resist.

古文：库仁者，卫辰之族，什翼犍之甥也，与秦兵战于石子岭，库仁大败。
现代文：刘库仁与刘卫辰同族，是拓跋什翼犍的外甥。他与前秦的军队在石子岭交战，刘库仁大败。
English: Liu Kuren was a member of the same clan as Liu Weichen and was the nephew of Tuoba Shijian. He fought against the former Qin army in Shiziling, and Liu Kuren suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：什翼犍病，不能自将，乃帅诸部奔阴山之北。
现代文：拓跋什翼犍患病，不能亲自带兵上阵，于是率领众部族逃奔到阴山以北。
English: Tuoba Shijiang fell ill and could not personally lead the troops into battle, so he led the tribes to flee to the north of Yinshan.

古文：高车杂种尽叛，四面寇钞，不得刍牧，什翼犍复渡漠南。
现代文：高车的各部族全都反叛，四面攻劫掠夺，由于无法牧养牲畜，拓跋什翼犍又到了沙漠以南。
English: All the tribes in the carts rebelled, attacking and plundering on all sides. Unable to graze their livestock, the Tuoba Shilou went south of the desert.

古文：闻秦兵稍退，十二月，什翼犍还云中。
现代文：听说前秦的军队逐渐撤退，十二月，拓跋什翼犍回到云中。
English: I heard that the former Qin's army gradually retreated, and in December, Tuoba Shijiu returned to the clouds.

古文：初，什翼犍分国之半以授弟孤，孤卒，子斤失职怨望。
现代文：当初，拓跋什翼犍分出国土的一半授与弟弟拓跋孤，拓跋孤死后，儿子拓跋斤失去了继承的职位，因而心怀不满。
English: At first, Tuoba Shih Tzu awarded half of the land to his brother Tuoba Guo. After Tuoba Guo's death, his son Tuoba Jian lost the position he had inherited, and was therefore dissatisfied.

古文：世子寔及弟翰早卒，寔子珪尚幼，慕容妃之子阏婆、寿鸠、纥根、地干、力真、窟咄皆长，继嗣未定。
现代文：拓跋什翼犍的长子拓跋及弟弟拓跋翰早年死亡，拓跋的儿子拓跋年龄尚幼，慕容妃的儿子拓跋阏婆、拓跋寿鸠、拓跋纥根、拓跋地干、拓跋力真、拓跋窟咄全都年长，由谁来继位还未确定。
English: The eldest son Tuoba and younger brother Tuoba Han of Tuoba Shifeng died at an early age, Tuoba's son Tuoba is still young, and Mu Rongfei's sons Tuoba Shuba, Tuoba Shuxuan, Tuoba Xuangen, Tuoba Di Gan, Tuoba Lijin, and Tuoba Guoqi are all old, and it is not yet determined who will succeed.

古文：时秦兵尚在君子津，诸子每夜执兵警卫。
现代文：当时前秦的军队尚在君子津，慕容妃的儿子们每到夜晚都手持兵器警卫。
English: At that time, the former Qin army was still in Junjitsu, and Murongfei's sons were armed with weapons every night.

古文：斤因说什翼犍之庶长子寔君曰： 王将立慕容妃之子，欲先杀汝，故顷来诸子每夜戎服，以兵绕庐帐，伺便将发耳。 
现代文：拓跋斤借机劝说拓跋什翼犍的庶长子拓跋君说： 国王将要立慕容妃的儿子为继承人，想要先杀掉你，所以近来慕容妃儿子们每到夜晚都全副武装，领兵环绕庐帐，窥探好时机后就要动手了。 
English: Tuoba Jin took the opportunity to persuade Tuoba's eldest illegitimate son, Tuoba Jun, to say: "The king is going to make Murongfei's son the heir, and he wants to kill you first, so recently, Murongfei's sons have been fully armed every night, leading soldiers around the bed, and when they see a good opportunity, they will start.

古文：寔君信之，遂杀诸弟，并弑什翼犍。
现代文：拓跋君信以为真，于是杀掉了弟弟们，把拓跋什翼犍也杀了。
English: Tuoba believed it to be true, so he killed his brothers, and also killed Tuoba Shilong.

古文：是夜，诸子妇及部人奔告秦军，秦李柔、张蚝勒兵趋云中；部众逃溃，国中大乱。
现代文：当晚，慕容妃儿子们的妻子以及部属跑去向前秦的军队报告，前秦的李柔、张蚝率兵开赴云中，代国的部属兵众溃逃，国内大乱。
English: That evening, the wives and subordinates of the sons of Murongfei ran to report to the former Qin army. The former Qin Li Rong and Zhang Ye led the soldiers to Yunchu, and the subordinate soldiers of the representative country fled, causing a great disturbance in the country.

古文：珪母贺氏以珪走依贺讷。
现代文：拓跋的母亲贺氏带着拓跋投奔了贺讷。
English: Tuoba's mother, He, took Tuoba with her to Honne.

古文：讷，野干之子也。
现代文：贺讷是贺野干的儿子。
English: Honne is the son of Hono Kan.

古文：秦王坚召代长史燕凤，问代所以乱故，凤具以状对。
现代文：前秦王苻坚召见代国长史燕凤，问他导致代国大乱的原因，燕凤把实情原原本本地告诉了他。
English: Former Qin King Jian Jian summoned the acting head of state Shi Yanfeng and asked him about the reasons that led to the chaos in the country. Yan Feng told him the whole truth.

古文：坚曰： 天下之恶一也。 
现代文：苻坚说： 天下的丑恶都是一样的。 
English: Yu Jian said: The ugliness of the world is all the same.

古文：乃执寔君及斤，至长安，车裂之。
现代文：于是就将拓跋君及拓跋斤押解到长安，车裂了他们。
English: So they took Tuoba Jun and Tuoba Jin to Chang'an, and the car broke them.

古文：坚欲迁珪于长安，凤固请曰： 代王初亡，群下叛散，遗孙冲幼，莫相统摄。
现代文：苻坚想把拓跋迁移到长安，燕凤坚持请求说： 代王拓跋什翼犍刚刚死亡，群臣、部属背叛离散，留下来的孙子年幼，没有人再统领代国。
English: Yu Jian wanted to relocate Tuoba to Chang'an, and Yan Feng insisted on the request, saying: The king of Tuoba, Shi Yingtao, had just died, his ministers and subordinates had betrayed and dispersed, and his grandchildren who remained were young. There was no one left to lead the country.

古文：其别部大人刘库仁，勇而有智；铁弗卫辰，狡猾多变，皆不可独任。
现代文：代国的别部大人刘库仁，勇猛而有智谋，刘卫辰则狡猾多变，他们都不宜独担重任。
English: Liu Kuren, the representative of the other adults of the country, is brave and resourceful, while Liu Weichen is cunning and changeable. They are not suitable to shoulder the heavy responsibility alone.

古文：宜分诸部为二，令此两人统之；两人素有深仇，其势莫敢先发。
现代文：应该将众部族一分为二，让这两人分别统领。他们两人历来有深仇，势必都不敢首先发难。
English: Let the tribes be divided into two, and let these two men, who have always had a bitter enmity against each other, be placed at their head.

古文：俟其孙稍长，引而立之，是陛下有存亡继绝之德于代，使其子子孙孙永为不侵不叛之臣，此安边之良策也。 
现代文：等到拓跋逐渐长大，再将他立为王，这样陛下对代国有存亡继绝的恩德，从而使他们子子孙孙永远成为不侵犯、不背叛的臣属，这才是安定边境的良第。 
English: Wait until Tuoba gradually grows up, and then make him king. In this way, His Majesty will have a lasting legacy of gratitude to the country, so that their children and grandchildren will forever become subjects who do not invade or betray. This is the best way to stabilize the border.

古文：坚从之，分代民为二部，自河以东属库仁，自河以西属卫辰，各拜官爵，使统其众。
现代文：苻坚听从了燕凤的意见。把代国的百姓分为两部分，自黄河以东属于刘库仁，自黄河以西属于刘卫辰，各授官职爵位，让他们统领自己的部众。
English: Yu Jian listened to the opinion of Yan Feng and divided the people of the representative country into two parts, from the east of the Yellow River belongs to Liu Kuren, from the west of the Yellow River belongs to Liu Weichen, and each of them was given official positions and titles, so that they could lead their subordinates.

古文：贺氏以珪归独孤部，与南部大人长孙嵩、元佗等皆依库仁。
现代文：贺氏带着拓跋返回了独孤部，与南部大人长孙嵩、元佗等都归依了刘库仁。
English: He returned to the Solitary Confinement with Tuoba, and together with Nanfang's eldest son, Song, and Yuan Zang, they all converted to Liu Curen.

古文：行唐公洛以什翼犍子窟咄年长，迁之长安。
现代文：行唐公苻洛考虑到拓跋什翼犍的儿子拓跋窟咄年长，把他迁移到了长安。
English: Taking into account that Tuobao's son, Tuobaoshu Yingtao, was too old, the Tang emperor moved him to Chang'an.

古文：坚使窟咄入太学读书。
现代文：苻坚让拓跋窟咄进入太学读书。
English: Yu Jian let Tuoba Grottoes go to study in Taiyue.

古文：下诏曰： 张天锡承祖父之资，藉百年之业，擅命河右，叛换偏隅。
现代文：苻坚下达诏书说： 张天锡继承了先辈的成果，凭借着延续百年的功业，擅自在黄河以西发号施令，偏居一隅飞扬跋扈。
English: Zou Jian issued an edict saying: Zhang Tianxi inherited the achievements of his predecessors, and by virtue of the work that lasted for a hundred years, he arbitrarily gave orders to the west of the Yellow River, preferring to stay in a corner.

古文：索头世跨朔北，中分区域，东宾秽貊，西引乌孙，控弦百万，虎视云中。
现代文：索头部族世代横跨朔北，在中部，分割地域，在东部，结交貊，在西部，召引乌孙，士兵百万，虎视云中。
English: The Sokou tribe spans generations in the north of Shuo, in the middle, dividing the region, in the east, making friends, in the west, summoning Uson, a million soldiers, and watching the clouds.

古文：爰命两师，分讨黠虏，役不淹岁，穷殄二凶，俘降百万，辟土九千，五帝之所未宾，周、汉之所未至，莫不重译来王，怀风率职。
现代文：于时命令苟苌、苻洛二军，分别讨伐狡诈的敌虏，征战不到一年，就彻底消灭了这两个顽凶，俘获多达百万，开群领土九千。五帝所没有结交周朝、汉朝所没能到达的地方的人，全都经过辗转翻译前来朝见，感念我们的恩德，克尽职守。
English: At that time, he ordered the two armies of Goguryeo and Silla to fight against the cunning enemy separately. After less than a year of war, they completely eliminated the two villains, captured as many as one million, and opened up a territory of nine thousand. People from the places that the Five Emperors did not make friends with the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty could not reach, all came to the court through the translation, felt our kindness, and fulfilled their duties.

古文：有司可速班功受爵，戎士悉复之五岁，赐爵三级。 
现代文：有关部门应当迅速依功授爵，军中将士全都免除赋税五年，赏赐爵位三级。 
English: Relevant departments should quickly award knighthoods according to merit, and all lieutenant generals should be exempted from tax for five years and awarded a knighthood of the third level.

古文：于是加行唐公洛征西将军，以邓羌为并州刺史。
现代文：于是让行唐公苻洛担任征西将军，任命邓羌为并州刺史。
English: Therefore, he made Xing Tang Gongluo serve as the general of the Western Conquest, and appointed Deng Yao as the governor of the annexed state.

古文：阳平国常侍慕容绍私谓其兄楷曰： 秦恃其强大，务胜不休，北戍云中，南守蜀、汉，转运万里，道殣相望。
现代文：阳平国常侍慕容绍私下里对他的哥哥慕容楷说： 前秦自恃强大，求胜不止，北面驻守云中，南面镇守蜀、汉，辗转运输，遥遥万里，道旁坟冢相望。
English: Yangping's State Councilor Murong Shao said to his brother Murong Cai in private: The former Qin Dynasty prided itself on being powerful and sought victory more than anything else. To the north, it garrisoned Yunzhong, to the south, it garrisoned Shu and Han, it transported goods thousands of miles away, and its roadside cemeteries overlooked each other.

古文：兵疲于外，民困于内，危亡近矣。
现代文：军队疲惫在外，百姓困苦在内，危亡之时已经临近了。
English: With the army exhausted on the outside and the people in distress on the inside, the time of peril was drawing near.

古文：冠军叔仁智度英拔，必能恢复燕祚，吾属但当爱身以待时耳！ 
现代文：冠军叔父慕容垂的仁爱、智谋、气度出类拔萃，一定能宏扬光复燕国的国统，我们只需要多多保重以等待时机！ 
English: Champion uncle Mu Rongtui's benevolence, wisdom and temperament are second to none, and he will surely be able to magnify the glory and national unity of Yan country. We just need to take care of ourselves and wait for the right time!

古文：初，秦人既克凉州，议讨西障氐、羌。
现代文：当初，前秦人攻克了凉州以后，商议讨伐西方边境上的氐族、羌族部落。
English: At first, after the Qin conquered Liangzhou, they discussed how to attack the Yao and Yao tribes on the western border.

古文：秦王坚曰： 彼种落杂居，不相统壹，不能为中国大患。宜先抚谕，征其租税。若不从命，然后讨之。 
现代文：前秦王苻坚说： 他们不同种族部落混杂而居，并不统一，不能构成中原之国的大患，应该先加以安抚劝谕，征收他们的田租赋税，如果不服从命令，然后再去讨伐他们。 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said: They live in a mixture of different ethnic tribes, are not unified, and cannot constitute a great danger to the Central Plains country. They should first be pacified and advised, their land rent and taxes should be collected, and if they do not obey orders, then they should be fought.

古文：乃使殿中将军张旬前行宣慰，庭中将军魏曷飞帅骑二万七千随之。
现代文：于是就让殿中将军张旬前往安抚，让庭中将军魏曷飞率领骑兵二万七千人紧随其后。
English: As a result, the palace general Zhang Shun went to pacify, and the court general Wei Yufei led twenty-seven thousand cavalry to follow.

古文：曷飞忿其恃险不服，纵兵击之，大掠而归。
现代文：魏曷飞对他们凭借险要的地势拒不降服非常气愤，就发兵对他们展开攻击，大肆抢掠以后返回。
English: Wei Yufei was very angry that they refused to surrender due to the critical situation, so he sent troops to attack them and returned after plundering.

古文：坚怒其违命，鞭之二百，斩前锋督护储安以谢氐、羌。
现代文：苻坚对他违背命令十分愤怒，打了他二百鞭，杀掉了前锋督护储安以向氐族、羌族人谢罪。
English: Yu Jian was very angry with him for disobeying the order, beat him with two hundred lashes, and killed the foreman, Guo Shu'an, in order to apologize to the Yi people and the Yi people.

古文：氐、羌大悦，降附贡献者八万三千馀落。
现代文：氐族、羌族人十分高兴，向前秦投降归附进献贡奉的有八万三千多个部落。
English: The Yi and Qiang people are very happy. More than 83,000 tribes have surrendered to the former Qin Dynasty and contributed to the tribute.

古文：雍州士族先因乱流寓河西者，皆听还本。
现代文：雍州士族先前因为战乱而流落寓居河西的人，全都听凭他们返回故土。
English: The people of the Yongzhou warrior tribe, who had previously lived in Hexi due to the war, were all allowed to return to their homeland.

古文：刘库仁分招抚离散，恩信甚著，奉事拓跋珪恩勤周备，不以废兴易意，常谓诸子曰： 此儿有高天下之志，必能恢隆祖业，汝曹当谨遇之。 
现代文：刘库仁招纳安抚叛离逃散的百姓，恩德与信义十分明显，事奉拓跋殷勤周到，不因为他的废兴而改变主意，常对儿子们说： 这孩子有高于天下人的志向，一定能弘扬昌隆祖先的业绩，你们应当谨慎小心地对待他。 
English: Liu Curen recruited and pacified the people who had defected and fled. His benevolence and faithfulness were very obvious. He served the people diligently and thoughtfully. He did not change his mind because of his failed rejuvenation. He often said to his sons: This child has higher aspirations than the rest of the world, and will surely be able to promote the achievements of Changlong's ancestors. You should treat him with caution and care.

古文：秦王坚赏其功，加广武将军，给幢麾鼓盖。
现代文：前秦王苻坚奖赏刘库仁的功绩，任命他为广武将军，并给予他旌族、战鼓、伞盖。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian rewarded Liu Kuren's achievements, appointed him as Guangwu General, and gave him the Dong nationality, war drums, and umbrella cover.

古文：刘卫辰耻在库仁之下，怒，杀秦五原太守而叛。
现代文：刘卫辰对位居刘库仁之下感到耻辱，愤怒地杀掉了前秦的五原太守后反叛。
English: Liu Weichen felt the shame of being under Liu Kuren, and angrily killed the former Qin Emperor Wuyuan and rebelled.

古文：库仁击卫辰，破之，追至阴山西北千馀里，获其妻子。
现代文：刘库仁攻打刘卫辰，攻破了他，一直追击到阴山西北一千多里的地方，俘获了他的妻儿。
English: Liu Kuren attacked Liu Weichen, defeated him, and pursued him to a place more than a thousand miles northwest of Yinshan, capturing his wife and child.

古文：又西击库狄部，徙其部落，置之桑干川。
现代文：又向西攻击库狄部，迁徙他们的部落，安置在桑乾川。
English: They also attacked Kudibe to the west, displaced their tribes, and settled in the Sanganshan River.

古文：久之，坚以卫辰为西单于，督摄河西杂类，屯代来城。
现代文：过了许久，苻坚任命刘卫辰为西单于，督率统领河西的各部族，驻扎在代来城。
English: After a long time, Yu Jian appointed Liu Weichen as the leader of Xidanwu, who led the tribes in the west of the river and was stationed in Dai Lai City.

古文：是岁，乞伏司繁卒，子国仁立。
现代文：这一年，乞伏司繁去世，儿子乞伏国仁继位。
English: In the same year, Kuibushi Shigenobu died, and his son Kuibushi Kunihito succeeded him.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之中太元二年
现代文：太元二年
English: Founded in 2nd year of Taiyuan

古文：春，高句丽、新罗、西南夷皆遣使入贡于秦。
现代文：春季，高句丽、新罗、西南夷全都派遣使者来向前秦进献贡奉。
English: In the spring, Goguryeo, Silla, and Xianyangyi all sent emissaries to pay tribute to Qin.

古文：赵故将作功曹熊邈屡为秦王坚言石氏宫室器玩之盛，坚以邈为将作长史，领尚方丞，大修舟舰、兵器，饰以金银，颇极精巧。
现代文：原后赵国的将作功曹熊邈向前秦王苻坚讲述石氏宫室、器物古玩的华丽丰盛，苻坚任命熊邈为将作长史，兼尚方丞，大规模地修整舟船、兵器，用金银装饰，精巧之极。
English: After the war, Zhao's military commander, Cao Xiongkun, told the former Qin king, Yu Jian, about the splendid opulence of Shi's palace and the antiques. Yu Jian appointed Xiongkun as military commander, and he repaired boats and weapons on a large scale, and decorated them with gold and silver, which was extremely ingenious.

古文：慕容农私言于慕容垂曰： 自王猛之死，秦之法制，日以颓靡，今又重之以奢侈，殃将至矣，图谶之言，行当有验。
现代文：慕容农私下里对慕容垂说： 自从王猛死后，前秦的法律制度，日益荒废，如今再加上奢侈，灾祸快要临头了，图谶中的话，行将应验。
English: Murong Nong privately said to Murong Du: Since the death of Wang Meng, the legal system of the former Qin Dynasty has become increasingly desolate. Now, with the addition of luxury, the disaster is about to come to an end. The words in the picture are about to come true.

古文：大王宜结纳英杰以承天意，时不可失也！ 
现代文：大王应该结交招纳勇武杰出之人以禀承天意，时机不可丧失！ 
English: The great king should make friends and recruit brave and outstanding people to inherit the will of heaven. The opportunity must not be lost!

古文：垂笑曰： 天下事非尔所及。 
现代文：慕容垂笑着说： 天下大事不是你所能预知的。 
English: Murong said with a smile: You can't predict the major events in the world.

古文：桓豁表兗州刺史硃序为梁州刺史，镇襄阳。
现代文：桓豁上表请求任命兖州刺史朱序为梁州刺史，镇守襄阳。
English: At the request of Huan Huan, Zhu Xiu, the town guard of Yangyang, was appointed as the town guard of Liangzhou.

古文：秋，七月，丁未，以尚书仆射谢安为司徒，安让不拜；复加侍中、都督扬、豫、徐、兗、青五州诸军事。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁未，东晋任命尚书仆射谢安为司徒，谢安辞让不予接受。又任命谢安为侍中，都督扬、豫、徐、兖、青五州诸军事。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ding Wei, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Shang's servant Sha Xie'an as a tutor, and refused to accept Xie'an's resignation. He also appointed Xie'an as an attendant, the military governor of Yang, Yu, Xu, Zhai and Qing five provinces.

古文：丙辰，征西大将军、荆州刺史桓豁卒。
现代文：丙辰，征西大将军、荆州刺史桓豁去世。
English: Hsin-Chen, General of the Western Expedition, and Jingzhou statesman Huan-Huan passed away.

古文：冬，十月，辛丑，以桓冲都督江、荆、梁、益、宁、交、广七州诸军事，领荆州刺史；以冲子嗣为江州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛丑，任命桓冲都督江、荆、梁、益、宁、交、广七州诸军事，兼荆州刺史。任命桓冲的儿子桓嗣为江州刺史。
English: In the winter, October, Xinwu, appointed Huanchong the military governor of Jiang, Jing, Liang, Yi, Ning, Jia, and Guangxi provinces, and the governor of Jing Province. Appointed Huanchong's son Huan Zi as the governor of Jiang Province.

古文：又以五兵尚书王蕴都督江南诸军事，假节，领徐州刺史；征西司马领南郡相谢玄为兗州刺史，领广陵相，监江北诸军事。
现代文：又任命五兵尚书王蕴都督江南诸军事，兼徐州刺史，任命征西司马兼南郡相谢玄为兖州刺史，兼广陵相，监长江以北诸军事。
English: He also appointed the five soldiers Shangshu Wangyun as the military governor of the south of the Yangtze River and the military governor of Xuzhou, and appointed the Western Sima Ma and the South County official Xie Xuan as the military governor of Luzhou, the Guangling official, and the military inspector north of the Yangtze River.

古文：桓冲以秦人强盛，欲移阻江南，奏自江陵徙镇上明，使冠军将军刘波守江陵，咨议参军杨亮守江夏。
现代文：桓冲考虑到前秦人威势强盛，想移师固守长江以南，奏请从江陵移镇上明，让冠军将军刘波戍守江陵，谘议参军杨亮戍江夏。
English: Taking into account that the former Qin people were powerful and powerful, Huanchong wanted to move the division to the south of the Yangtze River, so he asked to move the town of Shangming from Jiangling, let the champion general Liu Bo keep Jiangling, and consult Yang Liang to join the army.

古文：王蕴固让徐州，谢安曰： 卿居后父之重，不应妄自菲薄，以亏时遇。 
现代文：王蕴坚持辞让徐州刺史的职务，谢安说： 你居皇后之父的重要身份，不应该妄自菲薄，以损害一时的恩遇。 
English: Wang Yun insisted on resigning from the post of Xuzhou stabbing history, Xie An said: You are the important identity of the father of the queen, you should not pretend to be weak, so as to damage the momentary favor.

古文：蕴乃受命。
现代文：王蕴于是接受任命。
English: Wang Yun then accepted the appointment.

古文：初，中书郎郗超自以其父愔位遇应在谢安之右，而安入掌机权，愔优游散地，常愤邑形于辞色，由是与谢氏有隙。
现代文：当初，中书郎郗超自认为他的父亲郗的职位待遇应该在谢安之上，然而谢安入朝掌握了重要的权力。郗却在一些闲散的职位上悠闲无事，所以郗超的愤恨抑郁之情时常溢于辞色，因此与谢氏产生了隔阂。
English: At first, Zhongshulang Gong Chao thought that his father Gong's position should be higher than that of Xie An. However, when Xie An entered the imperial court, he gained important power. Gong, on the other hand, had an easy time in some idle positions. Therefore, Gong Chao's feelings of resentment and depression often overflowed into rhetoric, thus creating a rift with Xie.

古文：是时朝廷方以秦寇为忧，诏求文武良将可以镇御北方者，谢安以兄子玄应诏。
现代文：这时朝廷正对前秦的侵扰深以为忧，下达诏书在文武良将中寻求可以镇守戍卫北方领土的人，谢安荐举他哥哥的儿子谢玄应诏。
English: At this time, the imperial court was deeply worried about the invasion of the former Qin Dynasty, and issued an edict to seek a person who could guard and defend the northern territory among General Wen Wuliang. Xie An recommended his brother's son Xie Xuan to respond to the edict.

古文：超闻之，叹曰： 安之明，乃能违众举亲；玄之才，足以不负所举。 
现代文：郗超听说以后，慨叹道： 谢安贤明，才能够违背凡俗荐举他的亲戚；谢玄的才能，足以不辜负谢安的荐举。 
English: After hearing this, Zou Chao sighed: Xie An is wise enough to be able to recommend his relatives against the common practice; Xie Xuan's talent is enough to live up to Xie An's recommendation.

古文：众咸以为不然。
现代文：众人全都认为并非如此。
English: Everyone agrees that this is not so.

古文：超曰： 吾尝与玄共在桓公府，见其使才，虽履屐间未尝不得其任，是以知之。 
现代文：郗超说： 我曾经与谢玄同在桓温的幕府共事，见他施展才能，虽然是履屐间的小事也从来不失职，所以我了解他。 
English: Zou Chao said, "I once worked with Xie Xuan at the Shogunate in Kuanwen. I saw him display his talent and never fail to do his duty, even if it was a trivial matter, so I know him well.

古文：玄募骁勇之士，得彭城刘牢之等数人。
现代文：谢玄招募敏捷勇猛之人，得到了彭城的刘牢之等数人。
English: Xie Xuan recruited agile and brave people, and obtained several people such as Liu Diao from Pengcheng.

古文：以牢之为参军，常领精锐为前锋，战无不捷。
现代文：任命刘牢之为参军。他经常统领精锐部队作为前锋出战，战无不胜。
English: Liu Diao was appointed to join the army. He often led the elite troops to fight as a forward, and was invincible.

古文：时号 北府兵 ，敌人畏之。
现代文：当时的人称他们为 北府兵 ，敌人对他们很害怕。
English: People at the time called them Beifu soldiers, and the enemy was very afraid of them.

古文：壬寅，护军将军、散骑常侍王彪之卒。
现代文：壬寅，护军将军、散骑常侍王彪之去世。
English: Ren Yin, the general of the escorting army and the horseback riding attendant of Wang Biao passed away.

古文：初，谢安欲增修宫室，彪之曰： 中兴之初，即东府为宫，殊为俭陋。
现代文：当初，谢安想要增建宫室，王彪之说： 朝廷中兴之初，把东府作为宫廷，甚为简陋。
English: At first, Xie An wanted to build an additional palace, Wang Biao said: At the beginning of the rise of the imperial court, it was very simple to use Dongfu as a palace.

古文：苏峻之乱，成帝止兰台都坐，殆不蔽寒暑，是以更营新宫。
现代文：苏峻之乱，成帝住在御史台官吏办公的地方，几乎连寒风酷暑也不能遮挡，所以才又营造了新宫。
English: During the Sushun Rebellion, Emperor Chengdu lived in a place where the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office had their offices. Even the cold wind and heat could hardly be kept away, which is why a new palace was built.

古文：比之汉、魏则为俭，比之初过江则为侈矣。
现代文：与汉、魏时代相比，还算简陋，但与刚刚渡过长江时相比，则算是奢侈了。
English: Compared with the Han and Wei dynasties, it is still relatively simple, but compared with the time when it just crossed the Yangtze River, it is considered a luxury.

古文：今寇敌方强，岂可大兴功役，劳扰百姓邪！ 
现代文：如今正值敌寇强大，怎么能大兴土木，侵扰百姓呢！ 
English: Now is the time when the enemy invaders are strong, how can they build large-scale civil engineering and disturb the people!

古文：安曰： 宫室弊陋，后世谓人无能。 
现代文：谢安说： 宫室粗弊简陋，后人会说住在这里的人无能。 
English: Xie An said, "The palace room is crude and simple, and future generations will say that the people who live here are incompetent.

古文：彪之曰： 凡任天下之重者，当保国宁家，缉熙政事，乃以修室为能邪？ 
现代文：王彪之说： 凡承担天下重任的人，应当保全国家安定百姓，使政事光明显赫，怎么能以修建宫室为能事呢！ 
English: Wang Biazhi said, "Anyone who bears the heavy responsibility of the world should preserve the stability of the country and the people, and make the political affairs clear. How can building a palace be a good thing?

古文：安不能夺其议，故终彪之之世，无所营造。
现代文：谢安无法改变他的意见，所以王彪之在世期间，什么宫室也没有营建。
English: Xie An couldn't change his mind, so no palace was built during Wang Biao Zhi's lifetime.

古文：十二月，临海太守郗超卒。
现代文：十二月，临海太守郗超去世。
English: In December, Linhai Taishou Gong Chao passed away.

古文：初，超党于桓氏，以父愔忠于王室，不令知之。
现代文：当初，郗超与桓氏结为同党，因为父亲郗忠诚于王室，所以没让父亲知道。
English: At first, Gong Chao and Huan joined the same party, because his father Gong was loyal to the royal family, so he did not let his father know.

古文：及病甚，出一箱书授门生曰： 公年尊，我死之后，若以哀惋害寝食者，可呈此箱；不尔，即焚之。 
现代文：等到他病重以后，拿出一箱子书信交给了门下的弟子，说： 父亲年纪大了，我死了以后，如果父亲因为悲痛惋惜而妨碍了起居饮食的时候，可以把这个箱子呈献给他；如果没有出现这种情况，就把箱子烧掉。 
English: When he was seriously ill, he took out a box of letters and handed it to his disciple, saying: "My father is old, and when I die, if my father is prevented from living and eating because of grief and regret, you can present this box to him; if this does not happen, burn the box.

古文：既而愔果哀惋成疾，门生呈箱，皆与桓温往反密计。
现代文：郗超死后，郗果然因悲痛惋惜而患病，弟子把箱子呈送给他，里面全是郗超与桓温商议密谋的往返信件。
English: After Gong Chao's death, Gong Chao fell ill due to grief and regret. His disciple presented him with a box, which contained all the correspondence between Gong Chao and Kuan Wen.

古文：愔大怒曰： 小子死已晚矣！ 
现代文：郗勃然大怒，说： 这小子死得已经晚了！ 
English: The dragonfly flew into a rage and said, "It's too late for this boy to die!

古文：遂不复哭。
现代文：于是就不再为他悲痛流泪了。
English: So I no longer shed tears of sorrow for him.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之中太元三年春，二月，乙巳，作新宫，帝移居会稽王邸。
现代文：太元三年春季，二月，乙巳，开始建造新宫，孝武帝移居到会稽王的宫邸。
English: In the spring of the 3rd year of the Taiyuan era, in February, the construction of the new palace began, and Emperor Xiaowu moved to the palace residence of the king.

古文：秦王坚遣征南大将军、都督征讨诸军事、守尚书令长乐公丕、武卫将军苟苌、尚书慕容帅步骑七万寇襄阳，以荆州刺史杨安帅樊、邓之众为前锋，征虏将军始平石越帅精骑一万出鲁阳关，京兆尹慕容垂、扬武将军姚苌帅众五万出南乡，领军将军苟池、右将军毛当、强弩将军王显帅众四万出武当，会攻襄阳。
现代文：前秦王苻坚派征南大将军、都督征讨诸军事、守尚书令、长乐公苻丕，武卫将军苟长和尚书慕容率领七万步、骑兵进犯襄阳，让荆州刺史扬杨率领樊州、邓州的兵众作为前锋，征虏将军始平人石越率领一万精锐骑兵出鲁阳关，京兆尹慕容垂、扬武将军姚苌率领五万兵众出南乡，领军将军苟池、右将军毛当、强弩将军王显率领四万兵众出武当，会合攻打襄阳。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian sent the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army and the governor of the capital to recruit and recruit soldiers, Shushang Shuling and Changle Gongjun, Wuwei General Guo Chang and the monk Shushumurong led 70,000 steps, cavalry invaded Xiangyang, let Jingzhou Shishi Yang Yang lead the soldiers of Zhangzhou and Dangzhou as the vanguard, recruit general Shi Pingren Shi Yue led 10,000 elite cavalry out of Luyang Pass, Jing Zhao Yin Murongtai and Yangwu General Yao Wei led 50,000 soldiers out of the southern countryside, and the leading generals Guo Chi, Right General Mao Deng and Qiang

古文：夏，四月，秦兵至沔北，梁州刺史硃序以秦无舟楫，不以为虞。
现代文：夏季，四月，前秦的军队抵达沔水以北，梁州刺史朱序认为前秦的军队没有舟船，未作防备。
English: In the summer, in April, the former Qin army arrived in the north of Surabaya. Liang Zhou Zhishi Zhu Xuan believed that the former Qin army did not have boats and did not prepare.

古文：既而石越帅骑五千浮渡汉水，序惶骇，固守中城。
现代文：等到石越率领五千骑兵顺流渡过汉水，朱序惶恐惊骇，固守中城。
English: When Ishigoe crossed the Han River with five thousand cavalrymen, Zhu Zun was terrified and held fast to Zhongcheng.

古文：越克其外郭，获船百馀艘以济馀军。
现代文：石越攻克了他的外城，缴获了一百多艘船只，用来接运其余的兵众。
English: Shi Yue conquered his outlying towns and captured more than a hundred ships, which were used to transport the remaining troops.

古文：长乐公丕督诸将攻中城。
现代文：长乐公苻丕统领众将领攻打中城。
English: Changle officials and generals led the attack on Zhongcheng.

古文：序母韩氏闻秦兵将至，自登城履行，至西北隅，以为不固，帅百馀婢及城中女丁筑邪城于其内。
现代文：朱序的母亲韩氏听说前秦的军队将要到达，亲自登上城墙察看是否坚固。行至西北角，认为这里不够坚固，于是就率领女仆及城里的成年女子一百多人在城墙里边又斜着修筑了一道城墙。
English: Zhu Xuan's mother, Han, heard that the former Qin army was about to arrive and climbed the city wall herself to see if it was strong. She went to the northwest corner and thought that it was not strong enough, so she led the maid and more than a hundred adult women in the city to build a wall inside the city wall.

古文：及秦兵至，西北隅果溃，众移守新城，襄阳人谓之夫人城，桓冲在上明，拥众七万，惮秦兵之强，不敢进。
现代文：等到前秦的军队来到以后，西北角的城墙果然被攻破，兵众们转移到新城墙上防守，襄阳人称这段城墙为 夫人城 。桓冲在上明拥有兵众七万人，由于害怕前秦的强大，不敢进军。
English: After the Qin army arrived, the northwest corner of the city wall was finally breached, and the soldiers moved to the new city wall for defense. The people of Xiangyang called this section of the city wall "Lady City." Huanchong had 70,000 soldiers in Shangming, but they were afraid of the powerful Qin army and did not dare to march.

古文：丕欲急攻襄阳，苟苌曰： 吾众十倍于敌，糗粮山积，但稍迁汉、沔之民于许、洛，塞其运道，绝其援兵，譬如网中之禽，何患不获。
现代文：苻丕想要急攻襄阳，苟苌说： 我们的兵众十倍于敌人，储备的粮食堆积如山，只要逐渐把汉水、沔水一带的百姓迁徙到许昌、洛阳，阻塞他们转运的通道，断绝他们的援军，他们就如同坠入罗网的鸟，还怕抓不到他们吗？
English: Zou wanted to attack Xiangyang in a hurry, and Guo Zou said: Our soldiers are ten times more numerous than the enemy, and the grain reserves are piled up like a mountain. As long as we gradually migrate the people around Hanshui and Surabaya to Xuchang and Luoyang, block their transit channels, and cut off their reinforcements, they will be like birds falling into a net. Are they afraid of not catching them?

古文：而多杀将士，急求成功哉！ 
现代文：何必要以将士们过多地伤亡为代价，而急切地求取成功呢！ 
English: Why should success be eagerly pursued at the cost of too many deaths and injuries among our soldiers?

古文：丕从之。
现代文：苻丕听从了他的意见。
English: Zou listened to his advice.

古文：慕容垂拔南阳，执太守郑裔，与丕会襄阳。
现代文：慕容垂攻下了南阳，抓获太守郑裔，与苻丕在襄阳会合。
English: Murongdiao captured Nanyang, captured the imperial governor Zheng Rih, and rendezvoused with Yu in Xiangyang.

古文：秋，七月，新宫成；辛巳，帝入居之。
现代文：秋季，七月，新宫建成。辛巳，孝武帝进入新宫居住。
English: In the autumn, in July, the new palace was completed. Soon, Emperor Xiaowu came to live in the new palace.

古文：秦兗州刺史彭超请攻沛郡太守逯于彭城，且曰： 愿更遣重将攻淮南诸城，为征南棋劫之势，东西并进，丹杨不足平也。 
现代文：前秦兖州刺史彭超请求攻打在彭城的沛郡太守戴，而且说： 愿再派遣大将攻打淮河以南各城，以便与征南大将军苻丕形成围棋劫争之势，东西并进，丹阳不堪一击！ 
English: Former Qin Yongzhou general Shi Pengchao requested to attack Pei County in Pengcheng, and said: I would like to send another general to attack the cities south of the Huaihe River, so as to form a Go robbery conflict with the Southern Expeditionary Army. East and west go hand in hand, Danyang is vulnerable!

古文：秦王坚从之，使都督东讨诸军事；后将军俱难、右禁将军毛盛、洛州刺史邵保帅步骑七万寇淮阳、盱眙。
现代文：前秦王苻坚听从了他的意见，让他都督东讨诸军事。前秦后将军俱难、右禁将军毛盛、洛州刺史邵保率领七万步、骑兵进攻淮阳、盱眙。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian listened to his advice and made him the military governor of the East. Former Qin Emperor Qianlong, right-banned generals Mao Sheng and Luo Zhou Shishi Shao Bao led 70,000 steps, and cavalry attacked Huaiyang and Handan.

古文：超，越之弟；保，羌之从弟也。
现代文：彭超是彭越的弟弟；邵保是郡羌的堂弟。
English: Peng Chao is Peng Yue's younger brother; Shao Bao is Guan Yu's cousin.

古文：八月，彭超攻彭城，诏右将军毛虎生帅众五万镇姑孰以御秦兵。
现代文：八月，彭超攻打彭城。东晋诏令右将军毛虎生率领五万兵众镇守姑孰以抵御前秦的军队。
English: In August, Peng Chao attacked Pengcheng. The Eastern Jin Dynasty ordered the right general Mao Hursheng to lead fifty thousand soldiers to defend Guzhen against the former Qin army.

古文：秦梁州刺史韦钟围魏兴太守吉挹于西城。
现代文：前秦梁州刺史韦钟在西城包围了魏兴太守吉挹。
English: Former Qin Liangzhou general Shi Wei Zhong besieged Wei Xingtao, the governor of Jizhou, in the west of the city.

古文：九月，秦王坚与群臣饮酒，以秘书监硃肜为正，命人人以极醉为限。
现代文：九月，前秦王苻坚与群臣饮酒，让秘书监朱肜当酒正官，让人们都喝到烂醉如泥的程度。
English: In September, the former Qin King Yu Jian and his ministers drank alcohol, and made the secretary-supervisor Zhu Xi the official in charge of liquor, so that people drank until they were as drunk as mud.

古文：秘书侍郎赵整作《酒德之歌》曰： 地列酒泉，天垂酒池，杜康妙识，仪狄先知。
现代文：秘书侍郎赵整编了一首《酒德之歌》说： 地上有酒泉，天上垂着酒池，杜康酒的美妙，帝女仪狄先知。
English: Secretary Zhao Zhengyu compiled a "Song of Wine Virtue" and said: There are wine springs on the ground, wine pools hanging in the sky, the beauty of ducun wine, and the prophetess.

古文：纣丧殷邦，桀倾夏国，由此言之，前危后则。 
现代文：纣丧失殷商之邦，桀倾毁夏朝之国，由此言之，前人的危亡，后人的法则。 
English: The loss of the kingdom of merchants, the destruction of the country of the Xia Dynasty, in other words, the death of the predecessors, the rule of the descendants.

古文：坚大悦，命整书之以为酒戒，自是宴群臣，礼饮而已。
现代文：苻坚听后十分高兴，命令赵整写出来以作为对饮酒的禁戒，从此再宴请群臣时，只是礼节性地喝一点酒而已。
English: Yu Jian was very happy after listening to this, and ordered Zhao Zhengyi to write it down as a prohibition against drinking alcohol. From then on, when entertaining the courtiers, he would only drink a little wine as a matter of courtesy.

古文：秦凉州刺史梁熙遣使入西域，扬秦威德。
现代文：前秦凉州刺史梁熙派遣使者进入西域，宣扬前秦的威势道德。
English: The former Qin emperor Liang Xi, who ruled Liangzhou, sent an envoy to the Western Regions to preach the Qin dynasty's morality.

古文：冬，十月，大宛献汗血马。
现代文：冬季，十月，大宛进献汗血宝马。
English: In the winter, in October, Daewon went to work on a BMW.

古文：秦王坚曰： 吾尝慕汉文帝之为人，用千里马何为！
现代文：前秦王苻坚说： 我曾经羡慕汉文帝的为人，使用千里马干什么呢！ 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said: I used to admire Emperor Hanwen as a person, what is the use of a thousand horses!

古文：命群臣作《止马之诗》而反之。
现代文：于是就命令群臣作《止马之诗》，送还汗血马。
English: So he ordered his courtiers to write "The Poem of Stopping the Horse" and send back the sweaty horse.

古文：巴西人赵宝起兵梁州，自称晋西蛮校尉、巴郡太守。
现代文：巴西人赵宝在凉州起兵，自称为晋朝西蛮校尉、巴郡太守。
English: Zhao Bao, a Brazilian, raised an army in Liangzhou and called himself the captain of the Jin Dynasty and the governor of Ba County.

古文：秦豫州刺史北海公重镇洛阳，谋反。
现代文：前秦豫州刺史北海公苻重镇守洛阳，图谋反叛。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty, the states of Henan and Hebei had a strong military presence in Luoyang, and they plotted to rebel.

古文：秦王坚曰： 长史吕光忠正，必不与之同。 
现代文：前秦王苻坚说： 长史吕光忠诚正派，一定不会与他同流合污。 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said: Long Shi Liguang is a loyal and decent person, and he will definitely not collude with him.

古文：即命光收重，槛车送长安，赦之，以公就第。
现代文：于是命令吕光拘捕了苻重，用囚车把他送到长安。苻坚赦免了他，让他以公爵的身份回家。
English: He then ordered Lü Guang to arrest Xun Chong and send him to Chang'an in a prison wagon. Xun Jian pardoned him and allowed him to return home as a duke.

古文：重，洛之兄也。
现代文：苻重是苻洛的哥哥。
English: He is the older brother of Miao Luo.

古文：十二月，秦御史中丞李柔劾秦： 长乐公丕等拥众十万，攻围小城，日费万金，久而无效，请微下廷尉。 
现代文：十二月，前秦御史中丞李柔进上弹劾奏章说： 长乐公苻丕等人拥兵十万，围攻小城，每天耗费万金，但久围而不见功效，请求召回送交廷尉加以追究。 
English: In December, Li Rongjin, the former Qin imperial historian, said in his impeachment report: Changle Gongyong and others had 100,000 soldiers and besieged a small city, spending tens of thousands of yuan every day, but the siege had not been effective for a long time, and they requested to recall and send a courtier to investigate.

古文：秦王坚曰： 丕等广费无成，实宜贬戮；但师已淹时，不可虚返，其特原之，令以成功赎罪。 
现代文：前秦王苻坚说： 苻丕等人大量耗费，不见成效，确实应该被贬责斩杀。只是军队出征已久，不能无功而返，特别地宽恕他们一次，让他们以成就战功来赎罪。 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said: Yu and others spent a lot of money and did not achieve any results, and they should really be punished and killed. However, the army has been out for a long time, and they cannot return without any achievements. I especially forgive them once, and let them atone for their sins with their achievements.

古文：使黄门侍郎韦华持节切让丕等，赐丕剑曰： 来春不捷，汝可自裁，勿复持面见吾也！ 
现代文：苻坚派黄门侍郎韦华持符节严厉地责备苻丕等人，并赐给苻丕一把剑，说： 明年春天还不能取胜的话，你就可以自杀，不要再厚颜来见我了！ 
English: Wei Hua, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, who was sent by Zou Jian, severely rebuked Zou and the others with a rune, and gave Zou a sword, saying: If you can't win next spring, you can commit suicide, don't have the audacity to see me again!

古文：周飏在秦，密与桓冲书，言秦阴计；又逃奔汉中，秦人获而赦之。
现代文：周在前秦,秘密地给桓冲写信，报告前秦的密谋计策。后又逃奔到汉中，被前秦人抓获后赦免了。
English: Zhou secretly wrote a letter to Huan Chong in Qian Qin, reporting Qian Qin's conspiracy and strategy. Later, he fled to Hanzhong, was captured by Qian Qin and then pardoned.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之中太元四年
现代文：太元四年春季，正月，辛酉，东晋实行大赦。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Taiyuan Emperor, in the first month of the year, Xinjiang and the Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：春，正月，辛酉，大赦。秦长乐公丕等得诏惶恐，乃命诸军并力攻襄阳。
现代文：前秦长乐公苻丕等人见到诏令后十分惶恐，就命令各路部队协力攻打襄阳。
English: The former Qin emperor Changle Gongjun and others were very frightened when they saw the edict, and ordered all troops to work together to attack Xiangyang.

古文：秦王坚欲自将攻襄阳，诏阳平公融以关东六州之兵会寿春，梁熙以河西之兵为后继。
现代文：前秦王苻坚想亲自统领军队攻打襄阳，诏令阳平公苻融率关东六州的兵众会集寿春，诏令梁熙率黄河以西的兵众作为后继部队。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian wanted to personally lead the army to attack Xiangyang. He ordered Yang Ping to lead the troops from the six states of Guandong to gather in Shuchun, and ordered Liang Xi to lead the troops from the west of the Yellow River as a follow-up force.

古文：阳平公融谏曰： 陛下欲取江南，固当博谋熟虑，不可仓猝。
现代文：阳平公苻融劝谏说： 陛下想要夺取长江以南，本来应当广泛征求意见，深思熟虑，不可仓促行事。
English: Yang Ping said: If His Majesty wanted to conquer the south of the Yangtze River, he should have consulted widely and thoughtfully, and should not have acted hastily.

古文：若止取襄阳，又岂足亲劳大驾乎？
现代文：如果仅仅是攻取襄阳，又怎么值得亲劳大驾呢！
English: If it's just about conquering Xiangyang, how is it worth the effort?

古文：未有动天下之众而为一城者，所谓以随侯之珠弹千仞之雀也。 
现代文：没有动用整个天下的兵众而仅仅是为了区区一城的，正所谓 以珍贵无比的随侯之珠来弹射高达千仞的小雀 呀！ 
English: He did not use the entire army of the world, but only for the sake of a single city, just as it is said to catapult a small sparrow up to a thousand feathers with an incomparably precious pearl!

古文：梁熙谏曰： 晋主之暴，未如孙皓，江山险固，易守难攻。
现代文：梁熙劝谏说： 晋主的暴躁，不像孙，山河险峻坚固，易守难攻。
English: Liang Xi advised him, saying, "The Lord of Jin is not as hot-tempered as Sun. The mountains and rivers are steep and rugged, and are easy to defend but difficult to attack.

古文：陛下必欲廓清江表，亦不过分命将帅，引关东之兵，南临淮、泗，下梁、益之卒，东出巴、峡，又何必亲屈鸾辂，远幸沮泽乎？
现代文：陛下一定想要统一江南，也不过分别命令将帅带领关东的军队，南进淮河、泗水，让梁州、益州的士卒顺流而下，东出巴山、三峡就可以了，又何必亲自屈居鸾舆，远到洼湿之地呢！
English: His Majesty must have wanted to unify the south of the Yangtze River, and he only ordered the generals to lead the army of Kanto to the south into the Huai River and Surabaya, to let the soldiers of Liangzhou and Yizhou go down the river, and to the east out of Bashan and the Three Gorges. Why did he have to go all the way to the wetlands?

古文：昔汉光武诛公孙述，晋武帝擒孙皓，未闻二帝自统六师，亲执枹鼓，蒙矢石也。 
现代文：过去汉光武帝诛杀公孙述，晋武帝擒获孙，没有听说二位帝王亲自统领六军，亲自执掌战鼓，遭受箭石的攻击。 
English: In the past, it was said that Emperor Han Guangwu killed his grandson and Emperor Jinwu killed his grandson, but it was not known that the two emperors personally led the Six Armies, personally led the war drums, and were attacked by arrow stones.

古文：坚乃止。
现代文：苻坚于是作罢。
English: So Yan Jian stopped the practice.

古文：诏冠军将军南郡相刘波帅众八千救襄阳，波畏秦，不敢进。
现代文：东晋诏令冠军将军、南郡相刘波率领八千兵众救援襄阳，刘波畏惧前秦，不敢前进。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty ordered the champion general, the southern county official Liu Bo, to lead eight thousand soldiers to rescue Yangyang. Liu Bo was afraid of the former Qin Dynasty and did not dare to advance.

古文：硃序屡出战，破秦兵，引退稍远，序不设备。
现代文：朱序屡屡出战，攻破前秦的军队，秦兵逐渐远退，朱序不再设防。
English: Zhu Xuan repeatedly went to war, defeated the former Qin army, the Qin soldiers gradually retreated, and Zhu Xuan no longer set up defenses.

古文：二月，襄阳督护李伯护密遣其子送款于秦，请为内应；长乐公丕命诸军进攻之。
现代文：二月，襄阳督护李伯护秘密地派他的儿子到前秦去表示忠诚，请求作为内应。长乐公苻丕命令各路部队进攻襄阳。
English: In February, the governor of Xiangyang, Li Boqiu, secretly sent his son to the former Qin to express his loyalty and make a request as an internal response. Changle Gongjun ordered all troops to attack Xiangyang.

古文：戊午，克襄阳，执硃序，送长安。
现代文：戊午，攻克了襄阳，抓获了朱序，把他送至长安。
English: At noon, he conquered Xiangyang, captured Zhu Xuan, and sent him to Chang'an.

古文：秦王坚以序能守节，拜度支尚书；以李伯护为不忠，斩之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚因为朱序能够保持气节，授官度支尚书。认为李伯护不忠诚，把他杀掉了。
English: The former King of Qin, Qian Jian, thought that Li Bo Guo was not loyal and killed him.

古文：秦将军慕容越拔顺阳，执太守谯国丁穆。
现代文：前秦将军慕容越攻下顺阳，抓获了太守、谯国人丁穆。
English: The former Qin general Murong Yue conquered Shunyang and captured the governor of Shandong Province, Ding Mu.

古文：坚欲官之，穆固辞不受。
现代文：苻坚想给他授官，丁穆固执地推辞不接受。
English: Yu Jian wanted to give him an official post, but Ding Mu stubbornly refused to accept his resignation.

古文：坚以中垒将军梁成为荆州刺史，配兵一万，镇襄阳，选其才望，礼而用之。
现代文：苻坚任命中垒将军梁成为荆州刺史，给他配备了一万兵力，镇守襄阳，选拔当地有才能名望的人，给予礼遇，并加以任用。
English: Yu Jian appointed the middle general Liang to be the governor of Jingzhou, equipped him with ten thousand troops, guarded Xiangyang, selected local talented and famous people, gave them courtesy, and appointed them.

古文：桓冲以襄阳陷没，上疏送章节，请解职；不许。
现代文：桓冲因为襄阳沦陷覆没，上疏要求送还印章符节，请求解除他的职务，没有被允许。
English: Due to the fall of Xiangyang, Huanchong and Shangsu requested the return of the seal and insignia, and requested the dismissal of his post, which was not allowed.

古文：诏免刘波官，俄复以为冠军将军。
现代文：朝廷下达诏令，免除刘波的官职，不久又任命他为冠军将军。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to relieve Liu Bo of his official duties, and soon appointed him as the champion general.

古文：秦以前将军张蚝为并州刺史。
现代文：前秦任命前将军张蚝为并州刺史。
English: Former Qin Dynasty appointed former general Zhang Ye as the governor of the merged state.

古文：兗州刺史谢玄帅众万馀救彭城，军于泗口，欲遣间使报戴逯而不可得。
现代文：兖州刺史谢玄率领一万多兵众救援彭城，驻扎在泗口，想要派遣伺机行事的使者去向戴报告，但找不到合适的人。
English: Xie Xuan, the governor of Zhangzhou, led more than ten thousand soldiers to rescue Pengcheng, stationed in Hekou. He wanted to send an envoy to report to Dai, but he could not find the right person.

古文：部曲将田泓请没水潜行趣彭城，玄遣之。
现代文：军中将领田泓请求潜水去彭城，谢玄派他去了。
English: The army's lieutenant general, Tian Qi, requested to go diving in Pengcheng, and Xie Xuan sent him there.

古文：泓为秦人所获，厚赂之，使云南军已败；泓伪许之，既而告城中曰： 南军垂至，我单行来报，为贼所得。
现代文：田泓被前秦人抓获，前秦人送给他很多财物，让他报告说南军已经失败。田泓佯装同意，但到达后却告诉城里的人说： 南军快要到达了，我独自前来报告，被敌人抓获，你们努力吧！ 
English: Tian Ying was captured by the former Qin people, the former Qin people gave him a lot of wealth and goods, and asked him to report that the Southern Army had failed. Tian Ying agreed, but after arriving, he told the people in the city: The Southern Army is about to arrive, I came alone to report, I was captured by the enemy, you should work hard!

古文：勉之！ 秦人杀之。
现代文：前秦人把田泓杀掉了。
English: The former Qin people killed off Tian Yao.

古文：彭超置辎重于留城，谢玄扬声遣后军将军东海何谦向留城。
现代文：彭超在留城准备了轻重装备，谢玄扬言派遣后军将军何谦开赴留城。
English: Peng Chao prepared heavy and light equipment to stay in the city, and Xie Xuan threatened to send the rear army general He Qiankai to stay in the city.

古文：超闻之，释彭城围，引兵还保辎重。
现代文：彭超听说后，放弃了对彭城的包围，率兵返回留城保护轻重装备。
English: After hearing this, Peng Chao gave up the siege of Pengcheng and led his troops back to the city to protect the heavy and light equipment.

古文：戴逯帅彭城之众，随谦奔玄，超遂据彭城，留兗州治中徐褒守之，南攻盱眙。
现代文：戴率领彭城的部众，跟随何廉投奔谢玄，彭超于是占据彭城，留下兖州治中徐褒守卫彭城、彭超南攻盱眙。
English: Dai led the people of Pengcheng and followed He Lian to join Xie Xuan. Pengchao then occupied Pengcheng, leaving Xu Biao to guard Pengcheng and Pengchao to attack the southern part of Lianzhou.

古文：俱难克淮阴，留邵保戍之。
现代文：俱难攻克了淮阴，留下邵保戍守。
English: The club overcame Huaiyin with difficulty, leaving Shao Bao to defend.

古文：三月，壬戌，诏以 疆埸多虞，年谷不登，其供御所须，事从俭约；九亲供给，众官廪俸，权可减半。
现代文：三月，壬戌，东晋下达诏令认为： 边境多有忧患，谷物收成不佳，供奉御用所需，一律应该节简；九族的供给，百官的粮俸，暂且减掉一半。
English: In March, the Eastern Jin Dynasty issued an imperial edict, saying: There are many troubles at the border, the grain harvest is not good, and all supplies needed for royal use should be reduced; the supplies of the nine ethnic groups and the salaries of the officials should be reduced by half.

古文：凡诸役费，自非军国事要，皆宜停省。 
现代文：各种劳役费用，如果不是关系到军队和国家事务的关键，全都应该停止支出以求节省。 
English: All kinds of labor costs, if they are not related to the military and the key to national affairs, should stop spending in order to save.

古文：癸未，使右将军毛虎生帅众三万击巴中，以救魏兴。
现代文：癸未，东晋派右将军毛虎生率领三万兵众攻打巴中，用以救援魏兴。
English: Not long after, the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent the right-wing general Mao Hursheng to attack Ba Zhong with 30,000 soldiers to rescue Wei Xing.

古文：前锋督护赵福等至巴西，为秦将张绍等所败，亡七千馀人。
现代文：前锋督护赵福等人抵达巴西后，被前秦将领张绍等打败，损失七千多人。
English: After arriving in Brazil, the forward overseer Zhao Fu and others were defeated by the former Qin general Zhang Shao and others, with a loss of more than seven thousand people.

古文：虎生退屯巴东。
现代文：毛虎生退到巴东驻扎。
English: Mao Hu Sheng retreated to Badong and stationed there.

古文：蜀人李乌聚众二万，围成都以应虎生，秦王坚使破虏将军吕光击灭之。
现代文：蜀人李乌聚集了二万兵众，包围了成都以响应毛虎生，前秦国王苻坚派破虏将军吕光攻打并消灭了他们。
English: Li Wu, a man from Shu, gathered twenty thousand soldiers and surrounded Chengdu in response to Mao Huasheng. The former Qin king Yu Jian sent the general Lu Guang to attack and destroy them.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，韦钟拔魏兴，吉挹引刀欲自杀，左右夺其刀；会秦人至，执之，挹不言不食而死。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊申，韦钟攻下了魏兴，吉挹正要拔刀自杀，左右的人夺下了他的刀。恰好这时前秦人到达，抓获了他，吉挹一言不发，粒米不进而死亡。
English: In the summer, in April, in Wushin, Wei Zhong captured Wei Xing. Ji Yao was about to draw his sword to commit suicide, and people around him snatched his sword. Just then, the former Qin people arrived and captured him. Ji Yao did not say a word, and the grain of rice did not die.

古文：秦王坚叹曰： 周孟威不屈于前，丁彦远洁己于后，吉祖冲闭口而死，何晋氏之多忠臣也！ 
现代文：前秦王苻坚感叹地说： 前有周不示屈服，后有丁穆洁身自好，如今吉挹又闭口而死，为什么晋朝有这么多的忠臣呢！ 
English: Former Qin King Qian Jian sighed and said: Before, Zhou did not show submission, after that, Ding Mujie was self-righteous, and now Jizhe has closed his mouth and died. Why does the Jin Dynasty have so many loyalists?

古文：挹参军史颖逃归，得挹临终手疏，诏赠益州刺史。
现代文：吉挹的参军史颖逃了回来，东晋朝廷得到了吉挹临终前亲笔写下的奏疏，下达诏令追赠他为益州刺史。
English: Shih Ying, who had joined the army with Ji Huan, escaped and came back. The Eastern Jin Dynasty court obtained a record written by Ji Huan before his death and issued an imperial decree to posthumously bestow him with the title of the history of Yizhou.

古文：秦毛当、王显帅众二万自襄阳东会俱难、彭超攻淮南。
现代文：前秦毛当、王显率领二万兵众从襄阳东进，与俱难、彭超会合后攻打淮河以南地区。
English: Former Qin Emperors Mao Tang and Wang Xian marched eastward from Xiangyang with 20,000 soldiers at their head. It was difficult to keep up with them, and after Peng Chao's meeting, they attacked the area south of the Huai River.

古文：五月，乙丑，难、超拔盱眙，执高密内史毛璪之。
现代文：五月，乙丑，俱难、彭超攻下了盱眙，抓获了高密内史毛之。
English: In May, the second ugliness, the club is difficult, Peng Chao captured the cocoon, captured the high secret history Mao.

古文：秦兵六万围幽州刺史田洛于三阿，去广陵百里；朝廷大震，临江列戍，遣征虏将军谢石帅舟师屯涂中。
现代文：前秦的六万军队在三阿包围了幽州刺史田洛，离广陵只有一百里。东晋朝廷十分震惊，沿长江布署了戍卫力量，派遣征虏将军谢石率领水军驻扎在涂中。
English: The 60,000 troops of the former Qin Dynasty encircled Yuzhou, Jishi, and Tianluo in Sana, only 100 miles away from Guangling. The Eastern Jin Dynasty was very shocked and deployed its defense forces along the Yangtze River, sending the conscript general Xie Shi to lead the navy stationed in Tuizhong.

古文：石，安之弟也。
现代文：谢石是谢安的弟弟。
English: Xie Shi is the younger brother of Xie An.

古文：右卫将军毛安之等帅众四万屯堂邑。
现代文：东晋右卫将军毛安之等率领四万兵众驻扎在堂邑。
English: Eastern Jin Right Guard General Mao Anzhi led 40,000 soldiers stationed in Dongyue.

古文：秦毛当、毛盛帅骑二万袭堂邑，安之等惊溃。
现代文：前秦毛当、毛盛率领二万骑兵攻袭堂邑，毛安之等惊慌溃逃。
English: Former Qin Emperors Mao Dang and Mao Sheng led 20,000 cavalry to attack Dongyue, Mao An and others panicked and fled.

古文：兗州刺史谢玄自广陵救三阿；丙子，难、超战败，退保盱眙。
现代文：兖州刺史谢玄从广陵出发救援三阿。丙子，俱难、彭超战败，退守盱眙。
English: Xie Xuan, the governor of Zhangzhou, set out from Guangling to rescue San'a. He Zi was defeated, and Peng Chao was defeated and retreated.

古文：六月，戊子，玄与田洛帅众五万进攻盱眙，难、超又败，退屯淮阴。
现代文：六月，戊子，谢玄与田洛率领五万兵众进军攻打盱眙，俱难、彭超又被打败，退到淮阴驻扎。
English: In June, Wu Zi, Xie Xuan and Tian Luo led fifty thousand soldiers to attack and fight against Luo. It was very difficult, and Peng Chao was defeated again and retreated to Huaiyin.

古文：玄遣何谦等帅舟师乘潮而上，夜，焚淮桥。
现代文：谢玄派何谦等人率领水军趁着涨潮沿河而上，夜间焚烧了淮桥。
English: Xie Xuan sent He Qian and others to lead the navy to take advantage of the high tide to go up the river and burn the Huai Bridge at night.

古文：邵保战死，难，超退屯淮北，玄与何谦、戴逯、田洛共追之，战于君川，复大破之，难、超北走，仅以身免。
现代文：邵保战死，俱难、彭超后退驻扎于淮河以北。谢玄与何谦、戴、田洛一起追击他们，在君川交战，又大败了他们。俱难、彭超向北逃跑，仅仅逃脱了性命。
English: Shao Bao died in battle, Quan Nan and Peng Chao retreated and were stationed north of the Huai River. Xie Xuan, together with He Qian, Dai and Tian Luo, pursued them, fought in Junchuan, and defeated them. Quan Nan and Peng Chao fled north, and only escaped with their lives.

古文：谢玄还广陵，诏进号冠军将军，加领徐州刺史。
现代文：谢玄返回广陵，朝廷下达诏令，晋升他的封号为冠军将军，授予兼领徐州刺史的官职。
English: When Xie Xuan returned to Guangling, the imperial court issued a decree, promoting his title to champion general and awarding him the official post of leader of Xuzhou.

古文：秦王坚闻之，大怒。
现代文：前秦王苻坚听说此事，勃然大怒。
English: When the former Qin King He Jian heard about this, he flew into a rage.

古文：秋，七月，槛车征超下廷尉，超自杀。
现代文：秋季，七月，派囚车去征召彭超，要将他送交廷尉，彭超自杀。
English: In the autumn, in July, they sent a prisoner car to recruit Peng Chao, to send him to the court lieutenant, Peng Chao committed suicide.

古文：难削爵为民。
现代文：俱难被免除爵位降为庶民。
English: He was stripped of his peerage and reduced to a commoner.

古文：以毛当为徐州刺吏，镇彭城；毛盛为兗州刺史，镇胡陆；王显为扬州刺史，戍下邳。
现代文：苻坚任命毛当为徐州刺史，镇守彭城；毛盛为兖州刺史，镇守湖陆；王显为扬州刺史，戍守下。
English: Yu Jian appointed Mao Dang as the governor of Xuzhou and the town guard of Pengcheng; Mao Sheng as the governor of Zhangzhou and the town guard of Hulun; Wang Xian as the governor of Yangzhou and the town guard.

古文：谢安为宰相，秦人屡入寇，边兵失利，众心危惧，安每镇之，以和静。
现代文：谢安做宰相时，前秦人屡屡进犯，进境的军队失利，而谢安却总是以沉着、平和的态度使大家镇静。
English: When Xie An was the prime minister, the former Qin people repeatedly invaded and the invading army failed, but Xie An always kept everyone calm with a calm and peaceful attitude.

古文：其为政，务举大纲，不为小察。
现代文：他的施政方法，是务举大纲，不拘泥于小事。
English: His method of governance is based on the outline of the work plan, and does not stick to trifles.

古文：时人比安于王导，而谓其文雅过之。
现代文：当时的人把谢安与王导相提并论，但认为谢安的文雅要超过王导。
English: At that time, people compared Xie'an with Wang Du, but thought that Xie'an's gentleness was superior to Wang Du.

古文：八月，丁亥，以左将军王蕴为尚书仆射，顷之，迁丹杨尹。
现代文：八月丁亥，东晋任命左将军王蕴为尚书仆射。不久，又提升为丹阳尹。
English: In August of Dinghai, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the left general Wang Yun as Shang Shu's subordinate. Soon, he was promoted to Danyang Yin.

古文：蕴自以国姻，不欲在内，苦求外出；复以为都督浙江东五郡诸军事、会稽内史。
现代文：王蕴认为自己是皇后的父亲，不想在朝廷内任职，苦苦请求到外地去，朝廷又任命他为都督浙江东五郡诸军事、会稽内史。
English: Wang Yun thought that he was the father of the empress. He did not want to serve in the imperial court, so he begged to go to a foreign country. The imperial court appointed him as the governor of the five counties in eastern Zhejiang for military affairs and internal affairs.

古文：是岁，秦大饥。
现代文：这一年，前秦发生严重饥荒。
English: In this year, a severe famine occurred in the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之中太元五年春，正月，秦王坚复以北海公重为镇北大将军，镇蓟。
现代文：太元五年春季，正月，前秦王苻坚又任命北海公苻重为镇北大将军，镇守蓟城。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, in the first month, the former Qin King Yu Jian also appointed Beihai Gongyun as the general of the town of Beidai, and the town guard of Lucheng.

古文：二月，作教武堂于渭城，命太学生明阴阳兵法者教授诸将。秘书监硃肜谏曰： 陛下东征西伐，所向无敌，四海之地，什得其八，虽江南未服，盖不足言，是宜稍偃武事，增修文德。
现代文：二月，前秦在渭城建造了教武堂，命令太学生中明悉阴阳兵法的人教授众将领，秘书监朱肜劝谏苻坚说： 陛下东征西伐，所向无敌，四海之地，十得其八，虽然长江以南尚未征服，但不足挂齿。这时应该逐渐偃息战事，增加修行文德。
English: In February, the former Qin Dynasty built a martial arts hall in Shicheng, and ordered the generals who were well-versed in the Yin and Yang methods of warfare to teach the generals, and the secretary-supervisor, Zhu Xi, advised Yu Jian to say: Your Majesty is invincible in the east-west campaign, and the land of the four seas is the eighth out of ten, although the south of the Yangtze River has not yet been conquered, but it is not enough. At this time, it is necessary to gradually wind down the war and increase the practice of virtue.

古文：乃更始立学舍，教人战斗之术，殆非所以驯致升平也。
现代文：然而刚刚开始建立学宫，就教人征战之术，这大概不是招致天下升平的办法。
English: However, just starting to build a palace of learning, teaching people the art of war, this is probably not the way to invite the world to rise.

古文：且诸将皆百战之馀，何患不习于兵，而更使受教于书生，非所以强其志气也。
现代文：况且众将领都是身经百战，为什么还担心他们不熟悉军事，反而让他们受教于书生，这不是用来提高他们志气的办法。
English: Moreover, all generals have been through hundreds of wars, why are they worried that they are not familiar with military affairs, but let them be taught by students, this is not a way to raise their morale.

古文：此无益于实而有损于名，惟陛下图之！ 
现代文：此事没有实际的好处，又损害了声名，愿陛下考虑！ 
English: This matter has no practical benefit and damages the reputation, may His Majesty consider it!

古文：坚乃止。
现代文：于是苻坚停止了这种做法。
English: So Yan Jian stopped the practice.

古文：秦征北将军、幽州刺史行唐公洛，勇而多力，能坐制奔牛，射洞犁耳；自以有灭代之功，求开府仪同三司，不得，由是怨愤。
现代文：前秦征北将军、幽州刺史、行唐公苻洛，勇猛而又大力无比，能坐在那里制服奔牛，射穿坚硬而厚实的犁耳铁，自以为有消灭代国的功劳，要求开府仪同三司的资格，没有得到，因此便怨恨愤怒。
English: The former Qin general Zhengbei, the governor of Yuzhou, the ruler of Tang and the ruler of Luo, were brave and powerful beyond compare. They could sit there and subdue the bulls, shoot through the hard and thick ear of iron, think that they had the merit of destroying the country, and demand the qualification of the opening ceremony and the three divisions, but they did not get it, so they were resentful and angry.

古文：三月，秦王坚以洛为使持节、都督益、宁、西南夷诸军事、征南大将军、益州牧，使自伊阙趋襄阳，溯汉而上。
现代文：三月，前秦王苻坚任命苻洛为使持节，都督益、宁、西南夷诸军事，征南大将军，益州牧，让他从伊阙开赴襄阳，逆汉水而上。
English: In March, the former Qin King Jian Jian appointed Jiao Luo as the leader of the festival, and the governors of Duodu, Yixing, Ning and Xuanxi sent military forces to recruit the Southern Grand General, Yizhou Mu, and sent him from Yili to Xiangyang to go against the Han Dynasty.

古文：洛谓官属曰： 孤，帝室至亲，不得入为将相，而常摈弃边鄙。
现代文：苻洛对他的官属们说： 我是王室的至亲，不能进入朝廷成为将相，而一直被摈弃在边远之地。
English: Zhao Luo said to his officials: I am a close relative of the royal family, I cannot enter the court to become a commander, and I have been abandoned in a remote place.

古文：今又投之西裔，复不听过京师，此必有阴计，欲使梁成沉孤于汉水耳。
现代文：如今又把我投向西陲，还不让我路经京师，这里边一定有阴谋诡计，是想让梁成把我葬身于汉水！ 
English: Now they have sent me to Xidi again, and they still won't let me pass through Beijing Division, there must be a plot here, they want Liangcheng to bury me in the Han River!

古文：于诸君意何如？ 幽州治中平规曰： 逆取顺守，汤、武是也；因祸为福，桓、文是也。
现代文：幽州治中平规说： 逆取顺守，商汤、周武就是这样；因祸为福，齐桓、晋文就是这样。
English: Yuzhou Zhizhong Pingbo said: It is the same as Shang Tang and Zhou Wu; it is the same as Qi Huan and Jinwen.

古文：主上虽不为昏暴，然穷兵黩武，民思有所息肩者，十室而九。
现代文：主上虽然还没干昏庸暴虐之事，然而穷兵黩武，百姓中盼望安身休息一下的人，十有九家。
English: Although the Lord has not yet done the dizzying and tyrannical thing, but the poor soldiers, the people who hope to have a rest, nine out of ten.

古文：若明公神旗一建，必率土云从。
现代文：如果明公将神旗一竖，境域之内的百姓一定会随从如云。
English: If Ming Gong raises the banner of God, the people within the territory will surely follow like a cloud.

古文：今跨据全燕，地尽东海，北总乌桓、鲜卑，东引句丽、百济，控弦之士不减五十馀万，奈何束手就征，蹈不测之祸乎！ 
现代文：如今您横跨占据全燕，囊括东海，北边统领着乌桓、鲜卑，东面带领着高句丽、百济，士兵不下五十多万，为什么要束手服从征召，迈向不测之祸呢！ 
English: Now you have occupied the whole of Yan across the country, including the East China Sea, the north is led by Wuhuan and Xinbei, and the east is led by Goguryeo and Baekje, with more than half a million soldiers. Why should you be reluctant to obey the call-up and move towards an unforeseen disaster!

古文：洛攘袂大言曰： 孤计决矣，沮谋者斩！ 
现代文：苻洛捋起袖子大声说： 我的主意已定，反对者斩首！ 
English: Gong Luo rolled up his sleeves and said loudly: My idea has been decided, opponents will be beheaded!

古文：于是自称大将军、大都督、秦王。
现代文：于是苻洛自称大将军、大都督、秦王。
English: As a result, Jiao Luo called himself the great general, the great governor, and the king of Qin.

古文：以平规为幽州刺史，玄菟太守吉贞为左长史，辽东太守赵赞为左司马，昌黎太守王蕴为右司马，辽西太守王琳、北平太守皇甫杰、牧官都尉魏敷等为从事中郎。
现代文：任命平规为幽州刺史，玄菟太守吉贞为左长史，辽东太守赵为左司马，昌黎太守王为右司马，辽西太守王琳、北平太守皇甫杰、牧官都尉魏敷等人为从事中郎。
English: He appointed Ping Gu as the secretary of Yuzhou, Xuanzang Daju Yoshizhen as the left secretary, Liaodong Daju Zhao as the left secretary, Changli Daju Wang as the right secretary, West Liaodong Daju Wang Lin, Beiping Daju Wang Fu Jie, and Pastoral Officer Wei Shiki as the middlemen.

古文：分遣使者征兵于鲜卑、乌桓、高句丽、百济、新罗、休忍诸国，遣兵三万助北海公重戍蓟。
现代文：分别派遣使者到鲜卑、乌桓、高句丽、百济、新罗、休忍各国征召军队，派出三万兵力协助北海公苻重戍守蓟城。
English: Envoys were sent to Xianbei, Wuhuan, Goguryeo, Baekje, Silla, and Shuren to recruit troops, and 30,000 troops were sent to assist the Beihai Public Security Bureau to defend the city.

古文：诸国皆曰： 吾为天子守籓，不能从行唐公为逆。 
现代文：各国都说： 我们为天子守卫藩地，不能跟从行唐公苻洛作乱。 
English: All countries said: We are guarding the domain for the sake of heaven, we cannot make trouble with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：洛惧，欲止，犹豫未决。
现代文：苻洛害怕了，想停手不干，又犹豫不决。
English: Shiloh is scared, wants to quit, and hesitates.

古文：王缦、王琳、皇甫杰、魏敷知其无成，欲告之；洛皆杀之。
现代文：王、王琳、皇甫杰、魏敷知道苻洛终将无成，想要告发他，苻洛把他们全都杀掉了。
English: Wang, Wang Lin, Wang Fu Jie and Wei Shiki knew that Zhao Luo would not succeed in the end. They wanted to denounce him, but Zhao Luo killed them all.

古文：吉贞、赵赞曰： 今诸国不从，事乖本图。
现代文：吉贞、赵说： 如今各国都不跟从，事情与我们的本意相背。
English: Yoshizane and Zhao said: Nowadays, all countries do not follow suit, and things are contrary to our original intention.

古文：明公若惮益州之行者，当遣使奉表乞留，主上亦不虑不从。 
现代文：明公您如果是因为害怕前往益州，应当派遣使者进奉表章，请求留下，主上也不会不加考虑地拒绝。 
English: My lord, if you are afraid to go to Yizhou, you should send an envoy to present the seal and request to stay. The lord will not reject you without consideration.

古文：平规曰： 今事形颇露，何可中止！
现代文：平规说： 如今事情的形迹已经败露，怎么能半途而废！
English: Ping Gu said: Now that the situation has been exposed, how can we give up halfway!

古文：宜声言受诏，尽幽州之兵，南出常山，阳平公必郊迎；因而执之，进据冀州，总关东之众以图西土，天下可指麾而定也。 
现代文：应该声称接受诏令，实则带领幽州的全部军队，南出常山，阳平公苻融一定会远道迎接，乘势将他擒获，进军占据冀州，统领关东兵众以图谋西边的领土，天下弹指间就可以平定！ 
English: You should claim to accept the edict, but in fact, you should lead the entire army of Yuzhou, go south to Changshan, Yangping Gongjun Rong will certainly meet you from afar, seize the opportunity to capture him, march to occupy Jizhou, command the Kanto soldiers to plot the territory in the west, and the world can be pacified with a snap of the fingers!

古文：洛从之。
现代文：苻洛听从了平规的意见。
English: Min Luo listened to Ping Gui's advice.

古文：夏，四月，洛帅众七万发和龙。
现代文：夏季，四月，苻洛率领七万兵众从和龙出发。
English: In the summer, in April, Miao Luo led 70,000 soldiers to set out from Hailong.

古文：秦王坚召群臣谋之，步兵校尉吕光曰： 行唐公以至亲为逆，此天下所共疾。
现代文：前秦国王苻坚召集群臣商议此事，步兵校尉吕光说： 行唐公苻洛凭借王室至亲的身份作乱，这是天下人所共同痛恨的。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian convened a group of courtiers to discuss the matter, and the infantry lieutenant Lu Guang said: "It is the common hatred of the people of the world that Xing Tang Gongluo caused turmoil by virtue of his status as a close relative of the royal family.

古文：愿假臣步骑五万，取之如拾遗耳。 
现代文：愿您为臣配备五万步、骑兵，擒获他如同拣拾遗物那样容易。 
English: Equip your vassal with fifty thousand infantry and cavalry, and his capture will be as easy as picking up a relic.

古文：坚曰： 重、洛兄弟，据东北一隅，兵赋全资，未可轻也。 
现代文：苻坚说： 苻重、苻洛兄弟，占据着整个东北地区，兵员、赋税全都有所依凭，不可轻视。 
English: Zou Jian said: Zou Jian and Zou Luo brothers occupy the entire northeastern region, soldiers and taxes are all supported, and should not be despised.

古文：光曰： 彼众迫于凶威，一时蚁聚耳。
现代文：吕光说： 他的兵众是迫于凶狠的威慑，才一时像蚂蚁一样聚集起来的。
English: Lu Guang said: His soldiers were forced by the fierce deterrence to gather like ants for a while.

古文：若以大军临之，势必瓦解，不足忧也。 
现代文：如果大军前往，势必瓦解，不值得忧虑。 
English: If a large army comes, it is bound to collapse, so it is not worth worrying about.

古文：坚乃遗使让洛，使还和龙，当以幽州永为世封。
现代文：苻坚于是便派使者去责备苻洛，让他返回和龙，许诺当会把幽州作为他世代承袭的封地。
English: Xuan Jian then sent an envoy to reprimand Wu Luo, asking him to return to Hulong, promising that he would make Yuzhou his hereditary fief.

古文：洛谓使者曰： 汝还白东海王，幽州褊狭，不足以容万乘，须王秦中以承高祖之业。
现代文：苻洛对使者说： 你回去告诉东海王苻坚，幽州地域狭小，不足以容纳万乘之主，我必须在秦中称王以继承高祖苻健的大业。
English: Gongluo said to the messenger: You should go back and tell the East Sea King Gongjian that the Yuzhou region is too small to accommodate the Lord of the Ten Thousand Buddhas. I must be crowned king in Qin to inherit the great cause of Gao Zuo Gongjian.

古文：若能迎驾潼关者，当位为上公，爵归本国。 
现代文：如果他能亲自到潼关迎接大驾的话，我就让他位在上公，封爵后回归本国。 
English: If he can come to Shaoguan in person to meet the emperor, then I will make him the grand duke and return to his home country after he is knighted.

古文：坚怒，遣左将军武都窦冲及吕光帅步骑四万讨之；右将军都贵驰传诣鄴，将冀州兵三万为前锋；以阳平公融为征讨大都督。
现代文：苻坚听了这话后十分愤怒，派左将军、武都人窦冲以及吕光率领四万步、骑兵讨伐苻洛，派右将军都贵驰马急行，到邺城，统率冀州的三万军队作为前锋，任命阳平公苻融为征讨大都督。
English: After listening to this, Yu Jian was very angry. He sent General Zuo, Wu Du's Dou Chong and Luguang to lead 40,000 infantry and cavalry to fight against Luo, and sent General Du Gui to ride an express train to Lucheng, to lead 30,000 troops from Jizhou as a forward, and appointed Yang Ping Gong Rong as the conqueror of the capital.

古文：北海公重悉蓟城之众与洛会，屯中山，有众十万。
现代文：北海公苻重率领蓟城的全部兵众与苻洛会合，驻扎在中山，共有兵众十万。
English: Beihai Gongjun led all the soldiers of Fucheng to meet with Miao Luo and stationed in Zhongshan, with a total of 100,000 soldiers.

古文：五月，窦冲等与洛战于中山，洛兵大败，生擒洛，送长安。
现代文：五月，窦冲等与苻洛在中山交战，苻洛的军队大败，苻洛被活捉，送至长安。
English: In May, Dou Chong and others fought against Miao Luo in Zhongshan. Miao Luo's army was soundly defeated, and Miao Luo was captured alive and sent to Chang'an.

古文：北海公重走还蓟，吕光追斩之。
现代文：北海公苻重逃回蓟城，吕光追击并斩杀了他。
English: Beihai Gongjun fled back to Lucheng, and Lü Guang chased and killed him.

古文：屯骑校尉石越自东莱帅骑一万，浮海袭和龙，斩平规，幽州悉平。
现代文：屯骑校尉石越从东莱率领一万骑兵，渡海袭击和龙，斩杀了平规，幽州全部被平定。
English: The cavalry colonel Shi Yue led ten thousand cavalrymen from Donglai, crossed the sea to attack the dragon, killed the dragon, and Yuzhou was completely pacified.

古文：坚赦洛不诛，徙凉州之西海郡。
现代文：苻坚赦免了苻洛，没有诛杀他，把他迁徙到凉州的西海郡。
English: Gong Jian pardoned Gong Luo, did not kill him, and moved him to Xihai County, Liangzhou.

古文：臣光曰：夫有功不赏，有罪不诛，虽尧、舜不能为治，况他人乎！
现代文：臣司马光说：有功不赏，有罪不杀，就是尧、舜也不能实现大治，何况是其他人呢！
English: The courtier Sima Guang said: "Merit is not rewarded, guilt is not killed, even the most despicable person cannot achieve great governance, let alone others!"

古文：秦王坚每得反者辄宥之，使其臣狃于为逆，行险徼幸，虽力屈被擒，犹不忧死，乱何自而息哉！《书》曰： 威克厥爱，允济；爱克厥威，允罔功。 
现代文：前秦王苻坚每次擒获了反叛作乱的人就宽赦他们，从而使他的臣下对叛逆作乱习以为常，干险恶的勾当还心存侥幸，即便是力量不足被擒获，也不用担心被杀，这样祸乱从哪儿能停息呢！《尚书》曰： 以威胜爱，必定成功；以爱胜威，必定失败。 
English: Former Qin King He Jian pardoned rebels and troublemakers every time they were captured, so that his vassals became accustomed to rebellious and disorderly behavior. They were lucky enough to be captured and killed, even if they were not strong enough. How can such a calamity be stopped? "The Book of Songs" says: "To conquer love by might is sure to succeed; to conquer love by might is sure to fail."

古文：《诗》云： 毋纵诡随，以谨罔极；式遏寇虐，无俾作慝。 
现代文：《诗经》云： 别听狡诈欺骗的话，警惕两面三刀；制止暴虐与劫掠，不使作恶把人欺。 
English: "Song of Songs" cloud: Don't listen to cunning and deceitful words, beware of two sides and three swords; stop tyranny and plunder, don't let evil doers deceive people.

古文：今坚违之，能无亡乎！
现代文：如今苻坚违背了这些话，怎能不灭亡呢！
English: Now that Yan Jian has violated these words, how can he not perish!

古文：朝廷以秦兵之退为谢安、桓冲之功，拜安卫将军，与冲皆开府仪同三司。
现代文：东晋朝廷认为前秦军队的溃退是谢安、桓冲的功劳，给谢安授官卫将军，与桓冲都开府仪同三司。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court believed that the rout of the former Qin army was the merit of Xie'an and Huanchong, and awarded Xie'an with the rank of general of the Imperial Guards, and Huanchong with the ceremony of opening the capital and the three departments.

古文：六月，甲子，大赦。
现代文：六月，甲子，东晋实行大赦。
English: In June, an amnesty was implemented in Kazi and the Eastern Jin.

古文：丁卯，以会稽王道子为司徒；固让不拜。
现代文：丁卯，东晋任命会稽王司马道子为司徒，司马道子坚持辞让，不接受。
English: Dingwu, the East Jin Dynasty appointed Wang Sima Daozi as a tutor, but Sima Daozi insisted on resigning and did not accept.

古文：秦王坚召阳平公融为侍中、中书监、都督中外诸军事、车骑大将军、司隶校尉、录尚书事；以征南大将军、守尚书令长乐公丕为都督关东诸军事、征东大将军、冀州牧。
现代文：前秦王苻坚征召阳平公苻融为侍中、中书监、都督中外诸军事、车骑大将军、司隶校尉、录尚书事。任命征南大将军、守尚书令、长乐公苻丕为都督关东诸军事、征东大将军、冀州牧。
English: The former Qin King Shujian conscripted and integrated Yangping Gongyi as a chamberlain, the chief librarian, the governor of the military in and out of the country, the general of the cavalry, the lieutenant of the regiment, and the recorder of the records. Appointed the general of the south, the commander of the records, and Changle Gongyi as the governor of the military in Guandong, the general of the records of the east, and the governor of Jizhou.

古文：坚以诸氐种类繁滋，秋，七月，分三原、九嵕、武都、汧、雍氐十五万户，使诸宗亲各领之，散居方镇，如古诸侯。
现代文：苻坚考虑到众氐族种族滋长繁杂，秋季，七月，将三原、九、武都？雍氐的十五万户氐族人划分开来，让自己的各个亲属分别统领，散居一方，如同古代的诸侯国一样。
English: Taking into account the fact that the Yi people were ethnically diverse, Yu Jian separated the 150,000 Yi households in Sanyuan, Jiuzhaigou, Wudong and Yongle in the autumn and July, and let each of his relatives rule separately and live separately, just like the ancient vassal states.

古文：长乐公丕领氐三千户，以仇池氐酋射声校尉杨膺为征东左司马，九嵕氐酋长水校尉齐午为右司马，各领一千五百户，为长乐世卿。
现代文：长乐公苻丕统领了三千户氐族，任命仇池的氐族酋长、射声校尉杨膺为征东左司马，九的氏族酋长、长水校尉齐午为右司马，让他们各自统领一千五百户，作为长乐世代承袭的卿大夫。
English: Changle Gongye led the three thousand households of the Yao people, and appointed the chief of the Yao people in Qiuchi, Lieutenant Yang Jie, as the left steward of the Eastern Expedition, and the chief of the nine clans, Lieutenant Qi Wu of Changshui, as the right steward, so that they each led fifteen hundred households, as the noble doctor inherited by the Changle generation.

古文：长乐国郎中令略阳垣敞为录事参军，侍讲扶风韦干为参军事，申绍为别驾。
现代文：任命长乐郎中令、略阳人垣敞为录事参军，侍讲、扶风人韦为参军事，申绍为别驾。
English: He appointed Chang Le Lang as the second-in-command, Liao Yang as the second-in-command, Ren Wei as the third-in-command, and Shen Shao as the third-in-command.

古文：膺，丕之妃兄也；午，膺之妻父也。
现代文：杨膺是苻丕妻子的哥哥；齐午是扬膺妻子的父亲。
English: Yang Hui is the elder brother of Yang Hui's wife; Qi Wu is the father of Yang Hui's wife.

古文：八月，分幽州置平州，以石越为平州刺史，镇龙城。
现代文：八月，在幽州分置平州，任命石越为平州刺史，镇守龙城。
English: In August, Pingzhou was separated from Yuzhou, and Shi Yue was appointed as the governor of Pingzhou and the town guard of Longcheng.

古文：中书令梁谠为幽州刺史，镇蓟城。
现代文：任命中书令梁谠为幽州刺史，镇守蓟城。
English: In the letter of appointment, Liang Kun was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou and the town guard of Yucheng.

古文：抚军将军毛兴为都督河、秦二州诸军事、河州刺史，镇枹罕。
现代文：任命抚军将军毛兴为都督河、秦二州诸军事及河州刺史，镇守罕。
English: Mao Xing, the general of the Fuzhou army, was appointed as the military governor of He, Qin Erzhou, and Hezhou Shishi, and the town was protected.

古文：长水校尉王腾为并州刺史，镇晋阳。
现代文：任命长水校尉王腾为并州刺史，镇守晋阳。
English: Appointed Changshui school captain Wang Teng as the provincial governor and the town guard of Jinyang.

古文：河、并二州各配氐户三千。
现代文：河、并二州各自分配三千氐族民户。
English: Ho, and the two states will each allocate 3,000 Minzu households.

古文：兴、腾并苻氏婚姻，氐之崇望也。
现代文：毛兴、王腾全都与苻氏联姻，是氐族中有崇高声望的人。
English: Mao Xing and Wang Teng all married into the Yao clan, and were highly respected members of the Yao people.

古文：平原公晖为都督豫、洛、荆、南兗、东豫、扬六州诸军事、镇东大将军、豫州牧，镇洛阳。
现代文：任命平原公苻晖为都督豫、洛、荆、南兖、东豫、阳六州诸军事，镇东大将军，豫州牧，镇守洛阳。
English: He appointed Pingyuan Gongyi as the military commander of the six prefectures of Duoduo, Luo, Jing, Nanluo, Dongyu and Yang, the general of the town of Dongduo, the herdsman of the town of Yuzhou and the town guard of Luoyang.

古文：移洛州刺史治丰阳。
现代文：调动洛州刺史镇守丰阳。
English: The governor of Lozhou Zhishi Town, Fengyang, was transferred.

古文：以巨鹿公睿为雍州刺史，镇蒲阪。各配氐户三千二百。
现代文：任命钜鹿公苻睿为雍州刺史。各自配给三千二百氐族民户。
English: He appointed Gong Xuan Rui of the Elk to be the historian of Yongzhou, and distributed rice to 3,200 households of the Yao people.

古文：坚送丕至灞上，诸氐别其父兄，皆恸哭，哀感路人。
现代文：苻坚把苻丕送到灞上，众氐族人在辞别他们父兄的时候，全都失声痛哭，悲哀气氛感动路人。
English: Hao Jian brought the cocoon to the cocoon. When all the Yao people said goodbye to their fathers and brothers, they all lost their voices and cried bitterly. The sad atmosphere moved passers-by.

古文：赵整因侍宴，援琴而歌曰： 阿得脂，阿得脂，博劳舅父是仇绥，尾长翼短不能飞。
现代文：赵整趁着陪同宴请的机会，弹琴唱道： 阿得脂，阿得脂，伯劳鸟的舅父是仇绥，尾长翼短不能飞。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to accompany the banquet, Zhao Zhengyu played the piano and sang: Adzhi, Adzhi, the uncle of the grey shrike is the egret, the long tail and short wings can not fly.

古文：远徙种人留鲜卑，一旦缓急当语谁！ 
现代文：远徙氐人留鲜卑，一旦出现缓急应当告诉谁！ 
English: In case of emergency, who should be informed first?

古文：坚笑而不纳。
现代文：苻坚报之以微笑，但没有理会。
English: Yu Jian smiled in return, but ignored him.

古文：九月，癸未，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：九月，癸未，东晋皇后王氏去世。
English: In September, the Empress Wang of the Eastern Jin Dynasty passed away.

古文：冬，十月，九真太守李逊据交州反。
现代文：冬季，十月，九真太守李逊占据交州反叛。
English: In the winter, in October, Jiuzhen Grand Empress Dowager Li Xun occupied Jiaozhou and rebelled.

古文：秦王坚以左禁将军杨壁为秦州刺史，尚书赵迁为洛州刺史，南巴校尉姜宇为宁州刺史。
现代文：前秦王苻坚任命左禁将军杨壁为秦州刺史，尚书赵迁为洛州刺史，南巴校尉姜宇为宁州刺史。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Left Forbidden General Yang Bi as Qin State Historian, Shangshu Zhao Qian as Luozhou Historian, Nanba Lieutenant Jiang Yu as Ningzhou Historian.

古文：十一月，乙酉，葬定皇后于隆平陵。
现代文：十一月，乙酉，东晋在隆平陵安葬了定皇后王氏。
English: In November, the Eastern Jin Dynasty buried the Ding Empress Wang in the Longping Mausoleum.

古文：十二月，秦以左将军都贵为荆州刺史，镇彭城。
现代文：十二月，前秦任命左将军都贵为荆州刺史，镇守彭城。
English: In December, the former Qin Dynasty appointed General Zu Gui as the governor of Jingzhou and the town guard of Pengcheng.

古文：置东豫州，以毛当为刺史，镇许昌。
现代文：前秦设置东豫州，任命毛当为刺史，镇守许昌。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty, Dongyuzhou was set up, Mao Dang was appointed as the chief historian, and Xu Chang was appointed as the town warden.

古文：是岁，秦王坚遣高密太守毛璪之等二百馀人来归。
现代文：这一年，前秦王苻坚遣送高密太守毛之等二百多人回归东晋。
English: In the same year, the former Qin King He Jian sent more than 200 people, including Gao Mi Ta Shou Mao, back to the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之中太元六年春，正月，帝初奉佛法，立精舍于殿内，引诸沙门居之。
现代文：太元六年春季，正月，东晋孝武帝刚刚开始尊奉佛教的法度，在殿内设置了精舍，让僧徒们居住。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, in the first month of the year, Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, who had just begun to respect the laws of Buddhism, set up a hermitage in the hall for the monks to live in.

古文：尚书左丞王雅表谏，不从。
现代文：尚书左丞王雅上表劝谏，孝武帝不听。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not listen to Shangshu Zuozhe Wang Ya's overtures to advise him.

古文：雅，肃之曾孙也。
现代文：王雅是王肃的曾孙。
English: Wang Ya is the great-grandson of Wang Su.

古文：丁酉，以尚书谢石为仆射。
现代文：丁酉，东晋任命尚书谢石为仆射。
English: Ding Xi, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxi Xie Shi as a puppet.

古文：二月，东夷，西域六十二国入贡于秦。
现代文：二月，东夷、西域六十二国向前秦进贡。
English: In February, sixty-two countries in the eastern and western regions paid tribute to Qin.

古文：夏，六月，庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，六月，庚子朔，出现日食。
English: Summer, June, Geng Zi Shuo, solar eclipse.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，交趾太守杜瑗斩李逊，交州平。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲午，交趾太守杜缓斩杀李逊，交州得以平定。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the afternoon of the first day of the month, Jiaozuo's grand marshal Du Xuan killed Li Xun, and Jiaozuo was pacified.

古文：冬，十月，故武陵王晞卒于新安，追封新宁郡王，命其子遵为嗣。
现代文：冬季，十月，原武陵王司马在新安去世，东晋追封他为新宁郡王，让他的儿子司马遵继嗣王位。
English: In the winter, October, the original King of Wuling, Sima, died in Xin'an, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty crowned him as the King of Shining County, allowing his son Sima to succeed to the throne.

古文：十一月，己亥，以前会稽内史郗愔为司空；愔固辞不起。
现代文：十一月，己亥，任命前会稽内史郗为司空。郗固执地辞让，不肯就任。
English: In November, Ji Hai was appointed as the secretary of the pre-appointment internal auditor. He stubbornly resigned and refused to take office.

古文：秦荆州刺史都贵遣其司马阎振、中兵参军吴仲帅众二万寇竟陵，桓冲遣南平太守桓石虔、卫军参军桓石民等帅水陆二万拒之。
现代文：前秦荆州刺史都贵派遣其司马阎振、中兵参军吴仲率领二万兵众进犯竟陵，桓冲派南平太守桓石虔、卫军参军桓石民等率领二万水、陆军抵抗。
English: Former Qin Emperor Jing Zhou sent his secretary Ma Yan Zhen, the middle soldiers joined the army Wu Zhong led twenty thousand soldiers to invade the tomb, and Nanping Taishu Kuan Shikian and the guards joined the army Kuan Shikmin led twenty thousand water and army resistance.

古文：石民，石虔之弟也。
现代文：桓石民是桓石虔的弟弟。
English: Kanshimin is the younger brother of Kanshigin.

古文：十二月，甲辰，石虔袭击振、仲，大破之，振、仲退保管城。
现代文：十二月，甲辰，桓石虔袭击阎振、吴仲，重创他们。阎振、吴仲退守管城。
English: In December, Jia Chen and Huan Shikian attacked Yan Zhen and Wu Zhong, inflicting heavy losses on them. Yan Zhen and Wu Zhong retreated to take control of the city.

古文：石虔进攻之，癸亥，拔管城，获振、仲，斩首七千级，俘虏万人。
现代文：桓石虔进军攻打，癸亥，攻克管城，擒获阎振、吴仲，斩首七千人，俘虏一万人。
English: Huan Shikian marched into the army, attacked and defeated Yan Hai, conquered Guancheng, captured Yan Zhen and Wu Zhong, beheaded seven thousand people, and captured ten thousand people.

古文：诏封桓冲子谦为宜阳侯，以桓石虔领河东太守。
现代文：东晋朝廷下达诏书，封桓冲的儿子桓谦为宜阳侯。任命桓石虔兼河东太守。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty imperial court issued an imperial decree, appointing Kuan Chong's son, Kuan Qian, as the marquis of Yiyang, and appointing Kuan Shi Qian as the crown prince of Hedong.

古文：是岁，江东大饥。
现代文：这一年，长江以南发生严重饥荒。
English: That year, a severe famine occurred south of the Yangtze River.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝上之中太元七年
现代文：太元七年
English: In the seventh year of the Taiyuan

古文：春，三月，秦大司农东海公阳、员外散骑侍郎王皮、尚书郎周飏谋反，事觉，收下廷尉。
现代文：春季三月，前秦大司农东海公苻阳、员外散骑侍郎王皮、尚书郎周图谋反叛，事情被发觉，被捕后送交廷尉治罪。
English: In the spring of March, the former Qin Grand Secretary of Agriculture Donghai Gong Benyang, and the non-commissioned officers Wang Pi and Shang Shuro Zhou plotted to rebel. The matter was discovered, and they were arrested and sent to the court to be punished.

古文：阳，法之子；皮，猛之子也。
现代文：苻阳是苻法的儿子；王皮是王猛的儿子。
English: Shenyang is the son of Xingfa; Wangpi is the son of Wang Mengru.

古文：秦王坚问其反状，阳曰： 臣父哀公死不以罪，臣为父复仇耳。 
现代文：前秦王苻坚问他们谋反的情况及原因，苻阳说： 我的父亲哀公苻法无罪而死，我是为父亲复仇。 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian asked them about the circumstances of the rebellion and the reasons for it, and Yu Yang said: My father died without guilt, I am avenging my father.

古文：坚泣曰： 哀公之死，事不在朕，卿岂不知之！ 
现代文：苻坚哭泣着说： 哀公苻法之死，责任不在朕身上，你难道不知道吗？ 
English: Xuan Jian wept and said, "Don't you know that I am not responsible for mourning the death of Gong Xuan Fa?

古文：王皮曰： 臣父丞相，有佐命之勋，而臣不免贫贱，故欲图富贵耳。 
现代文：王皮说： 我的父亲身为丞相，有辅佐天命的功勋，而我却不免于贫贱，所以我想图谋富贵。 
English: Wang Pi said, "My father, as the prime minister, has the merit of supporting the Mandate of Heaven, but I am not immune to poverty, so I want to seek wealth.

古文：坚曰： 丞相临终托卿，以十具牛为治田之资，未尝为卿求官。
现代文：苻坚说： 丞相临终前嘱咐你，用十头牛作为种田的资本，未曾为你求取官位。
English: Hao Jian said: Before his death, the prime minister told you to use ten cows as capital for farming, and he never sought a post for you.

古文：知子莫若父，何其明也！ 
现代文：了解儿子没有谁能比得上父亲，这话多么英明啊！ 
English: How wise it is to know that no son is equal to his father!

古文：周飏曰： 飏世荷晋恩，生为晋鬼，复何问乎！ 
现代文：周说： 我世代承受晋朝的恩惠。生为晋臣，死为晋鬼，还有什么可问的呢！ 
English: Zhou said: My generation is the beneficiary of the benevolence of the Jin Dynasty. Born as a Jin subject, died as a Jin ghost, what else is there to ask!

古文：先是，飏屡谋反叛，左右皆请杀之。坚曰： 孟威烈士，秉志如此，岂惮死乎！
现代文：此前，周多次图谋反叛，周围的人都请求苻坚把他杀掉，苻坚说： 周是刚烈之士，他持有如此的志向，岂能害怕一死！
English: Previously, Zhou had repeatedly plotted to rebel, and people around him begged Yu Jian to kill him. Yu Jian said: Zhou is a man of fortitude, he has such aspirations, how can he be afraid of death!

古文：杀之适足成其名耳！ 
现代文：杀掉他正好足以成就他的名声！ 
English: Killing him was just enough to make his reputation!

古文：皆赦，不诛，徙阳于凉州之高昌郡，皮、飏于朔方之北。
现代文：于是将他们全部赦免不杀。把苻阳迁徙到凉州的高昌郡，把王皮，周迁徙到了朔方以北。
English: Therefore, he pardoned them all and did not kill them. He moved Fenyang to Gaochang County in Liangzhou, and moved Wangpi and Zhou to the north of Shuofang.

古文：飏卒于朔方。
现代文：周死于朔方。
English: Zhou died in Shao Fang.

古文：阳勇力兼人，寻复徙鄯善。
现代文：苻阳勇气力量过人，不久又被迁徙到鄯善。
English: Poyang's courage and strength were superior to others, and he was soon moved to Shaoshan.

古文：及建元之末，秦国大乱，阳劫鄯善之相，欲求东归，鄯善王杀之。
现代文：等到建元末年，前秦国中大乱，苻阳劫持鄯善丞相图谋东返，被鄯善王所杀。
English: At the end of the first year of the Jian Yuan Dynasty, during the Great War in the former Qin State, Fenyang kidnapped Fuxen, the prime minister, in an attempt to return to the East, and was killed by Fuxen Wang.

古文：秦王坚徙鄴铜驼、铜马、飞廉、翁仲于长安。
现代文：前秦王苻坚把邺城的铜驼、铜马、神禽飞廉像、巨人翁仲像迁移到长安。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian moved the bronze camel, bronze horse, sacred bird Fei Lian statue, and giant Weng Zhong statue from Yu City to Chang'an.

古文：夏，四月，坚扶风太守王永为幽刺史。
现代文：夏季四月，苻坚任命扶风太守王永为幽州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, Zou Jian appointed Wang Yong, the governor of Fufeng, as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：永，皮之兄也。
现代文：王永是王皮的哥哥。
English: Wang Yong is Wang Pi's elder brother.

古文：皮凶险无行，而永清修好学，故坚用之。
现代文：王皮凶狠险恶，无德，而王永却清正修明，好学，所以被苻坚任用。
English: Wang Pi was vicious and sinister, and had no virtue, while Wang Yong was clean, upright, and studious, so he was appointed by Yu Jian.

古文：以阳平公融为司徒，融固辞不受。
现代文：又任命阳平公苻融为司徒，苻融固执地辞让，不接受。
English: He also appointed Yang Ping Gongjun Rong as a disciple, but Rongjun stubbornly refused to accept the offer.

古文：坚方谋伐晋，乃以融为征南大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：苻坚正在图谋讨伐东晋，就任命苻融为征南大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: When Yu Jian was plotting to invade the Eastern Jin, he appointed Yu Rong as the general of the Southern Expedition, and Kaifu Yi as the commander of the Third Division.

古文：五月，幽州蝗生，广袤千里。
现代文：五月，幽州发生蝗灾，遍及千里。
English: In May, a locust plague occurred in Yuzhou, covering thousands of miles.

古文：秦王坚使散骑常侍彭城刘兰发幽、冀、青、并民扑除之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚让散骑常侍彭城人刘兰发动幽、冀、青、并四州的百姓消灭蝗虫。
English: Former Qin King He Jian ordered Liu Lan, a knight errant from Pengcheng, to mobilize the people of Yuzhou, Hebei, Qing and Shizhou to exterminate the locusts.

古文：秋，八月，癸卯，大赦。
现代文：秋季八月，癸卯，东晋实行大赦。
English: In the autumn of August, the Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：秦王坚以谏方大夫裴元略为巴西、樟潼二郡太守，使密具舟师。
现代文：前秦王苻坚任命谏议大夫裴元略为巴西、潼二郡太守，让他秘密地准备水军。
English: The former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Pei Yuanliu, the doctor of the imperial council, as the governor of Brazil and the second county of Anhui, and asked him to secretly prepare the navy.

古文：九月，车师前部王弥窴、鄯善王休密驮入朝于秦，请为乡导，以伐西域之不服者，因如汉法置都护以统理之。
现代文：九月，车师前部王弥、鄯善王休密驮来到前秦朝见，请求作为向导，以讨伐西域拒不臣服的部族，顺势效法汉代的办法设置都护来统领管辖他们。
English: In September, the chariot drivers, Wang Ya of Qianbu and Wang Xiu Mi Ya of Shanshan, came to see the former Qin Dynasty and asked to be a guide to fight the tribes that refused to submit in the western region, and to set up a tutelary to govern them according to the Han Dynasty.

古文：秦王坚以骁骑将军吕光为使持节、都督西域征讨诸军事，与凌江将军姜飞、轻车将军彭晃、将军杜进、康盛等总兵十万，铁骑五千，以伐西域。
现代文：前秦王苻坚任命骁骑将军吕光为使持节、都督西域征讨诸军事，与凌江将军姜飞、轻车将军彭晃、将军杜进、康盛等统领十万军队，铁甲骑兵五千，讨伐西域。
English: The former Qin king Yu Jian appointed the cavalry general Lu Guang as the commander of the expeditionary force, the governor of the western region to recruit military forces, and the Lingjiang River general Jiang Fei, the light vehicle general Peng Xiao, the general Du Jin, Kang Sheng, etc. led 100,000 troops, 5,000 armored cavalry, and fought in the western region.

古文：阳平公融谏曰： 西域荒远，得其民不可使，得其地不可食，汉武征之，得不补失。
现代文：阳平公苻融劝谏说： 西域荒芜遥远，得到了那里的百姓也无法役使，得到了那里的土地也无法耕种，汉武帝征伐他们，得不偿失。
English: Yangping Gongjun Rongxuan said: The Western Regions are far from desolate, and the people there can not be used, and the land there can not be cultivated. Emperor Hanwu conquered them, and it was not worth the loss.

古文：今劳师万里之外，以踵汉氏之过举，臣窃惜之。 
现代文：如今让部队艰辛地出征万里之外，重犯汉武帝的错误，我私下里为此感到痛惜。 
English: Now, I privately deplore the fact that troops are being sent thousands of miles away to repeat the mistakes of Emperor Han Wudi.

古文：不听。
现代文：苻坚没有听从苻融的意见。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：桓冲使扬威将军硃绰击秦荆州刺史都贵于襄阳，焚践沔北屯田，掠六百馀户而还。
现代文：桓冲让扬威将军朱绰攻打在襄阳的前秦荆州刺史都贵，焚烧破坏了沔水以北用以征收军晌的屯田，掳掠了六百多户百姓后返回。
English: Huanchong let Yangwei General Zhu Cao attack the former Qin and Jing states in Xiangyang, burn and destroy the military camps north of Surabaya, which were used to collect military pay, plunder more than six hundred households, and then return.

古文：冬，十月，秦王坚会群臣于太极殿，议曰： 自吾承业，垂三十载，四方略定，唯东南一隅，未沾王化。
现代文：冬季，十月，前秦王苻坚在太极殿会见群臣，和他们商量说： 自从我继承大业，已经三十年了，四方之地，大致平定，只有东南一隅，尚未蒙受君王的教化。
English: In the winter, in October, the former Qin King He Jian met with a group of ministers in the Taiji Hall, and discussed with them: "Since I inherited the great cause, it has been thirty years, the land in all directions has been roughly pacified, only the southeast corner has not yet been enlightened by the monarch.

古文：今略计吾士卒，可得九十七万，吾欲自将以讨之，何如？ 
现代文：如今粗略地计算一下我的士兵，能有九十七万，我想亲自统帅他们去讨伐晋朝，怎么样？ 
English: Now, roughly calculating my soldiers, there can be nine hundred and seventy thousand, I want to personally command them to fight against Jin Dynasty, how about it?

古文：秘书监硃肜曰： 陛下返中国士民，使复其桑梓，然后回舆东巡，告成岱宗，此千载一时也！ 
现代文：秘书监朱肜说： 陛下让中原之国的士人百姓返回故土，让他们恢复家园，然后回车东巡，在岱宗泰山奉告成功，这是千载难逢的时机。 
English: Secretary Inspector Zhu Xi said: His Majesty let the people of the Central Plains country return to their native land, let them restore their homes, and then return to the East Tour, and report success in Taishan, Shanzong. This is a rare opportunity.

古文：坚喜曰： 是吾志也。 
现代文：苻坚高兴地说： 这就是我的志向。 
English: Yu Jian said happily: This is my ambition.

古文：尚书左仆射权翼曰： 昔纣为无道，三仁在朝，武王犹为之旋师。
现代文：尚书左仆射权翼说： 过去商纣王无道，但微子、箕子、比干三位仁人在朝，周武王尚且因此回师，不予讨伐。
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Shaquan Ying, said, "In the past, Shang Shao Wang had no choice, but the three benevolent people, Wuzi, Zizi, and Bi Gan, were in the imperial court. Therefore, King Zhou Wu still returned to his division and would not fight.

古文：今晋虽微弱，未有大恶。谢安、桓冲皆江表伟人，君臣辑睦，内外同心。以臣观之，未可图也。 
现代文：如今晋朝虽然衰微软弱，但还没有大的罪恶，谢安、桓冲又都是长江一带才识卓越的人才，他们君臣和睦，内外同心，以我来看，不可图谋！ 
English: Today, although the Jin Dynasty is weak and feeble, it has not committed any major crimes. Xie An and Huan Chong are both outstanding talents in the Yangtze River area. They are in harmony with the emperor and empress, and are of the same mind at home and abroad. From my point of view, they cannot be plotting!

古文：坚嘿然良久，曰： 诸君各言其志。 
现代文：苻坚沉默了许久，说： 诸君各自发表自己的意见。 
English: Zou Jian was silent for a long time and said, "You all express your own opinions.

古文：太子左卫率石越曰： 今岁镇守斗，福德在吴。伐之，必有天殃。
现代文：太子左卫率石越说： 今木星、土星居于斗宿，福德在吴地，如果讨伐他们，必有天灾。
English: Prince Zuo Wei led the Shi Yue to say: Now Jupiter and Saturn live in Dooshuku, and Fuda in Wudi. If they are attacked, there will be a natural disaster.

古文：且彼据长江之险，民为之用，殆未可伐也！ 
现代文：而且他们凭借着长江天险，百姓又为其所用，恐怕不能讨伐！ 
English: Moreover, they rely on the Yangtze River as a natural hazard, and the people are also used for it, I'm afraid they can't fight!

古文：坚曰： 昔武王伐纣，逆岁违卜。
现代文：苻坚说： 过去周武王讨伐商纣，就是逆太岁运行的方向而进，也违背了占卜的结果。
English: Yu Jian said: In the past, Zhou Wu Wang's crusade against the merchants was against the direction of the Taiyuan operation, and also violated the results of divination.

古文：天道幽远，未易可知。
现代文：天道隐微幽远，不容易确知。
English: The way of heaven is subtle and far away, and it is not easy to know for sure.

古文：夫差、孙皓皆保据江湖，不免于亡。
现代文：夫差、孙皓全都据守江湖，但也不能免于灭亡。
English: Both Fuzha and Sun Yat-sen remained loyal to the state, but they were not immune to its demise.

古文：今以吾之众，投鞭于江，足断其流，又何险之足恃乎！ 
现代文：如今凭借我兵众，把鞭子投之于长江，也足以断绝水流，又有什么天险足以凭借呢！ 
English: Nowadays, with the help of our soldiers, throwing a whip into the Yangtze River is enough to cut off the water flow, but what natural hazard is enough to rely on!

古文：对曰： 三国之君皆淫虐无道，故敌国取之，易于拾遗。
现代文：石越回答说： 商纣、夫差、孙皓这三国之君，全都淫虐无道，所以敌对的国家攻取他们，就像俯身拣拾遗物一样容易。
English: Shi Yue replied, "The princes of these three countries, Shang Qi, Husha and Sun Qi, are all immoral, so it is as easy for an enemy country to capture them as it is to stoop down and pick up relics.

古文：今晋虽无德，未有大罪，愿陛下且案兵积谷，以待其衅。 
现代文：如今晋朝虽然缺乏道德，但没有大的罪恶，愿陛下暂且按兵不动，积聚粮谷等，等待他们灾祸的降临。 
English: Today, although the Jin dynasty lacks morality, there are no major evils. May His Majesty temporarily stand still, accumulate grain, etc., and wait for their calamity to come.

古文：于是群臣各言利害，久之不决。
现代文：于是群臣们各言利害，久久未能决定。
English: As a result, the ministers were at loggerheads and could not come to a decision for a long time.

古文：坚曰： 此所谓筑室道旁，无时可成。
现代文：苻坚说： 这正所谓在道路旁边修筑屋舍，没有什么时候能够建成。
English: Hao Jian said: This is exactly what is called building houses next to the road. It will not be built anytime soon.

古文：吾当内断于心耳！ 
现代文：我要自我决断了！ 
English: I want to decide for myself!

古文：群臣皆出，独留阳平公融，谓之曰： 自古定大事者，不过一二臣而已。
现代文：群臣们都出去了，唯独留下了阳平公苻融。苻坚对他说： 自古参与决定大事的人，不过是一两个大臣而已。
English: The courtiers had all left, except for Yang Ping, the minister of public security, who said to him, "Since ancient times, only one or two ministers have been involved in major decisions.

古文：今众言纷纷，徒乱人意，吾当与汝决之。 
现代文：如今众说纷纭，只能扰乱人心，我要与你来决定此事。 
English: There are many opinions now, which can only disturb people's hearts, and I want to decide this matter with you.

古文：对曰： 今伐晋有三难：天道不顺，一也；晋国无衅，二也；我数战兵疲，民有畏敌之心，三也。
现代文：苻融对苻坚说： 如今讨伐晋朝有三难：天道不顺，此其一；晋国自身无灾祸，此其二；我们频繁征战，士兵疲乏，百姓怀有畏敌之心，此其三。
English: Hao Rong said to Hao Jian: Today, there are three difficulties in fighting against the Jin Dynasty: First, the heavenly way is not smooth; second, the Jin Dynasty itself is not plagued with disasters; third, we frequently go to war, the soldiers are tired, and the people are afraid of the enemy.

古文：群臣言晋不可伐者，皆忠臣也，愿陛下听之。 
现代文：群臣当中说不能讨伐晋朝的人，全都是忠臣，希望陛下听从他们的意见。 
English: Among the courtiers, those who said that they could not fight against the Jin Dynasty were all loyal courtiers. I hope that His Majesty will listen to their opinions.

古文：坚作色曰： 汝亦如此，吾复何望！
现代文：苻坚脸色一变说： 你也是如此，我还能寄希望于谁呢！
English: Hao Jian's face changed and he said, "So are you. Who else can I pin my hopes on?"

古文：吾强兵百万，资仗如山；吾虽未为令主，亦非暗劣。
现代文：我有强兵百万，资财兵器堆积如山；我虽然不是完美的君主，但也不是昏庸之辈。
English: I have a million strong army, a mountain of wealth and weapons; although I am not a perfect monarch, I am not a dullard.

古文：乘累捷之势，击垂亡之国，何患不克，岂可复留此残寇，使长为国家之忧哉！ 
现代文：乘着捷报频传之势，攻击垂死挣扎之国，还怕攻不下来？怎么可以再留下这些残敌，使他们长久地成为国家的忧患呢！ 
English: Taking advantage of the frequent reports of success, to attack a country in its death throes, and fearing that it will not be able to be conquered? How can these remnants of the enemy be left behind, so that they become a long-term national worry?

古文：融泣曰： 晋未可灭，昭然甚明。
现代文：苻融哭泣着说： 晋朝无法灭掉，事情非常明显。
English: Hao Rong wept and said, "The Jin Dynasty cannot be eliminated, this is very obvious.

古文：今劳师大举，恐无万全之功。
现代文：如今大规模地出动疲劳的军队，恐怕不会获得万无一失的战功。
English: A large-scale mobilisation of a fatigued army now would not, I am afraid, win a sure-fire victory.

古文：且臣之所忧，不止于此。
现代文：况且我所忧虑的，还不仅于此。
English: And that's not all I'm worried about.

古文：陛下宠育鲜卑、羌、羯，布满畿甸，此属皆我之深仇。
现代文：陛下宠爱养育鲜卑人、羌人、羯人，让他们布满京师，这些人都对我们有深仇大恨。
English: Your majesty loves to nurture the lowly, the lazy, and the greedy, and fill them with the capitalists, all of whom have a deep hatred for us.

古文：太子独与弱卒数万留守京师，臣惧有不虞之变生于腹心肘掖，不可悔也。
现代文：太子独自和数万弱兵留守京师，我害怕有不测之变出现在我们的心腹地区，后悔不及。
English: Prince alone and tens of thousands of weak soldiers stayed behind in the Beijing Division. I was afraid that something unexpected would happen in our heartland, and I couldn't help but regret it.

古文：臣之顽愚，诚不足采；王景略一时英杰，陛下常比之诸葛武侯，独不记其临没之言乎！ 
现代文：我的愚妄之见，确实不值得采纳，王猛是一时的英明杰出之人，陛下常常把他比作诸葛亮，为什么唯独不铭记他的临终遗言呢！ 
English: My foolish opinion is really not worth adopting. Wang Meng was a wise and outstanding person at the time. His Majesty often compared him to Zhuge Liang. Why not remember his last words?

古文：坚不听。
现代文：苻坚依然没有听从。
English: Yan Jian did not listen.

古文：于是朝臣进谏者众，坚曰： 以吾击晋，校其强弱之势，犹疾风之扫秋叶，而朝廷内外皆言不可，诚吾所不解也！ 
现代文：此时向苻坚进谏的朝臣很多，苻坚说： 以我们的力量攻打晋朝，比较双方的强弱之势，就像疾风扫秋叶一样，然而朝廷内外都说不能攻打，这确实令我百思不得其解！ 
English: At this time, there were many courtiers who approached Yu Jian. Yu Jian said, "Let's use our strength to attack Jin Dynasty, and compare the strength and weakness of both sides. It's like the wind sweeping away the autumn leaves. However, both inside and outside the court said that we can't attack, which really puzzled me!

古文：太子宏曰： 今岁在吴分，又晋君无罪，若大举不捷，恐威名外挫，财力内竭，此群下所以疑也！ 
现代文：太子苻宏说： 如今木星在吴地的分野，再加上晋朝国君没有罪恶，如果大举进攻而不能取胜，在外威风名声受挫，在内资财力量耗尽，这就是导致群臣们产生疑问的原因！ 
English: Prince Yan Hong said: Now that Jupiter is in the field of Wudi, coupled with the fact that the prince of the Jin Dynasty has no sin, if he makes a large-scale attack and cannot win, if his prestige abroad is frustrated, and if his domestic resources and financial strength are exhausted, this is the reason why the courtiers have doubts!

古文：坚曰： 昔吾灭燕，亦犯岁而捷，天道固难知也。
现代文：苻坚说： 过去我消灭燕国，也违背了木星的征兆，但取得了胜利，天道本来就是难以确知的。
English: Yu Jian said, "In the past, when I destroyed the Yan Kingdom, I also violated the signs of Jupiter, but I won the victory. It is inherently difficult to know the way of heaven.

古文：秦灭六国，六国之君岂皆暴虐乎！ 
现代文：秦灭六国，六国之君难道全都是暴虐的君主吗！ 
English: Is it true that the Qin Dynasty annihilated the Six Kingdoms and the sovereigns of the Six Kingdoms were all tyrannical monarchs?

古文：冠军、京兆尹慕容垂言于坚曰： 弱并于强，小并于大，此理势自然，非难知也。
现代文：冠军将军、京兆尹慕容垂向苻坚进言说： 弱被强所并，小被大所吞，这是自然的道理与趋势，并不难理解。
English: The champion general, Jing Zhaoyun Murong, leaned forward and said: "The weak are united by the strong, and the small are swallowed up by the big. This is a natural reason and trend, and it is not difficult to understand.

古文：以陛下神武应期，威加海外，虎旅百万，韩、白满朝，而蕞尔江南，独违王命，岂可复留之以遗子孙哉！
现代文：像陛下这样神明威武，适应天意，威名远播海外，拥有强兵劲旅百万，韩信、白起那样的良将布满朝廷，而江南弹丸之地，独敢违抗王命，岂能再留下他们而交给子孙后代呢！
English: As your majesty is so divine and powerful, and adapts to the will of heaven, and his fame spreads far and wide overseas, and he has millions of strong soldiers, Han Xin and Baiqi are such good generals that the imperial court is full of them, and the south of the Yangtze River is the land of bullets, and no one dares to disobey the king's order, how can they be left to future generations?

古文：《诗》云： 谋夫孔多，是用不集。 
现代文：《诗经》云： 出谋划策人太多，因此事情不成功。 
English: "Shijing" cloud: There are too many strategists, so things are not successful.

古文：陛下断自圣心足矣，何必广询朝众！
现代文：陛下自己在内心做出决断就完全可以了，何必广泛地征询众朝臣的意见！
English: It is perfectly possible for His Majesty to make his own decision in his heart, so why not consult widely with his courtiers!

古文：晋武平吴，所仗者张、杜二三臣而已，若从朝众之言，岂有混壹之功乎！ 
现代文：晋武帝平定吴国，所倚仗的只有张华、杜预两三位大臣而已，如果听从众朝臣之言，难道能有统一天下的功业！ 
English: Emperor Jinwu conquered the State of Wu with only two or three ministers, Zhang Hua and Du Yu, to rely on. If he had listened to his courtiers, could he have unified the country?

古文：坚大悦，曰： 与吾共定天下者，独卿而已。 
现代文：苻坚十分高兴地说： 与我共同平定天下的人，只有你而已。 
English: Yu Jian was very pleased and said, "You are the only one who can work with me to pacify the world."

古文：赐帛五百匹。
现代文：赏赐给慕容垂五百匹帛。
English: Five hundred yakitori were awarded to Murongdol.

古文：坚锐意欲取江东，寝不能旦。
现代文：苻坚专注于想要攻取长江以东，连睡觉也不能睡到早晨。
English: He couldn't even sleep until morning because he was so focused on conquering everything east of the Yangtze River.

古文：阳平公融谏曰：  知足不辱，知止不殆。 
现代文：阳平公苻融劝谏他说：  知道满足就不会感到耻辱，知道停止就不会出现危险。 
English: Yang Ping advised him: "If you know how to be satisfied, you won't feel shame. If you know how to stop, you won't be in danger."

古文：自古穷兵极武，未有不亡者。
现代文：自古以来，穷兵黩武的人没有不灭亡的。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a warlord who did not perish.

古文：且国家本戎狄也，正朔会不归人。
现代文：况且我们的国家本来就属戎狄之人，天下的正宗嫡传大概不会归于像我们这样的外族人。
English: Moreover, our country has always belonged to the Juche people, and the world's true lineage will probably not belong to foreigners like us.

古文：江东虽微弱仅存，然中华正统，天意必不绝之。 
现代文：长江以南虽然衰微软弱，残喘生存，但他们是中华的正统，天意一定不会灭绝他们。 
English: Although the south of the Yangtze River is weak and weak, and survives as a remnant, they are the orthodoxy of China, and the providence will not exterminate them.

古文：坚曰： 帝王历数，岂有常邪！惟德之所在耳！
现代文：苻坚说： 帝王更替之道，怎么会有一成不变的呢，只看道德在哪里。
English: Hao Jian said: How can the way of replacing emperors be set in stone? It just depends on where morality is.

古文：刘禅岂非汉之苗裔邪，终为魏所灭。
现代文：刘禅难道不是汉朝的后裔吗？但最终被魏国所灭。
English: Wasn't Liu Zen a descendant of the Han Dynasty? But he was eventually destroyed by the Wei Dynasty.

古文：汝所以不如吾者，正病此不达变通耳！ 
现代文：你之所以不如我的原因，毛病正在于不了解变通的道理。 
English: The reason why you are not as good as me is that you do not understand the principle of flexibility.

古文：坚素信重沙门道安，群臣使道安乘间进言。
现代文：苻坚历来信任重视僧人道安，群臣们让道安寻找机会向苻坚进言。
English: Shujian had always trusted and valued the monk Daoan, and the courtiers let Daoan look for opportunities to speak to Shujian.

古文：十一月，坚与道安同辇游于东苑，坚曰： 朕将与公南游吴、越，泛长江，临沧海，不亦乐乎！ 
现代文：十一月，苻坚与道安同乘一车在东苑游览，苻坚说： 朕将要与你南游吴、越之地，泛舟长江，亲临沧海，不也是很快乐的事情吗！ 
English: In November, Hao Jian and Dao An took a car together to tour the East Garden. Hao Jian said: "I am going to travel with you to the south of Wu and Yue, raft the Yangtze River, and visit the Canghai Sea. Isn't it a very happy thing!

古文：安曰： 陛下应天御世，居中土而制四维，自足比隆尧、舜，何必栉风沐雨，经略遐方乎！
现代文：道安说： 陛下顺应天意统治天下，身居中原而控制四方，自身的昌隆就足以与尧、舜相比，何必栉风沐雨，经营远方呢！
English: Dao An said, "Your Majesty rules the world in accordance with the will of Heaven. You live in the Central Plains and control the four directions. Your own prosperity is enough to be compared to that of a baboon or a rooster. Why should you have to brave the wind and rain to manage far away places?

古文：且东南卑湿，沴气易构，虞舜游而不归，大禹往而不复。何足以上劳大驾也！ 
现代文：而且东南地区低洼潮湿，容易造成灾害不祥之气，虞、舜前去游猎就再也没有返回，大禹去了一趟就再也没有第二趟，有什么值得劳您大驾的呢！ 
English: Moreover, the southeastern region is low-lying and humid, which is easy to cause disasters and ominous. If you go hunting, you will never return. If you go once, you will never go twice. What is worth your trouble?

古文：坚曰： 天生烝民，而树之君，使司牧之，朕岂敢惮劳，使彼一方独不被泽乎！
现代文：苻坚说： 上天生育了民众而为他们树立了君主，是让君主统治他们，朕岂敢害怕辛劳，唯独使那一方土地不承受恩泽呢！
English: Yu Jian said: Heaven gave birth to the people and set up a monarch for them, and let the monarch rule over them. I dare not be afraid of hard work, but only let that side of the land not receive grace!

古文：必如公言，是古之帝王皆无征伐也！ 
现代文：如果一定像你所说的那样，古代的帝王就全都没有征伐之事了！ 
English: If it were as certain as you say, the ancient emperors would never have gone to war!

古文：道安曰： 必不得已，陛下宜驻跸洛阳，遣使者奉尺书于前，诸将总六师于后，彼必稽首入臣，不必亲涉江、淮也。 
现代文：道安说： 一定要干的话，陛下应该在洛阳停驻，先派遣使者给他们送去书信，众将领统领六军跟随于后，他们就一定会叩首称臣，您不必亲自涉足长江、淮河。 
English: Dao An said, "If you must do it, Your Majesty should make a stop in Luoyang, first send an envoy to them to send a letter, and then the generals in charge of the Six Armies will follow, and they will certainly bow their heads and call themselves ministers. You do not have to personally set foot on the Yangtze River and the Huai River.

古文：坚不听。
现代文：苻坚没有听从。
English: Yan Jian did not listen.

古文：坚所幸张夫人谏曰： 妾闻天地之生万物，圣王之治天下，皆因其自然而顺之，故功无不成。
现代文：苻坚所宠爱的张夫人劝谏他说： 妾听说天地滋生万物，圣王统治天下，全都是顺其自然，所以功业无所不成。
English: Lady Zhang, Fan Jian's favorite, advised him: "My concubine has heard that heaven and earth breed all things, that the holy king rules the world, and that all things follow their natural course. Therefore, one's deeds can achieve anything.

古文：是以黄帝服牛乘马，因其性也；禹浚九川，障九泽，因其势也；后稷播殖百谷，因其时也；汤、武帅天下而攻桀、纣，因其心也。皆有因则成，无因则败。
现代文：黄帝之所以能驯服牛马，是顺应了它们的禀性；大禹之所以能疏通九川，挡住九泽，是顺应了它们的地势；后稷之所以能播种繁殖百谷，是顺应了天时；商汤、周武王之所以能率领天下人攻下夏桀、商纣，是顺应了他们的心愿，全都是顺应则成功，不顺应则失败。
English: The reason why the Yellow Emperor was able to tame cattle and horses was in accordance with their stubbornness; the reason why Dayu was able to unclog the Nine Rivers and block the Nine Lakes was in accordance with their topography; the reason why Houyi was able to sow and propagate a hundred grains was in accordance with the time of day; the reason why Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu were able to lead the world's people to conquer Xiaqi and Shangqi was in accordance with their wishes, all of which were in accordance with success, and failure.

古文：今朝野之人皆言晋不可伐，陛下独决意行之，妾不知陛下何所因也。
现代文：如今朝野之人都说晋朝不可讨伐，唯独陛下一意孤行，妾不知道陛下是顺应了什么。
English: Nowadays, people from all walks of life say that it is impossible to fight against the Jin Dynasty. Only His Majesty can do as he pleases, and his concubine does not know what His Majesty has agreed to.

古文：《书》曰： 天聪明自我民聪明。 
现代文：《尚书》曰： 上天的聪慧明察来自于民众的聪慧明察。 
English: "Shangshu" said: The wisdom and insight of the heavens come from the wisdom and insight of the people.

古文：天犹因民，而况人乎！
现代文：上天尚且要顺应民意，何况是人呢！
English: Heaven forfend that it should conform to public opinion, let alone man!

古文：妾又闻王者出师，必上观天道，下顺人心。
现代文：妾又听说君王出动军队，一定要上观天道，下顺人心。
English: The concubine also heard that the king had sent out an army, and that it was necessary to go up to the Heaven Realm, and then go down to the people.

古文：今人心既不然矣，请验之天道。
现代文：如今人心既然不同意讨伐晋朝，请您再与天道验证一下。
English: Now that the people of the world do not agree with the crusade against the Jin Dynasty, please verify with the Heavenly Realm.

古文：谚云： 鸡夜鸣者不利行师，犬群嗥者宫室将空，兵动马惊，军败不归。 
现代文：俗谚说； 鸡夜鸣时不利于出师，犬群嚎时宫室将空，兵器响动，圈马蹶惊，军败难归。 
English: As the saying goes, when the rooster crows at night, it is not conducive to the formation of an army, when the dogs howl, the palace will be empty, the weapons will ring, the horses will be frightened, and the army will be defeated.

古文：自秋、冬以来，众鸡夜鸣，群犬哀嗥，厩马多惊，武库兵器自动有声，此皆非出师之祥也。 
现代文：自从秋季、冬季以来，众鸡夜鸣，群犬哀嚎，圈马多惊，武库里的兵器自己响动，这些都是不能出师的预兆。 
English: Since the autumn and winter, the chickens have been crowing at night, the dogs have been whining, the horses have been frightened, and the weapons in the arsenal have been ringing on their own. These are all signs that the division cannot be formed.

古文：坚曰： 军旅之事，非妇人所当预也！ 
现代文：苻坚说： 军旅之事，不是妇人所应当参与的！ 
English: Yu Jian said, "Women should not take part in military expeditions!

古文：坚幼子中山公诜最有宠，亦谏曰： 臣闻国之兴亡，系贤人之用舍。
现代文：苻坚的小儿子、中山公苻诜最受宠爱，他也劝谏苻坚说： 我听说国家的兴亡，与对贤明之人的弃用相联系。
English: Yu Jian's youngest son, Zhongshan Gongjun, was the most beloved of all. He also advised Yu Jian: "I heard that the rise and fall of a country is linked to the abandonment of wise people.

古文：今阳平公，国之谋主，而陛下违之；晋有谢安、桓冲，而陛下伐之，臣窃惑之。 
现代文：如今阳平公苻融，是国家的主谋，然而陛下却不听他的意见；晋朝有谢安、桓冲，然而陛下却要讨伐他们，我私下里感到大惑不解！ 
English: Today, Yang Ping Gong Rong Rong is the mastermind of the country, but His Majesty does not listen to his advice; the Jin Dynasty has Xie'an and Huanchong, but His Majesty wants to fight them, I feel very puzzled in private!

古文：坚曰： 天下大事，孺子安知！ 
现代文：苻坚说： 天下大事，小孩子知道什么！ 
English: Hao Jian said: The world's major events, what do children know!

古文：秦刘兰讨蝗，经秋冬不能灭。
现代文：前秦刘兰从事灭蝗，经过秋季冬季仍未明显奏效。
English: Former Qin Liu Lan was engaged in locust extermination, but after the autumn and winter, it has not been significantly effective.

古文：十二月，有司奏请征兰下廷尉。
现代文：十二月，有关部门奏请将刘兰送交廷尉处理。
English: In December, the relevant departments requested that Liu Lan be sent to the court for handling.

古文：秦王坚曰： 灾降自天，非人力所能除，此由朕之失政，兰何罪乎？ 
现代文：前秦王苻坚说： 灾害降自上天，不是人力所能消除的，这是由于朕的政治混乱所致，刘兰何罪之有！ 
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian said: Disasters come down from the heavens and cannot be eliminated by manpower. This is due to our political turmoil. What is Liu Lan guilty of?

古文：是岁，秦大熟，上田亩收七十石，下者三十石，蝗不出幽州境，不食麻豆，上田亩收百石，下者五十石。
现代文：这一年，前秦大获丰收，上等农田每亩收获七十石，下等农田每亩收获三十石。蝗虫不出幽州之境，而且不吃麻豆五谷，这里的上等农田每亩收获一百石，下等农田每亩收获五十石。
English: In this year, the former Qin Dynasty achieved a bumper harvest, with the upper-class farmland reaping 70 koku per mu, and the lower-class farmland reaping 30 koku per mu. Locusts do not come out of Yuzhou, and they do not eat beans and cereals. Here, the upper-class farmland reaps 100 koku per mu, and the lower-class farmland reaps 50 koku per mu.

