古文：子曰： 泰伯，其可谓至德也已矣。三以天下让，民无得而称焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 泰伯可以说是品德最高尚的人了，多次把王位让给季历，老百姓都找不到恰当的词句来赞美他。 
English: Confucius said: Tai Bo can be said to be a man of the highest moral character. He repeatedly abdicated the throne to Jiali, and the common people could not find the right words to praise him.

古文：子曰： 恭而无礼则劳；慎而无礼则葸；勇而无礼则乱；直而无礼则绞。
现代文：孔子说： 恭敬却不知礼，就会徒劳无功；谨慎却不知礼，便会畏缩拘谨；勇猛却不知礼，容易莽撞闯祸；心直口快却不知礼，会显得尖利刻薄。
English: Confucius said: "If you are respectful but not courteous, you will be useless; if you are cautious but not courteous, you will be timid; if you are brave but not courteous, you will be reckless; if you are outspoken but not courteous, you will be sharp."

古文：君子笃于亲，则民兴于仁；故旧不遗，则民不偷。 
现代文：君子能厚待自己的亲族，民众中则会兴起仁德的风气；君子不遗弃故交旧朋，那民众便不会对人冷淡漠然了。 
English: If a gentleman can be kind to his relatives, a benevolent atmosphere will arise among the people; if a gentleman does not abandon old friends, the people will not be indifferent to others.

古文：曾子有疾，召门弟子曰： 启予足，启予手。
现代文：曾子生病了，把他的学生召集到身边来，说道： 看看我的脚！
English: When Zeng Zi fell ill, he gathered his students around him and said, "Look at my feet!

古文：《诗》云： 战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。 
现代文：看看我的手有没有损伤。如何做到没有损伤的呢？如诗所言： 战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Walk with fear and trembling, as if approaching the abyss, as if walking on thin ice."

古文：而今而后，吾知免夫，小子！ 
现代文：从今以后，我才知道自己可以免于祸害刑戮了！弟子们！ 
English: From now on, I know that I can be free from the scourge of torture! Disciples!

古文：曾子有疾，孟敬子问之。
现代文：曾子有病，孟敬子去探望他。
English: Zeng Zi was ill, and Meng Keizi went to visit him.

古文：曾子言曰： 鸟之将死，其鸣也哀；人之将死，其言也善。
现代文：曾子对他说： 鸟快要死的时候，鸣叫的声音是悲哀的；人快要死的时候，说出来的话也是善良的。
English: Zengzi said to him, "When a bird is about to die, its song is sad; when a person is about to die, the words he utters are kind.

古文：君子所贵乎道者三：动容貌，斯远暴慢矣；正颜色，斯近信矣；出辞气，斯远鄙倍矣。
现代文：君子所应当重视的道有三个方面：使自己的容貌庄重严肃，这样就可以避免别人的粗暴和怠慢；使自己面色端庄严正，这样就容易使人信服；讲究言辞和声气，这样就可以避免粗野和错误。
English: There are three aspects of etiquette that a gentleman should pay attention to: to make his appearance solemn and serious, so that he can avoid the rudeness and negligence of others; to make his appearance dignified and upright, so that it is easy to convince people; to pay attention to words and tone, so that he can avoid rudeness and mistakes.

古文：笾豆之事，则有司存。 
现代文：至于祭祀和礼节仪式，自有主管这些事务的官吏来负责。 
English: As for the sacrificial rites and etiquette ceremonies, the officials in charge of these affairs are in charge.

古文：曾子曰： 以能问于不能；以多问于寡；有若无，实若虚，犯而不校。
现代文：曾子说： 有才能却向没有才能的人请教，知识渊博的人却向知识浅薄的人请教；有学问却像没学问一样；满腹知识却像空虚无所有；即使被冒犯也不去计较。
English: Zeng Zi said: Talented people ask advice from those who are not talented, knowledgeable people ask advice from those who are not knowledgeable; learned people are like uneducated people; a full stomach of knowledge is like emptiness; even if they are offended, they don't care.

古文：昔者吾友尝从事于斯矣。 
现代文：从前我的一位朋友就这样做过了。 
English: A friend of mine did this once.

古文：曾子曰： 可以托六尺之孤，可以寄百里之命，临大节而不可夺也。
现代文：曾子说： 可以把幼小的君主托付给他，可以把国家的政权寄放于他，即使在生死存亡关头也不会妥协。
English: Zeng Zi said: You can entrust a young monarch to him, you can entrust the power of the state to him, even in a life-or-death situation, he will not compromise.

古文：君子人与？君子人也。 
现代文：这样的人是君子吗？是君子啊！ 
English: Is such a man a gentleman? He is a gentleman!

古文：曾子曰： 士不可以不弘毅，任重而道远。
现代文：曾子说： 有抱负的人不可以不胸怀宽广，意志坚定，因为他肩负着重大的使命，路途又很遥远。
English: Zeng Zi said: An aspiring person must have a broad mind and a strong will, because he has a great mission and a long way to go.

古文：仁以为己任，不亦重乎？
现代文：把实现 仁 的理想看作自己的使命，不也很重大吗？
English: Isn't it also very important to regard the realization of the ideal of humanity as one's own mission?

古文：死而后已，不亦远乎？ 
现代文：直到死才停止，这不也是很遥远吗？ 
English: It doesn't stop until death, isn't that a long way off?

古文：子曰： 兴于《诗》，立于礼，成于乐。 
现代文：孔子说： 人的修养从学习《诗》开始，把礼作为立身的根基，掌握音乐使所学得以完成。 
English: Confucius said: "The cultivation of a person begins with the study of "Poetry" and regards etiquette as the foundation of one's life. Mastering music enables one to complete what one has learned.

古文：子曰： 民可，使由之；不可，使知之。 
现代文：孔子说： 百姓知道该怎么做，就让他们自主行为不要过多约束。
English: Confucius said: If the people know what to do, let them act independently without too much restraint.

古文：子曰： 好勇疾贫，乱也。人而不仁，疾之已甚，乱也。 
现代文：百姓疑惑而不知道该怎么做，那就设法引导、教化，甚至强制他们。 
English: If the people are confused and do not know what to do, then try to guide, enlighten, and even force them.

古文：子曰： 如有周公之才之美，使骄且吝，其余不足观也已。 
现代文：孔子说： 喜欢勇敢逞强却厌恶贫困，是一种祸害。对不仁的人憎恶太过，也是一种祸害。 孔子说： 即使有周公那样美好的才能，如果骄傲而吝啬的话，那其他方面也就不值得一提了。 
English: Confucius said: It is a calamity to like the brave and strong, but hate the poor, and it is also a calamity to hate the unkind too much. Confucius said: Even if there is such a wonderful talent as Zhou Gong, if he is proud and stingy, then the other aspects are not worth mentioning.

古文：子曰： 三年学，不至于谷，不易得也。 
现代文：孔子说： 读书三年，不是为了做官谋好职业，这是难能可贵的。 
English: Confucius said, "Studying for three years is not for the purpose of seeking a good career as a government official.

古文：子曰： 笃信好学，守死善道。
现代文：孔子说： 做人要勤奋好学，要坚持真理，坚定信仰。
English: Confucius said: To be a man, one must be diligent and eager to learn, adhere to the truth, and firm in faith.

古文：危邦不入，乱邦不居。
现代文：处在危险境地的国家不进入，处在乱世的邦国不去居住。
English: Don't enter a country in danger, and don't live in a country in turmoil.

古文：天下有道则见，无道则隐。
现代文：天下国家有正道就现身，荒乱无道就隐退。
English: In the world, when a country has a righteous path, it will emerge, but when there is no path, it will retreat.

古文：邦有道，贫且贱焉，耻也；邦无道，富且贵焉，耻也。 
现代文：国家有道，而自己贫穷鄙贱，是耻辱；国家无道，而自己富有显贵，也是耻辱。 
English: It is a disgrace for a country to be virtuous while its own people are poor and despised; it is also a disgrace for a country to be virtuous while its own people are rich and distinguished.

古文：子曰： 不在其位，不谋其政。 
现代文：孔子说： 不担任这个职务，就不去过问这个职务范围内的事情。 
English: Confucius said: If you are not in that position, you will not think about the things in that position.

古文：子曰： 师挚之始，《关雎》之乱，洋洋乎盈耳哉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 从太师挚开始演奏，到结尾演奏《关雎》乐曲的时间里，丰富而优美的音乐在我耳边回荡。 
English: Confucius said, "During the time from the beginning of Taishi's sincere performance to the end of the performance of the music of Guan Yu, the rich and beautiful music reverberated in my ears.

古文：子曰： 狂而不直，侗而不愿，悾悾而不信，吾不知之矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 狂妄而不正直，无知又不谨慎老实，表面上诚恳却不守信用，不知道为什么会有这样的人。 
English: Confucius said: Arrogant but not honest, ignorant but not prudent and honest, sincere on the surface but not trustworthy, I don't know why there are such people.

古文：子曰： 学如不及，犹恐失之。 子曰： 巍巍乎！
现代文：孔子说： 学习知识就像追赶什么似的，追赶上了又担心会丢失。 孔子说： 多么崇高啊！
English: Confucius said: "Learning knowledge is like catching up with something, and when you catch up, you worry about losing it."Confucius said: "How sublime!

古文：舜、禹之有天下也而不与焉。 
现代文：舜、禹拥有天下，不是为了自己享受却是为了黎民百姓。 
English: Yu, Yu owns the world, not for his own enjoyment, but for the people of Lai.

古文：子曰： 大哉尧之为君也！
现代文：孔子说： 真伟大啊！真崇高啊！尧这样的君主。
English: Confucius said, "How great! How lofty! How great a monarch!"

古文：巍巍乎，唯天为大，唯尧则之。
现代文：只有天最高最大，只有尧能效法于上天。
English: Only the highest heaven is the greatest, and only radium can imitate the heavens.

古文：荡荡乎，民无能名焉。
现代文：他的恩德多么广大啊，百姓们真不知道该怎么来赞美他。
English: His benevolence is so vast that the people really don't know how to praise him.

古文：巍巍乎其有成功也，焕乎其有文章！ 
现代文：真是崇高啊，他创建的功绩，真是崇高呀！他制定的礼仪制度，真是灿烂美好呀！ 
English: How sublime, how sublime are the merits he has created! How splendid and beautiful is the system of etiquette he has established!

古文：舜有臣五人而天下治。
现代文：舜拥有了五位贤臣，就治理好了天下。
English: If you have five wise men, you can rule the world.

古文：武王曰： 予有乱臣十人。 孔子曰： 才难，不其然乎？
现代文：周武王也说过： 我有十位能帮助我治理国家的贤臣。 孔子说： 人才难得，难道不是这样吗？
English: King Zhou Wu also said: I have ten wise men who can help me govern the country.Confucius said: Talent is rare, is it not so?

古文：唐虞之际，于斯为盛；有妇人焉，九人而已。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜时代以及周武王时，人才最盛。
English: Tang and Yu Dynasties, as well as the Zhou Dynasty, were the times when talent was at its peak.

古文：三分天下有其二，以服事殷。
现代文：然而武王十位治国人才中有一位还是妇女，所以实际上只有九人而已。
English: However, one of King Wu's ten talents for governing the country is still a woman, so there are actually only nine people.

古文：周之德，其可谓至德也已矣。 
现代文：周文王得了天下的三分之二，仍然事奉殷朝，周朝的道德，可以说是最高的了。 
English: King Zhou Wen won two-thirds of the world and still served the Yin Dynasty. The morality of the Zhou Dynasty can be said to be the highest.

古文：子曰： 禹，吾无间然矣。菲饮食而致孝乎鬼神，恶衣服而致美乎黼冕，卑宫室而尽力乎沟洫。
现代文：孔子说： 对于禹，我对他没什么意见；他的饮食很简单却尽力去孝敬鬼神；衣服简朴，祭祀时却尽量穿得华美，他自己住的宫室很低矮，却把力量完全用于沟渠水利上。
English: Confucius said, "As for Yu, I have no objection to him; his diet is simple, but he tries his best to show filial piety to ghosts and gods; his clothes are simple, but he tries his best to dress splendidly at the time of sacrifice. The palace where he lives is very low, but he devotes all his energy to ditch water conservancy.

古文：禹，吾无间然矣。 
现代文：禹，我对他确实没有意见了。 
English: Yu, I really don't have a problem with him.

