古文：敬宗文宗上
现代文：敬宗本纪
English: Honji Keizong passed away

古文：敬宗睿武昭愍孝皇帝讳湛，穆宗长子，母曰恭僖太后王氏。
现代文：敬宗睿武昭愍孝皇帝名湛，是穆宗的长子，生母即恭僖太后王氏。
English: Emperor Gaozong, the eldest son of Emperor Mu Zong, was born to Empress Dowager Wang, the mother of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：元和四年六月七日，生于东内之别殿。
现代文：元和四年六月七日，生于大明宫旁的侧殿。
English: He was born in the side hall next to the Daming Palace on June 7, 1901.

古文：长庆元年三月，封景王。
现代文：长庆元年三月，封为景王。
English: In March of the first year of Changqing, he was given the title of King of Scenery.

古文：二年十二月，立为皇太子。
现代文：翌年十二月，立为皇太子。
English: In December of the following year, he became crown prince.

古文：四年正月壬申，穆宗崩。
现代文：长庆四年正月二十二日穆宗去世。
English: Mu Zong passed away on the 22nd day of the first month of the fourth year of Changqing.

古文：癸酉，皇太子即位柩前，时年十六。
现代文：二十三日，皇太子在穆宗灵柩前宣布继承皇位，当时他才十六岁。
English: On the 23rd, the Crown Prince announced his succession to the throne before the funeral of Emperor Muzong, when he was only 16 years old.

古文：甲戌，左仆射韩皋卒。
现代文：二十四日，左仆射韩皋去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the left-hand man, Han Han, passed away.

古文：丙子，群臣准遗诏奏皇帝宝册礼毕，诏赏神策诸军士人绢十匹、钱十千、畿内诸军镇绢十匹、钱五千，其余军镇颁给有差。
现代文：二十六日，群臣遵穆宗遗诏，举行皇帝登极仪式。仪式结束，皇帝即下诏赏赐神策军每人绢十匹、钱十千，京城各驻军每人绢十匹、钱五千，其他军队之赏赐逐一不等。
English: On the 26th, a group of courtiers held the Emperor's enthronement ceremony in accordance with the last will and testament of Emperor Muzong. After the ceremony, the Emperor immediately issued an edict to reward the Shinsaka army with thirty horses and ten thousand coins each, and the troops stationed in the capital with thirty horses and five thousand coins each. The rewards for the other armies varied from one to another.

古文：内出绫绢三百万段以助赏给。
现代文：令内库拿出三百万段绫绢以贴补赏赐所需。
English: Let the treasury come up with three million baht to supplement the reward to the maximum required.

古文：穆宗初即位，在京军士人获五十千，在外军镇差降无几。
现代文：而当初穆宗登皇帝位时，京城驻军每人获赏钱五十千，其他在外军队所获与之相差无几。
English: However, when Emperor Muzong ascended the throne, each of the troops stationed in Beijing received a reward of fifty thousand, which was almost the same as that received by other foreign troops.

古文：至是，宰臣奏议请量国力颁赏，故差减于先朝，物议是之。群臣五上章请听政，从之。
现代文：这次皇帝听从了宰相量力而行的建议，故所赐少于穆宗登位时，人咸称是。群臣旋即五次上奏请主持国事，皇帝从之。
English: This time, the emperor listened to the suggestion of the prime minister to do as much as possible, so he gave less than when Mu Zong ascended the throne, people said yes. The ministers immediately petitioned five times to preside over state affairs, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：二月辛巳朔，上缞服见群臣于紫宸门外。
现代文：二月初一日，皇帝着孝服在紫宸门外接受群臣的拜贺。
English: On the first day of February, the emperor, dressed in filial piety, received congratulations from a group of courtiers outside Shishimen Gate.

古文：壬午，渤海送备宿卫大聪叡等五十人入朝。
现代文：初二，渤海郡王送大聪睿又等五十人来京以备侍卫之用。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the king of Bohai County sent Da Cong Rui and another fifty people to Beijing to prepare for the guards.

古文：癸未，贬户部侍郎李绅为端州司马。
现代文：初三，贬户部侍郎李绅为端州司马。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Li Sheng, the waiter of the Household Division, was demoted to the rank of Hanzhou Sima.

古文：丙戌，贬翰林学士、驾部郎中、知制诰庞严为信州刺史，翰林学士、司封员外郎、知制诰蒋防为汀州刺史，皆绅之引用者。
现代文：初六，贬翰林学士、驾部郎中、知制诰庞严为信州刺史，翰林学士、司封员外郎、知制诰蒋防为汀州刺史。庞、蒋二人皆李绅所推荐。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Hanlin Scholar, Chauffeur's son-in-law, and Zhizhe Yao Pangyan were promoted to Shinshu. Hanlin Scholar, Secretary's son-in-law, and Zhizhe Yao Jiang Bao were promoted to Tingzhou. Both Pang and Jiang were recommended by Li Sheng.

古文：以右拾遗吴思为殿中侍御史，充入蕃告哀使。
现代文：以右拾遗吴思为殿中侍御史，并充任入蕃告哀史。
English: Wu Si, the Right Reverend, was appointed as the attendant of history in the hall, and also served as the mourner of history.

古文：李绅之贬，李逢吉受贺，群官至中书，而思独不往，逢吉怒而斥为远使。
现代文：李绅被贬，群官至李逢吉府恭贺，惟吴思未去。李逢吉一怒之下，将吴思驱往远恶邻邦告哀。
English: Li Sheng was dethroned, and the officials went to Li Fengji to congratulate him, but Wu Si did not go. Li Fengji was so angry that he drove Wu Si to his evil neighbor to mourn.

古文：戊子，河北告哀使、谏议大夫高允恭卒于东都。
现代文：初八，河北告哀史、谏议大夫高允恭死于东都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Hebei mourned and mourned the death of the doctor Gao Yunqong in Dongdu.

古文：辛卯，敕没掖庭宫人、先配内园宫人，并宜放出，任其所适。
现代文：十一日，令尽将前妃嫔的宫女配给禁苑园圃中之男子，且一并从宫中放出，任其择居。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the court lady of the former concubine was assigned to the man in the garden of the forbidden garden, and was released from the palace and allowed to choose a place to live.

古文：己亥，册大行皇帝皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：十九日，封大行皇帝皇太后为太皇太后。
English: On the 19th, the Empress Dowager of Emperor Fongda Xing became the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：庚子，西川节度使杜元颖进罨画打球衣五百事，非礼也。
现代文：二十日，西川节度使杜元颖进奉彩色打衣五百件，这不合为臣的法则。
English: On the 20th, the Saikawa Festival ordered Du Yuanying to donate 500 pieces of colorful clothing, which was not in accordance with the rules of a vassal.

古文：辛丑，上始御紫宸殿受朝。
现代文：二十一日，皇上才开始到紫宸殿处理朝政。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Emperor only began to go to Shishinden to deal with the affairs of the Imperial Court.

古文：既退，幸飞龙院，厚赐内官等物有差。
现代文：一退朝，径至飞龙院，对近侍太监宫女重赏不等。
English: Once they left the palace, they went all the way to Fei Long Yuan, where the close attendants of the eunuch's wife received different rewards.

古文：以米贵，出太仓粟四十万石，于两市贱粜，以惠贫民。
现代文：以市上米贵，令从京城粮仓中拿四十万石粮食，至长安、洛阳市上贱卖，以惠贫民。
English: Taking advantage of the high price of rice in the market, he ordered that 400,000 koku of grain be taken from the grain silos in Beijing and sold at a low price in Chang'an and Luoyang to benefit the poor.

古文：癸未夜，太白犯东井北辕。
现代文：二十三日，夜，太白星移位至东井星北面。
English: On the evening of the 23rd, the Taibai Star moved to the north of the Dongjing Star.

古文：乙巳，上率群臣诣光顺门册皇太后。
现代文：二十五日，皇上率群臣至光顺门册封皇太后。
English: On the 25th, the emperor led a group of courtiers to Guangshun's gate to crown her empress dowager.

古文：丁未，御中和殿击球，赐教坊乐官绫绢三千五百匹。
现代文：二十七日，皇上至中和殿打，赏赐教坊内诸乐宫绫绢三千五百匹。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the emperor came to Zhonghe and rewarded the school with three thousand five hundred horses.

古文：戊申，击球于飞龙院。
现代文：二十八日，打于飞龙院。
English: On the 28th, it was played at Fei Long Yuan.

古文：己酉，大合乐于中和殿，极欢而罢，内官颁赐有差。
现代文：二十九日，在中和殿游宴、打、奏乐，极尽欢乐，对太监、宫女、乐工随意赏赐不等。
English: On the 29th, there were banquets, games and musical performances in the Zhonghe Hall, and the eunuchs, palace maids and musicians were given various rewards.

古文：三月庚戌朔，贬司农少卿李彤吉州司马，以前为邓州刺史，坐赃百万，仍自刻德政碑故也。
现代文：三月初一为庚戌日贬司农少卿李彤为吉州司马。李彤曾为邓州刺史，贪赃百万，却刻德政碑自美，事发遭贬。
English: On the first day of March, the day of Geng Xu, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Li Qian, was demoted to the Secretary of Jizhou. Li Qian had engraved the history of Dengzhou, embezzled millions, but carved the German political monument from the United States, and was demoted.

古文：壬子，上御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：初三，皇上至丹凤楼，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor went to the Danfeng Building to grant amnesty to the world.

古文：京畿夏青苗钱并放，秋青苗钱每贯放二百文。
现代文：将京城农田夏青苗钱全部放出，秋青苗钱按每贯二百文放出。
English: All the summer young seedlings in Beijing farmland will be released, and the autumn young seedlings will be released at 200 yuan each.

古文：天下常贡之外不得进献。
现代文：各地按例进贡之外，不得再行进献。
English: In addition to the usual tribute from all over the country, it is no longer allowed to march.

古文：六宅、十宅诸王女，宜令每年于选人中选择降嫁。
现代文：六宅、十宅诸王之女，令每年从候补官员中择人下嫁。
English: The daughters of the kings of the Six Houses and the Ten Houses were required to choose a spouse from among the alternate officials each year.

古文：今后户帐田亩，五年一定税。
现代文：今后户口田地，每五年按数定税。
English: In the future, fields with a hukou will be subject to a fixed tax every five years.

古文：是日，风且雨。
现代文：是日，风雨并作。
English: It is the sun, the wind and the rain.

古文：甲寅，始于延英对宰臣。
现代文：初五，皇帝始至延英殿与群臣议事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor went to the court of Yan Ying to confer with his retainers.

古文：丙辰，以尚书右丞韦顗为户部侍郎。
现代文：初七，以尚书右丞韦靑为户部侍郎。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Shoshu Ujo Weihai was promoted to the position of household attendant.

古文：戊午，礼仪使奏： 外命妇正旦及四始日旧行起居之礼，伏以礼烦则渎，请停。 
现代文：初九，礼仪史上奏 ：朝臣之妻每月初一和每季第一天进宫拜问之仪礼，频而繁以至不庄重，请停止。 
English: On the first day of the month and the first day of every quarter, the wife of a courtier enters the palace to make a formal request. The ceremony is so frequent and elaborate that it is undignified. Please stop it.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚申，工部尚书胡证检校户部尚书、京兆尹。
现代文：十一日，诏工部尚书胡证为检校户部尚书、京兆尹。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was announced that Shang Shu from the Engineering Department and Jing Zhaoyun from the Household Department would be sent to inspect the school.

古文：甲子，故山南东道节度使牛元翼家为王廷凑所害，上惜其冤横，伤悼久之，仍叹宰执非才，纵奸臣跋扈。
现代文：十五日，已故山南东道节度使牛元翼全家为王廷凑所杀害，皇上怜惜其冤祸横生，伤悼不已，慨叹宰相无能，致使奸臣跋扈。
English: On the fifteenth day, the late Shannan host Festus caused the whole family of Niu Yuan Ying to be killed by the royal court. The emperor pitied his misfortune, mourned, lamented the prime minister's incompetence, and caused the treacherous vassal to be killed.

古文：翰林学士韦处厚奏曰： 理乱之本，非有他术，顺人则理，违人则乱。
现代文：翰林学士韦处厚上奏 ：治惑乱的根本举措，没有别的办法，只有顺应民心。顺应民心则治，违背民心则乱。
English: Hanlin Scholar Wei Shuangtao: The fundamental measure to control the chaos, there is no other way but to comply with the people's will. To comply with the people's will is to govern, and to violate the people's will is to create chaos.

古文：陛下常叹息，恨无萧、曹。
现代文：汉文帝每当吃饭时就叹息没有萧何、曹参一样的治国之臣，陛下也有这个感叹。
English: Emperor Hanwen used to sigh every time he had a meal without Xiao He or Cao Zhan, the same as the vassals of the state, and His Majesty also has this sigh.

古文：今有一裴度，尚不能用，此冯唐所以感悟汉文，虽有颇、牧不能用也。 
现代文：其实，现放着一位裴度而不重用，就如冯唐对汉文帝所指出的那样，虽有廉颇李牧也是不会受到重用的。 
English: As a matter of fact, there is currently one baidu that is not reused, just as Feng Tang pointed out to Emperor Wen of Han, although there is a cheap Li Mu, it will not be reused.

古文：以太子少保张弘靖为太子少师，分司东都太子宾客令狐楚河南尹。
现代文：以太子少保张弘靖为太子少师，分设于东都洛阳的太子宾客令狐楚为河南尹。
English: Zhang Hongjing, the prince's younger bodyguard, was the prince's younger teacher, and Henan Yin, the prince's guest, was stationed in the eastern capital of Luoyang.

古文：丁卯，以刑部尚书段文昌判左丞事。
现代文：十七日，以刑部尚书段文昌兼任左丞事务。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wenchang, a member of the Ministry of Justice, was also appointed to the post of secretary of the left.

古文：戊辰，群臣入阁，日高犹未坐，有不任立而踣者。
现代文：十八日，群臣上朝，太阳很高了而皇帝还未来，时间一长，有人站立不住而跌倒。
English: On the eighteenth day, the courtiers went to court. The sun was high and the emperor was yet to come. As time passed, some people could not stand and fell down.

古文：谏议大夫李渤出次白宰相，俄而始坐。
现代文：谏议大夫李渤也站不住了，出列告知宰相，隔一会才让他坐下。
English: Li Yan, the doctor in charge of the deliberation, could not stand it any longer. He came forward to inform the prime minister, and it took a while for him to sit down.

古文：班退，左拾遗刘栖楚谏，头叩龙墀血流，上为之动容，仍赐绯鱼袋。
现代文：群臣退朝出来，左拾遗刘栖楚尽力规劝，将头在台阶上叩出血来，皇上甚为感动，不以为忤，赐他绯鱼袋。
English: The group of courtiers retreated out of the palace, and Liu Qi Chu, who was left behind, tried his best to persuade him, and beat his head on the steps until it bled. The emperor was very moved, and thought nothing of it, and gave him an eel bag.

古文：编氓徐忠信阑入浴堂门，杖四十，配流天德。
现代文：平民徐忠信擅入浴堂门，打四十杖，流放天德。
English: Xu Zhongxin, a commoner, entered the door of the bathhouse without permission, beat forty canes, and exiled Tiande.

古文：庚午，赐内教坊钱一万贯，以备游幸。
现代文：二十日，赐宫内教坊一万贯钱，以备游乐时使用。
English: On the 20th, he gave the palace's teaching hall ten thousand crowns to be used for entertainment.

古文：是夜，太白犯东井北辕。
现代文：是夜，太白星位移至东井星北面。
English: It was night, and the Taibai Star moved to the north of the Dongjing Star.

古文：甲戌，夏州节度使李祐奏：于塞外筑乌延、宥州、临塞、阴河、陶子等五城，以备蕃寇。
现代文：二十四日，夏州节度使李佑上奏，请求在塞外筑乌延、宥州、临塞、阴河、陶子等五城，以防备外敌。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Li You was summoned by the Xiazhou Festival and asked to build five cities outside Xizhou, including Wuyan, Yuzhou, Lincai, Yinhe, and Taozi, in order to be prepared for foreign enemies.

古文：又以党项为盗，于芦子关北木瓜岭筑垒，以扼其冲。
现代文：又因党项人常入汉地为盗，于芦子关北木瓜岭修筑军营，据守要道。
English: Also, due to the fact that party members often entered the Han Dynasty to steal, they built a military camp in the northern papaya ridge of Lushiguan and guarded the important road.

古文：乙亥，幸教坊，赐伶官绫绢三千五百匹。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝驾临教坊，赏赐众伶官绫绢三千五百匹。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor came to the monastery to reward the eunuchs with three thousand five hundred horses.

古文：夏四月庚辰朔。
现代文：夏四月初一为庚辰日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is Geng Chen Day.

古文：甲申，以御史大夫王涯为户部尚书、兼御史大夫，充盐铁转运等使。
现代文：初五，以御史大夫王涯为户部尚书、兼御史大夫、并充任盐铁转运使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Ya, the imperial historian, was appointed as the head of the household, and also the imperial historian, and also served as the salt and iron transport envoy.

古文：壬辰，兵部侍郎武儒衡卒。
现代文：十三日，兵部侍郎武儒衡去世。
English: On the 13th, Takeyuhira, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, passed away.

古文：丙申，贼张韶等百余人至右银台门，杀阍者，挥兵大呼，进至清思殿，登御榻而食，攻弓箭库。
现代文：十七日，贼人张韶等百余人冲至右银台门，杀守门军士，挥刀大呼，冲进清思殿，坐在皇帝的几案上取食物而吃，继而再攻弓箭库。
English: On the seventeenth day, the thief Zhang Ye and more than a hundred others rushed to the Yintai Gate, killed the guard sergeant, waved their swords and shouted, rushed into the Qing Si Palace, sat on several of the emperor's cases to get food and eat, and then attacked the bow and arrow warehouse.

古文：左神策军兵马使康艺全率兵入宫讨平之。
现代文：左神策军兵马使康艺全率兵平息了这场叛乱。
English: Zuoshensha's soldiers and horses led by Kang Yi quelled the rebellion.

古文：是日，上闻其变，急幸左军。
现代文：当时，皇帝听到叛乱，急至左军。
English: At that time, the emperor heard of the rebellion and hurried to the Left Army.

古文：丁酉，上还宫，群臣称庆。
现代文：十八日，皇帝还宫，群臣庆贺。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned to the palace, and the courtiers celebrated.

古文：谏议大夫李渤以上轻易致盗，言甚激切。
现代文：谏议大夫李渤指出皇上轻易招敌的缘故，言词激切。
English: The discussion doctor Li Yan pointed out that the reason for the emperor's easy attraction of enemies was the reason for the heated words.

古文：己亥，九仙门等监共三十五人，并笞之。
现代文：二十日，将守九仙门的三十五名太监一并笞打。
English: On the 20th, the thirty-five eunuchs who guarded the Nine Immortals Gate were beaten together.

古文：辛丑，染坊使田晟、段政直流天德，以张韶染坊役夫故也。诏雪吐突承璀之罪，令男士晔改葬之。
现代文：二十二日，因为张韶为染坊工人，就将染坊使田晟、段政直流放天德。原定吐突承璀之罪予以平反昭雪，命其子吐突士晔重新安葬。
English: On the 22nd, because Zhang Ye was a dyeing workshop worker, he exiled Tian Ye and Duan Zheng from the dyeing workshop. He pardoned the original crime of Tutu Chengye and ordered his son Tutu Shi Ye to be reburied.

古文：丙午，宰臣李逢吉封凉国公，牛僧孺封奇章县子。
现代文：二十七日，封宰相李逢吉为凉国公，封牛僧孺为奇章县子。
English: On the 27th, Li Fengji, the Minister of the Fief, became the Prince of Liang Province, and Niu Sangyu, the Minister of the Fief, became the son of Qizhang County.

古文：五月己酉朔。
现代文：五月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of May is a national holiday.

古文：乙卯，制以正议大夫、尚书吏部侍郎、上柱国、渭源县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋李程守本官、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初七，皇帝命正议大夫、尚书吏部侍郎、上柱国、渭源县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋李程除署理本职外，还任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered Li Cheng, the doctor of the main council, the attendant of the Shang Shuli Department, the son of the founder of Shangzhu Province and Shiyuan County, the founder of three hundred households, and the purple gold fish bag, in addition to his duties, he was also appointed as the deputy secretary of the middle school.

古文：以朝议郎、守尚书户部侍郎、兼御史大夫、判度支、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋窦易直为朝散大夫，本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以朝议郎、守尚书户部侍郎、兼御史大夫、判度支、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋窦易直为朝散大夫，除本职外，还任同中书门下平章事。
English: He appointed Choheiro, Shosho Shukubu no Jiro, concurrently Mishi no Daifu, Gando branch, Kamitsubashira province, and granted purple gold fish bag Dou Yitsuna as Chosan no Daifu, and in addition to this position, he was also appointed to the position of Shimon Shimohei in the middle school.

古文：判度支、户部侍郎韦顗赐金紫。
现代文：赐判度支、户部侍郎韦山豆页紫金鱼袋。
English: Judgement branch, household attendant Wei Shan bean leaves purple gold fish bag.

古文：己未，割富平县之丰水乡、下邽县之翟公乡、澄城县之抚道乡、白水县之会宾乡，以奉景陵。
现代文：十一日，划割富平县之丰水乡、下圭阝县之翟公乡、澄城县之抚道乡、白水县之会宾乡，归景陵奉祀之用。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fengshui Township in Fuping County, Danggong Township in Shimo-Guizhou County, Fudo Township in Chengcheng County, and Kebin Township in Baishui County were all designated as places of worship for Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：癸亥，以盐州刺史傅良弼为夏州节度使。
现代文：十五日，以盐州刺史傅良弼为夏州节度使。
English: On the 15th, the envoy of the Xiazhou Festival was appointed as the envoy of the Yanzhou chief Fu Liangqi.

古文：东都、江陵监大转运留后并改为知院官，从其使王涯请也。
现代文：根据王涯奏请，将东都、江陵监大转运留后一并改为知院官。
English: According to Wang Ya's request, Dongdu and Jiangling Jianda will be transferred and transferred together to Zhiyuan.

古文：六月己卯朔，以左神策大将康艺全为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：六月初一为己卯日，以左神策大将康艺全为坊节度使。
English: The first day of the first month of June is the festival day, with the Left Divine Providence General Kang Yi Quan as the festival messenger.

古文：辛巳，敕以霖雨命疏决京城系囚。
现代文：初三，因连绵大雨，诏命审理、疏散京城在押囚犯。
English: On the third day of the first month, due to continuous heavy rain, the imperial edict was issued to examine and evacuate the prisoners in custody in Beijing.

古文：庚辰，大风吹坏延喜、景风等门。
现代文：十二日，大风吹坏延喜、景风等门。
English: On the 12th, a strong wind blew down the gates of Yanxi and Jingfeng.

古文：工部侍郎张惟素卒。
现代文：工部侍郎张惟素去世。
English: Zhang Weisu, the head of the engineering department, has passed away.

古文：壬辰，以左金吾卫大将军李愿检校司空，兼河中尹、御史大夫，充河中、绛、隰等州节度使。
现代文：十四日，诏左金吾卫大将军李愿为检校司空，兼河中尹、御史大夫，并充任河中、绛隰等州节度使。
English: On the 14th, Li Zhaozhong, the General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great General of the Great.

古文：丙申，山南西道节度使、守司空裴度加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，诏令加山南西道节度使、守司空裴度为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th, it was decreed that Jia Shan Nan Xi Dao Jiedu Envoy and Guoji Ku Pei Du would be the same as Zhongzhong Shumen Shimo Ping Zhang.

古文：度之拜兴元也，为宰相李逢吉所排，不带平章事，李程、韦处厚日为度论于上前，故有是命。
现代文：裴度在任山南西道节度使后，为宰相李逢吉所排挤，不带平章事，李程、韦处厚就经常在皇上面前评论，故有此任命。
English: After Baidu was appointed as the envoy of the Shannan West Road Festival, he was pushed out by the Prime Minister Li Fengji. Li Cheng and Wei Shuanghou often commented in front of the emperor without any formalities, so there was this appointment.

古文：加陈、许节度使李光颜守司徒。
现代文：加封陈许节度使李光颜司徒衔。
English: The addition of Chen Xu Jiedu has made Li Guangyan the leader.

古文：癸卯，太保张弘靖卒。
现代文：二十五日，太保张弘靖去世。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Hongjing, the Taiho, passed away.

古文：己巳，浙西水坏太湖堤，水入州郭，漂民庐舍。
现代文：二十七日，浙西洪水冲坏太湖堤后，直入城郭，许多百姓和房屋都漂浮水上。
English: On the 27th, after the flood in western Zhejiang broke through the dam of Taihu Lake, it went straight into the city wall, and many people and houses were floating on the water.

古文：丁未，以吏部尚书赵宗儒为太常卿，兵部尚书郑絪为吏部尚书。
现代文：二十九日，任吏部尚书赵宗儒为太常卿，兵部尚书郑纟因为吏部尚书。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Zongru, the secretary of the General Staff, was appointed as the First Secretary of the State Council, and Zheng Xi, the secretary of the General Staff, was appointed as the second secretary of the General Staff.

古文：秋七月戊申朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为戊申日。
English: The first day of autumn in July is Boshin day.

古文：己酉，睦州、清溪等六县大雨，山谷发洪水泛溢，漂城郭庐舍。庚辰，以前河中节度使郭钊为兵部尚书。戊午，太子宾客许季同卒。
现代文：初二，睦州清溪等六县大雨，山洪泛滥，淹及城郭田舍。初九，任前河中节度使郭钊为兵部尚书。十一日，太子宾客许季同去世。
English: On the second day of the second month of the year, heavy rain, flash floods and flooding in six counties such as Qingxi in Mutsu Province inundated the castle's farmhouse. On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Guo Wei was appointed to the military department by the former mid-river governor. On the eleventh day of the month, the prince's guest, Xu Ji, passed away.

古文：辛酉，疏灵州特进渠，置营田六百顷。
现代文：十四日，疏通灵州特进渠，屯田六百顷。
English: On the 14th, the Lingshou Special Canal was dredged, and 600 hectares of farmland were reclaimed.

古文：乙丑，郓、曹、濮暴雨水溢，坏城郭庐舍。
现代文：十八日，郓、曹、濮等地暴雨成灾，毁坏城郭房屋。
English: On the 18th, torrential rain caused disasters in Handan, Cao, Handan and other places, destroying the city walls and houses.

古文：丁卯，敕以谷贵，凡给百官俸内一半合给匹段，今宜给粟，每斗折钱五十文。
现代文：二十日，诏以粮贵，原定百官俸禄以一半折合布帛发放的办法，改为发放粮食，每斗以五十文钱计算。
English: On the 20th, it was decided that grain was too expensive, and the original plan of distributing half of the salary of a hundred officials as cloth money was changed to distributing grain, calculated at 50 mon per bucket.

古文：辛未，以大理卿崔元略为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：二十四日，以大理卿崔元略为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
English: On the 24th, Dali Ching Cui Yuanli was promoted to the post of Jing Zhaoyin, and concurrently to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：甲戌，左金吾卫大将军李祐进马二百五十匹。
现代文：二十七日，左金吾卫大将军李进贡马二百五十匹。
English: On the 27th, two hundred and fifty horses were presented as tribute to General Li Jin.

古文：御史温造于阁内奏弹祐罢使违敕进奉，祐趋出待罪，诏宥之。
现代文：御史温造在朝弹劾李擅离职守违旨进奉事，李出班等待治罪，诏令宽免。
English: In the morning, Emperor Wenzo impeached Li for leaving his post without permission, leaving his post without instructions and continuing to serve, Li went on duty to wait for punishment, and was pardoned by imperial edict.

古文：襄、均、复等州汉江溢，漂民庐舍。
现代文：襄、均、复等州为汉江洪水所害，淹及百姓和房屋。
English: Hanzhong, Zhunan and Fuzhou were all affected by the flooding of the Han River, which inundated people and houses.

古文：丙子，浙西观察使李德裕奏： 诏令当道造盝子二十具，计用银一万三千两，金一百三十两。
现代文：二十九日，浙西观察使李德裕上奏 ：诏令卑职监造录皿子二十具，计需用银一万三千两，金一百三十两。
English: On the 29th, the Western Zhejiang Observer sent Li Deyu to report: He ordered the menial supervisor to make 20 plates, with a total of 13,000 taels of silver and 130,000 taels of gold.

古文：昨已进两具，用银一千三百两，当道在库贮备银无二三百两，皆百计收市，方成此两具。
现代文：昨已进奉两具，用银一千三百两，卑职库存银不到二三百两，乃想尽办法聚集所需，才成此两具。
English: Yesterday, two were sent to the temple, with 1,300 taels of silver and less than 2,300 taels of silver in reserve for the lower ranks. It took every effort to gather what was needed to make these two.

古文：臣当道唯有留使钱五万贯，每事节俭支费，犹欠十三万贯不足。
现代文：卑职现今只有留使钱五万贯，每件事都计划开支，还差十三万余贯。
English: A low-ranking official nowadays can only keep and spend 50 thousand yuan, and plans to spend more than 130 thousand yuan on everything.

古文：臣若因循不奏，则负陛下任使之恩；若分外诛求，又累陛下慈俭之德。
现代文：我若按例不再奏报，则有负陛下任用之恩，若分外强求，又恐败坏陛下慈俭之德的声誉。
English: If I do not report as usual, I will lose the grace of His Majesty's appointment, and if I ask too much, I may ruin His Majesty's reputation for frugality.

古文：伏乞宣令宰臣商议，何以遣臣得上不违宣索，下不阙军须，不困疲人，不敛物怨。 
现代文：叩求陛下令朝臣商议，何以使我上不违抗谕旨，下无缺空军需的过失，既不使我疲累之人处于困境，也不致于招致天下的怨愤。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to order your courtiers to discuss why I should not disobey the edict and commit the faults required by the Air Force, so as not to put my tired people in a difficult situation and not to incur the wrath of the world.

古文：时有诏罢进奉，故德裕有是奏。
现代文：当时诏令免除此项进奉，就是李德裕这道奏章引起的。
English: At that time, the imperial edict exempted this promotion, which was caused by Li Deyu's performance.

古文：八月丁酉朔。
现代文：八月初一为丁丑日。
English: The first day of August is Dingxia Day.

古文：是夜，火犯土星。
现代文：是夜，大火星移位土星。
English: It's night, the great Mars-Saturn shift.

古文：妖贼马文忠与品官季文德等凡一千四百人，将图不轨，皆杖一百处死。
现代文：妖贼马文忠与在职官员季文德等一千四百人，谋划作乱，皆重打一百杖后全部处死。
English: The evil thief Ma Wenzhong, together with the serving official Ji Wende and 1,400 others, plotted to create chaos. They were all executed after being beaten with a hundred rods.

古文：癸未，火犯东井。
现代文：初七，大火星冲犯东井星。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the Great Mars collides with the Eastern Star.

古文：甲寅，诏于关内、关东折籴、和籴粟一百五十万石。
现代文：初八，诏令关内、关东买或折价买入粮食一百五十万石。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an order to Guanzhong and Guandong to buy or buy grain at a discount of 1.5 million koku.

古文：陈、许、蔡、郓、曹、濮等州水害稼。
现代文：陈、许、蔡、郓、曹、濮等州水灾淹没了秋季的庄稼。
English: Floods in the provinces of Chen, Xu, Cai, Handan, Cao and Handan inundated the autumn crops.

古文：丁亥，火入东井。
现代文：十一日，大火星冲犯东井星。
English: On the 11th day, the Great Mars collided with the Eastern Star.

古文：己丑，以李忄妻孙宏为河南府兵曹参军，蒋清孙禺阝为伊阳令，录忠臣后也。
现代文：十三日，以李忄登之孙李宏为河南府兵曹参军，蒋清之孙蒋禺阝为伊阳令，此为安排录用忠臣后人之举。
English: On the 13th, Li Hong, the grandson of Li Yu-deng, joined the army as a Henan Prefecture petty officer, and Chiang Kai-shek, the grandson of Chiang Ching, joined the army as Iyangling. This was a move to arrange the appointment of loyal followers.

古文：是夜，金犯轩辕右角。
现代文：是夜，金星冲犯轩辕星右角。
English: It is night, and Venus impinges on the star in the right-hand corner.

古文：壬辰，江王府长史段钊上言，称前任龙州刺史，近郭有牛心山，山上有仙人李龙迁祠，颇灵应，玄宗幸蜀时，特立祠庙。
现代文：十六日，江王府长史段钊向朝廷上书，称其在任龙州刺史时，离城不远处有座牛心山，山上有仙人李龙迁之祠，很灵验，玄宗到四川时，特地建立祠庙。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the governor of Jiangsu Province, Shi Duanzhang, sent a letter to the imperial court, saying that when he was in Longzhou to make history, there was a Niu Xin Mountain not far from the city, and there was a temple of the immortal Li Longqian on the mountain, which was very effective. When Xuanzong came to Sichuan, he specially built a temple.

古文：上遣高品张士谦往龙州检行，回奏牛心山有掘断处。
现代文：皇上乃派朝中大员张士谦去龙州查看，回奏牛心山有被掘断处。
English: The emperor sent Zhang Shixian, a high-ranking member of the imperial court, to Longzhou to investigate, and he recalled that there was an excavated break in Niu Xin Mountain.

古文：群臣言宜须修筑。
现代文：群臣都说宜填补修筑。
English: The ministers all said that it was appropriate to fill in and rebuild.

古文：时方冱寒，役民数万计，东川节度使李绛表诉之。
现代文：时方冰冻严寒，征用民工数以万计，东川节度使李绛上书陈述衷情。
English: Times were freezing cold, tens of thousands of migrant workers were requisitioned, and the Dongchuan Festival made Li Jie write a heartfelt statement.

古文：甲子，以太常卿赵宗儒为太子少师。
现代文：二十四日，以太常卿赵宗儒为太子少师。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Zongru, the ethereal chancellor, became the prince's apprentice.

古文：乙巳，宣武军节度韩充卒。
现代文：二十九日，宣武军节度韩充去世。
English: On the 29th, Han Chong, the leader of the Xuanwu Army, passed away.

古文：九月丙午朔。
现代文：九月初一为丙午日。
English: The first day of September is C-noon.

古文：丁未，波斯大商李苏沙进沉香亭子材，拾遗李汉谏云： 沉香为亭子，有异瑶台、琼室。 
现代文：初三，波斯巨商李苏沙进贡沉香以作修建亭子之用，拾遗李汉直言规劝： 以沉香修建亭子，不异于瑶台、琼室。 
English: On the third day of the first month, the Persian merchant Li Susa paid a tribute of agarwood for the construction of a pavilion, and Li Han advised him bluntly: the construction of a pavilion with agarwood is no different from Xingtai and Qiongshu.

古文：上怒，优容之。
现代文：皇上虽很生气，但宽容置之。
English: Although the Emperor was very angry, he tolerated it.

古文：庚戌，以河南尹令狐楚检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史、宣武军节度、宋、汴、亳观察等使。
现代文：初五，诏以河南尹令狐楚检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史、宣武军节度、宋、汴、亳观察等使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the envoys of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies of Yinlinghu Chuxian School of Henan Province, the Ministry of History of Zhangzhou Province, the Ministry of Military Affairs of Xuanwu Province, the Song Dynasty, the Qing Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty were sent to observe.

古文：乙卯，罢理匭使。以谏议大夫李渤知匭，奏请置胥吏、添课料故也。
现代文：初十，将理匦使免职，以谏议大夫李渤为知匦使，奏请设置胥吏一职，并于俸禄外添加一定补贴。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, he removed the secretary-general from his post, and appointed Dr. Li Wei as the secretary-general. He requested that a post of secretary-general be established, and that a certain subsidy be added to his salary.

古文：戊午，加硃融检校司空。
现代文：十三日，诏加朱克融为检校司空。
English: On the 13th, Zhaojia Zhuk was integrated into the school inspection office.

古文：诏浙西织造可幅盘绦缭绫一千匹。
现代文：诏令浙西织造宽幅盘绦缭绫一千匹。
English: West Zhejiang was ordered to weave widths of up to a thousand horses.

古文：观察使李德裕上表论谏，不奉诏，乃罢之。
现代文：观察使李德裕上表据理规劝，称将不奉诏令，皇上免之。
English: The observation caused Li Deyu to make a formal appeal, saying that he would not obey the imperial edict and that the emperor would pardon him.

古文：己巳，以兵部侍郎王起为河南尹。
现代文：十四日，以兵部侍郎王起为河南尹。
English: On the 14th, he was promoted to Henan Yin with the title of Heibu Jiro Wangqi.

古文：甲子，吐蕃遣使求《五台山图》。
现代文：十九日，吐蕃遣使求赠五台山图。
English: On the 19th, the envoy from Tubo asked for a map of Mount Wutai.

古文：己巳，浙西、淮南各进宣索银庄奁三具。
现代文：二十四日，浙西、淮南奉诏各向皇宫进奉银妆奁三套。
English: On the 24th, West Zhejiang Province and Huainan Province each sent three sets of silver ornaments to the imperial palace.

古文：冬十月丙子朔，宗正寺选尚书县主胥和元亮等二十五人，各赐钱三十万，令备吉礼。
现代文：十月初一为丙子日，宗正寺选得可与诸王之女相婚配的男子和元亮等二十五人，各赐钱三十万，令筹备吉礼。
English: At the beginning of October, the first day of the tenth month, Sosei-ji Temple selected twenty-five men and Genryo, who could marry the daughters of kings, and each of them gave 300,000 yen and ordered the preparation of the auspicious ceremony.

古文：辛巳，以吏部侍郎崔从为太常卿。
现代文：初六，以吏部侍郎崔从为太常卿。
English: In the sixth year of his junior high school career, Choe Jung, a chamberlain of the cadre department, was promoted to the position of grand secretary.

古文：庚子，岭南节度使郑权卒。
现代文：二十五日，岭南节度使郑权去世。
English: On the 25th day of the Lingnan Festival, Zheng Quan passed away.

古文：辛丑，吐蕃贡牛，铸成银犀牛、羊、鹿各一。
现代文：二十六日，吐蕃进贡牦牛和用银铸成的犀牛、羊、鹿各一只。
English: On the 26th, a yakitori, a rhinoceros, a sheep and a deer, all made of silver, arrived in Tujia.

古文：壬寅，以鄂岳观察使、检校兵部尚书崔植检校吏部尚书，兼广州刺史、御史大夫，充岭南节度观察经略使。
现代文：二十七日，以鄂岳观察使、检校兵部尚书崔植检校吏部尚书，兼任广州刺史、御史大夫，并充任岭南节度观察经略使。
English: On the 27th, he was appointed as the observation envoy of Ege, the inspector of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the

古文：以户部侍郎韦顗为御史中丞，兼户部侍郎；以御史中丞郑覃权权工部侍郎；以刑部侍郎韦弘景为吏部侍郎；以权权礼部郎李宗闵权权兵部侍郎；以工部侍郎于敖为刑部侍郎。
现代文：以户部侍郎韦山豆页为御史中丞，兼户部侍郎；以御史中丞郑覃代理工部侍郎；以刑部侍郎韦弘景为吏部侍郎；以代理礼部侍郎李宗闵代理兵部侍郎；以工部侍郎于敖为刑部侍郎。
English: With the attendant of the Household Department, Wei Shanzhuai, as the secretary of the History Department, and also the attendant of the Household Department; with the attendant of the History Department, Zheng Yao, as the acting secretary of the Engineering Department; with the attendant of the Criminal Department, Wei Hongjing, as the secretary of the Administration Department; with the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Li Zongya, as the acting secretary of the Engineering Department; with the attendant of the Engineering Department, Yu Yao, as the secretary of the Criminal Department.

古文：十一月丙午朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丙午日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is C noon.

古文：戊申，安南都护李元喜奏：黄家贼与环王国合势陷陆州，杀刺史葛维。
现代文：初三，安南都护李元喜奏报：黄蛮与环王合兵攻陷陆州，杀死刺史葛维。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Annan tutelary Li Yuanxi reported: Huang Man and Huan Wang joined forces to invade Luzhou and kill Zhang Shi Gewei.

古文：苏、常、湖、岳、吉、潭、郴等七州水伤稼。
现代文：苏、常、湖、岳、吉、潭、郴等七州水灾淹没庄稼。
English: Floods inundated crops in seven prefectures including Su, Chang, Hubei, Yue, Ji, Tan and Handan.

古文：庚申，葬穆宗于光陵。
现代文：十五日，葬穆宗于光陵。
English: On the 15th, Mu Zong was buried in the Guangling Mausoleum.

古文：十二月乙亥朔。
现代文：十二月初一为乙亥日。
English: The first day of December is the first day of the second year of the Chinese zodiac.

古文：癸未，回纥、吐蕃、奚、契丹遣使朝贡。
现代文：初九，回纥、吐蕃、奚、契丹各派使者来朝觐进贡。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, envoys from the provinces of Yunnan, Fujian, Fujian, Fujian and Fujian were sent to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：襄州柳公绰、沧州李全略、晋州李寰、滑州高承简并自尚书加检校右仆射。
现代文：诏襄州柳公绰、沧州李全略、晋州李寰、滑州高承简等全部自尚书加检校右仆射。
English: Zhao Xiangzhou Liu Gongqiao, Cangzhou Li Quanliu, Jinzhou Li Yao, and Nanzhou Gao Chengjian were all right-handed shooters from Shangshu Jiajing School.

古文：以前起居舍人刘栖楚为谏议大夫。
现代文：以曾任起居舍人之刘栖楚为谏议大夫。
English: Liu Qichu, who once served as a resident, is the doctor of deliberation.

古文：淮南节度使王播厚赂贵要，求领盐铁使，谏议大夫独孤朗张仲方、起居郎孔敏行柳公权宋申锡、补阙韦仁实刘敦儒、拾遗李景主薛廷老等伏延英抗疏论之。
现代文：淮南节度使王播重贿权贵大臣，请求兼任盐铁使。谏议大夫独孤朗、张仲方，起居郎孔敏行、柳公权、宋申锡，补阙韦仁实、刘敦儒，拾遗李景让、薛廷老等人上书直言反对。
English: The Huainan Provincial Party Committee asked Wang Bo to bribe the minister of power and prestige and request that he also serve as the envoy of salt and iron. Dr. Du Guolang, Zhang Zhongfang, Kong Minxing, Liu Gongquan, Song Shensi, Wei Renshi, Liu Dunru, Li Jingzhang, Xue Tinglao, and others wrote a letter to express their opposition.

古文：戊子夜，月掩东井。
现代文：十四日夜，月掩东井星。
English: On the night of the 14th, the moon occulted Dongjing Star.

古文：庚寅，加天平军节度使乌重胤同平章事。
现代文：十六日，加天平军节度使乌重胤同平章事。
English: On the 16th, the Tianping Army Festival was held, and Wu Shigetian was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：乙未，徐泗王智兴请置僧尼戒坛，浙西观察使李德裕奏状论其奸幸。
现代文：二十一日，徐泗观察使王智兴奏请在泗州设置戒坛以剃度僧尼，浙西观察使李德裕上奏其损公肥私的邪恶行为。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xu Yao observed Wang Zhixing's evil act of setting up a sacrificial altar in Ganzhou to shave monks and nuns, and West Zhejiang's observation of Li Deyu's evil act of harming the public and private interests.

古文：时自宪宗朝有敕禁私度戒坛，智兴冒禁陈请，盖缘久不兴置，由是天下沙门奔走如不及。智兴邀其厚利，由是致富，时议丑之。
现代文：宪宗时曾明文禁止私置戒坛，王智兴甘冒禁令陈请，是因久不置戒坛之故。既置度，天下欲度之僧尼从各处奔来，王智兴得其厚利，由此致富，人们谈起这事都鄙视他。
English: At the time of the Kenzong, there was an explicit ban on the private placement of the votive altar, and Wang Zhixing was able to evade the ban because he had not placed a votive altar for a long time. After the votive altar was placed, monks and nuns from all over the world came to visit. Wang Zhixing made a lot of money and became rich. People despised him when he talked about this.

古文：丁酉，宰相牛僧孺进封奇章郡公，李程彭原郡公，窦易直晋阳郡公，并食邑三千户。
现代文：二十三日，宰相牛僧孺晋封奇章郡公，李程为彭原郡公，窦易直为晋阳郡公，各食邑三千户。
English: On the 23rd, the prime minister, Niu Xiangyu, became the county magistrate of Jinfeng Qizhang County, Li Cheng became the county magistrate of Pengyuan County, and Dou Yizhi became the county magistrate of Jinyang County, with 3,000 households in each food village.

古文：吏部侍郎韩愈卒。
现代文：吏部侍郎韩愈去世。
English: Han Yu, the head clerk's attendant, passed away.

古文：宝历元年春正月乙巳朔。
现代文：宝历元年春，正月初一为乙巳日。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Horyaku era, the first day of the first month was the first day of the year.

古文：辛亥，观祀昊天上帝于南郊。
现代文：初七，皇上祭天于南郊。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the Emperor held a festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦，改元宝历元年。
现代文：仪礼结束，回丹凤楼，大赦，改年号为宝历，是年为宝历元年。
English: At the end of the ceremony, back to Danfeng Building, amnesty, change the year name to Baoli, the year is the first year of Baoli.

古文：先是，雩县令崔发坐误辱中官下狱，是日，与诸囚陈于金鸡竿下俟释放。
现代文：在这之前，县县令崔发因误辱太监而被下狱。大赦日，崔发与诸囚同站列在金鸡竿下等待释放。
English: Prior to this, county magistrate Cui Fa was sent to prison for insulting a eunuch. On the day of the amnesty, Cui Fa stood with other prisoners under a golden chicken pole waiting to be released.

古文：忽有内官五十余人，环发而殴之，发破面折齿，台吏以度蔽之，方免。
现代文：忽有太监五十余人冲来，围着崔发殴打，崔发脸被打破牙齿被打断，御史台小吏以席子将其遮住，才得幸免。
English: Suddenly, more than 50 eunuchs rushed in, surrounded Cui Fa and beat him. Cui Fa's face was broken and his teeth were broken. The minor officials of the Imperial Historian's Office covered him with a mat, and he was spared.

古文：有诏复系于台中，宰相救之，方释。
现代文：此时诏令将其再囚于御史台，经宰相救助，才被释放。
English: At this time, the Imperial Edict reimprisoned him at the Imperial History Museum, and he was only released after the Prime Minister came to his rescue.

古文：宰相牛僧孺累表乞解机务，帝许以郊礼后。
现代文：宰相牛僧孺多次上表请求解除自己的机要重任，皇帝同意在南郊祭礼之后再议。
English: Prime Minister Niu Sang Hui repeatedly petitioned to be relieved of his important duties, and the emperor agreed to reconsider after the Southern Suburbs Festival.

古文：乙卯，以僧孺检校礼部尚书、同平章事、鄂州刺史，充武昌军节度、鄂岳观察使。
现代文：十一日，以牛僧孺为检校礼部尚书、同平章事、鄂州刺史，兼任武昌军节度、鄂岳观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Niu Xiangyu was appointed as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the ceremonial department, the inspector of Tongping chapter, and the inspector of Ezhou, and also served as the inspector of the Wuchang Army and the observer of Mount E.

古文：淮南节度使王播兼诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：淮南节度使王播兼诸道盐铁转运使。
English: The Huainan Festival made Wang Wang both the salt and iron transport envoy.

古文：于鄂州特置武昌军额，宠僧孺也。
现代文：于鄂州特地设置武昌军节度一职，是对牛僧孺的恩赐。
English: The establishment of the Wuchang Army Festival in Ezhou is a special gift to Niu Xianglu.

古文：壬申，以给事中李渤为桂州刺史、兼御史中丞、桂管防御观察使。
现代文：二十八日，以给事中李渤为桂州刺史、兼御史中丞、桂管防御观察使。
English: On the 28th, Li Wei was appointed as the Guizhou chief historian, vice chief historian, and Guizhou defense observation envoy.

古文：李德裕献《丹扆箴》六首，上深嘉之，命学士韦处厚优其答诏。
现代文：李德裕进献《丹箴》六首，皇上深为嘉许，命学士韦处厚拟诏慰勉。
English: Li Deyu presented six pieces of "Danzhen" to the emperor, who was deeply appreciative, and Wei Shizhuang, a scholar of life, offered a consolation prize.

古文：辛卯，以前礼部郎中李翱为庐州刺史，以求知制诰，面数宰相李逢吉过故也。
现代文：二月初一为乙亥日。十七日，以前任礼部郎中李翱为庐州刺史，以其求诸知制诰，当面数说宰相李逢吉的过失之缘故。
English: The first day of the second month of February was the day of the Chinese Year of the Boar. On the 17th, the former vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Li Xuan, who was the governor of Zhangzhou, said in person that it was the fault of the prime minister, Li Fengji.

古文：辛丑，江西观察使薛放卒。
现代文：二十七日，江西观察使薛放去世。
English: On the 27th, Xue Fang, the leader of Jiangxi Observation Post, passed away.

古文：癸卯，以职方郎中、知制诰王璠为御史中丞。
现代文：二十九日，以职方郎中、知制诰王播为御史中丞。
English: On the 29th, he was promoted to goshi chujo (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs) from jikigata roju (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs).

古文：三月乙巳朔，以兵部尚书郭钊为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
现代文：三月初一为乙巳日，以兵部尚书郭钊为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
English: The first day of March was the day of the Snake, with the Hyobusho (Ministry of War) Shangshu Guoqi as the official historian of Azusa and the Jianan Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：壬子，宴群臣于三殿。
现代文：初八，在三殿宴会群臣。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a banquet was held in the third hall.

古文：戊辰夜，有流星长三丈，出紫微，入浊灭。
现代文：二十四日，有流星光长三丈，从紫微星处流出，至浊星处消失。
English: On the 24th, there was a meteor three times as long, which streamed out from the Purple and Small Star and disappeared at the Pleiades.

古文：辛未，以前桂管观察使殷侑为江西观察使。
现代文：二十七日，以前任桂管观察使殷侑为江西观察使。
English: On the 27th, Yin Qi, the former Guizhou Observation Envoy, became the Jiangxi Observation Envoy.

古文：上御宣政殿试制举人二百九十一人，以中书舍人郑涵、吏部郎中崔琯、兵部郎中李虞仲并充考制策官。
现代文：皇上至宣政殿考试制举人二百九十一人，以中书舍人郑涵、吏部郎中崔、兵部郎中李虞仲等充任考试制策官。
English: Two hundred and ninety-one examiners were appointed from the Emperor to the Xuancheng Palace, with Zheng Han, the chief examiner, Ranzhong Cui, the secretary, and Li Yuzhong, the secretary of the military, serving as examiners.

古文：夏四月甲戌朔，宰相凉国公李逢吉进封郑国公。
现代文：夏四月初一为甲戌日，宰相凉国公李逢吉晋封郑国公。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, Armor Day, Li Fengji, the prime minister of Liang Guogong, was promoted to Zheng Guogong.

古文：以右神策大将军康志睦检校工部尚书，兼青州刺史、平卢军节度使。
现代文：以右神策大将军康志睦检校工部尚书、兼青州刺史、平卢军节度使。
English: With the Right Divine Providence General Kang Zhi as the inspector of the school's engineering department, as well as the history of Qingzhou and the commander of the Pinglu Army.

古文：宣中书，以谏议大夫刘栖楚为刑部侍郎。
现代文：皇上宣谕中书，以谏议大夫刘栖楚为刑部侍郎。
English: The Emperor's proclamation in the middle of the book, with the deliberation of the doctor Liu Qi Chu as the attendant of the criminal department.

古文：丞郎宣授，自栖楚始也。
现代文：由皇上直接授予侍郎一职，自刘栖楚始。
English: The position of chamberlain was granted directly by the emperor, starting with Liu Qi.

古文：郑涵等考定制举人。敕下后数日，上谓宰相曰： 韦端符、杨鲁士皆涉物议，宜与外官。 
现代文：郑涵等按规定考试录取制举人，诏令下后数日，皇上对宰相说 ：韦端符、杨鲁士牵涉到一些议论，宜授予地方官。 
English: Zheng Han and others selected candidates according to the prescribed examination admission system. A few days after the imperial edict was issued, the emperor said to the prime minister: Wei Duanfu and Yang Rus were involved in some discussions, and it was appropriate to award them to local officials.

古文：乃授端符白水尉，鲁士城固尉。
现代文：乃授予韦端符为白水尉，杨鲁士为城固尉。
English: Wei Duanfu was awarded the title of Bai Shuifu, and Yang Rusi was awarded the title of Cheng Guifu.

古文：宰臣请其罪名，不报。
现代文：宰相请说明其过失，不理。
English: The Prime Minister, please explain his fault and ignore it.

古文：癸巳，群臣上徽号曰文武大圣广孝皇帝，御宣政殿受册。
现代文：二十日，群臣献上皇帝徽号为 文武大圣广孝皇帝 ，皇帝在宣政殿接受徽号。
English: On the 20th, a group of courtiers presented the emperor's crest as Emperor Wenwu Daisheng Guangxiao, and the emperor accepted the crest at the Xuancheng Palace.

古文：礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦天下，大辟罪已下，无轻重咸赦除之。
现代文：仪式结束，至丹凤楼，大赦天下，死罪之外，无论轻重罪犯全部赦免。
English: At the end of the ceremony, to the Danfeng Building, the world was amnestied. In addition to the death penalty, all minor and serious criminals were pardoned.

古文：时李绅贬官。李逢吉恶绅，不欲绅量移，乃于赦书节文内，但言左降官已经量移，宜与量移近处，不言未量移者宜与量移。
现代文：当时李绅被贬官降级，而李逢吉素来憎恨李绅，不愿李绅得到就近安置的赦免，就将免罪文书的文字修饰了一下，写进了贬官已经是就近安置，可在所贬处就近安置的文字，却不提没有就近安置的应该就近安置。
English: At that time, Li Sheng was demoted, and Li Fengji, who had always hated Li Sheng, did not want Li Sheng to be pardoned by placing him nearby, so he embellished the text of the exoneration document and wrote in the text that the demoted official had been placed nearby and could be placed near the place where he was demoted, but did not mention that those who had not been placed nearby should be placed nearby.

古文：翰林学士韦处厚上疏论列云： 不可为李绅一人与逢吉相恶，遂令近年流贬官皆不量移，则乖旷荡之道也。 
现代文：翰林学士韦处厚上书评论： 不应因为李逢吉憎恨李绅一人，而致使近年被流放和贬降之官皆不能就近安置，这就背离了皇上宽宏大量的准则。 
English: Hanlin Scholar Wei Sheng Hou wrote: It should not be because of Li Fengji's hatred of Li Sheng that all the officials who have been exiled and demeaned in recent years cannot be placed nearby, which deviates from the emperor's magnanimous principle.

古文：帝遽命追赦书添改之。
现代文：皇帝急忙下令追还赦免文书并重新改正。
English: The emperor hastily ordered the amnesty document to be returned and re-amended.

古文：乙亥，以剑南东川节度、检校司空李绛为左仆射。
现代文：二十六日，以剑南东川节度、检校司空李绛为左仆射。
English: On the 26th, with Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival, the inspector of the school, Kuo Li, was the left-handed shooter.

古文：御史萧彻弹京兆尹、兼御大夫崔元略违诏徵畿内所放钱万七千贯，付三司勘鞫不虚。
现代文：御史萧彻弹劾京兆尹、兼御史大夫崔元略违诏征收在京城内所放出的钱一万七千贯，将崔元略交付三司审查属实。
English: Gu Shi Xiao Che impeached Jing Zhaoyun, and Gu Shi Daifu Cui Yuan Liang collected 17,000 yuan of money emitted in Beijing in violation of the edict, and delivered Cui Yuan Liang to the Third Division for verification.

古文：辛丑，敕削元略兼御史大夫。
现代文：二十八日，诏令削除崔元略兼御史大夫一职。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict removed Cui Yuanliu and the post of imperial historian.

古文：五月甲辰朔，以前平卢军节度使薛平检校左仆射、兼户部尚书。
现代文：五月初一，以前任平卢军节度使薛平为检校左仆射、兼户部尚书。
English: On the first day of May, Xue Ping, who had previously served as the commander of the Pinglu Military Festival, became the left-hand man of the school inspection and also the head of the household.

古文：赐振武军钱一十四万贯，修筑东受降城。
现代文：赐振武军钱十四万贯，修筑东受降城。
English: He gave the Zhenwu army 140,000 yuan to build the East Surrendered City.

古文：庚戌，幸鱼藻宫观竟渡。
现代文：初七，皇上至鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor went to the Fish Algae Palace to watch the boat race.

古文：庚申，正衙命使册九姓迥纥登里啰汨没密施毗伽昭礼可汗。
现代文：十七日，皇上在前殿命册封九族回纥登里口罗汨没密施毗伽昭礼可汗。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the emperor issued an order in the front hall to seal the nine tribes of Hui, Dengli, Luo, Miao, Shifu, Jia and Li khan.

古文：丙寅，太子少傅致仕阎济美卒。
现代文：二十三日，辞官回家的原太子少傅阎济美去世。
English: On the 23rd, the former prince's younger brother Fu Yanjimei, who was returning home, passed away.

古文：丁卯，湖南观察使沈传师奏： 当道先配吐蕃罗没等一十七人，准赦放还本国，今各得状，不愿还。 
现代文：二十四日，湖南观察使沈传师奏报： 卑职前所流放的吐蕃罗没等十七人，按赦免规定准予放还本国。但这十七人各写具陈情文书，不愿回国。 
English: On the 24th, the Hunan Observer sent a report to Shen Chuanshi: Seventeen people, including Tu Youluo, who were exiled before he took office, were allowed to return to their home country according to the amnesty regulations. However, these seventeen people each wrote a petition and did not want to return to China.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝准其所请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚午，以右金吾将军李文悦为丰州刺史、天德军防御使。
现代文：二十七日，以右金吾将军李文悦为丰州刺史、天德军防御使。
English: On the 27th, Li Wenyue, the right Kingu general, was appointed as the governor of Fengzhou and the defense envoy of the Tiande Army.

古文：安南李元喜奏移都护府于江北岸。
现代文：安南李元喜上奏将都护府移至江北岸。
English: Annan Li Yuanxi moved the capital to the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：六月壬申朔。
现代文：六月初一为癸酉日。
English: The first day of June is a leap day.

古文：乙酉，诏公主、郡主并不得进女口。
现代文：十三日，诏令公主、郡主等都不得信口说话，干预朝政。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor issued a decree that princesses, dukes, and others were not allowed to speak out of turn and interfere in imperial politics.

古文：丙戌，将作监张武均出为洋州刺史，坐赃犯也。
现代文：十四日，诏令将作监张武均为洋州刺史，而张武均犯有贪污之罪。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict listed Zhang Wuxi as an overseer of foreign countries, and Zhang Wuxi was guilty of corruption.

古文：诸司白身冯志谋等三百九人，并赐禄。
现代文：各部门尚未正式授官职的冯志谋等三百零九人，一并赐予俸禄。
English: Three hundred and nine people, including Feng Zhimou, who have not yet been officially appointed by various departments, were also awarded a salary.

古文：丁亥，命品官田务丰领国信十二车赐迥纥可汗及太和公主。
现代文：十五日，诏命职官田务丰带着使节文书和各类礼物共十二车赐予回纥可汗及太和公主。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor ordered the official Tian Mu Feng to bring the envoy's documents and various gifts to give a total of twelve cars to Hui Khan and Princess Taihe.

古文：己丑，河中节度使、检校司空李愿卒。
现代文：十八日，河中节度使、检校司空李愿去世。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the inspector of the inspection of schools, Kuo Liqian, died.

古文：乙未，以检校左仆射、兼户部尚书薛平检校司空、河中尹、河中节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以检校左仆射、兼户部尚书薛平为检校司空、河中尹、河中节度使。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the school inspector Zuo Fuxia and the concurrently head of the Household Department, Shangshu Xueping, were appointed as the school inspector Siku, Kawachuma Yin, and Kawachuma Setsudoshi.

古文：秋七月癸卯朔，以忠武军节度使、守司徒、兼侍中李光颜为太原尹、北京留守、河东节度使，以兗海节度使王沛为许州刺史、忠武军节度使。
现代文：秋七月初一为癸卯日，以忠武军节度使、守司徒、兼侍中李光颜为太原尹、北京留守、河东节度使，以兖海节度使王沛为许州刺史、忠武军节度使。
English: The first day of the first month of autumn in July is the Day of the Dragon Boat Festival. Li Guangyan, the loyal soldiers' festival envoy, guard and attendant, is the Taiyuan Yin, the Beijing left-behind, the Hedong festival envoy, and Wang Pei is the Huzhou Sashishi, the loyal soldiers' festival envoy, is the Bohai festival.

古文：荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：火星犯右执法星。
English: Mars is the planet of criminals and law enforcement.

古文：甲辰，监铁使王播进羡馀，物议欲鸣鼓而攻之。
现代文：初二，盐铁使王播进奉税收外所豪夺的绢一百万匹，以每日进奉二万匹计算，共五十日才进奉完。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Yan Tie asked Wang Bo to donate one million yakitori, which had been plundered by tax collectors, at a rate of 20,000 yakitori per day. It took a total of 50 days to complete the donation.

古文：乙酉，鄜坊水坏庐舍。癸丑，以右金吾卫大将军张茂宗为兗、海、沂、密节度使。
现代文：王播自为盐铁使后，将税收钱假托为税收之外的钱来进奉，以图得到皇帝好感而使自己官位稳固，众官议论将公开声讨其罪行。初七，坊水灾毁坏百姓房屋。十一日，以右金吾卫大将军张茂宗为兖海沂密节度使。
English: After Wang Bo made himself the envoy of salt and iron, he pretended that the tax money was the money in addition to the tax, in order to get the emperor's favor and make his official position stable. All officials will openly discuss and condemn his crimes. On the seventh day of the first month, floods destroyed people's houses. On the 11th day, Zhang Maozong, the general of the Right King Wuwei, was appointed as the envoy of the Erhai Lake.

古文：乙卯，正衙命使册司徒李光颜。
现代文：十三日，皇上在前殿褒奖册封司徒李光颜。
English: On the 13th, the emperor sealed the book of commendation in front of the hall for the scholar Li Guangyan.

古文：丙辰，淄王傅分司元锡卒。
现代文：十七日，淄王在洛阳的老师元锡去世。
English: On the 17th, Teacher Yuan Xi of Luoyang passed away.

古文：己未，诏王播造竞渡船二十只供进，仍以船材京内造。
现代文：十七日，诏令王播造竞渡船二十只以进奉，因计所需时间，造好后需半年才能运抵，所以，将造船所需一切就近在京城内建造。
English: On the 17th, the emperor ordered Wang Bo to build at least 20 ferries for the race. Due to the time required, it would take half a year to arrive after construction, so everything needed for shipbuilding was built close to the capital.

古文：时计其功，当半年转运之费。谏议大夫张仲方切谏，乃改进十只。
现代文：谏议大夫张仲方力谏，乃改为只造十只。
English: However, Dr. Zhang Zhong changed his mind and decided to make only ten.

古文：辛酉，万年县典贾镇诬告故统军王佖男正谟等七人谋乱，诏杖杀之。
现代文：十九日，万年县小吏贾镇诬告已故统军王亻必之子王正谟等七人谋反，诏令重杖打死。
English: On the 19th, Jia Zhen, a minor official of Wannen County, falsely accused seven people, including Wang Zhengyu, the son of the late general Wang Xibing, of plotting a rebellion, and ordered them to be beaten to death with a heavy stick.

古文：甲子夜，月犯毕。
现代文：二十二日夜，月亮遮掩毕宿星。
English: On the night of the 22nd, the moon covered the host star.

古文：乙丑，侍讲学士崔郾、高重进《纂要》十卷，赐锦采二百匹。
现代文：二十三日，侍讲学士崔郾、高重进奉《纂要》十卷，皇上命赐彩锦二百匹。
English: On the 23rd, Choe Heon and Gao Chong Jinhong, the attendant lecturers and scholars, presented the 10-volume "Summary" to the emperor, and the emperor gave them 200 brocades.

古文：丁卯，以户部侍郎韦顗为吏部侍郎，京兆尹崔元略为户部侍郎。
现代文：二十五日，以户部侍郎韦靑为吏部侍郎，京兆尹崔元略为户部侍郎。
English: On the 25th, Wei Wei, the steward of the household department, was appointed as the steward of the personnel department, and Jing Zhao Yin Cui Yuanli was appointed as the steward of the household department.

古文：奉天县水坏庐舍。
现代文：奉天县水灾淹没房屋。
English: Floods submerge houses in Fengtian County.

古文：辛未，以左散骑常侍胡证为户部尚书、判度支。
现代文：二十九日，以左散骑常侍胡证为户部尚书、判度支。
English: On the 29th, it was decided to use the left-handed horseback riding attendant Hu Xian as the head of the household and judge branch.

古文：太子宾客分司庐士玫卒。
现代文：在洛阳的太子宾客卢士玫去世。
English: Lu Shimei, the crown prince's guest in Luoyang, has died.

古文：闰七月壬午朔，以权知工部侍郎郑覃为京兆尹。
现代文：闰七月初一为壬申日，以代理工部侍郎郑覃为京兆尹。
English: The first day of the leap month of July was Jinshin Day, and Zheng Qi, the acting chamberlain of the work department, became Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：甲申，拾遗李汉、舒元褒、薛廷老于阁内论曰： 伏见近日除授，往往不由中书进拟，多是内中宣出。
现代文：十三日，拾遗李汉、舒元褒、薛廷老在廷前议论进奏： 近来看到免除旧职和任命新官，往往不由中书拟定提出，多半是由宫内直接任命。
English: On the 13th, Li Han, Shu Yuanbo, and Xue Tinglu, who had been in front of the court for a long time, made a speech: Recently, we have seen that the removal of old posts and the appointment of new officials are often not proposed by the Chinese government, and most of them are directly appointed by the palace.

古文：臣恐纪纲浸坏，奸邪恣行，伏希详察。 
现代文：臣等担心朝廷法度被逐步破坏，致使奸邪任意胡为，乞望皇上详察。 
English: The courtiers were worried that the imperial legal system was being gradually undermined, leading to treachery and arbitrary behavior, and begged the emperor for a detailed inspection.

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇帝也认为此论很对。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：诏度支进铜三千斤、金薄十万翻，修清思院新殿及升阳殿图障。
现代文：诏令度支进奉铜三千斤、金箔十万片，以作修缮清思院新殿及升阳殿图障之用。
English: According to the imperial edict, 3,000 catties of copper and 100,000 pieces of gold leaf were donated for the renovation of the new hall of Ching Si Yuan and the rising sun hall.

古文：丙戌，户部尚书致仕裴堪卒。
现代文：十五日，辞官回家的户部尚书裴堪去世。
English: On the fifteenth day, the dictionary officer went home, and the head of the household, Shangshu Peikan, passed away.

古文：戊子，以给事中卢元辅为工部侍郎。
现代文：十七日，以给事中卢元辅为工部侍郎。
English: On the 17th, Lu Yuanfu was appointed as the attendant of the engineering department.

古文：壬辰，以前河东节度使李听为义成军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，以前任河东节度使李听为义成军节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li He, the former commander of the Hedong Festival, was appointed as the commander of the Yicheng Festival.

古文：戊戌，以刑部尚书段文昌为兵部尚书，依前判左丞事。
现代文：二十七日，以刑部尚书段文昌为兵部尚书，同时兼理左丞事务。
English: On the 27th, Wenchang was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and concurrently served as the secretary of the left office.

古文：八月辛丑朔。
现代文：八月初一为辛丑日。
English: The first day of August is Shinsugashi Day.

古文：戊申，以酅国公杨造男元凑袭酅国公，食邑三千户。
现代文：初八，以餋国公杨造之子杨元凑袭封餋国公，食邑三千户。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Yang Yuan, the son of Yang Zou, the Duke of Yunnan, was crowned the Duke of Yunnan. Three thousand households in Yunnan Province were affected.

古文：两京、河西大稔，敕度支和籴折籴粟二百万石。
现代文：两京、河西庄稼大丰收，诏令度支按平买或打折价买进粮食二百万石。
English: There was a bumper harvest of crops in the two capitals and in Hexi, and the amount of grain purchased at the standard or discounted price rose to 2 million koku.

古文：乙卯夜，太白近房。
现代文：十五日夜，太白星近房宿星。
English: On the night of the fifteenth day, the white star is close to the roosting star.

古文：戊午，遣中使往湖南、江南等道及天台山采药。
现代文：十八日，从内宫派出使者前往湖南、江南及天台山采药。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was sent from the Inner Court to Hunan, Jiangnan and Tiantai Mountain to collect medicines.

古文：时有道士刘从政者，说以长生久视之道，请于天下求访异人，冀获灵药。
现代文：有个叫刘从政的道士，对皇上讲述长生不老之道，请在天下访求特殊才能之人，以求获得仙药。
English: A Taoist named Liu Zongzhen told the emperor about the way to immortality, and asked him to visit people with special talents around the world to obtain the elixir.

古文：仍以从政为光禄少卿，号升玄先生。
现代文：乃封刘从政为光禄少卿，号升玄先生。
English: Liu was given the title of Guanglu Shaoqing (光禄少卿) after entering politics, and his posthumous name was Sheng Xuan.

古文：秋九月辛未朔。
现代文：秋九月初一为辛未日。
English: The first day of autumn and the first day of September are the hardest days.

古文：丁丑，卫尉卿刘遵古役人安再荣告前袁王府长史武昭谋害宰相李逢吉，诏三司鞫之。
现代文：初七，卫尉卿刘遵古的仆人安再荣揭发前袁王长史武昭谋害宰相李逢吉，诏令三司审问详情。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, An Zhaerong, a servant of Liu Zungu, revealed that the former Yuan Wang Changshi Wuzhao plotted to assassinate the Prime Minister Li Fengji, and ordered the three departments to investigate the details.

古文：壬午，昭义节度使刘悟卒。
现代文：十二日，昭义节度使刘悟去世。
English: On the 12th, Liu Gou passed away after the Shouyi Festival.

古文：癸未夜，太白犯南斗。
现代文：十三日夜，太白星冲犯南斗星。
English: On the night of the 13th, the Taibai Star collided with the Southern Dipper.

古文：丙戌夜，月犯右执法。
现代文：十六日夜，月亮遮掩右执法星。
English: On the night of the 16th, the moon covered the right law enforcement star.

古文：丁酉，华州暴水伤稼。
现代文：二十日夜，华州突然暴发洪水，致庄稼被淹。
English: On the evening of the 20th, floods suddenly broke out in Huazhou, causing crops to be flooded.

古文：徐州王智兴奏，大将武华等四百人谋乱，并伏诛。
现代文：徐州王智兴奏报，大将武华等四百人谋反，已全部斩杀。
English: Xuzhou's Wang Zhixing, General Wu Hua and 400 others who plotted to rebel have all been killed.

古文：十月庚子朔，河南尹王起奏，盗销钱为佛像者，请以盗铸钱论。
现代文：十月初一为庚子日，河南尹王起上奏：将所盗之钱熔化铸成佛像的强盗，请以盗、铸钱合罪论处。
English: On the first day of October, Geng Zi Day, Yin Wang of Henan Province issued a proclamation: the robber who melted the stolen money and cast it into a Buddha statue should be punished for theft and casting money.

古文：丁巳，振武节度使张惟清以东受降城滨河，岁久雉堞坏，乃移置于绥远烽南，及是功成。
现代文：十八日，振武节度使张惟清以东受降城傍近黄河之故，时间一长，城墙即被浸坏。乃将受降城移置于绥远烽南，已告功成。
English: On the 18th day of the Zhenwu Festival, Zhang Weixing's eastern subjugated city was moved to the vicinity of the Yellow River. Due to the long time, the city wall was soaked. However, the subjugated city was moved to the far south of Xinjiang, which was a success.

古文：己未，以崖州安置人嗣郢王佐为颍王府长史，分司东都，仍赐金紫。
现代文：二十日，以贬谪到崖州的嗣郢王李佐为颍王府长史，供职东都洛阳，赐金紫鱼袋。
English: On the 20th, Li Zuo, the descendant of King Min, who was exiled to Yalang Prefecture, was appointed as the governor of King Min's capital Luoyang, and was given a gold and purple fish bag.

古文：壬戌夜，太白近哭星。
现代文：二十三日夜，太白星移近哭星。
English: On the night of the 23rd, the white star moved closer to the crying star.

古文：甲子，三司鞫武昭狱得实，武昭及弟汇、役人张少腾宜付京兆府决，河阳节度掌书记李仲言配流象州，汇流崖州，太学博士李涉流康州，皆坐武昭事也。
现代文：二十五日，三司审讯武昭一案，尽得详情，武昭及弟武汇、仆人张少腾交付京兆府处理判决。将河阳节度掌书记李仲言流放象州、武汇流放崖州、太学博士李涉流放康州，皆受武昭一案牵连而获罪。
English: On the 25th, the Third Division tried the case of Wu Zhao, and obtained all the details. Wu Zhao, his brother Wu Hui, and his servant Zhang Shao Teng were handed over to Jingzhao Prefecture to deal with the judgment. Li Zhongyan, the secretary of the Heyang Festival, was exiled to Xiangzhou, Wu Hui was exiled to Yajiazhou, and Li Wanzhong, a doctor of science, was exiled to Kangzhou. They were all implicated in the case of Wu Zhao and were convicted.

古文：十一月庚午朔。
现代文：十一月初一为庚午日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Geng Wu Day.

古文：辛未，以御史中丞王璠为工部侍郎，以谏议大夫独孤朗为御史中丞。
现代文：初二，以御史中丞王为工部侍郎，以谏议大夫独孤朗为御史中丞。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Prince Mishi Chujo was appointed as the attendant of the engineering department, and Dr. Dokushiro was appointed as Mishi Chujo.

古文：癸酉，镇星近东井。
现代文：初四，镇星移近东井星。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the town star moved closer to the east star.

古文：癸未，以殿中少监严公素为容管经略使。
现代文：十四日，以殿中少监严公素为容管经略使。
English: On the 14th, with the strict supervision of the junior prison warden in the hall as the reason for the fine.

古文：是夜，月犯东井。
现代文：是夜，月亮遮掩东井星。
English: It was night, and the moon covered the east star.

古文：庚寅，车驾幸温汤，即日还宫。
现代文：二十一日，皇上乘车到骊山温泉，当天回宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor took a car to Lushan Hot Spring and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：壬辰，以刑部侍郎刘栖楚为京兆尹。
现代文：二十三日，以刑部侍郎刘栖楚为京兆尹。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Xichu, a waiter of the Criminal Investigation Department, was cast as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：丙申，诏封皇子普为晋王。
现代文：二十七日，诏封皇子李普为晋王。
English: On the 27th, the emperor enthroned Prince Li Pu as the King of Jin.

古文：丁酉，吏部侍郎韦顗卒。
现代文：二十八日，吏部侍郎韦靑去世。
English: On the 28th, Wei Yao, the secretary of the personnel department, passed away.

古文：十二月己亥朔。
现代文：十二月初一为己亥日。
English: The first day of December is the start of the Chinese New Year.

古文：辛丑，以晋王普为昭义军节度副大使；以刘悟子将作监主簿从谏起复云麾将军、守金吾卫大将军同正、检校左散骑常侍、兼御史大夫，充昭义节度留后。
现代文：初三，以晋王李普为昭义军节度副大使；重新任命刘悟之子将作监主簿，刘从谏为云麾将军、守金吾卫大将军同正、检校左散骑常侍、兼御史大夫、充昭义节度留后。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Jin Wang Lipu was appointed as the deputy ambassador of the Shouyi Army Festival; the reappointment of Liu Wou's son will serve as the supervisor of the master book, and Liu Conglu will be the general of the Yunqi Army, the general of the Shou King Wuwei Army, the co-chairman of the Shouyi Army Festival, the attendant of the Shouyi Army Festival, and the chief historian of the Shouyi Army Festival.

古文：戊申夜，月犯毕。
现代文：初十夜，月亮遮掩毕宿星。
English: On the tenth night of the first month, the moon covers the host star.

古文：其夜，北方有雾起，须臾遍天，雾上有赤气，久而方散。
现代文：是夜，北方有雾起，须臾遍天，雾上有赤红色气，久而方散。
English: It was night. In the north, there was a fog, which spread all over the sky. There was a reddish-red atmosphere in the fog, which dispersed after a while.

古文：甲子，以左仆射李绛为太子少师，分司东都。
现代文：二十六日夜，以左仆射李绛为太子少师，分司东都。
English: On the evening of the 26th, he appointed his left-hand man, Li Yao, as the young prince's tutor, and assigned him to the eastern capital.

古文：戊辰，敕： 农功所切，实在耕牛，疲氓多乏，须议给赐。
现代文：三十日，诏命 ：耕田用物中最重要的，莫过于耕牛，辛劳的农民又最缺少耕牛，必须想办法赐给。
English: On the 30th, the imperial edict was issued: the most important farm produce is the oxen, and hard-working farmers are most in need of oxen, so we must find a way to give them to them.

古文：委度支往河东、振武、灵、夏等州市耕牛一万头，分给畿内贫下百姓。 
现代文：命度支去河东、振武、灵、夏等州买耕牛一万头，分给京城农村贫苦百姓。 
English: He spent his life savings to buy 10,000 heads of farm cattle from the provinces of Hedong, Zhenwu, Ling and Xia, which were distributed to poor people in rural areas of Beijing.

古文：是岁，淮南、浙西、宣、襄、鄂、潭、湖南等州旱灾伤稼。
现代文：这一年，淮南、浙西、宣、襄、鄂、潭、湖南等州因旱灾使庄稼受损。
English: This year, crops in Huainan, West Zhejiang, Xuan, Xiang, Hunan and other provinces were damaged by drought.

古文：二年春正月己巳朔。
现代文：二年春正月初一为己巳日。
English: The 1st day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st

古文：庚午，贬殿中侍御史王源植为昭州司马。
现代文：初二，贬殿中侍御史王源植为昭州司马。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Wang Yuanzhi, a palace attendant, was demoted to Shoshu Sima.

古文：时源植街行，为教坊乐伎所侮，导从呵之，遂成纷竟。
现代文：一次王源植在街上行走，为教坊歌女所侮辱，随从大声喝斥，双方发生争执。
English: One time Wang Yuanzhu was walking in the street and was insulted by a female singer from the school choir. His followers shouted at him, and the two sides got into an argument.

古文：京兆尹刘栖楚决责乐伎，御史中丞独孤朗论之太切，上怒，遂贬源植。
现代文：京兆尹刘栖楚判罚歌女，御史中丞独孤朗严词谴责，皇上生气，遂贬王源植。
English: Jing Zha Yin Liu Qi Chu sentenced the female singer to be punished, and Gu Shizhong Rong Rong condemned her severely. The emperor was angry, so he demoted Wang Yuan Zhi.

古文：辛未，湖南观察使沈传师奏：奉诏校寻叶靖能、罗光远文案，检寻不获。
现代文：初三，湖南观察使沈传师上奏：奉诏核查叶靖能、罗光远文案，经查核不获实据。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Hunan Observation asked Shen Chuanshi to play: After checking Ye Jingneng and Luo Guangyuan's manuscripts, there was no evidence after verification.

古文：癸酉，右赞善大夫李光现与品官李重实争忿，以笏击重实流血，上以宗属，罚两月俸料。
现代文：初五，右赞善大夫李光现与另一官员李重实愤怒争执，用笏打得李重实流血，皇上因为宗室之臣之故，罚减两月附加俸禄。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Li Guangzheng, the doctor of the Right Admiralty, got into an angry dispute with another official, Li Chongshi. Li Chongshi was beaten bloody with a club, and the emperor was fined two months' additional salary because he was a vassal of the imperial family.

古文：甲戌，以诸军丁夫二万入内穿池修殿。
现代文：初六，于诸军中挑出服正役和徭役共二万人入宫挖人工湖和修建宫殿。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7

古文：辛巳，兴元节度使裴度奏修斜谷路及馆驿皆毕功。
现代文：十三日，兴元节度使裴度上奏所修斜谷路及馆驿皆完工。
English: On the 13th day of the Xingyuan Festival, the construction of the valley road and the pavilion were completed.

古文：壬辰，裴度来朝。
现代文：二十四日，裴度调入京城。
English: On the 24th, Pei Du was transferred to Beijing.

古文：甲午，以卫尉卿刘遵古为湖南观察使，以国子祭酒卫中行为福建观察使。
现代文：二十六日，以卫尉卿刘遵古为湖南观察使，以国子祭酒卫中行为福建观察使。
English: On the 26th, Liu Zungu, a lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as the Hunan observation envoy, and Guo Zi's son, Wei Zhong, as the Fujian observation envoy.

古文：丙申，盐铁使王播奏： 扬州城内，旧漕河水浅，舟船涩滞，输不及期程。
现代文：二十八日，盐铁使王播上奏： 扬州城内，旧水运之河水渐浅，舟船经常阻塞滞留，不能按规定期限转运。
English: On the 28th, Yan Tie asked Wang Bo to report: In Yangzhou city, the river water of the old water transport is gradually shallow, the boat is often blocked and delayed, and it cannot be transported according to the prescribed time limit.

古文：今从阊门外古七里港开河，向东屈曲，取禅智寺桥，东通旧官河，计长一十九里。
现代文：今从阊门外古七里港处挖条河，向东曲伸，经禅智寺桥，接通旧官河，计长十九里。
English: Now, from the ancient seven-mile port outside Qimen, the river is dug up and stretched eastward, passing through the Zenchi Temple Bridge and connecting to the old Kuanhe River, with a length of nineteen miles.

古文：其功役所费，当使自方圆支遣。 
现代文：挖河所需费用，当自筹支出。 皇上同意。
English: The emperor agreed that the expenses required for digging the river should be self-financed.

古文：从之。二月己亥朔。
现代文：二月初一为己亥日。
English: The first day of February is Ji Hai Day.

古文：辛丑，容管经略使严公素奏： 当州普宁等七县，请同广、昭、桂、贺四州例北选。 
现代文：初三，容管经略使严公素上奏： 当州普宁等七县，请与广、昭、桂、贺四州一样，选拔当地人士或官吏至北方任职。 
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Yan Guan Jing slightly made Yan Gong Su play: Dangzhou Puning and other seven counties, please select local people or officials to serve in the north, just like Guang, Zhao, Gui and He four states.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙午夜，月犯毕。
现代文：初八夜，月亮遮掩毕宿星。
English: On the eighth night of the first month, the moon covers the host star.

古文：丁未，以山南西道节度观察处置等使、光禄大夫、守司空、同中书门下平章事、兴元尹、上柱国、晋国公裴度守司空、同平章事，复知政事。
现代文：初九，诏以山南西道节度观察处置等使、光禄大夫、守司空、同中书门下平章事、兴元尹、上柱国、晋国公裴度任司空、同平章事，并还任知政事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the envoys for the observation and disposition of the festival of Shannan West Road, Guanglu Doctor, Guo Jiguo, Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Ping Zhangji, Xing Yuan Yin, Shangzhu Guo, and Jin Guo Gongbei were appointed as Jiguo and Tongping Zhangji, and also appointed as governor.

古文：丁巳寒食节，三殿宴群臣，自戊午至庚申方止。
现代文：十九日，寒食节，皇上在三殿宴会群臣，自中午十一时至下午五时才结束。
English: On the 19th, the cold food festival, the emperor held a banquet for his ministers in the third hall, which lasted from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.

古文：丙寅，正册司空裴度。
现代文：二十八日，正式册封司空裴度。
English: On the 28th, the official sealing of Secretary Ku Pei Du came.

古文：丁卯，以礼部尚书王涯检校左仆射，为山南西道节度使。
现代文：二十九日，以礼部尚书王涯检校左仆射，并为山南西道节度使。
English: On the 29th, he was appointed as the left assistant of the ceremonial department of the Shangshu Wangya Inspection School, and was the official of the Shannan West Road Festival.

古文：三月戊辰朔，命兴唐观道士孙准入翰林待诏。
现代文：三月初一为戊辰日，命兴唐观道士孙准入翰林待诏。
English: The first day of March is the day of Pentecost, and the order for Xing Tang Guan Daoist Sun Jian to enter the Hanlin is pending.

古文：辛未，江西观察使殷侑请于洪州宝历寺置僧尼戒坛，敕殷侑故违制令，擅置戒坛，罚一季俸料。
现代文：初四，江西观察使殷侑请于洪州宝历寺设置僧尼戒坛，诏以殷侑故意违反法度，擅自设置戒坛，罚减一季附加俸禄。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Jiangxi Observation asked Yin Qi to set up a Buddhist altar for monks and nuns in Hongzhou Baoli Temple. Yin Qi deliberately violated the law by setting up a Buddhist altar without authorization, and was fined one quarter of additional salary.

古文：甲戌，赐宰臣百僚上巳宴于曲江亭。
现代文：初七，赐宰相等群官于三月初三上巳日宴游于曲江亭。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the prime minister and other officials held a banquet at Qujiangting on the 3rd day of the 3rd month.

古文：乙亥，右散骑常侍李翱卒。
现代文：初八，右散骑常侍李翱去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Right Hand Cavalryman Li Xi passed away.

古文：戊寅，幸鱼藻宫观竞渡。
现代文：十一日，皇上至鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡。
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor went to the Fish Algae Palace to watch the boat race.

古文：辛巳，以同州刺史萧俯为太子少保分司。
现代文：十四日，以同州刺史萧亻免为太子少保，任职洛阳。
English: On the 14th, Xiao Yimeng, the governor of Tongzhou, was appointed as the prince's minor protector, serving in Luoyang.

古文：壬午，以工部尚书裴武为同州刺史。
现代文：十五日，以工部尚书裴武为同州刺史。
English: On the fifteenth day, the history of the state was written by Shangshu Peiwu of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：癸未，岭南节度使崔植奏： 广、湖、封、雷、潘、辩等七州戍军。除折冲别将外，并请停。 
现代文：十六日，岭南节度使崔植上奏： 广、湖、封、雷、潘、辩等七州守军，除折冲别将之外，请留驻。 
English: On the 16th, the Lingnan Festival made Cui Zhi play: Guang, Hubei, Fen, Lei, Pan, Dian and other seven state defenders, with the exception of the departing generals, please stay.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙戌，昆明夷遣使朝贡。
现代文：十九日，昆明夷遣使朝贡。
English: On the 19th, Kunming Yi sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁亥，敕册才人郭氏为贵妃。
现代文：二十日，诏命册封才人郭氏为贵妃。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict named Guo, a talented person, as empress dowager.

古文：丙申，以吏部侍郎韦弘景为陕虢观察使。
现代文：二十九日，以吏部侍郎韦弘景为陕虢观察使。
English: On the 29th, Wei Hongjing, a servant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the Shaanxi and Fujian Observation Envoy.

古文：四月戊戌朔，横海军节度使李全略卒。
现代文：四月初一为戊戌日，横海军节度使李全略去世。
English: On the first day of April, the day of the Navy Day, Li Quanli passed away.

古文：壬寅，以右金吾卫大将军高承简为邠、宁、庆节度使。
现代文：初五，以右金吾卫大将军高承简为宁庆节度使。初九，诏王廷凑检校司空。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, Gao Chengyan, the general of the Right Jingu Wei, was appointed as the Ningqing festival envoy. On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Ting went to inspect the school.

古文：丙午，王廷凑检校司空。戊申，昭义节度使留后刘从谏检校工部尚书，充昭义节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：十一日，昭义节度使留后刘从谏检校工部尚书，充昭义军节度副大使、主持节度事务。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Zongjian from the Engineering Department of Shijian School wrote a letter to Zhao Yijun, deputy ambassador of Zhao Yijun, and presided over Zhao Yijun's affairs.

古文：庚戌，鄂岳观察使牛僧孺奏： 当道沔州与鄂州隔江相对，才一里余，其州请并省，其汉阳、汊川两县隶鄂州。 
现代文：十三日，鄂岳观察使牛僧孺上奏 ：卑职辖区内沔州与鄂州隔江相望，仅距一里余，这两州公务请同意一并署理。而汉阳、汊川两县请划归鄂州。 
English: On the 13th day of the month, the observation of Mt. E made the bull monk's gong play: the two counties of Bozhou and Ezhou are across the river from each other, only one mile apart, and the two counties should agree to be jointly responsible for official business. And the two counties of Hanyang and Beichuan should be transferred to Ezhou.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙辰，右金吾卫大将军高霞寓卒。
现代文：十九日，右金吾卫大将军高霞寓去世。
English: On the 19th, Gao Xiaye, General of the Right Jinguwei, passed away.

古文：丙寅，先是王廷凑请于当道立圣德碑，是日，内出碑文赐廷凑。
现代文：二十九日，因王廷凑曾上书请同意在辖区内立圣德碑，是日，宫内拟出碑文赐予王廷凑。
English: On the 29th, because Wang Tingpai had sent a letter asking for approval to erect a monument to sanctity in the area under his jurisdiction, it was the day that the palace drafted an inscription and gave it to Wang Tingpai.

古文：五月戊辰朔，上御宣和殿，对内人亲属一千二百人，并于教坊赐食，各颁锦彩。
现代文：五月初一为戊辰日，皇上至宣和殿，对歌女亲属一千二百人，一并在教坊内赐饮食，并发给彩锦。
English: On the first day of the first month of May, the Emperor went to the Xuanhe Hall and gave 1,200 relatives of the singer a meal in the classroom and presented them with colored brocade.

古文：辛未，秘书省著作郎韦公肃注太宗所撰《帝范》十二篇进，特赐锦彩百匹。
现代文：初四，秘书省著作郎韦公肃注太宗所撰《帝范》十二篇进奉，特赐彩锦百匹。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, twelve chapters of "Imperial Fan" written by Tai Zong and annotated by Lang Wei Gong Su, a book of the Ministry of Secretaries, were presented to him, and he was specially given a hundred pieces of brocade.

古文：甲戌，以泾原节度杨元卿为河阳三城怀州节度使，以金吾卫大将军李祐为泾原节度使。
现代文：初七，以泾原节度杨元卿为河阳三城怀州节度使，以金吾卫大将军李为泾原节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yang Yuanqing, the chief of the Shenyuan Festival, was appointed as the chief of the three cities of Heyang and Huizhou, and General Li, the chief of the Jinwu Festival, was appointed as the chief of the Shenyuan Festival.

古文：是夜，月近太微星。
现代文：是夜，月亮移近太微星。
English: It was night, and the moon was moving closer to the faint star.

古文：浙西送到绝粒女道士施子微。
现代文：浙西送到不食烟火、不食五谷的女道士施子微。
English: The female Taoist Shih Zi Wei, who does not eat firecrackers or grain, was sent to western Zhejiang.

古文：戊寅，幸鱼藻宫观竞渡。
现代文：十一日，皇上至鱼藻宫观看舟船竞渡。
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor went to the Fish Algae Palace to watch the boat race.

古文：庚辰，中使自新罗取鹰鹞回。
现代文：十三日，宫廷所派之使者从新罗国取回鹰鹞。
English: On the 13th, an envoy sent by the court retrieved the falcon from Silla.

古文：幽州军乱，杀其帅硃克融及男延龄，军人立其第二子延嗣为留后。
现代文：幽州军队哗变，杀其主帅朱克融及其子朱延龄，军人立其第二子朱延嗣主持军务。
English: The Yuzhou army mutinied, killed its commander Zhu Ke Rong and his son Zhu Yanling, and the soldiers appointed his second son Zhu Yan Ci to preside over military affairs.

古文：辛巳，神策军苑内古长安城中修汉未央宫，掘获白玉床一张，长六尺。
现代文：十四日，神策军在禁苑内古长安城中修汉代未央宫时，挖掘到白玉床一张，长六尺。
English: On the 14th, Shinsaku's troops excavated a six-foot-long bed of white jade in the middle of the ancient Chang'an City in the Forbidden City during the renovation of the Han Dynasty's Miang Palace.

古文：癸未，山人杜景先于光顺门进状，称有道术；令中使押杜景先往淮南及江南、湖南、岭南诸州求访异人。
现代文：十六日，山人隐士杜景先于光顺门进奉文书，自称有道术，诏命宫廷内官将杜景先押往淮南及江南、湖南、岭南等地访求特异才能之人。
English: On the 16th, Du Jing, a mountain hermit, was the first to go to Guangshun Gate to serve as a clerk, claiming to have Taoism, and ordered the palace officials to send Du Jing first to Huainan and Jiangnan, Hunan, Lingnan and other places to visit people with special talents.

古文：甲申，以右丞丁公著为兵部侍郎，以前湖南观察使沈传师为尚书左丞。
现代文：十七日，以右丞丁公著为兵部侍郎，以曾任湖南观察使之沈传师为尚书左丞。
English: On the seventeenth day, Ujo Ding Gongzhu was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and Shoshu Zuojo was appointed as the instructor of Shen Chuan, who had been the observer of Hunan.

古文：辛卯，赠硃克融司徒。
现代文：二十四日，追封朱克融为司徒。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Ke was posthumously reinstated as a disciple.

古文：甲午夜，荧惑犯昴。
现代文：二十七日夜，火星冲犯昴宿星。
English: On the evening of the 27th, Mars will collide with Pleiades.

古文：赐兴唐观道士刘从政修院钱二万贯。
现代文：赐兴唐观道士刘从政修缮道观钱二万贯。
English: He gave Xing Tang Guan Daoist Liu twenty thousand yuan to repair the Guan Dao from politics.

古文：六月丁酉朔，赐御史中丞独孤朗金紫。
现代文：六月初一为丁酉日，赐御史中丞独孤朗金紫鱼袋。
English: The first day of the first month of June was Ding Xi Day, and he gave a gold-and-purple fish bag to Gu Shizhong Rong.

古文：丁巳，减放苑内役人二千五百。
现代文：二十一日，裁减放出禁苑内劳工二千五百人。
English: On the 21st, 2,500 workers in the Forbidden City were laid off.

古文：帝性好土木，自春至冬，兴作相继。
现代文：皇帝很喜欢营造宫殿亭榭，自春至冬，相继兴建。
English: The emperor was very fond of building palace pavilions, and they were built one after another from spring to winter.

古文：庚申，郓州进驴打球人石定宽等四人。
现代文：二十四日，郓州进贡用驴打的石定宽等四人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, four people including Shi Dingwang, who was beaten with a donkey in the tribute of Zhangzhou.

古文：是夜，太白犯昴。
现代文：是夜，太白星冲犯昴宿星。
English: It's night, and the white star is colliding with the Pleiades.

古文：辛酉，幸凝碧池，令兵士千余人于池中取大鱼，长大者送入新池。
现代文：二十五日，皇上至凝碧池，命兵士千余人，从旧池中捕捞大鱼送入新池。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor arrived at the Jiebi Pond, and more than a thousand soldiers were sent to fish big fish from the old pond into the new pond.

古文：癸亥，以旱，命京城诸司疏理系囚。
现代文：二十七日，因天旱，命京城各司清查积案处理在押囚犯。
English: On the 27th, due to the drought, all departments in Beijing were ordered to clear the backlog of cases and deal with prisoners in custody.

古文：以延康坊官宅一区为诸王府司局。
现代文：以延康坊衙门一带地方为诸王府司局官署。
English: Yan Kangfang Qimen and the surrounding areas were the administrative offices of the prefectural governors.

古文：甲子，上御三殿，观两军、教坊、内园分朋驴鞠、角抵。戏酣，有碎首折臂者，至一更二更方罢。
现代文：二十八日，皇上至三殿，观看左右神策军人及教坊乐伎、内园役夫分为两方用驴打、摔跤、热闹非常，以致有打破头和折断手臂的，至一更二更才结束。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, the emperor went to the third hall to watch the soldiers of the left and right divine policy, and the yakuza of the inner garden, who were divided into two sides, beating and wrestling with donkeys. The excitement was so great that some people broke their heads and arms, and it was not until the second day that it was over.

古文：秋七月丙寅朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为丙寅日。
English: The first day of the first month of autumn in July is Hsin-Tin Day.

古文：乙亥，河中进力士八人。
现代文：初十，河中进献大力士八人。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, eight strong men came to the river.

古文：癸未，衡王绚薨。
现代文：十八日，衡王李绚去世。
English: On the 18th, Heng Wang Li Hua passed away.

古文：敕鄠县渼陂尚食管系，太仓广运潭复赐司农寺。
现代文：二十八日，诏命县氵美陂负责管理宫中所需饮食物资。在广运潭之储粮太仓重又赐予司农寺管辖。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Zhao ordered the county of Jimei to be responsible for the management of the food and drink needed in the palace. The grain stored in Guangyuntan was also placed under the jurisdiction of the Sino-Temple.

古文：八月丙申朔，以司空、平章事裴度判度支；以工部侍郎王播为河南尹，代王起；以起为吏部侍郎；以前福州观察使徐晦为工部侍郎。
现代文：八月初一为丙申日，以司空、平章事裴度兼任度支；以工部侍郎王播为河南尹，以代王起；以王起为吏部侍郎；以前任福州观察使徐晦为工部侍郎。
English: The first day of August was Hsin Shen Day, with Siku and Ping Zhang Ji Pei Du doubling as the provincial branch; Wang Bo, the attendant of the work department, was Henan Yin, and Wang Qi was the deputy; Wang Qi was the attendant of the personnel department; Xu Yu, the former Fuzhou observation envoy, was the attendant of the work department.

古文：是夜，太白近太微。
现代文：是夜，太白星移近紫微星。
English: It was night, and the white star moved closer to the violet star.

古文：令供奉道士二十人随浙西处士周息元入内宫之山亭院，上问以道术，言识张果、叶静能。
现代文：令供奉道士二十人随浙西高人周息元入内宫之山亭院，皇上问其道术，周息元说认识张果、叶静能。
English: Zhou Siyuan, a scholar of Western Zhejiang University, was accompanied by twenty priests of Taoism to enter the Mountain Pavilion of the Inner Palace. The emperor asked him about Taoism, and Zhou Siyuan said that he knew Zhang Guo and Ye Jingneng.

古文：浙西观察使李德裕上疏言息元诞妄，无异于人。
现代文：浙西观察使李德裕上书说周息元荒诞虚妄，其实他是个很普通的人。
English: Observing the western part of Zhejiang, Li Deyu wrote a letter saying that Zhou Xiyuan was absurd and false. In fact, he was a very ordinary person.

古文：庚戌，以太府卿李宪为江西观察使。
现代文：十五日，以太府卿李宪为江西观察使。
English: On the 15th, Li Xian, the prefect of Taiyuan, was appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：丁丑夜，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：十六日，月亮冲犯舆鬼星。
English: On the 16th, the moon collided with a ghost star.

古文：加京兆尹刘栖楚兼御史大夫。
现代文：诏京兆尹刘栖楚增任兼御史大夫。
English: Zhao Jingzha Yin Liu Qi Chu was appointed to the post of Grand Historian.

古文：癸丑，以太常卿崔从检校吏部尚书、判东都尚书省事、兼御史大夫、东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
现代文：十八日，以太常卿崔从检校吏部尚书、并任东都尚书省事、兼任御史大夫、东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
English: On the 18th, Ether Changqing Cui was promoted from the inspection officer department of the school to the secretary, and also served as the secretary of the East Capital, the secretary of the East Capital, the secretary of the East Capital and the defense envoy of the East Capital.

古文：九月丁丑朔，大合宴于宣和殿，陈百戏，自甲戌至丙子方已。
现代文：九月初一为丁丑日，皇上与所有群臣、内侍、诸乐伎等宴会于宣和殿，依次赏玩奏乐、歌舞、杂技、玩龙灯等各种表演，从晚七时至次日凌晨一时才结束。
English: On the first day of September, which was Dingwusi Day, the Emperor and all of his courtiers, attendants, and magicians held a banquet at the Xuanhe Hall, where they enjoyed various performances such as music, dance, acrobatics, and dragon lanterns, which lasted from 7 p.m. until 1 a.m. the next day.

古文：戊寅，河东节度使、守司徒、兼侍中李光颜卒。
现代文：初二，河东节度使、守司徒、兼侍中李光颜去世。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Li Guangyan, an emissary of the Hedong Festival, a tutor of the tutor, and a chamberlain, passed away.

古文：出内库钱万贯，令内园召募力士。
现代文：诏令从宫中库内拿出一万贯钱，在内苑招募大力士。
English: The imperial edict took out ten thousand crowns from the palace treasury to recruit Hercules in the inner courtyard.

古文：幽州盐军奏：都知兵马使李再义与弟再宁同杀硃延嗣并其家属三百余人，推再义为留后。
现代文：幽州监军上奏：都知兵马使李再义与其弟李再宁同杀朱延嗣及其家属三百余人，并推李再义主持军务。
English: Yuzhou Supervision of the Military: Li Zaiyi and his brother Li Zaining, both of whom were sent by the Sich soldiers and horses, together killed more than 300 people of Zhu Yanxi and his family members, and pushed Li Zaiyi to preside over the military affairs.

古文：壬申，宰相李程为北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：十六日，宰相李程为北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the 16th, the Prime Minister Li Cheng stayed in the North and became the envoy of the Hedong Festival.

古文：敕户部所管同州长春宫庄宅，宜令内庄宅使管系。
现代文：诏令户部将所管同州长春宫之庄宅，交由宫中庄宅使管理。
English: The imperial edict ordered the household department to hand over the manor house of the Spring Palace, which was under the control of the governor, to the management of the manor house steward in the palace.

古文：冬十月乙未朔。
现代文：十月初一为乙未日。
English: The first day of October is the eve of the second day of the month.

古文：乙亥，以幽州衙前都知兵马使李再义检校户部尚书，充卢龙军节度副大使、知节度事，仍赐名载义。
现代文：十一日，以幽州衙前都知兵马使李再义检校户部尚书、充任卢龙军节度副大使、主持节度事务，并赐名载义。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Zaiyi, who was sent to inspect the school by the Yuzhou Shanzhen Tochi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, was appointed as the vice-ambassador of the Lulong Army Festival, presided over the festival affairs, and gave his name to the festival.

古文：壬戌，以中书舍人崔郾为礼部侍郎。
现代文：二十八日，以中书舍人崔郾为礼部侍郎。
English: On the 28th, Cui Yao, a scholar of Chinese classics, was appointed as the attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：十一月甲子朔，以太清宫道士赵归真充两街道门都教授博士。
现代文：十一月初一为甲子日，诏以太清宫道士赵归真充任两街道门都教授博士。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the day of the birth of the first son, Zhao Guizhen, a Taoist priest of the Qing Palace, was appointed as a professor and doctor of the two streets.

古文：帝好深夜自捕狐狸，宫中谓之 打夜狐 。
现代文：皇帝喜好在深夜率人去捕捉狐狸，皇宫中谓之 打夜狐 。
English: The emperor liked to lead people to catch foxes late at night. In the imperial palace, it was called "fighting the night fox."

古文：中官许遂振、李少端、鱼弘志以侍从不及削职。
现代文：太监许遂振、李少端、鱼弘志等皆因服侍不力而被削职。
English: Eunuchs such as Xu Suizhen, Li Shaofang, and Yu Hongzhi were all dismissed for poor service.

古文：壬申，以户部尚书胡证检校兵部尚书，兼广州刺史，充岭南节度使。
现代文：初九，诏以户部尚书胡证检校兵部尚书、兼广州刺史、并充任岭南节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he was appointed as the secretary of the household department, the secretary of the military department of the Hucheng inspection school, and the secretary of the history of Guangzhou, and also served as the secretary of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：甲申，以右仆射、同平章事李逢吉检校司空、同平章事，兼襄州刺史，充山南东道节度使、临汉监牧使。
现代文：二十一日，诏以右仆射、同平章事李逢吉检校司空、同平章事、兼任襄州刺史、并充任山南东道节度使、临汉监牧使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Sha, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, the same rank as Li Fengji, and the same rank as Li Fengji.

古文：乙酉，同州刺史裴武卒。
现代文：二十二日，同州刺史裴武去世。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the state's top official, Pei Wu, passed away.

古文：己丑，诏朝官及方镇人家不得置私白身。
现代文：二十六日，诏令朝廷大员及地方军政长官不得私自授官。
English: On the 26th, it was decreed that members of the Imperial Court and local military and political leaders were not allowed to award themselves positions.

古文：癸巳，以前东都留守杨于陵为太子少傅。
现代文：三十日，以前任东都留守杨於陵为太子少傅。
English: On the 30th, Yang Yu Ling, who had previously been in charge of the Eastern Capital, was appointed as the Prince's Young Master.

古文：中官李奉义、王惟直、成守贞各杖三十，分配诸陵；宣徽使闫弘约、副使刘弘逸各杖二十。
现代文：太监李奉义、王惟直、成守贞各打三十杖，分别发配去各皇陵；宣徽使阎弘约、副使刘弘逸各打二十杖。
English: The eunuchs Li Bongyi, Wang Wei Zhi, and Cheng Shuzhen were each given 30 sticks and sent to the imperial tombs separately; the emissary Yan Hongyu and the deputy emissary Liu Hongyi were each given 20 sticks.

古文：十二月甲午朔。
现代文：十二月初一为甲午日。
English: The first day of December is the first day of the week.

古文：辛丑，帝夜猎还宫，与中官刘克明、田务成、许文端打球，军将苏佐明、王嘉宪、石定宽等二十八人饮酒。
现代文：初八，皇帝夜晚打猎回宫，与太监刘克明、田务成、许文端打，还同军将苏佐明、王嘉宪、石定宽等二十八人饮酒。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor returned to the palace from hunting in the evening, and fought with the eunuchs Liu Keming, Tian Muxing, and Xu Wenzhong, and also drank alcohol with twenty-eight soldiers including Su Zaming, Wang Jiaxian, and Shi Dinghan.

古文：帝方酣，入室埂衣，殿上烛忽灭，刘克明等同谋害帝，即时殂于室内，时年十八。
现代文：酒酣耳热之际，皇帝进内室更衣，这时，殿上灯烛忽然熄灭，刘克明等一同谋害了皇帝，皇帝当时就死于室内，时年十八岁。
English: When he was drunk, the emperor went into the inner room to change clothes. At this time, the lights and candles in the palace suddenly went out. Liu Keming and others plotted together to kill the emperor. The emperor died in the room at that time, at the age of eighteen.

古文：群臣上谥曰睿武昭愍孝皇帝，庙号敬宗。
现代文：群臣上谥为睿武昭愍孝皇帝，庙号敬宗。
English: Emperor Rui Wu Zhaozhong was enthroned above the crowd of courtiers, and the temple's name was changed to Keizong.

古文：大和元年七月十三日葬于庄陵。
现代文：大和元年七月十三日，葬于庄陵。
English: He was buried in the village mausoleum on July 13, 1901.

古文：史臣曰：古人谓尧无子，舜无父，言其贤不肖之相远也。
现代文：史官曰：古人说尧无儿子，舜无父亲，是指仁孝与不仁不义之间相隔太远了。
English: The historian said: The ancients said, "There is no son, there is no father," meaning that the distance between filial piety and injustice is too far.

古文：以文惠骄诞之性，继之以昭愍，固其宜也。
现代文：文惠穆宗皇帝骄横荒诞的个性，却由昭愍敬宗皇帝完全继承下来，是不足为奇的。
English: It is not surprising that the arrogant and absurd personality of Emperor Wenhui Muzong was completely inherited by Emperor Zhaohui Keizong.

古文：而昭献、昭肃，英特不群，文足以纬邦家，武足以平祸乱。
现代文：但昭献文宗皇帝、昭肃武宗皇帝，英武出众，其文才足以治国，武略足以平祸乱。
English: However, Emperor Zhao Xianwenzong and Emperor Zhao Suwuzong were outstanding in military prowess. Their literary talent was enough to govern the country, and their military strategy was enough to quell the calamity.

古文：三子之操行顿异，其可道哉？
现代文：三个儿子的操行竟有如此大的差别，是什么原因呢？
English: Why is there such a big difference in the behaviour of the three sons?

古文：宝历不群，国统几绝，天未降丧，幸赖裴度，复任弼谐。
现代文：敬宗丧失了做皇帝的准则，致皇室几乎陷于绝境，但天意还未要唐朝灭亡，是因为多亏了裴度，屡次相辅佐。
English: Emperor Jingzong lost the principle of being an emperor, and the imperial family was almost in a desperate situation. However, the providence did not want the Tang Dynasty to perish, because thanks to Pei Du, they repeatedly assisted each other.

古文：彼狡童兮，夫何足议！
现代文：总的来说，敬宗还是个不懂事的少年，有什么值得多议论的呢？
English: On the whole, Keizong is still a naïve boy. What is there worth talking about?

古文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝讳昂，穆宗第二子，母曰贞献皇后萧氏。
现代文：文宗本纪文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝名昂，是穆宗的第二个儿子，生母即贞献皇后萧氏。
English: The second son of Emperor Mu Zong, the second son of Emperor Mengang, the second son of Emperor Wenzong, and the son of Empress Zhenxian Xiao.

古文：元和四年十月十日生。
现代文：元和四年十月十日生。
English: He was born on October 10th, 1904.

古文：长庆元年封江王。
现代文：长庆元年封江王。
English: In the first year of the Changqing Dynasty, Fong Jiang Wang was crowned.

古文：初名涵。
现代文：原名涵。
English: His original name was Han.

古文：宝历二年十二月八日，敬宗遇害，贼苏佐明等矫制立绛王勾当军国事。
现代文：宝历二年十二月八日，敬宗遇害，叛将苏佐明等假托朝廷之命立绛王处理国事。
English: On December 8 of the second year of the Baoli calendar, Emperor Keizong was assassinated, and the traitor Su Zuoming and others set up a puppet king to handle state affairs on the pretext of the imperial court's order.

古文：枢密使王守澄、中尉梁守谦率禁军讨贼，诛绛王，迎上于江邸。
现代文：枢密使王守澄、中尉梁守谦率禁军讨平叛乱，杀绛王，恭迎皇上于江王邸。
English: The imperial envoy Wang Shoucheng and Lieutenant Liang Shouqian led the imperial army to quell the rebellion, kill the king, and welcome the emperor to Jiang Wang's residence.

古文：癸卯，见宰臣于阁内，下教处分军国事。
现代文：初十，皇上在偏殿接见宰臣，请教如何处理军务国政等事。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor met with the vice-minister in a side hall and asked for advice on how to deal with military affairs, state affairs, and other matters.

古文：甲辰，僧惟真、齐贤、正简，道士赵归真，并配流岭南，击球军将于登等六人令本军处置。
现代文：十一日，将和尚惟真、齐贤、正简，道士赵归真，一并流放岭南，将击军将于登等六人交由本部军队处置。
English: On the 11th day, the monks Weizhen, Qi Xian, Zheng Jian, and the Taoist Zhao Guizhen were exiled to Lingnan together, and the six members of the attack force, including Deng, were handed over to the headquarters army for disposal.

古文：宰臣百僚三上表劝进。
现代文：宰臣和百官三次上表请皇帝正式登位。
English: The vice-minister and hundreds of officials went to the table three times to invite the emperor to officially ascend the throne.

古文：乙巳，即位于宣政殿。
现代文：十二日，皇帝在宣政殿正式继承皇位。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor officially succeeded to the throne at Xuancheng Palace.

古文：丙午，上赴西宫成服。
现代文：十三日，皇上至西宫穿上丧服。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor went to the Western Palace to put on his mourning clothes.

古文：丁未，宰臣百僚上表请听政，三表，许之。
现代文：十四日，宰臣等百官上表请皇上主持国事，经三次上表，皇帝才同意。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor was asked to preside over the affairs of state by hundreds of officials, including the vice-chancellors. After three requests, the Emperor agreed.

古文：道士纪处玄、杨冲虚，伎术人李元戢、王信等，并配流岭南。
现代文：将道士纪处玄、杨冲虚，艺人李元戢、王信等，一并流放岭南。
English: The Taoist scholar Ji Chu Xuan, Yang Chong Hu, and the artists Li Yuanqi and Wang Xin were all exiled to Lingnan.

古文：戊申，尊圣母为皇太后。
现代文：十五日，诏封圣母为皇太后。
English: On the 15th, the Holy Mother of God was enthroned as empress dowager.

古文：己酉，敕凤翔、淮南先进女乐二十四人，并放归本道。
现代文：十六日，诏令凤翔、淮南先进奉的女乐伎二十四人，全部送回原地。
English: On the 16th, Feng Xiang and Huainan ordered the 24 female musicians to be sent back to their original places.

古文：庚戌，以正议大夫、尚书兵部侍郎、知制诰、充翰林学士、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋韦处厚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，诏以正议大夫、尚书兵部侍郎、知制诰、充翰林学士、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋韦处厚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he was awarded the titles of Zheng Rong Dafu, Shang Shuheib Rong Rong Dafu, Zhisheng Rong, Zheng Hanlin Baibiao, Zhu Guo, and Zhe Zi Jinyuabukuro Wei Sheduo as the Chushu Dafu Rong Dafu and the Chushu Men Shimohei Shouji.

古文：以翰林学士路随承旨，侍讲学士宋申锡充书诏学士。
现代文：诏翰林学士路随为承旨，侍讲学士宋申锡充任书诏学士。
English: Zhao Hanlin, a scholar, followed the imperial edict, and the attendant scholar, Song Shenxi, became a scholar of the imperial edict.

古文：丙辰，以山南道节度使柳公绰为刑部尚书。
现代文：二十三日，诏以山南东道节度使柳公绰为刑部尚书。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Gongpu was appointed as the head of the Criminal Law Department in accordance with the Shannan Host Festival.

古文：丁己，为绛王举哀，废朝三日。
现代文：二十四日，为绛王举哀吊丧，停止朝政公务三天。
English: On the 24th, a mourning ceremony was held for King Gong, and the official duties of the imperial government were suspended for three days.

古文：庚申，诏：
现代文：二十七日，诏：
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued:

古文：君天下者，莫尚乎崇澹泊，子困穷，遵道以端本，推诚而达下。
现代文：统治国家的皇帝，应崇尚淡泊，蔑视穷困，以遵循道德准则为根本，推行诚信于天下。
English: The emperor who rules the country should advocate indifference, despise poverty, follow the moral code as the fundamental principle, and promote honesty in the world.

古文：故圣祖之诫，以慈俭为宝；大《易》明训，垂简易之文。
现代文：所以圣祖皇帝告诫后人，应以慈善节俭为做皇帝的基本要求，《易》、《礼》等书中所载的法则，写得清楚明白简略通俗。
English: Therefore, the Holy Ancestor Emperor admonished future generations that charity and frugality should be the basic requirements of emperors. The rules contained in books such as "Easy" and "Rite" should be written clearly, simply and popularly.

古文：未有上约而下不丰，欲寡而求不给。
现代文：从未有皇上节俭约束而百姓不丰盈、节制嗜欲而所需不能满足的。
English: There has never been a time when the emperor was constrained to be frugal but the people were not rich, or when the emperor restrained the people's appetites but the people's needs remained unsatisfied.

古文：朕以眇薄，遭逢内难，刷君父之仇耻，摅亿兆之哀冤。
现代文：我虽微薄，又遭逢内难，但能洗刷先皇的仇敌和耻辱，伸张亿万百姓的冤屈。
English: Although I am poor and have suffered hardships, I can wash away the enemies and shame of the first emperor and assert the grievances of hundreds of millions of people.

古文：而股肱大臣，群卿庶士，引义抗请，至于再三。
现代文：辅国大臣，群官百姓，多次引经据典劝我登位。
English: The Vice-Minister of State, officials and common people have repeatedly quoted scriptures to persuade me to ascend to the throne.

古文：以图宗社之安，以答华夷之望，俯从众欲，夙夜震兢。
现代文：为了国家安稳和不负中外的希望，我接受了大家的要求，登上皇位，但日夜畏惧谨慎。
English: For the sake of national stability and to live up to the hopes of China and the rest of the world, I accepted everyone's request to ascend the throne, but I am cautious day and night.

古文：思所以克己复礼，修政安人，宵兴匪宁，旰食劳虑。夫俭过则酌之以礼，文胜则矫之以质。
现代文：我时刻想着怎样才能按孔子说的，抑制自己，使言语行为都合于礼，管好国家安定民心，使国家日夜都是兴旺景象，再也没有不法之徒作乱，我常常因思考治国之策而忘了吃饭。俭朴过分则用礼仪来充实，文采过多则用朴实来矫正。
English: I always think about how I can follow what Confucius said, restrain myself, make speech and behavior conform to etiquette, manage the country and stabilize the people's hearts, so that the country is a thriving scene day and night, and there are no more lawless people making trouble. I often forget to eat because of thinking about the strategy of governing the country. Excessive frugality is filled with etiquette, and excessive literature is corrected with simplicity.

古文：庶乎俗合太古，道洽生灵，仪刑家邦，以化天下。
现代文：使礼仪和治理接近于上古之时，政治清明百姓受益，讲法重礼国泰民安，以达到造化于天下的目的。
English: So that the etiquette and governance are close to the time of the ancients, the people will benefit from the political clarity, and the country and the people's safety will be emphasized in the teaching of the law, so as to achieve the purpose of creation in the world.

古文：内庭宫人非职掌者，放三千人，任从所适。
现代文：皇宫内的宫女凡没有具体职务和工作的，放回三千人，任其择嫁和居住。
English: The palace maids of honor who do not have a specific position or job within the imperial palace will be returned to the three thousand, and will be allowed to choose their own wives and residences.

古文：长春宫斛斗诸物，依前户部收管。
现代文：长春宫内所贮绸缎丝麻等物，交由原户部收纳管理。
English: The collection of silk, silk and hemp stored in the Changchun Imperial Palace was handed over to the original household department for management.

古文：鄠县、渼陂、凤翔府骆谷地还府县。
现代文：皇室在县氵美陂、凤翔府骆谷等处所占田地发还当地。
English: The fields occupied by the imperial family in the counties of Jimei and Luogu, Fengxiang Prefecture, etc. were returned to the local area.

古文：教坊乐官、翰林待诏、伎术官并总监诸色职掌内冗员者共一千二百七十人，并宜停废。
现代文：教坊乐官、翰林待诏、伎术官并总监等各部门没有专职的各等官员共一千二百七十人，全部废除解散。
English: A total of 1,270 officials without full-time positions in various departments, such as the music director of the classroom, the music director of the hall, the games director and the director, were all abolished and dissolved.

古文：总监中一百二十四人先属诸军，并各归本司。
现代文：总监中一百二十四人先到京城各部队中去，然后逐一回到原隶属部门。
English: One hundred and twenty-four of the supervisors first went to various units in Beijing, and then returned to their original subordinate departments one by one.

古文：余七百三人，勒纳牒身，放归本管。
现代文：余下七百零三人，强令交出官籍，放归到原部门管束。
English: The remaining seven hundred and three people were forcibly ordered to surrender their official registration and were released to the custody of the original department.

古文：先供教坊衣粮一百分，厢家及诸司新加衣粮三千分，并宜停给。
现代文：原先供给教坊的一百份衣粮，禁军及京城各部门新增加的三千份衣粮，全部停止发给。
English: The one hundred rations of clothing and grain originally supplied to the teachers' college, and the newly added three thousand rations of clothing and grain supplied to the Imperial Army and various departments of the capital, have all been stopped.

古文：五方鹰鹞并解放。
现代文：从各处进贡来的鹰鹞全部放飞。
English: The eaglets that had come from all over to pay tribute were all released.

古文：今年新宣附食度支衣粮小兒一百人，并停给。
现代文：今年在宫中新殿内的杂役一百人从度支部门领取的衣粮，全部停发。
English: This year, the distribution of clothing and grain received by one hundred attendants in the new hall of the Imperial Palace from the sub-departments of the Imperial Household Agency has all been suspended.

古文：别诏宣索纂组雕镂不在常贡内者，并停。
现代文：非正式诏令而向各地征收的彩缎及珍贵装饰等物，凡不在进贡之列的，一并停止。
English: The collection of painted urns, precious ornaments and other items from various regions, which are not included in the tribute, will also be stopped.

古文：度支、盐铁、户部及州府百司应供宫禁年支一物已上，并准贞元元额为定。
现代文：度支、盐铁、户部及各州府和部门一年中应供给皇宫所需即使一件以上，也要依照贞元年间所定的数额为准。
English: Even if more than one item is required to be supplied to the Imperial Palace in a year by the Imperial Household Agency, the Salt and Iron Ministry, the Household Ministry, and the various prefectures and departments, the amount determined during the first year of the Zhengyuan era shall prevail.

古文：先造供禁中床榻以金筐瑟瑟宝钿者，悉宜停造。
现代文：原所定做供皇宫所用的金筐、床榻以及各类珍宝，全部停造。
English: The gold baskets, beds and all kinds of treasures that were originally made for the imperial palace have all been stopped.

古文：东头御马坊、球场，宜却还龙武军。其殿及亭子，所司毁拆，余舍赐本军。
现代文：东边的御马坊、场，宜交还给龙武军，其中的殿宇和亭子，责成有关部门拆毁，其余房舍也一并交给龙武军。
English: The east side of the Mima Fang and the field should be returned to the Longwu army, and the palace and pavilion should be ordered to be demolished by the relevant departments. The remaining buildings should also be handed over to the Longwu army.

古文：应行从处张陈，不得用花蜡结彩华饰。
现代文：皇上所到之处的接待摆设，不得用花烛、结彩等奢华物装饰。
English: The reception furnishings wherever the emperor goes must not be decorated with flowers, candles, decorations and other luxury items.

古文：今年已来诸道所进音声女人，各赐束帛放还。
现代文：今年以来各道所进奉的歌女，各赐给礼物放还。
English: Since the beginning of this year, all the female singers who have been dedicated by various schools have been given gifts and released.

古文：城外坟墓先有开劚以备行幸处，宜晓示百姓，任其修塞。
现代文：城外坟地如要开挖道路以备皇上经过，应告知百姓，让其移葬。
English: If a road is to be dug in a cemetery outside the city in preparation for the emperor's passing, the people should be informed and allowed to move the burial.

古文：其大逆魁首苏佐明等二十八人，并已处斩，宗族籍没。
现代文：叛乱首犯苏佐明等二十八人，已全部斩死，其宗族人口财物全部没收入官。
English: Twenty-eight people, including the first offender of the rebellion, Su Zaming, have all been beheaded, and all of their family members, property and belongings have been confiscated.

古文：妖妄僧惟贞、道士赵归真等或假于卜筮，或托以医方，疑众挟邪，已从流窜。
现代文：妖邪和尚惟贞、道士赵归真等假托卜卦巫术或长生不老之药方，造谣惑众，已经流放。
English: The demon and evil monk Wei Zhen and the Taoist priest Zhao Guizhen have been exiled for fabricating rumors and misleading the public with false magic or immortality prescriptions.

古文：其情非奸恶，迹涉诖误者，一切不问。
现代文：其本意如不是邪恶不正，或是误入歧途受人利用的，一概不予处分。
English: If their original intention is not evil or dishonest, or if they go astray and are taken advantage of, they will not be punished at all.

古文：凶徒既殄，寰宇伫康，载举令猷，用弘庶绩。
现代文：罪恶之徒即已消灭，四海康宁，将推行有效的治国之策，以发扬光大国家的各项事业。
English: The evildoers have been eliminated, and Shihai Kangning will implement effective national governance policies to carry forward the various undertakings of the glorious country.

古文：布告中外，知朕意焉。
现代文：特此布告晓谕中外，使天下人都了解我的思想。
English: I hereby make this announcement to the people at home and abroad, so that people all over the world can understand my thoughts.

古文：帝在籓邸，知两朝之积弊，此时厘革，并出宸衷，士民相庆，喜理道之复兴矣。
现代文：皇帝还是江王的时候，就了解穆宗敬宗两朝的弊病，此时改革，既出自皇帝早已抱有的愿望，而官民也共同庆贺法治复兴，国家有希望了。
English: When the emperor was still the king of Jiang, he understood the ills of the two dynasties of Mu Zong and Jing Zong. At this time, the reform came from the emperor's long-held desire, and the government and the people also jointly celebrated the revival of the rule of law. The country has hope.

古文：壬戌，以前江西观察使殷侑为大理卿。
现代文：二十九日，以前任江西观察使殷侑为大理卿。
English: On the 29th, the former leader of Jiangxi observation, Yin Qi, was appointed as the leader of Dali.

古文：大和元年春正月癸亥朔。
现代文：大和元年春正月初一为癸亥日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the first year of the Yamato era was the first day of the year of the boar.

古文：庚午，以御史中丞独孤朗为户部侍郎，以兵部尚书、权判左丞事段文昌为御史大夫。
现代文：初八，以御史中丞独孤朗为户部侍郎，以兵部尚书、暂兼左丞事的段文昌为御史大夫。
English: In the eighth year of his junior high school career, he was assigned to the Household Division as a houseboy, and to the Military Division as a page boy, and temporarily to the Left Division as a page boy.

古文：是夜，月掩毕大星。
现代文：是夜，月亮遮掩毕宿星。
English: It is night, the moon hides behind the host star.

古文：戊寅，以左散骑常侍李益为礼部尚书致仕，以京兆尹刘桂楚为栖管观察使。
现代文：十六日，以左散骑常侍李益为礼部尚书并允其退休回家。以京兆尹刘栖楚为桂管观察使。
English: On the 16th, Li Yi, the left horseback riding attendant, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary and allowed to retire to his home. Jing Zhaoyin Liu Qi Chu was appointed as the Gui Guan observation envoy.

古文：以前户部侍郎于敖为宣歙观察使，代崔群；以群为兵部尚书。
现代文：以前任户部侍郎于敖为宣歙观察使，取代崔群；以崔群为兵部尚书。
English: Formerly, the Household Attendant Yu Qi was appointed as the Xuanqi Observation Envoy, replacing Cui Qun; Cui Qun was appointed as the Hyobusho.

古文：癸未，以吏部侍郎庾承宣为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：二十一日，以吏部侍郎庾承宣为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was appointed to the post of Keizhoin (京兆尹) and Goshi no daibu (御史大夫).

古文：丙申，复置两辅、六雄、十望、十紧三十四州别驾。
现代文：二月初一为癸巳日。初四，对长安、洛阳以及称为六雄的六个州、称为十望的十个州、称为十紧的十个州并其他三十四州重新设置别驾一职。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the second month of the year, Chang'an, Luoyang, and the six prefectures known as the six males, the ten prefectures known as the ten hopes, the ten prefectures known as the ten tightnesses, and the other thirty-four prefectures were re-established.

古文：其诸色在京及内外诸军使等职事，并不在挟名限。
现代文：在京各部门及内外军队、节度等官员名额，均不在限制之列。
English: The number of officials in various departments in Beijing, as well as in and out of the military, festivals, etc., are not included in the restrictions.

古文：己亥，以右散骑常侍、集贤殿学士、判院事张政甫为工部尚书。
现代文：初七，以右散骑常侍、集贤殿学士兼院事张正甫为工部尚书。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Zhang Zhengfu, a right-hand rider, a scholar of Jixian Palace and an academician, was appointed as a member of the engineering department.

古文：辛丑，以前广州节度使崔植为户部尚书，以太子少师、分司东都李绛检校司空，兼太常卿。
现代文：初九，以前任广州节度使崔植为户部尚书，以太子少司、在东都洛阳任职的李绛为检校司空兼太常卿。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Cui Zhi, the former Guangzhou Festival Administrator, was appointed as the head of the household, while Ether Zi, the junior secretary, and Li Wei, who worked in the eastern capital of Luoyang, were appointed as the school inspector and the superintendent.

古文：乙巳，御丹凤楼，大赦，改元大和。
现代文：十三日，皇帝至丹凤楼，大赦天下，改年号为大和。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor went to the Danfeng Building, pardoned the world, and changed the year name to Yamato.

古文：甲寅，敕诸道节度观察使去任日，宜具交割状，仍限新使到任一月分析闻奏，以凭殿最。
现代文：二十二日，诏令诸道节度观察使离任之时，要写出交割文书，把工作移交清楚，并限定新任官员到任后一个月即把工作情况上奏朝廷，以作考核之据。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that when the officials of the various departments of the State Council leave office, they should write a delivery document to clearly transfer the work, and limit the new officials to report the work situation to the Imperial Court one month after taking office, so as to serve as a basis for assessment.

古文：丙辰，以华州刺史钱徽为尚书右丞，以前河阳节度使崔弘礼为华州镇国军使。
现代文：二十四日，以华州刺史钱徽为尚书右丞，以前任河阳节度使崔弘礼为华州镇国军使。
English: On the 24th, with Huazhou chief Qian Hui as Shang Shu Rong, the former commander of the Heyang Festival, Cui Hongli, was appointed as the commander of the Huazhou Town National Army.

古文：己未，以太子少保分司萧俯为检校右仆射，兼礼部尚书。
现代文：二十七日，以在洛阳东都任职的太子少保萧亻免为检校右仆射，兼礼部尚书。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Xiamen, the prince's younger brother, who worked in Luoyang's Dongdu, was appointed as the school's right-hand man, and was also the head of the etiquette department.

古文：以虔州刺史韩约为安南都护。
现代文：二十八日，以虔州刺史韩约为安南都护。
English: On the 28th, Kyeongju, Gyeongsangbuk-do and Gyeongsangbuk-do were placed under the protection of Annam.

古文：三月庚戌朔，右军中尉梁守谦请致仕，以枢密使王守澄代。
现代文：三月初一为壬戌日，右军中尉梁守谦上书请求退职回乡，诏以枢密使王守澄代理。
English: On the first day of March, the Day of the Dragon, Liang Shouqian, a lieutenant of the Right Army, sent a letter requesting to retire and return to his hometown, with the imperial envoy Wang Shouchen acting as his deputy.

古文：戊寅，以前苏州刺史白居易为秘书监，仍赐金紫。
现代文：十七日，以前任苏州刺史白居易为秘书监，并赐紫金鱼袋。
English: On the 17th, Bai Juyi, the former Suzhou chief secretary, was appointed as the secretary supervisor, and was given a purple goldfish bag.

古文：壬午，幽州李载义奏故张弘靖判官家属凡一百九十人，并送赴阙。
现代文：二十一日，幽州李载义上奏：已故判官张弘靖的家属共一百九十人，全部送至京城。
English: On the 21st, Yuzhou Li Zaiyi reported: A total of one hundred and ninety family members of the late judge Zhang Hongjing were sent to Beijing.

古文：四月壬辰朔。
现代文：四月初一为壬辰日。
English: The first day of April is Imjin Day.

古文：癸巳，以太子少傅杨于陵守右仆射致仕，俸料全给。
现代文：初二，以太子少傅杨於陵署理右仆射一职并退职还乡，正式和附加俸禄全数照发。
English: On the second day of the new school year, Yang, the younger brother of Tai Zi, was appointed as the right-hand man of the Mausoleum Department and retired to his hometown. The official and additional salaries were paid in full.

古文：甲午，凤翔筑临汧城于汧阳县西北八十里。
现代文：初三，凤翔府在氵开阳县西北八十里处修筑临氵开城。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Fengxiang Prefecture built Linyi Kaicheng in the northwest eighty miles of Linyi Kaiyang County.

古文：壬寅，毁升阳殿东放鸭亭；戊申，毁望仙门侧看楼十间：并敬宗所造也。
现代文：十一日，将升阳殿东边的放鸭亭拆毁；十七日，将望仙门侧边的看楼十间也拆毁，这都是敬宗时建造的。
English: On the eleventh day, the duck-hunting pavilion on the east side of the Rising Sun Hall was demolished; on the seventeenth day, the ten watchtowers on the side of the Wangxian Gate were also demolished, all of which were built by Keizong.

古文：以前亳州刺史张遵为邕管经略使。
现代文：以前亳州刺史张遵为邕管经略使。
English: Formerly, Zhang Zun, the chief historian of Zhangzhou, was a minor official of the Shandong Provincial Government.

古文：乙卯，以礼部尚书萧俯为太子少师分司。
现代文：二十四日，以礼部尚书萧亻免为太子少司并在东都洛阳任职。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Xiao Yimeng was appointed as the Prince's Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies and served in the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：己未，忠武军节度使王沛卒。
现代文：二十八日，忠武军节度使王沛去世。
English: On the 28th, Wang Pei passed away after the loyal military festival.

古文：庚申，以太仆卿高瑀检校左散骑常侍，充忠武军节度。
现代文：二十九日，以太仆卿高王禹为检校左散骑常侍，兼任忠武军节度使。
English: On the 29th, Gao Wang Yu, the servant of Ether, was the left rider of the inspection of the school, and also served as the commander of the loyal troops.

古文：己巳，贬山南东道节度副使李续为涪州刺史，山南东道行军司马张又新为汀州刺史，李逢吉党也。
现代文：三十日，贬山南东道节度副使李续为涪州刺史，贬山南东道行军司马张又新为汀州刺史，此二人皆李逢吉的党羽。
English: On the 30th, Li Jian, the deputy envoy of the South Shanshan Host Festival, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Ma Zhang, the secretary of the South Shanshan Host Marching Army, was newly appointed as the governor of Tingzhou. Both of them were party members of Li Fengji.

古文：五月壬戌朔。
现代文：五月初一为壬戌日。
English: The first day of May is the Day of the Raven.

古文：戊辰，诏： 元首股肱，君臣象类，义深同体，理在坦怀。
现代文：初七，皇帝诏曰 ：头颅和股骨，如同君臣一样，其意义是同为一体，其道理是相互真诚。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor decreed: "The skull and the femur, like the sovereign and the vassal, are one and the same, and the reason is mutual sincerity."

古文：夫任则不疑，疑则不任。
现代文：用人不疑人，疑人不用人。
English: Those who employ people do not suspect them, those who suspect people do not employ them.

古文：然自魏、晋已降，参用霸制，虚议搜索，因习尚存。
现代文：然而自魏晋以来，多半推行暴政，上下都虚情假意，这陋习至今尚存。
English: However, since the Wei and Jin dynasties, most of them have been tyrannical, and everyone is full of hypocrisy, and this bad habit still exists today.

古文：朕方推表大信，置人心腹，庶使诸侯方岳，鼓洽道化，夷貊飞走，暢泳治功。
现代文：现在我将推心置腹，诚信待人，以使各军政大员得以感恩同道，四方邻邦，也歌功颂德。
English: Now I will put my heart and soul into treating people with integrity, so that all military and political leaders can be grateful to the same path, neighbors in all directions, and also sing the praises of merit.

古文：况吾台宰，又何间焉。
现代文：而我与宰相之间，更无隔阂。
English: And between me and the Prime Minister, there is no separation.

古文：自今已后，紫宸坐朝，众僚既退，宰臣复进奏事，其监搜宜停。 
现代文：从今往后，在紫宸殿坐朝时，众官退朝后，宰相当再进殿议事，御史不得搜查。 
English: From now on, when the imperial court is in the Shishinden, after the officials have left the court, the vizier is to re-enter the court for deliberation, and the imperial records are not to be searched.

古文：丙子，以天平军节度使、守司徒、同中书门下平章事乌重胤为横海军节度使；以前摄横海军节度副使、检校国子祭酒、侍御史李同捷检校左散骑常侍，兼兗州刺史，充兗海沂密等州节度使。
现代文：十五日，以天平军节度使、兼司徒、同中书门下平章事乌重胤为横海军节度使；以前任暂代横海军节度副使、检校国子祭酒、侍御史李同捷为检校左散骑常侍，兼任兖州刺史，并充任兖、海、沂、密等州节度使。
English: On the 15th, Wu Shigetian, who was the Tianping Army's festival envoy, and also a scholar, and Wu Shigetian, who was a disciple of the same school, became the horizontal navy's festival envoy; Li Tongjie, who was previously the interim vice-envoy of the horizontal navy's festival, the school-checking national son's festival wine, and the attendant historian, became the school-checking left horseback rider's regular attendant, and also served as the state's stabbing historian, and also served as the state's festival envoy for Min, Hai, Min, and My.

古文：就加魏博史宪诚同平章事。
现代文：并加魏博、史宪诚同平章事。
English: And add Wei Bo, Shi Xiancheng and Tongping Zhang.

古文：甲申，淮南节度、盐铁、转运等使王播来朝。
现代文：二十三日，淮南节度、盐铁、转运等使王播来京入朝。
English: On the 23rd, the Huainan Festival, salt, iron, and transportation brought Wang Bo to Beijing to enter the imperial court.

古文：丙戌夜，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：二十五日夜，火星冲犯右执法星。
English: On the night of the 25th, Mars will collide with the right law enforcement planet.

古文：六月辛卯朔，敕文武常参官朝参不到，据料钱多少，每贯罚二十五文。
现代文：六月初一为辛卯日，诏令定时入朝的官员到时不至，则将附加俸禄按每贯罚二十五文以示惩处。
English: The first day of the first month of June is the Xinwu Day, and if the officials who enter the DPRK at the time specified in the edict do not arrive on time, they will be punished with an additional salary at a penalty of 25 mon per hour.

古文：癸巳，以淮南节度副大使、知节度事、管内营田观察处置临海监牧等使，兼诸道盐铁转运等使、银青光禄大夫、检校司空、同中书门下平章事、扬州大都督府长史、上柱国、太原县开国伯、食邑七百户王播可尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，依前充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：初三，以淮南节度副大使、主持节度事、辖区内屯田观察处置临海监牧等使，兼诸道盐铁转运等使、银青光禄大夫、检校司空、同中书门下平章事、扬州大都督府长史、上柱国、太原县开国伯、食邑七百户王播为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，并仍任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was appointed as the deputy ambassador of Huainan Festival, presided over the festival affairs, and supervised and disposed of the coastal supervision and pastoral affairs in the area under his jurisdiction. He was also appointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation in various provinces, the doctor of Yinqing Guanglu, the inspector of the school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the governor of Yangzhou, the governor of Shangzhu Province, the governor of Taiyuan County, and the king of the seven hundred households in the food village. He was also appointed as the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school,

古文：以御史大夫段文昌代播为淮南节度使。
现代文：以御史大夫段文昌代王播为淮南节度使。
English: Wang Bo, acting on behalf of the Grand Historian Duan Wenchang, served as the envoy to the Huainan Festival.

古文：丙申，左司郎中、兼侍御史知杂温造权知御史中丞。
现代文：初六，以左司郎中、兼侍御史知杂温造代理主持御史中丞事。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Satoshi Chizoyama, a junior high school teacher, and Satoshi Chizoyama, a waiter, acted as acting headmaster of the junior high school.

古文：癸卯，诏： 元和、长庆中，皆因用兵，权以济事，所下制敕，难以通行。
现代文：十三日，诏： 元和、长庆年代期间，总是通过战争，才能暂时维持局面，而朝廷所下的命令，很难贯彻执行。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict: During the Yuan and Changqing dynasties, it was always through war that the situation could be temporarily maintained, and the orders issued by the imperial court were difficult to implement.

古文：宜令尚书省取元和已来制敕，参详删定讫，送中书门下议定奏。 
现代文：所以令尚书省将元和年间以来的所有诏令，参照删定后，送中书门下商议并做出决定，一并奏知。 
English: Therefore, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was ordered to submit all the imperial decrees since the Yuan Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, after reference and deletion, to the Chinese Academy of Letters for discussion and decision.

古文：甲寅，以旱放系囚。
现代文：二十四日，因天旱而清理积案审理释放了一些在押囚犯。
English: On the 24th, due to the drought, the backlog of cases was cleared and some prisoners were released.

古文：七月辛酉朔。
现代文：七月初一为辛酉日。
English: The first day of July is a very busy day.

古文：癸亥，太常卿李绛进封魏国公。
现代文：初三，下诏封太常卿李绛为魏国公。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong conferred the title of Grand Duke of Wei on Li Xi.

古文：李同捷除兗、海，不受诏，结幽镇谋叛。
现代文：诏令李同捷为兖海节度使，李同捷拒不从令，反而勾结幽、镇二地之军叛乱。
English: The emperor ordered Li Tongjie to be the envoy of the Bohai Festival. Li Tongjie refused to obey the order, but instead colluded with Yu and the army of the two towns to rebel.

古文：癸酉，葬敬宗于庄陵。
现代文：十三日，葬敬宗于庄陵。
English: On the 13th, the funeral was held for Zong in the mausoleum.

古文：辛巳，敕今年权于东都置举。
现代文：二十一日，诏令今年科举暂且在洛阳举行。
English: On the 21st, it was decreed that this year's Science Fair would be held in Luoyang for the time being.

古文：徐州王智兴请全军讨李同捷。
现代文：徐州的王智兴奏请倾其全军讨伐李同捷。
English: Wang Zhixing of Xuzhou asked his whole army to fight against Li Tongjie.

古文：八月庚寅朔，以工部侍郎独孤朗为福建观察使，以太府卿裴弘泰为黔中经略使、观察使。
现代文：八月初一为庚寅日，以工部侍郎独孤朗为福建观察使，以太府卿裴弘泰为黔中经略使、观察使。
English: On the first day of August, Geng Yin Day, the Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Du Guolang, was appointed as the Fujian Observer, and the Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Pei Hongtai, was appointed as the Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports and the Observer.

古文：左仆射致仕杨于陵让全给俸料，许之。
现代文：退职后的右仆射杨於陵奏请减去全部附加俸禄，皇上同意。
English: After retiring, his right-hand man, Sho Yang, requested that the entire additional salary be deducted for his performance at the mausoleum. The emperor agreed.

古文：庚子，诏削夺李同捷在身官爵，复以张茂宗为兗、海、沂、密节度使。
现代文：十一日，诏令免除李同捷所担任的全部官爵，重新任命张茂宗为兖、海、沂、密节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict exempted all titles and ranks held by Li Tongjie, and reappointed Zhang Maozong as the envoy to the states of Qi, Hai, Qi, and My.

古文：辛丑，邠宁节度使高承简卒。
现代文：十二日，宁节度使高承简去世。
English: On the 12th, Ning Jiedu caused Gao Chengjian to pass away.

古文：壬寅，以刑部尚书柳公绰检校左仆射，充邠宁节度使。
现代文：十三日，以刑部尚书柳公绰为检校左仆射，并充任宁节度使。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Shang Shuliu Gongpo of the Criminal Law Department as the left-hand man of the inspection of the school, and appointed Ning Jiedu as the envoy.

古文：戊申，以谏议大夫张仲方为福建观察使。
现代文：十九日，以谏议大夫张仲方为福建观察使。
English: On the 19th, Dr. Zhang Zhongfang was appointed as the Fujian Observer.

古文：癸丑，前福建观察使独孤朗卒。
现代文：二十四日，前任福建观察使独孤朗去世。
English: On the 24th, the predecessor of Fujian Observation died.

古文：九月庚申朔。
现代文：九月初一为庚申日。
English: The first day of September is Koshin day.

古文：癸亥，以左神军将军、知军事何文哲为鄜、坊、丹、延节度使。
现代文：初四，以左神策军将军、主持军队工作的何文哲为、坊、丹、延等州节度使。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, He Wenzhe, who was the general of the Zuo Sheng Army and presided over the work of the army, was appointed as the provincial festival envoy for the provinces of Fang, Dan and Yan.

古文：甲戌，以左神策军、知军事李泳为单于都护，充振武、麟胜节度使。
现代文：十五日，以左神策大将军、主持军队工作的李泳为单于都护，并充任振武、麟、胜节度使。
English: On the 15th, General Zuo Shenze and Li Yong, who presided over the work of the army, were sent to protect the capital, and served as Zhenwu, Lin, and Sheng.

古文：丁丑，浙西观察使李德裕、浙东观察使元稹就加检校礼部尚书。
现代文：十八日，诏加浙西观察使李德裕、浙东观察使元稹为检校礼部尚书。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Li Deyu, the inspector of West Zhejiang Province, and Yuan Qi, the inspector of East Zhejiang Province, came to inspect the school.

古文：壬午，桂管观察使刘栖楚卒。
现代文：二十三日，桂管观察使刘栖楚去世。
English: On the 23rd, Gui Guan's observation caused Liu Qiuchu's death.

古文：丙戌，以谏议大夫萧裕为桂管观察使。
现代文：二十七日，以谏议大夫萧裕为桂管观察使。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Yu, a medical doctor, was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：癸丑，兗州复置莱芜县。
现代文：十月初一为己丑日。十五日，兖州重新设置莱芜县。
English: The first day of October is the Ugly Duckling Day. On the 15th, Luzhou re-established Laiwu County.

古文：十一月己未朔。
现代文：十一月初一为己未日。
English: The first day of November is just around the corner.

古文：丙申，河中薛平奏虞乡县有白虎入灵峰观。
现代文：初二，河中节度使薛平上奏说虞乡县发现白虎跑进灵峰观。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, the mid-river festival made Xue Ping recite that Yu Xiang County found that the white tiger ran into Lingfeng.

古文：天平、横海等军节度使、守司徒，同中书门下平章事乌童胤卒。
现代文：天平、横海等军节度使、守司徒、同中书门下平章事乌重胤去世。
English: Tenpyo, Yokokai, and other military commanders, such as Setsudoshi, Shosito, and Wu Shigetane, who was a subordinate of Shumon, passed away.

古文：庚辰，以保义军节度、晋慈等察处置等使李寰为横海军节度使。
现代文：二十二日，以保义军节度、晋、慈等州观察处置等使李寰为横海军节度使。
English: On the 22nd, with the observation and disposition of the Baoying Volunteer Army Festival, Jin, Cixi and other states, Li Wei was appointed as the horizontal naval festival envoy.

古文：癸巳，以晋州、慈州复隶河中。
现代文：十二月初一为戊子日。初六，将晋州、慈州划归河中。
English: The first day of the first month of December was Bosi Day, and on the sixth day of the first month, Jinzhou and Cizhou were transferred to Hezhong.

古文：癸巳，以左丞钱徽为华州刺史。
现代文：任命左丞钱徽为华州刺史。
English: The appointment of Leo Qianhui as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：丁酉，右金吾卫大将军王公亮为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：初十，任命右金吾卫大将军王公亮为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Wang Gongliang, the general of the Right Jinguwei, was appointed as the Tangzhou chief historian and the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：二年春正月戊午朔。
现代文：大和二年春正月初一为戊午日。
English: The 1st day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Yamato's spring became the 1st day of the 3rd month.

古文：壬申，以右散骑常侍孔戢为京兆尹。
现代文：十五日，以右散骑常侍孔戢为京兆尹。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the right horseback rider and regular attendant, Kong Xi, was appointed as the Keizho Yin.

古文：二月丁亥朔，以兵部侍郎王起为陕虢观察使，代韦弘景；以弘景为尚书左丞。
现代文：二月初一为丁亥日，任命兵部侍郎王起为陕虢观察使，以代替韦弘景；任韦弘景为尚书左丞。
English: The first day of February was Dinghai Day, and Wang Qi, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian to replace Wei Hongjing; Wei Hongjing was appointed as Shangshu Zuojie.

古文：乙己，以刑部侍郎卢元辅为兵部侍郎，秘书监白居易为刑部侍郎。
现代文：十九日，任命刑部侍郎卢元辅为兵部侍郎，秘书监白居易为刑部侍郎。
English: On the 19th, Lu Yuanfu, the Warden of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the Warden of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Guan Bai Juyi, the Secretary, was appointed as the Warden of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：庚戌，敕李绛所进则天太后删定《兆人本业》三卷，宜令所在州县写本散配乡村。
现代文：二十四日，诏令将李绛所进奉武则天太后所删改审定的《兆人本业》三卷，由各州县抄写出来到乡村中去散发。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict ordered that the three volumes of "Trillions of People's Business," which had been censored and revised by Empress Dowager Wu Zetian and introduced by Li Xi, should be copied and distributed to the villages by the states and counties.

古文：三月丁巳朔，度支奏： 京兆府奉先县界卤池侧近百姓，取水柏柴烧灰煎盐，每一石灰得盐一十二斤一两，乱法甚于咸土，请行禁绝。
现代文：三月初一为丁巳日，度支上奏： 京兆府奉先县盐池附近居住的老百姓，擅自将水柏柴烧灰煮盐，计每一石灰可得盐十二斤一两，这种违法行为比破坏盐土的后果还要严重。
English: On the first day of March, which falls on the first day of the third month of the lunar calendar, the following incident occurred: the people who lived near the salt pond in Fengxian County, Beijing Zhao Prefecture, without authorization, boiled the ash of the water cypress wood into salt. Each lime could be used to obtain 12 catties of salt. This illegal act was even more serious than the consequences of destroying the salt soil.

古文：今后犯者据灰计盐，一如两池盐法条例科断。 
现代文：所以，请下令绝对禁止。今后如有谁敢违犯，除以灰之多少计盐之多少外，还按照两池盐法条例依法判刑。 
English: Therefore, please order an absolute ban. In the future, if anyone dares to violate, in addition to the amount of salt in ash, they will be sentenced according to the regulations of the Two Pools of Salt Law.

古文：从之。辛巳，上御宣政殿亲试制策举人。以左散骑常侍冯宿、太常少卿贾餗、库部郎中庞严为考制策官。
现代文：二十五日，皇上至宣政殿亲自考试制策举人，以左散骑常侍冯宿、太常少卿贾饣束、库部郎中庞严为考试制策官。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor went to Xuan Zheng Palace to personally select the exam planners, with the left rider, the regular attendant Feng Shuku, the regular junior secretary Jia Yanzhong, and the treasurer, the junior secretary Pang Yan, as the exam planners.

古文：闰三月丙戌朔，内出水车样，令京兆府造水车，散给缘郑白渠百姓，以溉水田。
现代文：闰三月初一为丙戌日，皇宫内拿出水车式样，令京兆府按样造水车，发给沿郑白渠居住的百姓以灌溉水田之用。
English: On the first day of the third month of the leap year, the imperial palace took out the waterwheel model and ordered the Beijing Zhao Prefecture to build a waterwheel according to the model and issue it to the people living along the Zhengbai Canal for irrigation of paddy fields.

古文：夏四月丙辰朔。
现代文：夏四月初一为丙辰日。
English: In summer, the first day of April falls on the first day of spring.

古文：壬午，以邕管经略使王茂元为容管经略使。
现代文：二十七日，以邕管经略使王茂元为容管经略使。
English: On the 27th, Wang Maoyuan was promoted to the position of vice-minister with the title of vice-minister.

古文：五月乙酉朔。
现代文：五月初一为乙酉日。
English: The first day of May is Acetylene Day.

古文：丁巳，命中使于汉阳公主及诸公主第宣旨： 今后每遇对日，不得广插钗梳，不须著短窄衣服。
现代文：初三，宫中派出使者至汉阳公主及其他公主府中宣读皇帝圣旨：今后每逢日食，头发上不得满插钗、梳等类饰物，也不要穿过短过窄的衣服。
English: On the third day of the first month, the imperial court sent an envoy to Princess Hanyang and other princesses to read the emperor's edict: In the future, whenever there is a solar eclipse, the hair must not be full of braids, combs and other accessories, and do not wear clothes that are too short and too narrow.

古文：乙未，以吏部侍郎丁公著为礼部尚书。
现代文：十一日，以吏部侍郎丁公著为礼部尚书。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the official book of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was published, written by the Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：庚子，敕： 应诸道进奉内库，四节及降诞进奉金花银器并纂组文缬杂物，并折充铤银及绫绢。
现代文：十六日，诏令： 各地进奉给皇宫之物，包括一年中四季及皇上生日所进奉的各类金银器皿饰物和彩锦等杂物，全部折合银两充作军费开支及部分薄绸绢。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict stated that the objects presented to the imperial palace from various regions, including all kinds of gold and silverware, dish ornaments, and miscellaneous items such as brocades presented for the four seasons of the year and the emperor's birthday, were all equivalent to two silver charges for military expenses and some thin silk cocoons.

古文：其中有赐与所须，待五年后续有进止。 
现代文：如有皇上赏赐所需要，待五年后再决定是否仍进呈或免除。 
English: If there is a need for a reward from the emperor, wait five years before deciding whether to present it or waive it.

古文：帝性恭俭，恶侈靡，庶人务敦本，故有是诏。
现代文：皇帝一向奉行节俭，讨厌奢侈，对待臣民注重发展农业等国家根本，所以才颁布了这个诏令。
English: The emperor has always pursued thrift, hated luxury, treated his subjects with attention to the development of agriculture and other national fundamentals, so he issued this edict.

古文：帝与侍讲学士许康佐语及取蚺蛇胆，生剖其腹，为之恻然。
现代文：一次侍讲学士许康佐对皇帝谈到，割取蟒蛇胆，必须是将活蟒蛇的腹部剖开去割取，皇帝听后为之伤感。
English: An attendant lecturer, Xu Kangzao, once told the emperor that to cut a boa constrictor's gall bladder, it was necessary to cut open the abdomen of a live boa constrictor. The emperor was sad to hear this.

古文：乃诏度支曰： 每年供进蚺蛇胆四两，桂州一两、贺州二两、泉州一两，宜于数内减三两，桂、贺、泉三州轮次岁贡一两。 
现代文：于是诏令度支 ：每年向皇宫进奉的蟒蛇胆总共是四两，即桂州一两、贺州二两、泉州一两。从现在开始，减去三两，由桂、贺、泉三州轮流一年进贡一两。 
English: Therefore, the emperor decreed that a total of four yakitori would be sent to the imperial palace each year, namely, one yakitori from Guizhou, two yakitori from Hezhou, and one yakitori from Quanzhou. From now on, subtract three yakitori, and one yakitori from each of the three states of Guizhou, Hezhou, and Quanzhou in turn.

古文：帝自撰集《尚书》中君臣事迹，命画工图于太液亭，朝夕观览焉。
现代文：皇帝将《尚书》中有关贤君忠臣之类的事迹，摘录在一起，还命画工将这些事迹绘成画，画在太液亭上，皇帝早晚都去观看。
English: The emperor took excerpts from "Shang Shu" about the deeds of the wise men and loyal subjects, and ordered the artist to paint these deeds. They were painted on the Taishu Pavilion, and the emperor went to see them both in the morning and in the evening.

古文：王廷凑出兵侵邻籓，欲挠王师，以援李同捷，昭义刘从谏请出军讨之。
现代文：王廷凑派军队去打邻近的藩镇，阻挠朝廷派往讨伐李同捷的军队。昭义节度使刘从谏上奏请出兵讨伐王廷凑。
English: The royal court sent troops to fight the neighboring towns and hamlets to prevent the imperial court from sending troops to fight Li Tongjie. Shao Yi sent Liu Zongjiao to request the dispatch of troops to fight the royal court.

古文：六月乙卯朔，晋王普薨，赠为悼怀太子。
现代文：六月初一为乙卯日，晋王李普去世，诏追赠为悼怀太子。
English: The first day of the first month of June was the second day of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the first month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the first month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second

古文：陈州水，害秋稼。
现代文：陈州暴发洪水，淹没秋季庄稼。
English: Flash floods hit Chenzhou, submerging autumn crops.

古文：癸亥，四方馆请赐印，其文以 中书省四方馆 为名。
现代文：初九，四方馆为其馆印，请皇上下令刻治并赐予，印文当刻 中书省四方馆 数字。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Shifang Museum was given the seal of the museum. The emperor was asked to have it engraved and bestowed. The seal was engraved with the number of the Shifang Museum of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：辛酉，以吏部尚书郑絪为太子少保。
现代文：十九日，以吏部尚书郑纟因为太子少保。
English: On the 19th, Zheng Xuan, who was in charge of the personnel department, was removed from his post because he was a minor prince.

古文：辛巳，以灵武节度使李进诚为邠宁节度使，以天德军使李文悦为灵武节度使。
现代文：二十七日，调灵武节度使李进诚为宁节度使，调天德军使李文悦为灵武节度使。
English: On the 27th, the Lingwu Festival was transferred to make Li Jincheng the Ning Festival envoy, and the German Army was transferred to make Li Wenyue the Lingwu Festival envoy.

古文：乙酉，以前邠宁节度使柳公绰检校左仆射，兼刑部尚书。
现代文：七月初一为乙酉日，以前任宁节度使柳公绰为检校左仆射，兼刑部尚书。
English: The first day of July is the Acetylene Day. Previously, the Ning Festival had appointed Liu Gongqiao as the left-hand man of the school inspection, and he was also a member of the Penal Department.

古文：甲辰，诏宰臣集三署四品已上常参官，议讨王廷凑可否。
现代文：二十日，诏令宰相召集中书、门下、尚书等部门四品衔以上朝官，议论是否讨伐王廷凑。
English: On the 20th, the chancellor issued an imperial edict summoning four imperial officials with the rank of nobility or higher from the departments of central government, subordinate government, and the Imperial Household Agency to discuss whether or not to attack the imperial palace.

古文：是夜，彗西出摄提南，长二尺。
现代文：当夜，有一从西而来的彗星，出现在摄提星南边，光长二尺。
English: That night, a comet from the west appeared to the south of the shooting star, with a light two feet long.

古文：八月申寅朔。
现代文：八月初一为甲寅日。
English: The first day of August is "Kotora Day."

古文：丁巳，以兵部侍郎卢元辅为华州镇国军使，以代钱徽；以徽为吏部尚书致仕。
现代文：初四，调兵部侍郎卢元辅为华州镇国军使，取代钱徽；加钱徽为吏部尚书官职以退休回家。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Lu Yuanfu, the attendant of the military transfer department, was appointed as the national military envoy of Huazhou Town, replacing Qian Hui; Qian Hui was appointed as the official of the personnel department and retired home.

古文：壬戌，京畿奉先等十七县水。
现代文：初九，京城所属奉先等十七县发生水灾。
English: In early September, floods occurred in 17 counties including Bongxian, which belongs to Beijing.

古文：九月甲申朔。
现代文：九月初一为甲申日。
English: The first day of September is the first day of the year.

古文：丁亥，王智兴拔棣州。
现代文：初四，王智兴攻克棣州。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, Wang Zhixing conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：以新除横海军节度使李寰为夏州节度使。
现代文：以刚任命的横海军节度使李寰为夏州节度使。
English: With the newly-appointed Vice-Admiral of the Navy, Li Qian became the Vice-Admiral of the State of Xia.

古文：甲午，诏削夺王迁凑在身官爵，邻道接界随便进讨。
现代文：十一日，诏令免除王廷凑所担任的全部官职，与王廷凑部接壤的部队均可发兵讨伐。
English: On the 11th, the imperial edict exempted Wang Tingpai from all the official positions he held, and the troops bordering Wang Tingpai could send troops to fight.

古文：以前夏州节度使傅良弼为横海军节度使。
现代文：调前任夏州节度使傅良弼为横海军节度使。
English: The transfer of the former Xiazhou Festival made Fu Liangyao the highest-ranking naval festival envoy.

古文：庚戌，安南军乱，逐都护韩约。
现代文：二十七日，安南军队叛乱，叛军将都护韩约驱逐。
English: On the 27th, Annan's army mutinied, and the rebels expelled Tonggu Hanjo.

古文：冬十月癸丑朔。
现代文：十月初一为癸丑日。
English: The first day of October is the Day of the Ugly Goat.

古文：丁巳，罢扬州海陵监牧。
现代文：初五，罢免扬州海陵监牧。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Yangzhou Hailing Supervisor was dismissed.

古文：以户部尚书崔植为华州刺史、镇国军使。
现代文：以户部尚书崔植为华州刺史、镇国军使。
English: Choe Seok, the head of the Household Division, was appointed as the governor of Hwaseong Province and the military envoy of the county.

古文：丙寅，岭南节度使胡证卒。
现代文：十四日，岭南节度使胡证去世。
English: On the 14th day of the Lingnan Festival, Hu Zhen passed away.

古文：辛未，以江西观察使李宪为岭南节度使。
现代文：十九日，任命江西观察使李宪为岭南节度使。
English: On the 19th, Jiangxi Observation Envoy Li Xian was appointed as Lingnan Festival Envoy.

古文：癸酉，以尚书右仆射、同平章事窦易直检校左仆射、同平章事，充山南东道节度使、临汉监牧等使，代李逢吉；以逢吉为宣武军节度使，代令狐楚；以楚为户部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，诏命尚书右仆射、同平章事窦易直为检校左仆射、同平章事，并充任山南东道节度使、临汉监牧等使，以取代李逢吉；而以李逢吉为宣武军节度使，以取代令狐楚；以令狐楚为户部尚书。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial edict ordered Shangshu to be the right-hand man of Shao, Tongping to be the left-hand man of Shao, Tongping to be the right-hand man of Tongping, and Li Fengji to be the right-hand man of Shao, and Li Fengji to be the right-hand man of Tongping, and Li Fengji to be the right-hand man of Shao, and Li Fengji to be the right-hand man of Tongping, and Li Fengji to be the right-hand man of Tongping, and Li Fengji to be the right-hand man of Shao, and Li Fengji to be

古文：以右丞沈传师为江西观察使。
现代文：任右丞沈传师为江西观察使。
English: Shen Chuanshi, the right-hand man, was appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：己卯，以河南尹王璠为右丞，以左散骑常侍冯宿为河南尹。
现代文：二十七日，任河南尹王为右丞，任左散骑常侍冯宿为河南尹。
English: On the 27th, Henan Yin Wang was appointed as the right-hand man, and Feng Shuku, the left-hand rider, was appointed as Henan Yin's second in command.

古文：十一月癸未朔。
现代文：十一月初一为癸未日。
English: The first day of the month of November is a leap day.

古文：乙酉，以右金吾卫大将军李祐为横海军节度使，新除傅良弼赴镇，卒于陕州故也。
现代文：初三，任命右金吾卫大将军李为横海节度使，之所以有这个任命，是九月份受任此职的傅良弼在赴任途中病死陕州。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he appointed General Li of the Right-Handed King Wuwei as the envoy of the Henghai Festival. The reason for this appointment was that Fu Liangyao, who was appointed to this post in September, died of illness in Shaanxi on his way to the post.

古文：甲辰，禁中巳时昭德寺火，直宣政殿之东，至午未间，北风起，火势益甚，至暮稍息。
现代文：二十二日，上午十一时左右，昭德寺突发火灾，直冲宣政殿东面，到下午一两点钟时，又刮起了北风，风助火势，火越烧越大，直到傍晚火势才减弱并逐渐被扑灭。
English: On the 22nd, at around 11:00 a.m., a sudden fire broke out in Zhaode Temple and rushed straight to the east of Xuanzheng Hall. By one or two o'clock in the afternoon, the north wind blew again, the wind helped the fire, and the fire grew larger and larger. The fire did not weaken until the evening and was gradually extinguished.

古文：十二月壬子朔。
现代文：十二月初一为壬子日。
English: The first day of December is Minshi Day.

古文：乙丑，魏博行营都知兵马使亓志绍率所部兵马二万人谋叛，欲杀史宪诚父子。
现代文：十四日，魏博行营都知兵马使亓志绍率所部兵马二万人阴谋叛乱，欲杀史宪诚父子。
English: On the 14th, Wei Bo's encampment of all-knowing soldiers and horses led by Zou Zhishao led 20,000 soldiers and horses of the headquarters to plot a rebellion and wanted to kill Shi Xiancheng and his son.

古文：壬申，中书侍郎、同平章事韦处厚暴卒。
现代文：二十一日，中书侍郎、同平章事韦处厚暴死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhongshu's servant, Tongping Zhang Zhiwei, died violently.

古文：戊寅，诏以兵部侍郎、知制诰、充翰林学士路随为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二十七日，诏令兵部侍郎、知制诰、充任翰林学士路随为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that the attendants of the Military Department and the Chisei Shogunate would be transferred to the Hanlin Academy Road, followed by the attendants of the Chusho Shogunate and the Tongbei Shogunate.

古文：三年春正月壬午朔。
现代文：大和三年春正月初一为壬午日。
English: The first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Yamato era is the Jingu day.

古文：丙戌，亓志绍率兵回据永济县，其众分散入诸县邑。
现代文：初五，亓志绍返兵占据永济县，其部队则分散至各县城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Shishao returned to occupy Yongji County, and his troops were dispersed to various counties.

古文：史宪诚告难，诏沧州行营兵士赴之。
现代文：史宪诚告急，诏令沧州行营部队赴援。
English: Shi Xiancheng was in a hurry and ordered the Cangzhou expeditionary force to come to his aid.

古文：丁亥，京兆尹孔戢卒。
现代文：初六，京兆尹孔戢去世。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Jingzhao died.

古文：庚寅，吏部尚书致仕钱徽卒。
现代文：初九，退休在家的原吏部尚书钱徽去世。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, retired former official Shang Shuxu Qianhui passed away at home.

古文：庚子，李听杀败亓志绍兵，志绍北走镇州。
现代文：十九日，李听打败亓志绍的部队，亓志绍率残部北上镇州。
English: On the 19th, Li He listened to and defeated Zou Zhishao's troops, and Zou Zhishao led the remnants north to Zhenzhou.

古文：甲辰，以太常卿李绛检校司空，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：二十三日，任命太常卿李绛为检校司空，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Li Yan, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), as the inspector of schools, and also appointed Xing Yuanyin, the delegate of the Western Shannan Province, as the delegate of the festival.

古文：华州刺史、镇国军潼关防御使崔植卒。
现代文：华州刺史、镇国军潼关防御使崔植去世。
English: The history of Huazhou and the defense of Shaoguan by the Zhenguo Army caused the death of Cui Zhi.

古文：己酉，以前山南西道节度使王涯为太常卿。
现代文：二十八日，命前任山南西道节度使王涯为太常卿。
English: On the 28th, Wang Ya was appointed by the predecessor of the Shannan West Road Festival to be the Tai Changqing.

古文：二月辛亥朔，以兵部尚书崔群为荆南节度使。
现代文：二月初一为辛亥日，任命兵部尚书崔群为荆南节度使。
English: On the first day of February, the day of Xinhai, Shang Shuxu Cui Qun of the Ministry of Military Affairs was appointed as the Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：甲寅，荆南节度使王潜卒。
现代文：初四，荆南节度使王潜去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Wang Qian passed away at the Jingnan Festival.

古文：三月辛巳朔，以户部尚书令狐楚为东都留守。
现代文：三月初一为辛巳日，命户部尚书令狐楚为东都留守。
English: On the first day of March, known as "Hinmei Day," the head of the household department, Shang Shuling, ordered the fox to stay away from the eastern capital.

古文：乙酉，敕兵戈未息，教坊每日祗候乐人宜权停。
现代文：初五，诏令因战争连绵不断，教坊内每天供皇帝赏玩的奏乐、歌舞都暂时停止。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, due to the continuous war, the imperial edict was issued, and the music, songs and dances that the emperor enjoyed every day in the classroom were temporarily suspended.

古文：壬辰，易定节度使柳公济卒。
现代文：十二日，易定节度使柳公济去世。
English: On the twelfth day, Yi Ding died.

古文：以前东都留守崔从为户部尚书。
现代文：令前任东都留守崔从为户部尚书。
English: The former Dongdu left Cui Cong as the head of the household.

古文：夏四月庚午，王智兴奏部下将石雄摇扇军情，请行朝典，乃长流白州。
现代文：夏四月初一为庚戌日，王智兴奏报部下将领石雄谎报军情，动摇军心，请按朝廷法则制度给予制裁。乃将石雄长期流放白州。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Geng Zi's birthday, Wang Zhixing sent a message to the commander of the newspaper, Shi Xiong, saying that he had lied about the military situation and shaken the military spirit, and asked him to impose sanctions according to the imperial court's legal system. Instead, he exiled Shi Xiong to Baizhou for a long time.

古文：五月己卯朔。
现代文：五月初一为己卯日。
English: The first day of May is a holiday.

古文：甲申，柏耆斩李同捷于将陵，沧景平，李祐入沧州。
现代文：初六，柏耆在将陵县杀死李同捷，沧景之地的叛乱全部平息，李入沧州。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Baodi killed Li Tongjie in Jialing County, the rebellion in Cangjing County was completely quelled, and Li entered Cangzhou.

古文：丁亥，御兴安楼，受沧州所献。
现代文：初九，皇上至兴安楼，接受沧州的进奉。
English: In the early 9th century, Emperor Zhi Xingan Lou accepted the envoys from Cangzhou.

古文：李祐送李同捷母、妻及男元达等赴阙，诏并宥之，令于湖南安置。
现代文：李送李同捷的母亲、妻子及儿子李元达到京，诏令宽大处理，令送到湖南安置居住。
English: Li sent Li Tongjie's mother, wife and son, Li Yuan, to Beijing, where he was treated leniently and sent to live in Hunan Province.

古文：贬沧德宣慰使、谏议大夫柏耆循州司户，宣慰判官、殿中侍御史沈亚之虔州南康尉，以擅入沧州取李同捷，诸镇所怒，奏论之也。
现代文：贬沧德宣慰使、谏议大夫柏耆为循州司户；贬宣慰判官、殿中侍殿史沈亚之虔州南康尉。这是因为柏、沈二人擅入沧州捕捉李同捷，引起诸镇不满，纷纷上奏，所以有这次贬谪事。
English: This was because the two men, Bao and Shen, had entered Cangzhou without permission to capture Li Tongjie, which caused discontent in the towns and was reported one after another, so there was this scandal.

古文：丙申，横海军节度使李祐卒。
现代文：十八日，横海军节度使李去世。
English: On the 18th, during the Navy Day holiday, Li passed away.

古文：以泾原节度使李岵为齐、德等州节度使，改名有裕。
现代文：调任泾原节度使李岵为齐、德等州节度使，改名为李有裕。
English: He was transferred to the post of the chief of the Shenyuan Festival, which made him the same as the chief of the German and other state festivals, and changed his name to Li Youyu.

古文：丁酉，以前义武军节度使傅毅为沧州刺史、横海军节度使。
现代文：十九日，任前任义武军节度使傅毅为沧州刺史、横海军节度使。
English: On the 19th, Fu Yi, who was appointed as the previous commander of the Volunteer Army, was appointed as the commander of the Cangzhou Military History and the Cangzhou Naval History.

古文：辛丑，以右金吾卫大将军张惟清检校司空，充泾原节度使；以左金吾卫大将军刘遵古为邠宁节度使。
现代文：二十三日，任命右金吾卫大将军张惟清为检校司空，充任泾原节度使；任命左金吾卫大将军刘遵古为宁节度使。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Zhang Weiqing, General of the Right-Handed King Wuwei, as the inspector of the school, and appointed him as the delegate of the Gongyuan Festival; and appointed Liu Zungu, General of the Left-Handed King Wuwei, as the delegate of the Ning Festival.

古文：六月己酉朔。
现代文：六月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of June is a national holiday.

古文：辛亥，以魏博节度使史宪诚检校司徒、兼侍中、河中尹，充河中晋绛节度使；以义成军节度使李听兼充魏博节度使；以魏博节度副使、检校工部尚书史孝章为相卫节度使。
现代文：初三，任命魏博节度使史宪诚为检校司徒、兼侍中、河中尹，并充任河中、晋、绛节度使；命义成军节度使李听兼任魏博节度使；任命魏博节度副使、检校工部尚书史孝章为相卫节度使。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the Wei Bo Festival appointed Shi Xiancheng as the inspector of the school, and also the attendant, and Kechu Yin, and also served as the inspector of the school in Kechu, Jin and Zou; the Yi Chengjun Festival appointed Li Xun as the inspector of the school in Wei Bo; the Wei Bo Festival appointed the deputy inspector of the school in Wei Bo, and appointed the inspector of the school in Shangshushi and Xiaozhang as the inspector of the school in Xiangbei.

古文：壬申，敕： 元和四年敕禁铅锡皆纳官，许人纠告，一钱赏百钱，此为太过。
现代文：二十四日，诏告： 元和四年下诏禁止制造和使用铅锡钱，如发现，则全部没收，并要求知情人检举揭发，如属实，则没收一文钱奖赏检举人一百文钱，这条法则太过分了。
English: On the 24th, the edict announced: The edict under the Yuan and the Four-Year Edict prohibits the manufacture and use of lead and tin money, and if found, all of it will be confiscated, and requires insiders to report and expose, and if it is true, it will confiscate one penny and reward the whistleblower with one hundred pennies. This rule is too excessive.

古文：此后以铅锡钱交易者，一贯以下，州府常行杖决脊杖二十；十贯以下决六十，徒三年；过十贯已上，集众决杀。
现代文：今后如发现用铅锡钱进行交易的，钱在一贯以下，州府按已制定的法律判打背脊二十杖；一贯以上十贯以下打六十杖，并服劳役三年；超过十贯以上的，集中起来处死。
English: In the future, if anyone is found to have traded with lead and tin money, and the money is less than one rupee, the state government shall, in accordance with the laws that have been formulated, sentence him to beat his spine with twenty rods; if it is more than ten rupees but less than ten rupees, he shall be sentenced to beat his spine with sixty rods and serve three years of forced labor; if it is more than ten rupees, he shall be collectively sentenced to death.

古文：能纠告者，一贯赏钱五十文。 
现代文：对检举人，则按一贯钱赏五十文的比例奖赏。 
English: Whistleblowers will be rewarded at the usual rate of 50 mon.

古文：秋七月己卯朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为己卯日。
English: The first day of autumn and the first day of July are the same day.

古文：癸未，中使刘弘逸送史宪诚旌节自魏州还，称六月二十六日夜，魏博军乱，杀史宪诚，立大将何进滔为留后，其新节度使李听入城不得。
现代文：初五，宫廷使者刘弘逸将史宪诚的节度使的旌节从魏州送回，并说六月二十六日夜，魏博军队叛乱，杀死史宪诚，拥立大将何进滔为留后，将新任节度使李听拒之城外。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, Liu Hongyi, an emissary of the imperial court, sent back from Weizhou the imperial edict sent by Shi Xiancheng, and said that on the night of June 26, the Weibo army rebelled, killed Shi Xiancheng, supported General He Jintao, and kept the newly appointed imperial edict out of the city.

古文：乙丑，河中节度使薛平依前河中节度使。
现代文：十一日，河中节度使薛平依旧担任河中节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the mid-river festival made Xue Ping still serve as the mid-river festival envoy.

古文：乙未，岭南节度使李宪卒。兵部侍郎卢元辅卒。
现代文：十七日，岭南节度使李宪去世；兵部侍郎卢元辅去世。
English: On the 17th day of the Lingnan Festival, Li Xian passed away; Lu Yuanfu, the secretary of the military department, passed away.

古文：丁酉，以京兆尹崔护为御史大夫、广南节度使。
现代文：十九日，任命京兆尹崔护为御史大夫、广南节度使。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Jingzhao Yin Cui Mo as the chief historian and Guangnan festival envoy.

古文：戊戌，以大理卿李谅为京兆尹。
现代文：二十日，任大理卿李谅为京兆尹。
English: On the 20th, Li Peng was appointed as the Prime Minister and Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：乙巳，以礼部尚书、翰林侍讲学士丁公著检校户部尚书，兼润州刺史，充浙江西道观察使；以前浙西观察使、检校礼部尚书李德裕为兵部侍郎。
现代文：二十七日，以礼部尚书、翰林侍讲学士丁公著为检校户部尚书、兼润州刺史、充任浙江西道观察使；以前任浙西观察使、检校礼部尚书李德裕为兵部侍郎。
English: On the 27th, with the official report of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the official report of the Hanlin Attendant Lecturer Ding Gong as the official report of the inspection of the school and the history of Runzhou, he served as the observer of the West Zhejiang Province; Li Deyu, the former observer of the West Zhejiang Province and the official report of the inspection of the school, served as the attendant of the military department.

古文：辛亥，魏博何进滔奏：准诏割相、卫三州，三军不受。
现代文：八月初一为戊申日。初四，魏博何进滔上奏，同意诏令所说割出相、卫三州，但军队将士不接受这个诏令。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of August, Wei Bo He Jin gave a speech in which he agreed with the imperial edict to carve out three states, but the soldiers did not accept the imperial edict.

古文：壬子，诏以魏博衙内都知兵马使何进滔检校左散骑常侍，充魏博节度使。
现代文：初五，诏令任魏博衙内都知兵马使何进滔为检校左散骑常侍，充任魏博节度使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict appointed He Jintao, the military commander of Wei Bo and Inner Mongolia, as the attendant of the inspection of the left horseback, and he served as the Wei Bo festival envoy.

古文：癸丑，以卫尉卿殷侑检校工部尚书，为齐德沧节度使。
现代文：初六，以卫尉卿殷侑为检校工部尚书，并为齐、德、沧节度使。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, the inspector of the school inspection department was Weifeiqing Yinqi, and he was the chief inspector of Qi, De and Cang.

古文：辛酉，京畿、奉先等九县旱，损田。
现代文：十四日，京城所属奉先等九县发生旱灾，损害庄稼。
English: On the 14th, a drought occurred in nine counties including Fengxian, which belongs to Beijing, damaging crops.

古文：播州流人卫中行卒，宋、亳水害稼。
现代文：流放到播州的卫中行去世。宋、亳二地发生水害，损害庄稼。
English: Wei Zhongxing, who was exiled to Banzhou, died. Floods occurred in Song and Jiuyuan, damaging crops.

古文：壬申，诏雪王廷凑，复官爵。
现代文：二十五日，下诏对王廷凑平反昭雪，恢复其官爵。
English: On the 25th, the emperor issued an edict against Wang Pingping, restoring his official title.

古文：甲戌，以吏部侍郎李宗闵同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，任命吏部侍郎李宗闵为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Li Zongyao, an attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the second-ranking official of the same school.

古文：九月戊寅朔。
现代文：九月初一为戊寅日。
English: The first day of September is "Wu Yin Day."

古文：辛巳，敕两军、诸司、内官不得著纱縠绫罗等衣服。
现代文：初四，诏令京城两军、诸司、内官不得穿绉纱、绫罗等衣服。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued ordering the two armies in the capital, their officers, and officials not to wear clothes made of embroidered fabric or silk.

古文：帝性俭素，不喜华侈。
现代文：皇帝崇尚俭朴，不喜华丽奢侈。
English: The emperor advocated thrift and simplicity, and disliked pomp and luxury.

古文：驸马韦处仁戴夹罗巾，帝谓之曰： 比慕卿门地清素，以之选尚。
现代文：驸马韦处仁戴夹罗巾，皇帝对他说： 当年经比较，觉得你家有俭朴的传统，所以把公主嫁给你。
English: The emperor said to him, "Back then, I thought your family had a tradition of frugality, so I married the princess to you.

古文：如此巾服，从他诸戚为之。
现代文：但这样的头巾和衣服，让别的王公大臣去穿戴好了，惟独不适合于你。 
English: But such a turban and dress, let other princes and ministers wear it, but it is not suitable for you.

古文：唯卿非所宜也。 壬辰，以兵部侍郎李德裕检校永部尚书，兼滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：十五日，以兵部侍郎李德裕为检校户部尚书，兼滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: On the 15th, Li Deyu, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the inspector of the school's household department, and also served as the secretary of the history of Nanzhou and the festival of the Yicheng Army.

古文：戊戌，以前睦州刺史陆亘为越州刺史、浙东观察使，代元稹；以稹为尚书左丞，代韦弘景；以弘景为礼部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，任命前任睦州刺史陆亘为越州刺史、浙东观察使，以取代元稹；任命元稹为尚书左丞，以取代韦弘景；任命韦弘景为礼部尚书。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he appointed the predecessor of Mutsuzhou Sashih Lu Wai as Yuezhou Sashih and East Zhejiang Observation Envoy to replace Yuan Shao; appointed Yuan Shao as Shangshu Zuo, to replace Wei Hongjing; appointed Wei Hongjing as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：冬十月戊申朔。
现代文：冬十月初一为戊申日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is Boshin Day.

古文：己酉，江西沈传师奏：皇帝诞月，请为僧尼起方等戒坛。
现代文：初二，江西沈传师上奏：皇帝诞辰的那一个月，请在各地为僧尼兴建戒坛。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Jiangxi Shen Chuanshi recited: In the month of the emperor's birthday, please build altars for monks and nuns in various regions.

古文：诏曰： 不度僧尼，累有敕命。
现代文：诏曰 ：为不同意百姓出家为僧尼，朝廷已多次下过敕令。
English: The edict said: "The Imperial Court has repeatedly issued imperial decrees in order to prevent people from becoming monks and nuns.

古文：传师忝为籓守，合奉诏条，诱致愚妄，庸非理道，宜罚一月俸料。 
现代文：沈传师作为地方长官，却愚昧荒诞，真无道理，罚减去一个月的附加俸禄。 
English: Shen Chuanshi, as a local magistrate, is stupid and absurd, it is unreasonable, the penalty is reduced by one month's additional salary.

古文：丙辰，以前义成军节度使李听为太子少师。
现代文：初九，以前任义成军节度使李听为太子少师。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li He, who had previously been appointed as the military governor of Yicheng, became the prince's junior teacher.

古文：癸亥，以户部侍郎崔元略为户部尚书、判度支。
现代文：十六日，任户部侍郎崔元略为户部尚书、兼度支。
English: On the 16th, Choi Won-ryu, who was appointed as the steward of the household, became the head of the household and also the branch secretary.

古文：以中书舍人韦辞为湖南观察使。
现代文：任命中书舍人韦辞为湖南观察使。
English: Wei Shushe Ren resigned from the post of Hunan Observation Envoy.

古文：十一月丁丑朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丁丑日。
English: The first day of November is Dingwu Day.

古文：庚辰，太子太傅郑絪卒。
现代文：初四，太子太傅郑纟因去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the crown prince Taifu Zheng Yao passed away.

古文：丙戌，敕前亳州刺史李繁于京兆府赐死。
现代文：初十，诏令前任亳州刺史李繁在京兆府自尽。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Li Xiang, the former governor of Zhangzhou, was ordered to commit suicide in Beijing.

古文：甲申，帝亲祀昊天上帝于南郊，礼毕，御丹凤门，大赦。
现代文：十八日，皇帝亲至南郊祭天，仪礼结束，回到丹凤门，大赦天下。
English: On the 18th, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to hold a divine service. After the ceremony, he returned to the Danfeng Gate to grant a general amnesty to the world.

古文：节文禁止奇贡，云： 四方不得以新样织成非常之物为献，机杼纤丽若花丝布缭绫之类，并宜禁断。
现代文：诏令为节制开支禁止进贡珍奇之物，诏曰： 各地不得以新式花样织成新奇之物进贡。凡织布机所织艳丽的花丝布、缭绫之类，全部禁止。
English: In order to control expenses, the Imperial Edict prohibited the payment of tribute to rare and unusual items. The Imperial Edict said, "Everywhere, it is prohibited to pay tribute to new and unusual items woven with new patterns. All colorful silk fabrics, daisies and the like woven by looms are prohibited."

古文：敕到一月，机杼一切焚弃。
现代文：诏令到达之日一月之内，将织布机全部焚毁。
English: Within one month of the arrival of the edict, all the looms were burned.

古文：刺史分忧，得以专达。
现代文：各地刺史应与皇上分忧，所以特地单独告知。
English: Each region's history should be separate from the emperor's, so it was specially announced separately.

古文：事有违法，观察使然后奏闻。 
现代文：如出现违令事项，观察使要马上奏报。 
English: If there is a violation of the order, the observation should be reported immediately.

古文：丙申，西川奏南诏蛮入寇。
现代文：二十日，西川奏报南诏国军队入侵。
English: On the 20th, Saikawa reported the invasion of Nanzhao's army.

古文：甲辰，王智兴来朝。
现代文：二十八日，王智兴来京入朝。
English: On the 28th, Wang Zhixing came to Beijing to enter the imperial court.

古文：乙巳，以智兴守太傅，依前平章事、武宁军节度使，进封雁门郡王。
现代文：二十九日，任命王智兴为太傅，依旧担任平章事、武宁军节度使，并晋封雁门郡王。
English: On the 29th, Wang Zhixing was appointed as Taifu, and still served as Pingzhangji, Wu Ning Army Festival Envoy, and was promoted to the king of Ganmen County.

古文：十二月丁未朔，南蛮逼戎州，遣使起荆南、鄂岳、襄邓、陈许等道兵赴援蜀川。
现代文：十二月初一为丁未日，南诏军队逼近戎州，朝廷派人带领荆南、鄂岳、襄邓、陈许等道军队赶赴蜀川增援。
English: On the first day of December, the Nanzhao army approached Eonju, and the imperial court sent people to lead the armies of Jingnan, Ege, Xiangdong, Chen Xu and other provinces to rush to the Shu River for reinforcement.

古文：以剑南东川节度使郭钊为西川节度使，仍权东川事。
现代文：任命剑南东川节度使郭钊为西川节度使，仍代理东川节度使工作。
English: Jiannan Dongchuan Section Chief Guo Qi was appointed as the West River Section Chief, and he is still acting as the East River Section Chief.

古文：壬子，贬剑南西川节度使杜元颖为韶州刺史。遣中使杨文端赍诏赐南蛮王蒙丰佑。
现代文：初六，贬剑南西川节度使杜元颖为韶州刺史，派宫廷使者杨文端将皇帝的诏书送与南蛮王蒙丰佑。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the South West River Festival made Du Yuanying the prince of Zhangzhou, and he sent the court envoy Yang Wentuan to deliver the emperor's edict to the king of Nanban, Meng Fengyou.

古文：蛮军陷邛、雅等州。
现代文：南诏军队攻陷邛、雅等州。
English: Nanzhao's army invaded and occupied Yunnan, Ya and other provinces.

古文：戊午，以右领军卫大将军董重质充神策西川行营都知兵马使。
现代文：十二日，诏令右领军卫大将军董重质充任神策西川行营都知兵马使。
English: On the 12th, the right-hand leader of the army, General Dong Juxiao, was appointed as the envoy of the Shenshe Nishikawa Campaign.

古文：西川奏蛮军陷成都府。
现代文：西川奏报南诏军队攻陷成都府。
English: Nishikawa reported that Nanzhao's army had captured Chengdu.

古文：东川奏蛮军入梓州西郭门下营。
现代文：东川奏报南诏军攻进梓州西郭门下营。
English: Dongchuan reported that the Nanzhao Army invaded the camp under the west gate of Zizhou.

古文：又诏促诸镇兵救援西川。
现代文：皇帝又下诏书催促各镇军队赶快赴西川救援。
English: The emperor also issued an edict urging the troops of each town to rush to the rescue of Xichuan.

古文：己丑，以东都留守令狐楚检校右仆射、天平军节度使，代崔弘礼为东都留守。
现代文：十九日，令东都留守令狐楚为检校右仆射、天平军节度使，代替崔弘礼为东都留守。
English: On the 19th, Dongdu was left behind, and Guochu was appointed as the school inspector's right-hand man and the Tianping Army's chief of staff, replacing Cui Hongli as Dongdu left behind.

古文：丁卯，贬杜元颖循州司马。
现代文：二十一日，再贬杜元颖为循州司马。
English: On the 21st, Du Yuanying was relegated to Shuzhou Sima.

古文：乙巳，郭钊奏蛮军抽退，遣使赐蛮帅蒙巅国信。
现代文：二十三日，郭钊奏报南诏军队逐步退却。皇帝派遣使者将国书赐给南诏军队主帅蒙巅。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Xuan reported that Nanzhao's army was gradually retreating. The emperor sent an envoy to give the imperial rescript to Meng Hou, the commander of Nanzhao's army.

古文：辛未，以太子少师李听为邠宁节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任命太子少师李听为宁节度使。
English: On the 25th, the prince's apprentice, Li Xun, was appointed as Ning's delegate to the festival.

古文：癸酉，以中丞温造为右丞，吏部郎中宇文鼎为中丞。
现代文：二十七日，任命中丞温造为右丞，吏部郎中宇文鼎为中丞。
English: On the 27th, the middle-ranking official, Unzo, was appointed as the right-ranking official, and the official, Rojuu, was appointed as the middle-ranking official.

古文：文宗下
现代文：敬宗本纪
English: Honji Keizong passed away

古文：大和四年春正月丙子朔。
现代文：大和四年春正月初一为丙子日。
English: The first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Yamato era is the C day.

古文：辛卯，武昌军节度使牛僧孺来朝。
现代文：初六，武昌军节度使牛僧孺进京朝见文宗。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Wuchang army's festival brought the cow monk Zou to Beijing to see Emperor Wenzong.

古文：丙戌，以左神策军大将军丘直方为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：十一日，调左神策军大将军丘直方出任坊节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, General Yau Naokata, commander of the Left Divine Defense Force, was transferred to the post of the Grand Marshal.

古文：戊子，诏封长男永为鲁王。
现代文：十三日，封长子李永为鲁王。
English: On the 13th, Fong's eldest son Li Yong became the King of Lu.

古文：辛卯，以武昌节度使、鄂岳蕲黄安申等观察处置等使、金紫光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、同中书门平章事、上柱国、奇章郡开国公牛僧孺为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十六日，任命原武昌节度使、鄂岳蕲黄安申等观察处置等使、金紫光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事、上柱国、奇章郡开国公牛僧孺为兵部尚书，同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 16th, the former Wuchang Festival envoy, E Yueqin Huang Anshin and other observation and disposal envoys, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, school inspector Shangshu, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same middle school, the same

古文：壬辰，以兵部侍郎崔郾为陕虢观察使。
现代文：十七日，调原兵部侍郎崔郾出任陕虢观察使。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Cui Jian, the attendant of the former military department, was appointed as the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：封鲁王母王氏为昭仪。
现代文：封鲁王的母亲为昭仪。
English: The mother of King Furu is Shogi.

古文：癸巳，以前邠宁节度使刘遵古为剑南东川节度使。
现代文：十八日，诏原宁节度使刘遵古任剑南东川节度使。
English: On the 18th, Liu Zungu was appointed as the Jianan Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：甲午，守左仆射、同平章事，诸道盐铁转运使王播卒。
现代文：十九日，守左仆射、同平章事、诸道盐铁转运使王播去世。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Wang Bo passed away due to the following reasons: Shou Zuofu shooting, Tongping incident, and transportation of salt and iron to various places.

古文：丙申，以太常卿五涯为吏部尚书，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：二十一日，任命原太常卿王涯为吏部尚书、担任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: On the 21st, Wang Lai, the former First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed as the secretary of the General Office of the CPC Central Committee, and served as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：辛丑，以尚书左丞元稹检校户部尚书，充武昌军节度、鄂岳蕲黄安申等州观察使。
现代文：二十六日，调原尚书左丞元稹检校户部尚书出任武昌军节度使、鄂岳蕲黄安申等州观察使。
English: On the 26th, Shangshu Zojo, Yuan Shijian, and his former subordinate, Shangshu of the Household Department of Wuchang Military Academy, were appointed as the festival envoy of the Wuchang Army and the state observation envoy of the Hubei Province.

古文：癸卯，以前陕虢观察使王起为左丞。
现代文：二十八日，起任原陕虢观察使王起为左丞。
English: On the 28th, the appointment of the former Shaanxi and Shaanxi Observation Corps made Wang Qi the left junior secretary.

古文：二月丙午朔。
现代文：二月初一为丙午日。
English: The first day of February is C-noon.

古文：戊午，兴元军乱，节度使李绛举家被害，判官薛齐、赵存约死之。
现代文：十三日，兴元军发生叛乱，节度使李绛全家遇难，判官薛齐、赵存约殉职。
English: On the 13th, the Xingyuan army rebelled, and the whole family of Li Yan was killed by the soldiers. The judges Xue Qi and Zhao Cunyu died in the line of duty.

古文：庚申，以左丞温造为兴元节度使。
现代文：十五日，调左丞温造出任兴元节度使。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Zhe Zuo Wenzo was appointed as the Xingyuan Festival envoy.

古文：辛未，夏州节度使李寰卒。
现代文：二十六日，原夏州节度使李寰去世。
English: On the 26th, the original Xiazhou Festival caused the death of Li Xuan.

古文：壬申，以神策行营节度使董重质为夏、绥、银、宥节度使。
现代文：二十七日，调任神策行营节度使董重质为夏绥银宥节度使。
English: On the 27th, he was transferred to the position of the god's strategist in charge of the festival, so that Dong Chongqing became the god's strategist in charge of the summer solstice.

古文：三月乙亥，以河东节度使李程检校左仆射、同平章事，兼河中尹、晋绛慈隰等州节度使，以刑部尚书柳公绰检校左仆射、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：三月初一为乙亥日，任命河东节度使李程为检校左仆射、同平章事，兼河中尹、晋绛慈隰等州节度使，任命刑部尚书柳公绰为检校左仆射、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: The first day of March was the day of the Chinese Year of the Pig, and the Hedong Festival appointed Li Cheng as the school inspection left-hand man, Tongping chapter, and also appointed the state festival envoys such as Hechu Yin, Jinqi Cixi, and appointed the criminal department's Shangshu Liu Gongpu as the school inspection left-hand man, Taiyuan Yin, Beidou left-hand man, and Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：丁丑，以前河中节度使薛平为太子太保。
现代文：初三，调原河中节度使薛平为太子太保。
English: On the third day of the first month of the new year, the emperor sent Xue Ping to be the prince's bodyguard.

古文：丁亥，以卫尉卿桂仲武为福建观察使。
现代文：十三日，调卫尉卿桂仲武出任福建观察使。
English: On the 13th, Vice-Marshal Gui Zhongwu was appointed as Fujian Observer.

古文：兴元温造奏： 害李绛贼首丘崟、丘铸及官健千人，并处斩讫。
现代文：兴元节度使温造上奏说： 杀害李绛的叛军头目丘山金、丘铸和参加兵变的军官士兵一千人，一并斩首。
English: At the Xingyuan Festival, Wen Zhe made a report: The rebel leader Qiu Shanjin and Qiu Ji, who killed Li Xi, and a thousand officers and soldiers who participated in the mutiny, were beheaded together.

古文：其亲刃绛者斩一百段，号令者三段，余并斩首。
现代文：亲手杀害李绛的凶手，碎尸一百段，指挥者被砍成三截，其余的都一律斩首。
English: The murderer, who killed Li Yao with his own hands, had his body cut into a hundred pieces. The commander was chopped into three pieces, and the rest were all beheaded.

古文：内一百首祭李绛，三十首祭死王事官僚，其余尸首并投于汉江。 
现代文：用其中一百颗人头祭奠李绛，用三十颗人头祭奠死难将士，其余尸首全部投入汉江。 
English: One hundred of the human heads were used to pay tribute to Li Qian, thirty human heads were used to pay tribute to the dead soldiers, and the rest of the bodies were all thrown into the Han River.

古文：己丑，诏兴元监军使杨叔元宜配流康州百姓，锢身递于配所。
现代文：十四日，文宗命令将原兴元监军使杨叔元流放康州为百姓，戴枷押送到发配的地方。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Wenzong ordered that Yang Shuyuan, who had been appointed to supervise Yuan Xingyuan's army, be exiled to Kangzhou as a commoner and sent to the place of distribution in shackles.

古文：丁酉，监修国史、中书侍郎、平章事路随进所撰《宪宗实录》四十卷，优诏答之，赐史官等五人锦绣银器有差。
现代文：二十二日，监修国史、中书侍郎、平章事路随呈送他所编写的《宪宗实录》四十卷，传令嘉奖，赏给参加编写的五名史官锦绣银器不等。
English: On the 22nd, the supervisor of the national history, the attendant of the Chinese book, and Ping Zhang Shilu presented the forty volumes of the "Constitutional Record" compiled by him, and the award was given to the five historians who participated in the compilation.

古文：癸卯，以淮南节度使段文昌检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，兼江陵尹，充荆南节度使；以前太子宾客崔从检校右仆射、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：二十八日，调原淮南节度使段文昌检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、兼江陵尹，担任荆南节度使；调原太子宾客崔从检校右仆射，扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
English: On the 28th, Duan Wenchang, the former Huainan governor, was transferred from the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools to the inspection of schools.

古文：甲辰，以前荆南节度使崔群检校右仆射、兼太常卿。
现代文：二十九日，任命原荆南节度使崔群检校右仆射，兼太常卿。
English: On the 29th, he appointed the former Jingnan Jie as the right-hand man of the Cui Qun inspection school, and also the Tai Changqing.

古文：以中书舍人李虞仲为华州刺史，代严休复；以休复为右散骑常侍。
现代文：调中书舍人李虞仲接替严休复为华州刺史，调严休复为右散骑常侍。
English: Li Yuzhong, a middle-ranking scholar, succeeded Yan Hui and became the governor of Huazhou Province, and Yan Hui became the right-hand horseman of the cavalry.

古文：夏四月乙巳朔。
现代文：夏四月初一为乙巳日。
English: In the summer, the first day of April is the first day of spring.

古文：丙午，以右散骑常侍、翰林侍讲学士郑覃为工部尚书。
现代文：初二，任命右散骑常侍、翰林侍讲学士郑覃为工部尚书。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Zheng Yao, the Right Riding Attendant and Hanlin Attendant Lecturer, was appointed as the official secretary of the Engineering Department.

古文：丁未，兵部尚书致仕张贾卒。
现代文：初三，原退休兵部尚书张贾去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of the new year, former retired military commander Shangshu Zhang Jia passed away.

古文：丁巳，贬前齐德沧景等州节度使李有裕为永州刺史，驰驿赴任。
现代文：十三日，贬原齐德沧景等州节度使李有裕为永州刺史，并须兼程赶赴任所。
English: On the 13th, the state festival such as the dethronement of the original Zide Cangjing made Li Youyu a history of Yongzhou, and he had to rush to the office.

古文：庚申，以尚书左丞王起为户部尚书、判度支，代崔元略；以元略检校吏部尚书，为东都留守。
现代文：十六日，调尚书左丞王起接替崔元略为户部尚书、兼度支，调崔元略检校吏部尚书，为东都留守。
English: On the 16th, Choe Young-soo, the left-handed king, succeeded Choe Won-ryeok as Choe Young-soo, the head of the household, and Jeongdo, and Choe Young-soo as Choe Won-ryeok, the head of the inspection of school officials, leaving Dongdu.

古文：辛酉，月掩南斗第二星。
现代文：十七日夜，月亮遮掩南斗二星。
English: On the night of the 17th, the moon covered the Southern Dipper.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 俭以足用，令出惟行，著在前经。斯为理本。
现代文：十八日，文宗颁发诏书道： 厉行节约以增强国家财力，抓紧政令的贯彻执行，这些在以往典籍中所记载的都是治国的根本原则。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict, saying, "Enforce austerity to strengthen the country's financial strength, and pay close attention to the implementation of government orders. These are the fundamental principles of governing the country that have been recorded in previous classics."

古文：朕自临四海，愍元元之久困，日昃忘食，宵兴疚怀。
现代文：我自执政以来，体念百姓长期不能摆脱贫困，经常到天黑都顾不上吃饭，半夜里忧虑得不能入睡。
English: Since I have been in power, I have realized that the people cannot get rid of poverty for a long time, often cannot afford to eat until dark, and cannot fall asleep in the middle of the night because of worry.

古文：虽绝文绣之饰，尚愧茅茨之俭。
现代文：虽然也禁止使用华贵的文绣装饰，但自愧不如古代贤君的俭朴。
English: Although it is also forbidden to use luxurious embroidered decoration, it is not as frugal as the ancient wise men.

古文：亦谕卿士，形于诏条。
现代文：我曾告诫过各级官员，也已形成文件。
English: I have warned officials at all levels, and this has also been documented.

古文：有司不禁，侈俗滋扇。盖朕教导之未敷，使兆庶昧于耻尚也。
现代文：如今得知腐败恶习仍未革除，在车马服饰房屋住宅上互相攀比豪华，利用国家财物贪污挪用，管理部门又不禁止，腐化风气日益猖獗。都因我教导不够，使百姓分不清善恶是非。
English: Now we know that the evil habits of corruption have still not been eradicated, people compete with each other for luxury in cars, horses, clothes, houses and residences, use state assets to embezzle and misappropriate, and management departments do not prohibit it, and the corrupt culture is increasingly rampant. All because I did not teach enough, so that the people could not distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：其何以足用行令，臻于致理欤！
现代文：如此怎么能使国家富足，政令贯彻，达到治理的目的呢？
English: In this way, how can we make the country rich, implement government orders, and achieve the goal of governance?

古文：永念惭叹，迨兹申敕。
现代文：想到这些如何能不惭愧叹息。
English: I can't help but sigh when I think about it.

古文：自今内外班列职位之士，各务素朴，弘兹国风。
现代文：现在重申，今后内外官员，人人厉行朴素，发扬优良国风。
English: I now reiterate that in the future, officials at home and abroad should all practice simplicity and carry forward the fine national style.

古文：有僭差尤甚者，御史纠上。
现代文：如有违背者，御史举报查办。
English: If there is a violator, it shall be reported to the history and investigated.

古文：主者宣示中外，知朕意焉。 
现代文：主管部门要广泛宣传让全国了解我的意见。 
English: The competent departments should widely publicize and let the whole country know my opinion.

古文：文宗承长庆、宝历奢靡之风，锐意惩革，躬行俭素，以率厉之。
现代文：文宗面临穆宗、敬宗两朝腐化奢侈积习余风，决心加以革除，因此带头厉行节约。
English: Faced with the lingering wind of corruption and extravagance of the two dynasties of Mu Zong and Keizong, Wenzong was determined to eliminate it, and thus took the lead in implementing austerity.

古文：辛未，以前东都留守崔弘礼为刑部尚书。
现代文：二十七日，任命原东都留守崔弘礼为刑部尚书。
English: On the 27th, Cui Hongli, who had stayed behind in the former Dongdu, was appointed as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：镇州王廷凑请修建初、启运二陵，从之。
现代文：镇州王廷凑请修葺建初、启运两座陵墓，批复同意。
English: Zhenzhou Wangting jointly requested to repair the two mausoleums at the beginning of construction and the start of transportation, and the approval was approved.

古文：五月甲戌朔。
现代文：五月初一为甲戌日。
English: The first day of May is Armor Day.

古文：丁丑，以旱命京城诸司疏理系囚。
现代文：初四，因久旱，命令京城各司衙门清查积案审理在押人犯。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, due to a long drought, all the magistrates in Beijing were ordered to clear the backlog of cases and try the prisoners.

古文：己卯，通化南北二门锁不可开，钥入，如有持之者。
现代文：初六，通化南北二门锁不能开，钥匙插入，像有东西夹住。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the two locks on the north and south of Tonghua could not be opened, and the key was inserted, as if something was caught.

古文：上令铁工破锁，时日己及辰矣。
现代文：文宗命派铁匠砸锁，到辰时时分方才将门打开。
English: Wenzong ordered a blacksmith to smash the lock, and the door was only opened at the eleventh hour.

古文：丁亥，改郓州东平县为天平县。
现代文：十四日，改郓州东平县为天平县。
English: On the 14th, Dongping County of Ganzhou was changed to Tianping County.

古文：戊子，敕度支每岁于西川织造绫罗锦八千一百六十七匹，令数内减二千五百十匹。
现代文：十五日，命度支每年在西川织造绫罗锦八千一百六十七匹，又命从数内减去二千五百一十匹。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, it was decreed that 8,167 pieces of brocade should be woven in Nishikawa each year, and that 2,510 pieces should be subtracted from the number.

古文：六月癸卯朔。
现代文：六月初一为癸卯日。
English: The first day of June is a leap day.

古文：丁未，以守司徒、门下侍郎、平章事、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户、食实封三百户裴度为守司徒、平章军国重事；待疾损日，每三日、五日一度入中书。
现代文：初五，任命守司徒、门下侍郎、平章事、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户、食实封三百户裴度为守司徒、平章军国重事；等病好转后，每三、五天到中书省上一次班。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Shushi-tsu, his attendants, Taira-zhang, Shangzhu, Jin, 3,000 households in Shibuya, and 300 households in Jishifu as Shushi-tsu and Taira-zhang, important matters of the military state; after his illness improved, he went to the Chinese Literature Department every three to five days.

古文：辛未夜，自一更至五更，大小星流旁午，观者不能数。
现代文：二十九日夜，一更到五更时分，大小流星纵横错落，观看的人不计其数。
English: On the night of the 29th, between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., large and small meteors streaked across the sky, watched by countless people.

古文：壬申，诏：如闻诸司刑狱例多停滞，委尚书左右丞及监察御史纠举以闻。
现代文：三十日，文宗诏令：得知各司监狱积案常多，特派尚书左右丞和监察御史审查清理作出报告。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Wenzong issued the following edict: Upon learning that the number of cases backlogged in each division of the prison was often high, he sent Shangshu Zuoren and the inspector to make a report on the review and cleanup of the history.

古文：秋七月癸酉朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为癸酉日。
English: The first day of autumn and the first day of July are leap days.

古文：癸未，诏以朝议郎、尚书右丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋宋申锡为正议大夫、行尚书右丞、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，文宗亲任原朝议郎、尚书右丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋宋申锡为正议大夫、行尚书右丞、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wenzong personally appointed the original chancellor, Shang Shuyuan, Shangzhu Guo, and gave the purple gold fish bag to Song Shensi to be the chairman, Shang Shuyuan, and Dongzhong Shumen to be the lower level.

古文：乙酉，敕： 前行郎中知制诰者，约满一周年，即与正授；从谏议大夫知者，亦宜准此；余依长庆二年七月二十七日敕处分。 
现代文：二十四日，发文规定： 原行郎中知制诰将满一周年的，就正式授职；从谏议大夫知者，也应照此办理；其余按长庆二年七月二十七日行文规定执行。 
English: On the 24th, a document was issued stipulating that: the first year after the completion of the appointment of the original practitioner shall be officially conferred; those who have been appointed by the doctor shall also be treated accordingly; the rest shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the document on July 27th, 2000.

古文：振武置云伽关，加镇兵千人。
现代文：在振武州设云伽关，派守军一千人。
English: Yunjia Pass was set up in Zhenwuzhou, and a thousand soldiers were sent to defend it.

古文：以吏部侍郎王璠为京兆尹、兼御史大夫，代李谅为桂管观察使。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎王为京兆尹、兼御史大夫，接替李谅为桂管观察使。
English: He appointed Jing Zhaoyun, who served as Wang's attendant in the cadre department, as well as the chief historian, and Li Piao, who succeeded him, as the observation envoy of the Guizhou government.

古文：太原饥，赈粟三万石。
现代文：太原闹饥荒，发放救济粟三万石。
English: Taiyuan suffered from famine, and 30,000 koku of millet were distributed as relief.

古文：赐十六宅诸王绫绢二万匹。
现代文：赐十六宅各王绫绢二万匹。
English: Sixteen households were given 20,000 king pheasants each.

古文：丁酉，守司徒裴度上表辞册命，言： 臣此官已三度受册，有靦面目。 
现代文：二十五日，守司徒裴度请求辞去封号说 ：我在这个位置上已经三次受到皇帝封赏，自觉惭愧。 
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the governor, Szuzu Pei Du, asked to resign from the title, saying: I have been awarded by the emperor three times in this position, and I am ashamed of myself.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意所请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八月壬寅朔。
现代文：八月初一为壬寅日。
English: The first day of August is Jinsin Day.

古文：丙辰，鄜州水，溺居民三百余家。
现代文：十五日，州发生水灾，淹没居民三百余家。
English: On the 15th, flooding occurred in the prefecture, inundating more than 300 homes.

古文：太原柳公绰奏云、代、蔚三州山谷间石化为面，人取食之。
现代文：太原柳公绰报告说，云、代、蔚三州的山谷间石头化成面粉状，百姓取来当饭吃。
English: Taiyuan Liu Gongqiao reported that between the valleys of Yunnan, Shandong and Yunnan, the stone turned into flour, and the people took it as a meal.

古文：己未，宣歙观察使于敖卒。
现代文：十八日，原宣歙观察使于敖去世。
English: On the 18th, the original Xuan Zang observation caused the death of Yu Zang.

古文：甲子，内出绫绢三十万匹，付户部充和籴。
现代文：二十三日，从内库拨出绫绢三十万匹给户部作为向民间购买军粮之用。
English: On the 23rd, 300,000 was allocated from the treasury to the Household Department for the purpose of purchasing war food from the civilian population.

古文：戊辰，幸梨园亭，会昌殿奏新乐。
现代文：二十四日，文宗游梨园亭，会昌殿演奏新乐。
English: On the 24th, the new music was performed at the Wenzong Yu Liyuan Pavilion and the Huichang Hall.

古文：九月壬申朔。
现代文：九月初一为壬申日。
English: The first day of September is Jinshin Day.

古文：丁丑，以大理卿裴谊检校右散骑常侍，充江西观察使，代沈传师；以传师为宣歙观察使。
现代文：初六，调大理卿裴谊任检校右散骑常侍，接替沈传师任江西观察使，调沈传师任宣歙观察使。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, he transferred Daliqing Peiyi to serve as the right rider of the school inspection, succeeded Shen Chuanshi to serve as the Jiangxi observation envoy, and transferred Shen Chuanshi to serve as the Xuanqi observation envoy.

古文：内出绫三千匹，赐宥州筑城兵士。
现代文：从内库取绫三千匹赏给宥州筑城的士兵。
English: Three thousand yakitori were taken from the inner storehouse and given to the soldiers who built the city of Yuzhou.

古文：戊寅，舒州太湖、宿松、望江三县水，溺民户六百八十，诏以义仓赈贷。
现代文：初七，舒州太湖、宿松、望江三县发生水灾，淹没居民六百八十户，文宗命令拨义仓粮救灾。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, floods occurred in three counties of Shuzhou, Taihu Lake, Suqiao, and Wangjiang, flooding 680 households, and Wenzong ordered the allocation of grain for disaster relief.

古文：庚辰，吏部尚书王涯为右仆射，依前盐钅岁转运使。
现代文：初九，任吏部尚书王涯为右仆射，仍兼任盐铁转运使。
English: In the early 9th century, Shangshu Wangya was appointed as the right-hand man of the cadre department, and still served as the salt and iron transfer envoy.

古文：壬午，以守司徒、平章军国重事、晋国公裴度守司徒、兼待中，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：十一日，调守司徒、平章军国重事、晋国公裴度守司徒、兼侍中，出任山南东道节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he was transferred to guard Sito, Pingzhang Military and State Affairs, Jin Guo Pei Duo Guard Sito, and served as Shannan Host Festival Envoy.

古文：以投来奚王茹羯为右骁卫将军同正。
现代文：任命归附的奚王茹羯为右骁卫将军同正。
English: He appointed the subordinate Shao Wang Ruyi as the right guard general and co-premier.

古文：丙戌，以前山南东道节度使窦易直为尚书左仆射。
现代文：十五日，任命原山南东道节度使窦易直为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 15th, Dou Yizhong was appointed as the host of the original Shannan Festival, making Dou Yizhong the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：戊子，吏部尚书致仕裴向卒。
现代文：十七日，退休吏部尚书裴向去世。
English: On the 17th, retired cadre Shang Shubei passed away.

古文：己丑，淮南天长等七县水，害稼。
现代文：十六日，淮南天长等七县发生水灾，农作物受到损害。
English: On the 16th, floods occurred in seven counties including Huainan Tianchang, and crops were damaged.

古文：丁酉，前丰州刺史、天德军使浑铁坐赃七千贯，贬哀州司马。
现代文：二十三日，原丰州刺史，天德军使浑钅岁因贪污七千贯，罚降为袁州司马。
English: On the 23rd, the former Fengzhou stabbed history, the Tian De Army made the turbid years old for corruption seven thousand, and the penalty was reduced to Yuanzhou Sima.

古文：冬十月壬寅朔。
现代文：冬十月初一为壬寅日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is Renin Day.

古文：戊申，以东都留守崔元略检校吏部尚书，兼滑州刺史、义成军节度使，代李德裕；以德裕检校兵部尚书，兼成都尹。
现代文：初七，任命东都留守崔元略检校吏部尚书、接替李德裕兼华州刺史、义成军节度使；调李德裕检校兵部尚书，兼成都尹，任剑南西川节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed Shang Shu of the East Military Academy to succeed Li Deyu, who had stayed behind in Cui Yuanliangguan, Huazhou, and Yicheng; transferred Li Deyu, who had stayed behind in Cui Yuanliangguan, and Chengdu, and appointed Jian Nan, who had stayed behind in Huazhou, to succeed Li Deyu, who had stayed behind in Huazhou, and Yicheng.

古文：充剑南西川节度使、检校司空郭钊为太常卿，代崔群为吏部尚书。
现代文：初八，京城有熊跑进庄严寺。初九，任命原刑部尚书崔弘礼为东都留守。十三日，调原剑南西川节度使，检校司空郭钊接替崔群为太常卿，任命崔群为吏部尚书。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a bear ran into the Solemn Temple in Beijing. On the ninth day of the first month, Choi Hong-ri, the former head of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed to stay in the eastern capital. On the 13th day, the former secretary of the Jianan West River Festival, the school inspector Kuo Kuo, succeeded Choi Qun as the grand secretary, and Choi Qun was appointed the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：丁卯，御史中丞宇文鼎奏： 今月十三日，宰臣宣旨，今后群臣延英奏事，前一日进状入来者。
现代文：二十六日，御史中丞宇文鼎上奏道： 本月十三日，宰相传达皇上旨意说，今后群臣来延英殿议事，应先一天呈交书面报告。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the Imperial Historian Chujo Umending made a report: On the thirteenth day of this month, the prime minister conveyed the emperor's will, saying that in the future, when ministers came to Yan Ying Dian for deliberation, they should submit a written report one day in advance.

古文：臣以寻常公事，不暇面论，但见表章，足以陈露。
现代文：臣认为一般公务，没有时间面谈，可凭书面报告讲清楚。
English: The minister thought that it was a general official duty, and there was no time for an interview, so he could make it clear with a written report.

古文：傥临时忽有公务，文字不足尽言，则咫尺天听，无路闻达。
现代文：但若临时有紧急情况，文字又讲不清楚，皇上虽然近在咫尺，却无路上达。
English: But if there is a temporary emergency, the text is not clear, and although the emperor is close at hand, there is no way to reach him.

古文：更俟后坐，动逾数辰，处置之间，便有不及。
现代文：要等下次接见，一隔就是几天，该急办的事就会贻误时机。
English: If you have to wait for the next interview, the interval is a few days, and the urgent matter will delay the opportunity.

古文：伏乞重赐宣示，限以状入者，并在卯前；如在卯后，听不收览。
现代文：因此请皇上重新下令，规定上交书面材料须在当日上朝前，过时不予受理。
English: Therefore, I would like to ask the Emperor to issue a new order, stipulating that the written materials must be submitted before the morning of the same day, and will not be accepted if they are out of date.

古文：自然人各遵守，礼亦得中。 
现代文：这样大家自会遵守。 文宗同意。
English: In this way, everyone will abide by it.

古文：从之。十一月辛未朔。是夜，荧惑近左执法。
现代文：十一月初一为辛未日，当晚，火星行近左执法星。
English: The first day of the first month of November is the eve of the Chinese New Year. On the evening of that day, Mars is close to Leo, the planet of law enforcement.

古文：癸巳，以左丞康承宣为兗、海、沂、密等州节度使。
现代文：二十三日，调左丞康承宣出任兖、海、沂、密等州节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Kang Chengxuan, transferred to the left, was appointed as the delegate to the state festivals of Min, Hai, Min, and My.

古文：淮南大水及虫霜，并伤稼。
现代文：淮南发生水灾、虫灾及霜冻损害了农作物。
English: Floods, insect plagues and frost damage crops in Huainan.

古文：十二月辛丑朔，沧州殷侑请废景州为景平县。
现代文：十二月初一为辛丑日，沧州殷侑报请改景州为景平县。
English: On the first day of December, Cangzhou Yinqian Bao requested that Jingzhou be changed to Jingping County.

古文：己酉，义成军节度使崔元略卒。
现代文：初九，原义成军节度使崔元略去世。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the former Yicheng Army Festival caused the death of Cui Yuanliu.

古文：壬子，以左金吾卫大将军段嶷为义成军节度使。
现代文：十二日，调左金吾卫大将军段嶷出任义成军节度使。
English: On the 12th, General Duan Qi of the Left Wing of the Qing Army was transferred to serve as the military envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：癸丑，湖南观察使韦辞卒。
现代文：十三日，原湖南观察使韦辞去世。
English: On the 13th, Wei Ji, the former Hunan observation leader, passed away.

古文：丙辰，以工部侍郎崔琯为京兆尹，代王璠为尚书左丞。
现代文：十六日，调工部侍郎崔为京兆尹，代王为尚书左丞。
English: On the 16th, Choi, the steward of the engineering department, became Jing Zhaoyun, and the acting king became Shang Shuzhizuo.

古文：癸亥，东都留守崔弘礼卒。
现代文：二十三日，原东都留守崔弘礼去世。
English: On the 23rd, Cui Hongli, who had stayed behind in Dongdu, passed away.

古文：以同州刺史高重为潭州刺史、兼御史中丞，充湖南观察使。
现代文：调同州刺史高重为潭州刺史，兼御史中丞，担任湖南观察使。
English: He was appointed as the high-ranking official in charge of the history of Tang Prefecture and the middle-ranking official in charge of the history of Tang Province, and served as the observer of Hunan.

古文：甲子，左仆射致仕杨于陵卒，赠司空。
现代文：二十四日，退休左仆射杨于陵去世，追封为司空。
English: On the 24th, retired left-hand man Yang Yuling passed away and was posthumously promoted to the rank of second-in-command.

古文：丙寅，以前河南尹冯宿为工部侍郎。
现代文：二十六日，任命原河南尹冯宿为工部侍郎。
English: On the 26th, the former Henan Yin Fengjuan was appointed as the Minister of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：戊辰，以太子宾客分司白居易为河南尹，以代韦弘景；以弘景守刑部尚书、东都留守。
现代文：二十八日，调原太子宾客分司白居易接替韦弘景任河南尹；调任韦弘景守刑部尚书，东都留守。
English: On the 28th, Bai Juyi, the guest division chief of the former crown prince, was transferred to succeed Wei Hongjing as Henan Yin; Wei Hongjing was transferred to guard the criminal department of Shangshu, and Dongdu stayed behind.

古文：闰十二月辛未朔。
现代文：闰十二月初一为辛未日。
English: The first day of the leap month of December is a bad day.

古文：壬申，太常卿郭钊卒，赠司徒。
现代文：初二，太常卿郭钊去世，追封为司徒。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Guo Jian, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of China, died and was posthumously promoted to the position of tutor.

古文：壬辰，废齐州归化县地入临邑县。
现代文：二十二日，撤销齐州归化县并入临邑县。
English: On the 22nd, Qiuzhou Naturalization County was revoked and merged into Linyi County.

古文：废是州，其县隶沧州刺史。
现代文：撤销景州，其县划归沧州刺史管辖。
English: Jingzhou was revoked, and its counties were placed under the jurisdiction of Cangzhou.

古文：是岁，京畿、河南、江南、荆襄、鄂岳、湖南等道大水，害稼，出官米赈给。
现代文：本年度，京畿、河南、江南、荆襄、鄂岳、湖南等道发生水灾，损害农作物，调拨官粮予以救济。
English: This year, floods occurred in Gyeonggi Province, Henan Province, Jiangnan Province, Jingxiang Province, Egyu Province, Hunan Province and other provinces, damaging crops, and government grain was allocated for relief.

古文：五年春正月庚子朔，以积阴浃旬，罢元会。
现代文：大和五年春正月初一为庚子日，连阴十日，取消元旦朝见。
English: The first day of the first month of the spring of the year of the year of the Year of the Horse and the Goat, the 10th day of the month of the Horse and the Goat, and the New Year's morning meeting will be cancelled.

古文：丁巳，赐沧德节度使曰义昌军。
现代文：十八日，赐沧德节度使称号义昌军。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the title of Yichang Army was bestowed upon them.

古文：太原旱，赈粟十万石。
现代文：太原发生旱灾，发放救济粮粟十万石。
English: A drought occurred in Taiyuan, and 100,000 koku of relief grain was distributed.

古文：己未，诏方镇节度观察使请入观者，先上表奏闻，候充则任进程，庚申，幽州军乱，逐其帅李载义，立后院副兵马使杨志诚为留后。
现代文：二十日，诏令各方镇节度观察使请求朝见的，须提前报告，经批准后方可起程前来。二十一日，幽州发生兵变，驱逐原节度使李载义，拥立后院副兵马使杨志诚为留后。
English: On the 20th, all parties were ordered to observe the town festival, and if they wanted to see the morning, they had to report in advance. After approval, they could come. On the 21st, there was a mutiny in Yuzhou, the original festival was expelled by Li Zaiyi, and Yang Zhicheng, the deputy commander of the courtyard, was left behind.

古文：癸亥诏端午节辰，方镇例有进奉，其杂彩匹段，许进生白绫绢。
现代文：二十四日，诏令各方镇原按例所献端午节贡品中杂彩匹段允许以生白绫绢代替。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that all the towns in the region were allowed to use fresh egrets instead of miscellaneous colored egrets in the Dragon Boat Festival tribute.

古文：己丑，以权知渤海国务大彝震检校秘书监、忽汗州都督、渤海国王。
现代文：二十六日，任代理渤海国务的大彝震为检校秘书监、忽汗州都督、渤海国王。
English: On the 26th, Dazhong Zhen, acting as the state of Bohai, became the inspector of the school inspection, the governor of Khukhan, and the king of Bohai.

古文：二月庚午朔。
现代文：二月初一为庚午日。
English: The first day of February is Geng Wu Day.

古文：壬辰，以卢龙军节度使、守太保、同平章事李载义守太保、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，任命原卢龙军节度使、守太保、同平章事李载义守太保、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed the former Lulong Army's chief delegate to the festival, the guard of peace, and the same rank as Li Zaiyi, the guard of peace, and the same rank as Zhong Shumen.

古文：时载义失地入朝，赐第于永宁里，给赐优厚。
现代文：李载义丢失幽州，逃回京师，文宗因他先前平沧景有功，仍让他保留宰相职位，并于永宁里赐给宅院及其他优厚赏赐。
English: Li Zaiyi lost Yuzhou and fled back to Beijing, but Wenzong let him retain the post of prime minister because of his previous achievements, and gave him a mansion and other generous rewards in Yongningli.

古文：丙申，以桂管观察使李谅为岭南节度使。
现代文：二十七日，调原桂管观察使李谅任岭南节度使。
English: On the 27th, the former Guizhou observation envoy Li Peng was appointed as the Lingnan festival envoy.

古文：戊戌，神策中尉王守澄奏得军虞候豆卢著状，告宰相宋申锡与漳王谋反。即令追捕。
现代文：二十九日，神策中尉王守澄上奏说得到军虞候豆卢著举报，揭发宰相宋申锡与漳王李凑阴谋策动政变，命令逮捕宋申锡。
English: On the 29th, Shenze lieutenant Wang Shoucheng reported to the emperor that he had received a report written by the military commander Zhu Lu, exposing the prime minister Song Shenxi and the warlord Li Bin's conspiracy to instigate a coup, and ordered the arrest of Song Shenxi.

古文：庚子，诏贬宋申锡为太子右庶子。
现代文：三月初一为庚子日。贬宋申锡为太子右庶子。
English: On the first day of March, it was the day of Geng Zi. Song Shensi was dethroned as the prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：壬寅，左常侍崔玄亮及谏官等十四人伏奏玉阶： 北军所告事，请不于内中鞫问，乞付法司。 
现代文：初三，左常侍崔玄亮同谏官等十四人在殿前玉阶跪奏 ：北军所告宰相谋反一事，请不要在宫内秘密审讯，请交司法部门查办。 
English: On the third day of the junior high school term, 14 people, including the Left Attendant Choi Hyun Ryong and the eunuch, kneeled on the front steps of the hall and sang: The Northern Army accused the prime minister of plotting a rebellion, please do not hold a secret trial in the palace, please submit it to the judicial department for investigation.

古文：帝曰： 吾已谋于公卿矣，卿等且退。 
现代文：文宗说 ：我已和大臣们研究过了，诸位退下吧。 
English: Wenzong said, "I have already discussed this with the ministers, so please step down."

古文：崔玄亮泣涕陈谏久之，帝改容劳之曰： 朕即与宰臣商议。 玄亮等方退。
现代文：崔玄亮痛哭陈辞长跪不起，文宗态度缓和下来安慰崔玄亮说 ：我马上和宰相们再研究。 崔玄亮等这才退下。
English: Choi Hyun Ryong cried bitterly, Chen Ji Chang could not kneel down, Wenzong's attitude softened and comforted Choi Hyun Ryong, saying: I will immediately study with the prime ministers. Choi Hyun Ryong waited for this to retreat.

古文：癸卯，诏漳王凑可降为巢县公，右庶子宋申锡开州司马同正。
现代文：初四，诏令漳王李凑应降为巢县公，贬右庶子宋申锡为开封司马同正。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that King Gong Liqin should be reduced to the status of a county magistrate, and his right illegitimate son, Song Shenxi, should be reduced to the status of Kaifeng Sima Tongzheng.

古文：初，京师忷忷，以宰相实联亲王谋逆，三四日后，方知诬构。
现代文：此事刚传出时，京师轰动，纷纷传说宰相勾结亲王谋反，三四天以后，才弄清是有人诬陷。
English: When the news first broke, the capital was abuzz with rumours that the prime minister was plotting a coup with the prince. It took three or four days for it to become clear that someone had framed him.

古文：人士侧目于守澄、郑注，故谏官号泣论之。申锡方免其祸。
现代文：官吏们都害怕王守澄和郑注，只因谏官号哭申辩，宋申锡才得免死罪。
English: The officials were afraid of Wang Shoucheng and Zheng Zhu. It was only because of the eunuch's crying plea that Song Shensi was spared the death penalty.

古文：己酉，敕以李载义入朝，于曲江亭赐宴，仍命宰臣百僚赴会。
现代文：初十，因李载义回京，文宗在曲江亭赐宴，传宰臣百官参加宴会。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, as Li Zaiyi returned to Beijing, Wenzong gave a banquet at Qujiang Pavilion, and hundreds of officials attended the banquet.

古文：辛酉，以黔中观察使裴弘泰为桂管经略使，以前安州刺史陈正仪为黔中观察使。
现代文：二十二日，调原黔中观察使裴弘泰任桂管经略使，调原安州刺史陈正仪任黔中观察使。
English: On the 22nd, Pei Hongtai, who was originally transferred to be a middle-ranking observation envoy, was appointed as a vice-minister of Guizhou Guanzhong, and Chen Zhengyi, who was originally transferred to be a middle-ranking observation envoy of Anzhou Jishi.

古文：丁卯，紫宸奏事，宰相路随至龙墀，仆于地，令中人掖之。
现代文：二十六日，群臣在紫宸殿奏事，宰相路随到龙墀处跌倒在地，文宗命令太监扶起。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, a group of courtiers were giving a speech at Shishinden, and when Prime Minister Lu followed them to the dragon's lair, he fell to the ground, and Emperor Wenzong ordered the eunuch to help him up.

古文：翌日，上疏陈退，识者嘉之。
现代文：次日，路随上书请求退休，人们赞许他这样做。
English: The next day, he submitted a letter asking to retire, and was allowed to do so.

古文：夏四月己巳，甲戌，以新罗王嗣子金景徽为开府仪同三司、检校太保，使持节鸡林州诸军事、鸡林州大都督、宁海军使、上柱国，封新罗王；仍封其母朴氏为新罗国太妃。
现代文：夏四月初一为己巳日。初六，以新罗王嗣子金景徽为开府仪同三司、检校太保，使持节鸡林州诸军事、鸡林州大都督、宁海军使、上柱国，封新罗王；封其母朴氏为新罗国太妃。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 4th month of the summer, Jin Jinghui, the heir of the king of Silla, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony and the third secretary of the inspection of the school, and the military of Jilin Province, the grand governor of Jilin Province, the Ning naval envoy, and the upper pillar country were appointed as the king of Silla; and his mother Pak was appointed as the princess of Silla.

古文：丁亥，诏： 史官记事，用戒时常，先朝旧制，并得随仗。其后宰臣撰时政记，因循斯久，废坠实多。
现代文：十九日，文宗诏令： 先朝制度规定史官随朝记录皇帝与大臣的言论活动，后来改为宰相下朝后追记《时政记》，沿袭多年，缺漏太多。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor Wenzong issued an edict: The previous system stipulated that the historian should record the speech activities of the emperor and ministers with the previous system. Later, it was changed to the chancellor should write down the "History of State Affairs" after the next dynasty. This system has been followed for many years, and there are too many omissions.

古文：自今后宰臣奏事，有关献替及临时处分稍涉政刑者，委中书门下丞一人随时撰录，每季送史馆，庶警朕阙，且复官常。 
现代文：今后大臣们上朝奏事，有关批评建议或临时的决定涉及政策法令的，派中书门下丞一人随时记录，每一季度送交史馆保存，让我能随时查阅，警惕自己的缺点疏忽。 
English: In the future, when ministers report to the cabinet, and the relevant criticisms, suggestions or temporary decisions involve policies and decrees, one person will be sent to record them at any time and send them to the history museum for preservation every quarter, so that I can check them at any time and be wary of my own shortcomings and negligence.

古文：己丑，以李载义为山南西道节度，依前守太保、同平章事，代温造；以造为兵部侍郎。
现代文：二十一日，调李载义接替温造任山南西道节度使，原守太保、同平章事职衔不变；任命温造为兵部侍郎。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li Zaiyi was transferred to succeed Wen Zuo as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, and the original title of Guotaibo and Tongping Zhang remained unchanged; Wen Zuo was appointed as the attendant of the military department.

古文：以幽州卢龙节度留后杨志诚检校工部尚书，为幽州卢龙节度使。
现代文：任命原幽州卢龙节度留后杨志诚检校工部尚书，为幽州卢龙节度使。
English: After the appointment of the former Yuzhou Lulong Festival delegate, Yang Zhicheng inspected the school engineering department and was appointed as the Yuzhou Lulong Festival delegate.

古文：五月戊戌朔，太庙第四室、第六室破漏，有司不时修葺，各罚俸。
现代文：五月初一为戊戌日，太庙第四室、第六室破漏，管理人员不及时维修，分别罚扣工资。
English: On the first day of May, the 4th and 6th rooms of the Great Temple were leaking, and the management personnel did not repair them in time, and were fined and deducted wages.

古文：上命中使领工徒及以禁中修营材葺之。
现代文：文宗命太监带宫中工匠用宫中建筑材料前往修缮。
English: The eunuch of Emperor Wenzong brought craftsmen from the imperial court to repair it with imperial building materials.

古文：右补阙韦温上疏论曰： 宗庙不葺，罪在有司弛慢，宜加重责。
现代文：右补阙韦温上奏说 ：宗庙失修，管理人员玩忽职守有罪，应从严惩处。
English: The Right Rev. Wei Wen said in his report: the ancestral temple is in disrepair, the management personnel are guilty of dereliction of duty, and should be severely punished.

古文：今有司止于罚俸，便委内臣葺修，是许百司之官公然废职。
现代文：如今对他们只罚扣工资，同时派太监负责维修，这是纵容百官公然渎职。
English: Nowadays, they are only fined and docked wages, while eunuchs are assigned to be in charge of maintenance. This is condoning the blatant dereliction of duty by hundreds of officials.

古文：以宗庙之重，为陛下所私，则群官有司便同委弃，此臣窃为圣朝惜也。
现代文：如果把宗庙这样重大的事看成皇上的私事，则百官和各部门，也可不设置了，这是我个人深为朝廷惋惜的事。
English: If such an important matter as the construction of the ancestral temple is regarded as a private matter of the emperor, then hundreds of officials and various departments may not be set up. This is something that I personally deeply regret for the imperial court.

古文：事关宗庙，皆书史册，苟非旧典，不可率然。
现代文：事关宗庙，是要载入史册的，若非典章制度内所规定的，不可轻率从事。
English: If the matter is related to the ancestral temple and is to be recorded in the annals of history, it should not be taken lightly if it is not stipulated in the ordinance system.

古文：伏乞更下诏书，复委所司营葺，则制度不紊，官业各修矣。 
现代文：请皇上重新下令，责成原经管部门和人员负责维修，这样才能使制度不乱，分工明确。 
English: I would like to ask the emperor to issue a new order, instructing the original administrative departments and personnel to be responsible for maintenance, so that the system is not chaotic and the division of labor is clear.

古文：疏奏，帝嘉之，乃追止中使，命有司修奉。
现代文：文宗看到奏折，十分赞许，便将原派出太监召回，命主管宗庙的部门负责维修。
English: Seeing the report and highly approving of it, Wenzong recalled the eunuch who had been dispatched and ordered the department in charge of the ancestral temple to be responsible for the repairs.

古文：戊午，西川李德裕奏：南蛮放还先掳掠百姓、工巧、僧道约四千人还本道。
现代文：二十一日，西川节度使李德裕奏南诏已将原先掳去的百姓、工匠、僧道约四千人放还本道。
English: On the twenty-first day of the West River Festival, Li Deyu announced that Nanzhao had released about four thousand people, craftsmen, and monks who were originally abducted.

古文：辛酉，东都留守、刑部尚书韦弘景卒。
现代文：二十四日，原东都留守、刑部尚书韦弘景去世。
English: On the 24th, the former Dongdu was left behind, and the head of the criminal investigation department, Wei Hongjing, passed away.

古文：丙寅，以京兆尹崔琯为尚书左丞。
现代文：二十九日，调原京兆尹崔任尚书左丞。
English: On the 29th, the former Jingzhao Yin Cui was transferred to the post of Shangshu Zuo.

古文：太常少卿庞严权知京兆尹。
现代文：调太常少卿庞严代理京兆尹。
English: Jing Zhaoyun, the deputy of Jing Pangyan, was transferred to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：六月丁卯朔。
现代文：六月初一为丁卯日。
English: The first day of June is Dingwu Day.

古文：戊寅，以霖雨涉旬，诏疏理诸司系囚。
现代文：二日，因苦于雨十余日不停，诏令各司清理积案，审查处理在押人犯。
English: On the second day, due to more than ten days of non-stop rain, all departments were ordered to clear the backlog of cases and review the handling of prisoners.

古文：辛卯，苏、杭、湖南水害稼。
现代文：二十五日，苏、杭、湖南洪水淹坏农作物。
English: On the 25th, floods in Suzhou, Hangzhou and Hunan ruined crops.

古文：甲午，东川奏：玄武江水涨二丈，梓州罗城漂人庐舍。
现代文：二十八日，东川奏：玄武江水涨二丈，梓州罗城内房屋被冲毁。
English: On the 28th, the Dongchuan played: the water of the Xuanwu River rose two meters, and the houses in Luocheng, Zizhou, were washed away.

古文：秋七月丁酉朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为丁酉日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is Ding Xi Day.

古文：庚子，赠太子宾客李渤礼部尚书。
现代文：初四，追封原太子宾客李渤为礼部尚书。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, the guest Li Wei, the former crown prince, was named the guest of honor.

古文：辛丑，以兵部侍郎温造检校户部尚书，为东都留守。
现代文：五日，任命原兵部侍郎温造检校户部尚书，为东都留守。
English: On the fifth day, the former attendant of the military department, Wen Zuo, was appointed to inspect the school, and the secretary of the household department, Shang Shu, stayed behind in Dongdu.

古文：甲辰，以太了少师分司、上柱国、袭徐国公萧俯守左仆射致仕。
现代文：八日，原太子少师分司、上柱国、袭徐国公萧亻免守左仆射退休。
English: On the 8th, the former prince's young division division chief, Shangzhu Guo, attacked Xu Guogong Xiaoqi and retired.

古文：剑南东、西两川水，遣使宣抚赈给。
现代文：剑南东、西两川发生水灾，派人前往慰问救济。
English: Floods occurred in the East and West Rivers of South Jian, and people were sent to offer condolences and relief.

古文：己未，以给事中罗让为福建观察使。
现代文：二十三日，调原给事中罗让出任福建观察使。
English: On the 23rd, Luo Zhen, who was originally assigned to the case, took up the post of Fujian Observer.

古文：八月丙寅朔。
现代文：八月初一为丙寅日。
English: The first day of August is Hsin-Tin Day.

古文：庚午，武昌军节度使、检校户部尚书元稹卒。
现代文：五日，原武昌军节度使、检校户部尚书元稹去世。
English: On the fifth day, the former Wuchang military festival envoy, the head of the school inspection department, Shangshu Yuanqi, died.

古文：辛未，贬刑部员外郎舒元舆为著作郎。元舆累上表请自效，并进文章，朝议责其躁进也。
现代文：初六，贬原刑部员外郎舒元舆为著作郎，舒元舆曾多次上表请求重用，并呈送自己的文章，朝廷讨论时批评他太不安分。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Shu Yuan-Yu, the son-in-law of a former member of the Criminal Investigation Department, was denounced as the author's son. Shu Yuan-Yu had repeatedly petitioned for re-use, and submitted his own articles. During the discussion at the Imperial Court, he was criticized for being too restless.

古文：壬申，以河阳三城怀州节度使杨元卿为宣武军节度使，代李逢吉；以逢吉检校司徒、兼太子太师，充东都留守，代温造；以温造为河阳三城怀州节度使。
现代文：初七，调原河阳三城怀州节度使杨元卿接替李逢吉为宣武军节度使；调李逢吉检校司徒、兼太子太师并接替温造为东都留守；调温造任河阳三城怀州节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yang Yuanqing was transferred from Heyang to the three cities of Huai Zhou to succeed Li Fengji as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu army; Li Fengji was transferred to the school inspector, the prince and the grandmaster and succeeded Wen Zuo as the Dongdu left; and Wen Zuo was appointed as the festival envoy of Heyang to the three cities of Huai Zhou.

古文：戊寅，以陕虢观察使崔郾为鄂岳安黄观察使。
现代文：十三日，调陕虢观察使崔郾任鄂岳安黄观察使。
English: On the 13th, the Shaanxi-Hebei Observation Envoy Cui Jun was appointed as the E-Yue-Anhuang Observation Envoy.

古文：甲申，以中书舍人崔咸为陕州防御使。
现代文：十九日，调中书舍人崔咸出任陕州防御使。
English: On the 19th, Cui Xian, a middle school teacher, was transferred to the post of Shaanxi defense envoy.

古文：诏陕州旧有都防御观察使额宜停，兵马属本州防御使。
现代文：诏令停止旧有都防御观察使职称，所属兵马划归州防御使管带。
English: The imperial edict suspended the old title of defense observation and command, and the soldiers and horses belonging to it were assigned to the state defense and command zone.

古文：丙戌，京兆尹庞严卒。
现代文：二十一日，原京兆尹庞严去世。
English: On the twenty-first day, the original Beijing Zhao Yin Pangyan passed away.

古文：庚寅，以司农卿、驸马都尉杜忭为京兆尹。
现代文：二十五日，任命司农卿、驸马都尉杜为京兆尹。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Jing Zhaoyun as the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：九月丙申朔。
现代文：九月初一为丙申日。
English: The first day of September is the first day of spring.

古文：甲辰，贬太子左庶子郭求为婺王府司马，以其心疾，与同僚忿竞也。
现代文：初九，原太子左庶子郭求被降职为婺王府司马，因郭求心怀妒嫉，常与同事争执。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Guo Qiu, the second son of the former crown prince Zuo, was demoted to the post of secretary of the Shao Wangfu. Because Guo Qiu was jealous, he often quarreled with his colleagues.

古文：翰林学士薛廷老、李让夷皆罢职守本官。
现代文：翰林学士薛廷老、李让夷也被革去本兼各职。
English: Hanlin scholars Xue Tinglao and Li Jangyi were also dismissed from their posts.

古文：廷老在翰林，终日酣醉无仪检，故罢。让夷常推荐廷老，故坐累也。
现代文：因薛廷老在翰林整天酗酒失态，李让夷则多次推荐薛廷老而受牵连。
English: Due to Xue Tinglao's drinking all day in Hanlin, Li Zhangyi was implicated for recommending Xue Tinglao many times.

古文：己未，以左仆射窦易直判太常卿。
现代文：二十四日，任左仆射窦易直兼太常卿。
English: On the 24th, his left-hand man, Sho Dou, was appointed to the position of First Secretary of the Grand Council of State.

古文：西川李德裕奏收复吐蕃所陷维州，差兵镇守。
现代文：西川节度使李德裕奏称收复被吐蕃侵占的维州，并已派军队驻防。
English: The Nishikawa festival made Li Deyu declare that he would recover the province of Wizhou, which had been invaded and occupied by the Tibetans, and that he had sent troops to defend it.

古文：冬十月乙丑朔，以前绵州刺史郑绰为安南都护。
现代文：冬十月初一为乙丑日。任原绵州刺史郑绰为安南都护。
English: In winter, the first day of October is the second day of the Ugly Duckling. Former Mianzhou chief Zheng Zhuo was appointed as Annan tutelary.

古文：戊寅，蛮寇隽州，陷二县。
现代文：十四日，南诏入侵，攻陷辒州的两个县。
English: On the 14th, Nanzhao invaded and captured two counties in Ganzhou.

古文：辛巳，沧州移清池县于南罗城内置。
现代文：十七日，沧州将清池县治移到城南罗城内设置。
English: On the 17th, Cangzhou transferred the administration of Qingchi County to Nanluo city.

古文：十一月乙未朔。
现代文：十一月初一为乙未日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is the eve of the second day of the third month.

古文：庚戌，凤翔节度使王承元来朝。
现代文：十六日，凤翔节度使王承元进京朝见。
English: On the 16th, the Fengxiang Festival brought Wang Chengyuan to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：己未，以承元检校司空、青州刺史，充平卢军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任王承元为检校司空、青州刺史，担任平卢军节度使。
English: On the 25th, Wang Chengyuan was appointed as the inspector of the school in the sky and the historian of Qingzhou, and served as the festival envoy of the Pinglu Army.

古文：癸亥，以尚书左仆射、判太常卿事窦易直检校司空，为凤翔陇右节度使。
现代文：二十九日，调原尚书左仆射兼太常卿事窦易直检校司空，任凤翔陇右节度使。
English: On the 29th, Shangshu's right-hand man, Sho Kan, was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing's secretary, Dou Yi was transferred to the position of direct inspector of schools, and Feng Xiangjun was assigned to the position of right-hand sexton.

古文：十二月乙丑朔。
现代文：十二月初一为乙丑日。
English: The first day of December is the first day of the second month.

古文：戊寅，以左丞王璠兼判太常卿事。
现代文：十四日，任命左丞王兼判太常卿事。
English: On the 14th, he was appointed to the post of Sajo-o-Wang and also the post of Jandai-jong-kyo.

古文：甲申，贬新除桂管观察使裴弘泰为饶州刺史，以除镇淹程不进，为宪司所纠故也。
现代文：二十日，将新任桂管观察使裴弘泰降职为饶州刺史，因为他被任职后拖延不到任所，被宪司检举告发。
English: On the 20th, Pei Hongtai, the newly-appointed Gui Guan observation, was demoted to the position of Raozhou chief historian, because he did not reach his post after being appointed, and was reported by the prosecutor of the Constitutional Court.

古文：癸巳，以郑州刺史李翱为桂管观察使。
现代文：二十九日，调郑州刺史李翱任桂管观察使。
English: On the 29th, Zhengzhou Zishi Li Jun was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：是岁，淮南、浙江东西道、荆襄、鄂岳、剑南东川并水，害稼，请蠲秋租。
现代文：这一年，淮南、浙江东西道、荆襄、鄂岳、剑南东川普遍发生水灾，农作物受害，各地报请减免秋租。
English: This year, widespread flooding occurred in Huainan, Zhejiang East-West Road, Jingxiang, Ege, and Jianan Dongchuan, and crops were damaged. All regions reported to reduce and exempt autumn rent.

古文：京师大雨雪。
现代文：这年冬天，京城下了大雨雪。
English: This winter, there was heavy rain and snow in Kyoto.

古文：六年春正月乙未朔，以久雪废元会。
现代文：大和六年春正月初一为乙未日。因久雪取消元旦朝见仪式。
English: The 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st

古文：戊戌，振武李泳招收得黑山外契苾部落四百七十三帐。
现代文：初四，振武节度使李泳招收来归附的黑山外契絆部落四百七十三帐。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Zhenwu Festival made Li Yong collect the 473 accounts of the Black Mountain foreign bond tribe.

古文：壬子，诏： 朕闻 天听自我人听天视自我人视。 
现代文：十八日，文宗颁发诏书说 ： 上天倾听的是百姓的呼声，上天观察的是百姓的反映。 
English: On the 18th, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict saying: Heaven is listening to the people's voice, and Heaven is observing the people's reflection.

古文：朕之菲德，涉道未明，不能调序四时，导迎和气。
现代文：我的修养不够，懂得道理不多，不能使四季有序，阴阳调和。
English: My cultivation is not enough, I don't understand much, I can't make the four seasons orderly and harmonize yin and yang.

古文：自去冬已来，逾月雨雪，寒风尤甚，颇伤于和。
现代文：自去冬以来，雨雪下了一个多月，寒冷的北风刮个不停，气候很是反常。
English: Since last winter, it has rained and snowed for more than a month, the cold north wind has been blowing non-stop, and the weather is very abnormal.

古文：念兹庶氓，或罹冻馁，无所假贷，莫能自存。
现代文：想到百姓都在挨冻受饿，借贷无门，难以维持生活。
English: To think that people are freezing and starving, unable to borrow money, and struggling to make ends meet.

古文：甲寅，司徒致仕薛平卒。
现代文：我不免整天惶恐不安。常想多施行些善政，顺应天心。
English: All day long I am filled with trepidation and anxiety. I often wish I could implement more good policies and follow God's will.

古文：二月甲子朔，以前义昌军节度使殷侑检校吏部尚书，充天平军节度、郓曹濮等州观察使，代令狐楚；以楚检校右仆射，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：二月初一为甲子日，任命原义昌军节度使殷侑为检校吏部尚书，接替令狐楚为天平军节度使、郓曹濮等州观察使；任命令狐楚检校右仆射，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the first day of the second month of the second month, the former Yichang military festival was appointed as the inspection officer of the inspection department of Shangshu, and the Tianping military festival was appointed as the inspection officer of the Tianping military festival, and the state observation envoy such as Zou Caoqi was appointed as the state observation envoy; the right-hand man of the inspection school was appointed as the inspection officer of the inspection school, and the Taiyuan Yin, the Beidou left-behind, and the Hedong festival were appointed as the inspection envoy.

古文：戊寅，苏、湖二州水，赈米二十二万石。以本州常平义仓斛斗给。
现代文：十五日，苏、湖二州发生水灾，发放救济粮米二十二万石，各由本州常平义仓支付。
English: On the 15th, floods occurred in the two states of Suzhou and Hubei, and 220,000 kilos of relief grain and rice were distributed, each of which was paid from the Changping warehouse in the state.

古文：庚辰，户部尚书、判度支王起请于邠宁、灵武置营田务，从之。
现代文：十七日，户部尚书兼度支王起请在宁、灵武两节度使下设营田务。同意所请。
English: On the seventeenth day, the head of the household, Shangshu and Duodu, asked the king to set up camp duties under Ning and Lingwu. They agreed to the request.

古文：己丑，寒食节，上宴群臣于麟德殿。
现代文：二十六日，寒食节，文宗在麟德殿设宴招待群臣。
English: On the 26th, the cold food festival, Emperor Wenzong held a banquet at the Lin De Hall to invite a group of ministers.

古文：是日，杂戏人弄孔子，帝曰： 孔子，古今之师，安得侮渎。 
现代文：这天杂戏演员有演出孔子戏的，文宗看后说 ：孔子自古以来都是人们的师表，怎么能对他如此不尊重？ 
English: On this day, a troupe of actors performed a Confucius play. After watching it, Wenzong said, "Confucius has been people's teacher since ancient times. How can he be so disrespected?"

古文：亟命驱出。
现代文：立刻命令将演员们赶走。
English: Immediately order the actors to leave.

古文：三月甲午朔。
现代文：三月初一为甲午日。
English: The first day of March is the first day of the month.

古文：辛丑，以武宁军节度使、守太傅、同平章事王智兴兼侍中，充忠武军节度、陈许蔡观察等使。
现代文：初八，调原武宁军节度使、守太傅、同平章事王智兴兼侍中，还担任忠武军节度使陈许蔡观察等使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wang Zhixing, the former festival envoy of the Armed Forces of Ningxia, was transferred to the position of the commander-in-chief, and Wang Zhixing, the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of Ningxia, was also appointed as the attendant. Chen Xu Cai, the festival envoy of the Loyal Armed Forces, was also appointed as the observer.

古文：以邠宁节度使李听为武宁军节度、徐泗濠观察等使；以金吾卫大将军孟友亮为邠宁节度使。
现代文：调原宁节度使李听任武宁节度使、徐泗濠观察等使；调金吾卫大将军孟友亮出任宁节度使。
English: The transfer of the original Ning Jiedu caused Li Xun to be appointed as the Wu Ning Jiedu envoy, Xu Xi observation and other envoys; the transfer of the gold to the Wei general Meng Youliang as the Ning Jiedu envoy.

古文：以前河东节度使柳公绰为兵部尚书。
现代文：任前河东节度使柳公绰为兵部尚书。
English: Prior to his appointment, Hedong Jiedu made Liu Gongpu the secretary of the military department.

古文：辛酉，以前忠武军节度使高瑀检校右仆射，充武宁军节度、徐泗濠观察等使。
现代文：二十八日，调原忠武军节度使高王禹检校右仆射，并任武宁军节度、徐泗濠观察等使。
English: On the 28th, Gao Wang Yuqian was appointed as the right-hand man of Gao Wang Yuqian, and he was also appointed as the commander of the Wu Ning Army and the observer of Xu Xi.

古文：夏四月癸亥朔。
现代文：夏四月初一为癸亥日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is the day of the boar.

古文：乙丑，兵部尚书柳公绰卒。
现代文：初三，原兵部尚书柳公绰去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of the new year, former military commander Shang Shuling passed away.

古文：戊寅，以新除武宁军节度使李听为太子太保。
现代文：十六日，调新近任命的武宁军节度使李听任太子太保。
English: On the 16th, the newly appointed military governor of Wu Ning was transferred to make Li listen to Prince Taibo.

古文：五月癸巳朔。
现代文：五月初一为癸巳日。
English: The first day of May is the Day of the Snake.

古文：甲辰，西川修邛崃关城，又移隽州于台登城。
现代文：十二日，西川修筑邛崃关城，又将辒州治所移到台登城。
English: On the 12th, Saikawa built Shinguan City and moved the Bozhou Administration Office to Taiteng City.

古文：壬子，浙西丁公著奏杭州八县灾疫，赈米七万石。
现代文：二十日，浙江西道观察使丁公著奏称，杭州等八县遭受天灾之后又发生瘟疫，发放救济粮米七万石。
English: On the 20th, Ding Gong, the envoy of Zhejiang West Road Observation, said in his report that after Hangzhou and other eight counties suffered from natural disasters, the plague occurred again, and 70,000 kilos of relief grain and rice were distributed.

古文：丁巳，以盐州刺史王晏平检校左散骑常侍、御史大夫，充灵盐节度使。
现代文：二十五日，调盐州刺史王晏平检校左散骑常侍，御史大夫，并任灵盐节度使。
English: On the 25th, he was appointed as the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider of the left rider

古文：己未，兴平县人上官兴因醉杀人而亡窜，官捕其父囚之，兴归，待罪有司。
现代文：二十七日，兴平县有个名叫上官兴的人醉后杀人畏罪逃走，地方官将他的父亲捉来关押在牢里，上官兴闻讯回来投案自首，听候处置。
English: On the 27th, a man named Shangguan Xingru in Xingping County got drunk and fled after committing homicide. Local officials arrested his father and detained him in prison. Shangguan Xingru returned to surrender and await disposition.

古文：京兆尹杜忭、中丞宇文鼎以兴自首免父之囚，其孝可奖，请免死。
现代文：京兆尹杜琮和中丞宇文鼎认为上官兴能自首救父出狱，孝心可贵，请不要判他死刑。
English: Jing Zhao, Yin Du and Zhong Zhao, Yu Wenting believe that Shangguan Xing can turn himself in to get his father out of prison, and his filial piety is valuable. Please do not sentence him to death.

古文：诏两省参议，皆言杀人者死，古今共守，兴不可免。
现代文：文宗将此事交中书、门下两省讨论，参加讨论的官员们一致认为杀人者抵命可是从古以来都遵守的法律，上官兴死罪难免。
English: Wen Zong submitted the matter to the Chinese government and the two provinces under his command for discussion. The officials who participated in the discussion agreed that the murderer's resistance to death is a law that has been observed since ancient times, and it is inevitable for the superior officer to commit the crime of death.

古文：上竟从忭等议免死，决杖八十，配流灵州。
现代文：文宗还是采纳杜琮等人的意见，命免去上官兴死罪，判打八十棍，流放灵州。
English: Wenzong still adopted the opinions of Du Xuan and others, pardoned Shangguan Xing from the death penalty, sentenced him to 80 lashes, and exiled him to Lingzhou.

古文：庚申，诏： 如闻诸道水旱害人，疾疫相继，宵旰罪己，兴寝疚怀。
现代文：二十八日，文宗颁发诏书说： 得知各道不断发生水旱灾害，随后又遇瘟疫流行，我认为这都是因为我一人的过失所致，因此早晚自责，深感不安。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict, saying, "I have learned that floods and droughts have been occurring continuously in various provinces, followed by epidemics of plague. I believe that all of this is due to my own mistakes. Therefore, I feel guilty sooner or later and feel deeply uneasy.

古文：今长吏奏申，札瘥犹甚。盖教化未感于蒸人，精诚未格于天地，法令或爽，官吏为非。
现代文：现接各地负责官员报表说灾情仍在加重，大凡政策教育没有普及到百姓，诚心不能感动天地，政策法令出了偏差，官员有的胡作非为。
English: Now we have received reports from officials in charge of various regions saying that the disaster situation is still worsening, that policy education has not spread to the people, that sincerity cannot move heaven and earth, that policies and laws have deviated, and that some officials have acted improperly.

古文：有一于兹，皆伤和气。
现代文：这几条只要有一条都会影响天时反常。
English: As long as there is just one of these, it will affect the weather anomalies.

古文：并委中外臣僚，一一具所见闻奏，朕当亲览，无惮直言。
现代文：请内外官员们对上述情况一有所闻所见及时向我反映。我会亲自批阅，大家不要害怕讲真话。
English: I would like to ask officials at home and abroad to report to me in a timely manner as soon as they have heard or seen about the above situation. I will personally approve the report. Everyone should not be afraid to speak the truth.

古文：其遭灾疫之家，一门尽殁者，官给凶器。
现代文：对遭了灾害的人家，全家遭难的，由公家发给棺木安葬。
English: For the families of people who have suffered disasters, if the whole family has suffered, the public family will give them coffins for burial.

古文：其余据其人口遭疫多少，与减税钱。疫疾未定处，官给医药。
现代文：其余按遭灾人口多少，减免税租。瘟疫还在流行的地区，由公家供应医药。
English: The rest, according to the number of people affected by the disaster, will receive tax reductions and exemptions. In areas where the plague is still prevalent, medicine will be supplied by the public sector.

古文：诸道既有赈赐，国费复虑不充，其供御所须及诸公用，量宜节减，以救凶荒。 
现代文：各道既有救灾的任务，国家财政也有困难，所以，今后宫中和各衙门的费用应酌量削减，以利救灾。 
English: All provinces have both the task of disaster relief and national financial difficulties. Therefore, in the future, the expenses of the palace and each gate should be reduced as much as possible in order to facilitate disaster relief.

古文：六月壬戌朔。
现代文：六月初一为壬戌日。
English: The first day of June is Jinshan Day.

古文：丙寅，京兆尹杜忭兼御史大夫。
现代文：初五，任京兆尹杜琮兼御史大夫。
English: In the fifth year of his junior high school career, he was appointed to the post of Keizhoin Doushong (京兆尹杜) and goshi taifu (御史大夫).

古文：戊寅，右仆射王涯奉敕，准令式条疏士庶衣服、车马、第舍之制度。
现代文：十七日，右仆射王涯奉命草拟官民人等的衣服、车马、屋宇制度。
English: On the 17th, his right-hand man, Sha Wangya, was ordered to draw up a system of clothing, chariots and horses, and houses for officials and commoners.

古文：敕下后。
现代文：命令下达后，流言四起。
English: After the order was issued, rumors began to circulate.

古文：浮议沸腾。杜忭于敕内条件易施行者宽其限，事竟不行，公议惜之。秋七月辛卯朔。
现代文：杜琮对制度中易行部分放宽限制，结果还是行不通，公议认为很可惜。秋七月初一为辛卯日。
English: Du Wei relaxed the restrictions on the easy-to-operate part of the system, but the result was still not feasible, and the public discussion was considered to be a pity. The first day of autumn in July is a hard day.

古文：甲午，以谏议大夫王彦威、户部郎中杨汉公、祠部员外郎苏涤、右补阙裴休并充史馆修撰。
现代文：初四，调谏议大夫王彦咸、户部郎中杨汉公、祠部员外郎苏涤、右补阙裴休等同任史馆修撰。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Wang Yixian, the director of the examination and deliberation department, Yang Han Gong, the head of the household department, Wai Lang Su Dairi, the member of the ancestral hall department, and Zui Xuan Pei Xiu, who were also in charge of the history museum, revised it.

古文：故事，史官不过三员，或止两员，今四人并命，论者非之。
现代文：按先例，任命史官不超过三人，一般两人，此次同时任命四人，人们认为不妥。
English: According to precedent, the appointment of no more than three historians, usually two, but this time four at the same time, is considered inappropriate.

古文：戊申，原王逵薨。
现代文：十八日，原王李逵去世。
English: On the 18th, the former King Lihong passed away.

古文：癸丑，以前灵武节度使李文悦为兗、海、沂、密节度使。
现代文：二十三日，调原灵武节度使李文悦任兖海沂密节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Li Wenyue, the former Lingwu Festival Delegate, was appointed as the Erhai Ermi Festival Delegate.

古文：己未，以河中节度使李程为左仆射；以户部尚书、判度支王起检校吏部尚书，充河中晋、慈、隰节度使；以御史中丞、兼刑部侍郎宇文鼎为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：十九日，任原河中节度使李程为左仆射；调原户部尚书、判度支王起检校吏部尚书，出任河中晋慈隰节度使；任御史中丞、兼刑部侍郎宇文鼎为户部侍郎、判度支。
English: On the 19th, Li Cheng was appointed as the left-hand man of the former Kecong Sect; Shang Shu of the former Household Division and Shang Shu of the Inspection Division of the Judgement Division were transferred to serve as the Kecong Jin Cixi Sect's Sect's envoy; and U Wenting, who was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History and also the attendant of the Criminal Division, was appointed as the attendant of the Household Division and the Judgement Division.

古文：八月辛酉朔，吏部尚书崔群卒。
现代文：八月初一为辛酉日，原吏部尚书崔群去世。
English: On the first day of August, the day of the Chinese New Year, Cui Qun, the former secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, passed away.

古文：以驾部郎中、知制诰李汉为御史中丞。
现代文：任驾部郎中、知制诰李汉为御史中丞。
English: He was appointed to the position of chauffeur's aide-de-camp and chieftain's aide-de-camp, and Rihan was appointed to the position of secretary-general.

古文：乙丑，以尚书右丞、判太常卿王璠检校礼部尚书、润州刺史、浙西观察使。
现代文：初五，调原尚书右丞、判太常卿王检校礼部尚书，出任润州刺史、浙西观察使。
English: In the fifth year of his junior high school, he was transferred to the Shoshu U.S.A. and the Shoshu Department of the Shoshu School of the Shoshu School of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy of the Shoshu Academy.

古文：庚午，山南东道节度使裴度来朝。
现代文：初十，山南东道节度使裴度进京朝见。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Baidu was invited to Beijing by the Shannan Host Festival.

古文：壬申，以前浙西观察使丁公著为太常卿。
现代文：十二日，任命原浙西观察使丁公著为太常卿。
English: On the 12th, Ding Gongzhu, the former Western Zhejiang Observation Envoy, was appointed as Tai Changqing.

古文：甲戌，御史中丞李汉奏论仆射上事仪，不合受四品已下官拜。
现代文：十四日，御史中丞李汉奏称仆射就任仪式，不应受四品以下官跪见礼。
English: On the 14th, Imperial Historian Chujo Li Han said at the inauguration ceremony that officials below the fourth grade should not kneel.

古文：时左仆射李程将赴省上故也。诏曰： 仆射上仪，近定所缘拜礼，皆约令文，已经施行，不合更改，宜准大和四年十一月十六日敕处分。 
现代文：当时左仆射李程将赴尚书省就职，因此李汉提及此事，文宗诏说 ：仆射就职礼仪都是早有规定，施行已久，不宜更改，应依照大和四年十一月十六日指示执行。 
English: At that time, the left attendant Li Cheng will go to Shangshu Province to take office, so Li Han mentioned the matter, and Wenzong Zhao said: The attendant's inauguration etiquette has long been stipulated, has been implemented for a long time, should not be changed, and should be carried out in accordance with the instructions of November 16th, 2015.

古文：九月庚寅朔，淄青初定两税额，五州一十九万三千九百八十九贯，自此淄青始有上供。
现代文：九月初一为庚寅日，淄青地区开始确定两税金额，淄、青、齐、登、莱五州共计一十九万三千九百八十九贯。从这时起，淄青才开始向国家上交赋税。
English: At the beginning of September, on the day of Geng Yin, the amount of the two taxes began to be determined in Handan and Qingdao, with a total of one hundred and ninety-three thousand nine hundred and eighty-nine yuan from the five states of Handan, Qingdao, Qi, Dengxing and Lai. From this time on, Handan and Qingdao began to pay taxes to the state.

古文：庚子，以太傅赵宗儒守司空致仕。
现代文：十一日，原太傅、守司空赵宗儒退休。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the former Taifu and governor Ku Zhao Zongru retired.

古文：辛丑，涿州置新城县，古督亢之地也。
现代文：十二日，涿州设置新城县，历史上这里是古燕国督亢旧地。
English: On the 12th, Xincheng County was set up in Zhangzhou. Historically, this was the old place of Guyan Guozhuang.

古文：丁未，太常卿丁公著卒。
现代文：十八日，原太常卿丁公著去世。
English: On the 18th, the former Grand Duke Ding Gongzhu passed away.

古文：庚戌，司空致仕赵宗儒卒。
现代文：二十一日，退休的原司空赵宗儒去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhao Zongru, the retired former Secretary of the Central Military Commission, passed away.

古文：壬子，以右金吾卫将军史孝章为鄜、坊、丹、延节度使。
现代文：二十三日，调右金吾卫将军史孝章出任州刺史、坊丹延节度使。
English: On the 23rd, the right-hand Kinguwei general Shi Xiaozhang was transferred to serve as the provincial governor and the provincial governor of Bo Dan Yan.

古文：冬十月庚子朔。
现代文：冬十月初一为庚申日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is the first day of the year.

古文：甲子，诏鲁王永宜册为皇太子。
现代文：初五，封鲁王李永为皇太子。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the crown prince of Lu, King Li Yong, was crowned.

古文：壬午，以左金吾卫将军李昌言检校左散骑常侍，充夏、绥、银、宥节度使。
现代文：二十三日，调左金吾卫将军李昌言检校左散骑常侍，出任夏绥银宥节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Li Changyun, the general of the Left King Wu Wei, was transferred to the left cavalry of the left cavalry of the inspection school, and served as the governor of Xiaqi Yinyu.

古文：甲申，以谏议大夫王彦威为河中少尹，以其论上官兴狱太徼讦故也。
现代文：二十五日，调原谏议大夫王彦威为河中少尹，因为他在讨论上官兴案件时发言太刻薄偏激。
English: On the 25th, Wang Yanwei, the former chief of the Central Military Commission, was demoted to the position of a minor official, because his speech during the discussion of the Shangguan Xing case was too harsh and extreme.

古文：十一月己丑朔。
现代文：十一月初一为己丑日。
English: The first day of November is National Ugly Sweater Day.

古文：丁未，淮南节度使、检校右仆射崔从卒。
现代文：十八日，原淮南节度使、检校右仆射崔从去世。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the former Huainan festival envoy and the right-hand man of the inspection of the school, Sho Cui, passed away.

古文：乙卯，以荆南节度使段文昌为剑南西川节度使。依前检校左仆射、同平章事。
现代文：二十六日，调原荆南节度使段文昌任剑南西川节度使，仍带检校左仆射、同平章事衔。
English: On the 26th, Duan Wenchang, the former Jingnan Festival Delegate, was appointed as the Jiannan Xichuan Festival Delegate, still with the titles of Zhaopu Ya and Tongping Zhang.

古文：十二月己未朔。
现代文：十二月初一为己未日。
English: The first day of December is just around the corner.

古文：乙丑，以中书侍郎、同平章事牛僧孺检校右仆射、同平章事、扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度使。
现代文：初七，任中书侍郎、同平章事牛僧孺检校右仆射、同平章事、扬州大都督府长史，并为淮南节度使。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he served as the junior secretary, Tongping Zhangji, the secretary of Niu Zang, the secretary of Guzheng School, the right-hand man of Sha, the secretary of Tongping Zhangji, the governor of Yangzhou, and the secretary of Huainan Festival.

古文：戊辰，内养王宗禹渤海使回，言渤海置左右神策军事、左右三军一百二十司，画图以进。
现代文：初十，内官王宗禹出使渤海回来介绍说，渤海设置有左右神策军，左右三军一百二十司，并绘图呈给文宗。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Zongyu, an officer of the Ministry of the Interior, sent an envoy to the Bohai Sea and came back with a report that the Bohai Sea had been set up with a left and right Shinsaka army, and a hundred and twenty divisions of the three armies on the left and right, and presented the drawing to Wenzong.

古文：以尚书右丞崔琯为江陵尹、荆南都团练观察使。
现代文：调原尚书右丞崔出任江陵尹、荆南都团练观察使。
English: Choe, the original director, appointed Jiangling Yin and Jing Nandu as observation envoys for regimental training.

古文：珍王諴薨。
现代文：珍王李讠咸去世。
English: Zhen Wang Lixian passed away.

古文：乙亥，昭义节度使刘从谏来朝。
现代文：十七日，昭义节度使刘从谏进京朝见。
English: On the 17th, the Shouyi Festival brought Liu Zonglu to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：丁未，以前西川节度使李德裕为兵部尚书。
现代文：任原西川节度使李德裕为兵部尚书。
English: The appointment of the former Nishikawa Setsudo made Li Deyu a military officer.

古文：责授循州司马杜元颖卒，赠湖州刺史。
现代文：原被罚降的循州司马杜元颖去世，追赠湖州刺史衔。
English: Xuzhou Sima Du Yuan Ying, who was originally punished and demoted, passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Huzhou thorn.

古文：七年春正月乙丑朔，御含元殿受朝贺。
现代文：大和七年春正月初一为己丑日，文宗在含元殿接受群臣朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the seventh year of the Yamato era, on the day of his birthday, Wenzong received morning greetings from his retainers at the Kanemoto-den.

古文：比年以用兵、雨雪，不行元会之仪。
现代文：近几年因为打仗、雨雪而没有举行元会仪式，因此史官要记上一笔。
English: In recent years, because of war, rain and snow, the ceremony for the founding of the party has not been held, so historians should make a note of it.

古文：故书，吴蜀贡新茶，皆于冬中作法为之，上务恭俭，不欲逆其物性，诏所供新茶，宜于立春后造。
现代文：吴、蜀进贡新茶，都是在冬季想办法催使茶叶提前生长得来的。文宗崇尚朴实，不愿违反植物生长规律，命令所进贡新茶，立春后祭祀之用。
English: Both Wu and Shu paid tribute for new tea in the winter to encourage the tea leaves to grow ahead of schedule. Wenzong advocated simplicity and did not want to violate the laws of plant growth. He ordered the new tea to be paid tribute, and it was used for sacrifices after the start of spring.

古文：甲午，加刘从谏同平章事。
现代文：三十日，加封昭义节度使刘从谏同平章事。
English: On the 30th, the Zhaoyi Festival was added to Liu Congzongping's record.

古文：襄州裴度奏请停临汉监牧，从之。
现代文：山南东道节度使裴度奏请撤销临汉监牧，批准。
English: The host of the festival in Shannan asked Pei Duxiao to revoke Linhan's supervision and approval.

古文：此监元和十四年置，马三千二百匹，废百姓田四百余顷，停之为便。
现代文：该监设于元和十四年，养马三千二百匹，毁耕地四百余顷，因此撤毁了是好事。
English: The inspectorate was set up in the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, raising 3,200 horses and destroying more than 400 hectares of arable land, so it is a good thing that it was dismantled.

古文：乙亥，以太府卿崔珙为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：十一日，调太府卿崔珙出任广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Cui Jian, the Deputy Governor of Guangdong Province, was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou and the chief envoy of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：壬子，诏： 朕承上天之睠佑，荷列圣之丕图，宵旰忧劳，不敢暇逸，思致康乂，八年于兹。
现代文：二十四日，文宗颁发诏书说： 我上得皇天的保佑，继承了历代先皇创建的国家。日夜操劳，不敢怠慢。希望能使国家富强，至今已有八年了。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict, saying, "I have been blessed by the emperor and have inherited the country founded by the emperors of past generations. I have worked day and night, and I dare not neglect it. I hope to make the country rich and strong. It has been eight years so far.

古文：而水旱流行，疫疾作沴，兆庶艰食，札瘥相仍。
现代文：可是水灾旱灾不断发生，瘟疫相继而来，亿万人民生活艰难，死亡相继。
English: However, floods and droughts continue to occur, plagues come one after another, and hundreds of millions of people live in hardship and die one after another.

古文：盖德未动天，诚未感物，一类失所，其过在予。
现代文：这都因我的德行不能感动上天，诚心不能感动万物所致，任何过失，责任在我。
English: This is all due to the fact that my virtue cannot move heaven, and my sincerity cannot move all things. Any fault is my responsibility.

古文：载怀罪己之心，深轸纳隍之叹。
现代文：我满怀自责的心情，深愧不能拯救百姓于水火之中。
English: I am full of self-reproach and deeply regret not being able to save the people from the water and fire.

古文：如闻关辅、河东，去年亢旱，秋稼不登，今春作之时，农务又切，若不赈救，惧至流亡。
现代文：得知京城附近、河东，去年久旱，秋粮无收，现值春耕农忙季节，如不及时救济，恐怕百姓要四出逃荒。
English: It was learned that there was a long drought last year in the vicinity of Beijing and in the east of Hedong, and there was no harvest of autumn grain. At present, it is the busy season for spring farming. If timely relief is not provided, I am afraid that the people will have to flee the famine.

古文：京兆府赈粟十万石，河南府、河中府、绛州各赐七万石，同、华、陕、虢、晋等州各赐十万石，并以常平义仓物充。 
现代文：决定给京兆府救灾粮粟十万石，河南府、河中府、绛州各给七万石，同、华、陕、虢、晋各州各给十万石，一律从常平义仓存粮中调拨。 
English: It was decided to give 100,000 koku of disaster relief grain to Jingzhao Prefecture, 70,000 koku each to Henan Prefecture, Henan Province, and Zhangzhou, and 100,000 koku each to Tong, Hua, Shaanxi, Handan, and Jin Provinces, all of which were allocated from the grain stored in the Changping warehouse.

古文：以新除岭南节度使崔珙检校工部尚书，充武宁军节度使；以右金吾卫将军王茂元为岭南节度使。
现代文：调新任岭南节度使崔珙检校工部尚书，并任武宁军节度使；调右金吾卫将军王茂元任岭南节度使。
English: The newly appointed Lingnan Festival envoy, Cui Yijian, inspected the school's engineering department, and also served as the Wu Ning Army Festival envoy; the newly appointed right-wing Kinguwei General Wang Maoyuan served as the Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：丙辰，以前武宁军节度使高瑀为刑部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，任命原武宁军节度使高王禹为刑部尚书。
English: On the 28th, Gao Wangyu was appointed as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department of the former Wu Ning Army.

古文：岭南五管及黔中等道选补使，宜权停一二年。
现代文：决定将岭南五管和黔中等道选补使暂停一二年。
English: It was decided to suspend the selection of Lingnan Wukang and Handan Middle School for one or two years.

古文：二月己未朔。
现代文：二月初一为己未日。
English: The first day of February is the last day of the year.

古文：己巳，以吏部侍郎庾承宣为太常卿。
现代文：十一日，任吏部侍郎庾承宣为太常卿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zou Chengxuan, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed to the position of Grand Councilor.

古文：癸酉，以宗正卿李诜为陕州防御使，代崔咸；以咸为右散骑常侍。
现代文：十五日，任宗正卿李诜接替崔咸为陕州防御使；任崔咸为右散骑常侍。
English: On the 15th, Zong Zhengqing Li Jie succeeded Cui Han as the defense envoy of Shaanxi; Cui Han was appointed as the right cavalryman.

古文：己卯，麟德殿对吐蕃、渤海、牂柯、昆明等使。
现代文：二十一日，文宗在麟德殿接见吐蕃、渤海、柯、昆明等来使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Wenzong received envoys from Tubo, Bohai, Ke and Kunming at the Lin De Palace.

古文：辛巳，御史台奏：均王傅王堪男祯，国忌日于私第科决罚人。
现代文：二十三日，御史台检举均王的老师王堪之子王祯国忌日在家里处罚人。
English: On the 23rd, the History Channel reported that on the day of the death of Wang Xingguo, the son of Wang Kan, the teacher of King Jun, a person was punished at home.

古文：诏曰： 准令，国忌日禁饮酒、举乐。
现代文：文宗批示 ：按以往规定，国忌日禁止饮酒、作乐。
English: Wenzong's instruction: According to previous regulations, alcohol and music are prohibited on the National Day of Mourning.

古文：决罚人吏，都无明文。起今后从有此类，不须举奏。
现代文：并无明文规定不准处罚人。以后这类事情，不必举报。
English: There is no explicit provision prohibiting the punishment of people. In the future, such things do not have to be reported.

古文：王祯宜释放。 
现代文：王祯应予释放。 
English: Wang Qi should be released.

古文：丙戌，诏以银青光禄大夫、守兵部尚书、上柱国、赞皇县开国伯、食邑七百户李德裕以本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十八日，任银青光禄大夫、守兵部尚书、上柱国、赞皇县开国伯、食邑七百户李德裕原职外还任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 28th, Li Deyu was appointed as the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu, the guard of the military department of Shangshu, Shangzhu Province, Zhanwang County, the founding of the country, and the 700 households of the food village. In addition, he was also appointed as the deputy secretary of the same middle school.

古文：三月戊子朔。
现代文：三月初一为戊子日。
English: The first day of March is Boshi Day.

古文：庚寅，以前户部侍郎杨嗣复为尚书左丞。
现代文：初三，任原户部侍郎杨嗣复为尚书左丞。
English: In the third year of his junior high school career, Yang Shifu, who had been an attendant to the head of the household, was promoted to Shojo-zojo.

古文：壬辰，以左散骑常侍张仲方为太子宾客分司。
现代文：初五，任原左散骑常侍张仲方为太子宾客分司。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Zhongfang, the left rider of Ren Yuan, became the guest manager of the prince.

古文：仲方为郎中时，常驳故相李吉甫谥，德裕秉政，仲方请告，因授之。
现代文：张仲方任度支郎中时曾反对追加给李吉甫的封号，认为过于美化死者，因此受到宪宗的贬斥。李德裕做了宰相，张仲方请病假，因而授任现职。
English: When Zhang Zhongfang was in the middle of appointing Zhuo Jiro, he had opposed adding Li Jifu's name to the seal, believing that it was too much to beautify the deceased, and was therefore rebuked by Kenzong. Li Deyu became prime minister, Zhang Zhongfang took sick leave, and was thus appointed to his current post.

古文：己亥，岭南节度使李谅卒。
现代文：十二日，原岭南节度使李谅去世。
English: On the 12th, the former Lingnan Festival made Li Piao pass away.

古文：辛丑，和王绮薨。
现代文：十四日，和王李绮去世。
English: On the 14th, Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：复于埇桥置宿州，豁徐州符离县蕲县、泗州虹县隶之，以东都盐铁院官吴季真为宿州刺史。
现代文：重新在土甬桥建置宿州，将徐州的符离县、蕲县、泗州的虹县划归宿州管辖，调东都盐铁院官吴季真任宿州刺史。
English: He re-established Suzhou in Dujiaqiao, and placed Xuzhou's Fuyong County, Handan County, and Handan's Hong County under the jurisdiction of Suzhou, and transferred the East Capital Salt Railway Academician Wu Jizhen to serve as the governor of Suzhou.

古文：癸卯，以京兆尹、驸马都尉杜忭检校礼部尚书，充凤翔陇右节度。
现代文：十六日，调原京兆尹、驸马都尉杜琮检校礼部尚书，任凤翔陇右节度。
English: On the 16th, the former Jing Zhaoyun and the lieutenant of the imperial cavalry, Du Xi, were transferred to the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor.

古文：己酉，安南奏：蛮寇寇当管金龙州，当管生獠国、赤珠落国同出兵击蛮，败之。
现代文：二十二日，安南奏：南蛮入侵所辖金龙州，所辖生獠国、赤珠落国联合出兵击败南蛮入侵军。
English: On the 22nd, Annan played: Jinlong Prefecture, under the jurisdiction of the Southern Barbarian invasion, and Zhoushan Province, under the jurisdiction of the Red Pearl Province, jointly dispatched troops to defeat the Southern Barbarian invasion army.

古文：庚戌，出给事中杨虞卿为常州刺史，中书舍人张元夫汝州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，调原给事中杨虞卿出任常州刺史，调原中书舍人张元夫出任汝州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Yuqing, who was originally assigned to the case, served as the Changzhou court historian, and Zhang Yuanfu, who was originally assigned to the case, served as the Yuzhou court historian.

古文：以太府卿韦长为京兆尹。
现代文：任太府浣韦长为京兆尹。
English: Jing Zhaoyun was appointed the governor of Taifu and Wei.

古文：丙辰，以散骑常侍严休复为河南尹。
现代文：二十九日，任散骑常侍严休复为河南尹。
English: On the 29th, Ren Sanjie, a regular attendant of Yan Hui, was reinstated as Henan Yin.

古文：丁巳，以给事中萧浣为郑州刺史。
现代文：三十日，调给事中萧浣出任郑州刺史。
English: On the 30th, Xiao Wei was transferred to Zhengzhou as the chief historian.

古文：夏四月戊午朔。
现代文：夏四月初一为戊午日。
English: In summer, the first day of April falls on a Saturday.

古文：辛酉，九姓回纥可汗卒。
现代文：初四，九姓回纥可汗去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the new year, Jiuzhong Huiqi Khan passed away.

古文：癸亥，前凤翔节度使、检校司空窦易直卒。
现代文：初六，原凤翔节度使、检校司空窦易直去世。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the former Fengxiang section chief and school inspector Kuo Dou Yi Zhi passed away.

古文：癸酉，以同州刺史吴士智为江西观察使。以吏部侍郎高釴为同州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任原同州刺史吴土智为江西观察使，调吏部侍郎高钅弋出任同州刺史。
English: On the 16th, Wu Tu Zhi, the former governor of the same province, was appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy, and Gao Yao, the attendant of the administrative department, was transferred to serve as the governor of the same province.

古文：庚辰，以工部侍郎李固言为右丞，中书舍人杨汝士为工部侍郎。
现代文：二十三日，任原工部侍郎李固言为右丞，任原中书舍人杨汝士为工部侍郎。
English: On the 23rd, Li Gugen, who was originally the chamberlain of the engineering department, was appointed as the second-in-command, and Yang Rushi, who was originally the junior high school teacher, was appointed as the chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：壬子，以河南尹白居易为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：二十五日，任原河南尹白居易为太子宾客，分司东都。
English: On the 25th, the former Henan Yin Bai Juyi was appointed as the prince's guest, and became the deputy governor of Dongdu.

古文：甲申，以江西观察使裴谊为歙池观察使，代沈传师；以传师为吏部侍郎。
现代文：二十七日，调原江西观察使裴谊接替沈传师任歙州观察使；任沈传师为吏部侍郎。
English: On the 27th, the former Jiangxi observation envoy Peiyi succeeded Shen Chuanshi as the Bozhou observation envoy; and appointed Shen Chuanshi as the attendant of the personnel department.

古文：以右金吾卫将军唐弘实使回纥，册九姓回纥爱登里罗汨没施合句录毗伽彰信可汗。
现代文：派右金吾卫将军唐弘实出使回纥，封九姓回纥爱登里罗汨没施合句钅录毗伽彰信可汗。
English: Tang Hongsheng, the right-wing King of Wei, sent an envoy to Huizhou, and the nine surnames Huizhou, Ai Dengli, Luo Mingshi, Huizhou, Viga, and Changxin khan were sealed.

古文：五月丁亥朔。
现代文：五月初一为丁亥日。
English: The first day of May is Dinghai Day.

古文：丁酉，以李听为凤翔陇右节度使，依前检校司徒、兼太子太保。
现代文：十一日，任李听为凤翔陇右节度使，仍带检校司徒、兼太子太保衔。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ren Li listened to Feng Xiang's right-hand messenger, still carrying the title of school inspector, and also the title of prince.

古文：癸卯，兴元李载义来朝。
现代文：十七日，兴元节度使李载义进京朝见。
English: On the 17th, the Xingyuan Festival brought Li Zaiyi to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：癸丑，以前邛州刺史刘旻为安南都护。
现代文：二十七日，任原邛州刺史刘为安南都护。
English: On the 27th, Liu, the former governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annan.

古文：六月丁巳朔。
现代文：六月初一为丁巳日。
English: The first day of June is "Ting Si Day."

古文：乙巳，以山南西道节度使李载义为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使，依前守太保、同平章事。
现代文：十三日，任原山南西道节度使李载义为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使，仍带守太保、同平章事衔。
English: On the 13th, Li Zaiyi was appointed as Taiyuan Yin for the festival of Shannan West Road, and left for Beidou, and was appointed as an envoy for the festival of Hedong, still with the title of Shou Taibo and the same title as Ping Zhang.

古文：壬申，以御史中丞李汉为礼部侍郎，以工部尚书、翰林侍讲学士郑覃为御史大夫。
现代文：十六日，任原御史中丞李汉为礼部侍郎，任原工部尚书、翰林侍讲学士郑覃为御史大夫。
English: On the 16th, Li Han, the former Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Zheng Qi, the former Vice-Minister of Engineering and the former Assistant Lecturer of Hanlin, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：甲戌，以刑部尚书高瑀为太子少保分司。
现代文：十八日，任刑部侍郎高王禹为太子少保分司。
English: On the 18th, Gao Wangyu, an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the Prince's Junior Security Officer.

古文：乙亥，以中书侍郎、平章事李宗闵检校礼部尚书、同平章事，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：十九日，任原中书侍郎、平章事李宗闵为检校礼部尚书、同平章事，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: On the 19th, Li Zongyao, who was appointed as the junior high school secretary and the secretary of Pingzhang, was appointed as the school inspection department secretary, the secretary of Tongping, the secretary of Xingyuan and the secretary of the festival of West Shannan Road.

古文：丁丑，以左金吾卫将军李从易为桂管观察使。
现代文：二十一日，调左金吾卫将军李从易出任桂管观察使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, General Li Congyi was transferred to the post of Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：己卯，以右神策大将军李用为邠宁节度使。
现代文：二十三日，调右神策大将军李用出任宁节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Li Ying, the commander of the Right Divine Defense Force, was transferred to serve as the Ning Jiedu envoy.

古文：河阳修防口堰，役工四万，溉济源、河内、温县、武德、武陟五县田五千余顷。
现代文：河阳修筑防口堰，征用民工四万，可灌溉济源、河内、温县、武德、武陟等五县的农田五千多顷。
English: The construction of a weir at the mouth of the river in Heyang, with the requisition of 40,000 migrant workers, can irrigate more than 5,000 hectares of farmland in five counties including Jiyuan, Hanoi, Wenshan, Wude and Wuxi.

古文：癸未，泾原节度使张惟清卒。
现代文：二十七日，原泾原节度使张惟清去世。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Zhang Weiqing passed away.

古文：乙酉，以前河东节度使令狐楚检校右仆射，兼吏部尚书。
现代文：二十九日，任原河东节度使令狐楚为检校右仆射兼吏部尚书。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the former head of the Hedong Festival sent his right-hand man, Xuchu, to inspect the school.

古文：秋七月丙戌朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为丙戌日。
English: The first day of autumn and the first day of July are the most auspicious days.

古文：丁亥，以右龙武统军康志睦为四镇北庭行军、泾原节度使。
现代文：初二，调右龙武统军康志睦任四镇北庭行军、泾原节度使。
English: On the second day of the first semester, he was transferred to the right wing of the Long March Military Command of the Kangzhi Mutsu Army and assigned to march in the North Court of the Four Towns, and became the commander of the Shenyuan Military Command.

古文：壬寅，以金紫光禄大夫、守尚书右仆射、诸道盐铁转运使、上柱国、代郡公、食邑二千户王涯可同中书门下平章事，领使如故。
现代文：十七日，任金紫光禄大夫、守尚书右仆射、诸道盐铁转运使、上柱国、代郡公、食邑二千户王涯担任同中书门下平章事，仍担任原职。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wang Ya, who was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the right-hand man of Shou Shang Shu, the envoy of salt and iron transportation in all directions, the governor of Shangzhu, the deputy county official, and the food village of two thousand households, still held his original position.

古文：甲辰，右丞李固言等奏状，论仆射省中上事，不合受四品已下拜。
现代文：十九日，右丞李固言等上奏，说仆射到尚书省就职，不当受四品以下官员跪拜。
English: On the 19th, the right-hand man, Li Guyan, and others made a report, saying that he was appointed to Shangshu Province and was improperly bowed down to by officials below the fourth grade.

古文：敕旨宜准大和四年十一月十六日敕处分。
现代文：文宗批示：应按大和四年十一月十六日规定执行。
English: Wen Zong's instruction: It should be implemented in accordance with the provisions of November 16th, 2004.

古文：乙巳，虢州刺史崔玄亮卒。
现代文：二十日，原虢州刺史崔玄亮去世。
English: On the 20th, former Zhangzhou assassin Cui Xuanliang passed away.

古文：以左丞杨嗣复检校礼部尚书，充剑南东川节度使；以户部侍郎庾敬休为左丞。
现代文：调左丞杨嗣复检校礼部尚书，并任剑南东川节度使；任户部侍郎庾敬休为左丞。
English: Yang Zi, transferred to the Left Wing of the General Staff, resumed his duties as a member of the Ceremonial Department of the Quarantine School, and was appointed as an envoy to the Jianan Dongchuan Festival. His household attendant, Zou Jingyu, was appointed as the Left Wing of the General Staff.

古文：己酉，以旱，命京城诸司疏决系囚。
现代文：二十四日，因久旱，命令京城各司清理审查在狱人犯。
English: On the 24th, due to a long drought, all departments in Beijing were ordered to clean up and review the prisoners.

古文：壬子，敕应任外官带一品正京官者，纵不知政事，其俸料宜兼给。
现代文：二十七日，发文规定凡正一品京官出任外官的，虽不再参予军国大事，但仍发给原附加的薪水。
English: On the 27th, a document was issued stipulating that if a high-ranking Beijing official was appointed as a foreign minister, although he would no longer participate in military affairs, he would still be paid the original additional salary.

古文：癸丑，以左仆射李程检校司空，兼汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。
现代文：二十八日，调原左仆射李程检校司空，出任汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。
English: On the 28th, the former second-in-command, Li Cheng, was transferred to the position of the secretary of the inspection of the school. He served as the secretary of the history of Zhangzhou and the secretary of the festival of the Xuanwu army.

古文：甲寅，以旱徙市。
现代文：二十九日，因久旱取消集市贸易。
English: On the 29th, due to the long drought, the fair trade was cancelled.

古文：左降官开州司马宋申锡卒，诏许归葬。
现代文：原被贬降为开州司马的宋申锡去世，文宗指示，准予回原籍安葬。
English: After the death of Song Shensi, who was originally demoted to the position of Kaizhou Sima, Emperor Wenzong ordered that he be allowed to return to his hometown for burial.

古文：闰七月乙卯朔，诏曰： 朕嗣守丕图，覆妪生类，竞业寅畏，上承天休。
现代文：闰七月初一为乙卯日，文宗颁发诏书说： 我继承皇位，抚育百姓，小心谨慎，希望不辜负天赐的福佑。
English: On the 1st day of the 7th month, the 1st day of the 7th month, Emperor Wenzong issued an edict saying, "I will inherit the imperial throne, nurture the people, be careful and prudent, and hope to live up to the blessings bestowed by Heaven.

古文：而阴阳失和，膏泽愆候，害我稼穑，灾于黔黎。
现代文：可还是阴阳失调，气候反常，农作物受害，百姓遭殃。
English: However, the yin and yang are still out of balance, the climate is abnormal, crops are suffering, and the people are suffering.

古文：有过在予，敢忘咎责。
现代文：这是我的过失，不能推卸责任。
English: It's my fault, I can't shirk responsibility.

古文：从今避正殿，减供膳，停教坊乐，厩马量减刍粟，百司厨馔亦宜权减。
现代文：因此从现在起，我不在正殿上朝，降低个人生活标准，停止娱乐歌舞，减少马匹饲料中的粮食部分。
English: Therefore, from now on, I will not go to the morning in the main hall, reduce my personal living standards, stop entertaining songs and dances, and reduce the grain portion of horse feed.

古文：阴阳郁堙，有伤和气，宜出宫女千人。
现代文：百官的伙食标准也应暂时降低一些。宫中大量年轻宫女不能婚配，也是阴阳失调的表现，应放一千人出宫。
English: A large number of young maids of honor in the palace cannot marry, which is also a manifestation of yin and yang imbalance, and a thousand people should be released from the palace.

古文：五坊鹰犬量须减放。
现代文：五坊猎鹰猎犬也应酌量减放。
English: Five-pointed falcon hunting dogs should also be reduced in discretion.

古文：内外修造事非急务者，并停。 
现代文：宫内宫外一切土木建造不属急需的一律停止施工。 
English: All civil engineering construction inside and outside the palace that is not urgently needed will be suspended.

古文：时久无雨，上心忧劳。
现代文：当时久旱，文宗十分焦急。
English: At that time, there was a long drought, and Wenzong was very anxious.

古文：诏下数日，雨泽霑洽，人心大悦。
现代文：这份诏令颁发不久，竟下了一场喜雨，老百姓都欢欣鼓舞。
English: Not long after this edict was issued, there was a downpour of joy, and the people were overjoyed.

古文：乙丑，以前宣武军节度杨元卿为太子太保。
现代文：十一日，任原宣武军节度使杨元卿为太子太保。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ren Yuan proclaimed a military festival and made Yang Yuanqing the crown prince.

古文：戊戌，以给事中崔戎为华州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，调原给事中崔戎出任华州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Cui Rong, who was originally assigned to the case, took up the post of the chief judge of Huazhou.

古文：癸未，以太子宾客李绅检校左散骑常侍兼越州刺史，充浙东观察使，代陆亘；以亘为宣歙观察使。
现代文：二十九日，调原太子宾客李绅任检校左散骑常侍，接替陆亘出任越州刺史、浙东观察使；调陆亘为宣歙观察使。
English: On the 29th, Li Sheng, the guest of the former crown prince, was appointed as the attendant of the left cavalry of the inspection of the school. He succeeded Lu Wai as the observer of Yuezhou and East Zhejiang; Lu Wai was appointed as the observer of Xuancheng.

古文：八月甲申朔，御宣政殿，册皇太子永。
现代文：八月初一为甲申日，文宗在宣政殿立李永为皇太子。
English: On the first day of August, the day of Jia Sheng, Wenzong installed Li Yong as crown prince in Xuan Zheng palace.

古文：是日降诏： 应犯死从流，流已下递减一等。
现代文：当天颁发诏令 ：死刑犯减一等改判流放，流放以下递减一等。
English: On the same day, an imperial edict was issued: death-row prisoners were reduced by one grade and sentenced to exile, and those sentenced to exile and below were reduced by one grade.

古文：诸王自今后相次出阁，授紧望已上州刺史佐。
现代文：各位亲王从今年起先后派出担任二、三千户重要州的长官。
English: Since this year, the princes have successively sent officials to serve as governors of two or three thousand important states.

古文：其十六宅诸县主，委吏部于选人中简择配匹，具以名闻。
现代文：十六宅各位亲王的女儿，委托吏部在候补官员中为她们选择配偶，并将名册送阅。
English: The daughters of the princes of the sixteenth house, entrust the officials to choose their spouses from the alternate officials and send the list to them.

古文：皇太子方从师傅传授《六经》，一二年后，当令齿胄国庠，以兴坠典。
现代文：皇太子现在从师学习《六经》，一二年后，当送他到国学按年龄分班学习。
English: The crown prince is now learning the "Six Classics" from a teacher. A year or two later, he will be sent to study in a class according to his age.

古文：宜令国子选名儒，置五经博士各一人。
现代文：应令国子监选著名学者，设五经博士各一人。
English: Guo Zi should be ordered to supervise the selection of famous scholars, and each of them should be made a doctor of the Five Classics.

古文：其公卿士族子弟，明年已后，不先入国学习业，不在应明经进士限。
现代文：凡公卿官家子弟，自明年以后，不先经国学学习的，不得应明经进士的考试选举。
English: From next year, all sons and daughters of court nobles and officials who do not first study Chinese studies will not be allowed to pass the entrance examination.

古文：其进士举宜先试帖经，并略问大义，取经义精通者放及第。卿大夫者，下人之所视，远方之所仿，若非恭俭克己，廉直任人，而望其服从，固不可得。
现代文：进士选考先通过经学考试，选精通经义的予以录取。政府要员为下属楷模，是四方旗帜，如不能谨慎谦虚严格要求自己，廉洁公正善于用人，怎么可能使下面服从呢？
English: Government dignitaries serve as role models for their subordinates and are a banner for all four parties. If they cannot be prudent, modest, strict with themselves, honest and fair, and good at employing people, how can they make their subordinates obey them?

古文：况朕不宝珠玉，不御纤华，逮于六宫，皆务俭薄。
现代文：我一向不重视珍宝玉器，不穿戴华贵衣物，包括宫内人等都崇尚俭朴。
English: I have always paid little attention to precious jewels and do not wear expensive clothes. Everyone, including those in the imperial court, advocates frugality.

古文：卿大夫得不叶朕此志，率先兆人？
现代文：诸位官员们能否与我同心同德为人表率？
English: Will you officials join me in setting an example?

古文：比年所颁制度，皆约国家令式，去其甚者，稍谓得中。
现代文：近年颁发的各项规章制度，都是将过去条例中不切实际的部分删掉，是比较合理的，可行的。
English: All the rules and regulations issued in recent years have deleted the unrealistic parts of the past regulations, which is more reasonable and feasible.

古文：而士大夫苟自便身，安于习俗，因循未革，以至于今。
现代文：但官员中还有人只图一己的方便，安于以往奢华恶习而至今未改。
English: However, there are still some officials who only think about their own convenience and are satisfied with the previous luxurious vices and have not changed.

古文：百官士族，起今年十月，其衣服舆马，并宜准大和六年十月七日敕，如有固违，重加黜责。
现代文：现重申，从今年十月开始，今后百官的衣服车马标准应按大和六年十月七日颁发的规定执行。如有明知故犯，一定严加处分。
English: I would like to reiterate that, starting from October this year, the standards for the clothing, chariots and horses of officials should be implemented in accordance with the regulations issued by the State Council on October 7, 2006. If they knowingly commit crimes, they will be severely punished.

古文：文武常参官及诸州府长官子为父后者，赐勋两转。 
现代文：文武朝官及诸州府长官之子职务在其父之后者，加勋二等。 
English: The sons of the civil and military court officials and prefectural governors of various states, who succeeded their fathers, were awarded the second class.

古文：癸巳，太子太保杨元卿卒。
现代文：初十，原太子太保杨元卿去世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the former crown prince Yang Yuanqing passed away.

古文：戊申，以京兆尹韦长兼御史大夫，以刑部尚书高瑀为忠武军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任京兆尹韦长兼御史大夫，调原刑部尚书高王禹出任忠武军节度使。
English: On the 25th, he was appointed as the head of the Jingzhao Yinwei and the chief historian, and transferred to the original criminal department, Shangshu Gao Wang Yu, to serve as the loyal military festival envoy.

古文：九月甲寅朔。
现代文：九月初一为甲寅日。
English: The first day of September is "Kotora Day."

古文：丙寅，侍御史李款阁内奏弹前邠州行军司马郑注，曰： 注内通敕使，外连朝官，两地往来，卜射财货，昼伏夜动，干窃化权。
现代文：十三日，侍御史李款弹劾原州行军司马郑注，说： 郑注勾结宫内使者，联络各部官员，上下钻营，巧取财货。昼伏夜出，营私舞弊，窃取权位，人们敢怒不敢言。
English: On the 13th, the Grand Chamberlain Li Xian impeached the secretary of the Yuanzhou March, Ma Zhengzhu, saying: Zhengzhu colluded with the emissaries of the palace, liaised with officials of various ministries, drilled the camp up and down, and cleverly took money and goods. Day and night, he engaged in private malpractice, and stole power. People dare not say anything.

古文：人不敢言，道路以目，请付法司推劾情款。 
现代文：请将郑注送司法机关审查处置。 十天之中，收到同类举报材料数十起。
English: Please submit Zheng's complaint to the judicial organs for review and disposition.During the past ten days, we have received dozens of similar reports.

古文：旬日之中，谏章数十上，由是授注通王府司马、兼侍御史，充神策军判官，中外骇叹。
现代文：但因有人在文宗面前为郑注说情，没有被治罪，反授予通王府司马、兼侍御史和神策军判官，举国上下都为之惊叹。
English: However, because someone interceded for Zheng Zhuang in front of Wenzong, he was not punished, but was instead awarded the post of Tsongwangfu Sima, concurrently serving as a historian and judge of the Shenzhao Army, which astonished the whole country.

古文：甲寅，以前忠武军节度使王智兴依前守太傅、兼侍中、河中尹、河中晋绛慈显节度使，代王起；以起为兵部尚书。
现代文：二十二日，调原忠武军节度使王智兴仍带守太傅兼侍中衔，接替王起任河中尹、河中晋绛慈隰节度使，任王起为兵部尚书。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Zhixing, who had been transferred from the post of loyal military commander to the post of military governor, still held the post of taifu and the rank of attendant. He succeeded Wang Qi as the military governor of Hechu Yin and Hechu Jinyu Cixi, and was appointed as the military governor of Hebei.

古文：冬十月癸未朔，扬州江都等七县水，害稼。
现代文：冬十月初一为癸未日，扬州江都等七县发生水灾，农作物受损。
English: On the first day of winter in early October, floods occurred in seven counties including Yangzhou Jiangdu, and crops were damaged.

古文：壬辰，上降诞日，僧徒、道士讲论于麟德殿。
现代文：初十，文宗生日，和尚道士在麟德殿讲经。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wenzong's birthday, a Buddhist monk gave a sermon at the Lin De Hall.

古文：翌日，御延英，上谓宰臣曰： 降诞日设斋，起自近代。
现代文：次日，文宗在延英殿对宰相们说： 皇帝生日设斋，起自近代，我因为它相沿已久，未轻易改变。
English: The next day, Wenzong said to the prime ministers at the Yan Ying Palace: The emperor's birthday has been set as a fast since modern times, and because it has been with us for a long time, it is not easy to change.

古文：朕缘相承已久，未可便革，虽置斋会，唯对王源中等暂入殿，至僧道讲论，都不监听。 
现代文：虽设斋会，我也只在翰林学士王源中等讲经时进殿，至于和尚道士的讲道，我都没有去听。 
English: Although there was a fasting meeting, I only went to the temple when Hanlin Scholar Wang Yuanrong gave a sermon, and I didn't listen to the monk's sermon.

古文：宰相路随等奏： 诞日斋会，诚资景福，本非中国教法。
现代文：宰相路随等奏说： 皇上寿诞之期举行斋会，是为了祈福，但毕竟不是中国教传统。
English: Prime Minister Lu Zuoren said, "Holding a feast during the emperor's birthday is to pray for good fortune, but it is not a Chinese tradition.

古文：臣伏见开元十七年张说、乾源曜以诞日为千秋节，内外宴乐，以庆昌期，颇为得礼。 
现代文：我们见开元十七年张说、源乾曜请定皇帝生日为千秋节，上下同乐，共同庆祝倒是好办法。 
English: In the seventeenth year of the first century, Zhang said, "Yuan Qianyou, please set the emperor's birthday as the Mid-Autumn Festival. It is a good way to celebrate together.

古文：上深然之，宰臣因请十月十日为庆成节上诞日也。
现代文：文宗很赞赏他们的意见。宰相们因建议将十月初十文宗生日这天定为庆成节。文宗同意。
English: Emperor Wenzong appreciated their opinion. The prime ministers suggested that the day of Emperor Wenzong's 10th birthday in early October should be designated as a celebration day. Emperor Wenzong agreed.

古文：从之。辛酉，润、常、苏、湖四州水，害稼。
现代文：二十九日，润、常、苏、湖四州发生水灾，农作物受损。
English: On the 29th, floods occurred in Run, Chang, Su and Huzhou, and crops were damaged.

古文：十一月癸丑朔。
现代文：十一月初一为癸丑日。
English: The first day of November is the Day of the Ugly Goat.

古文：乙亥，泾源节度使康志睦卒。
现代文：二十三日，原泾原节度使康志睦去世。
English: On the 23rd day of the month, Kang Zhiming passed away.

古文：己卯，以左神策长武城使硃叔夜为泾州刺史，充泾原节度使。
现代文：二十七日，调左神策长武城使朱叔夜出任泾州刺史、泾原节度使。
English: On the 27th, Zhu Shucheng, the left-hand divine strategist of Changwu City, was transferred to the post of the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Zhangyuan in the evening.

古文：壬午，于银州置监牧。
现代文：三十日，在银州设马场。
English: On the 30th, a horse farm was set up in Yinzhou.

古文：十二月癸未朔。
现代文：十二月初一为癸未日。
English: The first day of December is a leap day.

古文：己亥，刑部详定大理丞谢登新编《格后敕》六十卷，令删落详定为五十卷。
现代文：十七日，刑部审订大理丞谢登新编《格后敕》六十卷，命删去一部分校订为五十卷。
English: On the 17th, the Criminal Investigation Department reviewed and approved the 60 volumes of Dalizhe Xieden's new edition of "Kego Gong," and ordered to delete a part of the revision and set it at 50 volumes.

古文：庚子，幸望春宫，圣体不康。
现代文：十八日，文宗到望春宫，患病。
English: On the 18th, Wenzong went to Wangchun Palace and fell ill.

古文：癸卯，平卢军节度、检校司空王承元卒。
现代文：二十一日，原平卢军节度、检校司空王承元去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Kuo Wang Chengyuan, the former commander of the Pinglu Army and inspector of schools, passed away.

古文：丁未，以河南尹严休复检校礼部尚书，充平卢军节度、淄青登莱棣观察等使。
现代文：二十五日，调原河南尹严休复为检校礼部尚书，并任平卢军节度、淄青登莱棣观察等使。
English: On the 25th, the former Henan Yin Yanqiu was reinstated as the inspector of the school's etiquette department, and served as the commander of the Pinglu Army and the observation of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：戊甲，以给事中王质权知河南尹。
现代文：二十六日，调给事中王质代理河南尹。
English: On the 26th, Henan Yin, the acting royal hostage in the case, was transferred.

古文：以河东节度副使李石为给事中。
现代文：任河东节度副使李石为给事中。
English: Li Shishi, deputy chief of the Hedong Festival, is now in charge of the event.

古文：八年春正月癸丑朔。
现代文：大和八年春正月初一为癸丑日。
English: The first day of the first month of the spring of Yamato 8 is the day of the Ugly Goat.

古文：丁巳，圣体痊平，御太和殿见内臣。
现代文：初五，文宗病愈，在太和殿接见内臣。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wenzong recovered from his illness and met with Naishin at Taihe-den.

古文：甲子，御紫宸殿见群臣。
现代文：十二日，文宗在紫宸殿接见群臣。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Wenzong received a group of ministers at Shishu-den.

古文：丙寅，修太庙。
现代文：十三日，对太庙进行维修。
English: On the 13th, the temple was repaired.

古文：令太常卿庾承宣摄太尉，遍告九室，迁神主于便殿。
现代文：命太常卿庾承宣行太尉职，分别祭奠九室，将历代皇室祖先灵位移放便殿。
English: It was ordered by the Grand Steward of the Imperial Household, who was promoted to the rank of taifu, to dedicate the nine rooms separately, and to transfer the ancestral spirits of the imperial family to the hall.

古文：癸酉，扬、楚、舒、庐、寿、滁、和七州去年水，损田四万余顷。
现代文：二十日，扬、楚、舒、庐、寿、滁、和七州在去年水灾中，淹毁农田四万余顷。
English: On the 20th, Yang, Chu, Shu, Handan, Shou, Handan, and Shichizhou had more than 40,000 hectares of farmland flooded in last year's floods.

古文：二月壬午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月初一为壬午日，日蚀。
English: On the first day of February, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：庚寅，诏以圣躬痊复，赦系囚，放逋赋，移流人。
现代文：初九，文宗诏令，因病体痊愈，赦减在押人犯，减免百姓所欠租赋，将流放人员转迁内地。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wenzong issued an edict that, due to the recovery of the sick, the criminals in custody would be pardoned, the people's rent arrears would be reduced, and the exiled people would be relocated to the inland.

古文：己亥，蔚州飞狐镇置铸钱院。
现代文：十八日，在蔚州飞狐镇开办铸钱院。
English: On the 18th, a mint was opened in Fei Foo Town, Ulsan.

古文：三月壬子朔。
现代文：三月初一为壬子日。
English: The first day of March is Minshi Day.

古文：甲寅，上巳，赐群臣宴于曲江亭。
现代文：初三，今日上巳节，在曲江亭设宴招待群臣。
English: On the third day of the first month, today is the Lantern Festival, and a banquet is being held at Qujiangting to invite a group of ministers.

古文：庚午，以山南东道节度使裴度充东都留守，依前守司徒、兼侍中；以东都留守李逢吉检校司徒、兼右仆射。
现代文：十九日，调原山南东道节度使裴度充任东都留守，仍带原守司徒、兼侍中衔。任原东都留守李逢吉为检校司徒、兼右仆射。
English: On the 19th, the original Shannan host festival was transferred so that Pei Du, who was in charge of the East Capital, stayed behind, still with the original guard stucco, and also with the rank of junior attendant. Li Fengji, who was in charge of the East Capital, was a school inspection stucco, and also a right-hand man.

古文：癸酉，兗海节度使李文悦卒。
现代文：二十二日，原兖州节度使李文悦去世。
English: On the 22nd, Li Wenyue passed away at the former Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：丙子，以右丞李固言为华州刺史，代崔戎；以戎为兗海观察使。
现代文：二十五日，调原右丞李固言接替崔戎任华州刺史，调崔戎任兖海观察使。
English: On the 25th, the former Second Consul, Li Guyan, succeeded Choe Jung as Consul of Huazhou, and Choe Jung was transferred to the post of Bohai Observer.

古文：四月壬午朔。
现代文：四月初一为壬午日。
English: The first day of April is Renpo Day.

古文：壬辰，集贤学士裴濆撰《通选》三十卷，以拟昭明太子《文选》，濆所取偏僻，不为时论新称。
现代文：十一日，集贤殿学士裴氵仿梁昭明太子所编《文选》编《通选》三十卷，但他选的文章太偏僻，因此没有得到当时人士的好评。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Baekhyun, a scholar of Jixianden, imitated the 30 volumes of "Wenxian" and "Tsunxian" edited by Prince Liang Zhaoming, but the articles he selected were too remote, so they were not well received by the people at that time.

古文：甲午，以缩州刺史吴李真为邕管经略使，乙已，乾林学士，兵部侍郎王源中辞内职乃以源中为礼部尚书。
现代文：十三日，调宿州刺史吴季真任邕管经略使。二十四日，翰林学士、兵部侍郎王源中要求辞去宫内职务，于是任他为礼部尚书。
English: On the 13th, Wu Jizhen, the governor of Jiaozhou, was appointed as the vice-commander of the imperial court. On the 24th, Wang Yuanzhong, a scholar of Hanlin and a military servant, asked to resign from the palace, so he was appointed as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：五月辛亥朔。
现代文：五月初一为辛亥日。
English: The first day of May is Xinhai Day.

古文：己巳，修奉太庙毕，以吏部尚书令狐楚摄太尉，遍告神主，复正殿。
现代文：十九日，太庙维修竣工，命吏部尚书令狐楚行太尉职，分别祭奠祖宗灵位，移正殿安置。
English: On the 19th, the maintenance of the Great Temple was completed, and the Ministry of the General Office ordered the fox to perform the duties of the captain, respectively, to pay tribute to the spiritual position of the ancestors, and to relocate to the main hall.

古文：飞龙神驹中厩火。
现代文：飞龙院神驹中厩失火。
English: The fire broke out in the middle stables of the Flying Dragon Temple.

古文：六月庚辰朔。
现代文：六月初一为庚辰日。
English: The first day of the first month of June is Geng Chen Day.

古文：辛巳，徙市。
现代文：初二，迁移集市。
English: On the second day of junior high school, the relocation fair began.

古文：壬午，大理卿刘遵古卒。
现代文：初三，原大理卿刘遵古去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Liu Zungu, the former Prince of Dali, passed away.

古文：壬辰，陈许节度使高瑀卒。
现代文：十三日，原陈许节度使高王禹去世。
English: On the 13th, Gao Wangyu passed away at the hands of Chen Xu Jiedu.

古文：甲午，以旱，诏诸司疏决系囚。
现代文：十五日，因久旱，诏令各司清理积案审理发落在押人犯。
English: On the 15th, due to a long drought, the magistrate ordered each division to clear the backlog of cases and start the trial of remand prisoners.

古文：丙申，以前凤翔节度使、驸马都尉杜忭起复检校户部尚书，充忠武军节度使。
现代文：十七日，调原凤翔节度使、驸马都尉杜起复为检校户部尚书衔，任忠武军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Fengxiang, who had been transferred to the post of festival envoy, and Duqi, who had been transferred to the post of captain of the cavalry, were reinstated as inspectors of schools, and appointed as loyal military festival envoys.

古文：戊戌，衬臣王涯、路随奏请依旧制读时令。
现代文：十九日，宰相王涯、路随奏请仍按以往制度宣讲时令。
English: On the 19th, Prime Minister Wang Ya and Lu Zuoqiao still announced the season according to the previous system.

古文：庚子，充海观察使崔戎卒。
现代文：二十一日，原兖海观察使崔戎去世。
English: On the 21st day of the month, the former Bohai Sea observation died.

古文：辛丑，同州刺史高釴卒。
现代文：二十二日，原同州刺史高钅弋去世。
English: On the 22nd, Gao Wei, the former governor of Tongzhou, passed away.

古文：戊申，以将作监、驸马都尉崔杞为充海沂密观察使。
现代文：二十九日，调将作监、驸马都尉崔杞出任兖海沂密观察使。
English: On the 29th, the inspector-general and lieutenant of the Horse Guards, Cui Wei, was transferred to serve as the observation envoy of the Bohai Strait.

古文：秋七月庚戌朔。
现代文：秋七月初一为庚戌日。
English: The first day of the first month of autumn and July is Geng Zi Day.

古文：丙辰，以工部侍郎杨汝士为同州刺史。
现代文：初七，调原工部侍郎杨汝士出任同州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Yang Rushi, the attendant of the original engineering department, took up the post of the governor of the same state.

古文：戊午，奉先、美原、栎阳等雨，损夏麦。
现代文：初九，奉先、美原、栎阳等久雨，夏麦受损。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, it rained for a long time in Bongxian, Meihara and Fenyang, and the summer barley was damaged.

古文：辛酉，定陵台大雨，震东廊郎下地裂一百三十尺，诏宗正卿李仍叔启告修塞。
现代文：十二日，定陵台大雨，雷击东廊，廊下地面震裂一百三十尺，诏令宗正卿李仍叔前往祭告并维修填平。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the east corridor of Dingling Tower was hit by a thunderstorm. The ground beneath the corridor was cracked by one hundred and thirty feet. Emperor Zong Zheng's uncle, Li Ying, was ordered to go to the scene and repair the damage.

古文：癸亥，郯王经薨。
现代文：十四日，郯王李经去世。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the Dragon King, Li Jing, passed away.

古文：己巳夜，月犯昴。
现代文：二十日，夜，月亮走进昴星位。
English: On the evening of the 20th, the moon entered the sign of Cancer.

古文：壬申，以右金吾卫大将军段百伦检校工部尚书，充福建观察使。
现代文：二十三日，调右金吾卫大将军段百伦检校工部尚书，出任福建观察使。
English: On the 23rd, he was transferred to the inspection department of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and became the Fujian Observer.

古文：堂帖中外臣僚，各举善《周易》学者。
现代文：政事堂通知内外官员，推荐精通《周易》的学者。
English: The State Council informed officials at home and abroad to recommend scholars who are proficient in "Zhou Yi."

古文：八月己卯朔，右龙武统军董重质卒。
现代文：八月初一为己卯日，原右龙武统军董重质去世。
English: On the first day of August, the former Right Dragon Wu Tong Jun Dong passed away.

古文：庚寅，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：十三日，金星走近火星位。
English: On the 13th, Venus approached Mars.

古文：辛卯，诏故澧王大男汉可封东阳郡王，第二男源可封安陆郡王，第三男演可封临安郡王；故深王大男潭可封河内郡王，第二男淑可封吴兴郡王；故绛王大男洙可封新安郡王，第二男滂可封高平郡王；故洋王大男沛可封颍川郡王；淄王大男浣可封许昌郡王；沔王大男瀛可封封晋陵郡王；鄜王大男溥可封平阳郡王：仍并赐光禄大夫。
现代文：十四日，诏封已故澧王长子李汉为东阳郡王，次子李源为安陆郡王，三子李演为临安郡王；封已故深王长子李潭为河内郡王，次子李淑为吴兴郡王；封已故绛王长子李洙为新安郡王，次子李滂为高平郡王；封已故洋王长子李沛为颍川郡王；封淄王长子李浣为许昌郡王；封沔王长子李瀛为晋陵郡王；封王长子李溥为平阳郡王：一律赐光禄大夫衔。
English: On the 14th, Li Han, the eldest son of the late King Min, was crowned the king of Dongyang County, Li Yuan, the second son, was crowned the king of Anlu County, and Li Yuan, the third son, was crowned the king of Lin'an County; Li Tan, the eldest son of the late King Sheng, was crowned the king of Hanoi County, and Li Shu, the second son, was crowned the king of Wuxing County; Li Yao, the eldest son of the late King Min, was crowned the king of Xin'an County, and Li Yao, the second son, was crowned the king of Gaoping County; Li

古文：丙申，罢诸色选举，岁旱故也。
现代文：十九日，因今年发生旱灾，停止各种考试选拔官吏的活动。
English: On the 19th, due to this year's drought, the activities of various examinations for selecting officials were suspended.

古文：己亥，御写《周易》义五道示群臣，有人明此义者，三日内闻奏。
现代文：二十二日，文宗撰写对《周易》的体会五则给群臣传阅，有人能理解的，三日内奏明皇上。
English: On the twenty-second day, Wenzong wrote the five points of experience on "Zhou Yi" and passed them on to the courtiers. If someone could understand them, he would report to the emperor within three days.

古文：时李仲言以《易》道惑上，及下其义，人皆窃笑，卒无进言者。
现代文：当时李仲言讲《周易》使文宗入迷，以至文宗让群臣传阅自己的学习心得，大家私下传为笑料，结果无人作出反应。
English: At that time, Li Zhongyan said that "Zhou Yi" made Wenzong infatuated, so much so that Wenzong let the courtiers read his learning experience, and everyone privately passed it on as a joke, with the result that no one reacted.

古文：九月乙酉朔。
现代文：九月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of September is a national holiday.

古文：辛亥夜，彗起太微，近郎位，西指，长丈余，西北行，凡九夜，越郎位西北五尺灭。
现代文：初三，夜，出现彗星，起自太微，靠近郎位，头向西，长丈余，走向西北，一连出现九个夜间，然后越过郎位西北约五尺处消失。
English: On the night of the third day of the first month, a comet appeared. It started from Taimiao, near Langyi, headed west, grew longer and longer, and moved northwest. It appeared for nine nights in a row, and then disappeared about five feet northwest of Langyi.

古文：癸丑，月入南斗。
现代文：初五，月亮走进南斗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the moon entered the Southern Cross.

古文：乙亥，宣州观察使陆亘卒。
现代文：初七，原宣州观察使陆亘去世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the former Xuanzhou observation envoy, Lu Wu, passed away.

古文：己未，宰臣李德裕进《御臣要略》及《柳氏旧闻》三卷。
现代文：十一日，宰相李德裕呈交《御臣要略》和《柳氏旧闻》三卷。
English: On the 11th, Prime Minister Li Deyu presented the "Minister's Summary" and the "Old Stories of the Liu Clan" in three volumes.

古文：随州刺史杜师仁前刺吉州，坐赃计绢三万匹，赐死于家。
现代文：随州刺史杜师仁在先任吉州刺史时贪污绢三万匹，事发，责令在家中自杀。
English: Zhu Shiren, the governor of Zhouzhou, embezzled 30,000 yakitori when he was governor of Zhizhou, and was ordered to commit suicide at home.

古文：故江西观察使裴谊乖于廉察，削所赠工部尚书。
现代文：已故原江西观察使裴谊对此事失察，撤销原来追封的工部尚书衔。
English: The deceased original Jiangxi observation caused Pei Yi to lose sight of this matter and revoke the original seal of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：庚申，右军中尉王守澄宣召郑注，对于浴堂门，仍赐锦彩银器。
现代文：十二日，右军中尉王守澄在浴堂门召见郑注，赐给锦彩银器等物。
English: On the 12th, Wang Shoucheng, a lieutenant of the Right Army, summoned Zheng Zhu at the door of the bathhouse and presented him with gold and silver jewelry and other items.

古文：是夜，彗出东方，长三尺，辉耀甚伟。
现代文：夜间，彗星从东方天空出现，彗尾长三尺，光辉耀眼，十分壮观。
English: At night, the comet appeared from the eastern sky. The comet's tail was three feet long, shining brightly, and it was very spectacular.

古文：辛酉，以权知河南尹王质为宣歙观察使。
现代文：十三日，调代理河南尹王质任宣歙观察使。
English: On the 13th, Yin Wangqiu, the acting envoy of Henan Province, was transferred to serve as the observation envoy of Xuancheng.

古文：吏部尚书致仕张正甫卒。
现代文：退休的吏部尚书张正甫去世。
English: Retired bureaucrat Zhang Zhengfu passed away.

古文：癸亥，以尚书吏部侍郎郑浣为河南尹。
现代文：十五日，调尚书吏部侍郎郑浣任河南尹。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Zheng Rong, the attendant of the Book Clerk's Department, was transferred to Henan Yin.

古文：甲子，郑注进《药方》一卷。
现代文：十六日，郑注献《药方》一卷。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Zhuang presented a volume of "Pharmacopoeia."

古文：庚午，安王溶、颍王瀍皆检校兵部尚书。
现代文：二十二日，安王李溶、颍王李鏶同被任为检校兵部尚书。
English: On the 22nd, An Wang Li Rong and Zhi Wang Li Jie were both appointed as inspectors of the school's military department.

古文：宰相路随册拜太子太师。
现代文：封宰相路随为太子太师。
English: Fuzaisei-no-Michi succeeded to the position of Crown Prince and Daishi.

古文：辛巳，幽州节度使杨志诚、监军李怀仵悉为三军所逐，立其部将史元忠为留后。
现代文：二十三日，幽州发生兵变，赶走节度使杨志诚和监军李怀仵，推举兵马使史元忠为留后。
English: On the 23rd, there was a mutiny in Yuzhou. Yang Zhicheng and Li Huaiyao, the commander of the army, were driven out of the festival, and Shi Yuanzhong was left behind after the soldiers and horses were raised.

古文：陕州、江西旱、无稼。
现代文：陕西、江西久旱，粮食颗粒无收。
English: Shaanxi and Jiangxi have been in drought for a long time, and grain grains have not been harvested.

古文：己丑，秘书监崔威卒。
现代文：二十九日，秘书监崔威去世。
English: On the 29th, Secretary Supervisor Cui Wei passed away.

古文：庚寅，以山南西道节度使、检校礼部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、襄武县开国侯、食邑一千户李宗闵可中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：冬十月初一为庚寅日，任原山南西道节度使、检校礼部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、襄武县开国侯、食邑一千户李宗闵为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In winter, the first day of October was the day of Geng Yin, and Li Zongya, who had been appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, the inspection department of the school, Shang Shu, Tong Ping Zhangji, Shang Zhuo Province, Xiangwu County, and a thousand households in the food village, was the attendant of the middle school and the lower school of the middle school.

古文：辛卯，以中使田全操充皇太子见太师礼仪使。
现代文：初二，派太监田全操主持皇太子拜见太师仪式。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, they sent the eunuch Tanzen to preside over the ceremony of the crown prince's meeting with the grandmaster.

古文：壬辰，召国子四门助教李仲言对于思政殿，赐绯。
现代文：初三，文宗在思政殿召国子四门助教李仲言谈话，赐给五品以上才能穿的绯衣。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Wenzong called four assistant teachers from four provinces to talk to Li Zhongyan in Shizheng Hall, and gave him a long dress that could only be worn by students of the fifth grade and above.

古文：河南府、邓州、同州、扬州并奏旱虫伤损秋稼。
现代文：河南府、邓州、同州、扬州同时上报发生旱灾、虫灾，粮食减产。
English: Henan, Dengzhou, Tongzhou and Yangzhou simultaneously reported droughts, insect plagues and grain production reductions.

古文：甲午，以银青光禄大夫、守中书侍郎、平章事李德裕检校兵部尚书、同平章事、兴元尹，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：初五，调银青光禄大夫、守中书侍郎、平章事李德裕检校兵部尚书、同平章事，并出任兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he was appointed as the doctor of Qingguanglu, the secretary of Guozhong, the secretary of Ping, the secretary of the military department of Li Deyuqian School, and the secretary of Tongping, and served as the delegate of Xingyuan Yin and the delegate of the festival of Shannan West Road.

古文：以助教李仲言为国子《周易》博士，充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：任助教李仲言为国子《周易》博士、翰林院侍讲学士。
English: Li Zhongyan, who was appointed as an assistant professor, became a doctor of Kuniko "Zhou Yi" and an attendant lecturer of Hanlin Academy.

古文：皇太子见太师路随于明门。
现代文：皇太子在崇明门拜见太师路随。
English: The Crown Prince met with the Grand Master and his entourage at the Chongming Gate.

古文：丙申，谏官上疏论李仲言不合奖任，上令中使宣逾谏官曰： 朕留仲言禁中，顾问经义，敕命已行，不可遽改。 
现代文：初七，谏官上书争辩说不该奖任李仲言那么高级别的职位，文宗派太监代表他向谏官们说 ：我这样做是为了留李仲言在宫中切磋《周易》经义。任命已经发出，不可轻易改变。 
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the eunuchs argued in a letter that Li Zhongyan should not be awarded such a high-ranking position. On his behalf, the eunuch of the Wen sect said to the eunuchs: I did this to keep Li Zhongyan in the palace to study the meaning of "Zhou Yi." The appointment has been issued and cannot be easily changed.

古文：淮南、两浙、黔中水为灾，民户流亡，京师物价暴贵。
现代文：淮南、两浙、黔中发生水灾，百姓四出逃荒。京城物价暴涨。
English: Floods occurred in Huainan, the two Zhejiang Provinces, and Fujian Province, and people fled in all directions to escape the floods. Prices in Beijing skyrocketed.

古文：庚子，诏郑注对于太和殿。以御史大夫郑覃为户部尚书。
现代文：十一日，在太和殿召见郑注谈话。任原御史大夫郑覃为户部尚书。
English: On the 11th day of the month, I was summoned to see Zheng Zhu for a talk at the Palace of the Grand Dukes. Zheng Zhu, the former imperial historian, was the household secretary.

古文：壬寅，翰林院宴李仲言，赐《法曲》弟子二十人奏乐以宠之。
现代文：十三日，在翰林院宴请李仲言，奖赐《法曲》弟子二十人奏乐，表示对他的尊宠。
English: On the 13th, Li Zhongyan was invited to a banquet at the Hanlin Academy, and twenty disciples of "Dharma Music" were given awards to play music, expressing their respect for him.

古文：丙午，以新除兴元节度使李德裕为兵部尚书。
现代文：十七日，以新任兴元节度使李德裕为兵部尚书。
English: On the 17th, with the new Xingyuan Festival, Li Deyu was appointed as the military secretary.

古文：十一月丁未朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丁未日。
English: The first day of November was a Sunday.

古文：庚戌，以尚书左仆射致仕萧府为太子太傅。
现代文：初四，任命已退休的尚书左仆射萧亻免为太子太傅。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, he appointed the retired left-hand man of Shang Shuxu, Jie Xiao, as the prince's daifu.

古文：辛亥，以左金吾卫大将军萧洪为河阳三城节度使。
现代文：初五，调左金吾卫大将军萧洪出任河阳三城节度使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xiao Hong, the general of the Left Wing of the Qing Dynasty, was transferred to the post of the festival envoy of the three cities of Heyang.

古文：襄州水，损田。
现代文：襄州大水，冲毁农田。
English: Yangzhou floods, farmland washed away.

古文：壬子，滁州奏清流等三县四月雨至六月，诸山发洪水，漂溺户万三千八百。
现代文：初六，滁州上奏，清流等三县四月起下雨，直下到六月，山洪暴发，受灾户达一万三千八百户。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, it rained from April to June in three counties such as Zhangzhou Shangso and Qingliu, and flash floods occurred, affecting 13,800 households.

古文：癸丑，以礼部尚书王源中检校户部尚书，充山南西道节度使；以户部侍郎李汉为华州刺史、镇国军潼关防御使。
现代文：初七，调原礼部尚书王源中检校户部尚书，出任山南西道节度使；调原户部侍郎李汉出任华州刺史、镇国军潼关防御使。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he transferred the original ceremonial department secretary Wangyuan Junior High School to the household department secretary, and served as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road; Li Han, the attendant of the original household department, served as the secretary of Huazhou and the defense envoy of the Zhenguo Army.

古文：成德军节度使王廷凑卒。
现代文：原成德军节度使王廷凑去世。
English: The original German military festival caused the death of Wang Tingpang.

古文：以前河阳节度使温造为御史大夫。
现代文：任原河阳节度使温造为御史大夫。
English: Ren Yuanheyang's decree made Unzo a goshi taifu.

古文：己卯，幽州节度使杨志诚被逐入朝，下御史台讯鞫。
现代文：二十三日，原幽州节度使杨志诚被所部兵士驱逐，逃回京师，被交御史台审讯。
English: On the 23rd, the original Yuzhou Festival caused Yang Zhicheng to be expelled by the soldiers of the headquarters, fled back to the Beijing Division, and was handed over to the History Department for interrogation.

古文：志诚在幽州，被服皆为龙凤，乃流之岭外，至商州杀之。
现代文：查出杨志诚在幽州的穿着、被子都绣有龙凤图案，判处流放岭外，行至商州便被杀了。
English: It was found that Yang Zhicheng's clothes and quilt in Yuzhou were all embroidered with dragon and phoenix patterns. He was sentenced to exile outside Ling, and was killed when he went to Shangzhou.

古文：乙亥，以兵部尚书李德裕检校右仆射，充镇海军节度、浙江西道观察等使。
现代文：二十九日，调兵部尚书李德裕检校右仆射，出任镇海军节度使、浙江西道观察等使。
English: On the 29th, Shangshu Li Deyu Jian, the right-hand man of the Military Transfer Department, was appointed as the envoy of the Zhen Navy Festival and the envoy of the Zhejiang West Road Observation.

古文：丙子，李仲言奏请改名训，从之。
现代文：三十日，李仲言申请改名李训，文宗同意所请。
English: On the 30th, Li Zhongyan applied to change his name to Li Xun, and Wenzong agreed to the request.

古文：十二月丁丑朔。
现代文：十二月初一为丁丑日。
English: The first day of December is Dingwuxi Day.

古文：己卯，以昭义节度副使、检校库部员外郎、赐紫金鱼袋郑注为太仆卿。
现代文：初三，任原昭义节度副使、检校库部员外郎、赐紫金鱼袋郑注为太仆卿。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Akiyoshi Hara was appointed vice-minister of education, vice-dean of the school library, and given a purple gold fish bag as a gift.

古文：辛巳，以棣州刺史韩威为安南都护。
现代文：初五，任原棣州刺史韩威为安南都护。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Han Wei, the former governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annam.

古文：癸未，以通王为幽州卢龙节度使，以权勾当幽州兵马史元忠为留后。
现代文：初七，任通王为幽州卢龙节度使，任原代理幽州兵马史元忠为留后。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Tong Wang was appointed as the Yuzhou Lulong Festival envoy, and the former agent of Yuzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Shi Yuanzhong, was appointed to stay behind.

古文：甲申，许太子太傅萧瑀致仕。
现代文：初八，同意太子太傅萧亻免退休。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, he agreed to allow Prince Taifu Xiao Yao to retire.

古文：是夜，月掩昴。
现代文：夜，月球遮掩昴星。
English: At night, the moon hides the shooting star.

古文：己丑，以太子宾客分司张仲方为左散骑常侍，常州刺史杨虞卿为工部侍郎。
现代文：十三日，任太子宾客分司张仲方为左散骑常侍，任常州刺史杨虞卿为工部侍郎。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Zhongfang, director of the Prince's Guests Division, was appointed as the left rider's equerry, and Yang Yuqing, the governor's secretary, was appointed as the workshop's equerry.

古文：己亥，以尚书左仆射李逢吉守司徒致仕。
现代文：二十三日，原尚书左仆射李逢吉带守司徒衔退休。
English: On the 23rd, the former left-hand man of Shangshu, Sha Li Fengji, retired with the title of tutor.

古文：以宗正卿李仍叔为湖南观察使，代李翱；以翱为刑部侍郎，代裴濆；以濆为华州镇国军潼关防御使。
现代文：调宗正卿李仍叔接替李翱出任湖南观察使；任命李翱接替裴氵为刑部侍郎；调裴氵出任华州镇国军潼关防御使。
English: Zongzheng Zhengqing Li Yanzhong was transferred to succeed Li Jie as Hunan observation envoy; Li Jie was appointed to succeed Pei Jie as the head of the criminal investigation department; Pei Jie was transferred to serve as the Huazhou Town National Army Shaoguan defense envoy.

古文：昭成寺火。
现代文：昭成寺失火。
English: Shosei-ji Temple catches fire.

古文：九年春正月丁未朔。
现代文：大和九年为春正月初一为丁未日。
English: The ninth year of the Yamato era began on the first day of the first month of spring.

古文：乙卯，以镇州左司马王元逵起复定远将军、守左金吾卫大将军、检校工部尚书，充成德军节度使、镇冀深赵观察等使。
现代文：初九，重新起用镇州左司马王元逵加定远将军、守左金吾卫大将军、检校工部尚书衔，并任成德军节度使、镇冀深赵观察等使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhenzhou Zuo Sima Wang Yuanjun plus Dingyuan General, Zuo Zuo Kingu Wei General, and the school inspection department were reappointed, and he was appointed as the German military festival envoy, Zhenji Shenzhao observation and other envoys.

古文：以太常卿庾成宣检校吏部尚书，充天平军节度使，代殷侑；以侑为刑部尚书。
现代文：调太常卿庾承宣带检校吏部尚书衔，接替殷侑，出任天平军节度使；任殷侑为刑部尚书。
English: The Chief of the General Staff, Zou Chengxuan, took the title of Shang Shu of the Inspection and Inspection Department, succeeded Yin Qi, and served as the commander of the Tianping Army; and appointed Yin Qi as the Shang Shu of the Penal Department.

古文：癸亥，巢县公凑薨，追封齐王。
现代文：十七日，巢县公李凑去世，追封为齐王。
English: On the 17th, Neixian Gong Liqin passed away, and he was posthumously crowned the King of Qi.

古文：壬申，司徒致仕李逢吉卒。
现代文：二十六日，已退休的原司徒李逢吉去世。
English: On the 26th, the retired former scholar Li Fengji passed away.

古文：癸酉，以右散骑常侍舒元舆为陕州防御观察使。
现代文：二十七日，调右散骑常侍舒元舆出任陕州防御观察使。
English: On the 27th, Shu Yuanmou, the right-hand rider, was transferred to the post of Shaanxi Defense Observation Envoy.

古文：以前棣州刺史田早为安南都护。
现代文：调前棣州刺史田早任安南都护。
English: Before the transfer, Zhangzhou Zhi Shitian was the first to serve as Annan's tutelary.

古文：二月丙子朔。
现代文：二月初一为丙子日。
English: The first day of February is Cixi Day.

古文：甲申，以司农卿王彦威兼御史大夫，充平卢军节度使。
现代文：初九，调司农卿王彦威带兼御史衔出任平卢军节度使。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Wang Yanwei, the director of the Agricultural Affairs Bureau, assumed the post of the commander of the Pinglu Army with the concurrent title of Grand Historian.

古文：丁亥，发神策军一千五百人修淘曲江。
现代文：十二日，抽调神策军一千五百人疏浚曲江。
English: On the 12th, 1500 soldiers of the Divine Providence Army were dispatched to dredge the Qujiang River.

古文：如诸司有力，要于曲江置亭馆者，宜给与闲地。
现代文：通知各部门如有条件在曲江沿岸购建亭馆的，可拨给空余土地。
English: All departments will be notified that if they have the conditions to purchase and build pavilions along the Qujiang River, they can be allocated to spare land.

古文：辛丑，冀王絿薨。
现代文：二十六日，冀王李纟求去世。
English: On the 26th, the King of Hebei, Li Yongkui, passed away.

古文：癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：二十八日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 28th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：甲辰，以幽州留后史元忠为卢龙节度使。
现代文：二十九日，任幽州留后史元忠为卢龙节度使。
English: On the 29th, after staying in Yuzhou, Shi Yuanzhong became the Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：乙巳，剑南西川节度使、检校左仆射、同平章事段文昌卒。
现代文：三十日，原剑南节度使、检校左仆射、同平章事段文昌去世。
English: On the 30th day of the month, Wenchang, the former secretary of the Jian'nan Festival, the left-handed shot of the inspection, and the dongping chapter passed away.

古文：庚申，以剑南东川节度使杨嗣复检校户部尚书，兼成都尹、西川节度使。
现代文：三月初一为丙午日，十五日，调原剑南东川节度使杨嗣复检校户部尚书，任兼成都尹、西川节度使。
English: The first day of March was the afternoon of the 3rd, and on the 15th, the original Jiannan Dongchuan Festival was transferred to Yang Zi to resume the inspection of the school's household department, and he was also appointed as the Chengdu Yin and the West River Festival.

古文：乙丑，以岁饥，河北尤甚，赐魏博六州粟五万石，陈许、郓、曹濮三镇各赐糙米二万石。
现代文：二十日，因灾荒，河北更为严重，救济魏博六州粟五万石，陈许、郓、曹濮三镇各米造米二万石。
English: On the 20th, due to the disaster and famine, Hebei was more serious, and the relief of Wei Bo six states amounted to 50,000 koku of millet, and the three towns of Chen Xu, Handan and Caoqian each produced 20,000 koku of rice.

古文：庚午，左丞庾敬休卒，废朝一日。
现代文：二十五日，原左丞庾敬休去世，停朝一日。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the original left-hand man, Zou Jingyu, passed away, and the parade was suspended for one day.

古文：诏曰： 官至丞、郎，朕所亲委，不幸云亡者，宜为之废朝。
现代文：文宗诏令道： 丞、郎以上官职都是经我亲自任命的，不幸去世的，应停止上朝，以示悼念。
English: Emperor Wenzong gave the following order: I personally appointed all officials above the rank of chancellor and vassal, and those who unfortunately passed away should stop going to the imperial court as a sign of mourning.

古文：自今丞、郎宜准诸司三品官例，罢朝一日。 
现代文：今后丞、郎去世的也都按三品官一样，停朝一日。 
English: In the future, the death of a son-in-law and a son-in-law will also be suspended for one day in accordance with the three court ranks.

古文：夏四月丙子朔。
现代文：夏四月初一为丙子日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is Cixi Day.

古文：丙戌，以桂管观察使李从易为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：十一日，调原桂管观察使李从易任广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Congyi was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou and the special envoy of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：以镇海军节度使、浙西观察等使李德裕为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：任原镇海军节度使、浙西观察等使李德裕为太子宾客、分司东都。
English: Ren Yuanzhen naval festival envoy, Zhejiang West observation, etc. made Li Deyu the prince's guests, and the division of the East Capital.

古文：辛卯，以京兆尹贾饣束为浙西观察使；以工部侍郎杨虞卿为京兆尹，仍赐金紫。
现代文：十六日，调原京兆尹贾饣束任浙西观察使；调原工部侍郎杨虞卿任京兆尹，仍赐金紫鱼袋。
English: On the 16th, the former Jing Zhaoyun Jia Shuo was transferred to the post of Western Zhejiang Observation Envoy; the former attendant of the Ministry of Industry, Yang Yuqing, was transferred to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, and was still given a gold and purple fish bag.

古文：以给事中韩佽为桂管观察使。
现代文：调原给事中韩亻次出任桂管观察使。
English: According to the original document, Han Zheng was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：丙申，以太子太师、门下侍郎、平章事路随为镇海军节度、浙西观察等使。
现代文：二十一日，调原太子太师、门下侍郎、平章事路随出任镇海军节度使、浙西观察等使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the former prince's father-in-law, the servant of the prince's father-in-law, and the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy.

古文：戊戌，诏以新浙西观察使贾餗为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，诏令新任浙西观察使贾饣束为中书侍郎，同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that the newly appointed Zhejiang West Observation Envoy Jia Yingzhu would be the attendant of the Chinese book, and the Chinese book would be issued.

古文：庚子，诏银青光禄大夫、守太子宾客分司东都、上柱国、赞皇县开国伯、食邑七百户李德裕贬袁州长史。
现代文：二十五日，诏令将原银青光禄大夫、守太子宾客分司东都、上柱国、赞黄县开国伯、食邑七百户李德裕降职为袁州长史。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict demoted Li Deyu, the former doctor of Yin, Qing and Guanglu, the governor of the East Capital, Shangzhu Province, the founding governor of Zhanhuang County, and the 700 households of the food village, to the position of the governor of Yuan.

古文：辛丑，大风，含元殿四鸱吻并皆落。坏金吾仗舍。废楼观城四十余所。
现代文：二十六日，大风，含元殿屋脊四角的鸱吻全部被刮落，吹倒金吾仗舍，摧毁楼观四十多所。
English: On the 26th, a strong wind blew down the four corners of the roof, including the four corners of the roof ridge of the original hall. It blew down the King's Guard House and destroyed more than forty buildings.

古文：壬寅，吏部侍郎沈传师卒。
现代文：二十七日，原吏部侍郎沈传师去世。
English: On the 27th, Shen Chuanshi, the former attendant of the Cadre Department, passed away.

古文：五月乙巳朔。
现代文：五月初一为乙巳日。
English: The first day of May is the Day of the Snake.

古文：丁未，以浙东观察使李绅为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：初三，任原浙东观察使李绅为太子宾客，分司东都。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Li Sheng, who was originally appointed to observe the eastern part of Zhejiang, was the prince's guest.

古文：乙卯，以给事中高铢为浙东观察使。
现代文：十一日，调原给事中高铢出任浙东观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Gao Wei, who was originally assigned to the case, was appointed as the East Zhejiang Observation Envoy.

古文：戊午，以御史大夫温造为礼部尚书，以吏部侍郎李固言为御史大夫。
现代文：十四日，任原御史大夫温造为礼部尚书，任原吏部侍郎李固言为御史大夫。
English: On the 14th, Wen Zuo, the former imperial secretary, was appointed as the secretary of the etiquette department, and Li Guyan, the former attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the imperial secretary.

古文：辛酉，太和公主进马射女子七人、沙陀小兒二人。
现代文：十七日，太和公主献会骑马射箭的女子七名，沙陀小儿两名。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Empress Dowager and the Princess presented seven horse-riding, archery-playing women and two Satou children.

古文：戊辰，以金吾大将军李玼为黔中观察使，以尚书右丞王璠为户部尚书、判度支。
现代文：二十四日，调原金吾大将军李王比出任黔中观察使；任原尚书右丞王为户部尚书、判度支。
English: On the 24th, Li Wangbi, the former general of Kingu, was transferred to serve as a middle-ranking observation envoy; the former Shangshu Yu Rong Wang was appointed as the head of the household department of Shangshu and the judgment department.

古文：己巳，以户部尚书郑覃为秘书监。
现代文：二十五日，任原户部尚书郑覃为秘书监。
English: On the 25th, the former head of the household department, Shang Shu Zheng, was appointed as the secretary supervisor.

古文：辛未，宰相王涯册拜司空。
现代文：二十七日，封宰相王涯为司空。
English: On the 27th, Wang Ya, the Vice-Chancellor of the State Council, was appointed as the Vice-Emperor.

古文：癸酉，以河中节度使王智兴为宣武军节度使，依前守太傅、兼侍中。
现代文：二十九日，调原河中节度使王智兴任宣武军节度使，仍带守太傅、兼侍中衔。
English: On the 29th, Wang Zhixing was assigned to be the festival envoy of the Xuanwu army, still holding the title of taifu and the rank of attendant.

古文：六月乙亥朔，西市火。
现代文：六月初一为乙亥日，西市失火。
English: On the first day of June, the first day of the second month of the Chinese lunar calendar, Xi'an City caught fire.

古文：以前宣武军节度使李程为河中节度使。
现代文：调原宣武军节度使李程任河中节度使。
English: Li Cheng was appointed as the deputy commander of the middle of the river by the former commander of the Xuanwu army.

古文：庚寅夜，月掩岁。
现代文：十六日，夜，月亮遮掩木星。
English: On the night of the 16th, the moon occulted Jupiter.

古文：癸巳，以吏部尚书令狐楚为太常卿。
现代文：十九日，任原吏部尚书令狐楚为太常卿。
English: On the 19th, Shang Shuling, who had been appointed as the former head of the cadre department, promoted Xuchu to the position of Tai Changqing.

古文：丁酉，礼部尚书温造卒。
现代文：二十三日，原礼部尚书温造去世。
English: On the 23rd, the former leader of the ceremonial department, Shang Shuyun Zou, passed away.

古文：京兆尹杨虞卿家人出妖言，下御史台。
现代文：京兆尹杨虞卿因家属传播谣言，被送交御史台关押。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Yang Yuqing was sent to the custody of the State History Channel for spreading rumors by his family members.

古文：虞卿弟司封郎中汉公并男知进等八人挝登闻鼓称冤，敕虞卿归私第。
现代文：杨虞卿之弟杨汉公及子杨知进等八人击登闻鼓喊冤，文宗命暂放杨虞卿回家。
English: Eight people, including Yang Han Gong, the younger brother of Yang Yuqing, and Yang Zhijin, his son, took to the streets to appeal for justice. Wenzong ordered Yang Yuqing to be temporarily allowed to return home.

古文：己亥，以右神策大将军刘沔为泾原节度使。
现代文：二十五日，调右神策大将军刘沔出任泾原节度使。
English: On the 25th, General Liu Wei, the commander of the Right Divine Policy Division, was transferred to the post of Shenyuan Sectional Envoy.

古文：壬辰，诏以银青光禄大夫、守中书侍郎、同平章事、襄武县开国侯、食邑一千户李宗闵贬明州刺史，时杨虞卿坐妖言人归第，人皆以为冤诬，宗闵于上前极言论列，上怒，面数宗闵之罪，叱出之，故坐贬。
现代文：二十八日，命将银青光禄大夫、守中书侍郎、同平章事、襄武县开国侯、食邑一千户李宗闵降职为明州刺史。杨虞卿因家人传谣归家待罪，人们都认为是受诬陷，李宗闵也在文宗面前极力为杨虞卿辩护，文宗很生气，当面数落李宗闵的过失，将他喝退，李宗闵因此被降职。
English: On the 28th, Li Zongyao was ordered to demote Yinqing Guanglu Doctor, Guozhong Shushirong, Tongping Zhangji, Xiangwu County Kaifu, and 1,000 households of food villages to become the history of Mingzhou. Yang Yuqing, because of his family's rumor, returned home to be punished. People all thought that he was framed. Li Zongyao also tried his best to defend Yang Yuqing in front of Wenzong. Wenzong was very angry. When he saw Li Zongyao's mistake, he rebuffed him, and Li Zongyao was demoted.

古文：秋七月甲申朔，贬京兆尹杨虞卿为虔州司马同正。
现代文：秋七月初一为甲辰日，将原京兆尹杨虞卿降职为虔州司马同正。
English: On the 1st day of the 7th month of autumn, the former Jing Zhao Yin Yang Yuqing was demoted to the position of Jianzhou Sima Tongzheng.

古文：丙午，以给事中李石权知京兆尹。
现代文：初三，调原给事中李石代理京兆尹。
English: On the third day of the first month, Li Shishi, who was originally assigned to the case, became the agent of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：戊申，填龙首池为鞠场，曲江修紫云楼。
现代文：初五，填龙首池为打场，在曲江畔修建紫云楼。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Longshou Pond was filled as a batting field, and Ziyun Building was built on the banks of the Qu River.

古文：辛亥，诏以御史大夫李固言为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：初八，任原御史大夫李固言为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the eighth year of his junior high school career, he was appointed as a subordinate attendant of the former Imperial Historian, Li Gugen.

古文：壬子，再贬李宗闵为处州长史。
现代文：初九，再将李宗闵降职为处州长史。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, he demoted Li Zongyao to the position of deputy governor.

古文：癸丑，以右司郎中、兼侍御史、知杂事舒元舆为御史中丞。
现代文：初十，任原右司郎中、兼侍御史、知杂事舒元舆为御史中丞。
English: At the age of ten, he was appointed to the post of junior secretary of the Right Division of the Privy Council, concurrently serving as secretary of the Privy Council, and as secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：贬吏部侍郎李汉为汾州刺史，刑部侍郎萧浣为遂州刺史。
现代文：将吏部侍郎李汉降职为汾州刺史，将刑部侍郎萧浣降职为遂州刺史。
English: Li Han, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was demoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, and Xiao Wei, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was demoted to the post of Suizhou chief historian.

古文：丁巳，诏不得度人为僧尼。
现代文：十四日，诏令禁止剃度百姓作和尚、尼姑。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor issued an edict prohibiting ordinary people from becoming monks and nuns.

古文：戊午，贬工部侍郎、充皇太子侍读崔侑为洋州刺史，贬吏部郎中张讽夔州刺史，考功郎中、皇太子侍读苏涤忠州刺史，户部郎中杨敬之连州刺史。
现代文：十五日，将原工部侍郎、充皇太子侍读崔侑降职为洋州刺史，将原吏部郎中张讽降职为夔州刺史，将原考功郎中、皇太子侍读苏涤降职为忠州刺史，将原户部郎中杨敬之降职为连州刺史。
English: On the 15th, he demoted Choe Hyun, the attendant of the former engineering department and the crown prince, to the position of Yangju historian, Zhang Yeon, the attendant of the former administration department, to the position of Gyeongju historian, So Hyang, the attendant of the former examination committee and the crown prince, to the position of Chungju historian, and Yang Kei, the attendant of the former household department, to the position of Lianju historian.

古文：辛酉，以鄂岳观察使崔郾充浙西观察使，以国子祭酒高重为鄂岳观察使。
现代文：十八日，调原鄂岳观察使崔郾任浙西观察使，调国子祭酒高重出任鄂岳观察使。
English: On the 18th, Cui Jun, who was originally assigned to the observation of Mount Etu, was assigned to the observation of West Zhejiang, and Gaozhe, who was assigned to the observation of Mount Etu, was assigned to the observation of Guozi Festival.

古文：壬戌，镇海军节度使路随卒。
现代文：十九日，原镇海军节度使路随去世。
English: On the 19th, the founder of the Naval Festival in the original town passed away.

古文：癸亥，贬侍御史李甘为封州司马，殿中侍御史苏特为潘州司户。
现代文：二十日，将原侍御史李甘降职为封州司马，将原殿中侍御史苏特降职为潘州司户。
English: On the 20th, Li Gan, the former chamberlain of the palace, was demoted to the position of Fuzhou steward, and the former palace chamberlain Shisut was demoted to the position of Panzhou steward.

古文：甲子，以《周易》博士李训为兵部郎中、知制诰，依前充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：二十一日，任《周易》博士李训为兵部郎中、知制诰，带翰林侍讲学士衔。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li Xun, the doctor of "Zhou Yi," was appointed as the junior of the military department and the assistant lecturer with the bachelor's degree of Hanlin.

古文：丁卯，天平军节度使庾承宣卒。
现代文：二十四日，原天平军节度使庾承宣去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the former Tianping Army died.

古文：以大理卿罗让为散骑常侍，以汝州刺史郭行余为大理卿。
现代文：任原大理卿罗让为散骑常侍，任原汝州刺史郭行余为大理卿。
English: Appointed the original Dali Lord, Luo Zhan, as the riding attendant, and appointed the original Ruzhou Jishi Guo Xingyu as the Dali Lord.

古文：戊辰，以刑部尚书殷侑为天平军节度使，以吉州刺史裴泰为邕管经略使。八月甲戌朔，以户部侍郎李翱检校礼部尚书，充山南东道节度使，代王起；以起为兵部尚书，判户部事。
现代文：二十五日，调原刑部尚书殷侑出任天平军节度使。八月初一为甲戌日，调原吏部侍郎李翱任检校礼部尚书，接替王起，出任山南东道节度使；任王起为兵部尚书，兼户部事。
English: On the 25th, Shangshu Yinqi, transferred from the original criminal investigation department, served as the festival envoy of the Tianping Army. At the beginning of August, on the first day of the Armistice Day, Li Xi, the attendant of the original criminal investigation department, served as the festival envoy of the school inspection and ceremonial department, succeeded Wang Qi, and served as the host festival envoy of Shannan; Wang Qi was appointed as the military department official, and also served as the household department.

古文：丙子，又贬处州长史李宗闵为潮州司户。丁丑，以太仆卿郑注为工部尚书，充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：初三，再次将李宗闵降职为潮州司户。初四，任原太仆卿郑注为工部尚书，充翰林院侍讲学士。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he once again demoted Li Zongyao to the position of Chaozhou steward. In the fourth year of junior high school, he appointed the former eunuch Zheng Zhu as the official secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and the attendant lecturer of the Academy of Forestry.

古文：上幸左军龙首殿，因幸梨园，含元殿大合乐。
现代文：文宗去左军龙首殿，顺道游梨园，到含元殿赏乐。
English: Wenzong went to the Dragon's Head Hall of the Left Army, toured the Pear Garden on the way, and enjoyed himself at the Hall of Han Yuan.

古文：戊寅，以秘书监郑覃为刑部尚书。
现代文：初五，任原秘书监郑覃为刑部尚书。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the former secretary and superintendent, Zheng Qi, became the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：贬翰林学士、守尚书户部侍郎、知制诰李珏为江州刺史，以鄜坊节度使史孝章为义成军节度使。
现代文：将原翰林学士、守尚书户部侍郎、知制诰李珏降职为江州刺史。调原坊节度使史孝章为义成军节度使。
English: He demoted the former Hanlin Baccalaureate, Shosho Shukubo Jiro, and Chizoku Shokubo Rikyo to the post of Jiangsu Provincial Historian. The Shoranbo Festival made Shi Xiao Zhang the Yicheng Army Festival Delegate.

古文：甲申，以左神策军大将军赵儋为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：十一日，调左神策军大将军赵儋出任坊节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, General Zhao Wei, commander of the Left Divine Defense Force, was transferred to serve as the envoy of the festival.

古文：甲午，贬中书舍人权璩为郑州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，将原中书舍人权璩降职为郑州刺史。
English: On the 21st, he demoted the former Chinese School of Human Rights to Zhengzhou History.

古文：丙申，内官杨承和于驩州安置，韦元素象州安置，王践言思州安置，仰锢身递送。
现代文：二十三日，将内官枢密使杨承和遣送到州安置，左神策中尉韦元素遣送象州安置，枢密使王践言遣送思州安置，要戴枷押送。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Chenghe, the privy councillor and privy councillor, was sent to Shizhou for resettlement, Zuo Shenke, Lieutenant Wei Ye, was sent to Zhangzhou for resettlement, and Wang Jangyan, the privy councillor and privy councillor, was sent to Shizhou for resettlement, and had to be escorted with shackles.

古文：言李宗闵为吏部侍郎时，托驸马沈于宫人宋若宪处求宰相，承和、践言、元素居中导达故也。
现代文：因为李宗闵任吏部侍郎时曾托驸马沈在宫女宋若宪面前为他活动宰相的位置，当时杨承和等三人从中牵线。
English: Because when Li Zongxuan was the steward of the cadre department, he had asked Ma Shen to act as the prime minister for his activities in front of his concubine Song Ruoqian. At that time, Yang Chenghe and three others were pulling the strings.

古文：宗闵党杨虞卿、李汉、萧浣皆再贬。
现代文：李宗闵一派的杨虞卿、李汉、萧浣也都再次降职。
English: Yang Yuqing, Li Han and Xiao Yao from Li Zongyao's faction were also demoted again.

古文：壬寅，贬中书舍人高元裕为阆州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，将原中书舍人高元裕降职为阆州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Gao Yuanyu, a former middle school teacher, was demoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：元裕为郑注除官制，说注医药之功，注衔之故也。
现代文：高元裕在草拟任命郑注入翰林的文书中说郑注用医药奉文宗有功，郑注怀恨在心，这次采取报复手段。
English: Gao Yuanyu said in the document drafting the appointment of Zheng Jianlin that Zheng Jian used medicine to serve the Emperor, and Zheng Jian harbored hatred in his heart, and this time he took retaliatory measures.

古文：以苏州刺史卢周仁为湖南观察使。
现代文：调原苏州刺史卢周仁任湖南观察使。
English: Former Suzhou governor Lu Zhouren was appointed Hunan observation envoy.

古文：九月癸卯朔，奸臣李训、郑注用事，不附己者，即时贬黜，朝廷悚震，人不自安。
现代文：九月初一为癸卯日，奸臣李训、郑注掌权，不趋附他们的官员，立即降职降级，罚到边远地区去，满朝文武官员十分震惊，人心惶惶。
English: On the first day of September, the day of Wu Wu, the treacherous vassals Li Xun and Zheng Zhu took power. The officials who did not follow them were immediately demoted and relegated to remote areas. The officials of Manchukuo were very shocked and panicked.

古文：是日，下诏曰： 朕承天之序，烛理未明，劳虚襟以求贤，励宽德以容众。
现代文：文宗在这天颁发诏书说 ：我承受上天的安排，来治理多事的国家，我的宗旨是虚心求贤，大度容众。
English: On this day, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict, saying, "I have received God's arrangement to govern the eventful country. My purpose is to seek virtue with an open mind and to be tolerant of the public.

古文：今既再申朝典，一变浇风，扫清朋附之徒，匡饬贞廉之俗，凡百卿士，惟新令猷。如闻周行之中，尚蓄疑惧，或有妄相指目，令不自安，今兹旷然，明喻朕意。应与宗闵、德裕或新或故及门生旧吏等，除今日已前放黜之外，一切不问。 
现代文：文武百官，有所遵循。如若有人尚未消除顾虑，或者不负责任地互相猜忌，搅得人心不安，那么，现将我的态度明白告诉大家：凡原来与李宗闵、李德裕有师生、同事关系，除今日以前已经处分的以外，其余一律不予追究。 
English: If there are people who have not yet eliminated their misgivings, or have irresponsibly stirred up mutual suspicions and disturbed people's hearts, then I would like to make my attitude clear to everyone: If you have any teacher-student or colleague relationship with Li Zongyao and Li Deyu, you will not be investigated, except for those who have been punished before today.

古文：辛亥，以太子宾客分司东都白居易为同州刺史，代杨汝士；以汝士为驾部侍郎。
现代文：初九，调原太子宾客分司东都白居易接替杨汝士出任同州刺史，任杨汝士为驾部侍郎。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14

古文：乙亥，以泾原节度使刘沔为振武麟胜节度使。
现代文：十三日，调原泾原节度使刘沔任振武麟胜节度使。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Liu Bei appointed Zhenwu Lin as the prime minister.

古文：丙辰，以权知御史中丞舒元舆为御史中丞，兼判刑部侍郎。
现代文：十四日，任原代理御史中丞舒元舆为御史中丞，兼判刑部侍郎。
English: On the 14th, Shu Yuanwu, who had been acting as goshi chujo, was appointed as goshi chujo, and also became a chamberlain of the Sentencing Department.

古文：庚申，以凤翔节度使李听为忠武军节度使。
现代文：十八日，调原凤翔节度使李听为忠武军节度使。
English: On the 18th, Fengxiang, the former military attaché, sent Li He to be the military attaché of the loyal army.

古文：癸亥，令内养齐抱真将杖于青泥驿决杀前襄州监军陈弘志，以有杀逆之罪也。
现代文：二十一日，派太监齐抱真去青泥驿将原襄州监军陈弘志处死，因陈弘志犯了谋杀宪宗之罪。
English: On the twenty-first day, he sent the eunuchs Qi Baozhen to Qingdao and executed Chen Hongzhi, the former inspector of the Xiangzhou army, because Chen Hongzhi had committed the crime of murdering Xianzong.

古文：丁卯，以门下侍郎、同平章事李固言为兴元尹、山南西道节度使；以翰林侍讲学士、工部尚书郑注检校右仆射，充凤翔陇右节度使。
现代文：二十五日，调原门下侍郎、同平章事李固言出任兴元尹、山南西道节度使；调翰林侍讲学士、工部尚书郑注为检校右仆射，出任凤翔、陇右节度使。
English: On the 25th, the attendant of the original disciple, Tongping Zhangji Li Guyan, was appointed as the Xingyuan Yin, the festival delegate of Shannan West Road; the attendant of Hanlin, the lecturer, and the department of engineering, Shangshu Zheng, was the right-hand man of the school inspection, and served as the Fengxiang, the right-hand festival delegate.

古文：戊辰，以右军中尉王守澄为左右神策观军容使，兼十二卫统军。
现代文：二十六日，任原右军中尉王守澄为左右神策观军容使，兼十二卫统军。
English: On the 26th, Wang Shoucheng, a former lieutenant of the Right Army, was appointed as the envoy of the Left and Right Divination Army, and the leader of the 12th Guards United Army.

古文：己巳，诏以朝议郎、守御史中丞、兼刑部侍郎、赐紫金鱼袋舒元舆本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，诏令任朝议郎、守御史中丞、兼刑部侍郎、赐紫金鱼袋舒元舆领原职同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict was issued appointing him as the chancellor of the court, the junior secretary of the shogunate's history department, and the attendant of the criminal justice department, as well as awarding him the purple gold fish bag, and giving him the former position of the shogunal secretary and the position of the junior secretary of the school.

古文：朝议郎、守兵部郎中、知制诰、充翰林侍讲学士、赐绯鱼袋李训可守尚书礼部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，仍赐金紫。
现代文：任朝议郎、守兵部郎中、知制诰、充翰林侍讲学士、赐绯鱼袋李训守尚书礼部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，仍赐金紫鱼袋。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Council of Elders, a member of the Guarding Military Department, a member of the Chisei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy, a member of the Chosei Academy and a member of the Chosei Academy.

古文：壬申，以刑部郎中、兼侍御史、知杂李孝本权知御史中丞。
现代文：三十日，任原刑部郎中、兼侍御史、知杂李孝本代理御史中丞。
English: On the 30th, he was appointed as the junior secretary of the original criminal investigation department, concurrently the attendant of the history, and the deputy secretary of the history by Chizho Lee Takamoto.

古文：冬十月癸酉。
现代文：冬十月初一为癸酉日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is a leap day.

古文：乙亥，杜忭复为陈许节度使，李听为太子太保分司。
现代文：初三，再任杜为陈许节度使，任李听为太子太保分司。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Du was reappointed as Chen Xu's delegate, and Li Xuan was appointed as Prince Taibo's branch secretary.

古文：内出曲江新造紫云楼彩霞亭额，左军中尉仇士良以百戏于银台门迎之。
现代文：文宗为曲江新建紫云楼彩霞亭题写匾额，送出之日，左军中尉仇士良率人表演百戏在银台门迎接。
English: Wen Zong inscribed a plaque for the newly built Ziyun Building Cai Xia Ting in Qujiang. On the day of delivery, Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the Left Army led a group of people to perform a hundred plays at the Yintai Gate.

古文：时郑注言秦中有灾，宜兴土功厌之，乃浚昆明、曲江二池。
现代文：因先前郑注曾向文宗建议说，秦中发生灾荒，应搞些建筑来镇邪消灾，所以对昆明、曲江二池进行疏浚。
English: Because Zheng Zhu had previously suggested to Wenzong that there was a disaster in Qin, and some buildings should be built to eliminate the disaster, the two ponds in Kunming and Qujiang were dredged.

古文：上好为诗，每诵杜甫《曲江行》云： 江头宫殿锁千门，细柳新蒲为谁绿？ 
现代文：文宗爱好写诗，每当读到杜甫《曲江行》 江头宫殿锁千门，细柳新蒲为谁绿？ 
English: Wenzong likes to write poetry. Whenever he reads Du Fu's "Qu River," the Jiangtou Palace locks thousands of doors. For whom is the willow shinpu green?

古文：乃知天宝已前，曲江四岸皆有行宫台殿、百司廨署，思复升平故事，故为楼殿以壮之。
现代文：的诗句，方才知道天宝以前，曲江沿岸都是行宫台殿，各部衙门。想见当年太平景象，因此也在曲江建些亭台楼阁美化一番。
English: It was only after reading this poem that I learned that before Tianbao, the Qujiang River was lined with palaces and gates. I wanted to see the peaceful scene of that year, so I also built some pavilions and pavilions in Qujiang to beautify it.

古文：王涯献榷茶之利，乃以涯为榷茶使。茶之有榷税，自涯始也。
现代文：王涯交纳实行茶叶专卖后所得盈利，于是任王涯为榷茶使，茶叶实行专卖就是从王涯开始实行的。
English: Wang Ya handed over the profits earned after the tea monopoly was implemented, so Wang Ya was appointed as the tea steward. The tea monopoly was implemented from Wang Ya onwards.

古文：京兆、河南两畿旱。
现代文：京兆、河南两地发生旱灾。
English: Droughts have occurred in the cities of Jingzhao and Henan.

古文：以吏部尚书令狐楚为左仆射，以刑部尚书郑覃为右仆射。
现代文：任原吏部尚书令狐楚为左仆射，任原刑部尚书郑覃为右仆射。
English: The former head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuling, appointed Xuchu as his left-hand man, and the former head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuling, appointed Zheng Yao as his right-hand man.

古文：辛巳，遣中使李好古赍赐王守澄，是日，守澄卒。
现代文：初九，派太监李好古送毒酒毒杀王守澄。初十，在曲江亭宴请文武百官。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, he sent the eunuch Li Haogu to poison Wang Shuzhen with poisoned wine. On the tenth day of the new year, he invited a hundred military and civilian officials to a banquet at Qujiang Pavilion.

古文：壬午，赐群臣宴于曲江亭。癸未，以前广州节度使王茂元为泾原节度使。
现代文：十一日，调原广州节度使王茂元任泾原节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Maoyuan was appointed as the ambassador of the original Guangzhou Festival.

古文：丁亥，礼部郎中钱可复、兵部员外郎李敬彝、驾部员外郎卢简能、主客员外郎萧杰、左拾遗卢茂弘等皆授凤翔使府判官，从郑注奏请也。
现代文：十五日，听从郑注的意见，派礼部郎中钱可复、兵部员外郎李敬彝、驾部员外郎卢简能、主客员外郎萧杰、左拾遗卢茂弘等一同出任凤翔使府判官。
English: On the 15th, heeding the advice of Zheng Shu, he sent the ceremonial secretary, the middle-ranking official Qian Kefu, the military officer, the second-ranked official Li Jingyao, the driver, the second-ranked official Lu Jianneng, the chief guest, the second-ranked official Xiao Jie, the left-handed official Lu Maohong, and others to serve as judges for the Fengxiang envoy.

古文：乙未，以新受同州刺史白居易为太子少傅分司，以汝州刺史刘禹锡为同州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，调新任命同州刺史白居易为太子少傅分司，调汝州刺史刘禹锡任同州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Bai Juyi, the governor of the same province, was newly appointed as the deputy governor of the same province, and Liu Yuxi, the governor of the same province, was newly appointed as the governor of the same province.

古文：己亥，以前河阳节度使萧洪为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：二十七日，调原河阳节度使萧洪任坊节度使。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Hong was transferred from Heyang Festival Envoy to Fangfang Festival Envoy.

古文：淄青观察使王彦威请停管内县丞一十九员，从之。
现代文：淄青观察使王彦威奏请减免辖区内十九员县丞，批复同意。
English: Wang Yanwei made a request to reduce or exempt the nineteen county magistrates in the jurisdiction, and the reply was approved.

古文：庚子，东都留守、特进、守司徒、侍中裴度进位中书令，余如故。
现代文：二十八日，给东都留守、特进、守司徒、侍中裴度晋升为中书令，原有职位封号不变。
English: On the 28th, Dongdu left-behind, special advance, guard Sito, and attendant Baidu were promoted to Chushirei, and the original position seal number remained unchanged.

古文：以前山南西道节度使王源中为刑部尚书。
现代文：任原山南西道节度使王源中为刑部尚书。
English: Wang Yuanzhong was appointed as the head of the criminal department of the West Shannan Road Festival.

古文：十一月壬寅朔。
现代文：十一月初一为壬寅日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Jinsin Day.

古文：乙巳，令内养冯叔良杀前徐州监军王守涓于中牟县。
现代文：初四，派太监冯叔良往中牟县将原徐州监军王守涓处死。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he sent eunuch Feng Shuliang to Zhongmou County to execute the former Xuzhou overseer Wang Shouyi.

古文：以左神策军胡沐为容管经略使，以大理卿郭行余为邠宁节度使。
现代文：调左神策将军胡沐任容管经略使，调大理卿郭行余任宁节度使。
English: He transferred General Hu Mucheng from the left to the right to be the vice-minister of finance, and transferred Guo Xingyu from the right to the left to be the vice-minister of finance.

古文：丁未，鄜坊节度使赵儋卒。
现代文：初六，原坊节度使赵儋去世。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the Yuanfang Festival caused Zhao Yao's death.

古文：乙酉，左金吾卫大将军崔鄯卒。
现代文：初八，原左金吾卫大将军崔鄯去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the former General of the Left Wing of the Korean People's Army, Choe Son, passed away.

古文：癸丑，以左仆射令狐楚判太常卿事，右仆射郑覃判国子祭酒事。
现代文：十二日，任左仆射令狐楚兼太常卿事，任右仆射郑覃兼国子祭酒事。
English: On the twelfth day, his left-hand servant, Zhaozhong Zhaozhong, performed the duties of the Grand Duke, and his right-hand servant, Zhengxuan Zhaozhong, performed the duties of the Grand Duke.

古文：丁巳，以户部尚书、判度支王璠为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：十六日，调原户部尚书判度支王出任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the 16th, the former head of the household department, Shangshu Shandu, was transferred to the position of Taiyuan Yin, the Hokuto left-behind, and the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：戊午，以京兆尹李右为户部侍郎、判度支，以京兆少尹罗立言权知府事。
现代文：十七日，调原京兆尹李石任户部侍郎判度支，任京兆少尹罗立言代理京兆府工作。
English: On the 17th, the former Jingzhao Yin Lishi was transferred to serve as the head of the Household Division of the Judiciary Branch, and the former Jingzhao Minor Yin Luo was appointed as the representative of the Jingzhao Prefecture.

古文：己未，以太府卿韩约为左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：十八日，调原太府卿韩约为左金吾卫大将军。
English: On the 18th, Han Yu, the former Dafu-ch'ing (Grand Steward of the Grand Palace) sent the general Jin Wuwei.

古文：壬戌，中尉仇士良率兵诛宰相王涯、贾餗、舒元舆、李训，新除太原节度王璠，郭行馀、郑注、罗立言、李孝本，韩约等十余家，皆族诛。
现代文：二十一日，中尉仇士良带兵捕杀宰相王涯、贾饣束、舒元舆、李训，新任太原节度使王以及郭行余、郑注、罗立言、李孝本、韩约等十余人及其家属全部被杀。
English: On the twenty-first day, Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang led the troops to capture and kill the Prime Minister Wang Lai, Jia Yingzhu, Shu Yuan Yiwu, Li Xun, the newly appointed Taiyuan Festival envoy Wang, as well as Guo Xingyu, Zheng Zhu, Luo Lijian, Li Xiaobeng, Han You and more than ten other people and their families were all killed.

古文：时李训、郑注谋诛内官，诈言金吾仗舍石榴树有甘露，请上观之。
现代文：先是李训、郑注密谋杀掉内宫掌权的太监，欺骗文宗说金吾仗院内石榴树上昨夜天降甘露，请皇帝亲自去观看。
English: First, Li Hun and Zheng Chun conspired to murder the eunuch who held power in the Inner Court, and deceived Wenzong by saying that the sky had rained nectar on the pomegranate tree in the court of King Wu, and asked the emperor to go and see for himself.

古文：内官先至金吾仗，见幕下伏甲，遽扶帝辇入内，故训等败，流血涂地。
现代文：宦官们在文宗之前到了金吾仗，发现幕后埋伏有武装兵士，急忙将文宗扶上软轿逃回后宫。李训等的计划因此失败，并被杀得尸横遍地。
English: The eunuchs arrived at the Battle of Kingu before Wenzong, found that there were armed soldiers lurking behind the scenes, and hurriedly put Wenzong on a soft sedan to escape back to the harem. Li Xun's plan failed, and he was killed and his body was scattered all over the ground.

古文：京师大骇，旬日稍安。
现代文：这事件引起京城内臣民的极大恐慌，一直过了十多天才稍为安定下来。
English: This incident caused great panic among the subjects in the capital, and it took more than ten days for things to settle down a bit.

古文：癸亥，诏以银青光禄大夫、尚书左仆射、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公郑覃以本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十二日，诏令银青光禄大夫、尚书左仆射、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公郑覃带原职同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that Dr. Yin Qing Guanglu, Shang Shuxu Zuofu Jie, Shangzhu Guo, and Zheng Yu, the founding father of Shenyang County, would take their former posts as middle school teachers to lower the rank.

古文：乙丑，诏以朝议郎、守尚书户部侍郎、判度支李石可朝议大夫、本官同平章事。
现代文：二十四日，诏令朝议郎、守尚书户部侍郎、判度支李石为朝议大夫、带原职同平章事。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that Choheiro, Shosho Shokubu Jiro, and Gando Shikiriishi would become Choheiro doctors, with the same rank as their original posts.

古文：丁卯，以左神刺大将军陈君奕为凤翔节度使。
现代文：二十六日，调原左神策大将军陈君奕出任凤翔节度使。
English: On the 26th, Chen Junyi, the former General of the Left Divine Policy, served as Fengxiang's festival envoy.

古文：戊辰，以给事中李翊为御史中丞，左右军尉仇士良、鱼志弘并兼上将军。
现代文：二十七日，任原给事中李翊为御史中丞，任左右军中尉仇士良、鱼弘志同为兼上将军。
English: On the 27th, Li Xi, who was originally in charge of affairs, was appointed as the vice-commander of history, and the left and right army lieutenants Qiu Shiliang and Ushihongzidong were appointed as adjunct generals.

古文：十二月壬申朔，诸道盐铁转运榷茶使令狐楚奏榷茶不便于民，请停，从之。
现代文：十二月初一为壬申日，诸道盐铁转运榷茶使令狐楚奏称茶叶实行专卖于民不便，请停止，批复同意。
English: At the beginning of December, it was Jinshin Day, and the salt and iron transport of tea from all directions caused the fox to say that it was inconvenient to sell tea to the people exclusively. Please stop, the reply agreed.

古文：癸丑。太子太保张茂宗卒。
现代文：初二，原太子太保张茂宗去世。
English: On the second day of the new year, the former crown prince Zhang Maozong passed away.

古文：甲子，敕左右省起居赍笔砚及纸于螭头下记言记事。
现代文：初三，命左右省起居郎携带纸笔墨砚在殿前饰有无角龙石雕的台阶下记录皇帝与大臣们的谈话和活动。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the provincial secretary Kijiro, carrying a pen and ink pad, recorded the conversations and activities of the emperor and his ministers under the steps decorated with stone sculptures of hornless dragons in front of the hall.

古文：丙子，以刑部尚书王源中为天平军节度使。
现代文：初五，调原刑部尚书王源中出任天平军节度使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he was transferred from the original criminal department, Shangshu Wangyuan Middle School, to serve as the Tianping Army's festival envoy.

古文：丁丑，敕诸道府不得私置历日板。
现代文：初六，命各道衙门不准私自设置历日板。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, it is not allowed to set up a calendar board by oneself.

古文：己卯，凤翔监军奏郑注判官钱可复等四人并处斩讫。
现代文：初八，凤翔监军奏称已将郑注的判官钱可复等四人全部处死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Feng Xiang's supervisors reported that they had executed all four of Zheng Zhu's judges, including Qian Ke Rong.

古文：庚辰，上御紫宸，谓宰相曰： 坊市之间，人渐安未？ 
现代文：初九，文宗在紫宸殿问宰相们： 外面城乡居民，人心是否逐渐平定下来？ 
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Emperor Wenzong asked the prime ministers in the Courtyard of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：李石奏曰： 人情虽安，然刑杀过多，致此阴沴。
现代文：李石奏道 ：人心虽然稍为安定，但惩办和杀人太多，以至天时不顺气候反常。
English: Li Shixiao said: Although the people's hearts are somewhat stable, there are too many punishments and killings, so that the weather is abnormal.

古文：又闻郑注在凤翔招致兵募不少，今皆被刑戮，臣恐乘此生事，切宜原赦以安之。 
现代文：还听说郑注原来在凤翔招募了不少士兵，现在一律处死，我耽心会激起事变，应该从宽处理免于追究，也好稳定人心。 文宗说 ：你讲得不错啊！ 
English: I also heard that Zheng Zhu had originally recruited a lot of soldiers in Fengxiang, and now they will all be executed. I was worried that it would provoke an incident, and it should be handled leniently to avoid prosecution, and also to stabilize people's hearts. Wenzong said: You're right!

古文：上曰： 然 郑覃又陈理道。上曰： 我每思贞观、开元之时，观今日之事，往往愤气填膺耳。 
现代文：郑覃也表示了同样的意见。文宗说： 每当想到我朝贞观、开元全盛时期，再看看现在，真是满腔气愤啊！ 
English: Zheng Rong also expressed the same opinion. Wenzong said, "Whenever I think back to the heyday of my chastity, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, and then look at now, I am really angry!

古文：癸未，仪仗使田全操巡边回，驰马入金光门，街市讹言相惊，纵横散走。
现代文：初十，仪仗使田全操巡视边疆地区后回京，骑马跑进金光门，街市上立刻谣言四起，市民纷纷逃散。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, after a ceremonial inspection of the border regions, Tian Quanxiao returned to Beijing and rode into the Golden Gate. Rumors immediately spread in the streets and the citizens fled in droves.

古文：赖金吾大将军陈君赏以其徒立望仙门下，至晚方定。
现代文：幸亏金吾大将军陈君赏带兵把守在望仙门下，直到晚上才平静下来。
English: Fortunately, Jinwu's general, Chen Jun, led his troops to keep watch under the Wangxian Gate, and the situation did not calm down until the evening.

古文：丁亥，以权知京兆尹张仲方为华州防御使，以司农卿薛元赏权知京兆。
现代文：十四日，调代理京兆尹张仲方任华州防御使，任司农卿薛元赏为代理京兆尹。
English: On the 14th, the deputy of Jing Zhaoyun, Zhang Zhongfang, was transferred to be the defense envoy of Huazhou, and the deputy of Jing Zhaoyun was appointed as the Secretary of Agriculture, Xue Yuan Rong.

古文：左仆射令狐楚奏： 方镇节度使等，具弩帓，带器仗，就尚书省兵部参辞，伏乞停罢。
现代文：左仆射令狐楚奏称： 各地方镇节度使等官将往尚书省兵部参见拜谢时，都是穿军服、带武器，请停止这种作法。
English: Zuo Mu Xie Ling Xuchuo said: When the local town festival envoys and other officials go to the military department of Shangshu Province to worship, they are wearing military uniforms and carrying weapons. Please stop this practice.

古文：如须参谢，令具公服。 
现代文：应规定今后如需拜谢，一律穿普通官服。 
English: It should be stipulated that in the future, if there is a need to offer thanks, everyone should wear ordinary official uniforms.

古文：从之。
现代文：批复同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时楚引训、注奸谋，用王璠、郭行余兵仗，遂云不宜以兵仗入省参辞，殊乖事体也。
现代文：当时令狐楚举例说李训、郑注那次阴谋，就是将王、郭行余的武装兵士带进来。因此认为不应带武器到尚书省参拜，其实，这是不切实际的，舆论对令狐楚的建议颇不以为然。
English: At that time, Ling Fuchu gave the example of Li Xun and Zheng Zhu's conspiracy, which was to bring in armed soldiers from Wang and Guo Xingyu. Therefore, it was believed that weapons should not be brought to Shangshu to worship. In fact, this was impractical, and public opinion was quite dismissive of Ling Fuchu's suggestion.

古文：物方尤之。先是，宰相武元衡被害，宪宗出内库弓箭、陌刀赐左右街使，俟宰相入朝，以为翼从，及建福门退。
现代文：先前，宰相武元衡上朝时被刺客暗箭射死，宪宗李纯命令将宫内武器库的弓箭长刀发给金吾骑士，在宰相上朝时，从两旁担任护卫，送到建福门才退去，后来成为制度一直沿用下来，这次也取消了。
English: Previously, when the prime minister, Wu Yuanheng, ascended to the throne, he was shot dead by an assassin's hidden arrow. The constitutional monarch, Li Chun, ordered that the long sword with bow and arrow from the palace's arsenal be given to the knight Kingu. When the prime minister ascended to the throne, he was escorted from both sides and sent to Jianfu Gate before retreating. Later, it became a system that has been used ever since, and this time it was also cancelled.

古文：至是亦停之。辛卯，置谏院印。
现代文：十八日，铸谏官官署专用印章。
English: On the 18th, the special seal of the Government Printing Office was created.

古文：开成元年正月辛丑朔，帝常服御宣政殿受贺，遂宣诏大赦天下，改元开成。
现代文：开成元年正月一日是朔日，皇上穿便服到宣政殿接受朝贺，于是宣布诏令大赦天下，改元为开成。
English: The first day of the first month of the first year of Kaisei was New Year's Day. The emperor, dressed in casual clothes, went to Xuancheng Palace to receive morning greetings, and then announced that he would grant amnesty to the world and change the era to Kaisei.

古文：乙巳，御紫宸殿，宰臣李石奏曰： 陛下改元御殿，人情大悦，全放京兆一年租赋，又停四节进奉，恩泽所该，实当要切。 
现代文：五日，皇上驾到紫宸殿，宰相李石上奏道： 陛下驾到宣政殿宣布改元，人们大喜，全部免除京兆地区一年的田租赋税，又停止四种节令进贡，恩泽所包罗的，确实抓住了关键。 
English: On the fifth day, the emperor drove to the Palace of the Empress Dowager Cixi, and the Prime Minister Li Shisheng gave a speech: His Majesty drove to the Palace of the State Council to announce the change of the era, and people were overjoyed. They were all exempted from paying a year's land rent tax in the Beijing-Shanghai region, and the four kinds of festival tribute were stopped. The benefits included really grasped the key.

古文：帝曰： 朕务行其实，不欲崇长空文。 
现代文：皇上说： 朕务必推行实际，不愿意崇尚一纸空文。 
English: The emperor said: "I must promote reality, I do not want to advocate a piece of paper.

古文：石曰： 赦书须内留一本，陛下时看之。
现代文：李石说 ：赦书须要内廷留一本，陛下可以随时看它。
English: Li Shi said, "The Imperial Court must keep a copy of the pardon letter, and His Majesty can read it at any time."

古文：又十道黜陟使发日，更付与公事根本，令向外与长吏详择施行，方尽利害之要。 
现代文：另外，十道黜陟使出发之日，还要给他们公事的原稿，让他们向外面与地位较高的官员们详细地择要施行，方能全部抓住关键要害。 
English: In addition, on the day of the departure of the ten emissaries, they should also give them the manuscript of the public affairs, and let them choose and implement the details to the outside and the higher-ranking officials, so that they can grasp all the key points.

古文：丁未，以秘书监韦缜为工部尚书。
现代文：七日，以秘书监韦缜为工部尚书。
English: On the seventh day, the secretary supervisor Wei Wei was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：敕： 杨承和、韦元素、王践言、崔潭峻顷遭诬陷，每用追伤，宜复官爵，听其归葬。 
现代文：皇上命令： 杨承和、韦元素、王践言、崔潭峻近来遭到诬陷，常常追思伤感，应该恢复他们的官职爵位，听任归家安葬。 
English: The Emperor's order: Yang Chenghe, Wei Ermeng, Wang Jianyan, and Cui Tanjun, who have recently been framed and often think about sadness, should restore their official titles and be allowed to return home for burial.

古文：以银州刺史刘源为夏、绥、银、宥节度使。
现代文：以银州刺史刘源为夏、绥、银、宥节度使。
English: Liu Yuan, the famous statesman of Yinzhou, was the summer, autumn, silver and yuletide envoy.

古文：丙辰望，日有蚀之。
现代文：十六日是望日，有日蚀。
English: The 16th is the day of the watch, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：二月辛未朔，以左散骑常侍罗让为江西观察使。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，以左散骑常侍罗让为江西观察使。
English: The first day of February was the New Year's Day, and Luo Zhang, a left-handed cavalryman, was appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：乙亥夜四更，京师地震，屋瓦皆坠。
现代文：五日夜四更，京师地震，屋瓦都掉在地上。
English: Five days and four nights later, there was an earthquake in Beijing, and the roof tiles all fell to the ground.

古文：丙申，左武卫大将军硃叔夜赐死于蓝田关。
现代文：二十六日，左武卫大将军朱叔夜在蓝田关被赐死。
English: On the 26th, General Zuo Wei was killed in the night at Lantian Pass.

古文：天德奏生退浑部落三千帐来投丰州。
现代文：天德上奏道生退浑部落有三千座帐幕的人来投奔丰州。
English: There are three thousand tents of people from the Hun tribe who came to Fengzhou.

古文：三月庚子朔。
现代文：三月一日是朔日。
English: March 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：壬寅以袁州长史李德裕为滁州刺史。
现代文：三日，以袁州长史李德裕为滁州刺史。
English: On the third day, Li Deyu, the governor of Yuan Province, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：庚申，幸龙首池，观内人赛雨，因赋《暮春喜雨诗》。
现代文：二十一日，皇上驾到龙首池，观看宫中人在雨中比赛，因而赋《暮春喜雨诗》。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor drove to Longshou Pond to watch the people in the palace compete in the rain, thus giving "Late Spring Rainy Poem."

古文：昭义节度使刘从谏三上疏，问王涯罪名，内官仇士良闻之惕惧。
现代文：昭义节度使刘从谏三次上疏，追问王涯的罪名，太监仇士良听后为之警惕恐惧。
English: Zhao Yi sent Liu Conglu three times to inquire about Wang Ya's crime, and the eunuch Qiu Shiliang was alarmed and afraid.

古文：是日，从谏遣焦楚长入奏，于客状诽谤，请面对。
现代文：这天，刘从谏派焦楚长入奏，在中书省进献状纸，请求皇上当面问。
English: On this day, Liu Zonghai sent Jochu Chang to perform, and presented a paper to the Chinese Book Ministry, asking the emperor to ask him face to face.

古文：上召楚长慰谕遣之。
现代文：皇上召见楚长慰问而后送走了他。
English: The emperor summoned Chu Chang to offer his condolences and then sent him away.

古文：夏四月庚午朔，以河南尹郑浣为左丞，以太子宾客分司东都李绅为河南尹。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日，以河南尹郑浣为左丞，以太子宾客分管东都的李绅为河南尹。
English: The first day of the fourth month of summer is the new moon day, with Henan Yin Zhengqi as the left-hand man, and Li Sheng, who is in charge of the East Capital, as Henan Yin.

古文：癸酉，以亳州刺史裴弘泰为义成军节度使，以谏议大夫李让夷兼权知起居舍人事。
现代文：四日，以亳州刺史裴弘泰为义成军节度使，以谏议大夫李让夷暂代主持起居舍人之事。
English: On the 4th, Bae Hongtai, the governor of Bozhou, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Yicheng Army, and Dr. Li Jangyi temporarily presided over the event.

古文：乙卯，以潮州司户李宗闵为衡州司马，以江州刺史李珏为太子宾客分司。
现代文：十日，以潮州司户李宗闵为衡州司马，以江州刺史李珏为太子宾客分司。
English: On the 10th, Li Zongya, the steward of Chaozhou, was appointed as the steward of Hengzhou, and Li Yao, the steward of Jiangzhou, was appointed as the guest of the prince.

古文：癸未，吏部侍郎李虞仲卒。
现代文：十四日，吏部侍郎李虞仲去世。
English: On the 14th, Li Yuzhong, the head of the personnel department, passed away.

古文：辛卯，淄王协薨。
现代文：二十二日，淄王李协去世。
English: On the 22nd, Gong Wang Lixie passed away.

古文：甲午，诏以山南西道节度使、检校兵部尚书李固言门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事；以左仆射、诸道盐铁转运使令狐楚检校左仆射，为山南西道节度使。
现代文：二十五日，皇上诏令以山南西道节度使、检校兵部尚书李固言为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事；以左仆射、诸道盐铁转运使令狐楚为检校左仆射，山南西道节度使。
English: On the 25th, the emperor issued an imperial edict, appointing Shangshu Li Gugen, the inspecting officer of the Shannan West Road Festival and the inspecting officer of the Shannan West Road Festival, as the attendant of the school, and Shunping Zhangji, the inspecting officer of the Shandong West Road Festival, as the inspecting officer of the Shannan West Road Festival and the inspecting officer of the Shandong West Road Festival, and Zuo Fuchu, the inspecting officer of the Shannan West Road Festival and the inspecting officer of the Shandong West Road Festival, as the inspecting officer.

古文：丙申，李固言判户部事；李石判度支，兼诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：二十七日，李固言又兼户部事宜；宰相李石兼任度支使，兼诸道盐铁转运使。
English: On the 27th, Li Guyan was also in charge of the household affairs; Prime Minister Li Shih was also appointed as the special envoy, and the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron to various provinces.

古文：五月乙亥朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：癸卯，以翰林学士归融为御史中丞。
现代文：五日，以翰林学士归融为御史中丞。
English: On the fifth day, the Hanlin Baccalaureate was merged into the History Junior High School.

古文：丁未，以给事中郭承嘏为华州防御使。
现代文：四日，以给事中郭承嘏为华州防御使。
English: On the fourth day, Guo Chengyao was appointed as the defense envoy of Huazhou.

古文：给事中卢载以承嘏公正守道，屡有封驳，不宜置之外郡，乃封还诏书。
现代文：给事中卢载认为郭承嘏公正而守正道，屡次有对封章的批驳，不应放他到外郡任职，于是卢载把诏书封还给朝廷。
English: In the matter, Lu Zai thought that Guo Chengyao was just and kept to the right path, and repeatedly objected to the seal, and he should not be allowed to serve outside the county, so Lu Zai returned the imperial seal to the imperial court.

古文：诩日，复以承嘏为给事中，乃以给事中卢钧代嘏守华州。
现代文：第二天，皇上再次以郭承嘏为给事中，于是以给事中卢钧代郭承嘏守华州。
English: The next day, the emperor once again appointed Guo Chengyi as the regent, and Lu Wei was appointed as the regent to represent Guo Chengyi in the defense of Huazhou.

古文：乙卯，御紫宸，上谓宰臣曰： 为政之道，自古所难。 
现代文：十七日，皇上到紫宸殿，对宰相们道： 治国的办法，从古以来就很难。 
English: On the seventeenth day, the Emperor went to Shishinden and said to the prime ministers: The method of governing the country has been difficult since ancient times.

古文：李石对曰： 朝廷法令行，则易。 
现代文：李石对答道： 朝廷法令通行，治国就容易。 
English: Li Shishi replied, "Once the imperial edicts are passed, it is easy to govern the country.

古文：丁巳，以尚书右丞郑肃为陕虢都防御观察使。
现代文：十九日，以尚书右丞郑肃为陕虢都防御观察使。
English: On the 19th, Shang Shuyuan Zheng Su was appointed as the defense observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：前罢观察，复置之。
现代文：先前撤销的观察使一职，又重新设置。
English: The previously abolished post of inspector general has been reinstated.

古文：以中书舍人唐扶为福建观察使。
现代文：以中书舍人唐扶为福建观察使。
English: Tang Fu, a Chinese scholar, was appointed as the Fujian Observer.

古文：庚申，判国子祭酒宰臣郑覃奏： 太学新置五经博士各一人，请依王府官例，赐以禄粟。 
现代文：二十二日，兼任较小职务国子祭酒宰相郑覃上奏道 ：太学新近设置五经博士各一人，请求按照王府官例，赐给他们禄米。 
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Jian, who also held the lesser post of Minister of the National Children's Festival and Minister of Wine, sent a message: Taigaku has recently set up one person for each of the Five Classics, and requested that they be given lumens in accordance with the official regulations of the royal government.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙寅，昭义奏开夷仪山路，通太原、晋州，从之。
现代文：二十八日，昭义上奏开通夷仪山道路，通到太原、晋州，皇上听从了。
English: On the 28th, Shouyi issued a proclamation to open the Yiyishan Road, leading to Taiyuan and Jinzhou, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：闰五月己巳朔。
现代文：闰五月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of leap May is New Year's Day.

古文：甲申，以河中节度使李程为左仆射、判太常卿事。
现代文：十六日，以河中节度使李程为左仆射，兼任太常卿事宜。
English: On the 16th, Li Cheng was appointed as the left-hand man and concurrently as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：乙酉，以太子太保分司李听为河中节度使。
现代文：十七日，以太子太保分司李听为河中节度使。
English: On the seventeenth day, Li He, the sub-division chief of the Etheric Sub-Division of Taibao, came to serve as an envoy for the mid-river festival.

古文：丙戌，乌集唐安寺，逾月方散。
现代文：十八日，乌鸦飞集在唐安寺，经过一个月才散走。
English: On the 18th, the crows gathered at Tang'an Temple, and only dispersed after a month.

古文：己丑，以神策大将军魏仲卿为朔方灵盐节度。
现代文：二十一日，以神策大将军魏仲卿为朔方、灵、盐节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wei Zhongqing, the great general of divine policy, was appointed as the messenger of the party, the spirit and the salt.

古文：湖南观察使卢周仁进羡余钱二万贯、杂物八万段；不受，还之，使贷贫下户征税。
现代文：湖南观察使卢周仁进奏额外赋税二万贯钱，杂物绸缎八万段；朝廷不接受，还给他，让他宽免贫困户的征税。
English: Hunan Observer asked Lu Zhouren to impose an additional tax of 20,000 yuan and 80,000 yuan for miscellaneous goods; the imperial court did not accept it and returned it to him, allowing him to exempt poor households from taxation.

古文：六月戊戌朔。
现代文：六月一日是朔日。
English: June 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：癸亥，以河南尹李绅检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史，充宣武军节度使。
现代文：二十六日，以河南尹李绅为检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史，并充任宣武军节度使。
English: On the 26th, Yin Lishen from Henan Province was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school and the inspector of the history of Zhangzhou. He also served as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu Army.

古文：秋七月戊辰朔，御史台奏： 秘书省管新旧书五万六千四百七十六卷，长庆二年已前并无文案。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，御史台上奏道： 秘书省管理新旧书共五万六千四百七十六卷，长庆二年以前，并没有文案记载。
English: The first day of autumn, July 1st, was the new year's day, and the following announcement was made on the historical stage: The Ministry of State Secretaries manages a total of 56,476 volumes of old and new books. Prior to the second year of Changqing, there was no written record.

古文：大和五年已后，并不纳新书。
现代文：大和五年以后，并没有收新书。
English: Five years after the end of World War II, no new books were received.

古文：今请创立簿籍，据阙添写卷数，逐月申台。 
现代文：现在请求创立文籍记载，根据缺少书卷加添书写卷数，每月月中报御史台。 
English: We now request the creation of a literary record, the addition of the number of written volumes according to the lack of volumes, and a monthly mid-month newspaper.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛未，以左金吾卫将军傅毅为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：四日，以左金吾卫将军傅毅为坊节度使。
English: On the 4th, with the left Kinguwei General Fu Yi as the messenger.

古文：癸酉，宣武军节度使王智兴卒。
现代文：六日，宣武军节度使王智兴去世。
English: On the 6th, Wang Zhixing passed away after the Xuanwu Army Festival.

古文：辛卯，刑部尚书殷侑检校右仆射，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：二十四日，刑部尚书殷侑任检校右仆射，充任山南东道节度使。
English: On the 24th, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Yinjun, was appointed as the right-hand man of the inspection of the school, and served as the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：壬午，以滁州刺史李德裕为太子宾客。
现代文：二十五日，以滁州刺史李德裕为太子宾客。
English: On the 25th, Li Deyu, the governor of Zhangzhou, was the guest of the crown prince.

古文：甲午，以金吾卫大将军陈君赏为平卢军节度使，代王彦威；以彦威为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：二十七日，以金吾卫大将军陈君赏为平卢军节度使，代王彦威。以王彦威为户部侍郎，兼任较低的度支使。
English: On the 27th, King Wuwei's general, Chen Jun, was appointed as the Pinglu military festival envoy, replacing Wang Yanwei. Wang Yanwei was appointed as the household attendant, and also served as a lower-ranking envoy.

古文：丙申，湖南观察使卢周仁进羡余钱一十万贯，御史中丞归融弹其违制进奉，诏以周仁所进钱于河阴院收贮。
现代文：二十九日，湖南观察使卢周仁进奉额外收缴的苛捐杂税十一万贯钱，御史中丞归融弹劾他违背朝廷规章制度进奉，皇上诏令以周仁所进奉的钱放在河阴县收下贮藏。
English: On the 29th, Hunan Observation asked Lu Zhouren to collect an additional 110,000 yuan in heavy taxes and surcharges, and he was impeached for violating the rules and regulations of the imperial court. The emperor ordered that the money collected by Zhouren be stored in Heyin County.

古文：八月戊戌朔。
现代文：八月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day.

古文：甲辰，诈称国舅人前鄜坊节度使萧洪宜长流驩州。
现代文：七日，诈称国舅的前坊节度使萧洪应长期流放州。
English: On the 7th, the former monk who falsely claimed to be the uncle of the state caused Xiao Hong to be exiled to the state for a long time.

古文：戊申，以皇太后亲弟萧本为右赞善大夫。
现代文：十一日，以皇太后亲弟肖本为右赞善大夫。
English: On the 11th day, the Empress Dowager's own brother, Xiao Ben, was appointed as the Right Honorable Doctor.

古文：九月丁卯朔。
现代文：九月一日是朔日。
English: September 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：庚辰，诏复故左降开州司马宋申锡正议大夫、尚书右丞、同平章事，仍以其子慎徽为城固尉。
现代文：十四日，皇上诏令恢复过去降职为开州司马的宋申锡为正议大夫、尚书右丞、同平章事，并以他的儿子宋慎徽为城固尉。
English: On the 14th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to reinstate Song Shenxi, who had been demoted to the position of Kaizhou Sima, as the chief councilor, Shang Shuyuan, and Tong Ping Zhangji, and to appoint his son Song Shenhui as the city guard lieutenant.

古文：以饶州刺史马植为安南都护。
现代文：以饶州刺史马植为安南都护。
English: Raozhou Jishi Maze was appointed as the protector of the Annamese capital.

古文：辛巳，以寿州刺史高承恭为邕管经略使。
现代文：十五日，以寿州刺史高承恭为邕管经略使。
English: On the 15th, Gao Chenggong, the governor of Shoushu County, was appointed as the special envoy.

古文：辛卯，敕秘书省，集贤院应欠书四万五千二百六十一卷，配诸道缮写。
现代文：二十五日，命令秘书省、集贤院将全部欠书四万五千二百六十一卷，配发给各道缮写。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the Ministry of Secretaries and the Jixian Academy to distribute all 45,261 volumes of arrears to all provinces.

古文：冬十月丁酉朔。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is New Year's Day.

古文：己酉，扬州江都七县水旱，损田。
现代文：十三日，扬州、江都七县水灾和旱灾，损害田亩庄稼。
English: On the 13th, floods and droughts in seven counties of Yangzhou and Jiangdu caused damage to acres of crops.

古文：十一月丙寅朔。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日。
English: The first of November is New Year's Day.

古文：庚辰，浙西观察使崔郾卒。以太子宾客分司东都李德裕检校户部尚书，充浙西观察使。
现代文：十五日，浙西观察使崔郾去世，以太子宾客分司东都的李德裕为检校户部尚书、充任浙西观察使。
English: On the 15th, the West Zhejiang Observation Envoy Cui Wei passed away, and Li Deyu of the East Capital, who was in charge of the guest guest division, was appointed as the West Zhejiang Observation Envoy.

古文：壬午，以兵部尚书、皇太子侍读王起兼判太常卿。
现代文：十七日，以兵部尚书、皇太子侍读王起兼任较低职务的太常卿。
English: On the seventeenth day, Wang Qi, who also held the lower position of Taizhongqing, was appointed as the secretary of the military department and the crown prince's attendant.

古文：甲申，以左仆射李程兼吏部尚书。
现代文：十九日，以左仆射李程兼任吏部尚书。
English: On the 19th, he appointed his left-hand man, Li Cheng, as his assistant secretary.

古文：忠武帅杜忭、天平帅王源中奏：当道常平义仓斛斗，除元额外，请别置十万石。
现代文：忠武帅杜、天平帅王源中上奏：朝廷常平义仓储存粮食，除了原来份额外，请求另外添置十万石。
English: Zhongwu Shuai Du and Tianping Shuai Wangyuan: The imperial court often stored grain in the warehouse, and requested an additional 100,000 koku in addition to the original portion.

古文：十二月丙申朔，以京兆尹、兼御史大夫薛元赏为武宁节度、徐泗宿濠观察等使，以户部侍郎、兼御史中丞归融为京兆尹，以给事中狄兼谟为御史中丞。
现代文：十二月一日是朔日，以京兆尹、兼御史大夫薛元赏为武宁节度使、徐、泗、宿、濠观察使，以户部侍郎、兼御史中丞归融为京兆尹，以给事中狄兼谟为御史中丞。
English: December 1st was the New Year's Day, with Jing Zhaoyun, also the chief historian, and Xue Yuan Rong as the observation envoys of the Wu Ning Festival, and Xu, Yao, Shuku, and Yao as the observers, with the attendant of the household department, also the chief historian, and Gui Rong as the chief historian, and with Di and Moo as the chief historians.

古文：己酉，岭南节度使李从易卒。
现代文：十四日，岭南节度使李从易去世。
English: On the 14th day of the Lingnan Festival, Li Congyi passed away.

古文：庚戌，以华州刺史卢钧为广州刺史，充岭南节度使；以中书舍人崔龟从为华州防御使。
现代文：十五日，以华州刺史卢钧为广州刺史，充任岭南节度使；以中书舍人崔龟从为华州防御使。
English: On the 15th, Lu Xun, a scholar from Huazhou, was appointed as the Guangzhou scholar and the Lingnan festival envoy; Cui Gu, a scholar from China, was appointed as the Huazhou defense envoy.

古文：辛亥，剑南东川节度使冯宿卒。
现代文：十六日，剑南、东川节度使冯宿去世。
English: On the 16th, the Jianan and Dongchuan festivals led to the death of Fengshu.

古文：壬子，太仆卿段伯伦卒，癸丑，以兵部侍郎汤汝士检校礼部尚书，充剑南东川节度使。
现代文：十七日，太仆卿段伯伦去世。十八日，以兵部侍郎杨汝士任检校礼部尚书、充任剑南、东川节度使。
English: On the 17th, the great retainer, Duan Bailun, passed away. On the 18th, Yang Rushi, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the school inspection, and served as the Kendo and Higashikawa festival envoy.

古文：己未，溆王纵薨。
现代文：二十四日，溆王纵去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zou Wang Zong passed away.

古文：二年春正月乙丑朔。
现代文：开成二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring Festival is the New Year's Day.

古文：丙寅，宣州观察使王质卒。
现代文：二日，宣州观察使王质去世。
English: On the second day, Xuanzhou observation caused the death of the royal hostage.

古文：乙亥，以吏部侍郎崔郸为宣歙观察使，以右丞郑浣为刑部尚书、判左丞事。
现代文：十一日，以吏部侍郎崔郸为宣歙观察使，以右丞郑浣为刑部尚书、兼任较低职务的左丞事宜。
English: On the 11th day, it was decided to appoint Choi Min, the chamberlain of the Cadre Department, as the Xuan Ye observation envoy, and Ujo Zheng Min as the Corporal of the Penal Department, concurrently holding the lower position of Zujo.

古文：庚寅，户部侍郎、判度支王彦威进所撰《供军图》，略序曰 至德、乾元之后，迄于贞元、元和之际，天下有观察者十，节度二十有九，防御者四，经略者三。掎角之师，犬牙相制，大都通邑，无不有兵，约计中外兵额至八十八万。
现代文：二十六日，户部侍郎、兼任较低职务的度支使王彦威进献他所撰写的《供军图》，大略是说：至德、乾元之后，直到贞元、元和之际，天下有十个观察使，二十九个节度使，四个防御使，三个经略使，军队都形成了互相支援之势，像犬牙一样交错，大城市大都会，都有军队，朝廷内外军队大约兵额有八十多万。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yanwei, an aide-de-camp of the household department and a high-ranking envoy who also served in a lower position, presented his "Army Supply Chart," which roughly said: After the Qing and Qian dynasties, until the time of the Zhengyuan and Yuan dynasties, there were ten observation envoys, twenty-nine festival envoys, four defense envoys, and three economic envoys. The armies all formed a mutual support trend, interlaced like dog's teeth. Large cities, metropolises, all had armies. The armies inside and outside the court had about 800,000 soldiers.

古文：长庆户口凡三百三十五万，而兵额又约九十九万，通计三户资奉一兵。
现代文：长庆年间户口总计三百三十五万，而兵额又约计九十九万，通盘计算三户人家资助一个兵。
English: During the Changqing period, the total number of households reached 3.35 million, while the number of soldiers was about 0.99 million. In total, three households supported one soldier.

古文：今计天下租赋，一岁所入，总不过三千五百余万，而上供之数三之一焉。
现代文：现在计算天下田租赋税，一年的总收入，总计不过三千五百多万，而往上供给朝廷之数占三分之一。
English: Now calculate the total income of the country, the total income of a year is only more than 35 million, and the number of supplies to the imperial court accounts for one-third.

古文：三分之中，二给衣赐，自留州留使兵士衣食之外，其余四十万众，仰给度支焉。 
现代文：三分之中，两分供给衣物，除了自己留存供给州里兵士衣食之外，其余四十万部队，都靠朝廷度支供应。
English: Of the three parts, two parts were supplied with clothing. In addition to the fact that the emperor himself provided the soldiers with food and clothing, the remaining 400,000 troops were supplied by the imperial government.

古文：二月乙未朔。
现代文：二月一日是朔日。
English: February 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丙申，刑部侍郎郭承嘏卒。
现代文：二日，刑部侍郎郭承嘏去世。
English: On the second day, Guo Chengyao, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, passed away.

古文：丙午夜，彗出东方，长七尺，在危初，西指。
现代文：十二日，彗星从东方出来，长七尺，往西指。
English: On the twelfth day, the comet emerged from the east, grew seven feet long, and pointed westward.

古文：戊申，王彦威进所撰《唐典》七十卷，起武德，终永贞。
现代文：十四日，王彦威进上所撰写的《唐典》七十卷，从武德初年写起，一直写到永贞年间。
English: On the 14th, the 70 volumes of the "Tang Dynasty" written by Wang Yanwei started from the first year of Wude and continued until the Yongzheng era.

古文：庚戌，均王纬薨。
现代文：十六日，均王李纬去世。
English: On the 16th, Junwang Li Wei passed away.

古文：辛酉夜，彗长丈余，直西行，稍南指，在虚九度半。壬戌夜，彗长二丈余，广三尺，在女九度，自是渐长阔。
现代文：二十七日，彗星长一丈多，笔直向西行，渐渐向南指。二十八日夜，彗星长二丈多，广三尺，在女九度方位，从此渐渐长而阔。
English: On the 27th, the comet grew a foot longer, headed straight west, and gradually pointed southward. On the night of the 28th, the comet grew two feet longer and three feet wider, at the ninth degree of the feminine, and gradually grew longer and wider.

古文：三月甲子朔，内出音声女妓四十八人，令归家。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，宫内放出会歌舞女妓四十八人，让她们回家。
English: March 1st was New Year's Day, and forty-eight courtesans were released from the palace to go home.

古文：夫道大为帝，朕膺此称，祗愧已多，矧钟星变之时，敢议名扬之美？
现代文：二日，彗星长五丈，尾上分歧成两尾，其中一尾指氐星。一尾指掩房星。三日，皇上撤销了曲江宴。
English: On the second day, the comet grew five meters in length, and the tail split into two tails, one tail pointing to the planet Uranus, and the other tail pointing to the planet Occultus. On the third day, the emperor cancelled the Qujiang banquet.

古文：非惩既往，且儆将来，中外臣僚，更不得上表奏请。表已在路，并宜速还。
现代文：这夜，彗星长六丈，尾无分歧，在亢七度位上。皇上命令尚食使，从今天起每天皇上的食料分为十天用，并且停止宫内修造。
English: That night, the comet was six feet long, with a tail that did not diverge, and it was in the 37th degree. The emperor ordered the food envoy to divide the emperor's daily food supply into ten days from that day, and to stop building in the palace.

古文：在朝群臣，方岳长吏，宜各上封事，极言得失，弼违纳诲，副我虚怀。
现代文：五日夜，彗星长八丈多，往西北走，又往东指，在张十四度的位置。
English: On the evening of the fifth day, the comet grew more than eight feet in length, headed northwest, and pointed east, at a position of fourteen degrees.

古文：甲戌，以左仆射李程为山南东道节度使。
现代文：十一日，以左仆射李程为山南东道节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Cheng, a left-hander, was appointed as Shannan's host festival envoy.

古文：壬午，以楚州刺史严誉为桂管观察使。
现代文：十九日，以楚州刺史严誉为桂管观察使。
English: On the 19th, he was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：甲申，以山南东道节度使殷侑为太子宾客分司。
现代文：二十一日以山南东道节度使殷侑为太子宾客分司。
English: On the 21st, with Shannan as the host, Yin Xi was made the guest of the prince.

古文：贞兴门外鹊巢于古冢。
现代文：贞兴门外喜鹊在古冢上筑巢。
English: The magpies outside the Zhenxing Gate build their nests on ancient reeds.

古文：丁亥，邠宁节度使李用卒。
现代文：二十四日，宁节度使李用去世。
English: On the 24th, Ning Jietuo caused Li Ying to pass away.

古文：戊子，以河南尹李珏为户部侍郎。
现代文：二十五日，以河南尹李珏为户部侍郎。
English: On the 25th, Yin Lijuan from Henan Province was appointed as the steward of the household.

古文：乙丑，以金吾大将军李直臣为邠宁节度使。
现代文：二十六日，以金吾大将军李直臣为宁节度使。
English: On the 26th, Kingu's general, Li Nao-sin, was appointed as Ning's envoy.

古文：壬辰，桂管观察使韩佽卒。
现代文：二十九日，桂管观察使韩亻次去世。
English: On the 29th, Gui Guan's observation caused Han Xiji to pass away.

古文：以兵部侍郎裴濆为河南尹。
现代文：以兵部侍郎裴氵为河南尹。
English: He is portrayed as Henan Yin, a waiter in the military.

古文：辛酉，诏置终南山神祠。
现代文：二十八日，皇上诏令设置终南山神庙。
English: On the 28th, the emperor issued a decree to establish the final Nanshan Temple.

古文：蓬州复置蓬池、朗池二县。
现代文：蓬州重新设置蓬池、郎池二县。
English: Pengzhou was reorganized into two counties, Pengchi and Rongchi.

古文：五月癸亥朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：乙丑，以东都留守裴度为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使，依前守司徒、中书令。
现代文：三日，以东都留守裴度为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使，依旧兼任司徒和中书令。
English: On the third day, Taiyuan Yin, Beidou Ruzhu, and Hedong Jiedu Envoy were left in charge of the Eastern Capital, and they still concurrently served as the magistrate and the chief clerk.

古文：丙寅，户部侍郎李珏判本司事。
现代文：四日，户部侍郎李珏兼任本司之事。
English: On the fourth day, the head waiter, Li Yan, was also appointed to the post.

古文：以浙西观察使李德裕检校户部尚书，兼扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度使。
现代文：以浙西观察使李德裕为检校户部尚书，兼扬州大督府长史，并充任淮南节度使。
English: With the observation of western Zhejiang, Li Deyu was appointed as the inspector of the school, the governor of Yangzhou, and the secretary of the Huainan Festival.

古文：辛未，诏以前淮南节度使牛僧孺为检校司空、东都留守，以苏州刺史卢商为浙西观察使。
现代文：九日，诏令以前任淮南节度使牛僧孺为检校司空、东都留守，以苏州刺史卢商为浙西观察使。
English: On the 9th, it was decreed that the former Huainan governor should send Niu Zengqi as the inspector of the school to the north and east, and Suzhou's Zhishuluxiang as the inspector to the west of Zhejiang.

古文：壬申，上幸十六宅，与诸王宴乐。
现代文：十日，皇上驾到十六宅，与诸王宴饮欢乐。
English: On the tenth day, the emperor drove to the Sixteen Mansions and feasted with the kings.

古文：决十六宅宫市内官范文喜等三人，以供诸王食物不精故也。
现代文：判决十六宅宫中太监范文喜三人，因为他们供给诸王食物不精的缘故。
English: The court sentenced three eunuchs of the 16th palace, Fan Wenxi, because they supplied the kings with food that was not refined.

古文：六月癸巳朔。
现代文：六月一日是朔日。
English: June 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丁酉，以成德军节度使王元逵为驸马都尉，尚寿安公主。
现代文：五日，以成德军节度使王元逵为驸马都尉，娶寿安公主为妻。
English: On the fifth day, on the occasion of the Chengdu German Army Festival, Wang Yuanjun was promoted to lieutenant and married Princess Shouan.

古文：己亥，以鸿胪卿李逵为天德军都防御使。
现代文：七日，以鸿胪卿李逵为天德军都防御使。
English: On the seventh day, the German army sent a defensive force to defend the capital, led by Hongxu's son, Li Qian.

古文：庚子，吏部奏长定选格，请加置南曹郎中一人，别置印一面，以 新置南曹之印 为文，从之。
现代文：八日，吏部上奏，长定选格请增设南曹郎中一人，另外设置印一面，以 新置南曹之印 为印文，皇上听从了。
English: On the eighth day, the cadre department announced, please add one person from Nansao Lang to the long-term selection, and set up another seal side, with the newly set Nansao's seal as the seal, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：丙午，河阳军乱，逐节度使李泳。
现代文：十四日，河阳军乱，驱逐了节度使李泳。
English: On the 14th, there was a military riot in Heyang, and Li Yong, the commander of the festival, was expelled.

古文：戊申，以左金吾卫将军李执方为河阳三城怀州节度使。
现代文：十六日，以左金吾卫将军李执方为河阳三城、怀州节度使。
English: On the 16th, General Li Rongfang of the Left Jinguwei Army was appointed as the festival envoy for the three cities of Heyang and Waizhou.

古文：庚戌，以右金吾卫大将军崔珙为京兆尹。
现代文：十八日，以右金吾卫大将军崔珙为京兆尹。
English: On the 18th, General Cui Wei, the right-hand king of Wuwei, was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：魏、博、泽、潞、淄、青、沧德？兗、海、河南府等州并奏蝗害稼。
现代文：魏、博、泽、潞、淄、青、沧、兖、河南府等州都上奏说蝗虫危害庄稼。
English: The prefectures of Wei, Bo, Ze, Handan, Handan, Qing, Cang, Handan and Henan all reported that locusts were damaging crops.

古文：郓州奏蝗得雨自死。
现代文：郓州上奏说，蝗虫被雨水淋后自己死亡了。
English: Zhangzhou Shangsuo said that the locusts died after being showered with rainwater.

古文：丁亥，以御史中丞狄兼谟为刑部侍郎，以前京兆尹归融为秘书监，以给事中李翊为湖南观察使。
现代文：二十五日，以御史中丞狄兼谟为刑部侍郎，以前任京兆尹归融为秘书监，以给事中李翊为湖南观察使。
English: On the 25th, Di Jianmo, the Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, Jing Zhaoyin, who had previously served as the secretary, was appointed as the secretary, and Li Qian, who was in charge of the case, was appointed as the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：秋七月壬戌朔。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of autumn in July is New Year's Day.

古文：乙亥，以久旱徙市，闭坊门。
现代文：十四日，因长久干旱迁移市场，关闭了市场门。
English: On the 14th, due to the long drought, the market was relocated and the market gate was closed.

古文：甲申，以太府卿张贾为兗海观察使。
现代文：二十三日，以太府卿张贾为兖海观察使。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Jia, the governor of Yunnan Province, was appointed as the observation envoy for the Bohai Sea.

古文：诏除河北三镇外，诸州府不得以试衔奏官。
现代文：诏令除河北三镇以外，各州府不得用试用官为上奏官。
English: In addition to the three towns in Hebei Province, all prefectures are not allowed to use probation officers as reporting officers, according to the decree.

古文：郓州奏： 当州先废天平、平阴两县，请复置平阴县，以制盗贼。 
现代文：郓州上奏 ：本州先前废除了天平、平阴两县，请求再次设置平阴县，以制服盗贼。 
English: An appeal from Bozhou: Honshu had previously abolished the two counties of Tianping and Pingyin, and requested the re-establishment of Pingyin County to subdue the thieves.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙酉，以蝗旱，诏诸司疏决系囚。
现代文：二十四日，因为蝗虫和旱灾，诏令各有关衙门清理关押已久的囚徒。
English: On the 24th, because of locusts and drought, the emperor ordered the relevant gates to clean up the prisoners who had been held for a long time.

古文：己丑，遣使下诸道巡覆蝗虫。
现代文：二十八日，皇上派遣使者下到各道巡视回复蝗虫灾害情况。
English: On the 28th, the emperor sent an envoy down to inspect each province to respond to the locust disaster.

古文：是日，京畿雨，群臣表贺。
现代文：这天，京师附近下雨，群臣上表祝贺。
English: On this day, it was raining in the vicinity of Beijing Division, and the ministers congratulated each other.

古文：外州李绅奏蝗虫入境，不食田苗，诏书褒美，仍刻石于相国寺。
现代文：外州官员李绅上奏说蝗虫入境，不吃田苗。皇上下诏书嘉奖赞许，仍旧将此事在相国寺刻石记载。
English: Li Sheng, an official from out of state, reported that locusts had entered the country and would not eat the seedlings. The Emperor's imperial edict praised and commended this, and the matter was still recorded in stone at Shokoku-ji Temple.

古文：八月壬辰朔。
现代文：八月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day.

古文：丁酉，彗出虚、危之间。
现代文：六日，彗星出现在虚、危二星之间。
English: On the 6th, the comet appeared between two stars.

古文：振武奏突厥入寇营田。
现代文：振武军上奏说突厥入侵军队耕种之田。
English: The Zhenwu army reported that the Turkish invasion army cultivated the fields.

古文：庚戌，诏昭仪王氏册为德妃，昭容杨氏册为贤妃。
现代文：十九日，皇上诏令昭仪王氏册封为德妃，昭容杨氏册封为贤妃。
English: On the 19th, the emperor decreed that the Zhaoyi Wang clan would be crowned as the German Empress and the Zhaoyong Yang clan would be crowned as the Virtuous Empress.

古文：又诏： 敬宗皇帝第二子休复、第三子执中、第四子言扬、第六子成美等，宜开列土之封，用申睦族之典。
现代文：又诏令： 敬宗皇帝第二子休复、第三子执中、第四子言扬、第六子成美等，应该施行列土封王，以此表示和睦皇族的典范。
English: It was also decreed that the second son of Emperor Keizong, Emperor Jiefu, the third son, Emperor Jizhong, the fourth son, Emperor Goryang, and the sixth son, Emperor Chengmei, should be enthroned as emperors, as an example of the harmony of the imperial family.

古文：休复可封梁王，执中可封襄王，言扬可封纪王，成美可封陈王。
现代文：休复可以封为梁王，执中可封为襄王，言扬可封为纪王，成美可封为陈王。
English: Hui Fu can be named Liang Wang, Xuzhong can be named Xiang Wang, Yan Yang can be named Ji Wang, Cheng Mei can be named Chen Wang.

古文：皇第二男宗俭可封蒋王。 
现代文：皇帝第二个儿子宗俭可封为蒋王。 
English: The emperor's second son, Zong Jian, could be crowned King Jiang.

古文：乙丑，房州刺史卢行简坐赃杖杀。
现代文：九月四日，房州刺史卢行简犯贪赃罪而被棍杖打死。
English: On September 4th, Fangzhou Jishulu was beaten to death with a cane for the minor crime of embezzlement.

古文：己巳，以前湖南观察使卢行术为陕虢观察使。
现代文：八日，以前任湖南观察使卢行术为陕虢观察使。
English: On the 8th, Lu Xingshu, the former Hunan observation envoy, became the Shaanxi observation envoy.

古文：甲申，诏曰： 庆成节朕之生辰，天下锡宴，庶同欢泰。
现代文：二十三日，皇上下诏曰： 庆成节是朕的诞辰，赐天下人宴饮，让庶民人等共同享受欢乐和平。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: "The Qingcheng Festival is my birthday, and I will give banquets to people all over the world, so that the common people can enjoy joy and peace together.

古文：不欲屠宰，用表好生，非是信尚空门，将希无妄之福。
现代文：不想屠宰牲畜，以表示好生之德，不是崇信佛门，只是希望不要降下无妄之灾。
English: I don't want to slaughter livestock to express the virtue of a good life, I don't believe in Buddhism, but I just hope that I don't bring down a disaster.

古文：恐中外臣庶不谕朕怀，广置斋筵，大集僧众，非独凋耗物力，兼恐致惑生灵。
现代文：恐怕朝内外臣民不理解朕之胸怀，却广泛设置斋席、筵席，大肆集中和尚，这样不独消耗物力，还恐怕导致蛊惑生灵。
English: I am afraid that subjects at home and abroad do not understand my heart, but they have set up a wide range of banquets and banquets, and have concentrated monks in large numbers. This not only consumes material resources, but may also lead to the bewitchment of living beings.

古文：自今宴会蔬食，任陈脯醢，永为常例。 
现代文：从今天起宴会一律吃蔬菜果品，可以任意陈设果脯、干菜，永远成为常规。 
English: From today, all banquets will eat vegetables and fruits, and you can set up fruit baskets and dried vegetables at will, which will always be the norm.

古文：又敕： 庆成节宜令京兆尹准上已，重阳例，于曲江会斌百僚。延英奉觞宜权停。 
现代文：又命令： 庆成节应令京兆尹按照上巳节、重阳节老例，在曲江会集文武百官，在延英殿奉觞上寿应该暂时停止。 
English: He also ordered: On the Qingcheng Festival, Jing Zhaoyun should be ordered to follow the old custom of the Spring Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival, and the gathering of the military and civilian officials in Qujiang and the celebration of the New Year at Yan Ying Dian should be temporarily suspended.

古文：戊子，以尚书户部侍郎、判度支王彦威为卫尉卿，分司东都。
现代文：二十七日，以尚书户部侍郎、兼任较小职务的度支使王彦威为卫尉卿、分管东都。
English: On the 27th, Wang Yanwei, an attendant of the Imperial Household Ministry and a tutor who also held minor positions, was appointed Lord of the Imperial Guards and put in charge of the Eastern Capital.

古文：冬十月辛卯朔，诏改天后所撰《三教珠英》为《海内珠英》。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日，皇上诏令改天后所撰写之《三教珠英》为《海内珠英》。
English: In winter, October 1st was the New Year's Day, and the Emperor's edict changed the "Three Teachings of Zhuying" written by the Queen of Heaven to "The Journey of Zhuying in the Sea."

古文：戊戌，诏嘉王运、循王遹、通王谌并可光禄大夫、检校司空，赐勋上柱国，仍依百官例给料钱。
现代文：八日，诏令嘉王运、循王适、通王谌都可以任光禄大夫、检校司空，赐勋为上柱国，仍旧依照百官旧制给予俸禄钱。
English: On the 8th, it was decreed that Jia Wangyun, Xun Wangshu, and Tong Wangyun could all be appointed as Guanglu doctors and school inspectors, and they were awarded as Shangzhu countries, and they were still given salary money according to the old system of one hundred officials.

古文：安王溶、颍王瀍并给料钱。
现代文：安王溶、颍王氵廛都给俸禄钱。
English: Both An Wang Rong and Xing Wang Rong gave salary money.

古文：庚子，庆成节，赐群臣宴于曲江，上幸十六宅，与诸王宴乐。
现代文：十日，是庆成节，皇上赐予群臣在曲江宴会，皇上驾到十六宅，与诸王宴饮欢乐。
English: On the 10th day, it was the celebration day. The emperor gave the courtiers a banquet in Qujiang. The emperor drove to the 16th house to feast and drink with the kings.

古文：癸卯，宰臣判国子祭酒郑覃进《石壁九经》一百六十卷。
现代文：十三日，宰相兼任较小官职国子祭酒的郑覃进献《石壁九经》一百六十卷。
English: On the 13th, Zheng Qi, the prime minister who also served as a minor official, presented 160 volumes of "The Nine Classics of the Stone Wall."

古文：甲寅，敕盐铁、户部、度支三使下监院官，皆郎官、御史为之。
现代文：当时皇上喜好文章，郑覃以经义启发开导，渐渐折服了文宗。于是上奏请求设置五经博士，依照后汉蔡邕刊在石碑之上列放在太学，创立《石壁九经》，诸儒生校正讹误。
English: At that time, the emperor was fond of writing, and Zheng Yi was inspired by the sutras to enlighten and enlighten, and gradually accepted the literature. Therefore, the emperor requested that the Five Classics be set up, and according to the post-Han Cai Yi publication, it was placed on the stone monument, and the "Stone Wall Nine Classics" was created. The Confucian students corrected the mistakes.

古文：使虽更改，院官不得移替，如显有旷败，即具事以闻。
现代文：皇上又命令翰林刻字官唐玄度反复校正字体，但他又违背师法，所以石经立后数十年，名家大儒都不看，认为字体繁杂累赘过分了。
English: The emperor also ordered the Hanlin calligrapher Tang Xundu to repeatedly correct the font, but he also violated the teaching method, so for decades after the establishment of Shijie, famous scholars did not look at it, believing that the font was too complicated and cumbersome.

古文：己未，以前西川节度使杨嗣复为户部尚书，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：十八日，以门下侍郎、同平章事李固言为剑南、西川节度使，依旧同先前任门下侍郎，同平章事。二十九日，以前任西川节度使杨嗣复为户部尚书，充任诸道盐铁使、转运使。
English: On the 18th, Li Guyan was appointed as Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Setsudoshi with the title of Jiannan and Nishikawa Sets

古文：十一月辛酉朔。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日。
English: The first of November is New Year's Day.

古文：壬戌，以太子宾客分司东都殷侑为忠武军节度使。
现代文：二日，以太子宾客分管东都的殷侑为忠武军节度使。
English: On the second day, the guest of the East Capital, Yin Yi, who is in charge of the East Capital, was the festival envoy of the loyal military.

古文：癸亥，狂病人刘德广突入含元殿，付京兆府杖杀。
现代文：三日，疯病人刘德广突冲入含元殿，将他交付京兆府用棍杖打死。
English: On the third day, Liu Deguang, a mentally ill man, rushed into the Han Yuan Hall and was handed over to the Beijing Zhao Prefecture, where he was beaten to death with a cane.

古文：乙丑，京师地震。
现代文：五日，京师地震。
English: On the 21st, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：丁丑，兴元节度使令狐楚卒。
现代文：十七日，兴元节度使令狐楚去世。
English: On the 17th day of the Xingyuan Festival, the leader of the Xingyuan Festival, Lingfuchu, died.

古文：丁亥，以刑部尚书郑浣为山南西道节度使。
现代文：二十七日，以刑部尚书郑浣为山南西道节度使。
English: On the 27th, Shangshu Zhengqi of the Criminal Investigation Department was appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：己丑，契丹朝贡。
现代文：二十九日，契丹前来朝贡。
English: On the 29th, Khitan came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月庚寅朔。
现代文：十二月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of December is New Year's Day.

古文：丙申，内阁对左右史裴素等。上自开成初复故事，每入阁，左右史执笔立于螭头之下，君臣论奏，得以备书，故开成政事最详于近代。
现代文：七日，阁内应对左右史裴素等人，皇上从开成初年就恢复旧法，每次入阁，左右史都拿笔站在阶陛石螭首之下，君臣言论奏事，得以准备书写，所以开成政事在近代最为详备。
English: On the seventh day, the cabinet responded to the left and right of Shi Pei Su and others. The emperor restored the old law from the first year of Kaisei. Every time he entered the cabinet, the left and right historians took a pen and stood under the stone dagger of the emperor. The speech of the monarch and the minister was recorded, and they were able to prepare to write, so the Kaisei government affairs were the most detailed in modern times.

古文：壬寅，以前忠武军节度使杜悰为工部尚书、判度支。
现代文：十三日，以前任忠武军节度使杜为工部尚书、兼任较低职务的度支使。
English: On the 13th, Du, who had previously served as the loyal military's chief delegate to the festival, became the official delegate of the Ministry of Industry and also served as a lower-ranking delegate.

古文：时忭既除官，久未谢恩，户部侍郎李珏奏杜为岐阳公主服假内。
现代文：当时杜既已被任命为官，长期没有向皇上谢恩，户部侍郎李珏上奏说杜不谢恩是因为替岐阳公主服丧。
English: At that time, Du, who had already been appointed as an official, did not thank the emperor for a long time. The head of the household, Li Xuan, said that Du did not thank the emperor because he was mourning for the Princess of Guiyang.

古文：珏因言： 比来驸马为公主行服三年，所以士族之家不愿为国戚者以此。 
现代文：李珏因而说道 ：近来驸马为公主服丧三年，所以士族之家不愿意做国戚。 
English: As a result, Li Yan said, "Recently, it has been three years since the princess's funeral, so the family of the warrior class does not want to be a national relative."

古文：帝大骇其奏，即日诏曰： 制服轻重，必资典礼，如闻往者驸马为公主行服三年，缘情之义，殊非故实，违经之制，今乃闻知。
现代文：皇上对他的上奏大为惊骇，当天下诏书道： 服丧之制有轻有重，必须依据典章制度，听说过去驸马替公主服丧三年，这是由于情感道义，并不是旧的制度。而违反章程制度，现在才听说。
English: The emperor was greatly shocked by his performance, and on that day he issued an edict: The mourning system is both light and heavy, and must be based on the award system. I heard that in the past, the horse had mourned for the princess for three years. This was due to emotion and morality, and was not the old system. And the violation of the charter system was only heard of now.

古文：宜行期周，永为定制。 
现代文：应服一年之丧，永远成为定制。 
English: After one year of mourning, it will always be a custom.

古文：三年春正月庚申朔。
现代文：开成三年春正月庚申是朔日。
English: The first day of spring in the third year, the first month of the year, is the first day of the year.

古文：甲子，宰臣李石遇盗于亲仁里，中剑，断其马尾，又中流矢，不甚伤。
现代文：五日，宰相李石在亲仁里遇见强盗，李石中剑，而且砍断了他的马尾，又身中流箭，伤势不重。
English: On the fifth day, Prime Minister Li Shih encountered a robber in his relatives. Li Shih was hit by a sword, and his horse's tail was cut off. He was also hit by an arrow, but his injuries were not serious.

古文：是时，京城大恐，捕盗不获，既而知仇士良新为。
现代文：这时，京城大为恐慌，没有捕到盗贼，不久才知道是仇士良所为。
English: At this time, there was great panic in the capital. The thieves were not caught, and it was not long before it became known that it was the work of Kuchishiryo.

古文：乙丑，常参官入朝者九人而已，余皆潜窜，累日方安。
现代文：六日，常时朝见官员入朝者只有九人而已，其余都暗中隐藏逃窜，经过多日才安定。
English: On the 6th, there were only nine officials who regularly visited the imperial court in the morning. The rest secretly hid and fled, and it took several days for the situation to stabilize.

古文：丁卯，诏故齐王凑赠怀懿太子。
现代文：八日，皇上下诏，赠已故齐王为怀懿太子。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor issued an imperial edict, presenting the late King Qi as the crown prince of Huaiyi.

古文：戊申，以诸道盐铁转运使、正议大夫、守户部尚书、上柱国、宏农郡开国伯、食邑七百户、赐紫金鱼袋杨嗣复可本官同中书门下平章事，朝议郎、户中侍郎、判户部事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋李珏可本官同中书门下平章事，依前判户部事。
现代文：九日，以诸道盐铁转运使、正议大夫、兼任较高职务户部尚书、上柱国、宏农郡开国伯、食邑七百户、赐紫金鱼袋杨嗣复可以在本官位上兼同中书门下平章事；朝议郎、户部侍郎、兼任较低职务的户部事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋李珏可以在本官职位上兼同中书门下平章事，依旧按先前一样兼任较低职务的户部事宜。
English: On the 9th, Yang Shifu, who was appointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation, the chief of the council of elders, and concurrently held the higher posts of Shangshu, Shangzhuan, Hongnong County, and the founder of the seven hundred households, was awarded the Purple Gold Fish Bag; Yang Shifu, who was awarded the salt and iron transportation, was awarded the higher posts of Shangshu, Shangzhuan, Hongnong County, and the seven hundred households, and Yang Shifu, who was awarded the Purple Gold Fish Bag, was awarded the higher posts of Shangshu, Shangzhuan, Hongnong County, and the founder

古文：丙子，以中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事李石为荆南节度使，依前中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：十七日，以中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事李石为荆南节度使，依旧同先前一样任中书侍郎、平章事。
English: On the 17th, Li Shih, the secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was appointed as Jingnan's envoy for the festival. He continued to serve as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：丁丑，以前荆南节度使韦长为河南尹。
现代文：十八日，以前任荆南节度使韦长为河南尹。
English: On the 18th, Wei Chang was promoted to Henan Yin by the former Jingnan Festival.

古文：癸未，诏去秋蝗虫害稼处放逋赋，仍以本处常平仓赈贷。
现代文：二十四日，皇上诏令去年秋天蝗虫危害庄稼之处免除赋税，仍旧以本地常平仓的粮食赈济。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an imperial edict exempting from taxation the areas where locusts had damaged crops last autumn, and still using grain from local storehouses.

古文：是日大雪。
现代文：这天下大雪。
English: It snowed heavily that day.

古文：二月己丑朔。
现代文：二月己丑是朔日。
English: February is the new moon.

古文：乙未，上谓宰臣曰： 李宗闵在外数年，可别与一官。 
现代文：七日，皇上对宰相们说 ：李宗闵在外贬官数年，可以另外给他一官。 
English: On the seventh day, the emperor said to the prime ministers: Li Zongyao has been demoted for several years, you can give him another post.

古文：郑覃、陈夷行曰： 宗闵养成郑注，几覆朝廷，其奸邪甚于李林甫。 
现代文：郑覃、陈夷行道： 李宗闵培养郑注这样的人，几乎倾覆了朝廷，他的奸邪甚过了李林甫。 
English: Zheng Yao and Chen Yigang: Li Zongyao cultivated people like Zheng Zhu and almost overthrew the imperial court. His treachery exceeded that of Li Linfu.

古文：杨嗣复、李珏奏曰： 大和未，宗闵、德裕同时得罪，二年之间，德裕再量移为淮南节度使，而宗闵尚在贬所。
现代文：杨嗣复、李珏上奏道 ：大和末年，李宗闵、李德裕同时得罪，两年之间，李德裕两次调职任淮南节度使，而李宗闵还在被贬之处所。
English: Yang Shifu and Li Zongyi recited: In the last year of the Yamato era, Li Zongyi and Li Deyu were simultaneously punished. Between the two years, Li Deyu was transferred to the post of Huainan Festival envoy twice, while Li Zongyi was still in the place where he was demoted.

古文：凡事贵得中，不可但徇私情。 
现代文：大凡事情贵在适中，不可以只徇私情。 
English: When it comes to great things, moderation is the key. You can't just rely on your personal feelings.

古文：上曰： 与一郡可也。 
现代文：皇上道 ：给他一个郡就可以了。 
English: Empress Dowager: Just give him a county.

古文：丁酉，以衡州司马李宗闵为杭州刺史。
现代文：九日，以衡州司马李宗闵为杭州刺史。
English: On the 9th, with Hengzhou Sima Li Zongyao as the Hangzhou stabbing history.

古文：庚子，吏部奏： 去年所修长定选格，或乖往例，颇不便人，不可久行，请却用旧格。 
现代文：十二日，吏部上奏 ：去年所修订的长定选格，与以往旧例不同，对人颇不方便，不可长期施行，请还是用旧格。 
English: On the 12th, the cadre department reported: The long-term selection format revised last year is different from the previous cases. It is quite inconvenient for people and cannot be implemented for a long time. Please still use the old format.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙巳，诏仆射、尚书、侍郎、左右丞、大卿监每遇坐日，宜令两人循次进对。
现代文：十七日，诏令仆射、尚书、侍郎、左右丞、大卿监每次遇到坐班之日，应该令两人交换进奏答对。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the emperor ordered the attendants, servants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants, attendants.

古文：丁未，以同州刺史孙简为陕虢观察使，代卢行术；以术为福王傅，分司东都。
现代文：十九日，以同州刺史孙简为陕虢观察使，代替卢行术；以卢行术为福王傅，分管东都。
English: On the 19th, Sun Jian, the statesman of Tongzhou, was appointed as the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian to replace Lu Xingjie; Lu Xingjie was appointed as Fu Wangfu, in charge of the eastern capital.

古文：乙酉，礼部尚书许康佐卒。
现代文：二十一日，礼部尚书许康佐去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the head of the etiquette department, Shangshu Xu, passed away.

古文：辛亥，左丞卢载为同州防御使。
现代文：二十三日，左丞卢载任同州防御使。
English: On the 23rd, Zuo Ruzai was appointed as the defense envoy of the same state.

古文：三月己未朔。
现代文：三月己未是朔日。
English: March has not yet dawned.

古文：庚午，封故陈王第十九男俨为宣城郡王，故襄王第三男寀为乐平郡王。
现代文：十二日，封已故陈王第十九子俨为宣城郡王，已故襄王第三子肕为乐平郡王。
English: On the 12th, the 19th son of the late King Chen was named the King of Xuancheng County, and the 3rd son of the late King Xiang was named the King of Leping County.

古文：夏四月戊子朔。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is Boshi Day.

古文：己丑，礼部尚书致仕徐晦卒。
现代文：二日，以礼部尚书辞官的徐晦去世。
English: On the second day, Xu Gui, who served as the etiquette official of the Ministry of Ceremonies, died.

古文：辛卯，户部侍郎崔龟从判本司事。
现代文：四日，户部侍郎崔龟从兼任本司之事。
English: On the 4th, Choi Kame, the head waiter of the household, was appointed to the post of head waiter.

古文：诏曰： 户部侍郎两员，今后先授上者，宜令判本司钱谷；如带平章事，判盐铁度支，兼中丞学士不在此限。 
现代文：诏令说 ：户部侍郎两名，今后先授予职务较高者，应让他兼本司钱、粮；如果户部侍郎是加平章事者，应兼管盐铁、度支事，如果是任中丞、学士者不在此限。 
English: The edict said: "For the two household attendants, whoever is given a higher post first in the future should also be in charge of money and grain; if the household attendant is Gapyeong, he should also be in charge of salt and iron, and if he is a junior high school student or a bachelor, he is not limited to this."

古文：壬辰，以给事中裴衮为华州防御使。
现代文：五日，以给事中裴衮为华州防御使。
English: On the fifth day of the month, Pei Xuanming was appointed as the defense envoy of Huazhou.

古文：乙酉，改《法曲》为《仙韶曲》，仍以伶官亲处为仙韶院。
现代文：二十二日，改《法曲》为《仙韶曲》，又以唱戏的伶官所住地方为仙韶院。
English: On the 22nd, "Dhokke" was changed to "Sengju," and the eunuch who sang the opera lived in Sengjuin.

古文：兵部侍郎裴濆卒。
现代文：兵部侍郎裴氵去世。
English: Hyobu waiter Pei Hao passed away.

古文：癸丑，屯田郎中李衢、沔王府长史林赞等进所修《皇唐玉牒》一百五十卷。
现代文：二十六日，屯田郎中李衢、沔王府长史林赞等人进上《皇唐玉牒》一百五十卷。
English: On the 26th, Tongda's son-in-law Li Xi, the governor of the Shao King Prefecture, Shi Linzan, and others entered the 150-volume "Imperial Tang Yu Zhao."

古文：五月丁巳朔，敕礼部：贡院进士、举人，岁限放三十人及第。
现代文：五月丁巳是朔日，皇上诏令礼部、贡院选拔进士、举人，每年限定选拔三十人及第。
English: In May, on the first day of the new year, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Tribute Academy to select and promote new members, with an annual limit of 30 new members.

古文：辛酉，诏：前江西观察使吴士规坐赃，长流端州。
现代文：五日，皇上诏令：前江西观察使吴士规犯法贪赃，长期流放到端州。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor issued a decree: the former Jiangxi observation made Wu Shigu violate the law of corruption, and he was exiled to Danzhou for a long time.

古文：庚午，月犯天心大星。
现代文：十三日，月亮冒犯天心大星。
English: On the 13th, the moon offended Tenshin Daisei.

古文：癸未，以吏部侍郎高锴为鄂岳观察使，代高重；以重为兵部侍郎。
现代文：二十七日，以吏部侍郎高锴为鄂岳观察使，代替高重，以高重为兵部侍郎。
English: On the 27th, Gao Jian, the attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the observation envoy of Etu, replacing Gao Jie, who was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：六月丁未朔。
现代文：六月丁亥是朔日。
English: The first day of June is a Sunday.

古文：辛酉，出宫人四百八十，送两街寺观安置。废晋州平阳院矾官，并归州县。
现代文：十五日，放出宫人四百八十人，送到两街上寺庙、道观安置，废除晋州平阳院管矾石的官员，都归州县管辖。
English: On the 15th, 480 palace officials were released, sent to the two streets of temples and Taoism resettlement, and the officials who abolished the Jinzhou Pingyang Courthouse were placed under the jurisdiction of the county.

古文：癸丑，上御紫宸，对宰臣曰： 币轻钱重如何？ 
现代文：二十七日，皇上驾到紫宸殿，对宰相们道 ：财货轻钱重怎么办？ 
English: On the 27th, the Emperor drove to Shishinden and said to the prime ministers, "What should we do about light goods and heavy money?

古文：杨嗣复曰： 此事已久，不可遽变其法，法变则扰人。但禁铜器，斯得其要。 
现代文：杨嗣复道 ：此事已经很久，不可以马上改变方法，方法一变就会扰乱人心，只要禁止铜器，便可以抓住要领。 
English: Yang Zifu said, "This matter has been going on for a long time. It is not possible to change the method immediately. A change in the method will disturb people's hearts. As long as copperware is banned, the essentials can be grasped."

古文：秋七月丙辰朔。
现代文：秋七月丙辰是朔日。
English: The first day of autumn and the first day of July are the new moon.

古文：壬戌，陈许节度使殷侑卒。
现代文：七日，陈许节度使殷侑去世。
English: On the seventh day, Chen Xuxi died.

古文：甲子，以卫尉卿王彦威检校礼部尚书，充忠武军节度使；以右金吾卫大将军史孝章为邠宁节度使。
现代文：九日，以卫尉卿王彦威任检校礼部尚书，充任忠武军节度使；以右金吾卫大将军史孝章为宁节度使。
English: On the 9th, Wang Yanwei, a lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the school inspection, and served as the festival envoy of the loyal troops; Shi Xiaozhang, the general of the Right King Wu Wei, was appointed as the Ning festival envoy.

古文：戊辰，西川节度使李固言再上表，让门下侍郎及检校右仆射。
现代文：十三日，西川节度使李固言两次上表，请求让出门下侍郎及检校右仆射。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the Saikawa Seito made Li Guyan appear twice and asked him to let go of the under-waiter and the right-hand man of the inspection.

古文：八月丙戌朔。
现代文：八月丙戍是朔日。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day.

古文：甲午，山南东道诸州大水，田稼漂尽。
现代文：九日，山南东道各州发大水，田亩庄稼全部淹尽。
English: On the 9th, all the prefectures in Shannan Province were flooded, and the fields and crops were all drowned.

古文：丁酉，诏： 大河而南，幅员千里，楚泽之北，连亘数州。
现代文：十二日，皇上下诏说： 大河南面，幅员广大有一千里。楚泽的北面，连绵数州。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor issued an imperial edict, saying: To the south of the great river, there is a vast expanse of a thousand miles. To the north of Chuze, there are several states.

古文：以水潦暴至，堤防溃溢，既坏庐舍，复损田苗。
现代文：因为大水突然到来，堤防崩溃大水泛滥，既损坏了房屋，又损害了田亩庄稼。
English: Due to the sudden arrival of high water, the dike collapsed and the high water flooded, damaging both houses and acres of crops.

古文：言念黎元，罗此灾沴，或生业荡尽，农功索然，困餧雕残，岂能自济。
现代文：想到广大百姓，遭遇此等灾祸，有的生产生活的基业被大水冲光，农业生产全部停顿，困顿饥饿，难道还能够救济自己。
English: Thinking of the broad masses of the people, encountering such a disaster, some of the production and life of the foundation were washed out by the flood, agricultural production all stopped, and they were starving, can they still relieve themselves?

古文：宜令给事中卢弘宣往陈许、郑滑、曹濮等道宣慰，刑部郎中崔瑨往山南东道、鄂岳、蕲黄道宣慰。 
现代文：应该令给事中卢弘宣前往陈许、郑滑、曹濮等道安抚慰问，刑部郎中崔王晋前往山南东道、鄂岳、蕲黄道安抚慰问。 
English: Lu Hongxuan should be ordered to go to Chen Xu, Zheng Slip, Cao Pi and other roads to offer condolences and consolation, and Choi Wangjin, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, should go to Shannan Host, E Mountain, and the Yellow Road to offer condolences and consolation.

古文：己亥，嘉王运薨。
现代文：十四日，嘉王运去世。
English: On the 14th, Ji Wangyun passed away.

古文：魏博六州蝗食秋苗并尽。
现代文：魏博等六州蝗虫将秋天庄稼禾苗吃光了。
English: Wei Bo and other locusts from six states have eaten up the autumn crops and seedlings.

古文：九月丙辰朔。
现代文：九月丙辰是朔日。
English: The first day of September is the New Year's Day.

古文：辛酉，荆南李石让中书侍郎，乃改授检校兵部尚书。
现代文：六日，荆南李石请求让出中书侍郎，于是改授检校兵部尚书。
English: On the sixth day, Jingnan Lishi requested that the junior secretary of the middle school be transferred, so the junior secretary of the military inspection department was transferred.

古文：壬戌，上以皇太子慢游败度，欲废之，中丞狄兼谟垂涕切谏。
现代文：七日，皇上因为皇太子游手好闲，贪玩无度，想要废掉他，中丞狄兼谟垂泪切直劝谏。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor wanted to depose the crown prince because of his idleness and excessive playfulness, and the junior middle officer Di Kanmu tearfully urged him to do so.

古文：是夜，移太子于少阳院，杀太子宫人左右数十人。
现代文：这一夜，移皇太子到少阳院，杀太子宫人左右侍从数十人。
English: That night, he moved the crown prince to Shao Yang Yuan and killed dozens of attendants around the prince's womb.

古文：戊辰，诏梁王等五人，先于北内，可却归十六宅。
现代文：十三日，皇上诏令梁王等五人，先到北内，可退归到十六宅居住。
English: On the 13th, the emperor decreed that five people, including Liang Wang, would go to the north first and could return to live in the 16th house.

古文：辛未，易定节度使张璠卒。
现代文：十六日，易定节度使张去世。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Zhang passed away.

古文：壬申，以易州刺史李仲迁为定州刺史，充义武军节度使。
现代文：十七日，以易州刺史李仲迁为定州刺史，充任义武军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Li Zhongqian, a military historian from Yizhou, was appointed as a military historian from Dingzhou, and served as the military historian of the Volunteer Army.

古文：戊寅，以东都留守牛僧孺为左仆射。
现代文：二十三日，以东都留守牛僧儒为左仆射。
English: On the 23rd, the left-handed shot was made by the cow monk who stayed behind in the eastern capital.

古文：辛巳，诏皇太子侍读窦宗直隔日入少阳院。
现代文：二十六日，诏令皇太子侍读窦宗直隔日入少阳院侍读。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict ordered the crown prince to attend the reading of Dou Zong, and the next day he entered Shao Yang Academy to attend the reading.

古文：冬十月乙酉朔，以尚书左丞崔琯检校户部尚书，充东都留守。
现代文：冬十月乙酉是朔日，以尚书左丞崔为检校户部尚书，充任东都留守。
English: It was the first day of the new year in the winter of October, and Choi, the left-hand man of Shangshu, was in charge of the inspection of the school. Shangshu, who was in charge of the inspection, stayed behind.

古文：易定军乱，不纳新使李仲迁，立张璠子元益为留后。
现代文：易定军乱，不接纳新易定军使李仲迁，立已故易定节度使张之子张元益为留后。
English: Yi Ding's army rioted, the new Yi Ding's army did not accept Li Zhong's relocation, and the late Yi Ding's troops made Zhang's son Zhang Yuanyi stay behind.

古文：己丑，以少府监张沼为黔中观察使。
现代文：五日，以少府监张沼为黔中观察使。
English: On the fifth day, Zhang Numa, a minor prefectural inspector, was appointed as a junior middle school observation envoy.

古文：壬辰，以右金吾卫将军高霞寓为夏、绥、银、宥节度使。
现代文：八日，以右金吾卫将军高霞寓为夏、绥、银、宥节度使。
English: On the 8th, with the right Kinguwei General Gao Xiaoying as the summer, autumn, silver, and yang governor.

古文：癸巳，以中书舍人李景让为华州防御使。
现代文：九日，以中书舍人李景让为华州防御使。
English: On the 9th, Li Jingzhang, a Chinese scholar, was appointed as the defense envoy of Huazhou.

古文：甲午，庆成节，命中人以酒酺、《仙韶乐》赐群臣宴于曲江亭。
现代文：十日是庆成节，皇上诞辰之日，皇上命太监以酒宴、《仙韶乐》赐给群臣在曲江亭宴会。
English: On the 10th day of the festival, the day of the emperor's birthday, the eunuch of the emperor's order gave a wine banquet, "Cherry Blossom Music" to the courtiers at the Qujiang Pavilion banquet.

古文：丁酉，夏州节度使刘源卒。
现代文：十三日，夏州节度使刘源去世。
English: On the 13th, Liu Yuan passed away during the Xiazhou Festival.

古文：庚子，皇太子薨于少阳院，谥曰庄恪。
现代文：十六日，皇太子在少阳院去世，谥号为庄恪。
English: On the 16th, the Crown Prince passed away at Shao Yang Academy. His posthumous name was Zhuang Ke.

古文：今年遭水蝗虫处，并宜存抚赈给。 
现代文：二十一日，以左金吾将军郭日文为、宁、庆节度使。这一夜，彗星从轸星位置出现，长三丈，往东西方向指。
English: On the twenty-first day, with the left Kingu general Guo Nichibun as the messenger of Ning and Qing. On this night, the comet appeared from the position of the bright star, three meters long, pointing in the east-west direction.

古文：以沧州节度使李彦佐为郓、曹、濮节度使，以德州刺史、沧景节度副使刘约为义昌军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，前任宁节度使史孝章去世。十一月乙卯是朔日，这一夜，彗星从东到西贯穿了整个天空。以沧州节度使李彦佐为郓、曹、濮节度使，以德州刺史、沧景节度副使刘约为义昌军节度使。
English: On the 25th, the predecessor of the Ning Festival, Shi Xiaozhang, passed away. November 18 was the new moon day, and on this night, the comet penetrated the entire sky from east to west. With the Cangzhou Festival, Li Yanzu was the, Cao,  Festival Ambassador, and with the Dezhou Festival and the Cangjing Festival Deputy Ambassador Liu You was the Yichang Army Festival Ambassador.

古文：癸亥，以宋州刺史唐弘实为邕管经略使。
现代文：九日，以宋州刺史唐弘实为邕管经略使。
English: On the 9th, Tang Hongsheng, the governor of Songzhou, was appointed as the special envoy.

古文：乙丑，天平军节度使王源中卒。
现代文：十一日，天平军节度使王源中去世。
English: On the 11th day of the Tianping Army Festival, Wang Yuanzhong passed away.

古文：庚午，以翰林学士丁居晦为御史中丞。
现代文：十六日，以翰林学士丁居晦为御史中丞。
English: On the 16th, Hanlin Scholar Ding Jugao was appointed as the Vice President of History.

古文：壬申，以蔡州刺史韩威为定州刺史、义武军节度、北平军等使。
现代文：十八日，以蔡州刺史韩威为定州刺史、义武军节度使、北平军使。
English: On the 18th, Han Wei, the military attaché of Caizhou, was appointed as the military attaché of Dingzhou, the military attaché of the People's Liberation Army, and the military attaché of Peiping.

古文：十二月乙酉朔。
现代文：十二月乙酉是朔日。
English: December is the New Year's Day.

古文：辛丑，诏以河东节度使、开府仪同三司、守司徒、兼中书令、太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户裴度可守司徒、中书令。
现代文：十七日，皇上诏令以河东节度使、开府仪同三司、兼任较高的司徒兼中书令、太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户裴度可以兼任较高职务的司徒、中书令。
English: On the 17th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to appoint the Hedong Festival envoy, the Kaifu ceremony with three departments, concurrently serving as a higher scribe and the middle secretary, the Taiyuan Yin, the Beidou left-behind, the Shangzhu Province, the Jin Province, and the three thousand households of the food village can also serve as a higher position of the scribe and the middle secretary.

古文：以兵部侍郎狄兼谟为河东节度使。
现代文：以兵部侍郎狄兼谟为河东节度使。
English: With the attendant of the Military Department, Di Kanmu, as the special envoy to the East River Festival.

古文：丙午，守太子太师、尚书右仆射、门下侍郎、国子祭酒、同平章事郑覃罢太子太师，仍三五日入中书。
现代文：二十二日，兼任较高职务太子太师、尚书右仆射、门下侍郎，国子祭酒、同平章事郑覃罢免太子太师，仍旧三天或五天进入中书省一次。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Zheng, who also held the higher positions of the Crown Prince and Grand Master, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and shot, and the servant of the door, the son of the country and the wine, and Tongping Zhangji, dismissed the Crown Prince and Grand Master, and still entered the Central Shuxu Province once every three days or five days.

古文：日本国贡珍珠绢。
现代文：日本国进贡珍珠绢。
English: Japan's tribute pearl necklace.

古文：四年春正月甲寅朔。
现代文：开成四年春正月甲寅是朔日。
English: The first day of the fourth year of the Spring Festival, the first month of the year, is the first day of the year.

古文：丁巳，荧惑太白辰聚于南斗。
现代文：四日，荧惑星、太白星早晨聚集在南斗星区。
English: On the morning of the 4th, the fluorescent planet and the too-white star gathered in the southern dipper area.

古文：丁卯夜，于威泰殿观灯作乐，三宫太后诸公主等毕会。
现代文：十四日夜，在咸泰殿观灯作乐，三宫太后、诸位公主等全都来聚会。
English: On the evening of the 14th, the lanterns were lit and music was played at Ham Tai Hall. The Empress Dowager of the Three Kingdoms and all the princesses came to the party.

古文：上性节俭，延安公主衣裾宽大，即时斥归，驸马窦浣待罪。
现代文：皇上生性节俭，延安公主衣裾太宽大，浪费衣料，马上被皇上训斥归府，驸马窦浣等待处分。
English: The emperor was born with a frugal nature, and Yan'an Princess's hemline was too wide, wasting clothing. She was immediately reprimanded by the emperor and sent back to the palace to await punishment.

古文：诏曰： 公主入参，衣服逾制，从夫之义，过有所归。
现代文：皇上下诏道： 公主入朝参见皇上，衣服穿着超过规定，但出嫁从夫，在道义上归过于其夫驸马。
English: The emperor issued an edict: The princess entered the imperial court according to the emperor, wearing clothes exceeding the regulations, but married to her husband, she was morally superior to her husband.

古文：浣宜夺两月俸钱。 
现代文：窦浣应该罚两月的薪俸钱。 
English: Dou Wei should be fined two months' salary.

古文：闰月甲申朔，以吏部侍郎郑肃检校礼部尚书、河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使，以苏州刺史李道枢为浙东观察使，以谏议大夫高元裕为御史中丞。
现代文：闰正月甲申是朔日，以吏部侍郎郑肃任检校礼部尚书、河中、晋、绛、慈、隰等州节度使，以苏州刺史李道枢为浙东观察使，以谏议大夫高元裕为御史中丞。
English: It was the New Year's Day in the leap year of the first month of the year, and Zheng Su, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the state festival envoy of the school inspection ceremony department of Shangshu, Kechu, Jin, Yao, Ci and Yao, and Li Douzhu, the chief historian of Suzhou, was appointed as the East Zhejiang observation envoy, and Gao Yuanyu, the chief historian, was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：丙申，以前河中节度使李听为太子太保。
现代文：十三日，以前任河中节度使李听为太子太保。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the former governor of Kawagoe, Setsudo, promoted Li He to the position of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：己亥，裴度自太原至，上令中人就第问疾。
现代文：十六日，裴度从太原到来，皇上令太监到府第中探间裴度病情。
English: On the 16th day, Pei Du arrived from Taiyuan, and the emperor ordered the eunuch to investigate Pei Du's illness.

古文：辛丑，以司农卿李为福建观察使，谏官论其不可，乃罢之。
现代文：十八日，以司农卿李王己为福建观察使，谏官们认为李王己不能担任，这才停止任命。
English: On the 18th, with the Secretary of Agriculture Li Wangji as the Fujian Observer, the eunuchs thought that Li Wangji could not serve, so they stopped the appointment.

古文：丙午，以大理卿卢贞为福建观察使。
现代文：二十三日，以大理卿卢贞为福建观察使。
English: On the 23rd, Dalicheng Lu Zhen was appointed as the Fujian Observer.

古文：丁未，兴元节度使郑浣卒。
现代文：二十四日，兴元节度使郑浣去世。
English: On the 24th day of the Xingyuan Festival, Zheng Qi passed away.

古文：戊申，阇婆国朝贡。
现代文：二十五日，婆国前来朝贡。
English: On the 25th, the mother country came to pay tribute.

古文：二月癸酉朔。
现代文：二月癸酉是朔日，月初一。
English: The first day of February is New Year's Day, the first day of the month.

古文：辛酉，以吏部侍郎归融检校礼部尚书，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：九日，以吏部侍郎归融为检校礼部尚书，充任山南西道节度使。
English: On the 9th, he was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school, and served as the delegate of the festival of Shannan West Road.

古文：丙寅，寒食节，上御通化门以观游人。
现代文：十四日，寒食节，皇上到通化门以观看游人。
English: On the 14th, the cold food festival, the emperor went to Tonghua Gate to watch the tourists.

古文：戊辰，幸勤政楼观角抵、蹴鞠。
现代文：十六日，皇上到勤政楼观看角抵、蹴鞠。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to the Gongzheng Building to watch the arrival of the players and the game of kemari.

古文：三月癸未朔。乙酉，赐群臣上巳宴于曲江。
现代文：三月癸未是朔日，三日，皇上赐群臣上巳节在曲江饮宴。
English: On the third day of the third month, the Emperor gave a banquet to his courtiers in Qujiang for the Spring Festival.

古文：是夜，月掩东井第三星。
现代文：这一夜，月亮掩盖了东井第三星。
English: On this night, the moon hides the third star of Higashii.

古文：丙申，司徒、中书令裴度卒。
现代文：十四日，司徒、中书令裴度去世。
English: On the 14th, Sito and Chushirei Baidu passed away.

古文：癸酉，浙东观察使李道枢卒。
现代文：十五日，浙东观察使李道枢去世。
English: On the 15th, Li Daozhu passed away.

古文：五月辛丑朔。丁亥，阁内上谓宰臣曰： 新修《开元政要》如何？ 
现代文：以户部侍郎崔龟从为宣歙观察使，代替崔郸，以崔郸为太常卿，以楚州刺史萧亻叔为浙东观察使。夏四月壬子是朔日，月初一。七日，在内阁皇上问宰相们说： 新近修订的《开元政要》怎么样？ 
English: He appointed Choi Kame, the steward of the Household Department, as the Xuan Ye observation envoy in place of Choi Hao, Choi Hao as the Grand Admiral, and Choe Su Shi Xiao Hao as the East Zhejiang observation envoy. The summer solstice falls on New Year's Day, the first day of the month. On the seventh day, the emperor asked the prime ministers in the cabinet: What about the newly revised "Important Political Personages of the First Century"?

古文：杨嗣复曰： 臣等未见。
现代文：杨嗣复道 ：臣等未见到《开元政要》。
English: Yang Zhi Fudo: My ministers and I have not seen the "Kaiyuan Dignitaries."

古文：陛下欲以此书传示子孙，则宣付臣等，参定可否。
现代文：陛下想要以此书传示子孙知道，那么就应该交付臣等，检验确定是好还是不好。
English: If His Majesty wants this book to be passed down to his children and grandchildren, then it should be handed over to his ministers to examine and determine whether it is good or not.

古文：缘开元政事与贞观不同，玄宗或好畋游，或好声色，选贤任能，未得尽美。
现代文：因为开元政事与贞观不同，玄宗有时喜爱打猎游玩，有时喜爱音乐美女，选拔贤能，任用贤能，还不能尽善尽美。
English: Because the political affairs at the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty were different from the view of chastity, Xuanzong sometimes liked to go hunting, sometimes liked music and beautiful women. The selection of talents and the appointment of talents could not be perfect.

古文：撰述示后，所贵作程，岂容易哉！ 
现代文：撰述书籍，传示后人，贵在作模范，难道容易吗？ 
English: Isn't it easy to write books, to pass them on to future generations, to be a role model?

古文：丙申，郑覃、陈夷行罢知政事，覃守左仆射，夷行为吏部侍郎。
现代文：十六日，郑覃、陈夷行罢免知政事，郑覃兼任左仆射，陈夷行为吏部侍郎。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Yao and Chen Yixing were removed from their posts as political leaders. Zheng Yao concurrently served as the left-hand man, and Chen Yixing as the head of the personnel department.

古文：丙午，邠宁节度使郭旼卒。
现代文：二十六日，宁节度使郭日文去世。
English: On the 26th, Ning Jiedu caused Guo Nibun to pass away.

古文：天平、魏博、易定等管内蝗食秋稼。
现代文：天平、魏博、易定等管辖区内蝗虫吃秋天庄稼。
English: Locusts in the jurisdiction areas such as Tianping, Weibo and Yiding eat autumn crops.

古文：六月辛亥朔，以长武城使苻澈为邠宁节度。
现代文：六月辛亥是朔日，月初一，以长武城使苻澈为宁节度使。
English: In June, Xinhai is the New Year's Day, the first day of the month, with Changwu City's celebration of the Ning Festival.

古文：庚申，上幸十六宅安王、颍王院宴乐，赐与颇厚。
现代文：十日，皇上驾到十六宅的安王、颍王院里宴饮欢乐，赐给得非常丰厚。
English: On the 10th day, the emperor drove to the 16th mansion of the An Wang and the Yao Wang courtyard to feast and rejoice, and was given a very rich gift.

古文：戊辰，以久旱，分命祠祷，每忧动于色。
现代文：十八日，因为长久干旱，皇上分头命人祈求祷告，忧愁常常表现在脸上。
English: On the eighteenth day, because of the long drought, the emperor divided his attention and ordered people to pray. Sadness often showed on their faces.

古文：宰相等奏曰： 水旱时数使然，乞不过劳圣虑。 
现代文：宰相等人奏道 ：水灾旱灾是时代气数使它这样，请求皇上不要过分忧虑。 
English: The prime minister and others appealed, "Floods and droughts are the signs of the times that have made it this way. We ask the emperor not to worry unduly."

古文：上改容言曰： 朕为人主，无德及天下，致兹灾旱，又谪见于天。
现代文：皇上改变神色严肃地说： 朕为人主，对天下无恩德，以致造成这样的旱灾，又被上天谴谪。
English: The emperor changed his countenance and said gravely: "I am the master, and I have done no favors to the world, so that I have caused such a drought, and I have been condemned by heaven.

古文：若三日不雨，当退归南内，更选贤明以主天下。 
现代文：假若三天不下雨，当退归宫中南内养老，另外再选贤明之主上以统治天下。 
English: If it doesn't rain for three days, he should retire to the palace to live out the rest of his days, and then choose a wise lord to rule the world.

古文：宰臣呜咽流涕，各请策免。
现代文：宰相们都呜咽流泪，各人都请求皇上免除职务，自我谴责。
English: The prime ministers were all sobbing and shedding tears, each of them begging the emperor to relieve them of their duties and condemning themselves.

古文：是夜，大雨霑霈。
现代文：这一夜，大雨倾盆。
English: That night, it rained heavily.

古文：丁丑，襄阳山竹结实，其米可食。
现代文：二十七日，襄阳山上竹子结果实，竹上结的米可以吃。
English: On the 27th, the bamboo shoots on the mountain in Xiangyang turned out to be real, and the rice tied on the bamboo can be eaten.

古文：秋七月庚辰朔，西蜀水，害稼。
现代文：秋七月庚辰是朔日，月初一，西蜀水灾，危害庄稼。
English: Autumn July Gengchen is the New Year's Day, the first day of the month, West Shuxu floods, harming crops.

古文：乙未夜，月犯荧惑。
现代文：十六日夜，月亮侵犯荧惑星。
English: On the night of the 16th, the moon invaded the fluorescent planet.

古文：壬寅，以河南尹韦长为平卢军节度使，以刑部侍郎高锴为河南尹。
现代文：二十三日，以河南尹韦长为平卢军节度使，以刑部侍郎高锴为河南尹。
English: On the 23rd, Yin Weichang of Henan Province was appointed as the envoy of the Pinglu Army, and Gao Yao, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the Henan Yin.

古文：甲辰，以大中大夫、守太常卿、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔郸可本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十五日，以大中大夫、兼任较高职务的太常卿、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔郸可以凭本官职任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 25th, with the title of senior middle and high school doctor, and concurrently holding the higher positions of Tai Changqing, Shang Zhuo Guo, and Zi Jin Yu Bao, Cui Yao could, with his official position, and the middle school teacher, lower the rank.

古文：沧景、淄青大水。
现代文：沧景、淄青发大水。
English: Cangjing, bituminous hair and heavy water.

古文：八月庚戌朔，以给事中姚合为陕虢观察使。
现代文：八月庚戍是朔日，月初一，以给事中姚合为陕虢观察使。
English: August is the New Year's Day, the first day of the month, with Yao He as the Shaanxi observation envoy.

古文：辛亥，鄜王憬薨。
现代文：二日，王憬去世。
English: On the second day, Wang Jing passed away.

古文：丙辰，邢州废青山县，磁州移昭义县于固镇驿。
现代文：七日，邢州撤销青山县，磁州移昭义县到固镇驿。
English: On the seventh day, Zhangzhou revoked Aoyama County, and the magnetic state moved to Zhaoyi County to Guzheng.

古文：癸亥，以左仆射牛僧孺检校司空、同平章事，兼襄州刺史，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：十四日，以左仆射牛僧孺任检校司空、同平章事，兼襄州刺史，充任山南东道节度使。
English: On the 14th, with his left-hand man, the bull-shooting monk Zou, he served as the inspector of the school, the inspector of Tongping, and the inspector of Xiangzhou, and served as the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：辛未夜，流星出羽林，尾长八十余尺，灭后有声如雷。
现代文：二十二日夜，流星从羽林星发出，尾长八十余尺，流星灭后有声响如雷。
English: On the night of the 22nd, a meteor shot out from Hualin Star, with a tail more than 80 feet long. After the meteor went out, there was a thunderous sound.

古文：壬申，镇、冀四州蝗食稼，至于野草树叶皆尽。
现代文：二十三日，镇、冀四州蝗虫吃庄稼，以至于野草、树叶都被蝗虫吃尽。
English: On the 23rd, locusts ate crops in the town and the four prefectures of Hebei, so much so that the wild grass and leaves were all eaten up by the locusts.

古文：九月己卯朔。
现代文：九月己卯是朔日，月初一。
English: September is the new moon day, the first day of the month.

古文：辛卯，以剑南东川节度杨汝士为吏部侍郎。
现代文：十三日，以剑南、东川节度使杨汝士为吏部侍郎。
English: On the 13th, Yang Ruxi was appointed as the attendant of the cadre department by Jiannan and Dongchuan Setsudo.

古文：丁酉夜，月掩东井第三星。
现代文：十九日夜，月亮遮掩了东井第三星。
English: On the night of the 19th, the moon covered the third star of the East Well.

古文：辛丑，以吏部侍郎陈夷行为华州镇国军防御使，以苏州刺史李颖为江西观察使，以谏议大夫冯定为桂管观察使。
现代文：二十三日，以吏部侍郎陈夷行为华州镇国军防御使，以苏州刺史李颖为江西观察使，以谏议大夫冯定为桂管观察使。
English: On the 23rd, Chen Yi, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the defense envoy of the Huazhou Town National Army, Li Ying, the Suzhou chief of staff, was appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy, and Feng, the chief of staff, was appointed as the Guizhou observation envoy.

古文：甲辰，以京兆尹郑复为剑南东川节度使。
现代文：二十六日，以京兆尹郑复为剑南东川节度使。
English: On the 26th, Jingzhao Yin Zhengfu was appointed as the Jianan Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：丙午，以前江西观察使敬昕为京兆尹。
现代文：二十八日，以前任江西观察使敬昕为京兆尹。
English: On the 28th, the former Jiangxi observation envoy, Jingyao, was replaced by Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：冬十月己酉朔。
现代文：冬十月己酉是朔日，月初一。
English: In winter, the first day of October is New Year's Day, the first day of the month.

古文：戊午，庆成节，赐群臣宴于曲江亭。
现代文：十日，是庆成节，是皇上诞辰日，皇上在曲江亭赐群臣宴会。
English: On the 10th, it was Qingcheng Festival, the birthday of the emperor, and the emperor gave a banquet to the courtiers at Qujiang Pavilion.

古文：辛酉夜，星入斗魁。前桂管观察使严謇卒。
现代文：十三日夜，前任桂管观察使严謇去世。
English: On the evening of the 13th, the predecessor of Gui Guan observation died.

古文：丙寅，制以敬宗第六男陈王成美为皇太子。
现代文：十八日，皇上下诏令，以敬宗第六个儿子陈王成美为皇太子。
English: On the 18th, the emperor issued an imperial edict naming Chen Wangchengmei, the sixth son of Emperor Jingzong, as the crown prince.

古文：丁丑，太子太保李听卒。
现代文：二十九日，太子太保李听去世。
English: On the 29th, Prince Taibo Li Zhuang passed away.

古文：十一月己卯朔。
现代文：十一月己卯是朔日，月初一。
English: November is the new moon day, the first day of the month.

古文：壬申，前福建观察使唐扶卒。
现代文：十四日，前任福建观察使唐扶去世。
English: On the 14th, Tang Fu, the predecessor of Fujian Observatory, passed away.

古文：己亥，曲赦京城系囚。
现代文：二十一日，特别赦免京城被关押的囚犯。
English: On the 21st, a special amnesty was granted to prisoners held in Beijing.

古文：十二月己酉朔。
现代文：十二月己酉是朔日，月初一。
English: The first day of December is New Year's Day, the first day of the month.

古文：癸丑，贬光禄卿、驸马都尉韦让为澧州长史。
现代文：五日，贬光禄卿、驸马都尉韦让为澧州长史。
English: On the fifth day of the month, Lu Kengqing and Weizhan, the lieutenant of the imperial cavalry, were demoted to the rank of prefectural governor.

古文：乙卯，乾陵火。
现代文：七日，乾陵失火。
English: On the seventh day, the Qianling Temple caught fire.

古文：以杭州刺史李宗闵为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：以杭州刺史李宗闵为太子宾客，分管东都。
English: Li Zongyao, the chief historian of Hangzhou, was the prince's guest. He was in charge of the eastern capital.

古文：辛酉，上不康，百僚赴延英起居。
现代文：十三日，皇上身体不适，百官到延英殿问安。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor was unwell, and hundreds of officials came to Yan Ying Palace to say hello.

古文：乙亥，宰臣入谒，见上于太和殿。
现代文：二十七日，宰相们入宫进见，在太和殿拜见皇上。
English: On the 27th, the prime ministers entered the palace and paid their respects to the emperor at the Imperial Palace.

古文：是岁，户部计见管户四百九十九万六千七百五十二。
现代文：这一年，户部统计现在管辖户数是四百九十九万六千七百五十二户。
English: In that year, the number of households now under the jurisdiction of the Household Statistics Department was 4,996,752.

古文：五年春正月戊寅朔，上不康，不受朝贺。
现代文：开成五年春正月戊寅是朔日，月初一，皇上身体不适，不接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Emperor's reign, the Emperor was unwell and did not accept morning greetings.

古文：己卯，诏立亲弟颍王瀍为皇太弟，权勾当军国事。皇太子成美复为陈王。
现代文：二日，皇上下诏立亲弟弟颍王氵廛为皇太弟，暂时主管军国大事，皇太子成美重新做陈王。
English: On the second day, the emperors decreed that the emperor's younger brother, Zou Wangye, would become the emperor's younger brother, temporarily in charge of military and state affairs, and that the crown prince, Cheng Mei, would once again become the king of Chen.

古文：辛巳，上崩于大明宫之太和殿，寿享三十三。
现代文：四日，皇上在大明宫之太和殿去世，享年三十三岁。
English: On the 4th, the Emperor passed away at the age of thirty-three in the Great Hall of the Daimyo Palace.

古文：群臣谥曰元圣昭献皇帝，庙号文宗。
现代文：群臣上谥号曰元圣昭献皇帝，庙号文宗。
English: The senior vassal's posthumous name was Yuan Sheng Zhaokian Emperor, and his temple name was Wenzong.

古文：其年八月十七日，葬于章陵。
现代文：这年八月十七日，安葬在章陵。
English: On August 17th of this year, he was buried in Zhengling.

古文：史臣曰：昭献皇帝恭俭儒雅，出于自然，承父兄奢弊之余，当阍寺挠权之际，而能以治易乱，代危为安。
现代文：史臣说：昭献皇帝严肃、节俭，温文尔雅，出于自然，继位于父兄奢侈、败坏风气之后，正当宦官专职之际，然而他能以治改变乱，化危为安。
English: Shichen said: Zhaokian Emperor is serious, frugal, gentle and elegant. By nature, after his father and brother's extravagant and corrupt customs, he is on the verge of being a full-time eunuch. However, he can change the chaos with governance and resolve the crisis.

古文：大和之初，可谓明矣。
现代文：大和初年，可谓圣明了。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, it can be described as the beginning of enlightenment.

古文：初，帝在籓时，喜读《贞观政要》，每见太宗孜孜政道，有意于兹。
现代文：当初，皇上在藩邸当王时，喜欢阅读《贞观政要》，每每阅读到太宗勤奋努力于治国之道，便对治国有意了。
English: At the beginning, when the emperor was the king at the residence of the domain, he liked to read "Zhenguan Zhengyou," and every time he read that Taizong was diligent in the way of governing the country, he became interested in governing the country.

古文：洎即位之后，每延英对宰臣，率漏下十一刻。
现代文：等到即帝位之后，每次在延英殿召见宰相们议事，常常到深夜。
English: After the enthronement, each time the prime ministers were summoned to the palace for deliberation, often late into the night.

古文：故事，天子双日视事，帝谓宰辅曰： 朕欲与卿等每日相见，其辍朝、放朝、用双日可也。 
现代文：按照旧制，天子在单日处理朝政，皇上对宰相们说： 朕想与卿等每天相见，至于停止上朝、放朝，用双日就可以了。 
English: According to the old system, the emperor handled the affairs of the imperial court on a single day. The emperor said to the prime ministers, "I would like to meet with you every day. As for stopping going to the imperial court and leaving the imperial court, I can use two days."

古文：时宪宗郭后居兴庆宫，曰太皇太后，敬宗宝历太后及上母萧太后，时呼 三宫太后 。
现代文：当时宪宗的郭后居住在兴庆宫，叫太皇太后，敬宗母宝历太后及皇上母亲萧太后，当时并呼为 三宫太后 。
English: At that time, Guo Hou, the mother of Emperor Xianzong, lived in the Xingqing Palace. She was called the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager of Keizong, the Empress Dowager of Baoli, and the Empress Dowager of Xiao, the Empress Dowager. At that time, she was also called the Empress Dowager of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：帝性仁孝，三宫问安，其情如一。
现代文：皇上性格仁爱孝敬，到三宫向三位太后问安，情感忠厚对待态度完全一样。
English: The emperor is benevolent and filial, and when he went to the Three Kingdoms to greet the three queens, he treated them with the same loyal and affectionate attitude.

古文：尝内园进樱桃，所司启曰： 别赐三宫太后。 
现代文：内园曾经进献樱桃，有关部门报告说： 可以另外赐给三宫太后。 
English: The inner garden used to offer cherries, and the relevant department reported: It can also be given to the Three Kingdoms Empress Dowager.

古文：帝曰： 太后宫送物，焉得为赐。 
现代文：皇上说： 到太后宫送东西，怎么能叫做 赐 。 
English: The emperor said, "How can sending something to the Imperial Palace be called a gift?

古文：遽取笔改赐为奉。
现代文：马上拿笔改 赐 为 奉 。
English: Take a pen and change it immediately.

古文：宗正寺以祭器杇败，请易之，及有司呈进，命陈于别殿，具冠带面阅之，容色凄然。
现代文：宗正衙门认为祭祀器皿朽坏，请求更换，等到有关部门呈献新器皿，皇上命陈列在别殿，而且穿戴好冠带去观看，容颜一派凄凉的样子。
English: Zongzheng Shimen thought that the sacrificial vessels were rotten and requested a replacement. When the relevant departments presented the new vessels, the emperor ordered them to be displayed in the hall, and to wear a crown and go to watch, with a look of desolation.

古文：尤勒于政理凡选内外群官，府进名，帝必面讯其行能，然后补除。
现代文：皇上尤其在朝政治理上勤奋，凡是选拔朝廷内外官员，宰相们进上名单，皇上一定要当面询问了解他的品行、才能，然后才补官。
English: The emperor is especially diligent in the political affairs of the DPRK. Whenever officials inside and outside the imperial court are selected, and prime ministers are added to the list, the emperor must personally inquire about his character and talents before filling the post.

古文：中书用鸿胪卿张贾为衢州刺史，贾好博，朝辞日，帝谓之曰： 闻卿善长行。 
现代文：中书省用鸿胪卿张贾为衢州刺史，张贾喜欢赌博，在朝廷辞别皇上之日，皇上对他道： 听说你擅长赌博。 
English: The People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture used Zhang Jia, the Prince of Hongye, to write the history of Zhangzhou. Zhang Jia liked to gamble. On the day of the imperial court's farewell to the emperor, the emperor said to him: I heard that you are good at gambling.

古文：对曰： 政事之余，聊与宾客为戏，非有所妨。 
现代文：张贾对答说： 办理政事之闲暇，姑且与宾客玩玩，不会对政事有什么妨碍。 
English: Zhang Jia replied, "The leisure of handling government affairs, even if you play with guests, will not interfere with government affairs.

古文：帝曰： 岂有好之而无妨也！ 
现代文：皇上说 ：难道有爱好赌博而对政事毫无妨碍的！ 
English: The emperor said, "Is there anyone who loves to gamble and is not a hindrance to politics?"

古文：内外闻之悚息。
现代文：朝廷内外听说后都惊惧而停止了赌博。
English: Both inside and outside the court were shocked and stopped gambling.

古文：而帝以累世变起禁闱，尤侧目于中官，欲尽除之。
现代文：然而皇上由于累代国家发生事变都来自宫中，尤其痛恨专权的太监，想要将他们都除掉。
English: However, the emperor hated the autocratic eunuchs in particular, and wanted to get rid of them all, since all the upheavals that had occurred in the country over the generations had come from the palace.

古文：然训、注狂狡之流，制御无术，矢谋既误，几致颠危。
现代文：然而李训、郑注这些狂妄轻率之人，制服太监没有办法，施行计谋已经败露以至于国家颠覆。
English: However, Li Xun and Zheng Zhu, these arrogant and imprudent people, had no way to subdue the eunuchs, and the implementation of the scheme had failed to the point of subverting the country.

古文：所谓 有帝王之道，而无帝王之才 ，虽旰食焦忧，不能弭患，异哉！
现代文：文宗皇帝是所谓的 有帝王的品德，而无帝王的才干 ，即使为国事焦虑甚至不能按时吃饭，也不能平息祸患，可惜啊！
English: Emperor Wenzong is the so-called emperor who has the character of an emperor, but without the talent of an emperor, even if he can't even eat on time due to anxiety about state affairs, he can't quell the disaster, what a pity!

