古文：杨嗣昌，字文弱，武陵人。
现代文：杨嗣昌，字文弱，湖南武陵人。
English: Yang Shichang, the characters are weak, from Wuling, Hunan Province.

古文：万历三十八年进士。改除杭州府教授。迁南京国子监博士，累进户部郎中。
现代文：万历三十八年进士，改任杭州府教授，提升为南京国子监博士，逐渐官至户部郎中。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Wanli, was appointed as a professor of Hangzhou Prefecture, promoted to a doctor of Nanjing State Children's Supervision, and gradually rose to a junior official of the household department.

古文：天启初，引疾归。
现代文：天启初年，他称病回家。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, he called in sick.

古文：崇祯元年，起河南副使，加右参政，移霸州。
现代文：崇祯元年起用为河南副使，加封为右参政，移居霸州。
English: Since the first year of the year, Chongzhen has been the deputy envoy of Henan Province, and Jafeng has been a right-wing politician and moved to Bazhou.

古文：四年，移山海关饬兵备。
现代文：四年改派往山海关整顿军备。
English: Four years later, he was reassigned to Shanhaiguan to reorganize the armament.

古文：父鹤，总督陕西被逮，嗣昌三疏请代，得减死。
现代文：父亲杨鹤，总督陕西时被逮捕。杨嗣昌三次上疏请求代替父亲受死，免除他父亲的死刑。
English: His father, Yang He, was the governor of Shaanxi Province when he was arrested. Yang Shichang petitioned Shang Su three times to die in place of his father and to be exempted from his father's death sentence.

古文：五年夏，擢右佥都御史，巡抚永平、山海诸处。
现代文：五年夏天，提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚永平、山海关等处。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, he was promoted to the right-hand man of the governor of the capital, the governor of Yongping, the mountain customs and other departments.

古文：嗣昌父子不附奄，无嫌于东林。
现代文：杨嗣昌父子不依附宦官，跟东林党人没有仇怨。
English: Yang Shichang and his son do not rely on eunuchs and have no grudge against the Donglin Party members.

古文：侍郎迁安郭巩以逆案谪戍广西，其乡人为讼冤。
现代文：侍郎迁安郭巩因为逆案被贬职发配到广西，他同乡的人为他伸冤。
English: Guo Gong, a waiter in Qian'an, was demoted and sent to Guangxi because of a treason case. His fellow townspeople came to his defense.

古文：嗣昌以部民故，闻于朝，给事中姚思孝驳之，自是与东林郄。
现代文：杨嗣昌因为是本部人民的缘故，报告给朝廷知道，给事中姚思孝反驳他，从此跟东林党人感情上产生裂痕。
English: Yang Shichang reported to the imperial court because of the people in the headquarters, but Yao Sihiao contradicted him, and from then on there was a rift between him and the Donglin Party members.

古文：七年秋，拜兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督宣、大、山西军务。
现代文：崇祯七年秋天，授职兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督宣府、大同、山西军事事务。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was appointed as the right attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital, and the governor of Xuanfu, Datong and Shanxi military affairs.

古文：时中原饥，群盗蜂起，嗣昌请开金银铜锡矿，以解散其党。
现代文：这时中原发生饥荒，到处都发生暴乱。杨嗣昌请求开采金银铜锡矿，以解散这些流民暴徒。
English: At this time, there was a famine in the Central Plains, and riots broke out everywhere. Yang Shichang requested the mining of gold, silver, copper and tin to disperse these displaced rioters.

古文：又六疏陈边事，多所规画。
现代文：又六次上疏陈述边防事务，多有所规划、谋议。
English: There were also six briefings on border defense affairs, most of which involved planning and deliberation.

古文：帝异其才。以父忧去，复遭继母丧。
现代文：皇帝对他的才能感到惊奇，因为父亲丧礼离职，又碰到继母去世，因此在家乡呆了一段时间。
English: The emperor was astonished at his talent, for he had been away from home for some time on account of his father's funeral and the death of his stepmother.

古文：九年秋，兵部尚书张凤翼卒，帝顾廷臣无可任者，即家起嗣昌。
现代文：崇祯九年秋天，兵部尚书张凤翼死，皇帝环顾廷臣没有可以担任此职的人，就起用在家居住的杨嗣昌。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year of the reign of Chongzhen, the military secretary Zhang Fengyi died. The emperor looked around the courtiers and found no one who could serve in this position, so he appointed Yang Shichang, who lived at home.

古文：三疏辞，不许。
现代文：三次上疏推辞，皇帝不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree to the emperor's three refusals.

古文：明年三月抵京，召对。
现代文：第二年三月抵达北京，皇帝召见，问他对策。
English: When he arrived in Beijing in March of the following year, the emperor summoned him and asked him what to do.

古文：嗣昌通籍后，积岁林居，博涉文籍，多识先朝故事，工笔札，有口辨。
现代文：杨嗣昌回到原籍后，在乡间居住了一年多，广泛涉猎各种书籍，知道很多先朝的故事，工于文笔书札，有口才。
English: After returning to his hometown, Yang Shichang lived in the countryside for more than a year. He read a wide variety of books, knew a lot of stories from the previous dynasty, was good at writing calligraphy, and was eloquent.

古文：帝与语，大信爱之。
现代文：皇帝跟他交谈，十分信任喜爱他。
English: The emperor conversed with him, trusted him, and loved him.

古文：凤翼故柔靡，兵事无所区画。
现代文：张凤翼本来柔弱无为，对军事事务没有计划，无所建树。
English: Zhang Fengyi was originally weak and helpless, had no plan for military affairs, and did nothing.

古文：嗣昌锐意振刷，帝益以为能。
现代文：杨嗣昌锐意改革，皇帝更加认为他有才能。
English: Yang Shichang was eager to reform, and the emperor thought he was talented.

古文：每对必移时，所奏请无不听，曰： 恨用卿晚。 
现代文：每次对答必定在一个时辰以上，杨嗣昌的报告请求没有不同意的，说： 遗憾的是没有早点起用爱卿。 
English: Each reply must be more than one hour, Yang Shichang did not disagree with the report request, said: Unfortunately, I did not use Aiqing earlier.

古文：嗣昌乃议大举平贼。请以陕西、河南、湖广、江北为四正，四巡抚分剿而专防；以延绥、山西、山东、江南、江西、四川为六隅，六巡抚分防而协剿；是谓十面之网。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是建议大举平定农民军，请求以陕西、河南、湖广、江北四地为主，四省巡抚分别围剿而各自专门设防，以延绥、山西、山东、江南、江西、四川六地为辅，六地巡抚分别设防，协助围剿。这就叫作 十面之网 。
English: Yang Shichang then proposed to quell the peasant army on a large scale, and requested that the four provinces of Shaanxi, Henan, Hukang, and Jiangbei should be the main ones, and the governors of the four provinces should separately encircle and set up special defenses, supplemented by the six provinces of Yancheng, Shanxi, Shandong, Jiangnan, Jiangxi, and Sichuan, and the governors of the six provinces should separately set up defenses and assist in the encirclement. This is called the ten-sided network.

古文：而总督、总理二臣，随贼所向，专征讨。
现代文：而总督、总理二臣，跟随盗贼的去向，专门负责征伐。
English: The Governor-General, the Prime Minister and two ministers followed the thieves and were specifically responsible for the expedition.

古文：福建巡抚熊文灿者，讨海贼有功，大言自诡足办贼。
现代文：福建巡抚熊文灿，征伐海上盗贼有功，口出狂言说自己有办法制服盗贼。
English: Xiong Wencang, the governor of Fujian Province, has made a great contribution to the conquest of the sea thieves, and has said that he has a way to subdue the thieves.

古文：嗣昌闻而善之。
现代文：杨嗣昌听后认为是对的。
English: After listening to Yang Shichang, he thought it was right.

古文：会总督洪承畴、王家桢分驻陕西、河南。
现代文：正好总督洪承畴、王家祯分别驻扎在陕西、河南。
English: Governor-General Hong Chengzheng and Wang Jiaxuan were stationed in Shaanxi and Henan respectively.

古文：家桢故庸材，不足任，嗣昌乃荐文灿代之。
现代文：王家祯本是庸才，不足以担当大任，杨嗣昌于是推荐熊文灿代替他。
English: Wang Jiaxuan was a mediocre talent, not enough to take on a big job, so Yang Shichang recommended Xiong Wencang to replace him.

古文：因议增兵十二万，增饷二百八十万。
现代文：并因此建议增加十二万士兵，增加二百八十万粮饷。
English: He therefore proposed an increase of one hundred and twenty thousand soldiers and an increase of two million eight hundred thousand rations.

古文：其措饷之策有四，曰因粮，曰溢地，曰事例，曰驿递。
现代文：他采集粮饷的计策有四条：一是 因粮 ，二是 溢地 ，三是 事例 ，四是 驿递 。
English: He has four strategies for collecting grain: one is due to grain, the second is overflow, the third is cases, and the fourth is delivery.

古文：因粮者，因旧额之粮，量为加派，亩输粮六合，石折银八钱，伤地不与，岁得银百九十二万九千有奇；溢地者，民间土田溢原额者，核实输赋，岁得银四十万六千有奇；事例者，富民输资为监生，一岁而止；驿递者，前此邮驿裁省之银，以二十万充饷。
现代文：所谓 因粮 ，就是因袭原定数额的粮食数量，按照这数量增加征派，每亩缴纳粮食六合，每石折算为八钱银子，受损害的土地不交纳，一年可得银子一百九十二万九千多两。所谓 溢地 ，就是将民间超出原定数额的土地，一一核实缴纳赋税，一年可得银子四十万九千多两。所谓 事例 ，就是让富裕的农民缴纳资财可以做监生，以一年为限。所谓 驿递 ，就是将这之前裁省邮驿的银子，拿二十万两充军饷。
English: The so-called due grain, that is, the amount of grain due to the attack of the original amount, increased the levy according to this amount, paid six grain per mu, converted to eight silver coins per stone, and did not pay for the damaged land, and could obtain one million nine hundred and twenty-nine thousand more than two silver coins a year. The so-called overflow land, that is, the land where the people exceeded the original amount, verified and paid the tax one by one, and could obtain one million four hundred and ninety-nine thousand more than two silver coins a year. The so-called case, that is, let the rich farmers pay the capital and can do the

古文：议上，帝乃传谕： 流寇延蔓，生民涂炭，不集兵无以平寇，不增赋无以饷兵。
现代文：奏议上报，皇帝于是传出告示： 流寇到处蔓延，平民百姓的生命受到威胁，不征集部队不能够平定流寇，不增赋税不能够提供军饷。
English: After the report was submitted, the emperor then issued a proclamation: the roving bandits were spreading everywhere, the lives of the common people were threatened, the roving bandits could not be quelled without recruiting troops, and the military pay could not be provided without increasing taxes.

古文：勉从廷议，暂累吾民一年，除此腹心大患。
现代文：努力听从朝廷的建议，暂且劳累我的臣民一年，消除这个心腹大患。
English: I will try my best to listen to the advice of the Imperial Court, and temporarily wear out my subjects for one year to eliminate this major problem.

古文：其改因粮为均输，布告天下，使知为民去害之意。 
现代文：改 因粮 为 均输 ，告诉天下人民，让他们知道为民除害的心意。 
English: Change the cause of grain to uniform loss, tell the people of the world, let them know the will to eliminate harm to the people.

古文：寻议诸州县练壮丁捍本土，诏抚按饬行。
现代文：不久讨论各州县操练壮丁捍卫本乡本土，下诏抚按申饬执行。
English: It was soon discussed that the states and counties should train young men to defend their hometowns and the mainland, and the following edict was implemented according to the petition.

古文：贼攻淅川，左良玉不救，城陷。
现代文：农民军进攻淅川，左良玉不救援，淅川城失陷。
English: Peasants' army attacked Lugu River, Sadayotama did not come to the rescue, and Lugu River Castle fell.

古文：山西总兵王忠援河南，称疾不进，兵噪而归。
现代文：山西总兵王忠增援河南，称病不前进，士兵喧哗闹事然后返回陕西。
English: Shanxi general soldier Wang Zhong reinforces Henan, saying that the disease does not advance, the soldiers make a lot of noise and then return to Shaanxi.

古文：嗣昌请逮戮失事诸帅，以肃军令，遂逮忠及故总兵张全昌。
现代文：杨嗣昌请求逮捕杀死失责的各将帅，用以严肃军纪，于是逮捕王忠及原总兵张全昌。
English: Yang Shichang requested the arrest of the generals who killed and failed to fulfill their responsibilities in order to enforce strict military discipline. Wang Zhong and the former commander Zhang Quanchang were then arrested.

古文：良玉以六安功，落职戴罪自赎。
现代文：左良玉因为六安的战功，削职戴罪立功赎罪。
English: Zuo Liangyu, because of his war exploits in Lu'an, had to give up his post to atone for his crimes.

古文：嗣昌既建 四正六隅 之说，欲专委重文灿，文灿顾主抚议，与前策牴牾。
现代文：杨嗣昌在上书以四地为主、六地为辅的 十面之网 的主张后，想专门将重要职位交给熊文灿。熊文灿却主张招抚，跟前面的策略相矛盾。
English: After Yang Shichang published his proposal of a ten-faceted network with four regions as the main and six regions as the auxiliary, he wanted to specifically give important positions to Xiong Wencang. Xiong Wencang, however, advocated the use of persuasion, contradicting the previous strategy.

古文：帝谯让文灿，嗣昌亦心望。
现代文：皇帝责怪熊文灿，杨嗣昌也在心里埋怨他。
English: The emperor blamed Xiong Wencang, and Yang Shichang also complained about him in his heart.

古文：既已任之，则曲为之解，乃上疏曰： 网张十面，必以河南、陕西为杀贼之地。
现代文：但既然已经任用了他，就歪曲事实为他辩解。
English: But now that he has been appointed, they are distorting the facts to justify him.

古文：然陕有李自成、惠登相等，大部未能剿绝，法当驱关东贼不使合，而使陕抚断商、雒，郧抚断郧、襄，安抚断英、六，凤抚断亳、颍，而应抚之军出灵、陕，保抚之军渡延津。
现代文：于是上疏说： 网开十面，一定用河南、陕西作为剿灭盗贼的地方，然而陕西有李自成、惠登相等人，大部分没有剿灭干净，方法应当是驱赶关东的盗贼，不让他们汇合在一起，而让陕西巡抚截断商州、洛南，郧阳巡抚截断郧阳、襄阳，安庆巡抚截断英山、六安，凤阳巡抚截断亳州、颍州，而让应天巡抚的军队开到灵宝、陕州，保定巡抚的军队渡过延津。
English: Therefore, Shang Zuo said, "If you open the ten sides of the net, you must use Henan and Shaanxi as the place to exterminate the thieves. However, there are Li Zicheng, Hui Deng Xiang and others in Shaanxi, and most of them have not been completely exterminated. The method should be to drive out the thieves in Guandong and prevent them from merging together, and let the Shaanxi governor cut off Shangzhou, Lonan, the Poyang governor cut off Poyang and Xiangyang, the Anqing governor cut off Yingshan and Lu'an, the Fengyang governor cut off Ganzhou and Ganzhou, and let the army

古文：然后总理提边兵，监臣提禁旅，豫抚提陈永福诸军，并力合剿。
现代文：然后总理率领边境部队，监臣率领皇城禁卫军，河南巡抚率领陈永福各军，合力围剿。
English: Then the prime minister led the border troops, the overseer led the imperial city guards, and the Henan governor led Chen Yongfu's troops to jointly encircle the city.

古文：若关中大贼逸出关东，则秦督提曹变蛟等出关协击。
现代文：假若关中大盗逃往关东，那么陕西总督率曹变蛟等部出关协助攻击。
English: If the bandits in Guanzhong fled to Guandong, then the Governor of Shaanxi Province, led by Cao Zhenyao, and other departments would go to Guanzhong to assist the attack.

古文：期三月尽诸剧寇。
现代文：要求在三个月之内荡平各大盗。
English: They demanded that all major thieves be brought to justice within three months.

古文：巡抚不用命，立解其兵柄，简一监司代之；总兵不用命，立夺其帅印，简一副将代之；监司、副将以下，悉以尚方剑从事。
现代文：巡抚不听命令，立即解除他的兵权，选择一名监司代替他。总兵不听调遣，立即剥夺他的帅印，选择一名副将代替他。监司、副将以下，全部用尚方宝剑自行处置。
English: If the inspector does not obey the order, he will be immediately relieved of his military authority and a supervisor will be selected to replace him. If the general does not listen to the dispatch, he will be immediately deprived of his seal and a vice-general will be selected to replace him. The supervisor, vice-general and below will all be disposed of by Shangfang Sword.

古文：则人人效力，何贼不平。 
现代文：那么人人都会尽力，有什么盗贼不能平定的。 
English: Then everyone will do their best, what thieves can not be pacified.

古文：乃克今年十二月至明年二月为灭贼之期。帝可其奏。
现代文：于是限定今年十二月到明年二月为消灭盗贼的期限，皇帝同意他的报告。
English: So he set a deadline of December this year to February next year for the elimination of thieves, and the emperor agreed to his report.

古文：是时，贼大入四川，朝士尤洪承畴纵贼。
现代文：这时，农民军大批进入四川，朝臣们指责洪承畴放纵盗贼。
English: At this time, the peasant army entered Sichuan in large numbers, and the courtiers accused Hong Chengzhuang of indulging the thieves.

古文：嗣昌因言于帝曰： 熊文灿在事三月，承畴七年不效。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是对皇帝说： 熊文灿上任只有三个月，洪承畴有七年还不见成效。
English: Yang Shichang then said to the emperor: "Xiong Wencang has only been in office for three months, and Hong Chengzhuang has been in office for seven years and has not achieved any results.

古文：论者绳文灿急，而承畴纵寇莫为言。 
现代文：议论的人对熊文灿的过失急于纠正，可是对于洪承畴放纵敌人却没有人说话。 
English: Commentators are eager to correct Xiong Wencang's mistakes, but no one is talking about Hong Chengzho's indulgence of the enemy.

古文：帝知嗣昌有意左右之，变色曰： 督、理二臣但责成及时平贼，奈何以久近藉之口！ 
现代文：皇帝知道杨嗣昌有意袒护他，发脾气说： 总督、总理二臣只能责备他们及时平定盗贼，怎么能拿时间的长短作为借口！ 
English: The emperor knew that Yang Shichang intended to protect him, and he lost his temper and said: The governor, the prime minister and the two ministers can only blame them for putting down the thieves in time, how can they use the length of time as an excuse!

古文：嗣昌乃不敢言。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是不敢说话。
English: Yang Shichang did not dare to speak.

古文：文灿既主抚议，所加饷天子遣一侍郎督之，本藉以剿贼，文灿悉以资抚。帝既不复诘，廷臣亦莫言之。
现代文：熊文灿既然主张招抚，追加的粮饷由皇帝派一名侍郎监督，本来是用来剿抚农民军的，熊文灿全部将它用于招抚，皇帝既然不再斥责他，廷臣也就没有人提这件事。
English: Since Xiong Wencang advocated appeasement, the emperor sent an attendant to supervise the additional grain, which was originally used to appease the peasant army. Xiong Wencang used it all for appeasement. Since the emperor no longer rebuked him, no courtier mentioned the matter.

古文：至明年三月，嗣昌以灭贼逾期，疏引罪，荐人自代。
现代文：到第二年二月，杨嗣昌因为消灭农民军的期限已过，上疏承担过错，推荐别人代替自己。
English: By February of the following year, since Yang Shichang's deadline for eliminating the peasant army had passed, Shang So took the blame and recommended someone else to replace him.

古文：帝不许，而命察行间功罪，乃上疏曰： 洪承畴专办秦贼，贼往来秦、蜀自如，剿抚俱无功，不免于罪。
现代文：皇帝不答应，命令检查行动，以查明功罪。于是上疏说： 洪承畴专门对付陕西盗贼。盗贼在陕西、四川之间往来自如，剿灭、招抚都没有功劳，不能免除他的罪责。
English: The emperor did not agree, and ordered to inspect the action to find out the merits and demerits. So Shang Shu said: Hong Chengzhuang specifically dealt with the Shaanxi thieves. The thieves came from Shaanxi and Sichuan, and there was no merit in annihilating or enticing them, which could not absolve him of his guilt.

古文：熊文灿兼办江北、河南、湖广贼，抚刘国能、张献忠，战舞阳、光山，剿抚俱有功，应免罪。
现代文：熊文灿同时对付江北、河南、湖广的强盗，招抚刘国能、张献忠，在舞阳、光山打仗，剿灭、招抚都有功绩，应该免于处分。
English: Xiong Wencang dealt with the bandits in Jiangbei, Henan and Hukang at the same time, attracted Liu Guoneng and Zhang Xianzhong, fought in Muyang and Guangshan, and had achievements in annihilation and attraction. He should be exempted from punishment.

古文：诸巡抚则河南常道立、湖广余应桂有功，陕西孙传庭、山西宋贤、山东颜继祖、保定张其平、江南张国维、江西解学龙、浙江喻思恂有劳，郧阳戴东旻无功过，凤阳朱大典、安庆史可法宜策励图功。
现代文：各巡抚之中，河南常道立、湖广余应桂有功绩，陕西孙传庭、山西宋贤、山东颜继祖、保定张其平、江南张国维、江西解学龙、浙江喻思恂有功劳，郧阳戴东无功也无过，凤阳朱大典、安庆史可法应该鞭策鼓励他们立功。
English: Among the governors, Henan Changdoling and Huguang Yu Yinggui have made great achievements, Shaanxi Sun Chuanting, Shanxi Song Xian, Shandong Yan Jizhu, Baoding Zhang Qiping, Jiangnan Zhang Guowei, Jiangxi Le Xue Long, Zhejiang Yu Siyu have made great achievements, Fenyang Daidong has made great achievements, Fengyang Zhu Dadian and Anqing Shi Kofa should encourage them to make great achievements.

古文：总兵则河南左良玉有功，陕西曹变蛟、左光先无功，山西虎大威、山东倪宠、江北牟文绶、保定钱中选有劳无功，河南张任学、宁夏祖大弼无功过。
现代文：总兵里面，河南左良玉有功，陕西曹变蛟、左光先没有功，山西虎大威、山东倪宠、江北牟文绶、保定钱中选有劳无功，河南张任学、宁夏祖大弼没有功也没有过。
English: Among the total soldiers, Zuo Liangyu from Henan Province was meritorious, Cao Zhenya and Zuo Guangxian from Shaanxi Province were not meritorious, Hu Dawei from Shanxi Province, Ni Zhaotong from Shandong Province, Mufeng from Jiangbei Province and Qian from Baoding Province were meritorious but not meritorious, Zhang Renhu from Henan Province and Zuo Daxian from Ningxia Province were not meritorious and not meritorious.

古文：承畴宜遣逮，因军民爱戴，请削宫保、尚书，以侍郎行事。
现代文：洪承畴应该逮捕，因为军民爱戴他，请求削去他宫保、尚书的官职，以侍郎的身份执行任务。
English: Hong Chengzheng should be arrested, because the military and the people love him, and request that he be stripped of his official posts of palace guard and secretary, and carry out his duties as a waiter.

古文：变蛟、光先贬五秩，与大弼期五月平贼，逾期并承畴逮治。
现代文：曹变蛟、左光先降五级官，跟祖大弼一起以五个月为期，限定他们平定盗贼，超过期限连同洪承畴一起逮捕法办。
English: Cao Zhengyuan and Zuo Guang were the first to be demoted to the fifth rank, and together with Zu Dajuan, they were sentenced to a five-month term, limiting them to subdue the thieves. If they exceeded the time limit, they would be arrested and prosecuted together with Hong Chengzhuang.

古文：大典贬三秩，可法戴罪自赎。 
现代文：朱大典降三级官，史可法戴罪立功。 
English: Zhu Datian was demoted to a third-grade official, but he was still able to do meritorious service.

古文：议上，帝悉从之。
现代文：建议提交上去后，皇帝全都同意了。
English: After the plan was reported, the emperor agreed to everything.

古文：嗣昌既终右文灿，而文灿实不知兵。
现代文：杨嗣昌既然自始至终袒护熊文灿。而熊文灿实际上并不懂军事。
English: Since Yang Shichang has been protecting Xiong Wencang from beginning to end, Xiong Wencang does not really understand military affairs.

古文：既降国能、献忠，谓抚必可恃。
现代文：招降刘国能、张献忠之后，认为招抚一定可行。
English: After recruiting and demoting Liu Guoneng and Zhang Xianzhong, it is believed that recruiting and demoting is definitely feasible.

古文：嗣昌亦阴主之，所请无不曲徇，自是不复言 十面张网 之策矣。
现代文：杨嗣昌也私下里坚持这样做，凡是有所请求没有不曲意顺从的，从此以后不再说 十面张网 的计策了。
English: Yang Shichang also insisted on doing this in private. From now on, anyone who had a request and did not comply with it, would no longer talk about the strategy of "spreading the net in all directions."

古文：是月，帝御经筵毕，嗣昌奏对有 善战服上刑 等语，帝怫然，诘之曰： 今天下一统，非战国兵争比。小丑跳梁，不能伸大司马九伐之法，奈何为是言？ 
现代文：这个月，皇帝听完讲经后，杨嗣昌的奏对有 善战服上刑 的话。皇帝很不高兴，责问他说： 当今天下统一，不是战国时各国交战的局势所能相比，对于这些跳梁小丑，不能运用大司马制裁诸侯违犯王命行为的九种办法，你怎么说出这样的话来？ 
English: This month, after the emperor had listened to the sermon, Yang Shichang's recitation of the nine methods of sanctioning the behavior of the princes in violation of the king's order made him very unhappy. The emperor scolded him, saying, "When today's unification is not comparable to the situation of the warring states at the time of the warring states, you cannot use the nine methods of sanctioning the behavior of the princes in violation of the king's order for these clowns jumping the beam. How can you say such a thing?"

古文：嗣昌惭。
现代文：杨嗣昌很惭愧。
English: Yang Shichang is very ashamed.

古文：当是时，流贼既大炽，朝廷又有东顾忧，嗣昌复阴主互市策。
现代文：正在这个时候，农民军的势力已经日益昌盛，朝廷又有东顾之忧，杨嗣昌又暗中主张互相交易的计策。
English: At this time, the power of the peasant army had become increasingly prosperous, the imperial court was worried about the East, and Yang Shichang secretly advocated the strategy of mutual trade.

古文：适太阴掩荧惑，帝减膳修省，嗣昌则历引汉永平、唐元和、宋太平兴国事，盖为互市地云。
现代文：恰好月亮遮住了火星，皇帝减少饮食修身反省，杨嗣昌就一一援引汉代永平年间、唐代元和年间、宋代太平兴国年间的事例，作为互相交易的例证。
English: The moon just happened to cover Mars, and the emperor reduced his diet and reflected on his self-cultivation. Yang Shichang cited the examples of the Han Dynasty Yongping years, the Tang Dynasty Yuanwu years, and the Song Dynasty Taiping Xingguo years as examples of mutual trade.

古文：给事中何楷疏驳之，给事中钱增、御史林兰友相继论列，帝不问。
现代文：给事中何楷上疏反驳他，给事中钱增、御史林兰友相继列举事例辩论，皇帝不过问。
English: The emperor didn't ask any questions, as Ho Kai Shang Soh refuted him, Qian Zeng and Gu Xilin Lanyou successively listed cases for debate.

古文：六月，改礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入参机务，仍掌兵部事。
现代文：六月改任礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参予机要事务，仍然掌管兵部的事情。
English: In June, he was reappointed as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Donggak University, and participated in important affairs, still in charge of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：嗣昌既以夺情入政府，又夺情起陈新甲总督，于是楷、兰友及少詹事黄道周抗疏诋斥，修撰刘同升、编修越士春继之。
现代文：杨嗣昌已在没服完丧期情况下进入政府，又将正在服丧的陈新甲起用为总督。于是何楷、林兰友及少詹事黄道周上疏诋毁驳斥他，修撰刘同升、编修赵士春跟着上疏。
English: Yang Shichang had already entered the government without completing the mourning period, and appointed Chen Xinjia, who was in mourning, as the governor. Therefore, He Kai, Lin Lanyou and Shao Zhanjie defamed and refuted him on the first day of the week, and the author Liu Tongsheng and the editor Zhao Shichun followed.

古文：帝怒，并镌三级，留翰林。
现代文：皇帝发怒，将他们降职三级，留任翰林。
English: The emperor was so angry that he demoted them to the third grade and kept them in Hanlin.

古文：刑部主事张若麒上疏丑诋道周，遂镌道周六级，并同升、士春皆谪外。
现代文：刑部主事张若麒上疏羞辱诋毁黄道周，于是降黄道周六级官，连同刘同升、赵士春一起都流发到外地。
English: The head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Zhang Ruoxuan, humiliated and slandered the Zodiac Week, so he demoted the Zodiac Saturday-level officials, and together with Liu Tongsheng and Zhao Shichun, they were all exiled to other places.

古文：已而南京御史成勇、兵部尚书范景文等言之，亦获谴。
现代文：不久南京御史成勇、兵部尚书范景文等人说他的坏话，也都被谴责。
English: Not long after, Nanjing goshi Chengyong, military commander Shangshu Fan Jingwen and others said bad things about him, and they were all condemned.

古文：嗣昌自是益不理于人口。
现代文：杨嗣昌从此更加有恃无恐，不再理会别人对他的指责。
English: Since then, Yang Shichang has become more fearless and no longer pays attention to others' criticisms of him.

古文：我大清兵入墙子岭、青口山，蓟辽保定总督吴阿衡方醉，不能军，败死。
现代文：我大清兵进入墙子岭、青口山，蓟、辽、保定总督吴阿衡正好喝醉了，不能指挥作战，失败阵亡。
English: My Great Qing soldiers entered Wanziling and Qingkou Mountain. Wu Aheng, the governor of Handan, Liao, and Baoding, happened to be drunk, unable to command the battle, and died in defeat.

古文：京城戒严，召卢象升帅师入卫。
现代文：北京城戒严，召卢象升率领部队回来保卫京城。
English: Beijing was placed under martial law, and Lu Xiangsheng was summoned to lead the troops back to defend the capital.

古文：象升主战，嗣昌与监督中官高起潜主款，议不合，交恶。
现代文：卢象升主张作战，杨嗣昌和监督宦官高起潜主张和议，意见不合，关系十分紧张。
English: Lu Xiangsheng advocated war, while Yang Shichang and the supervising eunuch Gao Zhixing advocated peace. Their opinions were at odds, and the relationship was very tense.

古文：编修杨廷麟劾嗣昌误国，嗣昌怒，改廷麟职方主事监象升军，而戒诸将毋轻战。
现代文：编修杨廷麟弹劾杨嗣昌误国。杨嗣昌很恼怒，改派杨廷麟为职方主事以监督卢象升的军队，而告诫各将领不要轻易出战。
English: The editor Yang Tinglin impeached Yang Shichang for misleading the country. Yang Shichang was very angry and reassigned Yang Tinglin as the head of the staff to supervise Lu Xiangsheng's army, and warned the generals not to go to war easily.

古文：诸将本恇怯，率藉口持重观望，所在列城多破。
现代文：各将本来就胆怯，都以此为借口拥兵观望，驻守的列城都被攻破。
English: All generals were timid by nature, and used this as an excuse to watch the soldiers, and the garrisoned cities were breached.

古文：嗣昌据军中报，请旨授方略。
现代文：杨嗣昌根据军中的报告，请求传旨授给方法谋略。
English: Yang Shichang, according to the report of the middle of the army, requested the method of conferring the order.

古文：比下军前，则机宜已变，进止乖违，疆事益坏云。
现代文：等到圣旨传到军中，形势已发生了变化，仍按计划行事，一切都与实际不符，边疆的形势更加危急了。
English: By the time the edict reached the army, the situation had changed, but they continued to act according to the plan. Everything did not correspond to reality, and the situation on the frontier became even more critical.

古文：象升既阵亡，嗣昌亦贬三秩，戴罪视事。
现代文：卢象升阵亡后，杨嗣昌也被降了三级官，让他戴罪主持战事。
English: After Lu Xiangsheng was killed in battle, Yang Shichang was also demoted to a third-level official, making him bear the crime of presiding over the war.

古文：十二年正月，济南告陷，德王被执，游骑北抵兖州。
现代文：崇祯十二年正月，济南失陷，德王被活捉，骑兵先头部队直抵兖州。
English: In the first month of the twelfth year of Chongzhen, Jinan fell, De Wang was captured alive, and the cavalry's leading troops arrived in Ganzhou.

古文：二月，大清兵北旋，给事中李希沆言： 圣明御极以来，北兵三至。
现代文：二月，大清兵胜利返回北方，给事中李希沆说： 皇上登位以来，北方军队三次进逼京城。
English: In February, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty returned to the north in triumph, to which Li Xizhe said: Since the emperor ascended the throne, the northern army has entered the capital three times.

古文：己巳之罪未正，致有丙子；丙子之罪未正，致有今日。 
现代文：己巳的罪过没有得到纠正，所以有丙子的罪过。丙子的罪过没有纠正，以致有今日。 
English: His sin was not corrected, so there was the sin of the third son. The sin of the third son was not corrected, so that there is today.

古文：语侵嗣昌。
现代文：言语涉及到杨嗣昌。
English: The words refer to Yang Shichang.

古文：御史王志举亦劾嗣昌误国四大罪，请用丁汝夔、袁崇焕故事。
现代文：御史王志举也揭发杨嗣昌误国的四大罪状，请求按照丁汝夔、袁崇焕的先例办理。
English: Wang Zhizhi also exposed the four major crimes of Yang Shichang's misrule of the country and requested that the case be handled in accordance with the precedents of Ding Ruxuan and Yuan Chonghuan.

古文：帝怒，希沆贬秩，志举夺官。
现代文：皇帝发怒，李希沆贬职，王志举被剥夺官职。
English: The emperor was furious, Li Xizhe was demoted, and Wang Zhiju was deprived of his official position.

古文：初，帝以嗣昌才而用之，非廷臣意，知其必有言，言者辄斥。
现代文：当初，皇帝认为杨嗣昌有才就任用他，不是廷臣的意思。知道廷臣必然有话说，议论他的人都被排斥。
English: At first, the emperor thought that Yang Shichang had the talent to appoint him, not the courtiers. Knowing that courtiers must have something to say, everyone who talked about him was excluded.

古文：嗣昌既有罪，帝又数逐言官，中外益不平。
现代文：杨嗣昌既然有罪，而皇帝又多次驱逐言官，朝廷内外更加愤愤不平。
English: Since Yang Shichang was guilty, and the emperor had expelled the speaker several times, there was even more indignation inside and outside the court.

古文：嗣昌亦不自安，屡疏引罪，乃落职冠带视事。
现代文：杨嗣昌自己也感到不安，多次上疏承担罪责，于是撤销职务冠带，处理事情。
English: Yang Shichang himself also felt uneasy, repeatedly failing to take responsibility for the crime, so he revoked his position and dealt with the matter.

古文：未几，以叙功复之。
现代文：没有多久，因为追叙功绩又官复原职。
English: It didn't take long for the officer to be reinstated due to a merit review.

古文：先是，京师被兵，枢臣皆坐罪。
现代文：在这之前，北京城被围困，枢臣都因此受连累。
English: Prior to this, Beijing was besieged, and the imperial court suffered as a result.

古文：二年，王洽下狱死，复论大辟。
现代文：崇祯二年，王洽下狱死，又追论判他大辟的刑罚。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Wang Chaiming was sentenced to death in prison, and he was given a heavy sentence.

古文：九年，张凤翼出督师，服毒死，犹削籍。
现代文：九年，张凤翼出外督师，服毒自杀，还剥夺了他的官籍。
English: In the ninth year, Zhang Fengyi went abroad as an inspector, took poison and committed suicide, and was stripped of his official status.

古文：及是，亡七十余城，而帝眷嗣昌不衰。
现代文：到现在，被敌人占领了七十多座城市。而皇帝仍然宠爱杨嗣昌不衰减。
English: Up to now, more than seventy cities have been occupied by the enemy, and the emperor still loves Yang Shichang unabated.

古文：嗣昌乃荐四川巡抚傅宗龙自代。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是推荐四川巡抚傅宗龙代替自己。
English: Yang Shichang then recommended the Sichuan governor Fu Zonglong to replace him.

古文：帝命嗣昌议文武诸臣失事罪，分五等：曰守边失机，曰残破城邑，曰失陷藩封，曰失亡主帅，曰纵敌出塞。
现代文：皇帝命令杨嗣昌评议文武各臣失责的罪行，分为五等，一为守边丧失时机，二为残破城邑，三为失陷土地，四为主帅临阵逃亡，五为纵敌出塞。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Shichang to evaluate the crimes of dereliction of duty of the ministers of literature and military affairs, divided into five classes, one for losing the opportunity to defend the border, two for ruined cities and towns, three for lost land, four for fleeing from the front, and five for fleeing from the enemy.

古文：于是中官则蓟镇总监邓希诏、分监孙茂霖，巡抚则顺天陈祖苞、保定张其平、山东颜继祖，总兵则蓟镇吴国俊、陈国威，山东倪宠，援剿祖宽、李重镇及他副将以下，至州县有司，凡三十六人，同日弃市。
现代文：于是宦官则有蓟镇总监邓希诏、分监孙茂霖，巡抚则有顺天陈祖苞、保定张其平、山东颜继祖，总兵则有蓟镇吴国俊、陈国威，山东倪宠，援剿祖宽、李重镇以及其他副将以下，到各州县的有关官员，一共三十六人，同一天被杀弃市。
English: As a result, the eunuchs included Deng Xizhao, the director of Yingzhen, and Sun Maolin, the sub-supervisor; the inspectors included Shuntian Chen Zuyu, Baoding Zhang Qiping, and Shandong Yan Jizu; and the soldiers included Wu Guojun, Chen Guowei, Shandong Ni Diao, Ying Yuzhuan, Li Chongzhen, and other vice-generals from Yingzhen, and other relevant officials from various states and counties. A total of thirty-six people were killed and abandoned the city on the same day.

古文：而嗣昌贬削不及，物议益哗。
现代文：而杨嗣昌毫发无损，议论更加哗然。
English: Yang Shichang, however, emerged unscathed, and the discussion became even more heated.

古文：当戒严时，廷臣多请练边兵。
现代文：正当京城戒严的时候，很多廷臣都请求操练边境兵。
English: At a time when the capital was under martial law, many courtiers asked for border guards to be trained.

古文：嗣昌因定议：宣府、大同、山西三镇兵十七万八千八百有奇，三总兵各练万，总督练三万，以二万驻怀来，一万驻阳和，东西策应。余授镇监、巡抚以下分练。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是确定方案，宣府、大同、山西三镇兵共有十七万八千八百多人，三个总兵各练一万兵，总督练三万兵。用二万兵驻守怀来，一万兵驻守阳和，东西策应，其余的交给镇监、巡抚以下分别操练。
English: Yang Shichang then decided on a plan. A total of more than 178,800 soldiers from Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi Three Towns will be trained. Each of the three generals will train 10,000 soldiers, and the governor will train 30,000 soldiers. Twenty thousand soldiers will be stationed in Huailai, 10,000 soldiers will be stationed in Yanghe, and the east and west will be coordinated. The rest will be given to the town supervisor, the inspector, and the following to train separately.

古文：延绥、宁夏、甘肃、固原、临兆五镇兵十五万五千七百有奇，五总兵各练万，总督练三万，以二万驻固原，一万驻延安，东西策应。
现代文：延绥、宁夏、甘肃、固原、临洮五镇兵共有十五万五千七百多人。五总兵各练一万兵，总督练三万兵。用二万兵驻守固原，一万兵驻守延安，东西策应。
English: There were a total of more than 155,700 soldiers from the five towns of Yancheng, Ningxia, Gansu, Gouyuan and Linyi. Each of the five generals trained ten thousand soldiers, and the governor-general trained thirty thousand soldiers. Twenty thousand soldiers were stationed in Gouyuan, and ten thousand soldiers were stationed in Yan'an, covering the east and west.

古文：余授巡抚、副将以下分练。
现代文：其余的交给巡抚、副将以下分别操练。
English: The rest will be handed over to the governor and vice-governor, who will practice separately as follows.

古文：辽东、蓟镇兵二十四万有奇，五总兵各练万，总督练五万，外自锦州，内抵居庸，东西策应。
现代文：辽东、蓟镇兵共有二十四万多人，五个总兵各练一万兵，总督练五万兵。外面起自锦州，里面抵达居庸关，东西策应。
English: There are more than 240,000 soldiers in Liaodong and Shanzhen. Each of the five commanders-in-chief trains 10,000 soldiers, and the commander-in-chief trains 50,000 soldiers. They start from Jinzhou on the outside, and arrive at Juyongguan on the inside, and plan for the east and west.

古文：余授镇监、巡抚以下分练。
现代文：其余的交给镇监、巡抚以下分别操练。
English: The rest were handed over to the town supervisor, the patrolman and the following to practice separately.

古文：汰通州、昌平督治二侍郎，设保定一总督，合畿辅、山东、河北兵，得十五万七千有奇，四总兵各练二万，总督练三万，北自昌平，南抵河北，闻警策应。
现代文：废除通州、昌平督治二个郡，增设保定总督，合并畿辅、山东、河北的兵力，共得十五万七千多人，四总兵各练二万，总督练三万。北边起自昌平，南边抵达河北，听到警报策应。
English: The Tongzhou and Changping Commands were abolished, the Governor of Baoding was added, and the forces of Kifu, Shandong, and Hebei were combined, resulting in a total of more than 157,000 troops, with each of the four commanders training 20,000 soldiers and the commander-in-chief training 30,000 soldiers. The northern side started from Changping, and the southern side arrived in Hebei, and heard the alarm.

古文：余授巡抚以下分练。又以畿辅重地，议增监司四人。
现代文：其余的交给巡抚以下分别操练，又因为畿辅地位重要，建议增加四名监司。
English: The rest were given to the governor and below to practice separately, and because of the importance of the Kievan status, it was recommended to add four supervisors.

古文：于是大名、广平、顺德增一人，真定、保定、河间各一人。
现代文：于是大名、广平、顺德共增设一人，真定、保定、河间各增加一人。
English: As a result, Daimyo, Guangping, and Shunde were all increased by one person, and Jinding, Baoding, and Kawama were each increased by one person.

古文：蓟辽总督下增监军三人。
现代文：蓟、辽东总督以下增设监军三人。
English: , the Governor of Liaodong, and three additional supervisors.

古文：议上，帝悉从之。
现代文：方案报上后，皇帝一切照准。
English: After the plan was reported, the emperor agreed to everything.

古文：嗣昌所议兵凡七十三万有奇，然民流饷绌，未尝有实也。
现代文：杨嗣昌确立的方案共有七十三万多。然而人员流失，军饷不足，从来没有达到过此数。
English: The plan established by Yang Shichang has a total of more than 730,000. However, the loss of personnel and shortage of military pay have never reached this number.

古文：帝又采副将杨德政议，府汰通判，设练备，秩次守备，州汰判官，县汰主簿，设练总，秩次把总，并受辖于正官，专练民兵。
现代文：皇帝又采纳副将杨德政的建议，府废除通判，增设练备，官级低于守备，州废除判官，县废除主簿，增设练总，官级低于把总，一起受正官管辖，专门操练民兵。
English: The emperor also adopted the suggestion of Vice Admiral Yang Dezheng, the government abolished the general judgment, increased the training, the official level was lower than the guard, the state abolished the judge, the county abolished the main book, added the general training, the official level was lower than the general, and was subject to the jurisdiction of the official, and specially trained the militia.

古文：府千，州七百，县五百，捍乡土，不他调。
现代文：府一千人，州七百人，县五百人，捍卫本乡本土，不调往别处。
English: One thousand people in the prefecture, seven hundred people in the prefecture, and five hundred people in the county will defend their hometown and the mainland, and will not be transferred elsewhere.

古文：嗣昌以势有缓急，请先行畿辅、山东、河南、山西，从之。
现代文：杨嗣昌以为各地轻重缓急不同，请求先在畿辅、山东、河南、山西实行，皇帝同意了。
English: Yang Shichang thought that the priorities of different regions were different, so he requested that it be implemented first in Kifu, Shandong, Henan and Shanxi, and the emperor agreed.

古文：于是有练饷之议。
现代文：于是有了练饷的议论。
English: So there was a well-rehearsed discussion.

古文：初，嗣昌增剿饷，期一年而止。
现代文：当初，杨嗣昌增派剿饷，以一年为限。
English: At first, Yang Shichang increased the allocation of funds, but only for one year.

古文：后饷尽而贼未平，诏征其半。
现代文：后来粮饷用尽而强盗未平，下诏征收原额的一半。
English: Later, when the grain reserve was exhausted and the bandits were not defeated, the government decided to collect half of the original amount.

古文：至是，督饷侍郎张伯鲸请全征。
现代文：到这时，督饷侍郎张伯鲸请求全部征收。
English: At this time, the steward's servant Zhang Bokwhale asked for the entire collection.

古文：帝虑失信，嗣昌曰： 无伤也，加赋出于土田，土田尽归有力家，百亩增银三四钱，稍抑兼并耳。 
现代文：皇帝担心失信于民，杨嗣昌说： 不要紧的，加派的赋税来自土地，土地都被富家大户占领了，百亩土地增收三四钱银子，还可以稍微压抑土地兼并。 
English: The emperor was worried about losing the trust of the people, Yang Shichang said: It doesn't matter, the tax increase comes from the land, the land is all occupied by rich families, a hundred mu of land will increase by three or four coins, and land annexation can also be slightly suppressed.

古文：大学士薛国观、程国祥皆赞之。
现代文：大学士薛国观、程国祥都赞同他。
English: College graduates Xue Guojun and Cheng Guoxiang both agree with him.

古文：于是剿饷外复增练饷七百三十万。
现代文：于是在剿饷之外又增加练饷七百三十万两。
English: So, in addition to the, another 7.3 million won was added to the.

古文：论者谓： 九边自有额饷，概予新饷，则旧者安归？
现代文：有人说： 九边原本有一定数额的军饷，全部发给新增的军饷，那么原来的官饷到哪里去了？
English: Some people said: Jiubei originally had a certain amount of military pay, all of which was distributed to new military pay, so where did the original official pay go?

古文：边兵多虚额，今指为实数，饷尽虚糜，而练数仍不足。
现代文：边境部队多有虚额，现在都看作是足数，军饷全都浪费了，而练兵的数量仍然不足。
English: The border troops, many of which are overstretched, are now seen as a sufficient number, the military pay has all been wasted, and the number of trained soldiers is still insufficient.

古文：且兵以分防不能常聚，故有抽练之议，抽练而其余遂不问。
现代文：况且部队因为分地设防不能经常聚集在一起，所以有抽练的议论，抽练了而其他事情又不管了。
English: Moreover, the troops could not always gather together because of the separation of the fortifications, so there was a discussion of drills, drills and other things did not matter.

古文：且抽练仍虚文，边防愈益弱。
现代文：况且抽练又是虚文，边防每况愈下了。
English: Moreover, the drills are a sham, and the border defense is getting worse and worse.

古文：至州县民兵益无实，徒糜厚饷。 
现代文：至于州县民兵更加名不符实，白白地浪费国家钱财。 
English: As for the state and county militias, their names are even more untrue, and they waste the country's money.

古文：以嗣昌主之，事钜莫敢难也。
现代文：因为是杨嗣昌主持的，事体太大没有谁敢发难。
English: Because it is presided over by Yang Shichang, the matter is too big and no one dares to make trouble.

古文：神宗末增赋五百二十万，崇祯初再增百四十万，总名辽饷。
现代文：神宗末年增加赋税五百二十万，崇祯初年再增加一百四十万，一起称作 辽饷 。
English: In the last year of Shenzong, the tax was increased by 5.2 million yuan, and in the first year of Chongzhen, the tax was increased by another 1.4 million yuan, both of which are called Liaozhen.

古文：至是，复增剿饷、练饷，额溢之。先后增赋千六百七十万，民不聊生，益起为盗矣。
现代文：到这时，又增派剿饷、练饷，规定的数目更加滥了，前后增加赋税一千六百七十万两，民不聊生，更多的人揭竿而起成为盗贼了。
English: At this time, the number of cadres and cadres was increased, and the prescribed number was even more extravagant. The tax was increased by 16.7 million taels, and the people were not satisfied with life, and more people took up arms and became thieves.

古文：五月，熊文灿所抚贼张献忠反谷城，罗汝才等九营皆反。
现代文：五月，熊文灿招抚的强盗张献忠在谷城反叛，罗汝才等九营都反了。
English: In May, the bandit Zhang Xianzhong, who was courted by Xiong Wencang, rebelled in Guicheng, and nine battalions including Luo Rucai rebelled.

古文：八月，傅宗龙抵京，嗣昌解部务，还内阁。未几，罗犭英山败书闻。
现代文：八月，傅宗龙抵北京，杨嗣昌被解除部里的职务，回到内阁，不久，罗犭英山失败的消息传来。
English: In August, Fu Zonglong arrived in Beijing, Yang Shichang was relieved of his duties in the ministry and returned to the cabinet, and soon, the news of Luo Qian Yingshan's defeat came.

古文：帝大惊，诏逮文灿。
现代文：皇帝极为震惊，下诏逮捕熊文灿。
English: The emperor was extremely shocked and ordered the arrest of Xiong Wencang.

古文：特旨命嗣昌督师，赐尚方剑，以便宜诛赏。
现代文：特别降旨命令杨嗣昌统帅部队，赐予尚方宝剑，相机实行赏与罚。
English: Yang Shichang, commander-in-chief of the troops, was specially ordered to give Shangfang a sword, and the camera was rewarded and punished.

古文：九月朔，召见平台。嗣昌曰： 君言不宿于家，臣朝受命，夕启行，军资甲仗望敕所司遄发。 
现代文：九月初一，皇上在平台召见他，杨嗣昌说： 皇上的话不留在家过夜，臣早晨接受命令，傍晚就出发，军用物资器械希望皇上下令有关部门迅速发下来。 
English: On the first day of September, the emperor summoned him to the platform. Yang Shichang said: The emperor told me not to stay at home overnight. The vassal received the order in the morning and set out in the evening. I hope the emperor will order the relevant departments to send the military supplies and equipment quickly.

古文：帝悦，曰： 卿能如此，朕复何忧。 
现代文：皇帝很高兴，说： 爱卿能够如此，朕还有什么可担心的呢。 
English: The emperor was very pleased and said, "If Ai Qing can do this, then I have nothing to worry about."

古文：翊日，赐白金百、大红絺丝四表里、斗牛衣一、赏功银四万、银牌千五百、币帛千。
现代文：第二天，赏赐白金百两，大红丝四套，斗牛衣一件，银子四万两，银牌一千五百个，帛币一千。
English: The next day, he was awarded one hundred taels of platinum, four sets of red silk, one bullfighting costume, forty thousand taels of silver, one thousand five hundred silver medals, and one thousand taels of money.

古文：嗣昌条七事以献，悉报可。
现代文：杨嗣昌列举七件事报告给皇帝，都同意了。
English: Yang Shichang listed seven things to report to the emperor, and they all agreed.

古文：四日召见赐宴，手觞三爵，御制赠行诗一章。
现代文：四日召见他为他设宴饯行，皇帝亲手进了三爵酒，御制赠行诗一章。
English: On the fourth day, he summoned him to hold a banquet for him. The emperor personally drank the third lord's wine and presented him with a chapter of the poem.

古文：嗣昌跪诵，拜且泣。
现代文：杨嗣昌跪着朗诵，一边拜一边哭。
English: Yang Shichang kneeled and recited, crying as he bowed.

古文：越二日，陛辞，赐膳。
现代文：过了二天，向皇帝辞行，赐给他用膳。
English: Two days later, he submitted his resignation to the emperor and was given a meal.

古文：二十九日抵襄阳，入文灿军。文灿就逮，嗣昌犹为疏辩云。
现代文：二十九日抵达襄阳，进入熊文灿军中，熊文灿被捕，杨嗣昌还在为他上疏辩解。
English: On the 29th, he arrived in Yangyang and entered the army of Xiong Wencang. Xiong Wencang was arrested, and Yang Shichang was still defending him.

古文：十月朔，嗣昌大誓三军，督理中官刘元斌，湖广巡抚方孔召，总兵官左良玉、陈洪范等毕会。
现代文：十月初一日，杨嗣昌大誓三军，督理宦官刘元斌，湖广巡抚方孔火召，总兵官左良玉、陈洪范等人都到会。
English: On the first day of October, Yang Shichang made a solemn oath to the three armies, and Liu Yuanbin, the eunuch in charge of supervision, Fang Konghuo, the governor of Hunan and Guangxi Provinces, and the general officers Zuo Liangyu and Chen Hongfan all attended the meeting.

古文：贼贺一龙等掠叶，围沈丘，焚项城之郛，寇光山。
现代文：农民军贺一龙等人夺取叶县，包围沈丘，放火烧了项城的外城，侵略光山。
English: The peasant army of He Yilong and others captured Ye County, surrounded Shenqiu, set fire to the outer city of Xiangcheng, and invaded Guangshan.

古文：副将张琮、刁明忠率京军逾山行九十里，及其巢。
现代文：副将张琼、刁明忠率领北京部队翻山越岭行军九十里，到达敌人老巢。
English: Vice Generals Zhang Qiong and Zou Mingzhong led the Beijing troops on a ninety-mile march through the mountains and reached the enemy's lair.

古文：先驱射贼，殪绛袍而驰者二人，追奔四十里，斩首千七百五十。
现代文：先驱赶射击敌人，射死二个穿红袍骑马奔跑的人，追击逃敌四十里，斩首一千七百五十。
English: The vanguard chased and shot the enemy, shot dead two men in red robes who were running on horseback, chased the fleeing enemy for forty miles, and beheaded seventeen hundred and fifty.

古文：嗣昌称诏颁赐。
现代文：杨嗣昌举诏书颁发赏赐。
English: Yang Shichang issued an imperial edict to award the prize.

古文：十一月，兴世王王国宁以众千人来归，受之于襄阳，处其妻子樊城。
现代文：十一月，兴世王王国宁率千人来归附，在襄阳接受他，把他的妻子、儿女安排在樊城。
English: In November, Xing Shi Wang Wang Guo Ning led a thousand people to join him, received him in Xiangyang, and arranged for his wife and children to join him in Lucheng.

古文：表良玉平贼将军。
现代文：表彰左良玉讨平贼将军。
English: Commendation to General Zuo Liangyu for defeating the bandits.

古文：诸将积骄玩，无斗志。
现代文：各将日益放纵而轻敌，丧失斗志。
English: Each side will become increasingly indulgent and dismissive of the other side, losing morale.

古文：献忠、罗汝才、惠登相等八营遁郧阳、兴安山间，掠南漳、谷城、房、竹山、竹溪。
现代文：张献忠、罗汝才、惠登相等八营顺着郧阳、兴安的山间小道，攻打南漳、谷城、房县、竹山、竹溪。
English: Zhang Xianzhong, Luo Rucai, Hui Deng and other eight battalions followed the mountain paths of Fenyang and Xing'an to attack Nanlu, Gucheng, Fangxian, Zhushan and Zhuxi.

古文：嗣昌劾逮孔召，奏辟永州推官万元吉为军前监纪，从之。
现代文：杨嗣昌鞭打刁明忠，杀死监军佥事殷大白来示众。发布檄文给巡抚方孔火召，奏请惩办永州推官万元吉为军前监督法纪，皇帝同意了。
English: Yang Shichang whipped Zou Mingzhong and killed the overseer of the army, and the incident was widely publicized. An imperial edict was issued calling on the governor to punish the Yongzhou magistrate Yuanji for supervising military discipline, and the emperor agreed.

古文：当是时，李自成潜伏陕右，贺一龙、左金王等四营跳梁汉东，嗣昌专剿献忠。
现代文：正在这时，李自成潜伏陕西，贺一龙、左金王等四营活跃在汉水以东地区。杨嗣昌专门围剿张献忠。
English: At this time, Li Zicheng was hiding in Shaanxi, and He Yilong, Zuo Jinwang and other four battalions were active in the east of Hanshui. Yang Shichang specifically surrounded Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：献忠屡败于兴安，求抚，不许。
现代文：张献忠在兴安多次被打败，要求投降，不同意。
English: Zhang Xianzhong was defeated many times in Xing'an. He asked for surrender, but was refused.

古文：其党托天王常国安、金翅鹏刘希原来降，献忠走入川，良玉追之。嗣昌牒令还，良玉不从。十三年二月七日，与陕西副将贺人龙、李国奇夹击献忠于玛瑙山，大破之，斩馘三千六百二十，坠岩谷死者无算。
现代文：他的同党托天王常国安、金翅鹏刘希原来投降，张献忠逃往四川，左良玉追击他，杨嗣昌写信命令他回师，左良玉不听，崇祯十三年二月七日与陕西副将贺人龙、李国奇在玛瑙山夹击张献忠，大败张献忠，斩首三千六百二十。掉下悬岩山谷死亡的不计其数。
English: His co-partisans Tong Tianwang Chang Guoan and Jin Ying Peng Liu Xi originally surrendered, Zhang Xianzhong fled to Sichuan, Zuo Liangyu chased him, Yang Shichang wrote a letter ordering him to return to his division, Zuo Liangyu did not listen, and on February 7th, Chongzhen 13th year, he and Shaanxi Vice Generals He Renlong and Li Guoqi clamped down on Zhang Xianzhong on Manaoshan Mountain, defeated Zhang Xianzhong, and beheaded 3620. The number of deaths from falling down the hanging rock valley is incalculable.

古文：其党扫地王曹威等授首，十反王杨友贤率众降。
现代文：他的同党扫地王曹威等人被杀，十反王杨友贤率众人投降。
English: His comrade Wang Cao Wei, the scavenger, and others were killed, and Yang Youxian, the rebel leader, led all the people to surrender.

古文：是月也，帝念嗣昌，发银万两犒师，赐斗牛衣、良马、金鞍各二。
现代文：这个月，皇帝惦念杨嗣昌，发放银子万两犒劳军队，赐给他斗牛衣、良马、金鞍各二。
English: This month, the emperor paid tribute to Yang Shichang by awarding him silver worth 10,000 taels of silver for his military service, and gave him a bullfighting costume, a fine horse, and a golden saddle, two of each.

古文：使者甫出国门，而玛瑙山之捷至，大悦，再发银五万，币帛千犒师。
现代文：使者刚出都城门，而玛瑙山的捷报传到。皇帝十分高兴，再次拨给银子五万两，帛币一千犒劳部队。
English: The messenger had just left the gate of the capital, and the news of the victory of the agate mountain arrived. The emperor was very happy and once again allocated fifty thousand taels of silver and one thousand taels of silver to the laboring troops.

古文：论功，加太子少保。
现代文：论功行赏，加封太子少保。
English: As a reward for his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of Crown Prince and Minor Protector.

古文：而湖广将张应元、汪之凤败贼水石坝，获其军师。
现代文：而湖广将领张应元、汪之凤在水右坝打败敌人，抓获了敌军师。
English: However, Hukang generals Zhang Yingyuan and Wang Zhifeng defeated the enemy at Shuiyouba and captured the enemy division.

古文：四川将张令、方国安败之千江河。
现代文：四川将领张令、方国安在千江河获胜。
English: Sichuan generals Zhang Ling and Fang Guoan won in Qianjiang River.

古文：李国奇、贺人龙等败之寒溪寺、盐井。
现代文：李国奇、贺人龙等人在寒溪寺、盐井获胜。
English: Li Guoqi, He Ronglong and others won in Hanxi Temple and Yanjing.

古文：川、陕、湖广诸将毕集，复连败之黄墩、木瓜溪，军声大振。
现代文：四川、陕西、湖广各将领全部集中，又接连在黄墩、木瓜溪打了胜仗，军队声威大振。
English: The generals of Sichuan, Shaanxi, and Hunan were all concentrated, and they successively fought victorious battles in Huangpi and Muguaxi, and the army's prestige was greatly enhanced.

古文：汝才、登相求抚，献忠持之，敛兵南漳、远安间，杀安抚官姚宗中，走大宁、大昌，犯巫山，为川中患。
现代文：罗汝才、惠登相请求招抚，张献忠控制了他们，在南漳、远安间收拢部队，杀死安抚官姚宗中，跑到大宁、大昌，进犯巫山，成为四川一带的灾祸。
English: Luo Rucai and Hui Dengxiang asked for appeasement, Zhang Xiantong controlled them, gathered troops in Nanlu and Yuan'an, killed the pacification officer Yao Zongzhong, ran to Daning and Dachang, invaded Wushan, and became a disaster in Sichuan.

古文：献忠遁兴安、平利山中，良玉围而不攻，贼得收散亡，由兴安、房县走白羊山而西，与汝才等合。
现代文：张献忠顺着兴安、平利山间行进，左良玉围而不攻，敌人得以收拾失散逃亡的人，由兴安、房县直奔白羊山向西逃跑，跟罗汝才等人汇合。
English: Zhang Xianzhong marched along the mountains of Xing'an and Pingli, encircled Zuo Liangyu without attacking, and the enemy was able to gather up the scattered fugitives. He fled westward from Xing'an and Fang County straight to Mount Baiyang, and met up with Luo Rucai and others.

古文：嗣昌以群贼合，其势复张，乃由襄阳赴夷陵，扼其要害。
现代文：杨嗣昌认为群贼汇合在一起，他们的势力一定又会强大起来，于是由襄阳赶往夷陵，控制要害地形。
English: Yang Shichang thought that if the bandits gathered together, their power would surely become strong again, so he rushed from Xiangyang to Yiling to control the critical terrain.

古文：帝念嗣昌行间劳苦，赐敕发赏功银万，赐鞍马二。
现代文：皇帝惦念杨嗣昌行军劳苦，下令赐给他赏功银一万两、鞍马二匹。
English: The emperor remembered Yang Shichang's hard work in the march and ordered that he be awarded ten thousand taels of silver and two saddle horses.

古文：罢郧阳抚治王鳌永，诏废将猛如虎军前立功。
现代文：罢免郧阳抚治王鳌永，下诏让被废除的将领猛如虎在军前立功。
English: He dismissed the Shanyang Fuzhi Wang Xingyong, and ordered that the abolished generals, fierce as tigers, should make meritorious contributions to the army.

古文：黄得功、宋纪大破贼商城，贺一龙五大部降而复叛。
现代文：黄得功、宋纪在商城大败农民军，贺一龙五大部投降之后又反叛了。
English: Huang Dergong and Song Ji defeated the peasant army in Shangcheng, and He Yilong's Five Departments rebelled after surrendering.

古文：郑嘉栋、贺人龙大破汝才、登相开县。
现代文：郑嘉栋、贺人龙在开县大败罗汝才、惠登相。
English: Zheng Jiadong and He Renlong defeated Luo Rucai and Hui Dengxiang in Kaishan.

古文：汝才偕小秦王东奔，登相越开县而西，自是二贼始分。
现代文：罗汝才随同小秦王一起向东逃跑，惠登相经过开县向西退却，从此二部农民军才分开。
English: Luo Ru only escaped to the east with Xiao Qin Wang, and Hui Deng Xiang retreated to the west through Kaishan. From then on, the two peasant armies separated.

古文：当是时，诸部士马居山谷，罹炎暑瘴毒，物故十二三。
现代文：这个时候，各部兵马居山谷，遭遇酷暑瘴毒，死去的十分之二、三。
English: At this time, the various departments of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses lived in the valley, suffered from heatstroke and poisoning, and two-thirds of them died.

古文：京兵之在荆门、云南兵之在简坪、湖广兵之在马蝗坡者，久屯思归，夜亡多。
现代文：北京部队在荆门、云南部队在简坪、湖广部队在马蝗坡，长期驻守都想回家，晚上逃跑的很多。
English: The Beijing troops in Jingmen, the Yunnan troops in Jianping, and the Hukang troops in Ma Locust Slope all want to go home after being stationed for a long time, and many of them run away at night.

古文：关河大旱，人相食，土寇蜂起，陕西窦开远、河南李际遇为之魁，饥民从之，所在告警。嗣昌以闻。帝发帑金五万，营医药，责诸将进兵。
现代文：关河大旱，人吃人，土寇蜂起，其中以陕西窦开运、河南李际遇最著名。饥饿的百姓都投奔他们，所到之处都报警告急，杨嗣昌向上面报告，皇帝发给国库银五万两，谋求医药，要求各将领进兵。
English: Guanhe drought, man-eat-man, Turk Uprising, the most famous of which was the beginning of the campaign in Shaanxi Dou and the Li Ji encounter in Henan. Hungry people all rushed to them, and everywhere they went they reported an emergency warning, Yang Sychang reported to the above, the emperor sent fifty thousand taels of silver to the treasury, sought medicine, and demanded that all generals enter the army.

古文：而陕之长武，川之新宁、大竹，湖广之罗田又相继报陷。
现代文：而陕西的长武，四川的新宁、大竹，湖广的罗田又相继报告失陷。
English: However, Changwu in Shaanxi, Shining, Datu in Sichuan, and Luotian in Hukang have successively reported the loss of their peaks.

古文：嗣昌乃下招抚令，为谕帖万纸，散之贼中。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是下达招抚的命令，写了上万张告示，在农民军中散发。
English: Yang Shichang then issued an order to appease, wrote tens of thousands of notices, and distributed them among the peasant army.

古文：七月，监军孔贞会等大破汝才丰邑坪。
现代文：七月，监军孔贞会在丰邑坪大败罗汝才。
English: In July, the supervising army of Kong Zhengyi defeated Luo Rucai in Fengyiping.

古文：其党混世王、小秦王率其下降，贼魁整十万及登相、王光恩亦相继降，于是群贼尽萃于蜀中。
现代文：他的同党混世王、小秦王率领部下投降，农民军首领整十万和惠登相、王光恩也相继投降。于是农民军集中到了四川。
English: His fellow party member, the half-breed king, Xiao Qin Wang, led his subordinates to surrender, and the leaders of the peasant army, the whole hundred thousand, Hui Deng Xiang, and Wang Guangen also surrendered one after another. So the peasant army was concentrated in Sichuan.

古文：嗣昌遂入川，以八月泛舟上，谓川地厄塞，诸军合而蹙之，可尽殄。
现代文：杨嗣昌于是进入四川，在八月份乘舟溯江而上，认为四川为四塞之地，各路大军合围困住他，可以全部歼灭。
English: Yang Shichang then entered Sichuan and sailed up the Yangtze River in August, believing that Sichuan was a land of four rivers, and that the armies of all directions would encircle and trap him, so that they could all be destroyed.

古文：而人龙以秦师自开县噪而西归，应元等败绩于夔之土地岭，献忠势复张，汝才与之合。
现代文：而贺人龙率陕西部队从开县叫嚷吵闹着向西回去了。张应元等人在夔门土地岭被打败，张献忠势力又强盛起来，罗汝才跟他汇合。
English: However, the Shaanxi troops led by He Renlong went back to the west from Kai County, shouting and noisily. Zhang Yingyuan and others were defeated in the Qimen Land Ridge, Zhang Xiantu's forces became strong again, and Luo Ru finally joined him.

古文：闻督师西，遂急趋大昌，犯观音岩，守将邵仲光不能御，遂突净壁，陷大昌。
现代文：听说官军向西开拔，于是急忙向大昌进发，侵犯观音岩，守将邵仲光抵挡不住，于是突击净壁，攻陷大昌。
English: Hearing that the government army was advancing westward, they hurriedly marched toward Dachang, encroaching on Guanyin Rock. The guard general Shao Zhongguang could not resist, so he stormed the wall and captured Dachang.

古文：嗣昌斩仲光，劾逮四川巡抚邵捷春。
现代文：杨嗣昌将邵仲光斩首，弹劾逮捕四川巡抚邵捷春。
English: Yang Shichang beheaded Shao Zhongguang and impeached and arrested the Sichuan governor Shao Jechun.

古文：贼遂渡河至通江，嗣昌至万县。
现代文：农民军于是渡河到通江，杨嗣昌到万县，农民军攻巴州不下。
English: The peasant army then crossed the river to Tongjiang, Yang Shichang to Wanshan, and the peasant army attacked Bazhou.

古文：贼攻巴州不下，嗣昌至梁山，檄诸将分击。贼已陷剑州，趋保宁，将由间道入汉中。
现代文：杨嗣昌到梁山，传令各将分兵出击。农民军已攻陷剑州，直奔保宁，准备由小路进入汉中。
English: Yang Shichang arrived at Liangshan and sent out detachments of soldiers. The peasant army had captured Jianzhou and headed straight for Boryeong, preparing to enter Hanzhong by the back roads.

古文：赵光远、贺人龙拒之，贼乃转掠，陷梓潼、昭化，抵绵州，将趋成都。
现代文：赵光远、贺人龙抵抗，农民军于是转而抢劫，攻陷梓潼、昭化，到达绵州，准备奔向成都。
English: Zhao Guangyuan and He Renlong resisted, so the peasant army turned to robbery, invaded Zizhou and Zhaohua, reached Mianzhou, and prepared to rush to Chengdu.

古文：十一月，嗣昌至重庆。贼攻罗江，不克，走绵竹。
现代文：十一月，杨嗣昌到达重庆，农民军进攻罗江，没有攻下，跑到绵竹。
English: In November, Yang Shichang arrived in Chongqing. The peasant army attacked Luojiang, but did not capture it, and ran to Mianzhu.

古文：嗣昌至顺庆，诸将不会师。
现代文：杨嗣昌到达顺庆，各将不会师。
English: Yang Shichang arrives in Shunqing, but no one will be able to follow him.

古文：贼转掠至汉州，去中江百里，守将方国安避之去，贼遂纵掠什邡、绵竹、安县、德阳、金堂间，所至空城而遁，全蜀大震。
现代文：农民军转攻到汉州，离中江一百里，守将方国安避敌离开，农民军于是肆意抢掠于什邡、绵竹、安县、德阳、金堂之间。所到之处将城市抢劫一空然后离去，整个四川都受到极大震动。
English: The peasant army turned to attack Hanzhou, a hundred miles from the Middle River, and the commander Fang Guoan left to avoid the enemy. The peasant army then looted and plundered freely between Shifang, Mianzhu, An County, Deyang, and Jindo. Everywhere they went, they looted the city and then left, and the whole of Sichuan was greatly shaken.

古文：贼遂由水道下简州、资阳。
现代文：农民军于是由水路下简州、资阳。
English: The peasant army then marched from the waterway to Jianzhou and Ziyang.

古文：嗣昌征诸将合击，皆退缩。
现代文：杨嗣昌召集各将合击，都退缩不前。
English: Yang Shichang called the generals together for a joint attack, but they all retreated.

古文：屡征良玉兵，又不至。
现代文：多次征召左良玉的部队，又不到来。
English: The troops of Zuo Liangyu were repeatedly called up, but they did not come.

古文：贼遂陷荣昌、永川。
现代文：农民军于是攻陷荣昌、永川。
English: As a result, the peasant army captured Rongchang and Yongchuan.

古文：十二月，陷泸州。
现代文：十二月，攻陷泸州。
English: In December, it invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：自贼再入川，诸将无一邀击者。
现代文：自从农民军第二次进入四川，各将没有一个主动出击的。
English: Since the peasant army entered Sichuan for the second time, no one has taken the initiative to attack.

古文：嗣昌虽屡檄，令不行。
现代文：杨嗣昌虽然多次传布檄文，命令得不到执行。
English: Although Yang Shichang repeatedly spread the slander, the order could not be carried out.

古文：其在重庆也，下令赦汝才罪，降则授官，惟献忠不赦，擒斩者赉万金，爵侯。
现代文：当他在重庆时，下令赦免罗汝才的罪行，如果投降就授给他官职，只有张献忠不赦免，将他活捉斩首的赏赐银子一万两，封侯爵。
English: When he was in Chongqing, he ordered that Luo Rucai's crimes be pardoned, and if he surrendered, he would be given an official post. Only Zhang Xianzhong would not be pardoned. If he was captured alive and beheaded, he would be rewarded with ten thousand taels of silver and made a marquis.

古文：翌日，自堂皇至庖湢，遍题 有斩督师献者，赉白金三钱 ，嗣昌骇愕，疑左右皆贼，勒三日进兵。
现代文：第二天，从办事的大厅到厨房角落到处都写着： 有谁斩督师进献的，赏给他白金三钱。 杨嗣昌感到很惊讶，怀疑左右的人都是盗贼，勒令三天内进兵。
English: The next day, from the office lobby to the corner of the kitchen, it was written everywhere: "Whoever insults the superintendent will be rewarded with three pieces of platinum." Yang Shichang was very surprised, suspected that everyone around him was a thief, and ordered him to march into the army within three days.

古文：会雨雪道断，复戒期。
现代文：正好碰到下雪阻断道路交通，又改变了日期。
English: Just in time for snow to snarl road traffic, they've changed the date again.

古文：三檄人龙，不奉令。
现代文：三次传令贺人龙，贺人龙都不接受命令。
English: Three times the herald herald dragon, the herald dragon did not accept the order.

古文：初，嗣昌表良玉平贼将军，良玉浸骄，欲贵人龙以抗之。
现代文：当初，杨嗣昌表彰左良玉为平贼将军，左良玉逐渐骄傲起来，杨嗣昌想抬高贺人龙来对抗左良玉。
English: At first, Yang Shichang commended Zuo Liangyu for being a thief general. Zuo Liangyu gradually became proud. Yang Shichang wanted to elevate He Renlong to fight against Zuo Liangyu.

古文：既以玛瑙山功不果，人龙愠，反以情告良玉，良玉亦愠，语载良玉、人龙传。
现代文：因为玛瑙山的战功没有得到好的报答，贺人龙心怀怨恨，反而把杨嗣昌的想法告诉了左良玉，左良玉心里也不高兴。详情参见《左良玉传》、《贺人龙传》。
English: Because the war service of Onyushan was not well rewarded, He Ren Long harbored resentment, but instead told Yang Shichang's idea to Zuo Liangyu, and Zuo Liangyu was not happy. For details, see "The Legend of Zuo Liangyu" and "The Legend of He Ren Long."

古文：嗣昌虽有才，然好自用，躬亲簿书，过于繁碎。
现代文：杨嗣昌虽然有才能，但喜欢刚愎自用。对于文书信札都亲自过问，过于繁杂琐碎。
English: Although he is talented, Yang Shichang likes to be self-sufficient. He personally inspects all the documents and labels, which are too complicated and trivial.

古文：军行必自裁进止，千里待报，坐失机会。
现代文：军队行动一定要自己决定前进或停留，千里等待报告，往往坐失良机。
English: Military operations must decide on their own whether to advance or stay. Waiting thousands of miles for a report is often a missed opportunity.

古文：王鳌永尝谏之，不纳。
现代文：王鳌永曾规劝过他，他不采纳。
English: Wang Qianyong had advised him, but he did not accept.

古文：及鳌永罢官，上书于朝曰： 嗣昌用师一年，荡平未奏，此非谋虑之不长，正由操心之太苦也。
现代文：王鳌永罢官后向朝廷上书说： 杨嗣昌指挥作战已有一年，还没传来荡平盗贼的捷报，这并不是没有谋略计划，而正是由于操心太苦的缘故。
English: After Wang Qianyong was dismissed from his post, he wrote to the imperial court, "Yang Shichang has been in command of the battle for one year, but there has been no report of success in leveling the thieves. This is not because there is no strategic plan, but precisely because of worrying too much.

古文：天下事，总挈大纲则易，独周万目则难。
现代文：天下大事，总领大纲就容易，一个人想面面俱到就困难。
English: It is easy to lead the general outline of the world's major events, but it is difficult for a person to do everything.

古文：况贼情瞬息更变，今举数千里征伐机宜，尽出嗣昌一人，文牒往返，动逾旬月，坐失事机，无怪乎经年之不战也。
现代文：况且敌人的情况瞬息万变，现在数千里之间征伐的机宜，全出自杨嗣昌一人之手，文书往返，动不动就超过十天半月，坐失歼敌的时机，难怪过了年还找不到获胜的战斗。
English: Moreover, the situation of the enemy is rapidly changing. The ability to conquer thousands of miles now comes entirely from the hand of Yang Shichang. The paperwork takes more than ten and a half months to go back and forth, and the opportunity to annihilate the enemy is lost. It is no wonder that after a year, there is still no victorious battle.

古文：其间能自出奇者，惟玛瑙山一役。
现代文：在这期间能够出奇制胜的，只有玛瑙山一仗。
English: During this period, only the Battle of Manaus was able to achieve a surprise victory.

古文：若必遵督辅号令，良玉当退守兴安，无此捷矣。
现代文：假如一定要遵守督辅的号令，左良玉应当退守兴安，就没有这次胜利了。
English: If we had to obey the order of the superintendent and assistant superintendents that Zuo Liangyu should retreat to Xing'an, there would have been no victory this time.

古文：臣以为陛下之任嗣昌，不必令其与诸将同功罪，但责其提衡诸将之功罪。
现代文：微臣以为陛下任命杨嗣昌，不一定让他跟各将一样，同等对待，只看他提拔衡量各将有没有功罪。
English: The minor vassal thought that since His Majesty had appointed Yang Shichang, He did not necessarily have to treat him the same way as the generals. He only promoted the generals according to their merits and demerits.

古文：嗣昌之驭诸将，不必人人授以机宜，但核其机宜之当否，则嗣昌心有余闲，自能决奇制胜。何至久延岁月，老师糜饷为哉？ 
现代文：杨嗣昌驾驭各将，不一定要向每个人都传授机宜，只检查他们的计划方案是不是适当。那么杨嗣昌就不至于操劳过度，自然能够出奇制胜了，何至于拖延时间，拖垮了军队又浪费粮饷啊！ 
English: Yang Shichang controlled the generals, he didn't have to teach everyone how to do things, he only had to check whether their plans were appropriate. Then Yang Shichang wouldn't be overworked and would naturally be able to win unexpectedly. What a waste of time, dragging down the army and wasting grain!

古文：先是，嗣昌以诸将进止不一，纳幕下评事元吉言，用猛如虎为总统，张应元副之。
现代文：在这之前，杨嗣昌因为各将行动不能统一，采纳幕下评事元吉的建议，任用猛如虎为总统，张应元为副总统。
English: Prior to this, Yang Shichang, because the actions of each leader could not be unified, adopted the suggestion of the under-the-scenes commentator Yuan Ji and appointed Meng Rugao as president and Zhang Yingyuan as vice-president.

古文：比贼入泸州，如虎及贺人龙、赵光远军至，贼复渡南溪，越成都，走汉州、德阳、绵州、剑州、昭化至广元，又走巴州、达州。
现代文：等敌人进入泸州，猛如虎和贺人龙、赵光远的部队到达，敌人又渡过南溪，经过成都，直奔汉州、德阳、绵州、剑州、昭化到达广元，又奔向巴州、达州。
English: When the enemy entered Bozhou, fierce as a tiger, and the troops of He Renlong and Zhao Guangyuan arrived, the enemy crossed the Nanxi River, passed through Chengdu, went straight to Hanzhou, Deyang, Mianzhou, Jianzhou, and Zhaohua to reach Guangyuan, and then ran to Bazhou and Dazhou.

古文：诸军疲极，惟如虎军蹑其后。
现代文：各军都很疲惫，只有猛如虎的部队还悄悄地跟在后面。
English: All the armies are exhausted, only the fierce tiger troops are still quietly following behind.

古文：十四年正月，嗣昌知贼必出川，遂统舟师下云阳，檄诸军陆行追贼。
现代文：崇祯十四年正月，杨嗣昌得知敌人一定会离开四川，于是率舟师到云阳，传令各军从陆路追击敌人。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of Chongzhen, Yang Shichang learned that the enemy would definitely leave Sichuan, so he led the boat division to Yunyang and ordered the troops to pursue the enemy by land.

古文：人龙军既噪而西，顿兵广元不进，所恃惟如虎。
现代文：贺人龙部鼓噪着向西边前进后，在广元屯兵不前，杨嗣昌能够依靠的只有猛如虎。
English: After He Ren Longbu noisily advanced to the west, Yang Shichang could only rely on fierce as a tiger in Guangyuan.

古文：比与贼战开县、黄陵城，大败，将士死亡过半。
现代文：等到在开县、黄陵城同敌人交战，被打得大败，官兵死亡超过半数。
English: They waited until they fought with the enemy in Kai County and Huangling City, where they were soundly defeated and more than half of the officers and soldiers were killed.

古文：如虎突围免，马骡关防尽为贼有。
现代文：猛如虎突围出来免于一死，马匹、物资、关防全部被叛贼占有。
English: Like a tiger, he broke out of the encirclement and was saved from death. The horses, supplies, and customs were all occupied by the traitors.

古文：初，贼窜南溪，元吉欲从间道出梓潼，扼归路以待贼。
现代文：当初，农民军逃窜南溪，元吉想从小路出梓潼，控制回来的道路等待敌人。
English: At first, the peasant army fled to Nanxi, and Yuanji wanted to escape from the path, control the road back and wait for the enemy.

古文：嗣昌檄诸军蹑贼疾追，不得拒贼远，令他逸。
现代文：杨嗣昌传令各军跟在敌军后面猛追，不能离敌人太远，让敌人从别处逃走了。
English: Yang Shichang ordered the troops to chase after the enemy troops, not to be too far away from the enemy, and let the enemy escape from other places.

古文：诸将乃尽从泸州逐后尘。
现代文：各将于是全部从泸州出发追赶敌人。
English: They will all set out from Zhangzhou to chase the enemy.

古文：贼折而东返，归路尽空，不可复遏，嗣昌始悔不用元吉言。贼遂下夔门，抵兴山，攻当阳，犯荆门。
现代文：敌人回过头来向东逃跑，回来的路上全没有设防，不能够阻止住敌人，杨嗣昌这才后悔没有采纳元吉的建议，农民军于是沿江下夔门，抵达兴山，进攻当阳，侵犯荆门。
English: The enemy turned around and fled to the east. There were no fortifications on the way back, unable to stop the enemy. This made Yang Shichang regret that he did not accept the suggestion of Yuanji. The peasant army then went along the lower Yamen River, arrived at Xingshan, attacked Dangyang, and invaded Jingmen.

古文：嗣昌至夷陵，檄良玉兵，使十九返。
现代文：杨嗣昌到夷陵，传令左良玉出兵，使者往返有十九次之多。
English: Yang Shichang went to Yiling, and sent a messenger to Zuo Liangyu to dispatch troops. The messenger went back and forth as many as nineteen times.

古文：良玉撤兴、房兵趋汉中，若相避然。
现代文：左良玉撤走兴山、房县部队直奔汉中，好像有意避开敌军的样子。
English: Zuo Liangyu withdrew from Xingshan, Fang County troops headed straight to Hanzhong, as if deliberately avoiding the enemy.

古文：贼所至，烧驿舍，杀塘卒，东西消息中断。
现代文：农民军所到之处，烧旅馆，杀死驻守堤防的士兵，东西间的信息中断。
English: The peasant army went everywhere, burned hotels, killed soldiers stationed on the embankment, and information between East and West was interrupted.

古文：郧阳抚治袁继咸闻贼至当阳，急谋发兵。
现代文：郧阳抚治袁继咸听到农民军到了当阳，赶忙想方设法派出军队。
English: Fuzhi Yuan Jixian, the governor of Dangyang, heard that the peasant army had arrived in Dangyang, and hurried to find a way to send troops.

古文：献忠令汝才与相持，而自以轻骑一日夜驰三百里，杀督师使者于道，取军符。
现代文：张献忠命令罗汝才跟他纠缠，自己却率领轻骑兵一日一夜急行军三百里，在中途杀死督师的使者，拿走了军符。
English: Zhang Xiantong ordered Luo Rucai to entangle with him, but he himself led the light cavalry to march three hundred miles one day and one night, killing the superintendent's messenger in the middle and taking away the military insignia.

古文：以二月十一日抵襄阳近郊，用二十八骑持军符先驰呼城门督师调兵，守者合符而信，入之。
现代文：在二月十一日抵达襄阳近郊，派二十八名骑兵拿着军符先奔跑高喊着督师要调集部队，守城的士兵取过军符与另一半相合就相信了他们，让他们进入城内。
English: On February 11, he arrived at the outskirts of Xiangyang and sent 28 cavalrymen to run ahead with military badges, shouting that the superintendent should mobilize the troops. The soldiers guarding the city believed them after they took the military badges and met the other half, and let them enter the city.

古文：夜半从中起，城遂陷。
现代文：到了半夜，在城中起事，襄阳城因此陷落了。
English: At midnight, there was a riot in the city, and Xiangyang City fell as a result.

古文：献忠缚襄王置堂下，属之酒，曰： 吾欲断杨嗣昌头，嗣昌在远。
现代文：张献忠把襄王捆了丢在堂下，给他酒，说： 我想割杨嗣昌的人头，杨嗣昌在远处。
English: Zhang Xianzhong tied up Yang Wang, threw him under the hall, gave him wine, and said, "I want to cut off Yang Shichang's head. Yang Shichang is far away."

古文：今借王头，俾嗣昌以陷藩伏法。王努力尽此酒。 
现代文：现在借你襄王的头，使杨嗣昌因为失陷封王的土地而伏法，襄王努力喝完这杯酒。 
English: Now, let me borrow your King Xiang's head, so that Yang Shichang will bow to the law because of the loss of the land of the king, and King Xiang will try his best to finish this glass of wine.

古文：遂害之。
现代文：于是杀害了他。
English: So they killed him.

古文：未几，渡汉水，走河南，与贺一龙、左金王诸贼合。
现代文：不久，渡过汉水，直奔河南，跟贺一龙、左金王各支农民军汇合。
English: Soon, he crossed the Han River and went straight to Henan Province to join He Yilong and Zuo Jinwang's peasant armies.

古文：嗣昌初以襄阳重镇，仞深沟方洫而三环之，造飞梁，设横枑，陈利兵而讥诃，非符要合者不得渡。
现代文：杨嗣昌当初以为襄阳是军事重镇，环城挖了三条很深的护城河，造天桥，在城门前设置栅栏，布置精锐士兵设防，进出都要传呼口令，不是军符相合的不能够过桥进城。
English: At first, Yang Shichang thought that Yangyang was a military stronghold. He dug three very deep moats around the city, built a flyover, set up a fence in front of the city gate, arranged elite soldiers to set up fortifications, and required passers-by to enter and exit. Those who did not match the military emblem could not cross the bridge into the city.

古文：江、汉间列城数十，倚襄阳为天险，贼乃出不意而破之。
现代文：江、汉之间大小城市数十个，依靠襄阳为天险，敌人竟然出其不意地攻占了它。
English: There are dozens of large and small cities between the Yangtze River and the Han Dynasty that rely on Xiangyang as a natural hazard, and the enemy unexpectedly captured it.

古文：嗣昌在夷陵，惊悸，上疏请死，下至荆州之沙市，闻洛阳已于正月被陷，福王遇害，益忧惧，遂不食。
现代文：杨嗣昌在夷陵，惊恐害怕，上疏请求赐死，走到荆州的沙市，听说洛阳已在正月失陷，福王遇害，更加担心害怕，于是不进食。
English: Yang Shichang was in Yiling, he was terrified and afraid, he went to Shangzhu to ask for death, he went to Shashi in Jingzhou, he heard that Luoyang had fallen in the first month, Fu Wang was killed, he was even more worried and afraid, so he did not eat.

古文：以三月朔日卒，年五十四。
现代文：死于三月初一日，终年五十四岁。
English: He died on the first day of March, at the age of 54.

古文：廷臣闻襄阳之变，交章论列，而嗣昌已死矣。继咸及河南巡按高名衡以自裁闻，其子则以病卒报，莫能明也。
现代文：廷臣听到襄阳的变化，纷纷上疏列举杨嗣昌的罪行，而杨嗣昌已经死了，袁继咸和河南巡抚高名衡自杀了，他的儿子病死了，消息传来，不知道是真是假。
English: When the courtiers heard of the changes in Yangyang, they enumerated Yang Sychang's crimes one after another, but Yang Sychang had already died, Yuan Jixian and the Henan governor Gao Mingheng had committed suicide, and his son had died of illness. The news came, and they didn't know if it was true or not.

古文：帝甚伤悼之，命丁启睿代督师。
现代文：皇帝很悲伤，命令丁睿代替他做督师。
English: The emperor was very sad and ordered Ding Rui to replace him as inspector.

古文：传谕廷臣： 辅臣二载辛劳，一朝毕命，然功不掩过，其议罪以闻。 
现代文：传谕告廷臣： 辅臣二年辛劳，现在已死，然而功劳不能掩盖罪过，讨论他的罪过上报。 
English: A message was sent to the courtier: The aide-de-camp has worked hard for two years and is now dead, but his merits cannot cover up his sins. Discuss his sins and report them.

古文：定国公徐允祯等请以失陷城寨律议斩。
现代文：定国公徐允祯等人请求以失陷城寨的罪名将他斩首。
English: Dingguogong Xu Yunyao and others requested that he be beheaded on the charge of losing the walled city.

古文：上传制曰； 故辅嗣昌奉命督剿，无城守专责，乃诈城夜袭之檄，严饬再三，地方若罔闻知。
现代文：皇上传命令说： 原辅臣杨嗣昌奉命督剿，不负责专门防守一座城市，发布檄文，再三告诫要防止敌人诈城夜袭，地方上置若罔闻。
English: The emperor issued an order saying: The former aide-de-camp Yang Shichang was ordered to supervise the siege, was not responsible for the special defense of a city, issued a warning, repeatedly warned to prevent the enemy from raiding the city at night, and was ignored by the local authorities.

古文：及违制陷城，专罪督辅，非通论。
现代文：等到违抗命令失陷城市，却专门怪罪督辅一人，这是不公平的。
English: It's not fair to wait until the city falls for disobeying orders, and then blame the assistant superintendent alone.

古文：且临戎二载，屡著捷功，尽瘁殒身，勤劳难泯。 
现代文：况且深入前线二年，多次获得胜利，鞠躬尽瘁，死而后已，他一生的勤劳是难以泯灭的。 
English: Moreover, he has been in the front line for two years, won many victories, bowed down and worked hard, and has died. His life's hard work is indelible.

古文：乃昭雪嗣昌罪，赐祭，归其丧于武陵。
现代文：于是恢复了杨嗣昌的名誉，赐祭，将他的尸体运回武陵埋葬。
English: So he restored Yang Shichang's reputation, offered a sacrifice, and sent his body back to Wuling for burial.

古文：嗣昌先以剿贼功进太子少傅，既死，论临、蓝平盗功，进太子太傅。
现代文：杨嗣昌先后因为剿贼有功，封太子少傅。死后，讨论平定临、蓝盗匪的功劳，加封太子太傅。
English: Yang Shichang was successively awarded the title of crown prince because of his achievements in suppressing the bandits. After his death, the merits of suppressing the Blue Bandits were discussed, and the title of crown prince was added.

古文：廷臣犹追论不已，帝终念之。
现代文：廷臣还在不停地追究，皇帝最终怀念他。
English: The courtiers continued to pursue him, and the emperor eventually pined for him.

古文：后献忠陷武陵，心恨嗣昌，发其七世祖墓，焚嗣昌夫妇柩，断其尸见血，其子孙获半体改葬焉。
现代文：后来张献忠攻占武陵，心中怀恨杨嗣昌。挖了他七代祖宗的坟墓，放火烧了杨嗣昌夫妇的棺材，割裂他的尸体还看得见血，他的子孙都身首异处改葬了。
English: Later, Zhang Xianzhong captured Wuling, harboring hatred for Yang Shichang. He dug the graves of his seven generations of ancestors, set fire to the coffin of Yang Shichang and his wife, cut his body and saw blood, and his children and grandchildren were buried in different places.

