古文：刘昆洼丹任安杨政张兴戴憑孙期欧阳歙牟长宋登张驯尹敏周防孔僖杨伦昔王葬、更始之际，天下散乱，礼乐分崩，典文残落。及光武中兴，爱好经术，未及下车，而先访儒雅，采求阙文，补缀漏逸。先是，四方学士多怀协图书，遁逃林薮。
现代文：◆儒林列传序，从前，在王莽、更始的时候，天下纷纷扰扰，礼乐分崩，内籍文书残缺。光武中兴，爱好经术，还未即帝位，就访求儒雅之士，采集残缺的典文，修补遗漏，收罗散文。以前，四方学人，多怀抱图书，逃入山林。
English: ◆The line of succession of the Confucianism was once disturbed by the world at the time of Wang Mang and Chang Shi, the etiquette and music were destroyed, and the domestic registration documents were incomplete. Guangwu Zhongxing, who was fond of the classics, visited the Confucianists, collected the incomplete texts, repaired the omissions, and collected the prose. Previously, the scholars in the four directions had more books in their arms and fled into the mountains.

古文：自是莫不抱负坟策，云会京师，范升、陈元、郑兴、杜林、卫宏、刘昆、桓荣之徒，继踵而集。
现代文：自此以后，都携带书籍，齐集京师。范升、陈元、郑兴、杜林、卫宏、刘昆、桓荣之流，也相继而来。
English: Since then, they have all brought books and gathered together Beijing teachers. Fan Sheng, Chen Yuan, Zheng Xing, Du Lin, Wei Hong, Liu Kun, and Huan Rong have also come one after another.

古文：于是立《五经》博士，各以家法教授，《易》有施、孟、梁丘、京氏，《尚书》欧阳、大小夏侯，《诗》齐、鲁、韩，《礼》大小戴，《春秋》严、颜、凡十四博士，太常差次总领焉。
现代文：于是国家设立《五经》博士，各人按各人的家法教授学生，《易》有施、孟、梁丘、京氏，《尚书》有欧阳、大小夏侯，《诗》有齐、鲁、韩，《礼》有大小戴，《春秋》有严、颜，共十四博士，太常依次总领。
English: As a result, the state set up the "Five Classics" doctorate, each person according to their family law to teach students, "Yi" has Shi, Meng, Liangqiu, Beijing, "Shangshu" has Ouyang, big and small Xia Hou, "Poetry" has Qi, Lu, Han, "Rite" has big and small Dai, "Spring and Autumn" has Yan, Yan, a total of fourteen doctors, too often in turn leaders.

古文：建武五年，乃修起太学，稽式古典，笾豆干戚之容，备之于列，服方领习矩步者，委它乎其中。
现代文：建武五年，修建太学，考求古代的模式，祭祀用竹做的笾，用木做的豆以及舞蹈所执的盾和钺，都列于太学之中，穿直领学习矩步的诸生，在里面徐徐行走。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, the construction of Taixue, the pursuit of ancient models, the sacrifice of bamboo, the beans made of wood, and the shields and gongs used in the dance are all listed in Taixue. All beings who wear a straight collar and learn to walk slowly are walking slowly in it.

古文：中元元年，初建三雍。
现代文：中元元年，修建了辟雍、明堂、灵台。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, the temples of Biyong, Myeongdong and Lingdae were built.

古文：明帝即位，亲行其礼。
现代文：明帝即位，亲自行礼。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and paid homage in person.

古文：天子始冠通天，衣日月，备法物之驾，盛清道之仪，坐明堂而朝群后，登灵台以望云物，袒割辟雍之上，尊养三老五更。
现代文：天子开始戴通天冠，衣日月星辰之衣，具法物之驾，公不在卤簿，属车三十六乘，用旄头为前驱以清道，坐明堂，朝群后，登灵台，望云物，天子袒衣，亲自切割牲口于辟雍之上，尊养三老五更。
English: The heavenly son began to wear the heavenly crown, the clothing of the sun, the moon and the stars, the driving of the legal things, the public is not in the halo book, the thirty-six rides of the car, the clear road with the hoe, the bright hall, the morning group, the spiritual platform, the cloud-watching thing, the heavenly son's clothing, the personal cutting of the cattle on the top of the mountain, and the respect for the three old men and five younger men.

古文：飨射礼毕，帝正坐自讲，诸儒执经问难于前，冠带缙绅之人，圜桥门而观听者盖亿万计。
现代文：飨食宾客，与诸侯射的礼仪完毕之后，天子正坐讲授，诸儒执经问疑质惑于前，臣下及士大夫，绕桥门观看听讲的，多得不可胜数。
English: After the guests had eaten and the ceremony of exchanging fire with the princes was over, the emperor was giving a lecture, the scholars were busy asking questions, and there were countless subjects and scholars walking around the bridge gate to watch and listen to the lecture.

古文：其后复为功臣子孙、四姓末属别立校舍，搜选高能以受其业，自期门羽林之士，悉令通《孝经》章句，匈奴亦遣子入学。
现代文：这以后，再为功臣子孙，四姓末属另立校舍，挑选有才能的授业，从期门羽林之士，统统使学《孝经》章句，匈奴也派子弟入学。
English: After that, a separate school building was built for the descendants of the meritorious sons and daughters of the last four families, and the talented students were selected and sent to study the chapters of the "Book of Filial Piety" from the descendants of the sons and daughters of the Huns. The Huns also sent their children to the school.

古文：济济乎，洋洋乎，盛于永平矣！建初中，大会诸儒于白虎观，考详同异，连月乃罢。
现代文：美啊！盛大啊！盛在永平啊！建初中，大会诸儒于白虎观，考核同异，一连几个月。
English: Beautiful! Magnificent! Magnificent in Yongping! The junior high school has just been built, and the students are all convinced in the white tiger view, and the assessment is the same, for several months.

古文：肃宗亲临称制，如石渠故事，顾命史臣，著为通义。
现代文：肃宗亲临指示，如宣帝甘露三年与诸儒韦玄成、梁丘贺等讲论于石渠阁故事。命令史臣，著为《白虎通义》。
English: Su Zong personally instructed, for example, Emperor Xuanzong to lecture on the story of the three years of nectar with Zhu Rongwei, Xuancheng, Liang Qiuhe and others at Shiquijie. He ordered the scholar to write "White Tiger."

古文：又诏高才生受《古文尚书》、《毛诗》、《穀梁》、《左氏春秋》，虽不立学官，然皆擢高第为讲郎，给事近署，所以网罗遗逸，博存众家。
现代文：又诏令高才生受《古文尚书》、《毛诗》、《谷梁》、《左氏春秋》，虽不立学官，但是，都擢高第为讲郎，给事近署，这是为了网罗遗漏隐逸，广存众家。
English: In addition, it was decreed that high-achieving students should receive the "Ancient Texts," "Mao Poems," "Guliang" and "The Spring and Autumn of the Zuo Dynasty," and although they would not be appointed as scholars, they would all be promoted to the position of lecturers and given close supervision. This was done in order to catch omissions and absconding, and to ensure the existence of a wide range of families.

古文：孝和亦数幸东观，览阅书林。
现代文：孝和也多次到东观，览阅群书。
English: Takakazu also went to Dongguan many times to read books.

古文：及邓后称制，学者颇懈。
现代文：邓后行使天子权力时，学者多有懈怠。
English: When Emperor Deng exercised the power of the Son of Heaven, scholars mostly slacked off.

古文：时，樊准、徐防并陈敦学之宜，又言儒职多非其人，于是制诏公卿妙简其选，三署郎能通经术者，皆得察举。
现代文：这时，樊准、徐防都上书陈述教学的重要，又说儒职多不胜任，于是诏令公卿慎重选拔，三署郎通经术的，都得到选举。
English: At this time, Zhai Jun and Xu Bao both submitted a letter stating the importance of teaching, and that the Confucianism was not competent. Therefore, the emperor ordered the court nobles to be carefully selected, and the three officials who were versed in Confucianism were all elected.

古文：自安帝览政，薄于艺文，博士倚席不讲，朋徒相视怠散，学舍穨敝，鞠为园蔬，牧兒荛竖，至于薪刈其下。
现代文：安帝听政以后，不讲究艺文，博士倚席不施讲坐，朋徒你看着我，我看着你，游惰散漫，学舍也坏败，成为蔬园，牧童樵夫，在这里采薪刈草。
English: After listening to the government, An Di did not pay attention to the arts and literature, the doctor did not sit in the chair, the pundit looked at me, I looked at you, the idleness was scattered, the schoolhouse was ruined, it became a vegetable garden, the shepherd was a widower, and he was paid to cut grass here.

古文：顺帝感翟酺之言，乃更修黉宇，凡所结构二百四十房，千八百五十室。
现代文：顺帝感于翟酉甫的话，于是重新建立学校，共造二百四十房，一千八百五十室。
English: Emperor Shun was impressed by Sun Fu's words, so he re-established the school, building a total of 240 rooms and 1850 rooms.

古文：试明经下第补弟子，增甲乙之科员各十人，除郡国耆儒皆补郎、舍人。
现代文：考试明经下第补弟子，增加甲乙科员各十人，除郡国耆儒皆补郎、舍人。
English: According to the examination results, the number of supplementary students has been increased by ten for each of Section A and Section B. Except for the county-level cadres, all of them are supplementary students.

古文：本初元年，梁太后诏曰： 大将军下至六百石，悉遣子就学，每岁辄于乡射月一飨会之，以此为常。 
现代文：本初元年，梁太后诏说： 大将军以下至六百石，都派子弟入学，每年就在飨食宾客，与诸侯射的这个月集会，以此为常。 
English: In the first year of this century, Empress Dowager Liang Zhao said: From the general down to the six hundred koku, they all send their children to school, and every year they eat guests, and this month's meeting with the lords, this is normal.

古文：自是游学增盛，至三万余生。
现代文：自此游学的人增加了，多到三万余生。
English: Since then, the number of foreign students has increased to more than 30,000.

古文：然章句渐疏，而多以浮华相尚，儒者之风盖衰矣。
现代文：然而，章句渐渐疏阔了，多尚浮华，儒者的风气衰微了。
English: However, the chapters and sentences gradually broadened and became more and more flashy, and the Confucian ethos waned.

古文：党人既诛，其高名善士多坐流废，后遂至忿争，更相信告，亦有私行金货，定兰台漆书经字，以合其私文。
现代文：党人遭到诛杀，那些高名善士大多流放废弃，后来就因忿争，互相控告，也有私行金货，改定兰台漆书经字，以合他的私文。
English: Party members were beaten and killed, and most of those well-known good men were exiled and abandoned. Later, because of anger, they sued each other, and there was also a private gold shop that changed the script of the Lantai Urushi Book to match his private text.

古文：熹平四年，灵帝乃诏诸儒正定《五经》，刊于石碑，为古文、篆、隶三体书法以相参检，树之学门，使天下咸取则焉。
现代文：熹平四年，灵帝于是诏令诸儒正定《五经》，刻在石碑，用古文、篆、隶三体书法互相参证，立在学门，使天下以此为标准。
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period, Emperor Ling thus issued an edict ordering all the Confucianists to set forth the Five Classics, engrave them on stone tablets, and use the three-body calligraphy of ancient texts, calligraphy, and writing to mutually corroborate each other, and set them up at school gates, so that the whole world would use them as a standard.

古文：初，光武迁还洛阳，其经牒秘书载之二千余两，自此以后，参倍于前。
现代文：起先，光武迁都还洛阳，那些经牒、秘书用二千辆车子运载，自此以后，三倍于前。
English: At first, the capital of Guangwu was moved to Luoyang, and those sutras and secretaries were transported by two thousand cars. Since then, it has tripled.

古文：及董卓移都之际，吏民扰乱，自辟雍、东观、兰台、石室、宣明、鸿都诸藏典策文章，竞共剖散，其缣帛图书，大则连为帷盖，小乃制为縢囊。
现代文：到了董卓移都的时候，官吏百姓扰乱，在辟雍、东观、兰台、石室、宣明、鸿都所收藏的典册文章，纷纷散失，那些缣帛图书，大的连成帷盖，小的制为滕囊。
English: When the time came for Dong Zhuo to move the capital, the officials disturbed the people, and the books and articles collected in Biyong, Dongguan, Lantai, Shishu, Xuanming, and Hongdu were scattered and lost one after another. Those rare books, the large ones were connected into a curtain, and the small ones were made into a bag.

古文：及王允所收而西者。裁七十余乘，道路艰远，复弃其半矣。
现代文：等到王允收拾运到长安的，才七十余车，道路艰远，又丢了一半啊！
English: By the time Wang Yun had collected and transported to Chang'an, there were only more than seventy cars, the road was difficult, and half of them were lost!

古文：后长安之乱，一时焚荡，莫不泯尽焉。
现代文：后来长安大乱，一时焚烧，就消灭尽了！
English: Later, during the Chang'an Rebellion, it was burned down in an instant, wiping out all the horses!

古文：东京学者猥众，难以详载，今但录其能通经名家者，以为《儒林篇》。其自有列传者，则不兼书。
现代文：东京学者很多，不易详细记载，现在仅录那些能通经名家的，作为《儒林传》，有列传的，就不重录。
English: There are many scholars in Tokyo, so it is not easy to record in detail. Currently, only those who can go through famous masters are recorded as "Jurassic Legends." If there is a list of legends, it will not be re-recorded.

古文：若师资所承，宜标名为证者，乃著之云。
现代文：如果因师资相承，应当标名为证的，也写在这里。
English: If it is due to the succession of teachers, it should be marked with a certificate, which is also written here.

古文：《前书》云：田何传《易》授丁宽，丁宽授田王孙，王孙授沛人施雠、东海孟喜、琅邪梁丘贺，由是《易》有施、孟、梁丘之学。
现代文：《前书》说： 田何传《易》授丁宽，丁宽授田王孙，王孙授沛人施雠、东海孟善、琅笽梁丘贺，由是《易》有施，孟、梁丘之学。
English: "The first book" said: Tian He transmitted "Yi" to Ding Guang, Ding Guang gave it to Tian Wangsun, Wang Sun gave it to Pei Ren Shi, Donghai Meng Zhen, Zou Liang Qiuhe, so "Yi" has the learning of Shi, Meng and Liang Qiuhe.

古文：又东郡京房受《易》于梁国焦延寿，别为京氏学。
现代文：又东郡京房受《易》于梁国焦延寿，别为京氏学。
English: Moreover, Jing Fang of Dong County received "Yi" from Jiao Yan Shou of Liang Province, not from the Peking University.

古文：又有东莱费直，传《易》，授琅邪王横，为费氏学。
现代文：又有东莱费直传《易》，授琅笽王横，为费氏学。
English: There is also Donglaifei's direct transmission of "Yi" and the conferment of the title of "Wangyong," which is the study of Fei.

古文：本以古字，号《古文易》。
现代文：本以古字，号《古文易》。
English: The original was published under the title "古文易" (ancient characters).

古文：又沛人高相传《易》，授子康及兰陵毋将永，为高氏学。
现代文：又沛人高相传《易》，授子高康及兰陵毋将永，为高氏学。
English: In addition, "Yi" has been passed down from generation to generation in colleges and universities, and the bestowed sons Gaokang and Lanling have gone on to study with Gao.

古文：施、孟、梁丘、京氏四家皆立博士，费、高二家未得立。
现代文：施、孟、梁丘、京氏四家皆立博士，费、高二家没有立。 
English: The four schools of Shi, Meng, Liangqiu, and Ke all have Ph.D.s, while the two schools of Fei and Gao have not.

古文：刘昆字桓公，陈留东昏人，梁孝王之胤也。
现代文：◆刘昆传，刘昆字桓公，陈留东昏人，梁孝王的后代。
English: ◆ Liu Kun Chuan, Liu Kun Zi Huan Gong, Chen Liu Dong Dou Ren, descendants of Liang Xiao Wang.

古文：少习容礼。
现代文：年轻时学习仪礼。
English: Learn etiquette while you're young.

古文：平帝时，受《施氏易》于沛人戴宾。能弹雅琴，知清角之操。
现代文：平帝时，从沛人戴宾学习《施氏易》，能弹雅琴，懂得清角之操。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ping, he learned "Shi Shi Yi" from the great scholar Dai Bin. He could play the harpsichord and knew how to play the clear horn.

古文：王莽世，教授弟子恒五百余人。
现代文：王莽时，教授弟子常达五百多人。
English: When Wang Mang was teaching, there were often more than five hundred students.

古文：每春秋飨射，常备列典仪，以素木瓠叶为俎豆，桑弧蒿矢，以射 菟首 。
现代文：春秋飨食宾客，与诸侯射，常准备典仪，用素木瓠叶为俎豆，桑弧蒿矢，惧礼废缺，射则歌 菟首 诗以为节。
English: Spring and autumn banquet guests, shooting with the lords, often prepare ceremonies, use plain wood leaves for peas, mulberry arcs for arrows, fear of missing the ceremony, shooting songs, daggers, poetry for the festival.

古文：每有行礼，县宰辄率吏属而观之。
现代文：每次行礼，县长刘昆常率领吏属观看。
English: Every time a salute is performed, the county head Liu Kunzheng leads the officials to watch.

古文：王莽以昆多聚徒众，私行大礼，有僭上心，乃系昆及家属于外黄狱。
现代文：王莽认为刘昆聚集生徒，私行大礼，有冒犯朝廷的思想，于是收捕刘昆及其家属，送入外黄狱中。
English: Wang Mang thought that Liu Kun had the idea of offending the imperial court by gathering students and making a big gift, so he arrested Liu Kun and his family and sent them to the Yellow Prison.

古文：寻莽败得免。
现代文：不久，王莽失败，刘昆和他的家属才免遭处理。
English: Soon, Wang Mang failed and Liu Kun and his family were spared from being dealt with.

古文：既而天下大乱，昆避难河南负犊山中。
现代文：天下大乱以后，刘昆避难河南负犊山中。
English: After the global turmoil, Liu Kun took refuge in the mountains of Zhouzhuang, Henan Province.

古文：建武五年，举孝廉，不行，遂逃，教授于江陵。
现代文：建武五年，被举为孝廉，不去，逃跑了，在江陵教授生徒。
English: Jianwu five years, was raised as a filial piety, do not go, ran away, in Gangneung to teach students.

古文：光武闻之，即除为江陵令。
现代文：光武听说了，就授他担任江陵令。
English: When Guangwu heard about this, he appointed him as the Gangneung Commander.

古文：时，县连年火灾，昆辄向火叩头，多能降雨止风。
现代文：当时江陵县连年火灾，刘昆经常向火叩头，能降雨止风。
English: At that time, Gangneung County suffered from fires year after year. Liu Kun often kowtowed to the fire and was able to stop the rain and wind.

古文：征拜议郎，稍迁侍中、弘农太守。
现代文：征授议郎，升为侍中、弘农太守。
English: He was awarded the title of solicitor-general, promoted to the rank of chamberlain, and made Konodai no kami.

古文：先是，崤、黾驿道多虎灾，行旅不通。
现代文：先时崤、癉驿道老虎为灾，行旅不通。
English: The  and  roads have been plagued by tigers in the past, and travel is not possible.

古文：昆为政三年，仁化大行，虎皆负子度河。
现代文：刘昆为政三年，推行仁政，老虎也背着小老虎过黄河去了。
English: Liu Kun has been in politics for three years, promoting benevolent politics, and the tiger has also crossed the Yellow River with the little tiger on his back.

古文：帝闻而异之。
现代文：光武听说，认为很奇怪。
English: Mitsutake heard about it and thought it was strange.

古文：二十二年，征代杜林为光禄勋。
现代文：建武二十二年，征召代替杜林为光禄勋。
English: In the 22nd year of Jianwu, he was called up to replace Du Lin as a member of the Order of the Star.

古文：诏问昆曰： 前在江陵，反风灭火，后守弘农，虎北度河，行何德政而致是事？ 
现代文：诏问刘昆 ：你以前在江陵，反风灭火，后来作弘农太守，老虎北渡黄河，实行了什么德政招来了这类事呢？ 
English: Zhao asked Liu Kun: You used to be in Jiangling, fighting fires against the wind, and later as the governor of Hongnong, the tiger traveled north to the Yellow River. What German policy did you implement that caused such things?

古文：昆对曰： 偶然耳。 
现代文：刘昆回答说 ：这不过是偶然的巧合罢了。 
English: Liu Kun replied, "It's just a coincidence."

古文：左右皆笑其质讷。
现代文：左右的人都笑他朴实。
English: People on both sides laughed at his naivety.

古文：帝叹曰： 此乃长者之言也。 
现代文：帝笑道： 这才是长者所说的话啊。 
English: The emperor laughed and said, "This is what the elder said."

古文：顾命书诸策。
现代文：让左右的人写在本子上。
English: Have the person on either side of you write in the book.

古文：乃令入授皇太子及诸王小侯五十余人。
现代文：令他教授皇太子及诸王小侯五十余人。
English: He taught the crown prince and more than 50 princes.

古文：二十七年，拜骑都尉。
现代文：建武二十七年，授骑都尉。
English: Jianwu 27 years old, awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三十年，以老乞骸骨，诏赐洛阳第舍，以千石禄终其身。
现代文：建武三十年，因年老请求回家，诏赐洛阳第舍，按千石的俸禄终身。
English: After 30 years of military service, he requested to return home due to old age, and was granted a house in Luoyang and a lifetime salary of 1,000 koku.

古文：中元二年卒。
现代文：中元二年死。
English: He died two years later.

古文：子轶，字君文，传昆业，门徒亦盛。
现代文：儿子刘轶，字君文，继承刘昆教授生徒的事业，门生也很多。
English: Liu Kun's son, also known as Junwen, has followed in the footsteps of Liu Kun's students, and has many protégés.

古文：永平中，为太子中庶子。
现代文：永平中，为太子中庶子。
English: Yongping Junior High School, the Prince's junior high school illegitimate son.

古文：建初中，稍迁宗正，卒官，遂世掌宗正焉。
现代文：建初中，升为宗正，死在任上，于是就世掌宗正。
English: He built a junior high school, was promoted to Zongzheng, died in office, and then became the head of Zongzheng.

古文：洼丹字子玉，南阳育阳人也。
现代文：◆洼丹传，洼丹字子玉，南阳育阳人。
English: ◆Wadan Chuan, Wadan Zidama, Nanyang Yuyangjin.

古文：世传《孟氏易》。
现代文：世世传《孟氏易》。
English: "Meng Shiyi" has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：作《易通论》七篇，世号《洼君通》。丹学义研深，《易》家宗之，称为大儒。
现代文：王莽时，常避世教授门生，立志不做官，门生多至几百人。建武初年，稍得升迁，为博士，建武十一年，为大鸿胪。作《易通论》七篇。洼丹学问深邃，《易》家尊崇他，称为大儒。
English: Wang Mangshi was a protégé of a professor who often avoided the world, determined not to be an official, and had up to several hundred protégés. In the first year of Jianwu, he was slightly promoted to doctor, and in the eleventh year of Jianwu, he was a great scholar. He wrote seven articles of "The Theory of Yi Tong." Ou Dan was deeply learned, and the Yi family respected him and called him a great scholar.

古文：十七年，卒于官，年七十。
现代文：十七年在任内逝世，年七十。
English: He died 17 years into his term of office, at the age of 70.

古文：时，中山觟阳鸿，字孟孙，亦以《孟氏易》教授，有名称，永平中为少府。
现代文：这时，中山角圭阳鸿，字孟孙，也用《孟氏易》教授学生，有名气，永平中为少府。
English: At this time, Gui Yanghong, also known as Meng Sun, also used "Meng Shiyi" to teach students. He was famous, and Yongping Middle School was his junior high school.

古文：任安字定祖，广汉绵竹人也。
现代文：◆任安传，任安字定祖，广汉绵竹人。
English: ◆ Ren An Chuan, Ren An Zi Ding Zu, Guang Han Mianzhu Ren.

古文：少游太学，受《孟氏易》，兼通数经。
现代文：年轻时游太学，学《孟氏易》，兼通好几经。
English: When you were young, you were very studious. You studied "Meng Shiyi" and read several classics.

古文：又从同郡杨厚学图谶，究极其术。
现代文：又跟同郡人杨厚学习河图符命之书，深究其术。
English: He also studied the Book of River Charts and Runes of Life with Yang Hou, a fellow county resident, and deepened his skills.

古文：时人称曰： 欲知仲桓问任安。 
现代文：当时人称他说： 想知道仲桓问任安。 
English: At the time, he was quoted as saying: "I want to know if Chukwan asked Ren An.

古文：又曰： 居今行古任定祖。 
现代文：又说： 居今行古任定祖。 
English: He also said, "I am the founder of the present lineage.

古文：学终，还家教授，诸生自远而至。
现代文：学完后，回家教授门徒，诸生都来自很远的地方。
English: After finishing his studies, he went home to teach his disciples. All the sentient beings came from far away.

古文：初仕州郡。
现代文：开始在州郡做官。
English: He began his career as a state and county official.

古文：后太尉再辟，除博士，公车征，皆称疾不就。
现代文：后来太尉一再征召他，授博士，公车征召他都托病不去。
English: Later, he was repeatedly conscripted by the captain, awarded a doctorate, and conscripted by the bus, but he did not go because of illness.

古文：州牧刘焉表荐之，时王涂隔塞，诏命竟不至。
现代文：州牧刘焉上表推荐，这时道路阻塞，诏命终于没有达到。
English: At this time, the road was blocked, and the imperial command was finally not achieved.

古文：年七十九，建安七年，卒于家。
现代文：年七十九，建安七年，死在家里。
English: Seventy-nine years old, Jianan seven years old, died at home.

古文：杨政字子行，京兆人也。
现代文：◆杨政传，杨政字子行，京兆人。
English: ◆Yang Zheng Chuan, Yang Zheng Zizi Xing, Jing Zhao Ren.

古文：少好学，从代郡范升受《梁丘易》，善说经书。
现代文：年轻好学习，从代郡范升学《梁氏易》，擅长说经书。
English: Young and eager to learn, Fan Sheng from Dai County studied "Liang Shi Yi" and is good at reciting scriptures.

古文：京师为之语曰： 说经铿铿杨子行。 
现代文：京师流行这样一句话： 说经铿铿杨子行。 
English: There is a popular saying among Beijing teachers: Saying the sutras is good.

古文：教授数百人。
现代文：教授几百人。
English: He taught hundreds of people.

古文：范升尝为出妇所告，坐系狱，政乃肉袒，以箭贯耳，抱升子潜伏道傍，候车驾，而持章叩头大言曰： 范升三娶，唯有一子，今适三岁，孤之可哀。 
现代文：范升曾经被出妇所苦，获罪系狱中。杨政于是光着身子，用箭穿耳，抱了范升的儿子暗里伏在道旁，等候皇帝的车驾，拿着奏章叩头大喊： 范升三娶，惟有一个儿子，今才三岁，成了孤儿，实在可怜啊。 
English: As a result, Yang Zheng stripped himself naked, pierced his ears with arrows, hugged Fan Sheng's son, and secretly lay down by the roadside, waiting for the emperor's chariot, holding a scroll and shouting: Fan Sheng married three times, but has only one son, who is only three years old and has become an orphan. How pitiful.

古文：武骑虎贲惧惊乘舆，举弓射之，犹不肯去；旄头又以戟叉政，伤胸，政犹不退。
现代文：武骑虎贲怕惊了皇帝，举弓射杨政，杨政还是不走，旄头又用戟叉杨政，把杨政的胸部叉伤了，杨政仍然不退。
English: The emperor was frightened by the horsemen riding on the tiger. He raised his bow and shot Yang Zheng, but Yang Zheng still refused to leave. He also used a hammer and fork on Yang Zheng, injuring Yang Zheng's chest, but Yang Zheng still refused to retreat.

古文：哀泣辞请，有感帝心，诏曰： 乞杨生师。 
现代文：哀泣诉请，感动了皇上，下诏说 ：乞杨生师。 
English: The Emperor was moved by the plaintive appeal, and issued the following edict: Beggars beware.

古文：即尺一出升，政由是显名。
现代文：立即诏书释出范升。杨政因此著了名。
English: Fan Sheng was immediately released by imperial edict. Yang Zheng became famous as a result.

古文：为人嗜酒，不拘小节，果敢自矜，然笃于义。
现代文：杨政为人好饮酒，放荡不注意小节，果敢自任，但他很重情义。
English: Yang Zheng is a good drinker, debauchery does not pay attention to the subsection, dares to take matters into his own hands, but he is very serious.

古文：时，帝婿梁松、皇后弟阴就，皆慕其声名，而请与交友。
现代文：当时皇上的女婿梁松，皇后的弟弟阴就，都羡慕他的声名，请同他结为朋友。
English: At that time, the Emperor's son-in-law, Liang Song, and the Empress's brother, Yin Rong, were both envious of his fame. Please make friends with him.

古文：政每共言论，常切磋恳至，不为屈挠。
现代文：杨政经常同他们讨论，互相勉励，情投意合，不屈不挠。
English: Yang Zheng often discussed with them, encouraged each other, sympathized with each other, and persevered.

古文：尝诣杨虚侯马武，武难见政，称疾不为起。
现代文：曾经去扬虚侯马武处，马武不想接见杨政，托病不起床。
English: I once went to Yang Xuhou's place. Mabu didn't want to meet Yang Zheng, so he feigned illness and didn't get up.

古文：政入户，径升床排武，把臂责之曰： 卿蒙国恩，备位籓辅，不思求贤以报殊宠，而骄天下英俊，此非养身之道也。
现代文：杨政进入户内，直升床排击马武，捉了他手臂，责问他 ：您蒙国家的恩典，位居藩辅重职，不想求贤人以报答皇上的特殊宠信，对天下的英才骄傲自大，这不是养身的方法。
English: Yang Zheng entered the house, hit Ma Wu with a helicopter bed, grabbed his arm, and scolded him: You have received the grace of the country, you are in the position of the assistant of the domain, you do not want to ask the wise man to repay the emperor's special favor, you are proud of the world's talents, this is not a way to keep yourself healthy.

古文：今日动者刀入胁。 
现代文：今天如果您敢于动手动脚，刀就进了您的肋里。 
English: Today, if you dare to move your hand or foot, the knife will enter your ribs.

古文：武诸子及左右皆大惊，以为见劫，操兵满侧，政颜色自若。
现代文：马武的几个儿子及左右的人都大为惊骇，认为是抢劫，操着兵器，站在马武旁边，杨政颜色不变，好像无事的样子。
English: Several of Mabu's sons and the people around them were shocked. They thought it was a robbery. Armed with weapons, they stood next to Mabu. Yang Zheng's color remained unchanged, as if nothing had happened.

古文：会阴就至，责数武，令为交友。
现代文：正好阴就到了，批评马武，令他与杨政交朋友。
English: Just as Yin arrived, he criticized Ma Wu and made him friends with Yang Zheng.

古文：其刚果任情，皆如此也。
现代文：杨政的刚果任性就如此。
English: Such is the waywardness of Yang Zheng's Congo.

古文：建初中，官至左中郎将。
现代文：建初中，官至左中郎将。
English: Ken junior high school, official to left junior high school captain.

古文：张兴字君上，颍川鄢陵人也。
现代文：◆张兴传，张兴字君上，颍川鄢陵人。
English: ◆Zhang Xing Chuan, Zhang Xing Zi Jun Shang, the person who built the Mausoleum in Luochuan.

古文：习《梁丘易》以教授。
现代文：学《梁丘易》用来教授生徒。
English: "Liang Qiu Yi" is used to teach students.

古文：建武中，举孝廉为郎，谢病去，复归聚徒。
现代文：建武中，举孝廉为郎，托病回去，聚徒讲授。
English: In the middle of the Jianwu period, Zhu Xiaolian was the son, and he went back on sick leave to teach the students.

古文：后辟司徒冯勤府，勤举为教廉，稍迁博士。
现代文：后来辟司徒冯勤府，冯勤举为孝廉，升博士。
English: Later, he promoted the scholar Feng Qinfu, and Feng Qin was promoted to Xiaolian, and promoted to Ph.D.

古文：永平初，迁侍中祭酒。
现代文：永平初，升侍中祭酒。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, it became a ceremonial wine for junior high school students.

古文：十年，拜太子少傅。
现代文：永平十年，授太子少傅。
English: In the tenth year of Yongping, he was given the title of crown prince.

古文：显宗数访问经术。
现代文：显宗多次向他问经术。
English: Hentong repeatedly asked him about the sutra.

古文：既而声称著闻，弟子自远至者，著录且万人，为梁丘家宗。
现代文：自此声名闻于远近，弟子自远方来的，登记入册近万人，为梁丘家所尊崇。
English: Since then, his fame has spread far and wide, and nearly 10,000 disciples from far and wide have been registered. He is revered by the Liangqiu family.

古文：十四年，卒于官。
现代文：永平十四年，死在任上。
English: Yongping 14 years, died in office.

古文：子鲂，传兴业，位至张掖属国都尉。
现代文：儿子张鲂，传张兴学业，位至张掖属国都尉。
English: Zhang Xing's son, Zhang Xing Xuan, was promoted to captain of Zhang Xing's subordinate state.

古文：戴凭字次仲，汝南平舆人也。
现代文：◆戴凭传，戴凭字次仲，汝南平舆人。
English: ◆Dai Po Chuan, Dai Po Zi Zhong, Ru Nanping Shih Ren.

古文：习《京氏易》。
现代文：学《京氏易》。
English: Study "Keishiei."

古文：年十六，郡举明经，征试博士，拜郎中。
现代文：十六岁时，郡里举他为明经，征试博士，授郎中。
English: At the age of sixteen, the county gave him the title of Mingjing, Candidate for Doctorate, and Junior Doctor.

古文：时，诏公卿大会，群臣皆就席，凭独立。
现代文：这时，朝廷召公卿大会，群臣都就席，戴凭一个立着。
English: At this time, the court summoned the assembly of nobles, and the courtiers all took their seats, with Dai standing alone.

古文：光武问其意。
现代文：光武问他这是什么意思。
English: Guangwu asked him what it meant.

古文：凭对曰： 博士说经皆不如臣，而坐居臣上，是以不得就席。 
现代文：凭回答道： 博士说经的都不及我，但是却坐在我的上面，所以我不就席。 
English: Po replied, "All the scholars are not as good as me, but they sit on top of me, so I don't take a seat.

古文：帝即召上殿，令与诸儒难说，凭多所解释。
现代文：光武立即召他上殿，命令他与诸儒说疑问难，戴凭解释很多。
English: Guangwu immediately summoned him to the palace and ordered him to talk to the Confucian scholars.

古文：帝善之，拜为侍中，数进见问得失。
现代文：帝以为很好。授他为侍中，多次接见他问政治的得失。
English: The emperor thought it was a good idea. He made him an aide-de-camp and met with him many times to ask him about the merits and demerits of politics.

古文：帝谓凭曰： 侍中当匡补国政，勿有隐情。 
现代文：帝对戴凭说 ：侍中应当匡正辅佐国家大事，不要有意见不说。
English: The emperor said to Dai Biao, "The attendants should support the national affairs in a correct manner, and should not keep their opinions to themselves."

古文：凭对曰： 陛下严。 
现代文：戴凭回答道： 皇上太严了。 
English: Dai Bian replied: The emperor is too strict.

古文：帝曰： 朕何用严？ 
现代文：帝说： 我为何太严？ 
English: The emperor said, "Why am I so strict?

古文：凭曰： 伏见前太尉西曹掾蒋遵，清亮忠孝，学通古今，陛下纳肤受之诉，遂致禁锢，世以是为严。 
现代文：戴凭说 ：前太尉西曹掾蒋遵，清正忠孝，学通今古，皇上听信谗言，不知实情，以至禁锢他不得为吏。
English: Dai Bian said, "Former Second Lieutenant Xi Cao and Jiang Zun, both loyal and filial, learned from ancient times, listened to the emperor's advice, but did not know the truth, so he was banned from being an official.

古文：帝怒曰： 汝南子欲复党乎？ 
现代文：都说皇上严。 帝发怒说 ：汝南子想恢复党祸吗？ 
English: They all said that the emperor was strict. The emperor became angry and said, "Does Yunanzi want to bring back the party disaster?"

古文：凭出，自系廷尉，有诏敕出。
现代文：戴凭出去，自系廷尉，诏令出来。
English: Dai Biao went out, he was a courtier, and issued a decree.

古文：后复引见，凭谢曰： 臣无謇谔之节，而有狂瞽之言，不能以尸伏谏，偷生苟活，诚惭圣朝。 
现代文：后来又召见，戴凭谢罪道 ：我没有正直不阿的大节，却说狂妄不明事理的话，不能伏尸劝谏，苟且偷生，真正有愧圣朝。 
English: Later, he was summoned again, and he said, "I have not been honest and upright, but I have said arrogant and unreasonable things. I can't be persuaded by the dead, I have to live secretly, and I am truly sorry for the Holy Morning."

古文：帝即敕尚书解遵禁锢，拜凭虎贲中郎将，以侍中兼领之。
现代文：帝就命令尚书解除蒋遵的禁锢，授戴凭为虎贲中郎将，由侍中兼任。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shuxu to release Jiang Zun from his ban and bestowed upon him the title of Vice Admiral of the Tiger Regiment, with the position of chamberlain.

古文：正旦朝贺，百僚毕会，帝令群臣能说经者更相难诘，义有不通，辄夺其席以益通者，凭遂重坐五十余席。
现代文：朝廷庆贺元日，百官齐集，帝命令群臣中能够解说经的，互相问疑质难，经义说不通的，就夺了他的席位给能说通的人，戴凭因此重坐了五十余席。
English: The imperial court was celebrating the first day of the year, and hundreds of officials had gathered. The emperor ordered the courtiers who could explain the sutras to ask each other questions, and those who could not understand the sutras to give up their seats to those who could. As a result, Dai Yu re-seated more than fifty seats.

古文：故京师为之语曰： 解经不穷戴侍中。 
现代文：京师流行一句话说 ：解经不穷戴侍中。 
English: There is a popular saying among scholars in Beijing: "The explanation of the sutras is never complete without the attendants."

古文：在职十八年，卒于官，诏赐东园梓器，钱二十万。
现代文：在职十八年，死在任上，诏赐棺材器用，钱二十万。
English: After eighteen years in office, he died in office. He was given a coffin and 200,000 yuan in cash.

古文：时南阳魏满字叔牙，亦习《京氏易》，教授。
现代文：这时，南阳魏满字叔牙，也学《京氏易》，教授生徒。
English: At this time, Nanyang Wei full of characters uncle tooth, also learn "Jing Shi Yi," teach students.

古文：永平中，至弘农太守。
现代文：永平中，官至弘农太守。
English: In Yongping Middle School, he was given the title of Hongnong Dazhong.

古文：孙期字仲彧，济阴成武人也。
现代文：孙期传，孙期字仲，济阴成武人。
English: Sun Zhi Chuan, Sun Zi Zhanzhong, Jiyin became a warrior.

古文：少为诸生，习《京氏易》、《古文尚书》。
现代文：年轻时为诸生，学《京氏易》、《古文尚书》。
English: When he was young, he studied "Keiji Ryo" and "Kobun Shosho."

古文：家贫，事母至孝，牧豕于大泽中，以奉养焉。
现代文：家里很贫，对母亲很孝，在大泽中放猪，以之来奉养母亲。
English: His family was very poor, and he was very filial to his mother. He raised pigs in Osawa to support his mother.

古文：远人从其学者，皆执经垄畔以追之，里落化其仁让。
现代文：远方人◆跟他学习的，都拿着经书在田垄旁边追着他求学，乡里为他的仁义所感化。
English: People from far away ◆ who study with him, all hold scriptures and follow him to study next to the ridge, and the village is inspired by his benevolence.

古文：黄巾贼起，过期里陌，相约不犯孙先生舍。
现代文：黄巾贼起，经过孙期乡里，彼此相约不侵犯孙先生住宅。
English: From the beginning of the theft of the yellow scarf, after passing through Sun's village, they agreed not to invade Mr. Sun's house.

古文：郡举方正，遣吏赍羊、酒请期，期驱豕入草不顾。
现代文：郡里举他为方正，派遣吏员送羊酒请孙期，孙期赶着猪群入草泽中，看也不看一眼。
English: The county promoted him to the position of Founder, dispatched officials to send sheep's wine to invite the grandson, and the grandson drove the pigs into the grass, without even looking at them.

古文：司徒黄琬特辟，不行，终于家。
现代文：司徒黄琬特辟他，不去，死在家里。
English: He was specially chosen by St. Stephen the Yellow-Haired to die at home.

古文：建武中，范升传《孟氏易》，以授杨政，而陈元、郑众皆传《费氏易》，其后马融亦为其传。
现代文：建武中，范升传《孟氏易》，用以教授杨政，又陈元、郑众都传《费氏易》，后来马援也传《费氏易》。
English: In Jianwu, Fan Sheng transmitted "Meng's Yi" to teach Yang Zheng, and Chen Yuan and Zheng Zong all transmitted "Fei's Yi," and later Ma Yuan also transmitted "Fei's Yi."

古文：融授郑玄，玄作《易注》，荀爽又作《易传》，自是《费氏》兴，而《京氏》遂衰。
现代文：马融传授给郑玄，郑玄作《易注》，荀爽又作《易传》，自此以后，《费氏》兴，《京氏》就衰落了。
English: Ma Rong passed it on to Zheng Xuan. Zheng Xuan wrote "Easy Note" and "Easy Transmission." Since then, "Fei's" has flourished and "Kei's" has declined.

古文：《前书》云：济南伏生传《尚书》，授济南张生及千乘欧阳生，欧阳生授同郡宽，宽授欧阳生之子，世世相传，至曾孙欧阳高，为《尚书》欧阳氏学；张生授夏侯都尉，都尉授族子始昌，始昌传族子胜，为大夏侯氏学；胜传从兄子建，建别为小夏侯氏学：三家皆立博士。
现代文：《前书》说：济南伏生传《尚书》，授给济南张生及千乘欧阳生，欧阳生授给同郡倪宽，倪宽授给欧阳生的儿子，代代相传，到曾孙欧阳高，为《尚书》欧阳氏学；张生授给夏侯都尉，都尉授给族子始昌，始昌传族子胜，叫大夏侯学；胜授给从兄子建，建另外叫小夏侯氏学；三家都立博士。
English: "The first book" said: Jinan Fusheng passed down the "Shangshu" to Jinan Zhang Sheng and Qianlian Ouyang Sheng, Ouyang Sheng passed it to Ni Guang of the same county, Ni Guang passed it to Ouyang Sheng's son, passed down from generation to generation, to Ouyang's great-grandson Ouyang Gao, the "Shangshu" is Ouyang's learning; Zhang Sheng passed it to Xia Hou Duifeng, Duifeng passed it to the son of the tribe Shi Chang, Shi Chang passed it to the son of the tribe Sheng, called the great Xia Hou learning; Sheng

古文：又鲁人孔安国传《古文尚书》授都尉朝，朝授胶东庸谭，为《尚书》古文学，未得立。
现代文：又鲁人孔安国传《古文尚书》授给都尉朝，朝授给胶东庸谭，叫《尚书》古文学，未能立博士。
English: In addition, the Lu people awarded the "Book of Ancient Literature" of the national biography of Confucius to Du Fu, and the morning awarded it to Jiaodong Yong Tan, called the "Book of Ancient Literature," but failed to establish a doctorate.

古文：欧阳歙字正思，乐安千乘人也。
现代文：◆欧阳歙传，欧阳歙字正思，乐安千乘人。
English: ◆The legend of Ouyang Xizhong, Ouyang Xizhong Zhengsi, Le'an Qianren.

古文：自欧阳生传《伏生尚书》，至歙八世，皆为博士。
现代文：自从欧阳生传《伏生尚书》，到欧阳歙八代，都为博士。
English: From Ouyang Sheng's biography "Fusei Shangshu" to Ouyang Zou's eight generations, they are all doctors.

古文：歙既传业，而恭谦好礼让。
现代文：欧阳歙得传家业，又恭谦好礼让。
English: Ouyang Xuan inherited the family business, and he was very polite.

古文：王莽时，为长社宰。
现代文：王莽时，任长社宰。
English: Wang Mangshi was appointed as the head of the company.

古文：更始立，为原武令。
现代文：更始立为帝，任原武令。
English: He was reinstated as emperor and appointed as the original military commander.

古文：世祖平河北，到原武，见歙在县修政，迁河南都尉，后行太守事。
现代文：世祖光武平定河北，到达原武县，看到欧阳歙在县政绩不错，升他任河南都尉，后来代理太守。
English: The ancestor Guangwu pacified Hebei, and when he arrived at Yuanwu County, he saw that Ouyang Zang had a good performance in the county government. He was promoted to the post of Henan captain, and later became the acting governor.

古文：世祖即位，始为河南尹，封被阳侯。
现代文：世祖做了皇帝，才做河南尹，封被阳侯。
English: The ancestor of the world became the emperor, and only then did he become the Henan Yin, and he was given the title of Yang Hou.

古文：建武五年，坐事免官。
现代文：建武五年，因事免去了官职。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, he was removed from his official position.

古文：明年，拜杨州牧，迁汝南太守。
现代文：第二年，授扬州牧，升汝南太守。
English: In the second year, he was awarded the title of Yangzhou Patriarch and promoted to the position of Southern Imperial Governor.

古文：推用贤俊，政称异迹。
现代文：推举选用贤能的人，政绩特好。
English: The selection committee selects the most capable person, and their performance is the best.

古文：九年，更封夜侯。
现代文：建武九年，改封夜侯。
English: In the 9th year of the Kenmu era, he was given the title of Yago.

古文：歙在郡，教授数百人，视事九岁，征为大司徒。
现代文：欧阳歙在郡，教授几百人，工作九年，征召任大司徒。
English: Ouyang Zou taught hundreds of people in the county, worked for nine years, and was conscripted as a senior scholar.

古文：坐在汝南臧罪千余万发觉下狱。
现代文：因在汝南贪污千余万被发觉下狱。
English: He was found guilty of embezzling more than 10 million yuan in the south of the country and was sent to prison.

古文：诸生守阙为歙求哀者千余人，至有自髡剔者。
现代文：诸生守在宫门外替欧阳歙哀求的有一千多人，有的甚至自己剃去头发愿意代罪的。
English: There were more than a thousand people who begged for Ouyang Xuan outside the palace gate, and some even shaved their hair to atone for their sins.

古文：平原礼震，年十七，闻狱当断，驰之京师，行到河内获嘉县，自系，上书求代歙死。
现代文：平原礼震，十七岁，听说狱将判决，自京师骑马赶去，走到河内获嘉县，自己捆绑，上书请求代欧阳歙死。
English: Plains Li Zhen, seventeen years old, heard that the warden would be sentenced, rode a horse from Beijing Division to catch up, went to Hanoi to get Jia County, tied himself, and sent a letter requesting Ouyang to die.

古文：曰： 伏见臣师大司徒欧阳歙，学为儒宗，八世博士，而以臧咎当伏重辜。
现代文：说： 我的老师大司徒欧阳歙，学问渊博，为儒者所尊重，八代博士，因赃罪应当处以重罪。
English: He said, "My teacher, the great scholar Ouyang Zang, who is very learned and respected by Confucians, and the eighth-generation doctor, should be punished with a felony for the crime of sedition.

古文：歙门单子幼，未能传学，身死之后，永为废绝，上令陛下获杀贤之讥，下使学者丧师资之益。
现代文：欧阳歙门户单薄，儿子还小，不能传学，身死以后，永远废绝，这样，在上，皇上有杀贤的名声；在下，使学习的人失去了一位好老师。
English: Ouyang Xuan's portal is thin, his son is still young, he cannot pass on his knowledge, and after his death, he will be abolished forever. In this way, at the top, the emperor has a reputation for killing sages; at the bottom, the people who study have lost a good teacher.

古文：乞杀臣身以代歙命。 
现代文：请杀了我代替欧阳歙的死命。 
English: Please kill me in place of Ouyang Xuan's death.

古文：书奏，而歙已死狱中。
现代文：奏书上去，欧阳歙已经死在狱中。
English: According to the report, Ouyang Xuan died in prison.

古文：歙掾陈元上书追讼之，言甚切至，帝乃赐棺木，赠印绶，赙缣三千匹。
现代文：欧阳歙掾史陈元上书追诉，言词恳切，帝于是赐给棺木，赠印绶，丧仪缣三千匹。
English: Ouyang Shishi Chen Yuan wrote a letter of complaint, his words were sincere, and the emperor then gave him a coffin, a gift of a seal, and three thousand funerary urns.

古文：子复嗣。
现代文：儿子欧阳复继承爵位。
English: His son Ouyang Fu succeeded to the title.

古文：复卒，无子，国除。
现代文：欧阳复逝世，没有儿子，国除。
English: Ouyang Fu died without a son, leaving the country destitute.

古文：济阴曹曾字伯山，从歙受《尚书》，门徒三千人，位至谏议大夫。
现代文：济阴曹曾字伯山，跟欧阳歙学《尚书》，门生三千人，位至谏议大夫。
English: Jixin Cao was once called Baoshan, and studied "Shangshu" with Ouyang Zeng. He had 3,000 students, and rose to the position of Zengli Doctor.

古文：子祉，河南尹，传父业教授。
现代文：儿子曹祉，河南尹，传父亲的学业，教授子弟。
English: His son, Cao Zhi, Henan Yin, inherited his father's studies and became a professor.

古文：又陈留陈弇，字叔明，亦受《欧阳尚书》于司徒丁鸿，仕为蕲长。
现代文：又陈留陈，字叔明，也受《欧阳尚书》于司徒丁鸿，任为蕲长。
English: In addition, Chen Liu Chen, also known as Shu Ming, was also appointed by "The Ouyang Shangshu" to be the chief of the eunuchs.

古文：牟长字君高，乐安临济人也。
现代文：◆牟长传，牟长字君高，乐安临济人。
English: ◆Muchang Chuan, Muchang Zi Jun Gao, Le An Lin Ji Ren.

古文：其先封牟，春秋之末，国灭，因氏焉。
现代文：他的先人封于牟，春秋末，国灭，因此以牟为姓。
English: His ancestors were given the title "Mou" in the Spring and Autumn Period and "Kokucho" in the Late Period, so his surname is "Mou."

古文：长少习《欧阳尚书》，不仕王莽世。
现代文：牟长年轻时学《欧阳尚书》，王莽时，不出来作官。
English: When Mou Chang was young, he studied "The Book of the Western Yang Dynasty." When Wang Mang was young, he did not come out to work as an official.

古文：建武二年，大司空弘特辟，拜博士，稍迁河内太守，坐垦田不实免。
现代文：建武二年，大司空宋弘特辟他，授博士，升河内太守，因垦田不实，免了他的官。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Song Hong, the grand secretary of the Ku, specially promoted him, awarded him a doctorate, and promoted him to the governor of Hanoi. However, he was dismissed from his post because of his insincerity.

古文：长自为博士及在河内，诸生讲学者常有千余人，著录前后万人。
现代文：牟长自从做了博士及河内太守，诸生听他讲学的常有千多人，记录在册的前后一万多人。
English: Since Mou Chang became a doctor and the governor of Hanoi, more than a thousand people have listened to his lectures, and more than ten thousand people have been recorded.

古文：著《尚书章句》，皆本之欧阳氏，俗号为《牟氏章句》。
现代文：著《尚书章句》，都是根据欧阳氏学写的，叫《牟氏章句》。
English: His book "Shangshu Chapter and Verse" was written according to Ouyang's learning, and is called "Mou's Chapter and Verse."

古文：复征为中散大夫，赐告一岁，卒于家。
现代文：再征为中散大夫，皇帝准许他带官属归家治病一年，死在家里。
English: Re-enlisted as a Zhongshan doctor, the emperor allowed him to take his officials back home for a year to treat his illness, and he died at home.

古文：子纡，又以隐居教授，门生千人。
现代文：儿子牟行，隐居教授，门生千人。
English: His son, Mou Xing, is a reclusive professor with thousands of students.

古文：肃宗闻而征之，欲以为博士，道物故。
现代文：肃宗听说了征召他，想要他为博士，死在路上。
English: Sozong heard of his call-up and wanted him to become a doctor, but he died on the way.

古文：宋登字叔阳，京兆长安人也。
现代文：◆宋登传，宋登字叔阳，京兆长安人。
English: ◆Song Deng Chuan, Song Deng Zi Shuyang, Jingzhao Chang'an Ren.

古文：父由，为太尉。
现代文：父亲宋由，任太尉。
English: His father, Song Yu, was a captain.

古文：登少传《欧阳尚书》，教授数千人。
现代文：宋登年轻时传《欧阳尚书》，教授生徒几千人。
English: When he was young, Song Deng passed down the "Book of the Western Yang Dynasty" and taught it to thousands of students.

古文：为汝阴令，政为明能，号称 神父 。
现代文：任汝阴令，为政精明能干，号称 神父 。
English: Ren Ruyin, a shrewd and capable politician, is known as a priest.

古文：迁赵相，入为尚书仆射。
现代文：升赵相，入朝任尚书仆射。
English: Zhao Xiang ascended to the throne, and Shang Shufu entered the imperial court.

古文：顺帝以登明识礼乐，使持节临太学，奏定曲律，转拜侍中。
现代文：顺帝因宋登熟悉礼乐，使他持节主持太学，他奏定典律，调授侍中。
English: Emperor Shun was familiar with ceremonial music because of Song Deng, so he presided over the ceremony, he played the canon, and taught the attendants.

古文：数上封事，抑退权臣，由是出为颖川太守。
现代文：多次秘密上奏指责权臣，因此被放出朝廷，任颍川太守。
English: He repeatedly made secret reports accusing powerful vassals, and as a result he was banished from the imperial court and appointed governor of the Beichuan Province.

古文：市无二价，道不拾遗。
现代文：在任期间，做生意的商品没有两种价格，道路上丢了东西，也没有人拾。
English: During his tenure, there were no two prices for business goods, things were lost on the road and no one picked them up.

古文：病免，卒于家，汝阴人配社祠之。
现代文：因病免官，死在家里。汝阴人配社祭祀他。
English: Dismissed from his post due to illness, he died at home. Ruyin people made an offering to him.

古文：张驯字子，济阴定陶人也。
现代文：◆张驯传，张驯字子鯭，济阴定陶人。
English: ◆Zhang Jia Zhuan, Zhang Jia Zi Zi Zi, Ji Yin Ding Tao Ren.

古文：少游太学，能诵《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：年轻时进太学，能诵《春秋左氏传》。
English: When he was young, he studied hard and could recite "The Biography of Shunqiu Zuo."

古文：以《大夏侯尚书》教授。
现代文：用《大夏侯尚书》教授门生。
English: Taught his protégé with "Daxia Hou Shang Shu."

古文：辟公府，举高第，拜议郎。
现代文：辟公府，举高第，授议郎。
English: He was appointed to public office, promoted to high rank, and conferred the title of councilor.

古文：与蔡邕共奏定《六经》文字。擢拜侍中，典领秘书近署，甚见纳异。
现代文：与蔡邕共同奏定《六经》文字，升授侍中，主持秘书近署，采纳不同意见。
English: He and Cai Jun jointly approved the text of the "Six Classics of Confucianism," promoted the attendants to middle-ranking officials, and the presiding secretary was close to the office, and adopted different opinions.

古文：多因便宜陈政得失，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：多次利用机会向皇上陈述政治的得失，获得朝廷嘉奖。
English: He repeatedly took advantage of opportunities to explain to the emperor the gains and losses of politics and received awards from the imperial court.

古文：迁丹阳太守，化有惠政。
现代文：升丹阳太守，政治清明，老百姓非常爱戴他。
English: Sheng Danyang is the supreme governor, his politics are clear, and the people love him very much.

古文：光和七年，征拜尚书，迁大司农。
现代文：光和七年，征授尚书，升大司农。
English: At the age of seven, he was awarded the title of Shangshu and promoted to Senior Vice-Minister of Agriculture.

古文：初平中，卒于官。
现代文：初平中，死在任上。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he died in office.

古文：尹敏字幼季，南阳堵阳人也。
现代文：◆尹敏传，尹敏字幼季，南阳堵阳人。
English: ◆Yin Min Chuan, Yin Min Zi Ju Ju Ji, Nanyang Duyang Ren.

古文：少为诸生。
现代文：年轻时为诸生。
English: When I was young, I sang for the living.

古文：初习《欧阳尚书》，后受《古文》，兼善《毛诗》、《穀梁》、《左氏春秋》。
现代文：开始学习《欧阳尚书》，后来学《古文》兼长《毛诗》、《谷梁》、《左氏春秋》。
English: He began to study the Ouyang Shangshu, and later studied the Guwen, as well as Mao Shi, Gu Liang, and Zuo's Spring and Autumn.

古文：建武二年，上疏陈《洪范》消灾之术。
现代文：建武二年，打报告给皇上陈述《洪范》消灾的办法。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he made a report to the emperor to present the "Feng Fan" method of disaster relief.

古文：时，世祖方草创天下，未遑其事，命敏待诏公车，拜郎中，辟大司空府。
现代文：当时世祖方初创天下，没有顾及这件事，命令尹敏待诏公车，授郎中，辟大司空府。
English: At that time, the founding fathers of the world did not take this matter into account and ordered Yin Min to wait for a bus, to give birth to a child, and to build a big sky palace.

古文：帝以敏博通经记，令校图谶，使蠲去崔发所为王莽著录次比。
现代文：帝认为尹敏博通经记，命令他校正图谶，使他除去崔发所作的王莽著录叙列。
English: The emperor thought that Yin Min was familiar with the sutras, and ordered him to correct the diagrams and remove Wang Mang's descriptions from Cui Fa's work.

古文：敏对曰： 谶书非圣人所作，其中多近鄙别字，颇类世俗之辞，恐疑误后生。 
现代文：尹敏回报道： 谶书不是圣人所作，里面有不少的错别字，很像世俗的俚语，恐贻误后生。 
English: Yin Min reported back: The Book of Changes was not written by a sage, and there are quite a few misspellings in it, much like worldly slang.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：帝不采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：敏因其阙文增之曰： 君无口，为汉辅。 
现代文：尹敏依据那些缺文增加： 君无口，为汉辅。 
English: Yin Min added according to those missing sentences: You have no mouth, you are a Han auxiliary.

古文：帝见而怪之，召敏问其故。
现代文：帝看了觉得很奇怪，召见尹敏问他这是什么缘故。
English: The emperor found it very strange and summoned Yin Min to ask him why.

古文：敏对曰： 臣见前人增损图书，敢不自量，窃幸万一。 
现代文：尹敏回答道： 我看见以前的人增减图书，不自量力，也学着这样做了，私心侥幸万一不见罪。 
English: Yin Min replied: I saw that people in the past added and subtracted books, not by their own efforts, but also learned to do so, selfishly lucky in case they were not found guilty.

古文：帝深非之，虽竟不罪，而亦以此沈滞。
现代文：帝大为不满，虽然没有加罪于他，但尹敏从此不得重用。
English: The Imperial University was displeased, and although no additional charges were brought against him, Yin Min was no longer allowed to reuse the rope.

古文：与班彪亲善，每相遇，辄日旰忘食，夜分不寝，自以为钟期、伯牙，庄周、惠施之相得也。
现代文：尹敏与班彪是好朋友，两人相遇常常谈得日落西山忘记了吃饭，深夜不睡觉，他们自己认为是钟子期、伯牙、庄周、惠施一流。
English: Yin Min and Ban Biao are good friends. When the two meet, they often talk so much that they forget to eat at sunset and do not sleep late at night. They themselves think that Zhong Zi Shi, Ba Ya, Zhuang Zhou and Hui Shi are first-class.

古文：后三迁长陵令。
现代文：后来三升任长陵令。
English: Later, he was promoted three times to the position of Choryo Rei.

古文：永平五年，诏书捕男子周虑。
现代文：永平五年，诏书逮捕男子周虑。
English: In the fifth year of Yongping, a man named Zhou Xian was arrested.

古文：虑素有名称，而善于敏，敏坐系免官。及出，叹曰： 喑聋之徒，真世之有道者也。
现代文：周虑素有名称，与尹敏相好，尹敏因此被系免官，出狱时，叹息说： 聋哑之流，真是世上有道的人啊。
English: Zhou Xian had a name and was good friends with Yin Min. As a result, Yin Min was relieved of his duties. When he was released from prison, he said with a sigh: "The deaf and dumb are truly the most virtuous people in the world."

古文：何谓察察而遇斯患乎？ 
现代文：不然，察察为明的人为什么遇上这样的祸患呢？ 
English: Otherwise, why would such a calamity befall a man of discernment?

古文：十一年，除郎中，迁谏议大夫。
现代文：永平十一年，升谏议大夫，死在家里。
English: Yongping 11 years old, a doctor of medicine, died at home.

古文：卒于家。周防字伟公，汝南汝阳人也。
现代文：周防传，周防字伟公，汝南汝阳人。
English: Zhou Fang Chuan, Zhou Fang Zi Wei Gong, Ru Nan Ru Yang Ren.

古文：父扬，少孤微，常修逆旅，以供过客，而不受其报。
现代文：父亲周扬，小时失去了父亲，家境贫困，曾经开旅店，供来往客人住宿，但不收取报酬。
English: His father, Zhou Yang, lost his father at an early age, and the family was poor. He once opened a hotel to provide accommodation for guests coming and going, but he did not receive any remuneration.

古文：防年十六，仕郡小吏。
现代文：周防十六岁时，出仕为郡小吏。
English: When Zhou Fang was sixteen years old, he served as a county magistrate.

古文：世祖巡狩汝南，召掾史试经，防尤能诵读，拜为守丞。
现代文：世祖出巡汝南，召见掾史考试率经术，周防特别能诵读，授任守丞。
English: The ancestor went on a tour of the south of Ryukyu, and was summoned to see that the rate of passing the examination in history was high, and Zhou Bao was particularly able to recite, and was awarded the title of Shoucheng.

古文：防以未冠，谒去。
现代文：周防自己还未成人，请去。
English: Zhou Fang himself is not yet an adult, please go.

古文：师事徐州剌史盖豫，受《古文尚书》。经明，举孝廉，拜郎中。
现代文：从徐州刺史盖豫学习《古文尚书》，经义通晓，举孝廉，授郎中。
English: He studied the "Ancient Texts of the Shang Dynasty" from Xuzhou Zhi Shi Gai Yu. He was well versed in the meaning of the scriptures, raised a filial son, and had a son-in-law.

古文：撰《尚书杂记》三十二篇，四十万言。
现代文：著《尚书杂记》三十二篇，四十万字。
English: He is the author of "Shang Shuxizhong Ji" with thirty-two articles and 400,000 words.

古文：太尉张禹荐补博士，稍迁陈留太守，坐法免。
现代文：太尉张禹荐他补博士，升陈留太守，因犯法，免去官职。
English: Second Lieutenant Zhang Yu recommended him to fill the post of doctor, and promoted Chen to the position of grand marshal, but he was removed from his post for violating the law.

古文：年七十八，卒于家。
现代文：七十八岁死在家里。
English: He died at home at the age of 78.

古文：子举，自有传。
现代文：儿子周举，另有传。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Zhou Ji.

古文：孔僖字仲和，鲁国鲁人也。
现代文：◆孔僖传，孔僖字仲和，鲁国鲁人。
English: ◆The legend of Confucius, Confucius's character Zhonghe, and the Lu people of Lu.

古文：自安国以下，世传《古文尚书》、《毛诗》。
现代文：从孔安国以下，世传《古文尚书》、《毛诗》。
English: From Kong An Guo onward, "Kowen Shang Shu" and "Mao Shi" have been passed down through the ages.

古文：曾祖父子建，少游长安，与崔篆友善。
现代文：曾祖父孔子建，年轻时游学长安，与崔篆友好。
English: His great-grandfather, Confucius Jian, studied in Chang'an when he was young, and was friendly with Cui Yong.

古文：及篆仕王莽为建新大尹，尝劝子建仕。
现代文：崔篆出仕王莽任建新大尹时，曾经劝孔子建出仕。
English: When Wang Mang was appointed as the new Great Yin, he had persuaded Confucius to become the new Great Yin.

古文：对曰： 吾有布衣之心，子有衮冕之志，各从所好，不亦善乎！
现代文：子建回答他说 ：我有做布衣老百姓的心愿，您有做官的志气，各人听各人的所爱，不是很好吗？
English: Zi Jian replied to him, "I have the desire to make cloth clothes for the common people. You have the ambition to become an official. Everyone should listen to what they love. Isn't that great?"

古文：道既乘矣，请从此辞。 
现代文：我们所走的道路，既然不同，请从此别。 
English: Since the path we are taking is different, please don't do it again.

古文：遂归，终于家。
现代文：就回去了，死在家里。
English: He went back and died at home.

古文：僖与崔篆孙骃复相友善，同游太学，习《春秋》。
现代文：孔僖与崔篆的孙子崔骃是好朋友，同游太学，学习《春秋》。
English: Confucius and Cui Wei's grandson Cui Wei are good friends. They travel to the same school and study "Spring and Autumn."

古文：因读吴王夫差时事，僖废书叹曰： 若是，所谓画龙不成反为狗者。 
现代文：因读吴王夫差的时事，孔僖废书叹息说： 如此，这是所谓画虎不成反为狗。 
English: As a result of reading Wu Wangfu's poor current affairs, Kong Yu wasted the book and sighed and said: So, this is the so-called painting of a tiger turning into a dog.

古文：骃曰： 然。
现代文：崔骃说： 是的。
English: Cui Zhe said: Yes.

古文：昔孝武皇帝始为天子，年方十八，崇信圣道，师则先王，五六年间，号胜文、景。
现代文：从前孝武皇帝做天子时，年纪轻轻的，才十八岁，崇信圣人之道，以先王为学习的榜样，五六年的时间，号称胜过文帝、景帝的恭俭。
English: When the former Emperor Xiaowu was the Son of Heaven, he was a young man, only eighteen years old. He believed in the way of a saint, and took the previous king as a model for learning. For five or six years, he was known to be more frugal than Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing.

古文：及后恣己，忘其前之为善。 
现代文：到后来任意而行，忘记了自己以前的好处。 
English: Later, they acted arbitrarily and forgot their previous benefits.

古文：僖曰： 书传若此多矣！ 
现代文：孔僖道 ：书传上这样的事情多着呢！ 
English: Kong Xuan Dao: There are a lot of things like this in books!

古文：邻房生梁郁和之曰： 如此，武帝亦是狗邪？ 
现代文：邻房生梁郁附和着道： 这样，武帝也是狗吗？ 
English: Liang Yu, who lives next door, chimed in: So Emperor Wu is also a dog?

古文：僖、骃默然不对。
现代文：孔僖、崔骃默然不做声。
English: Kong Wei and Cui Wei remained silent.

古文：郁怒恨之，阴上书告骃、僖诽谤先帝，刺讥当世。
现代文：梁郁发怒恨了他们，暗地里上书告崔骃、孔僖诽谤先帝，讥讽当世。
English: Liang Yu was furious and hated them. He secretly sent a letter to Cui Zheng and Kong Zheng, accusing them of slandering the former emperor and mocking the contemporary world.

古文：事下有司，骃诣吏受讯。
现代文：朝廷把这件事交管事人处理，崔骃去狱吏受审讯。
English: The court referred the matter to the person in charge, and Cui Gan went to the prison officials for interrogation.

古文：僖以吏捕方至，恐诛，乃上书肃宗自讼曰：臣之愚意，以为凡言诽谤者，谓实无此事而虚加诬之也。
现代文：孔僖看到逮捕他的人快来了，害怕被诛，于是上书肃宗申诉： 我的愚蠢的意思，认为凡属称为诽谤的，是说实际上没有这回事，捏造诬蔑而已。
English: Seeing that his arresting officer was approaching, Kong Juan was afraid of being arrested, so he wrote a formal complaint: My stupid idea that everything that is called slander is actually nothing but fabricated slander.

古文：至如孝武皇帝，政之美恶，显在汉史，坦如日月。
现代文：至于孝武皇帝，政治的好与坏，在汉史上写得明明白白，有如日月。
English: As for Emperor Xiaowu, the good and bad of politics are as clear as the sun and moon in the history of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是为直说书传实事，非虚谤也。
现代文：这是叫做直说书传实事，不算捏造。
English: It's called a true story, not a fabrication.

古文：夫帝者为善，则天下之善咸归焉；其不善，则天下之恶亦萃焉。斯皆有以致之，故不可以诛于人也。
现代文：皇帝为善，天下的善就都归于他，皇帝不为善，天下的恶也都会集在他那里，这都有原因的，不可以责于人呢。
English: If the emperor is good, all the good in the world will come to him. If the emperor is not good, all the evil in the world will come to him. There is a reason for all this, and no one can be blamed for it.

古文：且陛下即位以来，政教未过，而德泽有加，天下所具也，臣等独何讥刺哉？
现代文：并且皇上即位以来，政治没有什么过失，德泽及于百姓的却很多，天下的人都是知道的，我等为什么要讥刺他呢？
English: Moreover, since the Emperor ascended the throne, there have been no mistakes in politics, but there have been many virtues and virtues in the people. People all over the world know this, so why should we ridicule him?

古文：假使所非实是，则固应悛改；倘其不当，亦宜含容，又何罪焉？
现代文：假使非议的是事实，那就应该坚决悔过改正；若是说得不适合，也应当宽容，又为什么要加罪他呀？
English: If the accusation is true, it should be firmly repented and corrected; if it is inappropriate, it should also be tolerated, and why should he be punished?

古文：陛下不推原大数，深自为计，徒肆私忿，以快其意。
现代文：皇上不推原大数，深自考虑，仅仅为了泄私忿，以快己意。
English: The emperor did not push the original large number, deep self-consideration, just to vent his private anger, with self-interest.

古文：臣等受戮，死即死耳，顾天下之人，必回视易虑，以此事窥陛下心。
现代文：我等受戮，死就死了，但天下的人，一定会改变过去对皇上的看法，从这件事观察皇上的用心。
English: We are waiting to be slaughtered, death is death, but the people of the world will certainly change their past views of the emperor and observe the emperor's intentions from this matter.

古文：自今以后，苟见不可之事，终莫复言者矣。
现代文：自今以后，如果看到不可的事，就绝对不会再说了啊。
English: From now on, if I see something that is impossible, I will never say it again.

古文：臣之所以不爱其死，犹敢极言者，诚为陛下深惜此大业。
现代文：我之所以不怕死，还敢于毫无顾虑地这样说，真正是为皇上爱惜这天下大业。
English: The reason why I am not afraid of death, and dare to say this without hesitation, is that I truly cherish this great cause for the Emperor.

古文：陛下若不自惜，则臣何赖焉？
现代文：皇上如果不爱惜，那我有什么办法呢？
English: If the Emperor doesn't care, what can I do?

古文：齐桓公亲扬其先君之恶，以唱管仲，然后群臣得尽其心。
现代文：齐桓公亲自揭露他先君的过错，以启发管仲，然后全体臣子得以尽心为国。
English: Prince Qi Huan personally exposed the wrongdoing of his predecessor to enlighten Guanzhong, and then all the courtiers were able to devote themselves to the country.

古文：今陛下乃欲以十世之武帝，远讳实事，岂不与桓公异哉？
现代文：现在皇上居然想以十世的武帝，时代久远，隐瞒事实，难道不与桓公差得太远了吗？
English: Now the emperor actually wants to hide the fact that he is the 10th Emperor Wu, a long time ago. Isn't he too far away from Prince Huan?

古文：臣恐有司卒然见构，衔恨蒙枉，不得自叙，使后世论者，擅以陛下有所方比，宁可复使子孙追掩之乎？
现代文：我恐怕管事人卒然构害，衔恨蒙冤，不能申诉，使后世议论的人随便以皇上作比较，难道可以再使子孙补救遮掩吗？
English: I am afraid that the steward will be blamed for the accident, will be hated and wronged, will not be able to appeal, and will cause people in later generations to casually make comparisons with the emperor. Is it possible to make the descendants remedy and cover up?

古文：谨诣阙伏待重诛。
现代文：我恭谨地去朝廷等待重诛。 
English: I respectfully went to the imperial court to wait for the re-enactment.

古文：帝始亦无罪僖等意，及书奏，立诏勿问，拜僖兰台令史。
现代文：帝本来也无加罪孔僖等人的意思，奏书送上去，马上下诏不问罪，授孔僖兰台令史。
English: Originally, the emperor had no intention of adding to the guilt of Kong Xuan and others. He sent a report to the emperor and immediately issued an edict not to charge him with any crime, awarding Kong Xuan the Order of Lantai.

古文：元和二年春，帝东巡狩，还过鲁，幸阙里，以太牢祠孔子及七十二弟子，作六代之乐，大会孔氏男子二十以上者六十三人，命儒者讲《论语》。
现代文：元和二年春，帝巡视东方，回来时经过鲁，去阙里，用牛祭祀孔子及七十二弟子，奏黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、周六代的音乐，大会孔氏男子二十岁以上的六十三人，命令儒者讲《论语》。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor toured the East. When he returned, he passed through Lu and went to Yili. He used cattle to sacrifice to Confucius and his seventy-two disciples. He played the music of Huangdi, Gong, Gong, Yu, Tang, and the Saturday generation. There were sixty-three Confucian men over the age of twenty. He ordered the Confucians to recite the Analects.

古文：僖因自陈谢。
现代文：孔僖因向皇上道谢。
English: Kong Xuan thanked the emperor for coming.

古文：帝曰： 今日之会，宁于卿宗有光荣乎？ 
现代文：帝说： 今天的大会，难道不是对于您孔氏一种光荣吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Isn't today's assembly a great honor for you, Kong?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻明王圣主，莫不尊师贵道。
现代文：孔僖回答道： 我听说贤明的圣主，没有不尊师重道的。
English: Confucius replied, "I have heard that the wise and holy Lord does not show disrespect to teachers.

古文：今陛下亲屈万乘，辱临敝里，此乃崇礼先师，增辉圣德。
现代文：现在皇上作为天子，亲自到我们这里，这是崇敬致礼老师，使圣德增辉。
English: Now that the Emperor, as the Son of Heaven, has come to us in person, it is a reverence to pay homage to the teacher and to enhance the sanctity.

古文：至于光荣，非所敢承。 
现代文：至于说到光荣，是不敢承当的。 
English: When it comes to glory, I wouldn't dare.

古文：帝大笑曰： 非圣者子孙，焉有斯言乎！ 
现代文：帝大笑说： 不是圣人的子孙，哪里说得这样好的话啊！ 
English: The emperor laughed loudly and said: "You are not the descendant of a saint, how can you say such nice things!

古文：遂拜僖郎中，赐褒成侯损及孔氏男女线、帛，诏僖从还京师，使校书东观。
现代文：就授孔僖郎中，赐褒成侯损及孔氏男女钱帛，令孔僖跟他回京师，使他校书东观。
English: On conferring the title of Confucius's disciple, he bestowed the title of Confucius's son-in-law and the title of Confucius's male and female disciple, and ordered Confucius to return to Beijing to study with him, so that he would have an eastern view of school books.

古文：冬，拜临晋令，崔骃以《家林》筮之，谓为不吉，止僖曰： 子盍辞乎？ 
现代文：这年冬天，授临晋令，崔骃用《家林》占卜，说不好，阻止孔僖道 ：你不如辞了的好。 
English: This winter, upon receiving the Order of the Jin Dynasty, Cui Yao used "Jia Lin" to tell fortunes, to say bad things, and to stop Kong Yao from doing bad things: "It's better to say nothing."

古文：僖曰： 学不为人，仕不择官，凶吉由己，而由卜乎？ 
现代文：孔僖说： 学习不为人，仕不选择什么样的官才做，凶吉由己，难道是由卜吗？ 
English: Confucius said: "Study is not a person, officials do not choose what kind of officials to do, and evil omens are up to themselves. Is it up to Bo?"

古文：在县三年，卒官，遗令即葬。二子：长彦、季彦，并十余岁。
现代文：死在任上，遗嘱就地埋葬。二子长彦、季彦，都十多岁。
English: He died in office, and his will was buried on the spot. His two sons, Nagahiko and Kihiko, are both more than ten years old.

古文：蒲坂令许君然劝令反鲁。对曰： 今载柩而归，则违父令；舍墓而去，心所不忍。 
现代文：蒲坂令许君然劝他们回鲁原籍，回答道： 现在载着父柩而归，违反了父亲的遗嘱；别墓而去，心所不忍。 
English: Busaka ordered Xu Jun to persuade them to return to their original place of residence in Lu, and he replied: I am now returning with my father's ashes, in violation of my father's will; I cannot bear to leave the grave.

古文：遂留华阴。
现代文：于是留在华阴。
English: So he stayed in Huayin.

古文：长彦好章句学，季彦守其家业，门徒数百人。
现代文：长彦好章句学，季彦守了他的家业，传《古文尚书》、《毛诗》等学。门生数百人。
English: Nagahiko was a good student of chapter and verse, while Kihiko kept up his family business, teaching classics such as "Kobun Shosho" and "Moshi." Hundreds of students followed in his footsteps.

古文：延光元年，河西大雨雹，大者如斗。
现代文：延光元年，河西落大雹，大的如斗大。
English: In the first year of Yan Guang, Hexi fell into a great depression.

古文：安帝诏有道术之士极陈变眚，乃召季彦见于德阳殿，帝亲问其故。
现代文：安帝诏令有道术的人，陈述灾异，在德阳殿召见孔季彦，帝亲自问孔季彦这是什么缘故。
English: Emperor An decreed that people with Taoist skills should report disasters, and summoned Kong Ji Yan at Deyang Palace. Emperor An personally asked Kong Ji Yan what was the reason for this.

古文：对曰： 此皆阴乘阳之征也。
现代文：孔季彦回答道 ：这是阴胜阳的征兆。
English: Kong Qihang replied: This is a sign of yin winning over yang.

古文：今贵臣擅权，母后党盛，陛下宜修圣德，虑此二者。 
现代文：现在大臣专权，母后党羽强大，皇上应当修至德，考虑这两件事。 
English: Now that ministers have absolute power and the mother's party is strong, the emperor should cultivate virtue and consider these two things.

古文：帝默然，左右皆恶之。
现代文：帝不吭声，左右的人都恨孔季彦。
English: The emperor did not speak out, and people on both sides hated Kong Qihang.

古文：举孝廉，不就。
现代文：举孝廉，不就。
English: It's not enough to be a filial son.

古文：三年，年四十七，终于家。
现代文：三年，年四十七岁，死在家里。
English: Three years later, at the age of 47, he died at home.

古文：初，平帝时王莽秉政，乃封孔子后孔均为褒成侯，追谥孔子为褒成宣尼。
现代文：以前，平帝对王莽掌权，封孔子后代孔均为褒成侯，追谥孔子为褒成宣尼。
English: In the past, Emperor Ping held power over Wang Mang, and the descendants of Confucius were rewarded with the title of prince, and those who pursued Confucius were rewarded with the title of prince.

古文：及莽败，失国。
现代文：王莽失败后，失去了封国。
English: After Wang Mang's defeat, he lost his fiefdom.

古文：建武十三年，世祖复封均子志为褒成侯。
现代文：建武十三年，世祖再给孔均的儿子孔志为褒成侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era, the founder of the dynasty gave the son of Kongjun, Kongzhi, the honor of becoming a prince.

古文：志卒，子损嗣。
现代文：孔志逝世，儿子孔损继承。
English: Kongzhi died and his son Kongzai succeeded him.

古文：永元四年，徙封褒亭侯。
现代文：永元四年，徙封褒亭侯。
English: In the 4th year of the 1st year of the 11th month of the 1st year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th month.

古文：损卒，子曜嗣。
现代文：孔损逝世，儿子孔曜继承。
English: Kongzai died, and his son Kongyou succeeded him.

古文：曜卒，子完嗣。
现代文：孔曜逝世，儿子孔完继承。
English: Confucius died, and his son Confucius succeeded him.

古文：世世相传，至献帝初，国绝。
现代文：代代相传，到献帝初年，封国断绝。
English: Passed down from generation to generation, the first year after the emperor was crowned, the state seal was broken.

古文：杨伦字仲理，陈留东昏人也。
现代文：◆杨伦传，杨伦字仲理，陈留东昏人。
English: ◆ Yang Lun Chuan, Yang Lun Zi Zhongli, Chen Liu Dong Douren.

古文：少为诸生，师事司徒丁鸿，习《古文尚书》。
现代文：年轻时为诸生，拜司徒丁鸿为老师，学《古文尚书》。
English: When he was young, he was a disciple of Ding Hong as a teacher and studied the "Ancient and Modern Classics."

古文：为郡文学掾。
现代文：任郡文学掾。
English: He was appointed as the county literary scholar.

古文：更历数将，志乘于时，以不能人间事，遂去职，不复应州郡命。
现代文：经过几个郡将，志意不合于时，因为不会应酬世俗的一套 做官术 ，于是去职，自此不再应州郡的任命。
English: After several county generals, his ambition was not in line with the times, because he would not entertain a worldly set of officialdom, so he left the post and no longer responded to the appointment of the state and county.

古文：讲授于大泽中，弟子至千余人。
现代文：讲授于大泽中，弟子有一千多人。
English: He teaches at Osawa Junior High School and has more than a thousand students.

古文：元初中，郡礼请，三府并辟，公车征，皆辞疾不就。
现代文：元初中，郡里以礼请他，三府都征召他，公车征，都托病不就。
English: Former junior high school, the county invited him with courtesy, the three prefectures conscripted him, and the bus conscripted him, but he couldn't go because of illness.

古文：后特征博士，为清河王傅。
现代文：后来特征博士，做清河王傅。
English: Later, he became a doctor of physiognomy and served as the Qinghe Wangfu.

古文：是岁，安帝崩，伦辄弃官奔丧，号泣阙下不绝声。
现代文：这年，安帝逝世，杨伦就弃官奔丧，号泣阙下不断声。
English: This year, after the death of Emperor An, Yang Lun resigned from his post and went into mourning, crying incessantly.

古文：阎太后以其专擅去职，坐抵罪。
现代文：阎太后因他专擅，罢了他的官，获罪。
English: Because of his expertise, Empress Yan dismissed him from his post and was found guilty.

古文：顺帝即位，诏免伦刑，遂留行丧于恭陵。
现代文：顺帝即位，诏令免去杨伦的罪刑，就留在恭陵办丧事。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, the imperial edict exempted Yang Lun from criminal punishment, so he stayed in Gongling to carry out the funeral.

古文：服阕，征拜侍中。
现代文：服满，征授侍中。
English: He has completed his service and is now in the process of being awarded the title of samurai.

古文：是时，邵陵令任嘉在职贪秽，因迁武威太守，后有司奏嘉臧罪千万，征考廷尉，其所牵染将相大臣百有余人。
现代文：这时邵陵令任嘉在职贪污腐化，升武威太守，后来管事人奏任嘉赃罪千万，征到廷尉考问，牵涉将相大臣一百多人。
English: At this time, Shao Ling ordered Renjia to engage in on-the-job corruption, and he was promoted to the position of military commander and grand marshal. Later, the steward reported that Renjia was guilty of tens of thousands of crimes, and he was summoned to the imperial examination, involving more than a hundred generals and ministers.

古文：伦乃上书曰： 臣闻《春秋》诛恶及本，本诛则恶消；振裘持领，领正则毛理。
现代文：杨伦于是上书道 ：我听说《春秋》上说诛恶要找根本，根本除了，其余的就自然会消除了；提裘要拿着裘领，裘领正了，裘毛就自然顺理了。
English: Yang Lun then wrote: I heard that "Spring and Autumn" said that the root of evil should be found, the root should be removed, and the rest will naturally be eliminated; Tijiu should hold Qiu's collar, Qiu's collar is correct, and Qiu's hair is naturally smooth.

古文：今任嘉所坐狼藉，未受辜戮，猥以垢身，改典大郡，自非案坐举者，无以禁绝奸萌。
现代文：现在任嘉所犯的贪污罪行，极为严重，却没有受到处理，反而以罪恶之身，调守大郡，如果不办原来荐举的人，就不能禁绝奸罪。
English: The corruption crimes committed by Ren Jia are extremely serious, but they have not been dealt with. Instead, he has been transferred to Daxu County as a criminal. If the person who originally recommended him is not dealt with, the crime of treason cannot be prohibited.

古文：往者湖陆令张叠、萧令驷贤、徐州刺史刘福等，衅秽既章，咸伏其诛，而豺狼之吏至今不绝者，岂非本举之主不加之罪乎？
现代文：从前湖陆令张叠、萧令马因贤、徐州刺史刘福等人，罪恶明白之后，都处决了，但是如豺狼一样的官吏至今不绝，难道不是对荐举的人没有加罪的原因吗？
English: Former Hulun ling Zhangjiajie, Xiao ling Ma Yingxian, Xuzhou ling Shi Liu Fu and others were all executed after their crimes became clear, but officials like jackals are still incessant. Isn't that the reason why there is no additional punishment for the person who recommended the promotion?

古文：昔齐威之霸，杀奸臣五人，并及举者，以弭谤讟。
现代文：从前齐威成霸，杀奸臣五个，都连累到荐举的人，因而止息了诽谤的流行。
English: In the past, Qi Wei became a tyrant and killed five treacherous vassals, all of which involved people who were recommended for promotion, thus ending the epidemic of slander.

古文：当断不断，《黄石》所戒。
现代文：当断不断，反受其乱，这是黄石公所戒的。
English: It is forbidden by Huangshi Gong to be constantly offended and to be disturbed by it.

古文：夫圣王所以听僮夫匹妇之言者，犹尘加嵩岱，雾集淮海，虽未有益，不为损也。
现代文：圣主贤王所以听匹夫匹妇的话，好比灰尘加在嵩山、泰山，云雾集在淮海，虽说没有增加什么，但也没有使它失去什么呢。
English: Therefore, the holy Lord and King listened to the words of the two women, and it was as if dust was added to Mount Song and Mount Tai, and clouds gathered in the Huaihai Sea. Although it did not add anything, it did not lose anything.

古文：惟陛下留神省察。 
现代文：希望皇上留神考察。 
English: I hope the Emperor will pay attention to the investigation.

古文：奏御，有司以伦言切直，辞不逊顺，下之。
现代文：书送上。管事人认为杨伦的话太切直，措词不委婉，公布出来。
English: The administrator thought that Yang Lun's words were too direct and the wording was not euphemistic, and it was made public.

古文：尚书奏伦探知密事，激以求直。坐不敬，结鬼薪。
现代文：尚书奏杨伦探知国家机密，说话激切以表示自己正直，获不敬罪，结论定为鬼薪罪。
English: Shang Shuxiao Yang Lun detected state secrets, spoke passionately to express his honesty, was found guilty of disrespect, and the conclusion was set as a ghost salary crime.

古文：诏书以伦数进忠言，特原之，免归田里。
现代文：诏令认为杨伦多次进忠言，特加原宥，免官回乡。
English: The imperial edict held that Yang Lun had been promoted to the post of loyal counselor many times, and had been dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：阳嘉二年，征拜太中大夫。
现代文：阳嘉二年，征授太中大夫。
English: In the second year of Yang Jia, he was awarded the title of Taizhong Doctor.

古文：大将军梁商以为长史。
现代文：大将军梁商任为长史。
English: General Liang Shangren has a long history.

古文：谏诤不合，出补常山王傅，病不之官。
现代文：因谏诤不合，出补常山王傅，因病不到任。
English: Due to disagreements, Wang Fu of Zhuozhong Mountain was appointed. However, he was unable to take up the post due to illness.

古文：诏书敕司隶催促发遣，伦乃留河内朝歌，以疾自上，曰： 有留死一尺，无北行一寸。
现代文：诏令司隶催促他去，杨伦因留河内朝歌，因病上书说： 有留死一尺，不北行一寸。
English: The imperial commanding officer urged him to go, and Yang Lun, who had stayed in Hanoi to sing the morning song, wrote in a letter due to illness: "If you stay, you will die, if you don't go north, you will die."

古文：刎颈不易，九裂不恨。
现代文：杀头不改，九死不恨。
English: If you don't mend your ways, you'll die nine times.

古文：匹夫所执，强于三军。
现代文：匹夫所守，比三军还强。
English: The defense of a peacock is stronger than three armies.

古文：固敢有辞。 
现代文：因敢于上词。 
English: For daring to say the last word.

古文：帝乃下诏曰： 伦出幽升高，宠以籓傅，稽留王命，擅止道路，托疾自从，苟肆狷志。 
现代文：帝乃下诏说： 杨伦出低处，升高地，得傅的宏任不遵王命，擅自停止道路，托病自从，肆其狂志。 
English: Emperor Nao issued an edict saying: Yang Lun started from a low place and rose to a higher place. The great scholar Hong Ren disobeyed the king's order, stopped the road without permission, feigned illness, and let his ambition run wild.

古文：遂征诣廷尉，有诏原罪。
现代文：于是征到廷尉，诏令原谅他的罪过。
English: So a courtier was summoned and he was ordered to forgive his sins.

古文：伦前后三征，皆以直谏不合。
现代文：杨伦前后三次被征举，都因直谏不合。
English: Yang Lun was conscripted three times, all because he did not fit in.

古文：既归，闭门讲授，自绝人事。
现代文：归家以后，闭门讲学，不与人来往。
English: After returning home, he lectured behind closed doors and did not socialize with others.

古文：公车复征，逊遁不行，卒于家。
现代文：公车再征，逃避不应，死在家里。
English: Bus re-enlistment, should not escape, died at home.

古文：中兴，北海牟融习《大夏侯尚书》，东海王良习《小夏侯尚书》，沛国桓荣习《欧阳尚书》。
现代文：光武中兴，北海牟融学《大夏侯尚书》，东海王良学《小夏侯尚书》，沛国桓荣学《欧阳尚书》。
English: Guangwu Zhongxing, Beikai Murong studied "Big Xia Hou Shang Shu," Donghai Wang Liang studied "Small Xia Hou Shang Shu," and Pei Guo Huan Rong studied "Ouyang Shang Shu."

古文：荣世习相传授，东京最盛。
现代文：桓荣世代学习传授，东京称他最盛。
English: Kan's generation of learning and teaching, Tokyo says he is the best.

古文：扶风杜林传《古文尚书》，林同郡贾逵为之作训，马融作传，郑玄注解，由是《古文尚书》遂显于世。
现代文：扶风杜林传《古文尚书》、杜林同郡人贾逵为他作考证，马融作传，郑玄作注解，由是《古文尚书》就为世所重。
English: Fufu Duling's "Ancient Chinese Classics" was passed down to the world, with Duling's compatriot Jia Wei as a reference, Ma Rong as a biographer, and Zheng Xuan as a commentator. This is why the "Ancient Chinese Classics" is so important.

