古文：申时行，字汝默，长洲人。
现代文：申时行，字汝默，长洲人。
English: When the call goes out, the word is silent, and the people of Cheung Chau rise.

古文：嘉靖四十一年进士第一。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年的进士第一。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing, he was the first to be promoted.

古文：授修撰。
现代文：授职为修撰。
English: The awarding of the post is a self-assessment.

古文：历左庶子，掌翰林院事。
现代文：历任左庶子，负责翰林院的事务。
English: Successive left illegitimate son, responsible for the affairs of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：万厉五年，由礼部右侍郎改吏部。
现代文：万历五年，由礼部右侍郎改任吏部职。
English: After five long years, he was transferred from the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department to the position of the Secretary.

古文：时行以文字受知张居正，蕴藉不立崖异，居正安之。
现代文：当时申时行因为文采与书法而受张居正赏识，含蓄宽容不标新立异，张居正安抚他。
English: At that time, Shin Shih-hong was appreciated by Zhang Juzheng because of his literary skills and calligraphy. Implicit tolerance was not new and innovative, and Zhang Juzheng appeased him.

古文：六年三月，居正将归葬父，请广阁臣，遂以左侍郎兼东阁大学士入预机务。
现代文：六年三月，张居正准备回乡安葬父亲，奏请扩充内阁大臣，他便以左侍郎兼东阁大学士的身份入阁参与机要事务。
English: In March of the sixth year, when Zhang Ju was preparing to return to his hometown to bury his father, he submitted a request to expand the cabinet of ministers, and he entered the cabinet as a left-hand man and a scholar of Donggak University to participate in important affairs.

古文：已，进礼部尚书兼文渊阁，累进少傅兼太子太傅、吏部尚书、建极殿。
现代文：此后，晋升为礼部尚书兼职文渊阁，升任少傅兼太子太傅、吏部尚书、建极殿学士。
English: After that, he was promoted to the part-time position of the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was promoted to the position of the Junior Master and the Grand Master of the Prince's Household, the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the academician of the Jianji Temple.

古文：张居正揽权久，操群下如束湿，异己者率逐去之。
现代文：张居正揽权很久，操纵部下如同拧去湿水，异己之人全部驱除。
English: Zhang Juzheng has been grabbing power for a long time, manipulating his subordinates like wringing out wet water, and expelling all those who are different.

古文：及居正卒，张四维、时行相继柄政，务为宽大。
现代文：等到张居正去世，张四维、申时行相继执政，实行宽大政策。
English: After Zhang Juzheng's death, Zhang Siwei and Shin Shigang successively took office and implemented a lenient policy.

古文：以次收召老成，布列庶位，朝论多称之。
现代文：依次召收老练成熟之人，安排在各个职位，朝廷的议论大都称赞此举。
English: The Imperial Court's commentaries mostly praised the move to successively recruit experienced and mature people and place them in various positions.

古文：然是时内阁权积重，六卿大抵徇阁臣指。
现代文：然而，此时内阁的权势很重，六卿大都依从内阁大臣的指向。
English: However, at this time, the power of the cabinet was very strong, and most of the six lords followed the direction of the cabinet minister.

古文：诸大臣由四维、时行起，乐其宽，多与相厚善。
现代文：诸位大臣由张四维、申时行起用，大臣们对他们的宽大之举感到高兴，大都与他们很友好。
English: The ministers, starting with Zhang Siwei and Shen Shixing, were pleased with their generous act, and most of them were very friendly with them.

古文：四维忧归，时行为首辅。
现代文：张四维服丧回乡，申时行任首辅。
English: Zhang Siwei went back to his hometown in mourning, and was appointed as the chief aide when he died.

古文：余有丁、许国、王锡爵、王家屏先后同居政府，无嫌猜。
现代文：余有丁、许国、王锡爵、王家屏先后同居衙门之中，彼此没有猜疑。
English: Yu Yuding, Xu Guo, Wang Xizhe, and Wang Jiaping successively lived together in the palace, and there was no suspicion between them.

古文：而言路为居正所遏，至是方发舒。
现代文：此前舆论被张居正控制，到此时才得舒缓。
English: Previously, public opinion had been controlled by Zhang Jiusheng, and it was only at this time that it was relaxed.

古文：以居正素昵时行，不能无讽刺。
现代文：因为张居正一向亲近申时行，人们不能不对他有所讽刺。
English: Because Zhang Juzheng has always been close to Shenshi Rong, people can't help but be sarcastic about him.

古文：时行外示博大能容人，心故弗善也。
现代文：申时行对外显出胸怀博大，能够容人，内心却本不善良。
English: To the outside world, Shin Shigyo appeared to be broad-minded and tolerant, but inside he was not a kind person.

古文：帝虽乐言者讦居正短，而颇恶人论时事，言事者间谪官。
现代文：皇帝虽然高兴言官攻击张居正的缺点，却很厌恶别人评论时事，论事的人间或遭贬官。
English: Although the emperor was pleased that the speaker attacked Zhang Juzheng's shortcomings, he was very averse to others commenting on current affairs, discussing the human side of things, or being demoted.

古文：众以此望时行，口语相诋諆。
现代文：众人因此都责备申时行，口语交相辱骂。
English: As a result, everyone blamed Shen Shijie and verbally abused each other.

古文：诸大臣又皆右时行拄言者口，言者益愤，时行以此损物望。
现代文：诸位大臣又都袒护，申时行堵塞言官之口，言官更加愤怒，申时行因此损害了自己的威望。
English: The ministers all defended him, and Shin Shigyo blocked the spokesman's mouth. The spokesman became even angrier, and Shin Shigyo thereby damaged his own prestige.

古文：十二年三月，御史张文熙尝言前阁臣专恣者四事，请帝永禁革之。
现代文：万历十二年三月，御史张文熙曾谏言以前的内阁大臣的四件专横恣意的事，奏请皇帝永远将其禁革。
English: In March of the twelfth year of the Wanli calendar, the imperial historian Zhang Wenxi had reproached the former cabinet minister with four arbitrary and arbitrary things, and asked the emperor to ban him forever.

古文：时行疏争曰： 文熙谓部院百执事不当置考成簿，送阁察考；吏、兵二部除授，不当一一取裁；督抚巡按行事，不当密揭请教；阁中票拟，当使同官知。
现代文：申时行上奏争辩称 ：张文熙称部院的百官不应该设置考成簿，送交内阁监察、考核；吏部、兵部的解职授任，不应该一一由内阁裁决；督抚巡按办事，不应该用密揭请教阁臣；内阁中的票拟，应该让同官知道。
English: At the time of the petition, the petition argued that: Zhang Wenxi said that the 100 officials of the ministries and institutions should not set up examination books and send them to the cabinet for supervision and assessment; the dismissal and appointment of the Ministry of Personnel and the Ministry of Military Affairs should not be decided by the cabinet; the supervision and inspection should not use secret to consult the cabinet ministers; the votes in the cabinet should be known to the same officials.

古文：夫阁臣不职当罢黜，若并其执掌尽削之，是因噎废食也。
现代文：阁臣不称职应当罢黜，如果合并他们的职权将阁臣全部革职，这是因噎废食。
English: Cabinet ministers who are incompetent should be dismissed. If their powers are combined to dismiss all cabinet ministers, this is due to malfeasance.

古文：至票拟，无不与同官议者。 
现代文：至于票拟，没有不与同官商议的事。 
English: As for vote-rigging, there is no such thing as not consulting with one's colleagues.

古文：帝深以为然，绌文熙议不用。
现代文：皇帝也深信如此，废弃张文熙的提议不用。
English: The emperor is also convinced of this, and there is no need to scrap Zhang Wenxi's proposal.

古文：御史丁此吕言侍郎高启愚以试题劝进居正，帝手疏示时行。
现代文：御史丁此吕称侍郎高启愚用试题劝张居正即王位，皇帝御批奏疏后交给申时行看。
English: Emperor Shizong called his attendant Gao Qigu a fool for using a test question to persuade Zhang Jizheng to take the throne. After the emperor's approval, he gave it to Shen Jixing to read.

古文：时行曰： 此吕以暧昧陷人大辟，恐谗言接踵至，非清明之朝所宜有。 
现代文：申时行回答 ：丁此吕用不明不白事构陷人以斩首之罪，恐怕谗言会接踵而来，这不是清明的王朝所应该有的。 
English: Shin replied, "Ding Koguryo framed a man to be beheaded for an unknown reason. I'm afraid the criticism will come one after another. This is not what a pure dynasty should have."

古文：尚书杨巍因请出此吕于外，帝从巍言。
现代文：尚书杨巍于是请求将丁此吕贬出京城，皇帝依从了杨巍的谏言。
English: Shangshu Yang Hui then requested that Ding Guoliu be banished from the capital, and the emperor complied with Yang Hui's edict.

古文：而给事御史王士性、李植等交章劾巍阿时行意，蔽塞言路。
现代文：而给事御史王士性、李植等人交替上奏弹劾杨巍阿谀申时行，堵塞进谏之路。
English: However, Wang Shixi, Li Zhi and others, who were in charge of the investigation, alternately raised the impeachment of Yang Jie and blocked Yang Jie's path to the throne.

古文：帝寻亦悔之，命罢启愚，留此吕。
现代文：皇帝不久也后悔此事，下令罢免高启愚，将丁此吕留用。
English: The emperor soon regretted this and ordered the dismissal of Gao Qigu, leaving Ding Ke Lyu in charge.

古文：时行、巍求去。
现代文：申时行、杨巍请求离去。
English: At the time of the petition, Yang Hui requested to leave.

古文：有丁、国言： 大臣国体所系，今以群言留此吕，恐无以安时行、巍心。 
现代文：余有丁、许国称： 大臣是国体的维系，现在因为众议而留用丁此吕，恐怕不能安抚申时行、杨巍的心。 
English: Yu You Ding and Xu Guo said: The minister is the maintenance of the national body, and now because of the public discussion, Ding Guo Lv is retained. I am afraid that it will not be able to appease the hearts of Shin Shigong and Yang Jie.

古文：国尤不胜愤，专疏求去，诋诸言路。
现代文：许国尤其不堪愤怒，特地上奏请求离去，并攻击那些谏官。
English: Xu Guo, in particular, was so angry that he made a special request to leave and attacked the eunuchs.

古文：副都御史石星、侍郎陆光祖亦以为言。
现代文：副都御史石星、侍郎陆光祖也因此劝谏。
English: The vice-governor of the capital, Shi Xing, and his attendant, Lu Guangzu, also advised him.

古文：帝乃听巍，出此吕于外，慰留时行、国，而言路群起攻国。
现代文：皇帝才听从了杨巍的劝谏，将丁此吕贬出京都，安慰、挽留申时行、许国，而舆论群起攻击许国。
English: It was only after the emperor heeded Yang Xuan's advice that he banished Ding Guoliu from Kyoto and consoled and entreated Shenshi Xing and Xu Guo, while the public opinion swarmed to attack Xu Guo.

古文：时行请量罚言者，言者益心憾。
现代文：申时行奏请适当处罚议论的人，议论的人更加不满。
English: At the time of the petition, it was requested that the person who made the comment be punished appropriately, and the person who made the comment was even more dissatisfied.

古文：既而李植、江东之以大峪山寿宫事撼时行不胜，贬去，阁臣与言路日相水火矣。
现代文：不久李植、江东之用大峪山寿宫的事件来动摇申时行未能取胜，被贬职，内阁大臣与言路一天天形同水火。
English: Soon after, Li Zhi and Jiang Dongzhi used the incident of the Lushan Palace of the Sun to shake up the situation, but failed to win, and were demoted. The cabinet minister and his words and deeds were one and the same.

古文：初，御史魏允贞、郎中李三才以科场事论及时行子用懋，贬官。
现代文：起初，御史魏允贞、郎中李三才因为科举试场的事论及申时行的儿子申用懋，被贬官。
English: At first, goshi Wei Yunzhen and his brother-in-law Li Sancai were demoted because of the debate on the examination test field and the son of Shin Shigong's son applying for the post.

古文：给事中邹元标劾罢时行姻徐学谟，时行假他疏逐之去。
现代文：给事中邹元标弹劾并罢免了申时行的姻亲徐学谟，申时行就借别的奏疏将他驱逐了。
English: Xu Xuemou, a relative-in-law of Shin Shih-kwan, was impeached and removed from office, and Shin Shih-kwan expelled him on the basis of another report.

古文：已而占物情，稍稍擢三人官，三人得毋废。
现代文：不久，他观察众情，稍稍提升了三个人的官职，三个人得以不被废黜。
English: Soon, he observed the public mood, slightly promoted three people's official positions, and three people were able not to be deposed.

古文：世以此称时行长者。
现代文：世人因此称颂申时行为长者。
English: As a result, the world praises the elderly for their behavior.

古文：时行欲收人心，罢居正时所行考成法；一切为简易，亦数有献纳。
现代文：申时行想收买人心，罢除了张居正时所实行的考成法，一切从简，也多次提出治政意见。
English: In an attempt to win the hearts and minds of the people, Shen Zhi Xing eliminated the test-and-accomplishment method implemented by Zhang Jizheng, simplified everything, and repeatedly proposed governance opinions.

古文：尝因灾异，力言催科急迫，征派加增，刑狱繁多，用度侈靡之害。
现代文：曾经因为灾变，极力谏称科税催促太急迫，征派增加，刑狱繁多，开支侈靡等诸事的祸害。
English: Once, because of the disaster, they tried their best to falsely claim that it was too urgent to speed up science and technology taxation, increase conscription, have a large number of prison sentences, and spend extravagantly, etc.

古文：又尝请止抚按官助工赃罚银，请减织造数，趣发诸司章奏。
现代文：又曾经请求阻止抚按官员为支助工程乱罚款，请求减少织造的数额，催促向诸司转发奏章。
English: It has also requested to prevent the payment of random fines by officials to support the project, requested to reduce the amount of weaving, and urged to forward the report to all departments.

古文：缘尚宝卿徐贞明议，请开畿内水田。
现代文：依照尚宝卿徐贞明的提议，请求在京都地区开辟水田。
English: In accordance with the proposal of Shangbaoqing Xu Zhenming, he requested the opening of rice paddies in the Kyoto area.

古文：用邓子龙、刘綎平陇川，荐郑洛为经略，趣顺义王东归，寝叶梦熊奏以弭杨应龙之变。
现代文：任用邓子龙、刘彳廷平定陇川，推荐郑洛为经略，催促顺义王东归，压制叶梦熊的奏章以便消弭杨应龙的变乱。
English: He appointed Deng Zilong and Liu Bingding to pacify Luochuan, recommended Zheng Luo as a strategist, urged Shunyi Wang to return eastward, and suppressed Ye Mengxiong's play in order to eliminate Yang Yinglong's disturbance.

古文：然是时天下承平，上下恬熙，法纪渐不振。
现代文：然而此时天下太平，上下坦然安逸，法纪逐渐松弛。
English: However, at this time, the world was peaceful, people were at ease, and laws and regulations were gradually relaxed.

古文：时行务承帝指，不能大有建立。
现代文：申时行以遵循圣旨为要务，不能有大的建树。
English: When petitioning, it is important to act in accordance with the will of God, and there can be no great achievements.

古文：帝每遇讲期，多传免。
现代文：皇帝每每到了讲筵日期大都传令免去。
English: Every time the emperor arrived at the date of the speech, most of them were ordered to be excused.

古文：时行请虽免讲，仍进讲章。
现代文：申时行奏请即使免去侍讲仍应呈送讲章。
English: If you apply for a recital, please submit a transcript even if you do not need to attend the recital.

古文：自后为故事，讲筵遂永罢。
现代文：从此之后这就成为成例，于是讲筵被永远罢除。
English: From then on, this became the norm, and the koto was banished forever.

古文：评事雒于仁进《酒色财气四箴》，帝大怒，召时行等条分析之，将重谴。
现代文：评事名隹于仁呈献《酒色财气四箴》。皇帝大为恼怒，召见申时行等人逐条分析，准备从严责罚。
English: The commentator, Meng Yu Ren, presented the "Four Proverbs of Wealth and Liquor." The emperor was very angry and summoned Shen Shixing and others to analyze the articles one by one and prepare to punish them more severely.

古文：时行请毋下其章，而讽于仁自引去，于仁赖以免。
现代文：申时行请求皇帝不要向下散发他的奏章，而劝告名隹于仁自己辞职，名隹于仁由此幸免于惩罚。
English: Minshi Xing pleaded with the emperor not to send down his report, and advised Mingshu Yujin to resign himself. Mingshu Yujin was thus spared punishment.

古文：然章奏留中自此始。
现代文：然而奏章留于宫中的做法由此开始。
English: However, the practice of leaving the score in the palace began.

古文：十四年正月，光宗年五岁，而郑贵妃有宠，生皇三子常洵，颇萌夺嫡意。
现代文：万历十四年正月，光宗年满五岁，而郑贵妃得宠，生了皇三子常洵，颇有萌生争夺嫡宗的心思。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Wanli calendar, Guangzong was five years old, and Zheng Guifei was favored and gave birth to the third son of the emperor, Changzong. There was a budding competition for the heir.

古文：时行率同列再请建储，不听。
现代文：申时行率领同僚再三请求建立储宫，皇帝不听。
English: Shen Shih-hong and his colleagues repeatedly asked the emperor to build a storehouse, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：廷臣以贵妃故，多指斥宫闱，触帝怒，被严谴。
现代文：朝廷大臣因为贵妃的缘故，大都指责宫闱之事，触怒了皇帝，被严厉训责。
English: Most of the ministers of the imperial court blamed the imperial edict for the death of the princess, which angered the emperor, and they were severely reprimanded.

古文：帝尝诏求直言。
现代文：皇帝曾下诏让臣下直言政事。
English: The emperor once issued an edict to let his subjects speak their minds about politics.

古文：郎官刘复初、李懋桧等显侵贵妃。
现代文：郎官刘复初、李懋桧等人明显触犯了贵妃。
English: The vassals Liu Fuchu, Li Jie and others clearly violated Guifei.

古文：时行请帝下诏，令诸曹建言止及所司职掌，听其长择而献之，不得专达。
现代文：申时行奏请皇帝颁布诏书，指令各部曹的建议只议论本部门职权之内的事务，听任长官选择性地呈送，不能直接递交皇帝。
English: The petition requested the emperor to issue an imperial edict, instructing the various ministries to discuss only matters within the scope of their authority, and to allow the appointed officials to selectively submit them, and not to submit them directly to the emperor.

古文：帝甚悦，众多咎时行者。
现代文：皇帝甚感高兴，众人大都责怪申时行。
English: The emperor was overjoyed, and most people blamed Shin Shih-hong.

古文：时行连请建储。
现代文：申时行连续奏请建立储宫。
English: Please build a storehouse for the continuous playing of the shin-jyo line.

古文：十八年，帝召皇长子、皇三子，令时行入见毓德宫。
现代文：万历十八年，皇帝召见皇长子、皇三子，指令申时行等人到毓德宫觐见。
English: In the 18th year of the Wanli era, the emperor summoned the eldest son and the third son of the emperor, and ordered Shenshixing and others to go to the Shunde Palace for an audience.

古文：时行拜贺，请亟定大计。
现代文：申时行跪拜祝贺，请求皇帝赶紧决定大计。
English: He knelt down to offer congratulations and asked the emperor to make a decision as soon as possible.

古文：帝犹豫久之，下诏曰： 朕不喜激聒。
现代文：皇帝犹豫了很久，颁布诏书称： 我不喜欢激动、喧扰。
English: The emperor hesitated for a long time before issuing the edict, saying: "I don't like excitement and noise.

古文：近诸臣章奏概留中，恶其离间朕父子。
现代文：近来诸位大臣的奏章一概被留在宫中，厌恶它们离间我父子。
English: Lately, all the music of the ministers has been left in the palace. I hate that they have separated my father and son.

古文：若明岁廷臣不复渎扰，当以后年册立，否则俟皇长子十五岁举行。 
现代文：如果明年朝廷大臣不再轻慢滋扰，定当在后年册立皇储，否则就等皇长子十五岁时举行册封。 
English: If the ministers of the Imperial Court do not continue to be a trifling nuisance next year, the crown prince should be crowned the following year. Otherwise, the crown prince should be crowned when the eldest son turns fifteen.

古文：时行因戒廷臣毋激扰。
现代文：申时行于是就告诫朝廷大臣不要激发惊扰皇帝。
English: Shin Shigyo then admonished the ministers of the Imperial Court not to provoke the Emperor.

古文：明年八月，工部主事张有德请具册立仪注。
现代文：第二年八月，工部主事张有德奏请准备册立仪式的礼节制度。
English: In August of the following year, the head of the engineering department, Zhang Youde, requested that preparations be made to establish a ceremonial etiquette system.

古文：帝怒，命展期一年。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，命令延期一年。
English: The emperor, exasperated, ordered a one-year delay.

古文：而内阁中亦有疏入。
现代文：而且内阁也呈送了奏疏。
English: Moreover, the cabinet also submitted a report.

古文：时行方在告，次辅国首列时行名。
现代文：申时行刚好在度假，次辅许国将申时行的姓名列在第一位。
English: Ms Shin happened to be on holiday at the time, and the second-ranked country listed Ms Shin's name first.

古文：时行密上封事，言： 臣方在告，初不预知。
现代文：申时行秘密上奏，称： 我正在度假，起初不知道。
English: "I was on vacation and didn't know it at first," said Shin, who secretly recorded the song.

古文：册立之事，圣意已定。
现代文：册立皇储的事，皇帝的意思已经很明确。
English: The emperor's intention in appointing the crown prince was already clear.

古文：有德不谙大计，惟宸断亲裁，勿因小臣妨大典。 
现代文：张有德不识大计，希望皇帝亲自裁定，不要因为小臣的事而妨碍了大典。 
English: Zhang Youde did not know the big plan, and hoped that the emperor would personally decide not to interfere with the grand ceremony because of the matter of the junior minister.

古文：于是给事中罗大纮劾时行，谓阳附群臣之议以请立，而阴缓其事以内交。
现代文：因此，给事中罗大弹劾申时行，称他表面上附和群臣的提议，请求册立皇储，而暗地里延缓此事与内宫交好。
English: Therefore, the impeachment petition of the Central Academy of Sciences was filed, saying that on the surface he agreed with the proposal of the ministers and requested the appointment of the crown prince, while secretly delaying the matter and making friends with the Inner Court.

古文：中书黄正宾复论时行排陷同官，巧避首事之罪。
现代文：中书黄正宾又论说申时行陷害同官，巧妙地避开首犯的罪责。
English: In the book, Huang Zhengbin also said that Shen Jixing framed his colleague, cleverly avoiding the culpability of the first offender.

古文：二人皆被黜责。
现代文：两人都被罢黜官职。
English: Both were removed from office.

古文：御史邹德泳疏复上，时行力求罢。
现代文：御史邹德泳又上奏，申时行极力请求退职。
English: On the other hand, Shun Tak-yuen was promoted again, and Shin Shigyo strongly requested to resign.

古文：诏驰驿归。
现代文：诏令他乘驿车回乡。
English: He was ordered to take a train back to his hometown.

古文：归三年，光宗始出阁讲学，十年始立为皇太子。
现代文：他回乡三年，光宗才出宫接受讲学，他回乡十年光宗才被立为皇太子。
English: It was three years after he returned to his hometown that Mitsumune went to the palace to receive a lecture, and ten years after his return to his hometown that he was appointed crown prince.

古文：卒，赠太子太保。用嘉，举人。
现代文：万历四十年，申时行八十岁，皇帝派遣行人问候。
English: Forty years after his death, at the age of eighty, the emperor sent greetings to passers-by.

古文：历官广西参政。
现代文：诏书传到他家门前他就去世了。
English: He died before the edict reached his home.

古文：孙绍芳，进士，户部左侍郎。
现代文：先因为平定云南岳凤，加封少师兼太子太师、中极殿大学士，令赠封他为太师，谥号文定。
English: First, because of the pacification of Yunnan Yuefeng, he was awarded the title of Junior Teacher, Crown Prince, and Grand Master, and the title of Grand Master was bestowed on him, with the posthumous name of Wending.

古文：王锡爵，字元驭，太仓人。
现代文：王锡爵，字元驭，太仓人。
English: Wang Xizhe, the character of Gui, is from Taicang.

古文：嘉靖四十一年举会试第一，廷试第二，授编修。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年，在京师会试中获第一名，廷试又得第二名，授职为编修。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the exam of the Beijing Teachers' Association, and the second place in the court exam, and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：累迁至祭酒。
现代文：逐渐官至国子监祭酒。
English: Gradually, it became the official and ceremonial wine of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：万历五年，以詹事掌翰林院。
现代文：万历五年，以詹事身份负责翰林院。
English: After five years of hard work, he was put in charge of the Hanlin Academy as the official in charge.

古文：张居正夺情，将廷杖吴中行、赵用贤等。
现代文：张居正服丧期限未满，即出仕为官，准备对吴中行、赵用贤等人施以廷杖。
English: Zhang Juzheng did not complete the period of mourning, that is, he served as an official, preparing to use the imperial scepter on Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian and others.

古文：锡爵独造丧次，切言之，居正径入不顾。
现代文：王锡爵邀集同馆的十多人到张居正处请求宽免，张居正径直入内而不理他。
English: Wang Xizhe invited more than ten people from the same museum to Zhang Jiusheng's place to ask for forgiveness. Zhang Jiusheng went straight inside and ignored him.

古文：中行等既受杖，锡爵持之大恸。
现代文：吴中行等人既已受到杖罚，王锡爵扶着他们大哭。
English: After Wu Zhongxing and the others had been punished with the cane, Wang Xizhe supported them and cried loudly.

古文：明年，进礼部右侍郎。
现代文：第二年他晋升礼部右侍郎。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：居正甫归治丧，九卿急请召还，锡爵独不署名。
现代文：张居正才回乡处理丧葬，九卿急忙请求召他回京，唯独王锡爵不签名。
English: Zhang Jizheng had just returned to his hometown to deal with the funeral. The Nine Lords hastily requested that he be called back to Beijing, but Wang Xizhe did not sign.

古文：旋乞省亲去。
现代文：不久，他请求探亲而离职。
English: Soon after, he asked to visit his family and left the job.

古文：居正以锡爵形己短，益衔之，锡爵遂不出。
现代文：张居正因为王锡爵揭露自己的短处，更加怀恨他，王锡爵因此不出任官职。
English: Zhang Jiu hated Wang Xizhe all the more because he had exposed his own shortcomings. As a result, Wang Xizhe did not take up his official post.

古文：十二年冬，即家拜礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，参机务。
现代文：万历二十年冬季，在家中被任命为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: In the winter of the 20th year of Wanli, he was appointed as a member of the etiquette department and a scholar of Wenyu Academy at home, and participated in important affairs.

古文：还朝，请禁谄谀、抑奔竞、戒虚浮、节侈靡、辟横议、简工作。
现代文：返回朝廷，他奏请禁止谄谀、抑制钻营角逐、戒除虚浮、节制侈靡、鼓励议政风气、精简工作。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he appealed for the prohibition of graft, the suppression of rigging and competition, the prevention of vanity, the restraint of extravagance, the encouragement of deliberative politics, and the streamlining of work.

古文：帝咸褒纳。
现代文：皇帝都加以褒扬、接纳。
English: Emperors praised and accepted them.

古文：初，李植、江东之与大臣申时行、杨巍等相构，以锡爵负时望，且与居正贰，力推之。
现代文：起初，李植、江东之与大臣申时行、杨巍等人产生矛盾，因为王锡爵负有重望，并且与张居正不和，就极力推举他。
English: At first, Li Zhi and Jiang Dongzhi had conflicts with the ministers Shin Shigong and Yang Qi, because Wang Xizhe had high hopes and was at odds with Zhang Jizheng, so they tried their best to promote him.

古文：比锡爵至，与时行合，反出疏力排植等，植等遂去。
现代文：等到王锡爵入朝，与申时行结合，他们反而上奏极力排斥李植等人，于是李植等人全部离去。
English: When Wang Xizhe entered the imperial court and united with Shen Shixing, they tried their best to exclude Li Zhi and the others, so Li Zhi and the others all left.

古文：时时行为首辅，许国次之，三人皆南畿人，而锡爵与时行同举会试，且同郡，政府相得甚。
现代文：当时申时行任首辅、许国任次辅，三个人都是南畿人，而王锡爵与申时行同时在会试中举，并且在同一郡，在内阁中相处很好。
English: At that time, Shin Shigyo served as First Vice-Minister and Ko Kuni as Second Vice-Minister, and all three were from Nanki, while Wang Xizhe and Shin Shigyo were in the middle of the examination at the same time, and they got along well in the cabinet in the same county.

古文：然时行柔和，而锡爵性刚负气。
现代文：因为申时行性格柔和，而王锡爵性格刚直气盛。
English: Because Shin Shigyo's personality is soft, while Wang Xizhe's personality is upright and energetic.

古文：十六年，子衡举顺天试第一，郎官高桂、饶伸论之。
现代文：万历十六年，他的儿子王衡考取顺天试的第一名，郎官高桂、饶伸议论此事。
English: In the 16th year of Wanli, his son Wang Heng won the first place in the Shun Tian test, and his vassals Gao Gui and Rao Sheng discussed the matter.

古文：锡爵连章辨讦，语过忿，伸坐下诏狱除名，桂谪边方。
现代文：王锡爵接连上奏辩驳，话语过于愤恨，饶伸被投入诏狱并从官籍除名，高桂被贬责到边疆。
English: Wang Xizhe made a series of arguments, the words were too angry, Rao Sheng was thrown into the imperial prison and removed from the official register, and Gao Gui was relegated to the frontier.

古文：御史乔璧星请帝戒谕锡爵，务扩其量，为休休有容之臣，锡爵疏辨。
现代文：御史乔璧星奏请皇帝告诫王锡爵，务必扩展他的气量，成为美善有涵养的大臣，王锡爵上奏辩解。
English: Wang Qiao Bi Xingxiao asked the emperor to admonish Wang Xizhe, be sure to expand his stamina, become a good and well-mannered minister, Wang Xizhe played a defense.

古文：以是积与廷论忤。
现代文：因此逐渐与朝廷议论抵触。
English: As a result, he gradually came into conflict with the imperial court.

古文：时群臣请建储者众，帝皆不听。
现代文：当时群臣奏请建立皇储的人很多，皇帝都不听。
English: At that time, many courtiers requested the establishment of a crown prince, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：十八年，锡爵疏请豫教元子，录用言官姜应麟等，且求宥故巡抚李材，不报。
现代文：万历十八年，王锡爵奏请预先教导太子，录用言官姜应麟等人，并请求宽恕以前的巡抚李材，没有答复。
English: In the 18th year of the Wanli era, Wang Xizhong asked Wang Xizhong to teach the prince in advance, hired the spokesman Jiang Yinglin and others, and asked for forgiveness from the former governor Li Zhai, but there was no reply.

古文：尝因旱灾，自陈乞罢。
现代文：曾经因为旱灾，自己陈奏请求罢免官职。
English: He once petitioned to be removed from office because of a drought.

古文：帝优诏留之。
现代文：皇帝下诏好言挽留。
English: The emperor issued an edict to stay.

古文：火落赤、真相犯西陲，议者争请用兵，锡爵主款，与时行合。
现代文：火落赤、真相侵犯西部边疆，议论的人争相请求出动军队，王锡爵主张和平解决，与申时行的意见相合。
English: With the flames dying down, the truth encroaching on the western frontier, and commentators clamoring for the army to be sent in, Wang Xizhe advocated a peaceful solution, which coincided with the opinion of the petitioner.

古文：未几，偕同列争册立不得，杜门乞归。
现代文：不久，他与同列争请册立皇储也不成，他关门闭户请求回乡。
English: Soon, he and his peers were unable to get on the list of candidates for the post of crown prince, and he closed his doors and requested to return to his hometown.

古文：寻以母老，连乞归省。
现代文：不久因为母亲年迈，接连奏请回乡探亲。
English: Soon, because of her mother's old age, she asked her to return to her hometown to visit relatives.

古文：乃赐道里费，遣官护行。
现代文：于是皇帝赐给他路费，派遣官员护送。
English: So the emperor gave him travel expenses and sent officials to escort him.

古文：归二年，时行、国及王家屏相继去位，有诏趣召锡爵。
现代文：回乡两年，申时行、许国和王家屏相继离开职位，有诏书催促、召见王锡爵。
English: Two years after returning to his hometown, Shen Jixing, Xu Guo and Wang Jiaping left their posts one after another, and there was an imperial edict urging and summoning Wang Xizhe.

古文：二十一年正月，还朝，遂为首辅。
现代文：万历二十一年正月，他返回朝廷，是成为首辅。
English: In the first month of the 21st year of Wanli, he returned to the imperial court and became the first assistant.

古文：先是有旨，是年春举册立大典，戒廷臣毋渎陈。
现代文：在此之前有圣旨，这年春季举行册立皇储的大典，告诫朝廷大臣不要轻慢地陈请。
English: Prior to this, there was a sacred will that the grand ceremony of the enthronement of the Crown Prince be held in the spring of this year, and the ministers of the Imperial Court were warned not to disdainfully make requests.

古文：廷臣鉴张有德事，咸默默。
现代文：朝廷大臣鉴于张有德事件，都表现出沉默。
English: In light of the Zhang Youde incident, the ministers of the Imperial Court have all remained silent.

古文：及是，锡爵密请帝决大计。
现代文：等到此，王锡爵秘密奏请皇帝决定大计。
English: At this point, Wang Xizhe secretly asked the emperor to decide on the plan.

古文：帝遣内侍以手诏示锡爵，欲待嫡子，令元子与两弟且并封为王。
现代文：皇帝派遣内侍将亲手写的诏书向王锡爵出示，想等待嫡系的儿子，命令将长子和两个次子暂且一起分封为王。
English: The emperor sent a chambermaid to present Wang Xizhe with a personally handwritten edict. He wanted to wait for a legitimate son, and ordered that the eldest son and the two second sons be temporarily appointed as king together.

古文：锡爵惧失上指，立奉诏拟谕旨。
现代文：王锡爵惧怕有失皇上的旨意，立即奉诏草拟谕旨。
English: Wang Xizhe, afraid of losing the emperor's will, immediately drafted an edict.

古文：而又外虑公论，因言 汉明帝马后、唐明皇王后、宋真宗刘后皆养诸妃子为子，请令皇后抚育元子，则元子即嫡子，而生母不必崇位号以上压皇贵妃 ，亦拟谕以进。
现代文：但是他对外又顾虑公众的舆论，于是劝谏： 汉明帝的马后、唐明皇的王后、宋真宗的刘后都抚养诸位妃子的儿子为自己的儿子，请皇帝指令皇后抚育长子，则长子就是嫡系儿子，而且生母不必尊崇位号以致压制了皇贵妃。 也拟谕旨呈送宫中。
English: However, he was also concerned about the public opinion of the outside world, so he advised: the horse queen of Han Ming Emperor, the queen of Tang Ming Emperor, and the Liu Queen of Song Zhenzong all raised the sons of the concubines as their own sons, and asked the emperor to instruct the empress to raise the eldest son, then the eldest son is the legitimate son, and the birth mother does not have to respect the title, so as to suppress the imperial princess.

古文：同列赵志皋、张位咸不预闻。
现代文：同列赵志皋、张位都没预先听说。
English: Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi, who are also on the list, had not heard about it in advance.

古文：帝竟以前谕下礼官，令即具仪。
现代文：皇帝竟然将前面的谕告下达给了礼官，下令马上准备礼仪。
English: The emperor actually issued the previous edict to the etiquette officer, ordering that the etiquette be prepared immediately.

古文：于是举朝大哗。
现代文：因此整个朝廷哗然。
English: As a result, the entire court was in an uproar.

古文：给事中史孟麟、礼部尚书罗万化等，群诣锡爵第，力争。
现代文：给事中史孟麟，礼部尚书罗万化等人，集体到王锡爵的府第力争。
English: Shi Menglin, the head of the etiquette department Shangshu Luo Wanhua and others went to Wang Xizhe's mansion to compete.

古文：廷臣谏者，章日数上。
现代文：朝廷大臣和劝谏的人，奏章每天几次呈上。
English: Several times a day, the ministers of the Imperial Court and those who advised the emperor would present the report to him.

古文：锡爵偕志皋、位力请追还前诏，帝不从。
现代文：王锡爵与赵志皋、张位一起极力奏请皇帝追回先前的诏书，皇帝不依从。
English: Wang Xizhe, together with Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi, urged the emperor to recover the previous imperial edict, but the emperor did not comply.

古文：已而谏者益多，而岳元声、顾允成、张纳陛、陈泰来、于孔兼、李启美、曾凤仪、钟化民、项德祯等遮锡爵于朝房，面争之。
现代文：不久，劝谏的人更多，而且岳元声、顾允成、钟纳陛、陈泰来、于孔兼、李启美、曾凤仪、钟化民、项德祯等人将王锡爵拦在朝房里，当面与他争辩此事。
English: Soon, there were more people to persuade him, and Yue Yuan Sheng, Gu Yun Cheng, Zhong Na Shi, Chen Tai Lai, Yu Kong Kan, Li Qimei, Zeng Feng Yi, Zhong Huamin, Xiang De Qi and others stopped Wang Xizhe in the imperial room to argue the matter with him face to face.

古文：李腾芳亦上书锡爵。
现代文：李腾芳也上书王锡爵。
English: Li Tengfang also wrote a letter to Wang Xizhe.

古文：锡爵请下廷议，不许。
现代文：王锡爵奏请在朝廷商议，皇帝不同意。
English: Wang Xizhe requested that the matter be discussed in the imperial court, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：请面对，不报。
现代文：他奏请当面陈述，没有答复。
English: He was asked to make a statement in person, but did not reply.

古文：乃自劾三误，乞罢斥。
现代文：于是他自己弹劾自己的多项失误，请求接受罢免官职的责罚。
English: So he impeached himself for his many mistakes and asked to be removed from office.

古文：帝亦迫公议，追寝前命，命少俟二三年议行。
现代文：皇帝迫于公众的舆论，追回并搁置了先前的命令，下令稍候二、三年再商议施行册立的事。
English: Forced by public opinion, the emperor recalled and set aside the previous order and ordered to wait two or three years to discuss the implementation of the decree.

古文：锡爵旋请速决，且曰： 曩元子初生，业为颁诏肆赦，诏书称 祗承宗社 ，明以皇太子待之矣。
现代文：王锡爵立即奏请皇帝迅速决定，并说 ：过去嫡长子刚出生，已经颁布诏书大赦，诏书称 祗承宗社 ，明显地是像皇太子般待他。
English: Wang Xizhe immediately petitioned the emperor for a speedy decision, and said: In the past, the eldest son had just been born, and a decree of amnesty had been issued. The decree said that he was treated like a crown prince.

古文：今复何疑而弗决哉？ 
现代文：现在又疑惑什么而不决定呢？ 
English: Now what are you wondering about and why haven't you decided?

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：七月，彗星见，有诏修省。
现代文：七月，彗星出现了，有诏令修行、反省。
English: In July, the comet appeared, and there was a decree to practice and reflect.

古文：锡爵因请延见大臣。
现代文：王锡爵便奏请皇帝召见大臣。
English: Wang Xizhe then asked the emperor to summon the minister.

古文：又言： 彗渐近紫微，宜慎起居之节，宽左右之刑，寡嗜欲以防疾，散积聚以广恩。 
现代文：又劝谏说 ：彗星渐渐接近紫微星座，皇帝应慎重起居的时节，对左右放宽刑罚，不要嗜欲以防疾病，散发钱粮以广布皇恩。 
English: He also advised Zou that the comet was gradually approaching the violet-micro constellation, and that the emperor should be cautious about the time of the year, relax the punishment for the left and right, not indulge in lust to prevent disease, and distribute money and grain to widely spread the royal grace.

古文：逾月，复言： 慧已入紫微，非区区用人行政所能消弭，惟建储一事可以禳之。
现代文：过了一个月，他又劝谏说： 彗星已进入紫微星座，不是仅仅靠用人行政能够消弭的，只有建立皇储这一件事可以消除灾祸。
English: A month later, he also advised the empress: "The comet has entered the violet-micro constellation. It is not something that can be eliminated simply by employing administrative personnel. Only the establishment of a crown prince can eliminate the disaster."

古文：盖天王之象曰帝星，太子之象曰前星。
现代文：天王的星象称帝星，太子的星象称前星。
English: The celestial king's astrological sign is called the Imperial Star, and the prince's astrological sign is called the Front Star.

古文：今前星既耀而不早定，故致此灾。
现代文：现在前星已经闪耀而皇帝不早做决定，所以招致此灾祸。
English: Now that the sun has set, the emperor's failure to make a decision earlier has brought about this calamity.

古文：诚速行册立，天变自弭。 
现代文：如果迅速册立皇太子，天象之变就自然消弭。 
English: If the crown prince is quickly appointed, the celestial phenomenon will naturally disappear.

古文：帝皆报闻，仍持首春待期之说。
现代文：皇帝都答复知道了，仍坚持等待春季之期的观点。
English: The emperor replied that he knew, but still insisted on waiting for the spring.

古文：锡爵答奏复力言之，又连章恳请。
现代文：王锡爵的复奏又极力劝谏，并接连上奏恳请。
English: Wang Xizhe's reenactment also strongly urged him to play, and he repeatedly begged him to play.

古文：十一月，皇太后生辰，帝御门受贺毕，独召锡爵暖阁，劳之曰： 卿扶母来京，诚忠孝两全。 
现代文：十一月，皇太后的生辰，皇帝驾御宫门接受朝贺完毕，单独召王锡爵到暖阁，慰劳他说： 卿扶持母亲来京都，的确是忠孝两全。 
English: In November, on the birthday of the empress dowager, after the emperor had arrived at the imperial palace gate to receive the morning greetings, he called Wang Xizhe alone to the warm pavilion to console him, saying, "Sir, supporting your mother to come to Kyoto is indeed a matter of loyalty and filial duty.

古文：锡爵叩头谢，因力请早定国本。
现代文：王锡爵叩头答谢，趁此极力奏请皇帝早日确定国家的根本。
English: Wang Xizhe kowtowed and thanked him, and took the opportunity to urge the emperor to determine the country's fundamentals as soon as possible.

古文：帝曰： 中宫有出，奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 皇后有了儿子，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor asked, "What if the queen has a son?"

古文：对曰： 此说在十年前犹可，今元子已十三，尚何待？
现代文：他答复： 这种说法在十年前尚可以，现在嫡长子已经十三岁，尚等待什么？
English: He replied: "That was ten years ago, but now my eldest son is 13 years old, what are we waiting for?

古文：况自古至今，岂有子弟十三岁犹不读书者？ 
现代文：况且从古至今，难道有子弟十三岁了还不读书的事？ 
English: Moreover, from ancient times to the present, has there ever been a case of a child not reading at the age of thirteen?

古文：帝颇感动。
现代文：皇帝颇为感动。
English: The emperor was quite moved.

古文：锡爵因请频召对，保圣躬。
现代文：王锡爵于是奏请皇帝多召见大臣面叙，保护圣体。
English: King Sigismund then petitioned the emperor to summon more ministers to report to him and to protect the Blessed Sacrament.

古文：退复上疏力请，且曰： 外廷以固宠阴谋归之皇贵妃，恐郑氏举族不得安。
现代文：退出后又上奏极力请求，并且劝谏： 外廷认为贵妃利用皇帝的宠爱而居心叵测，这种归罪皇贵妃的说法恐怕令郑氏全族不得安心。
English: After withdrawing, he made a strong request and advised Zheng: The court believes that the empress took advantage of the emperor's favor and deliberately miscalculated. This accusation of the empress may not be reassuring to the entire Zheng family.

古文：惟陛下深省。 
现代文：希望陛下深思。 
English: I hope His Majesty will think about it.

古文：帝得疏，心益动，手诏谕锡爵： 卿每奏必及皇贵妃，何也？
现代文：皇帝得到奏疏，更加动心，手书诏令告谕王锡爵： 卿每次上奏都提及皇贵妃，为什么？
English: The emperor became more enthusiastic, and issued a handwritten imperial edict to tell Wang Xizhe: Sir, every time you play, you mention the empress dowager. Why?

古文：彼数劝朕，朕以祖训后妃不得与外事，安敢辄从。 
现代文：他们屡次劝告我，我知道祖训，后妃不得参与宫外事，怎么敢就依从？ 
English: They repeatedly advised me. I know the ancestral precept that the empress dowager must not be involved in matters outside the palace. How dare I follow it?

古文：锡爵上言： 今与皇长子相形者，惟皇贵妃子，天下不疑皇贵妃而谁疑？
现代文：王锡爵上奏称： 现在与皇长子相伴的人，只有皇贵妃的儿子，天下人不怀疑皇贵妃而怀疑谁呢？
English: Wang Xizhe said in his report: The person who is now accompanying the eldest son of the emperor is only the son of the empress dowager. People around the world do not doubt the empress dowager, but who do they doubt?

古文：皇贵妃不引为己责而谁责？
现代文：皇贵妃不引以自责而责备谁？
English: Whom does the Empress Dowager blame when she does not blame herself?

古文：祖训不与外事者，不与外廷用人行政之事也。
现代文：祖训不参与宫外事，是不参与外廷的用人行政之事。
English: Ancestral teachings do not participate in the affairs outside the palace, and do not participate in the employment administration of the outer court.

古文：若册立，乃陛下家事，而皇三子又皇贵妃亲子，陛下得不与皇贵妃谋乎？
现代文：就像册立，是陛下的家事，而皇三子又是皇贵妃的亲儿子，陛下该不会与皇贵妃谋划吧？
English: Just like registration, it is a family matter for His Majesty, and the third son is the son of the Empress Dowager. Shouldn't His Majesty make plans with the Empress Dowager?

古文：且皇贵妃久侍圣躬，至亲且贤，外廷纷纷，莫不归怨，臣所不忍闻。
现代文：而且皇贵妃长期侍奉圣体，至亲爱贤惠，外廷议论纷纷，没有不归怨她的，我不忍心听说。
English: Moreover, the Empress served the Blessed Sacrament for a long time, dearly beloved, and there was a lot of discussion outside the court. I couldn't bear to hear that there was nothing but grudge against her.

古文：臣六十老人，力捍天下之口，归功皇贵妃，陛下尚以为疑。
现代文：我一个六十岁的老人，极力辩驳天下人之口，归功于皇贵妃，陛下尚且有疑虑。
English: I, a sixty-year-old man, strenuously refute the world's opinion, attributing it to the Empress Guifei. Your Majesty still has doubts.

古文：然则必如群少年盛气以攻皇贵妃，而陛下反快于心乎？ 
现代文：然而必定像众少年盛气攻击皇贵妃，而陛下反倒心情愉快吗？ 
English: However, must it be like a crowd of boys attacking the emperor and empress, while his majesty is in a happy mood?

古文：疏入，帝颔之。
现代文：奏疏呈入，皇帝点头称是。
English: The Emperor nodded his approval.

古文：志皋、位亦力请。
现代文：赵志皋、张位也极力请求。
English: Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi also strongly requested to leave.

古文：居数日，遂有出阁之命。
现代文：过了几天，于是有了皇子出阁学习的命令。
English: A few days later, there was an order for the prince to leave the palace to study.

古文：而帝令广市珠玉珍宝，供出阁仪物，计直三十余万。
现代文：而且皇帝下令广购珠玉珍宝，供作出阁礼仪之物，计值为三十多万两。
English: Moreover, the emperor ordered the widespread purchase of precious gems and jewels to be used to make court ceremonial objects, with a value of more than 300,000 taels.

古文：户部尚书杨俊民等以故事争，给事中王德完等又力谏。
现代文：户部尚书杨俊民等人拿先制进行争辩，给事中王德完等人又极力劝谏。
English: The head of the household, Yang Junmin, and others argued about the pre-emptive strike, while Wang Dehuan and others tried their best to dissuade them.

古文：帝遂手诏谕爵，欲易期。
现代文：皇帝就亲手写诏书告谕王锡爵，想改变时间。
English: The emperor wrote an edict in his own hand telling Wang Xizhe that he wanted to change the time.

古文：锡爵婉请，乃不果易。
现代文：王锡爵婉言奏请，才没有真的改期。
English: Wang Xizhe made a polite request, but there was no real rescheduling.

古文：明年二月，出阁礼成，俱如东宫仪，中外为慰。
现代文：第二年二月，皇子出阁的礼仪完成，一切都如同东宫的礼仪，朝廷内外为此感到安慰。
English: In February of the following year, the ceremony of the prince's ascension to the throne was completed. Everything was just like the ceremony at the East Palace, and both inside and outside the Imperial Court felt comforted by this.

古文：锡爵在阁时，尝请罢江南织造，停江西陶器，减云南贡金，出内帑振河南饥，帝皆无忤，眷礼逾前后诸辅臣。
现代文：王锡爵在内阁的时候，曾经请求罢除江南的织造，停止江西的陶器贡奉，减少云南的贡金，拨出内府的钱财赈济河南的饥荒。皇帝都没有反对，宠爱之情超过前后的诸位辅臣。
English: When Wang Xizhe was in the cabinet, he once requested the abolition of weaving in the south of the Yangtze River, the cessation of pottery tribute in Jiangxi, the reduction of tribute in Yunnan, and the allocation of money and wealth from the inner government to relieve famine in Henan. The emperor did not object, and his favorability exceeded that of all the assistants before and after him.

古文：其救李沂，力争不宜用廷杖，尤为世所称。
现代文：他营救李沂，极力争辩不应该施行廷杖，尤其受世人称道。
English: He is especially praised by the world for rescuing Li Qian and arguing that the imperial scepter should not be used.

古文：特以阿并封指被物议。
现代文：只因为阿谀二王并封之旨意被众人议论。
English: It was only because of King Ahasuerus's decision to unite the two kingdoms that it became a topic of discussion.

古文：既而郎中赵南星斥，侍郎赵用贤放归，论救者咸遭谴谪，众指锡爵为之。
现代文：不久，郎中赵南星遭贬斥，侍郎赵用贤放逐回乡，上疏救助的人都遭谴责或贬职，众人都认为是王锡爵所为。
English: Soon after, his son-in-law, Zhao Nansing, was reprimanded, his son-in-law, Zhao Yingxianbo, was banished back to his hometown, and the people who helped Shang Suo were reprimanded or demoted. Everyone thought that Wang Xizhe was responsible.

古文：虽连章自明，且申救，人卒莫能谅也。
现代文：虽然他接连上奏自我表白并援救众人，人们最终不能谅解他。
English: Although he repeatedly confesses and rescues people, people eventually can't understand him.

古文：锡爵遂屡疏引疾乞休。
现代文：于是王锡爵屡次上奏称病请求退休。
English: As a result, Wang Xizhe repeatedly reported illness and asked to retire.

古文：帝不欲其去，为出内帑钱建醮祈愈。
现代文：皇帝不想他离去，为他拨出内库的钱修建斋戒之所，祷祈他痊愈。
English: The emperor did not want him to leave, so he set aside money from his treasury to build a fasting place for him, and prayed for his recovery.

古文：锡爵力辞，疏八上乃允。
现代文：王锡爵极力推辞，八次上奏皇帝才同意。
English: Wang Xizhe tried his best to refuse, but the emperor only agreed after eight appeals.

古文：先累加太子太保，至是命改吏部尚书，进建极殿，赐道里费，乘传，行人护归。
现代文：先已累次加封太子太保，至此命令他改任吏部尚书，进入建极殿，赏赐他路费，乘坐驿车，由行人护送回乡。
English: He had already been repeatedly awarded the title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, and now he was ordered to change his title to Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service, enter Jianye Hall, be rewarded with travel expenses, take a tuk-tuk, and be escorted back to his hometown by pedestrians.

古文：归七年，东宫建，遣官赐敕存问，赉银币羊酒。
现代文：回乡七年，册立太子，皇帝派遣官员带着敕令向他问候，赏赐他银币、羊、酒。
English: After returning to his hometown for seven years, he was named crown prince, and the emperor sent officials to greet him with an imperial decree, and rewarded him with silver coins, sheep, and wine.

古文：三十五年，廷推阁臣。
现代文：万历三十五年，朝廷推举内阁大臣。
English: Thirty-five years later, the imperial court promoted him to cabinet minister.

古文：帝既用于慎行、叶向高、李廷机，还念锡爵，特加少保，遗官召之。
现代文：皇帝已经任用了于慎行、叶向高、李廷机，还想念王锡爵，特意加封他为少保，派遣官员去召唤他。
English: The emperor had already appointed Yu Shengxing, Ye Xianggao, and Li Tingji, and also missed Wang Xizhe, specially adding him as a minor official and sending officials to summon him.

古文：三辞，不允。
现代文：他多次推辞，皇帝不同意。
English: He repeatedly declined, and the emperor did not agree.

古文：时言官方厉锋气，锡爵进密揭力诋，中有 上于章奏一概留中，特鄙夷之如禽鸟之音 等语。
现代文：当时，言官锋芒正盛，王锡爵秘密上奏竭立诋毁，其中有 皇上对奏章一概留在宫中，特别鄙夷它们，称之为禽鸟的声音 等话语。
English: At that time, the speech official Feng Mengzheng Sheng and Wang Xizhe secretly sent a series of slanderous messages, including the emperor's words that all the music pieces were left in the palace, especially despised them, and called them the sound of birds.

古文：言官闻之大愤。
现代文：言官听说这些后大为愤恨。
English: The magistrate was very angry when he heard about this.

古文：给事中段然首劾之，其同官胡嘉栋等论不已。
现代文：给事中毅然最先弹劾他，同官胡嘉栋等人也议论不已。
English: He was resolutely the first to impeach him, and his colleague Hu Jiadong and others also talked about it incessantly.

古文：锡爵弟鼎爵，进士。
现代文：王锡爵也自己关门自养，最终推辞而不赴京。
English: Wang Xizhe also closed the door to support himself, and eventually declined to go to Beijing.

古文：累官河南提学副使。
现代文：又过了三年，他在家中去世，享年七十七岁。
English: Three years later, he died at home at the age of 77.

古文：沈一贯，字肩吾，鄞人。
现代文：赠封为太保，谥号文肃。沈一贯，字肩吾，鄞人。
English: His posthumous name was Taibo, and his posthumous name was Wenshu. He was born in Shengang, and his family name was Shanwu.

古文：隆庆二年进士。
现代文：隆庆二年的进士。
English: Longqing two-year starter.

古文：选庶吉士，授检讨，充日讲官。
现代文：选任庶吉士，授职为检讨，担当日讲官。
English: He was appointed as the second-in-command, and his appointment was subject to review. He is now in charge of the Japanese lecturer.

古文：进讲高宗谅阴，拱手曰： 托孤寄命，必忠贞不二心之臣，乃可使百官总己以听。
现代文：进宫讲授高宗丧事时，他拱手称： 托孤寄命，必须是忠贞无二心的大臣，才可以使百官以自己为总领，听从吩咐。
English: When he came to the palace to give a lecture on Gaozong's funeral, he said, "A minister must be loyal and have no second thoughts when he is entrusted with a lonely mission. Only then will he be able to make hundreds of officials take him as their leader and obey his orders.

古文：苟非其人，不若躬亲听览之为孝也。 
现代文：倘若不是这种人，不如亲自听政揽事才是孝呀。 
English: If he is not such a person, it would be better for him to listen to politics in person.

古文：张居正以为刺己，颇憾一贯。
现代文：张居正以为他是讽刺自己，很恼恨沈一贯。
English: Zhang Jiusheng thought he was satirizing himself, and was very angry with Shen Gang.

古文：居正卒，始迁左中允。
现代文：张居正去世后，他才任左中允。
English: After the death of Zhang Juzheng, he was appointed to the position of Zuozhongyong.

古文：历官吏部左侍郎兼侍读学士，加太子宾客。
现代文：历任吏部左侍郎兼诗读学士，加封为太子宾客。
English: He was the left-hand valet of successive officials and a poet laureate, and was also a guest of the crown prince.

古文：假归。
现代文：请假回到家乡。
English: He took a leave of absence to return to his hometown.

古文：二十二年起南京礼部尚书，复召为正史副总裁，协理詹事府，未上。
现代文：万历二十二年，他出任南京礼部尚书，又受召见并任命为正史的副总裁，协助负责詹事府，他没有到任。
English: In the 22nd year of the lunar calendar, he served as the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department of Shangshu, and was also summoned and appointed as the vice president of the official history, assisting in charge of Zhan Shifu, but he did not arrive at the post.

古文：王锡爵、赵志皋、张位同居内阁，复有旨推举阁臣。
现代文：王锡爵、赵志皋、张位同处内阁，又有圣旨要求推举内阁大臣。
English: Wang Xizhe, Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang are all in the same cabinet, and there is also a demand for the appointment of cabinet ministers.

古文：吏部举旧辅王家屏及一贯等七人名以上。
现代文：吏部推举旧辅臣王家屏以及沈一贯等七个人。
English: Seven people, including former aide-de-camp Wang Jiaping and Shen Gang, were nominated by the cadre department.

古文：而帝方怒家屏，谯责尚书陈有年。
现代文：而皇帝正恼怒王家屏，就责备了尚书陈有年。
English: But the emperor was so angry with Wang Jiaping that he reprimanded Shangshu Chen Yu.

古文：有年引疾去。
现代文：陈有年称病离去。
English: Chen Younian claimed to be ill and left.

古文：一贯家居久，故有清望，阁臣又力荐之。
现代文：沈一贯在家居住很久，向来就有清正的声望，内阁大臣又极力推荐他。
English: Shen has always lived at home for a long time, has always had a reputation for integrity, and the cabinet minister strongly recommended him.

古文：乃诏以尚书兼东阁大学士，与陈于陛同入阁预机务，命行人即家起焉。
现代文：于是诏令他任尚书兼东阁大学士，与陈于陛一道进入内阁，参与机要事务，皇帝指令行人到他家中请他。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered him to be appointed as Shangshu and Donggak University Scholar, to enter the cabinet together with Chen Yuxi, and to participate in important affairs. The emperor ordered pedestrians to invite him to his home.

古文：会朝议许日本封贡。
现代文：遇上朝廷议论允许日本受封并朝贡。
English: When confronted with the Imperial Court's arguments, Japan was allowed to receive the title and pay tribute.

古文：一贯虑贡道出宁波，为乡郡患，极陈其害，贡议乃止。
现代文：沈一贯顾虑贡道由宁波辟出，成为乡郡的祸患，极力陈述它的危害，朝贡的议论才终止。
English: Shen has always been concerned about the tribute road from Ningbo, which has become a scourge of townships and counties. He tried his best to explain its harm, and the discussion of tribute ended.

古文：未几，锡爵去，于陛位第三，每独行己意。
现代文：不久，王锡爵离去，陈于陛位居第三，每每执意孤行。
English: Soon after, Wang Xizhe left, and Chen Yu Xizhe took the third place, each determined to go his own way.

古文：一贯柔而深中，事志皋等惟谨。
现代文：沈一贯性情柔和而城府很深，与赵志皋等共事很谨慎。
English: Shen has always had a gentle disposition and a deep understanding of the city government. He is very cautious about working with Zhao Zhixuan and others.

古文：其后于陛卒官，志皋病痹久在告，位以荐杨镐及《忧危竑议》事得罪去，一贯与位尝私致镐书，为赞画主事丁应泰所劾。
现代文：此后，陈于陛死于任上，赵志皋病瘫了很久，正在休假，张位因为推荐杨镐和《忧危议》的事情获罪离去，沈一贯与张位曾经私下致函杨镐，被赞画主事丁应泰弹劾。
English: Since then, Chen Yuxing died in office, Zhao Zhixuan has been paralyzed for a long time and is on vacation, Zhang Yi was convicted for recommending Yang Jie and the "Dangerous Proposal," and left. Shen Yuxing and Zhang Yi once sent a letter to Yang Jie in private, and were impeached by Ding Yingtao, the director of the praise painting.

古文：位疏辨，激上怒罢。一贯惟引咎，帝乃慰留之。
现代文：张位上奏争辩激怒了皇帝而遭罢免，沈一贯只是引咎自责，皇帝于是抚慰，挽留他。
English: Zhang angered the emperor by arguing about the position of the emperor and was dismissed. Shen always blamed himself, so the emperor consoled him and retained him.

古文：时国本未定，廷臣争十余年不决。
现代文：当时皇储没有确定，朝廷大臣争执了十多年也没有决定。
English: At that time, the crown prince had not been determined, and the ministers of the Imperial Court had not decided after more than ten years of dispute.

古文：皇长子年十八，诸请册立冠婚者益迫。
现代文：皇长子十八岁时，奏请进行册立、加冠、完婚的提议更急迫。
English: When the eldest son of the emperor was eighteen years old, it was even more urgent to submit a proposal to register, add a crown, and consummate the marriage.

古文：帝责户部进银二千四百万，为册立、分封诸典礼费以困之。
现代文：皇帝责令户部提供二千四百万两白银，作为册立、分封等典礼的费用，以此使户部为难。
English: The emperor ordered the household department to provide 24 million taels of silver as the cost of the ceremony of registration, division and so on, which put the household department in a difficult situation.

古文：一贯再疏争，不听。
现代文：沈一贯再次上奏争辩，皇帝不听。
English: Shen Zongzheng again brought up the argument, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：二十八年，命营慈庆宫居皇长子。
现代文：万历二十八年，皇帝命令营造慈庆宫给予皇长子居住。
English: In the 28th year of Wanli, the emperor ordered the construction of Cixing Palace for the eldest son of the emperor to live in.

古文：工竣，谕一贯草敕传示礼官，上册立、冠婚及诸王分封仪。
现代文：竣工时，告谕沈一贯草拟敕令昭示于礼官，呈交册立、加冠、完婚以及诸王受封的礼仪。
English: When it was completed, the edict Shen had drafted was shown to the etiquette officials, presenting the etiquette of handing in the book, crowning, marrying, and the kings being crowned.

古文：敕既上，帝复留不下。
现代文：敕令呈入宫中，皇帝又留住而不下达。
English: The imperial edict was presented to the palace, but the emperor withheld it and did not issue it.

古文：一贯疏趣，则言： 朕因小臣谢廷讃乘机邀功，故中辍。
现代文：沈一贯上奏催促，皇帝却说： 我因为小臣谢廷氵赞乘机邀功，所以暂停。
English: Shen persistently urged him to play, but the emperor said: I suspended the performance because the junior minister Xie Tinghuanzan took the opportunity to solicit contributions.

古文：俟皇长子移居后行之。 
现代文：等到皇长子迁移住处后再施行。 
English: It will be implemented after the eldest son of the emperor has moved his residence.

古文：既而不举行。
现代文：最终没有举行。
English: In the end, it did not take place.

古文：明年，贵妃弟郑国泰迫群议，请册立、冠婚并行。
现代文：第二年，贵妃的弟弟郑国泰迫于众人舆论请求册立、加冠、完婚同时进行。
English: In the second year, Zheng Guotai, the younger brother of Guifei, was forced by public opinion to request that the marriage be registered, crowned and consummated at the same time.

古文：一贯因再草敕请下礼官具仪，不报。
现代文：沈一贯于是再次草拟敕令请求皇帝下达给礼官准备礼仪，没有答复。
English: Shen Zhen then drafted the imperial edict again, requesting the emperor to issue it to the etiquette officer to prepare the etiquette, but there was no reply.

古文：廷议有欲先冠婚后册立者，一贯不可，曰： 不正名而苟成事，是降储君为诸王也。 
现代文：朝廷的议论中有想先行加冠、完婚，后册立的提议，沈一贯不同意，说： 没有正名，就苟且成事，这是将储君降为诸王。 
English: In the discussions of the imperial court, there was a proposal to add the crown and complete the marriage first, and then register the establishment, but Shen always disagreed, saying: If there is no legitimate name, it is necessary to do it, which is to reduce the crown prince to the kings.

古文：会帝意亦颇悟，命即日举行。
现代文：遇上皇帝又颇为不省悟，下令当天就举行。
English: The emperor did not think twice and ordered the event to be held the same day.

古文：九月十有八日漏下二鼓，诏下。
现代文：九月十八日夜晚二更的时候，颁布诏书。
English: On the evening of September 18th, at two o'clock, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：既而帝复悔，令改期。
现代文：最后皇帝又后悔，命令更改时间。
English: Finally, the emperor had second thoughts and ordered the time to be changed.

古文：一贯封还诏书，言 万死不敢奉诏 ，帝乃止。
现代文：沈一贯封好诏书将它还给皇帝，说： 我万死不敢奉诏。 
English: Shen always sealed the edict and returned it to the emperor, saying, "I would never dare to issue an edict."

古文：十月望，册立礼成，时论颇称之。
现代文：皇帝这才没有中止册立之事。十月十五日，完成了册立的礼仪，当时的舆论很称道他。
English: It was only then that the emperor did not stop the registration. On October 15, he completed the registration ceremony, and the public opinion at that time praised him.

古文：会志皋于九月卒，一贯遂当国。
现代文：遇上赵志皋在九月去世，于是沈一贯屡次奏请增添内阁大臣。
English: When Zhao Zhisheng died in September, Shen repeatedly asked for more cabinet ministers.

古文：初，志皋病久，一贯屡请增阁臣。及是乃简用沈鲤、朱赓，而事皆取决于一贯。寻进太子太保、户部尚书、武英殿大学士。自一贯入内阁，朝政已大非。
现代文：等到此时才选拔任用沈鲤、朱赓入阁，而事情都取决于沈一贯。不久，晋升为太子太保、户部尚书、武英殿大学士。自从沈一贯进入内阁，朝政已经大为不同。
English: It was not until this time that Shen Tong and Zhu Xi were selected and appointed to the cabinet, and everything depended on Shen Cong. Soon, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo, Head of the Household, and Grand Master of the Imperial Household. Since Shen Cong entered the cabinet, the imperial government has been very different.

古文：数年之间，矿税使四出为民害。
现代文：数年之间，矿税使四出成为百姓的祸害。
English: In the space of a few years, the mining tax has become a scourge for the people.

古文：其所诬劾逮系者，悉滞狱中。
现代文：他们诬陷、弹劾而逮捕、囚禁的人，都滞留在狱中。
English: The people they framed and impeached and arrested and imprisoned are still in prison.

古文：吏部疏请起用建言废黜诸臣，并考选科道官，久抑不下，中外多以望阁臣。
现代文：吏部奏疏请求起用因为劝谏而被废黜的各位大臣，同时考选科道官，皇帝长久压抑奏章而不下达，朝廷内外大都观望内阁大臣。
English: The Ministry of Personnel requested the appointment of the ministers who had been deposed because of the persuasion, and at the same time, the examination for the election of the scientific officer. The emperor suppressed the medal for a long time and did not issue it. Most people inside and outside the court were watching the cabinet minister.

古文：一贯等数谏，不省。
现代文：沈一贯等人多次劝谏，皇帝都不省悟。
English: Shen Zongxun and others repeatedly persuaded him, but the emperor did not understand.

古文：而帝久不视朝，阁臣屡请，皆不报。
现代文：而且皇帝长期不上朝廷，内阁大臣屡次奏请，都没有答复。
English: Moreover, the emperor did not go to the imperial court for a long time, and the cabinet minister repeatedly appealed to the emperor, but there was no reply.

古文：一贯初辅政面恩，一见帝而已。
现代文：沈一贯初辅政，面谢皇恩，只见了皇帝一次。
English: At the beginning of his auxiliary government, Shen always thanked the emperor for his favor. He only met the emperor once.

古文：东征及杨应龙平，帝再御午门楼受俘。
现代文：东征与平定杨应龙，皇帝再次御临午门楼受理俘获。
English: The Eastern Expedition and the pacification of Yang Yinglong, the emperor once again accepted and captured the gatehouse at noon.

古文：一贯请陪侍，赐面对，皆不许。
现代文：沈一贯奏请陪同、侍候，赐予他面陈的机会，皇帝都不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree to Shen Zeng Rong's request to accompany and wait for him, nor to give him the opportunity to meet him.

古文：上下否隔甚，一贯虽小有救正，大率依违其间，物望渐减。
现代文：皇上臣下间的隔膜很大，沈一贯虽然小有救助，但大都是在皇帝和群臣之间调和，因此他的声望逐渐减弱。
English: The gap between the emperor and his vassals was very large, and Shen always had some help, but most of it was mediated between the emperor and his vassals, so his reputation gradually weakened.

古文：迨三十年二月，皇太子婚礼甫成，帝忽有疾。
现代文：到了万历三十年二月，皇太子刚完成婚礼，皇帝忽然患病。
English: In February of the 30th year of Wanli, the crown prince had just completed his wedding ceremony when the emperor suddenly fell ill.

古文：急召诸大臣至仁德门，俄独命一贯入启祥宫后殿暖西阁。
现代文：急忙将诸位大臣召至仁德门，不久，唯独命令沈一贯到启祥宫后殿的西暖阁。
English: He hurriedly summoned all the ministers to the Rendezvous Gate. Soon, he only ordered Shen Congguan to go to the West Warming Pavilion in the back of the Qixiang Palace.

古文：皇后、贵妃以疾不侍侧，皇太后南面立稍北，帝稍东，冠服席地坐，亦南面，太子、诸王跪于前。
现代文：皇后、贵妃因病不在皇帝身边侍候，皇太后面对南方站立而稍处皇帝之后，皇帝稍稍靠右，穿戴整齐地席地而坐，也面向南方，太子、诸王跪在跟前。
English: Due to illness, the empress and empress dowager did not wait at the emperor's side. The empress dowager stood at the back facing the south and slightly behind the emperor. The emperor sat slightly to the right, neatly dressed and facing the south. The prince and the kings knelt before him.

古文：一贯叩头起居讫，帝曰： 先生前。
现代文：沈一贯叩头后起身、坐定，皇帝说 ：先生请上前。
English: After bowing his head, Shen stood up and sat down. The emperor said, "Sir, please come forward."

古文：朕病日笃矣，享国已久，何憾。
现代文：我的病一天天严重，在位已经很久，没有遗憾。
English: My illness is getting worse day by day. I have been on the throne for a long time and I have no regrets.

古文：佳儿佳妇付与先生，惟辅之为贤君。
现代文：佳儿和佳妇托付给先生，希望辅佐他成为贤君。
English: The maiden and the lady are entrusted to the gentleman, hoping to assist him in becoming a virtuous ruler.

古文：矿税事，朕因殿工未竣，权宜采取，今可与江南织造、江西陶器俱止勿行，所遣内监皆令还京。
现代文：矿税的事，我因为宫殿的工程没有完成，暂时收取它，现在可以与江南的织造、江西的陶器一起停止不再进行，所派遣的太监都下令返回京都。
English: The matter of the mining tax, I temporarily collected it because the palace project was not completed, and now it can be stopped together with the weaving in the south of the Yangtze River and the pottery in the west of the Yangtze River. All the eunuchs sent were ordered to return to Kyoto.

古文：法司释久系罪囚，建言得罪诸臣咸复其官，给事中、御史即如所请补用。
现代文：法司释放长期关押的囚犯，劝谏而被治罪的诸位大臣都恢复官职，给事中、御史都按所奏请的补充、任用。
English: The Department of Justice released long-term prisoners, and all ministers who were convicted of crimes were restored to their official positions, and both the Minister of Justice and the Minister of History were supplemented and appointed as requested.

古文：朕见先生止此矣。 
现代文：我只见先生这一次了。 
English: I've only seen him once.

古文：言已就卧。
现代文：说完就卧倒了。
English: After saying this, he fell down.

古文：一贯哭，太后、太子、诸王皆哭。
现代文：沈一贯哭泣，太后、太子、诸王都哭泣。
English: Shen is always crying, the empress dowager, the prince and the kings are all crying.

古文：一贯复奏： 今尚书求去者三，请定去留。 
现代文：沈一贯又奏请： 现在尚书多人请求离去，请皇帝决定去留。 
English: Shen Gang also made a request: Now that many people in Shangshu have asked to leave, please let the emperor decide to stay.

古文：帝留户部陈渠、兵部田乐，而以祖陵冲决，削工部杨一魁籍。
现代文：皇帝留下了户部的陈蕖、兵部的田乐，而因祖陵的要道冲决，削夺了工部杨一魁的官籍。
English: The emperor left Chen Xuan of the Household Department and Tian Le of the Military Department, but because of the destruction of the main road of the ancestral mausoleum, he took away the official registration of Yang Yikui of the Industrial Department.

古文：一贯复叩首，出拟旨以进。
现代文：沈一贯再次叩首，出宫拟旨呈进。
English: Shen Zheng again bowed his head and submitted the imperial edict.

古文：是夕，阁臣九卿俱直宿朝房。
现代文：当晚，内阁大臣和九卿都在朝房中值夜班。
English: That evening, the cabinet minister and the nine nobles were all on night duty in the morning room.

古文：漏三鼓，中使捧谕至，具如帝语一贯者。
现代文：半夜三更，宫中使者捧来告谕，都如皇帝对沈一贯所说的话。
English: At three o'clock in the morning, a messenger from the palace came with a message, just as the emperor had always said to Shen.

古文：诸大臣咸喜。
现代文：诸位大臣都很高兴。
English: The ministers are very happy.

古文：翼日，帝疾，廖悔之。
现代文：第二天，皇帝的病好了，后悔此事。
English: The next day, the emperor recovered from his illness and regretted it.

古文：中使二十辈至阁中取前谕，言矿税不可罢，释囚、录直臣惟卿所裁。
现代文：宫中使者二十多人到内阁中取先前的告谕，称矿税不可以罢除，释放囚犯，录用正直的大臣都听您裁决。 
English: More than twenty emissaries from the palace came to the cabinet to take the previous announcement, saying that the mining tax could not be removed, that prisoners should be released, and that the appointment of honest ministers was subject to your ruling.

古文：一贯欲不予，中使辄搏颡几流血，一贯惶遽缴入。
现代文：沈一贯想不还圣谕，宦官就叩头，几乎流血，沈一贯惶恐就交纳了圣谕。
English: Shen always wanted to give back the oracle, the eunuch bowed down and almost bled, Shen always panicked and handed over the oracle.

古文：时吏部尚书李戴、左都御史温纯期即日奉行，颁示天下，刑部尚书萧大亨则谓弛狱须再请。
现代文：当时吏部尚书李戴、左都御史温纯希望马上奉行，颁诏告知天下，刑部尚书萧大亨则称释放囚犯必须再次奏请。
English: At that time, Li Dai, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Wen Chun, the governor of the Left Capital, hoped to implement it immediately, and issued an edict to inform the world. Xiao Tycoon, the secretary of the Ministry of Criminal Affairs, said that the release of prisoners must be requested again.

古文：无何，事变。太仆卿南企仲劾戴、大亨不即奉帝谕，起废释囚。
现代文：不久，事情变化，太仆卿南企中弹劾李戴、萧大亨不迅速遵奉皇帝的圣谕，启用废黜的官吏，释放囚犯。
English: Soon, things changed. Li Dai and Xiao Tycoon were impeached for not promptly obeying the emperor's edict to reinstate the deposed officials and release the prisoners.

古文：帝怒，并二事寝不行。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，将两件事都压制不再施行。
English: The emperor was so angry that he suppressed both of these things and no longer enforced them.

古文：当帝欲追还成命，司礼太监田义力争。
现代文：当皇帝想追回成命时，司礼太监田义极力争辩。
English: When the emperor wanted to reclaim his life, the ceremonial eunuch Tian Yi argued strenuously.

古文：帝怒，欲手刃之。义言愈力，而中使已持一贯所缴前谕至。
现代文：田义劝谏更加急切，而宫中使者已经拿着沈一贯所缴纳的先前的圣谕回来了。
English: Tian Yi's exhortation was more urgent, and the palace messenger had already returned with the previous edict that Shen had always paid.

古文：后义见一贯唾曰： 相公稍持之，矿税撤矣，何怯也！ 
现代文：后来田义见到沈一贯就唾弃地说 ：你稍稍坚持一下，矿税就撤除了，胆怯什么！ 
English: Later, when Tian Yi saw Shen, he scorned him and said: "If you persist a little, the mineral tax will be removed, what a coward!"

古文：自是大臣言官疏请者日相继，皆不复听。矿税之害，遂终神宗世。
现代文：从此大臣、言官上奏请求罢免矿税使的人每天都有，皇帝皆不再听从矿税的祸害，于是横行神宗一世。
English: Since then, ministers and officials have been petitioning for the removal of the mining tax every day, and emperors have no longer listened to the scourge of the mining tax, so Shenzong I is rampant.

古文：帝自疾瘳以后，政益废弛。
现代文：皇帝自从病好了之后，政治更加废弛。
English: Since the emperor recovered from his illness, politics has become even more chaotic.

古文：税监王朝、梁永、高淮等所至横暴，奸人乘机虐民者愈众。
现代文：税监王朝、梁永、高淮等人横征暴敛，许多奸诈的人乘机肆虐老百姓。
English: The dynasty of tax inspectors, Liang Yong, Gao Huai and others were violent in collecting taxes, and many treacherous people took the opportunity to wreak havoc on the common people.

古文：一贯与鲤、赓共著论以风，又尝因事屡争，且揭陈用人行政诸事。帝不省。
现代文：沈一贯与沈鲤、朱赓共同撰写奏章加以讽谏，又曾经就事屡次争辩，并且陈述用人与行政等事，皇帝不理。
English: Shen had always co-authored a musical composition with Shen Yi and Zhu Xi to ridicule them, and had repeatedly argued about the matter, and stated the employer and administration and other things, but the emperor ignored it.

古文：顾遇一贯厚，尝特赐敕奖之。
现代文：皇帝待沈一贯很好，曾经特别赐予敕令褒奖他。
English: Emperor Taishen was always very kind to him, and once gave him a special imperial edict to praise him.

古文：一贯素忌鲤，鲤亦自以讲筵受主眷，非由一贯进，不为下，二人渐不相能。
现代文：沈一贯一向顾忌沈鲤，沈鲤也自以为讲筵而受皇帝宠爱，不是由沈一贯引荐，不甘居其下，二人渐渐不和。
English: Shen had always been wary of Shen Zhen, and Shen Zhen also thought that he was the best and was favored by the emperor. He was not always recommended by Shen, and was not willing to live under him. The two gradually fell out.

古文：礼部侍郎郭正域以文章气节著，鲤甚重之。
现代文：礼部侍郎郭正域以文章的气节著称，沈鲤很器重他。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Guo Zhengwei, was famous for his literary prowess, and Shen Yi was very fond of him.

古文：都御史温纯、吏部侍郎杨时乔皆以清严自持相标置，一贯不善也。
现代文：都御史温纯、吏部侍郎杨时乔都以清廉自持相标榜，沈一贯不喜欢他们。
English: The governor of the capital, Wenjun Shi, and the secretary of the cadre department, Yang Shijiao, both advertised themselves as incorruptible and self-supporting. Shen always disliked them.

古文：会正域议夺吕本谥，一贯、赓与本同乡，寝其议。
现代文：遇上郭正域提议剥夺吕本的谥号，沈一贯、朱赓与吕本是同乡，压制了他的提议。
English: When Guo Zhengwei proposed to deprive Lüben of his surname, Shen Gang, a fellow villager of Zhu Xi and Lüben, suppressed his proposal.

古文：由是益恶正域，并恶鲤及纯、时乔等，而党论渐兴。
现代文：从此他更加厌恶郭正域以及沈鲤、温纯、杨时乔等人，而党论逐渐兴起。
English: From then on, he was even more disgusted with Guo Zhengwei, as well as Shen Qi, Wenzhong, Yang Shijiao and others, and the party theory gradually emerged.

古文：浙人与公论忤，由一贯始。
现代文：浙江人与公众议论相违逆，由沈一贯开始。
English: Zhejiang people are contrary to the public discussion, starting from Shen.

古文：三十一年，楚府镇国将军华勣讦楚王华奎为假王。
现代文：万历三十一年，楚府的镇国将军华责力攻击楚王华奎是假王。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, the general of the town of Chu, Hua Ruili, attacked the king of Chu, Hua Kui, as a false king.

古文：一贯纳王重贿，令通政司格其疏月余，先上华奎劾华勣欺罔四罪疏。
现代文：沈一贯收受了楚王的大量贿赂，指令通政司将此奏疏阻滞了一个多月，先呈进华奎弹劾华责力的四条欺骗的罪状。
English: Shen had always received a large amount of bribes from King Chu, and the instructions of the Secretary of State delayed this report for more than a month, first presenting four charges of deception to Hua Kui to impeach Hua Ruili.

古文：正域，楚人，颇闻假王事有状，请行勘虚实以定罪案。
现代文：郭正域是楚人，很听说了一些有关假王之事的传闻，奏请皇帝勘探虚实以便审定罪案。
English: Guo Zhengwei, a native of Chu, had heard some rumors about the false king and asked the emperor to investigate the facts in order to try and convict the case.

古文：一贯持之。
现代文：沈一贯压制此事。
English: Shen has consistently denied the affair.

古文：正域以楚王馈遗书上，帝不省。
现代文：郭正域将楚王行贿的事奏疏给皇帝，皇帝不理。
English: Guo Zhengwei leaked the story of King Chu's bribe-taking to the emperor, but the emperor ignored it.

古文：及抚按臣会勘并廷臣集议疏入，一贯力右王，嗾给事中钱梦皋、杨应文劾正域，勒归听勘，华勣等皆得罪。
现代文：等到抚按臣一起核查以及朝廷大臣们将议论集中奏报皇帝时，沈一贯又极力袒护楚王，唆使给事中钱梦皋、杨应文弹劾郭正域，勒令他回乡听候勘查；华责力等人都被治罪。
English: By the time Fuxian's vassals had conducted a joint inspection and the imperial court ministers had reported their discussions to the emperor, Shen had consistently and strenuously protected King Chu, instigated Qianmenqian and Yang Yingwen to impeach Guo Zhengwei, and ordered him to return to his hometown to await an investigation; Hua Rongli and others were all punished.

古文：正域甫登舟，未行，而 妖书 事起。
现代文：郭正域登船尚未起航，而 妖书 的事情发生。
English: Guo Zhengwei boarded the ship has not yet set sail, and the "evil book" happened.

古文：一贯方衔正域与鲤，其党康丕扬、钱梦皋等遂捕僧达观、医生沈令誉等下狱，穷治之。
现代文：沈一贯正怀恨郭正域与沈鲤，他的党羽康丕扬，钱梦皋等人逮捕了僧侣达观、医师沈令誉等人，投入监狱，竭力整治他们。
English: Shen has always held a grudge against Guo Zhengwei and Shen Yi, and his followers, including Kang Xiangyang and Qian Mengyao, arrested the monk Daguan, the physician Shen Lingyuan, and others, put them in prison, and tried their best to rectify them.

古文：一贯从中主其事，令锦衣帅王之祯与丕扬大索鲤私第三日，发卒围正域舟，执掠其婢仆乳媪，皆无所得。
现代文：沈一贯坐中主持，指令锦衣帅王之祯与康丕扬将沈鲤的私宅大搜了三天，派兵围困了郭正域的船，搜掠他的婢女、仆从、乳母，都没有获取他所要的证据。
English: Shen always presided over the meeting, and ordered Jin Yi Shuai Wang Zhi Tong and Kang Rongyang to search Shen Rong's private house for three days, sent troops to besiege Guo Zhengwei's ship, and searched and plundered his maids, servants, and nannies. None of them obtained the evidence he wanted.

古文：乃以皦生光具狱。
现代文：于是将白敫生光结案。
English: As a result, the case against Shiragi Ikimitsu was closed.

古文：二事错见正域及楚王传中。
现代文：两件事在郭正域与楚王传中都有记载。
English: Both events are recorded in the Guo Zhengyi and Chu Wang Chuan.

古文：始，都御史纯劾御史于永清及给事中姚文蔚，语稍涉一贯。
现代文：开始，都御史温纯弹劾御史于永清和给事中姚文尉，话语稍稍涉及沈一贯。
English: At the beginning, the prefectural governor Wen Chun impeached the prefectural governor in Yongqing and gave the matter to Yao Wenfei, the discourse slightly involved Shen Gang.

古文：给事中钟兆斗为一贯论纯，御史汤兆京复劾兆斗而直纯。
现代文：给事中钟兆斗替沈一贯疏论温纯，御史汤兆京又弹劾钟兆斗而认为温纯行为正直。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhong Zhaodu substituted Shen's usual laxity for Wenjun, and the Imperial Historian Tang Zhaojing also impeached Zhong Zhaodu and thought that Wenjun's behavior was honest.

古文：纯十七疏求去，一贯佯揭留纯。
现代文：温纯十七次上奏请求离去，沈一贯佯装竭力挽留温纯。
English: Wen Chun requested to leave after the seventeenth performance, but Shen always pretended to do his best to keep Wen Chun.

古文：至岁乙巳，大察京朝官。
现代文：到了乙巳年，对京城和朝廷的官员全面考察。
English: In the Year of the Snake, officials from the capital and the imperial court were comprehensively inspected.

古文：纯与时乔主其事，梦皋、兆斗皆在黜中。
现代文：温纯与杨时乔主持此事，钱梦皋、钟兆斗都在罢黜之列。
English: Wen Chun and Yang Shijiao presided over the matter, and Qian Mengyao and Zhong Zhaodu were among those dismissed.

古文：一贯怒，言于帝，以京察疏留。
现代文：沈一贯恼怒，上奏皇帝，将京察的奏疏留在宫中。
English: Shen was always irritated and played the emperor, leaving Jingzha's sonata in the palace.

古文：久之，乃尽留给事、御史之被察者，且许纯致仕去。
现代文：此后很久，便将被察处的给事，御史全部留用，并同意温纯结束仕途而离去。
English: A long time after that, he left all of his records with the inspector's office, and agreed to end his career and leave.

古文：于是主事刘元珍、庞时雍、南京御史朱吾弼力争之，谓二百余年计典无特留者。
现代文：因此，主事刘元珍、庞时雍，南京御史朱吾弼极力争辩，称统计二百多年的典制，没有特加挽留的人。
English: Therefore, the leaders Liu Yuanzhen, Pang Shiyong, and the Nanjing imperial historian Zhu Wuxi argued strenuously, saying that there was no one who was specially detained in the more than 200-year-old imperial system.

古文：时南察疏亦留中，后迫众议始下。
现代文：当时南京考察的奏疏也留在宫中，后来迫于众议才下发。
English: At that time, the report of the Nanjing inspection was also left in the palace, and later it was forced to issue it after public discussion.

古文：一贯自是积不为公论所与，弹劾日众，因谢病不出。
现代文：沈一贯从此不被公论所看重，弹劾一天天增多，于是他称病不出门。
English: Since then, Shen has not been valued by the public opinion, and the impeachment has increased day by day, so he said that he was sick and would not go out.

古文：三十上四年七月，给事中陈嘉训、御史孙居相复连章劾其奸。
现代文：万历三十四年七月，给事中陈嘉训、御史孙居相又接连弹劾他奸诈、贪婪。
English: In July of the 34th year of the Manchurian calendar, Chen Jiaxun and the Grand Historian Sun Juxiang repeatedly impeached him for treachery and greed.

古文：一贯愤，益求去。
现代文：沈一贯恼恨，更加请求离去。
English: Shen has always been angry, and even more begged to leave.

古文：帝为黜嘉训，夺居相俸，允一贯归，鲤亦同时罢。
现代文：皇帝替他罢免了陈嘉训，剥夺了孙居相的俸禄，同意沈一贯回乡，沈鲤也同时被罢免。
English: On his behalf, the emperor dismissed Chen Jiaxun, deprived Sun Juxiang of his salary, and agreed that Shen would always return to his hometown. At the same time, Shen Yu was also dismissed.

古文：而一贯独得温旨，虽赓右之，论者益訾其有内援焉。
现代文：而唯独沈一贯得到温和的御旨，虽然朱赓袒护他，疏论者更加攻击他有内援。
English: But only Shen has consistently received a moderate imperial edict. Although Zhu Xi has protected him, the slacker theorists have attacked him even more for having internal support.

古文：一贯之入阁也，为锡爵、志皋所荐。
现代文：沈一贯进入内阁，由王锡爵、赵志皋举荐。
English: Shen has always entered the cabinet, recommended by Wang Xizhe and Zhao Zhixuan.

古文：辅政十有三年，当国者四年。枝拄清议，好同恶异，与前后诸臣同。
现代文：辅政十三年，当政四年，与清流议论相冲突，喜欢相同的意见，厌恶不同的。
English: Thirteen years as a vice-president, four years in office, conflict with clear-flow discussions, like the same opinions, dislike different ones.

古文：至楚宗、妖书、京察三事，独犯不韪，论者丑之，虽其党不能解免也。
现代文：宗亲、妖书、京察等三件事偏偏冒犯了天下大不韪之事，疏论者以为不齿，即使他的党羽也因此受株连。
English: Zongren, Yoshu, Beijing inspection and other three things have offended the world's great unseemly things, and the slacker thinks they are unseemly, even if his party feathers are also affected.

古文：一贯归，言者追劾之不已，其乡人亦多受世诋諆云。
现代文：沈一贯回乡，谏言诸官仍追着弹劾不止，他的乡里人也多受到世人的诋毁。
English: Shen has always returned to his hometown, and officials are still chasing impeachment. His fellow villagers have also been slandered by the world.

古文：一贯在位，累加少傅兼太子太傅、吏部尚书、建极殿大学士。
现代文：沈一贯在位时，加封为少傅兼太子太傅、吏部尚书、建极殿大学士。
English: When Shen was still on the throne, he was awarded the titles of Shao Fu and Taifu of the Crown Prince, Shang Shu of the Ministry of Personnel, and Jian Ji Dian University Scholar.

古文：家居十年卒。
现代文：在家居住十年后去世。
English: She died after living in the home for 10 years.

古文：赠太傅，谥文恭。
现代文：赠封太傅，谥号文恭。
English: He was awarded the title of Taifu (太傅) and his posthumous name was Wengong (文恭).

古文：方从哲，字中涵，其先德清人。
现代文：方从哲，字中涵，他的先祖是山东德清人。
English: Fang Congzhe, his ancestors are Shandong Deqing people.

古文：隶籍锦衣卫，家京师。
现代文：户籍隶属锦衣卫，家住京城。
English: His family register belongs to Jin Rongwei, and he lives in Beijing.

古文：从哲登万历十一年进士，授庶吉士，屡迁国子祭酒。
现代文：方从哲考取万历十一年的进士，授任庶吉士，多次迁官后升任国子监祭酒。
English: Fang was awarded the prize of the eleventh year of Wanli from Zhe Gao, was awarded the posthumous good luck medal, and was promoted to the post of provincial overseer of sacrificial wine after being transferred several times.

古文：请告家居，久不出，时颇称其恬雅。
现代文：请假在家休养，长期不出任官职，当时人们颇为称道他恬静雅正。
English: He took a leave of absence to recuperate at home and did not hold any official position for a long time. At that time, people praised him for his quiet and elegant demeanor.

古文：大学士叶向高请用为礼部右侍郎，不报。
现代文：大学士叶向高奏请任用他为礼部右侍郎，没有答复。
English: The university scholar Ye Xiang Gao Suo requested that he be appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, but there was no reply.

古文：中旨起吏部左侍郎。
现代文：御旨起用他任吏部左侍郎。
English: At his request, he was appointed as the Left Attendant of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：为给事中李成名所劾，求罢，不允。
现代文：被给事中李成名弹劾，请求罢职，皇帝不同意。
English: When Li Chengmei was impeached and asked to resign, the emperor did not agree.

古文：四十一年，拜礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，与吴道南并命。
现代文：万历四十一年，任命为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，与吴道南一起受命。
English: In the 41st year of Wanli, he was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees and a scholar of Dongge University, and was appointed together with Wu Daonan.

古文：时道南在籍，向高为首辅，政事多决于向高。
现代文：当时吴道南尚在官籍，叶向高任首辅，政事大多由叶向高裁决。
English: At that time, Wu Daonan was still an official, Ye Xiang Gao was the first assistant, and most of the political affairs were decided by Ye Xiang Gao.

古文：向高去国，从哲遂独相。
现代文：叶向高离开京都，方从哲便独自为相。
English: Ye Xianggao left Kyoto, while Fang Congzhe went solo.

古文：请召还旧辅沈鲤，不允。
现代文：奏请召回旧辅臣沈鲤，皇帝不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree to the request to recall his former aide-de-camp, Shen Qi.

古文：御史钱春劾其容悦，从哲乞罢。
现代文：御史钱春弹劾他逢迎取悦皇上，方从哲请求罢职。
English: Emperor Qianchun impeached him to please the emperor, and Fang Congzhe asked him to resign.

古文：帝优旨慰留。
现代文：皇帝下诏好言抚慰，挽留。
English: The emperor made a good speech to soothe and keep him.

古文：未几，道南至。
现代文：不久，吴道南到来。
English: Soon, Wu Daonan arrived.

古文：会张差梃击事起，刑部以疯癫蔽狱。
现代文：遇上张差遭梃击的事件发生，刑部以疯癫为名将他藏匿在监狱中。
English: When Zhang Chia was beaten, the criminal investigation department hid him in prison under the pretext that he was insane.

古文：王之寀钩得其情，庞保、刘成等迹始露。
现代文：王之肕搜取了情况，庞保、刘成等人的马脚开始显露。
English: Wang Zhiyao searched the situation, and the dirty tricks of Pang Bao, Liu Cheng and others began to be revealed.

古文：从哲偕道南斥之寀言谬妄，帝纳之。
现代文：方从哲与吴道南斥责王之肕言语荒谬，皇帝采纳了他们的意见。
English: Fang Congzhe and Wu Daonan reprimanded the king for the absurdity of his speech, and the emperor adopted their opinion.

古文：道南为言路所诋，求去者经岁，以母忧归。
现代文：吴道南遭舆论的诋毁，多次请求辞职，后来因母亲的丧事而回乡。
English: Wu Daonan was slandered by public opinion, repeatedly asked to resign, and later returned to his hometown because of his mother's funeral.

古文：从哲复独相，即疏请推补阁臣。
现代文：方从哲又单独任宰相，马上上奏请求推举、补充内阁大臣。
English: Fang Congzhe was appointed as the prime minister alone, and immediately petitioned for the election and supplement of cabinet ministers.

古文：自后每月必请。
现代文：从此之后每月必定奏请。
English: From now on, it must be requested every month.

古文：帝以一人足办，迄不增置。
现代文：皇帝认为一个人足以胜任，终究没有增添内阁大臣。
English: The emperor thought that one person was enough to do the job, so he didn't add a cabinet minister after all.

古文：从哲性柔懦，不能任大事。
现代文：方从哲的性格柔弱、懦腐，不能胜任大事。
English: Fang Congzhe's character is weak and cowardly, and he is not capable of handling important matters.

古文：时东宫久辍讲，瑞王婚礼逾期，惠王、桂王未择配，福府庄田遣中使督赋，又议令鬻盐，中旨命吕贵督织造，驸马王昺以救刘光复褫冠带，山东盗起，灾异数见，言官翟凤翀、郭尚宾以直言贬，帝遣中使令工部侍郎林如楚缮修咸安营，宣府缺饷数月，从哲皆上疏力言，帝多不听。
现代文：当时东宫长期停止讲授，瑞王的婚礼过期，惠王、桂王没有选择配偶，福府的庄田派宦官督促赋税，又提议下令卖盐，御旨指令吕贵监督织造，驸马王籨因为救助刘光复被剥夺冠带，山东兴起盗贼，多次出现灾变，言官翟凤罛、郭尚宾因为直言劝谏贬职，皇帝派宦官传令工部侍郎林如楚修缮咸安宫，宣府数月缺粮饷，方从哲都上奏极力劝谏，皇帝大都不听。
English: At that time, the East Palace stopped lecturing for a long time, the wedding of the king of Sui was overdue, the king of Hui and the king of Gui did not choose a spouse, the Shoda of Fu Fu sent eunuchs to urge taxation, and proposed to order the sale of salt, the imperial order ordered Lugui to supervise weaving, the king of Ma was deprived of the crown belt because of the rescue of Liu Guangfu, the rise of thieves in Shandong, and there were many disasters, the officials of Yan Feng and Guo Shangbin were demoted because of their frank advice, the emperor sent eunuchs to order the waiter of the work department Lin

古文：而从哲有内援，以名争而已，实将顺帝意，无所匡正。
现代文：而方从哲有内援，为名誉而争辩罢了，实际准备顺从皇帝的意志，没有匡正什么。
English: On the other hand, the party had internal support from the philosopher, argued for honor, and actually prepared to obey the emperor's will, but did not rectify anything.

古文：向高秉政时，党论鼎沸。
现代文：叶向高执政时，党论鼎沸。
English: When Ye Xianggao was in power, the party was in full swing.

古文：言路交通铨部，指清流为东林，逐之殆尽。
现代文：言官与吏部相交结，指责清流派为东林党，于是将他们全部驱逐。
English: The govt. officials and the cadres accused the Qing faction of being the Donglin faction, and expelled them all.

古文：及从哲秉政，言路已无正人，党论渐息。
现代文：等到方从哲执政，言官中已经没有正直之人，党论渐渐平息。
English: By the time Fang Zizhe came to power, there were no longer any honest people among the officials, and the party theory gradually subsided.

古文：丁巳京察，尽斥东林，且及林居者。
现代文：丁巳年的京察，将东林党人全部贬斥，并波及隐居之人。
English: The inspection of Beijing in the year of Ding Si denounced all the Donglin Party members, and affected those who lived in seclusion.

古文：齐、楚、浙三党鼎立，务搏击清流。
现代文：齐楚浙三党鼎立，着力搏击清流派。
English: The three parties of QiChuZhejiang stood in a triumvirate and fought against the Qing school.

古文：齐人亓诗教，从哲门生，势尤张。
现代文：齐人亓诗教，是方从哲的门生，势力尤为嚣张。
English: Qi Renzhong's poetry teaching is the protégé of Fang Congzhe, and its power is particularly arrogant.

古文：从哲昵群小，而帝怠荒亦益甚。
现代文：方从哲亲昵群小，而皇帝懈怠，荒疏也更加厉害。
English: Fang Congzhe's intimate group is small, and the emperor is slack, and the desolation is even more severe.

古文：畿辅、山东、山西、河南、江西及大江南北相继告灾，疏皆不发。
现代文：京郊、山东、山西、河南、江西以及大江南北相继报告灾变，奏疏都没下发。
English: Suburbs of Beijing, Shandong, Shanxi, Henan, Jiangxi and the north and south of the Yangtze River successively reported disasters, but no reports were issued.

古文：旧制，给事中五十余员，御史百余员。
现代文：旧制，给事中五十多人，御史一百多人。
English: Under the old system, there were more than 50 people in charge of affairs and more than 100 people in charge of history.

古文：至是六科止四人，而五科印无所属；十三道止五人，一人领数职。
现代文：此时，六科只有四个人，而五科的官印没有归属；十三道只有五个人，一人负责几职。
English: At this time, there were only four people in the six disciplines, and the official seal of the five disciplines did not belong to anyone; there were only five people in the 13 disciplines, and one person was responsible for several positions.

古文：在外巡按率不得代。
现代文：在京城之外，巡抚一律不能代理。
English: Outside the capital, the governor cannot represent anyone.

古文：六部堂上官仅四五人，都御史数年空署，督抚监司亦屡缺不补。
现代文：六部堂的上级高员仅四、五人，都御史数年空缺，督抚监司也多次空缺，没有补充。
English: There are only four or five senior high-ranking officials in the Sixth Division, and the position of Metropolitan has been vacant for several years. The position of Supervisor has also been vacant several times, and has not been filled.

古文：文武大选、急选官及四方教职，积数千人，以吏、兵二科缺掌印不画凭，久滞都下，时攀执政舆哀诉。
现代文：文武大选、急选官以及四方的教职，累计数千人，因为吏、兵两科缺掌印人而不签凭证，长期滞留京都，时常攀附内阁的公车哀怨、诉说。
English: Cumulatively, thousands of people have been stranded in Kyoto for a long time due to the lack of stamps for the civil and military affairs, the general election, the urgent election, and the teaching positions of the four parties. They often cling to the cabinet's bus to lament and complain.

古文：诏狱囚以理刑无人不决遣，家属聚号长安门。
现代文：诏狱的囚犯，因为没有人负责刑部，不做判决遣送，家属聚集在长安门号哭。
English: Since there was no one in charge of the criminal department, the prisoners of the Zaozhuang Prison were not sentenced and deported, and their families gathered at the Chang'an Gate to cry.

古文：职业尽弛，上下解体。
现代文：职司各业全部废弛，上下级分离，脱节。
English: The functions of all industries are all wasted, the upper and lower levels are separated, and they are out of touch.

古文：四十六年四月，大清兵克抚顺，朝野震惊。
现代文：万历四十六年四月，大清的军队攻克抚顺，朝野震惊。
English: In April of the 46th year of Wanli, the Qing army conquered Fushun, shocking the court and the country.

古文：帝初颇忧惧，章奏时下，不数月泄泄如故。
现代文：皇帝起初很忧虑、惧怕，时时下达文书，不出几个月就像原来一样迟缓。
English: At first, the emperor was very worried and afraid. He constantly issued documents, and after a few months, he was as slow as before.

古文：从哲子世鸿杀人，巡城御史劾之。
现代文：方从哲的儿子方世鸿杀了人，巡城御史弹劾他。
English: Fang Congzhe's son, Fang Shihong, killed a man, and the city inspector impeached him.

古文：从哲乞罢，不允。
现代文：方从哲请求罢职，皇帝不同意。
English: Fang Congzhe asked to resign, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：长星见东南，长二丈，广尺余，十有九日而灭。
现代文：长星出现在东南方，长二丈，宽一尺多，过了十九天才消失。
English: The long star appeared in the southeast, two feet long and more than a foot wide, and it took nineteen days to disappear.

古文：是日京师地震。
现代文：当天，京城发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：从哲言： 妖象怪徵，层见叠出，除臣奉职无状痛自修省外，望陛下大奋乾纲，与天下更始。 
现代文：方从哲上奏称 ：妖象与怪征兆，层出迭见，除了我尽职，痛心修身、反省之外，希望陛下大振天纲，使天下更新。 
English: Fang Congzhe said: "I see signs of monsters and signs of monsters, one after another. In addition to my due diligence, painstaking self-cultivation and self-reflection, I hope that His Majesty will make great efforts to renew the world.

古文：朝士杂然笑之。
现代文：朝廷人纷纷地讥笑他。
English: The courtiers laughed at him.

古文：帝亦不省。
现代文：皇帝也不做反省。
English: The emperor did not do any self-reflection.

古文：御史熊化以时事多艰、佐理无效劾从哲，乞用灾异策免。
现代文：御史熊化因为时事多艰、辅佐无效而弹劾方从哲，请求依灾变的方策罢免他。
English: Because of the difficult current affairs and the ineffectiveness of the assistant, the impeachment party asked Zong Zhe to remove him according to the method of disaster.

古文：从哲恳求罢，坚卧四十余日，阁中虚无人。
现代文：方从哲恳求罢免自己的官职，坚持在家躺卧四十多天，内阁空虚无人。
English: Fang Congzhe pleaded to be relieved of his post, insisted on lying at home for more than forty days, and the cabinet was empty.

古文：帝慰留再三，乃起视事。
现代文：皇帝再三抚慰、挽留，他才起身处置事务。
English: The emperor repeatedly comforted and held him back, and only then did he get up to deal with the matter.

古文：明年二月，杨镐四路出师，兵科给事中赵兴邦用红旗督战，师大败。
现代文：第二年二月，杨镐分四路出兵，兵科给事中赵兴邦用红旗督战，官军大败。
English: In February of the following year, Yang Hui dispatched troops in four directions. Zhao Xingbang used the red flag to supervise the battle, and the government army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：礼部主事夏嘉遇谓辽事之坏，由兴邦及从哲庇李维翰所致，两疏劾之。
现代文：礼部主事夏嘉遇称辽地事情的严重，由赵兴邦与方从哲庇护李维翰所造成的，两次上奏弹劾他们。
English: The head of the ceremonial department, Xia Jia, said that the serious situation in Liaoning Province was caused by Zhao Xingbang and Fang Congzhe's patron, Li Weihan, and impeached them twice.

古文：众哲求罢，不敢入阁，视事于朝房。
现代文：方从哲请求罢职，不敢进入内阁，在朝房处理政务。
English: Fang Congzhe asked to resign and did not dare to enter the cabinet and deal with government affairs in the imperial court.

古文：帝优旨恳留，乃复故，而反擢兴邦为太常少卿。
现代文：皇帝下优诏恳留，才如常上班，而且反而提升赵兴邦为太常少卿。
English: The emperor ordered Zhao Xingbang to stay at home and work as usual, but instead he was promoted to the position of junior minister.

古文：未几，大清兵连克开原、铁岭。
现代文：不久，大清的军队接连攻克开原、铁岭。
English: Soon, the Qing Dynasty's army successively conquered Kaiyuan and Tieling.

古文：廷臣于文华门拜疏，立请批发，又候旨思善门，皆不报。
现代文：朝廷大臣在文华门跪拜上奏，请求立即批示、发放奏章，又在思善门等候圣旨，都没有答复。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court knelt down at the Wenhua Gate to play the music, requested immediate instructions and the issuance of the music, and waited for the Holy Will at the Shishan Gate, but there was no answer.

古文：从哲乃叩首仁德门跪俟俞旨，帝终不报。
现代文：于是，方从哲在仁德门叩首，跪着等候皇帝的答复，皇帝始终没有答复。
English: As a result, Fang Congzhe bowed his head at the Rendezvous Gate and knelt down to wait for the emperor's reply. The emperor never replied.

古文：俄请帝出御文华殿，召见群臣，面商战守方略。
现代文：不久，奏请皇帝出宫，驾临文华殿，召见群臣，当面商议战守的策略，也没有答复。
English: Not long after, the emperor was asked to leave the palace, come to the Wenhua Palace, summon his ministers, and discuss the defense strategy in person, but there was no reply.

古文：亦不报。请补阁臣疏十上，情极哀，始命廷推。
现代文：他十次上奏请求补充内阁大臣，心情极度悲哀，皇帝才命令朝廷大臣推举。
English: Ten times he petitioned for additional cabinet ministers, feeling extremely sad, and only then did the emperor order the imperial court ministers to be nominated.

古文：及推上，又不用。
现代文：等到推举给皇上，又不任用。
English: He waited until he was recommended to the Emperor, and then he was not appointed.

古文：从哲复连请，乃简用史继偕、沈纮，疏仍留中，终帝世寝不下。
现代文：方从哲又接连奏请，才选用史继偕、沈纮，奏疏仍然留在宫中，终万历皇帝之世没有下达。
English: Fang Zhe and Zhe Zhe asked to play in succession, and only then did they choose Shi Jixuan and Shen Jixuan. The play was still left in the palace, and it was not issued during the lifetime of Emperor Wanli.

古文：御史张新诏劾从哲诸所疏揭，委罪群父，诳言欺人，祖宗二百年金瓯坏从哲手。
现代文：御史张新诏弹劾方从哲的诸封奏疏，归罪于君王，诳言骗人，祖宗二百多年的基业毁坏在方从哲的手中。
English: The imperial historian Zhang Xinzhao impeached Fang Congzhe's various fiefs for slander, blamed the king, slandered and deceived people, and destroyed the ancestral property of more than two hundred years in the hands of Fang Congzhe.

古文：御史萧毅中、刘蔚、周方鉴、杨春茂、王尊德、左光斗，山西参政徐如翰亦交章击之。
现代文：御史萧毅中、列蔚、周方鉴、杨春茂、王尊德、左光斗，山西的参政徐如翰也相继上奏攻击他。
English: Xiao Yizhong, Li Wei, Zhou Fangyan, Yang Chunmao, Wang Zunde, Zuo Guangdou, and Shanxi politician Xu Ruhan also attacked him in succession.

古文：从哲连疏自明，且乞罢。
现代文：方从哲接连上奏表白自己，并请求罢免官职。
English: Fang Zhe successively made a report to confess himself, and requested to be removed from office.

古文：帝皆不问。
现代文：皇帝都没有理会。
English: The emperor paid no attention.

古文：自刘光复系狱，从哲论救数十疏。
现代文：自从刘光复被投入监狱，方从哲数十次上奏相救。
English: Since Liu Guangfu was put into prison, Fang Congzhe has come to his rescue dozens of times.

古文：帝特释为民，而用人行政诸章奏终不发。
现代文：皇帝特例释放他为平民，而用人与行政的诸件奏章始终没有下发。
English: The emperor released him as a civilian under a special case, but the employment and administrative records were never issued.

古文：帝有疾数月。
现代文：皇帝患病几个月。
English: The emperor had been ill for several months.

古文：会皇后崩，从哲哭临毕，请至榻前起居。
现代文：遇上皇后逝世，方从哲刚刚哭完，就奏请到皇帝龙床前侍候。
English: When the empress passed away, Fang Congzhe had just finished crying, so he invited her to wait in front of the emperor's dragon bed.

古文：召见弘德殿，跪语良久，因请补阁臣，用大僚，下台谏命。
现代文：皇帝在弘德殿召见他，他跪着诉说了很久，于是奏请补充内阁大臣，任用大臣，下发谏书、命令。
English: The emperor summoned him to Hongde Hall, where he kneeled and spoke for a long time. He then asked for additional cabinet ministers, appointed ministers, and issued decrees and orders.

古文：帝许之，乃叩头出。
现代文：皇帝同意了，他才叩头出门。
English: The emperor agreed, and he went out with his head bowed.

古文：帝素恶言官，前此考选除授者，率候命二三年，及是候八年。
现代文：皇帝一向厌恶言官。在此之前的考选后任职、授命的人，都要候职二、三年。
English: The emperor has always disliked speech officials. Before this, those who were appointed after the examination and selection had to wait for two or three years.

古文：从哲请至数十疏，竟不下。
现代文：等到这时候，等待再次任职的人则要四年。方从哲几十次上奏想请求任命这些人最终没有下发。
English: By this time, it will be four years for those who are waiting for re-appointment. Fang Congzhe has made dozens of requests for the appointment of these people, but they have not been issued.

古文：帝自以海宇承平，官不必备，有意损之。
现代文：皇帝自认为天下平安，官吏不必完备，有意减少他们。
English: The emperor thought that the world was at peace and that officials did not need to be perfect, so he deliberately reduced their number.

古文：及辽左军兴，又不欲矫前失，行之如旧。
现代文：等到辽左的兵事兴起，又不想矫正以前的过失，照旧施行。
English: Wait until Liao Zuo's military affairs arise, and do not want to correct the previous mistakes, carry on as before.

古文：从哲独秉国成，卒无所匡救。
现代文：方从哲单独执政，最终没有什么匡扶、救助。
English: Fang Zongzhe ruled alone, and in the end there was no support or rescue.

古文：又用姚宗文阅辽东，齮经略熊廷弼去，辽阳遂失。
现代文：又任用姚宗文到了辽东察看，将经略熊廷弼倾轧离去，于是丢失了辽阳。
English: He also appointed Yao Zongwen to go to Liaodong to inspect it, and then left Liaoyang.

古文：论者谓明之亡，神宗实基之，而从哲其罪首也。
现代文：论事者称明朝的灭亡，实际上由神宗酿成，而方从哲是罪魁祸首。
English: Commentators say that the demise of the Ming Dynasty was actually caused by the Shenzong, and that Fang Congzhe was the main culprit.

古文：四十八年七月丙子朔，帝不豫，十有七日大渐。
现代文：万历四十八年七月二十九日，皇帝不舒适，十七天后渐渐加重。
English: On July 29th, 48 B.C., the emperor began to feel unwell, which gradually worsened 17 days later.

古文：外廷忧危，从哲偕九卿台谏诣思善门问安。
现代文：外廷忧虑，方从哲与九卿台谏到思善门问安。
English: The court was worried, and the party went from Zhe and Jiuqing Taiyuan to Shishanmen to say hello.

古文：越二日，召从哲及尚书周嘉谟、李汝华、黄嘉善、黄克缵等受顾命。
现代文：过了两天，皇帝召见方从哲和尚书周嘉谟、李汝华、黄嘉善、黄克缵等人接受遗命。
English: Two days later, the emperor summoned Fang to accept the last rites from Zhe Monk Shu Zhou Jia Mu, Li Ruhua, Huang Jia Shan, Huang Kehong and others.

古文：又二日，乃崩。八月丙午朔，光宗嗣位。
现代文：又过了两天，皇帝才逝世。八月二十八日，光宗继位。
English: Two more days passed before the emperor died, and on August 28th, Emperor Guangzong succeeded to the throne.

古文：郑贵妃以前福王故，惧帝衔之，进珠玉及侍姬八人啖帝。
现代文：郑贵妃因为以前福王的缘故，怕皇帝怀恨她，呈送珠玉以及八名侍姬利诱皇帝。
English: Zheng Guifei, fearing that the emperor would hold a grudge against her because of the previous King of Fortune, presented jewels and eight attendants to lure the emperor.

古文：选侍李氏最得帝宠，贵妃因请立选侍为皇后，选侍亦为贵妃求封太后。
现代文：所选送的侍姬李氏最受皇帝宠爱，于是贵妃请求立选侍为皇后，选侍也替贵妃请求册封太后。
English: The chosen lady-in-waiting, Ms. Li, was the emperor's favorite, so the empress requested that the chosen lady-in-waiting be made the empress, and the chosen lady-in-waiting also requested the title of empress dowager for the empress.

古文：帝已于乙卯得疾，丁巳力疾御门，命从哲封贵妃为皇太后，从哲遽以命礼部。
现代文：皇帝已经在乙卯患病，丁巳病重，命令方从哲册封贵妃为皇太后，方从哲赶紧命令礼部。
English: The emperor was already ill in the second half of the year, and Ding Si was seriously ill. He ordered Fang Zhecang to crown Guifei as empress dowager, and Fang Zhecang to quickly order the ceremonial department.

古文：侍郎孙如游力争，事乃止。
现代文：侍郎孙如游极力争辩，此事才终止。
English: The matter ended only after the chamberlain, Sun Ruyou, argued strenuously.

古文：辛酉，帝不视朝，从哲偕廷臣诣宫门问安。
现代文：辛酉，皇帝不朝见，方从哲与朝廷大臣到宫门前问安。
English: As the emperor did not want to meet the emperor, the emperor sent Zhe and the minister of the imperial court to the front of the palace gate to say hello.

古文：时都下纷言中官崔文升进泄药，帝由此委顿，而帝传谕有 头目眩晕，身体软弱，不能动履 语，群情益疑骇。
现代文：当时京城纷纷传说宦官崔文升进呈泄药，皇帝因此萎靡，而且皇帝的圣谕中有 头目眩晕，身体软弱，不能动脚 的话，众人的情绪更加疑惑、惊骇。
English: At that time, there were many rumors in Beijing that the eunuch Cui Wenxing had been poisoned, and the emperor was weak as a result. Moreover, the emperor's edict included the words "the head is dizzy, the body is weak, and the feet cannot be moved," which made people's emotions even more confused and shocked.

古文：给事中杨涟劾文升，并及从哲。
现代文：给事中杨涟弹劾崔文升并波及方从哲。
English: During the incident, Yang Jie impeached Cui Wensheng and affected Fang Congzhe.

古文：刑部主事孙朝肃、徐仪世、御史郑宗周并上书从哲，请保护圣体，速建储贰。
现代文：刑部主事孙朝肃、徐仪世，御史郑宗周一起呈书方从哲，请求保护圣体，迅速建立皇储。
English: The head of the criminal justice department, Sun Chaosu, Xu Yixi, and the imperial historian, Zheng Zong Zhou, together submitted a petition to the emperor, requesting the protection of the Blessed Sacrament and the speedy establishment of the imperial treasury.

古文：从哲候安，因言进药宜慎。
现代文：方从哲向皇帝问安，于是劝谏皇帝慎重吃药。
English: Fang Congzhe greeted the emperor and advised him to take the medicine carefully.

古文：帝褒答之。
现代文：皇帝褒扬并答应了他。
English: The emperor praised him and agreed.

古文：戊辰，新阁臣刘一燝、韩爌入直，帝疾已殆。
现代文：戊辰，新任内阁大臣刘一火景、韩火广上任，皇帝的病情已经很危险。
English: When the new cabinet ministers Liu Yihuoqing and Han Huoguang took office, the emperor's condition was already very dangerous.

古文：辛未，召从哲、一燝、爌，英国公张惟贤，吏部尚书周嘉谟，户部尚书李汝华，礼部侍郎署部事孙如游，刑部尚书黄克缵，左都御史张问达，给事中范济世、杨涟，御史顾慥等至乾清宫。
现代文：辛未，皇帝召唤方从哲、刘一火景、韩火广，英国公张惟贤，吏部尚书周嘉谟，户部尚书李汝华，礼部侍郎署理部中事务的孙如游，刑部尚书黄克缵，左都御史张问达，给事中范济世、杨涟，御史顾忄造等人到乾清宫。
English: Xin Wei, the emperor summoned Zhe, Liu Yi Huo Jing, Han Huo Guang, the British public Zhang Wei Xian, the official Zhou Jia Mu, the household official Li Ruhua, the ceremonial official Sun Ruyou, the official of the Ministry of Central Affairs, the official of the Ministry of Justice Huang Kehuan, the left capital official Zhang Qida, and the officials Fan Jisei, Yang Jie, the official of the Ministry of Central Affairs Gu Shizou and others to the Qianqing Palace.

古文：帝御东暖阁凭几，皇长子、皇五子等皆侍。
现代文：皇帝驾御东暖阁靠着茶几，皇长子、皇五子等人都侍从在旁。
English: The emperor is leaning against a tea table in the East Pavilion, while the emperor's eldest son and fifth son wait on his side.

古文：帝命诸臣前，从哲等因请慎医药。
现代文：皇帝命令诸位大臣上前，方从哲等人便奏请皇帝慎重就医、服药。
English: The emperor ordered the ministers to come forward, and Fang Congzhe and others sent a message asking the emperor to carefully seek medical treatment and take medicine.

古文：帝曰： 十余日不进矣。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：十多天没有吃了。 
English: The emperor said, "I haven't eaten for more than ten days."

古文：遂谕册封选侍为皇贵妃。
现代文：于是下谕册封选侍为皇贵妃。
English: As a result, a decree was issued to select a lady-in-waiting for the empress dowager.

古文：甲戌，复召诸臣，谕册封事。
现代文：甲戌，又召见诸位大臣，告谕册封的事。
English: He also summoned the ministers to inform them of the matter.

古文：从哲等请速建储贰。
现代文：方从哲等人奏请迅速册立皇储。
English: Fang Congzhe and others, please quickly sign up to be crown prince.

古文：帝顾皇长子曰： 卿等其辅为尧、舜。 
现代文：皇帝看着皇长子说： 你们辅佐他成为尧、舜。 
English: The emperor looked at the eldest son and said, "You are helping him to become a prince.

古文：又语及寿宫，从哲等以先帝山陵对。
现代文：又谈及寿宫，方从哲等人以先帝的山陵作答。
English: He also talked about Shugu, to which Fang Congzhe and others responded by referring to the former emperor's mausoleum.

古文：帝自指曰； 朕寿宫也。 
现代文：皇帝指着自己说： 我的寿宫。 
English: The emperor pointed to himself and said, "My tomb is empty."

古文：诸臣皆泣。
现代文：诸位大臣都哭泣了。
English: Ministers were in tears.

古文：帝复问： 有鸿胪官进药者安在？ 
现代文：皇帝又问 ：有位鸿胪官敬呈药物，他在哪里？ 
English: The emperor also asked, "There is a rich official who has presented medicine, where is he?"

古文：从哲曰： 鸿胪寺丞李可灼自云仙方，臣等未敢信。 
现代文：方从哲回答 ：鸿胪寺丞李可灼自称有仙方，我们不敢相信。 
English: Fang Congzhe replied: "We can't believe that Li Keqiang, the priest of Hongye Temple, claims to have a fairy godmother.

古文：帝命宣可灼至，趣和药进，所谓红丸者也。帝服讫，称 忠臣 者再。
现代文：皇帝命令召李可灼来，催促他调配药物奉献给皇帝，即所谓的红丸。皇帝服完一再称他为 忠臣 。
English: The emperor ordered Li Kegui to come and urged him to prepare a medicine to offer to the emperor, the so-called red pill. The emperor repeatedly called him "loyal subject" after the service.

古文：诸臣出俟宫门外。
现代文：诸位大臣退出恭候在宫门外。
English: The ministers withdrew to wait outside the palace gates.

古文：顷之，中使传上体平善。
现代文：宦官传告皇上身体平安。
English: The eunuch announced that the Emperor was in good health.

古文：日晡，可灼出，言复进一丸。
现代文：将近下午三至五时，李可灼出来，称又呈送了一粒红丸。
English: From around 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., Li Keqing came out and said that he had sent another red pill.

古文：从哲等问状，曰： 平善如前。 
现代文：方从哲等人询问状况，他回答： 像先前一样平安。 
English: When Fang Congzhe and others inquired about the situation, he replied: It is as safe as before.

古文：明日九月乙亥朔卯刻，帝崩。
现代文：第二天即九月二十六日卯时，皇帝逝世。
English: The next day, September 26th, the emperor died.

古文：中外皆恨可灼甚，而从哲拟遗旨赉可灼银币。
现代文：朝廷内外都恨李可灼，而方从哲拟遗旨却赏赐李可灼银币。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court hated Li Kegui, but the emperor rewarded Li Kegui with silver coins.

古文：时李选侍居乾清宫，群臣入临，诸阉闭宫门不许入。
现代文：当时李选侍居住在乾清宫，群臣进去哭诉，诸宦官紧闭宫门不允许进去。
English: At that time, Li Xuan lived in the Qianqing Palace, the courtiers went in and cried, and the eunuchs closed the palace door tightly and were not allowed to enter.

古文：刘一燝、杨涟力拄之，得哭临如礼，拥皇长子出居慈庆宫。
现代文：刘一火景、杨涟极力讥讽他们，才得以依礼面对皇帝哭泣，拥着皇长子出来，住进慈庆宫。
English: Liu Yixing and Yang Xuan ridiculed them vigorously, and only then were they able to face the emperor and weep, embrace the emperor's eldest son, and live in the Cixing Palace.

古文：从哲委蛇而已。
现代文：方从哲只是周旋而已。
English: Fang Congzhe is just a manoeuvre.

古文：初，郑贵妃居乾清宫侍神宗疾，光宗即位犹未迁。
现代文：起初，郑贵妃住在乾清宫侍候神宗的病体，光宗登基后她仍然没有迁移。
English: At first, Zheng Guifei lived in the Qianqing Palace to wait for the sick body of Shenzong. After Guangzong ascended the throne, she still did not move.

古文：尚书嘉谟责贵妃从子养性，乃迁慈宁宫。
现代文：尚书周嘉谟责备贵妃的从子郑养性，于是她迁居慈宁宫。
English: Zhou Jia Mu reproached Guifei's son-in-law, Zheng Yao, and she moved to the Cining Palace.

古文：及光宗崩，而李选侍居乾清宫。
现代文：等到光宗逝世，而李选侍住在乾清宫。
English: Wait until Guangzong died, and Li Xuan lived in the Qianqing Palace.

古文：给事中涟及御史左光斗念选侍尝邀封后，非可令居乾清，以冲主付托也。
现代文：给事中杨涟和御史左光斗思虑选侍曾经要求册封为后，不可以让她居住乾清宫，以防冲撞了皇帝的嘱托。
English: In the middle of the matter, Yang Hui and Gu Shi Zuo Guang Dou thought about the selection of a lady-in-waiting and once asked to be canonized, she could not be allowed to live in the Qianqing Palace, in case she ran afoul of the emperor's request.

古文：于是议移宫，争数日不决。
现代文：因此商议迁移宫殿，争辩几天不能决定。
English: So they discussed moving the palace, but couldn't come to a decision for several days.

古文：从哲欲徐之。
现代文：方从哲想慢慢处理。
English: Fang Congzhe wanted to deal with it slowly.

古文：至登极前一日，一燝、爌邀从哲立宫门请，选侍乃移哕鸾宫。
现代文：新皇帝登基的前一天，刘一火景、韩火广邀约方从哲到宫门奏请，选侍才移居哕鸾宫。
English: The day before the new emperor ascended to the throne, Liu Yi, Huo Jing and Han Huo Guang invited the parties from Zhe to the palace gate to perform the ceremony, and only after the selection of the attendants did they move to the Summer Palace.

古文：明日庚辰，熹宗即位。
现代文：第二天庚辰，熹宗登基。
English: On the second day of Geng Chen, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne.

古文：先是，御史王安舜劾从哲轻荐狂医，又赏之以自掩。
现代文：在此之前，御史王安舜弹劾方从哲轻率地推荐疯癫的医生，又奖赏他以掩饰自己。
English: Prior to this, Wang Anya, the impeachment party, had rashly recommended a mad doctor from Zhe and rewarded him with a cover-up.

古文：从哲拟太子令旨，罚可灼俸一年。
现代文：方从哲草拟太子的指令，罚李可灼一年的俸禄。
English: Fang Zhezong drafted the prince's order, and the penalty could be a year's salary.

古文：御史郑宗周劾文升罪，请下法司，从哲拟令旨司礼察处。
现代文：御史郑宗周弹劾崔文升的罪行，请交给法司，方从哲拟令由司礼察处。
English: Mr. Zheng Zong Zhou, please refer the crime of impeaching Cui Wensheng to the Department of Law, and the matter should be investigated by the Department of Ceremonies.

古文：及御史郭如楚、冯三元、焦源溥，给事中魏应嘉，太常卿曹珖，光禄少卿高攀龙，主事吕维祺，先后上疏言： 可灼罪不容诛，从哲庇之，国法安在！ 
现代文：等到御史郭如楚、冯三元、焦源溥，给事中魏应嘉，太常卿曹王光，光禄少卿高攀龙，主事吕维祺，先后上奏说 ：李可灼的罪行诛之难泄其愤，方从哲却庇护他，国法何在？ 
English: When Guo Ruchu, Feng Sanyuan, and Jiao Yuanqian were summoned, Wei Yingjia, Tai Changqing Cao Wangguang, Guanglu Shaoqing Gao Panglong, and Lu Weiqian, who was in charge of the case, successively reported: Li Kegui's crime was so difficult to vent his anger, but Fang Congzhe sheltered him, where is the national law?

古文：而给事中惠世扬直纠从哲十罪、三可杀。
现代文：而且给事中惠世扬径直检举方从哲的十条罪状、三条可杀的理由。
English: Moreover, Hui Shiyang's direct prosecution of Zhu Zhe's ten charges and three reasons for killing were given.

古文：言： 从哲独相七年，妨贤病国，罪一。
现代文：上奏称： 方从哲独任七年宰相，妨碍贤良祸害国家，为第一条罪状。
English: The report said: Fang Congzhe served as prime minister for seven years, hindering the virtuous and harming the country, which is the first charge.

古文：骄蹇无礼，失误哭临，罪二。
现代文：骄横愚钝，没有礼节，在皇帝去世处理事务时出现失误，为第二条罪状。
English: Arrogance, stupidity, lack of etiquette, and mistakes in the handling of affairs after the emperor's death are the second charge.

古文：梃击青宫，庇护奸党，罪三。
现代文：在太子宫中发生梃击案，庇护奸党，为第三条罪状。
English: In the third charge, there was a case of beating in the womb of the princess, and aiding and abetting a traitor.

古文：恣行胸臆，破坏丝纶，罪四。纵子杀人，蔑视宪典，罪五。
现代文：随心所欲，破坏皇帝的诏书，为第四条罪状，纵容儿子杀人，蔑视法令、典章，为第五条罪状。
English: Article 4 is the crime of destroying the emperor's edict at will, while Article 5 is the crime of condoning his son's murder and flouting laws and ordinances.

古文：阻抑言官，蔽壅耳目，罪六。
现代文：阻挠、抑制言官，堵塞皇帝的耳目，为第六罪状。
English: Obstructing and restraining the speaker, and blocking the emperor's ears and eyes, is the sixth charge.

古文：陷城失律，宽议抚臣，罪七。
现代文：丢失城池违反法令，宽纵抚臣，为第七条罪状。
English: Article 7 is the charge of losing the castle in violation of the law, and indulging a vassal.

古文：马上催战，覆没全师，罪八。
现代文：马上督战，全军覆没，为第八条罪状。
English: Instantly supervising the battle, the entire army was wiped out, which is the eighth charge.

古文：徇私罔上，鼎铉贻羞，罪九。
现代文：徇私骗上，使辅臣蒙羞，为第九条罪状。
English: Article 9 is the charge of cheating a vassal and disgracing a vassal.

古文：代营榷税，蠹国殃民，罪十。
现代文：代征专卖税，侵蚀国家，殃及百姓，为第十条罪状。
English: Collecting monopoly sales tax on behalf of others, eroding the state, and harming the people are the charges in Article 10.

古文：贵妃求封后，举朝力争，从哲依违两可，当诛者一。
现代文：贵妃请求封为皇后，举朝极力争辩，方从哲模棱两可，为第一件该杀的事。
English: Guifei's request to be crowned as empress, vigorously argued by the imperial court, and ambiguous from the philosophical point of view, was the first thing to be killed.

古文：李选侍乃郑氏私人，抗凌圣母，饮恨而没。
现代文：李选侍是郑氏亲近的人，凌辱圣母，致使圣母饮恨而死。
English: Li Xuanzhu, who was a close associate of Zheng, insulted the Virgin Mary, causing her to drink herself to death.

古文：从哲受刘逊、李进忠所盗美珠，欲封选侍为贵妃，又听其久据乾清，当诛者二。
现代文：方从哲接受了刘逊、李进忠所盗取的美珠，想封选侍为贵妃，又听任她长期居住乾清宫，为第二件该杀的事。
English: Fang Congzhe's acceptance of the pearls stolen by Liu Xun and Li Jinzhong, his desire to make her a noble consort, and his allowing her to live in the Qianqing Palace for a long time are the second things that should be killed.

古文：崔文升用泄药伤损先帝，诸臣论之，从哲拟脱罪，李可灼进劫药，从哲拟赏赉，当诛者三。 
现代文：崔文升用泄药伤害先帝的身体，诸位大臣议论此事，方从哲想逃脱罪责，李可灼奉献毒药，方从哲还拟作赏赐，为第三件该杀的事。 
English: Cui Wensheng harmed the body of the former emperor with the medicine, the ministers discussed the matter, Fang Congzhe wanted to escape the blame, Li Keqiao dedicated the poison, and Fang Congzhe also proposed to reward, which was the third thing to be killed.

古文：疏入，责世杨轻诋。
现代文：奏疏呈入，皇帝责备惠世扬轻率地诋毁人。
English: The report was slow in coming, and the emperor rebuked Hui Shiyang for his thoughtless slander.

古文：从哲累求去，皆慰留。
现代文：方从哲多次请求离去，皇帝都抚慰挽留。
English: Fang Congzhe repeatedly requested to leave, and the emperor consoled him to stay.

古文：已而张泼、袁化中、王允成等连劾之，皆不听。
现代文：不久，张泼、袁化中、王允成等人接连弹劾他，皇帝仍不听。
English: Soon, Zhang Pu, Yuan Huazhong, Wang Yuncheng and others successively impeached him, but the emperor still did not listen.

古文：其冬，给事中程注复劾之，从哲力求去，疏六上。
现代文：当年冬天，给事中程注又弹劾他，皇帝仍不听。
English: In the winter of that year, the emperor did not listen to the mid-term note and impeached him.

古文：命进中极殿大学士，赉银币、蟒衣，遣行人护归。
现代文：方从哲极力请求离去，六次上奏，皇帝任命他为中极殿大学士，赏赐银币、蟒衣，派遣行人护送他回乡。
English: Fang Congzhe pleaded with him to leave, and the emperor appointed him as a member of the Zhongji Temple, rewarded him with silver coins and a silk robe, and sent a pedestrian to escort him back to his hometown.

古文：天启二年四月，礼部尚书孙慎行追论可灼进红丸，斥从哲为弑逆。
现代文：天启二年四月，礼部尚书孙慎行追究李可灼奉献红丸的事，斥责方从哲为谋害君王的逆贼。
English: In April of the second year of the Apocalypse, the head of the Ceremonial Department, Shangshusun Shengxing, investigated Li Kegui's dedication of the Red Marbles and rebuked Fang Congzhe as a traitor who plotted to kill the king.

古文：诏廷臣议。
现代文：诏令朝廷大臣商议。
English: The imperial edict was discussed by the ministers of the Imperial Court.

古文：都御史邹元标主慎行疏。
现代文：都御史邹元标赞同孙慎行的奏疏。
English: The Metropolitan Historian Yu Yuanbiao agreed with Sun Shengxing's recitation.

古文：从哲疏辨，自请削官阶，投四裔。帝慰谕之。
现代文：方从哲上奏辩解，自己请求削夺官阶，发配到边远的地方，皇帝下谕安慰他。
English: The emperor sent an imperial edict to comfort Fang, who had pleaded to be demoted in rank and sent to a faraway place.

古文：给事中魏大中以九卿议久稽，趣之上。
现代文：给事中魏大中因为九卿的提议长期拖延，上奏催促。
English: Due to the long delay in the proposal of the nine nobles, Wei Dazhong urged the submission of the report.

古文：廷臣多主慎行，罪从哲，惟刑部尚书黄克缵，御史王志道、徐景濂，给事中汪庆百右从哲，而詹事公鼐持两端。
现代文：朝廷大臣大都赞同孙慎行给方从哲定的罪名，只有刑部尚书黄克缵，御史王志道、徐景濂，给事中汪庆百般偏袒方从哲，而詹事公鼐持中立态度。
English: Most of the ministers of the imperial court agreed with Sun Shengxing on the crimes committed by Fang Congzhe. Only Huang Kechuan, Wang Zhidao, and Xu Jingxuan of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Wang Qing took sides with Fang Congzhe in various ways, while Zhan Zhi Gongxuan held a neutral attitude.

古文：时大学士爌述进药始末，为从哲解。
现代文：当时大学士韩火广陈述呈送药的前后经过，替方从哲解脱。
English: At that time, Han Huiguang, a university scholar, gave a presentation on the before and after of the delivery of the medicine, and the substitute was released from Zhe.

古文：于是吏部尚书张问达会户部尚书汪应蛟合奏言： 进药始末，臣等共闻见。
现代文：因此吏部尚书张问达与户部尚书汪应蛟联合上奏称： 呈送药的前后经过，我们一起耳闻目睹。
English: Therefore, Zhang Erda of the Personnel Department and Wang Yingyao of the Household Department jointly made a report, saying: We have heard and witnessed the process before and after the delivery of the medicine.

古文：辅臣视皇考疾，急迫仓皇，弑逆二字何忍言。
现代文：辅臣探视皇帝的病，情形急迫、仓促，怎么忍心说 弑逆 二字？
English: An aide-de-camp visits the emperor in his illness. The situation is urgent and hasty. How can he bear to say the word "treachery"?

古文：但可灼非医官，且非知脉知医者。
现代文：但是李可灼不是医官，而且也不是知脉懂医道的人。
English: But Li Kegui is not a medical officer, and he is not someone who knows the medical way.

古文：以药尝试，先帝龙驭即上升。
现代文：用药做尝试，先帝就去世了。
English: The former emperor died after experimenting with drugs.

古文：从哲与臣等九卿未能止，均有罪，乃反赉可灼。
现代文：方从哲与我们九卿未能制止，都有罪，反而赏赐李可灼。
English: Fang Congzhe and our nine lords failed to stop, are guilty, but rewarded Li Kegui.

古文：及御史安舜有言，止令养病去，罚太轻，何以慰皇考，服中外。
现代文：等到御史王安舜上奏，只令他以养病而离去，处罚太轻，怎么告慰先帝，让朝廷内外心服。
English: By the time the Imperial edict of peace and tranquillity was issued, he was only allowed to leave to recover from his illness. The punishment was too light, but it comforted the former emperor and won the hearts of people inside and outside the court.

古文：宜如从哲请，削其官阶，为法任咎。
现代文：应该像方从哲的请求，削夺他的官阶，依法追究。
English: As Fang Congzhe requested, his official rank should be stripped and he should be investigated in accordance with the law.

古文：至可灼罪不可胜诛，而文升当皇考哀感伤寒时，进大黄凉药，罪又在可灼上。法皆宜显僇，以泄公愤。 
现代文：至于李可灼的罪行不胜诛杀，而崔文升在先帝不幸感染伤寒的时候，呈送大黄凉药，罪行又在李可灼之上，依法都应该处决示众，以泄公愤。 
English: As for Li Kegui's crime, he could not be killed, while Cui Wensheng, when the former emperor was unfortunately infected with typhoid, presented rhubarb cold medicine. The crime was above Li Kegui, and according to the law, they should all be executed in public to vent public anger.

古文：议上，可灼遣戍，文升放南京，而从哲不罪。
现代文：奏议呈上，李可灼被遣送去戍边，崔文升贬至南京，而方从哲没有治罪。
English: According to the report, Li Kegui was sent to Lijiang, Cui Wensheng was demoted to Nanjing, and Fang Congzhe was not punished.

古文：无何，慎行引疾去。
现代文：不久，孙慎行称病离去。
English: Soon after, Sun Shengxing announced that he was ill and left.

古文：五年，魏忠贤辑 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三事为《三朝要典》，以倾正人，遂免可灼戍，命文升督漕运。
现代文：天启五年魏忠顺辑录 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三件事编成《三朝要典》以倾轧正直的人，于是免去了李可灼的戍边之罚，任命崔文升督导漕运。
English: In the fifth year of the Apocalypse, the Wei Zhong Shun compilation of the three things, the beating, the red circle, and the moving of the palace, was compiled into the "Three Dynasties Guidebook" to promote honest people. Therefore, Li Keqiao was exempted from the penalty of breaking the edge, and Cui Wensheng was appointed as the supervisor of rowing.

古文：其党徐大化请起从哲，从哲不出。
现代文：他的党羽徐大化请求启用方从哲，方从哲不出仕。
English: His faction, Xu Dahua, requested that Fang Congzhe be allowed to serve and that Fang Congzhe not be allowed to serve.

古文：然一时请诛从哲者贬杀略尽矣。
现代文：然而一时间请求诛杀方从哲的人被贬官、杀戮几乎殆尽。
English: However, in a short time, those who asked to fight and kill Zenzhe were demoted, and the killings were almost exhausted.

古文：崇祯元年二月，从哲卒。
现代文：崇祯元年二月，方从哲去世。
English: In February of the first year of Chongzhen, Fang Congzhe passed away.

古文：赠太傅，谥文端。
现代文：赠封太傅，谥号文端。
English: He was awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：三月，下文升狱，戍南京。
现代文：三月将崔文升投入监狱，戍守南京。
English: In March, he threw Cui Wensheng into prison, leaving him in charge of Nanjing.

古文：沈纮，字铭缜，乌程人。
现代文：沈纮，字铭镇，乌程人。
English: Shenyu, Zhiming Town, Wucheng people.

古文：父节甫，字以安。
现代文：他的父亲沈节甫，字以安。
English: His father, Shen Jiefu, spelled his name Yian.

古文：嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：授礼部仪制主事，厉祠祭郎中。
现代文：授职为礼部仪制主事，历任祠祭郎中。
English: He was in charge of the ceremonial system of the etiquette club, and was a junior member of the ancestral hall.

古文：诏建祠禁内，令黄冠祝釐，节甫持不可。
现代文：诏令在禁宫建祠，让道士在里边祭祀祈福，沈节甫坚持不赞同。
English: The imperial edict ordered that a small shrine be built in the Forbidden City for Taoists to offer sacrifices and pray for good fortune, but Shen Jiefu did not agree.

古文：尚书高拱恚甚，遂移疾归。
现代文：尚书高拱对他非常恼恨，于是他称病归乡。
English: Shang Shugaoqong was very angry with him, so he called in sick.

古文：起光禄丞。
现代文：后起用为光禄寺丞。
English: He was later promoted to Kōrokuji no jo.

古文：会拱掌吏部，复移疾避之。
现代文：遇上高拱负责吏部，又称病回避他。
English: When Gao Gong was in charge of the cadre department, he avoided him, also known as illness.

古文：万历初，屡迁至南京刑部右侍郎。
现代文：万历初年，逐次升迁至南京刑部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was successively promoted to the right-hand man of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：召为工部左侍郎，摄部事。
现代文：神宗召见并委任他任工部左侍郎，负责工部事务。
English: Shinso summoned him and appointed him as the left attendant of the engineering department, responsible for engineering department affairs.

古文：御史高举言节甫素负难进之节，不宜一岁三迁。
现代文：御史高举称沈节甫一向负有缓进的节操，不应该一年三次升迁。
English: Gu Shi Gao said that Shen Zifu always had the discipline of slow advancement, and should not be promoted three times a year.

古文：吏部以节甫有物望，绌其议。
现代文：吏部因为沈节甫有众望，否定了高举的提议。
English: The cadre department denied the proposal to hold it aloft, because the Shen Festival had already gained a lot of popularity.

古文：节甫连上疏请省浮费，核虚冒，上兴作，减江、浙织造，停江西瓷器，帝为稍减织造数。
现代文：沈节甫接连上奏请求减少浮费、核查虚冒，阻止兴作，减少江浙的织造，停止江西的瓷器，神宗为此稍稍减少了织造的数额。
English: Shen Zifu successively petitioned to reduce floating expenses, check fraud, stop the work, reduce the weaving of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and stop the porcelain of Jiangxi. Shen Zong slightly reduced the amount of weaving for this reason.

古文：中官传奉，节甫持不可，且上疏言之。
现代文：宦官传承俸禄，沈节甫坚持不同意，并且上奏劝谏此事。
English: The eunuchs inherited the salary, but Shen Jifu insisted that he did not agree, and he appealed to the emperor to reconsider the matter.

古文：又尝献治河之策，语凿凿可用。
现代文：又曾提出治理黄河的方案，意见切实，值得采用。
English: He also proposed a plan for the management of the Yellow River. The suggestions are practical and worth adopting.

古文：父忧归，卒。
现代文：他在父亲去世后回乡，至去世。
English: After his father's death, he returned to his hometown and lived there until his death.

古文：赠右副都御史。
现代文：赠封右副都御史。
English: He was awarded the title of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：天启初，纮方柄用，得赐谥端清。
现代文：天启初年，沈纮刚刚任官，他的父亲被赐予端清的谥号。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, Shen Yao had just been appointed as an official, and his father was given the surname of Duanqing.

古文：纮与弟演同登万历二年进士。
现代文：沈纮与弟弟沈演同时考取万历二十年的进士。
English: At the same time, Shen Zhen and his brother Shen Yuan were awarded the title of "Twenty Years of Wanli."

古文：纮改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：沈纮改任庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: Shen Qi was re-appointed as the second-in-command, and the appointment was subject to review.

古文：累官南京礼部侍郎，掌部事。
现代文：官至南京礼部侍郎，负责礼部事务。
English: He became the attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department and was in charge of ceremonial affairs.

古文：西洋人利玛窦入贡，因居南京，与其徒王丰肃等倡天主教，士大夫多宗之。
现代文：西洋人利玛窦入京朝贡，于是居住在南京，与他的门徒王丰肃等人倡导天主教，士大夫中很多人信奉它。
English: The Westerner Matteo Ricci paid tribute to the imperial court in Beijing and lived in Nanjing. Together with his disciple Wang Fengsu and others, Ricci advocated Catholicism, which was embraced by many scholars.

古文：纮奏： 陪京都会，不宜令异教处此。 
现代文：沈纮上奏称： 陪京是都会之地，不适宜让异教在此存在。 
English: Shen Yao said in his report: Beijing is a metropolitan place, and it is not appropriate to allow paganism to exist here.

古文：识者韪其言。
现代文：有识之人赞同他的劝谏。
English: Sensible people agree with his advice.

古文：然纮素乏时誉。
现代文：然而沈纮向来没有什么声誉。
English: But Mr. Shen has never had much of a reputation.

古文：与大学士从哲同里闬，相善也。
现代文：与大学士方从哲是小同乡，互相友善。
English: He is a small-town fellow with the university scholar Fang Zhe, and they are friendly with each other.

古文：神宗末，从哲独当国，请补阁臣，诏会推。
现代文：神宗末年，方从哲单独执政，奏请补充内阁大臣，诏令公众推举。
English: In the last years of the Shinshu sect, Fang Congzhe ruled alone, petitioned for additional cabinet ministers, and ordered the public to elect them.

古文：亓诗教等缘从哲意，摈何宗彦、刘一燝辈，独以纮及史继偕名上。
现代文：亓诗教等人遵循方从哲的心意排斥何宗彦、刘火广之流，唯独将沈纮和史继偕的姓名呈上。
English: Gong Shi Jiao and others followed Fang Zhe's intention to exclude He Zongyan and Liu Huiguang from the lineage, but only the names of Shen Yao and Shi Jizhe were presented.

古文：帝遂用之。
现代文：皇帝就任用了他们。
English: The emperor made use of them.

古文：或曰由从哲荐也。
现代文：有的人说是由方从哲推荐，奏疏没有下发。
English: Some people said that it was recommended by Fang Congzhe, but it did not work.

古文：疏未发，明年，神宗崩，光宗立，乃召纮为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士。
现代文：第二年，神宗逝世，光宗继位，这才召见沈纮任命他为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士。
English: The following year, when Shinso died and Mitsuzo succeeded to the throne, it was only then that Shen Yi was called upon to appoint him as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University.

古文：未至，光宗复崩。
现代文：还没有到任，光宗也逝世了。
English: He died before he could take office.

古文：天启元年六月，纮始至。
现代文：天启元年六月，沈纮才到任。
English: It was not until June of the following year that Shen Yi took up his post.

古文：故事，词臣教习内书堂，所教内竖执弟子礼。
现代文：先例，词臣在内书堂做讲授，所教的宦官要行弟子之礼。
English: As a precedent, the eunuch who is taught by the eunuch who teaches in the inner study hall must perform the disciple's salute.

古文：李进忠、刘朝皆纮弟子。
现代文：李进忠、刘朝都是沈纮的弟子。
English: Li Jinzhong and Liu Chaozhou were disciples of Shen Yi.

古文：李进忠者，魏忠贤始名也。
现代文：李进忠是魏忠贤最初的姓名。
English: Li Jinzhong was the original name of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：纮既至，密结二人，乃奏言： 辽左用兵亟，臣谨于东阳、义乌诸邑及扬州、纮安募材官勇士二百余，请以勇士隶锦衣卫，而量授材官职。 
现代文：沈纮到任后，与他们两人秘密结交，于是上奏称： 辽左的战事急迫，我在东阳、义乌等城邑以及扬州、淮安招募材官和勇士二百多人，请将勇士编入锦衣卫，而对材官依照才干授予官职。 
English: After taking office, Shen Yi secretly made friends with the two of them, and then made a report to the emperor, saying: Due to the urgency of the war in Liao Zuo, I have recruited more than 200 officers and warriors in Dongyang, Yiwu and other cities, as well as Yangzhou and Huai'an. Please compile the warriors into Jin Yi Wei, and award the officers according to their talents.

古文：进忠、朝方举内操，得淮奏大喜。
现代文：李进忠、刘朝正好负责内宫事务，得到沈纮的奏疏，大为高兴。
English: Li Jinzhong and Liu Chaozhou happened to be in charge of the affairs of the Inner Court, and they were very happy to get Shen Yao's report.

古文：诏锦衣官训练募士，授材官王应斗等游击以下官有差。
现代文：诏令锦衣官训练所招募的兵士，授予材官王应斗等人为游击以下不同级别的官职。
English: He ordered that the soldiers recruited by the Jin Yi Officer Training Institute should be given different levels of official positions below the guerrilla.

古文：纮又奏募兵后至者复二百余人，请发辽东、四川军前。
现代文：沈纮又上奏招募了二百多名兵士，请求拨发到辽东、四川的军队中。
English: Shen Yi also recruited more than two hundred soldiers and requested that they be sent to the armies of Liaodong and Sichuan.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令依从了。
English: He complied.

古文：寻加太子太保，进文渊阁，再进少保兼太子太保、户部尚书、武英殿大学士。
现代文：不久，加封他为太子太保，进入文渊阁，再晋升为少保兼太子太保、户部尚书、武英殿大学士。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Prince's Privy Councilor, entered the Bunyukaku Palace, and then was promoted to Junior Privy Councilor and Prince's Privy Councilor, Shosho of the Household, and a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：禁中内操日盛，驸马都尉王昺亦奉诏募兵，愿得帷幄重臣主其事。
现代文：禁宫的练兵之事一天天兴盛，驸马都尉王籨也奉诏招募兵丁，希望得到身居帷幄中的重臣支持。
English: The training of soldiers at the Forbidden City was flourishing day by day, and the commander of the imperial horse, Wang Qi, was also ordered to recruit soldiers, hoping to get the support of the senior vassals living in the palace.

古文：廷臣皆言纮与朝阴相结，于是给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞等劾纮阳托募兵，阴藉通内。
现代文：朝廷大臣都称沈纮与刘朝暗中勾结，因此给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞等人弹劾沈纮表面上借口招募兵丁，暗中凭借此举与宦官勾结。
English: The ministers of the imperial court all said that Shen Yi was secretly colluding with the Liu dynasty, so Hui Shiyang, Zhou Chongrui and others impeached Shen Yi on the pretext of recruiting soldiers and secretly colluding with eunuchs.

古文：刘朝内操，纮使门客诱之。
现代文：刘朝在宫中练兵，沈纮派门客诱惑他。
English: Liu Xiao was training soldiers in the palace, and Shen Yu sent a concubine to seduce him.

古文：王昺疏，疑出纮教。
现代文：王籨的奏疏，怀疑出自沈纮的教唆。
English: Wang Yao's report is suspected to have been instigated by Shen Yao.

古文：阉人、戚畹、奸辅内外弄兵，长安片土，成战场矣。
现代文：宦官、外戚亲贵、奸邪辅臣在宫廷内外操练兵马，片土之地的京城，成了战场。
English: Eunuchs, relatives, and treacherous vassals drilled their horses and men both inside and outside the court, and the capital city, a sparsely populated place, became a battlefield.

古文：纮疏辨，因请疾求罢。
现代文：沈纮上奏辩解，就请求因病罢职。
English: After Shen Rong's defense, he asked to be relieved of duty due to illness.

古文：帝慰留之。
现代文：皇帝抚慰、挽留他。
English: The emperor consoled him with kind words.

古文：世扬等遂尽发纮通内状，刑部尚书王纪再疏劾纮，比之蔡京。
现代文：惠世扬等人便详尽揭发了沈纮与宫内太监勾结的情况，刑部尚书王纪再上奏弹劾沈纮，将他与蔡京并论。
English: Hui Shiyang and others exposed in detail the collusion between Shen Yi and the eunuchs in the imperial court, and the Criminal Law Department's Shang Shou Wang Ji then impeached Shen Yi and discussed him with Cai Jing.

古文：纮亦劾纪保护熊廷弼、佟卜年、刘一巘等。
现代文：沈纮也弹劾王纪保护熊廷弼、佟卜年、刘一山献等人。
English: Shen Yi also impeached Wang Ji for protecting Xiong Tingtao, Zou Bu Nian, Liu Yishan Xiong and others.

古文：诏两解之。
现代文：皇帝两度颁诏化解此事。
English: The emperor issued two edicts to resolve the matter.

古文：未几，纪以卜年狱削籍，议者益侧目纮。
现代文：不久，王纪因为佟卜年的狱案被削夺官籍，议论的人更加对沈纮侧目而视。
English: Soon, Wang Ji was stripped of his official registration because of the prison case in the Year of the Rooster, and the people who discussed it looked sideways at Shen Yao.

古文：大学士叶向高言 纪、纮交攻，均失大臣体。
现代文：大学士叶向高上奏称 ：王纪、沈纮互相攻击，都有失大臣的体统。
English: Ye, a university scholar, reported to the higher-ups that: Wang Ji and Shen Qi attacked each other, and both of them lost their dignity as ministers.

古文：今以谳狱斥纪，如公论何？ 
现代文：现在因为刘一山献的狱案贬责王纪，谈何公论？ 
English: Now, because of the prison case dedicated by Liu Yishan, Wang Ji is being blamed. How about a public discussion?

古文：朱国祚至以去就争，帝皆弗听。
现代文：朱国祚以辞职相争辩，皇帝都不听。
English: Zhu Guozhen argued that he should resign, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：纮不自安，乃力求去。
现代文：沈纮自感不安，于是极力请求离去。
English: Feeling uneasy, Shen Yao pleaded to leave.

古文：命乘传归。
现代文：皇帝令他乘驿车归乡。
English: The emperor ordered him to take a stagecoach back to his hometown.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：过了一年去世。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：赠太保，谥文字。
现代文：赠封为太保，谥号文定。
English: His posthumous name was Taibo, and his posthumous name was Wenzing.

