古文：鲁肃简公劲正，不狥爱憎，出于天性，素与曹襄悼不协。
现代文：鲁肃简公为人刚正，行事不循从个人爱憎，这是出于他的天性。
English: Lu Su Jian Gong is an upright person. He does not act according to his personal likes and dislikes. This is due to his nature.

古文：天圣中因议茶法，曹力挤肃简，因得罪去；赖上察其情，寝前命，止从罚俸，独三司使李谘夺职，谪洪州。
现代文：他一向与曹襄悼不合，天圣中曾因讨论茶法，曹极力排挤肃简，因此导致肃简得罪被罢职；不过随后赖皇上察觉到真实情况，又撤销了先前的罢官令，仅给了他扣罚俸禄的处分，只有三司使李谘被削去贴职，贬到了洪州。
English: He had always been at odds with Cao Xiang. At the Heavenly Sacred Middle School, Cao had tried to oust Su Jian for discussing the tea ceremony. As a result, Su Jian took offense and was dismissed. However, Emperor Lai later realized the true situation, revoked the previous dismissal order, and only gave him a penalty of deduction of salary. Only the third secretary Li Zhi was removed from his post and relegated to Hongzhou.

古文：及肃简病，有人密报肃简，但云 今日有佳事。 
现代文：等到肃简公病重时，有人给他传递宫中密报，但只是说 今天有好事 。
English: When Su Jian Gong was seriously ill, someone passed him a secret report from the palace, but only said that today was a good day.

古文：鲁闻之，顾婿张之曰： 此必曹利用去也。 
现代文：鲁听到消息后，回头对女婿张昷之说： 这一定是指曹利用要丢官了。 
English: After Lu heard the news, he turned to his son-in-law Zhang Xizhi and said, "This must mean that Cao Rong will lose his position."

古文：试往侦之，果襄悼谪随州。
现代文：张昷之试着去打听，果然时曹利用谪官随州。
English: Zhang Xizhi tried to inquire, but Cao used eunuchs to follow the state.

古文：肃简曰： 得上殿乎？ 
现代文：肃简说： 皇上召见他了吗？ 
English: Su Jian said, "Has the emperor summoned him?"

古文：张曰： 已差人押出门矣。 
现代文：张说： 已经派人把他押出国门了。 
English: Zhang said: Someone has been sent to push him out of the country.

古文：鲁大惊曰： 诸公误也，利用何罪至此？
现代文：鲁闻听大惊，说： 这事几个主事大臣办得不对。
English: Hearing this, Lu Wenlu was shocked and said, "This matter has not been handled correctly by several leading ministers.

古文：进退大臣，岂宜如此之遽？
现代文：利用的罪过怎么能到这地步？贬斥大臣，哪儿该这么仓促！
English: How can the crime of taking advantage reach such a level? What's the hurry to reprimand the minister!

古文：利用在枢密院，尽忠于朝廷。但素不学问，倔强不识好恶耳，此外无大过也。 
现代文：利用在枢密院，还是尽忠于朝廷的，只是他向来不学无术，倔强得很，有时不识好歹，此外并无大过错。 
English: In the Privy Council, he was still loyal to the court, but he was always uneducated, very stubborn, and sometimes did not know right from wrong. In addition, he did not make any major mistakes.

古文：嗟惋久之，遽觉气塞。
现代文：他嗟叹了好一阵子，突然觉得闷得慌。
English: He sighed for a long time and suddenly felt dizzy.

古文：急召医视之，曰： 此必有大不如意事动其气，脉已绝，不可復治。 
现代文：家人急忙请医生来看，医生说： 这一定是有大不如意的事让他动气了，现在气脉已断绝，没法再治。 
English: The family rushed to see a doctor, who said: "It must have been something really bad that made him angry, and now the vein has been severed and can no longer be treated.

古文：是夕，肃简薨。
现代文：当天晚上，肃简谢世。
English: That evening, Su Jian died.

古文：李谘在洪州，闻肃简薨，有诗曰： 空令抱恨归黄壤，不见崇山谪去时。 
现代文：李谘在洪州，听到肃简去世的消息，曾写诗曰： 空令抱恨归黄壤，不见崇山谪去时。 
English: Li Zi, in Hongzhou, upon hearing the news of Su Jian's death, once wrote a poem saying, "If I were ordered to return to the Yellow Earth, I would not see the passing of Chongshan."

古文：盖未知肃简临终之言也。
现代文：他大概还不知道肃简公临终所说的话。
English: He probably doesn't know what Su Jiangong said on his deathbed.

古文：杜甫诗有 家家养乌鬼，顿顿食黄鱼 之句，近世注杜甫诗，引《夔州图经》称： 峡中人谓鸬鹚为乌鬼。 
现代文：杜甫诗有 家家养乌鬼，顿顿食黄鱼 的句子，近年世人注释杜甫诗，引《夔州图经》说： 峡州一带叫鸬鹚为 乌鬼 。
English: In Du Fu's poem, there is a sentence about raising ghosts at home and eating yellowfish all the time. In recent years, the world has commented on Du Fu's poem, citing the "Luzhou Classic," saying: The area around the canyon is called the "ghost."

古文：蜀人临水居者，皆养鸬鹚，系绳其颈，使之捕鱼，得鱼则倒提出之，至今如此。
现代文：蜀人临水居住的，都养鸬鹚，用绳系住它的脖颈，让它捕鱼，在它捕到鱼后，就把它倒提起来，使它把鱼吐出，至今还是这样。 
English: The Shu people, who lived near the water, raised a carp, tied a rope around its neck, let it catch fish, and after it caught a fish, it was raised upside down so that it could spit out the fish, and this is still the case today.

古文：又尝有近侍奉使过夔、陕，见居人相率十百为曹，设牲酒于田间，众操兵仗，群噪而祭，谓之养鬼。
现代文：然而又曾有皇上的贴身侍从奉命办差，路过夔州、峡州一带，见当地居民相互跟随，以几十人或上百人为一群，备置牺牲和酒食于田间，众人操着兵器，集体鼓噪而举行祭祀活动，称之为 养鬼 。
English: However, there was also a close attendant of the emperor who was ordered to run errands and passed through the area of Luzhou and Xiaozhou, and saw local residents follow each other, with dozens or hundreds of people in a group, preparing sacrifices and drinking and eating in the fields, all of them wielding weapons and making a collective noise to hold sacrificial activities, called "raising ghosts."

古文：养读去声。言乌蛮战殇，多与人为厉，每歳以此禳之；又疑此所谓养乌鬼者。
现代文：所谓 养鬼 ，意思是乌蛮战死的人多，这些死者会变成厉鬼害人，所以每年都举行这种活动来禳除灾害。我因此又怀疑这种活动就是所谓的 养乌鬼 。
English: The so-called "raising ghosts" means that there are many people who died in the war, and these dead people will turn into fierce ghosts to harm people, so this activity is held every year to eliminate disasters. I therefore suspect that this activity is the so-called "raising ghosts."

古文：韩退之诗句有 断送一生唯有酒 ，又曰 破除万事无过酒。 
现代文：韩退之的诗句有 断送一生唯有酒 ，又有 破除万事无过酒 。
English: Han Peizhi's poems include "Cut off a lifetime of nothing but liquor" and "Cut off everything but liquor."

古文：王荆公戏改此两句为一字题四句曰： 酒，酒，破除万事无过，断送一生唯有。 
现代文：王荆公戏为改作，将两句诗合成 一字题 的形式，变为四句，说： 酒，酒，破除万事无过，断送一生唯有。 
English: Wang Jing's public play was adapted by combining two poems into the form of a one-word title, into four sentences, saying: "Wine, wine, breaks all things without fault, but only destroys one's life."

古文：不损一字，而意韵如自为之。
现代文：没有减少一个字，而寓意和韵味都像是自己创作出来的。
English: Not a single word has been omitted, and the meaning and charm all seem to have been created by themselves.

