古文：卢思道从父兄昌衡卢思道，字子行，范阳人也。
现代文：○卢思道卢思道字子行，范阳人。
English: ○ Lu Si DaoLu Si Dao Zi Zi Xing, Fan Yang Ren.

古文：祖阳乌，魏秘书监。
现代文：祖父卢阳乌，是西魏的秘书监。
English: His grandfather Lu Yangwu was a secretarial supervisor in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父道亮，隐居不仕。
现代文：父亲卢道亮，隐居不愿做官。
English: His father, Lu Daoliang, lived in seclusion and did not want to be an official.

古文：思道聪爽俊辩，通侻不羁。
现代文：卢思道聪明善辩，通达脱俗。
English: Lu Sidao is intelligent and eloquent.

古文：年十六，遇中山刘松，松为人作碑铭，以示思道。思道读之，多所不解，于是感激，闭户读书，师事河间邢子才。
现代文：十六岁那年，有一次，碰上中山人刘松替别人写碑铭，刘松把文章给他看，思道读了，有很多地方不理解，因此感触很深而受到激励。回家闭门不出苦读经书，并拜河间人邢子才为师。
English: When he was 16 years old, he once met Liu Song, a man from Zhongshan, who was writing a monument for someone else. Liu Song showed him the article and read it thoughtfully. There were many parts that he did not understand, so he was deeply inspired. He did not go home to study the scriptures, and he learned from Hechuan people.

古文：后思道复为文，以示刘松，松又不能甚解。
现代文：后来，思道再写文章给刘松看，刘松也不能透彻理解。
English: Later, Sido re-wrote the article for Liu Song to read, but Liu Song could not thoroughly understand it.

古文：思道乃喟然叹曰： 学之有益，岂徒然哉！ 
现代文：思道于是感慨地说： 学习很有益处，不是没有道理啊！ 
English: He thought about it and said with emotion: Learning is very beneficial, and not without reason!

古文：因就魏收借异书，数年之间，才学兼著。
现代文：因此找魏收借阅奇书，几年里，学识才智有明显长进。
English: Therefore, he borrowed some books from Wei and read them. In the past few years, his knowledge and intelligence have significantly improved.

古文：然不持操行，好轻侮人。
现代文：但是，他不讲品德，喜欢轻视侮辱别人。
English: However, he does not talk about morality and likes to belittle and insult others.

古文：齐天保中，《魏史》未出，思道先已诵之，由是大被笞辱。
现代文：齐天保中，《魏史》还没有发行，思道已先诵读了，由于这个原因多次被鞭笞受辱。
English: In Qi Tianbo Middle School, "Wei Shi" has not been released yet, but Shidao has read it first. For this reason, he has been whipped and insulted many times.

古文：前后屡犯，因而不调。
现代文：思道因前后多次违犯禁例，所以长期没被调用。
English: Sido has not been called up for a long time due to repeated violations of the prohibitions.

古文：其后左仆射杨遵彦荐之于朝，解褐司空行参军，长兼员外散骑侍郎，直中书省。
现代文：后来左仆射杨遵彦向朝廷推荐了他，才由平民百姓升做司空行参军，长期兼任员外散骑侍郎，在中书省值班。
English: Later, his left-hand man, Yang Zunyan, recommended him to the imperial court, and he was promoted from a commoner to join the army as a flight attendant. For a long time, he also served as a non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, and was on duty in the Chinese Book Ministry.

古文：文宣帝崩，当朝文士各作挽歌十首，择其善者而用之。
现代文：文宣帝去世，当时朝廷文官各作挽歌十首，供皇宫择优录用。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan died, the scribes of the dynasty each wrote ten elegies and selected the best to be used.

古文：魏收、阳休之、祖孝徵等不过得一二首，唯思道独得八首。
现代文：魏收、阳休之、祖孝征等人只被选其一二首，惟独卢思道被录用了八首。
English: Wei Jie, Yang Xiu Zhi, Zu Xiao Zheng and others were only selected for one or two of their poems, but Lu Si Dao alone was accepted for eight.

古文：故时人称为 八米卢郎 。
现代文：所以当时人称他 八米卢郎 。
English: That's why people called him Eight Mile Road at the time.

古文：后漏泄省中语，出为丞相西閤祭酒，历太子舍人、司徒录事参军。
现代文：后因泄漏省中机密，调出中书省而担任丞相西阁祭酒，历任太子舍人、司徒录事参军等职。
English: Later, he was transferred from the Ministry of Education to the Ministry of Culture and Literature due to leaking of the ministry's confidential information, and served as the Minister of Justice for the Sikkim Sacrifice, and successively held positions such as the Prince's Custodian and the Custodian of Military Records.

古文：每居官，多被谴辱。
现代文：每每做官，常常遭谴受辱。
English: Each time he took office, he was mostly denounced and insulted.

古文：后以擅用库钱，免归于家。
现代文：后来因擅自动用库钱，被罢官回家。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post and sent home for using treasury money without authorization.

古文：尝于蓟北怅然感慨，为五言诗为见意，人以为工。
现代文：他曾在蓟北感叹万千，写了一首五言诗表达心中的情思，人们都认为写得很好。
English: He once wrote a five-character poem to express his feelings in northern Jiangsu Province, and people thought it was well written.

古文：数年，复为京畿主簿，历主客郎、给事黄门侍郎，待诏文林馆。
现代文：几年后，又做京畿主簿，历任主客郎、给事黄门侍郎，待诏于文林馆。
English: A few years later, he became the chief registrar of Gyeonggi Province, and successively served as host, guest, and attendant of the Yellow Gate, and waited for the imperial edict at the Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：周武帝平齐，授仪同三司，追赴长安，与同辈阳休之等数人作《听蝉鸣篇》，思道所为，词意清切，为时人所重。
现代文：周武帝平定北齐时，授他仪同三司，赶赴长安，与同辈阳休之等各写了《听蝉鸣篇》。思道所作词意清切，被当时文人所推崇。
English: When Emperor Zhou Wudi conquered the Northern Qi, he awarded him the title of Tong San Shi, and rushed to Chang'an. Together with his peer Yang Xiu, they each wrote "Listening to the Cicadas." The words written by Sido were clear and were highly respected by the literati at the time.

古文：新野庾信遍览诸同作者，而深叹美之。
现代文：新野人庾信看完他们同题诗作后，惊叹不已，并高度称赞。
English: Xinwuangren Yuxin has read several of Lu Si Dao's works. He is deeply impressed by Lu Si Dao's works and thinks they are beautifully written.

古文：未几，以母疾还乡，遇同郡祖英伯及从兄昌期、宋护等举兵作乱，思道预焉。
现代文：不久，思道因母亲有病而回乡了，正好遇到同乡的祖英伯和他的堂兄昌期、宋护等率兵叛乱，思道参与了这件事。
English: Soon after, Sidao returned to his hometown due to his mother's illness. He happened to meet fellow townsman Zu Yingbo and his cousins Chang Zi and Song You, who led the soldiers in the rebellion. Sidao participated in this event.

古文：曩之扇俗搅时，骇耳秽目，今悉不闻不见，莫余敢侮。
现代文：北周派柱国宇文神举前往讨伐，一举平定。依法论罪思道应判死刑。但神举平时知道思道的名气，从俘虏中把他提出来，让他撰写布告。
English: North Zhou sent the pillar state Uwen Shen to go to the crusade and quelled it in one fell swoop. According to law, the crime of Sido should be sentenced to death. However, the god knew the fame of Sido in peacetime, brought him out from the prisoners, and let him write a proclamation.

古文：《易》曰： 圣人作而万物睹 ，斯之谓乎！ 
现代文：思道提笔成章，文不加点，神举很赏识他的才华而宽恕了他。后来思道提升为掌教上士。
English: Sido wrote a complete chapter without adding any points, and the gods were very appreciative of his talent and forgave him. Later, Sido was promoted to the teaching staff sergeant.

古文：岁馀，被征，奉诏郊劳陈使。
现代文：一年多后，思道被调回京师，奉皇上命令在郊外慰劳陈国使者。
English: More than a year later, Sidao was transferred back to the Beijing Division, and ordered by the emperor to comfort the Chen envoys in the suburbs.

古文：顷之，遭母忧，未几，起为散骑侍郎，奏内史侍郎事。
现代文：不久，他因母亲去世而离职，没多长时间，又出仕做散骑侍郎，代理内史侍郎事。
English: Not long after, he left his job due to his mother's death, and not long after that, he was assigned to work as a horseback riding attendant, acting as an internal history attendant.

古文：于时议置六卿，将除大理。
现代文：此时，朝廷商议设置六卿，将废除大理寺。
English: At this time, the Imperial Court deliberated on the establishment of six nobles, and would abolish Dali Temple.

古文：思道上奏曰： 省有驾部，寺留太仆，省有刑部，寺除大理，斯则重畜产而贱刑名，诚为未可。 
现代文：思道陈奏皇上说： 省设驾部，寺存大仆，省有刑部，寺撤大理，这是重畜产而轻法度，的确不合适。 
English: Sido Chen Soo said to the emperor, "Provincial establishment of a driving department, the existence of a temple servant, provincial establishment of a criminal department, the withdrawal of a temple, this is heavy animal husbandry and light legal system, it is indeed inappropriate.

古文：有子允玉。孝贞弟孝威，亦有雅望，大业中，官至大理少卿。
现代文：思道有文集三十卷，流传于世。儿子卢赤松，大业年间官至河东长史。
English: Shido has a collection of thirty volumes, which has been passed down to the world. His son, Lu Chakmong, rose through the ranks to become the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：○薛道衡从弟孺薛道衡，字玄卿，河东汾阴人也。祖聪，魏济州刺史。
现代文：○薛道衡薛道衡，字玄卿，河东汾阴人。祖父薛聪，西魏齐州刺史。
English: ○ Xue Daoheng Xue Daoheng, surnamed Xuanqing, was born in Shiyin, East China's Henan Province. His grandfather, Xue Cong, was a historian from Qizhou, West Wei.

古文：父孝通，常山太守。
现代文：父亲薛孝通，常山太守。
English: His father, Xue Xiaotong, was the governor of Changshan.

古文：道衡六岁而孤，专精好学。
现代文：道衡六岁就成了孤儿。他专精好学。
English: Doheng was orphaned at the age of six. He was an avid learner.

古文：年十三，讲《左氏传》，见子产相郑之功，作《国侨赞》，颇有词致，见者奇之。
现代文：十三岁时，读《左传》，见子产相郑国之功，写下了《国侨赞》，文辞、情致都很不错，看见的人都感到很惊奇。
English: At the age of thirteen, he read "Zhuan" and saw the contribution of Zheng Guo, the Minister of Childbirth, and wrote "Overseas Chinese Praise." The words and sentiment were very good, and everyone who saw it was very surprised.

古文：其后才名益著，齐司州牧、彭城王浟引为兵曹从事。
现代文：此后才名更加显著。北齐的齐州牧、彭城王高氵攸，任他为兵曹从事。
English: After that, his name became more prominent. He was appointed as a petty officer of the Northern Qi's Qizhou Mu and Pengcheng Wang Gaoqiu.

古文：尚书左仆射弘农杨遵彦，一代伟人，见而嗟赏。
现代文：尚书左仆射、弘农人杨遵彦是一代伟人，见了薛道衡，十分叹赏。
English: Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, Yang Zunyan, a Hongnong person, was a great man. Seeing Xue Daoheng, I was very impressed.

古文：授奉朝请。
现代文：授为奉朝请。
English: Please grant me the honor of serving the Emperor.

古文：吏部尚书陇西辛术与语，叹曰： 郑公业不亡矣。 
现代文：吏部尚书、陇西人辛术与他交谈后感叹说： 郑玄的学业不会中断失传了啊！ 
English: After talking with him, officials Shang Shu and Xin Shu from Shaanxi exclaimed: Zheng Xuan's study will not be interrupted, it has been lost!

古文：河东裴谳目之曰： 自鼎迁河朔，吾谓关西孔子罕值其人，今复遇薛君矣。 
现代文：河东人裴讠献看见他后说： 自从周鼎迁离河北，我还以为关西再没有孔子那样的人了，不料今日遇到薛君！ 
English: After seeing him, Pei Yuxian, a person from the east of the river, said: "Since Zhou Ding moved away from Hebei, I thought there was no one like Confucius in Kansai, but today I met Xue Jun!

古文：武成作相，召为记室，及即位，累迁太尉府主簿。
现代文：北齐武成帝作丞相时，召他为记室。武帝即位后，几次升迁他，后至太尉府主簿。
English: When the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng served as chancellor, he called him to the record room. After Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he was promoted several times, and later became the master of the captain's office.

古文：岁馀，兼散骑常侍，接对周、陈二使。
现代文：一年多后，他兼任散骑常侍，负责接待北周、陈国的使者。
English: More than a year later, he also served as a knight-errant, responsible for receiving the envoys of Northern Zhou and Chen.

古文：武平初，诏与诸儒修定《五礼》，除尚书左外兵郎。
现代文：武平初，朝廷让他和诸儒生修定《五礼》，任尚书左外兵郎。
English: At the beginning of the Wuping era, the imperial court asked him and other Confucian scholars to revise the "Five Rites" and appointed Shangshu Zuoheiro.

古文：陈使傅縡聘齐，以道衡兼主客郎接对之。
现代文：陈国使者傅纟宰来齐，朝廷让薛道衡兼任主客郎中，接待陈国使者。
English: Southern Chen's emissary Fu Xizai dispatched the emissary Bei Qi, and Xue Doheng received him as the chief guest.

古文：縡赠诗五十韵，道衡和之，南北称美。
现代文：傅纟宰赠诗五十韵，道衡和之，南人北人都认为诗很美。
English: Fu Yanzai wrote a poem of fifty rhymes, Xue Daoheng sang along with it, and the two countries exchanged praise.

古文：魏收曰： 傅縡所谓以蚓投鱼耳。 
现代文：魏收说： 傅纟宰这么作，只是人们所说的把蚯蚓投给鱼吃罢了。 
English: Wei Jie praised Xue Daoheng and said: Fu Rongzai's poem is like using a hook to catch a big fish.

古文：待诏文林馆，与范阳卢思道、安平李德林齐名友善。
现代文：薛道衡待诏于文林馆，与范阳人卢思道、安平人李德林齐名，与他们很友好。
English: Xue Daoheng worked at the Wenlin Museum. He had a close relationship with Lu Si Dao of Fanyang and Li Delin of Anping, and his reputation was well-known.

古文：复以本官直中书省，寻拜中书侍郎，仍参太子侍读。
现代文：他又以本官身份在中书省值班，不久拜授中书侍郎，仍任太子侍读。
English: He also concurrently held the post of Chushisho (Minister of Books) with his original official post, and soon he was appointed Chushisajiro (Clerk of Books) as well as the Prince's Attendant.

古文：后主之时，渐见亲用，于时颇有附会之讥。
现代文：后主时，他渐渐被亲近重用，当时对他颇有些附会皇室的讥讽。
English: When he became emperor, he was gradually used more and more, and there was quite a bit of ridicule attached to him by the imperial family at the time.

古文：后与侍中斛律孝卿参预政事，道衡具陈备周之策，孝卿不能用。
现代文：后来，他与侍中解律孝卿参与朝政，道衡备陈防备北周国的计策，孝卿不采用。
English: Later, he participated in the court politics with the chamberlain, Xiaoqing Lixing, and Daoheng prepared a strategy to defend northern Zhou, but Xiaoqing did not adopt it.

古文：及齐亡，周武引为御史二命士。
现代文：到北齐灭亡后，北周武帝任他为御史二命士。
English: After the demise of Northern Qi, Northern Zhouwu Emperor appointed him as the second-in-command.

古文：后归乡里，自州主簿入为司禄上士。
现代文：他后来回到了乡里，从州主簿当起，后入京任司录上士。
English: He later returned to the countryside, starting as a state chief bookkeeper, and then went to Beijing to serve as a staff sergeant.

古文：高祖作相，从元帅梁睿击王谦，摄陵州刺史。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，薛道衡随元帅梁睿攻打王谦，任陵州刺史。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, Xue Daoheng followed the marshal Liang Rui to attack Wang Qian, and was appointed as the governor of Lingzhou.

古文：大定中，授仪同，摄邛州刺史。
现代文：大定元年，授为仪同，任邛州刺史。
English: In the first year of Dading, he was awarded the title of gitong, and was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：高祖受禅，坐事除名。
现代文：高祖受北周禅让，薛道衡因事受牵连，被除名。
English: Gaozu was pardoned by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, while Xue Daoheng was implicated and expelled.

古文：河间王弘北征突厥，召典军书，还除内史舍人。
现代文：河间王杨弘北征突厥，召他掌管军书，回京后授他内史舍人。
English: King Yang Hong of Kawama led the Northern Expedition against the Turks, called him to be in charge of military records, and after returning to Beijing, gave him the title of Inner Historian.

古文：其年，兼散骑常侍，聘陈主使。
现代文：这年，他兼任散骑常侍和出使陈国的大使。
English: In this year, he also served as a knight errant and ambassador sent by Chen Guo.

古文：道衡因奏曰： 江东蕞尔一隅，僭擅遂久，实由永嘉已后，华夏分崩。
现代文：薛道衡上奏高祖说： 江南只是个小角角，擅称帝号很久了，实因晋永嘉之乱以后，华夏分崩离析。
English: Xue Daoheng said: Jiangnan is just a small corner, and it has been boasting the imperial title for a long time. In fact, after the Jin Yongjia Rebellion, Huaxia fell apart.

古文：刘、石、符、姚、慕容、赫连之辈，妄窃名号，寻亦灭亡。
现代文：刘、石、符、姚、慕容、赫连之辈，妄自称帝，不久都灭亡了。
English: The generations of Liu, Shi, Fu, Yao, Murong, and Heren, who arrogantly claimed to be emperors, soon perished.

古文：魏氏自北徂南，未遑远略。
现代文：魏国从北往南，路程太远，来不及经略远处。
English: Wei from north to south, the distance is too far, too late to travel a little farther.

古文：周、齐两立，务在兼并，所以江表逋诛，积有年祀。
现代文：北周、北齐两相对立，务在兼并对方。所以江南未被诛伐，到现在有些年头了。
English: North Zhou and North Qi opposed each other and tried to annex each other. Therefore, the southern part of the Yangtze River has not been conquered for several years.

古文：陛下圣德天挺，光膺宝祚，比隆三代，平一九州，岂容使区区之陈，久在天网之外？
现代文：陛下圣德天挺，应恢复皇室的荣光，与夏商周三代圣君相比，平定天下，怎能容忍区区一个小陈国久在法网之外？
English: His majesty, the saint of virtue, should restore the glory of the imperial family, and, compared with the third generation of the saint of summer merchants, pacify the world. How can we tolerate a small Chen Guojiu outside the legal network?

古文：臣今奉使，请责以称籓。 
现代文：我如今出使陈国，请让我让陈国自称藩邦。 
English: I am now dispatching Chen Guo, please let me let Chen Guo call itself Han Guo.

古文：高祖曰： 朕且含养，置之度外，勿以言辞相折，识朕意焉。 
现代文：高祖说： 我姑且跟他们讲点涵养，把他们置之于度外，你不要用言辞去折辱他们。望明白我的意思。 
English: Gaozu said, "Let me talk to them about a little self-restraint and leave them out of it. Don't insult them with your words. I hope you understand what I mean."

古文：江东雅好篇什，陈主尤爱雕虫，道衡每有所作，南人无不吟诵焉。
现代文：江南陈国很爱作诗，陈国国主尤其爱这种雕虫小技，薛道衡每有所作，陈国人无不吟诵。
English: The south of the Yangtze River region is fond of poetry. Chen Shubao, the empress dowager of the Chen Kingdom, is particularly fond of chanting poetry. Whenever a poem by Xue Daoheng comes out, the people of the south of the Yangtze River chant it and pass it on.

古文：及八年伐陈，授淮南道行台尚书吏部郎，兼掌文翰。
现代文：到开皇八年讨伐陈国时，授薛道衡为行台尚书吏部郎，兼管文秘。
English: In the eighth year of the Emperor's reign, when the crusade against Chen, Xue Daoheng was appointed as the secretary of Gaotai Shoshu, and also in charge of the secretary.

古文：王师临江，高颎夜坐幕下，谓之曰： 今段之举，克定江东已不？
现代文：隋军临江，高赹夜坐军帐之下，对他说： 今日之战，能消灭陈国吗？
English: The Sui army in Linjiang, sitting under the military account in the middle of the night, said to him: Can today's battle wipe out Chen Guo?

古文：君试言之。 
现代文：请你说说看。 
English: Tell me, tell me.

古文：道衡答曰： 凡论大事成败，先须以至理断之。
现代文：薛道衡回答说： 凡是评论大事的成败，先要用大理来评判。
English: Xue Daoheng replied, "Whenever you comment on the success or failure of a major event, you must first use reason to judge.

古文：《禹贡》所载九州，本是王者封域。
现代文：《尚书·禹贡篇》上所记载的九州，本是为王的人的封域。
English: Kyushu, which is recorded in "Yugon," was originally the area under the jurisdiction of the king.

古文：后汉之季，群雄竞起，孙权兄弟遂有吴、楚之地。
现代文：东汉之末，群雄并起，孙权兄弟于是占有吴国、楚国的地盘。
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the Sun Quan brothers occupied the territory of Wu and Chu.

古文：晋武受命，寻即吞并，永嘉南迁，重此分割。
现代文：晋武帝受天命即位，不久就吞并了东吴国。永嘉之乱，晋室南迁，从此天下又遭分割。
English: Emperor Jinwu ascended the throne by the mandate of heaven, and soon annexed East Wu. After the Yongjia Rebellion, Emperor Jin's court moved to the south, and the country was divided again.

古文：自尔已来，战争不息，否终斯泰，天道之恆。
现代文：从那以来，战争不息。坏运完了，好运就来了，这是不变的天道。
English: Since then, the war has not stopped. When the bad luck is over, good luck will come. This is the unchanging heavenly way.

古文：郭璞有云： 江东偏王三百年，还与中国合。 
现代文：郭璞说过： 江南偏于一隅，称王三百年后，还是会与中原统一。 
English: Guo Wei said: the Jiangdong split is said to be three hundred years old, and it will be merged with the Central Plains.

古文：今数将满矣。
现代文：现在，三百年之数已快满了。
English: Now, the three hundred years are almost up.

古文：以运数而言，其必克一也。
现代文：按定数而论，这是必克江南的第一个原因。
English: According to the constant, this is the first reason for the rise of the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：有德者昌，无德者亡，自古兴灭，皆由此道。
现代文：有德之君兴旺，无德之君灭亡，自古以来的兴亡，都是按这来的。
English: Those with morals prosper and flourish, those without morals wither and die, and the rise and fall of nations since ancient times has been consistent with this principle.

古文：主上躬履恭俭，忧劳庶政，叔宝峻宇雕墙，酣酒荒色。
现代文：我大隋皇上廉恭节俭，操劳政事，陈叔宝却大兴宫殿，沉溺酒色。
English: My great Emperor of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Lian Gong, was frugal and practiced labor politics, but Emperor Chen Shubao was fond of palaces and indulged in drinking.

古文：上下离心，人神同愤，其必克二也。
现代文：陈国上下离心，人神共愤，这是必克江南的第二个原因。
English: This is the second reason for the unrest in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：为国之体，在于任寄，彼之公卿，备员而已。
现代文：治国之本，在于信任大臣。江南的公卿，只是充数罢了。
English: The foundation of governing the country is to trust the minister. The court nobles in the south of the Yangtze River are just a number.

古文：拔小人施文庆委以政事，尚书令江总唯事诗酒，本非经略之才，萧摩诃、任蛮奴是其大将，一夫之用耳。
现代文：他们选拔小人施文庆委以重任；尚书令江总，只知作诗喝酒，本非经邦济世之才；萧摩诃、任蛮奴是他们的大将，都只有一个勇夫的效用罢了。
English: They have chosen a villain, Shi Wenqing, to play the important role; Shang Shuling, the general of the river, only knows how to write poetry and drink, and is not a scholar; Xiao Miao, and the barbarian slave are their generals, all of which only have the effect of a brave man.

古文：其必克三也。
现代文：这是必克江南的第三个原因。
English: This is one of the three reasons why it must be defeated.

古文：我有道而大，彼无德而小，量其甲士，不过十万。
现代文：我大隋有道而又势力强大，他陈国无道而又势力弱小，我看他们的人马，不超过十万。
English: My great Sui Dynasty had a moral code and great power, while his Chen Kingdom had no moral code and little power. I estimate their manpower to be no more than one hundred thousand.

古文：西自巫峡，东至沧海，分之则势悬而力弱，聚之则守此而失彼。
现代文：他们的防线，西到巫峡，东到沧海。分兵而守吧，那么势力分开而力量弱小；聚兵而守吧，又会顾此而失彼。
English: Their line of defense stretches from the Wuxia Gorge in the west to the Canghai Sea in the east. If they divide their forces to defend themselves, their strength will be weak if they are separated; if they gather their forces to defend themselves, they will lose the battle.

古文：其必克四也。
现代文：这是必克江南的第四个原因。
English: This is the fourth reason why Nanchen is bound to be conquered.

古文：席卷之势，其在不疑。 
现代文：我隋克陈，是席卷之势，请您不要疑虑。 
English: The situation sweeping the south of the Yangtze River has taken shape, and the key to success lies in not hesitating.

古文：颎忻然曰： 君言成败，事理分明，吾今豁然矣。
现代文：高赹很高兴，说： 你分析成败，事理都很分明，我如今豁然明白了。
English: Gao Yao was very happy and said, "You analyze success and failure, and the reasons are very clear. Now I suddenly understand.

古文：本以才学相期，不意筹略乃尔。 
现代文：本因你有文才而指望你，没料到你的谋略也如此了不起！ 
English: I used to admire your talent, but I didn't expect you to be so resourceful.

古文：还除吏部侍郎。
现代文：回京后授他吏部侍郎。
English: After his return to Kyoto, he was awarded the title of Jiro (侍郎).

古文：后坐抽擢人物，有言其党苏威，任人有意故者，除名，配防岭表。
现代文：后来因为他在吏部提拔官员，有人说他与苏威结党，任人唯亲，他被除名，流放到岭南。
English: Later, because he promoted officials in the cadre department, some people said that he was a partisan of Su Wei and a crony, he was expelled and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：晋王广时在扬州，阴令人讽道衡从扬州路，将奏留之。
现代文：晋王杨广当时在扬州，偷偷地派人劝薛道衡从扬州走，说他将上奏朝廷，把道衡留在扬州。
English: At that time, Yang Guang, the King of Jin, was in Yangzhou. He secretly sent someone to persuade Xue Daoheng to leave Yangzhou, saying that he would appeal to the imperial court and keep Daoheng in Yangzhou.

古文：道衡不乐王府，用汉王谅之计，遂出江陵道而去。
现代文：道衡不想在晋王府，用了汉王杨谅之计，于是从江陵到岭南去。
English: Xue Daoheng did not like Yang Guang, but he took the advice of Han Wang Yang Peng and went to the south of Lingnan along the Gangneung Road.

古文：寻有诏征还，直内史省。
现代文：不久有诏书征调他还京，在内史省值班。
English: Soon after, an imperial edict was issued to transfer him to Beijing, where he was put on duty at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：晋王由是衔之，然爱其才，犹颇见礼。
现代文：晋王杨广因此记恨他，但爱他的才能，还能对他讲点礼貌。
English: As a result, the Jin king Yang Guang hated him, but loved his talent and was able to be polite to him.

古文：后数岁，授内史侍郎，加上仪同三司。
现代文：几年后，朝廷授他内史侍郎，加授上仪同三司。
English: A few years later, the Imperial Court appointed him as Naishi no Jiro, and he was also given the title of Gidon Sanji.

古文：道衡每至构文，必隐坐空斋，蹋壁而卧，闻户外有人便怒，其沉思如此。
现代文：薛道衡每到构思文章时，必定会一个人坐在空书斋里，靠着墙壁而卧下，听到门外有人声，他便发怒，他就是这样沉思作文。
English: Whenever Xue Daoheng comes to think about an article, he must sit alone in an empty study, lie down against the wall, and when he hears someone's voice outside the door, he gets angry. This is how he ponders composition.

古文：高祖每曰： 薛道衡作文书称我意。 
现代文：高祖常常说： 薛道衡写的文书，我很满意。 
English: Gao Zu often said: I am very satisfied with the documents written by Xue Daoheng.

古文：然诫之以迂诞。
现代文：但告诫他别迂腐。
English: However, his meandering absurdity is cautioned against.

古文：后高祖善其称职，谓杨素、牛弘曰： 道衡老矣，驱使勤劳，宜使其硃门陈戟。 
现代文：后来，高祖夸奖他很称职，对杨素、牛弘说： 道衡老了，为国奔走，很辛苦，应该让他家的大门口有人持戟站岗。 
English: Later, Gao Zu praised him for being very competent, and said to Yang Su and Niu Hong, "Doheng is old, he works hard for the country, and he should have someone stand guard at the gate of his house with a crossbow.

古文：于是进位上开府，赐物百段。
现代文：于是提拔他当上开府，赐他上百段布帛。
English: As a result, he was promoted to be the head of the government, and was given more than a hundred pieces of cloth.

古文：道衡辞以无功，高祖曰： 尔久劳阶陛，国家大事，皆尔宣行，岂非尔功也？ 
现代文：道衡以无功为由而推辞，高祖说： 你在朝廷长期辛劳，国家的大事，都是你写的文书，难道这不是你的功劳？ 
English: Daoheng declined on the grounds of lack of merit, and Gaozu said, "You have worked hard for a long time at the imperial court, and you have written important documents for the country. Isn't this your achievement?

古文：道衡久当枢要，才名益显，太子诸王争相与交，高颎、杨素雅相推重，声名籍甚，无竞一时。
现代文：道衡久在重要岗位，才气名声更加大了，太子诸王都争着与他交往，高赹、杨素又都推重他，名声更大，一时无人与他相比。
English: Dao Hengjiu was in an important position, and his talent and reputation were even greater. Princes and kings all competed to associate with him, and Gao Xi and Yang Su both promoted him. His reputation was even greater, and no one could compare to him at the time.

古文：仁寿中，杨素专掌朝政，道衡既与素善，上不欲道衡久知机密，因出检校襄州总管。
现代文：仁寿中，杨素执掌朝政，道衡既与杨素交好，皇上不想让道衡久管机密之事，因此让他出京任检校襄州总管。
English: During the reign of Emperor Renshou, Yang Su was in charge of imperial politics, and Emperor Daoheng was friendly with Yang Su. The emperor did not want Daoheng to be in charge of confidential matters for a long time, so he sent him to Beijing to be the head of the inspection of schools in Xiangzhou.

古文：道衡久蒙驱策，一旦违离，不胜悲恋，言之哽咽。
现代文：道衡在高祖身边很久了，一旦离别，不胜悲伤依恋，话别时哽咽起来。
English: Dogen has been around Gao Zu for a long time. Once they parted, he was overcome with sadness and attachment, and choked up when saying goodbye.

古文：高祖怆然改容曰： 尔光阴晚暮，侍奉诚劳。
现代文：高祖也很悲伤，说： 你已年老，侍奉我的确很辛苦。
English: Gaozu was also sad and said, "You are old, and it is really hard to serve me.

古文：朕欲令尔将摄，兼抚萌俗。今尔之去，朕如断一臂。 
现代文：我想让你休息调养一下，同时料理一下民风民俗。今天你离去，我就像断了一臂一样。 
English: I want you to rest and recuperate for a while, and at the same time cook some folk customs. If you leave today, it will be like I've broken my arm.

古文：于是赉物三百段，九环金带，并时服一袭，马十匹，慰勉遣之。
现代文：于是送给道衡三百段缣帛、九环金带，和一套时装，十匹马，安慰并鼓励他上路。
English: So he gave Dogen three hundred denarii, nine gold rings, a suit of clothes, and ten horses to comfort and encourage him on his way.

古文：尚想睿图，永惟圣则，道洽幽显，仁沾动植。
现代文：道衡在任州官时，为政清简，官吏、百姓都感激他的恩惠。炀帝继位后，道衡转任番州刺史。
English: When he was serving as a prefectural official, Dohyun was a great benefactor to the Qing Dynasty, and the officials and people were grateful for his favors. After Emperor Xizong succeeded to the throne, Dohyun was transferred to the post of prefectural governor of Fanzhou.

古文：爻象不陈，乾坤将息，微臣作颂，用申罔极。帝览之不悦，顾谓苏威曰： 道衡致美先朝，此《鱼藻》之义也。 
现代文：一年多后，他上表请求退休。炀帝对内史侍郎虞世基说： 道衡将要回到京师了，让他当秘书监吧。 道衡回京后，呈上他写的《高祖文皇帝颂》。炀帝看了不高兴，回头对苏威说： 道衡赞美先朝，这是《诗经·鱼藻》言在此而意在彼的意思。 
English: More than a year later, he asked to retire on the table. Emperor Zou said to Yu Shiji, the servant of the internal history, "Doheng is going to return to Beijing, let him be the secretary." After Doheng returned to Beijing, he presented his "Ode to the Emperor Gaozouwen." Emperor Zou was not happy to see it, and turned to Su Wei and said: "Doheng praises the first dynasty, this is the meaning of "Poetry · Fish Algae."

古文：于是拜司隶大夫，将置之罪。
现代文：于是授道衡为司隶大夫，想给他加罪。
English: So let him be the judge, and he will be asked about his sin.

古文：道衡不悟。
现代文：道衡未醒悟。
English: Dohyaku hasn't woken up.

古文：司隶刺史房彦谦素相善，知必及祸，劝之杜绝宾客，卑辞下气，而道衡不能用。
现代文：司隶刺史房彦谦与道衡一向交好，知道道衡必定会遭乱，劝他不与宾客来往，谦卑一点，但道衡不听。
English: The courtier Fusahiko Ken, who had always been friendly with Dogen, knew that Dogen would certainly be disturbed, and advised him not to mingle with the guests and to be humble, but Dogen did not listen.

古文：会议新令，久不能决，道衡谓朝士曰： 向使高颎不死，令决当久行。 
现代文：适逢议论新的法令，久议不决。道衡对大臣们说： 假使高赹不死，法令肯定早就推行了。 
English: At the time of the discussion of the new law, the discussion was not resolved for a long time.Doheng said to the ministers: If Gao Yao did not die, the law would certainly have been implemented long ago.

古文：有人奏之，帝怒曰： 汝忆高颎邪？ 
现代文：有人告他，炀帝发怒说： 你想念高赹吗？ 
English: When someone accused him, Emperor Gao became angry and said, "Do you miss Gao Yao?

古文：付执法者勘之。
现代文：把他交给司法部门勘问处置。
English: Turn him over to the justice department for questioning.

古文：道衡自以非大过，促宪司早断。
现代文：道衡自认为不是大过，还催促司法部门早点定案。
English: Dao Heng thought that it was not too much, and urged the judicial department to make a final decision as soon as possible.

古文：暨于奏日，冀帝赦之，敕家人具馔，以备宾客来候者。
现代文：到了司法部门上奏炀帝的那一天，他还指望炀帝会赦免他，让家人准备了酒菜，以备招待来家的宾客。
English: When the day came for the justice department to summon Emperor Gong, he still hoped that Emperor Gong would pardon him and had his family prepare food and wine to welcome the guests.

古文：及奏，帝令自尽。
现代文：到奏明炀帝时，炀帝下令让他自杀。
English: When the case was reported, Emperor Xuan ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：道衡殊不意，未能引诀。
现代文：道衡全没料到，不能马上自杀。
English: Xue Daoheng was very surprised and did not say goodbye.

古文：宪司重奏，缢而杀之，妻子徙且末。
现代文：司法部门重又上奏。炀帝下令把他缢杀了，妻子儿女全部流放到且末。
English: The judicial department also reported to Emperor Qian. Emperor Qian ordered that Xue Daoheng be strangled to death, and his wife and children were sent into exile.

古文：时年七十。
现代文：当时他七十岁。
English: He was seventy years old at the time.

古文：天下冤之。
现代文：天下人都认为他死得冤枉。
English: People all over the world think that his family was very wronged.

古文：有集七十卷，行于世。
现代文：他有文集七十卷，流传在世上。
English: He had a collection of seventy volumes, which are known all over the world.

