古文：洭水出桂阳县卢聚，水出桂阳县西北上驿山卢溪，为卢溪水，东南流径桂阳县故城，谓之洭水。
现代文：洭水发源于桂阳县的卢聚，洭水发源于桂阳县西北上骤山的卢溪，叫卢溪水，往东南流经桂阳县老城，称为洭水。
English: Surabaya water originates from Luju in Guiyang County. Surabaya water originates from Lu Creek in the northwest of Guiyang County, called Lu Creek Water, and flows southeast through the old city of Guiyang County, called Surabaya water.

古文：《地理志》曰：洭水出桂阳，南至四会是也。
现代文：《地理志》说：洭水发源于桂阳，往南流到四会。
English: "Geography" said: Surabaya originated in Guiyang and flowed south to Nanhui.

古文：洭水又东南流，峤水注之，水出都峤之溪，溪水下流，历峡南出，是峡谓之贞女峡。峡西岸高岩，名贞女山。山下际有石，如人形，高七尺，状如女子，故名贞女峡。
现代文：洭水又往东南流，有娇水注入。娇水发源于都娇之溪，溪水下流，穿过山峡，从南边出峡，这条山峡叫贞女峡，峡西岸有高岩，名为贞女山，山下有一块岩石，形状像一个女人，高七尺，所以叫贞女峡。
English: The Jiao Water originates from the Du Jiao Creek, the stream water flows downstream, passes through the mountain gorge, and emerges from the south side of the gorge. This mountain gorge is called the Virgin Gorge. There is a high rock on the west coast of the gorge, called the Virgin Mountain, and there is a rock under the mountain, shaped like a woman, seven feet high, so it is called the Virgin Gorge.

古文：古来相传，有数女取螺于此，遇风雨昼晦，忽化为石。
现代文：据古来相传，有几个姑娘在这里捡螺蜘，遇上了暴风雨，白昼天昏地暗，姑娘们忽然都变成了石头。
English: According to an ancient legend, several girls were picking up snails here, when they encountered a storm, the day turned dark, and the girls suddenly turned into stone.

古文：斯诚巨异，难以闻信。
现代文：这实在是天大的奇闻，听来难以置信。
English: It's such a big story, it's unbelievable.

古文：但启生石中，挚呱空桑，抑斯类矣。
现代文：但启在岩石中降生，挚在空心桑树中呱呱出世，或许也是类似的事。
English: But perhaps it is a similar matter that Kai was born in a rock and Seungri was born in a hollow mulberry tree.

古文：物之变化，宁以理求乎？
现代文：事物的变化很多，难道都是可按常理来解释的吗？
English: There are many changes in things, can they all be explained by common sense?

古文：溪水又合洭水。洭水又东南入阳山县，右合涟口，水源出县西北百一十里石塘村，东南流，水侧有豫章木，本径可二丈，其株根犹存，伐之积载，而斧迹若新。
现代文：溪水又与洭水汇合，洭水又往东南流入阳山县，右边在涟口汇合涟水。涟水的源头出自阳山县西北一百一十里的石塘村，往东南流，水边有豫章木，树根直经约二丈，至今株根还在，砍伐已经多年，但斧痕仍像新砍的一样。
English: The source of the stream comes from Shitang Village, which is 110 miles northwest of Yangshan County, and flows to the southeast. There is a Yuzhang tree by the water's edge. The tree's roots run straight up to about two meters in height, and the roots are still there to this day. It has been cut down for many years, but the axe marks are still like new.

古文：羽族飞翔不息，其旁众枝，飞散远集，乡亦不测所如，惟见一枝，独在含洭水矣。
现代文：据说伐木时群鸟不停地绕树飞翔，树倒之后，众枝忽然远飞而去，也不知道落到哪里，以后只见到一枝，还孤零零地在含框水上。
English: It is said that when a tree is felled, a flock of birds constantly flies around the tree. After the tree falls, the branches suddenly fly far away, and it is not known where they landed. Later, only one branch can be seen, still alone on the water.

古文：涟水东南流注于洭。
现代文：涟水往东南流，注入洭水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：洭水又东南流，而右与斟水合。
现代文：洭水又往东南流，右边汇合了斟水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, merging with Chongwu water on the right.

古文：掘断连冈，流血成川，城因倾阤，遂即倾败。
现代文：斟水的源头就在近处的东岩下，洞口如井，一日之中，泉水十次溢出，十次涸竭，就像潮汐一样准时，水流注入洭水。
English: The source of the water is under the nearby east rock, the mouth of the cave is like a well. During the day, the spring water overflows ten times and dries up ten times. Just like the tides, the water flow injects the water.

古文：阁下大鼓，飞上临武，乃之桂阳，追号圣鼓，自阳山达乎桂阳之武步驿，所至循圣鼓道也。
现代文：洭水又往南流经阳山县老城西边，老人们传说：从前县官一到县里来，就会越级升官，太史经过这里察看后，说是地势风水所造成的，就把相连的山冈掘断，于是流血成河，城也就倾斜崩毁，立即倒塌了，同时阁下的大鼓也飞上了临武，直到桂阳，以后称为圣鼓。从阳山通到桂阳武步骤的路，就是循着圣鼓的路径开成的。
English: Surabaya also flows southward through the west side of the old city of Yangshan County. The old people have a legend: Once upon a time, county officials would be promoted to higher ranks as soon as they came to the county. After Taishi inspected this place, he said that the terrain was caused by wind and water, and he dug out the connected mountains and hills. As a result, blood flowed into a river, the city also tilted and collapsed, and immediately collapsed. At the same time, your big drum also flew up to Linwu, until Guiyang, later known as the sacred drum. The road from Yangshan to Guiyangwu was opened following the path of the sacred

古文：其道如堑，迄于鼓城矣。
现代文：这条路好像壕沟一样，直到鼓城为止。
English: The road is trench-like all the way to Gucheng.

古文：洭水又径阳山县南，县故含洭县之桃乡，孙皓分立为县也。
现代文：洭水又流经阳山县南。阳山县就是原来含洭县的桃乡，孙皓把它分出另立为县。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the south of Yangshan County. Yangshan County was originally the peach town of Surabaya County, and Sun Yat-sen separated it and established it as a separate county.

古文：洭水又东南流也。
现代文：洭水又往东南流去。
English: Surabaya's water flowed to the southeast.

古文：东南过含洭县，应劭曰：洭水东北入沅。
现代文：往东南流过含洭县，应劭说：穿匡水往东北流，注入沉水。
English: It flows to the southeast through Ganlu County, and Yinglu said, "Pass through the Kuangshui to the northeast, and inject the submerged water."

古文：瓒注《汉书》，沅在武陵，去洭远，又隔湘水，不得入沅。
现代文：薛攒注《汉书》，说玩水在武陵，离洭水很远，又隔着湘水，是不可能注入玩水的。
English: Xue Gan wrote in "Chinese Classics" that the play of water is in Wuling, far away from Surabaya, and separated by Hunan water, it is impossible to inject the play of water.

古文：洭水东南，左合翁水。
现代文：洭水往东南流，左边与翁水汇合。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, merging with Wengui water on the left.

古文：水出东北利山湖，湖水广圆五里，洁逾凡水，西南流注于洭，谓之翁水口。
现代文：翁水发源于东北方的利山湖，湖水方圆五里，比一般的水要洁净得多，往西南流，注入洭水，汇流处称为翁水口。
English: Weng water originates from the northeast of Lishan Lake. The lake water is five miles in circumference and is much cleaner than ordinary water. It flows to the southwest, injecting salty water. The confluence is called Weng water outlet.

古文：口已下，东岸有圣鼓杖，即阳山之鼓杖也。横在川侧，虽冲波所激，未尝移动。
现代文：翁水口下流，东岸有圣鼓杖，就是阳山之鼓的鼓杖，横搁在川流旁边，虽然受到水浪的冲击，但却丝毫没有移动。
English: Downstream of Weng Shuikou, on the east bank, there is a sacred drumstick, that is, the drumstick of the Yangshan Drum, lying on the side of the stream, although it is impacted by the waves, it has not moved at all.

古文：百鸟翔鸣，莫有萃者。
现代文：百鸟在这里飞鸣，却并不聚集于杖上。
English: Hundreds of birds fly here, but they do not gather on the cane.

古文：船人上下，以篙撞者，辄有疟疾。
现代文：船夫撑船往来经过这里，如用篙去戳杖，就会得疟疾。
English: Boatmen paddle past here, and if you poke a stick with a hoe, you will get malaria.

古文：洭水又东南，左合陶水，水东出尧山。
现代文：洭水又往东南流，在左边汇合了陶水。陶水发源于东面的尧山。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast and is joined on the left by potable water, which originates from Mount Surabaya in the east.

古文：山盘纡数百里，有赭岩迭起，冠以青林，与云霞乱采。
现代文：尧山盘曲绵延数百里，山上有储红色的岩石层叠而起，岩顶林木青葱，相映艳如朝霞。
English: The Lushan Pan Curve stretches for hundreds of miles. Red rocks are piled up on the mountain, and the forest trees on the top of the rock are green and beautiful, like the morning sky.

古文：山上有白石英，山下有平陵，有大堂基，耆旧云，尧行宫所。
现代文：山上有白石英，山下有平缓的丘陵，还有大堂遗址。据老人相传，这是尧行宫的所在地。
English: There is white quartz on the mountain, rolling hills below, and the remains of the main hall. According to old people, this is the location of the Minhang Palace.

古文：陶水西径县北，右注洭水。
现代文：陶水往西流经县北，向右边注入框水。
English: The pottery water flows westward through the north of the county, and the frame water is injected to the right.

古文：洭水又径含洭县西。
现代文：框水又流经含洭县西边。
English: The frame water also flows through the west side of Yancheng County.

古文：王歆《始兴记》曰：县有白鹿城，城南有白鹿冈。
现代文：王散《始兴记》说：县里有白鹿城，城南有白鹿冈。
English: Wang San's "Beginning of Prosperity" said: There is a white deer city in the county, and a white deer hill in the south of the city.

古文：咸康中，郡民张鲂为县，有善政，白鹿来游，故城及冈并即名焉。
现代文：咸康年间，郡人张纺当县令，有利民的政绩，于是白鹿来游，城和山冈都因而得名了。
English: During the Han and Kang dynasties, county man Zhang Zhan became the county magistrate, and his political achievements were beneficial to the people. As a result, the white deer came to visit, and both the city and the mountain got their names from this.

古文：南出洭浦关，为桂水。
现代文：往南流出洭浦关，叫桂水。
English: The water that flows south out of Ganpu Pass is called Gui Sui.

古文：关在中宿县。洭水出关，右合溱水，谓之洭口。
现代文：洭浦关在中宿县，洭水流出洭浦关，在右边与漆水汇合，汇流处叫洭口。
English: Gongpuguan is located in Zhongshuku County. Gongshui water flows out of Gongpuguan, and merges with lacquer water on the right side. The confluence is called Gonggou.

古文：《山海经》谓之湟水。
现代文：《山海经》称为涅水。
English: "Sankaikyo" is called "Nesui."

古文：徐广曰：湟水一名洭水，出桂阳，通四会，亦曰洭水也。
现代文：徐广说：徨水又名框水，发源于桂阳，通四会，也叫催水。
English: Xu Guang said: "Hovering water, also known as frame water, originated in Guiyang, through the Four Associations, and is also called rushing water.

古文：汉武帝元鼎元年，路博德为伏波将军，征南越，出桂阳，下湟水，即此水矣。
现代文：汉武帝元鼎元年前，路博德为伏波将军，远征越南，出桂阳，下浪水，就是这条水。
English: Before Emperor Hanwu's accession to the throne in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lubo De became General Fubo, went on an expedition to Vietnam, left Guiyang, and went to the waves. It was this water.

古文：桂水其别名也。
现代文：桂水是别名。
English: Keisui is another name for cinnamon.

古文：深水出桂阳卢聚，吕忱曰：深水，一名邃水，导源卢溪，西入营水，乱流营波，同注湘津。
现代文：深水发源于桂阳卢聚。吕忱说：深水又名邃水，发源于卢溪，西流注入营水，与营水乱流一同注入湘水。
English: The deep water originates from the Lu River in Guiyang. Lu Zhen said: The deep water, also known as the turbid water, originates from the Lu River, the west stream is injected into the Ying River, and together with the turbulent flow of the Ying River, it is injected into the Xiang River.

古文：许慎云：深水出桂阳南平县也。
现代文：许慎说，深水发源于桂阳南平县。
English: Xu Sheng said that the deep water originated in Nanping County, Guiyang.

古文：《经》书桂阳者，县本隶桂阳郡，后割瞩始兴。
现代文：《水经》之所以说桂阳，是因为南平县本来隶属于桂阳郡，后来才划给始兴郡的缘故。
English: "Water Sutra" mentions Guiyang because Nanping County was originally part of Guiyang County, but was later assigned to Shixing County.

古文：县有卢溪、卢聚山，在南平县之南，九疑山东也。
现代文：县里有卢溪、卢聚山，在南平县以南、九疑山以东。
English: There are Lu River and Lu Mountain in the county, south of Nanping County and east of Jiuqi Mountain.

古文：西北过零陵营道县南，又西北过营浦县南，又西北过泉陵县，西北七里至燕室，邪入于湘。
现代文：往西北流过零陵郡营道县南边，又往西北流过营浦县南边，又往西北流过泉陵县，往西北流了七里到燕室，斜流人湘水。
English: It flowed northwest through the south side of Yingdao County, Jiling County, and northwest through the south side of Yingpu County, and northwest through Quanling County, and flowed northwest for seven miles to Yanshu.

古文：水上有燕室丘，亦因为聚名也。
现代文：深水上有燕室丘，也就用以作为聚落名了。
English: There is a swallow's nest hill in the deep water, which is also used as a gathering place.

古文：其下水深不测，号曰龙渊。
现代文：燕室丘下水深不可测，号称龙渊。
English: The depth of the water below the Swallow's Nest Hill is unfathomable. It is known as the Dragon's Abyss.

古文：钟水出桂阳南平县都山，北过其县东，又东北过宋渚亭，又北过钟亭，与漼水合。
现代文：钟水发源于桂阳郡南平县都山，往北流过县东，又往东北流过宋渚亭，又往北流过钟亭，与淮水汇合。
English: Zhongshui originates from Dushan, Nanping County, Guiyang County, flows north through the east of the county, flows northeast through Songzhu Ting, flows north through Zhongting, and merges with Huai Shui.

古文：都山即都庞之峤，五岭之第三岭也。
现代文：都山就是都庞之娇，是五岭中的第三岭。
English: Du Mountain is the most beautiful mountain in Du Pang, and is the third ridge in the Five Ridges.

古文：钟水即峤水也。
现代文：钟水就是峤水。
English: Zhongshui is the name of the water.

古文：庾仲初曰：峤水南入始兴溱水，注于海。
现代文：庾仲初说：娇水往南流入始兴漼水，注入大海。
English: Yan Zhongchu said: Jiao Shui flows southward into Shixing Shishui and pours into the sea.

古文：北入桂阳，湘水注于江是也。
现代文：另一条往北流入桂阳湘水，注入大江。
English: The other flows northward into the Guiyang Xiangshui and is injected into the Yangtze River.

古文：漼水，即桂水也。漼、桂声相近，故字随读变，《经》仍其非矣。
现代文：漼水就是桂水，漼、桂读音相近，所以字也跟读音而变，《水经》也就跟着错了。
English: "水" is "桂水," and "" and "桂" are pronounced similarly, so the characters also change with the pronunciation, and "水經" is also wrong.

古文：桂水出桂阳县北界山，山壁高耸，三面特峻，石泉悬注，瀑布而下。
现代文：桂水发源于桂阳县北界山，山上崖壁高耸，三面异常峻峭，山石间的泉水奔泻而下，成为瀑布。
English: Guishui originates from the North Boundary Mountain in Guiyang County. The cliffs on the mountain are towering, and the three sides are extremely steep. The spring water between the mountains and rocks rushes down and becomes a waterfall.

古文：北径南平县，而东北流届钟亭，右会钟水，通为桂水也。
现代文：往北流经南平县，然后往东北流到钟亭，在右边与钟水汇合，通称桂水。
English: It flows northward through Nanping County, and then northeastward to Zhongting, where it meets the Zhongshui River on the right, commonly known as the Keisui River.

古文：故应劭曰：桂水出桂阳，东北入湘。
现代文：所以应劭说：桂水发源于桂阳，往东北注入湘水。
English: Therefore, Ying Zang said: "Kuei water originated in Guiyang, and Hunan water was injected into the northeast.

古文：县南、西二面，阻带清溪，桂水无出县东理，盖县邑流移，今古不同故也。又北入于湘。
现代文：又往北流经魏宁县东边，魏宁就是旧时的阳安，晋太康元年改名晋宁。魏宁在桂阳郡东一百二十里，清溪绕过县城南面和西面，因此桂水决无从县东流出去的道理。这大概是因为县城迁移，古今地点不同的缘故。又往北注入湘水。
English: It also flows northward through the east of Wei Ning County. Wei Ning is the old Yang'an, and Jin Taikang changed its name to Jin Ning in the first year of the year. Wei Ning is one hundred and twenty miles east of Guiyang County, and Qingxi bypasses the south and west of the county seat, so there is no reason for Gui Shui to flow out from the east of the county. This is probably due to the relocation of the county seat and the difference between the ancient and modern locations. It also injects Xiangshui to the north.

古文：耒水出桂阳郴县南山。
现代文：耒水发源于桂阳郡郴县的南山。
English: Surabaya originated from Nanshan, Surabaya County, Guiyang County.

古文：耒水发源出汝城县东乌龙白骑山，西北流径其县北，西流三十里，中有十四濑，各数百步，濬流奔急，竹节相次，亦为行旅溯涉之艰难也。
现代文：耒水发源于汝城县东边的乌龙白骑山，往西北流经该县北边，又往西流三十里，其间有十四处礁滩，各长数百步，又深又急的水流，与礁滩如竹节相间，旅人逆水行舟或涉水渡河，都有很大的困难。
English: The Surabaya River originates from the Ulongbaiji Mountain in the eastern part of Rucheng County, flows northwest through the northern part of the county, and flows west for thirty miles. There are fourteen reefs, each several hundred paces long, with deep and rapid currents. Between the reefs and shoals, such as bamboo knots, travelers have great difficulties in rowing against the water or wading across the river.

古文：又西北径晋宁县北，又西，左合清溪水口，水出县东黄皮山，西南流历县南，又西北注于耒水。
现代文：耒水又往西北流经晋宁县北边，又往西流，左边汇合清溪水于清溪水口。清溪水发源于县东黄皮山，往西南流经县南，又往西北注入耒水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northwest through the north of Jinning County, and then to the west, where it meets the water of Qingxi River at the mouth of Qingxi River on the left. The water of Qingxi River originates from the Huangpi Mountain in the east of the county, flows to the southwest through the south of the county, and injects Surabaya water to the northwest.

古文：汝城县在郡东三百余里，山又在县东，耒水无出南山理也。
现代文：汝城县在桂阳郡城东三百余里，山又在县东，耒水决无发源于南山的道理。
English: Rucheng County is more than 300 miles east of the city of Guiyang County, the mountain is also in the east of the county, and there is no reason for the water to originate from Nanshan.

古文：又北过其县之西，县有渌水，出县东侠公山。 西北流，而南屈注于耒，谓之程乡溪。
现代文：又往北流过县西。郴县有绿水，发源于县东侠公山，往西北流，然后向南转弯注入耒水，称为程乡溪。
English: It also flows northward through the west of the county. There is green water in Handan County. It originates from the East Xiaogang Mountain of the county, flows northwestward, and then turns south to inject salty water. It is called Chengxiang Creek.

古文：郡置酒官，酝于山下，名曰程酒，献同酃也。
现代文：桂阳郡设置酒官，在山下酿酒，称为程酒，也同鄙酒一样，是用来进贡的。
English: Guiyang County set up a wine officer to brew wine at the foot of the mountain, known as Cheng wine, which, like mint wine, was used to collect tribute.

古文：耒水又西，黄水注之。水出县西黄岑山，山则骑田之峤，五岭之第二岭也。
现代文：末水又往西流，有黄水注入，黄水发源于县西的黄岑山；山有骑田之娇，是五岭中的第二岭。
English: The last water also flows westward, and is infused with yellow water. The yellow water originates from Mount Huangpi in the west of the county; the mountain has the appearance of Mount Keita, and is the second ridge in the Five Ridges.

古文：黄水东北流。按盛弘之云：众山水出注于大溪，号曰横流溪。
现代文：黄水往东北流，盛弘之说：从诸山流出的水，注入大溪，名为横流溪。
English: The yellow water flows to the northeast, and Morihiro said: The water flowing from the mountains is injected into the large stream, which is called the cross-flow stream.

古文：溪水甚小，冬夏不干，俗亦谓之为贪泉，饮者辄冒于财贿，同于广州石门贪流矣。
现代文：溪水很小，但冬夏不涸，民间也称之为贪泉，喝了这水，就会变得贪财，同广州石门的贪流一样。
English: The stream is small, but it does not dry up in winter and summer. People also call it a greedy spring. If you drink this water, you will become greedy, just like the corruption of Guangzhou Shimen.

古文：廉介为二千石，则不饮之。
现代文：清廉的太守是不喝这水的。
English: The incorruptible Empress Dowager does not drink this water.

古文：昔吴隐之挹而不乱，贪岂谓能渝其贞乎？
现代文：从前吴隐之饮了贪泉，却并未受到诱惑，贪泉难道能改变他的清节吗？
English: Once upon a time, Wu Yingzhi drank greed spring, but he was not tempted. Can greed spring change his purity?

古文：盖亦恶其名也。
现代文：不饮这水，大概也是因为讨厌它的名字之故吧。
English: If you don't drink this water, it's probably because you hate its name.

古文：刘澄之谓为一涯溪，通四会，殊为孟浪而不悉也。
现代文：刘澄之说是同一条溪，通四会，实在太轻率无知了。
English: Liu Chengzhi said that it is the same stream, through the four associations, it is too imprudent and ignorant.

古文：庾仲初云：峤水南入始兴溱水，注海。即黄岑水入武溪者也。北水入桂阳湘水，注于大江，即是水也。
现代文：庚仲初说：娇水往南流入始兴漆水，注入大海，这就是注入武溪的黄岑水；北水汇合桂阳湘水，注入大江，就是这条水。
English: Geng Zhonghu said: Jiao water flows southward into the Shixing lacquer water and is injected into the sea, which is the Huanglong water injected into the Wuxi River; the north water merges with the Guiyang Hunan water and is injected into the Dajiang River, which is this water.

古文：右则千秋水注之。
现代文：右边有千秋水注入，千秋水发源于西南的万岁山。
English: On the right is the infusion of Qiushi water, which originates from the southwest of Mount Wanli.

古文：水出西南万岁山，山有石室，室中有钟乳。山上悉生灵寿木，溪下即千秋水也。水侧民居，号万岁村。
现代文：山上有岩洞，洞中有钟乳，山上长遍灵寿木，溪的下流就是千秋水。水边的居民点叫万岁村，此水下派与黄水汇合。
English: There are rock caves on the mountain, stalactites in the caves, reeds growing all over the mountain, and the lower reaches of the stream are the Chixiu Water. The residential area on the water's edge is called Wanlian Village, and this underwater faction merges with the Yellow Water.

古文：其水下合黄水，黄水又东北径其县东，右合除泉水。
现代文：黄水又往东北流经县东，右边汇合了除泉水。
English: Yellow water also flows northeast through the east of the county, and the right side is joined by spring water.

古文：水出县南湘陂村，村有圆水，广圆可二百步，一边暖，一边冷。
现代文：除泉水发源于县南的湘破村，村中有圆水，方圆约二百步，一边水暖，一边水冷。
English: The spring water originates from Xiangba village in the south of the county. The village has round water, about two hundred paces in circumference, with warm water on one side and cold water on the other.

古文：冷处极清绿，浅则见石，深则见底。
现代文：冷处极其澄清，水色翠绿，浅的地方看得到石子，深的地方看得到底；暖处水色乳白而浑浊。
English: The cold place is extremely clear, the water color is emerald green, the shallow place can see the stone, the deep place can see the bottom; the warm place is milky white and cloudy.

古文：暖处水白且浊，玄素既殊，凉暖亦异，厥名除泉，其犹江乘之半汤泉也。水盛则泻黄溪，水耗则津径辍流。
现代文：水色既不相同，冷暖也是互异，名为除泉，正如江乘的半汤泉一般。水大时流泻入黄溪，水小时就会断流。
English: The color of the water is not the same, and the temperature is also different. It is called de-fountain, just like the semi-hot spring in Jiangren. When the water flows into the Yellow River, the water will be cut off in an hour.

古文：郴，旧县也，桂阳郡治也，汉高帝二年分长沙置。
现代文：郴县是旧县，桂阳郡治所就在这里。桂阳郡是汉高帝二年前，从长沙郡分出来的。
English: Handan County is an old county, and the Guiyang County Government is located here. Guiyang County was separated from Changsha County two years ago by Emperor Gao.

古文：《地理志》曰：桂水所出，因以名也。
现代文：《地理志》说：桂水发源在这里，因此称为桂阳。
English: "Geography" said: Guiyang originated here, so it is called Guiyang.

古文：王莽更名南平，县曰宣风。项羽迁义帝所筑也。
现代文：王莽改郡名为南平，县名为宣风，城是项羽迁义帝时所筑。
English: Wang Mang changed the county name to Nanping, the county name to Xuanfeng, and the city was built when Emperor Xiang Yu moved to Yiwu.

古文：县南有义帝冢，内有石虎，因呼为白虎郡。
现代文：县南有义帝墓，内有石虎， 因此叫白虎郡。
English: In the southern part of the county, there is the tomb of Emperor Yi, which contains a stone tiger. Therefore, it is called Baihu County.

古文：《东观汉记》曰：茨充，字子河，为桂阳太守，民惰懒，少粗履，足多剖裂，茨教作履。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：茨充字子河，他当桂阳太守时，看到老百姓很懒惰，连粗劣的鞋子也很少穿，脚上常有破伤，于是就教他们做鞋子。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: When he was the governor of Guiyang, he saw that the people were very lazy and rarely wore even shoddy shoes. They often had injuries on their feet, so he taught them to make shoes.

古文：今江南知织履，皆充之教也。
现代文：现在江南知道做鞋都是茨充教会的。
English: Now Jiangnan knows that all shoes are made by Tshicheng Church.

古文：黄溪东有马岭山，高六百余丈，广圆四十许里。
现代文：黄溪东有马岭山，高六百余丈，方圆约四十里。
English: To the east of the Yellow River, there is the Ma Ling Mountain, which is more than 600 meters high and has a circumference of about 40 miles.

古文：汉末，有郡民苏眈，栖游此山。
现代文：汉末郡里有个叫苏耽的人，曾在这座山上居住和遨游。
English: In Hamat County, there was a man named Su Tan who used to live and travel on this mountain.

古文：《桂阳列仙传》云：眈，郴县人。少孤，养母至孝。言语虚无，时人谓之痴。
现代文：《桂阳列仙传》说：苏耽，郴县人，小时父亲就死了，他奉养母亲极其孝顺，但说的都是些虚无缥缈的事一，人们都说他是个傻子。
English: "The Legend of the Guiyang Immortals" says: Su Tan, a native of Jixian County, his father died when he was young, and he was extremely filial to his mother, but everything he said was nothing but empty words. People said he was a fool.

古文：常与众儿共牧牛，更直为帅，录牛无散。
现代文：他常常和孩子们一起放牛，大家轮流看管，把牛群赶到一起，以免散失。
English: He often herds cattle with his children, and they take turns looking after them, herding the cattle together so that they don't disperse.

古文：每至眈为帅，牛辄徘徊左右，不逐自还。
现代文：每次轮到苏耽值班时，牛就只在近傍走动，不必去赶，都会自行返回的。
English: Every time it's Sutang's turn to be on duty, the cows just walk around nearby. There's no need to chase them, they'll return on their own.

古文：众儿曰：汝直，牛何道不走耶？
现代文：孩子们问：你值班时，牛为什么不走开呢？
English: The children asked: Why doesn't the cow move away when you are on duty?

古文：眈曰：非汝曹所知。
现代文：苏耽说：这一点你们是不知道的。
English: Su Tan said, "You don't know that."

古文：即面辞母云：受性应仙，当违供养。
现代文：他就辞别母亲，说：我生性应当成仙，不能再供养你了。
English: He said goodbye to his mother, saying: "I was born to be an immortal, I can no longer provide for you.

古文：涕泗。又说：年将大疫，死者略半。
现代文：又流着泪说：今年将有一场大疫病，人要死掉一半。
English: And again, with tears streaming down his face, he said: "This year there will be a great plague, and half the people will die.

古文：穿一井饮水，可得无恙。
现代文：凿一口井饮水，可以不得病。
English: If you dig a well and drink the water, you will not get sick.

古文：如是有哭声甚哀。
现代文：苏耽母亲去世安葬后，人们听到山上有哭声很是悲哀。
English: After Su Tan's mother died and was buried, it was very sad to hear people crying on the mountain.

古文：后见眈乘白马，还此山中，百姓为立坛祠，民安岁登，民因名为马岭山。
现代文：后耒看到苏耽骑着一匹白马回到山中，百姓为他立祠，于是人民安宁，年成丰熟，因此把山叫做马岭山。
English: Houyi saw Su Tan riding a white horse back to the mountain, and the people set up a shrine for him. As a result, the people were peaceful and had a prosperous year. Therefore, the mountain was called Ma Ling Shan.

古文：黄水又北流注于耒水，谓之郴口。
现代文：黄水又往北流，注入耒水，汇流处称为郴口。
English: Yellow water also flows northward, injecting brackish water, and the confluence is called the mouth of the river.

古文：耒水又西径华山之阴，亦曰华石山，孤峰特耸，枕带双流。东则黄溪、耒水之交会也。
现代文：耒水又往西流经华山北面。华山也叫华石山，孤峰屹然高耸，山旁有两条溪水流过，东边是黄溪与耒水的汇合处。
English: Surabaya also flows westward through the northern side of Huashan. Huashan is also called Huashi Mountain, a lonely peak towering high, with two streams flowing by the mountain, and the east side is the confluence of Yellow Creek and Surabaya.

古文：耒水东流沿注，不得北过其县西也。
现代文：耒水一路向东奔流，是不可能往北流经县西的。
English: Surabaya water flows all the way to the east, it is impossible to flow north through the west of the county.

古文：两岸连山，石泉悬溜，行者辄徘徊留念，情不极已也。
现代文：两岸山峦连绵起伏，山岩间悬挂着下泻的流泉，行人到这里就会盘桓不去，流连忘返。
English: The mountains on both sides of the strait rise and fall continuously, and there are flowing springs hanging between the rocks. When pedestrians come here, they will linger and forget to return.

古文：又北过便县之西，县故惠帝封长沙王子吴浅为侯国，王莽之便屏也。
现代文：又往北流过便县西边，便县，从前惠帝曾封给长沙王的儿子吴浅，立为侯国。也就是王莽的便屏。
English: It also flows north through the west side of Bengu County, Bengu County, which was once granted by Hui Di to Wu Asan, the son of Changsha King, and established as a principality. That is, Wang Mang's Benguin.

古文：县界有温泉水，在郴县之西北，左右有田数千亩，资之以溉。常以十二月下种，明年三月谷熟，度此水冷，不能生苗。
现代文：便县边界上有温泉水，在郴县西北，两岸有田数千亩，全都靠此水灌溉，常常在十二月下种，次年三月，稻子成熟；过了这里，水都是冷的，就不能长稻苗。
English: There is hot spring water on the border of Ben County, and in the northwest of Handan County, there are thousands of mu of fields on both sides of the river, all of which are irrigated by this water. They are often planted in December, and the rice is ripe in March of the following year. After this point, the water is cold, and the rice seedlings cannot grow.

古文：温水所溉，年可三登。
现代文：温水灌溉得到的地方，每年三熟。
English: In places where warm water irrigation is available, it ripens three times a year.

古文：其余彼散流，入于耒水也。
现代文：灌溉剩余下来的水，就散流注入耒水。
English: The water remaining after irrigation is discharged into the irrigation canal.

古文：又西北过耒阳县之东，耒阳，旧县也，盖因水以制名。
现代文：又往西北流过耒阳县东边，耒阳是旧县，是按水命名的。
English: It also flows northwest through the eastern edge of Poyang County. Poyang is an old county and was named after the river.

古文：王莽更名南平亭。
现代文：王莽改名为南平亭。
English: Wang Mang was renamed Nanping Pavilion.

古文：东傍耒水，水东肥南，有郡故城。
现代文：县城东濒耒水。在耒水以东、肥川以南，有一座老郡城。
English: There is an old county seat east of Surabaya and south of Hichawa.

古文：县有溪水，东出侯计山，其水清辙，冬温夏冷。西流谓之肥川。
现代文：耒阳县有一条溪水，发源于东方的侯计山，水很清澈，冬温夏冷；往西流叫肥川。
English: There is a stream in Fenyang County. It originates from the eastern Houjie Mountain. The water is very clear, and is warm in winter and cold in summer. It flows westward and is called the Fei River.

古文：川之北有卢塘。塘他八顷，其深不测，有大鱼常至，五月辄一奋跃，水涌数丈，波襄四陆，细鱼奔迸，随水登岸，不可胜计。
现代文：肥川北面有卢塘，面积八顷，深不可测，塘里有大鱼，到了五月间，鱼就在水面腾跃，激起水浪上涌数丈，向四面岸上横溢，小鱼纷纷逃散，随水被冲到岸上的多得数不清。
English: To the north of Hechuan is Lutang, with an area of eight hectares, unfathomable. There are big fish in the pond. In May, the fish are leaping on the surface of the water, stirring up waves several meters high and overflowing onto the shore on all sides. Small fish are fleeing in droves, with countless more being washed ashore with the water.

古文：又云：大鱼将欲鼓作，诸鱼皆浮聚。
现代文：又说：大鱼将要鼓动水浪时，鱼群就浮上水面，聚集在一起。
English: He also said: When the big fish are about to agitate the waves, the schools of fish rise to the surface and gather together.

古文：水侧注。西北径蔡洲，洲西即蔡伦故宅，傍有蔡子池。
现代文：肥川从旁流过注入耒水，耒水往西北流过蔡洲，蔡洲西边就是蔡伦的故居，旁有蔡子池。
English: The Hechuan River flows from its tributary into the Lishui River, and the Lishui River flows northwest through Caizhou. On the west side of Caizhou is Cai Lun's former residence, next to which is Cai Zi Pond.

古文：伦，汉黄门，顺帝之世，捣故鱼网为纸，用代简素，自其始也。
现代文：蔡伦是汉时的太监，顺帝时，蔡伦用破鱼网捣烂造纸，以代替竹简和帛。造纸就是蔡伦创始的。
English: Cai Lun was a eunuch during the Han Dynasty. During the Shun Dynasty, Cai Lun used a fish net to make paper instead of bamboo strips and reeds. Paper-making was founded by Cai Lun.

古文：又北过酃县东，县有酃湖，湖中有洲，洲上民居，彼人资以给酿，酒甚醇美，谓之酃酒，岁常贡之。
现代文：又往北流过酃县东边，酃县有酃湖，湖中有个沙洲，洲上居民就用湖水来酿酒，这种酒味极醇美，称为鄙酒，每年常用来进贡。
English: It also flows northward through the eastern part of Handan County. Handan County has Handan Lake. There is a sandbar in the lake. The residents on the mainland use the lake water to brew wine. This wine is very mellow and is called minced wine. It is often used to pay tribute every year.

古文：湖边尚有酃县故治，西北去临承县十五里。
现代文：湖边还有鄙县老县城，西北距临承县十五里。
English: Beside the lake, there is also the old county seat of Minxian County, fifteen miles northwest of Lincheng County.

古文：从省隶。
现代文：太元二十年，撤废鄙县，并入临承。
English: In the 20th year of the Taiyuan era, the county was abolished and merged into Linshe.

古文：《十二州志》曰：大别水南出耒阳县太山，北至酃县入湖也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：大别水发源于南方耒阳县的太山，北流到鄙县注入鄙湖。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" says: The Dabie Water originates from the Taishan Mountains in the southern Poyang County, and flows northward into the Henao Lake in Henao County.

古文：北入于湘。
现代文：往北注入湘水。
English: Injecting Honshu water to the north.

古文：耒水西北至临承县，而右注湘水，谓之耒口也。
现代文：耒水往西北流，到了临承县，在右边注入湘水，汇流处叫耒口。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northwest, to Lincheng County, injecting Hunan water on the right, and the confluence is called Hukou.

古文：洣水出荼陵县上乡，西北过其县西，水出江州安成郡广兴县太平山，西北流，径荼陵县之南。
现代文：洣水发源于茶陵县的上乡，往西北流过县西，洣水发源于江州安成郡广兴县的太平山，往西北流经茶陵县南边。
English: The Ershui originates from Shangxiang in Chaling County and flows northwest through the west of the county. The Ershui originates from Taiping Mountain in Guangxing County, Ancheng County, Jiangsu Province, and flows northwest through the south of Chaling County.

古文：汉武帝元朔四年，封长沙定王子节侯訢之邑也。王莽更名声乡矣。
现代文：汉武帝元朔四年前，把茶陵封给长沙定王的儿子节侯诉作为食邑；王莽改名为声乡。
English: Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo four years ago, the tea mausoleum was given to the son of the king of Changsha, King Ding, as a food town; Wang Mang changed his name to Song Town.

古文：洣水又屈而过其县，西北流注也。
现代文：洣水又转弯流过县城，然后往西北流去。
English: Surabaya water turned and flowed through the county seat, and then flowed to the northwest.

古文：《地理志》谓之泥水者也。
现代文：这就是《地理志》所说的泥水。
English: This is what "Geography" calls muddy water.

古文：又西北过攸县南，攸水出东南安成郡安复县封侯山，西北流径其县北，县北带攸溪，盖即溪以名县也。
现代文：又往西北流过故县南边，牧水发源于东南方安成郡安复县的封侯山，往西北流经县北。枚县北面有修溪流过，彼县就是按溪来命名的。
English: It also flowed to the northwest through the southern part of the former county. The pasture water originated from Fenghou Mountain in Anfu County, Ancheng County in the southeast, and flowed to the northwest through the north of the county. There is a repair stream in the north of Hira County, and his county is named after the stream.

古文：汉武帝元朔四年，封长沙定王子则为攸舆侯，即《地理志》所谓攸县者也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔四年前，封长沙定王的儿子则为枚舆侯，就是《地理志》里所说的枚县。
English: Four years before Emperor Hanwu's accession to the throne, the son of King Fuchang Shading was the prince of Hii County, which was called Hii County in the "Geography."

古文：攸水又西南流入荼陵县，入于洣水也。
现代文：枚水又往西南流入茶陵县，注入洣水。
English: The sheet water flows to the southwest into Chaling County, where it is injected with reed water.

古文：又西北过阴山县南，县本阳山县也，县东北犹有阳山故城，即长沙孝王子宗之邑也。
现代文：又往西北流过阴山县南边，阴山县本来是阳山县。该县东北还有阳山老城，就是长沙孝王的儿子宗的食邑。
English: It also flows northwest past the southern edge of Yinshan County, which was originally Yangshan County. In the northeast of the county, there is Yangshan Old Town, which is the food village of Zong, the son of Changsha Prince Xiao Wang.

古文：言其势王，故堑山堙谷，改曰阴山县。
现代文：据说这里的地势有王气，所以掘山填谷，并改名为阴山县。
English: It is said that the terrain here is majestic, so the mountains were dug and the valleys filled, and the name was changed to Yinshan County.

古文：县上有容水，自侯昙山下注洣水，谓之容口。
现代文：县里有容水，从侯昙山注入洣水，汇流处叫容口。
English: In the county, there is Yingzhou water, which is injected from Houyi Mountain, and the confluence is called Yingkou.

古文：水有大穴，容一百石，水出于此，因以名焉。
现代文：源头有个大湖，容得下一百石，因为水发源在这里，所以名为容水。
English: There is a large lake at the source, which can hold a hundred stones. Because the water originates here, it is called Yongshui.

古文：洣水又西北径其县东，又西径历口。
现代文：洣水又往西北流经县东；又往西流经历口。
English: Surabaya water also flows northwest through the east of the county; it also flows west through the mouth.

古文：县有历水，下注洣，谓之历口。
现代文：县里有历水，注入洣水，汇流处叫历口。
English: There is Lishui in the county, which is infused with Lushui, and the confluence is called Liguo.

古文：洣水又西北，与洋湖水会。
现代文：洣水又往西北流，与洋湖水汇合。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northwest, merging with the water of the ocean lake.

古文：水出县西北乐薮冈下洋湖，湖去冈七里，湖水下注洣，谓之洋湖口。
现代文：洋湖水出自阴山县西北乐蔽冈底下的洋湖，洋湖离冈七里，湖水往下注入洣水，汇流处叫洋湖口。
English: The water of the Yanghu Lake comes from the Yanghu Lake at the bottom of the Lehuai Mountain in the northwest of Yinshan County. The Yanghu Lake is seven miles away from the mountain, and the water of the lake is injected into the lower part of the mountain. The confluence is called the Yanghu Mouth.

古文：洣水东北有峨山，县东北又有武阳龙尾山，并仙者羽化之处。
现代文：洣水往东北流，有峨山；县城东北有武阳山和龙尾山，都是修仙学道的人飞升的地方。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the northeast, and there is Mount Asan; the northeast of the county seat has Mount Wuyang and Mount Longwei, both of which are places where people who practice the path of cultivating immortality soar.

古文：上有仙人及龙马迹，于其处得遗咏，虽神栖白云，属想芳流，藉念泉乡，遗咏在兹。
现代文：山上有仙人和龙马的足迹，在那里还发现他们留下的诗歌。他们的神灵虽然栖息于白云之上，心情向往着灵山秀水，但仍然怀念着故乡，在这里留下吟咏。
English: There are footprints of sages and dragons on the mountain, and poems left by them have also been found there. Although their gods inhabit the white clouds and yearn for the beautiful mountains and rivers, they still miss their hometown and leave their songs here.

古文：览其余诵，依然息远，匪直邈想霞踪，爱其文咏可念，故端犊抽札，以诠其咏。
现代文：读他们的诗歌，可以感到他们依然心在远处。我不止是遥想他们驾着祥云来往的踪迹，还喜爱他们的歌辞朗朗上口，所以拿了纸笔抄录下来。
English: Reading their poems, you can feel that their hearts are still far away. I not only imagined the traces of their coming and going with Xiangyun, but also loved their catchy lyrics, so I took a pen and paper to copy them down.

古文：其略曰：登武阳，观乐薮，峨岭千蕤洋湖口，命蜚螭，驾白驹，临天水，心踟蹰，千载后，不知如。
现代文：歌辞大略是：登上武阳山，眺望着乐蔽，获岭千花竞发在洋湖口。驱着蜚璃，驾着白驹，飞临蓝天碧水，不禁心里踌躇。千年万代后，世事茫茫，不知何如。
English: The lyrics are roughly as follows: Climbing Mount Wuyang, looking out at the music shelter, winning the competition of thousands of flowers at the mouth of the lake. Driving the glacier, driving the egret, flying to the blue sky and water, I can't help but hesitate in my heart. After thousands of years, the world is in a daze, I don't know what to do.

古文：盖胜赏神乡，秀情超拔矣。
现代文：仙人游赏这迷人的神乡，他们高雅的感情真是超凡绝俗的了。
English: Immortals visit this enchanting land of the gods, and their refined emotions are truly transcendent.

古文：又西北入于湘。
现代文：又往西北注入湘水。
English: Another injection of Honshu water was made to the northwest.

古文：流水出醴陵县东漉山，西过其县南，醴陵县，高后四年，封长沙相侯越为国。
现代文：漉水发源于澄陵县东边的漉山，往西流过县南。醴陵县，于高后四年封给长沙相侯越为封国。
English: The water originated from the mountains in the east of Chengling County and flowed westward through the south of the county. Fuling County was given to Changsha Sanghou Yue as a fief four years after the high school.

古文：县南临渌水，水东出安城乡翁陵山。
现代文：县城南濒渌水，水源出自东方安城乡的翁陵山。
English: The source of the water comes from Wengling Mountain in Dongfang'an Township.

古文：余谓漉、渌声相近，后人藉便，以渌为称，虽翁陵名异，而即麓是同。
现代文：我想漉、渌二字读音相近，后人为图方便，就以渌字为名了。虽然翁陵一名相异，但靠近山麓却是相同的。
English: I think the two characters "漉" and "" are pronounced similarly, and later generations found it convenient to use "" as the name. Although the name of Wengling is different, it is the same near the foot of the mountain.

古文：屈从县西，西北流至流浦，注入于湘。
现代文：转弯从县西往西北流，到了漉浦，注入湘水。
English: Turning from the west of the county to the northwest, it flows to Kippura, where it is infused with Honshu water.

古文：浏水出临湘县东南浏阳县，西北过其县，东北与涝水合。
现代文：浏水发源于临湘县东南的浏阳县，往西北流过该县，往东北与劳水汇合。
English: Liu Shui originates from Liuyang County in the southeast of Linxiang County, flows through the county to the northwest, and merges with Luoshui to the northeast.

古文：浏水出县东江州豫章县首裨山，导源西北流，径其县南，县凭溪以即名也。
现代文：浏水发源于浏阳县东边江州豫章县的首裨山，发源后往西北流，经过浏阳县南，该县就是因溪而得名的。
English: Liu Water originates from Shobu Mountain in Jiangzhou Yuzhang County on the eastern edge of Liuyang County. After the source, it flows to the northwest, passing through the south of Liuyang County. The county is named after the stream.

古文：又西北注于临湘县也。
现代文：又往西北流向临湘县。
English: It also flowed northwest to Linxiang County.

古文：西入于湘。
现代文：往西流注入湘水。
English: The westward flow injects Honshu water.

古文：水出豫章艾县，《春秋左氏传》曰：吴公子庆忌谏夫差，不纳，居于艾是也。
现代文：氵买水发源于豫章艾县，《春秋左氏传》说：吴公子庆忌向夫差进谏，夫差不听，于是庆忌就住到艾去。
English: The origin of the story is in Ai County, Yuzhang. According to "The Story of Spring, Autumn and the Left," Wu Gongzi's wife, Qingyi, told her husband to go to Ai, but her husband did not listen, so Qingyi went to Ai.

古文：王莽更名治翰。
现代文：王莽改名为治翰。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Zhi Han.

古文：西过长沙罗县西，罗子自枝江徙此，世犹谓之为罗侯城也。
现代文：往西流过长沙罗县西边，罗子从枝江迁移到这里，世人至今还把它称为罗侯城。
English: Flowing westward through the western part of Changsha Luo County, Luo Zi migrated from the Yangtze River to here, and the world still calls it Luo Hucheng.

古文：水又西流，积而为陂，谓之町湖也。
现代文：氵买水又往西流，积水成为陂塘，叫町湖。
English: The rushing water flows westward, and the stagnant water becomes a pond, called the town lake.

古文：又西至累石山，入于湘水。
现代文：又往西流到累石山，注入湘水。
English: It also flows westward to Jieshishan, injecting Xiangshui.

古文：累石山在北，亦谓之五木山，山方尖如五木状，故俗人藉以名之。
现代文：累石山在北，也叫五木山，山形方而尖，像是五颗骸子，所以俗人就用以作山名。
English: Jieshishan in the north, also known as Woku Mountain, is square and sharp, like five skeletons, so the common people use it as a mountain name.

古文：山在罗口北。
现代文：山在罗口北边。
English: The mountain is in the north of Luokou.

古文：水又在罗水南，流注于湘，谓之东町口者也。
现代文：氵买水又在罗水南边，流注于湖水，汇流处叫东町口。
English: Buying water is also on the south side of Luoshui, flowing into the lake, and the confluence is called East Town Exit.

古文：赣水出豫章南野县西，北过赣县东，《山海经》曰：赣水出聂都山，东北流注于江，入彭泽西也。
现代文：赣水发源于豫章郡南野县西边，往北流过赣县东边，《山海经》说：赣水发源于聂都山，往东北流，注入江水，流入彭泽县西部。
English: Surabaya's water originates in the west of Minamino County, Yuzhang County, and flows northward through the east of Surabaya County. "Sanghaikyo" says: "Surabaya's water originates in Shudu Mountain, flows to the northeast, is injected into the river water, and flows into the west of Penza County.

古文：班固称南野县，彭水所发，东入湖汉水。
现代文：班固说：南野县，彭水发源在这里，东流注入湖汉水。
English: Bangu said: Nan'nian County, the source of Pengshui is here, and the east stream is injected into Lake Han.

古文：庾仲初谓大庾峤水，北入豫章，注于江者也。
现代文：庚仲初说；大庚娇水往北流入豫章，注入江水。
English: Geng Zhonghu said at the beginning of the day; the Great Geng Jiao Water flows northward into the Yuzhang, injecting river water.

古文：《地理志》曰：豫章水出赣县西南，而北入江。
现代文：《地理志》说：豫章水发源于赣县西南，北流入江，它接纳了许多支流，合成一条大川。
English: "Geography" said: Yuzhang Water originates from the southwest of Handan County and flows into the river in the north. It receives many tributaries and forms a large river.

古文：盖控引众流，总成一川，虽称谓有殊，言归一水矣。故《后汉郡国志》曰：赣有豫章水。
现代文：以上诸说中虽然名称不同，但说的都是同一条水。所以《后汉书•郡国志》说：赣县有豫章水。
English: Although the names are different, all of the above sayings are about the same water. Therefore, "Hou Han Shu • Gu Gu Guo Ji" said: There is Yuzhang water in Handan County.

古文：雷次宗云：似因此水为其地名。
现代文：雷次宗说：豫章似乎就是以这条水为地名的。
English: Lei Jizong said: "Yuzhang seems to be named after this water.

古文：虽十川均流，而此源最远，故独受名焉。
现代文：虽然水有十条，流量差不多一样大，但以赣水源流最远，所以唯独此水得名。
English: Although there are ten streams, the flow rate is almost the same, but the source of the water is the farthest, so only this water got its name.

古文：刘澄之曰：县东南有章水，西有贡水，县治二水之间。二水合赣字，因以名县焉。
现代文：刘澄之说：赣县东南有章水，西有贡水，县治在两水之间，两字相合，成为赣字，因此就作为县名了。
English: Liu Chengzhi said: "In the southeast of Handan County, there is Zhangshui, and in the west, there is Gongshui. The county seat is between the two waters. The two words coincide and become the character of Handan, so it became the name of the county.

古文：是为谬也，刘氏专以字说水，而不知远失其实矣。
现代文：这说法很荒唐。刘氏专门以字来释水，不知道这一来便远远失实了。
English: This statement is absurd. Mr. Liu specifically used words to release water, not knowing that this was far from the truth.

古文：豫章水导源东北流，径南野县北。赣川石阻，水急行难。
现代文：豫章水发源后往东北流，经过南野县北边，赣水因乱石梗阻，水流湍急，行船困难，滚滚的波涛一泻六十里。
English: After the source of the Yuzhang River, the river flows to the northeast, passing through the northern part of Nan'no County. Due to the obstruction of the turbulent rocks, the water flow is rapid, the navigation is difficult, and the rolling waves are 60 miles.

古文：倾波委注，六十余里，又北径赣县东，县即南康郡治，晋太康五年分庐江立。
现代文：又往北流经赣县东边，南康郡的治所就设在县城中。南康郡是晋太康五年从庐江郡分出来的。
English: It also flows northward through the east of Min County, and the administrative center of Nankang County is located in the county seat. Nankang County was separated from Minjiang County by Jin Taikang five years ago.

古文：豫章水右会湖汉水，水出雩都县，导源西北流，径金鸡石，其石孤竦临川，耆老云：时见金鸡出于石上，故石取名焉。
现代文：豫章水在右边汇合了湖汉水。湖汉水发源于零都县，往西北流经金鸡石。这块巨石独自临江耸峙着，据老人们说：时常见有金鸡出现于石上，所以取名金鸡石。
English: On the right, the Yuzhang Water merges with the Lake Han Water. The Lake Han Water originates in Zhudu County and flows northwest through the Jinji Stone. This huge stone stands alone on the river. According to the old people, it is common for a golden rooster to appear on the stone, hence the name Jinji Stone.

古文：湖汉水又西北径赣县东，西入豫章水也。
现代文：湖汉水又往西北流经赣县东边，往西注入豫章水。
English: The water of Lake Han also flows northwest through the eastern part of Handan County, and is injected into the west by the water of Yuzhang County.

古文：武帝元光六年，封长沙定王子刘苍为侯国，即王莽之用成也。吴宝鼎中立，以为安成郡，东至庐陵入湖汉水也。
现代文：又往西北流经庐陵县西边，庐陵县就是王莽的桓亭。《十三州志》说：庐水发源于西方的长沙郡安成县。武帝元光六年设立为安成郡，庐水东流，到庐陵注入湖汉水。
English: It also flows to the northwest through the west of Fuling County, which is the origin of Wang Mang's Hantei. "The History of the Thirteen States" said: "Bao Shui originated in Ancheng County, Changsha County in the west. Emperor Wu Yuan Guang established it as Ancheng County in the sixth year, and the east stream of Bao Shui was injected into Lake Han Shui in Fuling.

古文：又东北过石阳县西，汉和帝水平九年，分庐陵立。
现代文：又往东北流过石阳县西边，石阳县，是汉和帝永平九年，从庐陵分出来的。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west side of Shiyang County. Shiyang County was separated from Fuling in the ninth year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉献帝初平二年，吴长沙桓王立庐陵郡，治此。
现代文：汉献帝初平二年，吴长沙桓王设立庐陵郡，治所就在这里。
English: In the first two years of the Han Dynasty, King Shakan of Wuchang established Fuling County, and the government office is located here.

古文：豫章水又径其郡南，城中有井，其水色半清半黄，黄者如灰汁，取作饮粥，悉皆金色，而甚芬香。又东北过汉平县南，又东北过新淦县西，牵水西出宜春县，汉武帝元光六年，封长沙定王子刘成为侯国，王莽之修晓也。牵水又东径吴平县，旧汉平也，晋太康元年改为吴平矣。
现代文：汉光武帝元光六年改为吴平。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Guangwu's reign, the name was changed to Wu Ping.

古文：牵水又东径新淦县，即王莽之偶亭，而注于豫章水。
现代文：牵水又往东流经新淦县―就是王莽鹉亭一一注入豫章水。
English: The diverted water flows eastward through Xinlu County - that is, Wang Mangkati Pavilion is injected with Yuzhang water.

古文：湖汉及赣，并通称也。
现代文：湖汉水和赣水都是通称。
English: Lake Han and Lake Ershui are both commonly known as Tsurumo.

古文：又淦水出其县下，注于赣水。
现代文：此外，还有淦水发源于县中，注入赣水。
English: In addition, there is Surabaya water originating from the middle of the county and injected into Surabaya water.

古文：又北过南昌县西，旺水出南城县，西北流径南昌县南，西注赣水。
现代文：又往北流过南昌县西边，吁水发源于南城县，往西北流经南昌县南边，西流注入赣水。
English: It also flows northward through the west of Nanchang County. The Sui water originates in Nancheng County, flows northwestward through the south of Nanchang County, and the westward flow injects the Sui water.

古文：又有浊水注之，水出康乐县，故阳乐也。
现代文：又有浊水注入。浊水发源于康乐县，就是旧时的阳乐。
English: It was also infused with radon water. Radon water originated in Kangle County, which was Yangle in the old days.

古文：浊水又东径望蔡县，县因汝南上蔡民萍居此土，晋太康元年，改为望蔡县。
现代文：浊水又往东流经望蔡县。因为汝南上蔡的人民流寓在这里，所以在晋太康元年改为望蔡县。
English: Surabaya's water also flowed eastward through Wang Cai County. Because the people of Shang Cai in the south of the country lived here, it was changed to Wang Cai County in the first year of Jin Taikang.

古文：浊水又东径建成县，汉武帝元光四年，封长沙定王子刘拾为侯国。
现代文：浊水又往东流经建成县，汉武帝元光四年才派陈婴去平定豫章，设置南昌县，郡治也在这里，城就是陈婴筑的。
English: Surabaya also flowed eastward through Jiancheng County, and it was only in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yuan Guang of the Han Dynasty that Emperor Wu sent Chen Ying to settle Yuzhang and set up Nanchang County. The county seat is also here, and the city was built by Chen Ying.

古文：王莽更名之曰多聚也。
现代文：王莽改名，县称宜善，郡名九江。
English: Wang Mang changed his name, the county was called Yishan, and the county was named Jiujiang.

古文：水之西岸有盘石，谓之石头，津步之处也。
现代文：刘欲说：湖汉等九水注入彭蠢，所以叫九江。
English: Liu Zi said: the Hunan and other nine rivers are injected into the Pengbei, so it is called the Jiujiang River.

古文：西行二十里曰散原山，叠嶂四周，杳邃有趣。
现代文：陈蕃做太守，任徐稚为功曹，陈蕃在郡里从不接待宾客，只有徐稚来，才特地为他摆了一张坐榻，他去后就挂起来，这里就是悬榻的地方。
English: Chen Xi was the governor-general, and appointed Xu Zhi as a meritorious person. Chen Xi never received guests in the county. Only when Xu Zhi came, he specially set up a couch for him. After he left, he hung it up. This is the place to sleep.

古文：晋隆安末，沙门竺昙显建精舍于山南，僧徒自远而至者相继焉。
现代文：建安年间忽又茂盛起来，枝叶繁茂犹如当年，人们都以为是中宗的吉祥征兆。《礼•斗威仪》说：君王政治修明，诉讼平息，豫樟就常常盛长。太兴年间末年，僧人竺昙显在山南修建寺院，僧徒从远方来这里的络绎不绝。
English: During the Jian'an period, it suddenly flourished again, and the branches and leaves flourished just as they did that year, and people thought it was an auspicious sign of the Chinese sect. "Rite • Duwei Yi" said: The king's politics were clarified, the lawsuits were settled, and the yang and yang were often prosperous. At the end of the Taixing period, the monk Xing Xian built a temple in Shannan, and the monks came here from afar in an endless stream.

古文：西北五六里，有洪井，飞流悬注，其深无底，旧说洪崖先生之井也。
现代文：西北六七里处有洪井，上有瀑布，飞泻直下，注入井中，深不可测。旧时传说这是仙人洪崖先生的井。
English: Sixty-seven miles to the northwest is Hongjing, with a waterfall and a crane that swoops down and plunges into the well, which is unfathomable. In the old days, it was said to be the well of Mr. Hongya, the hermit.

古文：北五六里有风雨池，言山高濑激，激著树木，罪散远洒若雨。
现代文：往北五六里有风雨池，说是因山高滩急，飞流冲激到树木，水花就飘散远洒，像下雨一样。
English: To the north, there are five or six wind and rain ponds. It is said that due to the mountain-high-beach rapids, the flying currents are impelled to the trees, and the water splashes are scattered far and wide, like rain.

古文：西有鸾冈，洪崖先生乘鸾所憩泊也。
现代文：西边有莺冈，是洪崖先生骑莺停下休息的地方。
English: To the west, there is a ridge, which is the place where Mr. Hongya stopped to rest after riding a donkey.

古文：冈西有鹄岭，云王子乔控鹄所径过也。
现代文：山冈西有鹊岭，传说是仙人王子乔驾鹊经过的地方。
English: On the western side of the mountain range, there is a ridge, which is said to be the place where the fairy prince Jiao Jiao passed by.

古文：有二崖，号曰大萧、小萧，言萧史所游萃处也，雷次宗云：此乃系风捕影之论。
现代文：有两座石崖，称为大萧、小萧，传说是萧史游憩的地方。雷次宗说：这都是捕风捉影的话。
English: There are two stone cliffs, known as the Great Xiao and the Small Xiao, which are said to be the places where Xiao Shi rested. Lei Jizong said, "This is just a way of catching the wind and the shadow."

古文：据实本所未辨，聊记奇闻，以广井鱼之听矣。又按谢庄诗，庄常游豫章，观井赋诗。
现代文：我本来就没有对那些事迹作过鉴别，只是聊以记下奇闻异事，以增广见闻罢了。谢庄常游豫章，见过此井，又写过诗。
English: Originally, I didn't make a distinction between those stories, I just talked about them to write down strange stories and to expand my knowledge. Xie Zhuang often visited Yuzhang, saw this well, and wrote poems.

古文：赣水又东北径王步，步侧有城，云是孙奋为齐王镇此，城之。
现代文：按他的诗，说莺冈四周有水，叫莺破，好像这些说法又不是毫无根据的。东大湖十里二百二十六步，北面与城相平，南面弯弯曲曲，通到南塘，此湖本来与章江相通，湖水的涨落与江水相同。
English: According to his poem, it is said that there is water all around Shougang, and it is called Shougang, as if these statements are not unfounded. Dongdaegu Lake is ten miles and 226 paces, the north side is flat with the city, and the south side is curved, leading to Nantang. This lake was originally connected to the Zhangjiang River, and the ebb and flow of the lake water is the same as the river water.

古文：今谓之王步，盖齐王之渚步也。
现代文：汉永元年间，因为这是齐王水边的埠头。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, because this is the pier of the waterfront of King Qi.

古文：郡东南二十余里，又有一城，号曰齐王城。筑道相通，盖其离宫也。
现代文：郡城东南二十余里还有一座城，称为齐王城，筑路相通，这是齐王的行宫。
English: More than 20 miles southeast of the county seat, there is another city, known as the King of Qi City, which is connected by roads. This is the palace of the King of Qi.

古文：赣水又北径南昌左尉廨西，汉成帝时，九江梅福为南昌尉，居此。
现代文：赣水又往北流经南昌左尉官署西边。汉成帝时，九江梅福当南昌尉，曾住在这里。
English: Surabaya also flows north through Nanchang to the west of the left lieutenant's office. When Han Chengdi was emperor, Jiujiang Meifu was a Nanchang lieutenant and lived here.

古文：后福一旦舍妻子，去九江，传云得仙。
现代文：后来一天梅福抛下妻子儿女去到九江，传说他成仙了。
English: Later, one day, Meifu left his wife and children and went to Jiujiang. Legend has it that he became an immortal.

古文：赣水又北径龙沙西，沙甚洁白，高峻而阤，有龙形，连亘五里中，旧俗九月九日升高处也。
现代文：赣水又往北流经龙沙西边，沙很洁白，堆成沙丘，高峻倾斜，连绵长达五里，形状像龙，照老风俗，这是九月九日登高的地方。
English: Surabaya also flows north through the west side of Longsha. The sand is very white, piled up into dunes, steeply sloping, stretching for five miles, shaped like a dragon. According to the old custom, this is the place to climb on September 9.

古文：昔有人于此沙得故冢刻砖，题云：西去江七里半，筮言其吉，卜言其凶。
现代文：从前有人在这里沙地中找到一座古墓，砖上刻的字说：西面离江七里半，用著草占，说吉利；用龟甲卜，说不祥。
English: Once upon a time, someone found an ancient tomb in the sand here. The words engraved on the brick said: "The west side is seven and a half miles from the river. Use grass to say auspicious; use tortoise shell to say ominous."

古文：而今此冢垂没于水，所谓筮短龟长也。
现代文：现在墓就将没入水中了，真所谓签短龟长了。
English: Now the tomb will be submerged in water, and the so-called short-sighted tortoise has grown.

古文：赣水又径椒丘城下，建安四年，孙策所筑也。
现代文：赣水又流经椒丘城下，这座城是建安四年孙策所筑。
English: Surabaya water also flows under the Jiaoqiu Castle, which was built by Sun Ce in the fourth year of Jian'an.

古文：鄱水又西流，注于赣。
现代文：赣水又流经钓沂粮仓下，这里原是度支校尉的治所，太尉陶侃曾迁到这里来。
English: Surabaya's water also flows under the grain silo of the fishing pier, which used to be the governor's office of the provincial governor, Taifu Tao Kan, who once moved here.

古文：又有缭水入焉。
现代文：从前夏天时粮仓前的洲诸被水淹没，离水边较远。
English: In the previous summer, the islands in front of the granary were submerged and far from the water's edge.

古文：其水导源建昌县，汉元帝永光二年分海昏立。缭水东径新吴县，汉中平中立。
现代文：景平元年把海昏分开而设立的。缭水往东流经新吴县，该县是汉中平年间所立。
English: It was established in the first year of the reign of King Jingping to separate the two seas. The water flows eastward through Xinwu County, which was established in the middle of the Han Dynasty.

古文：缭水又径海昏县。王莽更名宜生。谓之上缭水，又谓之海昏江，分为二水。
现代文：缭水又流经海昏县―王莽改名为宜生―叫上赣水，又叫海昏江，分为两条。
English: The water also flows through Haikou County - Wang Mang changed its name to Yisheng - called Shangshui Water, also called Haikou River, and is divided into two.

古文：县东津上有亭，为济渡之要。
现代文：县东渡头上有个亭子，是过渡的要道。
English: There is a pavilion in Dongduotou of the county, which is an important road for the transition.

古文：其水东北径昌邑城，而东出豫章大江，谓之慨口。
现代文：水向东北流经昌邑城，往东从豫章流入大江，汇流处叫慨口。
English: The water flows northeast through the city of Changyi and flows east from Yuzhang into the Yangtze River. The confluence is called the mouth of the Yangtze.

古文：昔汉昌邑王之封海昏也，每乘流东望，辄愤慨而还，世因名焉。
现代文：从前汉昌邑王封于海昏，每次在江上泛舟东望，就满怀愤慨而回，因此世人称为慨口。
English: Once upon a time, the king of Hanchang-eup was lost at sea. Every time he went for a boat ride on the river and looked to the east, he came back full of indignation. Therefore, the world is called a sigh.

古文：其一水枝分别注，入于循水也。
现代文：一条水分支流到别处，注入循水。
English: A stream of water branches off to the other side, injecting running water.

古文：又北过彭泽县西，循水出艾县西，东北径豫宁县，故西安也，晋太康元年更从今名。
现代文：又往北流过彭泽县西边，循水发源于艾县西边，往东北流经豫宁县，豫宁就是旧时的西安。晋太康元年改为今名。
English: It also flowed northward through the west of Pengze County, followed the water and originated in the west of Ai County, and flowed to the northeast through Yuanning County, Yuanning is the old Xi'an. Jin Taikang changed to its current name in the first year of the year.

古文：循水又东北径永循县，汉灵帝中平二年立。
现代文：循水又往东北流经永循县，该县是汉灵帝中平二年所立。
English: The water flowed north-east through Yongxuan County, which was established in the second year of Hanling Emperor Zhongping.

古文：循水又东北注赣水，其水总纳十川，同臻一渎，俱注于彭蠡也。
现代文：循水又往东北流，注入赣水，赣水把十条水全都接纳了过来，合成一条大河，注入彭蠢泽。
English: It followed the water and flowed to the northeast, injecting brackish water. The brackish water absorbed all the ten waters, synthesized a large river, and injected it into the Penghu Lake.

古文：北入于江。
现代文：往北注入大江。
English: It flows into the Oe River to the north.

古文：大江南，赣水总纳洪流，东西四十里，清潭远涨，绿波凝净，而会注于江川。
现代文：大江以南，赣水接纳了各大川，东西四十里间，澄碧的潭水向远处伸展，成为一片汪洋，绿波明净如玉，汇注于江水。
English: To the south of the Yangtze River, Surabaya has received the major rivers. Forty miles from east to west, the clear water of the lake stretches into the distance, becoming a vast ocean. The green waves are bright and clear, pouring into the river water.

古文：庐江水出三天子都，北过彭泽县西，北入于江。
现代文：庐江水发源于三天子都，往北流过彭泽县西，往北注入江水。
English: The Lijiang River originates from Sanliangzi, flows northward through the west of Pengze County, and injects river water to the north.

古文：《山海经》三天子都，一曰天子鄣。
现代文：按《山海经》，三天子都又称天子郭。
English: According to the "Shanhai Jing," the three sons are also known as Tianzi Guo.

古文：王彪之《庐山赋叙》曰：庐山，彭泽之山也。虽非五岳之数，穹隆嵯峨，实峻极之名山也。
现代文：王彪之《庐山赋•叙》说：庐山，就是彭泽之山，虽然不在五岳之内，但峰峦磋峨，上接苍弯，实在也是极其高峻的名山。
English: Wang Biao's "Mount Lushan Fu•Su" said: Mount Lushan, that is, the mountain of Pengze, although it is not within the five mountains, but the peak is very high, and it is really a very high and famous mountain.

古文：孙放《庐山赋》曰：寻阳郡南有庐山，九江之镇也。临彭蠡之泽，接平敞之原。
现代文：孙放《庐山赋》说：寻阳郡南有庐山，是九江的主峰，此山俯临彭鑫的大泽，邻接平旷的原野。
English: Sun Fang said in "Mount Lushan Fu": There is Mount Lushan in the south of Xiangyang County, which is the main peak of the Jiujiang River. This mountain overlooks the Ozawa of Pengxin and is adjacent to the open plain.

古文：《开山图》曰：山四方，周四百余里，叠鄣之岩万仞，怀灵抱异，苞诸仙迹。
现代文：《开山图》说：庐山伸展向四方，周围四百余里，层峦叠嶂，山岩高达万协，其间藏着许多灵异的事物，留着许多仙人的遗迹。
English: "Lushan Map" said: "Lushan Mountain stretches in all directions, with a circumference of more than four hundred miles, layers of folds and folds, and mountain rocks as high as 10,000 kyats. There are many supernatural things hidden in it, and many relics of immortals remain.

古文：《豫章旧志》曰：庐俗，字君孝，本姓匡，父东野王，共鄱阳令吴芮佐汉定天下而亡。
现代文：《豫章旧志》说：庐俗，字君孝，本姓匡，他的父亲东野王与都阳县令吴丙为辅佐汉室平定天下而死。
English: "Yuzhang Old History" says: His father, King Higashino and the ruler of Duyang County, Wu Hei, died as an assistant to the Han dynasty in order to pacify the world.

古文：汉封俗于阳，曰越庐君。
现代文：汉封庐俗于那阳，名为越庐君。
English: Han dynasty emperors lived in Nanyang and were called Yue Yue Jun.

古文：俗兄弟七人皆好道术，遂寓精于宫庭之山。故世谓之庐山。
现代文：庐俗兄弟七人，都喜好道术，就在宫亭山上修炼，所以世人称为庐山。
English: The seven lay brothers, all of whom were fond of Taoism, practiced on the Palace Hill, which is why the world calls it Lushan Mountain.

古文：汉武帝南巡，睹山以为神灵，封俗大明公远法师。
现代文：汉武帝南巡时看到此山，觉得有点神灵，就封庐俗为大明公。
English: Emperor Hanwu saw this mountain when he was on a southern tour and thought it was a bit divine, so he named it Daminggong.

古文：《庐山记》曰：殷、周之际，匡俗先生，受道仙人，共游此山，时人谓其所止为神仙之庐，因以名山矣。
现代文：远法师的《庐山记》说：殷、周之交，匡俗先生从仙人接受了道术，同游此山，当时人们以为他所栖止的地方是神仙的庐舍，因而就作为山名。
English: "Lushan Ji" by Master Yuan said: Yin, Zhou's friend, Mr. Kuangzhu accepted Taoism from the immortals and traveled with this mountain. At that time, people thought that the place where he stayed was the hermitage of the immortals, so it was used as a mountain name.

古文：又按周景式曰：庐山匡俗，字子孝，本东里子，出周武王时，生而神灵，屡逃征聘，庐于此山，时人敬事之。
现代文：又按周景式说：庐山匡俗，字子孝，本来是东里子，出自周武主时，因他生来就有神灵之性，屡次逃避朝廷的征聘，在这山上建庐而居，当时人们都很敬仰他，奉他为师。
English: According to the Zhou Jing style, he also said: "Lushan Kuangzhu, also known as Zi Xiao, was originally a son of Dongli, from the time of Zhou Wushu. Because he was born with the nature of a god, he repeatedly evaded the recruitment of the imperial court and lived on this mountain. At that time, people all admired him and served him as a teacher.

古文：俗后仙化，空庐犹存，弟子睹室悲哀，哭之旦暮，事同乌号。
现代文：匡俗后来升仙了，只留一间空屋，弟子看到他的居室都很悲哀，早晚号哭，就像黄帝登仙时小臣们抱着他的乌号弓哀哭一般。
English: Later, when Kuangzhu became an emperor, only an empty room was left. When his disciples saw his room, they were very sad and cried in the morning and evening, just like the courtiers cried when the Yellow Emperor ascended to the throne.

古文：世称庐君，故山取号焉。
现代文：世人称他为庐君，山就因而取名为庐山了。
English: The world called him Shizun, and the mountain was named Shizan.

古文：斯耳传之谈，非实证也。
现代文：这些都是民间的口头传说，并非确实可信的记载。
English: These are folk oral traditions and are not reliable records.

古文：故《豫章记》以庐为姓，因庐以氏，周氏远师，或托庐慕为辞，假凭庐以托称。
现代文：所以《豫章记》以庐为姓，照庐字来命名，周氏和远师或者是仰慕庐山，就编造了这些话，借庐俗作为假托。
English: Therefore, "Yu Zhang Ji" took the surname of Zhai and named it after the character of Zhai, and Zhou and Yuan Shi either admired Zhai Shan and made up these words, using Zhai customs as a pretext.

古文：二证既违，二情互爽。按《山海经》创之大禹，记录远矣。
现代文：这两条记载既相矛盾，两件事情又互不一致，按《山海经》，还是始于大禹时，记录就更遥远了。
English: These two records are contradictory, two things are inconsistent with each other, according to the "Shanhai Jing," it still began with Dayu, and the record is even more distant.

古文：故《海内东经》曰：庐江出三天子都，入江彭泽西，是曰庐江之名，山水相依，互举殊称，明不因匡俗始，正是好事君子，强引此类，用成章句耳。
现代文：《海内东经》说：庐江发源于三天子都，在彭泽以西入江。这就是说庐江的名称是山水相依的，两者互举，分明不是由匡俗开始的。这都是好事的人硬把这类传闻拿来编造故事罢了。
English: "Hainai Dongjing" said: "The Lijiang River originated in Sanxingdu and entered the river west of Pengze. This means that the name of the Lijiang River depends on the landscape, the two are interdependent, and it is clearly not started by Kuangzhu. These are all good things. People are just making up stories with such rumors.

古文：又按张华《博物志。曹著传》，其神自云姓徐，受封庐山。
现代文：又据张华《博物志•曹著传》，山神自称姓徐，受封于庐山，后来吴猛经过这里，山神去迎接他。
English: According to Zhang Hua's "Natural History • Biography of Cao," the mountain god called himself surnamed Xu and was sealed in Lushan. Later, Wu Meng passed here, and the mountain god went to meet him.

古文：后吴猛经过，山神迎猛，猛语曰：君王此山，近六百年，符命已尽，不宜久居，非据。
现代文：吴猛说：你在这山里为王已近六百年，现在你受命为王的期限已到头了，不宜再在非你所应占有的地方久居了。
English: Wu Meng said, "You have been the king of this mountain for nearly six hundred years. Now, the time limit for you to be the king has ended. It is no longer appropriate for you to live in a place that is not yours.

古文：猛又赠诗云：仰瞩列仙馆；俯察王神宅，旷载畅幽怀，倾盖付三益。
现代文：吴猛又赠诗说：仰望众仙的楼台馆舍，俯视大王的仙宫灵府，长年里只图心怀快畅，逢挚友当把真情倾吐。
English: Wu Meng also gave a poem, saying, "Looking up at the mansions of the immortals, looking down at the Great King's Immortal Palace, over the years, I only want to be happy. If you are a good friend, you should pour out your true feelings."

古文：此乃神道之事，亦有换转，理难详矣。
现代文：这是神道之类事情，却也有换任调动，按事理就很难说得清楚了。
English: This is a Shinto-like matter, but there is also a transfer of duties, so it is difficult to say clearly according to the facts.

古文：吴猛，隐山得道者也。
现代文：吴猛是隐居深山得道的人。
English: Wu Meng is a hermit living deep in the mountains.

古文：《寻阳记》曰：庐山上有三石梁，长数十丈，广不盈尺，杳然无底。
现代文：《寻阳记》说：庐山上有叫三石梁的，长数十丈，但宽不到一尺，下面深杳无底。
English: "Seeking the Sun" says: There is something called the Three Stone Beam on Lushan Mountain. It is dozens of meters long, but less than a foot wide. The depth below is bottomless.

古文：吴猛将弟子登山，过此梁，见一翁坐桂树下，以玉杯承甘露浆与猛。
现代文：吴猛带子弟登山，走过这道石梁，看见一个老人坐在桂树底下，用玉杯承接了甘露浆递给吴猛。
English: Wu Meng took his son to climb the mountain, walked across the stone beam, saw an old man sitting under the laurel tree, and handed the nectar to Wu Meng in a jade cup.

古文：又至一处，见数人，为猛设玉膏。
现代文：又到一处，看到有几个人给吴猛摆了玉膏。
English: At another place, he saw several people put jade ointment on Wu Meng.

古文：其山川明净，风泽清旷，气爽节和，土沃民逸。
现代文：吴猛弟子偷了一件宝物，想拿来给世上的人看，石梁立即变得和手指一般细了。吴猛叫他把宝物送回去，手牵着弟子，叫他闭上眼睛，领着他回来。
English: A disciple of Wu Meng stole a treasure and wanted to show it to the world. The stone beam immediately became as thin as a finger. Wu Meng told him to send the treasure back, took the disciple by the hand, told him to close his eyes, and led him back.

古文：嘉遁之士，继响窟岩。龙潜风采之贤，往者忘归矣。
现代文：庐山山明水秀，风清气爽，气候温和，土壤肥沃，而人民安乐，山林隐逸的人士，到岩穴中来隐居的从不中断；像龙凤一般蛰伏待时的贤才，一到这里也会乐而忘归了。
English: The mountains of Lushan are clear and beautiful, the wind is clean and fresh, the climate is mild, the soil is fertile, and the people are safe and happy. Those who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests never interrupt their seclusion in the rock caves. Like dragons and phoenixes, the sages who are waiting will be happy and forget their home once they get here.

古文：秦始皇、汉武帝及太史公司马迁咸升其岩，望九江而眺钟、彭焉。
现代文：秦始皇、汉武帝和太史公司马迁，都曾登临这里的岩峰，遥望九江，凭眺石钟山和彭蠢泽。
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang, Emperor Han Wudi, and the leader of the Taishi Company, Ma Qian, have all climbed the rock peaks here, looking out over the Jiujiang River, with a view of Stone Bell Mountain and Penghu Lake.

古文：庐山之北有石门水，水出岭端，有双石高竦，其状若门，因有石门之目焉。
现代文：庐山北有石门水，发源于岭端，那里有两块高耸的巨石，样子像门，因此有石门之名。
English: In the north of Lushan Mountain, there is Shimen Water, originating from the edge of the ridge, where there are two towering boulders that look like doors, hence the name of Shimen.

古文：水出山腹，挂流三四百丈，飞湍林表，望若悬素。
现代文：水从这两块巨石之间流出，从悬崖上飞泻而下，高近三百步，到了底下，飘散开来约十多步。
English: Water flowed out from between the two boulders, cascaded down from the cliff, nearly three hundred steps high, and when it reached the bottom, it drifted away about ten steps.

古文：注处悉成巨并，其深不测。其永下入江渊。
现代文：从下面仰望，瀑布似乎高与天连，仿佛是从云端垂下的一幅飘曳的白绢。
English: Looking up from below, the waterfall seems to be as high as the sky, as if it were a floating egret hanging down from the clouds.

古文：庐山之南，有上霄石，高壁缅然，与霄汉连接。秦始皇三十六年，叹斯岳远，遂记为上霄焉。
现代文：下面有巨石，可坐数十人，冠军将军刘敬宣常常来此攀登。石门水流过山间，流经龙泉寺南，此寺是太元年间，惊叹这座山岳的高远，于是就以上霄为名记载下来。
English: Below, there are huge boulders that can seat dozens of people. The champion general Liu Jingxuan often came here to climb. The stone gate water flowed through the mountains and flowed south of Longquan Temple. This temple was built in the first century, marveling at the height of this mountain, so it was recorded as the name of the mountain.

古文：上霄之南，大禹刻石志其丈尺里数，今犹得刻石之号焉。
现代文：上霄峰南，大禹刻石标明它的丈尺里数，所以现在还有刻石的名 称。
English: In the south of Shangxiao Peak, the Dayu Carving Stone marked its length and width, so there is still a name for the carved stone.

古文：湖中有落垦石，周回百分步，高五丈，上生竹木。
现代文：湖中有落星石，周围百余步，高五丈，上面长着竹木。
English: In the lake there is a falling star stone, surrounded by more than a hundred steps, five meters high, with bamboo growing on it.

古文：传曰：有星坠此，因以名焉。
现代文：据传说，有星陨落在这里，所以叫落星石。
English: According to legend, a falling star fell here, hence the name "falling star stone."

古文：又有孤石，介立大湖中，周回一里，竦立百丈，矗然高峻，特为瑰异。
现代文：又有一块孤石，独立在大湖中，周围一里，高耸百丈，瑰奇卓绝；顶上虽有林木丛生，但飞禽却极少聚集到这里来。
English: There is also a solitary rock, isolated in the middle of a large lake, surrounded by a mile of land, towering high and magnificent; although there are forests at the top, birds rarely gather here.

古文：上生林木，而飞禽罕集，言其上有玉膏可采，所未详也。春旧云：昔禹治洪水至此，刻石纪功，或言秦始皇所勒，然岁月已久，莫能合辨之也。
现代文：传说上面有玉膏可采，但实际如何不得而知。老人们说：从前大禹治水到过这里，刻石纪功；又说碑是秦始皇所立。但年代久远，无从考辨了。
English: Legend has it that there is jade paste on it that can be mined, but it is not known how it actually is. The old people say: In the past, Dayu came here to control the water and carved stone records; it is also said that the monument was erected by Qin Shihuang. However, it is a long time ago and there is no way to tell.

