古文：刘珙王兰黄祖舜王大宝金安节王刚中李彦颖范成大刘珙，字共父，子羽长子也。
现代文：刘珙字共父，刘子羽的长子。刘珙一出生就显示出奇异的素质，他跟随叔父刘子学习。
English: The eldest son of Liu Zi Yu's father, Liu Zi Zi, Liu Zi showed an unusual quality as soon as he was born. He studied under his uncle Liu Zi.

古文：生有奇质，从季父子翚学。以荫补承务郎，登进士乙科，监绍兴府都税务。
现代文：刘珙因为父亲得以荫补承务郎，考中进士乙科，任绍兴府税务监官。刘珙请求回去管理一祠观。
English: Because his father was able to make up for his absence, Liu Wei became a junior high school entrance examination student, and served as a Shaoxing tax inspector. Liu Wei asked to go back and manage a small village.

古文：请祠归，杜门力学，不急仕进。
现代文：他回家后，闭门努力学习，不急于升官进爵。
English: When he returned home, he studied hard behind closed doors and was in no hurry to be promoted to the peerage.

古文：主管西外敦宗院，召除诸王宫大小学教授，迁礼部郎官。
现代文：朝廷命他主管京城西郊外的敦宗院，皇上召他回朝，拜官诸王宫大小学教授，又升为礼部郎官。
English: The imperial court ordered him to be in charge of Dunshoin in the western suburbs of Kyoto, and the emperor called him back to the imperial court, where he became a professor of palace and elementary schools, and was also promoted to the position of etiquette officer.

古文：秦桧欲追谥其父，召礼官会问，珙不至，桧怒，风言者逐之。
现代文：秦桧想追封谥号给他的父亲，召集礼部官员开会商量，刘珙不到会，秦桧大怒，暗示言官驱逐他。
English: Qin Hui wanted to give his father the imperial title and summoned officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies for a meeting to discuss it. Liu Hui did not attend the meeting. Qin Hui was furious and hinted that the officials should expel him.

古文：桧死，召为大宗正丞，迁吏部员外郎。
现代文：秦桧死后，刘珙被朝廷召为大宗正丞，升为吏部员外郎。
English: After the death of Qin Hui, Liu Hui was appointed by the imperial court as Daizong Zheng Rong, and was promoted to the position of the clerk's assistant.

古文：置令式庭中，使选集者得自翻阅，与吏辨，吏无得藏其巧。
现代文：刘珙把律令格式放在庭中，使选集者得以自行审阅，在与官吏争辩时，官吏不能投机取巧。
English: Liu Wei placed the format of the ritsuryo code in the court, so that the selectors could review it on their own. When arguing with officials, officials should not be opportunistic.

古文：兼权秘书少监，兼权中书舍人。
现代文：刘珙兼权秘书少监，又兼权中书舍人。
English: Liu Wei is also the secretary of the junior superintendent, and also the secretary of the middle school.

古文：金犯边，王师北向，诏檄多出其手，词气激烈，闻者泣下。
现代文：金侵犯宋边境，王师北伐，皇上所下的诏令、檄文多出自刘珙之手，其言词十分慷慨激昂，听到的人都流下了眼泪。
English: Jin's invasion of the Song Dynasty's border, Wang Shi's Northern Expedition, the Emperor's edict, and the imperial edict were mostly written by Liu Bei. His words were very impassioned, and everyone who heard them shed tears.

古文：御史杜莘老劾宦者张去为，忤旨左迁，珙不草制，莘老得不去。
现代文：御史杜莘老弹劾宦官张去为，与圣旨相违抗，皇上下令降他的职，刘珙没有草拟这个命令，杜莘老得以不去职。
English: Gu Shi Du Ying Lao impeached the eunuch Zhang De Rong for acting in defiance of the sacred edict, and the emperor ordered him to step down from his post. Liu Bei did not draft this order, and Du Ying Lao was able to step down from his post.

古文：从幸建康，兼直学士院。
现代文：刘珙跟随皇上到建康，兼任直学士院。
English: Liu Bei followed the emperor to Jiankang, and also served as the direct academy.

古文：车驾将还，军务未有所付，时张浚留守建康，众望属之。
现代文：皇上将返回朝廷，军务大事没有人托付，当时张浚留守建康，众望所归，是最合适的人选。
English: The emperor will return to the imperial court, and no one will be entrusted with military affairs. At that time, Zhang Jian stayed to keep Jiankang, and was highly regarded as the most suitable candidate.

古文：及诏出，以杨存中为江、淮宣抚使，珙不书录黄，仍论其不可。
现代文：等到诏令出来，皇上任命杨存中为江、淮宣抚使，刘珙不写录黄，仍然说不可以。
English: When the imperial edict came out, the emperor appointed Yang Cunzhong as the envoy of Jiang and Huai as the envoy of Huai. Liu Bei did not write down Huang, but still said that it was impossible.

古文：上怒，谓宰相曰： 刘珙父为浚所知，此特为浚地耳！ 命再下，宰相召珙谕旨，且曰： 再缴则累张公。 珙曰： 某为国家计，岂暇为张公谋。 执奏如初，存中命乃寝。
现代文：皇上大怒，对宰相说： 刘珙的父亲是张浚的好友，刘珙这是特别为张浚所为的。 皇上再次下命令，宰相召来刘珙告诉他圣旨，并说： 再纠缠下去就要连累张浚了。 刘珙说 ：我为国家计划，哪里有空为张浚打算。 仍然依旧上奏，杨存中的任命于是停发。
English: The emperor was furious and said to the prime minister: Liu Ye's father was a good friend of Zhang Jun, Liu Ye did this especially for Zhang Jun. The emperor once again issued an order, the prime minister called Liu Ye to tell him the holy will, and said: If you continue to entangle, you will be burdened with Zhang Jun. Liu Ye said: I am a national plan, where is the time to plan for Zhang Jun. It was still played, and the appointment of Yang Cunzhong was stopped.

古文：真除中书舍人、直学士院。
现代文：刘珙正式拜官中书舍人、直学士院。
English: Liu Ye officially became a member of the Central Academy of Fine Arts.

古文：田师中死，其家请以没入王继先第为赐，李珂关通近习，求为督府掾，诏从中下，珙皆论罢之。
现代文：田师中死后，他的家人请求赐给被没收的王继先的房屋，李珂打通侍从大臣的关系，请求为督府属官，皇上的诏令直接从宫中下达，刘珙都要求罢除这些请求。
English: After Tian Shizhong's death, his family members requested that Wang Jixian's house be given to them, which was confiscated; Li Ke established a relationship with an aide-de-camp of a minister, and requested to be a subordinate official of the governor's office; the emperor's edict was issued directly from the palace; Liu Ye demanded that these requests be removed.

古文：出知泉州，改衢州。
现代文：刘珙离朝任泉州知州，又改任衢州知州。
English: After Liu Bei left the imperial court, he was assigned to Quanzhou and Chizhou, and then he was reassigned to Zhangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：湖南旱，郴州宜章县李金为乱，朝廷忧之，以珙知潭州、湖南安抚使。
现代文：湖南干旱，郴州宜章县李金作乱，朝廷很是担忧，派刘珙为潭州知州、湖南安抚使。
English: Due to drought in Hunan, Li Jin of Yizhang County in Ganzhou caused a disturbance. The imperial court was very worried and sent Liu Bei as a pacifying envoy to Ganzhou, Zhouzhou and Hunan.

古文：入境，声言发郡县兵讨击，而移书制使沈介，请以便宜出师，曰： 擅兴之罪，吾自当之。 介即遣田宝、杨钦以兵至，珙知其暑行疲怠，发夫数程外迎之，代其负任，至则犒赐过望，军士感奋。
现代文：刘珙一入潭州境内，扬言发郡县兵讨伐李金，又寄信给制置使沈介，请他相机出师相助，并说： 擅自发兵的罪责，我自会承担。 沈介立即派田宝、杨钦率兵前往，刘珙知道士兵在暑天行军十分疲倦，派人到几里之外迎接，换下他们负荷的重物，军队到达后刘珙对他们热情犒劳、赏赐，超过了将士们的期望，将士们感到十分振奋。
English: As soon as Liu Hui entered the territory of Tanzhou, he threatened to send county and county soldiers to fight against Li Jin. He also sent a letter to the production and installation officer Shen Jie, asking him to send a camera to help the division, and said: I will bear the responsibility of sending soldiers without authorization. Shen Jie immediately sent Tian Bao and Yang Qin to lead the soldiers. Liu Hui knew that the soldiers were very tired in the hot weather, and sent people to meet them a few miles away and replace their heavy loads. After the army arrived, Liu Hui warmly rewarded and rewarded them, exceeding the expectations of the soldiers. The soldiers felt very excited.

古文：珙知钦可用，檄诸军皆受节制，下令募贼徒相捕斩诣吏者，除罪受赏。
现代文：刘珙了解到杨钦可以重用，令各军都受他调遣，下令对于能捕斩同伙报告官吏的盗贼，除去他们的罪名并予以奖赏。
English: Liu Bei learned that Yang Qin could be reused, so that all armies were dispatched by him, and ordered that thieves who could capture and kill their accomplices and report to officials should be cleared of their crimes and rewarded.

古文：钦与宝连战破贼，追至莽山，贼党曹彦，黄拱执李金以降。
现代文：杨钦与田宝连续几次打败敌人，追击敌人到莽山，敌人同伙曹彦、黄拱抓住李金出来投降。
English: Yang Qin and Tian Bao defeated the enemy several times in a row and chased the enemy to Mengshan. The enemy's comrades Cao Yan and Huang Gong grabbed Li Jin and surrendered.

古文：支党窜匿者尚众，珙谕钦等却兵，听其自降，贼相率纳兵，给据归田里。
现代文：敌寇支流逃走的还很多，刘珙令杨钦等人退兵，听任他们自己投降，敌人竞相交出兵器投降，刘珙发给他们路费让他们回归田里。
English: There were still many enemy raiders who fled. Liu Bei ordered Yang Qin and others to withdraw from the army and let them surrender on their own. The enemies competed to surrender their weapons. Liu Bei gave them travel expenses so that they could return to the fields.

古文：第上诸将功状有差，上赐玺书曰： 近世书生但务清谈，经纶实才盖未之见，朕以是每有东晋之忧。
现代文：刘珙按秩序排列各将领的功劳大小上报皇上，皇上下诏说： 近来书生只会清谈，处理国家大事的实干才能没看见，我于是常常有东晋灭亡的忧虑。
English: Liu Bei ordered the merits of the generals and reported them to the emperor. The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "Recently, scholars only talk, but they do not see how to deal with national affairs. Therefore, I often worry about the demise of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：今卿既诛群盗，而功状详实，诸将优劣，破贼先后，历历可观，宜益勉副朕意。 
现代文：今天你已经诛灭了群盗，而上报的立功状十分详细真实，诸将优劣，破敌先后，一目了然，望你更努力以称我的心。 
English: Today, you have annihilated the bandits, and the report of the performance is very detailed and true. The strengths and weaknesses of the generals and the success of defeating the enemy are clear at a glance. I hope you will work harder to praise my heart.

古文：除翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，言于上曰： 世儒多病汉高帝不悦学，轻儒生，臣以为高帝所不悦，特腐儒俗学耳。
现代文：刘珙拜官翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，他对皇上说 ：历代儒生多诟病汉高帝不喜欢学问，轻视儒生，我认为汉高帝所不喜欢的，是特别迂腐的儒生、俗气的学问。
English: Liu Yibai, an official scholar of Hanlin, a scholar of knowledge management, and an attendant reader, said to the emperor: the Confucianism of the past generations is often sick, and Emperor Han Gao dislikes learning and despises Confucianism. I think what Emperor Han Gao dislikes is the particularly pedantic Confucianism and tawdry learning.

古文：使当时有以二帝三王之学告之，知其必敬信，功烈不止此。 因陈 圣王之学所以明理正心，为万事之纲。 上亟称善。
现代文：如果当时有人告诉他二帝三王的学问，汉高帝知道后必定敬信，他的功绩也不止这些了。 刘珙于是陈述帝王之说所以能使人事理明白，内心端正，成为万事的准则的原因。
English: If someone had told him at that time about the learning of the two emperors and three kings, Emperor Han Gao would have respected him after knowing it, and his achievements would have been more than that. Liu Ye then stated the reason why the emperor's words could make people understand the truth, be upright at heart, and become the standard for all things.

古文：拜中大夫、同知枢密院事，辞不获，因进言曰： 汪应辰、陈良翰、张栻学行才能，皆臣所不逮，而栻穷探圣微，晓畅军务，曩幸破贼，栻谋为多，愿亟召用。 上可其奏。
现代文：皇上极为称赞。刘珙拜官中大夫、同知枢密院事，他推辞没得到批准，就进言说： 汪应辰、陈良翰、张木式的学问及品行才能，都是我所不及的，而张木式尽力探索圣政，不放过细小的地方，又通晓军务，我侥幸攻败敌人，用的多是张木式的计谋，希望立即召用他。 皇上同意了他的奏请。
English: The emperor highly praised him. Liu Zibai, who was a middle-ranking official and a doctor of the Privy Council, did not get approval for his resignation, but he said: Wang Yingchen, Chen Lianghan, Zhang Mu-style knowledge and moral ability are beyond my reach, and Zhang Mu-style tried his best to explore the sacred government, did not let go of small places, and was knowledgeable about military affairs. I was lucky to defeat the enemy, mostly using Zhang Mu-style strategy, and hoped to call him immediately. The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：兼参知政事。
现代文：刘珙兼任参知政事。
English: Liu Ye concurrently served as the vice-governor.

古文：奏除福建钞盐岁额二万万，罢江西和籴及广西折米盐钱，及蠲诸路累年逋负金钱谷帛巨亿计。
现代文：刘珙奏请除去福建钞盐每年数额二万万，罢除江西和籴及广西折米盐钱，以及蠲免诸路累年拖欠的应付金钱谷帛数达巨亿。
English: Liu Yongsong requested that the annual amount of Fujian banknotes and salt should be removed up to 20 million, the rice salt money in Jiangxi, Hebei and Guangxi should be cancelled, and the money owed by Zhuji Road, which has been in arrears for many years, should be cancelled, amounting to huge billions.

古文：上尝以久旱齐居祷雨，一夕而应，珙进言曰： 陛下诚心感格，其应如响，天人相与之际，真不容发，隐微纤芥之失，其应岂不亦犹是乎？
现代文：皇上曾因为天气久旱而斋居祈求下雨，一天得到回报，天下雨了，刘珙进言说： 陛下的诚心格外令人感动，其应验如回声一样，天人相与之际，真不能容下细小的失误，即使隐藏有很细小的失误，其应验也会随后而至啊。
English: The emperor had been praying for rain because of the long dry weather. He was rewarded one day, and it rained. Liu Ye said, "Your Majesty's sincerity is particularly touching. Its fulfillment is like an echo. When heaven and earth meet, it is really impossible to tolerate small mistakes. Even if there are very small mistakes hidden, their fulfillment will come later.

古文：臣愿益谨其独。 上竦然称善。
现代文：我希望皇上更加谨慎。 皇上惶恐称是。
English: I hope the Emperor will be more cautious. The Emperor said yes with trepidation.

古文：龙大渊、曾觌既被逐，未几，大渊死，上怜觌欲还之。珙言： 二人之去，天下方仰威断。此曹奴隶耳，厚赐之可也，若引以自近，使与闻机事，进退人才，非所以光德业、振纪纲。 命遂止。
现代文：龙大渊、曾觌已经被朝廷驱逐，不久，龙大渊死去，皇上可怜曾觌，想召他回来，刘珙说： 这二个人被驱逐，天下百姓正是从这件事上看到了皇上的威严果断，对这种奴婢，多赐些东西就可以了，如引为亲近之人，让他们参与机要大事，掌管进退人才之权，这不是使皇上的品德增光彩、使纲纪振兴呀。 
English: Long Dayuan and Zeng Yao had already been expelled by the imperial court. Soon after, Long Dayuan died. The emperor felt sorry for Zeng Yao and wanted to call him back. Liu Yao said: These two people were expelled. The people all over the world saw the emperor's majesty and decisiveness in this matter. For such slaves, it is enough to give them more things. For example, bringing them closer to the people, letting them participate in important events, and controlling the right to advance and retreat talents. This is not to add luster to the emperor's moral character and revitalize the envoy discipline.

古文：殿前指挥使王琪被旨，按视两淮城壁，还，密荐和州教授刘甄夫。
现代文：曾觌的任命因此被废除。殿前指挥使王琪受旨，巡视两淮城墙，王琪回朝后，秘密地推荐和州教授刘甄夫。
English: As a result, Zeng Yao's appointment was annulled. The commander of the front of the palace ordered Wang Qi to inspect the two Huai walls. After Wang Qi returned to the imperial court, he secretly recommended Hezhou Professor Liu Zhenfu.

古文：上谕执政召之，珙请曰： 此人名位微，何自知之？ 上以琪告。
现代文：皇上传令执政召刘甄夫觐见，刘珙问道 ：这个人名气小、地位低，皇上从何处知道他的？ 皇上告诉他是王琪所荐。
English: The emperor sent an order to the regent to summon Liu Zhenfu for an audience. Liu Zhen asked: This man is not well-known and has a low status. How did the emperor know him? The emperor told him that he was recommended by Wang Qi.

古文：珙退坐堂上，追琪至，诘其故，授牍使对。
现代文：刘珙退朝坐在大堂上，把王琪叫来，责问其原因，并给他牍板要他回答。
English: Liu Qian retreated to sit in the lobby, called Wang Qi, asked him the reason, and gave him a whiteboard to answer.

古文：珙恐，请后不敢，乃叱使责戒励状而去。
现代文：王琪很害怕，请求说以后不敢了，刘珙于是呵斥他并对他警告，令其立下保证书才让他离去。
English: Wang Qi was very scared and pleaded that he would not dare to do so in the future. Liu Ye then scolded him and warned him to sign a guarantee before letting him leave.

古文：会扬州奏琪檄郡增筑新城，珙遂奏罢琪，语在《陈俊卿传》。
现代文：恰巧扬州奏说王琪下令各郡增筑新城，刘珙于是奏请罢免王琪，具体见《陈俊卿传》。
English: It just so happened that Yangzhou reported that Wang Qi had ordered all counties to build new cities, and Liu Bei then reported that Wang Qi should be dismissed. For details, see "The Biography of Chen Junqing."

古文：珙时争之尤力，殿中皆惊，以故独罢为端明殿学士，奉外祠。
现代文：刘珙当时争辩事情十分认真，殿中大臣都很震惊，因为这个原因刘珙一人被罢为端明殿学士，主管郊外的一个祠观。
English: At that time, Liu Ye was very serious in arguing the matter, and the ministers in the palace were shocked. For this reason, Liu Ye alone was dismissed as a Duanming Palace scholar in charge of an ancestral hall in the suburbs.

古文：陈俊卿言： 珙正直有才，肯任怨，臣所不及，愿留之。 诏改知隆兴府、江西安抚使。
现代文：陈俊卿说 ：刘珙正直有才能，肯任劳任怨，我比不上他，希望能留下他。 皇上于是令改刘珙为隆兴府知府、江西安抚使。
English: Chen Junqing said: Liu Ye is honest and talented, willing to work hard, I can't match him, I hope to keep him. The emperor then ordered Liu Ye to be the governor of Longxing Prefecture and the peace envoy of Jiangxi.

古文：入辞，犹以六事为献，上曰： 卿虽去国，不忘忠言，材美非他人所及，行召卿矣。 至镇，首蠲税务新额，及罢苗仓大斛。
现代文：刘珙入宫辞行，还奏上六件事，皇上说： 你虽然要离开国都，但你不忘记献上忠心之言，品德之高尚不是他人比得上的，不久将会召见你的。 刘珙到了江西，首先蠲免新增的税额，以及罢除苗仓大斛。
English: When Liu Bei entered the palace and resigned, six things were also recorded. The emperor said: Although you are leaving the capital, you must not forget to offer the words of loyalty. Your moral character is incomparably high, and you will soon be summoned. When Liu Bei arrived in Jiangxi, he first exempted himself from the new tax amount and removed the Miao Cang Daju.

古文：属邑奉新有复出租税，穷民不能输，相率逃去，反失正税，并奏除之。
现代文：属县奉新有恢复交纳租税之令，穷民交纳不起，相继逃走，官府反而失去了正税收入，刘珙一起奏请免除。
English: According to the order of the county to resume the payment of taxes, the poor people could not pay and fled one after another. On the contrary, the government lost the positive tax income. Liu Wei also requested to be exempted.

古文：除资政殿学士、知荆南府、湖北安抚使，以继母忧去。
现代文：刘珙拜官资政殿学士、荆南府知府、湖北安抚使，因为他的继母去世而去职。
English: Liu Yibai, the vice-governor of Jingnan Prefecture and the pacifying envoy of Hubei Province, resigned from his post due to the death of his stepmother.

古文：起复同知枢密院事、荆襄安抚使。
现代文：朝廷重新起用刘珙为同知枢密院事、荆襄安抚使。
English: The imperial court reappointed Liu Bei as Tongzhi Privy Councillor and Jing Xiang as Pacifying Envoy.

古文：珙六上奏恳辞，引经据礼，词甚切，最后言曰： 三年通丧，三代未之有改，汉儒乃有 金革无避 之说，已为先王罪人。
现代文：刘珙六次上表恳请辞去这些职务，并引经据典，言词十分恳切，最后说 ：三年守丧，三代以来从没有改变这个规定，汉儒于是有 战争期间没有避讳 之说，这已经是先王的罪人了。
English: Liu Bei six times publicly and earnestly asked him to resign from these positions, and quoted scriptures, his words were very earnest, and finally said: three years of mourning, three generations have never changed this rule, so Han Ru did not shy away from saying during the war, this is already a sinner of the former king.

古文：今边陲幸无犬吠之惊，臣乃欲冒金革之名，以私利禄之实，不亦又为汉儒之罪人乎？ 
现代文：今天边境幸好平安无事，我如果想假借战争的名义，以求个人的利禄，不又是汉儒的罪人了吗？ 
English: Today, fortunately, the border is safe and sound. If I want to use the pretext of war to seek personal gain, am I not a Han-Ju criminal?

古文：服阕，再除知潭州、湖南安抚使。
现代文：刘珙孝服除去后，再次拜官潭州知州、湖南安抚使。
English: After the removal of Liu Bei's filial piety, he once again became the pacifying envoy of Tangzhou, Chizhou and Hunan.

古文：过阙入见，极论时事，言甚切至，上再三加劳，进资政殿大学士以行。
现代文：经过国都时他拜见了皇上，竭力论述时事，言词十分恳切，皇上再三对他加以慰劳，升他为资政殿大学士再走。
English: When he passed through the capital, he visited the emperor, tried his best to discuss current affairs, and his words were very sincere. The emperor repeatedly consoled him, promoted him to the position of senior palace official, and then left.

古文：安南贡象，所过发夫除道，毁屋庐，数十州骚然。
现代文：安南进贡象，所过之处征发民夫清理道路，毁坏房屋，数十州受到骚扰。
English: Annan went to pay tribute. Wherever he went, he sent out envoys to clear the roads, destroy houses, and harassed dozens of states.

古文：珙奏曰： 象之用于郊祀，不见于经，驱而远之，则有若周公之典。
现代文：刘珙上奏说： 象用于郊祀，在经书中未见有记载，把象赶到京城来路途太远，就像周公的典故所说的一样。
English: Liu Qian said: Elephants are used for suburban worship, but there is no record in the scriptures. It is too far to drive elephants to the capital, just as the allusion of Zhou Gong said.

古文：且使吾中国之疲民，困于远夷之野兽，岂仁圣之所为哉！ 湖北茶盗数千人入境，疆吏以告，珙曰： 此非必死之寇，缓之则散而求生，急之则聚而致死。 揭榜谕以自新，声言兵且至，令属州县具数千人食，盗果散去，其存者无几。
现代文：况且使我们中国疲惫的百姓，受困于远方夷族的野兽，这难道是仁圣之人所做的！ 湖北茶盗数千人进入湖南境内，边境官吏报告刘珙，刘珙说： 这些人不是必死之寇，慢慢地对付他们就会散开另求生路，太着急去捉拿他们就会使他们聚集起来导致灭亡。 刘珙出榜晓谕他们自新，扬言将派兵前往镇压，令所属州县准备数千人的粮食，茶盗们果然散去，留下来的没有多少。
English: Moreover, our tired Chinese people, trapped by the beasts of the distant barbarians, is this really the work of a benevolent man! Thousands of Hubei tea thieves entered Hunan territory, border officials reported to Liu Wei, Liu Wei said: These people are not invaders. If you deal with them slowly, they will scatter to find another way to survive. If you are too anxious to catch them, you will cause them to gather and lead to their demise. Liu Wei told them to reform, threatened to send troops to suppress them, and ordered their states and counties to prepare food for thousands of people. The tea thieves dispersed, and there was not much left.

古文：珙乃遣兵，戒曰： 来毋亟战，去毋穷追，不去者击之耳。 盗意益缓，于是一战败之，尽擒以归，诛首恶数十，余隶军籍。
现代文：刘珙于是派兵捕捉，警告士兵说： 茶寇来了不要立即交战，跑了不要穷追不舍，不跑走的就打死他。 茶寇的士气更加怠惰，于是刘珙派兵一战就打败他们，全部捉拿回来，杀掉数十个首恶分子，其余的收编入军籍。
English: Liu Bei then sent soldiers to catch them and warned the soldiers: "When the tea thieves come, don't fight immediately; if they run away, don't chase them; if they don't run away, kill them." The morale of the tea thieves was even more sluggish, so Liu Bei sent soldiers to defeat them in one battle, recapture them all, kill dozens of top villains, and enlist the rest into the army.

古文：淳熙二年，移知建康府、江东安抚使、行宫留守。
现代文：淳熙二年，刘珙改任建康府知府、江东安抚使、行宫留守。
English: In the second year of Chunxi, Liu Bei was reassigned as the governor of Jiankang Prefecture and the pacification envoy of Jiangdong Province, and left the palace.

古文：会水且旱，首奏蠲夏税钱六十万缗、秋苗米十六万六千斛。禁止上流税米遏籴，得商人米三百万斛。贷诸司钱合三万，遣官籴米上江，得十四万九千斛。
现代文：遇到水灾、干旱，他首先奏请蠲免夏税钱六十万缗、秋苗米十六万六千斛，下令禁止上流以米纳税并阻止买进粮食，如此买得商人的米三百万斛，贷各部门钱共三万，派官吏到上流买米，得米十四万九千斛。
English: When faced with floods and droughts, he first requested 600,000 baht for summer tax exemption and 166,000 baht for autumn seedlings, and ordered to prohibit the upstream from paying taxes with rice and prevent the purchase of grain. In this way, he bought 3 million baht of rice from merchants and loaned a total of 30,000 baht to various departments. He sent officials to the upstream to buy rice and obtained 149,000 baht of rice.

古文：籍主客户高下，给米有差。
现代文：按主客户等高低，依次给米。
English: According to the level of the main customer, the rice is given in turn.

古文：又运米村落，置场平价振粜，贷者不取偿。
现代文：刘珙又运米到村落，设市场平价出售，贷款的人不要求抵押。
English: Liu Wei also shipped rice to the villages and set up a market to sell it at a fair price. The borrower did not require a mortgage.

古文：起是年九月，尽明年四月，阖境数十万人，无一人捐瘠流徙者。
现代文：从这年九月，到第二年四月，境内数十万人，没一人抛弃贫瘠的土地而迁走的。
English: From September of that year to April of the following year, hundreds of thousands of people in the territory, none of whom abandoned the barren land and moved away.

古文：进观文殿学士，属疾，请致仕。
现代文：刘珙升为观文殿学士，因连续几次生病，请求退休。
English: Liu Jinsheng is a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism. Due to several consecutive illnesses, he asked to retire.

古文：孝宗遣中使以医来，疾革，草遣奏言： 恭、显、伾、文，近习用事之戒，今以腹心耳目寄之此曹，朝纲以紊，士气以索，民心以离，咎皆在此。
现代文：孝宗派宦官带医生去探望他，刘珙病好后，起草遗奏说： 恭、显、亻丕、文，可为侍从们掌权之鉴，今天把腹心大事交付给这些人，朝纲所以紊乱，士气所以退萎，民心所以离散，原因都在于此。
English: Xiaozong sent eunuchs to visit him with a doctor. After Liu Xuan recovered from his illness, he drafted a posthumous message saying: "Gong, xian, shen, wen, can serve as a model for the attendants to take power. Today, I will hand over the important matters to these people. This is the reason for the disorder of the morning program, the withering of morale, and the dispersion of the people's hearts.

古文：陈俊卿忠良确实，可以任重致远，张栻学问醇正，可以拾遗补阙，愿亟召用之。 既又手书诀栻与朱熹，其言皆以未能为国报雪仇耻为恨。
现代文：陈俊卿忠心、诚实，可以委以重任及未来大事，张木式学问纯正，可以让他拾遗补缺，希望陛下立即召用他们。 刘珙又亲自写诀别书给张木式与朱熹，所说的都是恨自己未能为国家报仇雪恨之类的话。
English: Chen Junqing is loyal and honest and can be entrusted with important tasks and future events, Zhang Mu-style has a pure culture and can let him pick up the slack, I hope that His Majesty will call them immediately. Liu Wei also personally wrote a farewell letter to Zhang Mu-style and Zhu Wei, saying that he hated himself for not being able to avenge the country.

古文：薨，年五十七。赠光禄大夫，谥忠肃。
现代文：刘珙去世了，终年五十七岁，皇上赠他光禄大夫之职，封谥号 忠肃 。
English: Liu Ye passed away at the age of fifty-seven. The emperor gave him the post of Guanglu doctor and the title of Zhengsu.

古文：珙精明果断，居家孝，丧继母卓氏，年已逾五十，尽哀致毁，内外功緦之戚，必素服以终月数。
现代文：刘珙精明果断，在家事亲十分孝顺，守继母卓氏之丧时，年纪已过五十，悲哀过度以致损害了身体。五服之内的亲戚去世一定要服丧满年月。
English: Liu Wei was shrewd and decisive. He was very dutiful in household chores and attended the funeral of his stepmother, Zhuo, when he was over fifty years old. The grief was so excessive that it damaged his body. If a relative died within five years, he must serve the full years of mourning.

古文：与秦桧忤，不出者十八年，及再起，论事终不屈，人以此服之。
现代文：刘珙喜欢听直言，事情有小的失误，下属指出后他立即就改正。
English: Liu Yao likes to hear straight talk. If there is a small mistake, he will immediately correct it after his subordinates point it out.

古文：有文集三十卷、《奏议表疏》、《周易解》。王刚中，字时亨，饶州乐平人。
现代文：刘珙到过几个地方任职，百姓爱他就像爱自己的父母，听到他的讣闻，有人罢市在巷道上哭起来了，并一起祭祀他。王刚中字时亨，饶州乐平人。
English: Liu Wei had served in several places, and the people loved him as if he were their own parents. When they heard about his scandal, some people in the market went out and cried on the roadway, and together they offered sacrifices to him. Wang Gang Zhong Zi Heng, Raozhou Leping people.

古文：刚中博览强记。
现代文：王刚中知识渊博，记忆力强。
English: Wang Gangzhong is knowledgeable and has a strong memory.

古文：绍兴十五年，进士第二人。
现代文：绍兴十五年，考中进士第二名。
English: Shaoxing for fifteen years, the second place in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：任某州推官，改左宣义郎。
现代文：王刚中便被任命为某州推官，后改为左宣义郎。
English: Wang Gangzhong was appointed to a certain state, and later changed to Zuo Xuan Yiro.

古文：故事当召试，秦桧怒其不诣己，授洪州教授。
现代文：按照过去的惯例，他被召试，秦桧恨他不去拜见自己，授予他洪州教授之职。
English: According to the past practice, he was called for an examination, Qin Yu hated him for not going to see him, and awarded him the post of Hongzhou professor.

古文：桧死，召见，擢秘书省校书郎，迁著作佐郎。
现代文：秦桧去世后，皇上召见王刚中，提拔他为秘书省校书郎，又升为著作佐郎。
English: After Qin Hui's death, the emperor summoned Wang Gangzhong and promoted him to secretary, provincial school scribe, and literary scribe.

古文：孝宗为普安郡王，刚中兼王府教授，每侍讲，极陈古今治乱之故，君子小人忠佞之辨。
现代文：孝宗为普安郡王时，王刚中兼任王府教授，每次对孝宗讲课，都竭力讲述古今治乱的原因，讲明如何分辨君子小人及忠诚与奸邪。
English: When Xiaozong was the king of Pu'an County, Wang Gang Middle School also served as a professor of Wangfu. Every time he gave a lecture to Xiaozong, he tried his best to explain the reasons for the chaos in the past and the present, and how to distinguish between a gentleman and a villain, and between loyalty and treachery.

古文：迁中书舍人，言： 御敌今日先务，敌强则犯边，弱则请盟。
现代文：王刚中升为中书舍人，他对皇上说 ：抵御外敌入侵是当今首要的任务，敌人强大就会侵犯我国的边境，敌人弱小时就会请求与我国结盟。
English: Wang Gangzhong, who was promoted to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, said to the emperor: resisting foreign invasion is today's primary task. When the enemy is strong, it will invade our country's borders, and when the enemy is weak, it will request an alliance with our country.

古文：今勿计敌人之强弱，必先自治，择将帅，搜战士，实边储，备器械，国势富强，将良士勇，请盟则为汉文帝，犯边则为唐太宗。 上韪其言。
现代文：今天不要考虑敌人的强弱与否，必须首先自治，选择将帅，检阅军队，充实边境的储备，准备好武器器械，国势富强，将良士勇后，当敌人请求结盟时就如汉文帝所为，使之臣服；当敌人侵犯边境时就如唐太宗所为，加以消灭。 
English: Today, we should not consider whether the enemy is strong or weak. We must first be self-governing, choose generals, review the army, replenish the border reserves, prepare weapons and equipment. The country is rich and strong, and when the enemy requests an alliance, it will subjugate the good men and women, just as Emperor Hanwen did; when the enemy violates the border, it will be eliminated, just as Emperor Taizong of Tang did.

古文：会西蜀谋帅，上曰： 无以逾王刚中矣。 以龙图阁待制知成都府、制置四川。
现代文：皇上认为他的话很对。正巧西蜀谋求良帅，皇上说： 没有人比王刚中合适的了。 王刚中以龙图阁待制之职被任命为成都府知府、四川制置使。
English: The emperor thought his words were very right. It was a coincidence that Xishu was looking for a good general, and the emperor said: No one is more suitable than Wang Gangzhong. Wang Gangzhong was appointed as the prefectural governor of Chengdu and the envoy of Sichuan Province with the post of Longtuge.

古文：御便殿，临遣锡金带、象笏。
现代文：皇上到便殿，接见王刚中，临别时赐送给他金带、象笏。
English: The emperor went to the hall to meet Wang Gangzhong, and gave him a gold belt and an elephant saddle as a parting gift.

古文：进敷文阁直学士。
现代文：王刚中被提拔为敷文阁直学士。
English: Wang Gang was promoted to Shibunkaku Direct Bachelor.

古文：时吴璘累官阀至大帅，其下姚仲、王彦等亦建节雄一方。
现代文：当时吴瞞累任官职至大帅，其下属姚仲、王彦等也设置符节称雄一方。
English: At that time, Wu Xie was appointed to the position of general, and his subordinates, Yao Zhong and Wang Yan, also set up symbols to show their superiority.

古文：守帅以文治则玩于柔，而号令不行；以武竞则窒于暴，而下情不通。
现代文：驻守的将帅或实行文治而轻慢柔弱，而所发号令不得施行；或实行武治又被暴力所窒息，下情不得上达。
English: The garrison commander is either too weak and timid to enforce civil law, and the orders issued cannot be enforced; or the martial law is suffocated by violence, and the orders cannot be carried out.

古文：惟刚中检身以法，示人以礼，不立崖堑，驭吏恩威并行，羽檄纷沓，从容裁决，皆中机会。
现代文：只有王刚中检查自己以作为大家的榜样，以礼待人，不设陷阱，驾驭官吏恩威并行，紧急檄文纷沓而至，王刚中也能从容裁决，且都切中时机。
English: Only Wang Gangzhong can examine himself as an example for everyone, treat people with courtesy, do not set traps, ride the favor of officials in parallel, and when emergencies come, Wang Gangzhong can also make decisions calmly, and all of them are timely.

古文：敌骑度大散关，人情汹汹。
现代文：敌人的骑兵度过大散关，人心惶惶。
English: The enemy's cavalrymen were in a panic as they passed through the Great Divide.

古文：刚中跨一马，夜驰二百里，起吴璘于帐中，责之曰： 大将与国义同休戚，临敌安得高枕而卧？ 璘大惊。
现代文：王刚中跨上一匹马，晚上奔驰了二百里路，把吴瞞从帐篷中叫起，责问他说 ：大将应与国家命运休戚相关，面临敌人来犯怎能高枕而卧？ 吴瞞大吃一惊。
English: Wang Gangzhong mounted a horse and galloped for two hundred miles in the evening. He called Wu Xie out of the tent and scolded him, saying: "The general should be closely related to the fate of the country. How can you lie on your back in the face of the enemy? Wu Xie was taken aback.

古文：又以蜡书抵张正彦济师。
现代文：王刚中又派人送蜡裹的书信给张正彦要他前来支援。
English: Wang Gangzhong also sent someone to send a wax-wrapped letter to Zhang Zhengyi to ask him to come to his aid.

古文：西师大集，金兵败走。
现代文：西边的军队集中起来了，打得金兵败逃。
English: The armies of the West were concentrated, and the Golden Army was routed.

古文：方议奏捷，刚中倍道驰还，谓其属李焘曰： 将帅之功，吾何有焉。 焘唶曰： 身督战而功成不居，过人远矣。 已乃差择将士，众所推者上之朝，备统帅选。
现代文：正议论向皇上奏捷报，王刚中转身奔回，对他的属下李焘说： 这都是将帅的功劳，我有什么功呢。 李焘赞叹说 ：你亲自督战，功成而不居功，超过一般的人很远了。 于是王刚中按一定比例选择将士，把大家所推选的人推荐给朝廷，以备为将帅之选。
English: Wang Gangzhong turned around and ran back, saying to his subordinate Li Xi: "This is all the merit of the commander-in-chief, what merit do I have?" Li Xi said with admiration: "You personally supervise the war, you achieve success without taking credit, you are far beyond the average person." So Wang Gangzhong selected soldiers according to a certain proportion, and recommended the person selected by everyone to the imperial court, in preparation for the selection of the commander-in-chief.

古文：又疏蜀名胜士与幕府之贤，备部使者、州刺史之佐。
现代文：王刚中又上疏举荐蜀名士与幕府中的贤良之人，使之为部使者、州刺史的辅佐人才。
English: Wang Gangzhong also recommended the famous people of Shu and the virtuous people in the shogunate, making them the emissaries of the ministry and the assistants of the state history.

古文：目使颐指，内外响应。
现代文：目使颐指，内外响应。
English: The eyes make the fingers twitch, and the inside and outside respond.

古文：诸汰遣使臣困绝不能自存，刚中以为冒刃于少壮之年，不可斥弃于既老之后，悉召诣府，有善射者复其禄秩，以禁军阙额粮给之，其罢癃不堪事，则给以义仓米。
现代文：那些被淘汰遣散的使臣贫困不能自养，王刚中认为他们在青壮年时冒着危险，为国家立下了功勋，现在年老了不可以抛弃他们。于是把他们全部召集起来上报给官府，对善射击的人恢复他的俸禄、级别，把禁军空缺名额的粮食给他们；对那些不能干事被罢除的手脚不灵的人，就发给他们义仓米。
English: Those envoys who were eliminated and discharged were poor and unable to support themselves. Wang Gangzhong thought that they had risked danger and made contributions to the country when they were young and strong, and now they were old and could not be abandoned. So he gathered them all together and reported to the government. For those who were good at shooting, he restored his salary and rank, and gave them the grain of the vacant quota of the forbidden army; for those who could not be dismissed, he gave them donated rice.

古文：成都万岁池广袤十里，溉三乡田，岁久淤淀，刚中集三乡夫共疏之，累土为防，上植榆柳，表以石柱，州人指曰： 王公之甘棠也。 府学礼殿，东汉兴平中建，后又建新学，遭时多故，日就倾圮，属九县缮完，悉复其旧。
现代文：因年岁久远淤积了许多泥土，王刚中召集三乡壮丁共同疏通，垒土为防，在堤防上种植榆柳树，并立石柱记载此事，州人指着池说： 这是王公的甘棠湖。 府学的礼殿，是东汉兴平中建立的，后又建立新学，因历时久远之故，一天天倾塌，王刚中吩咐九县百姓把它修好，全部恢复了其旧貌。
English: Due to the accumulation of a lot of mud over the years, Wang Gangzhong called together the three towns and villages to dredge and prevent the foundation soil, planted willow trees on the embankment, and erected a stone pillar to record the matter. The people of the state pointed to the pond and said: This is Wang Gong's Lake Gentang. The ceremonial hall of the prefectural school was established in the Eastern Han Dynasty Xingping, and later the new school was established. Due to the long period of time, it collapsed day by day. Wang Gangzhong ordered the people of nine counties to repair it and restore its old appearance.

古文：葺诸葛武侯祠、张文定公庙，夷黄巢墓，表贤瘅恶以示民。
现代文：王刚中派人修缮了诸葛武侯祠、张文定公庙，平了黄巢的墓，表彰贤者严处恶者以示民。
English: Wang Gangzhong sent people to repair Zhuge Wuhou's ancestral hall and Zhang Wending's public temple, and leveled the tomb of Huang Chao, to commend the wise and severely punish the wicked to show the people.

古文：有女巫蓄蛇为妖，杀蛇，黥之。
现代文：有一女巫养蛇施行妖法，王刚中派人杀掉蛇，并对她施以黥刑。
English: There was a witch who kept snakes to practice demonic law. Wang Gangzhong sent someone to kill the snake and beat her.

古文：孝宗受禅，以宫僚进左朝奉大夫，召赴阙，以足疾请祠，提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：孝宗即位后，王刚中以宫僚身份升为左朝奉大夫，皇上召他赴朝廷，王刚中因为脚疾请求管理一祠观，皇上令他提举太平兴国宫。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Wang Gangzhong was promoted to Left Court Attendant as a courtier. The emperor summoned him to the imperial court. Wang Gangzhong requested to manage an ancestral hall because of his foot ailment. The emperor ordered him to promote Taiping to the National Palace.

古文：归次番阳，营圃植竹，号竹坞。
现代文：回乡住在鄱阳，种菜植竹，号称竹坞。
English: He returned to his hometown and lived in Fenyang, growing vegetables and planting bamboo, known as Bamboo Dock.

古文：金犯淮，有旨趣刚中入见，陈战守之策。
现代文：金侵犯淮，皇上下旨召王刚中进宫觐见，王刚中陈述了战守之策。
English: When Jin invaded Huai, the emperor summoned Wang Gangzhong to the palace for an audience. Wang Gangzhong expounded the strategy of defense.

古文：除礼部尚书、直学士院兼给事中，为卤簿使，除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，进同知院事。
现代文：拜官礼部尚书、直学士院兼给事中，为卤簿使，拜为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，升为同知院事，王刚中说： 战守是实实在在的事，和议是徒有虚名，不可以依靠虚名损害实事。 
English: Wang Gang said: "Fighting is a real thing, and peace talks are nothing but a false name. You can't rely on a false name to damage the real thing.

古文：刚中曰： 战守者实事，和议者虚名，不可恃虚名害实事。 又奏四事：开屯田、省浮费、选将帅、汰冗兵。
现代文：王刚中又奏了四件事：开屯田、省浮费、选将帅、汰冗兵。
English: Wang Gangzhong also played four events: setting up a garrison, floating expenses, selecting a general, and delaying soldiers.

古文：居政府，属疾卒，年六十三，赠资政殿大学士、光禄大夫，谥恭简。
现代文：王刚中在政府任职期间，生病而死，终年六十三岁，皇上赠他资政殿大学士、光禄大夫之职，赠谥号为 恭简 。
English: Wang Gangzhong died of illness while serving in the government, at the age of sixty-three. The emperor gave him the posts of Senior Councilor of the State Great Hall of the People and Guanglu Doctor, and the posthumous name was Gongjian.

古文：建炎间，诏阶、成、岷、凤四州刺壮丁为兵，众以为忧。
现代文：建炎年间，皇上下令阶、成、岷、凤四州强迫征壮丁为兵，百姓深感忧虑。
English: During the construction of the Great Wall, the emperor and his subordinates in the four prefectures of Cheng, Handan and Feng forced the conscription of young men as soldiers. The people were deeply worried.

古文：刚中建言五害罢之，免符下，民欢呼，声震山谷。
现代文：王刚中奏言此事之五害请求加以罢除，皇上的免除令颁布后，百姓热烈欢呼，其呼声震动山谷。
English: After Wang Gangzhong made a report that the five harms of the matter should be removed, and the emperor's exemption order was issued, the people cheered enthusiastically, and their voices shook the valley.

古文：比去，蜀父老遮道，有追送数百里者。
现代文：等到王刚中离开蜀时，蜀地的父老乡亲拦在道上，有人追送他数百里之远。
English: When Wang Gangzhong left Shu, his father and fellow villagers in Shu stopped him on the road, and someone chased him hundreds of miles away.

古文：子沐，庆元中，与一时台谏排赵汝愚，善类一空，公论丑之。范成大，字致能，吴郡人。
现代文：王刚中从平民至公卿，没有其他嗜好，他退休后只是以读书写文章为乐。著有《易说》、《春秋通义》、《仙源圣记》、《经史辨》、《汉唐史要览》、《天人修应录》、《东溪集》、《应斋笔录》，共一百多卷。范成大字致能，吴郡人。
English: Wang Gangzhong, from a commoner to a noble, had no other hobbies. After his retirement, he only enjoyed reading and writing articles. He was the author of "Easy to Say," "Spring and Autumn Comprehension," "Sennyuan Sacred Records," "History of the Bible," "Summary of Han and Tang Dynasties," "Tianren Xiuyue Record," "Dongxi Collection" and "Zhai Lai Record," a total of more than one hundred volumes. Fan Chengda Zhi Neng, a resident of Wu County.

古文：绍兴二十四年，擢进士第。
现代文：绍兴二十四年，考中进士。
English: Twenty-four years old from Shaoxing, a junior high school entrance exam candidate.

古文：授户曹，监和剂局。
现代文：朝廷授予户曹之职，监管和剂局。
English: The Imperial Court awarded the post of Household Cao, Supervision and Administration Bureau.

古文：隆兴元年，迁正字。
现代文：隆兴元年，提升为秘书省正字。
English: In the first year of the Longxing era, he was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：累迁著作佐郎，除吏部郎官。
现代文：又多次升调，为著作佐郎，任命他为吏部郎官。
English: He was promoted several times, and was appointed to the post of Shosho-saro, the second-highest post in the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：言者论其超躐，罢，奉祠。
现代文：有人说他逾越等级，朝廷罢去他的职位，让他管理祠观。
English: Some people said that he was overstepping his rank, so the court removed him from his post and let him manage the shrine.

古文：起知处州。
现代文：范成大被朝廷起用为处州知州。
English: Fan Chengda was appointed by the imperial court as the prefect of Zhizhou.

古文：陛对，论力之所及者三，曰日力，曰国力，曰人力，今尽以虚文耗之，上嘉纳。
现代文：入宫回答皇帝的提问，陈说力的内容包括三方面：日力、国力、人力，今天全部被不急之务耗费掉，皇上高兴地采纳了他的意见。
English: Entering the palace to answer the emperor's question, the content of Chen's speech included three aspects: Japan's strength, national strength, and manpower. Today, everything was consumed by non-urgent matters, and the emperor was happy to accept his opinion.

古文：处民以争役嚣讼，成大为创义役，随家贫富输金买田，助当役者，甲乙轮第至二十年，民便之。
现代文：处州百姓因抗争劳役而吵闹、争论，范成大于是创建了义役，按照家庭贫富程度出钱买田，资助当差的人，甲乙轮流服役达二十年，百姓很是方便。
English: The people of Zhanzhou were noisy and argued with each other because they were fighting against labor service. Fan Chengyuan created a volunteer service. According to the degree of poverty and wealth of the family, they paid money to buy land and subsidize the person who was on duty. The service of A and B took turns for twenty years. It was very convenient for the people.

古文：其后入奏，言及此，诏颁其法于诸路。
现代文：此后范成大进宫上奏，说到此事，皇上于是下诏颁布义役法在各路实行。
English: After that, Fan Chengda entered the palace and made a speech, and when it came to this matter, the emperor then issued a decree to promulgate the volunteer service law in all directions.

古文：处多山田，梁天监中，詹、南二司马作通济堰在松阳、遂昌之间，激溪水四十里，溉田二十万亩。
现代文：处州多山田，梁天监年间，詹、南二司马在松阳、遂昌之间修建了通济堰，湍急的溪水流到四十里外，灌溉农田二十万亩。
English: During the years of Liang Tianjun, Zhan and Nan Er Sima built the Tongji Weir between Songyang and Suichang, and the rapid stream flowed to forty miles away, irrigating 200,000 mu of farmland.

古文：堰岁久坏，成大访故迹，叠石筑防，置堤闸四十九所，立水则，上中下溉灌有序，民食其利。
现代文：通济堰因年岁久而坏，范成大走访故迹，派人垒石筑防，建立堤闸四十九所，把堤闸立于水的两侧，使上中下灌溉有条有序，百姓深得其利。
English: The Tongji weir had deteriorated over the years, so Fan Chengda visited the historic site, sent people to build a stone wall, built forty-nine dam gates, and set the dam gates on both sides of the water, so that the upper, middle and lower irrigation was orderly, and the people were deeply benefited.

古文：除礼部员外郎兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：朝廷任命范成大为礼部员外郎兼崇政殿说书。
English: The Imperial Court appointed Fan Chengda as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a member of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：乾道《令》以绢计脏，估价轻而论罪重，成大奏： 承平时绢匹不及千钱，而估价过倍。
现代文：乾道年间，《令》规定以绢统计赃物数量，估价低而定罪重，范成大上奏说 ：太平年代绢每匹不到一千钱，而估的价超过几倍。
English: During the dry road period, the "Order" stipulated that the number of stolen goods should be counted by donkeys. The estimate was low and the conviction was heavy. Fan Chengda said in his report: In the Taiping era, donkeys were less than one thousand yuan each, but the estimated price was several times more.

古文：绍兴初年递增五分，为钱三千足。
现代文：绍兴初年绢价递增了五分，价钱有三千足够了。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, the price of tungsten increased by five points, and the price of three thousand was enough.

古文：今绢实贵，当倍时直。 上惊曰： 是陷民深文。 遂增为四千，而刑轻矣。
现代文：现在绢实在贵，应当比当时的价格翻一倍。 皇上吃惊地说 ：这是使百姓陷入困境的法令条文。 于是绢价增为四千，而刑罚减轻了。
English: Now the yakitori is really expensive, it should be twice as much as the price at that time. The emperor was surprised and said, "This is a legal provision that puts the people in trouble." So the price of yakitori was increased to four thousand, and the penalty was reduced.

古文：隆兴再讲和，失定受书之礼，上尝悔之。
现代文：隆兴年间朝廷与金再次议和，忘了议定受书的礼仪，皇上曾感到后悔。
English: During the years of prosperity, the imperial court and Kim again negotiated peace, forgetting to agree on the etiquette of receiving letters. The emperor once felt regret.

古文：迁成大起居郎，假资政殿大学士，充金祈请国信使。
现代文：调任范成大为起居郎，假托是资政殿大学士，充当金国祈请国信使。
English: He appointed Fan Chengda as Kijiro, pretending to be a scholar of the Imperial Palace, and acting as a messenger of the Golden State to pray for the country.

古文：国书专求陵寝，盖泛使也。
现代文：所送国书是专门为了帝王的陵墓寝庙，这是泛使。
English: The national anthem was sent specifically for the emperor's mausoleum, which is a pan-envoy.

古文：上面谕受书事，成大乞并载书中，不从。
现代文：皇上当面告诉他受国书的事，范成大请求一起写在信中，皇上不答应。
English: The emperor told him face-to-face about receiving the imperial edict, and Fan Chengda asked him to write about it in a letter, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：金迎使者慕成大名，至求巾帻效之。
现代文：金迎接使者的人仰慕范成大的大名，以致效仿他戴巾帻。
English: The people who greeted the envoy with gold admired the daimyo of Fan Chengda, so much so that they followed his example and wore scarves.

古文：至燕山，密草奏，具言受书式，怀之入。
现代文：到燕山后，范成大秘密地草拟奏章，具体论述接受国书的仪式，把它放入怀中。
English: After arriving in Yanshan, Fan Chengda secretly drafted a piece of music, specifically discussing the ceremony of receiving the national anthem, and put it in his arms.

古文：初进国书，词气慷慨，金君臣方倾听，成大忽奏曰： 两朝既为叔侄，而受书礼未称，臣有疏。 搢笏出之。
现代文：范成大首次呈进国书，言词慷慨，金朝君臣正认真倾听时，范成大忽然上奏道： 两朝已经结为叔侄关系，而受书礼仪没有确定，我这里有奏章。 
English: Fan Chengda presented the entry certificate for the first time, and his words were generous. When the Kim dynasty monarchs and ministers were listening attentively, Fan Chengda suddenly began to play: The two dynasties have formed an uncle-nephew relationship, but the etiquette for receiving the certificate has not been determined. I have the record here.

古文：金主大骇，曰： 此岂献书处耶？ 左右以笏标起之，成大屹不动，必欲书达。
现代文：于是把插在腰上的手板拿出。金主大吃一惊，说： 这难道是献国书的地方？ 金朝左右大臣用手板击他要他起来，范成大跪立不动，一定要把国书送上。
English: Then he took out the tablet that had been placed on his waist. The goldsmith was taken aback and said, "Is this the place for presenting the national anthem?" The ministers on both sides of Kim Jong Il hit him with the tablet and told him to get up. Fan Chengda knelt down and did not move. He had to present the national anthem.

古文：既而归馆所，金主遣伴使宣旨取奏。
现代文：不久，回到住所，金主派伴使宣旨听候处理。
English: Shortly after returning to the residence, the financier sent an accompanying envoy to listen to the announcement and wait for processing.

古文：成大之未起也，金庭纷然，太子欲杀成大，越王止之，竟得全节而归。
现代文：范成大一直跪着要献上国书，金朝廷上议论纷纷，太子想杀死范成大，越王阻止了他，范成大竟然得以保全气节而归。
English: Fan Chengda has been kneeling to present the state book, and there have been discussions in the Kim court. The prince wanted to kill Fan Chengda, but King Yue stopped him. Fan Chengda was even able to return with his dignity intact.

古文：除中书舍人。
现代文：朝廷任命范成大为中书舍人。
English: A person who skips school during the conferment of a post.

古文：初，上书崔寔《政论》赐辅臣，成大奏曰： 御书《政论》，意在饬纲纪，振积敝。
现代文：开始，皇上书写崔萛铸钱之案，连及士大夫《政论》赐给辅臣，范成大上奏说： 御笔书《政论》，本意在于严格法纪，整顿积弊。
English: At the beginning, the emperor wrote the case of Cui Wei's minting of money, and even gave the "Political Theory" to the assistant minister. Fan Chengda said: The original intention of the "Political Theory" was to strictly enforce legal discipline and rectify accumulated defects.

古文：而近日大理议刑，递加一等，此非以严致平，乃酷也。 上称为知言。
现代文：而近日大理寺议定刑罚，顺次加重一级，这不是以严刑换取太平，而是残酷。 皇上称他说的是明智的话。
English: However, recently, Dali Temple has agreed to increase the punishment by one level. This is not a harsh punishment in exchange for peace, but cruelty. The emperor said that what he said was wise.

古文：张说除签书枢密院事，成大当制，留词头七日不下，又上疏言之，说命竟寝。
现代文：张说被任命为签书枢密院事，范成大起草制书，扣留命令七天不下达，又上疏劝告，张说的任命最终被去除。
English: Zhang said that he was appointed to sign the Privy Council, Fan Chengda drafted and prepared the document, detained the order for seven days without issuing it, and advised Zhang that the appointment was eventually removed.

古文：知静江府。
现代文：范成大知静江府。
English: Fan Chengdaichi is from Jingjiang.

古文：广西窘匮，专藉盐利，漕臣尽取之，于是属邑有增价抑配之敝，诏复行钞盐，漕司拘钞钱均给所部，而钱不时至。
现代文：广西贫乏，专靠盐利，漕臣又把盐利全部取走，于是所属县邑有增加盐价抑配卖给百姓的弊病，皇上下诏恢复钞盐，漕司拘留钞钱平均分给所属各部，但钱没按时到。
English: Guangxi is poor and relies exclusively on salt profits, and the overseers have taken all the salt profits away. As a result, the counties and towns under their jurisdiction have increased the price of salt, suppressed the distribution and sold it to the people. The emperor issued an edict to restore the salt of banknotes, and the overseers detained the banknotes and distributed them equally to the departments under their jurisdiction, but the money did not arrive on time.

古文：成大入境，曰： 利害有大于此乎？ 奏疏谓： 能裁抑漕司强取之数，以宽郡县，则科抑可禁。 上从之。
现代文：范成大到广西后，说： 有比这更至关重要的利害吗？ 上疏皇上说 ：可以强制减去漕司强取的数目，以给各郡县使之宽裕，那么科卖抑配可以被禁止。 
English: After Fan Chengda arrived in Guangxi, he said: Is there a more important interest than this? Shang Shao said to the emperor: You can forcibly reduce the number of forced laborers to make the counties more affluent, then the sale of science and technology can be banned.

古文：数年，广州盐商上书，乞复令客贩，宰相可其说，大出银钱助之。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见。几年后，广州盐商上书，乞求恢复客商贩盐，宰相同意他们的意见，拿出大量的银钱帮助他们。
English: The emperor adopted his opinion. A few years later, the salt merchants of Guangzhou sent a letter to the emperor, begging for the restoration of the salt merchants. The prime minister agreed with their opinion and came up with a lot of money to help them.

古文：人多以为非，下有司议，卒不易成大说。
现代文：人们多认为不好，这个意见发给有关部门讨论，最终没能改变范成大的方法。
English: Most people thought it was not good, and this opinion was sent to the relevant departments for discussion, and ultimately failed to change the method of Fan Chengda.

古文：旧法马以四尺三寸为限，诏加至四寸以上，成大谓互市四十年，不宜骤改。
现代文：旧法规定政府所买之马以四尺三寸为限度，皇上下诏加到四寸以上，范成大说互市四十年，不应该突然改变。
English: The old law stipulates that the horse bought by the government is limited to four feet and three inches, and the emperor's edict added to more than four inches. Fan Chengda said that the market has been interchanged for forty years and should not be suddenly changed.

古文：除敷文阁待制、四川制置使，疏言： 吐蕃、青羌两犯黎州，而奴儿结、蕃列等尤桀黠，轻视中国。
现代文：任命范成大为敷文阁待制、四川制置使，范成大上疏说： 吐蕃、青羌两次侵犯黎州，而奴儿结、蕃列等尤其狡黠，轻视中国。
English: Appointing Fan Chengda as the ambassador of Shibunkaku and Sichuan, Fan Chengda said, "Tu Wei and Qing Wei invaded Lishuo twice, while Nuer Jie and Qian Li were especially cunning and despised China.

古文：臣当教阅将兵，外修堡砦，仍讲明教阅团结之法，使人自为战，三者非财不可。 上赐度牒钱四十万缗。
现代文：我应当教练将兵，外修堡寨，还要讲明训练团结的方法，使人人能够作战，这三方面没有钱不行。 皇上赐给度牒钱四十万缗。
English: I should train the generals and soldiers, repair the fortress outside, and also explain the method of training unity so that everyone can fight, these three aspects are not possible without money. The emperor gave Duo money of 400,000 baht.

古文：成大谓西南诸边，黎为要地，增战兵五千，奏置路分都监。
现代文：范成大说西南边境，黎州是要地，应增加能战的士兵五千，请设置路分都监。
English: Fan Chengda said that the southwest border, Lizhou, is a critical area. It is necessary to increase the number of soldiers who can fight by five thousand. Please set up a road division and a metropolitan inspector.

古文：吐蕃入寇之路十有八，悉筑栅分戍。
现代文：吐蕃入侵路线有十八条，全部修筑栅栏分别派兵戍守。
English: There are 18 routes for the invasion of Tibet, all of which require the construction of fences and the separate dispatch of soldiers to guard them.

古文：奴儿结扰安静砦，发飞山军千人赴之，料其三日必遁，已而果然。
现代文：奴儿结侵入安静寨，派飞山军一千人前往阻击，估计他们三天就会逃跑，结果果然如此。
English: He invaded the quiet village and sent a thousand Feishan troops to block them. It was estimated that they would run away in three days, and that's exactly what happened.

古文：白水砦将王文才私娶蛮女，常导之寇边，成大重赏檄群蛮使相疑贰，俄禽文才以献，即斩之。
现代文：白水砦守将王文才私娶蛮族之女，常常带人攻打边境，范成大用重赏使蛮人互相怀疑，不久，王文才被俘获送到治所，范成大立即杀掉了他。
English: Wang Wencai, the commander of the White Water Fort, secretly married a barbarian girl and often led people to attack the border. Fan Chengda used heavy rewards to make the barbarians suspicious of each other. Soon, Wang Wencai was captured and sent to a detention center. Fan Chengda immediately killed him.

古文：蜀北边旧有义士三万，本民兵也，监司、郡守杂役之，都统司又俾与大军更戍，成大力言其不可，诏遵旧法。
现代文：蜀北边境过去有义士三万，是本地的民兵，监司、郡守私自役使他们，都统司又让他们与大军轮流戍边，范成大极力说这样不行，皇上下诏命令遵循旧法。
English: In the past, there were 30,000 loyalists on the northern border of Shou, who were local militiamen. Supervisors and county governors allowed them to serve as mercenaries, and the prefectural governor also allowed them to take turns with the army. Fan Chengda strongly said that this was not possible, and the emperor issued an order to follow the old law.

古文：蜀知名士孙松寿年六十余，樊汉广甫五十九，皆挂冠不仕，表其节，诏召之，皆不起，蜀士由是归心。
现代文：蜀知名士人孙松寿六十多岁，樊汉广也五十九岁，都不愿出来做官，范成大表彰他们的气节，皇上下诏，召用他们，都不愿做官，蜀士从心眼里佩服他们。
English: Sun Songshou, a well-known scholar from Shuxi, who is in his 60s, and Yan Hanguang, also 59 years old, are not willing to come out to be officials. Fan Chengda commends them for their virtuous deeds. The emperor issued an edict calling them, but they are not willing to be officials. Shuxi admires them from the bottom of his heart.

古文：凡人才可用者，悉致幕下，用所长，不拘小节，其杰然者露章荐之，往往显于朝，位至二府。
现代文：凡是可用的人才，范成大全部招到幕下，用其所长，不拘于小节，其优秀突出的上书推荐，往往扬名于朝廷，位至二府。
English: Fan Chengda invited all available talents to the backstage, and with its director, regardless of the subsection, its excellent and outstanding letter of recommendation, it is often famous in the imperial court, and is ranked second.

古文：召对，除权吏部尚书，拜参知政事。
现代文：皇上召范成大入宫对话，任命他暂代吏部尚书之职，拜官为参知政事。
English: The emperor summoned Fan Chengda to the palace for a dialogue, and appointed him to the post of temporary secretary of the General Staff, and appointed him to the post of political advisor.

古文：两月，为言者所论，奉祠。
现代文：两个月后，被谏官所弹劾，奉命主管一祠观。
English: Two months later, he was impeached by the eunuchs and ordered to be in charge of an ancestral hall.

古文：起知明州，奏罢海物之献。
现代文：被起用为明州知州，上奏请求罢除进献海物。
English: It was appointed as the Mingzhou Chizhou, and the request for the removal of the sea offering was submitted.

古文：除端明殿学士，寻帅金陵。
现代文：被任命为端明殿学士，不久为金陵统帅。
English: He was appointed as an academician of the Duanming Palace, and soon became the commander of Jinling.

古文：会岁旱，奏移军储米二十万振饥民，减租米五万。
现代文：遇到干旱年，上奏调军队储蓄的米二十万石以赈饥民，减去租米五万石。
English: In a drought year, the rice saved by the army was increased by 200,000 koku to feed the hungry, minus 50,000 koku of rent rice.

古文：水贼徐五窃发，号 静江大将军 ，捕而戮之。
现代文：水盗徐五暗中兴事，号称 静江大将军 ，范成大抓获他并杀掉。
English: The water thief Xu Wimin, known as the General of the Shizuoka River, was captured and killed by Fan Chengda.

古文：以病请闲，进资政殿学士，再领洞霄宫。
现代文：范成大因生病请求休息，皇上提他为资政殿学士，再次主管洞霄宫。
English: Fan Chengda requested to take a break due to illness, and the emperor promoted him to the position of scholar of the Palace of Succession, once again in charge of the Dongxiao Palace.

古文：绍熙三年，加大学士。
现代文：绍熙三年，加职大学士。
English: In the third year of Shaoxi, he was promoted to associate professor.

古文：四年薨。
现代文：四年，范成大逝世。
English: Huang died four years later.

古文：成大素有文名，尤工于诗。
现代文：范成大一向有文才，尤其工于诗。
English: Fan Chengda has always been a talented writer, especially in poetry.

古文：上尝命陈俊卿择文士掌内制，俊卿以成大及张震对。
现代文：皇上曾令陈俊卿选文士掌管内制，陈俊卿推荐了范成大与张震。
English: The emperor once ordered Chen Junqing to select a scribe to take charge of the internal system. Chen Junqing recommended Fan Chengdu and Zhang Zhen.

古文：自号石湖，有《石湖集》、《揽辔录》、《桂海虞衡集》行于世。
现代文：范成大自号石湖，著有《石湖集》、《揽辔录》、《桂海虞衡集》流行于世。
English: Fan Chengda, known as Shihu, is the author of "Shihu Collection," "Selected Works," and "Guihai Yu Heng Collection," which are popular in the world.

