古文：文帝上
现代文：文帝上
English: Emperor Wen

古文：太祖文皇帝姓宇文氏，讳泰，字黑獭，代武川人也。
现代文：太祖文皇帝姓宇文氏，名讳泰，字黑獭，是代地武川人。
English: Emperor Taizowen's family name was Uwen, his nickname was Tai, and his Chinese name was Heihe, and he was originally from Takekawa.

古文：其先出自炎帝神农氏，为黄帝所灭，子孙遯居朔野。
现代文：他的祖先源自炎帝神农氏，被黄帝灭掉，子孙逃到北边旷野之地居住下来。
English: His ancestors originated from the Yan Emperor Shennong clan. They were exterminated by the Yellow Emperor, and their descendants fled to the north and settled in the wilderness.

古文：有葛乌菟者，雄武多算略，鲜卑慕之，奉以为主，遂总十二部落，世为大人。
现代文：后代有个叫葛乌菟的人，雄武多谋略，鲜卑人敬慕他，拥戴他为主子，就此总统十二部落，世代为大人。
English: In later generations, there was a man named Ge Wuzhen. He was a man of great military prowess and many stratagems. People of all ages admired him and held him in high esteem. He became the president of twelve tribes, and his generation became adults.

古文：其后曰普回，因狩得玉玺三纽，有文曰皇帝玺，普回心异之，以为天授。
现代文：他的后代中有个叫普回的，在打猎时捡到三枚玉玺，印文有 皇帝玺 三个字，普回很惊异，认为是上天授予的。
English: One of his descendants, named Pu Hui, found three jade urns while hunting. They were inscribed with the three words "Emperor's scepter." Pu Hui was very surprised and thought they were bestowed by heaven.

古文：其俗谓天曰宇，谓君曰文，因号宇文国，并以为氏焉。
现代文：他们的习俗称天为宇，称君为文，因此自号为宇文国，并以宇文为姓氏。
English: Their custom is to call the sky U and the king Wen, so they call themselves Uwen and take Uwen as their surname.

古文：普回子莫那，自阴山南徙，始居辽西，是曰献侯，为魏舅生之国。
现代文：普回的儿子莫那，从阴山向南迁徙，开始居住在辽西，他被称作献侯，为北魏的异姓诸侯国。
English: Pu Hui's son, Mona, migrated south from the Yinshan Mountains and began to live in western Liaoning. He was called Xian Hou (献侯), which was a different surname of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：九世至侯豆归，为慕容晃所灭。
现代文：传了九代到侯豆归时，被慕容晃灭掉。
English: Passed down for nine generations, it was extinguished by Murong Dang when he returned to Houzu.

古文：其子陵仕燕，拜驸马都尉，封玄菟公。
现代文：侯豆归的儿子宇文陵在燕做官，官授驸马都尉，被封为玄菟公。
English: Hou Guizou's son, Ling, held a post in Yan's country, and was given the title of "Hang Ma Du Fu" (馬都尉) and "Feng Xuan Yu Gu" (封玄公).

古文：魏道武将攻中山，陵从慕容宝御之。
现代文：北魏道武帝将要进攻中山，宇文陵跟随慕容实抵御。
English: Northern Wei Emperor Daowu will attack Zhongshan, and Uwenling will follow Murongshi to resist.

古文：宝败，陵率甲骑五百归魏，拜都牧主，赐爵安定侯。
现代文：慕容实战败，宇文陵率领五百披甲战骑归顺了北魏，官拜都牧主，赐爵安定侯。
English: Murong was defeated, and Uvenling led five hundred armored cavalrymen to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty. He was given the title of Duke and Prince of Anhui.

古文：天兴初，徙豪杰于代都，陵随例迁武川焉。
现代文：天兴初年，北魏把豪杰迁到代都，宇文陵按规定迁到了武川。
English: In the first year of Tianxing, the Northern Wei Dynasty moved Gao Jie to the capital, and the Uwen Mausoleum was moved to Wu River according to regulations.

古文：陵生系，系生韬，并以武略称。
现代文：宇文陵生子宇文系，宇文系生子宇文韬，他们都以军事谋略见称。
English: Uwen Ling's son, Uwen, and Uwen's son, Uwen Yao, were both famous for their military strategies.

古文：韬生肱。
现代文：宇文韬生子字文肱。
English: Uwen Wanzhong's son's name is Wenzhong.

古文：肱任有侠有气干。
现代文：宇文肱为人仗义有才干。
English: Uwen Yao is a man of integrity and talent.

古文：正光末，沃野镇人破六汗拔陵作乱，远近多应之。
现代文：正光末年，沃野镇人破六汗拔陵作乱，远近的人大多响应他。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, the people of Wuye Town broke into a sweat and ransacked the mausoleum, and most people from near and far responded to him.

古文：其伪署王卫可孤徒党最盛，肱乃纠合乡里斩可孤，其众乃散。
现代文：他所伪署的王卫可孤徒众最多，宇文肱就纠合乡里的人斩杀了卫可孤，卫可孤的部众才解散。
English: Wang Wei Ke, whom he had falsely appointed, had the largest number of followers, and Uwen Zang got the people in the village to kill Wei Ke, and the followers of Wei Ke were disbanded.

古文：后避地中山，遂陷于鲜于修礼。修礼令肱还统其部众。
现代文：之后宇文肱避祸迁居到中山，于是失陷在鲜于修礼军中，鲜于修礼命宇文肱仍然统率原来的部众。
English: After that, Uwen Hui moved to Zhongshan to avoid misfortune, so he was lost in the army of less-than-priests, and Uwen Hui still led the original followers.

古文：后为定州军所破，殁于阵。
现代文：后来宇文肱被定州官兵打败，死于阵中。
English: Later, Uwen Yao was defeated by Dingzhou officers and soldiers and died in the battle.

古文：武成初，追尊曰德皇帝。
现代文：到北周武成初年，宇文肱被追尊为德皇帝。
English: By the first year of Northern Zhou Wucheng, Uwen Zang was revered as the German Emperor.

古文：太祖，德皇帝之少子也。
现代文：太祖，是德皇帝的小儿子。
English: His grandfather was the youngest son of the German Emperor.

古文：母曰王氏，孕五月，夜梦抱子升·天，纔不至而止。
现代文：母亲叫王氏，王氏怀孕五个月时，夜裹梦到抱着儿子升天，刚要到达天上时便停止了。
English: His mother's name was Wang, and when Wang was five months pregnant, she had a dream that she was holding her son up to the sky. Just as she was about to reach the sky, the dream stopped.

古文：寤而告德皇帝，德皇帝喜曰： 虽不至天，贵亦极矣。 生而有黑气如盖，下覆其身。
现代文：王氏醒后告诉德皇帝，德皇帝高兴地说： 虽然没有到达天上，尊贵也到极点了。 太祖出生时，有像盖子一样的一团黑气，向下覆盖住他的身体。
English: After he woke up, Mr. Wang told Emperor De, who happily said, "Although he did not reach heaven, his dignity has reached the pinnacle.When the great-grandfather was born, there was a dark cloud like a lid that covered his body.

古文：及长，身长八尺，方颡广额，美须髯，发长委地，垂手过膝，背有黑子，宛转若龙盘之形，面有紫光，人望而敬畏之。
现代文：等到他长大时，身长八尺，额头方正宽广，俊美的胡须，长发拖地，垂手超过膝盖，背上有黑痣，宛转像龙盘曲的形状，面有紫光，人们见到后就敬畏他。
English: When he grew up, he was eight feet tall, his forehead was square and broad, he had a beautiful beard, his long hair dragged the ground, his hands hung over his knees, he had a black mole on his back, he was shaped like a dragon, and his face was purple. When people saw him, they were in awe of him.

古文：少有大度，不事家人生业，轻财好施，以交结贤士大夫。
现代文：太祖年少时就有远大的度量，不从事家事产业，轻视钱财而慷慨好施，以此结交贤士大夫。
English: When he was young, the great-grandfather had a far-sightedness, did not engage in the housekeeping industry, despised money and was generous, and thus made friends with a wise doctor.

古文：少随德皇帝在鲜于修礼军。
现代文：太祖年少时跟随德皇帝在鲜于修礼军中。
English: When he was young, the great-grandfather followed the German emperor in the army of the newly ordained.

古文：及葛荣杀修礼，太祖时年十八，荣遂任以将帅。
现代文：葛荣杀掉鲜于修礼时，太祖当时十八岁，葛荣就任命太祖为将帅。
English: When Ge Rong killed off the newly ordained, the great-grandfather was eighteen years old at the time, Ge Rong appointed the great-grandfather as a general.

古文：太祖知其无成，与诸兄谋欲逃避，计未行，会尔朱荣擒葛荣，定河北，太祖随例迁晋阳。
现代文：太祖知道葛荣成不了大事，与兄长们商量准备逃走，计谋还没有实行，适逢尔朱荣擒获葛荣，平定了河北，太祖按规定迁到晋阳。
English: The great-grandfather knew that Ge Rong could not achieve great things. He discussed with his brothers to prepare to escape, but the plan had not yet been implemented. At the right time, Er Zhu Rongyi won Ge Rong and leveled Hebei. The great-grandfather moved to Jinyang according to regulations.

古文：荣以太祖兄弟雄杰，惧或异己，遂托以他罪，诛太祖第三兄洛生，复欲害太祖。
现代文：尔朱荣认为太祖兄弟是英雄豪杰，怕他们有可能背叛自己，就藉其他罪名，诛杀了太祖的三哥宇文洛生，还想杀害太祖。
English: Le Zhu Rong thought that his great-grandfather's brothers were heroes. Fearing that they might betray him, he used other charges to kill his great-grandfather's third brother, Uwen Lousheng, and also wanted to kill his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖自理家冤，辞旨慷慨，荣感而免之，益加敬待。
现代文：太祖亲自申辩宇文家的冤屈，言辞慷慨，尔朱荣感动后赦免了他，反而更加尊敬地对待他。
English: The great-grandfather personally pleaded for the grievances of Yu Wenjia, and his words were generous. After being moved by Er Zhu Rong, he pardoned him, but treated him with more respect.

古文：孝昌二年，燕州乱，太祖始以统军从荣征之。
现代文：孝昌二年，燕州发生叛乱，太祖开始以统军的身份跟随尔朱荣征讨。
English: In the second year of Xiaochang, there was a rebellion in Yanzhou, and Taizu began to follow Er Zhu Rong as a unified army.

古文：先是，北海王颢奔梁，梁人立为魏主，令率兵入洛。
现代文：此前，北海王元颢出逃到梁，梁人立他为魏主，叫他率兵进入洛阳。
English: Previously, the North Sea King Yuan Xuan fled to Liang. Liang people made him the ruler of Wei and told him to lead his army into Luoyang.

古文：魏孝庄帝出居河内以避之。
现代文：北魏孝庄帝退居到河内躲避。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei retreated to Hanoi to hide.

古文：荣遣贺拔岳讨颢，仍迎孝庄帝。
现代文：尔朱荣派贺拔岳讨伐元颢，接着迎回孝庄帝。
English: Zhu Rong sent He Bajue to fight the Yuan Dynasty, and then welcomed back Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：太祖与岳有旧，乃以别将从岳。
现代文：太祖与贺拔岳有旧交，就以别将的身份跟随贺拔岳。
English: The great-grandfather had an old friendship with Mt. He Batur, so he followed Mt. He Batur as a second-in-command.

古文：及孝庄帝反正，以功封宁都子，邑三百户，迁镇远将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：到孝庄帝回京重做皇帝时，太祖因功被封为宁都子，食邑三百户，升任镇远将军、步兵校尉。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang returned to Beijing to reinstate himself as emperor, his great-grandfather was awarded the title of Ningduzi for his meritorious service, with 300 households in his hometown, and was promoted to Zhenyuan general and infantry lieutenant.

古文：万俟丑奴作乱关右，孝庄帝遣尔朱天光及岳等讨之，太祖遂从岳入关，先锋破伪行台尉迟菩萨等。
现代文：万俟丑奴在潼关以西地区起兵造反，孝庄帝派尔朱天光和贺拔岳等去讨伐他，太祖于是跟随贺远至进入宣翅，充当先锋打败了伪行台慰迟菩萨等人。
English: In the event that the Ugly Goat rebels in the area west of Shaoguan, Emperor Xiaozhuang sends Zhu Tianguang and He Batur to fight against him. Grandfather then follows He Yuan to Xuanling, and acts as a pioneer to defeat the pseudo-traveler Qiechi Bodhisattva and others.

古文：及平丑奴，定陇右，太祖功居多，迁征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，增邑三百户，加直阁将军，行原州事。
现代文：打败万俟丑奴，平定胧西后，左担因功劳居多，升任为征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，增加食邑三百户，加授直合将军，行原州刺史事。
English: After defeating Manchukuo's ugly slaves and pacifying the West, most of the left-handers were promoted due to their meritorious service. They were promoted to the general of the Western Conquest, the doctor of the Golden Purple Light, increased the number of households to 300, and were awarded the general of Zhouga, and carried out the historical affairs of the original state.

古文：时关陇寇乱，百姓凋残，太祖抚以恩信，民皆悦服。
现代文：当时关、陇地区经寇盗破坏，百姓凋敝，太祖施以恩德信义来安抚，百姓都心悦诚服。
English: At that time, Guan and Handan areas were destroyed by robbers and thieves, and the people were devastated. The great-great-grandfather appeased them with benevolence, loyalty and righteousness, and the people were sincerely satisfied.

古文：咸喜曰： 早值宇文使君，吾等岂从逆乱。 太祖尝从数骑于野，忽闻箫鼓之音，以问从人，皆云莫之闻也。
现代文：都高兴地说： 要是早点遇上宇文使君，我们怎会跟着去叛乱呢。 太祖曾与几名骑兵在野外，忽然听到箫鼓吹打的声音，太祖询问跟随的人，都说没有听到。
English: They all said happily, "If we had met Umenosu earlier, how could we have followed him to the rebellion?" The great-grandfather had been out in the field with several cavalrymen when he suddenly heard the sound of gongs and drums. When he asked his followers, they all said they had not heard it.

古文：普泰二年，尔朱天光东拒齐神武，留弟显寿镇长安。
现代文：普泰二年，尔朱天光束出抵抗齐神武，留下他的弟弟尔朱显寿镇守长安。
English: In the second year of Putai, Lzhu Tian Guangzhu resisted Qi Shenwu, leaving his brother Lzhu Xianshou to guard Chang'an.

古文：秦州刺史侯莫陈悦为天光所召，将军众东下。
现代文：秦州刺史侯莫陈悦被尔朱天光征召，带领兵众东下。
English: Mo Chen Yue, a scholar from Qinzhou, was conscripted by Er Zhu Tianguang and led the soldiers to the east.

古文：岳知天光必败，欲留悦共图显寿，而计无所出。
现代文：贺拔岳知道尔朱天光必定失败，想留下侯莫陈悦一起收拾尔朱显寿，但是想不出好办法。
English: He Batyue knew that Lzhu Tianguang must fail, and wanted to leave Hou Mo Chen Yue together to clean up Lzhu Xianshou, but he could not think of a good way.

古文：太祖谓岳曰： 今天光尚迩，悦未有二心，若以此事告之，恐其惊惧，然悦虽为主将，不能制物，若先说其众，必人有留心。
现代文：太祖对贺拔岳说： 如今尔朱天光还走得不远，侯莫陈悦没有异心，如果将这件事情告诉他，恐怕他会惊慌恐惧。但侯莫陈悦虽名为主将，却不能控制部众，如果先说动其部众，肯定会人人都想留下。
English: The great-grandfather said to He Batyue: Nowadays, Zhu Tianguang is still not far away, and Hou Mo Chen Yue has no other intentions. If you tell him about this, I'm afraid he will panic and fear. But although Hou Mo Chen Yue is the captain, he can't control his subordinates. If you talk to his subordinates first, everyone will definitely want to stay.

古文：进失尔朱之期，退恐人情变动，乘·此说悦，事无不遂。 岳大喜，即令太祖入悦军说之，悦遂不行。
现代文：侯莫陈悦束进就会误了尔朱天光指定的限期，后退又怕人心变动，乘这个机会去劝说侯莫陈悦，事情没有不成功的。 贺拔岳非常高兴，立刻命令太祖到侯莫陈悦军中去劝说，侯莫陈悦就不再前进。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue entered the army, he would miss the deadline designated by Zhu Tianguang, retreating and fearing changes in people's hearts. He took this opportunity to persuade Hou Mo Chen Yue, and the matter was not unsuccessful. He Batyue was very happy, and immediately ordered his great-grandfather to go to Hou Mo Chen Yue's army to persuade him, and Hou Mo Chen Yue would no longer advance.

古文：乃相率袭长安，令太祖轻骑为前锋。
现代文：于是贺拔岳就同侯莫陈悦一同袭击长安，派太祖率轻骑为先锋。
English: As a result, He Baduyue attacked Chang'an together with Hou Mo Chen Yue, and sent Taizu to lead the light cavalry as the vanguard.

古文：太祖策显寿怯懦，闻诸军将至，必当东走，恐其远遁，乃倍道兼行。
现代文：太祖估计尔朱显寿胆小，听到各路军队将要到来，必定会向东逃走，太祖怕他逃远，于是兼程而行。
English: The great-grandfather estimated that Er Zhu Xianshou was timid. When he heard that various armies were about to arrive, he would certainly flee to the east. The great-grandfather was afraid that he would flee far away, so he made a side trip.

古文：显寿果已东走，追至华山，擒之。
现代文：尔朱显寿果然已经向东逃走，太祖追到华山，将他擒获。
English: Le Zhu Xianshou had indeed fled to the east, and Taizu chased him to Huashan and captured him.

古文：太昌元年，岳为关西大行台，以太祖为左丞，领岳府司马，加散骑常侍。
现代文：太昌元年，贺拔岳任关西大行台，任命太祖为左丞，兼任贺拔岳府的司马，加授散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of Taichang, He Batyue was appointed to Kansai Daigyodai, and appointed Taizu as Zuo, and also served as the Sima of He Batyuefu, and was awarded the title of Sanzhi.

古文：事无巨细，皆委决焉。
现代文：事无大小，都委托他裁决。
English: He is entrusted with the adjudication of all matters, large and small.

古文：齐神武既破尔朱，遂专朝政。
现代文：齐神武既已打败了尔朱家族，就专擅北魏的朝政。
English: After defeating the Erzhu family, Qi Shenwu specialized in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：太祖请往观之。
现代文：请求前去观察齐神武的为人。
English: Please go ahead and observe Qi Shenwu as a person.

古文：既至并州，齐神武问岳军事，太祖口对雄辩，齐神武以为非常人，欲留之。
现代文：太祖到并州后，齐神武向他询问贺拔岳的军事情况，太祖对答雄辩，齐神武认为他不是一般的人，打算留下他。
English: After the great-grandfather arrived in the annexed prefecture, Qi Shenwu asked him about the military situation of Mt. Hebatake. The great-grandfather replied eloquently. Qi Shenwu thought that he was not an ordinary person and planned to keep him.

古文：太祖诡陈忠款，乃得反命，遂星言就道。
现代文：太祖假意陈述自己的忠诚，才得以返回覆命，于是星夜赶路。
English: The great-grandfather pretended to declare his loyalty, only to be able to return and die, so he had to make his way in the dark.

古文：齐神武果遣追之，至关，不及。
现代文：齐神武果然派人追赶，追到玺主困，也没追上。
English: Qi Shenwu did indeed send someone to chase after him, but he was too late to catch up with him.

古文：太祖还谓岳曰： 高欢非人臣也。
现代文：左担回来后对贺筵岳说： 直麸不是愿意做人臣的人。
English: When Zuo Dang returned, he said to He Yueyue: "Zhongyao is not a person who is willing to be a vassal.

古文：逆谋所以未发者，惮公兄弟耳。
现代文：他之所以还没有发动叛乱，是害怕您们兄弟啊。
English: The reason he hasn't rebelled yet is because he's afraid of you, brothers.

古文：然凡欲立大功，匡社稷，未有不因地势，总英雄，而能克成者也。
现代文：但凡要建立大功，匡扶社稷，没有不是凭藉地势，招集英雄，而能成功的。
English: However, if you want to build a great achievement and support the community, there is no way to succeed without relying on the terrain and summoning heroes.

古文：侯莫陈悦本实庸材，遭逢际会，遂叨任委，既无忧国之心，亦不为高欢所忌。
现代文：侯莫陈悦本足个庸才，遇上机会，才接受了委任，此人既无忧国之心，也不为高欢忌惮。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue is a mediocre talent. He only accepted the appointment when he had the opportunity. This person is not worried about the country, nor is he afraid of high joy.

古文：但为之备，图之不难。
现代文：衹要您作好准备，收拾他并不难。
English: It's not hard to clean him up if you're prepared.

古文：今费也头控弦之骑不下一万，夏州刺史斛拔弥俄突胜兵之士三千余人，及灵州刺史曹泥，并恃其僻远，常怀异望。
现代文：如今费也头部族的骑兵不下一万，夏州刺史斛拔弥俄突有精兵三千余人，还有灵州刺史曹泥，都凭着地处僻远，常心怀异志。
English: Today, there are less than ten thousand cavalrymen of the Feiyatou tribe, more than three thousand elite soldiers of the Xiazhou Zhishizhenba Miolu, and the Lingzhou Zhishizhao mud, all of which are far away from each other, and always have different aspirations.

古文：河西流民纥豆陵伊利等，户口富实，未奉朝风。
现代文：河西流民纥豆陵伊利等，户口殷实，而没有接受朝廷的教化。
English: The people from the west of the river, such as Peasling and Yili, had a prosperous household, but did not accept the imperial court's indoctrination.

古文：今若移军近陇，扼其要害，示之以威，服之以德，即可收其士马，以实吾军。
现代文：现在如果您调动军队逼近陇右，控扼住要害之地，用威力震慑他们，用恩德感化他们，就可以收编他们的兵马，来充实我军。
English: Now, if you mobilize the army to approach the right flank, control and strangle the key areas, deter them with power, and influence them with grace, you can collect their soldiers and horses to enrich our army.

古文：西辑氐羌，北抚沙塞，还军长安，匡辅魏室，此桓文举也。 岳大悦，复遣太祖诣阙请事，密陈其状。
现代文：在西面和睦氐、羌，在北面安抚沙漠边塞，回师长安，匡辅魏室，造就是齐桓公、晋文公的功业了。 贺拔岳大为高兴，又派太祖进京请示政事，秘密陈述有关情况。
English: In the west, he made peace with the Mongols, and in the north, he pacified the border fortresses in the desert, restored peace to his master Changan, and supported the Wei dynasty, all of which were the achievements of King Qi Huan and King Jinwen. He was greatly pleased, and sent his great-great-grandfather to Beijing to petition for political affairs and secretly report on the situation.

古文：魏帝深纳之。加太祖武卫将军，还令报岳。
现代文：北魏孝武帝深为赞同，加封太祖为武卫将军，让他回去向贺拔岳报告。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty was deeply in favor of this, and he appointed Gaofen Taizu as General Wuwei, and asked him to go back and report to He Batur.

古文：岳遂引军西次平凉，谋于其众曰： 夏州邻接寇贼，须加绥抚，安得良刺史以镇之？ 众皆曰： 宇文左丞即其人也。 岳曰： 左丞吾之左右手也，如何可废。 沉吟累日，乃从众议。
现代文：贺拔岳于是带兵西进屯驻平凉，和部众商量说： 夏州邻近贼寇，必须加以抚绥，从哪裹找个好刺史来镇守夏州呢? 部众都说： 宇文左丞就是合适的人选。 贺拔岳说： 左丞是我的左右手，怎可离去。 犹豫了几天，才听从了众人的建议。
English: Therefore, He Batyue led his soldiers westward and stationed them in Pingliang, and discussed with his subordinates, saying: Since Cangzhou is close to the bandits, it is necessary to appease them, so where can we find a good thorn to guard Cangzhou? The subordinates all said: Uwen Zuoxiao is the right person. He Batyue said: Zuoxiao is my right and left hand, how can I leave? He hesitated for a few days before he listened to everyone's advice.

古文：于是表太祖为使持节、武卫将军、夏州刺史。
现代文：于足表奏太祖为使持节、武卫将军、夏州刺史。
English: At the foot of the table, the great-grandfather is played as Zhi Jixi, General Wu Wei, and Xia Zhou.

古文：太祖至州，伊利望风款附，而曹泥犹通使于齐神武。
现代文：太祖到了夏州，纥豆陵伊利见势归附，而曹泥仍然派使者和齐神武来往。
English: When the great-grandfather arrived in Xiazhou, Peasling Yili saw the power transferred to him, but Cao Di still sent envoys to and from Qi Shenwu.

古文：魏永熙三年春正月，岳欲讨曹泥，遣都督赵贵至夏州与太祖计事。
现代文：北魏永熙三年春季正月，贺拔岳打算讨伐曹泥，派都督赵贵到夏州和太祖商量。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Northern Wei Yongxi, He Batyue planned to fight Cao Miao and sent the governor Zhao Gui to consult with Xia Zhou and Taizu.

古文：太祖曰： 曹泥孤城阻远，未足为忧。
现代文：太祖说： 曹迟衹有一座孤城，距离遥远，不值得忧虑。
English: The great-grandfather said: Cao Zhisheng has a lonely city, the distance is far away, it is not worth worrying about.

古文：侯莫陈悦怙众密迩，贪而无信，必将为患，愿早图之。 岳不听，遂与悦俱讨泥。二月，至于河曲，岳果为悦所害。
现代文：侯莫陈悦凭恃人多而且离我们很近，贪婪而又不讲信义，必定成为大患，希望尽早谋取。 贺拔鱼不听，就和侯莫陈悦一起讨伐萱迟一一,，进军到河曲，贺拔岳果真被侯莫陈悦杀害。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue, by virtue of having many followers and being very close to us, being greedy and not trustworthy, will surely become a great danger, and we hope to get it as soon as possible. He Bailu did not listen, so he and Hou Mo Chen Yue went on a crusade together and marched to Hequ, and He Bailu was really killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：其士众散还平凉，唯大都督赵贵率部曲收岳尸还营。
现代文：贺拔岳的兵众逃散回平凉，衹有大都督赵贵率领部曲收得贺拔岳的尸体回营。
English: The soldiers of He Baturake fled and dispersed back to Pingliang, and the great governor Zhao Gui led the troops to collect the corpse of He Baturake and return to the camp.

古文：于是三军未有所属，诸将以都督寇洛年最长，相与推洛以总兵事。
现代文：于是三军没有归属，将领们因都督寇洛年纪最长，共同推举寇洛总领军队事务。
English: As a result, the three armies did not belong to one another, and the generals, because the viceroy Kolo was the oldest, jointly elected Kolo as the commander of the army.

古文：洛素无雄略，威令不行，乃谓诸将曰： 洛智能本阙，不宜统御，近者迫于群议，推相摄领，今请避位，更择贤材。 于是赵贵言于众曰： 元帅忠公尽节，暴于朝野，勋业未就，奄罹凶酷。岂唯国丧良宰，固亦众无所依。
现代文：塞渔一向没有雄才大略，威令不能执行，于是对将领们说： 我寇洛本来缺乏才能，不适合统率军队，最近迫于众人提议，推举我代理总领，现在请准许我让位，另选贤才。 于是趟贵对众人说： 元帅忠心国事而竭尽臣节，已为朝野所共知，但勋业尚未成就，却遭遇凶杀，岂止国家丧失良宰，也使大家无所依靠。
English: Saying that he had never been able to carry out his orders, he said to the generals, "I, Koro, originally lacked talent and was not suited to command the army. Recently, I was forced by the people to propose that they elect me as acting commander-in-chief. Now, please allow me to step down and choose another wise man." So, Watarigui said to the people, "The marshal was loyal to the state and devoted himself to his duties. It was well known to the court and the country, but his distinguished career had not yet been accomplished, but he was murdered. Not only did the country lose a good man, but it also left everyone with nothing to rely on

古文：必欲纠合同盟，复雠雪耻，须择贤者，总统诸军。
现代文：若真要集合同盟，报仇雪耻，就必须推选贤能的人，总领各军。
English: If you really want to gather allies and take revenge, you must choose a capable person to lead the army.

古文：举非其人，则大事难集，虽欲立忠建义，其可得乎。
现代文：如果推选的人不当，就大事难成，虽想建立忠义，怎能达到目的。
English: If the person who is elected is not right, it is difficult to achieve great things. Even if you want to build loyalty, how can you achieve your goal?

古文：窃观宇文夏州，英姿不世，雄谟冠时，远迩归心，士卒用命。
现代文：我私下观察宇文夏州，英姿绝世，雄略无双，远近的人心都归向他，士兵们都愿为他效命。
English: Privately, I observed Uwen Xiazhou. His heroic appearance is unparalleled. The hearts of people near and far have turned to him, and soldiers are willing to serve him.

古文：加以法令齐肃，赏罚严明，真足恃也。
现代文：加之法令整肃，赏罚严明，确实可以依靠。
English: In addition, the laws and regulations have been rectified, and the rewards and punishments are strict, which can really be relied on.

古文：今若告丧，必来赴难，因而奉之，则大事集矣。 诸将皆称善。
现代文：现今如果向他报丧，他一定会来赴难，乘机推举他，那么大事就成了。 众将都说好。
English: If he were to die today, he would certainly come to the rescue and take advantage of the opportunity to promote him, and then a great thing would be accomplished.

古文：乃命赫连达驰至夏州，告太祖曰： 侯莫陈悦不顾盟誓，弃恩背德，贼害忠良，群情愤惋，控告无所。
现代文：于是派赫连达快马到夏州，报告太祖说： 医莫陈悦不顾同盟誓言，弃恩背德，杀害忠良，群情愤恨，无处控告。
English: So he sent Helenda on a fast horse to Shazhou to report to the great-grandfather, saying, "Doctor Chen Yue should not disregard the alliance oath, abandon his loyalty, kill the faithful, arouse the anger of the masses, and there is nowhere to file a complaint.

古文：公昔居管辖，恩信着闻，今无小无大，咸愿推奉。
现代文：您从前位居管辖，恩信闻名，如今无论大小将士，都愿推举您。
English: You have been in charge for a long time and are well-known for your loyalty. Today, no matter how big or small you are, everyone would like to recommend you.

古文：众之思公，引日成岁，愿勿稽留，以慰众望也。 太祖将赴之，夏州吏民咸泣请曰： 闻悦今在洛，去平凉不远。
现代文：大家思念您，度日如年，请不要滞留，以满足大家的要求。 太祖准备奔赴平凉，夏州的官吏百姓都哭泣着请求说： 听说侯莫陈悦如今在水洛城，离子凉不远。
English: Everyone misses you, every day is like a year, please don't stay to meet everyone's request. The great-grandfather is preparing to go to Pingliang, and the officials and people of Xiazhou are crying and pleading: I heard that Hou Mo Chen Yue is now in Shuiluo City, and it is not far from Pingliang.

古文：若已有贺拔公之众，则图之实难。
现代文：如果他已经拥有了贺拔岳的兵马，那么谋取他就确实困难了。
English: If he already has the soldiers and horses of Mt. He Batur, then it will be really difficult to obtain them.

古文：愿且停留，以观其变。 太祖曰： 悦既害元帅，自应乘势直据平凉，而反趑趄，屯兵水洛，吾知其无能为也。
现代文：希望您暂且停留下来，以观察时局的变化。 太祖说： 侯莫陈悦既已杀害了元帅，自然应当趁势直接占据平凉，他却反而犹豫观望，屯兵水洛，我知道他没有作为。
English: I hope you will stay for a while to observe the changes in the current situation. Grandfather said: Since Hou Mo Chen Yue has killed the marshal, it is natural that he should take advantage of the situation to directly occupy the calm, but instead he hesitated to wait and see. I know he did nothing.

古文：且难得易失者时也，不俟终日者几也，今不早赴，将恐众心自离。 都督弥姐元进规欲应悦，密图太祖。
现代文：况且难以得到而又容易失去的是时机，不可终等待的是机会，如今我不早去，恐怕大家的心自将离散。 都督弥姐元进谋划响应侯莫陈悦，秘密谋害太祖。
English: Moreover, what is hard to get and easy to lose is the opportunity, what cannot be waited for is the opportunity, now I do not go early, I am afraid that everyone's hearts will be scattered.

古文：事发，斩之。
现代文：事情暴露，太祖斩杀了他。
English: After the matter was discovered, he was beheaded.

古文：太祖乃率帐下轻骑，驰赴平凉。
现代文：太祖就率领帐下轻骑，赶赴平凉。
English: The great-great-grandfather led a light cavalry charge and rushed to Pingliang.

古文：时齐神武遣长史侯景招引岳众，太祖至安定，遇之，谓景曰： 贺拔公虽死，宇文泰尚存，卿何为也？ 景失色，对曰： 我犹箭耳，随人所射，安能自裁。 景于此即还。
现代文：此时齐神迭派长史退来招引贺墨遥的部众，赵旦到达室室，遇到尽量，对谜说： 贺篮公虽死，圭塞童还活着，你想干什么? 侯景大惊失色，回答说： 我好比是一枝箭而已，随人家射向哪裹，哪能自己裁决。 侯景于是就回去了。
English: At this time, Qi Shen Di sent Chang Shi back to invite He Mo Yao's subordinates, Zhao Dan arrived at the room, encountered as much as possible, said to the riddle: Although He Bin is dead, Guise Tong is still alive, what do you want to do? Hou Jing was shocked and lost his color, replied: I am just like an arrow, I can decide which way to shoot. Hou Jing then went back.

古文：太祖至平凉，哭岳甚恸。
现代文：太祖到达王遮，十分悲痛地哭悼贺拔岳。
English: When the great-grandfather arrived in Wangzha, he cried with great sorrow to mourn He Batur.

古文：将士且悲且喜曰： 宇文公至，无所忧矣。 
现代文：将士们又悲又喜地说： 宇文公到来，不用忧愁了。 
English: The officers said sadly and joyfully, "Uwenkong has arrived, there is no need to be sad.

古文：于时，魏孝武帝将图齐神武，闻岳被害，遣武卫将军元毗宣旨慰劳，追岳军还洛阳。
现代文：这时，北魏孝武帝准备图谋查垫武，听说贺远压被害，派武卫将军元毗传达旨意慰劳，召贺迈互的军队撤回困。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty was preparing to make an attempt to investigate the Wuzhong, and when he heard that Heyuan was under pressure, he sent General Wuwei Yuanpi to convey the will of consolation, and called on the army of He Maihuan to withdraw.

古文：毗到平凉，会诸将已推太祖。
现代文：五亚到了芒痉，正逢将领们已推举了左担。
English: When Wuya arrived at Mengya, the generals had already selected the left shoulder.

古文：侯莫陈悦亦被敕追还，悦既附齐神武，不肯应召。
现代文：侯莫陈悦也被诏敕追回，侯莫速坦既已归附齐神武，不肯应召。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue was also retrieved by the imperial edict. Hou Mo So Tan had already joined Qi Shenwu and refused to be summoned.

古文：太祖谓诸将曰： 侯莫陈悦枉害忠良，复不应诏命，此国之大贼，岂可容之！ 乃命诸军戒严，将以讨悦。
现代文：太祖对将领们说： 侯莫陈悦枉害忠良，又不肯接受诏命，这是国家的大贼，怎能容忍! 于是命令各路兵马戒严，准备讨伐侯莫陈悦。
English: The great-grandfather said to the generals, "Hou Mo Chen Yue is a great thief of the state, how can he be tolerated when he harms the faithful and refuses to accept the imperial edict. Therefore, he ordered soldiers and horses to be on high alert and prepare to fight Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：及元毗还，太祖表于魏帝曰： 臣前以故关西大都督臣岳，竭诚奉国，横罹非命，三军丧气，朝野痛惜。
现代文：等到返回，左担表奏魏孝武帝说： 臣以前与原闱西大都督臣贺拔岳，竭诚为国，他意外死于非命，三军丧失斗志，朝野痛惜。
English: When he returned, Emperor Wei Xiaowu, who was left in charge of the table, said: Minister He Baturak, who had previously been the same as the former Shaanxi Governor He Baturak, devoted himself to the country. He died in an accident, the three armies lost their fighting spirit, and the court regretted it.

古文：都督寇洛等，衔冤茹戚，志雪雠耻。
现代文：都督童盗等人，含冤忍悲，立志报仇雪耻。
English: The prefectural governor, Tongzhu, and others, with a sense of injustice and sorrow, are determined to avenge the shame.

古文：以臣昔同幕府，苦赐要结。
现代文：因臣从前和他们同在贺拔岳府共事，苦苦要求交结。
English: Because the minister had worked with them in the past at He Bagefu, he asked them to work together.

古文：臣便以今月十四日，轻来赴军，当发之时，已有别表，既为众情所逼，权掌兵事。
现代文：臣就在本月十四日轻车奔赴军中，在出发时，已有表奏，既然为大家盛情所迫，暂且掌管军事。
English: On the 14th of this month, the minister rushed to the army in a light car, and at the time of departure, there was already a demonstration. Since he was forced by everyone's generosity, he was temporarily in charge of the military.

古文：诏召岳军入京，此乃为国良策。
现代文：您命令征召贺拔岳的军队入京，这是为国的良策。
English: Your order to conscript He Baturake's army to enter Beijing is a good policy for the country.

古文：但高欢之众，已至河东，侯莫陈悦犹在水洛。
现代文：衹是高欢的部众，已经到了河东，侯莫陈悦还在水洛。
English: Zou is a member of Gao Huan, has arrived in Hedong, Hou Mo Chen Yue is still in Shuiluo.

古文：况此军士多是关西之人，皆恋乡邑，不愿东下。
现代文：况且这裹的兵士大多是关西的人，都留恋家乡，不愿束下。
English: Moreover, most of the soldiers here are Kansai people, who are nostalgic for their hometowns and do not want to leave.

古文：今逼以上命。悉令赴关，悦蹑其后，欢邀其前，首尾受敌，其势危矣。
现代文：现在如果逼迫他们听从皇上的命令，命他们全部赶赴京城，侯莫陈悦在后面追击，高欢在前面阻截，前后受敌，形势就危险了。
English: Now, if they are forced to obey the emperor's order and all of them are ordered to rush to the capital, with Hou Mo Chen Yue pursuing them from behind, Gao Huan intercepting them from the front, and being attacked from behind, the situation will be dangerous.

古文：臣殒身王事，诚所甘心，恐败国殄人，所损更大。
现代文：臣献身王事，本是心甘情愿，衹担心会使国家遭败百姓被杀，受到的损失更严重。
English: The vassals dedicated themselves to the king's cause willingly, not fearing that the country would be defeated, the people would be killed, and the losses would be more serious.

古文：乞少停缓，更思后图，徐事诱导，渐就东引。 太祖志在讨悦，而未测朝旨，且兵众未集，假此为词。
现代文：请您允许我们停缓一下，再作打算，让我慢慢地进行诱导，逐步将他们向东引进。 太祖志在讨伐侯莫陈悦，未能猜度朝廷的旨意，而且军队尚未聚集，便以此作为托辞。
English: Please allow us to pause for a moment and then make plans, let me slowly induce them, gradually introduce them to the east. Taizu Zhi is fighting Hou Mo Chen Yue, unable to guess the will of the imperial court, and the army has not yet gathered, he used this as an excuse.

古文：因与元毗及诸将刑牲盟誓，同奖王室。
现代文：趁此与元毗及将领们杀牲盟誓，共同扶佐王室。
English: He took advantage of this opportunity to swear a blood oath with Yuan Bei and the generals to jointly support the royal family.

古文：初，贺拔岳营于河曲，有军吏独行，忽见一老翁，须眉皓素，谓之曰： 贺拔岳虽复据有此众，然终无所成。
现代文：当初，贺拔岳驻扎在河曲，有一个军官独自行走，忽然见到一位老翁，须眉雪白，他对军官说： 贺拔岳虽重新拥有这些兵众，但最终无所成就。
English: At the beginning, He Batur was stationed in Hequ. An officer was walking alone when he suddenly saw an old man with snow-white eyebrows. He said to the officer: Although He Batur regained possession of these soldiers, he ultimately achieved nothing.

古文：当有一宇文家从东北来，后必大盛。 
现代文：应当有一位姓宇文的人从东北方向到来，以后必定十分兴盛。 说完就消失了。
English: A man by the name of Uwen must have come from the northeast, and he must have prospered greatly in the future.

古文：言讫不见。此吏恒与所亲言之，至是方验。
现代文：这个军官曾经对自己所亲近的人讲了，到这时方才应验。
English: The officer had told those closest to him, and only then did it sink in.

古文：魏帝诏太祖曰： 贺拔岳既殒，士众未有所归，卿可为大都督，即相统领。
现代文：魏孝武帝下诏太祖说： 贺拔岳已死，兵众没有归属，卿可担任大都督，即刻统领。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu issued an edict to Emperor Taizu, saying, "He Baturak is dead, the soldiers do not belong to him, and you can take up the post of grand governor and immediately take over the leadership.

古文：知欲渐就东下，良不可言。
现代文：得知您想逐步率军东下，再好不过。
English: I couldn't be happier to learn that you want to gradually lead the army eastward.

古文：今亦征侯莫陈悦士马入京。
现代文：现在我也征召侯莫速坦的兵马入京。
English: Now I am also conscripting Hou Mogaotan's soldiers and horses to enter Beijing.

古文：若其不来，朕当亲自致罚。
现代文：如果他不来，我当亲自让他受到惩罚。
English: If he doesn't come, I'll punish him myself.

古文：宜体此意，不过淹留。 太祖又表曰： 侯莫陈悦违天逆理，酷害良臣，自以专戮罪重，不恭诏命，阻兵水洛，强梁秦陇。
现代文：你应当体会这个意思，不要过于迟延。 太祖又上表说： 侯莫陈悦违背天理，残害良臣，自认为任意杀戮，罪恶深重，不接受韶命，陈兵盗，强横台胧。
English: You should understand this meaning and not be too late. The great-grandfather also said on the table: Hou Mo Chen Yue violated the principles of heaven, mutilated good ministers, thought of killing arbitrarily, was deeply guilty, did not accept sacrificing lives, was a thief, and was strong and domineering.

古文：臣以大宥既班，忍抑私憾，频问悦及都督可朱浑元等归阙早晚，而悦并维絷使人，不听反报。
现代文：臣因为朝廷的赦免既已颁布，便强忍抑制自己的愤恨，多次询问侯莫陈悦及都督可朱浑元等人何时入京，而侯莫陈悦囚禁我的使者，不让他们返回覆命。
English: Because the imperial pardon had already been issued, the vassal forcibly restrained his anger and repeatedly asked Hou Mo Chen Yue and the governor Zhu Hun Yuan when they would enter Beijing. Hou Mo Chen Yue imprisoned my envoys and did not allow them to return.

古文：观其指趣，势必异图。
现代文：观察他的意图，一定心怀异志。
English: Observe his intentions, and be sure to harbor dissent.

古文：臣正为此，未敢自拔。
现代文：臣正因为这样，所以不敢解脱。
English: It is precisely because of this that the vassal does not dare to break free.

古文：兼顺众情，乞少停缓。 太祖乃与悦书责之曰：顷者正光之末，天下沸腾，尘飞河朔，雾塞荆沔。
现代文：加上顺从兵众的人情，请求稍作停缓。 太祖就写信给侯莫陈悦责备他说：以前在正光末年，天下纷扰，河朔混战，型迺迷乱。
English: In addition to obeying the feelings of the soldiers, he also asked for a slight delay. The great-grandfather wrote to Hou Mo Chen Yue to reproach him: "In the past, at the end of the year, the world was in turmoil, the river was in chaos, and the country was confused.

古文：故将军贺拔公攘袂勃起，志宁宇县。
现代文：故将军贺拔公捋袖勃然奋起，立志平定天下。
English: The late General He Bapu rose up, determined to pacify the world.

古文：授戈南指，拯皇灵于已坠；拥旄西迈，济百姓于沦胥。
现代文：挥师南进，拯救已经坠落的皇权；拥旗西进，救助处于苦难中的百姓。
English: Go south with the army to save the fallen imperial power; go west with the flag to help the people in distress.

古文：西顾无忧，繄公是赖。
现代文：西部没有忧患，完全依赖于崖邀公。
English: There are no worries in the west, which is completely dependent on the cliff to invite the public.

古文：勋茂赏隆，遂征关右。
现代文：建立大功获得厚赏后，就征讨闱右。
English: After receiving a large reward for his great contribution to the establishment of the company, he began to solicit donations.

古文：此乃行路所知，不籍一二谈也。
现代文：这些都是路人皆知的，用不着一一列举。
English: These are well-known to passers-by and do not need to be enumerated.

古文：君实名微行薄，本无远量。
现代文：你本来声名很小品行低下，没有远大的器量。
English: You had a very low reputation, a low moral character, and no capacity for greatness.

古文：故将军降迁高之志，笃汇征之理，乃申启朝廷，荐君为陇右行台。
现代文：故将军追求高速的志向，奉行进能用贤的道理，于是申报朝廷，荐举你为陇右行台。
English: Therefore, the general pursued the high-speed aspiration and pursued the principle of advancing by virtue, so he declared to the imperial court and recommended you as the right-hand driving platform.

古文：朝议以君功名阙然，未之许也。
现代文：朝廷议论你功名不足，没有同意。
English: The imperial court disagreed, saying that your achievements were insufficient.

古文：遂频烦请谒，至于再三。
现代文：贺拔公就频频请示，再三请求。
English: He Baigong frequently asked for instructions and repeated requests.

古文：天子难违上将，便相听许。
现代文：天子难以违背上将的意愿，就同意了。
English: It was difficult for the emperor to go against the general's wishes, so he agreed.

古文：是亦遐迩共知，不复烦之翰墨。
现代文：这也是远近皆知的，不必再多费笔墨。
English: This is also known far and wide, so there is no need to spend more time on it.

古文：纵使木石为心，犹当知感；况在生灵，安能无愧。
现代文：即使是木石心肠，也应知道感恩；何况是有生命的人，怎么能没有羞愧之心。
English: Even a stony-hearted person should know how to be grateful; moreover, how can a living person be without a sense of shame?

古文：加以王室多故，高氏专权，主上虚心，寄隆晋郑。
现代文：加上因为王室多有变故，高氏独揽大权，皇上心无成见，寄居晋郑。
English: In addition, because the royal family had many vicissitudes, the Gao clan monopolized power, the emperor had no prejudices, and the sojourner Jin Zheng.

古文：君复与故将军同受密旨，屡结盟约，期于毕力，共匡时难。
现代文：你还与故将军一同接受了密旨，屡次缔结盟约，约定竭尽全力，共同匡救时难。
English: You also accepted the secret order together with the late general, repeatedly concluded an alliance agreement, and agreed to do your best to jointly save the day.

古文：而貌恭心狠，妒胜嫉贤，口血未干，匕首已发。
现代文：而你外表装作恭敬而内心却非常狠毒，嫉胜妒贤，与贺拔公缔约时抹在嘴上的牲血还没干，手中的匕首却已刺出。
English: On the other hand, you pretend to be respectful on the outside, but inside you are very vicious, jealous, and the blood of the animal that was smeared on your mouth when you signed the contract with Prince He Bao is not yet dry, but the dagger in your hand has already been pierced.

古文：协党国贼，共危本朝，孤恩负誓，有腼面目。
现代文：你阿附国贼，共同危害朝廷，少恩负约，有愧脸面。
English: You're a traitor to your country, you're jointly endangering the imperial court, you're ungrateful, and you should be ashamed.

古文：岂不上畏于天，下惭于地！
现代文：难道不在上敬畏于天，在下愧对于地!
English: Is it not above to revere the heavens, and beneath to feel sorry for the earth?

古文：吾以弱才，猥当藩牧，蒙朝廷拔擢之恩，荷故将军国士之遇。
现代文：我以微弱的才能，勉强充当一方的主帅，承蒙朝廷提拔的恩惠，领受故将军以国士相待的知遇之恩。
English: With my feeble talent, I reluctantly served as the head coach of one side, received the grace of the imperial court's promotion, and received the grace of the late general's treatment as a statesman.

古文：闻问之日，魂守惊驰。
现代文：得知贺拔公噩耗的时候，神魂受惊而躁动不安。
English: When he learned of He Bago's death, he was frightened and restless.

古文：便陈启天朝，暂来奔赴，众情所推，遂当戎重。
现代文：于是启奏朝廷，暂且奔赴军中，在众人盛情推举下，就担当了军事重任。
English: As a result, he was invited to the imperial court, temporarily rushed to the army, and under the generous recommendation of the people, he took on the heavy military task.

古文：比有敕旨，召吾还阙，亦有别诏，令君入朝。
现代文：近来收到皇上的命令，召我回京，也收到另外的韶书，令你入朝。
English: I have recently received the Emperor's order to call me back to Beijing, and I have also received another imperial edict to bring you to the Imperial Court.

古文：虽操行无闻，而年齿已宿。
现代文：虽然我的操行默默无闻，但年龄已长。
English: Though my deeds are obscure, my age is long.

古文：今日进退，唯君是视。
现代文：现在是进是退，全看你的行动。
English: It's all up to you whether you advance or retreat.

古文：君若督率所部，自山陇东迈，吾亦总勒师徒，北道还阙。
现代文：如果你率领部众，从山陇向东进发，我也总领军队，从北道回京。
English: If you lead your troops eastward from the foothills of the mountains, I will lead my army back to Beijing from the north.

古文：共追廉、蔺之迹，同慕寇、贾之风。
现代文：我们一起追效廉颇、蔺相如的事迹，共同仰慕寇恂、买复的遣风。
English: Together, we will pursue the same deeds, and jointly admire the sentiments of the Kuo-Kuo and Bui-Fu.

古文：如其首鼠两端，不时奉诏，专戮违旨，国有常刑，枕戈坐甲，指日相见。
现代文：如果你首鼠两端，不准时遵奉诏命，任意杀戮而违背圣旨，国家有一定的刑法，我们卧时枕戈坐时披甲，不久将相见。
English: If you act rashly, fail to obey the imperial edict on time, kill at will and violate the sacred edict, the country has a certain criminal law, we wear armor when we lie down and when we sit, and we will soon meet.

古文：幸图利害，无贻噬脐。
现代文：希望你考虑好利害关系，不要致使后悔不及。
English: I hope you will consider the stakes and not cause regret.

古文：悦既惧太祖谋己，诈为诏书与秦州刺史万俟普拨，令与悦为党援。
现代文：侯莫陈悦既已害怕太祖图谋自己，就伪造诏书给秦州刺史万俟普拨，命他与侯莫陈悦互为朋党应援。
English: Since Hou Mo Chen Yue was already afraid that his great-grandfather was plotting against him, he forged an imperial edict to give Qinzhou Zhishi Wan Rong Pu Zi, ordering him and Hou Mo Chen Yue to support each other as friends.

古文：普拨疑之，封诏以呈太祖。
现代文：万俟普拨认为可疑，封好诏书呈给太祖。
English: Wan Xuan Pu Zi thought it was suspicious and presented the sealed imperial edict to Taizu.

古文：太祖表之曰： 臣自奉诏总平凉之师，责重忧深，不遑启处。
现代文：太祖表奏朝廷说： 臣自接受诏命总领平凉的军队以来，感到责任重大忧虑深重，没有片刻安息闲暇的时候。
English: The great-great-grandfather told the imperial court: "Since I received the imperial command to lead the peaceful army, I have felt great responsibility and deep anxiety, and I have not had a moment of rest and leisure.

古文：训兵秣马，唯思竭力。
现代文：训练军队喂养战马，衹想竭尽全力为国。
English: Training the army and feeding the war horses, he wanted to do his best for the country.

古文：前以人恋本土，侯莫陈悦窥窬进退，量度且宜住此。
现代文：先前因为兵士眷恋故土，侯莫陈悦伺隙而动，我思量应当暂时留居此地。
English: Previously, because of the soldiers' attachment to their homeland, Hou Mo Chen Yue moved to seek a gap, I thought I should stay here temporarily.

古文：今若召悦授以内官，臣列旆东辕，匪朝伊夕。
现代文：现在如果征召侯莫陈悦，授予他朝廷官职，臣整军束进，就在朝夕之间。
English: Now, if Hou Mo Chen Yue were to be conscripted, given an official post in the imperial court, and sent to reorganize the army, it would happen between morning and evening.

古文：朝廷若以悦堪为边扞，乞处以瓜、凉一藩。
现代文：朝廷如果认为侯莫陈悦可以作为边疆的防御力量，就请将瓜、凉二州中的一个州分封给他。
English: If the imperial court believes that Hou Mo Chen Yue can be used as a frontier defense force, please assign him one of the two states of Gua and Liang.

古文：不然，则终致猜虞，于事无益。 
现代文：不然的话，终究会招致他的怀疑和忧虑，对于国事没有好处。 
English: Otherwise, it will eventually lead to his suspicion and anxiety, which is not good for national affairs.

古文：初，原州刺史史归为岳所亲任，河曲之变，反为悦守。
现代文：当初，原州刺史史归为贺拔岳所亲近信任，在河曲事变中，反而为侯莫陈悦效力。
English: At first, the Yuanzhou Sashihishi was close to and trusted by He Batyue, but in the Hequ Incident, he worked for Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：悦遣其党王伯和、成次安将兵二千人助归镇原州。
现代文：侯莫陈悦派他的党羽王伯和、成次安带兵二千人帮助史归镇守原州。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue sent his followers Wang Bo and Cheng Jian to bring 2,000 soldiers to help Shi return to the town to defend Yuanzhou.

古文：太祖遣都督侯莫陈崇率轻骑一千袭归，擒之，并获次安、伯和等，送于平凉。
现代文：太祖派都督侯莫陈崇率一千轻装骑兵袭击史归，捉住了他，并抓获了成次安、王伯和等人，将他们送到平凉。
English: The great-grandfather sent the governor Hou Mo Chen Chong with a thousand light cavalry to attack Shi Gui, caught him, and captured Chengdi An, Wang Bohe and others, and sent them to Pingliang.

古文：太祖表崇行原州事。
现代文：太祖上表让侯莫陈崇代理原州事务。
English: The great-grandfather sent Hou Mo Chen Chong to represent the affairs of Wonju.

古文：万俟普拨又遣其将叱干保洛领二千骑来从军。
现代文：万俟普拨又派他的部将叱干保洛带领二千骑兵前来投奔太祖军中。
English: Wancheng Pu Zi also sent his subordinate, Zhi Gan Baoluo, to lead two thousand cavalry to join the Tai Zu army.

古文：三月，太祖进军至原州。
现代文：三月，太祖进军到达原州。
English: In March, Emperor Taizu marched to Wonju.

古文：众军悉集，谕以讨悦之意，士卒莫不怀愤。
现代文：各路军队全部集结在那裹，太祖晓谕要讨伐侯莫陈悦的道理，士卒无不胸怀义愤。
English: All the armies from all directions were gathered there. The great-great-grandfather had declared that they would fight against Hou Mo Chen Yue, and all the soldiers were filled with righteous indignation.

古文：太祖乃表曰： 臣闻誓死酬恩，覆宗报主，人伦所急，赴蹈如归。
现代文：太祖于是上表说： 臣听说誓死酬报恩惠，毁败宗族报效君主，这是人伦中最紧迫的事情，为此而应赴汤蹈火视死如归。
English: The great-grandfather then said to the table: "The vassal has heard that the reward of death is the reward of grace, the destruction of the clan is the reward of the monarch, this is the most urgent thing in human relations, and for this reason he should go to the fire and die.

古文：自大都督臣岳殁后，臣频奉诏还阙，秣马戒途，志不俟旦。
现代文：自从大都督贺拔岳死后，臣多次接到诏书让我回京，我也喂饱战马准备登程，不打算停留片刻。
English: Since the death of the great viceroy He Batyue, the minister has received the edict to let me return to Beijing many times. I have also fed my war horse to prepare for the journey, and I do not plan to stay for a moment.

古文：直以督将已下，咸称贺拔公视我如子，今雠耻未报，亦何面目以处世间，若得一雪冤酷，万死无恨。
现代文：但是自督将以下的军士，都说贺拔公待我如亲生儿子一样，如今仇耻还没有报复，又有什么面目存在世间，如果能一举洗除冤耻，我虽死一万次也不会遣憾。
English: However, the governor and the following officers all said that He Bajong treated me like his own son. Today, there is no revenge, and there is no face in the world. If I can remove the shame at one stroke, I will not regret it even if I die ten thousand times.

古文：且悦外附强臣，内违朝旨。
现代文：况且侯莫陈悦在外依附强臣，在内违逆朝廷旨意。
English: Moreover, Hou Mo Chen Yue depended on powerful vassals on the outside, and defied the will of the imperial court on the inside.

古文：臣今上思逐恶之志，下遂节士之心，冀仗天威，为国除害。
现代文：臣现在在上想完成驱逐邪恶的志愿。在下顺从节士的心愿，希望仰仗天威，为国除害。
English: The vassal now wants to complete the expulsion of evil on the top. On the bottom, he obeys the wish of the sexton, hoping to rely on the will of heaven to eliminate harm for the country.

古文：小违大顺，实在兹辰。
现代文：在小的方面有所违背，在大的方面却顺从圣意，实在是时机就在此时。
English: For the time is at hand when the little ones will be offended, and the great ones will be subject to the will of God.

古文：克定之后，伏待斧钺。 
现代文：等平定侯莫陈悦之后，我再敬候皇上的惩处。 
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue is pacified, I will wait for the emperor's punishment.

古文：夏四月，引兵上陇，留兄子导为都督，镇原州。
现代文：夏季四月，左祖率军向陇地进发，留下哥哥的儿子宇文导为都督，镇守原州。
English: In the summer of April, Zuo Zuo led the army to march to Handan, leaving his brother's son, Wu Wendao, as the governor and town guard of Wonju.

古文：太祖军令严肃，秋毫无犯，百姓大悦。
现代文：太祖军令严明而有法度，一路上秋毫无犯，百姓都非常高兴。
English: Emperor Taizu's military orders were strict and lawful, and there were no crimes committed along the way, and the people were very happy.

古文：识者知其有成。
现代文：有见识的人都知道他会成功。
English: Anyone with any sense knew he would succeed.

古文：军出木峡关，大雨雪，平地二尺。
现代文：大军走出木峡关后，天下大雪，平地雪厚二尺。
English: After the great army went out of Muxia Pass, there was heavy snow all over the country, and the snow on the flat ground was two feet thick.

古文：太祖知悦怯而多猜，乃倍道兼行，出其不意。
现代文：太祖知道侯莫陈悦胆小而多疑，就兼程而行，使侯莫陈悦出其不意。
English: The great-grandfather knew that Hou Mo Chen Yue was timid and suspicious, so he made a side trip, which took Hou Mo Chen Yue by surprise.

古文：悦果疑其左右有异志者，左右亦不安，众遂离贰。
现代文：侯莫陈悦果然怀疑他的左右有心怀异心的人，他的左右也不白安，部众因此离心。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue indeed suspected that there were people on his right and left who harbored heretical thoughts. His right and left were also not at peace, and his followers were thus alienated.

古文：闻大军且至，退保略阳，留一万余人据守水洛。
现代文：侯莫陈悦听到太祖大军将到，退守略阳，留下一万多人据守水洛。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue heard that the great ancestor's army would arrive, he retreated to Liaoyang, leaving more than ten thousand people to guard Shuiluo.

古文：太祖至水洛，命围之，城降。
现代文：太祖到达水洛，命令围城，水洛城守军投降。
English: When the great-grandfather arrived in Shuilao, he ordered the city to be besieged, and the defenders of Shuilao surrendered.

古文：太祖即率轻骑数百趣略阳，以临悦军，悦大惧，乃召其部将议之。
现代文：太祖就率几百轻装骑兵直扑略阳，直逼侯莫陈悦的军队。侯莫陈悦大为恐惧，就召集部将商议。
English: The great-grandfather led a few hundred light cavalry to directly attack Liangyang and force the army of Hou Mo Chen Yue. Hou Mo Chen Yue was very afraid and called the general to discuss.

古文：皆曰 此锋不可当 ，劝悦退保上邽以避之。
现代文：部将们都说 这次来势锋锐不可抵挡 ，劝侯莫陈悦退守上邦以躲避太祖。
English: The generals all said that this time the invading force was too strong to be resisted, and advised Hou Mo Chen Yue to retreat to Shangguo to avoid the Great Ancestor.

古文：时南秦州刺史李弼亦在悦军，乃间道遣使，请为内应。
现代文：当时南秦州刺史李弼也在侯莫陈悦军中，就从小路派遣使者去太祖那裹，请求做内应。
English: At that time, the governor of Southern Qin State, Li Yan, was also in the army of Hou Mo Chen Yue. He sent an envoy to the ancestral home from a side road to ask for a reply.

古文：其夜，悦出军，军中自惊溃，将卒或相率来降。
现代文：当天夜裹，侯莫陈悦出兵应战，军中自相惊恐溃乱，将领士卒有的相继来到太祖军中投降。
English: In the evening of the same day, Hou Mo Chen Yue sent troops to fight. The army panicked and rioted. Some generals and soldiers came to the Taizu army to surrender one after another.

古文：太祖纵兵奋击，大破之。虏获万余人,马八千疋。
现代文：太祖指挥军队奋勇出击，大败侯莫陈悦，俘获一万多人，战马八千匹。
English: The great-grandfather led the army to attack bravely, defeated Hou Mo Chen Yue, captured more than ten thousand people and eight thousand horses.

古文：悦与其子弟及麾下数十骑遁走。
现代文：侯莫陈悦和他的子弟及麾下数十骑逃走。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue fled with his son and dozens of horsemen.

古文：太祖曰： 悦本与曹泥应接，不过走向灵州。 乃令原州都督导邀其前，都督贺拔颍等追其后。
现代文：太祖说： 侯莫陈悦本来和曹泥互为应援，他不过逃往灵州罢了。 于是命令原州都督宇文导在前面拦截，派都督贺拔颍等在后面追击。
English: The great-grandfather said: Hou Mo Chen Yue and Cao Di originally supported each other, but he only fled to Lingshou, so he ordered the governor of the original state, Yu Wendao, to intercept in front and sent the governor of the original state, He Baqian, to pursue in the back.

古文：导至牵屯山追及悦，斩之。
现代文：宇文导到达牵屯山后追上了侯莫陈悦，杀死了他。
English: After arriving at Tutun Mountain, U Wenduo caught up with Hou Mo Chen Yue and killed him.

古文：太祖入上邽，收悦府库，财物山积，皆以赏士卒，毫厘无所取。
现代文：太祖进入上鄞，收缴了侯莫陈悦的府库，财物堆积如山，都用来赏赐给士卒，自己一丝一毫也不拿取。
English: When the great-grandfather entered Shangguan, he confiscated the treasury of Hou Mo Chen Yue. The wealth piled up like a mountain, all of which was used to reward officials, and he did not take any of it for himself.

古文：左右窃一银镂瓮以归，太祖知而罪之，即赐将士，众大悦。
现代文：身边的人窃取了一个银镂的瓮回家，太祖知道后处罚了他，随即将银瓮剖开分赐给将士，众人非常高兴。
English: A person close to him stole a silver ingot and took it home. The great-grandfather punished him after he found out, and then gave the soldiers a cut-up silver ingot. Everyone was very happy.

古文：时凉州刺史李叔仁为其民所执，举州骚扰。
现代文：当时凉州刺史李叔仁被他的百姓捉住，整个凉州骚乱不堪。
English: At that time, Li Shujin, the governor of Liangzhou, was caught by his people, and the whole of Liangzhou was in turmoil.

古文：宕昌羌梁定引吐谷浑寇金城。
现代文：宕昌羌梁仑定引导吐谷浑侵犯金城。
English: Tang Chang and Liang Lunding led the Tuyuhun to invade Jincheng.

古文：渭州及南秦州氐、羌连结，所在蜂起。
现代文：渭州及南秦州的氐、羌相互连结，在各自聚居地区纷纷叛乱。
English: The Yao and Yao of Zhangzhou and South Qin connected with each other and rebelled one after another in their respective areas of settlement.

古文：南岐至于瓜、鄯，跨州据郡者，不可胜数。太祖乃令李弼镇原州，夏州刺史拔也恶蚝镇南秦州，渭州刺史可朱浑元还镇渭州，卫将军赵贵行秦州事。
现代文：从南岐一直到瓜、鄯地区，跨州据郡的不可胜数太祖就命令李弼镇守原州，夏州刺史拔也恶蚝镇守南秦州，渭州刺史可朱浑元仍旧镇守渭州，卫将军趟贵代理秦州事务。
English: From Nanqi all the way to Gua and Handan regions, countless great ancestors across states and counties ordered Li Shizhen to guard Yuanzhou, Xiazhou Zhishibai to guard South Qinzhou, Handan Zhishibai and Zhu Hunyuan to guard Handanzhou, and General Wei to represent Qinzhou affairs.

古文：征豳、泾、东秦、岐四州粟以给军。
现代文：征收豳、泾、东秦、岐四州的粮食来供给军队。
English: The grain from the provinces of Yunnan, Fujian, East Qin and Qi was collected to supply the army.

古文：齐神武闻秦陇克捷，乃遣使于太祖，甘言厚礼，深相倚结。
现代文：齐神武听说太祖在秦陇打了胜仗，就派使者到太祖那裹，用动听的言语和丰厚的礼物来结交太祖。
English: When Qi Shenwu heard that the great-grandfather had won the battle in Qin, he sent an envoy to the great-grandfather, using beautiful words and rich gifts to make friends with the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖拒而不纳。
现代文：太祖拒绝不予接受。
English: The great-grandfather refused to accept.

古文：时齐神武已有异志，故魏帝深仗太祖。乃征二千骑镇东雍州，助为声援，仍令太祖稍引军而东。
现代文：此时齐神武已有叛逆的念头，所以魏孝武帝十分依仗太祖，就向太祖征调二千骑兵来镇守束雍州，作为京师的声援，并叫太祖率领大军稍稍向东移动。
English: At this time, Qi Shenwu already had the idea of rebellion, so Emperor Wei Xiaowu was very dependent on his great-grandfather, so he transferred two thousand cavalrymen to his great-grandfather to guard Sokyang, as a solidarity of the Beijing division, and asked his great-grandfather to lead the army to move a little to the east.

古文：太祖乃遣大都督梁御率步骑五千镇河、渭合口，为图河东之计。
现代文：太祖就派大都督梁御率步兵骑兵五千镇守黄河、渭河的汇合处，作为进取河东的打算。
English: The great-grandfather sent the grand duke Liang Yu and his 5,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the confluence of the Yellow River and the Min River, as a plan to advance to the east of the river.

古文：太祖之讨悦也，悦遣使请援于齐神武，神武使其都督韩轨将兵一万据蒲阪，而雍州刺史贾显送船与轨，请轨兵入关。
现代文：太祖在讨伐侯莫陈悦的时候，侯莫陈悦曾派使者向齐神武求援，齐神武派他的都督韩轨率兵一万据守蒲坂，而雍州刺史买显送船给韩轨，请求韩轨入关。
English: When the great-grandfather was fighting against Hou Mo Chen Yue, Hou Mo Chen Yue had sent an envoy to Qi Shenwu to ask for help. Qi Shenwu sent his governor, Han Zhao, with 10,000 soldiers to guard Busan, while Yongzhou sent a ship to Han Zhao, requesting Han Zhao to enter the customs.

古文：太祖因梁御之东，乃逼召显赴军。
现代文：太祖藉梁御束进的机会，就逼召贾显前来军中。
English: The great-grandfather took advantage of the opportunity of Liang's arrival to force Jia Xian to join the army.

古文：御遂入雍州。
现代文：梁御于是进入了雍州。
English: Emperor Liang then entered Yongzhou.

古文：魏帝遣著作郎姚幼瑜持节劳军，进太祖侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、关西大都督、略阳县公，承制封拜，使持节如故。
现代文：北魏孝武帝派著作郎姚幼瑜持节慰劳太祖军队，提升太祖为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、关西大都督、略阳县公，可以按照皇帝授权封官拜爵，使持节照旧。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the book "Lang Yao Yu Yu" to the troops of the great-grandfather to celebrate the festival, and promoted the great-grandfather to be a chamberlain, a cavalry general, the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, the governor of Kansai, and the governor of Liaoyang County. According to the emperor's authorization, he could be made a peer, so that the festival would continue as before.

古文：于是以寇洛为泾州刺史，李弼为秦州刺史，前略阳郡守张献为南岐州刺史。
现代文：于是太祖任命寇洛为泾州刺史，李弼为秦州刺史，前略阳郡守张献为南岐州刺史。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizu appointed Koro to be the governor of Luzhou, Li Xi to be the governor of Qin, and the former governor of Liangyang County, Zhang Xian, to be the governor of South Qizhou.

古文：卢待伯拒代，遣轻骑袭擒之，待伯自杀。
现代文：卢待伯拒绝接受张献替代他的职务，太祖派轻装骑兵突袭并活捉了他，卢待伯自杀。
English: Lu Zhibo refused to accept Zhang Xian as his replacement, and Emperor Taizu sent light cavalry to raid and capture him alive. Lu Zhibo committed suicide.

古文：时魏帝方图齐神武，又遣征兵。
现代文：当时魏孝武帝正想图谋齐神武，又派使者向太祖征调兵马。
English: At this time, Emperor Wei was planning to attack Emperor Shenwu of Northern Qi, so he sent someone to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：太祖乃令前秦州刺史骆超为大都督，率轻骑一千赴洛。
现代文：太祖就命前秦州刺史骆超为大都督，率领一千轻骑前往洛阳。
English: The great-grandfather was appointed as the grand governor of the former Qin State, and led a thousand light cavalry to Luoyang.

古文：进授太祖兼尚书仆射、关西大行台，余官封如故。
现代文：魏孝武帝进授太祖兼尚书仆射、关西大行台，其余官职封爵照旧。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty conferred the title of Grandfather and the titles of Shang, Shupo, Sha, and Kansai Dajangtai, and the remaining officials were given the title of peer as before.

古文：太祖乃传檄方镇曰：盖闻阴阳递用，盛衰相袭，苟当百六，无间三五。
现代文：太祖于是向各地军事长官发布檄文说：听说阴阳交替发挥作用，盛衰相互承袭，如果正值阳九厄运，朝代就会发生变化。
English: The great-grandfather then issued an imperial edict to military commanders around the country, saying: I heard that yin and yang alternately play a role, and rise and fall are inherited from each other. If it is the time of Yang Jiu's bad luck, the dynasty will change.

古文：皇家创历，陶铸苍生，保安四海，仁育万物。
现代文：皇家创立魏政权，养育百姓，保护四海安宁，培育万物。
English: The royal family founded the Wei regime, nurtured the people, protected the tranquility of the four seas, and nurtured all things.

古文：运距孝昌，屯沴屡起，陇、冀骚动，燕、河狼顾。
现代文：国运行到孝昌年间，灾难屡屡发生，陇、冀骚乱，燕、河人人疑惧。
English: During the years of the country's operation to Xiaochang, disasters repeatedly occurred, and there were riots in Handan and Hebei, and people in Yan and He were suspicious.

古文：虽灵命重启，荡定有期，而乘衅之徒，因生羽翼。
现代文：虽然魏政权的霞命重开，不久就会平定祸乱，但那些乘机作乱的人，却趁此丰满了自己的羽翼。
English: Although the fate of the Wei regime has reopened and the calamity will soon be calmed down, those who take advantage of the opportunity to make trouble have taken advantage of this to enrich their wings.

古文：贼臣高欢，器识庸下，出自舆皂，罕闻礼义，直以一介鹰犬，效力戎行，腼冒恩私，遂阶荣宠。
现代文：贼臣高欢，度量和才识低下，出身低微，不知礼义，衹不过是以一个爪牙的身份，效力军中，惭愧冒昧地承受圣恩，于是攀上荣宠的高位。
English: The thief-vassal is high-spirited, low in stature and talent, low-born, knows nothing of propriety, but only serves as a minion, serves in the army, is ashamed to dare to receive the holy grace, and then climbs to a high position of honor.

古文：不能竭诚尽节，专挟奸回，乃劝尔朱荣行兹篡逆。
现代文：他不能竭尽忠贞保全操节，一味地心怀邪恶，于是劝说尔朱荣进行篡逆活动。
English: He could not do his best to be loyal, maintain discipline, and have evil in his heart, so he persuaded Er Zhu Rong to carry out usurpation activities.

古文：及荣以专政伏诛，世隆以凶党外叛，欢苦相敦勉，令取京师。
现代文：到尔朱荣因专擅朝政而被诛杀后，尔朱世隆因是尔朱荣的叛党而在外反叛，高欢苦苦慰勉他，让他夺取京师。
English: After Zhu Rong was killed for his interference in court politics, Er Zhu Shilong rebelled abroad because he was a rebel of Er Zhu Rong, and Gao Huan painstakingly consoled him and let him seize Beijing Division.

古文：又劝吐万儿复为弒虐，暂立建明，以令天下，假推普泰，欲窃威权。
现代文：产麸又劝说吐万儿杀害孝庄帝，暂立垦庐王为帝，以号令天下，假藉推举节闵帝，想窃取王权。
English: He also persuaded Tu Wan'er to kill Emperor Xiaozhuang and temporarily set up Emperor Jie to rule the world. He wanted to steal the kingship by pretending to appoint Emperor Jie.

古文：并归废斥，俱见酷害。
现代文：长广王和节闵帝均被废斥，都遭毒害。
English: King Changguang and Emperor Jiechi were both deposed and poisoned.

古文：于是称兵河北，假讨尔朱，亟通表奏，云取谗贼。
现代文：于是高欢在河北起兵，假藉讨伐尔朱氏，多次向朝廷上表奏，声称要清除谗贼。
English: As a result, Gao Huan raised an army in Hebei and, under the guise of fighting the Warzhu clan, repeatedly made overtures to the imperial court, claiming that he wanted to purge the usurpers.

古文：既行废黜，遂将篡弒。
现代文：高欢既已废黜了节闵帝，就准备篡夺帝位杀害节闵帝。
English: Since Gao Huan had already deposed Emperor Jiechi, he prepared to usurp the imperial throne and kill Emperor Jiechi.

古文：以人望未改，恐鼎镬交及，乃求宗室，权允人心。
现代文：因为人心没有改变，害怕遭受惩罚，就寻找皇家宗室的人继位，权且搪塞人心。
English: Because the hearts of the people have not changed and they are afraid of being punished, they are looking for a royal family member to succeed to the throne to usurp the power of the people.

古文：天方与魏，必将有主，翊戴圣明，诚非欢力。
现代文：上天正要将政权赋予魏，必定会有君主。拥戴圣明的君主，确实不是高欢的力量。
English: Heaven is about to bestow power on Wei, and there will certainly be a monarch. A monarch who embraces the sacred is indeed not a force for high spirits.

古文：而欢阻兵安忍，自以为功。
现代文：但高欢依恃重兵一贯残忍，自认为是他的功劳。
English: However, Gao Huan and his soldiers were always cruel, and he considered it to be his merit.

古文：广布腹心，跨州连郡，端揆禁闼，莫非亲党。
现代文：他到处安置自己的心腹，跨州连郡，朝中宫内，无处不是他的亲信党羽。
English: He has placed his henchmen everywhere, from interstate to inter-county, from the court to the palace, and his cronies are everywhere.

古文：皆行贪虐，窫窳生人。
现代文：他们贪婪暴虐，残害人民。
English: They are greedy and tyrannical and brutalize the people.

古文：而旧将名臣，正人直士，横生疮痏，动挂网罗。故武卫将军伊琳，清贞刚毅，禁旅攸属；直阁将军鲜于康仁，忠亮骁杰，爪牙斯在：欢收而戮之，曾?闻奏。
现代文：而旧将名臣，正人直士，横遭祸害，动辄遭受冤狱故武卫将军伊琳，为人清贞刚毅，为禁军官兵所仰戴；直合将军鲜于康仁，是忠直骁勇的豪杰，朝廷的爪牙：高欢却将他们收捕杀戮，也没有向圣上禀奏。
English: However, the late Wuwei General Yilin, who was a famous courtier and upright person, suffered from misfortune and was often unjustly imprisoned. He was a man of purity, chastity and fortitude, and was revered by forbidden officers and soldiers. General Zhaohui was a little different from Kangren, he was a loyal and courageous hero, and a minion of the imperial court. However, Gao Huan arrested and killed them, and did not play the harp to the saint.

古文：司空高干，是其党与，每相影响，谋危社稷。
现代文：司空高干，是高欢的党羽，他们常常相互策应，图谋危害社稷。
English: Siku Gao Gan is a high-spirited party member. They often coordinate with each other and plot to harm the society.

古文：但以奸志未从，恐先泄漏，乃密白朝廷，使杀高干，方哭对其弟，称天子横戮。
现代文：但因为高欢邪恶的心意还没有顺遂，担心高干事先泄漏出去，就暗中报告朝廷，让孝武帝杀掉高干，这才哭着对高干的弟弟说，是天子横加杀戮了高干。
English: However, because Gao Huan's evil intentions were not yet successful, fearing that Gao Jian would leak out first, Gao Jian secretly reported to the imperial court and asked Emperor Xiaowu to kill Gao Gan. He then cried to Gao Gan's younger brother and said that it was the Son of Heaven who killed Gao Gan.

古文：孙腾、任祥，欢之心膂，并使入居枢近，伺国间隙，知欢逆谋将发，相继逃归，欢益加抚待，亦无陈白。
现代文：孙腾、任祥是高欢的心腹臂膀，高欢让他们都进入皇上身边，窥测国家可乘之机，他们知道高欢的逆谋即将暴露，相继逃回，高欢更加抚慰地对待他们，也没有向皇上陈述。
English: Sun Teng and Ren Xiang were Gao Huan's confidants. Gao Huan let them all enter the emperor's side to spy on the country's opportunities. They knew that Gao Huan's countermeasures were about to be exposed and fled back one after another. Gao Huan treated them more soothingly and did not report to the emperor.

古文：然欢入洛之始，本有奸谋。
现代文：然而高欢从进入洛阳开始，本来就有邪恶的阴谋。
English: However, Gao Huan had an evil plot from the time he entered Luoyang.

古文：令亲人蔡囗作牧河、济，厚相恩赡，以为东道主人。
现代文：他让亲信蔡俊担任河、济二州刺史，厚加恩遇，将他作为东道主人。
English: He allowed his close friend Cai Jun to serve as the chief historian of He and Jizhou, and was so grateful that he became the host.

古文：故关西大都督、清水公贺拔岳，勋德隆重，兴亡攸寄，欢好乱乐祸，深相忌毒，乃与侯莫陈悦阴图陷害。
现代文：故关西大都督、清水公贺拔岳，功高德重，是国家兴亡的寄托，高欢好乱乐祸，对贺拔岳非常忌恨，就与侯莫陈悦一起阴谋陷害他。
English: Therefore, the governor of Kansai, Shimizu Gong He Baturake, who was highly meritorious, was entrusted with the country's rise and fall. He was very fond of chaos, and hated He Baturake very much, so he conspired with Hou Mo Chen Yue to frame him.

古文：幕府以受律专征，便即讨戮。
现代文：本帅因受命负责征伐，马上就将讨伐高欢。
English: Since he was ordered to be in charge of the campaign, this marshal will immediately begin the campaign against Gaohuan.

古文：欢知逆状已露，稍怀旅距，遂遣蔡囗拒代，令窦泰佐之。
现代文：高欢知道他的逆谋已经败露，决心聚众抗拒，于是让蔡俊拒绝朝廷派人替代他的职务，命窦泰辅佐他。
English: Gao Huan knew that his treacherous plot had been exposed and was determined to rally the masses to resist, so he asked Cai Jun to refuse to have the court send someone to replace him in his position, and to assist him with his life.

古文：又遣侯景等云向白马，辅世珍等径趣石济，高隆之、疋娄昭等屯据壶关，韩轨之徒拥众蒲阪。
现代文：又派侯景等人向白马运动，辅世珍等直奔石济，高隆之、疋娄昭等屯据壶关，韩轨之徒聚兵蒲坂。
English: He also sent Hou Jing and others to the White Horse Campaign, assisted Shizhen and others to go straight to Shiji, Gao Longzhi, Zou Zhao and others to settle in Kuguan, and the followers of Han Guo gathered in Hei Pusan.

古文：于是上书天子，数论得失，訾毁乘舆，威侮朝廷。
现代文：高欢于是上书天子，数说皇上过失，诋毁天子，恃势侮辱朝廷。
English: Gao Huan then wrote to the emperor, saying that the emperor was at fault, slandering the emperor, and insulting the imperial court.

古文：藉此微庸，冀兹大宝。
现代文：凭藉他低微的才德，希望篡夺帝位。
English: Hoping to usurp the throne with his lowly talents.

古文：溪壑可盈，祸心不测。
现代文：沟壑还可以填满，祸心却不可推测。
English: Gullies can be filled, but evil spirits cannot be predicted.

古文：或言径赴荆楚，开疆于外；或言分诣伊洛，取彼谗人；或言欲来入关，与幕府决战。
现代文：有人建议直奔荆楚，在外开拓疆土；有人建议分兵到伊洛，捉拿高欢那个谗佞之人；有人建议准备入关，与我一道共同作战。
English: Some people suggested that we should go straight to Jingchu and explore the territory outside; some people suggested that we should send troops to Ilo to capture Gaohuan, the lazy person; some people suggested that we should prepare to enter the customs and fight together with me.

古文：今圣明御运，天下清夷，百寮师师，四隩来暨。
现代文：如今圣明的君主掌握着国运，天下清平安定，百官端立整齐，四方前来会集。
English: Nowadays, the saintly monarch controls the national movement, the world is clear, peaceful and stable, the officials are neatly arranged, and the four parties come and gather.

古文：人尽忠良，谁为君侧？
现代文：人人竭尽忠良，谁是君主身边的小人?
English: Everyone does their best to be loyal, but who are the villains around the monarch?

古文：而欢威福自己，生是乱阶，缉构南箕，指鹿为马，包藏凶逆，伺我神器。
现代文：而高欢恃势弄权，招致祸乱，聚合谗佞，指鹿为马，包藏凶逆，窥测帝位。
English: But the high-spirited, the powerful, the power-grabbing, the calamity-causing, the aggregating, the deer-as-horse, the treacherous, and the imperial throne-speculating.

古文：是而可忍，孰不可容！
现代文：是可忍，孰不可忍!
English: It is bearable, it is unbearable!

古文：幕府折冲宇宙，亲当受脤，锐师百万，彀骑千群，裹粮坐甲，唯敌是俟，义之所在，糜躯匪恡。
现代文：本帅御敌于天下，当亲自统率大军，精兵百万，持弓弩的骑兵千群，携带粮草披甲而坐，专等敌人到来，为追求大义，虽糜烂身驱也不吝惜。
English: The commander of the enemy in the world, when personally leading a large army, millions of elite soldiers, thousands of cavalry with bows and arrows, carrying grain and grass, wearing armor and sitting, just waiting for the enemy to arrive, in pursuit of the greater good, although he is exhausted, he does not regret.

古文：况频有诏书，班告天下，称欢逆乱，征兵致伐。
现代文：况且天子频频下达诏书，颁布天下，声言高欢谋逆叛乱，微调军队讨伐。
English: Moreover, the emperor frequently issued imperial decrees, promulgated the world, claimed high rejoicing, plotted counter-rebellion, and fine-tuned the army's crusade.

古文：今便分命将帅，应机进讨。
现代文：现在就命令各位将帅，应合战机进军讨伐。
English: Now order your generals to march into battle in response to the fighters.

古文：或趣其要害，或袭其窟宅，电绕蛇击，雾合星罗。
现代文：或直奔他的要害之地，或突袭他的巢穴，急速追击，紧紧围困。
English: Or go straight to his stronghold, or raid his lair, quick pursuit, tight siege.

古文：而欢违负天地，毒被人鬼，乘此扫荡，易同俯拾。
现代文：高欢违背天地的意愿，毒害施及人鬼，乘此时机扫除他，就像俯身捡东西一样容易。
English: Contrary to the will of heaven and earth, Gao Huan poisons people and ghosts. Taking this opportunity to sweep him away is as easy as bending down to pick up something.

古文：欢若渡河，稍逼宗庙，则分命诸将，直取并州，幕府躬自东辕，电赴伊洛；若固其巢穴，未敢发动，亦命群帅，百道俱前，轘裂贼臣，以谢天下。
现代文：高欢如果渡过黄河，逐渐威逼王室，就命令各位将领，直取并州，本帅也亲自挥师束进，疾速奔赴伊洛；如果他固守其巢穴，不敢发兵行动，也命令各位将帅，各路一起进军，车裂贼臣，以此答谢天下。
English: If Gao Huan crossed the Yellow River and gradually threatened the royal family, he would order the generals to directly annex the state, and the general himself would personally wave the division into the state and rush to Ilo; if he stuck to his lair and dared not send troops, he would also order the generals to march all the way together and smash the traitors, in order to thank the world.

古文：其州镇郡县，率土人黎，或州乡冠冕，或勋庸世济，并宜舍逆归顺，立效军门。
现代文：全国各州镇郡县的人民，或者是州乡的官吏名人，或者是功臣世族，都应当舍弃叛逆归顺朝廷，效力于军营。
English: The people of all prefectures, towns, counties and counties across the country, or the officials and celebrities of prefectures and townships, or the heroes of the world, should abandon rebellion and submit to the imperial court, and serve in the military camp.

古文：封赏之科，已有别格。
现代文：封赏的等级，已经制定好了条例。
English: Regulations have been drawn up for the awarding of grades.

古文：凡百君子，可不勉欤。
现代文：所有的君子，难道可以不努力吗。
English: Can all the gentlemen not make an effort?

古文：太祖谓诸将曰： 高欢虽智不足而诈有余，今声言欲西，其意在入洛。
现代文：太祖对将领们说： 高欢虽然才智不足但狡诈有余，现在他扬言要西进，但他的本意在于进入洛阳。
English: The great-grandfather said to the generals: Although Gao Huan is not intelligent enough, he is cunning enough. Now he is threatening to go west, but his intention is to enter Luoyang.

古文：吾欲令寇洛率马步万余，自泾州东引；王罴率甲士一万，先据华州。
现代文：我打算命寇洛率领一万多骑兵和步兵，从迳州束进；王罢率领一万精锐士卒，先占据华州。
English: I want Kolo to take more than ten thousand horse infantrymen from Bozhou to the east, and Wang Yao to lead an army of ten thousand to occupy Huazhou first.

古文：欢若西来，王罴足得抗拒；如其入洛，寇洛即袭汾晋。
现代文：高欢如果西进，王熊完全可以抗拒；如果他进入洛阳，寇洛就去突袭汾晋。
English: If Gao Huan goes west, Wang Xiong can completely resist; if he enters Luoyang, Kolo will go to raid Shujin.

古文：吾便速驾，直赴京邑。
现代文：我就快速前进，径直奔赴京师。
English: I just fast-forwarded and went straight to Beijing.

古文：使其进有内顾之忧，退有被蹑之势。
现代文：使得他向前进时有内顾之忧，向后退时有被追赶之势。
English: This causes him to be cautious when moving forward, and to be chased when moving backward.

古文：一举大定，此为上策。 
现代文：一举成功，这是上策。 大家都说好。
English: It's the best way to succeed in one fell swoop. Everyone agrees.

古文：众咸称善。秋七月，太祖帅众发自高平，前军至于弘农。
现代文：秋季七月，太祖率领兵众从高平出发，前军到达弘农，而齐神武已逐渐逼近京师。
English: In the autumn of July, Taizu led the troops from Gaoping, the vanguard reached Hongnong, and Qi Shenwu was gradually approaching the Beijing Division.

古文：而齐神武稍逼京邑，魏帝亲总六军，屯于河桥，令左卫元斌之、领军斛斯椿镇武牢，遣使告太祖。
现代文：魏孝武帝亲自统率六军，屯驻在河桥，命左卫元斌之、领军斛斯椿镇守武牢，派使者通报太祖。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu personally led the six armies and stationed them in Heqiao. He ordered Zuo Wei Yuan Bin, the leader of the army, to guard the military prison in Jinszhu Town and sent an envoy to inform the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖谓左右曰： 高欢数日行八九百里，晓兵者所忌，正须乘便击之。
现代文：太祖对左右说： 高欢几天时间行军八九百里，这是懂得军事者所忌讳的，正应当趁此机会袭击高欢。
English: The great-grandfather said to the left and right: Gaohuan will march for eight or nine hundred miles in a few days. This is a taboo for those who know the military, and they should take this opportunity to attack Gaohuan.

古文：而主上以万乘之重，不能决战，方缘津据守。
现代文：而主上以万乘之重，不能决战，正在沿渡口据守。
English: But the main force, unable to fight a decisive battle, is holding out along the ferry.

古文：且长河万里，扞御为难，若一处得度，大事去矣。 即以大都督赵贵为别道行台，自蒲阪济，趣并州。
现代文：况且长河万里，很难防御，如果一处被高欢渡过，大事就完了。 于是任命大都督趟贵为别道行台，从蒲坂渡河，直扑并州。
English: Moreover, the river is very long, and it is difficult to defend, and if one place is crossed by Gao Huancong, the big event is over. Therefore, he appointed Datu Guotian as the other way, crossing the river from Busan and directly attacking and annexing the state.

古文：遣大都督李贤将精骑一千赴洛阳。
现代文：派大都督李贤率领精锐骑兵一千前往洛阳。
English: He sent the great governor Li Xian to lead a thousand elite cavalry to Luoyang.

古文：会斌之与斛斯椿争权不协，斌之遂弃椿还，绐帝云： 高欢兵至。 
现代文：正好遇上元斌之和斛斯椿为争夺权力不和，元斌之就丢开斛斯椿跑回来，欺骗孝武帝说： 高欢的兵马已经到了。 
English: Just when Yuan Binzhi and Zhang Shizhun were at odds with each other for power, Yuan Binzhi left Zhang Shizhun and ran back, deceiving Emperor Xiaowu and saying: The high-spirited soldiers have arrived.

古文：七月丁未，帝遂从洛阳率轻骑入关，太祖备仪卫奉迎，谒见东阳驿。
现代文：七月丁未，魏孝武帝就从洛阳率领轻骑入关，太祖备好仪仗和卫队迎接，在束阳驿参拜孝武帝。
English: In July, Emperor Wei Xiaowu led a light cavalry from Luoyang and entered the pass. The great-grandfather prepared a ceremonial battle and a guard to welcome him, and worshipped Emperor Xiaowu in Sokyang.

古文：太祖免冠泣涕谢曰： 臣不能式遏寇虐，遂使乘舆迁幸。
现代文：太祖摘下官帽流着泪谢罪说： 我没有能够遏制敌寇的残害，致使皇上颠沛流离。
English: The great-grandfather took off his official cap and shed tears, saying, "I was not able to contain the damage of the enemy bandits, causing the emperor to be displaced."

古文：请拘司败，以正刑书。 帝曰：
现代文：请求将我拘捕狱中，依法治罪。 孝武帝说：
English: He asked for me to be arrested and detained in prison for a crime in accordance with the law.

古文： 公之忠节，曝于朝野。
现代文： 你的忠诚和操节，朝野尽知。
English: Asano knows all about your loyalty and discipline.

古文：朕以不德，负乘致寇。
现代文：朕因为缺乏德行，身居尊位而招致贼寇横行。
English: Because of my lack of virtue, I am in a position of honor and invite bandits to run rampant.

古文：今日相见，深用厚颜。
现代文：今天与你相见，实在太惭愧了。
English: I'm so ashamed to be seen with you today.

古文：责在朕躬，无劳谢也。 乃奉帝都长安。
现代文：责任在我身上，不必谢罪。 太祖就拥奉孝武帝定都长安。
English: The responsibility is on me, there is no need to apologize. My great-grandfather worshipped Emperor Xiaowu and made Chang'an the capital.

古文：披草莱，立朝廷，军国之政，咸取太祖决焉。
现代文：清除草莽，建立朝廷，军国大政都由太祖决定。
English: The removal of weeds, the establishment of the imperial court, and the military government were all decided by the great ancestor.

古文：仍加授大将军、雍州刺史，兼尚书令，进封略阳郡公，别置二尚书，随机处分，解尚书仆射，余如故。
现代文：仍加授太祖大将军、雍州刺史，兼尚书令，进封略阳郡公，另外设置两名尚书，随时处理机要事务，解除太祖尚书仆射官职，其余照旧不动。
English: He was still awarded the title of Grand Patriarch General, the title of Yongzhou Grand Historian, the title of Grand Chancellor, and the title of Liaoyang County Governor. In addition, two Grand Chancellors were set up to deal with important matters at any time, and the post of Grand Patriarch's secretary was removed. The rest remained unchanged.

古文：太祖固让，诏敦谕，乃。
现代文：太祖坚决推让，孝武帝下韶敦促晓谕，太祖这才接受。
English: The great-grandfather resolutely pushed for concessions, and Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict urging him to explain, which the great-grandfather accepted.

古文：初，魏帝在洛阳，许以冯翊长公主配太祖，未及结纳，而帝西迁。
现代文：当初，魏孝武帝在洛阳，答应要把冯翊长公主许配给太祖，没来得及纳彩行聘，而茎亘游就西迁了。
English: At first, Emperor Wei Xiaowu in Luoyang, promised to marry Princess Feng Qi to the great-grandfather, but he did not have time to accept the offer, and Wanyu moved to the west.

古文：至是，诏太祖尚之，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：到这时，下韶太祖娶这位长公主，拜太祖为驸马都尉。
English: At this time, the Lower Yan Grandfather married the eldest princess, and the Great Grandfather became the captain of the horse.

古文：八月，齐神武袭陷潼关，侵华阴。
现代文：八月，齐神武突袭攻陷了潼关，入侵华阴。
English: In August, Emperor Qishenwu conquered Shaoguan and invaded Huayin.

古文：太祖率诸军屯霸上以待之。
现代文：立担率领各军屯驻在霸上待敌。
English: Li Zhanshan led the troops stationed in the hegemony to wait for the enemy.

古文：齐神武留其将薛瑾守关而退。
现代文：齐神武留下他的部将薛瑾守潼关，自己退回。
English: Qi Shenwu left his subordinate, Xue Yao, to guard Shaoguan and withdrew on his own.

古文：太祖乃进军讨瑾，虏其卒七千，还长安，进位丞相。
现代文：太祖于是进军讨伐莲瑾，俘虏了七千士卒，返回长安，被提升为丞相。
English: The great-grandfather then marched to fight against Lianye, captured seven thousand soldiers, returned to Chang'an, and was promoted to prime minister.

古文：冬十月，齐神武推魏清河王亶子善见为主，徙都于邺，是为东魏。
现代文：冬季十月，齐神武拥立韭蕴渣逛五禀的儿子元善见为皇帝，迁都到邺，造就是东魏。
English: In the winter of October, Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the son of Qi Shennwu, the son of Qi Shennwu and the

古文：十一月，遣仪同李虎与李弼、赵贵等讨曹泥于灵州，虎引河灌之。
现代文：十一月，太祖派仪同李虎与李弼、赵贵等在灵州讨伐曹泥，李虎引黄河水灌灵州城。
English: In November, Pai Yi, together with Li Hu, Li Zhe and Zhao Gui, fought against Cao Di and attacked Lingshou. Li Hu led the Yellow River to flood the city.

古文：明年，泥降，迁其豪帅于咸阳。
现代文：第二年，曹泥投降，太祖把当地的豪帅迁到咸阳。
English: The following year, Cao Di surrendered, and all the leaders of the powerful families were moved to Xianyang.

古文：闰十二月，魏孝武帝崩。
现代文：闰十二月，北魏孝武帝去世。
English: On leap December, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowu passed away.

古文：太祖与群公定策，尊立魏南阳王宝炬为嗣，是为文皇帝。
现代文：太祖和公卿们定策，尊立北魏南阳王宝炬继位为皇帝，这就是西魏的文皇帝。
English: The great-grandfather and the nobles made a decision to establish the Northern Wei Nanyang Wang Bao Jiao as the emperor. This was the beginning of the Western Wei Emperor Wen.

