古文：鄜、延境内有石油，旧说 高奴县出脂水 ，即此也。
现代文：鄜、延境内有一种石油，过去说的 高奴县出产脂水 ，就是指这种东西。
English: There is a kind of oil in Yan and Yan territory. In the past, the so-called "fat water produced in Gaona County" referred to this kind of thing.

古文：生于水际，沙石与泉水相杂，惘惘而出，土人以雉尾甃之，用采入缶中。
现代文：石油产生在水边，与沙石和泉水相混杂，慢慢地流出来，当地人用野鸡羽毛沾取它，采集到瓦罐里。
English: Oil is produced at the water's edge, mixed with sandstone and spring water, and slowly flows out. Locals collect it with pheasant feathers and collect it in earthenware jars.

古文：颇似淳漆，然之如麻，但烟甚浓，所沾幄幕皆黑。
现代文：这种油很像纯漆，燃起来像烧麻杆，只是冒着很浓的烟，它所沾染过的帐篷都变黑。
English: This oil is very much like pure lacquer, it burns like burning hemp, but it emits very thick smoke, and the tents it has contaminated turn black.

古文：余疑其烟可用，试扫其煤以为墨，黑光如漆，松墨不及也，遂大为之，其识文为 延川石液 者是也。
现代文：我猜疑这种烟可以利用，试着扫上它的烟煤用来做成墨，墨的光泽像黑漆，松墨也比不上它了，于是就大量制造它，给它标上名称，叫做 延川石液 。
English: I suspected that this smoke could be used, and tried to sweep its bituminous coal to make ink. The gloss of the ink was like black paint, and the pine ink was no match for it. So I made a lot of it and labeled it with a name, called Yanchuan Stone Liquid.

古文：此物后必大行于世，自余始为之。
现代文：这种墨以后一定广泛流行在世上，从我开始做它。
English: This kind of ink will surely become widely popular in the world after I start making it.

古文：盖石油至多，生于地中无穷，不若松木有时而竭。
现代文：因为石油特别多，在地中产生，无穷无尽，不像松木到一定时候就用完了。
English: Because there is a lot of oil, it is produced in the ground and is inexhaustible, unlike pine, which is used up at a certain time.

古文：今齐、鲁间松林尽矣，渐至太行、京西、江南，松山大半皆童矣。
现代文：现在山东一带的松林已经采完，就连太行山、京西、江南一带有松树的山，现在大都也都光秃秃的了。
English: Now the pine forests around Shandong have been harvested, and even Taihang Mountain, West Beijing, and the south of the Yangtze River, a mountain with pine trees, are now mostly bare.

古文：造煤人盖知石烟之利也。石炭烟亦大，墨人衣。
现代文：制墨的人还都不知道石油燃烧时产生的油烟对制墨有很大好处。石炭燃烧时发出的烟也很大，会把衣服熏黑。
English: People who make ink do not yet know that the soot produced when oil is burned is very good for making ink. The smoke emitted when coal is burned is also very large and can blacken clothes.

古文：余戏为《延州诗》云： 二郎山下雪纷纷，旋卓穹庐学塞人。
现代文：我高兴地开玩笑作了一首《延州》诗： 二郎山下雪纷纷，旋卓穹庐学塞人。
English: I happily made a "Yenzhou" poem as a joke: Jiro mountain snows fall one after another, swivel table dome, learn Cypriot.

古文：化尽素衣冬未老，石烟多似洛阳尘。 
现代文：化尽素衣冬未老，石烟多似洛阳尘。 
English: Vegetarian clothes are worn out before winter, and the stone smoke is more like Luoyang dust.

古文：熙宁中，初行淤田法。
现代文：宋神宗熙宁年间，开始推广淤田法。
English: During the reign of Emperor Song Shenzong, he began to promote the silting method.

古文：论者以谓《史记》所载： 泾水一斛，其泥数斗，且粪且溉，长我禾黍。 
现代文：谈论这件事的人以为就是《史记》中所记载的 泾水一斛，其泥数斗，且粪且溉，长我禾黍 。
English: People who talk about it think that it is just like the story recorded in the "Histories," "A bucket of water, a few buckets of mud, and a lot of manure, and I'll be fine."

古文：所谓 粪 ，即 淤 也。
现代文：文中所说的 粪 ，就是淤田。
English: The manure mentioned in the article is silt.

古文：余出使至宿州，得一石碑，乃唐人凿六陟门，发汴水以淤下泽，民获其利，刻石以颂刺史之功。
现代文：我出使至宿州时，发现过一块石碑，原来是唐朝人开挖修筑了六座斗门，拦截引导汴河水至下游的洼地来淤田，老百姓得到了淤田的利益，所以刻碑来颂扬刺史的功劳。
English: When I was on a mission to Suzhou, I found a stone monument. Originally, the Tang Dynasty excavated and built six sluice gates, intercepting and guiding the water of the Min River to the downstream depression to silt up the fields. The people benefited from the silting up, so the monument was carved to celebrate the merits of the silting up.

古文：则淤田之法，其来盖久矣。
现代文：由此看来，淤田的方法恐怕是由来已久的。
English: From this point of view, the method of silting has probably been around for a long time.

古文：北方有白雁，似雁而小，色白，秋深则来。
现代文：有一种形体短小而绿色的蝉，北方人叫做螓，也就是《诗经》中所说的 螓首蛾眉 的螓。
English: There is a kind of short and green cicada, which the northerners call the cicada, that is, the cicada of the cicada moth's eyebrow in the "Song of Songs."

古文：又闽人谓大蝇为胡螓，亦螓之类也。
现代文：《诗经》用以形容美人，就是取意于螓的头部前后深厚且额头方正。福建人又称一种大蝇为胡螓，大概是和螓属于同一类的昆虫。
English: The word "beautiful" used in the "Book of Songs" refers to the cormorant's deep head and square forehead. Fujianese people also call a large fly a cormorant, which is probably the same kind of insect as a cormorant.

古文：余奉使河北，边太行而北，山崖之间，往往衔螺蚌壳及石子如鸟卵者，横亘石壁如带。
现代文：北方有一种白雁，像雁而形体小，羽毛是白色的，深秋时就飞来。白雁飞来就是霜降的季节，所以河北人把这种鸟叫做 霜信鸟 。杜甫诗说 故国霜前白雁来 ，指的就是这种鸟。我奉命出使河北察访，沿着太行山北行，山崖的岩石间往往夹杂着螺蚌壳及像鸟卵的石子，横亘在石壁上像带子。
English: In the north, there is a white goose, small in size like a goose, with white feathers, which flies in late autumn. When the white goose flies, it is the season of frost, so the people of Hebei call this bird "frost messenger bird." Du Fu's poem said that the white goose came before the frost of the motherland, referring to this bird. I was ordered to send an envoy to Hebei to investigate, and I went north along the Taihang Mountain. The rocks of the mountain cliff are often mixed with snail shells and stones like bird eggs, and they stretch across the stone walls like a ribbon.

古文：此乃昔之海滨，今东距海已近千里。
现代文：这里应是昔日的海滨，而现在东距大海已有近千里。
English: This is supposed to be the former seashore, but now the east is nearly a thousand miles from the sea.

古文：所谓大陆者，皆浊泥所湮耳。
现代文：所谓大陆，看来都是由重浊的泥沙积淀而成的。
English: The so-called continents seem to have been formed by the accumulation of heavy sands.

古文：尧殛鲧于羽山，旧说在东海中，今乃在平陆。
现代文：古史记载尧杀鲧于羽山，旧说羽山在东海中，而现在却在陆地上。
English: According to ancient history, it was located on Mount Hasan, which was once said to be in the East Sea, but is now on land.

古文：凡大河、漳水、滹沱、涿水、桑乾之类，悉是浊流。
现代文：凡黄河、漳水、滹沱、涿水、桑干等河流，全都是混浊的水流。
English: All the rivers such as the Yellow River, Surabaya, Handan, Surabaya, and Sangan are turbid streams.

古文：今关、陕以西，水行地中，不减百余尺，其泥歳东流，皆为大陆之土，此理必然。
现代文：现在关陕以西，水在低于地面的峡谷中流动，最深处不下百余尺，所携带的泥沙每年向东流，都成为造大陆的泥土，大陆由此造成也就是必然之理。
English: Now, to the west of Guanshan, the water flows in a canyon below the ground, with a maximum depth of more than a hundred feet. The sediment carried by the river flows eastward every year, becoming the soil that forms the continent. It is inevitable that the continent was formed as a result.

古文：温州雁荡山，天下奇秀，然自古图牒，未尝有言者。
现代文：温州的雁荡山，是名闻天下的一座神奇秀丽的山，然而自古以来的地理图书，却从未见有提到过它的。
English: Wenzhou's Yandang Mountain is famous as a magical and beautiful mountain, but it has never been mentioned in any geography books since ancient times.

古文：祥符中，因造玉清宫，伐山取材，方有人见之，此时尚未有名。
现代文：大中祥符年间，因为朝廷建造玉清昭应宫，在这里开山伐木取材，才有人发现它，当时它还没有名气。
English: During the Shobu era, because the imperial court built the Jade Emperor's Palace and started logging here, it was only discovered by someone. At that time, it was not famous.

古文：按西域书，阿罗汉诺矩罗居震旦东南大海际雁荡山芙蓉峰龙湫。
现代文：按西域佛教书籍的记载，阿罗汉诺矩罗居住在中国东南大海边的雁荡山芙蓉峰下的龙湫。
English: According to the records of Western Buddhist books, Arohanno Jiro lived in Yongkang under the Furong Peak of Yandang Mountain on the southeast coast of China.

古文：唐僧贯休为《诺矩罗赞》，有 雁荡经行云漠漠，龙湫宴坐雨蒙蒙 之句。
现代文：唐代僧人贯休所作的《诺矩罗赞》中，便有 雁荡经行云漠漠，龙湫宴坐雨濛濛 的诗句。
English: In "Noochiro Rozan" written by the Tang Dynasty monk Nongyu, there is a poem about a wild goose flying through a cloudless desert and a dragon feasting in the rain.

古文：此山南有芙蓉峰，峰下芙蓉驿，前瞰大海，然未知雁荡、龙湫所在。后因伐木，始见此山。
现代文：这座山的南面有芙蓉峰，峰下有芙蓉驿俯瞰前面的大海，然而不知道雁荡、龙湫在什么地方，后来因为伐木，才见到这座山。
English: On the south side of this mountain there is a hibiscus peak, and under the peak there is a hibiscus fern overlooking the sea in front. However, I do not know where the geese and dragonflies are. Later, because of logging, I saw this mountain.

古文：山顶有大池。相传以为雁荡。下有二潭水，以为龙湫。
现代文：山顶有个大池，传说以为这就是雁荡；下面有两个水潭，以为这就是龙湫。
English: There is a large pond at the top of the mountain, and the legend says that this is the Wild Goose Dance; below there are two pools, and it is thought that this is the Dragon Dance.

古文：又以经行峡、宴坐峰，皆后人以贯休诗名之也。
现代文：又有经行峡、宴坐峰，都是后人借用贯休的诗句为它们起的名字。
English: There are also Jingxing Gorge and Ban Zifeng, both of which were named by later generations by borrowing a poem.

古文：谢灵运为永嘉守，凡永嘉山水，游历殆遍，独不言此山，盖当时未有雁荡之名。
现代文：谢灵运曾经为永嘉太守，凡永嘉一带的山水，他游历殆遍，却唯独不曾提到此山，大概当时它还没有 雁荡 这个名称。
English: Xie Lingyun was once the governor of Yongjia. He traveled almost everywhere in the mountains and rivers around Yongjia, but he never mentioned this mountain, probably because at that time it did not have the name "Ganhang."

古文：余观雁荡诸峰，皆峭拔崯怪，上耸千尺，穷崖巨谷，不类他山。
现代文：我观察雁荡诸峰，都峭拔险怪，上耸千尺，高崖巨谷，不似他山，然而它们全都包藏在各个山谷中。
English: I observe the geese flying over the peaks, all of which are steep and dangerous, rising thousands of feet, and the high cliffs and valleys, unlike other mountains, but they are all hidden in the valleys.

古文：皆包在诸谷中，自岭外望之，都无所见；至谷中，则森然千霄。
现代文：自岭外望去则什么都看不见，至谷中才发现它们森然耸立，直冲云霄。
English: If you look from the ridge, you can't see anything, but when you get to the valley, you'll find them towering, straight up into the sky.

古文：原其理，当是为谷中大水冲激，沙土尽去，唯巨石岿然挺立耳。
现代文：推原其形成之理，当是因为山谷中大水的冲激，沙土都被冲走，于是就只剩下那些巨大的岩石岿然挺立在那里。
English: The reason for its formation is probably due to the impact of the large water in the valley, the sand has been washed away, so only those huge rocks are left standing there.

古文：如大小龙湫、水帘、初月谷之类，皆是水凿音漕去声。
现代文：如大小龙湫、水帘谷、初月谷之类，都是大水冲凿出来的坑穴。
English: For example, Longjing, Shuizhen Valley, Hatsugetsu Valley and the like are all pits excavated by large water.

古文：之穴，自下望之，则高岩峭壁；从上观之，适与地平，以至诸峰之顶，亦低于山顶之地面。
现代文：从下面仰望是高岩峭壁，从上面看去则恰与地面相平，以至于诸峰的峰顶也低于山顶之外的地面。
English: From below, it looks like a high rocky cliff, but from above, it is exactly level with the ground, so much so that the summits of the peaks are lower than the ground beyond the summit.

古文：世间沟壑中水凿之处，皆有植土龛岩，亦此类耳。
现代文：世上的沟壑之中，被大水冲凿之处都有直立的土龛和土崖，也属于这一类。
English: Among the world's gullies, there are upright mounds and cliffs wherever they have been washed away by the water, and they also belong to this category.

古文：今成皋、峡西大涧中，立土动及百尺，迥然耸立，亦雁荡具体而微者，但此土彼石耳。
现代文：如今成皋至陕州西部一带的大涧中，直立的土崖动及百尺，迥然耸立，也可说就是具体而微的雁荡山，只不过这里是土崖而那里是石山而已。
English: Nowadays, from Chengdu to Dalat in the western part of Shaanxi Province, the upright cliffs are hundreds of feet high and towering. It can also be said that they are concrete and faint geese, but here is a cliff and there is a stone mountain.

古文：既非挺出地上，则为深谷林莽所蔽，故古人未见，灵运所不至，理不足怪也。
现代文：雁荡山既非陡峭地立于地面上，就一定被深山峡谷的莽莽丛林所掩蔽，因而古人未见此山，谢灵运也不曾到过，就理应不足为怪了。
English: Since the Wild Goose Mountain does not stand steeply on the ground, it must be covered by the wild jungle of the deep mountain canyon. Therefore, it should not be surprising that the ancients did not see this mountain and Xie Lingyun did not visit it.

古文：内诸司舍屋，唯秘阁最宏壮。
现代文：宫城内各机构的屋舍建筑，只有秘阁最为宏伟壮观。
English: Of all the institutional buildings in Miyagi, only Hidaka is the most magnificent.

古文：阁下穹隆高敞，相传谓之 木天 。
现代文：站在阁下仰望，穹隆形的阁顶高高地向四面敞开，历来相传，称之为 木天 。
English: Standing and looking up at you, the dome-shaped roof of the pavilion is high and open to all sides. It has been passed down from generation to generation and is called the Wooden Sky.

古文：方家以磁石磨针锋，则能指南，然常微偏东，不全南也，水浮多荡摇。
现代文：方术家用磁石磨针尖，则针尖能指南，然而常常微微偏东，不完全指向正南方。
English: When sharpening the tip of a household magnet, the tip of the needle can be sharpened, but it is often slightly eastward and does not completely point to the south.

古文：指爪及碗唇上皆可为之，运转尤速，但坚滑易坠，不若缕悬为最善。
现代文：让带磁的针浮在水上，则多摇荡；放在指甲上或碗边上试验也可以，而且转动速度更快，但这类物品坚硬光滑，针容易坠落；不如用丝线把针吊起来，这是最好的办法。
English: Let the magnetic needle float on the water, it will shake more; it can also be tested on the nail or on the edge of the bowl, and the rotation speed is faster, but this kind of item is hard and smooth, and the needle is easy to fall; it is better to hang the needle with silk thread, which is the best way.

古文：其法取新纩中独茧缕，以芥子许蜡，缀于针腰，无风处悬之，则针常指南。
现代文：其办法是从新缫出的丝絮中，抽出由一只茧拉出的丝，用芥末粒大小的一点蜡，把它粘缀于针腰处的平衡点上，在无风的地方悬挂，则针尖常常指南。
English: The method is to extract the silk pulled by a beak from the newly dredged silk fluff, use a little wax the size of a mustard grain, stick it to the balance point at the waist of the needle, and hang it in a windless place, then the needle tip is often the guide.

古文：其中有磨而指北者。
现代文：其中也有针尖磨过之后指北的。
English: Among them, there are also needles that point north after being sharpened.

古文：余家指南、北者皆有之。
现代文：我家里指南指北的都有。
English: My family's guidebooks all point north.

古文：磁石之指南，犹柏之指西，莫可原其理。
现代文：磁石指南的特性，犹如柏树的生长偏向西方，现在还无法推究其道理。
English: The nature of the magnetic compass, like the growth of cypress trees towards the west, cannot yet be deduced.

古文：歳首画钟馗于门，不右起自何时。
现代文：每年元旦时在门上画钟馗，不知源起于何时。
English: Every year on New Year's Day, a chime is painted on the door. I don't know when it originated.

古文：皇祐中，金陵发一冢，有石志，乃宋宗悫母郑夫人。
现代文：皇祐年间，金陵发掘出一座古墓，有石制的墓志，据此知道这是南朝刘宋时宗悫之母郑夫人的墓。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yu, an ancient tomb was unearthed in Jinling, with a stone epitaph, according to which it was known that this was the tomb of Mrs. Zheng, the mother of the Southern Dynasty's Liu Song Dynasty.

古文：宗悫有妹名钟道，则知钟馗之设亦远。
现代文：墓志载宗悫有个妹妹名叫钟馗，可见有关钟馗的风俗已经行之久远了。
English: Zonglu's epitaph mentions that he had a younger sister named Zhonglu, which shows that the custom of Zhonglu has been around for a long time.

古文：茶牙，古人谓之雀舌、麦颗，言其至嫩也。
现代文：茶叶的嫩芽，古人叫做 雀舌 、 麦颗 ，是说它们特别嫩。
English: The young shoots of tea leaves, the ancients called "bird's tongue" and "wheat grain," which means that they are particularly tender.

古文：今茶之美者，其质素良，而所植之木又美，则新牙一发，便长寸余，其细如针。
现代文：如今茶叶中的精品，其质地本来就好，而栽种的土地又肥沃，所以新芽一抽出来就能长到一寸多长，且像针一般细长。
English: Today's high-quality tea leaves have a good texture, and the land on which they are grown is fertile, so the new buds can grow to more than an inch long as soon as they are pulled out, and they are as slender as needles.

古文：唯牙长为上品，以其质榦、土力皆有余故也。
现代文：只有长的茶芽才算是上品，因为茶芽长是茶树本身的养分及土壤肥力都很富足的缘故。
English: Only long tea buds are considered superior, because long tea buds are the reason why the tea tree itself is rich in nutrients and soil fertility.

古文：如雀舌、麦颗者，极下材耳，乃北人不识，误为品题。
现代文：像 雀舌 、 麦颗 ，其实是最下等级的茶叶，由于北方人不懂，才误将其品评为好茶。
English: Like buckwheat and barley, it is actually the lowest grade of tea, and because people in the north do not understand it, they mistakenly rate it as good tea.

古文：余山居有《茶论》，《尝茶》诗云： 谁把嫩香名雀舌？定知北客示曾尝。
现代文：我闲居山乡时，写过《茶论》，在《尝茶》诗中写道： 谁把嫩香名 雀舌 ，定知北客未曾尝。
English: When I was living in the mountains, I wrote about "Tea," and in the poem "Tasting Tea" I wrote: "Whoever calls tea a delicacy, must have never tasted it."

古文：不知灵草天然异，一夜风吹一寸长。 
现代文：不知灵草天然异，一夜风吹一寸长。 
English: Unknown to me, the reishi is naturally different. One night, the wind blew it an inch long.

古文：闽中荔枝，核有小如丁香者，多肉而甘。
现代文：福建地区的荔枝，核有小得像丁香荔的，肉多而甘甜，当地人也能种植这种荔枝。
English: The litchi in Fujian has a core as small as a lilac litchi, with a lot of meat and sweetness. Local people can also grow this litchi.

古文：土人亦能为之，取荔枝木去其宗根，仍火燔令焦，復种之，以大石抵其根，但令傍根得生，其核乃小，种之不復牙。
现代文：其办法是拿普通的荔枝树，把它的老本和主根取下来，又用火把它烤得焦煳煳的，再栽到地里去，并用大石头压住它的根，只让它从旁边生根，这样长出来的荔枝核就小，再种这种核也不再发芽。
English: The method is to take an ordinary litchi tree, take off its old stem and main root, and roast it with fire until it is scorched, then plant it in the ground, and use large stones to hold down its roots, only letting it take root from the side, so that the litchi core that grows out is small, and this core will no longer germinate.

古文：正如六畜去势，则多肉而不復有子耳。
现代文：正如家畜被阉割去势后，就会多长肉而不再能繁殖后代。
English: Just as domestic animals are castrated after castration, they will have more meat and will no longer be able to reproduce offspring.

古文：处士刘易，隐居王屋山。尝于斋中见一大蜂，于蛛网，蛛搏之，为蜂所螫坠地。
现代文：处士刘易隐居于王屋山，曾在书房内看到一只大蜂被蛛网挂住，蜘蛛搏击蜂子，反被蜂子蜇刺而坠落地上。
English: Officer Liu Yi lives in seclusion in Wangyashan. In his study, he once saw a large bee caught in a spider's web. The spider fought the bee, but was stung by the bee and fell to the ground.

古文：俄顷，蛛鼓腹欲烈，徐行入草。
现代文：不一会儿，蜘蛛腹部肿胀起来似乎要破裂，就慢慢爬到了草中。
English: After a while, the spider's abdomen swelled up and looked like it was about to burst, and it slowly crawled into the grass.

古文：蛛啮芋梗微破，以疮就啮处磨之，良久腹渐消，轻躁如故。
现代文：蜘蛛微微咬破了一条芋头的梗，把被毒刺的疮口靠到芋梗咬破处摩擦，过了一阵子，其腹部的肿胀逐渐消了下去，又和先前一样轻松狂躁。
English: The spider slightly bit through a stalk of taro, rubbed the wound of the sting against the place where the stalk was bitten, and after a while, the swelling of its abdomen gradually disappeared, and it was as easy and manic as before.

古文：自后人有为蜂螫者，挼芋梗傅之则愈。
现代文：从那以后，人有被毒蜂蜇了的，揉搓芋梗敷在伤口上就能痊愈。
English: Since then, people who have been stung by poisonous bees can rub yakitori on the wound to heal.

古文：漳州界有一水，号乌脚溪，涉者足皆如黑。
现代文：漳州境内有一条河，叫做乌脚溪，蹚水过河的人，腿脚都会像被墨汁染过。
English: There is a river in Luzhou called Wufu Creek. People who cross the river through the water will have their legs and feet dyed with ink.

古文：数十里间，水皆不可饮，饮则病瘴，行人皆载水自随。
现代文：数十里之间的水都不可饮用，饮用了就会得瘴气病，路过这里的人都随身自己带着饮用水。
English: The water between tens of miles is not drinkable. If you drink it, you will get rickets. People who pass by here bring their own drinking water with them.

古文：梅龙图公仪宦州县时，沿牒至漳州；素多病，预忧瘴疠为害，至乌脚溪，使数人肩荷之，以物蒙身，恐为毒水所沾。
现代文：梅龙图公仪在州县为官时，调动到漳州，他素来多病，来之前就担心身体会更遭受瘴疠的伤害。至乌脚溪，让数人用肩舆抬着他过河，并用物品把全身蒙住，恐怕被有毒的水沾染。
English: When Merongtu Gongyi was an official in Zhoushu County, he was transferred to Zhangzhou. He had always been ill, and before he came, he was worried that his body would suffer more damage from radon. To Wufu Creek, he had several people carry him across the river on their shoulders and cover his whole body with items, fearing that he would be contaminated by toxic water.

古文：兢惕过甚，瞧盱矍铄，忽坠水中，至于没顶。
现代文：由于过分警惕，战战兢兢的，惊视水中，忽然掉了下去，以至于淹没了头顶才被捞出来，全身都黑得像是黑人。
English: Because of excessive vigilance, trembling, startled, staring into the water, suddenly fell down, so that the top of his head was submerged before being fished out, his whole body was black like a black man.

古文：乃出之，举体黑如昆仑，自谓必死。然自此宿病尽除，顿觉康健，无復昔之羸瘵。又不知何也？
现代文：自以为必死无疑，然而从此以后，多年的旧病全都没有了，顿觉身体康健，不再像以前那样病弱，却又不明白这是什么缘故。
English: He thought he would surely die, but after that, all his old illnesses of many years disappeared, and he suddenly felt healthy and no longer as weak as before, but he did not understand why.

