古文：黄干字直卿，福州闽县人。
现代文：黄干，字直卿，福州闽县人。
English: Huang Gan, also known as Zhi Jiaqing, is from Fuzhou's Jixian County.

古文：父瑀，在高宗时为监察御史，以笃行直道著闻。
现代文：父亲黄王禹，在高宗的时候担任监察御史，以行为诚实、正直守道而闻名。
English: His father, Huang Wang Yu, served as inspector-general of history during the reign of Emperor Gaozong, and was known for his honesty and integrity.

古文：瑀没，干往见清江刘清之。清之奇之，曰： 子乃远器，时学非所以处子也。 因命受业朱熹。
现代文：黄王禹死后，黄干去见清江县刘清之，刘清之对他的才能感到惊奇，说： 你是将来会成大器的人，现时的学问并不适合于你。 因此，令他去朱熹门下受业。
English: After the death of Huang Wang Yu, Huang Gan went to see Liu Qingzhi of Qingjiang County. Liu Qingzhi was surprised by his talent and said: You are a person who will become a great instrument in the future, the current learning is not suitable for you. Therefore, he was sent to study under Zhu Xi.

古文：干家法严重，乃以白母，即日行。
现代文：黄干家法严格，于是把这个话告诉他的母亲，当天就去了朱熹那里。
English: Huang Gan's family law is strict, so he told this to his mother and went to Zhu Xi that day.

古文：时大雪，既至而熹它出，干因留客邸，卧起一榻，不解衣者二月，而熹始归。
现代文：当时下大雪，到了后，朱熹因有其他的事而外出，黄干因此而留宿在客栈，睡觉起床都在一榻之上，不解衣而卧有两个月，而朱熹才回来。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily. After arriving, Zhu Xi went out due to other matters. Huang Gan stayed at the inn for this reason. He slept and woke up in the same bed. He lay there for two months without undressing, and only then did Zhu Xi return.

古文：干自见熹，夜不设榻，不解带，少倦则微坐，一倚或至达曙。
现代文：黄干自从见到朱熹后，晚上不设置床榻，不解衣带，稍疲倦就微坐片刻，一靠坐有时就到了早晨。
English: Since seeing Zhu Xi, Huang Gan does not set up a bed in the evening, does not undo the clothes belt, sits for a moment when he is a little tired, and sometimes sits until morning.

古文：熹语人曰： 直卿志坚思苦，与之处甚有益。 尝诣东莱吕祖谦，以所闻于熹者相质正。
现代文：朱熹告诉别人说 ：黄直卿意志坚定，思想苦心积虑，与他相处，甚为有益。 曾经拜访东莱吕祖谦，把从朱熹那里学得或听到的问题请他对证质疑。
English: Zhu Xi told others: Huang Zhiqing has a strong will, his thoughts are painstakingly calculated, and it is very beneficial to get along with him. He once visited Donglai Lu Zuqian and asked him to question the evidence of the questions he learned or heard from Zhu Xi.

古文：及广汉张栻亡。熹与干书曰： 吾道益孤矣，所望于贤者不轻。 后遂以其子妻干。
现代文：到广汉人张木式死时，朱熹给黄干的书信上说 ：我的道义学业更加孤单了，对你抱有的希望很大。 
English: When the Guanghan Zhang Muxihong died, Zhu Xi said in a letter to Huang Gan: My moral education has become more lonely, and I have great hopes for you.

古文：宁宗即位，熹命干奉表，补将仕郎，铨中，授迪功郎，监台州酒务。
现代文：后来，就把自己的女儿嫁给他为妻。宋宁宗即位之际，朱熹命黄干奉表上奏，补任将仕郎，铨选中后，授予迪功郎，监察台州酒务。
English: Later, he married his daughter to him. On the occasion of the enthronement of Song Ningzong, Zhu Xi ordered Huang Gan to serve as the first secretary, the second secretary, and after the election, he awarded Di Gonglang to supervise Taizhou's liquor affairs.

古文：丁母忧，学者从之讲学于墓庐甚众。
现代文：服母丧期间，很多学者跟随他一起讲学于他母亲的墓旁。
English: During his mother's funeral, many scholars followed him to lecture at his mother's grave.

古文：熹作竹林精舍成，遗干书，有 它时便可请直卿代即讲席 之语。
现代文：朱熹修建竹林精舍成后，写信给黄干，其中有 将来适当的时候便可请黄直卿代他担任讲席 的话。
English: After the construction of the bamboo forest was completed, Zhu Xi wrote a letter to Huang Gan, in which he said that in the future, when the time was right, Huang Zhiqing could be invited to take his place as a lecturer.

古文：及编《礼书》，独以《丧》、《祭》二编属干，稿成，熹见而喜曰： 所立规模次第，缜密有条理，它日当取所编家乡、邦国、王朝礼，悉仿此更定之。 病革，以深衣及所著书授干，手书与诀曰： 吾道之托在此，吾无憾矣。 讣闻，干持心丧三年毕，调监嘉兴府石门酒库。
现代文：到编《礼书》的时候，独以《丧》、《祭》二编嘱咐黄干编写，书稿写成以后，朱熹看后高兴地说： 所定立的规模次第，缜密而有条理，它日当取所编写的家乡、邦国、王朝礼，全部仿照这个来更改定稿。 病重之际，朱熹把制服及所写的书授给黄干，手书诀别语说： 我的学术思想就托付在这里，我没有遗憾了。 听到讣告，黄干在心中悼念老师三年后，调任嘉兴府石门酒库监察。
English: When compiling "The Book of Etiquette," Zhu Gan instructed Huang Gan to use only the second part of "Funeral" and "Celebration." After the manuscript was written, Zhu Gan looked at it and said happily: According to the established scale, it is meticulous and orderly. It should take the hometown, state, and dynasty etiquette that has been compiled, and change the final draft according to this. When he was seriously ill, Zhu Gan gave the uniform and the book he wrote to Huang Gan, and said goodbye to the manuscript: My academic thought is entrusted here, I do not regret it. After hearing the obituary, Huang Gan mourned the teacher in his heart for three years

古文：时韩侂胄方谋用兵，吴猎帅湖北，将赴镇，访以兵事。干曰： 闻议者谓今天下欲为大举深入之谋，果尔，必败。
现代文：当时韩胄刚打算用兵北伐，吴猎被召令赴荆湖北路任将帅，将要赴任之前，以兵事访问黄干，黄干说 ：听到人们议论说，现在天下想实施大举深入北伐的打算，果然这样做的话，一定失败。
English: At that time, Han Yigang planned to use soldiers for the Northern Expedition, and Wu Huan was ordered to go to Jinghu North Road to be appointed as a general. Before he was going to take office, he visited Huang Gan with soldiers. Huang Gan said: I heard people say that now the world wants to implement a large-scale plan to go deep into the Northern Expedition. If this is done, it will certainly fail.

古文：此何时而可进取哉？ 猎雅敬干名德，辟为荆湖北路安抚司激赏酒库兼准备差遣，事有未当，必输忠款力争。
现代文：这样什么时候可以进取呢？ 吴猎很敬重黄干的名义德行，请他担任荆湖北路安抚司激赏酒库兼准备差遣，事有未当之处，一定心怀忠心，努力力争。
English: When can you make progress in this way? Wu Han highly respected Huang Gan's reputation for virtue, and asked him to serve as the Jinghu North Road pacification department to reward the liquor store and prepare the dispatch. There were things that were not appropriate, and he must be loyal and work hard.

古文：江西提举常平赵希怿、知抚州高商老辟为临川令，岁旱，劝粜捕蝗极其力。
现代文：江西提举常平赵希怿、知抚州高商老举荐他担任临川县令，当年天旱，他劝粜捕蝗极其用力。
English: He was recommended by Changping Zhao Xichen, a high-ranking merchant in Jiangxi Province, and a high-ranking merchant in Chifuzhou Province, to serve as the county magistrate of Linchuan County. In the year of drought, he urged the locusts to be caught extremely hard.

古文：改知新淦县，吏民习知临川之政，皆喜，不令而政行。
现代文：改任新淦知县，官吏百姓都知道他在临川的政绩，都高兴，不出令而政教行。
English: He was reappointed to Xinqizhi County. The officials and common people all knew of his political achievements in Linchuan, and they were all happy. He did not issue orders, but acted as a political educator.

古文：以提举常平郡太守荐，擢监尚书六部门，未上，改差通判安丰军。
现代文：因提举常平、郡太守推荐，擢升任监尚书六部门，没有上任，改差任安丰军通判。
English: Because he was recommended by Changping and the county magistrate, he was promoted to the position of inspector of six departments, but he did not take up the post, and was transferred to the position of Anfeng military magistrate.

古文：淮西帅司檄干鞫和州狱，狱故以疑未决，干释囚桎梏饮食之，委曲审问无所得。
现代文：淮西帅司邀请黄干审讯和州狱事，狱事故意存疑而没有判决，黄干释放了囚犯的桎梏而给他饮食，委婉审问，没有所得。
English: Huaxi Superintendent invited Huang Gan for interrogation and the state prison warden. The prison accident was doubtful and there was no judgment. Huang Gan released the prisoner's shackles and gave him food. The interrogation was euphemistic and there was no income.

古文：一夜，梦井中有人，明日呼囚诘之曰： 汝杀人，投之于井，我悉知之矣，胡得欺我。 囚遂惊服，果于废井得尸。
现代文：一天晚上，梦见井中有人，第二天召捕囚犯审讯他说： 你杀了人，投之于井中，我都知道了，你不要来欺骗我。 囚犯于是惊服，果然在废井底中寻到了尸体。
English: One night, he dreamed that there was someone in the well. The next day, he summoned the prisoner to interrogate him and said, "You killed someone and threw him into the well. I know all about it. Don't try to deceive me." The prisoner was convinced, and the corpse was indeed found at the bottom of the waste well.

古文：寻知汉阳军。
现代文：黄干不久担任汉阳军知军。
English: Huang Gan soon became the leader of the Hanyang army.

古文：值岁饥，籴客米、发常平以振。
现代文：正值那年歉收，买进外地的粮米，开常平仓以赈济。
English: At the time of that year's poor harvest, they bought grain and rice from other places and often closed their warehouses to save money.

古文：制置司下令，欲移本军之粟而禁其籴，干报以乞候干罢然后施行，及援鄂州例，十之一告籴于制司。
现代文：制置司下令，想移本军的粟米而禁止他们买入外地的粮食，黄干回答说请待黄干被罢职后再这样施行，到援引鄂州的先例，十分之一告籴于制司。
English: Huang Gan replied that he would wait until Huang Gan was removed from his post before implementing the order. Citing the precedent of Ezhou, one-tenth of the grain went to the Ministry of Supply.

古文：荒政具举。
现代文：荒政都施行得很有条理。
English: The despotic regimes have all been carried out in a very systematic way.

古文：旁郡饥民辐凑，惠抚均一，春暖愿归者给之粮，不愿者结庐居之，民大感悦。
现代文：其他附近州县的饥民都集中到汉阳军来，他同样优抚惠顾，到春暖花开的季节愿意回归的人送给他粮食，不愿意回去的人可做茅屋居住下来，民众因此感到很高兴。
English: Hungry people from other nearby prefectures and counties flocked to Hanyangjunjun. He was also kind to his patrons. During the spring blooming season, those who were willing to return gave him grain, and those who did not want to go back could live in huts. The people were very happy about this.

古文：所至以重庠序，先教养。
现代文：黄干所到之地重视兴办学校，优先教化。
English: Huang Gan attaches great importance to building schools in the places he visits, and gives priority to education.

古文：其在汉阳，即郡治后凤栖山为屋，馆四方士，立周、程、游、朱四先生祠。
现代文：在汉阳军任职时，即在郡邑治所凤栖山修建学校，立馆收教四方之学士，修立周敦颐、程颐、游酢、朱熹四先生的祠庙。
English: When he served in the Hanyang Army, he built a school in Fengqishan, the county seat of the county, and established a hall to receive the bachelors of the four sides, and built a temple for Mr. Zhou Dunyao, Cheng Yao, You Zui and Zhu Xi.

古文：以病乞祠，主管武夷冲祐观。
现代文：因病请求祠官，主管武夷冲佑观。
English: Due to illness, he asked the priest in charge of the shrine, Wuyi Chongyou Xuan.

古文：寻起知安庆府，至则金人破光山，而沿边多警。
现代文：不久，黄干起任为安庆府知府，到任的时候，金人攻破光山县，而沿边地区多有敌兵入侵之报警。
English: Soon after, Huang Gan was appointed as the governor of Anqing Prefecture. When he took office, the Jin people invaded Guangshan County, and there were many alarms about the invasion of enemy soldiers along the border areas.

古文：安庆去光山不远，民情震恐。
现代文：安庆离光山县不远，民众的情绪因此震惊、恐惧。
English: Anqing is not far from Guangshan County, so the mood of the people is shocked and fearful.

古文：乃请于朝，城安庆以备战守，不俟报，即日兴工。
现代文：于是请求朝廷，修筑安庆城池以备战守，没有等到回答，即日动工兴建。
English: Therefore, he asked the imperial court to build Anqing Castle to prepare for the war, and did not wait for an answer, but started construction the same day.

古文：城分十二料，先自筑一料，计其工费若干，然后委官吏、寓公、士人分料主之。
现代文：城分十二料，先自筑一料，计算其工费若干，然后委任官吏、寓公、士人分料主持承担。
English: The city is divided into twelve parts. First, build one part yourself, calculate its cost, and then appoint officials, officials, and officials to preside over the division.

古文：役民兵五千人，人役九十日，而计人户产钱起丁夫，通役二万夫，人十日而罢。
现代文：集役民兵五千人，每人役作九十天，而按照人户的产钱摊派承担丁役负担，通役二万人，每人服役十天。
English: Five thousand militiamen were conscripted, each serving for ninety days, while twenty thousand people were conscripted, each serving for ten days, according to the apportionment of household income.

古文：役者更番，暑月月休六日，日午休一时，至秋渐杀其半。
现代文：承担劳役的人轮流进行，暑月天热每月休息六天，每天中午休息一个时辰，到秋天就减少一半休息的时间。
English: The people who undertake the labor service take turns. In the hot summer months, they have a six-day break every month, with an hour's break at noon every day. By the autumn, the break time is reduced by half.

古文：干日以五鼓坐于堂，濠砦官入听命，以一日成算授之：役某乡民兵若干，某乡人夫若干；分布于某人料分，或搬运某处土木，应副某料使用；某料民兵人夫合当更代，合散几日钱米。
现代文：黄干每天五更鼓响的时候就上衙署坐堂，负责城壕的官吏至此听他的命令，按照一天的成算授给他们：某乡民若干为役，某乡人夫若干为役，分布给某人的料分，或搬运某处土木，应完成某料的使用；某料民兵、人夫应当更换一批，应给他们几天的钱米。
English: Every day, when the drum sounded at five o'clock, Huang Gan would go to the government office and sit in the hall. The officials in charge of the trenches would then listen to his orders and award them according to the results of the day: a certain number of villagers would serve, a certain number of villagers would serve, the materials distributed to a certain person, or the carrying of a certain place of civil engineering, should complete the use of a certain material; a certain number of militia and manpower should be replaced, and they should be given a few days' worth of rice.

古文：俱受命毕，乃治府事，理民讼，接宾客，阅士卒，会僚佐讲究边防利病，次则巡城视役，晚入书院讲论经史。
现代文：都授命完毕，乃治理府事，受理民事诉讼，接待宾客，检阅士卒，会见僚属佐吏讲究边防利病，然后巡视城邑检查修城之役夫情况，晚上到书院讲论经典史籍。
English: After all the tasks were completed, it was time to manage the affairs of the government, accept civil lawsuits, receive guests, review the ranks of officers and men, meet with colleagues and subordinate officers, pay attention to the border defense, and then inspect the townships to check the status of the construction workers. In the evening, he went to the college to give a lecture on classic historical books.

古文：筑城之杵，用钱监未铸之铁，事毕还之。
现代文：筑城用的杵，用钱监没有铸造的铁，事毕之后就归还仓库。
English: The shovel used to build the city, the iron that the money supervisor did not cast, was returned to the warehouse after the event.

古文：城成，会上元日张灯，士民扶老携幼，往来不绝。
现代文：城池完工的时候，恰逢上元日张灯，士民扶老携幼，往来不断。
English: When the castle pond was completed, it coincided with the lighting of the lanterns on the first day of the year. The scholars and the people helped the elderly with their children, and they kept coming and going.

古文：有老妪百岁，二子舆之，诸孙从，至府致谢。
现代文：有一上百岁的老婆婆，二个儿子抬着她，许多孙子跟随她，到府衙致谢。
English: A hundred-year-old grandmother, two sons carrying her and many grandchildren following her, came to the prefectural capital to express their gratitude.

古文：干礼之，命具酒炙，且劳以金帛。
现代文：黄干用礼仪接待她，命摆酒招待她，又用金帛酬劳她。
English: Huang Gan received her with etiquette, invited her to drink wine, and rewarded her with gold ingots.

古文：妪曰： 老妇之来，为一郡生灵谢耳，太守之赐非所冀也。 不受而去。
现代文：老婆婆说 ：老妇之来致谢，是为了一郡的生灵百姓来感谢知府，知府的赏赐并不是我所希望的。 
English: The old woman said: The old woman came to thank the prefectural government for the sake of the living people of the county. The reward from the prefectural government was not what I had hoped for.

古文：是岁大旱，干祈辄雨，或未出，晨兴登郡阁，望灊山再拜，雨即至。
现代文：没有接受就离开了。这一年天大旱，黄干祈祷立刻下雨，未下，早晨就登临郡城的楼阁，望飅山再拜，雨就下下来了。
English: He did not accept and left. This year, the weather was very dry, Huang Gan prayed for rain immediately, and before it fell, he went to the county castle in the morning, looked at Lushan Mountain and prayed again, and the rain came down.

古文：后二年，金人破黄州沙窝诸关，淮东、西皆震，独安庆按堵如故。
现代文：后二年，金人攻破黄州沙窝各个关隘，淮东、淮西都因此震惊，唯独安庆凭依城墙之险如故，泰然自若。
English: In the last two years, the Jin people broke through all the barriers of the Huangzhou sand dungeon, and both East Huai and West Huai were shocked. However, Anqing was calm and confident because of the danger of the city wall.

古文：继而霖潦余月，巨浸暴至，城屹然无虞。
现代文：接着下了一个多月的大雨，巨大的洪暴席卷而来，城邑屹然无虑。
English: Then more than a month of heavy rain fell, huge floods swept in, and the city was undisturbed.

古文：舒人德之，相谓曰： 不残于寇，不滔于水，生汝者黄父也。 
现代文：舒地一带的人都以为他德高望重，相互称道他说： 没有受到金寇的残暴掳掠，没有淹没于滔滔的洪水，挽救了我们的生命的人是黄父母官。 
English: People in the Shudi area held him in high esteem and praised each other. He said, "It was the Yellow Parents' official who saved our lives, who did not suffer the cruel plunder of the gold robbers and did not drown in the torrential flood.

古文：制置李珏辟为参议官，再辞不受。
现代文：制置使李珏召黄干担任参议官，再次推辞没有接受。
English: As a result of the system set up, Li Ying called Huang Gan to serve as a senator, and he did not accept the second resignation.

古文：既而朝命与徐侨两易和州，且令先赴制府禀议，干即日解印趋制府。
现代文：接着朝廷命他与徐侨两次改易和州任官，又令他先赴制府禀告议论，黄干即日解印卸任急赴制府。
English: Next, the imperial court ordered him and Xu Qiao to be transferred twice and appointed to state officials, and ordered him to go to the government office first to discuss the obituary, and Huang Gan rushed to the government office the same day to unseal the obituary.

古文：和州人日望其来，曰： 是尝檄至吾郡鞫死囚、感梦于井中者，庶能直吾屈乎。 
现代文：和州民众每天盼望他来上任，说： 就是曾经被邀到我郡审问死囚、感梦于井中有尸的那个人，大概能为我们伸张冤屈了。 
English: And the people of the state look forward to his arrival every day, saying, "The man who was once invited to my county to interrogate a death row inmate, who had a dream about a body in a well, may be able to right our wrongs."

古文：先是，干移书珏曰： 丞相诛韩之后，惩意外之变，专用左右亲信之人，往往得罪于天下公议。
现代文：先前，黄干写信给李珏说： 丞相诛杀韩世忠之后，为了防止意外的变故，专门使用左右亲信之人，往往得罪于天下的公议。
English: Earlier, Huang Gan wrote a letter to Li Wei saying: After the assassination of Han Shizhong by the prime minister, in order to prevent unexpected changes, the special use of close confidants often offended the public opinion of the world.

古文：世之君子遂从而归咎于丞相，丞相不堪其咎，继然逐去之，而左右亲信者其用愈专矣。
现代文：世之君子于是从而归咎于丞相，丞相经不住其指责，断然驱逐而去，而左右亲信的小人办事更专断了。
English: The gentleman of the world then blamed the prime minister. The prime minister could not stand the criticism and expelled him, while the petty people around him became even more arbitrary.

古文：平居无事，纪纲紊乱，不过州县之间，百姓受祸。
现代文：平常无事情，法纪纲常紊乱，不过州县之间，百姓受祸。
English: Ordinarily, there is nothing wrong, and the legal system is often disorderly, but between states and counties, the people are plagued.

古文：至于军政不修，边备废弛，皆此曹为之，若今大敌在境，更不改图，大事去矣。
现代文：至于军政不修，边地军备废弛，都是这些人所造成的，假若现在大兵压境，还不改革图强，就会大势已去。
English: As for the lack of improvement in military and political affairs and the depletion of armaments in the border areas, all of these are caused by these people. If the army oppresses the border and does not have a strong reform plan, the general trend will be gone.

古文：今日之急，莫大于此。 又曰： 今日之计，莫若用两淮之人，食两淮之粟，守两淮之地。
现代文：现在的急务，没有什么比这个更大了？ 又说 ：现在的决策，没有什么比得上用两淮的民众，吃两淮的粟米，守两淮的地方。
English: There is nothing more urgent than this? He also said: the current decision-making, there is nothing comparable to the people who use two huai, eat two huai of corn, and guard two huai of places.

古文：然其策当先明保伍，保伍既明，则为之立堡砦，蓄马、制军器以资其用，不过累月，军政可成。
现代文：然而其治策当先明了保伍，保伍明了，就为之建立堡寨，养蓄马匹，制造军器以资助其用途，不过几个月时间，军政即可成功。
English: However, his policy should be to protect the troops, and when the troops knew it, they built a fortress for it, raised horses, and made military equipment to finance its use. However, in a few months, the military government could be successful.

古文：且淮民遭丙寅之厄，今闻金人迁汴，莫不狼顾胁息，有弃田庐、挈妻子渡江之意，其间勇悍者。且将伺变窃发。
现代文：而且两淮的民众遭受丙寅年之祸危以后，现在听说金人迁徙汴京，没有谁不惊慌失措，有的有抛弃土地、房屋、携妻带子渡过长江的打算，其中也有些勇敢者，又打算伺机而发动叛乱。
English: Moreover, after the people of the two Huai suffered the calamity of the year of Yin and Yin, now that they have heard that the Jin people are migrating to Beijing, no one is not panicked. Some have plans to abandon land, houses, and cross the Yangtze River with their wives, and some of them are brave and plan to wait for an opportunity to launch a rebellion.

古文：向日胡海、张军之变，为害甚于金，今若不早为之图，则两淮日见荒墟，卒有警急，攘臂而起矣。 珏皆不能用。
现代文：过去胡海、张军的变乱，其危害胜过了金兵，今天如果不早些为之打算，那么两淮就会一天天地更见荒凉，以致成为废墟，最后一旦遇有紧急情况，就会振臂激奋而起，生乱子。 李珏都不能够接受采用他的意见。
English: In the past, Hu Hai's and Zhang Jun's upheavals were more harmful than the rise of the Golden Army; today, if it is not planned for earlier, then the two provinces will become more and more desolate day by day, so that they will become ruins, and finally, in the event of an emergency, they will get excited and stir up trouble.

古文：及至制府，珏往惟扬视师，与偕行，干言： 敌既退，当思所以赏功罚罪者。崔惟扬能于清平山豫立义砦，断金人右臂，方仪真能措置捍御，不使军民仓皇奔轶，此二人者当荐之。
现代文：黄干到任制府，李珏往惟扬视察军队情况，黄干与他一起同行。黄干说： 敌人既已被打退，应当考虑奖赏那些有功的，惩罚有罪的人，崔惟扬能于清平山预先设置义寨，如断金人的右臂，方仪真能措置捍御，不致使军民仓惶奔逃，这两个人应当受到举荐。
English: Huang Gan went to the government-in-exile, Li Xi went to Wei Yang to inspect the situation of the army, and Huang Gan went along with him. Huang Gan said: Since the enemy has been repulsed, it should be considered to reward those who are meritorious and punish those who are guilty. Cui Wei Yang can set up a righteous encampment in Qingping Mountain in advance, such as the right arm of the gold breaker. Fang Yi can really protect the measures and prevent the soldiers and civilians from fleeing in panic. These two people should be recommended.

古文：泗上之败，刘倬可斩也。
现代文：泗上之战大败，应该斩杀刘倬。
English: After the crushing defeat in the Battle of Jiuyang, Liu Bei should be killed.

古文：某州官吏三人携家奔窜，追而治之，然后具奏可也。 其时幕府书馆皆轻儇浮靡之士，僚吏士民有献谋画，多为毁抹疏驳。
现代文：某州官吏三人携家奔逃，应当追究治罪，然后上奏朝廷即行了。 这个时候，幕府书馆都是轻薄浮躁空虚的士大夫，官僚小吏士民有出谋划策献计的人，大多受到他们的毁谤抹杀，疏议反驳。
English: Three officials of a certain state ran away with their families. They should be prosecuted and punished, and then reported to the imperial court. At this time, the shogunate libraries were full of frivolous, impetuous, and empty officials, bureaucrats, petty officials, and people who had plans to offer were mostly slandered and killed by them, and their arguments were refuted.

古文：将帅偏，人心不附，所向无功。
现代文：将帅偏补，人心不附和，所做的不能建立功业。
English: The generals are biased, the hearts of the people are not in harmony, and what they have done cannot build a career.

古文：流移满道，而诸司长吏张宴无虚日。
现代文：流民移徙的满布道路，而各机构衙署张罗宴会的没有哪一天空闲过。
English: The roads are full of migrants, and agencies have not had a day off since the Zhang Luo banquet.

古文：干知不足与共事，归自惟扬，再辞和州之命，仍乞祠，闭阁谢客，宴乐不与。
现代文：黄干知道不能与这样的人共事，就从惟扬而归，又辞掉和州知州的任命，仍然请求祠官，闭门谢客，从不参加宴会、舞乐。
English: Huang Gan knew that he could not work with such a person, so he returned from Wei Yang. He also resigned from the appointment of the prefect and the prefect of the prefecture. He still requested the priest, closed the door to thank the guests, and never attended the banquet or the dance.

古文：乃复告珏曰：
现代文：于是，又告诉李珏说：
English: Therefore, he also told Li Yao:

古文：浮光敌退已两月，安丰已一月，盱眙亦将两旬，不知吾所措置者何事，所施行者何策。
现代文： 浮光之战退敌已有两个月，在安丰退敌已有一个月，盱眙也近二十天了，不知我所措置的是怎么一回事，我所施行的是什么防边之策？
English: It has been two months since the retreat in the Battle of Fuxing, one month since the retreat in Anfeng, and nearly twenty days since the Battle of Shantou. I do not know what measures I have taken, and what border defense measures I have implemented.

古文：边备之弛，又甚于前，日复一日，恬不知惧，恐其祸又不止今春矣。
现代文：而边备松弛，又比以前更厉害了，日复一日，还满不在乎地不知道害怕，恐怕这个祸害又不只是今年春天了。
English: And the borderline slackness, again worse than before, day after day, still carelessly unaware of fear, I'm afraid this scourge is not just this spring.

古文：向者轻信人言，为泗上之役，丧师万人。
现代文： 过去，你轻信别人的话，进行泗水之役，丧失了军队上万人。
English: In the past, you trusted the words of others, carried out the Battle of Surabaya, and lost tens of thousands of troops.

古文：良将劲卒、精兵利器，不战而沦于泗水，黄团老幼，俘虏杀戮五六千人，盱眙东西数百里，莽为丘墟。
现代文：优良的将帅，勇敢的士兵，精锐的军队，锐利的武器，不战而沦败于泗水，黄团的老幼男女，被俘虏而杀戮的五六千人，盱眙东西几百里，一下子变为废墟。
English: Excellent generals, brave soldiers, elite troops, sharp weapons, without fighting and fallen in Surabaya, the old and young men and women of the Yellow Regiment, the five or six thousand people who were captured and killed, hundreds of miles to the east and west, suddenly turned into ruins.

古文：安丰、浮光之事大率类此。
现代文：安丰、浮光的事情，大概与这差不多。
English: The situation with Anfeng and Fugaku is probably similar to this.

古文：切意千乘言旋，必痛自咎责，出宿于外，大戒于国，曰： 此吾之罪也，有能箴吾失者，疾入谏。 日与僚属及四方贤士讨论条画，以为后图。
现代文：我的意思是，不论怎么说，一定须痛切地引咎自责，出宿于外，大戒于国，说： 这是我的罪过，若有能够指出我的过失的，请速入谏。 每天与僚属及四方的贤士大夫讨论策画，以为后来打算。
English: I mean, in any case, you must painfully blame yourself, go out of the country, and say: This is my fault, if anyone can point out my fault, please go to jail immediately. Discuss the plan with colleagues and doctors every day, and think about it later.

古文：今归已五日矣，但闻请总领、运使至玉麟堂赏牡丹，用妓乐，又闻总领、运使请宴赏亦然，又闻宴僚属亦然。
现代文：今回来有五天了，只是听说请总领、运使到玉麟堂欣赏牡丹，召用歌妓宴乐，又听说总领、运使宴赏也是一样的，只听说宴请僚属也是一样的。
English: I have been back for five days now, but I just heard that the general leader and dispatchers were invited to Yulin Hall to enjoy peonies and invite prostitutes to the banquet. I also heard that the general leader and dispatchers were also rewarded with the same banquet, and I just heard that the banquet was also the same.

古文：邦人诸军闻之，岂不痛愤。
现代文：国人、将士听到这些，难道不痛心愤恨吗？
English: Don't the Chinese people and soldiers feel bitter and angry when they hear this?

古文：且视牡丹之红艳，岂不思边庭之流血；视管弦之啁啾，岂不思老幼之哀号；视栋宇之宏丽，岂不思士卒之暴露；视饮馔之丰美，岂不思流民之冻馁。
现代文：况且，欣赏看到牡丹之红艳，难道不思虑边庭之流血；听到管弦的啁啾之声，难道不思考百姓老幼的哀号；看到楼房栋宇的富丽堂皇，难道不思虑士兵暴露于野的身影；看到饮食菜肴那样丰美，难道就不思虑流亡的民众忍饥挨冻的情形？
English: Moreover, when admiring and seeing the red and bright peonies, do you not think about the bloodshed in the courtyard; when hearing the orchestra, do you not think about the cries of the people; when seeing the grandeur of the buildings, do you not think about the soldiers exposed in the field; when seeing the richness of the food, do you not think about the hunger and cold of the exiled people?

古文：敌国深侵，宇内骚动，主上食不甘味，听朝不怡；大臣忧惧，不知所出。
现代文：敌国深入内侵，国内骚动不安，皇上食不甘味，听朝理政不快乐；大臣忧虑担心，不知良策所出。
English: The enemy country is deeply involved in internal invasion, domestic turmoil is unsettling, the emperor's food is not sweet, and he is not happy to listen to the government; the minister is worried and worried, and he does not know what good policies will come out.

古文：尚书岂得不朝夕忧惧，而乃如是之迂缓暇逸耶！
现代文：尚书难道就不早晚忧惧，而总是像这样轻松自如，无所事事吗？
English: Wasn't Shang Shuxu always worried, but always relaxed like this, with nothing to do?

古文：今浮光之报又至矣，金欲以十六县之众，四月攻浮光，侵五关，且以一县五千人为率，则当有八万人攻浮光，以万人刈吾麦，以五万人攻吾关。
现代文： 现在，金兵报浮光之仇的情形又快出现了，他们想以十六县的人众，于四月攻掠浮光，侵夺五关，暂且以一县有五千人参加，就应当有八万人来攻打浮光了，以一万人来割我们的麦子，以五万人来攻夺我们的关隘。
English: Now, the situation of Jinbei's revenge on Fuguang is about to appear again. They want to use the people of 16 counties to attack Fuguang in April and seize five passes. For the time being, if five thousand people participate in one county, there should be eighty thousand people to attack Fuguang, ten thousand people to cut our wheat, and fifty thousand people to capture our pass.

古文：吾之守关不过五六百人，岂能当万人之众哉？
现代文：我们守关的不过五六百人，岂能够抵挡万人之众呢？
English: We are only five or six hundred people guarding the gate, how can we hold out against thousands of people?

古文：则关之不可守决矣。
现代文：那么，关隘不可以防守是肯定的了。
English: So, it is certain that the pass cannot be defended.

古文：五关失守，则蕲、黄决不可保；蕲、黄不保，则江南危。
现代文：五关失守以后，那么蕲州、黄州决不可能保住；蕲州、黄州不能保住，那么，江南就危险了。
English: If the five passes are lost, then Zhangzhou and Huangzhou cannot be saved; if Zhangzhou and Huangzhou cannot be saved, then the south of the Yangtze River will be in danger.

古文：尚书闻此亦已数日，乃不闻有所施行，何耶？
现代文：尚书听到这个话已有几天，然而没有听说有什么施行的对策，不知为什么？ 
English: Shang Shu has heard this for a few days, but has not heard of any countermeasures to be implemented. I don't know why?

古文：其它言皆激切，同幕忌之尤甚，共诋排之。
现代文：其他的话，言辞都很激动，切中要害，李珏的同党、幕僚都很忌妒他，共同诋毁、排斥他。
English: Other words and rhetoric were very emotional and to the point. Li Gan's fellow party members and aides were very jealous of him and worked together to discredit and ostracize him.

古文：厥后光、黄、蕲继失，果如其言。
现代文：这以后，光州、黄州、蕲州相继失陷，果然像他所预料的那样。
English: After that, Gwangju, Hwangju and Yeongju fell one after another, just as he had expected.

古文：遂力辞去，请祠不已。
现代文：于是力求辞职而去，不断地请求祠官。
English: As a result, he tried to resign and left, constantly asking the priest for help.

古文：俄再命知安庆，不就，入庐山访其友李燔、陈宓，相与盘旋玉渊、三峡间，俯仰其师旧迹，讲《乾》、《坤》二卦于白鹿书院，山南北之士皆来集。
现代文：不久，黄干又一次被任命为安庆府知府，没有就职，到庐山拜访他的朋友李燔、陈宓，相与盘旋玉渊、三峡之间，俯仰拜谒老师到过的旧迹，宣讲《乾》、《坤》二卦于白鹿书院，庐山南北的士大夫们都会集于此。
English: Soon after, Huang Gan was once again appointed as the governor of Anqing Prefecture, but he did not take office. He went to Lushan to visit his friends Li Qian and Chen Quan, and hovered between the Jade River and the Three Gorges, bowing down and worshiping the old sites that Teacher Quan had visited. He preached "Qian" and "Kun" in Bailu Academy, and scholars from the north and south of Lushan would gather here.

古文：未几，召赴行在所奏事，除大理丞，不拜，为御史李楠所劾。
现代文：不久，被召赴朝廷上书奏事，任命为大理寺丞，没有接受任命，被御史大夫李楠所弹劾。
English: Soon after, he was summoned to the Imperial Court to make a report, and was appointed as the Dailiji no jo. However, he did not accept the appointment, and was impeached by the Imperial Historian, Li Nan.

古文：初，干入荆湖幕府，奔走诸关，与江、淮豪杰游，而豪杰往往愿依干。
现代文：起初，黄干在荆湖北路幕府任职，奔走于各地关隘，与江、淮各地的豪杰交往，而豪杰往往愿意依附黄干。
English: At first, Huang Gan held a post in the Northern Jinghu Road Shogunate, and traveled throughout the provinces, interacting with heroes from all over the Jiangsu and Huai, and the heroes were often willing to follow Huang Gan.

古文：及倅安丰、武定，诸将皆归心焉。
现代文：等到辅佐治理安丰、武安，诸将都诚心归附于他。
English: Wait until the assistant governors of Anfeng and Wu'an, all generals will sincerely adhere to him.

古文：后倅建康，守汉阳，声闻益著。
现代文：后来辅佐治理建康，主管汉阳军，其名声日益显著。
English: Later, he assisted in the governance of Jiankang and was in charge of the Hanyang Army, and his reputation became increasingly prominent.

古文：诸豪又深知干倜傥有谋，及来安庆，且兼制幕，长淮军民之心，翕然相向。
现代文：各位豪杰又深知黄干倜傥有谋略，来到安庆时，又兼任制置幕僚，长淮各地军民之心，全部一心倾向于他。
English: All the heroes also knew that Huang Gansu had a strategy. When he came to Anqing, he also served as a staff officer, and the hearts of the soldiers and people around Changhuai were all inclined to him.

古文：此声既出，在位者益忌，且虑干入见必直言边事，以悟上意，至是群起挤之。
现代文：这样的风声一传出，在权位上的人更加妒忌他，又担心黄干入见皇上时，一定直言相告边防的事情，以使皇上的心意感悟，至此，众多僚臣一起排挤他。
English: As soon as this rumor was spread, those in power became even more jealous of him. They also feared that when Huang Ganyin came to see the emperor, he would have to speak frankly about the border defense, so that the emperor's heart would be impressed. At this point, many ministers crowded him out.

古文：干遂归里，弟子日盛，巴蜀、江、湖之士皆来，编礼著书，日不暇给，夜与之讲论经理，亹亹不倦，借邻寺以处之，朝夕往来，质疑请益如熹时。
现代文：黄干于是回归乡里，学生日益增加，巴蜀、江浙、荆湖之士都有来投他的，编辑礼仪，著写书籍，每天没有闲暇，晚上与他们讲论经典，论说理义，勤勉不倦，借邻寺为住地，朝夕往来，质疑问难请求教益像朱熹讲学的时候一样。
English: Huang Gan then returned to the countryside. The number of students increased day by day. People from Bashu, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Jinghu all came to vote for him. He edited etiquette and wrote books. He had no leisure every day. In the evening, he lectured on classics and reason with them. He was diligent and tireless. He used a nearby temple as his residence. He came and went from morning to evening. He asked questions and solicited advice, just like when Zhu Xi was lecturing.

古文：俄命知潮州，辞不行，差主管亳州明道宫，逾月遂乞致仕，诏许之，特授承议郎。
现代文：不久，任命他担任潮州知州，推辞没有赴任，差遣主管亳州明道宫，过了一个多月就请求辞官归居，诏令同意，特地授予他职为承议郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Chaozhou Zhizhou, but he did not go to the post after his resignation. He sent a letter to the head of the Zhangzhou Mingdao Palace, and after more than a month, he asked to resign from the post and return to his residence. The imperial edict agreed, and he was specially awarded the post of negotiator.

古文：既没后数年，以门人请谥，又特赠朝奉郎，与一子下州文学，谥文肃。
现代文：死了几年以后，因为门人请求赐谥，又特地赠赐他为朝奉郎，给与他一个儿子为下州文学职，赐谥 文肃 。
English: A few years after his death, because of the request of his relatives, he was granted the title of "Court Servant" and one of his sons was given the title of "Lower State Literary Official" and given the title of "Minister of Civil Affairs."

古文：子〈木路〉、柽，赐同进士出身。
现代文：著作有《经解》、《文集》流行于世。
English: His works such as "The Interpretation of the Classics" and "Collected Works" are popular in the world.

古文：陈淳字安卿，漳州龙溪人。
现代文：陈淳，字安卿，漳州龙溪县人。
English: Chen Chun, also known as Anqing, was from Longxi County, Zhangzhou.

古文：少习举子业，林宗臣见而奇之，且曰： 此非圣贤事业也。 因授以《近思录》，淳退而读之，遂尽弃其业焉。
现代文：少年时代学习科举之业，林宗臣见到他后对他的才智感到很惊奇，又说： 这不是圣贤的事业。 因此，向他传授《近思录》，陈淳因此改读此书，于是全部抛弃了他原来的举子之业。
English: When Lin Zongchen met him, he was surprised by his talent and said, "This is not the career of a sage." Therefore, he taught Chen Jun to read "Current Thought" instead, and Chen Jun completely abandoned his original career of raising children.

古文：及朱熹来守其乡，淳请受教，熹曰： 凡阅义理，必穷其原，如为人父何故止于慈，为人子何故止于孝，其他可类推也。 淳闻而为学益力，日求其所未至。
现代文：到朱熹来他们乡居守的时候，陈淳请求接受他的教育，朱熹说： 凡是学习阅览义理，一定要穷究其原委，如为人父亲为什么要慈，为人之子为什么要孝，其他可因此类推。 陈淳听到这个话后学习更加努力，每天探求他所没有懂得的道理。
English: When Zhu Xi came to stay in their hometown, Chen Chun asked to be educated by him. Zhu Xi said, "Whenever you study and read the principles of righteousness, you must thoroughly investigate their reasons, such as why you should be kind as a father, why you should be filial to your children, and others can be inferred from this. After Chen Chun heard this, he studied harder and explored the truth he did not understand every day.

古文：熹数语人以 南来，吾道喜得陈淳 ，门人有疑问不合者，则称淳善问。
现代文：朱熹多次对人说道： 往南而来，我的道之传授喜得陈淳。 门人中有疑问不清楚的，就说陈淳善于回答。
English: Zhu Xi repeatedly said to people: "Coming to the south, Chen Jun is pleased with the teaching of my way. If there is a question that is not clear, he said that Chen Jun is good at answering.

古文：后十年，淳复往见熹，陈其所得，时熹已寝疾，语之曰： 如公所学，已见本原，所阙者下学之功尔。 自是所闻皆要切语，凡三月而熹卒。
现代文：后来过了十年，陈淳又去拜见朱熹，陈述他所学得的东西，当时，朱熹因疾病已经安寝休息，告诉他说： 如你所学，已经知道了本原，所缺乏的就是努力勤奋治学的功夫。 从这时从朱熹那里所听说的都是切中要害的话，过了三个月，朱熹去世了。
English: Ten years later, Chen Chun went to see Zhu Yao again to report what he had learned. At that time, Zhu Yao was already sleeping and resting due to illness. He told him: "As you have learned, you have already known the root cause. What is lacking is the effort to study diligently. From that time on, everything he heard from Zhu Yao was to the point. Three months later, Zhu Yao passed away.

古文：淳追思师训，前自裁抑，无书不读，无物不格，日积月累，义理贯通，洞见条绪。
现代文：陈淳追思老师的教训，痛心地自我抑制，无书不读，无物不去探究，日积月累，义理贯达通明，洞见条绪清晰。
English: Chen Chun thought about the teacher's lesson, painfully restrained himself, did not read any books, did not explore anything, accumulated over time, the principles were clear, and the insights were clear.

古文：故其言太极曰：太极只是理，理本圆，故太极之体浑沦。
现代文：故他议论太极道 ：太极只是理，理本圆，所以太极之体浑然而一。
English: Therefore, he said about Taijiquan: Taijiquan is just reason, reason is round, so the body of Taijiquan is one and the same.

古文：以理言，则自末而本，自本而末，一聚一散，而太极无所不极其至。
现代文：用理来议论，就从末而至本，又自本而至末，一聚一散，而太极无所不至其极。
English: To argue with reason is to go from the end to the beginning, and from the beginning to the end, and from the beginning to the end, and from the beginning to the end, and from the beginning to the end.

古文：自万古之前与万古之后，无端无始，此浑沦太极之全体也。
现代文：从万古之前到万古以后，没有开端没有结尾，这就是混沌太极的全体。
English: From eternity before to eternity after, there is no beginning and no end. This is the entirety of Chaos Taiji.

古文：自其冲漠无朕，而天地万物皆由是出，及天地万物既由是出，又复冲漠无朕，此浑沦无极之妙用也。
现代文：自从这个虚寂无我，而天地万物都由这里而出，到天地万物由这里而出的时候，又再归虚寂无我，这是混沌无极的妙用。
English: From the time when there is no self in this emptiness, and all things in heaven and on earth come forth from here, to the time when all things in heaven and on earth come forth from here, and again return to emptiness and no self, this is the ultimate use of chaos.

古文：圣人一心浑沦太极之全体，而酬酢万变，无非太极流行之用。
现代文：圣人全心于混沌太极之全体，而应酬万变，无非就是太极流行之用。
English: The sage is devoted to the entire chaos of Taiji, and the ever-changing entertainment is nothing more than the use of Taiji.

古文：学问工夫，须从万事万物中贯过，凑成一浑沦大本，又于浑沦大本中散为万事万物，使无少窒碍，然后实体得浑沦至极者在我，而大用不差矣。 
现代文：学问工夫，必须从万事万物中条贯通过，凑成一个混沌大本，又于混沌大本中分散为万事万物，使其没有一丁点儿阻碍，然后实体得以使混沌至极者在我，而大本之用不会有所欠缺了。 
English: The effort of learning must pass through all things and all things, make a chaotic big book, and then disperse into all things and all things in the chaotic big book, so that there is not the slightest obstacle, and then the entity can make the chaos supreme in me, and the use of the big book will not be lacking.

古文：其言仁曰： 仁只是天理生生之全体，无表里、动静、隐显、精粗之间，惟此心纯是天理之公，而绝无一毫人欲之私，乃可以当其名。
现代文：陈淳在谈论仁的时候说 ：仁只是天理所生衍出来的全体，没有外表与里面、运动与静止、隐晦与显露、精细与粗糙之间的差别，只有这个心纯是天理之公，而绝对没有一毫人欲之念，才可以担当这个名声。
English: Chen Jun said about Ren: "Ren is just a totality born and bred by nature. There is no difference between the outside and the inside, movement and stillness, obscurity and exposure, fineness and coarseness. Only this heart is pure by nature, and absolutely without any human desire, can take on this reputation."

古文：若一处有病痛，一事有欠阙，一念有间断，则私意行而生理息，即顽痹不仁矣。 
现代文：假如一处有病痛，一事有欠缺，一念有闪失间断，就会有私欲的意念横行而生理的意念停息，就会顽钝愚笨而不仁了。 
English: If there is an ailment in one place, a deficiency in one thing, a glitch in one thought, there will be a selfish thought rampant and a physiological thought stopped, and it will be obtuse, stupid and insensitive.

古文：其语学者曰： 道理初无玄妙，只在日用人事间，但循序用功，便自有见。
现代文：陈淳在谈论学者的时候说 ：道理起初并不玄妙，只是在日常生活、人事之间，只是循序用功，便自己有所领悟、收获。
English: When talking about scholars, Chen Jun said: At first, the truth is not mysterious, it is just in daily life, between people, just working hard in a step-by-step manner, and then they have some understanding and harvest.

古文：所谓 下学上达 者，须下学工夫到，乃可从事上达，然不可以此而安于小成也。
现代文：所谓 下学上达 者，须下学的功夫彻底，才可以从事于上达，然而，还不可以仅满足于这样的小小的成功。
English: The so-called high achievers need to work hard in school before they can work on improving, but they can't be satisfied with such a small success.

古文：夫盈天地间千条万绪，是多少人事；圣人大成之地，千节万目，是多少功夫。
现代文：盈天地之间千条万绪，是多少人事；圣人大成之地，千节万目，是多少功夫。
English: Between heaven and earth, there are thousands of links. How many people are involved? In the land of sages, there are thousands of knots. How much effort is required?

古文：惟当开拓心胸，大作基址。
现代文：应当开拓心胸，大规模地打好基础。
English: We should open our minds and lay a good foundation on a large scale.

古文：须万理明彻于胸中，将此心放在天地间一例看，然后可以语孔、孟之乐。
现代文：必须把万理在胸中完全清楚地弄明白，将此心放在天地间一例看，然后可以谈论孔孟之道的乐趣。
English: It is necessary to fully understand the universal truth in one's heart, put this heart in the world as an example, and then we can talk about the fun of the way of Confucius and Mencius.

古文：须明三代法度，通之于当今而无不宜，然后为全儒，而可以语王佐事业。
现代文：必须明了夏、商、周三代的法度，通晓于当今而没有不适应的，然后成为全儒，而可以与王者议论、辅佐他的事业。
English: It is necessary to understand the laws of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, to be familiar with the present and not unsuitable, and then to become a full Confucian, but to be able to discuss with the king and assist his cause.

古文：须运用酬酢，如探诸囊中而不匮，然后为资之深，取之左右逢其原，而真为已物矣。
现代文：须运用应酬，好像在口袋里面拿东西而没有匮乏，然后为资之深，取这左右而能逢其源，这样就真正成为了自己的东西。
English: You have to use entertainment as if you were taking something out of your pocket and there was no shortage, and then as a veteran, you can take this right and left and go to its source, so it really becomes your own thing.

古文：至于以天理人欲分数而验宾主进退之几，如好好色，恶恶臭，而为天理人欲强弱之证，必使之于是是非非如辨黑白，如遇镆鎁，不容有骑墙不决之疑，则虽艰难险阻之中，无不从容自适，夫然后为知之至而行之尽。 此语又中学者膏肓，而示以标的也。
现代文：至于以天理人欲的分数来检验宾主进退之机，如喜欢好的颜色，讨厌腐烂的气味，而成为天理人欲强弱的实证，一定会把是是非非处理得如分辨黑白，如遇到莫邪宝剑，不能容有骑墙不决的疑问，就是虽在艰难险阻之中，无不从容自如，然后为知之至极而行动彻底。 此语正中学者的弊端，而被奉为准则。
English: As for the opportunity to test the guest's advancement and retreat with the score of the heavenly man's desire, if you like good colors, hate the smell of decay, and become a positive proof of the strength of the heavenly man's desire, you will definitely deal with the right and wrong as if distinguishing between black and white, and if you encounter an evil sword, you cannot tolerate the doubt of riding the wall, that is, although in the midst of difficulties and obstacles, you can not help but take it easy, and then act thoroughly for the sake of knowledge.

古文：淳性孝，母疾亟，号泣于天，乞以身代。
现代文：陈淳性格孝顺，母亲患病很厉害，他对天痛哭号泣，请求以己身而代母亲患病。
English: Chen Jun is a dutiful person. His mother was very ill. He cried out in pain and asked God to take care of his sick mother.

古文：弟妹未有室家者，皆婚嫁之。葬宗族之丧无归者。
现代文：弟妹没有成家的，都为他们操办婚姻嫁娶之事，安葬本宗族中没有人为之料理的丧事。
English: Brothers and sisters who did not have a family, all arranged marriage and marriage for them, and buried the funeral that no one in the clan had prepared for them.

古文：居乡不沽名徇俗，恬然退守，若无闻焉。
现代文：居住乡里不沽名钓誉，因袭旧俗，安然退居，别人似乎都没听说过。
English: Living in the countryside, there are many famous fishing reputations. Due to the old customs, they retired safely, and others seem to have never heard of them.

古文：然名播天下，世虽不用，而忧时论事，感慨动人，郡守以下皆礼重之，时造其庐而请焉。
现代文：然而他的名声却传播天下，当世虽不被重用，然而他却忧虑时世，讨论国事，感慨动人，州郡守官职以下的人都以隆重的礼节对待他，时常建造房舍而延请他。
English: However, his fame spread all over the world. Although he was not much used in the present world, he was concerned about the times, discussed national affairs, and moved people. People below the state and county officials treated him with great courtesy, and often built houses and invited him.

古文：嘉定九年，待试中都，归过严陵郡守郑之悌，率僚属延讲郡庠。
现代文：嘉定九年，等待于中都应试，归来时碰见严陵郡守郑之悌，率领僚属延讲于州郡学校。
English: Jiading for nine years, waiting to take the exam at the middle school, when he returned, he met Yanling County Governor Zheng Zhixuan, and led his colleagues to speak at the county school.

古文：淳叹陆、张、王，学问无源，全用禅家宗旨，认形气之虚灵知觉为天理之妙，不由穷理格物，而欲径造上达之境，反托圣门以自标榜。
现代文：陈淳感叹惋惜陆九渊、张载、王安石的学问没有源头，全部采用禅家的宗旨，认形气之虚灵知觉为天理之妙，不由穷理而格物，只是通过捷径造上达之境，反而托词圣门来自我标榜。
English: Chen Jun lamented that the teachings of Lu Jiuyuan, Zhang Zai, and Wang Anshi have no source, all of which adopt the tenet of Zen. They believe that the perception of form and spirit is a miracle of nature. They do not rely on poor reason, but only create a superior state through shortcuts. On the contrary, they use the excuse that the holy gate is self-advertised.

古文：遂发明吾道之体统，师友之渊源，用功之节目，读书之次序，为四章以示学者。
现代文：于是发明我道的体统传承，师友之渊源，用功之节目，读书之次序，写成四章以示之于学者。
English: Therefore, I invented the transmission of the style of my way, the origin of teachers and friends, the program of hard work, the order of reading, and wrote four chapters to show it to scholars.

古文：明年，以特奏恩授迪功郎、泉州安溪主簿，未上而没，年六十五。
现代文：第二年，陈淳以特奏恩授予迪功郎、泉州安溪县主簿，没有上任就去世了，卒年六十五岁。
English: In the second year, Chen Jun awarded Di Gonglang, the master of Quanzhou Anxi County, with a special honor. He died without taking office, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：其所著有《语孟大学中庸》口义、字义、详讲，《礼》、《诗》、《女学》等书，门人录其语，号《筠谷濑口金山所闻》。
现代文：他所写的书有《论语口义》、《孟子口义》、《大学口义》、《中庸口义》、《字义详讲》、《礼》、《诗》、《女学》等书，门人记录他的话，名称为《筠谷濑口金山所闻》。
English: The books he wrote include "On the meaning of words," "Mencius's meaning," "University meaning," "Middle-class meaning," "Detailed explanation of the meaning of words," "Rite," "Poetry," "Feminism" and other books. His words were recorded by a doorkeeper and named "Heard in Shibuya, Shibuya, Shibuya."

