古文：隐太子建成小字毘沙门。
现代文：隐太子李建成小字毗沙门，是高祖的长子。
English: Prince Yingzhi Li Jiancheng is the eldest son of Gao Zu.

古文：资简弛，不治常检，荒色嗜酒，畋猎无度，所从皆博徒大侠。
现代文：资性简慢，行为不检，好色嗜酒，行猎无度，所交结者尽为赌徒大侠。
English: He is a slow-witted, disorderly person, a womanizer, a drunkard, an inveterate hunter, and an inveterate gambler.

古文：隋末，高祖被诏捕贼汾、晋间，留建成护家，居河东。
现代文：隋朝末年，高祖受诏前往汾州、晋州地区讨捕贼寇，留下建成护家，居于河东。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Gao Zu was ordered to go to Bozhou and Jinzhou regions to hunt down thieves and robbers. He left behind a complete protective family and lived in Hedong.

古文：高祖已起兵，密召与元吉赴太原，隋人购之急，从间道至，授左领军大都督，封陇西郡公。
现代文：高祖起兵时，密召建成与元吉前往太原，隋官悬赏收捕甚急，建成从小道赶赴太原，任职为左领军大都督，封为陇西郡公。
English: When Gao Zu raised an army, he secretly summoned Jiancheng and Yuanji to Taiyuan. Sui officials offered a reward for the capture of Jiancheng in a hurry. Jiancheng rushed to Taiyuan from the trail, served as the left leader of the army, and was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi County.

古文：引兵略定西河，从平京师。
现代文：率兵略定西河郡，随同平定京师。
English: He led the troops to slightly settle Saihe County, accompanied by the Beijing Division of Pingding.

古文：唐国建，为世子，开府置官属。
现代文：唐国建置后，拜为唐国世子，开建府署设置官属。
English: After the establishment of the Tang Dynasty, Bai, as the heir of the Tang Dynasty, set up the government office.

古文：又迁抚军大将军，为东讨元帅，将万人徇洛阳，授尚书令。
现代文：还兼任抚军大将军，担任东讨元帅，率兵十万东巡洛阳，返回后任职为尚书令。
English: He also concurrently served as the general of the army, served as the marshal of the Eastern Expedition, led a hundred thousand soldiers to patrol Luoyang in the East, and served as Shang Shuling after returning.

古文：高祖受禅，立为皇太子。
现代文：高祖接受隋禅之后，立建成为皇太子。
English: After Gaozhu accepted Sui Zen, Lijian became the crown prince.

古文：诏率将军桑显和击司竹群盗，平之。
现代文：下诏建成率领将军桑显和进击司竹群盗，将其平定。
English: Emperor Jiancheng led General Sang Xianhe to attack Shizhuqun bandits and subdue them.

古文：凉州人安兴贵杀李轨，以众降，诏趣原州应接。
现代文：凉州人安兴贵杀其帅李轨，率众归降，下诏建成前往原州接应他们。
English: The people of Liangzhou, An Xinggui, killed the handsome Li Rail, led the people to surrender, and then went to Wonju to meet them.

古文：建成素骄，不恤士，虽甚署，昼夜驰猎，众不堪其劳，亡者过半。
现代文：建成素来骄慢，不恤士卒，虽然正值酷暑，仍昼夜驰猎不止，众人不堪其劳，逃者过半。
English: Jiancheng has always been arrogant and does not show mercy to his subordinates. Although it is very hot, he still hunts day and night. Everyone is exhausted, and more than half of them have fled.

古文：帝欲其习事，乃敕非军国大务听裁决之。
现代文：高祖想让他熟习政务，便下令除了军国大事外其余政务悉听裁决。
English: Gaozu wanted him to become familiar with government affairs, so he ordered that all government affairs, except for military affairs, be subject to the ruling.

古文：又以李纲、郑善果为宫官，参谋议。
现代文：又命李纲、郑善果担任东宫官员，参与谋议。
English: He also ordered Li Gang and Zheng Zengguo to serve as officials of the East Palace and participate in the deliberation.

古文：稽胡刘屳成寇边，诏建成进讨，破之鄠州，斩虏千计，引渠长悉官之，使还招群胡。
现代文：稽胡首领刘人山成进犯边郡，下诏建成进讨，击破其寇于州，斩杀及俘虏以千计，将其酋帅全都授予官职，使之回去招诱群胡。
English: Liu Renshancheng, the leader of the Hui people, invaded the Guanzhong County, and ordered the Guanzhong people to fight against the Guanzhong people. They defeated the Guanzhong people's invasion of the state, killed and captured thousands of Guanzhong people, and appointed all of the Guanzhong people's chiefs to official positions to lure the Guanzhong people back.

古文：屳成与它大帅降，建成畏其众，绐欲城州县者，使降胡操筑，阴勒兵杀六千人，屳成奔梁师都。
现代文：人山成与其他大帅归降，建成畏其人众，假托为州县修筑城墙，派已归降的胡人操持板筑之具，暗地派兵诛杀六千余人，人山成投奔梁师都而去。
English: Renshancheng surrendered with other generals, built and feared his people, built city walls for prefectures and counties under the pretense of surrendering, sent Hu people who had surrendered to operate the board building tools, secretly sent soldiers to kill more than six thousand people, and Renshancheng surrendered to Liang Shidu.

古文：尝循行北边，遇贼四百出降，悉馘其耳纵之。
现代文：建成曾率兵巡行北方边地，遇贼四百人出降，尽割其耳然后放走。
English: Jiancheng once led an army to patrol the northern borderlands, and in the event of a thief, four hundred people surrendered, cut off their ears and then let them go.

古文：中允王珪、洗马魏征以帝初兴，建成不知谋，而秦王数平剧寇，功冠天下，英豪归之，阴许立为皇太子，势危甚。
现代文：中允王王圭、洗马魏征认为高祖初起时，建成未参预其谋，而秦王世民数次荡平巨寇，战功为天下之冠，英雄豪杰归心于他，高祖暗自答应立他为皇太子，因此建成之势甚危。
English: Zhong Yun Wang Wang Gui and Shima Wei Zheng believed that when Gaozu first started, he did not participate in the construction of his plan, while Qin Wang Shimin several times leveled the giant corsair, the war achievement was the crown of the world, the hero hero fell in love with him, and Gaozu secretly agreed to appoint him as the crown prince, so the construction was in great danger.

古文：会刘黑闼乱河北，珪等进说曰： 殿下特以嫡长居东宫，非有功德为人所称道。
现代文：时逢刘黑闼作乱于河北，王王圭等人便进劝建成说： 殿下仅以嫡长子身份居于东宫，没有功德为人称道。
English: When Liu Heixuan caused a disturbance in Hebei, Wang Wanggui and others went to persuade Jiancheng, saying: His royal highness only lives in the East Palace as the eldest son, and has no merits to be praised.

古文：今黑闼痍叛残孽，众不盈万，利兵鏖之，唾手可决，请往讨，因结山东英俊心，自封殖。 
现代文：如今黑闼所率残兵剩将不满一万，率领精兵与之决战，唾手可以取胜。请殿下前往讨伐，乘便交结山东英雄豪杰，深自封植。 
English: Today, the remnants of the troops led by the Black Pheasant will be less than ten thousand. Lead the elite soldiers to fight with them, and you can easily win. Please Your Highness go to the crusade, take the opportunity to meet the heroes and heroes of Shandong, and deeply seal yourself.

古文：建成遂请行。
现代文：建成便奏请出征。
English: After completion, please go to the front.

古文：黑闼败洺水，建成问征曰： 山东其定乎？ 
现代文：当时黑闼败于氵名水，建成问魏征说： 山东平定下来了吗？ 
English: At that time, the Black Pheasant was defeated by the Shanying Water. Jiancheng asked Wei Zheng and said: Has Shandong been settled down?

古文：对曰： 黑闼虽败，杀伤太甚，其魁党皆县名处死，妻子系虏，欲降无繇，虽有赦令，获者必戮，不大荡宥，恐残贼啸结，民未可安。 
现代文：魏征回答： 黑闼虽然战败，但我军对其部众杀伤太甚，其党羽全都悬赏捕捉予以处死，妻子儿女掳为奴婢，欲降而无路，朝廷虽有赦令，而捕获者必遭屠戮，不大加宽赦宥免，恐怕残贼还会啸聚，民众还未安定。 
English: Wei Zheng replied: Although the Black Pheasants were defeated, our army inflicted too much damage on their subordinates. All of their followers were offered a reward to be captured and executed. Their wives and children were taken as slaves. They wanted to surrender, but there was no way. Although the imperial court had issued a pardon, the captives would be slaughtered. There was not much mercy, forgiveness, and pardon. I am afraid that the remnants would still gather, and the people were not yet stable.

古文：既而黑闼复振，庐江王瑗弃洺州，山东乱。
现代文：不久黑闼军势果然复振，庐江王李瑗放弃氵名州，山东又乱。
English: Soon, the power of the Heihe army was revived, the king of the Minjiang River, Li Qian, gave up Shanmeizhou, and Shandong was again in turmoil.

古文：命齐王元吉讨之，有诏降者赦罪，众不信。
现代文：便命齐王李元吉往讨，有诏书宣布降者赦罪，但众人不信。
English: He then ordered the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, to discuss the matter, and issued an edict declaring that those who surrendered would be pardoned, but the people did not believe him.

古文：建成至，获俘皆抚遣之，百姓欣悦。
现代文：建成到达后，对俘获者全都予以抚慰遣还，百姓欢欣鼓舞。
English: After it was completed and arrived, all the captives were comforted and returned, and the people were jubilant.

古文：贼惧，夜奔，兵追战。
现代文：余贼害怕，连夜奔逃，建成调兵追击。
English: Afraid of the remaining thieves, they fled in the middle of the night, and Jiancheng sent troops to chase them.

古文：黑闼众犹盛，乃纵囚使相告曰： 褫而甲还乡里，若妻子获者，既已释矣。 
现代文：当时黑闼部众仍很强大，便释放囚徒使其相互传告说： 脱下你们的铠甲返回乡里吧，你们被捕获的妻子儿女都已释放回家了。 
English: At that time, the Black Eyed Peas were still strong, and they released the prisoners to let them preach to each other, saying: Take off your armor and return to the countryside. Your captured wives and children have been released and returned home.

古文：众乃散，或缚其渠长降，遂禽黑闼。
现代文：其部众才纷纷解散，有的还捆缚其首领归降，由此擒获黑闼。
English: His subordinate generals disbanded one after another, and some even tied up their leaders to force them to surrender, which led to the capture of Heiwa.

古文：帝晚多内宠，张婕妤、尹德妃最幸，亲戚分事宫府。
现代文：高祖晚年内宠甚多，其中张婕妤、尹德妃最受宠幸，其亲戚分别侍奉东宫及齐王府。
English: Gao Zu had many favorites in his later years, of which Zhang Ye and Yin Defei were the most favored, and their relatives served the East Palace and the Qi Royal Palace respectively.

古文：建成与元吉通谋，内结妃御以自固。
现代文：建成既与齐王元吉通谋，内结高祖妃嫔以自固其位。
English: It was built in collusion with King Qi Yuanjie, and it was built by Gao Zufei in order to consolidate his position.

古文：当是时，海内未定，秦王数将兵在外，诸妃希所见。
现代文：当此之时，海内还未平定，秦王世民常常领兵在外，很少见到高祖诸妃。
English: At that time, the sea had not yet been pacified, and Qin kings and commoners often led soldiers outside, and it was rare to see the empresses of Gaozu.

古文：及洛阳平，帝遣诸妃驰阅后宫，见府库服玩，皆私有求索，为兄弟请官。
现代文：洛阳平定之后，高祖派遣诸妃驰往东都检视宫人及府库珍玩，全都私下有所求索，并为娘家兄弟求官。
English: After Luoyang was pacified, Emperor Gaozu sent empresses to Dongdu to inspect the palace and treasury, and they all privately inquired about and sought positions for their daughters and brothers.

古文：秦王已封帑簿，及官爵非有功不得，妃媛曹怨之。
现代文：秦王已经封奏府库财簿，至于官职爵位，非有战功者不与，由此妃嫔之人怨恨不已。
English: King Qin had already sealed the government treasury's financial books, and as for official titles and ranks, those who had no war merit were not included, which made the concubine's people resentful.

古文：会为陕东道行台，有诏属内得专处决。
现代文：随后为陕东道行台，有诏属内事务可以全权办理。
English: Subsequently, Shaanxi is the host of the trip to Taiwan, and the internal affairs can be handled with full authority.

古文：王以美田给淮安王神通，而张婕妤为父丐之，帝手诏赐田，诏至，神通已得前，不肯与。
现代文：秦王将肥美之田给予淮安王李神通，而张婕妤为其父请求其地，高祖下手诏赐田。诏书到时，神通前已得田，不肯交出。
English: King Qin gave the fertile and beautiful fields to Li Shentong, the king of Huai'an, while Zhang Ye requested the land for his father, and Gao Zu issued an imperial edict to grant the fields. By the time the imperial edict arrived, Shentong had already obtained the fields and refused to hand them over.

古文：婕妤妄曰： 诏赐妾父田，而王夺与人。 
现代文：婕妤诬奏说： 诏书赐予妾父田产，而秦王夺去给予他人。 
English: Zang falsely said: The imperial edict gave the land to the concubine's father, but the Qin king took it away and gave it to others.

古文：帝怒，召秦王让曰： 我诏令不如尔教邪？ 
现代文：高祖发怒，召见秦王责让说： 我的诏令不如你的王府教令吗？ 
English: Gao Zu was furious and summoned Qin Wang to rebuke him, saying, "Is my imperial edict inferior to your royal edict?

古文：他日，谓裴寂曰： 儿久典兵，为儒生所误，非复我昔日子。 
现代文：有一天，对裴寂说： 孩儿久掌兵权，被儒生教坏，不再像我从前的儿子了。 
English: One day, he said to Pei Shao, "I have been in military power for a long time as a child. I have been corrupted by Confucianism, and I am no longer like my former son.

古文：秦府属杜如晦骑过尹妃父门，恚其傲，率家童捽殴，折一指。
现代文：秦王府属官杜如晦骑马经过尹德妃之父门前，妃父恨其傲慢，率其家僮将如晦拖下马来殴打，断其一指。
English: Du Rugao, a subordinate official of the Qin royal court, rode a horse and passed in front of Yin Defei's father. Her father hated his arrogance and led his family to drag Rugao off the horse and beat him, breaking one of his fingers.

古文：父惧，即使妃前诉秦王左右暴其父，帝不察，大怒，诘王曰： 儿左右乃凌我妃家，况百姓乎？ 
现代文：其父害怕出事，便让德妃在高祖前诉说秦王左右欺凌其父。高祖不明真情，大发脾气，训斥秦王说： 儿之左右竟敢欺凌我妃嫔之家，何况平民百姓呢！ 
English: His father was afraid of an accident, so he asked the Empress Dowager Cixi to tell Gaozhu that the Qin King bullied his father. Gaozhu did not know the truth, lost his temper, and scolded the Qin King, saying, "How dare you bully my wife's family, let alone the common people!

古文：王自辨晓，讫不置，繇是见疏。
现代文：秦王百般辩解，高祖置之不理，因此日渐疏远。
English: The Qin King made all sorts of excuses, but Gao Zu ignored him, and they became increasingly estranged.

古文：帝召诸王燕，秦王感母之不及有天下也，偶独泣，帝顾不乐，妃媛因得中伤之，为建成游说曰： 海内无事，陛下春秋高，当自娱，秦王辄悲泣，正为嗔忌妾属耳。
现代文：有一次，高祖召集诸王宴飨，秦王思念其母早逝而不见拥有天下，故而独自悲泣，高祖见此很不高兴，诸妃趁机加以中伤，为建成游说： 如今海内无事，陛下年事已高，应当娱乐自己，秦王感愤悲泣，正因忌恨我等。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Gao Zu convened a banquet for the kings. King Qin was saddened by the early death of his mother, but did not see that he owned the world, so he wept alone. Emperor Gao was very unhappy to see this. The empresses took the opportunity to slander him and lobbied for the completion of the construction: There is nothing wrong with the sea now. His Majesty is old and should entertain himself. King Qin was saddened and wept because he hated me.

古文：使陛下万岁后，王得志，妾属无遗类。
现代文：假如陛下万岁之后，秦王得志，妾等必无遗类。
English: If His Majesty lives forever, there will be no remnants of the Qin King's conquests, concubines, etc.

古文：东宫慈爱，必能全养。 
现代文：东宫太子，为人慈爱，必能保全供养我等。 
English: The Crown Prince of Donggong is a kind person and will surely be able to protect and provide for us.

古文：乃皆悲不自胜。
现代文：说罢全都悲不自胜。
English: It's all very sad to say.

古文：帝恻然，遂无易太子意。
现代文：高祖恻然伤感，便打消了更换太子的主意。
English: Feeling sad, Gao Zu dismissed the idea of replacing the crown prince.

古文：突厥入寇，帝议迁都，秦王苦谏止。
现代文：后遇突厥兵马进犯关中，高祖打算迁都避寇，因秦王苦谏而止。
English: Later, when the Turkic soldiers and horses invaded Guanzhong, Gaozu planned to move the capital to avoid the invaders, but was stopped by the Qin King's bitterness.

古文：建成见帝曰： 秦王欲外御寇，沮迁都议，以久其兵，而谋篡夺。 
现代文：建成往见高祖说： 秦王想抵御外寇，阻止迁都之意，是为了久掌兵权，而谋夺帝位。 
English: Gao Zu, who witnessed the completion of the construction, said: The Qin king wanted to resist foreign invaders and prevent the relocation of the capital, in order to hold military power for a long time and seek the imperial throne.

古文：帝浸不悦。
现代文：高祖渐渐不喜秦王。
English: Gaozu gradually grew to dislike King Qin.

古文：初，帝令秦王居西宫承乾殿，元吉居武德殿，与上台、东宫昼夜往来，皆携弓刀，相遇如家人礼。
现代文：起初，高祖令秦王居于西宫承乾殿，元吉居于武德殿，与上台、东宫昼夜都可往来，出行皆带弓箭刀仗，相遇则行家人之礼。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu ordered Qin Wang to live in the West Palace, the Chengyan Hall, and Yuan Ji to live in the Wu De Hall. They could come and go with Shangdai and the East Palace day and night. They would travel with bows and arrows and swords, and when they met, they would bow to each other.

古文：由是皇太子令、秦齐二王教与诏敕杂行，内外惧，莫知所从。
现代文：因此皇太子令及秦、齐二王教与高祖诏敕并行，内外惶惧，不知所从。
English: Therefore, the edict of the crown prince, the teachings of the Qin and Qi dynasties, and the edict of the emperor Gaozhu were in parallel. People inside and outside the country were worried and did not know what to do.

古文：建成等私募四方骁勇及长安恶少年二千人为宫甲，屯左右长林门，号 长林兵 。
现代文：建成等人私自招募四方骁勇及长安恶少年二千人蓄为宫甲，分屯于左右长林门，号为 长林兵 。
English: Jiancheng and others secretly recruited two thousand young men from Shifang Xiyong and Chang'an Hui to form the "Gongjia" and camped at the left and right sides of Changlin Gate, calling themselves the "Changlin Soldiers."

古文：又令左虞候率可达志募幽州突厥兵三百内宫中，将攻西宫。
现代文：又令左虞候率可达志招募幽州突厥兵士三百人进入宫中，准备进攻西宫。
English: He also made Zuo Yu wait until he could recruit 300 Yuzhou Turk soldiers to enter the palace and prepare to attack the Western Palace.

古文：或告於帝，帝召建成责谓，乃流志巂州。
现代文：有人向高祖告发，高祖召建成予以训斥，随即将可达志流放至州。
English: Someone reported to Gaozhu, Gaozhu summoned Jiancheng to reprimand him, and then Gaozhu was banished to the state.

古文：华阴杨文干素凶诐，建成昵之，使为庆州总管，遣募兵送京师，欲为变。
现代文：华阴人杨文干素来凶险，建成与他亲昵，使他任职为庆州总管，派遣使者令他招募兵士送往京师，准备起事。
English: Yang Wen, a native of Huayin, had a penchant for danger. Jian Jian befriended him, made him the governor of Gyeongju, and sent him an envoy to recruit soldiers and send them to the capital to prepare for an uprising.

古文：时帝幸仁智宫，秦王、元吉从，建成谓元吉曰： 秦王且遍见诸妃，彼金宝多，有以赂遗之也。
现代文：当时高祖出巡仁智宫，秦王世民与齐王元吉随从。建成对元吉说： 秦王将遍拜诸妃，他的金银宝物很多，尽可拿出来赠送。
English: At that time, Gao Zu went on a tour of the Ren Zhi Palace, accompanied by Qin King Shimin and Qi King Yuan Ji. Jiancheng said to Yuan Ji: Qin King will worship the princesses everywhere, he has a lot of gold and silver treasures, he can give them out.

古文：吾安得箕踞受祸？安危之计决今日。 元吉曰： 善。 
现代文：我怎能坐待祸患临头呢？安危之计决定于今日。 元吉说： 对。 
English: How can I sit and wait for disaster to strike? Today is the day to decide on a plan for safety. Motokichi said, "That's right."

古文：乃命郎将尒硃焕、校尉桥公山赍甲遗文干，趣兴兵。
现代文：建成便命令郎将尔朱焕、校尉桥公山持甲送与文干，催他起兵。
English: After it was completed, he ordered his son-in-law to send Er Zhuhuan and Captain Qiao Gongshan in armor to Wengan to urge him to join the army.

古文：焕等惧，至豳乡白反状，宁州人杜凤亦上变。
现代文：尔朱焕等人感到害怕，行至豳乡时上告谋反之状，宁州人杜凤也告发此事。
English: Er Zhuhuan and others were afraid, and when they went to Xiangxiang, they reported the countermeasures, and Du Feng from Ningzhou also reported the matter.

古文：帝遣司农卿宇文颖驿召文干，元吉阴结颖，使告文干，文干遽率兵反。
现代文：高祖派遣司农卿宇文颖驰驿征召文干，元吉暗与宇文颖交结，托他告知文干，文干立即率兵造反。
English: Gaozu dispatched the Secretary of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Wu Wenying, to recruit Wencang. Yuan Jieming met with Wencang and asked him to inform Wencang. Wencang immediately led the troops to rebel.

古文：帝以建成首谋，未忍治，即诏捕王珪、魏征及左卫率韦挺、舍人徐师、左卫车骑冯世立，欲杀之以薄太子罪。
现代文：高祖因建成为首谋，不忍加以劾治，便下诏逮捕王王圭、魏征及左卫率韦挺、舍人徐师谟、左卫车骑冯世立等东宫官员，想杀掉他们以减轻太子的罪过。
English: Gao Zu could not bear to impeach and punish Wang Wang Gui, Wei Zheng, Wei Ting, Xu Shimu, Feng Shili, and other officials of the East Palace, and wanted to kill them to alleviate the prince's guilt.

古文：乃手诏召建成，建成惧，不敢往。
现代文：便下手诏征召建成，建成恐惧，不敢前往。
English: Then he issued an edict calling for conscription to be completed. Once it was completed, they were afraid to go.

古文：师劝遂举兵，詹事主簿赵弘智谏建成捐车服，轻往谢罪。
现代文：师谟劝他就此起兵，詹事主簿赵弘智谏劝建成减损车驾服用之物，轻车前往认罪。
English: Shimo advised him to take up arms, and Zhao Hongzhi, the chief bookkeeper of Zhan, advised him to build a thing that would reduce the damage caused by driving, and take a light car to confess.

古文：乃诣行在所，未至，屏官属，径入谒，叩头请死，投身於地，不能起。
现代文：于是前至行在处所，将到其地时，建成屏退官属，径自入见高祖，叩头请死，伏身于地而不能站起。
English: So he walked to the place, and when he arrived at the place, he built a screen for the retired officials, went to see Gao Zu, bowed his head, and prostrated himself on the ground without being able to stand up.

古文：帝怒，夜囚幕中，使兵卫守。
现代文：高祖大怒，其夜囚禁于幕中，派兵加以防守。
English: Gao Zu was so angry that he was imprisoned in the tent at night and sent soldiers to defend it.

古文：会文干陷宁州，帝惊，以宫近贼，夜率卫士南趣，山行十馀里，明乃还宫。
现代文：恰遇文干攻陷宁州，高祖大惊，因仁智宫接近贼境，夜率卫士南奔，沿山行走十余里地，天亮后才返回宫中。
English: When the attack on Ningzhou happened, Gao Zu was shocked. Because the palace of Ren Zhi was close to the thief's territory, the night guard ran south, walked more than ten miles along the mountain, and only returned to the palace after dawn.

古文：召秦王问计，对曰： 文干竖子耳，官司当即禽之，就使假刻漏之久，正须遣一将可办。 
现代文：高祖召秦王问计，秦王回答说： 文干这小子，州县官员即可将他擒获，即使一时不能拿获，只须派遣一将就能解决问题。 
English: Gao Zu called Qin Wang to inquire, Qin Wang replied: Wengan this boy, state and county officials can capture him, even if they can't catch him for a while, they only need to send him to solve the problem.

古文：帝曰： 事连建成，恐应者众。
现代文：高祖说： 此事与建成有牵连，恐响应者众多。
English: Gao Zu said: This matter is related to the completion of the project, and many people are afraid of it.

古文：尔自行，还，吾以尔为太子，使建成王蜀，蜀地狭，不足为变，若不能事汝，取之易也。 
现代文：你亲自前去平叛，返回后，我立你为太子，废建成为蜀王，蜀地狭隘，不足为变，如不能侍奉你，取之亦易。 
English: You personally went to quell the rebellion. After your return, I appointed you as the crown prince, and you became the king of Shu. Shu is narrow and not enough to change. If you can't serve you, it's easy to take it.

古文：秦王率众趣宁州，文干为其下所杀，以其首降，执宇文颖送京师。
现代文：秦王便率众前趋宁州，文干已被其部下所杀，而以其首级归降，抓获宇文颖押送京师。
English: Qin Wang then led the crowd forward to Ningzhou. Wengan had been killed by his subordinates, but his head was lowered, and he was captured by Uwen Ying and sent to the capital.

古文：秦王之行，元吉及内嬖更为建成请，封德彝亦阴说帝，由是意解，复诏建成居守，但责兄弟不相容，而谪王珪、韦挺、天策兵曹参军杜淹於远方。
现代文：秦王出发后，元吉与高祖妃嫔轮流为建成求情，封德彝也暗自劝解高祖，由此怒意渐解，重新下诏令建成返京居守，仅仅责备他于兄弟之间不能相容，而贬谪王王圭、韦挺与天策兵曹参军杜淹于远方。
English: After the departure of King Qin, Yuanji and Gao Zufei took turns to intercede for Jiancheng, and Feng Dejun also secretly persuaded Gao Zu, and thus gradually resolved his anger, re-issued the edict to Jiancheng to return to Beijing to stay, only to blame him for incompatibility between brothers, and disparaged Wang Wang Gui, Wei Ting and Tiancao to join the army to drown in the distance.

古文：然怨猜日结。
现代文：然而猜忌怨恨日益加深。
English: But suspicion and resentment are growing.

古文：建成等召秦王夜宴，毒酒而进之，王暴疾，血数升，淮安王扶掖还宫。
现代文：建成等人后来召请秦王夜宴，下毒于酒而进奉秦王，秦王忽得暴病，吐血数升，淮安王神通扶持秦王返还西宫。
English: Jiancheng and others later invited the Qin King to a dinner party, poisoned the wine and served it to the Qin King. The Qin King suddenly fell violently ill and vomited several liters of blood. The Huai'an King Shintong supported the Qin King to return to the Western Palace.

古文：帝问疾，因敕建成： 秦王不能酒，毋夜聚。 
现代文：高祖前来问疾，因敕令建成说： 秦王不能饮酒，不要在夜里聚饮了。 
English: Gao Zu came to inquire about the illness, and because of the imperial edict, Jiancheng said: Qin Wang can't drink alcohol, don't drink together at night.

古文：又谓秦王曰： 吾起晋阳，平天下，皆尔力，将定东宫，尔亟让，故成而美志。
现代文：又对秦王说： 我起兵于晋阳，平定天下，都靠你出力，议立东宫时，你一再推让，以故成全你的美意。
English: He also said to King Qin, "I raised an army in Jinyang and pacified the world, all of which depended on your efforts. When you were deliberating on the construction of the East Palace, you repeatedly made concessions to fulfill your desire.

古文：又太子立多历年，吾重夺之。
现代文：再说太子已立多年，不好废黜他。
English: Besides, the crown prince has been in power for many years, and it is not easy to depose him.

古文：观而兄弟终不相下，同在京师，忿阋且深。
现代文：看来你们兄弟终究难以和好，同在京师，怨恨日益加深。
English: It seems that your brothers are difficult to reconcile after all, and the resentment is deepening day by day.

古文：尔还洛阳行台，自陕以东悉主之，建天子旌旗，如梁孝王故事。 
现代文：你还是返回洛阳行台为好，自陕州以东归你主管，可建天子旌旗，依照西汉梁孝王旧例。 
English: You'd better go back to Luoyang and Xingtai, and return to your superiors from the east of Shaanxi Province. You can build a banner of the Son of Heaven, according to the old example of Liang Xiao Wang in Western Han Dynasty.

古文：王泣曰： 非所愿也，不可远膝下。 
现代文：秦王哭着说道： 我不愿这样做，我不能离开膝下。 
English: Qin Wang cried and said, "I don't want to do this, I can't get off my knees."

古文：帝曰： 陆贾，汉臣也，犹递过诸子，况我天下主，东西两宫，思汝即往，何所悲邪？ 
现代文：高祖说： 陆贾是西汉大臣，尚能轮流居住于诸子之家，何况我是天下之主，东西两宫，近在咫尺，思念你时就能前往，何须悲伤呢？ 
English: Gao Zu said: Lu Jia is the minister of the Western Han Dynasty, he can still take turns to live in the house of his sons. What's more, I am the Lord of the world, the East and the West are two palaces, close at hand, I can go there when I miss you, why should I be sad?

古文：王将行，建成等谋曰： 秦王得土地甲兵，必为患；留之京师，一匹夫耳。 
现代文：秦王将行，建成等人商议说： 秦王得到土地甲兵，必为后患；留在京师，仅一匹夫而已。 
English: Qin Wang will go, Jiancheng and others will discuss and say: Qin Wang has obtained land and soldiers, he will be the last to suffer; only one horse will remain in Beijing.

古文：因密使人说帝，言 秦王左右皆山东人，闻还洛，皆洒然喜，观其意，不复来矣 。
现代文：因而密令数人劝说高祖说： 秦王左右尽是山东人士，闻知返回洛阳，全都欣喜非常，观其意图，不再做返回的打算了。 
English: Therefore, he secretly ordered several people to persuade Gao Zu to say: Qin Wang was surrounded by people from Shandong. When they heard that he had returned to Luoyang, they were all very happy. Seeing his intention, they no longer planned to return.

古文：事果寝。
现代文：其事果然中止。
English: The matter was indeed discontinued.

古文：俄而突厥寇边，太子荐元吉北讨，欲因其兵作乱。
现代文：不久又逢突厥进犯边郡，太子推荐元吉领兵北讨，想借其兵马作乱。
English: Not long after, the Turks invaded Fangbian County, and the prince recommended that Yuanji lead the soldiers to the north, hoping to use his soldiers and horses to create a disturbance.

古文：长孙无忌、房玄龄、杜如晦、尉迟敬德、侯君集等劝秦王先图之。
现代文：长孙无忌、房玄龄、杜如晦、尉迟敬德、侯君集等人都劝秦王先下手为强。
English: The eldest grandson Mubi, Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao, Ye Xi Jingde, Hou Junji and others all advised Qin Wang to start first.

古文：王乃密奏建成等与后宫乱，因曰： 臣无负兄弟，今乃欲杀臣，是为世充、建德复仇。
现代文：秦王便密奏建成等人与后宫淫乱，并说： 臣无负于兄弟，如今竟想杀臣，这是在为王世充、窦建德报仇。
English: The king of Qin then secretly arranged for Jiancheng and others to commit adultery with the harem, and said: The vassal is no less than his brother, and now he wants to kill the vassal. This is to avenge Wang Shichong and Dou Jiande.

古文：使臣死，虽地下，愧见诸贼。 
现代文：如使臣遭枉杀，虽在地下，也愧与诸贼相见。 
English: If an envoy is killed unjustly, even if he is underground, he is ashamed to be seen with the thieves.

古文：帝大惊，报曰： 旦日当穷治，而必早参。 
现代文：高祖大惊，回报说： 明早将追问此事，你得早些入朝。 
English: Gao Zu was shocked and said in return: I will inquire about this matter in the morning, you have to come to the Imperial Palace earlier.

古文：张婕妤驰语建成，乃召元吉谋，曰： 请勒宫甲，托疾不朝。 
现代文：张婕妤派人驰告建成，建成便召元吉谋议。元吉说： 那就授甲持兵于宫，托疾不去朝见。 
English: Zhang Ye sent someone to report the completion of the construction, and when it was completed, he called Yuan Ji to discuss. Yuan Ji said: Then award the armor and keep the soldiers in the palace, but do not go to see the emperor.

古文：建成曰： 善，然不共入朝，事何繇知？ 
现代文：建成说： 对。但不一道入朝，怎能得知事情的变化呢？ 
English: Jiancheng said, "That's right. But if we don't go to the North together, how can we know how things have changed?"

古文：迟明，乘马至玄武门，秦王先至，以勇士九人自卫。
现代文：天刚亮时，建成、元吉乘马前往玄武门，秦王已先到达，率勇士九人自卫。
English: At the break of dawn, the castle was completed, and Yuanji rode to the Xuanwu Gate. Qin Wang had arrived first, and he led nine warriors to defend himself.

古文：时帝已召裴寂、萧瑀、陈叔达、封德彝、宇文士及、窦诞、颜师古等入。
现代文：当时高祖已宣召裴寂、萧蠫、陈叔达、封德彝、宇文士及、窦诞、颜师古等人入宫。
English: At that time, Gao Zu had already invited Pei Jia, Xiao Yu, Chen Shuda, Feng Deyao, Wu Wenshi, Dou Xuan, Yan Shigu and others to enter the palace.

古文：建成、元吉至临湖殿，觉变，遽反走，秦王随呼之，元吉引弓欲射，不能彀者三。
现代文：建成、元吉行至临湖殿时，发觉事情有变，立即返回，秦王随后呼喊，元吉弯弓欲射，接连三次未果。
English: After the construction was completed, when Yuan Jie went to Linhu Palace, he found that things had changed and immediately returned. The Qin King then shouted that Yuan Jie wanted to shoot with a curved bow, but failed three times in a row.

古文：秦王射建成即死，元吉中矢走，敬德追杀之。
现代文：秦王随即射死建成，元吉中箭逃走，尉迟敬德将他追杀。
English: Qin Wang was then shot dead and Gengcheng, Yuan Jizhong and Qin Zhongya fled, and the second-in-command Jingde chased and killed him.

古文：俄而东宫、齐府兵三千攻玄武门，闭不得入。接战久之，矢及殿屋。
现代文：不久东宫与齐王府精兵三千人攻打玄武门，因门闭而不能入内，交战良久，射箭达于内殿。
English: Soon, the East Palace and 3,000 elite soldiers of the Qi royal court attacked the Xuanwu Gate. Because the gate was closed, they could not enter the palace. They fought for a long time, and the archery reached the inner hall.

古文：王左右数百骑至，合击之，众遂溃。
现代文：秦王左右数百骑赶到，合力进击，其众才溃散而逃。
English: Qin Wang arrived with several hundred horsemen, and they advanced in unison, only to break up and flee.

古文：帝谓裴寂等曰： 事今奈何？ 
现代文：高祖对裴寂等人说： 事到如今该怎么办呢？ 
English: Gaozu said to Peizhang and the others, "What should we do now?

古文：萧瑀、陈叔达曰： 臣闻内外无限，父子不亲，失而弗断，反蒙其乱。
现代文：萧蠫、陈叔达说： 臣等闻知内外没有界限，父子之间不亲，当决断时不断，反会蒙受其乱。
English: Xiao Wei and Chen Shuda said: "Vassals know that there is no boundary between inside and outside, and there is no kinship between father and son. When there is a decision, there will be chaos.

古文：建成、元吉自草昧以来，未始与谋，既立，又无功德，疑贰相济，为萧墙忧。
现代文：建成、元吉在义旗草创之际，并未预谋，既立之后，又无功德可言，常怀疑贰之心以济其恶，以致祸起萧墙。
English: At the time of construction, when the flag of righteousness was first created, there was no premeditation, and after it was established, there was no merit to speak of, and it was often suspected that the heart of the emperor was evil, so that the evil caused the wall to collapse.

古文：秦王功盖天下，内外归心，立为太子，付军国大务，陛下释重负矣。 
现代文：秦王功盖天下，内外归心，可立他为皇太子，托付军国大事，陛下就能如释重负了。 
English: King Qin's achievements have covered the world, and he has won the hearts of people at home and abroad. If he can be appointed as the crown prince and entrusted with military affairs, his majesty will be relieved.

古文：帝曰： 此吾志也！ 
现代文：高祖说： 这正是我的夙愿！ 
English: Gaozu said, "This is exactly my long-cherished wish!"

古文：乃召秦王至，尉抚之曰： 朕几有投杼之惑。 
现代文：便召秦王前来，抚慰他说： 我差点有投杼而起受人迷惑的事啊！ 
English: Then he called King Qin to come and comfort him, saying, "I almost had a stroke and was troubled by someone!

古文：秦王号泣不能止。
现代文：秦王号泣而难以抑制。
English: Qin Wang Rong was crying and it was hard to control.

古文：建成死年三十八。
现代文：建成死时年龄为三十八岁。
English: He was thirty-eight years old at the time of his death.

古文：长子承宗为太原王，早卒；承道安陆王，承德河东王，承训武安王，承明汝南王，承义巨鹿王，皆坐诛。
现代文：其长子承宗被封为太原王，早逝；次子承道为安陆王，承德为河东王，承训为武安王，承明为汝南王，承义为巨鹿王，全都坐罪诛死。
English: His eldest son, Chengzong, was crowned King of Taiyuan and died young; his second son, Chengdao, was crowned King of Anlu, Chengde was crowned King of Hedong, Chengxun was crowned King of Wu'an, Chengming was crowned King of Runan, and Chengyi was crowned King of Jugu, all of whom died in disgrace.

古文：诏除建成、元吉属籍。
现代文：下诏除去建成、元吉的唐室属籍。
English: The following edict was issued, and Motokichi's status as a Tang family member was confirmed.

古文：其党疑惧，更相告，庐江王瑗遂反。
现代文：二人党羽猜疑恐惧，相互告发，庐江王李瑗由此起兵造反。
English: Suspicious and fearful, the two party members denounced each other, which led to the rebellion of the king of the Li River, Li Xi.

古文：乃下诏建成、元吉、瑗支党不得相告讦，由是遂安。
现代文：朝廷便下诏宣布建成、元吉与李瑗枝党不得相互告讦，由此天下才安定下来。
English: The imperial court then issued an edict announcing the completion of the construction, and that the parties of Yuan Jie and Li Xuanjie were not allowed to slander each other. This is how the world was finally stabilized.

古文：太宗立，追封建成为息王，谥曰隐，以礼改葬，诏东宫旧臣皆会，帝於宜秋门哭之，以子福为后。
现代文：太宗即位后，追封建成为息王，谥为隐，按王礼改葬，下诏东宫旧臣都来会集，太宗亲临宜秋门哭泣，命皇子李福过继为建成之后。
English: After Emperor Taizong's accession to the throne, Prince Chifeng became the new king, Empress Dowager Dou became a hermit, and was reburied according to royal etiquette. Under the imperial edict, the former courtiers of the East Palace all came to the assembly, Emperor Taizong himself came to the Yiyi Autumn Gate to weep, and ordered Prince Li Fucao to succeed after the completion.

古文：十六年，追今赠。
现代文：贞观十六年，追赠为皇太子。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, he was posthumously made crown prince.

古文：宇文颖者，代人。
现代文：宇文颖是代州人。
English: Umenying is from Daishu.

古文：自李密所来降，为农圃监，封化政郡公。
现代文：从李密那里前来归降，担任农圃监，封为化政郡公。
English: He returned from Li Mi, served as a farm inspector, and was awarded the title of Huazheng County official.

古文：泰徙封越，更以宗室西平王琼子保定嗣。
现代文：性情贪婪昏庸，与元吉交情甚厚，以故参预文干逆谋。事败之后，高祖责问他说： 我因文干谋叛，所以派你前去召他，你怎能参预逆谋呢？ 
English: He was greedy and dull-witted, and had a close friendship with Genji. Therefore, he participated in the premeditated treason. After the defeat, Gaozu scolded him and said, "I sent you to summon him because of the premeditated treason. How could you participate in the premeditated treason?"

古文：薨，无子，国除。
现代文：宇文颖无词应答，被斩首处死。
English: Unable to answer, she was beheaded.

古文：巢刺王元吉小字三胡。
现代文：巢剌王李元吉小字三胡，是高祖的第四子。
English: King Li Yuanji, the fourth son of Gao Zu, is a small-character Sanhu.

古文：高祖兵已西，留守太原，封姑臧郡公，进齐国，总十五郡诸军事，加镇北将军、太原道行军元帅。
现代文：高祖起兵西行时，留守于太原，封为姑臧郡公，进封为齐国公，总管河东十五郡诸军事，加官为镇北将军、太原道行军元帅。
English: When Gaozu started to march west, he stayed in Taiyuan. At the beginning, he was appointed as the governor of Guye County, and later as the governor of Qi Province. He was in charge of the military of the 15 counties in the east of the river, and was also appointed as the general of Zhenbei and the marshal of Taiyuan Road.

古文：帝受禅，进王齐，为并州总管。
现代文：高祖受禅即位之后，进封为齐王，担任并州总管。
English: After Emperor Gaozong ascended the throne, he was enthroned as the King of Qi and served as the provincial governor.

古文：初，元吉生，太穆皇后恶其貌，不举，侍媪陈善意私乳之。
现代文：起初，元吉出生时，太穆皇后不喜其貌，不想养他，其侍媪陈善意私自乳养。
English: At first, when Yuanji was born, Empress Taimu did not like his appearance and did not want to raise him. Her attendant, Chen Zhengrong, raised him with her own milk.

古文：及长，猜鸷好兵，居边久，益骄侈。
现代文：长大成人之后，为人残忍好兵，居守边郡日久，愈益骄奢淫逸。
English: After he became an adult, he was a cruel and good soldier, and he stayed in the border county for a long time, becoming more and more arrogant and lascivious.

古文：常令奴客、诸妾数百人被甲习战，相击刺，死伤甚众。
现代文：常令奴仆、诸妾数百人披甲练习交战，相互击刺，以致死伤甚众。
English: He often ordered hundreds of servants and concubines to wear armor to practice fighting and stabbing each other, resulting in many deaths and injuries.

古文：后元吉中创，善意止之，元吉恚，命壮士拉死，私谥慈训夫人。
现代文：后来元吉被刺伤，善意制止他这样胡作非为，元吉发怒，命壮士将她弄死，而私谥她为慈训夫人。
English: Later, Motokichi was stabbed, he had the good intention to stop him from doing such an outrageous act, Motokichi got angry, the strong man killed her, and he took her as a mistress.

古文：刘武周略汾、晋，诏遣右卫将军宇文歆助守。
现代文：刘武周进犯汾、晋地区，朝廷下诏派遣右卫将军宇文歆协助他防守并州。
English: Liu Wuzhou invaded the Shantou and Jin regions, and the imperial court sent the right guard general, U Wenjun, to assist him in the defense and annexation of the state.

古文：元吉喜鹰狗，出常载罝罔三十车，曰： 我宁三日不食，不可一日不猎。 
现代文：元吉喜好鹰狗，出城常载猎网满三十余车，并说： 我宁可三天不吃饭，也不能一日不行猎。 
English: Motokichi is fond of eagles and hounds, and often leaves the city with more than thirty cartloads of hunting nets. He also said, "I would rather not eat for three days than not hunt for one day."

古文：夜潜出淫民家，府门不闭。
现代文：夜里潜出府门纵淫于民家，不闭府门。
English: At night, he sneaks out of the gate to have sexual intercourse in a private house, and does not close the gate.

古文：歆骤谏，不纳，乃显表於帝曰： 王数出与窦诞纵猎，蹂民田，纵左右攘夺，畜产为尽。
现代文：宇文歆多次劝谏，完全不听。宇文歆便上表于高祖说： 齐王多次出城与窦诞肆意游猎，蹂践民田，放纵左右公然劫夺，民间六畜殆尽。
English: Uwen Yao repeatedly tried to persuade him, but he did not listen at all. Uwen Yao then wrote to Gao Zu, saying: King Qi repeatedly went out of the city to hunt with Dou Zi, trampled on people's fields, indulged in open robbery left and right, and wiped out the six livestock of the people.

古文：每射於道，观人避矢以为乐。
现代文：常常当道而射，观人避箭以为乐笑。
English: He often shoots from the hip, and viewers think it's funny when he dodges arrows.

古文：百姓怨毒。
现代文：百姓无比怨恨。
English: The people are incredibly resentful.

古文：不可与共守。 
现代文：不可与他共守此城。 
English: You can't guard this city with him.

古文：有诏召还。
现代文：有诏书召他还京。
English: There was an imperial edict summoning him back to the capital.

古文：元吉密讽民诣阙请，乃得归。
现代文：元吉暗示父老百姓赴京请留，才得以恢复其职。
English: It was only after Motokichi hinted to his father that they should go to Beijing and stay there that he was able to resume his post.

古文：武周以五千骑屯黄蛇岭，元吉使将军张达以步卒百人尝寇，达辞兵少，强之，至则尽没。
现代文：武周率五千骑兵驻于黄蛇岭，元吉派将军张达率步兵一百人试着与贼寇交战，张达因兵少不愿出战，元吉强使他出战，结果尽没于阵。
English: Wu Zhou led five thousand cavalry stationed in Huang Sheiling, and Zhang Da, a general of the Yuan Ji faction, led one hundred infantry to try to fight the bandits. Zhang Da was reluctant to go to war because of the small number of soldiers, and Yuan Ji Qiang made him go to war. As a result, he did not fight at all.

古文：达怒，导武周陷榆次。
现代文：张达大怒，便引导武周攻陷榆次县城。
English: Zhang Da was so angry that he led Wu Zhou to attack and capture the county seat of Ganzi.

古文：元吉保祁，贼急攻之，遁还并州，贼张甚。
现代文：元吉退保祁县，贼众急攻其城，元吉随即逃回并州，贼寇气势甚张。
English: When Yuanji retreated to Baodi County, the bandits attacked the city in a hurry. Yuanji immediately fled back to Anhui Province, and the bandits were in full swing.

古文：元吉绐司马刘德威曰： 公以老弱守，吾率锐士拒贼。 
现代文：元吉哄骗司马刘德威说： 您带老弱守城，我率锐士出战击贼。 
English: Yuanji coaxed Sima Liu Dewei to say: You take the old and weak to defend the city, I will lead the warriors to fight against the thieves.

古文：因赍宝物、携妻妾夜出，委军奔京师，并州陷。
现代文：因而携带妻妾宝物夜出，抛弃军队奔还京师，以致并州失陷。
English: Therefore, he went out at night with his wife and concubine's treasure, abandoned the army and ran back to the capital, resulting in the annexation of the state.

古文：帝怒，自是尝令从秦王征讨，不复颛军矣。
现代文：高祖大怒，此后只让他随同秦王征讨，而不再让他独挡一面了。
English: Gao Zu was furious, and thereafter only allowed him to accompany the Qin King in the conquest, and no longer allowed him to stand alone.

古文：寻授侍中、襄州道行台尚书令、稷州刺史。
现代文：不久，任职为侍中、襄州道行台尚书令、稷州刺史。
English: Soon, he served as a chamberlain, Shang Shuling of Xiangzhou Road, and Sashishi of Zhangzhou.

古文：秦王围东都，窦建德来援，王以精骑逆战，留元吉、屈突通守，而世充易之，辄出兵，元吉设伏劫之，斩首八百级，禽其将。
现代文：秦王围攻东都时，窦建德前来援救，秦王率领精骑迎战，而留元吉与屈突通继续围困东都，世充小看他们，随即出兵进战，元吉设伏劫击，斩首八百级，生擒其战将。
English: When the Qin King besieged the Eastern Capital, Dou Jiande came to the rescue. The Qin King led the elite cavalry to meet the battle, while Ruyuan Ji and Qu Tutong continued to besiege the Eastern Capital. Shichong looked down on them and immediately sent troops into battle. Yuan Ji set up an ambush, beheaded eight hundred levels, and killed his generals.

古文：东都平，拜司空，赐衮冕服、鼓吹二部、班剑二十人、黄金二千斤，与太子、秦王得三炉铸钱。
现代文：东都平定之后，拜为司空，赐予衮冕礼服、鼓吹两部、执剑卫士二十人、黄金二千斤，与太子、秦王各得三炉铸钱自用。
English: After the pacification of the eastern capital, he was given the crowned ceremonial robe, two sets of trumpets, twenty sword-wielding guards, two thousand catties of gold, and three furnaces to mint money for his own use, together with the prince and King Qin.

古文：累进司徒，兼侍中、并州大都督。
现代文：累进为司徒，兼领侍中、并州大都督。
English: Gradually, he became a member of the Council of Elders, concurrently the leader of the middle, and the governor of the state.

古文：时秦王有功，而太子不为中外所属，元吉喜乱，欲并图之。
现代文：当时秦王建有大功，而皇太子不为朝廷内外所瞩目，元吉惟恐不乱，想一起除去两人。
English: At that time, Qin Wang Jian had made great achievements, while the crown prince was not attracting attention inside and outside the imperial court. However, Yuan Jie was not afraid of chaos and wanted to remove the two together.

古文：乃构於太子曰： 秦王功业日隆，为上所爱，殿下虽为太子，位不安，不早计，还踵受祸矣，请为殿下杀之。 
现代文：于是向太子建成说： 秦王功业日隆，为皇上所爱，殿下虽为太子，其位不安，不早为计，转眼就会受祸，请为殿下杀掉秦王。 
English: Therefore, Jiancheng said to the prince, "Qin Wang's exploits are increasing day by day, and he is loved by the emperor. Although your highness is the prince, his position is insecure. If you don't act quickly, you will suffer misfortune in the blink of an eye. Please kill Qin Wang for your highness."

古文：太子不忍，元吉数讽不已，许之。
现代文：太子不忍心，元吉多次劝说不止，太子方才答应。
English: The prince could not bear it, and Motoyoshi had to persuade him many times before he agreed.

古文：於是邀结宫掖，厚赂中书令封德彝，使为游说，帝遂疏秦王，爱太子。
现代文：于是邀结宫中妃嫔，厚贿中书令封德彝，让他们游说高祖，以致高祖果然疏远秦王，亲近太子。
English: So he invited the concubines in the palace and bribed them to lobby Gao Zu, so that Gao Zu really alienated King Qin and got close to the prince.

古文：元吉乃多匿亡命壮士，厚赐之，使为用。
现代文：元吉还藏匿许多亡命壮士，厚赐他们以钱财，使之为己所用。
English: Motokichi also hid many fugitive warriors and lavished them with money for his own use.

古文：元吉记室参军荣九思为诗刺之曰： 丹青饰成庆，玉帛礼专诸。 
现代文：元吉的记室参军荣九思做诗讽喻他说： 用丹青装饰成庆，拿玉帛礼遇专诸。 
English: Rong Jiu Si, a member of the army in Yuanji's office, made a poetic parable. He said, "Decorate Chengqing with Tanqing, and treat everyone with the utmost courtesy with a jade bracelet."

古文：元吉见之，弗悟也。
现代文：元吉见后，不悟其意。
English: After seeing Motokichi, he did not change his mind.

古文：其典签裴宣俨免官，往事秦府，元吉疑事泄，鸩杀之。
现代文：其典签裴宣俨罢官后，前往侍奉于秦王府，元吉怀疑其事会被泄露，因而毒杀宣俨。
English: After Pei Xuanqin resigned from his post, he went to serve in the Qin royal court. Yuanji suspected that his affair would be leaked, and thus poisoned Xuanqin.

古文：自是人莫敢言。
现代文：从此以后人莫敢言。
English: From then on, no one dared to speak out.

古文：秦王尝从帝幸元吉第，伏护军宇文宝寝内，将以刺王，太子固止之，元吉愠曰： 为兄计，於我何害？ 
现代文：秦王曾经随同高祖前往元吉宅第，元吉命其护军宇文宝埋伏于寝室之内，准备刺杀秦王，太子坚决制止这样做，元吉发脾气说： 这是为兄考虑，他对我有什么危害呢？ 
English: Qin Wang had once accompanied Gao Zu to the home of Yuan Jie. Yuan Jie's bodyguard, Yu Wenbao, was lying in wait in the bedroom, ready to assassinate Qin Wang. The prince resolutely stopped him from doing so. Yuan Jie lost his temper and said, "This is for my brother's sake. What harm can he do to me?"

古文：突厥郁射设入围乌城，建成荐元吉北讨，乃多引秦王府骁将秦叔宝、尉迟敬德、程知节、段志玄与行，又籍秦府精兵益麾下。
现代文：后逢突厥酋帅郁射设进围乌城，建成推荐元吉领兵北讨，还引荐秦王府骁将秦叔宝、尉迟敬德、程知节、段志玄等多人全都同行，又将秦王府精兵并入其府。
English: Later, when the Turkic chieftain Yushai set out to encircle Wucheng, it was built to recommend the leader of Yuanji to lead the soldiers to the North, and also to recommend the Qin King's palace to take Qin Shubao, Fuxi Jingde, Cheng Zhi Jie, Duan Zhigen and many others all together, and to merge the elite soldiers of the Qin King's palace into his palace.

古文：帝知之，不能禁。
现代文：高祖知其谋而不能禁制。
English: Gao Zu knows what he's doing and can't stop it.

古文：元吉承间密请害秦王，帝曰： 是有定四海功，杀之无名。 
现代文：元吉乘机密请加害秦王，高祖说： 他有平定四海之功，杀他没有理由。 
English: Yuan Jie secretly asked Gao Zu to harm King Qin. Gao Zu said, "He has contributed to the pacification of the four seas. There is no reason to kill him."

古文：元吉曰： 王昔平东都，顾望不即西，散金帛树私惠，岂非反邪？ 
现代文：元吉说： 秦王从前平定东都后，顾望而不西还，散发金银丝帛以立私恩，难道不是反状吗？ 
English: Yuanji said: After the Qin King had conquered the eastern capital, he did not return to the west, but distributed gold, silver and silk to establish personal favor. Isn't that the opposite?

古文：帝不应。
现代文：高祖不予回答。
English: Gaozu did not answer.

古文：太子与元吉谋： 兵行，吾与秦王至昆明池，伏壮士拉之，以暴卒闻，上无不信。
现代文：太子便与元吉谋议说： 大军出发时，我与秦王到昆明池宴别，埋伏壮士杀秦王，而以暴逝奏闻，皇上没有不相信的。
English: The prince then discussed the matter with Yuan Jie and said: "When the great army set out, I went to Kunming Pool with King Qin to have a farewell banquet. Strong men ambushed and killed King Qin. When I reported the news of his violent death, the emperor did not disbelieve me.

古文：然后说帝付吾国，吾以尔为皇太弟，而尽击杀叔宝等。 
现代文：然后再劝说父皇将帝位让给我，我就封你为皇太弟，而尽杀秦叔宝等人。 
English: Then I will persuade my father the emperor to give up the throne to me, I will make you the crown prince, and I will kill Qin Shubao and others.

古文：率更令王晊密以谋告秦王，王召僚属谋，皆曰： 元吉戾很，使得志，且不能事其兄。
现代文：率更令王日至暗中将其阴谋告知秦王，秦王召集僚属商议，大家都说： 元吉凶残阴险，使他得志，终究不能侍奉其兄。
English: Wang Zhi even ordered Wang Zhi to secretly inform Qin Wang of his plot. Qin Wang gathered his colleagues and subordinates for discussion. Everyone said: Yuan Ji's vicious insidiousness made him determined, after all, he could not serve his brother.

古文：往者护军薛宝以元吉字合之，其文成 唐 ，元吉喜曰： 但除秦王，取东宫如反掌耳！ 
现代文：从前护军薛宝上符录说， 元吉 二字可合成一个 唐 字。元吉大喜说： 只要除去秦王，夺取东宫易如反掌！ 
English: A former escort, Xue Bao, said in a record that the two characters of Yuanji could be combined to form a Tang character. Yuanji Daxi said: As long as the Qin King is eliminated, it is easy to seize the East Palace!

古文：为乱未克，已复倾夺，大王不蚤正之，社稷非复唐有。 
现代文：制造此乱还未如愿，就已复怀攘夺之心。大王如不早日正定其乱，社稷江山就会非复唐室所有。 
English: If the king does not resolve the issue soon, the mountains of Shifang will become the property of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：秦王由是定计。
现代文：秦王由此定计平乱。
English: As a result, King Qin planned to quell the unrest.

古文：死年二十四。
现代文：元吉死时年龄为二十四岁。
English: At the time of his death, Motokichi was 24 years old.

古文：子承业为梁郡王，承鸾渔阳王，承奖普安王，承裕江夏王，承度义阳王，并伏诛。
现代文：其子承业受封为梁郡王，承鸾为渔阳王，承奖为普安王，承裕为江夏王，承度为义阳王，全都连坐诛死。
English: His son Chengye was named King of Liang County, Chengyu was named King of Yuyang, Chengbo was named King of Pu'an, Chengyu was named King of Jiangxia, and Chengdu was named King of Yiyang. All of them died in the battle.

古文：贞观初，改葬，追爵海陵郡王及谥。
现代文：贞观初年，下诏改葬元吉，追封海陵郡王的爵位与谥号。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, the imperial edict was issued to change the funeral of Genji, and the title and nickname of the king of Hailing County were restored.

古文：后改封巢，以曹王明嗣。
现代文：后来又改封为巢王，并将曹王李明过继给他以主持其祭祀。
English: Later, he changed his title to King of the Nest, and passed Cao Wang Li Ming to him to preside over his sacrificial rites.

