古文：十有六年春，王正月己卯，卫世子蒯聩自戚入于卫。
现代文：十六年春季，周历正月己卯日，卫国的世子蒯聩从戚地进入卫国。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, the heir of the Heiguo entered the Heiguo from his relatives.

古文：卫侯辄来奔。
现代文：卫侯辄逃到鲁国。
English: Wei Houyi fled to Lu.

古文：二月，卫子还成出奔宋。
现代文：二月，卫国的子还成逃到宋国。
English: In February, the son of the Emperor fled to Song.

古文：夏四月己丑，孔丘卒。
现代文：夏季四月己丑日，孔丘去世。
English: On April Fool's Day, Confucius died.

古文：十六年春，瞒成、褚师比出奔宋。
现代文：十六年春季，瞒成、褚师比逃亡到宋国。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, Zhu Cheng and Zou Shibi fled to Song.

古文：卫侯使鄢武子告于周，曰： 蒯聩得罪于君父君母，逋窜于晋。
现代文：卫庄公派鄢武子向周室报告，说： 蒯聩得罪了君父、君母，逃窜到晋国。
English: Weizhuang sent Zou Wuzi to report to Zhou's office, saying: "You have offended your father and mother and fled to Jin Province.

古文：晋以王室之故，不弃兄弟，寘诸河上。
现代文：晋国由于王室的缘故，不抛弃兄弟，把蒯聩安置在黄河边上。
English: Jin, for the sake of the royal family, did not abandon his brother and placed the cocoon on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：王使单平公对曰： 肸以嘉命，来告余一人。往谓叔父，余嘉乃成世，复尔禄次，敬之哉。
现代文：上天开恩，得继承保有封地，派下臣肸谨向执事报告。 周敬王派单平公回答说： 肸把消息带来告诉我，回去对叔父说：我赞许你继承先世，恢复你的禄位。要恭敬啊！
English: By the grace of heaven, he was able to inherit and retain the fief, and sent his subordinate, Zhou Jing Wang, to report to the deacon. Zhou Jing Wang sent Shan Ping Gong to reply:  Bring me the news, go back and say to your uncle: I approve of you inheriting the previous life and restoring your position. Be respectful!

古文：方天之休，弗敬弗休，悔其可追？ 
现代文：这样才能得到上天赐福。不恭敬上天就不能赐福，后悔哪里来得及？ 
English: This is the only way to receive God's blessing. If you don't respect God, you can't receive His blessing. How can you regret?

古文：夏四月己丑，孔丘卒。公诔之曰： 旻天不吊，不慭遗一老。俾屏余一人以在位，茕茕余在疚。
现代文：夏季，四月十一日，孔丘死了，哀公致悼辞说： 上天不善，不肯留下这一位国老，让他捍卫我一人居于君位，使我孤零零地忧愁成病。
English: In the summer, on April 11th, Confucius died, and in his eulogy, he said, "The heavens were not kind, and they did not want to leave this elder of the nation, and let him defend me alone in the throne, which made me lonely, sad, and sick.

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：呜呼哀哉！
English: Alas, alas!

古文：尼父，无自律。 
现代文：尼父，我失去了律己的榜样。 
English: My father, I have lost my role model.

古文：子赣曰： 君其不没于鲁乎。
现代文：子赣说： 国君恐怕不能在鲁国善终吧！
English: Zixuan said, "I'm afraid the Emperor can't have a happy ending in the State of Lu."

古文：夫子之言曰： 礼失则昏，名失则愆。 
现代文：他老人家的话说： 礼仪丧失就要昏暗，名分丧失就有过错。 
English: Teacher's words: The loss of law will lead to confusion, and the loss of prestige will lead to mistakes.

古文：失志为昏，失所为愆。
现代文：失去意志就是昏暗，失去身份是过错。
English: If you lose your will, you will be confused, and if you lose what you want, you will make mistakes.

古文：生不能用，死而诔之，非礼也。称一人，非名也。
现代文：活着不能任用，死了又致悼辞，这不合于礼仪，自称 一人 ，这不合于名分。
English: If you are alive, you cannot be appointed; if you are dead, you have to give a eulogy, which is not in keeping with etiquette; if you claim to be a one-man show, which is not in keeping with your position.

古文：君两失之。 
现代文：国君把礼与名两样都丧失了。 
English: I lost them both.

古文：六月，卫侯饮孔悝酒于平阳，重酬之，大夫皆有纳焉。
现代文：六月，卫庄公在平阳招待孔悝喝酒，重重酬谢他，对大夫都有所赠送。
English: In June, the Duke of Wei Zhuang invited Confucius for a drink in Pingyang. He thanked him profusely and gave him gifts.

古文：醉而送之，夜半而遣之。
现代文：喝醉了送走他，半夜把他打发走。
English: Drove him home drunk, dropped him off in the middle of the night.

古文：载伯姬于平阳而行。及西门，使贰车反祏于西圃。
现代文：孔悝用车子装上伯姬动身离平阳，到达西门，派副车回到西圃宗庙中去取神主盒子。
English: Confucius loaded up the vehicle with the holy relic and set off from Pingyang, arriving at Ximen. He sent a second vehicle back to the Xipu ancestral temple to retrieve the god's box.

古文：子伯季子初为孔氏臣，新登于公。请追之，遇载祏者，杀而乘其车。
现代文：子伯季子当初是孔氏的家臣，近来晋升为卫庄公的大夫，请求追赶孔悝，路上碰到载神主盒子的人，就杀了他而坐上他的车子。
English: His son, Uncle Qizi, who was originally a vassal of Kong and was recently promoted to Weizhuang's doctor, asked to chase after Kong Yao. On the way, he met a man carrying the god's box, so he killed him and got into his car.

古文：许公为反祏，遇之，曰： 与不仁人争，明无不胜。 
现代文：许公为回去迎接神主盒子，遇到子伯季子，许公为说： 和不仁的人争强，没有不胜的。 
English: In order to go back to meet the god's box, Xu Gongwen met Zibo Jizi. Xu Gongwen said, "There is no way to win against those who are not kind."

古文：必使先射，射三发，皆远许为。
现代文：就一定要让子伯季子先射，射了三箭，箭都落到离许公为很远的地方。
English: He had to let Zibo Jizi shoot first, and he shot three arrows, all of which landed far away from Xu Gong.

古文：许为射之，殪。
现代文：许公为射他，只一箭就把他射死了。
English: Xu Gongwen shot him and killed him with a single arrow.

古文：或以其车从，得祏于橐中。
现代文：有人坐着子伯季子的车子跟上去，在袋子里得到了神主盒子。
English: Someone followed in Zibo Jizi's car and got the god box in a bag.

古文：孔悝出奔宋。
现代文：孔悝逃亡到宋国。
English: Kong Xi fled to Song.

古文：楚大子建之遇谗也，自城父奔宋。
现代文：楚国太子建遭到诬陷的时候，从城父逃亡到宋国，又去郑国躲避宋国华氏之乱。
English: When Prince Jian of Chu was framed, he fled from the city father to Song and then to Zheng to escape the Huashi Rebellion in Song.

古文：又辟华氏之乱于郑，郑人甚善之。
现代文：郑国人待他很好。又到晋国，和晋国人策划袭击郑国，为此就要求再回到郑国去。郑国人待他像以前一样。
English: The people of Zheng treated him very well. He went to Jin again, plotted with the people of Jin to attack Zheng, and asked to go back to Zheng again. The people of Zheng treated him as before.

古文：又適晋，与晋人谋袭郑，乃求复焉。
现代文：晋国人派间谍和太子建联系，事情完了准备回晋国，同时约定入袭郑国的日期。
English: The Jin people sent spies to establish contact with the prince, and when the matter was over, they prepared to return to Jin, and at the same time agreed on the date of the invasion of Zheng.

古文：郑人复之如初。
现代文：太子建在他的封邑里大肆暴虐，封邑的人告发他。
English: Prince Jian wreaked havoc in his fiefdom, and the people of the fiefdom denounced him.

古文：郑人省之，得晋谍焉。遂杀子木。
现代文：郑国人来查问，发现了晋国间谍，于是就杀死了太子建。
English: The Zheng people came to investigate and found the Jin spies, so they killed Prince Jian.

古文：其子曰胜，在吴。子西欲召之。
现代文：太子建的儿子名胜，在吴国，子西想找他来。
English: Prince Jian's son, Meisho, is in Wu, and Zixi wants to find him.

古文：叶公曰： 吾闻胜也诈而乱，无乃害乎。 
现代文：叶公说： 我听说胜这个人狡诈而好作乱，不是一个祸害吧！ 
English: Ye Gong said: I've heard that this man is cunning and likes to make trouble, isn't he a scourge!

古文：子西曰： 吾闻胜也信而勇，不为不利，舍诸边竟，使卫藩焉。 
现代文：子西说： 我听说胜这个人诚实而勇敢，不做没有利的事情。把他安置在边境上，让他保卫边疆。 
English: Zixi said, "I have heard that this man is honest and brave, and will not do anything that is not beneficial. Put him on the border and let him guard the border.

古文：叶公曰： 周仁之谓信，率义之谓勇。
现代文：叶公说： 符合仁爱叫做诚信，遵循道义叫做勇敢。
English: Ye Gong said: To act in accordance with benevolence is called integrity, to follow morality is called bravery.

古文：吾闻胜也好复言，而求死士，殆有私乎？
现代文：我听说胜这个人务求实践诺言，而又遍求不怕死的人，大概是有私心吧？
English: I've heard that this man, who wants to keep his promise and is not afraid of death, is probably selfish, right?

古文：复言，非信也。期死，非勇也。
现代文：不管什么话都要实践，这不是诚信，不管什么事情都不怕死，这不是勇敢。
English: No matter what words to practice, this is not integrity, no matter what things are not afraid of death, this is not brave.

古文：子必悔之。 
现代文：您一定会后悔的。 
English: You will regret it.

古文：弗从。召之使处吴竟，为白公。
现代文：子西不听，把胜召回来，让他住在和吴国边境的地方，号为白公。
English: Zixi didn't listen and called Sheng back, letting him live on the border with the State of Wu, where he was known as Bai Gong.

古文：请伐郑。子西曰： 楚未节也。
现代文：胜请求进攻郑国，子西说： 楚国一切政事还没纳入正常轨道。
English: After winning the request to attack Zheng Guo, Zixi said: All the political affairs of Chu Guo have not been put on a normal track.

古文：不然，吾不忘也。 
现代文：不是这样，我是不会忘记的。 
English: It's not like that. I won't forget.

古文：他日，又请，许之。
现代文：过了些时候，胜又请求，子西同意了。
English: After a while, Sheng asked again, and Zixi agreed.

古文：未起师。晋人伐郑，楚救之，与之盟。
现代文：还没有出兵，晋国攻打郑国，楚国却救援郑国，并和郑国结盟。
English: Without sending troops, Jin attacked Zheng, while Chu rescued Zheng and allied with Zheng.

古文：胜怒曰： 郑人在此，仇不远矣。 
现代文：白公胜发怒，说： 郑国人在这里，仇人不在远处了。 
English: Bai Gongsheng became angry and said: Zheng Guo Ren is here, the enemy is not far away.

古文：胜自厉剑，子期之子平见之，曰： 王孙何自厉也？ 
现代文：白公胜亲自磨剑，子期的儿子平见到，说： 您为什么亲自磨剑呢？ 
English: Bai Gongsheng personally sharpened the sword. When his son Ping Yu saw it, he said: "Why are you personally sharpening the sword?

古文：曰： 胜以直闻，不告女，庸为直乎？
现代文：他说： 胜是以爽直著称的，不告诉您，哪里能算得上直爽呢？
English: He said: "Sheng is known for his straightforwardness, but I don't know where you can count on straightforwardness.

古文：将以杀尔父。 
现代文：我要杀死你父亲。 
English: I'm gonna kill your father.

古文：平以告子西。
现代文：平把这些话报告子西。
English: He reported these words to Zixi.

古文：子西曰： 胜如卵，余翼而长之。
现代文：子西说： 胜就像鸟蛋，我覆翼而使他长大。
English: Zixi said, "Sheng is like a bird's egg. I cover his wings to make him grow.

古文：楚国第，我死，令尹、司马，非胜而谁？ 
现代文：在楚国，只要我死了，令尹、司马，不归于胜还归于谁？ 
English: In the state of Chu, as long as I am dead, if I am not returned to Sheng, who will I be returned to?

古文：胜闻之曰： 令尹之狂也，得死，乃非我。 
现代文：胜听了子西的话，说： 令尹真狂妄啊！他要得到好死，我就不是我。 
English: Sheng listened to Zixi's words and said, "Yin Zhen is arrogant! If he wants a good death, I'm not the one.

古文：子西不悛。
现代文：子西还是没有觉察。
English: Zixi still didn't notice.

古文：胜谓石乞曰： 王与二卿士，皆五百人当之，则可矣。 
现代文：胜对石乞说： 君王和两位卿士，一共用五百个人对付，就行了。 
English: Sheng said to Shi Qian: The king and two nobles, a total of five hundred people to deal with, that's enough.

古文：乞曰： 不可得也。 
现代文：石乞说 这五百个人是找不到的。 
English: The stone mendicant said that the five hundred people could not be found.

古文：曰： 市南有熊宜僚者，若得之，可以当五百人矣。 
现代文：又说： 市场的南边有个叫熊宜僚的，如果找到他，可以抵五百个人。 
English: He also said: There is a bear called Xiong Yiliang on the south side of the market. If you find him, you can reach five hundred people.

古文：乃从白公而见之。
现代文：石乞就跟着白公胜去见宜僚，和他谈话，很高兴。
English: The stone mendicant followed Bai Gongsheng to see Yiliang and had a conversation with him. He was very happy.

古文：与之言，说。告之故，辞。
现代文：石乞就把要办的事告诉宜僚，宜僚拒绝。
English: Shi Qian then told Yi Liang about what needed to be done, but Yi Liang refused.

古文：承之以剑，不动。
现代文：把剑架在宜僚脖子上，他一动不动。
English: He held the sword around Yiliang's neck, and he didn't move.

古文：胜曰： 不为利谄，不为威惕，不洩人言以求媚者，去之。 
现代文：白公胜说： 这是不为利诱、不怕威胁、不泄漏别人的话去讨好的人，离开这里吧。 
English: Bai Gongsheng said, "This is a person who is not enticed for profit, is not afraid of threats, and does not leak other people's words to please others. Leave here."

古文：吴人伐慎，白公败之。
现代文：吴国人进攻慎地，白公胜打败了他们。
English: The Wu people attacked cautiously, and Bai Gongsheng defeated them.

古文：请以战备献，许之。遂作乱。
现代文：白公胜请求不解除军队武装奉献战利品，楚惠王同意了，白公胜就乘机发动叛乱。
English: Bai Gongsheng requested not to disarm the army and offered the spoils of war. King Chu Hui agreed, and Bai Gongsheng took the opportunity to launch a rebellion.

古文：秋七月，杀子西、子期于朝，而劫惠王。
现代文：秋季，七月，在朝廷上杀了子西、子期，并且劫持楚惠王。
English: In the autumn, in July, he killed Zixi and Zida at the imperial court, and kidnapped King Chu Hui.

古文：子西以袂掩面而死。
现代文：子西用袖子遮着脸而死去。
English: Zosi died with his sleeve over his face.

古文：子期曰： 昔者吾以力事君，不可以弗终。 
现代文：子期说： 过去我用勇力事奉君王，不能有始无终。 
English: The son said, "In the past, I used to serve the king with courage.

古文：抉豫章以杀人而后死。
现代文：拔起一株樟树打死了敌人然后死去。
English: Pull up an elm tree, kill the enemy and die.

古文：石乞曰： 焚库弑王，不然不济。 
现代文：石乞说： 焚烧府库，杀死君王。不这样，事情不能成功。 
English: The stone mendicant said, "Burn the treasury, kill the king. Otherwise, the matter cannot succeed."

古文：白公曰： 不可。弑王不祥，焚库无聚，将何以守矣？ 
现代文：白公胜说： 不行，杀死君王不吉祥，烧掉府库没有积蓄，将要用什么来保有楚国？ 
English: Bai Gongsheng said, "No, it is not auspicious to kill the king, and there is no money to be saved by burning down the government treasury. What will be used to preserve the state of Chu?"

古文：乞曰： 有楚国而治其民，以敬事神，可以得祥，且有聚矣，何患？ 
现代文：石乞说： 有了楚国而治理百姓，用恭敬来事奉神灵，就能得到吉祥，而且还有物资，怕什么？ 
English: Shi Qian said: With the state of Chu to govern the people and serve the gods with respect, you can get auspicious, and there are materials, what are you afraid of?

古文：弗从。
现代文：白公胜不肯听从。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：叶公在蔡，方城之外皆曰： 可以入矣。 
现代文：叶公住在蔡地，方城山外边的人都说： 可以进兵国都了。 
English: Ye Gong lived in Cai Di, and people outside Fangcheng Mountain said: You can enter the capital.

古文：子高曰： 吾闻之，以险徼幸者，其求无餍，偏重必离。 
现代文：叶公说： 我听说，用冒险而侥幸成功的，他的欲望不会满足，办事不公平，百姓必然不依附。 
English: Ye Gong said: I've heard that if a person succeeds by chance through risk-taking, his desires will not be satisfied, things will not be done fairly, and the people will not be attached to him.

古文：闻其杀齐管修也而后入。
现代文：听到白公胜杀了齐国的管修，然后才进入郢都。
English: After hearing that Bai Gongsheng had killed Guan Xiu of Qi, he entered Shendu.

古文：白公欲以子闾为王。子闾不可，遂劫以兵。
现代文：白公胜想要让子闾做楚王，子闾不答应，就用武力劫持他。
English: Bai Gongsheng wanted to make Zixuan the King of Chu, but Zixuan did not agree, so he abducted him by force.

古文：子闾曰： 王孙若安靖楚国，匡正王室，而后庇焉，启之愿也，敢不听从？
现代文：子闾说： 您如果安定楚国，整顿王室，然后对启加以庇护，这是启的愿望，岂敢不听从？
English: Zixuan said, "If you stabilize the state of Chu, rectify the royal family, and then give shelter to Kai, which is Kai's wish, how dare you not obey?"

古文：若将专利以倾王室，不顾楚国，有死不能。 
现代文：如果要专谋私利来颠覆王室，置国家于不顾，那么启宁死不从。 
English: If you want to conspire for personal gain to subvert the royal family and disregard the country, then Qin Ning will not comply.

古文：遂杀之，而以王如高府，石乞尹门。圉公阳穴宫，负王以如昭夫人之宫。
现代文：白公胜就杀了子闾，带着惠王到高府。石乞守门，圉公阳在宫墙上打开一个洞，背上惠王到了昭夫人的宫中。
English: Bai Gongsheng then killed Zi Yao and took Hui Wang to Gaofu. Shi Beggar guarded the gate, Zi Gongyang opened a hole in the palace wall, and Hui Wang entered Lady Zhao's palace on his back.

古文：叶公亦至，及北门，或遇之，曰： 君胡不胄？
现代文：叶公也在这时候来到，到达北门，有人遇到他，说： 您为什么不戴上头盔？
English: Ye Gong also came at this time, arrived at the north gate, someone met him and said: Why don't you wear a helmet?

古文：国人望君如望慈父母焉。盗贼之矢若伤君，是绝民望也。
现代文：国内的人们盼望您好像盼望慈爱的父母，盗贼的箭如果射伤您，这就断绝了百姓的盼望。
English: The people of the land look to you as they would to a loving parent, but if the arrows of a thief pierce you, the hope of the people is cut off.

古文：若之何不胄？ 
现代文：为什么不戴上头盔？ 
English: Why not wear a helmet?

古文：乃胄而进。又遇一人曰： 君胡胄？
现代文：叶公就戴上头盔前进，又遇到一个人说： 您为什么戴上头盔？
English: Mr. Ye put on his helmet and walked forward. He met another person who said, "Why are you wearing a helmet?

古文：国人望君如望岁焉，日日以几。若见君面，是得艾也。
现代文：国内的人们盼望您好像盼望丰收一样，天天盼望，如果见到您的面，就能安心了。
English: People in this country look forward to seeing you every day, just as they look forward to a good harvest. If they see your face, they will be reassured.

古文：民知不死，其亦夫有奋心。犹将旌君以徇于国，而又掩面以绝民望，不亦甚乎？ 
现代文：百姓知道不至于再有生命危险，人人有奋战之心，还要把您的名字写在旗帜上在都城里巡行，但是您又把脸遮起来以断绝百姓的盼望，不也太过分了吗？ 
English: The people know that there will be no more danger to their lives, everyone has a fighting spirit, and they still have to write your name on the flag and parade in the capital, but you also covered your face to break the people's hope, isn't it too much?

古文：乃免胄而进。
现代文：叶公就脱下头盔前进。
English: Ye Gong took off his helmet and marched forward.

古文：遇箴尹固，帅其属将与白公。
现代文：遇到箴尹固率领他的部下，准备去帮助白公胜。
English: He met Zhen Yin Gu leading his men, ready to help Bai Gongsheng.

古文：子高曰： 微二子者，楚不国矣。弃德从贼，其可保乎？ 
现代文：叶公说： 如果没有子西他们两位，楚国就不成为国家了，抛弃德行跟从盗贼，难道能够安全吗？ 
English: Ye Gong said: If there were no Zixi and the two of them, Chu would not have become a country. Is it safe to abandon virtue and follow the thief?

古文：乃从叶公。
现代文：箴尹固就跟随叶公。
English: Zhen Yin Gu followed Ye Gong.

古文：使与国人以攻白公。
现代文：叶公派他和国内的人们攻打白公胜。
English: Ye Gongsheng sent him and the people of the country to attack Bai Gongsheng.

古文：白公奔山而缢，其徒微之。
现代文：白公胜逃到山上自己吊死了，他的部下把尸体藏起来。
English: Bai Gongsheng fled to the mountains and hanged himself. His subordinates hid the body.

古文：生拘石乞而问白公之死焉，对曰： 余知其死所，而长者使余勿言。 
现代文：叶公活捉石乞而追问白公胜的尸体。石乞回答说： 我知道他尸体所藏的地方，但是白公让我别说。 
English: Ye Gong chased after Bai Gongsheng's corpse while he was still alive. The stone mendicant replied, "I know where his corpse is hidden, but Bai Gong asked me not to tell."

古文：曰： 不言将烹。 
现代文：叶公说： 不说就烹了你。 
English: Ye Gong said, "If you don't say it, I'll cook you."

古文：乞曰： 此事克则为卿，不克则烹，固其所也。
现代文：石乞说： 这件事成功就是卿，不成功就被烹，这本来是应有的结果，有什么妨碍？ 
English: Shi Qian said, "Success in this matter is supreme, and if it is not successful, it will be eliminated. This is the result that should have happened, so what is the obstacle?"

古文：何害？ 乃烹石乞。
现代文：于是就烹了石乞。
English: So they cooked a stone mendicant.

古文：王孙燕奔黄氏。
现代文：王孙燕逃亡到頯黄氏。
English: Wang Sunyan fled to Shao Huang.

古文：沈诸梁兼二事，国宁，乃使宁为令尹，使宽为司马，而老于叶。
现代文：叶公身兼令尹、司马二职，国家安定以后，就让宁做令尹，宽做司马，自己在叶地退休养老。
English: After the country was stabilized, he let Ning be Lingyin and Guang be Sima, and retired in Ye.

古文：卫侯占梦嬖人，求酒于大叔僖子。不得，与卜人比而告公曰： 君有大臣在西南隅，弗去，惧害。 
现代文：卫庄公占卜他做的梦，他的宠臣向太叔僖子要酒，没有得到，就和卜人勾结，而告诉卫庄公说： 您有大臣在西南角上，不去掉他，恐怕有危害。 
English: Weizhuang Gong divined a dream he had. His favorite asked Uncle Zizi for wine. When he didn't get it, he colluded with the diviner and told Weizhuang Gong, "You have a minister in the southwest corner. If you don't get rid of him, I'm afraid there will be harm."

古文：乃逐大叔遗。
现代文：于是就驱逐太叔遗。
English: So they expelled the great-uncle's widow.

古文：遗奔晋。
现代文：太叔遗逃亡到晋国。
English: His great-uncle's remains fled to Jin Province.

古文：卫侯谓浑良夫曰： 吾继先君而不得其器，若之何？ 
现代文：卫庄公对浑良夫说： 我继承了先君而没有得到他的宝器，怎么办？ 
English: Weizhuang Gong said to Hunryufu: What should I do if I inherited the previous ruler but did not get his treasure?

古文：良夫代执火者而言曰： 疾与亡君，皆君之子也。
现代文：浑良夫让执烛的人出去，自己代他执烛然后说： 疾和逃亡在外的国君，都是您的儿子，召他来可以量才选择。
English: Hunryaf let the candle-bearer go out, and he himself held the candle for him, and then said: "The sick and the fleeing sovereign are both your sons, and you may call him as you see fit.

古文：召之而择材焉可也。若不材，器可得也。 
现代文：如果没有才能就废掉他，宝器就可以得到了。 
English: If you don't have talent, discard him, and you can get the treasure.

古文：竖告大子。
现代文：童仆密告太子。
English: The boy servant tipped off the prince.

古文：大子使五人舆豭从己，劫公而强盟之。且请杀良夫。
现代文：太子派五个人用车子装上公猪跟着自己，劫持卫庄公强迫和他盟誓，而且请求杀死浑良夫。
English: The crown prince sent five men to follow him with a cart loaded with boars, kidnapped Weizhuang Gong, forced him to swear an oath, and asked them to kill Hun Liangfu.

古文：公曰： 其盟免三死。 
现代文：卫庄公说： 和他的盟誓说过要赦免死罪三次。 
English: Weizhuang Gong said: And his oath said that he would pardon the death penalty three times.

古文：曰： 请三之后，有罪杀之。 
现代文：太子说： 请在三次以后，再有罪就杀死他。 
English: The prince said, "Please, after three times, if he is still guilty, kill him."

古文：公曰： 诺哉！ 
现代文：卫庄公说： 好啊！ 
English: Weizhuang Gong said: Good!

