古文：桓公问于管子曰： 国准可得闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 国家的平准措施可以讲给我听听么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: Can you tell me about the national leveling measures?

古文：管子对曰， 国准者，视时而立仪。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 国家的平准措施是按照不同时代而制定不同政策的。 
English: Guanzhong replied: The national leveling measure is to formulate different policies according to different times.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓视时而立仪？ 
现代文：桓公说； 何谓按不同时代而制定不同政策？ 
English: What does it mean to formulate different policies according to different eras?

古文：对曰： 黄帝之王，谨逃其爪牙。
现代文：管仲回答说： 黄帝当政的时代，努力除掉各地的武装。
English: Guanzhong replied: In the era when the Yellow Emperor was in power, efforts were made to get rid of armed forces everywhere.

古文：有虞之王，枯泽童山。
现代文：虞舜当政的时代，断竭水泽，伐尽山林。
English: In the era when Gu Yao was in power, the draining of rivers and lakes and the felling of mountains and forests were rampant.

古文：夏后之王，烧增薮，焚沛泽，不益民之利。
现代文：夏后氏当政的时代，焚毁草薮和大泽，不准民间增加财利。
English: During the reign of the Natsugo clan, Kusanagi and Osawa were burned, and the people were not allowed to increase their profits.

古文：殷人之王，诸侯无牛马之牢，不利其器。
现代文：殷人当政的时代，不许诸侯经营牛马畜牧事业，还限制他们制造武器和工具。
English: In the era when the Yin people were in power, the princes were not allowed to engage in cattle and horse husbandry, and they were also restricted from manufacturing weapons and tools.

古文：周人之王，官能以备物。
现代文：周人当政的时代，统一管理有技能的人材，集中贮备各种物资。
English: In the era when Zhou Ren was in power, there was unified management of skilled human resources and centralized storage of various materials.

古文：五家之数殊而用一也。 
现代文：五家的办法虽有不同，而集中统一的作用是一样的。 
English: Although the policies of the five are different, their functions are the same.

古文：桓公曰： 然则五家之数，籍何者为善也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么，对此五家的政策，借用哪家为好呢？ 
English: Huan Gong said: So, for this five-company policy, which company is better to borrow from?

古文：管子对曰： 烧山林，破增薮，焚沛泽，猛兽众也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 烧山林、毁草菇、火焚大泽等措施，是因为禽兽过多。
English: Guanzhong replied: measures such as burning mountains and forests, destroying plants and mushrooms, and setting fire to Osawa are because there are too many animals.

古文：童山竭泽者，君智不足也。
现代文：伐尽山林，断竭水泽，是因为君智不足。
English: The cutting down of mountains and forests and the draining of rivers and lakes is due to a lack of wisdom.

古文：烧增薮，焚沛泽，不益民利，逃械器，闭智能者，辅己者也。
现代文：焚烧草薮大泽，不使民间增加财利，既取消工具武器的发展，又闭塞人们的生产能力，都是为了加强自己。
English: To burn grass and stubble, not to increase the profit of the people, to cancel the development of tools and weapons, and to block the production capacity of the people, are all for the purpose of strengthening oneself.

古文：诸侯无牛马之牢，不利其器者，曰淫器而壹民心者也。
现代文：不许诸侯经营牛马畜牧事业，还限制他们制造武器工具，是为了不过分生产武器和工具而统一民心。
English: The lords were not allowed to engage in cattle and horse husbandry, and they were also restricted from manufacturing weapons and tools, in order to unify the people's hearts and not overproduce weapons and tools.

古文：以人御人，逃戈刃，高仁义，乘天固以安己者也。
现代文：派官吏管理人才，禁止私造刀枪，提倡仁义道德，是在稳固基础上安定自己地位。
English: Assigning officials to manage talents, prohibiting the illegal manufacture of knives and guns, and advocating benevolence and righteousness are to stabilize one's position on a solid foundation.

古文：五家之数殊而用一也。 
现代文：五家的政策虽有不同，而作用是一样的。 
English: Although the policies of the five are different, their functions are the same.

古文：桓公曰： 今当时之王者立何而可？ 
现代文：桓公说： 现时当政的王者，采用哪家的政策为好？ 
English: Kankong said, "The king who is currently in power, which policy should he adopt?

古文：管子对曰： 请兼用五家而勿尽。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 可以兼用五家之法而不可全盘照搬。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "You can use the methods of the five schools, but you can't copy them in their entirety.

古文：桓公曰， 何谓？ 
现代文：桓公说： 此话涵义如何？ 
English: Kanko said, "What is the meaning of this?"

古文：管子对曰： 立祈祥以固山泽，立械器以使万物，天下皆利而谨操重策。
现代文：管仲回答说： 设立祭神的坛场来封禁山泽，统一制造武器工具来运用物资，使天下同来经营但却严格着物价政策。
English: Guanzhong replied: to set up a shrine to ban mountains and lakes, to unify the manufacture of weapons and tools to use materials, to make the world operate together, but with a strict price policy.

古文：童山竭泽，益利搏流。
现代文：实行伐尽山林与断竭水泽的办法，控制财利并掌握流通。
English: Implement the method of cutting down the mountains and forests and draining the rivers and lakes, control the financial interests and control the circulation.

古文：出山金立币，存菹丘，立骈牢，以为民饶。
现代文：开发矿山以铸造钱币，保存草地以建立牧场，使人民富饶起来。
English: Develop mines to mint coins, preserve meadows to establish pastures, and enrich the people.

古文：彼菹菜之壤，非五谷之所生也，麋鹿牛马之地。
现代文：因为杂草丛生的洼地，不适合粮食生长，应作为饲养糜鹿牛马的牧场。
English: Because the overgrown depressions are not suitable for grain growth, they should be used as pastures for rearing elk, cattle and horses.

古文：春秋赋生杀老，立施以守五谷，此以无用之壤臧民之羸。
现代文：春秋两季，把幼畜供应百姓，把老畜杀掉卖出，发行货币来掌握粮食。这就利用了无用的土地吸收百姓余粮。
English: In the spring and autumn, the young animals were supplied to the people, the old animals were killed and sold, and money was issued to control the grain. This made use of the useless land to absorb the surplus grain of the people.

古文：五家之数皆用而勿尽。 
现代文：五家的政策都采用了而没有全盘照搬。 
English: The policies of the five companies have all been adopted, but have not been fully copied.

古文：桓公曰： 五代之王以尽天下数矣，来世之王者可得而闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 上述五个朝代，已经概括了人们所知的各种办法了。以后成王业的君主如何，可以再谈一谈么？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "The above-mentioned five dynasties have already summarized the various methods known to people. What about the monarchs who will become kings in the future, can we talk about it again?"

古文：管子对曰： 好讥而不乱，亟变而不变，时至则为，过则去。
现代文：管仲回答说： 重视调查而做到有条不紊，积极改革而不留恋过去，条件成熟就应当实行，条件已变就应放弃。
English: Guanzhong replied: attach importance to the investigation and do it in an orderly manner, actively reform without nostalgia for the past, the conditions should be implemented when they are ripe, and the conditions should be abandoned when they have changed.

古文：王数不可豫致。
现代文：成王业的具体政策是不能事前安排好的。
English: The specific policy of Chengwangye cannot be arranged in advance.

古文：此五家之国准也。 
现代文：这里所说，只能是五家的平准措施。 
English: What is said here can only be a leveling measure for five companies.

