古文：◎礼五
现代文：礼五
English: Line 5

古文：庙制禘佩时享荐新加上谥号庙讳
现代文：庙制禘佩时享荐新加上谥号庙讳
English: When the temple system was established, it was recommended to add the nickname "Temple Taboo"

古文：宗庙之制
现代文：宗庙之制
English: The family temple system

古文：明初作四亲庙于宫城东南，各为一庙。
现代文：明朝初年在宫城东南建四亲庙，各建一庙。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, a four-family temple was built in the southeast of Miyagi, with each family building one temple.

古文：皇高祖居中，皇曾祖东第一，皇祖西第一，皇考东第二，皆南向。
现代文：皇高祖居中，皇曾祖在东面第一位，皇祖在西面第一位，皇父在东面第二位，都面向南。
English: The emperor's great-great-grandfather is in the middle, the emperor's great-great-grandfather is first in the east, the emperor's grandfather is first in the west, and the emperor's father is second in the east, all facing south.

古文：每庙中室奉神主。
现代文：每座庙的中屋供奉着牌位。
English: The middle room of each temple is dedicated with plaques.

古文：东西两夹室，旁两庑。
现代文：东西两间夹室，旁边两庶。
English: There are two rooms between the east and west, and two outbuildings next to it.

古文：三门，门设二十四戟。
现代文：三个门，门上设置二十四戟。
English: Three gates, with twenty-four locks on them.

古文：外为都宫。
现代文：外面为都宫。
English: Outside is the Imperial Palace.

古文：正门之南斋次，其西馔次，俱五间，北向。
现代文：正门南面是斋戒的住处，西面是吃饭的处所，都是五间，面向北。
English: On the south side of the main entrance is the residence for fasting, on the west side is the place for eating, all five, facing north.

古文：门之东，神厨五间，西向。
现代文：门的东面，有烹调祭品的五间房子，面向西。
English: On the east side of the gate, there are five houses with cooking offerings, facing west.

古文：其南宰牲池一，南向。
现代文：甫面是一个宰牲池，面向南。
English: At the rear is a stockyard, facing south.

古文：洪武元年，命中书省集儒臣议祀典，李善长等言：
现代文：洪武元年，命令中书省会集儒臣商议祭祀典礼，李善长等人说：
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the order of the Central Government of the People's Republic of China to gather Confucian scholars to discuss the sacrificial ceremony, Li Shanchang and others said:

古文：周制，天子七庙。
现代文：周朝制度，天子七庙。
English: Zhou Dynasty system, Tianzi seven temples.

古文：而《商书》曰： 七世之庙，可以观德 ，则知天子七庙，自古有之。
现代文：而《商书》说， 七世神庙，可以观察德行 ，那么可知道天子七庙，自古就有。
English: And the "Commercial Book" says that the seventh generation temple can observe virtue, so you can know that the seven temples of the Son of Heaven have existed since ancient times.

古文：太祖百世不迁。
现代文：太祖百世不迁移。
English: Ancestors do not migrate.

古文：三昭三穆以世次比，至亲尽而迁。
现代文：三昭三穆按世系次第安排，到亲情关系已尽就迁庙。
English: The three Zhaozhou and three Mu were arranged according to their lineage, and moved to the temple when their family relationships were exhausted.

古文：此有天下之常礼。
现代文：这是天下的常礼。
English: This is a universal ritual.

古文：若周文王、武王虽亲尽宜祧，以其有功当宗，故皆别立一庙，谓之文世室、武世室，亦百世不迁。
现代文：如周文王、周武王虽然亲属关系已尽应当移祧庙，因他有功劳应当称宗，故都另立一庙，叫做文宗庙、武宗庙，也是百代不迁移。
English: For example, Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang, although the family relationship has been transferred to the Gong Temple as much as possible, because he has the merit to be called the Zong, so they all set up a separate temple, called the Wenzong Temple and the Wuzong Temple, and they will not be moved for hundreds of generations.

古文：汉每帝辄立一庙，不序昭穆，又有郡国庙及寝园庙。
现代文：汉代每位皇帝就建立一庙，不排昭穆，又有郡国庙以及寝园庙。
English: In the Han Dynasty, each emperor built a temple, and there were county temples and dormitory temples.

古文：光武中兴，于洛阳立高庙，祀高祖及文、武、宣、元五帝。
现代文：光武中兴，在洛阳立高庙，祭祀高祖以及文、武、童、丞五帝。
English: During the reign of Emperor Guangwu, a high temple was built in Luoyang to worship Emperor Gaozu and the Five Emperors Wen, Wu, Tong and Zheng.

古文：又于长安故高庙中，祀成、哀、平三帝。
现代文：又在长安原高庙中，祭祀成、夏、平三位皇帝。
English: In addition, the three emperors, Cheng, Xia and Ping, are enshrined in the Chang'an Original High Temple.

古文：别立四亲庙于南阳舂陵，祀父南顿君以上四世。
现代文：于南阳舂陵另立四亲庙，祭祀父亲南顿君以上四世。
English: In Nanyang Burying Ground, a separate temple was built for the four relatives, and the fourth generation after the father, Nantong Jun, was enshrined.

古文：至明帝，遗诏藏主于光烈皇后更衣别室。
现代文：到明帝，遣下诏命在光烈皇后更衣别室藏牌位。
English: To the Ming Dynasty, the imperial edict was sent down to collect the plaques in the changing room of the glorious empress.

古文：后帝相承，皆藏于世祖之庙。
现代文：后世皇帝相承，都藏于世祖庙。
English: Successive generations of emperors have inherited them, and they are all kept in the ancestral temple.

古文：由是同堂异室之制，至于元莫之改。
现代文：从此同堂异室的制度，到元代没有改变。
English: From then on, there was no change in the dormitory system until the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：唐高祖尊高曾祖考，立四庙于长安。
现代文：唐高祖尊高曾祖父，于长安建立四庙。
English: Tang Gao's ancestor and great-grandfather, Zong Gao, built four temples in Chang'an.

古文：太宗议立七庙，虚太祖之室。
现代文：太宗建议设立七庙，空出太祖室。
English: Emperor Taizong proposed the establishment of seven temples and vacated Emperor Taizong's ancestral residence.

古文：玄宗创制，立九室，祀八世。
现代文：玄宗创立制度，设立九室，祭祀八世。
English: Xuanzong founded the system, set up nine rooms, and worshipped the eighth generation.

古文：文宗时，礼官以景帝受封于唐，高祖、太宗创业受命，百代不迁。
现代文：文宗时，礼官以景帝受封于唐，高祖、太宗创业受命，百代不迁移。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzong, the etiquette officer was given the title of Emperor Jing in the Tang Dynasty, and Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Taizong were ordered to start a business, and they did not move for a hundred generations.

古文：亲尽之主，礼合祧迁，至禘佩则合食如常。
现代文：亲属关系已尽的牌位，按礼应当迁祧，至于柿袷祭祖礼仪，则如常合在一起祭祀。
English: In the case of a family relationship that has come to an end, the family should move to a different place according to the ritual. As for the ritual of sacrificing persimmons to the ancestors, they should be sacrificed together as usual.

古文：其后以敬、文、武三宗为一代，故终唐之世，常为九世十一室。
现代文：这以后以敬、文、武三宗为一代，所以到唐末，还为九世十一室。
English: After this, the three sects of Jing, Wen, and Wu were the next generation, so at the end of the Tang Dynasty, it was still the 11th house of the 9th generation.

古文：宋自太祖追尊僖、顺、翼、宣四祖，每遇禘，则以昭穆相对，而虚东向之位，神宗奉僖祖为太庙始祖，至徽宗时增太庙为十室，而不祧者五宗。
现代文：宋代自太祖追尊僖、顺、翼、宣四祖，每次遇到宗庙祭祀，就以昭穆相对，而空着向东的位置。神宗供奉僖祖为太庙始祖，到徽宗时增加太庙为十室，而不移祧庙的有五宗。
English: In the Song Dynasty, since the time of Emperor Taizu's pursuit of the four ancestors of Emperor Zong, Emperor Shun, Emperor Ying and Emperor Xuan, every time there was a religious ceremony at a patriarchal temple, it was held at the opposite side of Shomu, with the empty seat facing east. The Shin sect honored the patriarchal ancestor as the founder of the patriarchal temple, and when it came to the Hui sect, it increased the number of patriarchal temples to ten, while there were only five without moving the patriarchal temple.

古文：崇宁中，取王肃说，谓二祧在七世之外，乃建九庙。
现代文：崇宁年间，择取王肃之说二祧庙在七世以外，于是建九庙。
English: During the reign of King Chongning, Wang Su said that the two-tiered temple was beyond the seventh generation, so he built nine temples.

古文：高宗南渡，祀九世。
现代文：高宗南渡，祭祀九世。
English: Gaozong Nandu, the 9th generation of the family.

古文：至于宁宗，始别建四祖殿，而正太祖东向之位。
现代文：到宁宗，开始另建四祖殿，而确定左坦面向东的位置。
English: When he came to Ningzong, he began to build another ancestral hall, and determined the location of the left hall facing east.

古文：元世祖建宗庙于燕京，以太祖居中，为不迁之祖。
现代文：元世祖于燕京建宗庙，以太祖居中，作为不迁的祖宗。
English: The original ancestor built the ancestral temple in Yanjing, and the etheric ancestor lived in the middle, as the ancestor who did not move.

古文：至泰定中，为七世十室。
现代文：到了泰定年间，为七世十室。
English: In the Taiding era, it was the 7th generation, 10th house.

古文：今请追尊高曾祖考四代，各为一庙。
现代文：现在请求追尊高曾祖父四代，各建一庙。
English: Now they are asking for the fourth generation of great-grandfathers to build a temple each.

古文：于是上皇高祖考谥曰玄皇帝，庙号德祖，皇高祖妣曰裕玄皇后。
现代文：于是上皇高祖父谧号叫玄皇帝，庙号德祖，皇高祖母叫玄皇后。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao's grandfather's posthumous name was Emperor Xuan, his temple name was Dezu, and his grandmother's name was Empress Xuan.

古文：皇曾祖考谥曰恒皇帝，庙号懿祖，皇曾祖妣曰恒皇后。
现代文：皇曾祖父谧号叫恒皇帝，庙号懿祖，皇曾祖母叫恒皇后。
English: The imperial great-grandfather's posthumous name was Emperor Heng, the temple's posthumous name was Shizu, and the imperial great-grandmother's name was Empress Heng.

古文：皇祖考谥曰裕皇帝，庙号熙祖，皇祖妣曰裕皇后。
现代文：垒祖父谧号叫裕皇帝，庙号熙祖，皇祖母叫裕皇后。
English: His grandfather's posthumous name was Emperor Yu, his temple name was Xi Zu, and his grandmother was Empress Yu.

古文：皇考谥曰淳皇帝，庙号仁祖，皇妣陈氏曰淳皇后。
现代文：皇父谧号叫淳皇帝，庙号仁祖，皇母陈氏叫淳皇后。
English: The imperial father's posthumous name was Emperor Jun, the temple's posthumous name was Renzu, and the imperial mother of the Chen clan was called Empress Jun.

古文：诏制太庙祭器。
现代文：皇帝下诏制太庙祭器。
English: The emperor decreed that the temple's sacred vessels should be made of gold.

古文：太祖曰： 礼顺人情，可以义起。
现代文：太祖说： 礼顺人情，可以从道义开始。
English: The great-grandfather said, "If you want to be courteous, you can start with morality.

古文：所贵斟酌得宜，随时损益。
现代文：可贵的是斟酌恰当，随时增减。
English: What is valuable is to consider appropriately, and increase or decrease it at any time.

古文：近世泥古，好用古笾豆之属，以祭其先。
现代文：近代拘泥古礼，喜欢用古代篷豆一类物品，来祭祀先祖。
English: Modern people stick to the ancient rituals and like to use things such as ancient beans to worship their ancestors.

古文：生既不用，死而用之，甚无谓也。
现代文：活着既然不用，死了又用，太没有意义了。
English: There's no point in living if you don't use it, and no point in dying if you do.

古文：孔子曰： 事死如事生，事亡如事存。 
现代文：孔子说： 侍奉死者如侍奉活人，侍奉亡者如侍奉存者。 
English: Confucius said, "To serve the dead is to serve the living, and to serve the dead is to serve the living."

古文：其制宗庙器用服御，皆如事生之仪。 
现代文：制作宗庙器物衣服，都如侍奉活人的仪礼。 
English: Making ancestral temple utensils and clothes is like serving a living person.

古文：于是造银器，以金涂之。
现代文：于是制造银器，用金涂饰。
English: So they made silver and plated it with gold.

古文：酒壶盂盏皆八，朱漆盘碗二百四十，及楎椸枕簟箧笥帏幔浴室皆具。
现代文：酒壶盂盏都用八个，朱漆盘碗用二百四十个，以及挂衣用的竿架、卧具、竹制箱匣、帐幕、浴室都具备。
English: There are eight wine jugs, 240 vermilion lacquer bowls, clothes racks, bedding, bamboo boxes, tents and bathrooms.

古文：后又诏器皿以金涂银者，俱易以金。
现代文：后来又下韶凡是器皿用金涂银的，都换用金制品。
English: Later, all the vessels and utensils coated with gold and silver were replaced with gold products.

古文：二年，诏太庙祝文止称孝子皇帝，不称臣。
现代文：洪武二年，下诏太庙祭文只称孝子皇帝，不称臣。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the following edict of the Great Temple Festival only called the emperor a filial son, not a subject.

古文：凡遣皇太子行礼，止称命长子某，勿称皇太子。
现代文：凡是派遣皇太子行礼，只称命长子某，不称皇太子。
English: Whenever a crown prince is sent to perform a salute, he is only referred to as the eldest son, not the crown prince.

古文：后称孝玄孙皇帝，又改称孝曾孙嗣皇帝。
现代文：后来称孝玄孙皇帝，又改称孝曾孙嗣皇帝。
English: Later, he was called Emperor Xiaoxuan's great-grandson, and then Emperor Xiaozong's great-grandson.

古文：初，太庙每室用币一。
现代文：最初，太庙每间房用一匹缯帛。
English: In the beginning, a yakitori was used in each room of the temple.

古文：二年，从礼部议，用二白缯。
现代文：洪武二年，听从礼部提议，用二匹白缯。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, he followed the suggestion of the Ministry of Ceremonies and used two egrets.

古文：又从尚书崔亮奏，作圭瓒。
现代文：又听从尚书崔亮的呈奏，作圭瓒酒器。
English: He also listened to the performance of Shangshu Cui Liang and made Guizhou wine vessels.

古文：八年，改建太庙。
现代文：洪武八年，改建太庙。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, the Great Temple was rebuilt.

古文：前正殿，后寝殿。
现代文：前面是正殿，后面是寝殿。
English: In front is the main hall, behind is the sleeping hall.

古文：殿翼皆有两庑。
现代文：殿的两旁都有两走廊。
English: There are two corridors on either side of the hall.

古文：寝殿九间，间一室，奉藏神主，为同堂异室之制。
现代文：寝殿九间，每间一室，供奉神位牌，为同堂异室的制度。
English: There are nine bedrooms in the main hall, each with a room dedicated to a deity. This is a system of different rooms in the same hall.

古文：九年十月，新太庙成。
现代文：九年十月，新太庙建成。
English: In October of the ninth year, the new Taimiao was completed.

古文：中室奉德祖，东一室奉懿祖，西一室奉熙祖，东二室奉仁祖，皆南向。
现代文：中间一室供奉德祖，东面一室供奉懿祖，西面一室供奉熙祖，东面第二室供奉仁祖，都向南。
English: One room in the middle is dedicated to De Zu, one room in the east is dedicated to Ma Zu, one room in the west is dedicated to He Zu, and the second room in the east is dedicated to Ren Zu, all facing south.

古文：十五年，以孝慈皇后神主祔享太庙，其后皇后祔庙仿此。
现代文：十五年，将孝慈皇后的神位拊祭于太庙，这以后皇后拊祭大庙即仿照此。
English: Fifteen years later, the throne of the Empress Koji was enshrined in the Great Temple, and the Great Temple of the Empress Koji was modeled after this.

古文：建文即位，奉太祖主祔庙。
现代文：建文帝即位，供奉太祖神位拊祭太庙。
English: Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and the Great Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Ancestor's Temple was built.

古文：正殿神座次熙祖。
现代文：正殿神位座次是熙祖，向东。
English: In the main hall, the seat of the Shinto deity is next to that of Kiso, facing east.

古文：东向。寝殿神主居西二室，南向。
现代文：寝殿帝王的牌位放在西面第二室，向南。
English: The card of the sleeping emperor is placed in the second room on the west side, facing south.

古文：成祖迁都，建庙如南京制。
现代文：成祖迁都，如南京制式建庙。
English: Chengzu moved the capital, such as the Nanjing-style temple.

古文：宣德元年七月，礼部进太宗神主祔庙仪：先期一日，遣官诣太庙行祭告礼。
现代文：宣德元年七月，礼部举行拊祭太宗牌位于太庙的仪礼。祭期的前一天，派官员到太庙举行祭告礼。
English: In July of the first year of the Xuande era, the Ministry of Ceremonies held a ceremony for the wreath-laying ceremony of Taizong, which was located in the Great Temple. The day before the festival, officials were sent to the Great Temple to hold a ceremony to announce the festival.

古文：午后，于几筵殿行大祥祭。
现代文：午后，在灵座殿举行二周年祭祀。
English: In the afternoon, the second anniversary ceremony was held in the main hall.

古文：翼日昧爽，设酒果于几筵殿，设御辇二、册宝亭四于殿前丹陛上。
现代文：第二天黎明，在灵座殿上摆放酒果，陈设两部御辇、四个放册书和宝玺的亭子于殿前台阶上。
English: At dawn the next day, the wine and fruit were placed on the throne hall, and two imperial urns, four books and a treasure pavilion were set up on the front steps of the hall.

古文：皇帝服浅淡服，行祭告礼毕，司礼监官跪请神主升辇，诣太庙奉安。
现代文：皇帝穿着浅淡衣服，行祭告礼结束后，司礼监官跪请帝王牌位登上御辇，到太庙供奉安放。
English: The emperor wore light clothes. After the ceremony, the ceremonial supervisor kneeled down and asked the emperor to ascend the throne and go to the Imperial Temple to offer the offering.

古文：内使二员捧神主，内使四员捧册宝，由殿中门出，安奉于御辇、册宝亭。
现代文：内使太监两名捧牌位，四名捧册书与寅玺，从殿的中门出来，在御辇、册宝亭上安放供奉。
English: Two eunuchs holding plaques and four people holding scrolls and torches came out from the middle gate of the hall and placed them on the throne and scrolls pavilion for worship.

古文：皇帝随行至思善门，易祭服，升辂。
现代文：皇帝随行到思善门，更换祭服，登上辖车。
English: The emperor accompanied the procession to Shishan Gate, changed into ceremonial robes, and boarded the carriage.

古文：至午门外，仪卫伞扇前导，至庙街门内，皇帝降辂。
现代文：到午门外，仪仗队打着伞扇在前面引导，到庙街门内，皇帝下辖车。
English: Outside the noon gate, the guard of honor led the way in front with an umbrella fan. Inside the temple street gate, the emperor's car drove by.

古文：监官导诣御辇前奏，跪请神主奉安太庙，俯伏，兴。
现代文：监官引导到御辇前上奏，跪着请求将帝王牌位供奉安放于太庙，俯身伏地，起来。
English: The overseer led him to the front of the throne to play, kneeled and requested that the emperor's throne be placed in the temple, bowed to the ground, and stood up.

古文：内使捧神主册宝，皇帝从，由中门入，至寝庙东第三室，南向奉安。
现代文：内使捧着帝王牌位、册书宝玺，皇帝随从，由中门进入，到寝庙东面第三间屋，向南安放供奉。
English: The emissary, holding the emperor's ace of spades, the scroll of books, and the jewel, and the emperor's attendants, entered from the middle gate, went to the third room on the east side of the sleeping temple, and placed it to the south for worship.

古文：皇帝叩头，毕，祭祀如时祭仪。
现代文：皇帝叩头，结束，祭祀如同时令祭祀的礼仪。
English: Emperor kowtow, the end, the ritual, such as at the same time ordered the ritual etiquette.

古文：文武官具祭服行礼。
现代文：文武官员穿祭服行礼。
English: The civil and military officials wore ceremonial clothes and performed a salute.

古文：其正殿神座，居仁祖之次，西向。
现代文：正殿神座，处于仁祖的次一位，面向西。
English: The main shrine, the seat of the gods, is located next to Ninso, facing west.

古文：二年五月，仁宗神主祔庙，如前仪。
现代文：宣德二年五月，仁宗牌位柑祭于太庙，仪礼如前。
English: In May of the second year of Xuande, the ceremony of placing the mandarin oranges of the Rinzong brand in the Great Temple was held, with the same ceremony as before.

古文：寝殿，西第三室，南向。
现代文：寝殿，西面第三间房，向南。
English: The sleeping hall, the third room on the west side, facing south.

古文：正殿，居高祖之次，东向。
现代文：正殿处于高祖的次一位，向东。
English: The main hall is located next to the ancestral hall, facing east.

古文：其后大行祔庙仿此。
现代文：此后焉大行皇帝柑祭太庙礼，都仿照此。
English: Since then, all of the Emperor Kano Festival Taimyo Rites have been modeled after this.

古文：正统七年十二月，奉昭皇后神主祔庙，神主诣列祖神位前谒庙。
现代文：正统七年十二月，在太庙柑祭昭皇后牌位，捧神主牌到列祖神位前拜庙。
English: In December of the seventh year of the Juche era, in the mandarin orange festival of Taimiao, the card of the queen of glory, holding the main card of the god, worshiped the temple before the ancestral god.

古文：礼毕，太常寺官唱赐座，内侍捧衣冠，与仁宗同神位。
现代文：礼仪结束，太常寺官宣唱赐座，内侍捧着衣冠，与仁宗同一神位。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the officials of the Taijo-ji Temple gave out the seats for the chanting, and the lady-in-waiting held the crown, which was the same as that of the Ninshu sect.

古文：唱请宣宗皇帝朝见，内侍捧宣宗衣冠置褥位上，行四拜礼讫，安奉于座上。
现代文：宣唱请宣宗皇帝朝见，内侍捧宣宗衣冠放在褥位上，行了四拜礼后，在座上安放供奉。
English: After the chanting, Emperor Xuanzong was invited to meet the emperor for the first time. The chambermaid held the crown of Emperor Xuanzong and placed it on the throne. After four prostrations, it was placed on the throne for worship.

古文：孝宗即位，宪宗将升祔。
现代文：孝宗即位，宪宗将升入太庙柑祭。
English: The enthronement of Takamune and the ascension of Kenso to the Imperial Family.

古文：时九庙已备，议者咸谓德、懿、熙、仁四庙，宜以次奉祧。
现代文：当时九庙已经完备，议论的人都说德、懿、壁、仁四庙，应依次奉入祧庙。
English: At that time, nine temples had already been completed, and the people who discussed it said that the four temples of virtue, virtue, wall and benevolence should be successively enshrined in the gong temple.

古文：礼臣谓： 国家自德祖以上，莫推世次，则德祖视周后稷，不可祧。
现代文：礼臣说： 国家自德祖以上，不推算世系相承的先后，则德祖比照周代的后稷，不可移祧庙。
English: The minister of etiquette said: Since the country is more than the ancestors, without calculating the succession of the lineage, the ancestors can not move the temple according to the posterity.

古文：宪宗升祔，当祧懿祖。
现代文：宪宗升入太庙拊祭，应当移懿祖入祧庙。
English: If a member of the Constitutionalist sect is promoted to the grand temple, he should transfer his ancestors to the grand temple.

古文：宜于太庙寝殿后，别建祧殿，如古夹室之制。
现代文：应在太庙寝殿后，另建祧殿，如同古代夹室的制度。
English: It is necessary to build a new mortuary hall after the mortuary hall of the Great Temple, just like the ancient system of sandwiching rooms.

古文：岁暮则奉祧主合享，如古祫祭之礼。 
现代文：年终就奉远祖神位一起祭献，如同吉代合祖宗神位一起祭祀的礼仪。 
English: At the end of the year, they offer the remote ancestor's deity together, just like the ritual of offering the ancestor's deity together in the Kichida period.

古文：吏部侍郎杨守陈言： 《礼》，天子七庙，祖功而宗德。
现代文：吏部侍郎杨守陈说： 《礼》中有言，天子七庙，因祖有功而宗有德。
English: Yang Shou Chen, an attendant of the cadre department, said: "There is a saying in the "Rite" that there are seven temples of the Son of Heaven, and they are all virtuous because of the merits of their ancestors.

古文：德祖可比商报乙、周亚圉，非契、稷比。
现代文：德祖可以比照商代的报乙、周代的亚圉，不能比照契、稷。
English: Dedzu can be compared to the Shang Dynasty's Han B and the Zhou Dynasty's An, but not to the Jie and Zhou Dynasties.

古文：议者习见宋儒尝取王安石说，遂使七庙既有始祖，又有太祖。
现代文：议论的人常见宋代儒生曾采取王安石的说法，就使七庙既有始祖，又有太祖。
English: It is often said that the Song Dynasty Confucians adopted the theory of Wang Anshi, so that the seven temples had both ancestors and great-grandparents.

古文：太祖既配天，又不得正位南向，非礼之正。
现代文：太祖既配天，又不能正位向南，这不是正确礼法。
English: It is not the correct etiquette for the great-grandfather to match the sky and not be able to face south.

古文：今请并祧德、懿、熙三祖，自仁祖下为七庙，异时祧尽，则太祖拟契、稷，而祧主藏于后寝，祫礼行于前殿。
现代文：现在请求连同德、懿、酦三祖神位迁往祧庙，自仁祖以下为七庙，以后神位迁尽，那么就太祖比照契、稷，而远祖神位藏在后寝，在前殿举行大合祭。
English: Now it is requested that the three ancestral deities be moved together with the three ancestral deities of De, Yao, and Yao to the Ancestral Hall. From the ancestral deity of Ren to the ancestral deities of the seven temples, after the ancestral deities have been moved, the great ancestral deities should be compared with the ancestral deities of Qi and Yao, and the ancestral deities should be hidden in the back, and the grand closing ceremony should be held in the front hall.

古文：时享尊太祖，祫祭尊德祖，则功德并崇，恩义亦备。 
现代文：时享推尊太祖，大合祭推尊德祖，那么功德都推崇，恩义也完备。 
English: When you have the opportunity to venerate your great-grandfather and venerate your great-great-grandfather at the Great Conjunction Festival, your merits and virtues will be highly respected, and your gratitude will be complete.

古文：帝从礼官议，建祧庙于寝殿后，遣官祭告宗庙。
现代文：皇帝听从礼官的建议，在寝殿后建祧庙，派官员祭告宗庙。
English: The emperor followed the advice of the etiquette officer and built a temple after the bed chamber, and sent officials to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：帝具素服告宪宗几筵，祭毕，奉迁懿祖神主衣冠于后殿，床幔、御座、仪物则贮于神库。
现代文：皇帝穿素色衣祭告宪宗的灵座，祭祀完毕，奉迁懿祖的牌位衣冠到后殿，床帐、御座、仪礼用物都贮存于神库。
English: The emperor wore a plain-colored robe to offer sacrifice to the seat of the founder of the Jurchen sect of Buddhism. After the sacrifice was completed, the emperor moved his ancestor's robe and crown to the back of the hall. The bedspread, throne, and ceremonial objects were all stored in the sacred repository.

古文：其后奉祧仿此。
现代文：此后供奉祧庙仿照此仪式进行。
English: Since then, the offering of the temple has been carried out in imitation of this ceremony.

古文：嘉靖九年春，世宗行特享礼。
现代文：嘉靖九年春天，世宗举行特享礼。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Jiajing, the Sejong held a special ceremony.

古文：令于殿内设帷幄如九庙，列圣皆南向，各奠献，读祝三，余如旧。
现代文：命令如九庙在殿内设帷帐，各位圣人都向南，分别献祭品，读三遍祭文，其余的照旧。
English: For example, nine temples were ordered to set up curtains in the hall, and all the saints went to the south to offer sacrifices separately, read the sacrificial text three times, and the rest as before.

古文：十年正月，帝以庙祀更定，告于太庙、世庙并祧庙三主。
现代文：十年正月，皇帝因更改修定祭庙仪式，向太庙、世庙连同祧庙三神位一起告祭。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, the emperor, due to changes in the ritual of the temple, offered sacrifices to the three gods of the Great Temple, the World Temple, and the Temple of Heaven.

古文：迁德祖神主于祧庙，奉安太祖神主于寝殿正中，遂以序进迁七宗神位。
现代文：将德祖神位迁于祧庙，将太祖牌位安放在祭祀寝殿正中，就依次升迁七宗神位。
English: The position of the god of the seven sects was successively promoted when the position of the god of the ancestors was moved to the Gong Temple and the position of the god of the ancestors was placed in the middle of the main hall of the sacrificial hall.

古文：丁酉，帝诣太庙行特享礼。
现代文：丁酉，皇帝到太庙举行特享礼。
English: Ding Xuan, the emperor went to the Great Temple to hold a special ceremony.

古文：九月，谕大学士李时等，以 宗庙之制，父子兄弟同处一堂，于礼非宜。
现代文：九月，告谕大学士李时等人说 宗庙的制度，父子兄弟同处一堂，对于礼来说并不恰当。
English: In September, he told Li Shih, a university scholar, and others that the patriarchal temple system, in which father and son live together, was not appropriate for rituals.

古文：太宗以下宜皆立专庙，南向。 
现代文：太宗以下应该都建专门的庙宇，面向南 。
English: From Taizong on down, special temples should be built facing south.

古文：尚书夏言奏： 太庙两傍，隙地无几，宗庙重事，始谋宜慎。 
现代文：尚书夏言奏报： 太庙的两旁，空地很少，宗庙的重大事务，开始图谋应该谨慎。 
English: Shangshu Xiayuan's report: On both sides of the Great Temple, there are few open spaces, and the great affairs of the ancestral temple should be carefully planned at the beginning.

古文：未报。
现代文：没有回复。
English: There was no response from the Imperial Court.

古文：中允廖道南言： 太宗以下宜各建特庙于两庑之地。有都宫以统庙，不必各为门垣。
现代文：中允廖道南说： 太宗以下应该在雨庶各自建立特庙，有总的殿房来统率各庙，各庙不必各自建门户垣墙。
English: Zhongyong Liao Daonan said: Taizong and those under him should each build a special temple in Yushe. There should be a general hall to lead all the temples. Each temple does not need to build its own portal wall.

古文：有夹室以藏主，不必更为寝庙。
现代文：有夹室来藏牌位，不必再建寝庙。
English: There is a compartment to store the cards, so there is no need to rebuild the sleeping temple.

古文：第使列圣各得全其尊，皇上躬行礼于太祖之庙，余遣亲臣代献，如古诸侯助祭之礼。 
现代文：只要使各位圣人各自能受尊敬，皇上亲自在太祖庙举行礼仪，其余的派亲信大臣代替祭献，如同古代诸侯助祭的礼仪。 
English: As long as each of the saints can be respected, the emperor himself will hold the ceremony in Taizu Temple, and the rest will send trusted ministers to replace the offerings, just like the ancient rituals of the princes.

古文：帝悦，命会议。
现代文：皇帝高兴，下令会同议论。
English: The emperor was pleased and ordered a joint discussion.

古文：言等言： 太庙地势有限，恐不能容，若小其规模，又不合古礼。
现代文：夏言等人说： 太庙地域有限，恐怕不能容纳，如果缩小规模，又不合古礼。
English: Xia Yan and others said: The area of Taimiao is limited, I'm afraid it can't accommodate. If the scale is reduced, it won't be in line with ancient rites.

古文：且使各庙既成，陛下遍历群庙，非独筋力不逮，而日力亦有不给，古者宗伯代后献之文，谓在一庙中，而代后之亚献。
现代文：而且假如各庙建成后，陛下遍祭众庙，不但体力不足，而且一天的时间也不够。古代宗伯代替君王祭献的记载，是说在一庙中，而代替君王第二次祭献。
English: And if, after the completion of each temple, His Majesty were to offer sacrifices in all the temples, not only would His physical strength be insufficient, but also one day would not be enough. The ancient record of the patriarch's sacrifice in place of the king speaks of a second sacrifice in place of the king in one temple.

古文：未闻以人臣而代主一庙之祭者也。
现代文：役听说有让大臣代替君主在一庙条祀的。
English: It is said that a minister was allowed to replace the monarch in a temple.

古文：且古诸侯多同姓之臣，今陪祀执事者，可拟古诸侯之助祭者乎？
现代文：而且古代诸侯多是同姓臣，现在陪同祭祀的主管官员，可与古代诸侯的助祭相比吗？
English: Moreover, many ancient lords had the same surname as their vassals. Now, can the officials in charge of accompanying the sacrificial rites be compared to the ancient lords' assistant priests?

古文：先臣丘浚谓宜间日祭一庙，历十四日而遍。
现代文：先臣丘浚说应该间隔一天祭祀一庙，经过十四天而遍祭完。
English: The senior vassal, Qiu Jun, said that there should be a one-day interval between the sacrificial rites of a temple, and after fourteen days, all the sacrifices should be completed.

古文：此盖无所处，而强为之说耳。
现代文：这大约是没有办法处置而强作此说而已。
English: It's almost like there's no way to deal with it and just force it.

古文：若以九庙一堂，嫌于混同。
现代文：如果以九庙一堂，恐怕混同。
English: If you take nine temples as one, I'm afraid you'll get confused.

古文：请以木为黄屋，如庙廷之制，依庙数设之，又设帷幄于其中，庶得以展专奠之敬矣。 
现代文：请用木料制作帝王的黄缯车盖，如同庙宇前殿规格，按庙敷设置，又在其中设帷帐，差不多可以得到展陈专门祭奠的尊敬了。 
English: Please use wood to make the emperor's Huangpi carriage cover, like the specifications of the temple vestibule, set up according to the temple site, and set up curtains in it, you can almost get the respect of the special exhibition.

古文：议上，不报。
现代文：议论结果上报，没有回复。
English: The result of the discussion was reported, but there was no reply.

古文：十三年，南京太庙灾。
现代文：嘉靖十三年，南京太庙发生火灾。
English: In the 13th year of Jiajing, a fire broke out in the Great Temple of Nanjing.

古文：礼部尚书湛若水请权将南京太庙香火并于南京奉先殿，重建太庙，补造列圣神主。
现代文：礼部尚书湛若水请求暂且将香火一并放于南京奉先殿，重建太庙，补造列位圣君神位。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies requested that the incense be placed together with the fire in Nanjing Bonsen Hall to rebuild the temple and complete the construction of the throne of the saint.

古文：帝召尚书言与群臣集议。
现代文：皇帝召夏言与群臣集合讨论。
English: The emperor summoned Xia Yan and his courtiers to gather and discuss.

古文：言会大学士张孚敬等言： 国有二庙，自汉惠始。
现代文：夏言会同大学士张孚敬等人说： 一国有二庙，自汉惠帝开始。
English: Xia Yanhui, together with Zhang Fujing, a university scholar, and others said: There are two temples in one country, starting with Han Hui Di.

古文：神有二主，自齐桓始。
现代文：一神有两个牌位，是从齐桓公开始的。
English: Ichigami has two ranks, starting with Chikanko.

古文：周之三都庙，乃迁国立庙，去国载主，非二庙二主也。
现代文：周的三都庙，却是迁国立庙，迁离国都而保留神主牌位，不是二庙二牌位。
English: Zhou's Three Capital Temples, on the other hand, were relocated from the national capital to the national temple, and retained the position of deity, not two temples and two positions.

古文：子孙之身乃祖宗所依，圣子神孙既亲奉祀事于此，则祖宗神灵自当陟降于此。
现代文：子孙之身乃是祖宗的依靠，圣神的子孙既然在此亲自祭祀，那么祖宗神灵自己应当在此升降。
English: The body of the descendants is the reliance of the ancestors. Since the descendants of the Holy Spirit offer sacrifices here in person, then the ancestral deities themselves should ascend and descend from here.

古文：今日正当专定庙议，一以此地为根本。
现代文：今日正值专门制定庙议，全都以此地为根本。
English: Today is the time to specially formulate temple resolutions, all of which are based on this.

古文：南京原有奉先殿，其朝夕香火，当合并供奉如常。
现代文：南京原有奉先殿，早晚香火，应当合并，如平常一样供奉。
English: Nanjing's original memorial hall, morning and evening incense, should be merged and offered as usual.

古文：太庙遗址当仿古坛墠遗意，高筑墙垣，谨司启闭，以致尊严之意。 
现代文：太庙遗址应当仿照古代坛蝉的遣意，高筑墙垣，谨慎地管理开关，以示尊崇庄重之意。 
English: The temple site should follow the example of the ancient mandala, build high walls, and carefully manage switches to show respect and solemnity.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时帝欲改建九庙。
现代文：当时皇帝想改建九庙。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to rebuild nine temples.

古文：夏言因言： 京师宗庙，将复古制，而南京太庙遽灾，殆皇天列祖佑启默相，不可不灵承者。 
现代文：夏言乘机说： 京城宗庙，将恢复古代制度，而南京太庙突然发生火灾，大约是皇大列祖佑助启发私下帮助，不可以不顺应。 
English: Xia Yan took the opportunity to say: The ancestral temple in Beijing will restore the ancient system, and the sudden fire in the Nanjing Imperial Temple was probably inspired by the Emperor's great-great-grandfathers to help privately, and it is impossible not to comply.

古文：帝悦，诏春和兴工。
现代文：皇帝高兴，下诏春日和暖时动工。
English: The emperor was pleased and decreed that construction would begin in the spring and warm weather.

古文：诸臣议于太庙南，左为三昭庙，与文祖世室而四，右为三穆庙。
现代文：众臣议论在太庙南，左边是三昭庙，与文祖的世室共是四个，右面是三穆庙。
English: The courtiers are discussing in the south of the Great Temple, on the left is the San Zhao Temple, with the ancestral home of the founder of Confucianism, there are four, and on the right is the San Mu Temple.

古文：群庙各深十六丈有奇，而世室殿寝稍崇，纵横深广，与群庙等。
现代文：群庙各自纵深十六丈有余，而宗庙殿寝稍高，纵横深广，与群庙相等。
English: The group of temples each have a depth of more than 16 meters, while the ancestral temple hall is slightly higher, with a width and depth equal to that of the group of temples.

古文：列庙总门与太庙戟门相并，列庙后垣与太庙祧庙后墙相并。
现代文：各庙的总门与太庙的立有戟的门相互并列，各庙的后墙与太庙祧庙的后墙相并。
English: The main gate of each temple is juxtaposed with the gate of the ancient temple with a crossbeam, and the back wall of each temple is aligned with the back wall of the ancient temple with a crossbeam.

古文：具图进。
现代文：给制好图献上。
English: Present the finished drawing.

古文：帝以世室尚当隆异，令再议。
现代文：皇帝以为世室还应隆高异于别庙，命令再次议论。
English: The emperor thought that the family should be more grand than other temples, and ordered another discussion.

古文：言等请增拓世室前殿，视群庙崇四尺有奇，深广半之；寝殿视群庙崇二尺有奇，深广如之。
现代文：夏言等人请求增大世室的前殿，比众庙高四尺多，深度、广度多一半；寝殿比众庙高二尺多，深度、广度相当。
English: Natsugen and others requested to enlarge the front hall of the Seishitsu, which is more than four feet taller than the temples, with half the depth and width; the sleeping hall is more than two feet taller than the temples, with the same depth and width.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝回复许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十四年正月，谕阁臣： 今拟建文祖庙为世室，则皇考世庙字当避。 
现代文：十四年正月告谕内阁大臣： 现在打算建文祖庙为世室，那么皇考的世庙的世字应当回避。 
English: In the first month of the 14th year, he announced to the cabinet minister: Now it is planned to build the Wenzu Temple as the world's family, then the word "world" of the world's temple in the imperial examination should be avoided.

古文：张孚敬言： 世庙著《明伦大典》，颁诏四方，不可改。
现代文：张孚敬说： 世庙记载于《明伦大典》，颁布诏令于四方，不可更改。
English: Zhang Fujing said: The record of the world's temples is recorded in the Ming Dynasty, and the edict was promulgated in the four directions and cannot be changed.

古文：文世室宜称太宗庙。
现代文：文祖的世室虑改为太宗庙。
English: The family name of the founder was changed to Taizong Temple.

古文：其余群庙不用宗字，用本庙号，他日递迁，更牌额可也。 
现代文：其余众庙不用宗字，用本庙号，以后依次升迁，改变牌额就可以了。 
English: The rest of the temples do not use the family name, but use the temple name, and then they will be promoted in turn, and it is enough to change the license plate.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二月，尽撤故庙改建之。
现代文：二月，全部撤除旧庙改建。
English: In February, all the old temples were demolished and rebuilt.

古文：诸庙各为都宫，庙各有殿有寝。
现代文：众庙各自为总的殿房，庙各自有殿有寝殿。
English: Each temple has its own main hall, and each temple has its own halls and dormitories.

古文：太祖庙寝后有祧庙，奉祧主藏焉。
现代文：太祖庙的寝殿后有祧庙，供奉远祖神位藏在那儿。
English: Behind the main hall of Taizu Temple, there is a subterranean temple, where the deities of the ancestors are enshrined.

古文：太庙门殿皆南向，群庙门东西向，内门殿寝皆南向。
现代文：太庙的门、殿都向南，众庙门向东向西，内门殿、寝都向南。
English: The doors and halls of the Great Temple face south, the doors of all the temples face east and west, and the inner doors and halls face south.

古文：十五年十二月，新庙成，更创皇考庙曰睿宗献皇帝庙。
现代文：十五年十二月，新庙建成，重新创建皇考庙为睿宗献皇帝庙。
English: In December of the fifteenth year, the new temple was completed, and the imperial examination temple was re-created as a temple dedicated to Emperor Ruizong.

古文：帝乃奉安德、懿、熙、仁四祖神主于祧庙，太祖神主于太庙，百官陪祭如仪。
现代文：皇帝于是在速祖庙供奉安放德、懿、熙、仁四祖的神位牌，太祖的神主牌位安放于太庙，百官按照礼仪陪同祭祀。
English: The emperor then placed a tablet of the gods of the four ancestors, Anpo De, Zhou, Xi and Ren, in the temple of the ancestors, and the tablet of the god of the ancestors was placed in the temple, and hundreds of officials accompanied the sacrifice according to the etiquette.

古文：翌日，奉安太宗以下神主，列于群庙，命九卿正官及武爵重臣，俱诣太宗庙陪祭。
现代文：第二天，供奉安放太宗以下神位牌，放在众庙，命令九卿正官以及武官有爵位的重臣，都到太宗庙陪同祭祀。
English: On the next day, the emperor placed the throne plaques of Taizong and his successors in all the temples, and ordered the nine high-ranking officials as well as the high-ranking vassals of the military officers to accompany the sacrificial rites at the Taizong Temple.

古文：文三品以上，武四品以上，分诣群庙行礼。
现代文：文官三品以上、武官四品以上，分别到案庙行礼。
English: Civil servants with three or more pins and military officers with four or more pins go to the temple to make a bow.

古文：又择日亲捧太祖神主，文武大臣捧七宗神主，奉安于景神殿。
现代文：又选择吉日亲自捧着太祖的神位牌，文武大臣捧着七宗神位牌，供奉安置在景神殿。
English: He also chose Yoshihito to personally hold the throne of the great-grandfather, and the Minister of Education and Culture to hold the throne of the seven sects, to be enshrined and placed in the temple.

古文：二十年四月，太庙灾，成祖、仁宗主毁，奉安列圣主于景神殿。
现代文：嘉靖二十年四月，太庙发生火灾，成祖、仁宗的神位牌被烧毁，在景神殿供奉安置各圣君的神位。
English: In April of the 20th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, a fire broke out in the Grand Temple, and the deities of Cheng Zu and Ren Zong were burned. The deities of all the saints were enshrined in the Jing Temple.

古文：遣大臣诣长陵、献陵告题帝后主，亦奉安景神殿。
现代文：派遣大臣到长陵、献陵祭告题写帝后神位，也供奉安置在景神殿。
English: The empress dowager's divine status was inscribed on the notice of dispatching a minister to Changling Mausoleum and dedicating the mausoleum, and was also enshrined in the Temple of Heaven.

古文：二十二年十月，以旧庙基隘，命相度规制。
现代文：二十二年十月，因旧庙基地狭隘，命令测量规划形制。
English: In October 1922, due to the narrowness of the old temple base, the measurement planning system was ordered.

古文：议三上，不报。
现代文：奏议上呈三次，都不回复。
English: Three times the motion was made, but there was no response.

古文：久之，乃命复同堂异室之旧，庙制始定。
现代文：很久以后，纔命令恢复同堂异室的旧制，庙制纔定下来。
English: After a long time, he ordered the restoration of the old system of the same hall but different rooms, and the temple system was finally established.

古文：二十四年六月，礼部尚书费寀等以太庙安神，请定位次。
现代文：二十四年六月，礼部尚书费案等人因太庙安置牌位，请求规定位次。
English: In June of the 24th year, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Shang Shuxue Case and others, requested the establishment of rank due to the placement of plaques in the Great Temple.

古文：帝曰： 既无昭穆，亦无世次，只序伦理。
现代文：皇帝说： 既无昭穆，也无世代位次，只排伦理顺序。
English: The emperor said, "There is neither an illustrious person nor a generation rank, but only an ethical order.

古文：太祖居中，左四序成、宣、宪、睿，右四序仁、英、孝、武。
现代文：太祖居中，左面四位依次是成、童、宪、睿，右面四位依次是仁、英、孝、武，都向南。 
English: The great-grandfather is in the middle, the four on the left are Cheng, Tong, Xian and Rui, and the four on the right are Ren, Ying, Xiao and Wu, all facing south.

古文：皆南向。 七月，以庙建礼成，百官表贺，诏天下。
现代文：七月，因庙建成，百官上表庆贺，诏令天下。
English: In July, due to the completion of the temple, hundreds of officials went to the table to celebrate, and it was announced to the world.

古文：新庙仍在阙左，正殿九间，前两庑，南戟门。
现代文：新庙仍在阙左，正殿九间，前面有两间周屋，南面有戟门。
English: The new temple is still to the left of the pagoda, with nine rooms in the main hall, two rooms in the front, and a gate to the south.

古文：门左神库，右神厨。
现代文：门左是神库，右是神厨。
English: To the left of the door is the sacred repository, to the right is the sacred kitchen.

古文：又南为庙门，门外东南宰牲亭，南神宫监，西庙街门。
现代文：再南面是庙门，门外东南是宰牲亭，南面是神宫监，西面是庙街门。
English: Further to the south is the temple gate, outside the gate to the southeast is the sacrificial altar, to the south is the palace overseer, and to the west is the temple street gate.

古文：正殿后为寝殿，奉安列圣神主，又后为祧庙，藏祧主，皆南向。
现代文：正殿后面是寝殿，供奉安置各位圣王的牌位，再往后是远祖庙，藏有远祖牌位，都向南。
English: Behind the main hall is the sleeping hall, which is dedicated to the placement of the plaques of the holy kings, and further back is the distant ancestral temple, which contains the distant ancestral plaques, all to the south.

古文：二十七年，帝欲祔孝烈皇后方氏于太庙，而祧仁宗。
现代文：嘉靖二十七年，皇帝想在太庙拊祭孝烈皇后方氏，而迁祧仁宗的牌位。
English: In the 27th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor wanted to hold a memorial service for the noble Empress Fang in the Imperial Temple, and moved the card rank of the Jiaoren Sect.

古文：大学士严嵩、礼部尚书徐阶等初皆持不可，既而不能坚其议。
现代文：大学士严嵩、礼部尚书徐阶等人最初都认为不可以，随后不能坚持自己的主张。
English: Yan Song, a university scholar, and Xu Qi, a member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, initially thought that it was not allowed, but later they could not insist on their own position.

古文：二十九年十一月，祧仁宗，遂祔孝烈于西第四室。
现代文：二十九年十一月迁祧仁宗牌位，于是在西面第四室拊祭孝烈皇后。
English: In November of the 29th year, the position of the Jinzong plaque was moved, so the Empress of the Xiaoling Festival was moved to the fourth room on the west side.

古文：隆庆六年八月，穆宗将祔庙，敕礼臣议当祧庙室。
现代文：隆庆六年八月，穆宗将柑祭太庙，敕令礼臣议论应当迁祧的庙室神位。
English: In August of the sixth year of the Longqing, Mu Zong held a mandarin festival at the Great Temple, and ordered the courtiers to discuss the divinity of the temple room that should be moved.

古文：礼科陆树德言： 宣宗于穆宗仅五世，请仍祔睿宗于世庙，而宣宗勿祧。 
现代文：礼科陆树德说： 宣塞至穆宗仅有五世。请求仍在太庙拊祭睿宗，而宣宗牌位不要迁走。 
English: Lu Shude, a scholar of etiquette, said, "There are only five generations from Xuan Zet to Mu Zong. I request you to still hold a memorial service for Ruizong in the Great Temple, and not to move the Xuan Zong plaque."

古文：疏下礼部，部议宣宗世次尚近，祧之未安。
现代文：疏下交礼部，部里议论宣宗的世代次第还近，迁祧神位不妥当。
English: The discussion about the succession of the generation of Emperor Xuanzong is still close, and it is not appropriate to move the god's seat.

古文：因言： 古者以一世为一庙，非以一君为一世，故晋之庙十一室而六世，唐之庙十一室而九世。
现代文：就说： 古代以一世为一庙，不是以一君为一世，所以晋的太庙有十一室而只有六世，唐代的太庙有十一室而有九世。
English: He said, "In ancient times, a temple was built for one generation, not for one ruler. Therefore, the Jin Dynasty's Great Temple had eleven rooms but only six generations, while the Tang Dynasty's Great Temple had eleven rooms but nine generations.

古文：宋自太祖上追四祖至徽宗，始定为九世十一室之制，以太祖、太宗同为一世故也。
现代文：宋代自太祖往上追溯四祖往下到徽宗，纔定为九世十一室的制度，因太祖、太宗同为一世的缘故。
English: The Song Dynasty traced the four ancestors from the great-grandfather up to the Huizong, and established the system of the 11th generation of the 9th generation, because the great-grandfather and the great-grandfather were the same generation.

古文：其后徽宗祔以与哲宗同一世，高宗祔以与钦宗同一世，皆无所祧，及光宗升祔，增为九世十二室。
现代文：这以后，拊祭徽宗与哲宗同一世，柑祭高宗与钦宗同一世，都没有迁桃神位。到光宗升入祖庙附祭，增加为儿世十二室。
English: After this, there was no transfer of the peach god's throne between the Gansai Huizong and the Zhezong in the same generation, and the Kansai Gaozong and the Qinzong in the same generation. When the Guangzong ascended to the ancestral temple with the festival, it was increased to the 12th generation.

古文：今自宣宗至穆宗凡六世，上合二祖仅八世，准以宋制，可以无祧，但于寝殿左右各增一室，则尊祖敬宗，并行不悖矣。 
现代文：现在自宣宗到穆宗共六世，上合二祖仅有八世，按宋朝制度可以不迁祧神位，只在寝殿左右各自增加一室，那么尊祖敬宗并行不悖了。 
English: Now, from Xuan Zong to Mu Zong, there are a total of six generations, and the Shanghe Second Ancestor is only the eighth generation. According to the Song Dynasty system, it is possible not to move the deity, but to add one room each to the left and right of the bedroom, so it is not a bad idea to honor the ancestor and respect the ancestor.

古文：帝命如旧敕行，遂祧宣宗。
现代文：皇帝命令按原敕令办，于是迁祧宣宗牌位。
English: The emperor ordered that the ceremony be conducted according to the original imperial edict, so the position of Emperor Xuanzong was moved.

古文：天启元年七月，光宗将祔庙。
现代文：天启元年七月，光宗将在太庙柑祭。
English: In July of the first year of the Apocalypse, Emperor Guangzong will lead a mandarin orange festival in Taimiao.

古文：太常卿洪文衡请无祧宪宗，而祧睿宗。
现代文：太常卿洪文衡请求不要迁祧宪宗神位，而迁睿宗。
English: Hong Wenheng, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, requested that the god of the Jurchen Sect not be moved, but that the god of the Ruizong Sect be moved.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：禘佩
现代文：禘佩
English: pē

古文：洪武元年祫飨太庙。
现代文：洪武元年，在太庙大合祭。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the grand festival was held in the Great Temple.

古文：德祖皇考妣居中。
现代文：德祖皇考、皇妣居中，向南。
English: Emperor Dezong and Empress Dowager Guo were in the middle, facing south.

古文：南向。懿祖皇考妣东第一位，西向。
现代文：懿祖皇考、皇妣在东面第一位，面向西。
English: The ancestor of the imperial examination, the imperial examination is in the first place in the east, facing west.

古文：熙祖皇考妣西第一位，东向。
现代文：熙祖皇考、皇妣在西面第一位，面向东。
English: Emperor Xizong's imperial examination and imperial edict are in the first place in the west, facing east.

古文：仁祖皇考妣东第二位，西向。
现代文：仁祖皇考、皇妣在东面第二位，面向西。
English: Emperor Ninso's imperial examination and imperial edict are in the second place in the east, facing west.

古文：七年，御史答禄与权言： 皇上受命七年而禘祭未举。
现代文：七年，御史答禄与权说： 皇上即位七年，而椅祭未曾举行。
English: In the seventh year, Goshi replied to Ikkon saying, "It has been seven years since the Emperor ascended the throne, and the chair festival has not been held.

古文：宜参酌古今，成一代之典。 
现代文：应该参考斟酌古今，制成一代典礼。 
English: It should be made into a generation ceremony with reference to ancient and modern times.

古文：诏下礼部、太常司、翰林院议，以为： 虞、夏、商、周世系明白，故禘礼可行。
现代文：诏令下发礼部、太常司、翰林院议论，以为： 虞、夏、商、周，宗族世代相承的系统清晰，所以柿礼可以举行。
English: After the edict was issued, the Ministry of Ceremonies, the Grand Council of State, and the Hanlin Academy had a discussion, and decided that the system of succession from generation to generation was clear, so the Persimmon Festival could be held.

古文：汉、唐以来，莫能明其始祖所自出，当时所谓禘祭，不过祫已祧之祖而祭之，乃古之大祫，非禘也。
现代文：汉、唐以来，没有人明白始祖出自何处，当时所说的柿祭，不过是会合已经迁走的祖先牌位而祭祀，这是古代的宗庙大合祭，不是柿祭。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, no one has understood where the ancestors came from. The persimmon festival, as it was called at the time, was merely a reunion of the ancestors who had moved away and was sacrificed. This was the ancient ancestral temple festival, not a persimmon festival.

古文：宋神宗尝曰： 禘者，所以审谛祖之所自出。 
现代文：宋神宗曾经说： 柿祭，是仔细审察祖宗出自于何处。 
English: Song Shenzong once said: The persimmon festival is a careful examination of where the ancestors came from.

古文：是则莫知祖之所自出，禘礼不可行也。
现代文：所以不知道祖先出自何处，柿礼便不可以举行。
English: Therefore, if you don't know where your ancestors came from, you can't hold a persimmon ceremony.

古文：今国家追尊四庙，而始祖所自出者未有所考，则禘难遽行。 
现代文：现在国家追尊四庙，而始祖出自何处没有考定，所以柿祭难以立即举行。 
English: At present, the country is honoring four temples, but it has not been determined where the ancestors came from, so it is difficult to hold the persimmon festival immediately.

古文：太祖是其议。
现代文：太祖赞成这种建议。
English: The great-grandfather agrees with this suggestion.

古文：弘治元年，定每岁暮奉祧庙懿祖神座于正殿左，居熙祖上，行祫祭之礼。
现代文：弘治元年，规定每年年终在正殿左供奉远祖懿祖神座，居于熙祖之上，举行大合祭礼。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, it was stipulated that at the end of each year, the seat of the Distant Ancestor enshrined at the left of the main hall would be dedicated to the Distant Ancestor, who lived on top of the Heian ancestor, and a great festival would be held.

古文：嘉靖十年，世宗以禘祫义询大学士张璁，令与夏言议。
现代文：嘉靖十年，世宗以柿袷之义询问大学士张璁，命令与夏言商议。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, King Sejong inquired about Zhang Ye, a university scholar, and ordered him to negotiate with Xia Yan.

古文：言撰《禘义》一篇献之，大意谓： 自汉以下，谱牒难考，欲如虞夏之禘黄帝，商周之禘帝喾，不能尽合。
现代文：夏言撰写《柿义》一篇献上大意说： 自从漠代以来，宗族、氏族的世系难以考察，想象虞夏大祭黄帝，商周大祭帝誉，不能全部相合。
English: Nia Yan wrote "Persimmon Righteousness," a dedication to the effect that: Since the desert era, the lineage of the clan and the clan is difficult to investigate, imagine the Yu Xia Great Festival of the Yellow Emperor, the Shang Zhou Great Festival of the Emperor, can not all coincide.

古文：谨推明古典，采酌先儒精微之论，宜为虚位以祀。 
现代文：谨阐明古代典制，选取酌用先世儒者精深微妙的议论，应当设立虚位来祭祀。 
English: I would like to clarify the ancient ceremony system, select and use the profound and subtle discussions of the previous generation of Confucians, and should set up an empty seat for sacrifice.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：皇帝非常赞同。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：会中允廖道南谓朱氏为颛顼裔，请以《太祖实录》为据，禘颛顼。
现代文：恰逢中允廖道南说朱氏是颛项的后裔，请求以《太祖实录》为根据，椅祭颛项。
English: Coincidentally, Zhongyun Liao Dao Nan said that the Zhu family was a descendant of the Xiang family, and requested that the chair sacrifice Xiang family be based on the "Ancestral Records."

古文：遂诏礼部以言、道南二疏，会官详议。
现代文：于是下诏礼部以夏言、廖道南两人的奏疏，会同官员详细议论。
English: As a result, the Lower Court Ceremonial Department, with the assistance of Natsugen and Liao Daonan, discussed the matter in detail with the officials.

古文：诸臣咸谓： 称虚位者茫昧无据，尊颛顼者世远难稽。
现代文：众臣都说： 称立虚位的作法，模糊不清，毫无根据，推尊颛项，时代遥远难以考查。
English: All the ministers said, "The practice of appointing an empty seat is vague and unfounded, and the era is far away and difficult to investigate.

古文：庙制既定高皇帝始祖之位，当禘德祖为正。 
现代文：庙制既然定下高皇帝的始祖地位，应当柿祭德祖为正。 
English: Since the temple system has established the status of the ancestors of the emperor Gao, the persimmon sacrifice of the ancestors should be positive.

古文：帝意主虚位，令再议。
现代文：皇帝心意主张立虚位，命令再次议论。
English: The emperor was of the opinion that the vacancy should be filled, and ordered that the matter be discussed again.

古文：而言复疏论禘德祖有四可疑，且言今所定太祖为太庙中之始祖，非王者立始祖庙之始祖。
现代文：而夏言又上疏议论柿祭德祖有四点可疑，而且说现在规定太祖为太庙中的始祖，不是帝王建始祖庙的始祖。
English: On the other hand, Xia Yan also made four dubious points about the Persimmon Festival's founding fathers, and said that the founding fathers are now defined as the founding fathers of the Great Temple, not the founding fathers of the Imperial Founding Fathers' Temple.

古文：帝并下其章。
现代文：皇帝一并下发奏章。
English: The emperor also issued a call to arms.

古文：诸臣乃请设虚位，以禘皇初祖，南向，奉太祖配，西向。
现代文：众大臣就请求设立虚位，来椅祭皇初祖，面向南，奉祭太祖配享，面向西。
English: The ministers requested the creation of an empty seat, with the chair dedicated to the emperor's first ancestor facing south, and the chair dedicated to the great ancestor facing west.

古文：礼臣因言，大祫既岁举，大禘请三岁一行，庶疏数适宜。
现代文：礼臣就说，大合祭既然每年举行，大柿祭便请求三年举行一次，差不多疏密程度适宜。
English: The minister said that since the Daiwa Festival is held every year, the Daikon Festival is requested to be held once every three years, and the density is appropriate.

古文：帝自为文告皇祖，定丙、辛岁一行，敕礼部具仪择日。
现代文：皇帝亲自作文祭告皇祖，定于丙年、辛年举行一次，敕令礼部准备礼仪择日举行。
English: The emperor personally composed a dedication to the emperor's ancestor, scheduled to be held once in the year of C and in the year of Yin, and ordered the etiquette department to prepare the etiquette for the chosen day.

古文：四月，礼部上大禘仪注。
现代文：四月，礼部上呈大柿祭礼仪节。
English: In April, the Great Persimmon Festival was held.

古文：前期告庙，致斋三日，备香帛牲醴如时享仪。
现代文：祭期前祭告太庙，斋戒三天，如同时享仪式，准备香帛、牺牲和甜酒。
English: Before the festival, the temple is announced, fasting for three days, such as simultaneous enjoyment of the ceremony, preparation of champagne, sacrifice and sweet wine.

古文：锦衣卫设仪卫，太常卿奉皇初祖神牌、太祖神位于太庙正殿，安设如图仪。
现代文：锦衣卫设仪仗卫队，太常卿在太庙正殿捧持皇初祖神牌、太祖神位牌，安放设置如同图仪。
English: A ceremonial guard was set up at the Imperial Palace, and Emperor Taizong held the Imperial Ancestor's Medal and the Imperial Ancestor's Divine Rank Medal in the main hall of the Grand Temple. They were set up just like the pictures.

古文：至日行礼，如大祀圜丘仪。
现代文：到这一天行礼，如同大祀圜丘的祭仪。
English: To this day, the procession is like the ritual of worshipping the sacred mound.

古文：及议祧德祖，罢岁除祭，以冬季中旬行大祫礼。
现代文：到提议祧迁德祖，罢除年终的祭祀，在冬季中旬举行大合祭礼。
English: It is proposed to relocate the ancestors, cancel the year-end sacrifice, and hold the grand festival in the middle of winter.

古文：太常寺设德祖神位于太庙正中，南向。懿祖而下，以次东西向。
现代文：太常寺在太庙正中设德祖神位，面向南。懿祖以下，依次向东向西。
English: In Taizho-ji Temple, the Dezu Shinto shrine is located in the center of the temple, facing south. Below the Dezu, it faces east and west in turn.

古文：十五年，复定庙飨制。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，又制定庙飨制度。
English: In the 15th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the temple tax system was established.

古文：立春犆享，各出主于殿。
现代文：立春是特享，各自在殿中拿出牌位。
English: The first day of spring is a special privilege, and each of them takes out a place in the hall.

古文：立夏、立秋、立冬出太祖、成祖七宗主，飨太祖殿，为时祫。
现代文：立夏、立秋、立冬拿出太祖、成祖七代的牌位，在太祖殿祭祀，是每季的合祭。
English: At the beginning of summer, autumn and winter, the plaques of the seven generations of the great ancestors and founding fathers are brought out and sacrificed in the hall of the great ancestors. It is the festival of each season.

古文：季冬中旬，卜日出四祖及太祖、成祖七宗主，飨太祖殿，为大祫。
现代文：冬季的最后一月的中旬，卜择日期拿出四祖和太祖、成祖七宗的神位牌，在太祖殿祭祀，是大合祭。
English: In the middle of the last month of winter, the four ancestors, the great ancestor, and the founder of the seven sects of the deity plaques are brought out on the chosen date, and they are sacrificed in the great ancestor's hall, which is the grand festival.

古文：祭毕，各归主于其寝。
现代文：祭祀完毕，将牌位各自放回寝殿。
English: When the ritual is over, the plaques are placed back in the main hall.

古文：十七年定大祫祝文。九庙帝后谥号俱全书，时祫止书某祖、某宗某皇帝。
现代文：十七年，制定大合祭的祝祷文，九庙帝后的谧号全部写上，每季节的合祭只书写某祖、某宗某皇帝。
English: In the seventeenth year, the prayer for the great festival was formulated, and the names of the nine emperors and empresses were all written down. Only a certain ancestor, a certain sect, and a certain emperor were written down for each season's festival.

古文：更定季冬大祫日，奉德、懿、熙、仁及太祖异室皆南向，成祖西向北上，仁宗以下七宗东西相向。
现代文：重新制定冬季最后一月大合祭的日子，供奉德、懿、熙、仁以及太祖在另一室，都向南，成祖向西北上，仁宗以下七代束西相向。
English: Re-establish the day of the Grand Festival in the last month of winter, and offer De, Min, Hee, and Ren, as well as the great-grandfather in another room, all to the south, the great-grandfather to the northwest, and the seven generations following the Rinzong to the west.

古文：二十年十一月，礼官议，岁暮大祫，当陈祧主，而景神殿隘，请暂祭四祖于后寝，用连几，陈笾豆，以便周旋。
现代文：行三献礼、乐为六奏、舞为八佾。皇帝祭献德祖皇帝以及皇后，大臣十二人分别祭献众皇帝，内阁大臣十二人分别祭献众皇后。二十年十一月，礼官议论，年终举行大合祭礼，应当陈放祧庙的牌位，而景神殿狭小，请求暂且在后寝祭祀四祖，用连接的几案，陈放篷豆，以便行礼时进退。
English: There were three offerings, six pieces of music and eight dances. The emperor offered the emperor's ancestors and the empress, twelve ministers separately offered the emperors, and twelve cabinet ministers separately offered the empresses. In November of the 20th year, the etiquette officer discussed that the year-end festival should be held, and the plaques of the temple should be displayed, but the temple was small, and it was requested to temporarily sacrifice the four ancestors in the back, and to use several connected cases to display the beans so that they could advance and retreat during the ceremony.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：二十二年，定时享、大祫，罢出主、上香、奠献等仪，临期捧衣冠出纳。太常及神宫监官奉行。
现代文：二十二年，制定太庙四晴祭享、大合祭，罢除拿出牌位、上香、奠献等礼仪，到祭期捧着衣冠拿出再放入，太常以及神宫监官吏奉命执行。
English: In the 22nd year, the four-day festival and the grand closing ceremony of the Great Temple were formulated, and the etiquette of taking out the plaques, incense, and offerings was abolished. During the festival, they would take out the crowns and put them back in, and the officials of the Great Hall and the overseers of the sacred palace were ordered to carry it out.

古文：二十四年，罢季冬中旬大祫，并罢告祭，仍以岁除日行大祫，礼同时享。
现代文：二十四年，罢除在冬季最后一月中旬举行大合祭，一并罢除祭告祖先的典礼。仍然在年终那天举行大合祭礼，礼仪与每季节的合祭相同。
English: Twenty-four years after the cancellation of the Grand Festival held in the middle of the last day of winter, and the cancellation of the ceremony to commemorate the ancestors, the Grand Festival is still held on the last day of the year, with the same rituals as the seasonal festival.

古文：二十八年，复告祭仪。
现代文：二十八年，又恢复告祭礼仪。
English: Twenty-eight years later, the ritual was resumed.

古文：穆宗即位，礼部以大行皇帝服制未除，请遵弘治十八年例，岁暮大祫、孟春时享两祭，皆遣官摄事。
现代文：穆宗即位，礼部因为刚去世的皇帝丧服未除，请求遵循弘治十八年的先例，年终大合祭与正月的季节合祭这两次祭礼，都派官员代行。
English: When Emperor Muzong ascended the throne, the Ministry of Ceremonies requested to follow the precedent of the 18th year of the Hongzhi era, since the emperor who had just died had not yet removed his mourning clothes. Officials were sent to perform both the year-end grand festival and the season festival of the first month.

古文：乐设而不作，帝即丧次致斋，陪祀官亦在二十七日之内，宜令暂免。
现代文：陈设乐器而不演奏，皇帝到灵堂祭祀，陪从祭祀的官员也在二十七天以内，应命令暂免。
English: The display of musical instruments without performance, the emperor's visit to the mortuary hall for a religious service, and the officials accompanying the religious service shall also be suspended within twenty-seven days upon order.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从其议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时享
现代文：时享
English: Time share

古文：洪武元年，定宗庙之祭，每岁四孟及岁除，凡五享。
现代文：洪武元年，制定宗庙祭礼。每年各季首月以及年终，共祭祀五次。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the ancestral temple festival was established. Every year, in the first month of each season and at the end of the year, there are a total of five sacrifices.

古文：学士陶安等言： 古者四时之祭，三祭皆合享于祖庙，惟春祭于各庙。
现代文：学士陶安等人说： 古代四时祭祀，三祭都在祖庙合起来祭祀，只有春祭在各庙举行。
English: Bachelor Tao An and others said: In ancient times, there were four festivals, and the three festivals were all held together in the ancestral temple. Only the Spring Festival was held in each temple.

古文：自汉而下，庙皆同堂异室，则四时皆合祭。
现代文：自从汉代以来，太庙都同堂不同室，那磨四时都合于一处祭祀。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, the Imperial Temples have all been located in the same hall but in different rooms, so it is convenient to have a place of worship at all times.

古文：今宜仿近制，合祭于第一庙，庶适礼之中，无烦渎也。 
现代文：现在应仿照近代制度，在第一庙合起来祭祀，差不多适合中正之礼，不必繁琐。 
English: Now we should follow the example of the modern system and hold a combined ritual in the first temple, which is almost suitable for the Zhongzheng ceremony and does not need to be complicated.

古文：太祖命孟春特祭于各庙，三时及岁除则祫佩祭于德祖庙。
现代文：太祖命令正月在各庙单独祭祀，四月、七月以及十月、年终就在德祖庙大合祭。
English: Taizu ordered that the New Year's festival be held separately at each temple, and that the Grand Festival be held in April, July, October, and at the end of the year at Dezu Temple.

古文：二年，定时享之制，春以清明，夏以端午，秋以中元，冬以冬至。岁除如旧。
现代文：二年，制定在太庙四时祭祀的制度，春天在清明，夏天在端午，秋天在中秋节，冬天在冬至日，年终照旧。
English: In the second year, a four-hour ritual system was established at Taimiao, with spring at Qingming, summer at the Dragon Boat Festival, autumn at the Mid-Autumn Festival, winter at the winter solstice, and the end of the year as before.

古文：三年，礼部尚书崔亮言： 孟月者，四时之首。
现代文：三年，礼部尚书崔亮说： 孟月，是四时的首月。
English: In the third year, Choe Ryong, a member of the etiquette club, said, "Meng Yue is the first moon at 4 o'clock.

古文：因时变，致孝思，故备三牲黍稷品物以祭。
现代文：根据时事变化，致以孝亲之思，所以准备牛羊猎三牲黍稷物品来祭祀。
English: According to the changes in current affairs, with the thought of filial piety, it is best to prepare cattle and sheep hunting and three livestock items to be sacrificed.

古文：至仲季之月，不过荐新而已。
现代文：到仲季的月份，不过以时鲜的食物进献罢了。
English: By the middle months of the season, however, it's just a matter of offering fresh food.

古文：既行郊祀，则庙享难举，宜改从旧制。
现代文：既然已举行郊祀，那么庙享难以举行，应改从旧时礼制。
English: Since suburban worship has already been held, it is difficult to hold temple worship, and it should be changed from the old ritual system.

古文：其清明等节，各备时物以荐。 
现代文：清明等节日，各自准备时鲜物品进献。 
English: For festivals such as Qingming, they prepare fresh seasonal items for donation.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九年，新建太庙。
现代文：九年，新建太庙。
English: Nine years later, a new Imperial Temple was built.

古文：凡时享，正殿中设德祖帝后神座，南向。
现代文：凡是太庙四时祭祀，在正殿中设德祖皇帝及皇后神座，面向南。
English: For the temple's four-hour ritual, the throne of the Emperor and Empress is set up in the main hall, facing south.

古文：左懿祖，右熙祖，东西向。
现代文：左边是懿祖，右边是熙祖，东西向。
English: On the left is Zizou, on the right is Xizou, facing east and west.

古文：仁祖次懿祖。
现代文：仁祖挨着懿祖。
English: The benevolent ancestor is next to the evil ancestor.

古文：凡神座俱不奉神主，止设衣冠。
现代文：凡是神座都不供奉牌位，只放衣冠。
English: All the shrines do not offer plaques, only crowns.

古文：礼毕，藏之。
现代文：祭礼完后，收藏起来。
English: After the festival is over, collect them.

古文：孟春择上旬日，三孟用朔日，及岁除皆合享。
现代文：正月选择上旬日，四月、七月、十月用初一，以及年终都合在一处祭祀。
English: The first day of the first month is chosen, and the first day of the first month in April, July, and October, as well as the end of the year, are celebrated in one place.

古文：自是五享皆罢特祭，而行合配之礼。
现代文：从此五享都罢除单独祭祀，而举行合祭礼。
English: From then on, all five temples abolished their separate rituals and held a joint ceremony.

古文：二十一年，定时享仪。
现代文：二十一年，制定太庙四时祭祀的仪礼。
English: In the twenty-first year, the ritual of the temple's four-hour ritual was established.

古文：更前制，迎神四拜，饮福四拜，礼毕四拜。
现代文：更改以前制度，迎神拜四拜，祭后饮食酒肉请求赐福时拜四拜，礼仪完毕拜四拜。
English: Change the previous system, bow four times to welcome the gods, bow four times when requesting blessings for food and wine after the festival, and bow four times after the ceremony.

古文：二十五年，定时享。
现代文：二十五年制定太庙四时祭祀。
English: Twenty-five years have passed since the establishment of the temple's four-hour ritual.

古文：若国有丧事，乐备而不作。
现代文：如果国家有丧事，备设乐器却不演奏。
English: If the country is in mourning, musical instruments are set up but not played.

古文：正统三年正月，享太庙。
现代文：正统三年正月祭祀太庙。
English: The traditional three-year New Year's festival is still held at Taimyo.

古文：礼部言，故事，先三日，太常寺奏祭祀，御正殿受奏。
现代文：礼部说，按照旧例，祭祀以前三天，太常寺奏报祭祀，皇帝到正殿接受奏报。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies said that according to the old custom, three days before the sacrificial rites, the Taijo-ji Temple reported the sacrificial rites, and the emperor went to the main hall to receive the report.

古文：是日，宣宗皇帝忌辰，例不鸣钟鼓，第视事西角门。
现代文：这一天，是宣宗皇帝忌辰，按旧例不敲击钟鼓，祇在西角门办事。
English: This day is the anniversary of the death of Emperor Xuanzong. According to the old custom, no bells or drums are to be rung, and only business is to be conducted at the West Corner Gate.

古文：帝以祭祀重事，仍宜升殿，馀悉遵永乐间例行之。
现代文：皇帝因祭祀是重大事情，仍应升殿，其余的遵照永乐年间的旧例实行。
English: The emperor should still be elevated to the throne because the ritual is an important event, and the rest should be carried out in accordance with the old practice during the Yongle reign.

古文：天顺六年，阁臣以皇太后丧，请改孟冬时享于除服后。
现代文：天顺六年，内阁大臣因皇太后丧，请求将十月太庙祭祀改在除去丧服以后。
English: In the sixth year of the Tenshun era, a cabinet minister requested that the October Imperial Temple ritual be changed to after the removal of mourning clothes due to the death of the empress dowager.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：成化四年，礼部以慈懿太后丧，请改孟秋享庙于初七日。
现代文：成化四年，礼部因慈懿太后丧，请求改七月祭庙于初七日。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, the ritual department requested to change the July Festival Temple on the seventh day of the first month due to the funeral of the Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：不从。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：嘉靖十一年，大学士张孚敬等言： 太庙祭祀，但设衣冠。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，大学士张孚敬等人说： 太庙祭祀，只设衣冠。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Zhang Fujing, a university scholar, and others said: "The temple's rituals are over, only the crown is set up.

古文：皇上改行出主，诚合古礼。
现代文：皇上改为拿出牌位，确实合乎古礼。
English: Instead, the emperor took out a card, which was indeed in accordance with ancient etiquette.

古文：但遍诣群庙，躬自启纳，不免过劳。
现代文：但是遍拜群庙，亲自致礼把神位牌拿出放入，不免遇度劳累。
English: However, worshipping at temples all over the place, and personally giving a blessing and taking out and putting in the shinitai, inevitably leads to exhaustion.

古文：今请太祖神主，躬自安设。
现代文：现在请求皇上亲自安设太祖的牌位。
English: I now request the Emperor to personally set up the position of the great-grandfather.

古文：群庙帝后神主，则以命内外捧主诸臣。 
现代文：群庙皇帝皇后的牌位，就命令内外众大臣捧持。 
English: He ordered the ministers at home and abroad to hold up the plaques of the emperors and empresses of the group temples.

古文：帝从其请。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor acceded to his request.

古文：十七年，定享祫礼，凡立春特享，亲祭太祖，遣大臣八人分献诸帝，内臣八人分献诸后。
现代文：十七年，制定合祭礼。凡是立春的单独祭享，亲自祭祀太祖，派遣大臣八人分别祭献众皇帝，内臣八人分别祭献聚皇后。
English: In the seventeenth year, the closing ceremony was established. In the case of a separate celebration at the beginning of spring, the great-grandfather was personally sacrificed, eight ministers were sent separately to offer sacrifices to the emperors, and eight vassals separately offered sacrifices to the empress.

古文：立夏时祫，各出主于太庙。
现代文：立夏时合祭，各自在太庙拿出神位。
English: At the beginning of the summer festival, they each took out a god's throne in the temple.

古文：太祖南向，成祖西向，序七宗之上，仁、宣、英、宪、孝、睿、武宗东西相向。
现代文：太祖向南，成祖向西，位次在七宗以上，仁、宣、英、宪、孝、睿、武宗东西相向。
English: The great-grandfather went to the south, the great-grandfather went to the west, and there were more than seven sects in the hierarchy, with the Jin, Xuan, Ying, Xian, Xiao, Rui, and Wu sects facing east and west.

古文：秋冬时祫，如夏礼。
现代文：秋冬的季节合祭，如同夏礼。
English: The festival marks the end of the autumn and winter seasons, just like the summer festival.

古文：二十四年，新庙成，复定享祫止设衣冠，不出主。
现代文：二十四年，新庙建成，又制定合祭只设衣冠，不拿出牌位的规定。
English: Twenty-four years later, when the new temple was completed, it was decided that the closing ceremony would only feature the crown, and no plaques would be displayed.

古文：隆庆元年，孟夏时享，以世宗几筵未撤，遵正德元年例，先一日，帝常服祭告几筵，祗请诸庙享祀。
现代文：隆庆元年，孟夏举行季节合祭，因世宗的灵座还没有撤除，遵循正德元年例，前一天，皇帝穿常服祭告灵座，只请众庙享祀。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Mengxia held the season closing festival. Since the Sejong's shrine had not yet been removed, it followed the first year of Zhengde. On the previous day, the emperor wore his regular clothes to the shrine, and only invited the temples to worship.

古文：其后，时享、祫祭在大祥内者，皆如之。
现代文：这以后，季节合祭、年终大合祭在父母亡后两周年以内，都像这样办理。
English: Since then, the seasonal festival and the year-end festival have been held in the same way within two years of the death of a parent.

古文：荐新
现代文：荐新
English: Recommend new

古文：洪武元年，定太庙月朔荐新仪物：正月，韭、荠、生菜、鸡子、鸭子。
现代文：洪武元年，制定太庙在月朔献上时鲜食品的礼仪和物品。正月，献韭、荠、生菜、鹦蛋、鸭蛋。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the temple established the etiquette and items of seasonal fresh food to be presented at the Lunar New Year. In the first month, offerings of eel, clams, lettuce, parrot eggs, duck eggs.

古文：二月，水芹、蒌蒿、台菜、子鹅。
现代文：二月，献水芹、萎蒿、台菜、子鹅。
English: In February, cress, wilted lettuce, Taiwanese cabbage, and gosling are offered.

古文：三月，茶、笋、鲤鱼、鮆鱼。
现代文：三月，献茶、笋、鲤鱼、紫鱼。
English: In March, tea, bream, eel and purple fish are offered.

古文：四月，樱桃、梅、杏、鲥鱼、雉。
现代文：四月，献樱桃、梅、杏、鳙鱼、雉。
English: In April, cherries, plums, apricots, eels and clams are offered.

古文：五月，新麦、王瓜、桃、李、来禽、嫩鸡。
现代文：五月，献新麦、王瓜、桃、李、来禽、嫩鸡。
English: In May, fresh wheat, king melon, peach, plum, poultry and tender chicken were offered.

古文：六月，西瓜、甜瓜、莲子、冬瓜。
现代文：六月，献西瓜、甜瓜、莲子、冬瓜。
English: In June, watermelons, melons, lotus seeds, and winter melons are offered.

古文：七月，菱、梨、红枣、蒲萄。
现代文：七月，献菱、梨、红枣、葡萄。
English: In July, offerings included raspberries, pears, red dates, and grapes.

古文：八月，芡、新米、藕、茭白、姜、鳜鱼。
现代文：八月，献芡、新米、藕、茭白、姜、鳜鱼。
English: In August, offerings of bean curd, new rice, bean curd, white bean curd, ginger, and eel were served.

古文：九月，小红豆、栗、柿、橙、蟹、鳊鱼。
现代文：九月，献小红豆、栗、柿、橙、蟹、骗鱼。
English: In September, offerings included red beans, chestnuts, persimmons, oranges, crabs, and catfish.

古文：十月，木瓜、柑、橘、芦菔、兔、雁。
现代文：十月，献木瓜、柑橘、芦菔、兔、雁。
English: In October, papaya, citrus, asparagus, rabbit and goose are offered.

古文：十一月，荞麦、甘蔗、天鹅、鹚〈老鸟〉、鹿。十二月，芥菜、菠菜、白鱼、鲫鱼。
现代文：十一月，献薷麦、甘蔗、天鹅、鶸鹳、鹿。十二月，献芥菜、菠菜、白鱼、鲫鱼。
English: In November, buckwheat, sugar cane, swan, roe deer and deer were offered. In December, mustard greens, spinach, white fish and eel were offered.

古文：其礼皆天子躬行。
现代文：这些祭礼都由皇帝亲自举行。
English: These festivals were held by the emperor himself.

古文：未几，以属太常。
现代文：不久，交给太常寺。
English: Soon, it was handed over to the Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：二年诏，凡时物，太常先荐宗庙，然后进御。
现代文：二年，下诏，凡是时鲜食物，太常先祭献宗庙，然后进奉皇上。
English: In the second year, according to the edict, all fresh food must first be offered to the ancestral temple, and then presented to the emperor.

古文：三年，定朔日荐新，各庙共羊一、豕一、笾豆八、簠簋登鉶各二、酒尊三，及常馔鹅羹饭。
现代文：三年，规定朔日进献时鲜食品。各庙共享一只羊、一头猎、篷豆八个、篮簋登蜊器物各二个，酒尊三个，以及平常吃的鹅羹饭。
English: In the third year, it was stipulated that the temple would donate fresh food on the first day of the month. Each temple shared one sheep, one hunt, eight beans, two baskets of goods, three bottles of wine, and the usual goose soup.

古文：太常卿及与祭官法服行礼。
现代文：太常卿以及祭官穿法衣行礼。
English: Lord Taejong and the officiating priests wore Buddhist robes and performed the ritual.

古文：望祭，止常馔鹅羹饭，常服行礼。
现代文：逼祭山川，只用日常吃的鹅羹饭，穿日常衣服行礼。
English: They are forced to make offerings to mountains and rivers, use only the goose jelly rice they eat every day, and wear everyday clothes to perform rites.

古文：又有献新之仪，凡四方别进新物，在月荐外者，太常卿与内使监官常服献于太庙。不行礼。
现代文：又有献新的仪节，凡是各地单独进献的新鲜食物，在月祭以外的，太常卿与内使监官穿日常衣服在太庙祭献，不行礼。
English: There are also new offering ceremonies. For fresh foods that are offered separately from various regions, in addition to the moon festival, it is impolite for the grand vizier and the envoy inspector to wear everyday clothes to offer sacrifices in the grand temple.

古文：其后朔望祭祀，及荐新、献新，俱于奉先殿。
现代文：这以后朔日望日祭祀，以及进献、祭奠时鲜食物，都在奉先殿。
English: Since then, the New Year's Eve and New Year's Day sacrifices, as well as the offerings and fresh food at the time of the sacrifices, have all been held at the Hossenden Hall.

古文：加上谥号
现代文：加上谥号
English: With a flourish.

古文：洪武元年，追尊四庙谥号，册宝皆用玉。
现代文：洪武元年，追尊四庙谧号，册书与宝玺都用玉。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the names of four temples were engraved with jade, and the books and treasures were made of jade.

古文：册简长尺二寸，广一寸二分，厚五分，简数从文之多寡。
现代文：册简长一尺二寸，宽一寸二分，厚五分。简敷根据文字的多少。
English: The book is at most one foot and two inches long, one inch and two minutes wide, and five minutes thick.

古文：联以金绳，藉以锦褥，覆以红罗泥金夹帕，册匣朱漆镂金，龙凤文。
现代文：用金绳连系，放在锦褥上，用红色轻软丝织品印以金色颜料的夹帕覆盖。盛放册命的匣子，用朱漆镂金，龙凤花纹。
English: Connected with gold rope, placed on brocade, covered with red light silk fabric printed with gold pigment. The box containing the book of life, gilded with vermilion lacquer, dragon and phoenix pattern.

古文：其宝篆文，广四寸九分，厚一寸二分，金盘龙纽，系以锦绶，裹以红锦，加帕纳于盝，盝装以金。
现代文：宝玺上是篆文，宽四寸九分，厚一寸二分。金的盘龙纽扣，用锦制的绶带系着，裹上红锦，加盖夹帕放入小匣，匣中装上金子。
English: On the baojun is a seal, four inches nine minutes wide and one inch two minutes thick. A gold dragon button, tied with a brocade ribbon, wrapped in red brocade, put in a small box with a lidded clasp, and the box is filled with gold.

古文：德祖册文曰： 孝玄孙嗣皇帝臣某，再拜稽首上言：臣闻尊敬先世，人之至情，祖父有天下，传之子孙，子孙有天下，追尊祖父，此古今通义也。
现代文：德祖的册文说： 孝玄孙后嗣皇帝臣某，再拜叩头上奏。臣听说尊敬先世，是人最重的情义。祖父拥有天下，传给子孙，子孙拥有天下，追尊祖父，这是古今的通义。
English: The moral code of the ancestors says: "Be a filial son, a great-great-grandson, and an heir to the emperor, and then bow down and prostrate yourself before him." The vassal heard that respect for the past is a person's most important emotion. The grandfather owns the world, passes it on to his children and grandchildren, the children and grandchildren own the world, and pursue their grandfather. This is the common meaning of ancient and modern times.

古文：臣遇天下兵起，躬披甲胄，调度师旅，戡定四方，以安人民，土地日广。皆承祖宗之庇。
现代文：臣遭遇天下兵乱，亲自披着盔甲，指挥军队，平定四方，以安定百姓，土地一日比一日广大，都是禀承祖宗的庇护。
English: In the face of the world's military turmoil, he personally put on armor, commanded the army, and pacified the four directions to stabilize the people. The land is becoming more and more vast every day, all of which are the protection of the ancestors.

古文：臣庶推臣为皇帝，而先世考妣未有称号。
现代文：臣的大臣们推举臣做皇帝，而先世考妣没有称号。
English: The ministers of the vassals elected the vassals as emperors, while the previous generation did not have a title.

古文：谨上皇高祖考府君尊号曰玄皇帝，庙号德祖。
现代文：现在谨奉上皇高祖父尊号为玄皇帝，庙号德祖。
English: Now, I would like to honor the last Emperor Gao's grandfather with the honorary title of Emperor Xuan and the temple name Dezu.

古文：伏惟英爽。鉴此孝思。 
现代文：想到高祖英俊豪爽，谨以此寄托臣的孝亲之思。 
English: Thinking of Gao Zu's handsome and heroic, I would like to send my filial thoughts to him.

古文：其宝文曰 德祖玄皇帝之宝 。玄皇后、懿祖以下，帝后册宝并同。
现代文：宝玺上写 德祖玄皇帝之宝 玄皇后、懿祖以下，皇帝、皇后的册命、宝玺都相同。
English: The inscription "Treasure of Emperor Dezu Xuan" was written on the treasure chests. From Empress Xuan and Emperor Xuan's ancestors onward, the inscription of the emperor and empress and the treasure chests were all the same.

古文：建文时，追尊谥册之典，以革除无考。
现代文：建文年间，追尊谧册的典礼，因市被废除而不可考。
English: During the Jianwen period, the ceremony of chasing the statue was not possible due to the abolition of the city.

古文：永乐元年五月，进高皇帝、高皇后谥议。
现代文：永乐元年五月，进献高皇帝、高皇后的谧号。
English: In May of the first year of Yongle, the posthumous names of Emperor Gao and Empress Gao were presented.

古文：前一日，于奉天殿中设谥议案。
现代文：前一天，在奉天殿中设谧议案。
English: The day before, there was a motion to set up a shrine in the Bongten hall.

古文：是日早，帝衮冕升殿，如常仪。
现代文：这天早上，皇帝穿戴衮冕服上殿。如同平常礼仪。
English: On this morning, the emperor wore a coronation robe and went to the palace, as is the usual etiquette.

古文：文武官朝服四拜。
现代文：文武百官穿着朝服拜四拜。
English: Hundreds of civil and military officials wore court dress and bowed four times.

古文：礼部官奏进尊谥议。
现代文：礼部官员奏进尊谧议。
English: Officials from the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies reported the matter to the Emperor.

古文：序班二员引班首升丹陛，捧谥议官以谥议文授班首，由中门入，至殿中。
现代文：序班官员两名引导班列首领登上丹陛，捧谧议官拿着谧议文交给班列首领，从中门进入，到殿中。
English: The two officers of the procession lead the leaders of the procession up to His Majesty the Emperor, and the official holding the imperial scepter takes the imperial scepter and hands it to the leader of the procession. They enter through the middle gate and go into the hall.

古文：赞进尊谥议。
现代文：赞礼官进尊谧议。
English: The praiseworthy officer, Jinsun, made a speech.

古文：驾兴，诣谥议文案。
现代文：皇帝起身，到谧议文案。
English: The emperor got up and went to the gong to propose a text.

古文：班首进置于案，跪，百官皆跪。
现代文：班列首领将谧议文放到文案上，跪下，百官都跪下。
English: The leader of the platoon places the motion on the text, kneels down, and all the officers kneel down.

古文：帝览毕，复坐。
现代文：皇帝看完，又坐下。
English: When the emperor had finished reading, he sat down again.

古文：班首与百官俯伏兴，复位，再行四拜。
现代文：班列首领与百官跪伏在地上，起身，复返原位，再次拜了四拜。
English: The leader of the squadron and the centurion knelt down on the ground, got up, returned to their original position, and bowed four times again.

古文：礼毕。帝亲举谥议，付翰林院臣撰册文。
现代文：礼仪完毕，皇帝亲自举着谧议，交付翰林院大臣撰写册文。
English: When the ceremony was over, the emperor personally held up the imperial edict and gave it to the minister of the Hanlin Academy to write.

古文：六月，以上尊谥，先期斋戒，遣官祭告天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：六月，因上尊谧，到期之前斋戒，派遣官员祭告天地、宗庙、社稷。
English: In June, officials were dispatched to the heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community to announce the fast before the expiration of the fast due to the above-mentioned reverence.

古文：鸿胪寺设香案于奉天殿。
现代文：鸿胪寺在奉天殿摆设香案。
English: Honjo-ji Temple displays incense in front of the Bongten Hall.

古文：是日早，内侍以册宝置于案。
现代文：这一天早上，内侍把册书宝玺放置在案上。
English: On this particular morning, the chambermaid placed the precious books on the case.

古文：太常寺于太庙门外丹陛上，皇考、皇妣神御前各设册宝案。
现代文：太常寺在太庙门外台阶上，皇考、皇妣的神御前各设置册宝案。
English: On the steps outside the gate of Taijo-ji Temple, the imperial examination and the imperial scepter are set up in front of the gods.

古文：鸿胪寺设册宝舆于奉天门外，卤簿、乐悬如常仪。
现代文：鸿胪寺在奉天门外放置册书寅玺舆，扈从仪仗队、悬挂的乐器如同平常礼仪。
English: At Hongye Temple, a scroll was placed outside the Gate of Heaven, and an honor guard and hanging musical instruments followed the usual etiquette.

古文：百官祭服诣太庙门外立俟，执事官并宣册宝官，先从太庙右门入，序立殿右。
现代文：百官穿着祭服到太庙门外站着等候，执事官与宣读册宝官，先从太庙右门进入，依次站在宫殿右侧。
English: Hundreds of officials in ceremonial dress stood waiting outside the gate of the Great Temple. The deacon and the reciter entered from the right gate of the Great Temple and stood on the right side of the palace.

古文：帝衮冕御华盖殿，捧册宝官四员祭服，于奉天殿东西序立。
现代文：皇帝穿戴衮冕服驾临华盖殿。四名捧册寅官穿着祭服，在奉天殿东西依次站立。
English: The emperor, wearing a coronation robe, drove to the Huagai Hall. Four officials, wearing ceremonial robes, stood at the east and west ends of the Bonten Hall.

古文：鸿胪寺奏请行礼。
现代文：鸿胪寺奏请举行典礼。
English: Honjo-ji Temple held a ceremony.

古文：帝出奉天殿册宝案前，捧册宝官各捧前行，置彩舆内，卤簿大乐前导。
现代文：皇帝出奉天殿到册寅案前，捧册寅官各自捧着册书、宝玺在前行走，放在彩舆内，扈从仪仗大乐在前引导。
English: Before the emperor was sent to the Temple of Heaven, the officials of the Hall of Records each held a record book, and walked in front of the treasure map, which was placed in the hall of fame, and led the way from the ceremonial battle to the great joy.

古文：帝乘舆，随彩舆行。
现代文：皇帝乘舆，跟随彩舆前行。
English: The emperor rode on the horse and followed the horse.

古文：至午门外降舆，升辂，至太庙门。
现代文：到午门外下舆，登上大车，到太庙门。
English: Go outside the gate at noon, get on the bus, and go to the gate of the temple.

古文：百官跪俟彩舆过，兴。
现代文：百官跪着等候彩舆经过，起身。
English: The officials kneeled and waited for the parade to pass, then got up.

古文：帝降辂，随彩舆至太庙中门外。
现代文：皇帝下车，跟随彩舆到太庙中门外。
English: The emperor got off the bus and followed Ayame outside the middle gate of the Great Temple.

古文：捧册宝官各捧前行，帝随行，至丹陛上。
现代文：捧册宝官各自捧着册宝前行，皇帝跟着前行，到宫殿台阶上。
English: The officials, each holding a book of treasures, walked forward, followed by the emperor, to the steps of the palace.

古文：捧册宝置于案，典仪传唱如常，内赞奏就位，典仪奏迎神奏乐。
现代文：捧着册书和寅玺放于案上，主持礼仪的人像平常一样传唱。内赞官上奏请皇帝到位，主持礼仪官上奏迎神奏乐。
English: Holding the record book and the turtle, they put it on the case, and the person presiding over the ceremony sang as usual. The Naizan official asked the emperor to be in place, and the person presiding over the ceremony played music to welcome the god.

古文：乐止，内赞奏帝四拜，百官同。
现代文：音乐停止，内赞官奏请皇帝拜四拜，百官也同样行礼。
English: The music stopped, and the Neizan official asked the emperor to bow four times, and the officials also bowed.

古文：典仪奏进册宝，捧册宝官前行，驾由左门入，至庙中，诣皇考神御前。
现代文：主持礼仪官进献册宝，捧册宝官向前行，皇帝由左门进入，到庙中，来到皇考神座前。
English: The officiating etiquette officer enters to present the scroll of treasures, the book-holding treasure officer goes forward, the emperor enters from the left door, goes to the temple, and comes to the throne of the imperial examination.

古文：奏跪，搢圭。
现代文：奏请下跪，插上圭。
English: Please get down on your knees and join in the chorus.

古文：奏进册，捧册官跪进于帝左，帝受册以授执事官，置于案左，奏出圭，赞宣册，宣册官跪宣于帝左。
现代文：奏请进册，捧册官跪着到皇帝左边进献，皇帝接受册书交给执事官，放到桌案左边。奏请抽出圭，赞唱宣读册书，宣册官跪着在皇帝左边宣读册书。
English: Please read the scroll, the official holding the scroll kneels to the left of the emperor to present it, the emperor accepts the scroll and hands it to the deacon, placing it to the left of the desk. Please read the scroll, sing the hymn and read the scroll, the official kneeling to the left of the emperor reads the scroll.

古文：册文曰： 惟永乐元年，岁次癸未，六月丁未朔，越十一日丁巳，孝子嗣皇帝臣某，谨拜手稽首言：臣闻俊德赞尧，重华美舜，禹、汤、文、武，列圣相承，功德并隆，咸膺显号。
现代文：册文说： 永乐元年，岁次在癸未年，六月丁未朔日，遇十一日丁巳，孝子承嗣皇帝臣某，恭敬地跪拜奏言臣听说以俊德赞美尧，以重华赞美舜，禹、汤、文、武，各位圣君相承，功德都隆盛，都接受了显著名号。
English: The record says: "In the first year of Yongle, the year of the Year of the Monkey, in June, the month of the Monkey, on the 11th day of the month of the Monkey, the filial son of the emperor's successor, a certain minister, respectfully kneeled down to listen to the speech of the minister, who was heard to praise the monkey with virtue, praise the monkey with emphasis, Yu, Tang, Wen, Wu, all the saints inherited, the merits are flourishing, and all received the famous name.

古文：钦惟皇考皇帝，统天肇运，奋自布衣，戡定祸乱，用夏变夷，以孝治天下。
现代文：钦敬的皇考皇帝，统领天下，承受天运，从平民奋起，平定祸乱，以华夏改变蛮夷，以孝道治理天下。
English: The revered imperial examination emperor, leading the world, bearing the fate of heaven, rising from the commoners, pacifying the calamity, changing the barbarians with China, and governing the world with filial piety.

古文：四十馀年，民乐永熙，礼乐文章，垂宪万世，德合乾坤，明同日月，功超千古，道冠百王。
现代文：四十多年，民众都永远欢乐。礼乐文章，垂法万代。圣德合于天地，清明如同日月，功绩超过千古，道义为百王之首。
English: For more than forty years, the people have always been happy. Ritual music articles have been handed down for generations. Sanctity is compatible with heaven and earth, clear as the sun and moon, achievements over thousands of years, and morality is the first of a hundred kings.

古文：谨奉册宝，上尊谥曰圣神文武钦明启运俊德成功统天大孝高皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：谨捧持册书宝玺，上尊谧号为圣神文武钦明启运俊德成功统天大孝高皇帝，庙号太祖。
English: I respectfully hold the book treasure, and the highest honor is the Holy Spirit, Wenwu, Qinming, Qianjun, Junde, Tianda, Xiaogao, Emperor, and the temple name is Taizu.

古文：伏惟神灵陟降，阴骘下民，覆帱无极，与天常存。 
现代文：臣想神灵升降，默默地施惠平民，恩惠无穷，与天常存。 
English: The vassal wants the gods to ascend and descend, silently benefiting the common people, the bounty is endless, and it will always exist with the heavens.

古文：宣册讫，奏搢圭。
现代文：宣读完册书，奏唱请插圭。
English: After the reading of the book, please sing the chorus.

古文：奏进宝，捧宝官以宝跪进于帝左。
现代文：奏唱请进宝玺，捧宝官拿着实玺跪着进献于皇帝左侧。
English: Please enter the treasure chariot to sing the song. The official holding the treasure chariot kneeled down and presented it to the emperor on the left side.

古文：帝受宝，以授执事官，置于案右。
现代文：皇帝接受了宝玺，把它交给执事官，放在案桌右边。
English: The emperor accepted the treasure, handed it to the steward, and placed it on the right side of the desk.

古文：奏出圭。
现代文：奏唱请抽出圭。
English: If you want to sing, please pull out the strings.

古文：赞宣宝，宣宝官跪宣于帝右，宝文如谥号。
现代文：赞礼官赞唱宣读宝玺，宣宝官在皇帝右边跪着宣读，宝玺的文辞如同谧号。
English: The eulogist sang and read out the poem, and the eulogist knelt on the emperor's right and read it out. The words of the poem sounded like a battle cry.

古文：宣宝讫，奏俯伏，兴。
现代文：宣读宝玺完毕，奏唱请俯伏行礼，起身。
English: When the reading of the poem is over, please bow down and salute as the song is sung, and then stand up.

古文：帝诣皇妣神御前，进宣册宝如前仪。
现代文：皇帝到皇母神御前，如同前边的礼仪进呈宣读册书宝玺。
English: When the emperor came before the Empress Dowager, the reading of the Book of the Treasures was performed as in the previous ceremony.

古文：册文曰： 臣闻自古后妃，皆承世绪。
现代文：册文说： 臣听说自古后妃，都承继世代功业。
English: The record said: "I have heard that since ancient times, empresses have been inheriting the work of generations.

古文：妫汭嫔虞，发祥帝室，周姜辅治，肇基邦君。
现代文：妈油嫁给虞，帝室开始兴旺，周姜辅佐治理，君主创立基业。
English: Ma Yao married to Yu, the imperial family began to flourish, Zhou Jiang assisted the governance, and the monarch founded the foundation.

古文：钦惟皇妣孝慈皇后，以圣辅圣，同起侧微，弘济艰难，化家为国。
现代文：钦敬的皇母孝慈皇后以圣德辅佐圣明的帝王，和皇上同样出身卑贱，广泛救助艰难，把治家当成治国。
English: The revered empress dowager, Empress Dowager Xiao Ci, with Saint Defucius as her assistant and Saint Ming as her regent, came from the same humble background as the emperor, received extensive assistance in times of hardship, and treated the management of her household as the management of the country.

古文：克勤克俭，克敬克诚，克孝克慈，以奉神灵之统，理万物之宜。
现代文：勤劳节俭、孝敬慈爱，以承奉神灵的统绪，治理万物的相宜。
English: Diligence and thrift, filial piety and mercy, it is appropriate to govern all things by following the guidance of the gods.

古文：正位中宫十有五年，家邦承式，天下归仁。
现代文：正位中宫皇后十五年，树立的楷范让国家效法，天下的人都归向仁慈。
English: After fifteen years as the empress dowager, she has set an example for the country to follow, and people all over the world are turning to benevolence.

古文：谨奉册宝，上尊谥曰孝慈昭宪至仁文德承天顺圣高皇后。
现代文：谨奉上册书宝玺，上尊谧号为孝慈昭宪至仁文德承天顺圣高皇后。
English: I have the honor to present to you the registered book Baojun, with the honorific title of the Empress Xiao Ci Zhaoxian Zhi Ren Wen De Cheng Tian Shun Sheng Gao.

古文：伏惟圣灵陟降，膺慈显名，日月光华，照临永世。 
现代文：臣想圣明的神灵升降，接受慈爱的盛名，日月光华，永世照临。 
English: The vassal wants the holy spirit to ascend and descend, to receive the glorious name of love, the glory of the sun and the moon, and the eternal presence.

古文：宝文如谥号。
现代文：宝玺文如同谧号。
English: Baojun is like a nickname.

古文：宣宝讫，帝复位。
现代文：宣读宝玺结束，皇帝返回原位。
English: After the reading of the proclamation, the emperor returned to his original position.

古文：奏四拜，百官同。
现代文：奏请拜四拜，百官也拜四拜。
English: Performers bow four times, and officials bow four times.

古文：行祭礼如常仪。
现代文：举行祭礼如同平常礼仪。
English: The celebration of the festival went on as usual.

古文：翌日，颁诏天下。
现代文：第二天，颁布诏令于天下。
English: The next day, the edict was issued to the whole country.

古文：以上谥礼成，赐陪祀执事官宴，馀官人赐钞一锭。
现代文：因上谧礼成功，赐予陪同祭祀的执事官宴席，其余的官员赐给一锭钞。
English: Due to the success of the wreath-laying ceremony, the deacon who accompanied the ceremony was given a banquet, and the other officials were given a stack of banknotes.

古文：仁宗即位，九月，礼部同诸臣进大行皇帝仁孝皇后谥议。
现代文：仁宗即位，九月，礼部会同众臣为刚去世的皇帝和仁孝皇后的谧号进呈奏议。
English: In September, when Emperor Ninsong ascended the throne, the Ministry of Ceremonies, together with all the courtiers, submitted a petition for the posthumous name of the recently deceased emperor and Empress Ninshō.

古文：仁宗立受之，览毕，流涕不已，以付翰林院撰谥册。
现代文：仁宗立刻接受，看完后，流泪不止，交付翰林院撰写谧册。
English: Rinzong immediately accepted it. After reading it, he shed more and more tears and handed it over to the Hanlin Academy to write the third volume.

古文：礼部奏上谥仪，前期斋戒遣祭如常，内侍置册宝舆于奉天门。
现代文：礼部上奏加谧仪式，举行仪式之前如同常礼斋戒，派遣官员祭祀，内侍将册宝舆放在奉天门。
English: In the ritual department, a blessing ceremony was performed, and before the ceremony was held, officials were sent to offer sacrifices, and a chambermaid placed the scroll of treasures at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：厥明，捧册宝置舆中。
现代文：天刚明，捧册害宝玺放置在舆中。
English: The sky is bright, and a bunch of harmful treasures are placed in the middle of my mind.

古文：帝衰服诣奉天门，内侍举册宝舆，帝随舆后行，降阶，升辂。
现代文：皇帝穿丧服到奉天门，内侍抬着册宝舆，皇帝在舆后跟着走，下台阶，登上人车。
English: The emperor put on his mourning clothes and went to the Gate of Heaven, the chambermaid carried the scroll of treasures, and the emperor followed after the scroll, down the steps, and boarded the carriage.

古文：百官立金水桥南，北向跪。
现代文：百官站在金水桥南，向北跪下。
English: The officials stood south of the Jinshui Bridge and knelt to the north.

古文：俟舆过，兴。
现代文：等舆过后，起身。
English: After waiting for a while, get up.

古文：随至思善门外，序立，北向。
现代文：跟随到思善门外，依次站立，面向北。
English: Follow to the outside of Shishan Gate and stand in turn, facing north.

古文：帝降辂。
现代文：皇帝下车。
English: The emperor got off the train.

古文：册宝舆由中门入，至几筵殿丹陛上。
现代文：册宝舆从中门进入，到灵座殿台阶上。
English: Entering from the middle gate, enter the Hall of Records and Treasures and go up the steps to the Sanctuary.

古文：帝由左门入，就丹陛上拜位。
现代文：皇帝由左门进入，走上官殿台阶上的礼拜位。
English: The emperor entered through the left door and walked up the steps of the palace to the place of worship.

古文：捧册宝官由殿左门入，至几筵前。
现代文：捧册宝的官吏由殿左门进入，到灵座前。
English: The officials with the collection of treasures entered from the left door of the hall and went to the front of the shrine.

古文：导引官奏四拜，皇太孙、亲王、皇孙陪拜丹陛上，百官陪拜思善门外。
现代文：导引官上奏请拜四拜，皇太孙、亲王、皇孙在宫殿台阶上陪同拜祭，百官在思善门外陪同拜祭。
English: The guide asked for four prostrations, the grandson of the emperor, the prince, and the grandson of the emperor accompanied the worship on the steps of the palace, and the officials accompanied the worship outside the Shishan Gate.

古文：帝由殿左门入，诣大行皇帝位前，跪进册、进宝。
现代文：皇帝由宫殿左门进入，到刚去世的皇帝位前，跪着进献册书、宝玺。
English: The emperor entered from the left door of the palace, kneeled in front of the throne of the emperor who had just died, and entered the book of dedication and the treasure chest.

古文：宣册宝官跪宣毕，奏俯伏、兴。
现代文：宣读册宝的官吏跪着宣读完毕，奏唱请俯伏，站起来。
English: After the officials read out the treasures of the anthology on their knees, please bow down and stand up when the anthem is sung.

古文：帝诣仁孝皇后神位前，礼并同。
现代文：皇帝到仁孝皇后神位前，进行的礼仪都相同。
English: Before the enthronement of emperors and empresses, the rituals are the same.

古文：奏复位四拜，皇太孙以下同。
现代文：奏唱请返回原位，拜四拜，皇太孙以下相同。
English: Please return to the original position for the recital, bow four times, and the same for the Imperial grandsons and below.

古文：礼毕，行祭礼。
现代文：行礼完毕，举行祭祀礼。
English: After the procession is over, a ritual is held.

古文：是日，改题仁孝皇后神主，诏颁天下。
现代文：这一日，改题仁孝皇后牌位，下诏颁布天下。
English: On this day, the title of Empress Ninko was changed, and the following edict was promulgated to the world.

古文：是后，上皇帝及太皇太后、皇太后尊谥，皆仿此。
现代文：这以后，上皇帝及太皇太后、皇太后尊谧，都仿照此礼进行。
English: After that, the last emperor, the grand empress dowager and the grand empress dowager all followed the example of this ceremony.

古文：嘉靖十七年，世宗用丰坊奏，加献皇帝庙号，称宗配帝，乃改奉太宗为成祖。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，世宗用丰坊的奏议，加封献皇帝庙号，称宗配帝，于是改奉太宗为成祖。
English: In the 17th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Shizong used Fengfang's petition to add a seal dedicated to the emperor's temple name, calling Shizong the emperor, and then changed to Taizong as the founder.

古文：命制二圣神位于南宫，遂诣景神殿，奉册宝。尊文皇帝曰成祖启天弘道高明肇运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，尊献皇帝曰睿宗知天守道洪德渊仁宽穆纯圣恭俭敬文献皇帝。
现代文：命令在南宫制二圣的神位，于是到景神殿，进献册书神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，尊献皇帝为睿宗知天守道洪德渊仁宽穆纯圣恭俭敬文献皇帝。
English: He was ordered to set up the two holy places in the southern palace, so he went to the temple of Jing and presented the book to the emperor. The book was dedicated to Emperor Xiaowen, and the emperor was Ruizong Zhi Tianshu Dao, Hong De Yuanren, Quan Mu, Chun Sheng, Qian Qian, and respected the emperor.

古文：又上皇天上帝大号。
现代文：又献上皇天上帝大号。
English: He also presented the Emperor God's trumpet.

古文：十一月朔，帝诣南郊，恭进册表。
现代文：十一月朔日，皇帝到南郊，恭敬地进奉册表。
English: On the first day of November, the emperor went to the southern suburbs and respectfully presented the scroll.

古文：礼成，还诣太庙，奉册宝，加上高皇帝尊号曰太祖开天行道肇纪立极大圣至神仁文义武俊德成功高皇帝，加上高皇后尊号曰孝慈贞化哲顺仁徽成天育圣至德高皇后。
现代文：礼仪完成后，回到太庙，奉册书宝玺，加上高皇帝尊号为太祖开天行道肇纪立极大圣至神仁文义武俊德成功高皇帝，加上高皇后尊号为孝慈贞化哲顺仁徽成天育圣至德高皇后。
English: After the completion of the etiquette, he returned to the Great Temple to receive the scroll of books and treasures, together with the high emperor's honorific title for the great ancestor who opened the way to heaven, established the greatest holiness, the most benevolent, the most virtuous, the most successful high emperor, together with the high empress' honorific title for the filial piety, the most chaste, the most virtuous, the most virtuous empress.

古文：是日，中宫捧高皇后主，助行亚献礼，文武官命妇陪祀。
现代文：这一天，中宫皇后捧着高皇后的神位，佐助行亚献礼，文武官命妇都陪同祭祀。
English: On this day, the Empress held the divine throne of the high empress, Sasuke made an Asian offering, and the wives of the civil and military officers accompanied the sacrifice.

古文：复择日诣太庙，行改题神主礼。
现代文：又选择吉日到太庙，举行改题神主的祭礼。
English: He also chose an auspicious day to go to Taimiao to hold a re-titled festival for the god.

古文：庙讳
现代文：庙讳
English: The temple taboo

古文：天启元年正月，从礼部奏，凡从点水加各字者，俱改为 雒 ，从木加交字者，俱改为 较 。
现代文：天启元年正月。听从礼部奏议，凡是从点水加 各 字的，都改为 雒 字，从木加 交 字的，都改焉 较 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the year, according to the suggestion of the ceremony department, all the words added from the dotted water were changed to  characters, and those added from the wood were changed to 交 characters.

古文：惟督学称较字未宜，应改为学政。
现代文：只是督学称较字不合适，应改为学政。
English: It's just that the word "supervisor" is inappropriate and should be changed to "academic administration."

古文：各王府及文武职官，有犯庙讳御名者，悉改之。
现代文：各王府以及文武百官，有犯庙讳御名的，全部改换。
English: All royal residences, as well as hundreds of civil and military officials, who had committed the crime of taking the name of a temple, were all replaced.

