古文：司马温公《序赙礼》，书闾阎之善者五人，吕南公作《不欺述》，书三人，皆以卑微不见于史氏。
现代文：司马光在《序赙礼》这篇文章中说民间有善行者五人，吕南公在所撰《不欺述》中，记有三人的事略。这些都是由于他们出身微贱而不为史家所采取。
English: Sima Guang said in the article "Introduction" that there were five good-doers among the people, and Lü Nangong recorded the details of three people in his "No Deception." These were not taken by historians because they were from a lowly background.

古文：予顷修国史，将以缀于孝行传而不果成，聊纪之于此。
现代文：近来，我在编修国史时，曾想将这五人列入孝行传中，结果也未能列入。兹将这五人事略，记之于此。
English: Recently, when I was compiling the national history, I wanted to include these five people in the biography of filial piety, but the result could not be included. Here is a summary of these five people.

古文：温公所书皆陕州夏县人。
现代文：司马光所说的五人，都是陕州夏县人。
English: The five people mentioned by Sima Guang are all from Xia County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：曰医刘太，居亲丧，不饮酒食肉终三年，以为今世士大夫所难能。
现代文：一是刘太，是个医生，为父母守丧，三年不饮酒吃肉，始终如一，这是当今士大夫们所难以做到的。
English: First, Mrs. Liu, a doctor, held a memorial service for her parents and did not drink alcohol or eat meat for three years, which is something that is difficult for today's doctors to do.

古文：其弟永一，尤孝友廉谨。
现代文：他的弟弟永一，尤以孝顺父母友爱兄弟和洁身谨慎而著称。
English: His younger brother, Yong I, is especially known for his filial piety, brotherly love and prudence.

古文：夏县有水灾，民涨死者以百数，永一执竿立门首，他人物流入门者，辄擿出之。
现代文：夏县发生水灾，百姓被洪水淹没致死的数以百计，永一拿着一根竹竿，站在门首，凡是看到有人和东西漂流到家门口的，就打捞出来。
English: When floods occurred in Xia County, and hundreds of people were drowned and killed by the floods, Yongyi took a bamboo pole and stood in front of the door. Anyone who saw people and things drifting to the door of their home would salvage them.

古文：有僧寓钱数万于其室而死，永一诣县自陈，请以钱归其子弟。
现代文：有一个僧人，把数万钱寄放在他家里，这个僧人不幸死去，永一到县署述说其事，并且提出请求官府协助把这些钱归还给僧人的弟子。
English: There was a monk who sent tens of thousands of money to his home. Unfortunately, the monk died. He went to the county government office to report the matter, and requested the government's assistance in returning the money to the monk's disciples.

古文：乡人负债不偿者，毁其券。
现代文：当地人向他借债，言明如期按本付息，有的家中穷困，实在不能偿还的，他就将借贷契约焚毁。
English: Local people borrowed money from him, saying that they would pay the principal and interest as scheduled. Some of them were poor and could not repay, so he burned the loan contract.

古文：曰周文粲，其兄嗜酒，仰弟为生，兄或时酗殴粲，邻人不平而唁之，粲怒曰： 兄未尝殴我，汝何离间吾兄弟也！ 
现代文：三是周文粲，他的哥哥嗜饮酒，不务正业，依靠弟弟文粲供给为生。他的哥哥在醉酒时，往往对文粲进行毒打，邻居中好打不平的人，对文粲的遭遇深表同情，都去安抚他。
English: The third is Zhou Wenyi, his brother is a heavy drinker, does not have a proper job, and relies on his brother Wenyi for his livelihood. When his brother is drunk, he often beats Wenyi severely. People in the neighborhood who do not like to fight, express deep sympathy for Wenyi's suffering, and all go to appease him.

古文：曰苏庆文者，事继母以孝闻，常语其妇曰： 汝事吾母小不谨，必逐汝！ 
现代文：每当出现这种情形，文粲就恼火，并且对他们说： 我的哥哥不曾打我，你们为什么要在我们兄弟之间进行挑拔离间呢？ 四是苏庆文，殷勤事奉继母，以孝子闻名。他曾对他的妻子说： 你要谨镇耐心地事奉我的母亲，如果不是这样，就要把你赶走。 
English: Whenever this kind of situation occurred, Wen Rong would get angry and say to them, "My brother never beat me, why are you trying to cause discord between our brothers?" The fourth was Su Qingwen, who diligently served his stepmother and was known for his filial piety. He once said to his wife, "You should be patient and serve my mother. If you don't, you will be driven away."

古文：继母少寡而无子，由是安其室终身。
现代文：继母年少即守寡，没有儿子，后来，来到苏家安家并且最后病死在这里。
English: The stepmother was widowed at a young age and had no son. Later, she came to the Su family to settle down and eventually died of illness here.

古文：曰台亭者，善画，朝廷修景灵宫，调天下画工诣京师，事毕，诏选试其优者，留翰林授官禄，亨名第一。
现代文：五是台亭，善绘画，朝廷决定修建景灵宫，征调各地著名画工到京师，为景灵宫作画。这件事完成后，朝廷下令选拔其中的优秀者，留他们到翰林院，授给他们官职，发给他们薪禄。
English: Fifthly, the imperial court decided to build the Jingling Palace and conscripted famous painters from all over the country to come to Beijing to paint the palace. After the project was completed, the imperial court ordered that the best among them be selected and sent to the Hanlin Academy, where they would be given official posts and salaries.

古文：以父老固辞。归养于田里。
现代文：台亨名列第一，以其父年迈，坚持辞官，返回故里，侍养双亲。
English: Tai Heng ranked first, with his elderly father, insisted on resigning, returned to his hometown, and took care of his parents.

古文：南公所书皆建昌南城人。
现代文：吕南公说周文粲、苏庆文、台亭，都是建昌南城人。
English: Lv Nangong said that Zhou Wenyi, Su Qingwen and Taiting were all from Nancheng, Jianchang.

古文：曰陈策，尝买骡，得不可被鞍者，不忍移之他人，命养于野庐，俟其自毙。
现代文：六是陈策，曾经买一匹骡子，不被鞍或让人骑，或驮运货物，不忍心再到市上卖给他人，就叫人在村外草屋进行喂养，让它老死在这里。
English: Sixth is Chen Ce. He once bought a mule, but it was not saddled or ridden, or used to transport goods. He could not bear to go to the market to sell it to others, so he asked someone to feed it in a grass hut outside the village, and let it die here.

古文：其子与猾驵计，因经过官人丧马，即磨破骡背，以炫贾之。
现代文：他的儿子与奸诈的经纪合谋，在这里经过的官人，有的马突然死去急着再买，他们就借此机会，故意将骡子的脊背磨破，牵到市上去卖，并且极力夸耀这匹骡子如何如何。
English: His son conspired with a treacherous broker, and the officials who passed by here, some of whose horses had died suddenly and were in a hurry to buy more, took the opportunity to deliberately break the back of the mule, take it to the market and sell it, and boast about how good the mule was.

古文：既售矣，策闻，自追及，告以不堪。官人疑策爱也，秘之。
现代文：不久，就将它卖了出去。陈策听说后，就连忙前去追赶，见了买主，如实地告诉不能让人骑乘驮运的实情。
English: Soon, it was sold. After Chen Ce heard about it, he hurried to catch up, met the buyer, and truthfully told the truth that no one could ride the horse.

古文：策请试以鞍，亢亢终日不得被，始谢还焉。
现代文：官人听后，不禁产生疑虑，以为他是喜爱这匹骡子，便问他究竟是怎么一回事？
English: After listening to him, the officials couldn't help but have doubts, thinking that he loved this mule, and asked him what exactly was going on?

古文：有人从策买银器若罗绮者，策不与罗绮。
现代文：陈策让官人将鞍子放在骡背止，整要折腾了一天，也没有放止，被骡子踢得一塌糊涂。
English: Chen Zhe asked the officials to put the saddle on the mule's back, and they had to toss and turn for a whole day, but they did not let go, and were kicked into a complete mess by the mule.

古文：其人曰： 向见君帑有之，今何靳？ 
现代文：这时官人才明白了真情，从内心里对陈策发出了由衷的感谢。
English: At this time, the officials understood the truth and sincerely thanked Chen Zhe.

古文：策曰： 然，有质钱而没者，岁月已久，丝力糜脆不任用，闻公欲以嫁女，安可以此物病公哉！ 
现代文：陈策当即把钱退还给了官人，官人把骡子退还给了陈策。又有一次，一个人到陈策家里去买质地轻软带有椒眼文饰的银器，陈策不卖给。这个人有些生气，就问他道： 我明明见你家中有这种东西，现在为什么不卖给我呢？ 策回答说： 是啊！
English: Chen Ce immediately returned the money to the official, and the official returned the dice to Chen Ce. On another occasion, a person went to Chen Ce's home to buy silverware with a light and soft texture and a pepper eye decoration, but Chen Ce would not sell it to him. This person was a little angry and asked him, "I clearly see that you have this kind of thing in your home, why don't you sell it to me now?" Ce replied, "Yes!

古文：取所当与银器投炽炭中，曰： 吾恐受质人或得银之非真者，故为公验之。 
现代文：我家存放的这种银器，时间已经很长了，我听说你买这东西是为女儿作陪嫁用的，怎么能用这样过期报废的货物来坑害你呢？ 说罢，就将家中所存的银器投进炽热的炭火盆中焚毁，并对买主说： 我这东西是从质人手中买来的，怕不是真品，作个验证让你看。 
English: This silverware has been stored in my home for a long time. I heard that you bought this item to accompany your daughter to her wedding. How could you be harmed by such expired and scrapped goods? Say it, throw the silverware stored at home into a fiery brazier and burn it, and say to the buyer: I bought this item from a person of quality, I'm afraid it's not a genuine item, let me show you for verification.

古文：曰危整者，买鲍鱼，其驵舞秤权阴厚整。鱼人去，身留整傍，请曰： 公买止五斤，已为公密倍入之，愿畀我酒。 
现代文：七是危整，一天，他到市止买回鲍鱼，经纪舞弄着称锤，故意多给秤了几斤，卖鱼人走后，经纪就对危整说： 你只买五斤，我暗中给你称了十斤，你得请我喝酒 整听后，十分吃惊。
English: Seven is Guizhou, one day, he went to the market to buy back abalone, the broker danced with a weighing hammer and deliberately weighed a few more pounds. After the fish seller left, the broker said to Guizhou: You only buy five pounds, I secretly weighed ten pounds for you, you have to invite me to drink. After listening to the whole thing, I was very surprised.

古文：整大惊，追鱼人数里返之，酬以直。
现代文：忙去追赶卖鱼的人，跑了几里才追止，把多给他的鱼，按重付给了卖鱼的人。
English: He hurried to catch up with the fishmonger, ran a few miles before he could stop him, and paid the fishmonger by weight for the extra fish given to him.

古文：又饮驵醇酒，曰： 汝所欲酒而已，何欺寒人为？ 
现代文：就把那位经纪请到酒店中饮酒，并对那位经纪说： 你想喝酒，何必去欺侮卖鱼的贫苦人呢？ 
English: He invited the agent to drink in the hotel and said to the agent: "If you want to drink, why do you have to bully a poor man who sells fish?"

古文：曰曾叔卿者，买陶器欲转易于北方，而不果行。
现代文：八是曾叔卿，他打算到南方购买一批陶器运到北方贩卖。买回来后，迟迟不向北方转运。
English: The eighth was Uncle Zeng, who planned to go to the south to buy a batch of pottery to be transported to the north for sale. After buying it back, he delayed transferring it to the north.

古文：有人从之并售者，叔卿与之，已纳价，犹问曰： 今以是何之？ 
现代文：这天，一个跟他一起做陶器生意的人前来买货，叔卿答应卖给，已付了钱，他顺便问道： 现在你买这些陶器干什么？ 
English: On this day, a man who was in the pottery business with him came to buy the goods. The uncle had promised to sell them to him and had already paid the money. He asked by the way: What are you buying these pottery for now?

古文：其人对： 欲效公前谋耳。 
现代文：回答说： 我是跟你学的，是按照原先你的想法去做的。 
English: He replied, "I learned from you and followed your original idea.

古文：叔卿曰： 不可，吾缘北方新有灾荒，是故不以行，今岂宜不告以误君乎？ 
现代文：叔卿当即斩钉截铁地对他说： 你可不能这样做。我是由于北方新近遭灾，所以才不把这批陶器运到北方去卖的，如今你岂能不告诉我这一点呢？ 
English: His uncle immediately and emphatically told him: "You can't do this. I didn't ship this batch of pottery to the north to sell it because of the recent disaster in the north, so can you not tell me this now?

古文：遂不复售。
现代文：于是叔卿决定不再把存货卖给他。
English: So the uncle decided not to sell the stock to him.

古文：而叔卿家苦贫，妻子饥寒不恤也。
现代文：而叔卿家中贫穷，连妻子的饥寒温饱都难以顾全。
English: But the uncle's family is poor, and even his wife's hunger, cold, food and clothing are difficult to take care of.

古文：鸣呼，此八人者贤乎哉！
现代文：呜呼，以上八人，真可谓是善人贤人啊！
English: Wow, the above eight people are truly good people and sages!

