古文：王景崇，邢州人也。
现代文：王景崇，邢州人。
English: Wang Jingsong, from Zhangzhou.

古文：为人明敏巧辩，善事人。
现代文：为人聪明机敏巧于辩论，善于事奉人。
English: He is intelligent, quick-witted, good at debating, and good at serving others.

古文：唐明宗镇邢州，以为牙将，其后尝从明宗，隶麾下。
现代文：唐明宗镇守邢州，让他担任牙将，后来曾追随唐明宗，为部下。
English: Tang Mingzong, the warlord of Bozhou, made him the commander of the dental corps, and later he followed Tang Mingzong as his subordinate.

古文：明宗即位，拜通事舍人，历引进阁门使，驰诏方镇、监军征伐，必用景崇。后事晋，累拜左金吾卫大将军，常怏怏人主不能用其材。晋亡，萧翰据京师，景崇厚赂其将高牟翰以求用。
现代文：唐明宗登位，任他马通事舍人，历任引进阀门使驰马传诏给方镇、监督军队征伐，必定任用王景崇后来事奉普，做到左金吾卫大将军，常因君主不能信用他的才能而问闷不乐；晋灭亡，萧翰占据京师，王景崇重金贿赂他的将领高牟翰以便求得进用。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, and allowed his horse to do all the work, and successively introduced the valve to make the galloping horse preach to Fangzhen and supervise the army's conquest, and must appoint Wang Jingzong to serve the general, so that the left King Wuwei's general, often because the monarch could not trust his talent and asked sullenly; Jin perished, Xiaohan occupied the Beijing division, and Wang Jingzong bribed his general Gaomuhan with money in order to get into use.

古文：已而翰北归，许王从益居京师，用景崇为宣徽使、监左藏库。汉高祖起太原，景崇取库金奔迎高祖。高祖至京师，拜景崇右卫大将军，未之奇也。
现代文：不久萧翰北归，许王李从益住在京师，任命王景崇为宣徽使、监左藏库，汉高祖在太原起兵，王景崇取出左藏库的钱财赶去迎接汉高祖，漠高祖到达京师，拜任王景崇为右卫大将军，并没有看重他。
English: Soon, Xiao Han returned to the north, Xu Wang Li Congyi lived in Beijing Division, appointed Wang Jingsong as the heraldic envoy and overseer of the left repository, Han Gaozhu raised an army in Taiyuan, Wang Jingsong took out the money and wealth of the left repository and rushed to meet Han Gaozhu, and the monk Gaozhu arrived in Beijing Division, appointed Wang Jingsong as the right guard general, and did not value him.

古文：高祖攻鄴，景崇不得从，乃求留守起居表，诣行在见高祖，愿留军中效用，为高祖画攻战之策，甚有辩，高祖乃奇其材。是时，汉方新造，凤翔侯益、永兴赵赞皆尝受命契丹，高祖立，益等内顾自疑，乃阴召蜀人为助，高祖患之。及已破鄴，益等惧，皆请入朝。
现代文：汉高祖进攻邺都，王景崇不得随行，于是请求留守起居表，去行官见汉高祖，希望留在军中效力，替汉高祖筹划攻战的策略，十分能言善辩，漠高祖纔看重他的才能逭时，漠刚刚建立，凤翔侯益、永兴趟赞都曾听命于契丹，汉高祖登位，侯益等人自起疑心，于是暗中召引蜀人援助，汉高祖对此很担忧，等到攻破邺都，侯益等人害怕，都请求入朝。
English: When Han Gaozhu attacked Shidu, Wang Jingzong was not allowed to accompany him, so he asked to stay behind and go to see Han Gaozhu. He hoped to stay in the army to serve. He planned the strategy of the offensive for Han Gaozhu. He was very eloquent. When Han Gaozhu valued his talent, Shidu had just been established. Fengxiang Houyi and Yongxing Wuzhanzhu had been ordered by Khitan. Han Gaozhu ascended to the throne. Houyi and others were suspicious of their own accord, so they secretly called for assistance from Shushi. Han Gaozhu was very worried about this. When they conquered Shidu

古文：会回鹘入贡，言为党项所隔不得通，愿得汉兵为援，高祖遣景崇以兵迎回鹘。
现代文：恰逢回鸽进贡，说被党项阻隔不能通行，希望得到漠兵的援助，漠高祖派王景崇率兵迎接回鹊使者。
English: When the homing pigeons came to pay tribute, he said that he was blocked by the party and could not pass. He hoped to get the assistance of the desert soldiers. The desert Gaozhu sent Wang Jingsong to lead the soldiers to meet the messenger of the Hui Dynasty.

古文：景崇将行，高祖已疾，召入卧内戒之曰： 益等已来，善矣，若犹迟疑，则以便宜图之。 
现代文：王景崇将要出发，汉高祖已患病，召他进卧室告诫他说： 如果侯益等人已经前来，则罢，如果他们还迟疑不决，你就酌情自行处置他们。 
English: Wang Jingsong was about to set off, but Emperor Gaozu was already ill. He called him into his bedroom and admonished him: "If Hou Yi and the others have already come, so be it. If they are still hesitant, you can deal with them as you see fit."

古文：景崇行至陕，赵赞已东入朝，而蜀兵方寇南山，景崇击破蜀兵，追至大散关而还。
现代文：王景崇到达陕州时，趟赞已向东入朝，而蜀兵正侵犯南山，王景崇攻破蜀兵，追到大散关而返回。
English: When Wang Jingsong arrived in Shaanxi, Wuzan had already entered the east, while Shu soldiers were invading Nanshan. Wang Jingsong defeated the Shu soldiers, chased them to Dashan Pass and returned.

古文：高祖乃诏景崇兼凤翔巡检使。
现代文：漠高祖于是下诏任命王景崇兼凤翔巡检使。
English: Mogao Gaozu then issued an edict appointing Wang Jingsong and Feng Xiang as inspectors.

古文：景崇至凤翔，侯益未有行意，而高祖崩，或劝景崇可速诛益，景崇念独受命先帝而少主莫知，犹豫未决。
现代文：王景崇到达凤翔，侯益没有入朝的打算，而恰好汉高祖去世，有人劝王景崇可以迅速杀掉侯益，王景崇考虑到独自接受先帝的命令而年轻的君主不知道，犹豫不决。
English: Wang Jingsong arrived in Fengxiang, Hou Yi had no intention of entering the imperial court, and it just so happened that Emperor Gaozu passed away. Someone advised Wang Jingsong that he could quickly kill Hou Yi. Wang Jingsong hesitated, considering that he alone accepted the order of the former emperor and the young monarch did not know.

古文：益从事程渥，与景崇同乡里，有旧，往说景崇曰： 吾与子为故人，吾位不过宾佐，而子已贵矣，奈何欲以阴狡害人而取之乎？
现代文：侯益的从事程渥，和王景崇是同乡，有旧交，前去游说王景崇说： 我和你是老朋友，我的职位不遇是幕僚，而你已经显贵了，怎么想用阴谋诡计害人而取代他呢？
English: Hou Yi was engaged in Chengwoo, and Wang Jingsong was a fellow villager, and they had an old friendship. He went to lobby Wang Jingsong and said: I and you are old friends, my position is not that of a staff member, but you are already distinguished, how can you want to replace him with scheming and harming people?

古文：侯公父子爪牙数百，子毋妄发，祸行及矣！
现代文：侯公父子亲信几百人，你不要轻举妄动，灾祸快到了！
English: There are hundreds of relatives and friends of Hou Gong and his son. Don't make any rash moves. Disaster is coming!

古文：非吾，谁为子言之。 
现代文：除了我，谁会给你说这些。 
English: No one can tell you that but me.

古文：于是景崇颇不欲杀益，益乃亡去，景崇大悔失不杀之。
现代文：于是王景崇很不愿诛杀侯益，侯益因而逃去，王景崇十分后悔没有杀掉他。
English: As a result, Wang Jingsong was very reluctant to kill Hou Yi, and Hou Yi fled. Wang Jingsong very much regretted not killing him.

古文：益至京师，隐帝新立，史弘肇、杨邠等用事，益乃厚赂邠等，阴以事中景崇。已而益拜开封尹，景崇心不自安，讽凤翔将吏求己领府事。朝廷患之，拜景崇邠州留后，以赵晖为凤翔节度使。景崇乃叛，尽杀侯益家属，与赵思绾共推李守贞为秦王，隐帝即以赵晖讨之。
现代文：侯益到京师，漠隐帝刚登位，史弘肇、杨郇等人专权，侯益于是重金贿赂杨郇等人，暗中藉故中伤王景崇不久侯益被拜为开封尹，王景崇心中不安，暗示凤翔的将吏请求让自己掌领府事朝廷担心他，拜任王景崇为合州留后，任命赵晖为凤翔节度使，王景崇于是反叛，杀光侯益的家属，和赵思绾共同椎举李守贞为秦王，汉隐帝就命令趟晖讨伐他们。
English: Hou Yi went to Beijing to study, the Emperor Mo Yin had just ascended to the throne, Shi Hongzhao, Yang Zi and others had exclusive power, Hou Yi then bribed Yang Zi and others with heavy money, and secretly slandered Wang Jingsong. Soon Hou Yi was worshiped as Kaifeng Yin. Wang Jingsong was uneasy in his heart, suggesting that Feng Xiang's generals asked him to take charge of the affairs of the court to worry about him. After Wang Jingsong stayed in Hechu, he appointed Zhao Wei as Feng Xiang's festival envoy. Wang Jingsong then rebelled, killed all of Hou Yi's

古文：景崇西招蜀人为助，蜀兵至宝鸡，为晖将药元福、李彦从所败。晖攻凤翔，堑而围之，数以精兵挑战，景崇不出。晖乃令千人潜之城南一舍，伪为蜀兵旗帜，循南山而下，声言蜀救兵至矣，须臾尘起，景崇以为然，乃令数千人溃围而出以为应。晖设伏以待之，景崇兵大败，由是不敢复出。
现代文：王景崇西招蜀人援助，蜀兵到达宝鹦，被赵晖的将领药元福、李彦从打败赵晖进攻凤翔，挖壕沟包围他们，多次率精兵挑战，王景崇闭门不出趟晖于是命令一千士兵潜入城南三十里处，伪造蜀兵的旗帜，沿南山而下，声称蜀中救兵到了，一会儿烟尘扬起，王景崇信以为真，于是命令几千人突围而出作接应，趟晖设下埋伏等着他们，王景崇的军队大败，从此不敢再出城。
English: Wang Jingsong called for help from the Shu people in the west, the Shu soldiers arrived in Baotou, and were defeated by Zhao Zhen's generals, Yan Yuanfu and Li Yan, who attacked Fengxiang after defeating Zhao Zhen, dug trenches to surround them, and repeatedly led the elite soldiers to challenge. Wang Jingsong then ordered a thousand soldiers to sneak into a place 30 miles south of the city, forge the flag of the Shu soldiers, and descend along the South Mountain, claiming that the Shu soldiers had arrived. After a while, the smoke and dust rose, and Wang Jingsong believed that it was true, so he ordered several thousand people to break out

古文：明年，守贞、思绾相次皆败，景崇客周璨谓景崇曰： 公能守此者，以有河中、京兆也。
现代文：第二年，李守贞、趟思绾相继都被打败，王景崇的门客周璨对王景崇说： 你能坚守这里，是因为有河中、京兆。
English: In the second year, Li Shuzhen and Wanzhong were defeated one after another. Wang Jingsong's protégé Zhou Qi said to Wang Jingsong: You can hold on here because of Hezhong and Beijing.

古文：今皆败矣，何所恃乎？
现代文：如今都失败了，又依靠什么呢？
English: Now they have all failed, and what is there to rely on?

古文：不如降也。 
现代文：不如投降。 
English: You might as well surrender.

古文：景崇曰： 诚累君等，然事急矣，吾欲为万有一得之计可乎？
现代文：王景崇说： 的确拖累你们了，但事情危急，我想用个万一成功的计策行吗？
English: Wang Jingsong said, "It is true that I have been a drag on you, but the situation is critical. Do I want to use a strategy in case of success?

古文：吾闻赵晖精兵皆在城北，今使公孙辇等烧城东门伪降，吾以牙兵击其城北兵，脱使不成而死，犹胜于束手屯。 
现代文：我听说趟晖的精兵都在城北，现在让公孙辇等人烧毁城柬门伪称投降，我率牙兵攻打他们城北的军队，纵然不能成功而战死，也比束手就擒好。 
English: I heard that all the best soldiers were in the north of the city. Now let Gongsun Yao and others burn down the city gate and pretend to surrender. I will lead my soldiers to attack their army in the north of the city. Even if I can't succeed and die in battle, it's better than dying with my hands tied.

古文：璨等皆然之。
现代文：周璨等人都赞成这样做。
English: Zhou Wei and others are all in favor of doing so.

古文：迟明，辇烧东门将降，而府中火起，景崇自焚矣，辇乃降晖。
现代文：黎明，公孙辇烧毁束门假装准备投降，而府中起火，王景崇自焚了，公孙辇于是向趟晖投降。
English: At dawn, Gongsun Yao set fire to the bunch gate, pretending to be ready to surrender, while the middle of the house caught fire. Wang Jing Chong set himself on fire, and Gongsun Yao surrendered to Wanzao.

古文：○赵思绾
现代文：赵思绾，魏州人。
English: Zhao Sijian, from Weizhou.

古文：赵思绾，魏州人也。为河中节度使赵赞牙将。
现代文：为河中节度使赵赞的牙将。
English: For the festival in the middle of the river, Zhao Zan's tooth will be made.

古文：汉高祖即位，徙赞镇永兴，赞入朝京师，留思绾兵数百人于永兴。
现代文：漠高祖登位，调赵赞镇守永兴，趟赞到京师朝拜，留下趟思绾的士兵几百人在永兴。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, transferred Zhao Zan to Yongxing, went to Beijing to pay homage, and left hundreds of soldiers in Yongxing.

古文：高祖遣王景崇至永兴，与齐藏珍以兵迎回鹘，阴以西事属之。
现代文：漠高祖派王景崇到永兴，和齐藏珍率兵迎护回鹊入朝，暗中把西面的事交托给他。
English: Mogao sent Wang Jingsong to Yongxing, and Qizang Zhen led the troops to escort him back to the North, and secretly entrusted him with the affairs of the West.

古文：景崇至永兴，赞虽入朝，而其所召蜀兵已据子午谷，景崇用思绾兵击走之。
现代文：王景崇到达永兴，赵赞虽已进朝，但他所召引的蜀兵已占据子午谷，王景崇用趟思绾的士兵赶走他们。
English: Wang Jingsong arrived in Yongxing. Although Zhao Zan had already entered the country, the Shu soldiers he had summoned had already occupied Zi Wu Valley. Wang Jingsong drove them away with his soldiers.

古文：遂与思绾俱西，然以非己兵，惧思绾等有二心，意欲黥其面以自随，而难言之，乃稍微风其旨。思绾厉声请先黥以率众，齐藏珍恶之，窃劝景崇杀思绾，景崇不听，与俱西。
现代文：于是和趟思绾一道西去，但因不是自己的士兵，惧怕趟思绾等人怀有二心，就想在他们脸上刻字让他们跟随自己，而又难以开口，于是稍微暗示他的意思趟思绾高声请求先给他脸上刻字以便率领众兵，齐藏珍讨厌他，暗中劝王景崇杀掉趟思绾，王景崇不同意，和趟思绾一道西去。
English: So he went to the west with Wuzhong, but because he was not his own soldier, he was afraid that Wuzhong and the others were double-minded, he wanted to engrave on their faces to let them follow him, but it was difficult to speak, so he slightly hinted at his meaning Wuzhong loudly requested that he first engrave on his face in order to lead the soldiers, Qi Zangzhen hated him, secretly advised Wang Jingsong to kill Wuzhong, Wang Jingsong did not agree, and went to the west with Wuzhong.

古文：高祖遣使者召思绾等，是时侯益来朝，思绾以兵从益东归。思绾谓其下常彦卿曰： 赵公已入人手，吾属至，并死矣，奈何？ 
现代文：汉高祖派使臣召见赵思绾等人，这时侯益入京朝拜，趟思绾率兵跟随侯益束归，趟思绾对部下常彦卿说： 趟公已在别人手中，我们到了，将一起死，怎么办呢？ 
English: Henkel's ancestor sent an envoy to summon Zhao Siyi and others. At this time, Hou Yi entered Beijing to pay homage. Wai Siyi led the soldiers to follow Hou Yi and returned. Wai Siyi said to his subordinate, Lord Changyong, "Wai Gong is already in the hands of others. We have arrived and will die together. What should we do?

古文：彦卿曰： 事至而变，勿预言也。 
现代文：常彦卿说： 事情发生了再应变，不要预言。 
English: Lord Tsunehiko said: When things happen, you have to adapt, not predict.

古文：益行至永兴，永兴副使安友规出迎益，饮于郊亭，思绾前曰： 兵馆城东，然将士家属皆居城中，愿纵兵入城挈其家属。 益信之以为然。
现代文：侯益到达永兴，永兴副使安友规出来迎接侯益，在郊外亭中饮酒，趟思绾卜前说： 士兵住在城束，而将士们的家属都住在城中，希望放士乓进城带走他们的家属 侯益信以为真。
English: Hou Yi arrived in Yongxing. Yongxing deputy envoy An You Jian came out to meet Hou Yi, drank alcohol in the suburban pavilion, and said before thinking: Soldiers live in the city, and the families of the soldiers live in the city. He hoped that the soldiers would come into the city and take away their families. Hou Yi believed it was true.

古文：思绾与部下入城，有州校坐于城门，思绾殴之，夺其佩刀斩之，并斩门者十馀人，遂闭门劫库兵以叛。
现代文：趟思绾和部下进城，有个州校坐在城门口，趟思绾殴打他，抢遇佩刀把他杀掉，并斩杀十多个守门的人，于是关上城门抢劫库中武器反叛。
English: Wanzhong and his subordinates entered the city, there was a state school sitting at the gate of the city, Wanzhong beat him, killed him with a sword, and killed more than a dozen gatekeepers, then closed the gate, robbed the weapons in the warehouse and rebelled.

古文：高祖遣郭从义、王峻讨之，经年莫能下，而王景崇亦叛，与思绾俱送款于李守贞，守贞以思绾为晋昌军节度使。隐帝遣郭威西督诸将兵，先围守贞于河中。
现代文：汉高祖派郭从义、王峻讨伐他，一年多没能攻下，而王景崇也反叛了，和趟思绾一起向李守贞投诚，李守贞任趟思绾为晋昌军节度使，汉隐帝派郭威西去监督各将的军队，先在河中包围李守贞。
English: Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty sent Guo Zongyi and Wang Jun to fight against him, but they failed to capture him for more than a year. Wang Jingsong also rebelled, and together with Wu Shizhen, he threw in his lot with Li Shuzhen. Li Shuzhen appointed Wu Shizhen as the commander of the Jin and Chang armies. Emperor Han of the Han Dynasty sent Guo Weixi to supervise the armies of the generals, and first surrounded Li Shuzhen in the river.

古文：居数月，思绾城中食尽，杀人而食，每犒宴，杀人数百，庖宰一如羊豕。
现代文：遇了几个月，趟思绾城中粮食吃尽，杀人来吃，每次犒劳宴请，都杀掉几百人，在厨房中宰杀就如猪羊一样。
English: Over the course of a few months, the food in the city ran out, the murderers came to eat, and every time they held a banquet, they killed hundreds of people, slaughtering them in the kitchen like pigs.

古文：思绾取其胆以酒吞之，语其下曰： 食胆至千，则勇无敌矣！ 
现代文：赵思绾取出入胆用酒吞下，对他的部下说： 吃胆达到一千个，就勇猛无敌了！ 
English: Zhao Shixuan took out and swallowed the gallbladder with wine, and said to his subordinates: If you eat a thousand gallbladders, you will be invincible!

古文：思绾计穷，募人为地道，将走蜀，其判官陈让能谓思绾曰： 公比于国无嫌，但惧死而为此尔！
现代文：趟思绾没有办法了，招募人修建地道，准备逃到蜀中，他的判官陈让能对趟思绾说： 你对国家没有什么大恶，只是怕死纔这样做而已！
English: There was nothing more that he could do, so he recruited people to build a tunnel and prepared to escape to Shuzhong. His judge, Chen Zhaneng, said to him: "You are not doing any great evil to the country, you are just scared to death to do so!"

古文：今国家用兵三方，劳敝不已，诚能翻然效顺，率先自归，以功补过，庶几有生；若坐守穷城，待死而已。 思绾然之，乃遣教练使刘珪诣从义乞降，而遣其将刘筠奉表朝廷。拜思绾镇国军留后，趣使就镇，思绾迟留不行。
现代文：如今国家三方用兵，劳民伤财浚完没了，如果确实能够翻然悔悟效顺国家，自己率先归附，将功补过，或许还能活命；如果坐守危城，不过是等死而已 赵思绾赞同他的话，于是派教练使刘珪到郭从义处请求投降，而派部将刘筠入朝呈交降表，朝廷拜任赵思绾为镇国军留后，催促他赴任，趟思绾逗留不去。
English: Now that the country's tripartite use of soldiers, labor, people's injuries, and financial dredging is over, if he can truly repent and serve the country, he will be the first to return and make up for his efforts, and may still be alive; if he is guarding the dangerous city, he is just waiting for death. Zhao Siyu agreed with his words, so he sent a coach to make Liu Xuan go to Guo Congyi to request surrender, and sent Liu Xuan to the North to submit a surrender form. After the court appointed Zhao Siyu as the town's national army, he urged him to go to the post, and he did not

古文：蜀阴遣人招思绾，思绾将奔蜀，而从义亦疑之，乃遣人白郭威，威命从义图之。从义因入城召思绾，趣之上道，至则擒之。
现代文：蜀暗中派人招纳趟思绾，赵思绾将要投奔蜀，而郭从义也怀疑他，于是派人告诉郭威，郭威命令郭从义谋害他郭从义因来赵思绾问道： 怎檬用刑？ 
English: Shu sent someone in the dark to recruit Wanzhijun, Zhao Wanzhijun was about to go to Shu, and Guo Congyi was also suspicious of him, so he sent someone to tell Guo Wei, Guo Wei ordered Guo Congyi to kill him Guo Congyi came to Zhao Wanzhijun and asked: What is the punishment?

古文：少事唐明宗为军校，累迁刺史。唐、晋之间，历磁、单、濮、棣四州，坐濮州造麹受赇，法当死，汉高祖自太原上章论救，得减死，流于房州。
现代文：回答说： 站着钉死 赵思绾高声说： 替我报告郭公，我被处死也不够抵债罪责，但用钉子裂尸的丑相是壮士感到耻辱的，希望稍稍宽容一点， 郭从义答应了他，父产俩都在街上被斩。慕容彦超，吐谷浑部人，漠高祖的门母弟弟。曾冒姓阎，慕容彦超畏着黑色的长须，号称问昆仑：年轻时事奉唐明宗为，草校，多次升迁做到刺史，庸、普之际，历任磁、单、濮、棣四州刺史，因在濮州私造酒舢接受贿赂被治罪，依法应当处死，漠高祖从太原卜害为其辩解，得以免死，流放到房州。
English: Zhao Siyu said in a loud voice, "Report to Guo Gong for me. My execution is not enough to pay off the debt, but the ugliness of splitting the corpse with nails is a disgrace for a strong man, I hope to be a little tolerant. Guo Congyi agreed with him, and both of my parents were beheaded in the street. Murong Yanchao, a man from the Hunbu District of Tuyun, the younger brother of the mother of the founder of Mogao. He once assumed the surname Yan. Murong Yanchao was afraid of his long black beard, and claimed to ask Kunlun: When he was young, he served the Tang

古文：契丹灭晋，汉高祖起太原，彦超自流所逃归汉，拜镇宁军节度使。杜重威反于魏，高祖以天平军节度使高行周为都部署以讨之，以彦超为副。
现代文：契丹消灭晋，汉高祖在太原起兵，慕容彦超从流放地逃跑投奔漠，拜为镇宁军节度使，杜重威在魏州反叛，漠高祖任命天平军节度使高行周为都部酱来讨伐他，任命慕容彦赵为高行周副手。
English: Khitan annihilated Jin, Han Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, Murong Yanchao ran away from the exile and went to the desert, worshiped as the commander of the Zhening Army, Du Chongwei rebelled in Weizhou, the desert Gaozu appointed the Tianping Army commander to make Gao Xingzhou the capital sauce to fight him, and appointed Murong Yan Zhao as Gao Xingzhou's deputy.

古文：彦超与行周谋议多不协，行周用兵持重，兵至城下，久之不进。彦超欲速进战，而行周不许。
现代文：慕容彦超和高行周的谋略多不一致，高行周用兵稳重，兵临城下后，很久不进攻，慕容彦超想速战速决，而高行周不同意。
English: Murong Yanchao's and Gao Xingzhou's strategies were mostly inconsistent. Gao Xingzhou used a stable army, and did not attack for a long time after the soldiers entered the city. Murong Yanchao wanted to fight quickly, but Gao Xingzhou did not agree.

古文：行周有女嫁重威子，彦超扬言行周以女故，惜贼城而不攻，行周大怒。
现代文：高行周有个女儿嫁给杜重威的儿子，慕容彦超扬言说高行周因为女儿的缘故，怜惜贼城而不进攻，高行周大怒。
English: Gao Xing Zhou had a daughter married to Du Chong Wei's son, Murong Yanchao, and threatened that Gao Xing Zhou would not attack the Thief City because of his daughter. Gao Xing Zhou was furious.

古文：高祖闻二人不相得，惧有佗变，由是遽亲征。
现代文：汉高祖听说两人相处不好，怕有别的变故，因此就亲自出征。
English: Han Gaozu heard that the two did not get along well, and was afraid of other changes, so he personally went to the front.

古文：彦超数以事凌辱行周，行周不能忍，见宰相涕泣，以屎塞口以自诉。
现代文：慕容彦超多次借故凌辱高行周，高行周不能忍受，见到宰相哭泣，用屎塞嘴诉苦。
English: Murong Yanchao repeatedly insulted Gao Xing Zhou. Gao Xing Zhou could not bear to see the prime minister crying and stuffing his mouth with excrement to complain.

古文：高祖知曲在彦超，遣人慰劳行周，召彦超责之，又遣诣行周谢过，行周意稍解。
现代文：漠高祖知道慕容彦超理亏，派人慰劳高行周，召来慕容彦超加以斥责，又让他去向高行周谢罪，高行周的怒气纔渐渐消了。
English: Knowing that Murong Yanchao's reasoning was flawed, Mogao Gao Zu sent someone to console Gao Xing Zhou, summoned Murong Yanchao to reprimand him, and asked him to go and apologize to Gao Xing Zhou. Gao Xing Zhou's anger gradually dissipated.

古文：是时，汉兵顿魏城下已久，重威守益坚，诸将皆知未可图，方伺其隙，而彦超独言可速攻，高祖以为然，因自督士卒急攻，死伤者万馀人，由是不敢复言攻。
现代文：这时，汉兵在魏州城下已停留很久，杜重威的防守更加坚固，将领们都知道不能攻取，正在等待机会，而慕容彦超独自说可以迅速进攻，汉高祖认为不错，因此亲自督促士兵急攻，死伤一万多人，于是彦超不敢再谈进攻。
English: At this time, the Han soldiers had stayed for a long time under the castle of Weizhou, and Du Chongwei's defense was more solid. The generals knew that they could not attack and were waiting for an opportunity. However, Murong Yanchao said that he could attack quickly, which the Han Emperor thought was good. Therefore, he personally urged the soldiers to attack quickly, killing and wounding more than 10,000 people. Therefore, Yanchao did not dare to talk about the attack again.

古文：后重威出降，高祖以行周为天雄军节度使，行周辞不敢受，高祖遣苏逢吉谕之曰： 吾当为尔徙彦超。 
现代文：后来杜重威出城投降，汉高祖任命高行周为天雄军节度使，高行周推辞不敢接受，漠高祖派苏逢吉告诉他说： 我会为你调走慕容彦超的。 
English: Later, Du Chongwei left the city to surrender, and Emperor Gaozhu appointed Gao Xingzhu as the military envoy of Tianxiong. Gao Xingzhu did not dare to accept Gao Xingzhu's resignation, but Emperor Gaozhu sent Su Fengji to tell him: I will transfer Murong Yanchao for you.

古文：行周乃受，而彦超徙镇泰宁。
现代文：高行周纔接受任命，而慕容彦超调任镇守泰宁。
English: Gao Xing Zhou accepted the appointment, while Murong Yanchao was transferred to the post of Taining town guard.

古文：隐帝已杀史弘肇等，又遣人之魏杀周太祖及王峻等，惧事不果，召诸将入卫京师。
现代文：汉隐帝杀掉史弘肇等人后，又派人到魏州杀周太祖和王峻等人，怕不能成事，召集将领们前来保卫京城。
English: After Emperor Han Yin killed Shi Hongzhao and others, he also sent people to Weizhou to kill Zhou Taizu and Wang Jun and others. Fearing that he would not succeed, he summoned generals to come and defend the capital.

古文：使者至兗，彦超方食，释匕箸而就道。
现代文：使臣到达兖州，慕容彦超正在吃饭，放下勺筷就上路。
English: When the envoys arrived in Luzhou, Murong Yanchao was eating. He put down his spoon and chopsticks and started walking.

古文：周兵犯京师，开封尹侯益谓隐帝曰： 北兵之来，其家属皆在京师，宜闭门以挫其锐，遣其妻子登陴以招北兵，可使解甲。 
现代文：周兵侵犯京师，开封尹侯益对漠隐帝说： 北兵这次前来，他们的家属都在京师，应当关闭城门挫败他们的锐气，让他们的妻子儿女登上矮墙招降北兵，可以使他们放下武器。 
English: When the Zhou soldiers invaded the Beijing division, the Kaifeng Yin Houyi said to the Emperor: "The Northern soldiers have come this time, and their families are all in the Beijing division. It is necessary to close the city gate to frustrate their spirit, and let their wives and children climb the low wall to invite the Northern soldiers to surrender, so that they can lay down their weapons.

古文：彦超诮益曰： 益老矣！
现代文：慕容彦超讥诮侯益说： 侯益老了！
English: Murong Yanchao mocked Hou Yi and said: "Hou Yi is old!

古文：此懦夫之计也。 
现代文：这是懦夫的计策。 
English: It's a coward's move.

古文：隐帝乃遣彦超副益，将兵于北郊。
现代文：汉隐帝于是派慕容彦超作侯益的副手，率兵到北郊。
English: Emperor Han Yin then sent Murong Yanyanchao to serve as Houyi's deputy and led the troops to the northern suburbs.

古文：周兵至，益夜叛降于周。
现代文：周兵到后，侯益在晚上反叛向周投降。
English: After the arrival of Zhou soldiers, Hou Yi rebelled in the evening and surrendered to Zhou.

古文：彦超力战于七里，隐帝出劳军，太后使人告彦超善卫帝，彦超大言报曰： 北兵何能为？
现代文：慕容彦超在匕里奋战，漠隐帝出来犒赏军队，太后派入告诉慕容彦超妤好保卫皇帝，慕容彦超口气很大地回答说： 北兵能做什么？
English: Murong Yanchao fought hard in Baoli, the Emperor came out to reward the troops, and the Empress Dowager sent in to tell Murong Yanchao to be good at defending the emperor. Murong Yanchao replied loudly: What can the Northern soldiers do?

古文：当于阵上喝坐使归营。 
现代文：我在战阵上大喝一声，可坐着不动就使他们回军营去。 
English: I shouted at the front, but I sat still and let them go back to their barracks.

古文：又谓隐帝曰： 官家宫中无事，明日可出观臣战。 
现代文：又对汉隐帝说： 陛下要是官中无事，明天可以出来看我打仗。 
English: He also said to Emperor Han: "Your Majesty, if there is nothing wrong with the officials, you can come out tomorrow to watch me fight.

古文：明日隐帝复出劳军，彦超战败奔兗州，隐帝遇弑于北郊。
现代文：第二天汉隐帝又出来慰劳军队，慕容彦超战败后逃向兖州，汉隐帝在北郊被杀。
English: The next day, Emperor Han Yin came out again to comfort the troops. After the defeat of Murong Yanchao, he fled to Zhangzhou. Emperor Han Yin was killed in the northern suburbs.

古文：周太祖入立，彦超不自安，数有所献，太祖报以玉带，又赐诏书安慰之，呼彦超为弟而不名，又遣翰林学士鲁崇谅往慰谕之，彦超心益疑惧。
现代文：周太祖登位，慕容彦超心中不安，多次进献财物，周太祖回赠他玉带，又赐给诏害安慰他，称呼慕容彦超为弟弟而不叫名，又派翰林学士鲁崇谅去安慰开导他，慕容彦超心中更加疑惑惧怕。
English: When Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, Murong Yanchao was uneasy in his heart and made several donations of wealth. Zhou Taizu gave him a jade belt in return, and also gave him an imperial edict to comfort him, called Murong Yanchao his brother without naming him, and sent Hanlin Scholar Lu Chongyuan to comfort and enlighten him. Murong Yanchao was more suspicious and afraid in his heart.

古文：已而刘旻自立于太原，出兵攻晋、绛，太祖遣王峻用兵西方，彦超乘间亦谋反，遣押衙郑麟至京师求入朝，太祖知其诈，手诏许之。
现代文：不久刘曼在太原自立为王，出兵攻打晋、绛二州，周太祖派王峻在西面打仗，慕容彦超也乘机谋反，派押衙郑麟到京师请求入朝，周太祖知道有诈，亲手写诏害准许他入朝。
English: Before long, Liu Man established himself as king in Taiyuan and dispatched troops to attack Jin and Shandong. Zhou Taizu sent Wang Jun to fight in the west, and Murong Yanchao also took advantage of the opportunity to plot a rebellion and sent the captive Jie Zhenglin to Beijing to request entry into the imperial court. Zhou Taizu knew that there was fraud and personally wrote an edict to allow him to enter the imperial court.

古文：彦超复称管内多盗而止，又为高行周所与书以进，其辞皆指斥周过失，若欲共反者。
现代文：慕容彦超又称他管辖的地区内盗贼很多而没有走，又伪造高行周写给他的书信呈送朝廷，信中言语都指斥周的过失，像是想共同反叛的人。
English: Murong Yanchao also said that there were many thieves in the area under his jurisdiction who did not leave, and forged Gao Xing Zhou's letter to him and presented it to the court. The words in the letter all pointed to Zhou's mistakes, as if they were people who wanted to rebel together.

古文：太祖验其印文伪，以书示行周。
现代文：周太祖核验信上的印章是假的，拿信给高行周看。
English: Zhou Taizu checked that the seal on the letter was fake and showed the letter to Gao Xingzhu.

古文：彦超又遣人南结李昪，昪为出兵攻沐阳，为周兵所败，而刘旻攻晋、绛不克，解去。
现代文：慕容彦超又派人在南面勾结李升，李升为他出兵攻打沭阳，被周兵打败。而刘曼进攻晋、绛二州没有攻克，散去。
English: Murong Yanchao also sent people to the south to collude with Li Sheng, Li Sheng sent troops to attack Fenyang for him and was defeated by Zhou soldiers, while Liu Man attacked Jin and the two states of Yunnan but failed to conquer them and dispersed.

古文：太祖乃遣侍卫步军指挥使曹英、客省使向训讨之，彦超闭城自守。
现代文：周太祖于是派侍卫步军指挥使曹英、客省使向训讨伐他，慕容彦超紧闭城门防守。
English: Zhou Taizu then sent Cao Ying, the commander of the bodyguard and foot soldiers, and Xiang Xun, the guest provincial envoy, to fight him, and Murong Yan Chao closed the gate tightly for defense.

古文：初，彦超之反也，判官崔周度谏曰： 鲁，诗书之国也，自伯禽以来未有能霸者，然以礼义守之而长世者多矣。
现代文：当初，慕容彦超反叛的时候，判官崔周度谏阻说： 鲁，是诗书之国，自从伯禽以来没有能称霸的人，但用礼义守国而享世长久的很多。
English: At the beginning, when Murong Yancha rebelled, the judge Cui Zhoudu said: Lu is a country of poetry, and there has been no one who can dominate since Bo Yang, but there are many who have defended the country with courtesy and lived long.

古文：今公英武，一代之豪杰也，若量力相时而动，可以保富贵终身。
现代文：如今你英明神武，是一代豪杰，如果根据实力待机而动，可以终身保持富贵。
English: Now you are wise and powerful, a generation of heroes. If you act according to your strength, you can remain rich and noble for life.

古文：李河中、安襄阳、镇阳杜令公，近岁之龟鉴也。 
现代文：李河中、安襄阳、镇阳杜令公，都是近年来可以借鉴的。 
English: Li Hezhong, An Xiangyang, Zhenyang Du Ling Gong, are all examples that can be learned from in recent years.

古文：彦超大怒，未有以害之。
现代文：慕容彦超大怒，但没有理由加害他。
English: Murongyan was furious, but there was no reason to harm him.

古文：已而见围，因大括城中民赀以犒军，前陕州司马阎弘鲁惧其鞭扑，乃悉家赀以献。彦超以为未尽，又欲并罪周度，乃令周度监括弘鲁家。
现代文：不久被包围，因而大肆搜刮城中百姓的资财用来犒劳军队，原陕州司马间弘昼惧怕受他鞭打，于是把全部家产献上，慕容彦超认为没有献完，又想一并加罪给崔周度，于是命令崔周度监督搜刮阎弘鲁的家。
English: Soon he was besieged, as a result of which he plundered the resources of the people in the city to reward the army. The former Shaanxi Sima Miao Honglun was afraid of being whipped by him, so he donated all his family property. Murong Yanchao thought that the donation was not complete, and he also wanted to add a crime to Cui Zhoudu, so he ordered Cui Zhoudu to supervise the search of Yan Honglu's home.

古文：周度谓弘鲁曰： 公命之死生，系财之多少，愿无隐也。 
现代文：崔周度对阎弘鲁说： 你的生死，要看财产的多少，希望不要隐瞒。 
English: Cui Zhoudu said to Yan Honglu: Your life and death depend on how much property you have, I hope you don't hide it.

古文：弘鲁遣家僮与周度属刂掘搜索无所得。
现代文：间弘鲁派家僮和崔周度挖掘搜索一无所得。
English: In the meantime, Honglu sent Jiaqi and Cui Zhou to dig and search, but nothing was found.

古文：彦超又遣郑麟持刃迫之，弘鲁惶恐拜其妻妾，妻妾皆言无所隐。
现代文：慕容彦超又派郑麟持刀逼迫他问弘鲁惶恐地叩拜他的妻妾，妻妾都说没有隐瞒财产。
English: Murong Yancha also sent Zheng Lin with a knife to force him to ask Honglu to fearfully worship his wife and concubine. The wife and concubine both said that they did not hide the property.

古文：周度入白彦超，彦超不信，下弘鲁及周度于狱。
现代文：崔周度进去桌报慕容彦超，慕容彦超不相信，把阎弘鲁和崔周度投进狱中。
English: Cui Zhoudu entered the table and reported to Murong Yanchao. Murong Yanchao did not believe him and threw Yan Honglu and Cui Zhoudu into prison.

古文：弘鲁乳母于泥中得金缠臂献彦超，欲赎出弘鲁，彦超大怒，遣军校笞弘鲁夫妇肉烂而死，遂斩周度于市。
现代文：阎弘鲁的乳母在泥土中拾得金缠臂献给慕容彦超，想赎出间弘鲁，慕容彦超大怒，派军校鞭打间弘鲁夫妇至皮开肉绽而死，于是在街上处斩崔周度。
English: Yan Honglu's wet nurse found a gold-encrusted arm in the dirt and dedicated it to Murong Yanchao. Murong Yanchao was furious and wanted to redeem Ma Honglu. He sent the military school to beat Ma Honglu and his wife to death, and then executed Cui Zhoudu in the street.

古文：是岁，镇星犯角、亢，占曰： 角、亢，郑分，兗州当焉。 
现代文：这年镇星进入角、亢之域，占卜之辞说： 角、亢，是郑州的分野，兖州正当着。 
English: This year, Zhenxing entered the areas of Jiao and Yao. The divination words said: Jiao and Yao are the areas of Zhengzhou, and Bozhou is the rightful place.

古文：彦超即率军府将吏步出西门三十里致祭，迎于开元寺，塑像以事之，日常一至，又使民家立黄幡以禳之。
现代文：慕容彦超就率军府将吏走出西门三十里设祭，在开元寺迎候，塑像事奉，每天去一次，又让百姓家立黄旗求福消灾。
English: Murong Yanchao led the military officers out of the West Gate 30 miles to set up a festival, greeted them at Kaiyuan Temple, served as a statue, went there once a day, and let the people set up a yellow flag to seek blessings and eliminate disasters.

古文：彦超为人多智诈而好聚敛，在镇尝置库质钱，有奸民为伪银以质者，主吏久之乃觉。
现代文：慕容彦超为人狡诈多智而又喜好聚敛财富，在任所曾设库典当钱，有奸猾的百姓制造假银子来典当，主管官吏很久纔发觉。
English: Murong Yanchao was a cunning and witty person who liked to accumulate wealth. When he was in office, he set up a warehouse to pawn money. Some treacherous people made fake silver to pawn it. The officials in charge did not find out for a long time.

古文：彦超阴教主吏夜穴库垣，尽徙其金帛于佗所而以盗告。
现代文：慕容彦超暗中唆使主管官吏乘夜晚在库墙上挖洞，把库中的金银绸缎全部转移到别的地方，而以被盗报告。
English: Murong Yanchao secretly instigated the officials in charge to dig a hole in the wall of the warehouse at night, transfer all the gold, silver and silk in the warehouse to another place, and report it as stolen.

古文：彦超即榜于市，使民自占所质以偿之，民皆争以所质物自言，已而得质伪银者，置之深室，使教十馀人日夜为之，皆铁为质而包双银，号 铁胎银 。
现代文：慕容彦超就在街上张榜，让老百姓自报他们所典当的钱物而偿还他们，老百姓都争相自报典当的财物，不久发现典当假银子的人，把他安排在深室中，让他教十多人日夜不停地造假银子，都是铁制的而在外面包上银子，号称 铁胎银 。
English: Murong Yanchao put up a signboard on the street, asking the common people to report the money and goods they pawned to repay them. The common people all scrambled to report the pawned property. Soon they found the pawn of fake silver, placed him in a deep room, and let him teach more than ten people to continuously make fake silver day and night. They are all made of iron and wrap the silver outside, known as "iron tire silver."

古文：其被围也，勉其城守者曰： 吾有银数千铤，当悉以赐汝。 
现代文：当他被包围时，鼓励为他守城的人说： 我有银子几千艇，将全部拿来赐给你们。 
English: When he was besieged, he exhorted his defenders, saying, "I have several thousand talents of silver, and I will give it all to you."

古文：军士私相谓曰： 此铁胎尔，复何用哉！ 
现代文：士兵们私下相互说： 这不过是铁胎而已，又有什么用呢！ 
English: The soldiers said to each other privately: "It's just an iron tire, what's the use!"

古文：皆不为之用。
现代文：都不为他出力。
English: They're all pulling for him.

古文：明年五月，太祖亲征，城破，彦超夫妻皆投井死，其子继勋率其徒五百人出奔被擒，遂灭其族。
现代文：第二年五月，周太祖亲自出征，城被攻破，慕容彦超夫妻都投井而死，他的儿子慕容继勋率领随从五百人出逃被抓获，于是把他们减族。
English: In May of the following year, Zhou Taizu himself went to war, the city was breached, Murong Yanchao and his wife both fell into a well and died, and his son Murong Jixun led 500 people to escape and was captured, so they were reduced.

古文：兗州平，太祖诏赠阎弘鲁左骁卫大将军、崔周度秘书监。
现代文：童州平定，周太祖下诏追赠间弘鲁为左骁卫大将军、崔周度为秘书监。
English: Tongzhou was pacified, and Zhou Taizu issued a posthumous edict naming Honglu as General Zuo Jianwei and Cui Zhoudu as Secretary Supervisor.

