古文：南郭子綦隐机而坐，仰天而嘘，嗒焉似丧其耦。颜成子游立侍乎前，曰： 何居乎？
现代文：南郭子綦靠着几案坐着，仰起头向天缓缓地吐着气，那离神去智的样子真好像精神脱离了躯体，进入了忘我境界。他的学生颜成子游侍立在前，说道： 您这是怎么了？
English: Nan Guo Zijuan sat leaning against several cases, raised his head to the sky and slowly exhaled. The look of leaving God for wisdom really seemed like the spirit had left the body and entered the realm of self-forgetfulness. His student Yan Cheng Ziyu stood in front of him and said: What's wrong with you?

古文：形固可使如槁木，而心固可使如死灰乎？
现代文：形体诚然可以使它像干枯的树木，精神和思想难道也可以使它像死灰一般吗？
English: If the body can be reduced to dry wood, can the spirit and the mind be reduced to ashes?

古文：今之隐机者，非昔之隐机者也？ 
现代文：你今天凭几而坐，跟往昔凭几而坐的情景大不一样呢。 
English: How you sit today is very different from how you used to sit in the past.

古文：子綦曰： 偃，不亦善乎，而问之也！
现代文：子綦回答说： 偃，你这个问题问的很好！
English: Zi Yao replied: "Zi Yao, your question is very good!

古文：今者吾丧我，汝知之乎？
现代文：今天我忘掉了外在的自己，你知道吗？
English: Today I forgot my outer self, you know?

古文：汝闻人籁而未闻地籁，汝闻地籁而不闻天籁夫！ 
现代文：你听见过 人籁 却没有听见过 地籁 ，你即使听见过 地籁 却没有听见过 天籁 啊！ 
English: You have heard of man, but not of the earth; you have heard of the earth, but not of man.

古文：子游曰： 敢问其方。 
现代文：子游问： 我冒昧地请教它们的真实含意。 
English: Zoyu asked: I took the liberty of asking them what they really meant.

古文：子綦曰： 夫大块噫气，其名为风。
现代文：子綦说： 大地吐出的气，名字叫风。
English: Zixuan said, "The breath that the earth exhales is called wind.

古文：是唯无作，作则万窍怒呺。
现代文：风不发作则已，一旦发作整个大地上数不清的窍孔都怒吼起来。
English: If the wind doesn't blow, it's over, but when it does blow, all the countless nooks and crannies of the earth will roar.

古文：而独不闻之翏翏乎？
现代文：你难道没有听过那呼呼的风声吗？
English: Haven't you heard the rumours?

古文：山林之畏隹，大木百围之窍穴，似鼻，似口，似耳，似枅，似圈，似臼，似洼者，似污者。
现代文：山陵上陡峭峥嵘的各种去处，百围大树上无数的窍孔，有的像鼻子，有的像嘴，有的像耳朵，有的像圆柱上插入横木的方孔，有的像圈围的栅栏，有的像舂米的臼窝，有的像深池，有的像浅池。
English: The various places of the steep ridges on the mountains, the countless holes on the trees around the world, some like a nose, some like a mouth, some like an ear, some like a square hole inserted into a crossbeam on a cylinder, some like a fence, some like a rice mill, some like a deep pool, some like a shallow pool.

古文：激者、謞者、叱者、吸者、叫者、譹者、宎者，咬者，前者唱于而随者唱喁，泠风则小和，飘风则大和，厉风济则众窍为虚。
现代文：它们发出的声音，像湍急的流水声，像迅疾的箭镞声，像大声的呵叱声，像细细的呼吸声，像放声叫喊，像嚎啕大哭，像风吹入孔穴发出的声音，像鸟儿鸣叫叽喳，真好像前面在呜呜唱导，后面在呼呼随和。清风徐徐就有小小的和声，长风呼呼便有大的反响，迅猛的暴风突然停歇，万般窍穴也就寂然无声。
English: The sound they make is like the sound of rushing water, like the sound of speeding arrows, like the sound of loud scolding, like the sound of fine breathing, like shouting, like wailing, like the sound of wind blowing into a hole, like birds chirping, it's like the front is singing and the back is whistling. The clear wind gradually has a small harmony, the long wind whistles and there is a big response, the fast storm suddenly stops, and all the holes are silent.

古文：而独不见之调调之刁刁乎？ 
现代文：你难道没有看到草木随风摇动的样子吗？ 
English: Don't you see the plants swaying in the wind?

古文：子游曰： 地籁则众窍是已，人籁则比竹是已，敢问天籁。 
现代文：子游说：  地籁 是从万种窍穴里发出的风声， 人籁 是人用种不同的竹管吹出的声音。
English: Sub-lobbying: the earth's gurgle is the wind sound emitted from all kinds of nooks and crannies, and the human gurgle is the sound blown out by people using different kinds of bamboo pipes.

古文：子綦曰： 夫吹万不同，为而使其自己也。
现代文：我再冒昧地向你请教什么是 天籁 。 子綦说：  天籁 虽然有万般不同，但使它们发生和停息的都是出于自身，哪有谁命令它们呢？ 
English: Again, I venture to ask you what is the nature of things. Zi Chen said: Although the nature of things is very different, they all come and go of their own accord. Who commands them?

古文：咸其自取，怒者其谁邪？ 大知闲闲，小知閒閒。大言炎炎，小言詹詹。
现代文：才智超群的人广博豁达，只有点小聪明的人则乐于细察、斤斤计较；合乎道的发言，是稀疏平淡的，拘于智巧的言论则琐细无方、没完没了。
English: Men of superior intellect are broad-minded and open-minded; men of moderate intelligence are scrupulous and calculating; words of truth are few and far between; words of cleverness are trivial and interminable.

古文：其寐也魂交，其觉也形开。与接为构，日以心斗。
现代文：他们休息时神魂交构，醒后疲于与外物接触纠缠；跟外界交接相应，整日里勾心斗角。
English: When they rest, their minds and souls are intertwined, and when they wake up, they are tired of being entangled in contact with foreign objects; corresponding to the handover with the outside world, they are involved in intrigues all day long.

古文：缦者、窖者、密者。
现代文：有的疏怠迟缓，有的高深莫测，有的细心谨慎。
English: Some are careless and slow, some are inscrutable, and some are careful and cautious.

古文：小恐惴惴，大恐缦缦。
现代文：小恐时惴惴不安，大恐时失魂落魄。
English: When you are scared, you feel uneasy. When you are scared, you feel depressed.

古文：其发若机栝，其司是非之谓也；其留如诅盟，其守胜之谓也；其杀如秋冬，以言其日消也；其溺之所为之，不可使复之也；其厌也如缄，以言其老洫也；近死之心，莫使复阳也。
现代文：他们说话就好像利箭发自弩机快疾而又尖刻，那就是说是与非都由此而产生；他们将心思存留心底就好像盟约誓言坚守不渝，那就是说持守胸臆坐待时机取胜。他们衰败犹如秋冬的草木，这说明他们日渐消衰；他们沉缅于所从事的各种事情，致使他们不可能再恢复到原有的情状；他们心灵闭塞好像被绳索缚住，这说明他们衰老颓败，没法使他们恢复生气。
English: They speak as if arrows shot from a cutter, quick and sharp, that is to say, all the evils come from it; they keep their minds in their hearts, like a covenant, an oath to keep, that is to say, hold their chests and wait for the opportunity to win; they decay like autumn and winter grasses, which shows that they are fading away; they are absorbed in the things they do, which makes it impossible for them to return to their original state; their minds are closed, as if they were tied with ropes, which shows that they are old and decayed, and there is no way to revive them.

古文：喜怒哀乐，虑叹变慹，姚佚启态。
现代文：他们欣喜、愤怒、悲哀、欢乐，他们忧思、叹惋、反复、恐惧，他们躁动轻浮、奢华放纵、情张欲狂、造姿作态。
English: They exult, rage, mourn, rejoice; they brood, lament, ruminate, fear; they are restless, frivolous, extravagant, voluptuous, and pretentious.

古文：乐出虚，蒸成菌。
现代文：好像乐声从中空的乐管中发出，又像菌类由地气蒸腾而成。
English: It's as if music were emanating from a hollow pipe, or as if fungi were transpiring from the ground.

古文：日夜相代乎前而莫知其所萌。
现代文：这种种情态心境日夜变换，却不知道它们是怎样发生的。算了吧！算了吧！
English: These kinds of mental states change from day to day, without knowing how they happened. Forget it! Forget it!

古文：已乎，已乎！旦暮得此，其所由以生乎！
现代文：一旦懂得这一切发生的道理，不就明白了这种种情态发生、形成的原因？
English: Once you understand the reason for all this happening, don't you understand the reasons for the occurrence and formation of this kind of situation?

古文：非彼无我，非我无所取。
现代文：没有我的对应面就没有我本身，没有我本身就没法呈现我的对应面。
English: Without my counterpart, there would be no me, and without me, there would be no way to present my counterpart.

古文：是亦近矣，而不知其所为使。
现代文：这样的认识也就接近于事物的本质，然而却不知道这一切受什么所驱使。
English: This kind of understanding is also close to the essence of things, but we don't know what drives all of this.

古文：若有真宰，而特不得其眹。
现代文：仿佛有真正的主宰，却又寻不到它的端倪。
English: It's as if there's a real mastermind, but we can't find any sign of it.

古文：可行己信，而不见其形，有情而无形。
现代文：可以去实践并得到验证，然而却看不见它的形体，真实的存在而又没有反映它的具体形态。
English: It can be put into practice and verified, but its form, true existence, cannot be seen, and its concrete form is not reflected.

古文：百骸、九窍、六藏、赅而存焉，吾谁与为亲？
现代文：众多的骨节，眼耳口鼻等九个孔窍和心肺肝肾等六脏，全都齐备地存在于我的身体，我跟它们哪一部分最为亲近呢？
English: Numerous bone joints, nine orifices such as eyes, ears, mouth and nose, and six organs such as heart, lungs, liver and kidneys, all exist in my body, which part of them am I closest to?

古文：汝皆说之乎？
现代文：你对它们都同样喜欢吗？
English: Do you like them all equally?

古文：其有私焉？
现代文：还是对其中某一部分格外偏爱呢？
English: Or do you have a particular preference for one of them?

古文：如是皆有为臣妾乎？
现代文：这样，每一部分都只会成为臣妾似的仆属吗？
English: In this way, will each part only become a vassal-like servant of the whole?

古文：其臣妾不足以相治乎？
现代文：难道臣妾似的仆属就不足以相互支配了吗？
English: Isn't it enough to have a retinue of vassals to rule over each other?

古文：其递相为君臣乎？
现代文：还是轮流做为君臣呢？
English: Or do they take turns as monarchs and ministers?

古文：其有真君存焉！
现代文：难道又果真有什么 真君 存在其间？
English: Could it be that there really is something like a real prince among them?

古文：如求得其情与不得，无益损乎其真。
现代文：无论寻求到它的究竟与否，那都不会对它的真实存在有什么增益和损坏。
English: Whether it is sought after or not, it neither adds to nor detracts from its reality.

古文：一受其成形，不亡以待尽。
现代文：人一旦禀承天地之气而形成形体，便要不失其真性以尽天年。
English: Once a person inherits the spirit of heaven and earth and forms a body, he must not lose his true nature and live to the full.

古文：与物相刃相靡，其行尽如驰而莫之能止，不亦悲乎！
现代文：他们跟外界环境或相互对立、或相互顺应，他们的行动全都像快马奔驰，没有什么力量能使他们止步，这不是很可悲吗！
English: With the external environment, they either oppose each other or conform to each other. Their actions are all like a speeding horse. No force can stop them. Isn't it very sad!

古文：终身役役而不见其成功，苶然疲役而不知其所归，可不哀邪！
现代文：他们终身承受役使却看不到自己的成功，一辈子困顿疲劳却不知道自己的归宿，这能不悲哀吗！
English: They work hard all their lives, but can't see their own success. They are tired all their lives, but don't know where they are going. Isn't that sad?

古文：人谓之不死，奚益！
现代文：人们说这种人不会死亡，这又有什么益处！
English: What good is it to say that such a man cannot die?

古文：其形化，其心与之然，可不谓大哀乎？
现代文：人的形骸逐渐衰竭，人的精神和感情也跟着一块儿衰竭，这能不算是最大的悲哀吗？
English: Isn't it the saddest thing that the human skeleton is gradually wasting away, and the human spirit and emotions are also wasting away?

古文：人之生也，固若是芒乎？
现代文：人生在世，本来就像这样迷昧无知吗？
English: Is life in the world like this, full of confusion and ignorance?

古文：其我独芒，而人亦有不芒者乎？
现代文：难道只有我才这么迷昧无知，而世人也有不迷昧无知的吗！
English: Am I the only one who is so confused and ignorant, and is there anyone in the world who is not confused and ignorant?

古文：夫随其成心而师之，谁独且无师乎？
现代文：顺着自己已经形成的偏执己见，并把它当作判断事物的标准，那么谁会没有这样的标准呢？
English: Who, then, would not have such a standard, following the already formed paranoid opinion and using it as a criterion for judging things?

古文：奚必知代而心自取者有之？
现代文：为什么必须通晓事物的更替并从自己的精神世界里找到资证的人才有老师呢？
English: Why is it that only those who are familiar with the change of things and have found their credentials in their own spiritual world can be teachers?

古文：愚者与有焉！
现代文：愚味的人也会跟他们一样有老师哩。
English: Stupid people have teachers just like them.

古文：未成乎心而有是非，是今日适越而昔至也。
现代文：还没有在思想上形成定见就有是与非的观念，这就像今天到越国去而昨天就已经到达。
English: If you haven't formed a fixed opinion in your mind, you will have the concept of right and wrong. It's like going to Vietnam today and arriving yesterday.

古文：是以无有为有。
现代文：这就是把没有当作有。
English: That's taking nothing for granted.

古文：无有为有，虽有神禹且不能知，吾独且奈何哉！
现代文：没有就是有，即使圣明的大禹尚且不可能通晓其中的奥妙，我偏偏又能怎么样呢？
English: If there is nothing, then there is something. Even if it is impossible for the great sage Yu to understand the mystery, what can I do?

古文：果有言邪？其未尝有言邪？
现代文：说话辩论并不像是吹风。善辩的人辩论纷纭，然而他们说的话却并没有准则。
English: Speaking and debating are not like the wind. Good debaters debate many things, but there is no standard for what they say.

古文：其以为异于鷇音，亦有辩乎？
现代文：人们果真是在说话呢，还是不曾说话呢？
English: Are people really talking, or are they not talking?

古文：其无辩乎？道恶乎隐而有真伪？
现代文：他们都认为自己的言谈不同于雏鸟的鸣叫，真有区别，还是没有什么区别呢？大道是怎么隐匿起来而出现了真伪呢？
English: They all think that their speech is different from the chirping of chicks. Is there really a difference, or is there no difference? How did the avenue disappear and the truth emerge?

古文：言恶乎隐而有是非？
现代文：言论是怎么隐匿起来而有了是非呢？
English: How did speech become hidden and become right and wrong?

古文：道恶乎往而不存？
现代文：大道怎么会出现而又不复存在？
English: How can a boulevard appear and then disappear?

古文：言恶乎存而不可？
现代文：言论又怎么存在而又不宜认可？
English: How can speech exist and yet be unacceptable?

古文：道隐于小成，言隐于荣华。
现代文：大道被小小的成功所隐蔽，言论被浮华的词藻所掩盖。
English: The avenue is obscured by small successes, the speech is covered by flashy words.

古文：故有儒墨之是非，以是其所非而非其所是。
现代文：所以就有了儒家和墨家的是非之辩，肯定对方所否定的东西而否定对方所肯定的东西。
English: Therefore, there is a debate between Confucianism and Mohism, affirming what the other side denies and denying what the other side affirms.

古文：欲是其所非而非其所是，则莫若以明。
现代文：想要肯定对方所否定的东西而非难对方所肯定的东西，那么不如用事物的本然去加以观察而求得明鉴。
English: If you want to affirm what the other side denies, rather than what the other side affirms, then it is better to use the nature of things to observe and seek enlightenment.

古文：物无非彼，物无非是。自彼则不见，自知则知之。
现代文：各种事物都存在它自身的对立面的事物，没有事物不存在它自身对立面的事物。
English: All things exist as their opposites, and nothing exists without its opposite.

古文：故曰：彼出于是，是亦因彼。
现代文：从对立的那一面看便看不出这样所确信的这面，从确信的这一面又看能有所确信的这面。
English: From the opposite side one cannot see the side that is thus convinced, and from the side that is convinced one cannot see the side that can be convinced.

古文：彼是方生之说也。虽然，方生方死，方死方生；方可方不可，方不可方可；因是因非，因非因是。
现代文：所以说：事物是出自原本确信的这面，当下确信的来源也是因为过往对立面的出现。彼与此的概念相对而生，相依而存。虽然这样，刚刚兴起的随即便覆灭，刚刚覆灭的随即又会兴起；刚刚肯定随即就是否定，刚刚否定随即又予以肯定。
English: Therefore, it is said that things come from the side of original certainty, and the source of current certainty is also due to the emergence of past opposites. He is born opposite to this concept and depends on each other. However, what has just arisen will soon be destroyed, and what has just been destroyed will soon rise again; what has just been affirmed will soon be denied, and what has just been denied will soon be affirmed.

古文：是以圣人不由而照之于天，亦因是也。
现代文：因此圣人不走划分正误是非的道路而是观察比照事物的本然，也就是顺着事物自身的情态。
English: Therefore, the sage does not take the path of distinguishing between right and wrong, but observes according to the nature of things, that is, according to the state of things themselves.

古文：是亦彼也，彼亦是也。彼亦一是非，此亦一是非，果且有彼是乎哉？
现代文：事物的这一面也就是事物的那一面，事物的那一面也就是事物的这一面。
English: This side of things is that side of things, and that side of things is this side of things.

古文：果且无彼是乎哉？
现代文：事物的那一面同样存在是与非，事物的这一面也同样存在正与误。
English: That side of things also has right and wrong, and this side of things also has right and wrong.

古文：彼是莫得其偶，谓之道枢。
现代文：事物果真存在彼此两个方面吗？
English: Are things really two sides of the same coin?

古文：枢始得其环中，以应无穷。
现代文：事物果真不存在彼此两个方面的区分吗？彼此两个方面都没有其对立的一面，这就是大道的枢纽。
English: Is there really no distinction between the two sides of things? Both sides do not have their opposite side, which is the hub of the avenue.

古文：是亦一无穷，非亦一无穷也。故曰：莫若以明。
现代文：抓住了大道的枢纽也就抓住了事物的要害，从而顺应事物无穷无尽的变化。 是 是无穷的， 非 也是无穷的。
English: If you grasp the hub of the highway, you also grasp the crux of things, and thus conform to the endless changes of things.

古文：以指喻指之非指，不若以非指喻指之非指也；以马喻马之非马，不若以非马喻马之非马也。
现代文：所以说不如用事物的本然来加以观察和认识。用组成事物的要素来说明要素不是事物本身，不如用非事物的要素来说明事物的要素并非事物本身；用白马来说明白马不是马，不如用非马来说明白马不是马。
English: Therefore, it is better to use the nature of things to observe and understand. It is better to use the elements that make up things to show that the elements are not the things themselves, and it is better to use the elements that are not things to show that the elements of things are not the things themselves; it is better to use the white horse to understand that the horse is not a horse, and it is better to use the non-horse to understand that the horse is not a horse.

古文：天地一指也，万物一马也。
现代文：在事物的本然为一的状态中，万物并无区别对待，故天地亦可称作一指，万物亦可唤作一马。
English: In the original state of things being one, there is no difference in the treatment of all things, so heaven and earth can also be called one finger, and all things can also be called one horse.

古文：可乎可，不可乎不可。
现代文：能认可吗？一定有可以加以肯定的东西方才可以认可；不可以认可吗？
English: Can it be approved? There must be an East and West that can be affirmed before it can be approved; can it not be approved?

古文：道行之而成，物谓之而然。
现代文：一定也有不可以加以肯定的东西方才不能认可。道路是行走而成的，事物是人们称谓而就的。
English: There must also be East and West that cannot be affirmed and cannot be recognized. Roads are made by walking, things are named by people.

古文：恶乎然？
现代文：怎样才算是正确呢？
English: How can it be right?

古文：然于然。
现代文：正确在于其本身就是正确的。
English: What is right is right in itself.

古文：恶乎可？
现代文：怎样才算是不正确呢？
English: How is it incorrect?

古文：可于可。恶乎不可？
现代文：不正确的在于其本身就是不正确的。怎样才能认可呢？
English: What is not right is that it is not right. How can it be recognized?

古文：不可于不可。
现代文：能认可在于其自身就是能认可的。
English: It is recognizable because it is recognizable.

古文：恶乎不然？
现代文：怎样才不能认可呢？
English: How can it not be approved?

古文：不然于不然。
现代文：不能认可在于其本身就是不能认可的。
English: What is unacceptable is that it is unacceptable in itself.

古文：物固有所然，物固有所可。无物不然，无物不可。
现代文：事物原本就有正确的一面，事物原本就有能认可的一面，没有什么事物不存在正确的一面，也没有什么事物不存在能认可的一面。
English: Things inherently have a correct side, things inherently have a recognizable side, there is nothing that does not have a correct side, and there is nothing that does not have a recognizable side.

古文：故为是举莛与楹，厉与西施，恢诡谲怪，道通为一。
现代文：所以可以列举细小的草茎和高大的庭柱，丑陋的癞头和美丽的西施，宽大、奇变、诡诈、怪异等千奇百怪的各种事态来说明这一点，从 道 的观点看它们都是相通而浑一的。
English: Therefore, to illustrate this point, one can cite the tiny grass stalks and tall garden pillars, the ugly camphor trees and the beautiful lilies, the magnanimous, the eccentric, the cunning, the strange, and so on. From the perspective of Tao, they are all interrelated and unified.

古文：其分也，成也；其成也，毁也。
现代文：旧事物的分解，亦即新事物的形成，新事物的形成亦即旧事物的毁灭。
English: The decomposition of old things, that is, the formation of new things, and the formation of new things, that is, the destruction of old things.

古文：凡物无成与毁，复通为一。
现代文：所有事物并无形成与毁灭的区别，还是相通而浑一的特点。
English: All things do not have the distinction between formation and destruction, but are interconnected and have the same characteristics.

古文：唯达者知通为一，为是不用而寓诸庸。
现代文：只有通达的人方才知晓事物相通而浑一的道理，因此不用固执地对事物作出这样那样的解释，而应把自己的观点寄托于平常的事理之中。
English: Only those who are well-informed know the truth that all things are interrelated and unified. Therefore, one should not stubbornly interpret things in one way or another, but should base one's view on common sense.

古文：庸也者，用也；用也者，通也；通也者，得也；适得而几矣。
现代文：所谓平庸的事理就是无用而有用；认识事物无用就是有用，这就算是通达；通达的人才是真正了解事物常理的人；恰如其分地了解事物常理也就接近于大道。
English: The so-called mediocre reason is useless but useful; knowing things uselessly is useful, which is called insight; the person who is insightful is the one who truly understands the common sense of things; understanding the common sense of things appropriately is also close to the avenue.

古文：因是已。已而不知其然，谓之道。
现代文：顺应事物相通而浑一的本来状态吧，这样还不能了解它的究竟，这就叫做 道 。
English: Adhere to the original state of things that are interrelated and unified, so you can't understand its ultimate, this is called the way.

古文：劳神明为一而不知其同也，谓之 朝三 。
现代文：耗费心思方才能认识事物浑然为一而不知事物本身就具有同一的性状和特点，这就叫 朝三 。
English: It takes a lot of thought to recognize that things are one and the same without knowing that the things themselves have the same traits and characteristics, which is called morning three.

古文：何谓 朝三 ？
现代文：什么叫做 朝三 呢？
English: What do you call three in the morning?

古文：狙公赋芧，曰： 朝三而暮四。 
现代文：养猴人给猴子分橡子，说： 早上分给三升，晚上分给四升 。
English: The monkey keeper divided the acorns among the monkeys, saying, "Three liters in the morning and four liters in the evening."

古文：众狙皆怒。
现代文：猴子们听了非常愤怒。
English: The monkeys were very angry.

古文：曰： 然则朝四而暮三。 
现代文：养猴人便改口说： 那么就早上四升晚上三升吧。 
English: The monkey keeper changed his mind and said, "Then, four liters in the morning and three liters in the evening."

古文：众狙皆悦。
现代文：猴子们听了都高兴起来。
English: The monkeys were delighted to hear this.

古文：名实未亏而喜怒为用，亦因是也。
现代文：名义和实际都没有亏损，喜与怒却各为所用而有了变化，也就是因为这样的道理。
English: In name and in fact, there is no loss, but joy and anger have been used for different purposes and have changed, that is because of this reason.

古文：是以圣人和之以是非而休乎天钧，是之谓两行。
现代文：因此，古代圣人把是与非混同起来，优游自得地生活在自然而又均衡的境界里，这就叫物与我各得其所、自行发展。
English: Therefore, the ancient sages confused right and wrong and lived happily in a natural and balanced state. This allowed things and people to find their own place and develop on their own.

古文：古之人，其知有所至矣。
现代文：古时候的人，他们的智慧达到了最高的境界。
English: People in ancient times, their wisdom reached the highest level.

古文：恶乎至？
现代文：如何才能达到最高的境界呢？
English: How can you reach the highest level of singing?

古文：有以为未始有物者，至矣，尽矣，不可以加矣！
现代文：那时有人认为，整个宇宙从一开始就不存在什么具体的事物，这样的认识是最了不起，最尽善尽美，而无以复加了。
English: At that time, some people believed that the entire universe did not exist from the beginning of anything concrete, and this understanding was the greatest, the most perfect, and there was nothing more to add.

古文：其次以为有物矣，而未始有封也。
现代文：其次，认为宇宙之始是存在事物的，可是万事万物从不曾有过区分和界线。
English: Secondly, the view that the beginning of the universe is the existence of things, but all things have never had distinctions and boundaries.

古文：其次以为有封焉，而未始有是非也。
现代文：再其次，认为万事万物虽有这样那样的区别，但是却从不曾有过是与非的不同。
English: And secondly, that although there are such and such differences in all things, they have never been different from right and wrong.

古文：是非之彰也，道之所以亏也。道之所以亏，爱之所以成。
现代文：是与非的显露，对于宇宙万物的理解也就因此出现亏损和缺陷，理解上出现亏损与缺陷，偏私的观念也就因此形成。
English: With the revelation of right and wrong, the understanding of all things in the universe has also suffered losses and defects, and the concept of partiality has also formed.

古文：果且有成与亏乎哉？
现代文：果真有形成与亏缺吗？
English: Are there really formations and deficits?

古文：果且无成与亏乎哉？
现代文：果真没有形成与亏缺吗？
English: Is there really no formation and deficiency?

古文：有成与亏，故昭氏之鼓琴也；无成与亏，故昭氏之不鼓琴也。
现代文：事物有了形成与亏缺，所以昭文才能够弹琴奏乐。没有形成和亏缺，昭文就不再能够弹琴奏乐。
English: Things have formation and deficiency, that is why Shouwen can play the piano and music. Without formation and deficiency, Shouwen can no longer play the piano and music.

古文：昭文之鼓琴也，师旷之枝策也，惠子之据梧也，三者之知几乎！
现代文：昭文善于弹琴，师旷精于乐律，惠施乐于靠着梧桐树高谈阔论，这三位先生的才智可说是登峰造极了！
English: Zhaowen is good at playing the piano, Shi Kuang is good at music theory, Hui Xie is good at talking about things while leaning on a sycamore tree. The talent of these three gentlemen can be said to have reached the peak!

古文：皆其盛者也，故载之末年。
现代文：他们都享有盛誉，所以他们的事迹得到记载并流传下来。
English: They all had a reputation, so their deeds were recorded and passed down.

古文：唯其好之也，以异于彼，其好之也，欲以明之。
现代文：他们都爱好自己的学问与技艺，因而跟别人大不一样；正因为爱好自己的学问和技艺，所以总希望能够表现出来。
English: They all love their studies and skills, so they are very different from others; just because they love their studies and skills, they always want to show it.

古文：彼非所明而明之，故以坚白之昧终。而其子又以文之纶终，终身无成。
现代文：而他们将那些不该彰明的东西彰明于世，因而最终以石之色白与质坚均独立于石头之外的迷昧而告终；而昭文的儿子也继承其父亲的事业，终生没有什么作为。
English: However, they revealed things to the world that should not have been revealed, and as a result, they ended up with the ambiguity that the whiteness and hardness of the stone were independent of the stone; and Akifumi's son also inherited his father's career and did nothing for the rest of his life.

古文：若是而可谓成乎，虽我亦成也；若是而不可谓成乎，物与我无成也。
现代文：像这样就可以称作成功吗？那即使是我虽无成就也可说是成功了。像这样便不可以称作成功吗？外界事物和我本身就都没有成功。
English: Can I be called successful like this? Even if I have no achievements, I can be said to be successful. Can I not be called successful like this? External things and I myself are not successful.

古文：是故滑疑之耀，圣人之所图也。
现代文：因此，各种迷乱人心的巧说辩言的炫耀，都是圣哲之人所鄙夷、摒弃的。
English: Therefore, all kinds of dazzling and dazzling arguments and arguments are despised and abandoned by the sages.

古文：为是不用而寓诸庸，此之谓 以明 。
现代文：所以说，各种无用均寄托于有用之中，这才是用事物的本然观察事物而求得真实的理解。
English: Therefore, all kinds of useless things are placed in the middle of useful things, which is to use the original observation of things to gain a true understanding.

古文：今且有言于此，不知其与是类乎？其与是不类乎？
现代文：现在暂且在这里说一番话，不知道这些话跟其他人的谈论是相同的呢，还是不相同的呢？
English: Now, let's talk for a moment here, I don't know if these words are the same as other people's talk, or are they different?

古文：类与不类，相与为类，则与彼无以异矣。
现代文：相同的言论与不相同的言论，既然相互间都是言谈议论，从这一意义说，不管其内容如何也就是同类的了。
English: The same speech and different speech, since they are both speech and discourse, are in this sense the same, regardless of their content.

古文：虽然，请尝言之：有始也者，有未始有始也者，有未始有夫未始有始也者；有有也者，有无也者，有未始有无也者，有未始有夫未始有无也者。
现代文：虽然这样，还是请让我试着把这一问题说一说。宇宙万物有它的开始，同样有它未曾开始的开始，还有它未曾开始的未曾开始的开始。宇宙之初有过这样那样的 有 ，但也有个 无 ，还有个未曾有过的 无 ，同样也有个未曾有过的未曾有过的 无 。
English: Nevertheless, let me try to address this issue. All things in the universe have a beginning, as well as a beginning that has not yet begun, and a beginning that has not yet begun. At the beginning of the universe, there was such and such a being, but there was also a nothing, there was also a never-been nothing, and there was also a never-been never-been nothing.

古文：俄而有无矣，而未知有无之果孰有孰无也。
现代文：突然间生出了 有 和 无 ，却不知道 有 与 无 谁是真正的 有 、谁是真正的 无 。
English: Suddenly, there was something and nothing, but I didn't know what was something and what was nothing, who was the real something and who was the real nothing.

古文：今我则已有有谓矣，而未知吾所谓之其果有谓乎？
现代文：现在我已经说了这些言论和看法，但却不知道我听说的言论和看法是我果真说过的言论和看法呢，还是果真没有说过的言论和看法呢？
English: Now I have said these words and opinions, but I don't know whether the words and opinions I heard are the words and opinions I really said, or the words and opinions I really didn't say?

古文：其果无谓乎？夫天下莫大于秋毫之末，而太山为小；莫寿乎殇子，而彭祖为夭。天地与我并生，而万物与我为一。
现代文：天下没有什么比秋毫的末端更大，而泰山算是最小；世上没有什么人比夭折的孩子更长寿，而传说中年寿最长的彭祖却是短命的。天地与我共生，万物与我为一体。
English: There is nothing in the world bigger than the end of autumn, and Mount Tai is the smallest; there is no one in the world who lives longer than a child who died prematurely, and the legend of the longest-lived Peng Zu is short-lived. Heaven and earth coexist with me, and everything is one with me.

古文：既已为一矣，且得有言乎？
现代文：既然已经浑然为一体，还能够有什么议论和看法？
English: Now that it has become a seamless whole, what kind of discussions and opinions can there be?

古文：既已谓之一矣，且得无言乎？
现代文：既然已经称作一体，又还能够没有什么议论和看法？
English: Now that it has been called a unity, can there still be little discussion and opinion?

古文：一与言为二，二与一为三。自此以往，巧历不能得，而况其凡乎！
现代文：客观存在的一体加上我的议论和看法就成了 二 ， 二 如果再加上一个 一 就成了 三 ，以此类推，最精明的计算也不可能求得最后的数字，何况大家都是凡夫俗子！
English: The objectively existing unity, together with my arguments and opinions, becomes two, two, if one is added, one becomes three, and so on, and the most astute calculation cannot obtain the final number, not to mention that we are all ordinary people!

古文：故自无适有，以至于三，而况自有适有乎！
现代文：所以，从无到有乃至推到 三 ，又何况从 有 推演到 有 呢？
English: Therefore, from nothing to something, and even to three, and what is more, from something to something?

古文：无适焉，因是已！
现代文：没有必要这样地推演下去，还是顺应事物的本然吧。
English: There's no need to carry on like this. Let's just go with the flow.

古文：夫道未始有封，言未始有常，为是而有畛也。
现代文：所谓真理从不曾有过界线，言论也不曾有过定准，只因为各自认为只有自己的观点和看法才是正确的，这才有了这样那样的界线和区别。
English: The so-called truth has never had a boundary, and speech has never had a standard. It is only because each believes that only his own views and opinions are correct that there are such boundaries and differences.

古文：请言其畛：有左有右，有伦有义，有分有辩，有竞有争，此之谓八德。
现代文：请让我谈谈那些界线和区别：有左有右，有序列有等别，有分解有辩驳，有竞比有相争，这就是所谓八类。
English: Please let me talk about those boundaries and differences: there is left and right, there is sequence and equality, there is decomposition and refutation, there is competition and conflict, these are the so-called eight categories.

古文：六合之外，圣人存而不论；六合之内，圣人论而不议；春秋经世先王之志，圣人议而不辩。
现代文：天地四方宇宙之外的事，圣人总是存而不论；宇宙之内的事，圣人虽然细加研究，却不随意评说。至于古代历史上善于治理社会的前代君王们的记载，圣人虽然有所评说却不争辩。
English: In matters outside the four-sided universe, sages always exist and do not care; in matters within the universe, sages, although they have studied them carefully, do not comment on them at will. As for the records of the previous kings who were good at governing society in ancient history, although sages commented, they did not argue.

古文：故分也者，有不分也；辩也者，有不辩也。
现代文：可知有分别就因为存在不能分别，有争辩也就因为存在不能辩驳。
English: It can be seen that there is a difference because there is no difference, and there is an argument because there is no argument.

古文：曰： 何也？ 
现代文：有人会说，这是为什么呢？
English: Yan Wang said: Why?

古文： 圣人怀之，众人辩之以相示也。故曰：辩也者，有不见也。 
现代文：圣人把事物都囊括于胸、容藏于己，而一般人则争辩不休夸耀于外，所以说，大凡争辩，总因为有自己所看不见的一面。
English: The sages hold things close to their hearts and keep them to themselves, while ordinary people argue and boast about it. Therefore, the great ones always argue because they have a side that they cannot see.

古文：夫大道不称，大辩不言，大仁不仁，大廉不嗛，大勇不忮。
现代文：至高无尚的真理是不必称扬的，最了不起的辩说是不必言说的，最具仁爱的人是不必向人表示仁爱的，最廉洁方正的人是不必表示谦让的，最勇敢的人是从不伤害他人的。
English: The highest truth does not need to be praised, the greatest argument does not need to be said, the most benevolent person does not need to show benevolence to others, the most honest and upright person does not need to be humble, and the most courageous person never hurts others.

古文：道昭而不道，言辩而不及，仁常而不成，廉清而不信，勇忮而不成。
现代文：真理完全表露于外那就不算是真理，逞言肆辩总有表达不到的地方，仁爱之心经常流露反而成就不了仁爱，廉洁到清白的极点反而不太真实，勇敢到随处伤人也就不能成为真正勇敢的人。
English: If the truth is completely exposed to the outside world, then it is not considered to be the truth. There is always a place that cannot be expressed by boasting and arguing. The heart of benevolence is often revealed, but it cannot achieve benevolence. It is not very true to be honest to the extreme of innocence, and it cannot be a truly brave person to be brave enough to hurt people everywhere.

古文：五者圆而几向方矣！
现代文：这五种情况就好像着意求圆却几近成方一样。
English: These five cases are like trying to make a perfect circle but almost failing.

古文：故知止其所不知，至矣。
现代文：因此懂得停止于自己所不知晓的境域，那就是绝顶的明智。
English: Therefore, it is extremely wise to know how to stop in a territory that you do not know.

古文：孰知不言之辩，不道之道？
现代文：谁能真正通晓不用言语的辩驳、不用称说的道理呢？
English: Who can truly understand the non-verbal argument, the unspoken truth?

古文：若有能知，此之谓天府。
现代文：假如有谁能够知道，这就是所说的自然生成的府库。
English: If anyone can figure it out, it's what's known as a naturally occurring reservoir.

古文：注焉而不满，酌焉而不竭，而不知其所由来，此之谓葆光。
现代文：无论注入多少东西，它不会满盈，无论取出多少东西，它也不会枯竭，而且也不知这些东西出自哪里，这就叫做潜藏不露的光亮。
English: No matter how many things are injected, it will not be full, no matter how many things are taken out, it will not be exhausted, and it does not know where these things come from. This is called latent light.

古文：故昔者尧问于舜曰： 吾欲伐宗脍、胥、敖，南面而不释然。
现代文：从前尧曾向舜问道： 我想征伐宗、脍、胥敖三个小国，每当上朝理事总是心绪不宁，是什么原因呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, Zou had asked Zou: I want to conquer the three small states of Zong, Zou and Zou. Whenever I become a director of the Shang Dynasty, I always feel uneasy. What is the reason for this?

古文：其故何也？ 舜曰： 夫三子者，犹存乎蓬艾之间。
现代文：舜回答说： 那三个小国的国君，就像生存于蓬蒿艾草之中。
English: Zou replied, "The sovereigns of those three small countries are like living in a field of reeds.

古文：若不释然何哉！
现代文：你总是耿耿于怀心神不宁，为什么呢？
English: You're always complaining about being restless. Why is that?

古文：昔者十日并出，万物皆照，而况德之进乎日者乎！ 
现代文：过去十个太阳一块儿升起，万物都在阳光普照之下，何况你崇高的德行又远远超过了太阳的光亮呢！ 
English: For the past ten years, the sun has risen at the same time, everything is under the sun, and your lofty virtue has far exceeded the brightness of the sun!

古文：啮缺问乎王倪曰： 子知物之所同是乎？ 
现代文：齧缺问王倪： 你知道各种事物相互间总有共同的地方吗？ 
English: Yan Que asked Wang Ni: Do you know that there is always a common ground between all kinds of things?

古文：曰： 吾恶乎知之！ 
现代文：王倪说： 我怎么知道呢！ 
English: Wang Ni replied: How should I know?

古文： 子知子之所不知邪？ 
现代文：齧缺又问： 你知道你所不知道的东西吗？ 
English: Do you know what you don't know?

古文：曰： 吾恶乎知之！ 
现代文：王倪回答说： 我怎么知道呢！ 
English: Wang Ni replied: How should I know?

古文： 然则物无知邪？ 
现代文：齧缺接着又问： 那么各种事物便都无法知道了吗？ 
English: Gao Gao then asked: So all kinds of things can't be known?

古文：曰： 吾恶乎知之！
现代文：王倪回答： 我怎么知道呢！
English: Wang Ni replied: How should I know?

古文：虽然，尝试言之：庸讵知吾所谓知之非不知邪？
现代文：虽然这样，我还是试着来回答你的问题。你怎么知道我所说的知道不是不知道呢？
English: Still, I'll try to answer your question. How do you know if I'm saying I know or I don't know?

古文：庸讵知吾所谓不知之非知邪？
现代文：你又怎么知道我所说的不知道不是知道呢？
English: And how do you know that what I call not knowing is not knowing?

古文：且吾尝试问乎女：民湿寝则腰疾偏死，鳅然乎哉？
现代文：我还是先问一问你：人们睡在潮湿的地方就会腰部患病甚至酿成半身不遂，泥鳅也会这样吗？
English: Let me ask you first: do people who sleep in damp places suffer from lower back pain or even paralysis, and is the same true for mud?

古文：木处则惴栗恂惧，猨猴然乎哉？
现代文：人们住在高高的树木上就会心惊胆战、惶恐不安，猿猴也会这样吗？
English: People living high up in the trees get panicky, do apes do the same?

古文：三者孰知正处？
现代文：人、泥鳅、猿猴三者究竟谁最懂得居处的标准呢？
English: After all, who of the three, man, mud, and ape, knows the standard of living the best?

古文：民食刍豢，麋鹿食荐，蝍蛆甘带，鸱鸦耆鼠，四者孰知正味？
现代文：人以牲畜的肉为食物，麋鹿食草芥，蜈蚣嗜吃小蛇，猫头鹰和乌鸦则爱吃老鼠，人、麋鹿、蜈蚣、猫头鹰和乌鸦这四类动物究竟谁才懂得真正的美味？
English: People eat the meat of livestock, elk eat grass and mustard, badgers like to eat small snakes, owls and crows like to eat mice. Who really knows the true taste of these four types of animals: humans, elk, badgers, owls and crows?

古文：猨猵狙以为雌，麋与鹿交，鳅与鱼游。
现代文：猿猴把猵狙当作配偶，麋喜欢与鹿交配，泥鳅则与鱼交尾。
English: Apes mate with dragonflies, baboons like to mate with deer, and marmots mate with fish.

古文：毛嫱丽姬，人之所美也；鱼见之深入，鸟见之高飞，麋鹿见之决骤，四者孰知天下之正色哉？
现代文：毛嫱和丽姬，是人们称道的美人了，可是鱼儿见了她们深深潜入水底，鸟儿见了她们高高飞向天空，麋鹿见了她们撤开四蹄飞快地逃离。
English: Buttercup and Licky were already famous beauties, but the fish saw them dive deep into the water, the birds saw them fly high into the sky, and the elk saw them take off their hooves and flee quickly.

古文：自我观之，仁义之端，是非之涂，樊然淆乱，吾恶能知其辩！ 
现代文：人、鱼、鸟和麋鹿四者究竟谁才懂得天下真正的美色呢？以我来看，仁与义的端绪，是与非的途径，都纷杂错乱，我怎么能知晓它们之间的分别！ 
English: Who of the four - man, fish, bird, and elk - can understand the true beauty of the world? In my opinion, the beginning of benevolence and righteousness, the path of right and wrong, are all mixed up and confused. How can I know the difference between them?

古文：啮缺曰： 子不知利害，则至人固不知利害乎？ 
现代文：齧缺说： 你不了解利与害，道德修养高尚的至人难道也不知晓利与害吗？ 
English: Zou Que said, "You don't know the benefits and harms. Don't people with high moral standards also know the benefits and harms?"

古文：王倪曰： 至人神矣！
现代文：王倪说： 进入物我两忘境界的至人实在是神妙不测啊！
English: Wang Ni said, "A person who enters the realm of forgetting both things and myself is truly miraculous!

古文：大泽焚而不能热，河汉冱而不能寒，疾雷破山、飘风振海而不能惊。
现代文：林泽焚烧不能使他感到热，黄河、汉水封冻了不能使他感到冷，迅疾的雷霆劈山破岩、狂风翻江倒海不能使他感到震惊。
English: The burning of the Linze cannot make him feel hot, the freezing of the Yellow River and the Han River cannot make him feel cold, the rapid thunder can not make him feel shocked.

古文：若然者，乘云气，骑日月，而游乎四海之外，死生无变于己，而况利害之端乎！ 
现代文：假如这样，便可驾驭云气，骑乘日月，在四海之外遨游，死和生对于他自身都没有变化，何况利与害这些微不足道的端绪呢！ 
English: If so, he can ride the clouds, ride the sun and the moon, travel beyond the four seas, and death and life have no change for him, let alone these insignificant beginnings of benefit and harm!

古文：瞿鹊子问乎长梧子曰： 吾闻诸夫子：圣人不从事于务，不就利，不违害，不喜求，不缘道，无谓有谓，有谓无谓，而游乎尘垢之外。
现代文：瞿鹊子向长梧子问道： 我从孔夫子那里听到这样的谈论：圣人不从事琐细的事务，不追逐私利，不回避灾害，不喜好贪求，不因循成规；没说什么又好像说了些什么，说了些什么又好像什么也没有说，因而遨游于世俗之外。
English: I heard from Confucius that sages do not engage in trivial affairs, do not pursue self-interest, do not avoid disasters, do not like greed, do not follow the rules; they do not say anything and seem to say something, say something and do not seem to say anything, and thus wander outside the world.

古文：夫子以为孟浪之言，而我以为妙道之行也。
现代文：孔夫子认为这些都是轻率不当的言论，而我却认为是精妙之道的实践和体现。
English: Confucius thought that these were rash and improper remarks, but I thought that they were the practice and embodiment of the subtle way.

古文：吾子以为奚若？ 
现代文：先生你认为怎么样呢？ 
English: What do you think, sir?

古文：长梧子曰： 是黄帝之所听荧也，而丘也何足以知之！
现代文：长梧子说： 这些话黄帝也会疑惑不解的，而孔丘怎么能够知晓呢！
English: The eldest son said, "The Yellow Emperor would be puzzled by these words, but how could Confucius know!

古文：且女亦大早计，见卵而求时夜，见弹而求鸮炙。
现代文：而且你也谋虑得太早，就好像见到鸡蛋便想立即得到报晓的公鸡，见到弹子便想立即获取烤熟的斑鸠肉。
English: And you are thinking too early, just as if you saw an egg, you would immediately want to get a rooster to announce the dawn, and if you saw a marionette, you would immediately want to get a roasted grizzled meat.

古文：予尝为女妄言之，女以妄听之。
现代文：我姑且给你胡乱说一说，你也就胡乱听一听。
English: Let me give you a wild story, and you will listen wildly.

古文：奚旁日月，挟宇宙，为其脗合，置其滑涽，以隶相尊？
现代文：怎么不依傍日月，怀藏宇宙？跟万物吻合为一体，置各种混乱纷争于不顾，把卑贱与尊贵都等同起来。
English: Why not lean on the sun and the moon, cherish the universe? Be one with all things, disregard all kinds of chaos and strife, and equate the lowly with the noble.

古文：众人役役，圣人愚芚，参万岁而一成纯。
现代文：人们总是一心忙于去争辩是非，圣人却好像十分愚昧无所觉察，糅合古往今来多少变异、沉浮，自身却浑成一体不为纷杂错异所困扰。
English: People are always busy arguing about what is right and what is wrong, but sages seem to be very ignorant and unaware. Although there have been many changes and ups and downs from ancient times to the present, they are all one and the same and are not troubled by the chaos and confusion.

古文：万物尽然，而以是相蕴。予恶乎知说生之非惑邪！
现代文：万物全都是这样，而且因为这个缘故相互蕴积于浑朴而又精纯的状态之中。 我怎么知道贪恋活在世上不是困惑呢？
English: All things are like this, and for this reason are interwoven with each other in a state of simplicity and purity.How do I know that the craving to live in the world is not confusion?

古文：予恶乎知恶死之非弱丧而不知归者邪！
现代文：我又怎么知道厌恶死亡不是年幼流落他乡而老大还不知回归呢？
English: And how do I know that my aversion to death isn't the result of being young and living in a foreign country, while my boss still doesn't know how to return?

古文：丽之姬，艾封人之子也。晋国之始得之也，涕泣沾襟。及其至于王所，与王同匡床，食刍豢，而后悔其泣也。
现代文：丽姬是艾地封疆守土之人的女儿，晋国征伐丽戎时俘获了她，她当时哭得泪水浸透了衣襟；等她到晋国进入王宫，跟晋侯同睡一床而宠为夫人，吃上美味珍馐，也就后悔当初不该那么伤心地哭泣了。
English: Liji was the daughter of a landholder in the Aidi fiefdom. She was captured during the conquest of Jin and the siege of Lirong. At that time, she cried so much that tears soaked her clothes. When she came to Jin and entered the royal palace, slept in the same bed with the prince and became his wife, and ate delicious and rare eels, she regretted that she should not have cried so sadly.

古文：予恶乎知夫死者不悔其始之蕲生乎？
现代文：我又怎么知道那些死去的人不会后悔当初的求生呢？
English: And how do I know that those who died will not regret their initial attempt to survive?

古文：梦饮酒者，旦而哭泣；梦哭泣者，旦而田猎。
现代文：睡梦里饮酒作乐的人，天亮醒来后很可能痛哭饮泣；睡梦中痛哭饮泣的人，天亮醒来后又可能在欢快地逐围打猎。
English: People who drink alcohol in their sleep are likely to cry when they wake up in the morning; people who cry in their sleep are likely to hunt happily after waking up in the morning.

古文：方其梦也，不知其梦也。
现代文：正当他在做梦的时候，他并不知道自己是在做梦。
English: While he was dreaming, he didn't know he was dreaming.

古文：梦之中又占其梦焉，觉而后知其梦也。
现代文：睡梦中还会卜问所做之梦的吉凶，醒来以后方知是在做梦。
English: In his sleep, he would also speculate about the fate of the dream he had had. When he woke up, he knew he was dreaming.

古文：且有大觉而后知此其大梦也，而愚者自以为觉，窃窃然知之。 君乎！
现代文：人在最为清醒的时候方才知道他自身也是一场大梦，而愚昧的人则自以为清醒，好像什么都知晓什么都明了。
English: It is only when a man is most awake that he knows that he himself is also a great dream, while the stupid man thinks he is awake, as if he knows everything and understands everything.

古文：牧乎！ 固哉！
现代文：君尊牧卑，这种看法实在是浅薄鄙陋呀！
English: Monarchs are the shepherds of the poor, this view is really shallow and despicable!

古文：丘也与女皆梦也，予谓女梦亦梦也。
现代文：孔丘和你都是在做梦，我说你们在做梦，其实我也在做梦。
English: Confucius and you are both dreaming. When I say you are dreaming, I am also dreaming.

古文：是其言也，其名为吊诡。
现代文：上面讲的这番话，它的名字可以叫作奇特和怪异。
English: The name of this discourse may be called singular and strange.

古文：万世之后而一遇大圣知其解者，是旦暮遇之也。
现代文：万世之后假若一朝遇上一位大圣人，悟出上述一番话的道理，这恐怕也是偶而遇上的吧！
English: If, after all eternity, one day you meet a great sage and realize the truth of the above-mentioned words, I'm afraid it's just by chance!

古文：既使我与若辩矣，若胜我，我不若胜，若果是也？我果非也邪？
现代文： 倘使我和你展开辩论，你胜了我，我没有胜你，那么，你果真对，我果真错吗？
English: If I get into an argument with you, and you beat me and I don't beat you, are you really right and I'm really wrong?

古文：我胜若，若不吾胜，我果是也？而果非也邪？
现代文：我胜了你，你没有胜我，我果真对，你果真错吗？
English: I beat you, you didn't beat me, am I really right, are you really wrong?

古文：其或是也？其或非也邪？
现代文：难道我们两人有谁是正确的，有谁是不正确的吗？
English: Are there two of us who are right and who are wrong?

古文：其俱是也？其俱非也邪？
现代文：难道我们两人都是正确的，或都是不正确的吗？
English: Are we both right, or are we both wrong?

古文：我与若不能相知也。则人固受其黮暗，吾谁使正之？
现代文：我和你都无从知道，而世人原本也都承受着蒙昧与晦暗，我们又能让谁作出正确的裁定？
English: You and I have no way of knowing, and the world is inherently burdened with obscurities and obscurities, so who can we let make the right decisions?

古文：使同乎若者正之，既与若同矣，恶能正之？
现代文：让观点跟你相同的人来判定吗？既然看法跟你相同，怎么能作出公正的评判！
English: Let people with the same opinion as you judge? Since the opinion is the same as yours, how can you make a fair judgment!

古文：使同乎我者正之，既同乎我矣，恶能正之？
现代文：让观点跟我相同的人来判定吗？既然看法跟我相同，怎么能作出公正的评判！
English: Let someone with the same opinion as me judge? Since the opinion is the same as mine, how can a fair judgment be made!

古文：使异乎我与若者正之，既异乎我与若矣，恶能正之？
现代文：让观点不同于我和你的人来判定吗？既然看法不同于我和你，怎么能作出公正的评判！
English: To be judged by people whose views are different from mine and yours? Since the views are different from mine and yours, how can a fair judgment be made!

古文：使同乎我与若者正之，既同乎我与若矣，恶能正之？
现代文：让观点跟我和你都相同的人来判定吗？既然看法跟我和你都相同，又怎么能作出公正的评判！
English: Let people with the same views as me and you judge? Since the views are the same as me and you, how can you make a fair judgment!

古文：然则我与若与人俱不能相知也，而待彼也邪？ 
现代文：如此，那么我和你跟大家都无从知道这一点，还等待别的什么人呢？
English: So, if you and I and everyone else have no way of knowing this, who are we waiting for?

古文：化声之相待，若其不相待。和之以天倪，因之以曼衍，所以穷年也。 何谓和之以天倪？ 
现代文： 辩论中的不同言辞跟变化中的不同声音一样相互对立，就像没有相互对立一样，都不能相互作出公正的评判。用自然的分际来调和它，用无尽的变化来顺应它，还是用这样的办法来了此一生吧。什么叫调和自然的分际呢？
English: The different discourses in debate are as opposed to each other as are the different voices in change, and can no more fairly judge each other than if they were not opposed to each other. To reconcile it with the limits of nature, to accommodate it with endless changes, or to come to this life in this way. What is called reconciling the limits of nature?

古文：曰： 是不是，然不然。
现代文：对的也就像是不对的，正确的也就像是不正确的。
English: Right feels like wrong, and right feels like wrong.

古文：是若果是也，则是之异乎不是也亦无辩；然若果然也，则然之异乎不然也亦无辩。
现代文：对的假如果真是对的，那么对的不同于不对的，这就不须去争辩；正确的假如果真是正确的，那么正确的不同于不正确的，这也不须去争辩。
English: If what is true is true, then what is true is different from what is false, and there is no need to argue about it; if what is true is true, then what is true is different from what is false, and there is no need to argue about it; if what is true is true, then what is true is different from what is false, and there is no need to argue about it; if what is true is true, then what is true is different from what is false, and there is no need to argue about it.

古文：忘年忘义，振于无竟，故寓诸无竟。 
现代文：忘掉死生忘掉是非，到达无穷无尽的境界，因此圣人总把自己寄托于无穷无尽的境域之中。 
English: Forgetting life and death, forgetting right and wrong, reaching the boundless realm, thus sages always place themselves in the boundless realm.

古文：罔两问景曰： 曩子行，今子止；曩子坐，今子起。
现代文：影子之外的微阴问影子： 先前你在走，现在又停下；以往你坐着，如今又站了起来。
English: The shade outside the shadow asks the shadow: You were walking, but now you have stopped; you were sitting, but now you are standing.

古文：何其无特操与？ 
现代文：你怎么没有自己独立的操守呢？ 
English: Why don't you have your own independent ethics?

古文：景曰： 吾有待而然者邪？
现代文：影子回答说： 我是有所依凭才这样的吗？
English: The shadow replied, "Do I have a reason to be like this?

古文：吾所待又有待而然者邪？
现代文：我所依凭的东西又有所依凭才这样的吗？
English: Is it because I rely on something that something else relies on?

古文：吾待蛇蚹蜩翼邪？
现代文：我所依凭的东西难道像蛇的蚹鳞和鸣蝉的翅膀吗？
English: Is what I rely on like the scales of a snake or the wings of a cicada?

古文：恶识所以然？
现代文：我怎么知道因为什么缘故会是这样？
English: How do I know why this is happening?

古文：恶识所以不然？ 
现代文：我又怎么知道因为什么缘故而不会是这样？ 
English: How do I know that this is not the case for some reason?

古文：昔者庄周梦为胡蝶，栩栩然胡蝶也。
现代文：过去庄周梦见自己变成蝴蝶，欣然自得地飞舞着的一只蝴蝶，感到多么愉快和惬意啊！
English: In the past, Zhuang Zhou dreamed that he had turned into a butterfly, a butterfly that danced with pleasure, how happy and comfortable he felt!

古文：自喻适志与！
现代文：不知道自己原本是庄周。
English: He did not know that he was originally Zhuang Zhou.

古文：不知周也。俄然觉，则蘧蘧然周也。不知周之梦为胡蝶与？胡蝶之梦为周与？
现代文：突然间醒来，惊惶不定之间方知原来是我庄周。不知是庄周梦中变成蝴蝶呢，还是蝴蝶梦见自己变成庄周呢？
English: I suddenly woke up, and between panic and uncertainty, I knew that it was my Zhuang Zhou. I don't know if it was Zhuang Zhou who turned into a butterfly in his dream, or if the butterfly dreamed of turning into Zhuang Zhou.

古文：周与胡蝶则必有分矣。
现代文：庄周与蝴蝶那必定是有区别的。
English: There must be a difference between Zhuang Zhou and a butterfly.

古文：此之谓物化。
现代文：这就可叫做物、我的交合与变化。
English: This can be called the thing, my intercourse and change.

