古文：○牛弘牛弘，字里仁，安定鹑觚人也，本姓裛氏。祖炽，郡中正。
现代文：牛弘，字里仁，安定鹑觚人，本姓燎。祖父燎炽，郡里任中正。
English: Ushihiro, also known as RiRen, was born in Shizuoka Prefecture, and his real surname was Shizuku. His grandfather, Shizuka, was a high-ranking official in the county.

古文：父允，魏侍中、工部尚书、临泾公，赐姓为牛氏。
现代文：父亲燎允，在北魏任侍中、工部尚书、临泾公，赐姓牛。
English: His father, Zou Yun, served as a chamberlain in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Shang Shu of the Ministry of Industry, and Linyi, and was given the surname Cattle.

古文：弘初在襁褓，有相者见之，谓其父曰： 此兒当贵，善爱养之。 
现代文：牛弘尚在襁褓之中时，有相面的见了他，对他父亲说： 这个小孩日后当会富贵，好好养他。 
English: When Niu Hong was still in his infancy, he met him face to face and said to his father: This child will be rich in the future, take good care of him.

古文：及长，须貌甚伟，性宽裕，好学博闻。
现代文：他长大后，长满胡须，容貌魁伟，生性宽容，好学博闻。
English: When he grew up, he was very handsome, had a generous personality, liked to read, and was well-informed.

古文：在周，起家中外府记室、内史上士。
现代文：在北周时，开始任中外府记室、内史上士。
English: When he was in Northern Zhou, he began to serve as the central and foreign prefectural record office and the internal historian.

古文：俄转纳言上士，专掌文翰，甚有美称。
现代文：不久转任纳言上士，专管文牍，很有美名。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Nagon staff sergeant, specializing in literary criticism, and was very well known.

古文：加威烈将军、员外散骑侍郎，修起居注。
现代文：后升任威烈将军、员外散骑侍郎，修《起居注》。
English: Later, he was promoted to General Wei Rong, non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and revised the "Rong Rong Annotation."

古文：其后袭封临泾公。
现代文：后来袭封临泾公。
English: Later, he was given the title of Linyi Ceng.

古文：宣政元年，转内史下大夫，进位使持节、大将军，仪同三司。
现代文：宣政元年，转任内史下大夫，升任使持节、大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Xuan Zheng, he was transferred to the post of doctor of internal history, and was promoted to the post of envoy, general, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：开皇初，迁授散骑常侍、秘书监。
现代文：隋开皇初年，升任散骑常侍、秘书监。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of straggler, regular attendant, and secretary supervisor.

古文：伏愿天鉴，少垂照察。
现代文：牛弘因文献典籍散失，上表朝廷，请求开民间献书之路。
English: Ushihiro petitioned the Imperial Court to open a path for the donation of books by the public due to the loss of literature and classics.

古文：上纳之，于是下诏：献书一卷，赉缣一匹。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见，于是下诏，献书一卷，赏缣一匹。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion, and issued an edict, dedicating a scroll and awarding a donkey.

古文：一二年间，篇籍稍备。
现代文：一、二年间，文献稍稍齐备。
English: Within a year or two, the literature was more or less complete.

古文：进爵奇章郡公，邑千五百户。
现代文：牛弘晋爵为奇章郡公，食邑一千五百户。
English: Ushihiro Jinsaku is the lord of Qizhang County, with 1,500 households in the county.

古文：黄钟之笛，正声应黄钟，下徵应林钟，以姑洗为清角。
现代文：开皇三年，授礼部尚书，奉命修撰《五礼》，写成百卷，通行于当代。
English: In the flute of the yellow bell, the positive tone corresponds to the yellow bell, and the negative tone corresponds to the forest bell.

古文：大吕之笛，正声应大吕，下徵应夷则。
现代文：牛弘请求按古代规矩修建明堂。皇上因国家刚刚草创，无暇制作，最后没接受他的建议。开皇六年，牛弘任太常卿。
English: In the flute of the Great Lynx, the positive tone corresponds to the Great Lynx, while the lower stroke corresponds to the 夷.

古文：以外诸均，例皆如是。然今所用林钟，是勖下徵之调。
现代文：九年，皇上下诏改定雅乐，又作乐府歌词，撰定圆丘五帝凯乐，并议音乐之事。
English: All other tones are like this. However, today's forest bells are tuned in the descending mode of the gong.

古文：不取其正，先用其下，于理未通，故须改之。
现代文：牛弘提出建议，请求十一月以黄钟为宫，十三月以太簇为宫，皇上说： 不必作旋相为宫。暂且作黄钟一均。 牛弘又呈上建议，请求正定新乐。
English: Don't use it as a positive, use it as a negative first. It doesn't make sense, so it must be corrected.

古文：上甚善其义，诏弘与姚察、许善心、何妥、虞世基等正定新乐，事在《音律志》。
现代文：皇上认为他的建议很好，下诏牛弘，让他与姚察、许善心、何妥、虞世基等人一起，正定新乐，这事记载在《音律志》里头。
English: The emperor thought his suggestion was very good, and ordered Niu Hong to set the new music together with Yao Cha, Xu Zenshin, He Tuo, Yu Shiji and others, which was recorded in the "Music History."

古文：是后议置明堂，诏弘条上故事，议其得失，事在《礼志》。
现代文：这以后议论修建明堂事，皇上诏令牛弘一条一条地呈上历史故事，议论明堂兴废的得失，事情记载在《礼志》里头。
English: After this, the construction of Myeongdong was discussed, and the emperor ordered Ushihiro to present the historical story one by one, and the gains and losses of Myeongdong were discussed, and the matter was recorded in "Rishi."

古文：上甚敬重之。
现代文：皇上非常敬重他。
English: The Emperor has great respect for Ushihiro.

古文：时杨素恃才矜贵，轻侮朝臣，唯见弘未当不改容自肃。
现代文：当时杨素凭着才气和富贵看不起人，轻侮大臣，只有看见牛弘，没有哪回不肃然起敬的。
English: At that time, Yang Su, with his talent and wealth, looked down on people and belittled ministers. Only when he saw Niu Hong, there was never a time when he was not awestruck.

古文：素将击突厥，诣太常与弘言别。
现代文：杨素将要进攻突厥，到太常与牛弘话别。
English: Yang Su will go to conquer the Turks and say goodbye to Niu Hong at Tai Chang Fu.

古文：弘送素至中门而止，素谓弘曰： 大将出征，故来叙别，何相送之近也？ 
现代文：牛弘送杨素到中门，就停下了。杨素对牛弘说： 大将出征，所以来话别，为什么相送如此近呢？ 
English: Niu Hong sent Yang Su to the middle gate, and then stopped. Yang Su said to Niu Hong: The general is going to war, so don't talk to him. Why is the send-off so close?

古文：弘遂揖而退。
现代文：牛弘拱拱手，就退回去了。
English: Ushihiro bowed and retreated.

古文：素笑曰： 奇章公可谓其智可及，其愚不可及也。 
现代文：杨素笑笑说： 奇章公可说是其智可及，其愚不可及。 
English: Yang Su said with a smile: Qi Zhanggong can truly be said to be as smart as he is stupid.

古文：亦不以屑怀。
现代文：也不把这事放在心上。
English: Ushihiro doesn't care either.

古文：寻授大将军，拜吏部尚书。
现代文：不久授牛弘大将军、吏部尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of major general and appointed as the secretary of the General Staff.

古文：时高祖又令弘与杨素、苏威、薛道衡、许善心、虞世基、崔子发等并召诸儒，论新礼降杀轻重。
现代文：当时高祖又令牛弘和杨素、苏威、薛道衡、许善心、虞世基、崔子发等人一起，召集各位儒生，讨论新法中杀人刑法的轻重。
English: At that time, Gao Zu also ordered Niu Hong, together with Yang Su, Su Wei, Xue Daoheng, Xu Zenshin, Yu Shiji, Cui Zifa and others, to convene all Confucian students to discuss the importance of the homicide criminal law in the new law.

古文：弘所立议，众咸推服之。
现代文：牛弘所提出的见解，众人都很佩服。
English: The opinions proposed by Ushihiro are admired by everyone.

古文：仁寿二年，献皇后崩，三公已下不能定其仪注。
现代文：仁寿二年，献皇后去世，自三公以下的大臣都不能决定安葬皇后的仪礼。
English: Two years after her death, the Empress Dowager passed away, and the ministers from the Third Prince on down were unable to decide on the funeral rites for the Empress.

古文：杨素谓弘曰： 公旧学，时贤所仰，今日之事，决在于公。 
现代文：杨素对牛弘说： 您是老学者，时人都很仰慕，今天的事，就要请您决定了。 
English: Yang Su said to Niu Hong: You are an old scholar, and people admired you at that time. Today's matter is for you to decide.

古文：弘了不辞让，斯须之间，仪注悉备，皆有故实。
现代文：牛弘一点都不推让，一会儿，仪礼都安排好了，而且都有根有据。
English: Ushihiro didn't budge at all, and before long, the entire etiquette system was established, complete with examples from the past.

古文：素叹曰： 衣冠礼乐，尽在此矣，非吾所及也！ 
现代文：杨素感叹道： 士族的礼乐制度都在牛公这里了，这不是我们所能赶得上的呀！ 
English: Yang Su lamented: The etiquette system of the warrior class is all here in Niu Gong, this is not something we can catch up with!

古文：弘以三年之丧，祥禫具有降杀，期服十一月而练者，无所象法，以闻于高祖，高祖纳焉。
现代文：牛弘因为三年的守丧期，大祥、小祥祭礼的举行在时间和规格上都有所缩减，服丧十一个月便举行小祥之祭，无前例可循，把这告诉高祖，高祖采纳了他的意见。
English: Because of the three-year mourning period, Ushihiro reduced the time and size of the grand and small auspicious festivals, and held the small auspicious festival eleven months after the funeral. There was no precedent to follow. He told this to Gaozu, and Gaozu adopted his opinion.

古文：下诏除期练之礼，自弘始也。
现代文：下诏确定服丧之礼，是从牛弘开始的。
English: The eulogy to confirm the funeral rites began with Ushihiro.

古文：弘在吏部，其选举先德行而后文才，务在审慎。
现代文：牛弘在吏部，选举人才时，先看德行，后看文才，务在审慎。
English: Ushihiro in the cadre department, when electing talents, first look at virtue, then look at literary talent, and be prudent.

古文：虽致停缓，所有进用，并多称职。
现代文：虽然选人稍缓，但他所进用的人，大多称职。
English: Although he was a bit slow in selecting people, most of the people he used were competent.

古文：吏部侍郎高孝基，鉴赏机晤，清慎绝伦，然爽俊有余，迹似轻薄，时宰多以此疑之。
现代文：吏部侍郎高孝基，善鉴赏，很机敏，清廉、谨慎无与伦比，但他爽俊有余，形迹似嫌轻薄，当时执政多因此而怀疑他。
English: Gao Xiaoji, the head of the Ministry of Personnel, was quick and astute in discernment, upright and prudent, incomparable to anyone else, yet he was more than generous, and appeared to be a bit frivolous. Therefore, many of the prime ministers at the time doubted whether he was competent.

古文：唯弘深识其真，推心委任。
现代文：只有牛弘深知其真才，推心委任。
English: Only Ushihiro knew his true talent and appointed him.

古文：隋之选举，于斯为最。
现代文：隋代的选举到这时才最公允。
English: The elections of the Sui Dynasty were fairest at this time.

古文：时论弥服弘识度之远。
现代文：当时人们更加佩服牛弘见识的远大。
English: At that time, people admired Ushihiro's far-sightedness even more.

古文：炀帝之在东宫也，数有诗书遗弘，弘亦有答。
现代文：隋炀帝为东宫太子时，几次给牛弘赠送诗书，牛弘也有诗书回答。
English: When Emperor Sui Xuan was the crown prince of the Eastern Court, he presented Ushihiro with poetry books several times, and Ushihiro also replied with poetry books.

古文：及嗣位之后，尝赐弘诗曰： 晋家山吏部，魏世卢尚书，莫言先哲异，奇才并佐余。
现代文：到炀帝继位后，曾赐牛弘诗道： 晋家山吏部，魏世卢尚书。莫言先哲异，奇才并佐余。
English: After succeeding to the throne of Emperor Xuan, he gave Niu Hong the following poems: Jin Jia Shan Li Bu, Wei Shi Lu Shang Shu. Don't say you're a philosopher, you're not a genius.

古文：学行敦时俗，道素乃冲虚，纳言云阁上，礼仪皇运初。
现代文：学行敦时俗，道素乃冲虚。纳言云阁上，礼仪皇运初。
English: When one learns to behave in a dignified manner, one's moral standards are higher. When one's words are higher, one's etiquette is higher.

古文：彝伦欣有叙，垂拱事端居。 
现代文：彝伦欣有叙，垂拱事端居。 
English: Yulunxin has a story, and the hanging arch has a story.

古文：其同被赐诗者，至于文词赞扬，无如弘美。
现代文：一起被赐诗的，至于文词的赞扬，没有赐牛弘的诗这么美的。
English: Together with the person who gave the poem, the words of praise, no one can receive such praise as Ushihiro.

古文：大业二年，进位上大将军。
现代文：大业二年，升任上大将军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：三年，改为右光禄大夫。
现代文：三年，改任右光禄大夫。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to Uko Roku no daibu.

古文：从拜恆岳，坛场珪币，墠畤牲牢，并弘所定。
现代文：随同隋炀帝拜谒恒岳，坛场王圭币、土单牲牢，都由牛弘决定。
English: Accompanying the Sui and Qian Dynasties to pay homage to the Qian Heng Yue, the altar Wang Gui coin, and the soil single animal prison were all decided by Niu Hong.

古文：还下太行，炀帝尝引入内帐，对皇后赐以同席饮食。
现代文：后下太行山，炀帝曾把牛弘引到内帐里，赐他与皇后一起同桌饮食。
English: After descending Taihang Mountain, Emperor Zeng once brought Niu Hong to the inner tent and gave him a meal at the same table with the empress.

古文：其礼遇亲重如此。
现代文：他所受到的礼遇亲重就到了如此地步。
English: That was the extent of the courtesy he received.

古文：弘谓其诸子曰： 吾受非常之遇，荷恩深重。
现代文：牛弘对他的儿子们说： 我受到了非常的待遇，承受大恩。
English: Ushihiro told his sons, "I have been treated very well, and I am very grateful.

古文：汝等子孙，宜以诚敬自立，以答恩遇之隆也。 
现代文：你们这些子孙，应以诚实、敬职自立，以报答朝廷的大恩。 
English: Your children and grandchildren should repay the great favor of the Imperial Court with honesty, devotion to duty, and self-reliance.

古文：六年，从幸江都。其年十一月，卒于江都郡，时年六十六。
现代文：大业六年，随同隋炀帝巡幸江都，这年十一月，在江都郡去世，时年六十六岁。
English: In November of that year, after six years of service, he died in Jiangdu County at the age of sixty-six, having accompanied the Sui and Qian emperors on a tour of the Yangtze River.

古文：帝伤惜之，赠甚厚。
现代文：炀帝伤悼痛惜不已，赠予甚多。
English: Emperor Xuan mourned his death with great regret and made many gifts.

古文：归葬安定，赠开府仪同三司、光禄大夫、文安侯，谥曰宪。
现代文：归葬安定，追赠他为开府仪同三司、光禄大夫、文安侯，谥号叫 宪 。
English: He was buried in a stable condition, and was posthumously awarded the Kaifu Rite, along with the titles of Sanji, Guanglu Daifu, and Wenan Hou. His posthumous name was Ken.

古文：弘荣宠当世，而车服卑俭，事上尽礼，待下以仁，讷于言而敏于行。
现代文：牛弘荣宠当世，但车子、服饰都很一般，对上尽礼，对下尽仁，讷于言而敏于行。
English: Ushihiro I was a favorite of the emperor, but he was modest and frugal in his horse and carriage attire, courteous in his dealings, generous in his hospitality, said little, and did much.

古文：上尝令其宣敕，弘至阶下，不能言，退还拜谢，云： 并忘之。 
现代文：皇上曾让他宣布圣旨，牛弘到阶下，不能说话，退回拜见皇上，道歉说： 我都忘了。 
English: The emperor had asked him to announce his sacred will. When Ushihiro reached the foot of the stairs, he couldn't speak. He returned to see the emperor and apologized, saying, "I forgot everything."

古文：上曰： 传语小辩，故非宰臣任也。 
现代文：皇上说： 传几句话，这只是点小才，你都不行，看来你不是当宰相的料子。 
English: The emperor said, "Minor matters such as the promulgation of edicts are not the business of prime ministers.

古文：愈称其质直。
现代文：更加称赞他的质朴正直。
English: More praise for his down-to-earth honesty.

古文：大业之世，委遇弥隆。
现代文：大业年间，对他更加亲重。
English: During the years of his career, he became more and more attached to him.

古文：性宽厚，笃志于学，虽职务繁杂，书不释手。
现代文：牛弘生性宽厚，笃志于学，虽然公务繁杂，但是手不释卷。
English: Niu Hongsheng is generous and eager to learn. Although he has a lot of official duties, his hands are tied.

古文：隋室旧臣，始终信任，悔吝不及，唯弘一人而已。
现代文：隋代旧臣，能始终得到信任的，只有牛弘一人而已。
English: Niu Hong is the only one of the former ministers of the Sui Dynasty who has always been trusted and has no regrets.

古文：有弟曰弼，好酒而酗，尝因醉，射杀弘驾车牛。
现代文：牛弘有个弟弟叫牛弼，好喝酒，一喝就醉，曾因醉酒，射死了牛弘牛车上的牛。
English: Niu Hong has a younger brother named Niu Yao, who likes to drink and gets drunk as soon as he drinks. He once shot a cow on Niu Hong's ox cart because he was drunk.

古文：弘来还宅，其妻迎谓之曰： 叔射杀牛矣。 
现代文：牛弘回家，他妻子对他说： 小叔射死了牛。 
English: When Niu Hong got home, his wife said to him, "Uncle shot the cow."

古文：弘闻之，无所怪问，直答云： 作脯。 
现代文：牛弘听了，无所怪闻，只说： 作菜吃。 
English: Ushihiro listened, heard nothing strange, and only said, "Let's cook and eat."

古文：坐定，其妻又曰： 叔忽射杀牛，大是异事！ 
现代文：牛弘坐定后，他妻子又说： 小叔忽然射死了牛，真是怪事！ 
English: After he sat down, his wife added: "It's very strange that my uncle suddenly shot dead a cow.

古文：弘曰： 已知之矣。 
现代文：牛弘说： 我已知道了。 
English: Ushihiro said, "I already know.

古文：颜色自若，读书不辍。
现代文：他脸色不变，仍旧读书。
English: She looks at ease, reading more and more.

古文：其宽和如此。有文集十三卷行于世。
现代文：他就是这样待人宽和。牛弘有文集十三卷行于世。
English: This is how he treated people. Ushihiro has published thirteen volumes of literary works.

古文：长子方大，亦有学业，官至内史舍人。
现代文：他的长子牛方大，也有学问，官至内史舍人。
English: His eldest son, Fangda, is also a scholar, and he is not interested in politics or history.

古文：次子方裕，性凶险无人心，从幸江都，与裴虔通等同谋弑逆，事见《司马德勘传》。
现代文：次子牛方裕，生性凶险，没人性，隋炀帝巡幸江都，他与裴虔通等人谋杀炀帝，其事见《司马德戡传》。
English: The second son, Niu Fangyu, was born with a dangerous nature and lacked humanity. The Sui and Qian Emperors toured the Yangtze River. He and Pei Qiantong and others murdered the Qian Emperors, as described in the "Biography of Sima De."

