古文：刘景，字可大，河间人。
现代文：刘景，字可大，河间人。
English: Liu Jing, the characters can be large, the river people.

古文：四世祖怦，即朱滔之甥，唐右仆射、卢龙军节度使。
现代文：四世祖刘怦，也就是朱滔的外甥，唐右仆射、卢龙军节度使。
English: The fourth-generation ancestor Liu Ye, also known as Zhu Tao's nephew, was a right-hand man of the Tang Dynasty and an envoy of the Lulong Army.

古文：父守敬，南京副留守。
现代文：父刘守敬，南京副留守。
English: His father, Liu Shoujing, was a deputy magistrate in Nanjing.

古文：景资端厚，好学能文。
现代文：刘景生来正直朴实、好学，善做文。
English: Liu Jing was born honest and simple, eager to learn, and good at writing.

古文：燕王赵延寿辟为幽都府文学。
现代文：燕王赵延寿征辟为幽都府文学。
English: Yan Wang Zhao Yan Shou's Conquest is considered to be Yu Prefecture literature.

古文：应历初，迁右拾遗、知制诰，为翰林学士。
现代文：应历初，迁右拾遗、知制诰，为翰林学士。
English: At the beginning of the calendar, he moved to the right to collect relics and knowledge, and became a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：九年，周人侵燕，留守萧思温上急变，帝欲俟秋出师，景谏曰： 河北三关已陷于敌，今复侵燕，安可坐视！ 
现代文：九年，周人侵犯燕地，留守萧思温紧急上表告变，穆宗皇上想要等到秋天再出兵。刘景劝谏说 ：河北三关已经沦陷入敌人手中，现在他们又侵犯燕地，怎么能坐视不理？ 
English: In the ninth year, Zhou invaded Yan's territory, and Xiao Siwen, who was left behind, made an emergency appeal for change, and Emperor Mu Zong wanted to wait until the autumn to send troops. Liu Jing advised him: Hebei Sankuan has fallen into the hands of the enemy, and now they are invading Yan's territory, how can you sit idly by?

古文：上不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：会父忧去。
现代文：适逢刘景因父丧去职。
English: This coincided with Liu Jing's retirement due to his father's death.

古文：未几，起复旧职。
现代文：不久，起复任原职。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：一日，召草赦，既成，留数月不出。
现代文：一天，皇上召他草拟赦书，写成之后，留宫数月不下达。
English: One day, the emperor called him to draft a letter of pardon. After it was written, he stayed in the palace for several months and did not issue it.

古文：景奏曰： 唐制，赦书日行五百里，今稽期弗发，非也。 
现代文：刘景上奏说： 按唐制，赦书每天要走五百里，现在延期不发诏，是不对的。 
English: Liu Jing said: According to the Tang system, the pardon letter has to travel five hundred miles every day. It is not right to postpone it without issuing an edict.

古文：上亦不报。
现代文：皇上也不予答复。
English: The Emperor did not reply either.

古文：景宗即位，以景忠实，擢礼部侍郎，迁尚书、宣政殿学士。
现代文：景宗即位，认为刘景忠实，提升为礼部侍郎，迁任尚书、宣政殿学士。
English: After the enthronement of King Gyeongjong, he believed that Liu Jing was faithful, and was promoted to attendant of the etiquette department, transferred to the post of secretary, and became a scholar of the Palace of the Grand Council of State.

古文：上方欲倚用，乃书其笏曰： 刘景可为宰相。 
现代文：皇上想倚重和任用他，于是在他的笏上写道： 刘景可为宰相。 
English: The emperor wanted to rely on and appoint him, so he wrote on his letterhead: Liu Jing can be the prime minister.

古文：顷之，为南京副留守。
现代文：不久，任南京副留守。
English: Soon, he left for Nanjing as vice-governor.

古文：时留守韩匡嗣因扈从北上，景与其子德让共理京事。
现代文：当时留守韩匡嗣因为跟从皇上北上，刘景与他的儿子韩德让共同处理京中事务。
English: At that time, Han Kuanzhi stayed behind because he followed the emperor to the north, and Liu Jing and his son Han Dejan jointly handled the affairs of Beijing.

古文：俄召为户部使，历武定、开远二军节度使。
现代文：不久召为户部使，历任武定、开远二军节度使。
English: He was soon called to be the envoy to the Household Department, and successively served as the envoy to the military festivals of Wuding and Kaiyuan.

古文：统和六年致仕，加兼侍中。
现代文：统和六年，辞官返乡，加兼侍中。
English: After six years of unification, he returned to his hometown as a retired official, and became an additional attendant.

古文：卒，年六十七。
现代文：不久去世，时年六十七岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 67.

古文：赠太子太师。
现代文：赠太子太师。
English: He died of illness at the age of 88, and was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：子慎行，孙一德、二玄、三嘏、四端、五常、六符，皆具六符传。
现代文：子刘慎行，孙刘一德、刘二玄、刘三嘏、刘四端、刘五常、刘六符，事迹均详于《六符传》。
English: His son Liu Sheng Xing, Sun Liu Yide, Liu Er Xuan, Liu Sanzhong, Liu Siduan, Liu Wuchang, Liu Liufu, and their deeds are all detailed in the "Legend of Liufu."

古文：刘六符，父慎行，由膳部员外郎累迁至北府宰相、监修国史。
现代文：刘六符，父亲刘慎行，由膳部员外郎累迁至北府宰相、监修国史。
English: Liu Liufu, the father of Liu Shengying, was successively moved from the catering department to the north prefectural prime minister and the supervisor of national history.

古文：时上多即宴饮行诛赏，慎行谏曰： 以喜怒加威福，恐未当。 
现代文：当时皇上经常在宴饮时行诛杀和赏赐，慎行劝谏说 ：在大喜大怒时行赏罚，恐怕不合适。 
English: At that time, the emperor often gave rewards and punishments during banquets. He advised the empress to be cautious and said, "I am afraid it is not appropriate to give rewards and punishments during times of great joy and anger."

古文：帝悟，谕政府 自今宴饮有刑赏事，翌日禀行 。
现代文：皇上醒悟，晓谕宰相府政事堂 从今以后宴饮之时有刑赏之举，次日执行 。
English: The emperor came to his senses and told the Prime Minister's Office that from now on, when there was a banquet, there would be a punishment, which would be carried out the next day.

古文：为都统，伐高丽，以失军期下吏，议贵乃免，出为彰武军节度使。
现代文：为都统，讨伐高丽，因误了军期交法官审讯，据议贵法，得以免予刑罚，出为彰武军节度使。
English: For the sake of unification of Korea, he fought against Korea, and because he failed to submit his military enlistment to a judge for trial, he was able to be exempted from punishment according to the Gui Law, and he was appointed as an envoy to celebrate the military festival.

古文：赐保节功臣。
现代文：赐为保节功臣。
English: Awarded to a meritorious retainer for ensuring the festival.

古文：子六人：一德、二玄、三嘏、四端、五常、六符。
现代文：子六人：一德、二玄、三嘏、四端、五常、六符。
English: There were six children: I, De, II, Xuan, III, IV, V, and VI.

古文：德早世。
现代文：一德早死。
English: An early death.

古文：玄终上京留守。
现代文：二玄终官于上京留守。
English: The last two emperors stayed in Kamigyo.

古文：常历三司使、武定军节度使。
现代文：五常历任三司使、武定军节度使。
English: The five constables successively held the positions of three divisional envoys and the military commander of the Wuding Army.

古文：嘏、端、符皆第进士。
现代文：三嘏、四端、六符均为进士及第。
English: The three strokes, four ends, and six marks are all shinshi and the first.

古文：嘏、端俱尚王，为驸马都尉。
现代文：三嘏、四端均娶公主，为驸马都尉。
English: The third, fourth and fifth sons all married princesses and became lieutenant of horses.

古文：三嘏献圣宗《一矢毙双鹿赋》，上嘉其赡丽。
现代文：三嘏进献给圣宗《一矢毙双鹿赋》，皇上盛赞其文富丽。
English: The three gongs were presented to Seongjong for "One Arrow, Two Deer," which the emperor praised for its literary richness.

古文：与公主不谐，奔宋；归，杀之。
现代文：与公主不和，逃奔宋；回国，被杀。
English: Had a falling out with the princess and fled to Song; returned to China and was killed.

古文：四端以卫尉少卿使宋贺生辰，方宴，大张女乐，竟席不顾，人惮其严。
现代文：四端以卫尉少卿出使宋庆贺生辰，宴席中间，对方大肆陈设女乐，四端自始至终看都不看一眼，众人均畏惧其威严。
English: In the middle of the banquet, the other party lavishly displayed female music, and the four ends did not look at it from beginning to end, and everyone was afraid of its majesty.

古文：还，拜枢密直学士。
现代文：回国，拜为枢密直学士。
English: After returning to China, he became a Privy Direct Scholar.

古文：六符有志操，能文。
现代文：六符富有志向和操守，善做文章。
English: Six characters are full of ambition and integrity, and are good at writing articles.

古文：重熙初，迁政事舍人，擢翰林学士。
现代文：重熙初年，迁政事舍人，提升为翰林学士。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, he was promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：十一年，与宣徽使萧特末使宋索十县地；还，为汉人行宫副部署。
现代文：十一年，与宣徽使萧特末出使宋索要十县地；回国，为汉人行宫副部署。
English: In the eleventh year, Xiao Te sent an envoy to Song to ask for ten counties at the end of the Xuan Hui era; he returned to China and was seconded to the Han People's Palace.

古文：会宋遣使增岁币以易十县，复与耶律仁先使宋，定 进贡 名，宋难之。
现代文：适逢宋派遣使者增加岁币以代替十县，再次与耶律仁先出使宋，确定以 进贡 为名，宋不肯。
English: At the same time, Song dispatched an envoy to increase the annual tribute to replace the ten counties, and once again sent an envoy to Song with Ye Luren to determine the tribute, but Song refused.

古文：六符曰： 本朝兵强将勇，海内共知，人人愿从事于宋。
现代文：六符说： 本朝兵强将勇，天下所共知，人人都想对宋用兵。
English: Liufu said: This dynasty's soldiers are strong and brave. It is well known that everyone wants to use soldiers against the Song Dynasty.

古文：若恣其俘获以饱所欲，与 进贡 字孰多？
现代文：如果任他们俘虏缴获以满足求财之心，比起 进贡 二字来，哪一种更划得来呢？
English: If their captives are taken to satisfy their desire for money, which is better than tribute?

古文：况大兵驻燕，万一南进，何以御之！
现代文：况且大军驻扎于燕地，万一向南挺进，你们用什么办法抵御呢？
English: What's more, a large army is stationed in Yan Di, and if it were to advance south, how would you defend against it?

古文：顾小节，忘大患，悔将何及！ 
现代文：顾念小的节操，不顾大患将临，后悔何及！ 
English: Regard the small frugality, regardless of the big trouble coming, what a regret!

古文：宋乃从之，岁币称 贡 。
现代文：宋于是答应了，岁币称 贡 。
English: So Song agreed, and the money was called "tribute."

古文：六符还，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六符回，加同中书门下平章事。
English: Six times, plus the same thing in the middle of the book.

古文：及宋币至，命六符为三司使以受之。
现代文：待到宋之岁币到，命六符为三司使接受之。
English: When the money arrived in the Song Dynasty, it was accepted by the Three Departments.

古文：六符与参知政事杜防有隙，防以六符尝受宋赂，白其事，出为长宁军节度使，俄召为三司使。
现代文：六符与参知政事杜防有摩擦，杜防因六符曾接受宋之赠物，上告其事，便出六符为长宁军节度使，不久召为三司使。
English: There was friction between Liufu and Du Fang, the political advisor to the prefectural governor. Du Fang complained about Liufu because Liufu had accepted a gift from Song, and Liufu was appointed as the envoy of the Changning Army Festival, and was soon appointed as the envoy of the three departments.

古文：道宗即位，将行大册礼，北院枢密使萧革曰： 行大礼备仪物，必择广地，莫若黄川。 
现代文：道宗即位，将要举行大册礼，北院枢密使萧革说： 行大礼准备礼仪物品，必须选择一广阔地面，不如选黄川。 
English: The enthronement of the Taoist sect will be held in a grand ceremony. Xiao Ge, the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, said: To prepare the ceremonial items for the grand ceremony, it is necessary to choose a broad ground, and it is better to choose Huangchuan.

古文：六符曰： 不然。
现代文：六符说 ：这样不好。
English: Liufu said, "This is not good."

古文：礼仪国之大体，帝王之乐不奏于野。
现代文：依礼仪，行国之大礼，帝王之乐不得奏于荒郊野外。
English: According to the etiquette, the Emperor's music may not be played outside the wilderness.

古文：今中京四方之极，朝觐各得其所，宜中京行之。 
现代文：现有中京，位于四方之正中，前来朝觐的人各得其所，应该在中京举行。 
English: At present, Chukyo is located in the middle of the four directions. People who come to the pilgrimage have their own place, and it should be held in Chukyo.

古文：上从其议。
现代文：皇上听从了他的建议。
English: The Emperor followed his advice.

古文：寻以疾卒。
现代文：不久因病去世。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：耶律褭履，字海邻，六院夷离堇蒲古只之后。
现代文：耶律褭履，字海邻，六院夷离堇蒲古只的后代。
English: Yeludonglu, Zhaohai, and Liuhuan are descendants of the ancient Shobu.

古文：风神爽秀，工于画。
现代文：丰采俊秀，擅长做画。
English: Fengcai Junxiu, good at painting.

古文：重熙间，累迁同知点检司事。
现代文：重熙年间，累迁同知点检司事。
English: During the reign of Chongxi, he was successively promoted to the position of Tongzhi-tang procurator.

古文：驸马都尉萧胡睹为夏人所执，奉诏索之，三返以归，转永兴宫使、右祗候郎君班详稳。
现代文：驸马都尉萧胡睹为夏人所拘执，褭履奉诏索要，三度往返终于要回，转任永兴宫使、右祗候郎君班详稳。
English: Captain Xiao Hujian of the Horse Guards was a man of the summer, he followed the requirements of the imperial edict, he went back and forth three times and finally wanted to return, he was transferred to the Yongxing Palace Envoy, the right-hand attendant of the Emperor, and his class was stable.

古文：褭履将娶秦晋长公主孙，其母与公主婢有隙，谓褭履曰： 能去婢，乃许尔婚。 
现代文：褭履将要娶秦晋长公主的孙女，而母亲与公主的婢女有嫌隙，对褭履说： 你若能把婢女赶走，就准许你结婚！ 
English: Zou Lu was going to marry the granddaughter of the princess of Qin Jinchang, but his mother had a grudge against the princess's maid, and said to Zou Lu: "If you can get rid of the maid, you are allowed to marry!"

古文：褭履以计杀之，婚成。
现代文：褭履用计杀死婢女，婚事成。
English: He planned to kill his maid, and the marriage took place.

古文：事觉，有司以大辟论。
现代文：事情泄露，有司以大辟刑论处。
English: If the matter is leaked, the magistrate will impose a large fine.

古文：褭履善画，写圣宗真以献，得减坐，长流边戍。
现代文：褭履善于做画，绘成圣宗画像进献，得以减刑，判处长期流放边戍。
English: Zou Lu was good at painting, and he painted a picture of the Holy Sect for donation. He was able to reduce his sentence, and was sentenced to long-term exile.

古文：复以写真，召拜同知南院宣徽事。
现代文：又因为绘制画像，召拜同知南院宣徽事。
English: Also, for drawing a picture, he was summoned to proclaim the emblem of Tongzhi South Hospital.

古文：使宋贺正，写宋主容以归。
现代文：出使宋庆贺正旦，绘成宋主画像带回。
English: Song Qing He Zhengtan was sent out to bring back the main portrait of Song.

古文：清宁间，复使宋。
现代文：清宁年间，又出使宋。
English: During the Qing and Ning Dynasties, he was also sent to the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋主赐宴，瓶花隔面，未得其真。
现代文：宋主赐宴，瓶花隔断面容，无法看得真切。
English: Lord Song is giving a banquet, and a vase of flowers separates the faces, making it impossible to see them clearly.

古文：陛辞，仅一视，及境，以像示饯者，骇其神妙。
现代文：于陛下辞行时，也只看了一眼，到边境，将宋主画像拿出来给饯行者看，都惊叹其神妙。
English: At the time of His Majesty's departure, he only glanced at it. When he reached the border, he took out the portrait of Emperor Song to show it to passers-by, and they were all amazed at how wonderful it was.

古文：闻重元乱，不即勤王。
现代文：后来他得知重元叛乱发生，没有立即起兵勤王。
English: Later, when he learned of the Chongyuan Rebellion, he did not immediately raise an army to serve the king.

古文：贼平入贺，帝责让之。
现代文：待到贼乱平定进宫祝贺，道宗责备了他。
English: After waiting until the Thieves' Revolt was over to congratulate him on entering the palace, Emperor Daozong rebuked him.

古文：宴酣，顾褭履曰： 重元事成，卿必得为上客！ 
现代文：宴饮半醉之时，回头对褭履说 ：假如重元成了大事，你肯定能做个上客！ 
English: When he was half-drunk at the banquet, he turned back to Zou Lu and said, "If the reunion becomes a big event, you can certainly be a guest!"

古文：褭履大惭。
现代文：褭履羞愧无比。
English: I felt so ashamed.

古文：咸雍中，加太子太师，卒。
现代文：咸雍年间，加太子太师，不久去世。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, but died soon after.

古文：牛温舒，范阳人。
现代文：牛温舒，范阳人。
English: The beef is warm and tender, and the fans are happy.

古文：刚正尚节义，有远器。
现代文：刚正不阿，崇尚节义，有远大的器度。
English: He is upright, advocates righteousness, and has a great capacity.

古文：咸雍中，擢进士第，滞小官。
现代文：咸雍年间，提升为进士第，长期担任小官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianlong, he was promoted to the position of junior officer, and served as a junior officer for a long time.

古文：大安初，累迁户部使，转给事中、知三司使事。
现代文：大安初，累迁户部使，转给事中，知三司使事。
English: At the beginning of the Taian era, the resettlement household envoy was transferred to Zhizhong, and the Zhisanzhi envoy was transferred to Zhengzhou.

古文：国民兼足，上以为能，加户部侍郎，改三司使。
现代文：因国家与百姓都变得富足，皇上觉得他贤能，升为户部侍郎，改任三司使。
English: As both the country and the people became rich, the emperor thought him capable and promoted him to the position of household attendant, and he was reappointed as the third secretary.

古文：寿隆中，拜参知政事，兼同知枢密院事，摄中京留守。
现代文：寿隆年间，拜参知政事，兼同知枢密院事，摄中京留守。
English: During the Shulong era, he was in charge of political affairs as well as the Privy Council, and was often seen in Beijing.

古文：部民诣阙请真拜，从之。
现代文：属下百姓赴京请求拜为正式留守，从之。
English: The subordinate people went to Beijing to request that the worship be officially left behind, and they complied.

古文：召为三司使。
现代文：召为三司使。
English: He was appointed as the Third Divisional Envoy.

古文：乾统初，复参知政事，知南院枢密使事。
现代文：乾统初，再任参知政事，知南院枢密院使事。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qian, he was reappointed as a member of the Council of State and the Privy Council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：五年，夏为宋所攻，来请和解。
现代文：五年，夏为宋所攻击，来使请求出面和解。
English: In the fifth year, Xia was attacked by Song, and made a request to come forward for reconciliation.

古文：温舒与萧得里底使宋。
现代文：牛温舒与萧得里底出使宋。
English: Niu Wenshu and Xiao Deri at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：方大燕，优人为道士装，索土泥药炉。
现代文：正当大宴之时，优人身着道士衣装，索要土泥药炉。
English: Just at the time of the grand banquet, the superior man dressed in a Taoist costume and asked for a clay medicine stove.

古文：优曰： 土少不能和。 
现代文：优人说： 土少不能和药。 
English: The superior man said, "A small amount of soil cannot be mixed with medicine."

古文：温舒遽起，以手藉土怀之。
现代文：温舒赶紧站起，用手挖土揣入怀中。
English: Wenshu quickly stood up and scooped up the dirt into his arms.

古文：宋主问其故，温舒对曰： 臣奉天子威命来和，若不从，则当卷土收去。 
现代文：宋主问其缘故，温舒回答说： 我奉天子之威命前来讲和，如果不从，便当卷土而去。 
English: When Lord Song asked the reason for this, Wenshu replied, "I have been commanded by the Son of Heaven to speak the truth, and if I do not obey, I should be rolled up in the dirt and taken away."

古文：宋人大惊，遂许夏和。
现代文：宋人大惊，便准予夏人讲和。
English: Song Ren was shocked and allowed Xia Ren to make peace.

古文：还，加中书令，卒。
现代文：回国后，加中书令，不久去世。
English: After returning to China, he joined the Communist Party of China (CPC) and died soon after.

古文：杜防，涿州归义县人。
现代文：杜防，涿州归义县人。
English: Du Fang, a native of Guiyi County, Zhangzhou.

古文：开泰五年，擢进士甲科，累迁起居郎、知制诰，人以为有宰相器。
现代文：开泰五年，提升为进士甲科，累迁起居郎、知制诰，人们都认为他有宰相之器局。
English: After five years in Keitai, he was promoted to Jin Shi Jia Ke, and was successively transferred to Kijiro and Chisaku, and people all thought that he had the makings of a prime minister.

古文：太平中，迁政事舍人，拜枢密副使。
现代文：太平年间，迁政事舍人，拜枢密副使。
English: During the Taiping era, he was reluctant to relocate the seat of government, preferring to be a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：重熙九年，夏人侵宋。
现代文：重熙九年，夏人侵犯宋。
English: In the ninth year of Chongxi, Xia invaded Song.

古文：宋遣郭稹来告，请与夏和，上命防使夏解之。如约罢兵，各归侵地，拜参知政事。
现代文：宋派郭稹前来告知，请求出面与夏讲和，皇上命杜防出使夏国调解两国关系，使之如约消弭了用兵，各自归还侵占之地，因功被拜为参知政事。
English: Song sent Guo Wei to come and tell him that he was requested to come forward to talk peace with Xia, and the emperor ordered Du Fang to send an envoy to Xia to mediate the relations between the two countries, so that they would cancel the use of troops as agreed, return the occupied land to each other, and be worshiped as a governor for his service.

古文：韩绍芳、刘六符忌之，防待以诚。
现代文：韩绍芳、刘六符嫉妒他，杜防却待之以诚心。
English: Han Shaofang and Liu Liufu were jealous of him, but Du Bao remained sincere.

古文：十二年，绍芳等罢，愈见信任。
现代文：十二年，绍芳等人罢职，杜防更加受到信任。
English: Twelve years later, Shaofang and others resigned, and Du Fang was more trusted.

古文：十三年，拜南府宰相。
现代文：十三年，拜南府宰相。
English: Thirteen years later, he became the Prime Minister of Beinan Prefecture.

古文：十五年，防生子，帝幸其第，赐名王门奴。
现代文：十五年，杜防生子，兴宗皇上亲临其家，赐名为王门奴。
English: Fifteen years later, Du Fang's son, Emperor Xingzong, visited his home and gave him the name Wangmenu.

古文：以进奏有误，出为武定军节度使。
现代文：因为上奏折有误，出贬为武定军节度使。
English: Because there was a mistake in the report, he was demoted to the military commander of the Wuding Army.

古文：十七年，复召为南府宰相。
现代文：十七年，又召为南府宰相。
English: Seventeen years later, he was called to be the Prime Minister of Nanfu.

古文：二十一年秋，祭仁德皇后，诏儒臣赋诗，防为冠，赐金带。
现代文：二十一年秋，皇上祭祀仁德皇后，诏令儒臣赋诗，杜防为第一名，被赐给金带。
English: In the autumn of the twenty-first year, the emperor made a sacrifice to the Empress Rinde, and ordered the Confucian scholars to compose poems. Du Bao was the first, and was given a gold belt.

古文：道宗谅阴，为大行皇帝山陵使。
现代文：道宗居丧，杜防任大行皇帝山陵使。
English: At the time of Emperor Daizong's death, Du Fang served as the imperial mausoleum envoy of Emperor Daizong.

古文：明年，与刘六符使宋，索十县故地，宋请增银、绢十万两、匹以易之。归，称旨，加同政事门下平章事。
现代文：清宁二年，道宗晓谕杜防说： 朕因为你年老了还嗜爱喝酒，不想烦你再处理繁剧的事务。朝廷之事，不过要你总揽一下大纲而已。 不久，拜为右丞相，加尚父，去世。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, the Daoist Daozong Xiaozhu said to Du Fang: "I, because you are old and still like to drink, do not want to bother you with complicated affairs. The matter of the imperial court, but I want you to always grasp the outline.

古文：诏城西南浑底甸。
现代文：皇上叹息哀悼不已。
English: The Emperor sighed and mourned.

古文：还，复为北院宣徽使，卒。
现代文：加倍赠送助丧钱物，由官府拨给葬具，赠中书令，谥为元肃。子杜公谓，终官南府宰相。
English: Doubling the amount of money given to help with funerals, with the government allocating the most to funeral equipment, and the gift of a middle-ranking official's letter, which is called the "gensu." Zidukong is said to have been the last minister of the southern prefecture.

古文：耶律合里只，字特满，六院夷离堇蒲古只之后。
现代文：耶律合里只，字特满，六院夷离堇蒲古只之后。
English: In the middle of Yerutsu, the characters are full, and after the sixth house was destroyed, Shobu was left alone.

古文：重熙中，累迁西南面招讨都监。充宋国生辰使，馆于白沟驿。
现代文：重熙年间，累迁至西南面招讨都监，担任出使宋国生辰使，止宿于白沟驿。
English: During the reign of Chongxi, he was successively relocated to the southwestern side to solicit the governor of the capital, served as an envoy of the Song Dynasty, and stayed in Baigouye.

古文：宋宴劳，优者嘲萧惠河西之败。
现代文：宋国宴请慰劳，优人嘲笑萧惠河西之兵败。
English: The Song state banquet invites consolation, and the superior man mocks Xiao Hui's defeat in the west of the river.

古文：合里只曰： 胜负兵家常事。
现代文：合里只说 ：胜败乃兵家常事。
English: He only said, "Victory and defeat are common occurrences for soldiers."

古文：我嗣圣皇帝俘石重贵，至今兴中有石家寨。
现代文：我国嗣圣皇帝俘虏石重贵，至今在兴中府还有石家寨。
English: Heirs of the Holy Emperor of China, the captives of Shishi were precious, and there is still a Shishi village in Xingzhongfu.

古文：惠之一败，何足较哉！ 
现代文：萧惠的兵败，哪里值得与那一次相提并论呢？ 
English: Xiao Hui's military defeat, where is it worth comparing with that one?

古文：宋人惭服。
现代文：宋人惭愧而折服。
English: Embarrassed, the Song people gave in.

古文：帝闻之曰： 优令失辞，何可伤两国交好！ 
现代文：皇上得知后说： 优伶是失言，你怎么可以因此而伤了两国的交好？ 
English: When the Emperor learned of this, he said, "Your comment was a slip of the tongue. How could you hurt the friendship between the two countries?

古文：鞭二百，免官。
现代文：鞭打了他二百下，免其官职。
English: He was given 200 lashes and dismissed from his post.

古文：清宁初，起为怀化军节度使。
现代文：清宁初，起用为怀化军节度使。
English: At the beginning of the Qing and Ning Dynasties, he was appointed as an envoy of the Huaihua Army.

古文：七年，入为北院大王，封豳国公。
现代文：七年，入京任北院大王，封豳国公。
English: In the seventh year, he entered Beijing as the Great King of the Northern Court, and was given the title of Prince of the State.

古文：历辽兴军节度使、东北路详稳，加兼侍中。
现代文：历任辽兴军节度使，东北路详稳，加兼侍中。
English: Successive Liao Xingjun Festival envoy, Northeast Road detailed and stable, plus a chamberlain.

古文：致仕，卒。
现代文：辞官归田，不久去世。
English: He died shortly afterwards.

古文：合里只明达勤恪，怀柔有道。
现代文：合里只明智通达、勤勉恭谨，笼络安抚有方。
English: At the end of the day, only those who are wise, diligent and courteous, and have the ability to placate others.

古文：置诸宾馆及西边营田，皆自合里只发之。
现代文：设置宾馆及西边营田，都由合里只发其端绪。
English: The establishment of the hotel and the yakitori fields to the west are just the beginning.

古文：耶律颇的，字撒版，季父房奴瓜之孙。
现代文：耶律颇的，字撒版，季父房奴瓜之孙。
English: The son of a yakitori chef, the son of a typographer, the son of a butcher.

古文：孤介寡合。
现代文：耿直方正，与人不易投合。
English: Geng Nao Fang Zheng is not easy to get along with.

古文：重熙初，补牌印郎君。
现代文：重熙初，补为牌印郎君。
English: At the beginning of the Heisei era, he was appointed as the master of the seal.

古文：清宁初，稍迁知易州。
现代文：清宁初，渐渐升迁，为易州知州。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, it was gradually promoted to Yizhou Zhizhou.

古文：去官，部民请留，许之。
现代文：离官，部民请求他留任，道宗允准之。
English: When he left his post, his subordinates asked him to stay on, and he agreed.

古文：咸雍八年，改彰国军节度使。
现代文：咸雍八年，改任彰国军节度使。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he was appointed as the military envoy of the Spring Festival of the Zhangguo Army.

古文：上猎大牢古山，颇的谒于行宫。
现代文：皇上田猎于大牢古山，颇的在行宫拜见。
English: Empress Dowager Tian hunted in the ancient mountain of Dajiao, and paid a visit to the palace.

古文：帝问边事，对曰： 自应州南境至天池，皆我耕牧之地。
现代文：皇上询问边事，回答说： 从应州南境到天池，都是我国耕作放牧之地。
English: The emperor inquired about border affairs and replied: From the southern border of Yingzhou to Tianchi, our country is a land of farming and grazing.

古文：清宁间，边将不谨，为宋所侵，烽堠内移，似非所宜。 
现代文：清宁年间，边将不能镇守，为宋所侵夺，烽火堆只好内移，这似乎不应该。 
English: During the Qing and Ning Dynasties, the border generals could not guard the town, which was invaded by the Song Dynasty, and the bonfires had to be moved inside. This does not seem right.

古文：道宗然之。
现代文：道宗觉得有理。
English: The Taoist sect thinks it makes sense.

古文：拜北面林牙。
现代文：拜他为北面林牙。
English: He is known as the Northern Fang.

古文：后遣人使宋，得其侵地，命颇的往定疆界。
现代文：后来派人出使宋，索得其侵占之地，命令颇的前往勘定疆界。
English: Later, he sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty to sue it for the land it had occupied and ordered it to go to the border to settle accounts.

古文：还，拜南院宣徽使。
现代文：回京后，拜为南院宣徽使。
English: After returning to Beijing, he served as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：大康四年，迁忠顺军节度使，寻为南院大王，改同知南京留守事，召拜南府宰相，赐贞良功臣，封吴国公，为北院枢密使。
现代文：大康四年，迁忠顺军节度使，不久任南院大王，改为同知南京留守事，召拜南府宰相，赐贞良功臣、封吴国公、为北院枢密使。
English: In the 4th year of the Taikang era, he was transferred to the position of the festival envoy of the Zhongshun Army, and was soon appointed as the great king of the Southern Court, and was changed to stay in Nanjing with the same acquaintance, summoned the prime minister of the Southern Court, awarded the title of virtuous and meritorious vassal, the title of Wu Guogong, and became the Northern Court's confidential envoy.

古文：廉谨奉公，知无不为。
现代文：廉洁谨慎，不徇私情，知道是应该做的事情，就一定会尽力去做。
English: Honest, prudent, unselfish, knows what should be done, and will do his best.

古文：大安中致仕，卒。
现代文：大安年间辞官归田，去世。
English: During the Taian era, he returned to his post as a magistrate and passed away.

古文：子霞抹，北院枢密副使。
现代文：子耶律霞抹，北院枢密副使。
English: His son, Ye Lu Xia Maku, became the Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court.

