古文：竹鸡之性，遇其俦必斗。
现代文：竹鸡的本性，遇到同类必定争斗。
English: It is the nature of bamboo chickens to fight when they meet other chickens of the same kind.

古文：捕之者扫落叶为城，置媒其中，而隐身于后操罔焉。
现代文：捕竹鸡的人扫落叶作围墙，把诱鸟放在里面，自己隐蔽在后边操纵罗网。
English: The person catching the bamboo chicken sweeps the fallen leaves to make a fence, puts the bait bird inside, and manipulates the trawling net while hiding behind it.

古文：激媒使之鸣，闻者，随声必至，闭目飞入城，直前欲斗，而罔已起，无得脱者，盖目既闭则不复见人。
现代文：刺激诱鸟让它鸣叫，听到叫声的竹鸡，必定随声到来，闭着眼睛飞进树叶堆起的围墙，一直向前要争斗一番。可是网已收起，没有能逃脱的。这是因为眼睛已经闭上，就不再看得见人了。
English: Stimulate the decoy bird to make it sing, and the bamboo chicken that hears the call will surely come with the sound, fly into the wall of leaves with its eyes closed, and keep fighting forward. But the net has been closed, and there is no escape. This is because the eyes have been closed, and you can no longer see people.

古文：鹧鸪性好洁，猎人于茂林间净扫地，稍散谷于上，禽往来行游，且步且啄，则以竿取之。
现代文：鹧鸪本性喜欢清洁，猎人在茂密的树林中打扫干净一片地方，多少撒些谷米在上面。鹧鸪来往飞行，边走边食，猎人就用长杆粘取它。
English: Dragonflies like to be clean by nature. Hunters clean up an area in the dense forest and sprinkle some grain on it. Dragonflies fly back and forth, eating as they go. Hunters use a long pole to stick it.

古文：麂行草莽中，畏人见其迹，但循一径，无问远近也。
现代文：麋出没在荒草中，害怕人看到它的足迹，无论远近，只沿着一条小路走。
English: The grasshopper lurks in the weeds, afraid that people will see its footprints, no matter how far away they are, and only follows one path.

古文：村民结绳为环，置其所行处，麂足一挂，则倒悬于枝上，乃生获之。
现代文：村民把绳结成环套，安防在麋经过的地方，麋足一被绊住，就会倒挂在树枝上，被人们生擒活捉。
English: Villagers tie the rope into a loop, and the security is in the place where the centipede passes. Once the centipede is tripped, it will hang upside down on the branches and be caught alive by people.

古文：江南多土蜂，人不能识其穴，往往以长纸带黏于肉，蜂见之必衔入穴，乃蹑寻得之，薰取其子。
现代文：江南多土蜂，人们找不到它的洞穴，往往把长纸袋粘在肉上，蜂看到必定衔入洞穴，人们就能追踪寻找到它，用火熏取它的幼虫。
English: There are many earthworms in the south of the Yangtze River. People can't find their burrows, so they often stick long paper bags on their flesh. When the bee sees that it must climb into the burrow, people can track and find it, and use fire to smoke out its larvae.

古文：虫鸟之智，自谓周身矣，如人之不仁何？
现代文：虫鸟的智慧，自以为可以保全自身，但怎么能够抵抗得住人类的不仁呢？
English: The wisdom of the insect-bird thinks it can preserve itself, but how can it resist the cruelty of mankind?

