古文：郑岳刘玉汪元锡寇天叙唐胄潘珍李中欧阳铎陶谐潘埙欧阳重朱裳陈察孙懋王仪曾钧郑岳，字汝华，莆田人。
现代文：郑岳，字汝华，莆田人。
English: Zheng Yue, the character Ruhua, is from Putian.

古文：弘治六年进士。
现代文：弘治六年进士。
English: Koji became a priest six years later.

古文：授户部主事，改刑部主事。
现代文：授官为户部主事，改任刑部主事。
English: He was promoted to be the head of the Household Division and then the head of the Criminal Division.

古文：董天锡偕锦衣千户张福决囚，福坐天锡上，岳言其非体。
现代文：董天锡和锦衣千户张福一同判决囚犯，张福坐董天锡上方，郑岳说这样不合体统。
English: Zheng Yue said that it was unseemly for Dong Tianxi and Zhang Fu to be sentenced as prisoners together. Zhang Fu sat on top of Dong Tianxi.

古文：且言： 纠劾非镇监职，而董让行之。
现代文：并说 ：纠察弹劾并不是镇守太监的职责，但董让这样做了。
English: He also said: "Picketing and impeachment are not the duties of the town guard eunuchs, but Dong Zhan did it.

古文：太常本礼部属，而崔志端专之。
现代文：太常寺本属礼部管辖，而崔志端专权独断了。
English: Taijō-ji Temple is under the jurisdiction of the Ceremonial Department, but Choe Shih-duk has the sole right to decide.

古文：内外效尤，益无忌惮 。
现代文：朝廷内外效尤，将更加肆无忌惮。 
English: There will be more unscrupulous behavior both inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：忤旨，系狱。
现代文：因而忤逆圣旨，而被拘囚入狱。
English: As a result, he disobeyed the sacred edict and was imprisoned.

古文：尚书周经、侍郎许进等救，不听。
现代文：尚书周经、侍郎许进等为他求救，皇上不听。
English: Shangshu Zhoujing, chamberlain Xu Jin and others begged for his help, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：赎杖还职。
现代文：杖打赎罪后才复职。
English: He was reinstated only after expiating his crime with the cane.

古文：寻进员外郎。
现代文：不久进为员外郎。
English: He soon became a member of the outer circle.

古文：许进督师大同，贵近恶其刚方，议代之。
现代文：许进在大同督师，皇亲国戚讨厌他的刚正方直，谋议找人代替。
English: Xu Jin was the superintendent of Datong, and the emperor's relatives hated his stiffness and uprightness, and they tried to find someone to replace him.

古文：罢职总兵官赵袴谋起用，京军屡出无功。
现代文：被罢职的总兵官赵日永谋求起用，而京军屡次出击但无建树。
English: The dismissed commander-in-chief, Zhao Rongyong, tried to be appointed, but the Beijing army repeatedly attacked, but to no avail.

古文：岳言进不可代，袴不可用，京军不可出。
现代文：郑岳说许进不可代，赵日永不可用，京军不可出。
English: Zheng Yue said that Xu Jin could not be replaced, Zhao Rih could never be used, and the Beijing army could not leave.

古文：朝论韪之。
现代文：朝论认为郑岳是对的。
English: The Morning Post thinks Zheng Yue is right.

古文：迁湖广佥事，归宗藩侵地于民。
现代文：迁湖广佥事，归还严宗藩侵占的民地。
English: The relocation of Hukangyuan and the return of the people's land occupied by the Yanzong clan.

古文：施州夷民相仇杀者，有司以叛告。
现代文：施州夷民相互仇杀，有司告他们反叛。
English: The Shi Zhou barbarians killed each other with a vengeance, and a magistrate accused them of rebellion.

古文：岳擒治其魁，余悉纵遣。
现代文：郑岳整治其头目，其余的人都被释放遣走。
English: Zheng Yue punished the ringleaders, and the rest were released and sent away.

古文：荆、岳饥，劝富民出粟，驰河泊禁。
现代文：荆、岳两地发生饥荒，郑岳劝富民捐出粮食，放松河泊禁令。
English: Famine occurred in Jing and Yue. Zheng Yue advised the rich people to donate grain and relaxed the ban on river berthing.

古文：属县输粮远卫，率二石致一石。
现代文：属县有运粮远方卫所，一般花两石才能运到一石。
English: There is a granary in the county that transports grain to distant health centers. It generally takes two stones to transport one stone.

古文：岳以其直给卫，而留粟备振，民乃获济。
现代文：郑岳用一石的钱给卫所，而留粮以备救济，百姓于是获得救护。
English: Zheng Yue used one stone of money to give to the infirmary, while grain was reserved for relief, and the people were thus saved.

古文：正德初，擢广西副使。
现代文：正德年初期，升为广西副使。
English: At the beginning of the Zhengde era, he was promoted to deputy envoy to Guangxi.

古文：土官岑猛当徙福建，据田州不肯徙。
现代文：土官岑猛应当调往福建，但他据守在田州不肯前往。
English: The local magistrate should be transferred to Fujian, but he refuses to go to Tianzhou.

古文：岳许为奏改近地，猛乃请自效。
现代文：郑岳答应为他上奏改在近地为官，岑猛于是请求自己效力。
English: Zheng Yue promised to play for him and serve as an official in the vicinity, so he asked himself to serve.

古文：寻改广东。
现代文：不久郑岳改派广东。
English: Zheng Yue was soon reassigned to Guangdong.

古文：迁江西按察使，就迁左布政使。宸濠夺民田亿万计，民立砦自保。
现代文：迁江西按察使，就地调任为左布政使，宁王宸濠强取民田计有亿万，人民建立寨子以求自保。
English: The inspectors were transferred to Jiangxi Province, and the highest-ranking of them was appointed as the political envoy to Zuo Bu. Ning Wang Shaoqiang took hundreds of millions of people's land, and the people built stockades to protect themselves.

古文：宸濠欲兵之，岳持不可。
现代文：宸濠想出兵攻击，郑岳坚决认为不可。
English: Although he wanted to attack, Zheng Yue was adamant that it was impossible.

古文：会提学副使李梦阳与巡按御史江万实相讦，岳承檄按之。
现代文：正巧提学副使李梦阳与巡按御史江万实相互攻击，郑岳奉命去调查处理这件事。
English: It just so happened that Li Mengyang, the Vice Minister of Education, and the Inspector-General of Police, Jiang Wanshi, attacked each other. Zheng Yue was ordered to investigate and deal with this matter.

古文：梦阳执岳亲信吏，言岳子澐受赇，欲因以胁岳。
现代文：李梦阳捉拿郑岳的亲信官吏，说郑岳的儿子郑氵云接受贿赂，想以此来要挟郑岳。
English: Li Mengyang captured Zheng Yue's trusted officials and said that Zheng Yue's son, Zheng Bingyun, accepted bribes in order to blackmail Zheng Yue.

古文：宸濠因助梦阳奏其事，囚掠澐。
现代文：宸濠因助李梦阳上奏这件事，将郑氵云拷打囚禁。
English: For helping Li Mengyang play the piece, Gong tortured and imprisoned Zheng Bingyun.

古文：巡抚任汉顾虑不能决，帝遣大理卿燕忠会给事中黎奭按问。
现代文：巡抚任汉有顾虑不能做出决断，皇帝派遣大理卿燕忠会同给事中黎察问。
English: The governor, Renhan, was concerned that he could not make a decision, so the emperor sent Daliqing Yanzhong to investigate the matter.

古文：忠等奏勘岳子私有迹，而梦阳挟制抚、按，俱宜斥。
现代文：燕忠等上奏郑岳之子的偏私有迹可查，而李梦阳挟制抚、按，都应当受到贬斥。
English: The partiality of the son of Zheng Yue in the ascension of Yan Zhong and others can be investigated, and Li Mengyang's coercion and pressure should be condemned.

古文：岳遂夺官为民。
现代文：于是郑岳被罢官为民。
English: As a result, Zheng Yue was removed from office and became a commoner.

古文：宸濠败，中外交荐，起四川布政使。
现代文：宸濠衰落后，朝廷内外都推荐郑岳，任郑岳为四川布政使。
English: After the fall of the Han Dynasty, Zheng Yue was recommended both inside and outside the imperial court. Zheng Yue was appointed as the political envoy to Sichuan.

古文：以忧不赴。
现代文：郑岳因孝事在身而未赴任。
English: Zheng Yue did not take up the post due to his filial duty.

古文：世宗初，擢右副都御史，巡抚江西。
现代文：世宗初年，郑岳升为右副都御史，巡抚江西。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Zheng Yue ascended to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：甫两月，召为大理卿。
现代文：刚刚二个月，诏封为大理卿。
English: Just two months ago, he was posthumously awarded the title of Lord Dali.

古文：嘉靖元年冬，上言内臣有犯，宜听部院问理，毋从中决，不能从。
现代文：嘉靖元年冬天，郑岳向皇上献言说宦官犯法者，应当任凭部院审理，不要由宫中判决，皇帝不能听从他的话。
English: In the winter of the first year of Jiajing, Zheng Yue proposed to the emperor that eunuchs who broke the law should be tried by the ministry, not by the court, and the emperor could not obey his words.

古文：帝数不豫，岳请遵圣祖寡欲勤治之训，宫寝有制，进御以时，而退朝即御文华，裁决章奏，日暮还宫，以养寿命之源。
现代文：皇帝多次生病，郑岳请求皇帝遵循圣祖寡欲勤治的古训，后宫有一定的规制，房事有一定的时间安排，而退朝却去文华殿，裁决章奏，日暮还宫，以养寿命之源。
English: The emperor fell ill many times. Zheng Yue asked the emperor to follow the ancient teachings of the Holy Ancestor's diligent treatment. The harem has a certain regulation, and the house affairs have a certain time arrangement. However, when the emperor retired, he went to the Wenhua Hall, played the ruling chapter, and returned to the palace at dusk, in order to maintain the source of life.

古文：报闻。
现代文：皇帝说知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：出按甘肃乱卒事，总兵官李隆等皆伏罪。
现代文：不久到甘肃处理士兵叛乱之事，总兵官李隆等人都伏罪。
English: Soon after arriving in Gansu to deal with the soldiers' mutiny, the commander-in-chief Li Long and others were arrested.

古文：还朝，以灾异陈刑狱失平八事。
现代文：回到朝廷以后，因灾异发生陈述刑狱失平八事。
English: After returning to the Imperial Court, he reported eight cases of unfair imprisonment due to natural disasters.

古文：寻迁兵部右侍郎。
现代文：不久迁为兵部右侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Hyobu Ujitsuro.

古文：时 大礼 未定。
现代文：当时 大礼 未定。
English: At that time, the grand ceremony was still undecided.

古文：岳言若以两考为嫌，第称孝宗庙号，毋称伯考，以稍存正统。
现代文：郑岳说如果尊崇两位先考不太合适，就称考宗庙号，不要称伯考，以便稍稍保留些正统之意。
English: Zheng Yue said that if it is not appropriate to honor the two first examinations, it is better to call the examination "Zongmiao" and not "Berkow," so as to retain some sense of orthodoxy.

古文：大学士石珤请从之。
现代文：大学士石王缶请求皇帝听从郑岳的建议。
English: Shi Wang Can, a university scholar, asked the emperor to listen to Zheng Yue's suggestion.

古文：帝切责珤，夺岳俸两月。
现代文：皇帝深切地责罚了石王缶，夺去郑岳官俸两个月。
English: The emperor severely punished Shi Wang Can and deprived Zheng Yue of his official salary for two months.

古文：转左侍郎。
现代文：后转为兵部左侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Hyobu Sasajiro.

古文：请罢山海关税，弗许。
现代文：郑岳请求罢免山海关税，皇帝不准许。
English: Zheng Yue requested the removal of the mountain and sea tariffs, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：中官崔文欲用其兄子为副将，岳持不可。
现代文：中官崔文想用他哥哥的儿子当副将，郑岳认为不可以。
English: Lieutenant Colonel Cui Wen wanted to use his brother's son as vice-commander, but Zheng Yue thought it was unacceptable.

古文：天叙在太学时，尝闻父疾，驰六昼夜抵家，父疾亦廖。唐胄，字平侯，琼山人。
现代文：宁夏总兵官仲勋到京师行贿，御史聂豹根据风闻揭发郑岳。郑岳自己表白无辜，于是请求退休。回到家乡十五年后死去。唐胄，字平侯，琼山人。
English: Zhong Xun, the commander-in-chief of Ningxia, went to Beijing to offer bribes, and according to the rumor, Zheng Yue was exposed. Zheng Yue pleaded innocent and asked to retire. He died fifteen years after returning to his hometown. Tang Xuan, surnamed Ping Hou, from Qiongshan.

古文：弘治十五年进士。
现代文：弘治十五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of fifteen.

古文：授户部主事。
现代文：授官户部主事。
English: Assigned to be in charge of the Household Department.

古文：以忧归。
现代文：因父丧回家乡。
English: He came back to his hometown because of his father's death.

古文：刘瑾斥诸服除久不赴官者，坐夺职。
现代文：刘瑾指斥诸位服丧期满而不赴任者，因此剥夺他的官职。
English: Liu Wei pointed out that those who did not take office after the period of mourning was over, so he was deprived of his official position.

古文：瑾诛，召用，以母老不出。
现代文：刘瑾被诛，朝廷召用唐胄，唐胄因母亲老衰而不出任官职。
English: Liu Bei was executed, and the imperial court summoned Tang Jun, who did not take up his official post because of his mother's old age.

古文：嘉靖初，起故官。
现代文：嘉靖初年，唐胄以故官起用。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, Tang Xuan appointed him as a retired official.

古文：疏谏内官织造，请为宋死节臣赵与珞追谥立祠。
现代文：他疏谏内官织造事，请求为宋朝死节臣赵与珞追封谥号并为他立祠。
English: He evaded the officials to fabricate things, and requested that the Song Dynasty's dead festival vassals, Zhao and Zou, be given posthumous posthumous names and that a shrine be built for him.

古文：进员外郎，迁广西提学佥事。
现代文：进而升为员外郎，迁广西提学佥事。
English: He was then promoted to the position of a member of the Foreign Affairs Office and moved to Guangxi to continue his studies.

古文：令土官及瑶、蛮悉遣子入学。
现代文：命令土官和瑶、蛮等都送子入学。
English: He ordered the local officials to send their children to school, as well as the peasants and barbarians.

古文：擢金腾副使。
现代文：升为金腾副使。
English: He was promoted to vice-envoy of Jinteng.

古文：土酋莽信虐，计擒之。
现代文：土酋莽信残暴，唐胄用计将他擒获。
English: The local chief was thought to be cruel, so Tang Xuan used a plan to capture him.

古文：木邦、孟养构兵，胄遣使宣谕，木邦遂献地。
现代文：木邦、孟养交兵，唐胄遣派使者前往宣谕，木邦于是献地归服。
English: Mok Bang and Meng Yao exchanged troops, Tang Xuan sent an envoy to proclaim the edict, and Mok Bang surrendered.

古文：屡迁广西左布政使。
现代文：唐胄屡次迁为广西左布政使。
English: Tang Jun repeatedly moved to Guangxi Zuo Bu political envoy.

古文：官军讨古田贼，久无功，胄遣使抚之其魁曰： 是前唐使君令吾子入学者。 
现代文：官军讨伐古田贼寇，久战无功，唐胄派遣使者对贼寇进行安抚，贼寇首领说： 是前唐使君让我的孩子入学的。 
English: The government army fought against the ancient thieves and robbers, but the battle was long and fruitless. Tang Jun sent an envoy to pacify the thieves and robbers. The leader of the thieves and robbers said: It was the former Tang envoy who let my child go to school.

古文：即解甲。
现代文：于是自动解除了武装。
English: As a result, they disarmed themselves.

古文：擢右副都御史，巡抚南、赣，移山东。
现代文：他升为右副都御史，巡抚南、赣，转到山东。
English: He was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of the south and the north, and transferred to Shandong.

古文：迁南京户部右侍郎。
现代文：迁为南京户部右侍郎。
English: Moved to Nanjing as the right-hand man of the household.

古文：十五年改北部，进左侍郎。
现代文：十五年改派到北部，升职为左侍郎。
English: Fifteen years later, he was reassigned to the northern part of the country and promoted to the position of left-hand waiter.

古文：帝以安南久不贡，将致讨，郭勋复赞之。
现代文：皇帝因安南久不进贡，准备对它进行讨伐。郭勋又很赞成。
English: Because Annan has not paid tribute for a long time, the emperor is preparing to carry out a crusade against it. Guo Xun is also very much in favor.

古文：诏遣锦衣官问状，中外严兵待发。
现代文：皇帝下诏派遣锦衣官询问情况，中外严兵待发。
English: The emperor issued an edict to dispatch officials to inquire about the situation, and both Chinese and foreign soldiers were ready to go.

古文：胄上疏谏曰：
现代文：唐胄上疏规劝说：
English: Tang Yao went up to him and said:

古文：今日之事，若欲其修贡而已，兵不必用，官亦无容遣。
现代文： 今日之事，若只想他献贡，那么兵不必用，官也不用遣。
English: Today, if you only want him to pay tribute, then you don't need to use soldiers, and you don't need to send officials.

古文：若欲讨之，则有不可者七，请一一陈之：
现代文：若想讨伐它，则有七项不可，请允许我一一陈述。
English: If you want to fight it, there are seven things you can't do. Allow me to list them one by one.

古文：古帝王不以中国之治治蛮夷，故安南不征，著在《祖训》。
现代文： 古代帝王不用治理中国之法治蛮夷，所以不征讨安南，这已写进《祖训》之中。
English: The ancient emperors did not need to govern China under the rule of law, so they did not solicit Annan, which has been written into the "Ancestral Teachings."

古文：一也。
现代文：这是第一点。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：太宗既灭黎季筼，求陈氏后不得，始郡县之。
现代文： 太宗已经消灭黎季睺，求陈氏后人不得，才不得不设立郡县。
English: Emperor Taizong had already eliminated Lijian, so the descendants of the Chen clan had to set up counties.

古文：后兵连不解，仁庙每以为恨。
现代文：后来兵战连续不断，仁庙总是以此为遗憾。
English: Later, there were continuous military battles, and Renmiao always regretted this.

古文：章皇帝成先志，弃而不守，今日当率循。
现代文：章皇帝成先志，弃而不守，今日应当一概遵循。
English: Emperor Zhang Chengxian Zhi, abandoned and not kept, should be followed today.

古文：二也。
现代文：这是第二点。
English: That's two.

古文：外夷分争，中国之福。
现代文： 外夷纷争，是中国之福。
English: Conflict with foreigners is a blessing for China.

古文：安南自五代至元，更曲、刘、绍、吴、丁、黎、李、陈八姓，迭兴迭废，而岭南外警遂稀。
现代文：安南从五代至元朝，更换过曲、刘、绍、吴、丁、黎、李、陈八姓，屡兴屡废，因而岭南对我们无多少威胁。
English: From the Fifth Dynasty to the Yuan Dynasty, Annan changed the surnames of Qu, Liu, Shao, Wu, Ding, Li, Li and Chen eight times, and repeatedly abolished, so Lingnan is not much of a threat to us.

古文：今纷争，正不当问，奈何殃赤子以威小丑，割心腹以补四肢，无益有害。
现代文：现在它们相互纷争，正可不理睬，如何殃及百姓以威小丑，割心腹以补四肢，有害无益。
English: Now that they are quarreling with each other, they can just ignore it. How will it affect the people? It is harmful and useless to be a bully, to divide the heart and the abdomen, and to fill the limbs.

古文：三也。
现代文：这是第三点。
English: That's three.

古文：若谓中国近境，宜乘乱取之。
现代文： 如果说中国的近境，应当乘其混乱而取之。
English: If we talk about China's proximity, we should take advantage of its chaos.

古文：臣考马援南征，深历浪泊，士卒死亡几半，所立铜柱为汉极界，乃近在今思明府耳。
现代文：我考察了马援的南征，深入浪泊，士兵死亡将近一半，所立的铜柱作为汉的边界，乃近在现在的思明府。
English: I examined Ma Yuan's Southern Expedition, which went deep into Nampo, and nearly half of the soldiers died. The bronze pillar erected as the Han's border is near present-day Simingfu.

古文：先朝虽尝平之，然屡服屡叛，中国士马物故者以数十万计，竭二十余年之财力，仅得数十郡县之虚名而止。
现代文：先朝虽然尝试平定它，但是多次收服又多次叛乱，中国消耗的士、马、物计有数十万，竭尽近二十多年的财力，仅仅只得到数十郡县的虚名。
English: Although the previous government tried to pacify it, it was conquered many times and rebelled many times. China consumed hundreds of thousands of taxis, horses, and materials, exhausted nearly two decades of financial resources, and only got the false name of dozens of counties.

古文：况又有征之不克，如宋太宗、神宗，元宪宗、世祖朝故事乎？
现代文：况且还有讨伐而没有攻克的，像宋太宗、神宗、元宪宗、世祖朝就有这样的故事。
English: Moreover, there are also stories of crusades that have not been conquered, such as Song Taizong, Shenzong, Yuan Jianzong, and Shizu Dynasty.

古文：此可为殷鉴。
现代文：这可以作为借鉴。
English: This can be used as a reference.

古文：四也。
现代文：这是第四点。
English: Four, too.

古文：外邦入贡，乃彼之利。
现代文： 外邦向我们进贡，对他们有利。
English: It is to their advantage that the Gentiles pay us tribute.

古文：一则奉正朔以威其邻，一则通贸易以足其国。
现代文：一是向我们进献以威其邻，一是与我们互通贸易以足其国。
English: One is to make offerings to us as a neighbor, and the other is to trade with us as a country.

古文：故今虽兵乱，尚累累奉表笺、具方物，款关求入，守臣以姓名不符却之。
现代文：所以现在他们虽然发生兵乱，还累累进奉表笺，准备地方特产，叩头请求送入，守臣因姓名不符而将其退却。
English: So now, even though there is a mutiny, they are still making their way to the table, preparing local specialties, begging to be sent in, and the retainers are retreating because their names don't match.

古文：是彼欲贡不得，非抗不贡也。
现代文：这是他们想进贡而做不到，不是违抗不进贡。
English: This is because they want to pay tribute but can't, not because they refuse to pay tribute.

古文：以此责之，词不顺。
现代文：因为这件事去责备它，则言不顺。
English: To blame it for this would be unfair.

古文：五也。
现代文：这是第五点。
English: That's five.

古文：兴师则需饷。
现代文： 兴师则需要军饷。
English: Reinstating a division requires military pay.

古文：今四川有采木之役，贵州有凯口之师，而两广积储数十万，率耗于田州岑猛之役。
现代文：现在四川有采木工程，贵州有凯口兵事，而两广积储数十万，一概都耗费在田州岑猛战役上。
English: At present, Sichuan has logging projects, Guizhou has Kaikou military affairs, and the two provinces have accumulated hundreds of thousands, all of which are spent on the fierce battle of Tianzhou.

古文：又大工频兴，所在军储悉输将作，兴师数十万，何以给之？
现代文：又屡次兴办大工程，所有军储都用在这上面，现在兴师十万，用什么来供给呢？
English: Again and again, large-scale projects have been launched, and all military reserves have been spent on this. Now, 100,000 divisions have been launched. What will be used to supply them?

古文：六也。
现代文：这是第六点。
English: That's six.

古文：然臣所忧，又不止此。
现代文： 但我所忧虑的，还不止于此。
English: But I'm worried about more than that.

古文：唐之衰也，自明皇南诏之役始。
现代文：唐朝的衰落，是从明皇征南诏这个战役开始的。
English: The decline of the Tang Dynasty began with the Ming Emperor's campaign to conquer Nanzhao.

古文：宋之衰也，自神宗伐辽之役始。
现代文：宋朝的衰败，是从神宗讨伐辽这个战役开始的。
English: The decline of the Song Dynasty began with the Shenzong campaign against Liao.

古文：今北寇日强，据我河套。
现代文：现在北方敌寇逐渐强盛，占据我河套。
English: Now, the northern invaders are getting stronger and stronger, occupying the Ihe set.

古文：边卒屡叛，毁我藩篱。
现代文：边关兵卒屡次叛乱，毁坏我藩篱。
English: The frontier soldiers repeatedly rebelled and destroyed our fences.

古文：北顾方殷，更启南征之议，脱有不测，谁任其咎？
现代文：北方忧患正多，又启南征之议，倘若遇有不测，谁能担任这个罪过呢？
English: There is a lot of trouble in the north, and there is talk of invading the south. If something happens, who will take the blame?

古文：七也。
现代文：这是第七点。
English: This is seven.

古文：锦衣武人，暗于大体。
现代文： 锦衣武人，对大局不明白。
English: A warrior in brocade does not understand the overall situation.

古文：倘稍枉是非之实，致彼不服，反足损威。
现代文：倘若对是非的事实稍有歪曲，将导致安南不服，反而足以损害我们的威严。
English: If there is the slightest distortion of the facts of right and wrong, it will lead to Annan's disapproval, but it is enough to damage our dignity.

古文：即令按问得情，伐之不可，不伐不可，进退无据，何以为谋？
现代文：即便下令按问得到实情，那么讨伐不行，不讨伐也不行，这样进退都无凭借，那么该怎么办呢？
English: Even if it is ordered to get the truth by asking questions, then it is not possible to fight, and it is not possible to fight without fighting, so there is no way to advance or retreat, so what should we do?

古文：且今严兵待发之诏初下，而征求骚扰之害已形，是忧不在外夷，而在邦域中矣。
现代文：而且现在严兵待发的诏令才刚刚下达，但征求骚扰的危害已经显露出来，这个忧虑不在外夷，而在我们邦域之中。
English: And now, the long-awaited edict has just been issued, but the harm of soliciting harassment has been revealed. This concern is not in the diaspora, but in our state.

古文：请停遣勘官，罢一切征调，天下幸甚。
现代文：请求停遣勘官，罢去一切征调，那么天下幸甚。 
English: If you request the suspension of the transfer of the investigation officer and the cancellation of all transfers, then all is well in the world.

古文：章下兵部，请从其议。
现代文：奏章下到兵部，兵部请求听从他的建议。
English: He wrote to the War Office, which begged him to follow his advice.

古文：得旨，待勘官还更议。
现代文：圣旨说：等勘官回来再重新议论。
English: The edict said: wait for the inspector to come back and then re-discuss.

古文：明年四月，帝决计征讨。
现代文：第二年四月，皇帝决计征讨。
English: In April of the following year, the emperor decided to collect the tax.

古文：侍郎潘珍、两广总督潘旦、巡按御史余光相继谏，皆不纳。
现代文：侍郎潘珍、两广总督潘旦、巡按御史余光相继阻谏，都没有被采纳。
English: Pan Zhen, the chamberlain, Pan Dan, the governor of the two provinces, and Yu Guang, the inspector-general of the imperial archives, were all blocked successively and were not adopted.

古文：后遣毛伯温往，卒抚降之。
现代文：然后派遣毛伯温前往，终于抚降了他们。
English: Then he sent Maobowen to them, and they were finally subdued.

古文：郭勋为祖英请配享，胄疏争。
现代文：郭勋为祖父郭英请求以功臣身份附祭祖庙，唐胄上疏谏争。
English: Guo Xun, as the grandfather of Guo Ying, requested that the ancestral temple be attached as a meritorious subject, and the Tang Dynasty quarreled about it.

古文：帝欲祀献皇帝明堂，配上帝，胄力言不可。
现代文：皇帝想祭祀献皇帝于明堂，配祀上帝，唐胄极力谏言不可。
English: The emperor wanted to offer a sacrifice to the emperor in the Ming Hall, together with the worship of God, and Tang Xuan could not say a word.

古文：帝大怒，下诏狱拷掠，削籍归。
现代文：皇帝大怒，将他下诏狱进行拷问，削去他的官籍后让他回到家乡。
English: The emperor was furious and had him tortured in the imperial prison. He was stripped of his official status and sent back to his hometown.

古文：礼部尚书严嵩摘其误，奏之，被逮削籍。
现代文：后遇赦复官，不久死去。隆庆初年，赠右都御史。
English: He was later pardoned and reinstated, but died soon after. In the first year of the Longqing era, he was given the title of Uto goshi.

古文：光，江宁人。李中，字子庸，吉水人，正德九年进士。
现代文：唐胄忠直有孝义之心，好学多著述，居官有原则，是岭南人士之冠。李中，字子庸，吉水人，正德九年进士。
English: Tang Xizhong had a heart of filial piety, was eager to learn and wrote a lot, and was a principled official. He was the crown of Lingnan people. Li Zhong, Zi Yong, Jishui people, Zhengde entered the priesthood in the ninth year.

古文：杨一清为吏部，数召中应言官试，不赴。
现代文：杨一清做吏部尚书，多次召李中应言官试，李中不到。
English: Yang Yixing, as the secretary of the cadre department, repeatedly summoned Li Zhong to answer the official examination, but Li Zhong did not pass.

古文：及授工部主事，武宗自称大庆法王，建寺西华门内，用番僧住持，廷臣莫敢言。
现代文：等到李中授官工部主事时，武宗自称为大庆法王，在西华门内建立寺院，用番僧做主持，朝廷群臣都不敢言。
English: When Li Zhongzhu became the head of the engineering department, Emperor Wu Zong called himself the Daqing Emperor, built a temple inside the West China Gate, and appointed a monk to preside over it. The courtiers in the imperial court were afraid to say anything.

古文：中拜官三月即抗疏曰： 曩逆瑾窃权，势焰薰灼。
现代文：李中封官才三个月便抗言上疏说 ：以往逆臣刘瑾窃权，势焰嚣张。
English: Li Zhongfeng was only three months old when he said defiantly, "In the past, rebellious minister Liu stole power and became arrogant.

古文：陛下既悟，诛之无赦，圣武可谓卓绝矣。
现代文：陛下既已觉悟，诛之无赦，圣武可谓是卓绝的啊。
English: Since His Majesty has become aware of this, there is no forgiveness for him, and the sacred martial arts can be described as outstanding.

古文：今大权未收，储位未建，义子未革，纪纲日驰，风俗日壤，小人日进，君子日退，士气日靡，言路日闭，名器日轻，贿赂日行，礼乐日废，刑罚日滥，民财日殚，军政日弊。
现代文：现在大权未收，皇储位未立，义子未革除，纪纲日益松弛，风俗逐渐变坏，小人逐渐升官，君子逐渐引退，士气逐渐委靡，言路逐渐关闭，名器逐渐被轻视，贿赂逐渐流行，礼乐逐渐荒废，刑罚日益泛滥，民财日益殚竭，军政日益增加弊端。
English: At present, imperial power has not been usurped, the imperial throne has not been established, legitimate sons and daughters have not been expelled, the disciplinary system has become increasingly slack, customs have gradually deteriorated, villains have gradually been promoted, gentlemen have gradually retired, morale has gradually declined, the way of speech has gradually closed, famous instruments have gradually been despised, bribery has gradually become popular, ceremonial music has gradually been abandoned, punishments have become increasingly widespread, people's wealth has become increasingly exhausted, and military government has increasingly increased its drawbacks.

古文：瑾既诛矣，而善治一无可举者，由陛下惑异端故也。
现代文：刘瑾已经被诛，但善治仍一无可举，是因为陛下受异端蒙惑的缘故。
English: Liu Bei has been executed, but there is still no good governance, because His Majesty is bewildered by heresy.

古文：夫禁掖严邃，岂异教所得杂居？
现代文：至于禁掖严厉幽深，岂能容得异教与宫人杂居。
English: As for the severity and remoteness of the confinement, how can paganism and palace dwellers be tolerated?

古文：今乃建寺西华门内，延止番僧，日与聚处。
现代文：现在在西华门内建寺，招番容僧居住，每日相与聚处。
English: Now, a temple has been built inside the Xihua Gate, where the monks of Zhanban Rong live and meet every day.

古文：异言日沃，忠言日远，用舍颠倒，举错乖方。
现代文：异言日益繁盛，忠言日益远去，取舍颠倒，举措背离常理。
English: Dissent is increasingly flourishing, loyalty is increasingly fading away, trade-offs are reversed, and measures are deviating from common sense.

古文：政务废驰，职此之故。
现代文：政务废弛，是因此之故。
English: This is the reason why government affairs are wasteful.

古文：伏望陛下翻然悔悟，毁佛寺，出番僧，妙选儒臣，朝夕劝讲，揽大权以绝天下之奸，建储位以立天下之本，革义子以正天下之名，则所谓振纪纲、励风俗、进君子、退小人诸事，可次第举矣。 
现代文：乞望陛下翻然悔悟，摧毁佛寺，逐出番僧，妙选儒臣，朝夕劝讲，揽大权以杜绝天下的奸邪，建储位以立天下之本，革义子以正天之名，那么所说的振纪纲、励风俗、进君子、退小人诸事项，可以依次举行了。 
English: To implore His Majesty to repent, to destroy Buddhist temples, to expel monks, to select Confucian scholars, to preach morning and evening, to seize great power in order to put an end to the wickedness of the world, to build storehouses in order to establish the foundation of the world, and to make disciples in the name of Zhengtian, then the above-mentioned matters of the discipline program, the encouragement of customs, the promotion of gentlemen, and the expulsion of villains can be held in sequence.

古文：帝怒。
现代文：皇帝大怒。
English: The emperor was furious.

古文：罪将不测，以大臣救得免。
现代文：李中将有不测之罪，因大臣营救才得免。
English: Li Zhong will have an unforeseen crime, because the minister's rescue will be spared.

古文：逾日，中旨谪广东通衢丞。
现代文：过了一日，皇帝下旨将他贬为广东通衢驿丞。
English: A day later, the emperor decreed that he would be demoted to the title of "Guangdong Tong Xuan Zeng."

古文：王守仁抚赣州，檄中参其军事。
现代文：王守仁按抚赣州，邀李中参与他的军事。
English: Wang Shouren visited Fuzhou and invited Li Zhong to participate in his military parade.

古文：预平宸濠。
现代文：预备讨平宸濠。
English: Prepare to level the playing field.

古文：世宗践阼，复故官。
现代文：世宗登位，恢复李中原有官职。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne and restored Lee's former official position.

古文：未任，擢广东佥事。
现代文：未上任，升为广东佥事。
English: Before taking office, he was promoted to Guangdong Anji.

古文：再迁广西提学副使，以身为教。
现代文：再迁广西提学副使，以身为教。
English: He was then transferred to Guangxi as a vice-envoy for education.

古文：择诸生高等聚五经书院，五日一登堂讲难。
现代文：从诸学生里面选择高等级的集聚在五经书院，五日一次登上学堂讲解疑难。
English: From among the students, those who chose the higher level gathered at the Five Classics College, and went to the school once every five days to explain the difficulties.

古文：三迁广东右布政使。
现代文：三迁广东右布政使。
English: Three reshuffles of Guangdong Right Branch political envoys have taken place.

古文：忤总督及巡抚御史，坐以不称职，当罢。
现代文：忤逆了总督和巡抚御史，因而说李中不称职，应当罢去职务。
English: He rebelled against the governor and the governor-general, and therefore said that Li Zhong was incompetent and should be removed from office.

古文：霍韬署吏部事，称中素廉节有才望，当留。
现代文：霍韬署吏部事，说李中素有廉节有才望，应当留任。
English: An official from the Fulong Department said that Li Zhong, who is known for his integrity and talent, should remain in his post.

古文：会政府有不悦者，降四川右参政。
现代文：正巧政府有不喜欢李中的，李中被降为四川右参政。
English: It just so happened that the government did not like Li Zhong, and Li Zhong was demoted to Sichuan right-wing politician.

古文：十八年擢右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
现代文：十八年升为右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
English: In 18 years, he was promoted to the position of the Right Deputy Governor of the Capital and the Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：岁歉，令民捕蝗者倍予谷，蝗绝而饥者济。
现代文：这一年收成不好，下令让农民捕捉蝗虫，政府加倍付给粮食，因此蝗虫灭绝而饥饿的人得到救济。
English: This year's harvest was poor, and it was ordered that farmers should catch locusts, and the government doubled the payment for grain, so the locusts were exterminated and the starving people received relief.

古文：擒剧盗关继光，邻境攘其功，中不与辩。
现代文：李中擒获恶盗关继光，邻境攘夺李中的功劳，李中不与他争辩。
English: Li Zhongyao was awarded the evil thief Guan Jiguang, and the neighboring countries extorted Li Zhongyao's merits. Li Zhongyao did not argue with him.

古文：进副都御史，总督南京粮储。
现代文：进升为副都御史，总督南京粮食储备。
English: He was promoted to vice-governor of the capital and governor of the Nanjing grain reserve.

古文：御史金灿按四川时，尝荐中。
现代文：御史金灿按抚四川时，曾经推荐过李中。
English: When Emperor Jinshan of Sichuan was enthroned, he once recommended Li Zhong.

古文：中不谢，灿憾之，至是摭他事诬劾。
现代文：李中不谢他，金灿为此怀恨他，至此他摘取李中的一些事情诬告他。
English: Li Zhong did not thank him, Jin Can hated him for this, so he took some things from Li Zhong and falsely accused him.

古文：方议调用而中卒。
现代文：朝廷刚刚议调李中时，李中死去。
English: The imperial court had just discussed the transfer of Li Zhong when Li Zhong died.

古文：光宗时，追谥庄介。
现代文：光宗时，追加谥号为庄介。
English: At the time of Mitsuzo, his additional posthumous name was Shosuke.

古文：中守官廉。
现代文：李中守官廉洁。
English: Li Zhongguo is an incorruptible official.

古文：自广西归，欲饭客，贷米邻家。
现代文：从广西回到家乡，想用米饭招待客人，从邻家借贷粮米。
English: Returning to his hometown from Guangxi, he wanted to use rice to entertain his guests, so he borrowed grain and rice from a neighbor.

古文：米至，又乏薪，将以浴器爨。
现代文：米借到后，又没有柴薪，准备用浴器烧火做饭。
English: After the rice was borrowed, there was no firewood, so they prepared to use the bath to make fire for cooking.

古文：倭至，楷御于沙埠，倭不得渡，乃以间筑城。
现代文：客人等到天色暮黑，竟还不能吃到饭而告辞走了。
English: The guests waited until dusk, but were unable to eat and left.

古文：倭又至，登陴守，日杀贼数人，倭遁去。
现代文：李中少年时跟同乡杨珠学习，既而将杨珠学说扩充，使他的学术沉潜邃密，学者称李中为谷平先生。
English: When Li Zhong was a teenager, he studied with his fellow countryman Yang Zhu. He expanded Yang Zhu's theory and made his academic immersion thorough. Scholars call Li Zhong Mr. Gu Ping.

古文：改知昌乐，亦以治行闻。
现代文：他的学生罗洪先、王龟年、周子恭都能传承他的学术。
English: His students, Luo Hongxian, Wang Guiren and Zhou Ziqong, can all pass on his academic legacy.

古文：欧阳铎，字崇道，泰和人。
现代文：李中的同族人李楷，又传承罗洪先的学术。欧阳铎，字崇道，泰和人。
English: Li Zhong's compatriot Li Kai also inherited Luo Hongxian's scholarship. Ouyang Xuan, Zhaodong Dao, Taihe Ren.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：授行人。
现代文：授官行人。
English: Awarded to pedestrians.

古文：上书极论时政，不报。
现代文：向皇帝上书极力论讨时政，没有得到批复。
English: He wrote to the emperor to discuss current affairs, but received no reply.

古文：使蜀府，王厚遗之，不受。
现代文：出使蜀府，王厚礼赠他，他不接受。
English: Wang Houli sent an envoy to Shu, but he did not accept the gift.

古文：历工部郎中，改南兵部。
现代文：历任工部郎中，改派到南京兵部。
English: He was reassigned to the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：出为延平知府。
现代文：出任延平知府。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Yanping Prefecture.

古文：毁淫祠数十百所，以其材葺学宫。
现代文：捣毁淫祠数十百所，用这些材料修补学宫。
English: Tear down tens of hundreds of temples of prostitution and use the materials to repair the palace of learning.

古文：司礼太监萧敬家奴杀人，置之法。
现代文：司礼太监肖敬的家奴杀人，被他绳之以法。
English: Xiao Jing, a ceremonial eunuch, was brought to justice for the murder of his family slave.

古文：调福州，议均徭曰： 郡多士大夫，其士大夫又多田产。
现代文：调到福州，讨论均徭法说： 郡府有很多士大夫，这些士大夫又有很多田产。
English: Transferred to Fuzhou to discuss the equalization method, he said: There are a lot of officials and magistrates in the county, and these officials and magistrates have a lot of farmland.

古文：民有产者无几耳，而徭则尽责之民。
现代文：黎民百姓有田产的人没有几个，而劳役则都是由黎民百姓负责。
English: There are only a few Li people who have farmland, and all Li people are responsible for labor service.

古文：请分民半役。 士大夫率不便。
现代文：请求分出他们的一半劳役由士大夫负担。 
English: They requested that their half of the labor be borne by the shidafu.

古文：巡按御史汪珊力持之，议乃行。
现代文：士大夫都不愿意。因巡按御史汪珊极力支持这件事，这项建议才得以实行。
English: None of the magistrates were willing to do so, and it was only because of the strong support of the chief procurator, Wang Shan, that the proposal was implemented.

古文：嘉靖三年擢广东提学副使。
现代文：嘉靖三年升为广东提学副使。
English: Three years later, Jiajing was promoted to vice-envoy of Guangdong to promote education.

古文：累迁南京光禄卿，历右副都御史，巡抚应天十府。
现代文：累迁南京光禄卿，历任右副都御史，巡抚应天十府。
English: He was successively relocated to Nanjing Guangluqing, successively served as the right vice-governor of the capital, and became the governor of the Ten Prefectures of Yingtian.

古文：苏、松田不甚相悬。
现代文：苏、松两地民田相差不太大。
English: There is not much difference between the rice fields in Su and Song.

古文：下者亩五升，上者至二十倍。
现代文：最少的一亩负担五升，最多的达到了二十倍。
English: The smallest one mu burdened five liters, the largest reached twenty times.

古文：铎令赋最重者减耗米，派轻赍；最轻者征本色，增耗米。
现代文：欧阳铎下令让赋最重的农民减少耗米，分派轻资；最轻的求取本色，增加耗米。
English: Ouyang Zang ordered the farmers with the heaviest endowment to reduce rice consumption and allocate light capital; the lightest ones to seek their true nature and increase rice consumption.

古文：阴轻重之，赋乃均。
现代文：暗中对赋税减轻或加重，使赋税达到均衡。
English: Secretly reduce or increase the tax burden, so that the tax burden is balanced.

古文：诸推收田，从圩不从户，诡寄无所容。
现代文：推收田赋，根据田圩而不根据户，让诡名寄托者无地容纳。
English: According to the rice fields, but not according to the households, so that the bearer of the mysterious name can be accommodated without land.

古文：州县荒田四千四百余顷，岁勒民偿赋。
现代文：州县的荒田有四千四百多顷，年终勒令农民偿赋。
English: There are more than 4,400 hectares of wasteland in prefectures and counties. At the end of the year, farmers were ordered to pay compensation.

古文：铎以所清漏赋及他奇羡补之。
现代文：欧阳铎用所清理出来的漏赋和其他剩余的零数来弥补。
English: Ouyang Zou used the cleared out leaks and other remaining zeros to make up for it.

古文：议徭役及裁邮置费凡数十百条，民皆称便。
现代文：议论徭役及裁邮置费共有数十百条，百姓都称便利。
English: There are tens of hundreds of comments on the post office and the reduction of postage costs, and people all say it is convenient.

古文：迁南京兵部侍郎，进吏部右侍郎。
现代文：迁南京兵部侍郎，又升为吏部右侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the Nanjing Military Department as a chamberlain, and then promoted to the Right Chamberlain of the Cadastral Department.

古文：大顺子允淳，与父同登进士。终尚宝丞。潘埙，字伯和，山阳人。
现代文：做官虽然通显，但家里却很冷清。死后，赠工部尚书，谥号恭简。潘埙，字伯和，山阳人。
English: Although he was a well-known official, his family was very cold. After his death, he was given the title of Shangshu from the Ministry of Works and the posthumous name of Jingjian.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：授工科给事中。
现代文：授官工科给事中。
English: The conferment of engineering is pending.

古文：性刚决，弹劾无所避。
现代文：性格刚决，弹劾无所回避。
English: Impeachment is inevitable.

古文：论诸大寮王鼎、刘机、甯杲、陈天祥等，多见纳。
现代文：论判诸大僚王鼎、刘机、宁杲、陈天祥等人，多被皇上采纳。
English: Wang Ding, Liu Ji, Ning Yao, Chen Tianxiang and others, were mostly adopted by the emperor.

古文：乾清宫灾，埙上疏曰： 陛下莅阼九年，治效未臻，灾祥迭见。
现代文：乾清宫遭火灾，潘埙向皇帝上疏说： 陛下登位九年，治理效果未实现，灾祥迭相出现。
English: When the Qianqing Palace caught fire, Pan Zheng said to the emperor Shang Zuo: His Majesty has been on the throne for nine years, the governance effect has not been realized, and disasters and auspicious signs have appeared one after another.

古文：臣愿非安宅不居，非大道不由，非正人不亲，非儒术不崇，非大阅不观兵，非执法不成狱，非骨肉之亲不干政，非汗马之劳不滥赏。
现代文：我希望皇上不是安全的住宅不居住，不是大道不经由，不是正人君子不亲近，不是儒术不崇尚，不是大阅之礼不观兵，不是执法不成狱，不是骨肉之亲不让干预政事，不是汗马功劳不滥加赏赐。
English: I hope that the emperor does not live in a safe house, does not travel on a highway, is not close to a righteous person, does not worship Confucianism, does not watch soldiers, does not go to prison for enforcing the law, does not allow his relatives to interfere in political affairs, and does not reward them for their hard work.

古文：臣闻陛下好戏谑矣。
现代文：我听说陛下喜好谑戏。
English: I've heard your majesty is fond of a good romp.

古文：臣以为入而内庭琴瑟钟鼓人伦之乐，不必游离宫以为欢，狎群小以为快也；出而外廷华裔一统莫非臣妾，不必收朝官为私人，集远人为勇士也。
现代文：臣认为入内廷有琴瑟钟鼓人伦之乐，不必以游离宫外为欢，不必以狎戏众小人为快啊。出到外廷，华裔一统莫不都是您的臣妾，不必收朝廷官员做私人，不必集远人为勇士。
English: The vassal thought that entering the Inner Court has the music of the zither, the clock, the drum, and the harmony of the people. It is not necessary to enjoy the pleasure of floating outside the palace, and it is not necessary to enjoy the entertainment of the little people. When you go to the Outer Court, the Chinese are not all your vassals and concubines, you do not have to take the court officials as private individuals, and you do not have to gather distant people as warriors.

古文：闻陛下好佛矣。
现代文：听说陛下好佛。
English: I heard that Your Majesty likes Buddha.

古文：臣以为南郊有天地，太庙有祖宗。
现代文：臣认为南郊有天地，太庙有祖宗。
English: The vassal believed that the southern suburbs had heaven and earth, and the Great Temple had ancestors.

古文：锡祉迎庥，佛于何有？
现代文：赐给福礻止迎来福禄，佛能够做什么？
English: What can the Buddha do after bestowing blessings and ushering in fortune?

古文：番僧可逐而度僧可止也。
现代文：番僧可以逐出而度僧也可以制止。
English: Vigilant monks can be expelled and roving monks can be stopped.

古文：闻陛下好勇、好货、好土木矣。
现代文：听说陛下好勇、好货、好土木。
English: I have heard that His Majesty is brave, good with goods and good at civil engineering.

古文：臣以为诛奸遏乱，大勇也，不须驰马试剑以自劳。
现代文：臣认为诛锄奸邪遏止叛乱才是大勇，用不着驰马试剑以自劳为勇。
English: The vassal believed that it was bravery to stop the rebellion through treachery. There was no need to ride a horse, test a sword, and work hard to be brave.

古文：三军六师，大武也，不须边将边军以自拥。
现代文：三军六师是大武，用不着边将边军呼拥以为威武。
English: The Sixth Division of the Third Army is a great army, and there is no need to embrace the border troops as a great army.

古文：任土作贡，皇店奚为？
现代文：地方物产随时纳贡，皇店做什么用？
English: Local properties are subject to tax at any time. What is the imperial store used for?

古文：闤阓骈阗，内市安用？
现代文：市井繁盛，内市做什么用？
English: What use is the inner city if the outer city prospers?

古文：阿房壮丽，古以为金块珠砾也，况养豹乎！
现代文：阿房宫壮丽，古人以为是泥土瓦砾碎石，何况养豹呢？
English: Afang Palace is magnificent. The ancients thought it was mud, rubble and rubble. How about raising leopards?

古文：金碧荧煌，古以为涂膏畔血也，况供佛乎！
现代文：金碧辉煌，古代以为是涂膏抹血，何况供佛呢？
English: Golden splendor, ancient thought to be anointed with blood, let alone offered to the Buddha?

古文：是数者之好皆可已而不已者也。 
现代文：这些数种爱好都是可以废止而没有废止的啊。 
English: These several hobbies can be abolished, but they are not.

古文：疏入，报闻。
现代文：疏章呈入，没有下文。
English: The report has been submitted, and the reply has been received.

古文：十一年正月，上书言： 陛下始者血气未定，礼度或逾。
现代文：正德十一年正月，向皇帝上书说 ：陛下刚刚登位时，血气未定，礼度时有超越。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of Zhengde's reign, he wrote to the emperor, "When your majesty had just ascended the throne, his blood was undecided, and his courtesy sometimes exceeded.

古文：今春秋已盛，更弦易辙，此其时也。
现代文：而今年岁正盛，更弦易辙，则正是时候。
English: And this year, with the economy booming, it's time to change course.

古文：昔太甲居桐，处仁迁义，不失中兴。
现代文：昔年太甲在桐居住，处于仁而迁于义，不失中兴。
English: In the old days, Taiga lived in Tong, but moved from Jin to Yixing.

古文：汉武下轮台之诏，年已七十，犹为令主。
现代文：汉武帝下轮台的诏书时，年纪已经有七十，犹为贤明之主。
English: When Emperor Hanwu issued the edict to abolish the wheel, he was already seventy years old, and he was still the lord of wisdom.

古文：况陛下过未浮于太甲，悔又早于武帝，何愆不可盖，何治不可建乎？ 
现代文：况且陛下的过失没有超过太甲，悔悟又比汉武帝早，何错不能改，何功不能建呢？ 
English: Moreover, His Majesty's fault did not exceed Taiga, and repentance was earlier than Emperor Hanwu. Why can't mistakes be changed, and why can't merits be built?

古文：时欲毁西安门外民居，有所兴作。
现代文：当时武宗想拆毁西安门外的民居，有所兴建。
English: At that time, Bu Zong wanted to demolish the houses outside Xi'an Gate, but some were built.

古文：埙与御史熊相、曹雷复切谏，皆不报。
现代文：潘埙和御史熊相、曹雷又深切谏阻，皇帝均不答复。
English: Pan Xuan, Gong Shi Xiong and Cao Lei were also deeply opposed, and the emperor did not reply.

古文：三迁至兵科都给事中。
现代文：三次迁官至兵科给事中。
English: He has been transferred to the military academy three times.

古文：右都督毛伦以附刘瑾论死，削世荫。
现代文：右都督毛伦因为附随刘瑾而被论判处死，剥夺他的世袭荫庇的特权。
English: The right-hand governor, Mao Lun, was sentenced to death for following Liu Bei, depriving him of the privilege of hereditary patronage.

古文：伦尝有德于钱宁，恃为内援，其子求复袭。
现代文：毛伦曾经对钱宁有恩德，依靠钱宁为内援，毛伦的儿子请求恢复世袭。
English: Maureen had once been kind to Channing, relying on Channing for internal support, and Maureen's son asked to restore the lineage.

古文：埙等力争，宁从中主之，寝其奏。
现代文：潘埙等人力争反对，而钱宁从中做主，息止他们的奏请。
English: Pan Ye and the others fought against it, but Channing prevailed and stopped them from playing.

古文：忽中旨命埙与吏科给事中吕经各进一阶，外调，举朝大骇。
现代文：很快皇帝就下旨将潘埙和吏科给事中吕经各进官一级，从朝廷调出到外地，举朝都感到震惊。
English: Soon, the emperor issued an order to promote Pan Xuan and Li Ke to the first-level officials, and transferred them from the imperial court to other places. The whole court was shocked.

古文：给事中邵锡、御史王金等交章请留，不报。
现代文：给事中邵锡、御史王金等人都上章请求将他们留在朝廷，但没有结果。
English: Shao Xi, Goshi Wang Jin and others involved in the affair all petitioned the emperor to keep them at the imperial court, but to no avail.

古文：遂添注埙开州同知。
现代文：于是添注潘埙为开州同知。
English: Therefore, it was added that Pan Ye was an acquaintance of Kaizhou.

古文：嘉请七年，累官右副都御史，巡抚河南。
现代文：嘉靖七年加官为右副都御史，巡抚河南。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of Henan Province.

古文：潞州巨盗陈卿据青阳山为乱，山西巡抚江潮、常道先后讨贼无功，乃敕埙会剿。
现代文：潞州巨盗陈卿占据青羊山进行叛乱，山西巡抚江潮、常道先后讨伐敌贼但未见成效，于是命令潘埙会剿。
English: The giant thief Chen Xing of Zhangzhou occupied Qingyang Mountain to carry out a rebellion. The Shanxi governor Jiangchao and Changdao successively fought against the enemy thieves but did not achieve any results, so he ordered Pan Yu to meet him.

古文：埙谋于道曰： 贼守险，难以阵。
现代文：潘埙与常道谋划说： 敌贼占守天险，难以阵攻。
English: Pan Xuan and Changdao said in their planning: It is dangerous for the enemy to occupy and defend, and it is difficult to attack.

古文：合诸路夹攻，出不意夺其险，乃可擒也。 
现代文：现在合诸路兵士夹攻，出其不意夺下天险，就可以擒获敌人。 
English: Now, when soldiers of all ranks attack simultaneously, they can capture the enemy by taking the enemy by surprise.

古文：遂分五哨三路入，募土人为导。
现代文：于是将军队分为五哨三路攻入，招募当地人士作为向导。
English: As a result, the army was divided into five posts and three routes, and local people were recruited as guides.

古文：首攻夺井脑，贼悉众争险。
现代文：首次攻夺井脑，敌贼全部上来争夺险要。
English: For the first time, the wellhead was captured, and the enemy bandits all came up to fight for the key.

古文：官军奋击，大破之，追奔至莎草岭，毁安阳诸巢。
现代文：官军奋击，大破敌贼，追赶到莎草岭，烧毁安阳的诸多巢穴。
English: The official army fought hard, smashed the enemy, chased to the sedge ridge, and burned many nests of Anyang.

古文：山东副使牛鸾由潞城入，破贼李庄泉。
现代文：山东副使牛鸾由潞城攻入，攻破敌贼李庄泉。
English: Shandong Vice ordered the oxen to enter from Shicheng and break through the enemy Li Zhuangquan.

古文：其夕，河南副使翟瓒捣卿巢，卿败走。
现代文：当天晚上，河南副使翟瓒捣毁陈卿巢穴，陈卿败走。
English: In the evening of the same day, the Henan deputy envoy Zou destroyed Chen Xing's lair, and Chen Xing fled.

古文：瓒追败之栾庄山，又败之神河。
现代文：翟瓒追赶到栾庄山又打败敌人，又在神河打败敌人。
English: He chased and defeated the enemy in Shanzhuang Mountain, and defeated the enemy in Shenhe.

古文：山西佥事陈大纲亦屡蹙贼，先后降二千三百余人。
现代文：山西佥事陈大纲也多次威迫敌人，先后俘虏敌军二千三百多人。
English: Shanxi Anji Chen Guan also repeatedly intimidated the enemy, and successively captured more than 2300 enemy soldiers.

古文：自进兵至搜灭贼巢，凡二十九日。
现代文：从进兵到搜灭贼巢，共二十九日。
English: From entering the army to searching out the thieves' nest, a total of twenty-nine days passed.

古文：捷闻，帝将大赉，遣给事中夏言往核，未报。河南大饥，埙不以时振，而河南知府范璁不待报，辄开仓发粟，民德而颂之。
现代文：捷报传来，皇帝准备大赏，派遣给事中夏言前往核实，尚未报告结果时，河南发生大饥荒，潘埙没有及时救济饥民，但河南知府范没有等到报告批下来，就开仓发粮，黎民感德而歌颂他。
English: When the news of victory came, the emperor was preparing a large reward and sent Xia Yan to verify the matter. When the results had not yet been reported, a great famine occurred in Henan. Pan Ye did not provide timely relief to the starving people. However, Henan Governor Fan did not wait for the report to be approved before opening the warehouse to distribute grain. The people felt virtuous and sang his praises.

古文：埙怨声大起，流闻禁中。
现代文：但对潘埙的怨声大起，流言传到宫中。
English: However, rumours about Pan Xuan were rife, and the rumours spread to the palace.

古文：帝切责抚、按匿灾状。
现代文：皇帝深切责罚巡抚、巡按隐瞒灾情。
English: The emperor severely punished the inspector and the inspectors for concealing the disaster.

古文：埙惶恐引罪，且归罪于璁，遂为给事中蔡经等所劾。
现代文：潘埙惶恐地承认自己有罪，并且归罪于范，于是被给事中蔡经等人所弹劾。
English: Pan Zhe panicked and admitted that he was guilty, and blamed Fan, so he was impeached by Cai Jing and others.

古文：隆庆初，复官，卒。
现代文：皇帝下诏罢除潘埙，永不叙用。
English: The emperor decreed that Pan Xuan should be dismissed and never be reappointed.

古文：乱卒为曾铣所定，见《铣传》。
现代文：夏言核实上次平息叛贼的功劳时，潘埙功居首位。桂萼讨厌他，只赐银币。
English: When Xia Yan checked the merits of the last time to quell the traitors, Pan Xuan's merits ranked first. Gui Caly hated him and only gave him silver coins.

古文：欧阳重，字子重，庐陵人。
现代文：潘埙八十七岁时去世。欧阳重，字子重，庐陵人。
English: Pan Zheng died at the age of eighty-seven. Ouyang heavy, Zizi heavy, Fuling people.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：殿试对策，历诋阙政。
现代文：殿试对策，多次诋毁政事的过错。
English: The palace tried countermeasures and repeatedly denigrated the mistakes of the government.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授官刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：刘瑾兄死，百官往吊，重不往。
现代文：刘瑾的哥哥死后，百官前往吊祭，而欧阳重不去。
English: After the death of Liu Ye's brother, a hundred officials went to the hanging ceremony, but Ouyang did not go.

古文：张锐、钱宁掌厂卫，连构搢绅狱，重皆力与争。
现代文：张锐、钱宁掌管厂卫，连续制造绅案件，欧阳重都与他们力争。
English: Zhang Rui and Qian Ning were in charge of the plant's sanitary department, and they continuously fabricated gentry cases. Ouyang Chong was always struggling with them.

古文：锐等假他事系之狱，赎杖还职，仍停俸。
现代文：张锐等假借其他的事牵连欧阳重入狱，后来赎罪复职，但仍停了他的薪俸。
English: Zhang Rui and others implicated Ouyang back into prison under the guise of other matters, and later he was pardoned and reinstated, but his salary was still suspended.

古文：再迁郎中。
现代文：再迁郎中。
English: Then he moved to a junior high school.

古文：历四川、云南提学副使。
现代文：历任四川、云南提督副使。
English: Successive Vice-Envoy to the Admirals of Sichuan and Yunnan.

古文：迁浙江按察使，未上。
现代文：调任浙江按察使，但未上任。
English: He was transferred to the post of inspector of Zhejiang Province, but did not take up the post.

古文：嘉靖六年春拜右佥都御史，巡抚应天。
现代文：嘉靖六年春天拜官右佥都御史，巡抚应天。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Jiajing Emperor, the official of the Right Division of the Capital Imperial History, the governor Yingtian.

古文：会寻甸土酋安铨、凤朝文反，廷议以重谙滇事，乃改云南。
现代文：正逢寻甸土酋安铨、凤朝文造反，朝廷谋议认为欧阳重熟悉滇事，于是改派云南。
English: It was at the time of the rebellion of the local chiefs An Zi and Feng Chaowen, and the imperial court thought that Ouyang was familiar with the anecdote, so he was reassigned to Yunnan.

古文：初，武定土知府凤诏母子坐事留云南，朝文绐其众，言诏已戮，官军将尽灭其部党，以故诸蛮悉从为乱，攻围会城。
现代文：开始，武定土知府凤诏母子因故被留在云南，凤朝文欺骗他的部众，说凤诏已被杀戮，军官准备全部消灭他的部党，所以诸蛮都跟从凤朝文作乱，围攻会城。
English: At the beginning, Feng Zhao, mother and son of the Wuding prefectural governor, were left in Yunnan for some reason. Feng Chaowen deceived his subordinates, saying that Feng Zhao had been killed, and the officers were preparing to destroy all his subordinates. Therefore, all the barbarians followed Feng Chaowen to make trouble and besiege the capital.

古文：重督兵击败之，而遣诏母子还故地。
现代文：欧阳重督兵将他们击败，并且派遣凤诏母子返回故地。
English: Ouyang's heavy guards defeated them and sent Feng Zhao and his mother back to their hometown.

古文：其党愕，相率归之。
现代文：他的部党感到惊愕，都回归凤诏。
English: His ministers were taken aback, and they all returned to Feng Zhao.

古文：朝文计穷，绝普渡河走。
现代文：凤朝文无计可施，横渡普渡河逃走。
English: Feng Chaowen had no choice but to cross the Purdu River to escape.

古文：追兵至，歼焉。
现代文：追兵赶到，将他歼灭。
English: The pursuers arrived and annihilated him.

古文：铨逃寻甸故巢。
现代文：安铨逃到寻甸老巢。
English: An Xing fled to the old nest of Xingdian.

古文：官军攻破其砦，执铨，贼尽平。
现代文：官军攻破他的堡垒，捉住安铨，叛贼被全部平息。
English: The government army broke through his fortress, captured An Qi, and the traitors were all subdued.

古文：乃散其党二万人，迁寻甸府于凤梧山下，更设守御千户所。
现代文：于是解散其党二万人，将寻甸府迁到凤梧山下，又设守御千户所。
English: As a result, he disbanded his party of 20,000 people, moved the Shunde Prefecture to the foot of Fengwu Mountain, and set up the Office of the Guardian of Ten Thousand Households.

古文：重推功于前抚臣傅习，并进秩任子。
现代文：欧阳重将功劳推给前任抚臣付习，付习因此而提高官员品级，其子也被任命官职。
English: Ouyang Chong credited the work to his predecessor, Fuxin Fu Xi. Fu Xi thus raised the official's grade, and his son was also appointed to an official post.

古文：缅甸、木邦、陇川、孟密、孟养诸酋相仇杀，各讦奏于朝，下重等勘覆。
现代文：缅甸、木邦、陇川、孟密、孟养诸酋相互仇杀，并各方之间相互攻讦，奏于朝廷，朝廷命令欧阳重等人去勘察核实。
English: The leaders of Burma, Mupang, Luochuan, Mengmi, and Mengyang killed each other, and the parties attacked each other, which was reported to the imperial court. The imperial court ordered Ouyang Chong and others to investigate and verify.

古文：遣参政王汝舟、知府严时泰等遍历诸蛮，譬以祸福。
现代文：遣派参政王汝舟、知府严时泰等人走遍诸蛮，晓谕以祸福。
English: He sent Wang Ruzhou, a politician, and Yan Shitai, a prefectural governor, to walk all over the barbarians and tell them about good and evil.

古文：皆还侵地，供贡如故。
现代文：蛮人都返回侵地，向朝廷进贡如常。
English: The barbarians all returned to invade the country and pay tribute to the imperial court as usual.

古文：重列善后数事，悉报可，赐玺书褒谕。
现代文：欧阳重列出善后的数件事，向皇上报告，得到了批准，皇帝赐玺书褒奖。
English: Ouyang re-listed a few things to improve the aftermath, reported to the emperor, was approved, and the emperor gave him a letter of commendation.

古文：重乃恤创残，振贫乏，轻徭赋，规画盐铁商税、屯田诸务。
现代文：欧阳重于是进行抚恤创残、救济贫乏、减轻徭赋、规划盐铁商税、住宅耕田诸项事务。
English: Ouyang Rong then carried out a number of affairs, including the creation of pensions, relief of poverty, reduction of endowment, planning of salt and iron commercial tax, and residential farmland.

古文：民咸便之。
现代文：黎民皆称便利。
English: The people of Laiwu all call it convenient.

古文：云南岁贡金千两，费不赀。
现代文：云南每年进贡黄金千两，耗费不可计算。
English: Yunnan pays an annual tribute of 1,000 taels of gold, and the cost is incalculable.

古文：大理太和苍山产奇石，镇守中官遣军匠攻凿。
现代文：大理太和苍山出产奇石，镇守中官遣军匠采掘攻凿。
English: Dalitai and Cangshan produced strange stones, and the town guard sent soldiers and craftsmen to excavate and attack.

古文：山崩，压死无算。
现代文：山崩溃，压死人员无数。
English: The mountain collapsed, crushing countless people to death.

古文：重皆疏罢之，浮费大省。
现代文：欧阳重均上疏请求罢去，无益费用因此大量节省。
English: Ouyang re-evaluated the request to remove the dredge, thus saving a lot of unnecessary costs.

古文：当是时，镇守太监杜唐、黔国公沐绍勋相比为奸利，长吏不敢问，群盗由此起。
现代文：在这个时候，镇守太监杜唐、黔国公沐绍勋相互勾结为奸获利，地方长吏不敢过问，群盗由此而起。
English: At this time, the town guard eunuch, Du Tang, and the governor of Shandong Province, Mu Shao Xun, colluded with each other to make profits. Local officials did not dare to ask questions, and the group of thieves began.

古文：重疏言：盗率唐、绍勋庄户，请究主者。
现代文：欧阳重上疏说，群盗大都是杜唐、绍勋的庄户，请追究主事者。
English: Ouyang said that the group of thieves were mostly farmers from Dutang and Shaoxun. Please investigate the perpetrators.

古文：又奏绍勋任千户何经广诱奸人，夺民产；唐役占官军，岁取财万计。
现代文：又奏说绍勋任用千户何经广为招诱奸人，抢夺民产；杜唐役使占用官军，每年取得财产数以万计。
English: It was also reported that Shao Xun used thousands of households to recruit traitors and rob people's property; Du Tang's envoys occupied the official army and acquired tens of thousands of properties every year.

古文：因极言镇守中官宜革。
现代文：因而极力言说镇守中官应当革除。
English: Therefore, they insisted that the town guard lieutenant should be fired.

古文：帝颇纳其言，频下诏饬绍勋，命唐还京待勘。
现代文：皇帝很采纳他的建议，频频下诏书告诫绍勋，下令杜唐回到京城等待勘察。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion very well, frequently admonished Shao Xun in the imperial edict, and ordered Du Tang to return to Beijing to wait for the investigation.

古文：二人惧且怒，遣人结张璁，谋去重。
现代文：二人既恐惧又愤怒，派遣人巴结张璁，请求罢去欧阳重官职。
English: Both frightened and angry, the two men sent a messenger to Zhang Jun to request that Ouyang be removed from his high-ranking post.

古文：会重奉命清异姓冒军弊，都司久未报，给饷后期。
现代文：正巧欧阳重奉命清查军队中冒名顶替弊端，都司很久没有得到结果，供给军饷拖期。
English: It just so happened that Ouyang Rong was ordered to investigate the evils of impersonation in the army. The General Headquarters did not get the results for a long time, and the supply of military pay was delayed.

古文：唐等遂嗾六卫军华于军门。
现代文：杜唐等人于是怂恿六卫军在军队喧哗。
English: As a result, Dutang and the other members of the 6th Guards Army clamored to join the army.

古文：巡按御史刘臬以闻。劾重及唐、绍勋处置失当。
现代文：巡按御史刘臬听到后，弹劾欧阳重和杜唐、绍勋处置失当。
English: After listening to Liu Wei, the inspector-general of press and publication, he impeached Ouyang Shige and Du Tang and Shao Xun for improper handling.

古文：璁从中主之，解重职，责臬党庇，调外任，唐、绍勋不问。
现代文：张璁从中做主，解除欧阳重的职务，责罚刘臬结党庇护，调到地方任职，不问杜唐、绍勋之罪。
English: Zhang Ye took the initiative, relieved Ou Yang Ju of his duties, punished Liu Ye for sheltering the party, and transferred him to a local post, regardless of the crimes of Du Tang and Shao Xun.

古文：都给事中夏言等抗章曰： 以军士噪罪抚、按，纪纲谓何？
现代文：都给事中夏言等人抗章说 ：因军士喧哗加罪抚、按，纪纲怎么样？
English: They all protested to Xia Yan and others in the middle of the matter, saying, "Because of the sergeant's noise, the punishment was increased, what about the disciplinary code?"

古文：况重奉诏非生事。
现代文：况且欧阳重是奉诏行事并非生事。
English: Moreover, it is not a big deal that Ouyang Rongcheng is acting in accordance with the edict.

古文：臬言唐、绍勋罪与重等，今处分失宜，无以服天下。
现代文：刘臬说杜唐、绍勋的罪与欧阳重等同，现在的处分失宜，无以服天下。
English: Liu Wei said that the crimes of Du Tang and Shaoxun are the same as Ou Yangshuo, and the current punishment is inappropriate and cannot satisfy the world.

古文：顷年士卒骄悍，相效成风，类以月粮借口。
现代文：近年来士卒骄悍，互相效法成风，大都以月粮为借口。
English: In recent years, it has become common for soldiers and soldiers to be arrogant and imitate each other, mostly under the pretext of monthly rations.

古文：如甘肃、大同、福州、保定，事变屡见。
现代文：如甘肃、大同、福州、保定，事变屡次出现。
English: For example, in Gansu, Datong, Fuzhou and Baoding, incidents have repeatedly occurred.

古文：失今不治，他日当事之臣以此为讳，专务姑息，孰肯为陛下任事哉！
现代文：错过今天不治，他日当事之臣用这来作为借口，专门从事姑息宽大，谁肯为陛下效力呢？
English: Who would serve his majesty if he were to die today, and the ministers concerned were to use this as an excuse to specialize in clemency and leniency?

古文：愿曲宥二臣，全朝廷之体。 
现代文：希望宽恕二臣，以全朝廷的体统。 
English: He hoped that the two ministers would be pardoned, and that the entire imperial court would follow suit.

古文：帝怒，夺言等俸。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，削去夏言等人的俸禄。
English: Enraged, the emperor cut off the salaries of Natsugen and others.

古文：重罢归在道，闻御史王化劾其为桂萼党，不胜忿，抗疏陈辨，请录 大礼 大狱被逐诸臣，而自乞褫职。
现代文：欧阳重被罢官后在回家的路上，听到御史王化告他是桂萼的同党，他不胜愤怒，抗疏陈辩，请求任用被 大礼 大狱贬逐的诸臣，而自己乞求革除职务。
English: On his way home after Ouyang was removed from office, he heard Wang Hui of the imperial court accuse him of being a member of Gui Caly's party. He was enraged, resisted the argument, requested the appointment of ministers who had been expelled by the Great Ceremony and the Great Prison, and begged to be removed from office.

古文：又言得绍勋所遣百户丁镇私书，知行贿张璁，乞其覆护；璁奸佞，不宜在左右。
现代文：又说自己得绍勋所派遣百户丁镇的私人信件，知道绍勋行贿张璁，乞求张璁遮盖保护他，张璁奸佞，不应该让他留在皇上的左右。
English: He also said that he had received a personal letter from the hundred households of Ding Town sent by Shao Xun. He knew that Shao Xun had bribed Zhang Ye, begged Zhang Ye to cover and protect him, and that Zhang Ye was a traitor. He should not be allowed to stay around the emperor.

古文：璁疏辨。
现代文：张璁上疏为自己辩护。
English: Zhang Yuxiangsu defended himself.

古文：帝以重失职怨望，黜为民。
现代文：皇帝因欧阳重失职怨望，贬他为百姓。
English: The emperor, resentful of Ouyang's repeated dereliction of duty, demoted him to a commoner.

古文：重以臬被谪，言等夺俸，皆由己致之，复疏乞重谴代言官罪。
现代文：欧阳重认为刘臬被贬，夏言等人被剥夺俸禄，都是因为他自己牵累他们的，又上疏乞求加重处罚代言官之罪。
English: Ou Yangshuo believed that Liu Wei was demoted and Xia Yan and others were deprived of their salaries, all because he himself involved them, and he begged for a heavier punishment for the crime of the spokesperson.

古文：帝益怒，以已除名，置不问。
现代文：皇帝更加恼怒，因已经除名，而置之不问。
English: The emperor was even more angry, because he had already removed the name, but did not question it.

古文：重家居二十余年，言者屡荐，竟不复召。
现代文：欧阳重回家居住二十多年，言官多次推荐，终于没有再被召用。
English: Ouyang returned home to live for more than 20 years. He was recommended by the speech officer many times, but was finally not called again.

