古文：杜子春张老
现代文：杜子春张老
English: Du Zi Chun Zhang Lao

古文：杜子春
现代文：杜子春
English: Du Zichun

古文：杜子春者，盖周隋间人。
现代文：杜子春是南北朝对北周和隋朝时的人。
English: Du Zichun was a person who opposed the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty during the Southern and Northern Dynasties.

古文：少落拓，不事家产，然以志气闲旷，纵酒闲游。
现代文：少年时放浪不羁，没心思积累家业，心志很高，把一切看得很淡，每天纵酒闲游。
English: When he was a boy, he was wild and uninhibited, had no intention of accumulating a family business, had a high spirit, saw everything very lightly, and drank and swam every day.

古文：资产荡尽，投于亲故，皆以不事事见弃。
现代文：把家产花光后去投奔亲友，但亲友们都认为他不是个办正事的人，拒绝收留他。
English: After spending all of his family's money, he went to live with relatives and friends, but they all thought he was not a serious person and refused to take him in.

古文：方冬，衣破腹空，徒行长安中，日晚未食，彷徨不知所往。
现代文：当时已是冬天，他衣衫破烂腹中无食，徒步在长安街上游荡，天快黑了，还没吃着饭，徘徊着不知该去哪里。
English: At that time, it was already winter, his clothes were tattered and he had no food in his stomach. He wandered around Chang'an Street on foot. It was getting dark, he hadn't eaten yet, and he didn't know where to go.

古文：于东市西门，饥寒之色可掬，仰天长吁。
现代文：他从东街走到西街，饥寒交迫孤苦无靠，不由得仰天长叹。
English: He walked from East Street to West Street, hungry, cold and helpless, and could not help but sigh.

古文：有一老人策杖于前，问曰： 君子何叹？ 春言其心，且愤其亲戚之疏薄也，感激之气，发于颜色。
现代文：这时有位老人拄着拐杖来到他面前，问他为什么叹息，杜子春就说了他的处境和心情，怨恨亲友们对他如此无情无义，越说越愤慨，十分激动。
English: At this time, an old man on crutches came to him and asked him why he was sighing. Du Zichun told him about his situation and mood. He resented that his relatives and friends were so merciless towards him. He became more and more indignant and very excited.

古文：老人曰： 几缗则丰用？ 
现代文：老人问他： 你需要多少钱就能够花用呢？ 
English: The old man asked him: How much money do you need to be able to spend it?

古文：子春曰： 三五万则可以活矣。 
现代文：杜子春说： 我若有三五万钱就可以维持生活了。 
English: Du Zichun said, "If I had 350,000 yuan, I would be able to sustain my life.

古文：老人曰： 未也。 更言之： 十万。 
现代文：老人说： 不够吧，你再多说一些！  十万。 
English: The old man said, "That's not enough, say more! One hundred thousand."

古文：曰： 未也。 
现代文：老人说： 还不够吧！ 
English: The old man said, "That's not enough!

古文：乃言 百万 。
现代文：杜子春就说： 那么，一百万足够了。 
English: Du Zichun said: Well, one million is enough.

古文：亦曰： 未也。 曰： 三百万。 
现代文：老人还说不够。杜子春说： 那就三百万。 
English: The old man still said it was not enough. Du Zichun said: That's three million.

古文：乃曰： 可矣。 
现代文：老人说： 这还差不多。 
English: The old man said, "That's about right.

古文：于是袖出一缗曰： 给子今夕，明日午时，候子于西市波斯邸，慎无后期。 
现代文：老人就从袖子里掏出一串钱说： 今晚先给你这些，明天中午我在西街的波斯府宅等你，你别来晚了。 
English: The old man took out a bundle of money from his sleeve and said, "Tonight, I'll give you these first. Tomorrow at noon, I'll be waiting for you at the Persian mansion on West Street. Don't be late."

古文：及时子春往，老人果与钱三百万，不告姓名而去。
现代文：第二天中午杜子春如期前往，老人果然给了他三百万钱，没留姓名就走了。
English: The next day at noon, Du Zichun went as scheduled. The old man gave him three million yuan and left without leaving his name.

古文：子春既富，荡心复炽，自以为终身不复羁旅也。
现代文：杜子春有了这么多钱，就又浪荡起来，自己认为有这么多钱一生也不会受穷了。
English: When Du Zichun had so much money, he went on a spending spree again. He thought that with so much money, he would never be poor.

古文：乘肥衣轻，会酒徒，征丝管，歌舞于倡楼，不复以治生为意。
现代文：从此他乘肥马穿轻裘，每天和朋友们狂饮，叫来乐队给他奏乐开心，到花街柳巷鬼混，从来不把以后的生计放在心上。
English: From then on, he rode a fat horse and wore a light coat, drank heavily with his friends every day, invited a band to play music for him, and went to the Flower Street and Willow Alley to fool around. He never thought about his future livelihood.

古文：一二年间，稍稍而尽，衣服车马，易贵从贱，去马而驴，去驴而徒，倏忽如初。
现代文：只一二年的工夫就把老人给他的钱挥霍个精光，只好穿着很便宜的衣服，把马换成驴，后来驴也没有只好徒步，转眼间又像他刚到长安时那样，成了个穷光蛋。
English: After only a year or two, he squandered all the money the old man had given him. He had to wear very cheap clothes, and he had to exchange his horse for a donkey. Later, the donkey also had to go on foot. In no time, he became a pauper, just as he had been when he first arrived in Chang'an.

古文：既而复无计，自叹于市门。
现代文：穷途末路，无可奈何，又仰天长叹起来。
English: At the end of the road, helpless, and sighed.

古文：发声而老人到，握其手曰： 君复如此，奇哉。
现代文：刚一长叹，那位老人就出现在面前，拉着他的手说： 你怎么又弄到这个地步了？真怪。
English: Just after a long sigh, the old man appeared in front of him, took his hand and said: How did you get to this point again? It's strange.

古文：吾将复济子。
现代文：没关系，我还要帮助你，你说吧，要多少钱？ 
English: Never mind, I'll still help you. Tell me, how much will it cost?

古文：几缗方可？ 子春惭不应。
现代文：杜子春羞愧难当，不好意思开口。
English: Du Zichun was too ashamed and embarrassed to speak.

古文：老人因逼之，子春愧谢而已。
现代文：老人再三逼问，杜子春只是惭愧地赔礼。
English: The old man asked again and again, but Du Zichun only apologized with shame.

古文：老人曰： 明日午时，来前期处。 
现代文：老人说： 明天中午，你还到从前我约见你的地方去吧。 
English: The old man said, "Tomorrow at noon, you should go to the place where I used to meet you.

古文：子春忍愧而往，得钱一千万。
现代文：第二天杜子春很羞愧地去了，老人这次给了他一千万。
English: The next day, Du Zichun went home very ashamed. This time, the old man gave him ten million.

古文：未受之初，愤发，以为从此谋身治生，石季伦、猗顿小竖耳。
现代文：杜子春没接钱就再三表决心，说这次一定要奋发向上置办家业，今后会成为大富翁，让石崇、猗顿这些古时候的大富翁和他俩相比，都算个小角色。
English: Du Zichun did not accept the money and repeatedly expressed his determination, saying that this time he must work hard to set up a family business, and in the future he will become a millionaire, so that Shi Chong and Guyton, these ancient millionaires, are a small role compared to him.

古文：钱既入手，心又翻然，纵适之情，又却如故。
现代文：老人就把钱给了他。钱一到手，杜子春心又变了，又开始挥霍无度花天酒地了。
English: The old man gave him the money. As soon as he got the money, Du Zi Chunxin changed again and began to spend extravagantly.

古文：不一二年间，贫过旧日。
现代文：不到一二年间，又是两手空空，比上次还惨。
English: Less than a year or two later, both hands were empty again, worse than the last time.

古文：复遇老人于故处，子春不胜其愧，掩面而走。
现代文：这时，他在长安街上遇到老人的地方又是见到了老人，由于太羞愧，就用手捂上脸躲开了老人。
English: At this time, where he met the old man on Chang'an Street, he saw the old man again. Because he was too ashamed, he covered his face with his hands to avoid the old man.

古文：老人牵裾止之，又曰： 嗟乎拙谋也。 
现代文：老人却一把抓住他的衣服说： 你能躲到哪里去？
English: But the old man grabbed him by his clothes and said, "Where can you hide?

古文：因与三千万，曰： 此而不痊，则子贫在膏育矣。 
现代文：这是最笨的办法。 然后又给了他三千万说： 这次你要还不改过自新，你就永远受穷吧！ 
English: Then he gave him another thirty million and said, "If you don't reform this time, you'll be poor forever!"

古文：子春曰： 吾落拓邪游，生涯罄尽，亲戚豪族，无相顾者，独此叟三给我，我何以当之？ 
现代文：杜子春心想，自己放荡挥霍，最后弄得身上一文莫名，亲戚朋友中有的是豪富的人，但谁也不理睬我，唯独这位老人三次给我巨款，我该怎样做才对得起他呢？
English: Du Zichun thought to himself, I have been dissolute and profligate, and in the end I have made myself penniless. Among my relatives and friends are very rich people, but no one pays any attention to me, except for this old man who has given me huge sums of money three times. What should I do to be worthy of him?

古文：因谓老人曰： 吾得此，人间之事可以立，孤孀可以衣食，于名教复圆矣。
现代文：想到这里他就对老人说： 我有了这三次教训，应该能够在人世上自立了。我不但今后要自立，还要周济天下孤儿寡母，以此来挽回我失去的名誉和教化。
English: Thinking of this, he said to the old man, "With these three lessons, I should be able to stand on my own feet in the human world. Not only should I stand on my own feet in the future, but I should also help orphans and widows around the world in order to regain my lost reputation and enlightenment."

古文：感叟深惠，立事之后，唯叟所使。 
现代文：我深深感激你老人家对我的恩惠，就是将来我干成一番事业也完全是因为你对我的教诲和资助。 
English: I am deeply grateful to you old man for your kindness to me. Even if I succeed in my career in the future, it is entirely because of your teachings and financial support.

古文：老人曰： 吾心也！
现代文：老人说： 这正是我对你的期望啊！
English: The old man said, "That's exactly what I expect from you!"

古文：子治生毕，来岁中元，见我于老君双桧下。 
现代文：你有了成就以后，明年七月十五中元节时，你在老君庙前那两棵桧树下等我吧。 
English: After you have achieved something, you can wait for me under the two eucalyptus trees in front of the Laojun Temple on the Mid-Autumn Festival on July 15 next year.

古文：子春以孤孀多寓淮南，遂转资扬州，买良田百顷，郭中起甲第，要路置邸百余间，悉召孤孀，分居第中。
现代文：杜子春知道孤儿寡母大多流落在淮南，就来到扬州，买了一百顷良田，在城中盖了府宅，在重要的路口建了一百多间房子，遍召孤儿寡母分住在各个府宅里。
English: Du Zichun knew that most of the orphans and widows were in Huainan, so he came to Yangzhou, bought a hundred hectares of good farmland, built a mansion in the city, built more than a hundred houses at important intersections, and invited orphans and widows to live in various mansions.

古文：婚嫁甥侄，迁袝族亲，恩者煦之，仇者复之。
现代文：对于他自己家族里的亲戚，不分近亲和远亲，过去对他有恩的都给以报答，有仇的，也进行了报复。
English: For his relatives in his own family, regardless of close relatives and distant relatives, he rewarded those who were kind to him in the past, and also took revenge on those who had a grudge.

古文：既毕事，及期而往。老人者方啸于二桧之阴。
现代文：完成了自己的心愿后，杜子春按期来到了老君庙前，见那老人正在桧树下吹口哨唱歌。
English: After fulfilling his wish, Du Zichun arrived at the Laojun Temple on schedule and saw the old man whistling and singing under the eucalyptus tree.

古文：遂与登华山云台峰。
现代文：见到杜子春后，就领他登上华山云台峰。
English: After seeing Duzi Chun, he led him to climb Huashan Yuntai Peak.

古文：入四十里余，见一处，室屋严洁，非常人居。
现代文：进山四十多里后来到一个地方，见到一幢高大严整的房舍，看样子不是凡人住的。
English: After more than forty miles into the mountains, he came to a place where he saw a tall, well-kept house that did not look like it was inhabited by mere mortals.

古文：彩云遥覆，惊鹤飞翔其上。
现代文：仙鹤绕屋顶飞翔，彩云在上空缭绕。
English: Cranes fly around the roof, and colorful clouds swirl in the sky.

古文：有正堂，中有药炉，高九尺余，紫焰光发，灼焕窗户。
现代文：屋子的正堂中间有一个九尺多的炼丹药的炉子，炉内紫光闪耀，映亮了门窗。
English: In the middle of the main hall of the house, there is a nine-foot-tall alchemy furnace. The purple light shines in the furnace, illuminating the doors and windows.

古文：玉女九人，环炉而立；青龙白虎，分据前后。
现代文：有九个玉女环绕着炉子侍立着，炉子前后有青龙、白虎看守着。
English: There are nine maidens standing around the stove, guarded by a blue dragon and a white tiger in front and behind.

古文：其时日将暮，老人者，不复俗衣，乃黄冠缝帔士也。
现代文：这时天快黑了，再看那老人，身上穿的已不是凡间的衣服，而是穿着黄道袍戴着黄道冠的仙师了。
English: At this time, it was getting dark, and I looked at the old man again. He was no longer wearing ordinary clothes, but a genie wearing a zodiac robe and a zodiac crown.

古文：持白石三丸，酒一卮，遗子春，令速食之讫。
现代文：仙师拿了三个白石丸和一杯酒给了杜子春，让他赶快吃下去。
English: The sorcerer took three white stone pills and a glass of wine and gave them to Du Zichun, telling him to eat them quickly.

古文：取一虎皮，铺于内西壁，东向而坐，戒曰： 慎勿语。
现代文：仙师又拿了一张虎皮铺在内屋西墙下，面朝东坐下，告诫杜子春道： 你千万不要出声。
English: The sage also took a tiger skin and laid it under the west wall of the inner room, sat down facing east, and warned Du Zichun: You must not speak out.

古文：虽尊神恶鬼夜叉，猛兽地狱；及君之亲属，为所困缚万苦，皆非真实。
现代文：这里出现的大神、恶鬼、夜叉或者地狱、猛兽；以及你的亲属们被绑着受刑遭罪，这一切都不是真事。
English: The gods, the demons, the nightingales or hells, the beasts of prey, and your relatives being tied up and tortured are not real.

古文：但当不动不语，宜安心莫惧，终无所苦。
现代文：不论看见什么样的惨状，都不要动不要说话，安心别害怕，那就绝不会对你有什么伤害，千万要想着我这些嘱咐！ 
English: No matter what kind of misery you see, don't move, don't speak, don't be afraid, then there will never be any harm to you, remember these instructions from me!

古文：当一心念吾所言。 
现代文：仙师去后，杜子春向院里看，院里有一个装满了水的大瓮，此外没看到什么。
English: After the sage left, Du Zichun looked into the courtyard. There was a large urn full of water in the courtyard, but he didn't see anything else.

古文：言讫而去。子春视庭，唯一巨瓮，满中贮水而已。
现代文：道士刚走，杜子春就听见外面人喊马叫震天动地，只见满山满谷都是士兵，旌旗飘飘，戈矛闪闪，千乘万骑蜂拥而来。
English: As soon as the Taoist priest left, Du Zichun heard people outside shouting "horse" and "earth-shaking," only to see mountains and valleys full of soldiers, banners flying, spears flashing, and thousands of horsemen swarming in.

古文：道士适去，旌旗戈甲，千乘万骑，遍满崖谷，呵叱之声，震动天地。有一人称大将军，身长丈余，人马皆着金甲，光芒射人。亲卫数百人，皆杖剑张弓，直入堂前，呵曰： 汝是何人？
现代文：有一个人自称大将军，身高一丈多，他本人和他的马都披着金铠甲，光芒耀眼。大将军的卫士就有几百人，都举着剑张着弓，一直来到屋前，大声呵斥杜子春说： 你是什么人？
English: There was a man who called himself the great general. He was much taller than Du Zichun. Both he and his horse were clad in shining golden armor. There were several hundred guards of the great general, all holding swords and bows, and they kept coming to the front of the house, shouting loudly at Du Zichun and saying, "Who are you?

古文：敢不避大将军。 
现代文：大将军到了怎么竟不回避！ 
English: How come the general didn't shy away when he arrived!

古文：左右竦剑而前，逼问姓名，又问作何物，皆不对。
现代文：有些卫士还用剑逼着杜子春问他的姓名，还问他在做什么，他都一声也不吭。
English: Some guards also forced Du Zichun with a sword to ask his name and what he was doing, but he did not say a word.

古文：问者大怒，摧斩争射之声如雷，竟不应。
现代文：见他不出声，卫士们大怒，一声声喊叫着 杀了他！  射死他！ 
English: Seeing that he did not utter a word, the guards became enraged and shouted in unison, "Kill him!

古文：将军者极怒而去。
现代文：杜子春仍是不出声，那个大将军只好怒气冲冲地带着队伍走了。
English: Du Zichun remained silent, and the great general had no choice but to storm off with his troops.

古文：俄而猛虎毒龙，狻猊狮子，蝮蝎万计，哮吼拿攫而争前欲搏噬，或跳过其上，子春神色不动。
现代文：过了片刻，又来了一群群的猛虎毒龙、狮子蝮蛇和毒蝎，争先恐后地扑向杜子春要撕碎他吞食他，有的还在他头顶跳来跳去张牙舞爪，杜子春仍是不动声色。
English: After a while, a group of ferocious tigers, venomous dragons, lions, boa constrictors and poisonous scorpions came again. They rushed to Du Zichun to tear him up and devour him. Some were still jumping around above his head, opening their teeth and claws. Du Zichun remained motionless.

古文：有顷而散。
现代文：过了一会儿，这些毒蛇猛兽也都散去了。
English: After a while, these vipers and beasts also dispersed.

古文：既而大雨滂澍，雷电晦暝，火轮走其左右，电光掣其前后，目不得开。
现代文：这时突然大雨滂沱雷电交加，天昏地暗伸手不见五指，不一会儿又有大火轮燃烧着在他左右滚动，光在身前身后闪耀，亮得眼都睁不开。
English: At this time, there was a sudden heavy rain, thunder and lightning. He reached out his hand in the dark and could not see his five fingers. A moment later, a big wheel of fire was burning and rolling around him. The light was shining in front of him and behind him, so bright that he could not open his eyes.

古文：须臾，庭际水深丈余，流电吼雷，势若山川开破，不可制止。
现代文：片刻之间，院子里水深一丈多，空中雷声隆隆电光闪闪，像要让山峰崩塌河水倒流，其势不可挡。
English: Within a few moments, the water in the courtyard was more than a meter deep, and thunder boomed and lightning flashed in the air. It was as if the mountain was about to collapse and the river was about to flow backwards. It was overwhelming.

古文：瞬息之间，波及坐下，子春端坐不顾。
现代文：一眨眼的工夫滚滚的浪涛涌到杜子春的坐位前，他仍是端端正正坐着连眼皮也不眨一下。
English: In the blink of an eye, the rolling waves surged to Du Zichun's seat, and he still sat upright without blinking an eyelid.

古文：未顷而将军者复来，引牛头狱卒，奇貌鬼神，将大镬汤而置子春前，长枪两叉，四面周匝，传命曰： 肯言姓名即放，不肯言，即当心取叉置之镬中。 
现代文：接着那位大将军又来了，领着一群地狱中的牛头马面和狰狞的厉鬼，将一口装满滚开的水的大锅放在杜子春面前，鬼怪们手执长矛和两股铁叉，命令道： 说出你的姓名，就放了你，如果不说，就把你放在锅里煮！ 
English: Then the great general came again, leading a group of bull-headed, horse-faced and fierce demons from hell. He placed a cauldron full of boiling water in front of Du Zichun. The demons, holding spears and two-pronged forks, ordered: "Say your name and you will be released. If you don't say it, you will be boiled in the cauldron!"

古文：又不应。
现代文：杜子春仍然不说话。
English: Du Zichun remained silent.

古文：因执其妻来，拽于阶下，指曰： 言姓名免之。 
现代文：这时鬼怪们又把他的妻子抓来绑在台阶下，指着他妻子向杜子春说： 说出你的姓名，就放了她。 
English: At this time, the ghosts also grabbed his wife and tied her to the bottom of the steps. Pointing to his wife, they said to Du Zichun, "Say your name and let her go."

古文：又不应。
现代文：杜子春还是不作声。
English: Du Zichun remained silent.

古文：及鞭捶流血，或射或斫，或煮或烧，苦不可忍。
现代文：于是鬼怪们鞭打他的妻子，用刀砍她，用箭射她，一会儿烧，一会儿煮，百般折磨惨不忍睹。
English: So the ghosts whipped his wife, cut her with a knife, shot her with arrows, burned her, boiled her, and tortured her in all kinds of horrible ways.

古文：其妻号哭曰： 诚为陋拙，有辱君子，然幸得执巾栉，奉事十余年矣。
现代文：他妻子苦不堪忍就向杜子春哭号道： 我虽然又丑又笨，配不上你，但我毕竟给你作了十几年妻子了。
English: Unable to bear the pain, his wife cried out to Du Zichun: Although I am ugly and stupid, I am not worthy of you, but after all, I have been your wife for over ten years.

古文：今为尊鬼所执，不胜其苦！
现代文：现在我被鬼抓来这样折磨，我实在受不了啦！
English: Now I've been captured by a ghost and tortured like this, I really can't stand it!

古文：不敢望君匍匐拜乞，但得公一言，即全性命矣。
现代文：我不敢指望你向他们跪伏求情，只希望你说一句话，我就能活命了。
English: I don't expect you to go down on your knees and beg for mercy, just say the word and I'll live.

古文：人谁无情，君乃忍惜一言？ 
现代文：人谁能无情，丈夫你就忍心不出声，让我继续受折磨吗？ 
English: Who can be merciless, husband, can you bear to remain silent and let me continue to suffer?

古文：雨泪庭中，且咒且骂，春终不顾。
现代文：他妻子边哭边喊又咒又骂，杜子春始终不理不睬。
English: His wife cried and shouted, swore and cursed, but Du Zichun ignored her.

古文：将军且曰： 吾不能毒汝妻耶！ 
现代文：那位大将军也说： 你不说话，我还有更毒辣的手段对付你老婆！ 
English: The general also said: If you don't talk, I have more poisonous means to deal with your wife!

古文：令取锉碓，从脚寸寸锉之。
现代文：说着命令抬来了锉碓，从脚上开始一寸寸地锉他的妻子。
English: He said he gave the order to bring in the plough and began to plough his wife inch by inch, starting at her feet.

古文：妻叫哭愈急，竟不顾之。
现代文：妻子哭声越来越高，杜子春还是连看也不看。
English: As his wife's cries grew louder and louder, Du Zichun still refused to even look at her.

古文：将军曰： 此贼妖术已成，不可使久在世间。 
现代文：大将军说： 这人有妖术，不能让他在世上久呆！ 
English: The general said, "This man has magic, we can't let him stay in the world for long!"

古文：敕左右斩之。斩讫，魂魄被领见阎罗王。
现代文：于是命令左右，把杜子春斩了，然后把他的魂魄带着去见阎王。
English: So he gave the order to have Du Zichun beheaded, and then to take his soul with him to hell.

古文：曰： 此乃云台峰妖民乎？
现代文：阎王一见杜子春就说： 这不是云台峰的那个妖民吗？
English: As soon as he saw Du Zichun, Yan Wang said, "Isn't this the demon from Yuntai Peak?"

古文：捉付狱中。 
现代文：给我把他打入地狱里去！ 
English: Beat the hell out of him!

古文：于是镕铜铁杖、碓擣石寿磨、火坑镬汤、刀山剑树之苦，无不备尝。
现代文：于是杜子春受尽了下油锅、入石磨、进火坑、上刀山所有的地狱酷刑。
English: As a result, Du Zichun suffered all the hellish tortures of going under the oil pan, into the stone mill, into the fire pit, and up the knife mountain.

古文：然心念道士之言，亦似可忍，竟不呻吟。
现代文：然而由于他心里牢记着那位仙师的叮嘱，咬着牙都挺过来了，连叫都不叫一声。
English: However, because he kept the advice of the sorcerer in mind, he survived by gritting his teeth and did not even scream.

古文：狱卒告受罪毕。王曰： 此人阴贼，不合得作男，宜令作女人。 
现代文：后来，地狱的鬼卒向阎王报告，说所有的刑罚都给杜子春用完了。阎王说： 这个家伙阴险毒恶，不该让他当男人，下辈子让他做女人！ 
English: Later, the devil of hell reported to the king of hell that all the punishments had been used up for Du Zichun. The king of hell said: This guy is sinister and evil, he should not be allowed to be a man, let him be a woman in his next life!

古文：配生宋州单父县丞王劝家。
现代文：于是让杜子春投胎转世到宋州单父县的县丞王劝家。
English: Therefore, he had Du Zichun reincarnated as the county magistrate of Songzhou's Shanfa County.

古文：生而多病，针灸药医，略无停日。亦尝坠火堕床，痛苦不齐，终不失声。
现代文：杜子春转世为女子，一生下来就体弱多病，扎针吃药一天没断过，还掉进火里摔到床下，受了无数的苦，但杜子春始终不出声。
English: Du Zichun was reincarnated as a woman. When she was born, she was weak and sickly. She had to take medicine with a needle for a whole day. She also fell into a fire and fell under a bed. She suffered countless hardships, but Du Zichun never uttered a word.

古文：俄而长大，容色绝代，而口无声，其家目为哑女。
现代文：转眼间杜子春长成了一个容貌绝代的女子，但就是不说话，县丞王劝的全家认为她是个哑女。
English: In the blink of an eye, Du Zichun grew into a woman with an extraordinary appearance, but she did not speak, and the whole family was persuaded by the county magistrate that she was a dumb woman.

古文：亲戚狎者，侮之万端，终不能对。
现代文：有些人对她百般调戏侮辱，杜子春总是一声不吭。
English: Some people tease and insult her in all sorts of ways, but Du Zichun never says a word.

古文：同乡有进士卢圭者，闻其容而慕之，因媒氏求焉。
现代文：县丞的同乡有个考中了进士的人叫卢生，听说县丞的女儿容貌很美，就很倾慕，就求媒人去县丞家提媒。
English: There is a fellow villager of the county magistrate who has passed the entrance examination called Lu Sheng. When he heard that the county magistrate's daughter was very beautiful, he admired her very much and asked the matchmaker to go to the county magistrate's house to find a match.

古文：其家以哑辞之。
现代文：县丞家借口是哑女，把媒人推辞了。
English: The county magistrate dismissed the matchmaker on the pretext that she was a mute.

古文：卢曰： 苟为妻而贤，何用言矣？
现代文：卢生说： 妻子只要贤惠就好，不会说话又有什么关系？
English: Lu Sheng said: A wife is good as long as she is virtuous. What does it matter if she cannot speak?

古文：亦足以戒长舌之妇。 
现代文：正好给那些长舌妇作个榜样。 
English: Just to set an example to those long-tongued women.

古文：乃许之。
现代文：县丞就答应了婚事。
English: I said yes.

古文：卢生备六礼，亲迎为妻。
现代文：卢生按照规矩施行了六礼，和杜子春办了婚事。
English: Lu Sheng performed the Six Rites according to the rules, and married Du Zichun.

古文：数年，恩情甚笃，生一男，仅二岁，聪慧无敌。
现代文：两个人过了几年，感情非常好，生了一个男孩，男孩已经两岁了，十分聪明。
English: A few years later, the two had a very good relationship and gave birth to a boy, who is now two years old and very intelligent.

古文：卢抱儿与之言，不应；多方引之，终无辞。
现代文：卢生抱着孩子和她说话，她不吭声，想尽办法逗她也不说话。
English: Lu Sheng hugged the child and talked to her. She didn't say a word, and tried her best not to speak.

古文：卢大怒曰： 昔贾大夫之妻鄙其夫，才不笑，然观其射雉，尚释其憾。
现代文：卢生大怒说： 古时贾大夫的妻子瞧不起他，始终不笑，但后来妻子看见贾大夫射了山鸡，也就对他无憾了。
English: Lu Sheng said angrily: In the old days, Dr. Jia's wife looked down on him and never smiled, but later when she saw Dr. Jia shoot a pheasant, she had no regrets about him.

古文：今吾陋不及贾，而文艺非徒射雉也，而竟不言！
现代文：我虽然地位不如贾大夫，但我的才学比会射山鸡不强百倍吗？
English: Although I am not as high-ranking as Dr. Jia, isn't my talent a hundred times stronger than my ability to shoot mountain chickens?

古文：大丈夫为妻所鄙。
现代文：可是你却不屑于跟我说话！
English: But you don't mind talking to me!

古文：安用其子。 
现代文：大丈夫被妻子瞧不起，还要她的儿子做什么！ 
English: It's okay for a husband to be despised by his wife, but what does he want her son to do!

古文：乃持两足，以头扑于石上，应手而碎，血溅数步。
现代文：说着就抓起男孩的两腿扔了出去，孩子的头摔在石头上，顿时脑浆迸裂，鲜血溅出好几步远。
English: As he spoke, he grabbed the boy's legs and threw them out. The child's head hit a rock, and his brain was instantly ruptured, with blood splattering several steps away.

古文：子春爱生于心，忽忘其约，不觉失声云： 噫 噫声未息，身坐故处，道士者亦在其前。
现代文：杜子春爱子心切，一时间忘了仙师的嘱咐，不觉失声喊道： 啊呀！ 声还没落，发现他自己又坐在云台峰的那间道观中，他的仙师也在面前。
English: Du Zichun loved his son dearly. For a moment, he forgot the instructions of the Immortal Teacher. Unconsciously, he lost his voice and shouted: Ah! His voice had not yet fallen, and he found himself sitting in the Taoist temple on Yuntai Peak, with his Immortal Teacher also in front of him.

古文：初五更矣，见其紫焰穿屋上，大火起四合，屋室俱焚。
现代文：这时是黎明时分，突然紫色的火焰窜上了屋梁，转眼间烈火熊熊，把屋子烧毁了。
English: It was dawn, and suddenly purple flames licked the beams of the roof. In an instant, the fire was raging and the house was destroyed.

古文：道士叹曰： 错大误余乃如是。 
现代文：仙师说： 你这穷酸小子，可把我坑苦了！ 
English: The sorcerer said, "You poor boy, you've made my life miserable!

古文：因提其发，投水瓮中，未顷火息。
现代文：就提着杜子春的头发扔进水瓮里，火立刻就灭了。
English: He took Du Zichun's hair and threw it into the water basin. The fire was immediately extinguished.

古文：道士前曰： 吾子之心，喜怒哀惧恶欲皆忘矣，所未臻者爱而已。
现代文：仙师说： 在你的心里，喜、怒、哀、惧、恶、欲都忘掉了，只有爱你还没忘记。
English: The sorcerer said, "In your heart, you have forgotten joy, anger, sorrow, fear, evil, and desire, but you have not forgotten to love yourself.

古文：向使子无噫声，吾之药成，子亦上仙矣。
现代文：卢生摔你孩子时你若不出声，我的仙丹就能炼成，你也就能成为上仙了。
English: If you do not speak out when Lu Sheng hits your child, my fairy godmother will be refined, and you will become a fairy godmother.

古文：嗟乎，仙才之难得也！
现代文：可惜啊，仙才真是太难得了！
English: It's a pity, it's so hard to be a fairy godmother!

古文：吾药可重炼，而子之身犹为世界所容矣，勉之哉。 
现代文：我的仙丹可以再炼，但你却还得回到人间去，以后继续勤奋地修道吧！ 
English: My fairy tale can be refined again, but you still have to return to the world, and continue to diligently cultivate it in the future!

古文：遥指路使归。
现代文：说完给他向远方指了路让他回去。
English: After saying this, he showed him the way to a distant place and asked him to go back.

古文：子春强登基观焉，其炉已坏，中有铁柱，大如臂，长数尺，道士脱衣，以刀子削之。
现代文：临走时，他登上烧毁的房基，看见那炼丹炉已坏了，当中有个铁柱子，有手臂那么粗，好几尺长，那仙师正脱了衣服，用刀子削那铁柱子。
English: As he was about to leave, he climbed onto the burned foundation of the house and saw that the distillery had been destroyed. Among them was an iron pillar, as thick as an arm and several feet long. The sorcerer had taken off his clothes and was sharpening the iron pillar with a knife.

古文：子春既归，愧其忘誓，复自效以谢其过。
现代文：杜子春回到家后，非常悔恨他当初忘了对仙师发的誓，想回去找到仙师为他效力以补偿自己的过失。
English: After Du Zichun returned home, he regretted very much that he had forgotten the oath he had made to the Immortal Master, and wanted to go back and find the Immortal Master to work for him to compensate for his mistake.

古文：行至云台峰，绝无人迹，叹恨而归。
现代文：他来到云台峰，什么也没找到，只好怀着惋惜悔恨的心情回来了。
English: He came to Yuntai Peak, found nothing, and had to return with regret.

古文：张老
现代文：张老
English: Zhang Lao

古文：张老者，扬州六合县园叟也。
现代文：张老，是江苏扬州六合县的一个种菜园子的老头。
English: Zhang Lao is the old man of a vegetable garden in Liuhe County, Yangzhou, Jiangsu.

古文：其邻有韦恕者，梁天监中，自扬州曹掾秩满而来。
现代文：他有个邻居叫韦怒，梁武帝天监年间在扬州当曹掾，任满后回到六合县。
English: He has a neighbor named Wei Nu. During the reign of Emperor Liangwu, he served as Cao Pi in Yangzhou. After his term, he returned to Liuhe County.

古文：有长女既笄，召里中媒媪，令访良婿。
现代文：韦恕的大女儿到了出嫁的年龄了，召集来了乡里的媒婆，请她们给女儿选个好夫婿。
English: When Wei Shun's eldest daughter was of marriageable age, the village matchmakers were summoned and asked to choose a good husband for her daughter.

古文：张老闻之喜，而候媒于韦门。
现代文：种园子的张老听说后非常高兴，就跑到韦恕家门口等媒人。
English: Zhang Lao, a gardener, was very happy when he heard about it. He ran to the front door of Weizhong's house to wait for the matchmaker.

古文：媪出，张老固延入，且备酒食。
现代文：媒婆走出韦家门以后，张老就把她请到自己家里好酒好菜盛情招待。
English: After the matchmaker walked out of Wei's door, Zhang Lao invited her to his home for good wine and good food.

古文：酒阑，谓媪曰： 闻韦氏有女将适人，求良才于媪，有之乎？ 
现代文：饮酒半醉时，张老就对媒婆说： 我听说韦恕家有女儿要出嫁请你找良婿，有这事吗？ 
English: When he was half-drunk, Zhang Lao said to the matchmaker, "I heard that there is a daughter in the Weizhong family who wants to get married. I asked you to find a husband. Is there such a thing?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：媒婆说有这事。
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 某诚衰迈，灌园之业，亦可衣食。
现代文：张老说： 我虽然年老体衰了，但我种菜园子还能够保证丰衣足食。
English: Zhang Lao said: Although I am old and weak, I can still ensure adequate clothing and food by planting a vegetable garden.

古文：幸为求之，事成厚谢。 
现代文：请你替我到韦家作作媒，如果能办成，我会重谢你的。 
English: Please go to Wei's house to mediate for me. If you can do it, I will thank you very much.

古文：媪大骂而去。
现代文：媒婆听后，把张老臭骂了一顿愤愤而去。
English: After listening, the matchmaker scolded Zhang Laozhuang angrily and left.

古文：他日又邀媪，媪曰： 叟何不自度，岂有衣冠子女，肯嫁园叟耶？
现代文：过了两天，张老又约请媒婆，媒婆嘲笑说： 你这个老家伙怎么这样不自量？哪有当过官的人家的女子愿意嫁给一个种菜园的老头子的？
English: Two days later, Zhang invited the matchmaker again. The matchmaker scoffed and said, "How can you, an old man, be so self-centered? What woman who has been a government official would like to marry an old man who grows vegetables?

古文：此家诚贫，士大夫家之敌者不少，顾叟非匹。
现代文：韦家是穷了点儿，但一些做官人家上门求婚的却不在少数，我看哪个都比你强得多。
English: The Wei family is a bit poor, but there are quite a few officials who have proposed marriage, and I think they are all much better than you.

古文：吾安能为叟一杯酒，乃取辱于韦氏？ 
现代文：我怎么能为你的一杯酒而到韦家去找挨骂呢？ 
English: How am I supposed to go to Wei's house for your drink and get yelled at?

古文：叟固曰： 强为吾一言之，言不从，即吾命也。 
现代文：张老仍坚持求媒婆说： 求你勉强替我到韦家提一提吧，他们不同意我的求婚，我也就认命了。 
English: Zhang Lao still insisted on asking the matchmaker to say: Please reluctantly go to Wei's house to propose for me. They did not agree to my marriage proposal, so I accepted my fate.

古文：媪不得已，冒责而入言之。韦氏大怒曰： 媪以我贫，轻我乃如是？
现代文：媒婆经不住张老苦求，冒着挨骂就去韦家提了，韦恕一听果然大怒说： 你这媒婆看我穷就敢这样小看我吗？
English: The matchmaker couldn't stand Zhang Laobao's persistent pleading, so she went to Wei's house to mention it, risking being scolded. Upon hearing this, Wei Shou said angrily, "You, the matchmaker, dare to look down on me like this because you think I'm poor?

古文：且韦家焉有此事。
现代文：我们韦家从来没有过这种事！
English: We, the Wei family, have never experienced anything like this!

古文：况园叟何人，敢发此议！
现代文：那种园子的老东西竟敢动这种念头，太不自量了！
English: How dare that old thing in the garden have such an idea, it's too arrogant!

古文：叟固不足责，媪何无别之甚耶？ 
现代文：那人我不屑于去骂他，可是你难道就不会掂一掂这事的分量吗？ 
English: I don't mind calling the man names, but aren't you going to take some responsibility for this?

古文：媪曰： 诚非所宜言，为叟所逼，不得不达其意。 
现代文：媒婆赶忙赔罪说： 这事的确不像话，但我实在是架不住张老苦求逼得我没法子，才不得不来传达他的意思。 
English: The matchmaker hastened to make amends and said, "It's really not right, but I really can't stand it. I'm so hard pressed that I can't do anything, so I have to convey his meaning.

古文：韦怒曰： 为吾报之，今日内得五百缗则可。 
现代文：韦恕怒冲冲地说： 好吧，你替我转告那老家伙，如果他一天之内给我送来五百千钱，我就把女儿嫁给他！ 
English: Weishu said angrily, "Well, you tell the old man for me that if he sends me five hundred thousand dollars within one day, I will marry my daughter to him!"

古文：媪出，以告张老。
现代文：媒婆就告诉了张老。
English: The matchmaker told Zhang Lao.

古文：乃曰： 诺。 
现代文：张老说： 行。 
English: Zhang Lao said: OK.

古文：未几，车载纳于韦氏。
现代文：不一会儿，就用车拉着钱来到韦家。
English: Not long after, he drove to Wei's house with the money.

古文：诸韦大惊曰： 前言戏之耳，且此翁为园。
现代文：韦恕的族人们大惊说： 五百千钱是句玩笑话，都以为他是个种菜的老头，根本不会有这么多钱。
English: The people of Weizhong were shocked and said: "Five hundred thousand yuan is a joke. They all thought he was an old man who grew vegetables and would never have so much money.

古文：何以致此，吾度其必无而言之。
现代文：现在他这么快就把钱送来了，该怎么办呢？ 就让人偷偷问女儿，女儿竟同意了，并说： 这可能是上天的安排。 
English: Now that he has sent the money so quickly, what should he do? He had someone secretly ask his daughter, but she agreed and said: "It's probably God's plan."

古文：张老既娶韦氏，园业不废，负秽钁地，鬻蔬不辍。
现代文：韦恕只好把女儿嫁给了张老。张老娶了韦氏后，继续种菜园，挑粪锄草，每天卖菜。
English: Ms. Wei had no choice but to marry her daughter to Ms. Zhang. After Ms. Zhang married Mr. Wei, he continued to plant a vegetable garden, collect manure and weed, and sell vegetables every day.

古文：其妻躬执爨濯，了无怍色，亲戚恶之，亦不能止。
现代文：韦氏天天做饭洗衣，一点也不怕别人笑话，即使亲戚们讨厌她疏远她，她仍然一如既往。
English: Ms. Wei cooks and does laundry every day. She is not afraid of other people's jokes at all. Even if her relatives hate her and alienate her, she is still the same as ever.

古文：数年，中外之有识者责恕曰： 君家诚贫，乡里岂无贫子弟，奈何以女妻园叟？
现代文：过了几年，韦氏家族内外的一些有识之士责备韦恕说： 你家虽穷，但乡里有的是贫家子弟，何必把女儿嫁给一个种菜的老头子呢？
English: A few years later, some insightful people inside and outside the Wei family reproached Wei Shao and said: Although your family is poor, there are poor children in the village. Why should you marry your daughter to an old man who grows vegetables?

古文：既弃之，何不令远去也？ 
现代文：既然你把女儿嫁出去不要了，不如干脆让她到远处去呢？ 
English: Since you don't want your daughter to get married, why not let her go somewhere far away?

古文：他日恕致酒，召女及张老。酒酣，微露其意。
现代文：过了几天，韦恕备了酒饭把女儿和张老叫到家里，在喝到半醉时，韦恕微透露想让他们搬到远处去的意思。
English: A few days later, Wei Shouwei called his daughter and Zhang Lao to his home with wine and rice. When he was half drunk, Wei Shouwei revealed that he wanted them to move far away.

古文：张老起曰： 所以不即去者，恐有留念。
现代文：张老听后站起来说： 我们婚后没有马上到远处，是怕您想念。
English: After listening, Zhang Lao stood up and said: We didn't go far away immediately after getting married, for fear of missing you.

古文：今既相厌，去亦何难。
现代文：现在您既然讨厌我们，我们就搬走吧，这没有什么困难。
English: Now that you hate us, let's move away, it's not difficult.

古文：某王屋山下有一小庄，明旦且归耳。 
现代文：我在王屋山的山下有个小庄园，明天我们就回到那儿去。 
English: I have a small farm at the foot of Wangya Mountain, and tomorrow we will go back there.

