古文：起柔兆阉茂，尽著雍困敦，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。汉纪五十七汉献帝建安十一年
English: It lasted for a total of three years. In the 57th year of the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty dedicated to the Emperor Jianan

古文：孝献皇帝庚建安十一年
现代文：春季，正月，有异星出现在北斗星座。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, a strange star appears in the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：春，正月，有星孛于北斗。曹操自将击高幹，留其世子丕守鄴，使别驾从事崔琰傅之。
现代文：曹操亲自率军征讨并州刺史高干，留下世子曹丕镇守邺城，派别驾、从事崔琰辅佐曹丕。
English: Cao Cao personally led the army to conquer and annex the state of Shishi Gao Gan, leaving his son Cao Jie Zhen to guard the city of Jie, and dispatching and engaging in Cui Jie Suo Cao Jie.

古文：操围壶关，三月，壶关降。
现代文：曹操大军包围壶关。三月，壶关投降。
English: Cao Cao's army surrounded Kuguan. In March, Kuguan surrendered.

古文：高幹自入匈奴求救，单于不受。
现代文：高于亲自去向匈奴求救，被匈奴单于拒绝。
English: Than to go personally to the Huns for help, only to be rejected by the Huns.

古文：幹独与数骑亡，欲南奔荆州，上洛都尉王琰捕斩之，并州悉平。
现代文：高干身边只剩几名骑兵卫士，想南逃到荆州去投奔刘表。半路上，被上洛都尉王琰捉获，斩首。并州全部平定。
English: Gao Gan was left with only a few cavalry guards. He wanted to flee south to Jingzhou to join Liu Biao. Halfway there, he was captured and beheaded by Shangluo's lieutenant Wang Qi, and the whole province was pacified.

古文：曹操使陈郡梁习以别部司马领并州刺史。
现代文：曹操派陈郡人梁习以别部司马的职务，兼任并州刺史。
English: Cao Cao sent Liang Xi, a person from Chen County, to assume the post of secretary of other departments and concurrently assume the post of prefectural historian.

古文：时荒乱之馀，胡、狄雄张，吏民亡叛入其部落，兵家拥众，各为寇害。
现代文：当时在兵荒马乱之后，匈奴等各北方胡狄各族的势力都很大，官吏及百姓往往叛逃到他们的部落中；其余许多地方势力也都拥有强大的武装力量，各霸一方。
English: At that time, after the War of Northern Aggression, the Huns and other northern Hudi tribes were very powerful, and officials and people often defected to their tribes; many other local forces also had powerful armed forces, each dominating the other.

古文：习到官，诱喻招纳，皆礼如其豪右，稍稍荐举，使诣幕府；豪右已尽，次发诸丁强以为义从；又因大军出征，令诸将分清以为勇力。
现代文：梁习到任后，用引诱和劝导的方法招纳那些地方势力，对那些首领都以礼相待，并推荐其中一些人作官，让他们到州府来任职。等这些首领都离开本乡后，就征发当地青壮年充当志愿军。梁习又借大军出征之机，把这些志愿军分送到将领们部下，至别处作战。
English: After Liang Xi took office, he recruited those local forces by means of seduction and persuasion, treated those leaders with courtesy, and recommended some of them to serve as officials, so that they could serve in the state capital. After these leaders left their hometowns, they conscripted local young adults to serve as volunteers. Liang Xi also took the opportunity of a large army to go to war, and sent these volunteers to the generals' subordinates to fight elsewhere.

古文：吏兵已去之后，稍移其家，前后送鄴凡数万口；其不从命者，兴兵致讨，斩首千数，降附者万计。
现代文：在这些官员、兵士都离去以后，就陆续把他们的家小迁到邺城，前后送走的共有数万人。有不服从命令的，就出兵进行征讨，杀死几千人，投降的数以万计。
English: After these officials and soldiers left, they successively moved their families to Lucheng, sending tens of thousands of people back and forth. If anyone disobeyed orders, they sent out troops to investigate, killing several thousand people, and tens of thousands surrendered.

古文：单于恭顺，名王稽颡，服事供职，同于偏户。
现代文：于是，匈奴单于态度恭顺，各部落的王爷对梁习叩拜服从，承担赋税徭役，与编于民籍的百姓一样。
English: As a result, the Xiongnu became submissive simply because of their attitude, and the princes of each tribe bowed and obeyed Liang Xi and undertook to pay taxes and serve, just like the people who were registered in the civil register.

古文：边境肃清，百姓布野，勤劝农桑，令行禁止。长老称咏，以为自所闻识，刺史未有如习者。
现代文：边境隶清，农夫遍布田野，梁习鼓励农业和桑蚕业，法令得到严格执行，父老们称赞，认为记忆之中，没有一个刺史比得上梁习。
English: The border is clear, farmers are all over the fields, Liang Xi encourages agriculture and mulberry silkworm industry, the laws are strictly enforced, the fathers and grandfathers praise, think that in memory, there is no record than Liang Xi.

古文：习乃贡达名士，避地州界者河内常林、杨俊、王象、荀纬及太原王凌之徒，操悉以为县长，后皆显名于世。
现代文：梁习又向朝廷推荐来并州躲避战乱的各地名士，如河内人常林、杨俊、王象、荀纬以及太原人王凌等，曹操都任命他们为县长，以后，这些人都闻名于世。
English: Liang Xi also recommended to the imperial court celebrities from all over the country who had come to the county to escape the war, such as Hanoi people Changlin, Yang Jun, Wang Xiang, Zou Wei, and Taiyuan people Wang Ling. Cao Cao appointed them as county governors, and later, these people were famous in the world.

古文：初，山阳仲长统游学至并州，过高幹，幹善遇之，访以世事。
现代文：当初，山阳人仲长统游学来到并州，拜访刺史高干，高干对他待遇优厚，征求他对时局看法。
English: At the beginning, Shanyang's Zhong Chang made a study tour to Anhui Province to visit Gao Gan. Gao Gan treated him well and asked for his opinion on the current situation.

古文：统谓幹曰： 君有雄志而无雄才，好士而不能择人，所以为君深戒也。 
现代文：仲长统对高干说： 你有雄心大志，却缺乏雄才大略；喜好贤能之士，却不能鉴别人才。在这些事上面，你要深以为戒。 
English: Zhong Changtong said to Gao Gan: You have great ambition, but you lack great talent; you like people of ability, but you can't judge other people's talent. In these matters, you should beware.

古文：幹雅自多，不悦统言，统遂去之。
现代文：高干一向自以为是，对仲长统的话很不高兴，仲长统就离开了高干。
English: Gao Gan has always been self-righteous, and was very unhappy with the words of Zhong Changdi, and Zhong Changdi left Gao Gan.

古文：幹死，荀彧举统为尚书郎。
现代文：高干死后，荀推荐仲长统担任尚书郎。
English: After Gao Gan's death, Zou recommended that Zhong Changtong serve as Shang Shuro.

古文：著论曰《昌言》，其言治乱，略曰： 豪杰之当天命者，未始有天下之分者也，无天下之分，故战争者竞起焉。
现代文：仲长统撰写《昌言》，分析国家的安危治乱，主要大意是： 受命于上天的英雄豪杰，并不是从开始时就有统一天下的名分，由于没有这种名分，所以竞争者纷纷崛起。
English: Zhong Changtong wrote "Changyan" to analyze the country's safety and management of chaos, the main meaning of which is: The hero who was ordered by heaven did not have the title of unification from the beginning. Since there is no such title, competitors have risen one after another.

古文：角智者皆穷，角力者皆负，形不堪复伉，势不足复校，乃始羁首系颈，就我之衔绁耳。
现代文：但到后来，那些仗恃智谋的，智谋穷尽，仗恃力量的，力量枯竭。形势不允许再对抗，也不足以再较量，于是才被捉住头，捆住颈，置于我们控制之下。
English: However, later, those who tried to outwit and outmaneuver the enemy ran out of wits, and those who tried to outmaneuver and outmaneuver the enemy ran out of strength. The situation did not allow for further confrontation, nor was it sufficient for further contestation, so they were captured by the head, tied by the neck and placed under our control.

古文：及继体之时，豪杰之心既绝，士民之志已定，贵有常家，尊在一人。
现代文：等到第二代统治者继位时，那些豪杰已不再有争夺天下的雄心，士大夫与百姓都已习惯于遵从命令，富贵之家已经固定，威权都集中于君主一人手中。
English: By the time the second generation of rulers succeeded to the throne, those heroes no longer had the ambition to compete for the world, the scholars and the people had become accustomed to following orders, the rich family had been fixed, and the authority was concentrated in the hands of the monarch.

古文：当此之时，虽下愚之才居之，犹能使恩同天地，威侔鬼神，周、孔数千无所复角其圣，贲、育百万无所复奋其勇矣。
现代文：在这时候，即使是一个下等的蠢才坐在皇帝的宝座上，也能使他的恩德大到与天地相同，使他的威严达到与鬼神相似的地步。即使是有几千个周公姬旦和孔夫子这样的圣人，也无法再发挥他们的圣明；有百万个孟贲和夏育之类的勇士，也无处再施展他们的勇力。
English: At this time, even if a low-level fool sits on the throne of the emperor, he can make his benevolence as great as heaven and earth, and make his majesty similar to that of ghosts and gods. Even if there are thousands of saints such as Zhou Gong Hidan and Confucius, they can no longer exert their wisdom; there are millions of warriors such as Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, and there is nowhere to exert their courage.

古文：彼后嗣之愚主，见天下莫敢与之违，自谓若天地之不可亡也。乃奔其私嗜，骋其邪欲，君臣宣淫，上下同恶，荒废庶政，弃忘人物。
现代文：那些继承天下的愚蠢帝王，见到天下没有人敢违抗旨意，就自认为政权会像天地不会灭亡，于是随意发展自己的嗜好，放纵自己的邪恶欲望，君主与臣僚都为所欲为，上下一齐作恶，荒废朝政，排斥人才。
English: Those foolish emperors who inherited the world, seeing that no one in the world dared to defy the will, thought that the regime would be like heaven and earth and would not perish, so they developed their own hobbies at will and indulged their evil desires. The monarch and his ministers did whatever they wanted, the top and the bottom did evil together, ruined the government, and excluded talents.

古文：信任亲爱者，尽佞谄容说之人也；宠贵隆丰者，尽后妃姬妾之家也。
现代文：所信任亲近的，都是奸佞谄媚的小人；所庞爱提升的，都是后宫妃嫔的家族。
English: Those who are trusted and close are all sneaky and charming villains; those who are loved and promoted are the families of harem concubines.

古文：遂至熬天下之脂膏，斫生民之骨髓，怨毒无聊，祸乱并起，中国扰攘，四夷侵叛，土崩瓦解，一朝而去，昔之为我哺乳之子孙者，今尽是我饮血之冠雠也。
现代文：以至达到熬尽天下民脂民膏，敲骨吸髓的程度。人民身受怨毒，痛苦不堪，灾祸战乱，同时而起。中原大地纷扰不安，四方外族相继背叛，政权土崩瓦解，毁于一旦。从前受我养护哺育的小民，如今全都成为喝我鲜血的仇敌。
English: So much so that it has reached the level of exhausting the world's people's fat and ointment, and sucking the marrow from their bones. The people are plagued by bitterness and pain, and the calamity of war breaks out at the same time. The Central Plains are disturbed and uneasy, the foreign ethnic groups in the four directions betray one another in succession, and the regime collapses and is destroyed in an instant. The common people, who were once nurtured and nurtured by me, have now all become enemies who drink my blood.

古文：至于运徙势去，犹不觉悟者，岂非富贵生不仁，沉溺致愚疾邪！
现代文：至于那些大势已去，还不觉悟的人，岂不是富贵产生的麻木不仁，溺爱导致的愚昧顽劣吗！
English: As for those people who have not yet woken up to the fact that the tide has turned, aren't they insensitive as a result of affluence, stupid and vicious as a result of coddling?

古文：存亡以之失代，治乱从此周复，天道常然之大数也。 
现代文：政权的存亡相互交替，治理与战乱也不断周而复始地循环，这正是天地运行的规律。 
English: The existence and demise of regimes alternate with each other, and governance and war also continuously cycle around and around. This is exactly the law of the universe.

古文：秋，七月，武威太守张猛杀雍州刺史邯郸商；州兵讨诛之。猛，奂之子也。
现代文：秋季，七月，武威太守张猛杀死雍州刺史邯郸商。州中的军认讨伐张猛，把他杀死。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhang Meng, Wuwei's grand marshal, killed a merchant from Yongzhou, Zishi. The troops in Yongzhou recognized Zhang Meng and killed him.

古文：八月，曹操东讨海贼管承，至淳于，遣将乐进、李典击破之，承走入海岛。
现代文：张猛是张奂的儿子。八月，曹操向东讨伐海上的盗贼管承，进军到淳于，派大将乐进、李典击败管承，管承逃到海岛上。
English: Zhang Meng is the son of Zhang Ye. In August, Cao Cao marched east to fight the sea thief Guanzheng, marched to Chunyu, sent generals Lejin and Li Dian to defeat Guanzheng, and Guanzheng fled to the island.

古文：昌豨复叛，操遣于禁讨斩之。
现代文：昌又背叛曹操，曹操派于禁讨伐，斩杀昌。
English: Chang betrayed Cao Cao again. Cao Cao sent troops to suppress the rebellion and killed Chang.

古文：是岁，立故琅邪王容子熙为琅邪王。齐、北海、阜陵、下邳、常山、甘陵、济阴、平原八国皆除。
现代文：这一年，献帝立已故琅邪王刘容的儿子刘熙为琅邪王，撤销齐、北海、阜陵、下邳、常山、甘陵、济阴、平原等八个王国。
English: In the same year, Liu Xi, the son of Liu Rong, the late evil king of Qi, was appointed as the evil king of Qi, revoking eight kingdoms including Qi, Beihai, Fulin, Lower Qi, Changshan, Ganling, Jinyin, and Plains.

古文：乌桓乘天下乱，略有汉民十馀万户，袁绍皆立其酋豪为单于，以家人子为己女，妻焉。
现代文：乌桓人乘天下大乱，掳掠汉人十余万户。袁绍把各部落的酋长都封为单于，并以平民家的姑娘做自己的女儿，嫁给那些单于做妻子。
English: Wu Huan people took advantage of the chaos in the world and plundered more than 100,000 households of Han people. Yuan Shao made the chiefs of all tribes single, and took the girls from commoners as his own daughters and married those who were single wives.

古文：辽西乌桓蹋顿尤强，为绍所厚，故尚兄弟归之，数入塞为寇，欲助尚复故地。
现代文：辽西乌桓酋长蹋顿的势力尤其强盛，受到袁绍的厚待，因此袁尚兄弟去投奔蹋顿。蹋顿屡次派兵入塞抢掠，想帮助袁尚恢复旧有的疆土。
English: The influence of the Western Wuhuan chieftain Xingtong was particularly strong, and he was treated well by Yuan Shao. Therefore, Yuan Shang's brothers went to Xingtong. Xingtong repeatedly sent troops to invade and plunder Xingtong, and wanted to help Yuan Shang recover the old territory.

古文：曹操将击之，凿平虏渠、泉州渠以通运。
现代文：曹操准备出军讨伐，开凿平虏渠、泉州渠，以便运输大军所需的粮草。
English: Cao Cao prepared to go out to fight, and he dug the Pingru Canal and Quanzhou Canal in order to transport the grain and grass needed by the large army.

古文：孙权击山贼麻、保二屯，平之。
现代文：孙权攻击山贼盘据的麻屯和保屯，完全平定。
English: Sun Quan attacked Ma Tun and Baotun, where the bandits had their strongholds, and they were completely subdued.

古文：孝献皇帝庚建安十二年
现代文：建安十二年
English: The 12th year of Jianan

古文：春，二月，曹操自淳于还鄴。
现代文：春季，二月，曹操从淳于返回邺城。
English: In the spring, in February, Cao Cao returned to Shicheng from Chunyu.

古文：丁酉，操奏封大功臣二十馀人，皆为列侯。
现代文：丁酉，曹操上奏献帝并得到批准，封大功臣二十余人，都为列侯。
English: Ding Xi, Cao Cao appealed to the emperor and was approved, and more than 20 great heroes were knighted.

古文：因表万岁亭侯荀彧功状；三月，增封彧千户。
现代文：又上表称赞万岁亭侯荀的功劳。三月，为表彰荀，在他原来侯国封户的基础上，又增加一千户。
English: In March, in recognition of his efforts, another 1,000 households were added to the number of households he had sealed up in his former domain.

古文：又欲授以三公，彧使荀攸深自陈让，至于十数，乃止。
现代文：还准备任命荀为三公，荀派荀攸恳切地表达自己的辞让之意，先后达到十余次，曹操才同意。
English: He also planned to appoint Yao as the Third Prince. Yao sent Yao to earnestly express his resignation, and it took more than ten times for Cao Cao to agree.

古文：曹操将击乌桓，诸将皆曰： 袁尚亡虏耳，夷狄贪而无亲，岂能为尚用！
现代文：曹操准备出兵征讨乌桓，将领们都说： 袁尚只不过是个逃亡罪犯，乌桓人贪得无厌而不念旧情，岂能受袁尚利用。
English: Cao Cao prepared to send troops to recruit Wu Huan. The generals all said, "Yuan Shang is nothing more than a fugitive criminal. Wu Huan people are insatiably greedy and don't care about the past. How can they be used by Yuan Shang?"

古文：今深入征之，刘备必说刘表以袭许，万一为变，事不可悔。 
现代文：如今大军深入塞外征乌桓，刘备必然劝说刘表乘虚袭击许都，万一发生变化，事情就后悔不及了。 
English: Now that a large army is marching deep into Serbia on a foreign expedition, Liu Bei will certainly persuade Liu Biao to use the illusion to attack Xu Du. If anything changes, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：郭嘉曰： 公虽威震天下，胡恃其远，必不设备，因其无备，卒然击之，可破灭也。
现代文：郭嘉说： 您虽然威震天下，但乌桓人倚仗距离遥远，一定不会预先防备，乘其不备，突然袭击，可以一战告捷。
English: Guo Jia said: Although you are the most powerful country in the world, the Wuhuan people are far away from the war, and they will not be prepared in advance. If you are unprepared and make a sudden attack, you can win a victory.

古文：且袁绍有恩于民夷，而尚兄弟生存。
现代文：况且，袁绍对这一地区的百姓以及塞外的异族有恩德，而袁尚兄弟现在还活在世上。
English: Moreover, Yuan Shao was kind to the people of this region as well as to the foreign ethnic groups outside of Serbia, and the Yuan Shang brothers are still alive in the world.

古文：今四州之民，徒以威附，德施未加，舍而南征，尚因乌桓之资，招其死主之臣，胡人一动，民夷俱应，以生蹋顿之心，成觊觎之计，恐青、冀非己之有也。
现代文：如今冀、青、幽、并四州的百姓，只是因畏惧而服从我们，并没有受过我们的恩德。如果我们离开这里而率军南征，袁尚利用乌桓的武力作资本，招集愿为恩主效死的部属，乌桓人一动，四州的百姓及异族都会纷纷响应，这会使蹋顿动心，生出非分的打算，恐怕青州与冀州就不会再在您的控制下了。
English: Today, the people of Hebei, Qingdao, Yunnan, and Shizhou are only obeying us out of fear, and have not received our benevolence. If we leave here and lead the army to the south, Yuan Shang will use Wuhuan's force as capital and summon subordinates who are willing to die for the benefactor. If Wuhuan people move, the people of Shizhou and foreign ethnic groups will respond one after another. This will make Qutong's heart beat faster and give rise to non-participation plans. I am afraid that Qingdao and Jizhou will no longer be under your control.

古文：表坐谈客耳，自知才不足以御备，重任之则恐不能制，轻任之则备不为用，虽虚国远征，公无忧矣。 
现代文：刘表不过是个只会坐在那里发议论的人，他自知才干不能驾御住刘备，重用刘备则害怕控制不住，轻用则刘备不会为他所用。因此，即使我们调走全国兵力远征，您也不必担扰。 
English: Liu Biao is just a person who can only sit there and talk. He knows that he can't control Liu Bei with his talent, he can't control Liu Bei if he uses it a lot, and Liu Bei won't be used by him if he uses it a little. Therefore, even if we transfer the national troop expedition, you don't have to worry.

古文：操从之。
现代文：曹操听从了郭嘉的意见。
English: Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：行至易，郭嘉曰： 兵贵神速。今千里袭人，辎重多，难以趋利，且彼闻之，必为备。
现代文：大军进发到易县，郭嘉提议说： 兵贵神速，如今远涉千里进行奇袭，辎重太多，难以掌握先机。
English: Guo Jia proposed that the army advance to Yi County, saying: The soldiers are very fast, now they travel thousands of miles to carry out a surprise attack, the burden is too heavy, it is difficult to grasp the opportunity.

古文：不如留辎重，轻兵兼道以出，掩其不意。 
现代文：而且假如乌桓人得到消息，必然加强戒备；不如留下辎重，军队轻装以加倍的速度急进，出其不意地进攻。 
English: Moreover, if the Wuhuans get the news, they will inevitably strengthen their alertness; it is better to leave the heavy baggage behind, and the lightly armed troops will rush in at double the speed and attack unexpectedly.

古文：初，袁绍数遣使召田畴于无终，又即绶将军印，使安辑所统，畴皆拒之。
现代文：起初，袁绍几次派使者到无终县去召田畴，又派人授予田畴将军的印信，让田畴召抚所统部众，田畴都拒绝了。
English: At first, Yuan Shao sent several emissaries to Wuzhen County to summon Tian Zhen, and also sent someone to grant the seal of Tian Zhen to the general, and let Tian Zhen summon the leadership of the office, but Tian Zhen refused.

古文：及曹操定冀州，河间邢颙谓畴曰： 黄巾起来，二十馀年，海内鼎沸，百姓流离。
现代文：到曹操平定冀州后，河间人邢对田畴说： 黄巾军起事以来，已二十多年，天下动荡不定，百姓流离失所。
English: After Cao Cao had subdued Jizhou, a man from Kawama said to Tian Zhen: "It has been more than 20 years since the Yellow Turban Rebellion. The country is in turmoil and the people have been displaced.

古文：今闻曹公法令严。民厌乱矣，乱极则平，请以身先。 
现代文：如今，听说曹公法令严明，百姓对战乱已经厌恶，乱到极点，就会归于平静，请让我先去试探一下。 
English: Nowadays, I have heard that Cao Gong's edicts are strict and that the people have become disgusted with war and chaos. When the chaos reaches its peak, they will return to calm. Please let me explore this first.

古文：遂装还乡里。
现代文：于是，邢收拾行装，返回家乡。
English: So they packed up and went back to their hometown.

古文：畴曰： 邢颙，天民之先觉者也。 
现代文：田畴说： 邢是个先知先觉的人。 
English: Tian Zang said: Zou is a prescient person.

古文：操以颙为冀州从事。
现代文：曹操委任邢为冀州从事。
English: Cao Cao commissioned him to work for Jizhou.

古文：畴忿乌桓多杀其本郡冠盖，意欲讨之而力未能。
现代文：田畴忿恨乌桓人经常杀害本郡著名的士大夫，想讨伐乌桓而力量不够。
English: The village resented the fact that the Wuhuans often killed the county's famous scholar-officials, and they lacked the strength to fight the Wuhuans.

古文：操遣使辟畴，畴戒其门下趣治严。门人曰： 昔袁公慕君，礼命五至，君义不屈。今曹公使一来而君若恐弗及者，何也？ 
现代文：曹操派使者来征召田畴，田畴要他的部属赶快为他治理行装，部属说： 以前，袁绍仰慕您的名声，曾五次礼聘，您一直拒绝；如今，曹操的使者一来，您就好像迫不及待，这是什么原因？ 
English: Cao Cao sent an emissary to summon Tian Zhen. Tian Zhen asked his subordinates to quickly prepare for his governance. The subordinates said: In the past, Yuan Shao admired your reputation. He offered you five times, but you always refused. Now, when Cao Cao's emissary comes, you seem to be impatient. What is the reason for this?

古文：畴笑曰： 此非君所识也。 
现代文：田畴笑着说： 这就不是你们所能知道的了。 
English: Tajome smiled and said, "That's not all you can know."

古文：遂随使者到军，拜为蓚令，随军次无终。
现代文：他随同使者一起到曹操军中，被任命为令，随大军进驻无终县。
English: He accompanied the emissary to Cao Cao's army, was appointed as a commander, and stationed with the army in Mudu County.

古文：时方夏水雨，而滨海洿下，泞滞不通，虏亦遮守蹊要，军不得进。
现代文：当时正赶上夏季，大雨不止，沿海一带泥泞难行，而且乌桓人还在交通要道派兵把守，曹军受阻无法前进。
English: At that time, it was the rainy season in summer, and the low-lying areas along the coast, the roads were muddy and impassable, and the enemy forces had to guard the dangerous sections of the road, so the large army could not advance.

古文：操患之，以问田畴。
现代文：曹操十分忧虑，向田畴询问对策。
English: Cao Cao was very worried and asked Tian Zhuang for countermeasures.

古文：畴曰： 此道，秋夏每常有水，浅不通车马，深不载舟船，为难久矣。
现代文：田畴说： 这条道路每逢夏秋两季常常积水，浅不能通车马，深不能载舟船，是长期不能解决的难题。
English: Tian Zhengyi said: This road is often flooded every summer and autumn, and it is a long-term problem that cannot be solved.

古文：旧北平郡治在平冈，道出卢龙，达于柳城。
现代文：原来右北平郡府设在平冈，道路通过卢龙塞，到达柳城。
English: Originally, the Right Beiping County Government was located in Pinggang, and the road passed through Lulongse and reached Liucheng.

古文：自建武以来，陷坏断绝，垂二百载，而尚有微径可从。
现代文：自从光武帝建武以来，道路陷坏，无人行走，已将近二百年，但仍留有道路的残迹可循。
English: Since Emperor Guangwu founded Wuxi, the road has been sinking and no one has walked on it for nearly two hundred years, but there are still remnants of the road to follow.

古文：今虏将以大军当由无终，不得进而退，懈弛无备。
现代文：现在乌桓人以为无终是我们大军的必经之路，大军不能前进，只好撤退，因此他们放松以了戒备。
English: Now, the Wuhuan people thought that there is no end to the inevitable path of our great army. The great army could not advance, but had to retreat, so they relaxed their guard.

古文：若嘿回军，从卢龙口越白檀之险，出空虚之地，路近而便，掩其不备，蹋顿可不战而禽也。 操曰： 善！ 
现代文：如果我们默默地回军，却从卢龙塞口越过白檀险阻，进到他们没有设防的区域，路近而行动方便，攻其不备，可以不战而捉住蹋顿。 曹操说： 很好！ 
English: If we silently return to the army, but from the Lulong Pass, we will cross the sandalwood obstacle, enter the area where they have no fortifications, the road is close and the action is convenient, and if we are not prepared to attack it, we can capture Htun without a fight. Cao Cao said: Very good!

古文：乃引军还，而署大木表于水侧路傍曰： 方今夏暑，道路不通，且俟秋冬，乃复进军 。
现代文：于是率军从无终撤退，在水边的路旁留下一块大木牌，上面写着： 现在夏季暑热，道路不通，且等到秋冬，再出兵讨伐。 
English: As a result, he led the army to retreat from the endless, leaving a large wooden sign next to the road by the water, which read: Now the summer is hot, the road is impassable, and wait until autumn and winter, and then send troops to fight.

古文：虏候骑见之，诚以为大军去也。
现代文：乌桓人的侦察骑兵看到后，当真以为曹军已经离去。
English: When the Wuhuan's scout cavalry saw it, they seriously thought that Cao's army had already left.

古文：操令畴将其众为乡导，上徐无山，堑山堙谷，五百馀里，经白檀，历平冈，步鲜卑庭，东指柳城。
现代文：曹操命令田畴率领他的部众作向导，上徐无山，凿山填谷，行进五百余里，经过白檀、平冈，又穿过鲜卑部落的王庭，向东直指柳城。
English: Cao Cao ordered Tian Zhen to lead his subordinates as a guide, to climb mountains and fill valleys, to travel more than five hundred miles, through sandalwood, flat hills, and through the royal court of the Xianbei tribe, to the east straight to Liucheng.

古文：未至二百里，虏乃知之。
现代文：距离二百余里时，乌桓人才知道。
English: When he was more than two hundred miles away from Liucheng, the thief had already learned the news.

古文：尚、熙与蹋顿及辽西单于楼班、右北平单于能臣抵之等将数万骑逆军。
现代文：袁尚、袁熙与蹋顿以及辽西单于楼班、右北平单于能臣抵之等率领数万名骑兵迎击曹军。
English: Yuan Shang, Yuan Xi and Xingtang, as well as Liao Xi Shan in Louban and Ubei Ping Shan in Nengshen, led tens of thousands of cavalry to meet Cao's army.

古文：八月，操登白狼山，卒与虏遇，众甚盛。
现代文：八月，曹操登上白狼山，突然与乌桓军相遇，而乌桓军军力强盛。
English: In August, Cao Cao ascended the White Wolf Mountain and suddenly encountered the Wuhuan Army, which was in full strength.

古文：操车重在后，被甲者少，左右皆惧。
现代文：曹军车辆辎重都在后边，身披铠甲的将士很少，曹操左右的人都感到畏惧。
English: Cao Cao's army vehicles and heavy equipment are all in the back, and there are few soldiers wearing armor, and people around Cao Cao are afraid.

古文：操登高，望虏阵不整，乃纵兵击之，使张辽为先锋，虏众大崩，斩蹋顿及名王已下，胡、汉降者二十馀万口。
现代文：曹操登高，看到乌桓军队不整，就纵兵攻击，派张辽为先锋，乌桓军队大乱，斩杀蹋顿和各部落王爷及以下的乌桓首领，投降的胡人与汉人共有二十余万。
English: When Cao Cao ascended the throne, he saw that the Wuhuan army was not in order, so he launched a long-range attack and sent Zhang Liao as the vanguard. The Wuhuan army rioted, slaughtering Xingtang, the princes of various tribes, and the following Wuhuan leaders. A total of more than 200,000 Hu people and Han people surrendered.

古文：辽东单于速仆丸与尚、熙奔辽东太守公孙康，其众尚有教千骑。
现代文：辽东单于速仆丸与袁尚、袁熙投奔辽东郡太守公孙康，跟随他们的还有数千名骑兵。
English: Yuan Shang, Yuan Xi, and Liaodong's only son, Hayabusa Maru, invaded Liaodong County, accompanied by several thousand cavalry.

古文：或劝操遂击之，操曰： 吾方使康斩送尚、熙首，不烦兵矣。 
现代文：有人劝曹操乘势追击，曹操说： 我将使公孙康送来袁尚、袁熙的人头，不必再劳师动众。 
English: Some people advised Cao Cao to take advantage of the situation to pursue. Cao Cao said, "I will have my son-in-law, Kang, bring the heads of Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi, so you don't have to work so hard to motivate the people."

古文：九月，操引兵自柳城还。
现代文：九月，曹操率大军从柳城班师。
English: In September, Cao Cao led a large army from Liucheng.

古文：公孙康欲取尚、熙以为功，乃先置精勇于厩中，然后请尚、熙入，未及坐，康叱伏兵禽之，遂斩尚、熙，并速仆丸首送之。
现代文：公孙康想要杀死袁尚、袁熙，作为对朝廷立下的功劳，于是先埋伏精兵在马厩中，然后请袁尚、袁熙进来，他们还没来得及入座，公孙康叫出伏兵，把他们捉住。于是斩杀袁尚、袁熙，连同速仆丸的人头一起送给曹操。
English: Gongsun Kang wanted to kill Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi, as a credit to the imperial court, so he first ambushed the elite soldiers in the stables, and then invited Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi to come in. Before they could take their seats, Gongsun Kang called out the ambushers and caught them. So he killed Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi, and sent them to Cao Cao along with the head of the swift horse.

古文：诸将或问操： 公还而康斩尚、熙，何也？ 
现代文：将领中有人问曹操： 您已退军而公孙康杀死袁尚、袁熙，这是为什么？ 
English: One of the generals asked Cao Cao: You have retired from the army and Gongsun Kang killed Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi. Why?

古文：操曰： 彼素畏尚、熙，吾急之则并力，缓之则自相图，其势然也。 
现代文：曹操说： 公孙康一向畏惧袁尚、袁熙，我如果急攻，他们就会合力抵抗；缓和时，他们就会自相残杀；是形势使他们这样做的。 
English: Cao Cao said: Gongsun Kang had always been afraid of Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi. If I made a sudden attack, they would join forces to resist; if I eased up, they would kill each other; it was the situation that made them do it.

古文：操枭尚首，令三军： 敢有哭之者斩！ 
现代文：曹操把袁尚的头颅悬挂起来示众，号令三军： 有敢于哭泣的，处斩！ 
English: Cao Cao hung Yuan Shang's head up for all to see and ordered the three armies: "If you dare to cry, you will be beheaded!"

古文：牵招独设祭悲哭，操义之，举为茂才。
现代文：牵招却独自设祭，放声悲哭，曹操认为他是忠于故主的义士，推荐他为茂才。
English: Cao Cao thought that he was a righteous man who was loyal to the old lord, and recommended him to Mao Cai.

古文：时天寒且旱，二百里无水，军又乏食，杀马数千匹以为粮，凿地入三十馀丈方得水。
现代文：当时天寒，又遇上大旱，二百里没有水，军队缺乏粮食，只好杀死几千匹战马作为军粮，挖地三十余丈才见到水。
English: At that time, the weather was cold and there was a severe drought. There was no water for 200 miles, and the army lacked food. They had to kill several thousand war horses as military food and dig more than 30 feet to find water.

古文：既还，科问前谏者，众莫知其故，人人皆惧。
现代文：大军返回后，曹操调查以前劝阻他出兵征讨乌桓的人，众人不知道是因为什么，都心怀畏惧。
English: After the return of the large army, Cao Cao investigated the people who had previously dissuaded him from sending troops to recruit Wuhuan. People did not know why, and they were all afraid.

古文：操皆厚赏之，曰： 孤前行，乘危以徼幸。虽得之，天所佐也，顾不可以为常。
现代文：曹操对劝阻者都加以厚赏，对他们说： 我先前出兵，实在危险，虽然侥幸获胜，全是靠上天保佑，不能作为常规。
English: Cao Cao rewarded all those who dissuaded him, saying to them: My previous dispatch of troops was really dangerous. Although I won by a fluke, it was all thanks to God's blessing and cannot be regarded as normal.

古文：诸君之谏，万安之计，是以相赏，后勿难言之。 
现代文：你们的意见，才是万全之计，所以加以赏赐，以后不要害怕提相反的意见。 
English: Your opinion is all that matters, so reward it and don't be afraid to offer a contrary opinion in the future.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，有星孛于鹑尾。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛卯，有异星出现在鹑尾星次。
English: In winter, in October, in the middle of winter, a strange star appears in the constellation of the Dog-tailed Star.

古文：乙巳，黄巾杀济南王赟。
现代文：乙巳，黄巾军杀死济南王刘。
English: Suddenly, the Yellow Turban Army killed King Liu of Jinan.

古文：十一月，曹操至易水，乌桓单于代郡普富卢、上郡那楼皆来贺。
现代文：十一月，曹操到达易水，乌桓代郡部落单于普富卢、上郡部落单于那楼都来向曹操祝贺。
English: In November, Cao Cao arrived in Yishui. Wuhuandi County Tribal Council came to congratulate Cao Cao in Pufu Lu, and Shang County Tribal Council came to congratulate Cao Cao in that building.

古文：师还，论功行赏，以五百户封田畴为亭侯。
现代文：大军回到邺城，论功行赏，封田畴为亭侯，封地有五百户。
English: The large army returned to Lucheng and was rewarded for their meritorious deeds. The fiefdoms were given to the princes, and there were more than 500 fiefs.

古文：畴曰： 吾始为刘公报仇，率众遁逃，志义不立，反以为利，非本志也。 
现代文：田畴说： 我当初是为刘虞报仇，率众逃亡，我的志愿没有达到，反而以此获利，这不是我的本意。 
English: Tian Zang said: I initially took revenge for Liu Yu and led the crowd to escape. I did not achieve my goal, but instead made a profit from it. This was not my intention.

古文：固让不受。
现代文：坚决辞让，不肯接受封爵。
English: Wang Yun resolutely refused to accept the resignation.

古文：操知其至心，许而不夺。
现代文：曹操知道田畴是出于真心，同意他的辞让，没有勉强他接受。
English: Cao Cao knew that Tian Zhen was sincere, agreed to his resignation, and did not force him to accept.

古文：操之北伐也，刘备说刘表袭许，表不能用。
现代文：曹操出兵北伐乌桓时，刘备劝刘表发兵袭击许都，刘表不能用他的计策。
English: When Cao Cao sent troops to the Northern Expedition of Wuhuan, Liu Bei advised Liu Biao to send troops to attack Xu Du. Liu Biao could not use his strategy.

古文：及闻操还，表谓备曰： 不用君言，故为失此大会。 
现代文：等听到曹操得胜班师的消息，刘表对刘备说： 没有听你的话，结果失掉这个大好机会。 
English: After hearing the news of Cao Cao's winning team, Liu Biao said to Liu Bei: I didn't listen to you, and as a result, I lost this great opportunity.

古文：备曰： 今天下分裂，日寻干戈，事会之来，岂有终极乎？
现代文：刘备说： 如今天下分裂，战争不断，机会的到来，难道会有终极吗？
English: Liu Bei said, "If there is division today, continuous war, and the arrival of opportunities, will there be an end?

古文：若能应之于后者，则此未足为恨也。 
现代文：要是能不放过以后的机会，则这次也不足以遗憾。 
English: If you do not let go of future opportunities, then this time is not enough to regret.

古文：是岁，孙权西击黄祖，虏其人民而还。
现代文：这一年，孙权向西攻击黄祖，俘虏百姓后返回吴郡。
English: In this year, Sun Quan attacked Huang Zu to the west, captured the people and returned to Wu County.

古文：权母吴氏疾笃，引见张昭等，属以后事而卒。
现代文：孙权的母亲吴夫人病危，召见张昭等人，嘱托后事之后去世。
English: Mrs. Wu, the mother of Sun Quan, was critically ill, summoned Zhang Zhao and others, and died after the incident.

古文：初，琅邪诸葛亮寓居襄阳隆中，每自比管仲、乐毅。时人莫之许也，惟颍川徐庶与崔州平谓为信然。
现代文：起初，琅邪人诸葛亮寄居襄阳隆中，经常把自己比作管仲和乐毅；但当时人并不认可，只有颍川人徐庶与崔州平认为确是如此。
English: At first, Zhuge Liang, an evil villain, lived in Xiangyang Longzhong, and often compared himself to Guanzhong and Leyi; but at that time, people did not recognize it, only Xu Zhe and Cui Zhouping from Luochuan thought it was true.

古文：州平，烈之子也。
现代文：崔州平是崔烈的儿子。
English: Cui Zhouping is the son of Cui Lei.

古文：刘备在荆州，访士于襄阳司马徽。
现代文：刘备在荆州，向襄阳人司马徽询访人才。
English: In Jingzhou, Liu Bei inquired about visiting talents from Sima Hui, a person from Yangyang.

古文：徽曰： 儒生俗士，岂识时务，识时务者在乎俊杰。
现代文：司马徽说： 一般的儒生与俗士，怎么能认清时务，能认清时务的，只有俊杰之士。
English: Sima Hui said: How can ordinary Confucians and laymen recognize the current affairs? Only those who are brilliant can recognize the current affairs.

古文：此间自有伏龙、凤雏。 
现代文：在襄阳这里，自有伏龙与凤雏。 
English: Here in Yangyang, we have our own dragon and phoenix chicks.

古文：备问为谁，曰： 诸葛孔明、庞士元也。 
现代文：刘备问是谁，司马徽说： 就是诸葛亮与庞统。 
English: When Liu Bei asked who it was, Sima Hui said: It is Zhuge Liang and Pang Tong.

古文：徐庶见备于新野，备器之。
现代文：徐庶在新野县见到刘备，刘备对徐庶很器重。
English: Xu Shiao met Liu Bei in Xinye County. Liu Bei was very kind to Xu Shiao.

古文：庶谓备曰： 诸葛孔明，卧龙也，将军岂愿见之乎？ 
现代文：徐庶对刘备说： 诸葛亮乃是卧龙，将军愿见他吗？ 
English: Xu's son-in-law said to Liu Bei: Zhuge Liang is Wolong, does the general wish to see him?

古文：备曰： 君与俱来。 
现代文：刘备说： 请你与他一起来。 
English: Liu Bei said, "Please come with him."

古文：庶曰： 此人可就见，不可屈致也，将军宜枉驾顾之。 
现代文：徐庶说： 这个人，你可以去见他，不可以召唤他来，将军应当屈驾去拜访他。 
English: Xu Zhe said: This person, you can go to see him, you can't summon him, the general should bend down to visit him.

古文：备由是诣亮，凡三往，乃见。
现代文：刘备于是拜访诸葛亮，一共去了三次，才见到诸葛亮。
English: Liu Bei then paid a visit to Zhuge Liang. He went there a total of three times before meeting Zhuge Liang.

古文：因屏人曰： 汉室倾颓，奸臣窃命，孤不度德量力，欲信大义于天下，而智术浅短，遂用猖蹶，至于今日。
现代文：于是，刘备让左右的人都出去，说道： 汉朝王室已经衰败，奸臣窃据朝政大权，我不度德量力，打算伸张正义于天下，但智谋短浅，以致于遭受挫折，到了今天这个地步。
English: As a result, Liu Bei let everyone around him go out and said: The Han Dynasty royal family has decayed, and treacherous vassals have stolen the supreme political power of the dynasty. I tried my best and intended to uphold justice in the world, but my wisdom was short-sighted, so that I suffered setbacks, to this day.

古文：然志犹未已，君谓计将安出？ 
现代文：但我的雄心壮志仍然未息，你认为应当如何去作？ 
English: But the ambition hasn't changed. What do you think should be done?

古文：亮曰： 今曹操已拥百万之众，挟天子而令诸侯，此诚不可与争锋。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 如今，曹操已经拥有百万大军，挟持天子以号令天下，此人确实不可与他争锋。
English: Zhuge Liang said, "Nowadays, Cao Cao already has a million-strong army, and he holds the Son of Heaven in his arms to command the world. This person really cannot fight against him.

古文：孙权据有江东，已历三世，国险而民附，贤能为之用，此可与为援而不可图也。
现代文：孙权占据江东，已经历三代，地势险要，民心归附，贤能人才都为他尽力，此人可以与他联盟，却不可算计他。
English: Sun Quan has occupied the east of the Yangtze River for three generations. The terrain is precarious, the people's hearts are attached, and the talented people are doing their best for him. This person can be allied with him, but he cannot be counted on.

古文：荆州并据汉、沔，利尽南海，东连吴会，西通巴、蜀，此用武之国，而其主不能守，此殆天所以资将军也。
现代文：荆州地区，北方以汉水、沔水为屏障，南方直通南海，东边连接吴郡、会稽，西边可通巴郡、蜀郡，正是用武之地，但主人刘表却不能守，这恐怕是上天赐给将军的资本。
English: The Jingzhou region, with the Han River and Surabaya River as a barrier in the north, the South China Sea directly to the south, the east connected to Wu County and Hui County, and the west connected to Kotongba County and Shu County, is a place of martial arts, but the master Liu table can not keep, this is probably the capital given to the general by heaven.

古文：益州险塞，沃野千里，天府之土；刘璋暗弱，张鲁在北，民殷国富而不知存恤，智能之士思得明君。
现代文：益州四边地势险阻，中有沃野千里，是天府之地，而益州牧刘璋昏庸儒弱，北边还有张鲁相邻，虽然百姓富庶，官府财力充足，却不知道珍惜，智士贤才都希望有一个圣明的君主。
English: The terrain on all four sides of Yizhou is perilous, there are thousands of miles of fertile fields, and it is the land of heaven, while Yizhou's pastures are dim and weak, and Zhanglu is adjacent to the north. Although the people are rich, the government has sufficient financial resources, but they do not know how to cherish them. Wise men and sages all hope to have a holy monarch.

古文：将军既帝室之胄，信义著于四海，若跨有荆、益，保其岩阻，抚和戎、越，结好孙权，内修政治，外观时变，则霸业可成，汉室可兴矣。 
现代文：将军既是汉朝王室的后裔，信义闻名天下，如果能占有荆州与益州，据守险要，安抚戎、越等族，与孙权结盟，对内修明政治，对外观察时局变化，这样，就能建成霸业，复兴汉朝王室了。 刘备说： 很好！ 
English: As a descendant of the royal family of the Han Dynasty, the general's loyalty is famous all over the world. If he can occupy Jingzhou and Yizhou, guard against danger, pacify Rong, Yue and other ethnic groups, ally with Sun Quan, clarify politics internally, and observe changes in the current situation externally, he will be able to build hegemony and revive the royal family of the Han Dynasty. Liu Bei said: Very good!

古文：愿诸君勿复言。 
现代文：从此与诸葛亮的情谊日益亲密。
English: I wish you'd stop saying that.

古文：羽、飞乃止。司马徽，清雅有知人之鉴。
现代文：关羽、张飞对此感到不满，刘备对他们解释说： 我得到诸葛亮，是如鱼得水，希望你们不要再说了。 
English: Guan Yu and Zhang Fei were dissatisfied with this, Liu Bei explained to them: I got Zhuge Liang, it's like a fish getting water, I hope you don't say anything more.

古文：同县庞德公素有重名，徽兄事之。
现代文：关羽、张飞才停止抱怨。司马徽为人高雅，善于鉴别人才。与他同县的庞德公一向名望很高，司马徽把他当作兄长那样对待。
English: It took Guan Yu and Zhang Fei to stop complaining. Sima Hui is the most elegant person and is good at judging other people's talents. His fellow county official, Pang Degu, has always had a high reputation, and Sima Hui treats him like an older brother.

古文：诸葛亮每至德公家，独拜床下，德公初不令止。
现代文：诸葛亮每次到庞德公家里，都在床下向庞德公独拜。庞德公起初也不阻止。
English: Every time Zhuge Liang went to Lord Pound's house, he would bow to Lord Pound under the bed. Lord Pound did not stop him at first.

古文：德公从子统，少时朴钝，未有识者，惟德公与徽重之。
现代文：庞德公的侄子庞统，从小朴实，沉默寡言，大家都没有看到他的才能，只有庞德公与司马徽重视他。
English: Pang Tong, the nephew of Lord Pound, was simple and taciturn from an early age. No one saw his talent, only Lord Pound and Sima Hui valued him.

古文：德公常谓孔明为卧龙，士元为凤雏，德操为水鉴；故德操与刘备语而称之。
现代文：庞德公曾经说诸葛亮是 卧龙 ，庞统是 凤雏 ，司马徽是 水镜 。所以，当司马徽与刘备谈话时，向刘备称赞诸葛亮与庞统。
English: Lord Pound once said that Zhuge Liang was a dragon, Pang Tong was a phoenix, and Sima Hui was a water mirror. Therefore, when Sima Hui talked with Liu Bei, he praised Zhuge Liang and Pang Tong to Liu Bei.

古文：孝献皇帝庚建安十三年
现代文：建安十三年
English: The 13th year of Jianan

古文：春，正月，司徒赵温辟曹操子丕。
现代文：春季，正月，司徒赵温延聘曹操的儿子曹丕为僚属。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the disciple Zhao Wenyan hired Cao Cao's son Cao Pi as a subordinate.

古文：操表 温辟臣子弟，选举故不以实 ，策免之。
现代文：曹操上表说： 赵温召聘我的子弟为僚属，说明他并不依据真才实学选拔人才。 
English: Cao Cao said on the table: Zhao Wen recruited my son as a colleague, indicating that he did not select talent based on true talent.

古文：曹操还鄴，作玄武池以肄舟师。
现代文：献帝颁策将赵温免职。曹操回到邺城，修建玄武池，用以训练水军。
English: Zhao Wen was relieved of his duties by the emperor. Cao Cao returned to Shicheng and built the Xuanwu Pool to train the navy.

古文：初，巴郡甘宁将僮客八百人归刘表，表儒人，不习军事，宁观表事势终必无成，恐一朝众散，并受其祸，欲东入吴。
现代文：起初，巴郡人甘宁率领奴朴和宾客八百人投奔刘表。刘表是个儒者，不懂军事，甘宁看出刘表终究难以成就大业，恐怕一朝众叛亲离，自己也要受牵连，就打算东入吴郡。
English: At first, Ganning, a Ba County resident, led the slave Park and 800 guests to Liu Biao. Liu Biao was a Confucian and did not understand the military. Ganning saw that Liu Biao would eventually be unable to achieve a great cause. He was afraid that once the people of the dynasty rebelled and left their relatives, he would also be implicated, so he planned to go east into Wuxi County.

古文：黄祖在夏口，军不得过，乃留，依祖三年，祖以凡人畜之。
现代文：但刘表的部将黄祖据下待了三年，黄祖一直把他当作凡人来对待。
English: However, Liu's subordinate, Huang Zu, has been under him for three years. Huang Zu has always treated him as an ordinary person.

古文：孙权击祖，祖军败走，权校尉凌操将兵急追之。
现代文：孙权攻击黄祖，黄祖军队大败而逃，孙权部下的校尉凌操领兵急速追赶。
English: Sun Quan attacked Huang Zu. Huang Zu's army was defeated and fled. Sun Quan's lieutenant Ling Xiu led the troops in a rapid pursuit.

古文：宁善射，将兵在后，射杀操，祖由是得免。
现代文：甘宁善于射箭，率兵在后掩护，射死凌操，黄祖因此免于一死。
English: Gan Ning was good at archery. He led the soldiers to take cover behind and shot Ling Du dead. Huang Zu was thus spared from death.

古文：军罢，还营，待宁如初。
现代文：黄祖收军，回营后，对待甘宁还像过去一样。
English: Huang Zu collected his troops and, after returning to camp, treated Ganning as he had in the past.

古文：祖都督苏飞数荐宁，祖不用。
现代文：黄祖部下的都督苏飞屡次推荐甘宁，黄祖仍不加以重用。
English: Huang Zu's governor, Su Fei, repeatedly recommended Ganning, but Huang Zu still did not reuse it.

古文：宁欲去，恐不免；飞乃白祖，以宁为邾长。
现代文：甘宁打算离开，但又怕边防戎备森严，难于脱身。苏飞就向黄祖推荐甘宁担任邾县县长。
English: Ganning planned to leave, but he was afraid that the border troops would be so strong that it would be difficult to escape. So Fei recommended Ganning to Huang Zu for the post of county governor of Handan County.

古文：宁遂亡奔孙权。
现代文：甘宁于是逃亡，投奔孙权。
English: Ganning then fled and joined Sun Quan.

古文：周瑜、吕蒙共荐达之，权礼异，同于旧臣。
现代文：周瑜、吕蒙共同向孙权推荐甘宁，孙权对甘宁礼遇特别优厚，与跟随自己多年的旧臣一样。
English: Zhou Yu and Lv Meng jointly recommended Gan Ning to Sun Quan. Sun Quan treated Gan Ning with special courtesy, just like the old minister who had followed him for many years.

古文：宁献策于权曰： 今汉祚日微，曹操终为篡盗。
现代文：甘宁向孙权献计说： 如今，汉朝王室日见衰弱，曹操终究会篡夺江山。
English: Ganning proposed a plan to Sun Quan, saying, "Nowadays, the Han Dynasty royal family is weakening day by day, Cao Cao will eventually usurp the country.

古文：南荆之地，山川形便，诚国之西势也。
现代文：荆州南部，山川险要，在我们的西边，控制着长江上游。
English: In the southern part of Jingzhou, the mountains and rivers are very dangerous. To the west of us, it controls the upper reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：宁观刘表，虑既不远，儿子又劣，非能承业传基者也。
现代文：据我观察，刘表既没有深谋远虑，他的儿子又更加拙劣，不是能继承基业的人。
English: According to my observation, Liu Biao has neither forethought nor forethought, and his son is even more clumsy, and is not a person who can inherit the inheritance.

古文：至尊当早图之，不可后操。
现代文：您应当尽早采取行动，不能落在曹操后面。
English: You should take action as soon as possible and not lag behind Cao Cao.

古文：图之之计，宜先取黄祖。
现代文：夺取荆州的策略，是应该先进攻黄祖。
English: If you want to plan Liu table, the first step should be to seek Huang Zu.

古文：祖今昏耄已甚，财谷并乏，左右贪纵，吏士心怨，舟船战具，顿废不修，怠于耕农，军无法伍。
现代文：黄祖现在已经十分老迈昏愦，钱财与粮草都很缺乏，左右亲信都贪赃枉法，官吏与兵士都心怀怨恨，战船武器废坏，无人修整，农业荒废，军无法纪。
English: The Yellow Ancestor is now very old and feeble, money and grain and grass are in short supply, close relatives on both sides are greedy, officials and soldiers are resentful, warships and weapons are worn out, no one is repairing them, agriculture is in ruins, and the army is undisciplined.

古文：至尊今往，其破可必。
现代文：如果您现在出兵征讨，一定可攻破黄祖。
English: If you send out conscripts now, you will be able to defeat Huang Zu.

古文：一破祖军，鼓行而西，据楚关，大势弥广，即可渐规巴、蜀矣。 
现代文：攻破黄祖后，大张旗鼓地向西占据楚关，则势力大增，就可以逐步规划夺取巴、蜀地区了。 
English: After defeating Huang Zu, they occupied Chuguan to the west with great fanfare, and their power increased greatly, so they could gradually plan to seize the Ba and Shu regions.

古文：权深纳之。
现代文：孙权很以为然。
English: Sun Quan was very impressed.

古文：张昭时在坐，难曰： 今吴下业业，若军果行，恐必致乱。 
现代文：张昭当时也在座，提出疑问说： 现在吴郡民心不稳，大军如果出征，恐怕会发生变乱。 
English: Zhang Zhao, who was also present at the time, raised a question, saying, "Nowadays, the people of Wuxian County are not stable. If a large army goes to war, I'm afraid there will be turmoil.

古文：宁谓昭曰： 国家以萧何之任付君，君居守而忧乱，奚以希慕古人乎！ 
现代文：甘宁对张昭说： 国家把萧何那样的重任托付给您，您留守后方，却担心发生变化，怎么能效法古代名臣呢！ 
English: Ganning said to Zhang Zhao: The country has entrusted you with such an important task as Xiao Mao. You stay behind, but you are worried about changes. How can you follow the example of the ancient eminent ministers?

古文：权举酒属宁曰： 兴霸，今年行讨，如此酒矣，决以付卿。
现代文：孙权举杯向甘宁敬酒，说： 甘兴霸，今年进行讨伐，就像这杯酒，已决定交付给你。
English: Sun Quan raised a toast to Gan Ning and said: Gan Xingba, this year's crusade, like this glass of wine, has been decided to be delivered to you.

古文：卿但当勉建方略，令必克祖，则卿之功，何嫌张长史之言乎！ 
现代文：你只管努力去制定策略，使得一定能攻破黄祖，就是你的大功，何必在乎张长史的话呢！ 
English: All you have to do is to work hard to formulate a strategy so that you can definitely defeat Huang Zu, which is your great achievement. Why should you care about Zhang Changshi's words?

古文：权遂西击黄祖。
现代文：于是孙权西征黄祖。
English: As a result, Sun Quan went west to conquer Huang Zu.

古文：祖横两蒙冲，挟守沔口，以拼闾大绁系石为矴，上有千人，以弩交射，飞矢雨下，军不得前。
现代文：黄祖用两艘以生牛皮包裹的狭长的蒙冲战船封锁沔口，用粗大的棕绳捆住巨石，作为碇石，固定船身。船上有一千人，用弓弩向外轮流发射，箭如雨下，孙权军队无法上前。
English: Huang Zu used two long, narrow Mengchong warships wrapped in raw cowhide to block the mouth of the estuary, and tied huge boulders with thick brown ropes to fix the hull as anchor stones. There were a thousand people on board, taking turns to fire arrows with their crossbows. The arrows rained down, and Sun Quan's army could not advance.

古文：偏将军董袭与别部司马凌统俱为前部，各将敢死百人，人被两铠，乘大舸，突入蒙冲里。
现代文：偏将军董袭与别部司马凌统都是孙权的先锋，各率敢死队一百人，每人身披两副铠甲，乘大船，闯入黄祖的蒙冲战船之间。
English: Partial general Dong Hei and other divisional general Ma Ling were all Sun Quan's vanguard, each leading a death squad of one hundred men, each wearing two pairs of armor, on a large ship, breaking into Huang Zu's Mengchong warships.

古文：袭身以刀断两绁，蒙冲乃横流，大兵遂进。
现代文：董袭抽刀砍断两根棕绳，蒙冲战船模漂在水上，孙权大军才得以前进。
English: Dong Wei personally cut two large cables with a knife, and Huang Zu's huge ship moved away with the water, allowing Sun Quan's army to continue moving forward.

古文：祖令都督陈就以水军逆战。
现代文：黄祖命令都督陈就率水军迎战。
English: Huang Zu ordered the governor Chen to lead the navy into battle.

古文：平北都尉吕蒙勒前锋，亲枭就首。
现代文：孙权部将平北都尉吕蒙统率前锋，亲手斩下陈就的人头，悬挂示众。
English: Sun Quan led the advance under the command of the Northern General Lv Meng, and personally cut off Chen Zhen's head and hung it up for the public to see.

古文：于是将士乘胜，水陆并进，傅其城，尽锐攻之，遂屠其城。
现代文：于是吴军将士乘胜猛追，水陆并进，逼近夏口城，出动全部精锐部队猛攻，攻陷后大肆屠杀。
English: As a result, the soldiers of the Wu Army took advantage of the victory and chased fiercely, advancing by land and sea, approaching the city of Xiakou, dispatching all the elite troops to storm, and massacring after the fall.

古文：祖挺身走，追斩之，虏其男女数万口。
现代文：黄祖突围而逃，被追上杀死。吴军俘虏了数万男女。
English: Huang Zu broke out of the encirclement and fled, but was caught and killed. The Wu army captured tens of thousands of men and women.

古文：权先作两函，欲以盛祖及苏飞首。
现代文：孙权预先制作了两个木盒，打算装黄祖与苏飞的人头。
English: Sun Quan made two wooden boxes in advance, intending to contain the heads of Huang Zu and Su Fei.

古文：权为诸将置酒，甘宁下席叩头，血涕交流，为权言飞畴昔旧恩， 宁不值飞，固已损骸于沟壑，不得致命于麾下。
现代文：得胜后，孙权为诸将领摆宴庆功，甘宁走下坐位，向孙权叩头流血，鲜血与眼泪一齐往下流，对孙权进述苏飞从前对待自己的恩德，说： 我甘宁如果没有遇到苏飞，肯定已死在沟壑，而不能在您部下效力了。
English: After the victory, Sun Quan held a banquet for the generals to celebrate their achievements. Gan Ning stepped down from his seat, bowed to Sun Quan and bled blood. Blood and tears flowed down together. He told Sun Quan about the kindness that Su Fei had shown him in the past, saying, "If I hadn't met Su Fei, I, Gan Ning, would have surely died in the ravine and wouldn't have been able to serve under you."

古文：今飞罪当夷戮，特从将军乞其首领。 
现代文：如今，苏飞的罪本该处死，我特地请求将军饶他一命。 
English: Now, Su Fei's crime should have been punished by death, so I specifically asked the general to spare his life.

古文：权感其言，谓曰： 今为君置之。
现代文：孙权为甘宁的话所感动，说： 现在就为你放了他，如果他逃跑怎么办？ 
English: Moved by Ganning's words, Sun Quan said, "I'll release him now for you. What if he escapes?"

古文：若走去何？ 宁曰： 飞免分裂之祸，受更生之恩，逐之尚必不走，岂当图亡哉！
现代文：甘宁说： 苏飞能免除斩首之祸，受到您再生的大恩，赶他都不会走，怎么会打算逃跑呢！
English: Ganning said, "If Su Fei can be spared the scourge of beheading, thanks to the great grace of your rebirth, he won't run away. How could he plan to escape?"

古文：若尔，宁头当代入函。 
现代文：如果他这样做，我甘宁的人头将代替他放入木盒。 
English: If he does, I'll have Ganning's head put in a box instead.

古文：权乃赦之。
现代文：孙权于是不令赦免苏飞。
English: Sun Quan then ordered Su Fei not to be pardoned.

古文：凌统怨宁杀其父操，常欲杀宁，权命统不得仇之，令宁将兵屯于它所。
现代文：凌统怨恨甘宁杀死他的父亲凌操，经常打算杀死甘宁。孙权命令凌统不得仇恨甘宁，并让甘宁领兵到别的地方驻守。
English: Ling Tong resented Gan Ning for killing his father Ling Cao, and often planned to kill Gan Ning. Sun Quan ordered Ling Tong not to hate Gan Ning, and let Gan Ning lead troops to garrison elsewhere.

古文：夏，六月，罢三公官，复置丞相、御史大夫。
现代文：夏季，六月，朝廷撤除三公的职位，重新设置丞相、御史大夫。
English: In the summer, in June, the Imperial Court removed the positions of the three dukes and reinstated the position of chancellor and chief historian.

古文：癸巳。以曹操为丞相。
现代文：癸巳，任命曹操为丞相。
English: Soon after, Cao Cao was appointed chancellor.

古文：操以冀州别驾从事崔琰为丞相西曹掾，司空东曹掾陈留毛玠为丞相东曹掾，元城令河内司马朗为主簿，弟懿为文学掾，冀州主簿卢毓为法曹议令史。
现代文：曹操委任冀州别驾、从事崔琰为丞相西曹掾，司空东曹掾陈留人毛为丞相东曹掾，元城县县令河内人司马朗为主簿，他弟弟司马懿为文学掾，冀州主簿卢毓为法曹议令史。
English: Cao Cao appointed Jizhou Provincial Secretary and Minister of Industry and Commerce Cui Jiao as the Minister of the West Cao Cao Province, the Minister of the East Cao Cao Province Chen Lujin Mao as the Minister of the East Cao Cao Province, the former county magistrate Sima Lang as the Chief Registrar, his brother Sima Jiao as the Chief Registrar of Literature, and the Chief Registrar of Jizhou Province Lu Jiao as the Chief Registrar of Law.

古文：毓，植之子也。
现代文：卢毓是卢植的儿子。
English: Lu Wei is the son of Lu Zhi.

古文：琰、玠并典选举，其所举用皆清正之士，虽于时有盛名而行不由本者，终莫得进。
现代文：崔琰与毛一起负责官员的选拔、任免事务，他们所选用的都是清廉正直的人士。虽然当时名望很高，但品行不佳的人，始终不能获得任用。
English: Together with Mao, Cui Yong was in charge of the selection, appointment and removal of officials, and they selected people who were clean and honest. Although the reputation was high at the time, people with poor conduct could not be appointed.

古文：拔敦实，斥华伪，进冲逊，抑阿党。
现代文：他们选拔敦厚务实的人才，排斥只会空谈的浮华虚伪之人；进用谦虚和睦的长者，压抑结党营私的小人。
English: They select the hard-working and pragmatic talents, reject the vainglorious and hypocritical people who can only talk; promote the humble and harmonious elders, and suppress the party and private villains.

古文：由是天下之士莫不以廉节自励，虽贵宠之臣，舆服不敢过度，至乃长吏还者，垢面羸衣，独乘柴车，军吏入府，朝服徒行。
现代文：因此，天下的士大夫无不以清廉的节操来勉励自己，即便是高官庞臣，车辆、衣服的形式，也不敢超越制度。以至高级官员回家时，蓬头垢面，衣服破烂，独自乘坐柴车；文武官员入府办公时，穿着朝服，徒步从家中走到官署。
English: As a result, the world's officers and magistrates have to encourage themselves with their incorruptible self-discipline. Even high-ranking officials do not dare to go beyond the system in the form of vehicles and clothes. So much so that when high-ranking officials go home, their hair is unkempt, their clothes are tattered, and they ride alone in a chai car; when civil and military officials enter the government office, they wear a court dress and walk from home to the government office.

古文：吏洁于上，俗移于下。
现代文：身居高位的官员都如此廉洁，民间的风俗也随之改变。
English: Officials in high places are so incorruptible, and folk customs have changed accordingly.

古文：操闻之，叹曰： 用人如此，使天下人自治，吾复何为哉！ 
现代文：曹操知道后，叹息说： 像这样任用人才，使天下人都自我控制，我还有什么可做的呢！ 
English: After learning this, Cao Cao sighed and said, "What else can I do, appointing talented people like this, so that everyone in the world can control themselves!

古文：司马懿，少聪达，多大略。
现代文：司马懿自小聪明通达，有雄才大略。
English: Sima Yu has been clever and knowledgeable since he was a child, and he has great talent.

古文：崔琰谓其兄朗曰： 君弟聪亮明允，刚断英特，非子所及也。 
现代文：崔琰对他哥哥司马朗说： 你弟弟聪明机智，遇事果断，是个杰出的人才，你比不上他！ 
English: Cui Yao said to his brother Sima Lang: Your brother is clever and witty, decisive in the face of adversity, and an outstanding talent. You are no match for him!

古文：操闻而辟之，懿辞以风痹。
现代文：曹操听说后，征聘司马懿为僚属，司马懿借口患有风湿病而加以推辞。
English: After Cao Cao heard about it, he recruited Sima Yi as a colleague. Sima Yi refused on the pretext of suffering from rheumatism.

古文：操怒，欲收之，懿惧，就职。
现代文：曹操大怒，想要逮捕他，司马懿畏惧，才接受了职务。
English: Cao Cao was furious and wanted to arrest him. Sima Yu was afraid and accepted the post.

古文：操使张辽屯长社，临发，军中有谋反者，夜，惊乱起火，一军尽扰。
现代文：曹操派张辽驻守长社，临出发时，军中有人造反，乘夜在营中放火，全军都惊恐不定。
English: Cao Cao sent Zhang Liao to garrison Changsha, and when they were about to set out, someone in the army rebelled and set fire to the camp at night. The entire army was in a state of shock and uncertainty.

古文：辽谓左右曰： 勿动！
现代文：张辽对左右说： 不要乱动！
English: Zhang Liao said to the generals around him: Don't move!

古文：是不一营尽反，必有造变者，欲以惊动人耳。 乃令军中： 其不反者安坐！ 
现代文：这不是全营的人都想造反，只是少数叛乱分子制造混乱，想扰乱军心。 就下令说： 凡没有参与叛乱的，都坐在那里不动。 
English: It was not the whole battalion that wanted to mutiny, but only a few rebels who wanted to create confusion and disturb the morale of the army, so he gave the order: "All those who are not involved in the mutiny, sit there and do not move."

古文：辽将亲兵数十人中陈而立，有顷，皆定，即得首谋者，杀之。
现代文：张辽率领数十名亲兵在营的中央站定，过了一会，全军都安定下来，随即捉到主谋的人，将他们处死。
English: Zhang Liao led dozens of his own soldiers to the center of the camp. After a while, the whole army settled down. They immediately caught the mastermind and put them to death.

古文：辽在长社，于禁顿颍阴，乐进屯阳翟，三将任气，多共不协。
现代文：张辽在长社，于禁驻军颍阴，乐进驻军阳翟，三个将领都意气用事，互不配合。
English: Zhang Liao was stationed in Changsha, Yu was stationed in Yan, Le was stationed in Yang, and the three generals were full of ambition and did not cooperate with each other.

古文：操使司空主簿赵俨并参三军，每事训谕，遂相亲睦。
现代文：曹操派司空主簿赵俨同时参预三支部队的军务，遇到事情，就从中调解开导，使他们关系逐渐和睦。
English: Cao Cao sent the commander of the three armies, Zhao Jun, to take part in the military affairs of the three armies at the same time, and when he encountered problems, he mediated and enlightened them, so that their relationship gradually became harmonious.

古文：初，前将军马腾与镇西将军韩遂结为异姓兄弟，后以部曲相侵，更为仇敌。
现代文：起初，前将军马腾与镇西将军韩遂结拜为异姓兄弟，但后来由于部属间相互闹摩擦，关系逐渐恶化，进而成为仇敌。
English: At first, former General Ma Teng and Zhenxi General Han Sui were brothers with different surnames, but later, due to mutual friction between subordinates, the relationship gradually deteriorated and became enemies.

古文：朝廷使司隶校尉钟繇、凉州刺史韦端和解之，征腾入屯槐里。
现代文：朝廷派司隶校尉钟繇、凉州刺史韦端来调解他们的矛盾，征召马腾驻军槐里。
English: The imperial court sent Lieutenant-Colonel Zhong Qi and Liang Zhou Zhishi Wei Duan to mediate their conflict and conscripted Ma Teng to be stationed in Yili.

古文：曹操将征荆州，使张既说腾，令释部曲还朝，腾许之。
现代文：曹操准备远征荆州，派张既劝说马腾，建议他放弃军权，到朝廷担任官职。
English: Cao Cao was preparing for an expedition to Jingzhou, and sent Zhang Ye to persuade Ma Teng, suggesting that he give up military power and take up an official position in the imperial court.

古文：已而更犹豫，既恐其为变，乃移诸县促储偫，二千石郊迎，腾不得已，发东。
现代文：马腾表示同意，但是后来又犹豫不决。张既恐怕马腾改变主意，就下令沿途各县准备粮草等物资，以供马腾路上需要，又命令各郡太守都到郊外去迎送，马腾不得已，只好启程向东进发。
English: Zhang was afraid that Ma Teng would change his mind, so he ordered the counties along the way to prepare grain and grass and other supplies to supply Ma Teng's needs on the road, and ordered the county governors to go to the suburbs to meet him. Ma Teng was forced to leave for the east.

古文：操表腾为卫尉，以其子超为偏将军，统其众，悉徙其家属诣鄴。
现代文：曹操上表推荐马腾担任卫尉，任命他儿子马超为偏将军，继续统领马腾的部队，把马腾的家属全都迁到邺城。
English: Cao Cao recommended Ma Teng as a guard lieutenant on the table, appointed his son Ma Chao as a partial general, continued to command Ma Teng's troops, and moved all of Ma Teng's family members to Shicheng.

古文：秋，七月，曹操南击刘表。
现代文：秋季，七月，曹操出军南征刘表。
English: In the autumn, in July, Cao Cao sent troops to the south to conquer Liu Biao.

古文：八月，丁未，以光禄勋山阳郗虑为御史大夫。
现代文：八月，丁未，任命光禄勋山阳人郗虑为御史大夫。
English: In August, Ding Wei appointed Guanglu Shun Shanyang Zangxian as goshi daifu.

古文：壬子，太中大夫孔融弃市。融恃其才望，数戏侮曹操，发辞偏宕，多致乖忤。
现代文：壬子，太中大夫孔融被分开处死，孔融倚仗自己的才干与名望，屡次戏弄、嘲笑曹操，随便发表议论，褒贬人物，多与曹操意见不合。
English: On the other hand, the imperial physician Kong Rong was executed separately. Relying on his talent and reputation, Kong Rong repeatedly teased and mocked Cao Cao, casually made comments, praised and criticized figures, and mostly disagreed with Cao Cao.

古文：操以融名重天下，外相容忍而内甚嫌之。
现代文：曹操因为孔融名重天下，所以表面上容忍他的言行，而心里十分厌恶。
English: Cao Cao tolerated his words and deeds on the surface because Kong Rong's reputation was important to the world, but he was disgusted in his heart.

古文：融又上书言： 宜准古王畿之制，千里寰内不以封建诸侯。 
现代文：孔融又上书给献帝，提出： 应该遵照古代的王畿制度，在京师周围一千里的地方，不可建立封国。 
English: Kong Rong also sent a letter to Emperor Xianlu, proposing: According to the ancient Wang Gui system, a fiefdom should not be established in a place a thousand miles around Beijing.

古文：操疑融所论建渐广，益惮之。
现代文：曹操发现孔融的议论范围越来越广，对孔融更加忌惮。
English: Cao Cao found that the scope of discussion about Kong Rong was getting wider and wider, and he became more and more wary of Kong Rong.

古文：融与郗虑有隙，虑承操风旨，构成其罪，令丞相军谋祭酒路粹奏： 融昔在北海，见王室不静，而招合徒众，欲规不轨。
现代文：孔融与郗虑一向有矛盾，郗虑秉承曹操的意思，罗织孔融的罪状，命令丞相军谋祭酒路粹上奏： 孔融从前担任北海国国相时，看到天下大乱，就召集徒众，准备图谋不轨。
English: There has always been a contradiction between Kong Rong and Zou Qian. Zou Qian adhered to Cao Cao's intention, fabricated Kong Rong's crime, and ordered the prime minister's army to plot a sacrificial wine route.

古文：及与孙权使语，谤讪朝廷。
现代文：后来与孙权的使者谈话，又讥讽、诽谤朝廷。
English: Later, he spoke with Sun Quan's emissary and slandered the imperial court.

古文：又，前与白衣祢衡跌荡放言，更相赞扬。
现代文：另外，他从前与平民祢衡在一起行为放荡，互相标榜，祢衡称赞孔融为 孔子不死 ，孔融称赞祢衡是 颜回复生 。
English: In addition, in the past, he and the commoner Youheng had debauched behavior together and advertised each other. Youheng praised Kong Rong for "Confucius does not die," and Kong Rong praised Youheng for "his face has come back to life."

古文：衡谓融曰 仲尼不死 ，融答 颜回复生 ，大逆不道，宜极重诛。 操遂收融，并其妻子皆杀之。
现代文：这些都是大逆不道的行为，应该处以极刑。 曹操于是下令逮捕孔融，连他的妻子儿女一起处死。
English: These are all acts of high treason and should be punished with capital punishment. Cao Cao then ordered the arrest of Kong Rong and the execution of his wife and children.

古文：初，京兆脂习与融善，每戒融刚直太过，必罹世患。
现代文：初，京兆脂习与融善，每戎融刚直太过，必罹世患。
English: At the beginning, Beijing Zhaozhi was good at learning and integrating, but every time he was too rigid and rigid, he would suffer from the world.

古文：及融死，许下莫敢收者。
现代文：及融死，许下莫敢收者。
English: and melted to death, never daring to come out.

古文：习往抚尸曰： 文举舍我死，吾何用生为！ 
现代文：习往抚尸曰： 文举舍我死，吾何用生为！ 
English: Xi Wanzhong said: "Wen Qian gave up my death, what do I have to live for!

古文：操收习，欲杀之，既而赦之。
现代文：操收习，欲杀之，既而赦之。
English: Learn to live with it, kill it if you want, forgive it if you don't.

古文：初，刘表二子琦、琮，表为琮娶其后妻蔡氏之侄，蔡氏遂爱琮而恶琦。
现代文：起初，刘表有两个儿子，刘琦与刘琮。刘表把后妻蔡氏的侄女嫁给刘琮，蔡氏就喜爱刘琮而厌恶刘琦。
English: At first, Liu Biao had two sons, Liu Yao and Liu Yao. Liu Biao married the niece of his second wife, Cai Shi, to Liu Yao. Cai Shi loved Liu Yao and loathed Liu Yao.

古文：表妻弟蔡瑁、外甥张允并得幸于表，日相与毁琦而誉琮。
现代文：蔡氏的弟弟蔡瑁与刘表的外甥张允都是刘表的亲信，他们经常称赞刘琮，诋毁刘琦。
English: Cai's younger brother, Cai Wei, and Liu's nephew, Zhang Yun, were both close friends of Liu. They often praised Liu Wei and slandered Liu Wei.

古文：琦不自宁，与诸葛亮谋自安之术，亮不对。
现代文：刘琦心中不安，就与诸葛亮商议保护自己的对策，但诸葛亮不回答。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Liu Wei discussed with Zhuge Liang the countermeasures to protect himself, but Zhuge Liang did not answer.

古文：后乃共升高楼，因令去梯，谓亮曰： 今日上不至天，下不至地，言出子口，而入吾耳，可以言未？ 
现代文：后来，刘琦与诸葛亮一起登上高楼，命令左右把梯子撤开，对诸葛亮说： 如今上不着天，下不着地，话从你嘴里说出，只进入我一个人的耳中，可以说了吗？ 
English: Later, Liu Wei and Zhuge Liang ascended a high-rise building together, ordered the left and right ladders to be removed, and said to Zhuge Liang: "Nowadays, you can't go up to the sky, and you can't go down to the ground. Words come out of your mouth, and only enter my ears. Can you say that?"

古文：亮曰： 君不见申生在内而危，重耳居外而安乎？ 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 你难道不记得，春秋时晋国的太子申生在国中遭到危险，而他弟弟重耳在外流亡却终获平安的事情？ 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "Don't you see that Shen Sheng is dangerous at home, but it is safe to live abroad?

古文：琦意感悟，阴规出计。
现代文：刘琦领悟了诸葛亮的意思，暗中策划从刘表身边离开。
English: Realizing this, Liu Ye secretly planned a strategy to leave the capital.

古文：会黄祖死，琦求代其任，表乃以琦为江夏太守。
现代文：正好黄祖被孙权杀死，刘琦就请求接替黄祖的职务。刘表于是委任刘琦为江夏郡太守。
English: Just as Huang Zu was killed by Sun Quan, Liu Ye requested to take over the duties of Huang Zu. Liu Ye then appointed Liu Ye as the governor of Jiangxia County.

古文：表病甚，琦归省疾。
现代文：不久，刘表病重，刘琦从江夏回襄阳来探视。
English: Soon after, Liu Biao fell seriously ill, and Liu Yao came back from Jiangxia to visit Yangyang.

古文：瑁、允恐其见表而父子相感，更有托后之意，乃谓琦曰： 将军命君抚临江夏，其任至重；今释众擅来，必见谴怒。
现代文：蔡瑁、张允恐怕他与刘表相见，触动父子感情，刘表可能会立刘琦为继承人，于是就对刘琦说： 将军委派你镇守江夏，责任十分重大。如今你擅离职守，父亲见到你一定会生气。
English: I am afraid that his meeting with Liu Biao will touch the feelings of father and son, and Liu Biao may appoint Liu Biao as his successor, so he said to Liu Biao: The general has assigned you to guard Jiangxia, and the responsibility is very great. Now that you have left the post without permission, your father will certainly be angry when he sees you.

古文：伤亲之欢，重增其疾，非孝敬之道也。 
现代文：伤害亲人的感情，增重他的病势，不是孝顺之道。 
English: It is not in keeping with the principle of filial piety to spoil the father's enjoyment and aggravate his illness.

古文：遂遏于户外，使不得见。琦流涕而去。
现代文：他们把刘琦关到门外，不许他与刘表见面，刘琦只好流着眼泪离开。
English: They shut Liu Yao out of the door and did not allow him to meet Liu Biao. Liu Yao had to leave in tears.

古文：表卒，瑁、允等遂以琮为嗣。
现代文：刘表去世后，蔡瑁、张允等就拥立刘琮继任荆州牧。
English: After Liu Biao's death, Cai Wei, Zhang Yun and others supported Liu Wei to succeed Jingzhou Mu.

古文：琮以侯印授琦。琦怒，投之地，将因奔丧作难。
现代文：刘琦大怒，把印信扔到地上，准备借奔丧的名义起兵讨伐方琮。
English: Liu Bei awarded Liu Bei with the seal of the princes. Liu Bei became angry and threw the seal to the ground, preparing to use the occasion to launch an attack.

古文：会曹操军至，琦奔江南。
现代文：正在这时，曹操大军已南下荆州，刘琦就投奔江南。
English: At this time, Cao Cao's army had already gone south to Jingzhou, and Liu Bei rushed to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：章陵太守蒯越及东曹掾傅巽等劝刘琮降操，曰： 逆顺有大体，强弱有定势。
现代文：章陵郡太守蒯越及东曹掾傅巽等劝刘琮投降曹操，对他说： 逆顺有一定的道理，强弱有一定的形势。
English: Zhangling County Dazhong Yue Yue and Dong Cao Yufuo and others advised Liu Bei to surrender to Cao Cao, saying to him: There is a certain reason for being against Cao Cao, and there is a certain situation for being strong or weak.

古文：以人臣而拒人主，逆道也；以新造之楚而御中国，必危也；以刘备而敌曹公，不当也。
现代文：以臣属的身份去抗拒天子，是对国家叛逆；以刚接手的荆州去抵御朝廷大军，必会陷入危险；依靠刘备去对抗曹操，一定失败。
English: To confront the Son of Heaven as a vassal is a way of disobedience; to resist the Central Powers with the newly-created Chu Di is bound to be dangerous; it is not worth antagonizing Cao Gong for the sake of Liu Bei.

古文：三者皆短，将何以待敌？
现代文：这三个方面我们都不行，拿什么去对付曹操大军？
English: We are not good at these three aspects. What should we use to deal with Cao Cao's army?

古文：且将军自料何如刘备？
现代文：而且将军您自己考虑一下，您比得上刘备吗？
English: And General, think for yourself, are you comparable to Liu Bei?

古文：若备不足御曹公，则虽全楚不能以自存也；若足御曹公，则备不为将军下也。 
现代文：如果刘备挡不住曹操，则即使是投入荆州的全部力量，也不足以自保；如果刘备挡得住曹操，则他就不会再居于将军之下子。 
English: If Liu Bei could not stop Cao Cao, then even if he invested all the strength of Jingzhou, it would not be enough to protect himself; if Liu Bei could stop Cao Cao, then he would no longer live under the general.

古文：琮从之。
现代文：刘琮听从他们的意见。
English: Liu Ye listens to their opinions.

古文：九月，操至新野，琮遂举州降，以节迎操。
现代文：九月，曹操到达新野县，刘琮就以荆州投降曹操，派人用朝廷过去颁发的符节去迎接曹操。
English: In September, when Cao Cao arrived in Xinyo County, Liu Bei surrendered Jingzhou to Cao Cao and sent someone to greet Cao Cao with the symbols issued by the imperial court in the past.

古文：诸将皆疑其诈，娄圭曰： 天下扰攘，各贪王命以自重，今以节来，是必至诚。 
现代文：曹军将领都疑心刘琮是诈降，娄圭说： 现在天下分裂，各地割据势力都贪图用代表王命的符节来抬高自己的身份。这次送来符节，这必定是真心诚意。 
English: The generals of Cao's army were suspicious of Liu Bei's betrayal, and Zou Gui said: "Nowadays, the world is divided, and the separatist forces in various regions are eager to use the symbols representing the king's life to elevate their own status. This time, the symbols were sent, which must be sincere.

古文：操遂进兵。
现代文：曹操于是接受刘琮的投降，继续进军。
English: Cao Cao then accepted Liu Bei's surrender and continued his march.

古文：时刘备屯樊，琮不敢告备。
现代文：当时，刘备驻军樊城，刘琮不敢把投降的事告诉刘备。
English: At that time, Liu Bei was stationed in Shicheng, and Liu Bei did not dare to tell Liu Bei about the surrender.

古文：备久之乃觉，遣所亲问琮，琮令其官属宋忠诣备宣旨。
现代文：刘备过了很久才察觉情况不对，派遣亲信去问刘琮，刘琮命令属官宋忠去向刘备传达旨意。
English: It took Liu Bei a long time to realize that the situation was not right. He sent a close confidant to ask Liu Bei, and Liu Bei ordered the subordinate official Song Zhong to convey his will to Liu Bei.

古文：时曹操已在宛，备乃大惊骇，谓忠曰： 卿诸人作事如此，不早相语，今祸至方告我，不亦太剧乎！ 
现代文：当时，曹操已在宛城，于是刘备大惊失色，对宋忠说： 你们这些人怎么能这样办事，不早些告诉我，如今大祸临头才讲，不也太过分了吗！ 
English: At that time, Cao Cao was already in Wancheng, so Liu Bei was taken aback and said to Song Zhong: "How can you people do things like this, why didn't you tell me earlier? Isn't it too much to say that a great calamity is imminent now?

古文：引刀向忠曰： 今断卿头，不足以解忿，亦耻丈夫临别复杀卿辈。 
现代文：拔出刀指着宋忠说： 如今即使砍下你的头，也不足以解我心中的愤恨，而且我也耻于身为大丈夫而临别时还杀你们这些人！ 
English: Pulling out a knife and pointing it at Song Zhong, he said, "Nowadays, even if I cut off your head, it is not enough to solve the resentment in my heart, and I am ashamed to be okay and kill you people at the time of parting!

古文：遣忠去。
现代文：就放宋忠回去。
English: So they sent Song Zhong back.

古文：乃呼部曲共议。
现代文：于是，刘备召集部属，共商对策。
English: As a result, Liu Bei called together his subordinates to discuss countermeasures.

古文：或劝备攻琮，荆州可得。
现代文：有人劝刘备进攻刘琮，可以夺下荆州。
English: Some people advised Liu Bei to attack Liu Bei, so that he could take Jingzhou.

古文：备曰： 刘荆州临亡托我以孤遗，背信自济，吾所不为，死何面目以见刘荆州乎！ 
现代文：刘备说： 刘表临死时，把孤儿刘琮托付给我，请我代为照顾。违背信义，只图私利的事情，我不能作。否则，死后有什么脸去见刘表呢！ 
English: Liu Bei said, "When Liu Biao was about to die, he entrusted the orphan Liu Yao to me and asked me to take care of him on his behalf. I can't do something that violates the principle of good faith and seeks only personal gain. Otherwise, what would be the shame of seeing Liu Biao after death!"

古文：备将其众去，过襄阳，驻马呼琮；琮惧，不能起。
现代文：刘备率领部下撤离，经过襄阳时，停下马来呼喊刘琮，刘琮害怕，不敢露面。
English: Liu Bei led his subordinates to evacuate. When passing through Xiangyang, he stopped his horse to call out to Liu Bei. Liu Bei was afraid and did not dare to show his face.

古文：琮左右及荆州人多归备。
现代文：刘琮的左右亲信和荆州的人士，有许多都跟随刘备离去。
English: Many of Liu Bei's right and left cronies, as well as people from Jingzhou, followed Liu Bei to leave.

古文：备过辞表墓，涕泣而去。
现代文：刘备到刘表的墓前祭奠，流着泪辞别而去。
English: Liu Bei went to pay his respects at Liu Biao's grave and left with tears streaming down his face.

古文：比到当阳，众十馀万人，辎重数千两，日行十馀里，别遣关羽乘船数百艘，使会江陵。
现代文：到达当阳时，跟随刘备的已有十余万人，还有辎重车几千辆，每天只能走十余里。刘备另派关羽率部乘几百艘船，让他从水路到江陵会师。
English: When he arrived in Dangyang, Liu Bei was already accompanied by more than one hundred thousand people and several thousand carts, and he could only walk more than ten miles a day. Liu Bei also sent Guan Yu to lead a detachment of several hundred ships to let him join the division from the waterway to Gangneung.

古文：或谓备曰： 宜速行保江陵，今虽拥大众，被甲者少，若曹公兵至，何以拒之！ 
现代文：有人对刘备说： 您应当火速行动，保守江陵。如今人数虽众，但披有铠甲的兵士并不多，如果曹军来到，怎样抵挡！ 
English: Someone said to Liu Bei: You should act quickly and protect Jiangling. Today, although there are many people, there are not many soldiers wearing armor. If Cao's army comes, how will you resist?

古文：备曰： 夫济大事必以人为本，今人归吾，吾何忍弃去！ 
现代文：刘备说： 要成大事业，必须以民众为根本，如今百姓来归附于我，我怎么忍心舍弃他们而去呢？ 
English: Liu Bei said, "To accomplish great things, we must take the people as the foundation. Now that the people have come to me, how can I bear to abandon them?

古文：习凿齿论曰：刘玄德虽颠沛险难而信义愈明，势逼事危而言不失道。
现代文：习凿齿论曰：刘备尽管处在颠沛流离和危险艰难之中，却更讲信义；尽管形势事态危急，说出的话却并不违背道德。
English: According to the theory of chiseling teeth: Liu Bei, although he was in the midst of the chaotic displacement and danger and hardship, was more faithful; although the situation was critical, the words he said did not violate morality.

古文：追景升之顾，则情感三军；恋赴义之士，则甘与同败。
现代文：他追念刘表当年的旧恩，以情感动三军；眷恋追随他的民众，使这些人都甘心与他共度患难。
English: He remembered the old favor of Liu Biao that year, and moved the three armies with emotion; he was attached to the people who followed him, so that these people were willing to share the hardships with him.

古文：终济大业，不亦宜乎！
现代文：刘备终于能建成大业，不也是应该的吗？
English: Liu Bei was finally able to build a great cause, isn't that what it should be?

古文：刘琮将王威说琮曰： 曹操闻将军既降，刘备已走，必懈弛无备，轻先单进。
现代文：刘琮的部将王威向刘琮建议说： 曹操知道将军已经投降，刘备已经逃走，必然放松戒备，只率前锋部队轻装急进。
English: Liu Bei's general, Wang Wei, suggested to Liu Bei: Cao Cao knew that the general had surrendered and Liu Bei had fled, so he must relax his guard and lead the forward troops lightly armed.

古文：若给威奇兵数千，徼之于险，操可获也。
现代文：如果让我带领几千名奇兵，埋伏在险要地区，突然袭击，可以捉住曹操。
English: If I were to lead a few thousand extraordinary soldiers, lie in wait in a critical area, and make a surprise attack, I could capture Cao Cao.

古文：获操，即威震四海，非徒保守今日而已。 
现代文：只要捉住他，就可威震天下，不仅是可以保住今天的局面。 
English: As long as you catch him, you can dominate the world, not only can you maintain today's situation.

古文：琮不纳。
现代文：刘琮没有采纳。
English: Liu Yi did not adopt it.

古文：操以江陵有军实，恐刘备据之，乃释辎重，轻军到襄阳。
现代文：曹操知道江陵贮有军用物资，恐怕刘备先到，占据江陵，就留下辎重，轻装前进。
English: Cao Cao knew that there were military supplies stored in Jiangling. I'm afraid Liu Bei arrived first and occupied Jiangling, leaving behind the heavy baggage and moving forward lightly.

古文：闻备已过，操将精骑五千急追之，一日一夜行三百馀里，及于当阳之长坂。
现代文：到到襄阳后，听说刘备已经过去，曹操亲自率领五千名精锐骑兵急速追赶，一天一夜跑了三百余里，在当阳县的长坂追上刘备。
English: After arriving in Yangyang, he heard that Liu Bei had already passed. Cao Cao personally led five thousand elite cavalry in a rapid pursuit, running more than three hundred miles a day and night to catch up with Liu Bei on the long slope in Dangyang County.

古文：备弃妻子，与诸葛亮、张飞、赵云等数十骑走，操大获其人众辎重。
现代文：刘备抛下妻子及儿子，与诸葛亮、张飞、赵云等数十人骑马逃走，曹操俘获了大量的人马辎重。
English: Liu Bei left his wife and son and fled on horseback with Zhuge Liang, Zhang Fei, Zhao Yun and dozens of others. Cao Cao captured a large number of people and horses.

古文：徐庶母为操所获，庶辞备，指其心曰： 本欲与将军共图王霸之业者，以此方寸之地也。今已失老母，方寸乱矣，无益于事，请从此别。 
现代文：徐庶的母亲被曹军俘获，徐庶向刘备告辞，指着自己的心说： 我本来打算与将军共同建立王霸大业，是靠此方寸之地，现在失去老母，方寸已乱，留下无益于事，请从此与将军分别。 
English: Xu Shizhu's mother was captured by Cao Jun. Xu Shizhu bade farewell to Liu Bei, pointing to his heart and said: I originally planned to jointly establish the great cause of Wangba with the general, relying on this square inch of land. Now I have lost my mother, the square inch has been disordered, leaving nothing beneficial, please separate from the general from now on.

古文：遂诣操。
现代文：于是去见曹操。
English: So Cao Cao came to the rescue.

古文：张飞将二十骑拒后，飞据水断桥，瞋目横矛曰： 身是张益德也，可来共决死！ 
现代文：张飞率领二十名骑兵断后，他据守河岸，拆去桥梁，模握长矛，怒目而视，对曹军大喊道： 我就是张翼德，有谁敢来决一死战！ 
English: After Zhang Fei led twenty cavalrymen to break off, he guarded the riverbank, tore down bridges, grasped spears, glared at Cao Jun and shouted: I am Zhang Yide, who dares to fight a battle to the death!

古文：操兵无敢近者。
现代文：曹军士卒无人敢于上前。
English: No one dared to approach Sergeant Cao.

古文：或谓备： 赵云已北走。 
现代文：有人向刘备说： 赵云已向北逃走。 
English: Someone told Liu Bei: Zhao Yun has fled to the north.

古文：备以手戟擿之曰： 子龙不弃我走也。 
现代文：刘备大怒，将手戟向那人扔过去，说： 赵子龙不会丢下我逃跑。 
English: Liu Bei flew into a rage, threw the handcuffs at the man and said, "Zhao Zilong will not leave me to escape.

古文：顷之，云身抱备子禅，与关羽船会，得济沔，遇刘琦众万馀人，与俱到夏口。
现代文：过了一会儿，赵云抱着刘备的儿子刘禅来到。刘备等与关羽的船队会合，得以渡过沔水，遇到刘琦及其所率领的一万余人，与刘琦一起到达夏口。
English: After a while, Zhao Yun came with Liu Bei's son Liu Zen in his arms. Liu Bei and others met Guan Yu's fleet, were able to cross the Surabaya, met Liu Bei and the more than 10,000 people he led, and arrived in Xiakou with Liu Bei.

古文：曹操进军江陵，以刘琮为青州刺史，封列侯，并蒯越等，侯者凡十五人。
现代文：曹操进军江陵，任命刘琮为青州刺史，封为列侯，连同蒯越等人，被封为侯爵的一共有十五人。
English: Cao Cao marched into Gangneung, appointed Liu Ye as the prefect of Qingzhou, and made him a marquis. Together with Xing Yue and others, a total of fifteen people were made marquesses.

古文：释韩嵩之囚，待以交友之礼，使条品州人优劣，皆擢而用之。
现代文：曹操下令从狱中释放韩嵩，用朋友的礼节来接待他，让韩嵩评价荆州人士的优劣，都加以提拔任用。
English: Cao Cao ordered to release Han Song from prison, to receive him with the courtesy of a friend, to let Han Song evaluate the merits and demerits of Jingzhou people, and to promote and appoint them.

古文：以嵩为大鸿胪，蒯越为光禄勋，刘先为尚书，邓羲为侍中。
现代文：任命韩嵩为大鸿胪，蒯越为光禄勋，刘先为尚书，邓羲为侍中。
English: Han Song was appointed as the Great Honorable, Xuan Yue as the Honorable, Liu Xian as the Honorable, and Deng Yu as the Vice-Marshal.

古文：荆州大将南阳文聘别屯在外，琮之降也，呼聘，欲与俱。
现代文：荆州大将南阳人文聘统兵驻扎在外，刘琮投降时，曾召呼文聘，想与他一起投降。
English: The general of Jingzhou, Nanyang Wenyin, was stationed outside. When Liu Bei surrendered, he called Wenyin and wanted to surrender with him.

古文：聘曰： 聘不能全州，当待罪而已！ 
现代文：文聘说： 我不能保全荆州，只应等待定罪而已！ 
English: Wen said: "I can't save Jingzhou, I should just wait for a conviction!"

古文：操济汉，聘乃诣操。
现代文：曹操渡过汉水，文聘才来拜见曹操。
English: Cao Cao crossed the Han River, and it was only then that Wen Hui came to pay his respects to Cao Cao.

古文：操曰： 来何迟邪？ 
现代文：曹操说： 你为什么来得这么晚呢？ 
English: Cao Cao said: Why did you come so late?

古文：聘曰： 先日不能辅弼刘荆州以奉国家；荆州虽没，常愿据守汉川，保全土境。
现代文：文聘说： 从前，我不能辅佐刘荆州尊奉朝廷；刘荆州死后，我经常想据守汉水，保全荆州的疆域。
English: Wenyi said: In the past, I could not assist Liu Jingzhou in honoring the imperial court; after Liu Jingzhou's death, I often wanted to uphold Han Shui and preserve Jingzhou's territory.

古文：生不负于孤弱，死无愧于地下。
现代文：活着不辜负于孤弱的刘琮，死去无愧于地下的故主刘表。
English: He lived up to the lonely and weak Liu Ye, and died a death worthy of the underground former master Liu Biao.

古文：而计不在己，以至于此，实怀悲惭，无颜早见耳！ 
现代文：但是，我身不由已，为大势所趋，到了今天的地步，心中实在悲哀羞愧，没有脸早来相见！ 
English: However, I couldn't help but follow the general trend and got to where I am today, feeling really sad and ashamed. I didn't have the face to meet him in the first place!

古文：遂歔欷流涕。操为之怆然，字谓之曰： 仲业，卿真忠臣也！ 
现代文：于是文聘流泪不止，使得曹操也感到伤感，喊着文聘的表字说： 文仲业，你是真正的忠臣！ 
English: As a result, Wenbei shed more and more tears, which made Cao Cao also feel sad, shouting Wenbei's name and saying: Wen Zhongye, you are a true loyal subject!

古文：厚礼待之，使统本兵，为江夏太守。
现代文：对他厚礼相待，让他统率原来部队，任命他为江夏郡太守。
English: He treated him with courtesy, let him command the original troops, and appointed him as the governor of Jiangxia County.

古文：初，袁绍在冀州，遣使迎汝南士大夫。
现代文：起初，袁绍在冀州，派遣使者去迎接他家乡汝南郡的士大夫到冀州来。
English: At first, Yuan Shao was in Jizhou, and sent an envoy to welcome the shifu of his hometown, Runan County, to Jizhou.

古文：西平和洽，以为冀州土平民强，英桀所利，四战之地，不如荆州土险民弱，易依倚也，遂从刘表。
现代文：西平人和洽认为冀州地势平坦，民风强悍，是英雄豪杰所争夺的地方，不如荆州地势险要，民风柔弱，易于安身依靠，就去荆州投奔刘表。
English: Xiping people agreed that Jizhou is flat and the people are strong, and it is a place for heroes to compete. As opposed to Jingzhou, which is dangerous, soft and easy to rely on, they went to Jingzhou to join Liu Biao.

古文：表以上客待之。洽曰： 所以不从本初，辟争地也。
现代文：刘表用上客的礼节接待他，和洽对别人说： 我所以不去投奔袁绍，是为了躲避争夺之地。
English: Liu Biao received him with the etiquette of a distinguished guest, and said to others in a friendly manner: The reason why I did not go to Yuan Shao was to avoid the contested territory.

古文：昏世之主，不可黩近，久而不去，谗慝将兴。 
现代文：对于乱世中昏庸的君主，不可过于亲近，我再久留下去，就会被奸人的谗言所中伤。 
English: The ruler of a chaotic society can always approach, and if he does not leave for a long time, gossip and evil thoughts will arise.

古文：遂南之武陵。
现代文：于是，他离开襄阳，向东到武陵居住。
English: As a result, he left Yangyang and went east to live in Wuling.

古文：表辟南阳刘望之为从事，而其友二人皆以谗毁为表所诛，望之又以正谏不合，投传告归。
现代文：刘表延聘南阳人刘望之为从事，而刘望之的两个朋友都因为谗言的陷害，被刘表杀死。刘望之因所提的正确意见不被刘表接受而弃官回家。
English: Liu Biao continued to employ Nanyang's Liu Wanzhong to engage in it, and Liu Wanzhong's two friends were killed by Liu Biao because of the frame-up. Liu Wanzhong was not accepted by Liu Biao because his correct opinions were not accepted, and he resigned and went home.

古文：望之弟廙谓望之曰： 赵杀鸣犊，仲尼回轮。
现代文：刘望之的弟弟刘对刘望之说： 从前晋国的大夫赵鞅杀死窦呜犊，孔子就中途返回，不再前往晋国。
English: Liu Wangzhi's younger brother Liu said to Liu Wangzhi: Formerly, the doctor of Jin Province, Zhao Yao, killed Dou Wu Yao, and Confucius returned halfway and no longer went to Jin Province.

古文：今兄既不能法柳下惠和光同尘于内，则宜模范蠡迁化于外，坐而自绝于时，殆不可也。 
现代文：如今，哥哥您既然不能效法柳下惠那样，与世沉浮，随波逐流，就应该以范蠡为榜样，远远地迁到统治者的范围以外去。
English: Now, since you, my brother, cannot follow the example of Liu Shimo Hui and go with the flow, you should follow the example of Fan Yu and move far away from the realm of the ruler.

古文：望之不从，寻复见害，廙奔扬州。
现代文：坐在家里，却自认为已离开争权夺势的政局，恐怕不行！ 刘望之没有听从弟弟的话，不久也被刘表杀死。刘逃奔扬州。
English: Sitting at home, but thinking that he has left the political situation of competing for power, I'm afraid not! Liu Wangzhi did not listen to his brother's words, and was soon killed by Liu Biao. Liu fled to Yangzhou.

古文：南阳韩暨避袁术之命，徙居山都山。刘表又辟之，遂遁居孱陵。
现代文：南阳人韩暨逃避袁术的征聘，便迁居到山都山，刘表又征聘他为僚属，韩暨就逃到孱陵隐居起来。
English: Han Ji, a person from Nanyang, moved to Shantou Mountain to escape Yuan Shu's recruitment. Liu Biao recruited him as a colleague, and Han Ji fled to Fuling to live in seclusion.

古文：表深恨之，暨惧，应命，除宜城长。
现代文：刘表十分恼怒，韩暨害怕刘表下毒手，只好接受职务，出任宜城县县长。
English: Liu Biao was very angry, and Han Cui was afraid of Liu Biao's cruel hands, so he had no choice but to accept the post and became the governor of Yicheng County.

古文：河东裴潜亦为表所礼重，潜私谓王畅之子粲及河内司马芝曰： 刘牧非霸王之才，乃欲西伯自处，其败无日矣！ 
现代文：河东人裴潜也受到刘表的礼遇和敬重，但裴潜悄悄对王畅的儿子王粲以及河内人司马芝说： 刘表没有霸王的才干，却以殷朝未的西伯姬昌的地位自居，他随时都可能失败！ 
English: Baekhyun, a man from the east of the river, was also treated with courtesy and respect by Liu Biao, but Baekhyun quietly said to Wang Chang's son, Wang Hui, and to Sima Zhi, a man from Hanoi, "Liu Biao does not have the ability to be a tyrant, but he considers himself to be the Xibe Kichang of the Yin Dynasty. He may fail at any time!"

古文：遂南适长沙。
现代文：于是裴潜向南迁到长沙。
English: As a result, Pei Qian moved south to Changsha.

古文：于是操以暨为丞相士曹属，潜参丞相军事，洽、廙、粲皆为掾属，芝为管令，从人望也。
现代文：曹操占领荆州后，征聘韩暨为丞相士曹属，裴潜参预丞相府的军事，和洽、刘与王粲都担任丞相府的掾属，并委派司马芝为菅县县令，以顺应民心。
English: After Cao Cao occupied Jingzhou, he recruited Han Ji as the prime minister of Cao clan, Pei Xian as the military of the prime minister's office, He Chao, Liu and Wang Qi as the vice-premiers of the prime minister's office, and appointed Sima Zhi as the county magistrate of Kan County to comply with the people's will.

古文：冬，十月，癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸未朔，出现日食。
English: Winter, October, new moon, solar eclipse.

古文：初，鲁肃闻刘表卒，言于孙权曰： 荆州与国邻接，江山险固，沃野万里，士民殷富，若据而有之，此帝王之资也。
现代文：起初，鲁肃听到刘表去世的消息，就对孙权建议说： 荆州与我们相邻，江山险固，沃野万里，百姓富足，如果能占领荆州，就奠定了帝王的基业。
English: At first, when Lu Su heard the news of Liu Biao's death, he suggested to Sun Quan: Jingzhou is adjacent to us, the country is dangerous and solid, fertile fields are thousands of miles away, and the people are rich. If you can occupy Jingzhou, you will lay the foundation of the emperor.

古文：今刘表新亡，二子不协，军中诸将，各有彼此。
现代文：现在刘表刚死，他的两个儿子不和睦，军中将领也分为两派。
English: Now Liu Biao has just died, his two sons are not in harmony, and the generals in the army are also divided into two factions.

古文：刘备天下枭雄，与操有隙，寄寓于表，表恶其能而不能用也。
现代文：刘备是天下的英雄人物，与曹操矛盾很深，寄居在刘表那里，刘表嫉妒他的才干而不能加以重用。
English: Liu Bei was a hero of the world. He was deeply at odds with Cao Cao and lived with Liu Biao. Liu Biao was jealous of his talent and could not reuse it.

古文：若备与彼协心，上下齐同，则宜抚安，与结盟好；如有离违，宜别图之，以济大事。
现代文：如果刘备与刘表的儿子齐心协力，上下团结，我们就应当与他们和平相处，共结盟好。如果刘备与他们离心离德，我们就该另打主意，以成就大业。
English: If Liu Bei and Liu Biao's sons make concerted efforts and are of the same mind, we should appease them, make friends and allies with them; if they deviate from each other, we should make other plans to achieve our own great things.

古文：肃请得奉命吊表二子，并慰劳其军中用事者，及说备使抚表众，同心一意，共治曹操，备必喜而从命。
现代文：我请求您派我去向刘表的两个儿子吊丧，并慰劳他们军中的主要将领。同时劝说刘备，让他安抚刘表的部众，同心一意，共抗曹操，刘备一定会高兴地接受的。
English: I asked to be ordered to go to Jingzhou to offer condolences to Liu Biao's sons, and to console the generals in charge of their army, and to persuade Liu Bei to appease Liu Biao's subordinates, to work together, and to fight against Cao Cao. Liu Bei would certainly be happy to obey.

古文：如其克谐，天下可定也。
现代文：如果能达到目的，就能平定天下。
English: If this matter is handled properly, it will be settled that day.

古文：今不速往，恐为操所先。 
现代文：现在不赶快前去，就恐怕会让曹操占先。 
English: Now, if you don't hurry to Jingzhou, I'm afraid Cao Cao will be ahead of you.

古文：权即遣肃行。
现代文：孙权立即派鲁肃去荆州。
English: Sun Quan immediately dispatched Lu Su to the scene.

古文：到夏口，闻操已向荆州，晨夜兼道，比至南郡，而琮已降，备南走，肃径迎之，与备会于当阳长坂。
现代文：鲁肃到达夏口，听说曹操大军已向荆州进发，便日夜兼程前往，等他到达南郡时，刘琮已经投降曹操，刘备已经向南撤退。鲁肃便直接去见刘备，在当阳的长坂与他相会。
English: When Lu Su arrived in Xiakou, he heard that Cao Cao's army had advanced to Jingzhou and he traveled there day and night. By the time he reached Nan County, Liu Bei had already surrendered to Cao Cao and Liu Bei had retreated to the south. Lu Su went directly to see Liu Bei and met him on the long slope of Dangyang.

古文：肃宣权旨，论天下事势，致殷勤之意，且问备曰： 豫州今欲何至？ 
现代文：鲁肃传达了孙权的意图，与刘备讨论天下大事，对刘备表示诚恳的关心。并且询问刘备说： 刘豫州，如今您打算到什么地方去？ 
English: Lu Su conveyed Sun Quan's intention, discussed world affairs with Liu Bei, expressed sincere concern for Liu Bei, and asked Liu Bei: "Liu Yuzhou, where do you plan to go now?"

古文：备曰： 与苍梧太守吴巨有旧，欲往投之。 
现代文：刘备说： 苍梧郡太守吴巨是我的老朋友，打算去投奔他。 
English: Liu Bei said: Wu Jiu, the governor of Cangwu County, is my old friend, and I plan to go to him.

古文：肃曰： 孙讨虏聪明仁惠，敬贤礼士，江表英豪，咸归附之，已据有六郡，兵精粮多，足以立事。
现代文：鲁肃说： 孙将军聪明仁惠，敬重与优待贤能之士，江南的英雄豪杰都归附于他。现在已占有六郡的土地，兵精粮多，足以成就一番事业。
English: Lu Su said: General Sun was intelligent, benevolent, respected and treated with preferential treatment, and the heroes of the south of the Yangtze River all belonged to him. Now he has occupied the land of six counties, and there are many soldiers with refined grain, which is enough to achieve a cause.

古文：今为君计，莫若遣腹心自结于东，以共济世业。
现代文：如今为您打算，最好是派遣心腹之人到江东去与孙权将军联系，可以共建大业。
English: Now, for your consideration, it is best to send a confidant to the east of the Yangtze River to contact General Sun Quan, so that we can jointly build a great cause.

古文：而欲投吴巨，巨是凡人，偏在远郡，行将为人所并，岂足托乎！ 
现代文：而您却想投奔吴巨，吴巨不过是个凡夫俗子，又在偏远的边郡，即将被别人吞并，怎么可以托身于他呢？ 
English: But you want to go to Wu Jiu, Wu Jiu is just an ordinary man, and he is in a remote border county, which is about to be annexed by others. How can you rely on him?

古文：备甚悦。
现代文：刘备听后大为高兴。
English: Liu Bei was very happy after listening.

古文：肃又谓诸葛亮曰： 我，子瑜友也。 
现代文：鲁肃又对诸葛亮说： 我是诸葛子瑜的朋友。 
English: Lu Su also said to Zhuge Liang: I am a friend of Zhuge Ziyu.

古文：即共定交。
现代文：于是诸葛亮与鲁肃也成为朋友。
English: As a result, Zhuge Liang and Rusu also became friends.

古文：子瑜者，亮兄瑾也，避乱江东，为孙权长史。
现代文：诸葛子瑜就是诸葛亮的哥哥诸葛瑾，他避乱到江东，担任孙权的长史。
English: Zhuge Ziyu is the elder brother of Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Yao, who fled to the east of the Yangtze River and served as the long history of Sun Quan.

古文：备用肃计，进住鄂县之樊口。
现代文：刘备采纳鲁肃的计策，进驻鄂县的樊口。
English: Liu Bei adopted Lu Su's strategy and settled in Hekou, E County.

古文：曹操自江陵将顺江东下。
现代文：曹操从江陵出发，将要顺长江东下。
English: Starting from Gangneung, Cao Cao will travel eastward along the Yangtze River.

古文：诸葛亮谓刘备曰： 事急矣，请奉命求救于孙将军。 
现代文：诸葛亮对刘备说： 形势危急，我请求奉命去向孙将军求救。 
English: Zhuge Liang said to Liu Bei: The situation is critical. I request to be ordered to go to General Sun for help.

古文：遂与鲁肃俱诣孙权。
现代文：于是他就和鲁肃一起去见孙权。
English: So he and Lu Su went to see Sun Quan.

古文：亮见权于柴桑，说权曰： 海内大乱，将军起兵江东，刘豫州收众汉南，与曹操并争天下。
现代文：诸葛亮在柴桑见到孙权，对孙权说： 天下大乱，将军在长江以东起兵，刘备在汉水以南召集部众，与曹操共同争夺天下。
English: Zhuge Liang saw Sun Quan in Chaisang and said to Sun Quan: The world is in turmoil. The general has raised an army east of the Yangtze River, and Liu Bei has gathered his subordinates south of the Han River to fight for the world together with Cao Cao.

古文：今操芟夷大难，略已平矣，遂破荆州，威震四海。
现代文：现在，曹操基本已经消灭北方的主要强敌，接着南下攻破荆州，威震四海。
English: Cao Cao had already eliminated the separatist forces such as Lv Bu, Yuan Shu and Yuan Shao. When the situation was somewhat stabilized, he broke through Jingzhou and dominated the world.

古文：英雄无用武之地，故豫州遁逃至此，愿将军量力而处之。
现代文：在曹操大军面前，英雄无用武之地，所以刘备逃到这里，希望将军量力来加以安排。
English: In front of Cao Cao's army, a hero is useless, so Liu Bei fled here, hoping that the general would do his best to arrange it.

古文：若能以吴、越之众与中国抗衡，不如早与之绝；若不能，何不按兵束甲，北面而事之！
现代文：如果将军能以江东的人马，与占据中原的曹操相抗衡，不如及早与操断绝关系；如果不能，为什么不早点解除武装，向他称臣？
English: If the general can compete with Cao Cao, who occupies the Central Plains, in terms of manpower in the east of the river, it is better to break off relations with Cao Cao as early as possible; if not, why not disarm earlier and praise him?

古文：今将军外托服从之名，而内怀犹豫之计，事急而不断，祸至无日矣。 
现代文：现在，将军表面上服从朝廷，而心中犹豫不决，事情已到危急关头而不果断处理，大祸马上就要临头了。 
English: Now, the general is obeying the imperial court on the surface, but hesitating in his heart. The matter has reached a critical moment and is not dealt with decisively. Disaster is imminent.

古文：权曰： 苟如君言，刘豫州何不遂事之乎！ 
现代文：孙权说： 假如像你说的那样，刘备为什么不服从曹操？ 
English: Sun Quan said, "If, as you said, Liu Bei is mad, why doesn't he obey Cao Cao?

古文：亮曰： 田横，齐之壮士耳，犹守义不辱；况刘豫州王室之胄，英才盖世，众士慕仰，若水之归海！
现代文：诸葛亮说： 田模，不过是齐国的壮士，还坚守节义，不肯屈辱投降；何况刘备是皇室后裔，英雄才略，举世无双，士大夫们对他的仰慕，如同流水归向大海。
English: Zhuge Liang said: "Tan Miao is nothing but a strong man of Qi, who still adheres to the principles of justice and refuses to surrender in humiliation; moreover, Liu Bei is a descendant of the imperial family, a hero, unparalleled in the world, and the scholars admire him like water flowing to the sea.

古文：若事之不济，此乃天也，安能抗此难乎！ 
现代文：如果大事不成，这是天意，怎么能再居于曹操之下呢？ 
English: If things don't work out, which is God's will, how can I live under Cao Cao again?

古文：权勃然曰： 吾不能举全吴之地，十万之众，受制于人。
现代文：孙权勃然大怒，说： 我不能把全部吴国故地和十万精兵拱手奉送，去受曹操的控制。
English: Sun Quan flew into a rage and said, "I can't hand over the whole of the ancestral land of Wu and a hundred thousand elite soldiers to be controlled by Cao Cao.

古文：吾计决矣！
现代文：我的主意已定！
English: I've made up my mind!

古文：非刘豫州莫可以当曹操者；然豫州新败之后，安能抗此难乎！ 
现代文：除刘备以外，曹没有能抵挡曹操的人，但刘备新近战败之后，怎么能担当这项重任呢？ 
English: With the exception of Liu Bei, Cao had no one who could stand up to Cao Cao, but after Liu Bei's recent defeat, how could he take on this important task?

古文：亮曰： 豫州军虽败于长坂，今战士还者及关羽水军精甲万人，刘琦合江夏战士亦不下万人。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 刘备的军队虽然在长坂大败，但现在陆续回来的战士和关羽的水军加起来有一万精兵，刘琦集结江夏郡的战士，也不下一万人。
English: Zhuge Liang said: Although Liu Bei's army was heavily defeated in Nagasaka, the soldiers and Guan Yu's naval forces that have come back one after another now add up to ten thousand elite soldiers. Liu Bei's soldiers from Jiangxia County are less than ten thousand.

古文：曹操之众，远来疲敝，闻追豫州，轻骑一日一夜行三百馀里，此所谓 强弩之末势不能穿鲁缟 者也。
现代文：曹操的军队远道而来，已经疲惫。听说在追赶刘备时，轻骑兵一天一夜奔驰三百余里，这正是所谓 强弩射出的箭，到了力量已尽的时候，连鲁国生产的薄绸都穿不透 。
English: Cao Cao's army had come a long way and was exhausted. It is said that when they were chasing Liu Bei, the light cavalry galloped more than three hundred miles a day and night. This is precisely the arrow shot by the so-called strong dragonfly. When their strength was exhausted, even the silk produced in Lu was impenetrable.

古文：故《兵法》忌之，曰 必蹶上将军 。
现代文：所以《兵法》以此为禁忌，说 必定会使上将军受挫 。
English: Therefore, the "Law of War" regards this as a taboo, saying that it will definitely frustrate the general.

古文：且北方之人，不习水战；又，荆州之民附操者，逼近势耳，非心服也。
现代文：而且，北方地区的人，不善于进行水战。另外，荆州地区的民众归附曹操，只是在他军队的威逼之下，并不是心悦诚服。
English: Moreover, the people in the northern region were not good at waging naval warfare. In addition, the people in the Jingzhou region joined Cao Cao, but only under the threat of his army, which did not satisfy their hearts.

古文：今将军诚能命猛将统兵数万，与豫州协规同力，破操军必矣。
现代文：如今，将军如能命令猛将统领数万大军，与刘备齐心协力，一定能打败曹军。
English: Now, if the general can really order the brave generals to lead tens of thousands of soldiers, and work together with Liu Yuzhou, it is certain to break Cao Cao's army.

古文：操军破，必北还；如此，则荆、吴之势强，鼎足之形成矣。
现代文：曹操失败后，必然退回北方，这样荆州与东吴的势力就强大起来，可以形成鼎足三分的局势。
English: After Cao Cao's defeat, he will inevitably return to the north, so that the forces of Jingzhou and Dongwu will become strong and can form a three-point situation.

古文：成败之机，在于今日！ 
现代文：逃成败的关键，就在于今天！ 
English: The key to success or failure lies in today!

古文：权大悦，与其群下谋之。
现代文：孙权听后非常高兴，就去与他的部属们商议。
English: Sun Quan was very happy to hear this and went to consult with his subordinates.

古文：是时，曹操遗权书曰： 近者奉辞伐罪，旄麾南指，刘琮束手。
现代文：这时，曹操写信给孙权说： 最近，我奉天子之命，讨伐有罪的叛逆，军旗指向南方，刘琮降服。
English: At this time, Cao Cao wrote a letter to Sun Quan, saying: Recently, I have been ordered by the Son of Heaven to crush the guilty rebellion, the military flag is pointing south, and Liu Bei has surrendered.

古文：今治水军八十万众，方与将军会猎于吴。 
现代文：如今，我统领水军八十万人，将要与将军在吴地一道打猎。 
English: Now that I am in command of 800,000 sailors, I will go hunting with the general in Wudi.

古文：权以示群下，莫不响震失色。
现代文：孙权把这封书信给部属们看，他们无不惊惶失色。
English: Sun Quan showed this letter to his subordinates, and they were all shocked.

古文：长史张昭等曰： 曹公，豺虎也，挟天子以征四方，动以朝廷为辞；今日拒之，事更不顺。
现代文：长史张昭等人说： 曹操是豺狼虎豹，挟持天子以征讨四方，动不动就用朝廷的名义来发布命令。
English: Changshi Zhang Zhao and others said: Cao Cao is a wolf, a tiger and a leopard. He holds the Son of Heaven hostage in order to solicit the four directions, and issues orders in the name of the imperial court at every turn.

古文：且将军大势可以拒操者，长江也。
现代文：今天我们如果进行抗拒，就更显得名不正而言不顺。况且将军可以抵抗曹操的，是依靠长江天险。
English: If we were to resist today, it would be even more dishonorable. Moreover, the general could only resist Cao Cao by relying on the Yangtze River.

古文：今操得荆州，奄有其地，刘表治水军，蒙冲斗舰乃以千数，操悉浮以沿江，兼有步兵，水陆俱下，此为长江之险已与我共之矣，而势力众寡又不可论。
现代文：现在，曹操占有荆州的土地，刘表所训练的水军，包括数以千计的蒙冲战船，已由曹操接管，曹操计全部船只沿长江而下，再加上步兵，水陆并进。这样，长江天险已由曹操与我们共有，而双方势力的众寡又不能相提并论。
English: Now, Cao Cao occupies the land of Jingzhou, and the naval forces trained by Liu Biao, including thousands of Mengchong warships, have been taken over by Cao Cao. Cao Cao counts all the ships along the Yangtze River, plus the infantry, and marches both land and sea. In this way, the Yangtze River peril has been shared by Cao Cao and us, and the small number of forces on both sides cannot be compared.

古文：愚谓大计不如迎之。 
现代文：因此，依我们的愚见，最好是迎接曹操，投降朝廷。 
English: So the best strategy is to surrender to him.

古文：鲁肃独不言。
现代文：只有鲁肃一言不发。
English: Only Rusu did not utter a word.

古文：权起更衣，肃追于宇下。权知其意，执肃手曰： 卿欲何言？ 
现代文：孙权起身上厕所，鲁肃追到房檐下，孙权知道鲁肃的意思，握着鲁肃的手说： 你想说什么？ 
English: Sun Quan got up to go to the toilet, and Rusu chased him down the hallway. Sun Quan knew what Rusu meant, so he shook Rusu's hand and said, "What do you want to say?"

古文：肃曰： 向察众人之议，专欲误将军，不足与图大事。
现代文：鲁肃说： 刚才，我观察众人的议论，只是想贻误将军，不足以与他们商议大事。
English: Lu Su said, "Just now, I observed the discussion of the crowd. I only wanted to delay the general, but it was not enough to discuss important matters with them.

古文：今肃可迎操耳，如将军不可也。
现代文：现在，像我鲁肃这样的人可以迎降曹操，但将军却不可以。
English: Now, someone like me, Lu Su, can meet and greet Cao Cao, but a general cannot.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：今肃迎操，操当以肃还付乡党，品其名位，犹不失下曹从事，乘犊车，从吏卒，交游士林，累官故不失州郡也。
现代文：现在我在迎接曹操，曹操一定会把我交给乡里父老去评议，以确定名位，也还会做一个下曹从事，能乘坐牛车，有吏卒跟随，与士大夫们结交，步步升官，也能当上州、郡的长官。
English: Now I meet Cao Cao. Cao Cao should send me back to my hometown to examine my reputation and status. I can also be a minor official, ride a cattle car, have an entourage, interact with senior officials, slowly move up, and can also be a state and county governor.

古文：将军迎操，欲安所归乎？
现代文：可是将军迎接曹操，打算到哪里去安身呢？
English: But the general greeted Cao Cao, where did he plan to go?

古文：愿早定大计，莫用众人之议也！ 
现代文：希望将军能早定大计，不要听那些人的意见。 
English: I hope the general can make up his mind early and not listen to those people's opinions.

古文：权叹息曰： 诸人持议，甚失孤望。
现代文：孙权叹息说： 这些人的说法，太让我失望了。
English: Sun Quan sighed and said, "I'm so disappointed in what these people are saying.

古文：今卿廓开大计，正与孤同。 
现代文：如今，你阐明的策略，正与我想的一样。 
English: So far, the strategy you've outlined is working exactly as I thought it would.

古文：时周瑜受使至番阳，肃劝权召瑜还。
现代文：当时，周瑜奉命到达番阳，鲁肃劝孙权把他召回来。
English: At that time, Zhou Yu was ordered to arrive in Panyang, and Lu Su advised Sun Quan to call him back.

古文：瑜至，谓权曰： 操虽托名汉相，其实汉贼也。
现代文：周瑜来到后，对孙权说： 曹操虽然名义上是汉朝的丞相，但实际上是汉朝的贼臣。
English: After Zhou Yu arrived, he said to Sun Quan: Although Cao Cao is nominally the prime minister of the Han Dynasty, he is actually a vassal of the Han Dynasty.

古文：将军以神武雄才，兼仗父兄之烈，割据江东，地方数千里，兵精足用，英雄乐业，当横行天下，为汉家除残去秽；况操自送死，而可迎之邪？
现代文：将军以神武英雄的才略，又凭借父、兄的基业，割据江东，统治的地区有几千里，精兵足够使用，英雄乐于效力，应当模行天下，为汉朝清除邪恶的贼臣。何况曹操自己前来送死，怎么可以去迎降？
English: The general, with the talent of a divine warrior hero, and by virtue of the inheritance of his father and brother, divided the eastern part of the Yangtze River, and ruled an area of several thousand miles. The elite soldiers were enough to use, and the heroes were willing to serve. He should be a model for the world, and clean up the evil vassals for the Han Dynasty. What's more, Cao Cao himself came to die, so how could he surrender?

古文：请为将军筹之：今北土未平、马超、韩遂尚在关西，为操后患；而操舍鞍马，杖舟楫，与吴、越争衡；今又盛寒，马无藁草，驱中国士众远涉江湖之间，不习水土，必生疾病。
现代文：请允许我为将军分析：如今北方尚未完全平定，马超、韩遂还驻兵函谷关以西，是曹操的后患。而曹操舍弃鞍马，改用船舰，与生长在水乡的江东人来决一胜负。现在正是严寒，战马缺乏草料。而且，驱使中原地区的士兵远道跋涉来到江湖地区，不服水土，必然会发生疾疫。
English: Allow me to analyze for the general: Today, the north has not been completely pacified. Ma Chao and Han Sui are still stationed to the west of Hanzhongguan, which is Cao Cao's aftereffect. And Cao Cao abandoned the saddle horse and used ships to fight the people in the east of Jiangsu Province who grew up in the water village. It is very cold now, and the war horses lack grass. Moreover, soldiers in the Central Plains have been forced to travel far and wide to the river and lake areas, which is not suitable for water and soil, and will inevitably lead to disease epidemics.

古文：此数者用兵之患也，而操皆冒行之。
现代文：这几方面是用兵的大患，而曹操都贸然行事。
English: These aspects are the biggest problems for soldiers, and Cao Cao acts rashly.

古文：将军禽操，宜在今日。
现代文：将军抓住曹操的时机，正在今天。
English: If the general wants to capture Cao Cao, it should be today.

古文：瑜请得精兵数万人，进住夏口，保为将军破之！ 
现代文：我请求率领精兵数万人，进驻夏口，保证能为将军击破曹操。 
English: I request you to lead tens of thousands of elite soldiers and enter Xiakou to ensure that you can defeat Cao Cao.

古文：权曰： 老贼欲废汉自立久矣，徒忌二袁、吕布、刘表与孤耳；今数雄已灭，惟孤尚存。
现代文：孙权说： 曹操老贼早就想要废掉汉朝皇帝，自己篡位了，只是顾忌袁绍、袁术、吕布、刘表与我孙权。现在，那几个英雄都已被消灭，只剩下我还存在。
English: Sun Quan said: Cao Cao, the old thief, had long wanted to abolish the emperor of the Han Dynasty and usurped the throne himself. He was only concerned about Yuan Shao, Yuan Shu, Lv Bu, Liu Biao and me, Sun Quan. Now, those heroes have all been eliminated, and only I remain.

古文：孤与老贼势不两立，君言当击，甚与孤合，此天以君授孤也。 
现代文：我与老贼势不两立。你主张迎战曹军，正合我意，是上天把你授给了我！ 
English: I cannot stand against the old thief. Your proposal to fight Cao's army is exactly what I want. Heaven has given you to me!

古文：因拔刀斫前奏案曰： 诸将吏敢复有言当迎操者，与此案同！ 
现代文：孙权就势拔出佩刀，砍向面前的奏案，说： 将领官吏们，有胆敢再说应当投降曹操的，就与这个奏案一样！ 
English: Sun Quan drew out his sword and slashed at the report in front of him, saying, "Generals and officials, if you dare to say that Cao Cao should surrender, it is the same as this report!"

古文：乃罢会。
现代文：于是散会。
English: As a result, the group disbanded.

古文：是夜，瑜复见权曰： 诸人徒见操书言水步八十万而各恐慑，不复料其虚实，便开此议，甚无谓也。
现代文：当天夜里，周瑜又去见孙权，说： 众人只看到曹操信中说有水、陆军八十万而各自惊恐，不再去分析其中的虚实，就提出向曹操投降的意见，太不像话。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhou Yu went to see Sun Quan again and said: People only saw Cao Cao's letter saying that there was water and an army of 800,000, and they were all frightened. Instead of analyzing the truth and falsehood, they put forward the idea of surrendering to Cao Cao, which was too outrageous.

古文：今以实校之：彼所将中国人不过十五六万，且已久疲；所得表众亦极七八万耳，尚怀狐疑。
现代文：现在咱们据实计算一下，曹操所率领的中原部队不过十五六万人，而且长期征战，早已疲惫；新接收的刘表的部队，至多有七八万人，仍然心怀猜疑。
English: Now, let's make an accurate calculation. The Central Plains troops led by Cao Cao numbered only 156,000 men, and they had been fighting for a long time and were already exhausted. Liu Biao's newly received troops, numbering at most 780,000, still harbored suspicions.

古文：夫以疲病之卒御狐疑之众，众数虽多，甚未足畏。
现代文：以疲惫的士卒，驾驭心怀猜疑的部众，人数虽多，却并没有什么可怕的。
English: There's nothing scary about a bunch of tired cops trying to control a bunch of suspicious people.

古文：瑜得精兵五万，自足制之，愿将军勿虑！ 
现代文：我只要有五万精兵，就足以制服敌军，望将军不要顾虑！ 
English: As long as I have fifty thousand elite soldiers, it will be enough to subdue the enemy army. General, don't worry!

古文：权抚其背曰： 公瑾，卿言至此，甚合孤心。
现代文：孙权拍着周瑜的背说： 周公瑾，你说到这个地步，非常合我的心意。
English: Sun Quan patted Zhou Yu on the back and said, "Zhou Gongyao, you have come to this point, which is very much in line with my heart.

古文：子布、元表诸人，各顾妻子，挟持私虑，深失所望；独卿与子敬与孤同耳，此天以卿二人赞孤也。
现代文：张昭、秦松等人，各顾自己的妻子儿女，怀有私心，非常使我失望。只有你与鲁肃和我的看法相同，这是上天派你们两个人来辅佐我。
English: Zhang Zhao, Qin Song and others, each looking after his own wife and children, harboring selfishness, greatly disappointed me. Only you and Lu Su and I share the same view, which is that Heaven has sent you two to assist me.

古文：五万兵难卒合，已选三万人，船粮战具俱办。卿与子敬、程公便在前发，孤当续发人众，多载资粮，为卿后援。
现代文：五万精兵一时难以集结，已挑选了三万人，战船、粮草及武器装备都已备齐，你和鲁肃、程普率兵先行，我当继续调集人马，多运辎重、粮草，作为你的后援。
English: It is difficult to gather fifty thousand elite soldiers at one time. Thirty thousand people have been selected. Warships, grain and grass, and weapons and equipment have all been prepared. You and Rusu and Cheng Pu will lead the troops. I should continue to mobilize men and horses, transport more goods, grain and grass, as your backup.

古文：卿能办之者诚决，邂逅不如意，便还就孤，孤当与孟德决之。 
现代文：你能战胜曹军，就当机立断；如果失利，就退到我这里来，我当与曹操决一胜负。 
English: If you are able to defeat Cao Cao's army, you should take the opportunity to make a decision; if you fail, you should retreat to me, and I should fight Cao Cao to a draw.

古文：遂以周瑜、程普为左右督，将兵与备并力逆操；以鲁肃为赞军校尉，助画方略。
现代文：于是，孙权任命周瑜、程普为左、右督，率兵与刘备合力迎战曹操；又任命鲁肃为赞军校尉，协助筹划战略。
English: As a result, Sun Quan appointed Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu as the left and right captains to lead the troops and Liu Bei to fight against Cao Cao; he also appointed Lu Su as the captain of the Zhang Army to help plan the strategy.

古文：刘备在樊口，日遣逻吏于水次候望权军。
现代文：刘备驻军樊口，每天派巡逻的士兵在江边眺望孙权的军队。
English: Liu Bei stationed troops at the mouth of the river and sent soldiers on patrol every day to watch Sun Quan's army along the river.

古文：吏望见瑜船，驰往白备，备遣人慰劳之。
现代文：士兵看到周瑜的船队，就立即乘马回营报告刘备。刘备派人前去尉劳。
English: When the soldiers saw Zhou Yu's fleet, they immediately rode back to the camp to report to Liu Bei. Liu Bei sent men to work for him.

古文：瑜曰： 有军任，不可得委署；傥能屈威，诚副其所望。 
现代文：周瑜对慰劳的人说： 我有军事任务在身，不能委派别人代理，如果刘备能屈尊前来会面，实在符合我的愿望。 
English: Zhou Yu said to the consolers: I have a military mission on my body, I can't appoint someone else to represent me. If Liu Bei can deign to come and meet me, it is really in line with my wishes.

古文：备乃乘单舸往见瑜问曰： 今拒曹公，深为得计。
现代文：刘备就乘一只船去见周瑜，说： 现在抵抗曹操，实在是很明智的决定。
English: Liu Bei took a boat to see Zhou Yu and said, "It is a very wise decision to resist Cao Cao now.

古文：战卒有几？ 
现代文：不知有多少战士？ 
English: How many soldiers are there?

古文：瑜曰： 三万人。 
现代文：周瑜说： 三万人。 
English: Zhou Yu said: Thirty thousand people.

古文：备曰： 恨少。 
现代文：刘备说： 可惜太少了。 
English: Liu Bei said, "It's a pity that there are so few."

古文：瑜曰： 此自足用，豫州但观瑜破之。 
现代文：周瑜说： 这已足够用，将军且看我击败曹军。 
English: Zhou Yu said, "That's enough. General, let me defeat Cao Jun."

古文：备欲呼鲁肃等共会语，瑜曰： 受命不得妄委署。若欲见子敬，可别过之。 
现代文：刘备想要召呼鲁肃等来共同谈话，周瑜说： 接受军令，不得随意委托人代理，如果您要见鲁肃，可以另去拜访他。 
English: Liu Bei wanted to call Lu Su and others to have a joint conversation, Zhou Yu said: Accept the military order, do not arbitrarily represent the client, if you want to see Lu Su, you can visit him separately.

古文：备深愧喜。
现代文：刘备既很惭愧，又很高兴。
English: Liu Bei was both ashamed and pleased.

古文：进，与操遇于赤壁。
现代文：周瑜大军继续前进，在赤壁与曹操相遇。
English: Zhou Yu's army continued to advance and met Cao Cao at Chibi.

古文：时操军众已有疾疫，初一交战，操军不利，引次江北。
现代文：当时曹操的部队中已发生疾疫。两军初次交战，曹军失利，退到长江北岸。
English: At that time, Cao Cao's troops were already plagued by disease. When the two armies clashed for the first time, Cao's army lost and retreated to the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：瑜等在南岸，瑜部将黄盖曰： 今寇众我寡，难与持久。
现代文：周瑜等驻军在长江南岸，周瑜部将黄盖说： 如今敌众我寡，难以长期相持。
English: Zhou Yu and other garrisons are on the south bank of the Yangtze River. Huang Gai, the commander of Zhou Yu's division, said: "Nowadays, we have few enemies, and it is difficult to maintain a long-term relationship.

古文：操军方连船舰，首尾相接，可烧而走也。 
现代文：曹军正把战船连在一起，首尾相接，可以用火攻，击败曹军。 
English: Cao's troops are tying their warships together, so they can attack and defeat Cao's troops with fire.

古文：乃取蒙冲斗舰十艘，载燥荻、枯柴、灌油其中，裹以帷幕，上建旌旗，预备走舸，系于其尾。
现代文：于是，选取蒙冲战船十艘，装上干荻和枯柴，在里边浇上油，外面裹上帷幕，上边插上旌旗，预先备好快艇，系在船尾。
English: Therefore, ten Mengchong warships were selected, loaded with dry straw and dead wood, oiled on the inside, wrapped with a curtain on the outside, with a banner on the top, and fast boats were prepared in advance and tied to the stern.

古文：先以书遗操，诈云欲降。
现代文：黄盖先派人送信给曹操，谎称打算投降。
English: Huang Gai first sent a message to Cao Cao, falsely claiming that he intended to surrender.

古文：时东南风急，盖以十舰最著前，中江举帆，馀船以次俱进。
现代文：当时东南风正急，黄盖将士艘战船排在最前面，到江心时升起船帆，其余的船在后依次前进。
English: At that time, the southeast wind was strong. Huang Gai put his warship at the front of the line. When he reached the center of the river, he raised the sails, and the rest of the ships followed.

古文：操军吏士皆出营立观，指言盖降。
现代文：曹操军中的官兵都走出营来站着观看，指着船，说黄盖来投降了。
English: The officers and men of Cao Cao's army all came out of the camp to stand and watch, pointing at the ship and saying that Huang Gai had come to surrender.

古文：去北军二里馀，同时发火，火烈风猛，船往如箭，烧尽北船，延及岸上营落。
现代文：离曹军还有二里多远，那十艘船同时点火，火烈风猛，船象箭一样向前飞驶，把曹军战船全部烧光，火势还蔓延到曹军设在陆地上的营寨。
English: They were still more than two miles away from Cao's army, and the ten ships simultaneously ignited. The fire was fierce and fierce, and the ships flew forward like arrows, burning all of Cao's warships, and the fire also spread to Cao's camp on land.

古文：顷之，烟炎张天，人马烧溺死者甚众。
现代文：顷刻间，浓烟烈火，遮天蔽日，曹军人马烧死和淹死的不计其数。
English: In an instant, thick smoke and fire covered the sky and the sun, and countless Cao soldiers and horses were burned to death and drowned.

古文：瑜等率轻锐继其后，雷鼓大进，北军大坏。
现代文：周瑜等率领轻装的精锐战士紧随在后，鼓声震天，奋勇向前，曹军大败。
English: Zhou Yu and other light-armed elite soldiers followed closely behind, the sound of the drums shook the heavens, and the Cao army was soundly defeated.

古文：操引军从华容道步走，遇泥泞，道不通，天又大风，悉使羸兵负草填之，骑乃得过。
现代文：曹操率军从华容道步行撤退，遇到泥泞，道路不通，天又刮起大风。曹操让所有老弱残兵背草铺在路上，骑兵才勉强通过。
English: Cao Cao and his army retreated on foot from Huarong Road, encountering mud, impassable roads, and high winds. Cao Cao had all the old and weak soldiers spread straw on the road, and the cavalry barely passed.

古文：羸兵为人马所蹈藉，陷泥中，死者甚众。
现代文：老弱残兵被人马所践踏，陷在泥中，死了很多。
English: Old and weak soldiers were trampled by horses, stuck in the mud, and many died.

古文：刘备、周瑜水陆并进，追操至南郡。
现代文：刘备、周瑜水陆并进，追赶曹操直到南郡。
English: Liu Bei and Zhou Yu marched side by side, chasing Cao Cao all the way to Nanshun.

古文：时操军兼以饥疫，死者太半。
现代文：这时，曹军又饿又病，死了一大半。
English: At this time, Cao's army was hungry and sick, and most of them died.

古文：操乃留征南将军曹仁、横野将军徐晃守江陵，折冲将军乐进守襄阳，引军北还。
现代文：曹操就留下征南将军曹仁、模野将军徐晃镇守江陵，折冲将军乐进镇守襄阳，自己率军返回北方。
English: Cao Cao left the Southern General Cao Ren and the Modo General Xu Xing to guard Jiangling, and the Fuchong General Le Jin to guard Xiangyang, and returned to the north with his own army.

古文：周瑜、程普将数万众，与曹仁隔江未战。
现代文：周瑜、程普率领几万人马，与曹仁隔长江对峙，尚未开战。
English: Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu led tens of thousands of horses and confronted Cao Ren across the Yangtze River, but did not go to war.

古文：甘宁请先径进取夷陵，往，即得其城，因入守之。
现代文：甘宁请求先去直接夺取夷陵。甘宁率部前往，一到就占领了夷陵，于是入城防守。
English: Ganning requested to go directly to capture Yiling first. Ganning and his men went there, occupied Yiling as soon as they arrived, and then entered the city to defend it.

古文：益州将袭肃举军降，周瑜表以肃兵益横野中郎将吕蒙。
现代文：益州牧刘璋的部将袭肃率领全军投降。周瑜上表，请求用袭肃的部队扩充横野中郎将吕蒙的兵力。
English: Liu Yao, the governor of Yizhou, led the whole army to surrender. Zhou Yu went to the table and requested that the troops attacking Su should be used to expand the troops of Yokono Churo, the general of Lv Meng.

古文：蒙盛称： 肃有胆用，且慕化远来，于义宜益，不宜夺也。 
现代文：吕蒙极力称赞袭肃，说： 袭肃有胆识，有才干，而且仰慕归化，远来投奔。从道理上讲，应该扩充他的兵力，而不应夺去他的军权。 
English: Lv Meng highly praised Guizhou, saying: Guizhou is courageous, talented, and admires naturalization, and has come from afar. From a theoretical point of view, it is necessary to expand his military strength, but not to take away his military power.

古文：权善其言，还肃兵。
现代文：孙权赞同吕蒙的看法，归还袭肃的军权。
English: Sun Quan thought this was very reasonable, so he returned the troops to Sui.

古文：曹仁遣兵围甘宁，宁困急，求救于周瑜，诸将以为兵少不足分，吕蒙谓周瑜、程普曰： 留凌公绩于江陵，蒙与君行，解围释急，势亦不久。蒙保公绩能十日守也。 
现代文：吴军将领们以为兵力单薄，不能再分出援军去救甘宁。吕蒙对周瑜、程普说： 留凌统驻守江陵，我与您前去解围，也不会需要太长的时间，我保证凌统能守住十天。 
English: The generals of the Wu Army thought that their forces were too thin and could not send reinforcements to save Ganning. Lv Meng said to Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu: "Keep Lingdun stationed in Gangneung, and I will go with you to relieve the siege. It will not take too long. I guarantee that Lingdun can be held for ten days."

古文：瑜从之，大破仁兵于夷陵，获马三百匹而还。
现代文：周瑜同意他的建议，在夷陵大破曹仁军队，获战马三百匹归来。
English: Zhou Yu agreed to his suggestion and defeated Cao Ren's army in Yiling and brought back three hundred horses.

古文：于是将士形势自倍。瑜乃渡江，顿北岸，与仁相距。
现代文：于是，全军上下士气倍增，周瑜就渡过长江，驻兵北岸，与曹仁相持。
English: As a result, the morale of the whole army doubled, and Zhou Yu crossed the Yangtze River, stationed soldiers on the north bank, and stood with Cao Ren.

古文：十二月，孙权自将围合肥，使张昭攻九江之当涂，不克。
现代文：十二月，孙权亲自率军包围合肥，派张昭率军攻打九江郡所属的当涂，未能攻克。
English: In December, Sun Quan personally led an army to encircle Hefei, and sent Zhang Zhao to lead an army to attack Dangtu, which belonged to Jiujiang County, but failed to conquer it.

古文：刘备表刘琦为荆州刺史，引兵南徇四郡，武陵太守金旋、长沙太守韩玄、桂阳太守赵范、零陵太守刘度皆降。
现代文：刘备向朝廷上表推荐刘琦担任荆州刺史，率领军队向南夺取荆州南部的四郡。武陵太守金旋、长沙太守韩玄、桂阳太守赵范、零陵太守刘度全都投降。
English: Liu Bei recommended Liu Bei to the imperial court to serve as the chief of Jingzhou, and led the army to the south to seize four counties in the south of Jingzhou. Wuling Governor Jinxuan, Changsha Governor Han Xuan, Guiyang Governor Zhao Fan, and Luling Governor Liu Du all surrendered.

古文：庐江营帅雷绪率部曲数万口归备。
现代文：庐江营帅雷绪率领部属几万人归降刘备。
English: Lijiang River battalion commander Lei Xu led tens of thousands of subordinates to surrender to Liu Bei.

古文：备以诸葛亮为军师中郎将，使督零陵、桂阳、长沙三郡，调其赋税以充军实；以偏将军赵云领桂阳太守。
现代文：刘备任命诸葛亮为军师中郎将，派他督察零陵、桂阳、长沙三郡，征收赋税，以补充军用物资。又任命偏将军赵云兼任桂阳太守。
English: Liu Bei appointed Zhuge Liang as the commander of the military division and sent him to inspect the three counties of Luling, Guiyang and Changsha to collect taxes to supplement military supplies. He also appointed General Zhao Yun as the governor of Guiyang.

古文：益州牧刘璋闻曹操克荆州，遣别驾张松致敬于操。
现代文：先前，益州牧刘璋听到曹操占领荆州的消息，派遣别驾张松去向曹操表达敬意。
English: Previously, Yizhou herdsman Liu Wei heard the news of Cao Cao's occupation of Jingzhou and sent Zhang Song to pay his respects to Cao Cao.

古文：松为人短小放荡，然识达精果。
现代文：张松身材矮小，行为放荡，但他通达事理，精明果断。
English: Zhang Song is short in stature and debauched in his behavior, but he is rational, shrewd and decisive.

古文：操时已定荆州，走刘备，不复存录松。
现代文：曹操当时已平定荆州，打得刘备狼猾逃走，不再像从前对待贤士那样亲切地接待张松。
English: Cao Cao had already subdued Jingzhou at that time, forcing Liu Bei to cunningly escape, and he no longer received Zhang Song as cordially as he had previously treated the sage.

古文：主簿杨修白操辟松，操不纳；松以此怨，归，劝刘璋绝操，与刘备相结，璋从之。
现代文：主簿杨建议曹操征聘张松为僚属，曹操没有采纳。张松因此心怀怨恨，回到益州后，劝刘璋与曹操断绝关系，与刘备结交，刘璋听从了。
English: Yang, the chief accountant, suggested that Cao Cao recruit Zhang Song as a subordinate, but Cao Cao did not accept. Zhang Song therefore harbored resentment. After returning to Yizhou, he advised Liu Bei to break off relations with Cao Cao and make friends with Liu Bei. Liu Bei obeyed.

古文：习凿齿论曰：昔齐桓一矜其功而叛者九国，曹操暂自骄伐而天下三分。
现代文：习凿齿论曰：从前，齐桓公一炫耀自己的功业，立刻就有九国背叛；曹操的暂时骄傲自负，导致天下分为三国鼎立的局势。
English: According to the theory of chiseling teeth: Once upon a time, as soon as King Qi Huan showed off his exploits, nine countries immediately betrayed him; Cao Cao's temporary pride and conceit led to a situation in which the world was divided into three countries.

古文：皆勤之于数十年之内，而弃之于俯仰之顷，岂不惜乎！
现代文：他们都是将辛勤经营数十年的事业毁弃于低头仰头的片刻之间，岂不可惜吗！
English: Isn't it a pity that all of them have destroyed the business they have been diligently running for decades in the space of a few moments when their heads were bowed and their backs up!

古文：曹操追念田畴功，恨前听其让，曰： 是成一人之志而亏王法大制也。 
现代文：曹操追念田畴的功劳，后悔以前允许他辞让封爵，说： 这是成全一个人的志愿，而破坏国家的法制。 
English: Cao Cao remembered Tian Zhuang's merits and regretted that he had previously allowed him to resign and be knighted, saying: This is the fulfillment of a person's will, but the destruction of the country's legal system.

古文：乃复以前爵封畴。
现代文：于是，仍用先前要封的爵位来封他。
English: As a result, the previously intended title of nobility was used to create him.

古文：畴上疏陈诚，以死自誓。
现代文：田畴上书，表达自己的诚意，誓死不肯接受。
English: Tian Zong publicly declared his sincerity and swore to die.

古文：操不听，欲引拜之，至于数四，终不受。
现代文：曹操不听，想要拉他来拜封，甚至再三再四地施加压力，田畴始终不肯。
English: Cao Cao didn't listen and tried to get him to come and pay homage. He even put pressure on him again and again, but Tian Zhen was still unwilling.

古文：有司劾畴： 狷介违道，苟立小节，宜免官加刑。 
现代文：有关部门弹劾田畴说： 田畴自命清高，违背圣人大道，只顾建立自己的名节，应该免除官职，加以处分。 
English: The relevant departments impeached Tian Zeng, saying: Tian Zeng is self-proclaimed and high-minded, violates the sage road, and only cares about establishing his own festival. He should be exempted from official duties and punished.

古文：操下世子及大臣博议。世子丕以 畴同于子文辞禄，由胥逃赏，宜勿夺以优其节。 
现代文：曹操命令世子曹丕与大臣们共同商议这事，世子曹丕认为： 田畴的行动，与从前楚国的令尹子文辞让俸禄，申包胥逃避赏赐的情况相同，不应勉强，以此来褒扬他的节操。 
English: Cao Cao ordered his heir, Cao Pi, to discuss the matter with the ministers. The heir, Cao Pi, believed that: Tian Zang's actions were the same as the situation in the former Chu Kingdom, when Yin Zi ordered to give up his salary and Shen Bao Pi evaded the reward. It should not be reluctantly used to praise his self-restraint.

古文：尚书令荀彧、司隶校尉钟繇，亦以为可听。
现代文：尚书荀、司隶校尉钟繇也认为可以允许田畴辞让。
English: Shang Shuxuan and Sili School Lieutenant Zhong Qi also believe that the transfer of fields can be allowed.

古文：操犹欲侯之，畴素与夏侯惇善，操使惇自以其情喻之。
现代文：曹操仍然想封田畴为亭侯，因田畴一向与夏侯关系亲密，曹操就派夏侯自己前去用友情说服田畴。
English: Cao Cao still wanted to make Tian Zhen a prince. Since Tian Zhen had always been close to Xia Hou, Cao Cao sent Xia Hou to persuade Tian Zhen with friendship.

古文：惇就畴宿而劝之，畴揣知其指，不复发言。
现代文：夏侯在田畴的住处进行劝说，田畴知道他的来意，不再说话。
English: Xia Hou tried to persuade Tian Zeng at his residence, but Tian Zeng knew what he wanted and stopped talking.

古文：惇临去，固邀畴，畴曰： 畴，负义逃窜之人耳；蒙恩全活，为幸多矣，岂可卖卢龙之塞以易赏禄哉！
现代文：夏侯临走时，还坚持要田畴接受，田畴说： 我是一个辜负故主恩义，逃避危险的人。蒙受大恩，得以活命，已是大幸了，怎么能靠出卖卢龙塞而换取封爵呢？
English: When Xia Hou was about to leave, he still insisted that Tian Zhen accept it. Tian Zhen said, "I am a person who has failed to live up to the grace of my late master and escaped danger. It is a great blessing to receive great grace and to be able to live. How can I sell Lu Long Ce in exchange for a knighthood?

古文：纵国私畴，畴独不愧于心乎！
现代文：即使是朝廷对我特别优待，难道我心中不惭愧吗？
English: Even if the imperial court gives me special preferential treatment, won't I feel ashamed?

古文：将军雅知畴者，犹复如此，若必不得已，请愿效死，刎首于前。 
现代文：将军是一向了解我的，还这样勉强我接受，如果迫不得已，我情愿一死，在您的面前自刎。 
English: The general has always understood me and has forced me to accept that if I had to, I would rather die and commit suicide in front of you.

古文：言未卒，涕泣横流。
现代文：话还没有说完，已泪流满面。
English: Before the words were out of my mouth, I was in tears.

古文：惇具以答操，操喟然，知不可屈，乃拜为议郎。
现代文：夏侯一一向曹操汇报，曹操叹息，知道不能让田畴屈服，于是任命田畴为议郎。
English: Xia Hou once reported to Cao Cao, and Cao Cao sighed, knowing that he could not let Tian Zhen yield, so he appointed Tian Zhen as the mediator.

古文：操幼子仓舒卒，操伤惜之甚。
现代文：曹操的小儿子曹仓舒去世，曹操十分悲痛惋惜。
English: Cao Cao's youngest son, Cao Cangshu, passed away. Cao Cao was very sad and regretful.

古文：司空掾邴原女早亡，操欲求与仓舒合葬，原辞曰： 嫁殇，非礼也。
现代文：司空掾邴原的女儿也年幼早亡，曹操想请求邴原同意，让他女儿与曹仓舒合葬。邴原拒绝说： 为夭亡的儿女婚嫁，不符合古礼。
English: Cao Cao wanted to ask Yuan Yuan's permission to have his daughter buried together with Cao Cangshu. Yuan refused, saying, "It is not in accordance with ancient rites to marry off a child who died young."

古文：原之所以自容于明公，公之所以待原者，以能守训典而不易也。
现代文：我所以能为您效劳，您所以委任我担任职务，都是因为我能严守古代圣贤的经典而不违背。
English: I am able to serve you, and you have appointed me to this position, because I am able to adhere to the teachings of the ancient sages.

古文：若听明公之命，则是凡庸也，明公焉以为哉！ 
现代文：如果听从您的命令，我就成了平庸之人，您这样还有什么意思呢？ 
English: If I follow your orders, I will become a mediocre person. What do you mean by that?

古文：操乃止。
现代文：曹操才打消想法。
English: Cao Cao finally gave up.

古文：孙权使威武中郎将贺齐讨丹杨黟、歙贼。
现代文：孙权派威武中郎将贺齐讨伐丹阳郡属下黟、歙两地的盗贼。
English: Sun Quan sent Wei Wu Zhongro to He Qi to fight the thieves in Danyang County's subordinate counties and counties.

古文：黟帅陈仆、祖山等二万户屯林历山，四面壁立，不可得攻，军住经月。
现代文：黟地的盗贼首领陈仆、祖山等率领二万户在林历山中建立营寨，四面者是绝壁，无法进攻。
English: The leaders of the bandits in Lijiang, such as Chen Bu and Zu Shan, led twenty thousand households to build a camp in the Lijiang Mountains. There were steep walls on all sides, making it impossible to attack.

古文：齐阴募轻捷士，于隐险处，夜以铁戈拓山潜上，县布以援下人。
现代文：贺齐的军队驻扎一个多月，无计可施。后来，贺齐秘密召募身手敏捷的壮士，在隐蔽的险要之处，乘夜用铁戈挖开岩石间缝隙，悄悄攀登上山，然后悬下布带，把下边的人拉上去。
English: Hechi's army was stationed for more than a month, with nothing to do. Later, Hechi secretly called for skilled and agile men to dig a crevice between the rocks with an iron axe at night in a hidden critical place, quietly climb up the mountain, and then hang a cloth belt to pull up the people below.

古文：得上者百馀人，令分布四面，鸣鼓角。贼大惊，守路者皆逆走，还依众。
现代文：一共上去一百余人，让他们分布在四面，擂响战鼓，吹起号角，山上的敌军大吃一惊，扼守山路的人全都向上逃回大营。
English: A total of more than a hundred people went up, so that they were distributed on all sides, war drums were beaten, horns were blown, the enemy troops on the mountain were taken aback, and all those who guarded the mountain road fled back to the camp.

古文：大军因是得上，大破之。
现代文：贺齐大军因此能从山路上来，大破敌军。
English: As a result, Hechi's large army was able to come from the mountain road and defeat the enemy army.

古文：权乃分其地为新都郡，以齐为太守。
现代文：孙权于是把这两地从丹阳郡分出，设立新都郡，任命贺齐为新都太守。
English: Sun Quan then separated the two places from Danyang County, established Xindu County, and appointed He Qi as Xindu Governor.

