古文：幽王二年，西周三川皆震。
现代文：周幽王二年，泾水、渭水、洛水域都发生了地震。
English: In the second year of Yu Wang, an earthquake occurred in the areas of Feng, Handan, Handan, Handan and Luo in western Zhou.

古文：伯阳父曰： 周将亡矣！
现代文：伯阳父说： 周朝要灭亡了。
English: Uncle Yang's father said, "The Zhou Dynasty is about to perish."

古文：夫天地之气，不失其序；若过其序，民乱之也。
现代文：天地之气，不能错失自己的次序，如果错乱了应有的位置，民众就会大乱。
English: The yin and yang between heaven and earth should not be out of order; if the order is disturbed, then someone has disturbed it.

古文：阳伏而不能出，阴迫而不能烝，于是有地震。
现代文：阳气滞留在内不能出来，阴气受到压制不能散发，便会产生地震。
English: If the yang is trapped inside and cannot come out, and if the yin is suppressed and cannot be emitted, an earthquake will occur.

古文：今三川实震，是阳失其所而镇阴也。
现代文：现在三条河流都发生了地震，就是阳气不在自己的位置而压制了阴气。
English: Now earthquakes have occurred in all three rivers, that is, the yang is not in its place and suppresses the yin.

古文：阳失而在阴，川源必塞；源塞，国必亡。
现代文：阳气失位而处于阴气的位置，河流的源头一定会阻塞，水流被堵，国家一定会灭亡。
English: If the yang is out of place and the yang is in place, the source of the river will be blocked, the water flow will be blocked, and the country will surely perish.

古文：夫水土演而民用也。
现代文：水流畅通、土地湿润才能生长万物为民取用。
English: Soil and water ventilation can only be used for the people to engage in production.

古文：水土无所演，民乏财用，不亡何待？
现代文：水流不畅、土地干枯，百姓就缺乏财用，国家怎么会不灭亡？
English: The water flow is not smooth, the land is dry, the people lack financial resources, how can the country not perish?

古文：昔伊、洛竭而夏亡，河竭而商亡。
现代文：过去伊水、洛水枯竭而夏朝灭亡，黄河枯竭而商朝灭亡。
English: Once upon a time, when the Yishui and Luo waters dried up, the Xia Dynasty perished; when the Yellow River dried up, the Shang Dynasty perished.

古文：今周德若二代之季矣，其川源又塞，塞必竭。
现代文：现在周朝的国运就如同夏、商二代的末世，而河川的源头又被堵塞，源头堵塞水流就会枯竭。
English: The national fortune of the present Zhou Dynasty is like the last days of the second generation of Xia and Shang, and the source of rivers is blocked, and if the source is blocked, the water flow will be exhausted.

古文：夫国必依山川，山崩川竭，亡之征也。
现代文：立国要依靠山川，山崩水竭，这是即将败亡的征兆。
English: The country must rely on mountains and rivers, and the collapse of mountains and rivers is a sign of the country's demise.

古文：川竭，山必崩。
现代文：河流枯竭，山岭就会崩塌。
English: When the rivers run dry, the mountains collapse.

古文：若国亡不过十年，数之纪也。
现代文：这样的国家不超过十年便会灭亡，这是数的极限。
English: From this perspective, the country's demise will not take ten years, because ten is just a cycle of numbers.

古文：夫天之所弃，不过其纪。 
现代文：凡是被上天厌弃的，是不会超过这个极限的。 
English: Anyone who is rejected by heaven will not exceed this limit.

古文：是岁也，三川竭，岐山崩。
现代文：这一年，泾水、洛水、渭水流枯竭，岐山崩塌。
English: In that year, Shan, Shan and Luo were exhausted, and Qishan collapsed.

古文：十一年，幽王乃灭，周乃东迁。
现代文：十一年，幽王被杀，周都因而东迁。
English: In the eleventh year, Yu Wang was killed, and Zhou moved east.

