古文：黄帝问曰：愿闻刺浅深之分。
现代文：黄帝问道：我想听您讲一讲如何掌握针刺的浅深程度?
English: Huang Di asked: I would like to listen to you talk about how to master the shallow depth of acupuncture?

古文：岐伯对曰：刺骨者无伤筋，刺筋者无伤肉，刺肉者无伤脉，刺脉者无伤皮，刺皮者无伤肉，刺肉者无伤筋，刺筋者无伤骨。
现代文：岐伯回答说：针刺骨的，不要伤害了筋；针刺筋的，不要伤害了肉；针刺肉的，不要伤害了脉；针刺脉的，不要伤害了皮；针刺皮的，不要伤害了肉；针刺肉的，不要伤害了筋；针刺筋的，不要伤害了骨。
English: Zibo replied, "If you prick the bone, don't hurt the sinew; if you prick the muscle, don't hurt the flesh; if you prick the flesh, don't hurt the vein; if you prick the vein, don't hurt the skin; if you prick the skin, don't hurt the flesh; if you prick the flesh, don't hurt the muscle; if you prick the muscle, don't hurt the bone."

古文：帝曰：余未知其所谓，愿闻其解。
现代文：黄帝说：我仍然还是不十分明白，希望听您详细地解说一下。
English: Huang Di said: I still don't fully understand, I hope to hear your detailed explanation.

古文：岐伯曰：刺骨无伤筋者，针至筋而去，不及骨也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：所谓针刺骨就不要伤筋的，是说病在骨应当针刺到骨，不要只针刺到筋，就停针或出针。
English: Qibo replied: The so-called "needle pricking the bone without hurting the muscle" means that if the disease is in the bone, the needle should be pricked to the bone, not just pricked to the muscle, then stop the needle or remove the needle.

古文：刺筋无伤肉者，至肉而去，不及筋也。
现代文：所谓刺筋不要伤肉的，是说病在筋应当针刺到筋，不要只针刺到肉，就停针或出针。
English: The so-called stabbing sinew not to hurt the flesh means that the disease in the sinew should be needled to the sinew, not just needled to the flesh, stop the needle or pull out the needle.

古文：刺肉无伤脉者，至脉而去，不及肉也。
现代文：所谓针刺肉不要伤脉的，是说病在肉应当针刺到肉，不要只针刺到脉，就停针或出针。
English: The so-called needling meat without wounding the vein is to say that the disease in the meat should be needled to the meat, not just needled to the vein, then stop the needle or pull out the needle.

古文：刺脉无伤皮者，至皮而去，不及脉也。
现代文：所谓针刺脉不要伤皮的，是说病在脉应针刺到脉，不要只针到皮就停针或出针。
English: The so-called acupuncture pulse should not hurt the skin is to say that the disease in the pulse should be acupuncture to the pulse, do not just needle to the skin to stop the needle or needle.

古文：所谓刺皮无伤肉者，病在皮中，针入皮中，无伤肉也。
现代文：所谓针刺皮肤就不要伤肉的，是说病在皮肤之中，就不要再深刺伤肉。
English: The so-called needling of the skin should not hurt the flesh, that is to say, if the disease is in the skin, do not stab the flesh deeply.

古文：刺肉无伤筋者，过肉中筋也。
现代文：针刺肉不要伤筋的，是说刺肉太过，就要伤损及筋。
English: Needle-pierced meat should not injure the sinews, which means that if the meat is pierced too much, it will injure the sinews.

古文：刺筋无伤骨者，过筋中骨也。
现代文：针刺筋不要伤骨的，是说刺筋太过，就要伤损及骨。
English: Needle-piercing sinew should not injure bone, that is to say, if the needle-piercing sinew is too much, it will injure bone.

古文：此之谓反也。
现代文：这些都称之为违反正常的针刺原则。
English: These are called violations of normal acupuncture principles.

