古文：神元平文诸帝子孙
现代文：上谷公元纥罗，是神元皇帝的曾孙。
English: Shangguo was the great-grandson of Emperor Shen Yuan.

古文：上谷公纥罗，神元皇帝之曾孙也。初，从太祖自独孤如贺兰部，招集旧户，得三百家，与弟建议，劝贺讷推太祖为主。
现代文：起初，跟随太祖从独孤部落到贺兰部落，招集旧日辖户，得到三百家，和弟弟元建商议，劝贺讷推举太祖为君主。
English: At first, he followed his great-grandfather from the Doku tribe to the Horan tribe, called up the former Nikkei households, got three hundred households, and consulted with his brother Yuan Jian to persuade Horne to nominate his great-grandfather as the monarch.

古文：及太祖登王位，纥罗常翼卫左右。
现代文：等到太祖登上王位，纥罗时常在左右保卫。
English: By the time his great-grandfather ascended to the throne, Zhao Luo often guarded the throne from left to right.

古文：又从征伐，有大功。
现代文：又跟随太祖征伐，有大功劳。
English: He also followed his great-great-grandfather's conquest, which was a great achievement.

古文：纥罗有援立谋，特见优赏。
现代文：纥罗有推举拥立的谋略，特别受到优待赏赐。
English: Zhao Luo has a strategy of promoting and supporting the establishment, and has been specially rewarded with preferential treatment.

古文：及即帝位，与弟建同日赐爵为公。
现代文：等到太祖登上帝位，纥罗和弟弟元建同一天被赐爵位为公。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, Zhao Luo and his brother Yuan Jian were given the title of nobility on the same day.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子题，少以雄武知名，赐爵襄城公。
现代文：儿子元题，年轻时以英勇闻名，被赐爵位为襄城公。
English: His son, Yuan Qi, was famous for his bravery when he was young, and was given the title of Prince of Xiangcheng.

古文：从征中山，受诏徇下诸郡，抚慰新城，皆安化乐业。
现代文：跟随皇帝征伐中山，受韶令攻下各郡，安抚慰劳收复的城池，都安于教化乐于本业。
English: Following the emperor's conquest of Zhongshan, conquering counties by imperial order, and pacifying and reclaiming cities, they are happy to teach and enjoy this business.

古文：进爵为王。
现代文：升爵位为王。
English: Promotion to the peerage is king.

古文：击慕容驎于义台，中流矢薨。
现代文：在义台攻打慕容骈，中流箭逝世。
English: He attacked Murong Yao in Yidai and died in the middle of the battle.

古文：帝以太医令阴光为视疗不尽术，伏法。
现代文：皇帝以为太医令阴光治病没竭尽医术，依法处死阴光。
English: The emperor thought that the great physician ordered Yin Guang to cure the disease without exhausting medical skills, and executed Yin Guang according to law.

古文：子悉袭，降爵为襄城公。
现代文：儿子元悉继承爵位，降爵位为襄城公。
English: His son, Yuanxiu, succeeded to the title, and the title of Prince of Xiangcheng was restored.

古文：卒，赠襄城王。
现代文：去世，追赠襄城王。
English: He died and was posthumously awarded the title of King of Xiangcheng.

古文：建德公婴文，神元皇帝之后也。
现代文：建德公元婴文，是神元皇帝的后代。
English: Jiande, who was born in infancy, was a descendant of Emperor Shenyuan.

古文：少明辩，有决断，太宗器之。
现代文：年轻时聪明善辩，有决断能力，左塞器重他。
English: When he was young, he was clever and good at debate, had the ability to make decisions, and was a left-handed stopper.

古文：典出纳诏命，常执机要。
现代文：负责传达诏命，时常掌管机密大事。
English: Responsible for conveying the imperial edict, often in charge of confidential matters.

古文：世祖践阼，拜护军夷校尉，进爵建德公，镇辽西。
现代文：世担登位，任命他为护东夷校尉，升爵位为建德公，镇守辽酉。
English: Shetan ascended to the throne, appointed him as the captain of Dongyi, promoted to the peerage as Jiande Gong, and became the town guard of Liaoyang.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：真定侯陆，神元皇帝之后也。
现代文：真定侯五堡，是神元皇帝的后代。
English: He was a descendant of Emperor Jingen.

古文：世祖时，以武功颇蒙恩遇，拜散骑常侍，赐爵真定侯。
现代文：一时，因军功很受恩宠厚待，被任命为散骑常侍，赐爵位为真宣昼。
English: At one time, due to his military service, he was very favored and treated well. He was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, and was given a knighthood as the True Emperor.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：陆曾孙轨，字法寄，稍迁洛阳令。
现代文：五壁的曾孙互孰，字速寄，逐渐升任到盗墨令。
English: Five walls of the great-grandson of each other, the word express, gradually rose to the theft of ink.

古文：时天下多事，轨惟以深刻遇下，死多酷滥，识者非之。
现代文：当时天下变故多，元轨仅以严峻刻薄对待下属，许多人死于他的滥施酷政，有见识的人责难他。
English: At that time, the world had changed a lot. The Yuanlu only treated his subordinates with severe vitriol. Many people died from his abuse of power, and people with insight rebuked him.

古文：孝静时，鄴宫创制，以轨为营构使。
现代文：孝静帝时，邺城宫殿开始建造，任命元轨为营构使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozhing, the construction of the Palace of Shicheng began, and Yuanlu was appointed as the chief architect.

古文：除徐州刺史。
现代文：后任徐州刺史。
English: His successor was Xuzhou Zhishi.

古文：轨风望既陋，又无学术，虽历名位，时人轻之。
现代文：元轨的声望低，又没有学问道术，虽然担任显要职位，当时人仍轻视他。
English: Yuan Rong's reputation was low, and he did not learn the art of interrogation. Although he held a prominent position, people still despised him at that time.

古文：卒于州。
现代文：在州中去世。
English: He died in the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：武陵侯因，章帝之后也。
现代文：武陵侯元因，是章帝的后代。
English: Wuling Houyuan is a descendant of Emperor Zhang.

古文：从太祖平中原，以功封曲逆侯。
现代文：跟随太祖平定中原，以军功封为曲逆侯。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather in pacifying the Central Plains and rebelled against the shogunate with military exploits.

古文：世祖时，改爵武陵。
现代文：世祖时，改封爵为武陵侯。
English: At the time of the founder, he was given the title of Marquis of Wuling.

古文：长乐王寿乐，章帝之后也。
现代文：长乐王元寿乐，是童壹的后代。
English: Changle Wang Yuan Shule is a descendant of Tongyi.

古文：位选部尚书、南安王，改封长乐王。
现代文：担任选部尚书，封壶塞王，后改封旦碧廷。
English: He served as a member of the Selection Committee of Shangshu, and was given the title of Jug Stopper King. Later, he was given the title of Dan Bi Ting.

古文：高宗即位，寿乐有援立功，拜太宰、大都督、中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：产坦即位，昼銮有推举拥立的功劳，被任命为太宰、大都督、中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: Emperor Jintan ascended to the throne, and Emperor Yang Di had the merit of being elected and supported by the people. He was appointed as Dazai, grand governor, general of armies at home and abroad, and recorder of records.

古文：矜功，与尚书令长孙渴侯争权，并伏法。
现代文：夸耀功劳，和尚书令垦还遏堡争夺权力，都被处死。
English: Those who boasted of their merits, monks who wrote edicts or fought for power were all put to death.

古文：望都公颓，昭帝之后也。
现代文：望都公豆题，是坚童的后代。
English: Bodu Gongzhu Tie is a descendant of Jian Tong.

古文：随太祖平中原，赐爵望都侯。
现代文：跟随左鱼平定中原，赐爵位为望都侯。
English: He followed Zuo Yu in pacifying the Central Plains and bestowed a title of nobility on Mochimune.

古文：世祖以颓美仪容，进止可观，使迎左昭仪于蠕蠕，进爵为公。
现代文：世祖因元颓仪表容貌美好，进退有节，派他到蜢蟋迎接左昭仪，升爵位为公。
English: The founder of the world, because of the beautiful appearance of Yuan Shao, sent him to the capital to meet Zuo Zhaoyi, and he was promoted to the peerage.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：曲阳侯素延，桓帝之后也。
现代文：曲阳侯元素延，是桓帝的后代。
English: Qu Yang Hou elemental extension, is a descendant of Emperor Huan.

古文：以小统从太祖征讨诸部，初定并州，为刺史。
现代文：担任小统跟随太祖征讨各部落，开始平定并州，担任刺史。
English: He served as a minor general who followed the great ancestor to conquer the tribes, began to pacify and annex the state, and served as a historian.

古文：太祖之惊于柏肆也，并州守将封窦真为逆，素延斩之。
现代文：太祖在柏肆受惊，并州守将封窦真作乱，素延杀了他。
English: The great-great-grandfather was frightened in Bashi, and the state guard made a mess of Fong Dou Zhen, and Su Yan killed him.

古文：时太祖意欲抚悦新附，悔参合之诛，而素延杀戮过多，坐免官。
现代文：当时太祖心中想安抚取悦新归附的人，后悔参合陂的诛杀，而素延杀人过多，获罪免官。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather wanted to appease and please the newly annexed people, and regretted participating in the battle, but Su Yan killed too many people, and was acquitted.

古文：中山平，拜幽州刺史。
现代文：中山平定，被任命为幽州刺史。
English: Zhongshan Hepingding, was appointed as Yuzhou stabbing history.

古文：豪奢放逸，左迁上谷太守。
现代文：奢侈放纵，降职为上谷太守。
English: He indulged in extravagance and was demoted to the position of Kamitani Taishu.

古文：后赐爵曲阳侯。
现代文：后来被赐爵位为曲阳侯。
English: He was later given the title of Prince Quyang.

古文：时太祖留心黄老，欲以纯风化俗，虽乘舆服御，皆去雕饰，咸尚质俭，而素延奢侈过度，太祖深衔之。
现代文：当时太祖留心黄老之术，想用来纯洁风尚改变习俗，即使皇帝的车马服饰，都去掉雕刻装饰，崇尚质朴节俭，而素延奢侈超过限度，太祖深深地怨恨他。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather paid attention to the ancient art of Huang, and wanted to use pure fashion to change customs. Even the emperor's chariot and horse costumes were stripped of carved decoration, advocating simplicity and frugality, and extending luxury beyond the limit, the great-grandfather deeply resented him.

古文：积其过，因征，坐赐死。
现代文：累积他的过失，于是征召，因有罪赐令他自杀。
English: Accumulating his faults, he was conscripted, and because of his guilt he was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：顺阳公郁，桓帝之后也。
现代文：顺阳公亘郁，是担壹的后代。
English: Shunyanggu Wangyu is the descendant of Dangan.

古文：少忠正亢直。
现代文：年轻时忠贞耿直。
English: When he was young, he was very loyal.

古文：初以羽林中郎内侍，勤干有称。
现代文：起初任羽林中郎在宫内侍奉，有勤劳干练之称。
English: At first, he served as Uebayashi chūro in the Imperial Court, and was known for his diligence and skill.

古文：高宗时，位殿中尚书。
现代文：直塞时，担任殿中尚书。
English: When it was closed, he served as the palace's chancellor.

古文：从高宗东巡临海，以劳赐爵顺阳公。
现代文：跟随直塞向东巡视到海边，因劳绩被赐爵为顺阳公。
English: He followed Zhongsai to the east to inspect the coast, and was given the title of Shunyang due to his service.

古文：高宗崩，乙浑专权，隔绝内外，百官震恐，计无所出。
现代文：直塞逝世，乙浑独掌大权，隔绝宫廷内外的来往，百官震惊恐惧，无计可施。
English: When Zhosa died, Yigong became the sole ruler, cutting off all communication inside and outside the court. The officials were shocked and frightened, and there was nothing they could do.

古文：郁率殿中卫士数百人从顺德门入，欲诛浑。
现代文：元郁率领殿中卫士几百人从顺德门进去，想要诛杀乙浑。
English: Yuan Yu led several hundred of the palace's guards through the Shunde Gate, intending to fight and kill Yigong.

古文：浑惧，逆出问郁曰： 君入何意？ 
现代文：乙浑畏惧，迎出来问元郁说： 您进去想做什么? 
English: Afraid, Yihong came forward and asked Yuan Yu, "What do you want to do when you go in?"

古文：郁曰： 不见天子，群臣忧惧，求见主上。 
现代文：元郁说： 不见天子，群臣忧虑恐惧，我请求见皇上。 
English: Motooka said, "If I don't see the emperor, the courtiers will be worried and afraid. I beg to see the emperor."

古文：浑窘怖，谓郁曰： 今大行在殡，天子谅暗，故未接百官，诸郡何疑？ 
现代文：乙浑窘迫恐惧，对元郁说： 现在先帝刚去世还未殡殓，天子居丧，所以没有接见百官，各位何必怀疑呢? 
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Yihun said to Yuan Yu: "Now that the former emperor has just passed away and has not yet been buried, and the heavenly son is in mourning, so you have not met with a hundred officials, why should you doubt it?

古文：遂奉显祖临朝。
现代文：于是侍奉显祖前往朝廷。
English: So the servant went to the imperial court.

古文：后浑心规为乱，朝臣侧目，郁复谋杀浑，为浑所诛。
现代文：后来乙浑心中谋划作乱，朝中大臣不敢正视，元郁又策划杀乙浑，被乙浑诛杀。
English: Later, he plotted in his heart to create chaos, and the ministers of the two Koreas did not dare to face up to it. Yuan Yu also plotted to kill him, and was killed by Yi Hunyu.

古文：显祖录郁忠正，追赠顺阳王，谥曰简。
现代文：显祖依据元郁的忠诚正直，追赠他为顺阳王，谧号为简。
English: According to the loyalty and honesty of Yuan Yu, Xian Zu posthumously gave him the title of Shunyang Wang, and his nickname was Jian.

古文：宜都王目辰，桓帝之后也。
现代文：宜都王元目辰，是桓帝的后代。
English: King Motometsu of Iddo was a descendant of Emperor Kanto.

古文：初以羽林郎从太祖南伐至江。
现代文：起初任羽林郎跟随太祖向南征伐到长江。
English: At first, Ren Ulin Lang followed his great-grandfather south to the Yangtze River.

古文：高宗即位，以劳累迁侍中、尚书左仆射，封南平公。
现代文：高宗即位，目辰因劳绩屡经升迁到侍中、尚书左仆射，封为南平公。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, and because of his hard work, Muchen was repeatedly promoted to the position of chamberlain, and Shangshu Zuofu shot, and was named Nanping Gong.

古文：乙浑之谋乱也，目辰与兄郁议欲杀浑，事泄被诛，目辰逃隐得免。
现代文：乙浑谋划作乱时，目辰和哥哥元郁商议要杀乙浑，事情泄露元郁被诛杀，目辰逃跑隐藏得以免死。
English: When Yihun was plotting to start a riot, Mechen and his brother, Yuan Yu, discussed killing Yihun. When the affair was revealed, Yuan Yu was beaten to death, and Mechen was able to escape and hide to avoid death.

古文：显祖传位，有定策勋。
现代文：显祖传位，目辰有决定策略的功勋。
English: It is said that the eyes have the power to decide the strategy.

古文：高祖即位，迁司徒，封宜都王，除雍州刺史，镇长安。
现代文：高祖即位，目辰升为司徒，封宜都王，任雍州刺史，镇守长安。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, and was promoted to the status of a disciple, the king of Yidu, the governor of Yongzhou, and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：目辰性亢直耿介，不为朋党，朝臣咸惮之。
现代文：目辰性格正直强硬，不结朋党，朝廷官员都怕他。
English: Mechen's character is honest and tough, he does not make friends with the party, and the court officials are afraid of him.

古文：然好财利，在州，政以贿成。
现代文：然而喜好财利，在雍州时，政事以行贿而成。
English: However, when he was in Yongzhou, he was fond of money and bribery.

古文：有罪伏法，爵除。
现代文：有罪处以死刑，爵位被削除。
English: The guilty were sentenced to death and their titles were removed.

古文：穆帝长子六修，少而凶悖。
现代文：穆帝的长子元六脩，年轻时凶恶狂悖。
English: The eldest son of Mu Di, Yuan Liujuan, was vicious and rebellious when he was young.

古文：穆帝五年，遣六修为前锋，与辅相卫雄、范班及姬澹等救刘琨。
现代文：穆帝五年，派遣六脩为前锋，和辅相卫雄、范班以及姬澹等人救援刘琨。
English: In the fifth year of Mu Di's reign, he dispatched Liuchun as a striker, and assisted Wei Xiong, Fanban, and Ji Yao and others to rescue Liu Ye.

古文：帝躬统大兵为后继。
现代文：皇帝亲自统率大军为后续部队。
English: The emperor himself led a large army as a follow-up force.

古文：刘粲惧，焚烧辎重，突围遁走。
现代文：刘粲畏惧，焚烧车辆物资，突围逃跑。
English: Liu Wei was afraid, burned vehicles and materials, and broke through the encirclement to escape.

古文：纵骑追之，杀伤甚众。
现代文：皇帝派遣骑兵纵马追击，杀伤特别多。
English: The emperor dispatched cavalry to pursue them on horseback, inflicting a particularly high number of casualties.

古文：帝因大猎于寿阳山，陈阅皮肉，山为变赤。
现代文：皇帝于是在寿阳山大规模狩猎，陈列兽皮兽肉，山岭为之变成红色。
English: The emperor then went on a large-scale hunt in Shouyang Mountain, displaying animal skins and meat, turning the mountain range red.

古文：及晋怀帝为刘聪所执，穆帝遣六脩与桓帝子普根率精骑助刘琨。
现代文：等到晋怀帝被刘聪捉住，穆帝派遣六脩和桓帝的儿子普根率领精锐的骑兵援助刘琨。
English: When Emperor Jinhuai was captured by Liu Cong, Emperor Mu sent Liuchun and Emperor Huan's son Pugen to lead the elite cavalry to aid Liu Bei.

古文：初穆帝少子比延有宠，欲以为后。
现代文：当初穆帝的小儿子比延受宠信，想作为后嗣。
English: At first, Mu Di's youngest son, Bi Yan, was favored and wanted to be the heir.

古文：六修出居新平城，而黜其母。
现代文：外派六脩居住新平城，而废黜了他的母亲。
English: He sent Rokucho to live in Xinping City, and deposed his mother.

古文：六修有骅骝骏马，日行五百里，穆帝欲取以给比延。
现代文：六脩有一匹良种骏马，每天能跑五百里，穆帝想要过来给予比延。
English: Liuchuan has a well-bred mare that can run five hundred miles a day, and Mudi wants to come and give Biyan a ride.

古文：后六修来朝，穆帝又命拜比延，六修不从。
现代文：后来六脩来朝见，穆帝又命令他叩拜比延，六脩不顺从。
English: Later, Liukou came to see the emperor, and Mu Di ordered him to prostrate to Bi Yan, but Liukou did not obey.

古文：穆帝乃坐比延于己所乘步辇，使人导从出游。
现代文：穆帝于是让比延坐在自己所坐的人力车上，派人前呼后拥出游。
English: Mu Di then let Bi Yan sit on the rickshaw he was sitting on, and sent people to go ahead of him.

古文：六修望见，以为穆帝，谒伏路左，及至，乃是比延，惭怒而去。
现代文：六脩望见后，以为是穆帝，跪在路旁谒见，等到了跟前，却是比延，六脩惭愧发怒而离开。
English: After seeing him, Liuchun thought it was Mu Di and knelt down by the roadside to see him. When he arrived, it was Bian Yan. Liuchun was ashamed and angry and left.

古文：召之，不还。
现代文：征召他，不返回。
English: Conscript him, he won't come back.

古文：穆帝怒，率众伐之。
现代文：台壶发怒，率车队讨伐他。
English: Teiting became angry and led a motorcade to fight him.

古文：帝军不利，六修杀比延。
现代文：皇帝的军队失利，六幢杀死上邀。
English: The emperor's army was defeated, and Shidao was invited to kill him.

古文：帝改服微行民间，有贱妇人识帝，遂暴崩。
现代文：皇帝改换服装到民间，有个卑贱的妇人认识皇帝，皇帝于是突然逝世。
English: The emperor changed his clothes to civilian clothes. A lowly woman recognized the emperor, and the emperor died suddenly.

古文：普根先守于外，闻难，率众来赴。
现代文：萱担先在外地守卫，听到变难，率领军队来奔赴。
English: Xing took the lead in guarding in the field, and when he heard that things were getting difficult, he led the army to rush.

古文：攻六修，灭之。
现代文：攻打左恺，消灭了他。
English: Attacked the left shin and eliminated him.

古文：吉阳男比干，太祖族弟也。
现代文：吉阳男元比干，是左趄的远房弟弟。
English: Jiyang's male counterpart, Bi Gan, is Zuo Yao's distant younger brother.

古文：以司卫监讨白涧丁零有功，赐爵吉阳男。
现代文：任司卫监讨伐旦涸工垩立下功勋，被赐爵位为童凰里。
English: He was awarded the title of "Donghuangli" for his meritorious service as the director of the Department of Sanitation and Drought Control.

古文：后为南道都将，战没。
现代文：后来担任南道都将，战死。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Southern Province, and died in battle.

古文：江夏公吕，太祖族弟也。
现代文：江夏公正旦，足立趄的远房弟弟。
English: Jiangxia Zhengyuan, Adachi's distant younger brother.

古文：从世祖平凉州有功，封江夏公，位外都大官，委以朝政，大见尊重。
现代文：跟随世担平定远业立下功勋，被封为丝夏公，担任外都大官，把朝政托付给他，大受尊重。
English: He was awarded the title of Shixia Gong, served as a foreign capital official, entrusted the imperial government to him, and was highly respected.

古文：卒，赠江夏王，陪葬金陵。
现代文：去世后，追赠为辽夏王，在金堕陪葬。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Liao Xia Wang and was buried with Jin Pu.

古文：高凉王孤，平文皇帝之第四子也。
现代文：高凉王丞巫，是平文皇帝的第四个儿子。
English: Gao Liang Wang Rong Wu was the fourth son of Emperor Pingwen.

古文：多才艺，有志略。
现代文：多才多艺，有志向谋略。
English: Versatile, ambitious and strategic.

古文：烈帝之前元年，国有内难，昭成如襄国。
现代文：烈帝的前元年，国家有内乱，晅盛童前往塞厘。
English: In the first year before the martyred emperor, there was civil unrest in the country, and Sheng Sheng Tong went to Seli.

古文：后烈帝临崩，顾命：迎昭成立之，社稷可安。
现代文：后来至瞳逝世前，留下遣命，迎接昭成帝拥立他，社稷可以安定。
English: Later, before Hitomi's death, he left a will to welcome Emperor Shōjo to support him, so that the society could be stable.

古文：及崩，群臣咸以新有大故，内外未安，昭成在南，来未可果，比至之间，恐生变诈，宜立长君以镇众望。
现代文：等到型壶逝世，群臣都以为刚有大丧，内外不安定，昭成帝在南方，不能肯定前来，等他到来之时，恐怕产生变故诈伪，应该拥立年长的嗣君来稳定众人的心。
English: By the time of his death, the courtiers all thought that there had just been a great tragedy, that there was instability both at home and abroad, that Emperor Shōcheng was in the south and could not come for certain, and that when he came, there would probably be treachery and deception, and that an older heir should be supported to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：次弟屈，刚猛多变，不如孤之宽和柔顺，于是大人梁盖等杀屈，共推孤。
现代文：次弟元屈，刚强勇猛多变化，不如元巫的宽容柔和，这时大人梁盖等杀死元屈，共同推举亘巫。
English: The second brother, Yuan Qu, is strong, brave and changeable, but not as tolerant and soft as Yuan Wu. At this time, the adults, such as Liang Gai, killed Yuan Qu and jointly nominated Wan Wu.

古文：孤曰： 吾兄居长，自应继位，我安可越次而处大业。 
现代文：互巫说： 我的哥哥年长，自然应该继位，我怎能超越次序而继大业? 
English: The sorcerer said, "My brother is older, he should naturally succeed to the throne. How can I overstep the order and succeed to the great cause?"

古文：乃自诣鄴奉迎，请身留为质。
现代文：于是亲自前往塑球迎接，请求自己留下来做人质。
English: So he went to meet the plastic ball in person and asked to stay as a hostage.

古文：石虎义而从之。
现代文：石虎认为他有义气而答应了他。
English: Shihu believed he was a man of integrity and agreed.

古文：昭成即位，乃分国半部以与之。
现代文：昭成帝即位，就分出国家的一半给予他。逝世。
English: When Emperor Akechi ascended the throne, he was given half of the country. He died.

古文：薨。子斤，失职怀怒，构实君为逆，死于长安。
现代文：儿子五丘，失去职务心怀愤怒，诬陷塞君作乱，死在垦壹。
English: His son, Wuqiu, lost his position and, with anger in his heart, falsely accused Jiejun of creating a disturbance, and died at the age of one.

古文：太祖时，以孤勋高，追封高凉王，谥曰神武。
现代文：左担时，因五迅功勋高，追封为高速王，定谧号为神武。
English: When he was left-handed, he was posthumously awarded the title of "High-speed King" and given the posthumous name of "Shenwu" due to his high Five-speed Achievement.

古文：斤子乐真，频有战功，后袭祖封。
现代文：五丘的儿子碧堕，频繁立下战功，后来继承祖父的封爵。
English: The son of Wuqiu, Bi Pu, frequently distinguished himself in battle, and later inherited his grandfather's knighthood.

古文：太宗初，改封平阳王。
现代文：左塞初年，改封爵为平阳王。
English: In the first year of Zuo Sai, he was given the title of Pingyang Wang.

古文：薨。
现代文：逝世。
English: He died.

古文：子礼，袭本爵高凉王。
现代文：儿子元礼，继承本来的爵位高凉王。
English: His son, Yuan Li, inherited the original title of Gao Liang Wang.

古文：薨，谥懿王。
现代文：逝世。谧号为懿王。
English: He died. His posthumous name was Shao Wang.

古文：子那，袭爵。
现代文：儿子豆面，继承爵位。
English: His son, Mame, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：拜中都大官。
现代文：被任命为中都大宫。
English: He was appointed to Zhongdu Grand Palace.

古文：骁猛善攻战。
现代文：骁勇善于攻战。
English: He is good at attacking.

古文：正平初，坐事伏法。
现代文：正垩初年，因事获罪处死。
English: In the first year of Zheng He's reign, he was sentenced to death.

古文：显祖即位，追那功，命子纥绍封。
现代文：显祖即位，追记元那的功勋，命儿子元纥继承封爵。
English: Emperor Xianzu ascended to the throne, commemorated the merits of the Yuan Dynasty, and ordered his son, Yuan Xuan, to inherit the title of knight.

古文：薨。
现代文：逝世。
English: He died.

古文：子大曹，性愿直。
现代文：儿子大曹，性格朴实正直。
English: The eldest son, whose character is simple and honest.

古文：高祖时，诸王非太祖子孙者，例降爵为公。
现代文：高祖时，诸王不是太祖子孙的，依例降爵位为公。
English: At the time of Gaozu, the kings were not the children of the great-grandfather, and it was customary to lower the title of nobility.

古文：以大曹先世让国功重，曾祖乐真勋著前朝，改封太原郡公。
现代文：因大曹的先代推让国家功勋重大，曾祖乐真功勋闻名前代，改封为太原郡公。
English: Due to the fact that Dazhao's predecessor had made great contributions to the country, and Zengzu Lezhen's contributions were known to the previous generation, he was renamed Taiyuan County Governor.

古文：卒，无子，国除。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，封国被削除。
English: He died without a son, and his title was removed.

古文：世宗又以大曹从兄子洪威绍。
现代文：世宗又以大曹堂兄的儿子洪威继承。
English: Shizong was succeeded by Hong Wei, the son of Da Cao's cousin.

古文：恭谦好学，为颍川太守，有政绩。
现代文：洪威恭敬谦虚喜好学习，担任颖太守，有政绩。
English: Hong Wei is respectful, modest, likes to study, and has served as the governor of Ying, and has political achievements.

古文：孝静初，在颍川聚众应关西，齐献武王遣将讨平之。
现代文：孝静帝初年，在颖川聚集民众响应关西，齐献武王派遣将领讨伐平定了他。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaojing, the people gathered in Yingchuan to respond to Kansai, and sent generals to subdue him.

古文：礼弟陵，世祖赐爵襄邑男。
现代文：元礼的弟弟元陵，世祖赐给爵位为襄邑男。
English: Yuan Li's younger brother, Yuan Ling, was given a title of nobility by the founder for being the first male in Xiangyuan.

古文：进爵为子。
现代文：升为子爵。
English: He was raised to the rank of viscount.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子瑰，位柔玄镇司马。
现代文：儿子元瓖，担任柔玄镇司马。
English: His son, Geng Yao, served as Zhuoxuan Town Sima.

古文：瑰子鸷，字孔雀。
现代文：思元瓖的儿子元骛，字孑雀。
English: Siyuan Yuan's son, Yuan Xuan, spells his name as Zhaozhuang.

古文：容貌魁壮，腰带十围。
现代文：体魄魁伟雄壮，腰带有十围。
English: His body is huge and majestic, with a waistline of ten times his height.

古文：为羽林队仗副。
现代文：担任羽林队仗副。
English: He served as deputy commander of the Uebayashi squadron.

古文：高祖末，以征讨有功，赐爵晋阳男。
现代文：高祖末年，因征讨有功劳，赐爵位为晋阳男。
English: At the end of Gao Zu's life, he was awarded the title of Jinyang Male because of his contribution to the conquest.

古文：累迁领军、畿部都督。
现代文：屡经升迁至领军、畿部都督。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the leading army and the governor of the Kansai region.

古文：武泰元年，尔朱荣至河阴，杀戮朝士，鸷与荣共登高冢俯而观之，自此后与荣合。
现代文：武泰元年，尔朱荣到达河阴，杀戮朝廷官员，元鸷和尔朱荣一起登上高山低头观看，从此以后和氽朱荣友好。
English: In the first year of the Wutai era, Er Zhu Rong arrived in Hebei and killed the imperial officials. Yuan Qi and Er Zhu Rong climbed the mountain together and looked down. Since then, they have been friendly with Zou Zhu Rong.

古文：元颢之逼也，鸷从驾北迎。
现代文：元颢逼近时，元惊随车驾向北迎接。
English: When the Yuan Shao approached, the Yuan Shao followed the car and drove north to meet it.

古文：既到河内，欲入城，鸷奏曰： 河内昼则闭门，夜引驾入，此之意趣，难以测量。
现代文：到达河内后，想要进城，元骛上奏说： 河内白天关门，夜晚拉车进去，这事的意向，难以推测估量。
English: When he arrived in Hanoi and wanted to go into the city, he said, "Hanoi closes during the day and pulls cars in at night. It is difficult to predict the intention of this.

古文：本图有在，愿便发迈。 
现代文：自有本来的图谋，希望马上出发。 
English: He has his own original plan and hopes to leave immediately.

古文：帝从之，前至长子，以尔朱荣赴援，除鸷车骑将军，封华山王。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见，向前到达长子，因尔朱荣赶往援助，委任元驽为车骑将军，封华山王。
English: The emperor listened to his advice, reached forward to the eldest son, Ying Er Zhu Rong rushed to help, appointed Yuan Xuan as the general of chariot and cavalry, and crowned him King of Huashan.

古文：庄帝既杀尔朱荣，荣从子兆为乱。帝欲率诸军亲讨，鸷与兆阴通，乃劝帝曰： 黄河万仞，宁可卒渡！ 
现代文：庄帝杀死尔朱荣后，尔朱荣的侄儿氽朱兆作乱，皇帝想率领各军亲自讨伐，元骛和尔朱兆暗中交往，就劝皇帝说： 黄河宽至万仞，哪可急遽渡过? 
English: After Emperor Zhuang killed Er Zhu Rong, Er Zhu Rong's nephew Yan Zhu Zhao started a riot. The emperor wanted to lead all the armies in a crusade himself. Yuan Zheng and Er Zhu Zhao secretly communicated with each other, and persuaded the emperor to say: The Yellow River is as wide as ten thousand li, which can be crossed in a hurry?

古文：帝遂自安。
现代文：皇帝于是自以为安全。
English: As a result, Zhuang Di settled down.

古文：及兆入殿，鸷又约止卫兵。
现代文：等到尔朱兆进殿，元鹅又约束阻止卫兵。
English: When Er Zhuzhao entered the palace, Yuan Zang stopped the guards from interfering.

古文：帝见逼，京邑破，皆由鸷之谋。
现代文：皇帝受到逼迫，京城陷落，都是由于元驽的计谋。
English: The persecution of the emperor and the destruction of the capital were all caused by Yuan Shao's conspiracy.

古文：孝静初，入为大司马，加侍中。
现代文：孝静帝初年，征入为大司马，加授侍中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, he entered the imperial court as the grand steed, and was given the position of chamberlain.

古文：鸷有武艺，木讷少言，性方厚，每息直省，虽暑月不解衣冠。
现代文：元鸶有武艺，质朴少言语，性格方正忠厚，经常在宫中临时值勤，即使是热天也不脱衣帽。
English: Yuan Shao had martial arts, simplicity and few words, and was a loyal person. He was often on temporary duty in the palace, and would not take off his hat even on a hot day.

古文：曾于侍中高岳之席，咸阳王坦恃力使酒，陵侮一坐，众皆下之，不敢应答。
现代文：曾经在侍中高岳之的筵席上，咸阳王元坦仗恃力气酗酒任性，欺侮满座的人，众人都向他低头，不敢回应。
English: Once, at the banquet of Gao Yue, one of the attendants, Xianyang Wangyuan openly boasted of his strength, drunkenness and willfulness, and bullied a full table of people. Everyone bowed their heads to him, not daring to respond.

古文：坦谓鸷曰： 孔雀老武官，何因得王？ 
现代文：元坦问元惊说： 孔雀老武官，凭什么得王爵? 
English: Wontan said to Wontan: Peacock old military officer, how did you get the title of king?

古文：鸷即答曰： 斩反人元禧首，是以得之。 
现代文：元鹅马上回答说： 斩下叛徒元禧的首级，所以得王爵。 
English: Yuan Guo immediately replied, "I cut off the head of the traitor Yuan Xiyu, and that's why I got a peerage."

古文：众皆失色，鸷怡然如故。
现代文：众人都惊慌变色，元鹅却和悦如初。
English: Everyone was shocked and shocked, but Yuan Xuan was still as happy as usual.

古文：兴和三年薨，赠假黄钺、尚书令、司徒公。
现代文：兴和三年逝世，赠予假黄铁、尚书令、司徒公。
English: Three years after Xinghe's death, fake Huang Tie, Shang Shuling, and Sitou Gong were presented to him.

古文：子大器，袭爵。
现代文：儿子大器，继承爵位。
English: His son was a great man and succeeded him in the peerage.

古文：后与元瑾谋害齐文襄王，见害。
现代文：后来和元瑾图谋杀害齐文襄王，被杀。
English: Later, he and Yuan Shutu murdered King Qibun Xiang, and he was killed.

古文：孤孙度，太祖初赐爵松滋侯，位比部尚书。
现代文：元孤的孙子元度，太祖初年赐爵为松滋侯，担任比部尚书。
English: In the first year of his grandfather's reign, Mototada, the grandson of Motoko, was given the title of Baron Matsuzi and served as Hibu Shosho.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子乙斤，袭爵襄阳侯。
现代文：儿子乙斤，继承爵位襄阳侯。
English: His son, Yi Jin, succeeded to the title of Lord of Xiangyang.

古文：显祖崇旧齿，拜外都大官，甚见优重。
现代文：显祖尊崇故旧老人，任命为外都大官，十分受优待重视。
English: Hsien Zu respected and revered the old man. He was appointed as a high-ranking official outside the capital, and was highly regarded.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子平，字楚国，袭世爵松滋侯。
现代文：儿子元平，字楚国，继承先世爵位松滋侯。
English: His son, Yuanping, surnamed Chu Guo, succeeded to the peerage of Songzhi.

古文：以军功赐艾陵男。
现代文：因军功赐爵为艾陵男。
English: Ayr man knighted for services to the armed forces

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子苌，高祖时，袭爵松滋侯，例降侯，赐艾陵伯。
现代文：儿子元苌，高祖时继承爵位松滋侯，依条例降爵位，赐为艾陵伯。
English: The son of Yuan Zheng, Gao Zu inherited the peerage of Songzihou, and according to the regulations, the peerage was reduced and given to Ai Lingbo.

古文：苌性刚毅，虽有吉庆事，未尝开口而笑。
现代文：元苌性情刚毅，即使有喜庆的事，未曾开口而笑。
English: Geng Yao was a man of strong character. Even when he encountered a great auspicious event, he never opened his mouth to smile.

古文：高祖迁都，苌以代尹留镇。
现代文：高祖迁都城，元苌以代尹身份留下来镇守。
English: Gao Zu moved the capital to the city, and Geng Yao remained as the town guard as the representative of Yin.

古文：除怀朔镇都大将，因别赐苌酒，虽拜饮，而颜色不泰。
现代文：授任怀朔镇都大将，于是特别赐酒给元苌，虽然叩拜饮酒，而脸色不舒展。
English: Appointed as the general of the town of Waishuo, he specially gave wine to Yuan Zang, although he worshiped drinking, but his face did not stretch.

古文：高祖曰： 闻公一生不笑，今方隔山，当为朕笑。 
现代文：高祖说： 听说您从没笑过，现在面对兄弟，该为我一笑。 
English: Gaozu said, "I have heard that you have never smiled before, but now that you are facing your brother, you should smile for me.

古文：竟不能得。
现代文：最终未能得到。
English: However, Geng Yao still did not smile.

古文：高祖曰： 五行之气，偏有所不入。
现代文：高祖说： 五行的气性，总有偏僻不入的地方。
English: Gao Zu said: The temperament of the five elements is always associated with remote and inaccessible places.

古文：六合之间，亦何事不有？ 
现代文：天地四方之间，什么事没有? 
English: Between heaven and earth and the four directions, is there anything going on?

古文：左右见者，无不扼腕大笑。
现代文：左右看见的人，无不握住手腕大笑。
English: Everyone I saw, left and right, was gripping their wrists and laughing.

古文：世宗时，为北中郎将，带河内太守。
现代文：世塞时，担任北中郎将，兼领河内太守。
English: At the time of World War II, he served as the Northern Vice Admiral and concurrently as the leader of Hanoi.

古文：苌以河桥船絙路狭，不便行旅，又秋水泛涨，年常破坏，乃为船路，遂广募空车从京出者，率令输石一双，累以为岸。
现代文：元苌因回握一带船险路窄，不便于行人往来，又赶上秋水泛滥上涨，每年时常损坏，于是做船路，广泛募集从京城出发的空车，使各输送两块石头，堆积成河岸。
English: Due to the narrowness of the ship hazard road in the area of Yuancheng, it is inconvenient for pedestrians to travel, and it catches up with the autumn flood and rises, and it is often damaged every year. Therefore, it was made into a boat road, and the empty buses departing from Beijing were widely recruited to transport two stones each, and they piled up into riverbanks.

古文：桥阔，来往便利，近桥诸郡，无复劳扰，公私赖之。
现代文：桥梁宽阔，来往方便，靠近桥梁的各郡，不再劳累烦扰，公私都依赖它。
English: The bridge is wide and convenient for travel. Counties close to the bridge no longer have to worry about it. Both the public and private sectors rely on it.

古文：历位度支尚书、侍中、雍州刺史。
现代文：历任度支尚书、侍中、雍业刺史。
English: Later, he successively held the posts of Shishangshu, chamberlain, and Yongzhou scribe.

古文：卒，谥曰成。
现代文：去世，谧号为盛。
English: His posthumous name was Cheng.

古文：苌中年以后，官位微达，乃自尊倨，闺门无礼，昆季不穆，性又贪虐，论者鄙之。
现代文：元苌中年以后，官位稍微显要，就自高自大，家庭内没有礼节，兄弟不和睦，性格又贪婪暴虐，评论的人鄙视他。
English: After the middle age of Yuan Xuan, the official position was more obvious, he was proud of himself, there was no etiquette in the boudoir, there was no harmony between brothers, his nature was greedy and tyrannical, and commentators despised him.

古文：苌子子华，字伏荣，袭爵。
现代文：元墓的儿子王茎，字达茔，继承爵位。
English: Yuan Shao's son Zihua, also known as Fu Rong, inherited Yuan Shao's peerage.

古文：孝庄初，除齐州刺史。
现代文：孝庄壶初年，授任查州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xiaozhuang, he was appointed as the chief historian of Qizhou.

古文：先是，州境数经反逆，邢杲之乱，人不自保。
现代文：在这以前，州境内屡经反叛，巫是的叛乱，人们不能保护自己。
English: At the beginning, there were repeated incidents in the state, and it was difficult for everyone to protect themselves when there was a riot.

古文：而子华抚集豪右，委之管籥，众皆感悦，境内帖然。
现代文：而子华安抚召集豪强，将钥匙交给他们，众人都感激喜悦，境内安宁。
English: After Zihua arrived, he pacified and gathered the great families and appointed them to administer it. Everyone was grateful and happy, and the country was stable.

古文：而性甚褊急，当其急也，口不择言，手自捶击。
现代文：不过他性情十分急躁，当他着急时，不择言，动手打人。
English: He is a very quick-tempered person. When he is anxious, he will say anything with his mouth and keep beating himself with his hands.

古文：长史郑子湛，子华亲友也，见侮骂，遂即去之。
现代文：长史郑子湛，是子华的亲密朋友，受到侮辱责骂，就马上离开丫。
English: The chief historian Zheng Zizhan, a close friend of Zihua, was insulted and scolded, and immediately left.

古文：子华虽自悔厉，终不能改。
现代文：子萋虽然悔过自勉，终究不能改正。
English: Although Zihua also consciously regrets, it is always difficult to change.

古文：在官不为矫洁之行，凡有馈赠者，辞多受少，故人不厌其取。
现代文：在位不做矫情廉洁的事情，凡有嫔赠，推辞的多接受的少，所以人们不厌恶他的获取。
English: When he was an official, he did not hesitate to be honest. Whenever someone gave him a gift, he mostly resigned and received very little, so people did not dislike him receiving things.

古文：鞠狱讯囚，务加仁恕。
现代文：审查案件讯问囚徒，一意加以仁慈宽恕。
English: Reviewing cases and interrogating prisoners with a view to granting clemency.

古文：齐人树碑颂德。
现代文：齐州人立碑称颂他的功德。
English: The people of Qizhou erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：后除济州刺史。
现代文：后来授任济州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as Jeju chief historian.

古文：尔朱兆之入洛也，齐州城人赵洛周逐刺史丹阳王萧赞，表济南太守房士达摄行州事。
现代文：氽朱兆进入洛阳时，齐州州民趟洛周驱逐刺史丹阳王萧赞，奏请济南太守房士达代行州中事务。
English: When Gong Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang, the people of Qizhou went to Luozhou to expel the assassin Stan Yang Wang Xiao Zan, and asked Jinan Taishou Fanzhi Da to act on behalf of the state affairs.

古文：洛周子元显先随子华在济州，邀路改表，请子华复为齐州刺史。
现代文：洛周的儿子元显先前跟随子华在济州，拦路修改奏表，请求子华再任齐州刺史。
English: Luo Zhou's son, Yuan Xian, had previously followed Zihua in Jeju, blocking the road, revising the record, and requesting Zihua to be reappointed as the governor of Jeju.

古文：子华母房氏，曾就亲人饮食，夜还大吐，人以为中毒，甚忧惧，子华遂掬吐尽啖之，其母乃安。
现代文：子华的母亲房氏，曾到亲戚家喝酒吃饭，夜晚回来大吐，人们认为是中了毒，十分忧虑畏惧，子华于是捧取吐的食物全部吞下去，他的母亲才安心。
English: Zihua's mother, Ms. Fang, once went to a relative's house to drink and eat, and came back at night vomiting. People thought she had been poisoned, and were very worried and afraid. Zihua then swallowed all the food she had taken to vomit, and his mother was relieved.

古文：寻以母忧还都。
现代文：不久因母亲去世回到都城。
English: Soon after, he returned to Kyoto due to the death of his mother.

古文：孝静初，除南兗州刺史。
现代文：孝静帝初年，授任南兖州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, he was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：弟子思通使关西，朝廷使右卫将军郭琼收之。
现代文：弟弟子思派使者同关西来往，朝廷派右卫将军郭琼拘捕他。
English: His younger brother, disciple Si, had illicit relations with the Western Wei Dynasty, and the imperial court sent the right guard general, Guo Qiong, to arrest them all.

古文：子思谓琼仆曰： 速可见杀，何为久执国士！ 
现代文：于思对郭琼的仆人说： 可赶快杀了我，为什么长久地拘捕杰出人士? 
English: Yu Si said to Guo Qiong's servant: "You can kill me as soon as possible, why detain outstanding people for a long time?

古文：子华谓子思曰： 由汝粗疏，令我如此。 
现代文：子华对子思说： 由于你的粗疏，使我受到如此牵连。 
English: Zihua said to Zisi, "Because of your coarseness, I am so involved.

古文：以头叩床，涕泣不自胜。
现代文：用头叩击床面，哭泣不能止住。
English: I banged my head on the bed and couldn't stop crying.

古文：子思以手捋须，顾谓子华曰： 君恶体气。 
现代文：子思用手捋胡须，回头对子华说： 您缺乏气质。 
English: Zisi scratched his beard with his hand and turned to Zihua and said: You lack temperament.

古文：寻与子思俱死于门下外省。
现代文：不久和子思都死在门下外省。
English: Soon after, both he and his son died in the province.

古文：子思，字众念，性刚暴，恆以忠烈自许。
现代文：子思，字众念，性格刚烈暴躁，常以忠诚坚贞自许。
English: Zi Si, Zi Zong Nian, his personality is rigid and irritable, and he often praises himself for his loyalty and steadfastness.

古文：元天穆当朝权，以亲从荐为御史中尉。
现代文：元天穆执掌朝廷大权，以子思为同宗侄子推荐为御史中尉。
English: At that time, Emperor Tenmu held the supreme power of the imperial court. His nephew recommended him as a lieutenant of imperial history.

古文：先是，兼尚书仆射元顺奏，以尚书百揆之本，至于公事，不应送御史。
现代文：在这以前，兼尚书仆射元顺上奏，认为尚书是百官的根本，涉及到公事。不应送交御史。
English: Prior to this, Shogen Shinnosuke, who was also a courtier, believed that courtesies were fundamental for all officials and involved official business. They should not be sent to the imperial historian.

古文：至子思，奏曰：案《御史令》云： 中尉督司百僚；治书侍御史纠察禁内。 
现代文：到子思为御史中尉，上奏疏说：据《御史令》说： 中尉督察百官，治书侍御史纠举检查宫内。 
English: According to "Goshi Ryo," "Lieutenant inspector oversees hundreds of officials, serving as secretary and inspecting the palace."

古文：又云： 中尉出行，车辐前驱，除道一里，王公百辟避路。 
现代文：又说： 中尉出行，仪仗用木棒在前开道，清除一里的道路，王公百官让开道路。 
English: He also said: "When a lieutenant travels, he should use a wooden stick to clear a path in front of him, and clear a mile of road. When a prince travels, a hundred officials should move out of the way.

古文：时经四帝，前后中尉二十许人，奉以周旋，未曾暂废。
现代文：时间经历四位皇帝，前后任中尉的二十来人，奉令与各官府打交道，没有短暂废除过。
English: Over the course of time, four emperors and twenty or so former and current lieutenants have been ordered to deal with various government offices, and there has never been a short-term abolition.

古文：府寺台省，并从此令。
现代文：府寺台省，都遵从这个法令。
English: All prefectures, temples, and provinces have complied with this decree.

古文：唯肃宗之世，为临洮举哀，故兼尚书左仆射臣顺不肯与名，又不送簿。
现代文：仅有肃宗的时候，为临洮王举行丧事，前兼尚书左仆射臣元顺不肯给予名单，又不送簿籍。
English: It was only during the reign of Emperor Suzong that a funeral was held for the King of Linyi, but the former imperial secretary's left-hand servant, Archer Yuan Shun, refused to give a list of names, nor did he send any books.

古文：故中尉臣郦道元举而奏之。而顺复启云： 尚书百揆之本，令仆纳言之贵，不宜下隶中尉，送名御史。 
现代文：前中尉臣郦道元举奏他，而元顺又上奏说： 尚书是百官之首，尚书令和仆射处于出纳王命的尊贵地位，不应下属于中尉，向御史送名册。 
English: The former lieutenant courtier Shun Dogen played him, and Yuan Shun played him again, saying: Shang Shuxu is the head of a hundred officials, Shang Shuling and Hubei are in the honorable position of the cashier king's life, and should not belong to the lieutenant, and send the roster to the historian.

古文：寻亦蒙敕，听如其奏。
现代文：不久也得敕令，准许如他所奏。
English: He soon received a royal order to be allowed to play as he did.

古文：从此迄今，使无准一。
现代文：从那时到现在，法令没有定准。
English: From then until now, the law has not been enforced.

古文：臣初上台，具见其事，意欲申请决议，但以权兼，未宜便尔。
现代文：臣下起初到御史台，详见事情经过，心中想申请商议决断，衹因为是代行职务，不应如此急迫。
English: At first, the vassal went to the Imperial History Channel to see the details of the case and wanted to apply for a deliberation decision, but because it was an acting position, it should not be so urgent.

古文：日复一日，遂历炎凉。
现代文：复一，经历冬夏。
English: Again and again, experiencing winter and summer.

古文：去月朔旦，台移尚书索应朝名帐，而省稽留不送。
现代文：上月初一早晨，御史台发文给尚书省索取应朝见的名册，而尚书省扣留拖延不送。
English: On the morning of the first day of the last month, the History Channel sent a letter to the Ministry of Education and Culture to request a list of names to be submitted to the government, but the Ministry of Education and Culture delayed the delivery.

古文：寻复移催并主吏，忽为尚书郎中裴献伯后注云： 案旧事，御史中尉逢台郎于复道，中尉下车执板，郎中车上举手礼之。
现代文：不久又发文催促主管官吏，忽然得到尚书郎中裴献伯在文后的批注说： 案旧例，御史中尉在夹道中遇到尚书郎中，中尉下车拿着手板注目站立，郎中在车上举手表示回礼。
English: Soon after, he sent another letter to urge the officials in charge, and suddenly received a comment from Shang Shulang's middle son Pei Xianbo after the letter, saying: In the old case, when Lieutenant Goshi encountered Shang Shulang in the middle of the road, the lieutenant got out of the car and stood at attention holding the dashboard, and the middle son raised his hand on the car to return the salute.

古文：以此而言，明非敌体。 
现代文：以此而言，表明两者不对等。 
English: In this way, it is shown that the two are not equivalent.

古文：臣既见此，深为怪愕。
现代文：臣下见到这段话，深感奇怪惊讶。
English: The vassal was strangely surprised to see this.

古文：旋省二三，未解所以。
现代文：思索再三，不明所以然。
English: Thinking over and over again, for some unknown reason.

古文：正谓都省别被新式，改易高祖旧命，即遣移问，事何所依？
现代文：衹以为尚书省另接新条例，改变了高祖旧命令，就派人发文询问，事情有什么依据。
English: Thinking that the Ministry of Education and Culture had added a new regulation and changed Gao Zu's old order, he sent a letter to inquire what the basis of the matter was.

古文：又获尚书郎中王元旭报，出蔡氏《汉官》，似非穿凿。
现代文：又接到尚书郎中王元旭的通报，出自蔡氏《汉宫》，似乎不是牵强附会。
English: I also received a notification from Wang Yuanxu of Shang Shulang, from Cai's "Han Palace," which does not seem to be a far-fetched meeting.

古文：始知裴、王亦规坏典谟，两人心欲自矫。
现代文：才知道裴、王也想破坏典章，两人心中要自行改变。
English: It turns out that Bae and Wang also want to break the rules, and they have to change their minds.

古文：臣案《汉书宣秉传》云： 诏徵秉为御史中丞，与司隶校尉、尚书令俱会殿庭，并专席而坐，京师号之为三独坐。 
现代文：臣下据《汉书宣秉传》说，下诏征宣秉任御史中丞，和司隶校尉、尚书令都在殿堂相会，都独坐一席，京城称为三独坐。
English: According to the "Hanshu Xuan Bingzhuan" (Biography of Xuan Bingzhuan), the next emperor, Xuan Bingzhuan, was appointed as the vice-commander of the imperial court, and he, the lieutenant of the imperial court, and the secretary of the imperial court all met in the hall of fame, and they all sat in a single seat, and the capital city was called the three separate seats.

古文：又寻《魏书崔琰传》、晋文阳囗《傅嘏传》，皆云：既为中丞，百僚震悚。
现代文：又考《魏书。崔琰传》、晋文阳口《傅嘏传》，都说担任中丞后，百官震惊害怕。
English: In addition, the "Weishu. Cui Yu Chuan" and the "Fu Yu Chuan" by Jin Wenyang, both said that after serving as a middle-ranking official, hundreds of officials were shocked and afraid.

古文：以此而言，则中丞不揖省郎盖已久矣；宪台不属都堂，亦非今日。
现代文：以此说来，则中丞不向尚书郎中行礼大概已很久了，御史不隶属尚书省，也不仅现在。
English: From this point of view, it has probably been a long time since Chujo did not salute Shoshuro Chujo, and Goshi is not affiliated with Shoshu, not only now.

古文：又寻《职令》云： 朝会失时，即加弹纠。 
现代文：又考《职令》说： 朝堂相会延迟时间，就加以弹劾纠察。 
English: Another examination of the "Function Order" said: If the morning hall meeting is delayed, it will be impeached and picketed.

古文：则百官簿帐，应送上台，灼然明矣。
现代文：则百官的名册，应送到御史台，显然明了。
English: then the roll of the centurion should be sent to the historian, it is clear.

古文：又皇太子以下违犯宪制，皆得纠察，则令仆朝名宜付御史，又亦彰矣。
现代文：另外皇太子以下违犯法令，都能纠察，则尚书令和仆射朝见的名册应该交付御史，也很清楚了。
English: In addition, it is also clear that if the Crown Prince and his subordinates are able to picket in violation of the law, then the record of the letter and the roster of the visit should be handed over to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：不付名至，否臧何验？
现代文：不交付名册，优劣如何验证?
English: If you don't deliver the roster, how can you verify the pros and cons?

古文：臣顺专执，未为平通，先朝曲遂，岂是正法？
现代文：臣元顺独断固执，不算平允通达，先朝曲意顺从，哪是正确的法度?
English: Subordinate Yuan Shun is determined and obstinate, which is not considered to be fair and open, and the previous government is submissive, which is the correct law?

古文：谨案尚书郎中臣裴献伯、王元旭等，望班士流，早参清宦，轻弄短札，斐然若斯；苟执异端，忽焉至此！此而不纲，将隳朝令。
现代文：谨案尚书郎中臣裴献伯、王元旭等人，名望处于士人行列，很早担任清显职位，轻率玩弄刀笔，如此明白，假如坚持不同意见，忽然到此地步，对这不加整治，将毁坏朝廷法令。
English: Wang Yuanxu and others, such as the respected scholar Bae Jianbo and Wang Yuanxu, are famous in the ranks of scholars. They have held prominent positions very early, and they play with knives and pens so lightly, so clearly, that if they insist on dissenting opinions, and suddenly come to this point, without rectifying this, they will destroy the imperial decree.

古文：请以见事免献伯等所居官，付法科处。
现代文：请求以目前的事情免除献伯等人所任官职，交付执法官府处治。
English: The petition requests that the current situation be used to disqualify Xianbo and others from holding official positions, and that they be handed over to the magistrate's office for handling.

古文：尚书纳言之本，令仆百揆之要，同彼浮虚，助之乖失，宜明首从，节级其罪。
现代文：尚书是出纳王命的根本，尚书令和仆射是百宫中的要职，附和他们的浮躁虚假，助长他们的乖误过失，应该查清首犯从犯，分级定罪。
English: Shangshu is the foundation of the cashier king's life. Shangshu ling and mincing are important positions in the hundred palaces. Accompanying their impetuousness and falsehood, and contributing to their mistakes and errors, it is necessary to find out the first offender and accomplice, and classify and convict them.

古文：诏曰： 国异政，不可据之古事。
现代文：诏令说： 国家不同的政令，不可依据古代的事例。
English: The edict said: The decrees of different countries should not be based on ancient cases.

古文：付司检高祖旧格，推处得失以闻。 
现代文：交付有关官员查阅高祖的旧曰条例，推究得失上报。 
English: Relevant officials were instructed to look into Gao Zu's old regulations, investigate and report their findings.

古文：寻从子思奏。
现代文：不久听从于思的奏疏。
English: He soon followed Yu Si's lead.

古文：仍为元天穆所忿，遂停。
现代文：仍然被元天穆所憎恨，就停止了。
English: Still hated by Yuan Tianmu, he stopped.

古文：元颢之败，封安定县子。
现代文：元颢失败后，子思被封为安定县子。
English: After the failure of the Yuan Dynasty, Zisi was given the title of stable county.

古文：孝静时，位侍中而死。
现代文：孝静帝时，担任侍中而死去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, he died while serving as an aide-de-camp.

古文：苌弟珍，字金雀，袭爵艾陵男。
现代文：元苌的弟弟元珍字金雀，继承爵位艾陵男。
English: Yuan Shao's younger brother, Yuan Zhenzhe, inherited the title of Ailingan.

古文：世宗时，曲事高肇，遂为帝宠昵。
现代文：世宗时，曲意侍奉高肇，于是为皇帝所宠信亲近。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Quyi served Gao Zhao, so he was close to the emperor's favorite.

古文：彭城王勰之死，珍率壮士害之。
现代文：彭城王元勰的死，是元珍率领强壮的兵士杀死他。
English: The death of the king of Pengcheng, Yuan Zhen, was caused by Yuan Zhen leading strong soldiers to kill him.

古文：后卒于尚书左仆射。
现代文：后来任尚书左仆射时去世。
English: As she spoke, she banged her head on the bed and wept uncontrollably.

古文：平弟长生，位游、骑击将军。
现代文：元平的弟弟长生，担任游击将军、骑击将军。
English: Yuanping's younger brother Chang Sheng served as a guerrilla general and cavalry general.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：孝庄时，以子天穆贵盛，赠司空。
现代文：孝庄帝时，因儿子天穆尊贵当权，被迫赠为司空。
English: Not long after, both of them were sentenced to death in provinces outside the capital. Yuanping's younger brother Chang Sheng, who was a guerrilla general, was posthumously awarded the title of Siku after his death, when Emperor Xiaozhuang came to the throne, because his son Tianmu was distinguished.

古文：天穆，性和厚，美形貌，善射，有能名。
现代文：天穆，性格温和忠厚，形貌美好，善于射箭，有能干的名声。
English: Tenmu, gentle and loyal, good-looking, good at archery, with a reputation for ability.

古文：年二十，起家员外郎。
现代文：二十岁时，初任员外郎。
English: At the age of twenty, he became the first member of the Wairo.

古文：六镇之乱，尚书令李崇、广阳王深北讨，穆箔奉使慰劳诸军。
现代文：六镇叛乱时，尚书令李崇、广阳王元深向北征讨，天穆奉命慰劳各军。
English: When the Six Towns rebelled, Shang Shu ordered Li Chong and Guangyang Wang Yuan Shen to go to the north to fight, and Tianmu was ordered to comfort the troops.

古文：路出秀容，尔朱荣见其法令齐整，有将领气，深相结托，约为兄弟。
现代文：经过秀容，尔朱荣见他法令一致，有将领的气质，深相结交，约定为兄弟。
English: After the show, Le Zhu Rong saw that he was consistent with the law, had the temperament of a general, had a deep friendship, and agreed to be a brother.

古文：未几，荣请天穆为行台，朝廷不许，改授别将，令赴秀容。
现代文：不久，尔朱荣请求天穆担任行台，朝廷不准许，改授别将，命令赶赴秀容。
English: Soon after, Er Zhurong asked Tianmu to serve as a guildmaster, but the court did not allow it, instead awarding him the rank of second lieutenant and ordering him to rush to Xiurong.

古文：是时，北镇纷乱，所在峰起，六镇荡然，无复蕃捍，惟荣当职路冲，招聚散亡。
现代文：这时，北方边镇纷扰混乱，各地纷纷起兵，六镇荡然无存，不再有捍卫边境的作用，仅尔朱荣在要道上履行职责，招集逃散的人。
English: At this time, the northern border towns were in turmoil, troops were raised in various regions, six towns were destroyed, and they no longer had the role of defending the border. Only Zhu Rong performed his duties on the important road and called up the people who had fled.

古文：天穆为荣腹心，除并州刺史。
现代文：天穆是氽朱荣的心腹，被授任并州刺史。
English: Tianmu is a confidant of Zou Zhu Rong, and was awarded the title of "State Historian."

古文：及荣赴洛，天穆参其始谋，乃令天穆留后，为之继援。
现代文：等到氽朱荣赶赴洛阳，天穆参与了开始的谋划，就命令天穆留守，作为后援。
English: When Gong Zhu Rong rushed to Luoyang, Tianmu participated in the initial planning, and ordered Tianmu to stay behind as a backup.

古文：庄帝践阼，天穆以荣之眷昵，特除太尉，封上党王，徵赴京师。
现代文：庄帝登位，天穆因是尔朱荣的亲信，特委任为太尉，封为上党王，征召他赶赴京城。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne, and Tian Muyin was a close confidant of Er Zhu Rong. He was specially appointed as a captain and given the title of Upper Party King. He was summoned to rush to Beijing.

古文：荣之讨葛荣，诏天穆为前军都督，率京师之众以赴之。
现代文：氽朱荣讨伐葛荣，韶令天穆担任前军都督，率领京城的军队赶去。
English: Gong Zhu Rong fought against Ge Rong, Gong ordered Tian Mu to serve as the former military governor and led the army of Beijing to catch up.

古文：荣擒葛荣，天穆增封，通前三万户。
现代文：氽朱荣擒获葛荣，天穆增加封邑，加上以前的共三万户。
English: Zhu Rongqin received Ge Rong, and Tianmu increased its fiefs, adding a total of 30,000 households to the previous total.

古文：寻监国史，录尚书事，开府，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：不久监修国史，被任命为录尚书事、开府、世袭并州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to supervise the national history, record the history, open the government, and inherit the history of the state.

古文：初，杜洛周、鲜于脩礼为寇，瀛冀诸州人多避乱南向。
现代文：当初，杜洛周、鲜于脩礼作乱，瀛冀各州的人多避难到南部。
English: At the beginning, Douluo Zhou and Shanzhi Li started a riot, and many people from various provinces in Xinjiang took refuge in the south.

古文：幽州前北平府主簿河间邪杲，拥率部曲，屯据鄚城，以拒洛周、葛荣，垂将三载。
现代文：幽州前平北府主簿河间人邢基，率领军队，屯驻占据塑越，抗拒洛周、葛茔，将近三年。
English: Yuzhou's former governor of Pingbei Prefecture, Kawama no Hitomineki, led an army and occupied Suiyue, resisting Luo Zhou and Ge Yao, for nearly three years.

古文：及广阳王深等败后，杲南渡居青州北海界。
现代文：等到广阳王亘遝等人失败后，邢呆向南渡居住在青州北海地界。
English: After the failure of Wang Guanzhong and others in Guangyang, he stayed in Nandu and lived in the northern coastal area of Qingzhou.

古文：灵太后诏流人所在皆置命属郡县，选豪右为守令以抚镇之。
现代文：灵太后韶令各地流民都加以安置隶属于郡县，选取豪强担任郡守县令来安抚统领他们。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling ordered the displaced people from all over the country to be resettled and subordinated to the county, and selected Gao Qiang to serve as the county magistrate to pacify and lead them.

古文：时青州刺史元世俊表置新安郡，以杲为太守，未报。
现代文：这时青州刺史元世俊上奏设置新安郡，任命邢呆为太守，没有回覆。
English: At that time, the Qingzhou Zhishi Yuan Shi Shang table requested the establishment of Xin'an County, with Shi as the governor, but the imperial court did not reply.

古文：会台申汰简所授郡县，以杲从子子瑶资廕居前，乃授河间太守。
现代文：遇到尚书台淘汰所新设置的郡县，因邢杲的侄子子瑶资历位居前列，就授任子瑶为河间太守。
English: When it came to the counties newly set up by Shang Shudai's elimination institute, because Zou's nephew Zi Zou was in the forefront, he was awarded Zi Zou as the governor of Kawama.

古文：杲深耻恨，于是遂反。
现代文：邢呆深感耻辱，于是反叛。
English: Deeply humiliated and angry, Zou rebelled.

古文：所在流人先为土人凌忽，闻杲起逆，率来从之，旬朔之间，众逾十万。
现代文：各地流民原先为当地人欺凌轻视，听说邢呆起兵叛逆，相继来跟随他，一个月之间，部众超过十万。
English: Originally bullied and despised by the local people, the displaced people from all over the country came to follow him one after another. Within a month, there were more than 100,000 followers.

古文：劫掠村坞，毒害民人，齐人号之为 沓榆贼 。
现代文：劫掠村庄坞堡，危害民众，齐地人称他们叫 酷榆贼 。
English: The Qi people called them "Cool Thieves" because they plundered village dockyards and endangered the people.

古文：先是，河南人常笑河北人好食榆叶，故因以号之。
现代文：在这以前，黄河以南的人常常讥笑黄河以北的人喜爱吃榆树叶子，所以用这来称呼他们。
English: Before this, people south of the Yellow River often mocked people north of the Yellow River for their fondness for eating eucalyptus leaves, so they called them by this name.

古文：杲东掠光州，尽海而还。
现代文：邢杲向东掳掠光州，到海滨而返回。
English: The dragonfly flew eastward to prey on Gwangju, and returned to the seashore.

古文：又破都督李叔仁军。
现代文：又打败都督李叔仁的军队。
English: and defeated the army of the governor, Li Shuren.

古文：诏天穆与齐献武王讨，大破之。
现代文：韶令天穆和齐献武王讨伐，大败邢呆。
English: He ordered Tianmu and Qi Xianwu to fight against the king, but they were defeated.

古文：杲乃请降，传送京师，斩之。
现代文：邢呆于是请求投降，押送他到京城，杀了他。
English: Dazed, he asked to surrender, and they escorted him to the capital and killed him.

古文：增天穆邑万户。
现代文：增加天穆的封邑一万户。
English: Ten thousand fiefs of Tenmu were added.

古文：时元颢乘虚陷荥阳，天穆闻庄帝北巡，自毕公垒北渡，会车驾于河内。
现代文：这时元颢乘虚攻占荣阳，天穆听说庄帝向北巡视，从毕公垒向北渡河，在河内同皇帝会合。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao took advantage of the situation to occupy Rongyang. Tianmu heard that Zhuangdi was on a tour to the north, crossing the river from Bi Gongye to the north and meeting with the emperor in Hanoi.

古文：尔朱荣以天时炎热，欲还师。天穆苦执不可，荣乃从之。
现代文：氽朱荣因天气炎热，想退兵，天穆苦苦坚持不同意，尔朱荣才听从了。
English: Because of the hot weather, Zou Zhu Rong wanted to retire from the army. Tianmu painstakingly insisted on disagreeing, and only then did Zou Rong obey.

古文：庄帝还宫，加太宰，羽葆、鼓吹；增邑，通前七万户。
现代文：庄帝回宫，加授天穆为太宰，给予仪仗、鼓吹；增加封邑，加上以前的共七万户。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, conferred the title of Dazhai on Tianmu, gave him honors and propaganda, increased the number of fiefs, and added a total of seventy thousand households to the previous number.

古文：天穆以疏属，本无德望，凭藉尔朱，爵位隆极，当时熏灼，朝野倾悚，王公已下每旦盈门，受纳财货，珍宝充积。
现代文：天穆以疏远的族属，本来没有恩德声望，凭藉尔朱氏，爵位尊贵到极点，当时炙手可热，朝野斜视畏惧，王公以下每天清晨挤满门户，收受财货，珍宝堆积。
English: Tianmu, with an estranged clan, originally did not have a reputation for benevolence. With the help of the Zhu clan, the nobility was extremely noble. At that time, it was hot, the court and the field were afraid, and the princes crowded the portal every morning to receive goods and accumulate treasures.

古文：而宽柔容物，不甚见疾于时。
现代文：然而宽厚容人，不很为当时人愤恨。
English: However, he was a generous and tolerant person, and did not hold much resentment for the people of that time.

古文：庄帝以其荣党，外示宠敬，诏天穆乘车马出入大司马门。
现代文：筵壶因他是叁圭莹的党羽，外表上表示宠爱尊敬，诏令天穆可以乘车马进出大司马门。
English: Because he was a member of Gong Gui Ying's faction, he was favored and respected on the outside, and Tianmu was allowed to ride in and out of Dasima Gate.

古文：天穆与荣相倚，情寄特甚。
现代文：天穆和尔朱荣相依靠，感情特别深。
English: Tianmu and Er Zhu Rong rely on each other, and their feelings are particularly deep.

古文：荣常以兄礼事之，而尔朱世隆等虽荣子侄，位遇已重，畏惮天穆，俯仰承迎。
现代文：尔朱荣时常用兄长的礼节侍奉他，而氽朱世隆等人虽然是氽朱茔的子侄，地位待遇已高，仍畏惧天穆，前后奉承迎合。
English: At that time, Le Zhu Rong used the etiquette of his elder brother to serve him, while Yu Zhu Shilong and others, although they were the nephews of Yu Zhu Rong, had a high status and were still afraid of Tianmu, flattering and pandering.

古文：天穆曾言世隆之失，荣即加杖，其相亲任如此。
现代文：玉壁曾讲塑叁的过失，企苤莹马上棒打世隆，他就是如此地受到尔朱荣的亲近信任。
English: Yubi once talked about the mistakes of Shuxuan, and immediately beat Shilong, which is how he was trusted by Le Zhurong.

古文：庄帝内畏恶之，与荣同时见杀。
现代文：庄童心中畏惧厌恶他，与氽朱荣同时被杀。
English: Zhuangdong was afraid and disgusted with him in his heart, and was killed at the same time as Zou Zhu Rong.

古文：前废帝初，赠丞相、柱国大将军、雍州刺史，假黄钺，谥曰武昭。
现代文：前废帝初年，追赠丞相、柱国大将军、雍州刺史，赐予黄铁，谧号为武昭。
English: In the first year of the former dethroned emperor, he posthumously bestowed the titles of chancellor, great general of the pillar country, and prince of Yongzhou, and was given the title of Huang Tie. His posthumous name was Wu Zhao.

古文：子俨，袭，美才貌。
现代文：儿子元俪，继承爵位，有美好的才华相貌。
English: His son, Yuan Xuan, inherited the title of nobility and was a talented and handsome young man.

古文：位都官尚书。
现代文：担任都官尚书。
English: He held the post of Tokyo magistrate.

古文：及齐受禅，闻敕召，假病，遂怖而卒。
现代文：等到齐国接受挥让，听到征召，假称患病，便恐惧而去世。
English: He waited until Qi accepted the concession, heard the call-up, pretended to be ill, and then died of fear.

古文：西河公敦，平文帝之曾孙也。
现代文：酉回公重錾，是平文帝的曾孙。
English: He was a great-grandson of Emperor Pingwen.

古文：太祖初，从征，被坚执锐，名冠诸将。
现代文：立担初年，跟随征伐，披着坚固的镗甲拿着锐利的武器，名声为各将领之首。
English: In the first year of the establishment, he followed the conquest, wearing strong armor and holding sharp weapons, and his reputation was the head of all generals.

古文：后从征中山，所向无前。
现代文：后来跟随征伐虫山，所向无敌。
English: Later, following the conquest of Zhushan, he became invincible.

古文：太宗时，拜中都大官。
现代文：立塞时，任命他为中都大官。
English: At the time of his retirement, he was appointed as a high-ranking official of the central government.

古文：世祖时，进爵西河公，宠遇弥笃。
现代文：坐旦时，升爵位为西河公，宠信更深。
English: At the time of his enthronement, he was elevated to the peerage as the Lord of the West River, which made him even more popular.

古文：卒，子拨袭。
现代文：去世，儿子亘蛮继承爵位。
English: He died, and his son Watamaru succeeded to the peerage.

古文：司徒石，平文帝之玄孙也。
现代文：司徒五五，是平文帝的玄孙。
English: Sutou 55 is the great-great-grandson of Emperor Pingwen.

古文：忠勇有胆略，尤善骑射。
现代文：忠诚勇敢有胆识谋略，尤其善于骑马射箭。
English: Loyal, brave, daring and strategic, especially good at riding and archery.

古文：从世祖南讨，至瓜步。
现代文：跟随世担向南征讨，到达丛芝。
English: He followed the Shitan to the south and arrived at Congzhi.

古文：位尚书令，雍州刺史。
现代文：担任尚书令，壅丛刺史。
English: He served as Shang Shuling, and was a prominent figure in history.

古文：历比部侍郎、华州刺史，累迁征南大将军。
现代文：历任比部侍郎、茎州刺史，屡经升迁到征南大将军。
English: Successive attendants of Hibe, Kuchishu, repeatedly promoted to the general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：卒，赠司徒公。
现代文：去世，追赠为司徒公。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Stuko.

古文：武卫将军谓，烈帝之第四子也。
现代文：武卫将军元谓，是烈帝的第四个儿子。
English: Gen. Wuwei Yuan is the fourth son of the martyred emperor.

古文：宽雅有将略，常从太祖征讨有功，除武卫将军。后谢老归家，显祖善礼遇之，赐几杖服物，致膳于第。
现代文：宽厚雅致有军事谋略，时常跟从太祖征讨有功勋，授任为武卫将军后来称年老回家，显祖以隆重礼节对待他，赐给他几杖和衣物，送膳食到家中。
English: Generous and elegant, he had a military strategy. He often followed his great-great-grandfather's conquests and meritorious deeds. He was awarded the title of General Wuwei. Later, he said that he was too old to go home. His grandfather treated him with great courtesy, gave him a few sticks and clothes, and sent food to his home.

古文：卒，赐秘器。
现代文：去世，赐给棺材。
English: He died and was given a coffin.

古文：子乌真，膂力绝人。
现代文：儿子乌真，膂力超过常人。
English: His son, Wu Zhen, has a strength exceeding that of an ordinary person.

古文：随太祖征伐，屡有战功，官至钜鹿太守。
现代文：跟随太祖征伐，屡次立有战功，官位至钜鹿太守。
English: He followed his great-grandfather's conquests, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and rose through the ranks to become the governor of Elk Province.

古文：子兴都，聪敏刚毅。
现代文：儿子兴都，聪明刚毅。
English: His son, Xingdu, is smart and strong.

古文：高宗时，为河间太守，赐爵乐城子。
现代文：高宗时，担任河间太守，赐爵位为乐城子。
English: When he was Gao Zong, he served as the governor of Kawama Province, and was given the title of the son of Lecheng.

古文：为政严猛，百姓惮之。
现代文：行政威严猛烈。百姓害怕他。
English: The administrative authority is fierce. The people are afraid of him.

古文：显祖初，以子丕贵重，进爵乐城侯。
现代文：显祖初年，因儿子元丕尊贵，升爵位为乐城侯。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianzu's reign, he was promoted to the peerage as the Lord of Lecheng due to his son, Yuan Xuan.

古文：谢老归家，显祖益礼之，赐几杖服物，致膳于第。
现代文：称年老而回家，显祖更加尊敬他，赠给几杖衣物，送膳食到家中。
English: When he said he was too old to go home, Xianzu respected him even more, giving him a few sticks of clothing and sending food to his home.

古文：其妻娄氏，为东阳王太妃。
现代文：他的妻子娄氏，是东阳王左蛆。
English: His wife, Ms. Zou, is Dongyang Wang Zuo.

古文：卒，追赠定州刺史、河间公，谥曰宣。
现代文：兴都去世，追赠为宣业刺史、回塱公，谧号为宣。
English: Emperor Zhuang greatly feared and loathed him in his heart, so he was killed together with Er Zhu Rong. When Emperor Jie Rong died, he was posthumously given the titles of chancellor, general of Zhiguo, Yongzhou Jishi, False Huang Qi, and his posthumous name was Wu Zhao.

古文：子提，袭父侯爵。
现代文：儿子元提，继承父亲的侯爵。
English: His son, Yuan Ti, succeeded his father as marquis.

古文：提弟丕，世祖擢拜羽林中郎。
现代文：互提的弟弟五歪，世担提拔他为羽林中郎。
English: Wu Kek, the younger brother of Wu Hui, was promoted to Ulin Chungro by Shetan.

古文：从驾临江，赐爵兴平子。
现代文：跟随皇帝到长江边，赐爵位为兴平子。
English: He followed the emperor to the banks of the Yangtze River and conferred a title of nobility on Xing Ping Zi.

古文：显祖即位，累迁侍中。
现代文：显祖即位，屡经升迁至侍中。
English: He ascended the throne and was repeatedly promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：丞相乙浑谋反，丕以奏闻。
现代文：丞相乙浑阴谋反叛，元丕上奏禀告。
English: The chancellor, Yi Hun, plotted a rebellion, and his obituary was reported to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：诏丕帅元贺、牛益得收浑，诛之。迁尚书令，改封东阳公。
现代文：诏令元丕率领元贺、牛益得逮捕乙运，杀了他，升为尚书令，改封束阳公。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of the second movement led by Geng He and Niu Yik Du, and he was killed. He was promoted to Shang Shuling (尚書令) and changed his seal to Sokyang.

古文：高祖时，封东阳王，拜侍中、司徒公。
现代文：直担时，封束阳王，任命他为侍中、司徒公。
English: When he assumed direct charge, he sealed Yang Wang and appointed him as a chamberlain and tutor.

古文：时有诸疑事三百余条，敕丕制决，率皆平允。
现代文：当时有各种疑难的事三百多条，命元丕决断，大都处理得公平允当。
English: At that time, there were more than three hundred difficult cases, and most of them were handled fairly and fairly.

古文：丕子超生，车驾亲幸其第，特加赏赐。
现代文：元丕的儿子元超出生，皇帝亲自前往他的宅第，特地加以赏赐。
English: When Yuan Yuan's son, Yuan Chao, was born, the emperor personally went to his home to give him a special gift.

古文：以执心不二，诏赐丕入八议，传示子孙，犯至百，听责数恕之。放其同籍丁口杂使役调，永受复除；若有奸邪人方便谗毁者，即加斩戮。
现代文：因持心不变，下韶赐元丕进入八议范围，传给子孙，犯过失到一百次，准许在斥责后饶恕他们；免其同宗男丁各种役使微调，永久享受免除权力；如果有奸诈邪僻的人藉机诬陷诋毁的，就加以杀戮。
English: Because of his unchanging heart, the lower court granted Yuan Xuan to enter the scope of eight discussions, pass it on to his descendants, commit mistakes up to one hundred times, allow them to be forgiven after reprimand; exempt his male relatives from all kinds of fine-tuning, and permanently enjoy the exemption of power; if there are treacherous and perverse people who use the opportunity to frame and slander, they will be killed.

古文：寻迁太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：不久升为太尉、录尚书事。
English: He was soon transferred to the rank of Taijo (Lieutenant) and entered the Imperial Academy of Letters.

古文：时淮南王他、淮阳王尉元、河东王苟颓并以旧老见礼，每有大事，引入禁中，乘步挽，杖于朝，进退相随。
现代文：当时淮南王元他、淮阳王尉元、河东王苟颓都因是旧臣元老受到礼遇，每当有大事时，接进宫中，乘坐人拉车，在朝中拄着拐杖，进退在一起。
English: At that time, Huainan Wangyuan, Huaiyang Wangyuan, and Hedong Wangoguo were all treated with courtesy because they were former vassals and elders. Whenever there was an important event, they were taken into the palace, rode in a carriage pulled by a person, and walked on crutches in the middle of the court, advancing and retreating together.

古文：丕、他、元三人，皆容貌庄伟，腰带十围，大耳秀眉，须鬓斑白，百僚观胆，莫不祗耸。
现代文：元丕、元他、尉元三人，都身体强壮高大，腰粗至十围，大耳朵长眉毛，须鬓斑白，百官瞻视，无不恭敬肃穆。
English: The three of them, Geng Yao, Geng Tao, and Gui Yuan, were all tall and strong, with thick waists up to ten circumferences, large ears, long eyebrows, and white whiskers. They were watched by hundreds of officials, and were all respectful and solemn.

古文：唯苟颓小为短劣，姿望亦不逮之。
现代文：仅苟颓稍微矮小瘦弱，名望也赶不上三人。
English: However, Goguryeo was too short and too thin, and its appearance and reputation were not as good as theirs.

古文：高祖、文明太后重年敬旧，存问周渥，赐以珍宝。
现代文：高祖、文明太后尊重老人礼敬旧臣，慰劳周到，赐给珍宝。
English: The great ancestor and civilized empress dowager respected the elderly, honored the old ministers, consoled the laborers, and gave them precious treasures.

古文：丕声气高朗，博记国事，飨宴之际，恆居坐端，必抗音大言，叙列既往成败。
现代文：元丕声音高而爽朗，广记国家大事，饮宴之际，常在座位中，一定高谈阔论，叙述以往的成败。
English: With a high-pitched and hearty voice, he often recounts national events and banquets, and when seated, he is sure to talk at length, describing past successes and failures.

古文：帝、后敬纳焉。
现代文：皇帝、太后恭敬地接受。
English: The Emperor and Empress Dowager respectfully accepted.

古文：然谄事要人，骄侮轻贱，每见王睿、苻承祖，常倾身下之。
现代文：然而奉承当权的人，侮辱低贱的人，每当见到王散、苻承祖，常常低身下气
English: However, he flattered those in power and insulted the lowly, and whenever he saw Wang San and Zou Chengzu, he often felt inferior

古文：时文明太后为王睿造宅，故亦为丕造甲第。
现代文：当时文明太后为王散造房舍，所以也为元丕造宅第。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Cunwen was building houses for the king, so she also built a house for Yuan Shao.

古文：第成，帝、后亲幸之，率百官文武飨落焉。
现代文：宅第建成，皇帝、太后亲自前往，率领文武百官庆贺落成。
English: The residence was completed, and the emperor and empress dowager went there in person, leading hundreds of civil and military officials to celebrate the completion.

古文：使尚书令王睿宣诏，赐丕金印一纽。
现代文：派尚书令王叙宣读诏书，赏赐五歪金印一方。
English: He sent Shang Shu to order Wang Xiu to read out the edict, and rewarded him with one side of the five-cornered gold seal.

古文：太后亲造《劝式歌辞》以赐群官，丕上疏赞谢。
现代文：太后亲自创作《劝戒歌辞》赐给官员们，元丕上奏疏道谢。
English: The empress dowager personally composed the "Exhortation Song" and gave it to the officials, and the former empress dowager played it to express her thanks.

古文：太后令曰： 臣哉邻哉，邻或臣哉。
现代文：太后下令说： 臣属啊是近邻，近邻是臣属。
English: The empress dowager ordered, "The vassal is the near neighbor, and the near neighbor is the vassal."

古文：君则亡逸于上，臣则履冰于下。
现代文：君主在上担，灭亡，臣属在下谨慎小。
English: The monarch in the burden, perish, the vassal in the lower prudence small.

古文：若能如此，太平岂难致乎？ 
现代文：如能这样，太平还能很难达到吗? 
English: If so, will peace still be difficult to achieve?

古文：及丕妻段氏卒，谥曰恭妃。
现代文：等到五丕的妻子段氏去世，谧号为恭妃。
English: When Wuzhen's wife, Duan, passed away, her nickname was Gongfei.

古文：又特赐丕金券。
现代文：又特别赐予元丕金券。
English: In addition, a special gift of a gold certificate was given to the prime minister.

古文：高祖、文明太后引见公卿于皇信堂，太后曰： 今京师旱俭，欲听饥贫之人出关逐食。
现代文：直坦、文明太后在皇锤接见公卿，太后说： 现在京城天旱歉收，想准许饥饿贫困的人出关谋食。
English: Directly, the Empress Dowager of Civilization met with the nobles in the imperial hammer, and the Empress Dowager said: Now that the capital has a poor harvest due to drought, I want to allow hungry and poor people to go out to seek food.

古文：如欲给过所，恐稽延时日，不救灾窘；若任其外出，复虑奸良难辨。
现代文：如要给予过关凭证，恐怕拖延时间，不能挽救灾难窘急，如果听凭外出，又担，良莠难辨。
English: If you want to give a clearance certificate, I am afraid to delay the time, can not save the disaster distress, if you go out, and worry, good and bad are difficult to distinguish.

古文：卿等可议其所宜。 
现代文：你们可商议适宜的办法。 
English: You can discuss the best course of action.

古文：丕议： 诸曹下大夫以上，人各将二吏，别掌给过所，州郡亦然，不过三日，给之便讫，有何难也？ 
现代文：元丕建议： 各官曹下大夫以上，每人各带二名官员，分别掌管发给过关凭证，也如此，不超过三天，分发就结束了，有什么难的呢? 
English: Yuan Xuan suggested: Each officer from the rank of sergeant to doctor and above, each with two officials, should be in charge of issuing the clearance certificate separately, and the same is true, no more than three days, the distribution is over, what is difficult?

古文：高祖从之，四日而讫。
现代文：高祖听从他的意见，四天完成。
English: Gaozu listened to his advice and finished it in four days.

古文：丕请立东宫，诏曰： 年尚幼小，有何急之？ 
现代文：元歪请求立束宫太子，诏令说： 年纪还幼小，有什么要急的呢? 
English: Yuan Shikai requested the enthronement of the Prince of the Palace, and the imperial edict said: He is still young, what is there to be anxious about?

古文：丕曰： 臣年在西夕，思观盛礼，于臣实急。 
现代文：元丕说： 臣下年纪如夕阳西下，想观看盛大的典礼，在臣下实为急迫。 
English: Yuan Shao said, "Our vassals are as old as the setting sun. If they want to watch the grand ceremony, they really have to hurry."

古文：不许。
现代文：直担不准许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：后例降王爵，封平阳郡公。
现代文：后来依例降低王爵，封为平阳郡公。
English: Later, according to the regulations, he should be demoted to the rank of prince and be named the governor of Pingyang County.

古文：求致仕，诏不许。
现代文：请求退休，诏令不准许。
English: He asked to retire, but was not allowed to.

古文：及车驾南伐，丕与广陵王羽留守京师，并加使持节。
现代文：等到皇帝向南征伐，元丕和广陵王元羽留守京城，都加授使持节。
English: When the emperor went on the Southern Expedition, Zou and Guangling Wang Yu stayed in Beijing, and added the Jizhi Festival.

古文：诏丕、羽曰： 留守非贤莫可。
现代文：诏令元丕、元羽说： 留守的人不贤明是不可以的。
English: The emperor issued an edict to Shun and Yu, saying, "Those who stay behind must be sages."

古文：太尉年尊德重，位总阿衡；羽朕之懿弟，温柔明断。
现代文：太尉年纪大威望高，地位总揽朝政；元羽是我的弟弟，温和柔顺聪明果断。
English: The captain is very senior and highly respected, and his position is to take over the government; Yuan Yu is my younger brother, gentle, smart, and decisive.

古文：故使二人留守京邑，授以二节，赏罚在手。
现代文：所以派二人留守京城，授给两个符节，赏罚掌握在手中。
English: Therefore, they sent two people to stay in Beijing, awarded two badges, and the rewards and punishments were in their hands.

古文：其祗允成宪，以称朕心。 
现代文：可恭谨依照现成法度，来满足我的心意。 
English: You all respect the Constitution, which is my heart.

古文：丕对曰： 谨以死奉诏。 
现代文：元丕回答说： 恭谨地以生命来奉行诏书。 
English: The donkey answered, "I will obey the decree of the king even unto death."

古文：羽对曰： 太尉宜专节度，臣但可副贰而已。 
现代文：元羽回答说： 太尉应一人总管，臣下仅能辅助而已。 
English: The feather replied: The captain should be in charge of temperance, I can only serve as a deputy.

古文：高祖曰： 老者之智，少者之决，何得辞也。 
现代文：高祖说： 老人的智慧，青年人的决断，何必推辞呢? 
English: Gaozu said, "The wisdom of the old and the determination of the young, why should they be denied?

古文：及高祖还代，丕请作歌，诏许之。
现代文：等到高祖回到代京，元丕请求创作歌辞，诏令准许。
English: When Gaozu returned to Daikyo, Yuan Xuan asked him to compose a poem, which was approved by imperial edict.

古文：歌讫，高祖曰： 公倾朕还车，故亲歌述志。
现代文：作歌辞后，高祖说： 您一意让我返回，所以亲自作歌辞表述志向。
English: After composing the lyrics, Gaozu said, "You are determined to have me return, so I personally composed the lyrics to express my aspiration."

古文：今经构既有次第，故暂还旧京，愿后时亦同兹适。 
现代文：现在营造已有安排，所以暂时回到旧京城，希望今后也同有这种欢乐。 
English: Now there are already arrangements for construction, so I temporarily returned to the old capital, hoping to share this joy in the future.

古文：及高祖欲迁都，临太极殿，引见留守之官大议。
现代文：等到高祖要迁都，前往太极殿，召见留守的官员大规模地商议。
English: When Gao Zu wanted to move the capital, he went to the Taiji Hall and summoned the remaining officials for a large-scale discussion.

古文：乃诏丕等，如有所怀，各陈其志。
现代文：就诏令元丕等人，如有自己的想法，各自陈述意见。
English: On the issue of the imperial edict, if they have their own ideas, they should state their opinions separately.

古文：燕州刺史穆罴进曰： 移都事大，如臣愚见，谓为未可。 
现代文：燕州刺史穆照进奏说： 迁都的事情重大，如臣下的愚蠢见解，以为不可以。 
English: Muzhao Jinseo, the governor of Yanzhou, said: The relocation of the capital is a serious matter, such as the foolish opinions of the vassals, who think it is impossible.

古文：高祖曰： 卿便言不可之理。 
现代文：高祖说： 你就谈谈不可以的道理。 
English: Gaozu said, "Just tell me the reason why it's not allowed."

古文：罴曰： 北有猃狁之寇，南有荆扬未宾，西有吐谷浑之阻，东有高句丽之难。
现代文：穆照说： 北方有硷狁的侵犯，南方有荆州扬州没归附，西方有吐谷浑的阻遏，东方有高句丽的祸难。
English: Mu Zhao said: In the north, there was the encroachment of the Mongols; in the south, there was the failure to annex Jingzhou and Yangzhou; in the west, there was the suppression of the Tuyugun; in the east, there was the calamity of Goguryeo.

古文：四方未平，九区未定。
现代文：天下没平定，九州未统一。
English: The country has not been pacified, and Kyushu has not been unified.

古文：以此推之，谓为不可。
现代文：以此推断，以为不可以。
English: I don't think you can extrapolate from that.

古文：征伐之举，要须戎马，如其无马，事不可克。 
现代文：征伐的举动，必须要有战马，如果没有马，事情就不能成功。 
English: The act of conquest must be accompanied by war horses. Without horses, things cannot be successful.

古文：高祖曰： 卿言无马，此理粗可。
现代文：高祖说： 你说没有马，遣道理大体说得过去。
English: Gaozu said, "If you say there is no horse, you can get away with it.

古文：马常出北方，厩在此置，卿何虑无马？
现代文：马通常出在北方，马厩在这裹设置，你何必担心没有马?
English: The horses usually come out in the north, and the stables are set up here, so why should you worry about not having horses?

古文：今代在恆山之北，为九州之外，以是之故，迁于中原。 
现代文：现在代京在恒山的北面，是九州以外地区，因为这个缘故，所以迁到中原。 
English: Now Daikyo is in the north of Hengshan, outside of Kyushu, and because of this, it moved to the Central Plains.

古文：罴曰： 臣闻黄帝都涿鹿。
现代文：穆罢说： 我听说黄帝在涿鹿建都。
English: Mubai said: I heard that the Yellow Emperor built the capital in Elk.

古文：以此言之，古昔圣王不必悉居中原。 
现代文：以此说来，古代圣明的君王不一定都居住在中原。 
English: In this sense, the kings of ancient China did not necessarily live in the Central Plains.

古文：高祖曰： 黄帝以天下未定，居于涿鹿；既定之后，亦迁于河南。 
现代文：高祖说： 黄帝因天下没平定，居住在涿鹿，等平定之后，也迁到黄河以南。 
English: Gao Zu said: Because the world was not pacified, the Yellow Emperor lived in Moji, and after the pacification, he also moved to the south of the Yellow River.

古文：尚书于果曰： 臣诚不识古事，如闻百姓之言，先皇建都于此，无何欲移，以为不可。
现代文：尚书于果说： 臣下实在不懂古代的事，但听到百姓的议论，先朝皇帝在这裹建都，平白无故地要迁移，以为不可以。
English: Shangshu Yu Guo said, "Our vassals really don't understand ancient things, but they heard the people's discussion that the emperor of the previous dynasty built the capital here and wanted to move it for no reason, and they thought it was unacceptable.

古文：中原其如是所由拟，数有篡夺。
现代文：中原哪如拟定的那样好?不断地有篡夺发生。
English: Is the Central Plains as good as it is made out to be? Usurpation is constantly taking place.

古文：自建邑平城以来，与天地并固，日月齐明。
现代文：我国自从建都平城以来，同天地一样坚固，与曰月一样明朗。
English: Since the establishment of the capital, Pingcheng, our country has been as solid as the heavens and the earth, and as clear as the moon.

古文：臣虽管见肤浅，性不昭达，终不以恆代之地，而拟伊洛之美。
现代文：臣下虽然见议肤浅，秉性不通达，终究不能在恒代之地，而揣度伊水盗塞的美好。
English: Although the vassals think that the discussion is superficial and the nature is not clear, after all, they cannot be in the land of Hengdai, but think about the beauty of Yishui.

古文：但以安土重迁，物之常性，一旦南移，惧不乐也。 
现代文：仅因留恋故土不愿迁居，是人的本性，一旦向南迁移，担心人们不乐意。 
English: It is human nature to be reluctant to move just because of nostalgia for one's homeland. Once you move to the south, you worry that people will not be happy.

古文：丕曰： 陛下去岁亲御六军讨萧氏，至洛，遣任城王澄宣旨，敕臣等议都洛。
现代文：元丕说： 陛下去年亲自统率六军讨伐萧氏，到达洛阳，派遣任城王丞逻宣布旨意，命臣下等人商议在盗阻建都。
English: Yuan Zang said: Last year, His Majesty personally led six armies to fight against the Xiao clan, and arrived in Luoyang. He dispatched Ren Chengwang Rongluo to announce his will, and his vassals and others discussed the construction of the capital.

古文：初奉恩旨，心情惶越。
现代文：起初接到韶旨，心情惶恐。
English: At first, when I received the order, I was in a panic.

古文：凡欲迁移，当讯之卜筮，审定吉否，然后可。 
现代文：凡要迁移，应讯问卜筮，审察确定是否吉利，然后才可迁移。 
English: Anyone who wants to relocate should interrogate Bu Yao, investigate to determine whether it is auspicious, and then relocate.

古文：高祖谓丕曰： 往在鄴中，司徒公诞、咸阳王礻喜、尚书李冲等皆欲请龟占移洛吉凶之事。
现代文：高祖对元丕说： 往年在邺中，司徒公元诞、咸阳王元禧、尚书李冲等人都要请用龟甲占卜迁移洛阳的吉凶事情。
English: Gao Zu said to Yuan Xuan: In the past years in Handan, the birth of St. Peter, the birth anniversary of the King of Xianyang, the birth anniversary of the King of Xianyang, and Shangshu Li Chong all asked to use tortoise shell divination to relocate the auspicious and inauspicious events in Luoyang.

古文：朕时谓诞等曰，昔周邵卜宅伊洛，乃识至兆。
现代文：我当时对元诞等人说，从前周公邵公用占卜选定居住地在伊水洛水之间，是懂得最高的征兆。
English: At that time, I said to the people of the Yuanxing that it was the highest sign to understand that the place of residence selected by the previous week's public divination was between Yishui and Luoshui.

古文：今无若斯之人，卜亦无益。
现代文：现在没有这样的人，占卜也没有益处。
English: Now there is no such man, neither is there any profit in divination.

古文：然卜者所以决疑，此既不疑，何须卜也？
现代文：然而占卜是用来解决疑惑的，此事既不用疑惑，又何必占卜呢?
English: However, divination is used to resolve doubts, so there is no need for doubt, and why do we need divination?

古文：昔轩辕卜兆龟焦，卜者请访诸贤哲，轩辕乃问天老，天老谓为善。
现代文：从前轩辕占卜而龟甲焦枯，占卜者请求访求贤明的人，轩辕就询问天老，天老认为是好事。
English: Once upon a time, Xuan Xuan used divination while his tortoise shell was scorched. The diviner asked to visit the wise man, and Xuan Xuan asked the old man. The old man thought it was a good thing.

古文：遂从其言，终致昌吉。
现代文：于是听从他的话，终于达到昌盛吉祥。
English: So he followed his words and finally achieved prosperity and good luck.

古文：然则至人之量未然，审于龟矣。
现代文：那么当高明人士的见识难以判断时，而以龟甲来确定。
English: However, people's ability to predict future events has surpassed that of the tortoise.

古文：朕既以四海为家，或南或北，迟速无常。
现代文：我既以四海为家，有时南有时北，快慢不定。
English: Since I call the four seas my home, sometimes I go south, sometimes north, the pace is uncertain.

古文：南移之民，朕自多积仓储，不令窘乏。 
现代文：向南迁移的民众，我自然多积累仓库的储蓄，不使大家窘迫贫乏。 
English: For the people who migrate to the south, I will naturally accumulate more warehouse savings, so as not to embarrass everyone.

古文：丕曰： 臣仰奉慈诏，不胜喜舞。 
现代文：元丕说： 臣下恭敬接受仁慈的诏书，不胜欢欣鼓舞。 
English: Yuan Shao said, "The courtiers respectfully accepted the benevolent edict with great joy and encouragement.

古文：高祖诏群官曰： 卿等或以朕无为移徙也。
现代文：高祖诏令群官说： 你们或许以为我是平白无故地要迁徙。
English: Gao Zu's edict to the group of officials said: You may think that I want to migrate for no reason.

古文：昔平文皇帝弃背率土，昭成营居盛乐，太祖道武皇帝神武应天，迁居平城。
现代文：从前平文皇帝离弃本土，昭成皇帝营建居住到盛乐；太祖道武皇帝以英明勇武顺应上天，迁居到干城。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Pingwen abandoned his homeland, Emperor Zhaocheng built and lived in Shengle; Emperor Daowu obeyed God with valor and bravery, and moved to Gancheng.

古文：朕虽虚寡，幸属胜残之运，故移宅中原，肇成皇宇。
现代文：我虽然德才薄弱，荣幸地遇上遏制凶残的国运，所以迁都到中原，拓展国土。
English: Although I am weak in virtue, I am honored to meet the national movement to curb the ferocity, so I moved the capital to the Central Plains to expand the country.

古文：卿等当奉先君令德，光迹洪规。 
现代文：你们应遵奉先代君主的美德，继承宏伟的规范。 
English: You should follow the virtues of the previous monarchs and inherit the magnificent norms.

古文：前怀州刺史青龙，前秦州刺史吕受恩等仍守愚固，帝皆抚而答之，辞屈而退。
现代文：前怀州刺史青龙，前秦州刺史吕受恩等人仍然坚持愚蠢顽固的态度，皇帝都安抚而回答他们，各人在理屈词穷后退下去。
English: Former Waizhou Prince Qinglong, former Qin State Prince Lv Shouen and others still persist in their stupid and stubborn attitude. The emperor appeased and answered them, and each person retreated after poor reasoning.

古文：帝又将北巡，丕迁太傅、录尚书事。
现代文：皇帝又将向北巡视，元丕升任太傅、录尚书事。
English: The emperor will also inspect the north, and Yuan Xuan will be promoted to Taifu and record the records.

古文：频表固让，诏断表启，就家拜授。
现代文：接连上奏疏执意推让，诏令断绝奏疏陈述，到家中任命。
English: Successively, Shang Song So persisted in pushing for concessions, and the imperial edict cut off Song Song's statement and sent him home.

古文：及车驾发代，丕留守，诏曰： 中原始构，须朕营视，在代之事，一委太傅。 
现代文：等到皇帝从代京出发，元丕留守，诏令说： 中原开始经营，需要我督促料理，代京的事情，全部委托给太傅。 
English: When the emperor set out from Daikyo, and Yuan Shao remained behind, the imperial edict said: "Nakahara has begun to operate, I need to supervise the cooking, and all Daikyo matters should be entrusted to Taifu.

古文：赐上所乘车马，往来府省。
现代文：赐予皇帝所乘坐的车马，来往于府省中。
English: The carriage and horse given to the emperor are used to travel between prefectures and provinces.

古文：丕雅爱本风，不达新式，至于变俗迁洛，改官制服，禁绝旧言，皆所不愿。
现代文：元丕很喜爱本地风尚，不理解新条令，至于改变习俗迁都洛阳，改革官职制定服饰，禁止旧语言，都不愿意。
English: Yuanzhang loves the local fashion and does not understand the new regulations. As for changing customs, moving the capital to Luoyang, reforming the official dress code, and banning the old language, they are not willing to do so.

古文：高祖知其如此，亦不逼之，但诱示大理，令其不生同异。
现代文：高祖知道他这样，也不逼迫他，衹是用大道理诱导，使他不生出是非。
English: Gaozu knew this about him and did not persecute him. He was guided by the Great Principle so that he would not cause trouble.

古文：至于衣冕已行，朱服列位，而丕犹常服列在坐隅。
现代文：至于衣帽已换，众官穿着红色公服排列位次，而元丕仍穿平常的服装坐在角落。
English: As for the change of clothes and hats, the officials lined up in red uniforms, while the former emperors still wore ordinary clothes and sat in the corner.

古文：晚乃稍加弁带，而不能修饰容仪。
现代文：很久之后才渐加帽子丝带，而不能修饰自己的仪表。
English: Later, he also used the crown slightly, but without modifying the instrument.

古文：高祖以丕年衰体重，亦不强责。
现代文：高祖因元丕年纪衰老地位尊贵，也不勉强要求他。
English: Gao Zu did not hesitate to ask him to step down from his position of honor due to his advanced age.

古文：及罢降非太祖子孙及异姓王者，虽较于公爵，而利享封邑，亦不快。
现代文：等到罢除降低非立祖的子孙以及异姓为王者，虽降封为公，而享受封邑的利益，他也不快乐。
English: He is also not happy to wait until the descendants of non-founding fathers and kings with different surnames are removed, although they are demoted to the public and enjoy the benefits of fiefdoms.

古文：高祖南征，丕表乞少留，思更图后举。
现代文：疑高祖向南征讨，元丕上奏疏请求稍微停留，考虑再图谋今后的举动。
English: Suspicious of Gaozu's expedition to the south, the Yuan Dynasty petitioned the Sui Dynasty to stay for a while and consider future moves.

古文：会司徒冯诞薨，诏六军反旆。
现代文：遇上司徒冯诞逝世，诏令六军返回。
English: The emperor ordered the Sixth Army to return to the division, just as Stutthof died.

古文：丕又以熙薨于代都，表求銮驾亲临。
现代文：元丕又因冯熙在代都逝世，上奏疏请求皇帝亲临丧事。
English: He also died in Dai County, and the table above requested the emperor to come and pay his respects.

古文：诏曰： 今洛邑肇构，跂望成劳，开辟暨今，岂有以天子之重，远赴舅国之丧？
现代文：下诏说： 现在洛邑开始营建，举踵翘望深为辛劳。开天辟地到如今，岂有以天子的尊贵，遥远地奔赴舅氏丧事的道理?
English: The next edict said: Now that construction has begun in Luoyang, it is hard work to lift one's heel and look ahead. From the beginning of the world until now, is there any reason to rush to the funeral of one's uncle far away with the dignity of a son of heaven?

古文：朕纵欲为孝，其如大孝何？纵欲为义，其如大义何？天下至重，君臣道悬，岂宜苟相诱引，陷君不德。
现代文：我纵然想行孝，该如何对待大孝纵然想讲道义，该如何对待大义天下是最重要的，君臣道理悬远，怎么能随意相引诱，陷君于不道德的境地。
English: Even if I want to practice filial piety, how should I treat the great filial piety? Even if I want to preach morality, how should I treat the great righteousness is the most important thing in the world. The principle of monarchs and subjects is far away. How can I lure them at will and trap them in an immoral situation?

古文：令、仆已下可付法官贬之。 
现代文：尚书令、仆射以下可交付执法官员贬黜。 
English: The following can be handed over to law enforcement officials for disciplinary action.

古文：又诏以丕为都督，领并州刺史。
现代文：又下韶任命元丕为都督，兼领并州刺史。
English: In addition, the lower court appointed the former governor as the governor, and also led the merger of the state history.

古文：后诏以平阳畿甸，改封新兴公。
现代文：后来下韶因子阳是京郊，改封元丕为新兴公。
English: Later, it was decided that Pingyang would be the capital of Gyeonggi Province, and the name was changed to the new capital.

古文：初，李冲又德望所属，既当时贵要，有杖情，遂与子超娶冲兄女，即伯尚妹也。
现代文：起初，李冲的德行威望为人瞩目，他既是当时显要人物，元丕有依仗的心意，就为儿子元超娶李冲哥哥的女儿，即伯尚的妹妹。
English: At first, Li Chong's virtue and prestige attracted attention. As he was a prominent figure at that time, Yuan Qi had the desire to rely on him, so he married the daughter of Li Chong's brother, that is, Bozhang's sister, for his son, Yuan Chao.

古文：丕前妻子隆同产数人，皆与别居。
现代文：元丕前妻的儿子元隆同胞几人，都与元丕分别居住。
English: Several compatriots of Yuanlong, the son of Yuanlong's ex-wife, all live separately from Yuanlong.

古文：后得宫人，所生同宅共产。
现代文：后来得到宫女，所生子女住在一起共有家产。
English: Later, he got a concubine, and his children lived together and shared the family property.

古文：父子情因此偏。
现代文：父子的感情于是疏远。
English: As a result, the feelings between father and son are somewhat biased.

古文：丕父子大意不乐迁洛。
现代文：元丕父子大体的心愿是不乐意迁到洛阳。
English: Most of them are reluctant to move to Luoyang.

古文：高祖之发平城，太子恂留于旧京。及将还洛，隆与超等密谋留恂，因举兵断关，规据陉北。
现代文：高祖从平城出发，太子元恂留在旧都，到将要回洛阳时，元隆和元超等人密谋留下元恂，因之起兵拦截关口，谋划占据井陉以北。
English: Gao Zu set out from Pingcheng, while Prince Yuan Rong stayed in the old capital of Lu. When he was about to return to Luoyang, Yuan Long and Yuan Chao conspired to leave Yuan Rong behind. As a result, they raised an army to intercept Guekou and planned to occupy the north of Shigatse.

古文：时丕以老居并州，虽不预其始计，而隆、超咸以告丕。
现代文：当时元丕因年老居住在并州，虽然不参预他们开始的计划，而元隆、元超都将计划告诉了元丕。
English: At that time, Yuan Rong was living in Bozhou due to his old age, and although he did not participate in the plan they started, Yuan Long and Yuan Chao told Yuan Rong about the plan.

古文：丕外虑不成，口虽致难，心颇然之。
现代文：元丕外表上担心不能成功，口中虽表示责难，心中却很赞同他们。
English: Outwardly, Yuan Xuan was worried that they would not succeed. Although he expressed criticism, he agreed with them in his heart.

古文：及高祖幸平城，推穆泰等首谋，隆兄弟并是党。
现代文：等到高祖前往平城，推究穆泰等人是主谋，元隆兄弟都是党羽。
English: When Gaozu went to Pingcheng, it was deduced that Mutai and others were the masterminds, while the Yuanlong brothers were all party members.

古文：丕亦随驾至平城，每于测问，令丕坐观。
现代文：元丕也随皇帝到平城，每次审问，命元丕坐在旁边观看。
English: At that time, Zou also accompanied the emperor to Pingcheng, and every time he was interrogated, Zou was allowed to sit by and watch.

古文：隆、超与元业等兄弟并以谋逆伏诛。
现代文：元隆、元超和元业等兄弟都以谋反罪伏法受死刑。
English: Brothers such as Yuan Long, Yuan Chao and Yuan Ye were all sentenced to death for conspiracy to commit treason.

古文：有司奏处孥戮，诏以丕应连坐，但以先许不死之诏，躬非染逆之身，听免死，仍为太原百姓，其后妻二子听随。
现代文：有关官员上奏全家诛杀，下诏以为元丕应连坐，衹因先前许下不受死刑的诏书，元丕本人没有参与叛逆，准许免去死刑，贬为太原百姓，后妻所生二子准许跟随在身边。
English: The officials concerned reported that the whole family had been killed, and the next edict said that Yuan Xuan should sit together, but because of the previously issued edict not to receive the death penalty, Yuan Xuan himself did not participate in the rebellion, he was allowed to be exempted from the death penalty, he was reduced to Taiyuan people, and the two sons born to his second wife were allowed to follow him.

古文：隆、超母弟及余庶兄弟，皆徙敦煌。
现代文：元隆、元超的同母弟和其余庶出的兄弟，都流放到敦煌。
English: Yuanlong, Yuanchao's younger brother by the same mother, and the rest of the illegitimate brothers were all exiled to Dunhuang.

古文：丕时年垂八十，犹自平城力载，随驾至洛阳。
现代文：元丕遣时年近八十岁，还从平城扛着东西，跟随皇帝到洛阳。
English: At the time of Yuan Shao's dispatch, he was nearly eighty years old. He also carried things from Pingcheng and followed the emperor to Luoyang.

古文：高祖每遣左右慰勉之，乃还晋阳。
现代文：高祖时常派遣左右的人慰劳勉励他，于是回到晋阳。
English: Gaozu often sent people to comfort and encourage him, so he returned to Jinyang.

古文：高祖崩，丕自并州来赴，世宗引见之。
现代文：高祖逝世，元丕从并州来奔丧，世宗接见他。
English: When Gaozu passed away, Yuan Xuan came from Bianzhou to pay his respects, and Shizong received him.

古文：以丕旧老，礼有加焉。
现代文：因元丕是旧臣元老，礼遇隆重。
English: Because Geng Yao was a former minister and elder statesman, he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：寻敕留洛阳。
现代文：不久下令留在洛阳。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to stay in Luoyang.

古文：后宴于华林都亭，特令二子扶侍坐起。
现代文：后来在华林都亭饮宴，特地命他两个儿子扶持他的坐立。
English: Later, when he was invited to a banquet at the Imperial Pavilion in the Warlim Garden, he made a special order for his two sons to accompany him.

古文：丕仕历六世，垂七十年，位极公辅，而还为民庶，然犹心恋京邑，不能自绝人事。
现代文：元丕任官经历六代，将近七十年，位高至宰辅，而退为平民，然而还心恋京城，不能自己摆脱世间事情。
English: For nearly 70 years, six generations of the Yuan and Song dynasties have been in office, rising as high as vice-premier, and then retiring as commoners. However, they are still attached to the capital and cannot free themselves from worldly affairs.

古文：寻诏以丕为三老。
现代文：不久诏书任命元丕为三老。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict appointed Yuan Shao as the third elder.

古文：景明四年薨，年八十二。
现代文：景明四年逝世，时年八十二岁。
English: Jingming died four years later, at the age of 82.

古文：诏赠左光禄大夫、冀州刺史，谥曰平。
现代文：下诏追赠为左光禄大夫、冀州刺史，谧号为平。
English: The following edict was presented to Dr. Zuo Guanglu and Jizhou Zhishi, and was signed by Ping.

古文：长子隆，先以反诛。
现代文：长子元隆，先前因谋反被杀。
English: The eldest son, Takashi, was first killed for plotting treason.

古文：隆弟乙升、超，亦同诛。
现代文：元隆的弟弟乙升、元超，也同被诛杀。
English: Takashi's younger brothers, Chao and Atsushi, were also killed at the same time.

古文：超弟俊、邕，并有军功。
现代文：元超的弟弟元俊、元邕，都立有军功。
English: Yuan Chao's younger brothers, Yuan Jun and Yuan Qi, both had military achievements.

古文：俊封新安县男，邕封泾县男。
现代文：元俊被封为新安县男，元邕被封为泾县男。
English: Yuan Jun was named the man of Xin'an County, and Yuan Qi was named the man of Jixian County.

古文：淮陵侯大头，烈帝之曾孙也。
现代文：淮陵侯元大头，是乏嘘的曾孙。
English: Huairing Houyuan Daigou is the great-grandson of Bozhu.

古文：善骑射，擢为内三郎。
现代文：善于骑马射箭，擢升为内三郎。
English: He was good at horseback archery and was promoted to Uchisaburo.

古文：从世祖有战功，赐爵。
现代文：跟随世疆有战功，赐予爵位。
English: He was awarded a knighthood for his distinguished war service.

古文：高宗初，封淮陵。
现代文：直塞初年，封淮陵侯。
English: He was given the title of Huairing Marquis in the first year of his reign.

古文：性谨密，帝甚重之。
现代文：性格谨慎严密，皇帝十分重视他。
English: Prudent and strict, he was held in high regard by the emperor.

古文：位宁北将军，迁右将军。
现代文：担任宁北将军，升右将军。
English: He served as the general of Ningbei and the general of Shouhu.

古文：卒，赠高平公，谥曰烈。
现代文：去世，追赠毫王尘，谧号为型。
English: Chao's younger brothers, Zou and Zou, were both decorated for their military service. Zou was named the man of Xin'an County, and Zou was named the baron of Zou County.

古文：河间公齐，烈帝之玄孙也。
现代文：河间公元齐，是烈帝的玄孙。
English: He is the fifth generation of the Emperor's descendants.

古文：少雄杰魁岸，世祖爱其勇壮，引侍左右。
现代文：年轻时雄壮魁伟，世祖喜爱他勇敢强壮，安排在左右侍奉。
English: When he was young, he was majestic and powerful. The patriarch loved him because he was brave and strong, and he was assigned to serve on his right and left.

古文：从征赫连昌，世祖马蹶，贼众逼帝，齐以身蔽捍，决死击贼，贼乃退，世祖得上马。
现代文：跟随征伐赫连昌，世祖的马摔倒，贼寇人多逼近皇帝，五蛮用身体遮挡捍卫，拼死攻打贼寇，贼寇才退走，世祖得以上马。
English: Following the conquest of Helianchang, the ancestor's horse fell down, the robbers mostly approached the emperor, the five barbarians used their bodies to shield and defend, and fought the robbers to the death. The robbers only retreated when the ancestor was able to mount his horse.

古文：是日，微齐，世祖几至危殆。
现代文：这天如果没有元齐，世担几乎到危险边沿了。
English: If there is no Yuan Qi on this day, the world is almost at the edge of danger.

古文：世祖以微服入其城，齐固谏，不许，乃与数人从世祖入。
现代文：世祖穿平常人服装进入贼寇的城池，五齐一再规劝，世祖不答应，元齐就和几个人跟随世担进入。
English: The patriarch put on ordinary people's clothing to enter the thief's castle, and the five of them repeatedly persuaded him. The patriarch did not agree, and the patriarch and several people followed the thief into the castle.

古文：城内既觉，诸门悉闭。
现代文：城内人发觉后，各个门都关上。
English: When the townspeople found out, all the doors were closed.

古文：世祖及齐等因入其宫中，得妇人裙，系之槊上，世祖乘而上，因此得拔，齐有力焉。
现代文：世祖和元齐等人便进入宫中，得到妇人的裙子，系在长矛上，世祖登上城去，因此攻下城池，五查很有贡献。
English: Shizu and Genchi and others then entered the palace, obtained a woman's skirt, tied it to a spear, and Shizu went up to the city, thus capturing the city. The five investigations made a great contribution.

古文：赐爵浮阳侯。
现代文：赐爵位为浮阳侯。
English: He made great achievements and was given the title of Fuyang Marquis.

古文：从征和龙，以功拜尚书，进爵为公。
现代文：跟随征伐扭垄，因功劳被任命为尚书令，升爵位为公。
English: He followed the expedition and the dragon, and because of his merits, he was appointed as a Shangshu and promoted to the rank of Duke.

古文：后与新兴王俊讨秃发保周，坐事免官爵。
现代文：后来和新兴王丞篮讨伐秃发保周，因事获罪免去官职爵位。
English: Later, he fought with the emerging Wang Jun against the baldness prevention week, and was removed from the peerage for the incident.

古文：刘义隆将裴方明陷仇池，世祖复授齐前将军，与建兴公古弼讨之，遂克仇池，威振羌氐。
现代文：刘义隆的将领蜚左塱攻占铋电，世担又授任五变为前将军，和建兴公古弼讨伐裴方明，于是攻克仇迤，声威震动差人氐人。
English: Liu Yilong's generals 左 conquered 電, and the world council also appointed five to become former generals, and Jian Xing Gong Gu to fight against Bei Fangming, so they conquered the enemy, and the prestige was shaken.

古文：复赐爵河间公，与武都王杨保宗对镇骆谷。
现代文：又赐爵为河间公，和武都王扰堡塞一起镇守竖查。
English: He was again given the title of Kawama no Kimi. He and the King of Wudu, Yang Baozong, jointly governed Luogu.

古文：时保宗弟文德说保宗闭险自固，有期矣，秦州主簿边因知之，密告齐。
现代文：这时眯的弟弟塞坛劝说堡塞关闭险阻据守，过了一段时间，塞业主簿遑旦知道了这件事，秘密报告元蛮。
English: At this time, Yan's younger brother Setan persuaded the fortress to close the dangerous obstacle. After a period of time, the owner of the fortress learned about this incident and secretly reported it to the emperor.

古文：齐晨诣保宗，呼曰： 古弼至，欲宣诏。 
现代文：五壹早晨到堡塞那裹，叫喊说： 古弼到了，要宣读诏书。 
English: On the morning of the fifth day, they went to the citadel and shouted, "The emperor has arrived, and the imperial edict is to be read."

古文：保宗出，齐叱左右扶保宗上马，驰驿送台。
现代文：皑出来，五齐喝令左右扶保宗上马，用驿站马匹飞奔送朝廷。
English: When Hojong left the city, Qi immediately gave the order to support Hojong on horseback and send him galloping to the capital.

古文：诸氐遂推文德为主，求援于刘义隆。
现代文：氐人们于是推举文德为头领，向刘义隆求援。
English: The instigators then put forward Wen De as their leader and appealed to Liu Yilong for help.

古文：义隆遣将房亮之、苻昭、啖龙等率众助文德。
现代文：义隆派遣将领房亮之、苻昭、啖龙等人率领军队援助文德。
English: Yilong dispatched generals Fang Liangzhi, Zou Zhao, Yao Long and others to lead the army to aid Wende.

古文：齐击斩杀龙，擒亮之。
现代文：元齐出击杀死啖龙，擒获亮之。
English: Yuan Qi went out to kill the dragon, and the dragon won the victory.

古文：氐遂平。
现代文：氐人于是被平定。
English: The attackers were then subdued.

古文：以功拜内都大官。
现代文：因功劳被任命为内都大官。
English: He was appointed as a senior official of the Inner Capital for his meritorious service.

古文：卒，谥曰敬。
现代文：去世，谧号为敬。
English: He passed away, and his nickname was Jing.

古文：长子陵，袭爵。
现代文：长子元陵，继承爵位。
English: The eldest son, Genryo, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：陵性抗直，天安初，为乙浑所害。
现代文：元陵性格耿直，天安初年，被乙浑杀害。
English: Geng Nao, the character of Yuanling, was killed by Yi Hun in the first year of Tian'an.

古文：陵弟兰，以忠谨见宠。
现代文：元陵的弟弟元兰，以忠诚谨慎受到宠信。
English: Yuan Ling's younger brother, Yuan Lan, was favored for his loyalty and prudence.

古文：高祖初，赐爵建阳子。
现代文：高祖初年，赐爵位为建阳子。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, a peerage was bestowed on Jianyangzi.

古文：卒于武川镇将。
现代文：任武镇将时去世。
English: Ren Wuzhen passed away at the time.

古文：子志，字猛略。
现代文：儿子元志，字猛略。
English: His son, Motoshi, is omitted.

古文：少清辩强干，历览书传，颇有文才。
现代文：年轻时精明强干，博览群书，很有文才。
English: When he was young, he was shrewd and strong-willed, well-read, and very literate.

古文：为洛阳令，不避强御，与御史中尉李彪争路，俱入见，面陈得失。
现代文：担任洛阳令，不周避豪强高官，和御史中尉李彪争夺道路，都入宫求见，当面陈述得失。
English: He served as the governor of Luoyang, did not avoid the powerful and powerful high-ranking officials, and competed with the lieutenant of imperial history Li Biao for the road. They all went to the palace to seek an audience, and stated their gains and losses in person.

古文：彪言：御史中尉避承华车盖，驻论道剑鼓，安有洛阳县令与臣抗衡？
现代文：李彪说： 御史中尉避让太子车辆，停下三公的卫士鼓吹，哪有洛阳县令与臣下对抗的道理? 
English: Li Biao said, "Lieutenant Mishi avoided the prince's car and stopped the Three Princes' guards from preaching. Is there any reason for the Luoyang governor to confront his vassals?"

古文：志言：神乡县主，普天之下谁不编户？岂有俯同众官，避中尉？
现代文：元志说： 皇帝之乡的县令，普天之下的人谁不编入户籍，岂能低头和众官相同，避让中尉? 
English: Yuan Zhi said: The county magistrate of the emperor's hometown, who does not compile household registration, can he bow his head like all officials and avoid the lieutenant?

古文：高祖曰： 洛阳我之丰沛，自应分路扬镳。
现代文：高祖说： 洛阳是我的丰沛，自然应该分道扬镳。
English: Gao Zu said: Luoyang is my abundance, it is natural to part ways.

古文：自今以后，可分路而行。 
现代文：从今以后，可以划分道路行走。 
English: From now on, can be divided into road walking.

古文：及出，与彪折尺量道，各取其半。
现代文：等到出宫，和李彪拿起尺器量道路，各取一半。
English: After going out, Yuan Zhi and Li Biao took a ruler to measure the road, each taking half.

古文：高祖谓邢峦曰： 此兒竟可，所谓王孙公子，不镂自雕。 
现代文：高祖对邢峦说： 这个小伙子还可以，所谓王孙公子，不镂刻而自己雕琢。 
English: Gao Zu said to Zou: This young man is still good. The so-called Wang Sun Gongzi did not engrave, but carved it himself.

古文：峦曰： 露枝霜条，故多劲节，非鸾则凤，其在本枝也。 
现代文：邢峦说： 经过霜露的枝条，大多强劲有气节，落在本枝上的，不是鸾鸟就是凤凰。 
English: Zou said: Most of the branches that have gone through the frost and dew have strong air knots. If it falls on this branch, it is either an ostrich or a phoenix.

古文：员外郎冯俊，昭仪之弟，恃势恣挝所部里正。
现代文：员外郎冯俊，是昭仪的弟弟，依仗权势恣意敲打所属的里正。
English: Foreigner Feng Jun, the younger brother of Zhaoyi, used his power to arbitrarily beat up his subordinate Li Zheng.

古文：志令主吏收系，处刑除官。
现代文：元志命主管吏员逮捕关押，处以刑罚免除官职。
English: The official in charge of the former volunteer corps was arrested and detained, and was punished by being relieved of his official duties.

古文：由此忤旨，左迁太尉主簿。
现代文：因此违忤旨意，降为太尉主簿。
English: As a result, he offended the emperor and was demoted to the rank of captain.

古文：俄为从事中郎。
现代文：不久担任从事中郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of churo.

古文：车驾南征，高祖微服观战所，有箭欲犯帝，志以身障之，高祖便得免。
现代文：军队向南征伐，高祖穿着平民服装观察作战的地方，有枝箭射向皇帝，元志用身体遮挡，高祖便得以逃脱。
English: The army marched south, Gaozu, dressed in civilian clothes, observed the battle site, shot arrows at the emperor, Yuan Zhi used his body to shield him, and Gaozu was able to escape.

古文：矢中志目，因此一目丧明。
现代文：箭射中元志的眼睛，因此一只眼睛失明。
English: The arrow hit him in the eye, leaving him blind in one eye.

古文：以志行恆州事。
现代文：任命元志代行恒州事务。
English: He appointed Yuan Zhi as the responsible official of Hengzhou.

古文：世宗时，除荆州刺史，还朝，御史中尉王显奏志在州日，抑买良人为婢，兼乘请供朝。
现代文：世宗时，授任荆州刺史，回朝，御史中尉王显举奏元志在荆州之时，强行买下良民为婢女，以及剩留的人请求上供。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Wang Xian, a lieutenant of the Imperial Historian's Office, was awarded the title of Jingzhou Sashishi. When he returned to the imperial court, Wang Xian, a lieutenant of the Imperial Historian's Office, recited the legend that when he was in Jingzhou, he forcibly bought good people to be his maidservants, and those who were left behind requested him to surrender them.

古文：会赦免。
现代文：遇大赦获免。
English: He was released under an amnesty.

古文：肃宗初，兼廷尉卿。
现代文：肃宗初年，兼任廷尉卿。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Suzong, he also served as a courtier.

古文：后除扬州刺史，赐爵建忠伯。
现代文：后来授任扬州刺史，赐爵为建忠伯。
English: Later, he was also appointed as Yangzhou chief historian and given the title Jian Zhong Bo.

古文：志在州威名虽减李崇，亦为荆楚所惮。
现代文：元志在州中威名虽不如李崇，也为荆楚之人所畏惧。
English: Although the prestige of Yuan Zhi in the state is not as high as that of Li Chong, it is also feared by the people of Jingchu.

古文：寻为雍州刺史。
现代文：不久担任雍州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：晚年躭好声伎，在扬州日，侍侧将百人；器服珍丽，冠于一时。
现代文：晚年沉溺于声色伎乐，在扬州时，在身边侍奉的将近一百人，器物服饰珍奇美丽，高于当时标准。
English: In his later years, he indulged in vocal magic tricks. When he was in Yangzhou, there were nearly a hundred people serving around him, and the utensils and clothing were rare and beautiful, higher than the standard at that time.

古文：及在雍州，逾尚华侈，聚敛无极，声名遂损。
现代文：等到在雍州，更加崇尚奢侈，聚敛没有极限，声名于是损伤。
English: After he came to Yongzhou, he also pursued more luxury and extravagance, and his reputation suffered great damage.

古文：及莫折念生反，诏志为西征都督讨之。
现代文：等到莫折念生反叛，韶令元志为西征都督讨伐他。
English: When Moreno thought of rebelling, the emperor issued an imperial edict to make Yuan Zhi the governor of the Western Expedition and go to the crusade.

古文：念生遣其弟天生屯陇口，与志相持。
现代文：念生派遣他的弟弟天生驻守陇口，与元志对峙。
English: Nessen dispatched his younger brother Ingen, who was stationed in Hekou, to confront Motoshi.

古文：为贼所乘，遂弃大众奔还岐州。
现代文：元志被贼寇打败，于是放弃大军逃回岐州。
English: Yuan Zhi was defeated by the bandits, so he abandoned his army and fled back to Qizhou.

古文：贼遂攻城。
现代文：贼寇于是攻打城池。
English: The bandits then attacked the city.

古文：刺史裴芬之疑城人与贼潜通，将尽出之，志不听。
现代文：刺史裴芬之疑心城裹的人和贼寇暗中勾结，将要全部放出他们，元志不听从。
English: The suspicious-minded person who stabbed Shi Peifen colluded with the bandits in secret and was going to release them all, but Yuan Zhi did not listen.

古文：城人果开门引贼，锁志及芬之送念生，见害。
现代文：州民果然打开城门招引贼寇，用枷锁住元志和芬之送给念生，被杀。
English: The citizens of the state opened the city gate to lure the robbers, and they chained Motoshi and Fin to the yoke, and they were killed.

古文：前废帝初，赠尚书仆射、太保。
现代文：前废帝初年，追赠为尚书仆射、太保。
English: In the first year of the former deposed emperor, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Shangshu Puyi and Taibo.

古文：扶风公处真，烈帝之后也。
现代文：扶风公元处真，是烈帝的后代。
English: Fu Feng was born in the year of the Dragon, and is a descendant of the Emperor.

古文：少以壮烈闻。
现代文：年轻时以勇敢有气节闻名。
English: In his youth, he was known as a brave and energetic wrestler.

古文：位殿中尚书，赐爵扶风公，委以大政，甚见尊礼。
现代文：担任殿中尚书，赐爵为扶风公，将大政委托给他，十分受尊重礼敬。
English: He held the position of court scribe in the palace, was given a knighthood for his contribution to public morale, and was entrusted with great power. He was highly respected and honored.

古文：吐京胡曹仆浑等叛，招引朔方胡为援。
现代文：吐京胡曹仆浑等人反叛，招引朔方胡为增援。
English: Tujing Hu Cao, his retinue, and others rebelled and invited Shuo Fang Hu to join them as reinforcements.

古文：处真与高凉王那等讨灭之。
现代文：处真和高凉王元那等人讨伐消灭了他们。
English: Tsuchizane and Koryo Wangyuan and others joined the crusade and destroyed them.

古文：性贪婪，在军烈暴，坐事伏法。
现代文：性格贪婪，在军中行事残暴，因事获罪被处死。
English: He had a greedy personality, acted brutally in the army, and was executed for his crime.

古文：文安公泥，国之疏族也。
现代文：文安公元泥，是宗室疏远的同族人。
English: Wen An is a distant relative of the family.

古文：性忠直壮烈，有智画。
现代文：性格忠诚正直强健英勇，有智慧谋略。
English: Character: loyal, honest, strong and brave, with wisdom and strategy.

古文：太祖厚遇之，赐爵文安公，拜安东将军。
现代文：太祖优厚地对待他，赐爵为文安公，任命为安东将军。
English: The great-grandfather treated him generously, bestowing a knighthood on him and naming him General Anton.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子屈，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元屈，继承爵位。
English: His son, Genkuro, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：太宗时居门下，出纳诏命。
现代文：太宗时在门下省，发布韶命。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong's death, he was in the province under his tutelage.

古文：性明敏，善奏事，每合上旨。赐爵元城侯，加功劳将军，与南平公长孙嵩、白马侯崔玄伯等并决狱讼。
现代文：性格聪明敏捷，善于进奏事情，常合皇帝旨意，赐爵为元城侯，加授功劳将军，和南平公长孙嵩、白马侯崖圭堂等人一起决断诉讼。
English: He was clever and quick-witted, good at playing things forward, always in line with the emperor's will, knighted as a former city lord, awarded the general of merit, and decided the lawsuit together with Nanping Prince Sun Song, Bai Ma Hou Yapuidang and others.

古文：太宗东巡，命屈行右丞相，山阳侯奚斤行左丞相，命掌军国，甚有声誉。
现代文：叁塞向东巡视，命五星代理右丞相，山阳侯罢丘代理左丞相，命二人掌管军队朝政，十分有声誉。
English: Xie Xie made a tour to the east, ordering the five stars to act as the minister of the right, and the Sanyang marquis to act as the minister of the left. The two men in charge of the army and the government had a very good reputation.

古文：后吐京胡与离石胡出以兵等叛，置立将校，外引赫连屈丐。
现代文：后来吐京胡和离石胡出以兵等人反叛，设立将校，向外招引赫连屈丐。
English: Later, Tujing Hu and Lixi Hu revolted with soldiers and others, setting up officers on their own, while others colluded with Heren and Kugye.

古文：屈督会稽公刘洁、永安侯魏勤捍之。勤没于陈，洁坠马，胡执送屈丐，唯屈从犹存。
现代文：元屈统领会稽公室烬、永安侯瑟勤抵御，逸勤死于战阵，型辽落马，被吐塞翅抓住并押送给显王，仅五星的部众还存在。
English: Yuan Qutong grasped the ashes of the auditor's office, Yong'an Houser diligently resisted, Yingqin died in the battle, the type Liao fell off his horse, was caught by the wings and escorted to the king, only the five-star subordinates still exist.

古文：太宗以屈没失二将，欲斩之。
现代文：左塞因元届损失二位将领，想杀了他。
English: Zuo Sei wanted to kill him because he lost two generals in the first year.

古文：时并州刺史元六头荒淫怠事，乃赦屈令摄州事。
现代文：这时差塑刺史元六头荒淫懈怠，就赦免元屈让他代理州中事务。
English: At this time, the poor plastic prick, Yuan Rikuto, was lax and lazy, so he pardoned Yuan Qu and let him act for the affairs of the middle school.

古文：屈纵酒，颇废政事，太宗积其前后失，槛车徵还，斩于市。
现代文：元屈纵情饮酒，很荒废政事，塞塞累积他前后的过失，用囚车召回，在街市斩首。
English: Yuan Keng indulgent drinking, very wasteful politics, Jie Ce accumulated his past and future mistakes, recalled with a prisoner car, beheaded in the street market.

古文：子磨浑，少为太宗所知。
现代文：儿子磨运，年轻时为主塞所了解。
English: The son of a miller, when he was young, he learned from the master.

古文：元绍之逆也，太宗潜隐于外，磨浑与叔孙俊诈云太宗所在。
现代文：五钮作乱时，友塞躲藏在外，磨运和担还俊假称主塞所在的地方。
English: When the five knobs make a mess, the friend plug hides outside, and the grind and carry back the place where the main plug is supposed to be.

古文：绍使帐下二人随磨浑往，规为逆。
现代文：豆题派手下二人跟随磨运前去，谋划杀死左塞。
English: Yuan Shao then sent two men to go with Ma Hun to catch him, seeing Ma Hun as an accomplice.

古文：磨浑既得出，便缚帐下诣太宗斩之。
现代文：磨运出来后，就捆绑二人前往太宗那裹杀掉。
English: After grinding, they tied up the two and went to Taizongna to kill them.

古文：太宗得磨浑，大喜，因为羽翼。
现代文：太宗得到磨浑功勋赐爵位为长沙公，刺史。
English: Taizong was given the title of Lord of Changsha by the Ma Hun Gong.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

