古文：高乾，字乾邕，渤海蓚人也。
现代文：高乾，字乾邕，渤海蓚地人氏。
English: Gao Qian, Zha Qian Qian, and the local people of Bohai Bay are the main characters.

古文：父翼，字次同，豪侠有风神，为州里所宗敬。
现代文：父翼，字次同，豪侠有风度，被州中人士所尊崇。
English: His father, Tsubasa, has the same name. He is a heroic man with good manners and is revered by people in the prefecture.

古文：孝昌末，葛荣作乱于燕、赵，朝廷以翼山东豪右，即家拜渤海太守。
现代文：孝昌末，葛荣在燕、赵诸地作乱，朝廷认为翼是山东的豪族，便在他的家中拜他为渤海太守。
English: At the end of Xiaochang, Ge Rong caused turmoil in Yan and Zhao provinces. The imperial court believed that Ying was a powerful family in Shandong, and worshiped him as the governor of the Bohai Sea in his home.

古文：至郡未几，贼徒愈盛，翼部率合境，徙居河、济之间。
现代文：上任没有几天，贼徒越来越多，翼率领所有部众，移居河、济之间。
English: Within a few days of taking office, more and more bandits, led by Wing, migrated between the river and the farm.

古文：魏因置东冀州，以翼为刺史，加镇东将军、乐城县侯。
现代文：于是魏设置了东冀州，以翼为刺史，加镇东将军、乐城县侯。
English: As a result, Wei set up the East Hebei Province, taking the wing as the stinging history, adding the East General Town and the Lecheng County.

古文：及尔朱兆弑庄帝，翼保境自守。
现代文：当尔朱兆弑杀庄帝时，翼保境自守。
English: When Zhu Zhaohui killed Zhuangdi, Ying Bao Jie defended himself.

古文：谓诸子曰： 主忧臣辱，主辱臣死，今社稷阽危，人神愤怨，破家报国，在此时也。
现代文：翼对自己的儿子们说： 主忧臣辱，主辱臣死，眼下社稷岌岌可危，民众、神灵愤怒怨恨。破家荡产来报答国家，就在这个时候了。
English: Tsubasa said to his sons, "The lord is worried about the humiliation of his vassals, and the lord is ashamed of the death of his vassals. At the moment, the social order is in a precarious situation, and the people and gods are angry and resentful. It is time to repay the country by breaking up the family.

古文：尔朱兄弟，性甚猜忌，忌则多害，汝等宜早图之。
现代文：尔朱氏兄弟，性格异常猜忌，猜忌便会生出害人之心，你们应该趁早打算。
English: Brothers of the Lzhu clan, your character is unusually suspicious. Suspicion will give rise to a harmful heart. You should plan ahead.

古文：先人有夺人之心，时不可失也。 
现代文：先人就要有夺人之心，不要失去了大好时机。 
English: Ancestors must have a winning heart, do not lose a great opportunity.

古文：事未辑而卒。
现代文：事情还没有协调好，翼就死了。
English: Things hadn't been coordinated yet, and Tsubasa died.

古文：中兴初，赠使持节、侍中、太保、录尚书事、冀定瀛相殷幽六州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥曰文宣。
现代文：中兴初，赠使持节、侍中、太保、录尚书事、冀定瀛相殷幽六州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥号文宣。
English: At the beginning of the rejuvenation, he gave gifts to the military of six states, the history of Jizhou, and the nickname of Wenxuan.

古文：乾性明悟，俊伟有知略，美音容，进止都雅。
现代文：乾聪颖明悟，俊伟有智谋，音容美好，进止合乎规范。
English: Qian Cong Ying Mingguo, Jun Wei has wisdom, beautiful tone, and the progress is in accordance with the standard.

古文：少时轻侠，数犯公法，长而修改，轻财重义，多所交结。
现代文：少时轻侠，多次违犯公法，长大后翻然改过，而且轻财重义，交结了很多朋友。
English: When he was young, he was reckless and repeatedly violated public law. When he grew up, he changed his ways completely. Moreover, he valued money more than justice, and he made many friends.

古文：魏领军元叉，权重当世，以意气相得，接乾甚厚。
现代文：魏领军元叉，权倾当时，两人因意气相得，故叉以厚礼待乾。
English: At the time of the Wei leader Yuan Xuan's rise to power, the two men were attracted to each other because of their similar spirit, so Yuan Xuan waited for his turn with great courtesy.

古文：起家拜员外散骑侍郎，领直后，转太尉士曹、司徒中兵，迁员外。
现代文：起家拜员外散骑侍郎、领直后，转太尉士曹、司徒中兵、迁员外。
English: After starting the family, the worshiper rode horseback and led the attendants, and then became a captain, a sergeant, a sergeant-major, and a non-resident.

古文：魏孝庄之居藩也，乾潜相托附。
现代文：魏孝庄帝未作帝以前，乾偷偷地与他互相托附。
English: Before Wei Xiaozhuang became emperor, Qian secretly supported him.

古文：及尔朱荣入洛，乾东奔于翼。
现代文：当尔朱荣进入洛阳时，乾逃往东方投奔高翼。
English: When Er Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, Qian fled to the east to join Gao Yu.

古文：庄帝立，遥除龙骧将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，遥拜乾龙骧将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, General Qianlongyu was worshipped from afar, and Tsunzhi Sanzhi, a regular attendant, rode on horseback.

古文：乾兄弟本有从横志，见荣杀害人士，谓天下遂乱，乃率河北流人反于河、济之间，受葛荣官爵，屡败齐州士马。
现代文：乾兄弟本有纵横之志，见尔朱荣杀害人士，认为天下即将大乱，乃率领河北流民在河、济之间造反，还接受了葛荣的官爵，并且屡次打败了齐州士马。
English: Originally, the Qian brothers had a long-range ambition. They saw Zhu Rong killing people and thought that the world was about to be in chaos. Instead, they led the people of Hebei to rebel between the river and the economy. They also accepted the official title of Ge Rong and repeatedly defeated the Shima of Qizhou.

古文：庄帝寻遣右仆射元罗巡抚三齐，乾兄弟相率出降。
现代文：不久庄帝派右仆射元罗巡抚三齐，乾兄弟相继向朝廷投降。
English: Soon after, Emperor Zhuang sent his right-hand man, Governor Sho Yuanluo, and the three Qian brothers surrendered to the imperial court one after another.

古文：朝廷以乾为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：帝拜乾为给事黄门侍郎。
English: Dibai Qian is the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：尔朱荣以乾前罪，不应复居近要，庄帝听乾解官归乡里。
现代文：尔朱荣认为依照乾以前犯下的罪恶，不应任近要官爵，庄帝也就准许乾解官返归故里。
English: Er Zhurong believed that according to the sins committed by Qian before, he should not be allowed to be close to the official, and Zhuangdi also allowed Qian to return to his hometown.

古文：于是招纳骁勇，以射猎自娱。
现代文：回乡后，乾招纳骁勇，以打猎射箭为娱乐。
English: After returning to his hometown, he trained himself to be a daredevil and enjoyed hunting and archery.

古文：荣死，乾驰赴洛阳，庄帝见之，大喜。
现代文：荣死，乾快马赶赴洛阳，庄帝看到后，极其高兴。
English: After the death of Emperor Rong, Emperor Qian hurried to Luoyang. When Emperor Zhuang saw this, he was extremely happy.

古文：时尔朱徒党拥兵在外，庄帝以乾为金紫光禄大夫、河北大使，令招集乡闾为表里形援。
现代文：此时尔朱氏党徒拥兵在外，庄帝以乾为金紫光禄大夫、河北大使，令其招集乡勇互为表里作为朝廷的后援。
English: At this time, the followers of the Zhu clan were away, and Emperor Zhuang appointed Qian as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and the ambassador of Hebei Province, and ordered him to recruit local heroes to serve as the back-up of the imperial court.

古文：乾垂涕奉诏，弟昂拔剑起舞，请以死自效。
现代文：乾流着眼泪接诏，其弟昂拔剑起舞，请求以死报答皇帝之恩。
English: Receiving the imperial edict with dry tears, his younger brother, Ang, drew his sword and danced, begging to repay the emperor's kindness with his death.

古文：俄而尔朱兆入洛，寻遣其监军孙白鹞百余骑至冀州，托言普征民马，欲待乾兄弟送马，因收之。
现代文：不久尔朱兆进居洛阳。很快兆打发自己的监军孙白鹞领百余骑到冀州，宣言普征民马，准备等候乾兄弟送马来时，将他们抓获。
English: Not long after, Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang. Soon, Zhao sent his overseer, Sun Baiyun, with more than a hundred horsemen to Jizhou, declaring the universal enlistment of the people's horses, ready to wait for the Qian brothers to send horses and capture them.

古文：乾既宿有报复之心，而白鹞忽至，知将见图，乃先机定策，潜勒壮士，袭据州城，传檄州郡，杀白鹞，执刺史元仲宗。
现代文：乾早就有了报复之心，当白鹞突然到来的时候，知道自己要被他们算计，于是先定谋略，暗中带领壮士，突然袭击，占领了州城，并且传檄州郡，杀死白鹞，活捉了刺史元仲宗。
English: Qian had a revengeful heart for a long time. When the egrets suddenly arrived, he knew that he was going to be counted by them, so he first decided on a strategy, secretly led the strong men, made a surprise attack, occupied the state capital, and passed it to the state county, killed the egrets, and captured the assassin, Yuan Zhongzong, alive.

古文：推封隆之权行州事，为庄帝举哀，三军缟素。
现代文：乾推封隆之权行州刺史事，还为庄帝举哀，三军素缟。
English: The three armies marched in mourning for Emperor Zhuang following the historical event of Emperor Fenglong's power trip to the state.

古文：乾升坛誓众，辞气激扬，涕泪交下，将士莫不哀愤。
现代文：乾走上祭坛鼓动士气，其辞气激昂，涕泪交下，将士们没有一个不哀伤悲愤的。
English: They dryly walked up to the altar to encourage morale, their words were passionate, tears were shed, and none of the soldiers were not sad and angry.

古文：北受幽州刺史刘灵助节度，共为影响。
现代文：北受幽州刺史刘灵助节度统领，互为影响。
English: The north was dominated by the Yuzhou poet Liu Lingzuo, and the two influenced each other.

古文：俄而灵助被杀。
现代文：很快，灵助被人诛杀。
English: Soon after, Rinsuke was beaten to death.

古文：属高祖出山东，扬声来讨，众情莫不惶惧。
现代文：适逢高祖从山东出发，声言前来讨伐，众人因此不安，个个惶恐。
English: At the right time, Gao Zu set out from Shandong and announced that he would come to fight. As a result, everyone was uneasy and panicked.

古文：乾谓其徒曰： 吾闻高晋州雄略盖世，其志不居人下。
现代文：乾对自己的党徒们说： 我听说高晋州胆略盖世，其志气绝不在人之下。
English: Qian said to his party members: I heard that Gao Jinzhou is a daredevil, and his spirit is by no means inferior to others.

古文：且尔朱无道，杀主虐民，正是英雄效义之会也。
现代文：再说尔朱氏无道，弑主害民，这正是英雄为正义效力的时候。
English: Moreover, the Zhu clan has no way, the tyrant harms the people, this is exactly the time for the hero to work for justice.

古文：今日之来，必有深计，吾当轻马奉迎，密参意旨，诸君但勿忧惧，听我一行。 
现代文：今天他到这里来，必有更深层次的打算，我们应该轻马相迎，密陈旨意，大伙不要忧患恐惧，请让我去一趟吧。 
English: Today, when he comes here, he must have a deeper intention. We should welcome each other with open arms and make a secret will. Everyone, don't worry or be afraid. Please let me go.

古文：乾乃将十数骑于关口迎谒。
现代文：乾便带领十多骑前往关口迎接。
English: He led more than ten riders to the pass to welcome them.

古文：乾既晓达时机，闲习世事，言辞慷慨，雅合深旨，高祖大加赏重，仍同帐寝宿。
现代文：乾既通晓时机，且熟悉世事，言辞慷慨，十分合乎高祖的心意。因之高祖大加奖赏，还和他同帐共寝。
English: Since Qian knew the timing and was familiar with the world, his words were generous and very much in line with Gao Zu's intentions. Because of this, Gao Zu rewarded him greatly and even slept with him.

古文：时高祖虽内有远图，而外迹未见，尔朱羽生为殷州刺史，高祖密遣李元忠举兵逼其城，令乾率众伪往救之。
现代文：这时的高祖虽内心有着远大抱负，但外表上没有显露丝毫痕迹。尔朱羽生为殷州刺史，高祖秘密打发李元忠领兵围逼其城，并命令乾统众假装前往援救。
English: At this time, Gao Zu, although he had great ambitions in his heart, did not show the slightest trace on the outside. Er Zhu Yanyan was born in Yinzhou, Gao Zu secretly sent Li Yuanzhong to lead the troops to surround his city, and ordered Qian to pretend to go to the rescue.

古文：乾遂轻骑入见羽生，与指画军计。
现代文：乾便单骑跑进城中拜见羽生，同他商定防守计划。
English: He rode alone to the city to meet with Hanyu and agreed on a defense plan.

古文：羽生与乾俱出，因擒之，遂平殷州。
现代文：羽生与乾一道出城，即被高祖生擒，这样平定了殷州。
English: Hanyu and Qian went out of the city together and were captured by Gao Zuo, thus pacifying Yinzhou.

古文：又共定策推立中兴主，拜乾侍中、司空。
现代文：又同高祖等人定策推立中兴主为帝，因拜乾侍中、司空。
English: In addition, together with Gao Zu and others, they decided to promote Zhongxing Lord as emperor, and because of worship, Qian Zhi Zhong and Siku came out.

古文：先是信都草创，军国权舆，乾遭丧不得终制。
现代文：早些时候，信都草创，军国权舆，乾遭父母之丧却不能为他们守孝。
English: Earlier, the founder of the faith, the military sovereign, suffered the loss of his parents but could not be a filial son for them.

古文：及武帝立，天下初定，乾乃表请解职，行三年之礼。
现代文：当武帝即位后，天下逐渐安定，乾便上表请求辞职，归家行三年之孝。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, the world gradually stabilized, and he submitted his resignation and returned home after three years of filial piety.

古文：诏听解侍中，司空如故，封长乐郡公，邑一千户。
现代文：帝下诏同意解除侍中，但要保留司空之位，还封他为长乐郡公，食邑一千户。
English: Emperor Taizong agreed to dismiss the chamberlain, but he wanted to retain the position of Siku, and also made him the governor of Changle County, with a thousand households.

古文：乾虽求退，不谓便见从许。
现代文：乾虽然求退，却不让他随便入朝。
English: Although Inui pleaded for retreat, he was not allowed to enter the Imperial Palace at will.

古文：既去内侍，朝廷罕所关知，居常怏怏。
现代文：既然辞掉了内侍之职，朝廷也就不太关心照顾他了，所以心情不太畅快。
English: Now that he has resigned his position as a chamberlain, the imperial court is not very concerned about taking care of him, so he is not in a good mood.

古文：武帝将贰于高祖，望乾为己用，会于华林园，宴罢，独留乾，谓之曰： 司空奕世忠良，今日复建殊效，相与虽则君臣，实亦义同兄弟，宜共立盟约以敦情契。 
现代文：武帝对高祖存有二心，就希望乾能为己效力，曾在华林园设宴，毕，只让乾一人留下，说： 司空盖世的忠良，今日又立有特别的功劳，我们虽是君臣之交，但却是情同手足的兄弟，所以应该共立盟约来加深我们的关系。 
English: Emperor Wu had two hearts for Gao Zu, so he hoped that Qian would be able to work for him. He held a banquet in Hualing Garden, and only allowed Qian to stay behind, saying: "Sikong, the most loyal person in the world, has made a special contribution today. Although we are friends of kings and ministers, we are brothers who love each other, so we should make a covenant to deepen our relationship.

古文：殷勤逼之。
现代文：武帝极其真诚地逼迫着他。
English: Saying this, Emperor Xiaowu very diligently urged Gao Qian to sign the contract.

古文：乾对曰： 臣世奉朝廷，遇荷殊宠，以身许国，何敢有贰。 
现代文：乾回答说： 我家世代服事朝廷，而且得了极高的宠遇，因此只有以身报国，而丝毫没有异心。 
English: Qian replied, "My family has served the imperial court for generations, and we have been extremely favored, so I can only serve the country in my own right, and I have no ulterior motives.

古文：乾虽有此对，然非其本心。
现代文：乾虽然有这样的回答，但不是发自肺腑。
English: Although Inui had such an answer, it wasn't from the heart.

古文：事出仓卒，又不谓武帝便有异图，遂不固辞，而不启高祖。
现代文：事情仓猝，又不敢说武帝有不好的企图，更不敢坚决推辞，也不启奏高祖。
English: Things were in a hurry, and he did not dare to say that Emperor Wu had bad intentions, nor did he dare to firmly refuse, nor did he play Gaozu.

古文：及武帝置部曲，乾乃私谓所亲曰： 主上不亲勋贤，而招集群竖。
现代文：乾看到武帝设置部曲，私底下对亲近的人说： 主上不亲近勋贵贤臣，却招募小人。
English: Seeing Emperor Wu setting up the orchestra, Qian privately said to those close to him, "Lord, I am not close to the nobles and sages, but I am recruiting villains."

古文：数遣元士弼、王思政往来关西，与贺拔岳计议。
现代文：多次打发元士弼、王思政前往关西，同贺拔岳计议。
English: He repeatedly sent Yuan Shijun and Wang Shizheng to Kansai to discuss the plan of conquering Mt.

古文：又出贺拔胜为荆州刺史，外示疏忌，实欲树党，令其兄弟相近，冀据有西方。
现代文：又出贺拔胜任荆州刺史，外表上显示疏远猜忌，内底里则在树立朋党，令其兄弟相近，试图占有西方。
English: In addition, He Prabang was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou Province. On the outside, he showed alienation and suspicion, but on the inside, he was building a crony party, making his brothers close, and trying to occupy the West.

古文：祸难将作，必及于我。 
现代文：祸难即将出现，我很快就要遭殃了。 
English: Now disaster is about to strike, and it's bound to be me.

古文：乃密启高祖。
现代文：于是向高祖密报。
English: So he informed Gao Zu secretly.

古文：高祖召乾诣并州，面论时事，乾因劝高祖以受魏禅。
现代文：高祖召乾前往并州，一块讨论时事，乾于是劝高祖接受魏帝的禅让。
English: Gaozhu summoned Qian to discuss current affairs with him in Bianzhou. Qian then advised Gaozhu to accept Emperor Wei's offer of Zen.

古文：高祖以袖掩其口曰： 勿妄言。
现代文：高祖用衣袖堵着他的口说： 不要胡说。
English: Gaozu stuffed his mouth with his sleeve and said, "Don't talk nonsense.

古文：今启司空复为侍中，门下之事，一以相委。 
现代文：今天我已奏禀皇上请求恢复你的侍中之职，那样的话，门下的事情，就全部拜托给你了。 
English: Today I have written to the Emperor to request the reinstatement of your position as an attendant. In that case, I will entrust all the affairs of the household to you.

古文：高祖屡启，诏书竟不施行。
现代文：高祖对此事虽然多次请求，但诏书一直不下。
English: Although Gaozu has repeatedly requested this matter, the imperial edict has not been issued.

古文：乾以频请不遂，知变难将起，密启高祖，求为徐州，乃除使持节、都督三徐诸军事、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史。
现代文：数次恳请，均无答复，乾感觉到灾难就要出现了，秘密地向高祖作了报告，要求赴徐州任职，朝廷也就授予他使持节、都督三徐诸军事、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史。
English: Several times he pleaded, but there was no reply. Sensing that a disaster was about to occur, Qian secretly reported to Gao Zu and requested to go to Xuzhou to serve. The imperial court also awarded him the title of envoy, the governor of Sanzhu, the military, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and the history of Xuzhou.

古文：指期将发，而帝知乾泄漏前事，乃诏高祖云： 曾与乾邕私有盟约，今复反覆两端。 
现代文：快要动身上路时，帝知道乾泄漏了以前的密事，就诏告高祖说： 朕与乾邕早有盟约，现在他又自食其言了。 
English: When he was about to set out on his journey, knowing that Qianlong had divulged the secret of the past, the emperor told Gao Zu: I had a covenant with Qianlong long ago, but now he has gone back on his word.

古文：高祖便取乾前后数启论时事者，遣使封送武帝。
现代文：高祖就拿出乾前后递交的论启，打发使者呈送武帝。
English: Gaozu took out the commentaries submitted before and after and sent an envoy to present them to Emperor Wu.

古文：帝召乾邕示之，禁于门下省，对高祖使人责乾前后之失。
现代文：帝召来乾，将所有论启交给他看后，便将他拘禁到了门下省，还当着高祖的使者，数落乾前后的过失。
English: After summoning Emperor Qian and showing him all the teachings, he detained him in the province next to the emperor's residence and, in front of Emperor Gaozhu's emissaries, counted the faults before and after Qian's death.

古文：乾曰： 臣以身奉国，义尽忠贞，陛下既立异图，而乃云臣反覆。
现代文：乾辩解道： 我以身奉国，义尽忠贞，陛下既然已经有了异图，却指责我反复无常。
English: Dryly, he explained: I have been loyal to my country through my service and righteousness, but since His Majesty has a different view, he accuses me of being capricious.

古文：以匹夫加诸罪，尚或难免，况人主推恶，复何逃命。欲加之罪，其无辞乎？
现代文：如果是一般人这样批评，我也没有脸面了，何况是皇上谴斥，哪有活命的可能？欲加之罪，何患无辞。
English: If it were an ordinary person who criticized me in this way, I would have no face left, and what's more, if it were the Emperor who reprimanded me, what chance would I have of surviving?

古文：功大身危，自古然也。
现代文：功高震主，自古至今，都是如此。
English: This has been the case since ancient times and continues to be the case today.

古文：若死而有知，庶无负庄帝。 
现代文：假如我死后有知，无疑是不会辜负庄帝的希望的。 
English: If I had knowledge after my death, there is no doubt that I would not disappoint Zhuang Di's hope.

古文：遂赐死，时年三十七。
现代文：乾即被赐死，死时年仅三十七岁。
English: He was sentenced to death and died at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：乾临死，神色不变，见者莫不叹惜焉。
现代文：乾临死之前，神色不变，看他的人无不为之惋惜感叹。
English: Before his death, Qian Qian's face remained unchanged, and everyone who saw him was filled with regret and lamentation.

古文：时武卫将军元整监刑，谓乾曰： 颇有书及家人乎？ 
现代文：此时武卫将军元整监刑，对乾说： 有书信要交给家里人吧？ 
English: At this time, General Wuwei, who was in prison for rectification, said to Qian: Do you have a letter to give to your family?

古文：乾曰： 吾兄弟分张，各在异处，今日之事，想无全者，儿子既小，未有所识，亦恐巢倾卵破，夫欲何言。 
现代文：乾说： 我们兄弟分开后，各在不同的地方，今天的事情，料想到没有好的结果，我的儿子很小，什么都不懂，大概也会倾巢破卵，我还想说什么呢？ 
English: Qian said: After our brothers separated, each in a different place, today's events, I expected no good results. My son is very young, he doesn't know anything, and he will probably also fall apart. What else do I want to say?

古文：后高祖讨斛斯椿等，次盟津，谓乾弟昂曰： 若早用司空之策，岂有今日之举也！ 
现代文：后来高祖讨伐斛斯椿等，驻扎盟津，对乾的弟弟昂说： 我如果早点采用司空的谋略，那会有今天的举动！ 
English: Later, Gao Zu battled with Shishi Tsubaki and others, stationed in Mengjin, and said to Qian's younger brother Aung: If I had adopted Sikuo's strategy earlier, there would have been today's move!

古文：天平初，赠使持节、都督冀定沧瀛幽齐徐青光兖十州军事、太师、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谥曰文昭。
现代文：天平初，朝廷赠乾使持节、都督冀定沧瀛幽齐徐青光兖十州军事、太师、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谥号文昭。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, the imperial court presented the Jianjing Jisi Festival, the governor of Hebei, Ding Cang, Yu Qi, Xu Qingguang, the military of Shizhou, Taishi, the record of Shanzhang, the history of Hebei, and the honorary title of Wenzhao.

古文：长子继叔袭祖乐城县侯，令第二子吕儿袭乾爵。
现代文：乾长子继叔承袭其祖父的爵位为乐城县侯，朝廷下令乾弟第二子吕儿承继乾爵。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Qian, his step-uncle, inherited his grandfather's title of Lord of Lecheng County. The court ordered Qian's second son, Lü Er, to succeed Emperor Qian.

古文：乾弟慎，字仲密，颇涉文史，与兄弟志尚不同，偏为父所爱。
现代文：高乾之弟慎，字仲密，饱览文史，与兄弟志向有异，而得父亲钟爱。
English: Gao Qian's younger brother, Shen, was well-spoken, well-read in literature and history, had different aspirations from his brothers, but was loved by his father.

古文：魏中兴初，除沧州刺史、东南道行台尚书。
现代文：魏中兴初，除沧州刺史、东南道行台尚书。
English: At the beginning of the Wei and Qing dynasties, except for the history of Cangzhou and the history of Southeastern Dao, there were no written records.

古文：太昌初，迁光州刺史，加骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：太昌初，迁光州刺史，加骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, he moved to Gwangju to make history, and was promoted to the General of Cavalry and the Third Division of Cavalry.

古文：时天下初定，听慎以本乡部曲数千人自随。
现代文：时天下初定，准许慎以本乡部曲数千人跟随。
English: When the time was initially set, thousands of people were allowed to follow along with the local folk song.

古文：慎为政严酷，又纵左右，吏民苦之。
现代文：慎为政严酷，又怂恿左右，所以吏民深受其害。
English: Caution is a harsh policy, and it is lopsided, so the officials and the people suffer from it.

古文：兄乾死，密弃州将归高祖，武帝敕青州断其归路。
现代文：兄乾死，慎秘密放弃光州投奔高祖，武帝则下令青州截断他的归路。
English: After the death of his brother Qian, Shen secretly abandoned Gwangju to join Gaozu, and Emperor Wu ordered Qingzhou to cut off his return route.

古文：慎间行至晋阳，高祖以为大行台左丞，转尚书，当官无所回避，时咸畏惮之。
现代文：慎从小路赶往晋阳，高祖委任他做了大行台左丞，转尚书。因敢于揭发人的短处，所以民吏们都害怕他。
English: Shen hurried from the back roads to Jinyang, and Gaozu appointed him to be the grand commander of the left line, and to be the scribe. Because he dared to expose people's shortcomings, the officials were afraid of him.

古文：自义旗之后，安州民恃其边险，不宾王化，寻以慎为行台仆射，率众讨平之。
现代文：自义旗树立之后，安州民众依仗其边地险峻，不服朝廷，不久以慎为行台仆射，领兵平定了该地。
English: After the flag of self-righteousness was erected, the people of Anzhou relied on its precipitous edge, disobeyed the imperial court, and soon used caution as a platform, leading the troops to pacify the place.

古文：天平末，拜侍中，加开府。
现代文：天平末，拜侍中，加开府。
English: At the end of the world, in the middle of the world, in Kaifu.

古文：元象初，出为兖州刺史。
现代文：元象初，出任兖州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, he served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：寻征为御史中尉，选用御史，多其亲戚乡闾，不称朝望，世宗奏令改选焉。
现代文：很快征为御史中尉，而所选用的御史，多是亲戚乡邻，不符合朝廷的期望，世宗向朝廷上书，请求改选。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the Imperial Historian, but the Imperial Historians he chose were mostly relatives and neighbors, which did not meet the expectations of the Imperial Court. Sejong wrote to the Imperial Court to request a re-election.

古文：慎前妻吏部郎中崔暹妹，为慎所弃。
现代文：慎前妻为吏部郎中崔暹的妹妹，后来被慎抛弃。
English: Shen's previous wife was the younger sister of Choi Sie, a member of the cadre, who was later abandoned by Shen.

古文：暹时为世宗委任，慎谓其构己，性既狷急，积怀愤恨，因是罕有纠劾，多所纵舍。
现代文：暹这时正被世宗倚重，慎认为暹挑拨离间，加之性情急躁，积怨成恨，由是对犯法违纪者很少纠劾，反加纵舍。
English: At that time, Siam was held in high esteem by the world, and it was cautiously believed that Siam was trying to sow discord. Coupled with its impatient nature and the accumulation of resentment, there were few reprimands against those who violated the law and discipline, and the punishment was lenient.

古文：高祖嫌责之，弥不自安。
现代文：高祖有意见了，责备他，使得他更加不自安。
English: Gaozhu had an objection and scolded him, making him even more uneasy.

古文：出为北豫州刺史，遂据武牢降西魏。
现代文：朝廷放出任北豫州刺史，于是他占据武牢投降了西魏。
English: The imperial court released Ren Beiyuzhou, so he occupied the military prison and surrendered to the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：慎先入关。
现代文：慎最先入关。
English: Shen was the first to pass through.

古文：周文帝率众东出，高祖破之于邙山。
现代文：周文帝领众向东进发，在邙山被高祖打败。
English: Emperor Zhou Enlai led his people eastward and was defeated by Gaozu in Shaoshan.

古文：慎妻子将西度，于路尽禽之。
现代文：慎妻及子想逃往西方，在行进途中全被抓获。
English: Shen's wife and son wanted to flee to the West, but they were all caught on the way.

古文：高祖以其勋家，启慎一房配没而已。
现代文：高祖看在勋家的面上，上书朝廷只要求配没慎的一家。
English: Gao Zu looked at the face of the honored family and wrote to the imperial court to request only a family that was worthy of the honor.

古文：昂，字敖曹，乾第三弟。
现代文：高昂，字敖曹，乾第三弟。
English: Gao'ang, Zhe Cao, Qian's third brother.

古文：幼稚时，便有壮气。
现代文：小时候就有壮气。
English: When I was a child, I had a strong will.

古文：长而俶傥，胆力过人，龙眉豹颈，姿体雄异。
现代文：年轻时洒脱不拘，胆力过人，龙眉豹颈，姿体雄异。
English: When he was young, he was carefree and daring, with long eyebrows, a leopard neck, and a masculine physique.

古文：其父为求严师，令加捶挞。
现代文：其父为他找了位严厉的教师，并请多加捶挞。
English: His father found him a stern teacher and told him to study harder.

古文：昂不遵师训，专事驰骋，每言男儿当横行天下，自取富贵，谁能端坐读书作老博士也。
现代文：昂不从师训，专事驰骋，常说男儿当横行天下，自己争取富贵，那能呆坐读书，作老博士？
English: It is often said that men should run rampant in the world and strive for wealth, but can they sit still and read books and become old doctors?

古文：与兄乾数为劫掠，州县莫能穷治。
现代文：与兄乾一道，多次抢劫掠夺，州县不能给以治罪。
English: Together with his elder brother, Qian, he robbed and plundered many times. The state and county cannot punish him.

古文：招聚剑客，家资倾尽，乡闾畏之，无敢违迕。
现代文：他还招集剑客，倾尽家资，乡里畏惧他，不敢丝毫得罪。
English: He also summoned swordsmen and spent all his family's money. The villagers were afraid of him and did not dare to offend him in the slightest.

古文：父翼常谓人曰： 此儿不灭我族，当大吾门，不直为州豪也。 
现代文：其父翼经常对人讲： 这个儿子不是灭亡我的家族，就是要高大我家的门面，不只是州里的豪强。 
English: His father Tsubasa would often say to people: This son is not going to ruin my family, he is going to be the face of my family, not just the strong man of the state.

古文：建义初，兄弟共举兵，既而奉旨散众，仍除通直散骑侍郎，封武城县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：建义初年，昂兄弟一同举兵，不久又奉旨散众，被朝廷委任为通直散骑侍郎，封武城县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the Ang brothers raised an army together, and soon they were ordered by the imperial court to serve as horsemen, and were assigned to 500 households in Wucheng County.

古文：乾解官归，与昂俱在乡里，阴养壮士。尔朱荣闻而恶之，密令刺史元仲宗诱执昂，送于晋阳。
现代文：乾辞职归家，与昂均居乡里，阴养壮士，尔朱荣听报后很不高兴，密令刺史元仲宗诱捕昂，解送晋阳。
English: Qian resigned and returned home. He and Ang both lived in the countryside, and Yin raised a strong man, Lu Zhu Rong was very unhappy after hearing the news. He secretly ordered the assassin, Yuan Zhongzong, to entrap Ang and send him to Jinyang.

古文：永安末，荣入洛，以昂自随，禁于驼牛署。
现代文：永安末，尔朱荣进入洛阳，让昂跟随着，拘禁在驼牛署。
English: At the end of Yongan, Er Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, followed by Zhan Ang, and was detained at the Camel Cattle Station.

古文：既而荣死，魏庄帝既引见劳勉之。
现代文：不久荣死，魏庄帝马上召见并慰问了他。
English: Soon after his death, Emperor Wei Zhuang immediately summoned him and consoled him.

古文：时尔朱既隆还逼宫阙，帝亲临大夏门指麾处分。
现代文：时尔朱世隆回师围逼宫阙，帝亲赴大夏门指挥。
English: When Zhu Shilong returned to the palace, the emperor personally went to the Great Summer Gate to command.

古文：昂既免缧绁，被甲横戈，志凌劲敌。乃与其从子长命等推锋径进，所向披靡。
现代文：昂获得自由，披甲执锐，志凌强敌，乃与其从子长命等人挥舞刀枪，冲入敌阵，所到之处，全部披靡。
English: Aung gained freedom, wore armor tenaciously, and was determined to defeat the powerful enemy. Instead, he and his son waved their swords and guns and rushed into the enemy's lines. Everywhere they went, they were defeated.

古文：帝及观者莫不壮之。
现代文：帝和旁观的人没有一个不竖大姆指的。
English: Neither the emperor nor the onlookers did not give a thumbs up.

古文：既除直阁将军，赐帛千匹。
现代文：帝随即拜他为直阁将军，还赐帛千匹。
English: The emperor immediately worshiped him as General Naokaku and gave him a thousand horses.

古文：昂以寇难尚繁，非一夫所济，乃请还本乡，招集部曲。
现代文：昂认为寇贼难平，非一夫的力量能够胜任，便请求返回本乡，招集部曲。
English: Aung thought that it was difficult to defeat the bandits and that no one could do it, so he asked to return to his hometown and recruit a band.

古文：仍除通直常侍，加平北将军。
现代文：朝廷拜他为通直常侍，加平北将军。
English: The imperial court revered him as Tsunetsuna no Tsuneishi, General Gapyeongbuk.

古文：所在义勇，竞来投赴。
现代文：其故乡的义勇，纷纷前往投奔。
English: People from his hometown, Yiyong, rushed to join him.

古文：寻值京师不守，遂与父兄据信都起义。
现代文：适遇京师陷落，昂便与父兄一道占据信都起义。
English: In the event of the fall of the capital, he and his father and brother took part in the Shintō Uprising.

古文：殷州刺史尔朱羽生潜军来袭，奄至城下，昂不暇擐甲，将十余骑驰之，羽生退走，人情遂定。
现代文：殷州刺史尔朱羽生率军偷偷袭来，刚抵城下，昂来不及披甲，马上带领十余骑向敌方冲去，羽生退走，城内民心才趋安定。
English: Zhu Hanyu, the Yangzhou admiral, led a sneak attack. He had just arrived at the foot of the city, and was too late to put on armor. He immediately led more than ten cavalry to rush to the enemy side. Hanyu retreated, and the people's hearts in the city became stable.

古文：后废帝立，除使持节、冀州刺史以终其身。
现代文：后废帝立，除昂使持节、冀州刺史，并准许保持终身。
English: After the abolition of imperial rule, except for Angzhi Jisi Festival, Jizhou stabbed history, and allowed to remain for life.

古文：仍为大都督，率众从高祖破尔朱兆于广阿。
现代文：拜大都督，率众在高祖指挥下于广阿大败尔朱兆。
English: He paid homage to the great governor and led the people to defeat Zhu Zhao at Guangada under the command of Gao Zu.

古文：及平邺，别率所部领黎阳。
现代文：平定邺城后，又率自己的部众镇守黎阳。
English: After subduing Licheng, he led his troops to defend Liyang.

古文：又随高祖讨尔朱兆于韩陵，昂自领乡人部曲王桃汤、东方老、呼延族等三千人。
现代文：又跟随高祖在韩陵征讨尔朱兆，昂亲自领带乡人部曲王桃汤、东方老、呼延族等三千人。
English: He also followed Gao Zu to subjugate Er Zhuzhao in Hanling, and personally led 3,000 villagers, including Qu Wang Taotang, Dongfanglao, and Huyan people.

古文：高祖曰： 高都督纯将汉儿，恐不济事，今当割鲜卑兵千余人共相参杂，于意如何？ 
现代文：高祖说： 高都督统率地道的汉人，恐怕办不成事，今天应当分出千余鲜卑兵与汉军混合，你意下如何？ 
English: Gao Zu said: I'm afraid that the Chinese people led by Gao Duoduo will not be able to accomplish anything. Today, more than a thousand fresh soldiers should be separated and mixed with the Chinese army. What do you think?

古文：昂对曰： 敖曹所将部曲练习已久，前后战斗，不减鲜卑，今若杂之，情不相合，胜则争功，退则推罪，愿自领汉军，不烦更配。 
现代文：昂回答说： 敖曹我所带领的部曲，训练了好长时间，前后多次参加战斗，不比鲜卑人差，现在如果混杂，便会引起情不相合，胜则争抢功劳，败则推卸责任。我请求带领自己的汉军，不麻烦您来调配了。 
English: Aung replied, "I have been training for a long time, and I have participated in battles many times before and after. I am no worse than a lowly person. If I am mixed now, it will cause incompatibility. If I win, I will compete for credit, and if I lose, I will shirk responsibility. I ask you to lead your own Chinese army. Don't bother to deploy it.

古文：高祖然之。
现代文：高祖同意他的看法。
English: Gaozu thought it was right.

古文：及战，高祖不利，军小却，兆等方乘之。
现代文：与敌交战，高祖不利，军队向后退却，尔朱兆等正欲追击。
English: At war with the enemy, Gao Zu was at a disadvantage, the army retreated, and Er Zhu Zhao and others were eager to pursue.

古文：高岳、韩匈奴等以五百骑冲其前，斛律敦收散卒蹑其后，昂与蔡俊以千骑自栗园出，横击兆军。兆众由是大败。
现代文：高岳、韩匈奴等带领五百骑兵攻击兆的前军，斛律敦收集散卒紧追兆军的尾部，昂与蔡俊统帅千骑从栗园冲出，拦截兆军，兆军因此大败。
English: Gao Yue, Han Xiongnu and others led five hundred cavalry to attack Zhaozhou's front army, Baolutun gathered scattered soldiers to chase the tail of Zhaozhou's army, and Aung and Cai Jun, commander of the Thousand Cavalry, rushed out of the chestnut orchard to intercept Zhaozhou's army. As a result, Zhaozhou's army was defeated.

古文：是日微昂等，高祖几殆。
现代文：这一天若是没有昂等的援救，高祖就要遇险了。
English: On this day, if there was no rescue from Aung, Gao Zu would be in danger.

古文：太昌初，始之冀州。
现代文：太昌初，昂才到冀州。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, Angcai came to Jizhou.

古文：寻加侍中、开府，进爵为侯，邑七百户。
现代文：不久加侍中、开府，晋爵为侯，食邑七百户。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain, the head of the government, and the lord of the manor, with 700 households in his domain.

古文：兄乾被杀，乃将十余骑奔晋阳，归于高祖。
现代文：兄乾被朝廷杀死后，昂就带着十多随从逃往晋阳，投奔了高祖。
English: After his brother Qian was killed by the imperial court, Ang fled to Jinyang with more than ten followers and joined Gaozu.

古文：及斛斯椿衅起，高祖南讨，令昂为前驱。
现代文：斛斯椿作乱，高祖征讨，命令昂为前驱。
English: Gaozhuan made a riot, Gaozhuan made a raid, and ordered Ang to be the forerunner.

古文：武帝西遁，昂率五百骑倍道兼行，至于崤陕，不及而还。
现代文：武帝西遁，昂率五百骑兵以加倍的速度追赶，抵达崤陕，没有赶上，就回来了。
English: Wu Di Xisheng, Ang led five hundred cavalry to double the speed to catch up, arrived in Shenshan, did not catch up, and came back.

古文：寻行豫州刺史，仍讨三荆诸州不附者，并平之。
现代文：不长时间，行豫州刺史事，又带兵讨伐三荆诸州不愿归附的民众。
English: Not long after, he took part in a historical event in Yuzhou and led an army to fight against the people of Sanjing who did not want to join the state.

古文：天平初，除侍中、司空公。
现代文：天平初除侍中、司徒公。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpyo era, the middle-ranking samurai, Sotoko, was dismissed.

古文：昂以兄乾薨于此位，固辞不拜，转司徒公。
现代文：由于兄乾是死于侍中的位上，故昂坚决推辞此职，转司徒公。
English: Since his elder brother died in the position of chamberlain, Aung resolutely refused the post and was transferred to the position of steward.

古文：时高祖方有事关陇，以昂为西南道大都督，径趣商洛。
现代文：这时高祖正准备攻打关陇，就让昂为西南道大都督，从小路赶赴商洛。
English: At this time, Gao Zu was preparing to attack Guanzhang, so he let Ang be the governor of Southwest Province and rushed to Shangluo from a small road.

古文：山道峻隘，已为寇所守险，昂转斗而进，莫有当其锋者。
现代文：山道险阻，并且已被寇贼控制，昂边打边走，没有人能够制止他前进的步伐。
English: The mountain road is dangerous, and has been controlled by the bandits. He walks while walking, and no one can stop his progress.

古文：遂攻克上洛，获西魏洛州刺史泉企，并将帅数十人。
现代文：很快攻克了上洛，还活捉了西魏洛州刺史泉企以及几十名将帅。
English: They soon conquered Shangluo, and also captured Xiluozhou Zhishi Quanqi and dozens of generals alive.

古文：会窦泰失利，召昂班师。
现代文：适逢窦泰失利，召昂回师。
English: Dou Tai's defeat coincided with the recall of Ang.

古文：时昂为流矢所中，创甚，顾谓左右曰： 吾以身许国，死无恨矣，所可叹息者，不见季式作刺史耳。 
现代文：昂被流矢射中，伤势很重，他看了一眼左右说： 我以身报国，死无遗憾，所可叹息的，是没有看到季式作刺史。 
English: Ang was shot by a stray arrow and was seriously injured. He took a look around and said, "I served my country with my body. I have no regrets about my death. What I can lament is that I didn't get to see the seasonal stabbing history."

古文：高祖闻之，既驰驿启季式为济州刺史。
现代文：高祖听到报告，马上派人火速启禀皇上，委任季式作了济州刺史。
English: When Gaozu heard the report, he immediately sent someone to summon the emperor, and appointed Ji Shi to write the history of Jeju.

古文：昂还，复为军司大都督，统七十六都督，与行台侯景治兵于武牢。
现代文：昂回，再为军司大都督，统七十六都督，与行台侯景在武牢训练军队。
English: Angwu, then the military governor, unified the seventy-six governors, and Gangtai Houjing trained the army in the military prison.

古文：御史中尉刘贵时亦率众在北豫州，与昂小有忿争，昂怒，鸣鼓会兵而攻之。
现代文：御史中尉刘贵这时也领众驻屯北豫州，同昂发生了小小的争吵，昂火了，鸣鼓聚兵向刘贵发起进攻。
English: At this time, Liu Gui, the lieutenant of imperial history, also led the crowd to be stationed in North Henan Province. A small quarrel occurred with Ang, and the soldiers gathered to attack Liu Gui with drums.

古文：侯景与冀州刺史万俟受洛干救解乃止。
现代文：经侯景和冀州刺史万俟受洛干调解，进攻才停止。
English: The attack was stopped only after the mediation of Luo Gan between Houjing and Jizhou Jishi Wanxuan.

古文：其侠气凌物如此。
现代文：昂的任侠凌物就是这样。
English: That's how it is with Aung's Ren Chivalry.

古文：于时鲜卑共轻中华朝士，唯惮服于昂。
现代文：此时，鲜卑人一向轻视汉人朝臣，只畏服高昂一个。
English: At this time, the Xianbei people have always despised the Han courtiers, and only fear to obey Gao.

古文：高祖每申令三军，常鲜卑语，昂若在列，则为华言。
现代文：高祖每每向三军下令，就使用鲜卑语，如果高昂在场，就改用汉语。
English: Whenever Gao Zu gave orders to the three armies, he would use Xianbei, and if Gao Ang was present, he would switch to Chinese.

古文：昂尝诣相府，掌门者不纳，昂怒，引弓射之。
现代文：昂曾赴相府拜访，守门的人不让进去，昂一时火起，摘下弓箭就射。
English: Aung once went to pay a visit to the prime minister's residence. The person guarding the gate wouldn't let him in. Aung was so excited that he took off his bow and arrow and started to shoot.

古文：高祖知而不责。
现代文：高祖知道此事，却没有斥责。
English: Gaozu knew about it, but did not reprimand him.

古文：元象元年，进封京兆郡公，邑一千户。
现代文：元象元年，晋封京兆郡公，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the Yuanxiang Dynasty, Jinfeng became the county seat of Jingzhao County, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：与侯景等同攻独孤如愿于金墉城，周文帝率众救之。
现代文：同侯景一道向盘踞在金墉城的独孤如愿发起进攻，周文帝统众援救。
English: Together with Hou Jing, he launched an attack on the isolated people entrenched in Jinyu City as he wished, and Emperor Zhou Wen led the crowd to rescue them.

古文：战于邙阴，昂所部失利，左右分散，单马东出，欲趣河阳南城，门闭不得入，遂为西军所害，时年四十八。
现代文：两军在邙阴交战，昂带领的部众失利，兵士几乎跑光。昂单马往东，想赶到河梁南城，因城门锁闭无法进入，很快就被西魏军俘虏杀害，时年三十八岁。
English: The two armies clashed in Shuyin. The troops led by Aung were defeated, and almost all the soldiers ran away. Aung rode alone to the east, hoping to reach the southern city of Hailiang, but was unable to enter because the city gates were locked. He was soon killed by West Wei prisoners, at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：赠使持节侍中、都督冀定沧瀛殷五州诸军事、太师、大司马、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谥忠武。
现代文：赠使持节、侍中、都督冀定沧瀛殷五州诸军事、太师、大司马、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谥号忠武。
English: He was awarded the title of Ji Jie, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, and the title of Jizhong.

古文：子突骑嗣，早卒。
现代文：子突骑继嗣，突骑早死。
English: His son suddenly became the heir, and suddenly died young.

古文：世宗复召昂诸子，亲简其第三子道豁嗣。
现代文：世宗又召来昂的诸位儿子，亲自挑选第三子道豁嗣爵。
English: King Sejong also summoned all the sons of Lai On and personally selected the third son, King Hoekseong.

古文：皇建初，追封昂永昌王。
现代文：皇建初，追封昂为永昌王。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Jianchu, Emperor Gao was crowned as King of Yongchang.

古文：道豁袭，武平末，开府仪同三司。
现代文：道豁承继王爵，武平末，拜开府仪同三司。
English: Dogen succeeded Wangzhe, and at the end of the Warring States Period, he established the Imperial Household Agency with three departments.

古文：入周，授仪同大将军。
现代文：入周，授仪同大将军。
English: Arriving at the fortress, he was given the same ceremony as a general.

古文：开皇中，卒于黄州刺史。
现代文：开皇中卒于黄州刺史任上。
English: He graduated from the Emperor's Middle School and was appointed to the post of Huangzhou chief historian.

古文：季式，字子通，乾第四弟也。
现代文：季式，字子通，高乾第四弟。
English: The fourth brother of Ji Shih, Zhizi Tong and Gao Qian.

古文：亦有胆气。
现代文：季式也有胆气。
English: Seasonal styles also have guts.

古文：中兴初，拜镇远将军、正员郎，迁卫将军、金紫光禄大夫，寻加散骑常侍，领主衣都统。
现代文：中兴初，拜镇远将军、正员郎，迁卫将军、金紫光禄大夫，寻加散骑常侍，领主衣都统。
English: At the beginning of Zhongxing, General Bai Zhenyuan, Zhengjian Lang, Qianwei General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Xing Jia Sanzhi Changzhi, and the lord's clothing were unified.

古文：太昌初，除尚食典御。
现代文：太昌初，除尚食典御。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, in addition to food, there was also tea ceremony.

古文：天平中，出为济州刺史。
现代文：天平中，出季式为济州刺史。
English: In the balance of the scale, the out-of-season type is Jeju sashimi.

古文：山东旧贼刘盘陀、史明曜等攻劫道路，剽掠村邑，齐、兖、青、徐四州患之，历政不能讨。
现代文：山东老贼刘盘陀、史明曜等攻劫道路，剽掠村庄，齐、兖、青、徐四州都害怕他们，历任刺史均不能够加以制服。
English: The old thieves of Shandong, such as Liu Pantao and Shi Mingyou, attacked and plundered roads, pillaged villages, and the four prefectures of Qi, Qi, Qing and Xu were afraid of them. Successive leaders were unable to subdue them.

古文：季式至，皆破灭之。
现代文：季式上任后，全部消灭了他们。
English: After Ji took office, all of them were eliminated.

古文：寻有濮阳民杜灵椿等攻城剽野，聚众将万人，季式遣骑三百，一战擒之。
现代文：不久，濮阳百姓杜灵椿等攻城掠村，聚众近万人，季式派出三百骑兵，只打了一仗就将他们擒获。
English: Soon, the people of Shenyang, including Du Lingqin, attacked the city and pillaged villages, gathering nearly ten thousand people. Ji sent out three hundred cavalrymen, and captured them after only one battle.

古文：又阳平路叔文徒党绪显等立营栅为乱，季式讨平之。
现代文：另外，阳平路文的党徒绪显等人建立营栅作乱，季式出兵进行了弹压。
English: In addition, Yangping Luwen's party members, such as Xu Xian, set up camp fences to create chaos, and the quarterly troop deployment was carried out.

古文：又有群贼破南河郡，季式遣兵临之，应时斩戮。
现代文：又有群贼攻破南河郡，季式派兵围剿，很快平定了贼乱。
English: Another group of bandits invaded Nanhe County, and troops were dispatched to surround them, quickly quelling the banditry.

古文：自兹以后，远近清晏。
现代文：从此之后，远近安宁。
English: Since then, there has been relative calm.

古文：季式兄弟贵盛，并有勋于时，自领部曲千余人，马八百匹，戈甲器仗皆备，故凡追督贼盗，多致克捷。
现代文：季式兄弟贵盛，都有勋劳于时，自从统领千余部曲，八百匹马，以及准备充分的武器后，凡有追剿平定贼害，一般都会取得胜利。
English: The Ji brothers, Guisheng and Guisheng, have all served honorably, and since they have commanded more than a thousand troops, eight hundred horses, and well-prepared weapons, they will generally achieve victory in any pursuit and suppression of thieves.

古文：有客尝谓季式曰： 濮阳、阳平乃是畿内，既不奉命，又不侵境，而有何急，遣私军远战？
现代文：有一客人曾对季式说： 濮阳、阳平属京畿之地，既没有接受朝廷诏令，又没有寇贼侵入境内，哪有急事，就派遣私军远战的道理？
English: A guest once said to Ji Shi: "Shuyang and Yangping are part of Gyeonggi Province. They have neither accepted the imperial edict, nor have bandits invaded the territory. If there is an emergency, why not send a private army to fight?

古文：万一失脱，岂不招罪？ 
现代文：万一失利，难道不是自找死罪？ 
English: In the unlikely event of defeat, wouldn't they be committing a capital crime?

古文：季式曰： 君言何不忠之甚也！
现代文：季式答曰： 你这些话，对朝廷很是不忠。
English: Kishiki replied, "Your words are very disloyal to the Imperial Court.

古文：我与国义同安危，岂有见贼不讨之理？
现代文：国家的安危就是我的安危，哪有看见寇贼不加诛讨的？
English: The security of the country is my security. Have you ever seen a bandit who doesn't add insult to injury?

古文：且贼知台军卒不能来，又不疑外州有救，未备之间，破之必矣。
现代文：再说，贼寇知道官军永远不会来围剿他们的，又不会想到外州会出兵，在其无准备之时，打败他们是肯定的。
English: Moreover, the bandits knew that the government army would never come to encircle them, nor did they think that foreign states would send troops. When they were unprepared, it was certain that they would be defeated.

古文：兵尚神速，何得后机，若以获罪，吾亦无限。 
现代文：兵贵神速，何得后机，若以此得罪，我也没有遗憾。 
English: If I offend you, I don't regret it.

古文：元象中，西寇大至。
现代文：元象中，西魏军大至。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, the Western Wei Army was at its peak.

古文：高祖亲率三军以御之，阵于邙北，师徒大败，河中流尸相继，败兵首尾不绝。人情骚动，谓世事艰难。
现代文：高祖亲自统领三军进行抵御，布阵邙北，结果，交战不久，东魏军大败，河中漂流的尸体一个连着一个，败亡之兵首尾相接，人心动摇，都说世道要变。
English: Gaozu personally led the three armies to resist and set up a line of battle in the north. As a result, shortly after the battle, the East Wei Army was defeated, the bodies drifting in the river were one after another, the defeated soldiers were one after another, and the hearts of the people were shaken, saying that the world would change.

古文：所亲部曲请季式曰： 今日形势，大事去矣，可将腹心二百骑奔梁，既得避祸，不失富贵。何为坐受死也？ 
现代文：其所亲近的部曲向季式进言说： 看今天的形势，大事已去，您可带两百心腹跑到梁朝，又逃避了祸害，也没有丢掉富贵，为什么要坐在这里等死？ 
English: Xiang Qixi said: "Looking at today's situation, the big event has passed. You can run to Liang Dynasty with two hundred of your heart, and escape the disaster, and you have not lost your wealth. Why sit here and wait for death?

古文：季式曰： 吾兄弟受国厚恩，与高王共定天下，一旦倾危，亡去不义。
现代文：季式说： 我们几弟兄享受国家的重恩，与高王一同安定天下，国家一旦倾危，我们逃走，则是最大的不义。
English: Ji Shih said: Several of our brothers enjoy the heavy favor of the country, and together with Gao Wang, they stabilize the world. Once the country is in danger, it would be the greatest injustice for us to flee.

古文：若社稷颠覆，当背城死战，安能区区偷生苟活！ 
现代文：如果社稷颠覆，就应该拼命死战，那能顾及区区之身而苟且偷生？ 
English: If society is subverted, we should fight to the death, but can we take care of ourselves and live?

古文：是役也，司徒殁焉。
现代文：这次战役，其兄高昂殉职。
English: During this battle, his brother Gao An died in the line of duty.

古文：入为散骑常侍。
现代文：入朝为散骑常侍。
English: He was called up to be a samurai.

古文：兴和中，行晋州事。
现代文：兴和中，行晋州事。
English: Xingzhong and Jinzhou.

古文：解州，仍镇永安戍。
现代文：解州事，镇守永安戍。
English: Dissolution of the prefectural government, the town's governor, Yong Anjun, resigns.

古文：高慎以武牢叛，遣信报季式。
现代文：高慎拥武牢反叛，派遣信使向季式报告。
English: Gao Sheng rebelled against Wu Rong and sent a messenger to report to the emperor.

古文：为都督，从清河公岳破萧明于寒山，败侯景于涡阳。还，除卫尉卿。
现代文：武定中，除侍中，寻加翼州大中正。先是世宗曾任此职，上书朝廷请回授季式。为都督，从清河公岳破萧明，在涡阳败侯景。回朝，除卫尉卿。
English: Wuding junior high school, in addition to the attendants, looking for Wing Chau junior high school. First, Shizong had held this position, and the Imperial Court requested the return of the award ceremony. For the governor, from Qinghe Gongyue to Xiao Ming, in the vortex of the sun defeated Houjing. Back to the court, in addition to the guards.

古文：复为都督，从清河公攻王思政于颍川，拔之。
现代文：再任都督，随清河公进攻颍川的王思政，取得了胜利。
English: He was reappointed as the governor of the capital, and with the Qinghe Duke's attack on Wang Sizheng of the Li River, he achieved victory.

古文：以前后功加仪同三司。
现代文：累计前后所立军功加仪同三司。
English: Cumulatively, the military merit awards made before and after are the same as that of the three divisions.

古文：天保初，封乘氏县子。仍为都督，随司徒潘乐征讨江、淮之间。
现代文：天保初，封乘氏县子，仍为都督，随司徒潘乐征讨江、淮间的寇贼。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, Feng Rong's son, still the governor of the capital, accompanied the scholar Pan Le to fight against the bandits in the Huai River and Huai River.

古文：为私使乐人于边境交易，还京，坐被禁止，寻而赦之。
现代文：季式私自打发乐人赴边境交易，还京后，事发，遭拘禁。很快又被释放。
English: After returning to Beijing, an incident occurred and he was detained. He was soon released.

古文：四年夏，发疽卒，年三十八。
现代文：四年夏，因疽发，卒，年三十八岁。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, he died of gangrene, at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：赠侍中、使持节、都督沧冀州诸军事、开府仪同三司、冀州刺史，谥曰恭穆。
现代文：赠侍中、使持节、都督沧冀州诸军事、开府仪同三司、冀州刺史，谥号恭穆。
English: He was bestowed with the titles of "Junior Chamberlain," "Ambassador of the Military," "Governor of Cangzhou and Jizhou Provinces," "Governor of Kaifu and Jizhou Provinces," "Historian of Jizhou Province," and his posthumous name was "Gongmu."

古文：季式豪率好酒，又恃举家勋功，不拘检节。
现代文：季式性格豪爽，喜好饮酒，又依仗家族的勋功，而不加检束。
English: The seasonal type has a bold personality, likes to drink alcohol, and relies on the family's meritorious service, without being punished.

古文：与光州刺史李元忠生平游款，在济州夜饮，忆元忠，开城门，令左右乘驿持一壶酒往光州劝元忠。
现代文：同光州刺史李元忠交游，关系极好，在济州夜饮，想起了元忠，便打开城门，命令左右乘驿马带一壶酒赶往光州慰劳。
English: He had a very good relationship with Li Yuanzhong, the famous poet of Gwangju. When he was drinking in Jeju at night, he remembered Yuanzhong, opened the city gate, and ordered him to take a horse and a jug of wine to Gwangju for consolation.

古文：朝廷知而容之。
现代文：朝廷知道此事，却未加追究。
English: The Imperial Court knew about this, but did not pursue the matter.

古文：兄慎叛后，少时解职。
现代文：兄慎叛变后，很快就辞去了自己的官职。
English: After the rebellion of his brother Shen, he soon resigned from his post.

古文：黄门郎司马消难，左仆射子如之子，又是高祖之婿，势盛当时。
现代文：黄门郎司马消难，左仆射子如的儿子，也是高祖的女婿，势盛当时。
English: Huangmen Lang Sima, the son of Gaozu's son-in-law and the son of Gaozu's left-hand man, Shishi Ru, was very powerful at that time.

古文：因退食暇，寻季式与之酣饮。
现代文：消难趁着空闲，找到季式，两人畅饮起来。
English: They took advantage of their free time to find a seasonal drink, and the two of them began to drink.

古文：留宿旦日，重门并闭，关籥不通。消难固请云： 我是黄门郎，天子侍臣，岂有不参朝之理？
现代文：季式留消难住宿，第二天早晨，所有的门都关闭着，也找不见钥匙，消难十分焦急，一个劲地请求说： 我是黄门郎，天子的侍臣，哪有不参朝的道理？
English: In the morning of the second day, all the doors were closed and no key could be found. Qianfang was very anxious and pleaded: "I am Huangmenlang, the attendant of the son of heaven. Is there any reason why I should not go to the court?"

古文：且已一宿不归，家君必当大怪。
现代文：再说我已是一宿未归，家君无疑会十分惊异。
English: Besides, I've only been gone for one night, and my family will no doubt be very surprised.

古文：今若又留我狂饮，我得罪无辞，恐君亦不免谴责。 
现代文：今天如果还留我狂饮，我得罪无法推辞，恐怕你也免不了要受到谴责。 
English: If you still let me go on a drinking spree today, I will not be able to deny my guilt, and I'm afraid you will also be condemned.

古文：季式曰： 君自称黄门郎，又言畏家君怪，欲以地势胁我邪？
现代文：季式说： 你自称黄门郎，又说害怕令尊惊异，你是想用权势吓我吗？
English: Ji Shi said: You call yourself Huang Men Lang, and you say that you are afraid of surprising your father. Are you trying to scare me with your power?

古文：高季式死自有处，实不畏此。 
现代文：高季式死，自有一定的地方，本不害怕这些的。 
English: High-season death has its own place, and I'm not afraid of it.

古文：消难拜谢请出，终不见许。
现代文：消难道歉后请求出门，却始终得不到同意。
English: He apologized and asked to leave, but was never allowed to do so.

古文：酒至，不肯饮。
现代文：酒拿上来了，坚决不喝。
English: The wine is brought up, but he refuses to drink it.

古文：季式云： 我留君尽兴，君是何人，不为我痛饮。 
现代文：季式劝道： 我留你尽兴，你是什么人，不想和我痛饮？ 
English: Ji Shih advised, "If I let you enjoy yourself, who are you not to have a drink with me?"

古文：命左右索车轮括消难颈，又索一轮自括颈，仍命酒引满相劝。
现代文：命令手下拿来车轮括住消难的脖颈，又找来一轮括住自己的脖颈，还是倒满酒杯相劝。
English: He ordered his subordinates to bring a bicycle wheel to encircle the neck of the victim, and to find another round to encircle his own neck, or to pour a full glass of wine to persuade him.

古文：消难不得已，欣笑而从之，方乃俱脱车轮，更留一宿。
现代文：消难无可奈何，强笑着应酬。两人这才一同取下车轮。季式又留消难在家住了一宿。
English: The two of them took off the wheels together. Kishiki stayed at home with Kishimaru for another night.

古文：是时失消难两宿，莫知所在，内外惊异。
现代文：消难失踪两天，没有人知道他到哪里去了，所以内外惊异。
English: After disappearing for two days, no one knew where he had gone, so everyone was surprised.

古文：及消难出，方具言之。
现代文：消难出来后，才把详情告诉人们。
English: Only after the difficulties have been resolved will the details be told to the people.

古文：世宗在京辅政，白魏帝赐消难美酒数石，珍羞十舆，并令朝士与季式亲狎者，就季式宅宴集。
现代文：世宗在京师辅政，请求魏帝赐给消难美酒数石、珍肴十车，还下令与季式关系密切的朝士，都到季式宅中宴饮。
English: In Beijing, Shizong, who was an assistant to the government, asked Emperor Wei to bestow several stones of fine wine and ten carts of delicacies to the Qidong, and also ordered the Asashi, who were closely related to the Qidong, to go to the Qidong's house for a banquet.

古文：其被优遇如此。
现代文：其得恩宠就是如此。
English: That's how he got his blessing.

古文：翼长兄子永乐、次兄子延伯，并和厚有长者称，俱从翼举义。
现代文：高翼长兄的儿子永乐、次兄的儿子延伯，十分的宽厚，有长者的风度，他们都随从翼举起了义旗。
English: Yongle, the son of Gao Ying's eldest brother, and Yan Bo, the son of Gao Ying's second brother, were very generous and had the manners of elders. They all raised the banner of righteousness with Gao Ying.

古文：永乐官至卫将军、右光禄大夫、冀州大中正，出为博陵太守，以民事不济，自杀。
现代文：永乐年中官至卫将军、右光禄大夫、冀州大中正，出任博陵太守，因处理不好民事，被迫自杀。
English: Yongle Lieutenant-General Zhiwei, Uguanglu Doctor, Jizhou University Vice-Chancellor, served as the governor of Boling, due to poor handling of civil affairs, was forced to commit suicide.

古文：赠使持节、督沧冀二州诸军事、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
现代文：赠使持节、督沧冀二州诸军事、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
English: He presented gifts to the Military, the Three Departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the Historians of Jizhou Province.

古文：子长命，本自贱出，年二十余始被收举。猛暴好杀，然亦果于战斗。
现代文：子长命，本是贱出，二十多岁才被收养，但他凶猛好杀，不过在打仗时也很勇敢。
English: His son lived a long life. He was born out of wedlock and was adopted when he was in his twenties. He was ferocious and eager to kill, but he was also very brave in battle.

古文：初于大夏门拒尔朱世隆，以功累迁左光禄大夫。
现代文：最早在大夏门抗御尔朱世隆，因功累迁左光禄大夫。
English: Zhu Shilong was the first to resist at the Great Summer Gate, and he was promoted to Dr. Zaganglu because of his achievements.

古文：高祖遥授长命雍州刺史，封沮阳乡男，一百户。
现代文：高祖遥授长命雍州刺史，封沮阳乡男，食邑百户，很快晋封为鄢陵县伯，增邑二百户。
English: Gao Zuyao was awarded a long life in the history of Yongzhou. He was given the title of Deshiyang Hometown Man, with 100 households in Shiyou County. He was soon promoted to the title of Fuling County Mayor, with an additional 200 households in Shiyou County.

古文：寻进封鄢陵县伯，增二百户，武定中，随仪同刘丰讨侯景，为景所杀。
现代文：武定中，随仪同刘丰讨伐侯景，反被侯景诛杀。
English: In Wuding, he fought against Houjing with Liu Feng, but was killed by Houjing.

古文：赠冀州刺史。
现代文：赠冀州刺史。
English: He was awarded the Jizhou History Medal.

古文：延伯历中散大夫、安州刺史，封万年县男，邑二百户。
现代文：延伯历职中散大夫、安州刺史，封万年县男，食邑二百户。
English: Yanbo served as Zhongshan doctor and Anzhou chief historian, and was awarded the title of county man for ten thousand years. There are more than 200 households in Yanbo.

古文：天保初，加征西将军，进爵为子。
现代文：天保初，加征西将军，晋爵为子。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the rank of peer as the son of General Kazeishi.

古文：卒，赠太府少卿。
现代文：卒，赠太府少卿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu Shokei.

古文：自昂初以豪侠立名，为之羽翼者，呼延族、刘贵珍、刘长狄、东方老、刘士荣、成五彪、韩愿生、刘桃棒；随其建义者，李希光、刘叔宗、刘孟和。
现代文：自从高昂因豪侠为世人所知后，前来投奔他的有呼延族、刘贵珍、刘长狄、东方老、刘士荣、成五、韩愿生、刘桃棒；随同他举起义旗的有李希光、刘叔宗、刘孟和。
English: Since Gao Ang was known to the world for his heroic deeds, the Huyan people, Liu Guizhen, Liu Changdi, Dongfanglao, Liu Shirong, Chengwu, Han Jiansheng, and Liu Taobao came to his aid; Li Xiguang, Liu Shuzong, and Liu Menghe accompanied him to raise the banner of righteousness.

古文：并仕宦显达。
现代文：这些人仕宦都很显达。
English: These men have served with distinction.

古文：孟和名协，浮阳饶安人也。
现代文：刘孟和名协，浮阳饶安人氏。
English: Liu Meng He Ming Xie, Fuyang Rao Anren.

古文：孟和少好弓马，率性豪侠。
现代文：孟和年轻时喜好弓马，性格豪爽。
English: When he was young, Meng He was fond of archery and horsemanship, and he had a bold personality.

古文：幽州刺史刘灵助之起兵也，孟和亦聚众附昂兄弟，昂遥应之。
现代文：幽州刺史刘灵助起兵后，孟和也聚集徒众归附高昂兄弟，昂则与灵助遥相呼应。
English: After Liu Ling Rong, a Yuzhou scholar, raised an army, Meng He also gathered disciples to join Gao Ang brothers, and Gao Ang echoed with Ling Rong.

古文：及灵助败，昂乃据冀州，孟和为其致力。
现代文：灵助失败，昂便占据冀州，孟和就为其效力。
English: When the spiritual help failed, Ang Ben occupied Jizhou, and Meng He worked for him.

古文：会高祖起义冀州，以孟和为都督。
现代文：适逢高祖在冀州起义，拜孟和为都督。
English: At the time of Gao Zu's uprising in Jizhou, Bai Menghe became the governor.

古文：中兴初，拜通直常侍。
现代文：中兴初，授通直常侍。
English: At the beginning of ZTE, he was awarded the title of Juntoshinojo.

古文：二年，除安东将军。寻加征东将军、金紫光禄。
现代文：二年，除安东将军，寻加征东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the second year, in addition to General Andong, General Xingjia and General Zhaodong, and Dr. Jin Ziguanglu were promoted.

古文：以建义勋，赐爵长广县伯。
现代文：由于建义的功劳，赐爵长广县伯。
English: As a result of his contribution to the construction of righteousness, he was given the title of Guangxian County Mayor.

古文：天平中，卫将军、上党内史，罢郡，除大丞相司马。
现代文：天平中，为卫将军、上党内史，罢郡，除大丞相司马。
English: In the balance of the scales, it was General Wei, the party's internal history, the county strike, and the removal of the prime minister, Sima.

古文：武定元年，坐事死。
现代文：武定元年，坐事被处死。
English: In the first year of Wuding, he was sentenced to death for sedition.

古文：叔宗字元纂，乐陵平昌人。
现代文：刘叔宗字元纂，乐陵平昌人氏。
English: Liu Shuzong, the compiler of the characters, was from the Le-ling Pyeongchang clan.

古文：和谨，颇有学业，举秀才。
现代文：柔和谨慎，颇有学业，举秀才。
English: She is gentle and cautious, has a good academic record, and is an excellent teacher.

古文：稍迁沧州治中。
现代文：慢慢升为沧州治中。
English: Gradually rising to the middle of the Cangzhou government.

古文：永安中，加镇远将军、谏议大夫。
现代文：永安中，加镇远将军、谏议大夫。
English: In Yongan Middle School, Gen. Ga Zhenyuan and Dr. Zang Rong are the leaders.

古文：兄海宝，少轻侠，然为州里所爱。
现代文：兄海宝，少时侠义，却被州民喜爱。
English: Brother Haibao, who was chivalrous in his youth, was loved by the people of the state.

古文：昂之起义也，海宝率乡闾袭沧州以应昂，昂以海宝权行沧州事。
现代文：高昂举起义旗时，海宝率领乡民袭击沧州以响应，昂请海宝权行沧州事。
English: When the flag of righteousness was raised high, Haibo led the villagers to attack Cangzhou in response, and invited Haibo to take part in Cangzhou affairs.

古文：前范阳太守刁整心附尔朱，遣弟子安寿袭杀海宝。
现代文：前范阳太守刁整在内心里依附尔朱氏，他派弟弟的儿子安寿偷袭沧州，杀死了海宝。
English: Former Fanyang Grand Empress Dowager Guo Jian clung to the Er Zhu clan in his heart. He sent his brother's son An Shou to raid Cangzhou and killed Hai Bao.

古文：叔宗仍归于昂。
现代文：叔宗投奔高昂。
English: My uncle went to Gao'ang.

古文：中兴初，高祖除前将军、廷尉少卿。
现代文：中兴初，高祖拜他为前将军、廷尉少卿。
English: At the beginning of ZTE, Gao Zubaibai was a former general and court lieutenant.

古文：太昌初，加镇军将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：太昌初，加镇军将军、光禄大夫。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, the general of the town army, the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：天平初，除车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：天平初，除车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: At the beginning of the tenpyo era, the general of the cavalry and the doctor of the left light rose.

古文：二年卒。
现代文：二年卒。
English: Two years old.

古文：赠使持节、仪同、定州刺史。
现代文：赠使持节、仪同、定州刺史。
English: He was given the gifts of the festival, the ceremony, and the history of Dingzhou.

古文：老字安德，鬲人。
现代文：东方老，安德鬲县人氏。
English: Dongfanglao, Anding County people.

古文：家世寒微。
现代文：其家族世代寒微。
English: His family has been poor for generations.

古文：身长七尺，膂力过人。
现代文：老身长七尺，膂力过人。
English: The old man is seven feet tall and his strength is amazing.

古文：少粗犷无赖，结轻险之徒共为贼盗，乡里患之。
现代文：少年时粗犷无赖，交结轻险之徒同做贼盗，成了乡里的祸害。
English: When he was a young man, he was a rough-and-tumble ruffian, and became a scourge in the village by associating with petty criminals and thieves.

古文：魏末兵起，遂与昂为部曲。
现代文：魏末兵起，便做了昂的部曲。
English: Since the end of the Wei Dynasty, it has been a part of Ang's repertoire.

古文：义旗建，仍从征讨，以军功除殿中将军。
现代文：义旗树起后，随从高昂征战讨伐，因军功除殿中将军。
English: After the Rising of the Banner of Righteousness, he followed Gao's expedition and crusade, and was promoted to the rank of general due to his military achievements.

古文：累迁平远将军。除鲁阳太守。
现代文：累迁平远将军，除鲁阳太守。
English: General Pingyuan was exiled, except for the governor of Luyang.

古文：后除南益州刺史，领宜阳太守，赐爵长乐子。
现代文：后拜南益州刺史，兼领宜阳太守，赐爵长乐子。
English: Later, he served as the governor of South Yizhou Province, concurrently the governor of Yiyang Province, and conferred a peerage on Changlezi.

古文：老频为二郡，出入数年，境接群蛮，又邻西敌，至于攻城野战，率先士卒，屡以少制众，西人惮之。
现代文：老做二郡太守，出入数年，境接群蛮，又与西敌相邻，至于攻城野战，身先士卒，多次以少制众，西魏人很是害怕他。
English: He had been the governor of two counties for many years. He had been in and out of power for several years. He was bordered by barbarians, and was also adjacent to the western enemy. As for the siege of the city and the field, he was the first man, and many times he had to use force to control the crowd. The West Wei people were very afraid of him.

古文：显祖受禅，别封阳平县伯，迁南兖州刺史。
现代文：显祖受魏禅，别封老为阳平县伯，迁南兖州刺史。
English: Xianzu was influenced by the Wei and Zen dynasties. He was a Yangping County official and moved to Zhangzhou in the south.

古文：后与萧轨等渡江，战没。
现代文：后与萧轨等渡江攻陈，战殁。
English: Later, he and Xiao Zhao and others attacked Chen across the river and fought.

古文：希光，渤海蓚人也。
现代文：李希光，渤海蓚地人氏。
English: Li Xiguang, a native of Bohai Province.

古文：父绍，魏长广太守，希光随高乾起义信都。
现代文：父绍，魏长广太守。希光随同高乾在信都起义。
English: His father, Shao, was the governor of Wei Changguang. Xiguang followed Gao Qian to revolt in Xindu.

古文：中兴初，除安南将军、安德郡守。
现代文：中兴初，除安南将军、安德郡守。
English: At the beginning of ZTE, in addition to General Annan, Ande County Governor.

古文：后为世祖开府长史。
现代文：后任世祖的开府长史。
English: He was succeeded by the founder of the family, Kaifuchoshi.

古文：武定末，从高岳平颍川，封义宁县开国侯，历颍、梁、南兖三州刺史。
现代文：武定末，从高岳平颍川，封义宁县开国侯，历颍、梁、南兖三州刺史。
English: At the end of Wuding, from Gaoyue Pingyao River, Fenyining County, the founding of the country, Lishui, Liang, Nanzhuan three states of history.

古文：天保中，扬州刺史，与萧轨等渡江，战没。
现代文：天保中，为扬州刺史，与萧轨等渡江攻陈，战殁。
English: In Tianbo Middle School, he wrote history for Yangzhou and fought with Xiao Luo and others to cross the river to attack Chen.

古文：赠开府仪同三司、西兖州刺史。
现代文：赠开府仪同三司、西兖州刺史。
English: He presented the prefectural ceremony with the three divisions and the history of Xishuanzhou.

古文：子子令，尚书外兵郎中。
现代文：子子令，尚书外兵郎中。
English: As a child, he was a member of the Shoshu Foreign Legion.

古文：武平末，通直常侍。
现代文：武平末，通直常侍。
English: In the last years of Takehira's life, he was appointed as Tsunenao's personal attendant.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于易州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇中卒于易州刺史任上。
English: He graduated from Sui Kaifeng Middle School and was appointed to the post of Yizhou chief historian.

古文：希光族弟子贡，以与义旗之功，官至吏部郎，后为兖州刺史。
现代文：希光族弟子贡，因参与起义之功，官至吏部郎，后为兖州刺史。
English: Gong, a disciple of the Higuang ethnic group, was promoted to the rank of librarian due to his participation in the uprising, and later became the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：坐贪暴为世宗所杀。
现代文：由于贪污残暴被世宗诛杀。
English: He was killed by Sejong due to his corruption and brutality.

古文：显祖责陈武废萧明，命仪同萧轨率希光、东方老、裴英起、王敬宝步骑数万伐之。
现代文：显祖谴责陈武帝废了萧明，命令仪同萧轨率领李希光、东方老、裴英起、王敬宝及步骑数万人前往讨伐。
English: Emperor Xianzu condemned Emperor Chen Wu for abolishing Xiao Ming, and ordered Yi and Xiao Lu to lead Li Xiguang, Dongfanglao, Pei Yingqi, Wang Jingbao and tens of thousands of people on foot and horseback to go to the crusade.

古文：以七年三月渡江，袭克石头城。
现代文：七年三月渡江，袭占了石头城。
English: In March of the seventh year, they crossed the river and occupied Stone Town.

古文：五将名位相侔，英起以侍中为军司，萧轨与希光并为都督，军中抗礼，不相服御，竞说谋略，动必乖张。
现代文：五位将领名位相当，英起以侍中为军司，萧轨与希光都是都督，军中抗礼，不相服从，各有主意，互不买账。
English: The five generals were of the same rank. Yingzi took an equerry as his military commander, Xiao Rail and Xiguang were both military governors. The soldiers resisted, disobeyed each other, each had their own ideas, and did not buy into each other.

古文：顿军丹阳城下，值霖雨五十余日，及战，兵器并不堪施用，故致败亡。
现代文：屯军丹阳城下，适逢五十余天的霖雨，两军交战，兵器都不能使用，所以导致了失败。
English: At the end of the siege of Danyang, it rained for more than 50 days. The two armies clashed, and weapons could not be used, which led to the defeat.

古文：将帅俱死，士卒得还者十二三，所没器械军资不可胜纪。
现代文：将帅俱死，士卒生还者也只有十之二三，而遗弃的器械军资则无法统计。
English: Generals die, soldiers and officers survive only two out of ten, and abandoned equipment and munitions cannot be counted.

古文：萧轨、王宝事行，史阙其传。
现代文：萧轨、王敬宝之事迹，史缺，故无法为传。
English: The deeds of Xiao Lei and Wang Jingbao are not recorded in history, so they cannot be passed down.

古文：裴英起，河东人。
现代文：裴英起，河东人氏。
English: Pei Yingqi, from the Hedong ethnic group.

古文：其先晋末渡淮，寓居淮南之寿阳县。
现代文：其先辈晋末渡过淮河，寓居淮南的寿阳县。
English: His ancestors, the Jin late, crossed the Huai River and lived in Shouyang County in the south of Huai.

古文：祖彦先，随薛安都入魏，官至赵郡守。
现代文：祖父彦先，跟随薛安都入魏，官至赵郡守。
English: His grandfather, Hikohsen, followed Xue Andu into the Wei Dynasty and rose to the position of Zhao County Governor.

古文：父约，渤海相。
现代文：父约，渤海相。
English: Father's appointment, Bohai phase.

古文：英起聪慧滑稽，好剧谈，不拘仪检，仁魏至定州长史。
现代文：英起聪明滑稽，好诙谐，不拘礼节，仕魏至定州长史。
English: Yingqi intelligent, funny, witty, informal etiquette, Wei Zhiding prefectural history.

古文：世宗引为行台左丞。
现代文：世宗委任其为行台左丞。
English: Sejong appointed him as Gangdai Sajo.

古文：天保中，都官尚书，兼侍中，及战没，赠开府、尚书左仆射。
现代文：天保中，为都官尚书，兼侍中，战死，赠开府、尚书左仆射。
English: He was a high-ranking official in the Imperial Household Agency, and also a courtier. He died in battle and was given the title of Imperial Household Minister, and Shoshu was his right-hand man.

古文：封隆之，字祖裔，小名皮，渤海之蓚人也。父回，魏司空。
现代文：封隆之，字祖裔，小名皮，渤海地人氏。父回，魏朝的司空。
English: Feng Long Zhi, Zha Zu Zi, Xiaomei Pei, Zhai Haitian clan. Father Hui, Wei Dynasty's Sikuo.

古文：隆之性宽和，有度量。
现代文：隆之生性宽厚，有度量。
English: Takashi's temperament is generous and measured.

古文：弱冠州郡主簿，起家奉朝请，领直后。
现代文：二十岁，为州郡主簿，以奉朝请起家，领掌直后。
English: At the age of twenty, he became the county magistrate of the state. He started his career as a courtier, immediately after taking the reins of power.

古文：汝南王悦开府，为中兵参军。
现代文：汝南王悦开府，延请隆之为中兵参军。
English: King Yue of Southern Yun invited Long Jing to join the army.

古文：初，延昌中，道人法庆作乱冀方，自号 大乘 ，众五万余。遣大都督元遥及隆之擒获法庆，赐爵武城子。
现代文：早些年，即延昌中，道人法庆作乱冀地，自号 大乘 ，有众五万，朝廷派大都督元遥及隆之擒获法庆，以此赐爵武城子。
English: A few years earlier, in the middle of the Yanchang period, the Taoist Fa Qing made a mess of the country, calling himself the "Great Vehicle," and there were fifty thousand of them. The imperial court sent the great viceroy, Yuan Yao, to capture the Fa Qing and give him the title of Duke of Wucheng.

古文：俄兼司徒主簿、河南尹丞。
现代文：不久，兼任司徒主簿、河南尹丞。
English: Soon, he also served as the chief bookkeeper of the Sito and the Henan Yinzheng.

古文：时青、齐二州士民反叛，隆之奉使慰谕，咸即降款。
现代文：此时青、齐二州士民反叛，隆之奉使前往慰谕，所到之处，随即归降。
English: At this time, the Qing and Qi statesmen rebelled, and Takenobu's envoys went to console them. Wherever they went, they immediately surrendered.

古文：永安中，抚军府长史。
现代文：永安中，拜抚军府长史。
English: Yong'an Middle School, the military governor of Baifu.

古文：尔朱兆等屯据晋阳，魏朝以河内要冲，除隆之龙骧将军、河内太守，寻加持节、后将军、假平北将军、当郡都督。
现代文：尔朱兆等屯驻晋阳，魏朝廷认为河内为要冲之地，即除隆之龙骧将军、河内太守，不久又加持节、后将军、假平北将军、当郡都督。
English: Er Zhu Zhao and others were stationed in Jinyang, and the Wei court considered Hanoi to be the place to be attacked, that is, in addition to General Long Quan of Longzhong, the governor of Hanoi, he was soon followed by General Ji Ji, General Hou, General Fake Pingbei, and the governor of Dang County.

古文：未及到郡，属尔朱兆入洛，庄帝幽崩。
现代文：隆之还没有赴任，正好尔朱兆入据洛阳，庄帝因幽禁而死。
English: Longzhi had not yet taken office when Zhu Zhaor entered Luoyang, and Zhuangdi died due to confinement.

古文：隆之以父遇害，常怀报雪，因此遂持节东归，图为义举。
现代文：隆之由于父亲遭人陷害，常有报仇雪恨之心，因此便持节东归，图谋举义。
English: Since Takashi's father was framed by someone, he often has a vengeful heart, so he returns to the East on the day of the festival in an attempt to seek justice.

古文：时高乾告隆之曰： 尔朱暴逆，祸加至尊，弟与兄并荷先帝殊常之眷，岂可不出身为主，以报仇耻乎？ 
现代文：此时高乾提醒隆之说： 尔朱暴逆，祸及皇上，你的弟弟与兄长同蒙先帝殊常之恩，岂能忘恩负义，不为朝廷报仇雪耻？ 
English: At this time, Gao Qian reminded Longzhi, saying, "If Zhu rebels violently, woe to the emperor. Your younger brother and elder brother have received the special favor of the former emperor. Can't you be ungrateful and not avenge the disgrace of the imperial court?"

古文：隆之对曰： 国耻家怨，痛入骨髓，乘机而动，今实其时。 
现代文：隆之回答说： 国耻家恨，痛入骨髓，乘机而动，现在正是时候。 
English: Takayuki replied, "It is time for us to take advantage of the national shame and hatred that is ingrained in our bones.

古文：遂与乾等定计，夜袭州城，克之。
现代文：于是便与高乾等人定计，夜袭州城，取得成功。
English: As a result, he and Gao Qian and others made a plan to attack the state capital at night and succeeded.

古文：乾等以隆之素为乡里所信，乃推为刺史。
现代文：高乾等认为隆之一向为乡里敬重，就推荐他做了刺史。
English: Gao Qian and others thought that one of the Longxiang was respected by the township, and recommended him to do the engraving history.

古文：隆之尽心慰抚，人情感悦。
现代文：这样，隆之尽力慰抚，民情感奋。
English: In this way, Takashi tries his best to comfort, and people's emotions are stirred.

古文：寻高祖自晋阳东出，隆之遣子子绘奉迎于滏口，高祖甚嘉之。
现代文：不久，高祖从晋阳东出，隆之打发其儿子子绘于滏口迎接，高祖十分感动。
English: Not long after, Gao Zu left Jinyang for the east, and Long Zhi sent his son Zigu to meet him at the gate. Gao Zu was very moved.

古文：既至信都，集诸州郡督将僚吏等议曰： 逆胡尔朱兆穷凶极虐，天地之所不容，人神之所捐弃，今所在蜂起，此天亡之时也。
现代文：抵达信都后，高祖召集诸州郡督将僚吏等议论说： 逆胡尔朱兆穷凶极恶，天地不容，人神捐弃，眼下所在奋起举义，实在是上天诛杀此贼之时。
English: After arriving in Xindu, Gaozu convened the county governors of various states, generals, and other officials to discuss and said: "The rebel Hul Zhu Zhao is extremely vicious, heaven and earth are unacceptable, and people and gods are abandoned. The time to rise up for righteousness is really the time for God to kill this thief."

古文：欲与诸君剪除凶羯，其计安在？ 
现代文：我欲与诸位剪除凶残，大家有何好计？ 
English: I want to join you in stamping out cruelty. Do you have any good ideas?

古文：隆之对曰： 尔朱暴虐，天亡斯至，神怒民怨，众叛亲离，虽握重兵，其强易弱。
现代文：隆之回答说： 尔朱氏暴虐，其灭亡之时已到，神怒民怨，众叛亲离，虽然他手握重兵，貌似强大实则羸弱。
English: Takashi replied, "The time has come for the destruction of the tyrannical Erju clan. God is angry with the people's grievances, and the people have rebelled against their relatives. Although he has a heavy hand, he seems to be strong but is actually weak.

古文：而大王乃心王室，首唱义旗，天下之人，孰不归仰？愿大王勿疑。 
现代文：大王您心系王室，首举义旗，天下之人，孰不归仰，请大王不要疑惑不决。 
English: Your heart is the royal family, and you are the first to raise the banner of righteousness. People of the world, whether you admit it or not, please do not hesitate.

古文：中兴初，拜左光禄大夫、吏部尚书。
现代文：中兴初，拜左光禄大夫、吏部尚书。
English: At the beginning of ZTE, Dr. Bai Zaganglu and Secretary Shangshu left the company.

古文：尔朱兆等军于广阿，十月，高祖与战，大破之。
现代文：尔朱兆等屯驻广阿，十月，高祖与其交战，一下子就打败了他。
English: In October, Gaozu went to war with Er Zhuzhao, who was stationed in Guang'a, and defeated him at once.

古文：乃遣隆之持节为北道大使。
现代文：朝廷派遣隆之持节为北道大使。
English: The Imperial Court dispatched Takanobu Mochizuki as ambassador to Hokudo.

古文：高祖将击尔朱兆等军于韩陵，留隆之镇邺城。
现代文：高祖准备向驻在韩陵的尔朱兆等人发起进攻，就留隆之镇守邺城。
English: Gaozu was preparing to launch an attack on Er Zhuzhao and others stationed in Hanling, so he stayed in the town of Lulong to defend Lushan.

古文：尔朱兆等走，以隆之行冀州事，仍领降俘三万余人，分置诸州。
现代文：尔朱兆等逃遁，朝廷委任隆之行冀州刺史事，并将降俘三万余人分配诸州安置。
English: Zhu Zhao and others fled, and the imperial court appointed Long Zheng to go to Jizhou to make history, and distributed more than 30,000 prisoners of war to various states.

古文：寻征为侍中。
现代文：很快征拜为侍中。
English: Soon after, he was called up as a chamberlain.

古文：时高祖自洛还师于邺。
现代文：此时高祖从洛阳回师邺城。
English: At this time, Gao Zu returned from Luoyang to Shicheng.

古文：隆之将赴都，因过谒见，启高祖曰： 斛斯椿、贺拔胜、贾显智等往事尔朱，中复乖阻，及讨仲远，又与之同，猜忍之人，志欲无限。
现代文：隆之拟赴京城，趁便拜访谒见了高祖。他对高祖说： 斛斯椿、贺拔胜、贾显智等人先前侍奉尔朱，突生乖忤，到讨伐仲远时，又同心协力了。猜忌狠毒之人，欲望无穷。
English: Takanobu planned to go to Kyoto, and took the opportunity to visit  to see Gaozu. He said to Gaozu: 斯椿, 贺拔胜, Jia Xianzhi and others had previously served Er Zhu, and they were stubborn, and when they went to fight against Zhongyuan, they worked together again. People who are suspicious and vicious have endless desires.

古文：又叱烈延庆侯念贤皆在京师，王授以名位，此等必构祸隙。 
现代文：又叱列延庆、侯渊、念贤等均在京师，大王如果授以名位，他们一定会制造祸乱。 
English: Moreover, Yanqing, Houyuan, and Nianxian were all in Beijing, and if the great king were to bestow the title, they would surely create a disaster.

古文：高祖经宿乃谓隆之曰： 侍中昨言，实是深虑。 
现代文：第二天高祖才对隆之说： 侍中昨日之语，确实深虑远谋。 
English: It was only the next day that Gao Zu said to Takayuki, "Yesterday's speech by the chamberlain was indeed thoughtful and far-sighted.

古文：寻封安德郡公，邑二千户，进位仪同三司。
现代文：不久封为安德郡公，食邑二千户，进位仪同三司。
English: He was soon made the lord of Ander County, which had 2,000 households, and promoted to the third division.

古文：隆之表以先爵富城子及武城子转授弟子孝琬等，朝廷嘉而从之。
现代文：这个时候，朝议认为尔朱荣佐命前朝，应当配食明帝庙庭。隆之说： 荣为人臣，亲行杀逆，哪有害人的母亲，与子对享之理？考古查今，未见此事。 朝廷听从了他的意见。
English: At this time, the imperial court considered that Rzhu Rongzu should be the first to serve food to the Ming Emperor's temple. Takashi said: "Honored as a vassal, he personally committed treason, which is harmful to a person's mother, and to his son? Archaeological research has not seen this. The imperial court listened to his opinion.

古文：后为斛斯椿等构之于魏帝，逃归乡里。
现代文：诏隆之参议于麟趾阁，以制定新制。后因斛斯椿等人向魏帝进谗，隆之逃回了故里。
English: Zhao Longzhi held a meeting at Linzi Pavilion to formulate a new system. Later, as Zhu Xiqin and others made overtures to Emperor Wei, Longzhi fled back to his hometown.

古文：高祖知其被诬，召赴晋阳。
现代文：高祖知其遭受诬陷，召往晋阳。
English: Gao Zu knew that he had been framed and was summoned to Jinyang.

古文：魏帝寻以本官征之，隆之固辞不赴。
现代文：不久魏帝以本官征召，隆之坚辞未去赴任。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wei conscripted him as his own official, but Takashi refused to take up the post.

古文：仍以隆之行并州刺史。
现代文：依然使隆之行并州刺史事。
English: He still made Takashi's visit and the annexation of the prefecture a historical event.

古文：魏清河王亶为大司马。长史。
现代文：魏清河王为大司马，以隆之为长史。
English: Wei Qinghe Wang was the grand steed, with Long as the long history.

古文：天平初，复入为侍中，预迁都之议。
现代文：天平初，再入朝为侍中，参预迁都之议。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpyo era, he re-entered the court as a samurai and participated in the discussion of moving the capital.

古文：魏静帝诏为侍讲，除吏部尚书，加侍中，以本官行冀州事。
现代文：魏静帝诏其为侍讲，迁吏部尚书，加侍中，以本官行冀州刺史事。
English: Emperor Wei Jing decreed that he should be an attendant lecturer, the transfer of the cadre department to Shangshu, and the addition of attendants, with his official position in the history of Jizhou.

古文：阳平民路绍遵聚众反，自号行台，破定州博陵郡，虏太守高永乐，南侵冀州。
现代文：阳平人路绍遵聚众造反，自称行台，攻克定州博陵郡，掳太守高永乐，往南侵入冀州。
English: Yangping's ruler, Lu Shao Zun, rallied the masses to rebel, claiming to march to Taiwan, conquer Dingzhou Boling County, capture the emperor Gao Yongle, and invade Jizhou to the south.

古文：隆之令所部长乐太守高景等击破之，生擒绍遵，送于晋阳。
现代文：隆之命令部属长乐太守高景等打垮了路绍遵的进攻，还活捉了绍遵，扭送到了晋阳。
English: Takashi's order department subordinate Changle Taishu Gao Jing and others defeated Lu Shaozun's attack, captured Shaozun alive, and sent him to Jinyang.

古文：元象初，除冀州刺史。寻加开府。
现代文：元象初，拜冀州刺史，很快又加开府。
English: At the beginning of Yuan Xiang, he paid homage to the history of Jizhou, and soon added the opening of the capital.

古文：时初召募勇果，都督孛八、高法雄、封子元等不愿远戍，聚众为乱。
现代文：此时初次招募勇士，都督孛八、高法雄、封子元等不愿意远地戍守，遂聚众为乱。
English: At this time, warriors were recruited for the first time, and the governors Shihachi, Gao Faoxiong, and Fuzimoto did not want to stay far away, so they gathered together to cause chaos.

古文：隆之率州军破平之。
现代文：隆之带领本州军队平定了叛乱。
English: Takayuki led the Honshu troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：兴和元年，复征为侍中。
现代文：兴和元年，再征拜为侍中。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was re-recruited as a chamberlain.

古文：隆之素得乡里人情，频为本州，留心抚字，吏民追思，立碑颂德。
现代文：隆之一向得乡里民心，极力为本州着想，留心抚养，吏民怀念，因此立碑歌颂。
English: He was determined to win the hearts and minds of the people in his hometown, to do his best for the sake of his home state, to take care of his upbringing, and to cherish the memories of the people. Therefore, he set up a monument to sing his praises.

古文：转行梁州事，又行济州事，征拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：转行梁州刺史事，又行济州事，征拜尚书右仆射。
English: He was transferred to the Liangzhou stabbing historical event, and also went to the Jeju event, to solicit the Shangshu right-handed shot.

古文：武定初北豫州刺史高仲密将叛，遣使阴通消息于冀州豪望，使为内应。
现代文：武定初年，北豫州刺史高仲密拟将叛乱，并派人向冀州豪族秘密通报消息，请他们作为内应，于是轻薄之徒，相互串联。
English: In the first year of Wuding, Gao Zhong, a conspirator from North Henan Province, plotted a rebellion, and sent someone to secretly inform the powerful Jizhou people of the news, asking them to act as a middleman. As a result, the conspirators formed a series of connections with each other.

古文：轻薄之徒，颇相扇动，诏隆之驰驿慰抚，遂得安静。世宗密书与隆之云： 仲密枝党同恶向西者，宜悉收其家累，以惩将来。 
现代文：朝廷诏令隆之出使抚慰，之后才得安静。世宗给隆之密信，称： 仲密枝党同恶向西者，应该全部没收他们的家产，以杀一儆百。 
English: The imperial court ordered the emissary of Takashi to soothe, and then it was quiet. Sejong sent a secret letter to Takashi, saying: Those who join the evil of the Zhongmi branch of the party should confiscate all their family property to kill one hundred.

古文：隆之以为恩旨既行，理无追改，今若收治，示民不信，脱或惊扰，所亏处大。
现代文：隆之认为恩旨已经颁布，再无追改之理。如果现在给以惩处，是向民众显示不诚，若有惊扰，损失就大了。
English: Takashi believes that the decree has already been issued, and there is no reason to change it. If punishment is given now, it will show dishonesty to the public, and if there is a surprise, the loss will be great.

古文：乃启高祖，事遂得停。
现代文：便向高祖作了报告，事情才没有往前发展。
English: He then made a report to Gaozu, but things did not move forward.

古文：隆之自义旗始建，首参经略，奇谋妙算，密以启闻，手书削稿，罕知于外。
现代文：隆之从举义之日起，首参大计的制定，其间的奇谋妙算，随时向高祖启报，手书、草稿，均被销毁，因而外界罕知其事。
English: From the day Takashi was elevated to the throne, he began to work out his first grand plan. He kept Gaozu informed of the intricacies of the plan at all times, and all manuscripts and drafts were destroyed. As a result, the outside world rarely knew anything about it.

古文：高祖嘉其忠谨，每多从之。
现代文：高祖嘉奖隆之的忠心，时常遵从他的筹谋。
English: Gaozu commended Takashi's loyalty and often followed his plans.

古文：追忆隆之，顾谓冀州行事司马子如曰： 封公积德履仁，体通性达，自出纳军国，垂二十年，契阔艰虞，始终如一。
现代文：复以本官行济州事，转齐州刺史。武定三年死于任上，时年六十一岁。高祖后至冀州地界，停留交津，想起了隆之，回头对冀州行事司马子如说： 封公积德履仁，体通性达，自参预军国大计，将近二十年，劳苦困顿、艰险忧患，始终如一。
English: Wu Ding died three years into his term of office, at the age of sixty-one. Gao Zuo went to the border of Jizhou, stayed in Jiajin, remembered Long Zhi, and turned back to the Jizhou acting secretary Ma Zi and said: "Feng Gong has accumulated a lot of virtues, and has a high degree of versatility. Since participating in the pre-war military and national plan, for nearly twenty years, he has been through hardships, hardships and hardships, and has been consistent.

古文：以其忠信可凭，方以后事托之。
现代文：因其忠信可凭，才将后事托付给他。
English: It was because of his loyalty that he was entrusted with the succession.

古文：何期报善无徵，奄从物化，言念忠贤，良可痛惜。 
现代文：没料到未及极善，忽然身亡，念其忠贤，实可痛惜。 
English: Unexpectedly, he was not as good as he could have been, and he died suddenly. It is a great pity that he was not remembered for his loyalty.

古文：为之流涕。
现代文：并为之流涕。
English: and wept bitterly for the death of Li Daoxuan.

古文：令参军仲羡以太牢就祭焉。
现代文：又令参军宋仲羡用太牢祭奠。
English: He also ordered Song Zhongzheng, who had joined the army, to perform a memorial service.

古文：长子早亡。
现代文：封子绘，字仲藻，小名封搔。
English: The seal is drawn, the words "仲藻" and "小名封" are written.

古文：第二子子绘嗣。
现代文：为人性格平和，有治政的才能。
English: He is a peaceful person and has the ability to govern.

古文：子绘，字仲藻，小名搔，性和理，有器局。释褐秘书郎中。
现代文：入仕为秘书郎中。
English: Entered the service as a secretary junior high school student.

古文：尔朱兆之害魏庄帝也，与父隆之举义信都，奉使诣高祖。
现代文：尔朱兆谋害魏庄帝的时候，与父封隆之起义，奉父命到信都前往直担处报告。
English: When Er Zhu Zhao plotted to assassinate Wei Zhuangdi, he and his father Fong Long rebelled and, on his father's orders, went to the post office to report.

古文：至信都，召署开府主簿，仍典书记。
现代文：直担召用他为开府主簿，主管书记。
English: He was directly responsible for appointing him as the chief accountant and the secretary in charge of opening the government.

古文：中兴元年，转大丞相主簿，加伏波将军。从高祖征尔朱兆。
现代文：中兴元年，转任大丞相府主簿，加任伏波将军，随高祖征讨氽朱兆。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, he was transferred to the position of the chief accountant of the Prime Minister's Office, and was appointed to the position of General Fubao. He went with Gao Zu to recruit Zhu Zhao.

古文：及平中山，军还，除通直常侍、左将军，领中书舍人。
现代文：及平定中山，回师后，拜任通直常侍、左将军，领中书舍人。
English: He also subdued Zhongshan, and after returning to his master, he was appointed to the post of Tsunetsuna no zenshi, the left general, and the leader of the middle school.

古文：母忧解职，寻复本任。
现代文：因守母丧解职，不久复官。
English: He was relieved of duty due to the death of his mother, but was reinstated soon after.

古文：太昌中，从高祖定并、汾、肆数州，平尔朱兆及山胡等，加征南将军、金紫光禄大夫，魏武帝末，斛斯椿等佞幸用事，父隆之以猜忌，惧难潜归乡里，子绘亦弃官俱还。
现代文：左旦年间，随直趄定差州、汾州、肆州，平定尔朱兆及山胡等，加官征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。魏亘嘘末年，魁基噬等小人在朝中专权，父封隆之因被猜忌惧受难而私归故乡，子绘也就弃官而还。
English: In the years of the Eastern Tang Dynasty, with the rise of Zhoushou, Zhoushou and Zhoushou, and the pacification of Er, Zhuzhao and Shanhu, the general of the Southern Expedition and the doctor of the Jin and Ziguanglu were promoted to higher posts. In the last years of the Wei Dynasty, the dwarfs such as Qui Ji Zhao had absolute power in the Middle Kingdom, the father, Fong Long, returned to his hometown because he was suspected and feared suffering, and the son also resigned his post and returned.

古文：孝静初，兼给事黄门侍郎，与太常卿李元忠等并持节出使，观省风俗，问人疾苦。
现代文：孝静帝登基之初，兼任给事黄门侍郎，和太常卿李元忠等人奉命持节出使各地观风俗，视民情，问疾苦。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of Emperor Xiaojing, Huangmen Zhilong was also appointed to the post, and Li Yuanzhong, the First Secretary of the State Council, and others were ordered to hold the festival and send envoys to observe the customs of various regions, depending on the people's conditions, and ask about the hardships.

古文：还，赴晋阳，从高祖征夏州。
现代文：还，赴置阳，随高祖征讨夏州。
English: In addition, he went to Jiyang and followed Gao Zu to conquer Xiazhou.

古文：二年，除卫将军、平阳太守，寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：二年，拜任卫将军、垩堡太守，不久又加官散骑常侍。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the general of the Imperial Guards, the governor of the bunker, and soon after that, he was promoted to the rank of a samurai.

古文：晋州北界霍太山，旧号千里径者，山坂高峻，每大军往来，士马劳苦，子绘启高祖，请于旧径东谷别开一路。高祖从之，仍令子绘领汾、晋二州夫修治，旬日而就。
现代文：晋州北界为霍太山，古称千里径，此路山坂高峻，大军往来，士马劳苦。子绘请示高祖，在原路束谷另开一道，高祖采纳了，便命子绘率汾州、晋州的夫役共修新道，十来天就完工了。
English: The northern border of Jinzhou is Mount Huotai, known in ancient times as the "Thousand-Mile Trail." This route is steep, with many troops passing through, and requires a great deal of hard work. Ziguang asked Gao Zu to open another route in the original route, which Gao Zu accepted. He then ordered Ziguang to lead the men of Zhangzhou and Jinzhou to jointly build the new road, which was completed in about ten days.

古文：高祖亲总六军，路经新道，嘉其省便，赐谷二百斛。
现代文：高祖亲率六军，路经新道，称赞其便捷，赐谷二百斛。
English: Gao Zu progenitor led the six armies, passed through the new road, praised its convenience, and gave the valley 200 baht.

古文：后大军讨复东雍，平柴壁及乔山、紫谷、绛蜀等，子绘恒以太守前驱慰劳，征兵运粮，军士无乏。
现代文：后来大军征讨收复东雍州，平定柴壁、乔山、紫谷、绛蜀等地，子绘常以太守身份前往慰劳，征兵运粮，前方不至空乏。
English: Later, a large army was recruited to recover Dongyongzhou and pacify Chaibai, Qiaoshan, Zidani, Lushu and other places. Zigu often went to work as a conscript to conscript soldiers and transport grain, so that the front would not be empty.

古文：兴和初，自郡征补大行台吏部郎中。
现代文：兴和初年，从郡裹召他回京，任命为大行台吏部郎中。
English: In the first year of Xinghe, he was called back to Beijing from the county and appointed as a junior member of the Daihangdai Librarian.

古文：武定元年，高仲密以武牢西叛，周文帝拥众东侵，高祖于邙山破之，乘胜长驱，遂至潼关。
现代文：武定元年，高仲密据武牢叛归西魏，周文帝率兵向东进军，高祖破敌于邙山，乘胜长驱，直抵潼关。
English: In the first year of Wuding, Gao Zhongmi rebelled and returned to the Western Wei Dynasty from Wuding Prison. Zhou Wendi led the army to march eastward. Gao Zu defeated the enemy in Shaoshan and drove to Shouguan.

古文：或谏不可穷兵极武者，高祖总命群僚议其进止。
现代文：有人谏止，认为不可穷兵极武，高祖下令群僚共议进退。
English: Some people hesitated, thinking that it was impossible to use extreme force. Gaozu ordered his colleagues to advance and retreat together.

古文：子绘言曰： 贼帅才非人雄，偷窃名号，遂敢驱率亡叛，遂死伊瀍，天道祸淫，一朝瓦解。
现代文：封子绘进言说： 敌酋并不是杰出将帅，衹不过假藉名义，便大胆妄为，驱使一帮亡命叛徒到伊、涟来送死，天道惩罚于他，使之一朝瓦解。
English: Feng Zi-painting said: The enemy chief is not an outstanding general. However, under a false name, he dared to act recklessly, driving a group of desperate traitors to Iraq and China to be sent to death. Heaven will punish him and cause the collapse of one of the dynasties.

古文：虽仅以身免，而魂胆俱丧。
现代文：虽然只身逃脱，魂胆已经丧破。
English: Although he escaped alone, his soul was destroyed.

古文：混一车书，正在今日，天与不取，反得其咎。
现代文：统一天下，正在此时。天予而不取，反遭后患。
English: Unification is taking place at this very moment. It is a blessing rather than a curse.

古文：时难遇而易失。昔魏祖之平汉中，不乘胜而取巴蜀，失在迟疑，悔无及已。
现代文：机遇难得而易失，当年曹操平定漠中，不乘胜夺取巴蜀，失在迟疑，后悔也无济于事了。
English: Opportunities are hard to come by and easy to lose. When Cao Cao was in the middle of pacifying the desert, he did not take advantage of the victory to seize Bashu. He lost it by hesitating, and regret did not help.

古文：伏愿大王不以为疑。 
现代文：我恳请大王不要犹疑! 
English: I beseech the Great King not to hesitate!

古文：高祖深然之。但以时既盛暑，方为后图，遂命班师。
现代文：高祖很赞成他的分析，但因时正酷暑，打算以后再说，便命班师。
English: Gaozu agreed with his analysis, but since it was a very hot day, he decided to wait until later, so he called his teacher.

古文：三年，父丧去职。
现代文：武定三年，因父丧守孝而离职。
English: In the third year of Wuding's reign, he left office due to his father's death.

古文：四年，高祖西讨，起为大都督，领冀州兵赴邺，从高祖自滏口西趣晋州，会大军于玉壁。复以子绘为大行台吏部郎中。
现代文：四年，高祖西征，又起用他任大都督，领冀州兵赴邺都，从高祖自滏口向西进攻晋州，与大军会师于玉壁，又用封子绘任大行台吏部郎中。
English: In the fourth year, Gaozu went on the Western Expedition, and he was appointed as the grand governor of Dadu and led the Jizhou National Army to Shidu. From Gaozu, he attacked Jinzhou from Shigou to the west, joined forces with the great army in Yubi, and was appointed as the middle-ranking official of Dahuangtai with a seal.

古文：及高祖病笃，师还晋阳，引入内室，面受密旨，衔命山东，安抚州郡。
现代文：到高祖病重危急，军还晋阳，把子绘召入内室，受密旨，奉命去山东州郡进行安抚。
English: When Gao Zu was critically ill, the army also came to Jinyang and called Zi Er into the inner room. He received a secret order and was ordered to go to Shandong Prefecture to pacify.

古文：高祖崩，秘未发丧，世宗以子绘为渤海太守，令驰驿赴任。
现代文：高祖去世，秘不发丧。世宗用子绘为渤海郡太守，令他迅速骑驿马赴任。
English: Gaozu passed away, but his death was kept a secret. Shizong used his son as the governor of Bohai County, and he quickly rode his horse to the post.

古文：世宗亲执其手曰： 诚知此郡未允勋望，但时事未安，须卿镇抚。
现代文：世宗亲自拉着他的手说： 我很清楚此郡不能舆你的功勋名望相符，但时局动荡不安，正需你出面镇抚。
English: Sejong personally took him by the hand and said, "I am well aware that this county cannot match your achievements and reputation, but the situation is turbulent and unstable, and it is time for you to come forward and calm things down."

古文：且衣锦昼游，古人所贵，善加经略，绥静海隅，不劳学习常太守向州参也。 
现代文：而且衣锦还乡，也是古人所贵的美事。望能善加经营，安定海滨，不烦劳你学习平常太守去向州官参拜了。 
English: Moreover, the return of the brocade to the hometown is also a precious beauty of the ancients. It is hoped that it will be well managed and the seashore will be stable. Don't bother with your usual study of Taizhou to visit the state officials.

古文：仍听收集部曲一千人。
现代文：并允许他自招家丁一千人。
English: and allowed him to recruit a thousand people from his family.

古文：后进秩一等，加骠骑将军。
现代文：后来又进宫阶一等，加骠骑将军。
English: Later, he was promoted to the first class of the palace steps, and became a general.

古文：天保二年，除太尉长史。
现代文：天保二年，任他为太尉长史。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：三年，频以本官再行南青州事。
现代文：三年，多次以本官代理南青州州务。
English: In the past three years, I have been acting as my own official for the state affairs of South Qingzhou several times.

古文：四年，坐事免。
现代文：四年，因事获罪免职。
English: Four years later, he was found guilty and removed from office.

古文：六年，行南兖州事，寻除持节、海州刺史，不行。
现代文：六年，代理南兖州事，不久又拜任持节海州刺史，未到任。
English: For six years, he was the acting governor of Nanxizhou, and soon he took over the post of the governor of Haizhou, but he did not take up the post.

古文：七年，改授合州刺史。
现代文：七年，改任合州刺史。
English: Seven years later, he was reassigned to the post of chief historian of Hezhou.

古文：到州未几，值萧轨、裴英起等江东败没，行台司马恭发历阳，径还寿春，疆埸大骇。
现代文：到任不久，就遇上萧塾、裴英起等渡丝束作战全军覆没之事，行台司屋茎兵发历堡，回军路过画画，前方惊骇。
English: Not long after he took office, he encountered Xiaoju, Pei Yingqi and other soldiers who died in the battle of the crossing of the silk bundles, and the soldiers of the Gangtai house were shocked. The returning troops passed by the painting, and the front was shocked.

古文：兼在州器械，随军略尽，城隍楼雉，亏坏者多，子绘乃造城隍楼雉，缮治军器，守御所须毕备，人情渐安。
现代文：加之金赵城裹军用器械早已随军耗尽，城垣敌楼箭垛等一应设施，亏损败坏得不成样子。封子绘便勉力修缮，筑城垣，造兵器，逐步完善防御设施，人情渐渐安定下来。
English: In addition, the military equipment had already been exhausted along with the army, and the city walls, enemy towers, arrows, and other auxiliary facilities had deteriorated to a loss. Fuzipo then tried to repair, build city walls, build weapons, and gradually improve defense facilities, and the human condition gradually stabilized.

古文：寻敕于州营造船舰，子绘为大使，总监之。
现代文：不久朝廷命令在州府监造兵舰，以王绘任大使总负责监造。
English: Soon after, the imperial court ordered the construction of warships to be supervised by the prefectural government, with Wang Pu as the ambassador in charge of supervising the construction.

古文：陈武帝曾遣其护军将军徐度等率轻舟从栅口历东关入巢湖，径袭合肥，规烧船舫。以夜一更潜寇城下，子绘率将士格战，陈人奔退。
现代文：陈武帝曾派护军将军涂庐等率轻舟从栅经塞迩入幽，直逼金肥，准备烧船舫。深夜一更悄悄进袭到城下，封子绘率将士出城迎战，陈人奔退。
English: Emperor Chen Wudi once sent a light boat with the speed of a general of the escort army to sail from the gate through the plug into the darkness, straight to Jinfei, and prepared to burn the boat. In the middle of the night, a stealthy attack came to the city, the soldiers went out of the city to meet the battle, and the Chen people rushed back.

古文：九年，转郑州刺史。
现代文：武定九年，改任塑丛刺史。
English: In the ninth year of Wuding, he was appointed as the chief of the Plastic Conglomerate.

古文：子绘晓达政事，长于绥抚，历宰州郡，所在安之。
现代文：封子绘通晓政务，长于治民，历任州郡长官，所到之处都治理得很平安。
English: Fong Zi-pai is familiar with government affairs and is good at governing the people. Successive state and county governors have governed everywhere very safely.

古文：征为司徒左长史，行魏尹事。
现代文：征还京师任司徒左长史，并代理魏郡事宜。
English: He was appointed to the post of the Beijing division commander, and acted as the representative of Wei County.

古文：乾明初，转大司农，寻正除魏尹。
现代文：茎塱初年转任大司农，不久正式任命为魏尹。
English: At the beginning of the year, Zhu Xi was transferred to the post of Senior Secretary of Agriculture, and soon he was officially appointed as Wei Yin.

古文：皇建中，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：皇建年间，加封骠骑大将军。
English: During the period of imperial construction, he was awarded the title of Grand General of Cavalry.

古文：大宁二年，迁都官尚书。
现代文：大宰二年，改任都官尚书。
English: In the second year of Dazai, he was reassigned to the post of tokan (governor).

古文：高归彦作逆，召子绘入见昭阳殿。
现代文：高归彦反叛，召子绘入见于昭阳殿。
English: Takakibohiko rebelled, and his son is depicted in the Shōyō-den.

古文：帝亲诏子绘曰： 冀州密迩京甸，归彦敢肆凶悖。
现代文：皇上亲自跟王笙说： 冀业就在都城近处，高贼竟敢放肆张狂。
English: The emperor himself told Wang Yao: Ji Ye is near the capital, how dare the high thief be so arrogant.

古文：已敕大司马、平原王段孝先总勒重兵，乘机电发；司空、东安王娄睿督率诸军，络绎继进。
现代文：我已命令大司马、平原王段孝先总指挥部队，乘机快速扑灭反贼；司空、塞叁王娄壑督率诸军陆续进发。
English: I have ordered the commander-in-chief Sima and the commander-in-chief Pingyuan Wangdan Xiaoqian to take advantage of the opportunity to quickly extinguish the anti-thieves; the commander-in-chief Siku and the commander-in-chief Sayu Wangjun led the troops to advance one after another.

古文：卿世载名德，恩洽彼州，故遣参赞军事，随便慰抚，宜善加谋略，以称所寄。 
现代文：你世代名德，在州颇有声望，士民蒙受恩泽，所以让你参赞军事，随宜安抚。你可要善加谋算，不要辜负朝廷重望。 
English: Your generation is famous for its virtue, has a good reputation in the state, and the scholars and the people have been favored, so let you be the military counselor and appease as appropriate. You should be good at making plans and not disappoint the expectations of the court.

古文：即以其日驰传赴军。
现代文：当天，子绘便驰驿赴军到了前线。
English: On the same day, Zi Pu galloped to the front line.

古文：子绘祖父世为本州，百姓素所归附。
现代文：封子绘父祖世代任冀州刺史，百姓归心。
English: The people of Jizhou have been fascinated by the painting of seals for generations.

古文：既至，巡城谕以祸福，民吏降款，日夜相继，贼中动静，小大必知。
现代文：他一到便巡城，对众人晓谕祸福，于是民吏来降者日夜不绝。叛军动静，小大必知。
English: As soon as he arrived, he made a tour of the city, telling everyone about the good and the bad. As a result, there was a constant stream of civil servants coming and going day and night.

古文：贼平，仍敕子绘权行州事。
现代文：叛军消灭之后，就让王垫临时主持州事。
English: After the rebels were eliminated, Wang Jian was allowed to temporarily preside over state affairs.

古文：寻征还，敕与群官议定律令，加仪同三司。
现代文：不久便召还，下令他与群臣一起议定律令，加官仪同三司。
English: He soon recalled him and ordered him to work with his ministers to agree on the ritsuryo, and to add the official ceremony to the three departments.

古文：后突厥入逼晋阳，诏子绘行怀州事，乘驿之任。
现代文：后来突厥内侵，兵逼晋阳，派子绘代理怀州刺史，乘驿马快速赴任。
English: Later, the Turkic invasion, the soldiers forced Jinyang, Paizi painting agent Waizhou Shishi, and took the horse to quickly take office.

古文：还为七兵尚书，转祠部尚书。
现代文：还京，为七兵尚书，转任祠部尚书。
English: After returning to Beijing, he became the secretary of the seven soldiers and the secretary of the ancestral hall.

古文：河清三年，暴疾卒，年五十。
现代文：河清三年得暴病而亡，年五十岁。
English: He Qing died of a violent illness three years later, at the age of fifty.

古文：世祖深叹惜之。
现代文：世祖十分叹惜。
English: The ancestor was very sorry.

古文：赠使持节、瀛冀二州军事、冀州刺史、开府仪同、尚书右仆射，谥曰简。
现代文：赠使持节、瀛、冀二州军事、冀州刺史、开府仪同、尚书右仆射，谧号为简。
English: His posthumous names were Ji Jie, Jie Erzhou Military, Jie Zhou Zhishi, Kaifu Yi Tong, Shangshu Yuhusa, and his posthumous name was Jian.

古文：子宝盖嗣。
现代文：其子封实盖嗣爵。
English: His son was given the title of Heir to the Throne.

古文：武平末，通直常侍。
现代文：武平末年任通直常侍。
English: In the last years of Takehira's life, he was appointed as Tsunenao's personal attendant.

古文：子绘弟子绣，武平中，渤海太守、霍州刺史。
现代文：封子绘弟封子绣，武平年间任渤海太守、霍州刺史。
English: He painted and embroidered seals, and served as the governor of the Bohai Sea and the governor of Hozhou during the Wu-Ping era.

古文：陈将吴明彻侵略淮南，子绣城陷，被送扬州。
现代文：陈将吴明彻兵进淮南，子绣州城失守，被押送扬州。
English: Chen led Wu Mingche's soldiers into Huainan, lost Zhouzhuang, and was escorted to Yangzhou.

古文：齐亡后，逃归。
现代文：北齐亡后逃归。
English: He fled after the death of Bei Qi.

古文：隋开皇初，终于通州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇初年，死于通州刺史任上。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he died in Tongzhou.

古文：子绣外貌儒雅，而侠气难忤。
现代文：子绣外貌儒雅，而胸有侠气，谁也不能逆忤他。
English: Zixiu has a refined appearance and a chivalrous heart, and no one can resist him.

古文：司空娄定远，子绣兄之婿也，为瀛州刺史。
现代文：司空娄定远，是他的侄婿，时任瀛州刺史。
English: Sikyong Jangdingyuan was his nephew-in-law, who was then the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：子绣在渤海，定远过之，对妻及诸女宴集，言戏微有亵慢，子绣大怒，鸣鼓集众将攻之。俄顷，兵至数千，马将千匹。
现代文：子绣在渤海，定远路过去看望他，对其妻妾诸女宴集欢会。席间，定远言语稍涉轻慢，子绣大怒，立即鸣鼓召集众将攻打他，很快兵至数千，马将千匹。
English: Zixu was in the Bohai Sea, Dingyuan went to visit him, and held a banquet for his wives and concubines. During the banquet, Dingyuan's words were a little careless, Zixu was furious, and immediately beat a drum to summon the generals to attack him, and soon there were thousands of soldiers and thousands of horses.

古文：定远免冠拜谢，久乃释之。
现代文：定远脱了官帽，向他拜谢认错，好久，才放开了他。
English: Dingyuan took off his official hat, thanked him and admitted his mistake. It took him a long time to let him go.

古文：隆之弟延之，字祖业。少明辩，有世用。
现代文：封隆之的弟弟封延之，字祖业，少年时就头脑清晰，看事准确，能任大事。
English: Feng Longzhi's younger brother, Feng Yanzhi, nicknamed Zuye, had a clear mind when he was a boy, saw things accurately, and was capable of handling important matters.

古文：起家员外郎。
现代文：应召出任员外郎。
English: He was called up to serve as a member of the outer circle.

古文：中兴初，除中坚将军。
现代文：中兴初年，拜任中坚将军。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was appointed General Manager.

古文：高祖以为大行台左光禄大夫，封郏城县子。行渤海郡事。
现代文：高祖用他任大行台左光禄大夫，封为郏城县子，代理渤海郡事。
English: Gao Zu appointed him as the doctor of Dagangdai Zagonglu, and appointed him as the deputy of Buxing County, acting as the deputy of Bohai County.

古文：以都督从娄昭讨樊子鹄，事平，除青州刺史。
现代文：后以都督随娄昭讨平樊子鹄，拜任青州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Qingzhou with the title of Zhu Zhaozhao, and served as the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：延之好财利，在州多所受纳。
现代文：封延之好财利，在州多收受献纳。
English: Due to the good financial benefits of the extension of the seal, more donations were received in the state.

古文：后行晋州事，高祖沙苑失利还，延之弃州北走。高祖大怒，同罪人皆死，以隆之故，独得免。
现代文：后来代理晋州刺史，高祖在沙苑失利，回师，延之却弃州北走，高祖大怒，同罪之人一律处死，惟有他因隆之的情面得以免死。
English: Later, acting as Jinzhou chief historian, Gaozu lost in Shayuan and returned to his master, but Yan abandoned the north of the state. Gaozu was furious, and all those who committed the same crime were executed, but he was spared death because of Takashi's feelings.

古文：兴和二年卒，年五十四。
现代文：兴和二年死，年五十四岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of 54.

古文：赠使持节、都督冀殷瀛三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、司徒、冀州刺史，谥曰文恭。
现代文：赠使持节、都督冀殷瀛三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、司徒、冀州刺史，谧为文恭。
English: He gave gifts to Jixi, the governor of Hebei, Yin, the military of the three states, Zou, the cavalry general, Shang, Zuo, Shu, and Jizhou, and he was a scholar.

古文：子孝纂嗣。
现代文：其子封孝纂嗣其封爵。
English: His son, Fong Xiaojuan, succeeded him as a peer.

古文：隆之弟子孝琬，字子蒨，父祖曹，魏冀州平北府长史。
现代文：隆之弟子孝琬，字子蒨。其父挝狙曹任瑟冀翅子北府长史。
English: Takashi's disciple, Takahiro Takahiro, also known as Takahiro Takahiro, and his father, Takahiro Takahiro, were both appointed governor of Hoku-fu.

古文：以隆之佐命之功，赠雍州刺史、殿中尚书。
现代文：因隆之有佐命之功，赠给他壅塑刺史、殿中尚书。
English: In recognition of Takashi's contribution to the preservation of the Emperor's life, he was presented with an embroidered brooch and a copy of the Imperial Rescript.

古文：孝琬七岁而孤，独为隆之所鞠养，慈爱甚笃。
现代文：封孝琬七岁上父亲去世，是挝旦蛙把他抚养长大的，对他十分慈爱。
English: When Fong Xiaojun was seven years old, his father passed away. Lao Tan Frog brought him up and was very kind to him.

古文：年十六，本州辟主簿。
现代文：十六岁上被本州选任为主簿。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was selected by his home state to be the head librarian.

古文：魏永熙二年，隆之启以父爵富城子授焉。
现代文：划邀丞塞二年，封隆之请求以父爵富城子授予孝琬。
English: Two years after the invitation was extended, Fong Long's request to award the title of filial son to his father, Count Fucheng, was denied.

古文：三年，释褐开府参军事。
现代文：三年，入仕任开府参军事。
English: Three years later, he was appointed to the post of Kaifu Sangyo.

古文：天平中，轻车将军、司徒主簿。
现代文：天平年间任轻车将军、司徒主簿。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he served as the general of light vehicles and the chief accountant of Sito.

古文：武定中，为显祖开府主簿，迁从事中郎将，领东宫洗马。
现代文：武定年间任显祖开府主簿，升任从事中郎将、太子洗马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wujing, he was appointed as the chief accountant for the founding of Xianzu, and was promoted to the posts of middle steward and prince of Saima.

古文：天保二年卒，时年三十六，帝闻而叹惜焉。
现代文：天保二年死去，当时衹有三十六岁，皇上十分惋惜。
English: Emperor Tenpo died two years later, at the age of thirty-six, much to the Emperor's regret.

古文：赠左将军、太府少卿。
现代文：赠左将军、太府少卿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the rank of General of the Left and promoted to Taifu Shokei.

古文：孝琬性恬静，颇好文咏。
现代文：封孝琬性格文静恬淡，颇好作文咏诗。
English: Feng Xiaojuan's personality is quiet and light, and his composition and poetry are quite good.

古文：太子少师邢邵、七兵尚书王昕并先达高才，与孝琬年位悬隔，晚相逢遇，分好遂深。
现代文：当时太子少师邢邵、七兵尚书王听，都是前辈高才，与孝琬年龄资历差得极远，晚年相遇，成为忘年之交。
English: At that time, the prince's young apprentice, Zou Shao, and the seven soldiers, Shang Shu, listened to the king. They were all senior talents, and their age and qualifications were far from the filial piety. They met in their later years and became friends.

古文：孝琬灵榇言归，二人送于郊外，悲哭凄恸，有感路人。
现代文：封孝琬棺柩返乡，二老哭送于郊外，悲惨凄痛，路人感泣。
English: After the coffin was returned to the hometown, the two old men cried and sent it to the suburbs. It was tragic and painful, and passers-by were moved to tears.

古文：孝琬弟孝琰，字士光。
现代文：孝琬的弟弟孝琰，字士光。
English: Xiao Yao's younger brother, Xiao Yao, is a poet named Guang.

古文：少修饰学尚，有风仪。
现代文：少年时就留心修饰，一表风仪。
English: When he was a boy, he paid attention to grooming and had a good sense of style.

古文：年十六，辟州主簿，释褐秘书郎。
现代文：年十六岁，被举荐为州主簿，入仕任秘书郎。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was recommended to be the state's chief accountant and was assigned to the post of secretary.

古文：天保元年，为太子舍人，出入东宫，甚有令望。
现代文：天保元年任太子舍人，出入束宫，很有名气。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the prince's concubine, entering and leaving the palace, and was very famous.

古文：丁母忧，解任，除晋州法曹参军。
现代文：为守母丧而解任。后拜任晋州法曹参军。
English: He was relieved of his post in order to attend his mother's funeral. Later, he assumed the post of Jinzhou law officer and joined the army.

古文：寻征还，复除太子舍人。
现代文：不久召回，又拜任太子舍人。
English: Soon he was recalled, and then he abdicated in favor of the crown prince.

古文：乾明初，为中书舍人。
现代文：干明初年任中书舍人。
English: In the first year of his term of office, Kanemitsu gave up writing.

古文：皇建初，司空掾、秘书丞、散骑常侍，聘陈使主，已发道途，遥授中书侍郎。
现代文：皇建初年任司空掾、秘书丞、散骑常侍，聘使于陈，已经上路，朝廷遥授其为中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he held the positions of Sikyong, secretary, and horseback riding attendant. He was sent to Chen, who was already on his way. The imperial court awarded him the title of chancellery attendant.

古文：还，坐事除名。
现代文：返京，因事获罪被除名。
English: He returned to Beijing and was expelled for the offense.

古文：天统三年，除并省吏部郎中、南阳王友，赴晋阳典机密。
现代文：天统三年，拜任并省吏部郎中、南阳王友，赴晋阳掌机密。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was appointed to the post of provincial vice-minister, and Nanyang Wangyou went to Jinyang Shoucheng.

古文：和士开母丧，托附咸往奔哭。
现代文：和士开之母死了，攀附之徒全去哭丧。
English: His mother died, and all the followers went to mourn her.

古文：邺中富商丁邹、俨兴等并为义孝，有一士人，亦哭在限，孝琰入吊，出谓人曰： 严兴之南，丁邹之北，有一朝士，号叫甚哀。 
现代文：邺都富商丁邹、严兴等都以义子名分去守孝。有一个士人，竟也在其间。孝琰进去吊丧，出来后对众人说： 严兴的南边，丁邹的北面，有一名朝士，在那儿扯着嗓子号哭，倒像挺哀痛似的。 
English: The wealthy merchants Ding Xi and Yan Xing in the capital all went to pay their respects to Xiao Xiao in the name of their favorite son. A scholar was even among them. Xiao Xi went inside to mourn, and came out to say to the people: On the south side of Yan Xing, on the north side of Ding Xi, there is a morning warrior, crying loudly, but it seems to be quite sad.

古文：闻者传之。
现代文：闻者满街哄传。
English: The rumor spread all over the city.

古文：士开知而大怒。
现代文：和士开知而大怒。
English: He was furious when he found out.

古文：其后会黄门郎李怀奏南阳王绰专恣，士开因谮之曰： 孝琰从绰出外，乘其副马，舍离部伍，别行戏话。 
现代文：其后逢黄门郎李怀奏报南阳王元绰专权纵恶，士开乘机进谗说： 孝琰跟随元绰外出时，乘骑元绰的备用马，擅自离开大队，到别处去玩乐戏耍。 
English: After that, whenever Huangmen Lang Li Huai reported that Nanyang Wang Yuanchao's exclusive power was evil, Shikai took the opportunity to say: When Xiaojun went out with Yuanchao, he rode Yuanchao's spare horse, left the brigade without permission, and went to play elsewhere.

古文：时孝琰女为范阳王妃，为礼事因假入辞，帝遂决马鞭百余。放出，又遣高阿那肱重决五十，几致于死。
现代文：当时孝琰的女儿是范阳王的王妃，为礼仪上的事正入宫请假告辞，皇帝当即令抽马鞭百余下，放出后，又派高阿那肱重责五十下，几乎打死。
English: At that time, Xiao Yao's daughter was the princess of King Fan Yang. When she asked to be excused from entering the palace for a ceremonial matter, the emperor immediately ordered her to receive more than 100 lashes. After she was released, he also sent Gao Anan to receive 50 lashes. She was almost beaten to death.

古文：还京，在集书省上下，从是沉废。
现代文：孝琰回京后，在集书省上下，从此冷落废置。
English: After returning to Beijing, Xiao Yao worked in the book collection department, and has since been left out in the cold.

古文：士开死后，为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：和士开死后，任通直散骑常侍。
English: After the death of Kazuchika, Ren Tsunehira became a samurai.

古文：后与周朝通好，赵彦深奏之，诏以为聘周使副。
现代文：后舆北周通好，赵彦深奏请以他为副使聘周。
English: After the north-to-north communication between Zhou and Zhao, Zhao asked Zhou to be his deputy.

古文：祖珽辅政，又奏令入文林馆，撰《御览》。
现代文：祖埏辅政时，又奏请让他进入文林馆参加撰《御览》。
English: When Zu Xi was a vice-premier, he also requested that he be allowed to enter the Wenlin Museum to participate in the compilation of the "Overview."

古文：孝琰文笔不高，但以风流自立，善于谈谑，威仪闲雅，容止进退，人皆慕之。
现代文：封孝琰文笔并不高明，但平素以风流自立，善于谈笑恶作剧，有一种娴雅的仪表，容止进退让人羡慕。
English: Feng Xiaoqi's writing is not very clever, but he is usually self-reliant with a romantic streak, good at talking and joking, has an elegant appearance, and is enviable.

古文：尝谓祖珽云： 公是衣冠宰相，异于余人。 
现代文：曾对祖挺说： 您是衣冠宰相，和那些人不同。 
English: He once said to Zudin: You are a prime minister with a crown, unlike those people.

古文：近习闻之，大以为恨。
现代文：近臣听了，十分痛恨。
English: After hearing this, the relatives of the late lord were very angry.

古文：寻以本官为尚书左丞，其所弹射，多承意旨。
现代文：不久以本官兼任尚书左丞，他所弹劾的人，多承奉皇上意旨。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Shosho-zojo, and the people he impeached mostly followed the emperor's wishes.

古文：时有道人昙献者，为皇太后所幸，赏赐隆厚，车服过度。又乞为沙门统，后主意不许，但太后欲之，遂得居任，然后主常憾焉。
现代文：当时有位名叫昙献的道人受到皇太后的赏识，赐予太多，车服越轨，又求任沙门统，后主心中不愿，但太后要求委任他，也就这么办了，可后主心中很不快。
English: At that time, there was a Taoist named Yu Xian who was highly appreciated by the Empress Dowager. He was given too much, his car clothes were out of line, and he also asked to be appointed as Shamen Tong. The Empress Dowager was reluctant, but the Empress Dowager asked to appoint him, and so it was done, but the Empress Dowager was very unhappy.

古文：因有僧尼以他事诉竞者，辞引昙献。上令有司推劾。
现代文：因有别的僧尼为别的事情争讼，牵涉到昙献名下，皇上便下令有关方面严加审问。
English: Since there were other monks and nuns involved in a dispute over other matters, the emperor ordered the relevant parties to conduct a strict investigation.

古文：孝琰案其受纳货贿，致于极法，因搜索其家，大获珍异，悉以没官。
现代文：孝琰就判其收纳货贿处以极刑。进而抄没其家，大获珍异，全数充公上交国库。
English: Xiaojun sentenced him to the death penalty for receiving goods and bribes, and then confiscated his house, which was extremely rare, and all of it was confiscated and handed over to the national treasury.

古文：由是正授左丞，仍令奏门下事。
现代文：因此正式任命为左丞，并令其继续负责门下省的事。
English: As a result, he was officially appointed to the position of Zuojo, and ordered to continue to be responsible for the affairs of his subordinate province.

古文：性颇简傲，不谐时俗，恩遇渐高，弥自矜诞，举动舒迟，无所降屈，识者鄙之。
现代文：封孝琰性格简傲，与时俗不合辙。皇帝给他的恩遇一天天多起来，他也就一天天高傲轻慢起来，举动舒缓作势，毫无通融灵活的余地。有识之人都鄙视他。
English: Feng Xiaojuan's character is simple and proud, which is not in line with the times and customs. The favors given to him by the emperor are increasing day by day, and he is becoming more and more arrogant and contemptuous day by day. He acts in a soothing manner, and there is no room for flexibility. People with insight despise him.

古文：与崔季舒等以正谏同死，时年五十一。
现代文：与崔季舒等人一起因严肃进谏而死，时年五十一岁。
English: Together with Cui Jishu and others, he died at the age of fifty-one as a result of serious illness.

古文：子开府行参军君确、君静等二人徙北边，少子君严、君赞下蚕室。
现代文：其子开府行参军君确、君静二人徙北边，小儿子君严、君赞下蚕室受宫刑。
English: Two of his sons, Junji and Junjie, went to the north to join the army after the founding of the prefecture, while his younger sons, Junyan and Junzan, were subjected to palace punishment.

古文：南安之败，君确二人皆坐死。
现代文：南安之败，君确等二人都牵连而死。
English: In the defeat of Nan'an, Junji and two others were implicated and died.

古文：史臣曰：高、封二公，无一人尺土之资，奋臂而起河朔，将致勤王之举，以雪庄帝仇，不亦壮哉！
现代文：史臣曰：高干、封隆之二公，没有一人有尺土的资本，他们自己振臂一呼而崛起于河朔，将以勤王的义举，来洗雪庄帝的耻辱，真是英壮之举啊!
English: Shichen said: Gao Gan, Fenglong of the two princes, no one has the capital of a shaku of soil, they themselves rise up in Heshaku with a wave of the arm, and will wash the shame of Emperor Xuezhuang with the righteous act of a diligent king, it is really a heroic act!

古文：既克本藩，成其让德，异夫韩馥慑袁绍之威。
现代文：既已占据州城为一方头领，又主动听命于明主，成就让贤之美德，区别于当年韩馥的不得已而慑服于袁绍之威。
English: He not only occupied the state capital as the leader of one side, but also took the initiative to obey the orders of the Ming Lord, and achieved the virtue of letting Xianxian, which was different from the last resort of Han Xuan and the subjugation to the power of Yuan Shao.

古文：然力谢时雄，才非命世，是以奉迎麾掞，用叶本图。
现代文：然而高干力不称于雄霸，才不足以命世，因而也衹能奉迎高王，以求己志的发挥。
English: However, high ability is not considered to be a tyrant, it is not enough to live forever, so it is not possible to serve as a high king in order to fulfill one's ambition.

古文：高祖因之，遂成霸业。
现代文：高祖凭藉他们的力量，也就成就了霸业。
English: With their strength, Gaozhu also achieved hegemony.

古文：重以昂之胆力，气冠万物，韩陵之下，风飞电击。
现代文：再加上高昂的特殊胆力，气冠群雄，韩陵鏖战，风飞电击。
English: Coupled with a high degree of special courage, the air crowns are very strong, the Han Ling battle, the wind flying electric shock.

古文：然则齐氏元功，一门而已。
现代文：这么看来，高齐的创业元勋，实在出于高干家一门。
English: From this point of view, Gao Qi's entrepreneurial forefather was really a high-level doer.

古文：但以非颍川元从，异丰沛故人，腹心之寄，有所未允。
现代文：衹因为他不是颖川一般原从的故旧，也不是丰、沛一般故乡的功臣，腹心的信任不可能给予高昂、高干。
English: Because he is not a traditional follower of Yingchuan, nor a hero of Feng and Pei's hometown, it is impossible to give Gao Gao and Gao Gan the trust of a confidant.

古文：露其启疏，假手天诛，枉滥之极，莫过于此。
现代文：把高干为之谋议的表疏暴露出来，藉皇帝之手诛杀勋臣，千古枉滥，莫过于此!
English: To expose the plot that Gao Gan was plotting, and to have the emperor kill his noble vassal, would be the worst thing in the world!

古文：子绘才干可称，克荷堂构，弈世载德，斯为美焉。
现代文：封子绘的才干，可称不负期待。封门功德，实在值得赞美。
English: The talent of the seal painting can be said to live up to expectations. The merit of sealing the door is really worthy of praise.

古文：赞曰：烈烈文昭，雄图斯契。灼灼忠武，英资冠世。
现代文：赞曰：伟烈的文昭，雄图合乎时世的要求；光荣的忠武，英姿卓立于人才辈出的时代。
English: Zang said: the great literature, the heroic plan meets the requirements of the times; the glorious loyalty, the heroic stand out in the era of talent generation.

古文：门下之酷，进退惟谷。
现代文：而门下角斗的残酷阴险，让英才也会进退失据!
English: And the cruel insidiousness of the under-the-door gladiatorial combat, so that the talents will also be in and out of control!

古文：黄河之滨，蹈义亡身。
现代文：董回之滨，忠实履行义理的反而丧身。
English: On the other hand, Dong Huizhimin, who faithfully fulfilled the principle of righteousness, died.

古文：封公矫矫，共济时屯。比承明德，晖光日新。
现代文：挝公矫然特立，共济时艰，一代代相承，晖光日新。
English: Lao Gong is self-assertive, self-reliant, self-reliant, self-reliant, and self-reliant.

