古文：三年春，楚公子婴齐帅师伐吴。
现代文：三年春季，楚国公子婴齐率领军队攻打吴国。
English: In the spring of the third year, the prince of Chu, the infant Qi, led the army to attack the state of Wu.

古文：公如晋。
现代文：襄公去晋国。
English: Lu Zhaogong went to Jin Province.

古文：夏四月壬戌，公及晋侯盟于长樗。
现代文：夏季四月壬戌日，襄公与晋侯在长樗结盟。
English: In the summer of April, on the day of the Dragon Boat Festival, Prince Xiang and Prince Jin made an alliance in Changchun.

古文：公至自晋。
现代文：襄公从长樗回到鲁国。
English: Prince Xiang returned from Jin to Lu.

古文：六月，公会单子、晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、莒子、邾子、齐世子光。
现代文：六月，襄公与单顷公、晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、莒子、邾子、齐国世子光会见。
English: In June, Prince Xiang met with Prince Shanhaogu, Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Zhengbo, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, and the Heir Apparent of Qi.

古文：己未，同盟于鸡泽。
现代文：己未日，在鸡泽结盟。
English: On the 23rd, at the Jizawa Association.

古文：陈侯使袁侨如会。
现代文：陈侯派遣袁侨参加盟会。
English: Chen Hou sent Yuan Qiao to participate in the alliance.

古文：戊寅，叔孙豹及诸侯之大夫及陈袁侨盟。
现代文：戊寅日，叔孙豹和各诸侯国的大夫鱼陈国的袁侨结盟。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, the uncle and grandson of the leopard and the doctor fish of the various states of the state of Yuan and overseas Chinese formed an alliance.

古文：秋，公至自会。
现代文：秋季，襄公从盟会的地方回到鲁国。
English: In autumn, Aigong returns from Huangchi.

古文：冬，晋荀罃帅师伐许。
现代文：冬季，晋国的荀罃率领军队攻打许国。
English: In the winter, Jin's Zou led an army to attack Xu.

古文：三年春，楚子重伐吴，为简之师，克鸠兹，至于衡山。
现代文：三年春季，楚国的子重率军进攻吴国，选择了一支经过演习的军队。攻克鸠兹，到达衡山。
English: In the spring of the third year, the sons of Chu led an army to attack Wu, and chose an army that had been drilled. They conquered Luz and reached Hengshan.

古文：使邓廖帅组甲三百、被练三千以侵吴。
现代文：派遣邓廖率领穿组甲的车兵三百人、穿被练的步兵三千人以侵袭吴国。
English: Deng Liao sent three hundred armored car soldiers and three thousand trained infantrymen to invade Wu.

古文：吴人要而击之，获邓廖。
现代文：吴军拦阻攻击楚军，俘掳了邓廖。
English: The Wu army blocked the attack of the Chu army and captured Deng Liao.

古文：其能免者，组甲八十、被练三百而已。
现代文：免于死及被俘的只有车兵八十人、被练的步兵三百人而已。
English: Only eighty chariots and three hundred trained infantrymen escaped death or capture.

古文：子重归，既饮至。三日，吴人伐楚，取驾。
现代文：子重回国，在太庙庆祝慰劳，三天后，吴国人攻打楚国，占领了驾地。
English: The son returned to the country and celebrated the consolation in the Great Temple. Three days later, the people of Wu attacked Chu and occupied the territory.

古文：驾，良邑也。邓廖，亦楚之良也。
现代文：驾地，是好的城邑；邓廖，也是楚国的良将。
English: Zhidi is a good city; Deng Liao is also a good general of Chu.

古文：君子谓： 子重于是役也，所获不如所亡。 
现代文：君子认为： 子重在这次战役中，所得到的不如所失去的。 
English: The gentleman thought: In this battle, what Zi Chong gained was not as good as what he lost.

古文：楚人以是咎子重。
现代文：楚国人因此责备子重。
English: The people of Chu therefore blamed Zou Zou.

古文：子重病之，遂遇心疾而卒。
现代文：子重很不痛快，就碰上心脏病发作而死去。
English: Zowei was so unhappy that he suffered a heart attack and died.

古文：公如晋，始朝也。
现代文：鲁襄公到晋国，这是初次去朝见。
English: This is the first time for Prince Lu Xiang to visit Jin Province.

古文：夏，盟于长樗。孟献子相，公稽首。
现代文：夏季，在长樗会盟，孟献子作为相礼者。
English: In the summer, Meng Xianzi is the best matchmaker in the Changshu Association.

古文：知武子曰： 天子在，而君辱稽首，寡君惧矣。 
现代文：襄公行叩头礼。知武子说： 有天子在那里，而承贵君行叩头的大礼，寡君感到害怕。 
English: Chikamushi said, "There is a heavenly son there, and you, my lord, are afraid when he performs the great kowtow."

古文：孟献子曰： 以敝邑介在东表，密迩仇雠，寡君将君是望，敢不稽首。 
现代文：孟献子说： 由于敝邑地近东海，紧挨着仇敌，寡君将要仰望贵君协助，哪里敢不叩头呢？ 
English: Meng Xianzi said, "Since the capital is near the East Sea and close to the enemy, the nobles will look up to the nobles for help. How dare they not bow their heads?"

古文：晋为郑服故，且欲修吴好，将合诸侯。
现代文：晋国由于郑国顺服的缘故，又想要和吴国修好，准备会合诸侯。
English: As a result of Zheng's obedience, Jin wanted to make peace with Wu and prepare to meet with the princes.

古文：使士匄告于齐曰： 寡君使匄以岁之不易，不虞之不戒，寡君愿与一二兄弟相见，以谋不协。
现代文：派遣士匄向齐国报告说： 寡君派匄前来，是由于近年来各国之间纠纷不少，对意外的事情又没有戒备，寡君愿意和几位兄弟相见，来商讨解决彼此的不和睦。
English: The envoy sent to Qi reported: The reason why the oligarchs have sent envoys to Qi is that in recent years there have been many disputes between countries, and they are not prepared for unexpected things. The oligarchs are willing to meet with several brothers to discuss the resolution of mutual discord.

古文：请君临之，使匄乞盟。 
现代文：请君王光临，派匄来请求结盟。 
English: Invite the king to come and send a delegation to ask for an alliance.

古文：齐侯欲勿许，而难为不协，乃盟于耏外。
现代文：齐灵公本想不答应，而又难于表示不和睦，就在耏水之外结盟。
English: Qiling originally did not want to agree, but it was difficult to express discord, so they allied outside Surabaya.

古文：祁奚请老，晋侯问嗣焉。
现代文：祁奚请求告老退休，晋悼公问谁来接替他。
English: He has asked to retire, and the public is wondering who will replace him.

古文：称解狐，其仇也，将立之而卒。
现代文：祁奚称道解狐。解狐，是祁奚的仇人，晋悼公打算任命解狐，他却死了。
English: Zou was known as the fox. He was Zou's enemy. Jin Yuegong planned to appoint Zou, but he died.

古文：又问焉，对曰： 午也可。 
现代文：晋悼公又问祁奚，祁奚回答说： 祁午也可以胜任。 
English: Jin Yue Gong also asked Gong, Gong replied: Gong can also be competent.

古文：于是羊舌职死矣，晋侯曰： 孰可以代之？ 
现代文：这时羊舌职死了，晋悼公说： 谁可以接代他？ 
English: At this time, Sheep Tongue died on duty, and Jin Weigong said: Who can succeed him?

古文：对曰： 赤也可。 
现代文：祁奚回答说： 羊舌赤也可以胜任。 
English: Zou replied, "Sheep's tongue red can also do the job."

古文：于是使祁午为中军尉，羊舌赤佐之。
现代文：因此，晋悼公就派遣祁午做中军尉，羊舌赤为副职。
English: Therefore, Jin Yue Gong was sent to serve as a lieutenant in the afternoon, and Yang Zhi Aka as a deputy.

古文：君子谓： 祁奚于是能举善矣。
现代文：君子认为： 祁奚在这种情况下能够推举有德行的人。
English: The gentleman thought: In this situation, it is best to choose a virtuous person.

古文：称其仇，不为谄。立其子，不为比。举其偏，不为党。《商书》曰： 无偏无党，王道荡荡 其祁奚之谓矣！
现代文：举荐他的仇人而不是谄媚，推荐他的儿子而不是自私，推举他的副手而不是结党。《商书》说： 不偏私不结党，君王之道浩浩荡荡。 这说的就是祁奚啊。
English: To recommend one's enemy instead of flattery, to recommend one's son instead of selfishness, to promote one's deputy instead of forming a faction, the "Commercial Book" says: "No partiality, no faction, the way of the king is vast and tumultuous."

古文：解狐得举，祁午得位，伯华得官，建一官而三物成，能举善也夫！
现代文：解狐得到推荐，祁午得到安排，羊舌赤能有官位，建立一个官位而成全三件事，这是由于能够推举贤能的人的缘故啊。
English: There are three things that can be accomplished by recommending and arranging for the release of a fox, appointing a shepherd to an official position, and establishing an official position. This is due to the ability to elect a virtuous person.

古文：唯善，故能举其类。
现代文：唯其有德行，才能推举类似他的好人。
English: A good man like him can only be elected if he is virtuous.

古文：《诗》云： 惟其有之，是以似之。 祁奚有焉。 
现代文：《诗》说， 正因为具有美德，推举他的人才能和他相似 ，祁奚就是这样的人。 
English: "Poetry" says that it is precisely because of the virtues that the person who elects him can be similar to him, this is the kind of person.

古文：六月，公会单顷公及诸侯。
现代文：六月，鲁襄公会见单顷公和诸侯。
English: In June, the Duke of Lu Xiang met with the Duke of Shanhaogu and the princes.

古文：己未，同盟于鸡泽。
现代文：二十三日，在鸡泽会盟。
English: On the 23rd, at the Jizawa Association.

古文：晋侯使荀会逆吴子于淮上，吴子不至。
现代文：晋悼公派遣荀会在淮水边上迎接吴子，吴子没有来。
English: The Jin mourners dispatched a funeral procession to meet Wu Zi on the edge of Huai Shui, but Wu Zi did not come.

古文：楚子辛为令尹，侵欲于小国。
现代文：楚国的子辛做令尹，侵害小国以满足欲望。
English: Zi Xin of Chu ordered Yin to invade a small country to satisfy his desires.

古文：陈成公使袁侨如会求成，晋侯使和组父告于诸侯。
现代文：陈成公派遣袁侨到会求和好。晋悼公派遣和组父向诸侯报告。
English: Chen Chenggong sent Yuan Qiao to the meeting to seek reconciliation. Jin Weigong sent and the group father reported to the princes.

古文：秋，叔孙豹及诸侯之大夫及陈袁侨盟，陈请服也。
现代文：秋季，叔孙豹和诸侯的大夫同陈国的袁侨结盟，这是由于陈国请求顺服的缘故。
English: In the autumn, the uncle and grandson of the panther and the doctor of the princes allied with the Yuan overseas Chinese of Chen, which was due to the request for obedience from Chen.

古文：晋侯之弟扬干乱行于曲梁，魏绛戮其仆。
现代文：晋悼公的弟弟扬干在曲梁扰乱军队的行列，魏绛杀了他的驾车人。
English: Jin Yigong's younger brother, Yang Gan, disrupted the army's ranks in Quliang, and Wei Wei killed his driver.

古文：晋侯怒，谓羊舌赤曰： 合诸侯以为荣也，扬干为戮，何辱如之？
现代文：晋悼公发怒，对羊舌赤说： 会合诸侯，是以此为光荣。扬干受到侮辱，还有什么侮辱比这更大？
English: Jin Muikong became angry and said to the red-tongued sheep, "It is an honor to meet the princes. Yang Gan has been insulted. What insult is greater than this?"

古文：必杀魏绛，无失也！ 
现代文：一定要杀掉魏绛，不要耽误了。 
English: We must kill Wei Wei, don't delay.

古文：对曰： 绛无贰志，事君不辟难，有罪不逃刑，其将来辞，何辱命焉？ 
现代文：羊舌赤回答说： 魏绛一心为公，事奉国君不避危难，有了罪过不逃避惩罚，他大概会来说明的，何必劳动君王发布命令呢？ 
English: Sheep Tongue Red replied, "Wei Xuan is single-minded in his pursuit of justice. He serves the sovereign without avoiding danger. If he commits a crime, he will not escape punishment. He will probably explain why the laboring monarch has to issue an order.

古文：言终，魏绛至，授仆人书，将伏剑。
现代文：话刚说完，魏绛来了，把信交给仆人，准备抽剑自杀。
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, Wei Yao arrived, handed the letter to his servant, and prepared to draw his sword and commit suicide.

古文：士鲂、张老止之。
现代文：士鲂、张老劝阻了他。
English: Shi Yan and Zhang Lao dissuaded him.

古文：公读其书曰： 日君乏使，使臣斯司马。
现代文：晋悼公读他的上书，说： 以前君王缺乏使唤的人，让下臣担任司马的职务。
English: Jin Yue publicly read his petition, saying: In the past, the monarch lacked servants, so he had his subordinates serve as stewards.

古文：臣闻师众以顺为武，军事有死无犯为敬。
现代文：下臣听说 军队里的人服从军纪叫做武，在军队里做事宁死也不触犯军纪叫做敬 。
English: The vassal heard that people in the army who obey military discipline are called "Wu," and those who would rather die than violate military discipline are called "Ji."

古文：君合诸侯，臣敢不敬。
现代文：君王会合诸侯，下臣岂敢不执行军纪军法？
English: The monarchs meet with the lords, how dare the vassals not enforce military discipline?

古文：君师不武，执事不敬，罪莫大焉。
现代文：君王的军队不武，办事的人不敬，没有比这再大的罪过了。
English: There is no greater sin than for a king's army not to fight, or for a servant not to respect his master.

古文：臣惧其死，以及扬干，无所逃罪。
现代文：下臣畏惧触犯死罪，所以连累到扬干，罪责无可逃避。
English: The vassals were afraid of committing a capital crime, so they were tied up to the rafters, and there was no escaping the guilt.

古文：不能致训，至于用钺。臣之罪重，敢有不从，以怒君心，请归死于司寇。 
现代文：下臣不能够事先教导全军，以至于动用了斧钺，下臣的罪过很重，岂敢不服从惩罚来激怒君王呢？请求回去死在司寇那里。 
English: The vassal could not teach the whole army in advance, so he used the axe. The vassal's sin was very serious. Would he dare to disobey the punishment and provoke the king? He asked to go back and die with the governor.

古文：公跣而出，曰： 寡人之言，亲爱也。吾子之讨，军礼也。
现代文：晋悼公光着脚赶紧走出来，说： 寡人的话，是出于对兄弟的亲爱；大夫杀杨干，是出于按军法从事。
English: Jin Muigong hurriedly walked out barefoot and said: Some people's words are out of love for their brothers; the doctor killed Yang Gan because he was engaged in accordance with military law.

古文：寡人有弟，弗能教训，使干大命，寡人之过也。
现代文：寡人有弟弟，没有能够教导他，而让他触犯了军令，这是寡人的过错。
English: It's nobody's fault if you have a brother and you can't teach him and he breaks the rules.

古文：子无重寡人之过，敢以为请。 
现代文：您不要加重寡人的过错，谨以此作为请求。 
English: I would like to ask you not to aggravate the faults of others.

古文：晋侯以魏绛为能以刑佐民矣。反役，与之礼食，使佐新军。
现代文：晋悼公认为魏绛能够用刑罚来治理百姓了，从盟会回国，在太庙设宴招待魏绛，派他为新军副帅。
English: Jin Weikong thought that Wei Xuan was able to use punishment to govern the people. He returned from the alliance, held a banquet in the Great Temple to invite Wei Xuan, and sent him as the deputy commander of the new army.

古文：张老为中军司马，士富为候奄。
现代文：张老做中军司马，士富做了侦察长。
English: Zhang Lao became the Sima of the Chinese army, and Shifu became the chief of reconnaissance.

古文：楚司马公子何忌侵陈，陈叛故也。
现代文：楚国的司马公子何忌率军入侵陈国，这是由于陈国背叛了楚国的缘故。
English: Sima Gongzi Ho Boi of Chu led an army to invade Chen, because Chen had betrayed Chu.

古文：许灵公事楚，不会于鸡泽。
现代文：许灵公事奉楚国，不参加鸡泽的会见。
English: Xu Lingkun served the state of Chu, but did not attend the meeting with Jizawa.

古文：冬，晋知武子帅师伐许。
现代文：冬季，晋国的知武子领兵讨伐许国。
English: In the winter, Jin Province's Tomotsuko led an army to fight against Xu Province.

