古文：后废帝废帝讳昱，字德融，小字慧震，明帝长子也。
现代文：后废帝号昱，字德融，小字慧震，明帝的长子。
English: After the abolition of the emperor, the first son of the Ming emperor, the word De Rong, the small word Hui Zhen.

古文：大明七年正月辛丑，生于卫尉府。
现代文：大明七年正月二十日，出生在卫尉府。
English: He was born on the 26th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Daming at the Yeongwapu.

古文：太宗诸子在孕，皆以《周易》筮之，即以所得之卦为小字，故帝字慧震，其余皇子亦如此。
现代文：太宗各个儿子在出生前，都用《周易》占卜，用新得到的卦作小字，因此废帝字慧震，其他皇子的字也是这样得来的。
English: All the sons of Emperor Taizong used "Zhou Yi" for divination before they were born, and used the newly obtained "Gua" for small characters. Therefore, the word "Huizhen" was discarded, and other princes' characters were also obtained in this way.

古文：泰始二年，立为皇太子。
现代文：泰始二年，立为皇太子。
English: He became crown prince two years later.

古文：三年，始制太子改名昱。
现代文：三年，明帝将太子的号改为昱。
English: Three years later, Emperor Ming changed the prince's title to Zhou.

古文：安车乘象辂。
现代文：乘坐象辂。
English: Ride the elephant raft.

古文：六年，出东宫。
现代文：六年，太子搬出东宫。
English: It's been six years since Tai first left Donggong.

古文：又制太子元正朝贺，服衮冕九章衣。
现代文：明帝下令太子参加元旦朝臣的贺礼。穿衮冕九章衣。
English: The emperor also ordered the crown prince to wear a nine-pointed crown on New Year's Day.

古文：泰豫元年四月己亥，太宗崩。
现代文：十日，特进、右光禄大夫刘遵考改任左光禄大夫。泰豫元年四月七日，太宗驾崩。
English: On the 10th day, Liu Zunka, the doctor of the right Guanglu, was promoted to the doctor of the left Guanglu. On April 7th, Taizong died.

古文：庚子，太子即皇帝位，大赦天下。
现代文：八日，太子即位，大赦天下。
English: On the eighth day, the crown prince ascended to the throne, and the country was amnestied.

古文：尚书令袁粲、护军将军褚渊共辅朝政。
现代文：尚书令袁粲、护军将军褚渊共同辅佐朝政。
English: Shang Shuling, Yuan Shao, and the general of the escorting army, Yu Yuan, jointly assisted the imperial government.

古文：乙巳，以护军将军张永为右光禄大夫，抚军将军安成王为扬州刺史。
现代文：九日，任命护军将军张永为右光禄大夫，抚军将军安成王为扬州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Zhang Yong, the general of the garrison, was appointed as the doctor of Uguanglu, and An Cheng Wang, the general of the garrison, was appointed as the historian of Yangzhou.

古文：己酉，特进、右光禄大夫刘遵考改为左光禄大夫。
现代文：十日，特进、右光禄大夫刘遵考改任左光禄大夫。
English: On the 10th, Liu Zunka, the specially promoted doctor of the right Guanglu, was promoted to the doctor of the left Guanglu.

古文：五月丁巳，以吴兴太守张岱为益州刺史。
现代文：五月十二日，任命吴兴太守张岱为益州刺史。
English: On May 12th, Wu Xing appointed Zhang Ye, the de facto ruler of Yizhou, as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：戊辰，缘江戍兵老疾者，悉听还。
现代文：二十二日，沿江各戍老弱病残士兵，全部复员回家。
English: On the 22nd, all the old, weak, sick and disabled soldiers along the river were demobilized and sent home.

古文：班剑依旧入殿。
现代文：班剑照旧进入宫殿。
English: The squad of swords entered the palace as usual.

古文：六月壬辰，诏曰： 夫兴王经制，实先民隐，方求广教，刑于四维。
现代文：六月六日，下诏说： 圣王明主治理国家，首先关切民隐，访求百姓疾苦，推广教化，恩威并施。
English: On June 6, the following edict was issued: "Holy King Mingzhu governs the country, first of all concerned about the privacy of the people, visits the people's suffering, promotes enlightenment, and bestows grace and favor.

古文：朕以茕眇，夙膺宝历，永言民政，未接听览，眷言乃顾，无忘鉴寐。
现代文：我以卑微之身，继承皇位，总想着政务，但能传达到我的信息很少，时时眷恋着政务，就是睡着也没忘记。
English: As a lowly person, I inherited the imperial throne, always thinking about government affairs, but there was little information that could reach me. I was always attached to government affairs, and even when I fell asleep, I didn't forget.

古文：可遣大使分行四方，观采风谣，问其疾苦。
现代文：可派遣使臣巡视各地，收集民俗民谣，访求百姓疾苦。
English: Envoys can be dispatched to inspect various regions, collect folk folk songs, and visit the people's hardships.

古文：令有咈民，法不便俗者，悉各条奏。
现代文：假如有受冤枉的百姓，不合民俗的法律，一一上报。
English: If there are people who have been wronged, and the law does not conform to folk customs, report them one by one.

古文：若守宰威恩可纪，廉勤允著，依事腾闻；如狱讼诬枉，职事纰缪，惰公存私，害民利己者，无或隐昧。
现代文：若地方官员公正严明，廉洁勤政，据实上报。假如有制造冤假错案的，玩忽职守的，损公肥私的，害民利己的，也不要有所隐瞒。
English: If local officials are fair and rigorous, honest and diligent, and report truthfully, if there are cases of wrongdoing, dereliction of duty, damage to public and private interests, harm to the people and self-interest, do not hide anything.

古文：广纳刍舆之议，博求献艺之规。巡省之道，务令精洽，深简行识，俾若朕亲览焉。 
现代文：广泛收集访求定国安邦之策，巡视的使臣，一定要合乎实际，认真履行职责，就像我亲自巡视一样。 
English: The visiting envoys must be realistic and conscientiously perform their duties, just as I personally did.

古文：又诏曰： 夫寝梦期贤，往诰垂美，物色求良，前书称盛。
现代文：又下诏说： 做梦都想着访求贤才，前人对求贤盛为称颂。
English: The next edict said, "To dream of visiting and seeking sages is to dream of visiting and seeking sages. The ancients praised the success of seeking sages.

古文：朕以冲昧，嗣膺宝业，思仰述圣猷，勉弘政道，兴言多士，常想得人。
现代文：我无德无才，即皇位，想继承圣人之道，竭力弘扬治国之方，广开言路，博揽人才。
English: I have no virtue and no talent, that is, the throne, I want to inherit the path of a saint, do my best to promote the way of governing the country, open up the way, and recruit talents.

古文：可普下牧守，广加搜采。
现代文：各地官员，应广泛收集人才。
English: Officials of various regions should collect talents extensively.

古文：其有孝友闻族，义让光闾，或匿名屠钓，隐身耕牧，足以整厉浇风，扶益淳化者，凡厥一善，咸无遗逸。
现代文：以孝顺友爱在族人中出名的，以仁义在邻里间扬名的，或者隐匿在民间乡野，而能整理风俗，有益教化的，只要有一种优秀品质，就不要遗漏。
English: Famous for filial piety and friendship among the people, famous for benevolence and righteousness among the neighbors, or hidden in the folk countryside, but can sort out customs, beneficial to education, as long as there is an excellent quality, do not miss it.

古文：虚轮伫帛，俟闻嘉荐。 
现代文：各种贤达人才，都要举荐嘉奖。 
English: All kinds of talents should be recommended for awards.

古文：京师雨水，诏赈恤二县贫民。
现代文：京城发水灾，下诏赈济京城两县贫民。
English: Floods in Beijing, the following measures to help the poor in Beijing and the two counties.

古文：乙巳，尊皇后曰皇太后，立皇后江氏。
现代文：八日，尊皇后为皇太后，立江氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th, Empress Takamado became empress dowager, and Lady Tachikawa became empress.

古文：秋七月戊辰，崇拜帝所生陈贵妃为皇太妃。
现代文：秋七月九日，尊生母陈贵妃为皇太妃。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, His Imperial Highness's birth mother, Chen Guifei, became the Crown Princess.

古文：闰月丁亥，罢宋安郡还属广兴。
现代文：闰七月十日，撤宋安郡并入广兴郡。
English: On July 10, Song'an County was merged into Guangxing County.

古文：己丑，割南豫州南汝阴郡属西豫州，西豫州庐江郡属豫州。
现代文：十三日，划南豫州的南汝阴郡归西豫州，西豫州的庐江郡归豫州。
English: On the 13th, Nanruyin County in South Yuzhou was transferred to West Yuzhou, and Minjiang County in West Yuzhou was transferred to Yuzhou.

古文：甲辰，以新除征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史蔡兴宗为中书监、光禄大夫，安西将军、郢州刺史沈攸之为镇西将军、荆州刺史，南徐州刺史刘秉为平西将军、郢州刺史，新除太常建平王景素为镇军将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：二十日，委任新任征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史蔡兴宗为中书监、光禄大夫，安西将军、郢州刺史沈攸之为镇西将军、荆州刺史，南豫州刺史刘秉为平西将军、郢州刺史，新任太常建平王景素为镇军将军、南徐州刺史。
English: On the 20th, the newly appointed General Zheng Xi, Kaifu Yi and the Third Division, General An Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Zheng Xi, General Z

古文：八月戊午，新除中书监、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司蔡兴宗薨。
现代文：八月九日，新任中书监、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司蔡兴宗去世。
English: On August 9, Cai Xingzong, the newly appointed middle school librarian, Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Kaifu Yi, and the third secretary passed away.

古文：冬十月辛卯，抚军将军刘韫有罪免官。
现代文：冬十月八日，抚军将军刘韫犯罪被免官。
English: On the winter of October 8th, General Liu Wei of the Fuzhou Army was removed from office for committing a crime.

古文：辛未，护军将军褚渊母忧去职。
现代文：十日，护军将军褚渊因母病离职。
English: On the 10th, the general of the escort army, Gong Yuan, left the post due to her mother's illness.

古文：十一月己亥，新除平西将军、郢州刺史刘秉为左仆射。
现代文：十一月二十一日，委任新任平西将军、郢州刺史刘秉为尚书左仆射。
English: On November 21st, the newly appointed Pingxi General and Zhangzhou Governor Liu Bing was appointed as Shangshu's second-in-command.

古文：辛丑，护军将军褚渊还摄本任。
现代文：二十四日，护军将军褚渊回朝重新辅佐朝政。
English: On the 24th, the general of the escorting army, Shanyuan, returned to the imperial court to assist the imperial government again.

古文：芮芮国、高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：芮芮国、高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: Envoys from South Korea and North Korea came to offer special products.

古文：十二月，索虏寇义阳。
现代文：十二月，索虏侵犯义阳。
English: In December, the Sorbs invaded Yiyang.

古文：丁巳，司州刺史王瞻击破之。
现代文：二十六日，司州刺史王瞻击败索虏。
English: On the 26th, Wang Zhan of Sizhou stabbed Shi and defeated Sorru.

古文：元徽元年春正月戊寅朔，改元，大赦天下。
现代文：元徽元年春正月初一，改纪年。大赦天下。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Spring Festival of the 1st year of the Yuan Dynasty, the era was changed.

古文：壬寅，诏曰： 夫缓法昭恩，裁风茂典，蠲宪贷眚，训俗彝义。
现代文：二日，下诏说： 减约法律以恩泽天下，宽恕罪犯，以仁义教化百姓。
English: On the second day, the following edict was issued: The law of abrogation of treaties is to benefit the world, pardon criminals, and enlighten the people with benevolence and righteousness.

古文：朕临驭宸枢，夤制氓宇，式存宽简，思孚矜惠。今开元肆宥，万品惟新，凡兹流斥，宜均弘洗。
现代文：我治理天下，宽大为怀，力求合乎我为民族造福的愿望。今新改纪年，万象更新，一切流弊，都应消除。
English: I govern the world with magnanimity and strive to live up to my aspiration of benefiting the nation. In this new era, all things should be renewed, and all evils should be eliminated.

古文：自元年以前贻罪徙放者，悉听还本。 
现代文：元徽元年以前流放的罪犯，都释放回家。 
English: The criminals who were exiled before the first year of the Yuan Dynasty were all released to return home.

古文：二月乙亥，以晋熙王燮为郢州刺史。
现代文：二月三日，任命晋熙王燮为郢州刺史。
English: On February 3, Jinxi appointed Wang Xi as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：三月丙申，以抚军长史何恢为广州刺史。
现代文：三月四日，任命抚军长史何恢为广州刺史。
English: On March 4th, he was appointed as the military governor of Guangzhou.

古文：婆利国遣使献方物。
现代文：婆利国派使者来进献特产。
English: Borneo sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：戊戌，以前淮南太守刘灵遗为南豫州刺史。
现代文：六日，委任前任淮南太守刘灵遗为南豫州刺史。
English: On the 6th, Liu Lingyi, the former governor of Huainan Province, was appointed as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：夏五月辛卯，以辅师将军李安民为司州刺史。
现代文：夏五月九日，委任辅师将军李安民为司州刺史。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the summer, he appointed the assistant division general Li Anmin as the secretary of state.

古文：丙申，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：十三日，河南王派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 13th, the king of Henan sent an envoy to bring in special products.

古文：六月壬子，以越州刺史陈伯绍为交州刺史。
现代文：六月十五日，任命越州刺史陈伯绍为交州刺史。
English: On June 15th, Chen Bishao, the Vice Governor of Yuezhou, was appointed as the Vice Governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：乙卯，特进、左光禄大夫刘遵考卒。
现代文：十九日，特进、左光禄大夫刘遵考去世。
English: On the 19th, Dr. Liu Zunka, a special advance and left light doctor, passed away.

古文：寿阳大水，己未，遣殿中将军赈恤慰劳。
现代文：寿阳发洪水，二十三日，派殿中将军前往赈济慰问。
English: Shouyang suffered a flood, and on the 23rd, sent a general to Bie to offer condolences.

古文：朕以眇疚，未弘政道，囹圄尚繁，枉滞犹积，夕厉晨矜，每恻于怀。尚书令可与执法以下，就讯众狱，使冤讼洗遂，困弊昭苏。
现代文：二十六日，任命左军将军孟次阳为兖州刺史。秋七月十日，散骑常侍顾长康、长水校尉何翌之进献他们所撰写的《谏林》，上起自虞、舜，下到晋武帝，共十二卷。秘书丞王俭进献他撰写的《七志》三十卷。十二日，下诏说： 天道失常，发生旱灾，伤害庄稼，百姓困难。我很愧疚，未能弘扬治道，诉讼不断，积案甚多，这些早晚都挂在心头。尚书令可与执法官员，尽快审理各种案件，使冤假错案得到平反昭雪。
English: On the 26th, Meng Jiyang, a general of the Left Army, was appointed as the official historian of Luzhou. On the 10th of July, Gu Changkang, a cavalry officer, and He Xinghe, a lieutenant of the Changshui Regiment, presented their book "Yulin," a total of 12 volumes, from the reigns of Yu and Zhou to the reign of Emperor Jinwu. The secretary, Zhao Wang Jian, presented his book "Seven Stories," a total of 30 volumes. On the 12th, the next imperial edict said: "The heavens have gone out of kilter, droughts have occurred, crops have been damaged, and the people

古文：颁下州郡，咸令无壅。 
现代文：下令各州郡，不要让案件积压。 
English: Ordering states and counties not to let the backlog build up.

古文：癸亥，镇军将军、南徐州刺史建平王景素进号镇北将军。
现代文：二十日，镇军将军、南徐州刺史建平王景素晋升为镇北将军。
English: On the 20th, Jianping Wang Jingsu, the general of the Zhenjun Army and the southern Xuzhou general, was promoted to the general of Zhenbei.

古文：庚午，陈留王曹铣薨。
现代文：二十三日，陈留王曹铣去世。
English: On the 26th, Chen Liu Wang Cao Wei passed away.

古文：九月壬午，诏曰： 国赋氓税，盖有恆品，往属戎难，务先军实，征课之宜，或乖昔准。
现代文：九月四日，下诏说： 国家征收赋税，应该有个限额，过去战祸频繁，赋税首先要满足军费，征收赋税，有时超过了规定的标准。
English: On September 4th, the following edict was issued: When the state levies taxes, there should be a limit. In the past, there were frequent war disasters. Taxes should first meet military expenses. Taxes were levied, sometimes exceeding the prescribed standard.

古文：湘、江二州，粮运偏积，调役既繁，庶徒弥扰。
现代文：湘、江二州，输出的粮食、赋役繁多，百姓更加感到困难。
English: Hunan and Jiangsu both have a wide variety of grain and fuzhuo exports, and the people feel even more difficult.

古文：因循权政，容有未革，民单力弊，岁月愈甚。
现代文：因循守旧，没有变革，民力竭尽，越来越严重。
English: It is becoming more and more serious that people's strength is exhausted due to the old-fashioned way of life and no change.

古文：永言矜叹，情兼宵寐。
现代文：常为此事感叹，日夜挂在心头。
English: I often lament about this, and it hangs in my mind day and night.

古文：可遣使到所，明加详察。
现代文：可派遣使臣到湘、江二州，详细考察。
English: Envoys can be sent to Hunan and Jiangsu for detailed inspection.

古文：其输违旧令，役非公限者，并即蠲改，具条以闻。 
现代文：违背原来规定的征收赋税，不是国家派的劳役，都一律免除，逐条上报。 
English: Those who collect taxes in violation of the original provisions, and are not state-appointed laborers, are all exempted and reported one by one.

古文：丁亥，立衡阳王嶷子伯玉为南平王。
现代文：九日，立衡阳王嶷的儿子伯玉为南平王。
English: On the 9th, Hengyang Wang Yao's son, Bo Yu, became the king of Nanping.

古文：冬十月壬子，以抚军司马王玄载为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：冬十月六日，任命抚军司马王玄载为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 6th day of October in winter, he appointed the military governor of Fuzhou, Ma Wang Xuan Zai, as the leader and the governor of the two states of Southern Qin.

古文：癸酉，割南兗州之钟离、豫州之马头，又分秦郡、梁郡、历阳置新昌郡，立徐州。
现代文：十七日，将南兖州的钟离、豫州的马头划出来，又从秦郡、梁郡、历阳分出一部分设置新昌郡，钟离、马头、新昌三郡合在一起设立徐州。
English: On the 17th, Zhongli and Madu of Yuzhou in Nanluozhou were separated, and a part of Qin, Liang and Liyang counties were separated to form Xinchang County, and Zhongli, Madu and Xinchang counties were combined to form Xuzhou.

古文：十一月丙子，以散骑常侍垣闳为徐州刺史。
现代文：十一月二日，任命散骑常侍垣闳为徐州刺史。
English: On November 2nd, he appointed the horseback rider and regular attendant, Gaki Zou, as the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：丁丑，尚书令袁粲母丧去职。
现代文：五日，尚书令袁粲因母亲去世也离职。
English: On the 5th, Yuan Shuling also resigned from his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：十二月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月一日，出现日蚀。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：乙巳，司空、江州刺史桂阳王休范进位太尉，尚书令袁粲还摄本任，加号卫将军。
现代文：六日，司空、江州刺史桂阳王休范晋升为太尉，尚书令袁粲回朝担任本职，被加封为卫将军。
English: On the 6th, Guiyang Wang Xuanfan, the governor of Siku and the governor of Jiangzhou, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and Yuan Qi was ordered to return to the imperial court to take up his duties, and he was given the additional title of Wei general.

古文：癸亥，立前建安王世子伯融为始安县王。
现代文：八日，立前建安王长子伯融为始安县王。
English: On the 8th, the eldest son of King Jianan, Bo Rong, became the king of Shi'an County.

古文：丙寅，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：十日，河南王派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 10th, the king of Henan sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：二年春正月庚子，以右光禄大夫张永为征北将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：元徽二年正月六日，任命右光禄大夫张永为征北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Yong, a doctor of the Right Guanglu, was appointed as a general of the Northern Expedition and a historian of Southern Zhangzhou.

古文：二月己巳，加护军将军褚渊中军将军。
现代文：二月九日，加封护军将军褚渊为中军将军。
English: On February 9th, the general of the garrison of Gafong, Gongyuan, became the general of the Chinese army.

古文：三月癸酉，以左卫将军王宽为南豫州刺史。
现代文：三月十二日，任命左卫将军王宽为南豫州刺史。
English: On March 12th, Wang Guang, the General of the Left Division, was appointed as the prefect of South Henan Province.

古文：夏四月癸亥，诏曰： 顷列爵叙勋，铨荣酬义，条流积广，又各淹阙。
现代文：夏四月十三日，下诏说： 据功封爵，给予荣誉，条文虽多，但还有欠缺。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: "According to the merits of the knighthood, the honor is given. Although there are many provisions, there are still deficiencies.

古文：岁往事留，理至逋壅，在所参差，多违甄饬。赏未均洽，每疚厥心。
现代文：奖赏不公，我心有愧。可完全依照过去的标准，一一审订落实。 
English: I feel bad about the unfair reward. It can be fully implemented in accordance with the past standards, one by one.

古文：可悉依旧准，并下注职。 五月壬午，太尉、江州刺史桂阳王休范举兵反。
现代文：五月三日，太尉、江州刺史桂阳王休范起兵谋反。
English: On May 3, Guiyang Wang Huifan, a captain and the governor of Jiangsu Province, raised an army to rebel.

古文：庚寅，内外戒严。
现代文：六日，全国戒严。
English: On the 6th, martial law was declared throughout the country.

古文：加中领军刘勔镇军将军，加右卫将军齐王平南将军，前锋南讨，出屯新亭。
现代文：加封中领军刘面力为镇军将军，右卫将军齐王为平南将军，打先锋南讨出京城，驻扎在新亭。
English: Liu Mianli, the leader of the Central Garrison, became the general of the town army, and Qi Wang, the general of the Right Guards, became the general of Pingnan. The vanguard marched out of the capital and was stationed in Xinting.

古文：征北将军张永屯白下，前南兗州刺史沈怀明戍石头，卫将军袁粲、中军将军褚渊入卫殿省。
现代文：征北将军张永驻扎白下，前南兖州刺史沈怀明戍守石头，卫将军袁粲、中军将军褚渊拱卫京城。
English: Zhang Yong, the general of the Northern Expedition, was stationed under Baizhou, Shen Huiming, the former governor of Southern Zhangzhou, guarded the stone, and Yuan Qi, the general of the Wei Dynasty, and Yu Yuan, the general of the Chinese army, guarded the capital.

古文：壬辰，贼奄至，攻新亭垒。
现代文：八日，叛军突然进攻新亭垒。
English: On the 8th, the rebels suddenly attacked Xin Tingbei.

古文：齐王拒击，大破之。
现代文：齐王抗击，大败叛军。
English: King Qi fought back and defeated the rebels.

古文：越骑校尉张敬兒斩休范。
现代文：越骑校尉张敬儿斩了休范。
English: Zhang Jing'er, a Vietcong cavalry captain, cut short his leave.

古文：贼党杜黑蠡、丁文豪分军向硃雀航，刘勔拒贼败绩，力战死之；右军将军王道隆奔走遇害。
现代文：贼党杜黑蠡、丁文豪兵分两路进攻朱雀航，刘面力拼命抵抗，战败牺牲。右卫将军王道隆逃跑时被杀。
English: The Kuomintang soldiers Du Heijie and Ding Wenhao attacked Zhu Zhahang in two separate attacks. Liu Mian strenuously resisted and was defeated and killed. The right guard general Wang Daolong was killed while fleeing.

古文：张永溃于白下，沈怀明自石头奔散。
现代文：张永在白下溃败，沈怀明从石头逃走。
English: Zhang Yong was defeated under the white flag, and Shen Huiming ran away from Stone Town.

古文：戊午，抚军典签茅恬开东府纳贼，贼入屯中堂。羽林监陈显达击大破之。
现代文：十一日，抚军典签茅恬打开东府城迎接叛军，叛军进驻中堂，羽林监陈显达击败叛军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the governor signed the military edict to open Dongfu Town to welcome the rebels, the rebels entered the central hall, and Chen Xanda, the warden of the forest, defeated the rebels.

古文：丙申，张敬兒等破贼于宣阳门、庄严寺、小市，进平东府城，枭擒群贼。
现代文：十二日，张敬儿等在宣阳门、庄严寺、小市打败叛军，平定东府城。擒拿叛贼。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Jing'er and others defeated the rebels at Xuanyang Gate, Solemn Temple, and Small Town, and pacified Dongfu Town. They captured the traitors.

古文：赏赐封爵各有差。
现代文：将士都有封爵奖赐。
English: The generals all received knighthoods.

古文：丁酉，诏京邑二县埋藏所杀贼，并战亡者，复同京城。
现代文：十四日，下令京城二县掩埋叛军和战死者的尸体，恢复京城秩序。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the two counties of the capital to bury the bodies of the rebels and the war dead and restore order in the capital.

古文：是日解严，大赦天下，文武赐位一等。
现代文：同日，解除戒严，大赦天下，文武官员各加官一级。
English: On the same day, martial law was lifted, the country was amnestied, and all civil and military officials were promoted to the next level.

古文：戊戌，原除江州逋债，其有课非常调、役为民蠹者，悉皆蠲停。
现代文：十七日，免除江州旧债，不是国家征收的租调，有损百姓的劳役，一律停止征收。
English: On the 17th, the old debts of Jiangzhou were exempted, and the rent transfer, which was not levied by the state, and the labor service, which was detrimental to the people, were all stopped.

古文：诏曰： 顷国赋多骞，公储罕给。
现代文：下诏说： 先前国家赋税亏损，国库储藏很少。
English: The next edict said: the previous national tax losses, the national treasury reserves are very small.

古文：近治戎虽浅，而军费已多，廪藏虚罄，难用驭远。
现代文：近年来战事虽少，但军费开支大，府库空虚，入不敷出。
English: Although there have been fewer wars in recent years, military spending has been large, the treasury is empty, and income is not enough to make ends meet.

古文：宜矫革淫长，务在节俭。
现代文：宜革除奢华，力求节俭。
English: Strive to be thrifty rather than extravagant.

古文：其供奉服御，悉就减撤，雕文靡丽，废而勿修。
现代文：新供奉的服饰用品，都减少，雕梁画栋之类的奢糜行为一律禁止。
English: The number of newly-offered clothing items has been reduced, and extravagant acts such as carving beams and painting buildings have been banned.

古文：凡诸游费，一皆禁断，外可详为科格。 
现代文：各种不正当开支，一律杜绝，宫外可参照办理。 
English: All kinds of improper expenses will be eliminated, and the outside of the palace can refer to it.

古文：荆州刺史沈攸之、南徐州刺史建平王景素、郢州刺史晋熙王燮、湘州刺史王僧虔、雍州刺史张兴世并举义兵赴京师。
现代文：荆州刺史沈攸之、南徐州刺史建平王景素、郢州刺史晋熙王燮、湘州刺史王僧虔、雍州刺史张兴世同起义兵勤王赶赴京城。
English: Jingzhou assassin Shen Youzhi, South Xuzhou assassin Jianping Wang Jingsu, Zhangzhou assassin Jinxi Wang Qi, Hunan assassin Wang Sangyan, and Yongzhou assassin Zhang Xingshi rushed to Beijing with the rebel soldier Qin Wang.

古文：己亥，以第七皇弟友为江州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，任命第七皇弟友为江州刺史。
English: On the 26th, he appointed the seventh emperor's younger brother as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：芮芮国派使者进献特产。
English: The country sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：六月庚子，以平南将军齐王为中领军、镇军将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：六月七日，任命平南将军齐王为中领军、镇军将军、南兖州刺史。
English: On June 7, he appointed the Pingnan general Qi Wang as the middle leader, the general of the township army, and the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：癸卯，晋熙王燮遣军克寻阳，江州平。
现代文：十二日，晋熙王燮派兵攻克寻阳，平定江州。
English: On the 12th, King Jinshi sent troops to conquer Xiangyang and pacify Jiangzhou.

古文：戊申，以淮南太守任农夫为豫州刺史，右将军、南豫州刺史王宽进号平西将军。
现代文：二十日，任命淮南太守任农夫为豫州刺史，右将军、南豫州刺史王宽晋升为平西将军。
English: On the 20th, Huainan Taizhuang appointed the farmer to be the governor of Yuzhou, and the right general and the governor of South Yuzhou, Wang Guang, were promoted to the general of Pingxi.

古文：壬戌，改辅师将军还为辅国。
现代文：二十三日，又将辅师将军改为辅国将军。
English: On the 23rd, he also changed the title of Assistant Division General to Assistant National General.

古文：秋七月庚辰，立第七皇弟友为邵陵王。
现代文：秋七月三日，立第七皇弟友为邵陵王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the 7th emperor and his brother were enthroned as King Shao Ling.

古文：辛巳，以抚军司马孟次阳为兗州刺史。
现代文：六日，任命抚军司马孟次为兖州刺史。
English: On the 6th, he appointed the military governor Ma Mengzi as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙酉，镇西将军、荆州刺史沈攸之进号征西大将军，镇北将军、南徐州刺史建平王景素进号征北将军，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：八日，镇西将军、荆州刺史沈攸之晋升为征西大将军、镇北将军，南豫州刺史建平王景素晋升为征北将军，兼任开府仪同三司。
English: On the 8th, Zhenxi General and Jingzhou General Shen Youjun were promoted to General of the Western Conquest and Zhenbei General, and the Southern Yuzhou General Jianping Wang Jingsu was promoted to General of the Northern Conquest, and also served as the Third Division of the Kaifu Ceremony.

古文：征虏将军、郢州刺史晋熙王燮进号安西将军，前将军、湘州刺史王僧虔进号平南将军。
现代文：征虏将军、郢州刺史晋熙王燮晋升为安西将军，前将军、湘州刺史王僧虔晋升为平西将军。
English: The conscript general, Zhangzhou Zishi Wang Xi, was promoted to Anxi General, and the former general, Xiangzhou Zishi Wang Xiangqian, was promoted to Pingxi General.

古文：八月辛酉，以征虏行参军刘延祖为宁州刺史。
现代文：八月七日，任命征虏行参军刘延祖为宁州刺史。
English: On August 7th, Liu Yanzu, a member of the conscription march, was appointed as the historian of Ningzhou.

古文：九月壬辰，以游击将军吕安国为兗州刺史。
现代文：九月六日，任命游击将军吕安国为兖州刺史。
English: On September 6, he appointed the guerrilla general Lü Anguo as the new governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁酉，以尚书令、新除卫将军袁粲为中书监，即本号开府仪同三司，领司徒；加护军将军褚渊尚书令；抚军将军、扬州刺史安成王进号车骑将军。
现代文：十日，任命尚书令、新任卫将军袁粲为中书监，并以原来的封号开府仪同三司，兼任司徒，加封护军将军褚渊为尚书令，抚军将军、扬州刺史安成王晋升为车骑将军。
English: On the 10th, Shang Shuling and the newly appointed General of the Guards Yuan Shun were appointed as the Central Supervisor of Books, and with the original title of Kaifu Yi and the three departments, he also served as a tutor, with the additional title of General of the Guards Gongyuan as Shang Shuling, General of the Guards, Yangzhou Shishi Ancheng Wang was promoted to General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：冬十月庚申，以新除侍中王蕴为湘州刺史。
现代文：冬十月十一日，任命新任侍中王蕴为湘州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of winter in October, the newly-appointed chamberlain Wang Yun was appointed as the new governor of Hunan Province.

古文：甲子，以游击将军陈显达为广州刺史。
现代文：十九日，任命游击将军陈显达为广州刺史。
English: On the 19th, Chen Xianda, a guerrilla general, was appointed as Guangzhou's chief historian.

古文：十一月丙戌，御加元服，大赦天下。
现代文：十一月九日，皇上举行加冠礼，大赦天下。
English: On November 9th, the emperor held a coronation ceremony and pardoned the world.

古文：赐民男子爵一级；为父后及三老孝悌力田者爵二级；鳏寡孤独笃癃不能自存者，谷五斛；年八十以上，加帛一匹。
现代文：男子赐爵一级；做父母和掌管教化的三老、孝悌、致力耕田者赐爵二级；鳏寡孤独病重难以生存者，每人赐谷五斛；八十岁以上的，另赐给帛一匹。
English: A first-class knighthood is awarded to men; a second-class knighthood is awarded to parents and elders who are in charge of education, filial piety, and those who are committed to farming; widows and widowers who are alone and seriously ill and difficult to survive are each awarded five gongs; over the age of eighty, another gong is given.

古文：大酺五日，赐王公以下各有差。
现代文：聚饮五日；王公以下各官都有赏赐。
English: The party lasted for five days; everyone from the king down was rewarded.

古文：十二月癸亥，立第八皇弟跻为江夏王，第九皇弟赞为武陵王。
现代文：十二月五日，立第八皇弟跻为江夏王，第九皇弟赞为武陵王。
English: On December 5th, the eighth prince was crowned King of Jiangxia, and the ninth prince was crowned King of Wuling.

古文：三年春正月辛巳，车驾亲祠南郊、明堂。
现代文：元徽三年春正月二日，皇上到南郊、明堂祭祀。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Yuan He, the emperor went to the southern suburbs and held a religious service in the Ming Hall.

古文：三月丙寅，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：三月三日，河南王派使者来进献特产。
English: On March 3rd, the king of Henan sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：己巳，以车骑将军张敬兒为雍州刺史。
现代文：五日，任命车骑将军张敬儿为雍州刺史。
English: On the 5th, Zhang Jing'er, a cavalry general, was appointed as the chief historian of Yongzhou.

古文：其日，京师大水，遣尚书郎官长检行赈赐。
现代文：同日，京城发洪水，派尚书郎官长视察赈济。
English: On the same day, floods hit Beijing, and Shang Shulang, the governor, was sent to inspect the flood-hit areas.

古文：闰月戊戌，诏曰： 顷民俗滋弊，国度未殷，岁时屡骞，编户不给。
现代文：闰三月二日，下诏说： 民风不淳朴，国家不富足，灾难频频发生，百姓也很穷困。
English: On March 2, the following edict was issued: The people's customs are not simple, the country is not rich, disasters frequently occur, and the people are very poor.

古文：且边虞尚警，徭费弥繁，永言夕惕，寝兴增疚。
现代文：而且边境不安宁。征收的徭役赋税越来越多，心里总挂着这些，越来越感到惭愧。
English: Moreover, the border is restless. More and more taxes are being levied, and I always have these things on my mind, and I feel more and more ashamed.

古文：思弘丰耗之制，以惇约素之风，庶偫蓄拯民，以康治道。
现代文：想革除浪费诡弊，发扬节约之风，拯救百民，康宁国家。
English: Want to eliminate waste and fraud, carry forward the spirit of economy, save hundreds of people, and improve the country.

古文：大官珍膳，御府丽服，诸所供拟，一皆减撤，可详为其格，务从简衷。 
现代文：太官供应的膳食，御府供给的华丽服装，所有供给之物，都要减少，可详细制定个规定，务求合乎我从简之心。 
English: The meals provided by the eunuchs, the sumptuous clothing provided by the Imperial Household, all the things provided, should be reduced, and detailed regulations can be made to meet my simple heart.

古文：夏四月，遣尚书郎到诸州检括民户，穷老尤贫者，蠲除课调；丁壮犹有生业，随宜宽申；赀财足以充限者，督令洗毕。
现代文：夏四月，派尚书郎到各州检查登记户籍，穷困的老人，特别贫困者，免除租调，处于壮年还有生计的，适当给予减免；财产足够交纳赋税的，督促他们交清。
English: In the summer of April, Shang Shulang was sent to the states to check the registration of household registration. The poor elderly and the extremely poor were exempted from rent transfer, and those who were in their prime and still had livelihoods were given appropriate reductions and exemptions. Those whose property was sufficient to pay taxes were urged to pay them in full.

古文：丙戌，车驾幸中堂听讼。
现代文：十五日，皇上驾临中堂听诉讼。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor came to the central hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：六月癸未，北国使至。
现代文：六月八日，北方国家派来的使者到京城。
English: On June 8, envoys from northern countries arrived in Beijing.

古文：兼司徒袁粲、尚书令褚渊并固让。
现代文：兼任司徒的袁粲、尚书令褚渊都坚决请求辞去职务。
English: Yuan Qi and Shang Shuling Qianyuan, who also served as magistrates, both firmly requested to resign from their posts.

古文：秋七月庚戌，以粲为尚书令。
现代文：秋七月九日，任命袁粲为尚书令。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, Yuan Qi was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：壬戌，以给事黄门侍郎刘怀珍为豫州刺史。
现代文：十二日，任命给事黄门侍郎刘怀珍为豫州刺史。
English: On the 12th, Liu Huizhen, the Yellow Gate's steward, was appointed as the Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：八月庚子，加护军将军褚渊中书监。
现代文：八月二十日，加封护军将军褚渊为中书监。
English: On August 20th, the general of the Garrison of Gafong, Gong Yuan, was appointed as the Supervisor of Chinese Books.

古文：九月丙辰，征西大将军河南王吐谷浑拾夤进号车骑大将军。
现代文：九月二十四日，征西大将军河南王吐谷浑拾夤晋升为车骑大将军。
English: On September 24th, the General of the Western Conquest of Henan Province, Wang Tuya, was promoted to the General of the Cavalry.

古文：冬十月丙戌，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 26th day of the 10th month of winter, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：十二月乙丑，以冠军将军姚道和为司州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十日，任命冠军将军姚道和为司州刺史。
English: On December 20th, champion general Yao Daoha was appointed to write the history of Shizhou.

古文：四年春正月己亥，车驾躬耕籍田，大赦天下。
现代文：元徽四年春正月四日，皇上亲自耕田，大赦天下。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th month of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13

古文：赐力田爵一级；贷贫民粮种。
现代文：赐致力耕田的人爵一级；贷给贫民粮种。
English: Give a peerage to those who work the land; lend grain to the poor.

古文：壬子，以梁、南秦二州刺史王玄载为益州刺史。
现代文：八日，任命梁、南秦二州刺史王玄载为益州刺史。
English: On the 8th, Liang and Wang Xuanzhai, the governor of the two Southern Qin states, were appointed as the governors of Yizhou.

古文：二月壬戌，以步兵校尉范柏年为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：二月五日，任命步兵校尉范伯年为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On February 5th, he appointed Infantry Lieutenant Colonel Fan Boryeong as the leader of the Southern Qin and the governor of Erzhou.

古文：丁卯，加金紫光禄大夫王琨特进。
现代文：九日，加封紫金光禄大夫王琨为特进。
English: On the 9th, Dr. Wang Qi, a doctor of Zijin Guanglu, was awarded a special promotion.

古文：夏五月，以宁朔将军武都王杨文度为北秦州刺史。
现代文：夏五月，任命宁朔将军、武都王杨文度为北秦州刺史。
English: In the summer of May, Yang Wendu, the general of Ningshuo and the king of Wudu, was appointed as the governor of North Qin.

古文：乙未，尚书右丞虞玩之表陈时事曰：
现代文：十四日，尚书右丞虞玩之上表陈述时事说：
English: On the 14th, Shangshu Rongcheng said in his report on current affairs:

古文：天府虚散，垂三十年。
现代文： 国库耗散空虚，已三十年了。
English: The treasury has been empty for thirty years.

古文：江、荆诸州，税调本少，自顷以来，军募多乏。
现代文：江、荆各州，征收的税调原本很少，近年来，由于招募军队筹集军饷，也使它们匮乏。
English: In recent years, due to the recruitment of the army to raise military funds, they have also become scarce.

古文：其谷帛所入，折供文武。
现代文：每年征收入的谷物布帛，仅能供给文武官员的俸禄。
English: The annual revenue of grain cloth can only supply the salary of civil and military officials.

古文：豫、兗、司、徐，开口待哺；西北戎将，裸身求衣。委输京都，盖为寡薄。
现代文：豫、兖、司、徐各州，嗷嗷待哺，西北战将，缺少衣服，运往京都的粮食布帛也很少。
English: Henan, Shandong, Sichuan, and Hebei provinces are starving, the northwest is at war, there is a shortage of clothing, and there is little grain to be sent to Kyoto.

古文：天府所资，唯有淮、海。
现代文：国库所依靠的，只有淮、海。
English: The treasury relies only on Huai and Hai.

古文：民荒财单，不及曩日。
现代文：民穷财少，不如从前。
English: People are poorer and have less money than before.

古文：而国度弘费，四倍元嘉。
现代文：而国家的开支，却是元嘉年间的四倍。
English: The state's expenditure, however, was four times that of the Yuan Jia period.

古文：二卫台坊人力，五不余一；都水材官朽散，十不两存。
现代文：二卫台坊的人，还剩下的不到百分之二十，都水材官，还在的也不到百分之二十。
English: Less than twenty percent of the people in Nidaifang still remain, and less than twenty percent of the water and materials officials are still there.

古文：备豫都库，材竹俱尽；东西二嵒，砖瓦双匮。敕令给赐，悉仰交市。
现代文：府库，没有木竹；东西二均，缺砖少瓦。下诏给的赏赐，都依靠到市场上去交易。
English: There is no wood and bamboo in the prefectural treasury; things are the same in both directions, and there is a lack of bricks and tiles. The rewards given by the next edict all rely on the crane to go to the market to trade.

古文：尚书省舍，日就倾颓，第宅府署，类多穿毁。
现代文：尚书省的房舍，越来越倾斜，府第房室，多像这样破旧不堪。
English: The houses in Shangshu Province are more and more sloping, and most of the government offices are dilapidated like this.

古文：视不遑救，知不暇及。
现代文：摆在眼前却不能解决，看见了却无力顾及。
English: It is put in front of our eyes but cannot be solved, we see it but are powerless to deal with it.

古文：寻所入定调，用恆不周，既无储畜，理至空尽。积弊累耗，钟于今日。
现代文：先前所定的租调，考虑不周，没有储备，理所当然出现空虚，多年的弊政导致耗费甚多，今天尤为严重。
English: The previously determined rent adjustment is ill-considered, there is no reserve, emptiness naturally occurs, and many years of maladministration have led to a lot of expenditure, which is particularly serious today.

古文：如愚管所虑，不月则岁矣。经国远谋，臣所不敢言，朝夕祗勤，心存于匪懈。
现代文：往年奉旨，课征扬州、徐州欠的租税，共征收了六十万斛米谷、五千余万钱、五万匹布绢，杂物还在外，靠这勉强维持。现在所空缺的越来越多，开支越来越大，恐怕供奉缺乏，兵器供给不足，将士挨饿怨恨，百官没有俸禄。皇亲国戚难以赡养，有功之臣拿不出东西奖赏。
English: In previous years, I was ordered to collect the taxes owed by Yangzhou and Xuzhou, and collected a total of 600,000 bushels of rice, more than 50,000 million yuan, and 50,000 pieces of cloth. The debris is still outside, which is barely maintained. Now there are more and more vacancies, the expenses are getting bigger and bigger, I am afraid that there is a lack of offerings, insufficient supply of weapons, soldiers are starving and resentful, and there is no salary for all officials. It is difficult to support the relatives of the emperor and the country, and meritorious subjects cannot get rewards.

古文：起伏震遽，事属冒闻。
现代文：建筑官邸禁止搞华丽的雕刻，如真像我所忧虑的那样，混乱很快就会发生。
English: Ornate carvings are forbidden in the official residence, and if it is as I fear, chaos will soon ensue.

古文：伏愿陛下留须臾之鉴，垂永代之计，发不世之诏，施必行之典，则氓祗齐欢，高卑同泰。
现代文：治国大计，我不能妄言，朝夕勤勉，内心不敢懈怠。请陛下抽点时间考虑，推行必要的措施，则官民同庆。 
English: In the grand scheme of governing the country, I cannot make rash statements. I work diligently morning and evening, and I dare not slacken in my heart. I would like to ask His Majesty to take some time to consider and implement the necessary measures, and then the government and the people will celebrate together.

古文：帝优诏答之。
现代文：皇上下诏作了答复。
English: The Empress Dowager replied.

古文：庚戌，以骁骑将军曹欣之为徐州刺史。
现代文：十五日，任命骁骑将军曹欣为徐州刺史。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the cavalry general Cao Xin as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：六月乙亥，加镇军将军齐王尚书左仆射。
现代文：六月七日，加封镇军将军齐王为尚书左仆射。
English: On June 7th, the general of the Jafeng Town Army, Qi Wang, came to shoot for Shang Shuzha.

古文：秋七月戊子，征北将军、南徐州刺史建平王景素据京城反。
现代文：秋七月九日，征北将军、南豫州刺史建平王景素占据京城反叛。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, Jianping Wang Jingsu, the general of the Northern Expedition and the governor of the Southern Henan Province, led a rebellion to occupy the capital.

古文：己丑，内外纂严。
现代文：十七日，全国戒严。
English: On the second day of the new year, martial law was declared in and around Kyoto.

古文：遣骁骑将军任农夫、领军将军黄回北讨，镇军将军齐王总统众军。
现代文：派骁骑将军任农夫、冠军将军黄回北伐，镇军将军齐王统领各路兵马。
English: He sent the general of the imperial cavalry as a farmer, the champion general Huang Hui to the Northern Expedition, and the general of the town army, Qi Wang, to lead the soldiers and horses.

古文：曲赦南徐州；始安王伯融、都乡侯伯猷赐死。
现代文：赦免南徐州。始安王伯融、都乡侯伯猷被赐死。
English: Southern Xuzhou was pardoned. Shi'an Wang Bolong and Ducheng Hou Bolong were sentenced to death.

古文：辛卯，南豫州刺史段佛荣统前锋马步众军。
现代文：二十日，豫州刺史段佛荣统率打先锋的骑兵、步兵。
English: On the 20th, Fo Rong, the leader of the vanguard cavalry and infantry in the historical section of the Battle of Yuzhou, led the march.

古文：甲午，军主、左军将军张保战败见杀。
现代文：二十四日，军主、左军将军张保被杀。
English: On the 24th, the commander, General Zhang Bao of the Left Army, was killed.

古文：黄回等至京城，与景素诸军战，连破之。
现代文：黄回等抵达京城，与景素的军队交战，接连打败景素的军队。
English: Huang Hui and others arrived in Beijing, fought with Jing Su's army, and successively defeated Jing Su's army.

古文：乙未，克京城，斩景素，同逆皆伏诛；其日解严。
现代文：二十六日，攻克京城，斩杀景素，景素同党都被处决，同日解除戒严。
English: On the 26th, they conquered the capital and killed Jingsu. Jingsu and his party were all executed, and martial law was lifted on the same day.

古文：丙申，大赦天下，封赏各有差。
现代文：二十九日，大赦天下，各有封赏。
English: On the 29th, there was a general amnesty, and everyone received a reward.

古文：原京邑二县元年以前逋调。
现代文：免除京城二县元徽元年以前的所欠租调。
English: The rent arrears of two counties in Beijing before the first year of the Yuan Dynasty were exempted.

古文：辛丑，以武陵王赞为南徐州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命武陵王赞为南徐州刺史。
English: On the 30th, Wuling Wangzan was appointed as the leader of South Xuzhou.

古文：八月丁卯，立第十皇弟翙为南阳王，第十一皇弟嵩为新兴王，第十二皇弟禧为始建王。
现代文：八月十三日，立第十皇弟发羽为南阳王，第十一皇弟嵩为新兴王，第十二皇弟禧为始建王。
English: On August 13th, the 10th Prince Fei was appointed as the Nanyang King, the 11th Prince Song as the Emerging King, and the 12th Prince Xiyi as the Founding King.

古文：庚午，以给事黄门侍郎阮佃夫为南豫州刺史。
现代文：十五日，任命给事黄门侍郎阮佃夫为南豫州刺史。
English: On the 15th, Nguyn Phúc, the steward of the Yellow Gate, was appointed as the historian of South Hng Chíu.

古文：乙酉，以行青、冀二州刺史刘善明为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任命行青、冀二州刺史刘善明为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On the 16th, Liu Zhenming, the chief historian of Xingqing and Hebei two states, was appointed as the chief historian of Xingqing and Hebei two states.

古文：九月丁亥，割郢州之随郡属司州。
现代文：九月三日，将郢州的随郡划归司州。
English: On September 3, Su County of Ganzhou was transferred to Shizhou.

古文：戊子，骁骑将军高道庆有罪，赐死。
现代文：七日，骁骑将军高道庆犯罪，被处死。
English: On the seventh day, the general Gao Daoqing committed a crime and was executed.

古文：己丑，车骑将军、扬州刺史安成王进号骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，安西将军、郢州刺史晋熙王燮进号镇西将军。
现代文：八日，车骑将军、扬州刺史安成王晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，安西将军、郢州刺史晋熙王燮晋升为镇西将军。
English: On the 8th, the general of chariot and cavalry, Yangzhou Jishi Ancheng Wang, was promoted to the general of horse cavalry, Kaifu Jishi and three divisions, the general of Anxi, and the general of Zhangzhou Jishi Jinxi Wang, were promoted to the general of Zhenxi.

古文：冬十月辛酉，以吏部尚书王僧虔为尚书右仆射。
现代文：冬十月十日，任命吏部尚书王僧虔为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 10th day of October in winter, he appointed the head of the administrative department, Shoshu Wang Xiangqian, as his right-hand man.

古文：宕昌王梁弥机为安西将军、河凉二州刺史。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥机为安西将军、河凉二州刺史。
English: Tang Chang Wang Liang Yiji is the general of Anxi, and He Liang Erzhou is the history.

古文：丙寅，中书监、护军将军褚渊母忧去职。
现代文：十二日，中书监、护军将军褚渊因母亲病离职。
English: On the 12th, China's chief librarian and general of the military escort, Gong Yuan, resigned from his post due to his mother's illness.

古文：十一月庚戌，诏摄本任。
现代文：十一月十四日，皇上下诏命他回朝担任原职。
English: On November 14th, the Emperor issued an edict ordering him to return to his original post.

古文：五年春二月壬申，以建宁太守柳和为宁州刺史。
现代文：元徽五年二月二日，任命建宁太守柳和为宁州刺史。
English: On February 2nd of the 5th year of the Yuanhui Dynasty, Jianning Taishu Liuhe was appointed as the first governor of Ningzhou.

古文：四月甲戌，豫州刺史阮佃夫、步兵校尉申伯宗、硃幼谋废立，佃夫、幼下狱死，伯宗伏诛。
现代文：四月六日，豫州刺史阮佃夫、步兵校尉申伯宗、朱幼密谋废除皇帝，阮佃夫、朱幼被投入监牢处死，申伯宗被杀。
English: On April 6, the Yuzhou assassin Ruan Shifu, the infantry captain Shen Bozong, and Zhu Yu conspired to abolish the emperor. Ruan Shifu and Zhu Yu were put in prison and executed, and Shen Bozong was killed.

古文：五月己亥，以左军将军沈景德为交州刺史，骁骑将军全景文为南豫州刺史。
现代文：五月二日，任命左军将军沈景德为交州刺史，骁骑将军全景文为南豫州刺史。
English: On May 2nd, General Shen Jingde of the Left Army was appointed as the historian of Jiaozhou, and General Pan Jianwen of the Horse Cavalry was appointed as the historian of South Yuzhou.

古文：丙午，以屯骑校尉孙昙瓘为越州刺史。
现代文：九日，任命屯骑校尉孙云灌为越州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Sun Yungan, a cavalry colonel, was appointed as the governor of Yuezhou.

古文：六月甲戌，诛司徒左长史沈勃、散骑常侍杜幼文、游击将军孙超之、长水校尉杜叔文，大赦天下。
现代文：六月八日，杀司徒左长史沈勃、散骑常侍杜幼文、游击将军孙超之、长水校尉杜叔文，大赦天下。
English: On June 8th, the assassins, Zu Changshi, Shen Bo, Du Qiaowen, Sun Chaozhi, and Du Shuwen, were pardoned.

古文：七月戊子夜，帝殒于仁寿殿，时年十五。
现代文：七月十日夜，皇上在仁寿殿丧命，时年十五岁。
English: On the evening of July 10th, the Emperor passed away at Renshuden, at the age of fifteen.

古文：己丑，皇太后令曰：
现代文：十一日，皇太后下诏说：
English: On the 11th day, the Empress Dowager issued a decree:

古文：卫将军、领军、中书监、八座：昱以冢嫡，嗣登皇统，庶其体识日弘，社稷有寄。
现代文： 卫将军、领军、中书监、八座：昱因为是嫡长子，继承了皇位，指望他识大体，社稷有所依靠。
English: General Wei, the leader of the army, the chief librarian of the Middle Kingdom, and the eight emperors: because he was the eldest son, he inherited the imperial throne, and he was expected to have a general knowledge, and the society relied on him.

古文：弃冠毁冕，长袭戎衣，犬马是狎，鹰隼是爱，皁枥轩殿之中，韝绁宸扆之侧。至仍单骑远郊，独宿深野，手挥矛钅延，躬行刳斮，白刃为弄器，斩害为恆务。
现代文：岂料他穷凶极恶，自小到大，不行好事，专干坏事。师长训导，却常不肯认错，恶习难改，越来越严重。将宫廷衣冠弃之一边，常穿少数民族的服装，纵情犬马，酷好玩鹰。甚至一个人骑马跑到远郊，在野外住宿，手舞戈矛，亲自砍杀，把刀子作为玩物，以斩杀为乐事。
English: Unexpectedly, he was extremely vicious. From childhood to adulthood, he did not do good things, but specialized in bad things. He was often unwilling to admit mistakes, and the bad habits were difficult to change, becoming more and more serious. He abandoned the palace clothes, often wore ethnic minority clothing, indulged in dogs and horses, and played with eagles. He even rode a horse to the suburbs, stayed in the field, danced with spears, and personally slaughtered, took knives as toys, and enjoyed slaughtering.

古文：舍交戟之卫，委天毕之仪，趋步阛阓，酣歌垆肆，宵游忘反，宴寝营舍，夺人子女，掠人财物，方策所不书，振古所未闻。
现代文：不带卫士，不要为君的仪表，徒步街市，在市场上饮酒而歌，晚上出去游玩忘记了回宫，在宫舍中饮酒住宿，杀人子女，抢人财物，这种行径史书里没记载过，从古到今也没听说过。
English: Don't take a bodyguard, don't care about your appearance, go to the street market on foot, drink alcohol and sing songs in the market, go out to play at night and forget to return to the palace, drink alcohol and stay in the palace, kill children, rob people of their property, this kind of behavior has not been recorded in the history books, and has not been heard of from ancient times to the present.

古文：沈勃儒士，孙超功臣，幼文兄弟，并豫勋效，四人无罪，一朝同戮。
现代文：沈勃一介儒士，孙超是有功之臣，幼文是他的兄弟，这些人都没罪，却在同一天被杀。
English: Shen Bo Yijie was a Confucianist, Sun Chao was a meritorious vassal, and Yuwen was his brother. These people were not guilty, but they were killed on the same day.

古文：飞镞鼓剑，孩稚无遗，屠裂肝肠，以为戏谑，投骸江流，以为欢笑。
现代文：射箭舞剑完全像孩子一样，剖人肝肠，视为儿戏，把尸体丢到江里作为乐事。
English: Archery and sword-dancing are exactly like children, they dissect people's liver and intestines as a child's play, and throw the corpse into the river for fun.

古文：又淫费无度，帑藏空竭，横赋关河，专充别蓄，黔庶嗷嗷，厝生无所。
现代文：开销无节制，导致国库空虚，对关中黄河地区横征暴敛，搜刮所得胡乱挥霍，百姓嗷嗷待哺，生活无着。
English: Unrestrained spending has led to an empty treasury, rampant tax evasion in the Central Guanzhong and Yellow River regions, and indiscriminate squandering of income. The people are starving and have nothing to live on.

古文：民怨既深，神怒已积，七庙阽危，四海褫气。
现代文：我同他的生母多次用仁义道德来批评教育他，他却密谋毒害我们，好更放纵地胡作非为。天天忧虑担心。民怨神怒已久，宗庙社稷危殆。
English: I and his birth mother have repeatedly criticized and educated him with benevolence, righteousness and morality, but he has plotted to poison us, so that he can indulge in more wrongdoing. I am worried every day. The people's anger has been angry for a long time, and the family temple is in danger.

古文：废昏立明，前代令范，况乃灭义反道，天人所弃，衅深牧野，理绝桐宫。故密令萧领军潜运明略，幽显协规，普天同泰。
现代文： 废昏君立明主，前朝作出过典范，何况是不仁不义，为天下所弃的君主呢，因此暗地命令萧领军秘密筹划，骠骑大将军安成王是太宗的亲骨肉，相貌庄重，道德高尚。
English: The previous emperor had set a good example, not to mention being a ruthless and unjust monarch who was rejected by the world. Therefore, he secretly ordered Xiao to lead the army in a secret plan. The cavalry general Ancheng Wang was Taizong's own flesh and blood, with a dignified appearance and high morals.

古文：骠骑大将军安王体自太宗，天挺淹睿，风神凝远，德映在田。地隆亲茂，皇历攸归，亿兆系心，含生属望。
现代文：天命所归，人心所向。
English: What the heavens decree, the human heart yearns for.

古文：宜光奉祖宗，临享万国。
现代文：宜继承皇位，君临天下。
English: It is proper to succeed to the imperial throne, for the emperor reigns supreme.

古文：便依旧典，以时奉行。
现代文：依照旧例，即时执行。
English: According to the old practice, it will be implemented immediately.

古文：未亡人追往伤怀，永言感绝。
现代文：未亡人追忆往事心情悲伤，深有感慨。 
English: The widow recalled the past with sadness and deep emotion.

古文：太后又令曰： 昱穷凶极暴，自取灰灭，虽曰罪招，能无伤悼。弃同品庶，顾所不忍。
现代文：太后又下令说： 昱穷凶极恶，自取灭亡，虽说是罪有应得，用不着悲伤，但废为平民百姓，又于心不忍。
English: The empress dowager also ordered: "It is extremely evil and self-destructive, and although the crime is deserved, there is no need for sorrow, but it is a waste of ordinary people, and it is unbearable in the heart.

古文：可特追封苍梧郡王。 
现代文：可特追封为苍梧郡王。 
English: Kote was posthumously crowned the king of Gora County.

古文：葬丹阳秣陵县郊坛西。
现代文：葬在丹阳秣陵县郊坛西。
English: He was buried in the western suburb of Danyang, Fuling County.

古文：初，昱在东宫，年五六岁时，始就书学，而惰业好嬉戏，主师不能禁。好缘漆账竿，去地丈余，如此者半食久，乃下。
现代文：当初昱住在东宫，五六岁时，开始读书，但好玩不肯用功，老师无法管教，喜欢爬漆帐竿，爬到离地面一丈多高，这样玩半顿饭的工夫，才下来。
English: At first, Zou lived in the East Palace. When he was five or six years old, he began to study, but he didn't want to study hard for fun, the teacher couldn't discipline him, he liked to climb the paint pole, climb as high as he could from the ground, and it took him half a meal to get down.

古文：年渐长，喜怒乖节，左右有失旨者，辄手加扑打。
现代文：年纪稍大一些，喜怒无常，左右有违背他意愿的，动辄用手打。
English: He is a bit older, he is moody, there are people around him who go against his wishes, and he often beats them with his hands.

古文：徒跣蹲踞，以此为常。主师以白太宗，上辄敕昱所生，严加捶训。
现代文：常常屈膝而坐，老师将这些告诉了太宗，太宗令他的生母严加管教。
English: The teacher told this to Taizong, who ordered his birth mother to discipline him severely.

古文：及嗣位，内畏太后，外惮诸大臣，犹未得肆志。
现代文：即位后，内怕太后，外惧众臣，还不敢肆意妄为。
English: After ascending the throne, she was afraid of the empress dowager at home and of all her courtiers abroad, and did not dare to act recklessly.

古文：自加元服，变态转兴，内外稍无以制。
现代文：自从举行加冠礼之后，恶习逐渐暴露，太后、大臣感到难以控制。
English: Since the crowning ceremony, the vice has gradually been exposed, and the empress dowager and the minister have felt difficult to control.

古文：三年秋冬间，便好出游行，太妃每乘青篾车，随相检摄。
现代文：元徽三年秋冬之际，喜欢出去游玩，太妃总是乘青篾车，随后跟随。
English: On the occasion of the autumn and winter of the third year of the Yuanhui era, she likes to go out to play. Tofei always takes the blue-collar car and then follows.

古文：昱渐自放恣，太妃不复能禁。
现代文：昱逐渐放纵，太妃也管不了。
English: Toad gradually indulges, and Toffee can't control it.

古文：单将左右，弃部伍，或十里、二十里，或入市里，或往营署，日暮乃归。
现代文：他只率左右几个亲信，撇下侍卫，有时出城十里、二十里，有时到市场，有时到军营玩耍，黄昏时分才回宫。
English: He only led a few close confidants, left the guards behind, and sometimes went ten or twenty miles out of the city, sometimes to the market, sometimes to the military camp to play, and only returned to the palace at dusk.

古文：四年春夏，此行弥数。
现代文：元徽四年春夏之际，出游的次数更多。
English: On the occasion of the spring and summer of the fourth year of the Yuanhui era, the number of outings was more.

古文：自京城克定，意志转骄，于是无日不出。
现代文：自从京城平定之后，变得骄横，天天出游。
English: Since the capital was pacified, he has become arrogant and travels every day.

古文：与左右人解僧智、张五兒恆相驰逐，夜出，开承明门，夕去晨反，晨出暮归。
现代文：常与左右亲信解僧智、张五儿纵马驰骋，夜晚出，开承明门，傍晚出城早晨回来，早晨出去傍晚回城。
English: He often galloped on horseback with his right and left relatives, including Xie Zengzhi and Zhang Wuer, and went out at night, opened the Ming Gate, went out in the evening and came back in the morning, and went out in the morning and returned to the city in the evening.

古文：从者并执钅延矛，行人男女，及犬马牛驴，值无免者。民间扰惧，昼日不敢开门，道上行人殆绝。
现代文：随从都手执戈矛，路上行人及犬马牛驴，碰到了无一幸免，百姓恐惧，白天不敢开门，路上几乎没有行人。
English: Followed by all hands holding spears, pedestrians and dogs, horses, cows and donkeys on the road, encountered no one spared, the people are afraid, they dare not open the door during the day, there are almost no pedestrians on the road.

古文：常著小袴褶，未尝服衣冠。
现代文：常穿着小礻夸褶，不穿整齐的衣冠。
English: They often wear short, flowing skirts, and do not wear neatly trimmed crowns.

古文：或有忤意，辄加以虐刑。
现代文：如有违背意愿的，就严加处罚。
English: If there is a violation of the will, it will be severely punished.

古文：有白棓数十枚，各有名号，针椎凿锯之徒，不离左右。
现代文：昱有几十根白色的棒子，每个都起了名字，针椎凿锯之徒，不离左右。
English: There are dozens of white rods in the cocoon, each with a name.

古文：尝以铁椎椎人阴破，左右人见之有敛眉者，昱大怒，令此人袒胛正立，以矛刺胛洞过。
现代文：曾用铁椎椎人阴部、左右亲信中有人看到了皱眉头，昱大怒，命令此人袒露肩胛部立正，用矛刺穿他的肩胛。
English: He once used a spike to pierce a man's genitals, and when some of his close friends on his right and left saw his frowning face, they flew into a rage, ordered the man to stand up straight with his shoulders bare, and pierced his shoulders with a spear.

古文：于耀灵殿上养驴数十头，所自乘马，养于御床侧。
现代文：在耀灵殿上养几十头驴，所骑的马，养在御榻旁。
English: He kept dozens of donkeys at the Yoryo-den, and the horses he rode were kept next to his bed.

古文：先是民间讹言，谓太宗不男，陈太妃本李道兒妾，道路之言，或云道兒子也。
现代文：早先民间传言，太宗患了不育症，陈太妃本是李道儿的妾，有的说昱是李道儿的儿子。
English: Earlier, there were folk rumors that Taizong suffered from infertility, that Chen Taifei was actually Li Daor's concubine, and that Zou was Li Daor's son.

古文：昱每出入去来，常自称李统，或自号李将军。
现代文：昱每次出入归来，常自称刘统或自称李将军。
English: Every time he came and went, he often called himself Liu Tong or General Li.

古文：与右卫翼辇营女子私通，每从之游，持数千钱，供酒肉之费。
现代文：与右卫翼辇营女子私通，每次携她出游，带几千钱，作为酒宴之资。
English: He had an illicit affair with a woman from the Right Wing of the Ku Klux Klan. Every time he took her on a trip, he took several thousand dollars with him, which he used to fund his drinking parties.

古文：阮佃夫腹心人张羊为佃夫所委信。
现代文：阮佃夫的心腹张羊很得阮佃夫的信任。
English: Zhang Yang, a confidant of Nguyen Xuan Phuc, has gained the trust of Nguyen Xuan Phuc.

古文：佃夫败，叛走，后捕得，昱自于承明门以车轹杀之。
现代文：佃夫密谋败露后，张羊逃走，后捉住，昱亲自到承明门用车轮辗死了他。
English: After the woodcutter's plot was exposed, Zhang Yang fled and was later caught. Zou personally went to Chengming Gate and strangled him with a wheel.

古文：杜延载、沈勃、杜幼文、孙超，皆躬运矛钅延，手自脔割。
现代文：杜延载、沈勃、杜幼文、孙超被捕后，昱亲自用戈矛斩割。
English: After the arrest of Du Yanzai, Shen Bo, Du Yuwen, and Sun Chao, Zou personally cut off their throats with a spear.

古文：执幼文兄叔文于玄武湖北，昱驰马执槊，自往刺之。
现代文：在玄武湖北面捕到了幼文的哥哥叔文，昱骑马赶去，用矛杀了他。
English: In the north of Xuanwu Lake, he caught Zhuwen's brother, Shuwen. He rode there and killed him with a spear.

古文：制露车一乘，其上施篷，乘以出入，从者不过数十人。
现代文：制造露车一辆，车上架着篷子，昱乘坐露车出入，随从不过几十人。
English: A camper van was made, with a canopy on top, and the storks rode in and out of the van, accompanied by no more than a few dozen people.

古文：羽仪追之恆不及，又各虑祸，亦不敢追寻，唯整部伍，别在一处瞻望而已。
现代文：卫队常常追赶不上，又担心闯祸，也就不敢追寻，只好在远处整队遥望。
English: The guards often can't catch up, and they are afraid of getting into trouble, so they don't dare to pursue, and they have to watch the whole team in the distance.

古文：凡诸鄙事，过目则能，锻炼金银，裁衣作帽，莫不精绝。
现代文：凡是俗事，昱看一下就会，锻铸锡金银，缝衣作帽，技艺都很高超。
English: Forging tin, gold and silver, sewing clothes to make hats, the skills are superb.

古文：未尝吹篪，执管便韵，天性好杀，以此为欢，一日无事，辄惨惨不乐。
现代文：没学过乐器，拿起笛子却能吹出音律，天性好杀，以此为乐，一日无事，就闷闷不乐。
English: He has never learned a musical instrument, but he can pick up a flute and play a melody. His nature is to kill, and he takes this as his pleasure. If he has nothing to do for a day, he is unhappy.

古文：内外百司，人不自保，殿省忧遑，夕不及旦。
现代文：文武百官，人人担忧性命难保，朝中官员，更是朝不保夕。
English: There are hundreds of civil and military officials, everyone is worried about their lives, and the officials of the DPRK and China are even more worried.

古文：齐王顺天人之心，潜图废立，与直阁将军王敬则谋之。
现代文：齐王顺应民心，暗地图谋废昱，与直阁将军王敬则谋划。
English: King Qi complied with the people's will and plotted to depose the emperor, while he plotted with the Zhokou general Wang Jing.

古文：七月七日，昱乘露车，从二百许人，无复卤簿羽仪，往青园尼寺，晚至新安寺就昙度道人饮酒。
现代文：七月七日，昱坐露车，带随从二百多人，没带卫队，到青圆尼寺，晚上到新安寺同云度道人饮酒。
English: On the 7th of July, Gong took a trolley with more than 200 people, without guards, to the Qingyuan Temple. In the evening, he went to the Xin'an Temple to drink alcohol with Yundu Taoists.

古文：醉，夕扶还于仁寿殿东阿氈幄中卧。
现代文：喝醉了，傍晚随从扶他回仁寿殿东阿颤幄中休息。
English: He was drunk, and in the evening, his attendants helped him back to Renshuden to take a rest from the excitement.

古文：时昱出入无恆，省内诸皞，夜皆不闭。
现代文：当时，昱出入无常。宫内各门，夜晚都不关。
English: At that time, entry and exit of egrets was irregular. All the gates of the palace were not closed at night.

古文：且群下畏相逢值，无敢出者。
现代文：侍卫害怕碰上昱，没有敢出门的。
English: The guards were afraid of running into the baboons, so they didn't dare to go out.

古文：宿卫并逃避，内外无相禁摄。
现代文：卫士躲避，宫廷内外则没有戒备。
English: The guards ducked, leaving the palace and beyond unguarded.

古文：王敬则先结昱左右杨玉夫、杨万年、吕欣之、汤成之、陈奉伯、张石留、罗僧智、钟千载、严道福、雷道赐、戴昭祖、许启、戚元宝、盛道泰、钟千秋、王天宝、公上延孙、俞成、钱道宝、马敬之、陈宝直、吴璩之、刘印鲁、唐天宝、俞孙等二十五人，谋共取昱。其夕，敬则出外，玉夫见昱醉熟无所知，乃与万年同入氈幄内，以昱防身刀斩之。
现代文：王敬则与昱的左右亲信杨玉夫、杨万年、吕欣之、汤成之、陈奉伯、张石留、罗僧智、钟千载、严道福、雷道赐、戴昭祖、许启、戚元宝、盛道泰、钟于秋、王天宝、公上延孙、俞成、钱道宝、马敬之、陈宝应、吴琚之、刘邱鲁、唐天宝、俞孙等二十五人联络，谋划共同杀昱，那天晚上，王敬则外出，玉夫见昱醉得一无所知，就与万年一同进入颤幄内，用昱的防身刀杀了他。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, contacted Yang Yufu, Yang Wanli, Lv Xinzhi, Tang Chengzhi, Chen Fongbo, Zhang Shiliu, Luo Sangzhi, Zhong Qiancai, Yan Daofu, Lei Daozhu, Dai Zhaozhu, Xu Qi, Qi Yuanbao, Sheng Daotai, Zhong Yuqiu, Wang Tianbao, Gong Shang Yan's grandson, Xuan Cheng, Qian Daobao, Ma Jingzhi, Chen Baoying, Wu Xizhi, Liu Qiulu, Tang Tianbao, Xing Sun and other twenty-five people to plan a joint assassination. That night,

古文：奉伯提昱首，依常行法，称敕开承明门出，以首与敬则，驰至领军府，以首呈齐王。
现代文：奉伯提着昱的头，像平常一样，假称圣旨骗开承明门出宫，把昱的头交给敬则，敬则骑马跑到领军府，把昱的人头献给齐王。
English: Bongbo carried the head of the dragonfly, as usual, and went out of the palace under the pretense of the imperial edict, and gave the head of the dragonfly to King Jingzhe. King Jingzhe then rode to the military headquarters and presented the head of the dragonfly to King Qi.

古文：王乃戎服，率左右数十人，称行还，开承明门入。
现代文：齐王换上戎装，率亲信数十人，假称远行归来，开承明门进宫。
English: King Qi changed into military attire, led dozens of close friends, pretended to return from a long journey, and entered the palace through the Kaecheng Gate.

古文：昱他夕每开门，门者震慑不敢视，至是弗之疑。
现代文：昱以前每次开门，守门卫士害怕不敢抬头看，因此根本就不怀疑。
English: In the past, every time the door was opened, the doorkeepers were afraid to look up, so they didn't suspect anything.

古文：齐王既入，晓，乃奉太后令奉迎安成王。
现代文：齐王进宫，天刚亮，就奉太后令奉迎安成王。
English: When King Qi entered the palace at dawn, he was greeted by the Empress Dowager as King Ancheng.

古文：史臣曰：丧国亡家之主，虽适末同途，发轸或异也。
现代文：史臣说：亡国之君，虽说走的是同一条路，刚开始时却有所不同，前废帝喜欢游玩，不知礼节，铺张奢华，传令开道。
English: Shi Zhen said: Although the ruler of the dead country walked the same path, it was different at the beginning. The former emperor liked to play, did not know etiquette, flaunted luxury, and opened the way.

古文：前废帝卑游亵幸，皆龙驾帝饰，传警清路；苍梧王则藏玺怀绂，鱼服忘反，危冠短服，匹马孤征。至于殒身覆祚，其理若一。姬、夏之隆，质文异尚，亡国之道，其亦然乎！
现代文：苍梧王则把君王的仪表丢在一边，流连民间忘返，衣冠不整，独自骑马远离京城。至于丢掉皇位丧命，结果是一样的。姬、夏治国，国家兴隆，采取的措施却不同，亡国之道，不是也一样吗？
English: King Cangwu, on the other hand, threw the regalia of the king aside, lingered among the people and was forgotten, his robe was not in order, and he rode away from the capital alone. As for losing the throne and dying, the result was the same. The empress and the summer ruled the country and the country flourished, but the measures taken were different, and the way to ruin the country was not the same?

