古文：前辈议论，有出于率然不致思而于理近碍者。
现代文：前辈的议论，也有出于粗疏，思考不周密而情理不通的。
English: The arguments of our predecessors were also crude, ill-thought-out and illogical.

古文：张文潜云： 《诗》三百篇，虽云妇人妇子小夫贱隶所为，要之非深于文章者不能作，如 七月在野 至 入我床下 ，于七月已下，皆不道破，直至十月方言蟋蟀，非深于文章者能为之邪？ 
现代文：张文潜说： 《诗经》三百篇，虽说是妇人、女子、小夫、贱隶所作，总之除非对文章精通的人写不了来，如 七月在野 至 入我床下 ，以七月以下，都不说破，直到十月才说出蟋蟀，不是对文宣精通练达的人，能作出这样的诗句吗？ 
English: Zhang Wenqian said: Although the 300 poems in the "Book of Songs" were written by women, girls, children, and low-ranking officials, in short, unless they are written by people who are proficient in writing, they cannot be written. For example, from July in the field to under my bed, from July onwards, they are not finished, and they are not uttered until October. Is it not for people who are proficient in writing, can they make such poems?

古文：予谓三百篇固有所谓女妇小贱所为，若周公、召康公、穆公、卫武公、芮伯、凡伯、尹吉甫、仍叔、家父、苏公、宋襄公、秦康公、史克、公子奚斯，姓氏明见于大序，可一概论之乎？
现代文：我以为三百篇中当然有所谓妇人、女子，小夫、贱隶所作的，至于周公、召康公、穆公、卫武公、芮伯、凡伯、尹吉甫、仍叔、家父、苏公、宋襄公、秦康公、史克、公子奚斯，姓氏分明出现在《毛诗•关难》的大序之中，能一概而论吗？
English: I thought that, of course, there were so-called women, girls, young men, and low-ranking subordinates in the three hundred poems. As for Zhou Gong, Zhao Kangong, Mu Gong, Wei Wu Gong, Zibo, Fan Bo, Yin Jifu, Uncle Zhou, Father Zhou, Su Gong, Song Xiangong, Qin Kangong, Shi Ke, and Gong Zi Ren, the surnames clearly appear in the general order of "Mao Poem • Guan Nan," can it be generalized?

古文：且七月在野，八月在字，九月在户，本自言农民出入之时耳，郑康成始并入下句，皆指为蟋蟀，正已不然，今直称此五句为深于文章者，岂其余不能过此乎？
现代文：再说 七月在野，八月在字，九月在户 ，本当是说农民出入的季节而已，到郑康成才合并入下句，全都是指蟋蟀而言，正已然是错了，如今特意称赞这五句是精通文章之道的，难道其它就没有超过这五句的吗？
English: In addition, July in the field, August in the word, September in the house, is really only the season for farmers to come and go, and it was not until Zheng Kangcheng that it was merged into the next sentence, all referring to the plough, which is exactly wrong. Now it is specially praised that these five sentences are proficient in the way of writing, do others not exceed these five sentences?

古文：以是论《诗》，隘矣。
现代文：以此议论《诗经》，未免太偏狭了。
English: To discuss "The Book of Songs" in this way is too narrow.

