古文：一曰：贤主所贵莫如士。
现代文：贵直贤主所崇尚的莫过于士人。
English: There is nothing more revered by the noble and virtuous Lord than the scholar.

古文：所以贵士，为其直言也。
现代文：之所以崇尚士人，是因为他们言谈正直。
English: The reason why people admire scholars is because they speak honestly.

古文：言直则枉者见矣。
现代文：言谈正直，邪曲就会显现出来了。
English: Let's be honest, the bad songs will come out.

古文：人主之患，欲闻枉而恶直言。是障其源而欲其水也，水奚自至？是贱其所欲而贵其所恶也，所欲奚自来？
现代文：君主的弊病，在于想闻知邪曲却又厌恶正直之言，这就等于阻塞水源又想得到水，水又从何而至：这就等于轻贱自己想要得到的而尊尚自己所厌恶的，所要得到的又从何而来？
English: The malady of a prince is to desire to hear what is evil, and to abhor what is right. This is like blocking a spring and desiring water, but where does the water come from? This is like despising what one desires and honoring what one abhors, but where does what one desires come from?

古文：能意见齐宣王。
现代文：能意见齐宣王。
English: If we can all agree, we can proclaim him king.

古文：宣王曰： 寡人闻子好直，有之乎？ 
现代文：宣王说： 我听说你喜好正直，有这样的事吗？ 
English: King Xuan said, "I have heard that you like to be honest. Is there such a thing?"

古文：对曰： 意恶能直？
现代文：能意回答说： 我哪里能做到正直？
English: Nozomu replied, "How can I be honest?

古文：意闻好直之士，家不处乱国，身不见污君。
现代文：找听说喜好正直的士人，家不居于政治混乱的国家，自己不见德行污浊的君主。
English: If you are looking for an honest statesman, you do not live in a country in political turmoil, and you do not see a virtuous and filthy monarch.

古文：身今得见王，而家宅乎齐，意恶能直？ 
现代文：如果我来见您，家又住在齐国，我哪里能算得上正直！ 
English: If I come to see you and my home is in Qi Province, how can I be honest?

古文：宣王怒曰： 野士也！ 
现代文：宣王生气地说： 真是个鄙野的家伙！ 
English: Xuan Wang said angrily, "What a mean guy!

古文：将罪之。
现代文：打算治他的罪。
English: He was about to be punished for his crime.

古文：能意曰： 臣少而好事，长而行之，王胡不能与野士乎，将以彰其所好耶？ 
现代文：能意说： 我年轻时最好直言争辩，成年以后一直这样做，您为什么不能听取鄙野之士的言论，来彰明他们的爱好呢？ 
English: Can meaning say: When I was young, it was best to argue bluntly, and I have been doing so since I became an adult. Why can't you listen to the remarks of the villains to highlight their hobbies?

古文：王乃舍之。
现代文：宣王于是赦免了他。
English: Emperor Xuan then pardoned him.

古文：若能意者，使谨乎论于主之侧，亦必不阿主。
现代文：象能意这样的人，如果让他在君主身边谨慎地议事，一定不会曲从君主。
English: A man like Neng Yi, if he is allowed to be discreet around the monarch, will not be disloyal to the monarch.

古文：不阿，主之所得岂少哉？
现代文：不曲从君主，君主得到的教益难道会少吗？
English: Can a monarch learn less from a monarch?

古文：此贤主之所求，而不肖主之所恶也。
现代文：这是贤明的君主所追求的，不肖的君主所厌恶的。
English: This is what wise sovereigns seek, and what bad sovereigns abhor.

古文：狐援说齐湣王曰: 殷之鼎陈于周之廷，其社盖于周之屏，其干戚之音在人之游。
现代文：狐援劝齐滑王说： 殷商的九鼎被周摆放在朝廷，它的神社被周罩盖上庐棚，它的舞乐波被人们用在游乐中。
English: The fox helped to persuade the king of Qi, who said: "The nine dings of the merchants of Yin were placed in the imperial court, its shrine was covered with a cocoon, and its dance wave was used by people in amusement.

古文：亡国之音不得至于庙，亡国之社不得见于天，亡国之器陈于廷，所以为戒。
现代文：亡国的音乐不准进入宗庙，它的神社不准见到天日，它的重器被摆放在朝廷，这些都是用来警戒后人的。
English: The music of the defeated country was not allowed to enter the ancestral temple, its shrine was not allowed to see the light of day, and its heavy weapons were placed in the imperial court, all of which were used to warn future generations.

古文：王必勉之！
现代文：您一定要好自为之啊！
English: You must do it yourself!

古文：其无使齐之大吕陈之廷，无使太公之社盖之屏，无使齐音充人之游。 
现代文：千万不要让齐国的大吕摆在别国的朝廷，不要让太公建起的神社被人罩盖上庐棚，不要让齐国的音乐充斥在别人的游乐之中。 
English: Do not allow the Great Lu of Qi to be displayed in the imperial court of other countries, do not allow the shrine built by Taigong to be covered with a canopy, and do not allow the music of Qi to fill the amusement of others.

古文：齐王不受。
现代文：齐王不听他的劝谏。
English: King Qi did not listen to his advice.

古文：狐援出而哭国三日，其辞曰： 先出也，衣纻；后出也，满囹圄。
现代文：狐援离开朝廷以后，为国家即将到来的灾难哭了三天，哭着说到： 先离开的，尚可穿布衣；后离开的，遭受苦难最后进入大狱。
English: After leaving the imperial court, Foo Yuan cried for three days for the impending disaster of the country, crying and saying: Those who leave first can still wear cloth clothes; those who leave later will suffer hardships and finally go to hell.

古文：吾今见民之洋洋然东走而不知所处。 
现代文：我马上就会看到百姓仓惶东逃，不知道在哪里安居。 
English: I would immediately see people fleeing in panic, not knowing where to live.

古文：齐王问吏曰： 哭国之法若何？ 
现代文：齐王问狱官说： 国家太平无事却给它哭丧的，按法令该治什么罪？ 狱官回答龇： 当斩。 
English: King Qi asked the prison officer, "If the country is at peace but there is mourning, what crime should be punished according to the law?" The prison officer replied, "He should be beheaded."

古文：吏曰： 斮。 
现代文：齐王说： 照法令行事！ 
English: King Qi said: Act according to the law!

古文：王曰： 行法！ 吏陈斧质于东闾，不欲杀之，而欲去之。
现代文：狱官把刑具摆在国都东门，不愿真的杀死狐援，只想把他吓跑。
English: The prison officers placed the torture equipment at the east gate of the national capital. They did not want to really kill the fox aide, but just wanted to scare him away.

古文：狐援闻而蹶往过之。
现代文：狐援听到这个消息，反倒自己趺跌撞撞地去见狱官。
English: On hearing the news, Foo Yuan stumbled to see the warden.

古文：吏曰： 哭国之法斮，先生之老欤？
现代文：狱官说： 为国事痛哭的依法当斩，先生不知道吗？
English: The prison officer said, "Those who cry for national affairs should be beheaded according to the law, don't you know?"

古文：昏欤？ 狐援曰： 曷为昏哉？ 
现代文：您这样做，是老胡涂了呢，还是头脑发昏呢？ 狐援说： 怎么是发昏呢！ 
English: Did you do this out of ignorance, or did your head go into a tizzy? The fox aide said: How did you go into a tizzy?

古文：于是乃言曰： 有人自南方来，鲋入而鲵居，使人之朝为草而国为墟。
现代文：于是进一步说道； 有人从南方亲，进来时象鲫鱼那样恭顺谦卑，住下以后却象鲸鲵那样凶狠残暴，使别人朝廷变为草莽，国都变为废墟。
English: Then he went on to say: Some people from the south, when they come in, are as docile and humble as eels, but when they settle down, they are as ferocious and cruel as a whale's fin, causing others to turn the court into grass and the country into ruins.

古文：殷有比干，吴有子胥，齐有狐援。
现代文：殷商有个比干，吴国有个伍子胥，齐国有个狐援。
English: Yin merchants have a bikan, Wu country has a wuzihong, and Qi country has a fox aid.

古文：已不用若言，又斮之东闾，每斮者以吾参夫二子者乎！ 
现代文：既不听我的这些话，又要在东门把我杀掉，这是要把我向比干，伍子胥比并为三吧！ 
English: Not only did they not listen to my words, but they also want to kill me at the East Gate. This is to compare me to a lumberjack, a woodchuck, and make it three!

古文：狐援非乐斮也，国已乱矣，上已悖矣，哀社稷与民人，故出若言。
现代文：狐援并不是乐于被杀。国家太混乱了，君主太昏愦了，他哀怜国家和人民，所以才说这样的话。
English: The country is too chaotic, the monarch is too dim-witted, he pities the country and the people, that's why he said such a thing.

古文：出若言非平论也，将以救败也，固嫌于危。
现代文：这些话并不是持平之论，因为想以此挽救国家的危亡，所以必定近于危言耸听。
English: These words are not a flat theory, because they are trying to save the country from peril, so they must be close to alarmism.

古文：此触子之所以去之也，达子之所以死之也。
现代文：滑王不纳忠言却戮辱直士。这正是触子弃之而去的原因，也正是达子战败而死于齐难的原因。
English: This is exactly the reason why Tang Zi abandoned him, and it is also the reason why Dazi was defeated and died in a difficult situation.

古文：赵简子攻卫，附郭。
现代文：赵简子进攻卫国，迫近了外城。
English: Zhao Jianzi attacked the defense of the country and approached the outer city.

古文：自将兵，及战，且远立，又居于屏蔽犀橹之下。
现代文：他亲自统率军队，可是到了交战的时候，却站得远远的，躲在屏障和盾牌后面。
English: He personally led the army, but when it came to fighting, he stood far away, hiding behind barriers and shields.

古文：鼓之而士不起。
现代文：简子击鼓，士率却动也不动。
English: Kenzo beats the drum, but the shizoku does not move.

古文：简子投桴而叹曰: 呜呼！
现代文：简子扔下鼓植感叹道。 哎！
English: Kenji threw down the drum plant and sighed.

古文：士之速弊一若此乎！ 
现代文：士卒变坏竟然快到这个地步！ 
English: It's amazing how quickly things can deteriorate!

古文：行人烛过免胄横戈而进曰: 亦有君不能耳，士何弊之有？ 
现代文：行人烛过摘下头盔，横拿着戈走到他面前说： 只不过是您有些地方设能做到罢了，士卒有什么不好！ 
English: The passer-by took off his helmet, walked up to him with a crossbow next to him and said: "It's just that you can do it in some places, what's wrong with being a soldier!"

古文：简子艴然作色曰: 寡人之无使，而身自将是众也，子亲谓寡人之无能，有说则可，无说则死！ 
现代文：简子气得勃然变色，说： 我不委派他人而亲自统率逸些士卒，你却当面说我有些地方没能做到。
English: Jane's face darkened with anger, and she said, "I don't appoint others, but I personally lead some of my subordinates, and yet you say to my face that I failed to do so in some areas.

古文：对曰： 昔吾先君献公即位五年，兼国十九，用此士也。
现代文：你的话有理便罢，没理就治你死罪！ 烛过回答说： 从前我们先君献公，即位五年就兼井了十九个国家，用的就是这样的士卒。
English: If what you say is reasonable, you will be sentenced to death if it is unreasonable! Candlestick replied, "In the past, our predecessors dedicated themselves to the public, and in the five years of their reign, they visited nineteen countries, and they used such servants.

古文：惠公即位二年，淫色暴慢，身好玉女，秦人袭我，逊去绛七十，用此士也。
现代文：惠公即位二年，纵情声色，残暴傲慢，喜好美女，秦人袭击我国，晋军绩逃到离绛城只有七十里的地方，用的也是这样的士卒。
English: In the second year of Huigong's accession to the throne, he indulged in lust, cruelty and arrogance, liked beautiful women, the Qin people attacked our country, and the Jin army fled to a place only seventy miles away from Lucheng. Such soldiers were also used.

古文：文公即位二年，厎之以勇，故三年而士尽果敢；城濮之战，五败荆人，围卫取曹，拔石社，定天子之位，成尊名于天下，用此士也。
现代文：文公即位二年，以勇武砥砺士卒，所以三年之后士卒都变得非常坚毅果敢，城濮之战，五次打败楚军，围困卫国，夺取曹国，攻占石社，安定天子的王位，显赫的名声扬于天下，用的还是这样的士卒。
English: In the second year of Wenguang's enthronement, he promoted his soldiers with bravery and valor, so after three years, his soldiers became very strong and courageous. In the Battle of Chenghuang, he defeated the Chu army five times, besieged the defenders, captured Cao, captured Shisha, stabilized the throne of Tianzi, and became famous all over the world. Such soldiers are still used.

古文：亦有君不能耳，士何弊之有？ 
现代文：所以说只不过是您有些地方没能做对罢了，士卒有什么不好？ 
English: So it's just that you failed to do things right in some areas. What's wrong with you, sir?

古文：简子乃去屏蔽犀橹，而立于矢石之所及，一鼓而士毕乘之。
现代文：简子于是离开屏障和盾牌，站到弓箭石磐的射程以内，只击鼓一次士卒就全都登上了城墙。
English: Kenzo then left the barrier and shield, stood within the range of the bow and arrow stone rock, and after beating the drum only once, all the soldiers climbed the city wall.

古文：简子曰： 与吾得革车千乘也，不如闻行人烛过之一言。 
现代文：简子说： 与其让我获得兵车千辆，不如听到行人烛过一句话！ 
English: Jane said: Rather than let me get a thousand chariots, it is better to hear a word from a passer-by!

古文：行人烛过可谓能谏其君矣。
现代文：行人烛过可算得上能劝谏他的君主了。
English: Even a candle can be counted on to persuade his monarch.

古文：战斗之上，桴鼓方用，赏不加厚，罚不加重，一言而士皆乐为其上死。
现代文：正当击鼓酣战之时，赏赐不增多，刑罚不加重，只说了一句话，就使士卒都乐于为长上效死。
English: When the war drums were beating, the rewards were not increased, the punishments were not made more severe, and a single word was spoken, and the soldiers were all willing to die for their superiors.

古文：二曰：言极则怒，怒则说者危。
现代文：直谏臣下言谈尽情，君主就会发怒。君主发怒，劝谏的人就危险。
English: When a vassal speaks his heart out, the sovereign is enraged. When the sovereign is enraged, the counsellor is in danger.

古文：非贤者孰肯犯危？
现代文：除了贤明的人，谁肯去冒这危险？
English: Who but a wise man would risk it?

古文：而非贤者也，将以要利矣；要利之人，犯危何益？
现代文：如果是不贤明的人，就要凭着进言谋求私利了。对于谋求私利的人来说，冒这危险有什么好处？
English: If he is not wise, he will rely on his own words to seek personal gain. For those who seek personal gain, what is the benefit of taking this risk?

古文：故不肖主无贤者。
现代文：所以不贤的君主身边没有贤人。
English: Therefore, there are no wise men around the wicked monarch.

古文：无贤则不闻极言，不闻极言，则奸人比周，百邪悉起。
现代文：没有贤人就听不到尽情之言，听不到尽情之言，奸人就会结党营私，各种邪说恶行就会一起产生。
English: If there are no sages, people will not be able to listen to the truth, and if they cannot listen to the truth, traitors will form a party, and all kinds of heresies and evil deeds will come into being.

古文：若此则无以存矣。
现代文：这样国家就无法生存了。
English: The country cannot survive like this.

古文：凡国之存也，主之安也，必有以也。
现代文：凡是国家的生存，君主的平安，肯定是有原因的。
English: There must be a reason for the survival of the state and the safety of the monarch.

古文：不知所以，虽存必亡，虽安必危。
现代文：不了解这个原因，即使目前生存也必定要灭亡，即使目前平安也必定遭遇危险。
English: Without understanding this cause, even the present existence is sure to perish, even the present peace is sure to be endangered.

古文：所以不可不论也。
现代文：国存主安的原因是不可不察知的。
English: The reasons for the country's precarious existence are not hard to fathom.

古文：齐桓公、管仲、鲍叔、甯戚相与饮。
现代文：齐桓公、管仲、鲍叔牙、宁成在一起喝酒。
English: Qi Kuan Gong, Guanzhong, Bao Shuya and Ningcheng are drinking together.

古文：酒酣，桓公谓鲍叔曰： 何不起为寿？ 
现代文：喝得正高兴，桓公对鲍叔说。 何不起身敬酒祝寿？ 
English: While drinking happily, Prince Kan said to Uncle Bao, "Why don't you stand up and make a toast to celebrate your birthday?"

古文：鲍叔奉杯而进曰: 使公毋忘出奔在于莒也，使管仲毋忘束缚而在于鲁也，使甯戚毋忘其饭牛而居于车下。 
现代文：鲍叔捧起酒杯敬酒，说； 希望您不要忘记逃亡在莒国的情景，希望管仲不要忘记被囚禁在鲁国的情景，希望宁成不要忘记自己喂牛住在车下的情景。 
English: Uncle Bao raised his glass in a toast and said, "I hope you don't forget the scene of escaping to Shandong Province, I hope Guanzhong doesn't forget the scene of being imprisoned in Luzhou Province, and I hope Ningcheng doesn't forget the scene of feeding cattle and living under a car."

古文：桓公避席再拜曰: 寡人与大夫能皆毋忘夫子之言，则齐国之社稷幸于不殆矣！ 
现代文：桓公离席对鲍叔再拜，说； 如果我和各位大夫能都不忘记您说的话，那么齐国的江山也许就不危险了！ 
English: When Huan Gong left the table, he bowed to Uncle Bao and said, "If I and all the doctors can not forget what you said, then the country of Qi may not be dangerous!"

古文：当此时也，桓公可与言极言矣。
现代文：在这个时候，桓公是可以尽情进言的了。
English: At this time, Emperor Kan was able to speak freely.

古文：可与言极言，故可与为霸。
现代文：正因为可以尽情进言，所以可以跟他一起成就霸业。
English: It is precisely because you can talk as much as you like that you can achieve dominance with him.

古文：荆文王得茹黄之狗，宛路之矰，以畋于云梦，三月不反。
现代文：楚文王得到茹黄之狗和宽路之箭，就用它们到云梦泽打猎，三个月不回来。
English: When King Chu Wen obtained the Dog of Zhu Huang and the Arrow of Broad Way, he used them to go hunting in Yunmenze and did not return for three months.

古文：得丹之姬，淫，期年不听朝。
现代文：得到丹地的美女，纵情女色，整整一年不上朝听政。
English: Got the beauty of Dandi, indulged in womanly pleasures, and did not go to the court to listen to politics for a whole year.

古文：葆申曰: 先王卜以臣为葆，吉。
现代文：葆申说： 先王占卜让我做太葆，卦象吉利。
English: Zou Shen said: The forefather's fortune-telling let me do too many things, such as good luck.

古文：今王得茹黄之狗，宛路之矰，畋三月不反；得丹之姬，淫，期年不听朝。
现代文：如今您得到如黄之狗和宛路之箭，前去打猎，三个月不回来。得到丹地的美女，纵情女色，一年不上朝听政。
English: Now you get the golden dog and the arrow of destiny, go hunting and don't come back for three months, get a beautiful woman, indulge in sex, and don't go to the government for a year.

古文：王之罪当笞。 
现代文：您的罪应该施以鞭刑。 
English: You should be flogged for your crime.

古文：王曰： 不穀免衣襁褓而齿于诸侯，愿请变更而无笞。 
现代文：文王说： 我从离开襁褓就列位于诸侯，请您换一种刑法，不要鞭打我。 
English: King Wen said: I have been ranked as a vassal since I left the palace. Please change the criminal law and don't whip me.

古文：葆申曰： 臣承先王之令，不敢废也。
现代文：葆申说； 我敬受先王之命，不敢废弃。
English: I respectfully accept the former king's order, and I dare not abandon it.

古文：王不受笞，是废先王之令也。
现代文：您不接受鞭刑，这是我废弃了先王之命。
English: You do not accept the punishment of whipping. This is my abrogation of the former king's order.

古文：臣宁抵罪于王，毋抵罪于先王。 
现代文：我宁可获罪于您，不能获罪于先王。 
English: I would rather be accused by you than by the late king.

古文：王曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：文王说： 遵命。 
English: King Wen said, "I will obey your order."

古文：引席，王伏。
现代文：于是葆申拉过席子，文王伏在上面。
English: So Gong Shen pulled over the mat, and Wen Wang fell down on it.

古文：葆申束细荆五十，跪而加之于背，如此者再，谓王： 起矣！ 
现代文：葆申把五十根细荆条捆在一起，跪着放在文王的背上，再拿起来。
English: Xun Shen tied fifty thin strips of thorns together, knelt down and placed them on King Wen's back, and then picked him up.

古文：王曰： 有笞之名一也，遂致之！ 
现代文：这样反复做了两次，对文王说： 请您起来吧！ 文王说。 同样是有了受鞭刑的名声，索性真的打我一顿吧！ 
English: He did this repeatedly twice and said to King Wen, "Please get up!" King Wen said, "I also have a reputation for being whipped, so why don't you really give me a beating!"

古文：申曰： 臣闻君子耻之，小人痛之。
现代文：葆申说： 我听说，对于君子，要使他心里感到羞耻，对于小人，要让他皮内觉得疼痛。
English: Xun Shen said: I have heard that for a gentleman, you should make him feel ashamed in his heart, and for a villain, you should make him feel pain in his skin.

古文：耻之不变，痛之何益？ 
现代文：如果让他感到羞耻仍不能改正，那么让他觉得疼痛又有什么用处？ 
English: What's the use of making him feel pain if he can't be corrected by making him feel shame?

古文：葆申趣出，自流于渊，请死罪。
现代文：葆申说完，快步离开了朝廷，自行流放到澡渊边上，请求文王治自己死罪。
English: After he finished speaking, he left the imperial court at a fast pace, exiled himself to the edge of the bath, and asked King Wen to sentence him to death.

古文：文王曰： 此不穀之过也，葆申何罪？ 
现代文：文王说； 这是我的过错，葆申有什么罪？ 
English: King Wen said, "It's my fault. What's the crime?"

古文：王乃变更，召葆申，杀茹黄之狗，析宛路之矰，放丹之姬。
现代文：于是改弦更张，召回葆申，杀了茹黄之狗，折了宛路之箭，打发了丹地的美女。
English: So he changed his mind, recalled Gong Shen, killed Zhu Huang's dog, broke the arrow of the destination, and sent away the beauty of Dandong.

古文：后荆国兼国三十九。
现代文：后来楚国兼并了三十九个国家。
English: Later, Chu annexed thirty-nine countries.

古文：令荆国广大至于此者，葆申之力也，极言之功也。
现代文：使楚国疆土广阔到这种程度，这是葆申的力量，是直言劝谏的功效。
English: To make the territory of Chu so vast to such an extent is the power of Zhu Xun and the effectiveness of his frank persuasion.

古文：三曰：夫以勇事人者，以死也。
现代文：知化以勇力侍奉别人的人，也就是以死侍奉别人。
English: Those who serve others with courage are those who serve others with death.

古文：未死而言死，不论。以虽知之，与勿知同。
现代文：勇士没有死的时候谈论以死侍奉别人，人们不会了解，等到勇士真的死了以后，人们虽然已经了解了他，但为时已晚，和不了解是一样的。
English: When a warrior does not die, people do not understand when he talks about serving others with his death. When a warrior really dies, people understand him, but it is too late, and it is the same as not understanding.

古文：凡智之贵也，贵知化也。
现代文：太凡智慧的可贵，就贵在能事先察知事物的变化上。
English: The value of great wisdom lies in the ability to anticipate changes in the situation.

古文：人主之惑者则不然。化未至则不知；化已至，虽知之，与勿知一贯也。
现代文：君主中的胡涂人却不是这样的，变化没有到来时惜然无知，变化出现之后，虽然知道了却又为时已晚，和不知道是一样的。
English: But it is not so with the fools among princes, who, when the change does not come, are as ignorant as if they had not known it, and when the change comes, they know it but it is too late, and they do not know it.

古文：事有可以过者，有不可以过者。
现代文：事情有些是可以失误的，有些是不可以失误的。
English: Some things are fallible, some are not.

古文：而身死国亡，则胡可以过？
现代文：对于会导致身死国亡的大事，怎么能够失误呢！
English: How can you make a mistake about something so important that will lead to the death of a nation!

古文：此贤主之所重，惑主之所轻也。
现代文：这是贤明的君主所重视的，胡涂的君主所轻忽的。
English: This is what wise monarchs value, and what foolish monarchs neglect.

古文：所轻，国恶得不危？身恶得不困？
现代文：轻忽这一点，国家怎么能不危险，自身怎么能不困厄？
English: Neglecting this, how can the country not be in danger, how can it not be in trouble?

古文：危困之道，身死国亡，在于不先知化也。
现代文：行于危险困厄之道，遭致身死国亡，在于不能事先察知事物的发展变化。
English: It is not possible to detect the development and change of things in advance.

古文：吴王夫差是也。
现代文：吴王夫差就是这样。
English: That's how bad Wu Wangfu is.

古文：子胥非不先知化也，谏而不听，故吴为丘墟，祸及阖庐。
现代文：伍子胥并不是事先没有察知事物的变化，但他劝谏夫差而夫差不听，所以吴国成为废墟，殃及先君阖庐。
English: It is not that Wu Zixuan did not notice the change of the situation in advance, but he advised the husband to be bad and the husband did not listen, so the state of Wu became a ruin, which affected the former ruler.

古文：吴王夫差将伐齐，子胥曰： 不可。
现代文：吴王夫差要伐齐国，伍子胥说： 不行。
English: Wu Wangfu wanted to invade Qi, but Wu Zixuan said, "No."

古文：夫齐之与吴也，习俗不同，言语不通，我得其地不能处，得其民不得使。
现代文：齐国和吴国习俗不同，言语不同，即使我们得到齐国的土地也不能居住，得到齐国的百姓也不能役使。
English: The customs of Qi and Wu are different, and their languages are different. Even if we get the land of Qi, we can't live there, and if we get the people of Qi, we can't serve them.

古文：夫吴之与越也，接土邻境，壤交道属，习俗同，言语通，我得其地能处之，得其民能使之。
现代文：而吴国和越国疆土毗邻，田地交错，道路相连，习俗一样，言语相通。我们得到越国的土地能够居住，得到越国的百姓能够役使。
English: On the other hand, the territory of Wu and Yue is adjacent, the fields are interlaced, the roads are connected, the customs are the same, and the languages are the same. We can live in the land of Yue and serve the people of Yue.

古文：越于我亦然。
现代文：越国对于我国也是如此。
English: Viet Nam is the same for our country.

古文：夫吴越之势不两立。
现代文：吴越两国从情势上看不能并存。
English: From the perspective of the situation, the two countries of Wu and Yue cannot coexist.

古文：越之于吴也，譬若心腹之疾也，虽无作，其伤深而在内也。
现代文：越国对于吴国如同心腹之疾，即使一时没有发作，但它造成的伤害严重而且处于体内。
English: For Wu, Yue is like a disease of the heart. Even if it does not attack for a while, the damage it causes is serious and in the body.

古文：夫齐之于吴也，疥癣之病也，不苦其已也，且其无伤也。
现代文：而齐国对于吴国只是癣疥之疾，不愁治不好，再说治不好也没什么妨害。
English: However, for Wu, Qi is just a lingering illness, which can be cured, and moreover, the cure is not a hindrance.

古文：今释越而伐齐，譬之犹惧虎而刺猏，虽胜之，其后患未央。 
现代文：现在舍弃越国去进攻齐国，这就象担心虎患却去猎杀野猪一样，虽然可能获胜，但后患无穷。 
English: Abandoning Yue Province to attack Qi Province now is like hunting wild boars while worrying about tigers. Although it is possible to win, the consequences are endless.

古文：太宰嚭曰： 不可。
现代文：太宰豁说： 伍子胥的话不可听信。
English: Dazai Hakuin said: Wu Zixuan's words cannot be trusted.

古文：君王之令所以不行于上国者，齐、晋也。
现代文：君王您的命令所以不能推行到中原各国，就是由于齐晋的缘故。
English: The reason why Your Majesty's order cannot be implemented in the Central Plains countries is because of Qi Jin.

古文：君王若伐齐而胜之，徙其兵以临晋，晋必听命矣。
现代文：君王如果进攻齐国弗战胜它，然后移兵，以大军压晋国国境，晋国一定会俯首听命。
English: If the monarch attacks Qi Guofu and defeats it, and then moves troops to suppress the border of Jin with a large army, Jin will certainly bow down and obey.

古文：是君王一举而服两国也，君王之令必行于上国。 
现代文：这是君王一举降服两个国家啊！这样，君王的命令一定可以在中原各国推行。 
English: This is the emperor's surrender of two countries in one fell swoop! In this way, the emperor's order can certainly be implemented in the Central Plains countries.

古文：夫差以为然，不听子胥之言，而用太宰嚭之谋。
现代文：夫差认为太宰豁说得对，不听从子胥的意见，而采用了太宰船的计谋。
English: Fuzha thought that Dazaifu was right, and did not listen to Ziqun's opinion, but adopted Dazaifu's strategy.

古文：子胥曰： 天将亡吴矣，则使君王战而胜；天将不亡吴矣，则使君王战而不胜。 
现代文：伍子胥说； 上天如果想要灭亡吴国的话，就会让君王打胜仗；上天如果不想灭亡吴国的话，就会让君王打不了胜仗。 
English: Wu Zixuan said that if Heaven wanted to destroy the State of Wu, it would let the king win the war; if Heaven did not want to destroy the State of Wu, it would not let the king win the war.

古文：夫差不听。
现代文：夫差不听。
English: Husbands don't listen.

古文：子胥两袪高蹶而出于廷，曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：伍子胥提起衣服，迈着大步从朝廷中走了出去，说： 唉！
English: Wu Zixuan picked up his clothes and strode out of the court, saying, "Alas!

古文：吴朝必生荆棘矣！ 
现代文：吴国的朝廷一定耍生荆棘了！ 
English: The imperial court of the State of Wu must have been playing with thorns!

古文：夫差兴师伐齐，战于艾陵，大败齐师，反而诛子胥。
现代文：夫整兴兵伐齐，和齐军在艾陵交战，把齐军打得大败。回来以后就杀伍子胥。
English: Her husband Zhengxing led his troops to fight against the Qi army in Ailing, defeating the Qi army. After returning, he killed Wu Zihong.

古文：子胥将死，曰： 与！吾安得一目以视越人之入吴也？ 
现代文：伍子胥说； 我怎么才能留下一只眼睛看着越军入吴呢？ 
English: Wu Zixuan said; How can I keep an eye on the Vietnamese army entering Wu?

古文：乃自杀。
现代文：说完就自杀了。
English: He killed himself.

古文：夫差乃取其身而流之江，抉其目，著之东门，曰： 女胡视越人之入我也？ 
现代文：夫差把他的尸体投到江中冲走，把他的眼睛挖出来挂在国都的东门，说： 你怎么能看到越军侵入我的吴国？ 
English: The husband sent his body into the river to be washed away, dug out his eyes and hung them on the east gate of the capital, saying: "How can you see the Vietnamese invading my Wu country?

古文：居数年，越报吴，残其国，绝其世，灭其社稷，夷其宗庙，夫差身为禽。
现代文：过了几年，越人报复吴国，攻破了吴国的国都，灭绝了吴国的世系，毁灭了吴国的社稷，夷平了吴国的宗庙，夫差本人也被活捉。
English: A few years later, the Viets retaliated against the State of Wu, broke through the capital of the State of Wu, exterminated the lineage of the State of Wu, destroyed the social order of the State of Wu, razed the ancestral temple of the State of Wu, and Houcha himself was also captured alive.

古文：夫差将死，曰： 死者如有知也，吾何面以见子胥于地下？ 
现代文：夫差临死时说； 死人如果有知的话，我在地下有什么脸面见子胥呢？ 
English: My husband said on his deathbed, "If the dead know, what right do I have to see my son under the ground?"

古文：乃为幎以冒面死。
现代文：于是用巾盖上睑自杀了。
English: He then covered himself with a towel and committed suicide.

古文：夫患未至，则不可告也；患既至，虽知之无及矣。
现代文：胡涂的君主，祸患还没有到来时无法使他明白；祸患到来以后，他们虽然明白过来也来不及了。
English: Foolish princes cannot understand before the calamity comes; after the calamity comes, it is too late for them to understand.

古文：故夫差之知惭于子胥也，不若勿知。
现代文：所以夫差死到临头才知道愧对伍子胥，这种知道就还不如不知道。
English: Therefore, my husband almost died before he knew that he was ashamed of Wu Zixuan. This knowledge is not as good as not knowing.

古文：四曰：亡国之主一贯。
现代文：过理亡国的君主都是一样的。
English: The monarchs of overthrown countries are all the same.

古文：天时虽异，其事虽殊，所以亡者同，乐不适也。
现代文：天时虽然各异，行事虽然不同，但他们灭亡的原因相同，都是把不合礼义当作快乐。
English: Though the times were different, though their actions were different, they all perished for the same reason: they all took pleasure in being impolite.

古文：乐不适则不可以存。
现代文：把不合礼义当作快乐，就不能存在。
English: If you treat rudeness as a pleasure, you can't exist.

古文：糟丘酒池，肉圃为格，雕柱而梏诸侯，不适也。刑鬼侯之女而取其环，截涉者胫而视其髓，杀梅伯而遗文王其醢，不适也。
现代文：商纣设置糟丘、酒池、肉圃、炮格，铸造铜柱以虐害诸侯，杀死鬼侯的女儿摘取她的玉环，截断涉水者的小腿观看他的骨髓，这是不合礼义的。杀害梅伯，把用他的尸体制作的内酱送给文王，这是不合礼义的。
English: It is impolite for merchants to set up dungeons, wine pits, meat pits, and cannon emplacements, to cast copper pillars to abuse lords, to kill a ghost lord's daughter and take her jade ring, to cut off a wader's shin and look at his bone marrow, and to kill Mei Bo and give his body to King Wen to make jellied bean paste.

古文：作为琁室，筑为顷宫，剖孕妇而观其化，杀比干而视其心，不适也。
现代文：文王表面接受下来，暗中把它告诉了其他诸侯。建造璇室，修筑顷宫，刨开孕妇之腹观看她的胎儿，杀死比干观看他的心脏，这是不合礼义的。
English: King Wen accepted it on the surface, and secretly told it to other princes. It is not polite to build a chamber, build a palace, open the belly of a pregnant woman to see her fetus, and kill Bi Gan to see his heart.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 其窍通则比干不死矣。 
现代文：孔子听到商纣的暴行，说： 他的心窍如果通达，比干就不会被杀了。 
English: When Confucius heard of Shangguan's atrocities, he said, "If his mind were enlightened, he would not have been killed."

古文：夏、商之所以亡也。
现代文：这是商纣灭亡的原因。
English: This is the reason for the demise of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：晋灵公无道，从上弹人，而观其避丸也。
现代文：晋灵公暴虐无道，从高处用弹弓射人，看人怎样躲避弹丸。
English: The tyrannical Jinling Gong shoots people from a height with a slingshot to see how they can dodge the projectile.

古文：使宰人臑熊蹯，不熟，杀之，令妇人载而过朝以示威，不适也。
现代文：让厨师煮熊掌，熊掌没有煮熟，就把厨师杀死，命令妇人用车子拉着尸体从朝廷中经过，借以显示淫威。赵盾多次劝谏也不听。
English: He asked the cook to boil the bear's paws, and when the paws were not cooked, he killed the cook and ordered the woman to pull the corpse through the imperial court in a carriage, thereby showing her power. Zhao Dun did not listen to his repeated persuasions.

古文：赵盾骤谏而不听，公恶之，乃使沮麛。沮麛见之不忍贼，曰： 不忘恭敬，民之主也。
现代文：灵公厌恶赵盾，就派沮麑去刺杀他。沮麑看到赵盾，不忍心杀他，说： 时刻不忘恭谨，这是百姓的主宰啊！
English: Ling Gong disliked Zhao Dun, so he sent De Di to assassinate him. De Di saw Zhao Dun and could not bear to kill him, saying, "Always remember to be respectful, this is the ruler of the people!"

古文：贼民之主，不忠；弃君之命，不信。
现代文：杀害百姓的主宰，这是对百姓的不忠！抛弃国君的命令，这是对国君不守信用。
English: A ruler who kills the people is disloyal to the people! Abandoning the orders of the sovereign is a breach of trust to the sovereign.

古文：一于此，不若死。 
现代文：两条中有一条，就不如死了好。 
English: If it's one of the two, it's better to die.

古文：乃触廷槐而死。
现代文：于是就在院中槐树上撞死了。
English: As a result, he crashed into a birch tree in the courtyard and died.

古文：齐湣王亡居卫，谓公玉丹曰: 我何如主也？ 
现代文：齐湣王出亡，高居卫国，对公玉丹说， 我是怎样的一个君主呢？ 
English: King Qizhi, who had been exiled and was defending his country, said to Prince Yutang, "What kind of ruler am I?

古文：玉丹对曰： 王贤主也。
现代文：公玉丹回答说： 大王是个贤明的君主啊！
English: Prince Tamdan replied: "The great king is a wise monarch!"

古文：臣闻古人有辞天下而无恨色者，臣闻其声，于王而见其实。
现代文：我听说古时有人抛弃天下也没有憾色，从前我只是耳闻共名，今天在您身上才眼见其实。
English: I heard that in ancient times, there was no regret when someone abandoned the world. In the past, I only heard the common name, but today I can see it with my own eyes.

古文：王名称东帝，实辨天下。去国居卫，容貌充满，颜色发扬，无重国之意。 
现代文：您名义上称为东帝，实际是平治天下，但离开齐国住到卫国以后，体貌丰盈，容光焕发，毫无舍不得国家的念头。 
English: You are nominally known as the East Emperor, but in reality you are the ruler of the world. However, after leaving Qi and living in the motherland, your body is plump, your face is radiant, and there is no reluctance to think about the country.

古文：王曰： 甚善！
现代文：湣王悦： 说得太好了！
English: Zhai Wangyue: That's great!

古文：丹知寡人。
现代文：还是公玉丹了解我呀！
English: Even Prince Yudan understands me!

古文：寡人自去国居卫也，带益三副矣。 
现代文：我自从离开齐国到了卫国，衣带已经增加三倍了！ 
English: Since I left Qi Province and came to the motherland, I have tripled the number of belts!

古文：宋王筑为蘖帝，鸱夷血，高县之，射著甲胄，从下，血坠流地。
现代文：宋康王筑起高台，用大皮口袋盛上血，给它穿上铠甲头盔，高高地悬挂起来当作天帝，站在下迎射它，血一直流到地上。
English: Song Kang Wang built a high platform, filled it with blood with a large leather bag, put it on a armor helmet, hung it up high as a heavenly emperor, stood under it and shot it, and the blood flowed all the way to the ground.

古文：左右皆贺曰： 王之贤过汤、武矣。
现代文：他的左右侍从都祝贺说； 您的贤明超过商汤和周武王了！
English: His attendants on both sides congratulated him, saying, "Your wisdom surpasses that of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang!"

古文：汤、武胜人，今王胜天，贤不可以加矣。 
现代文：商汤周武只能胜人，如今您却能胜天，您的贤明无法超越了！ 
English: Shangtang Zhouwu can only beat people, but now you can beat the heavens, your wisdom cannot be surpassed!

古文：宋王大说，饮酒。
现代文：宋康王非常高兴，于是设宴饮酒。
English: Song Kang Wang was very happy, so he held a banquet and drank alcohol.

古文：室中有呼万岁者，堂上尽应；堂上已应，堂下尽应；门外庭中闻之，莫敢不应。
现代文：室中有人喊万岁，堂上的人都应和。堂上一应和，堂下的人也都应和，门外和院中的人听到了，没有一个人敢不应和。
English: Someone in the room shouted, "Long live!" and everyone in the hall responded in unison. Everyone in the hall responded in unison, and everyone below also responded in unison. People outside the door and in the courtyard heard it, and no one dared not respond in unison.

古文：不适也。
现代文：这是不合礼义的。
English: It's not polite.

古文：五曰：亡国之主不可以直言。
现代文：壅塞亡国的君主，不可直言相谏。
English: A monarch who is trying to prevent his country's downfall must not be outspoken.

古文：不可以直言，则过无道闻，而善无自至矣。
现代文：君主不可直言相谏，过失就无法听到，贤人就无从到来。
English: Princes cannot speak with one another, nor can errors be heard, nor can wise men come.

古文：无自至则壅。
现代文：贤人无从到来，君主的思想就会壅塞不通。
English: When a wise man comes from nowhere, the monarch's thoughts will be blocked.

古文：秦缪公时，戎强大。
现代文：秦穆公时，戎人势力强大。
English: During the Qin and Mu Dynasties, the eunuchs were very powerful.

古文：秦缪公遗之女乐二八与良宰焉。
现代文：秦穆公就送给他们两队女子歌舞队和一些高明的厨师，戎王十分高兴。
English: Qin Mu gave them two teams of women's singing and dancing teams and some skilled chefs. Emperor Rong was very happy.

古文：戎王大喜，以其故数饮食，日夜不休。
现代文：因为这个缘故，不管白天黑夜不停地大吃大喝。
English: Because of this, they eat and drink incessantly, day and night.

古文：左右有言秦寇之至者，因扜弓而射之。
现代文：身边有谁说秦军将会到来，戎王就开弓射他。
English: If anyone around him said that the Qin army would come, the Emperor would shoot him with a bow.

古文：秦寇果至，戎王醉而卧于樽下，卒生缚而禽之。
现代文：后来秦军果然到了，这时戎王正喝得大酵躺在酒尊下面睡觉，结果被秦军活活地捆起来捉住了。
English: Later, the Qin army did indeed arrive. At that time, King Rong, who had drunk too much wine, was sleeping under the god of wine. As a result, he was tied up and captured alive by the Qin army.

古文：未禽则不可知，已禽则又不知。
现代文：戎王被捉以前，不可能使他知道将会被捉；就是被捉以后，自己还睡在梦中，仍然不知道已经被捉。
English: Before he was caught, it was impossible for him to know that he would be caught; even after he was caught, he was still sleeping in a dream and still did not know that he had been caught.

古文：虽善说者，犹若此何哉？
现代文：对于这种人，即使是善于劝谏的人又有什么办法呢？
English: For this kind of person, even if you are good at persuasion, what can you do?

古文：齐攻宋，宋王使人候齐寇之所至。
现代文：齐国进攻宋国，宋王派人去侦察齐军到了什么地方。
English: When Qi attacked Song, King Song sent someone to investigate where the Qi army had gone.

古文：使者还，曰： 齐寇近矣，国人恐矣。 
现代文：派去的人回来说： 齐寇已经临近了，国人已经恐慌了。 
English: The person who was sent came back and said, "The earthquake is already approaching, and the people of our country are already panicking.

古文：左右皆谓宋王曰： 此所谓 肉自生虫 者也。
现代文：左右近臣都对宋王说： 这完全是俗话说的 肉自己生出蛆虫 啊！
English: All the courtiers around him said to King Song, "This is just like the saying, 'The flesh itself produces maggots!'"

古文：以宋之强，齐兵之弱，恶能如此？ 
现代文：凭着宋国的强大，齐兵的虚弱，怎么可能这样？ 
English: With the strength of Song and the weakness of Qi, how is this possible?

古文：宋王因怒而诎杀之。
现代文：于是宋王大怒，把派去的人屈杀了。
English: As a result, King Song flew into a rage and killed the person who had been sent.

古文：又使人往视齐寇，使者报如前，宋王又怒诎杀之。
现代文：接着又派人去察看，派去的人的回报仍象前一个人一样，宋王又大怒，把他屈杀了。
English: Then he sent another person to investigate, but the person he sent returned the same answer as the previous person. King Song was furious again and had him killed.

古文：如此者三，其后又使人往视。
现代文：这样的事接连发生了三次，之后又派人去察看。
English: This happened three times in succession, after which someone was sent to investigate.

古文：齐寇近矣，国人恐矣。
现代文：其实，那时齐军确实已经临近了，国人确实已经恐慌了。
English: In fact, at that time, the Qi army had indeed approached, and the Chinese people had indeed panicked.

古文：使者遇其兄，曰: 国危甚矣，若将安适？ 
现代文：派去的人路上遇见了他的哥哥。他的哥哥说； 国家已经十分危险了，你还要到哪儿去？ 
English: The dispatch met his brother on the road. His brother said; The country is already dangerous enough, where else are you going?

古文：其弟曰： 为王视齐寇。
现代文：弟弟说； 去替君主察看齐寇。
English: My brother said, "Go and look at Zico for the sovereign."

古文：不意其近而国人恐如此也。
现代文：没想到齐寇已经离得这么近，国人已经这么恐慌。
English: I didn't expect Zico to be so close and the Chinese people to be in such a panic.

古文：今又私患，乡之先视齐寇者，皆以寇之近也报而死；今也报其情，死，不报其情，又恐死。
现代文：现在我担心的是，先前察看齐军动静的人，都是因为回报齐军迫近被屈杀了。如今我回报真情是死，不回报真情恐怕也是一死。
English: What worries me now is that the people who observed the movements of the Qi army in the past were all killed in retaliation for the Qi army's impending surrender. Now I return the truth is death, and if I don't return the truth, I'm afraid I'll die.

古文：将若何？ 
现代文：这该怎么办呢？ 
English: What is to be done?

古文：其兄曰： 如报其情，有且先夫死者死，先夫亡者亡。 
现代文：他的哥哥说： 如果回报真情，你又将比国破后被杀和逃亡的人先遭受灾难。 
English: His brother said: If you return true feelings, you will suffer disaster before those who were killed and fled after the collapse of the country.

古文：于是报于王曰： 殊不知齐寇之所在，国人甚安。 
现代文：于是派击的人回报宋王说； 根本没看到齐寇在哪里，国人也非常安定。 
English: As a result, the person who sent the attack replied to Song Wang that he did not see where Zico was at all, and the Chinese people were very stable.

古文：王大喜。
现代文：宋王十分高兴。
English: Song Wang was very happy.

古文：左右皆曰： 乡之死者宜矣。 
现代文：左右近臣都说： 可见先前被杀的人是该杀了。 
English: His close advisers on both sides said, "It can be seen that the person who was killed before should be killed."

古文：王多赐之金。
现代文：宋王就赏赐这个人大量钱财。
English: King Song rewarded this man with a large amount of money.

古文：寇至，王自投车上，驰而走，此人得以富于他国。
现代文：齐军一到，宋王自己己奔到车上，赶着车飞跑，急急忙忙逃命去了，这个人得以徒居他国，生活非常富足。
English: As soon as the Qi army arrived, Song Wang himself ran to the car, drove the car, and hurriedly fled for his life. This person was able to live in another country, and his life was very rich.

古文：夫登山而视牛若羊，视羊若豚。
现代文：登上高山往下看，就会觉得牛象羊一样，羊象小猪一样。
English: If you climb a high mountain and look down, you will feel that cows are like sheep, and sheep are like piglets.

古文：牛之性不若羊，羊之性不若豚，所自视之势过也。
现代文：牛实际上不象羊那样小，羊实际上不象小猪那样小，之所以觉得它们象羊或小猪一样，是因为观察它们时站的地势不对。
English: Cows are actually not as small as sheep, and sheep are actually not as small as piglets. The reason why they feel like sheep or piglets is because they stand in the wrong position when they are observed.

古文：而因怒于牛羊之小也，此狂夫之大者。
现代文：如果因此对牛羊这样小而发怒，这种人可算是头等的征夫。
English: If, as a result, he gets angry at such small things as cows and sheep, such a person can be considered a first-class recruiter.

古文：狂而以行赏罚，此戴氏之所以绝也。
现代文：在狂乱状态下施行赏罚，这是宋国所以灭绝的原因。
English: Reward and punishment were carried out in a frantic state, which was the reason for the extinction of the Song Dynasty.

古文：齐王欲以淳于髡傅太子，髡辞曰： 臣不肖，不足以当此大任也，王不若择国之长者而使之。 
现代文：齐王想用淳于髡为太子的老师，淳于髡推辞说： 我才德低下，不足以担当这样的重任，您不如挑选国中德高望重的人予以委派。 
English: King Qi wanted to use the excuse of Junyuxuan, who was the prince's teacher, saying, "I am of low moral character, and I am not good enough to take on such an important task. It would be better for you to choose someone who is highly respected in the country."

古文：齐王曰： 子无辞也。
现代文：齐王说： 你不要推辞了。
English: King Qi said, "Don't refuse."

古文：寡人岂责子之令太子必如寡人也哉？
现代文：我哪能要求你让太子一定象我一样呢！
English: How can I ask you to make the crown prince like me!

古文：寡人固生而有之也。
现代文：我的贤德本来是天生就具备的。
English: I was born with my virtues.

古文：子为寡人令太子如尧乎？其如舜也？ 
现代文：你替我把太子教得象尧那样，或者象舜那样就行了。 
English: All you have to do is teach the prince to be like a dragonfly, or like a tadpole.

古文：凡说之行也，道不智听智，从自非受是也。
现代文：凡是臣下的主张得以实行，都是因为君主能够从自以为愚的认识出发去听从别人高明的见解，能够从自以为非的认识出发去接受别人正确的意见。
English: All the claims of subjects are implemented because the sovereign can listen to the high-level opinions of others from the perspective of self-deception, and can accept the correct opinions of others from the perspective of self-deception.

古文：今自以贤过于尧舜，彼且胡可以开说哉？
现代文：现在齐王自以为贤明超过了尧舜，这还怎么让人对他陈说劝谏呢？
English: Now that King Qi thought he was wiser than the emperors, how could anyone advise him?

古文：说必不入，不闻存君。
现代文：对臣下的劝谏如果一点也听不进去，没听说过这样的君主还能享有国家的。
English: If he does not listen to the advice of his subjects at all, I have never heard of such a monarch who can still enjoy the country.

古文：齐宣王好射，说人之谓己能用强弓也。
现代文：齐宣王爱好射箭，喜欢别人说自己能用硬弓。
English: Qi Xuanwang likes archery and likes it when others say he can use a hard bow.

古文：其尝所用不过三石，以示左右，左右皆试引之，中关而止。皆曰： 此不下九石，非王其孰能用是？ 
现代文：他平时所使用的弓力量不过三石，拿给左右侍从看，侍从们试着拉这张弓，都只拉到一半就停了下来，说： 这张弓的弓力不低于九石，除了您，谁还能用这样的弓！ 
English: The strength of the bow he usually used was only three stones. He showed it to the attendants on his right and left. The attendants tried to pull the bow, but they only pulled it halfway and stopped, saying, "This bow's strength is no less than nine stones. Who else can use a bow like this but you!"

古文：宣王之情，所用不过三石，而终身自以为用九石，岂不悲哉！
现代文：宣王的实际情况是所用的弓不超过三石，但一辈子都自认为用的弓是九石，这岂不可悲吗！
English: The actual situation of proclaiming the king is that the bow used does not exceed three stones, but all his life he thinks that the bow used is nine stones. Isn't that sad!

古文：非直士其孰能不阿主？
现代文：除了正直之士，还有谁能不奉迎君主？
English: Who but an honest man would fail to salute a monarch?

古文：世之直士，其寡不胜众，数也。
现代文：世上的正直之士寡不敌众，这是情势注定的。
English: The honest men of the world are few and far between, and that is as it should be.

古文：故乱国之主，患存乎用三石为九石也。
现代文：所以给国家造成祸乱的君主，他们的弊病就在于用的弓实有三石而自以为用九石啊！
English: Therefore, the evil of the monarchs who have brought disaster to the country lies in the fact that they use a bow that actually has three stones, while they think they use nine stones!

古文：六曰：乱必有弟。
现代文：原乱祸乱一定按等次顺序而至。
English: The original chaos and the calamity must come in the same order.

古文：大乱五，小乱三，䚯乱三。
现代文：大乱多次发生以后，还会有数次小乱，然后经过数次讨乱，祸乱才能平息。
English: After many times of great turmoil, there will be several small riots, and then after several riots, the calamity can be calmed down.

古文：故《诗》曰 毋过乱门 ，所以远之也。
现代文：所以古诗中说 不要从作乱者门前经过 ，这是远离祸乱的方法。
English: That's why the ancient poem says, "Do not pass in front of the troublemaker's door," which is a way to stay away from evil.

古文：虑福未及，虑祸过之，所以完之也。
现代文：对福祉宁可估计不足，对灾祸宁可估计过分，这是保全自身的方法。
English: It is a method of self-preservation to under-estimate one's well-being and overestimate one's misfortune.

古文：武王以武得之，以文持之，倒戈弛弓，示天下不用兵，所以守之也。
现代文：武王以武力得天下，以文德治天下，倒置干戈，松开弓弦，向天下表示不再用兵，这是保有天下的方法。
English: King Wu won the world by force, ruled the world by virtue, reversed the war, loosened the bowstring, and said to the world that he would no longer use soldiers. This is the way to keep the world.

古文：晋献公立骊姬以为夫人，以奚齐为太子。
现代文：晋献公立骊姬为夫人，以奚齐为太子。
English: Jin Xian gave his wife, the public Qian Ji, and crowned Qian Qi as the crown prince.

古文：里克率国人以攻杀之。
现代文：献公刚死，里克就率领同人攻杀了奚齐。
English: Shortly after the death of Xian Gong, Rick led his followers to attack and kill Lu Qi.

古文：荀息立其弟公子卓。
现代文：苟息又立奚齐的弟弟公子卓为君。
English: On his deathbed, his younger brother, Koji Taku, who was also a member of the Shinsengumi, became the new shogun.

古文：已葬，里克又率国人攻杀之。
现代文：安葬献公子卓，里克又率领国人攻杀了公子卓。
English: Rick led his countrymen to attack and kill Koji Zhuo.

古文：于是晋无君。公子夷吾重赂秦以地而求入，秦缪公率师以纳之。
现代文：这时晋国莫有君主，公子夷吾拿土地给秦国送厚礼，以求回国为君。秦穆公带领军队把他送入晋国。
English: At this time, there was no monarch in Jin. The prince sent a gift of land to Qin in order to return to the country. Qin Mu Gong led the army to send him to Jin.

古文：晋人立以为君，是为惠公。
现代文：晋人直赴吾为国君，这就是惠公。
English: Jin people go straight to me as the sovereign, this is the benefit.

古文：惠公既定于晋，背秦德而不予地。
现代文：惠公在晋国安定下来以后，背弃秦国之恩，不给秦国土地。
English: After Huigong settled down in Jin, he betrayed the kindness of Qin and refused to give land to Qin.

古文：秦缪公率师攻晋，晋惠公逆之，与秦人战于韩原。
现代文：素穆公率领军队进攻晋国，晋惠公迎做敌，与秦军战于韩原。
English: Su Mu Gong led the army to attack Jin, and Jin Huigong welcomed him as an enemy and fought with the Qin army in Han Yuan.

古文：晋师大败，秦获惠公以归，囚之于灵台。
现代文：晋军大败，秦俘获晋惠公带回秦国，囚禁在灵台。
English: The Jin army suffered a crushing defeat, and Qin captured Jin Huigong and brought him back to Qin, imprisoning him in Lingdai.

古文：十月，乃与晋成，归惠公而质太子圉。
现代文：到了十月，才同晋媾和，释放惠公回国，而以他的太子圉为人质。
English: It was not until October that he made peace with Jin and released Huigong to return to China, taking his son, the crown prince, as a hostage.

古文：太子圉逃归也。
现代文：后来太子圉逃回晋国。
English: Later, the crown prince fled back to Jin.

古文：惠公死，圉立为君，是为怀公。
现代文：惠公死了，圉立为国君，这就是怀公。
English: Huigong died and stood up as the ruler of the country, which is called Huigong.

古文：秦缪公怒其逃归也，起奉公子重耳以攻怀公，杀之于高梁，而立重耳，是为文公。
现代文：泰穆公对圉逃归很恼怒，就扶植公子重耳，帮助他进攻怀公，把怀公杀死在高梁，立重耳为国君，这就是文公。
English: Lord Taimu was very angry with Zou's escape, so he supported the young man and helped him to attack Lord Huai, kill Lord Huai in Gaoliang, and make Lord Huai the ruler of the country. This is Lord Wen.

古文：文公施舍，振废滞，匡乏困，救灾患，禁淫慝，薄赋敛，宥罪戾，节器用，用民以时，败荆人于城濮，定襄王，释宋围，出谷戍，外内皆服，而后晋乱止。
现代文：文公施布德惠，举用被废黜的旧臣和长期不得进用的人，救助钱财匮乏生活困难的人，赈济遭受灾荒祸患的人，禁绝邪恶，减轻赋税，赦免罪犯，减省所用器物，按一定时令使役民众，在城濮打败楚军，安定周襄王的王位，为宋国解围，使戍守谷邑的楚军撤离，国外国内都很敬服，而后晋国祸乱才停息。
English: The civil magistrate bestowed bounties and favors, promoted the use of deposed former ministers and those who had not been able to work for a long time, helped those who were short of money and had difficulties in life, helped those who suffered from disasters and calamities, forbade evil, reduced taxes, pardoned criminals, reduced the utensils used, forced the people to work according to certain seasons, defeated the Chu army in Chenghuang, stabilized the throne of King Zhou Xiang, lifted the siege for the Song Dynasty, and caused the Chu army to withdraw from Gui. Both abroad and at home were very respectful, and then the disaster in Jin stopped.

古文：故献公听骊姬，近梁五、优施，杀太子申生，而大难随之者五，三君死，一君虏，大臣卿士之死者以百数，离咎二十年。
现代文：所以献公听信骊姬，宠幸梁五、优施，杀害太子申生，随之而来的大祸有五次，三个国君被杀，一个国君被俘，大臣卿士死于祸乱的数以百计，使晋国遭受灾祸二十年之久。
English: Therefore, he devoted himself to public service, listened to the advice of his empress Dowager Cixi, favored Liang Wu and You Shi, and killed the crown prince Shen Sheng. The ensuing calamity occurred five times, three sovereigns were killed, one sovereign was captured, and hundreds of ministers and nobles died from the calamity, causing Jin to suffer from the calamity for twenty years.

古文：自上世以来，乱未尝一。
现代文：从上古以来，祸乱从来没有只发生一次就停息的。
English: Since ancient times, the calamity has never occurred only once and then stopped.

古文：而乱人之患也，皆曰一而已，此事虑不同情也。
现代文：而作乱的人的弊病，正在于全都认为祸乱只发生一次就会停息。这是想法和事实不一致。
English: But the trouble with the troublemakers is that they all think that if the calamity happens only once, it will stop. This is a contradiction between thought and fact.

古文：事虑不同情者，心异也。
现代文：想法和事实不一致，都是由于思想不符合实际。
English: The inconsistency between ideas and facts is due to the fact that ideas do not correspond to reality.

古文：故凡作乱之人，祸希不及身。
现代文：所以凡是作乱的人，灾祸很少不降到自己身上。
English: Therefore it is that the mischief of them that make a tumult is seldom but upon themselves.

