古文：北狄契丹，本东胡种，其先为匈奴所破，保鲜卑山。
现代文：契丹，本是东胡族人，其祖先被匈奴所破，退保鲜卑山。
English: Khitan, originally from the Eastern Hu ethnic group, whose ancestors were defeated by the Huns, retreated to Bishan.

古文：魏青龙中，部酋比能稍桀骜，为幽州刺史王雄所杀，众遂微，逃潢水之南，黄龙之北。
现代文：魏时青龙年间，部落酋长比能稍有不驯，被幽州刺史王雄所杀，部落衰微，逃至潢水之南，黄龙之北。
English: During the Qinglong period of the Wei Dynasty, the tribal chief Bineng was a bit unruly and was killed by the Yuzhou chief Wang Xiong. The tribe declined and fled to the south of Surabaya and the north of Huanglong.

古文：至元魏，自号曰契丹。
现代文：至后魏时，自称契丹。
English: Later, during the Wei Dynasty, he called himself a Khitan.

古文：地直京师东北五千里而赢，东距高丽，西奚，南营州，北靺鞨、室韦，阻冷陉山以自固。
现代文：地处离京师东北五千多里。东接高丽，西连奚，南挨营州，北靠、室韦，以冷陉山为屏障自卫。
English: It is located more than 5,000 miles northeast of Beijing Division. It is connected to Goryeo in the east, Lianye in the west, Yingzhou in the south, Beiyang and Murowe in the north, and uses Lengyi Mountain as a barrier for self-defense.

古文：射猎居处无常。
现代文：逐猎往来，居无定处。
English: They come and go hunting, and they have no fixed abode.

古文：其君大贺氏，有胜兵四万，析八部，臣于突厥，以为俟斤。
现代文：其君长为大贺氏，有精兵四万，分为八部，臣事突厥，任职俟斤。
English: Its ruler was the Oga clan, with 40,000 elite soldiers, divided into eight parts, vassals of the Turks, and high-ranking officials.

古文：凡调发攻战，则诸部毕会；猎则部得自行。
现代文：凡有调发争战，各部会合；若是猎射，则各部分散行动。
English: Whenever there is a war, the ministries meet; when there is a hunt, the ministries disperse.

古文：与奚不平，每斗不利，辄遁保鲜卑山。
现代文：与奚不和，争战若不利就退守鲜卑山。
English: If the battle is unfavorable, they will retreat to Xianbei Mountain.

古文：风俗与突厥大抵略侔。
现代文：风俗与突厥大体相同。
English: Their customs are generally the same as those of the Turks.

古文：死不墓，以马车载尸入山，置于树颠。
现代文：人死不埋，用马车送入大山，将尸体放在树巅。
English: The dead are not buried, they are sent by horse-drawn carriage into the mountains, and the bodies are placed on the tops of trees.

古文：子孙死，父母旦夕哭；父母死则否，亦无丧期。
现代文：子孙死，父母早晚都哭悼；父母死，子孙不哭，也没有服丧期。
English: When a child or grandchild dies, the parents cry and mourn sooner or later; when a parent dies, the child or grandchild does not cry, and there is no mourning period.

古文：武德中，其大酋孙敖曹与靺鞨长突地稽俱遣人来朝，而君长或小入寇边。
现代文：武德年间，大酋长孙敖曹与君长突地稽都派人入朝，而君长们时有骚扰边境之事。
English: During the Wude era, the great chieftain Sun Xizhao and the monarchs sent people to the North, and the monarchs sometimes harassed the border.

古文：后二年，君长乃遣使者上名马、丰貂。
现代文：两年后，君长咄罗派使者来贡名马、丰貂。
English: Two years later, Emperor Qianlong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the famous horses and plentiful crops.

古文：贞观二年，摩会来降。
现代文：贞观二年，君长摩会来降。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Jun Changma would come down.

古文：突厥颉利可汗不欲外夷与唐合，乃请以梁师都易契丹。
现代文：突厥的颉利可汗不愿意外夷与唐和好，请求拿梁师都与契丹交换。
English: The Turkic Khari Khan was not willing to make peace with the Tang, and asked for the exchange of Liang Shidu with Qidan.

古文：太宗曰： 契丹、突厥不同类，今已降我，尚可索邪？
现代文：太宗说 ：契丹、突厥不同类。现在契丹已经降我了，怎么还可以索要？
English: Taizong said: Khitan and Turk are different. Now that Khitan has lowered me, how can I still ask for anything?

古文：师都，唐编户，盗我州部，突厥辄为助，我将禽之，谊不可易降者。 
现代文：师都，原是唐的编户，抢夺我的州部，突厥竟然容纳助他，我正准备擒拿他，决不可用他换降者。 
English: Shidu, who was originally Tang's accountant, robbed my prefecture. The Turks even accommodated and helped him. I am preparing to capture him. He must never be used to replace those who have surrendered.

古文：明年，摩会复入朝，赐鼓纛，由是有常贡。
现代文：第二年，摩会又入朝，皇帝赐他鼓纛，从此有例贡。
English: The next year, Mok-hui again entered the imperial court, and the emperor gave him a drum and gong. From then on, there was a tribute.

古文：帝伐高丽，悉发酋长与奚首领从军。
现代文：皇帝讨伐高丽，调发所有酋长与奚的首领从军。
English: The emperor attacked Goryeo, and sent all the chiefs and warlords to join the army.

古文：帝还，过营州，尽召其长窟哥及老人，差赐缯采，以窟哥为左武卫将军。
现代文：班师时，皇帝过营州，召集君长窟哥及老人等，分级赐给缯绸等物，委任窟哥为左武卫将军。
English: When he was a teacher, the emperor passed Yingzhou, called together the monarchs, grooms and old men, and gave them silk and other things, and appointed Groom to be the left guard general.

古文：大酋辱纥主曲据又率众归，即其部为玄州，拜曲据刺史，隶营州都督府。
现代文：大酋辱纥主曲据又率众归降。即列其部为玄州，委任曲据为刺史，隶属营州都督府。
English: The great chieftain humiliated and humiliated the principal Qu Zuo and led the people to surrender. Qu Zuo was immediately listed as Xuanzhou, and Qu Zuo was appointed as the chief historian and subordinated to Yingzhou Governor's Office.

古文：未几，窟哥举部内属，乃置松漠都督府，以窟哥为使持节十州诸军事、松漠都督，封无极男，赐氏李。
现代文：不久，窟哥全部都来归附，于是设置松漠都督府，委派窟哥为使掌管十州诸军事、松漠都督，封爵无极男，赐姓李氏。
English: Soon, all the caves were annexed, so the Songpan Governor's Office was set up, and Grotto was appointed to be in charge of the military of the ten states, the Songpan Governor, knighted, and given the surname Li.

古文：以达稽部为峭落州，纥便部为弹汗州，独活部为无逢州，芬问部为羽陵州，突便部为日连州，芮奚部为徒河州，坠斤部为万丹州，伏部为匹黎、赤山二州，俱隶松漠府，即以辱纥主为之刺史。
现代文：列达稽部为峭落州，纥便部为弹汗州，独活部为无逢州，芬问部为羽陵州，突便部为日连州，芮奚部为徒河州，坠斤部为万丹州，伏部为匹黎，赤山二州，都隶属松漠府，即任辱纥主为刺史。
English: Leda Division is Jiaoling Prefecture, Zou Division is Pinghan Province, Du Division is Mufeng Province, Fen Division is Hualing Province, Tucun Division is Jilian Province, Zou Division is Tuhe Province, Qianjin Division is Banten Province, Fubo Division is Pili Province, and the two prefectures of Qingshan Mountain are all under Songpan Prefecture, and the current head of the division is Zhishi.

古文：窟哥死，与奚连叛，行军总管阿史德枢宾等执松漠都督阿卜固献东都。
现代文：窟哥死，契丹与奚联手叛乱。行军总管阿史德枢宾等抓住松漠都督阿卜固献到东都。
English: After the death of Grotto Brother, Khitan and Zou jointly rebelled. The commander-in-chief of the marching troops, Ashide, and other officials seized the capital of Songpan, Abgu, and took it to the eastern capital.

古文：窟哥有二孙：曰枯莫离，为左卫将军、弹汗州刺史，封归顺郡王；曰尽忠，为武卫大将军、松漠都督。
现代文：窟哥有两个孙子：一叫枯莫离，任左卫将军、弹汗州刺史，封爵归顺郡王；一叫尽忠，任武卫大将军、松漠都督。
English: Grotto has two grandsons: one is named Ku Mo Yatong, appointed as General of the Left Division of the Guards, played the role of the Khan of the Khanate, knighted and became the King of the County of Shun; the other is named Zhenzhong, appointed as the General of the Guards, and the Governor of Songpan.

古文：而敖曹有孙曰万荣，为归诚州刺史。
现代文：契丹别部酋帅孙敖曹有个孙子叫万荣，任归诚州刺史。
English: Sun Ying Cao, the chief of the Khitan branch, had a grandson named Wan Rong, who was appointed to the position of the governor of Chengdu.

古文：于是营州都督赵文翙骄沓，数侵侮其下，尽忠等皆怨望。
现代文：那时，营州都督赵文岁羽骄且贪，多次侵侮下属，尽忠等人心中怨恨。
English: At that time, the governor of Yingzhou, Zhao Wenlian, was arrogant and greedy. He repeatedly abused his subordinates, and there was resentment in the hearts of those who were loyal.

古文：万荣本以侍子入朝，知中国险易，挟乱不疑，即共举兵，杀文翙，盗营州反。
现代文：孙万荣本是以侍子身份入朝的，了解中国的虚实，于是共同举兵杀了赵文岁羽，窃据营州谋反。
English: Sun Wan Rong had entered the imperial court as an attendant and knew the truth about China, so they jointly raised an army to kill Zhao Wenyu and plundered Yingzhou to plot a rebellion.

古文：尽忠自号无上可汗，以万荣为将，纵兵四略，所向辄下，不重浃，众数万，妄言十万，攻崇州，执讨击副使许钦寂。
现代文：尽忠自称是无上可汗，任万荣为将，纵兵四处侵略，所到之处即被攻下，不到二十天，聚众几万人，妄称有十万，攻打崇州，擒拿讨击副使许钦寂。
English: Zhenzhong claimed to be the supreme khan, with Ren Wan Rong as his general. He led his troops to invade everywhere, and wherever they went, they were captured. In less than twenty days, he gathered tens of thousands of people, and falsely claimed to have a hundred thousand. He attacked Chongzhou, and captured and defeated the deputy envoy Xu Qinzha.

古文：武后怒，诏鹰扬将军曹仁师、金吾大将军张玄遇、右武威大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等二十八将击之；以梁王武三思为榆关道安抚大使，纳言姚为之副。
现代文：武后怒，诏令鹰扬将军曹仁师、金吾大将军张玄遇、右武威大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等二十八员大将率兵讨伐；派梁王武三思为榆关道安抚大使，纳言姚王寿为副使。
English: Angered by Wu Hou, Emperor Wu ordered 28 generals, including Yingyang General Cao Renshi, Kingu General Zhang Xuanyuan, Right Wuwei General Li Duojun, and Secretary of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Ma Rensi, to lead the troops in the crusade; he sent Liang Wang Wusan Si as the ambassador to pacify Shiguan Road, and Nagan Yao Wang Shou as the deputy envoy.

古文：更号万荣曰万斩，尽忠曰尽灭。
现代文：改称万荣为万斩，尽忠为尽灭。
English: Renamed "Wan Rong" to "Wan Zhe" and "Zhenzhong" to "Zhenhuan."

古文：诸将战西硖石黄麞谷，王师败绩，玄遇、仁节皆为虏禽。
现代文：诸将与万荣战于西硖石黄獐谷，王师败，张玄遇、麻仁节被俘。
English: Zhu and Wan Rong fought in the Huangpi Valley of Xi'an Shi, where Wang Shi was defeated, Zhang Xuan encountered, and Ma Ren Jie was captured.

古文：进攻平州，不克。
现代文：进攻平州，也不胜。
English: The attack on Pingzhou was also unsuccessful.

古文：败书闻，后乃以右武卫大将军建安王武攸宜为清边道大总管，击契丹；募天下人奴有勇者，官畀主直，悉发以击虏。
现代文：败书报入朝廷，武后派右武卫大将军建安王武攸宜为清边道大总管，进攻契丹；召募天下勇敢的奴隶，官府付给主人该奴的身价，开拔去击契丹。
English: The defeat was reported to the imperial court, and the empress Wu sent the right guard general Jianan Wang Wu Youyi as the general manager of Qingbian Road to attack the Khitan; recruited the world's bravest slaves, the government paid the master the price of the slave, and set out to fight the Khitan.

古文：万荣衔枚夜袭檀州，清边道副总管张九节募死士数百薄战，万荣败而走山。
现代文：万荣夜里悄悄地偷袭檀州，清边道副总管张九节召募敢死勇士数百人迎战，万荣败逃入山。
English: Wan Rong stealthily attacked Danzhou at night. Zhang Jiu Jie, the deputy head of Qingbian Road, recruited hundreds of brave warriors to fight. Wan Rong was defeated and fled into the mountains.

古文：俄而尽忠死，突厥默啜袭破其部。
现代文：不久尽忠死，突厥默啜击破其部。
English: Soon after, Duan Zhong died, and Turk Miao defeated him.

古文：万荣收散兵复振，使别将骆务整、何阿小入冀州，杀刺史陆宝积，掠数千人。
现代文：万荣收聚散兵重整旗鼓，派别将骆务整、何阿小入冀州，杀刺史陆宝积，掳掠数千人。
English: Wan Rong gathered the scattered soldiers to regroup, and the faction sent Luo Wujie and He Ah Xiao into Jizhou, killed Shi Lu Baozhe, and captured thousands of people.

古文：武后闻尽忠死，更诏夏官尚书王孝杰、羽林卫将军苏宏晖率兵十七万讨契丹，战东硖石，师败，孝杰死之。
现代文：武后听说尽忠死，再诏令夏官尚书王孝杰、羽林卫将军苏宏晖率兵十七万去讨契丹，在东硖石一仗，王师败，王孝杰战死。
English: When Empress Wu heard of the death of Zhenzhong, she ordered Xia official Shangshu Wang Xiaojie and Ulin Guards general Su Hongyi to lead 170,000 soldiers to fight against Khitan. In a battle in East Shaoshi, Wang Shishi was defeated and Wang Xiaojie died in battle.

古文：万荣席已胜，遂屠幽州。
现代文：万荣乘胜屠掠幽州。
English: Wan Rong took advantage of the victory to plunder Yuzhou.

古文：攸宜遣将讨捕，不能克。
现代文：武攸宜派将讨伐捉拿，不能取胜。
English: The Wuyueyi faction will fight and capture, but cannot win.

古文：乃命右金吾卫大将军河内郡王武懿宗为神兵道大总管，右肃政台御史大夫娄师德为清边道大总管，右武威卫大将军沙吒忠义为清边中道前军总管，兵凡二十万击贼。
现代文：于是诏命右金吾卫大将军、河内郡王武懿宗为神兵道大总管，右肃政台御史大夫娄师德为清边道大总管，右武威卫大将军沙吒忠义为清边中道前军总管，带兵二十万讨贼。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the right-hand King Wu Wei general, Wang Wu Rongzong of Hanoi County to be the general manager of the Shennong Military Highway, the right-hand Su Zhengtai goshi daifu, Zou Shide, to be the general manager of the Qingbian Military Highway, and the right-hand Wu Wei Wei general, Shaju Zhongyi, to be the general manager of the former army of the Qingbian Middle Road, leading 200,000 soldiers to fight against the bandits.

古文：万荣锐甚，鼓而南，残瀛州属县，恣肆无所惮。
现代文：万荣勇猛异常，浩荡南行，践踏瀛州属县，恣肆无所忌惮。
English: Wan Rong is unusually brave and ferocious, sweeping southward, trampling on counties belonging to Ganzhou, and acting recklessly.

古文：于是神兵道总管杨玄基率奚军掩其尾，契丹大败，获何阿小，降别将李楷固、骆务整，收仗械如积。
现代文：神兵道总管杨玄基率奚兵掩击其尾部，契丹大败。擒获何阿小，令别将李楷固、骆务整投降，收缴兵器堆积如山。
English: Yang Xuanji, the head of the Shenbei Road, led the soldiers to cover the tail of the horse, and the Khitan were defeated. Ho Ah Xiao was captured, Li Kai Gu and Luo Wuji surrendered, and the collected weapons piled up like a mountain.

古文：万荣委军走，残队复合，与奚搏。奚四面攻，乃大溃，万荣左驰。
现代文：万荣弃军逃走，残兵再次集聚，与奚兵搏战，奚兵四面出击，契丹大败，万荣东逃。
English: Wan Rong abandoned the army and fled, the remaining soldiers gathered again and fought with the Xiongnu soldiers. The Xiongnu soldiers attacked in all directions, the Khitan were defeated, and Wan Rong fled east.

古文：张九节为三伏伺之，万荣穷，与家奴轻骑走潞河东，惫甚，卧林下，奴斩其首，九节传之东都，馀众溃。
现代文：张九节设了三道埋伏线等他，万荣窘困，与家奴轻骑避至潞河东，疲惫极了，卧林下休息，家奴斩其首。张九节将其首传运至东都，余众溃败。
English: Zhang Jiuqi set up three ambush lines to wait for him, Wan Rong was in trouble, and he and his servants rode lightly to the east of the Wei River. Exhausted, he rested under the woods, and his servants beheaded him. Zhang Jiuqi transported his head to Dongdu, and the rest of the people were defeated.

古文：攸宜凯而还，后喜，为赦天下，改元为神功。
现代文：武攸宜凯旋。武后很高兴，大赦天下，改元为神功。
English: Wu Youyi made a triumphant return. Empress Wu was so happy that she pardoned the whole world and changed the name to Shengong.

古文：契丹不能立，遂附突厥。
现代文：契丹不能立国，于是依附突厥。
English: The Khitans were unable to establish a state, so they became dependent on the Turks.

古文：久视元年，诏左玉钤卫大将军李楷固、右武威卫将军骆务整讨契丹，破之。
现代文：久视元年，诏令左玉钤卫大将军李楷固、右武威卫将军骆务整讨伐契丹，取胜。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the emperor ordered the left jade guardian general Li Kai Gu and the right jade guardian general Luo Wuiwei to fight against the Khitan and win.

古文：此两人皆虏善将，尝犯边，数窘官军者也，及是有功。
现代文：这两人原是契丹的良将，曾侵犯边境，多次让官军吃败仗。至此为唐立功。
English: These two were originally good generals of the Khitan, who had violated the border and repeatedly defeated the government army. This was a great achievement for Tang.

古文：开元二年，尽忠从父弟都督失活以默啜政衰，率部落与颉利发伊健啜来归，玄宗赐丹书铁券。
现代文：开元二年，尽忠的表弟都督李失活因默啜政衰，率部落与颉利发伊健啜来归附，玄宗赐给丹书铁券。
English: In the second year of the first century, the dutiful cousin of the governor Li Zhuxing, because of the silent political decline, led the tribe and the Qili faction to attach Ijian, and Xuanzong gave Danshu iron coupons.

古文：后二年，与奚长李大酺皆来，诏复置松漠府，以失活为都督，封松漠郡王，授左金吾卫大将军。仍其府置静析军，以失活为经略大使，所统八部皆擢其酋为刺史。
现代文：两年后，与奚君长李大酉甫同入朝。诏令再置松漠府，任李失活为都督，封爵松漠郡王，授职左金吾卫大将军；就在其府设置静析军，派失活为经略大使，他所统辖八部都提拔其酋长为刺史。
English: Two years later, he entered the imperial court together with Li Daxinfu, the head of the Qianlong Emperor. The imperial edict re-established Songpan Prefecture, appointed Li Zhuchuo as the governor, knighted Songpan County King, and conferred the post of General Zuo Jinwu; he set up the Jingjing Army in his prefecture, sent Zhuchuo as the ambassador of economic strategy, and promoted his chiefs to the post of chief historian in the eight provinces under his jurisdiction.

古文：诏将军薛泰为押蕃落使，督军镇抚。
现代文：诏命将军薛泰为押蕃落使，督军镇抚。
English: Zhao ordered General Xue Tai to be the deputy commander and commander of the army.

古文：帝以东平王外孙杨元嗣女为永乐公主，妻失活。
现代文：皇帝封东平王外孙杨元嗣的女儿为永乐公主，嫁给失活。
English: The emperor named the daughter of Yang Yuan Ci, the grandson of Dongping Wang, as Yongle Princess, and married her.

古文：明年，失活死，赠特进，帝遣使吊祠，以其弟中郎将娑固袭封及所领。
现代文：第二年，失活死，追赠特进，皇帝派使者吊祭。让失活弟中郎将娑固袭封及所领官职。
English: In the second year, after the death of his brother, the emperor sent an emissary to offer a hanging sacrifice, so that the deceased brother, Zhongro, would succeed to the throne and the leading official position.

古文：明年，娑固与公主来朝，宴赍有加。
现代文：明年，娑固与公主来朝，宴饮招待，赏赐甚多。
English: The next year, Kengo and the princess came to the Imperial Court, where they were invited to a banquet and received many gifts.

古文：有可突于者，为静析军副使，悍勇得众，娑固欲去之，未决。可突于反攻娑固，娑固奔营州。
现代文：静析军副使可突于骁勇且得众心，娑固想除掉他，决心未下，可突于反过来攻娑固，娑固逃奔营州。
English: The Vice-Envoy of the Jingye Analysis Army could suddenly attack Shiji and win the hearts of the people. Shiji wanted to get rid of him, but before he could make up his mind, he could suddenly attack Shiji in turn, and Shiji fled to Yingzhou.

古文：都督许钦澹以州甲五百，合奚君长李大酺兵共攻可突于。不胜，娑固、大酺皆死。钦澹惧，徙军入榆关。
现代文：都督许钦澹派州中甲兵五百会同奚君长李大酉甫兵共攻可突于，不胜，娑固、大酉甫均战死，钦澹害怕，将军队迁入榆关。
English: Governor Xu Qinlian sent 500 soldiers from the Middle Armored Corps of the State to attack together with the soldiers of Li Daxunfu, the leader of the Qin Dynasty, but they could not win. Both Tuogu and Daxunfu were killed in the battle. Qinlian was afraid and moved the army into Shaoguan.

古文：可突于奉娑固从父弟郁于为君，遣使者谢罪。
现代文：可突于拥娑固的堂叔郁于为君长，派使者入朝谢罪。
English: His uncle, who was a staunch supporter of the Emperor, suddenly became the regent and sent an envoy to thank the Emperor.

古文：有诏即拜郁于松漠郡王，而赦可突于。
现代文：皇帝下诏，就封郁于为松漠郡王，而赦免可突于。
English: When the emperor issued an edict, he sealed Yu as the county king of Songpan, and pardoned Yu.

古文：郁于来朝，授率更令，以宗室所出女慕容为燕郡公主妻之。
现代文：郁于来朝，授职率更令，将宗室所生女慕容氏封为燕郡公主许配给他。
English: When he came to Korea, the award rate was even higher, and the daughter of the Murong family, who was born in the same family, was given the title of Princess of Yan County.

古文：可突于亦来朝，擢左羽林卫将军。
现代文：可突于也来朝，提升为左羽林卫将军。
English: However, he suddenly came to Korea and was promoted to General Gao Linwei.

古文：郁于死，弟吐于嗣，与可突于有隙，不能定其下，携公主来奔，封辽阳郡王，留宿卫。
现代文：郁于死，弟吐于即位，与可突于相互猜忌，不能安定其属下，于是带了公主来朝投奔，皇帝改封他为辽阳郡王，留任宿卫。
English: Depressed by the death, his brother vomited at the enthronement, and his subordinates could not be stabilized because of mutual suspicion, so he brought the princess to the North and fled. The emperor changed his title to the King of Liaoyang County and remained as a guard.

古文：可突于奉尽忠弟邵固统众，诏许袭王。
现代文：可突于拥尽忠之弟邵固为君主。有诏同意他继袭王位。
English: His loyal younger brother, Shao Gu, suddenly became the monarch. An imperial edict allowed him to succeed to the throne.

古文：天子封禅，邵固与诸蕃长皆从行在。
现代文：天子封禅，邵固与各蕃长都随从到行宫。
English: Tianzi Fuzhen, Shao Gu and all the magistrates followed him to the palace.

古文：明年，拜左羽林卫大将军，徙王广化郡，以宗室出女陈为东华公主，妻邵固，诏官其部酋长百馀人，邵固以子入侍。
现代文：第二年，委任邵固为左羽林卫大将军，改封广化郡王，将宗室所生女陈氏封为东华公主，许配邵固。有诏封其部酋长百余人为官。邵固派儿子入侍。
English: In the second year, Shao Gu was appointed the General of the Left Wing of the Imperial Guards, and his title was changed to the King of Guanghua County, and his daughter Chen, who was born in his family, was named the Princess of East China, and she married Shao Gu. More than a hundred chieftains from his family were appointed as officials. Shao Gu sent his son to serve as an attendant.

古文：可突于复来，不为宰相李元纮所礼，鞅鞅去。
现代文：可突于又来朝，宰相李元未以礼接待，怏怏而归。
English: However, Prime Minister Li Yuan suddenly came to the morning again, but he did not receive the reception with courtesy.

古文：张说曰： 彼兽心者，唯利是向。
现代文：张说说： 可突于人面兽心，惟利是视。
English: Zhang said: It can be seen on the human face, but it is not seen by the animal mind.

古文：且方持国，下所附也，不假以礼，不来矣。 
现代文：现正掌国政，人心归附。不用礼羁縻他，以后不来了。 
English: He is now in charge of state affairs, and the hearts of the people are with him. Don't treat him with disrespect, and don't come in the future.

古文：后三年，可突于杀邵固，立屈烈为王，胁奚众共降突厥。公主走平庐军。
现代文：三年后，可突于杀了邵固，立屈烈为王，胁迫奚人共降突厥，东华公主投奔平卢军。
English: Three years later, he suddenly killed Shao Gu, made Qu Rong the king, coerced the Xiongnu to surrender to the Turks, and Donghua Princess joined the Pinglu Army.

古文：诏幽州长史、知范阳节度事赵含章击之。遣中书舍人裴宽、给事中薛偘大募壮士，拜忠王浚河北道行军元帅，以御史大夫李朝隐、京兆尹裴伷先副之，帅程伯献、张文俨、宋之悌、李东蒙、赵万功、郭英杰等八总管兵击契丹。
现代文：诏令幽州长史、掌管范阳节度事赵含章去讨伐，派中书舍人裴宽、给事中薛亻品广募壮士，授职忠王浚为河北道行军元帅，派御史大夫李朝隐、京兆尹裴亻由先为副元帅，率领程伯献、张文俨、宋之悌、李东蒙、赵万功、郭英杰等八总管的兵讨伐契丹。
English: The edict ordered Zhao Hanzhang, the governor of Yu Prefecture and the person in charge of the Fanyang Festival, to go to the crusade, sent the Chinese scholar Pei Guang and the person in charge of the event Xue Yibin Guang to recruit strong men, and appointed Zhong Wangjun as the marshal of the march in Hebei Province, sent the goshi doctor Li Chaoying and Jing Zhao Yin Pei Jun to be the deputy marshal, and led the soldiers of the eight general managers such as Cheng Bo Xian, Zhang Wenyu, Song Zhixuan, Li Dongmeng, Zhao Wan Gong, and Guo Yingjie to fight against the

古文：既又以忠王兼河东道诸军元帅，王不行。
现代文：后来又要忠王兼任河东道诸军元帅。忠王没有启程。
English: Later, Prince Tadahito also had to serve as the marshal of the armies of Kawagoe. Prince Tadahito did not set off.

古文：以礼部尚书信安郡王祎持节河北道行军副元帅，与含章出塞捕虏，大破之。
现代文：于是诏令礼部尚书、信安郡王为河北道行军副元帅，与赵含章一道出塞捕获贼人，将契丹打得大败，可突于逃走，奚人降。
English: Therefore, the Emperor ordered the Vice-Marshal of the Ceremonial Department, Shang Shu, and the Vice-Marshal of the Hebei Province, Wang Xinyan, together with Zhao Hanzhang, to go out and capture the thieves, beat the Khitan to a large defeat, and then suddenly fled, forcing the people to surrender.

古文：可突于走，奚众降，王以二蕃俘级告诸庙。
现代文：信安郡王将契丹及奚被杀被俘的人祭告宗庙。
English: The king of Xin'an County sued the ancestral temple for sacrificing Khitan and those who were killed and captured.

古文：明年，可突于盗边，幽州长史薛楚玉、副总管郭英杰、吴克勤、乌知义、罗守忠率万骑及奚击之，战都山下。
现代文：第二年，可突于侵扰边境，幽州长史薛楚玉、副总管郭英杰、吴克勤、乌知义、罗守忠率领一万骑兵以及奚兵来反击，战于都山下。
English: In the second year, Governor Shi Xue Chuyu, Vice-Governors Guo Yingjie, Wu Kekin, Wuchiyi, and Luo Shuzhong led ten thousand cavalry and soldiers to counterattack and fought at the foot of the capital.

古文：可突于以突厥兵来，奚惧，持两端，众走险；知义、守忠败，英杰、克勤死之，杀唐兵万人。
现代文：可突于率了突厥兵来，奚人害怕了，犹豫不定，后来分散逃走，据守险地。乌知义、罗守忠败，郭英杰、吴克勤战死，唐兵被杀的有万人。
English: However, he suddenly led the Turkish soldiers to come. The Han people were afraid and hesitant, and later they scattered and fled. They were in a dangerous position. Wuchiyi, Luo, Guo Yingjie, and Wu Keqin died in battle, and tens of thousands of Tang soldiers were killed.

古文：帝擢张守珪为幽州长史经略之。
现代文：皇帝提拔张守王圭为幽州长史去指挥、治理。
English: The emperor promoted Zhang Shou Wang Gui to the post of governor-general to command and govern.

古文：守珪既善将，可突于恐，阳请臣而稍趋西北倚突厥。
现代文：守王圭善于指挥战役，可突于害怕了，表面请降，而实际上渐往西北去倚靠突厥。
English: Shou Wang Gui was good at commanding the campaign, but suddenly he was afraid and asked for a surrender on the surface, but in fact he gradually moved to the northwest to rely on the Turks.

古文：其衙官李过折与可突于内不平，守珪使客王悔阴邀之，以兵围可突于，过折即夜斩可突于、屈烈及支党数十人，自归。
现代文：其时，契丹衙官李过折与可突于有些矛盾，守王圭让客座管记王悔私下里邀约李过折，用兵包围可突于。过折当晚斩杀可突于、屈烈及其支党几十人后归附。
English: At that time, there were some contradictions between the Khitan eunuch Li Taofeng and Kecheng. The governor Wang Gui had the guest governor Wang Qian secretly invite Li Taofeng and surround Kecheng with soldiers. On the night of Kecheng, Kecheng killed Kecheng, Qu Lie and dozens of his branch party members and then annexed them.

古文：守珪使过折统其部，函可突于等首传东都。
现代文：守王圭派过折统帅可突于部，将可突于等人的头装盒传送东都。
English: Shou Wang Gui sent the commander-in-chief to the ministry, and sent the head-mounted box to Dongdu.

古文：拜过折北平郡王，为松漠都督。
现代文：诏封李过折北平郡王，任松漠都督。
English: Li Zhaofeng became the king of Beiping County and the governor of Songpan.

古文：可突于残党击杀过折，屠其家。一子剌乾走安东，拜左骁卫将军。
现代文：后来，可突于的残党击杀了李过折并其家属，只有一个儿子剌乾逃奔安东免难，任职左骁卫将军。
English: Later, the remnants who were able to break through killed Li Kofu and his family. Only one son, Qianqian, escaped to Andong to avoid danger and served as Zuo Wei general.

古文：二十五年，守珪讨契丹，再破之，有诏自今战有功必告庙。
现代文：开元二十五年，张守王圭讨伐契丹，两次击破其军。有诏令自这次战争开始，作战有功一定要祭告宗庙。
English: In the 25th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Zhang Shou Wang Gui fought against the Khitan and defeated his army twice. Since the beginning of this war, there has been a decree that the ancestral temple must be dedicated to those who have distinguished themselves in battle.

古文：天宝四载，契丹大酋李怀秀降，拜松漠都督，封崇顺王，以宗室出女独孤为静乐公主妻之。
现代文：天宝四年，契丹大酋李怀秀降。委任他为松漠都督，封崇顺王，将宗室所生女独孤氏封为静乐公主许配给李怀秀。
English: In the 4th year of the Tenpo era, the Khitan chieftain Li Huaixiu abdicated. He appointed him as the governor of Songpan and crowned him King Chongshun. He also gave Li Huaixiu the right to marry the daughter of his father's wife, Du Guo, who was crowned Princess Jingle.

古文：是岁，杀公主叛去，范阳节度使安禄山讨破之。
现代文：这一年，怀秀杀了公主叛离而去。范阳节度使安禄山将他击破。
English: That year, Huai Xiu killed the princess and left. Fan Yang Jiedu made Anlu Shan defeat him.

古文：更封其酋楷落为恭仁王，代松漠都督。
现代文：改封其酋长楷落为恭仁王，代理松漠都督。
English: He changed the title of his chieftain Kai Luo to King Gongren, and appointed Songmu as acting governor.

古文：禄山方幸，表讨契丹以向帝意。
现代文：其时安禄山正得宠，上表请求去讨伐契丹以称皇帝心意。
English: At that time, Anlu Mountain was favored, and the request to go to fight the Khitan was said to be the emperor's intention.

古文：发幽州、云中、平庐、河东兵十余万，以奚为乡导，大战潢水南。
现代文：调发幽州、云中、平卢、河东的兵共十多万，用奚人为向导，大战于潢水之南。
English: A total of more than one hundred thousand soldiers from Yuzhou, Yunchu, Pinglu and Hedong were dispatched to fight in the south of Surabaya, using Yunnan as a guide.

古文：禄山败，死者数千。
现代文：禄山败，死者几千人。
English: Lushan was defeated, and several thousand people died.

古文：自是禄山与相侵掠未尝解，至其反乃已。
现代文：从此禄山与契丹相互侵掠不停，直到安禄山反叛才罢。
English: From then on, Lushan and Khitan invaded and plundered each other incessantly, until Anlushan rebelled.

古文：契丹在开元、天宝间，使朝献者无虑二十。
现代文：契丹在开元天宝年间，派使入朝贡献不下二十次。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tenpo in the first year of the Heian period, Khitan sent envoys to the Joseon Dynasty no fewer than twenty times.

古文：故事，以范阳节度为押奚、契丹使，自至德后，籓镇擅地务自安，鄣戍斥候益谨，不生事于边；奚、契丹亦鲜入寇，岁选酋豪数十入长安朝会，每引见，赐与有秩，其下率数百皆驻馆幽州。
现代文：以前，派范阳节度使为押奚、契丹使，自肃宗至德年后，藩镇专有其地，致力于自安。险处的防守及侦察格外严谨，不使边界有事，奚、契丹也很少来侵扰，每年还选酋豪们几十人入长安朝会。每次引见，都赐与有秩，其下几百人都馆宿幽州。
English: In the past, Fanyang was sent as an envoy of the Empress Dowager and the Khitan Emperor. Since the Sui Dynasty to the German Empire, the town has its own territory and is committed to self-safety. The defense and reconnaissance of dangerous areas are extremely rigorous, and the border is not a problem. The Empress Dowager and the Khitan Emperor rarely intrude. Every year, dozens of chiefs are elected to the Chang'an Dynasty Association. Each introduction is given a rank, and the next few hundred are staying in Yuzhou.

古文：至德、宝应时再朝献，大历中十三，贞元间三，元和中七，大和、开成间凡四。
现代文：至德、宝应年间两次入朝贡献，大历中入朝十三次，贞元年间三次，元和年间七次，大和、开成年间四次。
English: Zhi De and Bao Ying made contributions to the imperial court twice, the Great Calendar made contributions to the imperial court thirteen times, the Zhen Yuan made contributions to the imperial court three times, the Yuan and He years made contributions seven times, and the Yamato and He years made contributions four times.

古文：然天子恶其外附回鹘，不复官爵渠长。
现代文：但是天子不喜欢契丹外附回鹘，所以不再封爵任官给他们的首领。
English: However, the Emperor did not like the Khitan annexing Hui territory, so he no longer knighted their leaders.

古文：会昌二年，回鹘破，契丹酋屈戍始复内附，拜云麾将军、守右武卫将军。
现代文：会昌二年，回鹘被攻破，契丹酋长屈戍再次归附。授他云麾将军，任守右武卫将军。
English: In the second year of Huichang, Huizhou was defeated, and the Khitan chieftain Qu Wei was once again annexed. He was awarded the title of General of Yunqi and appointed as General of the Right Division of Wuwei.

古文：于是幽州节度使张仲武为易回鹘所与旧印，赐唐新印，曰 奉国契丹之印 。
现代文：此时，幽州节度使张仲武为了换回回鹘所给的旧印，赐契丹唐制新印，印文是 奉国契丹之印 。
English: At this time, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Zhongwu give the Khitan a new seal of the Tang Dynasty in exchange for the old seal given by the Qing Dynasty. The seal was the seal of the Khitan to serve the country.

古文：咸通中，其王习尔之再遣使者入朝，部落浸强。
现代文：懿宗咸通年间，契丹王习尔之两次派使者入朝，部落渐强。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xizong of Han, the Khitan King Xi'er twice sent emissaries to the imperial court, and the tribe gradually became stronger.

古文：习尔之死，族人钦德嗣。
现代文：习尔之死，族人钦德即位。
English: After the death of Xi'er, the tribesman Qinde ascended to the throne.

古文：光启时，方天下盗兴，北疆多故，乃钞奚、室韦，小小部种皆役服之，因入寇幽、蓟。
现代文：光启时，天下盗贼蜂起，北疆多事。契丹乘机攻取奚、室韦，小小部种都听其指挥。于是侵扰幽州、蓟州。
English: At the time of the Enlightenment, the world's thieves rose up, and there were many events in Northern Xinjiang. Khitan took advantage of the opportunity to capture Handan and Muxi, and all small provinces obeyed his command. Therefore, they invaded Yuzhou and Handan.

古文：刘仁恭穷师逾摘星山讨之，岁燎塞下草，使不得留牧，马多死。
现代文：刘仁恭发所有的兵力越过摘星山去讨伐，烧毁塞下牧草，使契丹不能放牧，马很多饿死。
English: Liu Rengong sent all the troops to cross the Star Mountain to fight, burned down the pastures, so that the Khitan could not graze, and many horses starved to death.

古文：契丹乃乞盟，献良马求牧地，仁恭许之。
现代文：契丹只好求盟，献良马求牧地，刘仁恭同意。
English: Khitan had no choice but to ask for an alliance, to offer a good horse for pasture, and Liu Rengong agreed.

古文：复败约入寇，刘守光戍平州，契丹以万骑入，守光伪与和，帐饮具于野，伏发，禽其大将。
现代文：后来又毁约来侵扰，刘守光戍守平州，契丹将一万骑兵入州，守光假装与他们言和，在野外设帐宴饮，伏兵擒其大将。
English: Later, Liu Shouguang broke the treaty and invaded Pingzhou. The Khitan brought 10,000 cavalry into Pingzhou. Shouguang pretended to make peace with them, set up a banquet in the open, and ambushed the general.

古文：群胡恸，愿纳马五千以赎，不许。
现代文：契丹众人悲痛，愿用五千匹马赎人。刘守光不同意。
English: The people of Khitan are grieving and are willing to use five thousand horses to redeem the people. Liu Shouguang does not agree.

古文：钦德输重赂求之，乃与盟，十年不敢近边。
现代文：钦德用重金来请求，这才与他们盟誓。以后十年契丹不敢来侵犯。
English: When Chinde asked for a large sum of money, he swore an oath to them. For the next ten years, the Khitan did not dare to invade.

古文：钦德晚节政不竞，其八部大人法常三岁代，时耶律阿保机建鼓旗为一部，不肯代，自号为王而有国，大贺氏遂亡。
现代文：钦德晚年政令权威不强，契丹八部的大人法中有三年一换的条款，那时耶律阿保机建鼓旗为一部，不肯换，自称为契丹王而统领了国家，大贺氏就亡了。
English: In his later years, Chinde's government decrees were not very authoritative. There was a three-year replacement clause in the eight-part adult law of Khitan. At that time, Yerut Aboji built a drum and flag as one part, refused to replace it, called himself the king of Khitan and ruled the country, and the Ohga clan died.

古文：奚，亦东胡种，为匈奴所破，保乌丸山。汉曹操斩其帅蹋顿，盖其后也。
现代文：奚，也是东胡种，被匈奴打败后退守乌丸山，汉时曹操曾斩杀手下帅将蹋顿，就是奚的后代。
English: Yao, also a Donghu breed, was defeated by the Xiongnu and retreated to the Wu Maru Mountain. During the Han Dynasty, Cao Cao once beheaded the second-in-command, Zhaodong, who was a descendant of Yao.

古文：元魏时自号库真奚，居鲜卑故地，直京师东北四千里。
现代文：后魏时他们自称库真奚，居于鲜卑的旧地，在京师东北四千多里。
English: During the late Wei Dynasty, they called themselves Ku Zhenqi and lived in Xianbei, more than 4,000 miles northeast of Beijing.

古文：其地东北接契丹，西突厥，南白狼河，北。
现代文：其地东北接契丹，西连突厥，南为白浪河，北连靅国。
English: It is bordered by Qidan in the northeast, Turkestan in the west, Bai Langhe in the south, and Shan State in the north.

古文：喜战斗，兵有五部，部一俟斤主之。
现代文：与突厥同俗，逐水草而放牧，以毡庐为房舍，用车环绕周围为营。
English: Similar to the Turkic people, they graze by following the water and grass, use reeds as houses, and use cars to encircle their surroundings as a camp.

古文：其国西抵大洛泊，距回纥牙三千里，多依土护真水。
现代文：君长日常有五百人持兵器在牙廷守卫，其余的部落都散居在山谷间。国内无赋税，以射猎为资产。庄稼多糜子，收获后窖藏于山下。凿木为臼，用瓦罐煮饭，掺寒水而食。
English: The ruler is guarded daily by five hundred men with weapons in the palace, the rest of the tribes are scattered in the valley. There is no tax in the country, with shooting as an asset. The crops are mostly hazelnuts, after harvest they are stored in the cellar under the mountain. Sawed wood is used as a mill, rice is cooked in a crock, mixed with cold water and eaten.

古文：其马善登，其羊黑。
现代文：其马长于登高，羊黑色。
English: His horse is taller than he is, and his sheep are black.

古文：盛夏必徙保冷陉山，山直妫州西北。
现代文：盛夏时迁徙到冷陉山，山在妫州西北。
English: In midsummer, they migrate to Lengyi Mountain, which is in the northwest of Ganzhou.

古文：至隋始去 库真 ，但曰奚。
现代文：到隋时去掉 库真 ，单称奚。
English: By the time of the Sui Dynasty, the cucumber, known as cucumber, was removed.

古文：武德中，高开道借其兵再寇幽州，长史王诜击破之。
现代文：武德年中，高开道两次借他们的兵入侵幽州，长史王诜将他们击破。
English: In the middle of the Wu De era, Gao Kaido twice used their soldiers to invade Yuzhou, and Changshi Wang Yao defeated them.

古文：太宗贞观三年始来朝，阅十七岁，凡四朝贡。
现代文：太宗贞观三年才派人来朝，以后十七年中共来朝贡四次。
English: Taizong Zhenguan only sent people to the DPRK three years later, and in the following seventeen years, the CCP sent tributes to the DPRK four times.

古文：帝伐高丽，大酋苏支从战有功。
现代文：皇帝亲征高丽，奚大酋苏支随战有功。
English: The emperor personally led the conquest of Korea, and the great chieftain Su Shi made great contributions to the war.

古文：不数年，其长可度者内附，帝为置饶乐都督府，拜可度者使持节六州诸军事、饶乐都督，封楼烦县公，赐李氏。
现代文：几年后，其君长可度者来归附，皇帝设置饶乐都督府，授可度者长使持节六州诸军事、饶乐都督，封爵楼烦县公，赐姓李。
English: A few years later, the emperor set up the Raole Governor's Office, and awarded the chief envoy of the six states to the military, the Raole Governor, the knighthood to the Louyu County, and the surname Li.

古文：以阿会部为弱水州，处和部为祁黎州，奥失部为洛瑰州，度稽部为太鲁州，元俟折部为渴野州，各以酋领辱纥主为刺史，隶饶乐府。
现代文：将阿会部列为弱水州，处和部列为祁黎州，奥失部列为洛瑰州，度稽部列为太鲁州，元俟折部列为渴野州，各州均以原酋领辱纥主为刺史，隶属饶乐府。
English: It listed the Ahui Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the weak water province, the Shandong Province as the

古文：复置东夷都护府于营州，兼统松漠、饶乐地，置东夷校尉。
现代文：再置东夷都护府于营州，兼统松漠、饶乐等地，设东夷校尉。
English: He also set up the Dongyi Capital Protectorate in Yingzhou, and also unified Songpan, Raole and other places, and set up the Dongyi Captaincy.

古文：显庆间可度者死，奚遂叛。
现代文：显庆年间，可度者死，奚人叛。
English: In the year of the great festival, those who can spend will die, and those who can't will rebel.

古文：五年，以定襄都督阿史德枢宾、左武候将军延陀梯真、居延州都督李含珠为冷陉道行军总管。
现代文：显庆五年派定襄都督阿史德枢宾、左武侯将军延陀梯真、居延州都督李含珠等人为冷陉道行军总管。
English: In the fifth year of Xianqing, Dingxiang's governor Ashide, Zuowu's general Yenda Shizhen, and Jianzhou's governor Li Gangzhu were appointed as the general managers of the march on Lengye Road.

古文：明年，诏尚书右丞崔馀庆持节总护定襄等三都督讨之，奚惧乞降，斩其王匹帝。
现代文：第二年，诏令尚书右丞崔余庆持节总护定襄等三都督前往讨伐。奚害怕了，乞降，斩杀其王匹帝。
English: In the second year, Emperor Gaozong ordered the three governors, including Shangshu Rongcheng, Cui Yuqing, and the chief protector of the festival, Ding Xiang, to go to the crusade. He was afraid, begged for surrender, and killed his rival.

古文：万岁通天中，契丹反，奚亦叛，与突厥相表里，号 两蕃 。
现代文：万岁通天元年，契丹反叛，奚也反，与突厥互为表里，号称 两蕃 。
English: In the first year of the millennium, the Khitans rebelled, and the Mongols also rebelled. They were on the same side as the Turks, and were known as the Two Mongols.

古文：延和元年，以左羽林卫大将军幽州都督孙佺、左骁卫将军李楷洛、左威卫将军周以悌帅兵十二万，为三军，袭击其部。
现代文：延和元年，派左羽林卫大将军、幽州都督孙亻全，左骁卫将军李楷洛，左威卫将军周以悌率兵十二万，分为三军袭击其部落。
English: In the first year of Yanhe, he sent General Zuo Lin Wei, Yuzhou Governor Sun Bingquan, General Zuo Wei Li Kai Luo, and General Zuo Wei Wei Zhou Yixuan, leading 120,000 soldiers, divided into three armies to attack his tribe.

古文：次冷陉，前军楷洛与奚酋李大酺战不利。
现代文：驻军冷陉。前军李楷洛与奚酋长李大酉甫交战，不利。
English: The garrison was cold. The former army Li Kai Luo and the war chief Li Daxunfu were at a disadvantage.

古文：佺惧，敛军，诈大酺曰： 我奉诏来慰抚若等，而楷洛违节度辄战，非天子意，方戮以徇。 
现代文：孙亻全害怕，按军不敢救，骗李大酉甫说： 我是奉诏来慰抚你们的。而李楷洛不听指挥与你们交战。这不是天子的意旨，我正要斩他示众呢。 
English: Sun Xuanquan was afraid and did not dare to send troops to save him, so he lied to Li Daqianfu and said, "I came to comfort you by imperial edict, but Li Kai Luo did not listen to the command and fought against you. This is not the will of the Son of Heaven, I was about to slaughter him for all to see."

古文：大酺曰： 诚慰抚我，有所赐乎？ 
现代文：大酉甫说： 如果确实是来慰抚的，带来什么东西赐给我们呢？ 
English: The chief priest said, "If he is really coming to comfort us, what will he bring us?"

古文：佺出军中缯帛、袍带与之。
现代文：孙亻全拿出军中的绸缎、锦袍、玉带等给他，李大酉甫称谢，请孙亻全班师。
English: Sun Binquan took out the army's silk coats, brocade robes, jade belts, etc. and gave them to him. Li Daxinfu expressed his gratitude and invited Sun Bin's entire team to join him.

古文：大酺谢，请佺还师，举军得脱，争先无部伍，大酺兵蹑之，遂大败，杀伤数万。佺、以悌皆为虏禽，送默啜害之。
现代文：全军才得脱身，但返回时大家争先恐后，无队伍行列可言。大酉甫的兵随后追击，王师大败。杀伤好几万，孙亻全、周以悌都被俘，送交默啜，遭到杀害。
English: The whole army had to escape, but when they returned, everyone was scrambling, and there was no line of ranks to speak of. The soldiers of the Grand Mufti then chased, and Wang Shi was defeated. Tens of thousands were killed and wounded. Sun Bingquan and Zhou Yijuan were both captured, sent to silence, and killed.

古文：朝廷方多故，不暇讨。
现代文：当时朝廷正多事，无暇去讨伐。
English: At that time, the imperial court was very busy and had no time to fight.

古文：玄宗开元二年，使奥苏悔落丐降，封饶乐郡王，左金吾卫大将军、饶乐都督。
现代文：玄宗开元二年，奚派奥苏悔落来请降，封奚酋为饶乐郡王，委任为左金吾卫大将军、饶乐都督。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign in the first year of the 1st century, he sent Osu Kaifu to appeal for his abdication, and crowned Yao Hui as the king of Raole County, and appointed him as the general of Zuo Kinguwei and the governor of Raole.

古文：诏宗室出女辛为固安公主，妻大酺。
现代文：又诏令宗室所生女辛封为固安公主，嫁给李大酉甫。
English: He also decreed that the daughter of the family, Xinfeng, would become Guan Princess and marry Li Dazhongfu.

古文：明年，身入朝成昏。
现代文：第二年，李大酉甫亲自入朝成婚。
English: In the following year, Li Dazhongfu entered the imperial court in person and married.

古文：始复营州都督府，遣右领军将军李济持节护送。
现代文：恢复营州都督府，派右领军将军李济持节护送回国。
English: He restored the Yingzhou governor's office and sent the right-wing leading general Li Jizhong to escort him back to China.

古文：大酺后与契丹可突于斗，死。
现代文：李大酉甫后来与契丹可突于交战，战死。
English: Li Dazhongfu later clashed with Khitan troops and died in battle.

古文：弟鲁苏领其部，袭王。
现代文：弟鲁苏继承其位，继袭王爵。
English: His brother, Rusu, succeeded to the throne, succeeding to the title of prince.

古文：诏兼保塞军经略大使。
现代文：诏令鲁苏兼保塞军经略大使。
English: He is also the economic and strategic ambassador of the Korean People's Liberation Army.

古文：牙官塞默羯谋叛，公主置酒诱杀之，帝嘉其功，赐主累万。
现代文：牙官塞默羯谋叛，固安公主设宴将他诱杀。皇帝嘉奖其功劳，赐公主财物上万。
English: Dentist Semer plotted a rebellion, and Princess Guan set up a banquet to lure him to his death. The emperor praised his service and gave the princess tens of thousands in property.

古文：会与其母相告讦得罪，更以盛安公主女韦为东光公主妻之。
现代文：其时固安公主与其母不和，互相控告。于是另以盛安公主的女儿韦封为东光公主嫁鲁苏为妻。
English: At that time, Princess Guan was at odds with her mother and they sued each other. Therefore, Princess Dongguang married Rusu to Princess Weifeng, the daughter of Princess Sheng'an.

古文：后三年，封鲁苏奉诚郡王，右羽林卫将军，擢其首领无虑二百人，皆位郎将。
现代文：三年后，封鲁苏为奉诚郡王，任右羽林卫将军，提拔其首领二百人为郎将。
English: Three years later, Feng Lusu became the king of Fengcheng County and was appointed the right wing Lin Wei general, and promoted 200 of his leaders as subordinates.

古文：久之，契丹可突于反，胁奚众并附突厥。
现代文：后来，契丹可突于反叛，胁迫奚一同依附突厥。
English: Later, the Khitans suddenly rebelled and coerced the Mongols to join the Turks.

古文：鲁苏不能制，奔榆关，公主奔平庐。
现代文：鲁苏不能控制，于是逃奔榆关，东光公主奔归平卢。
English: Rusu couldn't be controlled, so she fled to Shaoguan, and Dongguang Princess returned to Pinglu.

古文：幽州长史赵含章发清夷军讨破之，众稍自归。
现代文：幽州长史赵含章发清夷军击败了叛众，奚众才渐渐回归。
English: Governor Shi Zhao Han Zhang sent the Qing army to defeat the rebels, and the rebels gradually returned.

古文：明年，信安王祎降其酋李诗锁高等部落五千帐，以其地为归义州，因以王诗，拜左羽林军大将军、本州都督，赐帛十万，置其部幽州之偏。
现代文：第二年，信安王讨叛，奚酋李诗锁高等部落五千帐归降，列其地为归义州，封李诗为归义王，任他为左羽林军大将军、本州都督，赐帛十万段，移其部落于幽州侧。
English: In the second year, King Xin'an rebelled, and the high-ranking chief Li Shizhu of the Five-thousand-Tribe surrendered, listing his land as Guizhou, crowning Li Shizhu as the King of Guizhou, appointing him as the General of the Left Feather Forest Army and the Governor of Honshu, awarding him 100,000 dan, and moving his tribe to the Yuzhou side.

古文：李诗死，子延宠嗣，与契丹又叛，为幽州张守珪所困。
现代文：李诗死，子延宠即位，又与契丹伙同反叛，被幽州长史张守王圭所困。
English: Li Shih died, his son Yan Qiao ascended to the throne, and he rebelled with the Khitan group, and was trapped by the governor of Yu Shi, Zhang Shou Wang Gui.

古文：延宠降，复拜饶乐都督、怀信王，以宗室出女杨为宜芳公主妻之。
现代文：延宠降，仍任他为饶乐都督，封怀信王，以宗室所生女杨氏封为宜芳公主嫁延宠为妻。
English: Yan Jia stepped down, but he was still appointed as the governor of Raole, and was given the title of Prince of Huaixin, and the daughter of the family, Yang Jia, was given the title of Princess of Yifang to marry Yan Jia as his wife.

古文：延宠杀公主复叛，诏立它酋婆固为昭信王、饶乐都督，以定其部。
现代文：延宠杀了公主又叛，诏令立另一酋长婆固为昭信王、饶乐都督，平定其部落。
English: Yan Qiao killed the princess and the traitor, and issued a decree to appoint another chief, Gu, as the king of Zhaoxin and the governor of Raole, and to pacify his tribe.

古文：安禄山节度范阳，诡边功，数与鏖斗，饰俘以献，诛其君李日越，料所俘骁壮戍云南。
现代文：安禄山节度范阳时，邀边功，多次与之鏖战，擒人献俘。诛杀其君王李日越，挑选俘虏中的骁壮者派去戍守云南。
English: When Fan Yang was celebrating the festival of Anlu Mountain, he invited Bian Gong, fought with him many times, took prisoners, killed his king Li Riyue, and selected the strong among the prisoners to be sent to defend Yunnan.

古文：终帝世，凡八朝献，至德、大历间十二。
现代文：终玄宗之世，八次来朝贡献，至德大历年间共入朝十二次。
English: At the end of Emperor Xuanzong's life, he came to the North eight times to make contributions, and he came to the North a total of twelve times during the reign of Emperor Dezong.

古文：贞元四年，与室韦攻振武。
现代文：贞元四年，与室韦攻打振武。
English: In the fourth year of Sadamoto, he and Murovei attacked Zhenwu.

古文：后七年，幽州残其众六万。
现代文：七年后，幽州兵击破奚兵六万。
English: Seven years later, the Youzhou soldiers defeated sixty thousand soldiers.

古文：德宗时，两朝献。
现代文：德宗时，两次朝献。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong, it was twice presented to the Imperial Court.

古文：元和元年，君梅落身入朝，拜检校司空、归诚郡王。
现代文：元和元年，奚君梅落亲自入朝，诏令任他为检校司空，封为归诚郡王。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the year, Zou Junmei Lu personally entered the imperial court, and the imperial edict appointed him as the school inspector, and he was named the King of Guicheng County.

古文：以部酋索氏为左威卫将军、檀蓟州游弈兵马使，没辱孤平州游弈兵马使，皆赐李氏。
现代文：任其部酋索氏为左威卫将军，檀、蓟两州游弈兵马使。任没辱孤为平州游弈兵马使，均赐姓李氏。
English: His subordinate Chiso was General Zuo Weiwei, and he was the envoy to the war games of the two states of Danzhou and Shantou. He was also the envoy to the war games of the state of Pingzhou, and both of them were given the surname Li.

古文：然阴结回鹘、室韦兵犯西城、振武。
现代文：然而他们暗中勾结回鹘、室韦侵犯西城、振武。
English: However, they secretly colluded to encroach on Xicheng and Zhenwu.

古文：大抵宪宗世四朝献。
现代文：终宪宗之世，四次朝献。
English: During the life of the last Kensei Sect, four imperial offerings were made.

古文：大和四年，复盗边，庐龙李载义破之，执大将二百余人，缚其帅茹羯来献，文宗赐冠带，授右骁卫将军。
现代文：大和四年，再次侵扰边界，卢龙的李载义将他打败，俘获大将二百余人，缚其帅茹羯来献。文宗赦其罪，赐给冠带，任他为右骁卫将军。
English: In the 4th year of the Taisho era, he invaded the border again. Lulong's Li Zaiyi defeated him, captured more than 200 generals, and tied up his son Shuai Rong to offer. Wenzong forgave his sin, gave him the crown belt, and made him the right guard general.

古文：后五年，大首领匿舍朗来朝。
现代文：五年后，大首领匿舍朗来朝。
English: Five years later, the great leader Nisshe Lang came to the DPRK.

古文：大中元年，北部诸山奚悉叛，庐龙张仲武禽酋渠，烧帐落二十万，取其刺史以下面耳三百，羊牛七万，辎贮五百乘，献京师。
现代文：大中元年，北部众山奚都反叛，卢龙的张仲武抓获大酋领，焚烧帐落二十万，收取其刺史以下的面耳三百人，牛羊七万，辎贮五百车入献京师。
English: In the first year of the Great Middle Ages, all the mountain clans in the north rebelled, and Zhang Zhongwu of Lulong captured the great chiefs, burned 200,000 tents, and received 300 people, 70,000 cattle and sheep, and 500 wagons for the Beijing division.

古文：咸通九年，其王突董苏使大都督萨葛入朝。
现代文：咸通九年，奚王突董苏派大都督萨葛入朝。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Hamdang, the king of Shanshan sent the grand governor Sagat to the imperial court.

古文：是后契丹方强，奚不敢亢，而举部役属。
现代文：此后，契丹日强，奚不敢也不能与之抗衡，就举部依附。
English: After that, the stronger the Khitan state became, the more he did not dare or could not compete with it, and he became dependent on it.

古文：虏政苛，奚怨之，其酋去诸引别部内附，保妫州北山，遂为东、西奚。
现代文：契丹政苛严，奚又有怨恨。其酋长去诸，引支部来归附，据守妫州北山，从此就有了东奚与西奚两部。
English: The Khitan government was harsh, and there was resentment. Its chiefs went to Zhu, and the branch office was annexed, and it was guarded by Beishu Beishan. Since then, there have been two branches, East and West.

