古文：《易》曰 观乎人文以化成天下 ，孔子曰 焕乎其有文章 也。
现代文：《易》说 观人文以化成天下 ，孔子说 有光采呵他的礼仪制度 。
English: "Yi" said that the view of humanities should be transformed into the world, and Confucius said that his etiquette system should be enlightened.

古文：自楚、汉以降，辞人世出，洛汭、江左，其流弥畅。
现代文：自楚、汉以来，辞人代出，洛油、江左，其流更加顺畅。
English: Since the Chu and Han dynasties, dictionaries have been issued on behalf of Luo Yu and Jiang Zuo, and the flow has been smoother.

古文：莫不思侔造化，明并日月，大则宪章典谟，裨赞王道，小则文理清正，申纾性灵。
现代文：无不思与造化同，明与日月齐，大者宪章文典，裨赞王道，小者文理清正，藉以抒发性灵。
English: Nothing but thought is the same as creation, light is the same as the sun and the moon, the great man's charter is the textbook, the king's way is praised, the small man's literature is clear and correct, and the spirit is expressed.

古文：至于经礼乐，综人伦，通古今，述美恶，莫尚乎此。
现代文：至于经礼乐，综人伦，通古今，述美恶，无不崇尚于此。
English: As for the sutra and ritual music, it is revered for its comprehensiveness of human relations, its connection to the past and the present, and its depiction of good and evil.

古文：后主嗣业，雅尚文词，傍求学艺，焕乎俱集。
现代文：后主继业，崇尚文词，旁求学艺，文采光明者都予集中。
English: Post-master's career, advocating literary words, learning skills on the side, and those who are bright in literature will be concentrated.

古文：每臣下表疏及献上赋颂者，躬自省览，其有辞工，则神笔赏激，加其爵位，是以搢绅之徒，咸知自励矣。
现代文：每有臣下表疏和献上赋颂的，后主都亲自览板，其中有文辞精工的，他就称神笔而倍加赞赏，加他们的爵位，由此士大夫们都知道自我激励了。
English: The empress dowager personally inspected each and every one of her vassals who wrote down and presented their eulogies. For those who excelled in writing, he called them "divine pens" and doubled their praise, adding their peerage. Thus, the scholars and magistrates all knew that they had been self-motivated.

古文：若名位文学晃著者，别以功迹论。
现代文：如有名位文学都突出的，另以功縯论。
English: If famous literature is prominent, another theory of merit will be used.

古文：今缀杜之伟等学既兼文，备于此篇云尔。
现代文：今集结杜之伟等人勤学又兼文采者，全载于此篇述及。
English: Du Zhiwei and other diligent students and writers are now assembled, all of which are described in this article.

古文：杜之伟，字子大，吴郡钱塘人也。
现代文：杜之伟，字子大，吴郡钱塘人。
English: Du Zhiwei, a big character, from Qiantang, Wuxi County.

古文：家世儒学，以《三礼》专门。
现代文：家庭世代为儒学，以《三礼》为专门之学。
English: Confucianism was taught in the family for generations, with the "Three Rites" as a special subject.

古文：父规，梁奉朝请，与光禄大夫济阳江革、都官尚书会稽孔休源友善。
现代文：父亲杜规，梁朝任奉朝请，与光禄大夫济阳江革、都官尚书会稽孔休源友好。
English: His father, Du Gui, was appointed by Liang Chao to serve the imperial court, and he was friendly with the Guanglu doctor, Jiyang Jiangge, and the prefectural government official, Shang Shucai.

古文：之伟幼精敏，有逸才。
现代文：杜之伟幼年精勤聪敏，有出众的才智。
English: As a child, Du Zhiwei was diligent, intelligent and had outstanding talent.

古文：七岁，受《尚书》，稍习《诗》、《礼》，略通其学。
现代文：七岁受教《尚书》；稍后又学习《诗》、《礼》，略通遣些学问。
English: At the age of seven, he was taught "Shang Shu"; later, he also studied "Poetry" and "Rite," and passed on some knowledge.

古文：十五，遍观文史及仪礼故事，时辈称其早成。
现代文：十五岁遍读文史及礼仪方面的古书，当时有名人士称他早成。
English: At the age of fifteen, he read ancient books on literary history and etiquette. At that time, famous people said that he was a precocious child.

古文：仆射徐勉尝见其文，重其有笔力。
现代文：仆射徐勉曾见到杜之伟的文章，看重他的文章有笔力。
English: Du Zhiwei's article was once seen by his servant, Xu Mian, who valued Du Zhiwei's writing ability.

古文：中大通元年，梁武帝幸同泰寺舍身，敕勉撰定仪注，勉以台阁先无此礼，召之伟草具其仪。
现代文：中大通元年，梁武童驾幸回童支为宣扬佛法自加苦行，韶涂勉撰定仪注，徐勉以台阁先前无此礼，召杜之伟草拟其仪。
English: In the first year of junior high school, Liang Wudong had the good fortune to return to Tongzhi to promote Buddhism with self-imposed penance. He drew up a set of rules and regulations, and Xu Yan, who had never done so before, called Du Zhiwei to draft his rules and regulations.

古文：乃启补东宫学士，与学士刘陟等钞撰群书，各为题目。
现代文：于是启奏补杜之伟为东宫学士，与学士刘陟等抄撰群书，各为题目。
English: As a result, Fu Du Zhiwei, a graduate of Donggong University, and Liu Wei, a graduate of Donggong University, copied and wrote a group of books, each with its own topic.

古文：所撰《富教》、《政道》二篇，皆之伟为序。
现代文：所撰《富教》、《政道》二篇，都由杜之伟为序。
English: The two articles "Fu Jiao" and "Zheng Dao" were both written by Du Zhiwei.

古文：及湘阴侯萧昂为江州刺史，以之伟掌记室。
现代文：到湘阴侯萧昂为江州刺史，以杜之伟掌记室。
English: Xiao'ang, the lord of Hunan and Yin, wrote the history of Jiangsu, with Du Zhiwei as the recorder.

古文：昂卒，庐陵王续代之，又手教招引，之伟固辞不应命，乃送昂丧柩还京。
现代文：萧昂死，庐陵王萧续代之，又亲手写教令招引，杜之伟坚辞不应命，于是送萧昂丧棺回京。
English: When Xiao Ang died, the King of Fuling, Xiao Zhuang, succeeded him and wrote the edict himself. Du Zhiwei's words were not enough to save his life, so he sent Xiao Ang's coffin back to Beijing.

古文：仍侍临城公读。
现代文：乃侍奉临城公读书。
English: He studied under Lord Lincheng.

古文：寻除扬州议曹从事、南康嗣王墨曹参军，兼太学限内博士。
现代文：不久封扬州议曹从事、南康嗣王墨曹参军，兼太学限内博士。
English: Soon after, he was appointed Yangzhou Counsellor, joined the South Kangxi Army, and received a doctorate from the Imperial Academy of Sciences.

古文：大同七年，梁皇太子释奠于国学，时乐府无孔子、颜子登歌词，尚书参议令之伟制其文，伶人传习，以为故事。
现代文：大同七年，梁朝皇太子祭拜于国学，其时乐府无孔子、颜子登歌词，尚书参议令杜之伟制其文，艺人传习，成为故事。
English: In the seventh year of the Datong, the crown prince of the Liang Dynasty began to worship in the study of Chinese classics. At that time, there was no Confucius or Yan Zi in the music school, and Yan Zi wrote the lyrics, and Du Zhiwei, the councillor of the music school, wrote the text, and the artist passed on the learning, which became a story.

古文：转补安前邵陵王田曹参军，又转刑狱参军。
现代文：转补安前邵陵王田曹参军，又转任刑狱参军。
English: Shao Ling Wang Tian Cao joined the army before he was transferred to Taiping, and he also joined the army after he was transferred to the prison.

古文：之伟年位甚卑，特以强识俊才，颇有名当世，吏部尚书张缵深知之，以为廊庙器也。
现代文：杜之伟年纪地位卑下，特以强识俊才，有名于当世，吏部尚书张缵深为了解他，认为他是能为朝廷负重任的大臣之才
English: Du Zhiwei was of humble birth, but he was famous in the contemporary world for his strong intellect and talent. The Ministry of Civil Service had a deep understanding of him and believed that he was a talented minister who could assume important responsibilities for the imperial court.

古文：侯景反，之伟逃窜山泽。
现代文：侯景反叛，杜之伟逃窜到山泽。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Du Zhiwei fled to the mountains.

古文：及高祖为丞相，素闻其名，召补记室参军。
现代文：到高祖为丞相，久闻其名，召补为记室参军。
English: Gaozu became chancellor, and his name was known for a long time. He was summoned to join the army as a recorder.

古文：迁中书侍郎，领大著作。
现代文：改任中书侍郎，领大著作。
English: He was reassigned to the position of chusho-sajiro (chamber secretary) and became the leader of the university's literature department.

古文：高祖受禅，除鸿胪卿，馀并如故。
现代文：高祖受禅，封鸿胪卿，其余都照旧。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen, Feng Hongzhu Sir, and the rest are as before.

古文：之伟启求解著作，曰： 臣以绍泰元年，忝中书侍郎，掌国史，于今四载。
现代文：杜之伟启奏请求解去大著作，说： 我在绍泰元年，愧任中书侍郎，掌国史，至今已四年。
English: Du Zhiwei made a request for the removal of the great work, saying: In the first year of Shao Tai, I am ashamed to have been appointed as the secretary of the middle school, in charge of the country's history, and it has been four years.

古文：臣本庸贱，谬蒙盼识，思报恩奖，不敢废官。
现代文：我本是平庸卑贱之辈，谬蒙重视赏识，我思报恩奖之情，不敢废官职。
English: I used to be a mediocre and low-class person, but I have been valued and appreciated. I want to repay the kindness of the award, and I dare not resign from the post.

古文：皇历惟新，驱驭轩、昊，记言记事，未易其人，著作之材，更宜选众。
现代文：皇历惟新，驱策驾驭轩、县，记言记事，没有变换人，著作之才，更应从众人中选。
English: The imperial calendar is new, the driving strategy is to drive Xuan, county, remember words, remember things, there is no change of people, the talent of writing, should be selected from the crowd.

古文：御史中丞沈炯、尚书左丞徐陵、梁前兼大著作虞荔、梁前黄门侍郎孔奂，或清文赡笔，或强识稽古，迁、董之任，允属群才，臣无容遽变市朝，再妨贤路。
现代文：御史中丞沈炯、尚书左丞徐陵、梁朝前兼大著作虞荔、梁朝前黄门侍郎王逸，他们有的文清笔富，有的强识通古，司马迁、董狐之职，完全属于他们这些人才，我不应迅速改变市朝，再妨碍贤路。
English: Gushizhongzheng Shenyu, Shangshuzhongzheng Xuling, Liang Zhaozhong and the great writer Yu Li, Liang Zhaozhong's former Yellow Gate attendant Wang Yizhong, some of them have rich literatures in the Qing Dynasty, some have strong knowledge of ancient times, and the posts of Sima Qian and Dong Jixin belong entirely to these talents. I should not quickly change the city and country, and then obstruct the path of virtue.

古文：尧朝皆让，诚不可追，陈力就列，庶几知免。 
现代文：童在朝时都让贤，我既不能追上他们，勉强列于其中，希望能够去职。 
English: I was not able to catch up with them, I was listed among them reluctantly, and I hope to be able to leave the post.

古文：优敕不许。
现代文：帝韶不允许。
English: The imperial harp is not allowed.

古文：寻转大匠卿，迁太中大夫，仍敕撰梁史。
现代文：不久转任大匠卿，改任太中大夫，仍韶撰凿史。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Daisho-kyo (Master Craftsman) and Taichung Doctor, and continued to write history.

古文：永定三年卒，时年五十二。
现代文：丞室三年死，其时五十二岁。
English: His wife died three years later at the age of fifty-two.

古文：高祖甚悼惜之，诏赠通直散骑常侍，赙钱五万，布五十匹，棺一具，克日举哀。
现代文：高祖甚为悼念惋惜，韶赠通直散骑常侍，赠助办丧事钱五万，布五十匹，棺材一具，限日举行哀礼。
English: Gao Zu was very sorry for the mourning. He presented a gift of 50,000 yuan, 50 pieces of cloth, one coffin, and a memorial service on the designated day.

古文：之伟为文，不尚浮华，而温雅博赡。
现代文：姓之伟撰文，不崇尚浮华，而是温雅博富。
English: The author, surnamed Zhiwei, does not advocate flashy, but gentle and affluent.

古文：所制多遗失，存者十七卷。
现代文：所撰文章多遗失，存者共十七卷。
English: Many of the articles were lost, but seventeen volumes remain.

古文：颜晃，字元明，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：颜晃，字元明，琅邪临沂近人。
English: Yan Rong, Zi Yuanming, and Zi Yanzhong are close relatives.

古文：少孤贫，好学，有辞采。
现代文：少年孤独贫困，好学，辞章富有文采。
English: The boy is lonely and poor, eager to learn, and his words are full of poetry.

古文：解褐梁邵陵王兼记室参军。
现代文：初任梁朝邵陵王兼记室参军。
English: The first king of Liang Dynasty, Shao Ling Wang, also joined the army.

古文：时东宫学士庾信尝使于府中，王使晃接对，信轻其尚少，曰： 此府兼记室几人？ 
现代文：其时东宫学士庐值曾出使于府中，王派颜晃接对，轻视他年纪还小，说： 此府兼记室几人? 
English: At that time, Donggong Baccalaureate Zou Zeng had been dispatched to the government office. Wang sent Yan Jiao to meet him, despised his young age, and said: How many people are in this government office?

古文：晃答曰： 犹当少于宫中学士。 
现代文：颜晃答道： 犹当少于宫中学士。 
English: Yan Akira replied, "Yudang is not as good as Miya Junior High School."

古文：当时以为善对。
现代文：当时人认为此乃佳对。
English: At the time, people thought this was a good idea.

古文：侯景之乱，西奔荆州。
现代文：侯景作乱，颜晃西奔荆州。
English: Hou Jing created a disturbance, and Yan Xingxing fled to Jingzhou.

古文：承圣初，除中书侍郎。
现代文：承圣初年，封中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of his ordination, he became a priest's page.

古文：时杜龛为吴兴太守，专好勇力，其所部多轻险少年，元帝患之，乃使晃管其书翰。
现代文：此时杜宠为吴兴太守，专门喜好勇力，他的部下多是敢于轻易冒险的少年，元帝视为心患，便派颜晃管杜龠的书札。
English: At this time, Du Zhao was the governor of Wu Xing, who was especially fond of bravery. Most of his subordinates were young men who dared to take risks easily. Yuan Di regarded this as a heart problem, and sent Yan Xingguan, Du Zhou's scribe.

古文：仍敕龛曰： 卿年时尚少，习读未晚，颜晃文学之士，使相毘佐，造次之间，必宜谘禀。 
现代文：于是下韶对杜宠说： 你年纪还轻，学习读书不晚，颜晃是文学之士，派他在你身边辅助，事情仓促、急速时，可以咨询禀告。 
English: Therefore, the lower jaw said to Du Qiao: You are still young, it is not too late to learn to read, Yan Ao is a man of literature, send him to assist you, when things are hasty and rapid, you can consult the obituary.

古文：及龛诛，晃归世祖，世祖委以书记，亲遇甚笃。
现代文：到杜宠被杀，颜晃归世祖，世祖委任他为书记，亲近厚遇关系极好。
English: When Du Qiao was killed, Yan Ao returned to his ancestor. The ancestor appointed him as secretary, and they had a close and warm relationship.

古文：除宣毅府中录事，兼记室参军。
现代文：封宣毅府中绿事，兼记室参军。
English: Xuan Yi was given the title of vice-governor of the palace, and he also joined the army.

古文：永定二年，高祖幸大庄严寺，其夜甘露降，晃献《甘露颂》，词义该典，高祖甚奇之。
现代文：永定二年，高祖驾临大庄严寺，这一夜甘露降下，颜晃献上《甘露颂》，词义精赅典雅，高担十分惊奇。
English: In the second year of Yongding, Gao Zu drove to the Grand Solemn Temple. That night, the nectar fell, and Yan Xing presented the "Ode to Nectar." The meaning of the words was exquisite and elegant. Gao Ran was very surprised.

古文：天嘉初，迁员外散骑常侍，兼中书舍人，掌诏诰。
现代文：天嘉初年，改任员外散骑常侍，兼中书舍人，掌诏诰文书。
English: In the first year of Tian Jia, he was reappointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, a regular attendant, and also a secondary school librarian, in charge of official documents.

古文：三年卒，时年五十三。
现代文：天嘉三年死，其时五十三岁。
English: Tian Jia died three years later, at the age of 53.

古文：诏赠司农卿，谥曰贞子，并赐墓地。
现代文：诏赠司农卿，谧号贞子，并赐以墓地。
English: The imperial edict bestowed upon him the title of Senenkyo, the posthumous name of Sadako, and granted him a cemetery.

古文：晃家世单门，傍无戚援，而介然修立，为当世所知。
现代文：颜晃家庭世代单门，旁无亲戚可援，然而他能专一修身而立，为当世人所知。
English: Yan's family has been single-parent for generations, and he has no relatives to help him. However, he is known to the world for his dedication to self-improvement.

古文：其表奏诏诰，下笔立成，便得事理，而雅有气质。
现代文：他写表奏韶诰，下笔便成，能得事理，且典雅有气质。
English: He can write and play music at the drop of a hat, he can reason, and he has an elegant temperament.

古文：有集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the series.

古文：江德藻，字德藻，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江德藻，字德藻，济阳郡考城人。
English: Jiang Dezuo, Zi Dezuo, Jiyang County Kaocheng people.

古文：祖柔之，齐尚书仓部郎中。
现代文：祖父江柔之，齐朝尚书仓部郎中。
English: Grandfather of Jiang Rongzhi, a disciple of Shang Shukang in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父革，梁度支尚书、光禄大夫。
现代文：父革，梁朝度支尚书、光禄大夫。
English: His father, Liang Chaodu Shizhong, was a doctor in Guanglu.

古文：德藻好学，善属文。
现代文：江德藻好学，擅长写文章。
English: Jiang Deyao is good at studying and writing articles.

古文：美风仪，身长七尺四寸。
现代文：风度仪表很美，身长七尺四寸。
English: She has a beautiful demeanor and is seven feet four inches tall.

古文：性至孝，事亲尽礼。
现代文：生性极孝顺，事奉亲人尽礼。
English: They are extremely filial by nature and do their best to serve their relatives.

古文：与异产昆弟居，恩惠甚笃。
现代文：舆同父异母弟弟居住，两人恩惠很深。
English: My half-brother lives with me, and the two of them are very close.

古文：起家梁南中郎武陵王行参军。
现代文：初任梁朝南中郎武陵王行参军。
English: The first head of the Liang Dynasty, the South Middle Brother, Wuling Wang Xing, joined the army.

古文：大司马南平王萧伟闻其才，召为东阁祭酒。
现代文：大司马卖垩王蓝伟听闻他的才名，召他为东合祭酒。
English: After hearing of his talent, Lan Wei, the chief steward of the horse-sellers, called him to make the Donghe Festival wine.

古文：迁安西湘东王府外兵参军，寻除尚书比部郎，以父忧去职。
现代文：改任安西湘束王府外兵参军，继而封尚书比部郎，以父丧离职。
English: He was reassigned as a foreign soldier from Anxi Xiangzhuangfu to join the army, and then he was given the title of Shang Shubiro and left the service after his father's death.

古文：服阕之后，容貌毁瘠，如居丧时。
现代文：服丧完毕后，容貌清瘦，如仍在服丧时。
English: After the mourning is over, the appearance is clear and thin, as if still in mourning.

古文：除安西武陵王记室，不就。
现代文：封安西武陵王记室，不去就职。
English: An Xi Wuling Wang Ji's office, not to take office.

古文：久之，授庐陵王记室参军。
现代文：很久后，授庐陵王记室参军。
English: A long time later, Juxu Ling Wang Ji's family joined the army.

古文：除廷尉正，寻出为南兗州治中。
现代文：封廷尉正，不久出为南兖州治中。
English: He was a court lieutenant, and soon became a middle-ranking official in Southern Zhangzhou.

古文：及高祖为司空、征北将军，引德藻为府谘议。
现代文：到高祖为司空、征北将军，引江德藻为府谘议。
English: Gao Zu is the Secretary of the Air Force and the General of the Northern Expedition, and Jiang Demao is the prefectural adviser.

古文：转中书侍郎，迁云麾临海王长史。
现代文：转任中书侍郎，改任云麾临海王长史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Chushushijiro, and then to the post of Yunshao Linhai Wangchongshi.

古文：陈台建，拜尚书吏部侍郎。
现代文：陈朝台阁建立，拜为尚书吏部侍郎。
English: Chen Chao-tai-kaku was established, and he was appointed as the attendant of the official secretary department.

古文：高祖受禅，授秘书监，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：高祖受禅，授秘书监，兼尚书左丞。
English: Gaozu received Zen, was awarded the title of secretary supervisor, and was also awarded the title of Shuzo Zojo.

古文：寻以本官兼中书舍人。
现代文：不久以本官兼中书舍人。
English: Soon after, he resigned from his post as principal and teacher.

古文：天嘉四年，兼散骑常侍，与中书郎刘师知使齐，著《北征道理记》三卷。
现代文：天嘉四年，兼散骑常侍，舆中书郎刘师知出使齐，着《北征道理记》三卷。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Jia, he was also a knight errant, and Liu Shichide, a scholar in the Middle Ages, was an envoy to Qi. He wrote three volumes of "The Northern Expedition."

古文：还拜太子中庶子，领步兵校尉。
现代文：回还拜为太子中庶子，领步兵校尉。
English: He was the prince's illegitimate son and an infantry captain.

古文：顷之迁御史中丞，坐公事免。
现代文：不久改任御史中丞，因公事牵连被免职。
English: He was soon promoted to goshi chujo, but was removed from his post due to his involvement in public affairs.

古文：寻拜振远将军、以通直散骑常侍。
现代文：继而拜为振远将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: Subsequently, he was worshipped as General Zhenyuan and Zongzhizang riding a horse as a regular attendant.

古文：自求宰县，出补新喻令，政尚恩惠，颇有异绩。
现代文：自己求任县令，出而补为新喻令，为政崇尚恩惠，很有不寻常的政绩。
English: He applied for the post of county magistrate, but was replaced by a new magistrate, and was praised for his political benevolence. This was a very unusual political achievement.

古文：六年，卒于官，时年五十七。
现代文：天嘉六年，死于官任内，其时五十七岁。
English: Tian Jia, aged six, died in office, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：世祖甚悼惜之，诏赠散骑常侍。
现代文：世祖很为痛悼惋惜，诏蹭散骑常侍。
English: The ancestor was very sorry for the mourning, and the imperial edict dispersed the regular attendants.

古文：所著文笔十五卷。
现代文：所著文章笔记共十五卷。
English: The author's article notes total fifteen volumes.

古文：子椿，亦善属文，历太子庶子、尚书左丞。
现代文：江德藻儿子江椿，也擅长写文章，历任太子庶子、尚书左丞。
English: Jiang Zemo's son, Jiang Tsubaki, is also good at writing articles. Successive prince's illegitimate son, Shang Shuzhu, is also good at writing articles.

古文：庾持，字允德，颍川鄢陵人也。
现代文：庾持，字允德，颍川鄢陵人。
English: He was a reserved, courteous man, and a member of the Hechuan Hanling people.

古文：祖佩玉，宋长沙内史。
现代文：祖父庾佩玉，宋朝长沙内史。
English: Grandfather Zou Peiyu, Song Dynasty Changsha history.

古文：父沙弥，梁长城令。
现代文：父亲庾沙弥，梁朝长城令。
English: His father, Bishami, ruled the Great Wall during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：持少孤，性至孝，居父忧过礼。
现代文：庾持少年成为孤儿，生性极孝，服父丧时超过礼节。
English: The reserved boy became an orphan, he was very filial by nature, and he went beyond the etiquette when he attended his father's funeral.

古文：笃志好学，尤善书记，以才艺闻。
现代文：专志好学，尤其擅长书记，以才艺闻名。
English: He is studious, especially good at secretarial work, and is known for his talent.

古文：解褐梁南平王国左常侍、轻车河东王府行参军，兼尚书郎，寻而为真。
现代文：初任梁朝南平王国左常侍、轻车河东王府行参军，兼尚书郎，不久即为正式。
English: At the beginning, he was the Left Attendant of the Nanping Kingdom of the Liang Dynasty, and he joined the army in a carriage to the King's palace in the eastern part of the He River. He was also a scholar, and he became an official soon after.

古文：出为安吉令，迁镇东邵陵王府限外记室，兼建康令。
现代文：出为安吉令，改任镇东邵陵王府限外记室，兼建康令。
English: Issued as Anji Order, he was assigned to the Zhendong Shaoling Wangfu Guan Gao Jie, and concurrently as Jiankang Order.

古文：天监初，世祖与持有旧，及世祖为吴兴太守，以持为郡丞，兼掌书翰，自是常依文帝。
现代文：天监初年，因世祖与庾持有旧情，到世祖为吴兴太守，命庾持为郡丞，兼掌书札，自此常依随文童。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervisor, because the founder of the world had an old relationship with Wu Xing, Wu Xing became the de facto ruler of the world, and Wu Xing was appointed as the county magistrate, and he was also in charge of the book collection. Since then, he often followed Wen Tong.

古文：文帝克张彪，镇会稽，又令持监临海郡。
现代文：文帝攻克张彪，镇守会稽，又令座持监守临海郡。
English: Emperor Wen conquered Zhang Biao, the town's guardian, and made him the guardian of Linhai County.

古文：以贪纵失民和，为山盗所劫，幽执十旬，世祖遣刘澄讨平之，持乃获免。
现代文：因贪婪放纵失去民心，被山盗所劫持。被幽禁一百天，世祖派刘澄讨伐平定，庾持才获免。
English: Because of greed and indulgence, he lost the hearts of the people, and was kidnapped by bandits. He was imprisoned for a hundred days, and the patriarch sent Liu Cheng to fight and pacify him. Only then was he released.

古文：高祖受禅，授安东临川王府谘议参军。
现代文：高祖受禅，授封安东临王府谘议参军。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen and was awarded the title of Andong Linwangfu to advise him to join the army.

古文：天嘉初，迁尚书左丞。
现代文：天嘉初年，改任尚书左丞。
English: In the first year of Tian Jia, he was reassigned to Shang Shuzo Zojo.

古文：以预长城之功，封崇德县子，邑三百户。
现代文：因参预长城有功，封为崇德县子，邑三百户。
English: Because of his contribution to the Great Wall, he was awarded the title of the son of Chongde County, with 300 households in the county.

古文：拜封之日，请令史为客，受其饷遗，世祖怒之，因坐免。
现代文：拜封之日，请令史为客，并受了他的饷赠，世祖大怒，因此牵连而免职。
English: On the day of his enthronement, he invited Shi to be his guest and received a gift from him. Shi Zu was furious, and was removed from his post as a result.

古文：寻为宣惠始兴王府谘议参军。
现代文：不久为宣惠始兴王府谘议参军。
English: Soon after, he joined the army as an adviser to the royal court of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：除临安令，坐杖杀县民免封。
现代文：封临安令，因牵连杖杀县民而免去封职。
English: He was relieved of his duties because he was implicated in the murder of county residents with a cane.

古文：迁为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：回还任给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was reappointed to the post of Huangmen waiter.

古文：除棱威将军、盐官令。
现代文：封棱威将军、盐官令。
English: General Feng Renwei and the order of the salt officer.

古文：光大元年，迁秘书监，知国史事。
现代文：光大元年，改任秘书监，知国史事。
English: In the first year of Guangda University, he was reassigned to the post of secretary superintendent, studying the history of the country.

古文：又为少府卿，领羽林监。
现代文：又为少府卿，领羽林监。
English: He was also a minor prefect and the leader of the forestry inspectors.

古文：迁太中大夫，领步兵校尉。
现代文：改任太中大夫，领步兵校尉。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Taichung Medical Officer, leading infantry captain.

古文：太建元年卒，时年六十二。
现代文：太建元年死，其时六十二岁。
English: Tai Jian died in 1981, at the age of sixty-two.

古文：诏赠光禄大夫。
现代文：诏赠光禄大夫。
English: Emperor's edict bestows doctor's salary on Guanglu.

古文：持善字书，每属辞，好为奇字，文士亦以此讥之。
现代文：庾持擅长文字学，每撰文，喜好用奇僻字，文士们颇以此讥讽他。
English: He was good at calligraphy and liked to use unusual characters in his writings. Scribes often made fun of him for this.

古文：有集十卷。
现代文：有文集十卷。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：许亨，字亨道，高阳新城人，晋徵士询之六世孙也。
现代文：许亨，字亨道，高阳郡新城人，他是晋朝征士许询的第六世孙。
English: Xu Heng, surnamed Heng Dao, from Xincheng, Goyang County, was the sixth-generation grandson of the Jin Dynasty solicitor Xu Enquirer.

古文：曾祖珪，历给事中，委桂阳太守，高尚其志，居永兴之究山，即询之所隐也。
现代文：曾祖父许珪，历任给事中，委以桂阳太守，他高尚己志，居于永兴的究山，此即许询隐居之地。
English: His great-grandfather Xu Xi, who was appointed Guiyang's governor-general, lived in Yongxing's Qushan Mountain, where Xu Xi lived in seclusion.

古文：祖勇慧，齐太子家令、冗从仆射。
现代文：祖父许勇慧，齐朝太子家令、冗从仆射。
English: Grandfather Xu Yonghui, the prince of Qi Dynasty, the leader of the family, the leader of the household.

古文：父懋，梁始平天门二郡守、太子中庶子、散骑常侍，以学艺闻，撰《毛诗风雅比兴义类》十五卷，《述行记》四卷。
现代文：父亲许懋，梁朝始平天门二郡守、太子中庶子、散骑常侍，以学艺闻名，撰有《毛诗风雅比兴义类》十五卷，《述行记》四卷。
English: His father Xu Jun, Liang Chao Shi Ping Tianmen, two county governors, the prince's middle child, and a knight's footman, were famous for their learning. They wrote 15 volumes of "Mao Shi Feng Yabi Xingyi Class" and 4 volumes of "Record of Actions."

古文：亨少传家业，孤介有节行。
现代文：许亨少传家业，方正耿直而有节操行为。
English: Xu Heng is less likely to inherit the family business, and the founder is straightforward and has a disciplined behavior.

古文：博通群书，多识前代旧事，名辈皆推许之，甚为南阳刘之遴所重，每相称述。
现代文：博览群书，多通晓前代旧事，名人们都推崇他，很为南阳刘之遴所看重，每每对人称道述及他。
English: He has an extensive collection of books, knows a lot about previous generations and events, and is highly respected by celebrities. He is highly valued by Nanyang Liu's selection committee, and is mentioned in every pair of people's praise.

古文：解褐梁安东王行参军，兼太学博士，寻除平西府记室参军。
现代文：初任梁朝安束王行参军，兼太学博士，不久封平西府记室参军。
English: The first president of the Liang Dynasty, An Sok Wang Xing, joined the army, and was also a doctor of science, and soon he was sent to the Pingxi Prefecture Records Office to join the army.

古文：太清初，为征西中记室，兼太常丞。
现代文：太清初年，为征西中记室，兼太常丞。
English: In the first year of the Taiching Dynasty, he became the secretary of the Western Conquest Middle School, and also the Grand Chancellor.

古文：侯景之乱，避地郢州，会梁邵陵王自东道至，引为谘议参军。
现代文：侯景作乱，许亨避难到郢州，适遇梁朝邵陵王从东道而来，引他为谘议参军。
English: Hou Jing made a disturbance, Xu Heng took refuge in Zhangzhou, and when the Liang Dynasty's King Shao Ling came from his host, he invited him to join the army for consultation.

古文：王僧辩之袭郢州也，素闻其名，召为仪同从事中郎。
现代文：王僧辩袭击郢州时，早听闻他的名声，召他为仪同从事中郎。
English: When Wang Sangye attacked Zhangzhou, he had already heard of his reputation and called him to be a middle-ranking official.

古文：迁太尉从事中郎，与吴兴沈炯对掌书记，府朝政务，一以委焉。
现代文：改任太尉从事中郎，与吴兴沈炯对掌书记，府中朝廷的政务，均委任他们。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain and engaged in the role of middle-ranking official, and he and Wu Xing Sheng were appointed to the posts of secretary and government affairs in the palace and the court.

古文：晋安王承制，授给事黄门侍郎，亨奉笺辞府，僧辩答曰： 省告，承有朝授，良为德举。
现代文：晋安王承制，授封给事黄门侍郎，许亨奉笺到府上辞行，王僧辩答道： 明白所告，能承有朝廷所授，确为恩惠之举。
English: The King of Jin'an accepted the system and conferred the title of Huangmen Zhiran, and Xu Heng Bongye went to the palace to resign. The king monk replied: It is clearly reported that it is indeed an act of grace to be able to receive the award from the court.

古文：卿操尚惇深，文艺该洽，学优而官，自致青紫。
现代文：你品德敦厚理想深远，写作方面学问广博，学优而任官，自己谋到贵官之服。
English: You are virtuous, idealistic and far-reaching. You have a broad knowledge of writing. You are an excellent student and have been appointed as an official. You have even managed to get yourself appointed as an official.

古文：况久羁骏足，将成顿辔，匡辅虚暗，期寄实深。
现代文：何况久羁于骏马之足，将成为停马的缰绳，匡辅成了虚暗之事，而期望寄托实际很深。
English: What's more, if you stay at a horse's feet for a long time, you will become a horse's bridle. Condoms have become a thing of darkness, and expectations are deeply rooted in reality.

古文：既欣游处，用忘劳屈，而枳棘栖鹓，常以增叹。
现代文：既然是令人高兴的游处，忘了劳烦与委屈，但是多刺的枳木棘木上栖息鹅鸟，常令人增加叹息。
English: Since it is a pleasant place to play, forget the troubles and grievances, but the thorny birch thorns on which the geese perch, often make people sigh more.

古文：夕郎之选，虽为清显，位以才升，差自无愧。
现代文：黄门侍郎之选，虽是清高显贵，然你是位以才升，自然无愧。
English: Huangmen waiter's choice, although it is noble and dignified, but you are the first to rise, naturally worthy of praise.

古文：且卿始云知命，方骋康衢，未有执戟之疲，便深夜行之慨，循复来翰，殊用怃然。
现代文：而且你开始时曾说知命，如正驰骋在康庄大道，没有执戟的疲乏，便发出了深深的夜行之感慨，循环往复来信，为未获殊用而茫然自失。
English: And you said at the beginning that you knew your destiny, if you were galloping on Kangzhuang Avenue, without the fatigue of holding on, you sent out a deep night walk emotion, a cycle of letters, and lost yourself for not being awarded.

古文：古人相思，千里命驾，素心不昧，宁限城闉，存顾之深，荒惭无已。 
现代文：古人相思，千里之遥也舍命驾，纯洁的心不昧，哪怕城曲重门的限制，存顾的情之深，很为羞愧不已。 
English: The ancients yearned for each other, even though they were thousands of miles away, they risked their lives for each other, their pure hearts were not lacking, even though the city was surrounded by heavy gates, they cared deeply for each other, and they were very ashamed.

古文：高祖受禅，授中散大夫，领羽林监。
现代文：高祖受禅，授中散大夫，领羽林监。
English: Gao Zu took up Zen, was awarded the title of Zhongshan Doctor, and became a forester.

古文：迁太中大夫，领大著作，知梁史事。
现代文：改任太中大夫，领大著作，知梁史事。
English: He was reappointed as the Grand Vice-Chancellor of the University of Tsukuba, authored a number of works, and was knowledgeable about history.

古文：初，僧辩之诛也。
现代文：当初，王僧辩被杀。
English: At first, Wang Sangye was killed.

古文：所司收僧辩及其子頠尸，于方山同坎埋瘗，至是无敢言者。
现代文：所管司收王僧辩及其儿子王颢的尸体，在方山同处埋葬，至此无人敢言。
English: No one dared to say anything about the fact that the bodies of Wang Sangyan and his son, Wang Yao, were buried in the same place in Fangshan.

古文：亨以故吏，抗表请葬之，乃与故义徐陵、张种、孔奂等，相率以家财营葬，凡七柩皆改窆焉。
现代文：许亨以旧吏身份，上书请求按礼葬之，便与过去的义友徐陵、张种、孔奂等，相继以家财购买葬具，共七口棺材都改置葬处。
English: Xu Heng, in his capacity as a former official, submitted a request for a ceremonial funeral, and together with his past friends Xu Ling, Zhang Zeng and Kong Wei, he successively purchased funeral equipment with his family's money, and a total of seven coffins were relocated to the burial place.

古文：光大初，高宗入辅，以亨贞正有古人之风，甚相钦重，常以师礼事之。
现代文：光大初年，高宗入朝辅政，以许亨为人正直有古人之风，很予钦敬看重，常对他事以师礼。
English: In the first year of Guangda University, Gao Zong entered the government as an aide to the emperor. Xu Heng was an honest person with the style of the ancients. He was highly respected and valued, and was often a mentor to him.

古文：及到仲举之谋出高宗也，毛喜知其诈，高宗问亨，亨劝勿奉诏。
现代文：到到仲举策谋让高宗出朝，毛喜知道其中有诈，高宗问许亨，许亨劝他不要奉韶。
English: When it came to the mediation of the scheme to let Gao Zong ascend to the throne, Mao Xi knew that there was fraud, Gao Zong asked Xu Heng, and Xu Heng advised him not to offer a bribe.

古文：高宗即位，拜卫尉卿。
现代文：高宗登位，许亨拜为卫尉卿。
English: Gaozong ascended to the throne, and Xu Hengbai became the Lord of the Imperial Guards.

古文：太建二年卒，时年五十四。
现代文：太建二年死，其时五十四岁。
English: Tai Jian died two years later at the age of fifty-four.

古文：初撰《齐书》并《志》五十卷，遇乱失亡。
现代文：开初尽皇撰有《齐书》并《志》五十卷，遇乱遗失。
English: At the beginning of his reign, the emperor compiled "Qi Shu" and "Zhi" in fifty volumes, which were lost in the turmoil.

古文：后撰《梁史》，成者五十八卷。
现代文：后撰有《梁史》，写成五十八卷。
English: Later, he compiled "History of Liang," which was written in fifty-eight volumes.

古文：梁太清之后所制文笔六卷。
现代文：梁朝主遣之后所撰文章笔记共六卷。
English: A total of six volumes of article notes written after Liang Chao's visit.

古文：子善心，早知名，官至尚书度支侍郎。
现代文：许亨儿子许善心，早年出名，官至尚书度支侍郎。
English: Xu Heng's son, Xu Zenshin, became famous in his early years, and became a high-ranking official and a secretary.

古文：褚玠，字温理，河南阳翟人也。
现代文：褚玠，字温理，河南阳翟人。
English: , the characters Wen Li, Henan Yang Xuan Ren.

古文：曾祖炫，宋升明初与谢朏、江斅、刘俣入侍殿中，谓之四友。
现代文：曾祖褚炫，宋朝升明初年与谢朏、江斅、刘俣入侍殿中，人称四友。
English: Zeng Zu Rongxuan, in the first year of the Song Dynasty and the rise of the Ming Dynasty, entered the palace with Xie Rong, Jiang Rong and Liu Mata, known as the four friends.

古文：官至侍中、吏部尚书，谥贞子。
现代文：官至侍中、吏部尚书，谧号皇王。
English: He was a high-ranking official, a member of the Privy Council, a member of the Council of State, and his posthumous title was Emperor.

古文：祖涷，梁御史中丞。
现代文：祖父褚涷，梁朝御史中丞。
English: His grandfather, Liang Chao, was a middle-ranking official in the imperial court.

古文：父蒙，太子舍人。
现代文：父亲褚蒙，太子舍人。
English: The father, Yimeng, and the prince, Zhou.

古文：玠九岁而孤，为叔父骠骑从事中郎随所养。
现代文：褚玠九岁成为孤儿，被叔父骠骑从事中郎褚随所收养。
English: He became an orphan at the age of nine and was adopted by his uncle, who was engaged in horse riding.

古文：早有令誉，先达多以才器许之。
现代文：早年即有好名声，前辈多认为他是有才之器而推重他。
English: He had a good reputation in his early years, and his predecessors thought he was a talented person and promoted him.

古文：及长，美风仪，善占对，博学能属文，词义典实，不好艳靡。
现代文：到长大，风度仪表很美，擅长口占对子，博学而能写文章，词义典实，不喜好艳丽侈靡。
English: When they grow up, their manners and appearance are very beautiful, they are good at matching partners, they are erudite and can write articles, their vocabulary is solid, and they don't like flashy luxury.

古文：起家王府法曹，历转外兵记室。
现代文：初任王府法曹，转任外兵记室。
English: He was initially a legal assistant at the Imperial Palace, and then transferred to the Foreign Soldiers Registration Office.

古文：天嘉中，兼通直散骑常侍，聘齐，还为桂阳王友。
现代文：天嘉年中，兼通直散骑常侍，聘于齐，返回后成为桂阳王友。
English: In the middle of the Tian Jia year, he was also appointed as an equerry, and was employed in Qi. After his return, he became a friend of King Guiyang.

古文：迁太子庶子、中书侍郎。
现代文：改任太子庶子、中书侍郎。
English: He was reappointed as the Prince's illegitimate son and junior secretary.

古文：太建中，山阴县多豪猾，前后令皆以赃污免，高宗患之，谓中书舍人蔡景历曰： 稽阴大邑，久无良宰，卿文士之内，试思其人。 
现代文：太建年中，山阴县中多不守法度的豪强，前后县令都因贪脏枉法而被免官，高宗很为担心，对中书舍人蔡景历说道： 会稽山阴大邑，很久没有良官，你在文士裹面，试着考虑一个人选。 
English: In the mid-19th century, most of the officials in Shanyin County did not abide by the law, and the county magistrates were dismissed for corruption. Gao Zong was very worried, and said to Cai Jingli, a Chinese calligrapher: There has been no good official in Shanyin County for a long time, you are a scribe, try to consider a candidate.

古文：景历进曰： 褚玠廉俭有干用，未审堪其选不？ 
现代文：蔡景历进言道： 褚玢廉洁勤俭有才干，不知您看他能否中选? 
English: Cai Jinglian said, "He is honest, diligent, thrifty and talented. I don't know if you can see if he can be elected.

古文：高宗曰： 甚善，卿言与朕意同。 
现代文：高宗说： 很好，你所说舆我的意思正相同。 
English: Gaozong said, "Very good, what you said about me is exactly what I meant.

古文：乃除戎昭将军、山阴令。
现代文：便封褚蚧为戎昭将军、山阴令。
English: He was then given the title of General Rensho and the order of Sangin.

古文：县民张次的、王休达等与诸猾吏贿赂通奸，全丁大户，类多隐没。
现代文：县民张次的、王休达等人舆多位不守法度的官吏贿赂通奸，全丁大户，大多被隐没。
English: County residents Zhang Zi, Wang Xueda and many other officials who did not abide by the law bribed adultery, all of them were large households, and most of them were hidden.

古文：玠乃锁次的等，具状启台，高宗手敕慰劳，并遣使助玠搜括，所出军民八百馀户。
现代文：褚蚧便捉捕张次的等人，将详细情况启奏禀告朝廷，高宗亲笔下韶予以慰劳，并派人帮助褚蚧搜查抄括，清出军民八百余户。
English: Gaozong then caught and arrested Zhang Zi and others, and reported the details to the imperial court. Gaozong personally wrote a letter of consolation to Zhang Zi, and sent people to help Zhang Zi search and sweep, clearing out more than 800 military and civilian households.

古文：时舍人曹义达为高宗所宠，县民陈信家富于财，谄事义达，信父显文恃势横暴。
现代文：其时舍人曹义达被高宗所宠，县民陈信家很有财富，他谄媚事奉曹义达，陈信父亲陈显文仗势横暴。
English: At that time, Cao Yida, the son of Cao Zong, was favored by Gao Zong. Chen Xin, a resident of the county, was very rich. He served Cao Yida with charm. Chen Xin's father, Chen Xianwen, was violent.

古文：玠乃遣使执显文，鞭之一百，于是吏民股栗，莫敢犯者。
现代文：褚阶便派人捉拿陈显文，鞭打一百，于是官吏百姓都害怕了，没有敢犯法的。
English: The authorities then sent someone to arrest Chen Xianwen and whip him a hundred times, so the officials and the people were afraid and did not dare to break the law.

古文：信后因义达谮玠，竟坐免官。
现代文：陈信后来通过曹义达诬陷壁瓰，竟以牵连罪而被免官。
English: Chen Xin was later framed by Cao Yida and was removed from office for the crime of implication.

古文：玠在任岁馀，守禄俸而已，去官之日，不堪自致，因留县境，种蔬菜以自给。
现代文：壁珍在任一年多，仅有俸禄而已，离官之日，不能自己维持生活，便留在县境内，种蔬菜以满足自己的生活。
English: For more than a year, Qizhen only received a salary. On the day of his retirement, unable to support himself, he stayed in the county and grew vegetables to make a living.

古文：或嗤玠以非百里之才，玠答曰： 吾委输课最，不后列城，除残去暴，奸吏局蹐。
现代文：有人嗤笑褚蚧不是百里之才，褚玢答道： 我运送赋税最力，不落后列城，我除残去暴，使贪官污吏畏缩恐惧。
English: Some people scoffed that he did not have the talent of a hundred li, and he replied: I am the strongest in delivering taxes, I do not lag behind other cities, I eliminate cruelty and violence, and make corrupt officials shrink in fear.

古文：若谓其不能自润脂膏，则如来命。
现代文：如果说是不能自己为自己丰润脂膏，那么我是诚如所说。
English: If it's true that you can't use lip balm to plump yourself up, then I'm right there with you.

古文：以为不达从政，吾未服也。 
现代文：但认为我不能很好从政，我不会服气。 
English: But I'm not convinced that I can't do well in politics.

古文：时人以为信然。
现代文：当时人认为他所说是可信的。
English: What he said was considered credible at the time.

古文：皇太子知玠无还装，手书赐粟米二百斛，于是还都。
现代文：皇太子知道褚玢没有回还京城的行装，亲自批赐粟米二百斛，于是褚玢回还京城。
English: The crown prince knew that Zou had not returned to the capital, so he personally gave Zou two hundred mu of corn, and Zou returned to the capital.

古文：太子爱玠文辞，令入直殿省。
现代文：太子喜爱锄的文辞，令他入直殿省。
English: The crown prince liked Shun's words and had him appointed to the Ministry of the Palace.

古文：十年，除电威将军、仁威淮南王长史，顷之，以本官掌东宫管记。
现代文：太建十年，封电威将军、仁威淮南王长史，不久，以本官掌东宫管记。
English: In the 10th year of the Great Leap Forward, General Fei Denyi and King Zhenwei of Huainan were appointed, and shortly after, he became the official in charge of the East Palace.

古文：十二年，迁御史中丞，卒于官，时年五十二。
现代文：十二年，改任御史中丞，死于官任上，其时五十二岁。
English: In 1912, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, and died in office at the age of fifty-two.

古文：玠刚毅有胆决，兼善骑射。
现代文：褚玠刚毅而有胆量和决断力，兼擅长骑马射箭。
English: He is tough and has courage and determination. He is also good at riding and archery.

古文：尝从司空侯安都于徐州出猎，遇有猛虎，玠引弓射之，再发皆中口入腹，俄而虎毙。
现代文：曾随从司空侯安都在徐州出猎，遇有猛兽，造垃引弓射之，两发，都射中：而入于腹中，一会儿兽即死。
English: He had been out hunting in Xuzhou with Sikuo Hou'an. When they encountered a ferocious beast, they shot it with a bow and arrow. Two shots were fired, both of which hit it in the stomach, and the beast died immediately.

古文：及为御史中丞，甚有直绳之称。
现代文：到任御史中丞时，很有正直绳法之称。
English: When he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, he was known as a very honest person.

古文：自梁末丧乱，朝章废弛，司宪因循，守而勿革，玠方欲改张，大为条例，纲维略举，而编次未讫，故不列于后焉。
现代文：从銮末丧乱，朝廷章法废弛，司宪因循旧章，守旧而不革新，褚蚧想要改张，大列条例，纲要略举，但编次没完毕，所以不列于后面。
English: From the end of the Edo period, there was turmoil, the Imperial Court's constitution and laws were abolished, the Constitutional Court followed the old constitution, adhered to the old and did not innovate, and wanted to change the constitution, a large number of regulations and outlines were briefly mentioned, but the series was not completed, so they were not listed later.

古文：及卒，太子亲制志铭，以表惟旧。
现代文：到死，太子亲自撰写墓志铭，以表旧情。
English: Until his death, the prince personally wrote an epitaph to express his old feelings.

古文：至德二年，追赠秘书监。
现代文：至德二年，追赠秘书监。
English: Two years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of secretary superintendent.

古文：所制章奏杂文二百馀篇，皆切事理，由是见重于时。
现代文：所撰章奏杂文共二百余篇，都能切中事理，由此见重于当时。
English: He wrote more than two hundred essays, all of which were able to get to the heart of the matter, which made him more important than he was at the time.

古文：子亮，有才学，官至尚书殿中侍郎。
现代文：褚玠儿子褚亮，有才学，官至尚书殿中侍。
English: Zou's son was brilliant, talented in learning, and rose to the rank of official, serving as the middle attendant in the study hall.

古文：岑之敬，字思礼，南阳棘阳人也。
现代文：岑之敬，字思礼，南阳棘阳人。
English: 之敬,字思礼,南阳棘yang人.

古文：父善纡，梁世以经学闻，官至吴宁令、司义郎。
现代文：父亲岑善纡，梁朝以经学出名，官至吴宁令、司义郎。
English: His father, Zou Zensheng, was famous for his study of the classics during the Liang Dynasty, and his officials included Wu Ningling and Siyi Lang.

古文：之敬年五岁，读《孝经》，每烧香正坐，亲戚咸加叹异。
现代文：岑之敬五岁时，读《孝经》，每次烧香都正襟危坐，亲戚们都大加叹异。
English: At the age of five, when reading the "Filial Piety Sutra," every time she burned incense, she was in a state of crisis, and her relatives all sighed.

古文：年十六，策《春秋左氏》、制旨《孝经》义，擢为高第。
现代文：十六岁，编简《春秋左氏》、制《孝经》旨义，被提拔为高品第。
English: At the age of sixteen, he edited "Spring and Autumn of the Left" and compiled "Filial Piety," and was promoted to the first grade.

古文：御史奏曰： 皇朝多士，例止明经，若颜、闵之流，乃应高第。 
现代文：御史上奏道： 皇朝多人士，提拔之例应止于明经，如颜、闵之流，才应是高品第。 
English: The imperial history recited: There are many people in the imperial court, and the examples of promotion should stop at the Ming Dynasty, such as Yan and Zou, and only then should they be high-ranking.

古文：梁武帝省其策曰： 何妨我复有颜、闵邪？ 
现代文：梁武帝览其奏策道： 何妨我朝又有颜、闵呢? 
English: Emperor Liangwu looked at his report and said, "How is it that I have a face and eyelashes in the morning?

古文：因召入面试，令之敬升讲座，敕中书舍人硃异执《孝经》，唱《士孝章》，武帝亲自论难。
现代文：便召岑之敬面试，令岑之敬升讲座，诏中书舍人朱异执《孝经》，唱《士孝章》，武帝亲自提出难题。
English: Emperor Wu then called for an interview with Zhu Xi, gave a lecture to promote him to the next rank, made Zhu Xi, the scribe of the imperial edict, recite the "Charter of Filial Piety" and sing the "Charter of Filial Piety," and Emperor Wu himself posed the difficult questions.

古文：之敬剖释纵横，应对如响，左右莫不嗟服。
现代文：岑之敬剖析解释纵横有序，应对自如，声音洪亮，左右人无不叹服。
English: Zou's respectful analysis and explanation are orderly, the response is comfortable, the voice is loud, and people on both sides are impressed.

古文：乃除童子奉车郎，赏赐优厚。
现代文：于是封童子奉车郎，赏赐优厚。
English: As a result, the boy was given the title of chariot driver and a generous reward.

古文：十八，预重云殿法会，时武帝亲行香，熟视之敬曰： 未几见兮，突而弁兮！ 
现代文：十八岁，参预重云殿法会，其时武帝亲自行香，注目看着岑之敬说： 没几次见啊，你突然戴帽子啊! 
English: At the age of eighteen, he participated in the preliminary heavy cloud hall puja. At that time, Emperor Wu personally burned incense. He looked at Zou Zhixian and said: I haven't seen you for a few times, but suddenly you're wearing a hat!

古文：即日除太学限内博士。
现代文：当天便封太学限内博士。
English: On the same day, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Science within the academic limit.

古文：寻为寿光学士、司义郎，又除武陵王安西府刑狱参军事。
现代文：不久为寿光学士、司义郎，又封武陵王安西府刑狱参军事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Shouko-shi, Siyiro, and was assigned to the Wuling Wang Anxi Prison to serve in the military.

古文：太清元年，表请试吏，除南沙令。
现代文：太清元年，上表请试官，封南沙令。
English: In the first year of the Taiching Dynasty, the above table was requested by the examiner, and the Nansha Decree was issued.

古文：侯景之乱，之敬率所部赴援京师。
现代文：侯景作乱，岑之敬率领部下，赴京城增援。
English: Houjing made a disturbance, and Zou Ziqing led his subordinates to go to Beijing to reinforce.

古文：至郡境，闻台城陷，乃与众辞诀，归乡里。
现代文：到郡境，听说台城陷落，便与众人辞别，回归乡里。
English: When he arrived at the county border and heard that Taicheng had fallen, he said goodbye to everyone and returned to the countryside.

古文：承圣二年，除晋安王宣惠府中记室参军。
现代文：承圣二年，封晋安王宣惠府中记室参军。
English: In the second year after his consecration, he joined the army after being assigned to the Middle Records Office of King Jinan's Xuan Hui Prefecture.

古文：是时萧勃据岭表，敕之敬宣旨慰喻，会江陵陷，仍留广州。
现代文：此时萧勃占据岭表，帝韶岑之敬宣旨慰劳，正值江陵陷落，他仍留在广州。
English: At this time, Xiao Bo occupied the Ling table, the emperor's honorable proclamation of consolation, coincided with the fall of Jiangling, he still remained in Guangzhou.

古文：太建初，还朝，授东宫义省学士，太子素闻其名，尤降赏接。
现代文：太建初年，回朝廷，被授东宫义省学士，太子早已听闻他的名声，特别赏识并延请他。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian's reign, he returned to the imperial court and was awarded the Donggong Yizhou Baccalaureate. The prince had already heard of his reputation, especially appreciated him and invited him.

古文：累迁鄱阳王中卫府记室、镇北府中录事参军、南台治书侍御史、征南府谘议参军。
现代文：又改任鄱阳王中卫府记室、镇北府中录事参军、南台治书侍御史、征南府谘议参军。
English: In addition, he was assigned to the record office of the Middle Palace Guard of the King of Shenyang, the Middle Record Office of Zhenbei Prefecture and joined the army, the History Office of Nantai Province, and the Consultation Office of Southern Province.

古文：之敬始以经业进，而博涉文史，雅有词笔，不为醇儒。
现代文：岑之敬开始以经业进身，而又博涉文史，文笔典雅，不做纯儒者。
English: Zou Ziqian started his career as a scholar, but he also dabbled in literary history and wrote elegantly, so he was not a pure Confucianist.

古文：性廉谨，未尝以才学矜物，接引后进，恂恂如也。
现代文：他本性谦虚谨慎，不曾以才学矜物恃傲，接引后进者，非常忠厚诚恳。
English: He is modest and prudent by nature, has never been proud of his learning, and is very loyal and sincere.

古文：每忌日营斋，必躬自洒扫，涕泣终日，士君子以笃行称之。
现代文：每逢忌办斋，他必定亲自洒水扫地，哭泣终日，士人君子很以他这种专意之行称道他。
English: Whenever he held a meal, he would personally sprinkle water and sweep the floor, weeping all day long. The scholar-gentlemen praised him very much for his dedication.

古文：十一年卒，时年六十一。
现代文：太建十一年死，其时六十一岁。
English: Tai Jian died eleven years ago, at the age of sixty-one.

古文：太子嗟惜，赙赠甚厚。
现代文：太子感叹惋惜，赠助丧事的财物很厚重。
English: The prince lamented and regretted that the property donated for the funeral was very heavy.

古文：有集十卷行于世。
现代文：有文集十卷行于世。
English: There is a ten-volume work that is popular in the world.

古文：子德润，有父风，官至中军吴兴王记室。
现代文：岑之敬的儿子岑德润，有父亲遣风，官至中军吴兴王记室。
English: Zou Derun, the son of Zou Ziqian, was sent by his father to the Chinese army to report on the family of Wu Xingwang.

古文：陆琰，字温玉，吏部尚书琼之从父弟也。
现代文：陆琰，字温玉，吏部尚书陆琼的堂弟。
English: Lu Yao, also known as Wen Yu, was the cousin of Lu Qiong, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：父令公，梁中军宣城王记室参军。
现代文：父亲陆令公，梁朝中军宣球三记室参军。
English: His father, Lu Ronggu, joined the army from the Third Recorder's Office of Xuanqiu in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：琰幼孤、好学，有志操。州举秀才。
现代文：陆琰幼年成为孤儿，好学，有志向有德操被州中举为秀才。
English: Lu Yao was orphaned at a young age. He was studious, ambitious and virtuous, and was praised as an outstanding talent by the middle school.

古文：解褐宣惠始兴王行参军，累迁法曹外兵参军，直嘉德殿学士。
现代文：初任宣惠始兴土行参军，又改任法曹外兵参军，直嘉德殿学士。
English: At the beginning, Xuan Huizhi joined the army in Xingdu, and then he was appointed as a legal officer for foreign soldiers to join the army, and then he became an academician of the Jijie De Dian.

古文：世祖听览馀暇，颇留心史籍，以琰博学，善占诵，引置左右。尝使制《刀铭》，琰援笔即成，无所点窜，世祖嗟赏久之，赐衣一袭。
现代文：世祖听政阅览公文空闲时，很留心史籍，以陆琰博学，善吟诵，将他引置于身边曾要陆琰撰《刀铭》，陆琰提笔即成，没有改动，世祖叹赏很久，赐他衣服一袭。
English: When listening to the government and reading official documents in his spare time, the ancestor paid close attention to historical books. He learned a lot from Lu Xun and was good at reciting. He was introduced to Lu Xun and asked him to write "The Sword Inscription." Lu Xun picked up the pen and it was done immediately. There was no change. The ancestor admired Lu Xun for a long time and gave him clothes.

古文：俄兼通直散骑常侍，副琅邪王厚聘齐，及至鄴下而厚病卒，琰自为使主。
现代文：不久兼通直散骑常侍，作为琅邪王厚的副使出聘齐，到邺下时王厚病亡，陆琰白为使主。
English: Soon after, he also became a regular attendant on horseback, and was appointed as the deputy envoy of Wang Hou, who died of illness when he came under the command of the emperor. Lu Shibai was the envoy.

古文：时年二十馀，风神韶亮，占对闲敏，齐士大夫甚倾心焉。还为云麾新安王主簿，迁安成王长史，宁远府记室参军。
现代文：其时二十多岁，风度神采光亮，应对娴熟敏捷，齐士大夫们十分倾心回朝后为云麾新安王主簿，改任安成王长史，宁远府记室参军。
English: At that time, he was in his twenties, with a bright demeanor and a skillful and agile response. After returning to the imperial court, Qi Shi's doctors were very devoted to the main book of Yunqi Xin'an Wang, and were reassigned to Ancheng Wang Changshi, and Ningyuan prefectural office to join the army.

古文：太建初，为武陵王明威府功曹史，兼东宫管记。
现代文：太建初年，为武陵王明威府功曹史，兼束宫管记。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was a meritorious scholar of Wuling Wang Mingwei Prefecture, and also a record keeper of the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁母忧去官。
现代文：母丧离官。
English: After his mother's death, he left the ministry.

古文：五年卒，时年三十四。
现代文：太建五年死，其时三十四岁。
English: Tai Jian died five years later at the age of thirty-four.

古文：太子甚伤悼之，手令举哀，加其赙赠，又自制志铭。
现代文：太子非常感伤哀悼，亲令举行哀礼，加其助办丧事财物之赠，又自撰墓志铭。
English: The prince was very sad and mournful. He personally ordered a memorial service to be held, and he also helped to arrange the funeral and gave gifts of property. He also wrote his own epitaph.

古文：至德二年，追赠司农卿。
现代文：至德二年，追赠司农卿。
English: Two years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of Minister of Agriculture.

古文：琰寡嗜欲，鲜矜竞，游心经籍，晏如也。
现代文：陆琰很少嗜好欲望，很少夸耀竞争心理，衹游心于经籍，十分安然。
English: Lu Yao rarely indulges in desires, rarely boasts of competition, and is very content with his studies.

古文：其所制文笔多不存本，后主求其遗文，撰成二卷。有弟瑜。
现代文：他所撰文章笔记多不存本，坠主求他的遣文，衹撰成二卷有弟名叫坠逾。
English: Most of the notes of the articles he wrote were not kept in a book. He was asked by his master to send him a manuscript, which was compiled into two volumes by a younger brother named Shengyo.

古文：瑜字干玉。
现代文：陆瑜，字干玉。
English: Lu Yu, Zi Gan Yu.

古文：少笃学，美词藻。
现代文：少年时即专意于学习，词藻优美。
English: When he was a boy, he devoted himself to learning and had a beautiful vocabulary.

古文：州举秀才。
现代文：被州裹举为秀才。
English: He was a standout in the state's junior high.

古文：解褐骠骑安成王行参军，转军师晋安王外兵参军、东宫学士。
现代文：初任骠骑安成王行参军，转任军师晋安王外兵参军、束宫学士。
English: He was initially assigned to ride on the horse of Ancheng Wang to join the army, and then he was transferred to be the military instructor of Jinan Wang, a foreign soldier to join the army, and Sokgong Baccalaureate.

古文：兄琰时为管记，并以才学娱侍左右，时人比之二应。
现代文：兄陆琰此时为管记，他俩同以才学娱侍左右，当时人比喻他们为二应。
English: At this time, his elder brother, Lu Yao, was in charge of the records, and the two of them used their talents to study and entertain. At that time, people likened them to two monkeys.

古文：太建二年，太子释奠于太学，宫臣并赋诗，命瑜为序，文甚赡丽。
现代文：太建二年，太子祭奠于太学，宫臣一同赋诗，命陆瑜作序，序文写得十分富赡华丽。
English: In the second year of Taiken, the prince's memorial service was held at Taigaku. The palace courtiers contributed poems together, and Lu Yu wrote the preamble. The preamble was very rich and gorgeous.

古文：迁尚书祠部郎中，丁母忧去职。
现代文：改任尚书祠部郎中，母丧离职。
English: He was reappointed as the vice-chairman of the Shoshu Shrine Department, and left the post after his mother's death.

古文：服阕，为桂阳王明威将军功曹史，兼东宫管记。
现代文：服丧毕，任桂阳王明威将军功曹史，兼束宫管记。
English: After the funeral, he was appointed as the general of Guiyang Wang Mingwei Gong Cao Shi, and also the secretary of the palace.

古文：累迁永阳王文学、太子洗马、中舍人。
现代文：又改任永阳王文学、太子洗马、中舍人。
English: He was also reappointed as Yongyang Literature King, Prince Saima, and Zhongshe Ren.

古文：瑜幼长读书，昼夜不废，聪敏强记，一览无复遗失。
现代文：陆瑜幼年时长时间读书，日夜不断，聪敏强记，读一遍就不会再忘失。
English: When Lu Yu was a child, she read for a long time, day and night, and she was very clever at memorizing. Once she read it, she would never forget it.

古文：尝受《庄》、《老》于汝南周弘正，学《成实论》于僧滔法师，并通大旨。
现代文：曾受汝南周弘正教《庄》、《老》，学《成实论》于僧滔法师，均能通晓这些书的大旨。
English: He had studied Zhuang and Lao from the Ru'nan Zhouhong Orthodox Church, as well as "The Theory of Becoming a Reality" from the monk Tao, and was able to understand the gist of these books.

古文：时皇太子好学，欲博览群书，以子集繁多，命瑜钞撰，未就而卒，时年四十四。
现代文：其时皇太子好学，想博览群书，因为子集繁多，命陆瑜抄撰，可未完成便死了，其时四十四岁。
English: At that time, the crown prince was eager to learn and wanted to read a lot of books. Because there were many children, he ordered Lu Yu to copy it, but he died before completing it. He was forty-four years old at the time.

古文：太子为之流涕，手令举哀，官给丧事，并亲制祭文，遣使者吊祭。
现代文：太子为之流涕，亲令举行哀礼，官府给办丧事，并亲自撰祭文，派使者吊丧祭奠。
English: The prince shed tears for him, ordered a memorial service to be held, the government organized a funeral, and personally wrote a memorial and sent an emissary to pay tribute.

古文：仍与詹事江总书曰： 管记陆瑜，奄然殂化，悲伤悼惜，此情何已。
现代文：还给詹事江总写信说： 管记陆瑜，突然身亡，悲伤悼念惋惜，此情怎能了。
English: He also wrote a letter to Zhan Shijiang, saying: Guan Ji Lu Yu, sudden death, sadness, mourning, regret, how can this be?

古文：吾生平爱好，卿等所悉，自以学涉儒雅，不逮古人，钦贤慕士，是情尤笃。
现代文：我生平爱好，你们都了解，白认为学涉儒雅，比不上古人，但钦佩贤人敬慕志士，此情尤其专一。
English: As you all know, my life's hobby is to think that learning involves sophistication, which is not as good as the ancients, but I admire the wise and admire the aspirants, and this feeling is particularly special.

古文：梁室乱离，天下糜沸，书史残缺，礼乐崩沦，晚生后学，匪无墙面，卓尔出群，斯人而已。
现代文：梁皇朝乱离，天下沸腾，书史残缺，礼乐崩坏沦落，晚生后学，不是没有不学无术的，但出类拔萃的，惟此人罢了。
English: Emperor Liang's dynasty is falling apart, the world is in turmoil, books and history are incomplete, ritual music has fallen into disrepair, and learning after late birth is not unskilled, but outstanding, except for this person.

古文：吾识览虽局，未曾以言议假人，至于片善小才，特用嗟赏。
现代文：吾见识观览虽有局限，但不曾以言议错人，甚至于那些稍有善才的，我也特别予以赞赏。
English: Although I have limited knowledge and observation, I have never misjudged anyone, even those with a little talent, and I especially appreciate them.

古文：况复洪识奇士，此故忘言之地。
现代文：何况那些有广博学识的奇士了，造就是我所以到忘言地步的缘故。
English: Not to mention those wizards with extensive knowledge, which is why I am at a loss for words.

古文：论其博综子史，谙究儒墨，经耳无遗，触目成诵，一褒一贬，一激一扬，语玄析理，披文摘句，未尝不闻者心伏，听者解颐，会意相得，自以为布衣之赏。
现代文：论陆瑜的博综子书史书，熟谙儒家墨家，凡经耳者都不会遣漏，凡触目者均可以成诵，一褒一贬，一激一扬，解说玄秘分析哲理，剖文摘句，未尝不使闻者心服，听的人开颜欢笑，会意相得，自以为是布衣庶士的赏识。
English: On Lu Yu's book on the history of Confucianism, familiar with Confucianism, anyone who listens will not miss it, anyone who touches the eyes can recite it, one praises, one disparages, one excites, explains esoteric analysis and philosophy, excerpts from the article, those who do not taste and do not hear are convinced, those who listen are happy, get along well, and think they are the appreciation of clothed men.

古文：吾监抚之暇，事隙之辰，颇用谭笑娱情，琴樽间作，雅篇艳什，迭互锋起。
现代文：我在监国抚军空闲时，办事间隙时，多以谈笑娱情，操琴与饮酒间作文，雅篇艳文，交相迭加而蜂起。
English: When I was supervising the National Guard in my spare time, when I had a break from work, I mostly talked, laughed and entertained, played the piano and wrote essays between drinking, and wrote elegant and colorful essays.

古文：每清风朗月，美景良辰，对群山之参差，望巨波之滉漾，或玩新花，时观落叶，即听春鸟，又聆秋雁，未尝不促膝举觞，连情发藻，且代琢磨，间以嘲谑，俱怡耳目，并留情致。
现代文：每当清风朗月之时，美景良辰之际，面对着参差高低的群山，眼望着浮动起伏的巨波，或玩新花，或观落叶，既听春鸟，又聆秋雁，未尝不促膝举杯，连情发辞藻，且代以互相琢磨，间杂以互相嘲谪，都能怡入耳目，均留下情致。
English: Whenever the weather is clear and the moon is bright, when the scenery is beautiful, facing the mountains of different heights and heights, looking at the floating undulating waves, or playing with new flowers, or watching the falling leaves, listening to the spring birds, listening to the autumn geese, raising a glass without hesitation, and even uttering words of love, and instead of studying each other, interspersed with mocking each other, can be pleasant to the ears and eyes, all of which leave feelings.

古文：自谓百年为速，朝露可伤，岂谓玉折兰摧，遽从短运，为悲为恨，当复何言。
现代文：自称百年时间太快，早上的露水可使人感伤，哪裹知道会玉折兰摧，迅速从了短运，是悲是恨，该再说什么。
English: Self-proclaimed hundred years of time is too fast, the morning dew can make people sentimental, who knows what will happen, quickly from the short-lived, is sad or hate, what else to say.

古文：遗迹馀文，触目增泫，绝弦投笔，恒有酸恨。
现代文：留下的遣迹余文，触增悲，绝弦投笔，永有酸痛与悲恨。
English: The remaining documents left behind by the emissaries will increase the sadness, and there will always be pain and resentment.

古文：以卿同志，聊复叙怀，涕之无从，言不写意。 
现代文：因你与我同有志向，故而聊以叙怀，涕泪无从流，言不达意。 
English: Because you and I have the same ambition, so we talk with sadness, tears without tears, and words without meaning.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：太子对陆瑜的看重到如此地步。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：至德二年，追赠光禄卿。
现代文：至德二年，追赠光禄卿。
English: Two years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of Guangluqing.

古文：有集十卷。
现代文：有文集十卷。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：瑜有从父兄玠，从父弟琛。
现代文：陆瑜有堂兄陆玢，堂弟陆琛。
English: Lu Yu has a cousin Lu Yao, a cousin Lu Yao.

古文：玠字润玉，梁大匠卿晏子之子。
现代文：陆阶，字润玉，梁朝大匠卿陆晏子的儿子。
English: Lu Jia, Zhi Run Yu, the son of the great Liang Dynasty master Lu Xunzi.

古文：弘雅有识度，好学，能属文。
现代文：宽弘文雅而有学识风度，好学，能撰文。
English: He is broad-minded, elegant and has a scholarly demeanor. He is eager to learn and can write articles.

古文：举秀才，对策高第。
现代文：被举为秀才，对策考试入高品第。
English: He was praised as an outstanding talent and ranked first in the countermeasures examination.

古文：吏部尚书袁枢荐之于世祖，超授衡阳王文学，直天保殿学士。
现代文：吏部尚书袁枢将他推荐给世祖，超授他为衡阳王文学，直天保殿学士。
English: Shangshu Yuan Zu, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, recommended him to Shizu, and he was awarded the title of Hengyang King of Literature and the title of Zhi Tian Bao Dian Baccalaureate.

古文：太建初，迁长沙王友，领记室。
现代文：太建初年，改任长沙王友，领记室。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was reassigned to Changsha Wang You, Receiving and Recording Office.

古文：后主在东宫，闻其名，徵为管记。
现代文：后主在束宫，听闻他的名声，征他为管记。
English: Afterward, the lord heard of his fame in Sok Palace and recruited him as a steward.

古文：仍除中舍人，管记如故，甚见亲待。
现代文：又封中舍人，管记照旧，很见亲近对待。
English: Once again, the central government sealed off the people, and the records were kept as usual. It was a very close relationship.

古文：寻以疾失明，将还乡里，太子解衣赠玠，为之流涕。
现代文：不久因病而眼失明，将要还乡里，太子解下衣服赠送陆玢，并为之而流涕。
English: Soon he will be blind from illness and will have to return to the countryside. The prince will take off his clothes, give him the earthenware bowl and shed tears for him.

古文：八年卒，时年三十七。
现代文：太建八年死，其时三十七岁。
English: Tai Jian died eight years later at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：有令举哀，并加赗赠。
现代文：帝有令举行丧事，并加赠助葬财物。
English: The emperor ordered the funeral to be held, and also gave gifts of funeral goods.

古文：至德二年，追赠少府卿。
现代文：至德二年，追赠少府卿。
English: Two years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shofu-kyo.

古文：有集十卷。
现代文：有文集十卷。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：琛字洁玉，宣毅临川王长史丘公之子。
现代文：陆琛，字洁玉，宣毅临川王长史陆丘公的儿子。
English: Lu Yao, also known as Jie Yu, was the son of the king of Linchuan, Lu Qiu.

古文：少警俊，事后母以孝闻。
现代文：少年时机警而才智出众，侍奉后母以孝顺闻名。
English: The boy is quick-witted and talented, and is known for his filial piety in serving his stepmother.

古文：世祖为会稽太守，琛年十八，上《善政颂》，甚有词采，由此知名，举秀才。
现代文：世祖任会稽太守时，陆琛十八岁，奏上《善政颂》，很有词采，由此而知名，被举为秀才。
English: When the founder of the world was appointed to the position of auditor-general, Lu Wei was 18 years old. He played the "Ode to Good Governance," which was very eloquent, and thus became famous and was praised as an outstanding talent.

古文：起家为衡阳王主簿，兼东宫管记。
现代文：初任衡阳王主簿，兼束宫管记。
English: He was the chief bookkeeper of the first Hengyang King, and also the secretary of the imperial court.

古文：历豫章王文学，领记室，司徒主簿，直宣明殿学士。
现代文：历任豫章王文学，领记室，司徒主簿，直宣明殿学士。
English: Successively held the posts of Yu Zhangwang Literature, Recorder's Office, St. Peter's Home, and Jiksen Myeongdong Academy.

古文：寻迁尚书三公侍郎，兼通直散骑常侍，聘齐，还为司徒左西掾。
现代文：不久改任尚书三公侍郎，兼通直散骑常侍，聘于齐，回还后为司徒左西掾。
English: He was soon appointed as the attendant of Shosho Sanko, and also the attendant of Tsuchida Sanshiro, and was employed in Qi, and after his return, he became the attendant of Shuto Zuishi.

古文：又掌东宫管记，太子爱琛才辩，深礼遇之。
现代文：又掌束宫管记，太子喜爱陆琛的富才善辩，以深礼厚待他。
English: He was also in charge of the palace administration, and the prince loved Lu Yao's talent and eloquence, and treated him with deep courtesy.

古文：后主嗣位，迁给事黄门侍郎、中书舍人，参掌机密。
现代文：后主继位。改任给事黄门侍郎、中书舍人，参预掌管机密。
English: He was later succeeded by the head of the family. He was reassigned to the position of Huangmen waiter, chusho (secondary school teacher) and prefect in charge of confidential matters.

古文：琛性颇疏，坐漏泄禁中语，诏赐死，时年四十二。
现代文：陆琛生性很随便，因泄露宫中的话获罪，帝下诏赐死，其时四十二岁。
English: Lu Xun's birth was very casual. He was found guilty of leaking the palace's words and was sentenced to death by imperial edict at the age of forty-two.

古文：何之元，庐江灊人也。
现代文：何之元，庐江郡灊人。
English: For whatever reason, the people of Minjiang County have risen to the top.

古文：祖僧达，齐南台治书侍御史。
现代文：祖父何僧达，齐朝南台治书侍御史。
English: His grandfather, He Zongda, ruled Southern Taiwan during the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父法胜，以行业闻。
现代文：父亲何法胜，以操行事业闻名。
English: His father, Ho Ho Sheng, was famous for his business activities.

古文：之元幼好学，有才思，居丧过礼，为梁司空袁昂所重。
现代文：何之元幼年好学，有才思，服丧超越礼节，被梁朝司空袁昂所看重。
English: He was good at learning at an early age, had talent, and transcended the etiquette of mourning. He was valued by the Liang Dynasty's Empress Dowager Ku Yuan Ang.

古文：天监末，昂表荐之，因得召见。
现代文：天监末年，袁昂上表推荐他，因而得以被召见。
English: At the end of his time as overseer of heaven, Yuan Ang recommended him and he was summoned to see him.

古文：解褐梁太尉临川王扬州议曹从事史，寻转主簿。
现代文：初任梁朝太尉临川王荡塑议曹从事史，不久转主簿。
English: The first Liang Chao's lieutenant, Linchuan Wang Xiangshuo, was engaged in history, and soon became the main book.

古文：及昂为丹阳尹，辟为丹阳五官掾，总户曹事。
现代文：到重旦为旦屋尹，他被任为丹阳五官掾，总户曹事。
English: When he arrived in Chungtan, he was named Tanya Yin, and he was appointed as the chief of the five government officials in Danyang and the head of the Cao family.

古文：寻除信义令。
现代文：继而封为值盏令。
English: It was subsequently closed as a watch tower.

古文：之元宗人敬容者，势位隆重，频相顾访，之元终不造焉。
现代文：何之五宗族人何敬容，权势地位均贵盛，多次约他去访，何之元始终没有造访他。
English: He Jingrong, who belonged to one of the five clans and held a powerful position, was invited to visit him many times, but he never visited him.

古文：或问其故，之元曰： 昔楚人得宠于观起，有马者皆亡。
现代文：有人问他是什么缘故，何之元说： 昔日楚人得宠于翘起，有马的人都死了。
English: Someone asked him what the reason was, to which he replied: In the old days, the people of Chu were so spoiled that they had to stand up straight, and everyone who had a horse died.

古文：夫德薄任隆，必近覆败，吾恐不获其利而招其祸。 
现代文：凡是德薄而地位高的人，必近于败，我恐怕得不到他的好处反而会招来祸害。 
English: Whoever is of lowly birth but high in rank is sure to fail, and I am afraid that instead of benefiting me, he will bring evil upon me.

古文：识者以是称之。
现代文：有识之士以此称道他。
English: People of insight praise him for this.

古文：会安西武陵王为益州刺史，以之元为安西刑狱参军。
现代文：安西武陵王任益州刺史时，任命何之元为安西刑狱参军。
English: When Wuling Wang of Anxi Province was appointed as the governor of Yizhou Province, he appointed He Nianyuan as the commander of Anxi Prison to join the army.

古文：侯景之乱，武陵王以太尉承制，授南梁州刺史、北巴西太守。
现代文：侯景之乱时，武陵王以太尉承制，授何之元为南梁州刺史、北巴西太守。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, Wuling Wang was awarded the rank of Lieutenant of Ether, which was originally awarded to the governor of Southern Liangzhou and the governor of North Brazil.

古文：武陵王自成都举兵东下，之元与蜀中民庶抗表请无行，王以为沮众，囚之元于舰中。
现代文：武陵王自盛都举兵东下，何之元与蜀中民众上奏抗表请求不要出行，王以为这是沮丧众人，囚禁何之元于舰船中。
English: King Wuling raised an army from Shengdu and marched to the east. He and the people of Shuzhong made a protest and requested not to travel. The king thought that this was a frustration for everyone. He was imprisoned in the ship.

古文：及武陵兵败，之元从邵陵太守刘恭之郡。
现代文：到武陵王兵败，何之元跟从邵陵太守刘恭到郡。
English: After the defeat of Wuling Wang, He Nianyuan followed Liu Gong, the governor of Shaoling, to the county.

古文：俄而江陵陷，刘恭卒，王琳召为记室参军。
现代文：不久江陵陷落，刘恭隧死，王琳召包之五为记室参军。
English: Soon after the fall of Jiangling, Liu Gongtun died, and Wang Lin summoned five of his generals to join the army.

古文：梁敬帝册琳为司空，之元除司空府谘议参军，领记室。
现代文：梁敬帝册封王琳为司空，何之元被封为司空府谘议参军，领记室。
English: Emperor Liang Jing made Wang Lin the Air Vice-Marshal, and he was appointed the Air Vice-Marshal of the Consultation on Joining the Army, Receiving and Recording Office.

古文：王琳之立萧庄也，署为中书侍郎。
现代文：王琳立萧庄时，何之元被任命为中书侍郎。
English: When Wang Lin established Xiaozhuang, He Nian Yuan was appointed as the secretary.

古文：会齐文宣帝薨，令之元赴吊，还至寿春，而王琳败，齐主以为扬州别驾，所治即寿春也。
现代文：正值齐文宣帝薨，命何之元前去吊丧，回到寿春时，王琳败，齐主命他为扬州别驾，所治之地即寿春。
English: At the time of Qibun's proclamation of the emperor's enthronement, he went to the funeral of his ancestor. When he returned to Shouchun, Wang Lin was defeated. The Lord of Qi ordered him to leave Yangzhou and govern the land of Shouchun.

古文：及在军北伐，得淮南地，湘州刺史始兴王叔陵遣功曹史柳咸赍书召之元。之元始与朝庭有隙，及书至，大惶恐，读书至 孔璋无罪，左车见用 ，之元仰而叹曰： 辞约若此，岂欺我哉！ 
现代文：到众军北伐。收得淮南地，湘州刺史始兴王叔陵派功曹史柳咸下书札召何之元何之元开始时与朝廷有矛盾，到书札来，十分惶恐，读到 孔璋无罪，左车见用 ，何之元仰面叹道： 辞旨如此，怎么会欺骗我呢? 
English: To the army's Northern Expedition. Received Huainan, Xiangzhou engraved the history of Shixing Wangshu's tomb, sent the merit to Cao Shiliu, and sent a letter to He Yuan, who had a conflict with the imperial court at the beginning of the letter. When he came to the letter, he was very frightened. When he read that Confucius was not guilty and that the left wheel was used, He Yuan looked up and sighed: If the wording is like this, how could he deceive me?

古文：遂随咸至湘州。
现代文：便随柳咸到了湘州。
English: He then followed Liu Xian to Hunan.

古文：太建八年，除中卫府功曹参军事，寻迁谘议参军。
现代文：太建八年，封为中卫府功曹参军事。不久改任谘议参军。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiken era, he was awarded the title of meritorious serviceman of the Central Guard. He was soon appointed as a consultant to join the army.

古文：及叔陵诛，之元乃屏绝人事，锐精著述。
现代文：到叔陵被杀，何之元便摒绝人事，锐意精于著述。
English: When his uncle was killed, he abandoned everything and devoted himself to writing.

古文：以为梁氏肇自武皇，终于敬帝，其兴亡之运，盛衰之迹，足以垂鉴戒，定褒贬。
现代文：他认为梁朝始自武皇，终于敬帝，它的兴亡命运，盛衰轨迹，足可以为后世作鉴戒，定是非褒贬。
English: He believed that the Liang Dynasty began with Emperor Wu and ended with Emperor Qian. Its rise and fall, as well as its rise and fall trajectory, are enough to serve as a warning to future generations.

古文：究其始终，起齐永元元年，迄于王琳遇获，七十五年行事，草创为三十卷，号曰《梁典》。
现代文：查究它的始终，起于齐永元元年，终于王琳被捉获。共七十五年行事，草创为三十卷，定名为《梁典》。
English: The investigation of its history began in the first year of Qiyong, and Wang Lin was finally caught. It took a total of seventy-five years to complete, and was originally composed of thirty volumes, named "Liang Dynasty."

古文：其序曰：
现代文：其序写道：
English: The preamble says:

古文：记事之史，其流不一，编年之作，无若《春秋》，则鲁史之书，非帝皇之籍也。
现代文：记事之史，其源流不一，编年之作，无如《春秋》，那么鲁史之书，不是帝皇的史籍。
English: Records of history have different sources, and chronicles are nothing like "Spring and Autumn," so the Book of Ruth is not the emperor's historical record.

古文：案三皇之简为《三坟》，五帝之策为《五典》，此典义所由生也。
现代文：按三皇的简是《三坟》，五帝的策是《五典》，这是典义所产生的源。
English: According to the three emperors, the jian is the "Three Graves," and the five emperors' strategy is the "Five Classics," which is the source of the dianyi.

古文：至乃《尚书》述唐帝为《尧典》，虞帝为《舜典》，斯又经文明据。
现代文：至于《尚书》述唐帝的是《尧典》，虞帝是《舜典》，这又是经文的明据。
English: As for the "Shang Shu," the Tang Emperor is described in the "Shan Dynasty," and the Yu Emperor is described in the "Shan Dynasty," which is also the clear evidence of the scriptures.

古文：是以典之为义久矣哉。
现代文：所以典之为义已很久了。
English: So it's been a long time coming.

古文：若夫《马史》、《班汉》，述帝称纪，自兹厥后，因相祖习。
现代文：至于司马迁的《史记》和班固的《汉书》，述帝部分称为纪，自此以后，便相宗奉学习。
English: As for Sima Qian's "Historical Records" and Ban Gu's "Chinese Classics," the imperial part is called Ji, and since then, they have been studying together.

古文：及陈寿所撰，名之曰志，总其三国，分路扬镳。
现代文：到陈寿所撰，名之为志，总领三国，又分道扬镳。
English: To Chen Shou's compilation, the name is Zhi, the leader of the three countries, and they parted ways.

古文：唯何法盛《晋书》变帝纪为帝典，既云师古，在理为优。
现代文：惟有何法盛《晋书》变帝纪为帝典，既表明师古，又在理为优。
English: However, the transformation of "Jinshu" into an imperial chronicle from a law-preserving text to an imperial chronicle indicates that it is both ancient and superior in theory.

古文：故今之所作，称为《梁典》。
现代文：所以今之所作，称为《梁典》。
English: That's why what we're doing now is called the Liang Dynasty.

古文：梁有天下，自中大同以前，区宇宁晏，太清以后，寇盗交侵，首尾而言，未为尽美，故开此一书，分为六意。
现代文：梁朝有天下。白中大同年以前，区宇安宁，太清年以后，寇盗并起，首尾而言，未为尽美，因而开此一书，分为六屑意思。
English: Before the same year of Baizhong University, the area was peaceful, and after the year of Taiching, robberies and thefts began simultaneously. From beginning to end, it was not perfect, so this book was divided into six parts.

古文：以高祖创基，因乎齐末，寻宗讨本，起自永元，今以前如干卷为《追述》。
现代文：高祖创基，因袭于齐末，寻宗讨本，起白永元年，今以前若干卷为《追述》。
English: Gao Zu, the founder of the foundation, was born in Qiming, and started to study Buddhism in the first year of the Heian period. Some of his previous books were "Recapitulation."

古文：高祖生自布衣，长于弊俗，知风教之臧否，识民黎之情伪。
现代文：高祖出生自布衣百姓，长于弊俗之地，知风教之好壤，识百姓之情真伪。
English: Gao Zu was born from the clothed people. He was born in the land of evil customs. He had a good knowledge of customs and manners. He knew the true and false feelings of the people.

古文：爰逮君临，弘斯政术，四纪之内，实云殷阜。
现代文：于是到登君位时，弘扬此政术，四十年之间，都为富实。
English: So when he ascended the throne, he promoted this political art, and for forty years, he was rich.

古文：今以如干卷为《太平》。
现代文：今以若干卷为《太平》。
English: He is currently working on several volumes of "Taiping."

古文：世不常夷，时无恒治，非自我后，仍属横流，今以如干卷为《叙乱》。
现代文：世上不常太平，时代无永恒之治，不是自我以后，才属横流，今以若干卷为《叙乱》。
English: The world is not always peaceful, there is no eternal rule of the times, it is not after the self, it is a cross-flow, now with several volumes for "Shuang."

古文：洎高祖晏驾之年，太宗幽辱之岁，讴歌狱讼，向西陕不向东都；不庭之民，流逸之士，征伐礼乐，归世祖不归太宗。
现代文：自高祖晏驾之年，太宗受幽辱之岁，讽歌狱讼，向西陕不向东都。不循理之民，流离闲雅之士，征伐礼乐，归世祖不归太宗。
English: From the year of Gao Zu's emigration, the year of Taizong's humiliation, the satire of prison litigation, to the west of Shaanxi and not to the east, the people who do not follow reason, the wandering leisurely elegant people, the conquest of ritual music, and the return of ancestors do not belong to Taizong.

古文：拨乱反正，厥庸斯在，治定功成，其勋有属。
现代文：拨乱反正，其功在此，治理安定功成，其功勋有归属。
English: In any case, its contribution to resolving the turmoil is here, its contribution to stable governance is here, and its contribution is here.

古文：今以如干卷为《世祖》。
现代文：今以若干卷为《世祖》。
English: It is now known as "Sezu" in several volumes.

古文：至于四海困穷，五德升替，则敬皇绍立，仍以禅陈，今以如干卷为《敬帝》。
现代文：至于四海困穷，五德升替，于是敬皇继立，仍以禅立陈朝，今以若干卷为《敬帝》。
English: As for the four seas being impoverished and the five virtues being promoted, the emperor was worshipped successively, and the Chen dynasty was still established with Zen, and now several volumes are "Honoring the Emperor."

古文：骠骑王琳，崇立后嗣，虽不达天命，然是其忠节，今以如干卷为《后嗣主》。
现代文：骠骑王琳，崇立后嗣，虽不达天命，然而这是他的忠节，今以若干卷为《后嗣主》。
English: Although it is not a heavenly destiny to ride on the back of Wang Lin and raise up an heir, it is his loyalty festival. He is now the "Heir of the Lord" in several volumes.

古文：至在太宗，虽加美谥，而大宝之号，世所不遵，盖以拘于贼景故也。
现代文：至于在太宗时，虽然加了美好谧号，但大宾之号，世所不遵，乃是因为被拘于贼侯景的缘故。
English: As for Taizong, although he was given the title of "beautiful crane," he did not receive the title of "great guest" because he was imprisoned for being a thief.

古文：承圣纪历，自接太清，神笔诏书，非宜辄改，详之后论，盖有理焉。
现代文：承圣年纪历，自接太清年，帝皇的神笔诏书，不宜随便改动，详于后论，都有理在。
English: The chronology of succession to the priesthood, dating back to the year of the Taiqing Emperor, and the Emperor's imperial edict, should not be changed arbitrarily. Details will be provided in a later article.

古文：夫事有始终，人有业行，本末之间，颇宜诠叙。
现代文：事有开始终了，人有事业行为，本末之间，应予诠解叙述。
English: Things have a beginning and an end, people have career behaviors, and between the beginning and the end, there should be an interpretation and description.

古文：案臧荣绪称史无裁断，犹起居注耳，由此而言，实资详悉。
现代文：因臧荣绪称史无裁断，犹如起居注罢了，由此言之，实应凭藉详细。
English: Because of this, Rongxu said that there is no judgment in history, just as if it were a living note. In other words, the truth should be detailed.

古文：又编年而举其岁次者，盖取分明而易寻也。
现代文：又，编年而举年代者，是取其分明易于寻找。
English: In addition, those who chronicle and enumerate the years are easy to find because they are clear.

古文：若夫猃狁孔炽，鲠我中原，始自一君，终为二主，事有相涉，言成混漫。
现代文：如强狁骚扰很厉害，作梗我中原地区，开始出自一君，终后却为二主，事有相涉，成言则杂乱难分。
English: For example, in the Central Plains region of China, where there is strong harassment and obstruction, there is one ruler at the beginning and two lords at the end. The two are related, and the idiom is complicated and difficult to separate.

古文：今以未分之前为北魏，既分之后高氏所辅为东魏，宇文所挟为西魏，所以相分别也。
现代文：今以未分之前为北龚，已分之后产氐所辅的为塞瑟，圭塞旦所挟持的为酉垫，以此相分别。
English: Now, before the division, it was the northern pupa, after the division, the pupa was supplemented by the sether, and the pupa was held by the guise of the pupa cushion, so as to distinguish them.

古文：重以盖彰殊体，繁省异文，其间损益，颇有凡例。
现代文：再以隐与显用不同体裁，繁舆省用不同文笔，其间损益之处，颇有凡例可循。
English: Moreover, there are quite a few examples to follow in terms of the gains and losses between using different genres implicitly and explicitly, and using different writing styles.

古文：祯明三年，京城陷，乃移居常州之晋陵县。
现代文：祯明年，京城陷落，便移居常州的晋陵县。
English: The following year, after the fall of Beijing, he moved to Jinling County in Changzhou.

古文：隋开皇十三年，卒于家。
现代文：隋朝开皇十三年，死于家中。
English: He died at home in the thirteenth year of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：徐伯阳，字隐忍，东海人也。
现代文：徐伯阳，字隐忍，东海人。
English: Xu Boyang, also known as Yin Ren, is from the East China Sea.

古文：祖度之，齐南徐州议曹从事史。
现代文：祖父徐度之，齐朝南徐州议曹从事史。
English: His grandfather, Xu Duzhi, was a member of the Southern Xuzhou Council of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：父僧权，梁东宫通事舍人，领秘书，以善书知名。
现代文：父亲徐僧权，梁朝东宫通事舍人，领秘书，以能书写知名。
English: His father, Xu Sangquan, was the secretary of the Eastern Court of the Liang Dynasty. He was famous for his ability to write.

古文：伯阳敏而好学，善色养，进止有节。
现代文：徐伯阳聪敏好学，善于孝养侍奉父母，进止有节度。
English: Xu Boyang is keen to learn, good at filial piety, serves his parents, and has discipline.

古文：年十五，以文笔称。
现代文：十五岁，以文笔被人称道。
English: At the age of fifteen, he became famous for his writing.

古文：学《春秋左氏》。
现代文：学《春秋左氏》。
English: Study "Spring, Autumn and the Left-Handed."

古文：家有史书，所读者近三千馀卷。
现代文：家有史书，所读者近三千余卷。
English: I have history books at home, and I have read nearly three thousand volumes.

古文：试策高第，尚书板补梁河东王国右常侍、东宫学士、临川嗣王府墨曹参军。
现代文：试策考试入高品第，尚书板补为梁河东王国右常侍、束宫学士、临川嗣王府墨曹参军。
English: He was ranked the first in the high grade in the trial examination, and his name was added to the official records as the right attendant of Lianghe Dong Kingdom, the bachelor of Sokong, and the prince of Linchuan.

古文：大同中，出为候官令，甚得民和。
现代文：大同年中，出为候官令，很得民心。
English: In the middle of the same year, he was appointed as a candidate, which was very popular.

古文：侯景之乱，伯阳浮海南至广州，依于萧勃，勃平还朝，仍将家属之吴郡。
现代文：侯景之乱时，徐伯阳浮海南下到广州，依附于萧勃。萧勃被平定回朝，乃将家属带到吴郡。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, Xu Boyang floated south to Guangzhou and attached himself to Xiao Bo. Xiao Bo was subdued and returned to the North, but he brought his family members to Wu County.

古文：天嘉二年，诏侍晋安王读。
现代文：天嘉二年，帝诏徐伯阳侍奉晋安王读书。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, Emperor Xu Boyang served King Jinan to study.

古文：寻除司空侯安都府记室参军事，安都素闻其名，见之，降席为礼。
现代文：不久封司空侯安都府记室参军事，侯安都早闻其名，见他时，下席行礼。
English: Not long after that, the Secretary of the Air Force, Hou Andu, became a member of the military. Hou Andu had heard his name for a long time. When he saw him, he bowed down.

古文：甘露降乐游苑，诏赐安都，令伯阳为谢表，世祖览而奇之。
现代文：甘露降乐游苑，帝诏赐侯安都，令徐伯阳撰写谢表，世祖板后感到惊奇。
English: The Emperor gave the imperial edict to Hou An Du, and made Xu Boyang write a thank-you letter. The world's ancestors were surprised.

古文：太建初，中记室李爽、记室张正见、左民郎贺彻、学士阮卓、黄门郎萧诠、三公郎王由礼、处士马枢、记室祖孙登、比部贺循、长史刘删等为文会之友，后有蔡凝、刘助、陈暄、孔范亦预焉。皆一时之士也。
现代文：太建初年，中记室李爽、记室张正见、左民郎贺彻、学士阮卓、黄门郎萧诠、三公郎王由礼、处士马枢、记室祖孙登、比部贺循、长史刘删等是徐伯阳的文会之友，后有蔡凝、刘助、陈暄、孔范也参预其中，他们都是当时的文士。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, Li Shuang of the Middle Records Office, Zhang Zhengjian of the Records Office, Zuo Min Lang He Che, Baccalaureate Ruan Zhuo, Huang Men Lang Xiao Yan, Wang Yulei of the Three Princes, Ma Zu, Sun Deng of the Records Office, Hibe He Cun, and Chang Shi Liu Ji were friends of Xu Boyang's literary society. Later, Cai Ge, Liu Su, Chen Qi, and Kong Fan also participated in it. They were all writers at that time.

古文：游宴赋诗，勒成卷轴，伯阳为其集序，盛传于世。
现代文：众文士游宴赋诗，制成卷轴，徐伯阳为此集作序言，该集盛传于世。
English: The scribes' banquet poems were made into a scroll, and Xu Boyang wrote the preface for this collection, which has been handed down to the world.

古文：及新安王为南徐州刺史，除镇北新安王府中记室参军，兼南徐州别驾，带东海郡丞。
现代文：到新安王为南徐州刺史，封徐伯阳为镇北新安王府中记室参军，兼南徐州别驾，带东海郡丞。
English: He went to Xin'an Wang to write a history of South Xuzhou, and Xu Boyang went to Xin'an Wangfu Central Records Office in the north of the town to join the army. He also went to South Xuzhou and took Donghai County.

古文：鄱阳王为江州刺史，伯阳尝奉使造焉，王率府僚与伯阳登匡岭，置宴，酒酣，命笔赋剧韵二十，伯阳与祖孙登前成，王赐以奴婢杂物。
现代文：鄱阳王为江州刺史，徐伯阳曾奉使造访他，鄱阳王率府中官员与徐伯阳同登匡岭，安排酒宴，酒饮到酣畅时，王命赋剧韵二十，徐伯阳与祖孙登先成，王赐以奴婢及杂物。
English: King Puyang is the history of Jiangzhou. Xu Boyang once sent an envoy to visit him. The king of Puyang led the government officials to ascend Mount Kuangling with Xu Boyang and arranged a wine banquet. When the wine drinking was smooth, the king gave twenty dramas, Xu Boyang and his grandchildren were the first to ascend, and the king gave slaves and sundry goods.

古文：及新安王还京，除临海嗣王府限外谘议参军。
现代文：到新安王回京，封徐伯阳临海嗣王府限外谘议参军。
English: When the King of Xin'an returned to Beijing, Xu Boyang was summoned to the King of Haiji's palace for consultation on joining the army.

古文：十一年春，皇太子幸太学，诏新安王于辟雍发《论语》题，仍命伯阳为《辟雍颂》，甚见嘉赏。
现代文：太建十一年春，皇太子驾幸太学，诏新安王于太学发表《论语》题，并命徐伯阳撰《辟雍颂》，很受好评与赞赏。
English: In the spring of the 11th year of the Jian dynasty, the crown prince took the opportunity to visit Taixue, and the king of Xin'an published the "Analects" in Taixue, and ordered Xu Boyang to write the "Song of the Yongle," which was well received and appreciated.

古文：除镇右新安王府谘议参军事。
现代文：封徐伯阳为镇右新安王府谘议参军事。
English: Xu Boyang was appointed as a military adviser to the town of Xin'an Wangfu.

古文：十三年，闻姊丧，发疾而卒，时年六十六。
现代文：太建十三年，听说姊丧亡，发病而死，其时六十六岁。
English: When Tai Jian was 13 years old, he heard that his sister had passed away. She was 66 years old at the time of her death.

古文：张正见，字见赜，清河东武城人也。
现代文：张正见，字见赜，清河郡东武城人。
English: Zhang Zhengyi, also known as Zhang Zhengyi, is from Dongwu City, Qinghe County.

古文：祖盖之，魏散骑常侍、勃海长乐二郡太守。
现代文：祖父张盖之。魏朝散骑常侍、勃海长乐二郡太守。
English: Grandfather Zhang Gai Zhi. Wei Dynasty horseback riding attendant, Bohai Changle two county governor.

古文：父修礼，魏散骑侍郎，归梁，仍拜本职，迁怀方太守。
现代文：父亲张脩礼，魏朝散骑侍郎，归梁朝后，仍拜为本职，改任怀方太守。
English: His father, Zhang Rongli, was a horseback riding attendant in the Wei Dynasty, and after returning to the Liang Dynasty, he still served his duty and was reappointed as the governor of Huai Fang.

古文：正见幼好学，有清才。
现代文：张正见幼年好学，有优秀才能。
English: Zhang Zhengmi was eager to learn at an early age and had excellent talent.

古文：梁简文在东宫，正见年十三，献颂，简文深赞赏之。
现代文：梁简文在束宫时，张正见年方十三岁，献上颂，简文深加赞赏。
English: When Liang Jianwen was in Sokong, Zhang Zhengbin, who was thirteen years old, presented an ode, and Jianwen deeply appreciated it.

古文：简文雅尚学业，每自升座说经，正见尝预讲筵，请决疑义，吐纳和顺，进退详雅，四座咸属目焉。
现代文：简文崇尚学业，每每自己升座说经，张正见曾参预讲席，被请决断疑义之处，他谈吐和顺，进退举止文雅，四座人都瞩目。
English: Jianwen advocated learning, and he always rose to the podium to recite scriptures. Zhang Zhengjian had attended the pre-lecture, and was asked to decide the doubtful points. He spoke in a conciliatory manner, and advanced and retreated in an elegant manner. All four of them were eye-catching.

古文：太清初，射策高第，除邵陵王国左常侍。
现代文：太清初年，射策取士时中高品第，被封为邵陵王国左常侍。
English: In the first year of the Taiching Dynasty, when he was awarded the middle and high ranks, he was appointed as the left attendant of the kingdom of Shaolin.

古文：梁元帝立，拜通直散骑侍郎，迁彭泽令。
现代文：梁元帝登位，张正见拜通直散骑侍郎，改任彭泽令。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan ascended to the throne, Zhang Zheng saw Baitong Zhizan riding as his equerry and changed his post to Pengze.

古文：属梁季丧乱，避地于匡俗山，时焦僧度拥众自保，遣使请交，正见惧之，逊辞延纳，然以礼法自持，僧度亦雅相敬惮。
现代文：值梁末丧乱，张正见避难于匡俗山，其时焦僧度拥众自保，派使者请舆他交往，张正见惧怕，用恭顺的言辞延请接纳使者，却又以礼法自持而不失节，焦僧度对他也雅相敬畏。
English: At the end of the civil war, Zhang Zheng could take refuge in the Kuangzhu Mountain. At that time, Jiao Zangdu was protecting himself from the crowd and sent an envoy to invite him to socialize. Zhang Zhengdi was afraid and asked the envoy to accept him with a respectful speech, but he kept himself in line with etiquette. Jiao Zangdu was also in awe of him.

古文：高祖受禅，诏正见还都，除镇东鄱阳王府墨曹行参军，兼衡阳王府长史。
现代文：高祖受惮，诏张正见还京城，封镇柬鄱阳王府墨曹行参军，兼衡阳王府长史。
English: Gao Zu was shunned, Zhao Zhang Zhengjian returned to Beijing, Mo Cao, who had been exiled to Liyang, joined the army, and became the governor of Hengyang.

古文：历宜都王限外记室、撰史著士，带寻阳郡丞。
现代文：历任宜都王限外记室、撰史着士，带寻阳郡丞。
English: He was successively assigned to Wang Quan's foreign secretary's office, a historian, and a county magistrate of Huanyang County.

古文：累迁尚书度支郎、通直散骑侍郎，著士如故。
现代文：又改任尚书度支郎、通直散骑侍郎，着士照旧。
English: He was also reappointed as Sho Shudo Shiro and Tsuchida Sanzhi Jiro, and remained a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：太建中卒，时年四十九。
现代文：太建年中死，其时四十九岁。
English: Tai Jian died in mid-year, at the age of forty-nine.

古文：有集十四卷，其五言诗尤善，大行于世。
现代文：有文集十四卷，其中五言诗尤其出色，大行于世。
English: There are fourteen volumes of the anthology, of which the five-character poem is particularly outstanding and is widely known.

古文：蔡凝，字子居，济阳考城人也。
现代文：蔡凝，字子居，济阳郡考城人。
English: Cai Rong, Zizi Ju, a resident of Kaocheng, Jiyang County.

古文：祖撙，梁吏部尚书、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父蔡撙，梁朝吏部尚书、金紫光禄大夫。
English: His grandfather Cai Qi, Liang Dynasty official Shang Shu, and Jin Zi Guanglu were doctors.

古文：父彦高，梁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：父亲蔡彦高，梁朝给事黄门侍郎。
English: His father, Cai Yangao, was Liang Chao's personal attendant at Huangmen.

古文：凝幼聪晤，美容止。
现代文：蔡凝幼年聪悟，容貌举止均美。
English: Cai Rong was very intelligent at a young age, and her appearance and demeanor were both beautiful.

古文：既长，博涉经传，有文辞，尤工草隶。
现代文：长大后，博涉经传之书，有文辞，尤工草书隶书。
English: When he grew up, he was fond of books related to the classics, especially literary works and cursive calligraphy.

古文：天嘉四年，释褐授秘书郎，转庐陵王文学。
现代文：天嘉四年，入仕被授秘书郎，转任庐陵王文学。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Jia's reign, he was promoted to the position of secretary and transferred to the post of literature of King Gongling.

古文：光大元年，除太子洗马、司徒主簿。
现代文：光大元年，封太子洗马、司徒主簿。
English: In the first year of the Kwangda University, Fong Taizi washed his horse, and Sito became the principal.

古文：太建元年，迁太子中舍人。
现代文：太建元年，改任太子中舍人。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was reappointed as the Prince's middle son.

古文：以名公子选尚信义公主，拜驸马都尉、中书侍郎。
现代文：以名公子被选尚信义公主，拜为驸马都尉、中书侍郎。
English: He was chosen to be the prince of Princess Shoshinobu, and was given the titles of Captain of the Horse and Junior Secretary to the Emperor.

古文：迁晋陵太守。
现代文：改任晋陵太守。
English: He was reappointed as Jin Mausoleum Governor.

古文：及将之郡，更令左右缉治中书廨宇，谓宾友曰： 庶来者无劳，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：在将到郡时，又令左右合治中书官舍，对宾客朋友说： 希望来者无劳，不也可以吗? 
English: When he was about to arrive at the county, he ordered the sheriff's residence in Heji to be prepared, and said to the guests and friends: "If you want to come without any effort, why not?

古文：寻授宁远将军、尚书吏部侍郎。
现代文：不久授宁速将军、尚书吏部侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to general of the Ningpo army and became a chamberlain of the Shoshu rikibu.

古文：凝年位未高，而才地为时所重，常端坐西斋，自非素贵名流，罕所交接，趣时者多讥焉。
现代文：蔡凝年纪官位都不高，但才气门第为当时所看重，他常端坐于西斋，如果不是显贵名流人士，很少与外界交往接触，趋时人士多讥讽他。
English: Cai Ning's age and official rank were not high, but his talent was valued at the time. He often sat in Xizai, and if he was not a dignitary or celebrity, he rarely had contact with the outside world. People of his time often ridiculed him.

古文：高宗常谓凝曰： 我欲用义兴主婿钱肃为黄门郎，卿意何如？ 
现代文：高宗常对蔡凝说： 我想用义兴主女婿钱肃为黄门郎，你的意见如何? 
English: Gao Zongchang said to Cai Rong: I want to use the Yixing Lord's son-in-law Qian Su as Huang Men Lang, what is your opinion?

古文：凝正色对曰： 帝乡旧戚，恩由圣旨，则无所复问。
现代文：蔡凝一本正经地答道： 他是皇帝的同乡旧戚，恩从圣旨，就不需要再问了。
English: Cai Rong replied solemnly, "He is an old relative of the emperor's from the same village, so there is no need to ask.

古文：若格以佥议，黄散之职，故须人门兼美，惟陛下裁之。 
现代文：如果以众人之议为标准，那黄门散骑侍郎之职，就必须人与门第兼美，惟请陛下裁决。 
English: If everyone's opinion is taken as the standard, then the position of Huangmen Sanzhajishi waiter must be both human and dog, but please His Majesty's ruling.

古文：高宗默然而止。
现代文：高宗默然而止。
English: Gao Zong silently stopped singing.

古文：肃闻而有憾，令义兴主日谮之于高宗，寻免官，迁交止。顷之，追还。
现代文：钱肃听说后很怨恨，让义兴主每谐言于高宗，不久高宗罢免了蔡凝的官职，迁往交耻。随后，又追还。
English: When Qian Su heard of this, he was very resentful, so he had the Yixing Lord speak to Gao Zong, and soon Gao Zong dismissed Cai Rong from his official position and moved to Jiaoxi. Subsequently, he was chased back.

古文：后主嗣位，受晋安王谘议参军，转给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：后主继位，授蔡凝晋安王谘议参军，转任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was enthroned as the lord of the manor, and was conferred the title of Cai Rong Jin An Wang, and advised to join the army, and was transferred to the post of Huangmen waiter.

古文：后主尝置酒会，群臣欢甚，将移宴于弘范宫，众人咸从，唯凝与袁宪不行。
现代文：后主曾置办酒会，群臣很欢欣，将移酒宴于弘范宫，众人都顺从，惟有蔡凝与袁宪不同行。
English: Afterwards, the master had arranged a banquet, and the courtiers were very happy. The banquet was moved to Hongfan Palace, and everyone obeyed, except for Cai Rong and Yuan Xian.

古文：后主曰： 卿何为者？ 
现代文：后主说： 你为什么这样? 
English: Then the Lord said, "Why have you done this?

古文：凝对曰： 长乐尊严，非酒后所过，臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：蔡凝对答道： 长乐宫尊严，不是酒后所应通过的地方，我不敢奉诏而行。 
English: Cai Rong replied: The dignity of Changle Palace is not a place that should be passed after drinking, I dare not follow the edict.

古文：众人失色。
现代文：众人闻之惊而失色。
English: Everyone was shocked and lost their composure.

古文：后主曰： 卿醉矣。 
现代文：后主说： 你醉了。 
English: The latter said: You are drunk.

古文：即令引出。
现代文：当即命令引他出去。
English: He was immediately ordered out.

古文：他日，后主谓吏部尚书蔡徵曰： 蔡凝负地矜才，无所用也。 
现代文：后某一天，后主对吏部尚书蔡征说： 蔡凝依仗门第矜恃才气，不能再用。 
English: One day later, the late master said to Cai Zheng, the secretary of the personnel department: Cai Zheng relied on his father's great talent and could not be used again.

古文：寻迁信威晋熙王府长史，郁郁不得志，乃喟然叹曰： 天道有废兴，夫子云 乐天知命 ，斯理庶几可达。 
现代文：不久蔡凝改任信威晋熙王府长史，郁闷不得志，便喟然叹道： 天道有废兴，孔夫子说 乐天知命 ，此理差不多可达。 
English: Soon after, Cai Rong was appointed as the governor of Xinwei, Jinxi and Wangfujing. Depressed and discouraged, he sighed and said, "The way of heaven has waste and prosperity. Confucius said, "Let heaven know your fate." This theory is almost attainable."

古文：因制《小室赋》以见志，甚有辞理。
现代文：便写《小室赋》以显志，很有辞理。
English: He wrote "Komurofu" with a clear vision and a lot of reason.

古文：陈亡入隋，道病卒，时年四十七。
现代文：陈朝亡，入隋朝，半路上病亡，其时四十七岁。
English: Chen Dynasty died, into the Sui Dynasty, died of illness on the way, when he was forty-seven years old.

古文：子君知，颇知名。
现代文：儿子蔡君知很有名。
English: Cai Junchi's son is very famous.

古文：阮卓，陈留尉氏人。
现代文：阮卓，陈留尉氏人。
English: Nguyn Tr, a member of the Trn Trn family.

古文：祖诠，梁散骑侍郎。
现代文：祖父阮诠，梁朝散骑侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Ruan Yin, was a cavalry officer in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父问道，梁宁远岳阳王府记室参军。
现代文：父亲阮问道，梁朝宁远岳阳王府记室参军。
English: Father Nguyen asked, Liang Chao Ningyuan Yueyang King's Office of Records to join the army.

古文：卓幼而聪敏，笃志经籍，善谈论，尤工五言诗。
现代文：阮卓幼年聪敏，专志经籍，善于谈论，尤其工于五言诗。
English: As a young boy, Ruan Zhuo was intelligent, specialized in classics, and good at talking, especially in five-character poems.

古文：性至孝，其父随岳阳王出镇江州，遇疾而卒，卓时年十五，自都奔赴，水浆不入口者累日。
现代文：生性极孝，他的父亲随岳阳王出镇江州，途中病亡，其时阮卓十五岁，他自京城奔赴，汤水不入口多日。
English: He was very filial by nature. His father accompanied Yueyang Wang out of the town of Jiangzhou and died of illness on the way. At that time, Ruan Zhuo was fifteen years old. He rushed from Beijing and did not have access to soup for many days.

古文：属侯景之乱，道路阻绝，卓冒履险艰，载丧柩还都。
现代文：正值侯景作乱，道路阻绝，阮卓冒着艰险，载着棺柩回京城。
English: At the time of the Houjing riot, the road was blocked, and Ruan Zhuo risked his life to carry the coffin back to Beijing.

古文：在路遇贼，卓形容毁瘁，号哭自陈，贼哀而不杀之，仍护送出境。
现代文：路上遇到贼人，阮卓形貌消瘦，大哭自诉，贼人同情而不杀他，并将他护送出境。
English: Encountering a thief on the road, Ruan Zhuo, emaciated and weeping, complained loudly. The thief took pity on him, did not kill him, and escorted him out of the country.

古文：及渡彭蠡湖，中流忽遇疾风，船几没者数四，卓仰天悲号，俄而风息，人皆以为孝感之至焉。
现代文：到渡彭蠡湖，中途忽然遇到疾风，船几乎沉没多次，阮卓仰天悲叫，不一会儿风停，人们都认为这是孝顺感应所致。
English: When they arrived at Penghu Lake, they suddenly encountered a gale in the middle of the journey. The boat almost sank several times. Ruan Zhuo cried out in grief, and the wind stopped soon after. People all thought that this was caused by filial piety.

古文：世祖即位，除轻车鄱阳王府外兵参军。
现代文：世祖登位，封轻车鄱阳王府外兵参军。
English: Emperor Shizu ascended to the throne, and foreign soldiers from Shinyang Wangfu were allowed to join the army.

古文：天康元年，转云麾新安王府记室参军，仍隋府转翊右记室，带撰史著士。迁鄱阳王中卫府录事，转晋安王府记室，著士如故。
现代文：天康元年，转任云麾新安王府记室参军，又随府转任翊右记室，带撰史着士、改任鄱阳王中卫府录事，转任晋安王府记室，着士照旧。
English: In the first year of Tian Kang, he was transferred to the Records Office of the King of Yunnan Xin'an to join the army, and then transferred to the Records Office of the King of Shandong Xin'an to write history, and then transferred to the Records Office of the King of Shandong Xin'an to write history, and then transferred to the Records Office of the King of Jin'an to write history.

古文：及平欧阳纥，交阯夷獠往往相聚为寇抄，卓奉使招慰。
现代文：到平定欧阳纥，交肚夷僚常常相聚为寇作乱，阮卓奉命出使招慰。
English: In order to pacify Ouyang Xuan, his friends and colleagues often gathered together to create chaos, and Ruan Zhuo was ordered to send an envoy to solicit consolation.

古文：交阯通日南、象郡，多金翠珠贝珍怪之产，前后使者皆致之，唯卓挺身而还，衣装无他，时论咸伏其廉。
现代文：交耻通曰南、象郡，其地多金翠珠贝珍怪之产，前后使者都有罗致，惟独阮卓挺身而还，衣装中无其他束西，时人谈论都佩服他的廉洁。
English: In the South and the Elephant County, both of which are famous for their gold, jewels, and rare products, the envoys were all Luo Zhi, but Ruan Zhuo was the only one who stood up and fought back. There was no other piece of cloth in his costume. People at the time admired his honesty.

古文：迁衡阳王府中录事参军。
现代文：改任衡阳王府中录事参军。
English: He was transferred to Hengyang King's palace to record his entry into the army.

古文：入为尚书祠部郎。
现代文：入为尚书祠部郎。
English: He was assigned to the Shoshu-jinja Shrine.

古文：迁始兴王中卫府记室参军。
现代文：改任始兴王中卫府记室参军。
English: He was transferred to the record office of the Middle Palace Guards of Shixing Wang and joined the army.

古文：叔陵之诛也，后主谓朝臣曰： 阮卓素不同逆，宜加旌异。 
现代文：叔陵被杀，后主对朝廷大臣们说： 阮卓向来不同叛者有关系，应表彰他的相异。 
English: After his uncle was killed, his successor said to the imperial ministers: Ruan Zhuo has always been related to different rebels, and he should be commended for his dissimilarity.

古文：至德元年，入为德教殿学士。
现代文：至德元年入为德教殿学士。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was admitted as a bachelor of the Tokugawa Shogunate.

古文：寻兼通直散骑常侍，副王话聘隋。
现代文：不久兼通直散骑常侍，作为王话的副职聘于隋。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed as a knight's footman, and was employed in Sui as an aide to Wang Zu.

古文：隋主夙闻卓名，乃遣河东薛道衡、琅邪颜之推等，与卓谈宴赋诗，赐遗加礼。
现代文：隋主早闻阮卓之名，便派河东薛道衡、琅邪颜之推等，与阮卓谈笑聚宴饮酒赋诗，赐赠加礼。
English: As soon as the Lord of the Sui Dynasty heard the name of Ruan Zhuo, He sent Xue Daoheng of Hedong Province and Xing Yanyan of Shandong Province to talk with Ruan Zhuo, have a banquet, drink wine, recite poems, and give him gifts.

古文：还除招远将军、南海王府谘议参军。
现代文：回还封招远将军、南海王府谘议参军。
English: General Zhaoyuan's enlistment was revoked, and the Nankai royal court advised him to join the army.

古文：以目疾不之官，退居里舍，改构亭宇，修山池卉木，招致宾友，以文酒自娱。
现代文：因眼疾不去就官，退居里舍，改建构筑亭宇，修山池花卉树木，招致宾客朋友，以文与酒白娱。
English: Due to his eye disease, he did not want to take up his post, so he retired to his country house, reconstructed it, built a pavilion, planted flowers and trees, invited guests and friends, and entertained them with literature and wine.

古文：祯明三年入于隋，行至江州，追感其父所终，因遘疾而卒，时年五十九。
现代文：祯明三年入于隋，行到江州，追感他父亲的所终，因此患疾而死，其时五十九岁。
English: Gongming entered Sui three years later, traveled to Jiangzhou, felt the death of his father, and died of illness at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：时有武威阴铿，字子坚，梁左卫将军子春之子。
现代文：其时有武威人阴铿，字子坚，梁朝左卫将军阴子春的儿子。
English: At that time, there was a powerful warrior named Yin Xi, also known as Zi Jian, who was the son of Liang Chaozhe Zuowei's general, Yin Zichun.

古文：幼聪慧，五岁能诵诗赋，日千言。
现代文：幼年聪敏有智慧，五岁能诵读诗赋，每曰千言。
English: Young children are sensitive and intelligent. Five-year-olds can recite a thousand words of poetry every day.

古文：及长，博涉史传，尤善五言诗，为当时所重。
现代文：到年长，博涉史书传记，尤擅长写五言诗，为当时所推重。
English: When he was older, he was interested in biographies and history books, and was particularly good at writing five-character poems, which was important at the time.

古文：释褐梁湘东王法曹参军。
现代文：初任梁朝湘束王法曹参军。
English: Liang Chao's first appointee, Xiangzhu Wang, joined the army.

古文：天寒，铿尝与宾友宴饮，见行觞者，因回酒炙以授之，众坐皆笑，铿曰： 吾侪终日酣饮，而执爵者不知其味，非人情也。 
现代文：天寒冷，阴铿曾与宾客朋友宴饮，见传酒者，便回以热酒而赠赐他，在座众人都笑他，阴铿说： 我辈终日酣饮，而持酒器者却不知酒味，不合人情。 
English: It was a cold day, and Yin Yao had been feasting with guests and friends. When he saw the passer-by, he returned with hot wine and gave it to him. Everyone present laughed at him. Yin Yao said, "We drink all day long, but the person holding the wine glass doesn't know the taste of wine. It's not human."

古文：及侯景之乱，铿尝为贼所擒，或救之获免，铿问其故，乃前所行觞者。
现代文：到侯景作乱，阴铿曾被贼所擒捉，有人救了他使他获免，阴铿问此人为何救他，原来他就是过去的传酒者。
English: At the time of the riots in Houjing, Yin Xi had been caught by a thief. Someone saved him and let him go. Yin Xi asked this person why he saved him. It turned out that he was a former wine courier.

古文：天嘉中，为始兴王府中录事参军。
现代文：天嘉年中，阴铿为始兴王府中录事参军。
English: In the middle of the year of Heaven and Earth, Yin Yao joined the army for Shixing Wangfu Middle Records.

古文：世祖尝宴群臣赋诗，徐陵言之于世祖，即日召铿预宴，使赋新成安乐宫，铿授笔便就，世祖甚叹赏之。累迁招远将军、晋陵太守、员外散骑常侍，顷之卒。
现代文：世祖曾聚宴群臣赋诗，徐陵对世祖说及阴铿。世祖当日即召阴铿参加聚宴，命他为新落成的安乐宫赋诗，阴铿提笔即成，世祖十分赞赏他又改任招远将军、晋陵太守、员外散骑常侍，不久即死。
English: On the day of the ancestor's death, Xu Ling told the ancestor that he had invited Yin Ru to a banquet and asked him to compose a poem for the newly built Anle Palace. Yin Ru took up the pen and completed the poem. The ancestor was very appreciative of his appointment to Zhaoyuan General, Jinling Grand Master, and non-commissioned officer, and died soon after.

古文：有集三卷行于世。
现代文：有文集三卷行于世。
English: Three volumes of the anthology have been published.

古文：史臣曰：夫文学者，盖人伦之所基欤？是以君子异乎众庶。
现代文：史臣曰：文学，乃是人伦的基础吗?所以君子不同于众庶民。
English: Shichen said, "Is literature the foundation of human relations? That is why a gentleman is different from the common people.

古文：昔仲尼之论四科，始乎德行，终于文学，斯则圣人亦所贵也。
现代文：过去壬迂论四科，始于德行，终于文学，这是圣人也推重的。
English: In the past, there were four disciplines, beginning with virtue and ending with literature, which was also emphasized by sages.

古文：至如杜之伟之徒，值于休运，各展才用，之伟尤著美焉。
现代文：至于如丝之伟这些人，正值善运，各展其才，其中丝之伟尤为出色。
English: As for these great people, it is a matter of good luck, each showing their talents, of which Ruxi Wei is particularly outstanding.

