古文：太阳之为病，脉浮，头项强痛而恶寒。
现代文：太阳病的典型特征，是脉象浮、头项部位疼痛转动不柔和并且畏寒。
English: The typical features of sunstroke are pulse-like floating, pain in the head and neck, unresponsive rotation, and chills.

古文：太阳病，发热，汗出，恶风，脉缓者，名为中风。
现代文：太阳病，发热，汗出，怕风，头痛，项部拘急不舒，脉象浮缓的，就叫做中风。
English: Sunstroke, fever, sweating, fear of wind, headache, neck pain, slow pulse, is called a stroke.

古文：太阳病，或已发热，或未发热，必恶寒，体痛，呕逆，脉阴阳俱紧者，名曰伤寒。
现代文：太阳病，不管是否已经发热，出现畏冷，头痛，项部拘急不舒，身体疼痛，呕逆，无汗，寸关尺三部脉象均浮紧的，就叫做伤寒。
English: Sun disease, whether or not it has fever, chills, headache, headache, body pain, nausea, no sweat, and the three parts of the pulse are tight, is called typhoid fever.

古文：伤寒一日，太阳受之，脉若静者为不传；颇欲吐，若躁烦，脉数急者，为传也。
现代文：外感病第一天，邪在太阳，如果脉证静止在太阳未变的，这是疾病未发生传变。如果病人总想呕吐、烦躁不安、脉象数而急疾，为邪气传里之象，表示病已传变。
English: On the first day of extrinsic disease, the evil is in the sun, if the pulse is still in the sun and has not changed, this is the disease has not been transmitted. If the patient always wants to vomit, is restless, has a pulse and is suddenly ill, it is a sign of evil, indicating that the disease has been transmitted.

古文：伤寒二三日，阳明少阳证不见者，为不传也。太阳病，发热而渴，不恶寒者，为温病。
现代文：外感病二三天，已到邪传阳明、少阳之期，如果不见阳明、少阳病见证，而只见太阳病症候的，表示病未传变。太阳病，出现发热、口渴、不恶寒的，就称为温病。
English: For two or three days, the extrinsic disease has reached the stage of spreading yangming and shaoyang. If you do not see yangming and shaoyang, but only see the symptoms of sun disease, it means that the disease has not been transmitted. Sun disease, with fever, thirst, and not bad cold, is called heat disease.

古文：若发汗已，身灼热者，名曰风温。
现代文：如果在使用发汗法以后，热势更高，就称为风温。
English: If the heat potential is higher after using the sweating method, it is called wind temperature.

古文：风温为病，脉阴阳俱浮，自汗出，身重，多眠睡，鼻息必鼾，语言难出。
现代文：风温的证候，是尺脉和寸脉都见浮象，常自动出汗，身体沉重，经常睡眠，呼吸时鼻有鼾声，而且言语困难。
English: The symptoms of wind and temperature are that the ulnar and radial veins are buoyant, frequent spontaneous sweating, heavy body, frequent sleep, snorting when breathing, and speech difficulties.

古文：若被下者，小便不利，直视，失溲；若被火者，微发黄色，剧则如惊痫，时瘛疭；若火熏之，一逆尚引日，再逆促命期。
现代文：此时假如误用下法，便会引起小便不利，两眼直视，甚则大小便失禁；假如误用火法，轻则皮肤发黄，严重的就会引起如同惊痫的症状，时而手足抽掣痉挛；倘若再用火熏的方法，这就一误再误了。一次误治，病人尚可苟延时日，再次误治，生命危险就迫在眉睫了。
English: At this time, if the method is misused, it will cause unfavorable urination, eyesight, and even incontinence; if the fire method is misused, light skin is yellowed, and if it is serious, it will cause symptoms like epilepsy, and sometimes hand and foot convulsions; if the fire method is used again, this will be a mistake again and again. One mistreatment, the patient can still delay the time, and if it is mistreated again, the risk of life is imminent.

古文：病有发热恶寒者，发于阳也；无热恶寒者，发于阴也。
现代文：如果病出现发热畏寒的症状，是病在阳经的表现；如果出现无热畏寒的症状，是病在阴经的表现。
English: If the symptoms of fever and chills appear, it is the manifestation of the disease in the yang period; if the symptoms of no fever and chills appear, it is the manifestation of the disease in the yin period.

古文：发于阳者七日愈，发于阴者六日愈，以阳数七，阴数六故也。
现代文：病在阳经的，大约七天可以痊愈；病在阴经的，大约六天可以痊愈。这是因为七属于阳数、六属于阴数的缘故。
English: If the disease is in the yang period, it can be cured in about seven days; if the disease is in the yin period, it can be cured in about six days. This is because seven belongs to the yang number and six belongs to the yin number.

古文：太阳病，头痛至七日已上自愈者，以行其经尽故也。
现代文：太阳病，头痛到了七天后自然痊愈的，这是因为太阳病程已尽的缘故。
English: Sunstroke, headache to seven days after the natural healing, this is because the sun disease process has been exhausted.

古文：若欲作再经者，针足阳明，使经不传则愈。
现代文：如果病情继续发展，可以针刺足阳明经的相关穴位，使邪不得内传，以促其转愈。
English: If the disease continues to develop, the relevant acupoints of the Foot Yang Mingjing can be acupuncture, so that the evil can not be transmitted to the inside, so as to promote its healing.

古文：太阳病欲解时，从巳至未上。
现代文：太阳病将要解除的时间，多在上午九时至下午三时之间。
English: The time when sunstroke will be relieved is mostly between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m.

古文：风家，表解而不了了者，十二日愈。
现代文：容易患太阳中风的人，表证解除以后，身体仍感觉不舒适的，需待一定的时日，正气恢复，才能痊愈。
English: People who are prone to sun stroke, if their body still feels uncomfortable after the certificate is lifted, it will take a certain amount of time to recover and recover.

古文：病人身大热，反欲得近衣者，热在皮肤，寒在骨髓也；身大寒，反不欲近衣者，寒在皮肤，热在骨髓也。
现代文：病人体表发热，反而想穿很多衣服，这是外部假热、内部真寒的表现；体表怕冷，反而不想穿衣服，这是外部假寒、内部真热的反映。
English: The patient's body surface is hot, but wants to wear a lot of clothes, which is a manifestation of external fake heat and internal real cold; the body surface is afraid of cold, but does not want to wear clothes, which is a reflection of external fake cold and internal real heat.

古文：太阳中风，阳浮而阴弱。阳浮者，热自发；阴弱者，汗自出。啬啬恶寒，淅淅恶风，翕翕发热，鼻鸣干呕者，桂枝汤主之。
现代文：太阳中风症，卫阳抗邪而浮盛于外，营阴不能内守而弱于内，卫阳浮盛于外就发热，营阴不能内守则汗自出，病人畏缩怕冷，瑟瑟畏风，象皮毛复盖身上一样发热，鼻塞气息不利，干呕的，应当用桂枝汤主治。
English: The sun is apoplectic, the yin and yang resist the evil and flourish outside, the yin and yang cannot be kept inside but are weak inside, the yin and yang that flourishes outside becomes hot, the yin and yang that cannot be kept inside causes sweat to come out, the patient is afraid of the cold, is afraid of the wind, and is as hot as the body covered with fur, the nasal congestion is unfavorable, and if it is retching, it should be treated with cinnamon stick soup.

古文：桂枝汤方
现代文：桂枝汤方
English: Cinnamon stick soup

古文：桂枝三两芍药三两甘草二两生姜三两大枣十二枚右五味，咀三味。以水七升，微火煮取三升，去滓，适寒温，服一升。
现代文：桂枝三两，去皮芍药三两甘草二两，灸生姜三两，切片大枣十二枚，剖开以上五味药，捣碎前三味药，与后两药混合，加水七升，用微火煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，待药汁冷热适当时，服药一升，一日服三次。
English: Three twigs of cinnamon, two twigs of licorice, two twigs of moxa, two twigs of ginger, twelve slices of jujube, cut the above five herbs, mash the first three herbs, mix with the last two herbs, add seven liters of water, cook with low heat to three liters, remove the residue, keep the medicinal juice hot and cold as appropriate, take one liter of medicine, take three times a day.

古文：服已须臾，啜热稀粥一升余，以助药力。
现代文：服药后一会儿，喝热稀粥一大碗，以助药力，并复盖棉被约二个小时，取暖保温来帮助发汗。
English: A little while after taking the medicine, drink a big bowl of hot gruel to help the medicine, and cover with a quilt for about two hours to keep warm to help sweating.

古文：温覆令一时许，遍身漐漐，微似有汗者益佳，不可令如水流漓，病必不除。
现代文：发汗程度最好是遍身微微出汗，不要让汗出如流水一样淋漓不断，否则伤阳耗阴，疾病就一定不能解除。
English: The degree of sweating is best to be slightly sweating all over the body, do not let the sweat flow like water, otherwise the sun will be damaged and the shade will be lost, and the disease will not be relieved.

古文：若一服汗出病差，停后服，不必尽剂；若不汗，更服，依前法；又不汗，后服小促其间，半日许，令三服尽；若病重者，一日一夜服，周时观之。
现代文：如果服了第一次药后汗出疾病痊愈，就停止服第二次、第三次药，不需要把一剂药都服尽。如果服第一次药汗不出，可以依照以上服药方法服第二次药。如果服第二次药还无汗出，那么，第三次药可适当提前服，可在半天左右将一剂服完。如果病情重的，可以白天夜晚服药，一天小时进行严密观察。
English: If the sweating disease is cured after taking the first medicine, stop taking the second and third medicine, and there is no need to take all the medicine. If the first medicine does not cause sweating, you can take the second medicine according to the above method of taking the medicine. If the second medicine does not cause sweating, then the third medicine can be taken in advance, and the dose can be completed in about half a day. If the condition is severe, you can take the medicine during the day and night, and observe closely for one hour a day.

古文：服一剂尽，病证犹在者，更作服；若汗不出者，乃服至二三剂。
现代文：如果服完一剂药后，病症仍然存在的，可以再继续服药，倘若服药后仍不出汗，那么，就可一直服药二三剂。
English: If after taking one dose of medicine, the disease still exists, you can continue to take the medicine. If you still do not sweat after taking the medicine, then you can continue to take two or three doses.

古文：禁生冷、粘滑、肉面、五辛、酒酪、臭恶等物。
现代文：服药期间、禁食生冷、粘滞滑腻、油腻、大蒜、小蒜、芸苔、胡荽、动物乳类及其制品，腐败变质及不良气味的食品。
English: During the period of taking the medicine, fasting from raw cold, viscous, sticky, greasy, greasy, garlic, garlic, lichen, beetroot, animal milk and its products, spoiled and bad-smelling food.

古文：太阳病，头痛发热，汗出恶风者，桂枝汤主之。
现代文：太阳病，只要出现头痛、发热、汗出、畏风的，就可以用桂枝汤主治。
English: Sun disease, as long as there is a headache, fever, sweating, and fear of the wind, can be treated with cinnamon soup.

古文：太阳病，项背强几几，反汗出恶风者，桂枝加葛根汤主之。
现代文：太阳病，项背部僵硬不柔和、俯仰不能自如，本来应该没有汗，反而出现汗出、怕风等太阳中风症的，用桂枝加葛根汤主治。
English: If you suffer from sunstroke, stiff neck and back, inability to bend over, no sweat, sweating, fear of wind and other sun stroke symptoms, use cinnamon sprig and kudzu root soup as the main treatment.

古文：桂枝加葛根汤方
现代文：桂枝加葛根汤方
English: Katsura sprig with kudzu root soup

古文：葛根四两，桂枝二两，芍药二两，生姜三两，大枣十二枚，甘草二两。上六味，以水一斗，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升。
现代文：葛根四两芍药三两，生姜三两，切片甘草二两，炙大枣十二枚，剖开桂枝二两，去皮以上六味药，用水一斗，先加入葛根煎煮，煮去水分二升，除去上面的白沫，再加入其它药物，共煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升。
English: First, add the decoction of kudzu root, boil it to remove 2 liters of water, remove the foam on top, then add other drugs, and boil it to 3 liters, remove the drug residue, and take 1 liter each time.

古文：不须啜粥，余如桂枝法将息及禁忌。
现代文：服药后复盖棉被取暖保温以助发汗，使病人遍身微微汗出为度。
English: After taking the medicine, cover the cotton quilt with heating and insulation to help perspire, so that the patient sweats slightly all over.

古文：太阳病，下之后，其气上冲者，可与桂枝汤。
现代文：除服药后不需喝热粥外，其余的调养护理方法及服药禁忌均同桂枝汤。
English: In addition to not needing to drink hot porridge after taking medicine, the rest of the treatment methods and contraindications for taking medicine are the same as Guizhi soup.

古文：方用前法。若不上冲者，不可与之。
现代文：太阳病，误用了泻下药之后，病人自觉胸中有气逆上冲感觉的，可以用桂枝汤治疗，服药方法同前边的一样。
English: Sun disease, after misusing the laxative, if the patient feels that there is gas in the chest, it can be treated with cinnamon soup. The method of taking medicine is the same as the previous one.

古文：太阳病三日，已发汗，若吐，若下，若温针，仍不解者，此为坏病，桂枝不中与之也。
现代文：如果误下后没有气逆上冲感觉的，则不能用桂枝汤治疗。太阳病第三天，已经用了发汗的方法，或者用了吐法，或者用了攻下法，或者用了温针的方法，病情仍然不解除的，这就是坏病，桂枝汤已不再适用。
English: If you do not have the feeling of gas reversal after mistaking, you can not use Guizhi soup to treat. On the third day of sun sickness, you have used the method of sweating, or used the spit method, or used the capture method, or used the warm needle method, and the condition is still not relieved, this is a bad disease, Guizhi soup is no longer applicable.

古文：观其脉证，知犯何逆，随证治之。
现代文：对于坏病，应该详细诊察其脉象、症状，了解使用了何种错误治法及演变为何种病症，因证立法，随证治疗。
English: For bad diseases, it is necessary to examine the pulse and symptoms in detail, understand what kind of wrong treatment methods have been used and what kind of diseases have evolved, legislate according to the evidence, and treat according to the evidence.

古文：桂枝本为解肌，若其人脉浮紧，发热汗不出者，不可与之也。
现代文：桂枝汤本来是解肌和营的方剂，适用于太阳中风证。如果病人脉象浮紧、发热、汗不出的，属太阳伤寒证，不可用桂枝汤治疗。
English: Guizhi decoction was originally a prescription for relieving muscle and joint pain, and is suitable for sun stroke. If the patient's pulse is tight, feverish, and sweat does not come out, it is a sun typhoid, and can not be treated with Guizhi decoction.

古文：常须识此，勿令误也。
现代文：医者务须经常记住这一点，千万不要发生错误。
English: Doctors must always remember this and never make a mistake.

古文：若酒客病，不可与桂枝汤，得汤则呕，以酒客不喜甘故也。喘家作桂枝汤，加厚朴杏子佳。
现代文：平素嗜酒的人，如果患了太阳中风证，不当用桂枝汤治疗，如果服用了桂枝汤，就会出现呕吐，这是因为嗜酒的人多湿热内蕴，而桂枝汤是辛甘温之剂，用后更助热留湿的缘故。宿有喘疾的病人，患了太阳中风证，引动喘疾发作的，用桂枝汤加厚朴、杏子治疗最好。
English: People who are habitual alcoholics, if they suffer from sun stroke, improperly use cinnamon soup for treatment. If they take cinnamon soup, they will vomit. This is because alcoholics have more moist heat content, and cinnamon soup is a cold remedy, and it helps retain heat after use. Patients with asthma who suffer from sun stroke and cause asthma attacks are best treated with cinnamon soup and thick parsley and apricot.

古文：凡服桂枝汤吐者，其后必吐脓血也。
现代文：凡是内热炽盛的病人，如果服用桂枝汤而发生呕吐的，以后可能会出现吐脓血的变证。
English: All patients who are hot inside, if they vomit while taking cinnamon soup, they may have a variant of spitting blood in the future.

古文：太阳病，发汗，遂漏不止，其人恶风，小便难，四支微急，难以屈伸者，桂枝加附子汤主之。
现代文：太阳病，发汗太过，导致汗出淋漓不止、病人怕冷、小便短小、四肢微感拘急疼痛、屈伸困难，如果头痛、发热等表证仍然存在的，用桂枝加附子汤主治。
English: Sun disease, sweating too much, causing perspiration to drip more and more, the patient is afraid of cold, urination is short, limbs feel slightly urgent pain, flexion and extension difficulties, if headache, fever and other symptoms still exist, use cinnamon sprig and aconite soup as the main treatment.

古文：桂枝加附子汤方
现代文：桂枝加附子汤方
English: Katsura sprig with green onion soup side

古文：桂枝三两，芍药三两，甘草三两，生姜三两，大枣十二枚，附子一枚。上六味，以水七升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升。
现代文：桂枝三两去，皮芍药三两，甘草三两，炙生姜三两，切片大枣十二枚，剖开附子一枚，炮制去皮破成八片，以上六味药，加水七升，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升。
English: Add three to two cinnamon sticks, three to two cinnamon sticks, three to two licorice sticks, three to two roasted ginger sticks, twelve slices of jujube, cut open one apricot, peel and break into eight pieces, add seven liters of water, fry into three liters, remove the residue, and take one liter each time.

古文：本云桂枝汤，今加附子，将息如前法。
现代文：旧本说：现用桂枝汤加入附子，其调养护理的方法同前。
English: According to the old text, the method of raising and caring for aconites is the same as before, with the addition of cinnamon sprig soup.

古文：太阳病，下之后，脉促胸满者，桂枝去芍药汤主之。
现代文：太阳病，误用攻下之后，脉象尺寸对比，寸脉比较明显，胸部胀闷的，用桂枝去芍药汤主治。
English: Sun disease, after misusing the sun, the pulse image size is contrasted, the pulse size is more obvious, the chest is swollen, and the decoction is mainly treated with cinnamon sticks.

古文：若微恶寒者，去芍药方中，加附子汤主之。
现代文：如果误下后出现胸部满闷、脉微、畏风寒较重的，用桂枝去芍药加附子汤主治。
English: If the chest is stuffy, the pulse is weak, and the wind chill is heavy after the mistake, use the cinnamon stick to remove the pus and add the aconite soup as the main treatment.

古文：桂枝去芍药汤方
现代文：桂枝去芍药汤方
English: Guizhi decoction decoction soup recipe

古文：桂枝三两，甘草二两，生姜三两，大枣十二枚。上四味，以水七升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升。
现代文：桂枝三两，去皮甘草二两，炙生姜三两，切片大枣十二枚，剖开以上四味药，用水七升，煎煮成三升，去药渣，每次温服一升。
English: Three pairs of cinnamon sticks, two pairs of peeled licorice, three pairs of roasted ginger, twelve sliced jujubes, cut the above four herbs, seven liters of water, boiled into three liters, remove the residue, and take one liter each time.

古文：本云桂枝汤，今去芍药，将息如前法。
现代文：旧本说：现用桂枝汤去掉芍药，调养护理方法同前。
English: The old book said: Now use cinnamon soup to remove the laxative, the same care method as before.

古文：桂枝去芍药加附子汤方
现代文：桂枝去芍药加附子汤方
English: Guizhi decoction with aconite soup

古文：桂枝三两，甘草二两，生姜三两，大枣十二枚，附子一枚。上五味，以水七升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，本云桂枝汤，今去芍药加附子，将息如前法。
现代文：桂枝三两，去皮甘草二两，炙生姜三两，切片大枣十二枚，剖开附子一枚，炮制去皮破成八片，以上五味药，用水七升，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升。旧本说：现用桂枝汤去掉芍药加入附子，其调养护理方法同前。
English: Three pairs of cinnamon twigs, two pairs of peeled licorice, three pairs of roasted ginger, twelve slices of jujube, one piece of honeysuckle, peeled and broken into eight pieces, the above-mentioned five-flavor medicine, seven liters of water, boiled into three liters, remove the drug residue, and take one liter each time. The old book said: Now use cinnamon twig soup to remove the lye and add the honeysuckle, and the care method is the same as before.

古文：太阳病，得之八九日，如疟状，发热恶寒，热多寒少，其人不呕，清便欲自可，一日二三度发，脉微缓者，为欲愈也。
现代文：太阳病，已经得了八九天，病人发热怕冷，发热的时间较长，怕冷的时间较短，一天发作二三次，好象疟疾一样，病人不呕吐，大小便正常，这是邪气郁滞在表的表现。
English: The sun sickness has lasted for eight or nine days. The patient is feverish and afraid of the cold. The time of fever is longer, and the time of fear of the cold is shorter. It occurs two or three times a day, just like malaria. The patient does not vomit, and his urine and feces are normal. This is a manifestation of the evil spirit.

古文：脉微而恶寒者，此阴阳俱虚，不可更发汗、更下、更吐也。
现代文：此时，如果脉象渐趋调匀和缓的，是邪气去、正气复的症象，疾病将要痊愈。如果脉象微弱而怕冷的，这是表里阳气均虚，可能系误用汗、吐、下所致，因此，就不能再用发汗、攻下、涌吐的方法治疗了。
English: At this time, if the pulse is gradually adjusted and slowed down, it is a symptom of the evil spirit going away and the righteous spirit returning, and the disease will be cured. If the pulse is weak and cold, this is the yang qi imbalance between the surface and the inside, which may be caused by the misuse of sweat, vomiting, and so on. Therefore, it can no longer be treated by sweating, attacking, and vomiting.

古文：面色反有热色者，未欲解也，以其不能得小汗出，身必痒，宜桂枝麻黄各半汤。
现代文：如果面部反而出现红色的，表明邪气仍郁滞在肌表未能解除，病人皮肤还一定有搔痒的症状，适宜用桂枝麻黄各半汤治疗。
English: If, on the other hand, the face appears red, it indicates that the evil spirit is still depressed and the muscle table has not been relieved, and the patient's skin must still have itching symptoms. It is suitable to use cinnamon branch ephedra half-soup for treatment.

古文：桂枝麻黄各半汤方
现代文：桂枝麻黄各半汤方
English: Gui Zhi Ma Huang, each half of the soup side

古文：桂枝一两十六铢，芍药、生姜、甘草、麻黄各一两，大枣四枚，杏仁二十四枚。上七味，以水五升，先煮麻黄一二沸，去上沫，内诸药，煮取一升八合，去滓，温服六合。
现代文：桂枝一两十六铢，去皮芍药生姜切片甘草炙麻黄各一两，去节大枣四枚剖开杏仁二十四枚，用水浸泡，去掉皮尖及双仁的以上七味药，用水五升，先加入麻黄煎煮，待煮一、二沸，除去上面的白沫，再加入其余各药，煎煮成一升八合，去掉药渣，每次温服六合。
English: One to twenty-six sprigs of cinnamon, peeled ginger, sliced licorice, roasted ephedra, one to two each, four jujubes cut open, twenty-four almonds, soaked in water, remove the skin tips and double kernels of the above seven herbs, use five liters of water, first add ephedra, boil for one or two boils, remove the foam above, then add the remaining medicines, boil to one liter of eight, remove the dregs, and take six at a time.

古文：本云桂枝汤三合，麻黄汤三合，并为六合，顿服，将息如上法。
现代文：旧本说：取桂枝汤三合，麻黄汤三合，合为六合，一次服完。调养护理方法同前。
English: The old book said: Take Guizhi decoction three times, ephedra decoction three times, combined into six times, and take it all at once. The treatment method is the same as before.

古文：太阳病，初服桂枝汤，反烦不解者，先刺风池、风府，却与桂枝汤则愈。
现代文：太阳病，服了一遍桂枝汤，不仅表证不解，反而增添了烦闷不安的感觉，这是邪气郁滞太甚所致。治疗应当先针刺风池、风府，以疏经泄邪，然后再给予桂枝汤就可以痊愈。
English: If you suffer from sunstroke and take Guizhi soup once, it will not only be incomprehensible, but will also increase the feeling of anxiety, which is caused by the stagnation of the evil spirit. The treatment should first prick the wind pool and the wind palace to relieve the evil spirit, and then give Guizhi soup to recover.

古文：服桂枝汤，大汗出，脉洪大者，与桂枝汤如前法；若形如疟，日再发者，汗出必解，宜桂枝二麻黄一汤。
现代文：服桂枝汤发汗，汗不遵法，出现大汗出、脉象洪大，而发热，畏寒，头痛等表证仍然存在的，为病仍在表，仍应给予桂枝汤治疗，服药方法同前。如果病人发热怕冷，发热的时间长，怕冷的时间短，好象发疟疾一样，一天发作二次的，用小发汗法就能治愈，适宜用桂枝二麻黄一汤。
English: If the patient sweats profusely, perspires for a long time, and is afraid of cold for a short time, as if it were malaria, and the attack occurs twice a day, it can be cured with a small perspiration method, and it is suitable to use Guizhi Dima Huang Yi Tang.

古文：桂枝二麻黄一汤方
现代文：桂枝二麻黄一汤方
English: Cinnamon sprig, two maple leaves, one soup side

古文：桂枝一两十七铢，芍药一两六铢，麻黄十六铢，生姜一两六铢，杏仁十六个，甘草一两二铢，大枣五枚。上七味，以水五升，先煮麻黄一二沸，去上沫，内诸药，煮取二升，去滓，温服一升，日再服。
现代文：桂枝一两十七铢，去皮芍药一两六铢麻黄十六铢，去节生姜一两六铢，切片杏仁十六个，去皮尖甘草一两二铢，炙大枣五枚，剖开以上七味药，用水五升，先加入麻黄，煮开一、二滚，除去上面的白沫，再加入其它药物，煎煮成二升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一日服二次。
English: Cinnamon twig one hundred and twenty-seven stalks, peeled ginger one hundred and twenty-six stalks, ginger one hundred and twenty-six stalks, sliced almonds sixteen, peeled pointed licorice one hundred and twenty-two stalks, roasted jujube five, cut the above seven herbs, use five liters of water, first add ephedra, boil one or two rolls, remove the foam above, then add other drugs, boil into two liters, remove the drug residue, warm one liter at a time, twice a day.

古文：本云桂枝汤二分，麻黄汤一分，合为二升，分再服，今合为一方，将息如前法。
现代文：旧本说：取桂枝汤二份，麻黄汤一份，混合成二升，分二次服。调养护理方法同前
English: The old book said: Take two parts of cinnamon soup, one part of ephedra soup, mix into two liters, and divide into two times.

古文：服桂枝汤，大汗出后，大烦，渴不解，脉洪大者，白虎加人参汤主之。
现代文：太阳中风证，服了桂枝汤后，汗出得很多，病人出现心烦口渴很厉害、饮水不能缓解、脉象洪大的，这是邪传阳明，热盛而津伤，用白虎加人参汤主治。
English: Sun stroke certificate, after taking Guizhi soup, sweating a lot, the patient appears upset, very thirsty, drinking water can not be alleviated, the pulse is like a flood, this is the evil sun, hot and hurt, with white tiger and ginseng soup.

古文：白虎加人参汤方
现代文：白虎加人参汤方
English: White tiger with ginseng soup

古文：知母六两，石膏一斤，甘草二两，粳米六合，人参三两。上五味，以水一斗，煮米熟汤成，去滓，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：知母六两石膏一斤，打碎，用布包甘草炙，二两粳米六合人参三两以上五味药，加水一斗煎煮，待粳米煮熟，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一天服三次。
English: 1 kg of mother-of-pearl gypsum, crushed, roasted liquorice with a cloth, 2 stalks of rice, 6 ginseng, 3 to 5 herbs, boiled with a bucket of water, boiled until the glutinous rice is cooked, remove the residue, warm one liter at a time, take three times a day.

古文：太阳病，发热恶寒，热多寒少，脉微弱者，此无阳也，不可更汗，宜桂枝二越婢一汤方。
现代文：太阳病，发热怕冷，发热的时间长，怕冷的时间短，一天发作二三次，并见心烦、口渴的，为表郁兼内热之证，可用桂枝二越婢一汤治疗。
English: Sun disease, fever is afraid of cold, fever time is long, fear of cold time is short, two or three times a day, and see upset, thirsty, as a sign of depression and internal heat, can be treated with Guizhi Er Yue Yi Tang.

古文：桂枝二越婢一汤方
现代文：如果病人脉象微弱的，这是阳气虚弱，不能用发汗法治疗。
English: If the patient's pulse is weak, this is yang qi weakness and cannot be treated by sweating.

古文：桂枝芍药甘草各十八铢生姜一两三钱大枣四枚麻黄十八铢石膏二十四铢右七味，咀。以五升水，煮麻黄一二沸，去上沫，内诸药，煮取二升，去滓，温服一升。
现代文：桂枝二越婢一汤方桂枝去皮芍药麻黄甘草各十八铢，炙大枣四枚，剖开生姜一两二铢，切片石膏二十四铢，打碎，用布包以上七味药，用水五升，先加入麻黄，煮开一二滚，除去浮在上面的白沫，再加入其他药物，煎煮成二升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升。
English: Guizhi, two yakitori, one soup, square guizhi, peeled yakitori medicine, ephedra licorice, 18 stalks each, roasted four jujube, cut ginger, one or two stalks, cut gypsum, 24 stalks, broken, use cloth to wrap more than seven herbs, use five liters of water, first add ephedra, boil one or two rolls, remove the white foam floating on top, then add other drugs, boil into two liters, remove the drug residue, warm one liter each time.

古文：本方当裁为越婢汤、桂枝汤，合饮一升，今合为一方，桂枝二越婢一。
现代文：旧本说：应当是将越婢汤、桂枝汤的煎剂混合，每次温服一升。现将二方混合成一方，取桂枝汤二份药量，越婢汤一份药量。
English: The old version said: It should be a mixture of the decoction of the soup and the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction of the decoction

古文：服桂枝汤，或下之，仍头项强痛，翕翕发热，无汗，心下满，微痛，小便不利者，桂枝汤去桂，加茯苓白术汤主之。
现代文：服了桂枝汤，或使用了泻下法后，病人仍然头痛，项部拘急不柔和，象皮毛复盖身上一样发热，无汗，胃脘部胀满，微感疼痛，小便不通畅的，用桂枝去桂加茯苓白术汤主治。
English: After taking Guizhi soup, or using the laxative method, the patient still has a headache, the head is anxious and not soft, it is as hot as the body covered with fur, no sweat, the stomach and abdomen are full, slightly painful, and the urine is not smooth. Use Guizhi to go to Gui Jiayu Baijiu soup for treatment.

古文：桂枝去桂加茯苓白术汤方
现代文：桂枝去桂加茯苓白术汤方
English: Cinnamon stick, cinnamon stick, cinnamon stick, white cabbage soup side

古文：芍药三两甘草二两生姜白术茯苓各三两大枣十二枚上六味，以水八升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，小便利则愈。
现代文：芍药三两甘草二两生姜白术茯苓各三两大枣十二枚上六味，以水八升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，小便利则愈。
English: Three or two licorice, two or two ginger, three or two jujubes, twelve jujubes, six flavors, eight liters of water, boil three liters, remove the ginger, warm one liter, small convenience is more.

古文：本云桂枝汤，今去桂枝，加茯苓，白术。
现代文：本云桂枝汤，今去桂枝，加茯苓，白术。
English: Originally cloud cinnamon soup, now go to cinnamon branch, add ginger, white cinnamon.

古文：伤寒脉浮，自汗出，小便数，心烦，微恶寒，脚挛急，反与桂枝汤，欲攻其表，此误也。
现代文：服药后就出现了四肢冰冷，咽喉干燥、烦躁不安、呕吐等症状，是误治导致阴阳两虚。
English: After taking the medicine, cold extremities, dry throat, restlessness, vomiting and other symptoms appeared. It was a misdiagnosis that led to yin and yang deficiency.

古文：得之便厥，咽中干，烦燥，吐逆者，作甘草干姜汤与之，以复其阳。
现代文：治疗应该先给予甘草干姜汤，来复阳气，如果服了甘草干姜汤后四肢厥冷转愈而见两腿温暖的，说明阳气已复。
English: Treatment should first be given to licorice dried ginger soup to restore yang qi. If after taking licorice dried ginger soup the limbs become cold and the legs become warm, it means that yang qi has been restored.

古文：若厥愈、足温者，更作芍药甘草汤与之，其脚即伸。
现代文：然后，再给予芍药甘草汤来复阴，阴液恢复，病人两小腿肚拘急疼痛解除，两腿即可自由伸展。
English: Then, the patient is given the herbal liquorice soup to restore the yin, the yin fluid is restored, the urgent pain in the patient's two lower legs is relieved, and the legs can be stretched freely.

古文：若胃气不和，谵语者，少与调胃承气汤。
现代文：假如误汗伤津，致肠胃燥实而气机不调和，出现谵言妄语等见症的，可以少量调胃承气汤治疗。
English: If the sweating is harmful, causes the stomach and intestines to be dry and the qi and qi are not in harmony, and there are symptoms such as abusive language, a small amount of stomach tonic soup can be used for treatment.

古文：若重发汗，复加烧针者，四逆汤主之。
现代文：如果反复发汗，再加上用烧针强迫发汗，汗多亡阳，导致少阴阳衰的，应当用四逆汤主治。
English: If repeated sweating, coupled with the use of burning needles to force perspiration, sweat more than the death of the sun, resulting in less yin and yang decline, should use the four reverse soup.

古文：甘草干姜汤方
现代文：甘草干姜汤方
English: Licorice and dried ginger soup

古文：甘草四两干姜二两右咀。以水三升，煮取一升五合，去滓，分温再服。
现代文：甘草四两，炙干姜二两，以上二味药，用水三升，煎至一升五合，去掉药渣，分二次温服。
English: Add four to two teaspoons of licorice, two to two teaspoons of roasted dried ginger, and three liters of water to the above two herbs, fry them to five to one liter, remove the medicinal residue, and heat them for two times.

古文：芍药甘草汤方
现代文：芍药甘草汤方
English: Chinese medicinal liquorice soup recipe

古文：白芍药四两甘草四两右二味咀，以水三升，煮取一升半，去滓，分温再服之。
现代文：白芍药甘草各四两，炙以上二味药，加水三升煎煮，煮至一升五合，去操药渣，分二次温服。
English: Four pairs of white licorice are prepared, roasted with more than two herbs, boiled with three liters of water, boiled to one liter of five, removed the residue, and divided into two warm dishes.

古文：调胃承气汤方
现代文：调胃承气汤方
English: Stomach-turning Chengqi soup

古文：大黄四两甘草二两芒硝半斤右三味咀，以水三升，煮取一升，去滓，内芒硝更上火微煮，令沸，少少温服。
现代文：大黄四两，去皮，用陈米酒洗甘草二两，炙芒硝半升以上三味药，用水三升，先加入大黄、甘草，煎煮成一升，去掉药渣，再加入芒硝，然后放在火上稍煮至开即成，每次温服少量。
English: Take four liters of rhubarb, peel it, wash two liters of licorice with stale rice wine, roast more than half a liter of mint syrup, three liters of water, first add rhubarb and licorice, boil it to one liter, remove the residue, then add the mint syrup, and then cook it on the fire until it is ready. Take a small amount each time.

古文：四逆汤方：
现代文：四逆汤方
English: Four Reverse Tang Sides

古文：甘草二两干姜一两半附子一枚右三味咀，以水三升，煮取一升二合，去滓，分温再服，强人可大附子一枚，干姜三两。
现代文：甘草二两，炙干姜一两半附子一枚，用生的，去皮，破成八片以上三味药，用水三升，煎煮成一升二合，去掉药渣，分两次温服。身体强壮的人可以用大的附子一枚，干姜三两。
English: Two pairs of licorice, one or two halves of roasted dried ginger, one piece of aconite, raw, peeled, broken into more than eight pieces of shamisen, three liters of water, boiled into one liter and two, remove the residue, divided into two warm clothes. Strong people can use one large aconite and three pairs of dried ginger.

古文：问曰：证象阳旦，按法治之而增剧，厥逆，咽中干，两胫拘急而谵语。师曰：言夜半手足当温，两脚当伸，后如师言。何以知此？
现代文：问：病人的症状象桂枝汤证，按照桂枝汤证的治法进行治疗，结果反而使病情加剧，出现四肢冰冷、咽喉干燥、两小腿肌肉拘急疼痛，甚至出现谵语等症，老师预测到了病人半夜手足应当温暖，两腿应当舒展，后来病情发展果然如老师说的那样，怎么知道会这样呢?
English: Q: The patient's symptoms resembled the symptoms of "Guizhi decoction syndrome" and was treated according to the treatment method of "Guizhi decoction syndrome." As a result, the patient's condition worsened. Cold extremities, dry throat, acute pain in the muscles of the two lower legs, and even slang appeared. The teacher predicted that the patient's hands and feet should be warm in the middle of the night, and the legs should be stretched. Later, the disease developed as the teacher said. How did you know it would be like this?

古文：答曰：寸口脉浮而大，浮则为风，大则为虚，风则生微热，虚则两胫挛。
现代文：老师答：病人寸口脉搏浮而大，浮是感受风邪，大是虚的表现，感受风邪就会产生轻微发热，正气虚弱就会出现两小腿肌肉拘挛疼痛。
English: Teacher's answer: The patient's pulse rate is high, and high is a symptom of a cold, and high is a symptom of a delusion. If you feel a cold, you will have a slight fever, and if you are weak, you will have cramping pain in your calf muscles.

古文：病证象桂枝，因加附子参其间，增桂令汗出，附子温经，亡阳故也。
现代文：症状虽然很象桂枝汤证，其实不是桂枝汤证，而是太阳中风兼阴阳两虚证。
English: Although the symptoms are very similar to those of "Gui Zhi Tang" syndrome, they are actually not "Gui Zhi Tang" syndrome, but "sun stroke" combined with "yin and yang" syndrome.

古文：厥逆咽中干，烦燥，阳明内结，谵语，烦乱，更饮甘草干姜汤。
现代文：因此，在治疗上必须用桂枝汤加附子以温经发汗。但是医生却反而单用桂枝汤发汗，导致汗出亡阳，并兼阴液亏虚，从而出现四肢冰冷、咽喉干燥、烦躁等症状。
English: Therefore, in the treatment, it is necessary to use cinnamon stick soup and aconite to warm up and perspire. However, the doctor instead used cinnamon stick soup alone to perspire, resulting in perspiration and yin deficiency, resulting in cold limbs, dry throat, irritability and other symptoms.

古文：夜半阳气还，两足当热，胫尚微拘急，重与芍药甘草汤，尔乃胫伸，以承气汤微溏，则止其谵语，故知病可愈。
现代文：治疗先给予甘草干姜汤，服药后阳气于半夜恢复，两腿就由厥冷转温暖，而两小腿肌肉拘挛疼痛尚未解除，于是再给予芍药甘草汤，服药后，阴液得复，则两脚就自由伸展了。如果误汗伤阴，导致阳明燥屎内结，就会出现谵语、心中烦乱不安等症，应当用承气汤攻下里实，服药后大便微见溏泻的，为燥屎得去，谵语等症就会停止，疾病即可以痊愈。
English: The first treatment is to give licorice dried ginger soup. After taking the medicine, the yang qi is restored in the middle of the night. The legs will turn from cold to warm, and the pain in the calf muscles has not been relieved. Then, the laxative liquorice soup is given. After taking the medicine, the yin liquid is recovered, and the feet are free to stretch. If the erroneous sweat hurts the yin, leading to the internal knot of the Yang Ming dry excrement, there will be slang, upset and anxiety in the heart, etc. It is necessary to use the air bearing soup to attack the core. If the stool shows slight diarrhea

