古文：魏太子自将，过宋外黄。外黄徐子曰： 臣有百战百胜之术，太子能听臣乎? 
现代文：魏国太子亲自率军队攻打齐国，路过宋国外黄，外黄人徐予说： 臣下有百战百胜的方法，太子能听臣下说一说吗？ 
English: The prince of Wei personally led the army to attack Qi, passing by the Song foreign Huang, the foreign Huang said Xu Yu: The vassal has a method of a hundred victories, can the prince listen to the vassal?

古文：太子曰： 愿闻之。 
现代文：魏国太子说： 愿闻其详。 
English: Wei's crown prince said, "I would like to hear more about it."

古文：客曰： 固愿效之。
现代文：徐子说： 臣下本来愿意效劳。
English: Xu Zi said: The vassal was willing to serve.

古文：今太子自将攻齐，大胜并莒，则富不过有魏，而贵不益为王。
现代文：如今太子亲自率军队进攻齐国，如果取得大胜，吞并了莒地，那富贵也超不过拥有魏国，显贵也不会超过做国君。
English: Today, the prince personally led the army to attack Qi. If he won a great victory and annexed Shantian, he would be richer than owning Wei, and he would not be more important than being the sovereign.

古文：若战不胜，则万世无魏。此臣之百战百胜之术也。 
现代文：如果不胜，就会永世失去魏国，这就是臣下百战百胜的方法。 
English: If you do not win, you will lose Wei forever. This is the way for a vassal to win a hundred battles.

古文：太子曰： 诺。
现代文：魏国太子说： 好吧。
English: The Prince of Wei said: All right.

古文：请必从公之言而还。 
现代文：我听您的话返回魏国。 
English: I will listen to your words and return to Wei.

古文：客曰： 太子虽欲还，不得矣。彼利太子之战攻，而欲满其意者众，太子虽欲还，恐不得矣。 
现代文：徐子说： 太子即使想回去，恐怕也做不到了，那些利用太子攻战机会谋取好处，想要满足私欲的人太多了，太子虽然想回去，恐怕做不到了。 
English: Xu Zi said: Even if the prince wants to go back, I'm afraid he won't be able to. There are too many people who want to satisfy their selfish desires by taking advantage of the prince's opportunity to fight. Although the prince wants to go back, I'm afraid he won't be able to.

古文：太子上车请还。
现代文：太子登战车请将士们回去。
English: The prince boarded the chariot and asked the soldiers to go back.

古文：其御曰： 将出而还，与北同，不如遂行。 
现代文：他的车夫说： 将领出征无故而还与败退是一样的，不如继续向前。 
English: His coachman said: "It's the same as a general going to war for no reason and still being defeated. It's better to keep moving forward."

古文：遂行。与齐人战而死，卒不得魏。
现代文：于是魏国太子又带兵前行，同齐国开战，不幸战死。魏国太子终于没有拥有魏国。
English: As a result, the prince of Wei again led his troops forward, went to war with Qi, and unfortunately died in battle. The prince of Wei finally did not own Wei.

