古文：哀公问政于孔子。
现代文：鲁哀公向孔子询问治国之道。
English: Lu Aikong asked Confucius about the way of governing the country.

古文：孔子对曰： 文武之政，布在方策。
现代文：孔子回答说： 周文王、周武王的治国方略，记载在简册上。
English: Confucius replied, "The strategies for governing the country of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu are recorded in the booklet.

古文：其人存，则其政举；其人亡，则其政息。
现代文：这样的贤人在世，他的治国措施就能施行；他们去世，他们的治国措施就不能施行了。
English: When such sages are alive, their governance measures can be implemented; when they are dead, their governance measures cannot be implemented.

古文：天道敏生，人道敏政，地道敏树。
现代文：天之道就是勤勉地化生万物，人之道就是勤勉地处理政事，地之道就是迅速地让树木生长。
English: The way of heaven is to diligently create all things, the way of man is to diligently deal with politics, and the way of the earth is to quickly make trees grow.

古文：夫政者，犹蒲卢也，待化以成。故为政在于得人。
现代文：政治，就像土蜂取螟蛉之子化为自己的儿子一样快速，得到教化就能很快成功，所以治理国家最重要的是得到人才。
English: Politics, just as quickly as the son of a beekeeper becomes his own son, can be quickly successful if he is educated, so the most important thing in governing the country is to get talent.

古文：取人以身，修道以仁。
现代文：选取人才在于修养自身，修养道德要以仁为本。
English: The selection of talents lies in the cultivation of oneself, and the cultivation of morality should be based on benevolence.

古文：仁者、人也，亲亲为大；义者、宜也，尊贤为大。
现代文：仁，就是具有爱人之心，爱亲人是最大的仁；义，就是事事做得适宜，尊重贤人是最大的义。
English: Benevolence means having the heart to love others, and loving one's relatives is the greatest benevolence. Righteousness means doing things appropriately, and respecting the wise is the greatest righteousness.

古文：亲亲之教，尊贤之等，礼所以生也。
现代文：爱亲人要分亲疏，尊重贤人要有等级，这就产生了礼。
English: Loving relatives should be kept separate, and respecting sages should be graded, which gave rise to etiquette.

古文：礼者、政之本也。
现代文：礼，这是政治的根本，因此君子不可以不修身。
English: Courtesy is the foundation of politics, so a gentleman must be modest.

古文：是以君子不可以不修身；思修身，不可以不事亲；思事亲，不可以不知人；思知人，不可以不知天。天下之达道有五，其所以行之者三。
现代文：想要修身，不能不侍奉父母；要侍奉父母，不能不了解人；要了解人，不能不知天。天下共通的人伦大道有五条，用来实行这五条人伦大道的德行有三种。
English: If you want to cultivate yourself, you must serve your parents; if you want to serve your parents, you must understand other people; if you want to understand other people, you must know heaven. There are five universal ethical roads, and there are three kinds of virtues for practicing these five ethical roads.

古文：曰：君臣也，父子也，夫妇也，昆弟也，朋友也。五者、天下之达道。
现代文：君臣之道，父子之道，夫妇之道，兄弟之道，朋友之道，这五条是天下共通的大道。
English: The way of the ruler and the subject, the way of the father and the son, the way of the husband and the wife, the way of the brother and the way of the friend, these five are the common highways of the world.

古文：智、仁、勇、三者，天下之达德也。
现代文：智、仁、勇三种品德，是天下共通的道德。
English: The three virtues of wisdom, benevolence and courage are the common morality of the world.

古文：所以行之者一也。
现代文：实行这些的目标都是一致的。
English: The implementation of these objectives is consistent.

古文：或生而知之，或学而知之，或困而知之，及其知之一也。
现代文：有的人天生就知道，有的人通过学习才知道，有的人经历了困苦才知道，最终都知道了，这是一样的。
English: Some people are born knowing, some people learn to know, some people go through hardships to know, and eventually they all know, it's the same.

古文：或安而行之，或利而行之，或勉强而行之，及其成功一也。 
现代文：有的人心安理得地去做，有的人为了名利去做，有的人被迫勉强去做，最终成功了，都是一样的。 
English: Some people do it with peace of mind, some people do it for fame and fortune, some people are forced to do it reluctantly, and eventually succeed, all the same.

古文：公曰： 子之言美矣，至矣！寡人实固，不足以成之也。 
现代文：哀公说： 您说得太好了，达到极点了，但我实在鄙陋，不足以成就这些。 
English: Aiko said, "You've said it so well, you've reached the pinnacle, but I'm too lowly to be able to accomplish this.

古文：孔子曰： 好学近乎智，力行近乎仁，知耻近乎勇。
现代文：孔子说： 喜欢学习近于有智慧，努力实行近于有仁心，知道耻辱近于有勇气。
English: Confucius said: Liking to learn is close to having wisdom, striving to practice is close to having benevolence, and knowing shame is close to having courage.

古文：知斯三者，则知所以修身；知所以修身，则知所以治人；知所以治人，则能成天下国家者矣。 
现代文：知道了这三者，就知道了如何修身；知道如何修身，就知道如何治理人；知道如何治理人，就能完成治理国家的事情了。 
English: If you know these three, you will know how to cultivate your body; if you know how to cultivate your body, you will know how to govern people; if you know how to govern people, you will be able to complete the task of governing the country.

古文：公曰： 政其尽此而已乎？ 
现代文：哀公问： 治理国家的事到此就完了吗？ 
English: Aiko asked: Is this the end of governing the country?

古文：孔子曰： 凡为天下国家有九经，曰：修身也，尊贤也，亲亲也，敬大臣也，体群臣也，重庶民也，来百工也，柔远人也，怀诸侯也。
现代文：孔子说： 凡是治理天下国家有九条原则，那就是：修养自身，尊重贤人，亲爱亲人，敬重大臣，体恤群臣，爱民如子，招纳工匠，优待远客，安抚诸侯。
English: Confucius said: There are nine principles for governing any country in the world. They are: cultivate oneself, respect the wise, love one's relatives, respect great ministers, sympathize with a group of ministers, love the people as one's own children, recruit artisans, give preferential treatment to distant guests, and appease princes.

古文：夫修身则道立，尊贤则不惑，亲亲则诸父兄弟不怨，敬大臣则不眩，体群臣则士之报礼重，重庶民则百姓劝，来百工则财用足，柔远人则四方归之，怀诸侯则天下畏之。 公曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：修养自身就能确立正道，尊重贤人就不会困惑，亲爱族人叔伯兄弟就不会怨恨，敬重大臣遇事就不会迷惑，体恤群臣士人的回报就会更加厚重，爱民如子百姓就会努力工作，招纳百工财物就会充足，优待远客四方之人就会归顺，安抚诸侯天下人就会敬畏。 哀公问： 怎么做呢？ 
English: Cultivation itself can establish the right path, respect for the wise will not be confused, dear tribal people, uncles and brothers will not be resentful, respect for great ministers will not be confused in times of trouble, the return of sympathetic ministers will be more substantial, love the people like a son, the people will work hard, recruit a hundred craftsmen, and the property will be sufficient, treat guests from all over the world with preferential treatment, and appease the world.

古文：孔子曰： 斋洁盛服，非礼不动，所以修身也；去谗远色，贱利而贵德，所以尊贤也；爵其能，重其禄，同其好恶，所以笃亲亲也；官盛任使，所以敬大臣也；忠信重禄，所以劝士也；时使薄敛，所以子百姓也；日省月考，饩廪称事，所以来百工也；送往迎来，嘉善而矜不能，所以绥远人也；继绝世，举废邦，治乱持危，朝聘以时，厚往而薄来，所以怀诸侯也。
现代文：劳役不误农时，减少赋税，这就是爱民如子的原则。每天省察，每月考核，付给的工钱粮米与工作业绩相称，这就是奖劝百工的原则。来时欢迎，去时欢送，嘉奖有善行的人而怜惜能力差的人，这就是优待远客的原则。延续绝嗣的家族，复兴废亡的小国，治理祸乱，扶持危弱，按时接受诸侯朝见聘问，赠送丰厚，纳贡菲薄，这就是安抚诸侯的原则。
English: Love the people like a son is the principle of reducing taxes when laborers do not miss farming. Daily inspection, monthly assessment, and payment of wages, grain and rice commensurate with work performance is the principle of rewarding and advising a hundred workers. Welcome when you come, send off when you go, reward people with good deeds and pity those with poor ability is the principle of preferential treatment of long-distance guests. Continuation of a family without heirs, revival of a small country in ruins, management of disasters, support of the weak, timely acceptance of the princes to see and ask questions, generous gifts, low fees, this is the principle of appeasing the princes.

古文：治天下国家有九经，其所以行之者一也。
现代文：治理天下国家有九条原则，实行这些原则的方法只有一个。
English: There are nine principles for governing a country, and only one way to put them into practice.

古文：凡事豫则立，不豫则废，言前定则不跲，事前定则不困，行前定则不疾，道前定则不穷。
现代文：任何事情，事先有准备就会成功，无准备就会失败。说话先有准备，语言就会顺畅；做事先有准备，就不会出现困窘；行动先有准备，就不会愧疚；道路预先选定，就不会阻碍不通。
English: In everything, if you prepare in advance, you will succeed; if you don't prepare, you will fail. If you speak with preparation, your speech will be smooth; if you prepare in advance, you won't be embarrassed; if you act with preparation, you won't feel guilty; if you choose a path in advance, you won't be blocked.

古文：在下位不获于上，民弗可得而治矣；获于上有道，不信于友，不获于上矣；信于友有道，不顺于亲，不信于友矣；顺于亲有道，反诸身不诚，不顺于亲矣；诚身有道，不明于善，不诚于身矣。
现代文：在下位的人得不到在上位人的信任，就不可能治理好民众。得到在上位人的信任是有规则的，得不到朋友的信任，就得不到在上位人的信任。得到朋友的信任是有规则的，不能让父母顺心，就得不到朋友的信任。让父母顺心是有规则的，反省自己不真诚，就不能让父母顺心。使自己真诚是有规则的，不明白什么是善，就不能使自己真诚。
English: There are rules for gaining the trust of superiors. There are rules for gaining the trust of friends. There are rules for gaining the trust of friends. There are rules for gaining the trust of parents. There are rules for gaining the trust of friends. There are rules for gaining the trust of parents. There are rules for gaining the trust of parents. There are rules for reflecting on one's own insincerity. There are rules for gaining the trust of parents. There are rules for gaining one's own sincerity. There are rules for gaining one's own sincerity. There are rules for not understanding what is good. There are rules for not gaining one's own sincerity.

古文：诚者、天之道也；诚之者、人之道也。
现代文：真诚，是上天的原则；追求真诚，是做人的原则。
English: Sincerity is the principle of heaven; the pursuit of sincerity is the principle of life.

古文：夫诚、弗勉而中，不思而得，从容中道，圣人之所以定体也。
现代文：如果有诚心，不用勉强就能做到，不用思考就能拥有，从从容容就能符合中庸之道，这是圣人表现出来的形象。
English: If you have sincerity, you can do it without reluctance, you can have it without thinking, and you can meet the middle way with ease. This is the image of a saint.

古文：诚之者，择善而固执之者也。 
现代文：真诚的人，就是选择好善的目标执著追求的人。 
English: A sincere person is one who chooses the goal of being good and pursues it persistently.

古文：公曰： 子之教寡人备矣，敢问行之所始。 
现代文：哀公说： 您教给我的方法已经很完备了，请问从什么地方开始实施呢？ 
English: Aiko said, "The method you taught me is already very complete. Where should I start implementing it?"

古文：孔子曰： 立爱自亲始，教民睦也；立敬自长始，教民顺也；教之慈睦，而民贵有亲；教以敬，而民贵用命。
现代文：孔子说： 树立仁爱从爱父母开始，可以教民众和睦；树立恭敬从尊敬长辈开始，可以教民众顺从。教人慈爱和睦，民众就会认为亲人是最宝贵的；教人恭敬，民众就会认为服从命令是最重要的。
English: Confucius said: "If you establish benevolence, starting with loving parents, you can teach the people to be harmonious; if you establish respect, starting with respecting elders, you can teach the people to be obedient. If you teach people to be loving and harmonious, the people will think that relatives are the most precious; if you teach people to be respectful, the people will think that obeying orders is the most important."

古文：民既孝于亲，又顺以听命，措诸天下，无所不可。 
现代文：民众既能孝顺父母，又能听从命令，让他们做天下的任何事情，没有不行的。 
English: People can be both filial and obedient to their parents, and obey orders, and let them do anything under the sun.

古文：公曰： 寡人既得闻此言也，惧不能果行而获罪咎。 
现代文：鲁哀公说： 我既已听到了这些话，很害怕不能果断地实行而犯错误。 
English: "Having heard these words, I am very much afraid that I will not be able to act decisively and make mistakes," Rouye said.

古文：宰我问于孔子曰： 吾闻鬼神之名，而不知所谓，敢问焉。 
现代文：宰我问孔子说： 我听说有鬼神的名称而不知指的是什么，冒昧地问一问。 
English: So I asked Confucius, "I have heard that there is a name for ghosts and gods, but I don't know what it refers to. I dare to ask."

古文：孔子曰： 人生有气有魄。气者，神之盛也。
现代文：孔子说： 人生来就有气有魄，是指人旺盛的生命力。
English: Confucius said: Life is full of vigor and vitality.

古文：众生必死，死必归土，此谓鬼；魂气归天，此谓神。
现代文：众生有生必有死，死后必定会回归到土里，这就是鬼。人的魂魄升到天上，这就是神。
English: All living beings have life and must have death. After death, they must return to the earth, which is the ghost. The human soul ascends to heaven, which is God.

古文：合鬼与神而享之，教之至也。
现代文：把鬼和神合起来祭祀，这是教化的极致了。
English: It is the acme of indoctrination to worship demons and gods together.

古文：骨肉弊于下，化为野土，其气扬于上，此神之著也。
现代文：人死骨肉埋于地下，化为野土；人的气向上发扬，就是神的显现。
English: When a man dies, his bones are buried in the ground and turn into the wild earth. When a man's spirit is lifted up, it is the appearance of God.

古文：圣人因物之精，制为之极，明命鬼神，以为民之则，而犹以是为未足也。
现代文：圣人根据物的精神，制定了标准，明确地命名为鬼神，作为民众的规范。
English: Based on the spirit of things, sages established standards and explicitly named ghosts and gods as the norms of the people.

古文：故筑为宫室，设为宗、祧，春、秋祭祀，以别亲踈，教民反古复始，不敢忘其所由生也。
现代文：但认为还不够，又修筑了宫室，建立了宗庙，春秋都来祭祀，用以区别亲疏远近，教育民众不忘记远古和初始，不忘记自己是怎样出生的。
English: But they thought that was not enough, so they also built a palace, established a family temple, and came to offer sacrifices in spring and autumn to distinguish between close and distant relatives, and to educate the people not to forget ancient times and beginnings, and not to forget how they were born.

古文：众之服自此，故听且速焉。
现代文：民众从此服从教化，所以能听从命令迅速执行。
English: Since then, the people have been subjected to indoctrination, so they can obey orders and carry them out quickly.

古文：教以二端，二端既立，报以二礼：建设朝事，燔燎膻、芗，所以报气也；荐黍稷，修肺、肝，加以郁鬯，所以报魄也。
现代文：又教给他们如何看待生和死这两件事，生死的问题解决之后，又献上黍、程两种祭品报答祖先，设置朝事礼，敬献刚宰杀的牲肉和牲血，烧烤牺牲的脂肪，发出膻味、香味，这是用来报答祖先的气即鬼的。再献上米饭，进上煮熟的肺、肝，还献上用郁金香草汁和黍米酿制的香酒，这是用来报答祖先的魂魄即神的。
English: He also taught them how to look at the two things of life and death. After the problem of life and death was solved, they also offered two kinds of sacrifices to repay their ancestors, setting up a morning ritual, offering freshly slaughtered meat and blood, fat from barbecue sacrifices, emitting salty taste and fragrance, which was used to repay the ancestor's breath, that is, the ghost. Then they offered rice, cooked lungs and liver, and also offered incense brewed with tulip herb juice and glutinous rice, which was used to repay the ancestor's soul, that is, the god.

古文：此教民修本反始崇爱，上下用情，礼之至也。
现代文：这些都是教导民众不忘祖先，崇尚仁爱，从上下两方面相互爱护沟通感情，这是礼的极致。
English: These are to teach the people not to forget their ancestors, to advocate benevolence and love, and to love and communicate with each other from the upper and lower aspects. This is the ultimate of etiquette.

古文：君子反古复始，不忘其所由生。是以致其敬，发其情，竭力从事，不敢不自尽也，此之谓大教。
现代文：君子反思远古和初始，不忘记自己生命的由来，所以要对祖先表示尊敬，表达对祖先的亲情，竭尽全力做事，不敢有丝毫懈怠，这叫做大教。
English: A gentleman reflects on the ancient times and the beginning, and does not forget the origin of his life, so he should show respect to his ancestors, express his affection for his ancestors, do his best to do things, and dare not slacken at all. This is called great teaching.

古文：昔者，文王之祭也，事死如事生，思死而不欲生，忌日则必哀，称讳则如见亲，祀之忠也，思之深，如见亲之所爱。
现代文：从前文王祭祀时，侍奉死者如同侍奉生者，思念死者而痛不欲生，祭祀的时候必定很悲哀，说起亲人的名字如同看到他们一样，这就是祭祀的忠心。思念之深切，如同看见亲人对自己的爱。
English: In ancient times, during the ritual of King Wen, people served the dead as if they were serving the living. They mourned the dead and longed for the living. It must have been very sad at the time of the ritual. They spoke the names of their relatives as if they were seeing them. This was the loyalty of the ritual. The depth of their mourning was like seeing their loved ones' love for them.

古文：祭欲见亲之颜色者，其唯文王与！
现代文：祭祀时想看见亲人模样的，恐怕只有文王吧！
English: If you want to see the appearance of your relatives during a religious service, I'm afraid it's only King Wen!

古文：《诗》云： 明发不寐，有怀二人。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 天亮还睡不着，又想起我的父母。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: In the morning, I still can't sleep, and I think of my parents.

古文：则文王之谓与。
现代文：说的就是文王吧？
English: Isn't that what King Wen said?

古文：祭之明日，明发不寐，有怀二人，敬而致之，又从而思之。
现代文：祭祀的第二天，天亮了还睡不着，想起了父母，尊敬地把他们的魂魄请来，接着又思念他们。
English: On the second day of the ritual, I couldn't sleep at dawn. I thought of my parents, respectfully invited their spirits, and then missed them.

古文：祭之日，乐与哀半，飨之必乐，已至必哀，孝子之情也。文王为能得之矣。 
现代文：祭祀那天，快乐和哀伤各半，向他们敬献贡品必然快乐，敬献完毕不知父母是否享用，又很哀伤。这就是孝子的感情，文王是能够做到这一点的啊。 
English: On the day of the sacrifice, happiness and sadness are both halves, and it is inevitable to be happy to pay tribute to them. After paying tribute, I don't know if my parents will enjoy it, but it is very sad. This is the feeling of a filial son, and King Wen is able to do this.

