古文：桓公在位，管仲、隰朋见。
现代文：桓公坐在位置上，管仲、隰朋进见。
English: Kan'ko sits in his position, while Kan no chu and Shibomoto look on.

古文：立有间，有贰鸿飞而过之。
现代文：站了一会儿，有两只鸿雁飞过。
English: After standing for a while, two wild geese flew by.

古文：桓公叹曰： 仲父，今彼鸿鹄有时而南，有时而北，有时而往，有时而来，四方无远，所欲至而至焉，非唯有羽翼之故，是以能通其意于天下乎？ 
现代文：桓公叹息说： 仲父，那些鸿雁时而南飞，时而北飞，时而去，时而来，不论四方多远，愿到哪里就到哪里，是不是因为有两只羽翼，所以才能把它们的意向通达于天下呢？ 
English: Huan Gong sighed and said: Zhong father, those wild geese sometimes fly south, sometimes fly north, sometimes go, sometimes come. No matter how far away they are, they can go wherever they want. Is it because they have two wings that they can communicate their intentions to the world?

古文：管仲、隰朋不对。
现代文：管仲和隰朋都没有回答。
English: Neither Guanzhong nor his friends answered.

古文：桓公曰： 二子何故不对？ 
现代文：桓公说： 你们两位为什么都不回答？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "Why don't you two answer?"

古文：管子对曰： 君有霸王之心，而夷吾非霸王之臣也，是以不敢对。 
现代文：管子回答说： 君上您有成就霸王之业的心愿，而我则不是成就霸王之业的大臣，所以不敢回答。 
English: Guanzi replied: Your Majesty, you have the desire to achieve the cause of the overlord, and I am not the minister to achieve the cause of the overlord, so I dare not answer.

古文：桓公曰： 仲父胡为然？盍不当言，寡人其有乡乎？
现代文：桓公说： 仲父何必这样，为什么不进直言，使我有个方向呢？
English: Kuan Kung said, "Middle father, why do you have to do this? Why don't you come right out and give me a direction?

古文：寡人之有仲父也，犹飞鸿之有羽翼也，若济大水有舟楫也。仲父不一言教寡人，寡人之有耳，将安闻道而得度哉。 
现代文：我有仲父，就像飞鸿有羽翼，过河有船只一样，仲父不发一言教导我，我虽然有两只耳朵，又怎么听到治国之道和学得治国的法度呢？ 
English: I have a stepfather, just as a feather has wings and a ship has a rudder. My stepfather taught me without saying a word. Although I have two ears, how can I hear the way to govern the country and learn the laws of governing the country?

古文：管子对曰： 君若将欲霸王举大事乎？
现代文：管子回答说： 您要成就霸王之业兴举大事么？
English: The pipe replied, "Do you want to achieve the overlord's career and do great things?

古文：则必从其本事矣。 
现代文：这就必须从它的根本事情做起。 
English: This has to start with its fundamentals.

古文：桓公变躬迁席，拱手而问曰： 敢问何谓其本？ 
现代文：桓公移动身体离开席位，拱手而发问说： 敢问什么是它的根本？ 
English: Huan Gong moved his body to leave the seat, and with a wave of his hand, he asked: "Dare I ask what its essence is?

古文：管子对曰： 齐国百姓，公之本也。
现代文：管子回答说： 齐国百姓，便是它的根本。
English: Guanzi replied, "The people of Qi are its foundation.

古文：人甚忧饥，而税敛重；人甚惧死，而刑政险；人甚伤劳，而上举事不时。
现代文：百姓很怕饥饿，而当前收税很重；百姓很怕死罪，而当前刑政严酷；百姓很怕劳顿，而国家举事竟没有时间限定。
English: The people are very afraid of hunger, but the current tax collection is very heavy; the people are very afraid of capital punishment, but the current criminal policy is harsh; the people are very afraid of fatigue, but there is no time limit for the national election.

古文：公轻其税敛，则人不忧饥；缓其刑政，则人不惧死；举事以时，则人不伤劳。 
现代文：您若能轻征赋税，百姓就不愁饥饿；宽缓刑政，百姓就不愁死罪；举事有时间限定，百姓就不愁劳顿了。 
English: If you can lightly levy taxes, the people will not have to worry about hunger; if you can give a wide respite to criminal justice, the people will not have to worry about capital punishment; if you have a time limit for handling affairs, the people will not have to worry about fatigue.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人闻仲父之言此三者，闻命矣，不敢擅也，将荐之先君。 
现代文：桓公说： 我听到仲父说的这三点，算是懂得了。我不敢私听这些话，要举荐给先君才行。 
English: Prince Kan said, "I understand these three points that I heard from my stepfather. I don't dare to listen to these words myself. I can only recommend them to my forefathers."

古文：于是令百官有司，削方墨笔。
现代文：于是命令百官有司，削好木板并备好墨笔。
English: So he ordered all the officials to sharpen the wooden boards and prepare the ink pens.

古文：明日，皆朝于太庙之门朝，定令于百吏。
现代文：第二天，全体都在太庙的门庭朝见，为百官确立了法令。
English: The next day, they all met in the courtyard of the Great Temple, and established a decree for the officials.

古文：使税者百一钟，孤幼不刑，泽梁时纵，关讥而不征，市书而不赋；近者示之以忠信，远者示之以礼义。
现代文：使纳税者只出百分之一，孤幼不准处刑，水泽按时开放，关卡只查问而不征税，市场只书契而不深税，对近处示以忠信，对远处示以礼义。
English: So that taxpayers only pay one percent, orphans and children are not allowed to be punished, Mizusawa is open on time, checkpoints only inquire and do not tax, market only deed and do not tax, show loyalty to the near and show courtesy to the far.

古文：行此数年，而民归之如流水。
现代文：这样实行了几年，人民归附之众，竟好象流水一样。
English: This has been going on for several years, and the people have flocked to it like water.

古文：此其后，宋伐杞，狄伐邢、卫。桓公不救，裸体纫胸称疾。
现代文：在这以后，宋国攻伐杞国，狄人攻伐邢国和卫国，桓公没有出兵援救，光着身子缠着胸部称病。
English: After this, Song attacked and conquered Yunnan, and the Di people attacked and conquered Yunnan and defended the country. Huan Gong did not send troops to help, but wrapped his bare body around his chest and called in sick.

古文：召管仲曰： 寡人有千岁之食，而无百岁之寿，今有疾病，姑乐乎！ 
现代文：召见管仲说： 我有千年的食品，而没有百年的寿命，现在又有疾病，姑且行乐一番吧! 
English: He summoned Guanzhong and said, "I have food for a thousand years, but I don't have a hundred-year lifespan, and now I have a disease. Let's have some fun!"

古文：管子曰： 诺。 
现代文：管子说： 好。 
English: The pipe said, "Good."

古文：于是令之县钟磬之榬，陈歌舞竽瑟之乐，日杀数十牛者数旬。
现代文：于是下命令悬起钟磬，陈设歌舞吹竿鼓瑟的音乐，每天杀牛数十头，连续了几十天。
English: So he gave the order to hang up the bell, set up the music of song and dance, and killed dozens of cows every day, for dozens of days.

古文：群臣进谏曰： 宋伐杞，狄伐邢、卫，君不可不救。 
现代文：群臣都来进谏说： 宋国伐杞，狄国伐邢、卫，君上您不可不出兵援救。 
English: A group of courtiers all came to the imperial palace and said: Song, Di, Wei, you must not fail to come to the rescue.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人有千岁之食，而无百岁之寿，今又疾病，姑乐乎！且彼非伐寡人之国也，伐邻国也，子无事焉。 
现代文：桓公说： 我拥有千年的食品，而没有百年的寿命，现在又有疾病，姑且行乐吧：而且，人家并没有进攻我的国家，不过是征伐邻国，你们都是平安无事的。 
English: Huan Gong said: I have food for a thousand years, but I don't have a hundred-year lifespan, and now I have a disease. Let's have some fun. Besides, they didn't attack my country, they just invaded a neighboring country. You are all safe and sound.

古文：宋已取杞，狄已拔邢、卫矣。
现代文：宋国已经取得杞国，狄国已经攻下邢、卫了。
English: Song has already gained Shandong, and Di has already captured Yunnan and Hebei.

古文：桓公起，行笋虡之间，管子从。至大钟之西，桓公南面而立，管仲北乡对之，大钟鸣。
现代文：桓公还盘桓在钟磬的行列里。管子跟着他，走在大钟的西侧，桓公面南而立，管仲面北对站着，大钟响奏起来。
English: The pipe followed him, walking on the west side of the big clock, while the rooster stood facing south, and the pipe stood facing north, and the big clock began to chime.

古文：桓公视管仲曰： 乐夫，仲父？ 
现代文：桓公看着管仲说： 快乐么，仲父？ 
English: Prince Kan looked at Guan Zhong and said, "Are you happy, Guan Zhong?"

古文：管子对曰： 此臣之所谓哀，非乐也。
现代文：管子回答说： 我说这是悲哀，而不是乐。
English: The reed answered, I said it was sorrow, not joy.

古文：臣闻之，古者之言乐于钟磬之间者不如此。
现代文：据我所知，古代君王称得上行乐于钟碧之间的，不是这种情况。
English: As far as I know, this was not the case with the ancient kings, who are said to have been pleased with the ascension of Zhong Bi.

古文：言脱于口，而令行乎天下；游钟磬之间，而无四面兵革之忧。
现代文：而是话说出口命令就行于天下；游于钟磬之间，而没有四面兵革的忧虑。
English: On the contrary, it is said that the export order will be carried out all over the world; swimming between the bell towers, but without the worries of war on all sides.

古文：今君之事，言脱于口，令不得行于天下；在钟磬之间，而有四面兵革之忧。
现代文：现在您的情况是：话说出口，命令并不能行于天下；身在钟磬之间，而存在四面兵革的忧虑。
English: Now you are in a situation where: words are spoken, but orders are not carried out; you are between two bells, but there are worries of war on all sides.

古文：此臣之所谓哀，非乐也。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：这就是我的所谓悲哀，而不是乐呵。 桓公说： 好。 
English: This is what I call sorrow, not joy.Kanko said, "Okay."

古文：于是伐钟磬之县，并歌舞之乐。宫中虚无人。
现代文：于是砍掉钟磬的悬列，撤除歌舞音乐， 宫中空虚无人了。
English: As a result, the hanging rows of bell towers were cut down, the song and dance music was removed, and the palace became empty and deserted.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人以伐钟磬之县，并歌舞之乐矣，请问所始于国，将为何行？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我已经砍掉钟磬的悬列，撤除歌舞音乐了，请问国事将开始做些什么？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "I have already cut down the hanging rows of bell towers and removed the song and dance music. What will the state affairs begin to do?"

古文：管子对曰： 宋伐杞，狄伐邢、卫，而君之不救也，臣请以庆。
现代文：管子回答： 宋国伐杞，狄国攻伐邢、卫，您没有出兵援救，我是为您庆幸的。
English: Guanzi replied, "Song Dynasty conquered Liao, Di Dynasty conquered Liao and Wei, you didn't send troops to help, I'm glad for you.

古文：臣闻之，诸侯争于强者，勿与分于强。
现代文：据我所知，诸侯争强的时候就不必与之分强。
English: As far as I know, when lords fight for supremacy, there is no need to fight against them.

古文：今君何不定三君之处哉？ 
现代文：现在，您何不安下三国国君的居处呢？ 桓公说： 好。 
English: Now, why don't you worry about the residence of the next three sovereigns? Prince Kan said: Good.

古文：于是桓公曰： 诺。 因命以车百乘、卒千人，以缘陵封杞；车百乘、卒千人，以夷仪封邢；车五百乘、卒五千人，以楚丘封卫。
现代文：于是命令以车百乘，士卒千人，把缘陵封给杞国；以车百乘，士卒千人，把夷仪封给邢国；又以车五百乘，士卒五千人，把楚丘封给卫国。
English: Therefore, he ordered that a hundred chariots and a thousand soldiers should be used to seal the mausoleum to Min Province; that a hundred chariots and a thousand soldiers should be used to seal Iyi to Min Province; and that five hundred chariots and five thousand soldiers should be used to seal Chu Qiu to Wei Province.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人以定三君之居处矣，今又将何行？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我已经安下三国国君的居处了，现在还要做些什么事？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "I have settled down in the residence of the three sovereigns. What do I have to do now?"

古文：管子对曰： 臣闻诸侯贪于利，勿与分于利。
现代文：管子回答说： 据我所知，诸侯贪利的时候，就不必与之分利。
English: Guanzi replied, "As far as I know, when princes are greedy, there is no need to share the profits with them.

古文：君何不发虎豹之皮、文锦以使诸侯，令诸侯以缦帛鹿皮报？ 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：您何不送出虎皮、豹皮和花锦，让使臣给予各诸侯国，而只要各诸侯国用素帛、鹿皮回报呢？ 桓公说： 好。 
English: Why don't you send tiger skins, leopard skins, and flower brocades, and have your envoys give them to each vassal state, as long as each vassal state returns them with bean paste and deer skins?

古文：于是以虎豹皮、文锦使诸侯，诸侯以缦帛、鹿皮报。
现代文：于是就用虎皮、豹皮和花锦出使各诸侯国，各诸侯国也只用素帛和鹿皮回报。
English: As a result, tiger skins, leopard skins and flower brocades were sent to the various vassal states, and the vassal states only used suede and deerskin in return.

古文：则令固始行于天下矣。
现代文：这样，齐国的命令便开始通行天下各国了。
English: In this way, Qi's order began to spread to every country in the world.

古文：此其后，楚人攻宋、郑。烧焫熯焚郑地，使城坏者不得复筑也，屋之烧者不得复葺也；令其人有丧雌雄，居室如鸟鼠处穴。
现代文：这以后，楚国攻伐宋国和郑国：火烧郑地，使郑国城池坏得不堪重建，屋毁不可复修，又使人男女丧其配偶，屋室如鸟巢鼠洞一样。
English: After that, Chu attacked Song and Zheng: burned Zheng, made the city of Zheng too bad to rebuild, destroyed the house beyond repair, and made men and women lose their spouses, the house was like a bird's nest and a rat's hole.

古文：要宋田，夹塞两川，使水不得东流，东山之西，水深灭垝，四百里而后可田也。
现代文：楚国又拦截宋国的农田，从两侧堵塞两条河水，使其不能东流，结果东山的西面，水深没墙，四百里以外才能种地。
English: Chu also intercepted Song's farmland and blocked the two rivers from both sides, so that they could not flow eastward. As a result, the west side of Dongshan has no wall of water depth, and it is only possible to farm land four hundred miles away.

古文：楚欲吞宋、郑而畏齐，曰思人众兵强能害己者，必齐也。
现代文：楚国想吞并宋、郑而害伯齐国，他考虑人众兵强能够加害于自己的，一定是齐国。
English: Chu wanted to annex Song and Zheng, but at the expense of Baqi. He thought that if a large number of soldiers could harm him, it must be Qi.

古文：于是乎楚王号令于国中曰： 寡人之所明于人君者，莫如桓公；所贤于人臣者，莫如管仲。
现代文：于是楚王在国内发令说： 我在国君中称其为明的，莫如桓公；在人臣中称其为贤的，莫如管仲。
English: As a result, King Chu issued an order in the country, saying, "Among the sovereigns, I call him bright, but he is not; among the courtiers, I call him wise, but he is not."

古文：明其君而贤其臣，寡人愿事之。
现代文：称明其君又称贤其臣，我愿意事奉他们。
English: I am willing to serve them as their lord and as their wise minister.

古文：谁能为我交齐者，寡人不爱封侯之君焉。 
现代文：谁能够替我交好齐国，我不吝借用一个封侯的君长赐给他。 
English: If anyone can make friends with Qi for me, I will not begrudge him the loan of a feudal lord.

古文：于是楚国之贤士皆抱其重宝币帛以事齐。
现代文：于是，楚国的贤士都拿贵重的宝物和布帛来事奉齐国。
English: As a result, the wise men of Chu took precious treasures and cloth to serve Qi.

古文：桓公之左右，无不受重宝币帛者。
现代文：桓公左右，没有不接受其贵重宝物和布帛的。
English: There was no one around Kan'gong who did not accept his precious treasures and cloth.

古文：于是桓公召管仲曰： 寡人闻之，善人者人亦善之。
现代文：于是桓公召见管仲说： 我听说，对人好人家也对他好。
English: Then King Kan summoned Guanzhong and said, "I have heard that those who are kind to others are also kind to him."

古文：今楚王之善寡人一甚矣，寡人不善，将拂于道。
现代文：现在楚王对我已是太好了，我不修好，将是不合道理的。
English: Now that King Chu has been so kind to me, it would be unreasonable for me not to fix it.

古文：仲父何不遂交楚哉？ 
现代文：仲父何不就同楚国交好呢？ 
English: Why doesn't the stepfather make friends with the state of Chu?

古文：管子对曰： 不可。
现代文：管子回答说： 不可。
English: The pipe answered, "No."

古文：楚人攻宋、郑，烧焫熯焚郑地，使城坏者不得复筑也，屋之烧者不得复葺也，令人有丧雌雄，居室如鸟鼠处穴。要宋田，夹塞两川，使水不得东流，东山之西，水深灭垝，四百里而后可田也。
现代文：楚人攻伐宋国和郑国：火烧郑地，使城坏不堪重建，屋毁不可复修，又使人男女丧其配偶，居室如鸟巢鼠洞；拦截宋国的农田，从两旁堵塞两道河流，使水不得东流，结果东山的西面，水深没墙，四百里以外才能种地。
English: The Chu people attacked Song and Zheng states: they set fire to Zheng, making the city so bad that it could not be rebuilt, the houses were destroyed beyond repair, and men and women lost their spouses, the living rooms were like a bird's nest and a rat's hole; they intercepted Song's farmland, blocked the two rivers from both sides, so that the water could not flow eastward, and as a result, the west side of Dongshan had no wall of water depth, and it was only possible to farm land four hundred miles away.

古文：楚欲吞宋。郑，思人众兵强而能害己者，必齐也。
现代文：楚国要吞并宋国和郑国，但考虑人众兵强而能加害于自己的，一定是齐国。
English: Chu wanted to annex Song and Zheng, but considering that they had a strong army and could inflict harm on themselves, they must have annexed Qi.

古文：是欲以文克齐，而以武取宋、郑也，楚取宋、郑而不知禁，是失宋、郑也；禁之，则是又不信于楚也。
现代文：所以要用 文 的办法胜齐，而用武的办法取得宋、郑。楚国攻取宋、郑，而我们不予禁止，就等于脱离宋国和郑国；予以禁止，则又失信于楚国。
English: Therefore, we should win the Song and Zheng dynasties by means of literature, and win the Song and Zheng dynasties by means of military force. If the State of Chu conquers the Song and Zheng dynasties, and we do not forbid it, it is tantamount to seceding from the State of Song and the State of Zheng; if we forbid it, we will lose the trust of the State of Chu.

古文：知失于内，兵困于外，非善举也。 
现代文：计谋失误于国内，军队就会被困于国外。交楚不是一个好办法。 
English: If there is a miscalculation at home, the army will be trapped abroad. It is not a good way to fight.

古文：桓公曰： 善。
现代文：桓公说： 好，那么怎样进行？ 
English: Kan said, "That's great!

古文：然则若何？ 管子对曰： 请兴兵而南存宋、郑，而令曰： 无攻楚，言与楚王遇。 
现代文：管子回答说： 请兴兵而南下保全宋、郑，同时下令说： 不要反攻楚国，我将与楚王相遇。 
English: Guanzi replied, "Please send troops to the south to protect Song and Zheng." At the same time, he ordered, "Don't counterattack Chu. I will meet the King of Chu."

古文：至于遇上，而以郑城与宋水为请，楚若许，则是我以文令也；楚若不许，则遂以武令焉。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：到相遇的地方，就提出郑城和宋水的问题。楚国若答应，就等于我们用 文 的方式命令他；楚国若不答应，就用武力命令好了。 桓公说： 好。 
English: When we got to the place where we met, we raised the issue of Zhengcheng and Songshui. If the State of Chu agreed, it would be the same as if we ordered him by letter; if the State of Chu did not agree, it would be better to order him by force. Huan Gong said, "Good."

古文：于是遂兴兵而南存宋、郑，与楚王遇于召陵之上，而令于遇上曰： 毋贮粟，毋曲堤，无擅废嫡子，无置妾以为妻。 
现代文：于是便兴兵南下保全宋国和郑国，与楚王遇在召陵的地方。桓公在相遇之处下令说： 不准囤集粮食，不准到处修筑堤坝，不准擅自废除嫡子，不准立妄为妻。 
English: Therefore, the Xing soldiers went south to protect the Song and Zheng dynasties, and met with the King of Chu at the place of his burial. At the place where they met, King Huan ordered: Do not collect grain, do not build dikes everywhere, do not arbitrarily abolish the legitimate son, and do not marry.

古文：因以郑城与宋水为请于楚，楚人不许。
现代文：同时就提出郑城与宋水问题，问于楚国。楚国没有同意。
English: At the same time, the question of Zhengcheng and Songshui was raised and asked to the State of Chu. The State of Chu did not agree.

古文：遂退七十里而舍。
现代文：遂退七十里屯驻军队。
English: So the troops stationed seventy miles away retreated.

古文：使军人城郑南之地，立百代城焉。
现代文：命令军队在郑国的南边筑城，立了百代城。
English: He ordered the army to build a city on the south side of Zhengzhou, and built Baidai City.

古文：曰：自此而北至于河者，郑自城之，而楚不敢隳也。
现代文：指明：从此处往北到黄河，由郑国自己建立城郭，楚国是没有敢于拆毁的。
English: It is pointed out that from here to the north of the Yellow River, Zheng Guo himself built the castle, and Chu Guo did not dare to demolish it.

古文：东发宋田，夹两川，使水复东流，而楚不敢塞也。
现代文：东面开放了宋国的田地，从两面处理两道河流，使水再向东流，而楚国也没有敢于堵塞。
English: In the east, the fields of the Song Dynasty were opened up, and the two rivers were treated from both sides, so that the water would flow eastward again, and the Chu Dynasty did not dare to block it.

古文：遂南伐，及逾方城，济于汝水，望汶山，南致楚越之君，而西伐秦，北伐狄，东存晋公于南，北伐孤竹，还存燕公。
现代文：于是南伐楚国，越过方城。渡过汝水，奔向汶山，南进而召见吴、越的国君。而且西伐秦国，北伐狄国，东回保全晋公于南部；北伐孤竹，回程保全燕公。
English: Therefore, the Southern Expedition of Chu State crossed Fangcheng, crossed Ru Shui, rushed to Wenshan, and then went south to summon the sovereigns of Wu and Yue. Moreover, the Western Expedition of Qin State, the Northern Expedition of Di State, and the Eastern Expedition protected Jin Gong in the south; the Northern Expedition of Lone Bamboo, and the return journey protected Yan Gong.

古文：兵车之会六，乘车之会三，九合诸侯，反位已霸。修钟磬而复乐。
现代文：兵车的会集诸侯有六次，乘车的会集诸侯有三次，共九次会集诸侯，在桓公反位已成霸业之后，又修治钟磬乐器并重新宴乐起来了。
English: There were six gatherings of feudal lords in chariots, three gatherings of feudal lords in wagons, and a total of nine gatherings of feudal lords. After Huan Quan had become a tyrant, the bell and gong musical instruments were repaired and the feasting began again.

古文：管子曰： 此臣之所谓乐也。 
现代文：管子说： 这才是我所说的快乐呵！ 
English: The pipe said: This is what I mean by happiness!

