古文：仑墟在西北，三成为昆仑丘。
现代文：昆仑墟在西北，山成三重的是昆仑丘。
English: Kunlun Market is in the northwest, and Kunlun Hill is at the top of the mountain.

古文：《昆仑说》曰：昆仑之山三级：下曰樊桐，一名板桐；二曰玄圃，一名阆风；上曰层城，一名天庭；是为太帝之居。
现代文：《昆仑说》写道：昆仑山有三层：底层叫樊桐，又名板桐；第二层叫玄圃，又名间风；上层叫层城，又名天庭，是天帝的居处。
English: "The Tale of Kunlun" writes: "Kunlun Mountain has three layers: the bottom layer is called Juntong, also known as Bantong; the second layer is called Guenpo, also known as Zhaifeng; the upper layer is called Shicheng, also known as Tianting, which is the residence of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：去嵩高五万里，地之中也。
现代文：离篙高五万里，位于大地的中央。
English: Fifty thousand miles away from the earth, it is located in the center of the earth.

古文：《禹本纪》与此同。
现代文：《禹本纪》的说法也一样。
English: The same is true of the "Uponki."

古文：高诱称河出昆山，伏流地中万三千里，禹导而通之；出积石山。
现代文：高诱说：河水发源于昆山，在地下潜流了一万三千里，经禹疏导畅通后，才从积石山流出。
English: Gao Yu said: The river originates from Kunshan. It flows underground for 13,000 miles, and only flows out of Zhishishan after being channeled smoothly by Yu Shuo.

古文：案《山海经》：自昆仑至积石千七百四十里。
现代文：按《山海经》，从昆仑到积石计一千七百四十里。
English: According to the "Shanhai Jing," it is 1,740 miles from Kunlun to Zhisheng.

古文：自积石出陇西郡至洛，准《地志》可五千余里。
现代文：从积石出陇西郡到洛，按各种地理典籍的推算，约有五千余里。
English: According to the estimates of various geographical books, it is about five thousand miles from Jishi in Shaanxi County to Luo.

古文：又案《穆天子传》：天子自昆山入于宗周，乃里西土之数。自宗周瀍水以西，至于河宗之邦、阳纤之山，三千有四百里，自阳纤西至河首四千里，合七千四百里。
现代文：又按《穆天子传》，穆天子从昆山到周朝都城，是按照西方的里程计算的，从周朝都城漓水以西到河宗之邦、阳纤之山，计三千四百里；从阳纤以西到河首是四干里，共计七千四百里。
English: According to "The Biography of Mu Tianzi," Mu Tianzi's journey from Kunshan to the capital city of the Zhou Dynasty was calculated according to the distance to the west. From the west of the capital city of the Zhou Dynasty, Lishui, to the country of Hezong and the mountain of Yangfei, it was 3,400 miles; from the west of Yangfei to the head of the river, it was 4,400 miles, for a total of 7,400 miles.

古文：《外国图》又云：从大晋国正西七万里，得昆仑之墟，诸仙居之。
现代文：《外国图》又说：从大晋国正西方行七万里，就到昆仑之墟，仙人们都住在那里。
English: "Foreign Map" also said: From Dajin Province, travel seventy thousand miles due west to the ruins of Kunlun, where the immortals live.

古文：数说不同，道阻且长，经记绵褫，水陆路殊，径复不同，浅见末闻，非所详究，不能不聊述闻见，以志差违也。
现代文：以上几种说法各不相同，但路途遥远，险阻难行，经籍记载因年代久远，脱略难考，水路陆路又互有差异，往返也不尽相同。我见闻浅陋，没有做过详细的研究，只是不能不叙述一下所见诸说，把其间互不一致的地方记下来罢了。
English: The above-mentioned explanations are all different, but the distance is far, the dangers are difficult to overcome, the records of the scriptures are difficult to examine because of their age, the waterways and land routes are different, and the round trips are not the same. I have seen and heard a little, I have not done a detailed study, but I can't help but describe what I saw and write down the inconsistencies between them.

古文：其高万一千里，《山海经》称方八百里，高仞切。
现代文：高一万一千里。《山海经》说：昆仑山方圆八百里，高万初。
English: It is eleven thousand li high. "Shanhai Jing" said: "Kunlun Mountain is eight hundred li in circumference, and it is very high.

古文：郭景纯以为自上二千五百余里。
现代文：郭景纯认为此山升起二千五百余里。
English: Guo Jingjun believes that this mountain rises more than two thousand five hundred miles.

古文：《淮南子》称高万一千里百一十四步三尺六寸。
现代文：《淮南子》说，山高一万一千里一百十四步三尺六寸。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said that the height of the mountain is eleven thousand miles and one hundred and fourteen paces and three feet and six inches.

古文：河水《春秋说题辞》曰：河之为言荷也，荷精分布，怀阴引度也。
现代文：《春秋说题辞》说：河，意思就是载荷。载荷着天地的精气，把它分布到四方，怀藏着属阴的水，加以引导流通。
English: "Spring and Autumn Inscription" says: "River, meaning a load. Loaded with the essence of heaven and earth, it is distributed to the four directions, harboring the water of yin, and guiding its circulation.

古文：《释名》曰：河，下也，随地下处而通流也。
现代文：《释名》说：河，就是下，循着地势低洼处而流。
English: "Explanation of the name" said: the river is down, following the low-lying areas.

古文：《考异邮》曰：河者，水之气，四渎之精也，所以流化。
现代文：彼考异邮》说：河是水的气体，四读的精华，就凭它的流布来化育万物。
English: He said: "The river is the gas of water, the essence of the fourth reading, and it is by virtue of its circulation that all things are nurtured.

古文：《元命苞》曰：五行始焉，万物之所由生，元气之腠液也。
现代文：《元命苞》说：五行始于水，万物靠着水才能萌生，它是元气凝成的血液。
English: "Origin of Life" says: The five elements begin with water. All things rely on water to germinate. It is the original condensed blood.

古文：《管子》曰：水者，地之血气，如筋脉之通流者，故曰水具财也。
现代文：《管子》说：水是大地的血气，正如血液在筋脉里流通一样，所以说，水是一种财货。
English: "Pipe" said: Water is the blood gas of the earth, just as blood circulates in the veins, so water is a kind of wealth.

古文：五害之属，水最为大。
现代文：五害之类以水为最大。
English: Among the five harms, water damage is the largest.

古文：水有大小，有远近，水出山而流入海者，命曰经水；引他水入于大水及海者，命曰枝水；出于地沟，流于大水，及于海者，又命曰川水也。
现代文：水有大有小，有远有近。水从山间出来，奔流入海的，叫经水；引导旁流的水注入大水，流到海洋的，叫支水；从地沟淌出，流进大水，流到海洋的，叫川水。
English: Water is big and small, far and near. Water that comes out of the mountains and rushes into the sea is called running water; water that guides side-flowing water into large water and flows to the ocean is called tributary water; water that flows out of the ditch and flows into large water and flows to the ocean is called river water.

古文：《庄子》曰：秋水时至，百川灌河，经流之大。
现代文：《庄子》说：秋水随着季节而来，千百条川流灌注入大河，经水的流量十分洪大。
English: "Zhuangzi" said: autumn water comes with the season, thousands of rivers flow into the river, and the flow of water is very large.

古文：《孝经援神契》曰：河者，水之伯，上应天汉。
现代文：《孝经援神契》说：河在诸水中高居首位，上与天上的银河相应。
English: "The Filial Piety and Benevolence Pact" says: "The river ranks first in all waters, corresponding to the Milky Way in the sky.

古文：《新论》曰：四渎之源，河最高而长，从高注下，水流激峻，故其流急。
现代文：《新论》说：四读的水源以河水为最高最长，它从高处流注而下，水势又凶又猛，所以水流湍急。
English: "New Theory" said: the fourth reading of the water source is the river water as the highest and longest, it flows down from a high place, the water potential is fierce and fierce, so the water flow is rapid.

古文：徐干《齐都赋》曰：川读则洪河洋洋，发源昆仑，九流分逝，北朝沧渊，惊波沛厉，浮沫扬奔。
现代文：徐干《齐都赋》写道：川流有浩浩荡荡的大河，发源于昆仑；九条支河分道流逝，往北汇聚于沧海，惊涛骇浪狂暴而凶猛，激起一片浮沫浪花。
English: Xu Gan wrote in "Qidufu": "The river has a vast and turbulent river, originating in Kunlun; nine tributaries branch off, converge northward in the sea of vicissitudes, and the storm surges are violent and fierce, stirring up a sea of foam and spray.

古文：《风俗通》曰：江、河、淮、济为四渎。
现代文：《风俗通》说：江、河、淮、济，合称四读。
English: "Folklore" said: Jiang, He, Huai, Ji, collectively known as the fourth reading.

古文：渎，通也，所以通中国垢浊。
现代文：读是通的意思，全靠着它把中原的垢秽涤荡掉。
English: Reading is a common sense, relying on it to wash away the filth of the Central Plains.

古文：《白虎通》曰：其德著大，故称渎。
现代文：《白虎通》说：它的特性宏大而昭著，所以叫读。
English: "White Tiger Pass" said: its characteristics are grand and prominent, so it is a must-read.

古文：《释名》曰：渎，独也。
现代文：《释名》说，读，就是单独的意思。
English: "Explanation of the name" says that read means alone.

古文：各独出其所而入海。
现代文：各从所在之处单独流出，注入大海。
English: Each flows separately from its location and pours into the sea.

古文：出其东北陬，《山海经》曰：昆仑虚在西北，河水出其东北隅。
现代文：发源于它的东北角，《山海经》说：昆仑墟在西北，河水发源于它的东北角。
English: Originating from its northeast corner, the "Shanhai Jing" says: Kunlun Ruins are in the northwest, and the river originates from its northeast corner.

古文：《尔雅》曰：河出昆仑虚，色白；所渠并千七百一川，色黄。
现代文：《尔雅》说：河水发源于昆仑墟时，水色澄清，合并了一千七百零一条川流后，水色就变成黄浊了。
English: "Lya" said: When the river water originates from the Kunlun Ruins, the water color is clear. After the merger of 1,700 streams, the water color becomes yellowish.

古文：《物理论》曰：河色黄者，众川之流，盖浊之也。
现代文：《物理论》说：河水之所以色黄，是因为众川的水流把它弄浊的缘故。
English: "Physics" said: The reason why the river is yellow is because the water flow of the rivers makes it salty.

古文：百里一小曲，千里一曲一直矣。
现代文：河道百里一小弯，千里有一段弯道、一段直道。
English: The river has a small bend every hundred miles, and a bend and a straight road every thousand miles.

古文：汉大司马张仲议曰：河水浊，清澄一石水，六斗泥。而民竞引河溉田，令河不通利。至三且，桃花水至则河决，以其噎不泄也。
现代文：汉大司马张仲评论道：河水很混浊，把一石水加以澄清，含泥竟有六斗，可是百姓却争着引水灌溉田亩，以致河水不能通航；到了三月，桃花水一来，河水就会决堤，这是因为水道阻塞，水流不畅的缘故。
English: Han Daishi Ma Zhangzhong commented: The river water is very turbid. It takes a stone of water to clarify it, and there are actually six buckets of mud, but the people are competing to divert water to irrigate the fields, so that the river water cannot be navigated. In March, when the peach blossom water comes, the river water will break the dike. This is because the waterway is blocked and the water flow is not smooth.

古文：禁民勿复引河，是黄河兼浊河之名矣。
现代文：于是禁止百姓继续引河灌溉。这样黄河又兼有浊河之名了。
English: As a result, the people were prohibited from continuing to divert the river for irrigation. As a result, the Yellow River is now also known as the Fen River.

古文：《述征记》曰：盟律、河津恒浊，方江为狭，比淮、济为阔。
现代文：《述征记》说：盟津、河津经常是混浊的，比江水要狭，但比淮水、济水要阔。
English: "Records of the Conquest" said: Meitun and Kawazu are often turbid, narrower than river water, but wider than Huai and Jishui.

古文：寒则冰厚数丈，冰始合，车马不敢过，要须狐行，云此物善听，冰下无水乃过。
现代文：数九寒冬，河水结冰厚达数丈。当河面刚刚开始封冻时，车马还不敢过河，必须等到有狐狸行走的时候。
English: In the cold winter of the nineties, the river froze and was several feet thick. When the river just started to freeze, the horses and carts did not dare to cross the river, and had to wait for the foxes to walk by.

古文：人见狐行，方渡。余案《风俗通》云：里语称狐欲渡河，无如尾何。
现代文：据说狐狸这种动物听觉十分灵敏，它听到冰下没有流水的声音了，才敢过去；人们看到狐狸在走了，才也踏冰过河。我按《风俗通》说：俗语道，狐狸想渡河，但对尾巴却无可奈何。
English: It is said that the fox, an animal with a very sensitive sense of hearing, only dares to cross the river when it hears the sound of running water under the ice; when people see the fox walking, they also cross the river on the ice. According to "Folklore," I said: As the saying goes, the fox wants to cross the river, but there is nothing he can do about his tail.

古文：且狐性多疑，故俗有狐疑之说，亦未必一如缘生之言也。
现代文：而且狐狸生性多疑，所以俗话有狐疑一词。但也未必都像郭缘生所说的那样。
English: Moreover, foxes are suspicious by nature, so there is a saying that they are suspicious of foxes. However, not all of them are like Guo Yansheng said.

古文：屈从其东南流，入渤海。
现代文：转弯从它的东南边流人渤海。
English: From its southeastern edge flows the Bohai Sea.

古文：《山海经》曰：南即从极之渊也，一曰中极之渊，深三百仞，惟冯夷都焉。
现代文：《山海经》说：南边就是从极之渊，又称中极之渊，深三百初，冯夷就住在那里。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: The south side is from the abyss of the extreme, also known as the abyss of the middle extreme. At the beginning of the three hundred years, Fengyi lived there.

古文：《括地图》曰：冯夷恒乘云车驾二龙。
现代文：《括地图》说：冯夷常常乘坐云车，由两条龙拉着走。
English: "Bang Map" said: Feng Yi often rides a cloud car, pulled by two dragons.

古文：河水又出于阳纤陵门之山，而注于冯逸之山。
现代文：河水又从阳纤之山、陵门之山流出，奔向冯逸之山。
English: The river also flows from Yangfizhi Mountain and Lingmen Mountain to Fengyi Mountain.

古文：《穆天子传》曰：天子西征，至阳纡之山，河伯冯夷之所都居，是惟河宗氏。
现代文：《穆天子传》说：穆天子西行，到了阳纤之山，河伯冯夷住在那里―冯夷就是河宗氏。
English: "The Biography of Mu Tianzi" says: Mu Tianzi traveled westward and arrived at Yangfizhi Mountain, where Hebei Fengyi lived - Fengyi is the Khezong clan.

古文：天子乃沉圭壁礼焉。
现代文：穆天子把硅璧投入水中，作为献礼。
English: Mu Tianzi threw the silicon into the water as a gift.

古文：河伯乃与天子披图视典，以观天子之宝器、玉果、璇珠、烛银、金膏等物，皆《河图》所载，河伯以礼，穆王视图，方乃导以西迈矣。
现代文：河伯于是和穆天子一起展图审阅典章制度，观看天子的宝器，如玉果、漩珠、烛银、金膏等物，《河图》中都有记载。河伯把它作为礼物献给穆王，穆王看了图后，才领他西行。
English: Together with Mu Tianzi, Hebe then held an exhibition of maps to review the system of awards and to see the treasures of the heavenly son, such as jade fruits, whirlpool beads, silver candles, gold paste and other things, all of which are recorded in the "River Map." Hebe presented it as a gift to King Mu. After King Mu read the map, he led him westward.

古文：粤在伏羲，受龙马图于河，八卦是也。
现代文：伏羲曾在河上接受龙马图，就是八卦。
English: Fuxi once received the Longma Tu on the river, that is, the Ba Gua.

古文：故《命历序》曰：《河图》，帝王之阶，图载江河、山川、州界之分野。
现代文：所以《命历序》说：《河图》是帝王所依赖的基业，图中记载着江河、山川、州界的分野。
English: Therefore, the "Biography" says: "The river map" is the foundation on which the emperor relies. The map records the rivers, mountains, and state boundaries.

古文：后尧坛于河，受《龙图》，作《握河记》。
现代文：后来尧在河上筑坛，接受了《龙图》，并作《握河记》。
English: Later, he built an altar on the river, accepted the "Dragon Map" and wrote "Holding the River."

古文：逮虞舜、夏、商，咸亦受焉。
现代文：及至虞舜、夏、商，也都接受过《河图》。
English: As far as Yuyao, Xia and Shang, they have also accepted the "river map."

古文：李尤《盟津铭》：洋洋河水，朝宗于海，径自中州，《龙图》所在。
现代文：李尤《盟津铭》写道：滔滔的河水，汇集于大海。它流经中州，那是《龙图》所在之处。
English: Li Yu's "Mengjinming" wrote: "The torrential river water gathers in the sea. It flows through Zhongzhou, which is where the "Dragon Map" is located.

古文：《淮南子》曰：昔禹治洪水，具祷阳纡。盖于此也。
现代文：《淮南子》说：从前禹治洪水，在阳纤祭礼祈祷。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: In the past, when the Yuji Flood occurred, people prayed at the Yangfibers Festival.

古文：高诱以为阳纡秦薮，非也。
现代文：说的就是这地方。高诱以为阳纤就是秦蔽，其实不是。
English: That's the place. Gao was lured into thinking that Yangfibai was Qinhuai, when in fact it wasn't.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：阿褥达太山，其上有大渊水，宫殿楼观甚大焉。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：阿褥达太山上有大渊水，那里的宫殿楼台十分宏大。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jie, there was a great abyss of water on the Adda Mountain, and the palace platform there was very grand.

古文：山，即昆仑山也。
现代文：这座山就是昆仑山。
English: This mountain is Kunlun Mountain.

古文：《穆天子传》曰：天子升于昆仑，观黄帝之宫，而封丰隆之葬。丰隆，雷公也。
现代文：《穆天子传》说；穆天子登上昆仑山，参观了黄帝的宫殿，给丰隆的坟头堆上泥土―丰隆就是雷神。
English: "The Biography of Mu Tianzi" says; Mu Tianzi climbed Mount Kunlun, visited the palace of the Yellow Emperor, and heaped earth on the grave of Honglong - Honglong is the god of thunder.

古文：黄帝宫，即阿褥达宫也。
现代文：黄帝宫就是阿褥达宫。
English: The Yellow Emperor's Palace is the Ajanta Palace.

古文：其山出六大水，山西有大水，名新头河。
现代文：有六条大河流发源于山间，山西的一条名叫新头河。
English: There are six major rivers that originate in the mountains, and one in Shanxi Province is called the Xintou River.

古文：郭义恭《广志》曰：甘水也，在西域之东，名曰新陶水，山在天竺国西，水甘，故曰甘水。
现代文：郭义恭《广志》说：这就是甘水。在西域以东，名叫新陶水。山在天竺国以西，因为水味甘冽，所以叫甘水。
English: Guo Yikong, "Guangzhi," said: "This is sweet water. In the west and east, it is called new pottery water. The mountain is in the west of Tianyao country, because the water tastes sweet, so it is called sweet water.

古文：有石盐，白如水精，大段则破而用之。
现代文：那里有石盐，洁白有如水晶；有的成大块，就把它敲碎使用。
English: There is rock salt there, as white as crystal; some of it is crushed into large pieces for use.

古文：康泰曰：安息、月氏、天竺至伽那调御，皆仰此盐。
现代文：康泰说：安息、月氏、天竺到伽那调御，都仰赖这里的石盐。
English: Kang Tai said, "Renmin, Yue Shi, and Tianzhu all depend on the rock salt here.

古文：释法显曰：度葱岭，已入北天竺境。
现代文：高僧法显说过：翻过葱岭，就进入北天竺的国境了。
English: The high-ranking monk Faxian said, "Once you cross the green onion ridge, you will enter the border of North Tianjin."

古文：于此顺岭西南行十五日，其道艰阻，崖岸险绝，其山惟石，壁立于仞，临之目眩，欲进则投是无所。
现代文：从这里循着山岭向西南行走十五日，道路险阻难行，崖岸峻峭极了。山上全是岩石，削壁干初，身临崖岸，令人头晕目眩，想再跨上一步，就连立足的地方一也没有了。
English: On the fifteenth day of walking from here along the mountains to the southwest, the road was dangerous and difficult to walk, and the cliff was extremely steep. The mountain was all rock, the walls were cut at the beginning, and being on the cliff was dizzying. If you wanted to take another step, there was no place to stand.

古文：下有水，名新头河。
现代文：崖下有一条河流，名叫新头河。
English: Beneath the cliff there is a river called the Xintou River.

古文：昔人有凿石通路施倚梯者，凡度七百梯，度已，蹑悬絙过河，河两岸，相去咸八十步。
现代文：从前有人在崖壁上凿石开路，架设了竖梯。一共要爬七百道梯子方才爬完，然后踩着索桥过河。沿河两岸相距都有八十来步。
English: Once upon a time, someone chiseled a path on the cliff and erected a ladder. It took a total of seven hundred ladders to complete the climb, and then crossed the river on a rope bridge. There are about eighty steps between the two sides of the river.

古文：九译所绝，汉之张骞、甘英皆不至也。
现代文：语言不通，翻译断绝，汉朝的张骞、甘英都没有到过。
English: The language was not understood, the translation was cut off, and the Han dynasty's Zhang Xuan and Gan Ying had never arrived.

古文：余诊诸史传，即所谓罽宾之境，有盘石之隥，道狭尺余，行者骑步相持，絙桥相引，二十许里，方到悬度，阻险危害，不可胜言。
现代文：我考证过史传，这就是所谓厨宾的国境。那里绕山凿了蹬道，极狭，宽仅尺余。过往行人，骑马的，步行的，你牵我挽，小心行走，还要靠着索桥过河。这样走了二十来里，才到悬度。一路上的险阻和艰危，真是说也说不尽。
English: I have examined the historical records, and this is the so-called border of the kitchen guests. There, a causeway was hewn around the mountain, extremely narrow, only a foot wide. Passing pedestrians, riders, walkers, you pull me, walk carefully, but also cross the river by the cable bridge. It took twenty miles to reach the suspension. The dangers and hardships along the way are truly inexhaustible.

古文：敦义恭曰：乌秅之西，有悬度之国，山溪不通，引绳而度，故国得其名也。
现代文：郭义恭说：乌耗以西，有个悬度之国，山溪阻隔，道路不通，要攀着绳索过去，所以国名叫悬度。
English: Guo Yigong said, "To the west of Wu Ku, there is a land of suspense. Mountains and streams block the way, the road is impassable, and you have to climb a rope to get there. That's why the country is called suspense.

古文：其人山居，佃于石壁间，累石为室。
现代文：那里的人都住在山上，在石壁之间耕种，用石块来造房子。
English: The people there live in the mountains, farming between the stone walls and using the stones to build houses.

古文：民接手而饮，所谓猿饮也。
现代文：他们用两手捧水喝，这就是所谓猿饮。
English: They hold water in their hands to drink, which is called "monkey drinking."

古文：有白草、小步马，有驴无牛，是其悬度乎？
现代文：山区多白草、小步马，有驴无牛，这大概就是悬度了吧。
English: In the mountains there is a lot of white grass, small horses, donkeys and no cows, which is probably the reason for the suspense.

古文：释法显又言：度河便到乌长国。
现代文：法显和尚又说：渡河便到乌长国。
English: Fa Hsien Monk also said: Cross the river and go to Wuchang.

古文：乌长国即是北天竺，佛所到国也。
现代文：乌长国就是北天竺，佛陀到过这个国家。
English: Wuchang is the North Celestial Capital, and Buddha once visited this country.

古文：佛遗足迹于此，其迹长短在人心念，至今犹尔，及晒衣石尚在。
现代文：佛陀在这里留有足印，足印长短能随人的意念而变化，到现在还是如此；佛陀的晒衣石也还在。
English: The Buddha left his footprints here, and the length of the footprints can vary according to people's thoughts, and this is still the case; the Buddha's drying stone is also still there.

古文：新头河又西南流，屈而东南流，径中天竺国。
现代文：新头河往西南流，又转向东南，从中天竺国流过，这里两岸都是平地。
English: The Xintuo River flows to the southwest and then turns to the southeast, flowing through Zhongtianyu, where both banks are flat.

古文：两岸平地，有国名毗茶，佛法兴盛。
现代文：有个国家名叫毗茶，佛法很兴盛。
English: There is a country called Vi Cha, where Buddhism is flourishing.

古文：又径蒲那般河。河边左右，有二十僧伽蓝。
现代文：又经过蒲那般河，左右两边岸上有二十座佛寺。
English: It also passes through the Punabhan River, where there are twenty Buddhist temples on the left and right banks.

古文：此水径摩头罗国，而下合新头河。
现代文：这条河流经摩头罗国，在下游与新头河汇合。
English: The river flows through the country of Motoura and joins the Shintou River downstream.

古文：自河以西，天竺诸国，自是以南，皆为中国，人民殷富。
现代文：自河以西，是天竺诸国，从这里以南，则都是 中国 地方，人民很殷富。
English: To the west of the river are the Celestial Empire countries, and to the south of here are the provinces of China. The people are very wealthy.

古文：中国者，服食与中国同，故名之为中国也。
现代文：这个国家之所以称为 中国 ，是因为饮食衣着与中天竺诸国相同，所以得名。
English: The reason why this country is called China is because the diet and clothing are the same as those of the Middle Kingdom, hence the name.

古文：泥洹已来，圣众所行，威仪法则，相承不绝。
现代文：佛陀涅架以来，众圣徒所行的礼仪法则，一脉相承，绵绵不绝。
English: Since the Buddha's Nirvana, the rules of etiquette followed by all the saints have been passed down in an unbroken line.

古文：自新头河至南天竺国，迄于南海，四万里也。
现代文：从新头河到南天竺国，直到南海为止，路途四万里。
English: From the Xintou River to the South China Sea, it is a journey of 40,000 miles.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：新头河经罽宾、犍越、摩诃刺诸国，而入南海是也。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：新头河流经厨宾、键越、摩诃刺诸国，注入南海。
English: According to the "History of the Western Regions" by Shi You, the Xin Tou River flowed through Guibin, Qian Yue, and Mabuxin countries and flowed into the South China Sea.

古文：阿耨达山西南有水，名遥奴；山西南小东有水，名萨罕；小东有水，名恒伽。
现代文：阿褥达山西南有一条水，名叫遥奴；山的西南边稍东，有一条水，叫萨罕；稍东又有一条水，叫恒伽。
English: There is a stream in the south-west of Mount Aqtadah called the Yaroun; a little to the east on the south-west edge of the mountain there is a stream called the Sakhan; and a little to the east there is another stream called the Henga.

古文：此三水同出一山，俱入恒水。
现代文：这三条水都发源于同一座山，又都汇合于恒水。
English: These three rivers all originate from the same mountain, and all converge at Hengshui.

古文：康泰《扶南传》曰：恒水之源，乃极西北，出昆仑山中，有五大源，诸水分流，皆由此五大源。
现代文：康泰《扶南传》说：恒水的源泉，在西北边尽头出自昆仑山。山间有五大源，诸水分流，都由这五大源而来。
English: Kangtai's "Funan Biography" says: The source of constant water comes from Kunlun Mountain at the end of the northwest. There are five sources in the mountains, and all water flows come from these five sources.

古文：枝扈黎大江出山西北流，东南注大海。
现代文：枝息黎大江出山后往西北流，转向东南注入大诲。
English: After emerging from the mountains, the Shishi-Li Dajiang flows to the northwest, turns to the southeast and flows into the Dazhong River.

古文：枝扈黎，即恒水也，故释氏《西域记》有恒曲之目。
现代文：枝启黎就是恒水，所以释氏《西域记》有恒曲的名目。
English: The branch Qili is Hengshui, so Shiji's "Western Regions" has the name of Hengqu.

古文：恒北有四国，最西头恒曲中者是也。
现代文：恒水以北有四国，位于最西端的就是恒曲中间的国度。
English: There are four countries to the north of Hengshui, and the country in the middle of Hengqu is located at the westernmost point.

古文：有拘夷那褐国。
现代文：有个拘夷那褐国。
English: There is a brown country.

古文：《法显传》曰：恒水东南流，径拘夷那褐国南，城北双树间，有希连禅河。河边，世尊于此北首般泥洹，分舍利处。
现代文：《法显传》说：恒水往东南流，从拘夷那褐国南边流过。都城北面，希连禅河畔双树间的北端，就是世尊涅架的地方，诸王也是在那里分舍利的。
English: "Legend of the Law" says: "Hengshui flows to the southeast, passing through the southern part of Jinyi's brown country. To the north of the capital, at the northern end of the two trees on the banks of the Xilian River, is the place of the Buddha's Nirvana, where the kings also divided their wealth.

古文：支僧载《外国事》曰：佛泥洹后，天人以新白緤裹佛，以香花供养，满七日，盛以金棺，送出王宫，度一小水，水名醯兰那，去王宫可三里许，在宫北。
现代文：支僧载《外国事》说：佛陀涅架后，天界的神人用新的白衣把他裹起来，用香花来供养。满七日后，把他硷入金棺，运出王宫。王宫北面约三里，有一条醛兰那河。
English: "Foreign Affairs" said: "After the Buddha passed away, the heavenly beings wrapped him in a new white robe and provided him with fragrant flowers. After seven days, they put him in a golden coffin and carried him out of the royal palace. About three miles north of the royal palace, there is a river called the Aldorana.

古文：以栴檀木为薪，天人各以火烧薪，薪了不燃，大迦叶从流沙还，不胜悲号，感动天地，从是之后，他薪不烧而自然也。
现代文：渡过这条小河，用旗檀木作柴火，天界的神人们各自用火来烧柴，但都点不着。大迎叶从流沙回来，呼号痛哭，悲不自胜，感动了天地，这以后不用点火，柴枝就自行燃烧起来。
English: After crossing this small river, they used the flag sandalwood to make firewood. The gods of the heavenly world each used fire to burn firewood, but they could not light it. The great Yingye returned from the quicksand, crying bitterly and inconsolably, and moved heaven and earth. After this, there was no need to light a fire, and the firewood would burn on its own.

古文：王敛舍利，用金作斗，量得八斛四斗，诸国王、天龙神王各得少许。赍还本国，以造佛寺。
现代文：国王收拾了舍利，用金斗来量，共八解四斗。各国王、诸天、龙众、神王各分得少许，大部分送回本国，建造佛寺。
English: The king collected the relics and weighed them with a gold bucket, a total of eighty-four buckets. The kings of all countries, the heavens, the dragons, and the gods each received a small portion, and most of them were sent back to their home countries to build Buddhist temples.

古文：阿育王起浮屠于佛泥洹处，双树及塔，今无复有也。
现代文：后来阿育王在佛陀涅架处造了佛塔，但那两棵树和佛塔现在都没有了。
English: Later, King Ashoka built a stupa at the Buddha's resting place, but the two trees and the stupa are no longer there.

古文：此树名婆罗树，其树花名婆罗佉也。
现代文：这两棵树叫婆罗树，开的花叫要罗怯。
English: These two trees are called the Bora Bora, and the flowers that bloom are called the Bora Bora.

古文：此花色白如霜雪，香无比也。
现代文：婆罗怯花白如霜雪，芳香无与伦比。
English: Borage flowers are white as snow and have an incomparable fragrance.

古文：竺枝《扶南记》曰：林杨国去金陈国步道二千里，车马行，无水道。
现代文：竺枝《扶南记》说：林杨国距金陈国陆路二千里，只能乘马来往，没有水路。
English: "Fu Nan Ji" said: Lin Yang Guo is two thousand miles away from Jin Chen Guo by land, and can only be reached by horse. There is no waterway.

古文：举国事佛，有一道人命过烧葬，烧之数千束樵，故坐火中，乃更著石室中，从来六十余年，尸如故不朽，竺枝目见之。
现代文：这里全国都信奉佛教。有个和尚死后举行火葬，烧了儿干把柴还是端坐在火中。于是把他搬到石室中去，六十余年来，尸体仍像原来一样，丝毫没有腐烂。这是竺枝亲眼所见的事。
English: Here, the whole country believes in Buddhism. When a monk died, he was cremated, and after burning a dry stick of wood, he still sat in the fire. So he was moved to a stone room, and for more than sixty years, the body was still the same as before, without any decay. This is what the branches saw with their own eyes.

古文：夫金刚常住，是明永存，舍利刹见，毕天不朽，所谓智空罔穷，大觉难测者矣。
现代文：金刚之身永不败坏，真智慧永远长存，舍利在刹那间显现，天长地久永不朽败，真所谓智空无穷，大彻大悟者深不可测了。
English: The body of a vajra will never be corrupted, true wisdom will last forever, serenity will appear in an instant, heaven and earth will last forever, the so-called wisdom and emptiness are infinite, and those who are thoroughly enlightened are unfathomable.

古文：其水乱流注于恒。
现代文：此水乱流注入恒水。
English: This turbulent flow of water injects constant water.

古文：恒水又东径毗舍利城北。
现代文：恒水又往东流，从毗舍利城北流过。
English: The Hengshui also flows to the east, passing north of Visheli.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：毗舍利，维邪离国也。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：毗舍利是维邪离国的都城。
English: According to "The Western Regions" by Shoghi Effendi, Vishārī was the capital of defending the country from evil.

古文：支僧载《外国事》曰：维邪离国去王舍城五十由旬，城周圆三由旬，维诘家在大城里宫之南，去宫七里许，屋宇坏尽，惟见处所尔。
现代文：支僧载《外国事》说：维邪离都城离王舍城五十由旬，城墙周围长三由旬。维洁家在大城的里宫以南，离王宫七里左右，但殿宇都已塌毁了，看到的只有遗址罢了。
English: The supporting monk said in "Foreign Affairs" that: Wei Jie's residence was 50 yuans away from the capital city and 30 yuans away from the royal palace, and the city wall was 3 yuans long. Wei Jie's residence was south of the imperial palace in the capital city and about 7 miles away from the royal palace, but the palace had collapsed, and all that could be seen were ruins.

古文：释怯显云：城北有大林重阁，佛住于此，本奄婆罗女家施佛起塔也。
现代文：法显和尚说：城北有大林重阁，佛陀在这里住宿过。这地方原来是奄婆罗女家施舍给佛陀造塔的。
English: There is a thick forest to the north of the city, where the Buddha once stayed, and where the Amabara women used to give alms to build a pagoda for the Buddha.

古文：城之西北三里，塔名放弓仗。
现代文：城的西北三里，有一座塔，叫放弓杖塔。
English: Three miles northwest of the city, there is a tower called the Bow and Staff Tower.

古文：恒水上流有一国，国王小夫人生肉胎，大夫人妒之，言汝之生，不祥之征，即盛以木函，掷恒水中。
现代文：恒水上流有个国度，国王的小夫人生了个肉胎，大夫人嫉妒她，就说：你生的是个不祥的东西。于是立即用木盒子装了，投到恒水里去。
English: There is a country upstream of the Hengshui River. The king's little wife gave birth to a foetus. The great lady was jealous of her and said, "You have given birth to an evil thing." So she immediately packed it in a wooden box and threw it into the Hengshui River.

古文：下流有国王游观，见水上木函，开看，见千小儿端正殊好，王取养之，遂长大，甚勇健，所往征代，无不摧服。
现代文：有个国王在下流游览，看见水上有个木盒子，就捞了起来，打开一看，只见里面有一千个婴儿，个个生得眉清目秀，就把他们收养了起来。他们长大后十分勇武，南征北战，所到之处，无不征服。
English: Once upon a time, a king was on an excursion downriver. He saw a wooden box floating on the water and fished it out. When he opened it, he saw a thousand babies inside. They were all born with clear eyebrows and beautiful eyes, and he adopted them. When they grew up, they were very brave. They went to the south and fought in the north, conquering everything they came across.

古文：次欲伐父王本国，王大愁忧。
现代文：接着他们就要去打父王的本国了，国王十分忧虑。
English: Then they are going to attack his father's country, and the king is very worried.

古文：小夫人问：何故愁忧？
现代文：小夫人问道：大王，您为什么这样愁忧呀？
English: The little lady asked, "Great King, why are you so worried?"

古文：王曰：彼国王有千子，勇健无比，欲来伐吾国，是以愁尔。
现代文：国王说：那位国王有一干个儿子，勇武无比，要来进攻我们的国家了，所以心中发愁。
English: The king said, "That king has a son who is very brave, and he is coming to attack our country, so I am worried.

古文：小夫人言：勿愁，但于城西作高楼，贼来时，上我置楼上，则我能却之。
现代文：小夫人道：您别愁，只要在城西造一座高楼，敌兵来时，让我到楼上去，我就能叫他们退兵。
English: Little Madam: Don't worry, as long as you build a tall building in the west of the city, when the enemy soldiers come, let me go upstairs, I can make them retreat.

古文：王如是言。
现代文：国王照她的话做了。
English: The king did as she said.

古文：贼到，小夫人于楼上语贼云：汝是我子，何故反作逆事？
现代文：敌人来到，小夫人在楼上对他们说：你们都是我的儿子，为什么反而要做这种大逆不道的事？
English: When the enemies came, the little lady said to them upstairs: "You are all my sons, why do you want to do such a perfidious thing?

古文：贼曰：汝是何人，云是我母？
现代文：敌兵说：你是什么人，胆敢自称是我们的母亲？
English: The enemy soldier said, "Who are you to call yourself our mother?

古文：小夫人曰：汝等若不信者，尽张口仰向。
现代文：小夫人说：你们如果不信，都把口张开，仰面朝着我。
English: The little lady said, "If you don't believe me, open your mouths and look at me."

古文：小夫人即以两手捋乳，乳作五百道，俱坠千子口中。
现代文：小夫人就用双手挤奶，每只乳房都射出五百支乳汁，支支都落入那一千个儿子的口中。
English: So the little lady milked the cow with both hands, and each breast pumped out five hundred drops of milk, which fell into the mouths of the thousand sons.

古文：贼知是母，即放弓仗。
现代文：敌人这才知道真是自己的母亲了，立即都把弓箭兵器放下了。
English: Only then did the enemy realize that it was their own mother, and they immediately put down their bow and arrow weapons.

古文：父母作是思惟，皆得辟支佛。
现代文：父母心里这样一想，就都成了辟支佛。
English: If parents think like this in their hearts, they will all become Hizhi Buddhas.

古文：今其塔犹在，后世尊成道，告诸弟子，是吾昔时放弓仗处。
现代文：现在那里的塔还在。后来世尊得道，告诉弟子们说：这是我从前放下弓箭兵器的地方。
English: Now the tower is still there. Later, the World Reverend was enlightened and told his disciples: "This is the place where I left my bow and arrow weapons.

古文：后人得知，于此处立塔，故以名焉。
现代文：后人知道这一事迹，就在那里造了一座塔，叫做放弓杖塔。
English: Later, when people learned about this, they built a tower there, called the Bow and Staff Tower.

古文：千小儿者，即贤劫千佛也。
现代文：那一千个孩子就是贤劫千佛。
English: Those thousand children are like a thousand Buddhas.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：恒曲中次东，有僧迎扇奈揭城，佛下三道宝阶国也。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：恒曲中稍东，有个僧迎扇奈揭城，就是佛陀走下三道宝阶的都城。
English: According to "The Western Regions Record" by Shi Jie: In the middle of the Hengqu, a little to the east, there was a monk, Ying Xuan Na, who opened the city, which was the capital city where Buddha descended the three steps.

古文：《法显传》曰：恒水东南流，径僧迦施国南。
现代文：《法显传》说：恒水往东南流，从僧迎施国南边流过。
English: "Legend of the Law" says: Hengshui flows to the southeast, passing through the southern part of the country.

古文：佛自忉利天东下三道宝阶，为母说法处。
现代文：佛陀从切利天往东走下三道宝阶，为他母亲说法，就是这地方。
English: According to his mother, this is the place where the Buddha descended the three steps from the celestial sphere to the east.

古文：宝阶既没，阿育王于宝阶处作塔。后作石柱，柱上作师子像，外道少信，师子为吼，怖效心诚。
现代文：宝阶早已湮没，阿育王在宝阶所在的地方造了一座塔，后来又立了一根石柱，柱上雕了狮子像；旁门邪教，心不信佛，狮子就会向他怒吼，吓得他诚心阪依。
English: The steps had long since disappeared, and King Ashoka built a tower on the site of the steps. Later, he erected a stone pillar with a carved lion statue on it. He was afraid that the lion would roar at him, scaring his sincerity.

古文：恒水又东径罽宾饶夷城。
现代文：恒水又往东流，从厨、宾饶夷城流过。
English: The Hengshui also flows eastward, passing through the cities of Gu and Binrao.

古文：城南接恒水，城之西北六七里，恒水北岸，佛为诸弟子说法处。
现代文：厨宾饶夷城南濒恒水，西北六七里，恒水北岸，是佛陀给弟子们说法的地方。
English: Kuchibinrao, located in the south of the city near Hengshui and 67 miles northwest of the city, on the north bank of Hengshui, is the place where Buddha gave his teachings to his disciples.

古文：恒水又东南径沙祗国北。
现代文：恒水又往东南流，从沙概国北边流过。
English: The Hengshui also flows to the southeast, passing through the north of Shaqiu.

古文：出沙祗城，南门道东，佛嚼杨枝刺土中，生长七尺，不增不减，今犹尚在。
现代文：出了沙抵城南门，路东一处，佛陀曾咬断一根杨枝，插入土中，杨枝长成杨树，长到七尺高后，就不增不减，至今仍在。
English: When he reached the south gate of the city from the sand, at a place east of the road, the Buddha had bitten off a poplar branch and inserted it into the soil. The poplar branch grew into a poplar tree. After it grew to seven feet tall, it did not increase or decrease, and it is still there.

古文：恒水又东南，径迦维罗卫城北。
现代文：恒水又往东南流，从迩维罗卫城北流过，就是从前净饭王宫殿所在的地方。
English: The Hengshui also flows to the southeast, passing through the north of the Wei Luo Acropolis, which is where the Palace of the Pure Food King used to be.

古文：故净王宫也，城东五十里有王园，园有池水，夫人入池洗浴，出北岸二十步，东向举手，扳树生太子。
现代文：城东五十里有一座御园，园中有池水，夫人到池中洗澡，从北岸出来，走了二十步，向东举起手扳着树枝，就生下了太子。
English: Fifty miles to the east of the city there was a royal garden. In the garden there was a pond. The lady went to the pond to bathe, came out from the north bank, walked twenty paces, raised her hand to the east and twisted a branch. She gave birth to a prince.

古文：太子堕地，行七步，二龙吐水浴太子，遂成井池，众僧所汲养也。
现代文：太子落地后走了七步，两条龙喷水给太子沐浴，于是就变成井池，僧人们都从这里汲水饮用。
English: After the prince landed, he walked seven steps. Two dragons sprayed water to bathe the prince, and then it turned into a well, from which the monks drew water to drink.

古文：太子与难陀等扑象角力，射箭入地。今有泉水，行旅所资饮也。
现代文：太子和难陀等扑象、角力，射箭入地，现在那里有一乱泉水，过往行人就靠这泉水饮用。
English: The prince and Nanda, for example, fought and wrestled, and shot arrows into the ground. Now there is a mess of spring water there, and passers-by rely on this spring water for drinking.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：城北三里恒水上，父王迎佛处，作浮图，作父抱佛像。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：城北三里的恒水岸上，在父王迎接佛陀的地方，造了一座佛塔，塔上刻有父王抱着佛陀的雕像。
English: According to "The Western Regions," a Buddhist pagoda was built on the banks of the Hengshui River, three miles north of the city, at the place where the father king greeted the Buddha. The pagoda is engraved with a statue of the father king holding the Buddha.

古文：《外国事》曰：边维罗越国今无复王也。
现代文：《外国事》说：迎维罗越国今天不再有国王了。
English: "Foreign Affairs" said: "Yingwilowei no longer has a king today.

古文：城池荒秽，惟有空处，有优婆塞姓释，可二十余家，是昔净王之苗裔，故为四姓，住在故城中，为优婆塞，故尚精进，犹有古风。
现代文：城池已经荒废，只有一片空荡荡的荒地。但这里还住着二十余家姓释的优婆塞，他们是旧时净饭王的后裔，但分为四个种姓，住在这座荒城中。因为他们是优婆塞，所以重视修行，还有些古风。
English: The city has been abandoned, and there is only an empty wasteland. However, there are still more than twenty upasas living here. They are the descendants of the former Pure Food King, but they are divided into four castes and live in this deserted city. Because they are upasas, they attach importance to practice, and there are some old-fashioned customs.

古文：彼日浮图坏尽，条王弥更修治一浮图，私河条王送物助成，今有十二道人住其中。
现代文：那时佛塔全都毁坏了，条王弥重新加以修建。有一座佛塔是私诃条王赠送财物资助修建的，现在有十二个修行的人住在里面。
English: At that time, all the Buddhist pagodas were destroyed, and King Jo rebuilt them. One of the pagodas was built with financial support from King Jo, and now twelve practitioners live in it.

古文：太子始生对，妙后所扳树，树名须诃。
现代文：太子刚生时，王后所扳的树叫须诃树。
English: When the prince was born, the tree the queen was pruning was called the mustache tree.

古文：阿育王以青石作后扳生太子像。
现代文：阿育王用青石雕了王后扳树生太子像。
English: King Ashoka used blue stone to carve the image of the crown prince.

古文：昔树无复有，后诸沙门取昔树栽种之，展转相承到今，树枝如昔，尚荫石像。
现代文：从前的原树不再存在了，后来僧众拿这种树栽在这里，辗转相传直到今天，树枝还像从前一样，依然荫蔽着石像。
English: The original tree no longer exists. Later, the monks took this tree and planted it here, and it has been passed down to this day. The branches of the tree still shade the stone statue as before.

古文：又太子见行七步足迹，今日文理见存。
现代文：此外，太子走了七步的足印，今天遗痕还依稀可见。
English: In addition, the prince walked seven steps of footprints, today the vestiges are still faintly visible.

古文：阿育王以青石挟足迹两边，复以一长青石覆上。
现代文：阿育王用青石在两边夹住足印，又在上面盖了一块长条青石。
English: Ashoka used bluestones to hold the footprints on both sides and covered them with a long piece of bluestone.

古文：国人今日恒以香花供养，尚见足七形，文理分明。
现代文：今天国人常用香花供奉，七个足印的形状，看来还是纹理分明。
English: Today, Chinese people often use fragrant flowers to worship, and the shape of the seven footprints still seems to have a distinct texture.

古文：今虽有石覆无异，或人复以数重吉贝，重覆贴着石上，逾更明也。
现代文：如今虽然上面同样还是盖了石板，有人还在石上贴了好几层吉贝叶，但足印反而更清楚了。
English: Today, although there is still a stone slab on top of it, and someone has also attached several layers of kibbeh leaves to the stone, the footprints are clearer.

古文：太子始生时，以龙王夹太子左右，吐水浴太子，见一龙吐水暖，一龙吐水冷，遂成二池。今尚一冷一暖矣。
现代文：太子生时，龙王在两边夹住太子，喷水给太子沐浴，一条龙喷的水暖，另一条喷的水冷，就变成了两口水池，直到今天还是一冷一暖。
English: When the prince was born, the dragon king clamped the prince on both sides and sprayed water to bathe the prince. One dragon sprayed warm water and the other sprayed cold water, which turned into two pools, which are still cold and warm to this day.

古文：太子未出家前十日，出往王田阎浮树下坐，树神以七宝奉太子，太子不受，于是思惟欲出家也。
现代文：太子出家前十日，出宫到御田中去，坐在阎浮树下，树神拿了七宝奉献给太子，太子不受，就在这里起了出家的念头。
English: Ten days before the prince became a monk, he left the palace and went to Midanaka, where he sat under a floating tree. The tree god took seven treasures and offered them to the prince, but the prince did not accept. It was here that he had the idea of becoming a monk.

古文：王田去宫一据。据者，晋言十里也。
现代文：御田离王宫一据―用晋朝的话来说，一据就是十里。
English: Mita is just a stone's throw away from the Imperial Palace - in the words of the Jin Dynasty, one stone's throw is ten miles.

古文：太子以三月十五日夜出家，四天王来迎，各捧马足。
现代文：太子在三月十五夜出家，四天王来迎接他，各自捧着一只马脚。
English: The prince became a monk on the night of March 15th, and the four heavenly kings came to greet him, each holding a horse's foot.

古文：尔时诸神天人侧塞，空中散天香花。
现代文：那时诸神和天人在两旁护卫，空中散下香花。
English: At that time, gods and heavenly beings escorted on both sides, scattering fragrant flowers in the air.

古文：此时以至河南摩强水，即于此水边作沙门。
现代文：这时太子去到河南摩强水，就在这条水边做了修道的沙门。
English: At this time, the prince went to Henan to swim in the strong water, and he made a shamanic path along this water.

古文：河南摩强水在迦维罗越北，相去十由旬。
现代文：河南摩强水在迎维罗越北边，其间相距十由旬。
English: Henan Makao Water is in the north of Yingwilou Yue, with a distance of ten years between them.

古文：此水在罗阅祗瓶沙国，相去三十由旬。
现代文：这条水在罗阅抵瓶沙国，相距三十由旬。
English: This water arrives in Luoyang at Jinsha country, at a distance of thirty-one weeks.

古文：菩萨于是暂过，瓶沙王出见菩萨，菩萨于瓶沙随楼那果园中住一日，日暮便去半达钵愁宿。
现代文：菩萨偶然经过瓶沙国，瓶沙王出来会见他。菩萨在瓶沙随楼那果园中停留了一日，天晚了就到半达钵愁去歇宿。
English: By chance, the Bodhisattva passed through the country of Bansha, and the King of Bansha came out to meet him. The Bodhisattva stayed in the orchard of Bansha Suilong for one day, and later that day he went to stay in Handa Banshu.

古文：半达，晋言白也；钵愁，晋言山也。
现代文：半达，用晋朝的话说，说是白；钵愁，就是山。
English: Handa, in the words of the Jin Dynasty, means white, and Shanxu means mountain.

古文：白山北去瓶沙国十里，明旦便去，暮宿昙兰山，去白山六由旬。
现代文：白山在瓶沙国北十里。天明后菩萨就离开白山，晚上宿在昙兰山，这里离白山六由旬。
English: Baishan is ten miles to the north of Jinsha. After daybreak, the Bodhisattva left Baishan and stayed in the evening in the Qilian Mountains, which is about six weeks away from Baishan.

古文：于是径诣贝多树，贝多树在阅祗北，去昙兰山二十里。
现代文：他从这里一直向贝多树走去。贝多树在阅抵北面，离昙兰山二十里。
English: From here, he walked all the way to the Bedo Tree, which is in the north of Yunnan Province, 20 miles from Mount Qilian.

古文：太子年二十九出家，三十五得道，此言与经异，故记所不同。
现代文：太子二十九岁出家，三十五岁得道，这说法与经相异，所以把不同之点记下来。
English: The prince became a monk at the age of twenty-nine and became a Taoist at the age of thirty-five, which is different from the sutra, so write down the differences.

古文：竺法维曰：迎维卫国，佛所生天竺国也。三千日月、万二千天地之中央也。
现代文：竺法维说：边旦维卫国就是佛陀出生的天竺国，正位于三千日月、一万二千天地的中央。
English: Zi Faw said: "Border Defense State is the Heavenly Defense State where Buddha was born. It is located in the center of the three thousand suns, twelve thousand heavens and earths.

古文：康泰《扶南传》曰：昔范旃时，有嘾杨国人家翔梨，尝从其本国到天竺，展转流贾至扶南，为旃说天竺土俗，道法流通，金宝委积，山川饶沃，恣所欲，左右大国，世尊重之。
现代文：康泰《扶南，传》说：从前范旗时，有潭杨国人家翔梨从他本国去到天竺，一路做买卖，辗转到了扶南，他对范旗讲述天竺的风土习俗。那里佛教流行，金银财宝积聚成堆，山川丰饶肥沃，要什么一育什么，相邻各国都很尊重它。
English: Kangtai's "Funan, Biography" says: "Once upon a time, in the time of Fan Qi, there was a man from Yang Province named Xiang Li who went from his home country to Tianzhu, doing business all the way, and then transferred to Funan. He told Fan Qi about the customs of Tianzhu. There, Buddhism was popular, gold and silver treasures accumulated in piles, mountains and rivers were rich and fertile, and whatever you wanted was nurtured. All neighboring countries respected it.

古文：旃问云：今去何时可到，几年可回？
现代文：范旗问道：现在就去，几时能到？几年可以回来？
English: Fan Qi asked, "I will go now, when can I arrive? How many years can I come back?"

古文：梨言：天竺去此，可三万余里，往还可三年逾。
现代文：家翔梨说：天竺离这里约三万余里，来往大约要三年多。
English: Ieshiori said, "Tianzhu is more than thirty thousand miles away from here, and it takes more than three years to travel back and forth.

古文：及行，四年方返，以为天地之中也。
现代文：他真的去了，结果四年方才回来，他认为那里确是天地的中央。
English: He did go, but it was four years before he came back, and he thought it really was the centre of the universe.

古文：恒水又东径蓝莫塔。塔边有池，池中龙守护之。
现代文：恒水又往东流过蓝莫塔，塔边有池，池中有龙守护。
English: The Hengshui River flows eastward past the Blue Mota Pagoda. There is a pond by the side of the pagoda, which is guarded by a dragon.

古文：阿育王欲破塔，作八万四千塔，悟龙王所供，知非世有，遂止。
现代文：阿育王想拆下这座塔，分建八万四千座塔，后来忽有所悟，知道此塔是龙王所供奉，不是人间所有的东西，于是就停下了。
English: Ashoka wanted to tear down this tower and build 84,000 separate towers, but then he suddenly had an epiphany and realized that this tower was dedicated to the Dragon King and not to all things on earth, so he stopped.

古文：此中空荒无人，群象以鼻取水洒地，若苍梧、会稽，象耕、鸟耘矣。
现代文：这一带空寂荒凉，无人居住，象群用长鼻吸水洒地，就像苍梧和会稽的象耕鸟耘一样。
English: The area is desolate and uninhabited. The herds of elephants use their long trunks to suck up water and sprinkle it on the ground, much like the ploughshare.

古文：恒水又东至五河口，盖五水所会，非所详矣。
现代文：恒水又往东流到五河口，大概这里是五条水汇合的地方，但详情不得而知。
English: The Hengshui River flows eastward to the mouth of the Five Rivers. This is probably the place where the five rivers converge, but the details are unknown.

古文：阿难从摩竭国向毗舍利，欲般泥洹，诸天告阿阇世王，王追至河上，梨车闻阿难来，亦复来迎，俱到河上。
现代文：阿难从摩竭国去向毗舍利，想到那里去涅架。诸天神把这消息告知阿阁世王，阿阁世王追到河上。梨车听说阿难来了，也都来河上相迎。
English: Ananda went from the land of Māso to Vishārī, intending to go to Nirvana there. The gods told this news to the king of Agharti, who chased him to the river. When the carts heard that Ananda had come, they also came to meet him on the river.

古文：阿难思惟，前则阿阇世王致恨，却则梨车复怨，即于中河，入火光三昧，烧具两般泥洹。
现代文：阿难心想：向前走，阿阁世王会恼恨，向后退，梨车又会抱怨；于是就在河心跳入三昧真火中自焚解脱，身体分作两半，两岸各有一半。
English: Ananda thought to himself, "If I go forward, the king of the world will be angry, if I go backward, the pear cart will complain again." So he jumped into the heart of the river and set himself on fire to free himself. His body was divided into two halves, one half on each side.

古文：身二分，分各在一岸，二王各持半舍利，还起二培。
现代文：两位国王各自拿了那半份舍利，回去造了两座塔。
English: The two kings each took their half of the shekel and went back to build two towers.

古文：渡河南下一由巡，到摩竭提国巴连弗邑。邑，即是阿育王所治之城。
现代文：渡河南下一由旬，到了摩竭提国的巴连弗城，这就是阿育王建都的那座城。
English: After crossing the southern part of Henan Province, we arrived at Balianfu City in Muxidi Province. This is the city where the capital was built by King Ashoka.

古文：城中宫殿皆起墙阙，雕文刻镂，累大石作山，山下作石室，长三丈，广二丈，高丈余，有大乘婆罗门子，名罗汰私婆，亦名文殊师利，住此城里、爽悟多智，事无不达，以清净自居，国王宗敬师事之。
现代文：城中的宫殿都建造了墙网，雕刻着花纹；又用大石堆成假山，山下建了石室，长三丈，阔二丈，高丈余。有个大乘婆罗门的儿子，名叫罗汰私婆，又名文殊师利，住在这座城内。他聪明颖悟，百事无不通晓，而以清净自居，国王很尊敬他，就奉他为师。
English: The palaces in the city were all built with a network of walls, carved with patterns; they were also heaped with large stones to form a rockery, and a stone room was built at the bottom of the mountain, three meters long, two meters wide, and more than two meters high. There was a son of the Mahayana Brahman, named Rota Siva, also known as Manjushri, who lived in this city. He was clever and enlightened, and knew everything, but he considered himself pure. The king respected him very much and served him as a teacher.

古文：赖此一人，宏宣佛法，外不能陵。
现代文：靠他一人宏扬佛法，外族不能侵凌。
English: He is the only one who can promote Buddhism, and foreigners should not encroach on him.

古文：凡诸国中，惟此城为大，民人富盛，竟行仁义。
现代文：各国之中，这座城要算最大了，人民殷富兴盛，争着实行仁义的事。
English: It is the largest city in the world, and its people are prosperous and eager to do what is right and just.

古文：阿育王坏七塔，作八万四千塔。
现代文：阿育王拆毁了七座塔，另建八万四千座塔。
English: King Ashoka demolished seven pagodas and built another 84,000 pagodas.

古文：最初作大塔，在城南二里余，此塔前有佛迹，起精舍，北户向塔，塔南有石柱，大四五围，高三丈余，上有铭，题云：阿育王以阎浮提布施四方。僧还以钱赎塔。
现代文：最初在城南二里余造了一座大塔，塔前有佛陀的足迹，因而在那里修建寺院。寺院北门对着宝塔，塔南有石柱，柱大四五围，高三丈余；上面刻着这样的铭口文：阿育王拿阎浮提来布施四方僧人，回来后又用钱赎回。
English: At first, a large tower was built about two miles south of the city. There were Buddha's footprints in front of the tower, so a temple was built there. The north gate of the temple faces the pagoda, and there is a stone pillar on the south side of the tower. The pillar is four to five meters in size, and more than three meters high. It is engraved with the following inscription: "Ayuko Wang took Yan Fu Ti to give alms to the monks in the four directions, and then redeemed it with money after his return."

古文：塔北三百步，阿育王于此作泥犁城，城中有石柱，亦高三丈余，上有师子柱，有铭记，作泥犁城因缘，及年数日月。恒水又东南径小孤石山。
现代文：塔北三百步，有阿育王所建的泥犁城。城中有石柱，也高三丈余，柱头雕着狮子，刻有铭文，记述兴建泥犁城的缘由及年月日。 巨水又往东南流，从小孤石山流过。
English: Three hundred paces to the north of the pagoda, there is a muddy city built by King Ashoka. There are stone pillars in the city, which are also more than three meters high. The column head is carved with a lion, engraved with an inscription, describing the reason for the construction of the muddy city and the date. The huge water flows to the southeast, flowing from the small lonely stone mountain.

古文：山头有石室，石室南向，佛昔坐其中，天帝释以四十二事问佛，佛一一以指画石，画迹故在。
现代文：山头有个石室，朝南，从前佛陀坐在石室内，天帝释拿了四十二件事问他，佛陀一件件用手指在石上刻划，划痕还在。
English: There is a stone chamber at the top of the mountain, facing south. Once upon a time, the Buddha was sitting in the stone chamber. The heavenly messenger took forty-two things and asked him about them. The Buddha scratched them on the stone one by one with his finger, and the scratches are still there.

古文：恒水又西径王舍新城。
现代文：恒水又往西流过王舍新城，这座城是阿阁世王所造。
English: The Hengshui also flows westward through Wangshe New Town, which was built by King Agge.

古文：是阿阇世王所造，出城南四里，入谷至五山里，五山周围，状若城郭，即是蓱沙王旧城也。
现代文：出城南行四里，进了山谷，就到五山里面。五山围绕山谷四周，就像城郭一样，这就是萍沙王旧城。
English: Go four miles south of the city, enter the valley, and you will find yourself in the middle of the five mountains. The five mountains surround the valley, just like a castle. This is the old city of Ping Sha Wang.

古文：东西五六里，南北七八里，阿阇世王始欲害佛处。
现代文：旧城东西宽五六里，南北长七八里，就是阿阁世王当初想谋害佛陀的地方。
English: The old city is 56 miles wide from east to west and 78 miles long from north to south. It is the place where King Akakusa originally wanted to assassinate the Buddha.

古文：其城空荒，又无人径，入谷傅山，东南上十五里，到耆阇崛山，未至顶三里，有石窟南向，佛坐禅处。
现代文：这座城已经荒废，空无一物了，也没有人走的路。进了山谷，沿山向东南上行十五里，就到曹阁崛山。距山顶还有三里处，有一座石窟，洞口朝南，这是佛陀坐禅的地方。
English: The city was deserted, there was nothing left, and there was no road for anyone to take. Entering the valley, we traveled fifteen miles southeast along the mountain to Sogakureyama. Three miles from the top of the mountain, there was a cave, the mouth of the cave facing south. This was the place where Buddha meditated.

古文：西北四十步，复有一石窟，阿难坐禅处。
现代文：向西北行四十步，又有一座石窟，这是阿难坐禅的地方。
English: Forty paces to the northwest, there is another grotto, where Anan meditates.

古文：天魔波旬化作雕鹫恐阿难，佛以神力，隔石舒手摩阿难肩，怖即得止。
现代文：天魔波旬变成雕鹭来恐吓阿难，佛陀隔着石壁用神力伸手抚摩阿难的肩膀，他就不害怕了。
English: The sky demon Po Shun turned into a dragonfly to intimidate Ananda. Buddha reached across the stone wall and touched Ananda's shoulder with his divine power, and he was no longer afraid.

古文：鸟迹、手孔悉存，故曰雕鹫窟也。
现代文：现在雕鹜的爪痕和壁上的手孔也都还在，所以这座石窟就叫雕鹜窟。
English: Now the claw marks of the carving and the hand holes on the walls are still there, so this cave is called the carving cave.

古文：其山峰秀端严，是五山之最高也。
现代文：省阁窟山峰峦秀丽峻伟，是五山中最高的一座。
English: The peak of the Provincial Pavilion Grottoes is beautiful and majestic, and is the highest of the five mountains.

古文：释氏《西域记》云：耆阇崛山在阿耨达王舍城东北，西望其山，有两峰双立，相去二三里，中道鹫鸟，常居其岭，土人号曰耆阇崛山。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：曹阁崛山在阿褥达王舍城东北，西望首阁窟山，双峰并峙，相距二三里，道路在中间通过，鹜鸟常栖止在岭上，当地人叫誊阁窟山。
English: Shi's "West Guiki" said: "Cao Ge Mountain is in the northeast of Ajuda Wang She City, and Xibang Shougu Grotto Mountain, the twin peaks stand side by side, two or three miles apart, the road passes in the middle, the ostrich often perches on the ridge, and the locals call it Shougu Grotto Mountain.

古文：胡语耆阇，鹫也。
现代文：胡人所说的曹阁，就是鹜的意思。
English: The Hu people call it Cao Ge, which means cormorant.

古文：又竺法维云：罗阅祗国有灵鹫山，胡语云耆阇崛山。
现代文：竺法维也说：罗阅抵国有灵鹜山，胡人叫曹阁崛山。
English: Zou Favei said: Luo Yue arrived at Linglong Mountain in the country, and the Hu people called it Sogou Mountain.

古文：山是青石，石头似鹫鸟。
现代文：山岩都是青石，岩石顶上像鸳鸟。
English: The mountain rocks are all bluestone, and the tops of the rocks look like ostriches.

古文：阿育王使人凿石，假安两翼两脚，凿治其身，今见存，远望似鹫鸟形，故曰灵鹫山也。
现代文：阿育王派人去凿石，装上两只假翼、两只假脚，又修琢了鸟身，今天都还在，远望形状像是鹭鸟，所以叫灵鹭山。
English: Ashoka sent someone to cut the stone, put on two false wings and two false feet, and carved the body of the bird, which is still there today. From a distance, it looks like an ostrich, which is why it is called Lingya Mountain.

古文：数说不同，远迩亦异，今以法显亲宿其山，诵《首楞严》，香华烘养，闻见之宗也。
现代文：以上几种说法各不相同，远近也不一样，但法显亲身在山上住宿过，念过《首楞严经》，又以香花供养， 他的记述该可作为见闻的依据了。
English: The above-mentioned accounts vary from place to place and from place to place, but since Faxian himself stayed in the mountains, recited the Sutra of the Severed Head, and offered fragrant flowers, his account can be used as evidence of what he saw and heard.

古文：又西径迦那城南。三十里，到佛苦行六年坐树处，有林木。
现代文：恒水又往西流，从迎那城以南三十里流过，到了佛陀坐在树下苦修六年的地方，这里长着一片丛林。
English: The Hengshui flows west again, passing 30 miles south of Yingna Town, to the place where Buddha sat under a tree and did penance for six years. There is a jungle here.

古文：西行三里，到佛人水洗浴、天王按树枝得扳出池处。
现代文：西行三里，就到佛陀入水洗浴，天王按下树枝，让他扳着上岸的地方。
English: Three miles to the west, he came to the Buddha bathing in the water. The king pressed a branch and asked him to point to the place where he landed.

古文：又北行二里，得弥家女奉佛乳糜处。
现代文：又北行二里，就到弥家女端了牛奶粥给佛陀的地方。
English: Two leagues further north, he came to the place where the maiden brought milk porridge to the Buddha.

古文：从此北行二里，佛于一大树下石上东向坐食糜处，树石悉在，广长六尺，高减二尺。
现代文：从这里北行二里，是佛陀在一棵大树下朝东坐在石头上吃奶粥的地方。树和石头都还在，石头长阔各六尺，高近二尺。
English: Two miles north of here is the place where the Buddha sat under a large tree, facing east, and ate milk porridge on a stone. Both the tree and the stone are still there. The stone is six feet wide and nearly two feet high.

古文：国中寒暑均调，树木或数千岁，乃至万岁。
现代文：这个国度气候温和，树龄有的长达几千年，甚至上万年。
English: This country has a mild climate, and some trees are thousands of years old, even tens of thousands of years old.

古文：从此东北行二十里，到一石窟，菩萨人中，西向结跏趺坐，心念若我成道，当有神验。
现代文：从这里往东北行走二十里，到了一处石窟，菩萨走进石窟，向西结枷跌坐，心想：如果我成道了，当有奇迹显现。
English: From here he walked twenty miles to the northeast until he reached a grotto. The Bodhisattva entered the grotto, knelt down facing west, and thought to himself: "If I attain enlightenment, a miracle will appear."

古文：石壁上即有佛影见，长三尺许，今犹明亮。
现代文：他这么一想，石壁上就现出佛影，长三尺左右，至今仍然很明亮。
English: As soon as he thought about it, a Buddha shadow appeared on the stone wall, about three feet long, and it is still very bright.

古文：时天地大动，诸天在空言，此非过去当来诸佛成道处，去此西南行，减半由旬，贝多树下，是过去当来诸佛成道处。
现代文：这时天地猛烈地震动起来，诸天神在空中说：这里不是过去将来诸佛成道的地方，从这里向西南走，不到半由旬，有棵贝多树，那树下才是过去将来诸佛成道的地方。
English: At this time, the heaven and earth were violently shaken, and the gods said in the sky, "This is not the place where the Buddhas of the past and the future will attain enlightenment. If you walk from here to the southwest, you will find a Bedo tree less than half a kilometer away. Under that tree is the place where the Buddhas of the past and the future will attain enlightenment."

古文：诸天导引菩萨起行，离树三十步，天授吉祥草，菩萨受之，复行十五步，五百青雀飞来，绕菩萨三匝西去。
现代文：诸天神引领着菩萨起行，离树三十步，天神拿了吉祥草给他，菩萨接过吉祥草，又走了十五步，有五百只青雀飞来，在菩萨头上转了三圈向西飞去。
English: The gods led the bodhisattva on his journey. He walked thirty paces from the tree. The gods gave him the auspicious grass. The bodhisattva took the grass and walked another fifteen paces. Five hundred young birds flew to him, circling around his head three times and flying west.

古文：菩萨前到贝多树下，敷吉祥草，东向而坐。
现代文：菩萨前行到贝多树下，铺上吉祥草，向东坐了下来。
English: The bodhisattva went forward to the bedo tree, spread the auspicious grass, and sat down facing east.

古文：时魔王遣三玉女从北来试菩萨。
现代文：这时魔王派遣了三个美女，从北方走过来骚扰菩萨，魔王自己从南方走过来。
English: At this time, the devil sent three beautiful women to come from the north to harass the bodhisattva, and the devil himself came from the south.

古文：魔王自从南来，菩萨以足指按地，魔兵却散，三女变为老姥，不自服。
现代文：菩萨用脚趾踏在地上，魔兵就退却逃散了，三个美女都变成老太婆，再也不能恢复为美女了。
English: When the Bodhisattva trod on the ground with his toes, the demon soldiers retreated and fled, and the three beautiful women turned into old women and could no longer return to being beautiful.

古文：佛于尼拘律树下方石上东向坐，梵天来诣佛处，四天王捧钵处皆立塔。
现代文：佛陀在尼拘律树下一块方石上朝东坐下，梵天向佛陀走来的地方，四天王捧钵的地方，都造了塔。
English: Buddha sat down facing east on a square stone under the Nyagrodha tree. The place where Brahma came to the Buddha, the place where the four heavenly kings held the scepter, all built towers.

古文：《外国事》曰：毗婆梨佛在此一树下六年，长者女以金钵盛乳糜上佛，佛得乳糜，住足尼连禅河浴。
现代文：《外国事》说：毗婆梨树，佛在此树下坐了六年，长者的女儿用金钵盛了奶粥端给佛陀，佛陀接过奶粥，就站在尼连禅河中沐浴。
English: "Foreign Affairs" said: "At the foot of the Vipa pear tree, the Buddha sat under this tree for six years. The elder's daughter served milk porridge to the Buddha with a golden spoon. The Buddha took the milk porridge and stood in the Nilien Zen River to bathe.

古文：浴竟，于河边啖糜竟，掷钵水中，逆流百步，钵没河中，迪梨郊龙王接取在宫供养，先三佛钵亦见。
现代文：沐浴后，就在河边吃了奶粥，把钵丢到河中，钵在水上逆流飘浮了一百步，才沉入河中。迎梨郊龙王接住了钵，在龙宫中供养，先前的三只佛钵也出现了。
English: After bathing, he ate milk porridge by the river and threw the dragonfly into the river. The dragonfly floated on the water against the current for a hundred steps before sinking into the river. Yingli Suburban Dragon King caught the dragonfly and raised it in the Dragon Palace. The previous three Buddha statues also appeared.

古文：佛于河傍坐摩诃菩提树，摩诃菩提树去贝多树二里，于此树下七日，思惟道成，魔兵试佛。
现代文：佛陀在河边坐在摩诃菩提树下，摩诃菩提树离贝多树二里。他在树下坐了七日，冥思苦想，终于成道，这时魔兵来骚扰他。
English: The Buddha was sitting by the river, two leagues from the Bedouin tree, under the Mahabodhi tree. He had been sitting under the tree for seven days, meditating and finally attaining enlightenment, when the demonic soldiers came to harass him.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：尼连水南注恒水，水西有佛树，佛于此苦行，日食糜六年。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：尼连水南流注入恒水，水西有佛树，佛陀在这里苦修，天天吃粥，接连吃了六年。
English: According to the "West Records" of Shi, the south stream of the Nilien Water injected Hengshui, and there was a Buddha tree on the west side of the water. Buddha practiced asceticism here, ate porridge every day, and ate it for six consecutive years.

古文：西去城五里许，树东河上，即佛入水浴处。
现代文：离城往西约五里，树东河上，就是佛陀入水沐浴的地方。
English: About five miles west of the city, on the Shudong River, is the place where Buddha took a bath.

古文：东上岸尼拘律树下坐修，舍女上糜于此。
现代文：他从东边上岸，在尼拘律树下面静坐修道，舍女就在这里端奶粥给他。
English: He came ashore from the east and sat in meditation under the Nyctricus tree, where the maid served him milk porridge.

古文：于是西度水，于六年树南贝多树下坐，降魔得佛也。
现代文：他从这里渡水向西走，在六年树南边的贝多树下打坐，在这里降魔成佛。
English: From here, he crossed the water to the west, meditated under the Bedo tree on the south side of the six-year tree, and became a Buddha here.

古文：佛图调曰：佛树中枯，其来时更生枝叶。
现代文：佛图调说：佛树曾一度枯死，佛陀来时，重又生了枝叶。
English: In the Buddha's tune, the Buddha tree once withered and died, but when the Buddha came, its branches and leaves were reborn.

古文：竺法维曰：六年树去佛树五里，书其异也。
现代文：竺法维说：六年树离佛树五里。以上诸说互不相同，姑且都记下备考。
English: "A six-year-old tree is five miles away from a Buddha tree," Gong Faw said. All of the above statements are different from each other, so let's just write them down for reference.

古文：法显从此东南行，还已连弗邑，顺恒水西下，得一精舍，名旷野，佛所住处。
现代文：法显从这里往东南走，回到巴连弗城，沿恒水顺流西下，到了一座寺院，叫旷野寺，这是佛陀住过的地方。
English: From here, Faxian walked southeast, back to the city of Balianfu, and down the west side of the Hengshui River to a temple called the Desert Temple, where the Buddha once lived.

古文：复顺恒水西下，到迦尸国波罗奈城。
现代文：他又沿恒水西下，到迩尸国波罗奈城。
English: He also went west along the Hengshui River to Boronai City, the country of zombies.

古文：竺法维曰：彼罗奈国在迪维罗卫国南千二百里，中间有恒水，东南流，佛转法轮处，在国北二十里，树名春浮，维摩所处也。
现代文：竺法维说：波罗奈国在迎维罗卫国南方一千二百里，中间有恒水，往东南流。佛陀转法轮的地点，就在都城以北二十里，有一棵树，叫春浮树，是维摩栖息过的地方。
English: Gong Fawi said: Borneo is 1,200 miles south of Yingwiro, with Hengshui in the middle, flowing southeast. The place where the Buddha turned the wheel of the Law, just 20 miles north of the capital, has a tree called the Spring Floating Tree, where Vima once roosted.

古文：法显曰：城之东北十里许，即鹿野苑，本辟支佛住此，常有野鹿栖宿，故以名焉。
现代文：法显说：城东北约十里，就是鹿野苑，辟支佛原来住在这里，因常有野鹿栖息、所以得名。
English: "About ten miles northeast of the city is Deer Park," said Hokian. The Buddha originally lived here, and it got its name from the wild deer that often roam the park.

古文：法显从此还，居巴连弗邑。
现代文：法显从这里返回，住在巴连弗城。
English: From here, he returned to live in the city of Palenque.

古文：又顺恒水东行，其南岸有瞻婆大国。
现代文：又沿恒水东行，南岸有瞻婆大国。
English: It also travels east along the Hengshui River, and the south bank is a vast country.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：恒曲次东有瞻婆国城，南有卜佉兰池，恒水在北，佛下说戒处也。
现代文：释氏《西城记》说：恒曲稍东有瞻婆国，城南有卜怯兰池―恒水在北边―是佛陀下来讲述戒律的地方。
English: According to the "West Town Chronicle" by Mr. Shi: Hengqu slightly to the east is Zhanba Province, and to the south of the city is Bu Ke Lan Pond - Hengshui is in the north - this is the place where the Buddha came down to teach the precepts.

古文：恒水又径波丽国。即是佛外祖国也。
现代文：恒水又流经波丽国，就是佛陀外祖父的国度。
English: The Hengshui also flows through the country of Bali, the country of Buddha's maternal grandfather.

古文：法显曰：恒水又东到多摩梨轩国，即是海口也。
现代文：法显说：恒水又往东流，到了多摩梨轩国，就是海口了。
English: Faxian said, "Hengshui is flowing eastward again. When it reaches the Tamarisk Country, it is Haikou.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：大秦一名梨靬。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：大秦又名梨靳。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jie, the Great Qin Dynasty was also known as the Pear Dynasty.

古文：康泰《扶南传》曰：从迦那调洲西南人大湾，可七八百里，乃到枝扈黎大江口，度江径西行，极大秦也。
现代文：康泰《扶南传》说：从迎那调洲往西南到大湾，流程约七八百里，才到枝启梨大江日；渡江一直朝西走，到尽头就是大秦。
English: Kangtai's "Funan Biography" said: From Yingna Dizhou to the southwest to the Great Bay, the process is about seven or eight hundred miles, and it is not until the day of the branch of the Pearl River; the river crossing has been going westward, and the end is the Great Qin.

古文：又云：发拘利口，入大湾中，正西北入，可一年余，得天竺江口，名恒水。
现代文：又说：从拘利口出发，进入大湾中，从正西向北进去，约一年余，就到天竺江口，那条水叫恒水。
English: He also said: Starting from the mouth of the Zhenli River and entering the middle of the Great Bay, and from due west to the north, it took more than a year to reach the mouth of the Tianzhu River. That water is called Hengshui.

古文：江口有国，号担袟，属天竺。
现代文：江口有个国度，叫担袂，属于天竺。
English: There is a country in Jiangkou, called Danzhao, which belongs to Tianzhou.

古文：遣黄门字兴为担袟王。
现代文：天竺派遣了黄门字兴去当担铁王。
English: The heavens have sent Huangmen Zixing to be the king of iron.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：恒水东流入东海。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说： 值水东流，注入东海。
English: According to the "West Country Diary" of Shi Jie, the valuable water flowed eastward and was injected into the East Sea.

古文：盖二水所注，两海所纳，自为东西也。
现代文：大概恒水分为两条，各自东西，是分头注入两海的吧。
English: Presumably, the Hengshui River is divided into two, each with its own east and west, and it is divided into two seas.

古文：释氏论佛图调列《山海经》曰：西海之南，流沙之滨，赤水之后，黑水之前，有大山，名昆仑。
现代文：释氏评论佛图调书时，举出《山海经》说：西海南面，流沙岸边，赤水后面，黑水前面，有大山名叫昆仑。
English: Commenting on the adjustment of the Buddha image, Mr. Shih cited the "Shanhai Jing" and said: In the south of the West China Sea, on the shore of the quicksand, behind the red water, and in front of the black water, there is a big mountain called Kunlun.

古文：又曰：钟山西六百里有昆仑山，所出五水，祖以《佛图调传》也。
现代文：又说：钟山西方六百里有昆仑山，发源于山中的水有五条。这是以《佛图调传》为根据的。
English: He also said, "There are six hundred Kunlun Mountains in the west of Mount Zhongshan, and there are five streams of water originating in the mountains." This is based on "Buddha's Calligraphy."

古文：又近推得康泰《扶南传》，《传》昆仑山正与调合。
现代文：最近又查考康泰《扶南传》，书中记述昆仑山，正好与《佛图调传》相合。
English: Recently, I also checked Kangtai's "Funan Biography." The book describes Kunlun Mountain, which coincides with "Buddha's Biography."

古文：如《传》，自交州至天竺最近。
现代文：按此传，从交州到天竺最近。
English: Click here to see the latest from Jiaozhou to Tianjin.

古文：泰《传》亦知阿褥达山是昆仑山。
现代文：康泰《扶南传》也知道阿褥达山就是昆仑山。
English: Kangtai "Funan Biography" also knows that Mount Aota is Mount Kunlun.

古文：释云赖得调《传》，豁然为解，乃宣为《西域图》，以语法汰。
现代文：释氏说，幸而有了《佛图调传》，问题才迎刃而解。于是绘成《西域图》，并对法汰说起这件事。
English: Mr. Shaku said that fortunately, with the publication of "Buddha's Map of the Western Regions," the problem was solved, so he drew a "map of the Western Regions" and talked about it with Fata.

古文：法汰以常见怪，谓汉来诸名人，不应河在敦煌南数千里，而不知昆仑所在也。
现代文：法汰觉得他提这种常识问题很奇怪，他说，从汉朝来的名人们，知道河在敦煌以南数千里，不应不知道昆仑山的所在的。
English: The court found it strange that he raised such a common sense question. He said that the famous people who came from the Han Dynasty should know that the river is thousands of miles south of Dunhuang and should not not know where Mount Kunlun is.

古文：释云，复书曰案《穆天子传》。
现代文：释氏又写道：这是以《穆天子传》为依据的。
English: Mr. Shaku also wrote: "This is based on "The Story of Mu Tianzi."

古文：穆王于昆仑侧瑶池上觞西王母，云去宗周瀍涧，万有一千一百里，何得不如调言？
现代文：穆王在昆仑山旁边、瑶池上面向西王母祝酒，说这里离周朝都城的渡涧有一万一千一百里，为什么却和佛图调说的不同呢？
English: King Mu made a toast to the Western Queen Mother on the Kunlun Mountain and above the Dianchi Pond, saying that it was 11,100 miles away from the Zhou Dynasty's capital city of Wudu, but why was it different from what the Buddha said?

古文：子今见泰《传》，非为前人不知也。
现代文：你今天看到康泰《扶南传》，说明并非前人不知道。
English: If you saw Kang Tai's "Funan Biography" today, it's not because you didn't know about it before.

古文：而今以后，乃知昆仑山为无热丘，何云乃胡国外乎？
现代文：从今以后，才知道昆仑山就是无热丘，为什么却说是在外国呢？
English: From now on, it is known that Kunlun Mountain is a no-hot spot, but why is it said to be in a foreign country?

古文：余考释氏之言，未为佳证。
现代文：我以为释氏的话并非很好的证据。
English: I don't think Mr. Shogo's words are very good evidence.

古文：《穆天子》、《竹书》及《山海经》，皆埋缊岁久，编韦稀绝，书策落次，难以缉缀。
现代文：《穆天子传》、《竹书纪年》和《山海经》都埋藏了多年，竹简的皮条都断了，次序也已错乱，很难理顺；后人凭着某一点的联系凑合起来，多与古人原意不相一致。
English: "Biography of Mu Tianzi," "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" and "Book of Mountains and Seas" have all been buried for many years. The strips of the bamboo slips are all broken, and the order is also out of order, which is difficult to straighten out. Later generations rely on a certain point of connection to make it fit together, which is mostly inconsistent with the original intention of the ancients.

古文：后人假合，多差远意，至欲访地脉川，不与经符，验程准途，故自无会。
现代文：至于要想实地考察山川，与经文记载是不会相符的，查验道途的里程，本来就难相合。
English: As for the on-site inspection of mountains and rivers, it would not be consistent with the scriptures, and it would be difficult to check the mileage of the path.

古文：释氏不复根其众归之鸿致，陈其细趣，以辨其非，非所安也。
现代文：释氏不再根究各种说法的大要，陈述细节以辨明它们的错误，是不妥当的。
English: It is not appropriate for Shi Jie to go beyond the generalities of various statements and present details to identify their errors.

古文：今案《山海经》曰：昆仑墟在西北，帝之下都，昆仑之墟，方八百里，高万仞，上有木禾，面有九井，以玉为槛，面有九门，门有开明兽守之，百神之所在。
现代文：现在按《山海经》所说，昆仑墟在西北，是天帝的下都。昆仑之墟方圆八百里，高万仍，山上有木禾，山边有九口井，都用玉来做井栏；四面有九道门，门口有开明兽守着，这是百神所在的地方。
English: Now, according to the "Song of Mountains and Seas," Kunlun Ruins is in the northwest, and it is the lower capital of the Heavenly Emperor. Kunlun Ruins is eight hundred miles in circumference, and it is still very high. There is wood on the mountain, and there are nine wells on the side of the mountain, and they are all made of jade. There are nine gates on all sides, and there are enlightened beasts guarding the entrance. This is the place where the hundred gods are.

古文：郭璞曰：此自别有小昆仑也。
现代文：郭璞说：从这里出去有个小昆仑。
English: Guo Wei said, "From here, there is a small Kunlun.

古文：又案《淮南》之书，昆仑之上，有木禾、珠树、玉树、玻树，不死树在其西，沙棠、琅玕在其东，绛树在其南，碧树、瑶树在其北。
现代文：又按《淮南之书》，昆仑山上有木禾、珠树、玉树、漩树，不死树在它西边，沙棠、琅牙在它东边，绛树在它南边，碧树、瑶树在它北边。
English: According to the "Book of Huainan," Mount Kunlun has woody grasses, pear trees, jade trees, and swirling trees; immortelle trees on its west side; sandalwoods and camphor trees on its east side; eucalyptus trees on its south side; and poplars and eucalyptus trees on its north side.

古文：旁有四百四十门，门间四里，里间九纯，纯丈五尺。
现代文：旁边有四百四十座城门，各门间宽四里。一里长九纯，一纯长一丈五尺。
English: Beside it are four hundred and forty gates, each four miles wide. A mile is nine cubits long, and a cubit is five feet high.

古文：旁有九井，玉横维其西北隅，北门开，以纳不周之风，倾宫、旋室、县圃、凉风、樊桐，在昆仑阊阖之中，是其疏圃，疏圃之池，浸之黄水，黄水三周复其源，是谓丹水，饮之不死。
现代文：旁边有九口井。西北边用玉栏干保护着，打开北门，迎面吹来不周之风。倾宫、旋室、县圃、凉风、樊桐，在昆仑山的天门―间阖门里面，还有菜园疏圃，疏圃的水池里灌满黄水，黄水绕了三周又流回它的源头，称为丹水，喝了可以长生不死。
English: There are nine wells next to it. The northwest side is protected by a jade railing, open the north gate, and the wind is blowing in the opposite direction. The palace, the spinning room, the county garden, the cool wind, the rhododendron, inside the heavenly gate of Kunlun Mountain, there is also a vegetable garden nursery. The pond in the nursery is filled with yellow water. The yellow water goes around three times and flows back to its source. It is called Dan water. If you drink it, you can live forever.

古文：河水出其东北陬，赤水出其东南陬，洋水出其西北陬，凡此四水，帝之神泉，以和百药，以润万物。
现代文：河水就发源于它的东北角，赤水发源于它的东南角，洋水发源于它的西北角。这四条水都是天帝的神泉，可以配制百药，滋润万物。
English: The river water originates from its northeast corner, the red water originates from its southeast corner, and the western water originates from its northwest corner. These four waters are the divine springs of the Heavenly Emperor, which can prepare a hundred medicines and moisturize all things.

古文：昆仑之丘或上倍之，是谓凉风之山，登之而不死。或上倍之，是谓玄圃之山，登之乃灵，能使风雨。或上倍之，乃维上天，登之乃神，是谓太帝之居。
现代文：从昆仑之丘又攀登到比它高一倍的上头，叫凉风之山，登上了就可以长生不死，又登到高一倍的上头，叫玄圃之山，登上了就会有法力，能够呼风唤雨；又登到高一倍的上头，就与上天相连了，登上了就成了神，这叫太帝之居。
English: From Kunlun Hill, climb to a peak that is twice as high as it, called the Mountain of Cool Wind, and you can live forever. Climb to a peak that is twice as high, called the Mountain of Hedge, and you will have magical power and be able to call the wind and rain. Climb to a peak that is twice as high, and you will be connected to the heavens. Climb up and you will become a god. This is called the residence of the great emperor.

古文：禹乃以息土填鸿水，以为名山，掘昆仑虚以为下地。
现代文：于是禹以能够不断增生的息土来堵遏洪水，作成大山，又掘昆仑墟成为洼地。
English: As a result, Yu used the ever-increasing soil to stop the flood, creating a large mountain, and dug Kunlun Ruins to become a depression.

古文：高诱曰：地或作池。则以仿佛近佛图调之说。
现代文：高诱说：地字有的写成池字，那就有点近于佛图调的说法了。
English: Gao Yu said: Some of the characters on the ground are written as pond characters, which is a bit close to the saying of Buddha tune.

古文：阿耨达六水，葱岭、于阗二水之限，与经史诸书，全相乖异。
现代文：阿褥达山有六条水，葱岭、于闻阻隔了其中的两条。这与各种经史典籍的说法完全相异。
English: There are six streams on Mount Aheda, and two of them are blocked by the Qilian Mountains and the Yuwen Mountains. This is completely different from what is said in various historical classics.

古文：又案《十洲记》，昆仑山在西海之戌地，北海之亥地。
现代文：又按《十洲记》，昆仑山在西海的西北，北海的北方，离岸十三万里，有弱水绕山一周而流。
English: According to the "Ten Continents," Mount Kunlun is in the northwest of the West Sea and the north of the North Sea, 130,000 miles from the coast, with weak water flowing around the mountain.

古文：去岸十三万里，有弱水，周匝绕山，东南接积石圃，西北接北户之室，东北临大阔之井，西南近承渊之谷。此四角大山，实昆仑之支辅也。
现代文：昆仑山东南，与积石圃相邻，西北与北户之室相接，东北面对大阔之井，西南靠近承渊之谷。这四角的四座大山，实际上是昆仑山的支脉。
English: In the southeast of Kunlun Mountain, it is adjacent to the cairn, in the northwest it is adjacent to the room of the north house, in the northeast it faces the big crane well, and in the southwest it is close to the valley of the Chengyuan. These four large mountains at the four corners are actually the offshoots of Kunlun Mountain.

古文：积石圃南头，昔西王母告周穆王云，去咸阳四十六万里，山高平地三万六千里，上有三角，面方，广万里，形如偃盆，下狭上广。
现代文：从前西王母对周穆王说：积石圃的南端离咸阳四十六万里，这座山高出平地三万六千里，上头有三角，上面呈方形，宽广万里，上大下小，形状就像一只仰放的盆。
English: Once upon a time, Xi Wangmu said to Zhou Mu Wang: The southern end of the cairn is 460,000 li away from Xianyang. This mountain is 36,000 li higher than the plain. It has a triangle at the top, a square shape at the top, a vast expanse at the bottom, and a small size at the top. It is shaped like an upturned basin.

古文：故曰昆仑山有三角。
现代文：所以说昆仑山有三角。
English: Therefore, it is said that there is a triangle in Kunlun Mountain.

古文：其一角正北，干辰星之辉，名曰阆风巅；其一角正西，名曰玄圃台；其一角正东，名曰昆仑宫。
现代文：一角在正北，高得遮住星辰的光芒，称为阎风之巅；一角在正西，名叫玄圃台；一角在正东，名叫昆仑宫。
English: A corner in the north, so high that it blocks the light of the stars, is called the Peak of Hell Wind; a corner in the west, called the Basement; and a corner in the east, called the Kunlun Palace.

古文：其处有积金，为天塘城，面方千里，城上安金台五所，玉楼十二。
现代文：那地方有一座用黄金砌叠成的天墉城，上面方圆千里，城上分布着五处金台，十二座玉楼。
English: In that place, there is a heavenly castle made of gold, which is a thousand miles in circumference. There are five gold towers and twelve jade towers on the castle.

古文：其北户山、承渊山又有墉城，金台玉楼，相似如一。
现代文：北户山和承渊山也有墉城，城上分布着金台玉楼，也都一模一样。
English: Beidushan and Chengyuan Mountain also have Lucheng, and Jintai Jade Tower is distributed on the city, which are all exactly the same.

古文：渊精之阙，光碧之堂，琼华之室，紫翠丹房，景烛日晖，朱霞九光，西王母之所治，真官仙灵之所宗。
现代文：有渊精网、光碧堂、琼华室和紫红翠绿的丹房，光辉映日，像红霞似的闪耀着虹彩般的光芒。西王母就在这里治理着仙界，仙宫神灵都在这里朝见她。
English: There are Yuanyuan Jingwang, Guangbi Hall, Qionghua Room and Dan Room of purple-red-green, shining like the sun, shining like an iris. It is here that the Queen Mother of the West governs the fairyland, and the deities of the Fairy Palace are here to see her.

古文：上通旋机，元气流布，玉衡常理，顺九天而调阴阳，品物群生，希奇特出，皆在于此。
现代文：这里上与漩矶相通，元气流布四方，玉衡经常调理，使它能与九天保持畅顺，与阴阳相互调和，于是万物就蓬勃生长，奇物稀珍也脱颖而出，都是由此而来的。
English: Here, it is connected to the whirlpool, the original gas flows in all directions, and the balance is often adjusted, so that it can maintain smoothness with the nine days, and harmonize with the yin and yang, so everything grows vigorously, and strange things stand out. All of this comes from this.

古文：天人济济，不可具记。
现代文：天神也十分众多，真是不可胜记。
English: Tenjin is also very numerous, it is really unforgettable.

古文：其北海外，又有钟山，上有金台玉阂，亦元气之所含，天帝居治处也。
现代文：北海外又有钟山，山上有金台玉阀，元气就蕴藏在这里，天帝也在这里治理着。
English: There is also Zhongshan in the north overseas, and there is Jintai Yutu on the mountain. The vitality is stored here, and the Heavenly Emperor also governs here.

古文：考东方朔之言，及《经》五万里之文，难言佛图调、康泰之《传》是矣。
现代文：查考东方朔的话和《水经》里说五万里的记载，就很难说佛图调和康泰《传》中所说是正确的了。
English: If we examine the words of Dongfangshuo and the records of "Fifty Thousand Miles" in the "Water Sutra," it is difficult to say that what was said in the "Biography" of Kangtai is correct.

古文：六合之内，水泽之藏，大非为巨，小非为细，存非为有，隐非为无，其所苞者广矣。
现代文：天地之内，水泽之下，所包藏的东西大的未必就大，小的未必就小；存在的未必就有，潜隐的未必就无，包罗万象，范围真是广泛得很。
English: Within heaven and earth, beneath the surface of the water, what is hidden is not necessarily big or small. What exists may or may not be there, and what is hidden may or may not be there. It is all-encompassing, and the scope is really very broad.

古文：于中同名异域，称谓相乱，亦不为寡。
现代文：其中名称相同而地域相异的，名称混淆的，也不在少数。
English: Among them, those with the same name but different regions, and those with confused names, are not a few.

古文：至如东海方丈，亦有昆仑之称，西洲铜柱，又有九府之治。
现代文：如东海方丈，也叫昆仑，西洲铜柱，又有九府的机构。
English: For example, the East China Sea Abbot, also known as Kunlun, and the West China Copper Pillar, are institutions from nine prefectures.

古文：东方朔《十洲记》曰：方丈在东海中央，东西南北岸，相去正等。
现代文：东方朔《十洲记》说：方丈在东海中央，与东西南北四方的海岸都是等距离的。
English: Dongfangshuo "Ten Continents" said: the abbot is in the middle of the East China Sea, and the coasts of the east, west, south, north and south are equidistant.

古文：方丈面各五千里，上专是群龙所聚，有金玉琉璃之宫，三天司命所治处，群仙不欲升天者，皆往来也。
现代文：方丈每边各五千里，上面专供群龙相聚，有金玉琉璃建的宫殿，是三天司命所管辖的地方。群仙不想升天的都在这里往来。
English: There are five thousand li on each side of the abbot, and a palace built with gold and jade glaze is dedicated to the gathering of dragons. It is a place under the jurisdiction of the three-day steward. The immortals who do not want to ascend to heaven come and go here.

古文：张华叙东方朔《神异经》曰：昆仑有铜柱焉，其高入天，所谓天柱也。
现代文：张华为东方朔《神异经》作序说：昆仑山上有铜柱，高与天通，就是所谓天柱。
English: Zhang Huadu said in the preface to Dongfangshuo's "Divine Mysteries": There is a bronze pillar on Mount Kunlun, which is as high as the heavens. It is the so-called Heavenly Pillar.

古文：围三千里，圆周如削，下有回屋，仙人九府治。
现代文：铜柱周围三千里，圆周就像刀削过一样；下面有回屋、属仙人九府管辖；上面有一只大鸟，名叫希有。
English: The copper pillar is surrounded by three thousand li, the circumference is like a knife has been sharpened; below there is a back room, which is under the jurisdiction of the nine prefectures of the immortals; above there is a big bird, named Xie You.

古文：上有大鸟，名曰希有，南向，张左翼覆东王公，右翼覆西王母，背上小处无羽，万九千里，西王母岁登翼上，之东王公也。
现代文：它朝向南方，张开左翼覆盖东王公，张开右翼覆盖西王母，背上一小片不长羽毛，宽广一万九千里。西王母每年爬到翼上，到东王公那边去。
English: It faces south, opens its left wing to cover the East King, opens its right wing to cover the West Queen, and has a small patch of feathers on its back that is 19,000 li wide. The West Queen climbs onto the wing every year to go to the East King.

古文：故其柱铭曰：昆仑铜柱，其高入天，圆周如削，肤体美焉。
现代文：所以柱上铭文道：昆仑铜柱，高入天上，圆周就像刀削，通体优美非常。
English: Therefore, the inscription on the pillar says: Kunlun copper pillar, high into the sky, the circumference is like a knife, the whole body is very beautiful.

古文：其鸟铭曰：有鸟希有，绿赤煌煌，不鸣不食，东覆东王公，西覆西王母，王母欲东，登之自通，阴阳相须，惟会益工。
现代文：柱上的鸟铭说：有只鸟儿叫希有，红翎绿羽亮光光，它不叫也不吃，东边遮蔽着东王公，西边遮蔽着西王母。王母想往东边走，爬上鸟背就到了，阴阳要相互依存，会合时才更精妙。
English: The bird inscription on the pillar said: There is a bird called Xiyu, red beak and green feathers are bright, it does not call or eat, the east side covers the East King, the west side covers the West Queen. The Queen Mother wants to go to the east, climb the bird's back and arrive, yin and yang must be interdependent, and it is more exquisite when they meet.

古文：《遁甲开山图》曰：五龙见教，天皇被迹，望在无外，柱州昆仑山上。
现代文：《遁甲开山图》说：五龙来指教，天皇在无外柱州昆仑山上看到它们的踪迹。
English: "The Map of the Opening of the Mountain Ranges of Bangka" says: The five dragons come to teach, and the emperor sees their footprints on Mount Kunlun in Wuzhizhou.

古文：荣氏注云：五龙治在五方，为五行神。
现代文：荣氏《注》说：五龙管辖五方，是五行的神灵。
English: Rong's "Note" says: The five dragons govern the five directions and are the gods of the five elements.

古文：五龙降天皇兄弟十二人，分五方为十二部，法五龙之迹，行无为之化，天下仙圣治。
现代文：五龙降凡，天皇兄弟十二人，把五方分为十二部，仿效五龙的遗迹，施行无为的教化。天下的仙人圣人，治所在柱州昆仑山上。
English: The five dragons descended to earth, and the twelve brothers of the emperor divided the five directions into twelve parts, emulated the relics of the five dragons, and carried out inactive enlightenment.

古文：在柱州昆仑山上，无外之山在昆仑东南万二千里，五龙、天皇皆出此中，为十二时神也。
现代文：无外之山在昆仑山东南一万二千里，五龙和天皇都是从这里出来的。十二天皇就是十二时的神。
English: Mount Muzugetsu is located 12,000 miles southeast of Mount Kunlun. The five dragons and the emperor came from here. The twelfth emperor is the god of the twelfth hour.

古文：《山海经》曰：昆仑之丘，实惟帝之下都，其神陆吾，是司天之九部，及帝之囿时。
现代文：《山海经》说：昆仑之丘实际上就是天帝的下都，山神陆吾的职司是管理天上的九部、天帝的园囿和时令。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" said: "Kunlun Hill is actually the lower capital of the Heavenly Emperor, and the function of the mountain god Luwu is to manage the nine parts of the sky, the Heavenly Emperor's garden and the seasons.

古文：然六合之内，其苞远矣，幽致冲妙，难本以情，万像遐渊，思绝根寻。
现代文：但天地之内，所包括的地方是很遥远的。
English: But within heaven and earth, the included places are very far away.

古文：自不登两龙于云辙，骋八骏于龟途，等轩辕之访百灵，方大禹之集会计。儒、墨之说，孰使辨哉！又出海外，南至积石山下，有石门。
现代文：神仙幽远的情致十分玄妙，难以凭人情来推想，宇宙的各种现象深远难知，人的思维无法来寻根究底，假如不登上在云间飞奔的两龙，驾了八骏在龟途上驰骋，对于轩辕氏访问百神，大禹会诸侯于会稽这类事情，作一番衡量和比较，又怎能分辨得清儒墨各家的说法呢？又流出海外，往南流到积石山下，有石门。
English: The distant feelings of the gods are very mysterious, and it is difficult to deduce them from human feelings. The various phenomena of the universe are far-reaching and difficult to know, and human thinking cannot get to the bottom of it. If you do not climb the two dragons flying between the clouds, and drive the eight rafts on the tortoise's journey, how can you measure and compare such things as Xuan Yu's visit to the Hundred Gods, and the Great Yu Association of Princes in the Association? How can you distinguish the claims of the various schools of Confucianism? And it flows out of the country, flowing south to the foot of the mountain, and there is a stone gate.

古文：《山海经》曰：河水入渤海，又出海外，西北入禹所导积石山。山在陇西郡河关县西南羌中。
现代文：《山海经》说：河水注入渤海，又流出海外。河水往西北流入大禹疏导过的积石山，这座山在陇西郡河关县西南的羌中。
English: "Shanhai Jing" says: The river water flows into the Bohai Sea and flows out overseas. The river water flows to the northwest into the Jishi Mountain, which was guided by Dayu So, this mountain is in the southwest of Heguan County, Shaanxi County.

古文：余考群书，咸言河出昆仑，重源潜发，沦于蒲昌，出于海水。
现代文：我考证诸书，都说河水发源于昆仑，潜流入地后再次发源，就是说在蒲昌海隐没，在海水中冒出。
English: According to my study of books, it is said that the river originates in Kunlun, flows into the earth and then springs up again, that is to say, it disappears in the Buchang Sea and emerges in the sea water.

古文：故《洛书》曰：河自昆仑，出于重野。
现代文：所以《洛书》说：河水从昆仑山经重野流出来。
English: Therefore, the Luo Shu said: the river water flows from the Kunlun Mountains through the heavy fields.

古文：谓此矣。
现代文：这句话就是指这种情况说的。
English: It means this place.

古文：径积石而为中国河，故成公子安《大河赋》曰：览百川之宏壮，莫尚美于黄河；潜昆仑之峻极，出积石之嵯峨。
现代文：河水流经积石后，就成为中原的河流。所以成公子安《大河赋》说：纵观百川壮伟的雄姿，再没有比黄河更美的了。它从昆仑极高之处潜流，从积石的崇山峻岭之间流出。
English: After the river water flows through the rocks, it becomes the river of the Central Plains. Therefore, Chenggong Zi'an, "The Great River Fu," said: "Looking at the magnificent grandeur of the rivers, there is nothing more beautiful than the Yellow River. It flows from the very high places of Kunlun and flows out from the mountains of the rocks.

古文：释氏《西域记》曰：河自蒲昌，潜行地下，南出积石。
现代文：释氏《西域记》说：从蒲昌海开始，河水潜入地一下，然后从南方的积石山流出。
English: According to "The Western Regions" by Shi Jie: Starting from the Putian Sea, the river water dived into the ground for a while, and then flowed out of the Jishishan Mountain in the south.

古文：而《经》文在此，似如不比积石，宜在蒲昌海下矣。
现代文：但经文在这里似乎序次倒错，积石应当是在蒲昌海以下。
English: However, the order of the verses seems to be reversed here, and the stones should be below the Putang Sea.

