古文：綦俊，字扌剽显，河南洛阳人也。其先代人。
现代文：綦俊，字摽显，河南洛阳人。其祖先是代人。
English: Hao Jun, also known as Hao Xian, was born in Luoyang, Henan Province. His ancestor was Genren.

古文：祖辰，并州刺史。
现代文：祖綦辰，任并州刺史。
English: Zu Yuchen, appointed as the state's chief historian.

古文：俊，庄帝时仕累迁为沧州刺史，甚为吏人畏悦。
现代文：綦俊，庄帝时仕官累迁为沧州刺史，很是被吏人害怕钦服。
English: Gao Jun, who was a high-ranking official at the time of Emperor Zhuang and became a historical figure in Cangzhou, was feared and admired by the officials.

古文：寻除太仆卿。
现代文：不久，除任太仆卿。
English: He was soon removed from his position as Taihoku-kyo.

古文：及尔朱世隆等诛，齐献武王赴洛，止于邙山。
现代文：等到尔朱世隆等被诛，齐献武王赴洛，停军邙山。
English: After the arrest of Lzhu Shilong and others, they all went to Luo to offer tribute to King Wu, and the army stopped at Shaoshan.

古文：上召文武百司，下及士庶，令之曰： 尔朱暴虐，矫弄天常，孤起义信都，罪人斯翦。
现代文：上召文武百司，下及士人百姓，训话说： 尔朱暴虐，矫妄权弄无常，孤起义信都，罪人便被剪除。
English: He summoned the hundreds of officers and men of the army, as well as the common people, and said, "If the Jews are violent, if they are arrogant, and if they are unstable, and if they do not believe in righteousness, then the sinners will be eliminated."

古文：今将翼戴亲贤，以昌魏历，谁主社稷，允惬天人？ 
现代文：而今将拥戴亲贤，以兴魏历，谁主社稷，和悦天下？ 
English: And now they will embrace their relatives and sages, with the aim of reviving the Wei calendar. Who is the master of society, and who is the world's favorite?

古文：申令频烦，莫有应者。
现代文：不停地重复，没有响应的。
English: Repeated incessantly, without response.

古文：俊乃避席曰： 人主之体，必须度量深远，明哲仁恕。
现代文：綦俊于是起身说： 人主之体，必须能够体察深远，明哲仁慈。
English: Gong Jun then stood up and said, "In the body of a human master, one must be able to see far and wide, be wise and kind.

古文：广陵王遇世艰难，不言淹载，以人谋察之，虽为尔朱扶戴，当今之圣主也。 
现代文：广陵王遇世道艰难，默默沉沦已经很久，以人谋察之，虽然被尔朱氏所拥戴，不失为当今圣主。 
English: Guangling Wang had a hard time in the world, and had been silently sinking for a long time. Although he was embraced by the Erju clan, he is still a saint today.

古文：献武王欣然是之。
现代文：齐献武王欣然同意。
English: Qi Xianwu readily agreed.

古文：时黄门侍郎崔悛作色而前，谓俊曰： 广陵王为主，不能绍宣魏纲，布德天下。为君如此，何圣之有！
现代文：当时黄门侍郎崔悛作色上前，对綦俊说： 广陵王为主，不能继宣魏纲，布德天下，为君如此，何圣之有！
English: At that time, the Yellow Gate's steward, Cui Yao, came forward and said to Yao Jun, "Since the Guangling King is the master, you can't follow the proclamation of the Wei Dynasty, and the whole world will be prosperous. If you do so, what a saint you are!

古文：若言其圣，应待大王。 
现代文：如言其圣，应是大王。 
English: As the saying goes, his holiness should be a great king.

古文：时高乾邕、魏兰根等固执悛言，遂立出帝。
现代文：当时高乾邕、魏兰根等人固持悛言，于是拥立出帝。
English: At that time, Gao Qianqian, Wei Langen and others held to their criticism, and therefore supported the emperor.

古文：及出帝失德，齐献武王深思俊言，常以为恨。
现代文：等出帝失德，齐献武王深思俊言，常常顿足不已。
English: Waiting for the emperor to lose his virtue, King Qi Xianwu thought deeply about the good words, and often did not stop.

古文：寻除御史中尉。于路与仆射贾显度相逢，显度恃勋贵，排俊驺列倒，俊忿见于色，自入奏之。
现代文：不久，綦俊为除任为御史中尉，在路上与仆射贾显度相逢，显度依仗自己是勋贵，撞倒了綦俊的马匹，俊愤怒形于颜色，自入奏启皇上。
English: Soon after, Gong Jun was dismissed as a lieutenant of the imperial history, and on the way, he met with the servant Jia Xindu. Xindu, relying on himself as a noble, knocked down Gong Jun's horses. Jun's anger was reflected in the color, and since then, it has been sung to the emperor.

古文：寻加散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：不久加授散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the ranks of straggling cavalryman, cavalry general, doctor of the left hand, and the three departments of ceremony.

古文：俊佞巧，能候当涂，斛斯椿、贺拔胜皆与友善。
现代文：俊佞奸谄巧，能奉迎当途权贵，斛斯椿、贺拔胜都与他交情很好。
English: He was skillful in cunning and treachery, and was able to court the powerful and influential. He was on very good terms with Emperor Jingzhuan and Emperor He.

古文：斛斯椿之构间也，出帝令俊奉诏晋阳，齐献武王集文武与俊申释，俊辞屈而退。
现代文：斛斯椿离间朝廷，出帝令俊奉诏到晋阳，齐献武王召集文武官员向綦俊解释，俊辞屈而退。
English: Qin Shiqin separated the imperial court, the emperor ordered Jun to go to Jinyang, and the king summoned the civil and military officials to explain to Jun Jun, and Jun resigned.

古文：性多诈。
现代文：綦俊性情多诈。
English: Hao Jun has a deceitful nature.

古文：贺拔胜出镇荆州，过俊别，因辞俊母，俊故见败氈敝被，胜更遗之钱物。
现代文：贺拔胜出镇荆州，到他那里道别，辞别其母，俊故意让他看见破毡破被，贺拔胜又给了他不少钱财。
English: He Baxing left the town of Jingzhou, went to him to say goodbye, to say goodbye to his mother. Jun deliberately let him see the broken bedclothes, and He Baxing gave him a lot of money.

古文：后兼吏部尚书，复为沧州刺史。
现代文：后兼吏部尚书，又为沧州刺史。
English: Later, he also served as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was also a historian of Cangzhou.

古文：征还，兼中尉，章武县伯。
现代文：征召还朝，兼任中尉，为章武县伯。
English: He was conscripted to the Imperial Army, and concurrently served as a lieutenant, and was the highest-ranking officer in Zhangwu County.

古文：寻除殷州刺史，薨于州。
现代文：不久除授殷州刺史，死于州任之上。
English: He was soon awarded the title of "Yin State Historian" and died at the top of his post.

古文：赠司空公，谥曰文贞。
现代文：赠为司空公，谥称文贞。
English: He was given the title of Siku Gong (司空公) and was nicknamed Wenzhen.

古文：子洪寔，字臣正。
现代文：子洪实，字巨正。
English: Zi Hongsheng, the character is very serious.

古文：位尚书左右郎，魏郡邑中正。
现代文：官历尚书左右郎，魏郡邑中正。
English: Shang Shuxu Zuolang of the official calendar, Zhongzheng of Wei County.

古文：嗜酒好色，无行检。
现代文：嗜酒好色，没有品行。
English: Alcoholic, promiscuous, no morals.

古文：卒官。
现代文：卒于官。
English: He later died in office.

古文：山伟，字仲才，河南洛阳人也。其先代人。
现代文：山伟，字仲才，河南洛阳人，其祖先为代人。
English: Shan Wei, also known as Zhong Cai, was a native of Luoyang, Henan Province. His ancestors were the generation of Mao.

古文：祖强，美容貌，身长八尺五寸，工骑射，弯弓五石。
现代文：祖山强，容貌美好，身长八尺五寸，工于骑射，弯弓力量可达五石。
English: Zushan is strong, good-looking, eight feet five inches tall, skilled in horseback archery, and his bow strength can reach five stone.

古文：为奏事中散，从显祖猎方山，有两狐起于御前，诏强射之，百步内二狐俱获。
现代文：任奏事中散，跟从显祖打猎方山，有两只狐狸从御座前惊起，帝令山强射之，百步内两只狐狸都被射倒。
English: In the middle of the play, two foxes jumped up from the throne in front of the emperor and were shot by the emperor. Within a hundred paces, both foxes were shot down.

古文：位内行长。
现代文：官做到内行长。
English: officials to the post of governor.

古文：父稚之，营陵令。
现代文：父山稚之，为营陵令。
English: His father, Yamawaki, was a camp mausoleum commander.

古文：伟随父之县，遂师事县人王惠，涉猎文史。
现代文：山伟随父到县，师事县人王惠，广读文史。
English: Shan Wei followed his father to the county and studied under Wang Hui, a native of the county, and read widely in literary history.

古文：稚之位金明太守。
现代文：山稚之官至金明太守。
English: Yamawaki no kanjin to Kinmei taishu.

古文：肃宗初，元匡为御史中尉，以伟兼侍御史。
现代文：肃宗初年，元匡任御史中尉，举山伟兼侍御史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Suzong's reign, Yuan Kuang was appointed Lieutenant of Imperial Historian, and he also served as Imperial Historian.

古文：入台五日，便遇正会。
现代文：入衙五天，便逢皇帝元旦朝会群臣。
English: On New Year's Day, five days after the Emperor's enthronement, the imperial court gathered together.

古文：伟司神武门，其妻从叔为羽林队主，挝直长于殿门，伟即劾奏。
现代文：山伟司掌神武门，其妻堂叔为羽林队主，在殿门前打直长，山伟立即弹劾于皇帝。
English: Shan Wei was in charge of the Shenwu Gate, and his wife's uncle was the leader of the Ulin team. They played a straight game in front of the palace gate, and Shan Wei was immediately impeached by the emperor.

古文：匡善之，俄然奏正。
现代文：元匡称赞他，不久官即为正。
English: Yuan Kuang praised him, and he was soon promoted.

古文：帖国子助教，迁员外郎、廷尉评。
现代文：帖国子助教、迁任员外郎、廷尉评。
English: Cho Kuniko, assistant professor, Gairo, transferred to a different post, and Ting Ryohei.

古文：时天下无事，进仕路难，代迁之人，多不沾预。
现代文：当时天下无事，进官十分困难，代郡迁南的人，大多没有升职。
English: At this time, the world was at peace, and it was very difficult to move up in the career. Most of the people who moved to Luoyang from other places were not employed.

古文：及六镇、陇西二方起逆，领军元义欲用代来寒人为传诏以慰悦之，而牧守子孙投状求者百余人。
现代文：及六镇、陇西二方叛逆乱起，领军元叉想启用代郡南迁的寒士为传诏使者以慰悦人心，而牧守子孙投状求此职的多达一百多人。
English: After the rebellion of the two parties in the six towns and Shaanxi, the leader of the army, Yuan Zha, wanted to use the cold warrior who moved south on behalf of the county as a messenger to comfort the hearts of the people, and more than a hundred people from the descendants of Mu Shou asked for this position.

古文：又欲杜之，因奏立勋附队，令各依资出身。
现代文：元叉又想杜绝这种现象，因此启奏立勋附队，令各依门第出身。
English: Yuan Zha also wanted to put an end to this phenomenon, so he initiated the establishment of an honor guard, so that everyone was from the same family.

古文：自是北人悉被收叙。
现代文：从此北人都被收录。
English: From then on, all northerners were included.

古文：伟遂奏记，赞义德美。
现代文：山伟于是奏记，赞颂元叉的美德。
English: Sanwei then wrote a poem, praising the virtues of Yuan Fang.

古文：义素不识伟，访侍中安丰王延明、黄门郎元顺，顺等因是称荐之。
现代文：元叉从来都不认识山伟，找侍中安丰王元延明、黄门郎元顺询问，元顺等因此称荐他。
English: Yuan Zha never knew Shan Wei, so he asked the chamberlains Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming and Huangmen Lang Yuan Shun, and Yuan Shun recommended him.

古文：义令仆射元钦引伟兼尚书二千石郎，后正名士郎。
现代文：元叉令仆射元钦引山伟兼任尚书二千石郎，后正名士郎。
English: Yuan Zhaorong's retainer, Yuan Zhaorong, also served as Shangshu of 2,000 koku, and later as Zheng Mingshiro.

古文：修《起居注》。
现代文：修撰起居注。
English: A note on the beginning of the essay.

古文：仆射元顺领选，表荐为谏议大夫。
现代文：仆射元顺主持选举，表荐山伟为谏议大夫。
English: The servant, Yuan Shun, was in charge of selecting officials, and also recommended that Shan Wei be appointed as the chief adviser.

古文：尔朱荣之害朝士，伟时守直，故免祸。
现代文：尔朱荣加害朝官，山伟当时在朝廷值班，所以免于祸难。
English: Lzhu Rong harmed a court official. Shan Wei was on duty at the court at the time, so he was spared the calamity.

古文：及庄帝入宫，仍除伟给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：及庄帝入宫，除他为给事黄门侍郎。
English: and Zhuangdi entered the palace, except that he became the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：先是，伟与仪曹郎袁升、屯田郎李延孝、外兵郎李奂、三公郎王延业方驾而行，伟少居后。
现代文：这以前，山伟与仪曹郎袁升、屯田郎李延孝、外兵郎李奂、三公郎王延业等人并驾而行，山伟稍稍居后。
English: Prior to this, Shan Wei had been driving alongside Yi Cao's son Yuan Sheng, Tonden's son Li Yan Xiao, Gaotie's son Li Xi, Sanguang's son Wang Yan Ye and others, with Shan Wei slightly behind.

古文：路逢一尼，望之叹曰： 此辈缘业，同日而死。 
现代文：路上碰到一个尼姑，她望他们叹气说： 这些人哪，将会同日而死。 
English: On the way, a nun saw the four of them and sighed, "You have the same chance, you will die on the same day."

古文：谓伟曰： 君方近天子，当作好官。 
现代文：对山伟说： 君刚近天子，当作好官。 
English: He also said to Sanwei, "You are close to the Son of Heaven, you can be a good official."

古文：而升等四人，皆于河阴遇害，果如其言。
现代文：而袁升等四个人，都在河阴遇害，果然应验了她说的话。
English: However, Yuan Sheng and four other people were all killed in Heyin, which certainly fulfilled her words.

古文：俄领著作郎。
现代文：不久，领任著作郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Shosho-ro.

古文：前废帝立，除安东将军、秘书监，仍著作。
现代文：前废帝登极，除授安东将军、秘书监，仍为著作。
English: The former deposed emperor ascended to the throne, in addition to awarding General Anton, Secretary Supervisor, it is still a work.

古文：初，尔朱兆之入洛，官守奔散，国史典书高法显密埋史书，故不遗落。
现代文：当初，尔朱兆攻入洛阳，官员奔散而去，国史典书高法显秘密埋起史书，所以书不遗落。
English: At the beginning, when Zhu Zhao invaded Luoyang, officials scurried away, and the State Historian Gao Faxian secretly buried the history book, so the book would not be lost.

古文：伟自以为功，诉求爵赏。
现代文：山伟把这当作自己的功劳，诉述皇上请求赏爵。
English: Sanwei considered himself to be meritorious and appealed to the imperial court to request a reward.

古文：伟挟附世隆，遂封东阿县伯，而法显止获男爵。
现代文：山伟附迎尔朱世隆，遂封东阿县伯，而法显只获男爵。
English: Zhu Shilong, who was attached to Shanwei, was awarded the title of Donga County magistrate, while Faxian was only awarded the title of baron.

古文：伟寻进侍中。
现代文：山伟不久官进侍中。
English: Sanwei soon rose to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：孝静初，除卫大将军、中书令，监起居。
现代文：孝静初年，除授卫大将军、中书令，监修起居。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jing, in addition to being awarded the title of General of the Guards and the Order of the Chinese Academy of Letters, he also became a supervisor.

古文：后以本官复领著作，卒官。
现代文：后以本官又领著作，卒于官。
English: Later, he took on the task of writing the book himself.

古文：赠骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、都督、幽州刺史，谥曰文贞公。
现代文：朝廷赠其为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督、幽州刺史，谥称文贞公。
English: The imperial court presented him with the titles of General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Governor, and Yuzhou Sashi, and he was nicknamed Munzheng.

古文：国史自邓渊、崔琛、崔浩、高允、李彪、崔光以还，诸人相继撰录。綦俊及伟等谄说上党王天穆及尔朱世隆，以为国书正应代人修缉，不宜委之余人，是以俊、伟等更主大籍。
现代文：国史从邓渊、崔琛、崔浩、高允、李彪、崔光以来，众人相继撰录，綦隽以及山伟等谄说上党王元天穆及尔朱世隆，认为国书正应该是代人修撰编辑才对，不宜交付他人，所以綦隽、山伟等人执掌大籍撰修。
English: Since the national history from Deng Yuan, Cui Wei, Cui Hao, Gao Yun, Li Biao, and Cui Guang, people have successively written records. Yu and Shan Wei and others said that the party king, Yuan Tian Mugir Zhu Shilong, believed that the national history should be edited on behalf of others, and should not be handed over to others. Therefore, Yu, Shan Wei and others were in charge of writing large books.

古文：守旧而已，初无述著。
现代文：綦隽、山伟等人得修史书，守旧而已，没有记述著录。
English: Zou, Shanwei and others had to revise the history books, but they only kept the old ones, and did not record the writings.

古文：故自崔鸿死后，迄终伟身，二十许载，时事荡然，万不记一，后人执笔，无所凭据。史之遗阙，伟之由也。
现代文：所以自崔鸿死后，迄止山伟，二十来年，时事荡然不记，以至万不记一，后人执笔，无所凭据，史实遗缺，都是因为山伟。
English: Therefore, since the death of Cui Hong, until the end of Shan Wei, in the next twenty years, current affairs have been completely forgotten, so much so that they are not remembered at all, posterity has written, there is no evidence, historical facts are missing, all because of Shan Wei.

古文：外示沉厚，内实矫竞。
现代文：他外示沉厚，内心实是矫浮。
English: He is outwardly dignified, but inwardly he is pompous.

古文：与綦俊少甚相得，晚以名位之间，遂若水火。
现代文：山伟与綦隽少年时代很是要好，后来因名位问题，便如水火不容。
English: He and Hao Jun hit it off from a young age. In their later years, the two of them jockeyed for position, and were like fire and water.

古文：与宇文忠之之徒代人为党，时贤畏恶之。
现代文：与宇文忠之这些代人结为朋党，当时有见识的人都畏惧厌恶他。
English: He formed a faction with one of Umenchu's surrogates, whom the sages of the time both feared and loathed.

古文：而爱尚文史，老而弥笃。
现代文：而他爱好文史，老而更爱。
English: He is very fond of literature and history, and the older he gets, the more interested he is.

古文：伟弟少亡，伟抚寡训孤，同居二十余载，恩义甚笃。
现代文：山伟弟弟早亡，他抚寡训孤，与侄儿们同居二十多年，恩义很厚。
English: Since his younger brother died when he was a child, he has raised his widowed sister-in-law, trained his nephew who lost his father, and raised their mother and son for more than twenty years. His gratitude is very deep.

古文：不营产业，身亡之后，卖宅营葬，妻子不免飘泊，士友叹愍之。
现代文：山伟不营产业，身死之后，卖房营葬，妻子儿女沦至飘泊，士友叹悯他们。
English: Shanwei did not run an industry. After his death, he sold his house and was buried. His wife and children were left adrift, and his friends felt sorry for them.

古文：长子昂，袭爵。
现代文：长子昂袭承爵位。
English: The eldest son, Ang, succeeded to the peerage.

