古文：太祖文皇帝中之上元嘉十三年
现代文：起，止，一共六年。宋文帝元嘉十三年
English: A total of six years have passed since then. Song Wendi Yuanjia is now 13 years old.

古文：春，正月，癸丑朔，上有疾，不朝会。
现代文：春季正月，癸丑朔，刘宋文帝患病，不举行朝会。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Liu Songwen fell ill and did not hold the imperial court meeting.

古文：甲寅，魏主还宫。
现代文：甲寅，北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。
English: Jia Yin, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to the palace.

古文：二月，戊子，燕王遣使入贡于魏，请送侍子，魏主不许，将举兵讨之，壬辰，遣使才十馀辈诣东方高丽等诸国告谕之。
现代文：二月，戊子，北燕王冯弘派使臣向北魏进贡，请求允许立即送太子冯王仁充当人质。拓跋焘拒绝，并准备兴兵讨伐北燕。壬辰，北魏派出使节十余人，分别前往东方高句丽等国，告诉北魏将对北燕采取军事行动。
English: In February, the Northern Yan King Feng Hong sent envoys to the Northern Wei to pay tribute and request permission to immediately send the Prince Feng Wang Ren to serve as a hostage. The Northern Wei refused and prepared to raise an army to fight against the Northern Yan. At the same time, the Northern Wei sent more than ten envoys to the Eastern Goguryeo and other countries to tell the Northern Wei that they would take military action against the Northern Yan.

古文：司空、江州刺史、永修公檀道济，立功前朝，威名甚重，左右腹心并经百战，诸子又有才气，朝廷疑畏之。
现代文：刘宋司空、江州刺史、永公檀道济，在刘裕时代就立下奇功，享有很重的威名。他左右心腹战将都身经百战，几个儿子都有才气，刘宋文帝对他又猜忌又畏惧。
English: Liu Song Sikuang, Jiangzhou Shishi, Yonggong Dang Daozi, made great achievements in the era of Liu Yu, and enjoyed a very high reputation. He had experienced hundreds of battles, and several of his sons were talented. Liu Song Emperor was both suspicious and afraid of him.

古文：帝久疾不愈，刘湛说司徒义康，以为： 宫车一日晏驾，道济不复可制。 
现代文：这时，文帝久病不愈，领军将军刘湛劝说司徒刘义康说： 皇上一旦驾崩，檀道济将不可控制。 
English: At this time, Emperor Wen had been ill for a long time, and the leading general Liu Zhan persuaded the scholar Liu Yikang to say: Once the emperor is dead, Dang Daozi will be uncontrollable.

古文：会帝疾笃，义康言于帝，召道济入朝。
现代文：正巧文帝的病情加重，刘义康劝说文帝，征召檀道济入京朝见。
English: As it happened, Emperor Wen's condition worsened, Liu Yikang persuaded Emperor Wen to conscript a group of disciples to go to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：其妻向氏谓道济曰： 高世之勋，自古所忌。
现代文：檀道济的妻子向氏对他说： 高于当世的功勋大臣，自古以来都易被猜忌。
English: Mr. Xiang's wife said to him, "Higher than the present-day Minister of Merit, he has been easily suspected since ancient times.

古文：今无事相召，祸其至矣。 
现代文：如今没有战事却召你入京，大祸降临了。 
English: Now there is no war, but you are called to go to Beijing. A great calamity has come.

古文：既至，留之累月。
现代文：檀道济来到建康以后，文帝留他在京一个多月。
English: After Dang Daozhi came to Jiankang, Wen Di stayed with him in Beijing for more than a month.

古文：帝稍间，将遣还，已下渚，未发；会帝疾动，义康矫诏召道济入祖道，因执之。
现代文：文帝病情稍稍好转，就要遣送他回到任所，船已下到码头，还没有出发。而文帝的病情突然加重，刘义康假传圣旨召回檀道济到祭祀路神的地方，声称为他设宴饯行，将他逮捕。
English: When Emperor Wen's condition improved slightly, he had to be sent back to his office. The ship had already docked, but had not yet set sail. However, Emperor Wen's condition suddenly worsened. Liu Yikang called him back to the place where the Road God was worshipped, claiming to have a banquet for him, and arrested him.

古文：三月，己未，下诏称： 道济潜散金货，招诱剽猾，因朕寝疾，规肆祸心。 
现代文：三月，己未，刘宋文帝下诏称： 檀道济暗中散发金银财物，招募地痞无赖。乘我病重之时，图谋不轨。 
English: In March, Liu Songwen issued the following edict: "Dangdao Ji secretly distributed gold, silver and other valuables and recruited villains. He took advantage of my serious illness to plot against me.

古文：收付廷尉，并其子给事黄门侍郎植等十一人诛之，唯宥其孙孺。
现代文：将檀道济交到专管司法的廷尉处理，连同他的儿子、给事黄门侍郎檀植等十一人，一并诛杀，仅仅饶恕了他年幼的孙子。
English: He handed over Dando Jizhi to the court official in charge of justice, and together with his son, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Dang Zhi, and eleven others, they fought and killed, and only spared his young grandson.

古文：又杀司空参军薛彤、高进之。二人皆道济腹心，有勇力，时人比之关、张。
现代文：同时，又杀死了司空参军薛彤、高进之二人，他们都是檀道济的心腹爱将，勇猛善战，当时的人把他们比作关羽、张飞。
English: At the same time, he also killed the two air marshals, Xue Qi and Gao Jin, who had joined the army. Both of them were devoted disciples of Taoism, brave and good at fighting. People at the time compared them to Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.

古文：道济见收，愤怒，目光如炬，脱帻投地曰： 乃坏汝万里长城！ 
现代文：檀道济被逮捕时，怒不可遏，两道目光象火炬一样，把头巾狠狠地摔在地上说： 你们是在毁坏你们自己的万里长城！ 
English: When Dang Daoji was arrested, his anger was uncontrollable, his two eyes were like torches, he threw his turban on the ground and said: You are destroying your own Great Wall!

古文：魏人闻之，喜曰： 道济死，吴子辈不足复惮！ 
现代文：北魏人听到檀道济被杀的消息非常高兴，都说： 檀道济死了，东吴那些竖子就没有值得我们忌惮的了。 
English: The people of the Northern Wei Dynasty were very happy to hear the news that Dang Daoji had been killed. They all said: Dang Daoji is dead, and those bastards in Eastern Wu are no longer worthy of our fear.

古文：庚申，大赦；以中军将军南谯王义宣为江州刺史。
现代文：庚申，刘宋大赦天下。朝廷任命中军将军、南谯王刘义宣为江州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Yixuan, the general of the Chinese army and the king of Nanxun, to write the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：辛未，魏平东将军娥清、安西将军古弼将精骑一万伐燕，平州刺史拓跋婴帅辽西诸军会之。
现代文：辛未，北魏平东将军娥清、安西将军古弼统率精锐骑兵一万人，讨伐北燕。平州刺史拓跋婴，率领辽西各路军队与娥清等会师。
English: In Xinwei, the Northern Wei Pingdong generals E Qing and Anxi generals Gu Ying led 10,000 elite cavalry to fight against Bei Yan. Pingzhou stabbed Shi Tuo and led all the armies in western Liaoning to join forces with E Qing.

古文：氐王杨难当自称大秦王，改元建义，立妻为王后，世子为太子，置百官皆如天子之制，然犹贡奉宋、魏不绝。
现代文：氐王杨难当自称大秦王，改年号为建义。封正室为王后，封世子为太子，仿照天子的制度设置文武百官。
English: King Yang Nantang called himself King Daqin and changed his era name to Jianyi. He made his lawful wife the queen and his heir the crown prince, and set up a hundred civil and military officials in imitation of the emperor's system.

古文：夏，四月，魏娥清、古弼攻燕白狼城，克之。
现代文：然而，他仍然向刘宋和北魏进贡，从不停止。夏季四月，北魏大将娥清、古弼围攻北燕的白狼城，一举攻克。
English: However, he still paid tribute to Liu Song and the Northern Wei Dynasty and never stopped. In the summer of April, the Northern Wei generals E Qing and Gu Yao besieged the White Wolf City in Beiyan and conquered it in one fell swoop.

古文：高丽遣其将葛卢孟光将众数万随阳伊至和龙迎燕王。
现代文：高丽派遣将领葛卢孟光率领几万部众，随同北燕的使臣阳伊来到和龙迎接北燕王冯弘。
English: Goryeo dispatched the general Ge Lu Mengguang to lead tens of thousands of troops, accompanied by the envoy of the Northern Yan, Yang Yi, to come to Hualong to meet the Northern Yan King Feng Hong.

古文：高丽屯于临川。
现代文：然后高丽军队屯驻在临川。
English: The Koryo army was then stationed in Imcheon.

古文：燕尚书令郭生因民之惮迁，开城门纳魏兵；魏人疑之，不入。
现代文：北燕尚书令郭生因为百姓不愿迁徙他乡，开启城门迎接城外的北魏军，魏军却以为北燕故意诱敌深入，不敢进城。
English: Beiyan Shangshu ordered Guo Sheng to open the city gate to meet the Northern Wei Army outside the city because the people were unwilling to migrate to other towns. However, the Northern Wei Army thought that Beiyan deliberately lured the enemy into the city and dared not enter the city.

古文：生遂勒兵攻燕王，王引高丽兵入自东门，与生战于阙下，生中流矢死。葛卢孟光入城，命军士脱弊褐，取燕武库精仗以给之，大掠城中。
现代文：葛卢孟光率军进入和龙城，他命令高丽将士脱掉身上的破军衣，夺取了北燕的军械库和国库，重新武装自己的军队，在和龙城中大肆抢劫。五月，乙卯，冯弘率领和龙城中所有的居民向东迁徒。
English: Glum Mengguang led the army into Hailong City. He ordered the Goryeo soldiers to take off their tattered uniforms, seized the armory and treasury of Beiyan, rearmed his army, and looted Hailong City. In May, Yi Wu, Feng Hong led all the residents of Hailong City to migrate east.

古文：五月，乙卯，燕王帅龙城见户东徙，焚宫殿，火一旬不灭；令妇人被甲居中，阳伊等勒精兵居外，葛卢孟光帅骑殿后，方轨而进，前后八十馀里。
现代文：临走前，北燕军纵火焚烧了宫殿，大火烧了十天还不曾熄灭。北燕逃亡的队伍中，由妇女身披铠甲在大军中间，阳伊等率精兵在外，高句丽的将领葛卢孟光率领骑兵殿后，组成方阵前进，前后长达八十余里。
English: Before leaving, Beiyan's army set fire to the palace, and the fire burned for ten days before it was extinguished. In the procession of Beiyan's escape, women dressed in armor were in the middle of the army, Yang Yi and other elite soldiers were outside, and Goguryeo's general Ge Lu Mengguang led the cavalry behind, forming a phalanx and advancing for more than eighty miles.

古文：古弼部将高苟子帅骑欲追之，弼醉，拔刀止之，故燕王得逃去。
现代文：北魏安西将军古弼的部将高苟子打算率领骑兵追赶，古弼当时酩酊大醉，拔出佩刀阻止高苟子，因此，冯弘等得以逃脱。
English: Northern Wei Anxi General Gu Yao's subordinate Gao Gao Zi planned to lead the cavalry in pursuit. Gu Yao was very drunk at the time and pulled out his sword to stop Gao Gao Zi. As a result, Feng Hong and others were able to escape.

古文：魏主闻之，怒，槛车征弼及娥清至平城，皆黜为门卒。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘听说后，怒不可止，把古弼和娥清装入囚车，押返平城，二人都罢黜官职。贬为看门士卒。
English: After hearing of this, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, was furious. He loaded Gu Yao and E Qing into a prison wagon and drove them back to Pingcheng. Both of them were dismissed from their posts and demoted to the status of gatekeepers.

古文：戊午，魏主遣散骑常侍封拨使高丽，令送燕王。
现代文：戊午，拓跋焘派散骑常侍封拨出使高丽，命令他们把冯弘送往北魏。
English: In the afternoon, Tuoba sent an envoy to Goryeo, ordering them to send Feng Hong to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁卯，魏主如河西。
现代文：丁卯，北魏国主拓跋焘前往河西。
English: Dingwu, the ruler of Northern Wei, traveled to Hexi.

古文：六月，诏宁朔将军萧汪之将兵讨程道养。
现代文：六月，刘宋文帝下诏，命宁朔将军萧汪之率兵讨伐程道养。
English: In June, Emperor Liu Songwen issued an edict, ordering Ningshuo General Xiao Wang to lead an army to fight against Daoyang.

古文：军至郪口，帛氐奴请降。
现代文：萧汪之的军队开到口，帛氐奴投降。
English: Xiao Wangzhi's army reached the mouth, and the slaves surrendered.

古文：道养兵败，还入郪山。
现代文：随即，程道养兵败，又潜入山。
English: Immediately afterwards, Cheng Dao was defeated and sneaked back into the mountains.

古文：赫连定之西迁也，杨难当遂据上邽。
现代文：前夏王赫连定西迁以后，氐王杨难当就占据了上。
English: After the former Xia King He Lianding moved to the west, the Shao King Yang Nantong occupied the upper.

古文：秋，七月，魏主遣骠骑大将军乐平王丕、尚书令刘絜督河西、高平诸军以讨之，先遣平东将军崔赜赍诏书谕难当。
现代文：秋季，七月，北魏国主拓跋焘派遣骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕和尚书令刘等人督率河西、高平的各路军队讨伐杨难当。在大军开进以前，拓跋焘先派平东将军崔赜，携带皇帝诏书，晓谕杨难当。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba sent the cavalry general, the Leping king Tuoba and the monk Liu to lead the armies of Hexi and Gaoping to fight Yang Nantang. Before the army entered, Tuoba first sent the Pingdong general Cui Wei, carrying the emperor's imperial rescript, to tell Yang Nantang.

古文：魏散骑侍郎游雅来聘。
现代文：北魏散骑侍郎游雅到刘宋访问。
English: The Northern Wei cavalry scatters to visit Liu Song.

古文：己未，零陵王太妃褚氏卒，追谥曰晋恭思皇后，葬以晋礼。
现代文：己未，刘宋零陵王的母亲、太妃褚灵媛去世。刘宋朝廷追加谥号称晋恭思皇后，用东晋皇家的礼节和仪式安葬她。
English: Not long after, the mother of Liu Songzhiling Wang, Tofei Yulingyuan, passed away. The Liu Song court added the title of Empress Jin Gongsi, and buried her with the etiquette and ceremony of the Eastern Jin royal family.

古文：八月，魏主畋于河西。
现代文：八月，北魏国主拓跋焘在河西狩猎。
English: In August, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, went hunting in Hexi.

古文：魏主遣广平公张黎发定州兵一万二千通莎泉道。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘派广平公张黎征调定州的军队一万二千人，开通莎泉大道。
English: Tuobao, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent Guangping Gong Zhang Li to recruit 12,000 troops from Dingzhou to open the Xaquan Road.

古文：九月，庚戌，魏乐平王丕等至略阳；杨难当惧，请奉诏，摄上邽守兵还仇池。
现代文：九月，庚戌，北魏乐平王拓跋丕的大军抵达洛阳。杨难当这才感到恐慌，言请接受诏令，把驻守在上的军队撤回仇池。
English: In September, the great army of the Northern Wei Emperor Leping Wang Tuobao arrived in Luoyang. Yang Nanshan panicked at this time and said that he would like to accept the imperial decree and withdraw the troops stationed in Luoyang to Qiuqi.

古文：诸将议，以为： 不诛其豪帅，军还之后，必相聚为乱。
现代文：北魏军各将领讨论，一致认为： 不杀掉这个凶悍的首领，等我们班师以后，他们一定会重新集结作乱。
English: The generals of the Northern Wei Army discussed and agreed that: If we do not kill this fierce leader, they will surely regroup and make trouble after our division.

古文：又，大众远出，不有所掠，无以充军实，赏将士。 
现代文：另外，我们大军离家远征，如果不掠夺些财物，无法补充军饷，也无法犒赏将士。 
English: In addition, if our great army leaves home for an expedition, if it does not plunder some property, it will not be able to supplement the military pay, nor will it be able to reward the soldiers.

古文：丕将从之，中书侍郎高允参丕军事，谏曰： 如诸将之谋，是伤其向化之心；大军既还，为乱必速。 
现代文：拓跋丕打算听从众将的意见。中书侍郎高允正在军中担任拓跋丕的军事参谋，他劝阻拓跋丕说： 如果听从诸位将领的意见，就会伤害他们归化朝廷的心意；大军班师后，叛乱必将来得更快。 
English: Tuobaobao planned to listen to the opinions of the generals. Gao Yun, the secretary of the Central Military Commission, who was serving as Tuobaobao's military staff officer in the army, dissuaded Tuobaobao, saying, "If you listen to the opinions of the generals, it will hurt their will to naturalize the imperial court; after the formation of a large army, the rebellion will surely come faster."

古文：丕乃止，抚慰初附，秋毫不犯，秦、陇遂安。
现代文：拓跋丕才打消进攻的念头，妥善地安抚新近归附的部落，军纪严明，秋毫无犯，秦陇地区于是民心安定。
English: It was only by making great efforts that the idea of attacking was dispelled, and the newly annexed tribes were properly pacified. Military discipline was strict, and there were no crimes committed in the autumn. As a result, the people's hearts in Qinhuangdao region were stable.

古文：难当以其子顺为雍州刺史，守下辨。
现代文：杨难当任命他的儿子杨顺为雍州刺史，驻守下辨。
English: Yang Nantang appointed his son Yang Shun to be the governor of Yongzhou and stationed him there.

古文：高丽不送燕王于魏，遣使奉表，称 当与冯弘俱奉王化 。
现代文：高丽不把北燕王冯弘送交给北魏，并且派使臣携带奏疏出使北魏，请求： 准许跟冯弘同时接受朝廷的教化。 
English: Goryeo refused to hand Northern Yan King Feng Hong over to the Northern Wei, and sent envoys to carry a message to the Northern Wei, requesting: Permission to accept the enlightenment of the imperial court at the same time as Feng Hong.

古文：魏主以高丽违诏，议击之，将发陇右骑卒。
现代文：拓跋焘根据高丽违反朝廷命令的种种表现，与群臣讨论讨伐高丽，要征调陇右的精锐骑兵。
English: According to the various manifestations of Goryeo's violation of the imperial order, Tuoba Yu discussed with the courtiers to fight against Goryeo and to recruit the best elite cavalry.

古文：刘絜曰： 秦、陇新民，且当优复，俟其饶实，然后用之。 
现代文：刘说： 秦、陇地区新近归附，应当减免那里的赋役，等他们富庶充实以后，再加以使用。 
English: Liu said: Since the Qin and Handan regions have recently been annexed, it is necessary to reduce and exempt the forced labor there, and wait until they are enriched before using it.

古文：乐平王丕曰： 和龙新定，宜广修农桑以丰军实，然后进取，则高丽一举可灭也。 
现代文：乐平王拓跋丕说： 和龙新近平定，应当大力发展农桑来充实军备，然后再进一步攻取，高丽就可以被我们一举消灭了。 
English: Leping Wang Tuobao said: We agreed with Long Xinping that we should vigorously develop the agricultural mulberry to enrich the armament, and then further capture it, so that we could wipe out Korea in one fell swoop.

古文：魏主乃止。
现代文：拓跋焘于是放弃了进攻的计划。
English: It's only now that it's come to a halt.

古文：癸丑，封皇子浚为始兴王，骏为武陵王。
现代文：癸丑，刘宋文帝封皇子刘浚为始兴王，刘骏为武陵王。
English: Liu Songwen's son, Liu Jun, was crowned as the King of Shuxing, and Liu Bei as the King of Wuling.

古文：冬，十一月，己酉，魏主如稒阳，驱野马于云中，置野马苑。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己酉，北魏国主拓跋焘前往阳，驱赶野马到云中，在那里设置了野马苑。
English: In winter, in November, Tuobao, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Yang, drove wild horses to Yunzhong, and set up a wild horse park there.

古文：闰月，壬子，还宫。
现代文：闰十一月，壬子，拓跋焘回宫。
English: In leap November, Ren Zi, Tuobao returned to the palace.

古文：初，高祖克长安，得古铜浑仪，仪状虽举，不缀七曜。
现代文：当初，刘裕攻克长安时，得到了一部古人制作的铜质浑天仪。浑天仪的构架虽然完整，但七星已经残缺。
English: At first, when Liu Yu conquered Chang'an, he obtained a bronze armillary sphere made by the ancients. Although the structure of the armillary sphere was complete, the seven stars were missing.

古文：是岁，诏太史令钱乐之更铸浑仪，径六尺八分，以水转之，昏明中星与天相应。
现代文：这一年，文帝诏令太史令钱乐之重新铸造浑天仪，直径六尺八分，用水作为动力旋转，仪上的星象，日出、日落和日中时与天上的星象相对应。
English: In the same year, Emperor Wen decreed that Qian Le should re-cast the armillary sphere, with a diameter of six feet and eight minutes, rotating with water as the driving force. The stars on the sphere, sunrise, sunset, and the time of day correspond to the stars in the sky.

古文：柔然与魏绝和亲，犯魏边。
现代文：柔然汗国与北魏断绝了和亲友好关系，开始骚扰北魏的边境。
English: The Rouran Khanate broke off the friendly relations with the Northern Wei Dynasty and began to harass the Northern Wei Dynasty's border.

古文：吐欲浑惠王慕璝卒，弟慕利延立。
现代文：吐谷浑汗国可汗慕容慕去世，他的弟弟慕容慕利延继承汗位。
English: Murong Murong, the khan of the Tuyun Khanate, died, and his brother Murong Muriyan succeeded to the khanate.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之上元嘉十四年
现代文：元嘉十四年
English: Founded in the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，正月，戊子，魏北平宣王长孙嵩卒。
现代文：春季正月，戊子，北魏北平王长孙嵩去世。
English: In the first month of spring, Wuzi, the eldest son of the Northern Wei Beiping King Changsun Song, passed away.

古文：辛卯，大赦。
现代文：辛卯，刘宋实行大赦。
English: Xinwu and Liu Song granted amnesty.

古文：二月，乙卯，魏主如幽州。
现代文：二月，乙卯，北魏国主拓跋焘前往幽州。
English: In February, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Yuzhou.

古文：三月，丁丑，魏主以南平王浑为镇东大将军、仪同三司，镇和龙。
现代文：三月，丁丑，拓跋焘任命南平王拓跋浑为镇东大将军、仪同三司，镇守和龙。
English: In March, Dingwuxu and Tuobao appointed Nanping Wang Tuobaohun as the general of the town of Dongdong, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, the town guard and the dragon.

古文：己卯，还宫。
现代文：己卯，拓跋焘回宫。
English: I'm going back to the palace.

古文：帝遣散骑常侍刘熙伯如魏议纳币，会帝女亡而止。
现代文：刘宋文帝派遣散骑常侍刘熙伯出使北魏，商量公主出嫁的事宜。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen dispatched Liu Xibo, the imperial equerry, to the Northern Wei Dynasty to discuss the matter of the princess's marriage.

古文：夏，四月，赵广、张寻、梁显等各帅众降。
现代文：正巧公主去世，因而停止。夏季四月，益州叛民领袖赵广、张寻、梁显等人帅众投降了朝廷。
English: In the summer of April, Yizhou rebel leaders Zhao Guang, Zhang Huan, Liang Xian and others surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：别将王道恩斩程道养，送首，馀党悉平。
现代文：别将王道恩斩杀了程道养，送程道养的人头进京，程道养的余党被平定。
English: Don't cut off Wang Dao's head and kill Cheng Dao Yang, send Cheng Dao Yang's head to Beijing, and the rest of Cheng Dao Yang's party will be defeated.

古文：丁未，以辅国将军周籍之为益州刺史。
现代文：丁未，刘宋朝廷任命辅国将军周籍之为益州刺史。
English: Ding Wei, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed Zhou Ziguo, a general of the Auxiliary State, to be the crown prince of Yizhou.

古文：魏主以民官多贪，夏，五月，己丑，诏吏民得举告守令不如法者。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘认为地方郡守、县令大多贪赃枉法。夏季，五月，己丑，拓跋焘下诏，命令官吏和百姓可以检举告发地方郡守、县令贪污不法的行为。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Guan, believed that most local governors and county magistrates were corrupt. In the summer, in May, Tuoba Guan issued an edict, ordering officials and citizens to report and denounce illegal acts of corruption by local governors and county magistrates.

古文：于是奸猾专求牧宰之失，迫胁在位，横于闾里；而长吏咸降心待之，贪纵如故。
现代文：从此，地方一些地痞流氓乘机专挑地方官的过失，威胁要挟在位的地方官，在民间横行。地方官则自低身分对待这些人，照样贪赃枉法。
English: Since then, some local hoodlums have taken the opportunity to single out the faults of local officials, threatening to blackmail the local officials in power, and have been rampant among the people. Local officials treat these people with low status, and they are still corrupt.

古文：丙申，魏主如云中。
现代文：丙申，北魏国主拓跋焘前往云中。
English: Bishen, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Yunzhong.

古文：秋，七月，戊子，魏永昌王健等讨山胡白龙馀党于西河，灭之。
现代文：秋季七月，戊子，北魏永昌王拓跋健等讨伐山胡部落酋长白龙的余党所据守的西河，彻底消灭了他们。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Zi, the Northern Wei Yongchang King Tuoba Jian and other remaining parties that fought against the Shanhu tribal chief Bai Long defended the West River and completely destroyed them.

古文：八月，甲辰，魏主如河西。
现代文：八月，甲辰，北魏国主拓跋焘前往河西。
English: In August, Jia Chen, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Hexi.

古文：九月，甲申，还宫。
现代文：九月，甲申，拓跋焘回宫。
English: In September, Gao Sheng and Tuobao returned to the palace.

古文：丁酉，魏主遣使者拜吐谷浑王慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封西平王。
现代文：丁酉，拓跋焘派使臣出使吐谷浑汗国，封新即位的吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封为西平王。
English: Ding Xuan and Tuobao sent envoys to the Kingdom of the Tugu Hun, and the newly enthroned Tugu Hun Khan, Murong Muli, was promoted to the position of Zhenxi General and the three departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and his title was changed to King of Xiping.

古文：冬，十月，癸卯，魏主如云中。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸卯，北魏国主拓跋焘前往云中。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Yunzhong.

古文：十一月，壬申，还宫。
现代文：十一月，壬申，回宫。
English: November, Jinshin, back to the palace.

古文：魏主复遣散骑侍郎董琬、高明等多赍金帛，使西域，招抚九国。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘再次派遣散骑侍郎董琬、高明等携带大批金银绸缎出使西域，招抚西域九国。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, once again dispatched his horseback riding attendants, Dong Xi, Gao Ming, and others, carrying a large amount of gold, silver, and silk, to send out envoys to the western region and invite the nine countries in the western region.

古文：琬等至乌孙，其王甚喜，曰： 破洛那、者舌二国皆欲称臣致贡于魏，但无路自致耳，今使君宜过抚之。 
现代文：董琬等人来到乌孙，乌孙国王大为欢喜，说： 破落那、者舌二国，也都想向魏国称臣进贡，可是没有门路可以表达自己的意向，如今你们应绕道前往安抚他们。 
English: When Dong Xuan and others came to Wusun, King Wusun was overjoyed and said, "Both countries want to pay tribute to Wei, but there is no way to express their intentions. Now you should take a detour to appease them."

古文：乃遣导译送琬诣破落那，明诣者舌。
现代文：于是，乌孙国王特派向导兼翻译送董琬前往破落那，高明前往者舌。
English: As a result, the King of Wusun sent a special guide and translator to send Dong Xuan to the broken place, and the skilled traveler's tongue.

古文：帝国闻之，争遣使者随琬等入贡，凡十六国。
现代文：邻近其他国家听到这个消息，也争先恐后地派遣使臣，随同董琬等人一道向北魏进贡，共有十六国之多。
English: When the neighboring countries heard this news, they also scrambled to send envoys to pay tribute to Northern Wei along with Dong Xuan and others, a total of 16 countries.

古文：自是每岁朝贡不绝。
现代文：从此以后，西域各国每年都到北魏朝贡，从不停止。
English: Since then, the Western countries have paid tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty every year, and have never stopped.

古文：魏主以其妹武威公主妻河西王牧犍，河西王遣宋繇奉表诣平城谢，且问其母及公主所宜称。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘把他的妹妹武威公主嫁给北凉王沮渠牧犍。沮渠牧犍派右相宋繇携带奏书前往平城谢恩，并请教将来怎么称呼武威公主。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty married his younger sister, Princess Wuwei, to the Northern Liang Dynasty's King Deshu Mucu. Deshu Mucu's right-hand man, Song Jun, went to Pingcheng Xie'en with a petition and asked what to call Princess Wuwei in the future.

古文：魏主使群臣议之，皆曰： 母以子贵，妻从夫爵。
现代文：拓跋焘让大臣们讨论，都说： 母以子贵，妻随夫爵。
English: Tuobao asked the ministers to discuss, and they all said: "Mother and son are precious, and the wife should follow the husband."

古文：牧犍母宜称河西国太后，公主于其国称王后，于京师则称公主。 
现代文：沮渠牧犍的母亲应称为河西国太后，武威公主在河西国内应称作王后，在京师则仍旧称为公主。 
English: The mother of Depu Qu Muxuan should be called the Empress Dowager of Hexi Province, Princess Wu Wei should be called the Queen in Hexi Province, and she is still called a princess in Beijing.

古文：魏主从之。
现代文：拓跋焘同意。
English: Tuobao adopted Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：初，牧犍娶凉武昭王之女，及魏公主至，李氏与其母尹氏迁居酒泉。
现代文：当初，沮渠牧犍娶西凉武昭王李的女儿为妻。现在，北魏的公主下嫁，李氏与她的母亲迁居酒泉。
English: At first, Deshu Muxuan married the daughter of Xilang Wuzhao Wang Li. Now, the princess of the Northern Wei Dynasty married, and the Li clan and her mother moved to Jiuquan.

古文：顷之，李氏卒，尹氏抚之，不哭，曰： 汝国破家亡，今死晚矣。 
现代文：不久，李氏去世，她的母亲尹氏抚摸她的尸体，却不曾恸哭，说： 你国破家亡，今天才死，太晚了。 
English: Soon after, Ms. Li passed away. Her mother, Ms. Yin, stroked her corpse, but did not weep, saying, "Your country has been destroyed. You only died today. It's too late."

古文：牧犍之弟无讳镇酒泉，谓尹氏曰： 后诸孙在伊吾，后欲就之乎？ 
现代文：当时，沮渠牧犍的弟弟沮渠无讳镇守酒泉，对尹氏说： 您的几个孙儿都在伊吾，您是否打算投奔他们去呢？ 
English: At that time, Depuqiu Muxu, the younger brother of Depuqiu Muxu, the town guard of Jiuquan, said to Yin: Several of your grandchildren are in Igu, do you plan to join them?

古文：尹氏未测其意，绐之曰： 吾子孙漂荡，托身异域，馀生无几，当死此，不复为氈裘之鬼也。 
现代文：尹氏没有揣测出沮渠无讳的真实用意，就欺骗他说： 我的子孙们到处逃亡，流落天涯，在他乡异域寄身。我还能活几天，就死在这儿吧，不再去当游牧地区的野鬼了。 
English: Yin did not guess the real intention of the shameless, and deceived him by saying: My children and grandchildren have fled everywhere, wandered to the ends of the earth, and lived in foreign lands. I still have a few days to live, so I will die here, and I will no longer be a wild ghost in the nomadic areas.

古文：未几，潜奔伊吾。
现代文：不久，尹氏偷偷地投奔伊吾。
English: Soon after, Yin secretly fled to Igu.

古文：无讳遣骑追及之，尹氏谓追骑曰： 沮渠酒泉许吾归北，何为复追！
现代文：沮渠无讳派骑兵追上了她，尹氏对追赶她的骑兵说： 沮渠无讳允许我回到北方，为什么还要派兵追赶。
English: Despondent, he sent his cavalry after her. Yin said to the cavalry chasing her, "Despondent, you allowed me to return to the north. Why did you send your cavalry after me?"

古文：汝取吾首以往，吾不复还矣。 
现代文：你拿我的人头回去交差吧，我不会再回去了。 
English: You can take my head and go back to the crossroads. I'm not going back.

古文：追骑不敢逼，引还。
现代文：追兵不敢逼迫，只好返回。
English: The pursuers did not dare to pursue and had to turn back.

古文：尹氏卒于伊吾。
现代文：尹氏在伊吾去世。
English: Yin died in Igu.

古文：牧犍遣将军沮渠旁周入贡于魏，魏主遣侍中古弼、尚书李顺赐其侍臣衣服，并征世子封坛入侍。
现代文：沮渠牧犍派将军沮渠旁周向北魏进贡。北魏国主拓跋焘派侍中古弼、尚书李顺赐赏北凉侍从臣僚衣服，并征召北凉世子沮渠封坛到京师平城充当人质。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign Tuobao sent the attendants Zhongguo and Shangshu Li Shun to reward the clothes of Bei Liang's attendants and ministers, and summoned the descendant of Bei Liang, Dequan Huotan, to Beijing Shiping as a hostage.

古文：是岁，牧犍遣封坛如魏，亦遣使诣建康，献杂书及敦煌赵匪攵所撰《甲寅元历》，并求杂书数十种，帝皆与之。
现代文：这一年，北凉王沮渠牧犍派遣沮渠封坛到平城。同时也遣使前往刘宋都城建康，呈献各种书籍以及敦煌人赵撰写的《甲寅元历》，并索取杂书数十种，文帝都满足了他们。
English: In the same year, the king of the Northern Liang Dynasty, Deqiu Muqi, sent Deqiu Hetan to Pingcheng. At the same time, he sent envoys to the capital of the Liu Song Dynasty, Jiankang, to present various books and the "Jia Yin Yuan Calendar" written by Zhao of Dunhuang, and to request dozens of miscellaneous books. Emperor Wen satisfied them all.

古文：李顺自河西还，魏主问之曰： 卿往年言取凉州之策，朕以东方有事，未遑也。
现代文：北魏尚书李顺从北凉回国，拓跋焘问他说： 你当年提出的攻取北凉的计划，我当时因为正对燕国用兵，没有来得及实行。
English: Northern Wei Shangshu Li Shun returned to the country from Bei Liang, and Tuobao asked him: The plan to capture Bei Liang that you proposed that year, I did not have time to implement it because I was using soldiers against Yan.

古文：今和龙己平，吾欲即以此年西征，可乎？ 
现代文：如今和龙已经平定，我打算立即在年内西征，你看怎么样？ 
English: Now that the dragon has been subdued, I plan to immediately march west within the year. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 臣畴昔所言，以今观之，私谓不谬。
现代文：李顺回答说： 我当年说的那番话，用今天的形势来验证，我自以为没有错误。
English: Li Shun replied: The words I said back then, using today's situation to verify, I think there is no mistake.

古文：然国家戎车屡动，士马疲劳，西征之义，请俟它年。 
现代文：但是国家频频兴兵，东征西讨，士卒和战马都疲劳不堪，西征的计划，还是请推迟几年再说。 
English: However, the country frequently raised an army, and the soldiers and horses were exhausted from the eastward and westward campaigns. Please postpone the plans for the western campaign for a few more years.

古文：魏主乃止。
现代文：拓跋焘同意了。
English: It's only now that it's come to a halt.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之上元嘉十五年
现代文：元嘉十五年
English: 15 years of Yuan Jia

古文：春，二月，丁未，以吐谷浑王慕利延为都督西秦、河、沙三州诸军事、镇西大将军、西秦、河二州刺史、陇西王。
现代文：春季二月，丁未，刘宋朝廷任命吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延为都督西秦、河、沙三州诸军事，兼任征西大将军，西秦、河二州刺史，封陇西王。
English: In the spring of February, Ding Wei, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed Tugu Hunka Khan Murong Muriyan as the military governor of West Qin, He and Sha three states, concurrently serving as the general of the West, the history of West Qin and He two states, and the king of the West.

古文：三月，癸未，魏主诏罢沙门年五十已下者。
现代文：三月，癸未，北魏国主拓跋焘下诏命令五十岁以下的和尚，一律还俗。
English: In March, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict ordering all monks under the age of fifty to return to secular life.

古文：初，燕王弘至辽东，高丽王琏遣使劳之曰： 龙城王冯君，爱适野次，士马劳乎？ 
现代文：当初，北燕王冯弘来到辽东以后，高丽王高琏派遣使臣慰劳他说： 龙城王冯君，光临敝国荒郊，人马都很劳苦吧？ 
English: At first, after the Northern Yan King Feng Hong came to Liaodong, the Goryeo King Gaozong sent an envoy to console him, saying: Dragon City King Feng Jun, when you are in the desolate suburbs of Yunnan, everyone is working hard, aren't they?

古文：弘惭怒，称制让之。
现代文：冯弘又惭愧又恼怒，以国王的身份斥责高琏。
English: Embarrassed and angry, Feng Hong reprimanded Gao Yu as the king.

古文：高丽处之平郭，寻徙北丰。
现代文：高丽把冯弘安置在平郭，不久，又迁往北丰。
English: Goryeo placed Feng Hong in Pingguo, and soon moved him to Beifeng.

古文：弘素侮高丽，政刑赏罚，犹如其国。
现代文：冯弘一向轻侮高丽，政务刑法，奖励惩罚，仍然象在北燕国一样。
English: Feng Hong has always been contemptuous of Goryeo, and the government's criminal law, reward and punishment, is still the same as in North Yan Province.

古文：高丽乃夺其侍人，取其太子王仁为质。
现代文：高丽于是强行夺走了冯弘的侍从，逼迫北燕的太子冯王仁作人质。
English: Goryeo then forcibly took away Feng Hong's attendant and forced Beiyan's prince Feng Wangren to become a hostage.

古文：弘怨高丽，遣使来上表求迎，上遣使者王白驹等迎之，并令高丽资遣。
现代文：冯弘怨恨高丽，派使臣到刘宋请求迎他南下。刘宋文帝派使臣王白驹等迎接冯弘一行，并令高丽出资遣送。
English: Feng Hong resented Goryeo and sent envoys to Liu Song to ask him to come south. Liu Song Emperor sent envoys such as Wang Baiyao to meet Feng Hong's party and ordered Goryeo to pay for their transportation.

古文：高丽王不欲使弘南来，遣将孙漱、高仇等杀弘于北丰，并其子孙十馀人，谥弘曰昭成皇帝。
现代文：高丽王高琏不愿放冯弘南下，就派他手下的将领孙漱、高仇等人，在北丰杀掉了冯弘及其子孙十余人。追赠冯弘谥号为昭成皇帝。
English: Goryeo King Gao Pi did not want to let Feng Hong go south, so he sent his generals Sun Shu, Gao Qiu and others to kill Feng Hong and more than ten of his descendants in Beifeng. He posthumously gave Feng Hong Pi the title of Shosheng Emperor.

古文：白驹等帅所领七千馀人掩讨漱、仇，杀仇，生擒漱。
现代文：刘宋使臣王白驹等率领七千多人讨伐孙漱、高仇，斩杀了高仇，生擒孙漱。
English: Liu Song's envoy Wang Baiyao and others led more than seven thousand people to fight Sun Su and Gao Qian, killed Gao Qian, and captured Sun Su alive.

古文：高丽王以白驹等专杀，遣使执送之。
现代文：高琏认为王白驹在他的国土上擅自杀害他的大将，派人逮捕王白驹，遣送回国。
English: Gao Yao thought that Wang Baiyao had killed his general on his own land, so he sent someone to arrest Wang Baiyao and send him back to China.

古文：上以远国，不欲违其意，下白驹等狱；已而原之。
现代文：文帝认为高丽是远方小国，不愿让高琏失望，就把王白驹等人关进监狱。
English: Emperor Wen thought that Korea was a small country far away, and did not want to disappoint Gao Gan, so he put Wang Baiyao and others in prison.

古文：夏，四月，纳故黄门侍郎殷淳女为太子劭妃。
现代文：不久宽恕了他们。夏季四月，刘宋文帝迎娶已故黄门侍郎殷淳的女儿，为太子刘劭的正妃。
English: He soon forgave them. In the summer of April, Emperor Liu Songwen married the daughter of the late Huangmen waiter Yin Chun, who was the princess of Prince Liu Ye.

古文：五月，戊寅，魏大赦。
现代文：五月，戊寅，北魏实行大赦。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：丙申，魏主如五原。
现代文：丙申，北魏国主拓跋焘前往五原。
English: Bishen, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Wuhan.

古文：秋，七月，自五原北伐柔然。
现代文：秋季，七月，拓跋焘从五原向北进攻，讨伐柔然汗国。
English: In the autumn, in July, Tuobao attacked from the Wuhuan to the north, and fought against the Juran Khanate.

古文：命乐平王丕督十五将出东道，永昌王健督十五将出西道，魏主自出中道。
现代文：拓跋焘命令乐平王拓跋丕督率十五个将领从东路出兵；永昌王拓跋健督率十五个将领从西路出兵；拓跋焘则亲自率军从中路进攻。
English: Tuobaobao ordered Leping King Tuobaobao and fifteen generals to attack from the east; Yongchang King Tuobaojian and fifteen generals to attack from the west; and Tuobaobao himself to attack from the middle.

古文：至浚稽山，复分中道为二：陈留王崇从大泽向涿邪山，魏主从浚稽北向天山，西登白阜，不见柔然而还。
现代文：大军开到浚稽山，又分中路军为两部分：一部分由陈留王拓跋崇率领，从大泽直指涿邪山，一部分由拓跋焘统率，从浚稽一直向北，直奔天山。再向西登上白阜山，没有发现柔然汗国的部落，班师回国。
English: The large army drove to the Dredging Hill, and the middle army was divided into two parts: one part was led by Chen Liu Wang Tuoba Chong, from Osawa straight to the Evil Mountain, and one part was led by Tuoba Chong, from the Dredging Hill all the way north to Tianshan. Then westward to Mount Baifu, no tribe of the Juran Khanate was found, and the team returned home.

古文：时漠北大旱，无水草，人马多死。
现代文：当时漠北发生严重的旱灾，没有水草，北魏军中的人和马匹死亡很多。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the north of the country, there was no water and grass, and many people and horses in the Northern Wei Army died.

古文：冬，十一月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，丁卯朔，发生日食。
English: In winter, in November, Dingushuo, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：十二月，丁巳，魏主至平城。
现代文：十二月，丁巳，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达平城。
English: In December, Ting Si, the ruler of Northern Wei, arrived in Pingcheng.

古文：豫章雷次宗好学，隐居庐山。
现代文：刘宋豫章人雷次宗勤奋好学，隐居在庐山。
English: Liu Song Yuzhang, a diligent and studious disciple of Lei Zizong, lived in seclusion in Shaoshan.

古文：尝征为散骑侍郎，不就。
现代文：刘宋朝廷曾经征召他为散骑侍郎，他拒绝入仕。
English: Liu Song's court once conscripted him as a horseback cavalryman, but he refused to serve.

古文：是岁，以处士征至建康，为开馆于鸡笼山，使聚徒教授。
现代文：这一年，雷次宗以隐士的身份，被征召到首都建康。朝廷在鸡笼山为他开设学馆，让他招聚学生，讲授学业。
English: That year, Lei Tszong was summoned to the capital, Jiankang, as a hermit. The imperial court opened a school for him in Jiuye Mountain, allowing him to recruit students and teach school.

古文：帝雅好艺文，使丹阳尹庐江何尚之立玄学，太子率更令何承天立史学，司徒参军谢元立文学，并次宗儒学为四学。
现代文：刘宋文帝素来喜欢文学艺术，特命丹杨尹、庐江人何尚之专设玄学，命太子率更令何承天设立史学，命司徒参军谢元开设文学，加上雷次宗的儒学并称为 四学 。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen had always liked literature and art. He specially ordered Tang Yangyin and He Shang, a native of the Minjiang River, to set up a special school of metaphysics. He also ordered He Chengtian to set up a school of history. He also ordered Xie Yuan, a scholar who had joined the army, to open a school of literature. Together with the Confucianism of Lei Zizong, it was called the Four Schools.

古文：元，灵运之从祖弟也。
现代文：谢元是谢灵运的族弟。
English: Xie Yuan is the younger brother of Xie Lingyun.

古文：帝数幸次宗学馆，令次宗以巾褠侍讲，资给甚厚。
现代文：文帝多次临幸雷次宗的学馆，命令雷次宗不必穿朝服为皇上讲授儒学。
English: Emperor Wen repeatedly visited Lei Zizong's school and ordered Lei Zizong not to wear the imperial robe to teach Confucianism to the emperor.

古文：又除给事中，不就。
现代文：赏赐的财物特别丰厚。文帝又任命雷次宗为给事中，雷次宗拒绝。
English: Emperor Wen also appointed Lei Jizong as a gift recipient, but Lei Jizong refused.

古文：久之，还庐山。
现代文：过了很久，雷次宗回到庐山。
English: After a long time, Lei Jizong returned to Shaoshan.

古文：臣光曰：《易》曰： 君子多识前言往行，以畜其德。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：《易经》说： 贤明的人大多都熟知前人的教诲，接受过去的经验，用来培养自己的德性。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: "The I Ching says: Most wise people are familiar with the teachings of their predecessors, accept past experience, and use it to cultivate their own virtues.

古文：孔子曰： 辞达而已矣。 
现代文：孔子曾说： 辞意通达便可以了。 
English: Confucius once said, "If one's intention is clear, one can do it."

古文：然则史者儒之一端，文者儒之馀事；至于老、庄虚无，固非所以为教也。
现代文：然而，史学是儒学的一部分，文学只是儒学的余事。至于老子、庄子的虚无学说，则根本不可以讲授和传播。
English: However, history is a part of Confucianism, and literature is only an afterthought of Confucianism. As for the empty teachings of Laozi and Zhuangzi, they cannot be taught and disseminated at all.

古文：夫学者所以求道；天下无二道，安有四学哉！
现代文：做学问的人，是在于追求真理。而天下的真理没有第二个，怎么可以有 四学 呢！
English: To be a scholar is to pursue the truth, and since there is no second truth in the world, how can there be four schools of thought?

古文：帝性仁厚恭俭，勤于为政，守法而不峻，容物而不弛。
现代文：刘宋文帝性情宽厚仁慈，恭谨勤俭，勤奋刻苦，从不荒怠朝廷政务。他遵循法规而不苛刻，对人宽容却不放纵。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen was generous and benevolent, respectful and frugal, diligent and hardworking, and never neglected the affairs of the imperial court. He followed the rules and regulations without being harsh, and was tolerant but not indulgent.

古文：百官皆久于其职，守宰以六期为断，吏不苟免，民有所系。
现代文：朝廷的文武百官都能久居职位。郡守、县宰也都以六年为一任期。官吏不轻易免职，百姓才有所依托。
English: All civil and military officials of the imperial court can stay in their positions for a long time. County governors and county magistrates also have a six-year term. Officials are not easily dismissed, and the people can rely on them.

古文：三十年间，四境之内，晏安无事，户口蕃息；出租供徭，止于岁赋，晨出暮归，自事而已。
现代文：三十年间，刘宋境内，平安无事，人口繁盛。至于租赋徭役，从不增加，只收取常赋，从不额外征收。
English: For thirty years, there was peace and prosperity in the territory of Liu Song, and the population flourished. As for the rent and service tax, it was never increased, only the regular tax was collected, and no extra tax was ever levied.

古文：闾阎之内，讲诵相闻；士敦操尚，乡耻轻薄。
现代文：百姓早晨出去耕作，晚上回家休息，可以随意做事，安居乐业。乡里街巷之间，读书的声音不绝于耳。士大夫重视操守，乡下人也讨厌轻薄无识的人。
English: The common people go out to farm in the morning and go home to rest in the evening. They can do whatever they want and live in peace and contentment. The sound of reading is always heard in the streets and lanes of the countryside. The scholar-bureaucrats attach great importance to ethics, and the villagers also hate frivolous and ignorant people.

古文：江左风俗，于斯为美。
现代文：江左的风俗，在这个时代最为美好。
English: The customs of Jiangzao are the most beautiful in this era.

古文：后之言政治者，皆称元嘉焉。
现代文：后代评论前世政治得失的人，都称道元嘉治世。
English: Descendants of those who commented on the political gains and losses of their previous lives all referred to the reign of Dogen Kaji.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之上元嘉十六年
现代文：元嘉十六年
English: in the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，正月，庚寅，司徒义康进位大将军、领司徒，南衮州刺史、江夏王义恭进位司空。
现代文：春季正月，庚寅，刘宋朝廷提升司徒刘义康为大将军，仍兼任司徒职务；提升南兖州刺史、江夏王刘义恭为司空。
English: In the first month of spring, the courts of the Gyeongin and Liu Song dynasties promoted the scholar Liu Yikang to the rank of general, and he still served as a scholar; promoted the governor of South Luzhou and the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, to the rank of scholar.

古文：魏主如定州。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘前往定州。
English: Tuobao, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Dingzhou.

古文：初，高祖遣诏，令诸子次第居荆州。
现代文：当初，刘宋武帝有遗诏，命令他的几个儿子依照长幼次序，驻守荆州。
English: At first, Emperor Liu Songwu had a will, ordering several of his sons to be stationed in Jingzhou according to the order of eldest to youngest.

古文：临川王义庆在荆州八年，欲为之选代，其次应在南谯王义宣。
现代文：这时，临川王刘义庆在荆州已经有八年了，朝廷打算另选一个亲王代替他。按照顺序，应该派南谯王刘义宣。
English: At this time, Liu Yixuan, the king of Linchuan, had been in Jingzhou for eight years, and the imperial court planned to choose another prince to replace him. According to the order, Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, should be sent.

古文：帝以义宣人才凡鄙，置不用；二月，己亥，以衡阳王义季为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：刘宋文帝却认为刘义宣的人品和才能都很平庸低下，不予任用。二月，己亥，文帝任命衡阳王刘义季为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事，荆州刺史。
English: However, Emperor Liu Songwen thought that Liu Yixuan's character and talent were very mediocre and low, and would not appoint him. In February, Emperor Wen appointed Hengyang King Liu Yiji as the governor of Jing, Hunan and other eight military states, and Jingzhou was engraved in history.

古文：义季尝春月出畋，有老父被苫而耕，左右斥之，老父曰： 盘于游畋，古人所戒。
现代文：刘义季曾经在春天外出打猎，有个老农夫身披苫衣，在田中耕种，不肯回避。刘义季的左右侍从斥责老农，老农说： 游猎取乐，古人深以为戒。
English: Liu Yiji used to go out hunting in the spring. There was an old farmer dressed in a yakitori, ploughing in the fields, and he would not turn away. Liu Yiji's right and left attendants rebuked the old farmer. The old farmer said, "Hunting for fun is something that the ancients would have been very wary of."

古文：今阳和布气，一日不耕，民失其时，奈何以从禽之乐而驱斥老农也！ 
现代文：如今天暖气湿，一天不耕种，百姓就会错过农时，怎么可以放纵狩猎的快乐，而驱赶勤于耕作的老农呢？ 
English: If it is hot and humid today, and people do not cultivate for a day, they will miss the farming time. How can they indulge in the joy of hunting and drive away the old farmers who are hard at work?

古文：义季止马曰： 贤者也！ 
现代文：刘义季听罢，勒住马缰说： 他是贤人！ 
English: Liu Yijie listened, restrained Ma Jun and said: He is a wise man!

古文：命赐之食，辞曰： 大王不夺农时，则境内之民皆饱大王之食，老夫何敢独受大王之赐乎！ 
现代文：命令左右亲信赐给老农食物，老农拒绝说： 大王您不侵夺农时，境内的百姓都可以吃饱大王赐予的饮食，我老汉怎么敢独自领受您的赏赐呢！ 
English: He ordered his relatives to give food to the old farmer, but the old farmer refused, saying, "Great King, if you do not encroach on the farmers, the people in the territory can all eat the food given by the great king. How dare my old man receive your reward alone!"

古文：义季问其名，不告而退。
现代文：刘义季询问老农夫的姓名，农夫不肯回答，告退。
English: Liu Yiji asked the old farmer's name. The farmer refused to answer and left.

古文：三月，魏雍州刺史葛那寇上洛，上洛太守镡长生弃郡走。
现代文：三月，北魏雍州刺史葛那进攻刘宋所属的上洛。刘宋上洛太守镡长生放弃郡城逃走。
English: In March, the Northern Wei Yongzhou Zhang Shigna attacked Liu Song's Shangluo. Liu Song abandoned the county seat of Shangluo and fled.

古文：辛未，魏主还宫。
现代文：辛未，北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。
English: Xin Wei, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the palace.

古文：杨保宗与兄保显自童亭奔魏。
现代文：氐王杨难当的侄儿杨保宗与他的哥哥杨保显从驻地童亭投奔北魏。
English: Yang Baozong and his brother Yang Baoxian, the nephews of the warlord Yang Nantang, went to the Northern Wei Dynasty from Doting.

古文：庚寅，魏主以保宗为都督陇西诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州牧、武都王，镇上邽，妻以公主；保显为镇西将军、晋寿公。
现代文：庚寅，北魏国主拓跋焘任命杨保宗为都督陇西诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州牧、武都王，镇守上。并把皇室公主嫁给他为妻。又任命杨保显为镇西将军，封晋寿公。
English: Geng Yin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, appointed Yang Baozong as the military governor of Shanxi Province, the general of the Western Expedition, the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, the governor of Qin Province, the king of Wudu, and the commander of the town, and married the royal princess to him. He also appointed Yang Baoxian as the general of Shanxi Province, and assigned him to Jin Shougong.

古文：河西王牧犍通于其嫂李氏，兄弟三人传嬖之。
现代文：北凉王沮渠牧犍与他的嫂子李氏通奸，他们兄弟三人都轮流和她相好。
English: Bei Liang Wang Deqiu Muxuan committed adultery with his sister-in-law Li, and all three of their brothers took turns making love to her.

古文：李氏与牧犍之姊共毒魏公主，魏主遣解毒医乘传救之，得愈。
现代文：于是，李氏与沮渠牧犍的姐姐合谋下毒害北魏武威公主。北魏国主拓跋焘派出解毒医生乘坐驿站的马车驰往救治，才把武威公主救活。
English: As a result, Mr. Li conspired with the sister of the dejected canal herdsman to poison the Northern Wei Princess Wuwei. The Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba sent an antidote doctor to take a carriage from the station to the rescue, and only then did he save the Wuwei Princess.

古文：魏主征李氏，牧犍不遣，厚资给，使居酒泉。
现代文：拓跋焘下令索取李氏，沮渠牧犍不肯交出，只是给李氏很多财物，命她迁居酒泉。
English: Tuobao ordered to take Ms. Li, but Deqiao refused to hand her over. He just gave Ms. Li a lot of property and ordered her to move to Jiuquan.

古文：魏每遣使者诣西域，常诏牧犍发导护送出流沙。
现代文：北魏每次派遣使者出使西域，常常命令沮渠牧犍派出向导，护送魏使走出流沙出没的大沙漠。
English: Every time the Northern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to the Western Regions, it often ordered the Diakou herdsmen to send a guide to escort the Wei envoy out of the desert infested with quicksand.

古文：使者自西域还，至武威，牧犍左右有告魏使者曰： 我君承蠕蠕可汗妄言云： 去岁魏天子自来伐我，士马疫死，大败而还；我擒其长弟乐平王丕。 
现代文：北魏使者从西域返回，抵达武威。沮渠牧犍左右有人告诉北魏的使臣说： 我们大王听到了柔然汗国的可汗大言不惭地说 去年，魏国的皇帝亲自来讨伐我们，结果士卒和战马大多染上疫病而死，大军惨败而回。我们生擒了他的长弟乐平王拓跋丕。 
English: The Northern Wei emissaries returned from the Western Regions and arrived in Wuwei. Someone around the frustrated canal herdsman told the Northern Wei envoys: Our great king has heard the khan of the Juren Khanate say boldly that Last year, the emperor of Wei personally came to fight us, as a result, most of the soldiers and horses contracted the plague and died, and the army returned in dismal defeat. We took his eldest brother Leping Wang Tuobao alive.

古文：我君大喜，宣言于国。
现代文：我们大王听说后非常高兴，在国内大肆宣传。
English: When we heard about it, we were very happy and advertised it all over the country.

古文：又闻可汗遣使告西域诸国，称： 魏已削弱，今天下唯我为强，若更有魏使，勿复供奉。 
现代文：又听说柔然汗国可汗派使臣，出使西域各国，声称： 现在魏国已经被削弱，普天之下只有我们汗国才是最强大的，如果再有魏国的使臣前来访问，你们不要供应他们。 
English: I also heard that the Khan of the Khanate of the Juran Khanate sent envoys to the countries of the Western Regions, claiming: Now that the Wei State has been weakened, only our Khanate is the most powerful in the world. If any more envoys from the Wei State come to visit, you should not supply them.

古文：西域诸国颇有贰心。 
现代文：因此，西域各国对魏国也怀有二心。 
English: Therefore, the Western countries also harbored ambivalence towards Wei.

古文：使还，具以状闻。
现代文：北魏使臣回国以后，把所听到的一切，汇报给朝廷。
English: After the envoys returned to Kyoto, they reported the entire situation to the Emperor.

古文：魏主遣尚书贺多罗使凉州观虚实，多罗还，亦言牧犍虽外修臣礼，内实乖悖。
现代文：拓跋焘派尚书贺多罗出使北凉观察虚实。贺多罗回来，也说沮渠牧犍虽然表面上对魏称臣纳贡，内心却叛离乖张。
English: Tuobao sent Shangshu and Hetoro to Beiliang to observe the truth and falsehood. When Hetoro returned, he also said that, although Dechu Mokuo was ostensibly a tributary to Wei, he was a traitor at heart.

古文：魏主欲讨之，以问崔浩。
现代文：拓跋焘打算讨伐北凉，向崔浩询问对策。
English: Tuobao planned to attack Beilang and asked Cui Hao for countermeasures.

古文：对曰： 牧犍逆心已露，不可不诛。
现代文：崔浩说： 沮渠牧犍叛逆之心，早已显露，不能不杀。
English: Cui Hao said: The rebellious heart of the disheartened herdsmen and herdsmen has already been revealed, and they must be killed.

古文：官军往年北伐，虽不克获，实无所损。
现代文：我军前几年北伐，虽说没有取得太大的胜利，实际上也没遭受什么损失。
English: Although our army did not gain much victory in the Northern Expedition in previous years, it actually did not suffer any losses.

古文：战马三十万匹，计在道死伤不满八千，常岁羸死亦不减万匹。
现代文：战马共三十万匹，算起来在征途中死伤的不满八千。平时每年正常死亡的也不少于一万匹。
English: There were 300,000 war horses in total, of which less than 8,000 were killed or injured during the campaign. In normal times, no fewer than 10,000 horses died each year.

古文：而远方乘虚，遽谓衰耗不能复振。
现代文：而远方借此便咬定我们的国力消耗殆尽，不能恢复。
English: And the far away countries are convinced that our national strength has been exhausted and cannot be restored.

古文：今出其不意，大军猝至，彼必骇扰，不知所为，擒之必矣。 
现代文：现在，我军出其不意，突然出现在他们面前，他们惊恐万状，自相骚扰，不知如何是好，我们一定可以擒获敌人。 
English: Now, our army has unexpectedly appeared in front of them. They are terrified and harassing each other. I don't know what to do. We can definitely capture the enemy.

古文：魏主曰： 善！
现代文：拓跋焘说： 太好了，我也是这样想的。 
English: Tuoba said, "That's great!

古文：吾意亦以为然。 
现代文：于是，召集公卿在太极殿西堂讨论。
English: As a result, the nobles were summoned to discuss the matter in the West Hall of the Taiji Temple.

古文：于是大集公卿议于西堂。弘农王奚斤等三十馀人皆曰： 牧犍，西垂下国，虽心不纯臣，然继父位以来，职贡不乏。
现代文：弘农王奚斤等三十余人都说： 沮渠牧犍是西方边陲归附的下等小国，虽然心中对我们不太臣服，但是自从继位以后，每年进贡从不间断减少。
English: More than 30 people, including King Gongnong, Wang Shujin and others, all said, "Deqiu and Muye are inferior small countries attached to the western borderlands. Although they are not very submissive to us in their hearts, but since the succession, the annual tribute has been decreasing without interruption.

古文：朝廷待以籓臣，妻以公主；今其罪恶未彰，宜加恕宥。
现代文：朝廷也把他作为一个藩臣来看待，嫁公主给他为妻。如今，他的罪行还不十分明显，应该加以宽恕。
English: The imperial court also regarded him as a vassal of the domain and married him to a princess. Today, his crime is not very obvious and should be forgiven.

古文：国家新征蠕蠕，士马疲弊，未可大举。
现代文：我国最近刚刚讨伐柔然汗国归来，人马疲惫，不能够再大举兴兵征讨了。
English: Our country has just recently returned from the war against the Mongolian Khanate, and our men and horses are exhausted, and we can no longer conscript large numbers of soldiers.

古文：且闻其土地卤瘠，难得水草，大军既至，彼必婴城固守。
现代文：况且，我还听说，凉国的土地贫瘠，盐碱地居多，水草也不多。我们大军兵临城下，他们一定环城固守。
English: Moreover, I have also heard that the land of Liangguo is barren, with a lot of saline and alkaline land, and not many aquatic plants. Our large army and soldiers are under the city, and they will definitely keep around the city.

古文：攻之不拔，野无所掠，此危道也。 
现代文：我军久攻不克，荒郊野外也没有什么可劫掠，这可是个危险的策略。 
English: Our army has not attacked for a long time, and there is nothing to loot outside the wilderness. This is a dangerous strategy.

古文：初，崔浩恶尚书李顺，顺使凉州凡十二返，魏主以为能。
现代文：当初，崔浩讨厌尚书李顺。李顺出使北凉，往返共十二次，拓跋焘认为李顺有才能。
English: At first, Cui Hao disliked Li Shun. Li Shun was sent to Bei Liang twelve times, and Tuobao thought that Li Shun was talented.

古文：凉武宣王数与顺游宴，对其群下时为骄慢之语；恐顺泄之，随以金宝纳于顺怀，顺亦为之隐。
现代文：当年，北凉武宣王沮渠蒙逊多次与李顺一起游乐宴饮，沮渠蒙逊常对群臣下属说一些骄傲无礼的大话，害怕李顺泄漏给北魏朝廷，就随即把金银财宝塞进李顺的怀里，李顺也就替他隐瞒。
English: At that time, the king of Liangwu Xuan in Northern Liangwu, Deqiu Mengxun, often had banquets with Li Shun. Deqiu Mengxun often said some arrogant and rude words to his subordinates. He was afraid that Li Shun would leak to the Northern Wei Dynasty, so he immediately put gold and silver treasures into Li Shun's arms, and Li Shun also hid them for him.

古文：浩知之，密以白魏主，魏主未之信。
现代文：崔浩知道后，就秘密报告给拓跋焘，拓跋焘不相信。
English: After Cui Hao knew, he secretly reported to Tuobao, but Tuobao did not believe him.

古文：及议伐凉州，顺与尚书古弼皆曰： 自温圉水以西至姑臧，地皆枯石，绝无水草。
现代文：等到这时讨论进攻北凉时，李顺和古弼都说： 从温圉水以西直到姑臧，遍地都是枯石，绝对没有水草。
English: At this time, when discussing the attack on Beiliang, both Li Shun and Gu Ying said: From the west of Wenzhou Water to Gu Ying, there are dead stones everywhere, and there is absolutely no aquatic plants.

古文：彼人言，姑臧城南天梯山上，冬有积雪，深至丈馀，春夏消释，下流成川，居民引以溉灌。
现代文：当地人说：姑臧城南的天梯山上，冬天有积雪，深达几丈。春季和夏季的时候，积雪融化，从山上流下来，形成河流，当地居民就是引雪水入渠，灌溉农田。
English: Locals say: On the Tiantai Mountains south of the city of Guzhen, there is snow in winter, up to several meters deep. In spring and summer, the snow melts and flows down from the mountains to form rivers. Local residents divert snow water into canals to irrigate farmland.

古文：彼闻军至，决此渠口，水必乏绝。
现代文：如果凉州人听说我们大军开到，一定会掘开渠口，让水流尽，我军的人马就无水可用。
English: If the people of Liangzhou hear that our army has arrived, they will certainly dig a ditch and let the water run out, and our soldiers will have no water to use.

古文：环城百里之内，地不生草，人马饥渴，难以久留。
现代文：姑臧城方圆百里之内，土地因无水杂草不生，我军人马饥渴，也难以久留。
English: Within a hundred-mile radius of the city of Guzhen, the land does not grow weeds because there is no water. Our soldiers are hungry and thirsty, and it is difficult for them to stay for a long time.

古文：斤等之议是也。 
现代文：奚斤他们的意见是正确的。 
English: I think they are right.

古文：魏主乃命浩与斤等相诘难。众无复它言，但云 彼无水草 。浩曰： 《汉书·地理志》称 凉州之畜为天下饶 ，若无水草，畜何以蕃？
现代文：拓跋焘于是让崔浩和奚斤辩论，众人再没有别的话可说，只是声称 凉州没有水草 。崔浩说： 《汉书·地理志》中讲道： 凉州的畜产，天下最为富饶。 如果那里没有水草，牲畜怎么繁殖？
English: Tuobao then let Cui Hao and Yao Jin debate, and the crowd had nothing else to say, except to claim that there were no aquatic plants in Liangzhou. Cui Hao said: In the "Chinese Book of Geography," there is a sermon: Livestock production in Liangzhou is the richest in the world. If there are no aquatic plants there, how can livestock breed?

古文：又，汉人终不于无水草之地筑城郭，建郡县也。
现代文：另外，汉朝绝不会在没有水草的土地上兴筑城郭，设置郡县。
English: In addition, the Han Dynasty would never build castles and set up counties on land without aquatic plants.

古文：且雪之消释，仅能敛尘，何得通渠溉灌乎！
现代文：况且，高山冰雪融化以后，只能浸湿地皮，收敛尘土，怎么能够挖通渠道，灌溉农田呢！
English: Moreover, after the melting of alpine snow and ice, only the wet ground can be soaked, and the dust can be collected. How can channels be dug through to irrigate farmland?

古文：此言大为欺诬矣。 
现代文：这种话实在是荒谬不可信。 
English: It's just so preposterous and unbelievable.

古文：李顺曰： 耳闻不如目见，吾尝目见，何可共辩 浩曰： 汝受人金钱，欲为之游说，谓我目不见便可欺邪！ 
现代文：李顺说： 耳闻不如亲眼所见。我曾经亲眼看到，你有什么资格和我辩论？ 崔浩说： 你接受了人家的金钱贿赂，想要替人家说话，你以为我没有亲眼看到就能被你蒙蔽吗！ 
English: Li Shun said: Hearing is not as good as seeing. I once saw with my own eyes, what qualifications do you have to debate with me? Cui Hao said: You accepted someone else's money bribe and want to speak for others, do you think I can be blinded by you without seeing with my own eyes!

古文：帝隐听，闻之，乃出见斤等，辞色严厉，群臣不敢复言，唯唯而已。
现代文：隐藏在屏风后面的拓跋焘听到这些话，就走出来面见奚斤等人，声音和表情都十分严厉，群臣不敢再说什么，唯唯听命而已。
English: When Tuobao, who was hidden behind the screen, heard these words, he came out to face the others. Their voices and expressions were very stern. The ministers did not dare to say anything, but only obeyed orders.

古文：群臣既出，振威将军代人伊馛言于帝曰： 凉州若果无水草，彼何以为国？
现代文：文武群臣走出太极殿后，振威将军、代郡人伊对拓跋焘说： 凉州如果真的没有水草，他们怎么建立王国？
English: After the civil and military ministers left the Taiji Hall, General Zhenwei, the representative of the county people, said to Tuoba: If there is really no aquatic plants in Liangzhou, how can they build a kingdom?

古文：众议皆不可用，宜从浩言。 
现代文：大多数人说的都不可采用，您应该听崔浩的话。 
English: What most people say is not applicable, you should listen to Cui Hao.

古文：帝善之。
现代文：拓跋焘同意他的说法。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：夏，五月，丁丑，魏主治兵于西郊；六月，甲辰，发平城。
现代文：夏季五月，丁丑，拓跋焘在平城西郊训练军队。六月，甲辰，大军从平城出发。
English: In the summer of May, Dingwuxu and Tuobao trained the army in the western suburb of Pingcheng. In June, Jiachen, the army set out from Pingcheng.

古文：使侍中宜都王穆寿辅太子晃监国，决留台事，内外听焉。
现代文：命令侍中、宜都王穆寿辅佐太子拓跋晃，主持朝政，裁决日常事务，朝廷内外都要遵从。
English: He ordered the Chamberlain, the King of Yidu, Mu Shoufu, and the Prince's aide, Tuobao, to preside over the imperial government and adjudicate on daily affairs, and both inside and outside the imperial court had to obey.

古文：又使大将军长乐王稽敬、辅国大将军建宁王崇将二万人屯漠南以备柔然。
现代文：拓跋焘又派大将军、长乐王嵇敬，以及辅国大将军、建宁王拓跋崇，率领二万人，屯驻漠南，防备柔然汗国乘虚进攻。
English: Tuobao also sent a general, Changle Wang Shujing, and an auxiliary general, Jianning Wang Tuobaozong, leading 20,000 people, stationed in the south of the country, to guard against the attack of the Juran Khanate.

古文：命公卿为书以让河西王牧犍，数其十二罪，且曰： 若亲帅群臣委贽远迎，谒拜马首，上策也。六军既临，面缚舆榇，其次也。若守迷穷城，不时悛悟，身死族灭，为世大戮。
现代文：拓跋焘又命令大臣们发布文告，历数北凉王沮渠牧犍的十二项罪状，并且警告沮渠牧犍说： 你如果亲自率领群臣，远远地出来伏在地上迎接，然后在我马首跪拜请罪，这是上策；我军兵临城下，你双手反绑携带空棺出城迎接，这是中策；你要是困守孤城，不及时醒悟，就要身死族灭，受到天下最酷烈的惩罚！
English: Tuobao also ordered his ministers to issue a proclamation, enumerating the twelve crimes of Bei Liang Wang Diqiu Muqi, and warned Diqiu Muqi, saying: If you personally lead a group of ministers, come out from a distance and prostrate yourself on the ground to meet, and then kneel at the head of my horse to plead guilty, this is the best strategy; when our soldiers come to the city, you tie your hands behind your back and carry an empty coffin out of the city to meet, this is the middle strategy; if you are trapped in a lonely city and do not wake up in time, you will die and suffer the most severe punishment in the world!

古文：宜思厥中，自求多福！ 
现代文：你要权衡利害，为自己寻一条生路。 
English: You have to weigh up the odds and find a way out for yourself.

古文：己酉，改封陇西王吐谷浑慕利延为河南王。
现代文：己酉，刘宋改封陇西王吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延为河南王。
English: Ji Kun, Liu Song changed the title of the King of Shaanxi to the King of Tuyun, Khan Murong, Muriyan to the King of Henan.

古文：魏主自云中济河，秋，七月，己巳，至上郡属国城。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘从云中渡过黄河。秋季，己巳，抵达上郡属国城。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty crossed the Yellow River from Yunzhong. In the autumn, he arrived in Shangxian.

古文：壬午，留辎重，部分诸军，使抚军大将军永昌王健、尚书令刘絜与常山王素为前锋，两道并进；骠骑大将军乐平王丕、太宰阳平王杜超为后继；以平西将军源贺为乡导。
现代文：壬午，大军留下辎重，部署分派各军，命令抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健，与尚书令刘、常山王拓跋素为前锋，分两路同时进发；又命令骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕，太宰、阳平王杜超为后备军；又命平西将军源贺为向导。
English: In the morning of the 13th, the great army left the heavy baggage behind, deployed and assigned each army, and ordered the general of the army, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, to be the vanguard, and Shang Shu ordered Liu and Changshan Wang Tuoba Su to be the vanguard, and to advance in two directions at the same time; and ordered the general of the cavalry, Leping Wang Tuoba Jian, Dazai, Yangping Wang Du Chao to be the reserve army; and also ordered the general of Pingxi, Yuan He, to be the guide.

古文：魏主问贺以取凉州方略，对曰： 姑臧城旁有四部鲜卑，皆臣祖父旧民，臣愿处军前，宣国威信，示以祸福，必相帅归命。
现代文：拓跋焘曾向源贺询问攻取北凉的作战方案，源贺回答说： 姑臧城的旁边有四个鲜卑族部落，都是我祖父的老部下，我愿意在大军未到之前，向他们宣扬我国的威信，分析祸福利害，他们一定会相继归降。
English: Tuobao once asked Geng He about the battle plan to capture Beiliang. Geng He replied, "There are four tribes of the Xianbei people next to Guye City. They are all my grandfather's old subordinates. I am willing to preach the prestige of our country to them before the great army arrives, and analyze the benefits and harms. They will surely surrender one after another."

古文：外援既服，然后取其孤城，如反掌耳。 
现代文：城外的援军一旦瓦解，然后攻取孤城，就易如反掌了。 
English: Once the reinforcements outside the city disintegrate and then capture the lone city, it will be as easy as pie.

古文：魏主曰： 善！ 
现代文：拓跋焘说： 太好了！ 
English: Tuoba said, "That's great!

古文：八月，甲午，永昌王健获河西畜产二十馀万。
现代文：八月，甲午，北魏永昌王拓跋健缴获北凉的各种牲畜共二十余万头。
English: In the afternoon of August, the Northern Wei Yongchang King Tuoba Jian captured more than 200,000 heads of various livestock in Beilang.

古文：河西王牧犍闻有魏师，惊曰： 何为乃尔！ 
现代文：北凉王沮渠牧犍听说北魏大军前来的消息，大吃一惊，说： 怎么会是这样！ 
English: After hearing the news that the Northern Wei army had arrived, the Northern Liang Wang Dequan herdsman was taken aback and said: "How could this be!

古文：用左丞姚定国计，不肯出迎，求救于柔然。
现代文：随后，他采用了左丞相姚定国的计策，不肯出城迎接，却向柔然汗国请求救兵。
English: Subsequently, he adopted the strategy of Yao Dingguo, the Minister of the Left, and refused to go out of the city to meet, but requested the rescue of soldiers from Juran Khan.

古文：遣其弟征南大将军董来将兵万馀人出战于城南，望风奔溃。
现代文：沮渠牧犍派他的弟弟征南大将军沮渠董来统兵一万多人，在城南出城迎战北魏军，北凉军望风崩溃。
English: Deshu Muxuan sent his younger brother, the Southern Expeditionary General Deshu Dong, to lead more than ten thousand soldiers to fight the Northern Wei Army in the south of the city, and the Northern Liang Army collapsed.

古文：刘絜用卜者言，以为日辰不不利，敛兵不追，董来遂得入城。
现代文：北魏前锋将领刘听信占卜人的预言，以为日子不吉利，所以召回军队没有乘胜追击，沮渠董来才得以逃进姑臧城。
English: Liu, the front-line general of the Northern Wei Dynasty, believed the fortuneteller's prediction and thought that the day was not auspicious. Therefore, he did not use the victory to call back the army and pursue the enemy. He was only able to escape into the city of Gushan because of Dong Lai's frustration.

古文：魏主由是怒之。
现代文：拓跋焘因此对刘十分恼怒。
English: As a result, Tuobao was very angry with Liu.

古文：丙申，魏主至姑臧，遣使谕牧犍令出降。
现代文：丙申，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达姑臧城下，派人通知沮渠牧犍，让他迅速出城投降。
English: Binshen, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuobao arrived at the foot of the city of Gushan, and sent someone to inform Zhuoqiu Muyi, so that he could quickly leave the city and surrender.

古文：牧犍闻柔然欲入魏边为寇，冀幸魏主东还，遂婴城固守；其兄子祖逾城出降，魏主具知其情，乃分军围之。
现代文：沮渠牧犍听说柔然汗国就要进攻北魏的边境，所以他还希望拓跋焘率军东还，援救国内。于是，沮渠牧犍命令将士绕城固守。沮渠牧犍的侄儿沮渠祖，翻越城墙投降了北魏军。拓跋焘于是了解了北凉的真实情况，拓跋焘分军包围了姑臧城。
English: He heard that the Zhu Ran Khanate was about to attack the border of the Northern Wei Dynasty, so he also hoped that Tuoba Rong would lead the army to the east and rescue the country. Therefore, Tuoba Rong ordered the soldiers to stay around the city. Tuoba Rong's nephew, Tuoba Rong, climbed over the city wall and surrendered to the Northern Wei Army. Tuoba Rong then learned the true situation of Beiliang, and Tuoba Rong's detachment surrounded the city of Guan.

古文：源贺引兵招慰诸部下三万馀落，故魏主得专攻姑臧，无复外虑。
现代文：源贺率兵招抚了他祖父的旧部三万多个帐落，所以拓跋焘得以集中全力攻城，没有顾虑。
English: The troops led by Genga attracted more than 30,000 troops from his grandfather's old army, so Tuobao was able to concentrate all his efforts on attacking the city without any concerns.

古文：魏主见姑臧城外水草丰饶，由是恨李顺，谓崔浩曰： 卿之昔言，今果验矣。 
现代文：拓跋焘看到姑臧城外水草茂盛，由此痛恨李顺，对崔浩说： 你当年说过的话，今天果然应验了。 
English: Seeing the lush water plants outside Guzheng, Tuobao hated Li Shun and said to Cui Hao, "What you said last year has come true today.

古文：对曰： 臣之言不敢不实，类皆如此。 
现代文：崔浩回答说： 我不敢不讲实话，一向如此。 
English: Cui Hao replied: I dare not not tell the truth, I always do.

古文：魏主之将伐凉州也，太子晃亦以为疑。
现代文：拓跋焘决计讨伐北凉，太子拓跋晃有些疑虑。
English: Prince Tuobao was determined to fight against the Northern Liang Dynasty, but Prince Tuobao had some doubts.

古文：至是，魏主赐太子诏曰： 姑臧城东、西门外，涌泉合于城北，其大如河。
现代文：这时，拓跋焘在诏书中告诉他： 姑臧城西门外边，有源源涌出的泉水，一直与北门外的泉水相接，水流之大，就象一条河。
English: At this time, Tuobao told him in his edict: "Outside the west gate of Guzheng, there is a spring water gushing from the source, which has been connected to the spring water outside the north gate. The water flow is large, just like a river.

古文：自馀沟渠流入漠中，其间乃无燥地。
现代文：除供灌溉农田外，其余都顺着沟渠流到沙漠之中，因此这一带没有干田燥地。
English: Except for irrigated farmland, the rest flows along the ditch into the desert, so there are no dry fields in this area.

古文：故有此敕，以释汝疑。 
现代文：特意敕书告诉你，以解除你的疑虑。 
English: I am writing to you specifically to address your concerns.

古文：庚子，立皇子铄为南平王。
现代文：庚子，刘宋立皇子刘铄为南平王。
English: Geng Zi, Liu Song and his son Liu Ye became the king of Nanping.

古文：九月，丙戌，河西王牧犍兄子万年帅所领降魏。
现代文：九月，丙戌，北凉王沮渠牧犍的侄儿沮渠万年率领他的部众投降北魏。
English: In September, Hun Sen, the nephew of the Northern Liang Dynasty's King Deqiu, led his troops to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：姑臧城溃，牧犍帅其文武五千人面缚请降，魏主释其缚而礼之。
现代文：姑臧城随即被北魏军攻陷，沮渠牧犍率领文武官员五千人，双手反绑，亲自请降。拓跋焘解开沮渠牧犍的绳索，以礼相待。
English: The city of Guzheng was immediately conquered by the Northern Wei army. Deqiu Mu Rong led five thousand civil and military officials, with his hands tied behind his back, and personally asked to surrender. Tuoba Rong untied Deqiu Mu Rong's ropes and treated him with courtesy.

古文：收其城内户口二十馀万，仓库珍宝不可胜计。
现代文：共接收姑臧城内的居民二十余万户，仓库中的珍奇异宝不可胜数。
English: A total of more than 200,000 households in the city of Guzhen have been received, and the treasures in the warehouse are countless.

古文：使张掖王秃发保周、龙骑将军穆罢、安远将军源贺分徇诸郡，杂胡降者又数十万。
现代文：拓跋焘又命令张掖王秃发保周、龙骧将军穆罴、安远将军源贺，分别向地方各郡宣布消息，各族胡人投降北魏的又有几十万。
English: Tuobao also ordered Zhangye's King Balda Bozhou, Longtao's General Mu Xi, and Anyuan's General Yuan He to announce the news to the local counties separately. Hundreds of thousands of Hu people of all ethnic groups surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，牧犍以其弟无讳为沙州刺史、都督建康以西诸军事、领酒泉太守，宜得为秦州刺史、都督丹岭以西诸军事、领张掖太守，安周为乐都太守，从弟唐儿为敦煌太守。
现代文：当初，沮渠牧犍任命他的弟弟沮渠无讳为沙州刺史、都督建康以西诸军事，兼任酒泉太守；任命沮渠宜得为秦州刺史、都督丹岭以西诸军事，兼任张掖太守；任命沮渠安周为乐都太守；还任命他的堂弟沮渠唐儿为敦煌太守。
English: At first, Depuqiu Muqi appointed his younger brother Depuqiu Muxun as the military governor of Shazhou and the military governor of the west of Jiankang, and also as the governor of Jiuquan; appointed Depuqiu Yide as the military governor of Qinzhou and the military governor of the west of Danling, and also as the governor of Zhangye; appointed Depuqiu Anzhou as the governor of Letu; and also appointed his cousin Depuqiu Tang'er as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：及姑臧破，魏主遣镇南将军代人奚眷击张掖，镇北将军封沓击乐都。
现代文：等到姑臧城被攻陷，北魏国主拓跋焘，派镇南将军、代郡人奚眷袭击张掖；派镇北将军封沓进攻乐都。
English: After the fall of Gushan, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, sent General Zhenan and his deputies to attack Zhangye. He also sent General Zhenbei to attack Letu.

古文：宜得烧仓库，西奔酒泉；安周南奔吐谷浑，封沓掠数千户而还。
现代文：沮渠宜得烧毁仓库，向西逃往酒泉；沮渠安周则向南逃往吐谷浑。
English: Depu Quan had to burn down the warehouse and fled west to Jiuquan; Depu Quan An Zhou fled south to Tuyugun.

古文：奚眷进攻酒泉，无讳、宜得收遗民奔晋昌，遂就唐儿于敦煌。
现代文：封沓裹胁数千户居民班师，奚眷则继续进攻酒泉，酒泉太守沮渠无讳与沮渠宜得一道，招集残部投奔晋昌，又前往敦煌投奔沮渠唐儿。
English: Thousands of households were besieged and thousands of residents were arrested, while their dependents continued to attack Jiuquan. Jiuquan's daimyō, Duanquan Muzhan, along with Duanquan Yidie, called on the remnants to flee to Jinchang, and then to Dunhuang to flee to Duanquan Tangye.

古文：魏主使弋阳公元絜守酒泉，及武威、张掖皆置将守之。
现代文：拓跋焘命令戈阳公元驻守酒泉，武威、张掖两城也分别遣将驻守。
English: Tuobao ordered Goyang to garrison Jiuquan, and Wuwei and Zhangye were also garrisoned separately.

古文：魏主置酒姑臧，谓群臣曰： 崔公智略有馀，吾不复以为奇。
现代文：拓跋焘在姑臧城大宴群臣，他对文武百官们说： 崔公足智多谋，我已经不再感到新奇。
English: Tuobao was attending a grand banquet of ministers in Guzheng. He said to the hundreds of civil and military officials: Cui Gongfu is resourceful. I no longer feel strange.

古文：伊馛弓马之士，而所见乃与崔公同，深可奇也！ 
现代文：伊是一个擅长骑马射箭的武夫，他的见识竟能与崔公相同，实在是令人惊奇。 
English: Yi is a warrior who is good at riding and archery. It is amazing that his insight is the same as that of Cui Gong.

古文：馛善射，能曳牛却行，走及奔马，而性忠谨，故魏主特爱之。
现代文：伊善长射箭，力气也很大，能拖着牛倒着走，跑起来，能够赶上奔腾的马。同时伊又十分忠诚谨慎，拓跋焘特别喜爱他。
English: Yishan is good at archery and has great strength. He can drag a cow backwards, run uphill, and catch a galloping horse. At the same time, he is very loyal and cautious. Tuobao especially loves him.

古文：魏主之西伐也，穆寿送至河上，魏主敕之曰： 吴提与牧犍相结素深，闻朕讨牧犍，吴提必犯塞，朕故留壮兵肥马，使卿辅佐太子。
现代文：拓跋焘即将率军西征时，宜都王穆寿一直送他到黄河岸边。拓跋焘告诫他说： 柔然汗国可汗郁久闾吴提与沮渠牧犍交情很深，他听说我要征讨沮渠牧犍，一定会来进犯我国边境，所以我故意留下精兵和壮马，使你辅佐太子。
English: When Tuobao was about to lead his army to the west, King Mu Shou of Yidu sent him all the way to the shore of the Yellow River. Tuobao admonished him: "The khan of the Juran Khanate, Yu Jiuyong Wu Ti, has a deep friendship with Deqiu Muyi. He heard that I wanted to recruit Deqiu Muyi, and that he would definitely come to invade our country's border, so I deliberately left behind elite soldiers and strong horses to assist the crown prince.

古文：收田既毕，即发兵诣漠南，分伏要害以待虏至。引使深入，然后击之，无不克矣。
现代文：等到田里的庄稼收割完毕，我立即发兵征讨漠南，我军分别潜伏在要害地区，等待柔然贼兵到来，再诱敌深入，然后攻击他们，必能全部攻克。
English: When the crops in the fields are harvested, I will immediately send troops to recruit the desert south. Our army will lurk separately in the key areas, wait for the gentle thief soldiers to arrive, then lure the enemy deeper, and then attack them, and will surely be able to conquer all.

古文：凉州路远，朕不得救，卿勿违朕言！ 
现代文：凉州离国内太远，我不能救你的危难，你千万不要违背我的嘱咐。 
English: Liangzhou is too far from home, I can't save you from danger, you must not disobey my orders.

古文：寿顿首受命。
现代文：穆寿叩头接受了命令。
English: Mu Shou kowtowed and accepted the order.

古文：寿雅信中书博士公孙质，以为谋主。
现代文：穆寿一向信任中书博士公孙质，就把他当做自己的谋士。
English: Mu Shou has always trusted the Chinese calligrapher Gong Sun Quan, and regarded him as his own adviser.

古文：寿、质皆信卜筮，以为柔然必不来，不为之备。
现代文：而穆寿、公孙质二人都相信占筮卜卦，认为柔然汗国的军队一定不会前来进犯，因此不加防备。
English: However, Mu Shou and Gong Sun Quan both believed in divination, and thought that the army of the Khanate of Rouran would not come to attack, so they did not take precautions.

古文：质，轨之弟也。
现代文：公孙质是公孙轨的弟弟。
English: Gongsun Quan is Gongsun Guo's younger brother.

古文：柔然敕连可汗闻魏主向姑臧，乘虚入寇，留其兄乞列归与嵇敬、建宁王崇相拒于北镇，自帅精骑深入，至善无七介山，平城大骇，民争走中城。
现代文：柔然汗国敕连可汗郁久闾吴提听说拓跋焘西征姑臧，立即乘北魏国内空虚，大举入侵。当时，郁久闾吴提留他的哥哥郁久闾乞列归与北魏长乐王嵇敬、建宁王拓跋崇在北镇相持。郁久闾吴提自己则亲自率兵深入北魏腹地，直抵善无的七介山。北魏平城居民大为惊恐，争相逃进内城。
English: When Ikukyu Uchi, a khan of Yulian Khanate, heard of the Western Conquest, he immediately took advantage of the emptiness in Northern Wei to invade. At that time, Ikukyu Uchi left his brother, Ikukyu Uchi, to join the Northern Wei Changle Wang Xingjing and Jianning Wang Tuobasong in Beizhen. Ikukyu Uchi himself personally led the troops deep into the Northern Wei hinterland, right up to the good-for-nothing Qixiaoshan. The residents of Northern Wei Pingcheng were greatly alarmed and fled into the inner city.

古文：穆寿不知所为，欲塞西郭门，请太子避保南山，窦太后不听而止。
现代文：穆寿不知所措，打算堵塞西城门，请太子拓跋晃逃往南山躲避，窦太后不让他这样处理，才告停止。
English: Mu Shou was at a loss. He planned to block the west gate of the city and asked Prince Tuobao to flee to Nanshan to escape. However, Empress Dowager Dou did not allow him to do so, and he was forced to stop.

古文：遣司空长孙道生、征北大将军张黎拒之于吐颓山。
现代文：随即，穆寿派遣司空长孙道生、征北大将军张黎在吐颓山阻击敌人。
English: Immediately afterwards, Mu Shou dispatched Sun Daosheng, the chief of the Air Force, and Zhang Li, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, to block the enemy on Mount Tubo.

古文：会嵇敬、建宁王崇击破乞列归于阴山之北，擒之，并其伯父他吾无鹿胡及将帅五百人，斩首万馀级。
现代文：正巧赶上嵇敬和建宁王拓跋崇在阴山北面击败了郁久闾乞列归的军队，并生擒郁久闾乞列归及其伯父郁久闾他吾无鹿胡，以及柔然的将领五百人，斩杀士卒一万多人。
English: Just in time to catch up with Yu Jing and Jian Ning, King Tuoba Chong defeated the army of Yu Jiu and his uncle Yu Jiu and his uncle Wu Wu Luhu on the north side of Yin Mountain, and killed more than ten thousand soldiers.

古文：敕连闻之，遁去；追至漠南而还。
现代文：柔然汗国可汗郁久闾吴提听说后，率部逃走。北魏的军队一直追到漠南才返回。
English: After hearing about Wu Ti, the khan of the Zhu Ran Khanate, Yujujun, and his entourage fled. The Northern Wei army chased them all the way to the south of the desert before returning.

古文：冬，十月，辛酉，魏主东还，留乐平王丕及征西将军贺多罗镇凉州，徙沮渠牧犍宗族及吏民三万户于平城。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛酉，北魏国主拓跋焘东返，留下乐平王拓跋丕以及征西将军贺多罗镇守凉州，强行迁徙沮渠牧犍王室以及北凉的官员和老百姓共三万户到平城。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to the east, leaving King Tuoba of the Leping Dynasty and the general of the Western Expedition, Hedoro, to guard Liangzhou, and forced the royal family, as well as the officials and ordinary people of Liangbei, a total of 30,000 households, to migrate to Pingcheng.

古文：癸亥，秃发保周帅诸部鲜卑据张掖叛魏。
现代文：癸亥，北魏张掖王秃发保周，据守张掖叛变。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zhang Ye, the king of Zhangye, was bald and bald, and Zhang Ye rebelled.

古文：十二月，乙亥，太子劭加元服，大赦。
现代文：十二月，乙亥，刘宋太子刘劭举行冠礼，大赦天下。
English: In December, Yihai, Liu Song's son Liu Xuan held a coronation ceremony and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：劭美鬓眉，好读书，便弓马，喜延宾客；意之所欲，上必从之，东宫置兵与羽林等。
现代文：刘劭眉目清秀，喜欢读书，擅长骑马射箭，喜爱延接宾客。只要他有所要求，文帝都满足。于是刘劭在东宫设置亲兵的数目与羽林军相等。
English: Liu Zhen was fair-faced, liked to read, was good at horse riding and archery, and liked to receive guests. As long as he had a request, Emperor Wen was satisfied. Therefore, Liu Zhen set up the number of his own soldiers in the East Palace equal to that of the Ulin Army.

古文：壬午，魏主至平城，以柔然入寇，无大失亡，故穆寿等得不诛。
现代文：壬午，北魏国主拓跋焘返回平城。因柔然汗国的进攻没有造成重大的损失和伤亡，所以没有处决宜都王穆寿等人。
English: In the morning of the following day, the head of the Northern Wei State, Tuobao, returned to Pingcheng. Because the attack of the Juran Khanate did not cause significant losses and casualties, there was no execution of Yidu King Mu Shou and others.

古文：魏主犹以妹婿待沮渠牧犍，征西大将军、河西王如故。
现代文：拓跋焘仍把沮渠牧犍当作妹婿来对待，仍命沮渠牧犍象过去一样担任征西大将军、河西王。
English: Tuobao still treated Deqiu Muyi as his brother-in-law, and Deqiu Muyi still served as the general of the Western Expedition and the king of Hexi as in the past.

古文：牧犍母卒，葬以太妃礼；为武宣王置守冢三十家。
现代文：沮渠牧犍的母亲去世，拓跋焘下令用太妃的礼仪安葬。另外，又为北凉武宣王沮渠蒙逊专门设置守冢户三十家。
English: When the mother of Deshu Moxon passed away, Tuobao ordered that she be buried with the etiquette of a taifu. In addition, he set up 30 guarding households specifically for King Deshu Moxon of the Northern Liangwu Xuan.

古文：凉州自张氏以来，号为多士。
现代文：凉州自从前凉国建立以来，一直号称人才济济。
English: Since the establishment of the former Liangguo, Liangzhou has always been known for its talent.

古文：沮渠牧犍尤喜文学，以敦煌阚骃为姑臧太守，张湛为兵部尚书，刘昞、索敞、阴兴为国师助教，金城宋钦为世子洗马，赵柔为金部郎，广平程骏、骏从弟弘为世子侍讲。
现代文：沮渠牧犍尤其喜欢文学，任命敦煌人阚为姑臧太守，张湛为兵部尚书，刘、索敞、阴兴为国师助教，金城人宋钦为世子洗马，赵柔为金部郎，广平人程骏，以及程骏的堂弟程弘为世子侍讲。
English: Deshu Muxuan was particularly fond of literature. He appointed Dunhuang's Zhengyu as the first lady of Guzheng, Zhang Zhan as the head of the military department of Shangshu, Liu, Sokang and Yin Xing as the assistant teachers of the state, Jincheng's Song Qin as the heir of Shima, Zhao Rong as the heir of Jin, Guangping's Cheng Yao, and Cheng Yao's cousin Cheng Hong as the heir of Zhengyu.

古文：魏主克凉州，皆礼而用之，以阚骃、刘昞为乐平王丕从事中郎。
现代文：拓跋焘攻克凉州以后，对这些士大夫都以礼相待，因才而用。于是，拓跋焘任命阚、刘为乐平王拓跋丕的从事中郎。
English: After Tuobao conquered Liangzhou, he treated these officials with courtesy and used them for their talents. Therefore, Tuobao appointed Zou and Liu as the middlemen of Leping King Tuobao.

古文：安定胡叟，少有俊才，往从牧犍，牧犍不甚重之，叟谓程弘曰： 贵主居僻陋之国而淫名僭礼，以小事大而心不纯壹，外慕仁义而实无道德，其亡可翘足待也。
现代文：安定人胡叟自幼便才华横溢，前往姑臧为沮渠牧犍效力，沮渠牧犍却不十分重视他。胡叟对程弘说： 贵国的主人身居穷乡僻壤的小国，却敢滥用名分，超越礼制；以小国事奉大国却又不诚心敬服；表面上仰慕仁义，实际上却不讲道德，他的灭亡就在眼前了。
English: Hu Yao, a stable person, had been brilliant since childhood. He went to Guzheng to work for Zhuzheng, but Zhuzheng did not pay much attention to him. Hu Yao said to Cheng Hong: The master of your country lives in a small country in the remote countryside, but dares to abuse his title and surpasses the etiquette; he serves a big country with a small country but does not sincerely respect it; on the surface he admires benevolence, but in reality he does not speak of morality, his demise is in sight.

古文：吾将择木，先集于魏；与子暂违，非久阔也。 
现代文：我将象鸟儿一样，择木而栖，先到魏国去。与你暂且辞别，不会久别的。 
English: Like a bird, I will choose a tree to perch on, and go first to Wei. I will say goodbye to you for the time being, but not for long.

古文：遂适魏。
现代文：于是，胡叟来到北魏。
English: So, Hu Yao came to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：岁馀而牧犍败。
现代文：一年之后，北凉灭亡。
English: A year later, Bei Liang perished.

古文：魏主以叟为先识，拜虎威将军，赐爵始复男。
现代文：拓跋焘因为胡叟有先见之明，任命他为虎威将军，赐封爵位为始复男爵。
English: Because of Hu Yao's foresight, Tuoba Yao appointed him as General Hu Wei and gave him the title of Baron Shi Fu.

古文：河内常爽，世寓凉州，不受礼命，魏主以为宣威将军。
现代文：河内人常爽世世代代寓居凉州，从不接受北凉的礼遇和任官，拓跋焘任命他为宣威将军。
English: Hanoi people have been living in Liangzhou for generations, never accepting the courtesy and appointment of Bei Liang. Tuobao appointed him as Xuan Wei general.

古文：河西右相宋繇从魏主至平城而卒。
现代文：河西人、北凉国右丞相宋繇随从拓跋焘到平城，不久去世。
English: Song Qian, a native of Hexi and the right-hand man of Bei Liang, followed Tuobao to Pingcheng and died soon after.

古文：魏主以索敞为中书博士。
现代文：拓跋焘又委任索敞为中书博士。
English: Tuobao also appointed Sokang as a Doctor of Chinese Literature.

古文：时魏朝方尚武功，贵游子弟以讲学为意。
现代文：当时北魏朝廷正崇尚武功，贵族子弟都不把读书当作一件大事。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty court was advocating martial arts, and the children of aristocrats did not regard reading as an important thing.

古文：敞为博士十馀年，勤于诱导，肃而有礼，贵游皆严惮之，多所成立，前后显达至尚书、牧守者数十人。
现代文：索敞担任中书博士十余年，勤于诱导，对学生严肃而有礼节，贵族子弟们都敬畏他，大多数都能刻苦学习，建功立业，前后在朝中担任尚书、牧守的，就有几十人。
English: Sokang served as a doctor of Chinese literature for more than ten years. He was diligent in induction, serious and courteous to students. The children of aristocrats were in awe of him. Most of them were able to study hard and make contributions. There were dozens of people who served as scholars and pastors before and after the dynasty.

古文：常爽置馆于温水之右，教授七百馀人；爽立赏罚之科，弟子事之如严君。
现代文：常爽在温水的西岸设置学馆，教授学生七百多人。常爽订立赏罚条例，弟子们服从他，就象事奉严明的君主。
English: Chang Shuang set up a school on the west coast of the warm water, teaching more than seven hundred students. Chang Shuang set up reward and punishment regulations, and his disciples obeyed him, just like a strict monarch.

古文：由是魏之儒风始振。
现代文：从此以后，北魏的读书风气开始振兴。
English: From then on, the reading culture of the Northern Wei Dynasty began to revive.

古文：高允每称爽训厉有方，曰： 文翁柔胜，先生刚克，立教虽殊，成人一也。 
现代文：中书侍郎高允每每称赞常爽对待学生教训有方，说： 汉代的文翁以柔取胜，而先生您却用刚直的方法取胜，方法虽然有异，但造就人才的功效是一样的。 
English: Gao Yun, the secretary of the Chinese classics, praised Chang Shuang for his skillful treatment of students, saying, "The writers of the Han Dynasty won with gentleness, but you, sir, won with a straightforward method. Although the methods are different, the effect of cultivating talents is the same.

古文：陈留江强，寓居凉州，献经、史、诸子千馀卷及书法，亦拜中书博士。
现代文：陈留人江强，寄居在凉州，他向北魏朝廷呈献经、史以及诸子百家的经典有一千多卷，另外还有研究文字学的书籍，亦被拓跋焘任命为中书博士。
English: Chen Liuren Jiangqiang, who lived in Liangzhou, presented more than a thousand volumes of scriptures, histories and classics of various schools to the Northern Wei Dynasty court, as well as books on philology. He was also appointed by Tuobao as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：魏主命崔浩监秘书事，综理史职；以中书侍郎高允、散骑侍郎张伟参典著作。
现代文：拓跋焘命崔浩监理秘书事，综合整理历史史料文献；又任命中书侍郎高允、散骑侍郎张伟参预处理掌管这些事并修撰史籍。
English: Tuoba appointed Cui Hao as the supervisory secretary to comprehensively sort out historical materials and documents; he also appointed Gao Yun, the secretary of the Central Committee, and Zhang Wei, the secretary of the Sanzhi, to take charge of these matters and compile historical books.

古文：浩启称： 阴仲达、段承根，凉土美才，请同修国史。 
现代文：崔浩奏称： 阴仲逵、段承根，都是凉州的才子，请征召他们共同修撰国史。 
English: Cui Haoso said: Yin Zhongyao and Duan Chenggen are all talented people in Liangzhou, please conscript them to jointly write national history.

古文：皆除著作郎。
现代文：二人都被授予著作郎。
English: Both of them were awarded the title of Doctor of Letters.

古文：仲达，武威人；承根，晖之子也。
现代文：阴仲逵是武威人。段承根是段晖的儿子。
English: Yin Zhongyao was a warrior. Duan Chenggen was the son of Duan Yao.

古文：浩集诸历家，考校汉元以来日月薄食、五星行度，并讥前史之失，别为《魏历》，以示高允。
现代文：崔浩收集各家历书，考订核对汉朝建立以来发生的日食、月食，以及金、木、水、火、土五星运行的度数，对从前史书的错误加以批评，又另行编纂了一部《魏历》，请高允过目。
English: Cui Hao collected all the family almanacs, examined the eclipses of the sun and moon that have occurred since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, as well as the frequency of the movement of the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, criticized the errors of the previous history books, and compiled a separate "Wei Calendar," please Gao Yun.

古文：允曰： 汉元年十月，五星聚东井，此乃历术之浅事；今讥汉史而不觉此谬，恐后人之讥今犹今之讥古也。 
现代文：高允说： 汉高祖元年十月时，五星会聚在井宿，这是历书上一个小错。现在你不满于汉朝人修的史书，却不觉自己荒谬，恐怕后人也会象我们今天批评古人一样，来批评我们。 
English: Gao Yun said: In October of the first year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, the Five Stars gathered in Jingju, which is a small mistake in the almanac. Now you are dissatisfied with the history books compiled by the Han Dynasty, but you do not feel absurd. I am afraid that future generations will criticize us as we criticize the ancients today.

古文：浩曰： 所谬云何？ 
现代文：崔浩说 你所谓的荒谬指什么？ 
English: Cui Hao said: What do you mean by "absurd"?

古文：允曰： 案《星传》： 太白、辰星常附日而行。 
现代文：高允说： 根据《星传》： 金星、水星，常常环绕太阳转行。 
English: Gao Yun said, "According to "Star Biography," Venus and Mercury often revolve around the sun.

古文：十月，日在尾、箕，昏没于申南，而东井方出于寅北，二星何得背日而行？
现代文：十月，太阳早晨在尾宿、箕宿之间，黄昏时，在申南消失，而井宿这时才从寅北出现。金星和火星怎么会背着太阳运行？
English: In October, the sun disappears in the morning between the tail and the occiput, and in the evening between the tail and the occiput, and in the evening between the tail and the occiput, and in the evening between the tail and the occiput, and in the evening between the tail and the occiput, and in the evening between the tail and the occiput.

古文：是史官欲神其事，不复推之于理也。 
现代文：这是史官为了增加事件的神秘色彩，不再加以客观推断和考究的结果。 
English: This is the result of historians no longer objectively extrapolating and scrutinizing in order to increase the mysteriousness of events.

古文：浩曰： 天文欲为变者，何所不可邪？ 
现代文：崔浩说： 天文现象发生异常变化，怎么会不可能呢？ 
English: Cui Hao said: How can it be impossible for an unusual change to occur in an astronomical phenomenon?

古文：允曰： 此不可以空言争，宜更审之。 
现代文：高允说： 这不是我们空口无凭地急辩所能解决的，应该更进一步地考察审断。 
English: Gao Yun said: This is not something that can be solved by our empty talk and unsubstantiated hasty debate, and should be further investigated and adjudicated.

古文：坐者咸怪允之言，唯东宫少傅游雅曰： 高君精于历数，当不虚也。 
现代文：当时在座的人都认为高允的谈论怪诞，只有东宫少傅游雅说： 高允先生精通历法，应不会是空言虚论。 
English: At that time, everyone present thought that Gao Yun's talk was bizarre. Only Donggong Shao Fu Youya said: Mr. Gao Yun is proficient in the calendar, it should not be empty talk.

古文：后岁馀，浩谓允曰： 先所论者，本不经心；乃更考究，果如君言。
现代文：一年多以后，崔浩对高允说： 上次我们谈论的，我没有仔细研究。等到重新考核推断，果然象你所说的那样。
English: More than a year later, Cui Hao said to Gao Yun: I didn't carefully study what we talked about last time. When I re-evaluated and deduced, it was as you said.

古文：五星乃以前三月聚东井，非十月也。 
现代文：五星是在前三个月在井宿聚集，而不是十月。 
English: Five stars are gathered in Ijuku in the first three months, not in October.

古文：众乃叹服。
现代文：众人都赞叹佩服。
English: Everyone was full of admiration.

古文：允虽明历，初不推步及为人论说，唯游雅知之。
现代文：高允虽然通晓天文历法，却从不推算，并向众人论说，只有游雅知道他的学识。
English: Although Gao Yun was well-versed in the astronomical calendar, he never did any calculations and told everyone that only Youya knew about his knowledge.

古文：雅数以灾异问允，允曰： 阴阳灾异，知之甚难；既已知之，复恐漏泄，不如不知也。
现代文：游雅多次就灾变询问高允，高允说： 阴阳灾变，很难明知，即使已经知道了，又害怕泄漏天机，还不如不知道呢。
English: Youya repeatedly asked Gao Yun about the cataclysm, and Gao Yun said: It is difficult to know the yin and yang of the cataclysm. Even if you already know, and you are afraid of leaking the divine plan, it is better not to know.

古文：天下妙理至多，何遽问此！ 
现代文：天下值得探索的道理很多，何必偏问这个。 
English: There are many reasons worth exploring in the world, why not ask this one.

古文：雅乃止。
现代文：游雅才不再问下去。
English: You Ya just stopped asking.

古文：魏主问允： 为政何先？ 
现代文：拓跋焘曾问高允： 治理国家，什么是第一位的？ 
English: Tuobao once asked Gao Yun: In governing the country, what comes first?

古文：时魏多封禁良田，允曰： 臣少贱，唯知农事。
现代文：当时北魏境内的许多良田，都被朝廷划为禁地，因此，高允说： 我幼年贫贱，只知道农事。
English: At that time, many good fields in the territory of the Northern Wei Dynasty were forbidden by the imperial court. Therefore, Gaoyong said: I was poor when I was young and only knew farming.

古文：若国家广田积谷，公私有备，则饥馑不足忧矣。 
现代文：如果国家扩大农田、积聚谷米，使朝廷和百姓都有粮食储备，就不忧虑饥馑了。 
English: If the state expands farmland and accumulates grain and rice, so that the imperial court and the people have grain reserves, they will not worry about hunger.

古文：帝乃命悉除田禁以赋百姓。
现代文：拓跋焘于是下令，解除被划为禁地的农田，让百姓耕作，国家收取田赋。
English: Tuobao then issued an order to lift the ban on farmland, let the people cultivate, and the state collected the land tax.

古文：吐谷浑王慕利延闻魏克凉州，大惧，帅众西遁，逾沙漠。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延，听说北魏已经攻克凉州，大为惊恐，率领他的部众向西逃去，越过了沙漠。
English: Tugu Hun Khan Murong Muriyan, hearing that the Northern Wei Dynasty had conquered Liangzhou, was greatly alarmed and led his followers to flee westward across the desert.

古文：魏主以其兄慕璝有擒赫连定之功，遣使抚谕之，慕利延乃还故地。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘因为谷浑可汗的哥哥慕容慕有生擒并呈献赫连定的功劳，因此派使臣招抚逃走的吐谷浑可汗慕容慕利延，慕容慕利延才率部众返回故地。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Guo, because Gu Hongkhan's elder brother Murong Mu had survived the battle and had rendered outstanding services, sent an envoy to recruit the fleeing Tu Gu Hongkhan Murong Mu Liyan, and only then did Murong Mu Liyan return to his hometown with his followers.

古文：氐王杨难当将兵数万寇魏上邽，秦州人多应之。
现代文：氐王杨难当率兵几万人进犯北魏的上，秦州百姓响应他的很多。
English: When the warlord Yang Nantang led tens of thousands of soldiers to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty, the people of Qinzhou responded to him in a big way.

古文：东平吕罗汉说镇将拓跋意头曰： 难当众甚，今不出战，示之以弱，众情离沮，不可守也。 
现代文：东平人吕罗汉劝说北魏的守将拓跋意头说： 杨难当势力正强盛，现在不出城迎战，向敌人示弱，我军士气将受挫折，军民就会离散，那时城池就守不住了。 
English: Lu Luohan, a Dongping person, persuaded the Northern Wei's guard general Tuoba to say: Yang Nan, when the forces are strong, now does not go to the city to fight, showing weakness to the enemy, our army's morale will be frustrated, the military and the people will be dispersed, and then the city will not be able to defend itself.

古文：意头遣罗汉将精骑千馀出冲难当陈，所向披靡，杀其左右骑八人，难当大惊。
现代文：拓跋意头就派吕罗汉率领精锐骑兵一千多人，出城冲击杨难当的战阵，北魏骑兵所向披靡，斩杀杨难当左右亲兵共八人，杨难当大为惊慌。
English: Lv Rohan sent more than a thousand elite cavalrymen led by Tuoba to attack Yang Nantang's battle line. The Northern Wei cavalrymen were invincible and killed a total of eight soldiers on Yang Nantang's right and left. Yang Nantang was greatly alarmed.

古文：会魏主以玺书责让难当，难当引还仇池。
现代文：这时，拓跋焘斥责杨难当的诏书也到了，杨难当于是率众退回了仇池。
English: At this time, the edict of Tuobao rebuking Yang Nantang also arrived, so Yang Nantang led the crowd back to Qiu Lake.

古文：南丰太妃司马氏卒，故营阳王之后也。
现代文：刘宋南丰太妃司马氏去世，司马氏是已故营阳王刘义符的王后。
English: Liu Songnanfeng, the queen of the late Yangyang King Liu Yifu, passed away.

古文：赵广、张寻等复谋反，伏诛。
现代文：被招抚的刘宋叛民首领赵广、张寻等，再度反叛朝廷，被斩首。
English: The leaders of the Liu Song rebels, Zhao Guang and Zhang Xing, who had been pandered to, once again rebelled against the imperial court and were beheaded.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之上元嘉十七年
现代文：元嘉十七年
English: Founded in 17th year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，正月，己酉，沮渠无讳寇魏酒泉，元絜轻之，出城与语；壬子，无讳执絜以围酒泉。
现代文：春季，正月，己酉，逃亡到敦煌的前北凉沙州刺史沮渠无讳进攻北魏占领的酒泉。北魏戈阳公元，轻视沮渠无讳，出城与敌人对话。壬子，沮渠无讳生擒元，然后包围了酒泉。
English: In the spring of the first month of the year, Ji Ying fled to Dunhuang in the former Northern Liangshazhou to attack the Jiuquan occupied by the Northern Wei Dynasty. In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Goyang A.D. despised the Jiuquan and went out of the city to talk with the enemy. In the Jin Dynasty, the Jiuquan was born and then surrounded the Jiuquan.

古文：二月，魏假通直常侍邢颖来聘。
现代文：二月，北魏的通直常侍邢颖，来刘宋访问。
English: In February, the Northern Wei Dynasty's Tsongzhizhong Zhanying came to visit Liu Song.

古文：三月，沮渠无讳拔酒泉。
现代文：三月，沮渠无讳攻克酒泉。
English: In March, he conquered Jiuquan.

古文：夏，四月，戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊午朔，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, at the new moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚辰，沮渠无讳寇魏张掖，秃发保周屯删丹；丙戌，魏主遣抚军大将军永昌王健督诸将讨之。
现代文：庚辰，沮渠无讳继续进攻北魏占领下的张掖，张掖守将秃发保周屯驻在删丹。丙戌，北魏国主拓拔焘派抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健率领各路兵马，讨伐沮无渠无讳等。
English: Geng Chen continued to attack Zhangye, which was under the occupation of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Zhangye's governor stationed Balda Baozhoutun in Qiaodan. Pro Qi, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent Tuobao to lead the army, and Yongchang King Tuoba Jian led all the troops and horses to fight against Zhangye.

古文：司徒义康专总朝权。
现代文：刘宋司徒刘义康独揽朝政大权。
English: Liu Song's successor, Liu Yikang, took sole control of the political power of the dynasty.

古文：上羸疾积年，心劳辄发，屡至危殆；义康尽心营奉，药食非口所亲尝不进，或连夕不寐，内外众事皆专决施行。
现代文：文帝多年患病，稍微操劳，旧病就复发，多次病危。刘义康对文帝尽心侍奉，药物非经自己亲口尝过，绝不让文帝服用，有时一连几夜都不睡觉。朝廷内外的大小事务，他都一个人决定施行。
English: Emperor Wen suffered from illness for many years, and with a little effort, his old illness would recur and he would be critically ill several times. Liu Yikang served Emperor Wen with all his heart. He would never allow Emperor Wen to take medicine unless he had personally tasted it, and sometimes he would not sleep for several nights in a row. He was the only one who decided to carry out large and small affairs both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：性好吏职，纠剔文案，莫不精尽。
现代文：因为生性就喜爱办理公务，所以阅读公文，处理诉讼等政务，他都处理得无不精密妥善。
English: Because he likes to handle official business by nature, he has handled government affairs such as reading official documents and handling lawsuits in a precise and proper manner.

古文：上由是多委以事，凡所陈奏，入无不可；方伯以下，并令义康选用，生杀大事，或以录命断之。
现代文：文帝因此把很多大事都委派给他。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen delegated many important matters to him.

古文：势倾远近，朝野辐凑，每旦府门常有车数百乘，义康倾身引接，未尝懈倦。
现代文：刘义康只要有奏请，立即就被批准。州刺史以下官员的人选，文帝都授权刘义康选拔任用。至于赦免和诛杀这类大事，有时刘义康就以录尚书事的身分裁决。因而，刘义康的势力倾动远近，朝野上下的各方人士，都集中在他周围。
English: As long as Liu Yikang had a request, he was immediately approved. Emperor Wen authorized Liu Yikang to select and appoint officials from the level of prefectural magistrate to that of prefectural governor. As for pardons and executions, Liu Yikang sometimes ruled as a recorder. As a result, Liu Yikang's influence spread far and wide, and people from all walks of life, from the top to the bottom, were concentrated around him.

古文：复能强记，耳目所经，终身不忘；好于稠人广席，标题所忆以示聪明。
现代文：每天早晨，刘义康府第前面常有车数百辆，刘义康对来访客人亲自接待，从不懈怠。刘义康记忆力极强，一经耳闻目睹，终生不忘，他喜好在大庭广众的场合下，提起自己记忆中的事情，用来显示自己的聪明才干。
English: Every morning, there are often hundreds of cars in front of Liu Yikang's residence. Liu Yikang personally receives visiting guests and never slacks off. Liu Yikang has an extremely strong memory. Once he hears or sees something, he will never forget it. He likes to bring up things in his memory in public to show his cleverness.

古文：士之干练者，多被意遇。
现代文：许多有才能的士大夫，都被他委以重任。
English: He entrusted many talented magistrates with important tasks.

古文：尝谓刘湛曰： 王敬弘、王球之属，竟何所堪！
现代文：刘义康曾对刘湛说： 王敬弘、王球这些人，有什么能力？
English: Liu Yikang once said to Liu Zhan: What are the abilities of Wang Jinghong and Wang Qiu?

古文：坐取富贵，复那可解！ 
现代文：坐享荣华富贵，真让人费解！ 
English: It's hard to understand how they can sit back and enjoy their wealth!

古文：然素无学术，不识大体，朝士有才用者皆引入己府，府僚无施及忤旨者乃斥为台官。
现代文：然而，刘义康一向没有学问，不识大体，朝中有才干的士大夫都被他延聘到府中来，府中没有才能的，或冒犯他的幕僚，都被贬斥到朝廷机构任职。
English: However, Liu Yikang has always been uneducated and ignorant of the general situation. In the imperial court, all talented officials were hired by him to work in the central government, and those without talent in the government, or staff members who offended him, were relegated to work in the imperial court.

古文：自谓兄弟至亲，不复存君臣形迹，率心而行，曾无猜防。
现代文：他自以为，兄弟之间是至亲手足，因此他也不严格用君臣的礼节约束自己的行为，常常任性行事，从不考虑他的行为是否会触犯禁忌。
English: He believed that the brothers were very close, so he did not strictly use the etiquette of the monarch to restrict his behavior. He often acted capriciously, never considering whether his behavior would violate taboos.

古文：私置僮六千馀人，不以言台，四方献馈，皆以上品荐义康，而以次者供御；上尝冬月啖甘，叹其形味并劣，义康曰： 今年甘殊有佳者。 
现代文：他在府中私养僮仆六千多人，未曾上奏朝廷。各地进贡的物品，都把上品呈献给刘义康，而把次等的呈献文帝。有一年冬天文帝吃柑，叹息柑的外形和味道太差。刘义康说： 今年的柑也有好的！ 
English: He privately raised more than six thousand servants in his palace, and never reported to the imperial court. All the tributes from all over the country were presented to Liu Yikang, and the second-class ones were presented to Emperor Wen. One winter, Emperor Tianmen ate oranges, and the shape and taste of the sighing oranges were too bad. Liu Yikang said: This year's oranges are also good!

古文：遣人还东府取甘，大供御者三寸。
现代文：于是派人到府中去取，取来的柑比进贡文帝的直径大三寸。
English: So they sent someone to the prefectural government to retrieve it. The mandarin oranges they retrieved were three inches larger in diameter than the mandarin oranges that went to Emperor Gongwen.

古文：领军刘湛与仆射殷景仁有隙，湛欲倚义康之重以倾之。
现代文：领军将军刘湛与仆射殷景仁结怨很深。刘湛打算倚靠刘义康的势力，排挤殷景仁。
English: Liu Zhan, the leading general, had a deep grudge against Yin Jingren, Liu Yikang's subordinate. Liu Zhan planned to rely on Liu Yikang's power to oust Yin Jingren.

古文：义康权势已盛，湛愈推崇之，无复人臣之礼，上浸不能平。
现代文：当时刘义康的势力十分强盛，刘湛更加推崇他的权势，使刘义康对文帝不能再保持臣属的礼节，文帝的内心很不平静。
English: At that time, Liu Yikang's power was very strong, and Liu Zhan respected his power even more, so that Liu Yikang could no longer maintain the etiquette of a subject to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen's heart was very uneasy.

古文：湛初入朝，上恩礼甚厚。
现代文：刘湛刚刚进朝廷作官时，文帝对他十分优待。
English: When Liu Zhan had just entered the imperial court as an official, Emperor Wen treated him very favorably.

古文：湛善论治道，谙前代故事，叙致铨理，听者忘疲。
现代文：刘湛特别善长谈论经邦治国的道理，熟悉前代的历史掌故，每每说起来，条分缕晰，使人忘记疲劳。
English: Liu Zhan is particularly good at talking about the principle of governing the country through the state, familiar with the history of previous generations, and every time he says it, it is clear and makes people forget fatigue.

古文：每入云龙门，御者即解驾，左右及羽仪随意分散，不夕不出，以此为常。
现代文：每次进宫朝见，一到云龙门，车夫就解开车马，刘湛的左右侍从及仪仗队伍也都各自散去。不到傍晚，不出来，都习以为常了。
English: Every morning when entering the palace, as soon as they arrived at the Cloud Dragon Gate, the driver would untie the horses, and Liu Zhan's right and left attendants and the honor guard would also disperse. It was not until the evening that they would not come out, and they had become accustomed to it.

古文：及晚节驱煽义康，上意虽内离而接遇不改，尝谓所亲曰： 刘班方自西还，吾与语，常视日早晚，虑其将去；比入，吾亦视日早晚，苦其不去。 
现代文：等到后来，刘湛煽动和唆使刘义康恣意妄为，文帝对他心怀不满，但对他礼遇却仍不改变。文帝曾对他的亲信说： 当年刘班从西方回来，我与他谈话，常看时间早晚，唯恐他离去；最近他入宫，我也常看时间早晚，苦于他不快走。 
English: Later, Liu Zhan incited and instigated Liu Yikang to act arbitrarily. Emperor Wen was dissatisfied with him, but his courtesy to him did not change. Emperor Wen once said to his close associates: "When Liu Bang returned from the West, I talked with him, often looking at the time in the morning and evening, lest he leave; recently he entered the palace, I also often looked at the time in the morning and evening, suffering from his reluctance to leave.

古文：殷景仁密言于上曰： 相王权重，非社稷计，宜少加裁抑。 
现代文：殷景仁秘密报告文帝说： 相王刘义康权势太重，并非国家久远的考虑，应该对他稍加抑制！ 
English: Yin Jingren's secret report to Emperor Wen said: The influence of Prince Liu Yikang is too heavy, and it is not a long-term consideration of the state. He should be restrained a little!

古文：上阴然之。
现代文：文帝心里暗暗同意。
English: Emperor Wen secretly agreed in his heart.

古文：司徒左长史刘斌，湛之宗也；大将军从事中郎王履，谧之孙也；及主簿刘敬文，祭酒鲁郡孔胤秀，皆以倾谄有宠于义康；见上多疾，皆谓 宫车一日晏驾，宜立长君。 
现代文：司徒左长史刘斌是刘湛的同族，大将军从事中郎王履是王谧的孙子，他们和簿刘敬文，祭酒、鲁郡人孔胤秀都因为阴险诌媚，排挤别人，而深得刘义康的宠信。他们看到文帝多病，都说 皇上一旦晏驾，应该拥护年长的人为君主。 
English: Liu Bin, the chief historian of the Southern Song Dynasty, was a member of the same family as Liu Zhan, and Wang Lu, the grand general who served as the middle brother of Liu Zhan, was the grandson of Wang Yao. They, together with Liu Jingwen, the scribe, and Kong Yanshuu, a native of Lu County, were favored by Liu Yikang because they were insidious and charming. When they saw that Emperor Wen was very ill, they all said that once the emperor passed away, he should support an older person as the monarch.

古文：上尝疾笃，使义康具顾命诏。
现代文：文帝一度病重，命刘义康起草托孤诏书。
English: Emperor Wen was once seriously ill and ordered Liu Yikang to draft an imperial edict.

古文：义康还省，流涕以告湛及景仁。湛曰： 天下艰难，讵是幼主所御！ 
现代文：刘义康回到府中，痛哭流涕地告诉刘湛和殷景仁，刘湛说： 治理国家，不胜艰难，怎么是年幼君主所能胜任的！ 
English: Liu Yikang went back to the palace and told Liu Zhan and Yin Jingren with tears streaming down his face. Liu Zhan said, "Governing a country is very difficult, how can a young monarch be competent!

古文：义康、景仁并不答。
现代文：刘义康、殷景仁都没有答腔。
English: Neither Liu Yikang nor Yin Jingren replied.

古文：而胤秀等辄就尚书义曹索晋咸康末立康帝旧事，义康不知也；及上疾瘳，微闻之。
现代文：而孔胤秀等人擅自前往尚书议曹，索取当年晋成帝去世，改立他的弟弟晋康帝的旧档案，刘义康并不知道这件事。等到文帝愈后，略微听到这些情况。
English: However, Liu Yikang did not know that Kong Yanshu and others went to Shangshu Rong Cao without authorization to obtain the old archives of Emperor Jincheng, who died that year, and to re-establish his brother Emperor Jinkang. Liu Yikang only heard about this after Emperor Wen had recovered.

古文：而斌等密谋，欲使大业终归义康，遂邀结朋党，伺察禁省，有不与己同者，必百方构陷之，又采拾景仁短长，或虚造异同以告湛。
现代文：而刘斌等人却加紧活动，秘密策划，打算让刘义康最后登上帝位。于是，他们结成死党，窥视朝廷和宫中的变化，凡是与自己不同心的，就千方百计地陷害他。同时，他们又百般搜集殷景仁的材料，或者捏造事实提供给刘湛。
English: However, Liu Bin and others stepped up their activities and secretly plotted to have Liu Yikang finally ascend to the throne. Therefore, they formed a deadly alliance, spied on the changes in the imperial court and the palace, and did everything they could to frame him. At the same time, they collected materials on Yin Jingren in various ways, or fabricated facts to provide to Liu Zhan.

古文：自是主、相之势分矣。
现代文：从此以后，文帝与宰相之间，离心离德。
English: From then on, the relationship between Emperor Wen and the chancellor was one of estrangement.

古文：义康欲以刘斌为丹阳尹，言次，启上陈其家贫。言未卒，上曰： 以为吴郡。 
现代文：刘义康打算任用刘斌为丹杨尹，说话中间向文帝报告刘斌家境贫寒，还没有说完，文帝就说： 可以让他去当吴郡太守。 
English: Liu Yikang planned to appoint Liu Bin as Danyang Yin. In the middle of his speech, he reported to Emperor Wen that Liu Bin's family background was poor. Before he had finished, Emperor Wen said, "You can let him be the governor of Wu County."

古文：后会稽太守羊玄保求还，义康又欲以斌代之，启上曰： 养玄保欲还，不审以谁为会稽？ 
现代文：后来，会稽太守羊玄保请求调回京师，刘义康又打算让刘斌接替他，就上奏文帝说： 羊玄保请求调回，不知用谁去管会稽的事？ 
English: Later, Yang Xuanbao, the auditor of the association, requested to be transferred back to Beijing. Liu Yikang also planned to have Liu Bin replace him, so he sent a message to Emperor Wen saying: Yang Xuanbao requested to be transferred back, I don't know who to use to manage the audit of the association?

古文：上时未有所拟，仓猝曰： 我已用王鸿。 
现代文：文帝当时还没有考虑妥当，仓猝之间回答说： 我已任用了王鸿！ 
English: At that time, Emperor Wen did not think about it properly, and suddenly replied: I have appointed Wang Hongzong!

古文：自去年秋，上不复往东府。
现代文：从去年秋天开始，文帝就不再临幸刘义康的相府。
English: Since last autumn, Emperor Wen no longer visits Liu Yikang's imperial palace.

古文：五月，癸巳，刘湛遭母忧去职。
现代文：五月，癸巳，刘湛因母亲去世，按礼制离职回家守丧。
English: In May, due to the death of his mother, Liu Zhan left his post to go home for the funeral.

古文：湛自知罪衅已彰，无复全地，谓所亲曰： 今年必败。
现代文：刘湛自知罪行已经暴露，已没有再保全性命的可能，便对亲近的人说： 今年一定失败！
English: Knowing that his crime had been exposed and that there was no longer any possibility of saving his life, Liu Zhan said to those close to him: "This year will surely be a failure!"

古文：常日正赖口舌争之，故得推迁耳；今既穷毒，无复此望，祸至其能久乎！ 
现代文：过去只靠口舌利为自己争辩，所以得以支吾拖延而已。如今人情事理发展到了尽头，就要遭受荼毒，不再有什么希望了，祸患到来的时间不会太久了！ 
English: In the past, people only argued with each other, so they were able to procrastinate. Now, the development of human affairs has come to an end, it is about to be poisoned, there is no longer any hope, and the time for the disaster to come will not be too long!

古文：乙巳，沮渠无讳复围张掖，不克，退保临松。
现代文：乙巳，前北凉州刺史沮渠无讳再次包围张掖，不能攻克。于是撤退，固守临松。
English: At this time, the former Northern Liangzhou besieged Zhangye again and could not conquer it. Therefore, they retreated and held on to Linsong.

古文：魏主不复加讨，但以诏谕之。
现代文：拓跋焘也不再举兵进攻，只是下诏命他投降归顺。
English: Tuobao no longer raised an army to attack, but he was ordered to surrender.

古文：六月，丁丑，魏皇孙浚生，大赦，改元太平真君，取寇谦之《神书》云 辅佐北方太平真君 故也。
现代文：六月，丁丑，北魏国主拓跋焘的皇孙拓跋浚诞生。下令大赦，改年号为太平真君。因道士寇谦之的《神书》上有言 辅佐北方太平真君 ，所以采用这个年号。
English: In June, Dingwuxi, the grandson of Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty, was born. An amnesty was ordered, and the year was changed to Taiping Zhenjun. Because Taoist Kuo Qian's "Divine Book" said that he assisted Taiping Zhenjun in the north, this year was used.

古文：太子劭诣京口拜京陵，司徒义康、竟陵王诞等并从，南兗州刺史、江夏王义恭自江都会之。
现代文：刘宋太子刘劭前往京口拜谒京陵。司徒刘义康、竟陵王刘诞等随同前往。南兖州刺史、江夏王刘义恭从江都前来会合。
English: Prince Liu Song and his son Liu Ye went to Beijing to pay homage at the Beijing Mausoleum, accompanied by Liu Yikang and Liu Xing, the king of the imperial mausoleum. Liu Yigong, the prince of southern Luzhou and the king of Jiangxia, came from Jiangdu to attend the meeting.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，魏永昌王健击破秃发保周于番禾；保周走，遣安南将军尉眷追之。
现代文：秋季，七月，己丑，北魏永昌王拓跋健在番禾击败了秃发保周；秃发保周逃走，拓跋健派安南将军尉眷追击。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei Yongchang King Tuoba Jian defeated Bald Guo Zhou in Fanhe; Bald Guo Zhou fled, and Tuoba Jian sent Lieutenant Annan to chase him as soon as possible.

古文：丙申，魏太后窦氏殂。
现代文：丙申，北魏皇太后窦氏去世。
English: Hsin, Northern Wei Empress Dowager Dou passed away.

古文：壬子，皇后袁氏殂。
现代文：壬子，刘宋皇后袁氏去世。
English: Ren Zi, the Empress of Liu Song and the Yuan Dynasty, passed away.

古文：癸丑，秃发保周穷迫自杀。
现代文：癸丑，秃发保周走投无路，自杀。
English: 丑,秃发保周 cornered, committed suicide.

古文：八月，甲申，沮渠无讳使其中尉梁伟诣魏永昌王健请降，归酒泉郡及所虏将士元絜等。
现代文：八月，甲申，沮渠无讳派他的中尉梁伟前往北魏永昌王拓跋健的营地，请求投降。归还酒泉郡，释放被俘的北魏将领元等人。
English: In August, Gao Shin, a ruthless general, sent his lieutenant Liang Wei to the camp of the Northern Wei Yongchang King Tuoba Jian to request surrender, the return of Jiuquan County, and the release of the captured Northern Wei generals and others.

古文：魏主使尉眷留镇凉州。
现代文：拓跋焘命令尉眷留下，镇守凉州。
English: Tuobao ordered his lieutenant to stay behind and guard Liangzhou.

古文：九月，壬子，葬元皇后。
现代文：九月，壬子，刘宋安葬袁皇后。
English: In September, Liu Song An buried Empress Yuan in Renzi.

古文：上以司徒彭城王义康嫌隙已著，将成祸乱。
现代文：刘宋文帝认为司徒、彭城王刘义康的猜忌怨恨已经明显，势必酿成祸乱。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen believed that the suspicions and resentment of Liu Yikang, the king of Stuto and Pengcheng, had already become obvious and would inevitably lead to disaster.

古文：冬，十月，戊申，收刘湛付廷尉，下诏暴其罪恶，就狱诛之，并诛其子黯、亮、俨及其党刘斌、刘敬文、孔胤秀等八人；徙尚书库部郎何默子等五人于广州，因大赦。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊申，命令逮捕刘湛交付廷尉，并且下诏公布刘湛的罪行，在狱中就地处决，同时斩杀了刘湛的儿子刘黯、刘亮、刘俨以及刘湛的党羽刘斌、刘敬文、孔胤秀等八人，下令将尚书库部郎何默子等五人，流放到广州，因此下令大赦。
English: In the winter, in October, Wu Sheng ordered the arrest of Liu Zhan and delivered him to the imperial lieutenant, and issued a decree to publicize Liu Zhan's crimes, and executed him on the spot in prison. At the same time, he killed Liu Zhan's sons Liu Qian, Liu Liang, Liu Wei, and eight of Liu Zhan's followers Liu Bin, Liu Jingwen, and Kong Yinxiu. He also ordered the exile of five people, including Shang Shuxubran He Merzi, to Guangzhou, and thus ordered an amnesty.

古文：是日，敕义康入宿，留止中书省。
现代文：这天，文帝命令刘义康进宫值班，随即把他软禁在中书省。
English: On this day, Emperor Wen ordered Liu Yikang to enter the palace on duty, and then put him under house arrest in the Chinese Literature Ministry.

古文：其夕，分收湛等；青州刺史杜骥勒兵殿内以备非常，遣人宣旨告义康以湛等罪状。
现代文：晚上，分别逮捕了刘湛等人。青州刺史杜骥统兵在金銮殿防备意外情况发生。最后，文帝派人把刘湛等人的罪状传达给刘义康。
English: In the evening, Liu Zhan and others were arrested separately. Qingzhou Zhishi Duyuan's soldiers prepared for an accident at the Golden Pavilion. Finally, Emperor Wen sent someone to convey the charges of Liu Zhan and others to Liu Yikang.

古文：义康上表逊位，诏以义康为江州刺史，侍中、大将军如故，出镇豫章。
现代文：刘义康上疏请求辞职，文帝下诏命刘义康为江州刺史，仍然保留侍中、大将军职，出京镇守豫章。
English: Liu Yikang requested to resign, and Emperor Wen issued an edict ordering Liu Yikang to make history in Jiangzhou, still retain the posts of chamberlain and general, and go to Beijing to guard Yuzhang.

古文：初，殷景仁卧疾五年，虽不见上，而密函去来，日以十数，朝政大小，必以咨之；影迹周密，莫有窥其际者。
现代文：当初，殷景仁卧病五年，虽然不与文帝相见，但是密信往来，每天有十几次，朝廷大事小事，文帝都征求他的意见，行踪十分隐密，竟没有一个人发现蛛丝马迹。
English: At first, Yin Jingren was bedridden for five years. Although he did not meet with Emperor Wen, he had a secret correspondence with him more than a dozen times a day. Emperor Wen asked him for advice on all matters of the imperial court. His whereabouts were very secret, and no one found any clues.

古文：收湛之日，景仁使拂拭衣冠，左右皆不晓其意。
现代文：逮捕刘湛那天，殷景仁命令家人打扫衣冠，左右家人都不明白他的用意。
English: On the day of Liu Zhan's arrest, Yin Jingren ordered his family members to clean his clothes. His family members did not understand his intention.

古文：其夜，上出华林园延贤堂，召景仁。
现代文：那天夜里，文帝前往华林园延贤堂，召见殷景仁。
English: That night, Emperor Wen went to Yan Xian Hall in the Waring Garden to summon Yin Jingren.

古文：景仁犹称脚疾，以小床舆就坐；诛讨处分，一皆委之。
现代文：殷景仁仍然声称患有脚病，用小椅子抬进宫就座。文帝把诛杀讨伐刘湛党羽的所有事情，全都委任殷景仁处理。
English: Yin Jingren still claimed to have a foot ailment and was carried into the palace in a small chair to take his seat. Emperor Wen entrusted Yin Jingren to handle all matters related to the campaign against Liu Zhan's followers.

古文：初，檀道济荐吴兴沈庆之忠谨晓兵，上使领队防东掖门。
现代文：当初，檀道济举荐吴兴人沈庆之忠诚谨慎，通晓兵法，文帝命他领兵在东掖门驻防。
English: At first, Dang Daojie recommended Wu Xingren to Shen Qing, who was loyal and prudent and well versed in the art of war. Emperor Wen ordered him to lead the troops to garrison at the East Gate.

古文：刘湛为领军，尝谓之曰： 卿在省岁久，比当相论。 
现代文：刘湛为领军将军，曾经对他说： 你留在这个职位上已经很久，最近应该考虑这个问题。 
English: Liu Zhan, the leading general, once said to him: You have stayed in this position for a long time, you should consider this issue recently.

古文：庆之正色曰： 下官在省十年，自应得转，不复以此仰累！ 
现代文：沈庆之面色严肃地说： 我在这里已经十年了，自然应该调职，不敢再麻烦你。 
English: Looking serious, Shen Qingzhu said, "I've been here for ten years. Naturally, I should be transferred. I don't dare to bother you again."

古文：收湛之夕，上开门召庆之，庆之戎服缚袴而入，上曰： 卿何意乃尔急装？ 
现代文：逮捕刘湛的那天晚上，文帝开启宫门召见沈庆之，沈庆之全副武装束紧裤管进门晋见，文帝说： 你为什么这般装束？ 
English: On the evening of Liu Zhan's arrest, Emperor Wen opened the palace gate to summon Shen Qingzhi. Shen Qingzhi, fully armed and with his trousers tightened, walked through the door. Emperor Wen said: "Why are you dressed like this?

古文：庆之曰： 夜半唤队主，不容缓服。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 夜半召见队主，定有急事，不能宽服大袖。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said: In the middle of the night, the leader of the team was called out, and it was too late to change the loose-fitting official uniform.

古文：上遣庆之收刘斌，杀之。
现代文：文帝派沈庆之逮捕刘斌，斩首。
English: Emperor Wen sent Shen Qing to arrest Liu Bin and behead him.

古文：骁骑将军徐湛之，逵之之子也，与义康尤亲厚，上深衔之。
现代文：骁骑将军徐湛之是徐逵之的儿子，与刘义康关系特别亲密，刘义隆心里恼恨他。
English: The cavalry general Xu Zhanzhi was the son of Xu Yanzhi. He was particularly close to Liu Yikang, and Liu Yilong resented him in his heart.

古文：义康败，湛之被收，罪当死。
现代文：刘义康失败后，徐湛之被捕，罪当处死。
English: After Liu Yikang's defeat, Xu Zhanzhi was arrested and sentenced to death.

古文：其母会稽公主，于兄弟为长嫡，素为上所礼，家事大小，必咨而后行。
现代文：他的母亲会稽公主，在兄弟姊妹中，她是敬皇后所生，年龄又最大，一向被文帝礼遇。
English: His mother was a princess of the imperial court. Among her brothers and sisters, she was born to the Empress Dowager and was the oldest. She was always treated with courtesy by Emperor Wen.

古文：高祖征时，尝自于新洲伐荻，有纳布衫袄，臧皇后手所作也；既贵，以付公主曰： 后世有骄奢不节，可以此衣示之。 
现代文：皇室事务不论大小，一定征求她的意见以后再决定。刘裕贫贱的时候，曾经到新洲砍割荻草，身穿补过的布衫棉袄，都是敬皇后亲手缝制的。刘裕即皇帝位以后，把穿过的旧衣服拿给公主看，说： 后世子孙，如有人骄傲奢侈，不知节俭，你可以把衣服拿给他们看。 
English: When Liu Yu was poor, he used to go to Xinzhou to cut rushes. He wore patched cloth shirts and cotton socks, all of which were sewn by hand in honor of the empress. After Liu Yu became emperor, he showed the old clothes he had worn to the princess and said: Future generations, if there are people who are proud and extravagant and do not know how to be frugal, you can show them your clothes.

古文：至是，公主入宫见上，号哭，不复施臣妾之礼，以锦囊盛纳衣掷地曰： 汝家本贫贱，此是我母为汝父所作；今日得一饱餐，遽欲杀我儿邪！ 
现代文：现在，因为徐湛之，会稽公主入宫晋见皇上，大声哭号，不再向文帝行臣妾节，把用绸缎包裹的破衣服抛在地上说： 你们家本来出身贫贱，这是我母亲为你父亲做的衣裳，才吃一天饱饭，就要杀我的儿子了！ 
English: Now, because of Xu Zhan Zhi, the princess will go to the palace to see the emperor, cry loudly, no longer to the Emperor Wen's Concubine Day, throw the ragged clothes wrapped in silk and satin on the ground and say: Your family was originally born poor, this is the dress my mother made for your father, only to eat a day's full meal, I am going to kill my son!

古文：上乃赦之。
现代文：文帝于是赦免徐湛之的死罪。
English: Gaozu then pardoned him.

古文：吏部尚书王球，履之叔父也，以简淡有美名，为上所重。
现代文：吏部尚书王球是王履的叔父。他淡泊于名利，一向俭朴，名声很好，为文帝所重。
English: Wang Lu's uncle was the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Wangqiu. He was indifferent to fame and fortune, had always been frugal, had a good reputation, and was important to Emperor Wen.

古文：履性进利，深结义康及湛；球屡戒之，不从。
现代文：王履却生性务进好利，与刘义康及刘湛交情很深，王球多次劝告他，他不听从。
English: Wang Lu, however, was born with the drive to make profits. He had a deep friendship with Liu Yikang and Liu Zhan. Wang Qiu advised him many times, but he did not listen.

古文：诛湛之夕，履徒跣告球，球命左右为取履，先温酒与之，谓曰： 常日语汝云何？ 
现代文：诛杀刘湛的那天晚上，王履光着双脚，跑去把情况告诉了王球，王球命左右侍从为他取来鞋子，先温酒为他压惊，对他说： 我平时都跟你说什么了？ 
English: On the night of the murder of Liu Zhan, Wang Lu, barefoot, ran to tell Wang Qiu about the situation. Wang Qiu ordered his attendants to fetch shoes for him, and first surprised him with warm wine. He said to him, "What did I tell you all the time?

古文：履怖惧不得答。球徐曰： 阿父在，汝亦何忧！ 
现代文：王履吓得答不出来，王球慢慢地说： 有你父我在，你还担忧什么！ 
English: Wang Lu was too scared to answer, Wang Qiu said slowly: With your father here, what are you worried about!

古文：上以球故，履得免死，废于家。
现代文：文帝因为尊重王球的缘故，赦免了王履的死罪，免职回家。
English: Emperor Wen, out of respect for Wang Qu, pardoned Wang Lu's capital crime and dismissed him to go home.

古文：义康方用事，人争求亲昵，唯司徒主簿江湛早能自疏，求出为武陵内史。
现代文：刘义康权势鼎盛的时候，人们都争相奉迎，与他亲近。唯独司徒主簿江湛早有远见，与他疏远，要求出任武陵内史。
English: When Liu Yikang was at the height of his power, people were all vying to worship him and be close to him. However, Jiang Zhan, the master of the Book of Disciples, had the foresight to distance himself from him and asked to be appointed as the historian of Wuling.

古文：檀道济尝为其子求婚于湛，湛固辞，道济因义康以请之，湛拒之愈坚，故不染于二公之难。
现代文：檀道济曾经为他的儿子向江湛求婚，江湛坚决推辞。檀道济又请刘义康出面，江湛推辞的态度更加坚决。
English: Dandooji once proposed marriage to Jiang Zhan for his son, but Jiang Zhan resolutely refused. Dandooji also invited Liu Yikang to come forward, and Jiang Zhan's attitude of refusal was even more resolute.

古文：上闻而嘉之。
现代文：因此没有受到檀道济、刘义康大祸的牵连。
English: Therefore, he was not implicated in the great disaster of Liu Yikang.

古文：湛，夷之子也。
现代文：文帝听说后，对他加以奖励。江湛是江夷的儿子。
English: When Emperor Wen heard of this, he rewarded him. Jiang Zhan was the son of Jiang Yi.

古文：彭城王义康停省十馀日，见上奉辞，便下渚；上唯对之恸哭，馀无所言。
现代文：彭城王刘义康被软禁在中书省十多天，晋见文帝并辞行，来到码头。文帝看到他时，悲伤痛哭，没有一句话。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was under house arrest for more than ten days in China's Shizuo Province. He came to the dock to see Emperor Wen and resigned. When Emperor Wen saw him, he cried bitterly with grief and did not say a word.

古文：上遣沙门慧琳视之，义康曰： 弟子有还理不？ 
现代文：文帝派僧人慧琳去看望他，刘义康说： 您看我还有回到京师的可能吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen sent the monk Huilin to visit him, and Liu Yikang said: Do you think there is any possibility for me to return to Beijing?

古文：慧琳曰： 恨公不读数百卷书！ 
现代文：慧琳说： 真遗憾你不多读几百卷书！ 
English: Huilin said, "It's a pity that you don't read more than a few hundred books!"

古文：初，吴兴太守谢述，裕之弟也。累佐义康，数有规益，早卒。
现代文：当初，吴兴太守谢述是谢裕的弟弟，多年辅佐刘义康，屡次规劝，不幸早死。
English: At the beginning, Wu Xing Taishu Xie Shu was the younger brother of Xie Yu. He was an assistant to Liu Yikang for many years, and was repeatedly persuaded by him. Unfortunately, he died early.

古文：义康将南，叹曰： 昔谢述唯劝吾退，刘班唯劝吾进；今班存而述死，其败也宜哉！ 
现代文：刘义康将要南下豫章，叹息说： 当初只有谢述劝我急流勇退，刘班劝我不断进取，后来刘班活着，谢述却死了，我身败名裂也是理所应当的了。 
English: Liu Yikang will go south to Yuzhang, sighed and said: At first, only Xie Shu advised me to brave the rapids, Liu Ban advised me to continue to forge ahead. Later, Liu Ban was alive, but Xie Shu died, and I lost my reputation.

古文：上亦曰： 谢述若存，义康必不至此！ 
现代文：文帝也说： 谢述如果活着，刘义康也不会落到这个地步。 
English: Wen Di also said: If Xie Shu is alive, Liu Yikang will not fall to this level.

古文：以征虏司马萧斌为义康咨议参军，领豫章太守，事无大小，皆以委之。
现代文：文帝任命征虏司马萧斌为刘义康谘议参军，兼任豫章太守，大小事务都委任他决断。
English: Emperor Wen appointed the recruiting officer Ma Xiaobin to advise Liu Yikang on joining the army, and he also served as the governor of Yuzhang. He was appointed to make decisions on both large and small matters.

古文：斌，摹之之子也。
现代文：萧斌是萧摹之的儿子。
English: Xiao Bin is the son of Xiao Yuanzhi.

古文：使龙骧将军萧承之将兵防守。
现代文：又命龙骧将军萧承之，率军驻防戒备。
English: He also ordered Longjing General Xiao Chengzhi to lead the army to be on the alert.

古文：义康左右爱念者，并听随从；资奉优厚，信赐相系，朝廷大事皆报示之。
现代文：刘义康左右亲信僚属，有愿追随的，都准许一同前往。文帝赐赏刘义康的财物十分丰厚，而且信件不断，朝中大事都告诉刘义康。
English: Liu Yikang's close relatives and confidants, as well as those who wished to follow him, were allowed to go together. Emperor Wen rewarded Liu Yikang with very rich property, and letters continued, telling Liu Yikang about the important events in the DPRK and China.

古文：久之，上就会稽公主宴集，甚欢；主起，再拜叩头，悲不自胜。
现代文：过了很久，文帝驾临会稽公主家赴宴，兄弟姐妹在一起非常愉快。突然，会稽公主起身跪在地上，再拜叩头，不胜悲伤。
English: After a long time, Emperor Wen arrived at the princess's house for a banquet, and the brothers and sisters were very happy together. Suddenly, the princess got up, knelt on the ground, and bowed again. She was very sad.

古文：上不晓其意，自起扶之。
现代文：文帝不明白她的用意，亲自把她扶起来。
English: Emperor Wen did not understand her intention and personally helped her up.

古文：主曰： 车子岁暮必不为陛下所容，今特请其命。 
现代文：会稽公主说： 车子到了晚年，陛下一定不能容他，今天特地求你饶他一命。 
English: The auditor princess said, "Chaeko is in his old age, and His Majesty must not tolerate him. Today, I specially ask you to spare his life."

古文：因恸哭。
现代文：随后痛哭不止。
English: Then she burst into tears.

古文：上亦流涕，指蒋山曰： 必无此虑。
现代文：文帝也泪流满面。他指着蒋山说： 你不必担心。
English: Wen Di was also in tears. He pointed to Jiang Shan and said, "You don't have to worry.

古文：若违今誓，便是负初宁陵。 
现代文：我如果违背今天的誓言，就是辜负了高帝。 
English: If I renege on today's oath, I will have failed Emperor Gao.

古文：即封所饮酒赐义康，并书曰： 会稽姊饮宴忆弟，所馀酒今封送。 
现代文：于是，把正在饮用的酒封起来，送给刘义康，附一封信说： 我与会稽姐宴饮，想起了你，把剩下的酒封起来送给你。 
English: So he sealed up the wine he was drinking and gave it to Liu Yikang, along with a letter saying: "I was at the banquet with the auditor and thought of you, so I sealed up the rest of the wine and gave it to you.

古文：故终主之身，义康得无恙。
现代文：因此，会稽公主在世的日子里，刘义康得以平安。
English: As a result, Liu Yikang was able to live in peace during the days when the princess was alive.

古文：臣光曰：文帝之于义康，友爱之情，其始非不隆也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：宋文帝与刘义康手足友爱的情意，开始时不是不重。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The friendship between Emperor Song and Liu Yikang was not insignificant at the beginning.

古文：终于失兄弟之欢，亏君臣之义，迹其乱阶，正由刘湛权利之心无有厌已。
现代文：但最后却以失去兄弟之间的感情，损害君臣之间的大义而告终。追溯祸乱的根源，正是由于刘湛贪权慕利的欲望没有止境。
English: But in the end, it ended with the loss of affection between brothers and the damage to the great justice between monarchs and ministers. The root of the calamity can be traced back to Liu Zhan's insatiable greed for power.

古文：《诗》云： 贪人败类。 其是之谓乎！
现代文：《诗经》说 贪婪的人败坏同类 ，正是对这种情况的形容呵！
English: The Book of Songs says that greedy people corrupt their fellows, and that's exactly how this situation is described!

古文：征南衮州刺史江夏王义恭为司徒、录尚书事。
现代文：刘宋文帝征召南兖州刺史、江夏王刘义恭为司徒、录尚书事。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen conscripted Nanluozhou Shishi and Jiangxia King Liu Yigong as scholars, and recorded their records.

古文：戊寅，以临川王义庆为南衮州刺史，殷景仁为扬州刺史，仆射、吏部尚书如故。
现代文：戊寅，任命临川王刘义庆为南兖州刺史，殷景仁为扬州刺史，仍任仆射、吏部尚书如故。
English: Wu Yin appointed Linchuan King Liu Yiquing as the governor of South Luzon, and Yin Jingren as the governor of Yangzhou, and they still serve as officials.

古文：义恭惩彭城之败，虽为总录，奉行文书而已，上乃安之。
现代文：刘义恭吸取刘义康失败的教训，虽然担任录尚书事，却不敢过问政事，只在文书上签字而已，文帝这才放心。
English: Liu Yikong learned the lesson of Liu Yikang's failure. Although he was in charge of record-keeping, he did not dare to ask questions about politics. He only signed the documents, which reassured Emperor Wen.

古文：上年给相府钱二千万，它物称此；而义恭性奢，用常不足，上又别给钱，年至千万。
现代文：文帝每年拨付相府的钱，有二千万，其他物品也与此差不多。但是刘义恭生性奢侈，费用常常不足，文帝又另外给他一些钱，每年高达一千万。
English: Emperor Wen allocated 20 million yuan to the prime minister's office every year, and the other items were similar. However, Liu Yigong was extravagant and the expenses were often insufficient. Emperor Wen also gave him some extra money, up to 10 million yuan every year.

古文：十一月，丁亥，魏主如山北。
现代文：十一月，丁亥，北魏国主前往山北。
English: In November, Dinghai, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Shanbei.

古文：殷景仁既拜扬州，羸疾遂笃，上为之敕西州道上不得有车声。
现代文：刘宋扬州刺史殷景仁到任后，病情愈加严重。文帝下令，禁止西州道上有车马经过，以免发出声音。
English: After Liu Song, Yang Zhou and Yin Jingren took office, the illness became more serious. Emperor Wen ordered that no car or horse be allowed to pass on Xizhou Road to avoid making noise.

古文：癸丑，卒。
现代文：癸丑，殷景仁去世。
English: Tragically, Yin Jingren passed away.

古文：十二月，癸亥，以光禄大夫王球为仆射。
现代文：十二月，癸亥，文帝任命光禄大夫王球为仆射。
English: In December, Emperor Wen appointed Guanglu Doctor Wang Qiu as a subordinate.

古文：戊辰，以始兴王浚为扬州刺史。
现代文：戊辰，任命始兴王刘浚为扬州刺史。
English: Boshen, appointed Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：时浚尚幼，州事悉委后军长史范晔、主簿沈璞。
现代文：当时刘浚年纪幼小，州里具体事务全部委派给后军长史范晔和主簿沈璞。
English: At that time, Liu Jun was very young, and all the specific affairs in the prefecture were delegated to the later military commander Shi Fan Rong and the main bookkeeper Shen Rong.

古文：晔，泰之子；璞，林子之子也。
现代文：范晔是范泰的儿子；沈璞是沈林子的儿子。
English: Fan Ye is the son of Fan Tai; Shen Ye is the son of Shen Linzi.

古文：晔寻迁左卫将军，以吏部郎沈演之为右卫将军，对掌禁旅；又以庾炳之为吏部郎，俱参机密。
现代文：不久，范晔提升为左卫将军。同时朝廷任命吏部郎沈演之为右卫将军，共同掌理皇家禁军。文帝还任命庾炳之为吏部郎，都参与处理朝廷机要。
English: Soon after, Fan Kui was promoted to General of the Left Guard. At the same time, the imperial court appointed the head of the Imperial Guard, Shen Xuan Tong, to be the General of the Right Guard, jointly in charge of the Royal Forbidden Army. Emperor Wen also appointed Xuan Tong to be the head of the Imperial Guard, both of whom were involved in dealing with the important matters of the imperial court.

古文：演之，劲之曾孙也。
现代文：沈演之是沈劲的曾孙。
English: Shen Yanzhi is the great-grandson of Shen Jin.

古文：晔有俊才，而薄情浅行，数犯名教，为士流所鄙。
现代文：范晔富有才干，却轻薄放荡，多次触犯礼教人伦规范，受到士大夫们的鄙视。
English: Although rich in talent, Fan Qi was frivolous and debauched. He repeatedly violated the norms of etiquette and ethics, and was despised by the magistrates.

古文：性躁竞，自谓才用不尽，常怏怏不得志。
现代文：他热中名利，急于进取，自以为才能无法充分发挥，常常闷闷不乐。
English: He was enthusiastic about fame and fortune, eager to forge ahead, thought that he could not give full play to his talent, and was often depressed.

古文：吏部尚书何尚之言于帝曰： 范晔志趋异常，请出为广州刺史；若在内衅成，不得不加鈇钺。
现代文：吏部尚书何尚之对文帝说： 范晔野心太大，志趣与常人不同，应该派他出去担任广州刺史。如果留在朝廷，一旦犯下罪行，就不能不诛灭。
English: He Shangzhi, a member of the Imperial General Staff, said to Emperor Wen: Fan Xuan's ambition is too great, and his interests are different from those of ordinary people. He should be sent out to serve as a historian of Guangzhou. If he remains in the imperial court, once he commits a crime, he must be destroyed.

古文：鈇钺亟行，非国家之美也。 
现代文：不断诛杀，不是国家的好事。 
English: Constant fighting is not a good thing for the country.

古文：帝曰： 始诛刘湛，复迁范晔，人将谓卿等不能容才，朕信受谗言。
现代文：文帝说： 刚杀了刘湛，又把范晔赶出京师，别人会议论你们不能包容有才能的人，说我听信谗言。
English: Wen Di said: I just killed Liu Zhan, and drove Fan Ye out of Beijing Division, others will say that you can't tolerate talented people, saying that I listen to gossip.

古文：但共知其如此，无能为害也。 
现代文：只要我们都知道范晔的问题，他就不能为害朝廷了。 
English: As long as we all know about Fan Xuan's problem, he can't harm the imperial court.

古文：是岁，魏宁南将军王慧龙卒，吕玄伯留守其墓，终身不去。
现代文：本年，北魏宁南将军王慧龙去世。吕玄伯留守他的墓园，终身不肯离去。
English: This year, the Northern Wei Ningnan general Wang Huilong passed away. Lü Xuanbo stayed at his cemetery and refused to leave for life.

古文：魏主欲以伊馛为尚书，封郡公，馛辞曰： 尚书务殷，公爵至重，非臣年少愚近所宜膺受。 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘打算任命伊为尚书，封郡公。伊辞让说： 尚书职务繁忙重要，公爵地位崇高，不是象我这样的年少愚鲁的臣属所能胜任的。 
English: Tuobao, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, planned to appoint Yi as Shangshu, the head of the county. Yi Jiejun said: Shangshu's duties are busy and important, and the duke's status is lofty, which is not something that a young and foolish subject like me can do.

古文：帝问其所欲，对曰： 中、秘二省多诸文士，若恩矜不已，请参其次。 
现代文：拓跋焘问他想担任什么职位？伊回答说： 中书省、秘书省中的官员大多是文士，如果承蒙赏赐的话，请允许我参加他们的行列。 
English: When Tuobao asked him what position he wanted to hold, Yi replied: "Most of the officials in the Ministry of Literature and the Ministry of Secretaries are scribes. If I am rewarded, please allow me to join their ranks."

古文：帝善之，以为中护国将军、秘书监。
现代文：拓跋焘欣然同意，就任命他为中护军将军、秘书监。
English: Tuobao readily agreed and appointed him as the general of the Middle Protection Force and the supervisor of secretaries.

古文：大秦王杨难当复称武都王。
现代文：自称为大秦王的氐王杨难当，又恢复旧号，称武都王。
English: Yang Nantang, the self-proclaimed King of the Great Qin, restored his old title and became known as King of Wudu.

古文：太祖文皇帝中之上元嘉十八年
现代文：元嘉十八年
English: Founded in 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，正月，癸卯，魏以沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州牧、酒泉王。
现代文：春季，正月，癸卯，北魏朝廷任命沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州牧、酒泉王。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed Deqiu Muxin as the general of the Western Expedition, the herdsman of Liangzhou, and the king of Jiuquan.

古文：彭城王义康至豫章，辞刺史；甲辰，以义康都督江、交、广三州诸军事。
现代文：刘宋彭城王刘义康抵达豫章，辞去江州刺史的职务。甲辰，文帝任命刘义康为都督江、交、广三州诸军事。
English: Liu Song Peng, the king of the city, Liu Yikang, arrived in Yuzhang and resigned from the post of the governor of Jiangsu Province. In Jia Chen, Emperor Wen appointed Liu Yikang as the military governor of Jiangsu Province, Jiajing Province and Guangzhou Province.

古文：前龙骧参军巴东扶令育诣阙上表，称： 昔袁盎谏汉文帝曰： 淮南王若道路遇霜露死，陛下有杀弟之名。 
现代文：前龙骧将军、巴东人扶令育前往皇宫，呈上奏章，说： 当年袁盎劝阻汉文帝说： 淮南王刘长如果在路上遇到风霜而死，陛下有杀弟的罪名。 
English: The former General Longyu and the people of Patong went to the imperial palace to present a petition, saying: Yuan Ang dissuaded Emperor Wen of Han in those days by saying: If Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, dies in a storm on the road, His Majesty will be accused of killing his brother.

古文：文帝不用，追悔无及。
现代文：汉文帝没有接受，后悔也来不及了。
English: Emperor Hanwen did not accept, and it was too late to regret it.

古文：彭城王义康，先朝之爱子，陛下之次弟，若有迷谬之愆，正可数之以善恶，导之以义方，奈何信疑似之嫌，一旦黜削，远送南垂！
现代文：彭城王刘义康是先帝钟爱的儿子，是陛下的二弟。如果一时糊涂犯了错误，陛下可以用善恶的标准责备他，用道义来引导他，怎么可以相信未加证实的嫌疑，一日之间被罢官黜爵，贬谪到南方边陲！
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was the beloved son of the former emperor, and the second brother of His Majesty. If he made a mistake in a moment of confusion, His Majesty could reproach him with the standard of good and evil, and guide him with morality. How could he believe in unconfirmed suspicions, and be dismissed from office and demoted to the southern border!

古文：草莱黔首，皆为陛下痛之。
现代文：荒野小民，都为陛下痛心。
English: The little people in the wilderness are all heartbroken for His Majesty.

古文：庐陵往事，足为龟鉴。
现代文：庐陵王被迁被杀的往事，足以引为借鉴。
English: The story of the relocation and murder of King Fuling is enough to serve as a reference.

古文：恐义康年穷命尽，奄忽于南，臣虽微贱，窃为陛下羞之。
现代文：深恐刘义康一旦不幸丧命，死在南方，我虽然身份低微卑贱，也暗为陛下羞惭。
English: I am deeply afraid that if Liu Yikang were to die in the south, I would be ashamed of His Majesty, even though I am a lowly person.

古文：陛下徒知恶枝之宜伐，岂知伐枝之伤树！
现代文：陛下只知坏掉的枝叶应该砍掉，怎么不知道砍枝叶也会伤及树干呢！
English: Your Majesty only knows that broken branches and leaves should be cut off, how can you not know that cutting branches and leaves can also damage the tree trunk!

古文：伏愿亟召义康返于京甸，兄弟协和，君臣辑睦，则四海之望塞，多言之路绝矣。
现代文：我诚心希望陛下把刘义康迅速召回京师，兄弟和睦友爱，君臣互相勉励，这样，四海之内的怨恨就会消除了，诽谤的谣言也可以息止了。
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will quickly call Liu Yikang back to Beijing. Brothers and sisters should live in harmony and friendship, and princes and ministers should encourage each other. In this way, the resentment in the four seas will be eliminated, and the slanderous rumors can also be stopped.

古文：何必司徒公、扬州牧然后可以置彭城王哉！若臣所言于国为非，请伏重诛以谢陛下。 
现代文：并有一定非要重新把彭城王置于司徒公、扬州牧的位子上呵！如果我的话对国家有害，我愿意被处死向陛下谢罪。 
English: And there must be a way to put King Pengcheng back on the throne of Stuchong and Yangzhou! If my words are harmful to the country, I am willing to be put to death to thank His Majesty.

古文：表奏，即收付建康狱，赐死。
现代文：奏章呈上以后，朝廷便把他逮捕，投入建康监狱，命他自杀。
English: After the petition was submitted, the court arrested him, put him in Jiankang Prison, and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：裴子野论曰：夫在上为善，若云行雨施，万物受其赐；及其恶也，若天裂地震，万物所惊骇，其谁弗知，其谁弗见！
现代文：裴子野论曰：身居高位的人行善施恩，就如同聚集云彩，降下甘霖，天下万物都得到他的恩惠。可是，身居高位的人做下恶事，就如同天崩地裂，天下万物所受到的惊恐，谁不知道，谁看不到！
English: Peizhino said: "When a high-ranking person does something good and benevolent, it is like gathering clouds and raining rain, and all things under the sky receive his grace. However, when a high-ranking person does something evil, it is like the sky collapsing, and all things under the sky are terrified. Who does not know, who does not see!

古文：岂戮一人之身，钳一夫之口，所能禳逃，所能弭灭哉？
现代文：岂是杀一个人的性命，钳一个人的口舌就能掩盖逃脱，就能消灭的？
English: Is it to kill a man's life, and by a man's speech to hide one's escape, and to destroy?

古文：是皆不胜其忿怒而有增于疾疹也。
现代文：这都是因为不能克制自己的怒火，而加重已有的疾病呀！
English: It's all because you can't control your anger, and it's aggravating an existing illness!

古文：以太祖之含弘，尚掩耳于彭城之戮，自斯以后，谁易由言！
现代文：以刘义隆的宽宏大度，还要对杀害刘义康的劝谏掩耳不听。从此以后，谁还敢轻易说话！
English: With the magnanimity of Liu Yilong, he also turned a deaf ear to the advice of killing Liu Yikang. From now on, who dares to speak easily!

古文：有宋累叶，罕闻直谅，岂骨鲠之气，俗愧前古？
现代文：宋一朝几代，很少有直言谏诤的人，这岂是朝中正直骨的大臣不如古人？
English: In several generations of the Song Dynasty, there were few outspoken people. Is it because the honest ministers of the dynasty are not as good as the ancients?

古文：抑时王刑政使之然乎？
现代文：还是当时政治、刑法不够开明造成的结果？
English: Or was it the result of insufficiently enlightened politics and criminal law at the time?

古文：张约陨于权臣，扶育毙于哲后，宋之鼎镬，吁，可畏哉！
现代文：张约冤死在权臣手中，扶令育却死在明君的手里。宋的杀人法网酷刑，唉！真可怕呀！
English: Zhang Yao died unjustly at the hands of a high-ranking official, while Fu Rong Yu died at the hands of Ming Jun. Song's torture, alas! How terrible!

古文：魏新兴王俊荒淫不法，三月，庚戌，降爵为公。
现代文：北魏新兴王拓跋俊荒淫不法。三月，庚戌，降为公爵。
English: Northern Wei's new king, Tuobaojun, was deposed and demoted to the rank of duke in March of the following year.

古文：俊母先得罪死，俊积怨望，有逆谋；事觉，赐死。
现代文：拓跋俊的母亲在这以前因罪被杀，拓跋俊一直心怀怨恨，阴谋反叛朝廷。事情泄漏，被赐死。
English: Prior to this, Tuoba Jun's mother had been killed for a crime, and Tuoba Jun had been harboring resentment and plotting to rebel against the imperial court. The affair leaked out, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：辛亥，魏赐郁久闾乞列归爵为朔方王，沮渠万年为张掖王。
现代文：辛亥，北魏封柔然汗国郁久闾乞列归为朔方王，封沮渠万年为张掖王。
English: At the end of the 19th century, the Northern Wei Dynasty made Iku Jiuquan the king of Shuo Fang, and made Zhang Ye the king of Shuo Fang.

古文：夏，四月，沮渠唐儿叛沮渠无讳；无讳留从弟天周守酒泉，与弟宜得引兵击唐儿，唐儿败死。
现代文：夏季四月，敦煌太守沮渠唐儿背叛了沮渠无讳，沮渠无讳留下他的堂弟沮渠天周镇守酒泉；他亲自与他的弟弟沮渠宜得率兵追击沮渠唐儿，沮渠唐儿战败身死。
English: In the summer of April, the governor of Dunhuang, Deqiu Tang'er, betrayed Deqiu Mujing, leaving his cousin, Deqiu Tianzhou, to guard Jiuquan. He and his brother, Deqiu Yidi, led the troops to pursue Deqiu Tang'er, and Deqiu Tang'er was defeated and killed.

古文：魏以无讳终为边患，庚辰，遣镇南将军奚眷击酒泉。
现代文：北魏朝廷担心沮渠无讳早晚是边疆的隐患。庚辰，拓跋焘派镇南将军奚眷进攻酒泉。
English: The Northern Wei court was worried that the open canal would sooner or later become a hidden danger on the frontier. Geng Chen, the governor of Tuoba, sent the Zhennan general to attack Jiuquan.

古文：秋，八月，辛亥，魏遣散骑侍郎张伟来聘。
现代文：秋季，八月，辛亥，北魏派散骑侍郎张伟出访刘宋。
English: In the autumn, in August, Xinhai, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Zhang Wei, a horseback riding attendant, to visit Liu Song.

古文：九月，戊戌，魏永昌王健卒。
现代文：九月，戊戌，北魏永昌王拓跋健去世。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Yongchang King Tuoba Jian passed away.

古文：冬，十一月，戊子，王球卒。
现代文：冬季，十一月，戊子，刘宋仆射球去世。
English: In winter, in November, Wu Zi, Liu Song's servant, passed away.

古文：己亥，以丹阳尹孟顗为尚书仆射。
现代文：己亥，刘宋朝廷任命丹杨尹孟为尚书仆射。
English: On the 21st, Danyang Yin Mengtou was appointed as Shang Shuxu's subordinate.

古文：酒泉城中食尽，万馀口皆饿死，沮渠天周杀妻以食战士。
现代文：被北魏围困的酒泉城中粮食吃尽，一万多人饿死，守将沮渠天周杀掉自己的妻子，分送战士们充饥。
English: In Jiuquan City, which was besieged by the Northern Wei Dynasty, the grain was exhausted and more than 10,000 people starved to death. The guard killed his wife and distributed it to the soldiers to relieve their hunger.

古文：庚子，魏奚眷拔酒泉，获天周，送平城，杀之。
现代文：庚子，北魏军将领奚眷攻克酒泉城，俘虏了沮渠天周，押送到平城斩首。
English: Geng Zi, the general of the Northern Wei Army, led his troops to conquer Jiuquan City as soon as possible, captured Depu Quan Tian Zhou, and sent him to Pingcheng to be beheaded.

古文：沮渠无讳乏食，且畏魏兵之盛，乃谋西度流沙，遣其弟安周西击郪善。
现代文：沮渠无讳的军中也缺乏粮食，又害怕北魏的强大兵力，于是打算向西渡过沙漠，派他的弟弟沮渠安周向西进攻鄯善国。
English: The undisguised army of Deshu Quan also lacked food and was afraid of the powerful troops of the Northern Wei Dynasty, so he planned to cross the desert to the west and sent his younger brother Deshu Anzhu to the west to attack Shaoshan.

古文：郪善王欲降，会魏使者至，劝令拒守；安周不能克，退何东城。
现代文：鄯善国王打算投降，正巧北魏的使臣赶到，劝他坚决防守。因此沮渠安周难以攻克，只好撤退，固守已占据的东城。
English: When the Northern Wei envoys arrived, they advised him to defend resolutely. Therefore, it was difficult to conquer Shichuan and Zhou, so he had to retreat and hold on to the occupied Dongcheng.

古文：氐王杨难当倾国入寇，谋据蜀土，遣其建忠将军苻冲出东洛以御梁州兵；梁、秦二州刺史刘真道击冲，斩之。真道，怀敬之子也。
现代文：氐王杨难当动员全国的兵马入侵刘宋，计划占据蜀地，派他手下的建忠将军苻冲从东洛出兵抵御刘宋梁州的军队。刘宋梁、秦二州刺史刘真道迎击苻冲，斩杀了苻冲，刘真道是刘怀敬的儿子。
English: King Yang Rong of Qin mobilized soldiers and horses from all over the country to invade Liu Song and planned to occupy Shu. He sent his subordinate General Jianzhong to dispatch troops from Dongluo to resist the army of Liu Song Liangzhou. Liu Songliang and Liu Zhendao, the governor of Qin Erzhou, confronted and killed Liu Zhendao, the son of Liu Huaijing.

古文：难当攻拔葭萌，获晋寿太守申坦，遂围涪城。
现代文：杨难当攻陷葭萌，俘获了晋寿太守申坦，进而又包围了涪城。
English: Yang Nantang attacked and besieged Qimeng, captured Shentan, the governor of Jinju, and then encircled Lucheng.

古文：巴西、梓潼二郡太守刘道锡婴城固守，难当攻之十馀日，不克，乃还。
现代文：巴西、梓潼二郡太守刘道锡绕城固守，杨难当连续进攻十多日，不能攻克，于是返回。
English: In Brazil, Liu Daoxi, the governor of Zizhou Second County, held fast around the city. Yang Nantang attacked for more than ten days in a row, but could not conquer the city, so he returned.

古文：道锡，道产之弟也。
现代文：刘道锡是刘道产的弟弟。
English: Liu Daoxi is the younger brother of Liu Daozang.

古文：十二月，癸亥，诏龙骧将军裴方明等帅甲士三千人，又发荆、雍二州兵以讨难当，皆受刘真道节度。
现代文：十二月，癸亥，刘宋文帝下诏，命令龙骧将军裴方明等率领全副武装的士卒三千人，又征调荆州、雍州二州的兵力讨伐杨难当，都由刘真道统一指挥。
English: In December, Emperor Wenhai and Liu Songwen issued an edict, ordering Longjing General Pei Fangming and others to lead 3,000 fully armed soldiers, and also conscripted troops from Jingzhou and Yongzhou to fight against Yang Nantang, all under the unified command of Liu Zhendao.

古文：晋宁太守爨松子反，宁州刺史徐循讨平之。
现代文：刘宋晋宁太守松子谋反，宁州刺史徐循镇压了叛军。
English: Liu Song and Jin Ning, the de facto ruler of Matsuzi, plotted a rebellion, while the ruler of Ningzhou, Shishi Xu, suppressed the rebels.

古文：天门蛮田向求等反，破溇中；荆州刺史衡阳王义季遣行参军曹孙念讨破之。
现代文：天门蛮族酋长田向求等人谋反，攻陷中。刘宋荆州刺史、衡阳王刘义季派遣代理参军曹孙念彻底平定叛乱。
English: Tianmen barbarian chieftain Tian Xiangqiu and others plotted a rebellion and were about to be captured. Liu Song, Jingzhou Jishi, and Hengyang King Liu Yiji dispatched acting general Cao Sunnian to completely quell the rebellion.

古文：魏寇谦之言于魏主曰： 今陛下以真君御世，建静轮天宫之法，开古以来，未之有也。
现代文：北魏道士寇谦之对北魏国主拓跋焘说： 现在陛下是以真君的名义统治天下，建立静轮天宫大法，这是开天辟地以来从未有过的事。
English: Northern Wei Daoist Kou Qian Zhi said to Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Lu: Now your majesty is ruling the world in the name of Zhenjun and establishing the Jinglun Heavenly Palace Great Law, which has never happened since the creation of heaven and earth.

古文：应登受符书，以彰圣德。 
现代文：应该登台接受符书表彰和宣扬皇上圣明的恩德。 
English: He should be on the stage to receive the award of characters and proclaim the benevolence of the emperor.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：拓跋焘同意了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

