古文：十有八年春，王正月，宋公、曹伯、卫人、邾人伐齐。
现代文：十八年春季，周历正月，宋公、曹伯、卫人、邾国人一起攻打齐国。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Song Gong, Cao Bo, the guards, and the people of Shan attacked Qi together.

古文：夏，师救齐。
现代文：夏季，出兵援救齐国。
English: In the summer, troops were dispatched to rescue Qi.

古文：五月戊寅，宋师及齐师战于甗，齐师败绩。
现代文：五月戊寅日，宋国在甗地与齐国交战，齐国战败。
English: In May, on the day of Wu Yin, Song fought against Qi in Handan, and Qi was defeated.

古文：狄救齐。
现代文：狄人援救齐国。
English: Di people came to the rescue of Qi.

古文：秋八月丁亥，葬齐桓公。
现代文：秋季八月丁亥日，安葬齐桓公。
English: In the autumn, on August Dinghai Day, Qi Huan Gong was buried.

古文：冬，邢人、狄人伐卫。
现代文：冬季，邢人、狄人进攻卫国。
English: In winter, the Xiongnu and Di people attacked the motherland.

古文：十八年春，宋襄公以诸侯伐齐。
现代文：十八年春季，宋襄公率领曹共公等攻打齐国。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, Song Xiangong led Cao Gongong and others to attack Qi.

古文：三月，齐人杀无亏。
现代文：三月，齐国人杀了无亏。
English: In March, the people of Qi killed without loss.

古文：郑伯始朝于楚，楚子赐之金，既而悔之，与之盟曰： 无以铸兵。 
现代文：郑文公开始到楚国朝见。楚成王把铜赐给他，不久又后悔，和他盟誓说： 不要拿来铸造武器。 
English: King Cheng of Chu gave him the copper, but he soon regretted it and swore to him: "Don't use it to cast weapons."

古文：故以铸三钟。
现代文：所以郑文公用它铸造了三座钟。
English: Therefore, Zheng Wenkong used it to cast three bells.

古文：齐人将立孝公，不胜，四公子之徒遂与宋人战。
现代文：齐国人准备立孝公为国君，挡不住四公子一伙的反对，孝公逃亡到宋国，四公子一伙就和宋军作战。
English: The people of Qi prepared to make Xiaogong the ruler of the country, but could not stop the opposition of a group of four boys. Xiaogong fled to Song, and a group of four boys fought against the Song army.

古文：夏五月，宋败齐师于甗，立孝公而还。
现代文：夏季，五月，宋国在甗地打败了齐国，立了孝公，然后回国。
English: In the summer, in May, Song defeated Qi and established Xiaogong in Handan, and then returned to China.

古文：秋八月，葬齐桓公。
现代文：秋季，八月，安葬齐桓公。
English: In the autumn, in August, the funeral of Lord Qi Huan took place.

古文：冬，邢人、狄人伐卫，围菟圃。
现代文：冬季，邢人、狄人进攻卫国，包围了菟圃。
English: In winter, the Xiongnu and Di people attacked the motherland and surrounded the Xiongnu.

古文：卫侯以国让父兄子弟及朝众曰： 苟能治之，燬请从焉。 
现代文：卫文公把国君的地位推让给父兄子弟和朝廷上的其他人，说： 谁如果能治理国家，我就跟从他。 
English: Weiwen gave up the position of the sovereign to his father, brother, son and others in the court, saying, "Whoever can govern the country, I will follow him."

古文：众不可，而后师于訾娄。
现代文：大家不同意，而后在訾娄摆开阵势。
English: Everyone disagrees, and then the battle lines are drawn.

古文：狄师还。
现代文：狄军就退回去了。
English: The Di army then retreated.

古文：梁伯益其国而不能实也，命曰新里，秦取之。
现代文：梁伯扩充了疆土，筑了很多城邑，却不能把百姓迁往那里，把那地方命名为新里，但被秦国占取了。
English: Liang Bo expanded the territory and built many cities and towns, but he could not move the people there. He named the place Xinli, but it was occupied by Qin.

