古文：古里甲石伦内族讹可撒合辇强伸乌林答胡土内族思烈纥石烈牙吾塔古里甲石伦，隆安人。
现代文：古里甲石伦，隆安人。
English: Guli Jia Shi Lun, from Long'an.

古文：以武举登第。
现代文：以武举得中。
English: You can't win a war with martial arts.

古文：为人刚悍，颇自用，所在与人不合。宣宗以其勇善战，每任用之。
现代文：他为人性格强悍，颇自以为是，到哪儿都和人家合不来，宣宗因为他英勇善战而经常任用他。
English: He had a strong personality and was rather self-righteous. He did not get along with people everywhere. Emperor Xuanzong often appointed him because he was brave and good at fighting.

古文：贞祐二年，累迁副提控、太原府判官，与从宜都提控、振武军节度使完颜蒲刺都议拒守不合，措置乖方，敌因大入，几不可御。
现代文：贞二年，累迁任副提控、太原府判官。他和从宜都提控、振武军节度使完颜蒲剌都在商议防守方略时意见不同，布置得不合理，敌军乘机大举入侵，差点不能抵御。
English: In the second year of Zhen, he was successively transferred to the post of deputy procurator and judge of Taiyuan Prefecture. He and Zong Yidu procurator and Zhenwu Jun's governor both had different opinions when discussing the defense strategy. The layout was unreasonable, and the enemy army took the opportunity to invade in large numbers, and it was almost impossible to resist.

古文：既乃交章论列，以自辨其无罪，上恶其不和，诏分统其兵。
现代文：后来他交了份表章自我申辩，说他没有罪责，皇帝对他们不和睦很不高兴，下诏让分开统领军队。
English: Later, he submitted a form to defend himself, saying that he was not guilty, and the emperor was very unhappy with their discord, and ordered him to lead the army separately.

古文：未几，迁同知太原府事。
现代文：不久，改任同知太原府事。
English: Soon after, he was reassigned to the Taiyuan prefectural government.

古文：奏请招集义军，设置长校，各立等差。
现代文：他上奏请求招募义军，设立长校官员，各有等级差别。
English: He appealed for the recruitment of rebels and the establishment of a superintendent of schools, each with a different rank.

古文：都统授正七品职，副统正八品，万户正九品，千户正班任使，谋克杂班。
现代文：都统授给正七品职位，副都统正八品，万户正九品，千户为正班任使，谋克为杂班。
English: All of them were awarded the position of the official seventh grade, the vice-officials were awarded the official eighth grade, the households were awarded the official ninth grade, the households were assigned to the official class, and the students were assigned to the miscellaneous class.

古文：仍三十人为一谋克，五谋克为一千户，四千户为一万户，四万户为一副统，两副统为一都统，外设一总领提控。
现代文：仍按三十人编成一谋克，五谋克为一千户，四千户为一万户，四万户为一副统，两副统为一都统，外设一位总领提控。
English: According to thirty people, they were still organized into one moshke, five moshkes up to one thousand households, four thousand households to ten thousand households, forty thousand households to one family, two families to one city, and a general leader to take control.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝批示可行。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：四年，迁河东宣抚副使，上章言宣抚使乌古论礼不肯分兵御敌，且所行多不法。
现代文：四年，迁任河东宣抚副使，上表章说宣抚使乌古论礼不肯分兵抵御敌人，况且所作所为多不守法度。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of the Henan Procuratorate, and the above table chapter said that the procuratorate was unwilling to divide the troops to resist the enemy, and moreover, his actions were not in accordance with the law.

古文：诏礼罢职，石伦迁绛阳军节度使，权经略使，寻知延安府事、兼鄜延路兵马都总管。
现代文：皇帝下诏罢免乌古论礼的职务，古里甲石伦升为绛阳军节度使，代理经略使，不久又任知延安府事、兼任延路兵马都总管。
English: The emperor issued an edict to remove Ugu from his post, and Gu Liqia Shilun was promoted to be the festival envoy of the Shenyang Army, acting as the deputy envoy, and soon he was appointed to the Yan'an prefectural government, and concurrently served as the head of the Yanlu Terracotta Army.

古文：大元兵围忻州，石伦率兵往援，以兵护其民入太原，所保军民甚众。
现代文：元军围困忻州，石伦领兵前去救援，他以军队保护忻州民众进入太原，受他保护的军民人数众多。
English: The Yuan army besieged Bozhou, Shi Lun led the troops to rescue, he protected the people of Bozhou with the army to enter Taiyuan, and a large number of soldiers and civilians were protected by him.

古文：兴定元年七月，改河平军节度、兼卫州管内观察使，诏谕曰： 朕初谓汝勇果，为国尽力，故倚以济事。
现代文：兴定元年七月，改任河平军节度使，兼卫州管内观察使，皇帝下诏对他说 ：朕当初认为你勇敢善战，为国尽力，所以倚仗你成功。
English: In July of the first year of Xingding, he was appointed as the military envoy of the Heping Army and the observation envoy of the Weizhou Province. The emperor said to him: I thought you were brave and good at war and did your best for the country, so I relied on you to succeed.

古文：寻闻汝嗜酒不法，而太原知府乌古论德升亦屡尝为朕言之，然皆琐屑，乃若不救汾州，岂细事哉？
现代文：不久听说你嗜酒不守法令，而太原知府乌古论德升也多次向我说过，都是琐碎事，但像不救援汾州，岂是小事？
English: Soon I heard that you were addicted to alcohol and did not abide by the law, and the governor of Taiyuan Province, Wu Guon De Sheng, also told me many times that they were trivial matters, but like not rescuing Zhangzhou, is it a small matter?

古文：有司议罪如此，汝其悉之，益当戮力，以掩前过。 
现代文：有司这样议罪，你应当知道，更加努力，以补前时的过失。 
English: If the magistrate finds you guilty, you should know that you should work harder to make up for your previous mistakes.

古文：是年十一月，迁镇西军节度使、兼岚州管内观察使、行元帅府事。
现代文：当年十一月，迁任镇西军节度使、兼岚州管内观察使、行元帅府事。
English: In November of that year, he was transferred to the post of Zhenxi Military Festival Envoy, and also served as the observation envoy within the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou, and acted as the marshal of the prefecture.

古文：二年四月，石伦言： 去岁北兵破太原，游兵时入岚州境，而官民将士悉力捍御，卒能保守无虞。
现代文：二年四月，石伦上奏说： 去年北兵攻破太原，游兵时常进入岚州境内，而官民将士全力抵抗，终能保守无误。
English: In April of the second year, Shi Lun said in his report: Last year, the Northern soldiers broke through Taiyuan, and the guerrillas often entered the territory of Zhangzhou, but the officials and civilians resisted with all their might and were able to keep it safe.

古文：向者河东内郡，皆驻以精甲，实以资储，视边城尤为完富，然兵一至，相继沦没。
现代文：以前河东内郡都驻守精兵，物资充实，比边城更加完备充裕，可是当敌军一到便相继沦没。
English: In the past, all counties in the Inner County of Hedong were garrisoned by elite soldiers, with abundant supplies, more complete and abundant than the border town, but when the enemy army arrived, they were successively destroyed.

古文：岚兵寡而食不足，惟其上下协同，表里相应，遂获安帖。
现代文：岚州兵少而食物供应不足，全靠上下同心协力，内外相应，固而得以安宁。
English: Zhangzhou has few soldiers and insufficient food supply. It is all thanks to the concerted efforts of the upper and lower levels, corresponding to the internal and external, that it has been able to achieve peace.

古文：当大军初入，郡县仓皇，非此帅府控制，则庾、管、保德、岢岚、宁化皆不可知矣。
现代文：当敌军初入时，郡县惶惶不安，如果不是帅府严加管制，那么，阝奥、管保德、岢岚、宁化都不知会怎样了。
English: When the enemy army first entered, the counties panicked and worried. If it were not for the strict control of the General Headquarters, then, Yao, Guanbaode, Handan and Ninghua would not know what would happen.

古文：今防秋不远，乞朝廷量加旌赏，务令益尽心力，易以镇守。 
现代文：如今秋防已近，请朝廷量情予以奖赏，务使更加尽心尽力，容易镇守。 
English: Now that the autumn defense is near, I would like to ask the Imperial Court to reward them according to their merits, so that they will be more diligent and easy to defend.

古文：诏有功者各迁官一级，仍给降空名宣敕，令枢密院遣授之。
现代文：朝廷诏令对有功人员各升官一级，仍给予没有填写名字的委任书，让枢密院派人送去。
English: The imperial edict of the imperial court still gave a letter of appointment without filling in the name to the meritorious personnel for each promotion level, and asked the Privy Council to send someone.

古文：三年二月，石伦奏： 向者并、汾既破，兵入内地，臣谓必攻平阳，平阳不守，将及潞州，其还当由龙州谷以入太原。
现代文：三年二月，古里甲石伦上奏说： 原来并、汾被攻破，敌军入侵内地，我认为他们必定攻打平阳，平阳不能守住，就将危及潞州，他们回兵时将从龙州谷入侵太原。
English: In February of the third year, Gu Li Jia Shilun said in his report: Originally, the Yangtze River was breached and the enemy invaded the inland. I think they must attack Pingyang. If Pingyang cannot be held, it will endanger Zhangzhou. When they return, they will invade Taiyuan from Longzhou Valley.

古文：故臣尝请兵欲扼其归路，朝廷不以为然，既而皆如臣所料。
现代文：所以我曾请求派兵扼守住敌军退路，朝廷不以为然，后来果然都如臣所预料那样。
English: Therefore, I had requested that troops be sent to hold the enemy's retreat route, but the Imperial Court did not agree, and later everything turned out as expected.

古文：始敌入河东时，郡县民皆携老幼徙居山险，后虽太原失守，而众卒不从，其意谓敌不久留，且望官军复至也。
现代文：开始敌军入侵河东时，郡县的民众都扶老携幼迁移到山上险要地方，后来太原虽然失守，而民众不肯跟从撤退，他们认为敌人不会久留，而且希望官军能再到。
English: At the beginning of the enemy's invasion of Hedong, the people of the county and county all helped the elderly with their children to migrate to the mountains where they were at risk. Later, although Taiyuan was lost, the people refused to follow the retreat. They believed that the enemy would not stay long, and hoped that the government army could come again.

古文：今敌居半岁，遣步骑扰诸保聚，而官军竟无至者，民其能久抗乎。
现代文：如今敌人已停留了半年之久，派遣步骑兵骚扰各民众聚居的村堡，而官军却始终不到，民众能够长久抵抗吗？
English: Now that the enemy has stayed for half a year, dispatching infantry and cavalry to harass the village fortresses where the people are gathered, but the official army has never arrived, can the people resist for a long time?

古文：夫太原，河东之要郡；平阳，陕西，河南之藩篱也。
现代文：太原是河东的要郡，平阳，是陕西、河南的前卫。
English: Taiyuan is an important county in Hedong, and Pingyang is the vanguard of Shaanxi and Henan.

古文：若敌兵久不去，居民尽从，屯兵积粮以固基本，而复扰吾郡县未残者，则边城指日皆下矣。
现代文：如果敌军久留不走，居民都跟从他们，驻扎军队积存粮食以巩固根基，再来骚扰我方还未残损的郡县的话，则边境城池指日将被攻下。
English: If the enemy troops stay for a long time and the residents follow them, stationing troops to accumulate grain to consolidate the foundation, and then harassing our counties that have not yet been damaged, the border city will be captured in the near future.

古文：北路不守，则南路为边，去陕西、河南益近，臣窃忧之，故复请兵以图战守。
现代文：北路守不住，则南路成为边境，离陕西、河南更近。我深感忧虑，所以再次请兵以求作战和防卫。
English: If the northern route cannot be defended, then the southern route will become the border, and it will be closer to Shaanxi and Henan. I am deeply worried, so I will call up troops again to fight and defend.

古文：而枢府檄臣，并将权太原治中郭遹祖、义军李天禄等万余人，就其粮五千石，会汾州权元帅右都监抹捻胡剌复太原。
现代文：而枢密院下文书给我，让我统率代理太原治中郭祖、义军李天禄等一万多人，就近取其粮五千石，会集汾州代理元帅右都监抹睰胡剌收复太原。
English: However, the Privy Council issued a document to me, asking me to lead more than ten thousand people, including Guo Zu, the deputy governor of Taiyuan, and Li Tianlu, the rebel army, to collect five thousand koku of grain nearby, and to gather together the deputy marshal of Zhangzhou and the right-hand governor of the capital, Matsuo Hu, to recover Taiyuan.

古文：臣召遹祖，欲号令其众，遹祖不从。
现代文：臣召令祖，要命令他的部众，郭祖不肯听从。
English: Guo Zu did not want to obey the order of his subordinates.

古文：寻得胡剌报曰： 尝问军数于遹祖，但称天禄等言之，未尝亲阅。
现代文：不久接到抹睰胡剌回报说 ：曾经几次向郭祖询问军队的情况，只是听李天禄等人说，没有亲自见到文书。
English: Soon after, he received a reply from Magdalen: I had asked Guo Zu several times about the state of the army, only to hear Li Tianlu and others say that they had not personally seen the documents.

古文：问粮，则曰散在数处。 
现代文：问粮食，则说分散在几个地方。 
English: When asked about food, they said it was scattered in several places.

古文：盖其情本欲视朝廷以己有兵粮，冀或见用，以取重职，不可指为实用也。
现代文：根据这种情况，原是想让朝廷知道自己有兵有粮，希望受到朝廷任用，以得到高的职务，不能指望他们能够实用。
English: According to this situation, they originally wanted to let the imperial court know that they had soldiers and food, and hoped to be appointed by the imperial court to obtain high positions. They could not be expected to be practical.

古文：虽然，臣已遣提控石盏吾里忻等领军以往矣。
现代文：虽则如此，臣已派遣提控石盏吾里忻等领兵前往了。
English: In spite of this, the vassal had already dispatched the leader of the troops, such as the leader of the troops, Shi Zhen and the leader of the troops, such as the leader of the troops, such as the leader of the troops.

古文：但敌势颇重，而往者皆新集白徒，绝无精锐，恐不能胜。
现代文：但敌军来势颇大，而派去的大多是新招来的平民，绝无精锐部队，恐怕难以取胜。
English: However, the enemy's momentum is quite large, and most of those sent are newly recruited civilians, there are no elite troops, I am afraid it will be difficult to win.

古文：乞於河南、陕西量分精兵，以增臣力，仍令陕西州郡近河东者给之资粮，更令南路诸军缀敌之南，以分其势，如此庶几太原可复也。 
现代文：请从河南、陕西量情分给精兵，以增大我的兵力，并令陕西州郡中靠近河东的给予一部分军粮，再让南路各军牵制住敌军的南部，以分散敌军兵力，这样太原大概可望收复。 
English: Please give the best soldiers from Henan and Shaanxi in proportion to increase my strength, and order the middle of the counties in Shaanxi Province near the east of the river to give a part of the military food, and then let the armies on the south road hold back the southern part of the enemy army to disperse the enemy army, so that Taiyuan can be expected to recover.

古文：诏陕西、河东行省分粮与之，请兵之事，以方伐宋不从。
现代文：朝廷诏令陕西、河东的行省分粮给他，请求派兵的事则因正在讨伐宋国而不听请求。
English: The imperial court ordered the provinces of Shaanxi and Hedong to distribute grain to him, but did not listen to the request to send troops because they were fighting against the Song Dynasty.

古文：三月，石伦复上言曰： 顷者大兵破太原，招民耕稼，为久驻之基。
现代文：三月，古里甲石伦又上奏说： 近时元兵攻破太原，招揽民众耕作，作为久驻的根基。
English: In March, Gu Li Jia Shi Lun made another report, saying: Recently, the Yuan soldiers broke through Taiyuan, and invited the people to cultivate, as the foundation for a long stay.

古文：臣以太原要镇，所当必争，遣提控石盏吾里忻引官兵义兵共图收复。
现代文：臣认为太原是重镇，为必争之地，派提控石盏吾里忻率领官兵、义兵共图恢复。
English: The minister believed that Taiyuan was an important town and a place that needed to be fought for, and dispatched the governor, Shi Zhan, and Uri Zheng, led by officers and soldiers, and volunteers, to restore it.

古文：又以军士有功者宜速赏之，故拟令吾里忻得注授九品之职，以是请于朝，而执政以为赏功罚罪皆须中覆。
现代文：又因军士有功的应当赶快赏赐，所以打算让吾里忻得以授九品官职，以此向朝廷请示，而执政大臣认为赏功罚罪都要经过朝廷批复。
English: In addition, since meritorious military officers should be quickly rewarded, it was planned to allow Urichika to be awarded nine official ranks as a way of requesting instructions from the imperial court, while the ruling minister believed that both rewards and punishments should be approved by the imperial court.

古文：夫河东去京师甚远，移报往返不暇数十日，官军皆败亡之余，锋锐略尽，而义兵亦不习行阵，无异乌合，以重赏诱之犹恐不为用，况有功而久不见报乎。
现代文：河东离京都很远，送去报告来回不停也要几十天，官军都是打了败仗和遭受毁灭的军队的残余，精锐大都丧尽，而义兵也不熟悉行阵之法，无异于乌合之众，以重赏加以诱惑还恐不为所用，何况立了功而久不见回报呢？
English: Hadong is very far from Kyoto, it takes dozens of days to send reports back and forth, the government army is the remnants of the army that was defeated and destroyed, the elite are mostly lost, and the volunteers are not familiar with the method of marching, no different from the rabble, tempting them with a heavy reward is not useful, and what's more, they have done their duty and have not seen a return for a long time?

古文：夫众不可用则不能退敌，敌不退则太原不可复，太原不可复则平阳之势日危，而境土日蹙矣。
现代文：不能用的人众多就难以退敌，敌军不退则太原不能收复，太原不能收复则平阳形势日趋危急，而国土就日趋减少了。
English: If there are too many useless people, it will be difficult to repel the enemy. If the enemy does not retreat, Taiyuan cannot be recovered. If Taiyuan cannot be recovered, the situation in Pingyang will become increasingly critical, and the land will become increasingly scarce.

古文：今朝廷抑而不许，不过虑其滥赏耳。
现代文：今朝廷抑制不加许可，不过是担心滥于奖赏罢了。
English: This morning, the court did not grant the restraining order, but only the fear of abuse of the award.

古文：借使有滥赏之弊，其与失太原之害孰重？ 
现代文：就算有奖赏过滥的弊端，比起太原损失的害处哪种更严重？ 
English: Even if there is a drawback of excessive reward, which is more serious than the harm of Taiyuan loss?

古文：于是诏从其请，自太原治中及他州从七品以下职、四品以下散官，并听石伦迁调焉。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏准了他的请求，太原治中和其他州从七品以下职务、四品以下散官，都听由石伦升迁调整。
English: As a result, the emperor granted his request, and Taiyuan Jizhong and other prefectures were promoted and adjusted by Shi Lun from positions below the seventh grade to positions below the fourth grade.

古文：是月，石伦复言： 日者遣军潜捣敌垒，欲分石州兵五百权屯方山，剿杀土寇，且备岚州，而同知蒲察桓端拒而不发。
现代文：当月，石伦又上奏说： 近日派遣军队偷偷地捣毁敌军营垒，准备分出石州的军队五百人暂时屯驻于方山，剿灭当地贼寇，并且防守岚州，而同知蒲察桓端拒不发兵。
English: In the same month, Shi Lun also reported: Recently, 500 troops were secretly dispatched to destroy the enemy's camp and prepare to separate from Shizhou, temporarily stationed in Fangshan, annihilate the local bandits, and defend Zhangzhou, but the same Shibuchakantou refused to send troops.

古文：又召同知宁边军节度使姚里鸦鹘与之议兵，竟不听命。
现代文：又召同知宁边军节度使姚里鸦鹘一起商议军事，他竟不听命令。
English: He also summoned his colleague, the commander of the Ningyan Border Army, to have Yao Lijuan discuss military affairs with him. However, he did not listen to the order.

古文：近领兵将取太原，委石州刺史纳合万家权行六部，而辞以他故，几误军粮。
现代文：近日领兵准备攻取太原，委任石州刺史纳合万家暂时掌管六部，而他以有其他事加以推辞，差点贻误军粮。
English: Recently, the leader of the army was preparing to capture Taiyuan, and appointed Shi Zhou Shina He Wan Jia to temporarily take charge of the six departments, but he refused to do so, saying that he had other things to do, and almost delayed the military food.

古文：约武州刺史郭宪率所领并进，宪亦不至。
现代文：约同武州刺史郭宪带领所部人马一同进取，郭宪也不肯来。
English: About the same time, Wuzhou's top official, Guo Xian, led the department's personnel and horses to advance together. Guo Xian also refused to come.

古文：臣猥当方面之任，而所统官属并不禀从，乞朝廷严为惩诫，庶人知职分，易以责办。 
现代文：臣不才而充任一方面的职掌，而所统率属官都不听从，请朝廷给予严惩，让人人各知职责，容易督责办理。 
English: If a vassal is incompetent to perform any of his duties, and his subordinate officers do not obey, please ask the imperial court to impose severe punishment, so that everyone knows their duties and it is easy to supervise and handle.

古文：宰臣恶之，乃奏曰： 桓端、鸦鹘已经奏改，无复可议。
现代文：宰臣们对石伦感到讨厌，便上奏说： 桓端、鸦鹘都已经上奏改动，不再复议了。
English: The aides-de-camp were disgusted with Shi Lun, so they reported to the emperor: "The Kan-tang and the Raven have been revised, and there will be no more reconsideration."

古文：石伦身兼行部，不自规画，而使万家往来应给，石州无人，恐亦有失。
现代文：石伦身兼行部之职，不亲自策划，而让纳合万家来回供应，石州没有人恐怕会有闪失。
English: Shi Lun, who is also in charge of the trade department, does not personally plan, but lets Nahe Wanjia supply back and forth, and no one in Shishu is likely to miss the target.

古文：武州边郡，正当兵冲，使宪率军离城，敌或乘之，孰与守御？
现代文：武州是边郡，正当敌军的要害，让郭宪领兵离城，敌军或乘机进攻，谁来防守？
English: Wuzhou is a border county. As it is the enemy's stronghold, let Guo Jianzhong's soldiers leave the city. If the enemy attacks, who will defend?

古文：万家等不从，未为过也。 
现代文：万家等没有听从，不能算为过失。 
English: It cannot be regarded as a mistake that Wanjia and others did not obey.

古文：上以为然，因遣谕石伦曰： 卿尝行院于归德，卫州防备之事，非不素知，乃屡以步骑为请何耶？
现代文：皇帝也这样认为，于是派人对石伦说： 你曾经在归德设立行院，卫州防御之事并非不知，而屡次请求派给步骑兵，是何缘故？
English: The emperor also thought so, so he sent a person to Shi Lun and said: You once set up a military academy in Guide, and you are not unaware of the defense of Weizhou, but why did you repeatedly request to be sent to the infantry?

古文：比授卿三品，且数免罪谴卿，尝自誓以死报国，今所为如此，岂报国之道哉！
现代文：近来授给你三品官职，并且几次免去你的罪责，你曾经发誓以死报效国家，如今这样做法，难道是报国之道吗？
English: Recently, you have been awarded the third-class official post, and you have been absolved of your guilt several times. You once swore to serve the country with death, is this the way to serve the country?

古文：意谓河南之众必不可分，但图他日得以藉口耳。
现代文：你认为河南的军队一定不可能再分派出去，却一再请求，无非为他日有个借口而已吧！
English: You think that it is absolutely impossible for Henan's army to be sent out again, but repeated requests are nothing more than an excuse for another day!

古文：卿果赤必为国，尽力经画，亦足自效。
现代文：你如果赤心为国，尽心策划，也足以自我报效了。
English: If you are a country with a pure heart and do your best to plan, it is enough to reward yourself.

古文：万家等若必惩戒，彼中谁复可使者？
现代文：万家等人如果必须惩处的话，那边又能派谁前去呢？
English: If it is necessary to punish Wanke and others, who can we send over there?

古文：姑为容忍可也。 
现代文：暂且容忍一下吧！ 
English: Just bear with it for a while!

古文：闰三月，石伦驻兵太原之西，俟诸道兵至进战，闻胁从人颇有革心，上言于朝，乞降空名宣敕、金银符，许便宜迁注，以招诱之。
现代文：闰三月，古里甲石伦将军队驻扎在太原以西的地方，等候各路军队到达后进攻，他听说元军中被胁迫去的人有反叛之心，便上奏朝廷，请求给予一部分没有填写姓名的委任书、金银符令等，允许他根据需要给予封授官职，以便招降。
English: In the intercalary month of March, Gu Li Jia Shilun stationed his army in the west of Taiyuan, waiting for the arrival of the various armies to attack. He heard that the people who were forced to go to the former army had a rebellious heart, so he reported to the imperial court, requesting a part of the power of attorney, gold and silver certificates, etc. without filling in their names, allowing him to award official positions as needed in order to invite surrender.

古文：上从其请，并给付之，仍听注五品以下官职。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求，并交付给了他，同时听由他委任五品以下的官职。
English: The emperor complied with his request and gave him a horse, as well as allowing him to appoint officials below the fifth grade.

古文：六月，保德州振威军万户王章、弩军万户齐镇杀其刺史孛术鲁银术哥，仍灭其家，胁官吏军民同状白岚州帅府，言银术哥专恣惨酷，私造甲仗，将谋不轨。
现代文：六月，保德州振威军万户王章、弩军万户齐镇杀死本州刺史孛术鲁银术哥，并杀了他全家，胁迫官吏和军民一起到岚州帅府告状，说银术哥专干残酷的事情，私造甲胄兵器，图谋不轨。
English: In June, the Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou Zhenwei Army of Bozhou

古文：石伦密令同知州事把蒲剌都图之，蒲剌都乃与兵吏置酒召章等钦，擒而族诛之。
现代文：古里甲石伦密令同知州事蒲剌都除掉他们。蒲剌都便和官吏们一起设酒召请王章等同饮，活捉了他们并族灭全家。
English: Gu Li, Gu Jia, Shi Lunmi, and the chizhou magistrate, Pudu, all ordered to eliminate them. Pudu, together with the officials, invited Wang Zhang and others to drink, and captured them alive and exterminated the whole family.

古文：至是，朝廷命行省胥鼎量宜迁赏，仍令蒲剌都摄州事，抚安其众焉。
现代文：这时，朝廷让行省胥鼎量情给以升迁和奖赏，仍令蒲剌都负责州事，安抚民众。
English: At this time, the imperial court allowed the provincial government to give the promotion and reward, but still made the governor responsible for state affairs to appease the people.

古文：六月，迁金安军节度使，行帅府事于葭州。
现代文：六月，转任金安军节度使，在葭州行帅府事。
English: In June, he was transferred to the post of Jinan Military Festival Envoy, and was in charge of government affairs in Zhangzhou.

古文：时鄜州元帅内族承立虑夏人入寇，遣纳合买住以兵驻葭州，石伦辄分留买住兵千八百人，令以余兵屯绥德，而后奏之。
现代文：当时州元帅内族承立担心西夏入侵，派纳合买住将军队驻扎在葭州，古里甲石伦便分留了买住的一千八百名兵士，命令他带领其余军队驻守于绥德，然后再上奏朝廷。
English: At that time, the state marshal Neizhong Chengli was worried about the invasion of Western Xia, and sent troops to be stationed in Zhangzhou. Guili Jiaxilun then separated 1800 soldiers who had been bought and ordered him to lead the rest of the army to be stationed in Zhengde, and then report to the imperial court.

古文：有司论罪当绞，既而遇赦，乃止除名。
现代文：有关方面论罪，认为应当处以绞刑，后遇赦令，便只是除名。
English: The relevant parties consider the crime to be punishable by hanging, and if a pardon is later issued, the person is only removed from the list.

古文：元光元年，起为郑州同知防御使，与防御使裴满羊哥部内酤酒不偿直，皆除名。
现代文：元光元年，起用担任郑州同知防御使，他跟防御使裴满羊哥在部内打酒不给钱，两人都受除名处分。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Guang Dynasty, he was appointed as the Zhengzhou Tongzhi Defense Envoy, and he and the defense envoy Pei Manyang did not pay for drinking in the department, and both were expelled.

古文：三月，上谕元帅监军内族讹可曰： 石伦今以罪废，欲再起之，恐生物议，汝军前得无用之乎。
现代文：三月，皇帝对元帅监军内族讹可说 ：古里甲石伦如今因罪而废黜，要再起用，恐怕引起非议，你的军前难道没有可用人的地方吗？
English: In March, the emperor said to the marshal-supervisor of the Inner Mongolian People's Liberation Army: "Gurikashilun has now been deposed for a crime. If you want to reinstate him, I'm afraid you'll be criticized. Isn't there a place for someone else before your army?"

古文：此人颇善战，果可用便当遣去。
现代文：这人颇为善战，如果能用就可以派去。
English: He's a pretty good fighter, if you can use him, you can send him.

古文：古亦有白衣领职者，渠虽除名，何害也。 
现代文：古代也有以白衣而任职的，他虽已除名又有什么妨碍。 
English: In ancient times, there was also a person who held office in white robes. Although he had been removed from office, what was the obstacle?

古文：十月，大元兵围青龙堡，诏以石伦权左都监，将兵会上党公、晋阳公往援之。
现代文：十月，元军包围了青龙堡，皇帝诏令古里甲石伦暂任左都监，领兵会合上党公、晋阳公一起前往救援。
English: In October, the Yuan army encircled the Qinglong Fortress. The emperor ordered Gu Li Jia Shilun to temporarily serve as the left capital supervisor. At the leader meeting, the Party chief and Jinyang went to the rescue together.

古文：兵次弹平寨东三十里，敌兵梗道不得进，会青龙堡破，召还。
现代文：当军队走到弹平寨以东三十里地时，因敌军堵塞道路而无法前进，正好青龙堡已被攻破，他们被召回。
English: When the troops came to a place 30 miles east of Pingzhai, they were unable to advance because the enemy blocked the road, just as Qinglong Fort had been breached, and they were recalled.

古文：既而复以罪免。
现代文：不久又因罪而免职。
English: He was soon removed from office for his crimes.

古文：正大八年，大兵入河南，州郡无不下者，朝议以权昌武军节度使粘葛仝周不知兵事，起石伦代之。
现代文：正大八年，元军入侵河南，州郡无不被攻破。朝议认为暂时代理昌武军节度使粘葛仝周不懂军事，起用古里甲石伦来代替他。
English: In the eighth year of Zhengda, the Yuan army invaded Henan, and no county or prefecture was left untouched. The imperial court considered that the temporary defeat of the Lichang armed forces made Xu Gejun Zhou not understand military affairs, and appointed Gu Lijia Shilun to replace him.

古文：石伦初赴昌武，诏谕曰： 卿先朝宿将，甚有威望，故起拜是职。
现代文：石伦初去昌武时，皇帝对他说： 您是先朝的有经验的老将，很有威望，所以拜任这个职务。
English: When Shi Lun first went to Changwu, the emperor said to him: You are an experienced veteran of the previous dynasty, very prestigious, so take over this post.

古文：元帅苏椿、武监军皆晓兵事，今在昌武，宜与同议，勿复不睦失计也。 
现代文：元帅苏椿、武监军都是懂得军事的，如今都在昌武，应当和他们共同商议，不要再因为不和睦而失算了。 
English: Marshal Su Tsiming and the Wuchuan Army are both military experts, and now they are in Changwu. It is necessary to discuss with them, and not to lose the game because of discord.

古文：时北兵已至许，石伦赴镇，几为游骑所获。
现代文：当时元兵已经到了许州，石伦前往驻镇途中差点被元军的游骑所俘虏。
English: At that time, the former soldiers had already arrived in Xuzhou. On his way to the garrison town, Shi Lun was almost captured by the former soldiers' cavalry.

古文：数日，知两省军败，溃军踵来。有忠孝军完颜副统入城，两手皆折，血污满身，州人忧怖不知所出。
现代文：几天后，已知两行省军队大败，败军接踵而来，有位忠孝军的完颜副都统进城时，两手都断了，血染全身，州人都十分害怕，不知怎么办好。
English: A few days later, it was known that the two provincial armies had suffered a crushing defeat, and the defeated army was coming one after another. When one of the loyal and filial soldiers entered the city, both hands were broken, and his whole body was stained with blood. The people of the state were very afraid and did not know what to do.

古文：石伦遣归顺军提控岚州人高珪往斥候，珪因持在州军马粮草数目奔大元军，仍告以城池深浅。
现代文：石伦派遣归顺军提控岚州人高皀出去侦察，高皀便带着这个州的军马粮草数目投奔元朝，并告诉元军城池的深浅。
English: Shi Lun dispatched Gao Yao, who was in charge of the Guishun Army, to go out to investigate. Gao Yao took the number of horses and grain in this state to the Yuan Dynasty, and told the Yuan Army the depth of the city pond.

古文：俄大兵至城下，以凤翔府韩寿孙持檄招降，言三峰败状。
现代文：不久元兵便来到城下，他们派凤翔府的韩寿孙拿着檄文招降，并叙述在三峰山失败的情况。
English: Soon the Yuan soldiers came to the city, and they sent Han Shousun from Fengxiang Prefecture with a letter of surrender, and described the circumstances of the defeat at Samfeng Mountain.

古文：石伦、苏椿不诘问即斩之市中。
现代文：石伦、苏椿并不询问立即把他斩于市中。
English: Shi Lun and Su Tsuen did not inquire, but immediately chopped him to pieces in the city.

古文：既而武监军偏裨何魏辈开东门，内族按春开南门，夹谷太守开西门。
现代文：后来武监军偏将何魏等人打开东门，内族按春开了南门，夹谷太守开了西门，元军进了城，抓住了苏椿，责问他在大名府时南逃之事。
English: Later, the Wuchuan army forced He Wei and others to open the east gate, the Naizoku opened the south gate according to the spring, and the Jiegu Taishu opened the west gate. The Yuan army entered the city, caught Su Tsubaki, and interrogated him about fleeing south when he was in Damingfu.

古文：少之，辇传令云： 同知叛降，有再下城者斩。 
现代文：苏椿说 ：我本是金朝人，没有抵抗能力所以投降，我回国担任大官，怎么说是反叛呢？ 
English: Su Tsubaki said, "I was originally a member of the Kim dynasty, and I had no ability to resist, so I surrendered. I returned to my country to serve as a high-ranking official. How can this be called a rebellion?"

古文：凡斩三四人，乃定。
现代文：元军大将因他不肯屈服而大怒，当即杀了他。
English: The former army general was enraged by his refusal to submit and immediately killed him.

古文：丙戌夜，城东北角破，辇夺南门出不得，投濠水死。已而，大兵退，强伸复立帅府。
现代文：古里甲石伦自投于官署后面的井中，仝周在州署中自缢。武监军起初并未参预打开城门的计谋，何魏之流想要保护他，故意对大将说 ：是监军让我们献门的。 
English: Guli Jia Shi Lun threw himself into the well behind the government office, and Zou Zhou hanged himself in the state office. At first, the armed guards did not participate in the pre-opening of the gate. He Wei's family wanted to protect him and deliberately said to the general: "It was the guards who let us open the gate."

古文：强伸，本河中射粮军子弟，貌极寝陋，而膂力过人。
现代文：但大将也恼怒他没有出来迎接元军投降，也将他杀掉了。强伸，原是河中射粮军子弟，他的相貌十分丑陋，但他力气过人。
English: However, the general was also angry that he did not come out to meet the surrender of the Yuan army, and he also killed him. Qiang Sheng, originally the son of a soldier who shot grain in the river, his appearance was very ugly, but he was more powerful than others.

古文：兴定初，从华州副都统安宁复潼关，以劳任使，尝监郃阳醋。
现代文：兴定初年，他跟从华州副都统安宁收复潼关，因功绩当了官，曾监制阳醋。
English: In the first year of Xingding, he followed Anning, vice-governor of Huazhou, to recover Shaoguan. He became an official due to his achievements, and once supervised the production of Yang vinegar.

古文：后客洛下，选充官军，戍陕铁岭，军溃被虏，从都尉兀林答胡土窜归中京。
现代文：后来客居洛阳，被选为官军，守卫陕铁岭，军败被俘，跟从都尉兀林答胡土逃回了中京。
English: Later, he lived in Luoyang as a guest, was selected as a member of the official army, guarded the Shaanxi Iron Range, was defeated and captured, and fled back to Beijing with the captain, Yulin and Hutu.

古文：时中京已破，留守兼行枢密院使内族撒合辇死之，元帅任守真复立府事，以便宜署伸警巡使。
现代文：当时中京也被攻破，留守兼行枢密院使内族撒合辇在作战中已死，元帅任守真又成立了官府，以方便处置授官，委任强伸做了警巡使。
English: At that time, Chukyo was also defeated, and the Privy Councillor who stayed behind and acted as an envoy of the Privy Council had died in the battle. Marshal Ren Shuzhen also established a government office to facilitate the disposition of the awarding of officers, and appointed Qiang Sheng as a police inspector.

古文：后守真率部曲军从行省思烈入援，郑州之败，守真死。
现代文：后来任守真率领他的军队跟从行省思烈入京救援，在郑州战败，任守真在作战中死去。
English: Later, Ren Shouzhen led his army to follow Xingguo Sirei to rescue Beijing, and was defeated in Zhengzhou. Ren Shouzhen died in the battle.

古文：天兴元年八月，中京人推伸为府签事，领所有军二千五百人，伤残老幼半之。
现代文：天兴元年八月，中京民众推选强伸为府签事，他所率领的军队共二千五百人，其中伤残老幼占了一半。
English: In August of the first year of Tianxing, the people of Zhongjing elected Qian Sheng as the prefectural signatory. He led a total of 2,500 troops, half of whom were disabled old and young.

古文：甫三日，北兵围之，东西北三面多树大炮。伸括衣帛为帜，立之城上，率士卒赤身而战，以壮士五十人往来救应，大叫，以 憨子军 为号，其声势与万众无异。
现代文：过了三天，北兵包围了他们，东、西、北三面立有大炮，强伸收集了衣服布帛做成旗帜立在城上，率领士兵赤膊上阵作战，用五十名壮士往来救应，大声喊叫，以 憨子军 为名，叫起来声势如有万人。
English: After three days, the Northern soldiers encircled them. There were cannons on the east, west and north sides. They gathered clothes and cloth and made a banner to stand on the city. They led the soldiers to fight shirtless. They used fifty strong men to help each other. They shouted loudly, in the name of the Lazy Army, and shouted loudly as if there were ten thousand people.

古文：兵器已尽，以钱为镞，得大兵一箭，截而为四，以筒鞭发之。
现代文：兵器用尽，他们便以钱做箭头，得到元兵的箭就一折为四，用筒鞭来发射。
English: When they ran out of weapons, they used money to make arrows. The arrows they got from the veterans were folded into four and fired with a cane whip.

古文：又创遏炮，用不过数人，能发大石于百步外，所击无不中。
现代文：他又领着人创造了遏炮，只用几个人就能把大石头发射到百步之外，而且百发百中。
English: He also led people to create a mortar, with only a few people can launch a large stone to a hundred paces away, and a hundred shots.

古文：伸奔走四应，所至必捷。
现代文：强伸四处奔跑接应，所到之处都获得胜利。
English: Qiang Sheng ran everywhere to meet the challenge and won everywhere he went.

古文：得二驼及所乘马皆杀之，以犒军士，人不过一啖，而得者如百金之赐。
现代文：他把得到的两只骆驼和自己所骑的马都杀了用来犒劳军士，虽然每人不过吃一口，但得到的人如得到百金赐钱。
English: He killed the two camels he got and the horse he rode to reward the servicemen. Although each person only eats a mouthful, those who get it are given money if they get a hundred money.

古文：九月，大兵退百里外。
现代文：九月，元兵退到百里之外。
English: In September, the Yuan soldiers retreated a hundred miles away.

古文：闰月，复攻，兵数倍于前。又一月，不能拔。
现代文：闰月又来攻城，而且士兵人数是以前的几倍，过了一个月，仍不能攻克。
English: The intercalary moon came again to attack the city, and the number of soldiers was several times as large as before. After a month, it still could not be conquered.

古文：事闻，哀宗降诏褒谕，以伸为中京留守、元帅左都监、世袭谋克、行元帅府事。
现代文：事情传到朝廷后，哀宗降诏褒奖，任命强伸为中京留守、元帅左都监、世袭谋克，行元帅府事。
English: After the matter came to the attention of the Imperial Court, Emperor Aizong lowered the imperial award and appointed Qiang Sheng to stay in Beijing, to be the marshal of the Left Capital, to carry out the marshal's affairs.

古文：十月，参知政事内族思烈自南山领军民十余万入洛，行省事。
现代文：十月，参知政事内族思烈从南山率领十多万军民进入洛阳，建立行省。
English: In October, more than 100,000 soldiers and civilians from Nanshan, led by Sanzhizhong Si Rong, entered Luoyang to establish the province.

古文：二年二月，伸建一堂于洛川驿之东，名曰 报恩 ，刻诏文於石，愿以死自效。
现代文：天兴二年二月，强伸在洛川驿东兴建一堂，名为 报恩堂 ，他将皇帝的诏文刻在石头上，表示愿以死效力。
English: In February of the second year of Tianxing, Qiang Sheng started to build a church in Luochuan Shandong, named Baon Hall. He engraved the emperor's edict on the stone, expressing his willingness to die.

古文：三月，中使至，以伸便宜从事。
现代文：三月，中使到来，让强伸可根据情况方便处置。
English: In March, the middle envoy arrived, so that the strong extension can be conveniently disposed of according to the situation.

古文：是月，大兵自汴驱思烈之子于东门下，诱思烈降。
现代文：当月，元兵在汴京驱赶思烈之子来到东门之下，引诱思烈投降，思烈立即命令左右射箭。
English: That month, the Yuan soldiers drove Sire's son to the east gate in Beijing, lured Sire to surrender, and Sire immediately ordered to shoot arrows left and right.

古文：思烈即命左右射之，既而知崔立之变，病不能语而死。总帅忽林答胡土代行省事，伸行总帅府事，月余粮尽，军民稍稍散去。
现代文：后来，他知道了崔立叛变，便得病说不出话而死。总帅忽林答胡土代行省事，强伸行总帅府事。过了一个多月，粮食已尽，军人和百姓便稍稍散去。
English: Later, when he learned of Cui Li's mutiny, he fell ill and died, unable to speak. The commander-in-chief, Hu Lin, asked Hutu to act as provincial governor, and forced him to carry out the commander-in-chief's duties. After more than a month, the grain was exhausted, and the soldiers and people dispersed slightly.

古文：五月，大兵复来，阵于洛南，伸阵水北。
现代文：五月元兵又来了，在洛南摆阵，而强伸在护城河北布阵。
English: In May, the Yuan soldiers came again, setting up camp in the south of Luonan, while the Qiang soldiers set up camp in the north of Moochenghe.

古文：有韩帅者匹马立水滨，招伸降，伸谓帅曰： 君独非我家臣子耶？
现代文：有个叫韩帅的人单枪匹马站在水边，招降强伸。强伸对韩帅说 ：你难道不是我国的臣子吗？
English: There was a man named Han Shuai, who stood by the water's edge single-handed, calling out to Han Shuai. He said to Han Shuai: Aren't you our country's courtier?

古文：一日勤王，犹遗令名于世，君既不能，乃欲诱我降耶？
现代文：只要能救王室一天，就能留下芳名于世，你既不能这样做，还想诱我投降吗？
English: If you can only save the royal family for one day, you can leave a good name in the world. You can't do that, and you want to lure me into surrendering?

古文：我本一军卒，今贵为留守，誓以死报国耳。 
现代文：我本是一个军卒，现在贵为留守，我发誓以死报国。 
English: I used to be a soldier, but now you are away, I swear to serve my country to the death.

古文：遂跃而射之。
现代文：说罢便跳出来射韩帅，韩帅奔入阵中，率领几百名步兵夺桥。
English: Saying that, he jumped out and shot Han Shuai. Han Shuai rushed into the battle and led several hundred infantrymen to seize the bridge.

古文：帅奔阵，率步卒数百夺桥，伸军一旗手独出拒之，杀数人，伸乃手解都统银符与之佩，士卒气复振。
现代文：强伸军中有一名旗手单独出来阻击他们，杀了几人，强伸立即解下都统银符给这名旗手戴上，兵士们士气又大振。
English: One of Qiang Sheng's soldiers, a standard-bearer, came out alone to stop them and killed several people. Qiang Sheng immediately took off the silver standard of the Capital and put it on the standard-bearer. The soldiers' morale was greatly boosted.

古文：初，筑战垒于城外四隅，至五门内外皆有屏，谓之迷魂墙。
现代文：起初，洛阳城外四角都筑有战垒，五门内外都有屏墙，被称为 迷魂墙 。
English: At first, there were battlements at all four corners outside Luoyang City, and there were screen walls inside and outside the five gates, known as the Enchanted Wall.

古文：大兵以五百骑迫之，伸率卒二百鼓噪而出，大兵退。
现代文：元军用五百骑兵攻打强伸的军队，强伸率二百士兵呐喊而出，元军就退却了。
English: Five hundred cavalrymen of the former army attacked the army of the strong extension, and the strong extension rate of two hundred soldiers shouted out, and the former army retreated.

古文：六月，行省胡土率众走南山，鹰扬都尉献西门以降，伸知城不能守，率死士数十人突东门出，转战至偃师，力尽就执。
现代文：六月，行省胡土率士兵逃到南山，鹰扬都尉献出西门投降，强伸知道城守不住了，便率领敢死队几十人从东门突围而出，转战到偃师，力尽被元兵抓住了。
English: In June, soldiers led by Governor Hutu fled to Nanshan. Captain Yingyang surrendered the West Gate. Qiang Sheng knew that the city could not be held, so he led a death squad of dozens of people to break out of the East Gate and fight to the Shun Division. He was caught by the Yuan soldiers.

古文：载以一马，拥迫而行。
现代文：他被载在一匹马上，元兵簇拥着他强迫前行。
English: He was carried on a horse, and the ex-soldiers crowded around him and forced him forward.

古文：伸宛转不肯进，强掖之，将见大帅塔察。
现代文：强伸拼命挣扎，不肯前进，被强推着去见大帅塔察。
English: Qiang Sheng struggled desperately, refused to move forward, and was forced to go to see Dashuai Tacha.

古文：及中京七里河，伸语不逊，兵卒相谓曰： 此人乖角如此，若见大帅，其能降乎？
现代文：走到中京七里河，强伸出言不逊，士兵们说： 这个人这么古怪，如见大帅他能投降吗？
English: When he reached the Shilihe River in central Beijing, he spoke out forcefully and arrogantly. The soldiers said: "This man is so eccentric, if he were a field marshal, would he surrender?"

古文：不若杀之。 
现代文：不如杀了他。 
English: It's better to kill such people.

古文：因好语诱之曰： 汝能北面一屈膝，吾贷汝命。 
现代文：他们用好话引诱他说 ：你要是能向北面下跪一次，我们就让你活命。 
English: And they enticed him with fair words, saying, If thou wilt fall on thy knees to the north, we will save thee alive.

古文：伸不从，左右力持使北面，伸拗头南向，遂杀之。
现代文：强伸不听他们的话，左右士兵便用力让他向着北方，强绅却拗头向南，士兵们便杀了他。
English: When Qiang Sheng did not listen to their words, the soldiers on both sides forced him to turn north, but Qiang Sheng kept his head to the south, and the soldiers killed him.

