古文：四境之内，丈夫女子皆有名于上，生者著，死者削。
现代文：国家四境内的男女都在官府登记上了名字，新生的人就注上，死了的就注销。
English: Men and women in all four regions of the country have registered their names with the government. Newborns are noted, and those who have died are written off.

古文：其有爵者乞无爵者以为庶子，级乞一人。
现代文：有爵位的人乞要无爵位的人做他的 庶子 ，第一级可以申请一个。
English: A man with a title begs a man without a title to be his son-in-law, the first level can apply for one.

古文：其无役事也，其庶子役其大夫月六日；其役事也，随而养之军。
现代文：没有军役的时候，庶子每月为其大夫服役六天。有军役的时候，根据实际情况役使庶子。
English: When there is no military service, the illegitimate son serves his doctor for six days a month. When there is military service, the illegitimate son serves according to the actual situation.

古文：爵自一级已下至小夫，命曰校、徒、操，出公；爵自二级已上至不更，命曰卒。
现代文：军中爵位，从一级以下到小夫叫校徒、操士。朝中爵位，从二级开始到不更，叫卒。
English: In the military, knighthoods from the first to the lowest rank are called "schoolboys" and "servants." In the imperial court, knighthoods from the second to the lowest rank are called "servants."

古文：其战也，五人来簿为伍，一人羽而轻其四人，能人得一首则复。
现代文：在战争中，五人编为一个名册，为一伍，若一人逃跑，就加刑于另四个人，如果谁能斩得敌人一颗首级，就可免除刑罚。
English: In war, five men are enrolled as a list, as a team, if one escapes, the other four will be punished, and if anyone can cut off an enemy's head, he will be exempt from punishment.

古文：夫劳爵，其县过三日有不致士大夫劳爵，能。
现代文：每五人设有 屯长 ，一百人设有一 将 。
English: For every five people, there is a mayor, and for every hundred people, there is a mayor.

古文：五人一屯长，百人一将。其战，百将、屯长不得，斩首；得三十三首以上，盈论，百将、屯长赐爵一级。
现代文：百将、屯长在作战时如果得不到敌人首级，是要杀头的；如果得到敌人三十三颗首级以上，就算满了朝廷规定的数目，可以升爵一级。
English: If a centurion or a garrison commander does not get the first rank of the enemy in battle, he is to kill the head; if he gets more than thirty-three first ranks of the enemy, even if the number specified by the imperial court is full, he can be promoted to the first rank.

古文：五百主，短兵五十人；二五百主，将之主，短兵百。
现代文：五百人的将领有卫兵五十人，统率两个五百主的主将和享受一千石俸禄的县令都可以有卫兵一百人。
English: A general with five hundred men can have fifty guards, while a commander with two five hundred men and a county magistrate with a salary of one thousand koku can have one hundred guards.

古文：千石之令，短兵百人；八百之令，短兵八十人；七百之令，短兵七十人；六百之令，短兵六十人。
现代文：享八百石俸禄的县令，有卫兵八十人；享七百石俸禄的县令，有卫兵七十人；享六百石俸禄的县令，有卫兵六十人。
English: A county magistrate with a salary of 800 koku had 80 guards; a county magistrate with a salary of 700 koku had 70 guards; and a county magistrate with a salary of 600 koku had 60 guards.

古文：国封尉，短兵千人。将，短兵四千人。
现代文：国尉有卫兵一千人，大将有卫兵四千人。
English: The lieutenant has 1,000 guards, and the major has 4,000 guards.

古文：战及死吏，而轻短兵，能一首则优。
现代文：如果将官战死，卫兵要受刑罚；如果卫兵中有人能够得到敌人一颗首级，就可免除刑罚。
English: If the general is killed in battle, the guards will be punished; if one of the guards can get an enemy's head, he can be exempted from punishment.

古文：能攻城围邑斩首八千已上，则盈论；野战斩首二千，则盈论；吏自操及校以上大将尽赏。
现代文：军队围攻敌国的城邑，能够斩敌人首级八千颗以上的，或在野战中能够斩敌人首级两千颗以上的，就算满了朝廷规定的数目，所有各级将吏都可得到赏赐，都可以升爵一级。
English: If an army besieges an enemy city and is able to cut off more than eight thousand enemy heads, or more than two thousand enemy heads in a field battle, even if the number specified by the imperial court is full, all generals at all levels can be rewarded and can be promoted to the first rank.

古文：行间之吏也，故爵公士也，就为上造也；故爵上造，就为簪袅；就为不更；故爵为大夫。
现代文：军官旧爵是公士的就升为上造；旧爵是上造的，就升为簪袅；旧爵是簪袅，就升为不更；旧爵为不更，就升为大夫。
English: If the officer is a noble, he will be promoted to the higher grade; if the officer is a higher grade, he will be promoted to the lower grade; if the officer is a commoner, he will be promoted to the higher grade; if the officer is a commoner, he will be promoted to the higher grade; if the officer is a commoner, he will be promoted to the higher grade; if the officer is a commoner, he will be promoted to the higher grade; if the officer is a commoner, he will be promoted to the higher grade.

古文：爵吏而为县尉，则赐虏六，加五千六百。
现代文：旧爵为小吏的，就升为县尉，赏赐奴隶六人，五千六百钱。
English: The old baron, who had been a minor official, was promoted to the rank of county lieutenant, and six slaves were rewarded with 5,600 silver coins.

古文：爵大夫而为国治，就为大夫；故爵大夫，就为公大夫；就为公乘；就为五大夫，则税邑三百家。
现代文：旧爵为大夫，而为国家掌握一样行政职务的，升为官大夫。旧爵为官大夫的，升为分大夫；旧爵为公大夫的，就升为公乘；旧爵为公乘的，升为五大夫，并赏给他三百户的地税。
English: If the former peer was a doctor and held the same administrative position for the state, he was promoted to official doctor; if the former peer was an official doctor, he was promoted to divisional doctor; if the former peer was a court doctor, he was promoted to official attendant; if the former peer was an official attendant, he was promoted to high-ranking official attendant, and he was awarded the land tax of 300 households.

古文：故爵五大夫；皆有赐邑三百家，有赐税三百家。
现代文：旧爵是五大夫，升为庶长；旧爵为庶长，升为左更；旧爵为三更的升为大良造。
English: The old peer was a five-star general and was promoted to vice-premier; the old peer was a vice-premier and was promoted to sous-lieutenant; the old peer was a three-star general and was promoted to sous-lieutenant.

古文：爵五大夫，有税邑六百家者，受客。
现代文：庶长、三更及大良造都赏赐三百户的封邑，另赏赐三百户的地税。
English: The chief vassal, the three viceroys, and the dairi no miyatsuko were all rewarded with fiefs of three hundred households, and another three hundred households were rewarded with land tax.

古文：大将、御、参皆赐爵三级。
现代文：有了六百户的地税和封邑就可以养客。将军、车夫、骖乘都赏赐爵位三级。
English: With the land tax and fiefdoms of 600 households, it can support guests. Generals, coachmen, and travelers are all awarded three levels of peerage.

古文：故客卿相，论盈，就正卿。
现代文：原来客卿辅佐军政的，满了朝廷的规定就升为正卿。
English: Originally, when a guest minister assisted in military and political affairs, he was promoted to full minister according to the provisions of the imperial court.

古文：以战故，暴首三，乃校，三日，将军以不疑致士大夫劳爵。其县四尉，訾由丞尉。
现代文：停战之后，把所获敌人首级示众三天并加以核实。经过三天，将军认为无误，就按功赏给战士和大夫爵位，赏赐的爵位，县里过了三天还没有落实就撤去该尉的职位，由该县的丞、尉进行量刑。
English: After the armistice, the captured heads of the enemy were displayed to the public for three days and verified. After three days, the general believed that there was no mistake and awarded the warrior and the grand duke a knighthood according to their merits. If the knighthood was not implemented in the county after three days, the position of the lieutenant was removed and the sentence was carried out by the county magistrate and the lieutenant.

古文：能得爵首一者，赏爵一级，益田一顷，益宅九亩，一除庶子一人，乃得人兵官之吏。
现代文：能够斩获敌人甲士首级一颗就赐给爵位一级，赏给田地一顷，宅地九亩，还一律赐庶子一名，就可以担任军队或行政部门的官员。
English: Those who are able to capture the first rank of enemy warrior will be given the first rank of knighthood, one hectare of farmland, nine mu of residential land, and one illegitimate child will be given, and they can serve as military or administrative officials.

古文：其狱法，高爵訾下爵级。高爵能，无给有爵人隶仆。
现代文：刑狱的法律，由爵位高的人审判爵位低的人，爵位高的人被罢免后，不再给他有爵位的人才享用的奴仆。
English: In the law of imprisonment, those with high rank judge those with low rank, and when a high-ranking person is removed from office, he no longer gives slaves to those with high rank.

古文：爵自二级以上，有刑罪则贬。爵自一级以下，有刑罪则已。
现代文：三级爵位发上的人犯了罪，就降低他的爵位；一级以下的人犯罪，就取消他的爵位。
English: If a person with a third-class knighthood commits a crime, his knighthood will be reduced; if a person with a first-class knighthood commits a crime, his knighthood will be canceled.

古文：小夫死，以上至大夫，其官级一等，其墓树级一树。
现代文：小夫死后，以上直到大夫，爵位每高一级，他的坟上就多种一颗树。
English: After the death of the little man, there was a tree on his grave for every higher rank up to the doctor.

古文：其攻城围邑也，国司空訾其城之广厚之数。
现代文：在围攻敌国城邑的时候， 国司空 测量那个城面积的大小和城墙的厚度，国尉划分各队攻打的地点，定出攻下的期限。
English: When besieging an enemy city, the Air Ministry would measure the size of the city's area and the thickness of its walls, and the captain would assign each team a place to attack and set a time limit for the attack.

古文：国尉分地，以徒、校分积尺而攻之，为期，曰： 先已者当为最启，后已者訾为最殿。
现代文：并命令说： 最先完成的立头功，最后完成的斥为末等，两次被斥为末等就不要他了。 打穿了洞穴，就塞上杂柴，烧起木柱。
English: And he commanded, saying, "The first work to be done is to set up the foundation, and the last work to be done is to cut it down, and if it is cut down twice, it is no longer to be used.

古文：陷队之士，知疾斗，不得，斩首；队五人，则陷队之士，人赐爵一级；死，则一人后；不能死之，千人环，规谏，黥劓于城下。
现代文：城的每一个方向分布十八个冲锋陷阵的士兵。一个队如能斩得敌人五颗首级，这个队的每个士兵就获得爵位一级；如果怕死退避，就在千人围观之下，在城下遭受黥刑或劓刑的刑罚。
English: Eighteen storming soldiers are distributed in every direction of the city. If a team can cut off five heads of the enemy, each soldier of this team will receive a first-class knighthood; if they are afraid of death, they will be surrounded by thousands of spectators and will be punished by flogging or whipping under the city.

古文：国尉分地，以中卒随之。
现代文：国尉划分地段，中军的士兵听从分派。
English: The captain divides the lots, and the soldiers of the Chinese army follow the assignment.

古文：将军为木壹，与国正监与王御史参望之。
现代文：将军搭起木台，和国家的正监、王的御使一同观望。
English: The general set up a wooden platform and watched with the state inspector and the king's emissary.

古文：其先入者，举为最启；其后入者，举为最殿。
现代文：士兵先进城的，评为先进，后进城的，评为落后。
English: The soldiers who advanced to the city were rated as advanced, and those who entered the city later were rated as backward.

古文：其陷队也，尽其几者；几者不足，乃以欲级益之。
现代文：攻打隧道的士兵，使用自己申请的人，自己申请不够，就用希望晋级的人补足。
English: The soldiers who attack the tunnels use their own applications, and if their own applications are not enough, they supplement them with those who hope to advance.

