古文：淮南漕渠，筑埭以畜水，不知始于何时，旧传召伯埭谢公所为。
现代文：淮南的漕运水道，采用修筑水坝来蓄水的办法，也不知是从什么时候开始的，传说召伯埭是东晋时谢安所修筑的。
English: It is not known when the construction of dams to store water began in the canalized waterways of Huainan Province. The legend says that the dam was built by Xie An during the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：按李翱《来南录》，唐时犹是流水，不应谢公时已作此埭。
现代文：但是查阅李翱《来南录》的有关记载可知，唐朝时召伯埭那儿还是畅通的河流，因此不可能在谢安时就修筑起了这座水坝。
English: However, a review of the relevant records of Li Wei's "Liu Nan Lu" shows that when the Tang Dynasty summoned Bo Wei, there was still a smooth river, so it was impossible to build this dam at the time of Xie An.

古文：天圣中，监真州排岸司右禁陶鉴始议为復闸节水，以省舟船过埭之劳。
现代文：宋仁宗天圣年间，监管真州的排岸司右侍禁陶鉴才开始提议修建复闸来调节水位落差，以解决船只通过水坝的困难。
English: It was during the reign of Emperor Song Renzong that Tao Jian, the governor of Zhenzhou, began to propose the construction of a sluice gate to regulate the water level drop, in order to solve the difficulties of ships passing through dams.

古文：是时工部郎中方仲荀、文思使张纶为发运使、副，表行之，始为真州闸。
现代文：当时工部郎中方仲荀和文思使张纶担任正、副发运使，上表请求朝廷推广这种做法，于是才修建了真州复闸。
English: At that time, the Minister of Industry and Commerce, the Chinese Zhong Yi and Wensi sent Zhang Qi to serve as the chief and deputy dispatching envoys. The above table requested the Imperial Court to promote this practice, so the Zhenzhou lock was built.

古文：歳省冗卒五百人，杂费百二十五万。
现代文：每年可节省五百名差役、一百二十五万杂费。
English: Five hundred clerks and 1.25 million yuan in miscellaneous expenses can be saved every year.

古文：运舟旧法，舟载米不过三百石。
现代文：按照老的船运方法，每条船装米不超过三百石。
English: According to the old shipping method, each ship loaded with rice does not exceed three hundred kilos.

古文：闸成，始为四百石船。
现代文：复闸修成后，一开始可以装载四百石。
English: After the reopening and repair, it can be loaded with four hundred stones at the beginning.

古文：其后所载浸多，官船至七百石；私船受米八百余囊，囊二石。
现代文：后来装载量逐步增加，官船可以达到七百石；私家船只可以装到八百多袋，每袋重二石。
English: Later, the loading capacity gradually increased, and government vessels could carry up to 700 kilos; private vessels could carry more than 800 bags, with each bag weighing two kilos.

古文：自后，北神、召伯、龙舟、茱萸诸埭，相次废革，至今为利。
现代文：从此以后，北神、召伯、龙舟、茱萸等水坝都相继废除旧制改用新法，水运的便利作用直到今天还在发挥。
English: Since then, Beishen, Zhao Bo, Longzhou, Zhuye and other dams have successively abolished the old system and replaced it with the new law, and the convenient role of water transportation is still playing out today.

古文：余元丰中过真州，江亭后粪壤中见一卧石，乃胡武平为《水闸记》，略叙其事，而不甚详具。
现代文：我曾于元丰年间路过真州，在江亭后面的污泥中发现了一块倒地的石碑，那上面刻的是胡武平所撰的真州《水闸记》，很简略地记述了建闸的事情，不过不够详细具体。
English: I once passed through Zhenzhou in the Yuanfeng years, and found a fallen stone tablet in the sludge behind Jiangting. It was inscribed with Hu Wuping's Zhenzhou "Sluice Record," which briefly described the construction of the sluice, but it was not detailed enough.

古文：张杲卿丞相知润州日，有妇人夫出外数日不归，忽有人报菜园井中有死人，妇人惊往视之。号哭曰： 吾夫也。 
现代文：张杲卿在润州担任知州时，有个妇女的丈夫外出多日没有回家。突然有人告知一处菜园的井里有死人，这个妇女很吃惊地过去一看，放声大哭道： 这是我的丈夫啊！ 
English: When Zhang Yuxing was in charge of Zhizhou in Runzhou, a woman's husband went out for several days and did not return home. Suddenly, someone told her that there was a dead man in a well in a vegetable garden. The woman was very surprised when she went to take a look and burst into tears: This is my husband!

古文：遂以闻官。
现代文：于是报告了官府。
English: He then reported the matter to the government.

古文：公令属官集邻里就井验是其夫与非，众皆以井深不可辨，请出尸验之。
现代文：张杲卿就让他的下属官员把这个妇女的邻居们召集到井边，辨认井里的死人是不是这个妇女的丈夫，大家都认为井深看不清而无法辨认，请求打捞出尸体再查验。
English: Zhang Yuxing asked his subordinate officials to gather the woman's neighbors to the well to identify whether the dead man in the well was the woman's husband. Everyone thought that the well was too deep to be identified and requested that the body be recovered for further examination.

古文：公曰： 众皆不能辨，妇人独何以知其为夫？ 
现代文：张杲卿说： 这么多人都分辨不清，为什么这个妇女偏偏就能知道井里的死人是她丈夫呢？ 
English: Zhang Yuxing said: So many people can't tell the difference, why can this woman know that the dead man in the well is her husband?

古文：收付所司鞠问，里奸人杀其夫，妇人与闻其谋。
现代文：于是就将这个妇女抓起来交给有关官员进行审讯，发现果然是这个妇女的奸夫杀了她的丈夫，她也参与了这桩谋杀案。
English: So the woman was arrested and handed over to the relevant officials for interrogation, and it was found that it was indeed the woman's adulterer who killed her husband, and she was also involved in the murder.

古文：庆历中，议弛茶盐之禁及减商税。
现代文：宋代庆历年间，有人提议要放宽盐和茶叶专卖的禁令以及削减商人的赋税，范仲淹认为不可行。
English: During the Qingli era of the Song Dynasty, there were proposals to relax the ban on the exclusive sale of salt and tea and to reduce taxes on merchants, which Fan Zhongyan considered unfeasible.

古文：范文正以为不可：茶盐商税之入，但分减商贾之利耳，行于商贾未甚有害也；今国用未减，歳入不可阙，既不取之于山泽及商贾，须取之于农。
现代文：因为征收盐和茶叶税，仅仅是分掉商人的一部分利润而已，对商人征税，并没有造成多大损害。如今朝廷的各项开支没有减少，每年的税收是不可缺少的，如果不向茶山盐池和商人征收，就必然要向农民收取。
English: Because the levying of salt and tea taxes only took away part of the profits of merchants, and the taxation of merchants did not cause much damage. Nowadays, the various expenses of the imperial court have not been reduced, and the annual tax is indispensable. If it is not levied on Chashan salt pans and merchants, it will inevitably be collected from farmers.

古文：与其害农，孰若取之于商贾？
现代文：与其损害农民，倒不如还是向商人征税。
English: Rather than harming farmers, it would be better to tax businessmen.

古文：今为计莫若先省国用；国用有余，当宪宽赋役；然后及商贾。
现代文：当前解决问题的办法，不如先节省国家的各项开支；国家的用度有了盈余，就应该先宽减对农民的税收和劳役；然后才可以考虑到商人。
English: The current solution to the problem is that it is better to save the various expenses of the state first; once the state has a surplus, it should first reduce taxes and labor services for farmers; then businessmen can be considered.

古文：弛禁非所当先也。其议遂寝。
现代文：因此，开放私营茶叶和盐的禁令，减免商人的税收都不是眼前急办的事情。
English: Therefore, the opening of the ban on private tea and salt, and the reduction and exemption of merchants' taxes are not urgent matters.

古文：真宗皇帝南衙日，开封府十七县皆以歳旱放税，即有飞语闻上，欲有所中伤。
现代文：于是为商人减税的议论也就平息了。真宗皇帝任开封府尹时，开封府十七个县都因为当年干旱而减免了租税，当即就有流言飞语传到太宗皇帝的耳朵里，想中伤真宗。
English: As a result, the discussion of reducing taxes for merchants also subsided. When Emperor Taizong of the Jinsong Dynasty was appointed as the governor of Kaifeng Prefecture, 17 counties of Kaifeng Prefecture were exempted from taxes because of the drought that year. Immediately, rumors spread to the ears of Emperor Taizong of the Jinsong Dynasty, trying to slander Jinsong.

古文：太宗不悦。
现代文：太宗不高兴。
English: Taizong is not happy.

古文：御史探上意，皆露章言开封府放税过实，有旨下京东、西两路诸州选官覆按。
现代文：御史们观察出皇上的心意，就都上书批评说开封府减免租税太过头，皇上下旨让京东、西两路各州选派官员去复查。
English: The imperial historians observed the emperor's intention, and they all wrote a letter criticizing that the tax reduction and exemption of Kaifeng was too excessive, and the emperor ordered the Beijing East and West provinces to send officials to review.

古文：内亳州当按太康，咸平两县。
现代文：其中亳州应当复查太康、成平两个县，当时曾会任亳州知州，王钦若是他的幕僚。
English: Among them, Zhangzhou should re-examine the two counties of Taikang and Chengping. At that time, he had served as Zhangzhou Zhizhou, and Wang Qinlu was his staff.

古文：是时曾会知亳州，王冀公在幕下，曾爱其识度，常以公相期之。至是遣冀公行，仍戒之曰： 此行所系事体不轻，不宜小有高下。 
现代文：曾会欣赏王钦若的学识、涵养，常常认为他将来会做到三公宰相。这次曾会就派遣王钦若前往，并且叮嘱他说： 此行关系重大，不能有丝毫差错。 
English: He used to admire Wang Qinruo's knowledge and forbearance, and often thought that he would become the third prime minister in the future. This time, he sent Wang Qinruo to visit, and told him: This trip is very important, and there must not be the slightest mistake.

古文：冀公至两邑，按行甚详。
现代文：王钦若到了那两个县，寻访调查非常仔细。
English: When Wang Qin visited those two counties, he conducted a very careful search and investigation.

古文：其余抗言放税过多，追收所税物，而冀公独乞全放，人皆危之。
现代文：其余地方的官员都危言租税减免过多，要求追缴应缴纳的租税，而唯独王钦若请求将租税全免，人们都认为他这么做很危险。
English: The rest of the local officials all said that the tax reductions and exemptions were too much and demanded that the taxes should be recovered. However, if Wang Qin requested to be completely exempted from taxes, people would think it was very dangerous for him to do so.

古文：明年，真宗即位。首擢冀公为右正言，仍谓辅臣曰： 当此之时，朕亦自危惧。
现代文：第二年，真宗即位，首先提拔王钦若为右正言，并且对辅政的大臣说： 在那个时候，朕自己也恐惧不安。
English: The following year, when Shingzong ascended to the throne, he first promoted Wang Qinruo to the Right Zhengde, and said to the assistant minister: At that time, I myself was also afraid and uneasy.

古文：钦若小官，敢独为百姓伸理，此大臣节也。 
现代文：钦若一名小官，却敢于独自为百姓伸张正义，这是大臣才有的气节。 
English: If you are a minor official, but dare to uphold justice for the people on your own, this is a quality that only a minister can have.

古文：自后进用超越，卒至入相。
现代文：从此以后，王钦若被破格提拔任用，最终做到了宰相。
English: Since then, Wang Qin has been promoted and appointed in an unprecedented manner, and finally became the prime minister.

古文：天下吏人，素无常禄，唯以受赇为生，往往致富者。
现代文：天下公吏一向没有固定的俸禄，只靠受贿为生，而往往有因此而致富的。
English: Public officials around the world have always had no fixed salary, living only on bribes, and often getting rich as a result.

古文：熙宁三年，始制天下吏禄，而设重法以绝请托之弊。
现代文：熙宁三年，朝廷始制定天下吏人的俸禄，而设立违者重罚的法律以杜绝请托受贿的弊端。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xining, the imperial court began to formulate the salary of the world's officials, and established a law of heavy punishment for violators to eliminate the drawbacks of soliciting and accepting bribes.

古文：是歳，京师诸司歳支吏禄钱三千八百三十四贯二百五十四。
现代文：这一年，京师各部门全年支出了吏禄钱三千八百三十四贯二百五十四文。
English: In this year, all departments in Beijing spent a total of 3,834 million yuan and 254 million yuan on officials.

古文：歳歳增广，至熙宁八年，歳支三十七万一千五百三十三贯一百七十八。
现代文：此后年年增加，到熙宁八年，全年支出了三十七万一千五百三十三贯一百七十八文。
English: After that, it increased year by year, and by the eighth year of Xi'ning, the annual expenditure was 371,533,178 yuan.

古文：自后增损不常皆不过此数，京师旧有禄者，及天下吏禄，皆不预此数。
现代文：后来有时增加，有时减少，没有定额，而年支出都不超过这个数。京师原先有些吏人有俸禄，以及京师以外各地吏人的俸禄，都不包括在这个数字之内。
English: Later, there was sometimes an increase, sometimes a decrease, there was no fixed amount, and the annual expenditure did not exceed this number. The salaries of some officials of the Beijing Division, as well as the salaries of officials from other regions, were not included in this figure.

古文：国朝茶利，除官本及杂费外，净入钱禁榷时取一年最中数，计一百九万四千九十三贯八百八十五，内六十四万九千六十九贯茶净利。卖茶，嘉祐二年收十六万四百三十一贯五百二十七，除元本及杂费外，得净利十万六千九百五十七贯六百八十五。
现代文：本朝从茶叶贸易中所获取的利润，除开官府的本钱以及杂费外，净收入在官府专卖时，取一年的平均数，净收入是一百九万四千九十三贯八百八十五文，其中六十四万九千六十九贯是茶净利，卖茶，嘉祐二年收入十六万四百三十一贯五百二十七文，除原来的本钱及杂费外，获得净利十万六千九百五十七贯六百八十五文。
English: This dynasty's profit from the tea trade, excluding the government's capital and miscellaneous expenses, the net income in the government's monopoly, take the average of one year, the net income is one million nine hundred forty-three thousand eight hundred eighty-five, of which six hundred forty-nine thousand nine hundred sixty-nine is the net profit of tea, selling tea, Jiayu two year income of one hundred sixty-four thousand thirty-one thousand five hundred twenty-seven, in addition to the original capital and miscellaneous expenses, net profit of one hundred sixty-six thousand nine hundred fifty-seven thousand six hundred eighty-five.

古文：客茶交引钱，嘉祐三年，除元本及杂费外，得净利五十四万二千一百一十一贯五百二十四。
现代文：商人所缴纳的茶交引钱，嘉祐三年，除本钱及杂费外，获得净利五十四万二千一百一十一贯五百二十四文。
English: In the third year of Jiayu, the merchants' tea transaction fee was up to 542,111 yuan, and the net profit was 5244 yuan in addition to the capital and miscellaneous expenses.

古文：四十四万五千二十四贯九百一十九钱，内三十六万九千七十二贯四百七十一钱茶租，嘉祐四年通商，立定茶交引钱六十八万四千三百二十一贯三百八十，后累经减放，至治平二年，最中分收上数。
现代文：四十四万五千二十四贯六百七十文是茶税钱。嘉祐年间元年所收茶税钱数是平价数，其中四川地区的茶钱没有计算在内。允许商人自由经销茶叶以后，取一年的平均数，有一百一十七万五千一百四贯九百一十九钱，其中三十六万九千七十二贯四百七十一钱茶租，嘉祐四年允许商人经销茶叶，制定茶交引钱六十八万四千三百二十一贯三百八十文。后来屡经减免，到治平二年，取中间数就得到了上面的数额。
English: The tea tax money collected in the first year of the Jiayu era was a flat-rate amount, of which the tea money in Sichuan was not included. After allowing merchants to freely distribute tea, the average for one year was 1,175,141-9,119 yuan, of which 369,72-4,71 yuan was tea rent. In the fourth year of the Jiayu era, merchants were allowed to distribute tea, and the tea tax deduction was set at 6,843,220-380 yuan. Later, after repeated reductions and exemptions, the middle number was taken to get the above amount in the second year of the Heian era.

古文：八十万六千三十二贯六百四十八钱茶税。
现代文：八十万六千三十二贯六百四十八钱茶税。
English: Eight hundred and sixty-three thousand two hundred and sixty-eight yuan tea tax.

古文：最中治平三年，除川茶税钱外会此数。
现代文：治平三年的数额是平价数，除开四川的茶税钱以外总计得到这一数额。
English: The amount in the third year of the restoration of peace is the number of parity, and this amount is obtained in total except for the tea tax money in Sichuan.

古文：本朝茶法：乾德二祐年，始诏在京、建州、汉、蕲口各置榷货务。五年，始禁私卖茶，从不应为情理重。
现代文：本朝的茶法，乾德二年始诏令在京师、建州、汉口、蕲口各设置榷货务；五年，始禁止私贩茶叶，不服从禁令的，按犯罪情节严重的条款处罚。
English: In the second year of Emperor Qiande's reign, he issued an edict to set up tea trading in Beijing, Jianzhou, Hankou, and Shigou; in the fifth year, he banned tea smugglers, and those who disobeyed the ban were punished according to the terms of serious crimes.

古文：太平兴国二年，删定禁法条贯，始立等科罪。
现代文：太平兴国二年，修订禁止私贩茶叶的法令条例，始定出科罪的等级以处罚犯禁者。
English: In the second year of Taiping Xingguo, the laws and regulations prohibiting the private sale of tea were amended, and the level of criminal offense was determined to punish those who violated the ban.

古文：淳化二年，令商贾就园户买茶，公于官场贴射，始行贴射法。
现代文：淳化二年，允许商人到种茶的园户买茶，官府在设置榷货务的茶场收取榷茶的利息，始推行贴射法。
English: In the second year of Chunhua, merchants were allowed to buy tea from tea growers, and the government began to implement the affixing method by collecting interest on infused tea at tea estates that set up infused goods services.

古文：淳化四年，初行交引，罢贴射法。
现代文：淳化四年，首次实行交引措施，停止贴射法。
English: Junhua four years, the first implementation of traffic measures, stop affixing method.

古文：西北入粟，给交引，自通利军始。
现代文：商人向西北边境输纳粮食即给以交引，这一措施自通利军开始实行。
English: Merchants who imported grain to the northwest border were given contracts, a measure that had been in effect since the arrival of the Tongli army.

古文：是歳，罢诸处榷货务，寻復依旧。
现代文：这一年曾罢去各地的榷货务，不久又恢复如旧。
English: This year, there was a strike in various parts of the country, but the business soon resumed as usual.

古文：至咸平元年，茶利钱以一百三十九万二千一百一十九贯三百一十九为额。
现代文：至咸平元年，茶税钱以一百三十九万二千一百一十九贯三百一十九文为定额。
English: By the first year of the Heian period, the amount of tea tax was fixed at 1,392,119 x 319 mon.

古文：至嘉祐三年，凡六十一年，用此额，官本杂费皆在内，中间时有增亏，歳入不常。
现代文：下至嘉祐三年，凡六十一年行用这一定额，官府的本钱及各种杂费都计算在内，中间有的年份增收，有的年份亏损，年收入不固定。
English: Down to the third year of Jiayu, this quota was used in every sixty-one years, and the government's capital and various miscellaneous expenses were included. In between, some years saw an increase in revenue, some years a loss, and the annual income was not fixed.

古文：咸平五年，三司使王嗣宗始立三分法，以十分茶价，四分给香药，三分犀象，三分茶引。六年，又改支六分香药犀象，四分茶引。
现代文：咸平五年，三司使王嗣宗开始创立三分法，以茶价为十分计算，四分支付香药，三分支付犀牛角和象牙，三分支付茶引；六年，又改为六分支付香药、犀牛角和象牙，四分支付茶引。
English: In the fifth year of Xianping, the Three Departments asked Wang Shizong to start creating a three-point method, with the price of tea calculated as ten, four points to pay for incense, three points to pay for rhino horn and ivory, and three points to pay for tea lead; in the sixth year, it was changed to six points to pay for incense, rhino horn and ivory, and four points to pay for tea lead.

古文：景德二年，许人入中钱帛金银，谓之三说。
现代文：景德二年，允许商人以钱、帛、金银入中，当时称为 三悦 。
English: In the second year of King Jingde, merchants were allowed to bring money, money, gold and silver into China. At that time, it was called the Three Delights.

古文：至祥符九年，茶引益轻，用知秦州曹玮议，就永兴、凤翔以官钱收买客引，以捄引价，前此累增加饶钱。
现代文：到大中祥符九年，茶引越来越不值钱，朝廷采纳秦州知州曹玮的建议，在永兴军、凤翔府用国库钱收购商人手中的茶引，以挽救茶引的价格。
English: In the ninth year of the Taizhong Xiangfu, tea infusions became increasingly worthless. The imperial court adopted the suggestion of Cao Qi of Qinzhou Zhizhou to use treasury money to purchase tea infusions from merchants in Yongxingjun and Fengxiangfu to save the price of tea infusions.

古文：至天禧二年，镇戎军纳大麦一斗，本价通加饶，共支钱一贯二百五十四。
现代文：在此之前还屡次增支加耗钱，到天禧二年，镇戎军缴纳大麦一斗，本价及加耗，总共支出现钱一贯二百五十四文。
English: Prior to this, there had been repeated increases in expenditure and consumption of money. By the second year of the Tenmei era, the town army had paid one barrel of barley, the original price and consumption, and the total expenditure of cash was always 254 mon.

古文：乾兴元年，改三分法，支茶引三分，东南见钱二分半，香药四分半。
现代文：乾兴元年，又改变三分法，支付茶引三分、东南现钱二分半、香药四分半。
English: In the first year of Qianxing, the three-point method was changed again, paying three points for tea, two and a half points for southeastern cash, and four and a half points for incense.

古文：天圣元年，復行贴射法，行之三年，茶利尽归大商，官场但得黄晚恶茶，乃诏孙奭重议，罢贴射法。
现代文：天圣元年，重新实行贴射法。实行三年之后，茶叶贸易的利润尽归于大商人，官卖茶场只得到发黄晚采的劣质茶叶，于是诏令孙奭重新审议，废罢贴射法。
English: After three years of implementation, the profits of the tea trade were all attributed to big businessmen, and the government-sold tea houses only received poor quality tea leaves harvested late, so the emperor ordered Sun Yat-sen to reconsider and abolish the affixing method.

古文：明年，推治元议省吏、计覆官、旬献等，皆决配沙门岛；元详定枢密副使张邓公、参知政事吕许公、鲁肃简各罚俸一月，御史中丞刘筠、入内内侍省副都知周文质、西上閤门使薛昭廓、三部副使，各罚铜二十斤；前三司使李谘落枢密直学士，依旧知洪州。
现代文：第二年，追究查处先前建议复行贴射法的三司官吏，勾覆官勾献等皆判决流放沙门岛；原详定官枢密副使张邓公、参知政事吕许公、鲁肃简各罚扣一个月的俸禄；御史中丞刘筠、入内内侍省副都知周文质、西上阁门使薛昭廓及户部、盐铁、度支三副使各罚铜二十斤；前三司使李谘撤销枢密直学士的贴职，仍依旧任为洪州知州。
English: In the second year, the officials of the three departments who investigated and dealt with the previously proposed method of repeated affixing were all sentenced to exile in Shamen Island; Zhang Dengg, the former detailed official and deputy envoy of the Privy Council, Lu Xukong, the senator of the governor, and Lu Suyan, the vice-governor of the governor, were each fined one month's salary; Liu Wei, the vice-governor of the Vice-governor of the Vice-governor of the Vice-governor of the Vice-governor of the Vice-governor of the Vice-governor of the Vice-governor

古文：皇祐三年，算茶依旧只用见钱。
现代文：皇祐三年，茶税依旧只用现钱缴纳。
English: In the third year of the Emperor's reign, tea tax was still paid only in cash.

古文：至嘉祐四年二月五日，降敕罢茶禁。
现代文：至嘉祐四年二月五日，又发布敕令解除茶禁。
English: On February 5th of the year of jubilee, the imperial edict was issued to lift the ban on tea.

