古文：州郡三○荆州郢州湘州雍州梁州秦州
现代文：○荆州郢州湘州雍州梁州秦州
English: ○ Jingzhou, Zhangzhou, Hunan, Yongzhou, Liangzhou, Qinzhou

古文：荆州刺史，汉治武陵汉寿，魏、晋治江陵，王敦治武昌，陶侃前治沔阳，后治武昌，王暠治江陵，庾亮治武昌，庾翼进襄阳，复还夏口；桓温治江陵，桓冲治上明，王忱还江陵，此后遂治江陵。
现代文：荆州刺史，汉朝时治所在武陵的汉寿，魏、晋时治所设在江陵，王敦任职时治所设在武昌，陶侃任职时前期治所设在沔阳，后期设在武昌，王暠任刺史时治所设在江陵，庾亮任刺史时治所设在武昌，庾翼任职时治所先移到襄阳，后又移回到夏口，桓温任刺史时治所设在江陵，桓冲任刺史时治所设在上明，王忱任职时又迁回江陵，此以后于是治所就设在江陵。
English: In the history of Jingzhou, Han Shou in Wuling during the Han Dynasty, Jiangling during the Wei and Jin Dynasties, Wuchang during the reign of Wang Dun, Shenyang during the early Tang Dynasty and Wuchang during the late Tang Dynasty, Jiangling during the reign of Wang Hui, Wuchang during the reign of Zhao Liang, first moved to Xiangyang and then moved back to Xiakou, Jiangling during the reign of Kuan Wen, Shangming during the reign of Kuan Chong, and then moved back to Jiangling during the reign of Wang Zhen, after which the city was located in Jiangling.

古文：宋初领郡三十一，后分南阳、顺阳、襄阳、新野、竟陵为雍州；湘川十郡为湘州，江夏、武陵属郢州，随郡、义阳属司州，北义阳省，凡余十一郡。
现代文：宋代初期荆州管辖三十一郡，后来分出南南阳、顺阳、襄阳、新野、竟陵设立雍州，分出湘川十郡为湘州，分出江夏、武陵划归郢州，随郡、义阳划归司州，撤除北义阳省，总共还余十一郡。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, 31 counties were under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou. Later, Yongzhou was divided into Nan Nanyang, Shunyang, Xiangyang, Xinyang, and Jingling. Ten counties of Xiangchuan were divided into Hunan, Jiangxia and Wuling were divided into Ganzhou, and the counties and Yiyang were divided into Shizhou. North Yiyang Province was removed, leaving a total of 11 counties.

古文：文帝世，又立宋安左郡，领拓边、绥慕、乐宁、慕化、仰泽、革音、归德七县，后省改。
现代文：文帝时代，又设立宋安左郡，领拓边、绥慕、乐宁、慕化、仰泽、革音、归德七县，后撤改。
English: During the era of Emperor Wen, Song Anzu County was also established, which included seven counties: Tuobao, Shumu, LeNing, Muhua, Yangze, GeYin, and GuiDe. It was later abolished and reformed.

古文：汶阳郡又度属。
现代文：汶阳郡又调归荆州管辖。
English: Wenyang County was also transferred to the jurisdiction of Jingzhou.

古文：今领郡十二，县四十八，户六万五千六百四。
现代文：现今型业管辖十二郡，四十八县。六万五千六百零四户。
English: Today, the pattern industry is under the jurisdiction of 12 counties and 48 counties, with 65,604 households.

古文：去京都水三千三百八十。
现代文：距离京都水路三干三百八十里。
English: It is 380 miles from Kyoto Suido Sangan.

古文：南郡太守，秦立。
现代文：南郡太守，秦朝设立。
English: The governor of Nan County, established in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉高帝元年，为临江国，景帝中二年复故。
现代文：汉高帝元年，改为临江国，景帝中二年恢复直郦太守。
English: In the first year of Emperor Han Gao, it was changed to Linjiang Province, and in the second year of Emperor Jing, it was restored to Naosuke Taishu.

古文：晋武帝太康元年改曰新郡，寻复故。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年改称新郡，不久即恢复旧名。
English: In the first year of Jinwu Emperor Taikang, it was renamed Xin County, and soon the old name was restored.

古文：宋初领县九，后州陵、监利度属巴陵；旌阳，文帝元嘉十八年省并枝江。
现代文：宋代初期管辖九县，后州陵、监利度归巴陵；旌阳，文帝元嘉十八年撤销，并归枝江。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, nine counties were under its jurisdiction. Later, Zhuling and the supervision of interest were transferred to Baling. In the 18th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Fenyang was revoked and transferred to Shijiang.

古文：二汉无旌阳，见《晋太康地志》，疑是吴所立。
现代文：二汉时没有旌阳县，事见《晋太康地志》，怀疑是三国吴时设立的。
English: During the Second Han Dynasty, there was no Poyang County. According to the "History of Jin Taikang," it is suspected to have been established during the Three Kingdoms of Wuxi.

古文：凡余六县，户一万四千五百四十四，口七万五千八十七。
现代文：总共仍有六县。一万四千五百四十四户。人口为七万五千零八十七。
English: There are still a total of six counties, with a total of 14,544 households and a population of 75,087.

古文：江陵公相，汉旧县。
现代文：江陵公相，汉时旧县。
English: Gangneung Minister of Public Security, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：华容公相，汉旧县，晋武太康元年省，后复立。
现代文：华容公相，汉时旧县，晋武帝太康元年撤，后又设立。
English: Hua Rong Public Minister, Han Dynasty old county, Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty withdrew in the first year of the year, and later it was established.

古文：当阳男相，汉旧县。
现代文：当阳男相，汉时旧县。
English: Dangyang male phase, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：临沮伯相，汉旧县。
现代文：临沮伯相，汉时旧县。
English: Lin Depu Buxiang, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：《晋太康》、《永守地志》属襄阳，后度。
现代文：《晋太康》、《永宁地志》归属襄阳，后调拨出来。
English: "Jin Taikang" and "Yongning Geography" belonged to Xiangyang, and were later transferred out.

古文：编县男相，汉旧县。
现代文：编县男相，汉时旧县。
English: Henxian County's male deity, Han Dynasty's old county.

古文：枝江侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：枝江侯相，汉时旧县。
English: Jiang Houxiang, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：南平内史，吴南郡治江南，领江陵、华容诸县。晋武帝太康元年，分南郡江南为南平郡，治作唐，后治江安。
现代文：南平内史，县时吴南郡治设在江南，管辖江陵、华容诸县晋武帝太康元年，分出南郡江亩设立南平郡，郡治设在生产，后郡治移至江安。
English: According to the history of Nanping, in the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu, when the county was under the administration of Wunan County, which was located in the south of the Yangtze River and had jurisdiction over the counties of Jiangling and Huarong, Nanping County was set up from the southern county of Jiangmu. The county government was set up in the production area, and later the county government was moved to Jiang'an.

古文：领县四，户一万二千三百九十二，口四万五千四十九。
现代文：管辖四县。有户一万二千三百九十二，人口四万五千零四十九。
English: It has jurisdiction over four counties, with 12,392 households and a population of 45,049.

古文：去州水二百五十，去京都水三千五百，无陆。
现代文：距州治水路二百五十里距离京都水路三千五百里，没有陆路。
English: It is two hundred and fifty miles from the prefectural waterway and three thousand five hundred miles from the Kyoto waterway. There is no land route.

古文：江安侯相，晋武帝太康元年立。
现代文：江安侯相，晋武帝太康元年设立。
English: It was established in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：孱陵侯相，二汉旧县，属武陵，《晋太康地志》属南平。
现代文：孱陵侯相，二汉时旧县，属逮武陵，《晋太康地志》上属南平郡。
English: Fuling Houxiang, an old county in the Second Han Dynasty, belongs to Fuzhou Wuling, and "Jin Taikang History" belongs to Nanping County.

古文：作唐侯相，前汉无，后汉属武陵，《晋太康地志》属南平。
现代文：作唐侯相，前汉时没有，后汉时属武陵郡，《晋太康地志》上属南平郡。
English: He was a prince of Tang, but not in the former Han Dynasty. In the later Han Dynasty, it belonged to Wuling County. In the "History of Jin Taikang," it belonged to Nanping County.

古文：南安令，晋武帝分江安立。
现代文：南安令，晋武帝划分江安部分地域而设立。
English: It was established by the Nan'an Decree, issued by Emperor Jinwu to divide part of Jiang'an.

古文：天门太守，吴孙休永安六年，分武陵立。
现代文：天门太守，吴孙休永安六年，分割武陵郡而设立。
English: Tianmen Daju, Wu Sunxu Yongan six years, split Wuling County and set up.

古文：充县有松梁山，山有石，石开处数十丈，其高以努仰射不至，其上名 天门 ，因此名郡。
现代文：充历有松梁山，山上的石头，裂开数十丈宽，裂开的高度就是用弓箭仰面向上射也达不到它的顶，那上面就取名 天门 ，因此用 天门 命作郡名。
English: There is a mountain full of pine beams, and the stones on the mountain are split into dozens of lengths and widths, and the height of the crack cannot reach its top even if it is shot upward with a bow and arrow. The top is called Tianmen, so Tianmen is used as the county name.

古文：充县后省。
现代文：充县后来撤销。
English: It was later revoked.

古文：孝武孝建元年，度郢州；明帝泰始三年，复旧。
现代文：宋孝武帝孝建元年，调归竖业管辖，塞旦眯童丝三年复归周业管辖。
English: In the first year of the Song Emperor Xiaowu Emperor Xiaojian, it was transferred to the jurisdiction of Zhabei, and three years later, it was returned to the jurisdiction of Zhouye.

古文：领县四，户三千一百九十五。
现代文：天门郡下辖四县。有户三千一百九十五。
English: There are four counties under the jurisdiction of Tianmen County, with 3,195 households.

古文：去州水一千二百，陆六百；去京都水三千五百。
现代文：距州治水路一千二百里，陆路六百里。距京都水路三干五百里。
English: It is 1,200 miles from the prefectural waterway, 600 miles by land, and 3,500 miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：澧阳令，晋武帝太康四年立。
现代文：澧阳令，晋武帝太康四年设立。
English: It was established in the fourth year of Emperor Taikang's reign.

古文：临澧令，晋武帝太康四年立。
现代文：临澧令，晋武帝太康四年设立。
English: It was established in the fourth year of Emperor Taikang's reign.

古文：零阳令，汉旧县，属武陵。
现代文：零阳令，汉时的旧县，属武陵郡管辖。
English: Ziyangling, an old county during the Han Dynasty, was under the jurisdiction of Wuling County.

古文：溇中令，二汉无，《晋太康地志》有，疑是吴立。
现代文：溇中令，二汉没有，《晋太康地志》上有记载，疑是三国吴时设立的。
English: There is no record of it in the Second Han Dynasty, but it is recorded in the "History of the Jin and Taikang Dynasties," and it is suspected that it was established in the Three Kingdoms of Wuxu.

古文：宜都太守，《太康地志》、王隐《地道》、何志并云吴分南郡立；张勃《吴录》云刘备立。
现代文：宜都太守，《太康地志》、王隐《地道》、何志上都说是县时分直郡地域而设立的；张勃《吴绿》说刘备设立的。
English: The governor of Yidu, "Taikang History," Wang Yin's "Historical Road" and He Zhisheng all said that it was established in the county area; Zhang Bo's "Wuling" said that it was established by Liu Bei.

古文：按《吴志》，吕蒙平南郡，据江陵，陆逊别取宜都，获秭归、枝江、夷道县。
现代文：考《吴志》，吕蒙平定南郡，占据江陵，陆逊另取宜都，获取秭归噩、枝江、夷道县。
English: According to "Wu Zhi," Lv Meng conquered Dingnan County and occupied Jiangling County, while Lu Xun took Yidu County and gained Guizhou, Jiangsu and Yidu Counties.

古文：初权与刘备分荆州，而南郡属备，则是备分南郡立宜都，非吴立也。
现代文：当初孙权与刘备分荆州，南郡属于刘备辖管，那么是刘备分出南郡地域设立宜都，不是吴设立的。
English: At the beginning, Sun Quan and Liu Bei divided Jingzhou, and Nan County belonged to Liu Bei's jurisdiction. Therefore, it was Liu Bei who set up the capital in Nan County, not Wu.

古文：习凿齿云，魏武平荆州，分南郡枝江以西为临江郡；建安十五年，刘备改为宜都。
现代文：习凿齿说，魏武帝占据荆州时，分划南郡的枝江以西地域为临江郡，建安十五年，刘备改名为宜都。
English: Xi Jizhen said that when Emperor Weiwu occupied Jingzhou, the area west of the Yangtze River in Nan County was divided into Linjiang County. In the 15th year of Jianan, Liu Bei was renamed Yidu.

古文：领县四，户一千八百四十三，口三万四千二百二十。
现代文：下辖四县。有户一千八日四十三，人口三万四千一二百二十。
English: It has jurisdiction over four counties, with a population of 34,120.

古文：去州水三百五十，无陆；去京都水三千七百三十。
现代文：距州治水路三百五十里，没有陆路。距离京都水路三千七百三十里。
English: It is 350 miles away from the prefectural waterway, and there is no land route. It is 3,730 miles away from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：夷道令，汉旧县。
现代文：夷道令，汉时的旧县。
English: It was an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：佷山男相，前汉属武陵，后汉属南郡，晋武帝太康元年改为兴山，后复旧。
现代文：佷山男相，前汉时属于武陵，后汉时属南郡，晋武帝太康元年改为兴山，后又恢复原样。
English: Shaoshan, formerly Wuling in the Han Dynasty and Nan County in the Later Han Dynasty, was renamed Xingshan in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, and later restored to its original form.

古文：宜昌令，何志晋武帝立。
现代文：宜昌令，何志说是晋武帝设立。
English: Yichang order, He Zhi said that it was established by Emperor Jinwu.

古文：按《太康》、《永宁地志》并无，疑是此后所立。
现代文：查考《太康》、《永宁地志》都没有，疑是两书以后设立的。
English: Neither "Taikang" nor "Yongning History" have been investigated, and it is suspected that it was established after the two books.

古文：夷陵令，汉旧县，吴改曰西陵，晋武帝太康元年复旧。
现代文：夷陵令，汉时旧有的县，吴时改名为西陵，晋武帝太康元年恢复旧称。
English: Yiling County, the old county in the Han Dynasty, was renamed Xiling in the Wu Dynasty, and the old name was restored in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：巴东公相，谯周《巴记》云，初平元年，荆州帐下司马赵韪建议分巴郡诸县汉安以下为永宁郡。
现代文：巴东公相，谯周《巴记》上说，初平元年，荆州帐下司马赵韪建议分划巴郡的诸县以下诸县为永宁郡。
English: Minister of Public Security Badong Zhou said in "Ba Ji" that at the beginning of the first year of the Heian period, Sima Zhao Yao, under the administration of Jingzhou, proposed to divide the counties of Badong County into the following counties: Yongning County.

古文：建安六年，刘璋改永宁为巴东郡，以涪陵县分立丹兴、汉葭二县，立巴东属国都尉，后为涪陵郡。
现代文：建安六年，刘璋改永宁为巴东郡，把涪陵县分开，设立作丹兴、汉葭二县，设立巴东属国都尉，后改作涪陵郡。
English: In the sixth year of Jian'an, Liu Bei changed Yongning into Badong County, separated Fuling County into two counties, Danxing County and Hanzhong County, set up the provincial capital of Badong, and later changed it into Fuling County.

古文：《晋太康地志》，巴东属梁州，惠帝太安二年度益州；穆帝永和初平蜀，度属荆州。
现代文：《晋太康地志》，巴东属梁州管辖，晋惠帝太安二年调归益州，穆帝永和起初年平定蜀地，将度调归荆州管辖。
English: According to the "History of Jin Taikang," Badong was under the jurisdiction of Liangzhou, Jin Hui Di Taian was transferred to Yizhou in the second year, and Mu Di Yonghe conquered Shu in the first year and transferred it to the jurisdiction of Jingzhou.

古文：《永初郡国志》无巴渠、黾阳二县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》裹无巴渠、醒阳二县。
English: "Yongchu County National History" covers Wubo Canal and Xingyang County.

古文：领县七，户一万三千七百九十五，口四万五千二百三十七。
现代文：管辖七县。有户一万三十七百九十五，人口四万五千二百三十七。
English: It has jurisdiction over seven counties, with a total of 137,955 households and a population of 45,237.

古文：去州水一千三百；去京都水四千六百八十。
现代文：距州治水路一千三百里。距京都水路四千六百八十里。
English: It is 1,300 miles from the prefectural waterway and 4,680 miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：鱼复侯相，汉旧县，属巴郡，刘备章武二年，改为永安，晋武帝太康元年复旧。
现代文：鱼复侯相，汉时旧县，隶属巴郡，刘备章武二年，改为永安，晋武帝太康元年改复旧名。
English: Yu Fu Hou Xiang, Han Dynasty old county, subordinate to Ba County, Liu Bei Zhangwu two years, changed to Yong'an, Emperor Taikang in the first year of the restoration of the old name.

古文：朐令，汉旧县，属巴郡。
现代文：姬酝令，汉时旧县，隶属于巴郡。
English: Ji Zhaoling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Ba County.

古文：新浦令，何志新立。
现代文：新浦令，何志新设立。
English: Xinpu County, He Zhi newly established.

古文：南浦令，刘禅建兴八年十月，益州牧阎宇表改羊渠立。
现代文：南浦令，刘禅建兴八年十月，益州牧阎字上表改羊渠设立直通。
English: In October of the eighth year of the Nampo era, Liu Zen Jianxing, Yizhou Mu Yan Zi changed the sheep canal to set up a direct channel.

古文：羊渠不详，何志吴立。
现代文：羊渠不清楚，何志说是吴设立的。
English: The sheep canal is not clear, but He Zhi said that it was set up by Wu Zang.

古文：汉丰令，何志不注置立。
现代文：汉丰令，何志没有注明何时设置。
English: At the behest of Hanfeng, He Zhi did not indicate when it would be set up.

古文：《太康地志》巴东有汉昌县，疑是。
现代文：《太康地志》巴东有汉昌县，疑是连丰。
English: The "Taikang Geography" has Hanchang County in the east of Badong, which is suspected to be Lianfeng.

古文：巴渠令，何志不注置立。
现代文：巴渠令，何志没有注明何时设置。
English: According to the canal regulation, He Zhi did not indicate when it was set up.

古文：黾阳令，何志不注置立。
现代文：黾阳令，何志没有注明何时设置。
English: According to the Shenyang order, He Zhi did not specify when it was set up.

古文：晋末平吴时，峡中立武陵郡，有黾阳、黔阳县，咸宁元年并省。
现代文：晋初平定吴国时，峡中设立武陵郡，有醒阳、黔阳县，晋武帝咸宁元年一并撤销。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, when the state of Wu was pacified, Wuling County was established in the middle of the gorge, and there were Xingyang and Fenyang Counties, which were abolished together by Emperor Xianning in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：汶阳太守，何志新立。
现代文：汶阳太守，何志新设立。
English: He Zhi was newly established as the governor-general of Wenyang.

古文：先属梁州，文帝元嘉十一年度。
现代文：起先属梁州管辖，文帝元嘉十一年调归回业。
English: Originally under the jurisdiction of Liangzhou, Wen Di Yuan Jia was transferred back to business in the eleventh year.

古文：宋初有四县，后省汶阳县。
现代文：宋初时辖治有四县，后来撤省了汶阳县。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, there were four counties under the jurisdiction of the province. Later, the province of Wenyang County was withdrawn.

古文：今领三县，户九百五十八，口四千九百一十四。
现代文：现今管辖三县。有户九百五十八，人口四千九百一十四。
English: It currently administers three counties, with 958 households and a population of 4,914 people.

古文：去州水七百，陆四百；去京都四千一百。
现代文：距州治水路七百里，陆路四百里。距京都水路四千一百里。
English: It is seven hundred miles from the prefectural waterway, four hundred miles by land, and four thousand one hundred miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：僮阳令，何志新立。
现代文：僮阳令，何志新设立。
English: By order of Shenyang, He Zhi newly established.

古文：沮阳令，何志新立。
现代文：沮阳令，何志新设立。
English: He Zhixin was established by the order of Deyang.

古文：高安令，何志新立。
现代文：高安令，包志新设立。
English: Gao An Ruling, Baozhi newly established.

古文：南义阳太守，晋末以义阳流民侨立。
现代文：南义阳太守，义阳郡另见处。是晋朝末年因为从义阳流亡来的百姓暂借寄居地侨置的。
English: Minami-Yiyang Taishu, Yiyang County, also seen here. It was built in the last years of the Jin Dynasty as a temporary residence for people who had fled from Yiyang.

古文：宋初有四县，孝武孝建二年，以平阳县并厥西。平阳本为郡，江左侨立。
现代文：宋代初年管辖四县，孝武孝建二年，把平阳县并入厥西平阳原本为郡，江左迁移后侨置的。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, four counties were under its jurisdiction. In the second year of Xiaowu Xiaojian, Pingyang County was merged into Juxi Pingyang, which was originally a county, but was placed by the overseas Chinese after the migration of Jiangzao.

古文：魏世分河东为平阳郡，晋末省为县。
现代文：魏世时分划河东部分为平阳郡，晋末撤郡改为县。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, the eastern part of He was divided into Pingyang County, and Jinmatsu County was divided into counties.

古文：今领县二，户一千六百七，口九千七百四十一。
现代文：现今管辖二县。有户一千六百零七，人口九千七百四十一。
English: It currently administers two counties, with 1,607 households and a population of 9,741.

古文：厥西令，二汉无，《晋太康地志》属义阳。
现代文：厥西令，二汉时没有，《晋太康地志》记载隶属义阳郡。
English: According to Jue Xi Rong, there was no Jue Xi Rong during the Second Han Dynasty. According to "Jin Taikang Di Zhi," Jue Xi Rong belonged to Yiyang County.

古文：平氏令，汉旧名，属南阳。
现代文：平氏令，汉时旧名，原属南阳。
English: Ping Shirei, the old name in Han Dynasty, originally belonged to Nanyang.

古文：新兴太守，《魏志》建安二十年，省云中、定襄、五原、朔方四郡，郡立一县，合为此郡，属并州。
现代文：新兴太守，《魏志》载建安二十年；撤销云中、定襄、五原、朔方四郡，改郡为县，合这四县为新兴郡，归并州管辖。
English: Xinxing Dazhou, "Weizhi" recorded 20 years of Jian'an; the four counties of Yunzhong, Dingxiang, Wuhuan and Shuofang were revoked, the counties were changed to counties, and the four counties were merged into emerging counties and merged into the jurisdiction of the state.

古文：晋江左侨立。
现代文：晋江左侨置。
English: Jinjiang Zuoqiao Station.

古文：宋初六县，后省云中；孝武孝建二年，又省九原县并定襄，宕渠并广牧。
现代文：孝武孝建二年，又撤减九原县汉时旧名，当时属五原。并入定襄，撤宕渠；寓他乡的流民设置的。并入广牧。
English: In the second year of Xiaowu Xiaojian, the old Han-era name of Jiuyuan County, which belonged to Wuhuan at that time, was withdrawn. It was merged into Dingxiang, withdrawn from Tagaogu, and resettled by displaced people from other townships. It was merged into Guangmu.

古文：凡今领县三，户二千三百一，口九千五百八十四。
现代文：现今辖治三县。有户二千三百零一，人口九千五百八十四。
English: It currently administers three counties, with 2,3001 households and a population of 9,584.

古文：定襄令，汉旧名。
现代文：定襄令，汉代的旧名。
English: Dingxiangling, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：广牧男相，汉旧名，属朔方。
现代文：广牧男相，汉代的旧名，属朔方。
English: Guangmu Nanzo, the old name of Han Dynasty, belongs to Shuo Fang.

古文：新丰令，汉旧名，属京兆。
现代文：新丰令，连伐的旧名，原属京兆。
English: Xinfengling, the old name of Lianfa, originally belonged to Beijing.

古文：侨流立。
现代文：是寄寓的流民侨置的。
English: It was placed there by the expatriates who were living there.

古文：南河东太守，河东郡，秦立。
现代文：临汾、安邑是汉时的旧县名。
English: Linfen and Anyi were the old names of counties during the Han Dynasty.

古文：晋成帝咸康三年，征西将军庾亮以司州侨户立。宋初八县，孝武孝建二年，以广戚并闻喜，弘农、临汾并松滋，安邑并永安。
现代文：临汾后来属平阳。
English: Linyi later belonged to Pingyang.

古文：今领县四，户二千四百二十三，口一万四百八十七。
现代文：现今管辖四县。有产二干四百二十三，人口一万零四百八十七。
English: It currently administers four counties, with a total of 423 farms and a population of 10,487.

古文：去州水一百二十；去京都水三千五百。
现代文：距州治水路一百二十里。距京都水路三干五百里。
English: It is 120 miles away from the prefectural waterway and 350 miles away from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：闻喜令，故曲沃，秦改为左邑。汉武帝元鼎六年，行幸至此，闻南越破，改名闻喜。
现代文：闾喜令，旧名曲沃，秦时改为左邑，汉武帝元鼎六年，巡视到这裹，闻听南越被攻破而改名为闻喜。
English: Yan Xiling, formerly known as Quwo, was renamed Zuoying during the Qin Dynasty. Emperor Hanwu, who reigned for six years during the Yuan Dynasty, inspected the area and heard that South Vietnam had been defeated, and the name was changed to Wenxi.

古文：永安令，前汉彘县，顺帝阳嘉二年更名，后属平阳。
现代文：永安令，前汉时为彘县，后汉顺帝阳嘉二年更名为永安，后属平阳。
English: According to the Yong'an edict, in the former Han Dynasty, it was Min County, and in the latter Han Dynasty, Shun Diyang Jia was renamed Yong'an in the second year, and later became Pingyang.

古文：松滋令，前汉属庐江，后汉无，晋属安丰。
现代文：松滋令，前汉时属庐江，后汉没有，晋代属安丰。
English: According to Songziling, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Minjiang, the later Han Dynasty did not, and the Jin Dynasty belonged to Anfeng.

古文：疑是有流民寓荆土，故立。
现代文：疑是有流民寄寓荆州地域，因而设立的。
English: It is suspected that there are displaced people living in the Jingzhou area, and thus it was established.

古文：谯县令，谯流民寓立。
现代文：谯县令，见另处。由原谯县的流民侨立的。
English: County Ordinance of Handan County, see elsewhere. It was established by the exiles from Handan County.

古文：建平太守，吴孙休永安三年，分宜都立，领信陵、兴山、秭归、沙渠四县。
现代文：建平太守，吴孙休永安三年，分割宜都部分地域而设立，辖治信陵、兴山、秭归、沙渠四县。
English: It was established by Emperor Jianping and Empress Wu Sunxu in the third year of Yongan, dividing a part of Yidu, and governed four counties including Xinying, Xingshan, Yugu and Shaju.

古文：晋又有建平都尉，领巫、北井、泰昌、建始四县。
现代文：晋初又有建平都尉，辖治巫、北井、泰昌、建始四县。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, there was also a captain named Jianping, who governed the four counties of Zhimu, Beijing, Taichang, and Jianshi.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年，改都尉为郡，于是吴、晋各有建平郡。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年，改都尉为郡，于是当时吴和晋各有一个建平郡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, the capital was changed to a county, so at that time, Wu and Jin each had a Jianping County.

古文：太康元年吴平，并合。
现代文：太康元年灭吴后，两建平郡合并。
English: After Taikang defeated Wu in the first year of the year, the two Jianping counties were merged.

古文：五年，省建始县，后复立。
现代文：太康五年，撤销建始县，后又复设。
English: In Taikang's fifth year, Jianshi County was revoked, and then reinstated.

古文：《永初郡国》有南陵、建始、信陵、兴山、永新、永宁、平乐七县，今并无。
现代文：《永初郡国》载有南陵、建始、信陵、兴山、永新、永宁、平乐七县，现今都没有。
English: "Yongchu County" contains Nanling, Jianzhi, Xinling, Xingshan, Yongxin, Yongning, Pingle seven counties, and now there are none.

古文：按《太康地志》无南陵、永新、永宁、平乐、新乡五县，疑是江左所立。
现代文：查考《太康地志》没有南陵、永新、永宁、平乐、新乡五县，疑是晋室偏安江左时设立的。
English: According to the investigation of "Taikang Geography," there are no five counties of Nanling, Yongxin, Yongning, Pingle, and Xinxiang, and it is suspected that it was established when Jin's office was to the left of Anjiang River.

古文：信陵、兴山、沙渠，疑是吴立。
现代文：信陵、兴山、沙渠，疑是三国吴时设立的。
English: Shingling, Xingshan and Sand Canal are suspected to have been built during the Three Kingdoms period.

古文：建始，晋初所立也。
现代文：建始县是晋朝初年设立的。
English: Jianzhi County was established in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：领县七，户一千三百二十九，口二万八百一十四。
现代文：管辖七县。有户一千三百二十九，人口二万零八百一十四。
English: It has jurisdiction over seven counties, with 1,329 households and a population of 20,814.

古文：去州水陆一千；去京都水四千三百八十。
现代文：距州治水路陆路均一千里。距京都水路四千三百八十里。
English: It is about 1,000 miles by land from the prefectural water control route, and 4,380 miles from the Kyoto water route.

古文：巫令，汉旧县。
现代文：巫令，汉朝时的老县。
English: Wuling, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：秭归侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：秭归侯相，汉代就有的老县。
English: There were old counties in the Han Dynasty as long as they belonged to princes and ministers.

古文：归乡公相，何志，故属秭归，吴分。
现代文：归乡公相，何志说原先属秭归，吴时分出的。
English: He Zhi said that the minister of returning to hometown was originally from Sui and Wu.

古文：按《太康地志》云，秭归有归乡，故夔子国，楚灭之，而无归乡县，何志所言非也。
现代文：考《太康地志》载，秭归有归乡，是先前的夔子国，被楚减，却无归乡县，包志所说不对。
English: According to the "Taikang History," Baozhi said it was wrong to say that there was a return to the hometown, which was the previous Zizi country. It was reduced by Chu, but there was no return to the hometown.

古文：北井令，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：北井令，《晋太康地志》上载有。
English: Kitai Rei, as recorded in "Jintai Kangji Ji" (History of Jintai Kangji).

古文：先属巴东，晋武帝泰始五年度建平。
现代文：先前属巴东郡，晋武帝泰始五年调归建平。
English: Formerly belonging to Badong County, it was transferred to Jianping in the first five years of the reign of Emperor Jinwu.

古文：泰昌令，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：泰昌令，《晋太康地志》载有。
English: Taichang Ruling, "History of Jin Taikang" is included.

古文：沙渠令，《晋起居注》，太康元年立。
现代文：沙渠令，《晋起居注》载，太康元年设立。
English: It was established in Taikang in the first year of the year, according to the Sand Canal Ordinance and the "Jinqi Residence Note."

古文：按沙渠是吴建平郡所领，吴平不应方立，不详。
现代文：按沙渠是吴建平郡辖治，不应在减星时才刚设立，弄不清楚。
English: According to the sand channel, it is under the jurisdiction of Wu Jianping County. It should not have just been established when the star was reduced. It is unclear.

古文：新乡令。
现代文：新乡令。
English: New township ordinance.

古文：永宁太守，晋安帝侨立为长宁郡；宋明帝以名与文帝陵同，改为永宁。
现代文：永宁太守，晋安帝侨置做长宁郡，宋明帝因它的名称与文帝陵名相同，改称永宁。
English: Yongning Dazhu, the overseas Chinese of the Jin and An dynasties were placed in Changning County, and the Song and Ming dynasties renamed it Yongning because its name was the same as the name of Emperor Wen's mausoleum.

古文：宋初五县，后省绥安。
现代文：宋初管辖五县，后撤绥安。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, five counties were under its jurisdiction. Later, it was withdrawn to Su'an.

古文：孝武孝建二年后，以僮阳并长宁，绥宁并上黄。
现代文：晋安帝设立。宋孝武帝孝建二年后，把僮阳晋安帝设立。并入长宁，绥宁晋安帝设立。
English: It was established by Emperor Jinan. Two years after Emperor Song Xiaowu established Emperor Xiaojian, it was established by Emperor Shenyang. It was merged into Changning, and Emperor Shenning established it.

古文：今领县二，户一千一百五十七，口四千二百七十四。
现代文：并入上黄现今管辖二县。有户一千一百五十七，人口四千二百七十四。
English: Incorporated into Shanghuang, it is now governed by two counties. There are 1,157 households, with a population of 4,274.

古文：去州陆六十；去京都三千四百三十。
现代文：距州治陆路六十里。距京都三干四百三十里。
English: It is 60 miles from Shuzhi by road, and 430 miles from Kyoto by car.

古文：长宁侯相，晋安帝立。
现代文：长宁侯相，晋安帝设立的。
English: Changning Houxiang, established by Emperor Jinan.

古文：上黄男相，宋初属襄阳，后度。
现代文：上黄男相，宋初属襄阳，后调拨出来。
English: Shanghuang male phase, Song initially belonged to Xiangyang, later transferred out.

古文：二汉、晋并无此县。
现代文：二漠、晋朝并没有追一县。
English: The Second Desert and Jin Dynasties did not pursue one county.

古文：武宁太守，晋安帝隆安五年，桓玄以沮、漳降蛮立。
现代文：武宁太守，晋安帝隆安五年，桓玄为沮、漳一带投降的蛮民设立。
English: It was established in the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yongan of the Jin Dynasty and Emperor Yongan of the Qin Dynasty by the barbarians who had surrendered in the areas around Jinshan and Shantou.

古文：领县二，户九百五十八，口四千九百一十四。
现代文：辖治二县。有户九百五十八，人口四千九百一十四。
English: It has jurisdiction over two counties. It has 958 households and a population of 4,914 people.

古文：乐乡令，晋安帝立。
现代文：乐乡令，晋安帝设立。
English: Lexiang Order, established by Emperor An of Jin Dynasty.

古文：长林男相，晋安帝立。
现代文：长林男相，晋安帝设立。
English: Changlin male phase, Jin and An emperor set up.

古文：郢州刺史，魏文帝黄初三年，以荆州江北诸郡为郢州，其年罢并荆，非今地。
现代文：郢州刺史，魏文帝黄初三年，以荆州长江北各郡设置郢州，那年又撤并到荆州，不是现今地域。
English: According to the history of Bozhou, Emperor Wei Wen of the State of Wei in the first three years of the Yellow Emperor set up Bozhou in the counties north of the Yangtze River with the governor of Jing Province. That year, it was merged into Jing Province, which is not the current region.

古文：吴又立郢州。
现代文：县也设立了竖业。
English: The county has also set up a post office.

古文：孝武孝建元年，分荆州之江夏、竟陵、随、武陵、天门，湘州之巴陵，江州之武昌，豫州之西阳，又以南郡之州陵、监利二县度属巴陵，立郢州。
现代文：宋孝武孝建元年，分割荆州的江夏、竟陵、随、武陵、天门，湘州的巴陵，江州的武昌，豫州的西阳，又把南郡的州陵、监利二县调归巴陵，设立郢州。
English: In the first year of the Jian Yuan Dynasty, Song Xiao Wu Xiao divided Jiangxia, Jingling, Sui, Wuling and Tianmen in Jingzhou, Baling in Hunan, Wuchang in Jiangzhou, Xiyang in Yuzhou, and transferred the two counties of Shuling and Jianli in Nan County to Baling and established Zhangzhou.

古文：天门后还荆。
现代文：后来还归荆州。
English: Later, it was returned to Jingzhou.

古文：领郡六，县三十九，户二万九千四百六十九，口十五万八千五百八十七。
现代文：郢州管辖六郡，三十九县。有户二万九千四百六十九，人口十五万八千五百八十七。
English: Luzhou has jurisdiction over six counties and 39 counties, with 29,469 households and a population of 158,587.

古文：去京都水二千一百。
现代文：距京都水路二千一百里。
English: It is 2100 miles away from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：江夏太守，汉高帝立，本属荆州。
现代文：江夏太守，汉高帝设立，原本属荆州。
English: The governor of Jiangxia, established by Emperor Gaozu, originally belonged to Jingzhou.

古文：《永初郡国》及何志并治安陆，此后治夏口。
现代文：《永初郡国》及包志均载郡治设在安陆，此后郡治设在星旦。
English: "Yongchu County" and "Bao Zhi" both state that the county seat is located in Anlu, and then the county seat is located in Xingtan.

古文：又有安陆、曲陵，曲后别郡。
现代文：又有宝座、迪陆，后来另归别郡。
English: There was also a throne, Di Lu, and later another county.

古文：领县七，户五千七十二，口二万三千八百一十。
现代文：江夏管辖七县。有户五千零七十二，人口二万三千八百一十。
English: Jiangxia governs seven counties, with 5,072 households and a population of 23,810.

古文：汝南侯相，本沙羡土，晋末汝南郡民流寓夏口，因立为汝南县。
现代文：汝南侯相，本是边羞地域，晋末汝南郡逃来寄寓夏口，因而设置为汝南县。
English: Runan Houxiang was originally a border region, but at the end of the Jin Dynasty, Runan County fled to Xiakou, and was thus set up as Runan County.

古文：沙羡令，汉旧县，吴省。
现代文：沙羡令，汉时的老县，县时曾撤销。
English: Sha Zhenling, the old county of the Han Dynasty, was revoked at the county level.

古文：晋武太康元年复立，治夏口。
现代文：晋武太康元元年重又设置，县治设在夏旦。
English: In the first year of the Jinwu Taikang era, the county government was set up in Xia Dan.

古文：孝武太元三年，省并沙阳，后以其地为汝南实土。
现代文：晋孝武太元三年，撤销设置并入边腿，后来把逭块土地作为汝南的实际疆土。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao and Empress Dowager Wu, the establishment was revoked and merged into the border leg, and later, the land of Yunnan was taken as the actual territory of Yunnan.

古文：沌阳子相，江左立。
现代文：沌阳子相，江左设置的。
English: Chaotic Yang Zi phase, Jiang Zu set up.

古文：孝昌侯相，《永初郡国》、何志并无，徐志有，疑是孝武世所立。
现代文：孝昌侯相，《永初郡国》、何志都没有记载，徐志上有，疑是孝武帝时设置。
English: There is no record of Xiaochang Houxiang, "Yongchu County" or He Zhi, but there is one in Xu Zhi, which is suspected to have been set up during the reign of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：惠怀子相，江左立。
现代文：惠怀子相，晋江左设置的。
English: Huihuai Zi phase, Jinjiang left set up.

古文：沙阳男相，二汉旧县，本名沙羡，属武昌，晋武帝太康元年更名；又立沙羡，而沙阳徙今所治。
现代文：沙阳男相，二汉时的旧县，原本名沙羡，属武昌，晋武帝太康元年更改名称，又设立沙羡，而将沙阳迁移到现今辖治的地方。
English: Shayang Nanso, an old county during the Second Han Dynasty, was originally named Shayang and belonged to Wuchang. In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed the name and established Shayang, and moved Shayang to the place currently under his jurisdiction.

古文：文帝元嘉十六年度巴陵，孝武孝建元年度江夏。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十六年调归巴陵郡，宋孝武帝孝建元年调归江夏。
English: Song Emperor Wen Yuan Jia was transferred to Baling County in 16th year, and Song Emperor Xiaowu (孝武帝) was transferred to Jiangxia in 1st year.

古文：羡阳子相，晋惠帝世，安陆人硃伺为陶侃将，求分安陆东界为此县。
现代文：羡阳子相，晋惠帝时,安陆人硃伺为陶侃部将，求得安陆东部地界设置。
English: Envious of Yang Zifang, during the reign of Emperor Jinhui, the people of Anlu considered him to be a Taoist general, seeking to set up the eastern boundary of Anlu.

古文：蒲圻男相，晋武帝太康元年立。
现代文：蒲圻男相，晋武帝太康元年设置。
English: It was set up in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：本属长沙，文帝元嘉十六年度巴陵，孝武孝建元年度江夏。
现代文：本属长沙，宋文帝元嘉十六年调归巴陵，孝武孝建元年调归江夏。
English: Originally from Changsha, Song Wen Di Yuan Jia was transferred to Baling in the 16th year, and Xiao Wu Xiao Jian was transferred to Jiangxia in the first year.

古文：竟陵太守，晋惠帝元康九年，分江夏西界立。
现代文：竟陵太守，晋惠帝元康九年，分划江夏部地界设立。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, the territory of Jiangxia was divided and established.

古文：何志又有宋县，徐无。
现代文：何志上还有宋县，徐志上则没有。
English: There is Song County on He Zhi Shang, but not on Xu Zhi Shang.

古文：领县六，户八千五百九十一，口四万四千三百七十五。
现代文：管辖六县。有户八千五百九十一，人口四万四千三百七十五。
English: It has jurisdiction over six counties, with 8,591 households and a population of 44,375.

古文：去州水一千四百；去京都水三千四百。
现代文：距州治水路一千四百里。距京都水路三千四百里。
English: It is 1,400 miles from the prefectural waterway and 3,400 miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：苌寿令，明帝泰始六年立。
现代文：苌寿令，宋明帝泰始六年设立。
English: It was established in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Song Dynasty.

古文：竟陵侯相，汉旧县，属江夏。
现代文：竟陵侯相，汉时旧县，当时属江夏。
English: Genglin Hossang, an old county during the Han Dynasty, belonged to Jiangxia at that time.

