古文：芮芮虏河南氐羌
现代文：芮芮虏，是塞外的混杂胡人。
English: The Xiongru people are a mixture of Hu people from outside of Tibet.

古文：芮芮虏，塞外杂胡也，编发左衽。晋世什翼圭入塞内后，芮芮逐水草，尽有匈奴故庭，威服西域。
现代文：结发为辫衣襟向左开。晋世什翼圭进入塞内后，芮芮人追逐水草游牧，完全占有匈奴旧曰地域，威势制服西域。
English: After Jinshi Shigu entered the Seine, the Xiongnu people chased the water and grass nomads, completely occupied the old Xiongnu region, and dominated the western region.

古文：土气早寒，所居为穹庐毡帐。
现代文：气温寒冷早，所住的是毡帐。
English: The temperature is cold and early, and we live on credit.

古文：刻木记事，不识文书。
现代文：契刻木片以记载事情，不认识文字图书。
English: He chops wood to record things, and doesn't know the meaning of books.

古文：马畜丁肥，种众殷盛。
现代文：马匹牲畜强壮肥大，种族强盛。
English: Horses and cattle are strong and fat, and the race is strong.

古文：常与魏虏为仇敌。
现代文：经常和魏虏为仇敌。
English: He was often enemies with Wei Krup.

古文：宋世其国相希利垔解星算数术，通胡、汉语，常言南方当有姓名齐者，其人当兴。
现代文：宋世芮芮的国相希利垩懂得星象历算和数术，通晓胡人、汉人语言，常说南方当有姓名为齐的，造人当兴盛。
English: Song Shih-tao's minister of state, He Lijun, knew the astrological calendar and arithmetic, and was familiar with the languages of the Hu people and the Han people. It was often said that the south should have people with the same name, and that people should be created to prosper.

古文：升明二年，太祖辅政，遣骁骑将军王洪轨使芮芮，克期共伐魏虏。
现代文：升明二年，太祖辅政，派遣骁骑将军王洪范出使芮芮，约定时间共同讨伐魏虏。
English: In the second year after his ascension to the throne, the great-grandfather Fu Zheng sent the cavalry general Wang Hongfan to dispatch an envoy, and agreed on a time to jointly fight Wei Rui.

古文：建元元年八月，芮芮主发三十万骑南侵，去平城七百里，魏虏拒守不敢战，芮芮主于燕然山下纵猎而归。
现代文：建元元年八月，芮芮主调发三十万骑兵向南侵犯，离平城七百里，魏虏坚守不敢交战，芮芮主在燕然山下大规模狩猎然后返回。
English: In August of the first year of Jianyuan, the warlord dispatched 300,000 cavalry to invade the south, seven hundred miles from Pingcheng. Wei Rui held out and did not dare to fight. The warlord hunted on a large scale at the foot of Yanran Mountain and then returned.

古文：上初践阼，不遑出师。
现代文：那时皇帝刚登位，来不及出兵。
English: At that time, the emperor had just ascended the throne and was too late to send troops.

古文：二年、三年，芮芮主频遣使贡献貂皮杂物。
现代文：二年、三年，芮芮主接连派遣使者贡奉貂皮杂物。
English: In the second and third years, the lord of the yakitori sent emissaries successively to offer yakitori and miscellaneous goods.

古文：与上书欲伐魏虏，谓上 足下 ，自称 吾 。
现代文：给皇帝写信要讨伐魏虏，称皇帝为 足下 ，自称为 吾 。
English: He wrote a letter to the emperor to fight against Wei and Ru, calling the emperor his subordinate, and calling himself "Wu."

古文：献师子皮裤褶，皮如虎皮，色白毛短。
现代文：贡奉狮子皮做的套服，皮如同虎皮，色彩白而毛短。
English: Tribute to a suit made of lion skin, skin like tiger skin, white in color and short fur.

古文：时有贾胡在蜀见之，云此非师子皮，乃扶拔皮也。
现代文：当时有胡商在蜀地见到这种套服，说这不是狮子皮，而是扶拔皮。
English: At that time, a Hu merchant in Shu saw this suit and said that it was not a lion skin, but a plucked skin.

古文：国相邢基祇罗回奉表曰：
现代文：他们的国相邢基祇罗回送上奏表说：
English: Their Minister of State,  Kigiro, sent back a report saying:

古文：夫四象禀政，二仪改度，而万物生焉。
现代文：四季更迭，出现曰月轮回变换，而万物滋生。
English: The four seasons change, the lunar cycle appears, and all things grow.

古文：斯盖亏盈迭袭，历数自然也。
现代文：这大约是亏缺盈满交相承袭，自然的命运。
English: It's probably an inherited, natural fate.

古文：昔晋室将终，楚桓窃命，实赖宋武匡济之功，故能扶衰定倾，休否以泰。
现代文：从前晋室将终结，楚桓篡位，依赖宋武帝匡复救助的功劳，所以能扶持衰微稳定倾覆，由困顿而安泰。
English: Once upon a time, the Jin dynasty was coming to an end, and Chu Huan usurped the throne, relying on the merits of Emperor Songwu's rescue, so he was able to support the decline and stabilization of the overthrow, and was safe from difficulties.

古文：祚流九叶，而国嗣不继。
现代文：经历九代，而国家后嗣不能继承。
English: Nine generations have passed, but the nation's heirs cannot inherit.

古文：今皇天降祸于上，宋室猜乱于下。
现代文：现在皇天在上降下祸殃，宋室在下猜忌扰乱。
English: Now, the Emperor's heaven is descending on the top, and the Song dynasty is descending on the bottom.

古文：臣虽荒远，粗窥图书，数难以来，星文改度，房心受变，虚危纳祉，宋灭齐昌，此其验也。
现代文：臣下虽然处于荒远地带，粗略翻阅过图书，多次祸难以后，星象改变运行，房宿心宿遭受变故，虚宿危宿接纳福祉，宋朝灭亡齐朝昌盛，这就是验证。
English: Although the vassals are in a desolate area, they have read books roughly, and after many disasters, the stars have changed and run, the house and the heart have suffered changes, the empty house and the dangerous house have accepted welfare, and the Song Dynasty has perished and the Qi Dynasty has flourished. This is verification.

古文：水运遘屯，木德应运，子年垂刈，刘穆之记，崏岭有不衽之山，京房谶云： 卯金十六，草肃应王。 
现代文：水德遭遇困厄，木德应运而生，王子年垂示铲除，刘穆之的记载，婚岭有不交叉的山头，京房的谶文中说 卯金十六，草肃应王 。
English: Water virtue encountered difficulties, wood virtue came into being, the year of the prince showed the eradication, the record of Liu Mu, the wedding ring has a non-crossing mountain, the imperial villa's obituary said that Ujin was the sixteenth, and the grass was the king.

古文：历观图纬，休征非一，皆云庆钟萧氏，代宋者齐。
现代文：遍观圃纬，美好的征兆众多，都说喜庆集中于萧氏，代替宋朝的是齐朝。
English: Looking at the landscape, there are many good signs, and they all say that the celebration is concentrated in the Xiao Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty is replaced by the Qi Dynasty.

古文：会有使力法度及囗此国使反，采访圣德，弥验天纵之姿。
现代文：遇有使者前来以及本国使者返回，访查有德行的人，更验证天所赋予的资质。
English: When envoys come and envoys return from their own countries, they visit those who are virtuous and verify their qualifications bestowed by heaven.

古文：故能挟隆皇祚，光权定之业；翼亮天功，济悖主之难。
现代文：所以能够兴复皇位，光大平定的业绩，辅助上天之功，救助昏庸君主的患难。
English: Therefore, it is possible to restore the imperial throne, magnify and stabilize the performance, assist the heavenly work, and help the suffering of the dull monarch.

古文：树勋京师，威振海外。
现代文：在京城建立功勋，声威震撼海外。
English: He has established a distinguished record in the capital city, and his reputation has shaken overseas.

古文：仗义之功，侔踪汤、武。
现代文：凭正义而行事的功劳，接踵承继商汤、周武王。
English: Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu successively succeeded to the credit of acting with justice.

古文：冥绩既著，宝命因归，受终之历，归于有道。
现代文：高深的功绩既已昭著，天命因而归之于身，接受帝位的历数，归于有道义的人。
English: The high and profound merits have already been made known, and the destiny of heaven has thus been attributed to him, and the number of years since he accepted the imperial throne has been attributed to a person with morality.

古文：况夫帝无常族，有德必昌，时来之数，唯灵是与。
现代文：何况做皇帝没有一定的族姓，有德行必定会昌盛，随时运而来的天命，衹给予威灵的人。
English: What's more, an emperor doesn't have a certain family name, and a virtuous line will surely prosper. The fate of heaven, which comes at any time, favors those who have virtue.

古文：陛下承乾启之机，因乘龙之运。计应符革祚，久已践极，荒裔倾戴，莫不引领。
现代文：陛下承受开创的时机，利用乘时而动的命运，估计顺应符命改朝换代，早完成登基，荒远地带的人倾心拥戴，无不翘首等待。
English: His Majesty took advantage of the pioneering opportunity, took advantage of the time-driven fate, estimated that it was in accordance with his destiny to change the dynasty, and completed his accession to the throne as early as possible. People in the desolate areas enthusiastically supported him, and all of them were waiting for him.

古文：设未龙飞，不宜冲挹，上违天人之心，下乖黎庶之望。
现代文：假使尚未就位，不应谦虚，以免上违天神的心意，下背百姓的期望。
English: If they are not yet in place, they should not be modest, so as not to go against the will of the gods and betray the expectations of the people.

古文：皇芮承绪，肇自二仪，拓土载民，地越沧海，百代一族，大业天固。
现代文：皇芮继承国统，开始于天地初分，开拓土地养育民众，地域越过沧海，百代中一个家族，大业如苍天般的牢固。
English: The imperial family inherits the national unity, starting from the first division of heaven and earth, opening up the land and nurturing the people, the region crosses the sea of vicissitudes, one family in a hundred generations, and the great cause is as solid as the sky.

古文：虽吴汉殊域，义同唇齿，方欲克期中原，龚行天罚。
现代文：虽吴地与沙漠处于不同地域，按道理同于唇齿，正想约定时间进军中原，恭敬实行上天的惩罚。
English: Although Wudi is in a different region from the desert, it is the same as the lips and teeth according to the principle. It is time to march into the Central Plains at the agreed time and respectfully implement the punishment of heaven.

古文：治兵缮甲，俟时大举。
现代文：训练兵士修缮武器，等待时机大举出动。
English: Soldiers are trained to repair weapons and wait for the right moment to make a big move.

古文：振霜戈于并、代，鸣和铃于秦、赵，扫殄凶丑，枭剪元恶。
现代文：在并州、代北挥舞锐利的兵器，在秦、趟地区摇动和谐的车铃，扫除凶恶小人，剪灭首恶分子。
English: They brandished sharp weapons in Binzhou and Dayibei, and rang harmonious car bells in Qin and Wuda districts to sweep away evil villains and cut off the heads of evildoers.

古文：然后皇舆迁幸，光复中华，永敦邻好，侔踪齐、鲁。使四海有奉，苍生咸赖，荒余归仰，岂不盛哉！
现代文：然后皇族车驾迁回，光复中华大地，永结邻邦友好，继承齐国、鲁国的踪迹，使四海有所拥戴，百姓都有依赖，荒远地带的归附敬仰，岂不是盛事吗!
English: Then the imperial family drove back, recovered the land of China, and established the friendship of neighbors forever, inheriting the traces of Qi and Lu, so that the four seas are supported, the people are dependent, and the remote areas are attached and respected. Isn't it a grand event!

古文：永明元年，王洪轨还京师，经途三万余里。
现代文：永明元年，王洪整回到京城，沿途经过三万多里。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Wang Hongzhe returned to Beijing, passing more than thirty thousand miles along the way.

古文：洪轨，齐郡临淄人，为太祖所亲信，建武中为青冀二州刺史，私占丁侵虏界，奔败结气卒。
现代文：洪轨，是齐郡临淄人，为太祖所亲近信赖。建武年间，担任青、冀二州刺史。私人所属兵士侵犯魏虏地界，失败后郁闷而死。
English: Hongzhu, a native of Linyi, Qi County, was a close confidant of the great-grandfather. During the Jianwu period, he served as a historian of the two states of Qing and Hebei. Privately-owned soldiers violated the Wei-Krup land boundary, and died of depression after the defeat.

古文：芮芮王求医工等物，世祖诏报曰： 知须医及织成锦工、指南车、漏刻、并非所爱。
现代文：茵茵王求取医生、工匠及各种器物，世祖下诏回答说： 知道你需要医生和织锦工人、指南车、漏刻，这些并非我所吝啬。
English: King Yin asked for doctors, craftsmen and various utensils, and the ancestor replied: "Knowing that you need doctors and brocade workers, compasses, and engravers, I am not stingy.

古文：南方治疾，与北土不同。
现代文：祇是南方治病，和北方地区不同。
English: It's just that the treatment in the south is different from that in the north.

古文：织成锦工，并女人，不堪涉远。
现代文：织锦工人，都是妇女，不能长途跋涉。
English: The brocade workers, all women, cannot travel long distances.

古文：指南车、漏刻、此虽有其器，工匠久不复存，不副为误。 
现代文：指南车、漏刻，这里虽有器具，但工匠早已不在，对于不能满足你的愿望感到遗憾。 
English: Guide car, leak engraving, although there are tools here, but the craftsman is long gone, I regret not being able to meet your wishes.

古文：自芮芮居匈奴故庭，十年，丁零胡又南攻芮芮，得其故地。
现代文：自从芮芮居住在匈奴旧地，十年，丁零胡又向南攻打芮芮，得到旧地，芮芮逐渐向南迁徙。
English: Ten years after the Xiongnu resided in the old land of the Xiongnu, Ding Zihu attacked the Xiongnu to the south and gained the old land. The Xiongnu gradually migrated to the south.

古文：芮芮稍南徙，魏虏主元宏以其侵逼，遣伪平元王驾鹿浑、龙骧将军杨延数十万骑伐芮芮，大寒雪，人马死者众。
现代文：魏虏主元宏因芮芮侵犯逼近，派遣所属平元王驾鹿浑、龙骧将军杨延率领几十万骑兵讨伐芮芮，遇大寒降雪，人马死亡的很多。
English: As Wei Rui's lord, Yuan Hong, was about to be invaded by the Mongols, he sent his subordinate, Pingyuan Wang, to drive the Deerslayer, and Longyi's general, Yang Yan, led hundreds of thousands of cavalry to fight against the Mongols. When it was very cold and snowy, many people and horses died.

古文：先是益州刺史刘悛遣使江景玄使丁零，宣国威德。
现代文：在这之前益州刺史刘悛派遣使者江景玄出使丁零，宣扬国家的声威恩德。
English: Prior to this, Liu Ye, the governor of Yizhou, sent an envoy, Jiang Jingxuan, to send an envoy, Ding Zhe, to promote the country's voice.

古文：道经鄯善、于阗，鄯善为丁零所破，人民散尽。
现代文：途中经过鄯善、于阗，鄯善被丁零打败，人民散失殆尽。
English: On the way, they passed through Jinshan and Yuyao. Jinshan was defeated by Dingye, and the people were scattered.

古文：于阗尤信佛法。
现代文：于阗尤其信仰佛法。
English: In particular, he believes in Buddhism.

古文：丁零僭称天子，劳接景玄使，反命。
现代文：丁零僭越称天子，慰劳接待丫景玄，景玄回国覆命。
English: Ding Ziyue was called the son of heaven, Jing Xuan was comforted and received, and Jing Xuan returned to the country to end his life.

古文：芮芮常由河南道而抵益州。
现代文：芮芮经常经过河南通道而抵达益州。
English: The cormorants often pass through the Henan passage and arrive in Yizhou.

古文：河南，匈奴种也。
现代文：河南，是匈奴种族。
English: Henan is the homeland of the Xiongnu.

古文：汉建武中，匈奴奴婢亡匿在凉州界杂种数千人，虏名奴婢为赀，一谓之 赀虏 。
现代文：汉朝建武年间，匈奴各个种族逃亡藏匿在凉州地界的奴婢有几千人，匈奴称奴婢为赀，一种称呼为 赀虏 。
English: During the Jianwu period of the Han Dynasty, there were several thousand male and female slaves of the Xiongnu of various races who fled and hid in the territory of Liangzhou. The Xiongnu called the slaves "," and one name was "虏."

古文：鲜卑慕容廆庶兄吐谷浑为氐王。
现代文：鲜卑慕容魔的庶出兄长吐谷浑为氐王。
English: Muryongma's younger half-brother, Tukugai, was crowned the king of warlocks.

古文：在益州西北，亘数千里。
现代文：住在益州西北，绵亘几千里。
English: I live in the northwest of Yizhou, stretching for thousands of miles.

古文：其南界龙涸城，去成都千余里。
现代文：南部边界的龙涸城，离成都一千多里。
English: Longhai City, on the southern border, is more than a thousand miles away from Chengdu.

古文：大戍有四，一在清水川，一在赤水，一在浇河，一在吐屈真川，皆子弟所治。
现代文：大城堡有四个，一个在清水川，一个在赤水，一个在浇河，一个在吐屈真川，都是其子弟所统领。
English: There are four large castles, one in Shimizu-gawa River, one in Chakusui River, one in Gose-gawa River, and one in Tukushima-gawa River, all of which are led by his sons.

古文：其王治慕驾川。
现代文：他们的王治所在慕驾。
English: Their kingship is at stake.

古文：多畜，逐水草，无城郭。
现代文：牲畜多，追逐水草游牧，没有城郭。
English: There are a lot of livestock, and they are nomadic, chasing water plants. There are no city walls.

古文：后稍为宫屋，而人民犹以毡庐百子帐为行屋。
现代文：后来逐渐建宫室，而人民还是以毡帐和帐篷为临时住处。
English: Later, palace rooms were gradually built, but people still used tents and tents as temporary accommodation.

古文：地常风寒，人行平沙中，沙砾飞起，行迹皆灭。
现代文：地域内时常刮风寒冷，人走在平沙中，沙石飞起，行迹都消失。
English: In the region, it is often windy and cold, people walk in the flat sand, the sand and stones fly up, and all traces disappear.

古文：肥地则有雀鼠同穴，生黄紫花；瘦地辄有瘴气，使人断气，牛马得之，疲汗不能行。
现代文：肥地则有麻雀老鼠在同一洞穴中，生长黄紫花；瘦地则有鄣气，使人断气，牛马遇到，疲惫流汗不能行走。
English: On the fertile land, there are sparrows and mice in the same cave, and yellow and purple flowers grow; on the poor land, there is miasma, which makes people short of breath, and when encountering cattle and horses, they are so tired and sweaty that they cannot walk.

古文：宋初始受爵命，至宋末，河南王吐谷浑拾寅为使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、领护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史。
现代文：宋朝初年开始接受爵位任命，到宋朝末年，迥直王吐谷浑拾寅担任使持节、散骑常侍、都督巫蠢迥沙三州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、兼护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, he began to accept the appointment of a knighthood. By the end of the Song Dynasty, King Hunchin of Tuya served as an envoy, horseback riding attendant, military governor of the Three Provinces of Shaanxi Province, cavalry general, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments, as well as a guarding lieutenant, and a historian of the West Qin River and the Two Provinces.

古文：建元元年，太祖即本官进号骠骑大将军。
现代文：建元元年，太祖就其本来官职升军号为骠骑大将军。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, the great-grandfather was promoted to the post of general of cavalry.

古文：宋世遣武卫将军王世武使河南，是岁随拾寅使来献。
现代文：宋世派遣武卫将军王世武出使河南，这年随同捡室的使者前来献纳。
English: Song Dynasty sent Wuwei General Wang Shibu to Henan as an envoy. This year, he accompanied the emissary of the collection room to offer gifts.

古文：诏答曰： 皇帝敬问使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、领护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、新除骠骑大将军、河南王：宝命革授，爰集朕躬，猥当大业，祗惕兼怀，闻之增感。
现代文：诏书回答说： 阜帝恭敬慰问使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、兼护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、新任骠骑大将军、河南王：天命改换，齐集于我，愧受大业，恭敬与忧惧兼而有之。
English: The edict replied: "Fu Di, respectfully send condolences to the envoys of the festival, the horseback riding attendants, the military of the three states of the West Qin River and the Three Provinces, the general of the cavalry, the three officers of the Kaifu ceremony, the lieutenant of the escort, the history of the two states of the West Qin River, the new general of the cavalry, and the king of Henan: the fate of heaven has changed, and they have gathered in me, and they are humbled by the great cause, and they are both respectful and fearful.

古文：王世武至，得元徽五年五月二十一日表，夏中湿热，想比平安。
现代文：听说后增添感慨。王世武到来，接到元徽五年五月二十一日的奏表，中原潮湿炎热，想来近日平安。
English: After hearing this, I felt even more emotional. Wang Shimu arrived and received the report card dated May 21st of the fifth year of the Yuan Hui Dynasty. The Central Plains were humid and hot, and I wanted to come to see the recent peace.

古文：又卿乃诚遥著，保宁遐疆。
现代文：另外你的诚心远近闻名，保卫安定遥远的边境。
English: In addition, your sincerity is well-known far and wide, protecting the stability of distant borders.

古文：今诏升徽号，以酬忠款。遣王世武衔命拜授。
现代文：现下韶进升你的名号，来报答你的忠心归附派遣王世武奉命授任。
English: Now I come forward to take your name, to reward your loyalty to the Emperor.

古文：又仍使王世武等往芮芮，想即资遣，使得时达。
现代文：随之指派王世武等前往芮芮，马上配备物资送出，使能及时到达。
English: He then assigned Wang Shibu and others to go to Handan, and immediately sent them out with supplies so that they could arrive in time.

古文：又奏所上马等物悉至，今往别牒锦绛紫碧绿黄青等纹各十匹。 
现代文：另外你奏表中所献马匹等物已全部到达，现在前往另外赠送绛紫碧绿黄青等各式花纹的锦各十匹。 
English: In addition, the horses and other items presented in your playlist have all arrived, and now you are going to additionally present ten brocades of various patterns such as indigo, purple, green, yellow and blue.

古文：拾寅子易度侯好星文，尝求星书，朝议不给。
现代文：拾寅的儿子易度侯喜好星象，曾经求取星象图书，朝廷商议不给予。
English: Shuyin's son, Yidu Hou, was fond of the stars. He once asked for a book on the stars, but the imperial court would not give it to him.

古文：寅卒，三年，以河南王世子吐谷浑易度侯为使持节、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、镇西将军、领护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
现代文：拾寅去世，三年，任命河南王的世子吐谷浑易度侯为使持节、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、镇西将军、兼护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
English: Three years after the death of Shuyin, he appointed the heir of the king of Henan, Tu Gu Hun Yidou, as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the West Qin River and the three states, the general of Zhen Xi, and the lieutenant of the guard, the governor of the West Qin River and the two states, and the king of Henan.

古文：永明三年，诏曰： 易度侯守职西蕃，绥怀允缉，忠绩兼举，朕有嘉焉。
现代文：永明三年，诏令说： 易度侯在西部边境履行职责，安抚团结民众，忠心与业绩都明显，我有嘉奖。
English: In the third year of Yongming, the imperial edict said: Yi Du Hou has performed his duties on the western border, pacified and united the people, and his loyalty and performance are obvious. I have a commendation.

古文：可进号车骑大将军。 
现代文：可升军号马车骑大将军。 
English: He can be promoted to General of Horse and Carriage.

古文：遣给事中丘冠先使河南道，并送芮芮使。
现代文：派遣给事中丘冠先出使河南道，并护送芮芮使者。
English: He dispatched the envoy of Henan Province to the matter, and escorted the envoy.

古文：至六年乃还。
现代文：到六年才返回。
English: He did not return until six years later.

古文：得玉长三尺二寸，厚一尺一寸。
现代文：得到实玉长三尺二寸厚一尺一寸。
English: The resulting solid marble is three feet two inches long and one foot one inch thick.

古文：易度侯卒，八年，立其世子休留茂为使持节、督西秦河沙三州诸军事、镇西将军、领护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史。
现代文：易度侯去世，八年，立他的世子休留茂为使持节、督西秦河沙三州诸军事、镇西将军、兼护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史。
English: Eight years after the death of Yidu Hou, his son Hu Ru Mao was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the West Qin River and the Three Provinces, the general of Zhenxi, and the lieutenant of Guozhu, and the historian of the West Qin River and the Two Provinces.

古文：复遣振武将军丘冠先拜授，并行吊礼。
现代文：又派遣振武将军丘冠先授任，并施行吊祭的礼仪。
English: He also sent Zhenwu General Qiu Guan to be appointed first, and performed the ritual of hanging.

古文：冠先至河南，休留茂逼令先拜，冠先厉色不肯，休留茂耻其国人，执冠先于绝岩上推堕深谷而死。
现代文：冠先到达河南，休留茂逼迫他先叩拜，冠先聋色严厉不答应，休留茂在国人面前感到羞耻，把冠先捉到悬崖边推下深邃的山谷而死去。
English: Guanxian arrived in Henan first, Huirumao forced him to bow first, Guanxian was deaf and did not agree. Huirumao felt ashamed in front of the Chinese people, caught Guanxian on the edge of a cliff and pushed him down a deep valley to his death.

古文：冠先字道玄，吴兴人，晋吏部郎杰六世孙也。
现代文：冠先字道玄，吴兴人，是晋朝吏部郎丘杰的六世孙。
English: Kuanqian, also known as Daoxuan and Wu Xingren, was the sixth-generation grandson of Qiu Jie, a bureaucrat in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：上初遣冠先，示尚书令王俭，俭答上曰： 此人不啻堪行。 
现代文：皇帝起初派遣冠先，给尚书令王俭看，王俭回答皇帝说： 这人不止能够胜任此行。 
English: At first, the emperor sent the leader to show Shang Shuling to Wang Jian. Wang Jian replied to the emperor, "This man is more than capable of making this trip.

古文：乃再衔命。
现代文：于是第二次受命出使。
English: So he was sent out a second time.

古文：及死，世祖敕其子雄曰： 卿父受使河南，秉忠守死，不辱王命，我甚赏惜。
现代文：等到死去，世祖下令他的儿子丘雄龇： 你的父亲受命出使河南，秉持忠心以生命履行职责，不侮辱君王使命，我十分赏识怜惜。
English: Until his death, the ancestor ordered his son Qiu Xiongqi: Your father was ordered to be sent to Henan, upholding loyalty with his life to perform his duties, not to insult the king's mission, I fully appreciate the pity.

古文：丧尸绝域，不可复寻，于卿后宦涂无妨，甚有高比。 
现代文：尸体在人迹不到之处，不能再寻找，对你今后的仕途没有妨碍，更有高等的考校。 
English: The body is in the middle of nowhere, you can't look for it any more, it doesn't hinder your future career, and there's a higher school entrance exam.

古文：赐钱十万，布三十匹。
现代文：赐钱十万，布三十匹。
English: A hundred thousand in money and thirty in cloth.

古文：氐杨氏，与苻氐同出略阳。
现代文：氏人杨氏，和苻氏同出于略阳，汉世居住在仇池，地方称为百顷。
English: The Yang clan and the Min clan both came from Liaoyang, while the Han dynasty lived in Quchi, a place known as the Hundred Hectares.

古文：汉世居仇池，地号百顷，建安中有百顷氐王是也。晋世有杨茂苾，后转强盛，事见前史。
现代文：建安年间，头领就是称为百顷氐王的。晋世有叫杨茂狡的，后来逐渐强盛，事情见于从前史书记载。
English: During the Jian'an era, the leader was known as the King of the Hundred Hectares. In the Jin Dynasty, there was a leader called Yang Maoju, who gradually became powerful, as recorded in ancient history.

古文：仇池四方壁立，自然有楼橹却敌状，高并数丈。
现代文：仇池四方如墙壁竖立，自然存在楼台御敌的地形，高度都有几丈。
English: The four sides of the pond are erected like walls, naturally there is a topography of the enemy of the tower, and the height is several feet.

古文：有二十二道可攀缘而升，东西二门，盘道可七里，上有冈阜泉源。
现代文：有二十二条道路可攀援上去，东西两个门，盘绕的道路约七里。上面有山冈水源。
English: There are twenty-two roads to climb up, two gates to the east and west, and about seven miles of winding roads. There is a mountain spring above.

古文：氐于上平地立宫室果园仓库，无贵贱皆为板屋土墙，所治处名洛谷。
现代文：氐人在上面的平地建立宫室果园和仓库，无论贵贱都是木板屋泥土墙，治理的地方叫洛谷。
English: The Xiongnu people built a palace, orchards and warehouses on the flat land above. No matter how high or low they were, they were all wooden houses with mud walls. The place of governance was called Luogu.

古文：宋元嘉十九年，龙骧将军裴方明等伐氐，克仇池，后为魏虏所攻，失地。
现代文：宋朝元嘉十九年，龙骧将军裴方明等人讨伐氏人，攻克仇池，后来遭魏虏攻打，丧失土地。
English: In the 19th year of the Song Dynasty's Yuan Jia, Longyu's general Pei Fangming and others fought against the Hui people and conquered Qiu Chi. Later, they were attacked by the Wei people and lost their land.

古文：氐王杨难当从兄子文德聚众茄芦，宋世加以爵位。
现代文：氐王杨难当堂兄的儿子文德在茄芦聚集部众，宋世赐给爵位。
English: King Yeongnam's cousin, King Yeongnam's son, King Wende, gathered a large number of followers in Geulju, and was given a title of nobility by King Song.

古文：文德死，从弟僧嗣、文庆传代之。
现代文：文德死去，堂弟僧嗣、文庆接替他。
English: Wende died, and his cousin and successor, Wenqing, succeeded him.

古文：难当族弟广香先奔虏，元徽中，为虏攻杀文庆，以为阴平公、茄芦镇主。
现代文：难当远房的弟弟广香先前投奔魏国，元徽年间，为魏国攻打杀害文庆，魏国委任他为阴干公、茄芦镇主。
English: When Yuanfang's younger brother Guangxiang had previously defected to Wei, during the Yuan Dynasty, Wenqing was attacked and killed for Wei, and Wei appointed him as Yingangong, the town's lord.

古文：文庆从弟文弘为白水太守，屯武兴，朝议以为辅国将军、北秦州刺史、武都王、仇池公。
现代文：文庆的堂弟文弘任白水太守，驻守在武兴，朝廷商议任命他为辅国将军、北秦州刺史、武都王、仇池公。
English: Wenqing's cousin, Wen Hong, served as the governor of Baishui and was stationed in Wuxing. The imperial court deliberated and appointed him as the general of the auxiliary state, the governor of North Qin, the king of Wudu, and the prince of Quchi.

古文：太祖即位，欲绥怀异俗。
现代文：太祖登位，想安抚不同风俗的人。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, wanting to appease people of different customs.

古文：建元元年，诏曰： 昔绝国入贽，美称前册，殊俗内款，声流往记。
现代文：建元元年，下诏说： 以前遥远的国家进贡，美名在从前史册中受称道，不同风俗的人归附，声名流传在往昔的记载中。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, the following edict was issued: Tribute was paid by distant countries in the past, fame was praised in ancient history, people of different customs were attached, and fame was passed down in past records.

古文：伪虏茄芦镇主、阴平郡公杨广香，怨结同族，衅起亲党，当宋之世，遂举地降敌。
现代文：魏国茄芦镇主、阴平郡公杨广香，和同族结怨，祸殃起自亲属乡党，在宋朝的时候，竞献出土地投降敌人。
English: Yang Guangxiang, the lord of Zhaoli Town, Yinping County, Wei Province, and his compatriots had a grudge, and the misfortune arose from the relatives of the township party. During the Song Dynasty, he competed to offer land to surrender to the enemy.

古文：茄芦失守，华阳暂惊，近单使先驰，宣扬皇威，广香等追其远世之诚，仰我惟新之化，肉袒请附，复地千里，氐羌杂种，咸同归顺。
现代文：茄芦失守，华山以南暂受惊扰。近来单派使者先行赶去，宣扬皇朝声威，广香等人追念前代的忠诚，仰慕我朝革新的教化，脱衣露体请求归附，收复土地一千里，氐羌各种族，都一同顺从。
English: The south of Huashan was temporarily alarmed by the loss of the gargoyles. Recently, a single emissary was sent ahead to promote the prestige of the imperial dynasty. Guangxiang and others remembered the loyalty of the previous generation, admired the enlightenment of the revolution of our dynasty, stripped naked to request affiliation, recovered a thousand miles of land, and all ethnic groups obeyed together.

古文：宜时领纳，厚加优恤。
现代文：应该及时收纳，厚加优待抚恤。
English: It should be received in a timely manner, with a generous bonus.

古文：广香翻迷反正，可特量所授。部曲酋豪，随名酬赏。 以广香为督沙州诸军事、平羌校尉、沙州刺史。
现代文：广香迷途知返，可特别考量授任、部众头领，随名位酬劳赏赐任命广香为督沙州诸军事、平羌校尉、沙州刺史。
English: Guangxiang lost his way and found his way back, he can be specially considered to be awarded the post of the head of the department, and he will be appointed as the military governor of Shazhou, the lieutenant of Pingyao, and the historian of Shazhou according to his title and reward.

古文：寻进号征虏将军。
现代文：不久升军号为征虏将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Conscripts.

古文：梁州刺史范柏年被诛，其亲将李乌奴惧奔叛，文弘纳之。
现代文：梁州刺史范柏年被杀，他的亲信将领李乌奴畏惧逃奔，文弘接纳了他。
English: When Liangzhou assassin Fan Bai was killed, his trusted general Li Wunu fled in fear, and Wenhong took him in.

古文：乌奴率亡命千余人攻梁州，为刺史王玄邈所破，复走还氐中。荆州刺史豫章王嶷遣兵讨乌奴，檄梁州能斩送乌奴首，赏本郡，乌奴田宅事业悉赐之。
现代文：乌奴率领逃亡的一千多人攻打梁州，被刺史王玄邈打败，又逃回氐人区域，型州剌史逸直王盖盛派遣军队讨伐乌基，传檄文说梁州有能斩送乌奴首级的，赏本郡太守，乌奴的田地房宅和财产全部赐给他。
English: Wunu led more than a thousand fugitives to attack Liangzhou. He was defeated by Wang Xuanqin, and fled back to the Shannan area. King Gaisheng of Shizhu sent troops to fight against Uki. According to the legend, if Liangzhou could defeat the first-ranked Wunu, he would be awarded the title of county governor, and all of Wunu's fields, houses and property would be given to him.

古文：与广香书曰：
现代文：给广香写信说：
English: He wrote to Guangxiang saying:

古文：夫废兴无谬，逆顺有恒，古今共贯。贤愚同察。
现代文：兴衰没有错谬，逆顺有不变的道理，这是古今一脉相承，贤愚共同察知的。
English: There is no fallacy in the rise and fall, and there is an unchanging principle in the rise and fall, which is inherited from ancient times to modern times, and is perceived by both the wise and the foolish.

古文：梁州刺史范柏年怀挟诡态，首鼠两端，既已被伐，盘桓稽命。
现代文：梁州刺史范柏年心怀诡计，犹豫观望，已经被接替，拖延执行命令。
English: The governor of Liangzhou, Fan Paknian, has been replaced and has been delaying the implementation of the order.

古文：遂潜遣李乌奴叛。杨文弘扇诱边疆荒杂。
现代文：竞暗中派遣李乌奴叛变杨文弘煽动引诱边疆荒远的种族。
English: Li Wunu secretly sent Yang Wenhong, a renegade, to incite and lure a race from the distant frontier.

古文：柏年今已枭禽，乌奴频被摧破，计其余烬，行自消夷。
现代文：柏年现已被杀示众，乌奴接连被打败，估计他们的残余势力，不久将被平定。
English: Now that the Kashiwabara have been killed and the Unu have been defeated one after another, it is estimated that their remaining forces will soon be subdued.

古文：今遣参军行晋寿太守王道宝、参军事行北巴西新巴二郡太守任湜之、行宕渠太守王安会领锐卒三千，遄涂风迈，浮川电掩。
现代文：现在派遣参军代理晋寿太守王道宝、参军事代理北巴西新巴二郡太守任浞之、代理宕渠太守王安会率领精锐兵士三千人，途中疾速行进，水道上如闪电突袭。
English: Now we are sending 3,000 elite soldiers led by the acting Jinju Governor Wang Daobao, the acting North Brazil Xinba Second County Governor Ren Shizhi, and the acting Danggu Governor Wang Anhui. They will march at high speed and make a surprise attack on the waterway like lightning.

古文：又命辅国将军三巴校尉明惠照、巴郡太守鲁休烈、南巴西太守柳弘称、益州刺史傅琰，并简徒竞鹜，选甲争驰。
现代文：又命令辅国将军三巴校尉明惠照、巴郡太守鲁休烈、南巴西太守柳弘称、益州刺史傅琰，都挑选部属竞相前进，选择甲士争先奔驰。
English: He also ordered the vice-governor of the country, Sanba Lieutenant Ming Huizhao, Ba County Governor Lu Xurye, South Brazil Governor Liu Hongxuan, and Yizhou Governor Shi Fuyao to select their subordinates to advance in a race, and select the best soldiers to race ahead.

古文：雍州水步，行次魏兴，并山东侨旧，会于南郑。
现代文：雍州的水军步兵，行进停驻在魏兴，以及山东侨居的驻军，在南郑会合。
English: The naval infantrymen of Yongzhou marched and stationed in Weixing, and the garrison troops of the Shandong diaspora gathered in Nanzheng.

古文：或泛舟垫江，或飞旌剑道，腹背飚腾，表里震击。
现代文：有的从垫江乘船，有的由剑道挥师前进，腹背狂扫，表裹合击。
English: Some of them took a boat from the Jie River, and some of them were waved forward by a kendo master, and they were swept back and forth, and the table was wrapped around them.

古文：文弘容纳叛戾，专为渊薮，外侮皇威，内凌国族。
现代文：文弘接受叛逆，专为逃亡者巢穴，外侮皇室声威，内欺国家大姓。
English: Fumihiro accepted the rebellion, especially as a fugitive's lair, insulted the prestige of the imperial family, and deceived the country's great name.

古文：君弈世忠款，深识理顺，想即起义，应接大军，共为掎角，讨灭乌奴，克建忠勤，茂立诚节。
现代文：你世代忠心归顺，深深懂得逆顺的道理，想来会立即发动义举，接应大军，共同形成牵制力量，讨伐剿灭乌奴，建立忠实业绩，树立诚挚节操。
English: Your generation is loyal and obedient, and deeply understands the principle of disobedience and obedience. If you want to, you will immediately launch a righteous act, receive a large army, jointly form a deterrent force, fight and exterminate the Wushu, establish a faithful performance, and establish a sincere discipline.

古文：沈攸之资十年之积，权百旅之众，师出境而城溃，兵未战而自屠，朝廷无遗镞之费，士民靡伤痍之弊。
现代文：沈攸之凭藉十年的积蓄，指挥上百旅的军队，军队出境而敌城崩溃，兵士没有交战而敌人白相屠杀，朝廷没有遗失箭头的耗费，官吏民众没有遭受创伤的弊害。
English: Shen Youzhi, with the help of ten years of savings, commanded an army of hundreds of brigades, the army went abroad and the enemy city collapsed, the soldiers did not fight and the enemy massacred in white, the court did not lose the cost of arrows, and the officials and the people did not suffer the harm of trauma.

古文：况蕞尔小竖，方之蔑如，其取歼殄，岂延漏刻！
现代文：何况小小的贼寇，与之相比大为不如，攻取歼灭，岂会拖延时刻。
English: What's more, a small bandit, compared to it, is much inferior, and it will delay the time to attack and annihilate.

古文：忝以寡昧，分陕司蕃，清氛荡秽，谅惟任职。
现代文：我愧以微薄才能，担当一方之任，清除污秽，实为职责。
English: I am humbled by the fact that with my meager talent, I am responsible for one side of the task, removing filth, which is actually my duty.

古文：此府器械山积，戈旗林耸，士卒剽劲，蓄锐积威，除难剿寇，岂俟征集！
现代文：本府器械如山堆集，干戈旗帜如树林高耸，兵士剽悍强劲，积蓄精锐与声威，除祸难剿贼寇，岂待微调!
English: The government's equipment is piled up like a mountain, the battle flags are towering like trees, the soldiers are brave and strong, the elite and the prestige are accumulated, and the scourge of thieves and robbers is eliminated, how can it be fine-tuned!

古文：但以剪伐萌菌，弗劳洪斧，扑彼蚊蚋，无假多力。
现代文：衹因砍伐萌发的竹笋，不烦劳大斧，扑灭蚊类飞虫，不必多费力量。
English: The bamboo shoots sprouted by the cutting of the bamboo shoots do not bother the big axe, and the mosquitoes and flying insects are extinguished, so there is no need to spend more effort.

古文：皇上圣哲应期，恩泽广被，罪止首恶，余无所问。赏罚之科，具写如别。
现代文：皇上圣明顺应期待，恩泽广泛施予，罪恶衹在首恶分子，其余的不加追究赏罚的条例，详细列出见附件。
English: See the attachment for a detailed list of the regulations of Emperor Shengming's compliance with expectations, the extensive granting of favors, the punishment of evildoers, and the rest of the rewards and punishments.

古文：使道宝步出魏兴，分军溯垫江，俱会晋寿。
现代文：指派道宝率步兵到魏兴，分出军队溯垫江而进，都在晋寿会合。
English: Daobao was assigned to lead the infantry to Weixing, and the detachments of the army advanced along the Jianjiang River, all meeting in Jinshou.

古文：太祖以文弘背叛，进广香为持节、都督西秦州刺史。
现代文：太祖因文弘背叛，升广香为持节、都督西秦州刺史。
English: The great-grandfather because of the betrayal of Wenhong, the promotion of Guangxiang to hold the festival, the governor of West Qin Province stabbed history.

古文：广香子北部镇将军郡事炅为征虏将军、武都太守。
现代文：广香的儿子北部镇将军郡事杨炅担任征虏将军、武都太守。
English: Guangxiang's son, the general of Beibu Town, the county magistrate Yang Jie, served as the conscript general and the governor of the capital.

古文：以难当正胤杨后起为持节、宁朔将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史、武都王，镇武兴，即文弘从兄子也。
现代文：任命难当的嫡系后代杨后起为持节、宁朔将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史、武都王，镇守武兴，他就是文弘堂兄的儿子。
English: The legitimate descendants of Yang Houqi, who was appointed to the position, were Jisong, Ningshuo General, Pingyao Lieutenant, North Qin State Sashih, Wudu King, and Town Guard Wu Xing, who was the son of Fumihiro's cousin.

古文：三年，文弘归降，复以为征西将军、北秦州刺史。
现代文：三年，文弘归顺投降，又任命他为征西将军、北秦州刺史。
English: In the third year, Fumihiro surrendered and was appointed as the general of the Western Conquest and the governor of North Qin.

古文：先是广香病死，氐众半奔文弘，半诣梁州刺史崔慧景。
现代文：在这以前广香病死，氐人部众一半投奔文弘，一半前往梁州刺史崔慧景那裹。
English: Before this, Guangxiang died of illness, and half of the members of the Xing Renbu went to Wenhong, and the other half went to Liangzhou Jishi Cui Huijing.

古文：文弘遣从子后起进据白水。
现代文：文弘派遣侄子后起进军占据白水。
English: After sending his nephew, Fumihiro marched to occupy Shiroshimizu.

古文：白水居晋寿上流，西接涪界，东带益路，北连阴平、茄芦，为形胜之地。晋寿太守杨公则启经略之宜，上答曰： 文弘罪不可恕，事中政应且加恩耳。
现代文：白水处在晋寿的上游，西接涪水地界，柬连益州通道，北连阴平、茄芦，是军事要地晋寿太守橱公则启奏攻取事宜，皇帝答覆说： 文弘的罪过不可宽恕，因情势姑且加以恩待而已。
English: Baishui is located in the upper reaches of Jinju, west of the Surabaya watershed, Cambodia-Lianyizhou passage, north of Lianying-Ping and Jiaolou, is a military important place of Jinju Taishou cupboard official opening and capture matters, the emperor replied: Fumihiro's sin is unforgivable, because of the situation, it is only treated with grace.

古文：卿若能袭破白水，必加厚赏。 
现代文：你如能够袭击攻下白水，必定给予厚重的赏赐。 
English: If you can attack and capture the White Water, you are sure to give a heavy reward.

古文：世祖即位，进后起号冠军将军。
现代文：世祖登位，升后起的军号为冠军将军。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and the ensuing military title was Champion General.

古文：永明元年，以征虏将军炅为沙州刺史、阴平王，将军如故。
现代文：永明元年，任命征虏将军杨炅为沙州刺史、阴平王，将军职衔照旧。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Yang Jie, a conscript general, was appointed as the governor of Shazhou and the king of Yinping, and his military rank remained the same.

古文：二年，八座奏后起勤彰款塞，忠著边城。
现代文：二年，尚书省八座上奏，后起辅助君王的业绩昭著于要塞，忠心闻名于边城。
English: In the second year, Shang Shuzhou Province won the first place in eight provinces. Later, the performance of the auxiliary monarchs was famous in the fortress, and the loyalty was famous in the border town.

古文：进号征虏将军。
现代文：升军号为征虏将军。
English: He was promoted to General of Conscripts.

古文：四年，后起卒，诏曰： 后起奄至殒逝，恻怆于怀。
现代文：四年，后起去世，诏令说： 后起突然逝世，心中悲伤。
English: Four years later, after his death, the imperial edict said: "After his sudden death, his heart was sad.

古文：绥御边服，宜详其选。
现代文：安抚边地，应仔细选择合适的人。
English: To pacify the periphery, the right person should be carefully selected.

古文：行辅国将军、北秦州刺史、武都王杨集始，干局沈亮，乃心忠款，必能缉境宁民、宣扬声教。
现代文：代理辅国将军、北秦州刺史、武都王杨集始，干练正直，忠心归顺，一定能整治边境安宁民众、弘扬教化。
English: The acting general of the Auxiliary State, the Northern Qin State, and the King of Wudang, Yang Jizhi, are capable, honest, loyal and obedient, and will surely be able to rectify the border peace and promote enlightenment.

古文：可持节、辅国将军、北秦州刺史、平羌校尉、武都王。 
现代文：可授任为持节、辅国将军、北秦州刺史、乎羌校尉、武都王。 
English: He can be awarded the titles of Ji Jie, Fu Guo Gen, Beqin Zhou Zhishi, Huanqian Leutnant, and Wudu Wang.

古文：后起弟后明为龙骧将军、白水太守。
现代文：后起的弟弟后明担任龙骧将军、白水太守。
English: His younger brother, Houming, who came up later, served as the general of Longjing and the governor of Baishui.

古文：集始弟集朗为宁朔将军。
现代文：集始的弟弟集朗担任宁朔将军。
English: Jiro, the younger brother of Jiso, served as the general of Ningshuo.

古文：五年，有司奏集始驱狐剪棘，仰化边服。
现代文：五年，有关官员上奏集始驱逐妖邪斩断荆棘，训化边民。
English: In five years, the relevant officials reported to the Supreme People's Procuratorate that they would begin to expel the evil spirits, cut off the thorns, and discipline the border residents.

古文：母以子贵，宜加荣宠。
现代文：母亲由儿子而尊贵，应加赐荣耀名号。
English: A mother is honored by her son, and she should be given a glorious name.

古文：除集始母姜氏为太夫人，假银印。
现代文：授任集始的母亲姜氏为太夫人，赐给银印。
English: Jiang's mother, who was appointed as the founder of the collection, was given the silver seal as the great-grandmother.

古文：九年，八座奏杨炅嗣勤西牧，驰款内昭，宜增戎章，用辉遐外。
现代文：九年，八座上奏。杨炅勤于西部治理，献忠心鲜明昭著，应增加名号，来炫耀远方。
English: In the ninth year, eight companies were promoted. Yang Jie was diligent in the governance of the west, and his loyalty was clearly evident. He should add a name to show off the far away.

古文：进号前将军。
现代文：升军号为前将军。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：十年，集始反，率氐、蜀杂众寇汉川，梁州刺史阴智伯遣军主宁朔将军桓卢奴、梁季群、宋囗、王士隆等千余人拒之，不利，退保白马。
现代文：十年，集始反叛，率领氐、蜀混杂的部众侵犯漠川，梁州刺史阴智伯派遣军主宁朔将军桓卢奴、梁季群、宋口、王士隆等一千多人抵御他，失利，退守白马。
English: In the 10th year, he started a rebellion, led his minions of mixed Han and Shu to invade Mu Chuan, and Liang Zhou sent his general Yin Zhibo to dispatch more than a thousand people, including the military leader Ningshuo General Huan Lunu, Liang Ji Qun, Song Kou, and Wang Shilong to resist him, but they failed and retreated to Baima.

古文：贼众万余人纵兵火攻其城栅，卢奴拒守死战。
现代文：贼军一万多人放纵兵士用火攻打城池栅栏，卢奴抵御死战。
English: The bandit army of more than ten thousand indulged the soldiers to attack the city fence with fire, and Lunu resisted the deadly battle.

古文：智伯又遣军主阴仲昌等马步数千人救援。
现代文：智伯又派遣军主阴仲昌等人率骑兵步兵几千人去救援。
English: Zhibo also sent the military leader Yin Zhongchang and others to lead several thousand cavalry and infantry to rescue.

古文：至白马城东千溪桥，相去数里，集始等悉力攻之，官军内外奋击，集始大败，十八营一时溃走，杀获数千人。
现代文：到达白马城东王，相距几里，塞篮等人全力攻打，官军内外奋勇冲击，只豌大败，十八个营垒同时崩溃逃跑，杀死斩获几千人。
English: Arriving at the East King of the White Horse Castle, a few miles apart, Saekan and others fought with all their might. The government army bravely attacked inside and outside, only to be defeated. Eighteen camps collapsed and fled at the same time, killing and capturing several thousand people.

古文：集始奔入虏界。
现代文：只蛆逃入魏厘境内。
English: Only Yan fled into the territory of Weili.

古文：隆昌元年，以前将军杨炅为使持节、督沙州诸军事、平西将军、平羌校尉、沙州刺史。
现代文：隆昌元年，任命前将军杨炅属使持节、督沙州诸军事、平西将军、乎羌校尉、沙州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, former general Yang Yongzhu was appointed as the envoy of the Longchang Festival, the military governor of Shazhou, the general of Pingxi, the lieutenant of Huancheng, and the governor of Shazhou.

古文：集始入武兴，以城降虏，氐人苻幼孙起义攻之。
现代文：集始进入武兴，献出城池投降魏国，氐人符幼孙发起义军攻打他。
English: Ji Shi entered Wuxing, surrendered the city and surrendered to Wei, and his grandson initiated the rebel army to attack him.

古文：建武二年，氐、虏寇汉中。
现代文：建武二年，氐人、魏入侵犯漠中。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the Xiongnu and Wei invaded the desert.

古文：梁州刺史萧懿遣前氐王杨后起弟子元秀收合义兵，氐众响应，断虏运道。
现代文：梁州刺史萧懿派遣前氏王杨后起弟弟的儿子元秀聚合义兵，氐人响应，截断魏军运粮路才。
English: Liangzhou governor Xiao Wei dispatched his younger brother's son, Yuan Xiu, who was the son of the previous ruler, Wang Yanghuo, to gather volunteers. The Yan people responded by cutting off the Wei army's grain transportation routes.

古文：虏亦遣伪南梁州刺史仇池公杨灵珍据泥功山以相拒格，元秀病死，苻幼孙领其众。
现代文：魏军也派遣所属南梁州刺史仇池公杨灵珍占据泥功山以相抗拒。元秀病死，苻幼孙统领他的部众。
English: The Wei army also dispatched Yang Lingzhen, a member of the Southern Liang Prefecture, to occupy Mud Gong Mountain to resist. Yuanxiu died of illness, leaving his young grandson to lead his men.

古文：高宗诏曰： 仇池公杨元秀，氐王苗胤，乃心忠勇，丑虏凶逼，血诚弥厉，宣播朝威，招诱戎种，万里齐契，响然归从。
现代文：高宗下韶说： 仇池公杨元秀，是氐王后代子孙，忠贞勇敢，敌寇凶恶逼迫，元秀以鲜血尽忠更为坚毅，宣扬朝廷声威，招诱戎人种族，万里之外同心默契，归附顺从。
English: Gao Zongjian said: Yang Yuanxiu, the enemy of the pond, is the descendant of the descendants of the king of Qi. He is loyal and brave, and the enemy is a fierce persecutor. Yuanxiu is more determined to be loyal with blood, to promote the prestige of the court, to attract the warrior race, and to be one-hearted and obedient.

古文：诚效显著，实有可嘉。
现代文：诚心功效显著，实在值得嘉奖。
English: The sincerity and effectiveness are remarkable, and they really deserve to be commended.

古文：不幸殒丧，凄怆于怀。
现代文：不幸身亡，使我心中悲伤。
English: My heart is saddened by his untimely death.

古文：夫死事加恩，《阳秋》明义。
现代文：对死于国事者施恩，是《春秋》中明确的义理。
English: It is a clear principle in "Spring and Autumn" to be kind to those who die in state affairs.

古文：宜追覃荣典，以弘劝奖。
现代文：应该追施荣华的礼仪，来鼓励奖赏。
English: We should follow the etiquette of Shi Ronghua to encourage rewards.

古文：赠仇池公。
现代文：现追赠仇池公。
English: It is now a posthumous gift to Prince Atsuike.

古文：持归国。 
现代文：送灵柩归国。 
English: The casket was sent back to the country.

古文：氐杨馥之聚义众屯沮水关，城白马北。
现代文：氐人杨馥之聚集义兵驻守沮水关，在白马的北面筑城。
English: Yang Xizhi's gathering of volunteers garrisoned Deshuishiguan and built a city on the north side of Baima.

古文：集始遣弟集朗率兵迎拒州军于黄亘，战大败。
现代文：集始派遣弟弟集朗率领兵士在黄亘迎击州中车队，交战大败。
English: Ji Zhi dispatched his younger brother Ji Lang to lead the soldiers to attack the middle school convoy in Huangwan, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：集始走下辩，馥之据武兴。
现代文：集始逃跑到下辩，馥之占据武兴。
English: Set fled at the start of the second half, leaving Wu Xing in his wake.

古文：虏军寻退。
现代文：魏军不久撤退。
English: The Wei army soon retreated.

古文：馥之留弟昌之守武兴，自引兵据仇池。
现代文：馥之留下弟弟昌之守卫武兴，自己带兵占据仇池。
English: Shizhi left his brother Shanzhi to guard Wuxing, and led his own troops to occupy Qiuchi.

古文：诏曰： 氐王杨馥之，世纂忠义，率厉部曲，树绩边城，克殄奸丑。
现代文：诏令说： 氐王杨馥之，世代继承忠义，统领部众，在边城建立功勋，消灭奸诈的敌人。
English: The edict said: "King Yang Xizhi of Qian will inherit loyalty from generation to generation, lead his subordinates, establish merit in the border city, and eliminate treacherous enemies.

古文：复内禀朝律，外抚戎荒，款心式昭，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：又于内禀受国家律令，于外安抚边远民众，诚意显著，我十分嘉许他。
English: In addition, he has shown remarkable sincerity in obeying the state's laws and regulations at home and appeasing the remote people abroad. I highly commend him.

古文：以为持节、督北秦雍二州诸军事、辅国将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史、仇池公。 
现代文：现委任为持节、督北秦雍二州诸军事、辅国将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史、仇池公。 
English: He is now appointed as Jisong, the military governor of North Qin and the two states of Yong, the general of the auxiliary state, the lieutenant of Pingyao, the governor of North Qin and the governor of Quchi.

古文：沙州刺史杨炅进号安西将军。
现代文：沙州刺史扰垦升军号为安西将军。
English: General Anxi was the name of the rising army in Shazhou.

古文：三年，炅死，以炅子崇祖为假节、督沙州军事、征虏将军、平羌校尉、沙州刺史、阴平王。
现代文：三年，搔星死去，任命扰是的儿子塞担为假节、督逆亚军事、征虏将军、平羌校尉、边业刺史、堕垩王。
English: Three years later, Gong Xing died, and his son, Setan, was appointed as the false festival, the military governor of the rebellious Asia, the conscript general, the lieutenant of Pingyao, the history of the border industry, and the fallen king.

古文：四年，伪南梁州刺史杨灵珍与二弟婆罗、阿卜珍率部曲三万余人举城归附，送母及子双健、阿皮于南郑为质。
现代文：四年，伪南梁州刺史杨灵珍和两个弟弟婆罗、阿卜珍率领部众三万多人献出城池归附，送母亲和儿子双健、阿皮在南郑做人质。
English: In the fourth year, Yang Lingzhen, the pseudo South Liangzhou assassin, and his two younger brothers, Boro and Abzhen, led more than 30,000 people to surrender the city and send their mother and sons, Shuang Jian and Appi, to be hostages in Nan Zheng.

古文：梁州刺史阴广宗遣中兵参军猷王思考率众救援，为虏所得，婆罗、阿卜珍战死。
现代文：梁州刺史阴广宗派遣中兵参军王思考率领部众救援，被魏军俘获，婆罗、阿卜珍战死。
English: Liangzhou Zhi Shi Yin Guangzong sent soldiers to join the army, Wang Xie led the rescue, and was captured by the Wei army. Borah and Abzhen died in the battle.

古文：灵珍攻集始于武兴，杀其二弟集同、集众。
现代文：垂趁在亘哩攻打只始，杀死他两个弟弟集同、集众。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that the attack was just beginning, he killed his two younger brothers and gathered a crowd.

古文：集始穷急，请降。
现代文：集始困穷危急，请求投降。
English: He was in dire straits and asked to surrender.

古文：以灵珍为持节、督陇右军事、征虏将军、北梁州刺史、仇池公、武都王。
现代文：任命灵珍为持节、督陇右军事、征虏将军、北梁州刺史、仇池公、武都王。
English: Ling Zhen was appointed as the commander of the right military, the general of the conquest, the governor of North Liangzhou, the prince of Qi, and the king of Wudu.

古文：永元二年，复以集始为使持节、督秦雍二州军事、辅国将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史。
现代文：永元二年，又任命集始为使持节、督秦雍二州军事、辅国将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, he also appointed Ji Gang to be the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Qin and Yong two states, the general of the auxiliary state, the lieutenant of Pingyao, and the historian of North Qin.

古文：灵珍后为虏所杀。
现代文：灵珍后来被魏人杀死。
English: Ling Zhen was later killed by the Wei.

古文：自虏陷仇池以后，或得或失。
现代文：自从魏人攻下仇池以后，有时占据有时失去。
English: Ever since the Wei people conquered Qiu Lake, they sometimes occupied and sometimes lost it.

古文：宋以仇池为郡，故以氐封焉。
现代文：宋朝把仇池作为郡，所以把氐人封在那裹。
English: The Song Dynasty made Qiu Lake a county, so the Qiu people were confined there.

古文：宕昌，羌种也。
现代文：宕昌，是羌人种族。
English: The Go-Chang are a race of deaf-mutes.

古文：各有酋豪，领部众汧、陇间。
现代文：各有首领，统领部众在沂水、陇山之间。
English: Each of them has a leader, and the leading group is between Surabaya and Lushan.

古文：宋末，宕昌王梁弥机为使持节、督河凉二州、安西将军、东羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公。建元元年，太祖进号镇西将军。
现代文：宋朝末年，宕昌王梁弥机担任使持节、督河凉二州、安西将军、束羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公建元元年，太祖升他的军号为镇西将军。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Tang Chang Wang Liang Yiji served as the envoy of the festival, the governor of He Liang Erzhou, the general of Anxi, the lieutenant of Sokou, the governor of He Liang Erzhou and the governor of Shaanxi in the first year of the 21st century, and the great-grandfather raised his military title to the general of Zhenxi.

古文：又征虏将军、西凉州刺史羌王像舒彭亦进为持节、平西将军。
现代文：另外征虏将军、西凉州刺史羌王像舒彭也升为持节、平西将军。
English: In addition, the conscript general, Xi Liang Zhou Zhi Shi Zi Wang, like Shupeng, was also promoted to the general of Jixi and Pingxi.

古文：后叛降虏。
现代文：后来背叛投降魏国。
English: Later, he betrayed and surrendered the State of Wei.

古文：永明元年，八座奏前使持节、都督河凉二州军事、镇西将军，东羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公、宕昌王梁弥机，前使持节、平北将军、西凉州刺史、羌王像舒彭，并著勤西垂，宁安边境，可复先官爵。
现代文：永明元年，尚书省八座上奏，前使持节、都督河凉二州军事、镇西将军、柬羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公、宕昌王梁弥机，前使持节、平北将军、西凉州刺史、羌王像舒彭，都在西部地区效力，安定边境，可以恢复原来的官职爵位。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Shangshu's eight envoys, including the former envoy Jishu, the military governor of He Liang's two prefectures, the general of Zhenxi, the lieutenant of Kam Rong, the governor of He Liang's two prefectures, the governor of Shaanxi, the king of Tangchang, Liang Yiji, the former envoy Jishu, the general of Pingbei, the governor of West Liang's prefectures, and the king of Shupeng, all worked in the western region, stabilized the border, and could restore the original official rank.

古文：诏又可以陇右都帅羌王刘洛羊为辅国将军。
现代文：韶令又同意任命陇右都帅羌王刘洛羊为辅国将军。
English: The imperial edict also agreed to appoint Liu Luoyang, the right-hand man of the emperor, as an auxiliary general.

古文：机卒。
现代文：梁弥机去世。
English: Liang Yicai passed away.

古文：三年，诏曰： 行宕昌王梁弥颉，忠款内附，著绩西服，宜加爵命，式隆蕃屏。
现代文：三年，韶令说： 代理宕昌王梁弥颉，忠心归附，在西部边境建立业绩，应加授官职爵位，使藩国隆盛。
English: In the third year, the imperial edict said: the agent of Tang Chang Wang Liang Yixuan, loyally attached, established performance in the western border, should be awarded official ranks and ranks, and make the domain prosperous.

古文：可使持节、督河凉二州诸军事、安西将军、东羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公、宕昌王。 
现代文：可授予使持节、督河凉二州诸军事、安西将军、东羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公、宕昌王。 
English: It can be awarded to Zhi Jizhi, the military commanders of the two states of He Liang and He Liang, the general of Anxi, the captain of Donglu, the governor of He Liang and He Liang, the prince of Shaanxi, and the king of Gaochang.

古文：颉卒。
现代文：梁弥颉去世。
English: Liang Yixuan passed away.

古文：六年，以行宕昌王梁弥承为使持节、督河凉二州诸军事、安西将军、东羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、宕昌王。
现代文：六年，任命代理宕昌王梁弥承为使持节、督河凉二州诸军事、安西将军、束羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、宕吕王。
English: In the sixth year, he appointed Liang Yicheng, the deputy of King Tang Chang, as the envoy of the festival, the military commanders of the two states of He Liang, General Anxi, Lieutenant Sokou, the two states of He Liang, and King Tang Lv.

古文：使求军仪及伎杂书，诏报曰： 知须军仪等九种，并非所爱。
现代文：梁弥承派人求取军事法度和技艺杂书，诏书回答说： 知你需要军事法度等九种书籍，并不是我有所吝啬。
English: Liang Yicheng sent someone to ask for military regulations and technical books. Zhao Shu replied, "I know you need nine kinds of books, including military regulations, so it's not that I'm stingy.

古文：但军器种甚多，致之未易。
现代文：不过兵器种类很多，罗致不容易。
English: However, there are many types of weapons, and it is not easy to choose.

古文：内伎不堪涉远。
现代文：宫内技工不能承受长途跋涉。
English: Uterine technicians can't afford to travel long distances.

古文：秘阁图书，例不外出。《五经集注》、《论语》今特敕赐王各一部。 
现代文：秘合的图书，依条例不能外借《五经集注》、《论语》，现特地下令赐给王各一部。 
English: According to the regulations, the "Five Classics Commentary" and "Analects" cannot be borrowed from books that are classified as secret. Therefore, a special order was issued to give a part of each book to Wang.

古文：俗重虎皮，以之送死，国中以为货。
现代文：宕昌习俗看重虎皮，用它送葬，国内作为货币。
English: According to the customs of the Tang and Chang Dynasties, tiger skins were highly valued and were used for funerals and as domestic currency.

古文：史臣曰：氐、胡犷盛，乘运迭起，秦、赵僭差，相系覆灭，余类蠢蠢，被西疆而奄北际。
现代文：史臣曰：氐、胡猛悍强盛，趁时运交相起兵，在秦、趟地区僭越割据，相继灭亡，残余势力蠢蠢欲动，普及西部边境而至北方地区。
English: Shichen said: Zhai and Hu were strong and powerful, and they took advantage of the opportunity to make war with each other. In the Qin and Wa regions, they overran the outposts and died one after another. The remaining forces were eager to move and spread to the western border and to the northern region.

古文：芮芮地穷幽都，戎马天隔。
现代文：芮芮土地到北方极远之地，兵马相隔遥远。
English: The land is very far to the north, and the soldiers and horses are far apart.

古文：氐杨密迩华、夷，分民接境，侵犯汉、漾，浸逼狼狐，疆埸之心，窥望威德，梁部多难，于斯为梗。残羌遗种，际运肇昌，尽陇凭河，远通南驿，据国称蕃，并受职命。
现代文：氐人杨氏靠近华夏、夷人，划分民众接壤疆土，侵犯汉水、漾水，逐渐逼近如豺狼狐狸，有割据边境的打算，窥伺声威德行，梁州祸难多，是他们在这裹作梗残余的羌人种族，因时机而昌盛，尽占陇右依凭黄河，可以远通南方驿路，占据领土自称藩镇，都获得官职爵位。
English: The Xiongnu Yang clan was close to China and the barbarians, dividing the people into bordering territories, encroaching on the Han River and the Xiongnu River, gradually approaching like a jackal fox, with the intention of dividing the border, spying on virtue and virtue, and Liangzhou was plagued by many calamities. They were the remnants of the Xiongnu race in this region. They prospered because of the opportunity, occupied all the land, relied on the Yellow River, could travel far to the south, occupied the territory, called themselves Han towns, and all received official titles.

古文：晋氏衰败，中朝沦覆，灭余四夷，庶雪戎祸，授以兵杖，升进军麾，后代因仍，贪广声教，绥外怀远，先名后实。
现代文：晋氏衰败，中原沦陷，残余的四方夷人，希望洗刷戎人的祸患，朝廷授给他们兵器，擢升他们的军号，后世因循，欲图扩大教化，安抚外族怀柔远方，先名义而后实质。
English: The Jin dynasty fell, the Central Plains fell, and the remnants of the Shifang barbarians hoped to wash away the ills of the Yongle people. The imperial court gave them weapons, promoted their military ranks, and later generations followed suit. They wanted to expand enlightenment and appease foreigners in distant places, first in name and then in substance.

古文：贸易有无，世开边利，羽毛齿革，无损于我。
现代文：交易往来互通有无，世代开展边境互利，羽毛齿革，对我朝廷没有损失。
English: There is no loss to my imperial court if there is or is not a reciprocal exchange of transactions, and if the border is mutually beneficial for generations.

古文：若夫九种之事，有囗囗至于此也。
现代文：至于九种礼节的事情，有口口到这种情形的。
English: As for the nine kinds of etiquette, there is talk of such a situation.

古文：赞曰：芮芮、河南，同出胡种。
现代文：赞曰：芮芮、河南，同出于胡人种族。
English: Zang said: "Bai and Henan are both from the Hu ethnic group.

古文：称王僭帝，擅强专统。
现代文：僭越称王称帝，擅权独断理事。
English: arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance.

古文：氐、羌孽余，散出河、陇。
现代文：氐、羌残余，散落到黄河、陇山间。
English: The remains of the rafts and rafts were scattered to the Yellow River and the mountains.

古文：来宾往叛，放命承宗。
现代文：前来归附离去又反叛，违背命令历代相承。
English: From generation to generation, they come, attach, leave, rebel, and disobey orders.

