古文：穆宗上穆宗孝安敬正皇帝，讳璟，小字述律。太宗皇帝长子，母曰靖安皇后萧氏。会同二年，封寿安王。
现代文：穆宗孝安敬正皇帝，名王景，乳名述律。太宗皇帝长子，母为靖安皇后萧氏。会同二年，封为寿安王。
English: Emperor Mu Zong Xiao'an, Emperor Jingzheng, Emperor Mingwangjing, Empress Dowager Shuritsu. The eldest son of Emperor Taizong, his mother was Empress Xiao of Jing'an. He was crowned King of Shou'an in the same year.

古文：天禄五年秋九月癸亥，世宗遇害。
现代文：天禄五年秋九月初四，世宗遇害。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the 5th year of the Tenroku era, Sejong was killed.

古文：逆臣察割等伏诛。
现代文：逆臣察割等人伏诛。
English: The rebellious vassal Chawari and others were executed.

古文：丁卯，即皇帝位，群臣上尊号曰天顺皇帝，改元应历。
现代文：初八，即皇帝位，群臣上尊号为天顺皇帝，改元应历。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, that is, the emperor's enthronement, the title of honor of the group of courtiers was the Emperor Tenshun, and the era was changed to the Heian era.

古文：戊辰，如南京。
现代文：初九，到南京。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, I went to Nanjing.

古文：是月，遣刘承训告哀于汉。
现代文：同月，派刘承训到汉告哀。
English: In the same month, Liu Chengxun was sent to Han to mourn.

古文：冬十一月，汉、周、南唐各遣使来吊。
现代文：冬十一月，汉、周、南唐分别派使者前来吊丧。
English: In the winter of November, Han, Zhou, and Southern Tang separately sent emissaries to pay their respects.

古文：乙亥，诏朝会依嗣圣皇帝故事，用汉礼。
现代文：十六日，诏令凡是朝会均依照嗣圣皇帝旧例，用汉礼。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict decreed that all court gatherings should follow the old custom of the Heir Apparent Emperor and use the Chinese rite.

古文：十二月甲辰，汉遣使献弓矢、鞍马。
现代文：十二月十七日，汉派使者进献弓箭、鞍马。
English: On December 17th, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to present bows and arrows and saddle horses.

古文：壬子，铁骊、鼻骨德皆来贡。
现代文：二十五日，铁骊、鼻骨德均来进贡。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, both the spade and the nose bone came to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月戊午朔，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书，及进犀兕甲万属。
现代文：二年春正月初一，南唐派遣使者奉上蜡丸书信，又进献犀甲、兕甲一万种。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Nantang sent an envoy to send a wax ball letter, and also donated 10,000 kinds of armor and armor.

古文：壬戌，太尉忽古质谋逆，伏诛。
现代文：初五，太尉忽古质谋反，伏诛。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the eunuch Hu Kuo plotted a rebellion and was captured.

古文：二月癸卯，女直来贡。
现代文：二月十七日，女真前来进贡。
English: On February 17th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：三月癸亥，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书。
现代文：三月初七，南唐派使者奉上蜡丸书信。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the envoys of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent a letter with wax balls.

古文：丁卯，复遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，又派使者前来进贡。
English: On the eleventh day, he also sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲申，以耶律挞烈为南院大王。
现代文：二十八日，任命耶律挞烈为南院大王。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Yeludong Rong as the king of the Southern Yuan.

古文：夏四月丙戌朔，日有食之。己亥，铁骊进鹰鹘。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。十四日，铁骊进献鹰鹘。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, there is a solar eclipse. On the 14th day, the pig is sacrificed to the eagle.

古文：五月丙辰朔，视朝。
现代文：五月初一，上朝视事。
English: On the first day of May, the Emperor inspected the situation.

古文：壬午，南唐遣使来贡。
现代文：二十七日，南唐派使者来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Southern Tang sent an envoy to collect tribute.

古文：六月壬辰，国舅政事令萧眉古得、宣政殿学士李澣等谋南奔，事觉，诏暴其罪。
现代文：六月初八，国舅政事令萧眉古得、宣政殿学士李遆等密谋南奔，事情泄露，诏令公布其罪状。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Xiao Mei Gude, the uncle of the State Council, and Li Yan, the scholar of the Xuan Zheng Palace, conspired to flee south, the matter was leaked, and the indictment was announced by the imperial edict.

古文：乙未，祭天地。
现代文：十一日，祭祀天地。
English: On the 22nd, the sacrifice to heaven and earth was concluded.

古文：壬寅，汉为周所侵，遣使求援，命中台省右相高模翰赴之。
现代文：十八日，汉为周所侵略，派使者前来求援，命中台省右相高模翰前往救援。
English: On the 18th day, Han invaded Zhou and sent an envoy to ask for help. Gao Mochan, the right minister of Taitai Province, was sent to the rescue.

古文：丁未，命乳媪之兄曷鲁世为阿速石烈夷离堇。
现代文：二十三日，任命乳母之兄曷鲁世代担任阿速石烈夷离堇。
English: On the 23rd, the elder brother of the wet nurse, Jilu, was appointed to serve as the head of the Azo stone martyrs.

古文：秋七月乙亥，政事令娄国、林牙敌烈、侍中神都、郎君海里等谋乱，就执。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，政事令娄国、林牙敌烈、侍中神都、郎君海里等密谋叛乱，被拘捕。
English: On the 21st day of the 7th month of the autumn, Shingoku, Linya, Shintou, and Rokunkai were arrested for plotting a rebellion.

古文：八月己丑，眉古得、娄国等伏诛，杖李澣而释之。
现代文：八月初六，眉古得、娄国等伏诛，李遆杖责后被释放。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, Meigude, Shandong Province and other Fuxi, Li Jiancang was released after being held accountable.

古文：九月甲寅朔，云州进嘉禾四茎，二穗。
现代文：九月初一，云州进献嘉禾四棵，均有二穗。
English: On the first day of September, Yunnan presented four Jiahe trees, all with two ears.

古文：戊午，诏以先平察割日，用白黑羊、玄酒祭天，岁以为常。
现代文：初五，诏令在先前平定察割那一天用黑白羊、玄酒祭天，每年如此。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor decreed that on the day of the previous inspection, black and white sheep and black wine should be used to sacrifice the sky, and this happened every year.

古文：壬戌，猎炭山。
现代文：初九，出猎于炭山。
English: At the age of nine, he went hunting in the mountains of coal.

古文：祭天。
现代文：祭天。
English: The day of the festival.

古文：庚辰，敌烈部来贡。
现代文：二十七日，敌烈部前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, the enemy soldiers came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月甲申朔，汉遣使进葡萄酒。
现代文：冬十月初一，汉派使者进献葡萄酒。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a Chinese envoy brought wine.

古文：甲午，司徒老古等献白雉。
现代文：十一日，司徒老古等进献白雉。
English: On the 11th day, St. Peter the Great and others presented egrets.

古文：戊申，回鹘及辖戛斯皆遣使来贡。
现代文：二十五日，回鹘及辖戛斯均派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, both Hui and Qas sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十一月癸丑朔，视朝。
现代文：十一月初一，上朝视事。
English: On the first day of November, the Emperor inspected the situation.

古文：己巳，地震。
现代文：十七日，地震。
English: On the 17th, there was an earthquake.

古文：己卯，日南至，始用旧制行拜日礼。
现代文：二十七日，日南使者到，开始用旧制行拜日礼。
English: On the 27th, the Japanese and South Korean envoys arrived and began to perform the Sunday service using the old system.

古文：朔州民进黑兔。
现代文：朔州百姓献黑兔。
English: The people of Shuozhou offer black rabbits.

古文：十二月癸未朔，高模翰及汉兵围晋州。
现代文：十二月初一，高模翰及汉兵包围晋州。
English: On the first day of December, Gao Mochan and Chinese soldiers surrounded Jinzhou.

古文：辛卯，以生日，饭僧，释系囚。
现代文：初九，因逢生日，供养僧侣，释放在押犯人。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, because it was his birthday, he made an offering to the monks and released the prisoners.

古文：甲辰，猎于近郊。
现代文：二十二日，出猎于近郊。
English: On the 22nd, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：祀天地。
现代文：祭祀天地。
English: Sacrificing heaven and earth.

古文：辛亥，明王安端薨。
现代文：二十九日，明王安端逝世。
English: On the 29th, Ming Wang Anduan passed away.

古文：三年春闰正月壬午朔，汉以高模翰却周军，遣使来谢。
现代文：三年春正月初一，汉因高模翰打退后周军队，派使者前来致谢。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, Han sent an envoy to Zhou to express his gratitude for Gao Mochan's defeat of the latter's army.

古文：二月辛亥朔，诏用嗣圣皇帝旧玺。
现代文：二月初一，诏令使用嗣圣皇帝旧玉玺。
English: On the first day of February, it was decreed that the old imperial jade scepter of the Holy Emperor should be used.

古文：甲子，太保敌烈修易州城，镇州以兵来挑战，却之。
现代文：十四日，太保敌烈修易州城，镇州派兵前来挑战，被打退。
English: On the 14th, Taibao sent troops to challenge Zhenzhou and was repulsed.

古文：三月庚辰朔，南唐遣使来贡，因附书于汉，诏达之。
现代文：三月初一，南唐派使者进贡，因其另有书信给汉，诏令送往。
English: On the first day of March, Nantang sent an envoy to pay tribute, because it had another letter to Han, sent by imperial decree.

古文：庚寅，如应州击鞠。
现代文：十一日，到应州，击鞠球。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Yingzhou to play a game of bowls.

古文：丁酉，汉遣使进球衣及马。
现代文：十八日，汉派使者进献球衣和马匹。
English: On the 18th, a Chinese envoy brought jerseys and horses.

古文：庚子，观渔于神德湖。
现代文：二十一日，于神德湖观看捕鱼。
English: On the 21st, watching the fishing in Shunde Lake.

古文：夏四月庚申，铁骊来贡。
现代文：夏四月十一日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, the spade came to pay tribute.

古文：五月壬寅，汉遣使言石晋树先帝《圣德神功碑》为周人所毁，请再刻，许之。
现代文：五月二十四日，汉派使者报告石晋所树之先帝《圣德神功碑》被周人毁掉，请求再刻，得到允许。
English: On May 24th, the Han envoy reported that the "Monument to the Sacred Virtue and Divine Merit" of the first emperor of Shijin Shoshu had been destroyed by the Zhou people, and requested that it be re-engraved, which was allowed.

古文：六月丁卯，应天皇太后崩。
现代文：六月十九日，应天皇太后驾崩。
English: On June 19, the empress dowager passed away.

古文：秋七月，不视朝。
现代文：秋七月，未临朝视事。
English: In autumn and July, he did not come to the Imperial Court to inspect the situation.

古文：八月壬子，以生日，释囚。
现代文：八月初五，因为是生日，释放囚犯。
English: On August 5th, because it was his birthday, the prisoners were released.

古文：己未，汉遣使求援。
现代文：十二日，汉派使者前来求援。
English: On the 12th, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to ask for help.

古文：三河乌古、吐蕃、吐谷浑、鼻骨德皆遣使来贡。
现代文：三河乌古、吐蕃、吐谷浑、鼻骨德等均派使者前来朝贡。
English: The three rivers, Ugu, Tu, Tuyn, and Náng Bình, all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：九月庚子，汉遣使贡药。
现代文：九月二十三日，汉派使者进贡药物。
English: On September 23rd, the Han envoys sent tribute drugs.

古文：冬十月己酉，命太师唐骨德治大行皇太后园陵。
现代文：冬十月初二，命太师唐骨德修治大行皇太后陵园。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the great-grandmother Tang Bonde repaired the tomb of the empress dowager.

古文：李胡子宛、郎君嵇干、敌烈谋反，事觉，辞逮太平王罨撒葛、林牙华割、郎君新罗等，皆执之。
现代文：李胡子耶律宛、郎君嵇干、敌烈谋反，事情败露，供词中牵涉到太平王罨撒葛、林牙华割、郎君新罗等，于是将他们全部拘捕。
English: Li Huzi's son-in-law, his son-in-law, and his son-in-law's son-in-law conspired to rebel, but the plot was uncovered. The confessions implicated Taiping Wang Quesagate, Lin Ya Hua Wai, and his son-in-law, Xin Luo, and they were all arrested.

古文：十一月辛丑，谥皇太后曰贞烈，葬祖陵。
现代文：十一月二十五日，谥皇太后为贞烈，葬于祖陵。
English: On November 25th, Empress Dowager Zou was buried in the ancestral mausoleum as a chaste martyr.

古文：汉遣使来会。
现代文：汉派使者前来会葬。
English: Envoys from the Han Dynasty came to attend the funeral.

古文：是冬，驻跸奉圣州。
现代文：这年冬天，车驾暂驻于奉圣州。
English: This winter, the driver was temporarily stationed in Feng Shengzhou.

古文：以南京水，诏免今岁租。
现代文：因南京发生水灾，下诏免去当年租税。
English: Due to the flood in Nanjing, the tax of that year was exempted.

古文：四年春正月戊寅，回鹘来贡。
现代文：四年春正月初三，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, he came back to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，华割、嵇干等伏诛，宛及罨撒葛皆释之。
现代文：十四日，华割、嵇干等伏诛，耶律宛及罨撒葛都被释免。
English: On the 14th, Hua Wai, Yan Gan and other Fuxi, as well as Yelowuan and Jiaozagat, were all released.

古文：是月，周主威殂，养子晋王柴荣嗣立。
现代文：同月，周主郭威崩殂，养子晋王柴荣继立。
English: In the same month, Zhou's master Guo Wei died, and his adopted son Jin Wang Chai Rong succeeded him.

古文：二月丙午朔，周攻汉，命政事令耶律敌禄援之。
现代文：二月初一，周攻汉，皇上命政事令耶律敌禄前往救援。
English: On the first day of February, Zhou attacked Han, and the emperor ordered Jeruchiroth to go to the rescue.

古文：丙辰，汉遣使进茶药。
现代文：十一日，汉派使者进贡药物。
English: On the 11th day, the Chinese envoys sent tribute drugs.

古文：幸南京。
现代文：车驾临幸南京。
English: Drive to Nanjing.

古文：夏五月乙亥，忻、代二州叛汉，遣南院大王挞烈助敌禄讨之。
现代文：夏五月初二，忻、代二州叛离北汉，派南院大王挞烈协助敌禄讨伐之。
English: On the 2nd day of the 5th month of the summer,, representing the two states, defected from the Northern Han Dynasty and sent the great king of the Southern Court, 烈, to assist the enemy in the crusade.

古文：丁酉，挞烈败周将符彦卿于忻口。
现代文：二十四日，挞烈在忻口打败周将符彦卿。
English: On the 24th, Yan Liang defeated Zhou General Fu Yanqing in Hekou.

古文：六月癸亥，挞烈献所获。
现代文：六月二十一日，挞烈进献俘虏及物品。
English: On the 21st of June, the fierce march to offer captives and goods took place.

古文：秋七月乙酉，汉民有为辽军误掠者，遣使来请，诏悉归之。
现代文：秋七月十三日，有汉民被辽军误认而遭到掳掠，汉派使者告请，下诏令放还。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of the autumn, some Han people were mistakenly identified by the Liao army and were abducted. The Han envoy appealed and issued a decree to return them.

古文：九月丙申，汉为周人所侵，遣使来告。
现代文：九月二十五日，汉受到周侵略，派使者前来告知。
English: On September 25, Han was invaded by Zhou and sent an envoy to inform him.

古文：冬十一月，彰国军节度使萧敌烈，太保许从赟奏忻、代二州捷。
现代文：冬十一月，彰国军节度使萧敌烈、太保许从进献在忻、代二州获取的俘虏。
English: In the winter of November, the festival of the Zhangguo Army made Xiao Jilei and Tai Baoxing take the captives captured from Jinxian in Yunnan and Erzhou.

古文：十二月辛酉朔，谒祖陵。
现代文：十二月初一，拜谒祖陵。
English: On the first day of December, pay homage to the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：庚午，汉遣使来贡。
现代文：初十，汉派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a Han Chinese envoy came to pay tribute.

古文：是冬，驻跸杏埚。
现代文：这年冬天，歇驾于杏埚。
English: This winter, I rested in the apricot grove.

古文：五年春正月辛未朔，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：五年春正月初一，鼻骨德派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the fifth year of spring, Naso Bone sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二月庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：庚申，汉遣使请上尊号，不许。
现代文：二十一日，汉派使者请求奉上尊号，不许。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Han envoy requested to be given the honorific title, but was not allowed.

古文：壬戌，如褭潭。
现代文：二十三日，到袅潭。
English: On the 23rd, to Shitan.

古文：夏四月己酉，周侵汉，汉遣使求援。
现代文：夏四月十一日，周侵汉，汉派使者前来求援。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, Zhou invaded Han, and Han sent an envoy to ask for help.

古文：癸丑，命郎君萧海璃世为北府宰相。
现代文：十五日，任命郎君萧海王黎世代担任北府宰相。
English: On the 15th, he appointed Xiao Hai's brother-in-law, King Li Zeng, as the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：秋九月庚辰，汉主有疾，遣使来告。
现代文：秋九月庚辰日，汉主患病，派使者来告知。
English: In autumn and September, on the day of Geng Chen, the lord of the Han Dynasty fell ill and sent an envoy to inform the emperor.

古文：冬十月壬申，女直来贡。
现代文：冬十月初八。女真来进贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：丁亥，谒太宗庙。
现代文：二十三日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 23rd, I visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：庚寅，南唐遣使来贡。
现代文：二十六日，南唐派使者进贡。
English: On the 26th, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十一月乙未朔，汉主崇殂，子承钧遣使来告，且求嗣立。
现代文：十一月初一，汉主刘崇崩殂，子承钧遣使奏告，并请求继承父位。
English: On the first day of November, the Han ruler Liu Chongjun died, and his son Zengjun sent a report and requested to inherit his father's throne.

古文：遣使吊祭，遂封册之。
现代文：皇上派使者前去吊唁祭祀，册封承钧为帝。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to offer condolences and make a sacrifice, and enthroned him as emperor.

古文：十二月乙丑朔，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十二月初一，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the first day of December, the visit to the Grand Ancestor's Temple ended.

古文：辛巳，汉遣使来议军事。
现代文：十七日，汉派使者前来商议军事。
English: On the 17th, a Chinese envoy came to discuss military matters.

古文：六年夏五月丁酉，谒怀陵。
现代文：六年五月初六，拜谒怀陵。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 5th year of the 6th lunar calendar, he paid his respects at the tomb.

古文：六月甲子，汉遣使来议军事。
现代文：六月初三，汉派使者前来商议军事。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to discuss military matters.

古文：秋七月，不视朝。
现代文：秋七月，未临朝视事。
English: In autumn and July, he did not come to the Imperial Court to inspect the situation.

古文：九月戊子，谒祖陵。
现代文：九月二十九日，拜谒祖陵。
English: On September 29, the visit to the ancestral mausoleum began.

古文：冬十一月壬寅，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：冬十一月十四日，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the 14th day of the 11th month of the winter, people came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月己未朔，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十二月初一，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the first day of December, the visit to the Grand Ancestor's Temple ended.

古文：七年春正月庚子，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：七年春正月十二日，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Nanzhongde came to pay tribute.

古文：二月辛酉，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书。
现代文：二月初三，南唐派使者奉上蜡丸书信。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the envoys of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent a letter with wax balls.

古文：辛未，驻跸潢河。
现代文：十三日，出巡途中暂住于潢河。
English: On the 13th, while on tour, he temporarily stayed in Luohe.

古文：夏四月戊午朔，还上京。
现代文：夏四月初一，回上京。
English: In the summer, I went back to Tokyo on the first day of April.

古文：初，女巫肖古上延年药方，当用男子胆和之。
现代文：先前，女巫肖古献上延年药方，声明必须与男子苦胆一起服用才有效。
English: Previously, the witch Xiaogu presented a prescription for longevity, stating that it must be taken with male bitterness to be effective.

古文：不数年，杀人甚多，至是，觉其妄，辛巳，射杀之。
现代文：不过数年，因此而杀人很多。现在皇上察觉到药方之虚妄。二十四日，射杀肖古。
English: However, for several years, many people were killed because of this. Now the emperor realized that the prescription was false. On the 24th, he shot Shogu.

古文：五月辛卯，汉遣使来贡。
现代文：五月初五，汉派使者前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, a Chinese envoy came to pay tribute.

古文：六月丙辰朔，周遣使来聘。
现代文：六月初一，周遣使来访。
English: On the first day of June, the Zhou Envoy came to visit.

古文：南唐遣使来贡。
现代文：南唐派使者前来进贡。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：八月己未，周遣使来聘。
现代文：八月初五，周派使者来访。
English: On the fifth day of August, Zhou sent an envoy to pay a visit.

古文：是秋，不听政。
现代文：这年秋天，未理朝政。
English: In the autumn of that year, the imperial court was overthrown.

古文：冬十月庚申，猎于七鹰山。
现代文：冬十月初九，出猎于七鹰山。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, I went hunting in Qiyue Mountain.

古文：十二月丁巳，诏大臣曰： 有罪者，法当刑。
现代文：十二月初五，诏告大臣说： 有罪者，当依法处罚。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, the emperor told the minister: "Those who are guilty should be punished according to the law."

古文：朕或肆怒，滥及无辜，卿等切谏，无或面从。 
现代文：朕若盛怒之下，罪及无辜之人，尔等应直言上谏，不要表面上顺从。 
English: If, in the heat of anger, the guilty and the innocent are at loggerheads, you should speak up, not meekly submit.

古文：辛巳，还上京。
现代文：二十九日，返回上京。
English: On the 29th, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：八年春二月乙丑，驻跸潢河。
现代文：八年二月十三日，歇驾于潢河。
English: On February 13th, 2008, it stopped at the Li River.

古文：夏四月甲寅，南京留守萧思温攻下沿边州县，遣人劳之。
现代文：夏四月初三，南京留守萧思温攻下沿边诸州县，皇上派使者犒劳之。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Xiao Siwen, who stayed behind in Nanjing, conquered Zhouzhou County along the border, and the emperor sent an envoy to reward him.

古文：五月，周陷束城县。
现代文：五月，周攻陷束城县。
English: In May, Zhou invaded and occupied Shucheng County.

古文：六月辛未，萧思温请益兵，乞驾幸燕。
现代文：六月二十一日，萧思温奏请增加兵力，并乞请圣上驾幸燕地。
English: On June 21st, Xiao Siwen asked for more troops and implored the saint to come to Yan'an.

古文：秋七月，猎于拽剌山。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于拽剌山。
English: In autumn and July, he went hunting in the mountains of Zhaozhou.

古文：迄于九月，射鹿诸山，不视朝。
现代文：直到九月，均在诸山射鹿，未理朝事。
English: Until September, they all shot deer in the mountains and did not care about morning matters.

古文：冬十一月辛酉，汉遣使来告周复来侵。
现代文：冬十一月十五日，汉派使者奏告周再次入侵。
English: In the winter, on November 15th, the Han envoy sent a report to Zhou, warning of another invasion.

古文：乙丑，使再至。
现代文：十九日，汉使再次前来。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese envoy came again.

古文：十二月庚辰，又至。
现代文：十二月初四，汉使又来。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the Han envoys came again.

古文：九年春正月戊辰，驻跸潢河。
现代文：九年春正月二十二日，歇驾于潢河。
English: On the 22nd day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the Spring, it stopped at the Li River.

古文：夏四月丙戌，周来侵。
现代文：夏四月十一日，周入侵。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, Zhou invaded.

古文：戊戌，以南京留守萧思温为兵马都总管，击之。
现代文：二十三日，任命南京留守萧思温为兵马都总管，迎击周军。
English: On the 23rd, Xiao Siwen, who stayed in Nanjing, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Terracotta Army to meet Zhou's army.

古文：是月，周拔益津、瓦桥、淤口三关。
现代文：同月，周攻下益津、瓦桥、淤口三关。
English: In the same month, Zhou captured Yijin, Tile Bridge, and Zuikou Three Passes.

古文：五月乙巳朔，陷瀛、莫二州。
现代文：五月初一，周攻下瀛、莫二州。
English: On the first day of May, Zhou conquered the provinces of Jiaozuo and Moji.

古文：癸亥，如南京。
现代文：十九日，皇上到南京。
English: On the 19th, the emperor went to Nanjing.

古文：辛未，周兵退。
现代文：二十五日，周撤兵。
English: On the 25th, Zhou withdrew his troops.

古文：六月乙亥朔，视朝。
现代文：六月初一，临朝视事。
English: On the first day of June, the imperial court inspected the situation.

古文：戊寅，复容城县。
现代文：初四，免除容城县赋役。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he was exempted from military service in Yeongseong County.

古文：庚申，西幸，如怀州。
现代文：庚申日，西幸，至怀州。
English: Goshun day, Xi Xing, to Huai Zhou.

古文：是月，周主荣殂，子宗训立。
现代文：同月，周主柴荣崩殂，子宗训继立。
English: In the same month, Zhou's master Chai Rong passed away, and his son Zongxun succeeded him.

古文：秋七月，发南京军戍范阳。
现代文：秋七月，征发南京军兵戍守范阳。
English: In autumn and July, Nanjing troops were conscripted to defend Fanyang.

古文：冬十二月戊寅，还上京。
现代文：冬十二月初七，回上京。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of winter, I went back to Tokyo.

古文：庚辰，王子敌烈、前宣徽使海思及萧达干等谋反，事觉，鞫之。
现代文：初九，王子敌烈、前宣徽使海思及萧达干等谋反，事情败露，被拘捕讯问。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the princes of the enemy and the former Xuanhui made Haisi and Xiao Dagan conspire to rebel, the matter was revealed, and they were arrested for questioning.

古文：辛巳，祀天地、祖考，告逆党事败。
现代文：初十，祭祀天地、祖先，告知逆党谋反失败。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the heavens and the earth and the ancestors are sacrificed, and the rebellious party is informed of the failure of the rebellion.

古文：丙申，召群臣议时政。
现代文：二十五日，召集群臣商议时政。
English: On the 25th, he convened a group of ministers to discuss current affairs.

古文：十年春正月，周殿前都点检赵匡胤废周自立，建国号宋。
现代文：十年春正月，周殿前都点检赵匡胤废周自立，建国号为宋。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, Zhao Kuangyin, the founder of Zhou Dynasty, established himself independently in front of the Zhou Dynasty Hall. The founding name of the country was Song.

古文：夏五月乙巳，谒怀陵。
现代文：夏五月初七，拜谒怀陵。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the summer, pay your respects at the Imperial Tomb.

古文：壬子，汉以潞州归附来告。
现代文：十四日，汉因潞州归附其国，派使者前来报告。
English: On the 14th, Han sent an envoy to report the annexation of Bozhou to his country.

古文：丙寅，至自怀陵。
现代文：二十八日，自怀陵回京。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Beijing from the Mausoleum.

古文：六月庚申，汉以宋兵围石州来告，遣大同军节度使阿剌率四部往援，诏萧思温以三部兵助之。
现代文：六月庚申日，汉因宋兵围攻石州，派使者前来报告，派大同军节度使阿剌率领四部兵前往增援，诏令萧思温率三部兵前往助战。
English: On June 6th, the Han Dynasty besieged Shizhou because of the Song soldiers, and sent an envoy to report the situation. They sent the Datong Army Council to send four soldiers led by Ah Qin to reinforce, and ordered Xiao Siwen to lead three soldiers to assist.

古文：秋七月己亥朔，宋兵陷石州，潞州复叛，汉使来告。
现代文：秋七月初一，宋攻陷石州，潞州再次叛汉，汉派使者前来告知。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Song conquered Shizhou, and Zhangzhou rebelled against Han again. Han sent an envoy to inform them.

古文：辛酉，政事令耶律寿远、太保楚阿不等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十三日，政事令耶律寿远、太保楚阿不等谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the 23rd, the regent, Ye Lu Shou Yuan, and the grand tutor, Chu Ah, conspired to rebel and were beaten to death.

古文：以酒脯祠天地于黑山。八月，如秋山，幸怀州。
现代文：在黑山用酒脯祭祀天地。八月，到秋山，临幸怀州。
English: In Montenegro, they use sake lees to worship heaven and earth. In August, they go to Akiyama, and finally to Huai Zhou.

古文：庚午，以镇茵石狻猊击杀近侍古哥。
现代文：初三，用镇茵石狻猊打死近侍古哥。
English: On the third day of his junior year, he killed his close attendant, Kogo, with a stone hammer.

古文：冬十月丙子，李胡子喜隐谋反，辞连李胡，下狱死。
现代文：冬十月初十，李胡子耶律喜隐谋反，供辞牵涉到李胡，李胡被捕死于狱中。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, Li Hu's son, Ye Lu Xi, conspired to rebel, and his confession implicated Li Hu. Li Hu was arrested and died in prison.

古文：十一月，海思狱中上书，陈便宜。
现代文：十一月，海思于狱中上书，陈述利国合宜之事。
English: In November, Haisi wrote a letter from prison, stating that he would do what was right for the country.

古文：十一年春二月丙寅，释喜隐。
现代文：十一年二月初二，释放耶律喜隐。
English: On the second day of the second month of February of the eleventh year, Yerut Xiyin was released.

古文：辛亥，司徒乌里只子迭剌哥诬告其父谋反，复诈乘传及杀行人，以其父请，杖而释之。
现代文：辛亥日，司徒乌里只之子迭剌哥诬告其父谋反，又诈言奉命出使以及杀死路人，因其父为之求情，杖责后被释放。
English: On the day of the Xinhai Incident, Diego, the only son of St. Uri, falsely accused his father of plotting a rebellion, and also falsely said that he had been ordered to send an envoy and kill passers-by. Because his father was pleading for him, he was released after being scolded.

古文：三月丙辰，萧思温奏老人星见，乞行赦宥。
现代文：三月二十二日，萧思温奏称老人星出现，请求赦免犯人。
English: On March 22nd, Xiao Siwen said that the elderly star appeared and asked for the pardon of the prisoner.

古文：闰月甲子朔，如潢河。
现代文：闰三月初一，车驾至潢河。
English: On the first day of March, I drove to the Minhe River.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，日有食之。是月，射鹿，不视朝。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。同月，射鹿，没有临朝视政。
English: On the first day of summer in April, there was a solar eclipse. In the same month, there was a deer shooting.

古文：五月乙亥，司天王白、李正等进历。
现代文：五月十三日，司天王白、李正等进献历法。
English: On May 13th, Wang Bai and Li Zheng, the chief priests, performed the calendar ceremony.

古文：六月甲午，赦。
现代文：六月初二，赦免犯人。
English: On the second day of June, prisoners were pardoned.

古文：冬十一月，岁星犯月。
现代文：冬十一月，岁星犯月。
English: November in winter, the month of the New Year's Eve.

古文：十二年春正月甲戌，夜观灯。
现代文：十二年春正月十五日，夜里观灯。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of spring in the twelfth year, the lanterns were observed at night.

古文：二月己丑朔，以御史大夫萧护思为北院枢密使，赐对衣、鞍马。
现代文：三月初一，任命御史大夫萧护思为北院枢密使，赐给对衣、鞍马。
English: On the first day of March, the Imperial Historian Dr. Xiao Shuxi was appointed as the Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan, and was given a pair of clothes and a pommel horse.

古文：夏五月庚午，以旱，命左右以水相沃，顷之，果雨。
现代文：夏五月十四日，因天旱，命令左右用水浇地，不一会儿，果然下了雨。
English: On the 14th day of the 5th month of the summer, due to the drought, the order was given to water the land left and right, and soon it rained.

古文：六月甲午，祠木叶山及潢河。
现代文：六月初八，祭祀木叶山及潢河。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the worship of Mt. Muji and the Lijiang River ended.

古文：秋，如黑山、赤山射鹿。
现代文：秋天，到黑山、赤山射鹿。
English: In autumn, go to the Black Mountain and the Red Mountain to shoot deer.

古文：十三年春正月，自丁巳昼夜酣饮者九日。
现代文：十三年春正月，从初四起，昼夜畅饮达九天。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of Spring, from the 4th day of the 1st month of the year, they drank freely day and night for nine days.

古文：丙寅，宋欲城益津关，命南京留守高勋、统军使崔廷勋以兵扰之。
现代文：十三日，宋国想在益津关筑城，皇上命令南京留守高勋、统军使崔廷勋率军骚扰宋军。
English: On the 13th, Song wanted to build a city in Yijin Pass, and the emperor ordered Gao Xun, the commander of the unified army, and Cui Tingxun, the commander of the unified army, to stay in Nanjing to harass the Song army.

古文：癸酉，杀兽人海里。
现代文：二十日，杀兽人海里。
English: On the 20th, the Orc Slayer floated out to sea.

古文：二月庚寅，汉遣使来告，欲巡边徼，乞张声援。
现代文：二月初七，汉派使者前来告知汉主想要巡行边关，请辽助其声威。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, an envoy from the Han Dynasty came to inform the Han Emperor that he wanted to parade along the border.

古文：壬辰，如潢河。
现代文：初九，车驾至潢河。
English: On the early morning of the 9th, I drove to the Li River.

古文：癸巳，观群臣射，赐物有差。
现代文：初十，观看群臣射箭，赏赐各若干。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he watched his vassals shoot arrows, and gave each of them a reward.

古文：乙巳，老人星见。
现代文：二十二日，老人星出现。
English: On the 22nd, the elderly star appeared.

古文：三月癸丑朔，杀鹿人弥里吉，枭其首以示掌鹿者。
现代文：三月初一，杀鹿人弥里吉，枭首以警示掌管鹿苑者。
English: On the first day of March, deer-killer Mirikichi wields a dagger as a warning to those in charge of the deer park.

古文：夏四月壬寅，猎于潢河。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，在潢河狩猎。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of summer, a goose was hunting in the Li River.

古文：五月壬戌，视斡朗改国所进花鹿生麛。
现代文：五月十一日，观看斡朗改国所进献之花鹿生产幼鹿。
English: On May 11th, watch the young deer being born from the white deer donated by the Chinese government.

古文：六月癸未，近侍伤獐，杖杀之。
现代文：六月初三，近侍伤獐，被杖杀。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, a close attendant was beaten and killed with a cane.

古文：甲申，杀獐人霞马。
现代文：初四，杀獐人霞马。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Xia Ma killed a man.

古文：壬辰，诏诸路录囚。
现代文：十二日，诏令诸路查看犯人口供。
English: On the 12th, the magistrate ordered all roads to be searched for the criminal's confession.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔，汉以宋侵来告。
现代文：秋七月初一，汉来奏告宋侵其国。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Han Lai sent a message to Song, accusing him of invading his country.

古文：乙丑，荐时羞于庙。
现代文：十五日，向太庙敬献时鲜珍馐。
English: On the 15th, the temple was presented with a fresh and rare eel.

古文：八月甲申，以生日，纵五坊鹰鹘。
现代文：八月初五，因生日，放飞五坊鹰鹘。
English: On the 5th of August, due to his birthday, the 5th eagle cormorant was released.

古文：戊戌，幸近山，呼鹿射之，旬有七日而后返。
现代文：十九日，临幸附近山岭，选鹿射之，经十七日才回宫。
English: On the 19th, he went to the mountains near Linxing to shoot deer, and only returned to the palace on the 17th.

古文：九月庚戌朔，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：九月初一，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the first day of September, the heavens and earth are sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：饮于野次，终夕乃罢。
现代文：在野外宴饮，终夜方罢。
English: Feasting in the open air, partying all night.

古文：辛亥，以酒脯祭天地，复终夜酣饮。
现代文：初二，用酒脯祭祀天地，又终夜纵酒酣饮。
English: On the second day of the first month, they used wine to sacrifice heaven and earth, and drank wine all night long.

古文：冬十月丙申，汉以宋侵来告。
现代文：冬十月十八日，汉因宋侵略其国，派使者前来奏告。
English: In winter, on October 18th, Han sent an envoy to report the Song invasion of their country.

古文：十一月庚午，猎，饮于虞人之家，凡四日。
现代文：十一月二十二日，出猎，在虞人家宴饮，总共四天。
English: On November 22nd, they went hunting and feasted at the rich man's house for a total of four days.

古文：十一月戊子，射野鹿，赐虞人物有差。
现代文：十二月初十，射野鹿，赐给虞人财物各若干。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the shooting of wild deer began, and the rich men were each given a certain amount of property.

古文：庚寅，杀彘人曷主。
现代文：十二日，杀彘人曷主。
English: On the 12th, the killing began.

