古文：桓公自莒反于齐，使鲍叔为宰，辞曰： 臣，君之庸臣也。
现代文：齐桓公从莒国返回齐国，任命鲍叔为国相。鲍叔推辞说： 我是你的一个庸臣。
English: Prince Qi Kuan returned to Qi from Shandong and appointed Uncle Bao as the Minister of State. Uncle Bao said, "I am one of your vassals."

古文：君加惠于臣，使不冻馁，则是君之赐也。
现代文：你照顾我，使我不挨冻受饿，就已经是恩赐了。
English: The fact that you take care of me and keep me from freezing and starving is already a blessing.

古文：若必治国家者，则非臣之所能也。
现代文：如果要治理国家的话，那就不是我所擅长的。
English: If you want to run a country, that's not what I'm good at.

古文：若必治国家者，则其管夷吾乎。
现代文：若论治国之才，大概只有管仲了。
English: When it comes to governing the country, perhaps the only way out is mediation.

古文：臣之所不若夷吾者五：宽惠柔民，弗若也；治国家不失其柄，弗若也；忠信可结于百姓，弗若也；制礼义可法于四方，弗若也；执枹鼓立于军门，使百姓皆加勇焉，弗若也。 
现代文：我有五个方面不如管仲：以宽厚慈惠来安抚民众，我不及他；治理国家不忘根本，我不及他；为人忠实诚信，能得到百姓的信任，我不及他；制定的礼仪足以使天下效法，我不及他；立在军门之前击鼓指挥，使百姓加倍勇猛，我不及他。 
English: There are five aspects in which I am inferior to Guanzhong: I am not as good as him at appeasing the people with generosity and benevolence; I am not as good as him at governing the country without forgetting the fundamentals; I am not as good as him at being a faithful and honest person and gaining the trust of the people; I am not as good as him at establishing etiquette that is good enough for the whole world to follow; I am not as good as him at standing in front of the military gate and conducting drumming to make the people twice as brave.

古文：桓公曰： 夫管夷吾射寡人中钩，是以滨于死。 
现代文：桓公说： 管仲曾用箭射中了我的腰钩，使我险些丧命。 
English: Kan said, "Guan Zhong once shot my waist hook with an arrow, nearly killing me.

古文：鲍叔对曰： 夫为其君动也。
现代文：鲍叔解释说： 那是为他的主子出力啊。
English: Uncle Bao explained, "It is to work hard for his master."

古文：君若宥而反之，失犹是也。 
现代文：你若赦免他，让他回来，他也会那样为你出力的。 
English: If you pardon him and let him come back, he will do the same for you.

古文：桓公曰： 若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 怎样使他回来呢？ 
English: King Kan asked, "How can I bring him back?"

古文：鲍子对曰： 请诸鲁。 
现代文：鲍叔说： 得向鲁国提出请求。 
English: Uncle Bao said, "We must make a request to the State of Lu.

古文：桓公曰： 施伯，鲁君之谋臣也，夫知吾将用之，必不予我矣。
现代文：桓公说： 施伯是鲁君的谋臣，若知道我将起用管仲，一定不会放还给我的。
English: Prince Kan said, "Shibo is Lu Jun's adviser. If he knew that I was going to use Guanzhong, he would not have given it back to me."

古文：若之何？ 
现代文：那可怎么办？ 
English: What's that going to do?

古文：鲍子对曰： 使人请诸鲁，曰： 寡君有不令之臣在君之国，欲以戮之于群臣，故请之。 则予我矣。 
现代文：鲍叔回答说： 派人去向鲁国要求说： 我们国君有个不遵守命令的臣子在贵国，想在群臣面前处死他，所以请交还给我国。 
English: Uncle Bao replied, "Send someone to the State of Lu to demand, 'Our sovereign has a vassal in your country who does not follow orders and wants to execute him in front of his vassals, so please return him to our country.

古文：桓公使请诸鲁，如鲍叔之言。
现代文：这样鲁国就会把他放还我国了。 于是桓公照鲍叔说的那样，派人向鲁国提出要求。
English: In this way, the State of Lu would release him back to our country. Therefore, as Uncle Bao said, Emperor Kuan sent someone to the State of Lu to make a request.

古文：庄公以问施伯，施伯对曰： 此非欲戮之也，欲用其政也。
现代文：鲁庄公询问施伯如何处置这件事。施伯回答说： 这不是想处死他，而是要起用他来执政。
English: Luzhong asked Shibo how to deal with this matter. Shibo replied: This is not to execute him, but to use him to govern.

古文：夫管子，天下之才也。所在之国，则必得志于天下。
现代文：管仲是天下的奇才，他所效劳的国家，一定会称霸于诸侯。
English: Guanzhong is the world's prodigy. The country he serves will surely dominate the provinces.

古文：令彼在齐，则必长为鲁国忧矣。 
现代文：让他返齐，必将会长久地成为鲁国的祸患。 
English: If he is allowed to return, he will surely become the scourge of Russia for a long time to come.

古文：庄公曰： 若何？ 
现代文：庄公说： 那怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhuang Gong said: Then what should we do?

古文：施伯对曰： 杀而以其尸授之。 
现代文：施伯答道： 杀了他把尸体交还给齐国。 
English: Shi Bo replied: I killed him and handed the body back to Qi Guo.

古文：庄公将杀管仲，齐使者请曰： 寡君欲亲以为戮，若不生得以戮于群臣，犹未得请也。
现代文：庄公准备处死管仲，齐国使者要求说： 我们国君想亲自处决他，如果不把他活着带回去在群臣面前施刑示众，还是没能达到要求。请让他活着回去。 
English: When Zhuang Gong was about to execute Guanzhong, the envoy of the State of Qi demanded: Our sovereign wants to execute him personally. If he is not brought back alive to be tortured in front of the courtiers, it still does not meet the requirements. Please let him return alive.

古文：请生之。 于是庄公使束缚以予齐使。
现代文：于是庄公派人把管仲捆缚起来交给齐国使者。
English: So Zhuang Gong sent someone to tie up Guanzhong and hand him over to the envoy of Qi.

古文：齐使受之而退。
现代文：齐使接受之后就回国了。
English: After the envoys accepted, he returned to China.

古文：比至，三衅，三浴之。桓公亲逆之于郊，而与之坐而问焉，曰： 昔吾先君襄公筑台以为高位，田、狩、罼、弋，不听国政，卑圣侮士，而唯女是崇。
现代文：管仲快到达齐国时，三次薰香沐浴，桓公亲自到郊外迎接，然后请他坐下并问道： 过去，我们的先君襄公修筑高台以示尊荣，成天打猎游乐，不处理国家政事，藐视圣贤，侮辱文士，只看重女色。
English: When Guan Zhongxin arrived in Qi Province, he was bathed in incense three times. Huan Gong personally went to the suburbs to meet him, then asked him to sit down and asked: In the past, our forefather Xiang Gong built a high platform to show his honor, hunted and played all day, did not deal with national politics, despised saints and sages, insulted scribes, and only valued women.

古文：优笑在前，贤材在后，是以国家不日引，不月长，恐宗庙之不扫除，社稷之不血食，敢问为此若何？ 
现代文：宫中有九妃六嫔、姬妾数百，吃的一定要是精米鱼肉，穿的一定要是彩衣绣服。将士们挨冻受饿，军车要等游玩的车子破损后才充用，士兵要靠侍妾吃剩的粮食来养活。亲近那些唱歌逗乐的倡优，却把贤德的人才抛在一边。国家因此而不能日有所进、月有所长。这样下去恐怕宗庙将无人清扫，社稷也难以受祭。请问面对这些景况应该怎么处理？ 
English: There are nine princesses and six concubines and hundreds of concubines in the palace. If they eat, it must be polished rice and fish, and if they wear, it must be colorful embroidered clothes. The generals are freezing and starving, the military vehicles have to wait until the cars are damaged before they can be fully used, and the soldiers have to rely on the leftover grain from the concubines to feed themselves. They are close to those who sing and make fun, but they leave the virtuous talents aside. The country cannot advance day by day and month by month. If this continues, I am afraid that the family temple will not be cleaned, and the shrine will be difficult to

古文：管子对曰： 昔吾先王昭王、穆王，世法文、武远绩以成名。
现代文：管仲回答说： 过去的先王周昭王、周穆王以效法文王、武王的政绩而成就美名。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The previous kings, King Zhou Zhao and King Zhou Mu, achieved a good reputation by emulating the political achievements of King Fabin and King Wu.

古文：合群叟，比校民之有道者，设象以为民纪，式权以相应，比缀以度，竱本肇末，劝之以赏赐，纠之以刑罚，班序颠毛，以为民纪统。 桓公曰： 为之若何？ 
现代文：召集众长老来考察选择百姓中有德行的人，制定法令作为民众行为的准则，同时树立相应的榜样，以此把百姓维系起来。从根本上来解决那些细微末节的问题，用赏赐善行来引导民众，用惩罚罪恶来纠正偏差，使长幼有序，为百姓立下规矩。 桓公说： 那怎样去做呢？ 
English: The elders should be convened to investigate and select the virtuous people among the people, formulate laws and regulations as the standards for the behavior of the people, and at the same time set up corresponding models to maintain the people. Fundamentally solve those subtle problems, guide the people by rewarding good deeds, correct deviations by punishing sins, keep the elders and children in order, and establish rules for the people. Huan Gong said: So how to do it?

古文：管子对曰： 昔者，圣王之治天下也，参其国而伍其鄙，定民之居，成民之事，陵为之终，而慎用其六柄焉。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 过去，圣王治理天下时，曾把都城分为三区、郊野分为五区，以确定百姓的住地，让百姓各就其业，设置葬地作为他们的归宿，并谨慎地运用六种权力。 
English: Guanzhong replied: In the past, when the holy king ruled the world, he divided the capital city into three districts and the countryside into five districts to determine the people's residence, let the people each do their own business, set up a burial ground as their home, and carefully use six powers.

古文：桓公曰： 成民之事若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 怎样使百姓各就其业呢？ 
English: Huan Gong asked: How can the people be made to do their jobs?

古文：管子对曰： 四民者，勿使杂处，杂处则其言哤，其事易。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 士、农、工、商，不要让他们混杂居住。混杂居住会使他们相互干扰，工作不安心。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Don't let them live together, whether they are lawyers, farmers, workers, or merchants. Living together will cause them to interfere with each other and make them feel uneasy at work."

古文：公曰： 处士、农、工、商若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 怎样来安排士、农、工、商的住地呢？ 
English: Huan Gong asked: How should we arrange the living space of scholars, farmers, workers, and merchants?

古文：管子对曰： 昔圣王之处士也，使就闲燕；处工，就官府；处商，就市井；处农，就田野。
现代文：管仲回答说： 过去圣王把士人的住处安排在清静的地方；把工匠的住处安排在官府；把商人的住处安排在市场；把农民的住处安排在田野。
English: Guanzhong replied: In the past, the holy king arranged the residence of scholars in a quiet place; arranged the residence of craftsmen in the government office; arranged the residence of merchants in the market; arranged the residence of farmers in the field.

古文： 令夫士，群萃而州处，闲燕则父与父言义，子与子言孝，其事君者言敬，其幼者言弟。
现代文： 让那些士人聚集在一起居住，空闲时父辈之间谈论礼义，子侄辈之间谈论孝道，侍奉国君的人谈论克尽职守，年幼的则谈论兄弟和睦。
English: Let the scholars gather together and live together, and in their spare time, let the parents talk about etiquette, the children talk about filial piety, those who serve the sovereign talk about duty, and the young talk about brotherly harmony.

古文：少而习焉，其心安焉，不见异物而迁焉。
现代文：从小就受到熏陶，他们的思想就安定了，不再见异思迁。
English: He has been accustomed to this since he was a boy, his mind is stable, and he will not change his mind.

古文：是故其父兄之教不肃而成，其子弟之学不劳而能。
现代文：所以父兄的教诲不用督促就能实行，子弟的学习无须费力就能掌握。
English: Therefore, the teaching of his father and brother can be taught well without strictness; the ability of his son can be learned without hard work.

古文：夫是，故士之子恒为士。
现代文：这样，士人的后代就一直是士人。
English: In this way, the descendants of scholars have always been scholars.

古文： 令夫工，群萃而州处，审其四时，辨其功苦，权节其用，论比协材。
现代文： 让那些工匠聚集在一起居住，了解不同季节的产品需要，辨别质量的优劣，衡量器材的用处，选用合适的材料。
English: Let those craftsmen gather together to live, understand the product needs of different seasons, distinguish the quality of pros and cons, measure the usefulness of equipment, and select suitable materials.

古文：旦暮从事，施于四方，以饬其子弟，相语以事，相示以巧，相陈以功。
现代文：从早到晚做这些事，使产品适用于四方，用这些来教诲子弟，互相谈论工作，互相交流技艺，互相展示成果。
English: To do these things from morning to night, to make the products applicable to the four directions, to use these to teach the children, to talk about the work with each other, to exchange skills with each other, and to show the results to each other.

古文：少而习蔫，其心安焉，不见异物而迁焉。
现代文：从小就受到熏陶，他们的思想就安定了，不再见异思迁。
English: Indoctrinated from an early age, their minds have been stabilized and they no longer see things differently.

古文：是故其父兄之权不肃而成，其子弟之学不劳而能。
现代文：所以父兄的教诲不用督促就能实行，子弟的学习无须费力就能掌握。
English: Therefore, the teachings of the father and brother can be implemented without supervision, and the learning of the child can be mastered without effort.

古文：夫是，故工之子恒为工。
现代文：这样，工匠的后代就一直是工匠。
English: In this way, the descendants of craftsmen have always been craftsmen.

古文： 令夫商，群萃而州处，察其四时，而监其乡之资，以知其市之贾，负、任、担、荷，服牛、轺马，以周四方，以其所有，易其所无，市贱鬻贵。
现代文： 让那些商人聚集在一起居住，了解不同季节的营销需要，熟悉本地的货源，掌握市场的行情。或背负肩挑，或车载畜驾，把货物运往四方，用已有的东西来换取缺少的物品，贱价买进高价卖出。
English: Let those merchants gather together to live, understand the marketing needs of different seasons, be familiar with the local sources of goods, and grasp the market conditions. Or carry a shoulder barge, or a vehicle-mounted animal drive, transport the goods to the four directions, use the existing things to exchange for the missing items, buy at a low price and sell at a high price.

古文：旦暮从事于此，以饬其子弟，相语以利，相示以赖，相陈以知贾。
现代文：从早到晚做这些事，用这些来教诲后代，互相谈论生财之道，互相交流赚钱经验，互相展示经营手段。
English: Do these things from morning to night, use these to teach future generations, talk to each other about ways to make money, exchange money-making experiences, and demonstrate business methods to each other.

古文：少而习焉，其心安焉，不见异物而迁焉。
现代文：从小就受到熏陶，他们的思想就安定了，不再见异思迁。
English: He has been accustomed to this since he was a boy, his mind is stable, and he will not change his mind.

古文：是故其父兄之教不肃而成，其子弟之学不劳而能。
现代文：所以父兄的教诲不用督促就能实行，子弟的学习无须费力就能掌握。
English: Therefore, the teaching of his father and brother can be taught well without strictness; the ability of his son can be learned without hard work.

古文：夫是，故商之子恒为商。
现代文：这样，商人的后代就一直是商人。
English: In this way, the descendants of merchants have always been merchants.

古文： 令夫农，群萃而州处，察其四时，权节其用，耒、耜、耞、芟。及寒，击草除田，以待时耕；及耕，深耕而疾耰之，以待时雨；时雨既至，挟其枪、刈、耨、镈，以旦暮从事于田野。
现代文： 让那些农民聚集在一起居住，了解不同季节的农事，根据不同的农事准备耒、耜、耞、镰等农具，到了冬天，要除去枯草，整修田地，以等待春耕；到了耕种季节，要深翻土壤，抓紧耙土复种，以等待春雨；春雨过后，就带着锄头等农具从早到晚在田里劳作。
English: Let those farmers gather together to live together, understand the farming in different seasons, prepare ploughs, harrows, hoes, ploughs and other agricultural tools according to different farming. In winter, they should remove dead grass and renovate the fields to wait for spring ploughing. In the planting season, they should dig deep and grasp the ploughed soil and double planting to wait for spring rain. After the spring rain, they will work in the fields from morning to night with farm tools such as hoes.

古文：脱衣就功，首戴茅蒲，身衣祓襫，霑体涂足，暴其发肤，尽其四支之敏，以从事于田野。
现代文：劳动时脱去上衣，头戴草帽，身穿蓑衣，全身沾满泥土，太阳曝晒皮肤，使出全部的力气在田里干活。
English: When working, they take off their tops, put on straw hats, wear loincloths, their whole bodies are covered with dirt, the sun exposes their skin, and they work in the fields with all their strength.

古文：少而习焉，其心安焉，不见异物而迁焉。
现代文：从小就受到熏陶，他们的思想就安定了，不再见异思迁。
English: He has been accustomed to this since he was a boy, his mind is stable, and he will not change his mind.

古文：是故其父兄之教不肃而成，其子弟之学不劳而能。
现代文：所以父兄的教诲不用督促就能实行，子弟的学习无须费力就能掌握。
English: Therefore, the teaching of his father and brother can be taught well without strictness; the ability of his son can be learned without hard work.

古文：夫是，故农之子恒为农。
现代文：这样，农民的后代就一直是农民。
English: In this way, the descendants of farmers have always been farmers.

古文：野处而不昵，其秀民之能为土者，必足赖也。
现代文：他们居住在郊野而不沾染不良习气，其中能入仕做官的优秀者，一定足以信赖。
English: They live in the countryside and are not tainted with bad habits. Those who are good enough to become officials must be trustworthy.

古文：有司见而不以告，其罪五。
现代文：有关官员见到这样的人才不予推荐，要受到五刑的处罚。
English: If the relevant officials see such a person, they will not recommend him, and he will be punished with a five-year sentence.

古文：有司已于事而竣。 
现代文：他们必须推荐贤才，才可谓之称职。 
English: After the presenter finished his report, he left.

古文：桓公曰： 定民之居若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 怎样来确定百姓的住地呢？ 
English: Kankong asked: How should the residences of the common people be delineated?

古文：管子对曰： 制国以为二十一乡。 
现代文：管仲答道： 把全国分为二十一个乡。 
English: Guanzhong replied: Divide the country into 21 townships.

古文：桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：桓公说： 好啊。 
English: Kan said, "That's great!

古文：管子于是制国以为二十一乡：工商之乡六；士农之乡十五。公帅五乡焉，国子帅五乡焉，高子帅五乡焉。
现代文：管仲于是把全国划分为二十一个乡：工匠和商人的乡有六个，士人和农民的乡有十五个，由国君掌管五个乡，国子掌管五个乡，高子掌管五个乡。
English: Guanzhong then divided the country into twenty-one townships: six townships for craftsmen and merchants, fifteen townships for scholars and farmers, five townships controlled by the sovereign, five townships controlled by the provincial governors, and five townships controlled by the provincial governors.

古文：参国起案，以为三官，臣立三宰，工立三族，市立三乡，泽立三虞，山立三衡。
现代文：分国事为三，各种官职也各设置三名：设三卿主管群臣，设三族主管工匠，设三乡主管商人，设三虞主管川泽，设三衡主管山林。
English: There were three divisions of state affairs, and three people were appointed to each of the various official positions: three nobles were appointed to be in charge of vassals, three ethnic groups were appointed to be in charge of craftsmen, three townships were appointed to be in charge of merchants, three states were appointed to be in charge of Kawazawa, and three states were appointed to be in charge of forests.

古文：桓公曰： 吾欲从事于诸侯，其可乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我想在诸侯中做一番事业，能行吗？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: I intend to establish hegemony among the principalities, is the time ripe?

古文：管子对曰： 未可，国未安。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 不行，国家还不安定。 
English: Guanzhong replied: No, the country is still unstable.

古文：桓公曰： 安国若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 怎样来安定国家呢？ 
English: Huan Gong asked: How to stabilize the country?

古文：管子对曰： 修旧法，择其善者而业用之；遂滋民，与无财，而敬百姓，则国安矣。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲说： 整顿已有的法令，选择合用的修订施行。然后繁殖人口，救济贫困，安抚百姓，这样国家就安定了。 桓公说： 就这样办。 
English: Guanzhong said, "Rectify the existing laws and regulations, select and implement suitable amendments, and then increase the population, relieve poverty, and pacify the people, so that the country will be stable." Huan Gong said, "Do it like this."

古文：遂修旧法，择其善者而业用之；遂滋民，与无财，而敬百姓。
现代文：于是整顿已有的法令，选择合用的修订施行。然后繁殖人口，救济贫困，安抚百姓。
English: As a result, the existing laws and regulations were rectified, and appropriate amendments were selected for implementation. Then, the population was increased, poverty was alleviated, and the people were pacified.

古文：国既安矣，桓公曰： 国安矣，其可乎？ 
现代文：国家安定了以后，桓公说： 国家已经安定，可以有所作为了吧？ 
English: After the country was stable, King Kan said: The country is stable, so we can make a difference, right?

古文：管子对曰： 未可。
现代文：管仲说： 还不行。
English: The pipe answered, "No."

古文：君若正卒伍，修甲兵，则大国亦将正卒伍，修甲兵，则难以速得志矣。
现代文：你如果整顿军队、修造盔甲兵器，其他大国也会整顿军队，修造盔甲兵器，我们就难以很快实现志向了。
English: If you reorganize the army and repair armor weapons, other great powers will also reorganize the army and repair armor weapons, and it will be difficult for us to achieve our ambitions soon.

古文：君有攻伐之器，小国诸侯有守御之备，则难以速得志矣。
现代文：你有进攻的武器，小国诸侯也有防御的准备，我们也难以很快实现志向。
English: You have offensive weapons, the small states also have defensive preparations, and it is difficult for us to achieve our ambitions quickly.

古文：君若欲速得志于天下诸侯，则事可以隐，令可以寄政。 桓公曰： 为之若何？ 
现代文：你若想迅速在天下诸侯中实现志向，就应该把要做的事情隐蔽起来，把战备寄寓在政令里。 桓公问： 怎样去做呢？ 
English: If you want to quickly achieve your ambition among the world's princes, you should hide what you are going to do and put the preparations for war in a government decree.Han Gong asked: How to do it?

古文：管子对曰： 作内政而寄军令焉。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 在整顿内政中寄寓军令。 桓公说： 很好。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "In the course of rectifying the internal affairs of the country, it is best to post the military order." Huan Gong said, "Very good.

古文：管子于是制国： 五家为轨，轨为之长；十轨为里，里有司；四里为连，连为之长；十连为乡，乡有良人焉。
现代文：于是管仲就制定国家的政令： 五家为一轨，轨设轨长；十轨为一里，里设有司；四里为一连，连设连长；十连为一乡，乡设良人。
English: As a result, Guanzhong made a national decree: Five families are one track, and a track is set up; ten tracks are one mile, and a division is set up; four miles are one company, and a company is set up; ten companies are one township, and a township is set up.

古文：以为军令：五家为轨，故五人为伍，轨长帅之；十轨为里，故五十人为小戎，里有司帅之；四里为连，故二百人为卒，连长帅之；十连为乡，故二千人为旅，乡良人帅之；五乡一帅，故万人为一军，五乡之帅帅之。
现代文：其中所寄寓的军令是：五家一轨，所以五人为一伍，由轨长统率；十轨一里，所以五十人为小戎，由里的有司统率；四里一连，所以二百人为一卒，由连长统率；十连一乡，所以二千人为一旅，由乡的良人统率；五个乡是一帅，所以正好是一万人，编成一个军，由卿来统率。
English: Among them, the military orders that were lodged there were: five families and one track, so five people were a group, led by the track leader; ten tracks and one mile, so fifty people were small, led by the leader; four miles and one company, so two hundred people were one person, led by the company leader; ten companies and one township, so two thousand people were one brigade, led by the township leader; five townships were one army, so it was just ten thousand people, organized into an army, led by the lord.

古文：三军，故有中军之鼓，有国子之鼓，有高子之鼓。
现代文：全国可编为三军，所以有国君亲自统帅的中军的旗鼓，有国子的旗鼓，有高子的旗鼓。
English: The whole country can be organized into three armies, so there is the Chinese army's banner drum personally commanded by the sovereign, the banner drum of the son of the state, and the banner drum of the son of the emperor.

古文：春以蒐振旅，秋以狝治兵。
现代文：春天用春猎的名义来整编军队，秋天以秋猎的名义来操练军队。
English: In the name of spring hunting in the spring to reorganize the army, in the name of autumn hunting in the autumn to train the army.

古文：是故卒伍整于里，军旅整于郊。
现代文：这样卒、伍一级的小队伍在里中就已经编就。
English: Such a small team at the elementary and junior high school level has already been formed in the middle school.

古文：内教既成，令勿使迁徙。
现代文：军、旅一级的大兵团在郊野中得以组成。
English: Army and brigade-level large corps were formed in the countryside.

古文：伍之人祭祀同福，死丧同恤，祸灾共之。
现代文：内政中既已包含了军事组织，就得命令民众不得迁徙。同一个伍的人祭祀时同享酒肉，死丧时大家哀伤，有了灾祸共同承担。
English: Since the military organization has been included in the internal affairs, it is necessary to order the people not to migrate. People of the same group share wine and meat when they make sacrifices, everyone mourns when they die, and they share the disaster.

古文：人与人相畴，家与家相畴，世同居，少同游。
现代文：人与人相伴，家与家相伴，世代同住一地，从小一起游戏。
English: People are accompanied by people, families are accompanied by families, generations live in the same place, and have been playing together since childhood.

古文：故夜战声相闻，足以不乖；昼战目相见，足以相识。
现代文：所以夜间作战能听到声音，就不会发生误会；白天作战能相互看见，足以认识同伙。
English: Therefore, when fighting at night, if you can hear voices, there will be no misunderstanding; when fighting during the day, you can see each other, which is enough to know your comrades.

古文：其欢欣足以相死。
现代文：那种欢乐的心情，能使他们拚死互助。
English: That kind of joyous mood can make them help each other out.

古文：居同乐，行同和，死同哀。
现代文：在家时共同欢乐，行军时融洽无间，战死时一起哀伤。
English: When we are at home, we rejoice together, when we are marching, we march in harmony, and when we die in battle, we mourn together.

古文：是故守则同固，战则同强。
现代文：所以，防守就坚固不移，作战就英勇顽强。
English: Therefore, the defense is unwavering, and the battle is heroic and tenacious.

古文：君有此士也三万人，以方行于天下，以诛无道，以屏周室，天下大国之君莫之能御。 
现代文：你若能拥有三万名这样的兵士，率领他们横行天下，讨伐无道，保卫王室，天下的大国诸侯还有谁能与你对抗。 
English: If you can have thirty thousand such soldiers and lead them to rampage around the world, to fight without a path, to defend the royal family, the great lords of the world, who else can oppose you?

