古文：阿合马，回回人也。
现代文：阿合马，回回人。
English: Ahma, a returner.

古文：不知其所由进。世祖中统三年，始命领中书左右部，兼诸路都转运使，专以财赋之任委之。阿合马奏降条画，宣谕各路运司。
现代文：世祖中统三年，始命他领中书左右部，兼诸路都转运使，委以专管财赋的重任。阿合马请帝下达条例规划，通告各路运司。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Zedong, Emperor Zedong ordered him to take charge of the left and right parts of Zhongshu, as well as the transportation of all roads, entrusting him with the important task of overseeing the financial endowment. Ahma requested the emperor to issue an ordinance plan and notify all road transportation departments.

古文：明年，以河南钧、徐等州俱有铁冶，请给授宣牌，以兴鼓铸之利。
现代文：次年，因河南的均州、徐州等地都有铁冶，请帝给授宣牌，以兴办鼓铸事业。
English: The following year, because there were iron smelters in Henan's Junzhou, Xuzhou and other places, the emperor was asked to grant a license to start a drum casting business.

古文：世祖升开平府为上都，又以阿合马同知开平府事，领左右部如故。
现代文：世祖将开平府升为上都，又以阿合马同知开平府事，仍领左右部。
English: The ancestor elevated Kaipingfu to the upper capital, and appointed Ahoma Tongzhi as the governor of Kaipingfu, still leading the left and right parts.

古文：阿合马奏以礼部尚书马月合乃兼领已括户三千，兴煽铁冶，岁输铁一百三万七千斤，就铸农器二十万事，易粟输官者凡四万石。
现代文：阿合马请帝以礼部尚书马月合乃兼领新登记的三千户，从事铁的冶炼，每年上纳铁一百零三万七千斤。官府将此铁铸农具二十万件，用以换取粮食四万石。
English: Ahama asked the emperor to use the ceremonial department Shangshuma Yueyuan to obtain 3,000 newly registered households, engaged in iron smelting, with an annual income of 1,037,000 kg of iron. The government used the iron to cast 200,000 pieces of agricultural tools in exchange for 40,000 kilos of grain.

古文：至元元年正月，阿合马言： 太原民煮小盐，越境贩卖，民贪其价廉，竞买食之，解盐以故不售，岁入课银止七千五百两。
现代文：至元元年正月，阿合马说： 太原民煮硝盐，越境贩卖。各地民众贪其价廉，竞买食之。解州官盐因而卖不出去。每年能收上来的银两，只有七千五百两。
English: In the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year

古文：请自今岁增五千两，无问僧道军匠等户，钧出其赋，其民间通用小盐从便。 
现代文：请自今年起，盐课增至五千两。不问僧道、军、匠等户，都要纳赋。民间通用的硝盐，则听其自便。 
English: From this year, please increase the salt allowance to 5,000 taels. No matter whether you are a monk, a soldier, or a craftsman, you must pay it. For common salt, you can do as you please.

古文：是年秋八月，罢领中书左右部，并入中书，超拜阿合马为中书平章政事，进阶荣禄大夫。
现代文：是年秋八月，罢领中书左右部，并入中书，越级任命阿合马为中书平章政事，官阶进为荣禄大夫。
English: In the autumn and August of the year, the left and right parts of Zhongshu were taken over and merged into Zhongshu, and Ahamma was appointed to Pingzhang Political Affairs of Zhongshu, and the official rank was promoted to Ronglu Doctor.

古文：三年正月，立制国用使司，阿合马又以平章政事兼领使职。
现代文：三年正月，成立 制国用使司 ，又使阿合马以平章政事兼领此使职。
English: In the first month of the third year, the state-level envoy office was established, and Ahma was made to concurrently lead this office with Pingzhang government affairs.

古文：久之，制国用使司奏： 以东京岁课布疏恶不堪用者，就以市羊于彼。
现代文：过了好久，制国用使司向皇帝报告说： 东京每年征收的布中，有疏恶不堪用的，可就地用以买羊。
English: After a long time, the imperial envoy reported to the emperor: "Among the cloth that Tokyo collects every year, there are some that are too disgusting to use, and they can be used to buy sheep on the spot.

古文：真定、顺天金银不中程者，宜改铸。
现代文：真定、顺天金银的成色不合的，宜于改铸。
English: If the color of the gold and silver is not right, it is advisable to change the casting.

古文：别怯赤山出石绒，织为布，火不能然，请遣官采取。 
现代文：别怯赤山出的石绵，织成布后火烧不燃，请派官组织开采。 
English: Don't be afraid of the stone wool from Akayama. After being woven into cloth, it will not burn. Please send an official to organize mining.

古文：又言： 国家费用浩繁，今岁自车驾至都，已支钞四千锭，恐来岁度支不足，宜量节经用。 
现代文：又说： 国家费用浩大，今年自皇帝到京都以后，已支出钞四千锭，恐来年的预算不足，要精打细算，节约开支。 
English: He also said: The national expenses are enormous. This year, since the emperor arrived in Kyoto, 4,000 monme in banknotes have been spent. It is feared that next year's budget will be insufficient. It is necessary to make careful calculations and save expenses.

古文：十一月，制国用使司奏： 桓州峪所采银矿，已十六万斤，百斤可得银三两、锡二十五斤。
现代文：十一月，制国用使司又报告说： 桓州峪所采银矿，已达十六万斤。每百斤矿石可得银三两、锡三十五斤。
English: In November, the imperial envoy also reported: The total amount of silver mined in Hanzhou Min has reached 160,000 catties. For every 100 catties of ore, 32 catties of silver and 35 catties of tin can be obtained.

古文：采矿所需，鬻锡以给之。 
现代文：采矿所需的开支，望准许卖锡以给之。 
English: It is hoped that the sale of tin will be allowed to cover the costs of mining.

古文：悉从其请。
现代文：世祖采纳了制国用使司的全部建议。
English: The founder adopted all the suggestions of the state-building envoys.

古文：七年正月，立尚书省，罢制国用使司，又以阿合马平章尚书省事。
现代文：七年正月成立尚书省，撤销制国用使司，又以阿合马为平章尚书省事。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the Ministry of Calligraphy was established, the post of national envoy was abolished, and Ahamma was made the title of the Ministry of Calligraphy.

古文：阿合马为人多智巧言，以功利成效自负，众咸称其能。
现代文：阿合马为人足智多谋，又会说话，在理财方面，以功利成效自负，大家都说他能干。
English: Ahamah is resourceful and can speak. In terms of financial management, he is proud of his efficiency. Everyone says he is capable.

古文：世祖急于富国，试以行事，颇有成绩。
现代文：世祖急于富国，放手让他办事，颇有成绩。
English: The founder of the world was anxious to enrich the country and let him do his work. He achieved quite a lot.

古文：又见其与丞相線真、史天泽等争辨，屡有以诎之，由是奇其才，授以政柄，言无不从，而不知其专愎益甚矣。
现代文：又见他与丞相真、史天泽等争论问题时，常使真无言以对，因而更奇其才，授以大权。对他的建议，无不采纳。但是，却没想到他也因而更加专权、更加刚愎自用了。
English: I also saw that when he was arguing with Prime Minister Zhen Zhen, Shi Tian Ze and others, he often made Zhen speechless, which made him even more amazing and gave him great power. His suggestions were all accepted. However, I did not expect him to be more authoritarian and more self-serving.

古文：丞相安童含容久之，言于世祖曰： 臣近言尚书省、枢密院、御史台，宜各循常制奏事，其大者从臣等议定奏闻，已有旨俞允。
现代文：丞相安童在容忍了很久之后，才对世祖说： 我近来常说尚书省、枢密院、御史台宜于各自遵循常例向皇帝作报告，其重大问题应由侍从的大臣议定后上奏，这是皇帝已有旨应允了的。
English: It was only after a long period of toleration that Prime Minister Ando said to Shizu: I have often said recently that the Ministry of Education, the Privy Council, and the Imperial Historian's Office should each report to the emperor in accordance with the usual practice, and that important issues should be agreed upon by the attendant ministers and then presented to the emperor. This has been agreed to by the emperor.

古文：今尚书省一切以闻，似违前奏。 世祖曰： 汝所言是。
现代文：今一切由尚书省报告，似违以前皇帝所应允了的话。 
English: Now everything is being reported by the Ministry of Education and Culture, which seems to contradict what the emperor had previously agreed to.

古文：岂阿合马以朕颇信用，敢如是耶！
现代文：世祖说： 你说得很对，我哪里想到阿合马因为得到我的充分信任而敢于如此呢？
English: The patriarch said, "You are quite right. Where did I get the idea that the horse dared to do this because he had my full trust?

古文：其不与卿议非是，宜如卿所言。 
现代文：有些问题我没有和你商议是不对的，应该像你说的那样，三家各按常制奏事为好。 
English: It's not right that I didn't discuss some issues with you. As you said, it's better for all three companies to file according to the regular system.

古文：又言： 阿合马所用部官，左丞许衡以为多非其人，然已得旨咨请宣付，如不与，恐异日有辞。宜试其能否，久当自见。 
现代文：上任的时间长了，是可以看出来的。 
English: He has been in office for a long time and it is clear to see why.

古文：世祖然之。
现代文：世祖认为这话也对。
English: The patriarch agreed with him.

古文：五月，尚书省奏括天下户口，既而御史台言，所在捕蝗，百姓劳扰，括户事宜少缓。
现代文：五月，尚书省请清查天下户口，接着御史台说： 到处在捕灭蝗虫，百姓劳扰已甚，清查户口的事，宜于稍缓再说。 
English: In May, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) asked to check the household registration of the whole country, and then the State Administration of History said: Locusts have been hunted everywhere, and the people have been working hard. It is appropriate to wait a little longer to check the household registration.

古文：遂止。
现代文：世祖采纳了御史台的意见。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：初立尚书省时，有旨： 凡铨选各官，吏部拟定资品，呈尚书省，由尚书咨中书闻奏。 
现代文：初立尚书省时，世祖有旨说： 凡选拔任用的各官，吏部议定资格品级，向尚书省报告，由尚书咨询中书意见后才奏闻皇上。 
English: When the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was first established, the founder had the following to say: All officials and cadres who are selected and appointed should agree on the qualification grade, report to the Ministry of Education, Sports, Science and Technology, and only report to the emperor after the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology consults with the central government.

古文：至是，阿合马擢用私人，不由部拟，不咨中书。丞相安童以为言，世祖令问阿合马。阿合马言： 事无大小，皆委之臣，所用之人，臣宜自择。 
现代文：但现在，阿合马擅自提拔，不由吏部拟订初步意见，不咨询中书，丞相安童将此情报告了世祖，世祖质问阿合马，阿合马说 ：事无大小，都交由我办，所用之人，当然应由我自己选择。 
English: But now, Ahama has been promoted without authorization, without the preliminary opinion being drawn up by the personnel department, and without consulting the official document. Prime Minister Ando reported this situation to the patriarch. The patriarch questioned Ahama, and Ahama said, "I am in charge of everything, no matter how big or small. The person I use should, of course, be chosen by me."

古文：安童因请： 自今唯重刑及迁上路总管，始属之臣，余事并付阿合马，庶事体明白。 
现代文：安童因而奏请皇上： 自今以后，只有重刑及调迁上路总管，才交付我这做丞相的办；其余的事，都交付给阿合马，以便各部门的权限清楚。 
English: Ando therefore petitioned the emperor: From now on, only the heavy sentence and the transfer of the chief road superintendent will be handed over to me as the prime minister; the rest of the things will be handed over to Ahama, so that the authority of each department is clear.

古文：世祖俱从之。
现代文：世祖都采纳了。
English: All the world's ancestors adopted it.

古文：八年三月，尚书省再以阅实户口事，奏条画诏谕天下。
现代文：八年三月，尚书省再次要求诏谕天下，要在全国核实人口。
English: In March of the eighth year, the Ministry of Education and Culture once again asked the emperor to issue an edict to the whole country to verify the population.

古文：是岁，奏增太原盐课，以千锭为常额，仍令本路兼领。
现代文：这一年，尚书省还奏请增加太原的盐税，定常额为千锭，仍由本路兼管其事。
English: This year, the Ministry of Education and Culture also requested an increase in the salt tax in Taiyuan, with a fixed amount of 1,000 baht, which is still managed by this road.

古文：九年，并尚书省入中书省，又以阿合马为中书平章政事。
现代文：九年，尚书省并入中书省，又以阿合马为中书平章政事。
English: In the ninth year, Shangshu Province was merged into Zhongshu Province, and Ahamma was made the government of Pingzhang, Zhongshu.

古文：明年，又以其子忽辛为大都路总管，兼大兴府尹。
现代文：十年，以阿合马之子忽辛为大都路总管兼大兴府知府。
English: Ten years later, the son of Ahama, Ku Xin, became the head of Dadu Road and the governor of Daxing Prefecture.

古文：右丞相安童见阿合马擅权日甚，欲救其弊，乃奏大都路总管以次多不称职，乞选人代之。
现代文：右丞相安童见阿合马专权日甚，心想清除此弊，便上奏皇帝说： 大都路总管以下的人多不称职，望皇上选人取代他们。 
English: When the Minister of the Right, Ando, saw that the absolute power of the Ahama was getting stronger and stronger, he wanted to get rid of this evil, so he appealed to the emperor and said: Many people below the head of Datu Road are incompetent, and we hope that the emperor will choose someone to replace them.

古文：寻又奏： 阿合马、张惠，挟宰相权，为商贾以网罗天下大利，厚毒黎民，困无所诉。 
现代文：接着又奏请皇帝 ：阿合马和张惠，持宰相的大权，做商贾之事，以尽收天下之利，受其毒害的百姓，有苦无处诉。 
English: Next, he petitioned the emperor: Ahma and Zhang Hui, holding the power of the prime minister, were doing business to maximize the profits of the world, and the people who were poisoned by them had nowhere to complain.

古文：阿合马曰： 谁为此言？臣等当与廷辩。 
现代文：阿合马得知后说： 是谁说这话，我与张惠要与他当廷辩论。 
English: After learning of this, Ahma said, "Whoever said this, Zhang Hui and I will argue with him in court."

古文：安童进曰： 省左司都事周祥，中木取利，罪状明白。 
现代文：安童又对皇上说 ：省左司都事周祥在官府与商人的木材交易中谋取私利，罪状清楚。 
English: Ando also said to the emperor: Zhou Xiang, the provincial left secretary of the capital, sought personal gain in the timber trade between the government and merchants, and the crime was clear.

古文：世祖曰： 若此者，征毕当显黜之。 
现代文：世祖说： 若是这样，查明后当撤他的职。 
English: The patriarch said: If this is the case, he should be removed from his post after the investigation.

古文：既而枢密院奏以忽辛同佥枢密院事，世祖不允曰： 彼贾胡事犹不知，况可责以机务耶！ 
现代文：既而枢密院奏请以忽辛同佥枢密院事，世祖不许，并说 ：他对其部属与胡人做生意的事尚且不知道，怎能把机密之责交给他呢？ 
English: When the Privy Council asked him to take over the Privy Council, the patriarch refused, saying, "He does not know that his subordinates are doing business with the Hu people, so how can he be entrusted with the responsibility of confidentiality?"

古文：十二年，伯颜帅师伐宋，既渡江，捷报日至。
现代文：十二年，伯颜带兵侵宋朝，已渡江，每日有捷报传来。
English: In the twelfth year, Boyan led an army to invade the Song Dynasty and crossed the Yangtze River. There were daily reports of victories.

古文：世祖命阿合马与姚枢、徒单公履、张文谦、陈汉归、杨诚等，议行盐、钞法于江南，及贸易药材事。
现代文：世祖令阿合马与姚枢、徒单公履、张文谦、陈汉归、杨诚等商议，将元之盐法、钞法在江南施行及贸易药材之事。
English: The patriarch ordered Ahama to consult with Yao Zu, Tsuchan Gonglu, Zhang Wenqian, Chen Hangui, Yang Cheng and others to implement the original salt law and banknote law in the south of the Yangtze River and to trade medicinal materials.

古文：阿合马奏： 枢云： 江南交会不行，必致小民失所。 
现代文：阿合马奏称 ：姚枢说 ：宋朝的纸币，在江南不能通行，必致小民破产。 
English: Ahema said: Yao Zu said: Song Dynasty banknotes cannot circulate in the south of the Yangtze River, which will inevitably lead to the bankruptcy of the common people.

古文：公履云： 伯颜已尝榜谕交会不换，今亟行之，失信于民。 
现代文：徒单公履说 ：伯颜已曾出告示宣布纸币不兑换，今又迫切地通行宋朝纸币，会失信于民。 
English: He said: Bo Yan had already issued a notice announcing that banknotes would not be exchanged, and now he is urgently passing Song Dynasty banknotes, which will lose credibility with the people.

古文：文谦谓 可行与否，当询伯颜 。汉归及诚皆言： 以中统钞易其交会，保难之有。  
现代文：张文谦说： 此事当问伯颜。 陈汉归及杨诚说 ：以中统钞兑换宋朝纸币没有困难。  
English: Zhang Wenqian said: This matter should be asked to Bo Yan. Chen Hangui and Yang Cheng said: There is no difficulty in exchanging Song Dynasty banknotes with Zhongtong banknotes.

古文：世祖曰： 枢与公履，不识事机。朕尝以此问陈岩，岩亦以宋交会速宜更换。
现代文：世祖说： 枢与公履不识事机，我曾以此问过陈岩，岩也认为宋朝的纸币宜于尽快更换。
English: I once asked Chen Yan about this, and he also thought that the Song Dynasty banknotes should be replaced as soon as possible.

古文：今议已定，当依汝言行之。 
现代文：现在议论已定，当按你说的去做。 
English: Now that the debate is settled, do as you're told.

古文：又奏： 北盐药材，枢与公履皆言可使百姓从便贩鬻。臣等以为此事若小民为之，恐紊乱不一。
现代文：阿合马又奏称： 北方盐和药材，枢与公履都认为可使百姓自己随便贩卖，我等以为，此事若让百姓自己去做，恐紊乱不一，拟于南京、卫辉等路，按户籍收集药材。
English: Ahama also reported: "Northern salt and medicinal materials, both the Central Committee and the Public Security Bureau, believe that the people can freely sell them. We believe that if the people are allowed to do this themselves, there will be chaos. It is planned to collect medicinal materials according to household registration in Nanjing, Weihui and other roads.

古文：拟于南京、卫辉等路，籍括药材，蔡州发盐十二万斤，禁诸人私相贸易。 
现代文：在蔡州，发售十二万斤官盐，禁止人们私相贸易。 
English: In Caizhou, 120,000 catties of government salt were put on sale, prohibiting people from private trade.

古文：世祖曰： 善，其行之。 
现代文：世祖认为可以批准实行。
English: The Patriarch believes that it can be approved and implemented.

古文：十二年，阿合马又言： 比因军兴之后，减免编民征税，又罢转运司官，令各路总管府兼领课程，以致国用不足。
现代文：十二年，阿合马又说： 近来因军兴之后，减免了百姓的赋税，又撤消了转运司官，使各路总管府兼管商税，以致国用入不敷出。
English: In the 12th year, Ahma also said: Recently, due to the rise of the military, the people's taxes have been reduced and exempted, and the transfer officer has been revoked, so that each road headquarters also manages the merchant tax, so that the national income does not make a profit.

古文：臣以为莫若验户数多寡，远以就近，立都转运司，量增旧额，选廉干官分理其事。
现代文：我认为，莫如检查户数多少，按远近设立都转运司，酌情增加原来税额，选择廉洁有为的官员分理其事。
English: In my opinion, there is no other way than to inspect the number of households, set up a transfer department according to the distance, increase the original tax amount as appropriate, and select a clean and effective official to manage the matter.

古文：应公私铁鼓铸，官为局卖，仍禁诸人毋私造铜器。
现代文：一应公私鼓铸铁，由政府设局贩卖，并禁诸人私造铜器。
English: In response to public and private concerns, the government set up a bureau to sell cast iron, and prohibited people from making copperware.

古文：如此，则民力不屈，而国用充矣。 
现代文：如果这样，则民力可不缺而国用也会充实。 
English: If this is the case, there will be no shortage of manpower and the state will be enriched.

古文：乃奏立诸路转运司，以亦必烈金、札马剌丁、张暠、富珪、蔡德润、纥石烈亨、阿里和者、完颜迪、姜毅、阿老瓦丁、倒剌沙等为使。
现代文：因而奏请设立诸路转运司，以亦必烈金、扎马剌丁、张日高、富王圭、蔡德润、纥石烈亨、阿里和者、完颜迪、姜毅、阿老瓦丁、倒剌沙等为转运使。
English: Therefore, it was requested to set up the Department of Transportation of All Roads, with Yibiling Jin, Zamasudin, Zhang Rigao, Fu Wanggui, Cai Derun, Zou Shi Rongheng, Ali Hezhe, Guan Yan Di, Jiang Yi, Alaowading, and Chaobansha as transportation envoys.

古文：有亦马都丁者，以负官银得罪而罢，既死，而所负尚多，中书省奏议裁处。世祖曰： 此财谷事，其与阿合马议之。 
现代文：有亦马都丁其人，因欠官银得罪而被免职，死后，所欠数额还很多，中书省奏议裁处，世祖说： 这是财政方面的事情，再和阿合马商量。 
English: There was also a man named Maduddin who was removed from his post for the crime of defrauding officials of money. After his death, he still owed a large amount of money. He appealed to the court of arbitration of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. The patriarch said: This is a financial matter, and we will discuss it with Ahma.

古文：十五年正月，世祖以西京饥，发粟万石赈之。
现代文：十五年正月，世祖因西京闹饥荒，便以万石粟赈灾。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of the Heian period, the founder of the sect, in response to the famine in Western Kyoto, offered 10,000 koku of millet to relieve the famine.

古文：又谕阿合马宜广贮积，以备阙乏。
现代文：又通知阿合马，要广为贮蓄，以备不足。
English: He also informed the Ahama that they should widely stockpile to prepare for shortages.

古文：阿合马奏： 自今御史台非白省，毋擅召仓库吏，亦毋究索钱谷数。
现代文：阿合马奏道： 自今以后，御史台不先报告中书省则不得随便召唤仓库的官吏，亦不得追索钱粮的数额。
English: Ahma Song said, "From now on, the Ministry of Education and Culture will not be allowed to summon the officials of the warehouse, nor will they be allowed to recover the amount of money and grain, unless the History Channel reports it first."

古文：及集议中书不至者，罪之。 
现代文：在中书省开会讨论时，御史台不出席，要办罪。 
English: When the Ministry of Education and Culture held a meeting to discuss the issue, the History Channel did not attend, and was charged with a crime.

古文：其沮抑台察如此。
现代文：可见，他打击、贬低御史台到了什么地步。
English: This shows the extent to which he has attacked and belittled the History Channel.

古文：四月，中书左丞崔斌奏曰： 先以江南官冗，委任非人，遂命阿里等澄汰之。今已显有征验，蔽不以闻，是为罔上。
现代文：四月，中书左丞崔斌奏告皇上 ：以前因为江南冗员多，且委任非人，便命阿里等人前往裁汰，今已有显著成效，但阿合马不上报，这是欺骗皇上。
English: In April, Censer Choi Bin reported to the emperor: Previously, because there were too many people in the south of the Yangtze River, and the appointment was not human, he ordered Ali and others to go to arbitration. Now there have been significant results, but Ahama does not report, which is deceiving the emperor.

古文：杭州地大，委寄非轻，阿合马溺于私爱，乃以不肖子抹速忽充达鲁花赤，佩虎符，此岂量才授任之道？ 
现代文：杭州地大，责任不轻，阿合马溺于私爱，以自己的不肖之子抹速忽担任达鲁花赤，佩虎符，这岂是量才授官之道？ 
English: Hangzhou is a big city, the responsibility is not light, Ahamah is addicted to self-love, with his own unshapely son, Makhzoh, serving as the Daru flower red, wearing a tiger emblem, is this the way to appoint officials?

古文：又言： 阿合马先自陈乞免其子弟之任，乃今身为平章，而子若侄或为行省参政，或为礼部尚书、将作院达鲁花赤、领会同馆，一门悉处要津，自背前言，有亏公道。 
现代文：又说 ：以前阿合马自己要求免除其子弟的职务，但现在，他自己身居平章要职，而其子和侄或做行省参政，或为礼部尚书，或以将作院达鲁花赤领会同馆，全家族人都安置在要害部门。这样自背前言，有损公道。 
English: He also said: In the past, Ahma himself asked for the removal of his sons and nephews from their positions, but now, he himself is in an important position, and his sons and nephews either participate in provincial politics, or write books for the Ministry of Rites, or are members of the Red Hat Society, and the whole family is placed in important departments. Such a self-serving preamble is detrimental to justice.

古文：有旨并罢黜之。然终不以是为阿合马罪。
现代文：于是世祖下令罢免了阿合马许多子弟的职务，但始终不将此情作为阿合马本人的罪过来处理。
English: As a result, the patriarch ordered the dismissal of many of Ahama's sons and brothers from their positions, but he never dealt with this situation as Ahama's own sin.

古文：世祖尝谓淮西宣慰使昂吉儿曰： 夫宰相者，明天道，察地理，尽人事，兼此三者，乃为称职。
现代文：世祖曾对淮西宣慰使昂吉儿说 ，做宰相的人，要明天道、察地理、尽人事。兼有此三条的，才是称职的宰相。
English: The Ancestor once said to Huaxi's consoler, Angjil, that a prime minister should study Taoism, geography, and human resources. Only a prime minister who has these three qualities is a competent one.

古文：阿里海牙、麦术丁等，亦未可为相，回回人中，阿合马才任宰相。 
现代文：阿里海牙、麦丁等也不能当宰相。回回人中，阿合马才可任宰相。 
English: Ali, Hague, Madin and others cannot be prime minister. Among the returnees, only Ahma can be appointed prime minister.

古文：其为上所称道如此。
现代文：可见，世祖多么称道阿合马。
English: It can be seen how highly the patriarch praised the horse.

古文：十六年四月，中书奏立江西榷茶运司，及诸路转运盐使司、宣课提举司。
现代文：十六年四月，中书奏请设立江西榷茶运司及诸路转运盐使司。不久，便以忽辛为中书右丞。
English: In April of the 16th year, the Chinese calligraphers requested the establishment of the Jiangxi tea transportation department and the salt transportation department. Soon, he named Hu Xin as the Chinese calligrapher.

古文：未几，以忽辛为中书右丞。明年，中书省奏： 阿塔海、阿里言，今立宣课提举司，官吏至五百余员。
现代文：十七年，中书省奏： 阿塔海、阿里说，现在设立宣课提举司，官吏达五百余员。
English: In the seventeenth year, the Chinese book ministry: Atahai, Ali said, now set up a proclamation and promotion department, with more than 500 officials.

古文：左丞陈岩、范文虎等言其扰民，且侵盗官钱。
现代文：左丞陈岩、范文虎等认为这是扰害百姓，且侵盗官钱，要求撤消此机构。 
English: Zojo Chen Yan, Fan Wenhu and others believe that this is a disturbance of the people, and theft of government money, and demand the withdrawal of this institution.

古文：乞罢之。 阿合马奏： 昨有旨籍江南粮数，屡移文取索，不以实上。
现代文：阿合马知道后对皇上说 ：前者有旨要登记江南粮数，我们一再去文索取，但无人据实上报。
English: After learning this, Ahma said to the emperor: "The former has the intention to register the number of grain in the southern part of the Yangtze River. We have repeatedly gone to request the document, but no one has reported it.

古文：遂与枢密院、御史台及廷臣诸老集议，谓设立运司，官多俸重，宜诸路立提举司，都省、行省各委一人任其事。
现代文：于是便和枢密院、御史台及朝廷诸老商议，认为中央设立运司，官多俸重，只宜在诸路设立提举司，都省、行省各委一人任其事。
English: As a result, he consulted with the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, and the elders of the Imperial Court, and came to the conclusion that the central government should establish a transportation department, which would require more officials and higher salaries, and that it would only be appropriate to establish a promotion department in the provinces, with one person from each of the prefectural and provincial committees in charge of the matter.

古文：今行省未尝委人，即请罢之，乃归咎臣等。
现代文：今行省没有派人，便想撤消此机构，并归罪于臣等。
English: Now that the province has not sent anyone, they want to abolish this institution and blame it on the minister and others.

古文：然臣所委人，有至者仅两月，计其侵用凡千一百锭，以彼所管四年较之，又当几何？
现代文：然而我所委任的人，有的到任还只两个月，计其侵用凡一千一百锭，如以他们所管的四年做比较，又当几何？
English: But if those whom I have appointed, some of whom have been in office for only two months, have misappropriated one thousand one hundred talents, how much more will their misappropriation be when compared with the four years they have been in office?

古文：今立提举司，未及三月而罢，岂非恐彼奸弊呈露，故先自言以绝迹耶？
现代文：今提举司成立不到三个月，又将它撤消，莫非他担心其奸情败露而先自言以绝其迹吗？
English: Now it has been less than three months since the nomination committee was established, and it has been revoked. Could it be that he is worried that his treachery will be revealed, and that he is trying to cover his tracks?

古文：宜令御史台遣能臣同往，凡有非法，具以实闻。 
现代文：我认为，正确的做法不是撤消它，而是令御史台派出能干的人同往审察，凡是有不法行为，要据实上报。 
English: I believe that the right thing to do is not to revoke it, but to have the Imperial History Channel send competent people to investigate together. Any illegal acts should be reported truthfully.

古文：世祖曰： 阿合马所言是，其令台中选人以往。
现代文：世祖同意阿合马的说法，令台中选人前往。
English: The ancestor agreed with Ahma's statement and ordered the selected person from Taichung to go.

古文：若己能自白，方可责人。 阿合马尝奏宜立大宗正府。
现代文：阿合马曾奏请设立大宗正府。
English: Ahma requested the establishment of Taizong Zhengfu.

古文：世祖曰： 此事岂卿辈所宜言，乃朕事也。
现代文：世祖说 ：这是朕的事，不是你应当提及的。
English: The patriarch said, "This is my business, it is not for you to mention."

古文：然宗正之名，朕未之知，汝言良是，其思之。 
现代文：但宗正之名，朕还不知道，你的意见很好，让我想想。 
English: But the name of Zong Zheng, I still don't know, your opinion is very good, let me think about it.

古文：阿合马欲理算江淮行省平章阿里伯、右丞燕帖木儿立行省以来一切钱谷，奏遣不鲁合答儿、刘思愈等往检核之，得其擅易命官八百员，自分左右司官，及铸造铜印等事，以闻。
现代文：阿合马欲清算江淮行省平章阿里伯、右丞燕帖木儿自成立行省以来的一切钱粮，奏遣不鲁合答儿、刘思愈等去检查核实。得知其擅自更换朝廷命官八百员，自分左右司官，为他们铸造铜印。
English: Ahema wanted to liquidate all the money and grain that Pingzhang Ali Bo and Yu Rong Yan Ti Mu'er of Jianghuai Province had accumulated since the establishment of the province, and sent Bu Lu He Da'er, Liu Siyu and others to check and verify. It was learned that he had arbitrarily replaced eight hundred officials appointed by the imperial court, and that he had surrounded himself with officials and cast copper seals for them.

古文：世祖曰： 阿里伯等何以为辞？ 
现代文：他把这些事上报皇帝，世祖问： 阿里伯等怎样说？ 
English: He reported these matters to the emperor, and the patriarch asked, "What do you have to say about Ali Bo?"

古文：阿合马曰： 彼谓行省昔尝铸印矣。
现代文：阿合马回答道： 他们认为行省过去曾铸了印。
English: Ahma replied: They think that the province has made a seal in the past.

古文：臣谓昔以江南未定，故便宜行之，今与昔时事异。又擅支粮四十七万石，奏罢宣课提举司及中书遣官理算，征钞万二千锭有奇。 二人竟以是就戮。时阿合马在位日久，益肆贪横，援引奸党郝祯、耿仁，骤升同列，阴谋交通，专事蒙蔽，逋赋不蠲，众庶流移，京兆等路岁办课至五万四千锭，犹以为未实。民有附郭美田，辄取为己有。
现代文：京兆等路年办税至五万四千锭，还认为没有据实征收。
English: The annual construction tax for the Jingzhao and other roads has risen to 54,000 baht, and it is also believed that there is no evidence that the tax has been levied.

古文：内通货贿，外示威刑，廷中相视，无敢论列。
现代文：靠近城郊的百姓良田，动辄被他们取为己有。内则贪赃纳贿，外则显示威刑，朝中廷臣敢怒而不敢言，不敢议论其是非。
English: The peasants' good fields near the outskirts of the city were often taken over by them. On the one hand, they were greedy and took bribes, on the other hand, they showed coercion. The courtiers in the imperial court dared to be angry but did not dare to speak, did not dare to discuss their rights and wrongs.

古文：有宿卫士秦长卿者，慨然上书发其奸，竟为阿合马所害，毙于狱。
现代文：有宿卫士秦长卿，愤慨已极，便向皇帝上书以揭发他的罪恶，竟为阿合马所害，最后死于狱中。
English: One of the guards, Qin Changqing, was so outraged that he wrote a letter to the emperor to expose his crime. However, he was killed by the horse, and eventually died in prison.

古文：事见长卿传。
现代文：此事在《长卿传》中有记载。
English: This event is recorded in the "Changqing Biography."

古文：十九年三月，世祖在上都，皇太子从。
现代文：十九年三月，世祖在上都，皇太子陪同。
English: In March 19th, the patriarch was in Shangdu, accompanied by the crown prince.

古文：著乃与合谋，以戊寅日，诈称皇太子还都作佛事，结八十余人，夜入京城。
现代文：有益都千户王著者，平素疾恶如仇，知人心愤恨阿合马，便秘密铸一大铜锤，发誓要以锤击死阿合马。恰好这时有妖僧高和尚，在军中行秘术，王著便与他们合谋，诈称三月十八日皇太子要还都做佛事，聚众八十余人，夜入京城。
English: According to the author, the prince of a thousand households, who was always plagued by evil, secretly made a large bronze hammer and vowed to use it to kill the horse. At that time, there was a demon monk, Gao Monk, who practiced secret arts in the army. The prince conspired with them and falsely claimed that on March 18th, the crown prince would also do Buddhist rituals. They gathered more than 80 people and entered the capital at night.

古文：旦遣二僧诣中书省，令市斋物，省中疑而讯之，不伏。
现代文：天将亮，王著和高和尚便派两个僧人到中书省，令他们买斋物，中书省的人对此抱怀疑态度，便审问二僧，没有审出罪状。
English: When the day dawned, Wang Zheng and Gao Monk sent two monks to Zhongshu Province and ordered them to buy food. The people of Zhongshu Province were skeptical about this and interrogated the two monks, but no criminal charges were found.

古文：及午，著又遣崔总管矫传令旨，俾枢密副使张易发兵若干，以是夜会东宫前。易莫察其伪，即令指挥使颜义领兵俱往。
现代文：到中午，著又派遣崔总管假传令旨，要枢密副使张易派一支军队在当天晚上到东宫门前集合，张易并未察觉这旨令是假的，当即使指挥使颜义领兵前往。
English: At noon, General Cui sent a fake order to Deputy Privy Councilor Zhang Yi to send an army to gather in front of the East Palace that evening. Zhang Yi did not realize that the order was fake, but the commander sent Yan Yi to lead the army.

古文：著自驰见阿合马，诡言太子将至，令省官悉候于宫前。
现代文：这时著自己骑马去见阿合马，假称太子将至，要求中书省官员都在宫前迎候。
English: At this time, he rode his horse to meet Ahma, pretending that the prince was coming, and asked the officials of the People's Republic of China to wait for him in front of the palace.

古文：阿合马遣右司郎中脱欢察儿等数骑出关，北行十余里，遇其众，伪太子者责以无礼，尽杀之，夺其马，南入健德门。
现代文：阿合马便派遣右司郎中脱欢察儿等数骑出关，北行十余里，便遇上著、高等伪装是皇太子的一群人，伪太子这时便责备脱欢察儿等无礼，尽杀之。又夺了他们的马，南入健德门。
English: Ahama then dispatched several horsemen, including the right-hand man, the middle-aged prince, to ride out of the pass, and more than ten miles to the north, they encountered a group of people who were disguised as the crown prince. At this time, the pseudo-prince accused the prince of being rude and killed them. He also took their horses and went south into the Kent Gate.

古文：夜二鼓，莫敢何问，至东宫前，其徒皆下马，独伪太子者立马指挥，呼省官至前，责阿合马数语，著即牵去，以所袖铜锤碎其脑，立毙。
现代文：夜晚二更，无人敢问他们是谁。至东宫前，众人皆下马，唯独伪太子立马指挥，呼省中官员至面前，指责阿合马几句后，著把他带走，以铜锤砸碎了他的头，立即毙命。
English: At two o'clock in the evening, no one dared to ask who they were. When they arrived in front of the East Palace, everyone dismounted, except for the pseudo-prince, who immediately commanded the horse, called the provincial officials to the front, accused the horse a few words, then took him away, smashed his head with a bronze hammer, and was immediately killed.

古文：继呼左丞郝祯至，杀之。
现代文：接着又唤左丞郝祯来，又杀之。
English: Next, he called Sadayo to come and killed him again.

古文：囚右丞张惠。
现代文：又囚右丞张惠。
English: Zhang Hui was also imprisoned.

古文：枢密院、御史台、留守司官皆遥望，莫测其故。
现代文：枢密院、御史台、留守司官都在远处观望，猜测不出是何缘故。
English: The Privy Council, the Historian's Table, and the Resident Magistrate are all watching from a distance, for reasons that are impossible to guess.

古文：尚书张九思自宫中大呼，以为诈，留守司达鲁花赤博敦，遂持梃前，击立马者坠地，弓矢乱发，众奔溃，多就禽。
现代文：只有尚书张九思从宫中大呼其诈，留守司达鲁花赤博敦拿棍棒冲上前去，把骑在马上的伪太子击倒在地。又以乱箭射击，作乱者们始逃散，多数被擒。
English: Shangshu Zhang Jiu Si was the only one who shouted his treachery from the palace. The remaining Siddarushka Chabot rushed forward with a club and knocked the pseudo-prince on horseback to the ground. They also shot arrows at random. The troublemakers began to flee, and most of them were captured.

古文：高和尚等逃去，著挺身请囚。
现代文：高和尚等逃走，王著则挺身请罪。
English: Gao Monk and others fled, while Wang Zhu stood up and pleaded guilty.

古文：中丞也先帖木儿驰奏世祖，时方驻跸察罕脑儿，闻之震怒，即日至上都。命枢密副使孛罗、司徒和礼霍孙、参政阿里等驰驿至大都，讨为乱者。
现代文：中丞也先帖木儿迅速派人向世祖报告，世祖当时已在察罕脑儿，听到这个消息，大怒，即日到上都，命枢密副使孛罗、司徒和礼霍孙、参政阿里等骑驿站的马赶至大都，去讨伐作乱的人。
English: First of all, Chujo also quickly sent someone to report to Shizuo. Shizuo was already on edge when he heard the news and flew into a rage. That same day, he went to Shangdu and ordered the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, Yao Luo, Shitou, and Li Huosun, and Sanzheng Ali, to ride horses to Shangdu to fight the troublemakers.

古文：庚辰，获高和尚于高梁河。辛巳，孛罗等至都。
现代文：三月二十日，在高梁河抓获高和尚。二十一日，孛罗等至京都。
English: On March 20th, Gao Monk was captured in Gaoliang River. On the 21st, Gong Luo waited in Kyoto.

古文：壬午，诛王著、高和尚于市，皆醢之，并杀张易。
现代文：二十二日，杀王著、高和尚于市，还把他们剁成肉酱，又杀了张易。
English: On the 22nd, he killed Wang Zhen and Gao Jianzhong in the city. He also minced them into meat sauce and killed Zhang Yi.

古文：著临刑大呼曰： 王著为天下除害，今死矣，异日必有为我书其事者。 
现代文：著在临刑前大呼道： 王著为天下除害，今日死了，他日必有为我写出此事真象的人。 
English: On his deathbed, he cried out loudly, "The king, who wrote for the world to eliminate evil, died today. On the next day, someone will write the truth about this matter for me."

古文：阿合马死，世祖犹不深知其奸，令中书毋问其妻子。
现代文：阿合马死时，世祖还不深知其奸邪行为，下令中书，不要问他妻子的罪。
English: At the time of Ahma's death, the patriarch was not yet fully aware of his treacherous and evil deeds, and ordered in a letter not to ask him about his wife's sins.

古文：及询孛罗，乃尽得其罪恶，始大怒曰： 王著杀之，诚是也。 
现代文：及向孛罗了解后，乃尽知其罪恶，始大怒，说 ：王著杀阿合马，实在是对的。 
English: And when he came to the king's house, he was angry and said, "It was right of the king to put Haman to death.

古文：乃命发墓剖棺，戮尸于通玄门外，纵犬啖其肉。
现代文：乃命开墓破棺，戮阿合马尸于通玄门外，放狗去咬其肉。
English: He ordered the tomb to be opened, the coffin to be broken open, the horse's corpse to be dragged outside the main gate, and the dogs to be let out to gnaw on its flesh.

古文：百官士庶，聚观称快。
现代文：百官士庶，聚观称快。
English: He is a descendant of hundreds of government officials, and is known for his quick wit.

古文：子侄皆伏诛，没入其家属财产。
现代文：阿合马子侄皆被杀，没收其家属财产。
English: All of Ahma's nephews and nieces were killed, and their family's property was confiscated.

古文：其妾有名引住者，籍其藏，得二熟人皮于柜中，两耳具存，一阉竖专掌其扃鐍，讯问莫知为何人，但云 诅咒时，置神座其上，应验甚速 。
现代文：阿合马的妾有名引住者，登记她的财产时，在柜中得到二张熟人皮，两耳都还存在。有一太监专为阿合马掌管箱柜的插关，审问他也不知道此皮是何人，但听他说： 阿合马念咒语时，置神坐其上，应验甚速。 
English: Ahamma's concubine had a famous suitor. When she was registering her property, she found two familiar skins in the chest, both of which still existed. A eunuch who was in charge of the chest for Ahamma intervened and interrogated him. He didn't know who the skins belonged to, but he heard him say: When Ahamma recited a spell, he focused on it and fulfilled it very quickly.

古文：又以绢二幅，画甲骑数重，围守一幄殿，兵皆张弦挺刃内向，如击刺之为者。
现代文：又用绢二幅，画甲骑数重，围守一座篷帐的宫殿，士兵都向帐内张弦挺刃，如击刺之状。
English: There are also two paintings of swords, several of armoured horsemen, guarding a tent palace. The soldiers are holding their swords at the tent, as if they were stabbing it.

古文：画者陈其姓。
现代文：画此绢画的人姓陈。
English: The artist's surname is Chen.

古文：又有曹震圭者，尝推算阿合马所生年月。王台判者，妄引图谶。
现代文：又有曹震圭曾推算阿合马的出生年月，王台判妄引图谶，皆有不轨言论。
English: In addition, Cao Zhengui once estimated the birth date of a horse, and Wang Tai judged that it was wrong to quote a picture, all of which were off-track remarks.

古文：皆言涉不轨。事闻，敕剥四人者皮以徇。卢世荣，大名人也。
现代文：这些情况向世祖报告后，世祖下令剥太监及陈、曹、王等四人之皮示众。卢世荣，大名人。
English: After reporting these circumstances to the ancestor, the ancestor ordered the eunuch and Chen, Cao, Wang and four others to be flayed and displayed to the public. Lu Shirong, a great celebrity.

古文：阿合马专政，世荣以贿进，为江西榷茶运使，后以罪废。
现代文：阿合马专政时，世荣向他行贿，得任江西榷茶运使，后因罪撤职。
English: During the Aham dictatorship, Shi Rong paid him a bribe to be appointed as the envoy of Jiangxi tea transport, but was later dismissed for his crime.

古文：阿合马死，朝廷之臣讳言财利事，皆无以副世祖裕国足民之意。
现代文：阿合马死时，朝廷大臣怕谈财利之事，怕不能符合世祖裕国足民的意愿。
English: At the time of Ahma's death, the ministers of the Imperial Court were afraid to discuss matters of financial gain, fearing that they would not be able to comply with the wishes of the founder, Hirokuni Ashitami.

古文：有桑哥者，荐世荣有才术，谓能救钞法，增课额，上可裕国，下不损民。
现代文：但有个叫桑哥的人，推荐世荣，说他有才术，能拯救正在破坏的钞法，能增赋税，上可富国，下不损民。
English: But a man named Sango recommended Shi Rong, saying that he had talent, could save the banknote law that was being destroyed, could increase taxes, and could enrich the country without harming the people.

古文：世祖召见，奏对称旨。
现代文：世祖便召见了他，其对答也甚合世祖之意。
English: The patriarch summoned him, and his answer was very much in line with the patriarch's wishes.

古文：至元二十一年十一月辛丑，召中书省官与世荣廷辨，论所当为之事，右丞相和礼霍孙等守正不挠，为强词所胜，与右丞麦术丁，参政张雄飞、温迪罕皆罢，复起安童为右丞相，以世荣为右丞，而左丞史枢，参政不鲁迷失海牙、撒的迷失，参议中书省事拜降，皆世荣所荐也。
现代文：至元二十一年十一月二十八日，召中书省官员与世荣在朝中展开辩论，陈述朝廷所当做的事情。右丞相和礼霍孙等坚持正道，为强词夺理的世荣所胜。于是，和礼霍孙与右丞麦术丁、参政张雄飞、温迪罕等都被撤职，复起用安童为右丞相，以世荣为右丞，而左丞史枢、参政不鲁迷失海牙及撒的迷失、参议中书省事拜降等，都是世荣所推荐的人。
English: On November 28th, the officials of the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture and Shi Rong were summoned to the central government to start a debate and state what the imperial court should do. The Minister of the Right and Li Huosun adhered to the right path and were defeated by Shi Rong, who used strong words. Therefore, He Li Huosun, the Minister of the Right, Mai Shuting, the Minister of the Right, Zhang Xiongfei, and Wendi Han were all dismissed, and Andong was reinstated as the Minister of the Right, with Shi Rong as the Minister of the Right, while the Minister of the Left, Zhao Shizhu, the Minister of the Right

古文：世荣既骤被显用，即日奉旨中书整治钞法，遍行中外，官吏奉法不虔者，加以罪。
现代文：世荣骤然被越级拔用，当天便奉旨到中书省去整顿钞法，行文内外，官吏不诚心执行钞法的，都要问罪。
English: Se Rong was suddenly promoted to a higher rank, and on the same day, he was ordered to go to the Ministry of Finance to rectify the banknote law. Officials who do not sincerely implement the banknote law should be punished.

古文：翌日，同右丞相安童奏： 窃见老幼疾病之民，衣食不给，行乞于市，非盛世所宜见。宜官给衣粮，委各路正官提举其事。 
现代文：次日，同右丞相安童奏称 ：现在有不少老幼疾病的人，缺衣少食，在市上行乞，这不是盛世所应看到的现象，应该由政府给这些人以衣粮，委托各路正官提举其事。 
English: The next day, the same Right Honourable Minister Andong said: There are now many old and young people with diseases, lack of clothing and food, and begging in the market. This is not a phenomenon that should be seen in the prosperous world. The government should give these people clothing and food, and entrust various officials to raise the matter.

古文：又奏怀孟竹园、江湖鱼课及襄淮屯田事。
现代文：又上奏有关怀孟竹园、江湖鱼税及襄淮屯田事宜。
English: He also reported on the affairs of Huai Meng Bamboo Garden, the tax on fugu and Xianghuai Tunden.

古文：越三日，安童奏： 世荣所陈数事，乞诏示天下。 
现代文：三日后，安童又敦促世祖，对世荣所说的几件事，望诏告天下。
English: Three days later, Ando again urged Shizu to tell the world about several things that Shiro had said.

古文：世祖曰： 除给丐者衣食外，并依所陈。 
现代文：世祖说： 除给乞丐以衣食这一条外，其他都按世荣请求的办。 
English: Shifu said, "Apart from giving food and clothing to beggars, everything else was done according to Shirei's request.

古文：乃下诏云： 金银系民间通行之物，自立平准库，禁百姓私相买卖，今后听民间从便交易。
现代文：于是下诏说 ：金银乃民间通用之物，自立平准库后，禁百姓私相卖买，今后听凭民间便宜交易。
English: Therefore, the following edict was issued: gold and silver are things that are used by the general public. After the self-sustaining leveling library, it is forbidden for the people to sell and buy privately. In the future, they will rely on the cheap transactions of the general public.

古文：怀孟诸路竹货，系百姓栽植，有司拘禁发卖，使民重困，又致南北竹货不通；今罢各处竹监，从民货卖收税。
现代文：怀孟诸路竹货，系百姓栽植，官府曾禁止发卖，使百姓贫困，并招致南北竹货不通。今撤消各地竹监，听从民间卖买，官府收税。
English: The government once banned the sale of bamboo products, which were grown by the common people. This impoverished the common people and led to the fact that bamboo products could not be transported from the north to the south. Now, bamboo inspectors from all over the country have been removed, and the government collects taxes by listening to the people's selling and buying.

古文：江湖鱼课，已有定例，长流采捕，贫民恃以为生，所在拘禁，今后听民采用。
现代文：江湖鱼税，已有定例。贫民捕捞以谋生，今到处禁止捕捞是不对的，今后听任人民采用。
English: The poor people fish to earn a living. It is not right to ban fishing everywhere now. In the future, it will be left to the people to adopt.

古文：军国事务往来，全资站驿，马价近增，又令各户供使臣饮食，以致疲弊，今后除驿马外，其余官为支给。 
现代文：军国事务往来，全靠驿站运送，近来马增长，又要求各驿户供给使臣饮食，以致疲敝。今后除驿马外，其余由官府开支。 
English: Military and state affairs were carried out entirely by the post stations. Recently, the number of horses increased, and each post household was required to provide meals for the envoys, which led to exhaustion. In the future, the government would pay for everything except the horses.

古文：既而中书省又奏： 盐每引十五两，国家未尝多取，欲便民食。
现代文：其后，中书省又上奏世祖： 盐每引收税十五两，国家未曾多收，目的是想让百姓便于食用。
English: After that, the Ministry of Education and Culture sent a message to the founder of the dynasty: the state had never collected more than 15 taels of tax for every tonne of salt. The aim was to make it easier for the people to eat.

古文：今官豪诡名罔利，停货待价，至一引卖八十贯，京师亦百二十贯，贫者多不得食。
现代文：现在官府豪强欺名骗利，囤货待价，以至一引卖八十贯。京师盐价一引竟高达一百二十贯，贫者多不得食。
English: Nowadays, the government is so arrogant and deceitful that it hoards goods and waits for the price to rise to as much as 80 kroner per sale. The price of salt in Beijing is as high as 120 kroner per sale, and many poor people can't afford to eat.

古文：议以二百万引给商，一百万引散诸路，立常平盐局，或贩者增价，官平其直以售，庶民用给，而国计亦得。 
现代文：建议以盐二百引给商人，一百引散存诸路。成立常平盐局。如盐商抬价，官府便以平价出售。这样庶民能吃到盐，国家财政也有收入。 
English: It was suggested that 200 tons of salt should be brought to the merchants, and 100 tons should be scattered and stored along the roads. The Changping Salt Bureau was established. If the salt merchants raised the price, the government would sell it at the same price. In this way, the common people could eat salt, and the state treasury would also have income.

古文：世祖从之。
现代文：世祖采纳了这条建议。
English: The patriarch accepted the suggestion.

古文：世荣居中书未十日，御史中丞崔彧言其不可为相，大忤旨，下彧吏按问，罢职。
现代文：世荣到中书还不到十天，御史中丞崔便说世荣不能担任相职，这就完全有违皇上旨意。
English: Less than ten days before Se-Rong arrived at Chushin, Goshi Chujo Choi said that Se-Rong could not serve as chancellor, which was completely contrary to the emperor's will.

古文：世荣言： 京师富豪户酿酒酤卖，价高味薄，且课不时输，宜一切禁罢，官自酤卖。 
现代文：世祖因而将下狱审问，撤消其职务。世荣说： 京师富豪酿酒沽卖，价高味薄，且不按时纳税，宜全部取缔，由政府沽卖。 
English: Shi Rong said: Beijing's rich people brew and sell wine, the price is high and the taste is thin, and they do not pay taxes on time, it is appropriate to ban all of them and sell them by the government.

古文：明年正月壬午，世祖御香殿，世荣奏： 臣言天下岁课钞九十三万二千六百锭之外，臣更经画，不取于民，裁抑权势所侵，可增三百万锭。
现代文：明年正月九日，世祖到香殿，世荣奏称： 臣过去说过，在全国，在每年税收九十三万二千六百锭之外，还另行筹划，不取于民，只要收回权势之辈侵占的部分，官府便可年增收入三百万锭。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the next year, the ancestor went to the Incense Hall, and Seirong said: The minister said in the past that in addition to the annual tax of 932 thousand 600 baht in the whole country, there will be another plan, which will not be taken from the people. As long as the part occupied by the influential people is recovered, the government can increase its annual income by 3 million baht.

古文：初未行下，而中外已非议，臣请与台院面议上前行之。 
现代文：这个建议还未下达时，朝廷内外已有非议，臣请求与台、院在皇上面前辩论后实行。 
English: When this proposal had not yet been issued, it had already been criticized both inside and outside the Imperial Court, and the vassal requested that it be implemented after a debate with Taiwan and the Imperial Court in front of the emperor.

古文：世祖曰： 不必如此，卿但言之。 
现代文：世祖说： 不必如此，你只管说来听听。 
English: The patriarch said, "No need to do that, just speak and listen."

古文：世荣奏： 古有榷酤之法，今宜立四品提举司，以领天下之课，岁可得钞千四百四十锭。
现代文：世荣说 ：古有酒的专卖之法，今宜成立四品提举司，以负责天下的税收，每年可得钞一千四百四十锭。
English: Shierong said, "The way to monopolize the sale of ancient liquor, it is now appropriate to set up a four-product promotion department to be responsible for the world's taxes, which can earn 1,440 baht a year.

古文：自王文统诛后，钞法虚弊，为今之计，莫若依汉、唐故事，括铜铸至元钱，及制绫券，与钞参行。 
现代文：自诛王文统后，钞法被破坏，为今之计，不如按汉唐故事，收铜铸至元钱，还用丝布制绫券，与钞混合流通。 
English: Since the unification of the Han and Tang dynasties, the banknote law has been destroyed. For now, it is better to follow the story of the Han and Tang dynasties, collect copper to mint yuan coins, and also use silk cloth to make banknotes, and circulate them mixed with banknotes.

古文：因以所织绫券上之。
现代文：说罢把所织绫券呈交世祖。
English: He then presented the woven money to the ancestor.

古文：世祖曰： 便益之事，当速行之。 
现代文：世祖说： 这是有益的事，应当快办。 
English: The patriarch said, "This is a good thing, and it should be done quickly."

古文：又奏： 于泉、杭二州立市舶都转运司，造船给本，令人商贩，官有其利七，商有其三。
现代文：世荣奏称： 在泉、杭二州成立市舶都转运司，给本造船，令人从事商贩，政府得利之七成，商人得利之三成。
English: Shi Rongsao said: In Quan and Hangzhou, the city's shipping and transshipment department was established. For this shipbuilding, people were engaged in merchants, the government gained 70% of the profits, and merchants gained 30%.

古文：禁私泛海者，拘其先所蓄宝货，官买之；匿者，许告，没其财，半给告者。
现代文：禁止私人下海。若遇下海私商，扣留其以前所积蓄之钱货，由政府拍卖。如隐瞒不报的，允许检举揭发。被检举揭发的财物没官，政府将其一半给与检举揭发者。
English: It is forbidden for private individuals to go to sea. If a private merchant goes to sea, the money and goods that he has previously saved will be withheld and auctioned by the government. If he conceals or fails to report, he will be allowed to be reported. The property that has been reported is not official, and the government will give half of it to the person who reported it.

古文：今国家虽有常平仓，实无所畜。
现代文：今国家虽有常平仓，实际无积蓄。
English: Now, although the country has often closed positions, there is actually no savings.

古文：臣将不费一钱，但尽禁权势所擅产铁之所，官立炉鼓铸为器鬻之，以所得利合常平盐课，籴粟积于仓，待贵时粜之，必能使物价恒贱，而获厚利。
现代文：我将不费一钱，但需完全禁止权势之家所独占的产铁地方的冶铁制造，由政府设立炉鼓，铸铁器卖与平民，其所得利，与常平盐税相当，将此款籴粟积于仓，待粟价贵时粜出，必能使物价常贱而政府获厚利。
English: I will not spend a single penny, but it is necessary to completely ban the manufacture of ferrous iron in iron-producing areas that are monopolized by powerful families. The government will set up furnaces and drums, and sell cast ironware to civilians, whose income is equivalent to the normal salt tax. I will accumulate this poppy in a warehouse and sell it when the price of the poppy is high, which will surely make the price low and the government earn a lot of profit.

古文：国家虽立平准，然无晓规运者，以致钞法虚弊，诸物踊贵。
现代文：今国家虽成立平准以管理物价，但无人知道规划运作，以致纸币贬值，百物腾贵。
English: Today, although the state has established a standard to manage prices, no one knows the planning operation, resulting in the devaluation of banknotes and the rise in the price of everything.

古文：宜令各路立平准周急库，轻其月息，以贷贫民，如此，则贷者众，而本且不失。
现代文：宜令各路成立平准周急库，以很轻的月息，贷款给贫民。这样一来，则很多人可以得到贷款，而且政府又不会丧失本钱。
English: It is advisable for all parties to set up a quasi-weekly express bank to lend to the poor at a very light monthly interest rate. In this way, many people can get loans, and the government will not lose capital.

古文：又，随朝官吏增俸，州郡未及，可于各都立市易司，领诸牙侩人，计商人物货，四十分取一，以十为率，四给牙侩，六为官吏俸。
现代文：还有州郡的官吏，并没有随着朝廷的官吏一起增加薪俸，可于各都立市易司，使它管理诸牙行商人，要牙商计算商人货物的价钱，四十分取一，再将牙商得的全部，分为十份，四份留给牙商做佣金，六份由政府收取作为州郡官吏俸给。
English: There are also officials of prefectures and counties who have not increased their salaries along with the officials of the imperial court. They can set up a city commission in each prefecture to manage all the dentists. They should ask the dentists to calculate the price of the merchant's goods, take one-fortieth, and then divide the total received by the dentists into ten parts. Four parts should be left for the dentists to make commission, and six parts should be collected by the government as the salaries of the prefectures and counties' officials.

古文：国家以兵得天下，不藉粮馈，惟资羊马，宜于上都、隆兴等路，以官钱买币帛易羊马于北方，选蒙古人牧之，收其皮毛筋角酥酪等物，十分为率，官取其八，二与牧者。
现代文：国家是以军力得天下的，不借重粮食，唯靠羊马。宜于上都、隆兴等路，以官家的钱买币帛到北方去换羊马，再选蒙古人牧放这些羊马，收其毛、皮、筋、角、酥、酪等物，分为十份，政府取其八，牧放者得二份。
English: The country gained the world by military power, not by heavy grain, but by sheep and horses. It is suitable for Shangdu, Longxing and other roads, to buy coins with official money to go to the north to exchange sheep and horses, and then choose Mongolians to herd these sheep and horses, collect their fur, skin, sinew, horn, crisp, cheese and other things, divided into ten parts, the government takes eight, and the herdsmen get two parts.

古文：马以备军兴，羊以充赐予。 
现代文：这些马，可用以备军需；羊则可以补充赐予。 
English: These horses can be used to supply the army; sheep can be given in addition.

古文：帝曰： 汝先言数事皆善，固当速行。
现代文：世祖说 ：你先说的几件事都很好，应当快些实行。
English: The ancestor said, "The things you mentioned earlier are good and should be implemented quickly."

古文：此事亦善，祖宗时亦欲行之而不果，朕当思之。 
现代文：你说的养羊马的事也好，祖宗时也曾想实行，但没有实现，我当好好想一想。 
English: What you said about raising sheep and horses, my ancestors also wanted to do it, but it didn't happen. I should think about it.

古文：世荣因奏曰： 臣之行事，多为人所怨，后必有谮臣者，臣实惧焉，请先言之。 
现代文：世荣因而又奏称 ：臣办的事，多为人所怨，将来必有人暗中说我坏话，臣实在有点骇怕，所以请您先说说对我建议的想法。 
English: As a result, Seirong also made a report, saying, "Most of the things I do are resented by people. In the future, someone is bound to say bad things about me in secret. I'm really a bit scared, so please first tell me what you think of my suggestion."

古文：世祖曰： 汝言皆是，惟欲人无言者，安有是理。
现代文：世祖说 ：你说的都是对的，但要没有人说三道四，那是不成的。
English: The patriarch said, "What you say is right, but if no one speaks out, it will not come to pass.

古文：汝无防朕，饮食起居间可自为防。
现代文：你不要防范我，只是在饮食起居中自己要注意。
English: Don't be on your guard against me, just pay attention to yourself when eating and living.

古文：疾足之犬，狐不爱焉，主人岂不爱之？
现代文：拐了脚的狗，狐狸是不喜欢的，但主人难道不喜欢它？
English: The fox does not like the dog that has lost its footing, but does the owner not like it?

古文：汝之所行，朕自爱也，彼奸伪者则不爱耳。
现代文：你的言行，朕是很喜欢的，但坏蛋是不会喜欢的。
English: Your words and deeds, I like very much, but the villain will not like it.

古文：汝之职分既定，其无以一二人从行，亦当谨卫门户。 
现代文：你的职分已定，没有一二人在左右护卫，也应谨卫门户。 
English: Your position has been determined, there is no one or two people guarding the left and right, you should also guard the portal.

古文：遂谕丞相安童增其从人，其为帝所倚眷如此。
现代文：于是，便通知丞相安童，增加世荣的随从，可见世荣是多么受到世祖的倚重和爱护。
English: As a result, he informed Prime Minister Ando to increase Shiro's entourage, which shows how much Shiro was supported and loved by the patriarch.

古文：又十有余日，中书省请罢行御史台，其所隶按察司隶内台。
现代文：又过十多天，中书省请皇上撤消御史台，将御史台所管的按察司转隶内台。
English: More than ten days later, the Ministry of Chinese Literature asked the emperor to revoke the Imperial History Office and transfer the inspector general in charge of the Imperial History Office to the Inner Office.

古文：又请随行省所在立行枢密院。
现代文：又请皇上在行省所在地成立行枢密院。
English: He also asked the emperor to establish a Privy Council in the location of the province.

古文：世祖曰： 行院之事，前日已议，由阿合马任智自私，欲其子忽辛行省兼兵柄而止。
现代文：世祖说 ：行院的事，前日已议。由于阿合马自私，任凭自己想法，欲其子忽辛行省兼兵权，才未实行。
English: The patriarch said, "The matter of going to the academy had been discussed the day before, but it was not carried out because Ahma was selfish and allowed himself to think that he wanted his son to be able to go to the province and the military at the same time.

古文：汝今行之，于事为宜。 明日，奏升六部为二品。
现代文：现在你想实行，是恰当的。 次日，奏升六部为二品。
English: Now you want to implement, it is appropriate. The next day, the six parts were raised to two products.

古文：又奏令按察司总各路钱谷，择干济者用之，其刑名事上御史台，钱谷由部申省。
现代文：又奏令按察司总各路钱谷，选择能干的有济世之才的人担任此职。其赏罚之事，上报御史台，钱谷由各部申报中书省。
English: He also issued an order to select a capable person with the ability to benefit the world to serve in this position according to the Qianya of each road of the inspector general. The matter of his reward and punishment shall be reported to the Imperial History Channel, and the Qianya shall be reported by each department to the Ministry of Education.

古文：世祖曰： 汝与老臣共议，然后行之可也。 
现代文：世祖说 ：你和老臣共同商议，然后行之，可也。 
English: The ancestor said, "You and the elder should discuss the matter together, and then act accordingly."

古文：二月辛酉，御史台奏： 中书省请罢行台，改按察为提刑转运司，俾兼钱谷。
现代文：二月十八日，御史台奏请皇上说： 中书省请撤消行台，改按察为提刑转运司，以便兼管钱谷。
English: On February 18th, the Imperial Historian petitioned the emperor, saying, "The Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, please revoke the travel ban, and change the inspector to the Department of Sentencing and Transportation, so that he can also manage Qiantu."

古文：臣等窃惟：初置行台时，朝廷老臣集议，以为有益，今无所损，不可辄罢。
现代文：臣等认为，初置行台时，朝廷老臣集议，以为有益。现在也无甚害处，不可随便撤消。
English: In the opinion of the ministers, when the platform was first set up, it was thought to be beneficial for the senior courtiers of the imperial court to discuss it. Now, there is no great harm, and it cannot be removed at will.

古文：且按察司兼转运，则纠弹之职废。请右丞相复与朝廷老臣集议。 
现代文：而且，按察司兼转运，就废弃了它的纠偏、弹劾的职能，请右丞相再与朝廷老臣集议。 
English: Moreover, since the inspector general was also the head of transportation, its functions of correction and impeachment were abolished, and the minister of justice was asked to discuss the matter with the senior court officials.

古文：得旨如所请。
现代文：世祖同意御史台的请求。
English: In response to his request, Emperor Nijong issued an order.

古文：壬戌，御史台奏： 前奉旨，令臣等议罢行台及兼转运事。世荣言按察司所任，皆长才举职之人，可兼钱谷。
现代文：十九日，御史台奏称： 前奉旨，令臣等议撤消行台及兼转运事，世荣认为任职于按察司的人，都是有才能的、称职的人，可兼钱谷。
English: On the 19th, the Imperial Historian's Office made a report saying, "In accordance with the previous order, the ministers and others have decided to cancel the trip to Taiwan and the transfer. Shirong believes that the people who serve as inspectors are talented and competent people, and can also be Qiangu."

古文：而廷臣皆以为不可，彼所取人，臣不敢止，惟言行台不可罢者，众议皆然。 世祖曰： 世荣以为何如？ 
现代文：但朝廷诸老臣都认为不可兼职。世荣怎样用人，我们不敢干预，大家只是同意保留行台，认为不能撤消。 世祖问： 世荣以为如何？ 
English: However, all the senior courtiers of the imperial court believed that part-time employment was unacceptable. We did not dare to interfere with how Se-Rong employed people, everyone just agreed to retain the position, believing that it could not be revoked. Se-Ju asked: What did Se-Rong think?

古文：奏曰： 欲罢之耳。 
现代文：御史台的人说 ：他想撤消行台。 
English: A source at the broadcaster said: "He wants to cancel the trip.

古文：世祖曰： 其依世荣言。 
现代文：世祖说 ：那就依世荣说的好了。 
English: The ancestor said, "Then let it be as Seirong said."

古文：中书省奏立规措所，秩五品，所司官吏，以善贾者为之。
现代文：中书省奏请设立规措所，官阶五品。这个机构的官吏，以会从事商业的人担任。
English: The Chinese Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy requested the establishment of a regulation institute, with five official ranks. The officials of this institution will be people engaged in business.

古文：世祖曰： 此何职？ 
现代文：世祖问 ：这机构是何职能？ 
English: The Patriarch asked: What is the function of this institution?

古文：世荣对曰： 规画钱谷者。 
现代文：世荣答道 ：规划钱谷。 
English: Seirong replied, "The planning of Qianya is complete."

古文：遂从之。
现代文：世祖便采纳中书省的这条建议。
English: So the midwife followed his advice.

古文：又奏： 天下能规运钱谷者，向日皆在阿合马之门，今籍录以为污滥，此岂可尽废。
现代文：世荣又上奏道 ：天下能规划钱谷的人，过去都在阿合马的门下，现在，在档案中把他们当成贪赃渎职的人。
English: Seirong went on to say, "In the past, all the people in the world who could plan Qianguo were under Ahma's tutelage. Now, in the archives, they are regarded as corrupt and derelict in their duties."

古文：臣欲择其通才可用者，然惧有言臣用罪人。 
现代文：然而这些人岂可完全弃置不顾。我现在想选择其中通才可用之人，但又怕有人说我任用有罪之人！ 
English: However, these people should not be completely disregarded. I now want to choose someone who can be used as a generalist, but I am afraid that someone will say that I am appointing a guilty person!

古文：世祖曰： 何必言此，可用者用之。 
现代文：世祖说： 何必说这话，可以用的人，你就使用吧！ 
English: The patriarch said: "Why do you need to say this? If you can use it, then use it!"

古文：遂以前河间转运使张私纲、撒都丁、不鲁合散、孙桓，并为河间、山东等路都转运盐使。
现代文：于是，世荣便使以前的河间转运使张弘纲、撒都丁、不鲁合散、孙桓等同为河间、山东等路都转运盐使。
English: As a result, Shi Rong made Zhang Honggang, Sadudin, Bu Lu Gassan, and Sun Huan, who had previously transported salt between rivers, transport salt between rivers and Shandong.

古文：其他擢用者甚众。
现代文：另外，还提拔任用了其他一些人。
English: In addition, a number of other people have been promoted.

古文：世荣既以利自任，惧怒之者众，乃以九事说世祖诏天下：其一，免民间包银三年；其二，官吏俸免民间带纳；其三，免大都地税；其四，江淮民失业贫困、鬻妻子以自给者，所在官为收赎，使为良民；其五，逃移复业者，免其差税；其六，乡民造醋者，免收课；其七，江南田主收佃客租课，减免一分；其八，添支内外官吏俸五分；其九，定百官考课升擢之法。
现代文：世荣既以兴国家之利为己任，当然怕他和恨他的人都不少。于是世荣便提出九件事要求世祖向天下发出告示：其一，民户的包银免征三年；其二，官吏俸禄，免民间代纳；其三，免大都地税；其四，江淮民众失业贫困，有卖妻子的，当地政府应代为收赎，使为良民；其五，逃亡、迁移后又复其业者，免其差税；其六，乡民制醋者免税；其七，江南田主收佃客租课时，要减免一分；其八，内外官吏增俸五分；其九，定百官提升考试的方法。
English: As it was his duty to promote the interests of the country, naturally there were many people who feared him and hated him. Therefore, Shi Rong put forward nine matters to require the patriarch to issue a notice to the world: First, the private households' gold and silver are exempted from taxation for three years; Second, the officials' salaries are exempted from the people's payment; Third, the metropolitan tax is exempted; Fourth, the people of Jianghuai are unemployed and poor, and those who have sold their wives should be redeemed by the local government on behalf of the people; Fifth, those who have resumed their business after fleeing or moving are exempted from the tax; Sixth, the people in the

古文：大抵欲以释怨要誉而已，世祖悉从之。
现代文：这些意见，大都是世荣为了减少别人对他的怨恨、想自己的名誉好一点而提出来的，世祖都听从了他。
English: Most of these opinions were put forward by Shi Rong in order to reduce the resentment of others towards him and to improve his own reputation. The patriarchs all obeyed him.

古文：既而又奏： 立真定、济南、江淮等处宣慰司兼都转运使司，以治课程，仍立条例，禁诸司不得追摄管课官吏，及遣人辄至办课处沮扰，按察司不得检察文卷。 
现代文：接着，世荣又奏请皇上： 建议设立真定、济南、江淮等处宣慰司兼都转运使司，以便管理各种赋税。另外，还要订立条例：诸司不得兼任税收官吏，不得遣人随便到办税收的地方干扰，按察司不得检察文卷等。 
English: Next, Shi Rong also petitioned the emperor: It was proposed to set up the Consolation Division, Jinan, Jianghuai and other departments as well as the Transportation Division to manage all kinds of taxes. In addition, regulations should be established: the departments should not concurrently serve as tax officials, should not send people to interfere with the places where taxes are collected, and should not inspect documents according to the inspection division.

古文：又奏： 大都酒课，日用米千石，以天下之众比京师，当居三分之二，酒课亦当日用米二千石。
现代文：又上奏说： 大都酒税，每日征米千石，以地方的人口与京师的人口相比，地方上的人口当居三分之二，因此，能收酒税的数额，每日应为米二千石。
English: It was also reported that: Most of the liquor taxes are levied at a daily rate of 1,000 koku of rice. If the local population is compared with the population of Beijing, the local population should account for two-thirds. Therefore, the amount of liquor tax that can be collected should be 2,000 koku of rice per day.

古文：今各路但总计日用米三百六十石而已，其奸欺盗隐如此，安可不禁。
现代文：今各路总计，酒课米不过三百六十万石，可见，内中是有奸、欺、盗、隐等弊端存在的，怎能不禁止这些弊端呢？
English: Now the total of all roads is only 3.6 million koku of rice. It can be seen that there are evils such as treachery, deceit, theft, and concealment in it. How can we not prohibit these evils?

古文：臣等已责各官增旧课二十倍，后有不如数者，重其罪。 
现代文：臣等已责成各官增加旧有的税额二十倍，将来如有不按额纳税的，就重治其罪。 
English: The ministers have ordered all officials to increase the previous tax amount by twenty times. In the future, if anyone does not pay tax according to the amount, they will be severely punished.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：世祖都采纳了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：三月庚子，世荣奏以宣德、王好礼并为浙西道宣慰使。
现代文：三月二十八日，世荣奏请皇上任命宣德、王好礼为浙西道宣慰使。
English: On March 28, Shi Rongso asked the emperor to appoint Xuan De and Wang Hao Li as Xuan Yu envoys of the Western Zhejiang Province.

古文：世祖曰： 宣德，人多言其恶。 
现代文：世祖说： 宣德，有许多人说他坏。 
English: The patriarch said: Xuan De, there are many people who say that he is bad.

古文：世荣奏： 彼入状中书，能岁办钞七十五万锭，是以令往。 
现代文：世荣说 ：宣德增补入中书省，能每年办钞七十五万锭，所以，我才让他去浙西。 
English: Shi Rong said: Xuan De has been added to the Central Book Ministry and can handle 750,000 baht of banknotes per year, so I let him go to West Zhejiang.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖听说后便采纳了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：臣今创田之，已耕者有焉，未耕者有焉，或才播种，或既生苗，然不令人守之，为物蹂践，则可惜也。
现代文：四月，世荣对世祖说： 承蒙您的厚爱，事情都要我来办。但我认为，今日的情况，就好像数万顷田，过去没人耕种，草生其间。今天我来开垦，有的已经耕种，有的还未耕种。在已耕种的田里，或刚下种，或已生苗。即使如此，如不使人守卫之，便会为野物所蹂躏，实在可惜。
English: In April, Shiro said to Shiso, "Thanks to your great love, I have to do everything. But I think that today's situation is like tens of thousands of hectares of fields, which no one cultivated in the past, with grass growing in between. Today, I have come to reclaim, some have been cultivated, some have not yet been cultivated. In the cultivated fields, or just planted, or have seedlings. Even so, if people do not guard it, it will be ravaged by wild animals, which is really a pity.

古文：方今丞相安童，督臣所行，是守田者也。
现代文：现在，丞相安童监督我的所为，他就是一个守卫田的人。
English: Now, Prime Minister Ando supervises what I do, he is a person who guards the fields.

古文：然不假之以力，则田者亦徒劳耳。
现代文：如不借给守卫田的人以力量，则种田人耕种了田也徒劳。
English: If you do not lend strength to the person guarding the field, then the farmer has cultivated the field in vain.

古文：守田者假之力矣，而天不雨，则亦终无成。
现代文：但如只守卫田的人获得力量，而天不下雨，那么，最后也不能成功。
English: But if only those who guard the fields gain strength, and it does not rain, then, in the end, they will not succeed.

古文：所谓天雨者，陛下与臣添力是也。
现代文：所谓下雨，就是陛下给我增添的力量。
English: The so-called rain is His Majesty's added strength to me.

古文：惟陛下怜臣。 
现代文：这一点，望陛下可怜我的处境。 
English: For this, may His Majesty have pity on my condition.

古文：世祖曰： 朕知之矣。 
现代文：世祖说： 我知道了。 
English: The ancestor said, "I know.

古文：令奏行事之目，皆从之。
现代文：便下令，凡是世荣奏请行事的条目，都批准实行。
English: He ordered that all the items requested by Shirounso be approved and implemented.

古文：世荣居中书才数月，恃委任之专，肆无忌惮，视丞相犹虚位也。
现代文：世荣在中书才数月，自恃皇帝的信任，肆无忌惮，根本不把丞相放在眼里。
English: Seirong had only been working at the Chinese Academy of Letters for a few months, and he had no scruples about taking the emperor's trust. He didn't care about the emperor at all.

古文：左司郎中周戭与世荣稍不合，坐以废格诏旨，奏而杀之，朝中凛凛。
现代文：左司郎中周寅戈与世荣稍有不合，便以破坏、抵制皇上诏旨论罪，奏请皇上将他杀了。
English: Zuo Si Lang Zhong Zhou Yingge had a slight disagreement with Shi Rong, so he broke and resisted the emperor's edict, pleaded guilty, and asked the emperor to kill him.

古文：监察御史陈天祥上章劾之，大概言其 苛刻诛求，为国敛怨，将见民间凋耗，天下空虚。
现代文：气氛凛冽，满朝无不敬畏。监察御史陈天祥上表弹劾世荣，说世荣 残酷搜刮，为国积怨，将会出现民间凋疲，天下空虚之状 。
English: The atmosphere is tingling, and there is nothing but awe throughout the dynasty. Supervisor and historian Chen Tianxiang is on the table to impeach Shirong, saying that Shirong is cruelly raiding, accumulating grievances for the country, there will be people's fatigue, and the world will be empty.

古文：考其所行与所言者，已不相副：始言能令钞法如旧，弊今愈甚；始言能令百物自贱，今百物愈贵；始言课程增至三百万锭，不取于民，今迫胁诸路，勒令如数虚认而已；始言令民快乐，今所为无非扰民之事。
现代文：说： 考查一下世荣的所言与所行，则显然是不相符的。世荣开始说能令钞法如旧，但现在弊病却更为厉害；开始说能令百物之价自己会降下来，而现在百物之价更贵；开始说赋税总额可增三百万锭，不取于民，而现在威胁诸地行政当局，勒令他们虚伪地承认中书下达的征收数额；开始说要老百姓快乐，而现在看来，他的所作所为，无非是侵害老百姓而矣。
English: He said: "If you look at what Shi Rong has said and done, it is obviously inconsistent. Shi Rong began by saying that he could make the banknote law the same as before, but now the disease is more severe; he began by saying that he could make the price of a hundred things lower, but now the price of a hundred things is more expensive; he began by saying that the total tax could increase by three million baht, not from the people, but now he is threatening the local administrative authorities, forcing them to hypocritically admit the amount of the levy issued in the document; he began by saying that he wanted the people to be happy, but now it seems that his actions are nothing

古文：若不早为更张，待其自败，正犹蠹虽除而木已病矣 。
现代文：如此等等，不一而足。若不早日改变世荣的所为，而等待其自己失败，就将如害木之蠹虽除，但木已经病倒了。 
English: And so on and so forth, one after another. If we do not change Shiro's behavior as soon as possible and wait for him to fail, we will be like removing the thorn from a diseased tree, but the tree is already diseased.

古文：世祖时在上都，御史大夫玉速帖木儿以其状闻，世祖始大悟，即日遣唆都八都儿、秃剌帖木儿等还大都，命安童集诸司官吏、老臣、儒士，及知民间事者，同世荣听天祥弹文，仍令世荣、天祥同赴上都。
现代文：世祖当时在上都，御史大夫玉速帖木儿便把陈天祥的揭发书转给世祖，世祖始大悟，即日派遣唆都八都儿、秃剌帖木儿等回大都，命安童召集诸司的官吏、老臣、儒士以及了解内情的人等，和世荣一道，倾听天祥的揭发，并令世荣和天祥同往上都见皇帝。
English: The patriarch was in Shangdu at the time, and the goshi doctor, Tamasho Timur, forwarded Chen Tianxiang's disclosure book to the patriarch. The patriarch realized for the first time that he had to send the eight emperors, the vulture Timur, and so on back to Dadu on the same day. He called together officials from various departments, old ministers, Confucianists, and people who knew the inside story. Together with Shiro, they listened to Tianxiang's disclosure, and made Shiro and Tianxiang see the emperor together.

古文：壬戌，御史中丞阿剌帖木儿、郭佑，侍御史白秃剌帖木儿，参政撒的迷失等，以世荣所伏罪状奏曰： 不白丞相安童，支钞二十万锭。擅升六部为二品。效李璮令急递铺用红青白三色囊转行文字。不与枢密院议，调三行省万二千人置济州，委漕运使陈柔为万户管领。以沙全代万户宁玉戍浙西吴江。用阿合马党人潘杰、冯珪为杭、鄂二行省参政，宣德为杭州宣慰，余分布中外者众。以钞虚，闭回易库，民间昏钞不可行。罢白酵课，立野面、木植、磁器、桑枣、煤炭、匹段、青果、油坊诸牙行。调出县官钞八十六万余锭。 
现代文：四月二十日，御史中丞阿剌帖木儿、郭佑、侍御史白秃剌帖木儿、参政撒的迷失等，将世荣服罪的报告转奏世祖，列举罪状如下：不先向丞相说明，就支用钞二十万锭；擅自升六部为二品；仿效李王传紧急军令的办法，用红、青、白三色囊转行文书；不与枢密院商议，便调三个行省的一万二千人置于济州；委漕运使陈柔为万户管领；以沙全代替万户宁玉驻防浙西吴江；用阿合马党人潘杰、冯王圭为杭、鄂二行省参政，以宣德为杭州宣慰，还安插了其他许多人在京师内外；纸钞贬值，怕人民兑换银两，便又封闭兑换钱钞的回易库，致民间模糊不清的旧钞，不能通行；撤消酒酵税；成立野面、木植、磁器、桑枣、煤炭、布匹、青果、油坊等诸牙行及调出县官钞八十余万锭等项。
English: On the 20th of April, the Grand Historian Chujo Ahun Timur, Guo You, the Attendant Grand Historian Bai Zhengqin Timur, and the Lost of the Participant in Politics, etc. transcribed the report of the crime of serving the honor of the world to the ancestor, and listed the charges as follows: without first explaining to the prime minister, he used a banknote of 200,000 baht; without authorization, he raised six parts into two products; following the method of King Li's emergency military order, he used red, blue and white tricolor bags to transfer documents; without consulting the Privy Council, he transferred 12,000 people from three provinces to Jeju

古文：丞相安童言： 世荣昔奏，能不取于民岁办钞三百万锭，令钞复实，诸物悉贱，民得休息，数月即有成效。
现代文：丞相安童说 ：世荣对皇上说，能不取于民而岁办钞三百万锭，还要使钞票恢复其值，使诸物价格都便宜，民众得到休养生息，数月即有成效。
English: Vice-Minister Ando said, "Shirong told the emperor that if he could get three million baht from the people, he would restore the value of the banknotes, make the prices of all things cheaper, and the people would have a rest and livelihood, which would be effective in a few months."

古文：今已四阅月，所行不符所言，钱谷出者多于所入，引用憸人，紊乱选法。 
现代文：但现在，已经四个多月了，他的行为和他过去说的话不相符。实际上，现在钱谷付出的多而收入的少。另外，世荣引用奸佞小人，使官职的任免紊乱。 
English: But now, for more than four months, his actions do not match what he said in the past. In fact, Qiantu is now paying more and earning less. In addition, Shi Rong is using villains to disrupt the appointment and removal of officials.

古文：翰林学士赵孟頫等，亦以为 世荣初以财赋自任，当时人情不敢预料，将谓别有方术，可以增益国用。
现代文：翰林学士赵孟传等也认为 ：开始时，世荣以经济理财为己任，当时人们不敢断定其可否，以为他另有方术，可以增加国用。
English: Zhao Mengchuan, a scholar of Hanlin, also believes that: At the beginning, Shi Rong took economic and financial management as his own responsibility. At that time, people did not dare to determine whether it was possible, thinking that he had another way to increase national consumption.

古文：及今观之，不过如御史所言。更张之机，正在今日。
现代文：但到今日看来，不过还是像御史所说的那样，彻底更改他那套祸国殃民的政策，已是时候了。
English: Today, however, it seems that it is time for him to completely change his policy of harming the country and the people, as the historian said.

古文：若复恣其所行，为害非细 。
现代文：若再任其所为，那么，其危害就决非小事了。 
English: If it is allowed to do so again, the damage it will do will be no small matter.

古文：阿剌帖木儿同天祥等与世荣对于世祖前，一一款伏。
现代文：阿剌帖木儿、陈天祥等与世荣在世祖面前对质，世荣认罪不讳。
English: Ah Qin Timur, Chen Tianxiang and others confronted Shi Rong in front of the patriarch, and Shi Rong confessed to the crime.

古文：遣忽都带儿传旨中书省，命丞相安童与诸老臣议，世荣所行，当罢者罢之，更者更之，所用人实无罪者，朕自裁处。
现代文：乃遣忽都带儿传旨中书省，命丞相安童与诸老臣商议，对世荣所推行的各项措施，当撤消的撤消，当改变的改变。对世荣所任用的人，由皇上自己裁处。
English: According to the instruction of the Ministry of Education and Culture, the Minister of Education and Culture, Ando, discussed with the elders, the various measures implemented by Shi Rong should be revoked or changed, and the people appointed by Shi Rong should be judged by the emperor himself.

古文：遂下世荣于狱。
现代文：于是，世荣便被捕入狱了。
English: As a result, Shi Rong was arrested and jailed.

古文：十一月乙未，世祖问忽剌出曰： 汝于卢世荣有何言？ 
现代文：十一月二十七日，世祖问忽剌出： 你对卢世荣的处理有什么话要说？ 
English: On November 27th, the patriarch suddenly asked, "What do you have to say about Lu Shirong's treatment?"

古文：有旨诛世荣，割其肉以食禽獭。桑哥，胆巴国师之弟子也。
现代文：答道 ：最近新到中书省任职的汉人说，世荣完全服罪，其罪状已彻底查清了，案也判定了，还每日把他养起来，岂不是糟踏仓库的粮食。 
English: Answer: A Chinese who recently took up a new post at the Ministry of Education and Culture said that Shi Rong had fully confessed his crime, the charges against him had been thoroughly investigated, and the case had been adjudicated. He was also brought up every day. Wouldn't that be a waste of grain from the warehouse?

古文：能通诸国言语，故尝为西蕃译史。
现代文：于是，世祖便下令杀死世荣，并割其肉以喂禽兽。桑哥，胆巴国师之弟子，能通诸国语言，曾任西蕃翻译。
English: As a result, the ancestor gave the order to kill Se Rong and cut up his flesh to feed to the animals. Sango, a disciple of the national teacher of Tibet, was fluent in many languages and once served as a translator in Xicheng.

古文：为人狡黠豪横，好言财利事，世祖喜之。
现代文：为人狡诈专横，爱谈财利，世祖喜欢他。
English: He was a cunning and domineering man, who loved to talk about money and gain. The ancestors liked him.

古文：及后贵幸，乃讳言师事胆巴而背之。
现代文：后来，飞黄腾达了，便闭口不说师从胆巴之事，背弃了胆巴。
English: Later, when he became famous, he kept his mouth shut and didn't talk about his teacher's gallbladder. He turned his back on his gallbladder.

古文：至元中，擢为总制院使。
现代文：至元年间被提拔为总制院使。
English: During the first year of the new year, he was promoted to the post of general secretary.

古文：总制院者，掌浮图氏之教，兼治吐蕃之事。御史台尝欲以章闾为按察使，世祖曰： 此人桑哥尝言之。 
现代文：总制院是负责掌管佛教和兼治吐蕃的机关，御史台曾想任章闾为按察使，世祖说， 此人桑哥曾说过。 
English: The General Research Institute is the body responsible for governing Buddhism and also governing Tibet. The History Channel once wanted to appoint Zhang Ye as an inspector, the patriarch said. This man, Sango, once said.

古文：及卢世荣见用，亦由桑哥之荐。
现代文：后来卢世荣被重用，也是由桑哥推荐的。
English: Later, Lu Shirong was reused, also recommended by Sango.

古文：中书省尝令李留判者市油，桑哥自请得其钱市之，司徒和礼霍孙谓非汝所宜为，桑哥不服，至与相殴，且谓之曰： 与其使汉人侵盗，曷若与僧寺及官府营利息乎？ 
现代文：中书省曾令李留判购油，桑哥自己要求得到李的购油钱自己去购买。司徒和礼霍孙说桑哥不宜做此事，桑哥不服，以致互相殴打。桑哥还对和礼霍孙说： 与其使汉人得机会搞钱，不如让僧寺及官府营利。 
English: The Chinese Ministry of Education had ordered Li Liu to purchase oil, and Sango himself demanded to get Li's oil purchase money to buy it himself. Szeto and Li Huosun said that Sango should not do this, Sango was not satisfied, so they beat each other. Sango also said to Li Huosun: Instead of giving the Han people the opportunity to make money, it is better to let the monasteries and government offices make a profit.

古文：乃以油万斤与之。
现代文：便以万斤油给予中书省。
English: It was then given to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：桑哥后以所营息钱进，和礼霍孙曰： 我初不悟此也。 
现代文：后来，桑哥还把自己在经营中赚的钱献给中书省，和礼霍孙便说： 我开始没有想到会有这种情况。 
English: Later, Sango also donated the money he earned from his business to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and Rehosun said: I didn't expect this to happen at first.

古文：一日，桑哥在世祖前论和雇和买事，因语及此，世祖益喜，始有大任之意。
现代文：一天，桑哥在世祖面前讨论官府雇佣工匠和购买民间器物的事，谈及桑哥买卖油赚钱给中书省，世祖便更欣赏他，便开始有意让他担负重任。
English: One day, Sango discussed the government's employment of craftsmen and the purchase of folk utensils in front of the patriarch, and talked about Sango buying and selling oil to make money for the Ministry of Education. The patriarch appreciated him more and began to let him shoulder heavy responsibilities.

古文：尝有旨令桑哥具省臣姓名以进，廷中有所建置，人才进退，桑哥咸与闻焉。
现代文：世祖曾指令桑哥上报省臣的姓名，可见朝廷有什么机构要设立、有什么人员要任免，桑哥都是知道的。
English: The ancestor had ordered Sango to report the names of the provincial officials. It can be seen that Sango knew what institutions the imperial court wanted to establish and what personnel it wanted to appoint and dismiss.

古文：二十四年闰二月，复置尚书省，遂以桑哥与铁木儿为平章政事。
现代文：二十四年闰二月，再设尚书省，并任桑哥及铁木儿为平章政事。
English: In leap February of the twenty-fourth year, the Ministry of Education and Culture was re-established, and Sango and Temur were appointed as ministers.

古文：诏告天下，改行中书省为行尚书省，六部为尚书六部。
现代文：世祖诏告天下，改行中书省为尚书省，六部为尚书六部。
English: The patriarchal edict announced to the world that the book ministry would be changed to the book ministry, and the six books would be changed to the six books.

古文：三月，更定钞法，颁行至元宝钞于天下，中统钞通行如故。
现代文：三月，更定钞法，在全国发行至元宝钞，中统宝钞流通如故。
English: In March, the revised banknote law came into effect, and yuan-denominated banknotes were issued throughout the country. The circulation of yuan-denominated banknotes remained unchanged.

古文：桑哥尝奉旨检核中书省事，凡校出亏欠钞四千七百七十锭、昏钞一千三百四十五锭，平章麦术丁即自伏，参政杨居宽微自辩，以为实掌铨选，钱谷非所专。
现代文：桑哥曾奉旨检核中书省事。查出亏损钞四千七百七十锭，破旧钞票一千三百四十五锭，平章麦丁自己服罪，参政杨居宽稍作辩解，说自己实际上只掌管人事方面的事，钱谷之事不是自己专任。
English: Sango had been instructed to inspect the books and save trouble. He found a loss of 4,770 baht in banknotes and 1,345 baht in worn-out banknotes. Ping Zhangmeding himself pleaded guilty. Yang Jiuyuan, who was involved in politics, slightly defended himself, saying that he was actually only in charge of personnel matters and that the Qiangu affair was not his sole responsibility.

古文：桑哥令左右拳其面，因问曰： 既典选事，果无黜陟失当者乎？ 
现代文：桑哥便令手下人以拳头打他的脸，并质问他说： 既然掌管人选方面的事，难道没有罢黜和提升失当的人吗？ 
English: Sango then ordered his men to hit him in the face with their fists and asked him: Since you are in charge of the selection process, aren't there people who have been removed and promoted for misconduct?

古文：寻亦引服。
现代文：很快杨居宽也服罪。
English: Soon, Yang Jukuang also pleaded guilty.

古文：参议伯降以下，凡钩考违惰耗失等事，及参议王巨济尝言新钞不便忤旨，各款伏。
现代文：参议伯降以下，凡考核出有违法、怠惰和失职等情及参议王巨济曾认为新钞通行不便而违背圣意之事，各人都已承认。
English: Everyone below the rank of councillor has admitted that the examination revealed illegalities, laziness and dereliction of duty, and that the councillor Wang Juzhi once thought that the new banknotes were inconvenient and violated the sacred will.

古文：遣参政忻都奏闻，世祖令丞相安童与桑哥共议，且谕： 毋令麦术丁等他日得以胁问诬伏为辞，此辈固狡狯人也。 
现代文：桑哥乃派参政忻都上奏皇上，世祖令丞相安童与桑哥共议，并指示说： 不要令麦丁等他日有机会说这一次服罪是胁问诬服而成的，因为此等人本来是很狡猾的人。 
English: Sankonyo sent his political advisors to appeal to the emperor, and the patriarch ordered the prime minister, Ando, to discuss the matter with Sankonyo, and instructed: Do not let Medin wait for another day to have the opportunity to say that this confession was made under duress, because these people were originally very cunning.

古文：数日，桑哥又奏： 鞫中书参政郭佑，多所逋负，尸位不言，以疾为托。
现代文：过几天，桑哥又上奏说： 审问中书参政郭佑，许多地方逃避责任，托言生病，居其位而不尽其职。
English: A few days later, Sango made another report: "During the interrogation of Guo You, a scrivener and politician, Guo You evaded his responsibilities in many places, used illness as an excuse, and stayed in his position without fulfilling his duties.

古文：臣谓中书之务，隳惰如此，汝力不能及，何不告之蒙古大臣，故殴辱之，今已款服。 
现代文：我质问他，中书省的事务，怠惰如此，如是你能力不行，为何不告知蒙古籍的大臣？故殴打侮辱了他。
English: I asked him why he did not inform the Mongolian minister about the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture, if he was so lazy and incompetent. So I beat him and insulted him.

古文：世祖命穷诘之。
现代文：现在，他已老老实实服罪了。 
English: Now he has honestly confessed his guilt.

古文：佑与居宽后皆弃市，人咸冤焉。
现代文：世祖听后，要求对郭佑进一步追查，郭佑与居宽均被斩首示众，人们都认为这是一宗冤枉案子。
English: After hearing this, the patriarch asked for further investigation into Guo You, and both Guo You and Ju Kuan were beheaded in public. People believed that this was a case of injustice.

古文：台吏王良弼，尝与人议尚书省政事，又言： 尚书钩校中书，不遗余力，他日我曹得发尚书奸利，其诛籍无难。 
现代文：台吏王良弼曾与人议论尚书省政事。又说： 尚书查核中书，不遗余力。他日我辈揭发尚书省的为奸好利之事，要杀戮籍没其家，也非难事。 
English: Wang Liangyao, a Taiwanese official, once discussed the political affairs of Shangshu with others. He also said: Shangshu did not spare any effort in checking the books. The other day, our generation exposed the treachery of Shangshu, and it was not difficult to kill those who had no family.

古文：桑哥闻之，捕良弼至，与中书台院札鲁忽赤鞫问，款服，谓此曹诽谤，不诛无以惩后。遂诛良弼，籍其家。
现代文：桑哥听到这些话，便逮捕良弼。自己与中书台院札鲁忽赤审问良弼，迫其服罪。桑哥说，此辈诽谤我，不杀之无以惩后，乃斩良弼，没收其家产。
English: When Sango heard these words, he arrested Yoshitaka. He and Sango interrogated Yoshitaka in the Red and White Hall of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and forced him to confess. Sango said, "This generation has slandered me. If they don't kill me, there is no way to punish them. Instead, they killed Yoshitaka and confiscated his family property."

古文：有吴德者，尝为江宁县达鲁花赤，求仕不遂，私与人非议时政，又言： 尚书今日核正中书之弊，他日复为中书所核，汝独不死也耶？ 
现代文：有吴德者，曾为江宁县达鲁花赤，求官不如愿，便私下与人非议朝政。他曾说 ：今日尚书检查中书的毛病，他日还要受中书审查，独你桑哥不死吗？ 
English: A certain Wu De, who once served as the DaLu HuaChi of Jiangning County, did not get the position he wanted, so he privately criticized the imperial government with others. He once said: Today Shang Shu checks the defects of Chinese books, the next day he will also be subject to Chinese book review, but won't your Sango die?

古文：或以告桑哥，亟捕德按问，杀之，没其妻子入官。
现代文：后来，有人向桑哥告密，桑哥便急忙逮捕吴德，审问后判处死刑，还籍没其妻子入官为奴。
English: Later, someone tipped off Sango, who promptly arrested Wu De, interrogated him, sentenced him to death, and forced his wife into slavery.

古文：桑哥尝奏以沙不丁遥授江淮行省左丞，乌马儿为参政，依前领泉府、市舶两司，拜降福建行省平章。
现代文：桑哥曾奏请授沙不丁江淮行省左丞，乌马儿为参政，依前领泉府、市舶两司。授拜降为福建行省平章。
English: Sango Zengso requested that Sabudin be awarded the title of Zuo Rong of Jianghuai Province, and Umar was awarded the title of Ping Zheng of Fujian Province for his participation in politics.

古文：既得旨，乃言于世祖曰： 臣前言，凡任省臣与行省官，并与丞相安童共议。
现代文：得到世祖批示后，乃向世祖说： 臣以前说过，凡任命省臣与行省官的人，要与丞相共同商议。
English: After receiving the instruction from the patriarch, Nao said to the patriarch, "The minister has said before that anyone who appoints provincial ministers and provincial officials should consult with the prime minister.

古文：今奏用沙不丁、乌马儿等，适丞相还大都，不及通议，臣恐有以前奏为言者。 
现代文：今奏请任用沙不丁、乌马儿等，是因为丞相正好返回大都，来不及和他商量，我担心有人以我从前说过的话来责备我。 
English: I'm asking you to appoint Sabudin, Umar and others now, because the prime minister just returned to the capital, and it's too late to consult with him. I'm worried that someone will blame me for what I said before.

古文：世祖曰： 安童不在，朕，若主也。朕已允行，有言者，其令朕前言之。 
现代文：世祖说 ：安童不在，朕是你的主子，朕已应允，有人说你，要他到朕的面前来说。 
English: The patriarch said, "Ando is not here. I am your master. I have already agreed. Someone told you to have him come and speak to me.

古文：时江南行台与行省，并无文移，事无巨细，必咨内台呈省闻奏。
现代文：时江南行御史台与行省并无公文来往，事无巨细，必咨询内台呈省上奏。
English: At that time, there was no official correspondence between the Southern Jiangsu Provincial History Station and the province, and there were no details. It was necessary to consult the inner station to submit the report to the province.

古文：桑哥以其往复稽留误事，宜如内台例，分呈各省。
现代文：桑哥认为这样公文往返，积压误事。如行台有事上报，宜按内台的例子，分呈各省。
English: Sango believes that the backlog is due to the back-and-forth of official documents. If there is something to report to the platform, it is appropriate to follow the example of the inner platform and submit it to the provinces.

古文：又言： 按察司文案，宜从各路民官检核，递相纠举。
现代文：桑哥又说： 按察司文书，宜随各路民官检查考核，互相纠举。
English: Sango also said: According to the inspection department's document, it is advisable to follow the inspection and assessment of the civil officers of each road, and to quarrel with each other.

古文：且自太祖时有旨，凡临官事者互相觉察，此故事也。 
现代文：且自太祖时有旨，凡遇有讼事者，应相互提醒和考察，这是我们的传统。 
English: And since the time of our ancestors, it has been our tradition to remind and examine each other in the event of a dispute.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十月乙酉，世祖遣谕旨翰林诸臣： 以丞相领尚书省，汉、唐有此制否？ 
现代文：十月二十八日，世祖询问翰林诸臣： 以丞相领尚书省，汉唐有此制吗？ 
English: On October 28th, the founder of the dynasty asked Hanlin's vassals: Does the Han and Tang Dynasties have this system, with the prime minister leading the Ministry of Education?

古文：咸对曰： 有之。 
现代文：都答道 ：有的。 
English: They all replied, "Yes."

古文：翌日，左丞叶李以翰林、集贤诸臣所对奏之，且言： 前省官不能行者，平章桑哥能之，宜为右丞相。 
现代文：次日，左丞叶李把翰林、集贤诸臣所说的答案告诉世祖，且说： 从前省官不能实行的，平章桑哥能办到，桑哥宜为右丞相。 
English: The next day, Zuo Ye Li told the patriarch the answer given by Han Lin and Ji Xian, and said, "What the provincial officials couldn't do before, Ping Zhang Sango can do, and Sango should be the minister of the right."

古文：制曰 可 。遂以桑哥为尚书右丞相，兼总制院使，领功德使司事，进阶金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：于是，便任桑哥为尚书右丞相兼总制院使，领功德使司事，官阶进为金紫光禄大夫。
English: As a result, Sango was appointed as the minister of the right and general envoy of the Imperial Academy of Letters, and promoted to the official rank of doctor of the golden purple light.

古文：于是桑哥奏以平章铁木儿代其位，右丞阿剌浑撒里升平章政事，叶李迁右丞，参政马绍升左丞。
现代文：于是桑哥奏请以平章铁木儿代替自己的位置，右丞阿剌浑撒里升平章政事。叶李升为右丞，参政马绍升为左丞。
English: Therefore, Sanggoseo asked Pingzhang Tiemu'er to take his place, and the right-hand man, Ah Kunzari, was promoted to the position of the right-hand man, Ye Li was promoted to the right-hand man, and the right-hand man, Ma Shao, was promoted to the left-hand man.

古文：十一月，桑哥言： 臣前以诸道宣慰司及路府州县官吏，稽缓误事，奉旨遣人逼笞责之。
现代文：十一月，桑哥对世祖说： 我以前因诸道宣慰司及路府州县官吏拖沓误事，曾奉旨派人到处责以笞刑。
English: In November, Sango said to the patriarch, "In the past, because of the procrastination of the Consolation Division and the officials of the prefectures and counties, I used to send people everywhere to punish them with flogging.

古文：今真定宣慰使速哥、南京宣慰使答失蛮，皆勋贤旧臣之子，宜取圣裁。 
现代文：今有真定宣慰使速哥、南京宣慰使答失蛮等，都是旧日功臣之子，应该由你皇上自己做决定如何处置。 
English: Right now, there are such as Zhending Xuancheng who makes a hasty decision, and Nanjing Xuancheng who makes a reckless decision, all of which are the sons of the heroes of the old days. It should be up to your emperor to decide what to do.

古文：敕罢其任。
现代文：世祖便下令罢了他们的官。
English: The patriarch then gave the order to dismiss their officials.

古文：明年正月，以甘肃行尚书省参政铁木哥无心任事，又不与协力，奏乞牙带代之。
现代文：二十五年正月，桑哥又弹劾甘肃行尚书省参政铁木哥无心于政府事务，又不与他合作，因此，要求世祖准予由乞牙带取代他。
English: In the first month of the 25th year, Sango also impeached Tie Muco, who had come from Gansu to participate in politics in Shangshu Province. Tie Muco was not interested in government affairs and did not cooperate with him. Therefore, he asked the patriarch for permission to replace him with a beggar.

古文：未几，又以江西行尚书省平章政事忽都铁木儿不职，奏而罢之。
现代文：不久，又弹劾江西行尚书省平章政事忽都铁木儿不称职，请世祖撤销他的职务。
English: Soon, he also impeached Jiangxi Province, Shangshu Province, Pingzhang Province, and the government for incompetence, and asked Shizu to revoke his position.

古文：兵部尚书忽都答儿不勤其职，桑哥殴罢之而后奏，世祖曰： 若此等不罢，汝事何由得行也。 
现代文：还有兵部尚书忽都答儿对其本职工作不勤奋，桑哥打了他一顿，先罢了他的官，而后才上奏世祖。世祖说： 如果这样的人不撤职，你要办的事怎能完成。 
English: Sango beat him up and dismissed him from his post before reporting to the patriarch. The patriarch said, "If such a person does not resign, how can you accomplish what you want to do?"

古文：万亿库有旧牌条七千余条，桑哥言岁久则腐，宜析而他用。
现代文：万亿库有旧牌绦七千余条，桑哥说牌绦时间久了会腐，宜分开来做他用。
English: There are more than 7,000 old plaques in the trillion library. Sango said that the plaques would rot after a long time and should be separated for other uses.

古文：赐诸王出伯银二万五千两、币帛万匹，载以官驴，至则并以为赐。
现代文：世祖赐诸王出伯银二万五千两，财帛万匹，以官家之驴运送，运到后则将银帛、官驴一并赐给出伯。
English: The forefathers gave the kings twenty-five thousand taels of silver and ten thousand donkeys, which were transported on the donkeys of the officials. After the transportation, the silver ingots and official donkeys were given to the officials.

古文：桑哥言： 不若以驴载玉而回。 
现代文：桑哥却说 ：不如将驴子载玉回来。 
English: But Sango said, "It would be better to bring the donkey back with the ball."

古文：世祖甚然之。
现代文：世祖很同意桑哥的建议。
English: The patriarch agreed wholeheartedly with Sangho's suggestion.

古文：其欲以小利结知如此。
现代文：他就是这样想以小利来讨好君王的。
English: That's how he tried to curry favor with the king.

古文：漕运司达鲁花赤怯来，未尝巡察沿河诸仓，致盗诈腐败者多，桑哥议以兵部侍郎塔察儿代之。
现代文：漕运司达鲁花赤怯来，没有巡视沿河诸仓库，以致不少的粮食被盗窃或腐烂。桑哥建议以兵部侍郎塔察儿取代他。
English: The rowing master, Daruka, was timid and did not inspect the warehouses along the river, so that a lot of grain was stolen or rotted. Sango suggested replacing him with the military servant, Tachar.

古文：自立尚书省，凡仓库诸司，无不钩考，先摘委六部官，复以为不专，乃置征理司，以治财谷之当追者。
现代文：自从成立尚书省以来，凡管理仓库的官员，无不细致考察，先选委六部官，又以为不专，乃设征理司，以催纳钱谷。
English: Since the establishment of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, all officials who manage warehouses have been carefully examined. Six members of the pre-selection committee also thought that it was not special, but to set up a collection and management department to speed up the payment of Qiangu.

古文：时桑哥以理算为事，毫分缕析，入仓库者，无不破产，及当更代，人皆弃家而避之。
现代文：时桑哥以清算为己任，十分细致，使在仓库任职的人无不破产。所以，每当仓库要更换人员的时候，人们都弃家避走。
English: At the time, Sango was in charge of liquidation and was very meticulous, so that everyone who worked in the warehouse went bankrupt. Therefore, whenever the warehouse needed to change personnel, people abandoned their homes and fled.

古文：十月，桑哥奏： 湖广行省钱谷，已责平章要束木自首偿矣。
现代文：十月，桑哥对皇上说： 湖广行省的钱谷，已责令平章要束木承认赔偿了。
English: In October, Sango said to the emperor: Qiangu of Hukanggang Province has ordered Pingzhang to admit compensation to Sokoku.

古文：外省欺盗必多，乞以参政忻都、户部尚书王巨济、参议尚书省事阿散、山东西道提刑按察使何荣祖、札鲁忽赤秃忽鲁、泉府司卿李佑、奉御吉丁、监察御史戎益、佥枢密院事崔彧、尚书省断事官燕真、刑部尚书安祐、监察御史伯颜等十二人，理算江淮、江西、福建、四川、甘肃、安西六省，每省各二人，特给印章与之。
现代文：外省欺骗偷盗之事必多，请求以参政忻都、户部尚书王巨济、参议尚书省事阿散、山东西道提刑按察使何荣祖、札鲁忽赤秃忽鲁、泉府司卿李佑、奉御吉丁、监察御史戎益、佥枢密院事崔、尚书省断事官燕真、刑部尚书安、监察御史伯颜等十二人，估定和计算江淮、江西、福建、四川、甘肃、安西六省，每省各二人，特给与他们印章。
English: There must have been many cases of deception and theft in other provinces. Twelve people, including the following, were asked to participate in the political affairs of Xindu, the household of Shangshu Wang Jujie, the councillor of Shangshu Zhi Asan, the east and west of Shandong Province to impose punishment on the inspector general He Rongzu, Zhalu Hu Chiaqian Hu Lu, the secretary of Quanfu Li You, Bongyiding, the inspector of Shishi Rongyi, the secretary of the Shao Privy Council Cui, the adjudicator of Shishi Province Yan Zhen, the criminal department Shangshu An

古文：省部官既去，事不可废，拟选人为代，听食元俸。
现代文：省部官既下到六省去，省部的事不可废，拟推人代理，代理人领原俸禄。
English: Since the provincial and ministerial officials have gone down to six provinces, the affairs of the provincial and ministerial departments cannot be wasted. The person to be promoted will be an agent, and the agent will receive the original salary.

古文：理算之间，宜给兵以备使令，且以为卫。 
现代文：在估定推算之间，宜于让他们带一支军队以备差使，并可起护卫作用。 
English: Between estimates, it is advisable for them to bring an army to stand by and act as an escort.

古文：世祖皆从之。
现代文：这些意见，世祖皆采纳了。
English: These opinions were all adopted by the patriarchs.

古文：当是时，天下骚然，江淮尤甚，而谀佞之徒，方且讽都民史吉等为桑哥立石颂德，世祖闻之曰： 民欲立则立之，仍以告桑哥，使其喜也。 
现代文：当时天下骚动不安，江淮尤为厉害。而阿谀奸佞之徒，正在劝说都民史吉等为桑哥立碑颂德，世祖听到后说： 民众想立碑就立碑吧！还要将都民的想法告诉桑哥，使他也高兴高兴。 
English: At that time, the country was in turmoil and unrest, and the Jianghuai River was particularly strong. Meanwhile, the traitors were persuading the people of Shijie and other cities to erect a monument in praise of Sango. After hearing this, the patriarch said, "If the people want to erect a monument, let them erect a monument! They should also tell Sango about the thoughts of the people of Tokyo, so that he would also be happy.

古文：于是翰林制文，题曰《王公辅政之碑》。
现代文：于是翰林撰文，题为《王公辅政之碑》。
English: As a result, Hanlin wrote an article entitled "The Monument of Wang Gong Fu Zheng."

古文：桑哥又以总制院所统西蕃诸宣慰司，军民财谷，事体甚重，宜有以崇异之，奏改为宣政院，秩从一品，用三台银印。
现代文：桑哥认为，总制院所辖的西蕃诸宣慰司，管理军民财谷，事关重大，应该把这个机构的级别再提高点，以示其尊崇而与其他机构不同，因此，建议改为宣政院，官秩一品，用三台银印。
English: Sango believed that the West Wing, including the Propaganda and Consolation Department, which is under the jurisdiction of the General System Research Institute and manages the military and civilian financial valley, is of great importance. It is necessary to raise the level of this institution to a higher level to show its respect and to be different from other institutions. Therefore, the proposal was changed to the Propaganda and Government Research Institute, with one official rank and three silver seals.

古文：世祖问所用何人，对曰： 臣与脱因。 
现代文：世祖问可用何人来主持此机构，桑哥说： 我和脱因。 
English: When the patriarch asked who could preside over this institution, Sango said, "I and Devyan."

古文：于是命桑哥以开府仪同三司、尚书右丞相兼宣政使，领功德使司事，脱因同为使。
现代文：于是世祖便命桑哥以开府仪同三司、尚书右丞相，兼宣政院使，并领功德使司事。又命脱因同为宣政院使。
English: As a result, the patriarch ordered Sango to be appointed as the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the second secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. He was also appointed as the second secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：世祖尝召桑哥谓曰： 朕以叶李言，更至元钞，所用者法，所贵者信，汝无以楮视之，其本不可失，汝宜识之。 
现代文：世祖曾召见桑哥说 ：我因叶李说的话，更改至元钞。这里所用的是法，所贵的是信。你不要把它视同片纸，其本金不可有损失，你应记住这一点。 
English: The founder once summoned Sangho and said, "I changed it to yuan banknotes because of what Ye Li said. What is used here is the law, and what is precious is the letter. You should not regard it as a piece of paper, and its principal should not be lost. You should remember this."

古文：二十六年，桑哥请钩考甘肃行尚书省、及益都淄莱淘金总管府，佥省赵仁荣、总管明里等，皆以罪罢。
现代文：二十六年，桑哥奏请审查甘肃行尚书省及益都淄莱淘金总管府，佥省赵仁荣、总管明里等，都以有罪的名义罢了官。
English: In 2016, Sango Song requested the review of the Gansu Province, Shangshu Province and Yidu Baili Taojin Administration, and Zhao Renrong and Mingli, the general manager of Handan Province, were dismissed in the name of guilt.

古文：世祖幸上都，桑哥言： 去岁陛下幸上都，臣日视内帑诸库，今岁欲乘小舆以行，人必窃议。 
现代文：世祖到上都，桑哥说： 去年陛下去上都，臣每日视察内宫诸库，今年想坐顶小轿子去，但又怕人暗地议论。 
English: When the patriarch went to Shangdu, Sango said, "Last year, when Your Majesty went to Shangdu, I inspected the treasuries of the Inner Palace every day. This year, I want to go in a sedan chair, but I am afraid of people talking about it behind my back.

古文：世祖曰： 听人议之，汝乘之可也。 
现代文：世祖说： 随别人去议论吧！你坐轿子去是可以的。 
English: The patriarch said: Let others talk about it. You can go by palanquin.

古文：桑哥又奏： 近委省臣检责左右司文簿，凡经监察御史稽照者，遗逸尚多。
现代文：桑哥又说 ：近来委托省臣检查责问左右司的文簿，凡经监察御史查看的，多有遗漏。
English: Sango also said, "Recently, I commissioned a provincial minister to inspect and question the books of the Left and Right Departments. Of all the books inspected by the inspector general, there were many omissions.

古文：自今当令监察御史即省部稽照，书姓名于卷末，苟有遗逸，易于归罪。
现代文：自今以后，当令监察御史到省部查看。查看后把自己姓名签署在卷末，如有遗漏，易于归罪。
English: From now on, the inspector of the history should be ordered to go to the provincial department to check. After checking, sign his name at the end of the volume. If there is an omission, it is easy to blame.

古文：仍命侍御史坚童视之，失则连坐。 
现代文：仍令侍御史坚童检查文簿，如有失逸，罪当连坐。 
English: He still ordered the attendant, Shi Jiantong, to check the textbook, and if there was any deviation, he should be punished.

古文：世祖从之，乃笞监察御史四人。
现代文：世祖接受了桑哥建议，有四个监察御史遭到鞭打。
English: The patriarch accepted Sango's suggestion, and four supervisors were whipped.

古文：是后监察御史赴省部者，掾令史与之抗礼，但遣小吏持文簿置案而去，监察御史遍阅之，而台纲废矣。
现代文：此后，监察御史到省部去的，省部属官与之抗礼，但遣小吏持文簿置案而去，监察御史便普遍阅读，御史台纲纪从而遭到破坏。
English: After that, the inspector of the history went to the provincial department, and the provincial department's subordinate officers rebelled against it, but the minor officials were sent away with the textbook and the case, and the inspector of the history was generally read, and the Goshidai Gangki was thus destroyed.

古文：参政忻都既去，寻召赴阙。
现代文：参政忻都罢职归家后不久，又召回朝廷。
English: Not long after he retired from politics and returned home, he was called back to the imperial court.

古文：以户部尚书王巨济专任理算，江淮省左丞相忙兀带总之。
现代文：以户部尚书王巨济专管清理的事，由江淮行省左丞相忙兀带总理其事。
English: With Shangshu Wang Jujie of the Household Department in charge of the clean-up, Jianghuai Xingxing, the left minister of the province, was busy leading the prime minister in the matter.

古文：闰十月，《桑哥辅政碑》成，树于省前，楼覆其上而丹雘之。
现代文：闰十月，《桑哥辅政碑》刻成，树立在尚书省衙门前，碑上盖有楼，楼下是红色的船。
English: In leap October, the "Sangko Auxiliary Government Monument" was carved and erected in front of the gate of Shangshu Province. There was a building on the monument and a red boat below.

古文：桑哥言： 国家经费既广，岁入恒不偿所出，以往岁计之，不足者余百万锭。
现代文：桑哥奏称： 国家开支很大，岁入常不敷出，以去年计算之，不足的金额超百万锭。
English: Sanguoso said: State expenditure is very large, and revenues often do not make ends meet. Calculated from last year, the shortfall exceeds one million baht.

古文：自尚书省钩考天下财谷，赖陛下福，以所征补之，未尝敛及百姓。
现代文：自尚书省查核天下钱谷以来，赖皇上的洪福，用所收补充进去，没有再向百姓搜刮。
English: Since the inspection of the world's money valley by the Ministry of Education and Culture, Lai Hongfu, the emperor, has used what he received to supplement it, and has not scrounged from the people.

古文：臣恐自今难用此法矣。
现代文：但我怕今后再难用此法来弥补不足了。
English: But I'm afraid it will be difficult to use this method to make up for the shortfall in the future.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：仓库可征者少，而盗者亦鲜矣，臣忧之。
现代文：因为仓库可征收的少，而偷盗的也少了，所以，我很忧虑。
English: I'm worried because there's less to take from the warehouse and less to steal.

古文：臣愚以为盐课每引今直中统钞三十贯，宜增为一锭；茶每引今直五贯，宜增为十贯；酒醋税课，江南宜增额十万锭，内地五万锭。
现代文：我认为，盐税每引现在值中统钞三十贯，应增加为一锭；茶每引今值五贯，应增为十贯；酒醋税，江南应增额为十万锭，内地为五万锭。
English: In my opinion, the salt tax should be increased to one baht for every 30 yuan of unified banknotes; the tea tax should be increased to 10 yuan for every 5 yuan of unified banknotes; the wine and vinegar tax should be increased by 100,000 baht in the south of the Yangtze River and 50,000 baht in the inland.

古文：协济户十八万，自入籍至今十三年，止输半赋，闻其力已完，宜增为全赋。
现代文：还有协济户十八万，自入籍之日起，至今已有十三年，只纳半赋。听说他们现在的财力已趋完善，应增为全赋。
English: There are also 180,000 Hechizai households, which have been receiving only half of the stipend for 13 years since the date of naturalization. I heard that their current financial resources have improved and should be increased to the full stipend.

古文：如此，则国用庶可支，臣等免于罪矣。 
现代文：如果这样，则国家费用大体可以维持，臣等也可免于罪了。 
English: If this is the case, the national expenses can be generally maintained, and the ministers and others can be exempted from the crime.

古文：世祖曰： 如所议行之。 
现代文：但委任令还是由中书省宣布。
English: However, the appointment order is still announced by the Ministry of Chinese Literature.

古文：桑哥既专政，凡铨调内外官，皆由于己，而其宣敕，尚由中书，桑哥以为言，世祖乃命自今宣敕并付尚书省。
现代文：对此，桑哥向世祖谈了自己的想法，世祖下令，自今以后，宣敕都交由尚书省办理。由是，尚书省就得以把刑罚和爵位都作为商品来买卖了。
English: In response, Sango spoke to the patriarch about his thoughts, and the patriarch ordered that from now on, all proclamations would be handled by the Ministry of Education and Culture. As a result, the Ministry of Education and Culture was able to sell punishments and titles of nobility as commodities.

古文：由是以刑爵为货而贩之，咸走其门，入贵价以买所欲。
现代文：那些触犯刑法和追求爵位的人，都到桑哥的门下进出，出高价以买得自己想得到的东西。
English: Criminals and knighthood-seekers flocked to Sango's door, paying high prices to get what they wanted.

古文：贵价入，则当刑者脱，求爵者得，纲纪大坏，人心骇愕。
现代文：人们一出高价，当判刑的能得以脱身，想当官的能得以升迁，于是，纲纪大坏，人心惊愕。
English: People pay a high price, and those who are sentenced can escape, and those who want to be officials can be promoted. As a result, discipline is very bad, and people are stunned.

古文：二十八年春，世祖畋于漷北，也里审班及也先帖木儿、彻里等，劾奏桑哥专权黩货。
现代文：二十八年春，世祖至氵郭北打猎，也里审班及也先帖木儿、彻里等向世祖弹劾桑哥专权贪财。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, the ancestor went to the north of Xingguo to go hunting, and the judges and first Timur, Cheri, etc. impeached Sango's exclusive power and greed for money.

古文：时不忽木出使，三遣人趣召之至，觐于行殿，世祖以问，不忽木对曰： 桑哥壅蔽聪明，紊乱政事，有言者即诬以他罪而杀之。
现代文：时不忽木出使，世祖三次遣人催来氵郭北，见面后世祖询问他有关桑哥的情况，不忽木说： 桑哥蒙蔽皇上，紊乱政事。有人揭发他，他便以其他罪名致人于死地。
English: At that time, Du Fu Mu sent an envoy, and the ancestor sent three times to urge Du Guo Bei. After the meeting, the ancestor asked him about Sango. Du Fu Mu said: Sango deceived the emperor and disrupted political affairs. When someone exposed him, he killed people with other charges.

古文：今百姓失业，盗贼蜂起，召乱在旦夕，非亟诛之，恐为陛下忧。 
现代文：今百姓失业，盗贼蜂起，日夕之间可能出大乱子，如果不立即杀死桑哥，恐为陛下之忧也。 
English: Now the people are out of work, the thieves are rising up, and there may be a great disturbance between sunset and sunrise. If Sango is not killed immediately, His Majesty will be worried.

古文：留守贺伯颜亦尝为世祖陈其奸欺。
现代文：留守贺伯颜也曾向世祖陈述桑哥的奸欺行为。
English: The stay-at-home He Boyan also told the patriarch about Sango's treachery.

古文：久而言者益众，世祖始决意诛之。
现代文：时间一长，说桑哥坏话的人越多，世祖便决心杀桑哥。
English: As time went on, the more people spoke ill of Sango, the more the patriarch resolved to kill Sango.

古文：二月，世祖谕大夫月儿鲁曰： 屡闻桑哥沮抑台纲，杜言者之口；又尝捶挞御史。其所罪者何事，当与辨之。 
现代文：二月二十四日，世祖对大夫月儿鲁说 ：屡闻桑哥压制御史台，以堵塞进谏者之口；又曾捶挞御史，桑哥责怪他们的是些什么事，应当辨别清楚。 
English: On February 24th, the patriarch said to the doctor, Yueru: "We have heard many times that Sango presses the control rod to block the mouth of the person who has fallen into the pit; we have also heard that Sango blames them for something, and we should distinguish clearly.

古文：桑哥等持御史李渠等已刷文卷至，令侍御史杜思敬等勘验辨论，往复数四，桑哥等辞屈。
现代文：桑哥等拿御史李渠等已经查看的文件来了，世祖令侍御史杜思敬等勘验文卷，进行辩论。经过几次交锋，桑哥等词穷理屈。
English: Sango and others came to take the documents that had already been examined by Grand Historian Li Qu, and the patriarch ordered the attendant Grand Historian Du Sijian and others to examine the documents and conduct a debate. After several confrontations, Sango and others were unable to reason.

古文：明日，帝驻跸大口，复召御史台暨中书、尚书两省官辨论。尚书省执卷奏曰： 前浙西按察使只必，因监烧钞受赃至千锭，尝檄台征之，二年不报。 
现代文：第二天，世祖歇驾于大口，再召御史台及中书、尚书两省官员辩论，尚书省执文卷告世祖说 ：前浙西御史只必，因监督烧钞受赃至千锭，曾通知他来台询问，二年没有回答。 
English: The next day, Shizu stopped in Otsuchi, and then summoned the official of the History Station and the officials of the two provinces of Zhongshu and Shangshu to debate. Shangshu Province sent a letter to Shizu, saying: The former West Zhejiang official, who was arrested for supervising the burning of banknotes, had informed him to come to Taiwan to inquire, but he did not answer for two years.

古文：思敬曰： 文之次第，尽在卷中，今尚书省拆卷持对，其弊可见。 
现代文：思敬说 ：文的等次，尽在卷中。今尚书省折卷持对，其弊可见。 
English: Si Jing said: The order of the text is all in the volume. Now Shang Shuzo folds the volume correctly, and its drawbacks can be seen.

古文：速古儿赤阇里抱卷至前奏曰： 用朱印以封纸缝者，防欺弊也。
现代文：速古儿赤里抱卷至世祖面前说 ：用朱印以封纸缝，是为了防止欺弊。
English: As she held the scroll up to the ancestor, she said, "I sewed the seal with red seal paper to prevent cheating."

古文：若辈为宰相，乃拆卷破印与人辨，是教吏为奸，当治其罪。 
现代文：他们做宰相，乃折卷、破印，与人争辩，这是教吏为奸，当治其罪。 
English: They are acting as prime ministers, but they are breaking scrolls, breaking seals, and arguing with others. This is treachery on the part of the clergy, and they should be punished for it.

古文：世祖是之。责御史台曰： 桑哥为恶，始终四年，其奸赃暴著非一，汝台臣难云不知。 
现代文：世祖同意里的说法，便批评御史台说 ：桑哥为恶，前后四年，其奸赃的暴露，不止一事，你们做台臣的很难说不知道吧？ 
English: The patriarch agreed with the statement in it, and then criticized the History Channel, saying: Sango is evil, four years before and after, the exposure of his treachery, more than one thing, it is difficult for you to say that you do not know?

古文：中丞赵国辅对曰： 知之。 
现代文：中丞赵国辅说 ：我们知道。 
English: Chujo Zhao Guoyu said, "We know.

古文：世祖曰： 知而不劾，自当何罪？ 
现代文：世祖说： 知情不揭发，该当何罪？ 
English: The founder said: What is the crime of not disclosing information?

古文：思敬等对曰： 夺官追俸，惟上所裁。 
现代文：思敬等答道 ：罢官免职，追还薪俸，听从您当皇上的裁决。 
English: Si Jing et al. replied, "Remove you from office, recover your salary, and obey the ruling of you as the emperor."

古文：数日不决。
现代文：数日不决。
English: The decision is not expected for several days.

古文：大夫月儿鲁奏： 台臣久任者当斥罢，新者存之。 
现代文：大夫月儿鲁对世祖说 ：台臣任职太久了，当罢免；刚上任的，应保留。 
English: The doctor, Yueru, said to Shizu: Taichen has been in office for too long and should be dismissed; those who have just taken office should be retained.

古文：乃仆《桑哥辅政碑》，下狱究问。至七月，乃伏诛。
现代文：于是世祖下令，毁《桑哥辅政碑》，将桑哥逮捕入狱审问，至七月，乃被处决。
English: As a result, the patriarch ordered the destruction of the "Sango Auxiliary Government Monument," arrested Sango to prison for interrogation, and he was executed in July.

古文：平章要束木者，桑哥之妻党，在湖广时，正月朔日，百官会行省，朝服以俟。
现代文：平章要束木，是桑哥的同党。在湖广时，正月初一，百官集会行省，穿朝服等待。
English: Pingzhang wanted a bundle of wood and was a member of Sanguo's party. In Hukang, on the first day of the first month, hundreds of officials gathered to go to the province, wearing imperial robes and waiting.

古文：要束木召至其家，受贺毕，方诣省望阙，贺如常仪。
现代文：要束木召百官到自己家中，受百官的祝贺。祝毕，才到省望着皇帝住所祝贺。
English: It was necessary for Sokoku to invite hundreds of officials to his home and receive the congratulations of hundreds of officials. After the congratulation, he went to the provincial capital to congratulate the emperor's residence.

古文：又阴召卜者有不轨言。
现代文：又暗地召人占卜，出言不轨。
English: He also secretly invited people to divination and made inappropriate remarks.

古文：至是，中书列其罪以闻，世祖命械致湖广，即其省戮之。铁木迭儿者，木儿火赤之子也。
现代文：至此，中书便向皇帝开列他的罪状，世祖命押解湖广处死。铁木迭儿，木儿火赤的儿子。
English: At this point, Zhongshu laid out his charges to the emperor, and the patriarch ordered the execution of Hu Guang. Tiemu Di'er, the son of Mu'er Huai'er.

古文：尝逮事世祖。
现代文：曾侍奉世祖。
English: He once served the patriarch.

古文：成宗大德间，同知宣徽院事，兼通政院使。
现代文：成宗大德年间，任同知宣徽院事，兼通政院使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chengzong, Tongzhi was appointed as a member of the Xuanhui Academy, and also as a member of the Tongzheng Academy.

古文：武宗即位，为宣徽使。
现代文：武宗即位，为宣徽使。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and the Emperor's Emblem was created.

古文：至大元年，由江西行省平章政事拜云南行省左丞相。
现代文：至大元年，由江西行省平章政事转任云南行省左丞相。
English: By the first year of the Great Leap Forward, he was transferred from the political affairs of Pingzhang in Jiangxi Province to Yunnan Province as the Minister of the Left.

古文：居二载，擅离职赴阙，尚书省奏，奉旨诘问，寻以皇太后旨，得贷罪还职。
现代文：两年后，擅自离职进京。尚书省将他的情况向皇帝作了报告，皇帝要尚书省查究。不久，因有皇太后的旨令出钱赎罪，仍恢复职务。
English: Two years later, he left his post without permission and went to Beijing. The Ministry of Education reported his situation to the emperor, and the emperor asked the Ministry of Education to investigate. Shortly after, he was ordered by the empress dowager to pay money to atone for his sins, but he still resumed his duties.

古文：明年正月，武宗崩，仁宗在东宫，以丞相三宝奴等变乱旧章，诛之。
现代文：明年正月，武宗逝世，这时仁宗在东宫，认为丞相三宝奴等乱变先朝的传统章程，将三宝奴处死。
English: In the first month of the next year, when Emperor Wuzong passed away, Emperor Renzong, who was in the East Palace at the time, thought that the prime minister Sanbo-nu and others had changed the traditional regulations of the previous dynasty, and had Sanbo-nu executed.

古文：用完泽及李孟为中书平章政事，锐欲更张庶务。
现代文：任用完泽及李孟为中书平章政事，锐意更张庶务。
English: After the appointment of Kanazawa and Li Meng, he was appointed to the political affairs of Zhongshu Pingzhang, and he was determined to be appointed to the general affairs.

古文：而皇太后在兴圣宫，已有旨，召铁木迭儿为中书右丞相。
现代文：而皇太后在兴圣宫降旨，召铁木迭儿为相。
English: The empress dowager, however, issued a decree at the Xingsheng Palace, summoning Tie Mu Di'er as her consort.

古文：逾月，仁宗即位，因遂相之。及幸上都，命铁木迭儿留守大都。
现代文：及仁宗去上都，命铁木迭儿留守大都。
English: And when Ninsong went to Shangdu, Mu Tiemu Dier stayed in Shangdu for the most part.

古文：平章完泽等奏： 故事，丞相留治京师者，出入得张盖。
现代文：平章完泽等上奏皇上说： 根据惯例，丞相留治北京的，出入都要遮盖。
English: After the seal was completed, the emperor said, "According to the usual practice, when the prime minister stays in Beijing, all entrances and exits must be covered.

古文：今右丞相铁木迭儿大都居守，时方盛暑，请得张盖如故事。 
现代文：今右丞相铁木迭儿在大都居守，时方盛暑，请如过去的惯例，也使他能得到遮盖的优待。 
English: Now, the Minister of the Right, Tie Mu Di'er, is staying in most places, when the weather is hot, please, as in the past, also give him the preferential treatment of being covered.

古文：许之。
现代文：仁宗同意所请。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：是年冬，制赠铁木迭儿曾祖唆海翊运宣力保大功臣、太尉，谥武烈；祖不怜吉带推诚保德定远功臣、太尉，谥忠武；父木儿火赤推忠佐理同德功臣、太师，谥忠贞。并开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封归德王。
现代文：此年冬天，赠铁木迭儿曾祖父唆海翊运宣力保大功臣、太尉，谥武烈。赠祖父不怜吉带推诚保德定远功臣、太尉，谥忠武，赠父木儿火赤为推忠佐理同德功臣、太师，谥忠贞，两人都赠开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封归德王。
English: In the winter of this year, the great-grandfather of Tie Mu Di'er, who was awarded the title of Xuan Li Bao Da Gong Rong, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the great-grandson, the

古文：皇庆元年三月，铁木迭儿奏： 臣误蒙圣恩，擢任中书，年衰且病，虽未能深达政体，思竭忠力，以图报效，事有创行，敢不自勉，前省弊政，方与更新。
现代文：皇庆元年三月，铁木迭儿向仁宗上奏说： 我误蒙皇上的圣恩，提拔为中书，年老且病，虽未能深刻地通达政体，但我总想竭尽忠心，力图报效，就是这些没有惯例的事，也不敢不勉励自己去做。对前中书省的弊政，我也正在更新。
English: In March of the first year of the Emperor's reign, Tiemu Di'er reported to Emperor Nanzong: "I was mistakenly blessed by the emperor and promoted to the position of chancellor. I am old and sick. Although I have not been able to thoroughly understand the political system, I always want to do my best to be loyal and try to be effective. These are things that are not customary, and I dare not not not encourage myself to do them. I am also updating the maladministration of the former chancellery.

古文：钦惟列圣相承，混一区宇，日有万几，若非整饬，恐致解驰。
现代文：现在，只是因为过去列位皇上至德相传，才有今日的一统天下。但要管理好这个天下，日理万机，若不整理治理天下的机构和百官，恐怕这个统一的天下会松弛解体。
English: Now, it is only because the past emperors were passed down from generation to generation that there is a unified world today. However, it is very difficult to manage this world well. If we do not sort out the institutions and officials that govern the world, I am afraid that this unified world will weaken and disintegrate.

古文：继今朝夕视事，左右司六部官有不尽心者，当论决，再不悛者，黜勿叙，其有托故侥幸他职者，亦不叙。 
现代文：所以，自今以后，无论朝夕，都要来处理政务。左右司六部官如有不尽心者，先是口头疏导；再不改过者，当撤职不再录用。如有找借口侥幸得到其他职务的，也不录用。 
English: Therefore, from now on, regardless of whether it is morning or evening, it is necessary to deal with government affairs. If there are any incompetent officials in the six departments of the Left and Right Departments, they will first be verbally coaxed; if they do not change, they will not be recruited when they are dismissed. If they find an excuse to get other positions by chance, they will not be recruited.

古文：仁宗是其言。既而以病去职。
现代文：仁宗肯定他说的话，但不久，他因病离职。
English: Nizong confirmed what he said, but soon he left the job due to illness.

古文：延祐改元，丞相哈散奏： 臣非世勋族姓，幸逢陛下为宰相，如丞相铁木迭儿，练达政体，且尝监修国史，乞授其印，俾领翰林国史院，军国重务，悉令议之。 
现代文：延元年，丞相哈散上奏仁宗说 ：我出身不是世勋望族，有幸遇到皇上，我才当了宰相。如丞相铁木迭儿，对当今政治体制老练通达，且曾监修国史，所以，我希望皇上能给他大印，以便他领翰林国史院，军国重大事务都要让他参与商议。 
English: In the first year of Yan, the prime minister, Hasan Josho Rinzong, said, "I was not born into a distinguished family. I was fortunate to meet the emperor, and I became prime minister. For example, the prime minister, Temujie, is experienced and knowledgeable about today's political system, and once supervised national history. Therefore, I hope that the emperor can give him the Great Seal, so that he can lead the Hanlin Institute of National History, and let him participate in the discussion of major military affairs.

古文：仁宗曰： 然。卿其启诸皇太后。与之印，大事必使预闻。 
现代文：仁宗说： 好，你启奏皇太后，给他大印，有大事必定使他预闻其事。 
English: Rinzong said, "Very well, you should inform the empress dowager and give him the seal. Something big must have happened for him to know about it in advance.

古文：遂拜开府仪同三司、监修国史、录军国重事。
现代文：遂拜开府仪同三司、监修国史、录军国重事。
English: He then attended the ceremony of the founding of the prefecture with the three departments, supervised the national history, and recorded the important matters of the country.

古文：居数月，复拜中书右丞相，合散为左丞相。
现代文：数月后，又为中书右丞相，哈散为左丞相。
English: A few months later, Chusho was appointed to the post of the Minister of the Right and Hasan to the post of the Minister of the Left.

古文：铁木迭儿奏： 蒙陛下怜臣，复擢为首相，依阿不言，诚负圣眷。
现代文：铁木迭儿上奏仁宗说 ：承蒙陛下可怜我，再次提拔我为宰相，我阿谀逢迎，不谈主见，就辜负圣恩了。
English: "I am grateful to Your Majesty for having pity on me and once again promoting me to prime minister," said Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress

古文：比闻内侍隔越奏旨者众，倘非禁止，致治实难。
现代文：近来，我听说内侍阻隔上情下达与下情上达的人不少，如不禁止，实难致治。
English: Recently, I have heard that there are quite a few people who are hindered by the chambermaid, and if it is not prohibited, it is really difficult to deal with.

古文：请敕诸司，自今中书政务，毋辄干预。
现代文：请皇上下令诸司，自今中书政务，不要随便干预。
English: I would like to ask the Emperor to issue an order to all departments that they should not arbitrarily interfere in the affairs of the Central Government.

古文：又往时富民，往诸蕃商贩，率获厚利，商者益众，中国物轻，蕃货反重。
现代文：往时富民于国外经商，多获厚利。商人越多，则中国货价值不高，而外国货反而贵重。
English: In the past, rich people did business abroad and made more profits. The more merchants there are, the lower the value of Chinese goods and the higher the value of foreign goods.

古文：今请以江浙右丞曹立领其事，发舟十纲，给牒以往，归则征税如制，私往者没其货。
现代文：今请以江浙右丞曹立领其事，发出十组海船，每组船都有证明书，在它们回国时，则按规定征税。
English: I now ask Jiang Zemin to take the lead in this matter and issue ten groups of ships, each group of ships has a certificate, and when they return home, they will be taxed according to regulations.

古文：又，经用不给，苟不预为规画，必至愆误。
现代文：如私自出海，没有证明的海船回来，便要没收它的货物。又经费紧张，如不预先规划，必犯大错误。
English: If I go to sea and the ship does not have a certificate, I will have to confiscate its cargo. And money is tight, if you do not plan in advance, you will make a big mistake.

古文：臣等集诸老议，皆谓动钞本，则钞法愈虚；加赋税，则毒流黎庶；增课额，则比国初已倍五十矣。
现代文：我等和诸老臣商议，都认为：如果动钞本，则钞票更加贬值；如新加税目，则要毒害民众；如增税额，则现在比国初已有一倍半了。
English: In our discussions with the elders, we all agreed that: if the banknotes are moved, the banknotes will depreciate even more; if new tax items are added, the people will be poisoned; if taxes are increased, the amount is now one and a half times that of the beginning of the country.

古文：惟预买山东、河间运使来岁盐引，及各冶铁货，庶可以足今岁之用。
现代文：看来只有预买山东、河间运使管辖的来岁盐引及各冶铁货，或可以满足今年的用途。
English: It seems that only the pre-purchase of next year's salt under the jurisdiction of Shandong and Hechi Transportation, as well as various metallurgical iron goods, may meet this year's use.

古文：又，江南田粮，往岁虽尝经理，多未核实。
现代文：另外，江南田粮，往年虽曾经理，多未核实。
English: In addition, the Jiangnan rice fields, although it was true in previous years, have not been verified.

古文：可始自江浙，以及江东、西，宜先事严限格、信罪赏，令田主手实顷亩状入官，诸王、驸马、学校、寺观亦令如之；仍禁私匿民田，贵戚势家，毋得沮挠。
现代文：可从江浙开始，再到江东、江西一带，应该首先严格限额，励行赏罚，要求田主将实有田亩的清单交官，诸王、驸马、学校、寺、观也一样。并禁私人隐藏民田。贵戚世家，也不能阻碍。
English: Starting from Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and then to the eastern and western regions of Jiangsu, strict quotas should first be set, rewards and punishments should be enforced, and landowners should be required to submit a list of actual acres to officials, as well as kings, emperors, schools, temples, and monasteries. Private individuals are also prohibited from hiding private land. Noble families should not be hindered.

古文：请敕台臣协力以成，则国用足矣。 
现代文：请皇上使台臣协助我们做成此事，则国用就足够了。 
English: If you ask the Emperor to send ministers to help us accomplish this, it will be enough for the country.

古文：仁宗皆从之。
现代文：仁宗采纳所有建议。
English: Nizong accepted all the suggestions.

古文：寻遣使者分行各省，括田增税，苛急烦扰，江右为甚，致赣民蔡五九作乱宁都，南方骚动，远近惊惧，乃罢其事。
现代文：不久，皇上派使者分行各省，搜括农田，增加税收，加重剥削，对江右的烦扰很大，以致江西之民蔡五九在宁都作乱，南方骚动，远近惊惧，于是括田增税之事只好作罢。
English: Soon, the emperor sent emissaries to all provinces to collect farmland, increase taxes, and increase exploitation. This greatly disturbed the right bank of the Yangtze River. As a result, the people of Jiangxi Province rioted in Ningdu, the south was in turmoil, and people far and near were alarmed. Therefore, the matter of increasing taxes on farmland had to be abandoned.

古文：明年，铁木迭儿奏： 天下庶务，虽统于中书，而旧制，省臣亦分领之。
现代文：二年，铁木迭儿上奏说： 天下庶务，虽由中书统处，但按旧制，各省臣也要分工负责。
English: In the second year, Tiemu Di'er delivered a report saying: Although the general affairs of the world are handled by the General Office of the Central Government, according to the old system, each provincial minister is also responsible for the division of labor.

古文：请以钱制、钞法、刑名，委平章李孟、左丞阿卜海牙、参政赵世延等领之。
现代文：现在，请以钱帛、钞法、刑名，交给平章李猛、左丞阿卜海牙、参政赵世炎等管理。
English: Now, please hand over the management of Qianqian, banknotes, and surnames to Pingzhang Li Meng, Zsao Ab Haiga, and Zhao Shiyan, who is involved in politics.

古文：其粮储、选法、造作，驿传，委平章张律、右丞萧拜住、参政曹从革等领之。 
现代文：将粮储、选法、手工、驿使，委与平章张驴、右丞萧拜住、参政曹从革等负责。 
English: He will be responsible for grain storage, selection method, manual work, and dispatching, and the committee will be responsible for Pingzhang Zhang Jie, Yu Rong Xiao Bai Ju, and Sanzhong Cao Zong Ge.

古文：得旨如所请。
现代文：仁宗便按他的请求发了旨令。
English: In response to his request, Emperor Nijong issued an order.

古文：七月，诏谕中外，命右丞相铁木迭儿总宣政院事。
现代文：七月，仁宗下诏书通告全国，命右丞相铁木迭儿总宣政院事。
English: In July, Emperor Nanzong issued an imperial edict to announce to the whole country that he had appointed the chancellor of the right, Tie Mu Di'er, as the chief proclamation of the government.

古文：十月，进位太师。
现代文：十月，晋位太师。
English: In October, he was promoted to Grand Master.

古文：十一月，大宗正府奏： 累朝旧制，凡议重刑，必决于蒙古大臣，今宜听于太师右丞相。 
现代文：十一月，大宗正府向皇上报告说： 历朝的旧制，凡议重刑，必由蒙古大臣决定。今天，则宜听于太师右丞相。 
English: In November, Daizong Zhengfu reported to the emperor: "In the old system of successive dynasties, the Mongolian minister must decide on any heavy sentence. Today, it is appropriate to listen to the Grand Master and Minister of the Right."

古文：从之。
现代文：仁宗也同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：铁木迭儿既再入中书，居首相，怙势贪虐，凶秽滋甚。
现代文：铁木迭儿既然再次进入中书省，居首相之位，恃势贪虐，干了许多坏事。
English: Since Tiemu Dier once again entered the Ministry of Education and Culture and held the position of prime minister, he has lost his influence, been greedy, and done many bad things.

古文：于是萧拜住自御史中丞为中书右丞，寻拜平章政事，稍牵制之。
现代文：于是萧拜住自御史中丞为中书右丞，不久，又任平章政事，略有牵制作用。
English: As a result, Xiao Baizhu changed his title from Zhongzheng of History to Zhongzheng of Literature, and soon he was appointed to the post of Pingzhang of Government, which had a slightly restraining effect.

古文：而杨朵儿只自侍御史拜中丞，慨然以纠正其罪为己任。
现代文：而杨朵儿只自侍御史转任中丞后，便慨然以纠正铁木迭儿的罪恶为己任。
English: However, after Yang Duo'er was transferred to the position of Vice-Commander-in-Chief, he took it upon himself to correct Tie Mu Di'er's evil.

古文：上都富人张弼杀人系狱，铁木迭儿使家奴胁留守贺伯颜，使出之，伯颜持正不可挠。
现代文：上都有富人张弼，因杀人而坐牢，铁木迭儿使家奴威胁留守贺伯颜，要求贺释放张弼。
English: There are rich people on both sides, including Zhang Ye, who is in prison for murder, and Tie Mu Di'er has his slaves threaten He Boyan to stay, demanding that He release Zhang Ye.

古文：而朵儿只已廉得丞相所受张弼赂有显征，乃与拜住及伯颜奏之： 内外监察御史凡四十余人，共劾铁木迭儿桀黠奸贪，阴贼险狠，蒙上罔下，蠹政害民，布置爪牙，威詟朝野，凡可以诬陷善人、要功利己者，靡所不至。
现代文：伯颜是个正派人，当然不会随便屈服于他的威胁，而朵儿只已经打听到丞相受张弼贿赂的一些证据，便与拜住、伯颜一道在皇帝面前揭发铁木迭儿说 ：内外监察御史四十余人，共同弹劾铁木迭儿凶暴奸贪，阴险毒辣，蒙上欺下，蠹政害民，布置爪牙，威慑朝野。凡可以诬陷好人、贪功利己之事，没有不做到的。
English: Boyan was a decent person, of course, would not casually succumb to his threats, and Doer had only heard some evidence that the prime minister had been bribed by Zhang Ye. Together with Baizhu and Boyan, they exposed Tiemu Dier in front of the emperor and said: more than forty people from both inside and outside the country monitored the imperial history, and jointly impeached Tiemu Dier for murder, violence, greed, insidiousness, deceit, abuse of power, harming the people, arranging minions, and intimidating the court. Anything that can be done to frame good people, greed for power, and self-interest, can be done.

古文：取晋王田千余亩、兴教寺后壖园地三十亩、卫兵牧地二十余亩。
现代文：取晋王田千余亩，夺兴教寺后河边园地三十亩，又夺卫兵牧地二十余亩。
English: He took more than 1,000 mu of Wang Tian in Jin, 30 mu of Houhe Riverside Park of Xingjiao Temple, and more than 20 mu of Guards Pasture.

古文：窃食郊庙供祀马。
现代文：偷吃郊庙供祭祀的马。
English: A horse sneaks into a suburban temple to be sacrificed.

古文：受诸王合儿班答使人钞十四万贯，宝珠玉带氍毹币帛又计钞十余万贯。
现代文：接受诸王合儿班答派人送来的钞十四万贯，还有宝珠玉带棉毛地毯币帛等又计钞十余万贯。
English: Accepting the banknotes sent by the Wanghe children's team, there are more than 140,000 yuan, and there are also more than 100 million yuan in banknotes such as precious stones and jade with cotton wool carpet coins and so on.

古文：受杭州永兴寺僧章自福赂金一百五十两。
现代文：又接受杭州永兴寺僧章自福赂金一百五十两。
English: He also accepted a bribe of one hundred and fifty-two yuan from Zhang Zifu, a monk of Hangzhou Yongxing Temple.

古文：取杀人囚张弼钞五万贯。
现代文：还取得有杀人罪的囚犯张弼钞五万贯。
English: In addition, Zhang Ye, a prisoner convicted of homicide, was fined 50,000 yuan.

古文：且既已位极人臣，又领宣政院事，以其子八里吉思为之使。
现代文：自己已经位极人臣，又要领宣政院事，而以自己的儿子八里吉思为院使。
English: He was already an extremely high-ranking courtier, and he also had to lead the proclamation of the government, and his son, Balighis, was the envoy to the court.

古文：诸子无功于国，尽居贵显。
现代文：他的许多儿子无功于国，却尽居显贵。
English: Many of his sons have no merit in the country, but they are prominent.

古文：纵家奴陵虐官府，为害百端。以致阴阳不和，山移地震，灾异数见，百姓流亡，己乃恬然略无省悔。
现代文：他放纵自己的家奴，欺负官府的僚吏，其危害已不可胜数，致使阴阳不和，山移地震，异灾数见，百姓流亡。
English: He indulged his family slaves and bullied his colleagues in the government. The harm caused by him is incalculable, resulting in discord between yin and yang, mountain-moving earthquakes, a number of natural disasters, and the exile of the people.

古文：私家之富，又在阿合马、桑哥之上。
现代文：但他自己却安然毫无悔改的表示，而他的私家之富，又在阿合马、桑哥之上。
English: But he himself has shown no sign of repentance, and his personal wealth is higher than that of Ahama and Sango.

古文：四海疾怨已久，咸愿车裂斩首，以快其心。
现代文：四海积怨已久，都希望对他处以车裂斩首之刑，以快人心。
English: The four seas have long-standing grudges, and they all hope to give him the punishment of beheading with a chariot crack, in order to make people happy.

古文：如蒙早加显戮，以示天下，庶使后之为臣者，知所警戒。 
现代文：如蒙早日正法，当众处决，以示天下，才可使后之为臣者知所警戒。 
English: If the death penalty were to be carried out as soon as possible, it would be a public execution, which would be seen by the whole world, and this would alert the next generation of vassals.

古文：奏既上，仁宗震怒，有诏逮问，铁木迭儿匿兴圣近侍家，有司不得捕。仁宗不乐者数日，又恐诚出皇太后意，不忍重伤咈之，乃仅罢其相位而已。
现代文：这个奏本一上，仁宗震怒，便下令逮捕审问铁木迭儿。铁木迭儿闻讯后便藏于兴圣近侍之家，政府有关部门不能前去抓人，仁宗有几天闷闷不乐，但又怕有违皇太后的旨意，招致皇太后的反感，故仅仅罢免铁木迭儿的相位便草草了事了。
English: On the first day of this report, Enzong was furious and ordered the arrest and interrogation of Tie Mu Di'er. After hearing the news, Tie Mu Di'er hid in the house of Xing Sheng's close attendant. The relevant government departments could not go to arrest people. Enzong was sullen for a few days, but he was afraid of violating the will of the Empress Dowager and incurring the antipathy of the Empress Dowager. Therefore, the phase of merely dismissing Tie Mu Di'er was short-lived.

古文：铁木迭儿家居未逾年，又起为太子太师，中外闻之，莫不惊骇。
现代文：铁木迭儿居家没有超过一年，便又被起用为太子太师。朝野听到此事，莫不惊骇。
English: When she hadn't been living at home for more than a year, she was appointed as crown prince again. When Asano heard about this, he was shocked.

古文：参政赵世延为御史中丞，率诸御史论其不法数十事，而内外御史论其不可辅导东宫者又四十余人。
现代文：参政赵世炎为御史中丞，便率领诸御史历数其不法之罪数十事，而内外御史陈述其不可辅导东宫者达四十余人。
English: Zhao Shiyan, a politician, was the middle-ranking official in the imperial history, and he led the imperial historians to record dozens of his illegal crimes, while more than forty people inside and outside the imperial history stated that he could not tutor the East Palace.

古文：然以皇太后故，终不能明正其罪。
现代文：然而因为有皇太后的庇护，终不能明正其罪。
English: However, because he had the protection of the Empress Dowager, he was unable to clear his name.

古文：明年正月辛丑，仁宗崩。
现代文：七年正月二十一日，仁宗去世。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the seventh year, Nizong passed away.

古文：越四日，铁木迭儿以皇太后旨，复入中书为右丞相。
现代文：再过四天，铁木迭儿以皇太后的旨意，又再进入中书为右丞相。
English: Four days later, Tekidiel, by order of the empress dowager, re-entered Chusho as the minister of the right.

古文：又逾月，英宗犹在东宫，铁木迭儿宣太后旨，召萧拜住与朵儿只至徽政院，与徽政院使失里门、御史大夫秃忒哈杂问之，责以前违太后旨，令伏罪。
现代文：又过月余，英宗还在东宫做太子时，铁木迭儿宣读皇太后旨，召萧拜住和朵儿只两人至徽政院，与徽政院使失里门、御史大夫秃忒哈共同审问两人，指责他们以前有违反皇太后旨之罪，并要他们服罪。
English: More than a month later, when Yingzong was still the crown prince in the East Palace, Tiemu Di'er read out the empress dowager's will, summoned Xiao Baiju and Duo Er to the Imperial Household Agency, and interrogated the two together with the Imperial Household Agency's messenger, the gatekeeper, and the imperial historian, Zheng Ha, accusing them of previously violating the empress dowager's will, and asking them to confess their sins.

古文：即起入奏，遽称旨，执二人弃市。是日，白昼晦冥，都人恟惧。
现代文：接着，铁木迭儿又立即入奏太后，据说是太后的旨意，将他们斩首示众。这一天，白日乌天黑暗，人心震惧。
English: Next, Tie Mu Di'er immediately played the music of the empress dowager, and it is said that it was the will of the empress dowager to decapitate them in public. On this day, the sky was dark and the people's hearts trembled.

古文：英宗将行即位礼，铁木迭儿恒病足，中书省启： 祖宗以来，皇帝登极，中书率百官称贺，班首惟上所命。 
现代文：英宗行将即位，中书省向皇上报告说 ：祖宗以来，皇帝登基，中书要率百官称贺，班首要由皇上指定。 
English: When Emperor Yingzong acceded to the throne, the Central Calligraphy Department reported to the emperor: Since Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, the Central Calligraphy Department has congratulated hundreds of officials, and the head of the class has been designated by the emperor.

古文：英宗曰： 其以铁木迭儿为之。 
现代文：英宗便指定让铁木迭儿担任。
English: The Yingzong then designated Tiemu Di'er to take the post.

古文：既即位，铁木迭儿即奏委平章王毅、右丞高昉等征理在京仓库所贮粮，亏七十八万石，责偿于仓官及监临出内者。
现代文：及英宗即位后，铁木迭儿要皇上同意派平章王毅、右丞高窻等勘察在京仓库所贮的粮食，亏七十八万石。于是，便要仓官及监察出纳的人赔偿。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Empress Dowager Tiemu requested the emperor's consent to send Pingzhang Wang Yi, Ujo Gao Yao and others to investigate the grain stored in the warehouse in Beijing, which had lost 780,000 koku. Therefore, she asked the warehouse clerk and the person who monitored the cashier for compensation.

古文：所贡币帛纰缪者，责偿于本处官吏之董其事者。
现代文：各地所贡币帛如有错误，便责令本处官吏中负责此事的人赔偿。
English: If there is a mistake in the tribute money collected from various regions, the person in charge of the matter among the officials of this department will be ordered to compensate.

古文：仍立程严督，违者杖之。
现代文：还立下严厉监督的章程，违者要受杖刑。
English: It has also set up a strict supervision regulation, and violators will be punished with canes.

古文：五月，英宗在上都，铁木迭儿嫉留守贺伯颜素不附己，乃奏其以便服迎诏为不敬，下五府杂治，竟杀之。都民为之流涕。
现代文：五月，英宗在上都，铁木迭儿恨留守贺伯颜一向不归附自己，便上奏说伯颜穿便衣迎皇上诏书是不敬的行为，把他押赴五府共同治罪，最后竟以此为借口把伯颜杀了，都民为之流涕。
English: In May, when Emperor Yingzong was in Shangdu, Tiemu Di'er, who hated the left-behind He Boyan, who had never been loyal to him, made a report that it was disrespectful for Boyan to wear plain clothes to welcome the Emperor's edict, and sent him to the five prefectures to jointly punish the crime. In the end, he actually used this as an excuse to kill Boyan, and the people of the capital were outraged.

古文：赵世延时为四川行省平章政事，铁木迭儿怒其昔尝论己，方入相时，即从东宫启英宗遣人逮捕之。
现代文：赵世炎时任四川行省平章政事，铁木迭儿恼怒他过去曾经揭露过自己，在刚入中书为相时，即赴东宫启奏尚待即位的皇太子英宗，要求派人逮捕世炎，世炎未至。
English: At that time, Zhao Shiyan was in charge of the Pingzhang political affairs of Sichuan Province. Tie Mu Di'er was angry that he had revealed himself in the past. When he had just entered the middle book, he went to the East Palace to inaugurate the crown prince Ying Zong, who was still waiting for the throne, and demanded that someone be sent to arrest Shiyan. Shiyan had not yet arrived.

古文：世延未至，铁木迭儿使讽世延，啖以美官，令告引同时异己者，世延不肯从。
现代文：铁木迭儿又使人暗示世炎，骗说要升他为高官，要求世炎告发反对过铁木迭儿的人，世炎也不从。
English: Tie Mu Di'er also made people insinuate that he was a traitor to the world, lied that he wanted to be promoted to a high-ranking official, and asked the world to denounce those who had opposed Tie Mu Di'er, but the world would not listen.

古文：至是，坐以违诏不敬，令法司穷治，请置极刑。
现代文：至此，铁木迭儿便诬陷世炎，说他违诏不敬，令司法部门深究，处以极刑。
English: At this point, Tiemu Di'er falsely accused Shiyan, saying that he violated the edict and disrespected the judicial department, and was sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：英宗曰： 彼罪在赦前，所宜释免。 
现代文：英宗说： 他犯的罪，在大赦之前，应该免罪释放。 
English: Yingzong said, "He should be exonerated from the crime he committed before the amnesty.

古文：铁木迭儿对曰： 昔世延与省台诸人谋害老臣，请究其姓名。 
现代文：铁木迭儿说 ：过去省台许多人谋害老臣，请您追究这些人。 
English: Tiemu Dier said: In the past, many people in Taiwan Province plotted to kill the old minister, please investigate these people.

古文：英宗曰： 事皆在赦前矣，又焉用问。 
现代文：英宗又说 ：事情都发生在大赦之前，又何必再问？ 
English: Yingzong also said: Everything happened before the amnesty, so why ask again?

古文：后数日，又奏世延当处死罪，又不允。
现代文：又过数日，铁木迭儿又对皇上说应当处死世炎的理由，英宗仍不允诺。
English: A few days later, Empress Dowager Tiemu again told the emperor that he should be put to death, but Emperor Yingzong still did not agree.

古文：有司承望风旨，锻炼欲使自裁，世延终无所屈，赖英宗素闻其忠良，得免于死。
现代文：司法官吏秉承皇太后、铁木迭儿的意图，加世炎以莫须有的罪名迫使他自裁，世炎终无所屈，这是由于英宗平素闻其忠良而得免于死。
English: Judicial officials adhered to the intention of the Empress Dowager, Tie Mu Di'er, and forced him to self-adjudicate with groundless accusations, but he did not give in. This was due to the fact that Emperor Yingzong knew his loyalty and was spared from death.

古文：铁木迭儿恃其权宠，乘间肆毒，睚眦之私，无有不报。
现代文：铁木迭儿恃其权宠，乘机到处作坏事。只要有人向他瞪一下眼睛，就一定要受到报复。
English: Tiemu Di'er is the favorite of his power, taking the opportunity to do bad things everywhere. As long as someone glares at him, he must be retaliated against.

古文：英宗觉其所谮毁者，皆先帝旧人，滋不悦其所为，乃任拜住为左丞相，委以心腹。
现代文：英宗也觉得他攻击诋毁的人都是先帝的旧臣，也很不高兴他的所作所为。乃任拜住为左丞相，把他当作最亲密的心腹看待。
English: Yingzong also felt that the people he attacked and slandered were the former emperor's old retainers, and he was also very unhappy with what he had done. However, he was appointed as the Minister of the Left, and regarded him as his closest confidant.

古文：铁木迭儿渐见疏外，以疾死于家。
现代文：铁木迭儿渐见皇上在疏远他，也可能是心存疑惧，便在家里病死了。
English: Tiemu Dier gradually saw that the emperor was distancing himself from him, and may also have been suspicious, and died of illness at home.

古文：御史盖继元、宋翼，言其上负国恩，下失民望，生逃显戮，死有余辜。
现代文：御史盖继元、宋翼说他上负国恩，下失民望，在生时虽逃掉了当众处决，死后还当惩其余罪。
English: Imperial Historians Gai Jiyuan and Song Ying said that he had failed the country and lost the people's trust. Although he escaped public execution during his lifetime, he was still punished for his remaining crimes after his death.

古文：乃命毁所立碑，追夺其官爵及封赠制书，籍没其家。
现代文：英宗乃命捣毁其所立之碑，撤销其官爵及封赠，籍没其家产。
English: Yingzong ordered the destruction of the monument erected by him, revoked his official title and gift, and confiscated his family property.

古文：子班丹，知枢密院事，寻以赃败，不叙；锁南，尝为治书侍御史，其后铁失弑英宗，锁南以逆党伏诛。
现代文：铁木迭儿之子班丹，知枢密院事。不久，因赃情败露，不予录用。另一子琐南，曾为治书侍御史，后来铁失弑英宗，琐南以逆党罪被杀。
English: Tie Mu Di'er's son, Bantan, knew about the Privy Council. Soon, he was not hired because of his affair. Another son, Zonan, had been a secretary to the Emperor. Later, Tie lost his position to Emperor Yongle, and Zonan was killed for treason.

古文：哈麻，字士廉，康里人。
现代文：哈麻字士廉，康里人。
English: Hama character Shillian, Kangli people.

古文：父秃鲁，母为宁宗乳母，秃鲁以故封冀国公，加太尉，阶金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父秃鲁，母为宁宗奶妈，秃鲁因而被封为冀国公，加太尉，官阶金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father was Baldur, his mother was Ningzong's wet nurse. As a result, Baldur was named the Prince of Ji Province, the Second Lieutenant of Jia Province, and the First Doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：哈麻与其弟雪雪，早备宿卫，顺帝深眷宠之。
现代文：哈麻与其弟雪雪很早就参加皇宫的禁卫，顺帝很喜欢他。
English: Hamma and his brother Xuexue joined the palace guards very early on, and Emperor Shun liked him very much.

古文：而哈麻有口才，尤为帝所亵幸，累迁官为殿中侍御史。
现代文：哈麻有口才，尤为帝所亲信，累迁官为殿中侍御史。
English: Hama was an eloquent man, especially a close confidant of the imperial court, and he was appointed as an official of the imperial court.

古文：雪雪累官集贤学士。
现代文：雪雪官至集贤学士。
English: Xue Xue Guan to Ji Xian Bao.

古文：帝每即内殿，与哈麻以双陆为戏，一日，哈麻服新衣侍侧，帝方啜茶，即噀茶于其衣。哈麻视帝曰： 天子固当如是耶！ 
现代文：帝每到内殿，便与哈麻走 双陆 棋为戏。一日，哈麻穿新衣侍于帝身边，帝正在喝茶，便喷茶于哈麻的衣上，哈麻望着帝说 ：做天子的人应该这样做吗？ 
English: Whenever the emperor came to the inner hall, he would play backgammon with Haman. One day, Haman was wearing new clothes and serving the emperor. The emperor was drinking tea, and he sprayed the tea on Haman's clothes. Haman looked at the emperor and said, "Should a man who is the son of heaven do such a thing?"

古文：帝一笑而已。
现代文：帝笑一下就算了。
English: It's enough for the emperor to smile.

古文：其被爱幸，无与为比。
现代文：可见，哈麻受帝之宠爱是无与伦比的。
English: It can be seen that the emperor's fondness for hemp is unparalleled.

古文：由是哈麻声势日盛，自藩王戚里，皆遗赂之。
现代文：由于帝的宠爱，哈麻声势日盛。连藩王、外戚都要送财物贿赂他。
English: As a result of the emperor's favor, Hamasa became more and more powerful. Even the king of the domain and his mother's relatives had to send money to bribe him.

古文：寻以谋害脱脱，出贬南安，召入为礼部尚书，俄迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：不久，因谋害脱脱，出贬安南。后又召入为礼部尚书，很快又迁同知枢密院事。
English: Soon after, he escaped from assassination and was demoted to Annan. Later, he was called to the Ministry of Ceremonies and soon moved to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：至正初，脱脱为丞相，其弟也先帖木儿为御史大夫，哈麻日趋附其兄弟之门。
现代文：至正初年，脱脱为丞相，其弟也先帖木儿为御史大夫，哈麻便日益趋附于脱脱兄弟门下。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, Dettori became chancellor, and his younger brother, Timur, became imperial secretary. Hama became increasingly attached to the Dettori brothers.

古文：会脱脱去相位，而别儿怯不花为丞相，与脱脱有旧怨，颇欲中伤之，哈麻每于帝前力营护之，以故得免。
现代文：及脱脱离开相位，别儿怯不花继为丞相。别儿怯不花因与脱脱有旧怨，很快便向帝中伤脱脱，哈麻则多次在帝面前竭力救护，使脱脱得免于祸。
English: Because he had an old grudge against Dangdang, Dangdang soon slandered Dangdang to the emperor, while Hama repeatedly tried to save Dangdang from harm in front of the emperor.

古文：初，别儿怯不花与太平、韩嘉纳、秃满迭儿等十人结为兄弟，情好甚密。
现代文：以前，别儿怯不花与太平、韩嘉纳、秃满迭儿等十人结为兄弟，情好甚密。
English: In the past, Bie Er Qiu Fuxia and Taiping, Han Jiana, Bald Man Dier and other ten people were brothers, and they were very close.

古文：及别儿怯不花既罢，九年，太平为左丞相，韩嘉纳为御史大夫，乃谋黜哈麻，讽监察御史斡勒海寿，列其罪恶劾奏之：其小罪，则受宣让王等驼马诸物；其大者，则设帐房于御幄之后，无君臣之分。又，恃以提调宁徽寺为名，出入脱忽思皇后宫闱无间，犯分之罪尤大。
现代文：及别儿怯不花被撤职，九年，太平为左丞相，韩嘉纳为御史大夫，便策划罢黜哈麻，暗示监察御史斡勒海寿列举哈麻的罪恶向皇上报告。在列举的诸罪中，有如受宣让王等的驼马诸物的小罪，也有如设帐房于皇上的御帐之后、无君臣之分的大罪，还有以提调宁徽寺为名畅通无阻地出入脱忽思皇后宫闱的无君臣之分的最大的罪。
English: In nine years, when Taiping was appointed as the Minister of the Left and Han Jiana as the Imperial Historian, they plotted to oust Haman, suggesting that the inspector of the Imperial Historian, Hai Shou, list Haman's crimes and report them to the emperor. Among the listed crimes, there are minor crimes such as the camel and other things that were proclaimed to be given to the king, as well as major crimes such as setting up an accounting room in the emperor's imperial account, which is not a part of the royal subjects, and the biggest crime of the royal subjects, which is to enter and leave the Empress's palace unhindered in the name of

古文：宁徽寺者，掌脱忽思皇后钱粮，而脱忽思皇后，帝庶母也。
现代文：所谓宁徽寺，是掌管脱忽思皇后钱粮的机构。而脱忽思皇后便是皇上的庶母。
English: The so-called Ninghui Temple is the institution in charge of the money and grain of the Empress Takhushi, who was the Emperor's mother-in-law.

古文：哈麻知御史有所言，先已于帝前析其非罪，事皆太平、韩嘉纳所摭拾。
现代文：哈麻知道御史们将会在皇上面前揭发他，便先到帝前辩说自己无罪，说这些事是太平、韩嘉纳所摘拾来的。
English: Knowing that the historians would expose him in front of the emperor, Hamma first went to the emperor to argue that he was not guilty, saying that these things were picked up by Taiping and Han Jiana.

古文：及韩嘉纳以御史所言奏，帝大怒，斥弗纳。
现代文：及韩嘉纳将御史们所说的话向皇上报告后，帝大怒，斥韩嘉纳而拒纳。
English: After Han Jian Na reported to the emperor what the historians had said, the emperor was furious and rebuffed Han Jian Na.

古文：明日，章再上，帝不得已，仅夺哈麻、雪雪官职，居之草地。
现代文：次日，韩又上奏，帝不得已，仅剥夺哈麻与雪雪的官职，迁居草地。
English: The next day, Han played again, and the emperor had no choice but to deprive Ha Ma and Xue Xue of their official positions and move to the meadow.

古文：而斡勒海寿为陕西廉访副使，于是太平罢为翰林学士承旨，韩嘉纳罢为宣政使，寻出为江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：斡勒海寿罢监察御史而为陕西廉访副使。太平罢左丞相而为翰林学士承旨。韩嘉纳罢御史大夫而为宣政使，不久，又出京为江浙行省平章政事。
English: Le Haishou was appointed as the deputy envoy of Shaanxi Lianqi after he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history; Taiping was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the scholar of Hanlin after he was appointed as the minister of the right after he was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the minister of the right after he was appointed as the minister of the right after he was appointed as the minister of the left after he was appointed as the minister

古文：有顷，脱忽思皇后泣诉帝，谓御史所劾哈麻事为侵己，帝益怒，乃诏夺海寿官，屏归田里，禁锢之。
现代文：过一段时间后，脱忽思皇后向皇上哭诉，说御史们弹劾哈麻的事，都是攻击皇后的。皇帝听后便发大脾气，下令夺去海寿一切职务，回家乡接受禁锢。
English: After a period of time, Empress Dehuxi cried to the emperor, saying that the historians' impeachment of Hama was an attack on the empress. After hearing this, the emperor lost his temper and ordered to take away all of Haishou's positions and to be imprisoned in his hometown.

古文：已而脱脱复为丞相，也先帖木儿复为御史大夫，而谪太平居陕西，而加韩嘉纳以赃罪，杖流奴儿干以死。
现代文：不久，皇上又恢复脱脱的相位，其弟也先帖木儿也恢复御史大夫职务。又谪太平于陕西，加贪赃罪于韩嘉纳，奴儿干受杖刑后流放致死。
English: Not long after, the emperor resumed the phase of detachment, and his younger brother, Tetsumu, also resumed the post of imperial historian. In addition, Taiping was arrested in Shaanxi, Han Jiana was charged with corruption, and he was sentenced to death by exile after being caned.

古文：别儿怯不花既罢，犹出居般阳，而秃满迭儿自中书右丞出为四川右丞，亦诬以罪，追至中道杀之。
现代文：别儿怯不花罢官后出居于般阳。秃满迭儿从中书右丞出京为四川右丞，也被诬告有罪，在中途被处死。
English: Bie Er was born in Banyang after he was dismissed from his post. Bald Man Die Er was born in Zhongshu Yujo and went to Beijing as Sichuan Yujo. He was also falsely accused and was executed halfway.

古文：已而哈麻复见召用，而脱脱兄弟尤德之。
现代文：其后，哈麻又被召用，而脱脱兄弟更对他感恩戴德。
English: After that, Hama was called up again, and the brothers were even more grateful to him.

古文：十二年八月，哈麻拜中书添设右丞。
现代文：十二年八月，哈麻拜中书添设右丞。
English: In August of the 12th year, Hanabai Middle School added a junior high school teacher.

古文：明年正月，正除右丞。
现代文：明年正月，正除右丞。
English: In the first month of the next year, Ujo will be dismissed.

古文：时脱脱方信任汝中柏，由郎中为参议中书，自平章政事以下，见其议事，皆唯唯而已。
现代文：时脱脱方信任汝中柏，将他由郎中升为参议中书。自平章政事以下人等，见汝议事，都只能唯唯听命。
English: At that time, the escaping party trusted Ru Zhongbai, and promoted him from ro-chung to the position of councillor. From the time of Pingzhang Zhengji to the present, everyone in the council had to follow his orders.

古文：独哈麻性刚决，与之论，数不合，汝中柏因谮哈麻于脱脱。
现代文：独哈麻性情刚决，有想法就和汝辩论，几次辩论都不得统一。这样，汝中柏就在脱脱面前说哈麻的坏话。
English: However, his character was just decided, and when he had an idea, he would argue with you, and several times the debate could not be unified. In this way, you, Zhongbo, spoke ill of him in front of his escape.

古文：八月，出哈麻为宣政院使，又位居第三，哈麻由是深衔脱脱。
现代文：八月，使哈麻出任宣政院使，位居第三，哈麻由是深恨脱脱。
English: In August, Hama was appointed as the envoy of the State Council, ranking third. Hama hated to leave the position.

古文：初，哈麻尝阴进西天僧以运气术媚帝，帝习为之，号演揲儿法。
现代文：起初，哈麻曾暗中引见西天僧，向皇帝推荐运气之术以讨好皇帝，皇帝学着做，称为 演揲儿法 。
English: At first, Hama had secretly introduced the Western Sky Monk to the emperor, recommending the art of luck to please the emperor. The emperor learned to do it, called the deduction method.

古文：演揲儿，华言大喜乐也。
现代文：所谓 演揲儿 ，译成汉语，便是 大喜乐 的意思。
English: Translated into Chinese, the so-called "Dedication" means "great joy."

古文：哈麻之妹婿集贤学士秃鲁帖木儿，故有宠于帝，与老的沙、八郎、答剌马吉的、波迪哇儿祃等十人，俱号倚纳。
现代文：哈麻的妹婿集贤学士秃鲁帖木儿，也因而有宠于帝。与老的沙、八郎、答剌马吉的、波迪哇儿等十人，俱号 倚纳 。
English: Hamma's brother-in-law, the scholar and scholar Baldru Timur, was also favored by the emperor. He was accompanied by ten people, including the old man Sa, Hachiro, Tadakuni Maji, and Bodhiwa.

古文：秃鲁帖木儿性奸狡，帝爱之，言听计从，亦荐西蕃僧伽璘真于帝。
现代文：秃鲁帖木儿性情奸狡，得到皇帝的欢心，言听计从。他也将西蕃僧伽瞞真推荐给皇帝。
English: Baldur Timur had a cunning and treacherous nature, and was favored by the emperor, who listened to his every word. He also secretly recommended the Xidi Sangha to the emperor.

古文：其僧善秘密法，谓帝曰： 陛下虽尊居万乘，富有四海，不过保有见世而已。
现代文：伽瞞真善于 秘密法 ，对帝说： 陛下虽有万乘之尊，富有四海，也不过只保有这一辈而已，但人生的这一辈能有多久呢？
English: Gadzhezhen, who was good at the secret law, said to the emperor: Although your majesty has the respect of millions of people and is rich in the four seas, he only preserves this generation, but how long can this generation of life last?

古文：人生能几何，当受此秘密大喜乐禅定。 
现代文：所以，应当接受这种秘密大喜乐禅定。 
English: Therefore, this secret meditation of great joy should be accepted.

古文：帝又习之，其法亦名双修法。曰演揲儿，曰秘密，皆房中术也。
现代文：皇帝又学了。此法也称 双修法 。 演揲法 和 秘密 ，都是房中术。
English: The emperor learned again. This method is also known as the double repair method. The deduction method and the secret are both in-house techniques.

古文：帝乃诏以西天僧为司徒，西蕃僧为大元国师。其徒皆取良家女，或四人、或三人奉之，谓之供养。
现代文：帝乃下诏书任西天僧为司徒，任西蕃僧为大元国师，这些和尚的徒弟，皆强取民间女子，或四人、或三人贡献给皇上，称之为 供养 。
English: In the imperial edict issued by the emperor, the West Heavenly Monk was appointed as a disciple, and the West Hakka Monk was appointed as the Grand Master of the State. The disciples of these monks all forcibly took folk women, and either four or three of them were offered to the emperor, which was called "offering."

古文：于是帝日从事于其法，广取女妇，惟淫戏是乐。
现代文：于是皇帝每日从事其法，广取民间妇女，惟淫戏取乐是务。
English: As a result, the emperor practised his law on a daily basis, extensively recruiting women from among the common people, but fornicating for pleasure was the order of the day.

古文：又选采女为十六天魔舞。
现代文：又选采女为十六天魔舞。
English: In addition, a young woman was chosen to lead the Sixteen Days Magic Dance.

古文：八郎者，帝诸弟，与其所谓倚纳者，皆在帝前相与亵狎，甚至男女裸处，号所处室曰皆即兀该，华言事事无碍也。
现代文：八郎是帝之诸弟，与其他的号称 倚纳 的人都在皇帝面前纵情放荡，甚至男女裸体集于一处，称其所居之室为 皆即兀该 ，译成汉语，即 事事无碍 。
English: Hachiro was one of the emperor's younger brothers, and he and the others, who were known as "supporters," indulged in debauchery in front of the emperor. They even gathered naked men and women in one place and called the room they lived in "everyone is welcome," which was translated into Chinese as "everything is fine."

古文：君臣宣淫，而群僧出入禁中，无所禁止，丑声秽行，著闻于外，虽市井之人，亦恶闻之。
现代文：君臣淫乐，群僧出入宫廷，无所禁忌，丑声秽行，著闻于宫廷之外。虽市井之人，也不堪入耳。
English: Princes and courtiers fornicating, monks entering and leaving the court, no taboos, obscene behavior, known outside the court. Although they were common people, they were hard to listen to.

古文：皇太子年日以长，尤深疾秃鲁帖木儿等所为，欲去之未能也。
现代文：皇太子年事日长，对秃鲁帖木儿的所为深感厌恶，很想把他们赶走，但又办不到。
English: The crown prince, who is getting older, is deeply disgusted by the actions of Baldur Timur and would like to get rid of them, but he can't.

古文：十四年秋，脱脱领大军讨高邮，哈麻乘间遂复入中书为平章政事。
现代文：十四年秋，脱脱领大军讨高邮，哈麻乘机复入中书为平章政事。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year, he led the army to discuss the high post, and Hama took the opportunity to re-enter the Chinese book for the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：脱脱之出师也，以汝中柏为治书侍御史，俾辅也先帖木儿。
现代文：脱脱出师时，以汝中柏为治书侍御史，以便辅助也先帖木儿。
English: When escaping from the escape room, take your middle brother as your guide, so that you can assist Timur first.

古文：汝中柏累言哈麻必当屏斥，不然必为后患，而也先帖木儿不从。
现代文：汝中柏多次说应该排除哈麻，否则必为后患。也先帖木儿不听。
English: Ye Zhongbai repeatedly said that hemp should be excluded, otherwise it would be a hindrance. Even Timur did not listen at first.

古文：哈麻知之，恐终不自保，因诉于皇后奇氏曰： 皇太子既立，而册宝及郊庙之礼不行者，脱脱兄弟之意也。 
现代文：此事给哈麻知道了，恐怕终究不能自保，于是便向皇后奇氏说： 皇太子虽已立了，但册宝和祭郊庙之礼的仪式之所以没有举行，是脱脱兄弟的意思。 
English: When Hama found out about this, he was afraid that he would not be able to protect himself, so he said to Empress Qi: Although the crown prince has been established, the reason why the ceremony of the collection of treasures and the ceremony of the suburb temple were not held was to get rid of the brothers.

古文：皇后既颇信之，哈麻复与汪家奴之子桑哥实里、也先帖木儿之客明理明古谮诸皇太子。
现代文：皇后颇相信这些话。哈麻又与汪家奴之子桑哥实里、也先帖木儿的门客明理明古等人在皇太子面前说脱脱兄弟的坏话。
English: The empress quite believed these words, and Hamma, along with Wang Jiannu's son, Sanggoshiri, and first Tamerlane's protégé, Ming Li Minggu, and others, spoke ill of the brothers in front of the crown prince.

古文：会也先帖木儿移疾家居，于是监察御史袁赛因不花等即承望哈麻风指，奏劾也先帖木儿罪恶，章凡三上，而帝始允，诏收御史台印，令也先帖木儿出都门听旨。
现代文：恰好也先帖木儿患病居家，于是监察御史袁赛因不花领会哈麻的暗示，奏劾也先帖木儿的罪恶，向皇上连上三本，帝始同意所请，下令收御史台印，并令也先帖木儿出都门听旨。
English: It so happened that Tamerlane was also ill at home, so the inspector, Yuan Sai, because he did not understand the hint of hemp, denounced the sins of Tamerlane, presented three copies to the emperor, the emperor agreed to the request, ordered the collection of the imperial seal, and ordered Tamerlane to leave the capital to obey.

古文：而遂以知枢密院事汪家奴为御史大夫。
现代文：遂以知枢密院事汪家奴为御史大夫。
English: Therefore, Wang Jia Rong, a member of the Privy Council of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was appointed as the imperial historian.

古文：寻降诏数脱脱老师费财之罪，即军中夺其兵柄，安置淮安。
现代文：不久，又下诏书列举脱脱长时间劳师费财之罪，当即在军中夺了他的军权，将他安置在淮安。
English: Soon after, he issued another edict, listing the crimes of getting rid of long-term laborers and spending money, and immediately seized his military power in the army and placed him in Huai'an.

古文：既而脱脱、也先帖木儿皆就贬逐以死，并籍其家赀人口，而以所籍也先帖木儿者赐哈麻。
现代文：接着，脱脱和也先帖木儿都被贬逐致死，他们的家财、人口没官，并以也先帖木儿的部分赐给哈麻。
English: Next, both Decheng and Timur were banished to death, their family wealth and population confiscated, and Haman was given part of Timur's.

古文：十五年四月，雪雪由知枢密院事拜御史大夫。
现代文：十五年四月，雪雪由知枢密院事拜御史大夫。
English: In April of the fifteenth year, Yuki Yuki went to the Privy Council to pay homage to the Imperial Historian.

古文：五月，哈麻遂拜中书左丞相，国家大柄，尽归其兄弟二人矣。
现代文：五月，哈麻遂拜中书左丞相。国家大权，尽归其兄弟之手了。
English: In May, Hama then bowed to Chushizojo, the Minister of the Left, and the supreme power of the state passed into the hands of his brother.

古文：明年二月，哈麻既为相，自以前所进蕃僧为耻，告其父秃鲁曰： 我兄弟位居宰辅，宜导人主以正，今秃鲁帖木儿专媚上以淫亵，天下士大夫必讥笑我，将何面目见人，我将除之。
现代文：明年二月，哈麻既为相，自以为从前向皇上进献蕃僧是可耻之事，便对自己的父亲秃鲁说： 我兄弟位居宰辅，应该引导人主走正道，今秃鲁帖木儿专媚上以淫亵，天下士大夫必讥笑我，我将有什么面目见人？以后，我将除掉秃鲁帖木儿。
English: In February of the next year, since Hama was a priest, he thought it was a shameful thing to have previously presented a defrocked monk to the emperor, so he said to his father, Baldur: My brother is the second-in-command, he should guide people to the right path. Now Baldur Timur is using obscenity to charm people. The world's sheriffs will laugh at me. What kind of face will I have? Later, I will get rid of Baldur Timur.

古文：且上日趋于昏暗，何以治天下。
现代文：现在皇上日趋昏暗，何以治天下？
English: Now that the emperor is getting dimmer and dimmer, how can he rule the world?

古文：今皇太子年长，聪明过人，不若立以为帝，而奉上为太上皇。 
现代文：今皇太子年长，聪明过人，不如立皇太子为帝而奉皇上为太上皇。 
English: Now that the crown prince is older and wiser, it is better to make the crown prince the emperor and the emperor the emperor.

古文：其妹闻之，归告其夫。
现代文：其妹闻知后，归告其夫。
English: When her sister found out, she told her husband.

古文：秃鲁帖木儿恐皇太子为帝，则己必先见诛，即以闻于帝，然不敢斥言淫亵事，第曰 哈麻谓陛下年老故耳 。
现代文：秃鲁帖木儿怕皇太子为帝后必先杀自己，于是便把哈麻想立皇太子的事告诉皇上，但因不敢直说哈麻斥责淫亵之事，而改口说是 哈麻立皇太子是因为他认为皇上老了 。
English: Baldur Timur was afraid that if the crown prince became emperor, he would have to kill himself first. Therefore, he told the emperor about Haman's intention to install the crown prince, but since he did not dare to say outright that Haman had rebuked the obscene thing, he changed his words and said that Haman had installed the crown prince because he thought the emperor was old.

古文：帝大惊曰： 朕头未白，齿未落，遽谓我为老耶！ 
现代文：帝听后大惊说： 我的头未白、齿未落，怎能马上就说我老了呢？ 
English: After listening, the emperor was shocked and said: My head is not white, my teeth have not fallen, how can I immediately say that I am old?

古文：帝即与秃鲁帖木儿谋去哈麻、雪雪，计已定，秃鲁帖木儿走匿尼寺中。明日，帝遣使传旨哈麻与雪雪，毋早入朝，其家居听旨。
现代文：于是帝便与秃鲁帖木儿商讨如何除掉哈麻和雪雪的办法。计划妥当后，秃鲁帖木儿便藏身于尼寺中，次日，帝遣使传旨给哈麻和雪雪，叫他们不要早朝，要他们呆在家里听旨。
English: So the emperor discussed with Baldrutimur how to get rid of Hamsa and Xuexue. After the plan was in place, Baldrutimur hid in the Ni Temple. The next day, the emperor sent a messenger to Hamsa and Xuexue, telling them not to get up early in the morning and to stay at home.

古文：御史大夫搠思监因劾奏哈麻与雪雪罪恶，帝曰： 哈麻、雪雪兄弟二人虽有罪，然侍朕日久，且与朕弟懿璘质班皇帝实同乳，可姑缓其罚，令其出征。 
现代文：御史大夫搠思监便在早朝时向皇上揭发哈麻和雪雪的罪恶，皇上说： 哈麻、雪雪兄弟二人虽有罪，但他们侍奉我的时间长，且与我弟懿瞞质班皇帝实是同奶兄弟，可暂缓其罪，令其出征。 
English: In the early morning, the Imperial Historian, Jian Siyuan, revealed the crimes of Hama and Xuexue to the emperor. The emperor said, "Although Hama and Xuexue are two guilty brothers, they have served me for a long time, and they have concealed the fact that the emperor and I are brothers. They can suspend their crime and order them to go to war.

古文：已而中书右丞相定住、平章政事桑哥失里复纠劾哈麻、雪雪之罪不已，乃命其兄弟出城受诏，遂诏哈麻于惠州安置，雪雪于肇州安置。
现代文：后来，中书右丞相定住、平章政事桑哥失里，又不停地弹劾哈麻与雪雪等之罪，帝便令哈麻兄弟出城受诏，说要安置哈麻于惠州，安置雪雪于肇州。
English: Later, when the Minister of the Right of the CPC Central Committee settled down, Pingzhang lost the political affairs of Sango, and kept impeaching the crimes of Hama and Xuexue, the emperor ordered the Hama brothers to leave the city to receive the edict, saying that they would place Hama in Huizhou and Xuexue in Zhaozhou.

古文：比行，俱杖死。
现代文：等到要动身时，又都以杖打死。
English: When it was time to leave, they were all beaten to death with a cane.

古文：哈麻既死，仍籍其家财，也先帖木儿所封之库藏，其封识固未尝启也。
现代文：哈麻死后，没收了他的家财。也先帖木儿被查封的宝库，当时虽已赐给哈麻，但实际哈麻并未享用，因查封时发现当时的封条未曾取掉。
English: After Haman's death, his family's wealth was confiscated. Timur's treasury was also seized. Although it had been given to Haman at the time, he did not actually enjoy it, as it was discovered during the seizure that the seal had not been removed.

古文：哈麻兄弟宠幸方固，而一旦遽见废外，人皆谓帝怒其谮害脱脱兄弟之故，而不知其罪盖由于不轨。
现代文：哈麻兄弟刚刚受到皇上强烈的宠幸，就突然被废除于外，人们都以为是皇上讨厌他暗害脱脱兄弟的原故，而不知其罪盖由于阴谋反对皇上。
English: The Hama brothers had just received a strong favor from the emperor when they were suddenly abolished from the outside world. People all thought that the reason was that the emperor hated him for plotting to get rid of his brothers, but they did not know that his crime was due to a conspiracy against the emperor.

古文：其兄弟之死，人无恤之者。
现代文：哈麻兄弟之死，没有人怜恤他们。
English: No one felt sorry for the death of the Hama brothers.

古文：搠思监，怯烈氏，野先不花之孙，亦怜真之子也。
现代文：搠思监，怯烈族人，野先不花之孙，亦怜真之子。
English: He is a member of the Cowardly Tribes, the grandson of the Wild Goose, and the son of Mercy.

古文：早岁，性宽厚，简言语，皆以远大之器期之。
现代文：早年，性情宽厚，语言不多，都希望他能成大器。
English: In his early years, he had a generous disposition and didn't speak many languages. Everyone hoped he would grow up to be a great man.

古文：泰定初，袭长宿卫，为必阇赤怯薛官。
现代文：泰定初年，承袭父职为宿卫之长，为必赤怯薛官。
English: In the first year of Tai Ding, he inherited his father's post as the head of the night watchman, and became the red-faced Xue official.

古文：至顺二年，除内八府宰相。
现代文：至顺二年，任内八府宰相。
English: He became the prime minister of eight prefectures in the following year.

古文：元统初，出为福建宣慰使都元帅。
现代文：元统初年，出京为福建宣慰使都元帅。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he went to Beijing as a consul general of Fujian.

古文：居三年，通达政治，威惠甚著。
现代文：在福建任职三年，政事清明，威惠甚著。
English: He has served in Fujian for three years. His administration is clear and dignified.

古文：后至元三年，拜江浙行中书省参知政事。
现代文：后至元三年，任江浙行中书省参知政事，这是管理海运的职务，国家开支在很大程度上要依靠海运方面的收入。
English: Later, in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the political advisor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, which was the position of managing maritime transport, and the national expenditure largely depended on the income from maritime transport.

古文：国用所倚，海运为重，是岁，搠思监被命督其役，措置有方，所漕米三百余万石，悉达京师，无耗折者。
现代文：这一年，搠思监便是负责这方面的工作。由于他的措置有方，所运的三百余万石米都安全到达京师，途中没有亏损。
English: This year, Gong Sijun was in charge of this work. Thanks to his skillful measures, the more than three million koku of rice transported arrived safely in Beijing and there was no loss on the way.

古文：六年，擢湖北道肃政廉访使，未行，改江浙行省右丞。
现代文：六年，提升为湖北道肃政廉访使，还未到任，又改为江浙行省左丞。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to the visiting envoy of Hubei Province to investigate political corruption, but before he took office, he was changed to the provincial secretary of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：福建盐法久坏，诏搠思监往究其私鬻、盗鬻及出纳之弊，至则悉廉得其利病，为罢行之。
现代文：福建盐法很久便遭到破坏，皇上下诏书要搠思监前往究察盐的私卖、盗卖及出纳之弊。他到任后，完全弄清楚了当时盐法的利弊，决心停止盐法的施行。
English: The Fujian Salt Law had been undermined for a long time, and the Emperor issued an imperial edict to send the inspector to investigate the illegal sale, theft and cashing of salt. After he took office, he fully understood the advantages and disadvantages of the salt law at that time, and decided to stop the implementation of the salt law.

古文：明年正月，除陕西行台御史中丞。
现代文：至正元年，改为山东肃政廉访使，二年正月，转任陕西行台御史中丞。
English: In the first year of Zheng He, it was changed to Shandong Su Zheng Lian Envoy, and in the first month of the second year, it was transferred to Shaanxi Xing Tai Mi Shi Zhong Zheng.

古文：三月，复为中政使。
现代文：三月，再为中政使。
English: In March, he was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of State.

古文：八月，调太府卿。
现代文：八月调太府卿。
English: He was promoted to daifu-kyo in August.

古文：四年，拜中书参知政事，寻升右丞。
现代文：四年，拜中书参知政事，接着又升任右丞。
English: In four years, Baizhongshu was promoted to the post of vice-premier, and then to the post of vice-premier.

古文：六年，迁御史中丞，遂除翰林学士承旨，俄复为中丞。
现代文：六年，调任御史中丞，又任命为翰林学士承旨，很快，再为中丞。
English: In the sixth year, he was transferred to the position of goshi chujo, and was also appointed as the successor of Hanlin, and soon became chujo again.

古文：又由资政使迁宣徽使。
现代文：由资政使迁宣徽使。
English: The investiture and promotion of the coat of arms was carried out by the minister of finance and administration.

古文：九年，除大宗正府也可紥鲁火赤，宗王国人咸称其明果。
现代文：九年，除大宗正府也可扎鲁火赤，宗王国人都称赞他办事精明果断。
English: In the ninth year, in addition to Daizong Zhengfu, Zaru was also red-hot, and the royal family members all praised him for his shrewd and decisive work.

古文：寻复入中书为右丞。
现代文：接着，再入中书为右丞。
English: Next, the re-entering chusho is the yojo.

古文：十年正月，升平章政事，阶光禄大夫。
现代文：十年正月，升平章政事，官阶光禄大夫。
English: In the first month of the 10th year, he was promoted to the post of political affairs, and the official rank of Guanglu doctor.

古文：十一年十一月，拜御史大夫，进银青荣禄大夫。
现代文：十一年十一月，拜御史大夫，进阶银青荣禄大夫。
English: In November of the eleventh year, he was promoted to doctor of history and doctor of honor.

古文：十二年四月，复为中书平章，从丞相脱脱平徐州有功。
现代文：十二年四月，再为中书平章，随丞相脱脱平定徐州叛乱有功，十三年，再拜御史大夫。
English: In April of the 12th year, he was awarded the title of Zhongshu Pingzhang again, and was awarded the title of Succeeding the Minister of War for his contribution to the suppression of the Xuzhou Rebellion. In the 13th year, he was awarded the title of Imperial Historian again.

古文：十三年，复拜御史大夫，寻又为中书平章。
现代文：不久，又为中书平章。
English: Soon, it was changed to Zhongshu Pingzhang.

古文：十四年九月，奉命率师讨贼淮南，身先士卒，面中流矢不为动。
现代文：十四年九月，奉命带兵到淮南讨伐反元起义军，在战斗中身先士卒，流矢伤脸也不为所动。
English: In September 1914, he was ordered to take soldiers to Huainan to fight the anti-Yuan rebels. He was the first in the battle, and he was not moved by the arrow.

古文：十五年，迁陕西行省平章，复召还，拜知枢密院事。
现代文：十五年，迁陕西行省平章。又召回京，拜知枢密院事。
English: Fifteen years later, he was transferred to Shaanxi Province, and then to Pingzhang Province. He was also recalled to Beijing to attend the Privy Council.

古文：俄复拜中书平章，兼大司农分司，提调大都留守司及屯田事。
现代文：不久，再任中书平章，兼大司农分司，管理大都留守司及屯田事。
English: Soon after, he was reappointed as Zhongshu Pingzhang, also as the Chief Secretary of the Agricultural Subdivision, managing the mostly left-behind division and the settlement of farmlands.

古文：一日，入侍，帝见其面有箭瘢，深叹闵焉。进为首平章。
现代文：有一天，入侍皇上，皇上见其脸上有箭疤，深为感慨，升他为首平章。
English: One day, when he entered the service of the emperor, the emperor saw an arrow scar on his face, was deeply moved, and promoted him to the highest rank.

古文：十六年，复迁御史大夫。
现代文：十六年，再升御史大夫。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to goshi taifu again.

古文：四月，遂拜中书左丞相，明年五月，进右丞相。
现代文：四月，拜中书左丞相。十七年五月，进升为右丞相。
English: In April, Baizhongshu was promoted to the position of the Left Minister of the Joseon Dynasty, and in May 17th, he was promoted to the Right Minister of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：十八年，加太保，诏封其曾祖孛鲁海为云王，祖也先不花为瀛王，父亦怜真为冀王。
现代文：十八年，加太保衔，诏封其曾祖孛鲁海为云王，祖父也先不花为瀛王，父亲亦怜真为冀王。
English: In the 18th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, his great-grandfather Lu Hai was granted the title of the King of Clouds, his grandfather was the King of Clouds, and his father was the King of Rivers.

古文：是时天下多故，日已甚，外则军旅烦兴，疆宇日蹙；内则帑藏空虚，用度不给；而帝方溺于娱乐，不恤政务。
现代文：此时，天下越来越不安定，对外方面，军旅繁兴而疆土日削；对内方面，库藏空虚而用度不继。而皇上又沉迷女色，不务政事。
English: At this time, the world was becoming increasingly unstable. Externally, the military was flourishing, but the territory was shrinking day by day. Domestically, the treasury was empty and the expenses continued. Meanwhile, the emperor was infatuated with women and was not engaged in political affairs.

古文：于是搠思监居相位久，无所匡救，而又公受贿赂，贪声著闻，物议喧然。
现代文：于是，搠思监久居相位，对大局无所作为，反而公开接受贿赂，贪财之名声远扬，国人对此议论纷纷。
English: As a result, Gao Sijun stayed in the same position for a long time, did nothing for the overall situation, but openly accepted bribes, and his reputation for greed spread far and wide, and the Chinese people discussed this.

古文：是年冬，监察御史燕赤不花劾奏搠思监任用私人朵列及妾弟崔完者帖木儿印造伪钞，事将败，令朵列自杀以灭口。
现代文：此年冬，监察御史燕赤不花向皇上劾奏搠思监任用私人朵列及妾弟崔完者帖木儿印造伪钞。事将败露，又令朵列自杀以灭口。
English: In the winter of that year, the inspector of the Imperial Palace, Yan Chia Fuxian, appealed to the emperor to impeach So Yeon Siong, who had appointed the privateer Do Rye and his brother-in-law Choe Han's concubine, Timur, to print counterfeit banknotes. The matter was about to be exposed, and Do Rye was made to commit suicide to silence him.

古文：搠思监乃请谢事，解机务，诏止收其印绶。
现代文：搠思监畏罪，乃请求解除他的职务，皇帝只下诏收其印绶。
English: The Emperor's only response to his request to be relieved of his duties was to issue an imperial edict to confiscate his seal.

古文：而御史答里麻失里、王彝言不已，帝终不听也。
现代文：御史答里麻失里、王彝仍不停地弹劾此事，帝终不采纳。
English: In the confusion of his answer, Wang Yao still continued to impeach the matter, and the emperor finally did not accept it.

古文：会辽阳贼势张甚，明年，遂起为辽阳行省左丞相，未行。
现代文：恰好辽阳反元声势大张，第二年便起用搠思监为辽阳行省左丞相，前往镇压，但未到任。
English: It just so happened that Liaoyang's anti-Yuan campaign was in full swing. The following year, Gong Siyuan was appointed as Liaoyang's acting provincial commissar of justice. He went to suppress the movement, but did not take up the post.

古文：孛罗帖木儿、扩廓帖木儿各拥强兵于外，以权势相轧，衅隙遂成。搠思监与朴不花党于扩廓帖木儿，而诬孛罗帖木儿以非罪。
现代文：二十年三月，再授中书右丞相职，还为此降诏通告天下。这时皇上更加厌恶政事，宦官资政院使朴不花乘机窃取权力做坏事。搠思监便与朴不花相勾结，使四方告急的警报及将臣功状都扣压下来不让皇上知道。孛罗帖木儿及扩廓帖木儿各拥强兵于外，搠思监、朴不花便和扩廓帖木儿相勾结，以莫须有的罪名诬陷孛罗帖木儿。
English: In March of the 20th year, Emperor Taizong conferred the post of the Minister of the Right of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council.

古文：二十四年三月，帝因下诏削夺其官爵，且命扩廓帖木儿以兵讨之。
现代文：二十四年二月，皇上听信搠思监等的诬告，下诏削夺孛罗帖木儿官爵，且命扩廓帖木儿带兵前往征讨孛罗帖木儿。
English: In February 24th, the emperor listened to the false accusation of Xinyi Sijian and others, and issued an edict to strip Tamerlane of his title of nobility, and ordered Tamerlane to lead an army to recruit Tamerlane.

古文：而宗王不颜帖木儿、秃坚帖木儿等皆称兵与孛罗帖木儿合，表言其无罪。
现代文：而宗王不颜帖木儿、秃坚帖木儿等都举兵和孛罗帖木儿站在一起，向皇上说明孛罗帖木儿无罪。
English: However, Zongwang Bujian Timur, Bald Jian Timur and others all raised an army to stand together with Zhao Luo Timur and explain to the emperor that Zhao Luo Timur was innocent.

古文：于是帝为降诏曰： 自至正十一年妖贼窃发，属尝选命将相，分任乃职，视同心膂，凡厥庶政，悉以委之。
现代文：于是，帝又为此下诏书说： 自至正十一年，红巾军反元妖贼起事，朝廷曾选命将相，分任其职，朝廷视之如骨干，一切政事，都委之于他们。
English: As a result, the emperor also issued an imperial edict to this effect, saying: Since the eleventh year of the Heian period, when the Red Scarf Army rebelled against the former yakuza, the imperial court had selected commanders-in-chief and assigned them their duties. The imperial court regarded them as the backbone, and all political affairs were entrusted to them.

古文：岂期搠思监、朴不花夤缘为奸，互相壅蔽，以致在外宣力之臣，因而解体；在内忠良之士，悉陷非辜。
现代文：没想到搠思监、朴不花相勾结起来做坏事，阻塞君臣之间的沟通。以致朝外为国效力之臣解甲归里，朝内的忠良之士遭受无辜。
English: It did not occur to me that Gong Sijun and Park Fuxaso would collude to do bad things and obstruct communication between monarchs and ministers. As a result, ministers who had served the country both at home and abroad were dismissed and returned to their families, and loyal and good people within the government suffered innocently.

古文：又复奋其私雠，诬构孛罗帖木儿、老的沙等同谋不轨。
现代文：加上他们报愤于私仇，诬陷孛罗帖木儿、老的沙等，说他们图谋不轨。
English: In addition, they reported their anger as a personal vendetta, and slandered Luo Timur, Lao Sha, and others, saying that they were plotting evil.

古文：朕以信任之专，失于究察，遂调兵往讨。
现代文：朕过于信任他们，对他们散布的诬陷不实之辞，未进行调查，便信以为真，调兵征讨。
English: I trusted them too much and spread false accusations about them. Without conducting an investigation, I believed them to be true and sent troops to investigate.

古文：孛罗帖木儿已尝陈词，而乃寝匿不行。今宗王不颜帖木儿等，仰畏明威，远来控诉，以表其情，朕为恻然兴念，而搠思监、朴不花犹饰虚词，簧惑朕听。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿自己曾陈词辩白，但他的奏章被扣压下来，现在，宗王帖木儿等，仰畏天子显赫权威，远道前来申诉，以表达自己的心情，朕恻然同情他们。但搠思监、朴不花还想虚词掩饰，来蒙欺朕的视听。
English: Tamerlane himself had made a speech to defend himself, but his play was suppressed. Now, King Tamerlane and others, fearing the eminent authority of the Son of God, have come a long way to appeal to express their feelings. I sympathize with them. However, Su Si Jian and Pak Fu Hua still want to cover up false words to deceive my audio-visual.

古文：其以搠思监屏诸岭北，朴不花窜之甘肃，以快众愤。
现代文：朕决定把搠思监放逐到岭北，让朴不花流窜甘肃，以平众愤。
English: I decided to banish him to Lingbei and let him live in Gansu to calm the public's anger.

古文：孛罗帖木儿等，悉与改正，复其官职。 
现代文：对孛罗帖木儿等人的处理全部改正。恢复他们的职务。 
English: The treatment of Diao Luo Timur and others was completely corrected. They were reinstated.

古文：然诏书虽下，而搠思监、朴不花仍留京师。
现代文：这个诏书虽然下达，但搠思监、朴不花仍留京师未动。
English: Although this imperial edict was issued, Shishikun and Pak Buka remained in Beijing and did not move.

古文：四月，孛罗帖木儿乃遣秃坚铁木儿称兵犯阙，必得搠思监、朴不花乃已。
现代文：四月，孛罗帖木儿派秃坚铁木儿领兵攻打京师，要求抓到搠思监、朴不花才肯罢兵。
English: In April, Emperor Luo sent Bald Guan Tiemu to lead the troops to attack the Beijing Division, demanding the capture of Gao Sijun and Pak Fuxia.

古文：帝不得已，缚二人畀之，遂皆为孛罗铁木儿所杀。
现代文：皇上不得已，便把两个人捆起来送给孛罗帖木儿，都被处死了。
English: As a last resort, the emperor tied up the two men and sent them to Mirotyamure, where they were both executed.

古文：已而监察御史复奏言： 搠思监矫杀丞相太平，盗用钞板，私家草诏，任情放选，鬻狱卖官，费耗库藏，居庙堂前后十数年，使天下八省之地，悉致沦陷。乃误国之奸臣，究其罪恶，大赦难原。
现代文：后来监察御史又上奏皇上 ：搠思监假托帝命杀死丞相太平，盗用钞板，私下起草诏书，随意任命官吏，卖狱卖官，大量耗费国库。他前后当政十数年，使天下八省都遭陷落，实是国家的奸臣，应追究其罪恶，即使逢大赦也不能原谅他。
English: Later, the inspector of imperial history also reported to the emperor: "He killed the prime minister Taiping, embezzled banknotes, privately drafted an edict, arbitrarily appointed officials, sold prison officials, and consumed a large amount of state treasury. He has been in power for more than ten years, causing the fall of eight provinces in the world. He is actually a treacherous vassal of the state, and should be investigated for his crimes. Even if he is pardoned, he cannot be forgiven.

古文：曩者，奸臣阿合马之死，剖棺戮尸，搠思监之罪，视阿合马为有过。今其虽死，必剖棺戮尸为宜。 
现代文：过去，奸臣阿合马死后，还补行剖棺戮尸之刑，现在搠思监之罪，较之阿合马则有过之而无不及，今他虽死，还必须剖棺戮尸，才为适当。 
English: In the past, after the death of the traitor Ahama, the punishment of dissecting the coffin and carving the corpse was also carried out. Now, the crime of the traitor, compared to Ahama, is far superior. Now, although he is dead, he still has to dissect the coffin and carve the corpse, which is appropriate.

古文：有旨从之。而台臣言犹不已，遂复没其家产，而窜其子宣徽使观音奴于远方。
现代文：皇上采纳了，但台臣还是控诉不已，于是再没收其家产，将其子宣徽使观音奴流窜远方。
English: The emperor accepted it, but the Taiwanese still complained about it, so they confiscated his family's property and sent his son Xuan Hui as a Guanyin slave far away.

古文：怯烈氏四世为丞相者八人，世臣之家，鲜与比盛。
现代文：怯烈族四世为丞相的有八人，即使是世臣之家，也很少能与他相比。
English: There are eight fourth-generation chancellors of the House of Martyrs, and even in the family of world-class ministers, few can compare to him.

古文：而搠思监早有才望，及居相位，人皆仰其有为，遭时多事，顾乃守之以懦，济之以贪，遂使天下至于乱亡而不可为。
现代文：搠思监虽早年有才望，当了宰相后，人们都希望他有所作为。但他在国家多事之秋，却懦于国事而贪婪无厌，遂使天下亡乱而不可收拾。
English: Although he had talent in his early years, when he became prime minister, people hoped that he would make a difference. However, in the country's eventful autumn, he was cowardly in matters of state and insatiable in his greed. As a result, the world was in turmoil and could not be put back in order.

古文：论者谓元之亡，搠思监之罪居多云。
现代文：议论这段历史的人，多数认为：元朝的灭亡，搠思监的罪过是其重要原因。
English: The majority of people who discuss this period of history believe that the Yuan Dynasty's downfall was caused by the sin of Zou Shijun.

