古文：陈仲弓为太丘长，时吏有诈称母病求假。事觉收之，令吏杀焉。
现代文：陈仲弓任太丘县县长的时候，有个小官吏谎称母亲生病请假，事情被发现后，陈仲弓就逮捕了他，并命令狱吏处死。
English: When Chen Zhongyun was the head of Taiqiu County, a minor official falsely claimed that his mother was sick and asked for leave. After the matter was discovered, Chen Zhongyun arrested him and ordered the prison officials to execute him.

古文：主簿请付狱，考众奸。仲弓曰： 欺君不忠，病母不孝。不忠不孝，其罪莫大。
现代文：主簿请求交给诉讼机关查究其他犯罪事实，陈仲弓说： 欺骗长官就是不忠，诅咒母亲生病就是不孝；不忠不孝，没有比这个罪状更大的了。
English: Chen Zhongyun said: "Deceiving a superior is disloyalty, cursing one's mother when she is ill is unfilial; there is no greater crime than disloyalty and unfiliality.

古文：考求众奸，岂复过此？ 
现代文：查究其他罪状，难道还有比这件事更严重的吗！ 
English: Investigating other charges, is there anything more serious than this!

古文：陈仲弓为太丘长，有劫贼杀财主主者，捕之。
现代文：陈仲弓任太丘县县长时，有强盗劫财害命，主管官吏逮捕了强盗。
English: When Chen Zhongyun was the governor of Taiqiu County, there were robbers who robbed money and killed people. The officials in charge arrested the robbers.

古文：未至发所，道闻民有在草不起子者，回车往治之。主簿曰： 贼大，宜先按讨。 
现代文：陈仲弓前去处理，还没到出事地点，半路上听说有家老百姓生下孩子不肯养育，便掉头去处理这件事。主簿说： 杀人事大，应该先查办。 
English: Chen Zhongyun went to deal with it, but before reaching the site of the accident, he heard on the way that there was a family of people who gave birth to a child and refused to raise it, so he turned around to deal with the matter.

古文：仲弓曰： 盗杀财主，何如骨肉相残？ 
现代文：仲弓说： 强盗劫财杀人，怎么比得上骨肉相残这件事重大？ 
English: Zhongyun said, "How can robbers robbing and killing people be compared to the suffering of flesh and blood?

古文：陈元方年十一时，候袁公。
现代文：陈元方十一岁时，有一次去拜访袁公。
English: When Chen Yuanfang was eleven years old, he once went to visit Yuan Gong.

古文：袁公问曰： 贤家君在太丘，远近称之，何所履行？ 
现代文：袁公问他： 令尊在太丘县任职时，远近的人都称颂他，他是怎么做到的呢？ 
English: Yuan Gong asked him: When your father was in office in Taiqiu County, people from near and far praised him. How did he do it?

古文：元方曰： 老父在太丘，强者绥之以德，弱者抚之以仁，恣其所安，久而益敬。 
现代文：元方说： 老父在太丘时，对强者就用恩德来安抚他，对弱者就用仁爱来抚慰他，放手让他们安居乐业，时间久了，就更加受到敬重。 
English: Yuan Fang said, "When my father was in Taiyuan, he used benevolence to pacify the strong, and benevolence to comfort the weak, and let them live and work in peace. After a long time, he was more respected.

古文：袁公曰： 孤往者尝为邺令，正行此事。
现代文：袁公说： 我过去曾经做过邺县县令，正是用的这种办法。
English: Yuan Gong said: I used to be a county magistrate of Jixian County in the past, and this is the method I used.

古文：不知卿家君法孤？孤法卿父？ 
现代文：不知道是你父亲效法我呢，还是我效法你父亲？ 
English: I don't know if your father took after me, or if I took after your father.

古文：元方曰： 周公、孔子，异世而出，周旋动静，万里如一。周公不师孔子，孔子亦不师周公。 
现代文：元方说： 周公、孔子生在两个不同的时代，他们的礼仪举止，虽然相隔很远也如出一辙；周公没有效法孔子，孔子也没有效法周公。 
English: Yuan Fang said: Zhou Gong and Confucius were born in two different eras, their etiquette and manners, although far apart, are the same; Zhou Gong did not follow Confucius, and Confucius did not follow Zhou Gong.

古文：贺太傅作吴郡，初不出门。
现代文：太子太傅贺邵任吴郡太守，到任之初，足不出门。
English: Prince Taifu He Shao was appointed governor of Wu County. At the beginning of his term of office, he did not leave the house.

古文：吴中诸强族轻之，乃题府门云： 会稽鸡，不能啼。 
现代文：吴中所有豪门士族都轻视他，竟在官府大门写上 会稽鸡，不能啼 的字样。
English: All the powerful families in Wuzhong despised him, so much so that they wrote on the gate of the government office, "You can't beat a chicken with a stick."

古文：贺闻故出行，至门反顾，索笔足之曰： 不可啼，杀吴儿！ 
现代文：贺邵听说后，故意外出，走出门口，回过头来看，并且要来笔在句下补上一句： 不可啼，杀吴儿。 
English: After hearing this, He Shao accidentally went out, walked out of the door, looked back, and wanted to write a sentence under the sentence: Do not beat, kill Wu Er.

古文：于是至诸屯邸，检校诸顾、陆役使官兵及藏逋亡，悉以事言上，罪者甚众。
现代文：于是到各大族的庄园，查核顾姓、陆姓家族奴役官兵和窝藏逃亡户口的情况，然后把事情本末全部报告朝廷，获罪的人非常多。
English: Therefore, they went to the estates of various ethnic groups to check the situation of enslaving officers and soldiers and hiding fugitive accounts of families with surnames of Gu and Lu, and then reported the whole matter to the imperial court. There were a lot of people who were convicted.

古文：陆抗时为江陵都督，故下请孙皓，然后得释。
现代文：当时陆抗正任江陵都督，也受牵连，便特意往建业请求孙皓帮助，这才得以了结。
English: At that time, Lu Quanzheng was the governor of Gangneung, and he was also implicated, so he specifically went to Jianye to ask Sun Yat-sen for help. Only then was the matter resolved.

古文：山公以器重朝望，年踰七十，犹知管时任。
现代文：山涛由于受到器重，并且在朝廷中有威望，年纪已过七十岁，还照旧担当重任。
English: As Shantao was held in high esteem and had prestige in the imperial court, he was over seventy years old and still had important responsibilities.

古文：贵胜年少，若和、裴、王之徒，并共言咏。
现代文：一些权贵家子弟，如和峤、裴楷、王济等人都一起给他歌功颂德。
English: Some sons of powerful families, such as He Xuan, Pei Kai, Wang Ji and others, all sang praises to him.

古文：有署阁柱曰： 阁东，有大牛，和峤鞅，裴楷鞦，王济剔嬲不得休。 
现代文：于是有人在阁道的柱子上题道： 阁道东边有大牛，和峤在牛前，裴楷在牛后，王济在中间挑逗纠缠不得休。 
English: As a result, someone inscribed on the pillar of the loft road: "On the east side of the loft road, there is a big cow, with a yakitori in front of the cow, Baikai in the back of the cow, and Wang Ji in the middle, teasing and pestering.

古文：或云：潘尼作之。
现代文：有人说这是潘尼干的。
English: Some say it was Penny who did it.

古文：贾充初定律令，与羊祜共咨太傅郑冲。
现代文：贾充刚刚定出法令，就和羊祜一起去征求太傅郑冲的意见。
English: As soon as Jia Chong issued the decree, he and Yang Qi went to solicit the opinion of Taifu Zhengchong.

古文：冲曰： 皋陶严明之旨，非仆闇懦所探。 
现代文：郑冲说： 皋陶制定法令的那种严肃而公正的宗旨，不是我这种愚昧软弱的人所能探测的。 
English: Zheng Chong said, "The serious and just purpose of the laws and regulations made by Xuntao cannot be detected by a stupid and weak person like me.

古文：羊曰： 上意欲令小加弘润。 
现代文：羊祜说： 圣上想要叫你稍加补充润色。 
English: The shepherd said, "The Lord wants you to add a little polish to your hair."

古文：冲乃粗下意。
现代文：郑冲这才概略他说出自己的意见。
English: It was only then that Zheng Chong outlined his opinion.

古文：山司徒前后选，殆周遍百官，举无失才。凡所题目，皆如其言。
现代文：司徒山涛前后所选拔的人，几乎遍及百官，举荐时没有遗漏人才，凡是他所品评的人，都如他所言。
English: The people selected by Szeto, both before and after, were almost all officials. He did not omit any talents when recommending them. All the people he evaluated were as he said.

古文：唯用陆亮，是诏所用，与公意异，争之不从。
现代文：唯有任用陆亮，是皇帝下令启用的，与山涛的意见不一致，他为此与皇帝争辩，但皇帝没有听从。
English: However, the appointment of Lu Liang, which was ordered by the emperor, was not consistent with Shantao's opinion. He argued with the emperor about this, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：亮亦寻为贿败。
现代文：不久，陆亮果然因为接受贿赂而被免官。
English: Soon after, Lu Liang was indeed dismissed for accepting bribes.

古文：嵇康被诛后，山公举康子绍为秘书丞。
现代文：嵇康被杀以后，山涛推荐嵇康的儿子嵇绍担任秘书丞。
English: After Gong Kang was killed, Shantao recommended Gong Kang's son Gong Shaoxing to serve as secretary.

古文：绍咨公出处，公曰： 为君思之久矣！
现代文：嵇绍去和山涛商量自己应该隐居还是出仕，山涛说： 我已经替你考虑了很久了。
English: Qinshao went to discuss with Shantao whether he should live in seclusion or become a minister. Shantao said: I have been thinking about you for a long time.

古文：天地四时，犹有消息，而况人乎？ 
现代文：天地间一年四季，尚且有交替变化的时候，何况是人呢！ 
English: In the four seasons of the year, when there are alternating changes between heaven and earth, how much more so are people!

古文：王安期为东海郡，小吏盗池中鱼，纲纪推之。
现代文：王承任东海郡内史时，有个小吏偷了池塘中的鱼，主簿要追查这件事。
English: When Wang Cheng Rong was in charge of the internal history of Donghai County, a petty official stole fish from the pond, and the principal wanted to investigate the matter.

古文：王曰： 文王之囿，与众共之。
现代文：王承说： 周文王的猎场，是和百姓共享的。
English: Wang Cheng said: Zhou Wenwang's hunting ground is shared with the people.

古文：池鱼复何足惜！ 
现代文：池塘中的几条鱼又有什么值得吝惜的呢！ 
English: What is there to be sorry about a few fish in the pond!

古文：王安期作东海郡，吏录一犯夜人来。王问： 何处来？ 
现代文：王承任东海郡内史时，有一次差役抓了一个犯宵禁的人。王承审问他： 从哪里来的？ 
English: When Wang Cheng was in charge of the internal history of Donghai County, there was a time when the police arrested a person who violated the curfew. Wang Cheng interrogated him: Where did he come from?

古文：云： 从师家受书还，不觉日晚。 
现代文：那个人回答说： 从老师家学完功课回来，没有察觉到天色已经晚了。 
English: The man replied, "When I came back from my teacher's house after finishing my homework, I didn't realize it was getting late.

古文：王曰： 鞭挞甯越以立威名，恐非致理之本。 
现代文：王承听后说： 依靠处分一个读书人来树立威名，恐怕不是获得治绩的根本办法。 
English: After listening to Wang Cheng, he said: Relying on punishing a reader to establish prestige is probably not the fundamental way to improve performance.

古文：使吏送令归家。
现代文：于是派差役送他出去，叫他回家。
English: So they sent an officer to bring him out and told him to go home.

古文：成帝在石头，任让在帝前戮侍中钟雅、右卫将军刘超。
现代文：晋成帝被迁到石头城，叛军任让在成帝面前要杀侍中钟雅和右卫将军刘超。
English: Emperor Jincheng was moved to Stone City, and the rebel army of Ren Zheng wanted to kill the attendant Zhongya and the right guard general Liu Chao in front of Emperor Jincheng.

古文：帝泣曰： 还我侍中！ 
现代文：成帝哭着说： 把侍中还给我！ 
English: Emperor Cheng cried and said, "Give me back the chambermaid!"

古文：让不奉诏，遂斩超、雅。
现代文：任让不听命令，终于斩了刘超和钟雅。
English: Ren Zheng disobeyed the order and finally beheaded Liu Chao and Zhong Ya.

古文：事平之后，陶公与让有旧，欲宥之。
现代文：等到叛乱平定以后，陶侃因为和任让有老交情，就想赦兔他。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, Tao Kan wanted to pardon Ren Zheng because he had an old friendship with him.

古文：许柳儿思妣者至佳，诸公欲全之。
现代文：另外叛军许柳有个儿子叫思妣，很有才德，大臣们也想保全他。
English: In addition, the rebel Xu Liu has a son named Siyu, who is very talented, and the ministers also want to protect him.

古文：若全思妣，则不得不为陶全让，于是欲并宥之。
现代文：可是要想保全思妣，就不得不为陶侃保全任让，于是就想两个人一起赦罪。
English: However, if you want to preserve the thought, you have to make concessions for Tao Kan's preservation, so you want to forgive the two of them together.

古文：事奏，帝曰： 让是杀我侍中者，不可宥！ 
现代文：当把处理办法上奏成帝时，成帝说： 任让是杀我侍中的人，不能赦罪！ 
English: When the solution was presented to Emperor Cheng, Emperor Cheng said, "I will not forgive those who kill my attendants!

古文：诸公以少主不可违，并斩二人。
现代文：大臣们认为不能违抗成帝命令，就把两人都杀了。
English: The ministers thought they could not disobey Emperor Cheng's order, so they killed both of them.

古文：王丞相拜扬州，宾客数百人并加沾接，人人有说色。
现代文：丞相王导出任扬州刺史的时候，几百名来道贺的宾客都得到了款待，人人都很高兴。
English: When Wang Tao, the prime minister, became the Yangzhou chief historian, hundreds of guests who came to congratulate him were entertained, and everyone was happy.

古文：唯有临海一客姓任及数胡人为未洽，公因便还到过任边云： 君出，临海便无复人。 
现代文：只有临海郡一位任姓客人和几位胡僧还没有接谈过。王导便找机会转身走到任姓客人身边，对他说： 您出来以后，临海就不再有人才了。 
English: Only a guest from Linhai County with the surname Ren and several Hu monks had not yet been interviewed. Wang Du took the opportunity to turn around and walk to the side of the guest with the surname Ren and said to him: After you come out, Linhai will no longer have talent.

古文：任大喜说。
现代文：任氏听了，非常高兴。
English: Mr. Ren listened and was very happy.

古文：因过胡人前弹指云： 兰阇，兰阇。 
现代文：王导于是又走过胡僧面前，弹着手指说： 兰闍，兰闍！ 
English: Wang Du then walked in front of the monk again, flicked his finger and said: Lan Xun, Lan Xun!

古文：群胡同笑，四坐并欢。
现代文：胡僧们一起笑了起来，四周的人都很高兴。
English: The monks laughed together, and everyone around them was happy.

古文：陆太尉诣王丞相咨事，过后辄翻异。
现代文：太尉陆玩到丞相王导那里去请示公务，商量好了的事情，过后常常改变主意。
English: Captain Lu went to the prime minister, Wang Du, to ask for official instructions. After discussing the matter, he often changed his mind.

古文：王公怪其如此，后以问陆。
现代文：王导很奇怪他为什么这样。
English: Wang Du was very puzzled as to why he did this.

古文：陆曰： 公长民短，临时不知所言，既后觉其不可耳。 
现代文：后来拿这事间陆玩，陆玩回答说： 您名高位尊，民职卑微，临时不知该说什么，只是过后觉得那样做不行罢了。 
English: Later, Lu Yu took advantage of the situation. Lu Yu replied, "You are a high-ranking dignitary with a lowly civil service position. At the time, I didn't know what to say, but later I felt that I couldn't do that.

古文：丞相尝夏月至石头看庾公。
现代文：丞相王导曾在夏天前往石头城去看望庾冰，庾冰正在处理公务。
English: Wang Du, the chancellor, went to Stone Town in the summer to visit Yu Bing, who was on official business.

古文：庾公正料事，丞相云： 暑可小简之。 
现代文：王导说： 天气热，可以稍微简略些。 
English: Wang Du said: The weather is hot, it can be shortened a little.

古文：庾公曰： 公之遗事，天下亦未以为允。 
现代文：庾冰说： 您不管世事，天下人也并不认为是妥当的。 
English: Hao Bing said: You do not care about the world, and the people of the world do not think it is appropriate.

古文：丞相末年，略不复省事，正封箓诺之。
现代文：王导到了晚年，几乎不再处理政事，只是在文件上签字同意。
English: In his later years, Wang hardly dealt with political affairs, but only signed documents.

古文：自叹曰： 人言我愦愦，后人当思此愦愦。 
现代文：自己感叹他说： 人家说我老糊涂，后人当会想念这种糊涂 。
English: Lamenting himself, he said: People say I'm a dotard, and posterity should miss this dotard.

古文：陶公性检厉，勤于事。
现代文：陶侃本性检点、认真，处理政务十分勤勉。
English: Tao Kan's nature is punctual and conscientious, and he is very diligent in handling government affairs.

古文：作荆州时，敕船官悉录锯木屑，不限多少，咸不解此意。
现代文：担任荆州刺史的时候，吩咐负责建造船只的官员把木屑全都收藏起来，多少不限，大家都不明白这是什么用意。
English: When he was the chief historian of Jingzhou, he ordered the officials in charge of building ships to collect all the wood chips, no matter how much, and no one understood what this was all about.

古文：后正会，值积雪始晴，听事前除雪后犹湿，于是悉用木屑覆之，都无所妨。
现代文：后来到正月初一贺年时，正碰上连日下雪刚刚转晴，正堂前的台阶雪后还是湿漉漉的，于是全用木屑铺上，就一点也不妨碍出入了。
English: Later, at the beginning of the first month of the Chinese New Year, when it was snowing for days on end and had just turned clear, the steps in front of the main hall were still wet after the snow, so they were completely covered with wood chips, which did not hinder entry and exit at all.

古文：官用竹皆令录厚头，积之如山。
现代文：官府用的竹子，他总是让人把竹根留下来，堆积如山。
English: For the bamboo used by the government, he always asked people to leave the bamboo roots behind, and they piled up like a mountain.

古文：后桓宣武伐蜀，装船，悉以作钉。
现代文：后来桓温讨代后蜀，要组装战船，这些竹头就都用来做了钉子。
English: Later, when Emperor Kuan-Wen asked the Empress Shou to assemble a warship, these bamboo sticks were used to make nails.

古文：又云：尝发所在竹篙，有一官长连根取之，仍当足，乃超两阶用之。
现代文：又听说陶侃曾经征调过当地的竹篙，有一个主管官员把竹于连根砍下，就用根部当做铁足，陶侃便把他连升两级来任用。
English: It was also heard that Tao Kan had once recruited a local bamboo cutter. A competent official cut down the bamboo at the roots and used the roots as iron feet. Tao Kan then promoted him two levels in succession.

古文：何骠骑作会稽，虞存弟謇作郡主簿，以何见客劳损，欲白断常客，使家人节量，择可通者作白事成，以见存。
现代文：骠骑将军何充任会稽内史时，虞存的弟弟虞春任郡主簿，他认为何充见客大多，劳累伤神，想禀告何充谢绝那些常客，让手下人酌量选择可以交往的才通报。他拟好一份呈文，便拿来给虞存看。
English: When the cavalry general Ho Chong was appointed to audit the internal history of the association, Yu Chun, the younger brother of Yu Cun, the head of the county, thought that Ho Chong had seen most of the guests, was exhausted, and wanted to denounce those regular guests, and let his subordinates choose what they could interact with. He prepared a submission and brought it to Yu Cun.

古文：存时为何上佐，正与謇共食，语云： 白事甚好，待我食毕作教。 
现代文：虞存这时担任何充的上佐，正和虞春一起吃饭，告诉他说： 这个呈文很好，等我吃完饭再作批示。 
English: At this time, Colonel Yu Cun, who was in charge of any charge, was eating with Yu Chun and told him: This petition is very good, wait until I finish eating before giving orders.

古文：食竟，取笔题白事后云： 若得门庭长如郭林宗者，当如所白。
现代文：吃过了饭，拿起笔在呈文后面签上意见说： 如果能找到一个像郭林宗那样有服力的人做门亭长，一定照所陈述的意见办。
English: After eating, he picked up a pen and signed the opinion at the back of the submission, saying, "If I can find someone as persuasive as Guo Linzong to be the doorman, I will definitely act in accordance with the opinions stated."

古文：汝何处得此人？ 
现代文：可是你到哪里去找这样的人！ 
English: But where can you find such a person!

古文：謇于是止。
现代文：虞謇于是作罢。
English: Therefore, he gave up the idea.

古文：王、刘与林公共看何骠骑，骠骑看文书不顾之。
现代文：王濛、刘惔和支道林一起去看望骠骑将军何充，何充在看公文，没有答理他们。
English: Wang Qian, Liu Qian and Shih Dorlin went to visit the cavalry general He Cheng together. He Cheng was reading official documents and did not answer them.

古文：王谓何曰： 我今故与林公来相看，望卿摆拨常务，应对玄言，那得方低头看此邪？ 
现代文：王漾便对何充说： 我们今天特意和林公来看望你，希望你摆脱开日常事务，和我们谈论玄学，哪能还低着头看这些东西呢！ 
English: Wang Yao then said to He Chong: "Today, we have specially come to visit you with Lin Gong, hoping that you will get rid of your daily affairs and talk to us about metaphysics. How can you still look down at these things!

古文：何曰： 我不看此，卿等何以得存？ 
现代文：何充说： 我不看这些东西，你们这些清谈家怎么能生存呢！ 
English: He Cheng said: I don't watch these things, how can you talkers survive!

古文：诸人以为佳。
现代文：大家认为说得很好。
English: Everyone thought it was very well said.

古文：桓公在荆州，全欲以德被江、汉，耻以威刑肃物。
现代文：桓温兼任荆州刺史的时候，想全用思德来对待江、汉地区的百姓，耻于用威势严刑来整治人民。
English: When Kuan Wen was also the governor of Jing Province, he wanted to treat the people of Jiang and Han regions with all his wisdom and virtue, and was ashamed to use the power of punishment to rectify the people.

古文：令史受杖，正从朱衣上过。
现代文：有一次，一位令史受杖刑，木棒只从令史的红衣上擦过。
English: On one occasion, a high-ranking official was punished with a cane. The wooden cane only scraped the top of the official's red coat.

古文：桓式年少，从外来，云： 向从阁下过，见令史受杖，上捎云根，下拂地足。 
现代文：这时桓温的儿子桓式年纪还小，从外面进来，对桓温说： 我刚才从官署门前走过，看见今史受杖刑，木棒子举起来高拂云脚，落下时低擦地面。 
English: At this time, Kuan-Wen's son, Kuan-Shik-Wen, who was still young, came in from outside and said to Kuan-Wen: I just walked past the front door of the government office and saw Kinshi being punished with a cane. The wooden stick was raised high to strike the foot of the cloud, and when it fell, it scraped the ground.

古文：意讥不著。
现代文：意思是讥讽唯独没有碰到令史身上。
English: It meant that ridicule alone did not touch him.

古文：桓公云： 我犹患其重。 
现代文：桓温说： 我还担心这也太重了呢。 
English: Kanwen said, "I'm also worried that it's too heavy."

古文：简文为相，事动经年，然后得过。
现代文：简文帝担任丞相的时候，一件政务，动下动就要整年的时间才能批复下来。
English: When Emperor Jianwen served as chancellor, it took a whole year for a government matter to be approved.

古文：桓公甚患其迟，常加劝免。
现代文：桓温很担心这太慢了，经常加以劝说鼓励。
English: Kuan Wen was worried that this was too slow, and often tried to persuade and encourage him.

古文：太宗曰： 一日万机，那得速！ 
现代文：简文帝说： 一天有成千上万件事，哪里快得了呢！ 
English: Jane Wendi said: There are thousands of things in a day, how fast can it go!

古文：山遐去东阳，王长史就简文索东阳云： 承藉猛政，故可以和静致治。 
现代文：山遐离开东阳太守职位后，左长史王濛到简文帝那里要求出任东阳太守，说道： 凭借前任严厉的措施，我自然可以用宽和的、清静无为的办法使得社会安定。 
English: After Yamazaki left the position of the governor of Dongyang, Zuochang Shi Wangtao went to Emperor Jianwen to ask to be the governor of Dongyang, saying: With the strict measures of my predecessor, I can naturally use a broad and quiet way to make the society stable.

古文：殷浩始作扬州，刘尹行，日小欲晚，便使左右取袱，人问其故？答曰： 刺史严，不敢夜行。 
现代文：殷浩切次任杨州刺史的时候，一天丹阳尹刘惔到外地去，太阳将要下山，便叫随从拿出被褥，要住下。人家问他什么原因，他回答说： 刺史严厉，我不敢夜间赶路。 
English: When Yin Haoqie, the second-in-command of the Yangzhou imperial court, went abroad one day, the sun was about to set, so he asked his attendants to bring out the bedclothes so that he could stay. When asked why, he replied: "The imperial court is strict, and I don't dare to travel at night.

古文：谢公时，兵厮逋亡，多近窜南塘，下诸舫中。
现代文：谢安辅政时，兵员差役时常逃亡，大多就近躲藏在南岸下的船里。
English: When Xie An was the vice-premier, soldiers and officials often fled, most of them hiding in boats under the south bank.

古文：或欲求一时搜索，谢公不许，云： 若不容置此辈，何以为京都？ 
现代文：有人请求谢安同时搜索所有船只，谢安不答应。他说： 如果不能宽恕这种人，又怎么能治理好京都！ 
English: Someone asked Xie An to search all the ships at the same time, but Xie An refused. He said: If you can't forgive such a person, how can you govern Kyoto well!

古文：王大为吏部郎，尝作选草，临当奏，王僧弥来，聊出示之。
现代文：王忱曾出任吏部郎，已经写好一份选任官员的人选名单的草案，准备上奏上去的时候，恰好好友王珉来，就随便拿出来给王珉看了看。
English: Wang Zhen had served as a bureaucrat, and he had already written a draft of the list of candidates for elected officials. When he was ready to submit it, his friend Wang Zhen came over and casually took it out for Wang Zhen to see.

古文：僧弥得便以己意改易所选者近半，王大甚以为佳，更写即奏。
现代文：王珉拿到这份名单，就按照自己的想法将其中的人选改掉了近一半。王忱看后认为改得很好，就重新誊写了一遍名单随即奏上。
English: When Wang Zhen got the list, he changed nearly half of the candidates according to his own ideas. After reading it, Wang Zhen thought that the change was very good, so he rewrote the list and played it immediately.

古文：王东亭与张冠军善。
现代文：东亭侯王珣与冠军将军张玄之交情很好。
English: Dongting marquis Wang Yao and champion general Zhang Xuan have a good relationship.

古文：王既作吴郡，人问小令曰： 东亭作郡，风政何似？ 
现代文：王珣担任吴郡内史之后，有人问他的弟弟王珉： 东亭侯担任一郡长官，政绩怎么样？ 
English: After Wang Hui served as the county magistrate of Wu County, someone asked his younger brother Wang Hui: Dongting Hou served as a county magistrate, how was his political performance?

古文：答曰： 不知治化何如，唯与张祖希情好日隆耳。 
现代文：王珉回答： 不知道他的政绩教化如何，只知道他与张玄之的交情一天天深厚起来。 
English: Wang Yao answered: I don't know how his political achievements and enlightenment are, I only know that his friendship with Zhang Xuanzhi is getting deeper and deeper day by day.

古文：殷仲堪当之荆州，王东亭问曰： 德以居全为称，仁以不害物为名。
现代文：殷仲堪即将要到荆州去任刺史的职位，东亭侯王珣便对他说： 德行完备称为德，不害人叫做仁。
English: When Yin Zhongkan was about to go to Jingzhou to take up the post of chief historian, Dongting marquis Wang Yao said to him: "Completeness of virtue is called virtue, harmlessness is called benevolence.

古文：方今宰牧华夏，处杀戮之职，与本操将不乖乎？ 
现代文：现在你要去治理中部地区，处在有生杀大权的职位上，这和你原来的操守恐怕违背了吧？
English: Now you're going to govern the central region, and you're in a position with the power of life and death. I'm afraid this goes against your original ethics, doesn't it?

古文：殷答曰： 皋陶造刑辟之制，不为不贤；孔丘居司寇之任，未为不仁。 
现代文：殷仲堪回答说： 帝舜时的法官皋陶制订了刑法，不算不贤德；孔子担任了司寇的职责，也不算不仁爱。 
English: Yin Zhongkang replied, "It is not unethical for Juntao, a judge at the time of the imperial edict, to have formulated the criminal law; it is not uncharitable for Confucius to have assumed the duties of a military governor.

