古文：俗信卜筮，谓卜者问天，筮者问地，蓍神龟灵，兆数报应，故舍人议而就卜筮，违可否而信吉凶。
现代文：世俗迷信卜筮，认为卜是向天问疑，筮是向地问疑，蓍草和龟甲都很神灵，龟兆和蓍数就是天地对占卜者提问的答复，因此遇事便不和人商议而去占卜算卦，违反事情是否可行的道理而去迷信吉凶之说。
English: The secular superstition of divination is that divination is to question the heavens, and divination is to question the earth, and the thistle and the tortoise shell are both divine, and the signs of the tortoise and the number of the turtle are the answers of heaven and earth to the questions of the diviners. Therefore, in case of trouble, they do not consult with people, but go to divination and calculation, and go against the principle of whether things are feasible, and go to superstition of good and evil.

古文：其意谓天地审告报，蓍龟真神也。
现代文：人们内心认为天地确实会给予答复，蓍草和龟甲真是很神灵的。
English: People believe in their hearts that heaven and earth will indeed give an answer, and the thistle and the tortoise shell are really very divine.

古文：如实论之，卜筮不问天地，蓍龟未必神灵。
现代文：按照实情论述此事，卜筮并不能问天地，蓍草和龟甲不一定那么神灵。
English: According to the truth of the matter, Bu Qian can not ask the heavens and the earth, and the grass and the tortoise shell are not necessarily so divine.

古文：有神灵，问天地，俗儒所言也。
现代文：说它们有神灵，能向天地提问，这是俗儒的说法。
English: To say that they have spirits and can ask questions of heaven and earth is a vulgar saying.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：子路问孔子曰： 猪肩羊膊，可以得兆，雚苇藁芼，可以得数，何必以蓍龟？ 
现代文：子路问孔子说： 猪羊的肩胛骨灼后同样可以得到兆，用雚苇藁芼这些草同样可以得到数，为什么一定要用蓍草和龟甲呢？ 
English: Zi Lu asked Confucius, "After burning the shoulder blades of pigs and sheep, you can also get signs, and you can also get the number of these grasses with a pestle. Why do you have to use eelgrass and tortoise shell?

古文：孔子曰： 不然！盖取其名也。
现代文：孔子说： 不是这样，大概只是取蓍和龟这两个名字的含义吧。
English: Confucius said, "That's not true. It's probably just the meaning of the two names of dragonfly and turtle."

古文：夫蓍之为言耆也，龟之为言旧也，明狐疑之事，当问耆旧也。 
现代文：称之为蓍，是指生存时间长；称之为龟，是指年代久远。要辩明疑惑不定的事情，应该请教年岁大、有经历的人。 
English: If you call it a toad, it means that it has been alive for a long time; if you call it a turtle, it means that it has been around for a long time. If you want to clarify something that is uncertain, you should consult someone who is older and has experience.

古文：由此言之，蓍不神，龟不灵，盖取其名，未必有实也。
现代文：由此说来，蓍草并不神，龟甲也不灵，这只是取它们的名，不一定有其实。
English: Therefore, eelgrass is not a god, and tortoise shell is not a spirit. This is just a name, not necessarily a fact.

古文：无其实，则知其无神灵，无神灵，则知不问天地也。
现代文：没有其实，就说明它们没有神灵；没有神灵，可见用龟蓍占卜并不是向天地问吉凶。
English: If there is no reality, it means that they have no gods; if there is no god, it can be seen that divination with the turtle beak is not about asking the heavens and the earth for good or bad luck.

古文：且天地口耳何在，而得问之？
现代文：况且天地的口耳在哪里，而能够问它们呢？
English: Besides, where are the lips and ears of heaven and earth, and how can they be asked?

古文：天与人同道，欲知天，以人事。相问，不自对见其人，亲问其意，意不可知。
现代文：自然和人事是同一个道理，想要了解天，根据人事就可以知道，相互提问，如不亲自当面看见对方，亲自问对方的意见，那么对方的意见就没法了解。
English: Nature and people are one and the same. If you want to know God, you can know Him based on people. If you don't see each other in person and ask each other's opinions in person, then you can't understand each other's opinions.

古文：欲问天，天高，耳与人相远。
现代文：想问天，天很高，天的耳与人相距很远。
English: If you want to ask the sky, the sky is very high, and the sky's ears are very far away from people.

古文：如天无耳，非形体也。
现代文：如果天没有耳，天就没有形体。
English: If the sky has no ears, the sky has no shape.

古文：非形体，则气也，气若云雾，何能告人？
现代文：没有形体，那就是气。气像云雾一样，怎么能答复人呢？
English: Without a body, that is qi. Qi is like a cloud, how can it respond to a person?

古文：蓍以问地，地有形体，与人无异。
现代文：蓍草是用来问地的，地有形体，与人没有差异。
English: Asparagus is used to ask the earth, the earth has a physical body, and there is no difference with people.

古文：问人，不近耳，则人不闻，人不闻，则口不告人。
现代文：向人提问，不靠近耳朵，人就听不见：人听不见，口就不会回答人。
English: If a man ask a question, and it is not near to the ear, it is not heard: if a man does not hear, his mouth will not answer him.

古文：夫言问天，则天为气，不能为兆；问地，则地耳远，不闻人言。
现代文：说问天，天只是一种气，不能使龟甲产生兆象；说问地，地的耳朵很遥远，听不见人的提问。
English: Ask the sky, the sky is just an air, can not make the tortoise shell produce signs; ask the earth, the earth's ears are very far away, can not hear people's questions.

古文：信谓天地告报人者，何据见哉？
现代文：确实认为天地会答复人的提问，有什么根据呢？
English: What is the basis for really believing that heaven and earth will answer people's questions?

古文：人在天地之间，犹虮虱之着人身也。
现代文：人在天地之间，如同虮虱附着在人身上一样。
English: Man is between heaven and earth, just as the earthworm is attached to man.

古文：如虮虱欲知人意，鸣人耳傍，人犹人闻。
现代文：如果虮虱想了解人的心意，它们在人的耳边鸣叫，人仍然听不见。
English: If the crickets want to know a person's mind, they sing in the person's ear, and the person still can't hear.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：小大不均，音语不通也。
现代文：因为虮虱和人小大不同，声音语言不通。
English: Because the cymbal is different from the human small and large, the sound language is not clear.

古文：今以微小之人，问巨大天地，安能通其声音？
现代文：现在用微小的人，去问巨大的天地，他们的声音怎么能相通呢？
English: Now, using tiny people, to ask the vast heavens and earth, how can their voices communicate?

古文：天地安能知其旨意？
现代文：天地怎么能知道人的旨意呢？
English: How can heaven and earth know the will of man?

古文：或曰： 人怀天地之气。天地之气，在形体之中，神明是矣。
现代文：有人说： 人怀有天地之气，天地之气在人的形体之中，这就是神了。
English: Some people say: Man carries the breath of heaven and earth, and the breath of heaven and earth is in man's body. This is God.

古文：人将卜筮，告令蓍龟，则神以耳闻口言。
现代文：人将要进行卜筮，告知蓍草龟甲，神就用耳听口言。
English: Man is going to perform divination and tell the tortoise and the hare, and God is going to listen with His ears.

古文：若己思念，神明从胸腹之中闻知其旨。
现代文：如果自己思念，神就从胸腹之中了解人的心意。
English: If you think for yourself, God will understand your heart from the depths of your heart.

古文：故钻龟揲蓍，兆见数著。 
现代文：所以钻薄龟甲揲分蓍草，兆象出现数字也明确。 
English: Therefore, drilling a thin turtle shell divides the weeds, and the number of signs is also clear.

古文：夫人用神思虑，思虑不决，故问蓍龟。
现代文：人用精神进行考虑，经考虑无法决定，所以就求问蓍龟。
English: Human spirit to consider, after consideration can not decide, so ask the tortoise.

古文：蓍龟兆数，与意相应，则是神可谓明告之矣。
现代文：蓍龟表现出的兆数，与人的心意相吻合，就可以认为这是神明答复的了。
English: The trillions shown by the hawksbill turtle coincide with the human mind, so it can be considered that this is the answer of the gods.

古文：时或意以为可，兆数不吉；或兆数则吉，意以为凶。
现代文：有时自己的心意认为可行，而兆数又不吉利；有时兆数就算吉利，而自己的心意又认为是凶。
English: Sometimes one's mind thinks it is feasible, but trillions are unlucky; sometimes trillions are lucky, but one's mind thinks they are evil.

古文：夫思虑者，己之神也；为兆数者，亦己之神也。
现代文：所谓思虑，就是自己的心神；所谓兆数，也是自己的心神。
English: The so-called thoughts are one's own mind; the so-called trillions are also one's own mind.

古文：一身之神，在胸中为思虑，在胸外为兆数，犹人入户而坐，出门而行也。
现代文：同一个身体的神，在胸中就是思虑，在胸外就是兆数，就同人进屋坐下，出门行走一样。
English: The god of the same body, in the chest is the thought, outside the chest is the trillions, just as people enter the house, sit down, and go out.

古文：行坐不异意，出入不易情。
现代文：或行或坐不会和自己的心意不一致，或出或入也不会违背自己的心意。
English: To go or to sit is not against one's will, to go or to enter is not against one's will.

古文：如神明为兆数，不宜与思虑异。
现代文：如果兆数是由神明形成的，就不应该和思虑有什么不同。
English: If trillions are made by gods, they should be no different from thoughts.

古文：天地有体，故能摇动。
现代文：天地有形体，所以能运动。
English: Heaven and earth have bodies, so they can move.

古文：摇动有生之类也。
现代文：能运动的，都是活的东西。
English: Anything that can move is alive.

古文：生，则与人同矣。
现代文：天地既然是活的，那就与人相同了。
English: Since heaven and earth are alive, they are the same as people.

古文：问生人者，须以生人，乃能相报。
现代文：问活人必须用活人，才能得到回答。
English: If you ask a live person, you have to use a live person to get an answer.

古文：如使死人问生人，则必不能相答。
现代文：如果让死人问活人，那就一定不能互相应答。
English: If the dead are to question the living, then they must not answer each other.

古文：今天地生而蓍龟死，以死问生，安能得报？
现代文：现在天地是活的而蓍龟是死的，通过死的龟甲、蓍茎去问活的天地，怎么能得到回答呢？
English: Now that heaven and earth are alive, but the tortoise is dead, how can we get an answer when we ask the living heaven and earth through the dead tortoise shell and turtle beak?

古文：枯龟之骨，死蓍之茎，问生之天地，世人谓之天地报应，误矣。
现代文：用枯龟的骨，死蓍的茎，去问活着的天地，世人认为天地会答复，这就错了。
English: Using the bones of a dead turtle and the stem of a dead earthworm to ask the living heaven and earth, the world thinks that heaven and earth will answer, which is wrong.

古文：如蓍龟为若版牍，兆数为若书字，象类人君出教令乎？
现代文：如果说蓍龟有如版牍，兆数有如文字，就像君王发布命令一样吗？
English: Are tortoises and turtles like plates, and trillions like letters, like a king issuing orders?

古文：则天地口耳何在而有教令？
现代文：天地的口耳在何处，而能发布命令呢？
English: Where is the mouth and ear of the heavens and the earth to give orders?

古文：孔子曰： 天何言哉？
现代文：孔子说： 天说过什么呢？
English: Confucius said: What did Heaven say?

古文：四时行焉，百物生焉。 
现代文：但四季照常运行，万物照常生长。 
English: However, the four seasons are running as usual, and everything is growing as usual.

古文：天不言，则亦不听人之言。
现代文：天不言语，那么也就不听人的言语。
English: God does not speak, so he does not listen to the words of man.

古文：天道称自然无为，今人问天地，天地报应，是自然之有为以应人也。
现代文：天道崇尚自然无为，现在人去问天地，天地有答复，这就成了自然有意识地答复卜筮者了。
English: The way of heaven advocates natural inaction. Now people ask heaven and earth, and heaven and earth have an answer. This has become a natural and conscious answer to the soothsayer.

古文：案《易》之文，观揲蓍之法，二分以象天地，四揲以象四时，归奇於扐，以象闰月。
现代文：考察《周易》上的文字，看它所载的用蓍草算卦的方法，是将蓍草分成两部分以象征天地，四根四根的分数以象征四季，所剩的余数放在旁边，以象征闰月。
English: Examining the text on "Zhou Yi" and seeing the method of calculating divination by means of egrets contained in it, it is to divide egrets into two parts to symbolize heaven and earth, the scores of four roots symbolize the four seasons, and the remaining number is placed next to it to symbolize the leap month.

古文：以象类相法，以立卦数耳。岂云天地报人哉？
现代文：这是用类似的事物相互仿效，以此确定构成卦象的数字罢了，哪里是说天地真会答复卜筮的人呢？
English: This is nothing more than using similar things to imitate each other in order to determine the numbers that make up the Chinese zodiac. Who is to say that heaven and earth can really answer the riddle?

古文：人道，相问则对，不问不应。无求，空扣人之门；无问，虚辨人之前，则主人笑而不应，或怒而不对。
现代文：人事的道理，互相提问则回答，不问就不回答，没有所求，平白无故地敲别人家的门，不提出问题，毫无目的地在别人的面前空辩，那么主人或者只笑不答应，或者生气而不回答。
English: According to the principle of personnel affairs, if you ask each other questions, you answer, if you don't ask, you don't answer, if you don't ask for anything, if you knock on someone's door for no reason, don't ask questions, and make empty arguments in front of others without any purpose, then the owner will either just laugh and not agree, or get angry and not answer.

古文：试使卜筮之人，空钻龟而卜，虚揲蓍而筮，戏弄天地，亦得兆数，天地妄应乎？
现代文：假如让卜筮的人平白无故地钻薄龟甲而卜问，毫无目的地摆弄蓍草来算卦，对天地进行戏弄，也会得到兆数，难道天地在胡乱答复吗？
English: If we were to let the magicians drill thin tortoise shells without any reason, play with rushes without any purpose, and play tricks on heaven and earth, they would also get trillions. Is heaven and earth randomly answering?

古文：又试使人骂天而卜，驱地而筮，无道至甚，亦得兆数。
现代文：假如又让人咒骂天而占卜，敲打地而算卦，无理至极，也会得到兆数。
English: If you also make people curse the heavens while divining, beat the ground while calculating divination, unreasonable to the extreme, you will also get trillions.

古文：苟谓兆数天地之神，何不灭其火，灼其手，振其指而乱其数，使之身体疾痛，血气凑踊？
现代文：如果说兆数是天地神灵的表现，为什么不灭掉他灼龟的火，烧他的手，使算卦人的手发抖而扰乱他求得的数字，让他身体生病疼痛，血气积聚喷涌呢？
English: If the trillions are the manifestation of the gods of heaven and earth, why not extinguish the fire of his turtle, burn his hands, make the hand of the fortune-teller tremble and disturb the numbers he has obtained, make his body sick and painful, and let the blood gas accumulate and gush out?

古文：而犹为之见兆出数，何天地之不惮劳，用心不恶也？
现代文：反而还为占卜的人显示兆数，为什么天地不怕辛劳，用心如此善良呢？
English: On the contrary, it shows trillions for diviners. Why is heaven and earth not afraid of hard work and so kindhearted?

古文：由此言之，卜筮不问天地，兆数非天地之报，明矣。
现代文：据此说来，卜筮不能问天地，兆数也不是天地的答复，是很明白的了。
English: According to this, it is very clear that Boao cannot ask heaven and earth, and trillions are not the answer of heaven and earth.

古文：然则卜筮亦必有吉凶。
现代文：然而卜筮也一定会表示出吉凶。
English: However, Bu Yao is also sure to express good luck and bad luck.

古文：论者或谓随人善恶之行也，犹瑞应应善而至，灾异随恶而到。
现代文：有些发议论的人说卜筮的吉凶是随人们行为的善恶而相应出现的，如同祥瑞应和善行而出现，灾异随着恶行而到来一样。
English: Some commentators say that the auspicious and inauspicious aspects of Bo Gui appear in accordance with the good and evil of people's actions, just as auspiciousness appears in accordance with good deeds, and calamity comes with evil deeds.

古文：治之善恶，善恶所致也，疑非天地故应之也。
现代文：国家治理的好坏，相应招致祥瑞或灾异，怀疑这不是天地有意应和的。
English: The good or bad state governance will bring about prosperity or disaster, and it is suspected that this is not the will of heaven and earth.

古文：吉人钻龟，辄从善兆；凶人揲蓍，辄得逆数。
现代文：吉人钻薄龟甲卜问，吉兆往往随着出现；恶人揲蓍算卦，往往得到不吉利的筮数。
English: When the auspicious person drills a thin turtle, the auspicious sign often appears with it; when the evil person casts a hexagram, the number of unlucky hexagrams is often obtained.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：纣，至恶之君也，当时灾异繁多，七十卜而皆凶，故祖伊曰： 格人元龟，罔敢知吉。 
现代文：殷纣王，是极凶恶的君王，他在位时灾异一个接一个，他占卜了七十次都是凶兆。所以祖伊说： 贤人和大龟板，都觉察不出一点吉兆。 
English: King Yin Xuan was a very wicked king. When he was on the throne, disasters and calamities followed one after another. He divined seventy times, all of which were bad omens. Therefore, Zui said, "Neither the wise man nor the great turtle can perceive a single good omen."

古文：贤者不举，大龟不兆，灾变亟至，周武受命。
现代文：贤人不称赞，大龟板不显现吉兆，灾异屡次到来，因此周武王承受天命灭殷称君。
English: Wise men do not praise, the big turtle board does not show auspicious signs, and disasters come again and again, so King Zhou Wu received the heavenly command to exterminate Yin and praise him.

古文：高祖龙兴，天人并佑，奇怪既多，丰、沛子弟，卜之又吉。
现代文：刘邦兴起，天和人全都护佑他，奇异的现象已经很多了，丰沛的百姓，占卜得到吉兆。
English: Liu Bang arose, heaven and man all blessed him, there have been many strange phenomena, abundant people, and divination has been auspicious.

古文：故吉人之体，所致无不良；凶人之起，所招无不丑。
现代文：所以吉人的占卜，所招致的兆象没有一个不吉利；恶人的揲蓍，所得到的筮数没有一个不是坏的。
English: Therefore, in the divination of the good man, there is not a single omen that is not auspicious; in the divination of the wicked man, there is not a single omen that is not bad.

古文：卫石骀卒，无适子，有庶子六人，卜所以为后者，曰： 沐浴佩玉则兆。 
现代文：卫国的石骀死了，他没有嫡子，却有六个庶子，就用占卜决定谁为继承人，占卜的人说： 洗头洗澡佩带玉器就会得吉兆。 
English: When the defender of the country, Shi Yan, died, he had no legitimate son, but six illegitimate children, so he used divination to decide who would be the heir. The diviner said, "If you wash your hair, take a bath, and wear jade, you will have good luck."

古文：五人皆沐浴佩玉。
现代文：五个庶子都洗头洗澡佩带玉器。
English: The five bastards all wash their hair, take a bath and wear jade jewelry.

古文：石祁子曰： 焉有执亲之丧而沐浴佩玉！ 
现代文：石祁子说： 哪有为父亲守丧期间还洗头洗澡佩带玉器的呢？ 
English: Shi Yanzi said, "Who would still wash their hair, take a bath and wear jade during the mourning period for their father?

古文：不沐浴佩玉，石祁子兆。
现代文：他不洗头洗澡不佩带玉器，石祁子得到了应继承父位的吉兆。
English: He did not wash his hair, take a bath, or wear any jade objects, and Shih Tzu received the auspicious omen that he should inherit his father's throne.

古文：卫人卜以龟为有知也。
现代文：卫国人认为龟甲是有知的。
English: The defenders of the country believed that the tortoise and the hare were intelligent.

古文：龟非有知，石祁子自知也。
现代文：龟甲并不有知，而是石祁子自己有知。
English: The tortoise shell does not know, but the stone louse itself knows.

古文：祁子行善政，有嘉言，言嘉政善，故有明瑞。
现代文：祁子施行善政，又有好的言语，言语好政治善，所以得到明显的吉兆。
English: If the mule carries out good governance, it will have good words, and if the words are good, the politics will be good, so the mule will have a clear auspicious sign.

古文：使时不卜，谋之於众，亦犹称善。
现代文：假使当时不用占卜决定继承人，让众人来商议推举，人们也仍然会称赞他好。
English: If he had not used divination to decide his successor, and had let the people discuss the nomination, people would still have praised him.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：人心神意同吉凶也。
现代文：因为人的心思和神的旨意对吉凶的看法是相同的。
English: For the mind of man and the will of God are one in regard to good and evil.

古文：此言若然，然非卜筮之实也。
现代文：以上的这些话好像是对的，但并不符合占卜算卦的实际。
English: These words above seem to be true, but they do not correspond to the reality of divination.

古文：夫钻龟揲蓍，自有兆数，兆数之见，自有吉凶，而吉凶之人，适与相逢。
现代文：钻薄龟甲摆弄蓍草，自然会得兆数，兆数的出现，自然会有吉凶，而有吉凶的人，碰巧与兆数相遇。
English: Drill thin tortoise shell fiddling with eelgrass, will naturally get trillions, trillions of the emergence, will naturally have good or bad luck, and people with good or bad luck, happened to meet with trillions.

古文：吉人与善兆合，凶人与恶数遇，犹吉人行道逢吉事，顾睨见祥物，非吉事祥物为吉人瑞应也。
现代文：吉人与好的兆象吻合，凶人与恶的筮数相遇，如同吉人走在路上遇到吉祥的事物，随便就可以看到吉祥之物一样，并不是吉祥的事物有意表现为吉人的祥瑞。
English: Lucky people coincide with good omens, and evil people meet with evil omens, just as lucky people can see lucky things when they encounter lucky things on the road. It is not that lucky things are intentionally shown as lucky.

古文：凶人遭遇凶恶於道，亦如之。
现代文：凶人，在路上碰到坏事也是如此。
English: It's the same with murderers and bad things that happen on the road.

古文：夫见善恶，非天应答，适与善恶相逢遇也。
现代文：善恶事物的出现，并不是天的回答，是碰巧与善恶之人相遇到一起了。
English: The appearance of good and evil things is not God's answer, but a chance encounter with good and evil people.

古文：钻龟揲蓍有吉凶之兆者，逢吉遭凶之类也。
现代文：钻龟占卜揲蓍算卦会出现吉凶的征兆，就是由于有相遇上吉凶事物这类情况。
English: The signs of auspicious and inauspicious things will appear in the divination of the drill turtle, that is, due to such situations as encountering auspicious and inauspicious things.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：周武王不豫，周公卜三龟。公曰： 乃逢是吉。 
现代文：周武王生病，周公用龟甲占卜了三次，周公说： 所遇到的都是吉兆。 
English: When King Zhou Wu fell ill, Zhou Gong used the tortoise shell to tell fortunes three times. Zhou Gong said, "Everything I have encountered is a good omen."

古文：鲁卿庄叔生子穆叔，以《周易》筮之，遇《明夷》之《谦》。
现代文：鲁国大夫庄叔生个儿子叫穆叔，用《周易》给儿子算命，遇上明夷卦变谦卦。
English: Dr. Zhuang Rong, a doctor in Lu Province, had a son named Mu Rong. He used "Zhou Yi" to tell his son's fortune, and when he met Ming Yi Gua, he changed it to Qian Gua.

古文：夫卜曰逢，筮曰遇，实遭遇所得，非善恶所致也。
现代文：占卜称为 逢 ，算卦称为 遇 ，实际上是各人的遭遇所得到的卦象，并不是由善恶所带来的。
English: Divination is called "feng" and fortune-telling is called "happenings," which are actually the "gatas" obtained by each person's encounter, and are not brought about by good or evil.

古文：善则逢吉，恶则遇凶，天道自然，非为人也。
现代文：善就遇上吉兆，恶就碰上凶兆，天道自然如此，不是由于人的善恶所造成的。
English: Good will meet with good omens, and evil will meet with evil omens. This is the natural course of heaven, and is not caused by the good or evil of man.

古文：推此以论，人君治有吉凶之应，亦犹此也。
现代文：根据这种情况而论，君王治国有吉凶征兆出现，也仍然是这个道理。
English: According to this situation, it is still the case that auspicious and inauspicious signs appear when the country is ruled by a king.

古文：君德遭贤，时适当平，嘉物奇瑞偶至。
现代文：君王碰巧道德高尚，时运碰巧天下应当太平，美好的事物奇异的征兆就会偶然出现。
English: Monarchs happen to be virtuous, times happen to be peaceful, wonderful things and strange omens happen by chance.

古文：不肖之君，亦反此焉。
现代文：不贤德的君王碰到的情况，也就和这种情况相反。
English: The opposite is the case with wicked kings.

古文：世人言卜筮者多，得实诚者寡。
现代文：世人谈论卜筮的很多，懂得卜筮的真正道理的人很少。
English: The world talks a lot about Boao, but few people understand the true meaning of Boao.

古文：论者或谓蓍龟可以参事，不可纯用。
现代文：有的论者认为龟蓍卜筮的结果可以作为做事情的参考，但不能完全信赖它。
English: Some commentators believe that the results of the study can be used as a reference for doing things, but cannot be fully trusted.

古文：夫钻龟揲蓍，兆数辄见。
现代文：钻龟占卜揲蓍算卦。
English: The drill turtle divines and calculates.

古文：见无常占，占者生意。吉兆而占谓之凶，凶数而占谓之吉，吉凶不效，则谓卜筮不可信。
现代文：兆数总是会出现的，它的出现并没有固定不变的解释，而是由占卜的人主观加以解释。出现吉兆而占卜的人认为它是凶兆，出现凶数而占卜的人认为它是吉数，如果吉凶不灵验，就认为卜筮不可信。
English: Trillions always appear, and there is no fixed and unchanging explanation for its appearance, but it is interpreted subjectively by the diviner. When a good omen appears, the diviner considers it to be a bad omen, when a bad omen appears, the diviner considers it to be a good omen, and if the good omen does not work, it is considered that the fortuneteller cannot be trusted.

古文：周武王伐纣，卜筮之，逆，占曰： 大凶。 
现代文：周武王讨伐纣王，筮算这件事，不吉利，占卜的人说： 大凶。 
English: King Zhou Wuhong fought against King Yao, and this event was considered to be unlucky. Soothsayers said, "He is very unlucky."

古文：太公推蓍蹈龟而曰： 枯骨死草，何知而凶？ 
现代文：姜太公推开蓍草践踏龟甲后说： 枯骨死草，怎么能知道就不吉利呢？ 
English: After Jiang Taigong pushed aside the rushes and trampled on the tortoise shell, he said, "How can you know if it is unlucky to have dead bones and dead grass?

古文：夫卜筮兆数，非吉凶误也，占之不审吉凶，吉凶变乱，变乱，故太公黜之。
现代文：卜筮出现兆数，不是兆数所显示的吉凶错了，是占卜的人辨别不清吉凶，把吉凶说颠倒了。吉凶颠倒了，所以姜太公不相信它。
English: When trillions of figures appear in divination, it is not that the auspicious and inauspicious events indicated by the trillions of figures are wrong, but that the diviners cannot distinguish the auspicious and inauspicious events, and have reversed the auspicious and inauspicious events. The auspicious and inauspicious events were reversed, so Jiang Taigong did not believe it.

古文：夫蓍筮龟卜，犹圣王治世；卜筮兆数，犹王治瑞应。
现代文：用蓍草算卦龟甲占卜，如同圣王治理天下；卜筮出现的兆数，如同圣王治理天下时出现的祥瑞。
English: The divination of tortoise and turtle by counting grasses is like that of a holy king ruling the world; the trillions that appear in divination are like the auspiciousness that appears when a holy king rules the world.

古文：瑞应无常，兆数诡异。
现代文：祥瑞不经常出现，兆数变化多端。
English: Xiang Rui does not appear often, and the trillions vary widely.

古文：诡异则占者惑，无常则议者疑。
现代文：兆数变化多端就使占卜的人疑惑，祥瑞不经常出现就使议论的人怀疑。
English: Trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions.

古文：疑则谓未治，惑则谓不良。
现代文：怀疑就认为天下尚未大治，疑惑就认为占卜不正确。
English: Doubt believes that the world has not yet been ruled, and doubt believes that divination is not correct.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：夫吉兆数，吉人可遭也；治遇符瑞，圣德之验也。
现代文：吉利的兆数，吉人可以遇上；治理天下遇上祥瑞，是圣王有德的证明。
English: The auspicious trillions, the auspicious people can meet; the governance of the world meets the auspicious, is the proof of the virtue of the holy king.

古文：周王伐纣，遇乌鱼之瑞，其卜曷为逢不吉之兆？
现代文：周武王讨伐纣王，遇到赤乌鸦和白鱼的祥瑞，他占卜为什么会遇上不吉利的兆数呢？
English: Zhou Wu Wang fought the Dragon King, encountered the auspiciousness of the red crow and the white fish, and he divined why he encountered the unlucky trillions?

古文：使武王不当起，出不宜逢瑞；使武王命当兴，卜不宜得凶。
现代文：假如周武王命中不应当兴起，出兵就不该遇上祥瑞；假如周武王命运该当兴盛，占卜就不该遇上凶兆。
English: If the fate of King Zhouwu should not rise, the dispatch of troops should not encounter auspiciousness; if the fate of King Zhouwu should be prosperous, divination should not encounter ominous signs.

古文：由此言之，武王之卜，不得凶占，谓之凶者，失其实也。
现代文：据此说来，武王的占卜，不应该得凶兆，说它是凶兆，就违背了它的真实情况。
English: According to this, King Wu's divination should not have a bad omen, and to say that it is a bad omen is to violate its true situation.

古文：鲁将伐越，筮之，得 鼎折足 。子贡占之以为凶。
现代文：鲁国将要攻打越国，对这件事算卦，得的爻辞是 鼎折断了足 ，子贡占断这件事认为是凶兆。
English: The state of Lu was about to attack the state of Yue, and when the matter was discussed, the excuse given was that Ding had broken his leg, while Zigong considered this to be a bad omen.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：鼎而折足，行用足，故谓之凶。
现代文：鼎折断了足，行走要用足，所以认为它是凶兆。
English: Ding broke his leg, and he had to use his foot to walk, so he thought it was a bad omen.

古文：孔子占之以为吉，曰： 越人水居，行用舟不用足，故谓之吉。 
现代文：孔子占断这件事认为是吉兆，孔子说： 越人居住在水边，行动用船，不用足，所以认为它是吉兆。 
English: Confucius considered this to be a good omen. Confucius said, "The Yue people live by the water and use boats to move about, not feet, so they consider this to be a good omen.

古文：鲁伐越，果克之。
现代文：鲁国攻打越国，果然战胜了越国。
English: Lu attacked Yue and successfully defeated Yue.

古文：夫子贡占鼎折足以为凶，犹周之占卜者谓之逆矣。
现代文：子贡占卜 鼎折断了足 认为是凶兆，就同周代占卜人说武王伐纣不吉利一样。
English: Zigong divination Ding broke his leg and thought it was a bad omen, just as the Zhou Dynasty diviners said that King Wu's felling was unlucky.

古文：逆中必有吉，犹折鼎足之占，宜以伐越矣。
现代文：不吉中一定含有吉，就像 折鼎足 这样的预兆有利于攻打越国一样。
English: There must be a blessing in misfortune, just as the omen of folding the top of one's foot is good for attacking Yue.

古文：周多子贡直占之知，寡若孔子诡论之材，故睹非常之兆，不能审也。
现代文：周代人多数像子贡那样只有死板地解释兆数吉凶的能力，很少有像孔子那样的与众不同的论证的才干，所以看到异乎寻常的兆数，就不能辨别清楚了。
English: Most Zhou people, like Zigong, only have the ability to rigidly explain the good and bad luck of trillions, and rarely have the ability to make distinctive arguments like Confucius, so when they see unusual trillions, they can't distinguish them clearly.

古文：世因武王卜，无非而得凶，故谓卜筮不可纯用，略以助政，示有鬼神，明己不得专。
现代文：世人因为武王占卜，没有过失而得凶兆，所以认为卜筮不能完全信赖，只能略微用来辅助政务，表示有鬼神在支配，说明不是自己在专断。
English: Because King Wu divined and received evil omens without fault, the world believed that divination could not be completely trusted, and could only be used to slightly assist government affairs, indicating that ghosts and gods were in control, indicating that they were not arbitrary.

古文：著书记者，采掇行事，若韩非《饰邪》之篇，明已效之验，毁卜訾筮，非世信用。
现代文：编书记史的人，收集以往的事例，如韩非《饰邪》那样的篇章，用已经发生的史事作证明。抨击指责卜筮，反对人们迷信卜筮。
English: Historians collect examples from the past, such as chapters from Han Fei's "Decoration of Evil," and use historical events that have already occurred as evidence. They criticize and accuse Bu Xun and oppose people's superstition of Bu Xun.

古文：夫卜筮非不可用，卜筮之人，占之误也。
现代文：卜筮并不是完全不能用，是卜筮的人往往占断错了。
English: It's not that divination is completely useless, it's just that people who use divination often get it wrong.

古文：《洪范》稽疑，卜筮之变，必问天子卿士，或时审是。
现代文：《尚书》中的《洪范》记载考察疑难问题，以及卜筮的卦象出现了不同的解释，一定要求教天子和大臣，或许确实是正确的。
English: "Hong Fan" in the "Shang Shu" records the investigation of difficult questions, and different interpretations of Bo Xuan's "Gua Xiang" have emerged. It may be true that it is necessary to teach the emperor and the minister.

古文：夫不能审占，兆数不验，则谓卜筮不可信用。
现代文：不能对兆数作出确切的解释，兆数不灵验，就认为卜筮不可信赖。
English: It is not possible to give a precise explanation for the trillions, and if the trillions do not work, it is considered that Bo Xuan cannot be trusted.

古文：晋文公与楚子战，梦与成王搏，成王在上而监其脑，占曰 凶 。
现代文：晋文公与楚成王开战，梦见同楚成王搏斗，楚成王伏在他身上吮吸他的脑汁，占梦的人说： 是凶兆。 
English: Jinwen Gong and Chu Cheng Wang went to war. He dreamed of fighting with Chu Cheng Wang. Chu Cheng Wang lay on him and sucked his brains. The person who interpreted the dream said, "It's a bad omen."

古文：咎犯曰： 吉！
现代文：咎犯说： 是吉兆！
English: The culprit said: It's a good omen!

古文：君得天，楚伏其罪。
现代文：您得天的保佑，楚成王是低头认罪。
English: You are blessed by heaven, and King Chu Cheng has bowed his head and confessed.

古文：君之脑者，柔之也。 
现代文：吮吸您的脑汁，会使他软弱无力。 
English: Sucking your brains out will make him limp.

古文：以战果胜，如咎犯占。
现代文：事后与楚成王交战果然获胜，正如咎犯所占断的一样。
English: After the fact, he won the battle with Chu Cheng Wang, just as the culprit did.

古文：夫占梦与占龟同。
现代文：占断梦象与占断龟兆相同。
English: The dream is the same as the dream of the tortoise.

古文：晋占梦者不见象指，犹周占龟者不见兆者为也。
现代文：晋国占梦的人不明白梦兆的意思，如同周代占卜的人不明白龟兆的意思一样。
English: The dream tellers of Jin did not understand the meaning of the dream omens, just as the soothsayers of the Zhou Dynasty did not understand the meaning of the turtle omens.

古文：象无不然，兆无不审。人之知暗，论之失实也。
现代文：梦兆没有不对的，龟兆没有不明的，由于人的才智愚昧，论断兆象偏离了实情。
English: There is nothing wrong with the dream omens, and there is nothing unclear about the turtle omens. Due to human wisdom and ignorance, the judgment of the omens deviates from the reality.

古文：传或言：武王伐纣，卜之而龟兆昔。
现代文：有的传上说： 武王讨伐纣王，占卜此事龟兆不清楚。
English: There is a legend that says: King Wu fought against King Gong, but the omens for divination are unclear.

古文：占者曰 凶 。
现代文：占卜的人说： 是凶兆。 
English: And the diviners said, An evil sign.

古文：太公曰： 龟兆昔，以祭则凶，以战则胜。 
现代文：姜太公说： 龟兆不清楚，依照这个兆象举行祭祀就不吉利，依照这个兆象进行战争就能取胜。 
English: Jiang Taigong said, "The omen of the turtle is not clear. It is not auspicious to hold a ritual according to this omen. If we fight according to this omen, we can win the war."

古文：武王从之，卒克纣焉。
现代文：武王听从了太公的话，终于战胜了纣王。
English: King Wu listened to the words of the Grand Duke and finally defeated King Gong.

古文：审若此传，亦复孔子论卦，咎犯占梦之类也。
现代文：如果真像这种记载所说的那样，也就又同孔子解释卦象，咎犯解释梦兆是同一类的了。
English: If it is true as this record says, then it is the same as Confucius's interpretation of the dream, and the culprit's interpretation of the dream is the same.

古文：盖兆数无不然，而吉凶失实者，占不巧工也。
现代文：大约兆数没有不对的，而吉凶失实，是因为占卜的人不高明巧妙的缘故。
English: There is nothing wrong with trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions of trillions.

