古文：班氏之先，与楚同姓，令尹子文之后也。
现代文：班氏的祖先与楚同姓，是令尹子文的后代。
English: The ancestor of the Ban clan had the same surname as Chu and was a descendant of Ling Yin Ziwen.

古文：子文初生，弃于瞢中，而虎乳之。
现代文：子文刚生下来时，被抛弃于瞢中，而老虎哺乳他。
English: When Ziwen was first born, he was abandoned in a pupa while a tiger suckled him.

古文：楚人谓乳 穀 ，谓虎 於菟 ，故名穀於菟，字子文。
现代文：楚人称哺乳为 谷 ，称老虎为 于杆 ，因此取名为谷于杆，字子文。
English: The Chu people called suckling as "gu" and the tiger as "yu bar," so it was named "gu yu bar" (谷于杆).

古文：楚人谓虎 班 ，其子以为号。
现代文：楚人称老虎为 班 ，他的儿子便以班为号。
English: The Chu people called the tiger Ban, and his son took the name Ban.

古文：秦之灭楚，迁晋、代之间，因氏焉。
现代文：秦国减掉楚国，迁徙到晋国、代国之间，于是以 班 为姓。
English: Qin State lost Chu State and migrated to Jin State and Dai State, so the family name was changed to Ban.

古文：始皇之末，班壹避地于楼烦，致马、牛、羊数千群。
现代文：秦始皇末年，班壹避难于楼烦，所养马牛羊达数千群。
English: At the end of Qin Shi Huang's reign, Ban Yi took refuge in a building and raised thousands of herds of horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：值汉初定，与民无禁，当孝惠、高后时，以财雄边，出入弋猎，旌旗鼓吹，年百余岁，以寿终，故北方多以 壹 为字者。
现代文：汉朝初年，国家对老百姓不加限制，孝惠帝、高后时期，班氏以财富称雄于边地，出入射猎，旌旗招展，鼓乐喧天，享年百余岁，寿终正寝，所以北方有许多人以 壹 为字。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the state did not impose restrictions on the common people. During the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui and the post-high school period, the Ban clan used its wealth to dominate the frontier, went out shooting, waved flags, and played drums. He was more than a hundred years old and died in his sleep. Therefore, many people in the north use the word "one."

古文：壹生孺。
现代文：班壹的儿子班孺。
English: Banyi's son, Banyu, is the star.

古文：孺为任侠，州郡歌之。
现代文：班孺为人行侠仗义，受到本州本郡人们的称颂。
English: Banyan was praised by the people of this county in Honshu for his heroic deeds.

古文：孺生长，官至上谷守。
现代文：班孺的儿子班长，官至上谷太守。
English: Benjo's son, the squad leader, became Kamitani Taishu.

古文：长生回，以茂林为长子令。
现代文：班长的儿子班回，凭借出众的才能为长子县令。
English: The squad leader's son, Ban Hui, became the eldest son of the county magistrate by virtue of his outstanding talent.

古文：回生况，举孝廉为郎，积功劳，至上河农都尉，大司农奏课连最，入为左曹越骑校尉。
现代文：班回的儿子班况，被推举为孝廉担任郎，累积功劳，官至上河农都尉，大司农屡次上书称其功高，入朝任左曹越骑校尉。
English: Ban Hui's son, Ban Zhou, was elected as a disciple of Xiao Lian and accumulated merits. He was promoted to the highest rank of Shanghe Nong Duifeng, and the chief secretary of Nong Duifeng repeatedly wrote that his merits were high. He entered the imperial court as Zuo Yue Jieifeng.

古文：成帝之初，女为婕妤，致仕就第，资累千金，徒昌陵。
现代文：成帝初年，他的女儿入宫为婕妤，他告老还乡，家财达到千金，迁至昌陵。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chengdu, his daughter entered the palace as a concubine, he returned to his hometown, his family wealth reached a thousand gold, and moved to Changling.

古文：昌陵后罢，大臣名家皆占数于长安。
现代文：后来昌陵被废，那里的大臣名家全都迁往了长安。
English: Later, Changling was abolished, and all the famous ministers there moved to Chang'an.

古文：况生三子：伯、斿、稚。
现代文：班况有三个儿子：班伯、班脖、班稚。
English: Bansho has three sons: Bamber, Banzhu, and Banzhu.

古文：伯少受《诗》于师丹。
现代文：班伯年轻时随师丹学习《诗经》。
English: When he was young, Bamber studied the Book of Songs with his teacher Dan.

古文：大将军王凤荐伯宜劝学，召见宴昵殿，容貌甚丽，诵说有法，拜为中常侍。
现代文：大将军王凤荐举班伯适合侍读，皇上在宴昵殿上召见班伯，他容貌俊美，诵读讲说甚有法度，拜为中常侍。
English: The great general Wang Feng recommended Bamber as a suitable attendant, and the emperor summoned Bamber to the banquet hall. He was handsome, had a great ability to recite and speak, and was worshipped as a middle attendant.

古文：时，上方乡学，郑宽中、张禹朝夕入说《尚书》、《论语》于金华殿中，诏伯受焉。
现代文：当时皇上正热衷于学习，郑宽中、张禹每曰早晚在金华殿中讲《尚书》、《论语》，皇上韶令班伯前去学习。
English: At that time, the emperor was keen on learning. Zheng Guangzhong and Zhang Yu read "Shangshu" and "Analects" every morning and evening in Jinhua Hall, and the emperor ordered Bamber to go to study.

古文：既通大义，又讲异同于许商，迁奉车都尉。
现代文：明了大义之后，又与许商一起讨论异同，升迁为奉车都尉。
English: After he understood the truth, he discussed the similarities and differences with Xu Shang and was promoted to lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：数年，金华之业绝，出与王、许子弟为群，在于绮襦纨绔之间，非其好也。
现代文：敷年后，金华殿讲学的活动中断，班伯出宫与王、许的后辈为伍，生活在纨绔子弟当中，并非他的喜好。
English: After the new year, the lecture activities of Jinhua Hall were interrupted, and Bamber went out of the palace to be with the younger generation of Wang and Xu, living among the children of the eunuchs, which was not his preference.

古文：家本北边，志节慷慨，数求使匈奴。
现代文：因为班氏祖籍原在北部边陲，班伯生来便志节慷慨，多次请求出使匈奴。
English: Because the ancestral home of the Ban clan was originally in the northern borderlands, Ban Bo was born generous and repeatedly requested the Huns to send an envoy.

古文：河平中，单于来朝，上使伯持节迎于塞下。
现代文：河平年间，单于前来朝见，皇上命班伯持符节在塞下迎接。
English: During the Heping era, when the emperor came to see the emperor, the emperor ordered Ban Bo to hold a festival to welcome him.

古文：会定襄大姓石、李群辈报怨，杀追捕吏，伯上状，因自请愿试守期月。
现代文：恰逢定襄一带的大姓石氏、李氏两伙人因报私怨而杀人，又杀死了追捕他们的官吏，班伯上书，表示自己愿意暂任定襄太守一个月。
English: At the same time, two groups of people around Dingxiang, surnamed Shi and Li, killed people for reporting personal grudges, and also killed the officials who pursued them. Bamber wrote a letter saying that he was willing to temporarily hold the position of Dingxiang's governor for one month.

古文：上遣侍中中郎将王舜驰传代伯护单于，并奉玺书印绶，即拜伯为定襄太守。
现代文：皇上派遣侍中中郎将王舜来驰传代替班伯护卫单于，同时带上玺书印绶，就地任命班伯为定襄太守。
English: The emperor dispatched a chamberlain to send Wang Lai Chi Chuan to replace Bamber as a single guard. At the same time, he brought an imperial seal to appoint Bamber as the governor of Dingxiang on the spot.

古文：定襄闻伯素贵，年少，自请治剧，畏其下车作威，吏民竦息。
现代文：定襄的人听说班伯向来地位显贵，又年纪轻轻，而且是自己请求来治理这一难以管辖的地方，担心他初来便会动用威刑，官吏和百姓都很畏惧。
English: The people of Dingxiang heard that Bamber had always been a dignified and young man, and that he had asked to govern this difficult place. They feared that he would use coercion when he first came, and the officials and the people were afraid.

古文：伯至，请问耆老父祖故人有旧恩者，迎延满堂，日为供具，执子孔礼。
现代文：班伯到任之后，问候年迈长者以及和其祖辈父辈有交情的老朋友，把他们请来，聚于一堂，每日供应酒食，像子孙服侍长辈一样对待他们。
English: When Bamber arrived, he greeted the elderly and old friends who had been friends with his parents and grandparents, invited them, gathered them together, served them with wine and food every day, and treated them like children and grandchildren serving their elders.

古文：郡中益弛。
现代文：于是郡中公务更加混乱。
English: As a result, public affairs in the county became even more chaotic.

古文：诸所宾礼皆名豪，怀恩醉酒，共谏伯宜颇摄录盗贼，具言本谋亡匿处。
现代文：那些被班伯以贵宾之礼相待的人都是当地的名人豪士，感激班伯款待之恩，酒醉之后，一道劝谏班伯应当大量拘捕盗贼，详尽地告知那些盗贼本来打算逃跑隐藏的地点。
English: Those who were treated as honored guests by Bamber were local notables, who were grateful for his hospitality and, when drunk, urged him to make a large number of arrests of thieves and to inform them in detail of the places where the thieves had planned to escape and hide.

古文：伯曰： 是所望于父师矣。 
现代文：班伯说： 这正是我有求于诸位的事情。 
English: "That's what I'm asking you to do," Bamber said.

古文：乃召属县长吏，选精进掾史，分部收捕，及它隐伏，旬日尽得。
现代文：于是召集所属各县的长吏，选拔精明能干的掾史，分队搜捕，连那些隐蔽的盗贼也没能逃脱，十天的时间全部拿获盗贼。
English: So they called together the chiefs of the counties they belonged to, selected the shrewd and capable Zou Shi, and sent a detachment to search and arrest him. Even those hidden thieves could not escape, and the thieves were all caught within ten days.

古文：郡中震栗，咸称神明。
现代文：郡中百姓感到非常震惊，都称许班伯神明。
English: People in the county have been left stunned and are praising Bamber.

古文：岁余，上征伯。
现代文：一年之后，皇上征召班伯。
English: A year later, the emperor conscripted Bamber.

古文：伯上书愿过故郡上父祖冢。
现代文：班伯上书说想绕道故郡到祖坟前祭奠。
English: Bamber wrote to say he wanted to take a detour through the county to pay his respects at his ancestral grave.

古文：有诏，太守、都尉以下会。
现代文：皇上下韶，太守都尉以下迎接班伯。
English: The Emperor, the Vice-Emperor, the Governor-General, and other dignitaries gathered to welcome Bamber.

古文：因召宗族，各以亲疏加恩施，散数百金。
现代文：于是召见其宗族，根据亲疏远近施恩，散发数百金。
English: So he summoned his family and distributed hundreds of gold coins according to the distance between relatives.

古文：北州以为荣，长老纪焉。
现代文：人士以此为荣，年长的人把遣事记了下来。
English: The men were proud of it, the older ones wrote it down.

古文：道病中风，既至，以侍中光禄大夫养病，赏赐甚厚，数年未能起。
现代文：进京途中，患了中风病。进京之后，以侍中光禄大夫的名誉养病，皇上给他的赏赐非常丰厚，许多年未能被起用。
English: On his way to the capital, he suffered a stroke. After entering the capital, he nursed his illness with the reputation of an attendant doctor, and the emperor gave him a very rich reward, which prevented him from being appointed for many years.

古文：会许皇后废，班婕妤供养东宫，进侍者李平为婕妤，而赵飞燕为皇后，伯遂称笃。
现代文：正逢许皇后被废，班侄仔供养束宫，进侍者李平为婕妤，而赵飞燕为皇后，班伯于是称病。
English: Just as Empress Xu was dethroned, Bamber's nephew supported the imperial court. Li Ping, a waiter, became the empress, while Zhao Feiyan became the empress. As a result, Bamber fell ill.

古文：久之，上出过临侯阳，伯惶恐，起视事。
现代文：时间长了，皇上出宫去探望班伯，班伯非常惶恐，起身上朝供事。
English: After a long time, the emperor went out of the palace to visit Bamber. Bamber was very frightened and went to work for the emperor.

古文：自大将军薨后，富平、定陵侯张放、淳于长等始爱幸，出为微行，行则同舆执辔；入侍禁中，设宴饮之会，及赵、李诸侍中皆引满举白，谈笑大噱。
现代文：自从大将军王凤去世后，富平侯张放、定陵侯淳于长等开始受到宠幸，如果皇帝微服出行，则同坐一辆车一起握着马的缰绳；入侍宫中，则设宴饮酒，与赵飞燕、李平等和侍中一起狂饮，大声谈笑。
English: Since the death of the great general Wang Feng, Fuping Marquis Zhang Fang, Dingling Marquis Chun Yu Chang and others began to be favored. If the emperor traveled in a micro-suit, they would ride together in a car and hold the reins of the horse; when they entered the palace, they would have a banquet and drink alcohol, and drink with Zhao Feiyan, Li Fengtong and the attendants, and talk and laugh loudly.

古文：时乘舆幄坐张画屏风，画纣醉踞妲己作长夜之乐。
现代文：当时他们乘坐的车帐中放着张有画的屏风，上面画的是商纣醉靠妲己通宵寻欢图。
English: At that time, they were riding in a carriage with a painted screen, on which was painted a picture of a businessman drunk and looking for fun all night.

古文：上以伯新起，数目礼之，因顾指画而问伯： 纣为无道，至于是乎？ 
现代文：皇上因为班伯刚被起用，所以非常敬重他，因此回过头来指着画问班伯： 商纣无道，能到这个地步吗？ 
English: The Emperor, who had great respect for Bamber because he had just been appointed to the position, turned to him and asked, pointing at the painting: "Bamber, there is no way you can be a merchant. How did you get to this point?"

古文：伯对曰： 《书》云 乃用妇人之言 ，何有踞肆于朝？
现代文：班伯回答说： 《尚书》上说 于是听用妇人的言语 ，哪裹有在朝廷上放纵这样的行为呢？
English: Bamber replied: "Where does it say in the Book of Common Prayer, 'Thus saith the Lord,' that such a thing should be indulged in at court?"

古文：所谓众恶归之，不如是之甚者也。 
现代文：所谓众恶归之，没有比这更过分的了。 
English: The so-called return of all evils is nothing more than this.

古文：上曰： 苟不若此，此图何戒？ 
现代文：皇上说： 如果不是这样，这张图画告诫的又是什么？ 
English: The emperor said, "If that is not the case, then what is this picture warning about?"

古文：伯曰：  沉湎于酒 ，微子所以告去也； 式号式呼 ，《大雅》所以流连也。
现代文：班伯回答道： 商纣 沉湎于酒，是微子离他而去的原因； 式号式呼 ，是《大雅》之所以流连的。
English: Bamber replied: "Merchant's addiction to drink was the reason he left; The Great Gatsby was the reason he stayed.

古文：《诗》、《书》淫乱之戒，其原皆在于酒。 
现代文：《诗经》、《尚书》所诫止的淫乱，其本源都在于酒。 
English: The root of the fornication that is forbidden in the "Book of Songs" and the "Song of Songs" lies in wine.

古文：上乃喟然叹曰： 吾久不见班生，今日复闻谠言！ 
现代文：皇上长叹一口气说： 我很久没有见到班生了，今天又一次听到了正直的话！ 
English: The emperor sighed and said, "It's been a long time since I've seen my classmates, but today I once again heard honest words!"

古文：放等不怿，稍自引起更衣，因罢出。
现代文：张放等人很不高兴，过了一会儿便藉上厕所为名趁机出宫。
English: Zhang Fang and the others were very unhappy, and after a while they took the opportunity to leave the palace in the name of going to the toilet.

古文：时，长信庭林表适使来，闻见之。
现代文：当时长信宫中的庭林表派人前来，看到听到了这些情况。
English: At that time, the court forest table in the Changxin Palace sent people to come and see and hear these conditions.

古文：后上朝东宫，太后泣曰： 帝间颜色瘦黑，班侍中本大将军所举，宜宠异之，益求其比，以辅圣德。
现代文：后来皇上去束宫朝见太后，太后哭泣着说： 皇上近日面容削瘦，脸色发黑。班侍中本来是大将军所推举的，应当对他宠爱有加，使他舆你能够更加亲近，以便更好地辅佐圣上。
English: Later, the emperor went to the Imperial Palace to see the empress dowager, and the empress dowager wept and said, "The emperor has recently become thin and his face has darkened. The chamberlain was originally chosen by the general, and he should be favored, so that he can be closer to you, in order to better assist the saint."

古文：宜遣富平侯且就国。 
现代文：而应当把富平侯逐出朝廷。 
English: Instead, Fuping Hou should be expelled from the imperial court.

古文：上曰： 诺。 
现代文：皇上回答道： 是。 
English: The Emperor replied: Yes.

古文：车骑将军王音闻之，以风丞相御史奏富平侯罪过，上乃出放为边都尉。
现代文：车骑将军王音听说之后，暗示丞相御史上书言明富平侯的罪过，皇上于是放逐张放为边都尉。
English: After hearing that the cavalry general Wang Yin had hinted that the prime minister's history book had revealed the sins of Fuping, the emperor then banished Zhang Fang to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：后复证入，太后与上书曰： 前所道尚未效，富平侯反复来，其能默乎？ 
现代文：后来皇上又把张放征召入朝，太后给皇上写信说： 以前所讲的尚未奏效，今天富平侯却又入朝，我岂能默然不语？ 
English: Later, the emperor summoned Zhang Fang to the court again, and the empress dowager wrote to the emperor, saying, "What I said before has not worked, but today Fuping Hou has entered the court again. Can't I remain silent?

古文：上谢曰： 请今奉诏。 
现代文：皇上谢罪道： 请允许我现在执行您的意旨。 
English: Emperor Xie Sin said: Please allow me to carry out your will now.

古文：是时，许商为少府，师丹为光禄大夫，上于是引商、丹入为光禄勋，伯迁水衡都尉，与两师并侍中，皆秩中二千石。
现代文：当时许商为少府，师丹为光禄勋，皇上于是征引许商、师丹二人为光禄大夫，班伯升迁为水衡都尉，和两位老师一起仟侍中，他们的俸禄均为二千石。
English: At that time, Xu Shang was Shao Fu, and Shidan was Guanglu Xun, so the emperor conscripted Xu Shang and Shidan to be Guanglu doctors, while Bamber was promoted to Captain of the Water Conservancy, and he and the two teachers became attendants together. Their salaries were both 2,000 koku.

古文：每朝东宫，常从；及有大政，俱使谕指于公卿。
现代文：皇上每每入束宫朝见太后，班伯经常跟从在后；逢朝中有大事，一起被派往向公卿大臣宣示皇上的意图。
English: Every time the emperor came to the palace to see the empress dowager, Bamber often followed behind; whenever there was a big event in the imperial court, they were sent together to announce the emperor's intentions to the noblemen and ministers.

古文：上亦稍厌游宴，复修经书之业，太后甚悦。
现代文：皇上也逐渐厌倦游乐宴饮之事，重新学习经书，太后非常高兴。
English: The emperor also gradually got tired of the entertainment, feasting and drinking, and began to study the scriptures again. The empress dowager was very happy.

古文：丞相方进复奏，富平侯竟就国。
现代文：丞相方进又上书，富干侯张放最终被放逐于朝外。
English: The chancellor, Fang Jin, submitted another letter, and the rich farmer, Zhang Fang, was finally exiled outside the imperial court.

古文：会伯病卒，年三十八，朝廷愍惜焉。
现代文：逢班伯病故，年方三十八岁，朝廷上下均感同情惋惜。
English: When Bamber died of illness at the age of thirty-eight, everyone in the imperial court felt sympathy and regret.

古文：斿博学有俊材，左将军史丹举贤良方正，以对策为议郎，迁谏大夫、右曹中郎将，与刘向校秘书。
现代文：班斿学识渊博、才智出众，左将军史丹以贤良方正察举班谆，班砖通过应对制策而担任议郎，又升迁为谏大夫、右曹中郎将，与刘向一起典校中秘藏书。
English: He was a scholar with profound knowledge and outstanding talent. The left general, Stan, led the team with the virtuous Fang Zhengcha, and the right general, Banzhu, served as the negotiator by responding to the policy, and was promoted to the doctor of Zhai and the captain of the right team. Together with Liu Xiang, he collected the secret books of the middle school.

古文：每奏事，斿以选受诏进读群书。
现代文：班脖常奏校书之事，得以受诏宫于天子面前读书。
English: The fact that the class regularly recited the school book was approved by the emperor and the emperor was allowed to read in front of the emperor.

古文：上器其能，赐以秘书之副。
现代文：皇上器重他的才能，把中秘之书的副本赏赐给他。
English: The emperor valued his talent and rewarded him with a copy of the book of secrets.

古文：时书不布，自东平思王以叔父求《太史公》、诸子书，大将军白不许。
现代文：当时书不能出示于群下，即使束平思王以叔父的名誉索求《太史公》、诸子书，大将军仍告诉他说不可以。
English: At that time, the book could not be presented to the group, even if Sok Ping Si Wang claimed the title of "Grand Historian" and "Children's Book" in the name of his uncle, the general still told him that it was not possible.

古文：语在《东平王传》斿亦早卒，有子曰嗣，显名当世。
现代文：事见《东平王传》。班脖也是英年早逝，他的儿子叫班嗣，名显当世。
English: The story is told in "The Biography of the Dongping King." Banzhe also died young, and his son, Banzhi, became famous.

古文：稚少为黄门郎中常侍，方直自守。
现代文：班稚年轻时任黄门郎中常侍，方正刚直洁身自好。
English: When he was young, Banzhong served as Huangmenro's middle attendant, and Fang Zhenggang was upright and self-assured.

古文：成帝季年，立定陶王为太子，数遣中盾请问近臣，稚独不敢答。
现代文：成帝晚年，立定陶王为太子，屡次派遣中盾询问近臣们的意见，惟独班稚不敢冒昧作答。
English: In the later years of Emperor Chengdu, when King Li Dingtao was crown prince, he repeatedly sent his middle guards to inquire about the opinions of his close vassals, but the middle guards did not dare to answer.

古文：哀帝即位，出稚为西河属国都尉，迁广平相。
现代文：哀帝登基之后，贬班稚为西河属国都尉，迁任广平相。
English: After Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, he was demoted to the rank of captain of the province of the West River and transferred to the post of Guangping minister.

古文：王莽少与稚兄弟同列友善，兄事斿而弟畜稚。
现代文：王莽年轻时与班稚兄弟地位相近而且关系友善，如同事奉兄长一样对待班脖，像对待弟弟一样看待班稚。
English: When Wang Meng was young, he was close to his classmates and had a friendly relationship with them. For example, his colleagues treated him like an elder brother and treated him like a younger brother.

古文：斿之卒也，修緦麻，赙赗甚厚。
现代文：班脖去世后，王莽身穿丧服，送来丰厚的随葬品。
English: After Ban's death, Wang Mang, dressed in mourning clothes, sent rich funeral goods.

古文：平帝即位，太后临朝，莽秉政，方欲文致太平，使使者分行风俗，采颂声，而稚无所上。
现代文：平帝即位后，由太后临朝听政，王莽主持朝政，打算通过文教使天下太平，派遣使者到各地访查风俗，采集颂歌，但是班稚没有献上什么颂歌。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ping, the empress dowager came to listen to the government, and Wang Mang presided over the government. He intended to make the world peaceful through literature and education, and sent emissaries to various places to investigate customs and collect carols. However, Ban Rong did not present any carols.

古文：琅邪太守公孙闳言灾害于公府，大司空甄丰遣属驰至两郡讽吏民，而劾闳空造不详，稚绝嘉应，嫉害圣政，皆不道。
现代文：琅邪太守公孙闳在公府大讲灾变，大司空甄丰派遣手下驰骑至两郡劝告官吏百姓衹讲祥瑞而不讲灾害，并上书弹劾公孙闳捏造不祥之事，班稚不讲瑞应，都是妒嫉圣政，均为左道。
English: The evil grand marshal Sun Yat-sen made a big speech about the disaster in the government office, and the chief magistrate Ku Zhenfeng dispatched his men to ride to the two counties to advise the officials and the people to speak of good fortune instead of disaster, and to impeach Sun Yat-sen for fabricating ominous things, and not to speak of good fortune in the class, all of which were jealous of the holy politics, and all of which were leftist.

古文：太后曰： 不宣德美，宜与言灾害者异罚。
现代文：太后说道： 不宣扬美德，应与大言灾异的人处置不同。
English: The empress dowager said: If you do not preach virtue, you should be dealt with differently from those who talk nonsense.

古文：且后宫贤家，我所哀也。 
现代文：并且班稚贤德，我同情可怜她的家族。 
English: And my heart goes out to her family.

古文：闳独下狱诛。
现代文：公孙闳单独被投下监狱处死。
English: Gongsun Yao was thrown into prison alone and executed.

古文：稚惧，上书陈恩谢罪，愿归相印，入补延陵园郎，太后许焉。
现代文：班稚大为恐惧，上书感恩谢罪，表示愿意归还相印，入朝为延陵园郎，太后允准。
English: Banzhong was greatly afraid, and sent a letter of gratitude and thanksgiving, expressing his willingness to return the seal. He entered the court as the gardener of the Yanling Mausoleum, which was approved by the Empress Dowager.

古文：食故禄终身。
现代文：享受原有的俸禄度过一生。
English: Enjoy the original salary for the rest of your life.

古文：由是班氏不显莽朝，亦不罹咎。
现代文：因此班氏家族在王莽时并不显达，也没有大灾难。
English: Therefore, the Ban family did not appear in Wang Mang's time, and there was no great disaster.

古文：初，成帝性宽，进入直言，是以王音、翟方进等绳法举过，而刘向、杜邺、王章、朱云之徒肆意犯上，故自帝师安昌侯，诸舅大将军兄弟及公卿大夫、后宫外属史、许之家有贵宠者，莫不被文伤诋。
现代文：起初，成帝生性宽厚，能够听从直言，所以王音、翟方进等依照法度议论天子的过失，而刘向、杜邺、王章、朱云等人肆意冒犯皇上，因此上至皇帝的老师安昌侯，皇舅大将军诸兄弟以及公卿大夫、后宫外戚史、许等家有宠幸的，没有不被诋毁的。
English: At first, Emperor Cheng Rong had a generous nature and was able to listen to straightforward speech. Therefore, Wang Yin, Xing Fang Jin and others discussed the faults of the emperor in accordance with the law, while Liu Xiang, Du Xi, Wang Zhang, Zhu Yun and others wantonly offended the emperor. Therefore, the emperor's teacher, An Chang Hou, the emperor's uncle, the generals and brothers, as well as the noble doctors, the relatives outside the imperial court, and Xu, who were favored by the family, were not defamed.

古文：唯谷永尝言： 建始、河平之际，许、班之贵，倾动前朝，熏灼四方，赏赐无量，空虚内臧，女宠至极，不可尚矣；今之后起，无所不飨，仁倍于前。 
现代文：只有谷永曾经说： 建始、河平之际，许家、班家的显贵，倾动前朝，显著四方，赏赐无度，以致内府空虚，你们所受的恩宠已经达到极限了，不可能再超过了；但如今后起之家所得到的宠幸，连上天也无法享受到，比前边提到班、许之氏所受恩宠还要高出十倍。 
English: Only Gu Yong once said: "At the time of the founding of the Heping, the prominence of the Xu family and the Ban family, and the decline of the former dynasty, were conspicuous in all directions, and the rewards were boundless, so that the inner palace was empty. The grace you received has reached its limit and cannot be exceeded; but now the favors received by the rising family cannot even be enjoyed by heaven, and they are ten times higher than the grace received by the aforementioned Ban and Mr. Xu."

古文：永指以驳饥赵、李，亦无间云。
现代文：谷永所言意在讥讽赵氏、李氏，对班家并没有非议。
English: What Gu Yong said was meant to ridicule the Zhao and Li clans, but he did not criticize the Ban family.

古文：稚生彪。
现代文：班稚的儿子是班彪。
English: The son of Bancho is Ban Biao.

古文：彪字叔皮，幼与从兄嗣共游学，家有赐书，内足于财，好古之士自远方至，父党扬子云以下莫不造门。
现代文：班彪字叔皮，从小便和其堂兄班嗣一起学习。班氏家有皇上赐给的图书，而且府内财力丰厚，好学之士多从远方而来，父辈的朋友白扬雄以下没有不登门拜访的。
English: Ban Biao, nicknamed Uncle Peel, has been studying with his cousin Banzhi since he was a child. The Ban family has books given by the emperor, and the government has abundant financial resources. Many students come from far away, and there is no one who does not visit the parents' friend Bai Yangxiong.

古文：嗣虽修儒学，然贵老、严之术。
现代文：班嗣虽然学习儒学，但他崇尚老庄之学。
English: Although Banzhi studied Confucianism, he advocated Laozhuang learning.

古文：桓生欲借其书，嗣报曰： 若夫严子者，绝圣弃智，修生保真，清虚淡泊，归之自然，独师友造化，而不为世俗所役者也。
现代文：桓生想借阅他的书籍，班嗣答覆说： 庄子那样的人，绝圣弃智，修炼生命保养真气，清静虚无不追求名利，归万物于自然，衹有师友之间相互影响，而不被世俗力量所役使。
English: When Huan Sheng wanted to borrow his books, Banzhong replied, "People like Zhuang Zi renounce wisdom, cultivate life and maintain true qi, pursue fame and fortune without seeking tranquility and nothingness, attribute all things to nature, do not have mutual influence between teachers and friends, and are not used by worldly forces.

古文：渔钓于一壑，则万物不奸其志，栖迟于一丘，则天下不易其乐。
现代文：在山壑中垂钓，那么天下万物难以干扰他的心志；隐居在一小山之中，则天下万物不能改变他的安乐。
English: If he is fishing in the mountains, then it is difficult for anything in the world to disturb his mind; if he is living in seclusion in a small mountain, then nothing in the world can change his happiness.

古文：不絓圣人之罔，不嗅骄君之饵，荡然肆志，谈者不得而名焉，故可贵也。
现代文：不受圣人的束缚，不为人君爵禄所诱惑，放纵自己的躯体放任自己的心志，谈论的人难以给他命名，因此非常宝贵。
English: Free from the shackles of the sage, not tempted by the king's wealth, indulge your body and let your mind go, it is difficult for people to name him, so it is very valuable.

古文：今吾子已贯仁谊之羁绊，系名声之缰锁，伏周、孔之轨躅，驰颜、闵之极挚，既系挛于世教矣，何用大道为自炫耀？
现代文：如今你已经套上了仁义情谊的羁绊，已经系上了声名的缰锁，已经信服了周公、孔子的主张，传扬颜回、闵子骞的精华，已经受拘于世俗教化，又何必言用老、庄之大道而自炫耀？
English: Now that you have put on the shackles of benevolence, righteousness and friendship, have fastened the locks of fame, have been convinced of the propositions of Zhou Gong and Confucius, and have propagated the essence of Yan Hui and Xun Zi Yao, and have been subject to secular enlightenment, why do you have to use the old and grand roads to show off?

古文：昔有学步于邯郸者，曾未得其仿佛，又复失其故步，遂匍匐而归耳！恐似此类，故不进。 
现代文：过去有个人到邯郸学人走路，并没有学成，反而忘掉了原来的走法，于是只好爬了回去！
English: In the past, there was a person who learned to walk by crawling, but did not learn, but forgot the original way of walking, so he had to crawl back!

古文：嗣之行己持论如此。
现代文：担心你也会那样，因此不把书借给你。 
English: I'm afraid you'll do the same, so I won't lend you the book.

古文：叔皮唯圣人之道然后尽心焉。
现代文：班嗣的立身行事发表言论就是这样。班彪只对圣人之道才倾尽心力。
English: This is how Banzhi acted and spoke. Ban Biao only devoted himself to the path of a saint.

古文：年二十，遭王莽败，世祖即位于冀州。
现代文：二十岁时，适逢王莽被减，光武帝在冀州即位。
English: At the age of twenty, when Wang Mang was demoted, Emperor Guangwu ascended the throne in Jizhou.

古文：时隗嚣据垄拥众，招辑英俊，而公孙述称帝于蜀汉，天下云扰，大者连州郡，小者据县邑。
现代文：当时隗嚣据有陇西拥众自立，招集英雄俊杰，而公孙述在蜀漠称帝，天下大乱，群雄割据，势力大的接连州郡，势力小的占据县邑。
English: At that time, there was a clamor for Shaanxi supporters to be self-reliant and to recruit heroes and heroes, while Gongsun said that he would be emperor in Shoumo, the world would be in turmoil, the heroes would be separated, the powerful would occupy successive counties, and the less powerful would occupy counties and towns.

古文：嚣问彪曰： 往者周亡，战国并争，天下分裂，数世然后乃定，其抑者从横之事复起于今乎？
现代文：隗嚣问班彪道： 以前周朝灭亡，战国纷争，天下分裂，几代之后方才安定下来，难道战国之时的纵横之事还会在今再次出现吗？
English: Pan Biao asked angrily: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty was overthrown, the Warring States was fought, and the world was divided. It took several generations for things to settle down. Will the ups and downs of the Warring States period happen again now?

古文：将承运迭兴在于一人也？愿先生论之。 
现代文：将会有一个人承受天运代而兴起吗？希望先生能够评论一下。 
English: Will there be a person who will rise to the occasion? I hope you can comment on this.

古文：对曰： 周之废兴与汉异。
现代文：班彪回答说： 周朝的兴衰与汉代不同。
English: Ban Biao replied: The rise and fall of the Zhou Dynasty is different from that of the Han Dynasty.

古文：昔周立爵五等，诸侯从政，本根既微，枝叶强大，故其末流有从横之事，其势然也。
现代文：当初周朝设立五等爵位，使各诸侯国各自为政，王室衰微，而各诸侯国曰益强大，所以周朝末年出现了诸侯纷争之事，客观条件决定了这一切。
English: At the beginning of the Zhou Dynasty, the establishment of the fifth-class peerage caused the various states to govern themselves, the royal family declined, while the states became more powerful, so there was a conflict between the states at the end of the Zhou Dynasty. The objective conditions determined all of this.

古文：汉家承秦之制，并立郡县，主有专己之威，臣无百年之柄。至于成帝，假借外家，哀、平短祚，国嗣三绝，危自上起，伤不及下。
现代文：汉代继承秦代的制度，并立郡县，人君有专制的威权，大臣没有成百年基业的权柄，到了成帝时，外戚专权，哀、平二帝短命，皇位三次没有人继承，危机是从上边出现的，而没有危及根基。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the system of the Qin Dynasty, and established counties and counties. The ruler had autocratic authority. The minister did not have the power of inheritance for hundreds of years. When he became emperor, he had the exclusive power of his relatives. The two emperors, Wei and Ping, were short-lived. The throne was not inherited for three times. The crisis came from above, but did not endanger the foundation.

古文：故王氏之贵，倾擅朝廷，能窃号位，而不根于民。
现代文：所以虽然王氏的显贵，危及朝廷，能够窃夺皇位改立国号，但并不能得民心。
English: Therefore, although the Wang clan's eminence endangers the imperial court and can steal the imperial throne to establish the country's name, it cannot win the hearts of the people.

古文：是以即真之后，天下莫不引领而叹，十余年间，外内骚扰，远近俱发，假号云合，咸称刘氏，不谋而同辞。
现代文：因此登基之后，天下百姓没有不为汉室衰落而叹息的，十几年间，外扰内忧，各地纷纷揭竿而起，立国号的人遍地皆是，都自称是刘氏后人，未曾商量而语辞相同。
English: Therefore, after he ascended to the throne, there was no one in the world who did not lament the decline of the Han dynasty. For more than ten years, external disturbances and internal worries arose in various regions, and people from all over the country set up the national anthem. They all claimed to be descendants of the Liu clan, and had not discussed it, but the language was the same.

古文：方今雄桀带州城者，皆无七国世业之资。
现代文：如今拥有州城的英雄豪杰，都没有七国世代相承的基业的资本。《诗经。
English: Today, the heroes and heroines who own the state capital do not have the capital of the inheritance of the seven countries.

古文：《诗》云： 皇矣上帝，临下有赫，鉴观四方，求民之莫。 
现代文：大雅。皇矣》中言： 伟大的上天，俯视天下赫然甚明，监察众国，求人所定而授之。 
English: In "Imperial Elegance," there is a saying: "Heaven is great, He looks down on the world with great clarity, He oversees the nations, He asks for what He wants and gives it to them."

古文：今民皆讴吟思汉，乡仰刘氏，已可知矣。 
现代文：如今百姓皆长歌短叹而思念汉朝，民心向汉，已经很清楚了。 
English: Nowadays, the people all sing and sigh and miss the Han Dynasty, and it is already clear that the people's hearts are turning to Han.

古文：嚣曰： 先生言周、汉之势，可也，至于但见愚民习识刘氏姓号之故，而谓汉家复兴，疏矣！
现代文：隗嚣说： 先生所言周朝、汉朝之形势，甚是，至于仅是见到愚民们习惯了刘氏姓号的缘故，就以为汉室可以复兴，所论则显粗疏！
English: Gong Han said: The situation of the Zhou and Han dynasties mentioned by the professor is very far-fetched. As for thinking that the Han dynasty can be revived just because the foolish people have become accustomed to the surname of the Liu family, the argument is obviously crude!

古文：昔秦失其鹿，刘季逐而掎之，时民复知汉乎！ 
现代文：过去秦失政权，刘季起兵于是得到天下，当时百姓又怎会知晓汉室呢！ 
English: In the past, Qin lost power, Liu Ji raised an army and gained control of the country. At that time, how could the people know about the Han dynasty?

古文：既感嚣言，又愍狂狡之不息，乃著《王命论》以救时难。
现代文：班彪对隗嚣的言语深有感触，又哀叹他疯狂凶暴的行为难于止息，就着《王命论》来补救时难。
English: Ban Biao was deeply moved by Yu's impassioned speech, and also lamented that it was difficult to stop his crazy and violent behavior, and that it was difficult to remedy it with "The Theory of the King's Life."

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：那篇文章写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：昔在帝尧之禅曰： 咨尔舜，天之历数在尔躬。 
现代文：当年帝尧禅让时说： 舜，天命预定你是统治的继承人。 
English: At that time, Emperor Zhenzang said: "Zhen, you are destined to be the heir to rule.

古文：舜亦以命禹。
现代文：舜也是按天命把天下挥让给了禹。
English: Later, Hao also used the same words to admonish Yu.

古文：泉于稷、契，咸佐唐、虞，光济四海，奕世载德，至于汤、武，而有天下。
现代文：至于稷、羿，都辅佐唐尧、虞舜，其荣光使四海之民受益，其美德泽及后世不绝，至于商汤、周武，拥有天下。
English: As for Zou and Zou, they both assisted Tang Zou and Yu Zou, and their glory benefited the people of the four seas, and their virtues and future generations are endless. As for Shang Tang and Zhou Wu, they own the world.

古文：虽其遭遇异时，禅代不同，至乎应天顺民，其揆一也。
现代文：虽然他们所处时代各异，更朝换代的方式不同，但他们都是上应天命下顺民心。
English: Although they lived in different eras, and even had different ways of changing dynasties, they were all guided by the will of heaven and the will of the people.

古文：是故刘氏承尧之祚，氏族之世，著乎《春秋》。
现代文：因此刘氏上承帝尧之帝统，刘姓氏族世世代代，显名于史书。
English: As a result, the Liu clan inherited the imperial lineage, and the Liu clan has been famous in history books for generations.

古文：唐据火德，而汉绍之，始起沛泽，则神母夜号，以章赤帝之符，由是言之，帝王之祚，必有明圣显懿之德，丰功厚利积累之业，然后精诚通于神明，流泽加于生民，故能鬼神所福飨，天下所归往，未见运世无本，功德不纪，而得屈起在此位者也。
现代文：唐尧为火德，汉王朝也续接为火德，开始起兵于沛县的大泽，神母夜间号哭，以彰显赤帝的符应。就此而言，帝王的国统，一定要有明圣显懿的德行，丰功厚利世代累积的基业，然后精诚通达至于神明之处，流泽施加于百姓身上，所以能为鬼神所佑护，天下百姓都前来归附，从未见过没有一定的根基，功德不被记载，而能够崛起登上皇位的人。
English: The Tang and Han dynasties followed suit. They began to raise an army in Osawa, Pae County, and the goddess cried at night to demonstrate the Red Emperor's response. In this regard, the emperor's national line must have the virtue of the saint, the foundation of the generation, and then the place of the god. The luster is applied to the people, so it can be protected by the ghosts and gods. People all over the world have come to adhere to it. They have never seen a person without a certain foundation, whose merits are not recorded, but who can rise to the throne.

古文：世俗见高祖兴于布衣，不达其故，以为适遭暴乱，得奋其剑，游说之士至比天下于逐鹿，幸捷而得之，不知神器有命，不可以智力求也。
现代文：世俗之人见到高祖由一介平民兴起，但不能通晓其究竟，以为恰逢乱世，便能够拔剑奋起，游说之士甚至把争夺天比作追逐野鹿，运气好、手脚快就可以得到它，不知道帝王之权柄乃是天命，是不可以凭藉璁明武力得到的。
English: Secular people saw Gao Zu rise from a group of commoners, but they couldn't fathom his true nature. They thought it was a time of chaos, so they could draw their swords and rise up. The lobbyists even compared the battle for heaven to chasing a wild deer. If you were lucky and fast, you could get it. They didn't know that the emperor's power was a destiny of heaven, and couldn't be obtained by brute force.

古文：悲失！
现代文：可悲呀！
English: How sad!

古文：此世所以多乱臣贼子者也。
现代文：这正是为什么世上有那么多乱臣贼子的原因。
English: This is exactly why there are so many traitors in the world.

古文：若然者，岂徒暗于天道哉？又不睹之于人事矣！
现代文：像这样，岂衹是昧于天道，而且不懂得人事。
English: In this way, they are ignorant of the heavenly way and do not understand human affairs.

古文：夫饿馑流隶，饥寒道路，思有短褐之亵，儋石之畜，所愿不过一金，然终于转死沟壑。
现代文：那些饥饿流离的贱隶，饥寒交迫流浪于道路中的人，只想有一件粗布的衣物，一点存粮，最大的愿望也不过一金，然而终于辗转死于沟壑之中。
English: Those hungry and wandering low-class people, those who are forced to wander on the road by hunger and cold, only want to have a piece of coarse cloth, a little stored grain, and the greatest wish is only a gold, but finally they die in the gully.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：贫穷亦有命也。
现代文：贫穷也是天命。
English: Poverty is also destiny.

古文：况乎天子之贵，四海之富，神明之祚，可得而妄处哉？
现代文：更何况天子的尊贵，四海之富，神明之祚，怎么可以轻易占有呢？
English: Not to mention the dignity of the Son of Heaven, the wealth of the four seas, the favor of the gods, how can they be easily possessed?

古文：故虽遭罹厄会，窃其权柄，勇如信、布，强如梁、籍，咸如王莽，然卒润镬伏质，亨醢分裂，又况幺，尚不及数子，而欲暗奸天位者乎！
现代文：因此虽然巧逢时机，暗中取得权柄，勇如韩信、季布，强如项梁、项籍，圆滑如王莽，最终仍被烹杀斩首，剁成肉酱分裂肢体，又何况无名之辈，还远比不上上述诸人，却打算谋取天子之位。
English: Therefore, although the opportune time, secretly acquired power, brave as Han Xin, Ji Bu, strong as Xiang Liang, Xiang Ji, and smooth as Wang Mang, they were eventually killed, beheaded, minced into meat sauce, and divided limbs, and what's more, they were nobodies, far less than the above-mentioned people, but they intended to seek the position of the Son of Heaven.

古文：是故驽蹇之乘不聘千里之途，燕雀之畴不奋六翮之用，棁之材不荷梁之任，斗筲之子不秉帝王之重。
现代文：因此劣等的马匹不能奔驰千里之途，燕雀之类的鸟不能展翅高翔万里，椽、薄之材难承当栋梁的重任，器小之人难以主持帝王的大业。
English: As a result, inferior horses cannot gallop for thousands of miles, birds such as chaffinches cannot spread their wings and soar thousands of miles high, storks and thin wood are difficult to undertake the important task of being a pillar, and small people are difficult to preside over the emperor's great cause.

古文：《易》曰 鼎折足，覆公餗 ，不胜其任也。
现代文：《易经》上讲 鼎折其足，覆洒公食 ，言其不能胜任其职。
English: In the "I Ching," it is said that the emperor broke his foot, spilled public food, and said that he was not competent for his duties.

古文：当秦之末，豪桀共推陈婴而王之，婴母止之曰： 自吾为子家妇，而世贫贱，卒富贵不祥，不如以兵属人，事成少受其刑，不成祸有所归。 
现代文：秦朝末年，天下豪杰一起推举陈婴称王，陈婴的母亲劝止他说： 自从我嫁到陈家以来，你家世代贫贱，骤然间富贵起来不是吉祥的事情，不如把兵权委让他人，成事之后可稍受他的恩惠，事不成灾祸也有他人承担。 
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, the world's heroes jointly elected Chen Jiao as king. Chen Jiao's mother dissuaded him, saying, "Since I married into the Chen family, your family has been poor for generations. It is not auspicious for you to suddenly become rich. It is better to entrust the Military Commission to someone else, so that you can receive a little favor from him after the matter is settled, and someone else will be responsible for the disaster if the matter is not settled.

古文：婴从其言，而陈氏以宁。
现代文：陈婴听从了他母亲的话，而陈氏得以平安无事。
English: Chen Ying obeyed his mother's words, and Mr. Chen was safe.

古文：王陵之母亦见项氏之必亡，而刘氏之将兴也。
现代文：王陵的母亲也预见到项氏一定会灭亡，而刘氏将要兴盛起来。
English: Wang Ling's mother also foresaw that the Xiang clan would certainly perish, while the Liu clan would prosper.

古文：是时，陵为汉将，而母获于楚，有汉使来，陵母见之，谓曰： 愿告吾子，汉王长者，必得天下，子谨事之，无有二心。 
现代文：当时王陵为汉将，而他母亲被楚俘获，有汉使来到楚地，王陵的母亲见到之后，对他说： 希望你能告诉我的儿子，汉王有长者之风，一定能得到天下，让他小心事奉汉王，不要有贰心。 
English: At that time, Wang Ling was a Han general, and his mother was captured by Chu. A Han envoy came to Chudi. After seeing Wang Ling's mother, she said to him: I hope you can tell my son that the Han king has the style of an elder and will surely gain the world. Let him be careful to serve the Han king, do not have a bad heart.

古文：遂对汉使伏剑而死，以固勉陵。
现代文：说完面对着漠使自杀而死，以坚定和鼓励王陵。
English: After that, facing the desert, he committed suicide and died, with the firmness and encouragement of Wang Ling.

古文：其后果定于汉，陵为宰相，封侯。
现代文：后来天下果然归于汉室，王陵出任丞相并被封侯。
English: Later, the country was indeed returned to the Han dynasty, and Wang Ling became the prime minister and was given the title of marquis.

古文：夫以匹妇之明，犹能推事理之致，探祸福之机，而全宗祀于无穷，垂策书于春秋，而况大丈夫之事乎！
现代文：她们以普通人的聪明才智，尚且能推究出事理的精微之处，探求祸福的关键，而且能保全宗族世代无忧，名垂青史，更何况大丈夫行事呢！
English: With the intelligence of ordinary people, they can still deduce the subtleties of reason and reason, explore the key to misfortune and fortune, and can preserve the family generation without worry, fame and history, let alone act well!

古文：是故穷达有命，吉凶由人，婴母知废，陵母知兴，审此四者，帝王之分决矣。
现代文：因此穷困通达自有天命，吉祥不幸则在于个人！陈婴的母亲了解衰败的道理，王陵的母亲明晓兴起的缘由，审察这四点，帝王的名分就可以判断了。
English: Therefore, poverty has its own destiny, and good fortune and misfortune depend on the individual! The mother of the old baby understands the reason for the decline, and the mother of the royal tomb knows the reason for the rise. By examining these four points, the emperor's reputation can be judged.

古文：盖在高祖，其兴也有五：一曰帝尧之苗裔，二曰体貌多奇异，三曰神武有征应，四曰宽明而仁恕，五曰知人善任使。
现代文：至于高祖，他兴起有五方面的原因：一是帝尧的后裔，二是体貌多奇异，三是神武而有帝王之征兆，四是为人宽明而仁恕，五是善于知人善用。
English: As for Gaozu, there are five reasons for his rise: First, he is a descendant of the emperor; second, he has a strange appearance; third, he is a divine warrior and has the signs of an emperor; fourth, he is a generous and forgiving person; and fifth, he is good at getting to know people and using them well.

古文：加之以信诚好谋，达于听受，见善如不及，用人如由己，从谏如顺流，趣时如响赴；当食吐哺，纳子房之策；拔足挥洗，揖郦生之说；寤戍卒之言，断怀土之情；高四皓之名，割肌肤之爱；举韩信于行陈，收陈平于亡命，英雄陈力，群策毕举：此高祖之大略，所以成帝业也。
现代文：加上他待人诚信喜好谋略，善于听取他人建议，看到优点惟恐赶不上，任用他人如用己般信任不疑，采纳正确建议似高山流水般自然，顺应时势像万川归海一样一往无前；效仿周公吐哺之德，得以采用张良的计策；一改边让女子洗脚边接见来访者，才可得闻郦食其的高论；采纳了士兵刘敬的建议，割断对故土的怀恋之情而定都长安。仰慕四位隐逸老者的声名，忍痛割爱没有立戚夫人主子为太子；从普通士兵中起用韩信，于流亡人当中招纳了陈平，天下英雄竭尽己力，提出许多良策：这都是由于高祖有雄才大略，因此才成就帝王之业。
English: In addition, he treats people with sincerity, likes to strategize, is good at listening to other people's suggestions, sees the advantages but is afraid to catch up, trusts others as if he is using himself, adopts the correct suggestions as naturally as the mountains and rivers, and adapts to the current situation as if he were returning to the sea; imitates Zhou Gongpu's virtue of feeding, and can adopt Zhang Liang's strategy; let a woman wash her feet while receiving visitors, and only then can you hear his high theory; adopted the suggestion of the soldier Liu Jing, and cut off the nostalgia for the motherland and settled in Chang'an. Admired the reputation of

古文：若乃灵端符应，又可略闻矣。
现代文：至于那些吉祥灵验的征兆，也大概听说一二。
English: As for those auspicious signs, you've probably heard of one or two.

古文：初刘媪任高祖而梦与神遇，震电晦冥，有龙蛇之怪。
现代文：起初刘媪怀高祖的时候梦见和神人相交合，雷电交加乌云翻滚，有龙蛇显形的奇异事情发生。
English: At first, when Liu Ye was pregnant with Gao Zu, he dreamed of intermingling with gods and mortals, lightning and thunder mixed with dark clouds, and strange things happened with dragons and snakes appearing.

古文：及其长而多灵，有异于众，是以王、武感物而折券，吕公睹形而进女；秦皇东游以厌其气，吕后望云而知所处；始受命则白蛇分，西入关则五星聚。
现代文：等到高祖长大多有灵异之处，往往不同于常人，因此王媪、武负看到高祖醉后有龙附身，便把他所欠酒账一笔勾销。吕公见到高祖相貌奇特，就把女儿许配给他；秦始皇束游是为了镇伏那裹的天子之气，吕后望见天上的云气就知道高祖之所在。高祖当初受命迁往郦山路斩白蛇，向西进驻关中时金、木、水、火、土五星同景辰相聚。
English: By the time Gao Zuo had grown up, most of his actions were supernatural and often different from those of ordinary people. Therefore, when Wang Qian and Wu Wan saw that Gao Zuo was possessed by a dragon after getting drunk, they wrote off his wine bill. Lu Gong saw Gao Zuo's strange appearance and gave him his daughter to marry; Qin Shihuang Zoku You was to restrain the air of the heavenly son, and Lu Houwang saw the clouds in the sky and knew Gao Zuo's whereabouts. Gao Zuo was originally ordered to move to Shaoshan Road to cut the white snake, and when he moved west to Guanzhong,

古文：故淮阴、留侯谓之天授，非人力也。
现代文：所以淮阴侯、留侯都说这是天命所授，而不是人力所为。
English: Therefore, Huaiyin Hou and Ruhou all said that this was given by fate, not by human beings.

古文：历古今之得失，验行事之成败，稽帝王之世运，考五者之所谓，取舍不厌斯位，符端不同斯度，而苟昧于权利，越次妄据，外不量力，内不知命，则必丧保家之主，失天气之寿，遇折足之凶，伏鈇钺之诛。
现代文：纵观古今之得失，考察行事之成败，考证历代帝王的兴衰，考查这五方面的因素，取舍如果和所处地位不相称，灵验的征兆不同于这种标准，如果贪图权力和财富，不安本分而妄图占据高位，自不量力，不知天命，则一定不能保家，不能颐养天年，遭遇如鼎折足一般的凶险，受到鈇铁诛杀的惩罚。
English: Looking at the gains and losses of ancient and modern times, examining the success or failure of actions, examining the rise and fall of emperors throughout the ages, examining these five factors, if the choice is not commensurate with the position, the signs of success are different from this standard, if you covet power and wealth, do not worry about your duty and try to occupy a high position, do not measure yourself, and do not know the fate of the world, you will not be able to keep your home, you will not be able to raise the heavenly years, you will encounter the most common dangers, and you will be punished by the iron sword.

古文：英雄诚知觉寤，畏若祸戒，超然远览，渊然深识，收陵、婴之明分，绝信、布之觊觎，距逐鹿之瞽说，审神器之有授，毋贪不可几，为二母之所笑，则福祚流于子孙，天禄其永终矣。
现代文：英雄能真正明白这种道理而暗自醒悟，害怕因非分之举而遭到上天的谴责，高瞻远瞩，深思熟虑，采取王陵、陈婴清楚自己本分的做法，排除韩信、英布篡夺汉室的非分之想，不信征伐可得天下的妄语，明白帝王的权柄自有天授，不要贪求不可得之事，被王陵、陈婴两位母亲所耻笑，这样就会使福分延及子孙后代，能够永世享受天赐之福！
English: The hero can truly understand this principle and secretly wake up, fearing that he will be condemned by heaven for not being chosen, look ahead, think deeply, take the approach of Wang Ling and Chen Jiao to be clear about his duties, eliminate the thought of Han Xin and Ying Bu usurping the Han Dynasty, do not believe that conquest can obtain the world's nonsense, understand that the emperor's power has its own gift, do not covet what cannot be obtained, and be ridiculed by the two mothers of Wang Ling and Chen Jiao, so that the blessing will be extended to future generations and can enjoy the blessing of heaven forever!

古文：知隗嚣终不寤，乃避地于河西。
现代文：知道隗嚣终究不会醒悟，于是躲避到河西。
English: Knowing that the hubris would not wake up in the end, he fled to Hexi.

古文：河西大将军窦融嘉其美德，访问焉。
现代文：河西大将军窦融赏识他高雅的操行，前去拜访，事事都和他商量。
English: Dou Rong, the general of Hexi Province, appreciated his elegant behavior, went to visit him and discussed everything with him.

古文：举茂材，为徐令，以病去官。
现代文：被举为茂才，出任徐令，因为生病辞去官职。
English: He was promoted to Maocai and assumed the post of Xu Ling, but resigned from the post due to illness.

古文：后数应三公之召。
现代文：以后屡次受到三公的征召。
English: Since then, he has been repeatedly called up by the three princes.

古文：仕不为禄，所如不合；学不为人，博而不俗；言不为华，述而不作。
现代文：任官不苟得禄，因此所往之处，不合其意；作学问不为人所用，学识渊博而不俗陋；言辞不浮华，述而不作。
English: To be appointed to a post, one should not be greedy for the reward, so that the place one goes to is not what one wants; to study is not useful, knowledge is profound but not vulgar; to speak is not flashy, to describe is not to make.

古文：有子曰固，弱冠而孤，作《幽通之赋》，以致命遂志。
现代文：班彪有子叫班固，二十岁时父亲去世，他作《幽通之赋》，以陈述吉凶性命，来表明自己的心志。
English: The son of Ban Biao was called Ban Gu. When his father died at the age of twenty, he wrote "Yutong no Fu" (The Gift of Yutong) to express his will by describing the nature of good and evil.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：赋文写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：系高顼之玄胄兮，氏中叶之炳灵，由凯风而蝉蜕兮，雄朔野以飏声。
现代文：班氏奉是颛项的后裔，家世中叶在楚国显出赫赫神灵，楚亡后离开了故土，又雄据北方晋、代之地远扬声名。
English: The Ban clan is believed to be a descendant of the Jurchen. In the middle of the family's history, a great deity appeared in the state of Chu. After the death of Chu, he left his native land and became famous in the northern Jin Dynasty.

古文：皇十纪而鸿渐兮，有羽仪于上京。
现代文：漠皇十世时官居高位，旌旗仪仗显耀在天子京城。
English: At the time of Emperor Mu X, officials held high positions, and the flag-raising ceremony was held in the Imperial Capital.

古文：巨滔天而泯夏兮，考遘愍以行谣，终保已而贻则兮，里上仁之所庐。
现代文：王莽罪恶滔天几亡汉室，我父遇祸乱高歌远行，终于保全自己并为民做出表率，像上古仁人一样逃避时凶。
English: Wang Mang's crimes were so monstrous that he almost destroyed the Han family. My father, when disaster struck, traveled far and wide, and finally saved himself and set an example for the people. Like the benevolent people of ancient times, he escaped the worst of times.

古文：懿前烈之纯淑兮，穷与达其必济，咨孤矇之眇眇兮，将圮绝而罔阶，岂余身之足殉兮？
现代文：懿美先祖多么贤善英明，穷困显达都能够救济黎民。可叹我自幼身孤势单力薄，恐怕要断送祖业而无路以成名，难道我身不足以营谋先人之业？
English: How wise and virtuous our ancestors were. They were able to help the people even when they were in dire straits. However, I have been so weak and powerless since I was a child. I am afraid that I will have to give up my ancestral heritage and will have no way to become famous. Am I not strong enough to work for the cause of my ancestors?

古文：韪世业之可怀。
现代文：我为家世衰微而深怀长恨。
English: I have a deep and abiding hatred for the decline of my family.

古文：靖潜处以永思兮，经日月而弥远，匪党人之敢拾兮，庶斯言之不玷。
现代文：幽室隐居不尽长思，岁月悠悠而心绪渺远，不敢与有德行之人并肩比善，怕玷辱先祖而恪守善行。
English: Seclusion in a secluded room is not enough for long-term thinking, the years are long and the mood is far away, do not dare to stand side by side with those who are virtuous, and adhere to good deeds for fear of dishonoring ancestors.

古文：魂茕茕与神交兮，精诚发于宵寐，梦登山而迥眺兮，觌幽人之仿佛，揽葛藟而授余兮，眷峻谷曰勿隧。
现代文：心魂常常与神灵交会，精诚往往发于深夜之中，睡梦中我登山远眺，仿佛看到了幽谷的神人，他手执葛万交给我，回望峻谷告诉我勿坠深渊。
English: My heart and soul often cross paths with the gods. My sincerity often arises in the middle of the night. In my sleep, I climb mountains and look into the distance. It's as if I've seen a god-man in a remote valley. He holds Ge Wan in his hand and gives it to me. Looking back at the steep valley, he tells me not to fall into the abyss.

古文：昒昕寤而仰思兮，心蒙蒙犹未察，黄神邈而靡质兮，仪遗谶以臆对。
现代文：清晨醒来我仰卧冥思，心智朦胧未知吉凶。黄帝遥远我无人可问，只好臆度谶书臆猜于胸。
English: Waking up in the early morning, I lay on my back and meditated, my mind hazy with the unknown fortunes and misfortunes. The Yellow Emperor was far away and I had no one to ask, so I had to spend my time reading books and guessing.

古文：曰乘高而神兮，道遐通而不迷，葛绵绵于樛木兮，咏《南风》以为绥，盖惴惴之临深兮，乃《二雅》之所祗。
现代文：书中说梦中登高遇神，将是道术遐通而不迷津。葛万缠连于穋木，歌咏《南风》是安乐的象征，心中恐惧如临深渊，乃知《诗经。小雅》中两篇诗的诫劝。
English: In the book, it is said that if one ascends to a high place in a dream and meets a god, one will be able to practice Taoism without getting lost. Ge Wan is entangled in a camphor tree, the song "South Wind" is a symbol of happiness, and the fear in one's heart is like approaching the abyss, but one knows the exhortation of two poems in the "Shijing. Xiao Ya."

古文：既谇尔以吉象兮，又申之以炯戒：盍孟晋以迨群兮？辰倏忽其不再。
现代文：梦境已经告诉我吉祥的象征，神明又给我以警戒。为什么不及早进仕以赶上同辈贤人，时光倏忽而逝不会再来。
English: The dream has already told me the auspicious symbol, and the gods have given me a warning. Why not enter the service early to catch up with your peers and sages? Time passes quickly and will not come again.

古文：承灵训其虚徐兮，伫盘桓而且俟，惟天地之无穷兮，鲜生民之脢生。
现代文：虽承神灵训诫而且怀疑，久久盘桓而难以前进。只有天地长久而无穷，孤苦的人生多么短暂。
English: Although he accepts the divine spirit's admonition and doubts, it is difficult to move forward for a long time. Only heaven and earth are long and endless, how short a lonely life is.

古文：纷屯亶与蹇连兮，何艰多而智寡！
现代文：纷繁的世间险阻重重，奈何艰难太多智慧太少。
English: The world is full of dangers and obstacles, but there are too many difficulties and too little wisdom.

古文：上圣寤而后拔兮，岂群黎之所御！
现代文：上古圣贤遇纷难而能醒悟自拔，凡夫俗子岂能预先防止！
English: The sages of ancient times were able to wake up and extricate themselves in the face of difficulties, but ordinary people can't prevent it in advance!

古文：昔卫叔之御昆兮，昆为寇而丧予。管弯弧欲毙雠兮，雠作后而成已。
现代文：当年卫叔武握发迎接他的哥哥成公，成公反而把他当作敌人射死。
English: At that time, Wei Shu Wu shook his head to greet his brother Cheng Gong, but Cheng Gong shot him dead as an enemy.

古文：变化故而相诡兮，孰云豫其终始！
现代文：管仲弯弓要射死仇敌公子小白，桓公即位后竟命其为宰相。事物的变化是多么难以预料啊，谁能预测出它的终始！
English: Guanzhong bent his bow to shoot his enemy, Prince Xiao Bai, and after Prince Kan ascended the throne, he actually appointed him as prime minister. How difficult it is to predict the changes of things, who can predict its beginning and end!

古文：雍造怨而先赏兮，丁繇惠而被戮，取吊于逌吉兮，王膺庆于所慼。
现代文：雍齿不满却最先受赏，丁公施恩惠反被杀戮；桌妃因为受宠而招致灾难，王徒仔由于忧伤而获得幸运。
English: Yang Zi was dissatisfied but was the first to be rewarded. Ding Gong was killed for doing favors; the table concubine was favored and caused a disaster. Wang Tu Zi was sad and got lucky.

古文：畔回冗其若兹兮，北叟颇识其倚伏。
现代文：世事乖违竞至于此，塞北老翁却能够认识到祸福相倚的道理。
English: As far as this is concerned, the northern Siberian old man is able to recognize the principle of the interdependence of good and evil.

古文：单治里而外凋兮，张修襮而内逼，聿中和为庶几兮，颇与冉又不得。
现代文：单豹调理体内五脏却为猛虎所伤，张毅外修礼仪却发内热而死。有人说中庸之道可以使人免于灾难，可是颜回、冉有又都不得意。
English: A lone leopard has its internal organs conditioned, but is injured by a ferocious tiger; Zhang Yi's external ritual is killed by internal heat. Some people say that the way of moderation can save people from disaster, but Yan Hui and Ran You are both disappointed.

古文：溺招路以从已兮，谓孔氏犹未可，安慆々而不萉兮，卒陨身乎世祸，游圣门而靡救兮，顾覆醢其何处？
现代文：桀溺招引子路跟随自己，说孔子道也无济于世。
English: He said that Confucianism is of no help to the world.

古文：固行行其必凶兮，免盗乱为赖道；形气发于根柢兮，柯叶汇而灵茂。
现代文：子路不避纷纷乱世，终于在乱世中被杀。虽游学圣贤之门也未得救助，即使盖上肉醢又有何补益呢？过于刚强必遭凶险，免于祸乱还有赖于圣人之道；万物的生气皆发于根柢，根柢强壮才能枝叶茂盛。
English: Paths do not avoid the turbulent world, and finally they are killed in the turbulent world. Although the door of the traveling sage has not been rescued, even if it is covered with flesh, what is the benefit? If it is too strong, it will be in danger. To be free from evil, it depends on the path of the sage. The vitality of all things comes from the root, and the strong root can make the branches flourish.

古文：恐网蜽之责景兮，庆未得其云已。
现代文：魍魉竟至责备影子，这都是未得大道的体现。
English: It is the embodiment of the road not taken, even to the point of blaming the shadow.

古文：黎淳耀于高辛兮，羋强大于南汜；嬴取威于百仪兮，姜本支乎三止：既仁得其信然兮，卬天路而同轨。
现代文：重黎昌明于高辛之时，楚国在长江一带称强；秦国由于伯益而扬威于六国；齐国因三礼而兴盛。求仁得仁何其诚信，仰枧天道亦同法理。
English: At the time of Chongli Changming in Gaoxin, Chu State was strong in the Yangtze River area; Qin State was strong in the Six Kingdoms due to Bo Yi; Qi State was prosperous due to Sanli. Seeking benevolence and getting benevolence is nothing but good faith, and the Way of Heaven is also the same as the law.

古文：东邻虐而歼仁兮，王合位乎三五；戎女烈而丧孝兮，伯徂归于龙虎：发还师以成性兮，重醉行而自耦。
现代文：商纣暴虐杀害三仁，周武王得五位三所故成天子；骊姬残酷致使孝子身亡，晋文公龙年出行而于虎年归国；周武王还师终成天命，重耳醉行正与天命相合。
English: Shangqiu brutally killed Sanren, and King Zhouwu had five sons and three daughters who became gods; Zou Ji cruelly caused the death of a filial son, Jinwen traveled in the year of the dragon and returned to the country in the year of the tiger; King Zhouwu also learned to fulfill the destiny of heaven, and his heavy drinking was in line with the destiny of heaven.

古文：《震》鳞漦于夏庭兮，匝三正而灭姬；《巽》羽化于宣官兮，弥五辟而成灾。
现代文：神龙流涎于夏帝王廷，经过三代竟亡周国。汉宣帝宫中有雌鸡化雄，过了五世终酿成灾祸。
English: The divine dragon lurked in the court of Emperor Xia, and after three generations, Zhou died. There was a male chicken in the palace of Emperor Han Xuan, and after the fifth generation, it eventually led to disaster.

古文：道悠长而世短兮，敻冥默而不周，胥仍物而鬼诹兮，乃穷宙而达幽。
现代文：天道悠悠而人世短暂，邈远冥然不可尽知，必须藉助卜筮而谋诸鬼神，藉此以穷古今通幽微。
English: The way of heaven is long, but the life of man is short, and the distance is immeasurable. It is necessary to seek ghosts and gods with the help of divination, and by doing so, it is possible to know the past and the present.

古文：妫巢姜于孺筮兮，旦算祀于挈龟。
现代文：陈完少年时占卜得知将来必占有齐国，史书上有周公用龟甲占卦的记载。
English: When Chen was a teenager, he learned from divination that he would occupy Qi in the future. There is a record of Zhou using tortoise shell to occupy Qi in history books.

古文：宣、曹兴败于下梦兮，鲁、卫名谥于铭谣。
现代文：周宣王、曹伯阳都在下人的梦境中预示了他们的兴败，鲁成公、卫灵公是在铭谣中预示了谧名。
English: Zhou Xuan Wang and Cao Boyang both foreshadowed their success or failure in the dreams of their subordinates, while Lu Chenggong and Wei Linggong foreshadowed their disgrace in the legends.

古文：妣聆呱而刻石兮，许相理而鞠条。
现代文：叔向的母亲听到伯石的哭声而知道他是亡晋之人，许负从周亚夫脸部的纹理看出他以后必定会饿死。
English: Uncle Xiang's mother heard Bo Shih's cries and knew that he was a dead man from Jin. She could tell from the texture of Zhou Yafu's face that he would surely starve to death in the future.

古文：道混成而自然兮，术同原而分流。
现代文：大道浑然一体而成于自然，道术虽分派歧流其发源却相同。
English: The Daido is a seamless whole created by nature, and although there are different schools of Daoism, their origins are the same.

古文：神先心以定命兮，命随行以消息。
现代文：神明先于人心而注定命运，命运随着人的行为而变化。
English: The gods predetermine the fate of the people, and the fate changes with the behavior of the people.

古文：翰流迁其不济兮，故遭罹而赢缩。
现代文：世事如瀚流滚滚没有止息，人生的祸福遭遇时有赢亏。
English: There is no end to the world's affairs like a torrent, and there are gains and losses in life's misfortunes and blessings.

古文：三栾同于一体兮，虽移盈然不忒。
现代文：乐氏三代本是一脉相承，虽世代变化却不差半点报应。
English: The three generations of the Le family are basically the same lineage, but although there are generational changes, they are not far apart.

古文：洞参差其纷错兮，斯众兆之所惑。
现代文：洞悉天道幽微纷乱，因此众人迷惑不醒。
English: He was aware of the subtle turmoil in the heavenly path, and as a result, people were confused and confused.

古文：周、贾荡而贡愤兮，齐死生与祸福，抗爽言以矫情兮，信畏牺而忌服。
现代文：庄周、贾谊思想狂诞惑乱，宣扬齐生死、一祸福的理论。高谈阔论而违反本心，实际上是怕作牺牛和鹏鸟。
English: The thoughts of Zhuang Zhou and Jia Youi are crazy and confusing, and they propagate the theory of equal life and death, and one misfortune and good fortune. They talk a lot and violate their original intention, but in fact, they are afraid of being sacrificed cattle and birds.

古文：所贵圣人之至论兮，顺天性而断谊。
现代文：可贵的是圣人的至理名言啊，顺应天性而且以道义为决断的依据。
English: Precious are the wise sayings of the sages, who obeyed their nature and based their decisions on morality.

古文：物有欲而不居兮，亦有恶而不避，守孔约而不贰兮，乃輶德而无累。
现代文：富贵是人之所欲但不合道义君子不敢呀，死亡是人所厌恶的但若因守道而死则不逃避。守道恒一不持两端呵，立心轻虑不为物欲所累。
English: Riches and honours are what men desire, but they are not moral. A gentleman dares not take them. Death is abhorred by men, but if a man dies in the way of virtue, he does not escape.

古文：三仁殊而一致兮，夷、惠舛而齐声。
现代文：三位仁人行事虽异但同致于仁呀，伯夷、柳下惠去留有别而同得美名。
English: Although the three benevolent people act differently, they are all benevolent. Bo Yi and Liu Shimo Hui are different, but they have the same reputation.

古文：木偃息以蕃魏兮，申重茧以存荆。
现代文：段干木安卧居室而保卫了魏国，申包胥双脚磨出了厚茧才保存了楚国。
English: Duan Ganmu and his bedchamber defended the State of Wei, while Shen Baozhen's feet wore out the thick planks to save the State of Chu.

古文：纪焚躬以卫上兮，晧颐志而弗营。
现代文：纪信焚身来保卫皇上啊，四皓坚守操节而不迷惑。
English: Jixin burned himself to defend the emperor, and the four emperors adhered to discipline and did not cause trouble.

古文：侯草木之区别兮，苟能实而必荣。
现代文：就是草木也有类别的划分，人能实践仁义之道则必得荣名。
English: Even plants and trees are divided into categories, and those who can practice the way of benevolence and righteousness are sure to be honored.

古文：要没世而不朽兮，乃先民之所程。
现代文：人死后应该声名不朽啊，这是先哲遵循的正道。
English: People should be immortalized after death. This is the right path followed by the sages.

古文：观天罔之纮覆兮，实棐谌而相顺，谟先圣之大繇兮，亦邻德而助信。
现代文：观天网恢弘包容万象，实是辅助诚信保护善良，谋求先圣的济世之道，有德的人必有志同道合的友人，诚信的人一定会得到别人的辅助。
English: Guan Tianwang is vast and tolerant of all things. In fact, it is to support honesty, protect goodness, and seek the pre-sacred way of benefiting the world. A virtuous person must have like-minded friends, and a person of integrity must be supported by others.

古文：虞《韶》美而仪凤兮，孔忘味于千载。
现代文：虞舜的《韶》乐优美引的凤凰来朝，干百年后还使孔子听而忘味。
English: After a hundred years, the phoenix coming to the North, beautifully introduced by Yu Xi's "Cherry Blossoms," still made Confucius forget the taste.

古文：素文信而底麟兮，汉宾祚于异代。
现代文：素王文章彰显礼仪而招来麒麟，汉朝于异代加以追谧追封。
English: Su Wang's essay highlights the etiquette and invites Kirin, and the Han Dynasty pursues it in different generations.

古文：精通灵而感物兮，神动气而入微。
现代文：精神能与神通则可感动万物呵，神动气运而能达到微妙的境界。
English: The spiritual energy and supernatural power can move all things, and the divine power can move the atmosphere and reach a subtle realm.

古文：养游睇而猿号兮，李虎发而石开。
现代文：养由基搭弓转目猿猴即号叫哇，李广箭发而石开。
English: Raised from the base of the bow and arrow to the eye of the monkey is called wow, Li Guang arrow hair and stone open.

古文：非精诚其焉通兮，苟无实其孰信！
现代文：不是至诚如何能通灵感物呢，如果没有实效谁又会相信！
English: If there is no effect, who would believe it!

古文：操末技犹必然兮，矧湛躬于道真！
现代文：掌握了矢射这样的小技还能感应于猿石，何况执着于大道呢！
English: Having mastered such a small skill as archery, he can still feel the ape stone, not to mention his obsession with the highway!

古文：登孔、颢而上下兮，纬群龙之所经，朝贞观而夕化兮，犹喧已而遗形，若胤彭而偕老兮，诉来哲以通情。
现代文：自孔子、太颢直到今天，经纬天道有多少先哲圣贤。朝闻大道傍晚就死去也可以，还可以忘了自己遣弃躯骸。如果能像彭祖、老聃一样长寿，我将告诉来者以幽通之情。
English: From Confucius and Taichung to the present day, there are so many sages and sages in the warp and weft of heaven and earth. You can die at dusk on the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the evening of the evening of the evening of the evening of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning of the evening of the evening of the evening of the evening of the morning of the evening of the morning of the morning of the morning of the morning

古文：乱曰： 天造草昧，立性命兮，复心弘道，惟贤圣兮。
现代文：乱曰：天造万物于冥昧之中，并确定他们的性命呵，恢复本心弘扬大道呀，衹有圣贤才可以做到呀。
English: Ru said: Heaven created all things in the darkness, and determined their lives, restored the original heart and promoted the road, and only saints and sages can do it.

古文：浑元运物，流不处兮，保身遗名，民之表兮。
现代文：天地之元气运动万物，周流而不停息呀，保全自己并留下美名，为民众的表率呵。
English: The vitality of heaven and earth moves all things, circulates without stopping, preserves itself and leaves a good name, and is a model for the people.

古文：舍生取谊，亦道用兮，忧伤夭物，忝莫痛兮！
现代文：舍生取义，去实践大道啊，为外物所天而忧伤不已，那是莫大的耻辱和痛苦呵！
English: To give up one's life to attain righteousness, to walk the path of practice, to be saddened by external things, that is a great shame and pain!

古文：昊尔太素，曷渝色兮？
现代文：守死善道不染流俗，又怎么会变色呢？
English: How can it change its color if it sticks to the virtuous path and does not dye with vulgarity?

古文：尚粤其几，沦神城兮！
现代文：守道通幽，则几于神明啊！
English: If you guard the path, you are more than a god!

古文：永平中为郎，典校秘书，专笃志于博学，以著述为业。
现代文：永平年间班固为郎，负责校雠皇家藏书，一味专心于博学，以著述为业。
English: During the Yongping era, he was the son of Ban Gu, who was in charge of editing the imperial collection of books. He devoted himself to learning and writing.

古文：或讥以无功，又感东方朔、扬雄自谕以不遭苏、张、范、蔡之时，曾不折之以正道，明君子之所守，故聊复应焉。
现代文：有人讥笑说这没有什么实际功用，同时又感到东方朔、扬雄等自以为没有遇到苏秦、张仪、范雎、蔡泽生活的时代，而没有用堂堂正正的道理去说服对方，表明君子的操守，故聊且答覆一下那些讥笑者。
English: Some people scoffed that this was of no practical use. At the same time, they felt that Dongfang Shuo, Yang Xiong and others thought that they had not encountered the era in which Su Qin, Zhang Yi, Fan Qi and Cai Ze lived, and did not use the noble and upright reason to convince the other party and show the gentleman's conduct, so they chatted and answered those scoffers.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：那篇文章写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：宾戏主人曰： 盖闻圣人有一定之论，列士有不易之分，亦云名而已矣。
现代文：宾客嘲笑主人道： 听说圣人有确定不移的言论，贤士有不改变的职分，也衹是崇尚名声。
English: The guests ridiculed the host: It is said that sages have certain and unshakable words, and sages have unchanging duties, but they are also advocates of fame.

古文：故太上有立德，其次有立功。
现代文：因此上圣要树立德业，其次要建立功勋。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to establish a virtuous career, and secondly, it is necessary to establish merits.

古文：夫德不得后身而特盛，功不得背时而独章，是以圣哲之治，栖栖皇皇，孔席不暧，墨突不黔。
现代文：德业不会在死后才特别兴盛，功勋若不合时宜也不会彰显，因此圣人的立身行事，忙忙碌碌，来去匆匆。孔子坐着待不到席子温暖，墨子安居也等不到烟囱被熏黑。
English: Virtue does not flourish especially after death, and merit does not shine if it is out of time. Therefore, sages act on their own initiative, are busy, and come and go quickly. Confucius could not sit and wait for the mat to be warm, and Mozi could not wait for the chimney to be blackened.

古文：由此言之，取舍者昔人之上务，著作者前列之余事耳。
现代文：由此推论，施行道德是先哲的首要任务，着述衹是前贤的小事而已。
English: From this, it is deduced that the implementation of morality is the primary task of the sages, and writing is a small matter for the sages.

古文：今吾子幸游帝王之世，躬带冕之服，浮英华，湛道德，矕龙虎之文，旧矣。
现代文：如今你有幸生在圣明的时代，身着宽衣博带，在外边有美好的声誉，内则有很高的修养道德，而且又有很好的文采，已经很长时间了。
English: It's been a long time since you were lucky enough to be born in the era of enlightenment, wearing a broad robe, with a good reputation on the outside, and a high degree of self-cultivation and morality on the inside, and a good literary taste.

古文：卒不能摅首尾，奋翼鳞，振拔洿涂，跨腾风云，使见之者景骇，闻之者响震。
现代文：却始终没有昂首伸尾，奋翼振鳞，超于污泥之外，腾于风云之上，使人看到影子就骇怕，听到响声就震恐。
English: However, it has never held its head high, stretched its tail, and strained its wings, rising above the sludge, soaring above the wind and clouds, so that people are horrified to see the shadow and shocked to hear the sound.

古文：徒乐枕经籍书，纡体衡门，上无所蒂，下无所根。
现代文：徒然陶醉于头枕经典，身卧书籍，让自己委屈于破庐旧舍，上没有人援引，下无依靠。
English: In vain to revel in the headrest classics, lying books, let themselves be wronged by the dilapidated old house, no one to invoke, and no one to rely on.

古文：独摅意乎宇宙之外，锐思于豪芒之内，潜神默记，恒以年岁。
现代文：惟独肆意冥想宇宙之外，精心思考于细微之中，专心致志于默默记诵，经年累月。
English: But only to meditate wildly outside the universe, to think carefully in the subtleties, to devote oneself to silent recitation, over the years.

古文：然而器不贾于当已，用不效于一世，虽驰辩如涛波，摛藻如春华，犹无益于殿最。
现代文：然而，才能不能在有生之年发挥出来，功用不能贡献于当代，即使纵横辩论如波涛汹涌，铺张辞藻似春花怒放，仍是无益于考评政绩。
English: However, talent cannot be brought into play in one's lifetime, and merit cannot be contributed to the present. Even if the vertical and horizontal debates are turbulent, and the rhetoric is like a spring flower, it is still not beneficial to evaluate political performance.

古文：意者，且运朝夕之策，定合会之计，使存有显号，亡有美谥，不亦优乎？ 
现代文：想来还是考虑很快可以见效的办法，采取能赢得朝野赏识的手段，使自己活着时有显赫的声名，死后有美好的谧号，不也是更高明吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be wiser to think about something that would have an immediate effect, something that would win the respect of the emperor and the people, so that you would have a great reputation when you are alive and a wonderful nickname when you are dead?

古文：主人逌尔而笑曰： 若宾之言，斯所谓见势利之华，暗道德之实，守突奥之荧烛，未仰天庭而睹白日也。
现代文：主人悠然而笑道： 像客人的议论，正是所谓衹看到势利的表面，却没有认识到道德的功效，守住屋子角落的微弱灯光，没有仰头看到天空中灿烂的太阳。
English: The host said with a slow smile: Just like the guest's discussion, it is the so-called baboons who see the surface of snobbery, but do not recognize the efficacy of morality, keep the faint light in the corner of the house, and do not look up to see the brilliant sun in the sky.

古文：曩者王涂芜秽，周失其御，侯伯方轨，战国横骛，于是七雄虓阚，分裂诸夏，龙战而虎争。
现代文：从前王道荒废，周朝失去了王权，诸侯争霸，列国角逐，七雄相争，分裂中原，龙争虎斗。
English: Once upon a time, the royal road was deserted, the Zhou Dynasty lost its royal power, princes fought for supremacy, nations competed, seven men fought, the Central Plains were divided, and dragons fought against tigers.

古文：游说之徒，风扬电激，并起而救之，其余猋飞景附，煜霅其间者，盖不可胜载，当此之时，搦朽摩钝，铅刀皆能一断，是故鲁连飞一矢而蹶千金，虞卿以顾眄而捐相印也。
现代文：游说之徒，奔走游说，并起而救之，其余像疾风一样追随诸侯，而显赫一时的人，更是不可胜数。在那个时候，各逞其能，铅刀都能发挥作用，因此鲁仲连发一箭而破敌，受千金而辞谢，虞卿一转眼便抛弃相位。
English: At that time, everyone did his best, and the lead knife could play a role. Therefore, Lu Zhong repeatedly shot an arrow and defeated the enemy, received a lot of money and resigned, and Yu Jing abandoned the phase in the blink of an eye.

古文：夫啾发投曲，感耳之声，合之律度，淫蛙而不可听者，非《韶》、《夏》之乐也；因势合变，偶时之会，风移俗易，乖忤而不可通者，非君子之法也。
现代文：那种随口唱出的歌曲，悦耳的声音，用乐律的标准来衡量，却是淫邪轻佻，不堪入耳的，并不是《韶》、《夏》一样的音乐；那种顺应形势合于时变，偶然契合时机，但到社会风气改变之后，便抵触而不通的道术，不是君子的原则。
English: The kind of songs that are sung out of the mouth, the pleasant sound, measured by the standard of the melody, but it is lewd, frivolous, and unbearable to the ear, is not the same music as "Summer"; the kind of music that adapts to the situation according to the time change, coincidentally fits the time, but after the social climate changes, it is not the principle of a gentleman.

古文：及至从人合之，衡人散之，亡命漂说，羁旅骋辞，商鞅挟三术以钻孝公，李斯奋时务而要始皇，彼皆蹑风云之会，履颠沛之势，据徼乘邪以求一日之富贵，朝为荣华，夕而焦瘁，福不盈眦，祸溢于世，凶人且以自悔，况吉士而是赖乎！
现代文：至于合纵之人纠合众国，连横之徒拆散联盟，逃亡他国夸夸其谈，流浪异邦振振有词，商鞅身怀帝道王道和霸道去投奔秦孝公，李斯高谈时务来取悦秦始皇，他们都是趁着有利的时机，遭逢动乱的局势，依靠侥幸利用邪术来求一时之富贵，早晨茂盛，傍晚便凋零，富贵尚未看上一眼，灾祸就已临头，歹徒还因此白悔，更何况是正人君子呢，又岂能利用这些办法？
English: As for the conspirators to split the United States, the traitors to break up the alliance, the fugitives to flee to other countries, the wandering foreigners, the negotiators to go to Qin Xiaogong with the imperial way and the domineering way, and the liars to talk about the current affairs to please Qin Shihuang, they are all taking advantage of the favorable opportunity, the turbulent situation, relying on luck to use magic to seek temporary wealth, the morning is prosperous, the evening is withered, the wealth has not seen a glance, the disaster is imminent, the gangsters are still unrepentant, let alone the upright gentleman, and can they use these methods

古文：且功不可以虚成，名不可以伪立，韩设辩以徼君，吕行诈以贾国。
现代文：并且功业不可以凭虚伪建成，名声不可以靠诈伪树立，韩非巧设辩辞而讨好君主，吕不韦施行诈术以金钱购得权力。
English: Moreover, achievements cannot be built on the basis of hypocrisy, fame cannot be established by fraud, Han Fei made clever arguments to please the monarch, and Lü Buwei practiced fraud to purchase power with money.

古文：《说难》既酋，其身乃囚；秦货既贵，厥宗亦隧。
现代文：《说难》等篇章写成了，韩非也被囚禁；秦即位之后，吕不韦的家族也被诛灭。
English: "Difficult to Say" and other chapters were written, Han Fei was also imprisoned; after Qin ascended the throne, Lü Buwei's family was also annihilated.

古文：是故仲尼抗浮云之志，孟轲养浩然之气，彼岂乐为迂阔哉？
现代文：因此孔子张扬富贵如浮云的志气，孟轲修养至大至刚的正气，他们难道是乐于为迂阔的言论吗？
English: Therefore, Confucius propagated the aspiration of being rich as a floating cloud, and Meng Qi cultivated the righteous spirit of being big and strong. Are they happy to make broad statements?

古文：道不可以贰也。
现代文：而是因为正道是不可以怀疑的。
English: Rather, it is because the right path cannot be doubted.

古文：方今大汉洒扫群秽，夷险芟荒，廓帝纮，恢皇纲，基隆于羲、农，规广于黄、唐；其君天下也，炎之如日，威之如神，函之如海，养之如春。
现代文：如今大汉肃清天下，除去危险平服四方。强化国纪，弘扬皇纲，基业比伏羲、神农还深厚，规模比黄帝、唐尧还广大；大汉统治天下，它普照百姓如阳光，监视人民如神灵，宽容黎民似大海，养育苍生像春天。
English: Nowadays, the Great Han cleans up the world, removes dangers and satisfies all sides. Strengthens national discipline, promotes the imperial system, the foundation is deeper than Fuxi and Shennong, and the scale is larger than the Yellow Emperor and Tang Dynasty; the Great Han rules the world, it shines on the people like sunshine, monitors the people like gods, tolerates the people like the sea, and nurtures the living beings like spring.

古文：是以六合之内，莫不同原共流，沐浴玄德，禀仰太和，枝附叶著，譬犹草木之殖山林，鸟鱼之毓川泽，得气者蕃滋，失时者苓落，参天地而施化，岂云人事之厚薄哉？
现代文：所以普天之下，没有不同源共流，沐浴在广博深远的德泽之中，享受太平幸福，如枝附于树，叶着于枝，好比是草木生长于山林，鸟鱼生活于山川河泽之中，适应气候就繁殖，不合季节就零落，效法天地而普施化育，难道是人力的厚彼薄此吗？
English: Therefore, under the whole heaven, there is no confluence of different sources, basking in the vast and far-reaching virtue, enjoying peace and happiness, such as branches attached to trees, leaves attached to branches, like plants growing in mountains and forests, birds and fish living in mountains and rivers, adapting to the climate and breeding, out of season and scattered, imitating heaven and earth and universal chemical breeding, is it the strength of human power?

古文：今子处皇世而论战国，耀所闻而疑所觌，欲从旄敦而度高乎泰山，怀氿滥而测深乎重渊，亦未至也。 
现代文：现在你生活在太平盛世却谈论战国的事情，被传闻迷惑而怀疑眼见的事实，想以土丘的标准去度泰山，想以细流的深度去测量深渊，也是不合道理的。 
English: It is also unreasonable for you to live in a time of peace and prosperity and yet talk about the events of the Warring States, to be confused by rumors and doubt the facts you see, to want to measure Mount Tai with the standard of a mound, and to want to measure the abyss with the depth of a trickle.

古文：宾曰： 若夫鞅、斯之伦，衰周之凶人，既闻命矣。
现代文：宾客说： 商鞅、李斯那些人，是周末乱世的恶人，关于他们的命运我已经知道了。
English: The guest said: Shang Jun and Li Si, those people, are the villains of the weekend chaos, and I already know about their fate.

古文：敢问上古之士，处身行道，辅世成名，可述于后者，默而已乎？ 
现代文：冒昧地问一下，上古的士人，那些处世行道，辅世成名，为后人所称道的，是默默地终其一生吗？ 
English: Dare I ask, did the ancient scholars, those who made their way in the world, became famous, and were praised by posterity, end their lives in silence?

