古文：袁昂子君正袁昂，字千里，陈郡阳夏人。
现代文：袁昂字千里，是陈郡阳夏人。
English: Yuan Angzili is a native of Yangxia, Chen County.

古文：祖询，宋征虏将军、吴郡太守，父抃，冠军将军、雍州刺史，泰始初，举兵奉晋安王子勋，事败诛死。
现代文：祖父袁洵，是宋朝征虏将军、吴郡太守。父亲袁颢，是冠军将军、雍州刺史，泰始初年，起兵拥立晋安王子勋，事败被杀。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Qi, was a general of the Song Dynasty and the governor of Wu County. His father, Yuan Qi, was a champion general and the governor of Yongzhou. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he raised an army to support the Prince of Jinan, but was defeated and killed.

古文：昂时年五岁，乳媪携抱匿于庐山，会赦得出，犹徙晋安。至元徽中听还，时年十五。
现代文：袁昂时年五岁，乳母携抱藏到庐山，碰到赦罪才得出山，迁往晋安，到元徽年间听许回乡，时年十五岁。
English: When Yuan Ang was five years old, his nanny took him to Shaoshan to hide him. When he was pardoned, he came out of the mountain and moved to Jin'an. During the Yuan Hui Dynasty, he was allowed to return to his hometown at the age of fifteen.

古文：初，抃败，传首京师，藏于武库，至是始还之。
现代文：当初，袁频起兵败，首级传到京师，藏在武库，现在才被送回。
English: At first, Yuan Fang was defeated, and his head was sent to the Beijing division, hidden in the arsenal, and has only now been returned.

古文：昂号恸呕血，绝而复苏，从兄彖尝抚视抑譬，昂更制服，庐于墓次。
现代文：袁昂号哭呕血，死去活来，从兄袁彖曾抚养教育他，袁昂换上丧服，在墓地建屋居住。
English: Yuan Ang cried and vomited blood, died and came back to life. He was raised and educated by his brother, Yuan Xuan. Yuan Ang changed into funeral clothes and built a house in the cemetery.

古文：后与彖同见从叔司徒粲，粲谓彖曰： 其幼孤而能至此，故知名器自有所在。 
现代文：后来与袁彖同去拜见堂叔司徒袁粲，袁粲对袁彖说： 他幼孤而能表现这样，故知爵位名号自有所在。 
English: Later, together with Yuan Qi, he went to pay homage to his uncle Yuan Qi. Yuan Qi said to Yuan Qi: He is young and can behave like this, so he knows that the title of knighthood is inherent.

古文：齐初，起家冠军安成王行参军，迁征虏主簿，太子舍人，王俭镇军府功曹史。
现代文：齐朝初年，起初作冠军安成王行参军，迁任征虏主簿，太子舍人，王俭镇军府功曹史。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, the champion Ancheng Wangxing joined the army, was transferred to the main book of conscription, the prince was absent, and Wang Jianzhen's military post was awarded.

古文：俭时为京尹，经于后堂独引见昂，指北堂谓昂曰： 卿必居此。 
现代文：王俭当时任京尹，曾经在后堂单独引见袁昂，指着北堂对袁昂说： 卿一定会居住此地。 
English: Wang Jian, who held the post of Beijing Yin at that time, once introduced Yuan Ang to him alone in the back hall, pointing to the north hall and saying to Yuan Ang: Sir will definitely live here.

古文：累迁秘书丞，黄门侍郎。
现代文：累迁任秘书丞，黄门侍郎。
English: He was successively appointed as secretary, secretary, and attendant of Huangmen.

古文：昂本名千里，齐永明中，武帝谓之曰： 昂昂千里之驹，在卿有之，今改卿名为昂。即千里为字。 
现代文：袁昂本名叫千里，齐朝永明年间，武帝对他说： 昂昂千里之驹，你的名字包含此意，今改卿名为袁昂，就用千里为字。 
English: Yuan Ang's original name was Qianli, and Emperor Wu said to him during the reign of the Qin Dynasty: "Aung Ang, son of Qianli, your name contains this meaning. Now that you have changed your name to Yuan Ang, use Qianli as the character."

古文：出为安南鄱阳王长史、寻阳公相。
现代文：出任安南鄱阳王长史、寻阳公相。
English: He served as Annan's Yang di-Pertuan Agong and Minister of Public Security.

古文：还为太孙中庶子、卫军武陵王长史。
现代文：还任太孙中庶子、卫军武陵王长史。
English: He was also the great-great-grandson of an illegitimate son, Wuling Wang Changshi.

古文：丁内忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：母亲去世，居丧尽依礼节。
English: When my mother died, the funeral was conducted with the utmost decorum.

古文：服未除而从兄彖卒。
现代文：未除服而堂兄袁彖去世。
English: His cousin, Yuan Qi, died before he was discharged.

古文：昂幼孤，为彖所养，乃制期服。
现代文：袁昂幼时父亲去世，被姜彖抚养，于是他为制期服。
English: Yuan Aung's father died when he was young, and he was raised by Jiang Chen, so he became a tailor.

古文：人有怪而问之者，昂致书以喻之曰： 窃闻礼由恩断，服以情申。故小功他邦，加制一等，同爨有缌，明之典籍。
现代文：人有怪而问他，袁昂致信晓谕他说： 我听说礼节的大小是由亲疏而定，服丧是为了表达哀思，故小功他邦，加制一等，同居同食的亲人有服鳃麻的，典籍中明文记载。
English: Yuan Ang sent a letter to him, saying, "I have heard that the size of the etiquette is determined by the distance between relatives, and the mourning is to express grief. Therefore, it is better to pay less than others, and the relatives who live together and eat together should wear white, which is clearly recorded in the classics.

古文：孤子夙以不天，幼倾乾廕，资敬未奉，过庭莫承。
现代文：我过去不被天护佑，幼年失去父亲的庇荫，没有能敬奉父亲，没有接受父亲的教诲，年纪幼小，未能成就显赫功名。
English: In the past, I was not blessed by Heaven, I lost the shadow of my father when I was young, I was not able to worship my father, I did not accept my father's teachings, I was too young, and I was unable to achieve outstanding achievements.

古文：藐藐冲人，未达硃紫。从兄提养训教，示以义方，每假其谈价，虚其声誉，得及人次，实亦有由。
现代文：堂兄扶持训教，告诉我做人做事的正道，藉他的谈论和评价，虚沾他的声誉，得以到达人群之中，确实也是有缘由的。
English: My cousin supported my training and told me the right way to be and do things. Through his discussion and evaluation, his reputation, I was able to reach the crowd. There is indeed a reason.

古文：兼开拓房宇，处以华旷，同财共有，恣其取足。尔来三十余年，怜爱之至，无异于己。
现代文：并给我扩建房屋，住在华丽宽大明亮的房屋中，钱财共有，听任我索取所需，从那时以来三十多年了，对我怜爱之极，无异己出。
English: Since then, for more than thirty years, he has shown me the utmost compassion and love, living in a magnificent, spacious, and bright house, sharing money and resources, and allowing me to take what I needed.

古文：姊妹孤侄，成就一时，笃念之深，在终弥固，此恩此爱，毕壤不追。
现代文：姊妹孤侄，成全一代，对他真诚思念之深，在他临终时更加牢固，此恩此爱，终身不追悔。
English: Sisters and cousins, a complete generation, sincerely miss him deeply, more firmly at the time of his death, this grace and love, do not regret for life.

古文：既情若同生，而服为诸从，言心即事，实未忍安。
现代文：既然情感如同己生，而服丧舆诸从辈相同，倾吐心意面对眼前的事情，实在不能忍安。
English: Since emotions are like one's own life, and all the followers are the same, it is really unbearable to pour out one's heart and face the things in front of one.

古文：昔马棱与弟毅同居，毅亡，棱为心服三年。
现代文：昔日马棱与弟马毅同居，马毅去世，马棱为他服心丧三年。
English: Once upon a time, Ma Ren and his brother Ma Yi lived together. Ma Yi passed away, and Ma Ren grieved for him for three years.

古文：由也之不除丧，亦缘情而致制，虽识不及古，诚怀感慕。
现代文：仲由也到期不除丧，也是缘情而致制，虽然我的见识不及古人，但对他们诚心感念仰慕。
English: The reason is also due to circumstances, although my knowledge is not as good as the ancients, but I sincerely admire them.

古文：常愿千秋之后，从服期齐；不图门衰，祸集一旦，草土残息，复罹今酷，寻惟恸绝，弥剧弥深。
现代文：常愿从兄去世后，为他服期服。没想到门第衰败，祸集一旦，居母丧的悲痛尚未平息，又遭遇今日的残酷，随即悲哀而昏厥，越来越厉害。
English: I always wanted to serve a term of service for him after the death of my brother. I did not expect the decline of my family, once the disaster set in, the grief of my mother's death had not yet subsided, and I encountered today's cruelty, and then I was sad and fainted, more and more severe.

古文：今以余喘，欲遂素志，庶寄其罔慕之痛，少申无已之情。
现代文：今以剩余的生命，想完成平素的志愿，寄托那不尽思慕的痛苦，稍伸无止境的情意。
English: Now, with the rest of my life, I want to fulfill my simple wish, to put aside the pain of not being able to fulfill my dream, and to expand my boundless emotions.

古文：虽礼无明据，乃事有先例，率迷而至，必欲行之。
现代文：虽礼没有明据，但事有先例，沉迷而至，必欲行之。
English: Although there is no clear evidence of the ritual, there are precedents, and if you are obsessed with it, you will want to do it.

古文：君问礼所归，谨以谘白。
现代文：君问礼的根据，谨以此禀告。
English: With this obituary, I would like to inform you of the reason for your request.

古文：临纸号哽，言不识次。 
现代文：面临信纸书写号哭哽噎，语无伦次。 
English: Faced with a piece of writing paper, the caller wails incoherently.

古文：服阕，除右军邵陵王长史，俄迁御史中丞。
现代文：服丧期满，除授右军邵陵王长史，随即迁任御史中丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was awarded the Right Army Shaoling Wang Changshi, and was immediately transferred to the position of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：时尚书令王晏弟诩为广州，多纳赇货，昂依事劾奏，不惮权豪，当时号为正直。
现代文：当时尚书令王晏弟王翔任广州刺史，多方接受贿赂，袁昂依事向皇帝检举他，不惧怕权贵豪门，当时人称赞他正直。
English: At that time, it was written that Wang Xiang, Wang Xiang's younger brother, was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou. He accepted bribes from many parties. Yuan Ang reported him to the emperor according to the circumstances. He was not afraid of the powerful and wealthy. At that time, people praised him for his honesty.

古文：出为豫章内史，丁所生母忧去职。以丧还，江路风浪暴骇，昂乃缚衣著柩，誓同沉溺。
现代文：出任豫章内史，遇亲生母亲去世离职，送丧回家乡，长江风浪暴骇，袁昂便用衣服把自己捆绑在棺柩上，誓同棺柩沉没。
English: In the history of Yuanzhang, when his biological mother passed away, he left his job and went back to his hometown for the funeral. The Yangtze River was stormy, so Yuan Ang tied himself to the coffin with his clothes and vowed to sink with the coffin.

古文：及风止，余船皆没，唯昂所乘船获全，咸谓精诚所致。
现代文：及风止，其他船皆没江中，衹有袁昂所乘的船获得安全，都说是他精诚所致。
English: When the wind died down, no other boats were in the river, but Yuan Ang's boat was safe, which was said to be due to his diligence.

古文：葬讫，起为建武将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：安葬毕，出任建武将军、吴兴太守。
English: After being buried peacefully, he became General Jianwu and Empress Dowager Wu Xing.

古文：永元末，义师至京师，州牧郡守皆望风降款，昂独拒境不受命。
现代文：永元末年，义师至京师，州牧郡守皆望风顺服投降，袁昂独据守境地抗拒不受命。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, from the Yishi to the Beijing Division, the governors of Zhumaki County all surrendered in obedience to the wind, and Yuan Ang was the only one who resisted the order.

古文：高祖手书喻曰： 夫祸福无门，兴亡有数，天之所弃，人孰能匡？
现代文：高祖亲笔写信晓谕他说： 祸福没有定敷，都是人所自取，国家的兴亡是有定数的，天要抛弃他，谁人能匡复?
English: Gao Zu personally wrote a letter to him, saying: "There is no set time for misfortune and good fortune. People take it upon themselves. The rise and fall of a country is predetermined. Heaven will abandon it. Who can restore it?

古文：机来不再，图之宜早。
现代文：机会不再来，圃谋应早。
English: The opportunity will not come again, so we should start early.

古文：顷藉听道路，承欲狼顾一隅，既未悉雅怀，聊申往意。
现代文：近来藉听众人传闻，你想像狼一样霸占一角，既然未悉知你的雅怀，姑且申明一向的主张。
English: Recently, by listening to people's rumors, you want to occupy a corner like a wolf. Since you don't know your Yahweh, let me affirm my long-standing position.

古文：独夫狂悖，振古未闻，穷凶极虐，岁月滋甚。
现代文：独夫狂妄猖獗，往昔都没听到像他这样，穷凶极虐，随着岁月他更厉害。
English: His arrogance is rampant. I have never heard of anyone like him in the past. He is extremely violent, and he has become more so over the years.

古文：天未绝齐，圣明启运，兆民有赖，百姓来苏。
现代文：天不减齐，圣明开启世运，万民有了依赖，百姓于困苦中获得复活。
English: The heavens will not be diminished, the holy light will open the world, the people will have dependence, and the people will be resurrected in hardship.

古文：吾荷任前驱，扫除京邑，方拨乱反正，伐罪吊民，至止以来，前无横阵。
现代文：吾担任前驱，扫除京邑，拨乱反正，讨伐罪人拯救百姓，从遣以来，前面没有横阻的阵地。
English: I acted as a forerunner to sweep away the capital cities, restore order, fight criminals and save the people. Since I was dispatched, there has been no obstacle in front of me.

古文：今皇威四临，长围已合，遐迩毕集，人神同奋。
现代文：今日皇威四临，长围已合拢，远近已会集，入神同奋斗。
English: Today, the emperor's majesty is everywhere, the long perimeter has been closed, the far and near have gathered, and they have entered into God's struggle together.

古文：锐卒万计，铁马千群，以此攻战，何往不克。
现代文：精兵万计，骑兵千群，以此攻战，何往不胜。
English: With thousands of elite soldiers and thousands of cavalry, this is the best way to attack and win.

古文：况建业孤城，人怀离阻，面缚军门，日夕相继，屠溃之期，势不云远。
现代文：何况建业已成孤城，人人都想离开险阻地，向军门投降的人，曰夕相继，因畏诛杀而溃逃的日期，不会太远。
English: Moreover, Jianye has become a lonely city, everyone wants to leave the dangerous place, and those who surrender to the military gate say that the date of defection due to fear of killing will not be too far away.

古文：兼荧惑出端门，太白入氐室，天文表于上，人事符于下，不谋同契，实在兹辰。
现代文：又火星出现在端门，太白星出现氐室，上表现在天文，下符合人事，不谋而相合，是在这个时刻。
English: Mars also appears at the end of the door, the white star appears in the antechamber, the above is manifested in astronomy, the below is in line with personnel, coincidentally coinciding, is at this moment.

古文：且范岫、申胄，久荐诚款，各率所由，仍为掎角，沈法瑀、孙肸、硃端，已先肃清吴会，而足下欲以区区之郡，御堂堂之师，根本既倾，枝叶安附？
现代文：而且范岫、申胄，很久前就表示真诚顺服，各率有关官吏，仍然分兵牵制敌人；沈法玛、孙肿、朱端，已先肃清吴、会，而足下想以区区之郡，抵御堂堂之师，树根已倾，枝叶安附?
English: Moreover, Fan Yu and Shen Yu had long ago expressed their sincere obedience, and the relevant officials at each level were still detaching troops to contain the enemy; Shen Fama, Sun Yu and Zhu Duan had first cleared Wu and Hui, and now they want to use the county of the district to resist the teacher of the hall, the roots of the tree have fallen, and the branches and leaves are attached?

古文：童儿牧竖，咸谓其非，求之明鉴，实所未达。
现代文：小儿牧童，都说不对，求之明鉴，实在是没有通达。
English: Children, shepherds and children all say it is not right, and it is really not possible to find a clear example.

古文：今竭力昏主，未足为忠，家门屠灭，非所谓孝，忠孝俱尽，将欲何依？
现代文：今竭力侍奉昏主，算不得忠，家门被屠灭，不是所说的孝，忠孝俱尽，将想依赖什么?
English: Now he is trying his best to serve the dimming Lord, but he is not loyal, his family has been slaughtered. This is not what is meant by filial piety, loyalty and filial devotion. What will he want to rely on?

古文：岂若翻然改图，自招多福，进则远害全身，退则长守禄位。
现代文：还不如迅速转变改换图谋，自招多福，进则远害全身，退则长守禄位。
English: It is also better to quickly change and change plans, self-recruitment is more beneficial, advance is far away from harming the whole body, retreat is to keep the position for a long time.

古文：去就之宜，幸加详择。
现代文：去就事宜，希望你详择。
English: I'd like you to make a detailed selection.

古文：若执迷遂往，同恶不悛，大军一临，诛及三族。
现代文：如果执迷以往的错误，怙恶不悛，大军一临，诛灭三族。
English: If you cling to the mistakes of the past, whether evil or not, a large army will come and annihilate the three tribes.

古文：虽贻后悔，宁复云补？
现代文：衹留下后悔，怎样再谈弥补。
English: How to talk about making amends after leaving behind regrets.

古文：欲布所怀，故致今白。 
现代文：想表达对你的关怀，所以现在告白于你。 
English: I want to express my concern for you, so I confess to you now.

古文：昂答曰： 都史至，辱诲。
现代文：袁昂回信说： 都史至，承蒙教诲。
English: Yuan Ang wrote back: It's all history, learn from it.

古文：承藉以众论，谓仆有勤王之举，兼蒙诮责，独无送款，循复严旨，若临万仞。
现代文：你藉听众人的议论，说我有勤王的举动，并蒙受责备，独自没有顺服投降，现我回覆您严厉的教训，心情如临万仞。
English: Now that you have heard from many people that I have been diligent and have been reproved, and that I alone have not obeyed and surrendered, I am responding to your stern admonition with a heavy heart.

古文：三吴内地，非用兵之所，况以偏隅一郡，何能为役？
现代文：三吴在内地，不是用兵的地方，更何况以偏僻的一郡，怎能作战?
English: San Wu is inland, not a place for soldiers, let alone a remote county, how can it fight?

古文：近奉敕，以此境多虞，见使安慰。
现代文：近日奉敕，以此境多防备，被使者安慰。
English: In recent days, Bongyeon has been on high alert in this situation and has been comforted by the messenger.

古文：自承麾旆届止，莫不膝袒军门，惟仆一人敢后至者，政以内揆庸素，文武无施，直是东国贱男子耳。
现代文：自从承军队行动，没有不到军门请罪的，惟仆一人敢后至，正是因为内官素质凡庸，文武无教，直是束国贱男子。
English: Since taking over the army, no one has come to the military gate to plead guilty, except for one servant who dared to come later, precisely because the quality of the officers was mediocre, uneducated in literature and martial arts, and they were low-ranking men.

古文：虽欲献心，不增大师之勇；置其愚默，宁沮众军之威。
现代文：虽想献心，但这不会增加大师的勇猛；保持愚默，哪能阻拒众军的威力。
English: A willing heart does not add to the strength of a mighty man, nor does a silent tongue diminish the power of an army.

古文：幸藉将军含弘之大，可得从容以礼。
现代文：幸亏凭藉将军度量大，可得使我从容用礼。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the general's great discretion, I was able to use the bow with ease.

古文：窃以一飡微施，尚复投殒，况食人之禄，而顿忘一旦。
现代文：我认为人受一餐微薄施舍，都可以死去报答，何况拿人俸禄，而顿然一日忘却?
English: Do I think that a man can die in return for a meager alms-meal, much less for a salary, and then one day forget it?

古文：非惟物议不可，亦恐明公鄙之，所以踌躇，未遑荐璧。
现代文：不仅众议认为不可以，恐怕明公也鄙视这做法，所以我踌躇，没有时间顾及进献璧玉。
English: Not only did the general public think it was unacceptable, but I'm afraid the emperor also despised this practice, so I hesitated, not having time to consider donating the gems.

古文：遂以轻微，爰降重命，震灼于心，忘其所厝，诚推理鉴，犹惧威临。 
现代文：遂以轻微，下达重命，使我心裹震动，不知所措，诚然推服您的见识，还是惧怕威临。 
English: Then, with a slight, heavy death, my heart was shaken, I was at a loss, admittedly persuaded by your insight, or fear of impending.

古文：建康城平，昂束身诣阙，高祖宥之不问也。
现代文：建康城被平定，昂自缚其身到宫阙，高祖宽免他不追问了。
English: Jiankang City was subdued, and Gao Zizhong bound his body to the palace. Gao Zu was pardoned and did not ask questions.

古文：天监二年，以为后军临川王参军事。
现代文：天监二年，任为后军临川王参军事。
English: In the second year of Tianjing, he was appointed as the commander of the Linchuan Wangshan Military.

古文：昂奉启谢曰： 恩降绝望之辰，庆集寒心之日，焰灰非喻，荑枯未拟，抠衣聚足，颠狈不胜。
现代文：袁昂敬奉回覆书函答谢说： 恩惠降落在我绝望的时辰，褒奖会集在我寒心的日子，衹有焰灰不能晓谕，枯草不能比拟，我提裳登阶一步一并，颠沛不胜。
English: Yuan Ang Jing replied with a letter of thanks: "Grace has fallen on me in my hour of despair, praise will gather in my cold hearted days, there are ashes that cannot be explained, and withered grass that cannot be compared. I have climbed step by step, and I am invincible.

古文：臣遍历三坟，备详六典，巡校赏罚之科，调检生死之律，莫不严五辟于明君之朝，峻三章于圣人之世。
现代文：臣遍览三坟，详察六典，考校赏罚的条文，调检生死的法律，都是在明君的朝代严惩五罪，在圣人的时代严厉法律。
English: In the Ming Dynasty, the five crimes were severely punished, and in the era of saints, the laws were strict.

古文：是以涂山始会，致防风之诛；酆邑方构，有崇侯之伐。
现代文：所以涂山始会盟，导致防风被杀；酆邑刚建，就有崇侯被讨伐。
English: Therefore, Tuishan was the first to join the alliance, which led to the killing of the windbreak; as soon as the county was built, there was a crusade against Chongwu.

古文：未有缓宪于斫戮之人，赊刑于耐罪之族，出万死入一生如臣者也。
现代文：没有对斩杀的人缓刑，对犯有耐罪之族宽刑，像臣这样出万死入一生的。
English: There is no reprieve for those who kill, and lenient punishment for those who commit crimes. Like a vassal, they go from death to life.

古文：推恩及罪，在臣实大，披心沥血，敢乞言之。
现代文：您推恩及罪人，在臣实大，披心沥血，冒味乞求陈述。
English: You infer grace and sinner, in the subject real big, wearing heart and blood, imposture to beg for statement.

古文：臣东国贱人，学行何取，既殊鸣雁直木，故无结绶弹冠，徒藉羽仪，易农就仕。
现代文：臣是东国贱人，学行无可取，既然不同于鸣雁和直木，所以没有出仕作官，徒然凭藉辅翼，变务农为作官。
English: The vassal was a commoner in the eastern provinces, and his learning and conduct were unimpressive. Since he was different from Mingyan and Naoki, he did not serve as an official, and in vain he changed from being a farmer to an official with the help of the auxiliary wing.

古文：往年滥职，守秩东隅，仰属龚行，风驱电掩。
现代文：往年不称职而列其位，在东隅守着俸禄，人们仰望奉行，风驱电掩。
English: In previous years, incompetents were put in their place. In the eastern corner, they kept their salaries, people looked up to them, and the wind drove them away.

古文：当其时也，负鼎图者日至，执玉帛者相望。
现代文：那时拿着国家重要器物的人日至，执玉帛来的人相互望见。
English: At that time, people holding important national artifacts could not see each other.

古文：独在愚臣，顿昏大义，殉鸿毛之轻，忘同德之重。
现代文：独在愚臣，迷昏大义，殉身于鸿毛的轻飘，忘掉了同德的重要。
English: Alone in folly, bewildered justice, martyred in the lightness of the hair, forgot the importance of the same.

古文：但三吴险薄，五湖交通，屡起田儋之变，每惧殷通之祸，空慕君鱼保境，遂失师涓抱器。
现代文：但三吴地势险要而贫薄，五湖交通，多次发生田儋杀令为王的变故，经常惧怕有殷通被杀的祸乱，空慕君鱼保卫境地的事情，也就失去了师涓抱器投水的忠诚。
English: However, the terrain of Sanwu is precarious and poor, the traffic of the five lakes is at the top, there have been many changes in the order of killing the king of the field, often fearing the calamity of the killing of the gentry, and longing for the protection of the situation of the fish, and have lost the loyalty of the watering.

古文：后至者斩，臣甘斯戮。
现代文：后投降者被杀，臣甘心被杀。
English: After that, those who surrendered were killed, and the vassals were willingly killed.

古文：明刑徇众，谁曰不然。
现代文：公开刑罚向众人示明，谁说不应这样。
English: Let the punishment be public and let everyone know who says this is wrong.

古文：幸约法之弘，承解网之宥，犹当降等薪粲，遂乃顿释钳赭。
现代文：幸运约法的弘大，承蒙仁德赦罪，犹当降一级鬼薪舆白粲刑，于是便立即从钳赭刑中释放出来。
English: Due to the magnanimity and benevolence of Hongda, who was fortunate enough to receive a pardon for his crime, he was immediately released from the flogging.

古文：敛骨吹魂，还编黔庶，濯疵荡秽，入楚游陈，天波既洗，云油遽沐。
现代文：敛骨吹魂，还编平民之中，清涤过失，荡洗污秽，入楚国游陈国，皇恩既洗，云油遽沐。
English: He restrained the bones and blew the soul, and also made the common people clean up their faults and wash away their filth. He went to Chu Province and toured Chen Province. He washed away the royal grace and washed away the clouds with oil.

古文：古人有言： 非死之难，处死之难。 臣之所荷，旷古不书；臣之死所，未知何地。 
现代文：古人有言： 死不困难，是相处到死才困难，臣所蒙受的恩惠，往昔都没有记载；臣所死的地方，未知何地。 
English: The ancients said: Death is not difficult, it is difficult to get along until death. The favors received by the vassal have not been recorded in the past; the place where the vassal died is unknown.

古文：高祖答曰： 朕遗射钩，卿无自外。 
现代文：高祖回答说： 朕送射钩，卿不要自枧为外人。 
English: Gaozu replied, "I'll send you a hook. Sir, don't think of yourself as a foreigner.

古文：俄除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久除授给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：其年迁侍中。
现代文：这年迁任侍中。
English: He was transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School that year.

古文：明年，出为寻阳太守，行江州事。
现代文：第二年，出任寻阳太守，行江州事。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the Chouyang Daju and went to Jiangsu Province.

古文：六年，征为吏部尚书，累表陈让，徙为左民尚书，兼右仆射。
现代文：六年，征入任吏部尚书，多次上表辞让，移任左民尚书，兼右仆射。
English: In the sixth year, he was conscripted into the cadre department of Shangshu, and was transferred to Zuomin Shangshu, and concurrently to the right minion Shao.

古文：七年，除国子祭酒，兼仆射如故，领豫州大中正。
现代文：七年，除授国子祭酒，兼仆射照旧，领豫州大中正。
English: In the seventh year, in addition to being awarded the national son's festival wine, he was also given the title of middle school principal of Yuzhou University.

古文：八年，出为仁威将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：八年，出任仁威将军、吴郡太守。
English: Eight years later, he became General Ren Wei and the governor of Wu County.

古文：十一年，入为五兵尚书，复兼右仆射，未拜，有诏即真封。
现代文：十一年，入任五兵尚书，再兼右仆射，未拜授，有诏改为实授。
English: In the eleventh year, he was appointed to the five soldiers of Shangshu, and then to the right-hand shooting, but he did not receive the award, and he was changed to the real award.

古文：寻以本官领起部尚书，加侍中。
现代文：接着以本官领起部尚书，加任侍中。
English: Then, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Ministry of the Imperial Household, and was also appointed to the post of chamberlain.

古文：十四年，马仙琕破魏军于朐山，诏权假昂节，往劳军。
现代文：十四年，马仙碑在朐山打败魏军，诏袁昂暂时代理持节，前往劳军。
English: In the 14th year, Ma Xianbei defeated the Wei army in Lushan, and Yuan Ang temporarily held the festival and went to the labor army.

古文：十五年，迁左仆射，寻为尚书令、宣惠将军。
现代文：十五年，迁任左仆射，接着任尚书令、宣惠将军。
English: In the fifteenth year, he was transferred to the position of Zuo Fuxia, and then to the positions of Shang Shuling and Xuan Hui.

古文：普通三年，为中书监、丹阳尹。
现代文：普通三年，任中书监、丹阳尹。
English: Ordinary three years, appointed librarian, Danyang Yin.

古文：其年进号中卫将军，复为尚书令，即本号开府仪同三司，给鼓吹，未拜，又领国子祭酒。
现代文：逭年进升号为中卫将军，再任尚书令，即本号开府仪同三司，给鼓吹，未拜授，又领国子祭酒。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General of the Middle Guards in the year of the Rooster, and was reappointed to the post of Shang Shuling, that is, the post of Kaifu Yi and the three departments, to preach, not to teach, and to lead the National Children's Festival.

古文：大通元年，加中书监，给亲信三十人。
现代文：大通元年，加任中书监，给护卫三十人。
English: In the first year of the Odori era, he was appointed as a middle school librarian, and thirty guards were assigned to him.

古文：寻表解祭酒，进号中抚军大将军，迁司空、侍中、尚书令，亲信、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：不久上表解除祭酒，进升号中抚军大将军，迁任司空、侍中、尚书令，亲信、鼓吹都照旧。
English: Soon after, the sacrificial wine was removed from the table, the title of promotion was changed to the general of the Central Military Commission, and the positions of secretary, attendant, secretary, close confidant, and propagandist were transferred as before.

古文：五年，加特进、左光禄大夫，增亲信为八十人。
现代文：五年，加特进、左光禄大夫，增亲信为八十人。
English: In five years, Gatjin and Sakoroku became doctors, and the number of trusted relatives increased to eighty.

古文：大同六年，薨，时年八十。
现代文：左回六年，去世，时年八十岁。
English: He died six years later, at the age of 80.

古文：诏曰： 侍中、特进、左光禄大夫、司空昂，奄至薨逝，恻怛于怀。
现代文：韶令说： 侍中、特进、左光禄大夫、司空袁昂，忽然去世，心裹忧伤。
English: The imperial edict said: The chamberlain, the special envoy, the doctor Zuo Guanglu, and the magistrate Yuan Ang passed away suddenly, their hearts filled with sorrow.

古文：公器珝凝素，志诚贞方，端朝燮理，嘉猷载缉。
现代文：公气概稳重朴素，志诚操正，端肃朝政，协和治理，好的谋略记载编辑。
English: The public spirit is stable and simple, the spirit is sincere and upright, the government is serious, the government is harmonious, and the strategy is good.

古文：追荣表德，实惟令典。
现代文：追述荣誉表彰品德，是国家的令典。
English: To recount the honors and commend the virtues is the order of the state.

古文：可赠本官，鼓吹一部，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱二十万，绢布一百匹，蜡二百斤，即日举哀。 
现代文：可追赠本官，一部鼓吹，给束园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱二十万，绢布一百匹，蜡二百斤，即日安葬。 
English: He could be posthumously given his official title, a piece of propaganda, a bunch of secret garden utensils, a royal robe, a piece of clothing, two hundred thousand in money, one hundred pieces of embroidered cloth, two hundred pounds of wax, and be buried the same day.

古文：初，昂临终遗疏，不受赠谥。敕诸子不得言上行状及立志铭，凡有所须，悉皆停省。
现代文：当初，袁昂在临终遣疏中说，不要接受追赠官职和谧号，告诫诸子不得言上行状和立志铭。凡是有所需，都应裁减节省。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Ang said in his deathbed eulogy that he would not accept the posthumous promotion and honorary title, and warned his sons not to say or do anything. If necessary, they should cut back on expenses.

古文：复曰： 吾释褐从仕，不期富贵，但官序不失等伦，衣食粗知荣辱，以此阖棺，无惭乡里。
现代文：又说： 我脱去布衣做官，不期望富贵，但官序不愧同辈，衣食粗知荣辱，以此盖棺，无惭乡里。
English: He also said, "I took off my clothes to become an official. I don't expect to be rich, but the official rank is worthy of my peers. I know the honor and disgrace of eating and wearing coarse clothes. I'm not ashamed to use it to cover my coffin in my hometown."

古文：往忝吴兴，属在昏明之际，既暗于前觉，无识于圣朝，不知天命，甘贻显戮，幸遇殊恩，遂得全门户。
现代文：往日任吴兴太守，属于在昏明之中，既对先觉不了解，又对圣朝不认识，不知天命，甘心让明正典刑，陈尸示众，幸遇殊恩，终于保全了门户。
English: In the past, Wu Xingtao, who was appointed as governor, was in a daze. He did not understand the premonition, did not know the Holy Dynasty, did not know the fate of heaven, and was willing to let Mingzheng ceremonial punishment, display the corpse to the public. Fortunately, he was fortunate enough to finally preserve the portal.

古文：自念负罪私门，阶荣望绝，保存性命，以为幸甚；不谓叨窃宠灵，一至于此。
现代文：自念有罪家门，升登高位的希望已绝，保存住生命，认为已是很幸运的；不料不当得而得到恩宠荣耀，一至于此。
English: To think oneself guilty, to have no hope of promotion, to think oneself fortunate to have survived, to be unexpectedly and undeservedly favored, and so on.

古文：常欲竭诚酬报，申吾乃心，所以朝廷每兴师北伐，吾辄启求行，誓之丹款，实非矫言。
现代文：常想竭诚酬报，申明我的心意，所以朝廷每有兴师北伐的事情，我就上奏书要求同行，誓言来自赤诚的心，实非矫情之言。
English: I often want to reward my dedication and affirm my intentions, so whenever the Imperial Court has a matter of the Northern Expedition, I will submit a petition to request a companion. The oath comes from the heart of Akechi, it is not a pretentious word.

古文：既庸懦无施，皆不蒙许，虽欲罄命，其议莫从。
现代文：既然我庸下懦弱没有办法，都不被允许，虽想竭尽性命，那个意见没有听从。
English: Since I was too weak and cowardly to do anything, I was not allowed to. Although I wanted to die, I did not listen to that advice.

古文：今日瞑目，毕恨泉壤，若魂而有知，方期结草。
现代文：今日暝目，抱恨九泉，假如我的灵魂有知，期望能报恩。
English: Today, my eyes are wide open, my heart is full of hatred, and if my soul has knowledge, I hope to be able to repay the favor.

古文：圣朝遵古，知吾名品，或有追远之恩，虽是经国恒典，在吾无应致此，脱有赠官，慎勿祗奉。 
现代文：圣朝遵古，知吾名声品格，或有追念前贤的恩典，虽是治国的恒典。在我不应致此，或有赠官，慎勿奉受。 
English: Although it is a perennial ceremony to govern the country, whether it is the Holy Dynasty of ancient times, knowing our reputation and character, or the grace of remembering former sages, I should not do this. If there is a gift official, be careful not to accept it.

古文：诸子累表陈奏，诏不许。
现代文：诸子多次上表陈奏，诏不许。
English: The sons have repeatedly made it clear that they do not want to be dictated to.

古文：册谥曰穆正公。
现代文：册赠谧号穆正公。
English: He was given the posthumous name Mu Zhenggong.

古文：子君正，美风仪，善自居处，以贵公子得当世名誉。
现代文：子君正，有很好的风度仪表，善于居处，以贵公子得到当世的名誉。
English: Zi Junzheng, has a good demeanor and appearance, is good at living, and has gained a reputation in the world as a noble man.

古文：顷之，兼吏部郎，以母忧去职。
现代文：不久，兼吏部郎，因母亲去世离职。
English: Not long after, he resigned from his position as assistant secretary due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，为邵陵王友、北中郎长史、东阳太守。
现代文：服丧期满，任邵陵王友、北中郎长史、塞厘太守。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Shao Ling Wang You, North Zhong Lang Chang Shi, and Seli Taishu were appointed.

古文：寻征还都，郡民征士徐天祐等三百人诣阙乞留一年，诏不许，仍除豫章内史，寻转吴郡太守。
现代文：不久征召还都，郡民征士涂玉茧等三百人至宫阙乞留任一年，韶不许，仍授豫章内史，不久转任吴郡太守。
English: He was soon called back to the capital, and three hundred people, including the county people's recruiters, went to the palace to beg to stay for one year, but they were not allowed. He was still awarded the Yuzhang Inner History, and soon he was transferred to the governor of Wuxi County.

古文：侯景乱，率数百人随邵陵王赴援，及京城陷，还郡。
现代文：侯景叛乱，率数百人随邵陵王赴援，京城失陷后，还郡。
English: Houjing rebellion, led by hundreds of people with Shao Ling Wang to help, after the fall of the capital, but also the county.

古文：君正当官莅事有名称，而蓄聚财产，服玩靡丽。
现代文：君正当官做事有名声，然而蓄聚财产，服用奢侈华丽。
English: You have a good reputation for doing things as an official, yet you amass wealth and live in luxury.

古文：贼遣于子悦攻之，新城戍主戴僧易劝令拒守；吴陆映公等惧贼脱胜，略其资产，乃曰： 贼军甚锐，其锋不可当；今若拒之，恐民心不从也。 
现代文：贼派于子悦进攻他，新城戍主戴僧易劝令拒守，吴郡陆映公等人惧贼如果取胜，掠走他们的资产，便说： 贼军甚锐，其锋不可拒挡；今若拒抗他，恐怕民心不服从。 
English: The bandits sent Yu Ziyue to attack him. The lord of Xincheng, Dai Zengyi, advised him to refuse to defend the city. Lu Yinggong of Wu County and others feared that if the bandits won and plundered their assets, they would say, "The bandits' army is very strong and their front cannot be resisted. If they resist him now, I am afraid that the people's hearts will not obey."

古文：君正性怯懦，乃送米及牛酒，郊迎子悦。子悦既至，掠夺其财物子女，因是感疾卒。
现代文：君正性怯懦，便送米及牛酒，出郊迎接子悦，子悦来之后，掠夺他的财物子女，因此感疾而死。
English: The king was cowardly, so he sent rice and cow wine and went out to the countryside to meet Ziyue. After Ziyue came, he plundered his wealth and children, and died of illness.

古文：史臣曰：夫天尊地卑，以定君臣之位；松筠等质，无革岁寒之心。
现代文：史臣曰：天尊地卑，以此决定了君臣的位置；松竹同等本质，不改变坚贞不屈的节操。
English: Shichen said: Heaven is higher than the earth, which determines the position of monarchs and ministers; pine and bamboo are of the same essence, and do not change the steadfast and unyielding discipline.

古文：袁千里命属崩离，身逢厄季，虽独夫丧德，臣志不移；及抗疏高祖，无亏忠节，斯亦存夷、叔之风矣。
现代文：袁千里命属崩离，身遇遭灾受难的末世，虽然统治者丧失道德，但臣志不动摇；当他向高祖上书直言时，也无亏忠节，遣也是存留了伯夷、叔齐的风尚。
English: Yuan Qianli's life was ruined, and he was in the last days of disaster and suffering. Although the ruler lost his morality, his ambition did not waver. When he wrote a letter to Gao Zu, he did not lose his loyalty, and his sending also preserved the style of Bo Yi and Uncle Qi.

古文：终为梁室台鼎，何其美焉。
现代文：终于成为梁室的台鼎，何其美呀！
English: It's great to finally be the top of the podium!

