古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：《经》言： 夏日伤暑，秋病疟 。
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：《医经》中说： 夏天伤于暑邪，到了秋天就会发生疟疾。 
English: Huang Di asked Qibo: "In the Medicine Sutra, it says: If you get heatstroke in summer, you will get malaria in autumn.

古文：疟之发以时，其故何也？
现代文：疟疾的发作有一定的时间性，这是什么原因呢？
English: The onset of malaria has a certain temporal pattern. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯对曰：邪客于风府，病循膂而下，卫气一日一夜，常大会于风府，其明日，日下一节，故其日作晏，此其先客于脊背也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：暑虐之邪是从督脉的风府穴侵入人体，然后从颈项沿脊椎两侧日渐向下移动。而人体的卫气，一日一夜之间行于人体五十周次后，就在风府穴处大会合，与稽留于风府穴的邪气相遇，由次日起，每日沿脊骨下移一个骨节，所以疟疾每日发作的时间也随着向后推迟。
English: Qibo replied, "The evil of heat torture invades the human body from the wind palace hole of the vas deferens, and then gradually moves down from the neck along both sides of the spine. And the human body's qi, after traveling through the human body for fifty times overnight, meets at the wind palace hole, and meets the evil spirit that remains in the wind palace hole. From the next day, one bone is moved down the spine every day, so the daily onset of malaria is also delayed.

古文：故每至于风府则腠理开，腠理开则邪气入，邪气入则病作，此所以日作尚晏也。
现代文：因为邪气已先期稽留于人体的脊背，每当卫气运行到风府穴时，腠理就张开，邪气便乘虚深入，则疟疾就发作，这就是疟疾发作时间日渐推迟的原因。
English: Because the evil qi has been retained in the spine of the human body in advance, whenever the qi runs to the wind palace, the body opens, the evil qi takes advantage of the false depth, and malaria occurs. This is the reason why the onset time of malaria is increasingly delayed.

古文：卫气之行风府，日下一节，二十一日下至尾底，二十二日入脊内，注于伏冲之脉，其行九日，出于缺盆之中，其气上行，故其病稍益至。
现代文：卫气出离风府穴，每天沿脊椎下行一节，到第二十一日，下行到尾骶骨，然后在第二十二日，又向上移入于脊内，流注于伏冲脉，再循脉上行九日，上出于左右两缺盆穴的中间，在这段时间内，卫气是逐日升高，因此发病的时间，就一天早于一天。
English: Wei qi comes out of the Fengfu hole and travels down the spine one section each day. On the 21st day, it travels down to the coccyx. Then, on the 22nd day, it moves up into the spine, flows into the afferent pulse, and then follows the pulse up for nine days. It comes out of the middle of the two missing pelvic holes on the left and right. During this time, Wei qi is elevated day by day, so the time of onset is one day earlier than one day.

古文：其内搏于五脏，横连募原，其道远，其气深，其行迟，不能日作，故次日乃蓄积而作焉。
现代文：如果邪气深陷内迫于五脏，并累及募原的，是邪气已入里，由于距离体表较远，不能及时与外出的卫气相搏，病就不能每日发作，所以发病迟缓，以致于到第二天才会聚集发作一次，而形成间日疟。
English: If the evil spirit is deeply trapped in the five viscera, and is involved in the recruitment of the original, it is the evil spirit that has entered the body. Since it is far from the surface of the body, it is not possible to fight the outgoing spirit in time. The disease cannot occur every day, so the onset is delayed, so that it will only occur once the next day, and form puerperal malaria.

古文：黄帝曰：卫气每至于风府，腠理乃发，发则邪入焉。
现代文：黄帝说：卫气每当运行到风府穴时，就会使腠理开泄，邪气便乘虚侵入而发病。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Whenever the virtuous qi flows to the wind palace, it will cause the virtuous qi to be released, and the evil qi will take advantage of the false qi to invade and cause illness.

古文：其卫气日下一节，则不当风府，奈何？
现代文：但卫气逐日下移一节，这样就不是每天在风府穴处，为什么疟疾还会发作呢？
English: But the geomagnetic field is shifting day by day, so it's not like we're in the windy city every day. Why does malaria still occur?

古文：岐伯曰：风府无常，卫气之所应，必开其腠理，气之所舍节，则其府也。
现代文：也就是说，不是一成不变的固定在风府穴。卫气每日下行一节，其相应的部位腠理必定开放，只要邪气留止在这个地方，必然引起邪正交争的反应。
English: That is to say, it is not immutably fixed in the Fengfu Cave. As the Wei Qi descends every day, the corresponding part of the Qi must be open. As long as the evil qi remains in this place, it will inevitably cause the reaction of the conflict between good and evil.

古文：黄帝曰：善。夫风之与疟也，相与同类，而风常在，而疟特以时休，何也？
现代文：所以，凡是卫气运行出入而邪气羁留的地方，就是发病的所在。黄帝说：讲得好。风邪所引起的疾病和疟疾相似而同属一类型，但外感风邪的病症，常常持续存在，而疟疾的发病却有间歇地定时发作，这是什么原因呢？
English: Therefore, wherever the virtuous qi flows in and out and the evil qi stays, that is where the disease occurs. Huang Di said: Well said. The diseases caused by colds and malaria are similar and belong to the same type, but the symptoms of external colds often persist, while the onset of malaria has intermittent regular attacks. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：风气留其处，疟气随经络，沉以内搏，故卫气应乃作也。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：因风邪常停留在肌表组织之间，卫阳之气不时地与之交争相搏，所以证候表现呈持续性；而疟疾病邪能随经络深入，搏结于内，所以只有卫气行至疟邪所在之处引起抗御病邪的反应时，疾病才会发作。黄帝说：讲得很好。
English: Qi Bo said: Because the wind often stays between the tissue of the skin surface, the qi of the sun and the wind fight with it from time to time, so the symptoms are persistent; and the malarial disease evil energy goes deep with the meridians and fights inside, so the disease will only occur when the qi of the wind goes to the place where the malarial disease is located and causes a reaction to resist the disease. Huang Di said: It was well said.

古文：黄帝问于少师曰：余闻四时八风之中人也，故有寒暑，寒则皮肤急而腠理闭；暑则皮肤缓而腠理开。
现代文：黄帝问少师：我听说四时八风伤害人体，本来就有寒暑气候的不同。寒冷时，人的皮肤紧束，腠理闭合；暑热时，人的皮肤弛缓，腠理开泄。
English: Huang Di asked the young master: I heard that the four o'clock and eight o'clock winds harm the human body, and there are differences in cold and hot climates. When it is cold, the human skin is tightly bundled, and the body is closed; when it is hot, the human skin is relaxed, and the body is open.

古文：贼风邪气因得以入乎？将必须八正虚邪，乃能伤人乎？
现代文：在这种情况下，贼风邪气是乘人体皮肤腠理开泄而侵入的呢，还是必须遇到四时八风反常的气候才会伤人呢？
English: In this case, is the thief wind evil spirit invading by taking advantage of the human skin to vent, or must it encounter the four o'clock wind abnormal climate to hurt people?

古文：少师答曰：不然。
现代文：少师回答说：不尽是这样。
English: The young master replied, "That's not entirely true.

古文：贼风邪气之中人也，不得以时，然必因其开也，其入深，其内极病，其病人也卒暴。因其闭也，其入浅以留，其病也，徐以迟。
现代文：贼风邪气侵害人体，并不按固定的时间刻板地依据四时八风的规律，但必须是人体皮肤腠理开泄时才能乘虚而入，这时人体内部往往精亏气虚，卫表不固，邪气容易深入，在这种情况下，病情就要严重些，发病也较急促。
English: The thief wind evil spirit invades the human body, and it does not rise according to the fixed time according to the law of four o'clock and eight winds, but it must be when the human skin is rationally excreted in order to take advantage of the opportunity. At this time, the inside of the human body is often deficient, the health meter is not solid, and the evil spirit is easy to penetrate. In this case, the condition is more serious, and the onset is more rapid.

古文：黄帝曰：有寒温和适，腠理不开，然有卒病者，其故何也？
现代文：如果在皮肤腠理闭合时，即使邪气侵入，因人体正气不亏，也只能逗留在表浅部位，病势就会较轻，发病也比较迟缓。
English: If, when the skin barrier is closed, even if the evil spirit invades, because the human body is righteous, it can only stay in the superficial parts, the disease will be lighter and the onset will be relatively slow.

古文：少师答曰：帝弗知邪入乎？虽平居，其腠理开闭缓急，其故常有时也。
现代文：黄帝说：有时气候寒温也适度，人本身也能恰当地调节衣着，人体腠理并没有开泄，然而也有突然发病的，其原因是什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: Sometimes the climate and temperature are moderate, and people themselves can properly adjust their clothing. The human body does not excrete, but there is also a sudden onset of illness. What is the reason for this?

古文：黄帝曰：可得闻乎？
现代文：少师回答说：黄帝你不知道邪气侵入的原因吗？
English: The young master replied, "Yellow Emperor, don't you know the reason why evil spirits invade?

古文：少师曰：人与天地相参也，与日月相应也。
现代文：即使在平时，人的腠理、皮肤也是有时张开有时闭合、有时松弛有时坚紧的，这原本就是人体的正常现象。黄帝问：我可以知道吗？
English: Even in ordinary times, the human body and skin are sometimes open, sometimes closed, sometimes loose and sometimes tight, which is originally a normal phenomenon of the human body. Huang Di asked: May I know?

古文：故月满则海水西盛，人血气积，肌肉充，皮肤致，毛发坚，腠理郗，烟垢着，当是之时，虽遇贼风，其入浅不深。
现代文：少师说：人与天地自然变化密切相关，日月运行亏满也会对人体产生影响。所以，当月亮满圆的时候，海水向西涌盛形成大潮，此时人体气血也相应地充盛，肌肉坚实，皮肤致密，毛发坚韧，腠理闭合，烟尘污垢容易附着于体表形成保护，在这个时候，即使遇到贼风邪气的侵入，也较表浅不会深陷。
English: The minor teacher said, "Human beings are closely related to the natural changes of heaven and earth. The sun and moon also have an impact on the human body. Therefore, when the moon is full, the seawater surges to the west to form a big tide. At this time, the human body's qi and blood are also correspondingly enriched. The muscles are solid, the skin is dense, the hair is tough, the joints are closed, and the soot and dirt easily adhere to the surface of the body to form protection. At this time, even if you encounter the invasion of the thief wind evil gas, it will not sink deeper than the surface.

古文：至其月郭空，则海水东盛，人气血虚，其卫气去，形独居，肌肉减，皮肤纵，腠理开，毛发残，膲理薄，烟垢落，当是之时，遇贼风则其入深，其病人也卒暴。
现代文：如果到了月亮亏缺的时候，海水向东涌盛形成大潮，这时人体气血相应虚弱，体表卫气衰退，外形虽然如常，但肌肉消减，皮肤弛缓，腠理开泄，毛发残脆，肉理疏薄，烟尘污垢不容易附着于体表形成保护，在这个时候，若遇到贼风邪气的侵袭，就容易深陷入里，发病也急暴。
English: If, when the moon is deficient, the seawater surges to the east to form a big tide, then the human body is correspondingly weak, the body surface is weakened, and although the appearance is as usual, the muscles are reduced, the skin is relaxed, the skin is open, the hair is brittle, the flesh is thin, and the soot dirt is not easily attached to the surface of the body to form protection. At this time, if you encounter the invasion of the thief wind evil gas, it is easy to fall deep into the belly, and the onset is also violent.

古文：黄帝曰：其有卒然暴死暴病者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有人得病呈暴发性，或是突然死亡这是什么原因？
English: Huang Di said: Some people have a sudden illness, or a sudden death. What is the reason?

古文：少师答曰：三虚者，其死暴疾也；得三实者，邪不能伤人也。
现代文：少师回答说：遭逢三虚的人，就会暴病暴死；得遇三实的人，邪气就不能伤害他。
English: The young master replied, "If a person is afflicted with the three evils, he will die a violent death; if a person is afflicted with the three virtues, evil spirits cannot harm him.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻三虚。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道什么是三虚。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I want to know what the Three Defects are."

古文：少师曰：乘年之衰，逢月之空，失时之和，因为贼风所伤，是谓三虚。
现代文：少师说：时逢岁气不及的虚年，遇上月亮亏缺无光，四时气候失和，在这种条件下，最容易感受贼风邪气的侵袭，这种情况称为三虚。
English: The young master said: When the year is too short, the moon is deficient in light, and the climate is out of harmony at four o'clock. Under these conditions, it is most easy to feel the invasion of the evil wind and the evil spirit. This situation is called the Three Defects.

古文：故论不知三虚，工反为粗。帝曰：愿闻三实。
现代文：所以，如果不了解三虚的理论，即使医学知识达到相当的高度，但往往因这一点而像粗率庸俗的医生一样了。黄帝说：我想知道什么是三实。
English: Therefore, if you don't understand the theory of the Three Realms, even if you have a fairly high level of medical knowledge, you will often be like a rude and vulgar doctor because of this. Huang Di said: I want to know what the Three Realms are.

古文：少师曰：逢年之盛，遇月之满，得时之和，虽有贼风邪气，不能危之也。
现代文：少师说：时逢岁气有余之年，又逢月望满圆，再遇到四时调和的气候，虽有贼风邪气也不能危害人体，这就叫做三实。
English: The young master said, "Whenever the year has more than enough energy, and the moon is full, and when the weather is harmonious at four o'clock, although there is a thief wind and evil spirit, it cannot harm the human body. This is called the three solidities.

古文：黄帝曰：善乎哉论！
现代文：黄帝说：这是多么深刻的哲理啊！
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What a profound philosophy!

古文：明乎哉道！
现代文：你讲得也很透彻。
English: You're also very thorough.

古文：请藏之金匮，命曰三实。
现代文：请把它珍藏在金匮之中。
English: Please treasure it in your heart.

古文：然，此一夫之论也。
现代文：不过，这只是指个别人疾病的单发情况而言。
English: However, this only refers to individual cases of the disease.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻岁之所以皆同病者，何因而然？
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道在一年之中，有许多人得相同的病，呈流行性。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know how many people have the same disease in a year. It's an epidemic.

古文：少师曰：此八正之候也。
现代文：这是什么原因造成的呢？少师说：这需要在交立八节的时候，观察四正、四隅气候是否异常。
English: What is the reason for this? The young master said, "It is necessary to observe whether the weather is abnormal in the four directions and four corners when the eight solar terms intersect."

古文：黄帝曰：候之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样观察呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to judge whether the disease is suitable to use the pricking method?

古文：少师曰：候此者，常以冬至之日，太一立于叶蛰之宫，其至也，天必应之以风雨者矣。
现代文：少师说：这种观察气象的方法，通常是在冬至日这天，太一入居北方叶蛰宫，当它到来之际，一定有风雨与之相应。
English: The young master said, "This method of observing the weather usually begins on the day of the winter solstice, when the emperor moves into the northern palace of Ye. When it comes, there must be wind and rain corresponding to it.

古文：风雨从南方来者，为虚风，贼伤人者也。
现代文：如果从南方来的，叫做虚风，这是能够伤害人体的贼风邪气。
English: If it comes from the south, it is called the false wind, which is the evil wind that can harm the human body.

古文：其以夜半至也，万民皆卧而弗犯也，故其岁民少病。
现代文：假如虚风来时正在半夜，人们都居于室内安睡，邪气无从冒犯，这就预示着当年很少人生病。
English: If the false wind comes in the middle of the night, people are sleeping peacefully indoors, and the evil spirit cannot offend, this indicates that few people were sick that year.

古文：其以昼至者，万民懈惰而皆中于虚风，故万民多病。
现代文：假如虚风出现在白天，人们多在室外活动而防范松懈，就容易被邪气所中伤，因此生病的人就较多。
English: If the false wind appears during the day, people are more active outdoors and are lax in prevention, they are easily slandered by evil spirits, so there are more people who are sick.

古文：虚邪入客于骨而不发于外，至其立春，阳气大发，腠理开，因立春之日，风从西方来，万民又皆中于虚风，此两邪相搏，经气结代者矣。
现代文：假如在冬季感受了虚邪，深入至骨而不外散，到了立春，阳气逐渐旺盛，腠理开泄，倘若再遇到立春这一天刮来的西风，人们又会被这种反常的气候再度中伤，因此两种邪气交结，就会使经气滞止不畅而发生疾病。
English: If in winter one feels the evil spirit, which penetrates deep into the bones but does not disperse, by the first day of spring, the yang spirit will gradually flourish and the reason will be revealed. If one encounters the west wind blowing on this day of the first day of spring, people will be slandered again by this abnormal climate. As a result, the two evil spirits will intertwine, which will cause the stagnation of qi and the occurrence of diseases.

古文：故诸逢其风而遇其雨者，命曰遇岁露焉。
现代文：所以，凡是这样遭逢不当令的虚风邪雨，都叫做遇岁露。
English: Therefore, whenever such an unwarranted wind and rain are encountered, it is called encountering the year dew.

古文：因岁之和，而少贼风者，民少病而少死。
现代文：总之，一年之中气候调和，或很少有异常气候的出现，人们患病的就少，死亡的也少。
English: In short, if the climate is temperate, or there are few abnormal weather conditions during the year, people will have fewer illnesses and fewer deaths.

古文：岁多贼风邪气，寒温不和，则民多病而死矣。
现代文：反之，一年之中寒温不时，风雨不调，人们患病的就多，死亡的也多。
English: On the other hand, in the middle of the year, cold temperatures from time to time, wind and rain, people get sick more, and there are more deaths.

古文：黄帝曰：虚邪之风，其所伤贵贱何如，候之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：虚风邪气，给人们造成危害的轻重，根据什么去判断呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: What is the basis for judging the severity of the harm caused to people by false winds and evil spirits?

古文：少师答曰：正月朔日，太一居天留之宫，其日西北风，不雨，人多死矣。
现代文：少师回答说：在正月初一这一天，月建在寅，太一在东北方的天留宫，这一天如果刮西北风，而且没有雨，人们多有生病而死亡的。
English: The young master replied, "On the first day of the first month of the year, when the moon is in the yin and the moon is in the yang, and the first day of the month is in the northeast of Tianliu Palace, if the northwest wind blows on this day and there is no rain, many people will get sick and die.

古文：正月朔日，平旦北风，春，民多死。
现代文：正月初一，早晨平旦寅时，刮起北风，到了春天，人们多因病致死，而且患病的人数多达十分之三。
English: On the first day of the first lunar month, in the morning of the first day of the first lunar month, the north wind blew, and in the spring, people mostly died from illness, and the number of people who fell ill was as high as three in ten.

古文：正月朔日，平旦北风行，民病多者，十有三也。
现代文：正月初一，中午刮北风，到了夏天，就会造成疾病流行，而且多有死亡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the north wind blows at noon, and in the summer, it will cause disease epidemics, and there are many deaths.

古文：正月朔日，日中北风，夏，民多死。
现代文：正月初一的傍晚刮北风，到了秋天，会有很多人病死。
English: In the evening of the first day of the first month of the year, the north wind will blow, and in the autumn, many people will die of illness.

古文：正月朔日，夕时北风，秋，民多死。终日北风，大病死者十有六。
现代文：如果这一天整天刮北风，就会大病流行，死亡的人数约占十分之六。
English: If the north wind blows all day on this day, there will be an epidemic of serious illness, and the number of deaths will account for about six out of ten.

古文：正月朔日，风从南方来，命曰旱乡；从西方来，命曰白骨，将国有殃，人多死亡。
现代文：正月初一，如果风从南方刮来，这叫做旱乡；从西方刮来，称为白骨，国家将会有祸殃，人多死亡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, if the wind blows from the south, it is called the Dry Town; if it blows from the west, it is called the White Bone. The country will be plagued and many people will die.

古文：正月朔日，风从东方来，发屋，扬沙石，国有大灾也。
现代文：正月初一，风从东方刮来，如果掀翻房屋，飞沙走石，国家将有大灾难。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the wind blows from the east. If the houses are overturned and the sand is blown away, the country will have a great disaster.

古文：正月朔日，风从东南方行，春有死亡。
现代文：正月初一，风从东南方刮来，到了春天会有人病死。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the wind blows from the southeast. By spring, people will die of illness.

古文：正月朔日，天和温不风，粜贱，民不病；天寒而风，粜贵，民多病。
现代文：正月初一，如果天气温和而无风，则本年内谷物价格低廉，人们不患疾病；如果天气寒冷而且有风，则本年内谷物价格昂贵，人们也多灾多病。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, if the weather is mild and there is no wind, grain prices will be low this year, and people will not suffer from diseases; if the weather is cold and windy, grain prices will be expensive this year, and people will have more disasters and diseases.

古文：此所谓候岁之风，残伤人者也。
现代文：这就是所说的，可以在正月初一观察天气与风向，以预测当年虚邪贼风伤人的情况。
English: That is to say, it is possible to observe the weather and wind direction on the first day of the first month of the year to predict the situation of the year.

古文：二月丑不风，民多心腹病；三月戌不温，民多寒热；四月巳不暑，民多瘅病；十月申不寒，民多暴死。
现代文：如果到了二月初二日，时近春分多风之际，春风仍不吹拂，人们每每患心腹之病。到了三月十一日，春将尽夏将来时，而气候仍不温暖，人们多患寒热之病。到了四月六日，天阳始盛，夏天到来，如果气候仍然不热，那么人们容易患瘅热病。
English: If by the second day of February, when it is windy near the vernal equinox, the spring breeze is still not blowing, people will often suffer from heart disease. By March 11, spring will be the end of summer, and the climate is still not warm, people are more likely to suffer from cold and fever. By April 6, when the sun is at its peak and summer comes, if the climate is still not hot, then people are prone to suffering from scarlet fever.

古文：诸所谓风者，皆发屋，折树木，扬沙石，起毫毛，发腠理者也。
现代文：到了十月九日，冬天已到，阴气始盛，但气候仍然不冷，人们往往会突然发病或猝然死亡。以上所说的风，都是指那些能损坏房屋、折断树木、飞沙走石的大风，这样的风能使人毛发竖立、腠理开张而致病。
English: By the 9th of October, winter had arrived and the gloomy weather was in full swing, but the weather was still not cold, and people often suddenly fell ill or died suddenly. The above-mentioned winds all refer to those high winds that can damage houses, break trees, and blow sand and stones. Such winds can make people's hair stand on end and cause illness.

