古文：蔡廓廓博涉群书，言行以礼，起家着作佐郎。
现代文：蔡廓博览群书，言行都依照礼节，最初离家任职著作佐郎。
English: Cai Guo is well-read, his words and deeds are in accordance with etiquette, and he initially left home to work for Saro.

古文：后爲宋武帝太尉参军、中书黄门郎，以方鲠闲素，爲武帝所知。
现代文：后来做宋武帝的太尉参军、中书黄门郎，以鲠直简素为武帝所赏识。
English: Later, he joined the army as Song Emperor Wu's lieutenant and became the Huangmen Lang of Chinese literature. Emperor Wu appreciated his straightforwardness and simplicity.

古文：载迁太尉从事中郎，未拜，遭母忧。
现代文：又调任太尉从事中郎，还没上任，遇到了母亲的丧事。
English: He was also transferred to the rank of captain to engage in churo, but before he took office, he encountered his mother's funeral.

古文：性至孝，三年不栉沐，殆不胜丧。
现代文：他性情极为孝顺，三年不梳头洗发，几乎难以承当丧事带来的悲哀。
English: His disposition is extremely filial, he hasn't combed or washed his hair for three years, and it's almost impossible for him to bear the grief brought about by the funeral.

古文：宋台建，爲侍中，建议以爲 鞫狱不宜令子孙下辞，明言父祖之罪。
现代文：宋台建立，他担任侍中，建议 审讯囚犯不应该让子孙提供证词，明白地说出父亲祖父的罪过。
English: Song Tai established, he served as a chamberlain, suggested that the interrogation of prisoners should not let the children and grandchildren to provide testimony, clearly state the sins of the father and grandfather.

古文：亏教伤情，莫此爲大。
现代文：损坏教化，伤害情感，没有比这更厉害的。
English: There's nothing worse than damaging education and hurting feelings.

古文：自今但令家人与囚相见，无乞鞫之诉，便足以明伏罪，不须责家人下辞 。
现代文：从今以后，只让家属与囚犯相见，不要让他们审讯时进行指控，便足以说明已经伏罪，不需要责令家人提供证词。 
English: From now on, only allowing family members to meet with prisoners, and not allowing them to make accusations during interrogation, is enough to show that a crime has been committed, and there is no need to order family members to provide testimony.

古文：朝议从之。
现代文：朝廷讨论并听从了他的意见。
English: The court agreed with him.

古文：世子左卫率谢灵运辄杀人，御史中丞王准之坐不纠免官。
现代文：世子左卫率谢灵运杀了人，御史中丞王准之因为对他不加纠弹而被免官。
English: The heir of the left guard, Xie Lingyun, killed a man, and the chief historian, Wang Junzhi, was removed from office for not punishing him.

古文：武帝以廓刚直，补御史中丞。
现代文：武帝因为蔡廓刚直，把他补为御史中丞。
English: Emperor Wu, because of Cai Kuo's firmness, promoted him to the position of Imperial Historian.

古文：多所纠奏，百僚震肃。
现代文：他纠弹了许多人，百官震恐整肃。
English: He has reprimanded many people, and hundreds of officials are trembling with fear of a purge.

古文：时中书令傅亮任寄隆重，学冠当时，朝廷仪典，皆取定于亮。
现代文：当时中书令傅亮职位隆重，学问冠于当时，朝廷的仪礼典章，都是由傅亮决定的。
English: At that time, Fu Liang held a high-ranking position in the General Office of the CPC Central Committee. He was the most learned person at that time. The ceremonial rules and regulations of the imperial court were all decided by Fu Liang.

古文：亮每事谘廓然后行，亮意若有不同，廓终不爲屈。
现代文：傅亮常常是先向蔡廓咨询然后实行，傅亮的意见如果有不同，蔡廓终于不肯屈从。
English: Fu Liang often consulted Cai Guo first and then implemented. If Fu Liang's opinion was different, Cai Guo finally refused to yield.

古文：迁司徒左长史，出爲豫章太守。
现代文：调任司徒左长史，出京担任豫章太守。
English: He was transferred to the post of Stuzasochoshi, and went to Kyoto to serve as the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：征爲吏部尚书。
现代文：他被征调为吏部尚书。
English: He was conscripted into the General Staff.

古文：廓因北地傅隆问亮： 选事若悉以见付，不论；不然，不能拜也。 
现代文：蔡廓通过北地的傅隆问傅亮： 选用人才的事如果都能兑现，没有可说的；如果不是这样，我不能就任这一职务。 
English: Cai Guo asked Fu Liang through Fu Long of the North: If the selection of talents can be fulfilled, there is nothing to say; if not, I can not take up this position.

古文：亮以语录尚书徐羡之，羡之曰： 黄门郎以下悉以委蔡，吾徒不复厝怀，自此以上，故宜共参同异。 
现代文：傅亮把这话告诉给录尚书徐羡之，徐羡之说： 黄门郎以下都交给蔡廓委任，我们不再考虑，由此以上，当然应该共同研究。 
English: Fu Liang told this to Xu Enzhi, the recorder of records, and Xu Enzhi said: Huang Menlang and below have been assigned to Cai Kuo, we will no longer consider it, so above, of course, should be jointly studied.

古文：廓曰： 我不能爲徐干木署纸尾。 
现代文：蔡廓说： 我不能为徐干木在纸尾上署名。 
English: Cai Kuo said: I can't sign the end of the paper for Xu Gangmu.

古文：遂不拜。
现代文：于是没有上任。
English: As a result, he did not take office.

古文：干木，羡之小字也。
现代文：干木，是徐羡之的小字。
English: "Dry wood" is a small character of Xu Enzhi.

古文：选案黄纸，录尚书与吏部尚书连名，故廓言署纸尾也。羡之亦以廓正直，不欲使居权要，徙爲祠部尚书。不可；但杀人二昆，而以之北面，挟震主之威，据上流之重，以古推今，自免爲难也。 
现代文：蔡廓说： 您受先帝的顾命，以国家为责任，废昏君立明君，在道义上没有什么不可以；但是杀死别人的两个哥哥，而让他面北听从命令，拥有震慑君主的威势，占据长江上游的要地，根据古代推论今天，自身免祸是很困难的。 
English: Cai Kuo said: There is nothing morally wrong with you taking the previous emperor's order, taking the country as your responsibility, and dethroning and setting up Ming Jun. However, it is very difficult to avoid disaster by killing someone else's two brothers, while letting him face north and obey orders, have the power to deter the monarch, and occupy an important place in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, according to ancient reasoning.

古文：廓年位并轻，而爲时流所推重，每至岁时，皆束带诣门。
现代文：蔡廓年龄和职位都很轻，却被当时的社会所推重，每当到了年节，都束好衣带到他门上去看望。
English: Cai Guo was very young in age and position, but he was highly regarded by the society of the time. Whenever the New Year's Day came, he would be bundled up and taken to his door for a visit.

古文：奉兄轨如父，家事大小，皆谘而后行，公禄赏赐，一皆入轨，有所资须，悉就典者请焉。
现代文：他侍奉兄长蔡轨如同父亲，家中的大小事情，都是询问以后再行动，俸禄和赏赐，一律都交给蔡轨，有时需要花费，全都是到主管人那里去要。
English: He served his elder brother, Cai Rail, like a father. In matters big and small in the family, it was always a matter of asking before acting. Salaries and rewards were all handed over to Cai Rail. Sometimes it was necessary to spend money, and everything had to be requested from the person in charge.

古文：从武帝在彭城，妻郗氏书求夏服。
现代文：他跟随武帝在彭城，妻子郗氏写信向他要夏服。
English: He followed Emperor Wu in Pengcheng, and his wife, Zou, wrote to him asking for summer clothes.

古文：廓答书曰： 知须夏服，计给事自应相供，无容别寄。 
现代文：蔡廓写信回答说： 知道你需要夏服，估计给事中自然会给你提供，不可以另外寻求。 
English: Cai Guo replied in a letter: "Knowing that you need summer clothes, I expect that you will naturally be provided with them, and you cannot seek them separately.

古文：时轨爲给事中。
现代文：当时是蔡轨做给事中。
English: At that time, Cai Rail was in the middle of something.

古文：元嘉二年，廓卒。
现代文：元嘉二年，蔡廓去世。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Cai Guo passed away.

古文：武帝常云： 羊徽、蔡廓，可平世三公。 
现代文：武帝常常说： 羊徽、蔡廓，可以与三公平等看待。 
English: Emperor Wu often said: Yang Hui and Cai Kuo can be regarded as equal to the Three Princes.

