古文：太祖上太祖大圣大明神烈天皇帝，姓耶律氏，讳亿，字阿保机，小字啜里只，契丹迭剌部霞濑益石烈耶律弥里人，德祖皇帝长子，母曰宣简皇后萧氏，唐咸通十三年生。
现代文：太祖大圣大明神烈天皇帝，姓耶律氏，名亿，字阿保机，乳名啜里只，契丹迭剌部霞濑益石烈乡耶律弥里人。德祖皇帝长子，生母为宣简皇后萧氏。唐朝咸通十三年生。
English: The great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：初，母梦日堕怀中，有娠。
现代文：起先，母亲梦见太阳坠入自己怀中，于是怀了孕。
English: At first, the mother dreamed of the sun falling into her lap, and became pregnant.

古文：及生，室有神光异香，体如三岁儿，即能匍匐。
现代文：待到出生之时，屋内有神光异香环绕，身体犹如三岁小儿，落地便能爬行。
English: By the time they are born, they are surrounded by a magical glow inside the house. Their bodies are like those of three-year-olds, and they can crawl when they land.

古文：祖母简献皇后异之，鞠为己子。
现代文：祖母简献皇后十分惊奇，把他当成亲生儿子一般加以抚养。
English: His grandmother, Jane, surprised the queen and raised him as if he were her own son.

古文：常匿于别幕，涂其面，不令他人见。
现代文：经常将他藏于别宫之中，涂抹其面，不让别人看见。
English: She often hid him in other palaces, smeared his face and did not let others see him.

古文：三月能行，晬而能言，知未然事。
现代文：三个月便能行走，满百日便能说话，凡事未卜先知。
English: After three months they can walk, after a hundred days they can talk, but they don't know everything.

古文：自谓左右若有神人翼卫。
现代文：自称左右好像有神人护卫。
English: Self-proclaimed left and right seem to be escorted by divine beings.

古文：虽龆龀，言必及世务，时伯父当国，疑辄咨焉。
现代文：即使在童年之时，开言便涉及国家大事。当时其伯父执掌国政，事有疑难便去向他咨问。
English: Even as a child, his first words were about national affairs, when his uncle, who was in charge of state affairs, would consult him when in doubt.

古文：既长，身长九尺，丰上锐下，目光射人，关弓三百斤。
现代文：成年之后，身高九尺，额宽颊瘦，目中神光照人，能开三百斤大弓。
English: After he became an adult, he was nine feet tall, with a broad forehead and thin cheeks. His eyes were radiant, and he could draw a three-hundred-kilo bow.

古文：为挞马狘沙里。
现代文：担任挞马笰沙里时，小黄室韦不肯附从，太祖用计使之降服。
English: When he was serving as the prince of Baima and Bansari, Xiao Huangshuwei refused to follow, and the great ancestor used a trick to make him submit.

古文：时小黄室韦不附，太祖以计降之，伐越兀及乌古、六奚、比沙狘诸部，克之。
现代文：又攻打越兀及乌古、六奚、比沙笰各部，取得胜利。
English: They also attacked the provinces of Yueqi, Wugu, Liuchu and Bisha, and won victory.

古文：国人号阿主沙里。
现代文：国人称之阿主沙里。
English: The Chinese people call it Achu Shari.

古文：唐天复元年，岁辛酉，痕德堇可汗立，以太祖为本部夷离堇，专征讨，连破室韦、于厥及奚帅辖剌哥，俘获甚众。
现代文：唐天复元年，岁在辛酉，痕德堇可汗即位，以太祖为本部夷离堇，专事征讨，接连攻破室韦、于厥及奚帅辖剌哥，俘获甚众。
English: In the first year of Tang's restoration, when he was in Xinjiang, the Khan of Yundu was enthroned, and his ancestor was the head of the campaign to expel the Xiongnu. He made a special effort to collect information, and successively attacked the Xiongnu of Shouwei, the Xiongnu of Yue and the Xiongnu of Shuai, and captured a large number of people.

古文：冬十月，授大迭烈府夷离堇。
现代文：冬十月，授任大迭烈府夷离堇。
English: In the winter of October, he was awarded the title of Grand Elder of the Martyrs of Fuyi District.

古文：明年秋七月，以兵四十万伐河东代北，攻下九郡，获生口九万五千，驼马牛羊不可胜纪。
现代文：次年秋七月，率众四十万进击河东代北，攻下九郡，获得生口九万五千，驼马牛羊不计其数。
English: In the autumn and July of the following year, he led 400,000 people to attack the northeast of Hedong, capturing nine counties, gaining 95,000 livestock, and countless camels, horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：九月，城龙化州于潢河之南，始建开教寺。
现代文：九月，筑龙化州城于潢河之南，始建开教寺。
English: In September, the construction of Kaikyo-ji Temple began in the south of the Minka River in Kazushu-jo, Chikulong.

古文：明年春，伐女真，下之，获其户三百。
现代文：次年春，攻女真，破其城，俘获三百户。
English: In the spring of the following year, they attacked Jianzhen, broke through the city, and captured three hundred households.

古文：九月，复攻下河东怀远等军。
现代文：九月，又攻下河东、怀远等军。
English: In September, the army of Hedong, Huaiyuan and others was also captured.

古文：冬十月，引军略至蓟北，俘获以还。
现代文：冬十月，率军攻战至蓟北，俘获人口财物而回。
English: In the winter of October, he led the army to the north of Shandong Province, captured the population and property, and returned.

古文：先是，德祖俘奚七千户，徙饶乐之清河。至是创为奚迭剌部，分十三县。
现代文：在此之前，德祖俘虏奚人七千户，迁于饶乐之清河，到这时便建立了奚迭剌部，分为十三县。
English: Prior to this, the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of

古文：遂拜太祖于越、总知军国事。
现代文：于是拜太祖为于越、总知军国事。
English: As a result, Emperor Baizu became the supreme commander of the armed forces of Vietnam.

古文：明年岁甲子，三月，广龙化州之东城。
现代文：次年岁当甲子，三月，扩建龙化州东城。
English: The following year, in March, the expansion of Longhua East City began.

古文：九月，讨黑车子室韦，唐卢龙军节度使刘仁恭发兵数万，遣养子赵霸来拒。
现代文：九月，讨伐黑车子室韦，唐卢龙军节度使刘仁恭发兵数万，遣养子赵霸前来拒战。
English: In September, the crusade against the Black Chariot's son Shumwei and the festival of the Tang and Lu's Dragon Army caused Liu Rengong to send tens of thousands of soldiers, and his adopted son Zhao Ba came to oppose the war.

古文：霸至武州，太祖谍知之，伏劲兵桃山下。
现代文：赵霸兵至武州，太祖从谍报得知，便埋伏精兵于桃山下。
English: Zhao Haibing went to Wuzhou. Taizu learned from the spy report and ambushed the elite soldiers at the foot of Momoyama Mountain.

古文：遣室韦人牟里诈称其酋长所遣，约霸兵会平原。
现代文：派室韦人牟里诈称为其酋长派来，约赵霸兵马相会于平原。
English: He sent his wife Wei Ren and Muri Zhao as his chieftains to meet Zhao Ba's soldiers and horses on the plain.

古文：既至，四面伏发，擒霸，歼其众，乘胜大破室韦。
现代文：赵霸兵到，四面伏击齐发，活捉赵霸，全歼其众，又乘胜大破室韦。
English: When Zhao Hao's soldiers arrived, they launched an ambush on all sides, captured Zhao Hao alive, wiped out his entire army, and took advantage of the victory to break Shuxu Wei.

古文：明年七月，复讨黑车子室韦。
现代文：次年七月，又讨伐黑车子室韦。
English: In July of the following year, the crusade against the black chariot came to Shumway.

古文：唐河东节度使李克用遣通事康令德乞盟。
现代文：唐河东节度使李克用派通事康令德请求会盟。
English: The festival in the east of the Tang River caused Li Ke to send a messenger to Kang Lingde to request the alliance.

古文：冬十月，太祖以骑兵七万会克用于云州，宴酣，克用借兵以报刘仁恭木瓜涧之役，太祖许之。
现代文：冬十月，太祖率骑兵七万与李克用会于云州，宴饮至酒酣，李克用为木瓜涧之役借兵报复刘仁恭，太祖便答应了。
English: In the winter of October, the great-grandfather led 70,000 cavalrymen to meet Li Ke in Yunnan, and the banquet lasted until the wine ran out. Li Ke used the soldiers borrowed for the Papaya War to take revenge on Liu Rengong, and the great-grandfather agreed.

古文：易袍马，约为兄弟。
现代文：互换袍马，相约为兄弟。
English: Swapping gowns and horses, they look like brothers.

古文：及进兵击仁恭，拔数州，尽徙其民以归。
现代文：接着进兵攻打刘仁恭，攻下数州，尽数迁掳其民而回。
English: Next, the marching troops attacked Liu Renkong, conquered several states, and deported as many of his people as possible.

古文：明年二月，复击刘仁恭。
现代文：次年二月，又攻打刘仁恭。
English: In February of the following year, Liu Rinkong was attacked again.

古文：还，袭山北奚，破之。
现代文：回军途中，袭击山北奚人，破之。
English: On his way back to the army, he attacked the Shanbei Xunren and defeated them.

古文：汴州朱全忠遣人浮海奉书币、衣带、珍玩来聘。
现代文：汴州朱全忠派人渡海奉上书币、衣带、珍宝前来聘问。
English: Zhu Quanzhong of Zhangzhou sent people to cross the sea to bring books, coins, belts, and treasures to ask questions.

古文：十一月，遣偏师讨奚、霫诸部及东北女直之未附者，悉破降之。
现代文：十一月，派偏师讨伐奚、靅诸部及东北女真之尚未归附者，一概攻破降服之。
English: In November, he sent partisan divisions to fight against those who had not yet surrendered in Yunnan, Shandong, Zhuibe and Northeastern Yizhen, and they all defeated and surrendered.

古文：十二月，痕德堇可汗殂，群臣奉遗命请立太祖。
现代文：十二月，痕德堇可汗崩驾，群臣奉遗命请立太祖。
English: In December, Yundehye Khan passed away, and the ministers were ordered to set up a grand ancestor.

古文：曷鲁等劝进，太祖三让，从之。
现代文：耶律曷鲁等人劝进。太祖多次辞让，后来接受了请求。
English: The great-grandfather repeatedly made concessions, and later accepted the request.

古文：元年春正月庚寅，命有司设坛于如迂王集会埚，燔柴告天，即皇帝位。
现代文：太祖元年春正月十三日，命有司设坛于如迂王集会埚，焚柴祭天，即皇帝位。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12

古文：尊母萧氏为皇太后，立皇后萧氏。
现代文：尊母萧氏为皇太后，立皇后萧氏。
English: Xiao's mother was the empress dowager, and Xiao became the empress.

古文：北宰相萧辖剌、南宰相耶律欧里思率群臣上尊号曰天皇帝，后曰地皇后。
现代文：北宰相萧辖剌、南宰相耶律欧里思率群臣上尊号曰天皇帝，皇后曰地皇后。
English: The Northern Prime Minister Xiao Jizhen, the Southern Prime Minister Ye Luo Lisi led a group of high-ranking dignitaries to call themselves the Heavenly Emperor and the Empress the Earthly Empress.

古文：庚子，诏皇族承遥辇氏九帐为第十帐。
现代文：二十三日，诏令皇族承遥辇氏九帐为第十帐。
English: On the 23rd, the Imperial family decreed that the ninth account of the Jangyao clan would become the tenth account.

古文：二月戊午，以从弟迭栗底为迭烈府夷离堇。
现代文：二月十一日，以弟迭栗底为迭烈府夷离堇。
English: On February 11th, he left the palace with his younger brother, Dui Li Di, as Dui Li Fu Yi.

古文：是月，征黑车子室韦，降其八部。
现代文：同月，征讨黑车子室韦，降服其八部。
English: In the same month, the black chariot subjugated Shumway and subdued its eight parts.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，唐梁王朱全忠废其主，寻弑之，自立为帝，国号梁，遣使来告。
现代文：夏四月初一，唐梁王朱全忠废其主，不久杀害了他，自立为帝，国号梁，派使者前来通告。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhu Quanzhong, the king of Tang Liang, deposed his master, killed him soon after, established himself as emperor, called himself Liang, and sent an envoy to announce it.

古文：刘仁恭子守光囚其父，自称幽州卢龙军节度使。
现代文：刘仁恭之子刘守光囚禁其父，自称幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: Liu Shouguang, the son of Liu Rengong, imprisoned his father and claimed to be an envoy of the Yuzhou Lulong Army.

古文：秋七月乙酉，其兄平州刺史守奇率其众数千人来降，命置之平卢城。
现代文：秋七月初十，其兄平州刺史刘守奇率众数千人来降，诏令将他们安顿于平卢城。
English: At the beginning of the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, his brother Liu Shouqi, the governor of Pingzhou, led thousands of people to descend and ordered them to settle in Pinglu City.

古文：冬十月乙巳，讨黑车子室韦，破之。
现代文：冬十月初一，征讨黑车子室韦，破之。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the campaign against the black chariots of Shumway was broken.

古文：二年春正月癸酉朔，御正殿，受百官及诸国使朝。
现代文：二年春正月初一，御临正殿受百官及各国使节朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, the Imperial Throne Hall received congratulations from hundreds of officials and envoys from various countries.

古文：辛巳，始置惕隐，典族属，以皇弟撒剌为之。
现代文：初九，初次设置惕隐官，典理宗室事务，以皇弟撒剌任宗正。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the new year, the first set of eunuchs and family affairs were set up, with the emperor's younger brother, Saku, appointed as the head of the family.

古文：河东李克用卒，子存勖袭，遣使吊慰。
现代文：河东李克用卒，子李存勖即位，派使者前往吊唁慰问。
English: After Li Ke's death, his son Li Cunxu ascended the throne and sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：夏五月癸酉，诏撒剌讨乌丸、黑车子室韦。
现代文：夏五月初三，诏令撒剌讨伐乌丸、黑车子室韦。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the summer, the emperor issued an order to the satraps to fight against the black pheasants and the black pheasants of Murowe.

古文：秋八月壬子，幽州进合欢瓜。
现代文：秋八月十三日，幽州进献合欢瓜。
English: On the 13th day of the 8th month of autumn, Yuzhou presented a combination of gourd and melon.

古文：冬十月己亥朔，建明王楼。
现代文：冬十月初一，建明王楼。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Jianming Royal Mansion is closed.

古文：筑长城于镇东海口。
现代文：筑长城于镇东海口。
English: Build the Great Wall at the east coast of the town.

古文：遣轻兵取吐浑叛入室韦者。
现代文：派遣轻兵掠取由吐浑叛逃入室韦者。
English: Sending light soldiers to capture those who had defected from Tuban to Muxiawei.

古文：三年春正月，幸辽东。
现代文：三年春正月，幸辽东。
English: In the first month of spring of the third year, the happiness of Liaodong.

古文：二月丁酉朔，梁遣郎公远来聘。
现代文：二月初一，梁遣郎公远来访。
English: On the first day of February, Liang Qianro Gongyuan came to visit.

古文：三月，沧州节度使刘守文为弟守光所攻，遣人来乞兵讨之。
现代文：三月，沧州节度使刘守文为弟刘守光所攻，派人来借兵讨伐。
English: In March, the Cangzhou Festival caused Liu Shouwen to be attacked by his brother Liu Shouguang, who sent soldiers to fight.

古文：命皇弟舍利素、夷离堇萧敌鲁以兵会守文于北淖口。
现代文：命皇弟舍利耶律素、夷离堇萧敌鲁派兵与刘守文相会于北淖口。
English: The emperor's younger brother, Sheliye Ruxu, who had been exiled, sent troops to meet Liu Shouwen at Beilunkou.

古文：进至横海军近淀，一鼓破之，守光溃去。
现代文：进军至横海军近淀，一举破之，刘守光人马溃散而去。
English: Liu Shouguang marched to the side of the navy near Yedong, broke it in one fell swoop, and the troops dispersed.

古文：因名北淖口为会盟口。
现代文：于是将北淖口命名为会盟口。
English: As a result, the north exit was named "Kai Menggou."

古文：夏四月乙卯，诏左仆射韩知古建碑龙化州大广寺以纪功德。
现代文：夏四月二十日，诏令左仆射韩知古建碑于龙化州大广寺以纪功德。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of the summer, Han Zhi, the left-hand servant of the imperial edict, built a monument in Longhua Prefecture's Daguang Temple.

古文：五月甲申，置羊城于炭山之北，以通市易。
现代文：五月二十日，在炭山之北设置羊城以互通贸易。
English: On May 20th, Yangcheng was set up in the north of the Coal Mountain to promote mutual trade.

古文：冬十月己巳，遣鹰军讨黑车子室韦，破之。西北嗢娘改部族进輓车人。
现代文：冬十月初七，派遣鹰军讨伐黑车子室韦，西北娘改部族进献挽车人。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, the eagle army was dispatched to fight against the black chariot son of Shumway, and the northwest daughter of the tribe was sent to help the chariot.

古文：四年秋七月戊子朔，以后兄萧敌鲁为北府宰相。后族为相自此始。
现代文：四年秋七月初一朔，以后兄萧敌鲁为北府宰相，后族为相自此始。
English: On the first day of the fourth year of autumn and the beginning of July, his brother, Xiao Qilu, became the prime minister of Beifu Province, and his descendants have been the same since then.

古文：冬十月，乌马山奚库支及查剌底、锄勃德等叛，讨平之。
现代文：冬十月，乌马山奚库支及查剌底、锄勃德等反叛，讨伐平定之。
English: In the winter of October, the Umasan and Shigu branches, as well as the rebellions in Jiaxing and Zibo, began to be fought and quelled.

古文：五年春正月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：五年春正月初一朔，日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙申，上亲征西部奚。
现代文：十一日，皇上亲征西部奚。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Emperor personally led the Western Expedition.

古文：奚阻险，叛服不常，数招谕弗听。
现代文：奚人自恃地险路远，叛服不常，多次派人对他们加以招抚晓谕而不听。
English: Han people are far away from the dangerous road, and it is not common for them to rebel. They have repeatedly sent people to entice and instruct them, but they did not listen.

古文：是役所向辄下，遂分兵讨东部奚，亦平之。
现代文：这次战役所向即下，于是分兵讨伐东部奚，也得到平定。
English: This battle was fought in the immediate vicinity, so a detachment of soldiers went to fight in the eastern part of the country and was also defeated.

古文：于是尽有奚、霫之地。
现代文：于是尽有奚、靅之地。
English: As a result, there is no shortage of places to go.

古文：东际海，南暨白檀，西逾松漠，北抵潢水，凡五部，咸入版籍。
现代文：东到大海，南及白檀，西越松漠，北抵潢水，总计五部，均归入版图。
English: East to the sea, south and sandalwood, west to Songpan, north to Surabaya, a total of five, are all included in the map.

古文：三月，次滦河，刻石纪功。
现代文：三月，驻兵于滦河，刻石纪功。
English: In March, the garrison was stationed in Luohe, and the stone engraved "Ji Gong" was set up.

古文：复略地蓟州。
现代文：又掠地于蓟州。
English: It also grabbed land in Ganzhou.

古文：夏四月壬申，遣人使梁。
现代文：夏四月十八日，派人出使至梁。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of summer, he sent an envoy to Liang.

古文：五月，皇弟剌葛、迭剌、寅底石、安端谋反。
现代文：五月，皇弟剌葛、迭剌、寅底石、安端阴谋起事。
English: In May, the younger brothers of the emperor, Zangge, Diyu, Tindishi, and Ando, conspired to start a riot.

古文：安端妻粘睦姑知之，以告，得实。
现代文：安端妻粘睦姑知道后，告发此事，因此得其详情。
English: Ando's wife, Kimi Mutsugu, learned of the incident and reported it, thus obtaining the details.

古文：上不忍加诛，乃与诸弟登山刑牲，告天地为誓而赦其罪。
现代文：皇上不忍心杀了他们，便与诸弟登山刑牲，祭告天地为誓，从而赦免其罪。
English: The emperor did not have the heart to kill them, so he and his brothers climbed the mountain to offer sacrifices and swear to tell heaven and earth, thus pardoning their sins.

古文：出剌葛为迭剌部夷离堇，封粘睦姑为晋国夫人。
现代文：贬剌葛为迭剌部夷离堇，封粘睦姑为晋国夫人。
English: Zhuge Ge was relegated to the position of second-in-command, and Mu Gu, the wife of Jin Guo, was promoted to the top.

古文：秋七月壬午朔，斜离底及诸蕃使来贡。
现代文：秋七月初一朔，斜离底及诸蕃使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the autumn and early July, all the emissaries came to pay tribute.

古文：八月甲子，刘守光僣号幽州，称燕。
现代文：八月十三日，刘守光在幽州僭居帝号，国号燕。
English: On August 13th, Liu Shouguang was crowned emperor of Yuzhou Province.

古文：冬十月戊午，置铁冶。
现代文：冬十月初八，设置铁冶官。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, iron smiths were set up.

古文：十一月壬午，遣人使梁。
现代文：十一月初二，派人出使梁。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Liang sent an envoy.

古文：六年春正月，以化葛为惕隐。
现代文：六年春正月，以化葛为惕隐。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Gege was used as a precautionary measure.

古文：二月戊午，亲征刘守光。
现代文：二月初九，亲征刘守光。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, Liu Shouguang was personally recruited.

古文：三月，至自幽州。
现代文：三月，回宫，幽州之征结束。
English: In March, after returning to the palace, the Yuzhou Campaign ended.

古文：夏四月，梁郢王友珪弑父自立。
现代文：夏四月，梁郢王朱友皀弑父自立。
English: In the summer of April, Liang Ye Wang and Zhu Youya's father became independent.

古文：秋七月丙午，亲征术不姑，降之，俘获以数万计，命弟剌葛分兵攻平州。
现代文：秋七月初一，亲征术不姑，降服之，俘获以数万计。命弟剌葛分兵攻打平州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the autumn and the first day of the seventh month, he surrendered and captured tens of thousands of soldiers. His younger brother, Xing Ge, led the troops to attack Pingzhou.

古文：八月壬辰，上次恩德山。
现代文：八月十七日，皇上驻兵于恩德山。
English: On the 17th of August, the Emperor stationed troops at Mount Ende.

古文：皇子李胡生。
现代文：皇子李胡出生。
English: Prince Li Hu was born.

古文：冬十月戊寅，剌葛破平州，还，复与迭剌、寅底石、安端等反。
现代文：冬十月初四，剌葛破平州，回，又与迭剌、寅底石、安端等反叛。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Ge Ge broke out of Pingzhou, and rebelled against Dui Yao, Tora Di Shi, and Anduan.

古文：甲申，遣人使梁致祭。
现代文：初十，派人出使至梁致祭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to Liang to offer a sacrifice.

古文：壬辰，还次北阿鲁山，闻诸弟以兵阻道，引军南趋十七泺。
现代文：十八日，回军驻于北阿鲁山，听说诸弟派兵拦截于道，率军向南直走十七泺。
English: On the 18th, the Hui army stationed in North Aru Mountain, heard that the brothers sent soldiers to intercept the road, and led the army straight south for 17 days.

古文：是日燔柴。
现代文：同日燔柴祭天。
English: On the same day, it was time for the Bonfire Festival.

古文：翼日，次七渡河，诸弟各遣人谢罪。
现代文：次日，驻兵于七渡河，诸弟分别派人来谢罪。
English: The next day, the soldiers were stationed at Shichidogawa, and the brothers separately sent people to express their gratitude.

古文：上犹矜怜，许以自新。
现代文：皇上仍然怜惜他们，准予改过自新。
English: The emperor still took pity on them and allowed them to reform.

古文：是岁，以兵讨两冶，以所获僧崇文等五十人归西楼，建天雄寺以居之，以示天助雄武。
现代文：这一年，派兵讨伐两冶，将所俘获的僧人崇文等五十人交给西楼，建天雄寺让他们居住，以表明天助雄武。
English: In that year, he sent troops to fight against the two invaders, and handed over the captured monk Chongwen and fifty other people to Xilou, and built Tianxiong Temple for them to live in, to show that he was a great warrior.

古文：七年春正月甲辰朔，以用兵免朝。
现代文：七年春正月初一朔，因为用兵暂停例行上朝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, because of the suspension of the use of soldiers, the routine went to the morning.

古文：晋王李存勖拔幽州，擒刘守光。
现代文：晋王李存勖攻下幽州，擒刘守光。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu captured Yuzhou, and Liu Shuguang was captured.

古文：甲寅，王师次赤水城，弟剌葛等乞降。
现代文：十一日，王师驻于赤水城，弟剌葛等请降。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Shi was stationed in Chishui City, and his younger brother, Xing Ge, and others were asked to step down.

古文：上素服，乘赭白马，以将军耶律乐姑、辖剌仅阿钵为御，解兵器、肃侍卫以受之，因加慰谕。
现代文：皇上身着素服，乘赭白马，以将军耶律乐姑、辖剌仅阿钵为御者，撤去兵器，严整侍卫以受其降，且加以抚慰晓谕。
English: The emperor, dressed in plain clothes, riding on a white horse, with the general Yerut Legu, the governor and only the imam as the driver, removed the weapons, strictly adjusted the guards to accept their surrender, and comforted them.

古文：剌葛等引退，上复数遣使抚慰。
现代文：剌葛等引兵退却，皇上又派使者加以慰抚。
English: The Emperor sent an envoy to comfort them.

古文：二月甲戌朔，梁均王友贞讨杀其兄友珪，嗣立。
现代文：二月初一朔，梁均王朱友贞讨杀其兄朱友王圭，继立。
English: At the beginning of February, Liang Junwang Zhu Youzhen tried to kill his brother Zhu Youwang Gui and succeeded him.

古文：三月癸丑，次芦水，弟迭剌哥图为奚王，与安端拥千馀骑而至，绐称入觐。
现代文：三月初十，驻兵芦水，皇弟迭剌哥想做奚王，与安端率千余骑前来，诳称入觐。
English: At the beginning of March, the 10th, stationed in Lushui, the king's younger brother, Diego, wanted to be the king, and he rode with more than a thousand riders to come, pretending to enter the castle.

古文：上怒曰： 尔曹始谋逆乱，朕特恕之，使改过自新，尚尔反覆，将不利于朕！ 
现代文：皇上终于发怒了，说 ：你等先前图谋作乱，朕特地开恩加以宽恕，让你们改过自新，还是这样反复多变，想要加害于我！ 
English: The emperor finally got angry and said, "You tried to make trouble before, and I was so kind as to forgive you and let you make amends, but you still want to harm me in this capricious way!

古文：遂拘之，以所部分隶诸军。
现代文：于是拘执了他们。将其部卒分摊隶于诸军。
English: And he constrained them, and divided his forces among them.

古文：而剌葛引其众至乙室堇淀，具天子旗鼓，将自立，皇太后阴遣人谕令避去。
现代文：这时剌葛率其兵马到了乙室堇淀，陈设天子旗鼓，准备自立为王，皇太后暗地派人晓谕开导他，要他远走。
English: At this time, Gongge led his soldiers to the second room of the palace, and set up a banner and drum to prepare to become king. The empress dowager secretly sent someone to enlighten him and tell him to go away.

古文：会弭姑乃、怀里阳言车驾且至，其众惊溃，掠居民北走。
现代文：适逢弭姑乃、怀里诈称皇上将到，其众惊慌溃散，掳掠居民向北逃窜，皇上派兵追击。
English: At the right time, the Empress falsely announced that the Emperor was coming, and the crowd panicked and scattered. The abducted residents fled north, and the Emperor sent soldiers to chase them.

古文：上以兵追之，剌葛遣其党寅底石引兵径趋行宫，焚其辎重、庐帐，纵兵大杀。
现代文：剌葛派其党人寅底石派兵直捣行宫，焚烧辎重、庐帐，纵兵大杀。
English: Gongge sent his party member, Tora Jishi, to march directly to the palace, burn the baggage, and kill the soldiers.

古文：皇后急遣曷古鲁救之，仅得天子旗鼓而已。
现代文：皇后急忙派曷古鲁救火，仅仅得到天子旗鼓而已。
English: The empress hurriedly sent Zangguru to put out the fire, only to be beaten by the heavens.

古文：其党神速姑复劫西楼，焚明王楼。
现代文：其党神速姑又劫掠西楼，焚毁明王楼。
English: His party, the Shenhegu, also looted the West Tower and burned the Ming Wang Tower.

古文：上至土河，秣马休兵，若不为意。
现代文：皇上到了土河，息养马匹，休整士卒，好像并不将叛军放在心上。
English: When the emperor arrived in Tuhe, he rested his horses and took leave of his soldiers, as if he did not care about the rebels.

古文：诸将请急追之，上曰： 俟其远遁，人各怀土，怀土既切，其心必离，我军乘之，破之必矣！ 
现代文：诸将请皇上火速追击之，皇上说： 等到他们走远了，人各怀恋其故土。怀土之心既切，众心必然离散，我军乘之，打败他们就是必然的了！ 
English: They asked the emperor to pursue them quickly, and the emperor said, "When they have gone far away, everyone will be nostalgic for their homeland. Since people are nostalgic for their homeland, their hearts will inevitably be scattered. Our army will take advantage of this and defeat them is inevitable!"

古文：尽以先所获资畜分赐将士，留夷离毕直里姑总政务。
现代文：全数以先前所获取的资财畜产分赐将士，留下夷离毕直里姑总理政务。
English: The full amount of the previously acquired assets, wealth and livestock production was given to the soldiers, leaving the prime minister Bi Nao Ligu's government affairs.

古文：夏四月戊寅，北追剌葛。
现代文：夏四月初六，向北追击剌葛。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, I chased the starling northward.

古文：己卯，次弥里，问诸弟面木叶山射鬼箭厌禳，乃执叛人解里向彼，亦以其法厌之。
现代文：初七，驻兵弥里，听说诸弟面对木叶山射鬼箭厌祭禳灾，便执叛人解里到那里，如法厌祭之。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, stationed in Miri, he heard that his younger brothers were tired of offering sacrifices and plagues in the face of Mount Mubei, so he went there to solve the riddle of traitors, as if he was tired of offering sacrifices.

古文：至达里淀，选轻骑追及培只河，尽获其党辎重、生口。
现代文：至达里淀，选轻骑兵追到培只河，全数获得其徒众、辎重、生口。
English: As far as Dariyodo, the selected light cavalry chased to Peizhaohe, and all of them gained their followers, weight, and mouths to feed.

古文：先遣室韦及吐浑酋长拔剌、迪里姑等五人分兵伏其前路，命北宰相迪里古为先锋进击之。
现代文：先派室韦及吐浑酋长拔剌、迪里姑等五人分兵在其前路设下埋伏，命北宰相迪里古为先锋进击之。
English: First, he sent five detachments of soldiers, including Shumway and the chiefs of Tuhun, Baju and Dirigu, to set up an ambush on their front path, and ordered the Northern Prime Minister, Dirigu, to lead the attack.

古文：剌葛率兵逆战，迪里古以轻兵薄之。其弟遏古只临阵，射数十人毙，众莫敢前。
现代文：剌葛率兵迎战，迪里古以轻兵迫近之，其弟遏古只在阵前射杀数十人，敌众不敢向前。
English: Zou Ge led the troops to fight, Dirigu approached with light troops, and his younger brother Ruigu only shot dozens of people before the battle, and the enemy did not dare to advance.

古文：相拒至晡，众乃溃。
现代文：相拒至申时，敌众方才溃败。
English: When the opposition refused to submit, the enemy was routed.

古文：追至柴河，遂自焚其车乘庐帐而去。
现代文：追到柴河，剌葛便自焚其车乘庐帐逃走。
English: After being chased to the Chai River, Yan Ge set fire to his car and fled with the stolen money.

古文：前遇拔剌、迪里姑等伏发，合击，遂大败之。
现代文：往前又遇到拔剌、迪里姑等伏兵齐发，合围而击，于是大败剌葛。
English: Further ahead, they encountered ambushes such as Baju and Dirigu, and they made a joint attack. As a result, they were soundly defeated.

古文：剌葛奔溃，遗其所夺神帐於路，上见而拜奠之。
现代文：剌葛之兵奔逃溃散，撇下所夺神帐于路，皇上见到后便拜祭之。
English: Xingge's soldiers ran away and dispersed, leaving the captured god's tent on the road. When the emperor saw it, he worshiped it.

古文：所获生口尽纵归本土。
现代文：所获生口一并放归本土。
English: All the proceeds will be returned to the mainland.

古文：其党库古只、磨朵皆面缚请罪。
现代文：其党徒库古只、磨朵均自缚请罪。
English: His party followers, Ku Ku and Ma Du, both pleaded guilty.

古文：师次札堵河，大雨暴涨。
现代文：兵马驻扎于札堵河，因天降大雨，河水暴涨。
English: The soldiers and horses were stationed at the Zadong River. Due to the heavy rain, the river water surged.

古文：五月癸丑，遣北宰相迪辇率骁骑先渡。
现代文：五月十二日，遣北宰相迪辇率骁骑先行渡河。
English: On May 12th, the prime minister of the Northern Expedition, Di Yan, led the cavalry to cross the river.

古文：甲寅，奏擒剌葛、涅里衮阿钵于榆河，前北宰相萧实鲁、寅底石自刭不殊。
现代文：十三日，奏称在榆河擒得剌葛、涅里衮阿钵，前北宰相萧实鲁、寅底石等自杀未死。
English: On the thirteenth day, it was reported that the former Northern Prime Minister Xiao Shilu, and the former Northern Prime Minister Toraishi committed suicide before they died.

古文：遂以黑白羊祭天地。
现代文：于是以黑白羊祭天地。
English: So the black and white sheep was used to sacrifice heaven and earth.

古文：壬戌，剌葛、涅里衮阿钵诣行在，以稿索自缚，牵羊望拜。
现代文：二十一日，剌葛、涅里衮阿钵到皇上行宫，以草绳将自己反绑，肉袒而前，望皇上一步一拜。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Gan Ge and Nieri Gan Ao went to the emperor's palace, tied themselves backwards with grass ropes, walked forward, and bowed to the emperor.

古文：上还至大岭。
现代文：皇上回到大岭。
English: The emperor returned to Daling.

古文：时大军久出，辎重不相属，士卒煮马驹、采野菜以为食，孳畜道毙者十七八，物价十倍，器服资货委弃于楚里河，狼籍数百里，因更剌葛名暴里。
现代文：当时大军在外日久，粮草接济不上，士兵们煮马驹、采野菜为食，新生牲口死于道路者十之七八，物价上涨了十倍，器物、服饰、资财、货物被遗弃于楚里河，一路散乱不堪，拉拉杂杂数百里，于是将剌葛改名为暴里。
English: At that time, the large army had been away for a long time, the grain and grass could not be supplied, the soldiers boiled horse manure and harvested vegetables for food, the newborn livestock died in seven out of ten people on the road, the price rose tenfold, the utensils, clothing, wealth and goods were abandoned in the Chuli River, and the road was scattered all the way, dragging the miscellaneous hundreds of miles, so they changed the name of Xingge to Bulli.

古文：丙寅，至库里，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：二十五日，皇上到库里，以青牛白马祭天地。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor went to Kuri to hold a festival of heaven and earth with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：以生口六百、马二千三百分赐大小鹘军。
现代文：以生口六百、马二千三百分赐与大、小鹘军。
English: With six hundred mouths to feed and two thousand three hundred horses, he gave to the large and small armies.

古文：六月辛巳，至榆岭，以辖赖县人扫古非法残民，磔之。
现代文：六月初十，到达榆岭，因辖赖县人扫古非法残害百姓，处以磔刑。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of June, he arrived in Fuling, and was punished by flogging for illegally killing people in the county of Lai.

古文：甲申，上登都庵山。抚其先奇首可汗遗迹，徘徊顾瞻而兴叹焉。
现代文：十三日，皇上登都庵山，抚摸先祖奇首可汗遗迹，流连往返，感慨万千。
English: On the 13th, the emperor ascended Du'an Mountain, touched the remains of his ancestor, the strange-headed khan, and wandered back and forth, full of emotion.

古文：闻狱官涅离擅造大校，人不堪其苦，有至死者，命诛之。
现代文：得知狱官涅离擅自制造大校刑，犯人不能忍受其痛楚，有人受刑至死，诏命诛之。
English: When it was learned that the prison officer, Nie Li, had arbitrarily created a large-scale punishment, the prisoner could not bear the pain, and some people were punished to death, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：壬辰，次狼河，获逆党雅里、弥里，生埋之铜河南轨下。
现代文：二十一日，驻兵狼河，获逆党雅里、弥里，活埋于铜河南轨下。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Wolf River garrison was buried alive under the Southern Railway of the Copper River.

古文：放所俘还，多为于骨里所掠。
现代文：释放所俘虏的人口回乡，途中大多为于骨里掳走。
English: When the captives were released and returned to their hometowns, most of them were taken away forcibly.

古文：上怒，引轻骑驰击。
现代文：皇上大怒，率轻骑疾驱往击。
English: The emperor flew into a rage and rode at full speed to attack.

古文：复遣骁将分道追袭，尽获其众并掠者。
现代文：又派骁将分道追袭，全数获得其人马及所掳掠者。
English: They also sent the mule to chase the camel on a separate road, and obtained all of its men and horses as well as the captives and looters.

古文：庚子，次阿敦泺，以养子涅里思附诸弟叛，以鬼箭射杀之。
现代文：二十九日，驻兵阿敦泺，因养子涅里思附从诸皇弟反叛，以鬼箭射杀之。
English: On the 29th, the garrison soldier, Atunsan, shot his adopted son, Neris, with a ghost arrow for rebelling against his royal brothers.

古文：其馀党六千，各以轻重论刑。
现代文：余党六千，各按情节轻重论刑。
English: The remaining 6,000 were sentenced according to the severity of their crimes.

古文：于厥掠生口者三十馀人，亦俾赎其罪，放归本部。
现代文：于厥掠生口者三十余人，也令出资赎其罪，放归本部。
English: More than 30 people who lived in Jueyuan were also ordered to pay money to atone for their sins and were released to the headquarters.

古文：至石岭西，诏收回军乏食所弃兵仗，召北府兵验而还之。
现代文：至石岭西，诏令收缴军中缺粮时所遗弃之兵器甲仗，召北府兵照验归还之。
English: To the west of Shiling, the imperial decree ordered the collection of weapons abandoned during the grain shortage in the army, and the soldiers of Beifu were summoned to check and return them.

古文：以夷离堇涅里衮附诸弟为叛，不忍显戮，命自投崖而死。
现代文：因夷离堇涅里衮附从诸皇弟为叛，而不忍心以刑杀之，诏令他自己投崖而死。
English: As he could not bear to execute him, he threw himself off a cliff to his death.

古文：秋八月己卯，幸龙眉宫，轘逆党二十九人，以其妻女赐有功将校，所掠珍宝、孳畜还主；亡其本物者，命责偿其家；不能偿者，赐以其部曲。
现代文：秋八月初十，幸龙眉宫，车裂逆党二十九人，将其妻女赐给有功之将校。所掠取的珍宝、幼畜归还原主；如果失去了本物，责令依其价值偿还；不能偿还者，将其部曲赐给物主。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month of the autumn, at the beginning of the 8th month, in the Longmei Palace, the 29 members of the Anti-Chariot Cracking Party gave their wives and daughters to the meritorious officers. The plundered treasures and young animals were returned to the original owners; if the real ones were lost, they were ordered to repay according to their value; those who could not repay were given to the owners.

古文：九月壬戌，上发自西楼。
现代文：九月二十三日，皇上自西楼出行。
English: On September 23rd, the Emperor left the West Building.

古文：冬十月庚午，驻赤崖。
现代文：冬十月初二，驻兵赤崖。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the garrison of Akihabara was disbanded.

古文：戊寅，和州回鹘来贡。
现代文：十一日，和州回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hezhou and Huizhou came to pay tribute.

古文：癸未，乙室府人迪里古、迷骨离部人特里以从逆诛。
现代文：十六日，乙室府人迪里古、迷骨离部人特里以从逆罪伏诛。
English: On the 16th, Dirigu, a member of the Second Division, and Terry, a disgruntled member, were arrested for treason.

古文：诏群臣分决滞讼，以韩知古录其事，只里姑掌捕亡。
现代文：诏令群臣分头审理积压的案件，由韩知古记录其事，只里姑专管搜捕逃犯。
English: The emperor ordered the courtiers to divide up the backlog of cases, with Han Zhigu recording the cases and Li Gu in charge of tracking down the fugitives.

古文：十一月，祠木叶山。
现代文：十一月，祠祭木叶山。
English: In November, the ancestral shrine festival Mujiyama is held.

古文：还次昭乌山，省风俗，见高年，议朝政，定吉凶仪。
现代文：回京途中歇驾于昭乌山，省察风俗，拜谒老人，探讨朝政大事，制定吉礼和凶礼。
English: On his way back to Beijing, he stopped at Zhaowu Mountain to reflect on customs, pay homage to the elderly, discuss the important events of imperial politics, and formulate auspicious and unlucky rituals.

古文：十二月戊子，燔柴于莲花泺。
现代文：十二月二十一日，在莲花泺燔柴祭天。
English: December 21st, the day of the Lotus and Firecracker Festival.

古文：八年春正月甲辰，以曷鲁为迭剌部夷离堇，忽烈为惕隐。
现代文：八年春正月初七，以曷鲁为迭剌部夷离堇，忽烈为惕隐。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, with Jilu as the second part of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year.

古文：于骨里部人特离敏执逆党怖胡、亚里只等十七人来献，上亲鞫之。
现代文：于骨里部人特离敏捉拿逆党怖胡、亚里只等十七人来献，皇上亲自审理。
English: Only seventeen people came to present themselves to the emperor, and the emperor himself held a trial.

古文：辞多连宗室及有胁从者，乃杖杀首恶怖胡，馀并原释。
现代文：供辞多有牵连宗室及被胁持之人者，于是杖杀首恶怖胡，其余一概从宽释放。
English: Most of the confessions implicate the family and the person who was coerced, so the stick killed the head of the evil bogeyman, and the rest were released.

古文：于越率懒之子化哥屡蓄奸谋，上每优容之，而反覆不悛，召父老群臣正其罪，并其子戮之，分其财以给卫士。
现代文：于越率懒之子化哥多次蓄藏奸谋，皇上总是宽容他，然而反复无定，不思悔改，这次便召集父老群臣声明其罪恶，连同其子一起处死，分其财物以济助卫士。
English: The emperor always tolerated Yu Yue's lazy son, Huagang, who repeatedly plotted treachery. However, he was indecisive and unrepentant. This time, he called together his father and elder vassals to declare his crime, execute him together with his son, and distribute his property to help the guards.

古文：有司所鞫逆党三百馀人，狱既具上以人命至重，死不复生，赐宴一日，随其平生之好使为之，酒酣，或歌、或舞、或戏射、角，各极其意。
现代文：有司所审理的逆党三百余人，案件已经具结，皇上以人命之事至关重大，人死不能复生，恩赐享宴一日，随其平生爱好，让他们去做。酒足饭饱，爱唱的唱，爱跳的跳，或者戏射，或者角抵，各尽平生之意。
English: There are more than three hundred people of the opposite party who have been tried by the magistrate, and the case has been concluded. The emperor regards human life as the most important thing. People can not be revived after death. He has given them a day to enjoy the banquet, and let them do it according to their life-long hobbies. They are full of wine and rice, love to sing, love to dance, or tease, or corner, and do their life's work.

古文：明日，乃以轻重论刑。
现代文：次日，便按轻重论刑。
English: The next day, he was sentenced according to severity.

古文：首恶剌葛，其次迭剌哥，上犹弟之，不忍置法，杖而释之。
现代文：首恶剌葛，其次迭剌哥，皇上仍认他们为弟，不忍心依法置之于死地，便在受杖后放了他们。
English: The emperor still considered them to be his younger brothers, and could not bear to put them to death according to the law, so he released them after receiving the cane.

古文：以寅底石、安端性本庸弱，为剌葛所使，皆释其罪。
现代文：因寅底石、安端本性庸弱，为剌葛所支使，均宽恕其罪。
English: Due to the mediocre nature of Ting Di Shi and Andou, both of whom were supported by Gan Ge, their sins were forgiven.

古文：前于越赫底里子解里、剌葛妻辖剌已实预逆谋，命皆绞杀之。
现代文：前于越赫底里之子解里、剌葛妻辖剌已，实际上参预了逆乱的策划，下令一概绞杀之。
English: Prior to the son of Yue Hetri's solution, Gongge Zuma ruled the country, and actually participated in the planning of the rebellion, and ordered to strangle them all.

古文：寅底石妻涅离胁从，安端妻粘睦姑尝有忠告，并免。
现代文：寅底石妻涅离属于胁从，安端妻粘睦姑曾有真诚之劝告，一并赦免。
English: Yin Di Shi's wife Nian Liang belongs to the category of coercion and subjugation, while An Duan's wife Mu Mu Gu once received sincere advice and was also pardoned.

古文：因谓左右曰： 诸弟性虽敏黠，而蓄奸稔恶。
现代文：于是对左右说 ：诸弟尽管天资聪敏黠慧，然而蓄谋奸恶之事。
English: So he said to the right and left, "My brothers, although you are gifted with intelligence and wisdom, you are plotting evil.

古文：尝自矜有出人之智，安忍凶狠，溪壑可塞而贪黩无厌。
现代文：总是自恃有超人之智，忍心做出凶恶狠毒之事，溪壑可以填塞而贪滥之欲望是永远没法满足的。
English: Always boasting of superhuman wisdom, with the patience to do the most vicious and cruel things, the brook can be filled, but the greed of desire can never be satisfied.

古文：求人之失，虽小而可恕，谓重如泰山；身行不义，虽入大恶，谓轻于鸿毛。
现代文：挑剔别人的过失，即使是小而应予宽恕的，还以为是重如泰山；自身行不义之事，即使归入大恶，还以为轻如鸿毛。
English: Those who find fault with others, even if the fault is small and deserves forgiveness, think it is as heavy as a mountain; those who commit injustice themselves, even if it is classified as a great evil, think it is as light as a feather.

古文：昵比群小，谋及妇人，同恶相济，以危国祚。
现代文：亲近小人，谋及妇人，狼狈为奸，妄图颠覆大位。
English: Get close to villains, plot with women, act as a traitor, and attempt to overthrow the emperor.

古文：虽欲不败，其可得乎？
现代文：就是想要不败，岂能得逞？
English: If you want to be undefeated, can you succeed?

古文：北宰相实鲁妻馀卢睹姑于国至亲，一旦负朕，从于叛逆，未置之法而病死，此天诛也。
现代文：北宰相实鲁妻余卢睹姑为国家至亲，一念之间就辜负了朕，附从于叛逆，未曾置之法网就先已病死，这便是天诛。
English: Northern Vice-Minister Shilu's wife, Yu Lujian, who was a close relative of the state, betrayed me in the blink of an eye, adhered to the rebellion, and died of illness before the law was put in place. This was a sign from heaven.

古文：解里自幼与朕常同寝食，眷遇之厚，冠于宗属，亦与其父背大恩而从不轨，兹可恕乎！ 
现代文：解里从小与朕每每同寝同食，眷顾恩遇之厚，超出宗族之上，也随其父亲一道背弃大恩而行乱政之事，教我怎么能够宽恕？ 
English: Since I was a child, Xie Li has always slept with me and eaten with me. He has been favored with many favors beyond the clan. Together with his father, he also betrayed the great grace and carried out a chaotic government. How can I forgive him?

古文：秋七月丙申朔，有司上诸帐族与谋逆者三百馀人罪状，皆弃市。
现代文：秋七月初一，有司表上各帐族参与谋反的三百余人之罪状，将他们全部弃市。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the magistrate found more than three hundred people guilty of plotting rebellion, and they were all expelled from the city.

古文：上叹曰： 致人于死，岂朕所欲。
现代文：皇上感叹道： 致人于死地，哪里是我想做的事？
English: The Emperor lamented, "What is it that I want to do that will cause people to die?

古文：若止负朕躬，尚可容贷。
现代文：如果只是有负于我，还可以容忍宽贷。
English: If you only owe me, you can still tolerate a lenient loan.

古文：此曹恣行不道，残害忠良，涂炭生民，剽掠财产。
现代文：这些人肆其所欲行无道之事，残害忠良，涂炭生灵，抢掠财物。
English: These people did whatever they wanted to do, destroying the loyal and the good, charring the living and robbing the property.

古文：民间昔有万马，今皆徒步，有国以来所未尝有，实不得已而诛之。 
现代文：民间原先有马万匹，现在只好徒步行走，这种局面自建国以来都未曾有过。杀掉他们我实在是出于不得已。 
English: The people used to have thousands of horses, but now they have to walk on foot. This situation has never happened since the founding of the country. I really had no choice but to kill them.

古文：冬十月甲子朔，建开皇殿于明王楼基。九年春正月，乌古部叛，讨平之。
现代文：冬十月初一朔，在明王楼台基上建造起开皇殿。九年春正月，乌古部反叛，讨伐平定之。
English: On the first day of winter and the first day of October, the construction of the Imperial Palace began on the foundation of the Ming Wang Tower. In the first month of spring of the ninth year, Ugube rebelled, and the battle was settled.

古文：夏六月，幽州军校齐行本举其族及其部曲男女三千人请降，诏授检校尚书、左仆射，赐名兀欲，给其廪食。
现代文：夏六月，幽州军校齐行本以其全族及其部曲男女三千人请求降附，诏令授予检校尚书、左仆射，赐名兀欲，由官府拨给粮食。
English: In the summer of June, 3,000 men and women from the entire Yuzhou Military Academy petitioned the emperor to grant them the title of Shangshu (尚書) and Zuofei (左仆射) and to grant them the title of Xingzhi (欲), and the government allocated grain to them.

古文：数日亡去，幽帅周德威纳之。
现代文：数日后逃走了，幽州军帅周德威接纳了他们。
English: A few days later, they escaped, and Yuzhou military commander Zhou Dewei took them in.

古文：及诏索之，德威语不逊，乃议南征。
现代文：待到下诏索要，周德威出语不逊，便考虑南征。
English: After waiting for the next imperial edict to be issued, Zhou Dewei spoke harshly, and then considered the southern expedition.

古文：冬十月戊申，钓鱼于鸭渌江。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，皇上于鸭绿江钓鱼。
English: In the winter, on October 21, the emperor went fishing in the Yalu River.

古文：新罗遣使贡方物，高丽遣使进宝剑，吴越王钱镠遣滕彦休来贡。
现代文：新罗遣使者贡献土产，高丽遣使者进献宝剑，吴越王钱派遣滕彦休前来进贡。
English: Silla sent emissaries to contribute local products, Goryeo sent emissaries to donate swords, and Wuyue King Qian sent Teng Yanju to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，君基太一神数见，诏图其像。
现代文：这一年，君基太一神多次显形，诏令为之画像。
English: In this year, the god Junji Taishin appeared many times and was depicted by imperial decree.

古文：神册元年春二月丙戌朔，上在龙化州，迭烈部夷离堇耶律曷鲁等率百僚请上尊号，三表乃允。
现代文：神册元年春二月初一朔，皇上在龙化州，迭烈部夷离堇耶律曷鲁等率百官请求奉上尊号，三次上表方才允可。
English: On the first day of the second month of the spring of the first year of the Divine Book, the emperor was in Longhua Prefecture, and he asked for the honorific title of the emperor from hundreds of officials, including the leader of the rebel forces, Yeludonglu. The request was only granted three times.

古文：丙申，群臣及诸属国筑坛州东，上尊号曰大圣大明天皇帝，后曰应天大明地皇后。
现代文：十一日，群臣及各属国筑坛于州东，奉上尊号曰大圣大明天皇帝，皇后曰应天大明地皇后。
English: On the 11th day, a group of ministers and their subordinate countries built the altar in the east of the state. They were given the honorifics of "Great Saint, Great Tomorrow Emperor" and "Empress, Great Tomorrow Empress."

古文：大赦，建元神册。
现代文：大赦天下，建元神册。
English: Universal amnesty for the whole world, according to the Jianyuan Chronicle.

古文：初，阙地为坛，得金铃，因名其地曰金铃冈，坛侧满林曰册圣林。
现代文：起先掘地筑坛之时，得一金铃，于是命名其地为金铃冈，坛边之满林为册圣林。
English: At first, when digging the ground to build the altar, a golden bell was obtained, so the place was named the Golden Bell Hill, and the full forest at the edge of the altar was registered as a sacred forest.

古文：三月丙辰，以迭烈部夷离堇曷鲁为阿庐朵里于越，百僚进秩、颁赉有差，赐酺三日。
现代文：三月初二，以迭烈部夷离堇耶律曷鲁为阿庐朵里于越，百官进秩位、颁赏各有等差，赐酉甫宴聚饮三日。
English: On the second day of the third month of the lunar calendar, the Emperor of the State of Yunnan, Yeludong Rongru, was appointed as the Supreme Ruler of the State of Yunnan, and all the officials were promoted to higher ranks and awards, and the Emperor of the State of Yunnan was given a banquet for three days.

古文：立子倍为皇太子。
现代文：立子耶律倍为皇太子。
English: Empress Dowager Yerutaka is crown prince.

古文：夏四月乙酉朔，晋幽州节度使卢国用来降，以为幽州兵马留后。
现代文：夏四月初一朔，晋幽州节度使卢国用来降，任为幽州兵马留后。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the Jin Yuzhou Festival caused the Lu Kingdom to fall, leaving the Yuzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses behind.

古文：甲辰，梁遣郎公远来贺。
现代文：二十日，梁派遣郎公远来朝贺。
English: On the 20th, Liang sent his son-in-law to come to the morning to congratulate.

古文：六月庚寅，吴越王遣滕彦休来贡。
现代文：六月初七，吴越王派遣滕彦休前来进贡。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, King Wu Yue sent Teng Yanyu to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月壬申，亲征突厥、吐浑、党项、小蕃、沙陀诸部，皆平之。
现代文：秋七月十九，亲征突厥、吐浑、党项、小蕃、沙陀诸部，均平定之。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he personally led the troops to conquer the provinces of Turk, Tuhun, Dangxiang, Xiaojuan, and Shado.

古文：俘其酋长及其户万五千六百，铠甲、兵仗、器服九十馀万，宝货、驼马、年羊不可胜算。
现代文：俘获其酋长及一万五千六百户，铠甲、兵仗、器物服饰九十余万件，宝货、驼马、牛羊不计其数。
English: They captured their chiefs and 15,600 households, more than 900,000 pieces of armor, war materials, and clothing, and countless treasures, camels, horses, cattle, and sheep.

古文：八月，拔朔州，擒节度使李嗣本。
现代文：八月，攻取朔州，擒节度使李嗣本。
English: In August, the capture of Shuozhou, the Qing Dynasty made Li Shiben.

古文：勒石纪功于青冢南。
现代文：刻石纪功于青冢南。
English: The stone carving discipline is credited to the south of Qingcheng.

古文：冬十月癸未朔，乘胜而东。
现代文：冬十月初一朔，乘胜东进。
English: At the beginning of October, the first day of winter, we will march eastward with victory.

古文：十一月，攻蔚、新、武、妫、儒五州，斩首万四千七百馀级。
现代文：十一月，攻蔚、新、武、妫、儒五州，斩首一万四千七百余级。
English: In November, the five prefectures of Wei, Xin, Wu, Jiao and Confucius were attacked and more than 14,700 heads were beheaded.

古文：自代北至河曲逾阴山，尽有其地。
现代文：自代北至河曲跨阴山，尽有其地。
English: From the north to the river, across the gloomy mountains, there is a place for everyone.

古文：遂改武州为归化州，妫州为可汗州，置西南面招讨司，选有功者领之。
现代文：于是改武州为归化州，妫州为可汗州，设立西南面招讨司，选拔有功者领其任。
English: As a result, Wuzhou was changed into a naturalization state, and Ganzhou into a khan state, and a recruitment office was set up in the southwest to select meritorious people to take up their duties.

古文：其围蔚州，敌楼无故自坏，众军大噪乘之，不逾时而破。
现代文：当围蔚州时，敌楼无故自坏，众军大事鼓噪，乘机进取，不过一个时辰便破了城。
English: When Ulsan was besieged, the enemy made a lot of trouble for no reason. The troops made a lot of noise and took the opportunity to advance, but the city was broken in an hour.

古文：时梁及吴越二使皆在焉，诏引环城观之，因赐滕彦休名曰述吕。
现代文：当时梁及吴越二国使者均在场，诏令带领他们环城观看，于是赐滕彦休名曰述吕。
English: At that time, the emissaries of Liang and Wu Yue of the two countries were present, and they were ordered to lead them around the city to watch, so Teng Yan was given the name Zhu Lu.

古文：十二月，收山北八军。
现代文：十二月，收编山北八军。
English: In December, the Shanbei Eighth Army was reorganized.

古文：二年春二月，晋新州裨将卢文进杀节度使李存矩来降。
现代文：二年春二月，晋新州偏将卢文进杀节度使李存矩来降。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, Jin Xinzhou inclined Lu Wen to advance and killed the festival to make Li Cun Mom come down.

古文：进攻其城，刺史安金全遁，以文进部将刘殷为刺史。
现代文：进军攻新州城，刺史安金全逃走，以卢文进部将刘殷为刺史。
English: He marched into Xinzhou City, stabbed Shi Anjin Quan and fled, and stabbed Liu Yin with Lu Wen Jinbu.

古文：三月辛亥，攻幽州，节度使周德威以幽、并、镇、定、魏五州之兵拒于居庸关之西，合战于新州东，大破之，斩首三万馀级。杀李嗣本之子武八。
现代文：三月初二，攻幽州，节度使周德威率幽、并、镇、定、魏五州兵马拒战于居庸关之西，会战于新州城东，大破之，斩首三万余级，杀李嗣恩之子武八。
English: On the 2nd day of the 3rd month of the lunar calendar, Zhou Dewei led the troops of Yu, Bin, Zhen, Ding and Wei from the five states to attack Yuzhou. The soldiers and horses refused to fight in the west of Juyongguan, and fought in the east of Xinzhou City. They defeated the enemy, beheaded more than 30,000 cadres, and killed Li Shiong's son, Wuhachi.

古文：以后弟阿骨只为统军，实鲁为先锋，东出关略燕、赵，不遇敌而还。
现代文：以后弟阿骨只为统军，实鲁为先锋，往东出居庸关掠地于燕、赵一带，未遇敌军而还。
English: Later, his younger brother, Akone, only served as a member of the unified army, while Shiro was the vanguard. He went east to settle in Yongguan and plundered the areas around Yan and Zhao, but returned without encountering the enemy army.

古文：己未，于骨里叛，命室鲁以兵讨之。
现代文：十一日，于骨里反叛，命室鲁率兵讨伐。
English: On the 11th day, he rebelled in his bones and ordered his wife Lu to lead the troops in a crusade.

古文：夏四年壬午，围幽州，不克。
现代文：夏四月初四，围幽州，未能攻克。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 4

古文：六月乙巳，望城中有气如烟火状，上曰： 未可攻也。 
现代文：六月二十八日，望见城中有气如烟火状，皇上说 ：不可攻。 
English: On the 28th of June, when the air in the city looked like fireworks, the emperor said: "Impregnable."

古文：以大暑霖潦，班师。
现代文：因大暑时节暴雨积水，便班师回京。
English: Due to torrential rain during the hot season, the team returned to Beijing.

古文：留曷鲁、卢国用守之。
现代文：留耶律曷鲁、卢国用看守。
English: Lived in Yeludonglu and became a guard for the State of Lu.

古文：剌葛与其子赛保里叛入幽州。
现代文：剌葛及其子赛保里叛入幽州。
English: Xingge and his son Sai Baoli invaded Yuzhou.

古文：秋八月，李存勖遣李嗣源等救幽州，曷鲁等以兵少而还。
现代文：秋八月，李存勖派李嗣源等救幽州，曷鲁等因兵少而回。
English: In the autumn and August, Li Cunxu sent Li Siyuan and others to save Yuzhou, and Zhao Lu and others returned because of the small number of soldiers.

古文：三年春正月丙申，以皇弟安端为大内惕隐，命攻云州及西南诸部。
现代文：三年春正月二十二日，以皇弟安端为大内惕隐，命他进攻云州及西南诸部。
English: On the 22nd day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, Emperor Anduan, the younger brother of the emperor, was sent to attack Yunnan and the southwestern provinces.

古文：二月，达旦国来聘。
现代文：二月，鞑靼国来访。
English: In February, the President of Tatarstan paid a visit.

古文：癸亥，城皇都，以礼部尚书康默记充版筑使。
现代文：二十日，筑皇都城，以礼部尚书康默记任版筑使。
English: On the 20th, the construction of the imperial capital city began, with the Ministry of Ceremonies Shang Shukang as the construction envoy.

古文：梁遣使来聘。
现代文：梁遣使来访。
English: The Liang envoy came to visit.

古文：晋、吴越、渤海、高丽、回鹘、阻卜、党项及幽、镇、定、魏、潞等州各遣使来贡。
现代文：晋、吴越、渤海、高丽、回鹘、阻卜、党项及幽、镇、定、魏、潞等州分别派使者前来进贡。
English: Envoys from Jin, Wuyue, Bohai, Goryeo, Huizhou, Zibo, Danzhong, Yu, Zhen, Ding, Wei, and Handan provinces separately came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月乙巳，皇弟迭烈哥谋叛，事觉，知有罪当诛，预为营圹，而诸戚请免。
现代文：夏四月初三，皇弟迭烈哥阴谋起事，事情败露，知道有罪将被处死，预先造好了坟墓，而各位亲戚请求免他一死。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the brother of the emperor, Diego, plotted to start a riot, but the plot was uncovered. Knowing that the guilty would be executed, he prepared a tomb in advance, and his relatives begged that he be spared death.

古文：上素恶其弟寅底石妻涅里衮，乃曰： 涅里衮能代其死，则从。 
现代文：皇上一向讨厌其弟寅底石之妻涅里衮，便说： 涅里衮能代他死，我就听从你们的意见。 
English: The emperor, who had always disliked Nereid, the wife of his brother Tyndale, said, "If Nereid can die in his place, I will listen to your advice."

古文：涅里衮自缢圹中，并以奴女古、叛人曷鲁只生瘗其中。
现代文：涅里衮自缢于墓穴中，并将其奴女古、叛人曷鲁只活埋于其中。
English: Nirvana hanged itself in a tomb, and buried its slave and traitor Jiro alive in it.

古文：遂赦迭烈哥。
现代文：于是赦免了迭烈哥。
English: As a result, he pardoned his brother.

古文：五月乙亥，诏建孔子庙、佛寺、道观。
现代文：五月初三，诏令建造孔子庙、佛寺、道观。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the Emperor issued a decree to build a Confucius temple, a Buddhist temple, and a Taoist temple.

古文：秋七月乙酉，于越曷鲁薨，上震悼久之，辍朝三日，赠赙有加。
现代文：秋七月十四日，于越耶律曷鲁薨，皇上惊悸悲痛，久久不能平复，停止上朝三日，所赠助丧财物远过其他臣子所能享受的。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor died in Yueyeluo. The emperor was shocked and grief-stricken, unable to recover for a long time, and stopped going to the court on the 3rd day. The donated funeral goods were far more than other courtiers could enjoy.

古文：冬十二月庚子朔，幸辽阳故城。
现代文：冬十二月初一朔，幸辽阳故城。
English: On the first day of winter in early December, the fortunes of Liaoyang Old Town changed.

古文：辛丑，北府宰相萧敌鲁薨。
现代文：初二，北府宰相萧敌鲁薨。
English: In the second year of junior high school, the prime minister of North Prefecture, Xiao Jiulun, came.

古文：戊午，以于越曷鲁弟污里轸为迭烈部夷离堇，萧阿古只为北府宰相。
现代文：十九日，以于越曷鲁的弟弟氵于里轸为迭烈部夷离堇，萧阿古只为北府宰相。
English: On the 19th, Yu Yue's younger brother, Yu Yu Lijun, was appointed as the second-in-command, while Xiao Agu was only the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：甲子，皇孙隈欲生。
现代文：二十五日，皇孙隈欲出生。
English: On the 25th, the grandson of the emperor, Kumago, was born.

