古文：自古受命帝王，曷尝不封禅？
现代文：自古以来受天命为帝王的人，何尝不封禅？
English: Since ancient times, those who are destined to be emperors, why not seal Zen?

古文：盖有无其应而用事者矣，未有睹符瑞见而不臻乎泰山者也。
现代文：大约没有必须的吉兆、瑞应就忙着行封禅礼的大有人在，而从来没有过已经出现了封禅必须的吉兆、瑞应而不到泰山去的人。
English: There are a lot of people who are busy performing the sealing ceremony without the necessary auspicious signs and auspicious conditions, but there has never been anyone who has already appeared the auspicious signs and auspicious conditions necessary for sealing without going to Mount Tai.

古文：虽受命而功不至，至梁父矣而德不洽，洽矣而日有不暇给，是以即事用希。传曰： 三年不为礼，礼必废；三年不为乐，乐必坏。 
现代文：有的人虽然承受天命当了帝王而治世的大功未能成就，有的身已至梁父而道德与封禅的盛举不侔，有的道德已侔而又无瑕行封禅礼，所以得行封禅的很少。《传》说： 三年不行礼，礼制必废；三年不举乐，乐必坏。 
English: Although some people have received the destiny of heaven and become emperors, they have not been able to achieve the great feat of reigning the world. Some people have reached the age of father and son, but their morality is not compatible with the grand performance of the sealing ceremony. Some people's morality is not perfect, but they perform the sealing ceremony flawlessly, so they rarely have to perform the sealing ceremony. "Legend" says: If you do not perform the ceremony for three years, the ceremony will be invalid; if you do not perform the music for three years, the music will be bad.

古文：每世之隆，则封禅答焉，及衰而息。
现代文：每逢盛世，则举行封禅礼以报答天的功德，衰世则停礼不行。
English: Whenever there is prosperity, a blessing ceremony is held to repay the merits of the day, but when there is decline, the ceremony cannot be stopped.

古文：厥旷远者千有馀载，近者数百载，故其仪阙然堙灭，其详不可得而记闻云。
现代文：远的千余年，近的数百年，所以封禅的仪式残缺以至堙灭，详细情形无法记录下来传闻后世了。
English: For more than a thousand years in the distant past, and for hundreds of years in the recent past, the ceremony of sealing the zen was incomplete to the point of extinction, and the details could not be recorded and passed down to posterity.

古文：尚书曰，舜在璇玑玉衡，以齐七政。
现代文：《尚书》说：舜在璇玑玉衡，以整齐七政。
English: "Shangshu" said: "Dragonfly in the dragonfly yu heng, in order to tidy up the seven policies."

古文：遂类于上帝，禋于六宗，望山川，遍群神。
现代文：于是类祭于上天，禋祭于六宗，望祭于山川，遍祭于群神。
English: As a result, similar festivals were held in the heavens, bonfire festivals in the six sects, votive festivals in the mountains and rivers, and pan-sacrifices to the gods.

古文：辑五瑞，择吉月日，见四岳诸牧，还瑞。
现代文：收取群后所持瑞玉，选择吉月吉日，会见四岳诸侯牧守，将所收瑞玉还给他们。
English: After collecting the gems held by the group, choose the auspicious month and day, meet with the pastors of the four counties, and return the collected gems to them.

古文：岁二月，东巡狩，至于岱宗。
现代文：当年二月，向东方巡察，到达岱宗。
English: In February of that year, he made an inspection tour to the east and arrived at Shanzong.

古文：岱宗，泰山也。
现代文：岱宗，就是泰山。
English: Taizong is Mount Tai.

古文：柴，望秩于山川。
现代文：焚烧柴薪为燎火，按次第望祭诸山川。
English: Burning firewood for bonfires, according to the order of the festival from the mountains and rivers.

古文：遂觐东后。
现代文：于是觐见东后。
English: So he went to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：东后者，诸侯也。
现代文：东后，就是东方的诸侯。
English: Dongpo, that is, the lords of the East.

古文：合时月正日，同律度量衡，修五礼，五玉三帛二生一死贽。
现代文：调合四时与月、日的相对误差，统一声律与度量衡，修饬五礼以及五玉、三帛、二生、一死等各等级人的贽见礼。
English: Adjusting the relative error of the four o'clock with the month and day, unifying the vocal rhythm with the weights and measures, repairing the gong and five props, as well as the five jewels, three gongs, two births, one death and other levels of people.

古文：五月，巡狩至南岳。
现代文：五月，巡察到南岳。
English: In May, the inspection team arrived at Nan Yue.

古文：南岳，衡山也。
现代文：南岳，就是衡山。
English: Nandake, that is Hengshan.

古文：八月，巡狩至西岳。
现代文：八月，巡察到西岳。
English: In August, the inspection team arrived at Seigaku.

古文：西岳，华山也。
现代文：西岳，就是华山。
English: Xidake, that is, Mount Huashan.

古文：十一月，巡狩至北岳。北岳，恆山也。
现代文：十一月，巡察到北岳，北岳，就是恒山。
English: In November, we inspected Beidake, Beidake, that is, Hengshan.

古文：皆如岱宗之礼。
现代文：都与岱宗的礼仪相同。
English: They all follow the same etiquette as that of the Shingon sect.

古文：中岳，嵩高也。五载一巡狩。
现代文：中岳，就是嵩高山，五年巡察一次。
English: Zhongyue, that is, Songgao Mountain, is inspected once every five years.

古文：禹遵之。
现代文：禹沿用了这种巡察制度。
English: Yu has continued to use this inspection system.

古文：後十四世，至帝孔甲，淫德好神，神渎，二龙去之。
现代文：其后十四世，到帝孔甲，有淫德，好神祀，神被亵渎，有二龙离去。
English: After that, in the fourteenth generation, to Emperor Kongjia, there was sexual morality, good gods were worshipped, gods were blasphemed, and two dragons left.

古文：其後三世，汤伐桀，欲迁夏社，不可，作夏社。
现代文：此后三世，汤伐夏桀，想除去夏祭社神的神坛，以为不合适而止，作了名为《夏社》的文诰。
English: After that, the third generation, Tang Wa Xia Ye, wanted to remove the altar of the god of the summer festival, but thought it was not appropriate, and made a document called "Summer Festival."

古文：後八世，至帝太戊，有桑穀生於廷，一暮大拱，惧。
现代文：此后八世，至帝太戊时，有桑、谷二木合为一株，生于庭院中，一个晚上长到拱把粗，太戊很是害怕。
English: After that, in the eighth generation, when Emperor Tae Wook was crowned, a mulberry tree and a juniper tree were combined into a single tree. It was born in the courtyard, and one night it grew to the size of an arch. Emperor Tae Wook was very scared.

古文：伊陟曰： 妖不胜德。 
现代文：伊陟说： 妖不胜德，邪不压正。 
English: Yixuan said: "The devil cannot defeat virtue, and evil cannot suppress righteousness."

古文：太戊修德，桑穀死。
现代文：太戊于是修德行善政，桑谷树自枯而死。
English: Therefore, Taiwu practiced virtue and good governance, and the mulberry tree withered and died.

古文：伊陟赞巫咸，巫咸之兴自此始。
现代文：伊陟将此事告知巫咸，巫咸记录为《咸又》四篇，巫咸的名子从此流传下来。
English: Iyi reported the matter to Wuxian, and Wuxian recorded it in four articles of "Xianmao," and the name of Wuxian has been passed down ever since.

古文：後十四世，帝武丁得傅说为相，殷复兴焉，称高宗。
现代文：此后十四世，帝武丁得傅说为相国，殷朝重又兴盛起来，称为高宗。
English: After that, the fourteenth generation, Emperor Wu Ding Defu said that it was a sister country, and the Yin Dynasty revived and flourished, known as Gaozong.

古文：有雉登鼎耳雊，武丁惧。祖己曰： 修德。 
现代文：有野鸡，登上鼎耳而鸣，武丁害怕起来，祖己说： 修德就不用怕了。 
English: There was a pheasant, it was crowing loudly in his ears. Wuding was scared. Zou Zi said, "You don't have to be afraid of cultivating virtue.

古文：武丁从之，位以永宁。
现代文：武丁听从了他的话，帝位一直安宁无事。
English: Wuding obeyed his words, and the throne has always been peaceful.

古文：後五世，帝武乙慢神而震死。
现代文：后五世，帝武乙由于怠慢神灵，遭雷震而死。
English: Five generations later, Emperor Wuyi was struck by lightning and died as a result of neglecting the gods.

古文：後三世，帝纣淫乱，武王伐之。
现代文：后三世，帝纣淫乱，武王兴兵讨伐他。
English: In the third generation after the emperor, the emperor committed adultery, and King Wu raised an army to fight against him.

古文：由此观之，始未尝不肃祗，後稍怠慢也。
现代文：由此看来，开始时未尝不肃敬神祗，后来渐渐怠慢松懈了。
English: From this point of view, at the beginning, they did not try to respect the gods, and later they gradually slackened.

古文：周官曰，冬日至，祀天於南郊，迎长日之至；夏日至，祭地祗。
现代文：《周官》说，冬至那一天，祭天于城南郊，以迎接夏至日的到来；夏至那一天，祭地祗。
English: "Zhou Guan" said that on the day of the winter solstice, the festival was held in the southern suburb of the city to welcome the arrival of the summer solstice; on the day of the summer solstice, the festival was held.

古文：皆用乐舞，而神乃可得而礼也。
现代文：都用音乐、舞蹈，神才会接受你的礼敬。
English: It takes music and dance for God to accept your worship.

古文：天子祭天下名山大川，五岳视三公，四渎视诸侯，诸侯祭其疆内名山大川。
现代文：天子祭祀天下的名山大川，视五岳如同对待三公礼，视四渎如同对诸侯礼，诸侯只祭境内的名山大川。
English: The heavenly sons sacrifice the world's famous mountains and rivers, and regard the five mountains as if they were three public rites, and regard the four sacrileges as if they were for the lords, and the lords only sacrifice the famous mountains and rivers within the territory.

古文：四渎者，江、河、淮、济也。
现代文：四渎，就是指长江、黄河、淮水、济水。
English: The four impurities refer to the Yangtze River, the Yellow River, the Huai River and the Jishui River.

古文：天子曰明堂、辟雍，诸侯曰泮宫。
现代文：天子祭天的地方称为明堂、辟雍，诸侯祭祀的地方称为泮宫。
English: The place where the Son of Heaven is enshrined is called Myeong-dong or Byeong-dong, and the place where the princes are enshrined is called Yeonggung.

古文：周公既相成王，郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王於明堂以配上帝。
现代文：周公既做了成王的相国，定下制度：郊祀时以后稷配天，宗庙祭祀时在明堂中祭文王以配天帝。
English: Zhou Gong, having made himself the king's consort, set up a system: after the suburb worship, the emperor would be worshipped, and during the ancestral temple worship, the king would be worshipped in the Ming Hall.

古文：自禹兴而修社祀，后稷稼穑，故有稷祠，郊社所从来尚矣。
现代文：自从夏禹兴起时从事社神的祭祀，后稷稼穑有功，才有后稷的神祠，郊祭与社祭都有很悠久的历史了。
English: Since the rise of Xia Yu, he has been engaged in the worship of the social gods, and it was only after he made great achievements that he was able to build the shrine of the social gods. Both the suburban festival and the social festival have a long history.

古文：自周克殷後十四世，世益衰，礼乐废，诸侯恣行，而幽王为犬戎所败，周东徙雒邑。
现代文：自周朝灭殷以后十四世，世道更加衰落，礼乐废弃，诸侯恣意行事，而周幽王被犬戎战败，周朝都城东迁到雒邑。
English: Since the 14th generation after the Zhou Dynasty's subjugation of Yin, the world has become even more decadent, the ritual music has been abandoned, and the lords have acted arbitrarily. However, King Zhou Yu was defeated by the dogs, and the Zhou Dynasty's capital was moved east of the city to Fuxi.

古文：秦襄公攻戎救周，始列为诸侯。
现代文：秦襄公攻犬戎救周，以功劳开始列为诸侯。
English: Qin Xiang Gong's attack dog, Rong, saved Zhou, and began to be listed as a vassal with merit.

古文：秦襄公既侯，居西垂，自以为主少昚之神，作西畤，祠白帝，其牲用驹黄牛羝羊各一云。
现代文：秦襄公既为诸侯，居住在西部边垂，自以为是少暤神的代表，作西畤祭祀白帝，牺牲用马驹、黄牛、羝羊各一头。
English: Qin Xianggong was a vassal lord who lived in the western edge of the valley and believed himself to be a representative of the god Shao Xuan. He made a sacrifice to the White Emperor, sacrificing a horse, a cow and a sheep.

古文：其後十六年，秦文公东猎汧渭之间，卜居之而吉。
现代文：过了十六年，秦文公往东方打猎，来到、渭二水之间，想留居下来，卜得吉兆。
English: Sixteen years later, Qin Wengong went to the East to hunt. He came to the area between the two rivers and wished to stay there, praying for good luck.

古文：文公梦黄蛇自天下属地，其口止於鄜衍。
现代文：文公梦见有一条黄蛇，身子从天上下垂到地面，嘴巴一直伸到鄜城一带的田野中。
English: Wengong dreamed of a yellow snake, its body hanging down from the sky to the ground, its mouth stretching all the way to the fields around Lucheng.

古文：文公问史敦，敦曰： 此上帝之徵，君其祠之。 
现代文：文公以梦中的事问史敦，史敦回答说： 这是天帝的象征，请君祭祀它。 
English: Wen Gong asked Stone about the dream, and Stone replied, "This is the symbol of the Heavenly Emperor, please sacrifice it."

古文：於是作鄜畤，用三牲郊祭白帝焉。
现代文：于是建立了鄜畤，用三牲大礼郊祭白帝。
English: As a result, a yakitori was established, and the three sacrificial animals were used in the suburb festival of the White Emperor.

古文：自未作鄜畤也，而雍旁故有吴阳武畤，雍东有好畤，皆废无祠。
现代文：在立鄜畤以前，雍城旁原有吴阳武畤，雍城东有好畤，都已废弃无人祭祀。
English: Prior to the erection of the pagoda, there was a Wuyang Martial Pagoda next to Yongcheng, and a Good Pagoda in the east of Yongcheng, both of which have been abandoned.

古文：或曰： 自古以雍州积高，神明之隩，故立畤郊上帝，诸神祠皆聚云。
现代文：有人说： 自古以来，由于雍州地势高，为神明聚居处，所以立畤郊祀天帝头，其他诸神的祠庙也都聚集在这里。
English: Some people said: Since ancient times, due to the high terrain of Yongzhou, it is a place where gods live together, so the suburb of Luo was built to worship the Heavenly Emperor, and other gods' ancestral temples are also gathered here.

古文：盖黄帝时尝用事，虽晚周亦郊焉。 
现代文：大约黄帝时曾加祭祀，直到晚周还举行郊祭。 
English: Around the time of the Yellow Emperor, sacrifices were added, and a suburb festival was held until late in the week.

古文：其语不经见，缙绅者不道。
现代文：这些话不见于经典，为缙绅大人所不言。
English: These words are not found in the classics, and are not spoken by the gentry.

古文：作鄜畤後九年，文公获若石云，于陈仓北阪城祠之。
现代文：作鄜畤以后九年，秦文公得到一块质似石头的东西，在陈仓山北坡的城邑中祭祀它。
English: Nine years after he made the coffin, Qin Wenguang obtained a piece of stone-like material and enshrined it in the city on the northern slope of Chencang Mountain.

古文：其神或岁不至，或岁数来，来也常以夜，光辉若流星，从东南来集于祠城，则若雄鸡，其声殷云，野鸡夜雊。
现代文：它的神灵有时经岁不至，有时一年之中数次降临，降临常在夜晚，有光辉似流星，从东南方来，汇集在祠城中，像雄鸡一样，鸣叫声殷殷然，引得野鸡纷纷夜啼。
English: Its deities sometimes come with the passage of time, sometimes several times a year, often in the evening, with a radiance like a meteor, coming from the southeast, gathering in the ancestral city, like a rooster, crowing loudly, attracting pheasants and nightingales.

古文：以一牢祠，命曰陈宝。
现代文：用牲畜一头祭祀，名为陈宝。
English: One head of livestock is sacrificed, called Chen Bao.

古文：作鄜畤後七十八年，秦德公既立，卜居雍， 後子孙饮马於河 ，遂都雍。雍之诸祠自此兴。
现代文：作鄜畤后七十八年，秦德公既立为帝，经占卜居住在雍城，后来子孙把疆域扩展到黄河沿岸，便定都于雍城，雍城的许多祠庙都是这时期建立的。
English: Seventy-eight years after his accession to the throne, Qin Deguang became emperor and lived in Yongcheng after divination. Later, his descendants expanded the territory to the coast of the Yellow River and settled in Yongcheng. Many ancestral temples in Yongcheng were built during this period.

古文：用三百牢於鄜畤。作伏祠。
现代文：每祭祀用牲畜达三百头。又作祭伏的祠庙。
English: Up to three hundred head of livestock were used for each ritual, and it was also used as an ancestral temple.

古文：磔狗邑四门，以御蛊菑。
现代文：还磔裂狗于城邑四方，以防御蛊灾的侵害。
English: They also set dogs on the four sides of the city to guard against the encroachment of floods.

古文：德公立二年卒。
现代文：德公立二年而死。
English: He died two years later.

古文：其後年，秦宣公作密畤於渭南，祭青帝。
现代文：又过四年，秦宣王在渭水以南作密畤，祭祀青帝。
English: Four years later, Qin Xuan Wang made a great sacrifice to the young emperor south of Surabaya.

古文：其後十四年，秦缪公立，病卧五日不寤；寤，乃言梦见上帝，上帝命缪公平晋乱。
现代文：过了十四年，秦缪公即位，病卧五天不省人事；醒来后，自说梦见天帝了，天帝命缪公平定晋国内乱。
English: After fourteen years, Qin Miao ascended to the throne. He was bedridden for five days, unconscious. When he woke up, he said that he had dreamed of the Heavenly Emperor, and the Heavenly Emperor ordered Miao to instigate a civil war.

古文：史书而记藏之府。
现代文：史官记载下来藏于内府。
English: The historian recorded it and hid it in Naifu.

古文：而後世皆曰秦缪公上天。
现代文：而后世都说秦缪公上天了。
English: Later generations said that Qin Miao ascended to heaven.

古文：秦缪公即位九年，齐桓公既霸，会诸侯於葵丘，而欲封禅。
现代文：秦缪公即位九年，齐桓公既为霸主，在葵丘召集诸侯会盟，产生了封禅的念头。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Qin Miao, King Qi Kuan, who was the overlord, convened the Association of Princes in Kwai Chiu, which gave rise to the idea of fusing Zen.

古文：管仲曰： 古者封泰山禅梁父者七十二家，而夷吾所记者十有二焉。
现代文：管仲说： 古时候封泰山禅梁父的有七十二家，而我记得的只有十二家。
English: Guanzhong said, "In ancient times, there were seventy-two families who owned Mount Tai, but I only remember twelve.

古文：昔无怀氏封泰山，禅云云；虙羲封泰山，禅云云；神农封泰山，禅云云；炎帝封泰山，禅云云；黄帝封泰山，禅亭亭；颛顼封泰山，禅云云；帝幹封泰山，禅云云；尧封泰山，禅云云；舜封泰山，禅云云；禹封泰山，禅会稽；汤封泰山，禅云云；周成王封泰山，禅社首：皆受命然後得封禅。 
现代文：以往无怀氏封泰山；禅云云；虙牺封泰山，禅云云；神农封泰山，禅云云；炎帝封泰山，禅云云；彭帝封泰山，禅亭亭；颛顼封泰山，禅云云；帝俈封泰山，禅云云；尧封泰山，禅云云；舜封泰山，禅云云；禹封泰山；禅会稽；汤封泰山，禅云云，周成王封泰山，禅社首。都是受天命为帝王以后才得以封禅。 
English: In the past, there was no Huai Clan's seal of Mount Tai; Zen Yun Yun;  victim's seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun; Shennong's seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun; Yan Emperor's seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun; Peng Emperor's seal of Mount Tai, Zen Ting Ting;  seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun; Emperor's seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun;  seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun; Yu Seal of Mount Tai; Zen Association's seal; Tang seal of Mount Tai, Zen Yun Yun; Zhou Cheng Wang's seal of Mount Tai, head of the

古文：桓公曰： 寡人北伐山戎，过孤竹；西伐大夏，涉流沙，束马悬车，上卑耳之山；南伐至召陵，登熊耳山以望江汉。
现代文：齐桓公说： 寡人向北征伐山戎，兵过孤竹；向西伐大夏，远涉流沙，勒马停车，登上卑耳山；向南征伐到召陵，登上熊耳山以眺望长江、汉水。
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: Many people went to the north to conquer Mount Rong, and soldiers crossed the Lone Bamboo; to the west to conquer Mount Daxia, waded far into the quicksand, stopped the horse, and climbed Mount Biel; to the south to conquer Mount Zhaoling, and climbed Mount Xiong'er to overlook the Yangtze River and the Han River.

古文：兵车之会三，而乘车之会六，九合诸侯，一匡天下，诸侯莫违我。
现代文：为平乱伐叛等武事召集诸侯会兵三次，为政治、外交等文事集会了六次，前后九次集会诸侯，一统天下，诸侯无一人敢违背我。
English: In order to quell the mutiny and other martial affairs, I have called together the warriors of the princes three times. In order to settle the political and diplomatic affairs, I have called together the soldiers of the princes six times, and the princes have called together nine times. I am the ruler of the world, and none of the princes dare to disobey me.

古文：昔三代受命，亦何以异乎？ 
现代文：与以往三代受天命为帝王，又有什么两样？ 
English: How is it different from the previous three generations of emperors who were chosen by God?

古文：於是管仲睹桓公不可穷以辞，因设之以事，曰： 古之封禅，鄗上之黍，北里之禾，所以为盛；江淮之间，一茅三脊，所以为藉也。
现代文：于是管仲看出对桓公不可能以言辞相说服，因设置些难办的事情阻止他，说道： 古时候封禅，需要用鄗上地区的黍，北里地区的禾，做祭天用的粢盛；用江淮之间生长的三脊茅，编织荐神的席子。
English: Guanzhong then saw that it was impossible to convince Huan Gong with words, so he set up some difficult things to stop him, saying: In ancient times, to seal a zen, it was necessary to use the straw from the upper region and the straw from the northern region to make a yakitori for offering to the gods; and to use the three ridges of thatch that grew between the Huai and Yangtze rivers to weave a mat to recommend the gods.

古文：东海致比目之鱼，西海致比翼之鸟，然后物有不召而自至者十有五焉。
现代文：东海来贡比目鱼，西海来贡比翼鸟，然后还有不求自至的十五种吉祥物出现。
English: The East Sea came to pay tribute to the flounder, the West Sea came to pay tribute to the winged bird, and then there were fifteen kinds of mascots.

古文：今凤皇麒麟不来，嘉穀不生，而蓬蒿藜莠茂，鸱枭数至，而欲封禅，毋乃不可乎？ 
现代文：如今什么祥瑞也没有，凤凰麒麟没有降临，嘉谷没有产生，而田野中的蓬蒿杂草茂盛，鸱枭等恶鸟数次出现于朝堂，在这种情况下想要封禅，是否有点儿不太合适？ 
English: Nowadays, there is no auspiciousness, the phoenix and the unicorn have not come, and the valley has not been created, but the weeds in the fields are flourishing, and evil birds such as the dragonfly have appeared several times in the imperial hall. In this situation, is it a bit inappropriate to want to seal Zen?

古文：於是桓公乃止。
现代文：于是桓公打消了封禅的念头。
English: As a result, Emperor Kan quashed the idea of sealing Zen.

古文：是岁，秦缪公内晋君夷吾。
现代文：这一年，秦缪公送夷吾回国立为晋君。
English: In the same year, Qin Muigong sent him back to the country as the crown prince.

古文：其後三置晋国之君，平其乱。
现代文：此后先后三次为晋国立君主，平定晋国的内乱。
English: After that, he became the monarch of Jin three times successively to quell the civil unrest in Jin.

古文：缪公立三十九年而卒。
现代文：缪公在位三十九年而死。
English: Miao Gong died after thirty-nine years on the throne.

古文：其後百有馀年，而孔子论述六，传略言易姓而王，封泰山禅乎梁父者七十馀王矣，其俎豆之礼不章，盖难言之。
现代文：此后过了一百多年，有孔子论述六艺。书传中曾简略地记述说天下改姓而出现的新王，封泰山禅梁父的有七十多人，而孔子论述中却看不到有关封禅的俎豆之礼，大约是难以记述的缘故。
English: More than a hundred years later, Confucius discussed the six arts. In the biography, it was briefly described that there was a new king in the world who changed his surname, and there were more than seventy people who were the founders of Mount Tai Zen, but Confucius's discussion did not see the pea ceremony about the founding of Zen, probably because it was difficult to describe.

古文：或问禘之说，孔子曰： 不知。
现代文：曾有人问及有关谛祭的事，孔子说： 不知道。
English: Confucius once said, "I don't know," when someone asked him about the Sacred Heart Festival.

古文：知禘之说，其於天下也视其掌。 
现代文：倘若知道谛祭的事，对天下任何事都如同观察自己的掌文一样明白了。 
English: If one knows about the precepts of the Buddha, he will understand everything in the world as if he were observing his own handwriting.

古文：诗云纣在位，文王受命，政不及泰山。
现代文：按《诗经》所说纣王在位，文王受天命后，政事中没有封泰山的事。
English: According to the "Song of Songs," when King Zhao was on the throne and King Wen was appointed by heaven, there was no matter of sealing Mount Tai in political affairs.

古文：武王克殷二年，天下未宁而崩。
现代文：武王于灭殷以后二年，天下尚未安宁而死。
English: Two years after the death of King Wu, the world was not yet at peace when he died.

古文：爰周德之洽维成王，成王之封禅则近之矣。
现代文：所以周朝惟有到成王时才说得上德政融洽，成王要封泰山才接近于合乎道理。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty can only be said to be harmonious with German politics when it becomes king, and it is close to reasonable for the king to seal Mount Tai.

古文：及後陪臣执政，季氏旅於泰山，仲尼讥之。
现代文：然而，此后诸侯各国陪臣执政，鲁国季氏旅祭于泰山，孔子曾嘲笑这种事。
English: However, after that, the vassals of the princes of various countries ruled, and the Ru Guo Ji Festival was held in Mount Tai. Confucius once laughed at this kind of thing.

古文：是时苌弘以方事周灵王，诸侯莫朝周，周力少，苌弘乃明鬼神事，设射貍首。
现代文：这时期苌弘以法术效力于周灵王，诸侯不肯朝见周王，周朝微弱，无力治其罪，于是苌弘就明目张胆地搞起了鬼神活动，设置了射《狸首》的仪式。
English: During this period, Gong Hong used magic to help King Zhou Ling. The princes refused to meet with King Zhou, and the Zhou dynasty was weak and unable to deal with the crime. Therefore, Gong Hong brazenly started ghost and god activities and set up the ceremony of shooting "the head of the fox."

古文：貍首者，诸侯之不来者。
现代文：狸首，代表那些不来朝见的诸侯。
English: Tanukisau, representing those lords who do not come to the court.

古文：依物怪欲以致诸侯。
现代文：想凭借神怪的力量招致诸侯来朝。
English: He wanted to use the power of the gods and monsters to invite princes to come to Japan.

古文：诸侯不从，而晋人执杀苌弘。
现代文：诸侯不从，而晋人捕获苌弘，杀掉了他。
English: The lords did not comply, and the Jin people captured Zou Hong and killed him.

古文：周人之言方怪者自苌弘。
现代文：周朝人谈法术神怪自苌弘开始。
English: People in the Zhou Dynasty began to talk about magic gods and monsters from the time of Qian Hong.

古文：其後百馀年，秦灵公作吴阳上畤，祭黄帝；作下畤，祭炎帝。
现代文：百余年后，秦灵公在吴阳设上畤，祭祀黄帝；设下畤，祭祀炎帝。
English: More than a hundred years later, Qin Linggong set up the upper anchor in Wuyang to worship the Yellow Emperor; set up the lower anchor to worship the Burning Emperor.

古文：後四十八年，周太史儋见秦献公曰： 秦始与周合，合而离，五百岁当复合，合十七年而霸王出焉。 
现代文：此后四十八年，周朝太史儋见秦献公说： 起初秦与周联合，联合后又分离，五百年后该当重新联合，联合十七年就会有霸王出现了。 
English: Forty-eight years after that, the Zhou Dynasty's Taishi Zang saw Qin Xiangong and said: At first, Qin and Zhou were united, and then separated. Five hundred years later, they should be re-united, and in the seventeenth year of the union, a tyrant will appear.

古文：栎阳雨金，秦献公自以为得金瑞，故作畦畤栎阳而祀白帝。
现代文：栎阳下雨，有黄金随雨而落，秦献公自认为是得了五行中属于金的祥瑞，因而在栎阳作畦畤祭祀白帝。
English: It rained in Fenyang, and some gold fell with the rain. Qin Xianguo thought that he had won the auspiciousness of gold in the Five Elements, so he made a skull-and-crossbones sacrifice to worship the White Emperor in Fenyang.

古文：其後百二十岁而秦灭周，周之九鼎入于秦。
现代文：此后过了一百二十年秦灭周朝，周朝的九鼎流入秦国。
English: One hundred and twenty years later, Qin destroyed the Zhou Dynasty, and the Jiuding of the Zhou Dynasty flowed into Qin.

古文：或曰宋太丘社亡，而鼎没于泗水彭城下。
现代文：有人说宋国的太丘社坛被毁以后，九鼎在彭城下的泗水中沉没了。
English: Some people say that after the destruction of the Taiqiu Shrine in the Song Dynasty, Jiuding sank in the turbid waters under Pengcheng.

古文：其後百一十五年而秦并天下。
现代文：又过了一百一十五年秦国统一天下。
English: One hundred and fifteen years later, Qin unified the country.

古文：秦始皇既并天下而帝，或曰： 黄帝得土德，黄龙地螾见。
现代文：秦始皇既统一天下为帝，有人说： 黄帝于五行得土德，有黄龙和大蚯蚓出现。
English: Since Qin Shihuang was unified and became the emperor, some people said: The Yellow Emperor became a patriot in the Five Elements, and the Yellow Dragon and the Great Dragonfly appeared.

古文：夏得木德，青龙止於郊，草木暢茂。
现代文：夏朝得木德，有青龙降落在都城郊外，草木长得格外茁壮茂盛。
English: In the summer, there are blue dragons landing on the outskirts of the capital, and the plants and trees grow extraordinarily vigorous.

古文：殷得金德，银自山溢。
现代文：殷朝得金德，所以才从山中流出银子来。
English: The Yin Dynasty had a golden virtue, so the silver flowed out of the mountains.

古文：周得火德，有赤乌之符。
现代文：周朝德火德，有红色乌鸦这种符瑞产生。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was a fire, and a red crow was born.

古文：今秦变周，水德之时。昔秦文公出猎，获黑龙，此其水德之瑞。 
现代文：如今秦朝改变了周朝天下，是得水德的时代，以前秦文公出外打猎，曾得到一条黑龙，这就是水德的吉祥物。 
English: Now that the Qin Dynasty has changed Zhou Dynasty, it is the era of obtaining water virtue. Before Qin Wenguang went out hunting, he once obtained a black dragon, which is the mascot of water virtue.

古文：於是秦更命河曰 德水 ，以冬十月为年首，色上黑，度以六为名，音上大吕，事统上法。
现代文：于是秦把黄河的名子改为 德水 ，以冬季十月为每年的开头，颜色崇尚黑色，尺度以六为数，音声崇尚大吕，政事崇尚法令。
English: As a result, Qin changed the name of the Yellow River to De Shui, with winter October as the beginning of each year, the color advocating black, the scale advocating six, the sound advocating big Lu, and the government advocating laws.

古文：即帝位三年，东巡郡县，祠驺峄山，颂秦功业。
现代文：即帝位的第三年，向东方巡察郡县，在驺县峄山立祠祭祀，歌颂秦朝的功德事业。
English: That is, in the third year of the emperor's reign, he went to the east to inspect counties and counties, and set up an ancestral shrine in Lushan, Handan County, to celebrate the merits of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：於是徵从齐鲁之儒生博士七十人，至乎泰山下。
现代文：于是征发齐鲁的儒生、博士七十人为随从，来到泰山下。
English: As a result, seventy Confucianism students and Ph.D. students from Qilu were conscripted as followers and came to the foot of Mount Tai.

古文：诸儒生或议曰： 古者封禅为蒲车，恶伤山之土石草木；埽地而祭，席用菹秸，言其易遵也。 
现代文：众儒生有的建议说： 古时候封禅，乘坐用蒲草包裹车轮的车子，是怕伤害了山上的土石草木；把地面打扫一下，就作为祭祀场地，席子用草、禾稽编成，是由于容易办到、易于遵行的缘故。 
English: Some suggestions from Confucians are as follows: In ancient times, to seal Zen, people would ride in a carriage with its wheels wrapped in rushes, for fear of damaging the soil, rocks and plants on the mountain; if the ground was swept, it would be used as a sacrificial site, and the mats would be made of grass and straw, for the reason that it was easy to do and easy to follow.

古文：始皇闻此议各乖异，难施用，由此绌儒生。
现代文：始皇听到这些议论各不相同，而且与情理不合，难以实行，由此不用儒生。
English: When the first emperor heard these arguments, they were all different, and they were unreasonable and difficult to implement, so he did not use Confucianism.

古文：而遂除车道，上自泰山阳至巅，立石颂秦始皇帝德，明其得封也。
现代文：而命人修理、打扫行车道路，自阳坡登上泰山的顶峰，立石碑歌颂秦始皇的功德，表明他应该封禅的道理。
English: He ordered people to repair and clean the road, climbed the peak of Mount Tai from the Yang slope, and erected a stone monument to praise the merits of Qin Shihuang, indicating that he should seal the principle of Zen.

古文：从阴道下，禅於梁父。
现代文：从阴坡下山，在梁父山禅祭地神。
English: From the gloomy slope down the mountain, in the Liangchuzhan Zen Festival of the Earth God.

古文：其礼颇采太祝之祀雍上帝所用，而封藏皆祕之，世不得而记也。
现代文：封禅的仪式有许多是采用在雍城祭祀天帝所用的仪式，而所封所藏都秘而不宣，世人无法知晓并记录下来。
English: Many of the ceremonies of Fuzan are the same as those used in Yongcheng to worship the Heavenly Emperor, and all of them are kept secret and cannot be known or recorded by the outside world.

古文：始皇之上泰山，中阪遇暴风雨，休於大树下。
现代文：秦始皇上泰山时，于山腰中遇到暴风雨，曾在大树下避雨。
English: When Emperor Qin Shihuang ascended Mount Tai, he encountered a storm on the mountainside and sheltered from the rain under a large tree.

古文：诸儒生既绌，不得与用於封事之礼，闻始皇遇风雨，则讥之。
现代文：诸儒生既被贬退，不能参与封禅的礼仪，听说始皇遇风雨，就讥笑他。
English: The Confucian scholars, who had been degraded and could not take part in the ceremony of the enthronement of the emperor, mocked the first emperor when they heard that he was in a storm.

古文：於是始皇遂东游海上，行礼祠名山大川及八神，求仙人羡门之属。
现代文：封禅既毕，秦始皇继续东行到海上游览，一路祭祀名山、大江河以及八神，向仙人羡门高等祈求福佑。
English: After the retreat, Qin Shi Huang continued his eastward journey to the sea, along the way offering sacrifices to famous mountains, great rivers and eight gods, and praying for blessings from the immortals.

古文：八神将自古而有之，或曰太公以来作之。
现代文：八神名目自古就有，有的说是齐太公以来制造出来的。
English: The names of the eight deities have existed since ancient times, and some say they have been made since the time of Emperor Qi.

古文：齐所以为齐，以天齐也。
现代文：齐国之所以名为齐，就是由于八神之一的天齐神的缘故。
English: The reason why Qi is called Qi is because of one of the eight gods, Tianqi.

古文：其祀绝莫知起时。
现代文：天齐的祭祀已经废绝，不知起自何时。
English: Tianqi's sacrificial rites have been abolished, I don't know when.

古文：八神：一曰天主，祠天齐。天齐渊水，居临菑南郊山下者。
现代文：八神：一是天主，祀于天齐，有天齐渊水，在临淄城南郊的山脚下。
English: Eight deities: One is God, enshrined in Tianqi, with Tianqi Yuanshui, at the foot of the mountain on the southern outskirts of Linyi City.

古文：二曰地主，祠泰山梁父。
现代文：二是地主，祀于泰山下的梁父山。
English: The second is the landowner, enshrined on Mount Liangchih under Mount Tai.

古文：盖天好阴，祠之必於高山之下，小山之上，命曰 畤 ；地贵阳，祭之必於泽中圜丘云。
现代文：这是由于天性喜阴，祭祀它必须在高山的下面，小山的上面，称为畤；地性喜阳，祭祀它必须在低洼地区的圆丘上。
English: This is due to the nature of yin and yang, and it must be sacrificed at the bottom of a high mountain and on top of a hill, which is called a yang; the nature of yin and yang, and it must be sacrificed on a round hill in a low-lying area.

古文：三曰兵主，祠蚩尤。
现代文：三是兵主，祭蚩尤。
English: The third is the commander of the army.

古文：蚩尤在东平陆监乡，齐之西境也。
现代文：蚩尤祠在东平陆的监乡，为齐国西境。
English: Qiyu Ancestral Hall is located in the monitoring village of Dongpinglu, the westernmost point of Qi Province.

古文：四曰阴主，祠三山。
现代文：四是阴主，祭于参山。
English: The fourth is Yin Lord, who is enshrined on Samshan Mountain.

古文：五曰阳主，祠之罘。
现代文：五是阳主，祭于之罘山。
English: The fifth is Yangshu, who is enshrined on Mount Lushan.

古文：六曰月主，祠之莱山。
现代文：六是月主，祭于莱山。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th lunar month, the festival is held on Mount Rai.

古文：皆在齐北，并勃海。
现代文：以上三项在齐国北部，临近勃海。
English: The above three items are in the northern part of Qi, near the Bohai Sea.

古文：七曰日主，祠成山。
现代文：七是日主，祀于成山。
English: The seventh is Nichijo, enshrined in Nariyama.

古文：成山斗入海，最居齐东北隅，以迎日出云。
现代文：成山绝壁迴曲，人于海中，在齐东北部的最为边隅的地区，据说是迎接日出的地方。
English: In the most remote area of northeastern Qi, where the cliffs of mountains echo and people swim in the sea, it is said to be the place to greet the sunrise.

古文：八曰四时主，祠琅邪。
现代文：八是四时主，祀于琅邪山。
English: Eight is the lord of the four seasons, and is enshrined on Mount Fuji.

古文：琅邪在齐东方，盖岁之所始。
现代文：琅邪在齐国东部，为太岁开始运行的地方。
English: It is located in the eastern part of Qi Province, which is the place where Tai Lai started to run.

古文：皆各用一牢具祠，而巫祝所损益，珪币杂异焉。
现代文：祭祀八神都用牺牲一头，而巫祝的数目有多有少，珪币的名目、数目也各不相同。
English: Each of the eight deities is worshipped with the sacrifice of one head, while the number of witches is more or less, and the names and number of coins are also different.

古文：自齐威、宣之时，驺子之徒论著终始五德之运，及秦帝而齐人奏之，故始皇采用之。
现代文：自从齐威王、宣王的时候，驺衍等人著书立说，论述五德终始变化，到秦称帝后有齐人把这套理论奏明秦王，所以秦始皇采用了它。
English: Since the time of King Qiwei and King Xuan, Yu Yan and others have written a book, discussing the changes of the five virtues from beginning to end. After Qin was proclaimed emperor, Qi people presented this theory to King Qin, so the First Emperor of Qin adopted it.

古文：而宋毋忌、正伯侨、充尚、羡门高最後皆燕人，为方仙道，形解销化，依於鬼神之事。
现代文：而自宋毋忌、正伯侨、充尚、羡门高以后都是燕国人，实行神仙道家的法术，如形解销化、依托鬼神等事。
English: However, since the Song Dynasty, Zhengbo Qiao, Zheng Shang, and Zhenmen Gao, they have all been Yan people, practicing the magic of the Immortal Taoist, such as the transformation of the form into a demon, and relying on ghosts and gods.

古文：驺衍以阴阳主运显於诸侯，而燕齐海上之方士传其术不能通，然则怪迂阿谀苟合之徒自此兴，不可胜数也。
现代文：驺衍以阴阳迭主运数的理论显名诸侯，而燕齐地区海上的方士传习他的理论又不能通达，因此一些荒诞奇怪、阿谀奉迎、苟且求合的人从此兴起了，其人数之多不可胜计。
English: Qianyan became famous for his theory of yin and yang as the main factors of fortune, but the magicians on the sea in Yanqi region could not reach his theory. Therefore, some absurd and strange people, flatterers, and people who are eager to meet, have arisen since then, and their number is incalculable.

古文：自威、宣、燕昭使人入海求蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲。
现代文：自从齐威王、齐宣王、燕昭王以来，就使人人海寻找蓬莱、方丈、瀛州三神山。
English: Ever since King Qiwei, King Qi Xuan, and King Yan Zhao ascended to the throne, people have been searching for Penglai, Hojo, and the Three Sacred Mountains of Zhangzhou.

古文：此三神山者，其傅在勃海中，去人不远；患且至，则船风引而去。
现代文：这三座神山，相传在渤海之中，路程并不算远，困难在于将到山侧时，就会有海风吹引船只离山而去。
English: These three sacred mountains are said to be in the middle of the Bohai Sea. The distance is not far, but the difficulty is that when you get to the side of the mountain, the sea breeze will blow the ship away from the mountain.

古文：盖尝有至者，诸仙人及不死之药皆在焉。
现代文：据说曾有人到过那里，众仙人以及长生不老药那里都有。
English: It is said that people have been there before, and that immortals and elixirs can be found there.

古文：其物禽兽尽白，而黄金银为宫阙。
现代文：山上的东西凡禽兽都是白色的，以黄金和白银建造宫阙。
English: Everything in the mountains and all the animals are white, and they build their palaces with gold and silver.

古文：未至，望之如云；及到，三神山反居水下。
现代文：到山上以前，望过去如同一片白云；来到跟前，见三神山反而在海水以下。
English: Before reaching the top of the mountain, it looks like a white cloud in the distance; when you get closer, you will see that instead, Mount Mikami is below the sea.

古文：临之，风辄引去，终莫能至云。
现代文：想要登上山，则每每被风吹引离去，终究不能到达。
English: If you want to climb the mountain, you will be blown away by the wind, and you will not be able to reach it.

古文：世主莫不甘心焉。
现代文：世俗间的君主帝王无不钦羡非常。
English: Monarchs and emperors in the secular world are greatly admired.

古文：及至秦始皇并天下，至海上，则方士言之不可胜数。
现代文：及秦始皇统一天下后，到海上游览，向始皇谈及这些事的方士不计其数。
English: After the unification of Qin and the First Emperor, there are countless sages who went to the sea to visit and talk to the First Emperor about these things.

古文：始皇自以为至海上而恐不及矣，使人乃赍童男女入海求之。
现代文：始皇自以为亲到海上不见得就能找到三神山，于是派人带着童男童女到海上寻找。
English: The first emperor thought that he would not necessarily be able to find the Three Sacred Mountains if he went to the sea, so he sent people with boys and girls to the sea to search.

古文：船交海中，皆以风为解，曰未能至，望见之焉。
现代文：船从海中回来，都以遇风不能到达为辞，说道虽没到达，确实看到了三神山。
English: When the boats came back from the sea, they all said that they couldn't reach it because of the wind, saying that although they didn't reach it, they did see Mount Mikami.

古文：其明年，始皇复游海上，至琅邪，过恆山，从上党归。
现代文：第二年，始皇重游海上，到琅邪，路过恒山，取道上党而回。
English: In the second year, the first emperor revisited the sea, went to Shanzhao, passed through Hengshan, and took the road to the party and returned.

古文：後三年，游碣石，考入海方士，从上郡归。
现代文：三年后，巡游碣石山，考察被派遣人海寻找三神山的方士，从上郡反回京城。
English: Three years later, he went on a tour of Mount Shouishi to inspect the sea of people who had been sent to look for the three wise men of Mount Mikami, and then returned to Kyoto from Kamigun.

古文：後五年，始皇南至湘山，遂登会稽，并海上，冀遇海中三神山之奇药。不得，还至沙丘崩。
现代文：过了五年，始皇南游到湘山，于是登上会稽山，并来到海上，希望能得到海中三神山中的长生不老药，没能如愿，回来的路上在沙丘宫病死。
English: After five years, the first emperor traveled south to Mount Xiangshan, then climbed Mount Huiqi and came to the sea, hoping to get the elixir of life from the Three Sacred Mountains in the sea. He did not succeed, and died of illness on the way back to the Sand Dune Palace.

古文：二世元年，东巡碣石，并海南，历泰山，至会稽，皆礼祠之，而刻勒始皇所立石书旁，以章始皇之功德。
现代文：二世元年，秦二世向东巡游到碣石山和海南，经过泰山，到达会稽，每处都按礼仪祭祀神祇，在始皇所立石上勒文纪事，以颂扬始皇的功德。
English: In the first year of the second generation, Qin II cruised eastward to Shaoshishan and Hainan, passing through Mount Tai and arriving at Huiqi. In each place, deities were worshiped according to the etiquette, and a chronicle was written on the stone erected by the first emperor to praise the merits of the first emperor.

古文：其秋，诸侯畔秦。三年而二世弑死。
现代文：这年秋天，诸侯起兵背叛秦朝，三年后二世遇弑而死。
English: In the autumn of that year, the princes raised an army to betray the Qin Dynasty, and three years later the second son was killed.

古文：始皇封禅之後十二岁，秦亡。
现代文：始皇封禅以后十二年，秦朝灭亡。
English: Twelve years after the first emperor was enthroned, the Qin Dynasty fell.

古文：诸儒生疾秦焚诗书，诛僇文学，百姓怨其法，天下畔之，皆讹曰： 始皇上泰山，为暴风雨所击，不得封禅。 
现代文：那些儒生们疾恨秦朝焚毁诗书，屠杀、侮辱文学士人，百姓怨恨秦朝法律，天下人都背叛秦朝，因而都讹传说： 始皇上泰山，被暴风雨所阻，没能行封禅礼。 
English: Those Confucians bitterly hated the Qin Dynasty for burning poetry books, massacring and insulting literary scholars, the people resented the Qin Dynasty's laws, and the whole world betrayed the Qin Dynasty, thus Tudor legend: The first emperor ascended Mount Tai, was blocked by a storm, and was unable to perform the sealing ceremony.

古文：此岂所谓无其德而用事者邪？
现代文：既没封禅，怎能如方士们所说说是无封禅之德而行封禅之礼呢？
English: Since there is no sealing of Zen, how can the ceremony of sealing Zen be performed without the virtue of sealing Zen, as the sages said?

古文：昔三代之皆在河洛之间，故嵩高为中岳，而四岳各如其方，四渎咸在山东。
现代文：以往三代建国都在河、洛二水之间，所以以嵩高山为中岳，其他四岳名也都与各自的方位相合，而四渎都在崤山以东。
English: In the past, the three generations of the founding of the country were between the river and Luo Ershui, so Song Gaoshan was the middle mountain, and the other four mountain names were also consistent with their respective positions, while the four faults were east of Lushan.

古文：至秦称帝，都咸阳，则五岳、四渎皆并在东方。
现代文：到秦称帝，建都咸阳，则五岳、四渎都在都城东方。
English: When Qin proclaimed himself emperor and built Xianyang as the capital, the Five Mountains and the Four Dynasties were all in the eastern part of the capital.

古文：自五帝以至秦，轶兴轶衰，名山大川或在诸侯，或在天子，其礼损益世殊，不可胜记。
现代文：自五帝到秦朝一代代的迭兴迭衰，名山大川或在诸侯境内，或在天子国中，祭祀的礼仪有损有益，随世而异，不可胜计。
English: From the Five Emperors to the Qin Dynasty, successive generations rise and fall, famous mountains and rivers, or in the territory of the princes, or in the kingdom of heaven, the ritual of sacrifice is harmful and beneficial, it varies with the world, it is incalculable.

古文：及秦并天下，令祠官所常奉天地名山大川鬼神可得而序也。
现代文：及秦朝统一天下后，命令祠官经常供奉的天地名山大川诸鬼神，便能按次序记述下来了。
English: And one day after the Qin Dynasty was unified, it was ordered that the famous mountains and rivers of heaven and earth and the ghosts and gods that the ancestral hall officials often worshipped could be recorded in order.

古文：於是自殽以东，名山五，大川祠二。
现代文：于是知道那时自崤山以东，有名山五个，大川二个加以祭祀。
English: So I knew that at that time, five famous mountains and two large rivers east of Lushan Mountain were worshipped.

古文：曰太室。
现代文：名为太室。
English: It is called Taishitsu.

古文：太室，嵩高也。
现代文：太室，就是嵩高山。
English: Taishitsu, that is, Song Gaoshan.

古文：恆山，泰山，会稽，湘山。
现代文：恒山，泰山，会稽山，湘山。
English: Hengshan, Mount Tai, Mount Huiqi, Mount Xiangshan.

古文：水曰济，曰淮。
现代文：水名是济水，淮水。
English: The water is called Jishui or Huai Shui.

古文：春以脯酒为岁祠，因泮冻，秋涸冻，冬塞祷祠。
现代文：春季以干肉、酒醴举行岁祭，此外由于岁暖不能封冻，或秋季因干旱而河床涸落、因早寒而冰冻，或冬季寒而冰雪塞途等异常现象，随时祈祷祭祀。
English: In spring, the New Year's festival is held with dried meat and sake lees. In addition, due to abnormal phenomena such as the New Year's warmth can not be frozen, or the riverbed dries up due to drought in autumn, freezes due to early cold, or the cold in winter is blocked by ice and snow, prayers and sacrifices are held at any time.

古文：其牲用牛犊各一，牢具珪币各异。
现代文：祭祀牺牲用牛犊各一头，与牛犊相配的礼器以及珪币等各不相同。
English: Each side of the calf is used as a sacrificial offering, and the ceremonial objects and coins used to match the calf are different.

古文：自华以西，名山七，名川四。
现代文：自华县以西名山有七个，名川有四个。
English: There are seven famous mountains and four famous rivers west of Jihua County.

古文：曰华山，薄山。
现代文：名为华山，薄山。
English: It is called Huashan or Weishan.

古文：薄山者，衰山也。
现代文：薄山，就是衰山。
English: A thin mountain is a decaying mountain.

古文：岳山，岐山，吴岳，鸿冢，渎山。
现代文：岳山，岐山，吴岳，鸿冢，渎山。
English: Yue Mountain, Qishan Mountain, Wuyue Mountain, Hongyao Mountain, Zhushan Mountain.

古文：渎山，蜀之汶山。
现代文：渎山，就是蜀中的汶山。
English: Guanzhong Mountain is the Wenshan Mountain in Shu.

古文：水曰河，祠临晋；沔，祠汉中；湫渊，祠朝；江水，祠蜀。
现代文：水的名子为河水，祀于临晋；沔水，祭祀于汉中；湫渊，祭祀于朝；江水，祭祀于蜀中。
English: The namesake of water is river water, which is enshrined in Linjin; brackish water, which is enshrined in Hanzhong; abyss, which is enshrined in Zhaozhou; and river water, which is enshrined in Shu.

古文：亦春秋泮涸祷塞，如东方名山川；而牲牛犊牢具珪币各异。
现代文：也是在春秋天不结冰，河川干涸及冰雪塞途时祷祭，与东方名山川相同，但祭祀所用牺牲牛渎以及配用礼具和珪币等各不相同。
English: It is also a prayer festival in spring and autumn when there is no ice, when rivers dry up and ice and snow block the way. It is the same as the famous mountains and rivers in the East, but the sacrificial ox used in the ritual and the use of ceremonial objects and coins are different.

古文：而四大冢鸿、岐、吴、岳，皆有尝禾。
现代文：此外四大冢鸿冢、岐冢、吴冢、岳冢，都有尝禾的祭祀。
English: In addition, the four major grasslands, Hongye, Qiye, Wuye and Yueye, all have grass-eating rituals.

古文：陈宝节来祠。其河加有尝醪。
现代文：遇到陈宝神应节降临祠庙，河水增加尝醪的祭祀。
English: Encountering Chen Baoshen's advent to the ancestral temple on the festival, the river water increased and the sacrificial rites were performed.

古文：此皆在雍州之域，近天子之都，故加车一乘，驹四。
现代文：这些都由于在雍州地域以内，靠近天子的都城，所以祭祀增加车一辆，马驹四匹。
English: These are all within the Yongzhou region, close to the capital city of Tianzi, so the sacrifices increase by one car and four horses.

古文：霸、产、长水、沣、涝、泾、渭皆非大川，以近咸阳，尽得比山川祠，而无诸加。
现代文：霸水、产水、长水、沣水、涝水、泾水、渭水都不是大川，由于邻近咸阳，都得到与名山川相同的祭祀，但没有加祭的诸项内容。
English: Bansui, Zhanshui, Changshui, Shanshui, Wanshui, Shanshui and Shanshui are not big rivers. Because they are close to Xianyang, they all receive the same sacrifices as famous mountains and rivers, but there are no additional sacrifices.

古文：汧、洛二渊，鸣泽、蒲山、岳鞚山之属，为小山川，亦皆岁祷塞泮涸祠，礼不必同。
现代文：水、洛水二渊，鸣泽、蒲山、岳山之类，是小山川，也都有每年的祷祭、冰雪塞途、河川干涸、不封冻等祀，但礼仪不必相同。
English: Water, Luoshui Nianyuan, Mingze, Pusan, Yue Shan and the like are small mountains and rivers, and they also have annual prayer festivals, ice and snow blocking, river drying up, unfrozen, etc., but the etiquette does not have to be the same.

古文：而雍有日、月、参、辰、南北斗、荧惑、太白、岁星、填星？
现代文：而雍州有日、月、参、辰、南北斗、荧惑星、太白星、岁星、填星？
English: And Yongzhou has the sun, the moon, the zodiac, the hour, the compass, the planetarium, the white star, the lucky star, and the star-filled star?

古文：二十八宿、风伯、雨师、四海、九臣、十四臣、诸布、诸严、诸逑之属，百有馀庙。
现代文：二十八宿、风伯、雨师、四海、九臣、十四臣、诸布、诸严、诸逑之类，凡一百多个祠庙。
English: There are more than a hundred ancestral temples, such as the Twenty-eight Inns, Fengbo, Yushi, Shihai, Jiucheng, Xiucheng, Zhubu, Zhujian and Zhulun.

古文：西亦有数十祠。
现代文：西县也有数十座祠庙。
English: There are also dozens of ancestral temples in West County.

古文：於湖有周天子祠。於下邽有天神。沣、滈有昭明、天子辟池。於、亳有三社主之祠、寿星祠；而雍菅庙亦有杜主。
现代文：在湖县有周天子祠，下邽有天神祠，沣县、滈县有昭明庙，天子辟池庙、在、亳二县有三主的祠庙、寿星庙；而雍城的菅庙中也有杜主庙。
English: In H County, there is the Zhou Tianzi Temple, in Lower Gansu there is the Tianzhenshi Temple, in Gansu County and Lop County there is the Zhaoming Temple, in Lop County and Gansu County there is the Tianzhibi Pond Temple, in Shandong and Fujian Counties there are the Three Principal Ancestral Temples and the Shouxing Temple, and in Yongcheng there is also the Du principal temple in the Suge Temple.

古文：杜主，故周之右将军，其在秦中，最小鬼之神者。
现代文：杜主，原是周朝的右将军，在秦中地区，是小庙中最有灵验的庙宇。
English: Du Lord, originally the Right General of the Zhou Dynasty, is the most effective temple among small temples in the central Qin region.

古文：各以岁时奉祠。
现代文：以上种种各自都按年岁、季节供奉和祭祀。
English: All of the above are offered and sacrificed according to the year and season.

古文：唯雍四畤上帝为尊，其光景动人民唯陈宝。
现代文：诸神祠中唯有雍州四畤的天帝祠地位最尊，祭祀场面最激动人心的要数陈宝祠。
English: Among the shrines of the gods, only the Heavenly Emperor's Shrine in the Four Quarters of Yongzhou has the highest status, and the Chenbao Shrine has the most exciting ritual scenes.

古文：故雍四畤，春以为岁祷，因泮冻，秋涸冻，冬塞祠，五月尝驹，及四仲之月月祠，陈宝节来一祠。
现代文：所以雍州四畤，春季举行岁祷，此外还有由于不封冻、秋季河川干涸和早寒冰冻，冬季寒引起的冰雪塞途的祭祀，五月的尝驹，以及四仲月举行的月祀；而陈宝祠只有陈宝应节降临时的一次祭祀。
English: Therefore, the New Year's Prayer is held in the spring at the Four Pagodas of Yongzhou. In addition, there are the rituals of blocking the path of ice and snow caused by the cold in winter due to the non-sealing frost, the drying up of rivers in autumn and the early cold freezing, the tasting of cucumbers in May, and the monthly rituals held in the four middle months; and the Chen Bao Shrine has only one ritual when Chen Bao falls.

古文：春夏用骍，秋冬用。
现代文：祭礼春夏季用骍牛，秋冬季用驹。
English: In spring and summer, yakitori is used for the festival, and in autumn and winter, bonito is used.

古文：畤驹四匹，木禺龙栾车一驷，木禺车马一驷，各如其帝色。
现代文：每用驹四匹，由四匹木偶龙拉的木偶栾车一乘，四匹木偶马拉的木偶马车一乘，颜色与各帝相应的五方色相同。
English: Each of them has a four-horse mule, a four-puppet carriage pulled by a four-puppet dragon, and a four-puppet carriage pulled by a four-puppet horse. The colors are the same as the corresponding five-square colors of each emperor.

古文：黄犊羔各四，珪币各有数，皆生瘗埋，无俎豆之具。
现代文：黄牛犊和羔羊各四只，珪币各有定数，牛、羊等都是活埋于地下，没有俎豆等礼器。
English: There are four gold calves and four lambs each, and there is a fixed number of shekels each. Cows, sheep, etc. are buried alive underground, and there are no ceremonial objects such as peas.

古文：三年一郊。
现代文：三年郊祭一次。
English: The suburb festival is held once every three years.

古文：秦以冬十月为岁首，故常以十月上宿郊见，通权火，拜於咸阳之旁，而衣上白，其用如经祠云。
现代文：秦以冬季十月为每年的开头，所以常以十月斋戒后郊祀天帝，由祭的地方以权火直达宫禁，皇帝拜于咸阳宫旁，衣服崇尚白色，其他用具与通常祭祀相同。
English: The Qin dynasty began each year in the winter month of October, so the emperor was often worshipped in the suburbs after the October fast. From the place of the festival, the imperial fire reached the palace, and the emperor worshiped next to the Xianyang Palace. The clothes were white, and the other utensils were the same as those used for ordinary sacrifices.

古文：西畤、畦畤，祠如其故，上不亲往。
现代文：西畤、畦畤的祭祀与秦统一前相同，皇帝不亲身往祭。
English: The sacrificial rites of Xidi and Handan were the same as before the unification of Qin, and the emperor did not personally go to the sacrifices.

古文：诸此祠皆太祝常主，以岁时奉祠之。
现代文：此类祠庙都由太祝主持常务，按年岁季节加以祭祀。
English: Such ancestral temples are presided over by Tai Zhu, and are dedicated according to the year and season.

古文：至如他名山川诸鬼及八神之属，上过则祠，去则已。
现代文：至于其他名山川、诸鬼神以及八神之类，皇帝路过它们的祠庙时就加祭祀，离去则停祭。
English: As for other famous mountains and rivers, ghosts and spirits, and the eight gods, when the emperor passed by their ancestral temples, he added sacrifices, and when he left, he stopped the festival.

古文：郡县远方神祠者，民各自奉祠，不领於天子之祝官。
现代文：郡县以及边远地区的神祠，百姓各自供奉祭祀，不归天子设置的祝官管辖。
English: The shrines in counties and counties as well as remote areas are not under the jurisdiction of the congratulatory officials set up by the Son of Heaven.

古文：祝官有祕祝，即有菑祥，辄祝祠移过於下。
现代文：祝官中有一种秘祝，即遇有灾祸，每每祝祷祭祀，把过失转归到臣下身上。
English: There is a secret blessing among the blessings, that is, in the event of a disaster, every blessing is a sacrifice, and the fault is transferred to the subject.

古文：汉兴，高祖之微时，尝杀大蛇。
现代文：汉朝兴起了。
English: The Han Dynasty arose.

古文：有物曰： 蛇，白帝子也，而杀者赤帝子。 
现代文：汉高祖贫贱时，曾经杀死一条大蛇，有神物化作人形说： 这条蛇，是白帝的儿子，杀它的是赤帝的儿子。 
English: When Henkel's ancestors were poor, they once killed a large snake. A divine being transformed into a doll said: This snake is the son of the White Emperor, and the one who killed it is the son of the Red Emperor.

古文：高祖初起，祷丰枌榆社。
现代文：高祖初起兵时，曾祷于丰县的枌榆社坛。
English: When Gaozu first raised an army, he prayed at the community hall in Feng County.

古文：徇沛，为沛公，则祠蚩尤，衅鼓旗。
现代文：攻下沛县后，称为沛公，就祭祀蚩尤神，以血衅鼓旗染成红色。
English: After conquering Peixian, he was called Pei Gong, and he worshipped the god Puyu and dyed the drum and banner red with his blood.

古文：遂以十月至灞上，与诸侯平咸阳，立为汉王。
现代文：终于在十月兵至霸上，与诸侯兵共同平定咸阳，自立为汉王。
English: Finally, in October, when the soldiers gained supremacy, he and the vassal soldiers jointly pacified Xianyang and established himself as the king of Han.

古文：因以十月为年首，而色上赤。
现代文：因此以十月为一年的开头，颜色崇尚赤色。
English: Therefore, with October as the beginning of the year, the color is red.

古文：二年，东击项籍而还入关，问： 故秦时上帝祠何帝也？ 
现代文：第二年，向东攻打项籍，还兵入关后，问道 过去秦朝时祭祀的天帝是什么帝呢？ 
English: In the second year, he went to the East to fight for the title, and after returning to the army and entering the customs, he asked: What was the heavenly emperor who was worshiped in the past Qin Dynasty?

古文：对曰： 四帝，有白、青、黄、赤帝之祠。 
现代文：左右回答说： 共四帝，有白帝、青帝、黄帝、赤帝等祠庙。 
English: The left and right answered: A total of four emperors, including the White Emperor, the Blue Emperor, the Yellow Emperor, the Red Emperor and other ancestral temples.

古文：高祖曰： 吾闻天有五帝，而有四，何也？ 
现代文：高祖说： 我听说天有五帝，只有四庙，是什么原因呢？ 
English: Gaozu said, "I have heard that there are five emperors and only four temples. What is the reason for this?

古文：莫知其说。
现代文：谁也回答不出来。
English: No one can answer that.

古文：於是高祖曰： 吾知之矣，乃待我而具五也。 
现代文：于是高祖说： 我知道了，是等待我来凑足五帝之数的。 
English: Then Gaozu said, "I see, they are waiting for me to make up the number of five emperors."

古文：乃立黑帝祠，命曰北畤。
现代文：于是又建立了黑帝祠，命名为北畤。
English: As a result, the Black Emperor's Ancestral Hall was built and named the North Pagoda.

古文：有司进祠，上不亲往。
现代文：由有关机构主持祭祀，皇帝不亲自往祭。
English: The relevant organization presides over the ceremony, and the emperor does not personally go to the ceremony.

古文：悉召故秦祝官，复置太祝、太宰，如其故仪礼。
现代文：全部录用往时秦朝的祝官，又设置了太祝、太宰，仪礼也与以往相同。
English: All of them were appointed as officials of the former Qin Dynasty, and they were also set up as Tai Zhu and Dazai, and the ceremony was the same as before.

古文：因令县为公社。下诏曰： 吾甚重祠而敬祭。
现代文：因命各县设置公用社坛，下诏书说： 我很重视祠庙而敬重祭祀。
English: As each county was ordered to set up public shrines, the following edict said: I attach great importance to ancestral temples and pay great respect to religious rites.

古文：今上帝之祭及山川诸神当祠者，各以其时礼祠之如故。 
现代文：如今天帝的祭祀以及山川诸神应当祭祀的，各州县及有关机构按时礼象往常一样加以祭祀。 
English: For example, for today's Emperor's sacrifice and the gods of mountains and rivers that should be sacrificed, the states, counties and related institutions will perform the rituals as usual.

古文：後四岁，天下已定，诏御史，令丰谨治枌榆社，常以四时春以羊彘祠之。
现代文：四年后，天下已经平定，诏命御史，令丰县整修枌榆社坛，恭谨祭祀，四时祭常于春季用羊猪祭祀。
English: Four years later, with the country pacified, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Feng County to renovate its community altar and hold a worship service. The four o'clock service is often held in the spring with a goat and pig sacrifice.

古文：令祝官立蚩尤之祠於长安。长安置祠祝官、女巫。
现代文：令祝官在长安建立蚩尤祠。在长安设置祠祝官、女巫。
English: In Chang'an, the celebrant was ordered to build the Puyu Shrine. In Chang'an, the celebrant and the witch were set up in the shrine.

古文：其梁巫，祠天、地、天社、天水、房中、堂上之属；晋巫，祠五帝、东君、云中、司命、巫社、巫祠、族人、先炊之属；秦巫，祠社主、巫保、族累之属；荆巫，祠堂下、巫先、司命、施糜之属；九天巫，祠九天：皆以岁时祠宫中。
现代文：其中梁巫，祭祀天、地、天社、天水、房中、堂上之类；晋巫，祭祀五帝、东君、云中君、司命、巫社、巫祠、族人、先炊之类；秦巫，祭祀社主、巫保、族累之类；荆巫，祭祀堂下、巫先、司命、施糜之类；九天巫，祭祀九天。都按年岁、季节祭于宫中。
English: Among them, Liangwu, sacrifice heaven, earth, heavenly shrine, heavenly water, room, hall, and so on; Jinwu, sacrifice the Five Emperors, Eastern Emperor, Yunnan Emperor, priest, shrine, ancestral shrine, tribesman, precursor, and so on; Qinwu, sacrifice the head of the shrine, guardian deity, family member, and so on; Jingwu, sacrifice the lower part of the hall, priestess, priest, and so on; Jiutianwu, sacrifice nine days. They are all held in the palace according to the year and season.

古文：其河巫祠河於临晋，而南山巫祠南山秦中。
现代文：其河巫祭河神于临晋，而南山巫祭祀南山和秦中。
English: The river god of the river witch festival is in Linjin, while the Nanshan witch festival is in Nanshan and Qin.

古文：秦中者，二世皇帝。
现代文：秦中，是祭祀二世皇帝的。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, it was the second emperor who was worshipped.

古文：各有时。
现代文：祭祀各有定时。
English: There is a fixed time for each ritual.

古文：其後二岁，或曰周兴而邑邰，立后稷之祠，至今血食天下。
现代文：此后二年，有人说周朝兴起就建立了邰邑，立了后稷庙，所以至今受天下人祭祀。
English: Two years later, it is said that when the Zhou Dynasty rose to power, it established Gongyue and built the Houyi Temple, which is why it has been worshipped by people all over the world.

古文：於是高祖制诏御史： 其令郡国县立灵星祠，常以岁时祠以牛。 
现代文：于是高祖命令御史 下令各郡、诸侯国和县建立灵星庙，经常按岁时用牛祭祀。 
English: As a result, Gao Zu ordered the magistrate to order the counties, principalities and counties to establish spirit star temples, often with cattle sacrifices according to the year.

古文：高祖十年春，有司请令县常以春月及腊祠社稷以羊豕，民里社各自财以祠。
现代文：汉高祖十年春天，主管机构请求，命各县常以春二月和腊月祀社稷，牺牲用羊猪，百姓按里社各自集资加以祭祀。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, the competent authority requested that each county should often use the spring and February and the waxing moon to worship the shrine, sacrificing sheep and pigs, and the people should collect funds from the local shrines to worship them.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：高祖以制书批复说： 可。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：其後十八年，孝文帝即位。
现代文：此后十八年，孝文帝即皇帝位。
English: Eighteen years later, Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne.

古文：即位十三年，下诏曰： 今祕祝移过于下，朕甚不取。
现代文：即位的第十三年，下诏书说： 如今的秘祝把过失转移到臣下身上，朕很不喜欢这种法子，从今日起，取消秘祝。 
English: In the thirteenth year of his enthronement, the next imperial edict said: Today's secret wish is to shift the blame to the vassals. I don't like this method very much. From today, cancel the secret wish.

古文：自今除之。 始名山大川在诸侯，诸侯祝各自奉祠，天子官不领。
现代文：起初名山大川在诸侯国境内的，由诸侯的祝官各自供奉祭祀，天子的祝官不领其事。
English: At first, the famous mountain river was within the borders of the vassals, and the vassals of the vassals each offered sacrifices, but the vassals of the emperor did not participate.

古文：及齐、淮南国废，令太祝尽以岁时致礼如故。
现代文：及废除了齐、淮南国后，命令由太祝官负责，一律象往常一样按岁时加以祭祀。
English: And after the abolition of Qi and Huainan, the order was given that the grand celebrant would be in charge, and everyone would be sacrificed according to their age as usual.

古文：是岁，制曰： 朕即位十三年于今，赖宗庙之灵，社稷之福，方内艾安，民人靡疾。
现代文：这一年，颁制书说： 朕即皇帝位至今已十三年，依赖宗庙的神灵，社稷的福报，境内安定，疾疫不兴。
English: This year, the award book said: I, the emperor, have been on the throne for thirteen years so far, relying on the gods of the ancestral temple, the blessings of the society, the stability of the territory, and the disease.

古文：间者比年登，朕之不德，何以飨此？
现代文：其间连年丰收，如朕这般无德，为何能享受这样的福报？
English: In the meantime, successive years of bumper harvests, if I am so devoid of virtue, why can I enjoy such a blessing?

古文：皆上帝诸神之赐也。
现代文：这都是天帝诸神的赐与啊。
English: It's all a gift from the gods.

古文：盖闻古者飨其德必报其功，欲有增诸神祠。
现代文：听说古时候享受神的恩德必报答它的功劳，所以想增加对诸神的祭祀礼数。
English: I heard that in ancient times, to enjoy the grace of the gods was to be rewarded for one's merits, so I wanted to increase the number of rituals for the gods.

古文：有司议增雍五畤路车各一乘，驾被具；西畤畦畤禺车各一乘，禺马四匹，驾被具；其河、湫、汉水加玉各二；及诸祠，各增广坛场，珪币俎豆以差加之。
现代文：经主管机构议定雍州五畤增加路车各一乘，连同驾车以及车上各种装具；西畤、畦畤增加偶车各一乘，偶马各四匹，连同驾车和车上的各种装具；河、湫、汉水的祭祀增加玉各二枚；并且所有祠庙，各增大其祭坛场地，珪币俎豆也按等级有所增加。
English: It was agreed upon by the competent authority that the number of road vehicles would be increased by one in each of Yongzhou and Wuzhen, together with the number of drivers and various accessories on the vehicles; that the number of horse-drawn carriages would be increased by one in each of Xi'an and Fujian, and the number of horse-drawn carriages would be increased by four, together with the number of drivers and various accessories on the carriages; that the number of beads would be increased by two in each of the sacrificial rites of He, Yao, and Hanshui; and that the number of altar sites would be increased in each of the ancestral temples, and the number of coins

古文：而祝釐者归福於朕，百姓不与焉。
现代文：而祝福者把这些都归福于朕，百姓得不到好处。
English: But the well-wishers attribute all these blessings to me, and the people get no benefit from it.

古文：自今祝致敬，毋有所祈。 
现代文：从今以后祝官向神致礼，不得为了朕再对神有所祈求。 
English: From now on, officials should bow to God and should not pray to God for me.

古文：鲁人公孙臣上书曰： 始秦得水德，今汉受之，推终始传，则汉当土德，土德之应黄龙见。
现代文：鲁人公孙臣上书说： 起初秦朝得水的福德，如今汉承受了它。若推求五德终始的传受，汉朝应当受土德，受土德的感应是出现黄龙。
English: Lu Rong Gong Sun Zhen wrote: At the beginning, the Qin Dynasty received the blessing of water, and now the Han Dynasty has received it. If the five virtues are to be passed down from beginning to end, the Han Dynasty should be influenced by the local virtues, and the influence of the local virtues is the emergence of the Yellow Dragon.

古文：宜改正朔，易服色，色上黄。 
现代文：应该更改岁正和月朔，变易服色，于五色崇尚黄色。 
English: We should change the lunar new year and the new moon, change the color of clothing, and advocate yellow in the five colors.

古文：是时丞相张苍好律历，以为汉乃水德之始，故河决金隄，其符也。
现代文：当时丞相张苍爱好律历的学问，认为汉朝是水德的开始河水决口于金堤，便是水德的符兆。
English: At that time, the prime minister Zhang Cang was fond of the study of the lunar calendar, and believed that the Han Dynasty was the beginning of water virtue. The river water breaking through the golden dike was a sign of water virtue.

古文：年始冬十月，色外黑内赤，与德相应。
现代文：以上年十月为，颜色崇尚外黑内赤，能与五行之德相符合。
English: In October of the previous year, the color advocated was black on the outside and red on the inside, which can be consistent with the virtue of the five elements.

古文：如公孙臣言，非也。
现代文：公孙臣所说，是错误的。
English: What Sun Qian said is wrong.

古文：罢之。後三岁，黄龙见成纪。
现代文：于是公孙臣的上书就被否决了。此后三年，黄龙出现于成纪地区。
English: As a result, Gongsun Chen's petition was rejected. Three years later, Huanglong appeared in the Chengji area.

古文：文帝乃召公孙臣，拜为博士，与诸生草改历服色事。
现代文：于是文帝召见公孙臣，拜他为博士官，与诸儒生一起起草更改历法和服色的事宜。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen summoned Gongsun Chen and made him a doctor, and together with other Confucian scholars, they drafted the matter of changing the calendar and the color of clothing.

古文：其夏，下诏曰： 异物之神见于成纪，无害於民，岁以有年。
现代文：当年夏天，颁下诏书说： 今有异类的神灵出现于成纪，对百姓不加伤害，且使每年得到好收成。
English: In the summer of that year, an imperial edict was issued, saying: "Nowadays, there are strange gods who appear in adulthood, do no harm to the people, and bring a good harvest every year.

古文：朕祈郊上帝诸神，礼官议，无讳以劳朕。 
现代文：朕欲郊祀天帝诸神，礼官商议一下具体事宜，不要因有所忌讳以劳联思。 
English: If I want to worship the gods and heavenly emperors in the suburbs, the etiquette officials should discuss the specific matters. Don't think of it as a taboo.

古文：有司皆曰 古者天子夏亲郊，祀上帝於郊，故曰郊 。
现代文：主管官员都说： 古时候天子在夏季亲自郊祀，在郊外祭祀天帝，所以称为郊 。
English: The officials in charge all said: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven was personally worshipped in the suburbs in the summer, and the Heavenly Emperor was worshipped in the suburbs, so it was called the suburbs.

古文：於是夏四月，文帝始郊见雍五畤祠，衣皆上赤。
现代文：于是夏季四月，文帝首次亲自郊祀雍城的五畤祠，礼服崇尚赤色。
English: As a result, in the summer of April, Emperor Wen personally visited the Five Ancestors' Shrine in the suburbs of Yongcheng for the first time. The red color of the ceremonial dress was revered.

古文：其明年，赵人新垣平以望气见上，言 长安东北有神气，成五采，若人冠纟免焉。
现代文：第二年，赵人新垣平以善望气得以朝见皇帝，说道： 长安城的东北方有神气，色呈五彩，形状与人的冠冕相同。
English: In the second year, Zhao Xinqi Ping, who was able to see the emperor for the first time, said: The northeastern part of Chang'an City is majestic, colorful, and has the same shape as a human crown.

古文：或曰东北神明之舍，西方神明之墓也。
现代文：有人说东北方是神明居住的地方；西方是神明的坟墓。
English: Some people say that the northeast is the place where the gods live; the west is the grave of the gods.

古文：天瑞下，宜立祠上帝，以合符应 。
现代文：今东北方出现神气，是天降的祥瑞，应该立祠庙祀天帝，以与这天降的祥瑞相应合 。
English: Now, in the northeastern part of the country, there is a divine spirit. It is the auspiciousness of heaven. It is necessary to set up shrines and temples to worship the heavenly emperor to match the auspiciousness of heaven.

古文：於是作渭阳五帝庙，同宇，帝一殿，面各五门，各如其帝色。
现代文：于是在渭阳作五帝庙，五帝同庙而居，每帝居一殿，庙的每一面有五个门，颜色各与殿内所祭帝的五方色相同。
English: So he built the Five Emperor Temple in Shenyang. The five emperors lived in the same temple, and each emperor lived in a hall. There were five doors on each side of the temple, and the colors were the same as the five-square colors of the emperors enshrined in the hall.

古文：祠所用及仪亦如雍五畤。
现代文：祭祀所用以及诸仪式也都与雍城的五畤相同。
English: The Five Auspices used in rituals and ceremonies are also the same as the Five Auspices of Yongcheng.

古文：夏四月，文帝亲拜霸渭之会，以郊见渭阳五帝。
现代文：夏季四月，文帝亲自在霸、渭二水会合处拜神，以郊祀渭阳五帝。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Wen himself worshipped the gods at the meeting places of Ba and Shao Ershui, and worshipped the Five Emperors of Shanyang in the suburbs.

古文：五帝庙南临渭，北穿蒲池沟水，权火举而祠，若光煇然属天焉。
现代文：五帝庙南临渭水，北部横跨蒲地池水，权火燃烧起来时开始祭祀，火光辉然上烛于天。
English: The Five Emperors' Temple is bordered by Surabaya to the south, and by Puti Pond to the north. When the sacred fire is lit, the sacrificial rites begin, and the light of the fire shines brightly in the sky.

古文：於是贵平上大夫，赐累千金。
现代文：于是封新垣平为上大夫，赏赐累计达千金之多。
English: As a result, Arakakihei was given the title of shōdōfu (senior doctor) and was rewarded with a total of thousands of gold coins.

古文：而使博士诸生刺六经中作王制，谋议巡狩封禅事。
现代文：而命博士和诸生员搜辑六经中有关资料撰成《五制》，打算商讨巡狩和封禅的事宜。
English: On the other hand, Dr. Mikoto and other members of the community collected relevant information from the Six Classics and compiled it into "Five Systems," intending to discuss the matter of the pilgrimage and the sealing of Zen.

古文：文帝出长门，若见五人於道北，遂因其直北立五帝坛，祠以五牢具。
现代文：文帝出游到长门，仿佛见到五人立于道路以北，于是在道路以北就其所立处建立了五帝坛，以五牢和相应的礼具祭祀。
English: When Emperor Wen traveled to Nagato, it was as if he saw five people standing on the north side of the road, so he built the Altar of the Five Emperors on the north side of the road at the place where they were standing, and offered sacrifices with the five dungeons and the corresponding ceremonial objects.

古文：其明年，新垣平使人持玉杯，上书阙下献之。
现代文：明年，新垣平使人带着玉杯，到天子阙下上书进献。
English: The next year, Arakaki Taira had someone bring a jade cup and present it to the emperor.

古文：平言上曰： 阙下有宝玉气来者。 
现代文：新垣平自己预先对皇帝说： 有宝玉气来到了天子阙下。 
English: Arakigahira himself told the emperor in advance, "A precious gem has come under the auspices of the Son of Heaven.

古文：已视之，果有献玉杯者，刻曰 人主延寿 。
现代文：事后，检查各处给皇帝的进献，果然发现有献玉杯的，上面刻着 人主延寿 四个字。
English: After the event, he inspected the offerings made to the emperor from all over the place, and indeed found a jade cup with an inscription of the four characters of the Lord's longevity.

古文：平又言 臣候日再中 。
现代文：新垣平又说： 就为臣观测，太阳在一日之内将会出现二个中午。 
English: Arakigahira also said: According to our observations, the sun will appear at noon twice in one day.

古文：居顷之，日卻复中。
现代文：过了不久，太阳过午以后，向东逆行，重又出现一个中午。
English: Shortly afterwards, after the sun had passed the afternoon, it retrograded to the east, and a new noon appeared.

古文：於是始更以十七年为元年，令天下大酺。
现代文：于是把文帝十七年改为元年，命令天下人得以聚饮庆贺。
English: Therefore, the 17th year of Emperor Wen was changed to the first year, and the people of the world were ordered to gather and celebrate.

古文：平言曰： 周鼎亡在泗水中，今河溢通泗，臣望东北汾阴直有金宝气，意周鼎其出乎？
现代文：新垣平对皇帝说： 周鼎失落在泗水之中，如今河水泛滥通于泗水，臣望见东北方汾阴地区有金宝气，推想难道是周鼎要出现了吗？
English: Niigaki Ping said to the emperor: Zhou Ding was lost in Surabaya, and now the river floods and flows through Surabaya. The vassal saw that there was gold and gas in the northeastern region of Suyin. Is Zhou Ding about to appear?

古文：兆见不迎则不至。 
现代文：虽然征兆已经出现，若不争取它还是不能自己来到人间。 
English: Although the signs have already appeared, if you don't fight for it, it still can't come to the world on its own.

古文：於是上使使治庙汾阴南，临河，欲祠出周鼎。
现代文：于是皇上命人在汾阴南修了一座庙，临河而立，希望通过祭祀祈求周鼎的出现。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered a temple to be built in the south of Suyin, which stood next to the river, hoping to pray for Zhou Ding's appearance through sacrifice.

古文：人有上书告新垣平所言气神事皆诈也。下平吏治，诛夷新垣平。
现代文：有人上书告发新垣平所说的种种望气事都是骗局，把新垣平交给司法官员审理，杀新垣平，夷灭其族。
English: Some people submitted a petition to denounce that the various hopeful things that Arakigahira had said were a hoax, to hand Arakigahira over to judicial officials for trial, to kill Arakigahira, and to exterminate his people.

古文：自是之後，文帝怠於改正朔服色神明之事，而渭阳、长门五帝使祠官领，以时致礼，不往焉。
现代文：从此以后，文帝对于更改岁正、服色、神明等事再也没有兴趣了，把渭阳、长门的五帝庙交给祠官管领，按时祭祀，自己不再亲往行礼了。
English: From then on, Emperor Wen was no longer interested in changing the time of the year, the color of the robes, the names of the gods, and so on. He handed over the Five Emperor Temples in Shenyang and Changmen to the officials in charge of the ancestral hall, held the sacrifices on time, and no longer personally performed the salute.

古文：明年，匈奴数入边，兴兵守御。後岁少不登。
现代文：第二年，匈役数次侵入边境，汉朝发兵守卫，此后几年收成少差一些。
English: In the second year, the Hungarian troops invaded the border several times, the Han Dynasty sent soldiers to guard, and in the following years, the harvest was a little worse.

古文：数年而孝景即位。十六年，祠官各以岁时祠如故，无有所兴，至今天子。
现代文：数年后孝景帝即皇帝位，在位十六年，祠官象以往一样各自按照岁时祭祀，没有什么兴革，一直到本朝天子。
English: A few years later, Emperor Xiaojing ascended to the throne. During his 16 years on the throne, the officials of the ancestral hall, as in the past, offered sacrifices according to the year. There was no revolution, until the present emperor.

古文：今天子初即位，尤敬鬼神之祀。
现代文：本朝天子即位之初，就特别注重对鬼神的祭祀。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of the emperor this morning, special attention was paid to the worship of ghosts and gods.

古文：元年，汉兴已六十馀岁矣，天下艾安，搢绅之属皆望天子封禅改正度也，而上乡儒术，招贤良，赵绾、王臧等以文学为公卿，欲议古立明堂城南，以朝诸侯。
现代文：到元年时，汉朝建国已经六十多年了，天下安定，官绅等辈都希望天子行封禅礼并改定岁正、度数。
English: By the first year of the year, the founding of the Han Dynasty was more than sixty years old, the world was stable, and the officials and gentry all hoped that Tianzi would perform the sealing ceremony and change the number of years and degrees.

古文：草巡狩封禅改历服色事未就。
现代文：而皇帝心向儒术，招揽贤良士人。
English: However, the emperor's heart was set on Confucianism, and he recruited virtuous men and women.

古文：会窦太后治黄老言，不好儒术，使人微伺得赵绾等奸利事，召案绾、臧，绾、臧自杀，诸所兴为皆废。
现代文：赵绾、王臧等是以文学升任为公卿的官员，打算按古制在城南建立明堂，以朝见诸侯；起草了皇帝巡狩、封禅的礼仪制度和改正历法、服色等事项，尚未完成。正赶上窦太后专攻黄老学说，不喜欢儒术，派人私下里搜集、访察赵绾等人干过的违法事，召集官员审理绾、臧的案件，赵绾、王臧自杀，他们主持兴办的各项事务也都随之废止。
English: Zhao Jun and Wang Jun, officials who were promoted to nobility by literature, planned to build a Ming hall in the south of the city according to the ancient system, and to meet the princes with the emperor; they drafted the etiquette system of the emperor's hunting, the seal of Zen, and the correction of the calendar and clothing, which have not yet been completed. They are catching up with the Dowager Empress Dowager Dou, who specializes in the Huanglao doctrine, dislikes Confucianism, sends people to privately collect and investigate the illegal things that Zhao Jun and others have done, and convene officials to try the cases of Zhao Jun and Wang Jun. Zhao

古文：後六年，窦太后崩。
现代文：此后六年，窦太后死。
English: Six years later, Empress Dowager Dou died.

古文：其明年，徵文学之士公孙弘等。
现代文：第二年，征召文学人士公孙弘等人为官。
English: In the second year, literary figures such as Gongsun Rong and others were called up to serve as officials.

古文：明年，今上初至雍，郊见五畤。
现代文：明年，本朝皇帝初次到雍城，郊祀、礼见五畤神灵。
English: The next year, the emperor of this dynasty came to Yongcheng for the first time, and worshipped and paid respects to the Five Immortal Deities.

古文：後常三岁一郊。
现代文：以后常常是每隔三年郊祀一次。
English: Since then, it has often been held once every three years.

古文：是时上求神君，舍之上林中氾氏观。
现代文：当时皇帝求得神君偶象，供奉在上林苑中的蹄氏观。
English: At that time, the emperor asked for a figurine of the god, which was offered to the Hoofed God in Shanglin Garden.

古文：神君者，长陵女子，以子死，见神於先後宛若。
现代文：神君，原是长陵一女子，因儿子的原因而死，显神灵于字为宛若的妯娌二人。
English: Shinkun, who was originally a woman from Nagamine, died because of her son, revealing the divine spirit in the words of the couple.

古文：宛若祠之其室，民多往祠。
现代文：宛若在家中供奉它，百姓多到他家里来祭祀。
English: If he offered it at home, more people would come to his house to offer sacrifices.

古文：平原君往祠，其後子孙以尊显。
现代文：平原君曾去祭祀，他的后世子孙因此而位尊名显。
English: Hirahara-kun once went to a religious service, and his descendants became famous as a result.

古文：及今上即位，则厚礼置祠之内中。
现代文：到本朝天子即位，就以隆重的礼节在宫中设庙祭祀。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne this morning, a temple was set up in the palace with great ceremony.

古文：闻其言，不见其人云。
现代文：能听到神君的说话声，看不到它的形象。
English: You can hear the voice of God, but you can't see His image.

古文：是时李少君亦以祠灶、穀道、卻老方见上，上尊之。
现代文：当时李少君也以祭灶、避谷、长生不老等法术见皇帝，受到皇帝的尊重。
English: At that time, Li Shaojun also met the emperor with spells such as offering the hearth, avoiding the valley, and immortality, and was respected by the emperor.

古文：少君者，故深泽侯舍人，主方。
现代文：李少君，原来是深泽侯的舍人，主管方术。
English: Li Shaojun, who was originally a subordinate of Fukasawa, was in charge of kung fu.

古文：匿其年及其生长，常自谓七十，能使物，卻老。
现代文：这时他隐瞒了自己的年龄和经历，经常自称是七十岁年纪，能驱使鬼物，长生不老。
English: At this time he concealed his age and experience, often claiming to be seventy years old, able to drive ghosts and live forever.

古文：其游以方遍诸侯。
现代文：他用自己的法术遍交诸侯。
English: He used his magic to make enemies everywhere.

古文：无妻子。
现代文：无妻无子。
English: No wife, no children.

古文：人闻其能使物及不死，更馈遗之，常馀金钱衣食。人皆以为不治生业而饶给，又不知其何所人，愈信，争事之。
现代文：人们听说他能驱使鬼物还能长生不死，不断赠送给他一些礼物，因此金钱衣食时常有余，不知情者都以为他不从事任何生业反而很富裕，又不知道他的来历出身，对他更加信奉，争相尊崇他。
English: People had heard that he could drive away evil spirits and could live forever. They kept giving him gifts, so he always had more than enough money, food and clothing. People who didn't know him thought that he didn't do anything for a living, but was very rich. They didn't know where he came from, but they believed in him even more and admired him.

古文：少君资好方，善为巧发奇中。
现代文：少君天生好法术，善于巧发奇中。
English: Shao Jun was born with a talent for magic and was good at performing feats of skill.

古文：尝从武安侯饮，坐中有九十馀老人，少君乃言与其大父游射处，老人为兒时从其大父，识其处，一坐尽惊。少君见上，上有故铜器，问少君。少君曰： 此器齐桓公十年陈於柏寝。 
现代文：曾经随武安侯赴宴，宴席中有一位九十多岁的老人，少君就与他谈论早先与他祖父一起游玩射猎的地方，这位老人年幼时与祖父住在一起，还能记得这些地方，宴会上所有的人都惊讶不止。少君见皇帝，皇帝有一件古铜器，问少君，少君说： 这件铜器是齐桓公十年时在柏寝台上的陈设品。 
English: Once he went to a banquet with Wu An Hou. There was a 90-plus-year-old man at the banquet. The young prince talked to him about the places where he had gone hunting with his grandfather earlier. The old man had lived with his grandfather when he was young and could still remember these places. All the people at the banquet were more than surprised. The young prince saw the emperor. The emperor had a bronze ware. When he asked the young prince, the young prince said, "This bronze ware was displayed on King Qi's bedstead when he was ten years old."

古文：已而案其刻，果齐桓公器。一宫尽骇，以为少君神，数百岁人也。
现代文：过后考察铜器上的铭文，果然是齐桓公时的器物，举宫上下，尽都惊骇，以为少君是活神仙，是数百岁人了。
English: Later, when the inscription on the bronze vessel was examined, it turned out to be a vessel from the reign of King Qi Huan. Everyone in the palace was shocked, thinking that the young prince was a living god and hundreds of years old.

古文：少君言上曰： 祠灶则致物，致物而丹沙可化为黄金，黄金成以为饮食器则益寿，益寿而海中蓬莱仙者乃可见，见之以封禅则不死，黄帝是也。
现代文：少君对皇帝说： 祭灶能招致鬼物，招致来鬼物后丹砂就能炼成黄金，用变化来的黄金打造饮食器，使用后能延年益寿。益寿才能见到蓬莱山的仙人，见仙人后再行封禅礼就能长生不老了。黄帝就是一个例证。
English: The young prince said to the emperor: The sacrificial hearth can attract ghosts, and after attracting the ghosts, the sands can be refined into gold, and the changed gold can be used to make eating utensils, which can prolong life and longevity after use. The immortals of the Penglai Mountains can be seen to increase life expectancy, and after seeing the immortals and performing the sealing ceremony, one can live forever. The Yellow Emperor is an example.

古文：臣尝游海上，见安期生，安期生食巨枣，大如瓜。
现代文：为臣曾经在海中游历，见到安期生，他正吃着一种枣，象瓜一样大。
English: For the minister once traveled in the sea and saw An Ji Sheng, he was eating a kind of jujube, as big as a melon.

古文：安期生仙者，通蓬莱中，合则见人，不合则隐。 
现代文：仙人安期生，往来于蓬莱山中，缘分合就与人相见，不合就隐而不见。 
English: Immortals are born in an auspicious time, and they go back and forth in the Penglai Mountains. When they meet, they see each other, but when they don't, they don't.

古文：於是天子始亲祠灶，遣方士入海求蓬莱安期生之属，而事化丹沙诸药齐为黄金矣。
现代文：于是天子开始亲自行祭灶礼，派遣方士到海中寻找安期生等仙人，并从事于炼丹砂等药剂为黄金的事情了。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven began to personally perform the sacrificial fire ceremony, send magicians to the sea to search for immortals such as Anjou Sheng, and engaged in the business of refining chemicals such as Tanzanite into gold.

古文：居久之，李少君病死。
现代文：过了很久，李少君病死。
English: After a long time, Li Shaojun died of illness.

古文：天子以为化去不死，而使黄锤史宽舒受其方。
现代文：天子认为没有死，是化去成仙了，指命黄锺县史名为宽舒的人学习他的方术。
English: Tianzi believed that there was no death, but a transformation into immortality, and ordered a man in Huangpi County with the historical name of Kanshu to learn his method.

古文：求蓬莱安期生莫能得，而海上燕齐怪迂之方士多更来言神事矣。
现代文：蓬莱安期生寻找不到，而燕齐两地海上怪诞、迂腐的方士们一泼又一泼地相继前来讲述修炼神仙的事了。
English: Penglai An could not be found in his lifetime, but the grotesque and pedantic magicians from Yanqi and the two seas came one after another to tell the story of cultivating immortals.

古文：亳人谬忌奏祠太一方，曰： 天神贵者太一，太一佐曰五帝。
现代文：亳县人廖忌以祭祀太一神的方法上秦朝廷，说： 天神之中以太一为贵，太一的辅佐名为五帝。
English: Liao Bo, a man from Jixian County, went to the Qin court with the method of sacrificing Taichi, saying, "Among the gods, Taichi is precious, and Taichi's assistants are called the Five Emperors.

古文：古者天子以春秋祭太一东南郊，用太牢，七日，为坛开八通之鬼道。 
现代文：古时候天子在春秋两季祭太一神于东南郊，礼用太牢，祭祀凡用七天，建造神坛，于八方设立阶梯，开门为鬼道。 
English: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven was worshipped as a single god in the southeastern suburbs during the spring and autumn seasons. The ritual was too rigid, and it usually took seven days to build a shrine, set up a staircase in Happo, and open the door to the ghost road.

古文：於是天子令太祝立其祠长安东南郊，常奉祠如忌方。
现代文：于是天子命太祝在长安东南郊建祠庙，经常按谬忌的方法供奉和祭祀。
English: As a result, Tianzi Meitai built an ancestral temple in the southeastern suburbs of Chang'an, often offering worship and sacrifice according to fallacious methods.

古文：其後人有上书，言 古者天子三年壹用太牢祠神三一：天一、地一、太一 。
现代文：后来有人上书，说： 古时候的天子，每三年一次用太牢祭祀三一神：就是天一、地一、太一神 。
English: Later, someone wrote a letter saying: "In ancient times, the Son of Heaven used the dungeon once every three years to offer sacrifices to the Triune God: that is, the One God of Heaven, the One God of Earth, and the One God of Heaven.

古文：天子许之，令太祝领祠之於忌太一坛上，如其方。
现代文：天子准其奏，命太祝负责在谬忌奏请建立的太一神坛上祭祀三一神，祭法按上书人所说的方法。
English: The Son of Heaven consented to the performance of the ritual, and I am responsible for the offering of the triune God on the altar of the triune God, which was built by the request of the scribe. The method of the offering is as described by the scribe.

古文：後人复有上书，言 古者天子常以春解祠，祠黄帝用一枭破镜；冥羊用羊祠；马行用一青牡马；太一、泽山君地长用牛；武夷君用乾鱼；阴阳使者以一牛 。
现代文：以后又有人上书，说： 古时候天子常在春季举行解除灾殃的祭祀，祀黄帝用枭、破镜各一只；祀冥羊用羊；祀马行用一匹青色牡马；祀太一、泽山君地长用牛；祀武夷君用干鱼；祀阴阳使者用牛一头。 
English: Later, someone else wrote, saying: In ancient times, the divine son often held a sacrificial rite in the spring to remove disasters. The Yellow Emperor was worshipped with a scepter and a broken mirror; the Dark Sheep was worshipped with a sheep; the Horse King was worshipped with a blue stallion; the Taichi and the Zeshan King were worshipped with a bull; the Wuyi King was worshipped with a dried fish; and the Yin Yang Messenger was worshipped with a bull.

古文：令祠官领之如其方，而祠於忌太一坛旁。
现代文：命祠官负责，都按上书人说的方法，在谬忌太一神坛的旁边祭祀。
English: According to the above-mentioned method, the sacrificial rites were held next to the altar of Muyi Taichi, with the mortuary priest in charge.

古文：其後，天子苑有白鹿，以其皮为币，以发瑞应，造白金焉。
现代文：后来，天子苑中有白鹿，用白鹿皮作为货币，为了引发祥瑞征兆的产生，制造了白金。
English: Later, there was a white deer in Tianziyuan, and white deer skin was used as currency. In order to trigger the emergence of auspicious signs, platinum was produced.

古文：其明年，郊雍，获一角兽，若麃然。
现代文：第二年，在雍城郊祭，猎获一只一角兽，样子象麃。
English: The following year, at a festival on the outskirts of Yongcheng, a unicorn, resembling a dragonfly, was hunted down.

古文：有司曰： 陛下肃祗郊祀，上帝报享，锡一角兽，盖麟云。 
现代文：主管官员说： 陛下恭恭敬敬的进行郊祀，天帝作为报答，赐给一角兽，这大约就是麒麟。 
English: The official in charge said, "Your majesty respectfully and reverently carried out the suburban worship. As a reward, the heavenly emperor gave a unicorn, which is roughly the unicorn.

古文：於是以荐五畤，畤加一牛以燎。
现代文：于是把它献给五畤，每畤的祭物增加牛一头，在燎火中焚祭。
English: And he offered it for the five bullocks: and for every bullock of the sacrifice he offered a bullock also: and they burnt the sacrifice with fire.

古文：锡诸侯白金，风符应合于天也。
现代文：由于这是造白金引发天降下的祥瑞，所以赐给诸侯白金，向他们暗示，造白金为瑞应是与天意相合的。
English: Since it was the auspiciousness of creating platinum that caused the heavens to fall, platinum was given to the lords, suggesting to them that creating platinum for auspiciousness should be in line with the will of heaven.

古文：於是济北王以为天子且封禅，乃上书献太山及其旁邑，天子以他县偿之。
现代文：于是济北王以为天子将要封禅了，就上书把太山以及附近的城邑献给天子，天子赏给他其他县城作为报答。
English: As a result, King Jibei thought that the emperor was about to banish Zen, so he sent a letter to dedicate Taishan and the nearby towns to the emperor, and the emperor rewarded him with other prefectures.

古文：常山王有罪，迁，天子封其弟於真定，以续先王祀，而以常山为郡，然后五岳皆在天子之。
现代文：常山王有罪，贬除王爵，天子另封他的弟弟为真定王，以继续对先王的祭祀，而把常山国改为郡，这样五岳都在天子直接管辖的郡县之内了。
English: King Jangsan was found guilty and stripped of his royal title, and Emperor Tianzi appointed his younger brother as King Zhending to continue the sacrifice to the former king, and changed the country of Jangsan into a county, so that the five mountains were all within the county directly under the jurisdiction of Emperor Tianzi.

古文：其明年，齐人少翁以鬼神方见上。
现代文：明年，齐人少翁以能与鬼神相通的法术来见皇帝。
English: The next year, Qi Ren Shaoong came to see the emperor with a spell that could communicate with ghosts and gods.

古文：上有所幸王夫人，夫人卒，少翁以方盖夜致王夫人及灶鬼之貌云，天子自帷中望见焉。
现代文：皇帝有一位宠爱的妃嫔王夫人，王夫人死，少翁用法术使王夫人和灶鬼的形貌在黑夜中重现，天子隔着帷幕看到了她。
English: The emperor had a favorite concubine, Lady Wang. When Lady Wang died, Shao Weng used magic to make the shape of Lady Wang and the stove ghost reappear in the dark. The heavenly son saw her through the curtain.

古文：於是乃拜少翁为文成将军，赏赐甚多，以客礼礼之。
现代文：于是就封少翁为文成将军，赏赐他很多东西，以客礼对待他。
English: So he appointed Shao Weng as General Wencheng, gave him many gifts, and treated him with courtesy.

古文：文成言曰： 上即欲与神通，宫室被服非象神，神物不至。 
现代文：文成向皇帝进言说： 皇帝想与神交往，宫殿居室衣服用具没有神的样子，神就不会降临。 
English: Wencheng made a suggestion to the emperor, saying, "The emperor wants to communicate with the gods. If the palace rooms, clothes and utensils do not have the appearance of the gods, the gods will not descend.

古文：乃作画云气车，及各以胜日驾车辟恶鬼。
现代文：于是制造了画着云气的车子，并且所驾车的颜色必与干支相胜的日子合，以避恶鬼。
English: Therefore, a car painted with clouds was made, and the color of the car must match the day of the Chinese Zodiac, to avoid evil spirits.

古文：又作甘泉宫，中为台室，画天、地、太一诸鬼神，而置祭具以致天神。
现代文：又建造甘泉宫，在宫中起高台，台上建宫室，室内画着天、地、太一等鬼神象，而且摆上祭祀用具，以此召致天神。
English: He also built Ganquan Palace. A platform was built in the middle of the palace, and a palace room was built on the platform. The interior was painted with images of heaven, earth, and the first-class ghosts and gods, and the sacrificial tools were set up to summon the gods.

古文：居岁馀，其方益衰，神不至。
现代文：过了一年多，他的法术更加不灵了，天神总也不降临。
English: After more than a year, his magic was even less effective, and the sky god never came down.

古文：乃为帛书以饭牛，详不知，言曰此牛腹中有奇。
现代文：于是用帛写上字让牛吃到肚子里，假装预先不识，说道这头牛肚子里必有古怪。
English: So he wrote in ink for the cow to eat into its stomach, pretending not to know in advance, saying that there must be something strange in the cow's stomach.

古文：杀视得书，书言甚怪。
现代文：杀牛得帛，上面写的尽是怪里怪气的话。
English: The killing of a cow is abhorrent, and all that is written above are strange and bizarre words.

古文：天子识其手书，问其人，果是伪书，於是诛文成将军，隐之。
现代文：但天子认识他的笔迹，经过追查，果然是假的，于是杀文成将军，并把这事掩盖起来。
English: However, Heaven's Son knew his handwriting, and after investigation, it turned out to be a fake, so he killed General Wencheng and covered up the matter.

古文：其後则又作柏梁、铜柱、承露仙人掌之属矣。
现代文：此后又建造了柏梁殿、铜柱、承露仙人掌之类。
English: Since then, other structures have been built, such as the Oak Leaves Pavilion, the Bronze Column, and the Chengdew Cactus.

古文：文成死明年，天子病鼎湖甚，巫医无所不致，不愈。
现代文：文成死后的第二年，天子在鼎湖宫病得很厉害，巫和医都千方百计加以治疗，始终不见好转。
English: In the second year after Wencheng's death, Tianzi fell seriously ill in Dinghu Palace. Witches and doctors tried their best to treat him, but he never got better.

古文：游水发根言上郡有巫，病而鬼神下之。
现代文：游水发根推荐说，上郡有一个巫师，曾经有病，有鬼神附在身上，因而很灵验。
English: Yu Shui Fagen recommended that there was a sorcerer in the upper county who had been ill and had ghosts and gods attached to his body, so he was very effective.

古文：上召置祠之甘泉。及病，使人问神君。
现代文：皇帝召来巫师，为附在他身上的鬼神在甘泉宫建立了祠庙，称为神君。这一次得病，使人问神君吉凶如何。
English: The emperor summoned a sorcerer and built a temple for the ghost god attached to him at Ganquan Palace, known as the god. This time he fell ill, making people ask what was the fate of the god.

古文：神君言曰： 天子无忧病。病少愈，彊与我会甘泉。 
现代文：神君说道： 天子不要为病耽心，等你病体稍愈，强起与我在甘泉宫相会。 
English: Shinkun said, "Son of heaven, don't worry about your illness. Wait until your illness is a little better and you are strong enough to meet me at Ganquan Palace."

古文：於是病愈，遂起，幸甘泉，病良已。
现代文：于是病体见轻，就起身，驾幸甘泉宫，病也完全好了。
English: As a result, his illness seemed to be easing, so he got up and drove to Ganquan Palace, and his illness was completely cured.

古文：大赦，置寿宫神君。
现代文：因此颁布大赦，为神君建造寿宫。
English: Therefore, a general amnesty was issued, and a funeral palace was built for the god.

古文：寿宫神君最贵者太一，其佐曰大禁、司命之属，皆从之。
现代文：在寿宫神君之中最尊贵的是太一神，他的辅佐是大禁、司命之类，都跟随着他。
English: The most revered among the Shugu Shinkun is Taishin, and his assistants, such as Okunin and Shimei, all follow him.

古文：非可得见，闻其言，言与人音等。
现代文：人们看不到他的样子，能听到他的说话声，与人的声音相同。
English: People can't see him, but they can hear his voice, which is the same as a human voice.

古文：时去时来，来则风肃然。
现代文：有时去有时来，来的时候则风声肃然。
English: Sometimes they go, sometimes they come, and when they come, the noise is deafening.

古文：居室帷中。时昼言，然常以夜。
现代文：住在室内帷帐中，有时白昼说话，然而经常是在夜间说话。
English: Lived in a curtained room, sometimes spoke in the day, but often at night.

古文：天子祓，然后入。
现代文：天子祓除以后才进入庙中。
English: They only enter the temple after they have been exorcised.

古文：因巫为主人，关饮食。
现代文：庙以巫为主人，关照、领取神君饮食。
English: Witches are the masters of the temple, taking care of and receiving food from the deities.

古文：所以言，行下。
现代文：神君有什么话，由巫传递到下面。
English: Whatever the god has to say is passed down from the witch.

古文：又置寿宫、北宫，张羽旗，设供具，以礼神君。
现代文：又建造了寿宫的北宫，在宫中张挂羽旗，设置供具，以礼敬神君。
English: He also built the North Palace of Shugu, where feather flags were hung, and offerings were set up to pay respect to the god.

古文：神君所言，上使人受书其言，命之曰 画法 。
现代文：神君说的话，皇帝使人记录下来，称为 画法 。
English: The emperor had people write down what the god-king said, and this was called "painting."

古文：其所语，世俗之所知也，无绝殊者，而天子心独喜。
现代文：它说的话，都是世俗人所知道的，没有特别不同处，然而独有天子心里喜爱。
English: The words it speaks are all known to the worldly people, and there is nothing particularly different about them, yet they are uniquely beloved by the Son of Heaven.

古文：其事祕，世莫知也。
现代文：事情很隐秘，世间无人知晓。
English: It's a secret, nobody knows about it.

古文：其後三年，有司言元宜以天瑞命，不宜以一二数。
现代文：此后三年，主管官员说，纪元应该按天降的符瑞命名，不应该按一元二元的顺次数。
English: Three years later, the official in charge said that the era should be named according to the heaven-sent Fu Rui, and should not be named according to the order of one yuan and two yuan.

古文：一元曰 建 ，二元以长星曰 光 ，三元以郊得一角兽曰 狩 云。
现代文：一元称为 建 ，二元因有长星出现称为 光 ，如今郊祀得到一角兽，应称为 狩 。
English: One yuan was called jian, two yuan was called huang because of the appearance of a long star, and now the suburban worshipers have obtained a unicorn, which should be called jian.

古文：其明年冬，天子郊雍，议曰： 今上帝朕亲郊，而后土无祀，则礼不答也。 
现代文：第二年，天子郊祀于雍城，说： 如今天帝由朕亲自祭祀，却不祭后土，与礼不合。 
English: In the second year, Tianzi suburb worshiped in Yongcheng, saying: If today the emperor is personally sacrificed by me, but does not sacrifice the soil, it is not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：有司与太史公、祠官宽舒议： 天地牲角茧栗。
现代文：负责官员与太史令司马谈、祠官宽舒商议后说： 祭天地用牛角象茧栗那样大的牲牛。
English: The official in charge talked with the Grand Historian, Sima, and the ancestral hall official, Kanshu, and after discussion, said, "Cattle with horns as big as chestnuts are used in the festival.

古文：今陛下亲祠后土，后土宜於泽中圜丘为五坛，坛一黄犊太牢具，已祠尽瘗，而从祠衣上黄。 
现代文：如今陛下要亲自祭祀后土，祭后土应在低洼地区建圆丘，在圆丘上设五个祭坛，每坛的祭牲用黄牛犊一头以及连带的太牢礼具，祭过以后全部埋掉，随从祭祀的人衣服用黄色。 
English: Now, His Majesty should personally sacrifice the hind soil. After the sacrifice, a round mound should be built in a low-lying area. Five altars should be set up on the round mound. The sacrificial animal of each altar should be a head of yellow oxen and the accompanying ceremonial objects. After the sacrifice, they should all be buried. The clothes of the people following the sacrifice should be yellow.

古文：於是天子遂东，始立后土祠汾阴脽丘，如宽舒等议。
现代文：于是天子遂东行，首次在汾阴脽丘建起了后土祠，祭仪按宽舒等议定的执行。
English: As a result, the heavenly son then traveled east, and for the first time built a small shrine in the back of the hill, and the ritual was carried out in accordance with the agreement of Kanshu.

古文：上亲望拜，如上帝礼。
现代文：皇帝亲自望祭礼拜，与祭天帝的礼仪相同。
English: The emperor himself attends the ritual, which is the same as the ritual for the heavenly emperor.

古文：礼毕，天子遂至荥阳而还。
现代文：祭祀结束后，天子经荥阳回京。
English: After the end of the ritual, the heavenly son returned to Kyoto via Shinya.

古文：过雒阳，下诏曰： 三代邈绝，远矣难存。
现代文：路过雒阳时下诏书说： 三代年代渺远，如今连一点影子也不存在了。
English: When passing through Fenyang, the next imperial edict said: The three generations are far away, and now there is not even a shadow.

古文：其以三十里地封周後为周子南君，以奉其先祀焉。 
现代文：可画出三十里的地区封周王的后人为周子南君，以供奉他们祖先的祭祀。 
English: The descendants of King Fong Zhou in the area of thirty miles can be drawn as Zhou Zi Nanjun to offer sacrifices to their ancestors.

古文：是岁，天子始巡郡县，侵寻於泰山矣。
现代文：这一年，天子第一次巡察郡县，逐渐到了泰山下。
English: In this year, Tianzi inspected counties for the first time and gradually reached the foot of Mount Tai.

古文：其春，乐成侯上书言栾大。
现代文：这年春天，乐成侯上书皇帝，介绍栾大事迹。
English: In the spring of that year, Emperor Lecheng marched to the capital to present his great deeds.

古文：栾大，胶东宫人，故尝与文成将军同师，已而为胶东王尚方。
现代文：栾大，是胶东王的宫人，以前曾与文成将军同师学习方术，后来做了胶东王的尚方。
English: Zou Da was a courtier of King Jiaodong. He had previously studied with General Wencheng, and later became King Jiaodong's Shangfang.

古文：而乐成侯姊为康王后，无子。
现代文：而乐成侯的姐姐是康王的王后，没有生子。
English: However, Le Cheng Hou's sister was the queen of King Kang and had no children.

古文：康王死，他姬子立为王。
现代文：康王死后，其他姬妾的儿子继承了王位。
English: After the death of King Kang, the sons of other concubines succeeded to the throne.

古文：而康后有淫行，与王不相中，相危以法。
现代文：康王后作风淫乱，与新王合不来，相互间明争暗斗。
English: Queen Kang had an adulterous lifestyle and could not get along with the new king, and they openly fought with each other.

古文：康后闻文成已死，而欲自媚於上，乃遣栾大因乐成侯求见言方。
现代文：康后听说文成将军已死，想对皇上谄媚，就派栾大通过乐成侯求见皇帝讲述自己的法术。
English: When Kang Hou heard that General Wencheng had died, she wanted to flatter the emperor, so she sent Zou Da to seek the emperor through Le Cheng Hou to tell him about her magic.

古文：天子既诛文成，後悔其蚤死，惜其方不尽，及见栾大，大说。
现代文：天子既已杀掉文成将军，后悔他死得太早，惋惜他的法术没有全部使用出来，及至见到栾大，很是高兴。
English: Having killed General Wencheng, Tian Zi regretted that he died too early, regretted that his spells were not fully used, and was very happy to see Zou Da.

古文：大为人长美，言多方略，而敢为大言处之不疑。
现代文：栾大这个人身材高大俊美，言谈中有许多机巧，而又敢于说大话，象真有其事一样。
English: He was a tall, handsome man, with a great deal of tact in his speech, and he dared to say big things as if they were true.

古文：大言曰： 臣常往来海中，见安期、羡门之属。
现代文：曾自吹说： 臣经常往来于海中，会见安期生、羡门高这些仙人。
English: He once boasted: "I often go to and fro in the sea, and meet immortals such as An Ji Sheng and Enmen Gao.

古文：顾以臣为贱，不信臣。
现代文：他们因为臣的地位低贱，不相信臣的话。
English: They didn't believe him because of his lowly position.

古文：又以为康王诸侯耳，不足与方。
现代文：又以为康王不过是一个诸侯，不足以把神仙方术交给他。
English: He also thought that King Kang was just a vassal, and it was not enough to give him the Immortal Square.

古文：臣数言康王，康王又不用臣。
现代文：臣曾数次对康王说，康王又不采用臣的话。
English: The vassal had told King Kang several times that King Kang did not accept the vassal's words.

古文：臣之师曰： 黄金可成，而河决可塞，不死之药可得，仙人可致也。 
现代文：为臣的师父说： 黄金可以炼成，河水的决口可以堵塞，长生不死药可以得到，仙人可以招致而来。 
English: The disciple's master said: Gold can be refined, the mouth of a river can be blocked, the elixir of life can be obtained, and a genie can be summoned.

古文：然臣恐效文成，则方士皆奄口，恶敢言方哉！ 
现代文：但是臣恐怕再走文成的老路，被诛而死，就会使方士人人掩口不言,怎么还敢再谈方术！ 
English: But I'm afraid that if the minister takes the same path as Wencheng and is arrested and dies, it will make all the Fang people keep their mouths shut. How dare they talk about Fang again!

古文：上曰： 文成食马肝死耳。
现代文：皇帝说： 文成是吃马肝死的，不是朕杀了他。
English: The emperor said, "Wencheng died from eating horse liver. I didn't kill him.

古文：子诚能脩其方，我何爱乎！ 
现代文：先生倘若真有修成神仙的方术，我对爵禄等赏赐有何吝惜呢！ 
English: Sir, if there really is a method of cultivating immortals, how can I begrudge such rewards as peerage!

古文：大曰： 臣师非有求人，人者求之。
现代文：栾大说： 臣的师父不是有求于人，而是人们有求于他。
English: Zou Da said, "The minister's master does not need people, but people need him."

古文：陛下必欲致之，则贵其使者，令有亲属，以客礼待之，勿卑，使各佩其信印，乃可使通言於神人。
现代文：陛下若一定要招他来，就要让招聘的使者地位更尊贵，使他做天子的亲属，以客礼对待他，不要卑视他，让他佩带各种印信，才可使他传话给神人。
English: If His Majesty must call him, he must give the envoy a more honorable status, make him a relative of the Son of Heaven, treat him with courtesy, do not despise him, and make him wear various seals, so that he can convey the message to the man of God.

古文：神人尚肯邪不邪。
现代文：即便这样，神人来与不来，尚在二可。
English: Even so, whether a godman comes or not is still in the balance.

古文：致尊其使，然后可致也。 
现代文：总之致尊敬崇求访神人的使者，然后才有可能招致神人降临。 
English: In short, to respect and venerate the messenger who seeks to visit the godman, and only then is it possible to invite the godman to come.

古文：於是上使验小方，斗棋，棋自相触击。
现代文：于是皇帝要他演示小方术，看有无效验。演示斗棋，棋子能自相撞击。
English: So the emperor asked him to demonstrate checkers, to see if there was an invalidation test. Demonstrate chess, the pieces can collide with each other.

古文：是时上方忧河决，而黄金不就，乃拜大为五利将军。
现代文：那时皇帝正为河水决口而忧虑，而炼黄金又不成功，就封栾大为五利将军。
English: At that time, the emperor was worried about the river's outflow, and the gold refining was not successful, so he made Zou Da the general of Wuli.

古文：居月馀，得四印，佩天士将军、地士将军、大通将军印。
现代文：过了一月多，他得到四颗官印，五利将军印之外，还佩有天士将军、地士将军、大通将军印。
English: More than a month later, he received four official seals. In addition to the seal of General Wuli, he also wears the seal of General Tianshi, General Ji, and General Datong.

古文：制诏御史： 昔禹疏九江，决四渎。
现代文：皇帝颁诏书给御史说： 以前大禹能够疏导九江，决通四渎。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to Goshi, saying, "In the past, Dayu was able to divert the Jiujiang River, and he was able to break through four defilements.

古文：间者河溢皋陆，隄繇不息。
现代文：近些日子河水泛滥于大陆，筑堤的徭役久不能息。
English: In recent days, rivers have been flooding the mainland, and the work of building dikes has been going on for a long time.

古文：朕临天下二十有八年，天若遗朕士而大通焉。
现代文：朕在帝位二十八年，如果天委派士人辅佐我而栾大就是其中之一。
English: In my 28th year on the throne, if the heavenly committee sends a scholar to assist me, I will be one of them.

古文：乾称 蜚龙 ， 鸿渐于般 ，朕意庶几与焉。
现代文：《乾》封称： 飞龙 ，又有所谓 鸿渐于般 ，朕以为栾大的境遇接近于这个样子。
English: "Dry" is called "Flying Dragon," and there is also a so-called "Hong Qian Yu Pan," I think that the great situation is close to this look.

古文：其以二千户封地士将军大为乐通侯。 
现代文：你们给办理一下，以二千户的租税封地士将军栾大为乐通侯。 
English: Let's see if you can handle it, with two thousand households of tax fiefs, the generals and generals are very happy.

古文：赐列侯甲第，僮千人。
现代文：赐给列侯的宅第一区，僮仆千人。
English: It was given to the lord of the manor's house in the first district, along with a thousand servants.

古文：乘轝斥车马帷幄器物以充其家。
现代文：从皇帝的乘骑用物中分出车马帷帐器物布置他的新居。
English: From the emperor's riding gear, horse-drawn carriages and curtains were selected to furnish his new residence.

古文：又以卫长公主妻之，赍金万斤，更命其邑曰当利公主。
现代文：又把卫长公主嫁给他作妻子，送给黄金万斤，把他住的城邑改名为当利公主邑。
English: He also married Princess Wei Changyu to him as his wife, gave him 10,000 jin of gold, and changed the name of the town where he lived to Dangli Princess Town.

古文：天子亲如五利之第。
现代文：天子亲自到五利家里作客。
English: The Son of Heaven himself came to stay with the Woli family.

古文：使者存问供给，相属於道。
现代文：到他家里慰问、赏赐物品的天子使者，络绎不绝。
English: The envoys of the Son of Heaven, who came to his home to offer condolences and reward him with gifts, were incessant.

古文：自大主将相以下，皆置酒其家，献遗之。
现代文：自大长公主、将相以下，都在他家摆酒庆贺，献给物品。
English: The eldest princess, the commander and his subordinates all celebrated at his house with wine and dedicated items.

古文：於是天子又刻玉印曰 天道将军 ，使使衣羽衣，夜立白茅上，五利将军亦衣羽衣，夜立白茅上受印，以示不臣也。
现代文：于是天子又刻了一颗 天道将军 的玉印，命使者穿着羽衣，夜间站在白茅草的上面，把印赐给五利将军，五利将军也穿着羽衣，夜间站在白茅上受印，以此表示不是天子的臣子。
English: As a result, the heavenly son engraved a jade seal of General Tendo, and the messenger of life, wearing a feather coat, stood on the white thatch at night and gave the seal to General Goryo. General Goryo also wore a feather coat and stood on the white thatch at night to receive the seal, thus indicating that he was not a vassal of the heavenly son.

古文：而佩 天道 者，且为天子道天神也。
现代文：而佩戴 天道 将军印，只是姑且为了与天子引导天神。
English: Wearing the seal of the Tendo Shogun, however, is merely for the sake of guiding the gods with the heavenly son.

古文：於是五利常夜祠其家，欲以下神。
现代文：于是五利时常夜间在家中祭祀，欲请神仙下降。
English: As a result, Goryo would often make sacrifices at home at night, wanting to ask the gods to descend.

古文：神未至而百鬼集矣，然颇能使之。
现代文：神没有降临，各种鬼却聚集来了，然而五利善能驱使诸鬼。
English: God has not come, but all kinds of demons have gathered. However, the Five Virtues can drive the demons away.

古文：其後装治行，东入海，求其师云。
现代文：此后他治理行装上路，东行到海中，说是要寻找他的师父。
English: After that, he packed his things and set out on the road, heading east to the sea, saying that he wanted to find his master.

古文：大见数月，佩六印，贵震天下，而海上燕齐之间，莫不搤捥而自言有禁方，能神仙矣。
现代文：栾大见皇帝后几个月的时间里，佩戴六颗大印，其尊贵使天下震动，而海上的燕齐众方士，无不以手扼腕表示振奋，并自言有祝禁的方术，能够修炼成神仙。
English: In the months after he met the emperor, he wore six great seals. His dignity made the world tremble, and the Yanqi seafarers all expressed their excitement by wringing their hands, and said that they had forbidden magic and could cultivate into immortals.

古文：其夏六月中，汾阴巫锦为民祠魏脽后土营旁，见地如钩状，掊视得鼎。鼎大异於众鼎，文镂无款识，怪之，言吏。
现代文：这年夏季六月中旬，一个名为锦的汾阴巫师在魏脽后土祠旁为民祭祀，见地下有个象钩一样的东西，挖开来看是一个鼎，尺寸很大，与普通大多数鼎都不同，刻有花纹，没有款识，觉得奇怪，告诉了小吏。
English: In the middle of June of this summer, a witch named Jin, a witch of the Yin Dynasty, was offering sacrifices for the people next to the earthen shrine of Wei Luo Hou. He saw a thing like a hook under the ground. When he dug it up, it was a tripod. It was large in size, different from most ordinary tripods, engraved with patterns, and had no sense of style. He thought it was strange and told the petty officials.

古文：吏告河东太守胜，胜以闻。
现代文：吏上报给河东太守胜，胜上报朝廷。
English: The officials reported the victory to the governor of Hedong Province, and the victory was reported to the imperial court.

古文：天子使使验问巫得鼎无奸诈，乃以礼祠，迎鼎至甘泉，从行，上荐之。
现代文：天子派使者检查并询问巫师得鼎的经过，确认中间没有奸诈作伪事以后，就按礼祭祀，迎接鼎到甘泉宫，天子从行，将要把它上献给天。
English: The heavenly son sent an emissary to check and inquire about the process of the sorcerer's tripod, and after confirming that there was no treachery or forgery in the middle, he made a ritual sacrifice to welcome the tripod to Ganquan Palace. The heavenly son followed and was going to offer it to heaven.

古文：至中山，曣翚，有黄云盖焉。
现代文：行到中山，鼎的上空出现一片黄云，氤氲缭绕如同车盖。
English: When I went to Zhongshan, a yellow cloud appeared in the sky, swirling around like a car cover.

古文：有麃过，上自射之，因以祭云。
现代文：恰有一头麃子经过，皇帝射死它，就势用来做了祭鼎的牲礼。
English: A mule just happened to be passing by, and the emperor shot it to death and used it to make a sacrificial offering.

古文：至长安，公卿大夫皆议请尊宝鼎。
现代文：到长安以后，公卿大夫都议论请求尊奉宝鼎。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, the court nobles and doctors all discussed and requested to honor Baoding.

古文：天子曰： 间者河溢，岁数不登，故巡祭后土，祈为百姓育穀。
现代文：天子说： 最近以来，河水泛滥，一连数年收成不好，所以朕才巡察郡县，祭祀后土，为百姓祈求有个好年成。
English: The heavenly son said, "Recently, the river has been flooded, and the harvest has been poor for several years in a row. That is why I have been inspecting counties and counties, offering sacrifices to the soil, and praying for the people to have a good year.

古文：今岁丰庑未报，鼎曷为出哉？ 
现代文：今年丰收与否尚不可知，鼎究竟是为什么原因才出现的呢？
English: Whether or not there will be a bumper harvest this year remains to be seen, but what exactly is the reason for this?

古文：有司皆曰： 闻昔泰帝兴神鼎一，一者壹统，天地万物所系终也。黄帝作宝鼎三，象天地人。
现代文：原因不明，就不知是何兆头，怎可盲目尊奉？ 有关官员都说： 听说过去泰帝制神鼎一个，一就是壹统的意思，天地万物都统于宝鼎，与宝鼎所示现象相联系。黄帝作宝鼎三个，三象征天地人。
English: The officials concerned all said: It is said that in the past, Emperor Taizong made one Baoding, which means unification. All things in heaven and earth are unified in Baoding, which is related to the phenomenon shown in Baoding. The Yellow Emperor made three Baoding, symbolizing the people of heaven and earth.

古文：禹收九牧之金，铸九鼎。皆尝亨上帝鬼神。
现代文：禹收集九州的铜，铸成九鼎，象征九州，都曾经用来烹煮牺牲祭祀天帝和鬼神。
English: Yu collected copper from Kyushu and cast it into nine tripods, a symbol of Kyushu, all of which were once used to cook sacrificial offerings to gods and spirits.

古文：遭圣则兴，鼎迁于夏商。周德衰，宋之社亡，鼎乃沦没，伏而不见。
现代文：遭逢圣主盛世鼎就会出现，迁延经过了夏商二朝，到周未世德衰败，宋国社坛被毁以后，鼎就沦没了。从此隐伏不再出现。
English: The Ding would appear when the saint was in his prime, and after the transition through the Xia Shang and Second Dynasties, to the decline of Zhou Wei Dynasty, and the destruction of the Song Dynasty, the Ding fell into oblivion. From then on, the Ding would no longer appear.

古文：颂云 自堂徂基，自羊徂牛；鼐鼎及鼒，不吴不骜，胡考之休 。
现代文：诗《颂》说： 自堂上至于门塾，自牲羊至于牲牛，大鼎小鼎，全都验过，牲肥鼎洁，祭事绸缪 ， 不喧哗不倨傲，恭慎又肃穆，神必降福，得享寿考，休美征候。 
English: The poem "Ode" says: From the hall to the gate school, from the sheep to the cattle, from the sheep to the cattle, from the big to the small, all have been tested, the livestock are clean, the sacrifices are sincere, not noisy and not proud, prudent and solemn, God will reduce the blessing, enjoy the longevity test, and stop the beauty symptoms.

古文：今鼎至甘泉，光润龙变，承休无疆。
现代文：如今鼎已到甘泉宫，看它色泽光润。变化如神，朝廷必承无疆之福。
English: Now, Ding has arrived at Ganquan Palace, look at its glossy color. It changes like a god, and the court will be blessed with boundless happiness.

古文：合兹中山，有黄白云降盖，若兽为符，路弓乘矢，集获坛下，报祠大享。
现代文：这与行到中山时，有黄白云盖降落在鼎上的征兆相符，还有麃兽这种符瑞，以及大弓和四支一套的箭，都是在神坛下得到的，这全是上天对于祭祀大享的回报。
English: This is consistent with the fact that when traveling to Zhongshan, there are signs of yellow and white cumulus clouds landing on the summit, as well as signs such as beasts of prey, as well as a large bow and a set of four arrows, all obtained under the altar, all of which are rewards from heaven for the sacrifice.

古文：唯受命而帝者心知其意而合德焉。
现代文：只有受天命而为帝的人才能心知其意而与天德相合。
English: Only those who are destined by Heaven to be emperors can know their own will and be compatible with Heaven and God.

古文：鼎宜见於祖祢，藏於帝廷，以合明应。 
现代文：鼎应该献给祖祢庙，藏于帝王宫廷，以与上述各种明显的瑞应相合。 
English: The tiara should be dedicated to the ancestral temple and hidden in the imperial court to match the above-mentioned obvious auspiciousness.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝下制书说道： 就这么办。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：入海求蓬莱者，言蓬莱不远，而不能至者，殆不见其气。
现代文：到海中寻找蓬莱山的人，说蓬莱山路程不远，而总也不能到达的原因，大约是看不到仙山的云气。
English: People who go to the sea to look for Penglai Mountain say that Penglai Mountain is not far away, but the reason why they can't reach it is that they can't see the clouds of Fairy Mountain.

古文：上乃遣望气佐候其气云。
现代文：于是皇上派遣善于望气者帮助他们观察云气。
English: So the emperor sent someone who was good at watching the clouds to help them observe the clouds.

古文：其秋，上幸雍，且郊。
现代文：这年秋天，皇上来到雍城，将要行郊祀五帝礼。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor came to Yongcheng and was going to perform the suburb worship of the Five Emperors.

古文：或曰 五帝，太一之佐也，宜立太一而上亲郊之 。
现代文：有人说： 五帝，是太一神的辅佐，应该建立太一庙，皇上亲自郊祀。 
English: Some people said, "The Five Emperors are the assistants of the Taichi God. A Taichi temple should be built, and the emperor himself should be worshipped in the suburbs."

古文：上疑未定。
现代文：皇上犹豫未决。
English: The Emperor hesitated.

古文：齐人公孙卿曰： 今年得宝鼎，其冬辛巳朔旦冬至，与黄帝时等。 
现代文：齐人公孙卿说： 今年得到宝鼎，冬季辛巳日十一月初一是冬至节，与黄帝时完全一样。 
English: Qi Ronggong Sunqing said, "This year, I got Baoding, and the winter solstice day in early November is the winter solstice festival, which is exactly the same as the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：卿有札书曰： 黄帝得宝鼎宛朐，问於鬼臾区。鬼臾区对曰： 帝得宝鼎神策，是岁己酉朔旦冬至，得天之纪，终而复始。 
现代文：公孙卿有一本扎记书说： 黄帝在宛朐城得到宝鼎，向鬼臾区询问，鬼臾区回答说： 帝得到了宝鼎和神策，这一年已酉日的月朔是冬至节，从此进入天纪，终而复始，循环不止。 
English: Gongsunqing has a book of records that says: The Yellow Emperor obtained Baoding in Wanlu City. He inquired with the ghost district, and the ghost district replied: The emperor obtained Baoding and the divine strategy. The new moon of this year, which is already the third day, is the winter solstice festival. Since then, it has entered the heavenly era, and the cycle has been repeated again and again.

古文：於是黄帝迎日推策，後率二十岁复朔旦冬至，凡二十推，三百八十年，黄帝仙登于天。 
现代文：于是黄帝按日影用神策推算，以后大率每二十年重又出现月朔黎明时为冬至节，到二十周，第三百八十年，黄帝成仙上天而去。 
English: As a result, the Yellow Emperor calculated by the shadow of the sun, and every 20 years thereafter, there would be a new moon at the dawn of the winter solstice, and by the 20th week, the 380th year, the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven.

古文：卿因所忠欲奏之。所忠视其书不经，疑其妄书，谢曰： 宝鼎事已决矣，尚何以为！ 
现代文：公孙卿想通过所忠把此事上奏皇上，所忠看他的书荒诞不经，怀疑是他妄造的假书，辞谢说： 宝鼎的事已经定下来了，还有什么文章可做？ 
English: Gongsunqing wanted to report the matter to the emperor through Zhodong. Zhodong thought his book was absurd and doubted that it was a fake book that he had fabricated. He thanked the emperor and said, "The matter of Baoding has already been settled, what else can be done?"

古文：卿因嬖人奏之。上大说，乃召问卿。对曰： 受此书申公，申公已死。 
现代文：公孙卿又通过皇帝的私宠上奏，皇上很是高兴，就召问公孙卿，公孙卿回答说： 这本书是申公传授给我的，如今申公已然去世。 
English: The Emperor was very pleased and summoned Gongsunqing, who replied, "This book was given to me by Shengong, and now Shengong has passed away.

古文：上曰： 申公何人也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 申公是个什么样的人？ 
English: The emperor said, "What kind of person is Shen Gong?

古文：卿曰： 申公，齐人。
现代文：公孙卿说： 申公，是齐人。
English: Gongsunqing said, "It's Qi people, Shengong.

古文：与安期生通，受黄帝言，无书，独有此鼎书。
现代文：与安期生相交往，接受黄帝的教言，没有书，只有这本关于鼎的书。
English: Interact with the students of Anji, accept the teachings of the Yellow Emperor, there is no book, only this book about Ding.

古文：曰 汉兴复当黄帝之时 。
现代文：其中说 汉朝兴盛于黄帝时的年名重新出现的时候 。
English: Among them, it is said that the Han Dynasty flourished at the time when the year name of the Yellow Emperor reappeared.

古文：曰 汉之圣者在高祖之孙且曾孙也。
现代文：说 汉朝的圣人出现在于高祖皇帝的孙和曾孙之中。
English: He said that the sages of the Han Dynasty appeared among the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of Emperor Gaozu.

古文：宝鼎出而与神通，封禅。
现代文：宝鼎出现后就能与神勾通，并行封禅礼。
English: After the appearance of Baoding, it will be able to collude with the gods and conduct a concurrent sealing ceremony.

古文：封禅七十二王，唯黄帝得上泰山封 。
现代文：古来行封禅礼的共有七十二个帝王，唯有黄帝得以登上泰山顶行封祭礼 。
English: Since ancient times, a total of seventy-two emperors have performed the sealing ceremony. Only the Yellow Emperor was able to ascend to the top of Mount Tai to perform the sealing ceremony.

古文：申公曰： 汉主亦当上封，上封能仙登天矣。
现代文：申公说： 汉朝皇帝也应当上泰山行封祭礼，登上泰山封祭就能成仙登天了。
English: Shen Gong said: Han Dynasty emperors should also go to Mount Taishan to perform the sealing ceremony. If they go to Mount Taishan for the sealing ceremony, they will be able to become immortals and ascend to heaven.

古文：黄帝时万诸侯，而神灵之封居七千。
现代文：黄帝时诸侯上万数，其中神灵被封的占七千。
English: At the time of the Yellow Emperor, there were tens of thousands of princes, of whom seven thousand were enshrined as deities.

古文：天下名山八，而三在蛮夷，五在中国。
现代文：天下有名山八座，其中三座在蛮夷境内，五座在中国。
English: There are eight famous mountains in the world, three of which are in the barbarian territory, and five are in China.

古文：中国华山、首山、太室、泰山、东莱，此五山黄帝之所常游，与神会。
现代文：在中国的有华山、首山、太室、泰山、东莱山，这五座是黄帝经常游观的地方，在那里与神相会。
English: In China, there are Huashan, Shoushan, Taishou, Taishan and Donglaishan. These five are the places where the Yellow Emperor often visited and met with the gods.

古文：黄帝且战且学仙。患百姓非其道者，乃断斩非鬼神者。
现代文：黄帝一边作战一边学习修仙，恐怕百姓有对仙道非议者，就断然把非难鬼神的人杀掉。
English: While the Yellow Emperor was fighting, he was also learning how to cultivate immortals. I'm afraid that if the people had any objections to the way of immortals, they would definitely kill anyone who criticized the way of ghosts and gods.

古文：百馀岁然後得与神通。
现代文：经过百多年的修炼然后能与神仙往来了。
English: After more than a hundred years of cultivation, he was able to make contact with the gods.

古文：黄帝郊雍上帝，宿三月。
现代文：黄帝在雍城郊祭天帝，住了三个月。
English: The Yellow Emperor lived on the outskirts of Yongcheng for three months.

古文：鬼臾区号大鸿，死葬雍，故鸿冢是也。
现代文：鬼臾区号称大鸿，死后葬在雍城，所以那里才有鸿冢这个地方。
English: Da Hong was buried in Yongcheng after his death, which is why this place was named after him.

古文：其後黄帝接万灵明廷。明廷者，甘泉也。
现代文：此后黄帝在明廷与万千神灵相见。明廷，就是甘泉山。
English: After that, the Yellow Emperor met with thousands of deities in Mingting. Mingting is Ganquan Mountain.

古文：所谓寒门者，谷口也。
现代文：黄帝升仙的地方为寒门，就是今天的谷口。
English: The place where the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven is the cold gate, which is today's Taniguchi.

古文：黄帝采首山铜，铸鼎於荆山下。
现代文：黄帝采掘首山的铜矿，铸鼎于荆山脚下。
English: Huangdi mined the copper ore of the first mountain, and cast the top at the foot of Mount Jing.

古文：鼎既成，有龙垂胡珣下迎黄帝。
现代文：鼎既铸成，云端里有一条龙垂下长长的胡须，迎接黄帝。
English: After the Ding was cast, there was a dragon with long whiskers hanging down from the clouds to greet the Yellow Emperor.

古文：黄帝上骑，群臣後宫从上者七十馀人，龙乃上去。
现代文：黄帝攀援而上骑在龙背上，群臣以及后宫纪嫔随他登上龙背的有七十多人，龙就向天上飞去。
English: The Yellow Emperor climbed up and rode on the dragon's back, accompanied by more than seventy of his courtiers and his harem, and the dragon flew into the sky.

古文：馀小臣不得上，乃悉持龙珣，龙珣拔，堕，堕黄帝之弓。
现代文：其余级别低的官员不得上，都抓住龙须不放手，龙须被拉断，从空中落下，匆忙间黄帝的弓也落了下来。
English: The rest of the low-ranking officials were not allowed to go up, they all grabbed the dragon's whiskers and did not let go. The dragon's whiskers were pulled off and fell from the air. In a hurry, the bow of the Yellow Emperor also fell down.

古文：百姓仰望黄帝既上天，乃抱其弓与胡珣号，故後世因名其处曰鼎湖，其弓曰乌号。  於是天子曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：百姓仰面望见黄帝慢慢飞上天去，于是抱着他失落的弓以及拉断的龙须哭号，所以后世把这个地方称为鼎湖，弓的名子叫作乌号  于是天子说： 呀！
English: The people looked up and saw the Yellow Emperor slowly flying up into the sky, so they held his lost bow and the broken dragon's whiskers and cried, so later generations called this place Dinghu, and the name of the bow was Wu. Then the Son of Heaven said: Ah!

古文：吾诚得如黄帝，吾视去妻子如脱鵕耳。 
现代文：要是能象黄帝那样，我把离开妻子只当作是扔掉一只鞋子一样容易。 
English: If I could be like the Yellow Emperor, I would treat leaving my wife as easy as throwing away a shoe.

古文：乃拜卿为郎，东使候神於太室。
现代文：就封公孙卿为郎官，让他到东面太室山去迎候神仙。
English: He appointed Gongsunqing as his vassal and sent him to the east side of Mt. Temuro to meet the god.

古文：上遂郊雍，至陇西，西登崆峒，幸甘泉。
现代文：皇上遂到雍城郊祀，后来到陇西，向西行登上崆峒山，又回到甘泉宫。
English: The emperor then went to the outskirts of Yongcheng to worship, and later went to Shaanxi, went westward to Mount Lushan, and then returned to Ganquan Palace.

古文：令祠官宽舒等具太一祠坛，祠坛放薄忌太一坛，坛三垓。
现代文：命祠官宽舒等人准备好太一神的祭坛，祭坛仿照薄忌的太一坛建造，坛分三层。
English: Kuanshu, an official of the Shinto shrine, and others prepare the altar of the god Taichi. The altar is modeled after the Taichi altar of Himi, and is divided into three levels.

古文：五帝坛环居其下，各如其方，黄帝西南，除八通鬼道。
现代文：第一层是太一坛，五帝坛环绕在太一坛下，五帝各自所在方位与所主方位相同，只有主中央方位的黄帝处在西南方，除去这个方向上的八通鬼道，以立黄帝坛位。
English: The first floor is the Great Altar. The Altar of the Five Emperors is surrounded by the Lower Altar of the Great Altar. The five emperors are located in the same direction as the main altar. Only the Yellow Emperor, which is located in the main central direction, is located in the southwest. After removing the eight ghost roads in this direction, the altar of the Yellow Emperor is erected.

古文：太一，其所用如雍一畤物，而加醴枣脯之属，杀一貍牛以为俎豆牢具。
现代文：太一坛，祭祀所用与雍城五畤中的一畤相同，而增加酒醴、枣和肉脯之类，宰杀一头犁牛作为俎豆和其他与牲牢相配的礼器中的供奉物。
English: It is a large altar, and the altar used for the ritual is the same as one of the five altars in Yongcheng, but wine lees, dates and meat lees are added, and a yakitori is slaughtered as an offering of peas and other ceremonial objects compatible with livestock.

古文：而五帝独有俎豆醴进。
现代文：而五帝坛只有酒醴和俎豆供奉。
English: The Altar of the Five Emperors, on the other hand, only offered wine lees and peas.

古文：其下四方地，为醊食群神从者及北斗云。
现代文：最下一层坛是一块四方形地面，作为供奉配祭群神和北斗的地方。
English: The lowest tier of the altar is a square piece of ground, used as a place to offer sacrifices to the gods and the Big Dipper.

古文：已祠，胙馀皆燎之。
现代文：祭祀完毕，剩余的胙肉都付之燎火。
English: Once the ritual is over, the remaining meat is burned.

古文：其牛色白，鹿居其中，彘在鹿中，水而洎之。
现代文：牲牛用白色，把宰杀好的鹿塞入牛的腹腔中，再把猪塞入鹿的腹腔中，一起放在釜中加水烹煮。
English: The cattle are white, and the slaughtered deer is stuffed into the cow's abdominal cavity, and then the pig is stuffed into the deer's abdominal cavity, and both are placed in the kettle and boiled with water.

古文：祭日以牛，祭月以羊彘特。
现代文：祭日的牺牲用牛，祭月用羊猪，都用一只，雄性。
English: The bulls used for the festival sacrifices and the pigs used for the moon sacrifices are both male.

古文：太一祝宰则衣紫及绣。五帝各如其色，日赤，月白。
现代文：太一坛的祝宰礼服用紫色以及五彩绣衣，五帝坛祝宰的礼服则各按帝所主方位的颜色，日坛祝宰礼服为赤色，月坛的为白色。
English: Purple and multicolored embroidered clothes are used for the blessing ceremony of the Great Altar, the colors of the blessing ceremony of the Altar of the Five Emperors are based on the color of the main direction of the emperor, the blessing ceremony of the Altar of the Sun is red, and the blessing ceremony of the Altar of the Moon is white.

古文：十一月辛巳朔旦冬至，昧爽，天字始郊拜太一。
现代文：十一月初一黎明冬至这一天，天刚拂晓，天子开始祭祀太一神，行跪拜礼。
English: At dawn on the first day of November, the winter solstice, the Son of Heaven began to offer sacrifices to the One True God, kneeling in worship.

古文：朝朝日，夕夕月，则揖；而见太一如雍郊礼。
现代文：早晨朝见日神，傍晚朝见月神，都揖而不跪；而朝见太一神则和雍城的郊祭礼相同。
English: To see the sun god in the morning and the moon god in the evening is to prostrate and not kneel. To see the sun god in the morning is the same as the suburban festival in Yongcheng.

古文：其赞飨曰： 天始以宝鼎神策授皇帝，朔而又朔，终而复始，皇帝敬拜见焉。 
现代文：其赞礼者念道： 天开始把宝鼎神策授给皇帝，此后朔日一次接着一次，终而复始，永无穷尽，皇帝恭敬拜见天神。 
English: His admirers recited: The heavens began to bestow the Baoding God to the emperor, and thereafter, day after day, again and again, beginning to end, never ending, the emperor reverently worshiped the gods.

古文：而衣上黄。
现代文：礼服崇尚黄色。
English: Yellow is the color of choice for formal wear.

古文：其祠列火满坛，坛旁亨炊具。
现代文：祭祀时满坛是一堆堆的燎火，坛旁边放着烹煮等炊具。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, the altar is a pile of bonfires, and cooking utensils are placed next to the altar.

古文：有司云 祠上有光焉 。
现代文：主管官员说： 祀坛上有光出现了。 
English: The official in charge said: A light appeared on the altar.

古文：公卿言 皇帝始郊见太一云阳，有司奉瑄玉嘉牲荐飨。
现代文：公卿说： 皇帝最初在云阳郊祭，朝见太一神，主管官员供奉着瑄玉，嘉牲献给太一神享食。
English: The courtier said, "The emperor first held a festival in the suburbs of Yunyang. At dawn, he saw the god Taichi, and the officials in charge offered jade and sacrificial animals to the god for him to enjoy.

古文：是夜有美光，及昼，黄气上属天 。
现代文：当夜就有很美的光辉出现，到天亮时，黄气上腾，与天相连。 
English: At night, a very beautiful radiance appears, and by dawn, the yellow aura rises and connects with the sky.

古文：太史公、祠官宽舒等曰： 神灵之休，祐福兆祥，宜因此地光域立太畤坛以明应。
现代文：太史公、祠官宽舒等说： 这是神灵的美意，保祐降福于人的吉兆祥瑞，应该按照这里神光所照的地区建立太畤坛以与神光的祥瑞吉兆相呼应。
English: Tai Shi Gong and ancestral priest Kuan Shu said, "This is the beautiful intention of the gods, the auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious auspicious ausp

古文：令太祝领，秋及腊间祠。三岁天子一郊见。 
现代文：命太祝管领此事，每年秋天和腊月间祭祀，隔三年天子郊祭朝见一次。 
English: Every autumn and between the waxing and waning of the moon, there is a religious service, and every three years, there is a visit to the morning of the Tenshi Suburban Festival.

古文：其秋，为伐南越，告祷太一。
现代文：这年秋天，为了讨伐南越，向太一神祷告祈求福祐。
English: In the autumn of that year, in order to fight against South Vietnam, he prayed to the Great God for blessings.

古文：以牡荆画幡日月北斗登龙，以象太一三星，为太一锋，命曰 灵旗 。
现代文：以荆为幡竿，幡上画日月、北斗、升龙等图案，以象征太一座的三星，作为太一锋旗，命名为 灵旗 。
English: The flagpole is made of wattle, and the sun, moon, Big Dipper, rising dragon and other motifs are painted on the flag. It is named the "Spiritual Flag" after the three stars that symbolize Taichi, which are the flags of Taichi.

古文：为兵祷，则太史奉以指所伐国。
现代文：在出兵祷告时，由太史官手捧灵旗指向被伐的国家。
English: When sending out soldiers to pray, the imperial official holds the spiritual flag in his hand and points to the country that was attacked.

古文：而五利将军使不敢入海，之泰山祠。
现代文：五利将军作为使者不敢入海求神，却来到泰山祭祷。
English: As an emissary, General Goryo did not dare to go to the sea to pray to God, but came to Mount Tai to offer prayers.

古文：上使人随验，实毋所见。
现代文：皇上派人尾随着他察看他的行踪，知道他实际上什么也没见到。
English: The emperor sent someone to follow him and check on his whereabouts, knowing that he had not actually seen anything.

古文：五利妄言见其师，其方尽，多不雠。上乃诛五利。
现代文：五利却妄言说见到他师父了。他的方术已经用尽，大多没有效验，于是皇上杀掉五利。
English: However, Goryo made a false claim that he had seen his master. His techniques had been exhausted and were mostly ineffective, so the Emperor killed Goryo.

古文：其冬，公孙卿候神河南，言见仙人迹缑氏城上，有物如雉，往来城上。
现代文：这年冬天，公孙卿在河南迎候神仙，说在缑氏城上看到了仙人足迹，还有个东西样子象山鸡一样，往来于城上。
English: In the winter of that year, Gongsun Xie was in Henan waiting for the immortal, and said that he had seen the footprints of the immortal on the city of Yao, and that there was also something that looked like a mountain chicken that came and went on the city.

古文：天子亲幸缑氏城视迹。
现代文：天子亲自到缑氏城看了仙人足迹。
English: Tianzi himself went to the city of Yao to see the footprints of the immortals.

古文：问卿： 得毋效文成、五利乎？ 
现代文：问公孙卿： 莫非你是仿效文成、五利吗？ 
English: Gongsun Xie asked: Are you following the example of Wencheng and Wuli?

古文：卿曰： 仙者非有求人主，人主者求之。
现代文：公孙卿说： 仙人不是有求于皇帝，是皇帝求仙人。
English: Gongsunqing said: Immortals do not have to ask the emperor, it is the emperor who has to ask the immortals.

古文：其道非少宽假，神不来。
现代文：所以这事非得宽限时日，神就不会降临。
English: Therefore, there must be a grace period for this, otherwise God will not come.

古文：言神事，事如迂诞，积以岁乃可致也。 
现代文：谈论神仙事，好象是迂腐怪诞，然而积以年岁就能办成。 
English: Talking about supernatural things may seem pedantic and bizarre, but it can be done with years of experience.

古文：於是郡国各除道，缮治宫观名山神祠所，以望幸。
现代文：于是郡国各自清扫道路，修治宫殿、列观、名山、神庙等，以等待皇帝到来。
English: As a result, each county and province swept the roads and repaired palaces, monuments, famous mountains, temples, etc. to wait for the emperor to arrive.

古文：其春，既灭南越，上有嬖臣李延年以好音见。
现代文：这年春天，既已灭掉南越，皇上有位宠爱的官员李延年献上一首优美的乐曲。
English: In the spring of that year, after South Vietnam had been eliminated, a favorite official of the emperor, Lee Yan Nien, presented a beautiful piece of music.

古文：上善之，下公卿议，曰： 民间祠尚有鼓舞乐，今郊祀而无乐，岂称乎？ 
现代文：皇上称善不止，命公卿商议说： 民间祠庙还有鼓舞乐曲，如今郊祭反而无乐，如何相称。 
English: The emperor praised the performance, and the empress dowager deliberated and said, "Folk shrines and temples still have inspirational music, but now the suburban festival has no music. How is that appropriate?"

古文：公卿曰： 古者祠天地皆有乐，而神祇可得而礼。 
现代文：公卿说： 古时候祭祀天地都有乐，神祇才来享受祭祀。 
English: The Kugyo said, "In ancient times, there was joy in both heaven and earth when there was a sacrifice, and the gods came to enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：或曰： 太帝使素女鼓五十弦瑟，悲，帝禁不止，故破其瑟为二十五弦。 
现代文：还有人说： 太帝命素女奏五十弦瑟，由于太过悲哀，太帝禁而不能止，所以把她的瑟分为两半成二十五弦瑟。 
English: Another person said: My great-grandfather ordered his daughter to play a fifty-stringed instrument. Since it was too sad, my great-grandfather forbade her to stop, so he divided her instrument into two halves, making a twenty-five-stringed instrument.

古文：於是塞南越，祷祠太一、后土，始用乐舞，益召歌兒，作二十五弦及空侯琴瑟自此起。
现代文：于是以南越为边塞，开始用乐舞祷祭太一、后土，广召歌儿，并从这时期开始制作二十五弦瑟和空侯。
English: As a result, Nan Yue became a border fortress, and began to use music, dance, and prayer to celebrate Taichi, Houchi, and Guangzhao songs, and from this period began to make twenty-five-stringed sofas and empty chairs.

古文：其来年冬，上议曰： 古者先振兵泽旅，然后封禅。 
现代文：来年冬天，臣下进言说 古时候先振兵释旅，专力于农，然后行封禅礼。 
English: In the winter of the following year, the vassal gave the following advice: In the old days, the first thing to do was to send troops to liberate the country, concentrate on agriculture, and then perform the sealing ceremony.

古文：乃遂北巡朔方，勒兵十馀万，还祭黄帝冢桥山，释兵须如。
现代文：于是皇帝巡察北方到朔方，布勒军队十多万人，回来时祭黄帝冢于桥山，在须如遣散军队。
English: So the emperor toured the north to the Shuo side, the Bul army of more than one hundred thousand people, and when he returned, he sacrificed the Yellow Emperor in Qiaoshan, and disbanded the army in Shurong.

古文：上曰： 吾闻黄帝不死，今有冢，何也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 我听说黄帝没有死，如今有黄帝冢，是何原因？ 
English: The emperor said: I have heard that the Yellow Emperor is not dead, but now there is a Yellow Emperor, what is the reason?

古文：或对曰： 黄帝已仙上天，群臣葬其衣冠。 
现代文：有人回答说： 黄帝成仙后飞升上天，群臣把他的衣冠埋葬起来，因而有黄帝冢。 
English: Someone replied: After the Yellow Emperor became immortal, he soared into the sky. His courtiers buried his crown, and thus the Yellow Emperor's casket was found.

古文：既至甘泉，为且用事泰山，先类祠太一。
现代文：既已回到甘泉宫，由于不久就要到泰山行封禅礼，先类祭了太一神。
English: Since he had already returned to Ganquan Palace, and since he was soon to go to Mount Tai for the enthronement ceremony, the first thing he did was to offer sacrifices to Taishin.

古文：自得宝鼎，上与公卿诸生议封禅。
现代文：自从得到宝鼎以后，皇上与公卿、诸经生员商议封禅事。
English: Since receiving the treasure, the emperor has been discussing the matter of the imperial seal with court nobles and scholars.

古文：封禅用希旷绝，莫知其仪礼，而群儒采封禅尚书、周官、王制之望祀射牛事。
现代文：封禅由于以往很少举行，有关资料已旷废绝灭，无人知道礼仪的详细情形，而众儒者从《尚书》、《周官》、《王制》等书中摘引了封禅时望祭射牛的故事。
English: Due to the fact that Fuzan was rarely held in the past, the relevant materials have been completely destroyed, and no one knows the details of the etiquette. However, many Confucians have quoted the story of the bull-shooting at the Fuzan Jibang Festival from books such as "Shang Shu," "Zhou Guan" and "King System."

古文：齐人丁公年九十馀，曰： 封禅者，合不死之名也。
现代文：齐人丁公年已九十多岁，说： 封禅，就是合当不死的意思。
English: Qijin Ding Gongnian, who is more than ninety years old, said: "Fu Zhen" is the meaning of being fit for immortality.

古文：秦皇帝不得上封，陛下必欲上，稍上即无风雨，遂上封矣。 
现代文：秦始皇没有这种造化，所以没能够登上山顶行封祭礼。陛下若一定上山，上到一定高度，乘无风雨的时候，即刻行礼就算是上山封祭了。 
English: Qin Shihuang did not have this kind of creation, so he was not able to ascend to the top of the mountain to perform the sealing ceremony. If His Majesty ascends to a certain mountain and reaches a certain height, when there is no wind or rain, he can immediately perform the ceremony.

古文：上於是乃令诸儒习射牛，草封禅仪。
现代文：皇上于是命诸儒者演习射牛的礼仪，起草封禅的程式。
English: The emperor then ordered the Confucians to practice the etiquette of shooting a bull and to draft a program for the seal.

古文：数年，至且行。
现代文：数年以后，终于到了将要封禅的日子。
English: A few years later, the day finally arrived when he was to be ordained.

古文：天子既闻公孙卿及方士之言，黄帝以上封禅，皆致怪物与神通，欲放黄帝以上接神仙人蓬莱士，高世比德於九皇，而颇采儒术以文之。
现代文：天子既然听了公孙卿以及方士的话，说黄帝以前的帝王封禅，都招徕异类以与神相通。所以想仿照黄帝以前的帝王招徕蓬莱士人以迎神仙，对世人抬高自己的身价以与九皇相比德，而又稍稍采用儒者的一套作为文饰。
English: After listening to the words of Gongsunqing and the magicians, Tianzi said that the emperors before the Yellow Emperor had all invited outsiders to commune with the gods. Therefore, he wanted to follow the example of the emperors before the Yellow Emperor who had invited the Penglai people to meet the gods, and to raise his status in the eyes of the world by comparing himself to the Nine Emperors, and to slightly use a Confucian set as a decoration.

古文：群儒既已不能辨明封禅事，又牵拘於诗书古文而不能骋。
现代文：众儒者既不能把封禅的仪式搞明白，又牵缠拘泥于《诗》《书》等古文的记载，不能骋其想象。
English: Confucians are not able to understand the ceremony of sealing the zen, and they are also entangled in the records of ancient texts such as "poetry" and "books," and cannot imagine it.

古文：上为封禅祠器示群儒，群儒或曰 不与古同 ，徐偃又曰 太常诸生行礼不如鲁善 ，周霸属图封禅事，於是上绌偃、霸，而尽罢诸儒不用。
现代文：皇上亲自设计了封禅用的祭器让群儒观看，这些儒者有的说： 与古时候不同 ，一个名叫徐偃的人又说： 太常诸生演习的礼不如鲁礼好 ，周霸嘱咐他另绘封禅礼图。于是皇上把徐偃、周霸免官，所有儒生也被停止使用。
English: The emperor personally designed the ceremonial tools for the sealing of the seal so that a group of Confucians could watch. Some of these Confucians said, "Unlike in ancient times, a man named Xu Yao also said, 'Too often the rites of all living beings are not as good as the rites of Lu.' Zhou Ba ordered him to draw another seal of the seal. So the emperor dismissed Xu Yao and Zhou Ba, and all Confucians were stopped from using them.

古文：三月，遂东幸缑氏，礼登中岳太室。
现代文：三月，东行到缑氏，登上中岳太室山行祭礼。
English: In March, he traveled east to Shinshi and climbed Mt. Naka-dake Taimuro for a festival.

古文：从官在山下闻若有言 万岁 云。
现代文：随从官员在山下听到象有呼喊 万岁 的声音。
English: At the foot of the mountain, the official's entourage heard the elephant's voice shouting "long live."

古文：问上，上不言；问下，下不言。
现代文：问皇上，皇上不答；问下官，下官也不言语。
English: If you ask the emperor, the emperor will not answer; if you ask a subordinate, the subordinate will not say a word.

古文：於是以三百户封太室奉祠，命曰崇高邑。
现代文：于是将三百户人家封为太室奉祠，以他们的租税作为太室山祭祀的费用，把他们的居住区命名为崇高邑。
English: As a result, three hundred households were designated as Taimuro worshipping shrines, and their taxes were used as the cost of Taimuroyama worship, and their residential area was named Sogo-eup.

古文：东上泰山，泰山之草木叶未生，乃令人上石立之泰山巅。
现代文：继续东行到泰山。那时候泰山上的草木还没有长出叶子，乘机命人将大石运上泰山绝顶，备封禅时用。
English: I continued east to Mount Tai. At that time, the plants on Mount Tai had not yet sprouted leaves, so I took the opportunity to order someone to transport large stones to the very top of Mount Tai, to be used for sealing during Zen.

古文：上遂东巡海上，行礼祠八神。
现代文：皇上随即向东巡游来到海上，行礼祭祀八神。
English: The emperor then went on a cruise to the east and came to the sea, where he performed a ritual to worship the eight gods.

古文：齐人之上疏言神怪奇方者以万数，然无验者。
现代文：齐人纷纷上书谈论神怪和奇异方术，数以万计，然而没有一件能得到证实。
English: Tens of thousands of people have written in to talk about supernatural phenomena and strange methods, but none of them have been confirmed.

古文：乃益发船，令言海中神山者数千人求蓬莱神人。
现代文：于是调发了更多的船只，让那些谈论海中神山的数千人下海寻求蓬莱山的神人。
English: As a result, more ships were dispatched to let the thousands of people who were talking about the sacred mountain in the sea go to sea to search for the sacred person of Penglai Mountain.

古文：公孙卿持节常先行候名山，至东莱，言夜见大人，长数丈，就之则不见，见其迹甚大，类禽兽云。
现代文：天子出行，常常由公孙卿持天子符节先行到达，在名山胜境迎候天子车驾，他到东莱后，说夜间看到一个异常高大的人，身长数丈，走近后却看不到了，只留下一个很大的足迹，形状象是禽兽的足印。
English: When the heavenly son travels, he is often preceded by Gongsunqing holding the heavenly son symbol. He waits for the heavenly son's car in the famous mountain resort. After he arrived in Donglai, he said that he saw an unusually tall person at night. He was several feet tall, but he couldn't see him after he approached. He only left a large footprint, shaped like the footprint of an animal.

古文：群臣有言见一老父牵狗，言 吾欲见巨公 ，已忽不见。
现代文：群臣还有的说见到一个老人牵着狗，说： 我想见一见臣公 ，说完忽然不见踪影。
English: Some of the courtiers also said that they saw an old man leading a dog and said, "I want to see my lord," and then suddenly disappeared.

古文：上即见大迹，未信，及群臣有言老父，则大以为仙人也。
现代文：皇上亲自看了大足印，尚不肯相信，等到又听群臣讲述牵狗老人的事，才深信这就是仙人了。
English: The emperor himself saw the big footprints, but still refused to believe it. It was only when he heard his courtiers talking about the old man with the dog that he became convinced that it was a hermit.

古文：宿留海上，予方士传车及间使求仙人以千数。
现代文：特意在海上留宿以待仙人，准予方士乘坐驿传的车子以来往报信，陆续派出的求仙人已有千数以上。
English: They deliberately stayed at sea to wait for the hermit, and allowed the priests to take a car that had been passed down to them. Since then, more than a thousand hermits have been sent out in succession.

古文：四月，还至奉高。
现代文：四月，从海上归来，到奉高县。
English: In April, he returned from the sea to Fenggao County.

古文：上念诸儒及方士言封禅人人殊，不经，难施行。
现代文：皇上认为众儒生和方士所说的封禅事各自不同，荒诞不经，难以施行。
English: The emperor thought that what the Confucians and the magicians said about the sealing of the seal was different from each other, absurd, and difficult to implement.

古文：天子至梁父，礼祠地主。
现代文：天子到了梁父山，以礼祭祀地主。
English: When the heavenly son arrived at Mt. Liangzhi, he made a ritual offering to the landlord.

古文：乙卯，令侍中儒者皮弁荐绅，射牛行事。
现代文：乙卯日，命侍中和儒者穿着隆重的礼服：头戴皮弁，插笏垂绅，行射牛的礼仪。
English: On the second day of the month, the attendants and Confucianists wore grand ceremonial dress: the head wore a leather flap, the crotch was inserted, and the etiquette of shooting a bull was performed.

古文：封泰山下东方，如郊祠太一之礼。
现代文：在泰山东面的山脚下封土行礼，礼仪程式与郊祭太一相同。
English: At the foot of Mount Tai in the east, the soil is sealed and a ceremony is performed. The ritual is the same as that of the Taichi Suburban Festival.

古文：封广丈二尺，高九尺，其下则有玉牒书，书祕。
现代文：所封土宽一丈二尺，高九尺。下面埋有玉牒书，书的内容隐秘无人知。
English: The sealed earth is one and a half feet wide and nine feet high. There is a sealed document buried underneath, the contents of which are secret and unknown.

古文：礼毕，天子独与侍中奉车子侯上泰山，亦有封。其事皆禁。
现代文：行礼毕，天子独自带了侍中奉车霍子侯登上泰山，在山顶同样行了封土礼，只是在山顶事禁止外传。
English: After the salute, Tianzi alone took the attendant Feng Che Huo Zi Hou to ascend Mount Tai, and also performed the sealing ceremony at the top of the mountain, but it was forbidden to spread the news at the top of the mountain.

古文：明日，下阴道。
现代文：第二天，从山后阴道下山。
English: The next day, I went down the mountain via my vagina.

古文：丙辰，禅泰山下阯东北肃然山，如祭后土礼。
现代文：丙辰日，在泰山脚下东北的肃然山上行禅祭礼，与祭后土仪式相同。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th lunar month, a Zen festival is held on Mount Tai at the foot of Mount Tai in the northeast. The ceremony is the same as the ceremony after the festival.

古文：天子皆亲拜见，衣上黄而尽用乐焉。
现代文：封祭、禅祭天子都亲行拜见礼。礼服尚黄色，都用乐伴奏。
English: At the closing ceremony and the Zen festival, the heavenly son himself performs the ceremony. The dress is still yellow, and it is all accompanied by music.

古文：江淮间一茅三脊为神藉。五色土益杂封。
现代文：荐神用的草席是用江淮间的三脊茅编织而成，封土用杂土石，上面加盖五色土。
English: The straw mat used by the recommending god is made of three ridges of thatch woven between the rivers Huai and Yangtze. The soil is fenced with mudstone, and the top is covered with five-colored soil.

古文：纵远方奇兽蜚禽及白雉诸物，颇以加礼。
现代文：将远方进贡来的奇兽、飞禽以及白山鸡等物纵还山林，比起雍畤的祭祀礼数颇有增加。
English: The number of sacrificial rites has increased compared to the Yongle period, with strange beasts, birds, and mountain chickens from far away brought back to the mountains and forests.

古文：兕牛犀象之属不用。皆至泰山祭后土。
现代文：兕牛犀象之类不宜放还山林的，都到泰山下祭祀后土。
English: Snails, rhinoceroses, and other animals that should not be released back into the mountain forest are brought to Mount Tai for sacrifice.

古文：封禅祠；其夜若有光，昼有白云起封中。
现代文：行封禅礼的地方，当夜仿佛有光出现，白天有白云从封土中升起。
English: At the place where the sealing ceremony was held, it seemed as if a light appeared at night, and a white cloud rose from the sealed land during the day.

古文：天子从禅还，坐明堂，群臣更上寿。
现代文：天子从禅祭的地方回来后，坐于明堂，群臣轮番入见道贺，恭祝天子圣寿无疆。
English: After the heavenly son returned from the place of the Zen festival, he sat in the Ming Hall, and the courtiers took turns to enter and congratulate him, wishing him a long and happy life.

古文：於是制诏御史： 朕以眇眇之身承至尊，兢兢焉惧不任。
现代文：于是降下制书，诏告于御史说： 朕以渺小之身继承至尊大位，终日战战兢兢深恐不能胜任。
English: So he resigned his position as a scribe and issued an edict to the Emperor, saying: "I have succeeded to the supreme throne in a small body, and I am deeply afraid that I will not be able to fulfill my duties.

古文：维德菲薄，不明于礼乐。
现代文：由于德行微薄，不明礼乐。
English: Because virtue is meager, the music of the rite is unknown.

古文：脩祠太一，若有象景光，箓如有望，震於怪物，欲止不敢，遂登封太山，至于梁父，而後禅肃然。
现代文：所以重修祭祀太一的盛典时，仿佛有霞光出现，又隐然见到一些奇怪物事，恐怕是怪物出现，欲停止行礼而又怕得罪神灵，于是强自支撑，登上太山行封祭礼，到梁父，而后在肃然山行禅祭礼。
English: Therefore, during the re-enactment of the grand ceremony of the Taichi ritual, it was as if a glow appeared, and I vaguely saw some strange things. I was afraid that a monster appeared. I wanted to stop performing the ritual but I was afraid of offending the gods, so I forced myself to support myself, climbed Mount Tai to perform the sealing ritual, went to Liang father, and then performed the Zen ritual in the solemn mountain.

古文：自新，嘉与士大夫更始，赐民百户牛一酒十石，加年八十孤寡布帛二匹。
现代文：欲从此自新，与士大夫一起重新做起，特赐给百姓每百户牛一头，酒十石，年八十岁以上的孤寡老人赠赐布帛二匹。
English: He wanted to start afresh from now on, to make a fresh start together with the scholars and doctors. He specially gave the people one cow for every hundred households, ten kilos of wine, and two cloth donkeys to the lonely elderly over the age of eighty.

古文：复博、奉高、蛇丘、历城，无出今年租税。
现代文：博县、奉高、蛇丘、历城四县免除徭役和今年租税。
English: The four counties of Bo County, Fenggao, Shekou and Licheng are exempt from labor service and tax this year.

古文：其大赦天下，如乙卯赦令。
现代文：大赦天下，细则与乙卯日赦令相同。
English: The amnesty applies to the whole country, and the rules are the same as for the amnesty on the second day of the month.

古文：行所过毋有复作。
现代文：所经过处不得再有复作者。
English: There must be no more copyists.

古文：事在二年前，皆勿听治。 
现代文：凡二年以前所犯过失，都不再治罪。 
English: Any misdemeanours committed two years ago are no longer punishable.

古文：又下诏曰： 古者天子五载一巡狩，用事泰山，诸侯有朝宿地。
现代文：又下诏说： 古时候天子每隔五年外出巡狩一次，到泰山行礼，诸侯都有朝见留宿的处所。
English: The imperial edict also said: In ancient times, the emperor went on a hunting tour every five years, and paid homage to Mount Tai. All the princes had a place to stay in the morning.

古文：其令诸侯各治邸泰山下。 
现代文：今命诸侯各自在泰山下构筑邸舍房屋。 
English: The lords were ordered to build mansions and houses at the foot of Mount Tai.

古文：天子既已封泰山，无风雨灾，而方士更言蓬莱诸神若将可得，於是上欣然庶几遇之，乃复东至海上望，冀遇蓬莱焉。
现代文：天子既已封泰山，没有遇到风雨灾，因而方士纷纷说蓬莱山诸神不久将能见到，皇上也欣然以为差不多，就重新东行到海上观望，希望能遇到蓬莱山诸神。
English: Since Taishi had already sealed Mount Tai and had not encountered any wind or rain, the priests said that the gods of Mount Penglai would be able to see them soon. The emperor was pleased to think that it was almost the same, so he went to the sea again to watch, hoping to encounter the gods of Mount Penglai.

古文：奉车子侯暴病，一日死。
现代文：奉车霍子侯突然得急病，才一天就死了。
English: Feng Che Huo Zi Hou suddenly fell ill and died one day later.

古文：上乃遂去，并海上，北至碣石，巡自辽西，历北边至九原。
现代文：皇上这才离去。沿海而上，北行到碣石，自辽西开始巡察，历经北部边塞来到九原县。
English: Only then did the emperor leave. He went up the coast, traveling north to Shanshi. He started his inspection from the west of Liao and traveled through the northern border fortress to arrive in Jiuhara County.

古文：五月，反至甘泉。
现代文：五月，返回到甘泉宫。
English: In May, he returned to Ganquan Palace.

古文：有司言宝鼎出为元鼎，以今年为元封元年。
现代文：主管官员说宝鼎出现年号定为元鼎，今年封禅年号应为元封元年。
English: The official in charge said that the year of Baoding's appearance was set as the founding year, and the year of this year's seal should be the founding year.

古文：其秋，有星茀于东井。
现代文：这年秋天，有彗星出现于东井宿中。
English: In the autumn of that year, a comet appeared in Tsuru-juku.

古文：後十馀日，有星茀于三能。
现代文：十多天后，又有彗星出现于三台附近。
English: More than ten days later, another comet appeared in the vicinity of Sanya.

古文：望气王朔言： 候独见填星出如瓜，食顷复入焉。 
现代文：有个望气的人名叫王朔的说： 测候时独有我看到填星出现时象瓜一样大，约一顿饭的功夫隐去不见了。 
English: A hopeful person named Wang Shuo said: "When I was measuring, I only saw a star appear as big as a melon. About a meal's worth of effort disappeared.

古文：有司皆曰： 陛下建汉家封禅，天其报德星云。 
现代文：有关官员都说： 陛下创建了汉朝封禅的礼仪，大约是上天以德星的出现作为报答。 
English: The relevant officials all said: His Majesty created the etiquette of Han Dynasty Fuzhen, probably as a reward from Heaven for the appearance of De Xing.

古文：其来年冬，郊雍五帝。还，拜祝祠太一。
现代文：来年冬天，郊祭雍城的五帝祠，回来后拜祝并祭祀了太一神。
English: In the winter of the following year, he went to the Five Emperors' Shrine in Yongcheng, a suburb of the festival, and after returning, he worshiped and sacrificed the god Taichi.

古文：赞飨曰： 德星昭衍，厥维休祥。
现代文：赞礼官念道： 德星明亮，其是吉祥。
English: The praising official recited, "The virtue star is bright, which is auspicious.

古文：寿星仍出，渊耀光明。
现代文：又出寿星，渊耀光明。
English: Another birthday star appears, shining brightly.

古文：信星昭见，皇帝敬拜太祝之享。 
现代文：信星光见，皇帝敬拜太祝之享食。 
English: Believing in the light of the stars, the emperor worshiped and enjoyed the food.

古文：其春，公孙卿言见神人东莱山，若云 欲见天子 。
现代文：这年春天，公孙卿说在东莱山见到神人，隐约听到他说： 要见天子 。
English: In the spring of that year, Gongsun Xie said that he had seen a godman on Donglaishan Mountain, and vaguely heard him say, "I want to see the Son of Heaven."

古文：天子於是幸缑氏城，拜卿为中大夫。
现代文：天子于是来到缑氏城，封公孙卿为中大夫。
English: Tianzi then came to Jiu's city and appointed Gongsunqing as the middle doctor.

古文：遂至东莱，宿留之数日，无所见，见大人迹云。
现代文：随后到达东莱，住了数日，什么也没看到，有的说见到了大人的足印。
English: They then arrived in Donglai and stayed there for a few days, but saw nothing. Some said they saw the footprints of the adults.

古文：复遣方士求神怪采芝药以千数。
现代文：重又派遣方士寻访神仙、采掘灵芝达千余人。
English: In addition, more than a thousand people were dispatched to search for immortals and extract reishi mushrooms.

古文：是岁旱。於是天子既出无名，乃祷万里沙，过祠泰山。
现代文：这一年天旱，天子既已出游，没有出游的理由，就借口说往万里沙祷神求雨，顺道祭祀泰山。
English: This year, the weather was dry. Since the heavenly son had already left on a trip, and there was no reason to travel, he used the excuse of going to Wanli Sha to pray to God for rain, and along the way he made a sacrifice to Mount Tai.

古文：还至瓠子，自临塞决河，留二日，沈祠而去。
现代文：回来时到达瓠子县，亲自到河水决口处堵塞决口，住了二日，沉祭河神以后离去。
English: When he came back, he arrived at Chizi County, personally went to the river mouth to block the mouth, stayed for two days, and left after sacrificing to the river god.

古文：使二卿将卒塞决河，徙二渠，复禹之故迹焉。
现代文：命上卿二人率领兵卒堵塞河水的决口，将二条渠水移位，以恢复禹时的旧迹。
English: The two generals led the soldiers to block the water outlet of the river, and shifted the water of the two canals to restore the ancient ruins of Yuqi.

古文：是时既灭两越，越人勇之乃言 越人俗鬼，而其祠皆见鬼，数有效。
现代文：当时既已灭掉两越，一个名为勇之的越人说道： 越人风俗是信鬼，祭祀时都能见到鬼，常常很有效验。
English: At that time, the two Yue had already been eliminated, and a Yue man named Yongzhi said: The Yue people believe in ghosts. Ghosts can be seen during sacrifices, and they are often very effective.

古文：昔东瓯王敬鬼，寿百六十岁。
现代文：过去东瓯王敬鬼，活了一百六十岁。
English: In the past, the king of the Eastern Song Dynasty worshipped ghosts and lived to be 160 years old.

古文：後世怠慢，故衰秏 。
现代文：后世人怠慢鬼神，所以很早就衰老了。 
English: Later, the world neglected ghosts and gods, so they aged very early.

古文：乃令越巫立越祝祠，安台无坛，亦祠天神上帝百鬼，而以鸡卜。
现代文：于是命越巫建立越祝庙，其中有台而无坛，同样是祭祀天帝百鬼，而用鸡卜吉凶。
English: As a result, she ordered Yue Wu to build Yue Zhu Temple, which had a platform but no altar, and also worshiped the Heavenly Emperor and hundreds of ghosts, and used the chicken to pray for good luck.

古文：上信之，越祠鸡卜始用。
现代文：皇上极为信任，越祭和鸡卜从此开始在天下行用。
English: The emperor had great trust in them, and the Yue Festival and the chicken and egg festival have been held all over the world ever since.

古文：公孙卿曰： 仙人可见，而上往常遽，以故不见。
现代文：公孙卿说： 仙人本来可以看到，而皇上来往急剧，匆匆忙忙，因此才看不到。
English: Gongsun Ching said: The hermit could have been seen, but the emperor's movements were so rapid and hurried that he could not be seen.

古文：今陛下可为观，如缑城，置脯枣，神人宜可致也。
现代文：如今陛下可以建一座楼观，象缑氏城楼一样，上面摆上肉脯、枣，神人理应可以请到。
English: Now His Majesty can build a tower, like the castle tower of the Xiong family, with meat and dates on top, and the godman should be able to visit.

古文：且仙人好楼居。 
现代文：而且仙人喜欢住在楼上。 
English: And the hermit likes to live upstairs.

古文：於是上令长安则作蜚廉桂观，甘泉则作益延寿观，使卿持节设具而候神人。
现代文：于是皇上命在长安建造蜚廉观和桂观，在甘泉则建造益寿观和延寿观，使公孙卿持天子符节在上面设立供具，迎候神人。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the construction of the Jia Lian Guan and the Gui Guan in Chang'an, and the Yixing Guan and the Yanzhong Guan in Ganquan, so that Gongsunqing would hold the heavenly son festival and set up offerings on top to welcome the godman.

古文：乃作通天茎台，置祠具其下，将招来仙神人之属。
现代文：又作通天台，台下设置祭祀礼具，用来招致仙人、神人之属。
English: In addition, a roof was made, and ceremonial objects were set up under the stage, which were used to invite the spirits of immortals and gods.

古文：於是甘泉更置前殿，始广诸宫室。
现代文：于是在甘泉宫又建了前殿，开始扩建各处的宫殿。
English: As a result, the front hall was built in Ganquan Palace, and the expansion of palaces began.

古文：夏，有芝生殿房内中。
现代文：夏季，在甘泉殿的房中长出了灵芝草。
English: In the summer, Ganoderma lucidum sprouted in the room of Ganquan Palace.

古文：天子为塞河，兴通天台，若见有光云，乃下诏： 甘泉房中生芝九茎，赦天下，毋有复作。 
现代文：天子以为是由于亲自塞决河，建通天台，产生的祥瑞感应，就下诏书说： 甘泉宫房中长出一株九茎灵芝，为此天下大赦，免去复作者刑。 
English: The heavenly son thought that it was because of the auspicious response generated by personally damming the river and building the roof, so he issued an edict saying: A nine-stemmed reishi mushroom grows in the palace of Ganquan. For this, the world is pardoned and the punishment of the copyist is exempted.

古文：其明年，伐朝鲜。
现代文：第二年，出兵伐朝鲜。
English: The following year, he sent troops to invade North Korea.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏季，天旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：公孙卿曰： 黄帝时封则天旱，乾封三年。 
现代文：公孙卿说： 黄帝时只要封祭就会出现天旱，是由于天要把封土晒干，一直晒上三年。 
English: Gongsun Ching said: In the time of the Yellow Emperor, as long as there was a festival, there would be a drought. This was due to the fact that the heavens wanted to dry the soil for the festival, and it remained dry for three years.

古文：上乃下诏曰： 天旱，意乾封乎？
现代文：皇上就下诏书说： 天旱，推想是天要晒干封土吗？
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: The drought is caused by the weather, so it must be the weather that is drying the fief land?

古文：其令天下尊祠灵星焉。 
现代文：兹令天下人都尊奉、祭祀灵星。 
English: All the people of the world are hereby commanded to venerate and worship the spirit star.

古文：其明年，上郊雍，通回中道，巡之。
现代文：明年，皇上在雍城郊祭，打通了去回中的道路，到那里去巡察。
English: Next year, the emperor will hold a festival on the outskirts of Yongcheng, open the road to Huizhong, and go there to inspect.

古文：春，至鸣泽，从西河归。
现代文：春季，到达鸣泽，从西河县而归。
English: In the spring, I arrived in Narusawa after returning from Saikawa Prefecture.

古文：其明年冬，上巡南郡，至江陵而东。
现代文：第二年冬天，皇上巡察南郡，到江陵后向东行。
English: In the winter of the following year, the emperor inspected Nan County, and after arriving in Gangneung, he headed east.

古文：登礼灊之天柱山，号曰南岳。
现代文：登上灊县境内的天柱山并且行了祭礼，此山号为南岳。
English: They climbed Tianzhu Mountain in Handan County and held a festival. The mountain's name is Nangue.

古文：浮江，自寻阳出枞阳，过彭蠡，礼其名山川。
现代文：然后乘船沿江而下，自寻阳起程，出枞阳，经过彭蠡湖，沿途祭奠了名山大河。
English: Then, they went down the river by boat, starting from Xuchangyang, going out of Fenyang, passing through Pengye Lake, and along the way they paid tribute to the famous mountain river.

古文：北至琅邪，并海上。
现代文：再向北行到琅邪，是循海路而上。
English: To travel further north to Xujiahui, take the sea route.

古文：四月中，至奉高脩封焉。
现代文：四月中旬，到奉高县修整了泰山上的封土。
English: In mid-April, they repaired the fenced land on Mount Tai in Fenggao County.

古文：初，天子封泰山，泰山东北阯古时有明堂处，处险不敞。
现代文：起初，天子封泰山，在泰山的东北方向有一处古时候的明堂旧址，周围地势险而且不宽敞。
English: At the beginning, Mount Tai was under the protection of Heaven. In the northeast direction of Mount Tai, there was an old site of the Ming Hall in ancient times. The surrounding terrain was dangerous and not spacious.

古文：上欲治明堂奉高旁，未晓其制度。
现代文：皇上想在奉高邑旁另建一座明堂，而不知道该建成什么样子。
English: The emperor wanted to build another Myeongdong next to Bonggao-eup, but he did not know what it should look like.

古文：济南人公带上黄帝时明堂图。
现代文：济南人公王带献上一幅黄帝时的明堂图。
English: The Prince of Jinan presented a map of the Ming Dynasty with the Yellow Emperor.

古文：明堂图中有一殿，四面无壁，以茅盖，通水，圜宫垣为衤复道，上有楼，从西南入，命曰昆仑，天子从之入，以拜祠上帝焉。
现代文：与水相通，水环绕宫垣一周。又建有复道。殿上有楼，从西南方的复道进入大殿，称为昆仑道。天了从这里入殿，就可拜祀天帝了。
English: It is connected to the water, and the water encircles the palace walls. There is also a multi-lane road. There is an upper floor in the hall, and a multi-lane road from the southwest enters the main hall, known as the Kunlun Road. Once you enter the hall from here, you can worship the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：於是上令奉高作明堂汶上，如带图。
现代文：于是皇上命奉高邑在汶水旁建造明堂，形制与公王带的明堂图相同。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Gao Yu to build a Ming Hall next to the Wenshui River, the shape of which was the same as that of the Ming Hall in the Prince's Belt.

古文：及五年脩封，则祠太一、五帝於明堂上坐，令高皇帝祠坐对之。祠后土於下房，以二十太牢。
现代文：到元封五年重到此处修整封土的时候，就在明堂的上层祭祀太一和五帝，命高皇帝庙的神坐与它们相对，在明堂下层祭奠后土，用牢牛共二十头。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the emperors came to this place to repair the soil, the upper layer of the Ming Hall was dedicated to the Taichi and the Five Emperors, and the gods of the Emperor's Temple sat opposite them. In the lower layer of the Ming Hall, there were a total of twenty cows.

古文：天子从昆仑道入，始拜明堂如郊礼。
现代文：天子从昆仑道进入，开始祭拜明堂，礼数与郊祭相同。
English: Tianzi entered from Kunlun Road and began to worship the Ming Hall, with the same number of rites as the suburban festival.

古文：礼毕，燎堂下。
现代文：行礼毕，在堂下点燃燎火。
English: After the ceremony, a bonfire is lit under the main hall.

古文：而上又上泰山，自有祕祠其巅。
现代文：皇上又登上泰山，在山顶又有一番外人不知详情的秘祭。
English: The emperor climbed Mount Tai again, and at the top of the mountain there was another secret festival that outsiders did not know the details of.

古文：而泰山下祠五帝，各如其方，黄帝并赤帝，而有司侍祠焉。
现代文：而在泰山下祭祀五帝，则各按其方位进行，只有黄帝与赤帝合并祭祀，祭时都有主管官员辅助侍候。
English: In contrast, the five emperors were sacrificed at the foot of Mount Tai, each according to his or her position. Only the Yellow Emperor and the Red Emperor were sacrificed together, and the officials in charge assisted the attendants during the festival.

古文：山上举火，下悉应之。
现代文：山上燃起燎火，山下各处都举火相应。
English: Bonfires were lit on the mountain, and fires were lit everywhere down the mountain.

古文：其後二岁，十一月甲子朔旦冬至，推历者以本统。天子亲至泰山，以十一月甲子朔旦冬至日祠上帝明堂，毋脩封禅。
现代文：二年以后，适逢十一月甲子日朔旦为冬至节，推算历法的人认为这一天是进入统岁的开始，所以天子亲自到泰山下，在这一天于明堂祭祀天帝，但不行封禅礼。
English: Two years later, the winter solstice festival fell on the first day of the second month of November, and people who calculated the calendar believed that this day was the beginning of the unified year. Therefore, the heavenly son himself went to Mount Tai and sacrificed the heavenly emperor in the Ming Hall on this day, but he could not perform the sealing ceremony.

古文：其赞飨曰： 天增授皇帝太元神策，周而复始。
现代文：其赞礼官念道： 天增授给皇帝太初历法，周而复始，无有穷尽。
English: The praising official recited: The Tian Zeng gave the Emperor the Taizhong calendar, which goes around and around, without end.

古文：皇帝敬拜太一。 
现代文：皇帝敬拜太一。 
English: The emperor paid homage to Taichi.

古文：东至海上，考入海及方士求神者，莫验，然益遣，冀遇之。
现代文：然后东行到海上，询问访求神仙的方士和其他下海人，没见有何效验，然而非但不停止这些活动，反正增派人员，希望能侥悻与神仙相遇。
English: Then he went to the sea to the east and asked the magicians and other seafarers who were visiting the immortals. He did not see any effect. However, instead of stopping these activities, he increased the number of personnel, hoping to meet the immortals.

古文：十一月乙酉，柏梁灾。
现代文：十一月乙酉日，柏梁殿发生火灾。
English: In November, a fire broke out in the Bai Liang Palace.

古文：十二月甲午朔，上亲禅高里，祠后土。
现代文：十二月甲午初一日，皇上亲自到高里禅祭，祭祀后土。
English: On the first day of the first day of the first month of December, the emperor himself went to the Goli Zen Festival to offer sacrifices.

古文：临勃海，将以望祀蓬莱之属，冀至殊廷焉。
现代文：来到勃海岸边，将要望祭蓬莱山的仙人之属，希望自己终有一日到达仙人之庭。
English: When you come to the coast of Baekje, you will wish to belong to the immortals of Mt. Penglai, and hope that you will eventually reach the garden of immortals.

古文：上还，以柏梁灾故，朝受计甘泉。
现代文：皇上回到京都，由于柏梁殿发生火灾的缘故，改在甘泉宫朝见天下郡国的上计吏，并接受他们献上的计薄。
English: When the Emperor returned to Kyoto, due to the fire that occurred in the Palace of the Oak Leaves, he changed his schedule to meet with the county councillors at Gansu Palace in the morning, and accepted the cheque presented by them.

古文：公孙卿曰： 黄帝就青灵台，十二日烧，黄帝乃治明廷。
现代文：公孙卿说： 黄帝建造成青灵台，才十二天被火烧掉，黄帝就又建造了明廷。
English: Gongsunqing said: The Yellow Emperor built Qinglingdai, which was destroyed by fire after only twelve days. The Yellow Emperor then built Mingting.

古文：明廷，甘泉也。 
现代文：明廷，就是甘泉宫。 
English: Mingting, that is, Ganquan Palace.

古文：方士多言古帝王有都甘泉者。
现代文：方士大都说古时帝王有建都于甘泉的。
English: Most scholars say that in ancient times, emperors built their capitals in Ganquan.

古文：其後天子又朝诸侯甘泉，甘泉作诸侯邸。
现代文：后来天子又在甘泉宫朝见诸侯，在甘泉建造诸侯的邸舍。
English: Later, the heavenly son visited the princes in the morning at Gansu Palace, and built the princes' residences in Gansu.

古文：勇之乃曰： 越俗有火灾，复起屋必以大，用胜服之。 
现代文：勇之就说： 越地的风俗是发生火灾后，重新盖屋必须比原来的更大，用以镇服、胜过原屋，以避灾害。 
English: Yuanzhi said, "The custom in Yuezi is that after a fire, the newly built house must be bigger than the original one, so that it can be used as a shelter and outdo the original house to avoid disasters.

古文：於是作建章宫，度为千门万户。
现代文：于是建造了建章宫，计有千门万户。
English: As a result, the Jianzhang Palace was built, with a total of thousands of households.

古文：前殿度高未央。
现代文：前殿比未央宫还高。
English: The front hall is even taller than Miang Palace.

古文：其东则凤阙，高二十馀丈。
现代文：建章宫以东建有凤阙，二十多丈高。
English: To the east of the Jianzhang Palace, there is a phoenix tower, more than 20 meters high.

古文：其西则唐中，数十里虎圈。
现代文：以西则是唐中，方圆数十里辟为虎圈。
English: To the west is the middle of the Tang Dynasty, with a radius of dozens of miles forming a tiger's den.

古文：其北治大池，渐台高二十馀丈，命曰太液池，中有蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲、壶梁，象海中神山龟鱼之属。
现代文：以北开凿了一个很大的池沼，其中有渐台，高二十多丈，名为太液池，池中有蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲、壶梁诸岛屿，以象征海中的神山龟鱼之类。
English: To the north, a large pond was excavated, including a crescent-shaped platform, more than twenty meters high, called Taiyue Pond. There are Penglai, Hojo, Zhouzhou, and Huliang islands in the pond, symbolizing the Kamiyama turtle fish in the sea.

古文：其南有玉堂、璧门、大鸟之属。
现代文：以南有玉堂、璧门等建筑以及大鸟的塑象。
English: To the south, there are buildings such as the Gyokudo and the Bi Gate, as well as a large bird sculpture.

古文：乃立神明台、井幹楼，度五十丈，辇道相属焉。
现代文：又建造了神明台、井干楼，高度为五十丈，以辇道彼此相连属。
English: They also built the Shinmyo-dai and the Igan-ro, which are 50 meters high and are connected to each other by a causeway.

古文：夏，汉改历，以正月为岁首，而色上黄，官名更印章以五字，为太初元年。
现代文：夏季，汉朝改变历法，以每年正月为一年的开头，五色中崇尚黄色，刻着官名的印章改为五字，以当年为太初元年。
English: In the summer, the Han Dynasty changed the calendar, with the first month of each year as the beginning of the year, yellow was advocated among the five colors, and the seal engraved with the official name was changed to five characters, with that year as the first year of the year.

古文：是岁，西伐大宛。
现代文：这一年，向西出兵讨伐大宛。
English: That year, troops were dispatched to the west to fight against Dawan.

古文：蝗大起。
现代文：遍地生蝗虫。
English: Locusts are everywhere.

古文：丁夫人、雒阳虞初等以方祠诅匈奴、大宛焉。
现代文：丁夫人，雒阳虞初等人以方术祷祀诅咒匈奴和大宛。
English: Mrs. Ding, Shanyang Yuchu and others used prayer to curse the Xiongnu and Dawan.

古文：其明年，有司上言雍五畤无牢熟具，芬芳不备。
现代文：明年，主管机构说雍城五畤没有煮熟的牲牢等祭品，祭祀时芬芳之味不能齐备。
English: Next year, the competent authority said that the Yongcheng Five Dynasties did not have cooked animal dungeons and other offerings, and the fragrant taste could not be fully prepared during the sacrifice.

古文：乃令祠官进畤犊牢具，色食所胜，而以木禺马代驹焉。
现代文：于是命祠官给五畤煮牺牲的器具，颜色按照五行相胜配置。牲礼中的驹以木偶马代替。
English: As a result, the mortuary officials ordered the sacrificial utensils to be boiled and arranged according to the five elements. The yakitori in the sacrificial rite was replaced by a puppet horse.

古文：独五月尝驹，行亲郊用驹。
现代文：只有五月的尝驹祭以及天子亲行郊祀礼时才用真正的驹作牺牲。
English: It is only at the May Feast of the Dragonfly and when the heavenly son performs the suburb ritual that the real dragonflies are sacrificed.

古文：及诸名山川用驹者，悉以木禺马代。
现代文：所有名山川的祭祀有用驹的，也一律改用木偶马代替。
English: All the famous mountains and rivers of the sacrificial rites are useful, and they are all replaced by puppet horses.

古文：行过，乃用驹。
现代文：天子出行路过该地祭祀时用真驹。
English: When the heavenly son travels and passes by the place of worship, he uses a real scepter.

古文：他礼如故。
现代文：其他礼数不变。
English: The number of other courtesies remains unchanged.

古文：其明年，东巡海上，考神仙之属，未有验者。
现代文：第二年，东行巡察来到海上，考察方士们关于神仙之类的话，没有一件有效验的。
English: In the second year, the eastbound inspection came to the sea, and the words of the inspectors about the immortals and the like were not valid.

古文：方士有言 黄帝时为五城十二楼，以候神人於执期，命曰迎年 。
现代文：方士有的说： 黄帝时候建造了五个城邑十二座楼，在执期迎接、等候神人，称为迎年。 
English: Some sages said: In the time of the Yellow Emperor, twelve towers were built in five cities to welcome and wait for the godman during the festival, which is called the New Year's Eve.

古文：上许作之如方，命曰明年。
现代文：皇上准许按他所说的办，称为明年。
English: The Emperor gave permission to do as he had said, and to call it next year.

古文：上亲礼祠上帝焉。
现代文：皇上亲自行礼祭祀天帝。
English: The emperor himself performed the rite of sacrifice to the heavenly emperor.

古文：公带曰： 黄帝时虽封泰山，然风后、封巨、岐伯令黄帝封东泰山，禅凡山，合符，然后不死焉。 
现代文：公王带说： 黄帝时虽然封祭泰山，然而风后、封巨、岐伯等都是要黄帝封东泰山，禅祭凡山，与符瑞相合，然后才能长生不死。 
English: The prince said, "Though the Yellow Emperor sealed Mount Tai, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager all wanted the Yellow Emperor to seal the East Mount Tai, and the Zen Festival to seal the South Mount Tai, in order to be able to live forever.

古文：天子既令设祠具，至东泰山，泰山卑小，不称其声，乃令祠官礼之，而不封禅焉。
现代文：天子既已命人准备祭祀用具，来到东泰山后，见东泰山很矮小，与名声不相称，就命祠官行礼，不在这里封禅了。
English: Since the heavenly son had already ordered people to prepare sacrificial equipment, after coming to the East Taishan, he saw that the East Taishan was very small and was not commensurate with its reputation, so he ordered the priest to make a salute, and he did not seal Zen here.

古文：其後令带奉祠候神物。
现代文：以后命公王带在这里主持祭祀以迎候神人。
English: In the future, the crown prince will preside over a ritual here to welcome the godman.

古文：夏，遂还泰山，脩五年之礼如前，而加以禅祠石闾。
现代文：夏季，回到泰山，象从前一样举行五年一次的修封礼，另外增加了禅祭石闾的礼仪。
English: In the summer, when they return to Mount Tai, they hold the five-yearly crowning ceremony as in the past, and in addition, they have added the ceremony of the zen ritual stone cockerel.

古文：石闾者，在泰山下阯南方，方士多言此仙人之闾也，故上亲禅焉。
现代文：石闾，在泰山以南的山脚下，方士有许多人说这是仙人居住的门闾，所以皇上亲加禅祭。
English: Shiqiao, at the foot of the mountain south of Mount Tai, is said by many Chinese to be a gateway inhabited by immortals, which is why the emperor personally initiated the Zen festival.

古文：其後五年，复至泰山脩封。还过祭恆山。
现代文：此后过了五年，重到泰山修封，回来时路过并祭祀了恒山。
English: Five years later, he returned to Mount Tai to repair the seal, and when he came back, he passed by and worshiped Mount Hengshan.

古文：今天子所兴祠，太一、后土，三年亲郊祠，建汉家封禅，五年一脩封。薄忌太一及三一、冥羊、马行、赤星，五，宽舒之祠官以岁时致礼。凡六祠，皆太祝领之。
现代文：本朝天子新制定的祭礼，有太一、后土，每隔三年天子亲自郊祭一次；建立了汉家的封禅制度，每隔五年修封一次，薄忌的太一祠以及三一、冥羊、马行、赤星、五床山祀，由宽舒等祀官按岁时祭祀，凡六庙，都由太祝官管领。
English: This morning, Tenshi newly established the festivals, including Taichi and Houtu, and every three years, Tenshi himself held a suburb festival; established the Han family's Hozan system, and every five years, the Hozan system, and every five years, established the Hozan system, and every five years, established the Han family's Hozan system, and established the Han family's Hozan system, and every five years, established the Hozan system.

古文：至如八神诸神，明年、凡山他名祠，行过则祠，行去则已。
现代文：至于此外的八神等神，明年、凡山等名祠，天子出行时路过则祭，离去则停祭。
English: As for the other eight gods and other deities, next year, famous shrines such as Van Mountain, when the heavenly son travels, he will pass through the festival, and when he leaves, the festival will stop.

古文：方士所兴祠，各自主，其人终则已，祠官不主。
现代文：由方士建议所立的祠庙，各由建议者主持，此人死，祠庙废，与祠官无涉。
English: The ancestral temples proposed by the founders are presided over by the proponents. If the person dies, the ancestral temple is abandoned, and there is no involvement of the ancestral officials.

古文：他祠皆如其故。
现代文：其他祭祀凡是沿袭下来的都一仍旧贯。
English: All other rites and rituals that have been handed down are still practiced.

古文：今上封禅，其後十二岁而还，遍於五岳、四渎矣。
现代文：今天子自封禅始，其后十二年间，五岳、四渎遍祭一周。
English: To this day, since the beginning of Zen, and for the next twelve years, the Five Mountains and Four Deities Festival has been held once a week.

古文：而方士之候祠神人，入海求蓬莱，终无有验。
现代文：而迎候并祭祀神人的方士，以及人海寻求蓬莱山的，终究没有效验。
English: However, there was no effect for the priests who greeted and offered sacrifices to the godman, or for the sea of people seeking Mount Penglai.

古文：而公孙卿之候神者，犹以大人之迹为解，无有效。
现代文：如公孙卿那样的候神者，还能以神人的脚印来辩解，再无其他效验。
English: A god-fearing person like Gongsunqing can also use the footprints of godmen to justify himself. There is no other test.

古文：天子益怠厌方士之怪迂语矣，然羁縻不绝，冀遇其真。
现代文：因而天子越来越对方士怪诞、迂阔的话感到厌倦懈怠了，然而仍对他们加以笼络，无使断绝往来，希望能遇到真有方术的人。
English: As a result, Tianzi became more and more tired of the grotesque and extravagant words of his opponents. However, he still courted them and could not break off contacts, hoping to meet someone who really had a way.

古文：自此之後，方士言神祠者弥众，然其效可睹矣。
现代文：从此以后，方士上言神仙和祭祀事的更多，然而其效验自可想见了。
English: Since then, there have been more claims of deities and sacrifices made by the magicians, but their effectiveness has been limited.

古文：太史公曰：余从巡祭天地诸神名山川而封禅焉。
现代文：太史公说：我随从天子巡视并祭祀天地诸神和名山川还参预了封禅礼。
English: Taishi said, "I have followed the Son of Heaven to inspect and worship the gods of heaven and earth and the famous mountains and rivers, and I have also participated in the pre-feudal Zen ceremony.

古文：入寿宫侍祠神语，究观方士祠官之意，於是退而论次自古以来用事於鬼神者，具见其表里。
现代文：进入寿宫祭祀并等候神君说话，考究并观察了祠官们的心态、意向，于是退而论述自古以来祭祀鬼神的事，全部涉及了事情的表里内外。
English: Entering the mortuary temple to offer sacrifices and waiting for the god to speak, he studied and observed the mindset and intentions of the shrine officials, then retreated to discuss the matter of sacrificing ghosts and gods since ancient times, all of which involved the inside and outside of the matter.

古文：後有君子，得以览焉。
现代文：使后世君子，得以观览。
English: so that future generations of gentlemen will be able to watch.

古文：若至俎豆珪币之详，献酬之礼，则有司存。
现代文：至于祭祀中关于俎豆珪币等情形，献酬的礼仪程式，则主管机构保存有详细档案，本文就不复赘及了。
English: As for the circumstances of the pea and coin offering in the ritual, and the etiquette of the offering, the competent authority has kept detailed files, and this article is out of scope.

