古文：孙子曰：兵者，国之大事，死生之地，存亡之道，不可不察也。
现代文：孙子说：战争，是国家的大事，它关系到军民的生死，国家的存亡，不能不慎重考察研究。
English: Sun Tzu said: War is a major national affair. It is related to the life and death of soldiers and civilians, and the survival of the country. It is necessary to carefully examine and study it.

古文：故经之以五事，校之以计，而索其情：一曰道，二曰天，三曰地，四曰将、五曰法。
现代文：因此要从五个方面进行认真的比较分析，从而了解敌我双方的真实情况，来预测战争胜负的可能性：一是道，二是天时，三是战场的地利，四是将领，五是严谨的军法。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to carry out a serious comparative analysis from five aspects, so as to understand the true situation of both the enemy and ourselves, and to predict the possibility of winning or losing the war: one is the way, the second is the time of day, the third is the location of the battlefield, the fourth is the generals, and the fifth is the strict military law.

古文：道者，令民与上同意也，故可与之死，可与之生，而不畏危也。
现代文：所谓 道 ，就是从政治上使民众与君主的思想一致，这样，民众就能与君主同生死共患难，不会惧怕危险。
English: The so-called way is to politically align the people with the thoughts of the monarch, so that the people can live and die with the monarch and will not be afraid of danger.

古文：天者，阴阳、寒暑、时制也。
现代文：所谓 天 ，就是气候的阴晴、寒暑、四季节令的更替规律等。
English: The so-called sky is the climate's cloudy and sunny, cold and hot, the four-season order's replacement rule, etc.

古文：地者，远近、险易、广狭、死生也。
现代文：所谓 地 ，就是指行程的远近、地势的险峻或平易，战地的广狭，是死地还是生地等。
English: The so-called "ground" refers to the distance of the journey, the steepness or flatness of the terrain, the vastness of the battlefield, whether it is a dead zone or a breeding ground, etc.

古文：将者，智、信、仁、勇、严也。
现代文：所谓 将 ，就是看将领们是否具备智、信、仁、勇、严五种素质。
English: The so-called will is to see whether the generals have the five qualities of wisdom, faith, benevolence, courage and strictness.

古文：法者，曲制、官道、主用也。
现代文：所谓 法 ，就是指部队的组织编制制度，军官的职责范围规定，军需物资的供应管理制度等。
English: The so-called law refers to the organization and establishment system of the army, the scope of duties of officers, the supply management system of military supplies and so on.

古文：凡此五者，将莫不闻，知之者胜，不知者不胜。
现代文：对这五个方面，将领都不能不做深刻了解。了解就能胜利，否则就不能取胜。
English: For these five aspects, generals must have a deep understanding. Understanding can win, otherwise it cannot win.

古文：故校之以计，而索其情，曰：主孰有道？
现代文：因而，还要通过比较双方的具体条件来探究战争胜负的情形。这些条件是：双方哪一方的君主是有道明君，能得民心？
English: Therefore, it is necessary to compare the specific conditions of the two sides to explore the situation of the victory and defeat of the war. These conditions are: Which side's monarch is Dao Mingjun and can win the people's hearts?

古文：将孰有能？
现代文：哪一方的将领更有才能？
English: Which side's generals are more talented?

古文：天地孰得？
现代文：哪一方天时、地利占得多？
English: Which side has more time and space?

古文：法令孰行？
现代文：哪一方军中法令执行得好？
English: Which side is better at enforcing laws in the military?

古文：兵众孰强？
现代文：哪一方兵力更强大？
English: Which side is more powerful?

古文：士卒孰练？
现代文：哪一方士兵更训练有素？
English: Which side's soldiers are better trained?

古文：赏罚孰明？
现代文：哪一方奖赏与惩罚更严明？
English: Which side rewards and punishes more severely?

古文：吾以此知胜负矣。
现代文：我凭着对这些情况的分析比较，就可知道战争胜负的情形了。
English: Based on the analysis and comparison of these situations, I can know the situation of winning or losing the war.

古文：将听吾计，用之必胜，留之；将不听吾计，用之必败，去之。
现代文：如果君上听从我的计策，用计作战定能胜利，我就留下；如果君上不听我的计策行事，用计必然失败，我就离开。
English: If you listen to my strategy and fight with a strategy that is sure to win, I will stay; if you do not listen to my strategy and act with a strategy that is sure to fail, I will leave.

古文：计利以听，乃为之势，以佐其外。
现代文：好的计策被采纳，还要营造有利的态势，以辅助对外的行动。
English: Good strategies have been adopted, and it is necessary to create a favorable situation to support external actions.

古文：势者，因利而制权也。兵者，诡道也。
现代文：所谓态势，就是根据如何有利于自己的原则，灵活机动运用兵力，掌握作战的主动权。
English: The so-called "posture" means flexibly and flexibly using military forces and seizing the initiative in combat in accordance with the principle of how to benefit oneself.

古文：故能而示之不能，用而示之不用，近而示之远，远而示之近；利而诱之，乱而取之，实而备之，强而避之，怒而挠之，卑而骄之，逸而劳之，亲而离之。攻其无备，出其不意。
现代文：用兵之道在于千变万化、出其不意。所以，明明能征善战，却向敌人装作软弱无能；本来准备用兵，却伪装不准备打仗；要攻打近处的目标，却给敌人造成攻击远处的假象；要攻打远处的目标，相反却伪装作要在近处攻击；敌人贪心就用小利来引诱他上当；敌人混乱就乘机攻取他；敌人实力雄厚就要谨慎防备；敌人强大就暂时避开其锋芒；敌人容易冲动发怒，就设法挑逗他，使其失去理智；对于小心谨慎的敌人，要千方百计骄纵他，使其丧失警惕；敌人安逸就设法骚扰他，搞得他疲劳不堪；内部团结的敌人，要设法离间他，让他分裂。
English: The way to use troops is to be ever-changing and surprise them. Therefore, the enemy is deceived by the enemy's greed by using small profits; the enemy takes advantage of the enemy's confusion to attack him; the enemy's strength should be carefully guarded; the enemy is strong and temporarily avoids its sharpness; the enemy is easy to get angry and angry, and tries to tease him and make him lose his mind; for the cautious enemy,

古文：此兵家之胜，不可先传也。
现代文：在敌人没有准备时，突然发起进攻，在敌人意料不到的情况下采取行动。
English: launch a surprise attack when the enemy is unprepared, and take action when the enemy is unexpected.

古文：夫未战而庙算胜者，得算多也；未战而庙算不胜者，得算少也。
现代文：这些都是军事家克敌制胜的诀窍，对于作战计划，阴谋诡计不能还没做就到处传。
English: These are the tricks of a military man to defeat the enemy and win. As for the battle plan, the intrigues cannot be spread everywhere before they are done.

古文：多算胜，少算不胜，而况于无算乎？
现代文：具备致胜条件多就胜，少就不能取胜，何况一个致胜条件也不具备的呢？
English: If you have more victory conditions, you will win, if you have less, you will not win, and what's more, if you don't have any victory conditions?

古文：吾以此观之，胜负见矣。
现代文：我们根据这些来分析战争双方，那么胜负结果就可预见了。
English: If we analyze both sides of the war on the basis of these, then the outcome can be predicted.

