古文：开平二年正月癸酉，帝御金祥殿，受宰臣文武百官及诸籓屏陪臣称贺，诸道贡举一百五十七人，见于崇元门。
现代文：开平二年二月，因去年冬天少雪，到今年春深农事才开始，很久没有及时下雨，又担心有灾祸疾病，太祖深切痛念百姓，于是令百官为百姓的愿望祭祀天地鬼神，掩埋暴露在外的尸骨，令附近各藩镇按古法禳灾求福，十来天后才下雨。
English: In February of the second year of Kaiping, due to the lack of snow last winter, the agricultural work did not begin until the late spring of this year. It had not rained in time for a long time, and they were worried about a disaster disease. The great-grandfather deeply missed the people, so he ordered hundreds of officials to sacrifice the gods and spirits of heaven and earth for the people's wishes, buried the exposed bones, and ordered the nearby towns to pray for good luck according to the ancient method. It did not rain for more than ten days.

古文：辛未，契丹主安巴坚遣使贡良马。
现代文：太祖因为上党未收复，便商议前往抚慰巡察，顺道到西都洛阳参加郊外祭天的典礼。
English: The great-great-grandfather did not recover because of the uprising, so he discussed going to the pacification inspection and went to the western capital Luoyang to participate in the suburban festival ceremony.

古文：三月壬申，帝亲统六军，巡幸泽、潞。是日寅时，车驾西幸，宰臣并要切司局皆扈从，晚次中牟。
现代文：于是下令通告朝廷内外，定于三月一日离开东京，以宰臣韩建临时主持建昌宫事务，兵部侍郎姚洎为卤簿使，开封尹、博王朱友文为东京留守。三月一日，太祖亲自率领六军，巡视泽州、潞州。这天清晨四时，御驾往西出发，宰臣和主要机关部门的官员随行，晚上到达中牟。
English: Therefore, he ordered to inform both inside and outside the Imperial Court that he was scheduled to leave Tokyo on March 1, with the aide-de-camp Han Jian temporarily presiding over the affairs of the Jianchang Palace, the aide-de-camp of the Military Department Yao Jun acting as the secretary, and Kaifeng Yin and Bo Wang Zhu Youwen staying in Tokyo. On March 1, Taizu personally led the Six Armies to inspect Zeshu and Zhangzhou. At four o'clock in the morning on this day, he set off to the west, accompanied by the aide-de-camp and officials from major departments, and arrived in Zhongmou in the evening.

古文：下诏，以去年六月后，昭义行营阵殁都将吏卒死于王事，追念忠赤，乃录其名氏，各下本军，令给养妻孥，三年内官给粮赐。
现代文：颁发诏令：在去年六月以后，为王室而阵亡的昭义行营都将官兵，为追念他们的忠心赤胆，现在登录他们的姓名，下达给生前所属昭义军各部，令供养他们的妻子儿女，三年内由官府供给粮食赏赐。
English: Issued a decree: after last June, all officers and soldiers who died in the battle for the royal family will be honored. In order to remember their loyalty, their names are now registered, and they are ordered to provide for their wives and children, and the government will provide food rewards within three years.

古文：丁丑，幸泽州。辛巳，以同州节度使刘知俊为潞州行营招讨使。
现代文：十日，以同州节度使刘知俊为潞州行营招讨使。
English: On the 10th, Liu Zhijun sent an envoy to Bozhou on the occasion of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：壬午，宴扈驾群臣并劳知俊，赐以金带、战袍、宝剑、茶药。
现代文：十一日，宴请随驾群臣并慰劳刘知俊，赐给金带、战袍、宝剑、茶叶、药品。
English: On the 11th day, he held a banquet for the attendants and consoled Liu Zhijun, giving him a gold belt, a battle robe, a sword, tea, and medicine.

古文：甲申，登东北隅逍遥楼搜阅骑乘，旌甲满野。
现代文：十三日，登上泽州东北角逍遥楼检阅车骑战马，旌旗兵甲漫山遍野。
English: On the 13th, they boarded the Shouyao Building in the northeast corner of Zezhou to inspect the car and ride the warhorse, and the flag soldiers and armor were everywhere.

古文：丙申，招讨使刘知俊上章请车驾还东京，盖小郡湫隘，非久驻跸之所。
现代文：二十五日，招讨使刘知俊呈上奏章请太祖驾返东京，因为小州郡潮湿偏僻，不是圣驾久留之地。
English: On the 25th, Liu Zhijun was summoned to present a petition to the emperor, asking him to return to Tokyo, because Xiaozhou County was wet and remote, and was not a place for the emperor to stay for a long time.

古文：丙寅，车驾幸繁台观稼。
现代文：太祖看到奏章，准允他的请求。
English: The great-grandfather saw the score and granted his request.

古文：鄢陵居人程震以两歧麦穗并画图来进。
现代文：四月六日，太祖离开泽州。七日，驾临怀州，宴请宰臣文武百官。十一日，到郑州。十二日，回到东京。
English: On the 6th of April, Taizu left Zezhou. On the 7th, he drove to Huaizhou and held a banquet for a hundred officials. On the 11th, he went to Zhengzhou. On the 12th, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：甲寅，淮寇侵轶潭、岳边境，欲援朗州，以战舰百余艘扬帆西上，泊鼎口。
现代文：二十五日，太祖到繁台视察庄稼。十四日，淮南吴贼侵扰潭州、岳州边界，想援助朗州，率领战舰一百多艘扬帆西上，停泊在鼎口。
English: On the 25th, Taizu went to Fangtai to inspect the crops. On the 14th, the Huainan Wu bandits invaded the borders of Tanzhou and Yuezhou, wanted to help Langzhou, and led more than a hundred warships to sail west and anchor in Dingkou.

古文：湖南马殷遣水军都将黄瑀率楼船遮击之，贼众沿流宵遁，追至鹿角镇。
现代文：湖南马殷派水军都将黄王禹率大船拦击，贼寇们顺水逃走，追到鹿角镇。
English: Hunan Ma Yin sent the navy to intercept the large ship led by Huang Wang Yu, and the thieves fled along the water and chased them to Lugu Town.

古文：诏以户部尚书致仕裴迪复为右仆射。
现代文：诏令以户部尚书辞官退休的裴迪又出任右仆射。
English: Pedi, who had retired from his post as a magistrate of the Household Division, was appointed to the post of right-hand man.

古文：迪敏事慎言，达吏治，明筹算。
现代文：裴迪敏于事而慎于言，懂政务管理，明筹划计算。
English: Pei Di is sensitive to things and prudent in speech, understands government affairs management, and clearly plans and calculates.

古文：帝初建节旄于夷门，迪一谒见如故知，乃辟为从事。
现代文：太祖在夷门刚做节度使时，裴迪拜谒太祖，一见如故，于是任裴迪为从事。
English: When the great-great-grandfather was just a ceremonial envoy in Yimen, Pei Dui's visit to the great-great-grandfather, at first glance, was as expected, so he was engaged in Pei Di.

古文：自是之后，历三十年，委四镇租赋、兵籍、帑廪、官吏、狱讼、赏罚、经费、运漕，事无巨细，皆得专之。
现代文：从此以后历三十年，将四镇的租赋、兵籍、仓库、官吏、狱讼、赏罚、经费、漕运交付给裴迪，事无巨细，全由他专管。
English: For the next thirty years, the four towns' lease, military registration, warehouses, officials, prison proceedings, rewards and punishments, funds, and transportation were handed over to Pedi. He was in charge of everything, no matter how big or small.

古文：帝每出师，即知军州事，逮于二纪，不出梁之闉闳，甚有裨赞之道。
现代文：太祖每次出征，即令裴迪留下主持军政事务，近二十多年，裴迪足不出梁城城门，很有辅佐赞助的方法才能。
English: Every time the great-grandfather went to war, he asked Paddy to stay behind to preside over military and political affairs. For nearly twenty years, Paddy did not set foot outside the gates of Liangcheng, and he was very capable of supporting and sponsoring methods.

古文：禅代之岁，命为太常卿，属年已耆耄，视听昏塞，不任朝谒。遂请老，许之。
现代文：太祖受禅代帝那年，任裴迪为太卿，这时他年已七、八十岁，耳昏眼花，不能胜任朝见拜谒，于是请求退休，太祖准允他。
English: In the year of the Emperor's enthronement, Paddy was appointed to the position of Taikyo. At that time, he was in his 70s or 80s, deaf and blind, and unable to perform the ceremonial courtesies, so he asked to retire, and the Emperor granted his request.

古文：期月复起，师长庶官焉。
现代文：二个月后又起用裴迪，作为众官之长。
English: Two months later he brought in Pardee as chief of staff.

古文：五月丁丑，王师围潞州将及二年，李进通危在旦夕，不俟攻击，当自降。
现代文：五月七日，朝廷军队包围潞州将近二年，李进通危在旦夕，不待攻击，就会自动投降。
English: On May 7, the imperial army besieged Luzhou for nearly two years. Li Jintong was in imminent danger and would surrender without waiting for an attack.

古文：太原李存勖以厚币诱结北蕃诸部，并其境内丁壮，悉驱南征决战，以救上党之急。
现代文：这时太原李存勖用重金诱惑联合北方蕃族各部，将北方契丹境内丁壮全驱使南征决战，以救上党之急。
English: At this time, the Taiyuan Emperor Li Cunxu used heavy money to tempt and unite the northern Yao tribes, and drove Ding Zhuangquan from the northern Qidan territory to the decisive battle in the south to save the party's urgent need.

古文：部落帐族，驰马励兵，数路齐进，于铜鞮树寨，旗垒相望。
现代文：蕃族部落，跃马扬刀，几路并进，在铜扎寨，战旗堡垒接连不断。
English: Shan tribes, prancing horses and swords, several roads go side by side, in Tongzazhai, battle flag fortresses continue to rise.

古文：王师败于潞州。
现代文：朝廷军队在潞州战败。
English: The imperial army was defeated in Zhangzhou.

古文：己丑，令下诸州，去年有蝗虫下子处，盖前冬无雪，今春亢阳，致为灾沴，实伤垄亩。
现代文：十九日，诏令各州，去年有蝗虫下子的地方，因为去冬没有下雪，到今春天气又干燥和暖，将招致灾害，伤害禾稻。
English: On the 19th, the prefectural government issued an order to all prefectures, saying that because there was no snow last winter and the weather is dry and warm this spring, the locusts will cause disasters and damage the rice.

古文：丙寅，月犯角宿。帝以其分野在兗州，乃令长吏治戎事，设武备，省狱讼，恤疲病，祈福禳灾，以顺天戒。
现代文：必须预防在今年秋天蝗虫再次毁坏庄稼，蝗虫幼蛹多在荒丘乱丛中，有蝗害的地方的长官必须各自划分地界，精心加以翦除扑灭，以绝祸根。六月十二日，因气候干旱反常，担心政治上有缺失，于是下诏说： 近来百姓违法乱纪，法官又舞文弄墨，审判既不细加甄别考察，州镇又不加以检举监察，民风不善，官司频繁，因为这个原因，招致上天谴责。 
English: It is necessary to prevent locusts from destroying crops again this autumn. Locust larvae are mostly found in desolate hills and tangled bushes. The governors of locust-infested areas must each delineate land boundaries, carefully remove and extinguish them, and eliminate the root of the disaster. On June 12, due to the abnormal dry weather, fearing political shortcomings, the emperor said: Recently, the people have violated laws and regulations, the judges have been playing games, the trials have not been carefully screened and inspected, and the state towns have not been inspected and monitored. The people's morale is not good, and the lawsuits are frequent. For this reason, it has

古文：丙辰，邠、岐来寇，雍西编户困于逃避，且芟害禾稼，结营自固。
现代文：于是判决流放囚徒并儆戒朝廷内外。十七日，州、岐下前来侵犯，雍西的编籍民户苦于逃避之难，又怕残害禾稼，于是各自联合筑营自守。
English: As a result, the court sentenced the prisoners to exile and warned the imperial court inside and outside. On the 17th, the state and Qishan came to invade, and the registered households in Yongxi suffered from the difficulty of escaping, and were afraid of damaging the crops, so they jointly built a camp to defend themselves.

古文：逾月，同州刘知俊领所部兵击退，袭至幕谷，大破之，俘斩千计，收其器甲，宋文通仅以身免。
现代文：一个多月后，同州刘知俊率领部下兵卒击退州、岐下的寇犯，攻袭到幕谷，大破敌军，俘虏斩杀数以千计，缴获他们的武器装备，宋文通只身逃脱。
English: More than a month later, Liu Zhijun of the same prefecture led his subordinate soldiers to repel the bandits of the same prefecture and province, attacked the valley of the curtain, defeated the enemy army, killed thousands of prisoners, seized their weapons and equipment, and Song Wentong escaped alone.

古文：诏曰： 敦尚俭素，抑有前闻，斥去浮华，期臻至理。
现代文：太祖颁发诏令说 ：崇尚俭朴，自古就有所闻，排斥浮华，以期达到大道。
English: The great-great-grandfather issued a decree saying: Advocating frugality, it has been known since ancient times, rejecting pomp, with a view to reaching the main road.

古文：如闻近日贡奉，竞务奢淫，或奇巧荡心，或雕镌溢目，徒殚资用，有费工庸。
现代文：但听说近来的贡奉，竞相追求奢华淫丽，有的奇巧而摇荡人心，有的雕饰而炫耀眼目，徒然损耗资财，浪费人力。
English: But I have heard that the recent tributes are competing in the pursuit of luxury and lasciviousness, some are fanciful and sway people's hearts, some are carved and show off their eyes, wasting resources and wasting manpower.

古文：此后应诸道进献，不得以金宝装饰戈甲剑戟。至于鞍勒，不用涂金及雕刻龙凤。
现代文：以后凡各道进献贡物，不准用金银宝物装饰戈甲剑戟，至于马鞍马勒，不必涂上金箔或者雕龙刻凤。
English: In the future, when tributes are brought in from all directions, it is not allowed to decorate the Goguryeo sword pommel with gold and silver treasures. As for the horse saddle, it does not have to be painted with gold leaf or carved with dragons and phoenixes.

古文：如有此色，所司不得引进。 
现代文：如有此等贡物，有关官员不准接受呈进。 
English: If there is such a tribute, the relevant officials are not allowed to accept it.

古文：邕州奏，镆鎁山僧法通、道璘有道行，冬赐紫衣。是月壬戌，岳州为淮贼所据。帝以此郡五岭、三湘水陆会合之地，委输商贾，靡不由斯，遂令荆湘湖南北举舟师同力致讨。王师既集，淮夷毁壁焚郭而遁。
现代文：二十三日，岳州被淮南吴人占据，太祖认为岳州为五岭、三湘水陆会合之地，货物运输商贾往来，无不经由此地，于是令荆湘湖南湖北出动水军合力征讨。王师汇集，淮南贼人毁坏房屋、焚烧城郭而逃。
English: On the 23rd, Yuezhou was occupied by the Wu people of Huainan. Emperor Taizu believed that Yuezhou was the meeting place of the Wuling River and the three Hunan rivers and the land, and that the goods transporter Jia came and went through this place. Therefore, he ordered the South Hubei and North Hubei to send naval forces to fight together. Wang Shi gathered, and the Huainan thieves destroyed the houses and burned the castle and fled.

古文：癸巳，以禅代已来，思求贤哲，乃下令搜访牢笼之，期以好爵，待以优荣，各随其材，咸使登用。
现代文：秋七月五日，大暴雨，河堤泽地洪水泛滥，大害庄稼，太祖到右天武军河亭视察洪水。到高僧台检阅禁卫六军。二十四日，太祖从受禅称帝以来，思求贤哲，再次下令搜访笼络他们，以好的爵位相期，以特殊的荣誉相待，根据各自的才能，全让得以发挥。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the heavy rainstorm, the flooding of the river dike and the floodplain, and the great damage to the crops, the great-grandfather went to the right heaven military river pavilion to inspect the flood. He went to Gaosangdai to inspect the six armies of the imperial guard. On the 24th day, the great-grandfather, since he was named emperor, thought about the sages and ordered to visit them again. He treated them with a good peerage period and special honor, and allowed them to play according to their respective talents.

古文：宜令所在长吏，切加搜访，每得其人，则疏姓名以闻。
现代文：让贤士所在的地方长官，严密加以搜访，每得到一位贤人哲士，就登记姓名上报。
English: Let the local magistrate where the sages are located, strictly search them, and register and report the names of every sage and philosopher.

古文：如在下位不能自振者，有司荐导之；如任使后显立功劳，别加迁陟。
现代文：如地位卑下不能自显的，有关官员应推荐引导他们；如任用后立有明显的功劳，再另加迁升。
English: If their inferior status cannot be self-evident, the relevant officials should recommend and guide them; if they have obvious merits after appointment, they should be promoted.

古文：敕禁屠宰两月。甲午，以高明门外繁台为讲武台。
现代文：二十五日，以高明门外的繁台作为讲武台。
English: On the 25th, the stage outside the Gaoming Gate was used as a lecture stage.

古文：是台西汉梁孝王之时，尝按歌阅乐于此，当时因名曰吹台。
现代文：繁台，在西汉梁孝王时，曾经在此吟歌赏乐，当时名叫吹台。
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, during the reign of King Liang Xiao, there used to be a place where people sang and enjoyed themselves. At that time, it was called Huidai.

古文：其后有繁氏居于其侧，里人乃以姓呼之，时代绵寝，虽官吏亦从俗焉。
现代文：打那以后有姓繁的人家住在旁边，乡人就以繁姓名台，时代绵延长远，就是官吏也随从乡间的称呼了。
English: Since then, people with traditional surnames have been living nearby, and the villagers have been using traditional names. The era has extended far and wide, and even government officials have followed the village's name.

古文：复改新城县曰新登，长城县曰长兴，乐成曰乐清，避梁讳也。
现代文：太祖经常登临远眺，检阅、训导车骑士卒，宰臣们于是上奏改名为讲武台。八月十二日，诏令凡有暴露野外的尸骨，各派专人掩埋。
English: The great-grandfather often went to the castle to look at it from a distance, to inspect and train the chariot knights, and the vassals changed the name to the military parade ground. On August 12th, the emperor ordered that if there were any bones exposed in the field, each faction would bury them.

古文：甲子夜，东方有大流星，光明烛地，有声如裂帛。
现代文：两浙钱上奏，请重新铸造各州的官印。二十五日夜，东方有大流星，光芒照亮地面，发出撕裂布帛的响声。
English: On the night of the 25th, there was a large meteor in the east. The light illuminated the ground and made the sound of tearing cloth.

古文：唐州上言，白龙见，图形以进。
现代文：广州上奏，有白龙出现，并画出图形献上。
English: At the Guangzhou concert, a white dragon appeared, and a drawing was presented.

古文：九月丙子，太原军出阴地关南牧，寇掠郡县，晋、绛有备。帝虑诸将玩寇，乃下诏亲议巡幸，命有司备行。
现代文：九月八日，太原晋军南出阴地关，侵掠郡县，晋州、绛州虽有准备，但太祖担心各位将领掉以轻心，于是下诏议定亲自出巡，命有关部门做好准备。
English: On September 8th, the Taiyuan Jin Army marched southward from Yinji Pass to invade and plunder counties and counties, Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, although there were preparations, but Taizu was worried that the generals would take it lightly, so he agreed to go on a tour in person and ordered the relevant departments to prepare.

古文：丁丑，翠华西狩，宰臣、翰林学士、崇政院使、金吾仗及诸司要切官皆扈从，余文武百官并在东京。
现代文：九日，御驾西行，宰臣、翰林学士、崇政院使、金吾仗及各机关部门主要官员都随行，其余文武百官都留在东京。
English: On the 9th, he drove to the west, accompanied by the Vice-Minister, Hanlin the scholar, the envoy of the State Council, King Gojong, and the main officials of various departments, while the rest of the civil and military officials remained in Tokyo.

古文：壬午，达洛阳。
现代文：十四日，到洛阳。
English: On the 14th, to Luoyang.

古文：帝御文思殿受朝参，许、汝、孟、怀牧守来朝，泽州刺史刘重霸面陈破敌之策。
现代文：太祖到文思殿接受朝拜，许、汝、孟、怀各州长官前来朝拜，泽州刺史刘重霸面陈破敌之策。
English: The great-grandfather went to the Wensi Palace to receive worship, Xu, Ru, Meng and Huai governors came to worship, and the governor of Zhejiang Province, Liu Chongba, proposed a strategy to defeat the enemy.

古文：癸未，西幸，宿新安。丙戌，至陕州驻跸，蒲、雍、同、华牧守皆进铠甲、骑马、戈戟、食味、方物。幽州都将康君绍等十人自蕃贼寨内来投，又幽州骑将高彦章八十人骑先在并州，乃于晋州军前来降。
现代文：十八日，到陕州驻驾，幽州大将康君绍等十人从蕃贼营寨前来投降，又有幽州骑兵将官高彦章等八十骑先前在并州，后到晋州军前投降。
English: On the 18th, they were stationed in Shaanxi Province, and ten people, including Yuzhou General Kang Junshao, came to surrender from the bandit camp. Another eighty cavalrymen, including Yuzhou Cavalry General Gao Yanzhang, were previously stationed in Bianzhou, and later surrendered to the Jinzhou army.

古文：至是到行在，皆赐分物衣服，放归本道，以示怀服。
现代文：现在来到太祖所在地，太祖都赐给财物衣服，放回本道，以示怀柔。
English: Now that I have come to the location of the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather has given away all his belongings and clothes and returned them to the original way to show his love.

古文：丁亥，至陈州，赐宴扈从官。
现代文：十九日，到达陈州，赐随从官员宴饮。
English: On the 19th, he arrived in Chenzhou and gave a banquet to the officials accompanying him.

古文：戊子，延州贼军寇上平关，又太原军攻平阳，烽火羽书，昼夜继至。
现代文：二十日，延州贼军寇犯上平关，又有晋军攻打平阳，烽火羽书，昼夜不断。
English: On the 20th, the Yanzhou thief army invaded Pinggu, and the Jin army attacked Pingyang, setting fire to feathers, day and night.

古文：丙午，御球场殿，宣夹马都指挥使尹皓、韩瑭以下将士五百人，赐酒食。
现代文：二十一日，六军统军牛存节、黄文靖各领部下将士赶赴太祖所在地。二十六日，晋军步兵、骑兵数万人进攻逼近晋州、绛州，十多天不能攻下，得悉朝廷大军来到，便自己焚烧营寨，到晚上逃走。十月一日，太祖在陕州。
English: On the 26th, tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry of the Jin army attacked and approached Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and they could not be captured for more than ten days. When they learned that the imperial army was coming, they burned the camp and fled in the evening. On October 1, Taizu was in Shaanxi.

古文：庚戌，至西都，御文思殿。
现代文：两浙节度使上奏，在常州东州镇杀死淮南贼寇一万多人，缴获战船一百二十艘。
English: The two Zhejiang festivals played a leading role, killing more than 10,000 Huainan thieves and robbers in Dongzhou Town, Changzhou, and capturing 120 warships.

古文：辛亥，宰臣百僚起居于殿前，遂宣赴内宴，赐方物有差。丁巳，至东都。
现代文：十二日，到西都洛阳，上文思殿。十三日，宰臣百官在殿前侍候起居，于是召往殿内宴饮，按等级赐给地方特产。十九日，回到东京。
English: On the 12th, he went to Luoyang, the western capital, and stayed at the palace. On the 13th, hundreds of vice-ministers waited and lived in front of the palace, so he invited them to a banquet in the palace and gave them local specialties according to their rank. On the 19th, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：己未，大明节，诸道节度刺史各进献鞍马、银器、绫帛以祝寿，宰臣百官设斋相国寺。
现代文：二十一日，大明节，各道节度使刺史各进献鞍马、银器、绫帛为太祖祝寿，宰臣百官在相国寺设斋。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Daying Festival, the leaders of the various sects each presented a pommel horse, silverware, and a scepter to celebrate the great-grandfather's birthday, and hundreds of vice-ministers set up a fast at Shokoku-ji Temple.

古文：己巳，奉迁太庙四室神主赴西京，太常仪仗鼓吹导引斋车，文武百官奉辞于开明门外。
现代文：二十四日，太祖上宣和殿，宴请宰臣文武百官。十一月三日，上宣和殿，宴请宰臣文武百官，因为大驾还京的缘故。开平三年正月二日，奉旨迁移太庙四室神主到西都洛阳，太常仪仗鼓吹在前引导斋车，文武百官在开明门外奉送。
English: On the 24th, the great-grandfather went up to the Xuanhe Hall to hold a banquet for the 100 vice-ministers and officials. On the 3rd of November, he went up to the Xuanhe Hall to hold a banquet for the 100 vice-ministers and officials, because he was returning to Beijing. On the 2nd of January in the 3rd year of the Heian period, he was ordered to relocate the four-chambered temple to the western capital Luoyang. He often preached and led the fasting car in front, and the 100 vice-ministers and officials were sent outside the Kaiming Gate.

古文：甲戌，发东都，百官扈从，次中牟县。
现代文：七日，从东京出发，百官随行，到中牟县。
English: On the 7th, they set off from Tokyo, accompanied by hundreds of officials, and arrived in Nakamura County.

古文：乙亥，次郑州。
现代文：八日，到郑州。
English: On the 8th, to Zhengzhou.

古文：丙子，次汜水县，河南尹张宗奭、河阳节度使张归霸并来朝。
现代文：九日，到汜水县。
English: On the 9th, to Surabaya.

古文：戊寅，次偃师县。
现代文：十日，到偃师县。
English: On the 10th, I arrived in Kaji County.

古文：己卯，备法驾、六军仪仗入西都。
现代文：十一日，用天子车驾六军仪仗迎入西都洛阳。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the six armies marched into Luoyang, the western capital, in a procession.

古文：是日，御文明殿受朝贺。
现代文：当日，太祖上文明殿接受朝贺。
English: On the same day, the Great Ancestor Civilization Hall received morning greetings.

古文：诏曰： 近年以来，风俗未泰，兵革且繁，正月燃灯，废停已久。
现代文：诏令说： 近年以来，风俗未安，战事频繁，正月燃灯之俗，废除停止已久。
English: The edict said: In recent years, customs have not been stable, wars are frequent, and the custom of lighting lanterns in the first month of the year has not been abolished for a long time.

古文：今属创开鸿业，初建洛阳，方在上春，务达阳气，宜以正月十四、十五、十六日夜，开坊市门，一任公私燃灯祈福。 
现代文：今正逢开创大业，初建洛阳，时在孟春，务须宣泄阳气，应于正月十四、十五、十六日夜晚，打开街市门户，听任公家私人燃灯求福。 
English: Now is the time to create a great cause, the beginning of Luoyang, when in Mengchun, it is necessary to vent the yang, should be on the evening of the 14th, 15th and 16th of the first month, open the street market portal, let the public and private burning lights to seek blessings.

古文：庚寅，亲享太庙。
现代文：二十三日，太祖亲自祭享太庙。
English: On the 23rd, the great ancestor personally dedicated and enjoyed the temple.

古文：己丑，复御崇勋殿，宴宰臣文武官四品以上。升宋州为宣武军节镇，仍以亳、辉、颍为属郡。
现代文：应将滑州的酸枣县、长垣县，郑州的中牟县、阳武县，宋州的襄邑县，曹州的戴邑县，许州的扶沟县、鄢陵县，陈州的太康县等九县，都割让隶属开封府，升为京城辖县。 
English: It is necessary to cede nine counties, including Azabu County and Nagagaki County in Luzhou, Zhongmou County and Yangwu County in Zhengzhou, Yangyi County in Songzhou, Daiyi County in Caozhou, Fuguo County and Fuling County in Huzhou, and Taikang County in Chenzhou, all of which are subordinate to Kaifeng Prefecture, and elevate them to counties under the jurisdiction of Beijing.

古文：六月庚戌，同州节度使刘知俊据本郡反，制令削夺刘知俊在身官爵，仍征发诸军，速令进讨。
现代文：六月十六日，同州节度使刘知俊凭据同州反叛，太祖下诏削夺刘知俊现任官职爵位，又征调各路军队，令急速进讨。
English: On June 16th, the festival of the same state caused Liu Zhijun to rebel against the same state. The great-great-grandfather issued an edict to deprive Liu Zhijun of his current official title and rank, and also conscripted various armies to make rapid progress.

古文：如有军前将士，怀忠烈以知机，贼内朋徒，愤胁从而识变，便能枭夷逆竖，擒获凶渠，务立殊功，当行厚赏。
现代文：如果有敌军将士，心怀忠烈而识时务，贼内党徒，不愿胁从而知反正，能斩杀叛贼，擒获元凶，建立大功，就当给予厚赏。
English: If there are soldiers of the enemy army, who are loyal and aware of the current affairs, who are party members within the thieves, who are unwilling to be intimidated and thus know what is right, and can kill the traitors, capture the culprits, and establish great merit, they should be rewarded.

古文：活捉得刘知俊者，赏钱一万贯文，便授忠武军节度使，并赐庄宅各一所；如活捉得刘知浣者，赏钱一千贯文，便与除刺史，有官者超转三阶，无官者特授兵部尚书；如活捉得刘知俊骨肉及近上都将并枭送阙廷者，赏赐有差。
现代文：活捉得刘知俊者，赏钱一万贯文，授予忠武军节度使，并赐给庄园住宅各一所。如活捉得刘知浣者，赏钱一千贯文，授任刺史，有官位的超升三级，无官位者特授予兵部尚书。如活捉得刘知俊的骨肉亲人以及亲信大将或斩首级送京城朝廷的，按等级赏赐。
English: If Liu Zhijun is captured alive, he will be rewarded with a reward of ten thousand crowns, given to the loyal armed forces and given to each of the manor houses. If Liu Zhijun is captured alive, he will be rewarded with a reward of one thousand crowns, given a history, promoted to the third level with an official rank, and those without an official rank will be specially awarded with a military award. If Liu Zhijun's flesh and blood relatives and trusted generals are captured alive, or if they are sent to the imperial court in Beijing at the level of decapitation, they will be rewarded according to their rank.

古文：辛亥，驾至蒲、陕，文武百官于新安县奉迎。
现代文：十七日，太祖到达蒲州、陕州，文武百官到新安县奉迎。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Taizu arrived in Puzhou and Shaanxi, and hundreds of civil and military officials came to Xin'an County to welcome him.

古文：人与转官职，仍勘名衔，分析申奏，当与施行。 是月，知俊奔凤翔，同州平。
现代文：刘知俊的弟弟、直右保胜指挥使刘知浣从洛阳逃到潼关，右龙虎军十将张温以上二十二人在潼关活捉了刘知浣，送到太祖所在地。这月，刘知俊逃往凤翔，同州平定。
English: Liu Zhijun's younger brother, the commander of the Right Wing Defense Force, made Liu Zhijun flee from Luoyang to Shaoguan. Zhang Wen, the 10th commander of the Right Wing Defense Force, captured Liu Zhijun alive in Shaoguan and sent him to Taizu's location. This month, Liu Zhijun fled to Fengxiang and subdued Tongzhou.

古文：七月乙丑，敕行宫将士阵殁者，咸令所在给槥椟，津置归乡里。
现代文：七月二日，诏令行营将士阵亡的，由所在地供给棺材，运回乡里。
English: On July 2nd, the Emperor issued an order that the coffins of the soldiers who died in the battle should be provided from the area and transported back to the countryside.

古文：战卒闻之悉感涕。
现代文：战士们听到后都感激流泪。
English: Hearing this, the soldiers were moved to tears with gratitude.

古文：丙寅，命宰臣杨涉赴西都，以孟秋享太庙。
现代文：三日，命宰臣杨涉赴西都洛阳，在孟秋时节祭享太庙。
English: On the third day, he ordered the vice-minister Yang Watan to go to Luoyang, the western capital, to enjoy the temple during the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：己丑夕，寝殿栋折。诘旦，召近臣诸王视栋折之迹，帝惨然曰： 几与卿等不相见。 
现代文：二十六日晚上，寝殿的栋梁突然折断，到天亮时，太祖召来近臣和各位王看栋梁折断的现场，太祖伤感地说： 差点与你们见不着面了。 
English: On the evening of the 26th, the beams of the main hall suddenly snapped. At dawn, the great-grandfather summoned his close vassals and the kings to see the scene of the broken beams. The great-grandfather said sadly, "I almost didn't get to meet you."

古文：君臣对泣久之。
现代文：君臣相对哭泣了很久。
English: The prince cried for a long time.

古文：遂诏有司释放禁人，从八月朔日后减膳，进素食，禁屠宰，避正殿，修佛事，以禳其咎。
现代文：于是诏令有关部门释放囚禁的犯人，从八月一日起减少膳食，吃素，禁止屠宰牲畜，开正殿，诵念佛经，以禳除灾祸。
English: Therefore, he ordered the relevant departments to release the imprisoned prisoners, reduce the diet, eat vegetarian, prohibit the slaughter of livestock, open the main hall, and recite Buddhist scriptures from August 1 to eliminate the disaster.

