古文：张华晋惠帝许逊陶贞白张祖宅唐仪唐中宗宋青春武胜之李守泰陈仲躬曹王皋渔人
现代文：张华晋惠帝许逊陶贞白张祖宅唐仪唐中宗宋青春武胜之李守泰陈仲躬曹王皋渔人
English: Zhang Hua Jin Hui Emperor Xu Song Tao Zhen Bai Zhang Ancestral House Tang Dynasty Tang Dynasty Song Dynasty Li Shou Tai Chen Zhong Wei Cao Wang Yao Fisherman

古文：张华
现代文：张华
English: Zhang Hua

古文：晋张华，生性聪慧。好观奇异图纬之学，捃拾天下遗逸。
现代文：晋朝人张华，生得聪明慧敏，喜爱读图谶纬书等奇异的书籍，广泛收集天下的遗闻逸事。
English: Zhang Hua, a man of the Jin Dynasty, was born clever and sensitive. He loved to read strange books such as books of maps and maps, and collected a wide range of anecdotes from around the world.

古文：自书契之始，考验神怪，及世间里闾所说，撰《博物志》四百卷，奏武帝。
现代文：从古代文字、书简起，考证神怪以及世间街头巷闾的传说，撰写成《博物志》一书，共一百卷，奏献给武帝。
English: Starting with ancient characters and short stories, he researched and verified the legends of gods and monsters as well as of the world's streets and alleys, and compiled them into a book called "The Natural History," a total of one hundred volumes, dedicated to Emperor Wu.

古文：帝曰：卿才十倍万代，博识无伦。
现代文：武帝说：你的才干超过万代十倍，知识广博没有人能和你相比。
English: Emperor Wu said, "Your talent is more than ten times that of all generations, and no one can compare with your vast knowledge."

古文：记事采言，多所浮妄。
现代文：但是你所记载的事情、采集的传说，多数都根据不足，或者原本就属于虚妄之谈。
English: But the things you have recorded, the legends you have collected, most of them are based on inadequacies, or are originally false.

古文：宜删翦无据，以见成交。
现代文：因此，应该将那些没有根据的删去，才能成为一本书。
English: Therefore, to be a book, you have to cut out things that are not true.

古文：昔仲尼删诗书，不及鬼神幽昧之事，不言怪力乱神。
现代文：昔年，孔仲尼改删定《诗》、《书》，在删定的《诗》、《书》上面，不记载神鬼阴司的事情，也不谈特异的妖力和各种仙神方士。
English: In the past, Kongzhongni changed and deleted "Poems" and "Books." In the deleted "Poems" and "Books," there is no record of the things of the gods and ghosts, nor does it talk about the special magical powers and various fairy gods and magicians.

古文：今见卿此志，惊所未闻，异所未见，将繁于耳目也。
现代文：现在看到你的这部书，记载的都是让人惊异从未听说过的和从未见到过的事情，会杂乱人的耳目的。
English: Looking at your book now, it's full of amazing never-before-heard and never-before-seen things that will boggle the mind.

古文：可更芟截浮疑，分为十卷。
现代文：因此，可以进一步删节去虚浮、尚未有定论的那些记载，经整理可分为十卷，就可以啦。
English: Therefore, it is possible to further abridge those records that are not yet conclusive and can be divided into ten volumes.

古文：即于御前赐青铁砚。此铁是于阗国所献，铸为砚。又赐麟角管，此辽西国所献也。侧理纸万番，南越所献也。
现代文：说完，当即赐给张华青铁砚一方，是用于阗国进献的铁铸的；麟角笔一支，此笔是辽西国进献的；侧理纸万张，此纸是南越国进献的，我们华夏叫它为陟厘。
English: Having said that, Zhang Huaxing was immediately given a piece of iron ingot, which was cast iron for the donation of the State of Min; a rare-angle pen, which was donated by the State of Liaoxi; and thousands of sheets of paper, which was donated by the State of South Vietnam, and we in China call it "Bali."

古文：汉言陟厘，陟厘与侧理相乱。
现代文：陟厘与侧理音相谐。
English: The Giri is in harmony with the Goryo.

古文：南人以海苔为纸，其理纵横斜侧，因为名焉。
现代文：南越人用海中苔类植物造的纸，它的纹理纵横斜侧，因此名叫侧理。
English: Paper made by the South Vietnamese using lichens from the sea. Its texture is oblique, hence its name.

古文：晋惠帝
现代文：晋惠帝
English: Emperor Jin Hui

古文：晋惠帝元康三年，武库火。烧汉高祖斩白蛇剑、孔子履。咸见此剑穿屋飞去，莫知所向。
现代文：但都不知道它飞向哪里去了。
English: But they don't know where it went.

古文：许逊
现代文：许逊
English: Xu Xun

古文：西晋末，有旌阳县令许逊者，得道于豫章西山。
现代文：西晋末年，有个旌阳县令叫许逊，在豫章西山得道。
English: At the end of the Western Jin Dynasty, there was a ruler of Fenyang County named Xu Xun, who became a Taoist in the western mountains of Yuzhang.

古文：江中有蛟蜃为患，旌阳没水，拔剑斩之，后不知所在。
现代文：江中有蛟蜃兴妖作怪为害百姓，许逊潜入江水中，挥剑斩杀了这只蛟蜃，后来就不知道他到哪里去了。
English: There was a dragonfly in the river, and Xu Xun sneaked into the river and killed the dragonfly with his sword. Later, he did not know where he had gone.

古文：顷鱼人网得一石，甚鸣，击之，声闻数十里。
现代文：过了一会儿，渔人打鱼网上来一块石头，很能鸣响，敲击它，发出的鸣声几十里以内都能听得到。
English: After a while, the fisherman hit a stone on the fishing net, which could ring very loudly. When he struck it, the ringing could be heard for dozens of miles.

古文：唐朝赵王为洪州刺史，破之，得剑一双。
现代文：到了唐朝，赵王任洪州刺史时，将这块石头击破，得宝剑一双。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, when Zhao Wang was stabbing the history of Hongzhou, he broke this stone and won a pair of swords.

古文：视其铭，一有许旌阳字，一有万仞字。一有万仞师出焉。
现代文：看看宝剑上的铭文，一只上刻有许旌阳三个字，一只上刻有万仞二字，那只刻有万仞师的剑流传于世。
English: Look at the inscriptions on the swords. One of them is engraved with the three characters "许阳" and the other with the two characters "万." The sword engraved with "万师" has been handed down to the world.

古文：陶贞白
现代文：陶贞白
English: Tao Zhenbai

古文：梁陶贞白所著《太清经》，一名《剑经》。
现代文：梁朝陶贞白著有《太清经》一书，还有一名叫《剑经》。
English: Liang Chao Tao Zhenbai is the author of "Tai Qing Jing" and "Jian Jing."

古文：凡学道术者，皆须有好剑镜随身。
现代文：上面说：凡是学道术的人，都必须备有宝剑、宝镜随身带着。
English: It said: Anyone who studies Taoism must have a sword and a mirror with him.

古文：又说。干将、莫耶剑，皆以铜铸，非铁也。
现代文：又说：干将、莫耶两柄名剑，都是用青铜铸造的，不是用铁铸造的。
English: He also said, "The two famous swords of Ganjun and Moye are both cast in bronze, not cast in iron.

古文：又贞白隐居贝都山中，尝畜二刀，一名善胜，一名宝胜。
现代文：又：陶贞白隐居在贝都山中，曾经有两把刀，一把叫善胜，一把叫宝胜。
English: Also: Tao Zhenbai lived in seclusion in the mountains of Bedu. He once had two swords, one called Zensheng and one called Baosheng.

古文：往往飞去，人望之，如二条青蛇。
现代文：这两把刀，常常能自行飞去，人们看见它们飞走的样子，象是两条青蛇。
English: These two swords are often able to fly away on their own, and people see them fly away, like two green snakes.

古文：本传具载。
现代文：《本传》上有这件事情的记载。
English: There is a record of this event in the "Honshu."

古文：张祖宅
现代文：张祖宅
English: Zhang Zu's house

古文：唐乾封年中，有人于镇州东野外，见二白兔。
现代文：唐高宗乾封年间，有人在镇州东郊的野外，看见两只白兔，想捉到它们。
English: When Emperor Gaozong of Tang was in exile, someone saw two white rabbits out in the open in the eastern suburbs of Zhenzhou and wanted to catch them.

古文：捕之，忽却入地，绝迹不见。
现代文：忽然这两只白兔钻入地里不见了。
English: Suddenly, the two white rabbits disappeared into the ground.

古文：乃于入处掘之，才三尺许，获铜剑一双，古制殊妙。
现代文：这个人在白兔钻入地里的地方挖掘查找，才挖进去三尺多深，得到铜剑一双，是古剑，作工异常特殊精妙。
English: This person was digging and searching in the place where the white rabbit had burrowed into the ground, and only after digging more than three feet deep did he get a pair of bronze swords. They were ancient swords, and the workmanship was exceptionally exquisite.

古文：于时长史张祖宅以闻。
现代文：这件事情，当时是在长史张祖家听到的。
English: This matter was heard in the Changshi Zhangzu family at that time.

古文：唐仪
现代文：唐仪
English: Tang Yi

古文：唐上元年中，令九品以上，佩刀砺等袋。
现代文：唐高中上元年间，朝廷命令九品以上的官员，必须佩带装有刀、砺石等的饰袋。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the imperial court ordered that officials above the ninth grade must wear an ornamental bag containing knives, flints, etc.

古文：取鱼之象，强之兆也。至天后朝乃绝。
现代文：饰袋的作法是先在彩帕上绘出鱼形，再用丝线绣出真色的图案，缝制成袋，象鱼的样子，兆示强盛。
English: The practice of decorating a pouch is to first draw a fish shape on a colored scarf, then embroider a true-colored pattern with silk thread, sew it into a bag, look like a fish, and show strength.

古文：景云之后，又复前饰。
现代文：到武则天临朝执政时，才杜绝佩带这种鱼袋。到睿宗景云年间，又恢复了这种佩饰。
English: It was not until the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian that the wearing of such bags was banned, and it was not until the reign of Emperor Ruizong of Jingyun that the wearing of such bags was resumed.

古文：唐中宗
现代文：唐中宗
English: Tang Zhongzong

古文：唐中宗令扬州造方丈镜。
现代文：唐中宗命令扬州的地方官吏给他制作一面一丈见方的镜子。
English: Tang Zhongzong ordered local officials in Yangzhou to make him a square mirror.

古文：铸铜为桂树，金花银叶。
现代文：在铜镜上铸出桂树，再镶嵌金花银叶。
English: On a bronze mirror, a laurel tree is cast and then inlaid with gold flowers and silver leaves.

古文：帝每常骑马自照，人马并在镜中。
现代文：中宗常常骑马照这面巨镜，人马都可以照进镜子里。
English: Zhongzong often rode on horseback to look into the giant mirror, and both men and horses could look into the mirror.

古文：宋青春
现代文：宋青春
English: Song Xiong

古文：唐开元中，河西骑将宋青春骁果暴戾，为众所推。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，河西骑将宋青春骁悍暴戾，手下的将士非常推崇他。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, the cavalry commander of Hexi, Song Yunxuan, was fierce and violent, and his soldiers highly respected him.

古文：西戎尝岁犯边境，青春每临阵，必独运剑大呼，执馘而旋，未尝中锋镝。
现代文：西戎常年侵犯边镜，宋青春每次与入侵者接战，必定是一个人手挥宝剑大声吼叫着冲入敌军，割下被他杀死的敌军将士的左耳凯旋而归，从未中过敌军的刀、箭。
English: Xi Rong always encroached on the border mirror, Song Rong every time he fought with the invaders, he must be a man waving his sword and shouting loudly to rush into the enemy army, cut off the left ear of the enemy soldier he killed and returned triumphantly, and never hit the enemy's sword and arrow.

古文：西戎惮之，一军咸赖焉。
现代文：西戎军都惧怕他。我方全军也都仰仗着他击退入侵的敌军。
English: The Western troops were afraid of him, and our whole army relied on him to repel the invading enemy troops.

古文：后吐蕃大北，获生口数千。
现代文：后来，前来进犯的吐蕃军被打得大败，俘虏数千人。
English: Later, the invading Tubo army was soundly defeated and thousands of people were taken prisoner.

古文：军帅令译问衣大虫皮者，尔何不能害之。
现代文：我军统帅让翻译问一个穿虎皮衣裳的敌军俘虏：你们为什么不能伤害我方的宋将军呢？
English: The commander of our army asked the interpreter to ask an enemy prisoner dressed in tiger skin: Why can't you hurt our General Song?

古文：答曰：但见青龙突阵而来，兵仞所及，若叩铜铁，以为神助将军也。
现代文：这个俘虏回答说：每次宋将军临阵，都见到一条青龙突阵而来。宋将军手中的那把利剑，所到之处象接撞铜铁似的，我们手中的兵器纷纷被它砍断。我们都认为他是有神力相助的将军啊！
English: The prisoner replied: "Every time General Song enters the battlefield, we see a blue dragon bursting out. The sharp sword in General Song's hand, everywhere it goes, is like a collision of copper and iron, and the weapons in our hands are successively cut off by it. We all think he is a general with divine help!

古文：青春乃知剑之灵。
现代文：到这时，宋青春才知道他用的是把通灵宝剑。
English: By this time, Song Xun only knew that he was using a psychic sword.

古文：青春死后，剑为瓜州刺史季广琛所得。
现代文：宋青春死后，这把宝剑落入瓜州刺史季广琛手中。
English: After the death of Song Yunxuan, this sword fell into the hands of Guazhou assassin Ji Guangyao.

古文：或风雨后，迸光出室，环烛方丈。
现代文：有时在风雨过后，这把宝剑会自行迸发出光芒，照耀周围一丈远的地方。
English: Sometimes, after a storm, this sword will spontaneously emit light, shining far and wide.

古文：哥舒翰镇西凉，知之。求易以他宝，广琛不与。
现代文：哥舒翰镇守西凉时，得知这把宝剑的灵性，曾用别的珍宝向季换取它。
English: When Goshukhan was guarding Xiliang, he learned of the sword's spiritual power and exchanged it for other treasures.

古文：因赠之诗曰：刻舟寻已化，弹铗未酧恩。
现代文：季广琛不换，赠诗说：按照船上的刻印去寻剑，谁知剑已经神化而去；我弹着剑鞘跟你说：这把宝剑还没有酬报我呢！
English: Ji Guangya did not change, the poem said: According to the engraving on the ship, go to find the sword, who knows that the sword has been deified and gone; I play the scabbard and tell you: This sword has not yet rewarded me!

古文：武胜之
现代文：武胜之
English: Take Katsuyuki

古文：唐开元末，太原武胜之为宣州司士，知静江事。
现代文：唐太宗开元末年，太原人武胜之任宣州司士，主持静江的政务。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Taiyuan native Wu Sheng was appointed as the Scribe of Xuanzhou and presided over the government affairs of Jingjiang.

古文：忽于滩中见雷公践微云逐小黄蛇，盘绕滩上。
现代文：一次，他忽然发现江边沙滩上，雷公踏着薄云追逐一条小黄蛇，在沙滩上绕来绕去。
English: Once, he suddenly found Lei Gong walking on a thin cloud chasing a small yellow snake on the beach by the river.

古文：静江夫戏投以石，中蛇，铿然作金声。
现代文：武胜之随意投去一块石头，将蛇击中，发出铿的一声响，象击中金属上似的，雷公随之也飞走了。
English: Wu Shengzhi threw a stone at random, hitting the snake with a bang, as if it had hit the metal, and Lei Gong also flew away.

古文：雷公乃飞去，使人往视，得一铜剑。
现代文：武胜之派人去察看，拾到一把铜剑。
English: Wu Shengzhi sent someone to investigate and found a bronze sword.

古文：上有篆许旌阳斩蛟第三剑云。
现代文：剑上刻有篆文：许旌阳斩蛟第三剑。
English: The sword is engraved with the following inscription: Xu Rongyang beheaded the third sword.

古文：李守泰
现代文：李守泰
English: Li Shou-tai

古文：唐天宝三载五月十五日，扬州进水心镜一面。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝三年五月十五日，扬州进献水心镜一面，长宽各九寸。
English: On the 15th day of the 5th month of the 3rd year of Tang Xuan Zong Tianbao, Yangzhou donated water to the mirror side, with a length and width of nine inches.

古文：纵横九寸，青莹耀日。
现代文：镜面青莹净亮，可耀日月。
English: The mirror surface is crystal clear and bright, and can shine like the sun and the moon.

古文：背有盘龙长三尺四寸五分，势如生动。
现代文：镜的背面盘着一条龙，龙身长三尺四寸五分，形态生动，象真龙一样。
English: On the back of the mirror is a dragon, three feet four and a half inches long, with a vivid shape, just like a real dragon.

古文：玄宗览而异之。
现代文：玄宗观赏后，很是觉得它不同一般的镜子。
English: After viewing the Xuanzong, I really felt that it was different from an ordinary mirror.

古文：进镜官扬州参军李守泰曰：铸镜时，有一老人，自称姓龙名护。
现代文：进献这面镜子的官员扬州参军李守泰向玄宗皇帝说：我们铸造这面镜子时，来了一位老人，自己说姓龙叫龙护。
English: Li Shou-tai, the Yangzhou military officer who presented the mirror, said to Emperor Xuanzong: "When we were casting this mirror, an old man came, who said his surname was Long and his name was Longuo.

古文：须发皓白，眉如丝，垂下至肩，衣白衫。
现代文：这位老人须发花白，眉毛如丝，下垂到肩上，身上穿着白衫。
English: The old man had white hair, silky eyebrows that hung down to his shoulders, and wore a white shirt.

古文：有小童相随，年十岁，衣黑衣。龙护呼为玄冥。
现代文：有一个小童跟随老人左右，年十岁，身穿黑衣，老人叫他 玄冥 。
English: A little boy, about ten years old and dressed in black, was following the old man. The old man called him "Hidden."

古文：以五月朔忽来，神采有异，人莫之识。
现代文：这一老一少是在五月初一这天，突然来到铸镜现场的。他们的神态跟一般人不一样，所有在场的人都不认识他们。
English: On the first day of May, the old and the young suddenly arrived at the mirror casting site. Their appearance was different from that of ordinary people, and all the people present did not know them.

古文：为镜匠吕晖曰，老人家住近，闻少年铸镜，暂来寓目。
现代文：那位老人对镜匠吕晖说他家就住在附近，听说你要铸镜，特来观看。
English: The old man told the mirror maker, Lv Ying, that his family lived nearby, and that he had heard that you wanted to cast a mirror, so he had come to watch.

古文：老人解造真龙，欲为少年制之，颇将惬于帝意。
现代文：又说他知道在镜上铸造真龙的方法，愿意为吕晖制作一条，将特别取得皇上的喜欢。
English: He also said that he knew how to cast a real dragon on a mirror, and was willing to make one for Lv Ying, which would be especially popular with the emperor.

古文：遂令玄冥入炉所，扃闭户牗，不令人到。
现代文：之后，就让随他来的那个叫玄冥的小童，进到安放镜炉的院子里，并让人从外面将门窗关闭好，不让任何人进入院里。
English: After that, he let the boy named Xuan Ming, who came with him, enter the courtyard where the mirror furnace was placed, and had someone close the doors and windows from the outside so that no one could enter the courtyard.

古文：经三日三夜，门左洞开。
现代文：过了三天三夜，左门洞开。
English: After three days and three nights, the left door did not open.

古文：吕晖等二十人于院内搜觅，失龙护及玄冥所在。镜炉前获素书一纸，文字小隶云：镜龙长三尺四寸五分，法三才。象四气，禀五行也。
现代文：吕晖等二十人在院子时搜查寻找，不见这位老人和小童的踪影，只在镜炉前边找到一纸素书，是用小篆写的，内容如下： 镜龙长三尺四寸五分，是效法天、地、人三才，春温、夏热、秋冷、冬寒四气，金、木、水、火、土五行是也。
English: Lv Ying and twenty others searched the yard, but there was no trace of the old man and the child. They only found a plain paper in front of the mirror furnace, written in small characters, with the following content: The length of the mirror dragon is three feet four inches and five minutes. It is modeled after the three elements of heaven, earth, and man. The four elements of spring temperature, summer heat, autumn cold, and winter cold, as well as the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth.

古文：纵横九寸，类九州分野。镜鼻如明月珠焉。
现代文：镜长宽各九寸，是类似天下九州的分野，镜鼻应呈明月珠状。
English: The length and width of the mirror should be nine inches each, which is similar to the field of Kyushu in the world. The nose of the mirror should be pearly.

古文：开元皇帝圣通伸灵，吾遂降祉。
现代文：开元皇帝圣明通达神灵，我才降福。
English: Emperor Kaiyuan sent Saint Ming Tongda to the gods, and I was blessed.

古文：斯镜可以辟邪，鉴万物。秦始皇之镜，无以加焉。
现代文：这面镜子可以避邪祟，鉴万物，秦始皇的镜子比不上它啊！
English: This mirror can ward off evil and judge all things. Qin Shi Huang's mirror is no match for it!

古文：歌曰： 盘龙盘龙，隐于镜中。
现代文：歌曰 盘龙盘龙，隐于镜中。
English: The song says, "Pan dragon, pan dragon, hiding in the mirror."

古文：分野有象，变化无穷。
现代文：分野有象，变化无穷。
English: The fields are similar and the changes are endless.

古文：兴云吐雾，行雨生风。
现代文：兴云吐雾，行雨生风。
English: The clouds spew out mist, the rain falls and the wind blows.

古文：上清仙子，来献圣聪。
现代文：上清仙子，来献圣聪。
English: A fairy from the Upper Qing Dynasty has come to pay tribute to Shentong.

古文：吕晖等遂移镜炉置船中，以五月五日午时，乃于扬子江铸之。
现代文：吕晖等看罢这纸素书后，就将镜炉移到船上，于五月五日午时，在扬子江上铸镜。
English: After reading this plain paper book, Lyu Hao moved the mirror furnace to the ship and cast the mirror on the Yangtze River at noon on May 5.

古文：未铸前，天地清谧。
现代文：未铸镜前，天地清明、安静。
English: In front of the uncast mirror, the world is clear and quiet.

古文：兴造之际，左右江水忽高三十余尺，如雪山浮江，又闻龙吟，如笙簧之声，达于数十里。
现代文：铸镜当中，左右的江水忽然高涨三十多尺，如一座雪山浮在江面上。又听到龙吟声，如笙簧吹鸣，传到几十里地以外。
English: In the middle of the casting mirror, the river water on both sides suddenly rose more than thirty feet high, like a snowy mountain floating on the river surface. And the sound of the dragon singing, like the sound of the reed blowing, was heard dozens of miles away.

古文：稽诸古老，自铸镜以来，未有如斯之异也。
现代文：我们考查了所有的老年人，都说打铸镜以来，从未见过这样怪异的事情啊！
English: We checked all the elderly people and they all said they had never seen anything so strange since the casting of the mirror!

古文：帝诏有司，别掌此镜。
现代文：玄宗皇帝诏令有司吏，将这面水心镜单独置放一个地方。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered a magistrate to put this water-centered mirror in a separate place.

古文：至天宝七载，秦中大旱。
现代文：到了天宝七年，秦中大旱。
English: In the seventh year of Tianbao, there was a severe drought in the middle of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：自三月不雨至六月。
现代文：从三月起没有降雨，一直旱到六月。
English: There has been no rain since March and it remains dry until June.

古文：帝亲幸龙堂祈之，不应。
现代文：玄宗皇帝亲自到龙堂祭祀祈雨，但是老天一点反应也没有。
English: Emperor Xuanzong himself went to the Longtang Hall to offer sacrifices and pray for rain, but there was no response from Heaven.

古文：问昊天观道士叶法善曰：朕敬事神灵，以安百姓。
现代文：玄宗皇帝问昊天观的道士叶法善：皇帝我用尊敬来侍奉神灵，用来安抚百姓。
English: Emperor Xuanzong asked Taoist priest Ye Fa-zen of Hao Tiangu: "Emperor, I use respect to serve the gods and to pacify the people.

古文：今亢阳如此，朕甚忧之。亲临祈祷，不雨何也？
现代文：现在大旱如此，我特别忧虑，亲自到龙堂祈雨，老天为什么还不降雨呢！
English: Now that the drought is so severe, I am particularly worried. I personally went to Longtang to pray for rain. Why doesn't it rain?

古文：卿见真龙否乎？
现代文：道长你见过真龙吗？
English: Chief, have you ever seen a real dragon?

古文：对曰：臣亦曾见真龙，臣闻画龙四肢骨节，一处得以似真龙，即便有感应。
现代文：叶法善道长说：贫道我也曾见过真龙。贫道听说画龙的四肢骨节，有一个地方得似真龙，就会立即有感应。
English: Ye Fa-zen said, "I have also seen a real dragon in the impoverished road. The impoverished road heard that there was a place that looked like a real dragon in the bones of the four limbs of the dragon, and it would immediately respond.

古文：用以祈祷，则雨立降。
现代文：用它来祈祷，雨立即就会降下来的。
English: Use it to pray and rain will fall immediately.

古文：所以未灵验者，或不类真龙耳。
现代文：之所以皇上你亲自祈雨未获灵验，大概是龙堂上画的龙不类似真龙吧。
English: The reason why your personal prayer for rain did not succeed is probably because the dragon painted on the dragon hall is not similar to the real dragon.

古文：帝即诏中使孙知古，引法善于内库遍视之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝听了法善道长这番话，立即诏令中使孙知古，带领法善道长去皇宫内库各处查看。
English: Emperor Xuanzong listened to the words of Fa-Zen Daochang, and immediately sent Sun Zhigu to lead Fa-Zen Daochang to inspect all parts of the palace treasury.

古文：忽见此镜，遂还奏曰：此镜龙真龙也。
现代文：法善道长忽然看见这面水心镜，立即返回奏玄宗皇帝，说：宫内水心镜背面是真龙啊！
English: Dogen suddenly saw the mirror and immediately returned to Emperor Xuanzong, saying, "The back of the mirror is a real dragon!"

古文：帝幸凝阴殿，并召法善祈镜龙。
现代文：玄宗皇帝亲临凝阴殿，同时召见法善道长祈祀镜龙。
English: Emperor Xuanzong personally visited the Jieyin Hall, and at the same time summoned the Fa-Shen Dao-Chang to pray for the Mirror Dragon.

古文：顷刻间，见殿栋有白气两道，下近镜龙。龙鼻亦有白气，上近梁栋。
现代文：顷刻间，只见殿栋间有两道白气降下来，接近镜龙；镜龙的鼻上也升出白气向上接近梁栋。
English: In an instant, I saw two streams of white gas descend between the palace and the building, approaching the mirror dragon; the white gas also rose up from the nose of the mirror dragon, approaching the beam building.

古文：须臾充满殿庭，遍散城内。
现代文：刹那间，云气充满殿庭，遍布京城。
English: In an instant, the cloud filled the palace courtyard and spread throughout the capital.

古文：甘雨大澍，凡七日而止。
现代文：大雨倾盆而降，下了七天才住。
English: It rained heavily, and we stayed there for seven days.

古文：秦中大熟。
现代文：这年秋天，秦中获得特大丰收。
English: In the autumn of this year, a bumper crop of cacti was harvested in Qin.

古文：帝诏集贤待诏吴道子，图写镜龙，以赐法善。
现代文：玄宗皇帝特意诏令集贤殿待诏吴道子，临摹镜龙真图，用以赏赐法善道长。
English: Emperor Xuanzong specifically ordered the collection of virtuous people to be sent to Wu Daozi, and the copy of the mirror dragon to be used to reward the virtuous leader.

古文：陈仲躬
现代文：陈仲躬
English: Chen Zhongwei

古文：唐天宝中，有陈仲躬家居金陵，多金帛。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，有个叫陈仲躬的书生，家住金陵，广富钱财。
English: During the Tang Xuan Zong Heavenly Treasure period, there was a scholar named Chen Zhong Mu, who lived in Jinling and was very rich.

古文：仲躬好学，修词未成，携数千金，于洛阳清化里，假居一宅。
现代文：陈仲躬非常好学，但因为赋诗、写文章一时没有成就，便带着几千金，来到东都洛阳清化里，租一所房屋住下。
English: Chen Zhong Mu was a very good student, but because of his lack of achievement in writing poems and articles, he came to the eastern capital Luoyang Qinghua with thousands of gold and rented a house to live in.

古文：其井甚大，常溺人，仲躬亦知之。以靡有家室，无所惧。
现代文：这所房屋庭院中有一口井，很大，经常淹死人。陈仲躬知道这件事情，自恃没有家室住在这里，无所惧怕。
English: There is a large well in the courtyard of this house, which often drowns people. Chen Zhongwu knows this and is not afraid, saying that he has no family living here.

古文：仲躬常习学不出。
现代文：陈仲躬住进这座院落后，总是关在屋中学习，足不出户。
English: Chen Zhongwim, who lives in this backward courtyard, is always locked in the house to study and does not leave the house.

古文：月余日，有邻家取水女可十数岁，怪每日来于井上，则逾时不去，忽坠井而死。
现代文：邻家有一个女孩，约十几岁的样子，每天都来到院中井边来提水。这天又来提水，站在井边过了很常时间也不离去，忽然坠入井中淹死了。
English: A neighbor had a teenage girl who came to the well in the hospital every day to fetch water. On this day, she came again to fetch water. After standing by the well for a long time, she did not leave, and suddenly fell into the well and drowned.

古文：井水深，经宿，方索得尸。
现代文：井水很深，隔了一宿，才将尸体打捞上来。
English: The well water was very deep, and it took an entire night for the bodies to be recovered.

古文：仲躬异之。
现代文：对女孩落井淹死，陈仲躬觉得有些可疑。
English: Chen Zhongwu felt a little suspicious about the girl falling into the well and drowning.

古文：闲日，窥于井上，忽见水中一女子。其形状少丽，依时样妆饰。以目仲躬，凝睇之际，以红袂半掩其面微笑，妖冶之姿，出于世表。
现代文：一天间时，他来到井边，探头向井下窥望，忽然看见水中出现一个女子，容貌端丽可爱，按当时人的样子妆饰，并用眼睛看陈仲躬，凝视之际，用红袖半掩脸面向他脉脉含情地微笑。妖媚妖冶，超出一般的女人。
English: One day, he came to the edge of the well, probed the well and peered down. Suddenly, he saw a woman appear in the water. She was beautiful and lovely, dressed up according to the way people looked at that time. He looked at Chen Zhongwu with his eyes, and when he gazed, he half-covered his face with a red sleeve and smiled affectionately at his veins. Enchanting, beyond the average woman.

古文：仲躬神魂恍惚，若不支持。
现代文：陈仲躬看得心动神迷，魂移魄惑，似乎都按捺不住了。
English: Chen Zhongwu was so captivating and mesmerizing that I couldn't stop watching.

古文：乃叹曰：斯为溺人之由也。
现代文：不由得叹息地说：怪不得呢，这就是女孩落入井中淹死的缘由吗！
English: Can't help but sigh and say: no wonder, is this the reason why the girl fell into the well and drowned!

古文：遂不顾而退。
现代文：于是不再看井中的妖媚女子，转身回到屋里。
English: So he stopped looking at the enchanting woman in the well, turned around and went back inside.

古文：后数月炎旱，此井水不减。
现代文：过了几个月，天炎热大旱，但是院中这口井里的水，一点也不见减少。
English: After a few months, the weather was hot and dry, but the water in this well in the hospital did not decrease at all.

古文：忽一日水竭。
现代文：忽然有一天井水突然干涸。
English: Suddenly, one day, the well water suddenly dried up.

古文：清旦，有人叩门云：敬元颖请谒。
现代文：一清早，有人敲门说：敬元颖请求拜见相公。
English: Early in the morning, someone knocked on the door and said, "Dear Gen Ying, I'd like to see you."

古文：仲躬命入，乃井中所见者。
现代文：陈仲躬让来人进屋一看，乃是那天在井中见到的那个妖丽女子。
English: When Chen Zhongwim let people into the house, they saw that it was the beautiful woman they had seen in the well that day.

古文：衣绯绿之衣，其装饰鈆粉，悉时制耳。
现代文：身穿红衣绿裳，面涂脂粉丹红，跟洛阳城中的女人一样。
English: Dressed in red and green, her face painted pink, she looks like a woman from the city of Luoyang.

古文：仲躬与坐，讯曰：卿何以杀人？
现代文：陈仲躬让这位女子坐下，询问道：你为什么要诱杀人呢？
English: Chen Zhongwu sat the woman down and asked, "Why are you trying to lure someone to commit murder?

古文：元颖曰：妾非杀人者，此井有毒龙。
现代文：敬元颖回答说：我不是杀人的人。这口井中住有一条毒龙。
English: Kei Gen Ying replied, "I am not a murderer. There is a poisonous dragon living in this well."

古文：自汉朝绛侯居于兹，遂穿此井。洛城内有五毒龙，斯其一也。
现代文：自汉朝绛侯住在这里，掘成这口井，这条毒龙就住在井中。洛阳城中有五条毒龙，它是其中的一条。
English: The dragon has lived in the well since the Han Dynasty, and it is one of the five poisonous dragons in Luoyang City.

古文：缘与太一左右侍龙相得，每为蒙蔽。
现代文：因为它同太一神左右的侍龙处得很好，因此每每被它所蒙蔽。
English: Because it gets along well with the attendant dragon around the god, it is often deceived by it.

古文：天命追征，多托故不赴集。
现代文：上天征召它，多数时候找个因由不去赴会。
English: It is summoned by heaven, and most of the time it finds a reason not to go to the meeting.

古文：好食人血，自汉以来，杀三千七百人矣，而水不耗涸。
现代文：这条毒龙喜爱喝人血。自汉朝以来，它已经吸食了三千七百多人的血啊！而且井里的水从来没有干涸的时候。
English: This poisonous dragon likes to drink human blood. Since the Han Dynasty, it has sucked the blood of more than 3,700 people! And the water in the well has never dried up.

古文：某乃国初方坠于井，遂为龙所驱使。
现代文：我是国朝初年坠入井中的，为这条毒龙所驱使。
English: I fell into a well in the first year of the Qing Dynasty, driven by this poisonous dragon.

古文：为妖惑以诱人，用供龙所食。
现代文：为它引诱人坠入井中，供它吸食。
English: It entices people to fall into the well for it to suck.

古文：甚于辛苦，情所非愿。
现代文：很是辛苦，而且也不是我情愿这样干的。
English: It was very hard, and I didn't want to do it.

古文：昨为太一使者交替，天下龙神尺须集驾。
现代文：昨天，是太一神使者交接班的日子，天下龙神都得集驾到太一神那里。
English: Yesterday was the day when the messenger of the god Taichi took over, and all the dragon gods in the world had to gather at Taichi's place.

古文：昨夜子时，已朝太一矣。
现代文：昨天夜里子时，各位龙神已经朝拜太一了。
English: Yesterday evening, when the sun was setting, everyone had already worshipped the Dragon God.

古文：兼为河南旱，勘责三数日方回。
现代文：但是，河南大旱，太一神让群龙考察三五天才放它们回来。
English: However, due to the severe drought in Henan Province, it took three to five days for the dragons to be released.

古文：今井内已无水，君子诚能命匠淘之，则获脱斯难矣。
现代文：现在井内已经没有水啦。如果你能诚心让工匠下去淘井，就可以让我摆脱这条毒龙给我的苦难啊！
English: Now there is no water in the well. If you can sincerely let the craftsman go to the well, you can let me get rid of the suffering caused by this poisonous dragon!

古文：若然，愿终君子一生奉养。
现代文：果然如此，我愿终生侍奉公子。
English: As it turned out, I am willing to serve my son for the rest of my life.

古文：世间之事无不致。
现代文：世间上的事情没有办不到的啊！
English: Nothing in this world is impossible!

古文：言讫，便失所在。
现代文：说罢，便不见了。
English: Say it and it's gone.

古文：仲躬当时即命匠，命一亲信，与匠同入井。嘱曰：但见异物即收。
现代文：陈仲躬当时就让一工匠下井去淘，并派一名亲信仆人一块儿下到井底，嘱咐说：到井底后，见到特殊的物件就将它取上来。
English: At that time, Chen Zhongwu had a craftsman go down to the mine and send a trusted servant to go down to the bottom of the well with him, instructing him: "When you get to the bottom of the well, if you see a special object, pick it up."

古文：至底无别物，唯获古铜镜一枚，阔七寸七分。
现代文：这位仆人随工匠下到井底后，没有见到其它东西，只拣得一面古铜镜，宽七寸七分。
English: The servant followed the artisan down to the bottom of the well, and when he came up he found nothing but a bronze mirror, seven inches and seven minutes wide.

古文：仲躬令洗净，贮匣内。
现代文：陈仲躬让仆人将古铜镜用水洗净，放在匣子里，焚香敬奉它。
English: Chen Zhongwen asked the servant to wash the bronze mirror with water, put it in a box, and burn incense to worship it.

古文：焚香以奉之，斯所谓敬元颖也。
现代文：这面古铜镜就是敬元颖啊！当夜一更后，敬元颖果然从门外走进屋来。
English: This bronze mirror is Kei Motoyoshi! That night, after a while, Kei Motoyoshi walked into the room from outside the door.

古文：一更后，元颖忽自门而入，直造烛前设拜。谓仲躬曰：谢生成之恩，照浊泥之下。
现代文：一直走到香烛前下拜，对陈仲躬说：感谢你搭救我的大恩，使我脱离了在井下照着污泥的苦差使。
English: He went all the way to the incense candle, bowed down, and said to Chen Zhongyu: "Thank you for rescuing me from the drudgery of shining sludge down the well.

古文：某昔本师旷所铸十二镜之第七者也。
现代文：我原本是昔年师旷所铸的十二面铜镜中的第七面。
English: I was originally the seventh face of the twelve-faced bronze mirror cast by my former teacher.

古文：其铸时，皆以日月为大小之差。
现代文：师旷铸造我们时，都以日月为大小之差。
English: When Shi Mei cast us, we were all the size of the sun and the moon.

古文：元颖则七月七日午时铸者也。
现代文：元颖是七月七日午时铸造的，因此宽为七寸七分。
English: The original Yingying was cast at noon on July 7th, so it is seven inches and seven minutes wide.

古文：贞观中，为许敬宗婢兰苕所坠。
现代文：贞观年间，是许敬宗的婢女兰苕将我坠入井中。
English: During the Zhenguan years, it was Xu Jingzong's maid Lan Lan who threw me into the well.

古文：以此井水深，兼毒龙气所苦，人入者闷绝，故不可取，遂为毒龙所役。
现代文：因为这井的水特别深，又有毒龙吐出的毒气，下到井底的人都被闷死，因此没人将我捞取上来，就为毒龙所使役。
English: Because the water of this well is particularly deep, and the poisonous gas exhaled by the poisonous dragon, people who go down to the bottom of the well are suffocated, so no one will fish me out, and I will be used by the poisonous dragon.

古文：幸遇君子正直者，乃获重见人间耳，然明晨内，望君子移出此宅。
现代文：幸亏遇到你这样正直的人，才得以重见人间啊！然而，明晨以内，望搬出这所房子。
English: It's thanks to honest people like you that I've been able to see the world again! However, I hope to move out of this house by tomorrow morning.

古文：仲躬曰：某已用钱僦居，今移出，何以取措足之所。
现代文：陈仲躬说：我已用钱将这所宅院租赁下来了。现在马上要搬出去住，我一时上哪筹措到足够的租金呢？
English: Chen Zhongwu said, "I have already used money to lease this house. Now I am about to move out, where can I get enough rent?

古文：元颖曰：但请君子饰装，一无忧也。
现代文：敬元颖说：现在就请你整装，什么忧虑也不要有。
English: Kei Gen Ying said, "Please get everything ready now, and don't worry about anything."

古文：将辞去，仲躬复留之。问曰：汝安得有红绿脂粉状乎？
现代文：说着就要告辞。陈仲躬又将敬元颖留住，问：你怎么能打扮成现在这种样子的呀？
English: As he was about to say goodbye, Chen Zhongwu held onto Kei Yuanying and asked, "How can you dress up like this?"

古文：对曰：某变化无常，非可具述。
现代文：敬元颖说：我变化无常，不是一一可以讲述出来的啊！
English: Jing Yuanying said: I'm fickle, I can't tell you everything!

古文：言讫，即无所见。
现代文：说完，立时不见了。
English: After saying this, he immediately disappeared.

古文：明旦，忽有牙人叩户，兼领宅主来谒仲躬，便请移居，并夫役并足。
现代文：第二天早晨，忽然有一个买卖的中间人来叫门，领来一位房主来拜见陈仲躬，并请他立即搬家。
English: The next morning, a sales intermediary suddenly called at the door and brought a homeowner to meet Chen Zhongmu and asked him to move immediately.

古文：未到斋时，前至立德坊一宅中。
现代文：外面车马夫役都准备好了，装上一应家俱用品后，未到正午就来到立德坊的一所宅院中。
English: The carriage drivers were all ready outside, and after loading up with furniture supplies, they came to a courtyard in Lidefang before noon.

古文：其大小价数，一如清化者。
现代文：这所宅院，大小和租金跟清化里那所宅院一样。
English: The size and rent of this house are the same as the house in Qinghua.

古文：其牙人云：价值契本，一无遗缺。并交割讫。
现代文：领陈仲躬来的中间人说：租金、房契都不缺少，并已交割完毕。
English: The middleman who brought Chen Zhongyi said: The rent and the house deed are not missing, and the transaction has been completed.

古文：后三日，其清化宅井，无故自崩。兼延及堂隅东厢，一时陷地。
现代文：过了三天，陈仲躬原来住的清化里那所宅院的水井，无缘无故地自行崩塌，牵延到东侧的厢房，一时间地都陷下去了。
English: Three days later, the well in the courtyard of the house in Qinghua, where Chen Zhongyi used to live, collapsed on its own for no reason. It extended to the guest house on the east side, and it all caved in at once.

古文：仲躬后文战累胜，为大官。
现代文：这以后，陈仲躬赋诗、写文章，屡屡扬名，并作了高官。
English: After this, Chen Zhongwu composed poems and wrote articles, repeatedly became famous, and became a high-ranking official.

古文：有所要事，未尝不如移宅之效也。
现代文：不论有什么重要的事情，都象当年搬家移居一样有人出来帮助。
English: No matter what's important, someone is always there to help, just like when we moved house.

古文：其镜背有二十八字，皆科斗书。
现代文：陈仲躬从井中得到的这面古铜镜，它的背面有二十八个字，都是蝌蚪文。
English: This bronze mirror, which Chen Zhongwei obtained from a well, has 28 characters on the back, all of which are cursive.

古文：以今文推而写之曰：维晋新公二年七月七日午时，于首阳山前白龙潭铸成此镜。
现代文：用现代文翻译过来，大意是：维晋新公二年七月七日午时，于首阳山白龙潭铸成此镜。
English: Translated into modern language, the meaning is: On the afternoon of July 7th, the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Jin, this mirror was cast in the White Dragon Pool of Shouyang Mountain.

古文：千年在世。
现代文：这面古铜镜已经在人世间有一千年啦。
English: This bronze mirror has been around for a thousand years.

古文：于背上环书，一字管天文列宿。依方列之，则左有日而右有月。龟龙虎雀，并如其位。
现代文：它背上的环书文字，一个字分管一个天文列宿，按照方位排列：左有日右有月，龟、龙、虎、雀，并列其位。
English: The ring script on its back, one character in charge of one astronomical station, is arranged according to the direction: the left has the sun, the right has the moon, the turtle, the dragon, the tiger, and the sparrow, side by side.

古文：于鼻四旁题云，夷则之镜。
现代文：在镜鼻四周题有四字：夷则之镜。
English: Around the nose of the mirror there are four words: "mirror of the Emishi."

古文：曹王皋
现代文：大意是：平坦均匀的镜子。
English: To wit: a flat, uniform mirror.

古文：唐嗣曹王皋有巧思，精于器用。
现代文：曹王皋唐朝曹王李皋有巧妙的构想，精通各种器具古玩。
English: Cao Wangyu of the Tang Dynasty, Cao Wang Lijun, had ingenious ideas and was well versed in all kinds of antique tools.

古文：为荆州节度使，有羁旅士人怀二羯鼓棬，欲求通谒。
现代文：李皋任荆州节度使时，有位暂居在这里的读书人，带着两付制造羯鼓用的棬，请求通报求见李皋。
English: When Li Qian was appointed as the Jingzhou Festival envoy, a reader who temporarily lived here, with two sets of cymbals for making cymbals and drums, requested to see Li Qian.

古文：先启于宾府，宾府观者咸讶议曰：岂足尚耶？
现代文：这位读书人将两付棬先打开给李皋的幕僚们看。这些人看了后故作惊讶地说：这种平常的棬，还用给曹王看啊？
English: The reader opened the two-pronged pestle to Li Yao's staff, who looked at it and said with surprise: "This ordinary pestle is also used to show Cao Wang?

古文：对曰：但启之，尚书当解矣。
现代文：读书人说：但请通报，节度使看了它们一定会识别出来的。
English: The reader said, "But please let me know, the festival will definitely recognize them."

古文：及见，皋捧而叹曰：不意今日获逄至宝。
现代文：待到通报后，曹王李皋见到了这两付棬，用手捧着赞叹地说：没想到今天还能遇到这么珍贵的宝物啊！
English: After being notified, Cao Wang Lijun saw the two sets of ingots, held them in his hands and said with admiration: I didn't expect to encounter such a precious treasure today!

古文：指其钢匀之状，宾佐唯唯，或腹非之。
现代文：指着两付棬说，你们看看，这钢性，这均匀劲儿。
English: Pointing to the two-pronged pliers, he said, "Look at this steel, this even strength.

古文：皋曰：诸公心未信乎？
现代文：这是用钢铁精制而成的啊！
English: It's made of refined steel!

古文：命取食拌，自选其极平正者。令置棬于拌心，以油注棬中，棬满而油无涓滴渗漏。
现代文：在座的众幕僚表面上唯口称是，心中都暗自说：什么精钢细做李皋看出幕僚心中所想，说：你们心中不一定相信这是难得的宝物吧，请取来食柈一用。食柈取来后，李皋亲自挑选出特别平整的食柈，将两付鼓棬打开重叠置放在食柈上面，让人将食油顷入棬中，直到注满为止。
English: On the surface, all the staff members present were just saying yes, but in their hearts they were all secretly saying to themselves: What kind of fine steel does Li Qian see in the minds of the staff members, saying: You may not necessarily believe in your hearts that this is a rare treasure, please take it and use it. After taking the bowl, Li Qian personally selected a particularly flat bowl, opened and overlapped the two sets of drums and placed them on top of the bowl, and let people pour the cooking oil into the bowl until it was full.

古文：皋曰：此必开元天宝中供御棬，不然无以至此。
现代文：油一点也不渗漏出来。李皋说：这两付棬一定是开元、天宝年间，向朝廷进贡的御棬。不然，没有这么制作精细的棬啊。
English: The oil does not seep out at all. Li Yan said: These two yakitori must be the imperial yakitori that paid tribute to the imperial court in the Kaiyuan and Tianbao years. Otherwise, there is no such finely made yakitori.

古文：问其所自，士人曰：某先人在黔中，得于高力士之家。
现代文：问献棬的读书人：你这两付棬是从哪儿得到的。读书人回答道：我的先人在黔中，从当年玄宗皇帝的宫内总管高力士大人家得到它们的。
English: The reader asked the donator, "Where did you get these two yakitori?" The reader replied, "My ancestors got them in the yakitori restaurant from the family of Emperor Xuanzong's chief steward, Gao Lixi."

古文：众方深伏。
现代文：众位幕僚们才深深拜服。
English: The members of the staff were deeply impressed.

古文：宾府又潜问士人，宜偿几何？
现代文：事后，幕僚们又暗中问这位读书人：你估计，曹王应偿给你多少钱！
English: After the event, the aides secretly asked the reader: How much do you think Cao Wang should pay you?

古文：士人曰：不过三万。
现代文：读书人说：也就三万吧。
English: The reader said, "Let's make it thirty thousand."

古文：及遗金帛器皿，其直果称是焉。
现代文：待到曹王李皋赠送给这位读书人金帛器皿等物后，这些幕僚好信计算一下：这些东西的价值果然就在三万左右。
English: After Cao Wang Lijun presented the reader with gold-plated utensils and other items, these staff members kindly calculated: the value of these things is indeed around thirty thousand.

古文：渔人
现代文：渔人
English: Fisherman from

古文：苏州太湖入松江口。唐贞元中，有渔人载小网。数船共十余人，下网取鱼，一无所获。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，在苏州太湖入松江口，有打鱼人载着小网捕鱼，好几条船十多个人，打了大半天，没有网到一条鱼，却网到一面镜子，不大。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty, in the first year of the Songjiang estuary in Suzhou Taihu Lake, there was a fisherman carrying a small net fishing. Several boats and more than ten people fished for more than half a day. They did not catch a single fish, but they did catch a small mirror.

古文：网中得物，乃是镜而不甚大。
现代文：打鱼人恼火没有打上来鱼，就将镜子丢入水中。
English: The fisherman, annoyed that he did not catch any fish, threw the mirror into the water.

古文：渔者忿其无鱼，弃镜于水。
现代文：移船再撒网，又将这面镜子打上来了。
English: They moved the boat, cast the net again, and brought up the mirror.

古文：移船下网，又得此镜。
现代文：打鱼人感到非常奇怪，其中有一人就将这面镜子拿在手中仔细观看。
English: The anglers were very surprised, and one of them took the mirror in his hands to take a closer look.

古文：渔人异之，遂取其镜视之，才七八寸。照形悉见其筋骨脏腑，溃然可恶，其人闷绝而倒，众人大惊。其取镜鉴形者，即时皆倒，呕吐狼藉。
现代文：镜子大小约七八寸，但是照人却筋骨五脏六腑都能看到。这个打鱼人用它照视自己的肚腹，发现里面溃烂得让人恶心欲吐，一下昏倒在地。其他的打鱼人都大吃一惊，纷纷自照，都昏倒在地，呕吐不止。
English: The mirror is about seven or eight inches in size, but people can see every muscle, bone, and organ. This fisherman used it to look at his stomach and found that it was festering inside, making people nauseous, and he fainted on the ground. Other fishers were shocked, they took selfies one after another, they all fainted on the ground and vomited.

古文：其余一人，不敢取照，即以镜投之水中。
现代文：还剩下一个打鱼人不敢照了，慌忙将镜子又抛入水中。
English: There was still one fisherman left who did not dare to take a picture, and he hurriedly threw the mirror back into the water.

古文：良久，扶持倒吐者既醒，遂相与归家，以为妖怪。
现代文：过了许久，昏倒在地的那些打鱼人都苏醒过来了。
English: After a long time, those fishermen who fainted and fell to the ground came to their senses.

古文：明日方理网罟，则所得鱼多于常时数倍。
现代文：这个打鱼人将他的这些同伙一一扶起来，相互搀扶着回到家里。
English: The fisherman picked up his companions one by one and they helped each other back home.

古文：其人先有疾者，自此皆愈。
现代文：大家都认为是遇上妖怪了。
English: Everyone thought it was a ghost.

古文：询于故老，此镜在江湖，每数百年一出。人亦常见，但不知何精灵之所恃也。
现代文：询问打鱼的老人们，有的说这面镜子在江湖间，几百年出现一次，有人曾经见到过。但是，却不知道是什么精灵所有。
English: Asking the old men who were fishing, some said that this mirror appeared once in hundreds of years, and some people had seen it before, but they didn't know what spirit possessed it.

