古文：陈公，逸其名，淳皇后父也。
现代文：陈公，不知其名字，淳皇后的父亲。
English: Chen Gong, I don't know his name, is the father of Empress Jun.

古文：洪武二年追封扬王，媪为王夫人，立祠太庙东。
现代文：洪武二年追封为扬王，其妻为扬王夫人，立祠于太庙东。
English: In the second year of Hongwu's enthronement as Yang Wang, his wife was Yang Wang's wife, and a small shrine was built in the east of the Great Temple.

古文：明年有言王墓在盱眙者，中都守臣按之信。
现代文：洪武三年，有人说扬王墓在盱眙，中都临濠府的守臣进行考察，认为可信。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, some people said that Yang Wang's tomb was in Handan, and the vice-minister of the Central Government, Linyi Prefecture, inspected it and thought it was credible.

古文：帝乃命中书省即墓次立庙，设祠祭署，奉祀一人，守墓户二百一十家，世世复。
现代文：于是太祖命中书省在墓地立庙，设祠祭祀，奉祀一人，守墓户二百一十家，他们世世代代免服劳役。
English: As a result, the great-grandfather ordered the Ministry of Education to build a temple in the cemetery, set up a small shrine for worship, and have one person serve as a worshiper, guarding 210 tombs. They were exempted from labor service for generations.

古文：帝自制《扬王行实》，谕翰林学士宋濂文其碑，略曰：
现代文：太祖自做《扬王行实》一文，并令翰林学士宋濂撰写碑文，大意是：
English: The great-grandfather wrote "Yang Wang Xingshi" by himself, and ordered the scholar Song Xi to write an inscription, to the effect of:

古文：王姓陈氏，世维扬人，不知其讳。
现代文： 王，姓陈，世代为维扬人，不知其名字。
English: Wang, surnamed Chen, was born in Wiyang, but his name is unknown.

古文：当宋季，名隶尺籍伍符中，从大将张世杰扈从祥兴。
现代文：宋代末期，名列军籍，随大将军张世杰扈从宋卫王赵籨。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, he was enlisted in the military and followed the great general Zhang Shijie from the Song Dynasty to the Song Dynasty.

古文：至元己卯春，世杰与元兵战，师大溃，士卒多溺死。王幸脱死达岸，与一二同行者，累石支破釜，煮遗粮以疗饥。已而绝粮，同行者闻山有死马，将其烹食之。
现代文：至元十六年春，世杰与元兵战，大败，士卒多溺死，王幸能上岸，与一二同行者砌石支破釜，煮所剩无几的粮食以充饥，不久粮绝，同行者闻山中有死马，要去拖来煮食。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shijie and the Yuan soldiers fought, suffered a great defeat, and many soldiers drowned. Wang Xunneng went ashore, and with one or two companions, he built a stone pillar to break the cauldron. There was little food left to cook to satisfy hunger, and soon the food ran out. The companions heard that there was a dead horse in the mountain, and they wanted to drag it to cook food.

古文：王疲极昼睡，梦一白衣人来曰： 汝慎勿食马肉，今夜有舟来共载也。 
现代文：王因极为疲劳，白昼入睡了。梦一白衣人来对他说 ：你切莫吃马肉，今夜有船来把你们载走。 
English: The king was so tired that he fell asleep in the middle of the day. In his dream, a man in a white robe came to him and said, "Don't eat horse meat. A ship is coming to take you away tonight."

古文：王未之深信，俄又梦如初。
现代文：王不很相信，一会儿又有这样的梦。
English: Wang didn't quite believe it, and soon he had another dream like this.

古文：至夜将半，梦中仿佛闻橹声，有衣紫衣者以杖触王胯曰： 舟至矣。 
现代文：快到半夜，梦中仿佛听到橹声，有个穿紫衣的人用杖敲他的胯说 ：船来了。 
English: It was nearly midnight, and in my dream I seemed to hear a click. A man in purple was tapping his gong with a cane, saying, "The ship is coming."

古文：王惊寤，身已在舟上，见旧所事统领官。
现代文：王惊醒，身已在船上，并看到他原来的统领官。
English: Wang woke up on the ship and saw his former commanding officer.

古文：时统领已降于元将，元将令来附者辄掷弃水中。
现代文： 这时统领官已降元，元将令他将来归附的人都投入水中。
English: At this time, the commander-in-chief had been demoted, and the former general ordered his future subordinates to throw themselves into the water.

古文：统领怜王，藏之艎板下，日取乾糇从板隙投之，王掬以食。
现代文：统领怜惜王，把他藏在船板下面，每天从板缝投干粮下去，王在下面捧着吃。
English: The captain took pity on the king and hid him under the plank of the ship. Every day, he threw dry grain down from the crevice of the plank, and the king held a horse underneath to eat it.

古文：复与王约，以足撼板，王即张口从板隙受浆。
现代文：统领又与王约定，用脚摇船板，王即下面张口，从板缝接饮汤水。
English: The leader also agreed with the king to shake the board with his foot, and the king opened his mouth from below to drink the soup from the board.

古文：居数日，事泄，彷徨不自安。
现代文：过了几天，被发觉了，王十分不安。
English: A few days later, he was discovered, and Wang was very uneasy.

古文：飓风吹舟，盘旋如转轮，久不能进，元将大恐。
现代文：这时遇到飓风，船盘旋不能前进，元将大恐。
English: At this time, the ship encountered a hurricane and was unable to move forward due to the ship's circling. The general was terrified.

古文：统领知王善巫术，遂白而出之。
现代文：统领知王会巫术，向元将说明让他出来。
English: The head sorcerer of the Sorcerer's Apprentice Guild tells Yuan Yuan to let him out.

古文：王仰天叩齿，若指麾鬼神状，风涛顿息。
现代文：王对天叩头，若指挥鬼神的样子，风涛立即平息。
English: The king kowtows to the heavens, and if he directs the appearance of ghosts and gods, the storm will immediately subside.

古文：元将喜，因饮食之。
现代文：元将大喜，给他饮食。
English: The former general was overjoyed and gave him food and drink.

古文：至通州，送之登岸。
现代文：到了通州，让他登岸而去。
English: When he arrived in Tongzhou, he was allowed to go ashore.

古文：王归维扬，不乐为军伍，避去盱眙津里镇，以巫术行。
现代文： 王回到维扬，不愿再去当兵，避居于盱眙津里镇，以巫术谋生。
English: When Wang returned to Wiyang, he did not want to be a soldier anymore, so he took refuge in the town of Yujin and earned a living by practicing witchcraft.

古文：王无子，生二女，长适季氏，次即皇太后。
现代文：王无子，生二女，长女嫁季家，次女即皇太后。
English: Wang had no children, but had two daughters. The eldest daughter married Ji Jia, and the second daughter became the empress dowager.

古文：晚以季氏长子为后，年九十九薨，遂葬焉，今墓是已。
现代文：晚年以季家的长子为自己的后代，终年九十九岁，葬于现今墓地。
English: In his later years, he took the eldest son of the Ji family as his descendant. He was ninety-nine years old and was buried in the current cemetery.

古文：臣濂闻君子之制行，能感于人固难，而能通于神明为尤难。
现代文： 臣濂闻君子的行为，能感动人固然难，而能感动神明尤其难。
English: It is difficult to move people, but it is especially difficult to move the gods.

古文：今当患难危急之时，神假梦寐，挟以升舟，非精诚上通于天，何以致神人之佑至于斯也。
现代文：当他处于危难之时，神给他在梦中指点，并把他扶到船上，若非其精诚上通于天，何以使神如此地保佑他。
English: When he was in danger, God gave him a sign in a dream and helped him onto the ship. If it wasn't for his heavenly wisdom, why would God have blessed him in this way?

古文：举此推之，则积德之深厚，断可信矣。
现代文：由此推论，积德深厚可得好的报应，这是断然可信的。
English: From this, it can be deduced that it is absolutely credible that a person who is deeply virtuous can receive good retribution.

古文：是宜庆钟圣女，诞育皇上，以启亿万年无疆之基，于乎盛哉！
现代文：应庆贺圣女生育了皇上，开拓亿万年无疆之基业，真盛世呀！
English: It should be celebrated that the holy maiden gave birth to the emperor, opening up a foundation of hundreds of millions of years without borders, a truly prosperous world!

古文：臣濂既序其事，复再拜稽首而献铭曰：皇帝建国，克展孝思。疏封母族，自亲而推。
现代文： 臣濂序完其事，再叩首奉献铭文： 皇帝建国，发扬孝道，诰封皇后家族，自亲而疏。
English: After the vassals bowed their heads, they then bowed their heads to dedicate the inscription: The emperor founded the country, promoted filial piety, enthroned the queen's family, and distanced himself from his relatives.

古文：锡爵维扬，地迩帝畿，立庙崇祀，玄冕衮衣。
现代文：赐爵扬王，其封地靠近京畿，立庙祭祀，穿戴皇帝衣冠。
English: Yang Wang was given a title of nobility, his fief was close to Gyeonggi, a temple was built for worship, and he wore the emperor's crown.

古文：痛念宅兆，卜之何墟，闾师来告，今在盱眙。
现代文：皇帝思念扬王的墓在何地，家乡守臣报告说在盱眙。
English: Where is the tomb of Emperor Xianxian Yangwang, his hometown Shouwen reported that it is in Zeng.

古文：王无后，以外亲武忠、武聚为之，置洒扫户九十三家。
现代文：皇上先是高兴，后又哀悼，即诏礼官，前去修理，毋让乡间村夫破坏。
English: The emperor was first happy and then in mourning, so the etiquette officer went to repair it, rather than let the villagers destroy it.

古文：永乐七年北巡，亲谒祠下。守冢武戡为建阳卫镇抚，犯法，责而宥之。
现代文：我扬王昔在军伍，遇飓风恶浪，又粮尽食绝，幸有天神托梦，又送到船上，依靠神力，死里脱生，寿高年久，积德深远，不知如何施恩人间，而生育圣女，繁衍皇族。开创鸿图，国运昌盛，光同日月。溯流求源，功有所归。
English: I, Yang Wang, used to be in the army. I was caught in a hurricane and a bad storm, and we ran out of food. Fortunately, I had an angel to help me dream, and I was sent to a ship. Relying on God's power, I was able to escape death. I have a long life and profound virtue. I don't know how to be a benefactor to mankind, but I gave birth to a holy woman and propagated the royal family. I created a great map, the national movement prospered, and the light was the same as the sun and the moon. I retraced the flow to find the source, and my efforts have been rewarded.

古文：十五年，帝复亲祭，以戡为徐州卫指挥佥事。
现代文：皇上广行孝治，以化民情。津里镇为王灵所居之地，立碑以昭示万年。  
English: The emperor widely practiced filial piety in order to transform the people's sentiments. Tsuri Town is the place where Wang Ling lived, and a monument was erected to show this for thousands of years.

古文：吕本，寿州人，懿文太子次妃父也。
现代文：吕本，凤阳府寿州人，懿文太子次妃之父。
English: Lübben, a native of Shoushu in Fengyang Prefecture, was the father of the second wife of the crown prince.

古文：仕元，为元帅府都事。
现代文：曾在元朝为官，为元帅府都事。
English: He was a government official in the Yuan Dynasty and worked for the Marshal's Office.

古文：后归太祖，授中书省令史。
现代文：后投奔太祖，授中书省令史。
English: Later, he joined Emperor Taizu and was awarded the title of "Minister of the History of Chinese Literature."

古文：洪武五年历官吏部尚书。
现代文：洪武五年任吏部尚书。
English: Hongwu's five-year term as cadre is still a record.

古文：六年改太常司卿。
现代文：六年改为太常司卿。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to the position of the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：明年四月，御史台言： 本奉职不谨，郊坛牲角非茧栗，功臣庙坏不修。 
现代文：七年四月，御史台奏称他 奉职不勤谨 。于是下诏免其官爵，罚他到功臣庙去服劳役。
English: In April of the seventh year, the Imperial Historian's report said that he was not diligent in his duties. Therefore, he was relieved of his official title and was punished to go to the hero temple to do labor service.

古文：诏免官，罚役功臣庙。已，释为北平按察司佥事。
现代文：其后赦免，调任北平按察司佥事。
English: He was later pardoned and transferred to the Beiping procuratorate.

古文：洪武中，长女入宫为女官，授锦衣卫百户。
现代文：太祖召见本及同时受命的杨基、答禄与权，告谕他们说： 监察官之设，目的在整肃纲纪，澄清吏治，不是专门处理刑罚事务。
English: The great-grandfather summoned Ben and Yang Ji, Ta Luo and Quan, who were ordered at the same time, and told them: The purpose of the establishment of the ombudsman is to rectify the discipline and clarify the administration of justice, not to deal specifically with criminal matters.

古文：永乐十五年将册其第三女为皇太孙妃，擢光禄寺卿，子安为府军前卫指挥佥事，专侍太孙，不莅事。
现代文：尔等去要克尽职守，务要明白大体，不要像一般官吏那样拘于执法行刑的具体事务。好事虽然小，若不断做下去，将积成大德；犯的过失虽小，若长期犯过，将成为元凶。
English: Therefore, in order to perform their duties, they must understand the general situation, and should not stick to the specific affairs of law enforcement and execution of punishment like ordinary officials. Although the good deed is small, if it is continuously done, it will accumulate great virtue; although the fault is small, if it is committed for a long time, it will become the main culprit.

古文：后太孙践阼，妃为皇后，安亦屡进官。
现代文：你难道没看见上冲云霄的楼台是由寸土堆积而成，燎原之火由一个小火星燃起来的吗？必须谨慎！ 本等叩头受命。
English: Can't you see that the skyscrapers that soar into the sky are made of piles of soil, and the fires of the wasteland are lit by a small fire? You must be careful! This kind of kowtowing is commanded.

古文：宣德三年，后废，胡氏遂不振。
现代文：不久又任本为太常司卿，两年后去世，无子，赐葬于钟山之后。
English: Soon after, Ben was appointed as the First Secretary of the Grand Council of State. He died two years later, without a son, and was buried behind Zhongshan.

古文：孙忠，字主敬，邹平人。
现代文：孙忠，字主敬，山东邹平人。
English: Sun Zhong, also known as Lord Jing, was born in Shandong.

古文：初名愚，宣宗改曰忠。
现代文：初名愚，宣宗为他改名忠。
English: His original name was Gu, but he changed it to Zhong.

古文：初，以永城主簿督夫营天寿山陵，有劳，迁鸿胪寺序班，选其女入皇太孙宫。
现代文：起初任永城县主簿，监督民工营建天寿山陵，有功升鸿胪寺序班，选其女入皇太孙宫中。
English: At first, he served as the chief registrar of Yongcheng County, supervising the construction of Tianshou Mountain Mausoleum by migrant workers. He was promoted to the first class of Hongyu Temple, and his daughter was selected to enter the imperial grandson's palace.

古文：宣宗即位，册贵妃，授忠中军都督佥事。
现代文：宣宗即位，册封忠之女为贵妃，授忠为中军都督佥事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, the daughter of Emperor Taizong was made a noble consort, and Emperor Taizong was made the Chinese military governor.

古文：三年，皇后胡氏废，贵妃为皇后，封忠会昌伯。
现代文：宣德三年，皇后胡氏被废，册封孙贵妃为皇后，封忠为会昌伯。
English: Three years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the Empress Hu was abolished, and Sun Guifei was proclaimed the Empress, and Huizhong Changbo was proclaimed the Prince.

古文：尝谒告归里，御制诗赐之，命中官辅行。
现代文：忠曾面向皇帝告假归里，宣宗恩准并赐诗送行，还命宦官陪伴。
English: Zhong once faced the emperor to return home after a leave of absence, was approved by Xuanzong and given a poem to see him off, and was accompanied by a eunuch.

古文：比还，帝后临幸慰劳。
现代文：回朝后，皇帝皇后又亲去慰劳。
English: After returning to the imperial court, the emperor and empress went to comfort him in person.

古文：妻董夫人数召入宫，赐赍弗绝。
现代文：忠妻董夫人多次被召入宫，赏赐不断。
English: Mrs. Dong, the loyal wife, has been invited to the palace many times and has been rewarded continuously.

古文：正统中，皇后为皇太后。
现代文：正统年间，皇后为皇太后。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, the empress was the empress dowager.

古文：忠生日，太后使使赐其家。
现代文：忠生日那天，太后派人将赏赐送到忠家里。
English: On the day of Chung's birthday, the Empress Dowager sent someone to deliver the reward to Chung's home.

古文：时王振专权，祭酒李时勉荷校国学门，忠附奏曰： 臣荷恩厚，愿赦李祭酒使为臣客。
现代文：当时王振专权，祭酒李时勉被戴上枷锁囚禁于国学之门。忠请使转奏： 臣蒙厚恩，希望赦李祭酒，让他为臣的上宾。
English: At that time, Wang Zhen had absolute power, and Li Shimin, the sacrificial wine, was put in chains and imprisoned at the gate of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：坐无祭酒，臣不欢。 
现代文：座无祭酒，臣就不愉快。 
English: If there is no libation, the vassal is not happy.

古文：太后立言之帝，时勉获释。
现代文：太后立即奏告英宗，时勉因而得释。
English: The empress dowager immediately reported to Emperor Yingzong, and Shi Mian was released.

古文：忠家奴贷子钱于滨州民，规利数倍，有司望风奉行，民不堪，诉诸朝，言官交章劾之。命执家奴戍边，忠不问。
现代文：忠家奴在滨州向百姓放高利贷，获利数倍。当地官府为了讨好，帮助家奴们放债，使百姓忍受不了，申诉于朝廷。谏官们纷纷上书弹劾，朝廷命执家奴送边疆充军，忠不过问。
English: Loyal servants in Binzhou lend usury to the people, making several times the profit. The local government, in order to please, helped the servants to lend money, so that the people could not bear it, and complained to the imperial court. The eunuchs sent letters of impeachment one after another, and the imperial court ordered the servants to send troops to the frontier. Loyalty is not questioned.

古文：景泰三年卒，年八十五，赠会昌侯，谥康靖。
现代文：景泰三年卒，终年八十五岁。赠会昌侯，谥康靖。
English: Jing Tai graduated in three years and lived to the age of eighty-five. He was given the posthumous titles of Changhou and Jiankangjing.

古文：英宗复辟，加赠太傅、安国公，改谥恭宪。
现代文：英宗复辟，加赠太傅、安国公，改谥恭宪。
English: Yingzong was restored, Taifu and Ankokukong were added, and the name changed to Gongxian.

古文：纯宗官锦衣卫指挥佥事，早卒。继宗，字光辅，章皇后兄也。
现代文：成化十五年再赠太师、左柱国。子五人：继宗、显宗、绍宗、续宗、纯宗。继宗字光辅，章皇后之兄。
English: In the fifteenth year of Chenghua's reign, Taishi and Zuozhu Guo were bestowed upon him. He had five children: Suizong, Xianzong, Shaozong, Suizong, and Junzong. Suizong's nickname was Guangfu, and he was the elder brother of Empress Zhang.

古文：宣德初，授府军前卫指挥使，改锦衣卫。
现代文：宣德初年授府军前卫指挥使，后改锦衣卫指挥使。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was awarded the post of the vanguard commander of the prefectural army, and later he was changed to the post of the commander of the imperial guard.

古文：景泰初，进都指挥佥事，寻袭父爵。
现代文：景泰初年进升都指挥佥事，随即承袭父亲爵位。
English: In his first year, Jing Tai was promoted to the rank of commander, and immediately succeeded his father's title.

古文：天顺改元，以夺门功，进侯，加号奉天翊卫推诚宣力武臣，特进光禄大夫、柱国，身免二死，子免一死，世袭侯爵；诸弟官都指挥佥事者，俱改锦衣卫。
现代文：天顺元年，发动夺门之变，使英宗复位，因功而进为侯爵，加号 奉天翊卫推诚宣力武臣 ，特进光禄大夫、柱国，自身可免二死，子免一死，世袭侯爵；诸弟为都指挥佥事者，都改为锦衣卫都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, initiated the change of seizing the gate, restored Yingzong, promoted to marquis due to his merits, plus the title of "Bong Tianlianwei pushing sincere Xuanli warrior," specially promoted to Guanglu doctor, pillar country, himself could be spared two deaths, his son could be spared one death, hereditary marquis; his brothers who were in charge of affairs in the capital were all changed to command affairs in the capital.

古文：复自言： 臣与弟显宗率子、婿、家奴四十三人预夺门功，乞加恩命。 
现代文：他自己又上书说： 臣与弟显宗率子、婿、家奴四十三人，参加夺门之变，有功，乞加恩宠。 
English: He himself also wrote: Forty-three vassals and brothers, sons, sons-in-law, and slaves of Emperor Xianzong, took part in the revolution of seizing the gate, and they were meritorious and begged for mercy.

古文：由是显宗进都指挥同知，子琏授锦衣卫指挥使，婿指挥使武忠进都指挥佥事，苍头辈授官者十七人。
现代文：于是显宗进升为都指挥同知，子琏授锦衣卫指挥使，婿指挥使武忠进升都指挥佥事，家奴授官者十七人。
English: As a result, Hsien Tsung was promoted to commander of the capital with his acquaintance, his son-in-law was promoted to commander of the imperial palace, his son-in-law was promoted to commander of the imperial palace, and his son-in-law was promoted to commander of the imperial palace. Seventeen members of the family were promoted to officers.

古文：五月，命督五军营戎务兼掌后军都督府事。
现代文：五月，命继宗督五军营军务兼掌后军都督府事。
English: In May, he was appointed to succeed the military affairs of the five military camps of the Sotoku and the military governor's office.

古文：左右又有为绍宗求官者，帝召李贤谓曰： 孙氏一门，长封侯，次皆显秩，子孙二十余人悉得官，足矣。
现代文：皇帝左右侍臣又有人为绍宗求官，帝召李贤说 ：孙氏一门，长子封侯，次者皆显官，子孙二十余人都为官，这就足够了。
English: Around the emperor, courtiers and retainers were also seeking a position for Shao Zong. The emperor summoned Li Xian and said: "The Sun clan has one family, the eldest son is a vassal, the second son is a vassal, and more than twenty descendants are vassals. That is enough."

古文：今又请以为慰太后心，不知初官其子弟时，请于太后，数请始允，且不怿者累日，曰： 何功于国，滥授此秩，物盛必衰，一旦有罪，吾不能庇矣。 
现代文：今又有人请为绍宗求官以慰太后之心，不知其初封孙氏子弟为官时，多次请示太后才允许；太后多日来就不高兴，曾说 ：何功于国，滥授这些官爵。物盛必衰，一旦获罪，我也包庇不了。 
English: Now, someone is asking for an official position for Shao Zong to comfort the Empress Dowager. I don't know when she first appointed Sun's son as an official, she repeatedly asked the Empress Dowager for permission. The Empress Dowager has not been happy for many days. She once said: "What a great service to the country, to give these officials titles. Prosperity is bound to decline, and if I am found guilty, I can't cover it up."

古文：太后意固如此。 
现代文：太后的意思很清楚了。 
English: The Dowager's meaning was clear.

古文：贤稽首颂太后盛德，因从容言祖宗以来，外戚不典军政。
现代文：贤叩头歌颂太后盛德，从容地讲述祖宗以来外戚不管军政事务的规定。
English: The virtuous kowtow to and sing the praises of Empress Dowager Shengde, and calmly recount the regulations that have been in place since the founding of the dynasty for relatives to be exempt from military and political affairs.

古文：帝曰： 初内侍言京营军非皇舅无可属，太后实悔至今。 
现代文：帝说 ：以前内臣说京师军务非皇舅掌管不可，为此太后至今还在后悔。 
English: The emperor said, "In the past, a vassal said that the emperor's uncle must be in charge of the military affairs of Beijing, and the empress dowager still regrets this.

古文：贤曰： 侯幸淳谨，但后此不得为故事耳。 
现代文：贤曰 ：侯继宗幸好还淳厚谨慎，但以后不得为例。 帝曰： 很好。 
English: Xian said: Fortunately, Hou Jizong is still prudent, but he must not set an example in the future. Emperor said: Very good.

古文：帝曰： 然。 已，锦衣逯杲奏英国公张懋、太平侯张瑾及继宗、绍宗并侵官地，立私庄。
现代文：其后，锦衣逯杲奏陈英国公张懋、太平侯张瑾及继宗、绍宗都侵占了官地，建立私庄。
English: Later, the British official Zhang Xuan, the Taiping marquis Zhang Xuan, the succeeding emperor Zong, and the emperor Shao Zong all occupied government land and established private estates.

古文：命各首实，懋等具服，乃宥之，典庄者悉逮问，还其地于官。
现代文：皇帝命他各具实奏报。懋等服罪，予以宽大，只将管庄的人一律逮捕问罪，其地还官。
English: The emperor ordered that each of them should make a written report. They were ordered to serve their sentences in strict accordance with the law, and were given leniency. Only those who were in charge of the village were arrested and interrogated, and they were returned to their posts.

古文：石亨之获罪也，继宗为显宗、武忠及子孙、家人、军伴辞职，帝止革家人、军伴之授职者七人，余不问。
现代文：此前，石亨获罪，奏请尽削夺其弟侄官职。继宗仿照石亨，为显宗、武宗及子孙、家人、军伴辞职。皇帝只革家人、军伴之授职者七人，其余不问。
English: Prior to this, Shihong was found guilty and petitioned the emperor to do his best to deprive his brother and nephew of their official positions. Shihong, following the example of Shihong, resigned for Hsenzong, Wuzong and his children and grandchildren, family members, and military companions. The emperor only dismissed seven people who had been appointed as family members and military companions, and did not ask about the rest.

古文：五年，曹钦平，进太保。
现代文：天顺五年，平定曹钦的反叛，进为太保。
English: In the fifth year of Tianshun, Cao Qin's rebellion was put down, and he was promoted to the position of Tai Po.

古文：寻以疾奏解兵柄，辞太保，不允。
现代文：不久因病奏请解除兵权，辞去太保之职，皇帝不允。
English: Soon after, due to his illness, he asked to be relieved of his military powers and to resign from his position as Taiho, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：宪宗嗣位，命继宗提督十二团营兼督五军营，知经筵事，监修《英宗实录》。
现代文：宪宗即位，命继宗提督十二团营兼督五军营，并管理为皇帝讲学的事，监修《英宗实录》。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, he was appointed to succeed Emperor Gensong as the admiral of the 12 regimental battalions and the governor of the 5 military battalions. He also managed the emperor's lectures and supervised the revision of "The True Record of Emperor Gensong."

古文：朝有大议，必继宗为首。
现代文：朝廷每有大事商议，必以继宗为首。
English: Whenever the imperial court has a major discussion, it must be headed by the heir.

古文：再核夺门功，惟继宗侯如故。
现代文：重新核实夺门之变之功劳，其他人有更改，只有继宗如故。
English: Re-verify the merit of the change of winning the gate, others have changed, only the successor is the same.

古文：乞休，优诏不许。
现代文：他请求退休，不许。
English: He asked to retire, not be allowed to retire.

古文：三年八月，《实录》成，加太傅。
现代文：成化三年八月，《英宗实录》修成，继宗加太傅。
English: In August of the third year of Chenghua, "The True Record of the Yingzong" was completed, and Zong Jia Taifu succeeded.

古文：十年，兵科给事中章镒疏言： 继宗久司兵柄，尸位固宠，亟宜罢退，以全终始。 
现代文：十年，兵科给事中章镒上疏说： 继宗久掌兵权，居其位而不尽职，确应罢退，以全其有始有终的名声。 
English: Ten years ago, the Military Science Research Institute issued a statement saying, "Successor Zong Jian, who has been in charge of the military power for a long time and has been in his position without doing his duty, should really step down, with all his reputation.

古文：于是继宗上疏恳辞，帝优诏许解营务，仍莅后府事，知经筵，预议大政。
现代文：于是继宗上疏恳求辞官，帝允许解军务之职，但仍在后府视事，管理经筵，参预朝政。
English: As a result, the Emperor allowed him to be relieved of his military duties, but he continued to oversee affairs at the Imperial Palace, manage the economy, and participate in pre-imperial politics.

古文：英宗复辟，尽夺景帝所授外亲官，尤恶杭氏，昱已前卒，敏削职还里。
现代文：他再辞，帝还是不准，只免其奏事承旨。自景泰以前，外戚无掌兵权者，帝见石亨、张车兀以军力完成夺门之变，故使外戚亲臣参预军务，此非原有成例。二十年去世，赠郯国公，谥荣襄。
English: He resigned again, but the emperor still did not allow him to do so, only exempting him from carrying out the imperial command. Since Jing Tai, the emperor saw that Shi Heng and Zhang Chejun, who did not have the power to lead the army, had completed the change of seizing the gate by military force, so he made the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the relatives of the

古文：周能，字廷举，昌平人。
现代文：周寿、周彧，周能之子。周能，字廷举，顺天府昌平州人。
English: Zhou Shou, Zhou Yao, the son of Zhou Neng. Zhou Neng, also known as Tinghu, was born in Changping County, Shuntianfu.

古文：女为英宗妃，生宪宗，是为孝肃皇太后。
现代文：其女为英宗妃子，生宪宗，是为孝肃皇太后。
English: His daughter was the concubine of Emperor Yingzong, born Emperor Jianzong, and became the empress dowager of Emperor Xiaoshu.

古文：英宗复位，授能锦衣卫千户，赐赍甚渥。能卒，长子寿嗣职。
现代文：英宗复辟，授能为锦衣卫千户。能卒，长子周寿继承父亲职位。
English: Emperor Yingzong was restored to power, and thousands of households in Jinbei and Wei were granted the title of nobility. The eldest son Zhou Shou inherited his father's position.

古文：宪宗践阼，擢左府都督同知。
现代文：宪宗登基，升寿为左府都督同知。
English: Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, and Shosetsu became the governor of Left Province.

古文：成化三年封庆云伯，赠能庆云侯。
现代文：成化三年封庆云伯，赠能为庆云侯。
English: The three-year ban of Qingyun Bo has become a reality, and the gift can be used for Qingyun Hou.

古文：寿以太后弟，颇恣横。
现代文：周寿因为是太后弟，恣意横行。
English: Because Zhou Shou was the younger brother of the Empress Dowager, he acted arbitrarily.

古文：时方禁勋戚请乞庄田，寿独冒禁乞通州田六十二顷，不得已与之。
现代文：当时正禁止勋戚请乞庄田，而寿竟敢犯禁乞请涿州田六十二顷，不得已而赐给他。
English: At that time, it was forbidden for relatives of the emperor to beg for shoyo fields, but Shou dared to violate the ban on begging and begged for sixty-two hectares of gushu fields, which were given to him as a last resort.

古文：尝奉使，道吕梁洪，多挟商艘。
现代文：曾奉使出京，取道徐州吕梁洪，多带商船。
English: There was an envoy from Beijing, taking the road of Xuzhou Lulianghong, with many merchant ships.

古文：主事谢敬不可，寿与哄，且劾之，敬坐落阳。
现代文：主事谢敬不准，寿与他争论起来，上章弹劾，致使谢敬被撤职。
English: The supervisor, Xie Jing, was not allowed to do so. Shou argued with him and impeached him, resulting in Xie Jing being removed from his post.

古文：十七年进侯，子弟同日授锦衣官者七人，能追赠太傅、宁国公，谥荣靖。
现代文：十七年进侯爵，子弟同授锦衣卫官的七人，能追赠太傅、宁国公，谥崇靖。
English: In seventeen years he became a marquis, and his seven sons, who were also given the title of Keeper of the Privy Purse, were able to be posthumously awarded the titles of Taifu, Ning Guogong, and Zou Chongjing.

古文：孝宗立，寿加太保。
现代文：孝宗即位，加寿为太保。
English: Takamune ascended the throne, and his reign was prolonged.

古文：时寿所赐庄田甚多，其在宝坻者已五百顷，又欲得其余七百余顷，诡言以私财相易。
现代文：这时寿已受赐庄田甚多，其在宝坻者已有五百顷，还要得其余七百余顷，谎称是以私人财产换来的。
English: By this time, Shou had already been given a large number of shodatis. He already had five hundred hectares in Baodi, and he wanted to get the remaining seven hundred hectares, falsely claiming that he had exchanged them for private property.

古文：部劾其贪求无厌，执不许，孝宗竟许之。
现代文：吏部劾奏寿贪求无厌，坚持不给，而孝宗终于给了他。
English: The cadre department impeached Soju, who was insatiable and insisted on not giving it to him, but Takamune finally gave it to him.

古文：又与建昌侯张延龄争田，两家奴相殴，交章上闻。
现代文：又与建昌侯张延龄争田，两家奴仆殴斗，都上章报告皇帝。
English: He also competed with Zhang Yanling, the lord of Jianchang, for the fields, and the two servants fought, and both reported to the emperor.

古文：又数挠盐法，侵公家利，有司厌苦之。
现代文：又多次破坏盐法，侵占公利，地方官吏为此烦恼不堪。
English: They also repeatedly violated the Salt Law and embezzled public funds, which made local officials very upset.

古文：十六年加太傅，弟长宁伯彧亦加太保，兄弟并为侯伯，位三公，前此未有也。
现代文：弘治十六年，加寿为太傅，加其弟长宁伯周彧为太保，兄弟都为侯伯，位在三公，这是前所未有之事。
English: In the 16th year of Hongzhi, Jia Shou was appointed Taifu, Jia's elder brother Ningbo Zhouqi was appointed Taipo, and both brothers were appointed Hou Bo, which was unprecedented.

古文：时已革外戚世爵，瑛卒，遂不得嗣。
现代文：武宗即位，裁汰传奉官，寿之子侄八人都在裁汰之列，寿上章请求留职，皇帝听从。正德四年周寿死，赠宣国公，谥恭和。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and eight of Emperor Shou's sons and nephews were among those who were dismissed. Emperor Shou's father-in-law requested to remain in office, and the emperor complied. Emperor Zhengde died four years after Emperor Shou's death, and was succeeded by Emperor Xuanxuan.

古文：彧，太后仲弟也。
现代文：周彧，太后之二弟。
English: Zhou Qi, the second brother of the Empress Dowager.

古文：成化时，累官左府都督同知。
现代文：成化时官至左府都督同知。
English: He was a confidant of Naritaka Tokikan, who later became the governor of Saifu.

古文：二十一年封长宁伯，世袭。
现代文：成化二十一年封长宁伯，子孙世袭。
English: In the 21st year of Chenghua, he was given the title of Chang Ningbo, which was inherited by his descendants.

古文：弘治中，外戚经营私利，彧与寿宁侯张鹤龄至聚众相斗，都下震骇。
现代文：弘治中，外戚经营私利，彧与寿宁侯张鹤龄各聚众相互殴斗，震骇京都。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kōji, his maternal relative engaged in business for personal gain, and Shō and Shuning's vassal, Zhang Heling, gathered crowds to fight each other, shocking Kyoto.

古文：九年九月，尚书屠滽偕九卿上言：
现代文：弘治九年九月，尚书屠氵庸同九卿上书，其文大体是：
English: In September of the ninth year of Hongzhi, Shangshu Tu Rongyong and Jiujing wrote a letter, the text of which is roughly:

古文：宪宗皇帝诏，勋戚之家，不得占据关津陂泽，设肆开廛，侵夺民利，违者许所在官司执治以闻。
现代文： 宪宗皇帝诏：勋戚之家，不得占据关口、渡口、山坡、湖泽，不得开设店铺商场，不得侵夺民利，违者许所在官府逮捕法办。
English: Emperor Gensong decreed that the families of honored relatives must not occupy gates, ferry ports, hillsides, or lakes, must not open shops or malls, must not plunder the people's profits, and violators may be arrested and prosecuted by the government.

古文：皇上践极，亦惟先帝之法是训是遵。
现代文：皇上即位，也是遵循先帝的法令和诫训。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne, he also followed the decrees and precepts of the former emperor.

古文：而勋戚诸臣不能恪守先诏，纵家人列肆通衢，邀截商货，都城内外，所在有之。
现代文：但勋戚诸臣不能恭敬地遵守先帝的诏令，纵家人在街上开铺设店，邀截商货，都城内外，无处不有。
English: However, the courtiers could not respectfully abide by the Emperor's edict, and even though the family members opened stores on the streets and invited merchants, they were nowhere to be found inside and outside the capital.

古文：观永乐间榜例，王公仆从二十人，一品不过十二人。
现代文：观永乐年间的榜文，王公的仆从二十人，一品官的仆从也不过十二人。
English: During the reign of Guan Yongle, there were twenty servants of the prince and only twelve servants of a courtier.

古文：今勋戚多者以百数，大乖旧制。
现代文：今勋戚的仆从多者数以百计，大大违背原来的规定。
English: Now, there are hundreds of servants of the relatives, which is a great violation of the original regulation.

古文：其间多市井无赖，冒名罔利，利归群小，怨丛一身，非计之得。
现代文：其间许多市井无赖之徒，冒名谋利，利归这些小人，而人民的怨怒集勋戚一身，此非良策。
English: In the meantime, many of the villains of the city, pretending to make a profit, the profits go to these villains, and the people's resentment gathers together, this is not a good strategy.

古文：迩者长宁伯周彧、寿宁侯张鹤龄两家，以琐事忿争，喧传都邑，失戚里之观瞻，损朝廷之威重。
现代文： 近来长宁伯周彧、寿宁侯张鹤龄，两家以小事忿争，弄得都市不安，失帝王姻戚之尊严，损朝廷之威信。
English: Recently, Changningbo Zhou Ye, Shuning Hou Zhang He Ling, the two families have been angry with small things, causing urban unrest, losing the dignity of the emperor's in-laws, and damaging the prestige of the imperial court.

古文：伏望纶音戒谕，俾各修旧好。
现代文：伏望陛下诏令戒谕，使他各修旧好。
English: Fushang His Majesty issued an edict, ordering him to mend his ways.

古文：凡在店肆，悉皆停止。
现代文：他们所开设的店铺，一律停止。
English: All the stores they have opened will be closed.

古文：更敕都察院揭榜禁戒，扰商贾、夺民利者，听巡城巡按御史及所在有司执治。
现代文：更要令都察院榜示禁戒，凡扰商贾、夺民利者，听巡城巡按御史及所在官府逮捕法办。
English: Moreover, it is necessary to order the city procuratorate to set an example of prohibitions, and anyone who disturbs merchants and deprives people of profits should listen to the history of the city patrol and the arrest and legal proceedings of the government office.

古文：仍考永乐间榜例，裁定勋戚家人，不得滥收。
现代文：仍旧根据永乐年间的规定，裁定勋戚的家中奴仆，不准滥收。 
English: According to the regulations of the Yongle era, it is still ruled that the domestic servants of the relatives of the deceased are not allowed to abuse.

古文：科道亦以为言，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：科道官也有同样的奏议，孝宗认为很好，加以采纳。
English: The science and technology officer also had the same suggestion, and Takamune thought it was good and adopted it.

古文：勋怒，录邵氏争袭章奏，讦杰实他姓，请覆勘，帝不听。
现代文：弘治十八年，周彧进为太保，还要求封为侯爵。吏部说封爵只有朝廷有权，这才了事。
English: In the 18th year of the Hongzhi era, Zhou Yujin was promoted to Taibo and also asked to be made a marquis. The officials said that only the imperial court had the right to make him a marquis, and that was that.

古文：会给事中陆粲论大学士桂萼受杰赂，使奴隶冒封爵。
现代文：武宗立，将彧之子瑭等六人都升为锦衣卫官。不久彧逝。
English: Wu Zongli, Zou Zi's son Zou, and six others were all promoted to the rank of brocade guards. He died soon after.

古文：帝怒，下粲狱，而尽革外戚封，杰亦夺击。张峦，敬皇后父也。
现代文：其子瑭、孙大经、曾孙世臣都降授锦衣卫指挥同知。张鹤龄、张延龄，张峦之子。张峦，孝宗敬皇后的父亲。
English: His son, Sun Da Jing, and great-grandson, Sun Shixin, were all conferred the Order of the Golden Garter. Zhang He Ling, Zhang Yan Ling, the son of Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye, the father of Xiaozong, honored the Empress.

古文：弘治四年封寿宁伯。
现代文：弘治四年封寿宁伯。
English: Gongzhi four years of longevity Ningbo.

古文：鹤龄兄弟并骄肆，纵家奴夺民田庐，篡狱囚，数犯法。
现代文：皇太子立，进为侯。死后赠昌国公，其子鹤龄嗣侯爵位。弘治十六年，次子延龄也由建昌伯进为侯爵。鹤龄兄弟都非常骄横，纵家奴强夺百姓田地房屋，劫狱，多次犯法。
English: The crown prince was established and promoted to marquis. After his death, the title of marquis was given to Chang Guogong and his son, He Ling He, to his son. In the 16th year of Hongzhi, the second son, Yan Ling, was also promoted to marquis by Jian Chang Baojin. The He Ling brothers were very arrogant, violently seized people's fields and houses, robbed prisons, and repeatedly violated the law.

古文：帝遣侍郎屠勋、太监萧敬按得实，坐奴如律。
现代文：孝宗遣侍郎屠勋、太监肖敬审问属实，依法惩办这些家奴。
English: Xiaozong sent his attendant Tu Xun and eunuch Xiao Jing to investigate and punish these slaves according to the law.

古文：敬复命，皇后怒，帝亦佯怒。已而召敬曰： 汝言是也。 
现代文：敬将惩处结果奏报皇帝，皇后大怒，帝也假怒，而事后召敬安慰道： 你的话是对的。 
English: When the result of the punishment was reported to the emperor, the empress was furious, and the emperor also feigned anger, but afterwards summoned Jing and comforted him: Your words are right.

古文：赐之金。
现代文：赐他以金。
English: Give him money.

古文：给事中吴世忠、主事李梦阳皆以劾延龄几得罪。
现代文：给事中吴世忠、主事李梦阳均因劾奏延龄几乎得罪。
English: Wu Shizhong, one of the presenters, and the host, Li Mengyang, were almost offended by the accusation of playing up their age.

古文：他日，帝游南宫，鹤龄兄弟入侍。
现代文：有天，帝游南宫，鹤龄兄弟入宫侍奉。
English: One day, the emperor was touring the southern palace, and the brothers entered the palace to serve.

古文：酒半，皇后、皇太子及鹤龄母金夫人起更衣，因出游览。
现代文：酒饮一半，皇后、皇太后及鹤龄母亲金夫人起身更衣，随即出去游览。
English: After drinking half of the wine, the empress, the empress dowager and his elderly mother, Mrs. Kim, got up, changed clothes, and then went out for a tour.

古文：帝独召鹤龄语，左右莫得闻，遥见鹤龄免冠首触地，自是稍敛迹。
现代文：帝独召鹤龄谈话，左右听不到他们谈些什么，只遥见鹤龄脱帽，头触地。自此以后鹤龄兄弟的不法行为稍有收敛。
English: The emperor alone summoned Hailing to a conversation, but he could not hear what they were talking about. He only saw Hailing take off his hat and touch his head to the ground. Since then, the wrongdoing of the Hailing brothers has slightly abated.

古文：正德中，鹤龄进太傅。
现代文：正德年间，鹤龄进为太傅。
English: During the Zhengde era, He Lingjin became taifu.

古文：世宗入继，鹤龄以定策功，进封昌国公。
现代文：世宗继承皇位，鹤龄因定策有功而进封昌国公。
English: Shizong succeeded to the imperial throne, and He Ling was promoted to Fongchang Guogong due to his success in making decisions.

古文：时敬皇后已改称皇伯母昭圣皇太后矣。
现代文：这时，敬皇后已改称皇伯母昭圣皇太后。
English: By this time, Empress Kei had changed her name to Empress Dowager Akihito.

古文：帝以太后抑其母蒋太后故，衔张氏。
现代文：世宗因太后压制其母蒋太后，怀恨张氏家族。
English: Sejong held a grudge against the Zhang family because Empress Dowager suppressed her mother, Empress Dowager Chiang.

古文：嘉靖十二年，延龄有罪下狱，坐死，并革鹤龄爵，谪南京锦衣卫指挥同知，太后为请不得。
现代文：嘉靖十二年，延龄有罪下狱，判处死刑，同时革除鹤龄爵位，贬为南京锦衣卫指挥同知，太后为之求情，不准。
English: In the twelfth year of Jiajing, Yanling was found guilty and sent to prison, sentenced to death, and at the same time he was stripped of his knighthood and demoted to the same rank as the commander of the Nanjing Jinling Garment Guards. The empress dowager was not allowed to intercede for him.

古文：初，正德时，日者曹祖告其子鼎为延龄奴，与延龄谋不轨。
现代文：早在正德时期，算命卜卦者曹祖，报告朝廷说他的儿子曹鼎为延龄家奴，与延龄阴谋不轨。
English: As early as the Zhengde period, the fortune-teller Cao Zu reported to the imperial court that his son Cao Ding was a slave of the Yanling family and conspired with Yanling.

古文：武宗下之狱，将集群臣廷鞫之，祖仰药死。
现代文：武宗将延龄下狱，准备召集群臣共同审问，就在这时，曹祖服毒自杀。
English: When Emperor Wuzong was about to be released from prison, and was preparing to convene his ministers for a joint interrogation, Cao Zu committed suicide by taking poison.

古文：时颇以祖暴死疑延龄，而狱无左证，遂解。
现代文：人们怀疑祖的突然死亡是延龄谋杀的，但无旁证证明延龄谋反，于是把他释放了。
English: People suspected that Zou's sudden death was the result of Yanling's murder, but there was no evidence that Yanling had plotted a rebellion, so he was released.

古文：指挥司聪者，为延龄行钱，负其五百金。索之急，遂与天文生董昶子至谋讦祖前所首事，胁延龄贿。
现代文：指挥司聪欠延龄钱五百金，追还甚急，司聪与天文生董昶之子董至谋划揭露曹祖前所告发的事，敲诈延龄的财物。
English: The conductor, Scutong, was short of five hundred gold coins, which needed to be recovered urgently. Scutong and Dong Zhi, the son of the astronomy student, Dong Yao, plotted to expose what Cao Zu had previously reported, and to extort Scutong's property.

古文：延龄执聪幽杀之，令聪子升焚其尸，而折所负券。
现代文：延龄抓到了司聪将他暗杀，令聪子司升烧其尸，撕毁债券。
English: Yanling caught Satoshi and assassinated him, and ordered Satoshi's son to burn his body and tear up the bonds.

古文：升噤不敢言，常愤詈至。
现代文：升不敢言，常愤恨董至。
English: Sheng did not dare to speak, and often resented Dong Zhi.

古文：至虑事发，乃摭聪前奏上之。
现代文：董至收集司聪以前的奏疏上报朝廷。
English: Dong Zhizhi collected the previous records of Shicong and reported them to the imperial court.

古文：下刑部，逮延龄及诸奴杂治。
现代文：刑部逮捕了延龄及其家奴一同治罪。
English: The criminal investigation department arrested Yanling and his family slave and sentenced them together.

古文：延龄尝买没官第宅，造园池，僣侈逾制。
现代文：延龄曾买下没收入官的第宅，建造园池，奢侈逾制。
English: Yanling once bought the second home of a government official with no income, built a garden pond, and went overboard with luxury.

古文：又以私憾杀婢及僧，事并发觉。
现代文：又因私仇而杀婢及僧。这些事都被揭发出来。
English: He also killed a maid and a monk because of a personal vendetta. All of this has been exposed.

古文：刑部治延龄谋不轨，无验，而违制杀人皆实，遂论死。
现代文：刑部判延龄阴谋不轨，但无证据，而违制杀人皆是事实，判处死刑。
English: The criminal justice department ruled that the age-extension plot was illegal, but there was no evidence, and the illegal killings were all facts, and sentenced him to death.

古文：既贵，服食如布衣时，见者不知为外戚也。
现代文：延龄在狱中囚禁四年，同狱囚犯刘东山告发延龄讥笑皇帝。东山得免于罚戍边疆。他又勾结奸人刘琦诬告延龄盗宫中的钱物，而且牵连数十百人。
English: Yanling was imprisoned for four years. Liu Dongshan, a fellow prisoner, accused Yanling of mocking the emperor. Dongshan was exempted from punishment and sent to the frontier. He also colluded with the traitor Liu Wei to falsely accuse Yanling of stealing money from the palace, and implicated dozens of hundreds of people.

古文：十年以寿终，子臣嗣伯。嘉靖八年罢袭。陈万言，肃皇后父也，大名人，起家诸生。
现代文：第二年，奸人班期、于云鹤又告延龄兄弟以巫术咒骂朝廷和太后，鹤龄在南京被捕送京病死，而期与云鹤也因系诬告而罚戍边疆。太后死后五年，斩延龄于西市。陈万言，世宗肃皇后的父亲，大名府人，起家于生员。
English: In the second year, the conspirator class period, Yu Yunhe also reported that Yanling brothers cursed the imperial court and the empress dowager with witchcraft, and Yanling was arrested in Nanjing and sent to Beijing to die of illness, while Yanling and Yunhe were also punished for making false accusations. Five years after the death of the empress dowager, Yanling was executed in Xi'an. Chen Wanyan, the father of the empress dowager Su, was a daimyo, and he was the founder of the family.

古文：嘉靖元年授鸿胪卿，改都督同知，赐第黄华坊。
现代文：嘉靖元年授鸿胪卿，后改都督同知，赐府宅于黄华坊。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Hongyuqing, and later became the governor of Tongzhi, and was given a mansion in Huanghuafang.

古文：明年诏复营第于西安门外，费帑金数十万。
现代文：第二年又诏令为他建府宅于西安门外，费金数十万。
English: The following year, he was ordered to build a mansion for him outside Xi'an Gate, at a cost of hundreds of thousands of yuan.

古文：工商尚书赵璜以西安门近大内，治第毋过高。
现代文：工部尚书赵璜认为西安门靠近皇宫，建立万言的宅第不要建得过高。
English: Shangshu Zhao Wei of the Ministry of Works believes that Xi'an Gate is close to the Imperial Palace, and that it is better not to build too high.

古文：帝怒，逮营缮郎翟璘下狱。
现代文：世宗大怒，将营缮郎翟瞞逮捕下狱。
English: Sejong was furious and arrested and imprisoned Ying Soe Lang.

古文：言官余瓒等谏，不省。
现代文：言官余瓒等劝谏，皇帝还是不准。
English: The emperor still did not allow the performance, despite the persuasion of the court officials such as Yu Xi.

古文：寻封万言泰和伯，子绍祖授尚宝司丞。
现代文：不久，封万言为泰和伯，其子陈绍祖授尚宝寺丞。
English: Soon, Fubangen was named Taihe Bo, and his son Chen Shao Zu was named Shangpoji.

古文：又明年，万言乞武清、东安地各千顷为庄田，诏户部勘闲地给之。
现代文：第三年，万言请求赐武清、东安两地的田各千顷以为庄田。皇帝诏令户部勘测闲田赐与。
English: In the third year, Wanzhong requested that a thousand hectares of farmland in Wuqing and Dong'an be given to him. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the household to survey the idle farmland.

古文：给事中张汉卿言： 万言拔迹儒素，联婚天室，当躬自检饬，为戚里倡，而僣冒陈乞，违越法度。
现代文：给事中张汉卿上书说 ：万言发迹于儒生，与皇室联姻，应当自己检点些才是，成为亲戚邻居表率。但是他不守本分，乞请无限，超越法度范围。
English: During the case, Zhang Hanqing wrote in a letter, "Wanren originated from Confucianism and married into the imperial family. He should have checked his facts and become a role model for his relatives and neighbors. However, he did not keep his duty, begged for infinity, and exceeded the scope of the law.

古文：去岁深冬冱雪，急起大第，徒役疲劳，怨咨载道。
现代文：去年深冬大雪，天寒地冻，急着建造大厦，民工疲劳不堪，怨声载道。
English: Last year, there was heavy snow in late winter, the weather was cold and icy, there was a rush to build buildings, migrant workers were exhausted, and complaints were rampant.

古文：方今灾沴相继，江、淮饿死之人，掘穴掩埋，动以万计。
现代文：如今灾害相继，江、淮一带饿死的人，掘穴掩埋，动以万计。
English: Nowadays, disasters are one after another. People who died of starvation in the Jiangsu and Huai'an regions are buried in pits, and tens of thousands of people are mobilized.

古文：万言曾不动念，益请庄田。小民一廛一亩，终岁力作，犹不足于食，若又割而畀之贵戚，欲无流亡，不可得也。
现代文：万言对此无动于衷，还要请求庄田，而小民只一间屋一亩田，终年劳作还衣食不足，若又分一些给贵戚，要他们不流亡异乡是不可能的。
English: Wan Yan was indifferent to this, and also asked Zhuoda, but the common people only had one room and one mu of land, and they worked all year round and still lacked food and clothing. If they were to give some to their relatives, it would be impossible for them not to go into exile.

古文：伏望割恩以义，杜渐以法，一切裁抑，令保延爵禄。 
现代文：伏望陛下少施恩多行义，以法来防微杜渐，将他的要求加以限制，这样才能使他长期保留其爵禄。 
English: His Majesty Fuchang is less benevolent and more righteous, and uses the law to prevent the slightest deviation and limit his demands, so that he can retain his peerage for a long time.

古文：帝意未慊，居正固奏，乃止。
现代文：世宗不听，终究又赐给万言田八百顷。
English: Sejong didn't listen, and eventually gave Mangyongdae 800 hectares of farmland.

古文：伟卒，传子栋及曾孙明辅，袭伯如制。郑承宪，神宗郑贵妃父也。
现代文：巡抚刘麟、御史任洛又上书说，不能侵夺民田给勋戚，世宗还是不肯听从。嘉靖七年，皇后死，万言也被贬退。十四年，陈万言去世。郑国泰，神宗郑贵妃兄郑承宪之子。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, when the empress died, Wanjian was also dethroned. In the fourteenth year, Chen Wanjian died. Zheng Guotai, the son of Zheng Chengxian, the elder brother of Shenzong Zheng Guifei.

古文：贵妃有宠，郑氏父子、宗族并骄恣，帝悉不问。
现代文：贵妃受神宗宠爱，郑氏父子、宗族恃势骄横，而神宗全不理会。
English: Guifei was favored by the Shenzong, the Zheng father and son and the clan were arrogant, and the Shenzong completely ignored them.

古文：承宪累官至都督同知，卒。子国泰请袭，帝命授都指挥使。
现代文：承宪官至都督同知，死后其子郑国泰请求承袭，皇帝则授他为都指挥使。
English: After his death, his son Zheng Guotai requested to succeed him, and the emperor awarded him the post of capital commander.

古文：给事中张希皋言： 指挥使下都督一等，不宜授任子。
现代文：给事中张希皋奏称 ：指挥使以下至都督等职，不宜授与承宪之子。
English: During the presentation, Zhang Xizhe said that it is not appropriate to award the position of commander-in-chief to the son of a constitutional monarch.

古文：妃家蒙恩如是，何以优后家。 
现代文：若贵妃家族蒙如此厚恩，皇后家族又将如何优待。 
English: If the princess's family is so favored, how will the queen's family be treated?

古文：不报。
现代文：但这奏章并未上报皇帝。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：是时，廷臣疑贵妃谋夺嫡，群以为言。
现代文：这时，廷臣怀疑郑贵妃有夺取皇后位置的意图，都上书报告皇帝。
English: At this time, courtiers suspected that Zheng Guifei had the intention of seizing the position of empress, and they all reported to the emperor.

古文：国泰不自安，上疏请立太子，其从子承恩亦言储位不宜久虚。
现代文：国泰为此不安，忙上书请立太子。其侄子承恩也说皇太子之位不宜久空。
English: Guotai was uneasy about this and hurriedly wrote a letter asking for the crown prince to be appointed. His nephew, Cheng En, also said that the position of crown prince should not be vacant for long.

古文：大学士沈一贯左右于帝，弗听。
现代文：大学士沈一贯也劝皇帝立太子。
English: Shen, a university scholar, has also consistently urged the emperor to make him crown prince.

古文：诏夺国泰俸，而斥承恩为民，然言者终不息。
现代文：皇帝不听，并下诏夺国泰俸禄，贬承恩为民，但关于议论郑贵妃的话一直未息。
English: The emperor did not listen, and issued an edict to seize the state's stipend and discard the favor for the people, but the discussion about Zheng Guifei's words has not ceased.

古文：万历二十六年，承恩复上疏劾给事中戴士衡、知县樊玉衡，妄造《忧危竑议》，离间骨肉，污蔑皇贵妃。
现代文：万历二十六年，承恩又上疏弹劾给事中戴士衡、知县樊玉衡，说他们妄造《忧危议》，离间骨肉，污蔑郑贵妃。
English: In the 26th year of Wanli, Cheng En also impeached Dai Shiheng and Zhixian Zou Yuheng, saying that they had fabricated the "Dangerous Discussion" and slandered Zheng Guifei.

古文：帝怒。
现代文：神宗大怒。
English: The emperor was furious.

古文：《忧危竑议》者，不知谁所作，中言侍郎吕坤构通宫掖，将与国泰等拥戴福王。
现代文：《忧危议》不知是何人所做，其中说到侍郎吕坤勾通宫廷中的人，将与国泰等拥戴福王。
English: In the "Dangerous Proposal," I don't know who made it, it was said that the person in the court who was enticed by Lu Kun, the chamberlain, would support Fu Wang with Cathay Pacific and others.

古文：而士衡前尝论坤与承恩相结，玉衡方抗言贵妃沮立太子，疏并留中，故承恩指两人。帝怒，士衡、玉衡皆永戍。
现代文：而且戴士衡曾说吕坤与承恩有勾结，樊玉衡也正反对贵妃阻挠立皇太子。这些就是承恩弹劾士衡与玉衡的缘故。神宗大怒，罚士衡、玉衡永远戍边。
English: Moreover, Dai Shiheng once said that Lü Kun was in collusion with Cheng En, and Zou Yuheng was also opposed to Guifei's obstruction of the crown prince. These are the reasons for Cheng En's impeachment of Shiheng and Yuheng. Shenzong was furious and punished Shiheng and Yuheng forever.

古文：廷臣益贫郑氏。
现代文：廷臣更加忿恨郑氏家族。
English: The courtiers were even more angry with the Zheng family.

古文：久之，皇太子立。
现代文：过了许久，才立皇太子。
English: It was a long time before a crown prince was appointed.

古文：四十三年，男子张差持梃入东宫，被擒。
现代文：万历四十三年，有一男子张差，持梃闯入东宫，被擒。
English: In the 43rd year of Wanli, a man named Zhang Zha broke into the East Palace with a shovel and was arrested.

古文：言者皆言国泰谋刺皇太子。
现代文：人们都说是国泰派人来谋杀皇太子。
English: People are saying that Cathay sent someone to murder the crown prince.

古文：主事王之寀鞫差，差指贵妃宫监。
现代文：主事王之肕审问张差。差说是受郑贵妃宫的太监指使。
English: The presiding officer Wang Zhixuan interrogated Zhang Zhaorong. Zhaorong said that he was instructed by the eunuch of the Zheng Guifei Palace.

古文：主事陆大受、给事中何士晋遂直攻国泰。
现代文：主事陆大受、给事中何士晋都攻击国泰。
English: The leader, Lu Da Rong, was attacked by a number of people.

古文：帝以贵妃故，不欲竟事，详之寀等传。
现代文：皇帝因贵妃的缘故，不愿追究其事。这就是 梃击案 。详见之肕等人的传中。
English: The emperor did not want to investigate the matter for the sake of the princess. This is known as the 击案. For details, see  et al.'s report.

古文：崇祯十七年，京师陷，被杀。刘文炳，字淇筠，宛平人。
现代文：国泰官至左都督，病死，子养性袭其职。刘文炳，字淇筠，宛平人。
English: Guotai official to the left of the governor, died of illness, the son of the nature of his duties. Liu Wenqi, the word Qiqi, Wanping people.

古文：祖应元，娶徐氏，生女，入宫，即庄烈帝生母孝纯皇太后也。
现代文：祖父刘应元，娶徐氏，生女，入宫，即庄烈帝生母孝纯皇太后。
English: Liu Yingyuan's grandfather married into the Xu family, had a daughter, and entered the imperial court. She was the mother of Emperor Zhuang and Empress Dowager Xiaochun.

古文：因怆然泣下。九年进文炳为新乐侯，其祖、父世赠爵如之。
现代文：应元早死，庄烈帝即位封太后弟刘效祖为新乐伯，这就是文炳的父亲。效祖于崇祯八年去世，文炳袭新乐伯爵位。九年进为新乐伯。
English: In response to Yuan's early death, Zhuang Rongde ascended the throne and appointed Liu Xizu, the younger brother of the empress dowager, as the new Count of Le, which was the father of Wenyi. Xizu died in the eighth year of the reign of Chongzhen, and Wenyi inherited the position of Count of Le. In the ninth year, he was promoted to the new Count of Le.

古文：十三年，宫中奉太后像，或曰未肖。帝不怿，遣司礼监太监王裕民同武英殿中书至文炳第，敕徐口授，绘像以进，左右咸惊曰： 肖。 
现代文：崇祯十三年，宫中供奉太后遗像，有人说不大像太后，皇帝不高兴，遣司礼监太监王裕民同武英殿中书，到文炳府第，据文炳的祖母徐氏口授而绘制皇太后遗像进呈，大家都说： 很像。 
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the empress dowager's portrait was dedicated in the palace. Some people said that it did not look much like the empress dowager. The emperor was not happy. He sent Wang Yumin, the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of

古文：帝大喜，命卜日具卤簿，帝俯伏归极门，迎入，安奉奉慈殿，朝夕上食如生。
现代文：皇帝大喜，命选良辰吉日，由仪仗队护送，皇帝在归极门俯伏迎入，供奉于奉慈殿，早晚上食，如同生人一样。
English: The emperor was overjoyed. The auspicious day was chosen by fate, and he was escorted by an honor guard. The emperor prostrated himself at the gate of returning to the capital to welcome him. He was offered to the Fong Ci Palace, and ate in the morning and in the evening, just like an ordinary person.

古文：因追赠应元瀛国公，封徐氏瀛国太夫人，文炳晋少傅，叔继祖，弟文翟、文照俱晋爵有差。
现代文：追赠刘应元为瀛国公，封徐氏为瀛国太夫人，文炳晋升少傅，叔继祖，弟文耀、文照都各晋官爵。
English: Liu Yingyuan was posthumously awarded the title of Duke of Shandong Province, Feng Xu became the Grand Duchess of Shandong Province, and Wenyi was promoted to the rank of Junior Master, while his uncle, uncle-in-law, younger brother, Wenyao, and younger brother, Wenzhao, were all promoted to the rank of peer.

古文：文炳母杜氏贤，每谓文炳等曰： 吾家无功德，直以太后故，受此大恩，当尽忠报天子。 
现代文：文炳母亲杜氏，为人贤惠，常对文炳说 ：我们家本无功德，只是因为太后的缘故，才受此大恩，你应当尽忠报天子。 
English: Wenyu's mother, Du Ji, was a virtuous person and often said to Wenyu: "Our family has no merits, it is only because of the empress dowager that we have received this great favor. You should be loyal to the emperor."

古文：帝遣文炳视凤阳祖陵，密谕有大事上闻。
现代文：帝遣文炳去凤阳视察祖陵情形，并秘密对他说，若有大事就奏报上来。
English: Emperor Wenxuan went to Fengyang to inspect the situation of the ancestral mausoleum, and secretly told him that if there were any major events, they would be reported.

古文：文炳归，奏史可法、张国维忠正有方略，宜久任，必能灭贼，后两人果殉国难。
现代文：文炳视察回来，陈奏史可法、张国维忠心正直，有谋略，应长期任用，他们必然灭贼。后两人果为国殉难。
English: After Wen Xuan's inspection, he came to the conclusion that Chen Sooshi Kefa and Zhang Guowei were loyal and honest, had a strategy, and should be appointed for a long time. They would certainly exterminate the thieves. As a result, the latter two were martyred for the country.

古文：文炳谨厚不妄交，独与宛平太学生申湛然、布衣黄尼麓及驸马都尉巩永固善。
现代文：文炳谨慎厚道，不随便交结，只是与宛平太学生申湛然、平民黄尼麓及驸马都尉巩永固等人相好。
English: Wen Xuan was prudent and kind, and did not casually intermarry, but he liked Wanping's student Shen Tianzhan, the commoner Huang Ni Lu and the imperial equerry Gong Yong Gu.

古文：时天下多故，流贼势益张，文炳与民麓等讲明忠义，为守御计。
现代文：当时天下多事，人民起义的势力更加增大，文炳与尼麓等明忠义之道，定守御之策。
English: At that time, there were many things going on in the world, and the power of the people's uprising increased even more. Wenyi and Nyiluk, who knew the way of loyalty and righteousness, decided to stick to it.

古文：及李自成据三秦，破榆林，将犯京师。
现代文：李自成占有三秦，攻破榆林，进军京师。
English: Li Zicheng occupied Sanqin, broke through Yulin, and marched into Beijing.

古文：文炳知势不支，慷慨泣下，谓永固曰： 国事至此，我与公受国恩，当以死报。 
现代文：文炳知明朝大势已去，慷慨泣下，对巩永固说 ：国事到如此地步，我与公均受国恩，应以死报国。 
English: Knowing that the Ming dynasty was no more, Wensheng wept and said to Gong Yonggui, "The state of affairs has reached such a stage that I and my father-in-law, both of whom have been favored by the state, should repay the state with my death."

古文：十七年正月，帝召文炳、永固等回国事。
现代文：崇祯十七年正月，帝召见文炳、永固等，询问国事。
English: In the first month of the seventeenth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the emperor summoned Wenyi, Yonggu and others to inquire about state affairs.

古文：二人请早建藩封，遣永、定二王之国。
现代文：二人请早封王建藩，遣永、定二王去所封之地。
English: The two asked Wang Jianhan, who had been appointed earlier, and Wang Yong and Wang Ding to go to the place where they had been appointed.

古文：帝是之，以内帑乏，不果行。
现代文：帝表示同意，但因国库空虚，这封王建藩的事没有实现。
English: The emperor agreed, but because the treasury was empty, the grant of Wang Jianhan did not materialize.

古文：三月初一日，贼警益急，命文武勋戚分守京城。
现代文：三月初一，农民起义军进攻北京的形势日益急迫，朝廷命文武勋戚分守京城。
English: On the first day of March, the situation of the peasants' uprising army attacking Beijing became increasingly urgent. The imperial court ordered the princes and nobles to defend Beijing separately.

古文：继祖守皇城东安门，文翟守永定门，永固守崇文门。
现代文：继祖守皇城东安门，文耀守永定门，永固守崇文门。
English: He succeeded his ancestor as the keeper of the Dong'an Gate of the Imperial City, the Wen Yao Keeper of the Yongding Gate, and the Yonggu Keeper of the Chongwen Gate.

古文：文炳以继祖、文翟皆守城，故未有职事。
现代文：文炳因继祖、文耀都守城，故未有任务。
English: Because his stepfather and Munyao both guarded the city, he did not have a task.

古文：十六日，贼攻西直门，势益急。
现代文：十六日，农民军攻西直门，形势紧急。
English: On the 16th, the peasant army attacked Xizhimen, the situation was urgent.

古文：尼麓踉跄至，谓文炳曰： 城将陷，君宜自为计。 
现代文：尼麓慌慌张张跑来对文炳说： 城将被攻陷，君最好自做打算。 
English: Ni Lu panicked and ran to Wen Yao and said, "The city will be taken, you'd better make your own plans."

古文：文炳母杜氏闻之，即命侍婢简笥绦于楼上，作七八缳，命家僮积薪楼下，随遣老仆郑平迎李氏、吴氏二女归，曰： 吾母女同死此。 
现代文：文炳的母亲杜氏闻知，即命侍女找一些丝绳在楼上做七八个环，命家僮在楼下堆积薪柴，随即又派老仆郑平去把李氏、吴氏二女接回来，对她们说： 我们母女同死于此。 
English: Du's mother knew that the maid had to find some silk cords to make seven or eight rings upstairs, and the maid had to pile up firewood downstairs. She then sent her old servant Zheng Ping to fetch the two daughters of the Li and Wu clans and said to them: "Our mother and daughter both died here."

古文：又念瀛国太夫人年笃老，不可俱烬，因与文炳计，匿之申湛然家。
现代文：念瀛国太夫人年岁已高，不与她们一同自焚，便与文炳商议，藏于申湛然家中。
English: Lady Nianqin Guotai was very old and did not want to self-immolate with them, so she negotiated with Wenqi and hid in the home of Shen Tianzhan.

古文：十八日，帝遣内使密召文炳、永固。
现代文：三月十八日，帝遣太监察召文炳、永固入宫。
English: On March 18th, the imperial envoy inspector summoned Wen Xuan and Yong Gu to the palace.

古文：文炳归白母曰： 有诏召儿，儿不能事母。 
现代文：文炳先归家对母亲说 ：有诏召儿，儿不能事奉母亲。 
English: When he first returned home, he said to his mother, "If you have a calling, you cannot serve your mother."

古文：母拊文炳背曰： 太夫人既得所，我与若妻妹死耳，复何憾。 
现代文：母轻轻拍着文炳的肩说 ：太夫人已安顿好了，我与你妻及妹死而无憾！ 
English: My mother gently patted Wenyi's shoulder and said, "Mrs. Wenyi has already settled down. I have no regrets about losing you, my wife, and my sister!"

古文：文炳偕永固谒帝，时外城已陷。
现代文：文炳与永固进见崇祯帝，这时外城已为农民军所占领。
English: When Wen Xuan and Yong Gu Jin met with Emperor Chongzhen, the outer city had already been occupied by the peasant army.

古文：帝曰： 二卿所纠家丁，能巷战否？ 
现代文：帝问他们 ：二卿所集中的家丁能巷战否？ 
English: The emperor asked them: Can the dynasties concentrated by the two lords fight in the streets?

古文：文炳以众寡不敌对，帝愕然。
现代文：文炳对帝说，寡不敌众，崇祯帝惊惶不知所措。
English: Wen Xuan said to the emperor that he was outnumbered, and Emperor Chongzhen panicked and was at a loss.

古文：永固奏曰： 臣等已积薪第中，当阖门焚死，以报皇上。 
现代文：永固奏道： 臣等已将柴薪堆在家中，到时闭门自焚，以报皇上恩德。 
English: Yongguso said: The ministers had already piled up the firewood at home, and at that time they closed the door and set themselves on fire to show their gratitude to the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 朕志决矣。朕不能守社稷，朕能死社稷。 
现代文：崇祯帝说 ：朕决心已下，朕不能守社稷，但能与社稷共存亡。 
English: Emperor Chongzhen said, "I have made up my mind. I cannot protect society, but I can coexist with it.

古文：两人皆涕泣誓效死，出驰至崇文门。
现代文：二人皆泪如雨下，誓死效忠，永固直奔崇文门。
English: Both of them burst into tears, swore allegiance to the death, and marched straight to the Chongwen Gate.

古文：须臾贼大至，永固射贼，文炳助之，杀数十人，各驰归第。
现代文：不一会儿，义军入城，永固、文炳进行抵抗，杀数十人，各自赶紧归家。
English: Not long after, the rebels entered the city. Yonggu and Wenyi resisted, killed dozens of people, and each of them hurried home.

古文：十九日，文照方侍母饭，家人急入曰： 城陷矣！ 
现代文：十九日，文照正侍奉母亲吃饭，家人急奔进来报告说 ：城已陷落！ 
English: On the 19th, when Wen Zhao was serving his mother dinner, his family members rushed in to report: "The city has fallen!"

古文：文照碗脱地，直视母。
现代文：文照手中的碗跌在地上，两眼直看着母亲。
English: The bowl in Wen Zhao's hand fell to the ground, and he looked straight at his mother.

古文：母遽起登楼，文照及二女从之，文炳妻王氏亦登楼。
现代文：母亲立即起身上楼，文照及二女随从，文炳妻王氏也上楼。
English: His mother immediately got up and went upstairs. Wen Zhao and his two female attendants, as well as Wen Zhao's wife Wang, also went upstairs.

古文：悬孝纯皇太后像，母率众哭拜，各缢死。
现代文：挂上孝纯皇太后的遗像，母亲率众哭拜于像前，然后都自缢而死。
English: A posthumous portrait of Empress Dowager Xiaochun was hung up, and the mother led the crowd in crying and bowing before the statue, and then they all hanged themselves and died.

古文：文照入缳堕，拊母背连呼曰： 儿不能死矣，从母命，留侍太夫人。 
现代文：文照上吊时又跌了下来，抚着母亲臂膀连声叫道： 儿不能死了，听从母命去奉侍太夫人。 
English: When Wen Zhao hanged himself, he fell down again, stroked his mother's arm and cried out: "I can't die, I must obey my mother's order to serve the great lady."

古文：遂逃去。家人共焚楼。
现代文：只身逃走了，家人点火焚烧了这栋楼。
English: He fled on his own and his family set fire to the building.

古文：文炳归，火烈不得入，入后园，适湛然、尼麓至，曰： 巩都尉已焚府第，自刎矣。 
现代文：文炳赶回来时，火烧得正旺，从后园进入，遇到湛然、尼麓，都说： 恐都尉已烧了府第，自刎了。 
English: When Wen Xuan rushed back, the fire was raging. He entered from the backyard and met with Zhan Ran and Ni Lu. They both said, "I'm afraid the captain has burned the mansion and committed suicide."

古文：文炳曰： 诺。 将投井，忽止曰： 戎服也，不可见皇帝。 
现代文：文炳只说了声 知道了 便去投井，但又忽然止步说： 我还穿着军装，不可见皇帝。 
English: Wen Xuan only said that he knew the voice and went to the well, but suddenly stopped and said: I'm still wearing a military uniform, I can't see the emperor.

古文：湛然脱己帻冠之，遂投井死。
现代文：湛然把自己的头巾取下给文炳戴上，文炳投井而死。
English: He bravely took off his headscarf and put it on Wenyu, and Wenyu fell into the well and died.

古文：继祖归，亦投井死。继祖妻左氏见大宅火，亟登楼自焚，妾董氏、李氏亦焚死。
现代文：继祖归家也投井自尽，其妻左氏见大宅着火，忙登楼自焚，妾董氏、李氏都自焚。
English: When his step-grandfather returned home, he also threw himself into a well to commit suicide. His wife, Zuo, saw that the mansion was on fire and rushed upstairs to set herself on fire. His concubines, Dong and Li, also set themselves on fire.

古文：初，文翟见外城破，突出至浑河，闻内城破，复入，见第焚，大哭曰： 文翟未死，以君与母在。
现代文：文耀见外城已破，冲到浑河，闻内城也被攻破，再入城，见自家房屋已焚，大声哭道： 文耀之所以不死，是因为有皇上和老母在。
English: Seeing that the outer city had been breached, he rushed to the Hunhe River, heard that the inner city had also been breached, re-entered the city, saw that his house had been burned, and cried loudly: The reason why he did not die was because the emperor and his mother were there.

古文：今至此，何生为！ 
现代文：今已如此，我活着为了什么！ 
English: Now it's like, what am I living for!

古文：遂觅文炳死所，大书版井旁曰 左都督刘文翟同兄文炳毕命报国处 ，亦投井死，阖门死者四十二人。
现代文：找到文炳死难地方，在井边石板上写道 ：左都督刘文耀同兄文炳毕命报国处。 投井自杀。郑氏一家人死者达四十二。
English: When they found the place where Wenyi died, they wrote on the stone slab next to the well: "Left Governor Liu Wenyao and his brother Wenyi reported their deaths to the State Council. They committed suicide by throwing themselves into the well. Forty-two members of the Zheng family were killed."

古文：福王时，谥文炳忠壮，文翟忠果。
现代文：福王时，谥文炳忠壮，文耀忠果。
English: In the time of King Fu, Wenyu was loyal and strong, and Wenyao was loyal and fruitful.

