古文：刘虞公孙瓒陶谦刘虞字伯安，东海郯人也。祖父嘉，光禄勋。
现代文：◆刘虞传，刘虞字伯安，东海郯人。祖父刘嘉，为光禄勋。
English: ◆ Liu Yu Chuan, Liu Yu Zi Bo'an, a native of the East China Sea. His grandfather, Liu Jia, was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：虞初举孝廉，稍迁幽州刺史，民夷感其德化，自鲜卑、乌桓、夫余、秽貊之辈，皆随时朝贡，无敢扰边者，百姓歌悦之。
现代文：刘虞最初被举荐为孝廉，升任幽州刺史，百姓与蛮夷被他的仁德所感动，鲜卑、乌桓、夫余、秽貊等部族都按时朝贡，不敢骚扰边境，受到百姓歌颂。
English: Liu Yu was initially recommended as a filial son, and was promoted to the post of Yuzhou historian. The common people and barbarians were moved by his benevolence. The tribes of Xianbei, Wuhuan, Fuyu and Nuxuan all paid tribute on time, did not dare to harass the border, and were praised by the people.

古文：公事去官。
现代文：因公事被免官。
English: He later left the post for business reasons.

古文：中平初，黄巾作乱，攻破冀州诸郡，拜虞甘陵相，绥抚荒余，以蔬俭率下。
现代文：中平初年，黄巾作乱，攻破冀州诸郡，朝廷任刘虞为甘陵相，安抚灾荒后的百姓，以俭朴为下属榜样。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, the Yellow Turbans made a riot and conquered the counties of Jizhou. The imperial court appointed Liu Yu as the Minister of Amity, to pacify the people after the disaster and famine, and to be frugal as an example for subordinates.

古文：迁宗正。
现代文：后升任宗正。
English: He was later promoted to Munemasa.

古文：后车骑将军张温讨贼边章等，发幽州乌桓三千突骑，而牢禀逋悬，皆叛还本国。
现代文：后来车骑将军张温讨伐贼寇边章等人，征调幽州乌桓三千骑兵，因军粮供应不上，都逃回本国。
English: Later, the cavalry general Zhang Wen fought against the bandit Koben Zhang and others, and conscripted three thousand cavalrymen from Yuzhou and Wuhu, but they all fled back to their home country because the supply of military grain was not available.

古文：前中山相张纯私谓前太山太守张举曰： 今乌桓既畔，皆愿为乱，凉州贼起，朝廷不能禁。
现代文：前中山相张纯私下对前太山太守张举说： 如今乌桓已经背叛，都想作乱。凉州贼人起事，朝廷不能禁止。
English: Zhang Jun, a former official of Zhongshan, privately said to Zhang Jue, the former governor of Taishan, "Now that Wuhuan has betrayed us, they all want to make trouble. The imperial court cannot forbid the Liangzhou thieves from starting a riot.

古文：又洛阳人妻生子两头，此汉祚衰尽，天下有两主之征也。
现代文：又有洛阳人的妻子生下的孩子有两个头，这是汉朝气数已尽，天下有两主的征兆啊。
English: There is also a Luoyang man whose wife gave birth to a child with two heads. This is a sign that the Han Dynasty is exhausted and that there are two masters in the world.

古文：子若与吾共率乌桓之众以起兵，庶几可定大业。 
现代文：你若和我一起率乌桓的部众来起兵，说不定可以成就大事业。 
English: If you join me in raising an army led by the members of Wuhuan, you may be able to achieve great things.

古文：举因然之。
现代文：张举于是听信了他。
English: Zhang He then listened to him.

古文：四年，纯等遂与乌桓大人共连盟，攻蓟下，燔烧城郭，虏略百姓，杀护乌桓校尉箕稠、右北平太守刘政、辽东太守阳终等，众至十余万，屯肥如。
现代文：中平四年，张纯等就和乌桓首领共同结盟，攻打蓟地，焚烧城郭，掳掠百姓，杀护乌桓校尉箕稠、右北平太守刘政、辽东太守阳终等，部众达到十余万，驻扎在肥如。
English: In the middle of the fourth year of the Heian period, Zhang Chun and the Wuhuan chieftains made an alliance, attacked the Xuan territory, burned the castle, captured and plundered the people, and killed Wuhuan's lieutenant Zeng Cong, the right north ping governor Liu Zheng, the east Liaodong governor Yang, etc. The number of soldiers reached more than 100,000 and were stationed in Firu.

古文：举称 天子 ，纯称 弥天将军安定王 ，移书州郡，云举当代汉，告天子避位，敕公卿奉迎。
现代文：张举称 天子 ，张纯称 弥天将军安定王 ，向各州郡传送文书，说张举要取代汉朝，让天子退位，命公卿来迎接。
English: Zhang Jiu claimed to be the son of heaven, Zhang Chun claimed to be the general of heaven and the king of stability, and sent documents to all states and counties, saying that Zhang Jiu wanted to replace the Han Dynasty, let the son of heaven abdicate, and ordered the nobles to come to meet him.

古文：纯又使乌桓峭王等步骑五万，入青、冀二州，攻破清河、平原，杀害吏民。
现代文：张纯又派乌桓峭王等人步骑兵五万，进入青冀二州，攻破清河、平原，杀害官吏百姓。
English: Zhang Chun also sent Wu Huanqiao Wang and other infantry and cavalry of fifty thousand to enter the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, break through the clear rivers and plains, and kill officials and commoners.

古文：朝廷虞威信素著。恩积北方，明年，复拜幽州牧。
现代文：朝廷因为刘虞素来有威信，对北方有恩德，第二年，又任命他为幽州牧。
English: Because Liu Yu always had prestige and was kind to the north, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou the following year.

古文：虞到蓟，罢省屯兵，务广恩信。
现代文：刘虞到蓟，裁减驻军，广布恩德。
English: Liu Yu arrived in Handan, reduced the garrison, and expanded the territory.

古文：遣使告峭王等以朝恩宽弘，开许善路。
现代文：派人向峭王等人转达朝廷的宽宏恩德，为他们开辟光明正道。
English: He sent someone to convey the magnanimity and benevolence of the imperial court to King Qiao and others, and to open up a bright and righteous path for them.

古文：又设赏购举、纯。
现代文：又悬赏捉拿退举、退锉。
English: A reward has also been offered for the capture, return, and escape.

古文：举、纯走出塞，余皆降散。
现代文：退垩、亟钟逃出塞外，其余的人都投降或四散。
English: They retreated and fled out of the fortress in the nick of time. The rest surrendered or scattered.

古文：纯为其客王政所杀，送首诣虞。
现代文：亟锤被他的门客型杀死，把头送给型虞。
English: Sledgehammer is killed by his doorman, Kata, and gives his head to Kata.

古文：灵帝遣使者就拜太尉，封容丘侯。
现代文：玺童派使者去就地任型虞为太尉，封查丘堡。
English: Xing Tong sent an emissary to the scene to appoint Guan Yu as the first lieutenant and seal the castle.

古文：及董卓秉政，遣使者授虞大司马，进封襄贲侯。
现代文：等到董卓执政，遣使授刘虞为大司马，进封襄贲侯。
English: When Dong Zhuo came to power, he sent an envoy to confer Liu Yu the title of grand steward and made him the lord of Xiangfu.

古文：初平元年，复征代袁隗为太傅。
现代文：翅王元年，又召他接替塞驴为太傅。
English: In the first year of the Winged King, he was also called upon to succeed the donkey as Taifu.

古文：道路隔塞，王命竟不得达。
现代文：因道路不通，诏命竟没有送到。
English: Due to impassable roads, the imperial edict was not delivered to Tsuru.

古文：旧幽部应接荒外，资费甚广，岁常割青、冀赋调二亿有余，以给足之。
现代文：过去因为幽州地处偏远，耗费钱粮很多，每年常要割取青、冀二州的赋税两亿多，来给它供应补足。
English: In the past, because Yuzhou was remote and consumed a lot of money and grain, it was often necessary to cut more than 200 million yuan of taxes from Qinghai and Hebei every year to supplement its supply.

古文：时处处断绝，委输不至，而虞务存宽政，劝督农植，开上谷胡市之利，通渔阳盐铁之饶，民悦年登，谷石三十。
现代文：当时道路不通，运送不到，而刘虞实行宽大政策，鼓励农业生产，开放和上谷胡人贸易，与渔阳富饶的盐铁进行流通，民众欢喜，粮食丰收，谷子一石才三十钱。
English: At that time, the roads were impassable and could not be transported, but Liu Yu implemented a lenient policy, encouraged agricultural production, opened up trade with Shangguan Hu people, and circulated the rich salt and iron of Yuyang. The people were happy, the grain harvest was abundant, and the grain was only 30 yuan per stone.

古文：青、徐士庶避黄巾之难归虞者百余万口，皆收视温恤，为安立生业，流民皆忘其迁徙。
现代文：青州、徐州士绅百姓躲避黄巾之难跑到塑胪这裹来的有百余万，他都收留慰问，为他们安排生计，流民都忘了自己是流民。
English: The gentry of Qingzhou and Xuzhou fled to Shuxi to escape the hardships of the yellow scarf, and more than one million people came to Shuxi. He received condolences and arranged livelihoods for them. The displaced people forgot that they were displaced people.

古文：虞虽为上公，天性节约，敝衣绳履，食无兼肉，远近豪俊夙僭奢者，莫不改操而归心焉。
现代文：刘虞虽然位居上公，但天性节俭，破衣草鞋，饭食没有两个肉菜，那些过于奢侈的有钱有势者，无不受其感化。
English: Although Liu Yu is in the upper echelon of society, he is naturally frugal, wears rags and straw shoes, and does not have two meat dishes for meals. Those rich and powerful people who are too extravagant are all influenced by him.

古文：初，诏令公孙瓚讨乌桓，受虞节度。
现代文：当初，朝廷命公孙瓒讨伐乌桓，受刘虞指挥。
English: At first, the imperial court ordered Sun Yat-sen to fight Wuhuan, under the command of Liu Yu.

古文：瓚但务会徒众以自强大，而纵任部曲，颇侵扰百姓，而虞为政仁爱，念利民物，由是与瓚渐不相平。
现代文：公孙瓒衹是一心扩充势力，而放纵部下，很是侵扰百姓，而刘虞为政仁爱，总想有利于民众，因此和公孙瓒逐渐不和。
English: Gongsun Qi was intent on expanding his power, and indulging his subordinates was very disturbing to the people, while Liu Yu was a benevolent politician and always wanted to benefit the people, so he gradually fell out with Gongsun Qi.

古文：二年，冀州刺史韩馥、勃海太守袁绍及山东诸将议，以朝廷幼冲，逼于董卓，远隔关塞，不知存否，以虞宗室长者，欲立为主。
现代文：初平二年，冀州刺史韩馥、勃海太守袁绍与山东诸将商议，因为皇帝幼小，受董卓逼迫，远隔关山，不知是否还活着，认为刘虞是汉宗室又是忠厚长者，想立他为君主。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Hanzhong, the governor of Jizhou, and Yuan Shao, the governor of Bohai, discussed with the Shandong generals, because the emperor was young, persecuted by Dong Zhuo, far away from Guanshan, and I do not know if he was still alive. They thought that Liu Yu was a Han dynasty and a loyal elder, and wanted to establish him as a monarch.

古文：乃遣故乐浪太守张岐等赍议，上虞尊号。
现代文：于是派原乐浪太守张岐等人带着他们商议的结果，给刘虞加皇帝的尊号。
English: Therefore, he sent Zhang Qi, the former governor of Lelang, and others, with the result of their deliberation, to give Liu Yu the honorary title of emperor.

古文：虞见岐等，厉色叱之曰： 今天下崩乱，主上蒙尘。
现代文：刘虞见了张岐等人，严厉地训斥他们说： 如今天下动乱，士上遭难。
English: Liu Yu saw Zhang Qi and others and severely reprimanded them, saying, "If there is a riot today, the officers will be in trouble.

古文：吾被重恩，未能清雪国耻。
现代文：我受朝廷大恩，不能洗雪国耻。
English: I have been greatly blessed by the Imperial Court, and I cannot wash away the shame of the nation.

古文：诸君各据州郡，宜共戮力，尽心王室，而反造逆谋，以相垢误邪！ 
现代文：诸位各自统领一方州郡，应当共同努力，为王室尽心，却反而想出叛逆的主意，来玷污坑害我吗！ 
English: Each of you commands a province and should work together to do your best for the royal family, but instead you come up with a rebellious idea to tarnish me!

古文：固拒之。
现代文：坚决拒绝了他们。
English: He flatly refused them.

古文：馥等又请虞领尚书事，承制封拜，复不听。
现代文：韩馥等人又请刘虞兼尚书事务，以皇帝名义封官拜爵，他又不答应。
English: Han Zheng and others also asked Liu Yu and Shang Shuxin to do business and to be given a title of nobility in the name of the emperor. He did not agree.

古文：遂收斩使人。
现代文：随即把来人杀了。
English: He then killed the intruder.

古文：于是选掾右北平田畴、从事鲜于银蒙险间行，奉使长安。
现代文：于是选派掾右北平田畴、从事鲜于银冒险秘密前往长安。
English: As a result, he was sent to Ping Tian Zhen in the right north and went to Chang'an secretly to engage in a rare silver adventure.

古文：献帝既思东归，见畴等大悦。
现代文：献帝早想东归，见了田畴等人非常高兴。
English: Xian Di wanted to return to the East as soon as possible, and was very happy to see Tian Zhuang and others.

古文：时，虞子和为侍中，因此遣和潜从武关出，告虞将兵来迎。
现代文：当时刘虞的儿子刘和任侍中，因此派刘翅偷偷从！困出发，告知刘廛领兵接驾。
English: At that time, Liu Yu's son, Liu He, was an attendant, so he secretly sent Liu Ying to help him out of the predicament and told Liu Yao to pick up the leader.

古文：道由南阳，后将军袁术闻其状，遂质和，使报虞遣兵俱西。
现代文：从直疆路过，后将军袁术听说此事，就扣押了刘和，派人告诉刘虞发兵一同西行。
English: After General Yuan Shou heard about this, he detained Liu He and sent someone to tell Liu Yu to send soldiers to the west together.

古文：虞乃使数千骑就和奉迎天子，而术竟不遣之。
现代文：刘虞就派几千骑兵来接刘和一道儿去奉接天子，而袁术居然不放刘曲。
English: Liu Yu sent several thousand cavalry to pick up Liu He and go with him to fetch Tian Zi, but Yuan Shu actually did not let Liu Qu.

古文：初，公孙瓚知术诈，固止虞遣兵，虞不从，瓚乃阴劝术执和，使夺其兵，自是与瓚仇怨益深。
现代文：当初，公孙瓒知道袁术奸诈，一再劝刘虞不要发兵，刘虞不听，公孙瓒于是偷偷劝袁术扣押刘和，以夺取刘虞的军队，从此刘虞和公孙瓒的仇恨更深了。
English: At first, Gongsun Rong knew that Yuan Shuxu was treacherous and repeatedly advised Liu Yu not to send troops, but Liu Yu did not listen. Gongsun Rong then secretly advised Yuan Shuxu to detain Liu He in order to seize Liu Yu's army. Since then, the hatred between Liu Yu and Gongsun Rong has deepened.

古文：和寻得逃术还北，复为袁绍所留。
现代文：刘和不久得以从袁术处逃脱回北方，又被袁绍扣留。
English: Liu He soon managed to escape from Yuan Shuxi's office and return to the north, where he was again detained by Yuan Shao.

古文：瓚既累为绍所败，而犹攻之不已，虞患其默武，且虑得志不可复制，固不许行，而稍节其禀假。
现代文：公孙瓒已经屡次被袁绍所败，却仍旧不断向袁绍进攻，刘虞既担心他滥用武力，又怕他发展起来管制不住，坚决不许他出兵，而稍稍削减他的供应。
English: Although Sun Quan had been defeated by Yuan Shao many times, he still continued to attack Yuan Shao. Liu Yu, fearing that Sun Quan would abuse his power and that Sun Quan's development would be uncontrollable, resolutely forbade Sun Quan from sending troops and slightly reduced his supply.

古文：瓚怒，屡违节度，又复侵犯百姓。
现代文：公孙瓒发怒，屡次不听他的管束，又去侵犯百姓。
English: In anger, Gongsun Yao repeatedly disobeyed his orders and attacked the people.

古文：虞所赉赏典当胡夷，瓚数抄夺之。
现代文：刘虞赏赐胡人的财物，公孙瓒几次抢去。
English: Liu Yu rewarded Hu's property, and Gongsun Yao snatched it several times.

古文：积不能禁，乃遣驿使奉章陈其暴掠之罪，瓚亦上虞禀粮不周，二奏交驰，互相非毁，朝廷依违而已。
现代文：长期不能禁止，刘虞就派传递公文的使节向朝廷奏报他强暴掠夺之罪，公孙瓒也上告刘虞克扣他的钱粮，二人的奏书不断驰送朝廷，互相诋毁，朝廷衹能和稀泥而已。
English: Unable to prohibit it for a long time, Liu Yu sent envoys to deliver official documents to report his crime of rape and plunder to the imperial court. Gongsun Qi also sued Liu Yu for withholding his money and grain. The two men's reports were constantly sent to the imperial court, slandering each other. The imperial court was nothing but mud.

古文：瓚乃筑京于蓟城以备虞。
现代文：公孙瓒于是在蓟城筑起高台以防备刘虞。
English: Therefore, Gongsun Rong built a high platform in Lucheng to prevent Liu Yu.

古文：虞数请瓚，辄称病不应。
现代文：刘虞几次邀请公孙瓒，公孙瓒总是推说有病不去。
English: Liu Yu invited Gongsun Yao several times, but Gongsun Yao always insisted that he was too sick to go.

古文：虞乃密谋讨之，以告东曹掾右北平魏攸。
现代文：刘虞于是密谋讨伐他，把这打算告诉东曹掾右北乎魏攸。
English: Liu Yu then plotted to fight him, and planned to tell this to Dong Cao, Yu Bei, and Wei You.

古文：攸曰： 今天下引领，以公为归，谋臣爪牙，不可无也。
现代文：魏攸说： 如今天下人都伸着脖子把您当作希望，谋臣武士不能没有啊。
English: Wei You said, "If people today are craning their necks to see you as a beacon of hope, we can't do without our samurai advisers."

古文：瓚文武才力足恃，虽有小恶，固宜容忍。 
现代文：公孙瓒的文武才干都足堪使用，虽有小过，本应容忍。 
English: Gongsun Qian's literary and military talents are all sufficient to use. Although there are minor faults, they should be tolerated.

古文：虞乃止。
现代文：刘虞才作罢。
English: Liu Yu finally gave up.

古文：顷之攸卒，而积忿不已。
现代文：不久魏攸去世，而刘虞积下的仇恨却没有消除。
English: Soon after, Wei You died, but Liu Yu's pent-up hatred did not disappear.

古文：四年冬，遂自率诸屯兵从合十万人以攻瓚。
现代文：初平四年冬天，自己率领各处驻军十万人去攻打公孙瓒。
English: In the winter of the 4th year of the Heian period, he led 100,000 garrisoned troops to attack Gongsunye.

古文：将行，从事代郡程绪免胄而前曰： 公孙瓚虽有过恶，而罪名未正。
现代文：将要出发时，从事代郡程绪摘掉头盔上前劝说： 公孙瓒虽有罪过，但罪名不明确。
English: When he was about to set off, he took off his helmet on behalf of the county chengxu and went forward to persuade: Although Gongsun Yao was guilty, the crime was not clear.

古文：明公不先告晓使得改行，而兵起萧墙，非国之利。
现代文：明公不先告诫使他改正，而自相动兵，不利国家。
English: Ming Gong did not first admonish him to rectify, but mobilized troops on his own, to the detriment of the country.

古文：加胜败难保，不如驻兵，以武临之，瓚必悔祸谢罪，所谓不战而服人者也。 
现代文：再说胜败难料，不如把军队驻扎下来，向他显示武力，公孙瓒必定会悔过而来谢罪，这是所谓不战而使人屈服的办法啊。 
English: Besides, victory or defeat is hard to predict. It is better to station the army and show force to him. Gongsun Yao will surely repent and apologize. This is the so-called way to make people give in without fighting.

古文：虞以绪临事沮议，遂斩之以徇。
现代文：刘虞认为程绪临战阻碍计划，便杀了他来示众。
English: Liu Yu thought that Chengxu was hindering the battle plan, so he killed him to show the public.

古文：戒军士曰： 无伤余人，杀一伯珪而已。 
现代文：告诫军士说： 不要伤害别人，衹杀一个伯珪就是了。 
English: "Don't hurt others, just kill a hawker," he warned the sergeant.

古文：时，州从事公孙纪者，瓚以同姓厚待遇之。
现代文：当时有个州裹的从事公孙纪，公孙瓒曾因为是同姓对他很好。
English: At that time, there was a prefect who was engaged in Gongsun Ji. Gongsun Yao had been very kind to him because he had the same surname.

古文：纪知虞谋而夜告瓚。
现代文：公孙纪知道了刘虞的计划而连夜报告了公孙瓒。
English: Gongsun Ji learned of Liu Yu's plan and reported it to Gongsun Yao overnight.

古文：瓚时部曲放散在外，仓卒自惧不免，乃掘东城欲走。
现代文：公孙瓒当时部队分散在外头，慌乱之间怕自己不能幸免，于是挖开束城打算逃走。
English: At that time, Gongsun Yao's troops were scattered outside, and he was afraid that he would not be spared during the panic, so he dug up Shucheng and planned to escape.

古文：虞兵不习战，又爱人庐舍，敕不听焚烧，急攻围不下。
现代文：刘虞的兵士不惯于打仗，又爱惜民房，不让焚烧，一时攻不下来。
English: Liu Yu's soldiers were not used to fighting, and they spared people's houses and did not allow them to be burned.

古文：瓚乃简募锐士数百人，因风纵火，直冲突之。
现代文：公孙瓒于是挑勇士数百人，趁风纵火，径直冲杀过去。
English: Gongsun Yao then picked up hundreds of warriors, took advantage of the wind to start a fire, and rushed straight to kill them.

古文：虞遂大败，与官属北奔居庸县。
现代文：刘虞随之大败，与他的下属向北逃到居庸县。
English: Liu Yu suffered a crushing defeat, and he and his subordinates fled north to Juyong County.

古文：瓚追攻之，三日城陷，遂执虞并妻、子还蓟，犹使领州文书。
现代文：公孙瓒追击攻城，三天城陷，随即抓住刘虞和他老婆孩子回蓟，还让他管理州裹的公文。
English: Gongsun Qi chased and attacked the city, and the city fell in three days. Liu Yu and his wife and children were immediately captured, and he was put in charge of the state-wrapped documents.

古文：会天子遣使者段训增虞封邑，督六州事；拜瓚前将军，封易侯，假节督幽、并、青、冀。
现代文：这时天子派使者段训给刘虞增加封邑，督率六州事务；拜公孙瓒为前将军，封易侯，假节，督率幽、并、青、冀四州。
English: At this time, the heavenly son sent the envoy Duan Xun to Liu Yu to increase the fiefs and counties, and supervise the affairs of six states; Baigong Sun Qi was a former general, fiefs and counties, and festivals, and supervised Yu, Nian, Qing, and Hebei four states.

古文：瓚乃诬虞前与袁绍等欲称尊号，胁训斩虞于蓟市。
现代文：公孙瓒于是诬陷刘虞以前和袁绍等人打算称皇帝，胁迫段司在蓟的街市上斩了刘虞。
English: Therefore, before Gongsun Rong framed Liu Yu, he and Yuan Shao and others planned to call him the emperor, and coerced Duan Si to behead Liu Yu in the street market of Rong.

古文：先坐而咒曰： 若虞应为天子者，天当风雨以相救。 
现代文：先坐下而祝告说： 如果刘虞当为天子，当降风雨相救。 
English: He first sat down and said, "If Liu Yu is supposed to be the son of heaven, he will be able to save us from the storm.

古文：时，旱势炎盛，遂斩焉。
现代文：当时干燥炎热，于是就斩了刘虞。
English: It was hot and dry at the time, so Liu Yu was beheaded.

古文：传首京师，故吏尾敦于路劫虞首归葬之。
现代文：公孙瓒让把他的头送到京城，他以前的下属尾敦在路上劫下刘虞的头埋了。
English: Gongsun Yujang sent his head to Beijing, and his former subordinate, Oden, kidnapped Liu Yu on the road and buried his head.

古文：瓚乃上训为幽州刺史。
现代文：公孙瓒上表请任命段训为幽州刺史。
English: Please appoint Duan Xun as Yuzhou's chief historian.

古文：虞以恩厚得众，怀被北州，百姓流旧，莫不痛惜焉。
现代文：刘虞得人心，恩义遍布北部州郡，无论是本地人还是迁移来的百姓，无不为之悲伤。
English: Liu Yu has won the hearts of the people, and Enyi has spread all over the northern prefectures and counties. Whether they are locals or people who have migrated, they are all saddened by it.

古文：初，虞以俭素为操，冠敝不改，乃就补其穿。
现代文：当初，刘虞一向保持俭朴的操守，帽子破了也不换，衹是补补而已。
English: At the beginning, Liu Yu always maintained a frugal and simple ethics. He did not replace his hat when it was broken, and only replaced his cape.

古文：及遇害，瓚兵搜其内，而妻妾服罗纨，盛绮饰，时人以此疑之。
现代文：等到遇害时，公孙瓒的兵搜他家裹，他的妻妾却穿着锦缎，妆饰华丽，当世人因此怀疑他的作为。
English: When he was killed, his soldiers searched his house, but his wife and concubine were wearing brocade and gorgeous makeup, so the world doubted his actions.

古文：和后从袁绍报瓚云。
现代文：刘和后来跟从袁绍向公孙瓒报仇云云。
English: Liu He later followed Yuan Shao in taking revenge on Gongsun Qi.

古文：公孙瓚字伯珪，辽西令支人也。
现代文：◆公孙瓒传，公孙瓒字伯珪，是辽西令支人。
English: ◆ According to Gongsun Xizhong, Gongsun Xizhong was from the West Liaoning Province.

古文：家世二千石。
现代文：家中世代做二千石的官。
English: There are people in my family who have served as Taishu.

古文：瓚以母贱，遂为郡小吏。
现代文：公孙瓒因为生母低贱，于是就做了郡裹的小吏。
English: Because his birth mother was a low-born woman, Gongsun Yao became a minor official of the county.

古文：为人美姿貌，大音声，言事辩慧。
现代文：他长得很漂亮，声音洪亮，报告公事聪明有口才。
English: He was good-looking, had a booming voice, and was an intelligent and eloquent business reporter.

古文：太守奇其才，以女妻之。
现代文：太守觉得他才干不一般，就把女儿嫁给他。
English: The Empress Dowager thought his talent was exceptional, so she married off her daughter to him.

古文：后从涿郡卢植学于缑氏山中，略见书传。
现代文：后来跟着涿郡卢植在缑氏山中读书，多少浏览了一些书籍。
English: Later, he followed Lu Zhi, the county magistrate, to study in the Jinshi Mountains and read some books.

古文：举上计吏。
现代文：被举荐为上计吏。
English: He was recommended for the post of senior tax inspector.

古文：太守刘君坐事槛车征，官法不听吏下亲近，瓚乃改容服，诈称侍卒，身执徒养，御车到洛阳。
现代文：太守刘君犯了事被用囚车解送京城，依朝廷法令不许下属接近，公孙瓒便化妆换了衣服，谎称是服侍他的兵卒，亲自带着路上的衣食用品，赶车到洛阳。
English: When the daimyō Liu Jun committed a crime, he was sent to the capital in a prison van. According to the imperial decree, subordinates were not allowed to approach him. Gongsun Yao then changed his clothes, falsely claimed to be a soldier serving him, and personally took the clothing and food supplies on the road and drove to Luoyang.

古文：太守当徙日南，瓚具豚酒于北芒上，祭辞先人，酹觞祝曰： 昔为人子，今为人臣，当诣日南。
现代文：太守要流放到曰南，公孙瓒在北芒上备下酒肉，祭祀祖先，洒酒祝告曰： 昔为人子，今为人臣，要到曰南去了。
English: The daimyō was to be exiled to the south of Japan, and the great-grandson of the shogun prepared meat and wine on the north wall, offered sacrifices to his ancestors, and poured out wine to celebrate, saying, "Once a son of man, now a vassal, I am going to the south of Japan."

古文：日南多瘴气，恐或不还，便当长辞坟茔。 
现代文：曰南多瘴气，恐怕回不来了，就此永别祖先坟墓。 
English: He said, "Nando is too depressed, I'm afraid he won't be able to come back, so I'm bidding farewell to my ancestor's grave."

古文：慷慨悲泣，再拜而去，观者莫不叹息。
现代文：感情激动悲伤哭泣，拜了又拜这才离去，观看的人无不叹息。
English: Emotionally excited, sad and crying, they bowed and bowed before leaving, and the people watching were all sighing.

古文：既行，于道得赦。
现代文：上路以后，在半道被赦。
English: After going on the road, he was released halfway.

古文：瓚还郡，举孝廉，除辽东属国长史。
现代文：公孙瓒回到郡裹，被举荐为孝廉，任辽东属国长史。
English: Gongsun Rong returned to the county, was recommended as a filial son, and was appointed governor of Liaodong Province.

古文：尝从数十骑出行塞下，卒逢鲜卑数百骑。
现代文：曾带数十名骑兵出塞，猝然遭遇鲜卑数百骑兵。
English: He once led dozens of cavalry out of the city and suddenly encountered hundreds of cavalry.

古文：瓚乃退人空亭，约其从者曰： 今不奔之，则死尽矣。 
现代文：公孙瓒就退到一个空堡垒中，对跟从他的人说： 今天不杀过去，就会死光的。 
English: Gongsun Yao retreated to an empty fortress and said to his followers: "If you do not kill today, you will die."

古文：乃自持两刃矛，驰出冲贼，杀伤数十人，瓚左右亦亡其半，遂得免。
现代文：于是自己手持两刃矛，直奔贼寇，杀敌数十人，他的人也死了一半，逭才得以幸免。
English: So he armed himself with a two-edged spear and headed straight for the bandits, killing dozens of them. Half of his men also died, and only the baboons were spared.

古文：中平中，以瓚督乌桓突骑，车骑将军张温讨凉州贼。
现代文：中平年间，任命公孙瓒统领乌桓突骑，跟车骑将军张温讨伐凉州贼。
English: During the period of Zhongping, Gongsun Qian was appointed as the leader of the Wuhuan cavalry, and rode with the cavalry general Zhang Wen to fight against the thieves of Liangzhou.

古文：会乌桓反畔，与贼张纯等攻击蓟中，瓚率所领追讨纯等有功，迁骑都尉。
现代文：碰上乌桓反叛，与贼人张纯等攻击蓟中，公孙瓒率领他的部下追击讨伐张纯等人有功，升任骑都尉。
English: Faced with Wuhuan's rebellion and attacked by Zhang Chun and others, Gongsun Yao led his men to pursue and fight Zhang Chun and others, and was promoted to captain.

古文：张纯复与叛胡丘力居等寇渔阳、河间、勃海，入平原，多所杀略。
现代文：张纯又和背叛的胡人丘力居等侵犯渔阳、河闲、勃海，入平原，大肆杀人抢掠。
English: Zhang Chun and the traitor Hu Renqiu joined forces to invade Yiyang, He Xing, Bo Hai, into the plains, killing and looting.

古文：瓚追击战于属国石门，虏遂大败，弃妻子逾塞走，悉得其所略男女。
现代文：公孙瓒追击战于属国石门，敌寇大败，丢弃妻子儿女越过边塞逃走，所抢走的男女全部被夺回。
English: Gongsun Qian pursued the war in his country, Shimen. The enemy bandits were defeated. He abandoned his wife and children and fled across the border. All the men and women he robbed were recaptured.

古文：瓚深入无继，反为丘力居等所围于辽西管子城，二百余日，粮尽食马，马尽煮弩楯，力战不敌，乃与士卒辞诀，各分散还。时多雨雪，队坑死者十五六，虏亦饥困，远走柳城。
现代文：公孙瓒深入敌后无援，反而被丘力居等人包围在辽西管子城，过了二百多天，粮食完了吃马，马吃完了煮弓和盾上的皮革，力战不支，于是和士卒们诀别，分散突围，当时雨雪很多，十之五六都死在沟壑裹，敌寇也饥饿困乏，退到柳城。
English: Gongsunjun went deep into the enemy's rear without any help, but was instead surrounded by Qiu Liguo and others in Guanzicheng, West Liaoning Province. After more than 200 days, they ran out of food and had to eat horses. The horses had finished eating the boiled bows and the leather on the shields, and were too weak to fight, so they said goodbye to the soldiers and dispersed to break out of the encirclement. At that time, there was a lot of rain and snow, and five out of ten died in the ravine. The enemy crows were also starving and exhausted, and retreated to Liucheng.

古文：诏拜瓚降虏校尉，封都亭侯，复兼领属国长史。
现代文：朝廷任命公孙瓒为降虏校尉，封都亭侯，又兼任领属国长史。
English: The imperial court appointed Gongsun Rong as a subordinate lieutenant, vassal prince, and also as a subordinate governor.

古文：职统戎马，连接边寇。
现代文：他统率兵马，地连边寇。
English: He led the soldiers and horses, accompanied by border robbers.

古文：每闻有警，瓚辄厉色愤怒，如赴仇敌，望尘奔逐，或继之以夜战。
现代文：每次有敌情，公孙瓒总是一脸怒气，如同去寻找仇人，望到敌人的踪迹就冲杀过去，有时还继之以夜战。
English: Whenever there was a hostile situation, Gongsun Yao always had an angry face, as if he was looking for enemies, and when he saw the enemy's tracks, he would rush to kill them, sometimes followed by a night battle.

古文：虏识瓚声，惮其勇，莫敢抗犯。
现代文：敌寇知道他的名声，害怕他的勇猛，无人敢和他对抗。
English: The enemy knew his reputation, feared his bravery, and no one dared to oppose him.

古文：瓚常与善射之士数十人，皆乘白马，以为左右翼，自号 白马义从 。
现代文：公孙瓒经常带领几十名善射箭者，都骑白马，作为左右翼，自称 白马义从 。
English: Gongsun Yao often led dozens of good archery players, all riding white horses, as the left and right wings, claiming to be the white horse.

古文：乌桓更相告语，避白马长史。
现代文：乌桓互相转告，避开白马长史。
English: The cormorants told each other to stay away from the white horse.

古文：乃画作瓚形，驰骑射之，中者咸称万岁。
现代文：于是画了公孙瓒的像，骑在马上射它，射中了就高呼万岁。
English: So he drew a picture of Gongsun Lan, rode a horse and shot it, and shouted "Long live!" when he hit it.

古文：虏自此之后，遂远窜塞外。
现代文：敌寇从此远逃塞外。
English: From then on, the enemy bandits fled far outside the fortress.

古文：瓚志埽灭乌桓，而刘虞欲以恩信招降，由是与虞相忤。
现代文：公孙瓒立志打败乌桓，而刘虞想以恩德招降，因此和刘虞产生矛盾。
English: Gongsun Yao was determined to defeat Wuhuan, while Liu Yu wanted to use benevolence to win over Wuhuan, which led to a conflict with Liu Yu.

古文：初平二年，青、徐黄巾三十万众入勃海界，欲与黑山合。
现代文：初平二年，青州、徐州黄巾三十万进入勃海地界，想和黑山会合。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, 300,000 Qingzhou and Xuzhou yellow scarves entered the territory of the Kingdom of Hungary, hoping to join Montenegro.

古文：瓚率步骑二万人，逆击于东光南，大破之，斩首三万余级。
现代文：公孙瓒带步骑兵二万人，迎击于东光之南，大破黄巾，斩首三万余级。
English: Gongsun led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to meet the attack in the south of Dongguang, broke the yellow scarf, and beheaded more than 30,000 people.

古文：贼弃其车重数万两，奔走度河。瓚因其半济薄之，贼复大破，死者数万，流血丹水，收得生口七万余人，车甲财物不可胜算，威名大震。
现代文：贼寇丢弃其辎重车敷万辆，逃渡黄河，公孙瓒趁他们渡河时压过去，贼寇又大败，死了几万人，流血染红了河水，生擒七万余人，车辆盔甲财物敷不清，公孙瓒威名大震。
English: The bandits abandoned their thousands of heavy carts and fled across the Yellow River. Gongsun Rong took advantage of their crossing to crush them. The bandits were again defeated. Tens of thousands of people died. Bloodshed turned the river red. More than 70,000 people died. Vehicles, armor, and property were not properly secured. Gongsun Rongwei suffered a major earthquake.

古文：拜奋武将军，封蓟侯。
现代文：封为奋武将军和蓟侯。
English: He was given the titles of General Tengwu and Prince.

古文：瓚既谏刘虞遣兵就袁术，而惧术知怨之，乃使从弟越将千余骑诣术自结。
现代文：公逊玺既然劝阻垫瞳派兵就塞街，怕塞姬知道了恨他，就让他的堂弟公孙越带着千余骑兵结交塞姬。
English: Since Gongsun Rong had dissuaded Mat Hitomi from sending soldiers to block the streets, fearing that Seiji would know and hate him, he had his cousin Gongsun Yue bring more than a thousand cavalrymen to befriend Seiji.

古文：术遣越随其将孙坚，击袁绍将周昕，越为流矢所中死。
现代文：塞姬派公逊越跟随他的部将逊坚，攻打塞垄的部将厘亚，公茎越被流矢射死。
English: Seiji sent his general Sun Yue to follow his general Sun Jian and attack the general Lia of Seireng. The general was killed by a stray arrow.

古文：瓚因此怒绍，遂出军屯槃河，将以报绍。
现代文：公逐玺因此痛恨袁绍，随即出兵驻扎在槃河，要向袁绍报仇。
English: Therefore, he hated Yuan Shao, and immediately dispatched troops to be stationed in Luohe to take revenge on Yuan Shao.

古文：乃上疏曰：臣闻皇羲已来，君臣道著，张礼以导人，设刑以禁暴。
现代文：因此向朝廷上书说： 臣听说自伏羲以来，君臣之道显明，张扬礼仪来引导人们，设置刑罚以禁止强暴。
English: Therefore, he wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: "I have heard that since Fuxi, the way of the ruler and the subject has become clear, the etiquette has been promoted to guide people, and punishments have been set up to prohibit rape.

古文：今车骑将军袁绍，托承先轨，爵任崇厚，而性本淫乱，情行浮薄。
现代文：如今车骑将军袁绍，凭藉先帝厚恩，得享高官厚禄。而他性本淫乱，行为浮薄。
English: Nowadays, the cavalry general Yuan Shao, thanks to the benevolence of the former emperor, has enjoyed high rank and high salary. However, his character is immoral and his behavior is shallow.

古文：昔为司隶，值国多难，太后承摄，何氏辅朝。
现代文：以前任司隶校尉时，正值国家多难，太后摄政，何氏掌权。
English: When he was a captain of the Sili School, the country was in a difficult time, the empress dowager was regent, and Ho was in power.

古文：绍不能举直措枉，而专为邪媚，招来不轨，疑误社稷，至令丁原焚烧孟津，董卓造为乱始。
现代文：袁绍不能选拔贤才，而专做奸邪谄媚之事，招引不轨之徒，贻误国家，致使丁原烧孟津，董卓作乱。
English: Yuan Shao couldn't select a wise man, but only did things that were treacherous, evil, and flattering, lured unscrupulous people, and misled the country, causing Ding Yuan to burn Mengjin and Dong Zhuo to create turmoil.

古文：绍罪一也。
现代文：这是袁绍第一条罪状。
English: This is the first charge against Yuan Shao.

古文：卓既无礼，帝主见质。
现代文：董卓不守臣礼，以君主为人质。
English: Dong Zhuo did not observe the court etiquette and took the monarch as a hostage.

古文：绍不能开设权谋，以济君父，而弃置节传，迸窜逃亡。
现代文：袁绍不能出谋献策，来帮助君主，却丢弃符节，奔窜逃亡。
English: Yuan Shao could not come up with a plan to help the monarch, but he threw away the charms and ran away.

古文：忝辱爵命，背违人主，绍罪二也。
现代文：辱没了他的职务，背叛了他的君主。这是袁绍第二条罪状。
English: He disgraced his office and betrayed his sovereign. This is Yuan Shao's second charge.

古文：绍为勃海，当攻董卓，而默选戎马，不告父兄，至使太傅一门，累然同毙。不仁不孝，绍罪三也。
现代文：袁绍在勃海任职，应当攻打董卓，但悄悄准备兵马，不告诉自己的父兄，致使他叔父太傅袁隗一门，被杀，不仁不孝，这是袁绍第三条罪状。
English: Yuan Shao was on duty in Bohai and was supposed to attack Dong Zhuo, but he quietly prepared troops and horses and did not tell his father and brother. As a result, his uncle, the great-uncle Yuan Shao, was killed. This is the third charge against Yuan Shao.

古文：绍既兴兵，涉历二载，不恤国难，广自封植，乃多引资粮，专为不急，割刻无方，考责百姓，其为痛怨，莫不咨嗟。
现代文：袁绍起兵以后，历时二年，不体恤国难，四处搜刮财物。大力储存粮食，专做不急之事，不择手段，勒索百姓，他所造成的痛苦，无不为之悲叹。
English: After Yuan Shao raised an army, which lasted for two years, he was inconsiderate of the national calamity, scavenged for wealth everywhere, conserved grain vigorously, devoted himself to non-urgent matters, and resorted to all means to extort the people. The pain he caused was lamented by all.

古文：绍罪四也。
现代文：这是袁绍第四条罪状。
English: This is the fourth charge against Yuan Shao.

古文：逼迫韩馥，窃夺其州，矫刻金玉，以为印玺，每有所下，辄皁囊施检，文称诏书。
现代文：逼迫韩馥，非法夺取他的州郡，私刻金石，作为印玺，每次下发文书，总用黑绸袋子密封，题名为 诏书 。
English: Persecuted Han Xuan, illegally seized his counties and prefectures, used privately engraved precious stones as seals, and always sealed the documents with black silk bags every time they were issued, with the title "The Edict."

古文：昔亡新僭侈，渐以即真。
现代文：王莽篡夺行为，也是逐渐发展而达到目的。
English: Wang Mang's act of usurpation is also a gradual development to achieve the goal.

古文：观绍所拟，将必阶乱。
现代文：观察袁绍的打算，一定将引出大乱。
English: Observe Yuan Shao's intention, it will surely lead to chaos.

古文：绍罪五也。
现代文：这是袁绍第五条罪状。
English: This is the fifth charge against Yuan Shao.

古文：绍令星工伺望祥妖，赂遗财货，与共饮食，克会期日，攻抄郡县。
现代文：袁绍命观星象的人察看吉凶，赠送他钱财，和他一起吃喝，选定日期，攻掠郡县。
English: Yuan Shao ordered the stargazer to observe the auspicious and the inauspicious, give him money and gifts, eat and drink with him, choose a date, and attack and plunder counties.

古文：此岂大臣所当施为？
现代文：这难道是一个大臣应当做的吗？
English: Isn't that what a minister is supposed to do?

古文：绍罪六也。
现代文：这是袁绍第六条罪状。
English: This is the sixth charge against Yuan Shao.

古文：绍与故虎牙都尉刘勋，首共造兵，勋降服张杨，累有功效，而以小忿枉加酷害。
现代文：袁绍与死去的虎牙都尉刘勋共同起兵，刘勋使张杨降服，屡次立功，而袁绍因为一点儿小仇冤枉地加以迫害。
English: Yuan Shao and the dead tiger-toothed captain Liu Xun jointly raised an army. Liu Xun forced Zhang Yang to surrender and repeatedly rendered meritorious service, while Yuan Shao unjustly persecuted him because of a small grudge.

古文：信用谗慝，济其无道，绍罪七也。
现代文：任用奸佞小人，帮助他为非作歹，这是袁绍第七条罪状。
English: Yuan Shao was charged with the seventh count of appointing a villain and helping him commit crimes.

古文：故上谷太守高焉、故甘陵相姚贡，绍以贪惏，横责其钱，钱不备毕，二人并命。
现代文：死去的上谷太守高焉，死去的甘陵相姚贡，袁绍贪婪地向他们要钱，钱没有备齐，二人一齐毙命。
English: The deceased Shanggu Taizhu Gao Yan, the deceased Ganling Xiang Yaogong, and Yuan Shao greedily asked them for money. The money was not ready, and they both died.

古文：绍罪八也。
现代文：这是袁绍第八条罪状。
English: This is Yuan Shao's eighth charge.

古文：《春秋》之义，子以母贵。
现代文：依照《春秋》之义，子随母贵。
English: According to the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," children are as precious as their mothers.

古文：绍母亲为傅婢，地实微贱，据职高重，享福丰隆。
现代文：袁绍之母身为婢女，地位实在低贱，他却身居高位，安享厚福。
English: Yuan Shao's mother was a handmaid, so her status was really low, but he was in a high position, enjoying good fortune.

古文：有苟进之志，无虚退之心，绍罪九也。
现代文：有侥幸进升之志，无谦虚退让之心，这是袁绍第九条罪状。
English: Yuan Shao was found guilty of Article 9 of the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China.

古文：又长沙太守孙坚，前领豫州刺史，遂能驱走董卓，埽除陵庙，忠勤王室，其功莫大。
现代文：另者长沙太守孙坚，从前领豫州刺史，能够驱逐董卓，打扫皇陵宗庙，忠心辅助王室，功劳很大。
English: On the other hand, Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, once led the history of Yuzhou, was able to expel Dong Zhuo, clean the imperial mausoleum and temple, and loyally assisted the royal family, which was a great achievement.

古文：绍遣小将盗居其位，断绝坚粮，不得深入，使董卓久不服诛。
现代文：袁绍派遣小将非法占据他的位置，断绝他的粮食供应，使他不能深入，使董卓长期不能伏法。
English: Yuan Shao sent young generals to illegally occupy his position, cut off his food supply, so that he could not go deep, so that Dong Zhuo could not lie for a long time.

古文：绍罪十也。
现代文：这是袁绍第十条罪状。
English: This is article 10 of Yuan Shao's indictment.

古文：昔姬周政弱，王道陵迟，天子迁徙，诸侯背叛，故齐桓立柯亭之盟，晋文为践土之会，伐荆楚以致菁茅，诛曹、卫以章无礼。
现代文：以前周朝衰落，王道沦丧，天子迁徙，诸侯背叛，所以齐桓公设立柯亭之盟，晋文公召集践土之会，讨伐荆楚使其向天子纳贡，攻击曹、卫以昭示他们无礼。
English: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty was in decline, the royal road was lost, the heavenly sons migrated, and the lords betrayed. Therefore, King Qi Huan established the alliance of Ke Ting, King Jin Weng convened the earth-moving association, fought against Jing Chu to make it pay tribute to the heavenly sons, and attacked Cao and Wei to show their rudeness.

古文：臣虽茸，名非先贤，蒙被朝恩，负荷重任，职在鈇钺，奉辞伐罪，辄与诸将州郡共讨绍等。
现代文：臣虽微贱，名声不比先贤，但蒙受皇恩，肩负重任，身负军职，奉命讨伐罪人，斗胆与诸将和各州郡共讨袁绍等人。
English: Although he was a lowly minister with a reputation no better than that of the sages, he was favored by the emperor, shouldered heavy responsibilities, served in the military, was ordered to fight criminals, and dared to fight against Yuan Shao and others with generals and various states and counties.

古文：若大事克捷，罪人斯得，庶续桓文忠诚之效。
现代文：如果大功告成，罪人都被擒获，或许能够续接齐桓、晋文忠诚的业绩。 
English: If the great work is accomplished and the criminals are caught, it may be possible to continue Qi Huan and Jinwen's loyal performance.

古文：遂举兵攻绍，于是冀州诸城悉畔从瓚。
现代文：随即发兵进攻袁绍，于是冀州各城都背叛袁绍而投向公孙瓒。
English: He immediately sent troops to attack Yuan Shao. As a result, all the cities in Jizhou betrayed Yuan Shao and sided with Gongsun Ye.

古文：绍惧，乃以所佩勃海太守印绶授瓚从弟范，遣之郡，欲以相结。
现代文：袁绍惧怕，就把自己所佩带的勃海太守印绶授给公孙瓒的堂弟公孙范，派他到勃海去上任，想以此来与公孙瓒和解。
English: Fearing this, Yuan Shao bestowed the imperial seal of the Bohai Empress Dowager on Gongsun Qi's cousin, Gongsun Fan, and sent him to Bohai to take office, hoping to reconcile with Gongsun Qi.

古文：而范遂背绍，领勃海兵以助瓚。
现代文：而公孙范立刻背叛了袁绍，领勃海兵来帮助公孙瓒。
English: But Gongsun Fan immediately betrayed Yuan Shao and led Bo's marines to help Gongsun Yao.

古文：瓚乃自署其将帅为青、冀、兗三州刺史，又悉置郡县守令，与绍大战于界桥。
现代文：公孙瓒就自己分派他的将帅任青、冀、兖三州刺史，又全部安排了郡守县令，与袁绍大战于界桥。
English: Gongsun Yao himself assigned his generals Renqing, Hebei, and Handan to the three states of Zhishi, and arranged all the county governors to fight with Yuan Shao at the bridge.

古文：瓚军败还蓟。
现代文：公孙瓒兵败回蓟。
English: Gongsun and his soldiers were defeated and returned to the capital.

古文：绍遣将崔巨业将兵数万攻围故安，不下，退军南还。
现代文：袁绍派部将崔巨业领兵数万围攻故安不下，退兵南归。
English: Yuan Shao sent his troops to besiege Cui Jiuye with tens of thousands of soldiers, but the situation remained unstable, and the troops retreated to the south.

古文：瓚将步骑三万人追击于巨马水，大破其众，死者七八千人。
现代文：公孙瓒带步骑兵三万人追击到巨马水，大败袁军，杀死七八千人。
English: Gongsun led 30,000 infantry and cavalry to chase the giant horse into the water, defeated Yuan's army, and killed seven or eight thousand people.

古文：乘胜而南，攻下郡县，遂至平原，乃遣其青州刺史田揩据有齐地。
现代文：乘胜南下，攻破一些郡县，接着到了平原，就派他的青州刺史田揩占有齐地。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, he went south and broke through some counties. Then, when he reached the plains, he sent his Qingzhou Jishi Tianyu to occupy all the land.

古文：绍复遣兵数万与揩连战二年，粮食并尽，士卒疲困，互掠百姓，野无青草。
现代文：袁绍又派兵数万和田揩连战二年，双方粮食都吃完了，士卒疲惫，交替抢掠百姓，田野裹连青草都光了。
English: Yuan Shao also sent tens of thousands of soldiers to the Hetian Plain to continue the war for two years. Both sides had run out of grain, the soldiers were exhausted, they alternately robbed and plundered the people, and the fields and grass were all gone.

古文：绍乃遣子谭为青州刺史，揩与战，败退还。
现代文：袁绍就派他儿子袁谭为青州刺史，田揩与他作战，战败返回。
English: Yuan Shao sent his son Yuan Tan to write a history of Qingzhou, and Tian Qi fought with him, but was defeated and returned home.

古文：是岁，瓚破禽刘虞，尽有幽州之地，猛志益盛。
现代文：当年，公孙瓒擒获刘虞，完全占有幽州之地，雄心更大。
English: In that year, Gongsun Yao won Liu Yu, completely occupied the land of Yuzhou, and was more ambitious.

古文：前此有童谣言： 燕南垂，赵北际，中央不合大如砺，唯有此中可避世。 
现代文：此前有童谣说： 燕南陲，趟北际，中间刚好大如砺，惟有此中可避世。 
English: Previously, there was a nursery rhyme that said: Yan Nan Zi, wade to the north, the middle is just as big as Zi, only in this way can you avoid the world.

古文：瓚自以为易地当之，遂徙镇焉。
现代文：公孙瓒自认为说的就是易这个地方，随即迁到这裹。
English: Gongsun Yao thought this was the right place and moved here.

古文：乃盛修营垒，楼观数十，临易河，通辽海。
现代文：修营垒，筑楼观敷十座，临易河，通辽海。
English: They set up camp, built ten viewing pavilions, crossed the Lin Yi River, and sailed to the Liao Sea.

古文：刘虞从事渔阳鲜于辅等，合率州兵，欲共报瓚。
现代文：刘虞的从事渔阳鲜于辅等人，联合率领州裹军队，要一起来找公孙瓒报仇。
English: Liu Yu, who was engaged in fishing, Yang Xian, Yu Shuo and others, jointly led the state-encircled army to come together to seek revenge for Gongsun Xuan.

古文：辅以燕国阎柔素有恩信，推为乌桓司马。
现代文：鲜于辅以为燕国阎柔一向有信义，推举他为乌桓司马。
English: Little Yu Fu thought that Yan Guo and Yan Rong had always been trustworthy, and recommended him as Wu Huan's successor.

古文：柔招诱胡汉数万人，与瓚所置渔阳太守邹丹战于潞北，斩丹等四千余级。
现代文：阎柔招募引诱胡汉数万人，和公孙瓒所任命的渔阳太守邹丹战于潞北，斩邹丹军首级四千多。
English: Yan Rong recruited and lured tens of thousands of people from Huhang, and together with Yuyang Taishu, appointed by Gongsun Qian, fought in the north of Shantang, decapitating more than four thousand of the Shantang army.

古文：乌桓峭王感虞恩德，率种人及鲜卑七千余骑，共辅南迎虞子和，与袁绍将麴义合兵十万，共攻瓚。
现代文：乌桓峭王感戴刘虞的恩德，率领同族人及鲜卑人的七千多骑兵，和鲜于辅一起南下迎接刘虞的儿子刘和，和袁绍部将曲义合兵十万，一起攻打公孙瓒。
English: King Wu Huanqiao was impressed by Liu Yu's benevolence, and led more than seven thousand cavalrymen of the same ethnic group and the Xianbei people. Together with Xian Yu Fu, he went south to meet Liu Yu's son Liu He, and with Yuan Shao's general Qu Yi and one hundred thousand soldiers, together they attacked Gongsun Yao.

古文：兴平二年，破瓚于鲍丘，斩首二万余级。
现代文：兴平二年，在鲍丘击败公孙瓒，斩首二万余级。
English: In the second year of Xingping, he defeated Gongsun Qi in Baoqiu and beheaded more than twenty thousand people.

古文：瓚遂保易京，开置屯田，稍得自支。
现代文：公孙瓒于是保守易京，屯田种粮，逐渐得以自给。
English: As a result, Gongsun Rong preserved the capital and cultivated grain in the rural areas, and gradually became self-sufficient.

古文：相持岁余，麴义军粮尽，士卒饥困，余众数千人退走。
现代文：相持一年多，曲义军粮吃完，士卒饥饿困乏，有一股数千人退走。
English: After holding out for more than a year, the Qiuyi army ran out of food, the soldiers were starving and exhausted, and thousands of people retreated.

古文：瓚徼破之，尽得其车重。
现代文：公孙瓒截击了他们，全部缴获他们的车辆辎重。
English: Gongsun Qi intercepted them, and all of their vehicles were seized.

古文：是时，旱、蝗，谷贵，民相食。
现代文：当时因早灾蝗灾谷价昂贵，以致人吃人。
English: At that time, due to the early disaster, the price of locusts in the valley was expensive, so that people ate people.

古文：瓚恃其才力，不恤百姓，记过忘善，睚眦必报，州里善士名在其右者，必以法害之。
现代文：公孙瓒仗恃自己的才干和势力，不爱惜百姓，专记别人的过失而不记别人的好处，一点小怨仇必定报复，州裹有德之士名声超过他的，他必定加上罪名而杀害。
English: Gongsun coveted his own talent and power, did not care about the people, focused on the faults of others without remembering the benefits of others, a little bit of grudge must be avenged, the reputation of a virtuous man in the state exceeded him, he must add a crime and kill.

古文：常言 衣冠皆自以职分富贵，不谢人惠。 
现代文：常说： 做官的都是命中注定享受富贵，不用感谢别人的好处。 
English: It is often said that those who become officials are destined to enjoy wealth and do not need to thank others for their benefits.

古文：故所宠爱，类多商贩庸兒。
现代文：因此他所宠爱的，大多是商贩之类的常人。
English: Therefore, most of his favorites are ordinary people such as merchants.

古文：所在侵暴，自姓怨之。
现代文：所到之处欺凌强暴，百姓怨恨。
English: Everywhere there is bullying and violence, and the people are angry.

古文：于是代郡、广阳、上谷、右北平各杀瓚所置长吏，复与辅、和兵合。瓚虑有非常，乃居于高京，以铁为门。
现代文：于是代郡、广阳、上谷、右北平各自杀死公孙瓒所任命的官吏，又与鲜于辅、刘和军队联合，公孙瓒怕生出意外，于是居住在高台上，用铁门。
English: As a result, Dai County, Guangyang, Shanggu and Right Beiping each killed the officials appointed by Gongsun Yao, and joined forces with Sun Yu Fu, Liu He and the army. Gongsun Yao was afraid of an accident, so he lived on a high platform with an iron gate.

古文：斥去左右，男人七岁以上不得入易门。
现代文：斥退左右的人，男人七岁以上不许进入易京大门。
English: Men over the age of seven are not allowed to enter the Yijing Gate.

古文：专侍姬妾，其文簿书记皆汲而上之。
现代文：衹让姬妾们服侍，所有公文书信都用绳子吊上去。
English: He had his concubines serve him, and all official letters were hung up with a rope.

古文：令妇人习为大言声，使闻数百步，以传宣教令。
现代文：命令周围的女人们练习大嗓门，使声音可以传敷百步，以传达他的命令。
English: He ordered the women around him to practice raising their voices so they could carry his orders.

古文：疏远宾客，无所亲信，故谋臣猛将，稍有乖散。
现代文：疏远宾客，谁也不信任，因此他的谋臣猛将，逐渐生出二心或离他而去。
English: He alienates his guests and trusts no one. As a result, his most trusted adviser, the fierce general, gradually loses heart or leaves him.

古文：自此之后，希复攻战。
现代文：从此以后，很少再去作战。
English: Since then, it has rarely gone to war.

古文：或问其故。瓚曰： 我昔驱畔胡于塞表，埽黄巾于孟津，当此之时，谓天下指麾可定。
现代文：有人间他原因，公孙瓒说： 我以前在塞外驱逐叛胡，在孟津扫荡黄巾，当那个时候，认为天下稍作指挥就可以平定。
English: Gongsun Yao said: I used to expel the traitor Hu outside of Tibet and sweep the yellow scarves in Mengjin. At that time, I thought that the world could be pacified with a little command.

古文：至于今日，兵革方始，观此非我所决，不如休兵力耕，以救凶年。
现代文：到了今天，战事还是方兴未艾，看来不是我所能解决的，不如罢兵耕田，救济荒年。
English: To this day, the war is still in the ascendant, it seems that it is not something I can solve, it is better to stop the army to cultivate the fields, relief the barren years.

古文：兵法百楼不攻。今吾诸营楼樐千里，积谷三百万斛，食此足以待天下之变。 
现代文：兵法上说百楼不攻，如今我各营楼台千里，积蓄谷物三百万斛，有这些吃的就足以等待天下的变化。
English: According to the laws of war, one hundred towers do not make an attack. Today, each battalion has thousands of towers, and three million bushels of grain have been accumulated. With these foods, it is enough to wait for the world to change.

古文：建安三年，袁绍复大攻瓚。
现代文：建安三年，袁绍又大举进攻公孙瓒。
English: Three years after the establishment of Jian'an, Yuan Shao launched another large-scale attack on Gongsun.

古文：瓚遣子续请救于黑山诸帅，而欲自将突骑直出，傍西山以断绍后。
现代文：公孙瓒派儿子公孙续向黑山各首领求救，而打算自率精锐骑兵突围，沿西山以断袁绍后路。
English: Gongsun sent his son Gongsun to appeal to the leaders of Montenegro for help, and planned to break out of the encirclement with his elite cavalry and cut off Yuan Shao's rear path along the West Mountain.

古文：长史关靖谏曰： 今将军将士，莫不怀瓦解之心，所以犹能相守者，顾恋其老小，而恃将军为主故耳。
现代文：长史关靖劝阻说： 如今将军的将士人心涣散，之所以还能在这裹守卫，是舍不得自家的老小，而倚赖将军是他们的主人罢了。
English: Changshi Guanjing dissuaded him, saying, "Nowadays, the generals' soldiers are scattered, and the reason why they can still guard here is that they can't spare their own children, but rely on the generals as their masters.

古文：坚守旷日，或可使绍自退。若舍之而出，后无镇重，易京之危，可立而待也。 
现代文：坚守日子长了，或许可以让袁绍自己退兵；如丢下逭裹冲出去，身后没有威重人物的镇守，易京的危亡，立等可到啊。 
English: If he holds out for a long time, he may be able to let Yuan Shao himself retire; if he throws down his shackles and rushes out, there will be no dignified town guard behind him, and the perilous death of Yijing can come immediately.

古文：瓚乃止。
现代文：公孙瓒才作罢。
English: It was only after the death of his grandson that he decided to stop.

古文：绍渐相攻逼，瓚众日蹙，乃却，筑三重营以自固。
现代文：袁绍逐步进逼，公孙瓒的军队趋困难，于是后退，修筑三层营垒来加固防御。
English: As Yuan Shao advanced step by step, Gongsun Yao's army was in difficulty, so he retreated and built a three-tiered camp to strengthen the defense.

古文：四年春，黑山贼帅张燕与续率兵十万，三道来救瓚。
现代文：建安四年春天，黑山贼首领张燕与公孙续率兵十万，分三路来救公孙瓒。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jianan, Zhang Yan, the leader of the Montenegrin thieves, and Gongsun continued to lead 100,000 soldiers, divided into three ways to rescue Gongsun Yao.

古文：未及至，瓚乃密使行人赍书告续曰： 昔周末丧乱，僵尸蔽地，以意而推，犹为否也。
现代文：未到以前，公孙瓒秘密派使者带书信告诉公孙续说： 从前周朝末年大乱，尸体遍地，据推测，总不相信有遣样的事。
English: Before he arrived, Gongsun Yao secretly sent an emissary with a letter to tell Gongsun Yao that: Since the chaos at the end of the previous week and the beginning of the new year, there have been dead bodies everywhere. Presumably, Gongsun Yao did not believe in the sending of samples.

古文：不图今日亲当其锋。
现代文：不料今天自己真赶上了。
English: Unexpectedly, I actually caught up today.

古文：袁氏之攻，状若鬼神，梯冲舞吾楼上，鼓角鸣于地中，日穷月急，不遑启处，鸟厄归人，滀水陵高，汝当碎首于张燕，驰骤以告急。
现代文：袁氏攻击，行动如同鬼神，架梯冲上来在我楼顶上跳跃，战鼓号角在地下岛响，形势一天天危急，没有喘息的功夫。飞乌无处可栖只好投入人的怀抱，湍急的水流会漫上高坡，你要拼命求告张燕，飞奔前去告急。
English: Yuan's attack, the action is like a ghost god, the ladder rushes up and jumps on the roof of my building, the war drum horn sounds in the underground island, the situation is critical day by day, there is no respite. Fei Wu has nowhere to live and has to be embraced by people, the rushing water will spread to the high slope, you have to desperately call Zhang Yan and rush forward to be in a hurry.

古文：父子天性，不言而动。
现代文：父子天然之情，无须言语也会有所感应。
English: The natural affection between father and son can be felt without words.

古文：且厉五千铁骑于北隰之中，起火为应，吾当自内出，奋扬威武，决命于斯。不然，吾亡之后，天下虽广，不容汝足矣。 
现代文：请火速带五千铁骑到北边的低湿地带，点火为号，我会从城内杀出，振奋神威，在那裹决一死战，不然，我死之后，天下虽大，没有你的立足之地了。 
English: Please ride to the low wetland in the north with the fire speed belt of five thousand iron, ignite as a signal, I will kill out of the city, invigorate, and fight to the death there, otherwise, after my death, although the world is big, there is no foothold for you.

古文：绍候得其书，如期举火，瓚以为救至，遂便出战。
现代文：袁绍的侦察兵截获逭封信，按约定时间点火，公孙瓒以为救兵到了，于是便出城交战。
English: Yuan Shao's scouts intercepted Gong's letter and set fire to it at the appointed time. Gongsun Gong thought that the rescuers had arrived, so he went out of the city to fight.

古文：绍设伏，瓚遂大败，复还保中小城。
现代文：袁绍设下埋伏，公孙瓒于是大败，又退回守卫其中的小城。
English: Yuan Shao set up an ambush, and Gongsun Yao was defeated and retreated to guard one of the small towns.

古文：自计必无全，乃悉缢其姊妹妻子，然后引火自焚。
现代文：自忖定难活命，于是把他的姐妹妻子儿女全部勒死，然后点火自焚。
English: Determined to end his life, he strangled his sisters, wife and children and then set himself on fire.

古文：绍兵趣登台斩之。
现代文：袁绍的兵士冲到台上斩了他。
English: Yuan Shao's soldiers rushed onto the stage and beheaded him.

古文：关靖见瓚败，叹恨曰： 前若不止将军自行，未必不济。
现代文：关靖见公孙瓒败亡，叹息痛恨说： 先前如果将军自己冲出去，未必不能成功。
English: Guan Jing saw Gongsun Yao's defeat, sighed bitterly and said: Previously, if the general rushed out on his own, he may not have been able to succeed.

古文：吾闻君子陷人于危，必同其难，岂可以独生乎！ 
现代文：我听说君子误把人引入危难，一定和人共同承受，怎能自己活着呢！ 
English: I have heard that if a gentleman mistakenly puts someone in danger, he must bear it together with the person. How can he live?

古文：乃策马赴绍军而死。
现代文：于是打马奔向袁绍阵中而死。
English: So he ran to Yuan Shao's camp and died.

古文：续为屠各所杀。
现代文：公孙续被屠各杀死。
English: Gongsun was killed repeatedly by Tu.

古文：田揩与袁绍战死。
现代文：田揩与袁绍交战而死。
English: Tian Xuan died in a battle with Yuan Shao.

古文：鲜于辅将其众归曹操，操以辅为度辽将军，封都亭侯。
现代文：鲜于辅带领他的部众投靠了曹操，曹操任命他为度辽将军，封都亭侯。
English: Xian Yu Fu led his subordinates to support Cao Cao, and Cao Cao appointed him as the general of Du Liao and the vassal of the capital.

古文：阎柔将部曲从曹操击乌桓，拜护乌桓校尉，封关内侯。
现代文：阎柔带着部下跟随曹操攻打乌桓，被任为护乌桓校尉，封关内侯。
English: Yan Rong and her subordinates followed Cao Cao to attack Wuhuan, and she was appointed the captain of Wuhuan's bodyguard and the lord of the castle.

古文：张燕既为绍所败，人众稍散。
现代文：退憨被直钮打败后，部众逐渐散去。
English: After the retreating troops were defeated by the advancing troops, the troops gradually dispersed.

古文：曹操将定冀州，乃率众诣鄴降，拜平北将军，封安国亭侯。
现代文：萱提将要乎定冀州时，他率领部众到邺投降，拜平北将军，封安国亭侯。
English: When Xingti was about to capture Dingji Prefecture, he led his subordinates to surrender to Xing, paid homage to General Pingbei, and was awarded the fief of An Guoting.

古文：论曰：自帝室王公之胃，皆生长脂腴，不知稼穑，其能厉行饬身，卓然不群者，或未闻焉。
现代文：论曰：从来皇家王公的后代都是娇生惯养，不懂得生产劳动，那些能够修炼操行约束自己，优异出众者，还没有听说过。
English: On the other hand, it is said that the descendants of the royal princes have always been pampered and spoiled, and do not know how to produce labor. Those who can cultivate and discipline themselves, and are outstanding, have not been heard of.

古文：刘虞守道慕名，以忠厚自牧。
现代文：刘虞守正道重名声，以忠厚自律。
English: Liu Yuzhu had a reputation of being a righteous person, and was known for his loyalty and self-discipline.

古文：美哉乎，季汉之名宗子也！
现代文：多么美好啊，漠末有名望的皇室后代！
English: How wonderful, the offspring of a famous royal family in the desert!

古文：若虞、瓚无间，同情共力，纠人完聚，稸保燕、蓟之饶，缮兵昭武，以临群雄之隙，舍诸天运，征乎人文，则古之休烈，何远之有！
现代文：如果刘虞公孙瓒二人没有矛盾，同心协力，收集民众修城聚粮，蓄积力量保守燕、蓟富饶之地，修缮甲兵显示威武，来抓住群雄的破绽，不依靠天运，致力于人事，那么要建立古人一样的功业，还能差多远吗！
English: If Liu Yugong and Sun Yat-sen are not contradictory, and work together to collect grain from the people to build the city, accumulate strength to maintain the rich land, repair the armor to show their might, to catch the weak points of the heroes, do not rely on the fate of heaven, and devote themselves to personnel, then how far can they be from establishing the same work as the ancients!

古文：陶谦字恭祖，丹阳人也。
现代文：◆陶谦传，陶谦字恭祖，丹阳人。
English: ◆Courtesy of Tao Qian, Tao Qian Zi Cong Zi, Danyang people.

古文：少为诸生，仕州郡，四迁为车骑将军张温司马，西讨边章。
现代文：年轻时是读书人，在州郡内做官，经过四次升迁任车骑将军张温的司马，到西方讨伐边章。
English: When he was young, he was a reader. He worked as an official in Zhoushu County. After four promotions, he was appointed as the cavalry general Zhang Wen's Sima and went to the west to fight against the border troops.

古文：会徐州黄巾起，以谦为徐州刺史，击黄巾，大破走之，境内晏然。
现代文：适时徐州黄巾起事，任命他为途业刺史，攻打茎生，把他们打败并赶走，境内太平安定。
English: At the right time, Xuzhou Huangban rose in revolt, appointed him as a way to stab history, attacked stems and shoots, defeated and drove them away, and the territory was peaceful and stable.

古文：时，董卓虽诛，而李傕、郭汜作乱关中。
现代文：当时董阜虽已被杀，而奎值、塑担在腿生作乱。
English: At that time, although Dong Fu had already been killed, Kui Zhen and the plastic stretcher caused a disturbance in the leg.

古文：是时，四方断绝，谦每遣使间行，奉贡西京。
现代文：此时四方断绝交通，陶谦屡次派人秘密出行，到酉塞奉献贡品。
English: At this time, the four sides cut off transportation, and Tao Qian repeatedly sent people to travel secretly and offer tributes in Fuxi.

古文：诏迁为徐州牧，加安东将军，封溧阳侯。
现代文：朝廷下诏升任他为徐州牧，加安束将军衔，封溧阳侯。
English: Under the imperial edict, he was promoted to the rank of Xuzhou Maki, Ga'anzhu General, and was given the title of Shenyang Marquis.

古文：是时，徐方百姓殷盛，谷实甚丰，流民多归之。
现代文：当时徐州地方人众多，粮食充足，流民很多跑到那裹去。
English: At that time, there were many local people in Xuzhou, food was sufficient, and many displaced people fled there.

古文：而谦信用非所，刑政不理，别驾从事赵昱，知名士也，而以忠直见疏，出为广陵太守。
现代文：但陶谜用人不当，不理政事。别驾从事趟昱，是知名人士，而因为忠直坦率被疏远，出京任广陵太守。
English: However, Tao Rong employed people improperly and did not take care of political affairs. Do not drive to engage in wading, is a well-known person, and because of loyalty and frankness was alienated, went to Beijing to serve as Guangling Taishu.

古文：曹宏等谗慝小人，谦甚亲任之，良善多被其害。
现代文：萱塞等奸佞小人，眯对他们却很信任重用，好人多被他们残害。
English: There are villains such as swindlers, but they are trusted and reused, and good people are often killed by them.

古文：由斯渐乱。
现代文：徐州从此渐乱。
English: Xuzhou has been in turmoil ever since.

古文：下邳阙宣自称 天子 ，谦始与合从，后遂杀之而并其众。
现代文：下邳鱼暄自称 天子 ，眯起初和他联合，后来把他杀死而兼并了他的部众。
English: He called himself the Son of Heaven, and at first they allied themselves with him, but later they killed him and annexed his followers.

古文：初，曹操父嵩避难琅邪，时谦别将守阴平，士卒利嵩财宝，遂袭杀之。
现代文：当初，曹操的父亲曹嵩到琅邪避难，此时陶谜的部将守堕垩，士兵贪图萱崖的财宝，于是袭击杀了他。
English: At first, Cao Cao's father, Cao Song, took refuge in the cliff. At this time, the leader of the Tao Riddles guarded the fallen cliff, and the soldiers coveted the treasure of the cliff, so they attacked and killed him.

古文：初平四年，曹操击谦，破彭城傅阳。
现代文：初干四年，曹操攻打陶谦，打下彭城垡匮。
English: In his first four years of work, Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian and defeated Peng Cheng.

古文：谦退保郯，操攻之不能克，乃还。
现代文：堕逮退守逊城，萱垒打不下来，于是退兵。
English: Caught in a trap, he retreated back to Sun City. He couldn't hit a home run, so he left the army.

古文：过拔取虑、雎陵、夏丘，皆屠之。
现代文：路过时攻下取虑、雎陵、夏丘，都进行了屠杀。
English: When they passed by, they captured and slaughtered Erxian, Fuling and Xiaqiu.

古文：凡杀男女数十万人，鸡犬无余，泗水为之不流，自是五县城保，无复行迹。
现代文：杀死男女共数十万人，鶸犬不留，泅水因此而堵塞不流通，从此五县地界之内，再没有人的踪影。
English: Hundreds of thousands of men and women were killed, the dogs were not allowed to stay, and the water supply was blocked and cut off. From then on, there was no trace of anyone within the boundaries of the five counties.

古文：初三辅遭李傕乱，百姓流移依谦者皆歼。
现代文：当初三辅遭受李催之乱，百姓流亡到陶谦逭裹的全被杀光。
English: At the beginning, Sanfu suffered from the Ri Chaozhou Rebellion, and the people exiled to Tao Qianlong were all killed.

古文：兴平元年，曹操复击谦，略定琅邪、东海诸县，谦惧不免，欲走归丹阳。
现代文：兴平元年，曹操又攻打陶谦，攻克琅邪、东涂等县，迪谜害怕不能幸免，打算逃回且屋。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian and conquered the counties of Shiyan, Dongtu and so on. Di Rong was afraid that he would not be spared and planned to escape back to Kechiya.

古文：会张邈迎吕布据兗州，操还击布。
现代文：赶上张邈招引吕布占据兖州，曹操回军迎战吕布。
English: Caught up with Zhang Ye, Lv Bu occupied Zhangzhou, Cao Cao returned to meet Lv Bu.

古文：是岁，谦病死。
现代文：当年，陶谦病死。
English: This year, Tao Qian died of illness.

古文：初，同郡人笮融，聚众数百，往依于谦，谦使督广陵、下邳、彭城运粮。
现代文：当初，同郡人笮融，聚众数百人，去投奔陶谦，陶廉让他督管广陵、下邳、彭城运粮。
English: At first, hundreds of people from the same county flocked to Tao Qian, and Tao Qian asked him to supervise the grain transportation in Guangling, Xiamen and Pengcheng.

古文：遂断三郡委输，大起浮屠寺。
现代文：于是他就扣下了三郡输送的资财，大举营造佛寺。
English: As a result, he withheld the funds sent by the three counties and built a Buddhist temple on a large scale.

古文：上累金盘，下为重楼，又堂阁周回，可容三千许人，作黄金涂像，衣以锦彩。
现代文：上面有层叠的黄金承露盘，下面是层层楼阁，又有堂阁环绕，可容纳三千来人，做镀金佛像，给它们穿上锦缎。
English: On the top, there are cascading golden cactus trays, and below, there are layers of pavilions, surrounded by pavilions, which can accommodate three thousand people, making gold-plated Buddha statues and dressing them in brocade.

古文：每浴佛，辄多设饮饭，布席于路，其有就食及观者且万余人。
现代文：每到浴佛节，总要设置大量饮食，在路上摆下桌案，来吃饭和观看的差不多有一万多人。
English: Every time I go to the Bathing Buddha Festival, I always have to set up a lot of food and drink, and set up tables on the road. There are almost more than 10,000 people who come to eat and watch.

古文：及曹操击谦，徐方不安。
现代文：等到曹操攻打陶谦时，徐州地方不安全。
English: When Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian, Xuzhou was not safe.

古文：融乃将男女万口、马三千匹走广陵。
现代文：笮融就带领男女数万人、马三千匹跑到广陵。
English: He led tens of thousands of men and women and 3,000 horses to Guangling.

古文：广陵太守赵昱待以宾礼。
现代文：广陵太守趟昱用贵宾之礼接待他。
English: Guangling Taishou Wanzhao received him with the honor of a distinguished guest.

古文：融利广陵资货，遂乘酒酣杀昱，放兵大掠，因以过江，南奔豫章，杀郡守朱皓，入据其城。
现代文：笮融贪图广陵富饶，于是乘喝酒时杀了趟昱，纵兵大肆抢劫，带着东西渡过长江，南奔豫章，杀死郡太守朱皓，进入占据了他的城池。
English: Yan Rong was greedy for riches, so he took advantage of drinking to kill a lot of people, robbed a lot of soldiers, crossed the Yangtze River with things, went south to Yuzhang, killed the county governor Zhu Xi, and entered the city that occupied him.

古文：后为杨州刺史刘繇所破，走入山中，为人所杀。
现代文：后来笮融被杨州刺史刘繇打败，逃到山裹，被人杀死。
English: Later, Zou Rong was defeated by the Yangzhou assassin Liu Yu and fled to the mountains, where he was killed.

古文：昱字元达，琅邪人。
现代文：赵昱字元达，是琅邪人。
English: Zhao Qi, the character of Yuan Da, is the leading villain.

古文：清己疾恶，潜志好学，虽亲友希得见之。
现代文：以清廉律己痛恨恶行，专心致志好学不厌，即使是亲友也很少见到他。
English: With his incorruptible character, hatred of evil deeds, dedication and eagerness to learn, even his relatives and friends rarely saw him.

古文：为人耳不邪听，目不妄视。
现代文：为人耳不斜听，眼不乱看。
English: The human ear is not inclined to listen, and the eyes are not confused.

古文：太仆种拂举为方正。
现代文：太仆种拂荐举他为方正。
English: He was recommended as a Founder by his servant.

古文：赞曰：襄贲励德，维城燕北。
现代文：赞曰：襄贲侯厉行仁德，于是在夔北筑城。
English: Zang Zi said: "Xiang Zi Hou was a benevolent ruler, so he built a city in the north of Shandong.

古文：仁能洽下，忠以卫国。
现代文：行仁义能和睦下属，尽忠心以保卫朝廷。
English: Benevolence and righteousness can harmonize subordinates, and be loyal to defend the imperial court.

古文：伯珪疏犷，武才趫猛。
现代文：值丝粗豪强悍，矫捷勇猛。
English: He is coarse and powerful, quick and brave.

古文：虞好无终，绍势难并。
现代文：型卢仁爱不得善终，重题与他不能并行。
English: Lu Ren's love story cannot have a happy ending, and the important issues cannot run parallel with him.

古文：徐方歼耗，实谦为梗。
现代文：途业惨遭杀戮，实为垄盛无能。
English: To Ye was brutally killed, and he was really incompetent.

