古文：吉顼成王千里张亶王旭京师三豹张孝嵩王弘义谢祐河内王懿宗酷吏
现代文：吉顼成王千里张亶王旭京师三豹张孝嵩王弘义谢祐河内王懿宗酷吏
English: The King of Good Fortune, The King of Good Fortune, The King of Good Fortune, The King of Good Fortune, The King of Good Fortune,

古文：杨务廉李全交
现代文：杨务廉李全交
English: Yang Wulian and Li Quanzhong

古文：吉顼
现代文：吉顼
English: Jilin Province

古文：周明堂尉吉顼，夜与监察御史王助同宿。王助以亲故，为说綦连耀男大觉、小觉，云应两角麒麟也。耀字光翟，言光宅天下也。
现代文：在武后称帝的周朝时，明堂县尉吉顼，夜里与监察御史王助住在一起，王助因为自己与吉顼是亲戚的缘故，便对他说綦连耀有两个儿子大觉和小觉，说綦连耀是长了对应两角的麒麟，而耀字是由光翟组成，说是要光宅整个天下。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, when Empress Wu was proclaimed emperor, the Myeongdong County lieutenant Ji Rong stayed with the inspector Wang Su at night. Wang Su, because he and Ji Rong were relatives, told him that Qilian Yao had two sons, Da Jue and Xia Jue. He said that Qilian Yao was a long unicorn corresponding to the two corners, and that the word Yao was composed of light, saying that he wanted to light the whole world.

古文：顼明日录状付来俊臣，敕差河内王懿宗推，诛王助等四十一人，皆破家。
现代文：第二天吉顼便把他的话记录下来交给了来俊臣。皇帝下诏书此案由河内王武懿宗追查审理，结果诛杀王助等四十一人，全都毁了他们的家。
English: The next day, Kichijang recorded his words and handed them to Lai Juntong. The emperor issued an edict, and the case was investigated and tried by the king of Hanoi, King Mucong. As a result, forty-one people, including Wang Jue, were killed, and all of their homes were destroyed.

古文：后俊臣犯事，司刑断死，进状三日不出，朝野怪之。
现代文：后来来俊臣犯了事，刑部判决他死刑，可状子进呈给皇帝三天也不批复，朝野对此都觉得奇怪。
English: Later, when a young courtier committed a crime, the criminal investigation department sentenced him to death, but the emperor did not approve the petition for three days. The court found this strange.

古文：上入苑，吉顼拢马。上问在外有何事意，顼奏曰：臣幸预控鹤，为陛下耳目。
现代文：有一天武则天到一处园林去，吉顼为她牵马，武则天问他外面有什么事情，吉顼奏道：我有幸当了皇上的近侍，做了陛下的耳目。
English: One day, Wu Zetian went to a garden. Ji Yan was leading a horse for her. Wu Zetian asked him what was going on outside. Ji Yan said, "I am fortunate to be the emperor's close attendant and to be his eyes and ears.

古文：在外唯怪来俊臣状不出。
现代文：现在外边唯独奇怪来俊臣的状子为何不批复。
English: Now it is only strange to outsiders why they do not approve of Junshin's behavior.

古文：上曰：俊臣于国有功，朕思之耳。
现代文：武则天说：来俊臣对国家有功，我正在考虑这件事。
English: Wu Zetian said, "Lai Juntian has made great contributions to the country. I am considering this matter."

古文：顼奏曰：于安远告虺贞反，其事并验。
现代文：吉顼又奏道：于安远曾告发虺贞反叛，他的事实已经验证，可是现在虺贞仍为成州司马。
English: Ji Yao also said: Yu Anyuan once accused Zou Zhen of rebellion, and his facts have been verified, but now Zou Zhen is still the mayor of Chengdu.

古文：今贞为成州司马，俊臣聚结不逞，诬遘贤良，赃贿如山。冤魂满路。国之贼也，何足惜哉？
现代文：来俊臣聚结的党羽还没显露出来。他诬陷贤良，贪赃受贿堆积如山，到处都有屈死的冤魂，是个国贼，哪里值得惋惜。
English: He has framed the virtuous, piled up mountains of graft and bribery, and there are dead souls everywhere. He is a national traitor, and there is nothing to be sorry for.

古文：上令状出，诛俊臣于西市，敕追于安远还，除尚食奉御。
现代文：武则天立即下令，将来俊臣斩于西市。并下敕追于安远回京，授予他殿中尚食奉御之职。
English: Wu Zetian immediately ordered that the future great statesman be beheaded in Xi'an, and sent an imperial edict to Anyuan to return to Beijing, awarding him the position of serving the emperor in the palace.

古文：顼有力焉。除顼中丞，赐绯。
现代文：吉顼因有功，授予他御史中丞，并赏赐他绯色官服。
English: For his meritorious service, Ji Kun awarded him the title of "Moshi Chujo" and gave him a navy blue official uniform.

古文：顼理綦连耀事，以为己功，授天官侍郎平章事，与河内王竞，出为温州司马卒。成王千里
现代文：吉顼认为自在处理綦连耀一案时有功，因此在朝中任命天官侍郎平章事一职时，与河内王武懿宗相竞争，结果被贬为温州司马，后死在那里。成王千里
English: Ji Yao thought that he had done a good job in handling the case of Qilian Yao, so he competed with the king of Hanoi, Wu Han Zong, when the emperor and the court appointed the celestial officer, Ping Zhang, to the post. As a result, he was demoted to Wenzhou Sima and died there. Cheng Wang Qianli

古文：唐成王千里使岭南，取大蛇，长八九尺。
现代文：唐朝时，成王千里出使岭南取回一条大蛇，有八九尺长。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Cheng Wang sent an envoy thousands of miles to Lingnan to retrieve a large snake, which was 89 feet long.

古文：以绳缚口，横于门限之下。
现代文：他用绳子绑住蛇嘴，把它横放在门坎下边。
English: He tied the snake's beak with a rope and placed it sideways under the door.

古文：州县参谒者，呼令入门，但知直视，无复瞻仰，踏蛇而惊，惶惧僵仆，被蛇绕数匝，良久解之，以为戏笑。
现代文：州县有来参拜他的官员，他便叫他们进门来，那些人只知照直向前看，不能上下乱瞅，踏到蛇身上便会大吃一惊，恐慌地仆倒在地上，于是被大蛇紧紧地缠绕数圈，良久才会松开，他就是以此来取笑别人。
English: When state and county officials came to pay homage to him, he invited them in. They only had to look straight ahead and could not run up and down. If they stepped on a snake, they would be taken aback, fall to the ground in panic, and then be tightly wrapped around by the snake for several laps. It would take a long time for the snake to let go. This was his way of making fun of others.

古文：又取龟及鳖，令人脱衣，纵龟等啮其体，终不肯放，死而后已。
现代文：又拿来龟和鳖。叫人脱去衣服，怂恿龟鳖去咬他的身体，只要咬住便始终不放，一直到死去。
English: They also brought a turtle and a toad. They made the man take off his clothes, and the toad turtle went to bite his body, and as long as it kept biting, it would not let go until it died.

古文：其人酸痛号呼，不可复言。
现代文：被咬的人疼痛得狂呼乱叫，不可言状。
English: The bitten man screamed uncontrollably in pain.

古文：王与姬妾共看，以为玩乐。
现代文：成王和姬妾们在一旁观看，以此来玩乐开心。
English: Cheng Wang and his concubines watched from the sidelines and enjoyed themselves.

古文：然后以竹刺龟鳖口，遂啮竹而放人。
现代文：之后再用竹杆子刺龟鳖的嘴，于是龟鳖去咬竹杆而放开人。
English: After that, a bamboo pole is used to pierce the mouth of the turtle beak, so the turtle beak bites the bamboo pole and lets go.

古文：艾灸鳖背，灸痛乃放口。
现代文：或者用点燃的艾蒿去烫鳖的脊背，烫得痛了它就松口了。
English: Or use a lit mugwort to scald the dorsal ridge of a toad, scalding it so painfully that it loosens.

古文：人被惊者，皆失魂，至死不平复矣。
现代文：人一旦被惊吓，都被吓得失魂落魄，直到死也不能恢复正常。
English: Once people are frightened, they are scared out of their wits and cannot return to normal until they die.

古文：张亶
现代文：张亶
English: Zhang Ye

古文：唐朔方总官张亶好杀。
现代文：唐朝时，朔方总官张亶好杀人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Xuan, the general of the Shuo side, was good at killing people.

古文：时有突厥投化，亶乃作檄文，骂默啜，言词甚不逊。
现代文：当时有突厥人来投诚的。张亶还要写声讨他的檄文，骂他是默啜，语言极为不逊。
English: At that time, a Turk came to cast a vote for him. Zhang Ye also wanted to write a slanderous article about him, calling him a "silent one" in extremely harsh language.

古文：书其腹背，凿共肌肤，涅之以墨，灸之以火，不胜痛楚，日夜作虫鸟鸣。
现代文：之后再把檄文写在他的前腹和后背上，用凿子把写在肌肤上的字划破，染上墨汁，再用火去烤，使他极为疼痛，那人像虫鸟鸣叫一样日夜不停地哼叫。
English: Then he wrote the inscription on his forearm and on his back, and with a chisel he scratched out the writing on his skin, and dyed it with ink, and baked it over a fire, so that it was very painful to him, and day and night he continued to chirp like a hummingbird.

古文：然后送与默啜。
现代文：然后再送回到匈奴人中间去。
English: Then he was sent back to the Huns.

古文：字者宣讫，脔而杀之。
现代文：檄文展示完毕。再用刀子把他的肉一片一片割下来把他杀死。
English: After the obituary was displayed, he used a knife to cut off his flesh piece by piece and kill him.

古文：匈奴怨望，不敢降。
现代文：凶奴人对他极为怨恨，都不敢来投降。
English: The thugs held a grudge against him and did not dare to surrender.

古文：王旭
现代文：王旭
English: Wang Xu

古文：唐殿中侍御史王旭，括宅中及别宅女妇风声目色，有不承者，以绳勒其阴，令壮士弹竹击之，酸痛不可忍。
现代文：唐朝时的殿中侍御史王旭，搜括自己家及别人家的女子当宫妓，有不肯承当的，便用绳子勒她的阴部，然后叫壮士用竹棍击打。使那些不顺从的女子们疼痛得难以忍受。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the palace attendant Shi Wangxu gathered together the women of his own family and other families to serve as court prostitutes. If any refused to do so, he would strangle her genitals with a rope, and then order a strong man to beat her with a bamboo stick, causing unbearable pain to the disobedient women.

古文：倒悬一女妇，以石缒其发，遣证与长安尉房恒奸，经三日不承。
现代文：他曾把一个女子倒悬起来，又在她的头发上缒上一块石头，再让长安县尉房恒去奸淫她。可是把她折磨了三天也不肯顺从。
English: He once hung a woman upside down, tied a stone to her hair, and asked Chang'an County Lieutenant Fangheng to rape her. However, he tortured her for three days and she refused to comply.

古文：女妇曰：侍御如此苦毒，儿死，必诉于冥司。
现代文：那女子道：侍御史竟这般恶毒，我就是死了，也要告到阴曹地府。
English: The woman said, "Shibushi is so vicious, even if I die, I will report it to the Evil Empire."

古文：若配入宫，必申于主上，终不相放。
现代文：如果我要被选送入宫，一定要申诉于皇上，永远不会放过你的！
English: If I am to be elected to the imperial court, I must appeal to the emperor. He will never let you go!

古文：旭惭惧，乃舍之。
现代文：王旭十分惭愧惧怕，只好放了她。
English: Wang Xu was so ashamed and afraid that he had to let her go.

古文：京师三豹
现代文：京师三豹
English: The Three Leopards of Beijing

古文：唐监察御史李嵩、李全交、殿中王旭，京师号为三豹。
现代文：唐朝的监察御史李嵩、李全交和殿中侍御史王旭，被京城的人称为三豹。
English: The inspectors of the Tang Dynasty, Li Song and Li Zhengjiao, and the attendant of the palace, Wang Xu, were called the three leopards by the people of Beijing.

古文：嵩为赤黧豹，交为白额豹，旭为黑豹。
现代文：李嵩叫赤黧豹，李全交叫白额豹，王旭叫黑豹。
English: Li Song called the red-beaked leopard, Li Quanzhang called the white-fronted leopard, Wang Xu called the black leopard.

古文：皆狠虐不轨，鸩毒无仪，体性狂疏，精神惨刻。
现代文：他们都极暴虐而不守法度，极狠毒而无法无天。体性放荡不羁，心神歹毒刻薄。
English: All of them were extremely violent and lawless, extremely vicious and lawless, physically debauched and mean-spirited.

古文：每讯囚，必铺棘卧，削竹签指，方梁压髁，碎瓦搘膝，遣作仙人献果、玉女登梯、犊子悬拘、驴儿拔橛、凤凰晒翅、猕猴钻火、上麦索、下阑单。
现代文：每次审讯囚犯，都要铺上荆棘让囚犯躺卧，或削竹签刺他的指甲缝，或用方型梁木压他的胯骨，或让他跪碎瓦片。或者命令他做仙人献果、玉女登梯、犊子悬拘、驴儿拔橛、凤凰晒翅等，直到垂下脑袋，身子精疲力尽。
English: Every time he interrogated a prisoner, he had to spread thorns to make the prisoner lie down, or sharpen bamboo sticks to pierce his nail seams, or press his shinbone with a square beam, or make him kneel and break tiles, or order him to make a fairy offering fruit, a princess climbing a ladder, a mule suspended, a donkey pulling a plough, a phoenix flapping its wings, and so on, until he hung his head and was exhausted.

古文：人不聊生，囚皆乞死。
现代文：人无法活下去，囚徒们都求一死。
English: There is no way to live, and the prisoners are begging to die.

古文：肆情锻炼，证是为非。任意指麾。传空为实。
现代文：他们肆意罗织罪名，颠倒是非，随意发令调遣材料，传来的材料没有事实的就去捏造。
English: They wantonly fabricated charges, reversed the rights and wrongs, arbitrarily issued orders to dispatch materials, and fabricated materials without facts.

古文：周公、孔子，请伏杀人；伯夷、叔齐，求其劫罪。
现代文：这样审讯，即使周公、孔子在世，也会服罪说杀了人，伯夷、叔齐也会求他说自己犯了抢劫罪的。
English: In such a trial, even if Zhou Gong and Confucius were alive, they would plead guilty and say that they had killed someone. Bo Yi and Uncle Qi would also beg him to say that he had committed robbery.

古文：讯劾干堑，水必有期；推鞠湿泥，尘非不入。
现代文：即使审讯的是干壕，总有一天会有水的；审讯的是湿泥，也会有尘土飞进来的。
English: Even if the trial is a dry trench, there will be water one day; if the trial is wet mud, there will be dust flying in.

古文：来俊臣乞为弟子，索元礼求作门生。
现代文：他们这三个人，即使是最歹毒的来俊臣也会乞求做他们的弟子，最残忍的索元礼也会请求收他作门徒的。
English: The three of them, even the most vicious of them would beg to be their disciple, and the most cruel of them would beg to be his disciple.

古文：被追者皆相谓曰：牵羊付虎，未有出期。缚鼠与猫，终无脱日。
现代文：凡是被审讯的都相互说道：这是牵着羊送给了老虎，不会有出去的日子；是绑了老鼠送给猫，永远不会有逃脱的那一天了。
English: Everyone who was interrogated said to each other: This is like leading a sheep and giving it to a tiger, and there will be no day of escape; it is like tying a mouse and giving it to a cat, and there will never be a day of escape.

古文：妻子永别。朋友长辞。
现代文：妻儿永别，朋友长辞了。
English: Say goodbye to your wife and children. A friend has passed away.

古文：京人相要，作咒曰：若违心负教，横遭三豹。
现代文：京城里的人在相互立约时，作咒语都说：如果我要违背自己的良心辜负了你的教诲，就会突然遭遇三豹！
English: When people in the capital city make contracts with each other, they all say the following incantation: "If I violate my conscience and fail to live up to your teachings, I will suddenly encounter the three leopards!"

古文：其毒害也如此。张孝嵩
现代文：他们竟是这样的恶毒厉害。张孝嵩
English: They are so vicious.Zhang Xiaodong

古文：京兆人高丽家贫，于御史台替勋官递送文牒。
现代文：京都人高丽家里很穷。在御史台为勋官们传送文书。
English: Kyoto-born Koryo's family was very poor, and she had to deliver documents to the officers at the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：其时令史作伪帖，付高丽追人，拟吓钱。
现代文：当时有个令史伪制一个假帖子，让高丽拿去送人，打算用它去恐吓诈骗钱财。
English: At that time, there was a fake post fabricated by Ling Shi, asking Gao Li to give it to someone, intending to use it to intimidate and swindle money.

古文：事败，令史逃亡，追讨不获。御史张孝嵩捉高丽拷，膝骨落地，两脚俱挛，抑遣代令史承伪。
现代文：事情败露后，令史逃走，去追捕而没有捉到，御史张孝嵩便把高丽捉来拷打，直打得膝骨落在地上，两尺脚都痉挛抽缩在一起，还要叫他代替令史承担伪造之罪。
English: After the affair was exposed, Ling Shi ran away and was chased but not caught. Zhang Xiaotong, the chief historian, caught and tortured Gao Li, beating her until her kneecaps hit the ground and her two-foot feet were cramped together. He was also ordered to bear the crime of forgery on Ling Shi's behalf.

古文：准法断死讫。大理卿状上。
现代文：判他死刑的状文批复下来之后，大理卿上了一份状文，意思是按照过去的典章制度，准则律条。
English: After the verdict to sentence him to death was reinstated, Lord Dali filed a petition, which means that according to the previous award system, the rules and regulations.

古文：故事，准名例律，笃疾不合加刑。
现代文：残废人是不该加刑的。
English: People with disabilities should not have their sentences increased.

古文：孝嵩勃然作色曰：脚挛何废造伪？
现代文：张孝嵩勃然大怒道：脚痉挛难道能停止他去假骗吗？
English: Zhang Xiaosong flew into a rage: Could the shackles stop him from cheating?

古文：命两人舁上市斩之。
现代文：于是命令两个人把他抬到街市上斩首。
English: He then ordered two men to carry him to the market square and behead him.

古文：王弘义
现代文：王弘义
English: Wang Hongyi

古文：王弘义，衡水人也，告变授游击将家。
现代文：王弘义，衡水人，是因为揭发了别人要反叛而被授予游击将军的。
English: Wang Hongyi, from Hengshui, was awarded the title of guerrilla general for revealing that others were planning to rebel.

古文：天授中，拜御史，与俊臣罗告衣冠。俊臣败，义亦流于岭南。
现代文：武后称帝的天授年间，被任命为御史，与来俊臣一起专干诬告士大夫的勾当，来俊臣的事情败露被处死，王弘义也被流放到岭南。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was appointed as Imperial Historian. Together with Lai Junchen, he specialized in the activities of false accusers. Lai Junchen's affair was exposed and he was executed. Wang Hongyi was also exiled to Lingnan.

古文：妄称敕追，时胡无礼以御史使岭南，次于襄邓，会而按之，弘义词穷，乃谓曰：与公气类。
现代文：后来他胡说皇帝下令要追他回京，当时御史胡元礼被派遣到岭南，暂住于襄邓，找到他查问这件事，王弘义无话可讲，便对他说：别忘了，我跟你可是一样的人啊。
English: Later, he made up a story that the emperor had ordered him to be chased back to Beijing. At that time, the imperial secretary Hu Yuanli was sent to Lingnan and temporarily lived in Xiangdong. When he found him to inquire about the matter, Wang Hongyi had nothing to say, so he said to him: "Don't forget, I am the same person as you."

古文：瓜园中有白兔。县吏会人捕逐，期须苗尽矣。
现代文：胡元礼道：你当年任御史，我任洛阳县尉；而我今天任御史，你却是个被流放的囚犯，这怎么能说是一样的人呢？于是将他用鞭子打死。
English: Hu Yuanli said, "Back then, you were a prefectural governor, and I was a Luoyang County lieutenant. Today, I am a prefectural governor, but you are an exiled prisoner. How can we say that we are the same person?" So he was beaten to death with a whip.

古文：内史李照德曰：昔闻苍鹰狱吏，今见白兔御史。
现代文：内史李昭德说：过去常听说有苍鹰狱卒，今日却看到了白兔御史！
English: Internal historian Li Zhaode said: In the past, I often heard that there was a goshawk jailer, but today I saw a white rabbit!

古文：谢祐
现代文：谢祐
English: Xie Yu

古文：周黔府都督谢祐凶险忍毒。
现代文：武氏周朝时，黔府都督谢祐十分凶险狠毒。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty of the Wu Dynasty, Xie Yu, the prefectural governor of Shanfu, was very dangerous and vicious.

古文：则天朝，徙曹王于黔中，祐吓云：则天赐自尽，祐亲奉进止，更无别敕。
现代文：武则天称帝后，把曹王迁移到黔中。有一天谢祐恐吓他道：则天已赐自尽，我奉命来亲自监督你的行动，再不另下敕书了。
English: Wu Zetian proclaimed Cao Wang to be the empress and moved him to Yunnan. One day, Xie Yu threatened him, saying, "Zetian has committed suicide, I have been ordered to personally supervise your actions, and I will never issue another imperial edict."

古文：王怖而缢死。
现代文：曹王很害怕而上吊自尽。
English: Cao Wang was so scared that he hanged himself.

古文：后祐于平阁上卧，婢妾十余人同宿，夜不觉刺客截祐首去。
现代文：谢祐住在平阁上，他是与十几个婢妾同住一起的，可是竟在一天夜里不知不觉地被刺客把他的头割掉拿走了。
English: Xie Yu lived on the flat roof, he lived with more than a dozen maidservants, but one night, unknowingly, an assassin cut off his head and took it away.

古文：后曹王破家，簿录事，得祐首漆之，题谢祐字，以为秽器。
现代文：后来曹王被抄家，在登记财务的时候，发现了谢祐的头骨，已经涂上了漆，上写谢祐二字，是用它做了盛大少便的家什。
English: Later, Cao Wang's home was raided, and when he was registering his finances, he found Xie Yu's skull, which had been painted with the word "Xie Yu" and used to make large and small household items.

古文：方知王子令刺客杀之。
现代文：此时才知道是曹王的儿子派刺客杀了他。
English: At this time, it was learned that Cao Wang's son had sent assassins to kill him.

古文：河内王懿宗
现代文：河内王懿宗
English: The king of Hanoi, Han Zong

古文：周默啜贼之陷恒定州。
现代文：武后称帝的周朝时，匈奴攻陷了恒定州。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, when Empress Wu was proclaimed emperor, the Xiongnu invaded and conquered Constantia.

古文：和亲使杨齐庄，敕授三品，入匈奴，遂没贼。
现代文：和亲使杨齐庄，皇帝下诏授予他三品官阶，出使到匈奴，结果沦落于敌手。
English: and his relative Yang Qizhuang, the emperor issued a decree awarding him three official ranks and dispatched him to the Xiongnu, and as a result, he fell into the hands of the enemy.

古文：将至赵州，襄公段瓆同没，唤庄共出走。庄惧不敢发，瓆遂先归。
现代文：将要到赵州时，遇到了沦于敌营的襄公段瓆，段瓆召呼杨齐庄一起逃走，杨齐庄惧怕而不敢行动。
English: When he was about to go to Zhaozhou, he met Xiang Gong Duan Yu, who had fallen into the enemy camp. Duan Yu called Yang Qizhuang to escape together. Yang Qizhuang was afraid and did not dare to act.

古文：则天赏之，复旧任。
现代文：段瓆先归来，武则天赏赐了他，恢复了他原来的职务。
English: Duan Rong returned first, and Wu Zetian rewarded him and restored his original position.

古文：齐庄寻至，敕付河内王懿宗鞠问。
现代文：杨齐庄不久也归来，武则天下令交由河内王懿宗对他审讯。
English: Yang Qizhuang soon returned, and Wu Zetian ordered that he be put on trial by the King of Hanoi, Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：庄曰：昔有人相庄，位至三品，有刀箭厄。
现代文：杨齐庄道：以前是有人帮助了我。才使我的官阶达到三品。
English: Yang Qizhuang said: In the past, someone helped me. It was only then that I was promoted to the third grade.

古文：庄走出被赶，砍射不死，走得脱来。
现代文：这一次是陷入了刀箭相遇的困境，我逃出的时候曾被追赶，刀砍箭射而未死，才算逃脱出来。
English: This time, I was caught in a dilemma of encountering swords and arrows. When I escaped, I was chased, and I only escaped when I was shot with swords and arrows and did not die.

古文：愿王哀之。
现代文：希望王能给与怜悯。
English: I hope the king will show mercy.

古文：懿宗性酷毒，奏庄初怀犹豫，请杀之。
现代文：懿宗性情残酷而又阴毒，他上奏皇帝说谢齐庄刚刚沦入敌营时曾犹豫动摇过，请求杀了他。
English: Shanzong's nature was cruel and malicious. He reported to the emperor that when Xie Qi Zhuang had just fallen into the enemy camp, he had hesitated and wavered, and asked to kill him.

古文：敕依。引至天津桥南，于卫士铺鼓格上，缚磔手足，令段瓆先射。三发皆中，又段瑾射之中，又令诸司百官谢，箭如猬毛，仍气弽弽然微动。
现代文：皇帝下敕依准，于是把他拉到天津桥南的卫士铺鼓格，把他手脚分扯开绑在上面，命令段瓆第一个举弓射他，三箭全中，又命段瑾再射也射中，最后下命诸司百官一齐射，杨齐庄身上的箭简直如刺猬身上的刺毛，但仍然在喘息着微微扭动。
English: The emperor agreed, so he dragged him to the guard room of the south of Tianjin Bridge, tore his hands and feet apart and tied them to it. He ordered Duan Qian to be the first to shoot him with a bow. All three arrows hit, and Duan Qian shot again. Finally, he ordered all the officials to shoot at once. The arrows on Yang Qizhuang's body were just like the bristles on a hedgehog's body, but he was still breathing and twisting slightly.

古文：即以刀当心直下，破至阴，剖取心掷地，仍趌趌跳数十回。
现代文：懿宗又用刀插进他的胸口，一直豁到阴部，然后又剖出心来抛在地上，那心在地上还呼呼嗒嗒地跳动了几十下。
English: Yanzong also plunged a knife into his chest, cutting all the way to his genitals, and then cut out his heart and threw it on the ground. The heart still thumped on the ground dozens of times.

古文：懿宗之忍毒也如此。酷吏
现代文：懿宗竟然如此残忍狠毒！酷吏
English: Shizong was so cruel and vicious!

古文：来俊臣、侯思止、王弘义、郭霸等数十人，为推官。
现代文：来俊臣、侯思止、王弘义、郭霸等数十人，都是掌管刑狱的推官。
English: Dozens of people, including Lai Junshin, Hou Sizh, Wang Hongyi, and Guo Ba, were the officials in charge of the prison.

古文：俊臣父操。与乡人蔡本善。本与操樗蒲，赢本钱数十万。
现代文：来俊臣的父亲来操，与同乡人蔡本很友好，蔡本和来操赌博，来操赢了蔡本数万钱，蔡本没钱偿还，便用自己的妻子冯氏顶了债。
English: Lai Junchen's father came to fuck, and was very friendly with fellow villager Cai Ben, Cai Ben and came to gamble, came to fuck and won Cai Ben tens of thousands of money, Cai Ben had no money to repay, so he used his wife Feng to pay off the debt.

古文：本无以酧。遂将其妻冯折。
现代文：等去了来操家，冯氏已经怀孕，在禾州生下了来俊臣。
English: By the time she came to run the household, Ms. Feng was already pregnant and gave birth to Lai Junchen in Hezhou.

古文：及至操家，已有娠，而产俊臣于禾州。犯盗，遂因密告。则天以忠，累拜侍御史。按制狱，无不会意，拜左台中丞。
现代文：来俊臣曾因偷盗而犯法，是由于他上书密告，武则天认为他对自己很忠诚，便屡屡提拔使他当了侍御史，专门审理皇帝交办的案子，而且没有不合意的，后来又授予他御史左台中丞。
English: Lai Junchen had broken the law by stealing, and it was because he reported it in a letter. Wu Zetian thought that he was very loyal to him, so he repeatedly promoted him to the position of court historian, specializing in hearing cases assigned by the emperor. And there was no disagreement, and later he was awarded the position of court historian.

古文：道路以目。
现代文：人们慑于其暴政，敢怒而不敢言。
English: People were more deterred by the tyranny of the time, and dared to be angry rather than speak out.

古文：与侯思止等，以告事为罗织。
现代文：他与侯思止等一起，专干诬告和罗织罪名的勾当。
English: Together with Hou Sizhi and others, he specialized in the business of making false accusations and fabricating crimes.

古文：则天于丽景门侧，别置推院，令俊臣等按之。
现代文：武则天还在丽景门的一侧，另设了监狱，命令来俊臣等人在那里审讯犯人。
English: Wu Zetian also set up a prison on the other side of the Lijing Gate and ordered the courtiers to interrogate the prisoners there.

古文：但入新开门。百不全一。
现代文：只要进入新开门，一百个人没有一个能保住活命的。
English: As long as you enter the newly opened door, none of the hundred people can keep you alive.

古文：弘义戏为例竟门。
现代文：王弘义戏称这里叫例景门。
English: Wang Hongyi play called here the example of the door.

古文：俊臣与其党朱南山等，造《罗织经》一卷。
现代文：来俊臣还与其党羽朱南山等，造了一册《罗织经》。
English: Lai Junchen and his followers, including Zhu Nanshan, also produced a copy of the Luo Weaving Classic.

古文：每鞠囚，无轻重，先以醋灌鼻，禁地牢中。
现代文：每次宰讯囚犯，不论罪刑轻重，先给犯人往鼻子里灌醋。
English: Every time they interrogate a prisoner, regardless of the severity of the crime, they first pour vinegar into the prisoner's nose.

古文：以火围绕，绝其粮，多抽衣絮以啗之。
现代文：在牢房中，用火把犯人围在当中，不给饭吃，犯人多是抽衣服中的棉絮吃下去充饥。
English: In the cell, they surrounded the prisoners with fire and did not give them food. The prisoners mostly ate lint from their clothes to satisfy their hunger.

古文：将有赦，必先尽杀其囚。
现代文：每次将要有大赦时，他们便提前把囚犯杀尽。
English: Every time there is going to be an amnesty, they kill all the prisoners in advance.

古文：又作大枷凡十遭其枷者，闷转于地，莫不自诬。
现代文：他们还制作了十个大枷，凡遭受枷刑的人，立刻就会晕倒在地，没有不自己诬陷自己的。
English: They also made ten large shackles. Anyone who was subjected to the shackles would immediately faint and fall to the ground, without blaming themselves.

古文：则天尤赏之。
现代文：武则天对这些尤为赞赏。
English: Wu Zetian is particularly appreciative of these.

古文：朝士每入朝，多与妻子诀别。
现代文：朝官们每次上朝，都要和妻儿老小作生死告别。
English: Every morning, the imperial officials bid farewell to their wives and children.

古文：及禁狄仁杰，仁杰置书于绵衣中，请狱吏付家人。家人得之，讼于则天。则天令验之，果冤。问仁杰何以自诬，对曰：若不承反，即已死于枷棒矣。
现代文：在囚禁狄仁杰的时候，狄仁杰把一封上告信藏在棉衣里，求狱卒将棉衣送给家人，家人得到信后，上诉于武则天，武则天派人去验证，果然是冤案，她问狄仁杰为什么要自己诬陷自己，狄仁杰道：若不承认谋反，早已死在枷棒下了。
English: During Di Renjie's imprisonment, Di Renjie hid a letter of appeal in a cotton coat, begging the jailer to give the cotton coat to his family. After the family received the letter, they appealed to Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian sent someone to verify that it was indeed a wrongful case. She asked Di Renjie why he wanted to frame himself. Di Renjie said: If he did not admit to plotting a rebellion, he would have died in chains.

古文：俊臣后坐赃，御史劾之，除殿中丞，又拜中丞。
现代文：来俊臣后来犯了贪赃罪，被御史揭发，降职为殿中丞，不久又任命他为御史中丞。
English: Lai Junchen later committed the crime of embezzlement, which was exposed by the imperial historian, and he was demoted to the position of palace junior secretary, and soon he was appointed imperial junior secretary.

古文：复坐赃，出为同州参军，夺同列参军妻。旋为合官尉，又拜洛阳令。
现代文：后来又犯贪赃罪，被贬为同州参军。在那里强占了同僚参军的妻子，再降职为合官县尉，后来又升为洛阳县令。
English: Later, he committed the crime of embezzlement and was demoted to join the army in the same state. There, he forcibly took the wife of a colleague who joined the army. He was then demoted to the position of county lieutenant, and later promoted to Luoyang county magistrate.

古文：复图西番酋长阿史那斛瑟罗婢，称其谋反。其党剺面诣阙讼之，得免。
现代文：为谋取西番酋长阿史那斛瑟罗的婢女，便说斛瑟罗要谋反，由于斛瑟罗的下属们用刀划破面孔到朝廷来为他申冤，才幸免遭难。
English: In order to obtain the handmaid of the Western chieftain, Ashina Zoseroth, he said that Zoseroth was about to rebel, and only because Zoseroth's subordinates went to the court with their faces slashed with a knife to seek justice for him, were they spared from suffering.

古文：将告诸武太平公主，乃反为其所发，弃市。
现代文：来俊臣又想要诬告武氏齐王和太平公主，结果反被他们抢先一步告发。
English: Lai Junchen also tried to falsely accuse King Qi and Princess Taiping of the Wu clan, but they were the first to denounce him.

古文：人竞脔其肉。
现代文：被押到街市上斩首示众。
English: He was taken to the market square and beheaded in public.

古文：中宗诏酷吏并配流远恶处，子孙不得仕进。
现代文：人们竟把他的肉一块一块地割下来。后来中宗曾下诏对酷吏要发配流放到最边远最恶劣的地方去，他们的子弟不得做官。
English: People actually cut his flesh off piece by piece. Later, Emperor Zhongzong issued an edict to the cruel officials that they should be exiled to the most remote and worst places, and their sons should not be allowed to become officials.

古文：周兴累为司刑少卿，上疏请除李家属籍，后徙岭表，为仇人所杀。
现代文：周兴官至司刑少卿。他上疏请求废除李氏皇族的族籍，后被发配到岭南，被仇人所杀。
English: Zhou Xingguan rose to the rank of Sentencing Junior Secretary. He petitioned the Shang Dynasty to abolish the nationality of the Li royal family, and was later sent to Lingnan, where he was killed by enemies.

古文：傅游艺除左补阙，上书言武氏革命，拜给事中，又为鸾台平章事。
现代文：傅游艺任左补阙时，上书说武则天应当革命。而后便被任命为给事中，接着升任鸾台平章事。
English: When Fu Youyi was appointed to fill the vacancy left by Wu Zetian, he wrote a letter saying that Wu Zetian should make a revolution, and then he was appointed to be in charge of affairs, and then he was promoted to the post of Xingtai Pingzhang.

古文：天授元年，改姓武氏。
现代文：天授元年，赐予他武姓。
English: In the first year of Tianju, he was given the surname Wu.

古文：梦登湛露殿，陈于所亲，及事发伏诛。
现代文：梦中登上湛露殿，并把此事说给了亲戚，事情被告发后处死。
English: In his dream, he ascended to the Hall of Heavenly Dew and told his relatives about the incident. He was accused of the incident and later executed.

古文：游艺一年内，青绿绯紫皆遍转，号为四时仕宦。
现代文：傅游艺在一年之内，青、绿、绯、紫四种官服全穿了一遍，被号称为四时仕官。
English: Within a year, Fu Youyi had worn all four official uniforms (blue, green, navy blue, and purple) and was known as the "four-time official."

古文：请则天置六道使，死后竟从其言。
现代文：他曾请求武则天设六道史，死后他可以去应其所言了。
English: He had asked Wu Zetian to set up a six-way history, after his death he could go to his words.

古文：于是万国俊、丘神勣皆酷虐。
现代文：正因为酷吏得宠，于是万国俊、丘神勣等争相残酷暴虐。
English: It was precisely because the cruel officials were favored that Bankokuchun, Kuchishinden, and others vied with one another in cruelty and tyranny.

古文：思止告舒王元名反，授游击将军。
现代文：侯思止告发舒王谋反，被授予游击将军。
English: Hou Sizi accused Shu Wang of plotting a rebellion and was awarded the title of guerrilla general.

古文：初元礼教思止，上必问候大不识字，但云：獬豸岂识字，只能触邪。
现代文：初元礼教给侯思止，皇帝一定会说你不识字，你可以说，獬豸哪里识字，可它能用角顶坏人。
English: At the beginning of the year, the emperor will surely say that you are not literate. You can say that you are not literate, but you can be a bad person.

古文：果问而对，则天大悦，授左台侍御史。
现代文：皇帝果然这样问了他而他照此作了回答，武则天极为欢喜，授予他左台侍御史。
English: The emperor indeed asked him this and he answered accordingly, and Wu Zetian was so pleased that he awarded him the title of Zuodai Jishi.

古文：又教，上若问要宅，得赐没官者，但云：臣恶其名，不愿居止。
现代文：又教给他说，皇帝要问要不要好住宅，赐予你没收充公的，你只要说，臣厌恶那些名誉，不愿去居住。
English: He also taught him to say, "If the emperor should ask you whether you want a good house or not, and if he should give it to you and confiscate it from you, just say that the vassal detests those honors and does not want to live there."

古文：上又悦。
现代文：这样问答后武则天又很喜悦。
English: After such a question and answer, Wu Zetian was very happy.

古文：尝按魏元忠曰：急承白司马，不然吃孟青。
现代文：他曾审讯魏元忠说：快承认就去白司马，不然就吃孟青的棒子！
English: He once interrogated Wei Yuanzhong and said: Admit it quickly and go to Bai Sima, otherwise eat Meng Qing's stick!

古文：孟青者，姓孟名青，即杀琅邪王冲者也。
现代文：所谓孟青，是个姓孟名青的将军，他曾棒杀过琅琊王冲。
English: The so-called Meng Qing is a general with the surname Meng Ming Qing, who once killed the King of Gong Chong.

古文：白司马，坂名。
现代文：白司马是洛阳郊外的山坡名。
English: Bai Sima is the name of a hillside on the outskirts of Luoyang.

古文：思止庸奴，常以此语吓元忠。元忠不挠，思止以其拒制命、倒曳之。
现代文：侯思止是个庸才，常以此话吓唬元忠，元忠没有屈服，侯思止便以他拒绝接受皇帝命令的罪名，倒过来拖他。
English: Hou Sizhi was a mediocre talent, and he often used these words to scare Yuanzhong. However, Yuanzhong did not give in, and Hou Sizhi dragged him backwards, accusing him of refusing to accept the emperor's order.

古文：元忠曰：我如乘恶驴而坠，为镫所挂。
现代文：魏元忠说：我就像骑了一头恶驴而坠地，脚被驴镫挂住。
English: Wei Yuanzhong said, "I fell to the ground as if I had ridden an evil donkey, and my feet were caught in the donkey's bridle.

古文：思止又怒，欲奏斩之。元忠曰：汝为御史，须识礼数。
现代文：侯思止又怒，准备奏请皇帝将他处斩，魏元忠道：你是御史，须懂得礼数。
English: Hou Xizhi was angry again and prepared to appeal to the emperor to have him beheaded. Wei Yuanzhong said, "You are an imperial historian, you must know the number of courtesies."

古文：若要元忠头，便将去，何必以锯截将。
现代文：如想要我的头，拿去好了，何必还要用锯来截！
English: If you want my head, take it, why use a saw to cut it off!

古文：思止惊悚，与之坐。
现代文：侯思止惊惧，让他坐起来。
English: Hou Si stopped being alarmed and told him to sit up.

古文：思止言音不正，霍献可笑之。思止怒，奏之。
现代文：侯思止语音不正，霍献可讥笑他，他很生气，奏与皇帝。
English: Hou Sizhi's pronunciation was not correct. Huo Xian could mock him. He was very angry and quarreled with the emperor.

古文：则天知，亦大笑。
现代文：武则天听说也大笑。
English: Wu Zetian was also heard laughing loudly.

古文：时俊臣逼娶太原王庆诜女，思止亦奏娶赵郡李自挹女，昭德抚掌谓诸宰相曰：往年来俊臣贼劫王庆诜女，已大辱国。今此奴又请索李自挹女，无乃又辱乎？
现代文：当时来俊臣曾逼娶太原王庆诜的女儿，侯思止也上奏要娶赵郡李自挹的女儿，李昭德拍着手对各位宰相道：当年来俊臣强娶王庆诜的女儿，已经使国家蒙受极大的耻辱，如今此奴又娶即李自挹的女儿，这不是又要使国家蒙受耻辱吗？
English: At that time, Zhuang Chen had forced to marry the daughter of Taiyuan Wang Qingyao, Hou Sidi also reported to marry the daughter of Zhao County Li Zhimen. Li Zhaode clapped his hands and said to the prime ministers: In the past, Zhuang Chen Qiang married the daughter of Wang Qingyao, which has brought great shame to the country. Now this guy is marrying the daughter of Li Zhimen. Isn't this going to bring shame to the country?

古文：竟为昭德榜杀。
现代文：后来侯思止竟被李昭德棒杀。
English: Later, Hou Si Tie was actually beaten to death by Li Zhaode.

古文：万国俊按岭南，流人三百余人，拥于水次，一时杀之。
现代文：万国俊到岭南巡察，他把流入在那里的三百余人，集合在水边，一齐杀死。
English: Ban Guojun went to Lingnan to inspect. He gathered more than three hundred people who had flowed into the area at the water's edge and killed them all.

古文：来子珣除右台监察，时朝士有不著靴带而朝者，必弹之曰：臣闻束带立于朝。
现代文：来子珣任右台监察御史，当时有朝官不穿靴子不系袍带上朝的，他必然会纠弹说：我听说束带立于朝。
English: When a court official who did not wear boots or tie his robe to the court was appointed to supervise the history of the Right Division, he was bound to say: I heard that the cords were tied to the court.

古文：举朝大噱。
现代文：满朝大笑。
English: The whole court burst into laughter.

古文：后赐武氏家臣，多按制狱，常衣锦半臂。
现代文：后来赐他为武姓家臣，多是审理皇帝交办的案子，经常穿着短袖衣服。
English: Later, he was given the surname "Wu" as a vassal, and mostly tried cases assigned by the emperor. He often wore short-sleeved clothes.

古文：郭霸应革命举，为监察，又为侍御史。
现代文：郭霸是由于他响应武氏革命而被推举上来的，先是授予监察御史，后又升侍御史。
English: Guo Ba was promoted because he responded to the Wu Dynasty revolution. First, he was awarded the title of inspector of imperial history, and later he was promoted to the title of attendant of imperial history.

古文：见则天曰：往年征除敬业，臣愿抽其筋、食其肉、饮其血、绝其髓。
现代文：有一次他见到武则天说：那年征讨徐敬业，我真想抽其筋，食其肉，饮其血，绝其髓！
English: Once he saw Wu Zetian and said, "That year, I wanted to collect money from Xu Jingye. I really wanted to eat his flesh, drink his blood, and eat his marrow!"

古文：上大悦。
现代文：武则天极为欢喜。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：人呼为郭四其。
现代文：人们都称他为郭四其。
English: People call him Guo Siqi.

古文：御史大夫魏元忠患病，霸请嚐其粪。元忠不许，竟尝之曰：其味苦，病即愈。
现代文：御史大夫魏元忠患病，郭霸请求尝他的粪便，魏元忠不准，他终于还是尝了，并说：味道很苦，病很快就会好。
English: Guo Ba asked to taste Wei Yuanzhong's faeces when he was ill. Wei Yuanzhong was not sure, but he finally tasted it and said: "The taste is very bitter, the illness will get better soon."

古文：元忠以以其佞，大恶之。
现代文：魏元忠看不惯他那套巧言谄媚的样子，因而很厌恶他。
English: Wei Yuanzhong didn't like his smooth-talking and charming appearance, so he disliked him.

古文：尝推苏州刺史索思微，微不胜其捶拷而死。后屡见思微。
现代文：他曾审讯过苏州刺史索思微，索思微忍受不了他拷打而死，后来他屡屡见到索思微。
English: He once interrogated the Suzhou assassin Sosibai, Sosibai could not bear his torture and died, and later he saw Sosibai again and again.

古文：遂设斋转经。
现代文：于是他设斋传经。
English: So he set up a fast to spread the gospel.

古文：俄见思微止于庭曰：汝陷我，今来取汝。
现代文：一会儿看见索思微站在庭院里对他说：你陷害了我，今天我来捉拿你！
English: After a while, he saw Suo Siwei standing in the courtyard and said to him: "You set me up, today I'm coming to catch you!"

古文：霸恐惧，遂自刳腹而卒。
现代文：郭霸极为恐惧，便剖腹自杀。
English: Guo Ba was so terrified that he committed suicide by disembowelment.

古文：时洛桥初成，人便之。则天问人曰：外有何好事。
现代文：当时洛阳桥刚刚建成，人们走着很方便，武则天问道：外边有什么好事啊？
English: At that time, Luoyang Bridge had just been built, and it was very convenient for people to walk. Wu Zetian asked: What good things are there outside?

古文：舍人张元一素滑稽，曰：喜洛桥成，幸郭霸死。
现代文：舍人张元一平时很滑稽，说：高兴洛桥建成，庆幸郭霸死去。
English: Zhang Yuanyi, who is usually very funny, said: I am glad that the Luo Bridge was built, and I am glad that Guo Ba died.

古文：杨务廉
现代文：杨务廉
English: Yang Muxian

古文：唐杨务廉，孝和时，造长宁安乐宅仓库成，特授将作大匠，坐赃数千万免官。
现代文：唐代人杨务廉。孝和年间，建成了长宁安乐宅仓库，皇帝特授予他将作大匠一职。后来因他贪赃数千万而被免职。
English: Yang Mu Lian, a Tang dynasty man, built the Changning Anle Residence Warehouse during the reign of Xiao He. The emperor specially awarded him the position of master craftsman. Later, he was dismissed for embezzling tens of millions.

古文：又上章，奏开陕州三门，凿山烧石，岩侧施栈道牵船。
现代文：以后他又上书，奏请在陕州三门峡开道。开山凿石，在悬崖上架起栈道供牵夫行走。
English: After that, he wrote again, asking for the opening of a road in Sanmenxia, Shaanxi Province. He opened a mountain hewn stone, and erected a footbridge on the cliff for the towman to walk.

古文：河流湍急，所顾夫并未与价值，苟牵绳一断，栈梁一绝，则扑杀数十人，取顾夫钱籴米充数，即注夫逃走，下本贯，禁父母妻子。
现代文：那里的河水十分湍急，所有雇用来的民工都不给工钱，假如牵绳一断，或者栈一折，就击杀数十人，然后用这些民工的工钱买成粮食来顶上这些死者的数目，并注明这些人是逃走的，通知当地官衙，囚禁他们的父老妻儿。
English: The river there is very fast-flowing, and all the hired migrant workers do not pay their wages. If the rope breaks or the tent is broken, dozens of people will be killed, and then the wages of these migrant workers will be used to buy grain to top up the number of the dead. These people are fugitives, notify the local officials, and imprison their fathers, wives and children.

古文：其牵船夫，皆令系二銽子胸背，落栈著石，百无一存。
现代文：对于拉船的牵夫，则命令在每个人的前胸后背拴上两个砣子，一旦落栈着石，百人之中也难活一人。
English: As for the men pulling the boat, they were ordered to tie two ropes to each man's forearm and back. If one of them fell and hit a rock, it would be difficult for even one of the hundred men to survive.

古文：道路悲号，声动山谷，皆称杨务廉为人妖。
现代文：整个道路都响着悲痛的号子，声音振动了山谷，人们都把杨务廉称作人妖。
English: The whole road was ringing with mournful horns, the sound vibrated the valley, and people called Yang Mu Lian a ogre.

古文：天生此妖，以破残百姓。
现代文：天生此妖，就是来残害百姓的啊！
English: This demon was born, and it came to destroy the people!

古文：李全交
现代文：李全交
English: Li Zhengjiao

古文：唐监察御史李全交等，以罗织酷虐为业，台中号为人头罗刹。
现代文：唐朝时，监察御史李全交等，专以残酷暴虐为职业，被御史台中的人们称之为人头罗刹。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, supervisors such as the imperial historian Li Quanzhong specialized in cruelty and tyranny as their profession. They were called "human monsters" by the people in the imperial history department.

古文：殿中王旭，号为鬼面夜叉。
现代文：殿中侍御史王旭，被称为鬼面夜叉。
English: The attendant in the hall, Shi Wangxu, is known as the ghost-faced Yasha.

古文：讯囚引枷柄向前，名为驴驹拔橛。缚枷头著树，名曰犊子悬车；两手捧枷，累砖于上，号为仙人献果；立高木之上，枷柄向后拗之，名玉女登梯。
现代文：在审讯犯人的时候，他们让犯人牵着枷柄向前走，叫做驴驹拔橛；给犯人上枷并把他们的脑袋绑在树上，起名叫犊子悬车，两手捧枷，并在上面摞砖的，称为仙人献果；让犯人活在木桩上，使他的枷柄向后别弯的，取名玉女登梯。
English: During the interrogation of the prisoner, they let the prisoner lead the yoke and walk forward, called the donkey yoke; put the prisoner in the yoke and tie their head to the tree, called the mule hanging car, holding the yoke with both hands and picking bricks on it, called the hermit offering fruit; let the prisoner live on the stake, so that his yoke handle does not bend backwards, named the lady climbing the ladder.

古文：拷郴州典廖福、司门令史张性，并求神狐魅，皆遣唤鹤作凤，证蛇成龙也。
现代文：在拷打郴州刺史廖福、司门令史张性时，让他们祈求神、狐、魅，而被称作唤鹤作凤、证蛇成龙。
English: When torturing Liaofu and Shimenling, they were asked to pray to gods, foxes, and charms, and were called calling cranes to become phoenixes and snakes to become dragons.

