古文：掌葛掌以时征絺绤之材于山农。凡葛征，征草贡之材于泽农，以当邦赋之政令，以权度受之。
现代文：掌葛掌管按时向山农征收葛草和凡属如葛的草类、向泽农征收萌芝等麻类而用以算作上缴国家赋税的政令，称量轻重长短而接受征收物。
English: Shouge in charge of the timely collection of kudzu grass and all grasses belonging to kudzu from mountain farmers, and the collection of hemp and other hemp from Zen farmers, which is used as a decree for submitting national taxes, weighing the weight and length and accepting the levy.

古文：掌染草掌以春秋敛染草之物，以权量受之，以待时而颁之。
现代文：掌染草掌管春秋季节征收可用作染料的草类，用秤称量轻重而后收纳，以待用时颁授给染人。
English: Hand dyeing grass is in charge of collecting grasses that can be used as dyes in the spring and autumn seasons, weighing them with a scale and then storing them, and awarding them to dyers when they are ready for use.

古文：掌炭掌灰物炭物之征令。以时入之，以权量受之，以共邦之用，凡炭灰之事。
现代文：掌炭掌管执行征收草木灰、木炭等物的命令，按时征收，用秤称轻重而后收纳，以供王国之用。凡有关炭、灰的事都负责掌管。
English: The person in charge of the charcoal is in charge of carrying out the order to collect grass and wood ash, charcoal and other things, collect them on time, weigh them with a scale and then store them for the use of the kingdom. He is responsible for all matters related to charcoal and ash.

古文：掌荼掌以时聚荼，以共丧事。
现代文：掌荼掌管按时收聚荼，以供办丧事时用。
English: The person in charge of the palanquin collects the palanquin on time for use during the funeral.

古文：征野疏材之物，以待邦事，凡畜聚之物。
现代文：征收野生的草木果实，以待王国有事时用。凡瓜瓠葵芋等可蓄聚之物都加以收聚以备用。
English: Wild plants and fruits are collected for use in the event of an emergency in the kingdom. All the things that can be collected, such as melon and sunflower seeds, are collected for backup.

古文：掌蜃掌敛互物蜃物，以共闉圹之蜃。
现代文：掌蜃掌管征收蚌蛤中的蛤类，以供填塞墓坑底部所需的蛤。
English: He was in charge of collecting earthworms from the graves to fill the holes at the bottom of the tombs.

古文：祭祀，共蜃器之蜃，共白盛之蜃。
现代文：举行祭祀供给勘祭器所需的蝗。供给研粉涂饰器物或墙壁使成白色所需的蛤。
English: Locusts are used to supply incense burners for religious ceremonies, and maggots are used to grind powder and paint decorative objects or walls white.

古文：囿人掌囿游之兽禁，牧百兽。祭纪、丧纪、宾客，共其生兽死兽之物。
现代文：囿人掌管囿中离宫小苑游观处野兽的蕃卫防禁，牧养苑中的各种野兽，有祭祀、丧事、宾客时，供给所需的从囿中猎获的活兽与杀死的兽。
English: The eunuch is in charge of the protection and prohibition of the wild animals in the small garden of the palace in the middle of the eunuch, and the various wild animals in the pasture garden are hunted and killed from the eunuch when there are sacrifices, funerals, and guests.

古文：场人掌国之场圃，而树之果蓏珍异之物，以时敛而藏之。
现代文：场人掌管王国的场圃，而种植瓜果和珍异的果树，按时收取果实而加以收藏。
English: Farmhands manage the kingdom's fields, grow melons and rare fruit trees, and collect the fruits on time.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客，共其果蓏。
现代文：凡祭祀或接待宾客，供给所需的瓜果。
English: Wherever there is a religious service or guests to be received, the required fruits and vegetables should be provided.

古文：享，亦如之。
现代文：行宗庙荐新礼也照样做。
English: The new rites recommended by the Gyosong Temple can still be performed.

古文：廪人掌九谷之数，以待国之匪颁、赒赐、稍食。
现代文：廪人掌管谷米数，以备国家分颁群臣俸禄、救济民众或恩赐、发给庶人在官者食粮。
English: The eunuchs controlled the amount of grain and rice in order to prepare for the state to distribute salaries to the vassals, relief to the people or gifts, and food to the commoners and officials.

古文：以岁之上下数邦用，以知足否，以诏谷用，以治年之凶丰。
现代文：依据年成的好坏计算王国的开支，以知道够用不够用，以报告上级用谷的原则，据以制定适于丰年或荒年的不同用谷标准。
English: To calculate the expenses of the kingdom according to the good and bad years, to know the sufficiency and insufficiency, to report the principle of grain use to superiors, and to formulate different grain use standards suitable for good years or bad years.

古文：凡万民之食，食者人四鬴，上也；人三鬴，中也；人二鬴，下也。
现代文：凡民众吃粮，每人每月四□，是上等年成；每人每月三□，是中等年成；每人每月二□，是下等年成。
English: For all the people who eat grain, four ounces per person per month is the upper grade; three ounces per person per month is the middle grade; and two ounces per person per month is the lower grade.

古文：若食不能人二鬴，则令邦移民就谷，诏王杀邦用。
现代文：如果每人每月吃不够二□，就命令国中饥民迁移到产粮多的地方，并告诉王减省国家开支。
English: If each person does not have enough to eat twice a month, he will order the hungry people in the country to move to places with more grain production, and tell Wang to reduce the national expenditure.

古文：凡邦有会同、师役之事，则治其粮与其食。
现代文：凡国家有会同、征伐、劳役的事，就置备所需的粮食。
English: Whenever a country has the need for cooperation, conquest, or forced labor, it prepares the necessary grain.

古文：大祭祀，则共其接盛。
现代文：有大祭祀，就供所取用的祭粮。
English: If there is a large religious service, the food for the service must be provided.

古文：舍人掌平宫中之政。分其财守，以法掌其出入。
现代文：舍人掌管有关合理分发宫中用米的事务，分颁米给在宫中各官府的办公人员，按制度掌管米的支出与退还。
English: The steward is in charge of the affairs related to the reasonable distribution of rice used in the palace, distributing rice to the office staff of various government offices in the palace, and controlling the expenditure and refund of rice according to the system.

古文：凡祭祀，共簠簋、实之、陈之。
现代文：凡祭祀，供给簋簋，盛上饭，加以陈列。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, the offering of food and the serving of a meal should be made and displayed.

古文：宾客，亦如之，共其礼车米、筥米、刍米。
现代文：接待宾客也这样做，并供给行致饔饩之礼所需的用车载的米、用笛盛的米、饲草和禾。
English: They also do the same when receiving guests, and provide the rice to be carried by car, the rice to be served with flute, and the fodder and grain to be used for the ceremony.

古文：丧纪，共饭米、熬谷。
现代文：有丧事，供给行饭含礼所需的米，并供给炒熟的谷。
English: If there is a funeral, the rice needed for the meal, including the rites, is provided, and the fried rice is provided.

古文：以岁时县穜稑之种，以共王后之春献种。
现代文：按一年的四季悬挂各类谷种而风干，以供王后孟春向王献种。
English: According to the four seasons of the year, all kinds of cereals are hung and dried for Queen Mengchun to present seeds to the king.

古文：掌米粟之出入，辨其物。
现代文：掌管米谷的支出和收入，辨明它们的种类和名称而分别记账。
English: Supervise the expenditure and income of the rice field, identify their types and names, and record them separately.

古文：岁终，则会计其政。
现代文：夏历年终就总计用谷的多少。
English: How much is the total amount of grain used at the end of the year according to the lunar calendar?

古文：仓人掌粟入之藏，辨九谷之物，以待邦用。
现代文：仓人掌管所收入谷物的储藏，分辨九谷的名称种类，以备王国所用。
English: The granter presided over the storage of the grain received, distinguishing the names and types of the nine valleys for use by the kingdom.

古文：若谷不足，则止余法用。有余，则藏之，以待凶而颁之。
现代文：如果谷物不足，就减省委积的支用；谷物有余，就把它储藏起来，以备灾荒年而颁用。
English: If there is a shortage of grain, the expenditure of the grain reserve will be reduced; if there is a surplus of grain, it will be stored and used in preparation for the year of disaster and famine.

古文：凡国之大事，共道路之谷积，食饮之具。
现代文：凡国家有大事，供道路委积所需的谷物和饮食。
English: Whenever there is a major event in the country, the grain and food needed for the road are stockpiled.

古文：司稼掌巡邦野之稼，而辨穜稑之种，周知其名，与其所宜地。
现代文：司稼掌管巡视王国野地的庄稼，辨别各种谷物的种类，全面了解它们的名称，以及它们所适宜种植的土地，作为下年种植的法则，悬挂在邑中里门上。
English: The steward of the harvest, in charge of inspecting the crops in the fields of the kingdom, distinguishing the types of various grains, fully understanding their names, and the land they are suitable for planting, as a rule for planting the next year, hangs on the middle gate of the town.

古文：以为法而县于邑闾，巡野观稼，以年之上下出敛法。
现代文：巡视野地的庄稼，根据年成的好坏制定出征收赋税的法则。
English: Inspect the crops in the field, and work out the rules for levying taxes according to the quality of the harvest.

古文：掌均万民之食，而赒其急而平其兴。
现代文：掌管调度民众粮食的多少，而救济人们的急困，公平地颁授所征收储积的粮食给急困之民。
English: It is in charge of scheduling the amount of grain for the people, while relieving the urgent needs of the people, and fairly awarding the grain collected and stored to the people in urgent need.

古文：舂人掌共米物。
现代文：舂人掌管供给各种米。
English: The eunuchs are in charge of supplying all kinds of rice.

古文：祭祀，共其齍盛之米；宾客，共其牢礼之米。
现代文：祭祀供给盛在篮簋等器中的米。款待宾客供给行致饔饩之礼时盛在笛中的米。
English: Rice in baskets and other utensils is offered at religious ceremonies, and rice in flutes is offered to guests at ceremonies.

古文：凡飨食，共其食米。
现代文：凡举行飨礼和食礼供给饭食所用的米。
English: The rice used for meals is served at all ceremonies and feasts.

古文：掌凡米事。
现代文：掌管凡属舂米舀米的事。
English: In charge of all things glutinous.

古文：饎人掌凡祭祀共盛，共王及后之六食。
现代文：饎人掌管凡属祭祀所当供给的炊熟的米。
English: The eunuch is in charge of the cooked rice, which is usually supplied to places of worship.

古文：凡宾客，共其簠簋之实；飨食，亦如之。
现代文：供给王和王后用六谷做的饭食。凡接待宾客，供给用篱簋盛的饭食。举行飨礼和食礼也这样做。
English: The king and queen were provided with food cooked in Rokkoku. When receiving guests, they were provided with food cooked in hedges. This was also the case for ceremonial occasions and meals.

古文：槀人掌共外内朝冗食者之食。
现代文：槁人掌管供应在外朝和内朝当值官吏的饭食。
English: He was in charge of providing meals for officials on duty in the Outer and Inner Dynasties.

古文：若飨耆老、孤子、士、庶子，共其食。
现代文：如果用飨礼款待老人、孤子、士、庶子，供给所需的饭食。
English: If you treat the elderly, orphans, nobles, and illegitimate children with bowls, provide the necessary meals.

古文：掌豢祭祀之犬。
现代文：掌管豢养供祭祀用的狗。
English: In charge of raising dogs for sacrifice.

