古文：刺家不诊，听病者言。
现代文：精通针术的医家，在尚未诊脉之时，还需听取病人的自诉。
English: Doctors who are proficient in acupuncture still need to listen to the patient's self-complaint when the pulse has not been diagnosed.

古文：在头，头疾痛，为藏针之，刺至骨病已，上无伤骨肉及皮，皮者道也。阴刺，入一旁四处，治寒热。
现代文：病在头部，且头痛剧烈，可以用针刺治疗，刺至骨部，病就能痊愈，但针刺深浅须恰当，不要损伤骨肉与皮肤，虽然皮肤为针刺入必经之路，仍应注意勿使其受损。
English: If the disease is in the head, and the headache is severe, it can be treated with acupuncture. If you prick the bone, the disease can be cured, but the depth of the needle must be appropriate. Do not damage the bone and skin. Although the skin is the only way for the needle to enter, you should still be careful not to damage it.

古文：深专者，刺大脏，迫脏刺背，背俞也。
现代文：阳刺之法，是中间直刺一针，左右斜刺四针，以治疗寒热的疾患。
English: The method of Yang Zhi is to make one needle in the middle and four needles on the left and right sides to treat cold and fever.

古文：刺之迫脏，脏会，腹中寒热去而止。与刺之要，发针而浅出血。
现代文：若病邪深入专攻内脏，当刺五脏的募穴；邪气进迫五脏，当刺背部的五脏俞穴，邪气迫脏而针刺背俞，是因为背俞是脏器聚会的地方。待腹中寒热消除之后，针刺就可以停止。针刺的要领，是出针使其稍微出一点血。
English: If the evil spirits go deep into the viscera, they can pierce the five viscera; if the evil spirits go deep into the five viscera, they can pierce the five viscera; if the evil spirits go deep into the five viscera, they can pierce the five viscera; if the evil spirits go deep into the viscera, they can pierce the five viscera; if the evil spirits go deep into the viscera, they can pierce the five viscera; if the evil spirits go deep into the viscera, they can pierce the five viscera; if the evil spirits go deep into the viscera, they can

古文：治腐肿者，刺腐上，视痈小大深浅刺。
现代文：治疗痈肿，应刺痈肿的部位，并根据其大小，决定针刺的深浅。
English: For the treatment of abscesses, the site of the abscess should be pricked, and the depth of the prick should be determined according to its size.

古文：刺大者多血，小者深之，必端内针为故止。
现代文：刺大的痈肿，宜多出血，对小的深部痈肿要深刺，一定要端直进针，以达到病所为止。
English: If the abscess is large, it is advisable to bleed more. If the abscess is small and deep, it is necessary to make a deep puncture. The needle must be inserted end-to-end to reach the site of the disease.

古文：病在少腹有积，刺皮𩩻以下，至少腹而止。刺侠脊两旁四椎间，刺两髂髎、季胁肋间，导腹中气热下已。
现代文：病在少腹而有积聚，应刺腹部肚脐以下与髂骨两端间，直到少腹为止的部位；再针第四椎间两旁的穴位和髂骨两侧，以及胁肋间的穴位，以引导腹中热气下行，则病可以痊愈。
English: If the disease has accumulated in the abdomen, it should be pricked in the abdomen below the navel and between the ends of the tibia until the location of the abdomen; then the fourth intervertebral space and the sides of the tibia, as well as the intercostal space, to guide the hot air in the abdomen down, then the disease can be cured.

古文：病在少腹，腹痛，不得大小便，病名曰疝，得之寒。
现代文：病在少腹，腹痛且大小便不通，病名叫做 疝 ，是受寒所致。
English: The illness is characterized by a small stomach, abdominal pain and incontinence. The name of the illness is dysentery, which is caused by the cold.

古文：刺少腹两股间，刺腰髁骨间，刺而多之，尽炅病已。
现代文：应针刺少腹到两大腿内侧间以及腰部和髁骨间穴位，针刺穴位要多，到少腹部都出现热感，病就痊愈了。
English: Acupuncture should be applied to the small abdomen between the inner thighs and between the waist and the shinbone. There are more acupuncture points, and the small abdomen will feel hot, and the disease will be cured.

古文：病在筋，筋挛节痛，不可以行，名曰筋痹。
现代文：病在筋，筋脉拘挛，关节疼痛，不能行动，病名为 筋痹 。
English: The disease is in the muscle, myocardial infarction, joint pain, unable to act, the disease is called myopathy.

古文：刺筋上为故，刺分肉间，不可中骨也。
现代文：应针刺在患病的筋上，由于筋脉在分肉之间，与骨相连，所以针从分肉间刺入，应注意不能刺伤骨。
English: The needle should be inserted into the diseased muscle. Since the muscle vein is located between the lobes and is connected to the bone, the needle should be inserted between the lobes. Care should be taken not to puncture the bone.

古文：病起筋炅，病已止。
现代文：待有病的筋脉出现热感，说明病已痊愈，可以停止针刺。
English: When the diseased muscle vein feels hot, it means that the disease has been cured and the needling can be stopped.

古文：病在肌肤，肌肤尽痛，名曰肌痹，伤于寒湿。
现代文：病在肌肤，周身肌肤疼痛，病名为 肌痹 ，这是被寒湿之邪侵犯所致。
English: The disease is on the skin, the skin around the body is painful, the disease is called myopathy, which is caused by the evil of cold and wet.

古文：刺大分小分，多发针而深之，以热为故，无伤筋骨，伤筋骨，痈发若变。
现代文：应针刺大小肌肉会合之处，取穴要多，进针要深，以局部产生热感为度。不要伤及筋骨，若损伤了筋骨，就会引起痈肿或其他病变。
English: The needles should be pricked where large and small muscles meet. The number of holes should be large and the depth of the needle should be deep, with the degree of local heat sensation. Do not injure the muscles and bones. If the muscles and bones are damaged, it will cause abscesses or other lesions.

古文：诸分尽热，病已止。
现代文：待各肌肉会合之处都出现热感，说明病已痊愈，可以停止针刺。
English: When there is a feeling of heat where all the muscles meet, it means that the disease has been cured and the needling can be stopped.

古文：病在骨，骨重不可举，骨髓酸痛，寒气至，名曰骨痹。
现代文：病在骨，肢体沉重不能抬举，骨髓深处感到酸痛，局部寒冷，病名为 骨痹 。
English: The disease is in the bones, the limb is heavy and cannot be lifted, there is soreness deep in the bone marrow, local cold, the disease is called osteomyelitis.

古文：深者刺，无伤脉肉为故。
现代文：治疗时应深刺，以不伤血脉肌肉为度。
English: The treatment should be deep stabbing, so as not to injure the blood vessels and muscles.

古文：其道大分小分，骨热病已止。
现代文：针刺的道路在大小分肉之间，待骨部感到发热，说明病已痊愈，可以停止针刺。
English: The path of acupuncture is between the size of the meat, until the bone feels hot, indicating that the disease has been cured and the needling can be stopped.

古文：病在诸阳脉，且寒且热，诸分且寒且热，名曰狂。
现代文：病在手足三阳经脉，出现或寒或热的症状，同时各分肉之间也有或寒或热的感觉，这叫 狂 证。
English: The disease begins in the three yang meridians of the hands and feet, with symptoms of either cold or heat. At the same time, there is also a feeling of either cold or heat between the joints, which is called maddening.

古文：刺之虚脉，视分尽热，病已止。
现代文：针刺用泻法，使阳脉的邪气外泄，观察各处分肉，若全部出现热感，说明病已痊愈，应该停止针刺。
English: Acupuncture with laxative, so that the evil of the yang vein outflow, observe all parts of the meat, if all appear heat, indicating that the disease has been cured, should stop acupuncture.

古文：病初发，岁一发；不治，月一发；不治，月四五发，名曰癫病。
现代文：有一种病，初起每年发作一次；若不治疗，则变为每月发作一次；若仍不治疗，则每月发作三、四次，这叫做 癫病 。
English: There is a disease which at first attacks once a year; if untreated, it becomes a monthly attack; if still untreated, it attacks three or four times a month, and this is called epilepsy.

古文：刺诸分诸脉。其无寒者，以针调之，病已止。
现代文：治疗时应针刺各大小分肉以及各部经脉，若没有寒冷的症状，可用针刺调治，直到病愈为止。
English: During treatment, acupuncture should be used to stimulate all parts of the body, large and small, as well as the various meridians. If there are no cold symptoms, acupuncture can be used to adjust the treatment until the disease is cured.

古文：病风且寒且热，炅汗出，一日数过，先刺诸分理络脉。汗出且寒且热，三日一刺，百日而已。
现代文：风邪侵袭人体，出现或寒或热的症状，热则汗出，一日发作数次，应首先针刺各分肉腠理及络脉；若依然汗出且或寒或热，可以三天针刺一次，治疗一百天，疾病就痊愈了。
English: The common cold invades the human body, the symptoms are either cold or heat, and the heat is sweating, and the attack occurs several times a day. The first thing to do is to prick all the joints and arteries. If you still sweat and are cold or hot, you can prick once every three days for 100 days of treatment, and the disease will be cured.

古文：病大风，骨节重，须眉堕，名曰大风，刺肌肉为故，汗出百日；刺骨髓，汗出百日。凡二百日，须眉生而止针。
现代文：病因大风侵袭，出现骨节沉重，胡须眉毛脱落，病名为 大风 。应针刺肌肉，使之出汗，连续治疗一百天后，再针刺骨髓，仍使之出汗，也治疗一百天，总计治疗二百天，直到胡须眉毛重新生长，方可停止针刺。
English: The cause of the disease is wind, the bony joints are heavy, and the whisker eyebrows fall off, the disease is called wind. The muscles should be needled to make them sweat, and after 100 days of continuous treatment, the bone marrow should be needled again to make them sweat, and also treated for 100 days, a total of 200 days of treatment, until the whisker eyebrows regrow, the needling can be stopped.

