古文：高诩包咸魏应伏恭任末景鸾薛汉杜抚召驯杨仁赵晔卫宏董钧丁恭周泽钟兴甄宇楼望程曾张玄李育何休服虔颍容谢该许慎蔡玄
现代文：《前书》鲁人申公受诗于浮丘伯，作训诂，叫做《鲁诗》；齐人辕固生解说的《诗》，叫做《齐诗》，燕人韩婴解说的《诗》，叫做《韩诗》；三家都立博士。赵人毛苌解说的《诗》，叫做《毛诗》，没立博士。
English: In the "First Book," Lu Ren Shengong received the poem from Fu Qubo and wrote a preface, which is called "Lu Poetry"; Qi Ren Ren Gu Sheng's commentary on the "Poem" is called "Qi Poetry"; Yan Ren Han Zi's commentary on the "Poem" is called "Han Poetry"; the three schools have a doctorate. Zhao Ren Mao Yao's commentary on the "Poem" is called "Mao Poetry" and does not have a doctorate.

古文：《前书》鲁人申公受《诗》于浮丘伯，为作诂训，是为《鲁诗》；齐人辕固生亦传《诗》，是为《齐诗》；燕人韩婴亦传《诗》，是为《韩诗》；三家皆立博士。赵人毛苌传《诗》，是为《毛诗》，未得立。高诩字季回，平原般人也。
现代文：◆高诩传，高诩字季回，平原郡人。
English: ◆Gao Jun Chuan, Gao Jun Zi Ji Hui, from Pingyuan County.

古文：曾祖父嘉，以《鲁诗》授元帝，仕至上谷太守。
现代文：曾祖父高嘉，用《鲁诗》教授元帝，官至上谷太守。
English: His great-grandfather Gao Jia used "Lu Shi" to teach Emperor Yuan, and became the highest-ranking official in Shanggu.

古文：父容，少传嘉学，哀、平间为光禄大夫。
现代文：高诩的父亲高容，年轻时传高嘉学，哀帝、平帝时为光禄大夫。
English: Gao Rong's father, Gao Rong, was a disciple of Gao Jiaxue when he was young, and a doctor of Guanglu during the reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping.

古文：诩以父任为郎中，世传《鲁诗》。
现代文：高诩因父亲的关系任郎中，世代传授《鲁诗》。
English: Due to his father's relationship, Gao Jun was appointed as a disciple and taught "Lu Shi" to the next generation.

古文：以信行清操知名。
现代文：因言行清正有操守而著名。
English: Known for being a man of integrity.

古文：王莽篡位，父子称盲，逃，不仕莽世。
现代文：王莽篡位，父子二人假称眼睛瞎了，逃走，不做王莽的官。
English: Wang Mang usurped the throne. Both father and son pretended to be blind and ran away, refusing to be Wang Mang's officials.

古文：光武即位，大司空宋弘荐诩，征为郎，除符离长。
现代文：光武即位，大司空宋弘荐举高诩，征为郎，授符离长。
English: When Guangwu ascended to the throne, the Grand Master Ku Song Hong recommended that he be given the title of Gao Jie, and he was awarded the title of Zifu Liang.

古文：去官，后征为博士。
现代文：去官之后，征为博士。
English: After demotion, he was promoted to doctor.

古文：建武十一年，拜大司农。
现代文：建武十一年，授大司农。
English: Jianwu 11 years old, awarded the title of Vice-Minister of Agriculture.

古文：在朝以方正称。
现代文：在朝廷因居官方正著名。
English: He was famous in the imperial court for his official residence.

古文：十三年，卒官，赐钱及冢田。
现代文：十三年，死在任上，赐钱及墓田。
English: Thirteen years, died in office, given money and a grave plot.

古文：包咸字子良，会稽曲阿人也。
现代文：◆包咸传，包咸字子良，会稽曲阿人。
English: ◆The legend of Bao Xianxuan, the characters of Bao Xianxian and Zi Liang, will be rehearsed by Ah Ren.

古文：少为诸生，受业长安，师事博士右师细君，习《鲁诗》、《论语》。
现代文：年轻时为诸生，在长安学习，以博士从细君为师，学《鲁诗》、《论语》。
English: When he was young, he studied in Chang'an, and learned "Lu Shi" and "Analects of Confucius" from Dr. Sejun.

古文：王莽末，去归乡里，于东海界为赤眉贼所得，遂见拘执。
现代文：王莽末年，回乡里，在东海境被赤眉贼拘执。
English: At the end of his life, Wang Mang returned to his hometown and was detained by red-browed thieves in the East China Sea.

古文：十余日，咸晨夜诵经自若，贼异而遣之。
现代文：十多天，包咸早晨晚上诵经自如，赤眉贼奇怪，把他遣发走了。
English: For more than ten days, Bao Xian chanted the sutras freely in the morning and evening. The red-browed thief was surprised and sent him away.

古文：因住东海，立精舍讲授。
现代文：因此住在东海，造精舍讲授。
English: That's why I live in the East China Sea and do my best to teach.

古文：光武即位，乃归乡里。
现代文：光武即位，才回到自己的家乡。
English: Only after the enthronement of Emperor Guangwu did he return to his hometown.

古文：太守黄谠署户曹史，欲召咸入授其子。
现代文：太守黄谠任户曹史，想找包咸去教授他的儿子。
English: Cao Shi, the governor of Huangpi Renhu, wanted to find Bao Xian to teach his son.

古文：咸曰： 礼有来学，而无往教。 
现代文：包咸说： 礼有来学的，没有去教的。 
English: Bao Xian said, "Rites and etiquette are learned, not taught.

古文：谠遂遣子师之。举孝廉，除郎中。
现代文：黄谠就送儿子去向他请教，以他为师。举孝廉，授郎中。
English: Huang Qi sent his son to ask him for advice, and took him as his teacher.

古文：建武中，入授皇太子《论语》，又为其章句。
现代文：建武中，入朝廷教授皇太子学习《论语》，又作《论语》章句。
English: In the middle of the Jianwu period, he entered the imperial court to teach the crown prince to study the Analects, and also wrote a chapter of the Analects.

古文：拜谏议大夫、侍中、右中郎将。
现代文：授谏议大夫、侍中、右中郎将。
English: He was awarded the titles of Jugei-gishi no daibu, Samurai no chu, and Uchuchuro no shosho.

古文：永平五年，迁大鸿胪。
现代文：永平五年，升大鸿胪。
English: Yongping five years, rising to the top.

古文：每进见，锡以几杖，入屏不趋，赞事不名。
现代文：每进见皇上，皇上以几杖赐他，入屏不趋，赞事不名。
English: Every time he saw the emperor, the emperor gave him a few sticks, but he did not enter the screen, and there was no praise.

古文：经传有疑，辄遣小黄门就舍即问。
现代文：经传有疑义，常派小黄门到他家里去问。
English: According to legend, whenever there was any doubt, he would send Xiao Huangmen to his home to ask.

古文：显宗以咸有师傅恩，而素清苦，常特赏赐珍玩束帛，奉禄增于诸卿，咸皆散与诸生之贫者。
现代文：显宗认为包咸有老师的恩德，生活清苦，经常赏赐珍玩束帛，俸禄也比各公卿多，包咸都散给诸生中最贫困的。
English: Emperor Xuanzong believed that Bao Xian had the grace of a teacher, lived a clean life, was often rewarded with precious trinkets, and his salary was more than that of the nobles. Bao Xian was distributed to the poorest of the poor.

古文：病笃、帝亲辇驾临视。
现代文：病重时，显宗亲自去看视。
English: When he was seriously ill, Emperor Xuanzong went to see him in person.

古文：八年，年七十二，卒于官。
现代文：八年，年七十二，死在任内。
English: Eight years later, at the age of 72, he died in office.

古文：子福，拜郎中，亦以《论语》入授和帝。
现代文：儿子包福，授郎中，也是用《论语》入朝廷教授和帝。
English: Baofu's son Baofu also used "Analects" to enter the imperial court as a professor and emperor.

古文：魏应字君伯，任城人也。
现代文：◆魏应传，魏应字君伯，任城人。
English: ◆ Wei Ying Chuan, Wei Ying Zi Junbo, Rencheng.

古文：少好学。
现代文：年轻时好学习。
English: Very studious when young.

古文：建武初，诣博士受业，习《鲁诗》。
现代文：建武初年，去博士学习，学《鲁诗》。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he went to study for a doctorate and learned "Lu Shi."

古文：闭门诵习，不交僚党，京师称之。
现代文：关门学习，不交结朋党，京师人都称赞他。
English: He studied behind closed doors and did not make friends with the party. The teachers in Beijing all praised him.

古文：后归为郡吏，举明经，除济阴王文学。
现代文：后来归家作郡吏，举明经，授济阴王文学。
English: Later, he returned home to work as a county official, reciting the Ming and Qing Dynasties classics, and teaching Yin and Wang literature.

古文：以疾免官，教授山泽中，徒众常数百人。
现代文：因病免去官职，教授山泽中，生徒往往几百人。
English: Due to illness, he was removed from his official position and became a professor at Yamazawa Junior High School, where there are often hundreds of students.

古文：永平初，为博士，再迁侍中。
现代文：永平初年，为博士，升侍中。
English: In the first year of Yongping, he became a doctor and was promoted to a middle-ranking officer.

古文：十三年，迁大鸿胪。
现代文：十三年，升大鸿胪。
English: Thirteen years later, he graduated from university.

古文：十八年，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：十八年，授光禄大夫。
English: In 18 years, he was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：建初四年，拜五官中郎将，诏入授千乘王伉。
现代文：建初四年，授五官中郎将，诏令入朝授千乘王伉。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianchu era, he was awarded the title of five-ranked middle-ranking general, and the imperial edict was issued that he would be awarded the title of Chosen Jisho Wangye.

古文：应经明行修，弟子自远方至，著录数千人。
现代文：魏应通晓经术，品行修洁，弟子自远方来学的，在册的几千人。
English: Wei Ying was well versed in the art of the sutra, his conduct was chaste, and his disciples came from far and wide to learn from him. There are several thousand of them on the register.

古文：肃宗甚重之，数进见，论难于前，特受赏赐。
现代文：肃宗非常器重他，多次进见，在皇上面前讨论疑难，受到特殊的赏赐。
English: Su Zong held him in high esteem, consulted him many times, discussed difficult issues in front of the emperor, and received a special reward.

古文：时会京师诸儒于白虎观，讲论《五经》同异，使应专掌难问，侍中淳于恭奏之，帝亲临称制，如石渠故事。
现代文：这时集合京师儒生于白虎观，讨论《五经》同异，使魏应专门解释疑难，侍中淳于恭报告皇上，皇上亲自到会主持，与石渠旧事一样。
English: At this time, Confucian scholars from Beijing gathered at the White Tiger Temple to discuss the similarities and differences of the Five Classics, so that Wei Ying specifically explained the difficulties, and the attendant Jun Yu Gong reported to the emperor. The emperor himself came to preside over the meeting, just like the old days of Shiqu.

古文：明年，出为上党太守，征拜骑都尉，卒于官。
现代文：第二年，魏应出为上党太守，征授骑都尉，死在任上。
English: In the second year, Wei Ying was appointed as the supreme commander of the party and was awarded the title of cavalry captain. He died in office.

古文：伏恭字叔齐，琅邪东武人，司徒湛之兄子也。
现代文：◆伏恭传，伏恭字叔齐，琅笽东武人，司徒伏湛的弟弟的儿子。
English: ◆Fu Kyong Chuan, Fu Kyong Zi Shu Qi, son of the younger brother of Shidong Wu Ren, Siu Fuchan.

古文：湛弟黯，字稚文，以明《齐诗》，改定章句，作《解说》九篇，位至光禄勋，无子，以恭为后。
现代文：伏湛的弟弟伏黯，字稚文，为了阐明《齐诗》，改定章句，作《解说》九篇，位至光禄勋。伏湛没有儿子，以伏恭为后。
English: Fuchan's younger brother, Fuchuan, a poet, in order to clarify the "Qi Shi," revised the fixed chapters and made nine "explanations," and was awarded the Guanglu Medal. Fuchan did not have a son, and Fuchuan was the last.

古文：恭性孝，事所继母甚谨，少传黯学，以任为郎。
现代文：伏恭性孝，对待继母非常敬谨，年轻时传伏黯学，因任为郎。
English: He had a filial piety and treated his stepmother with great respect. When he was young, he passed on his knowledge to his stepmother, and became her son.

古文：建武四年，除剧令。
现代文：建武四年，授剧县令。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, it was ordered by the county to stage the play.

古文：视事十三年，以惠政公廉闻。
现代文：任职十三年，因政治清廉公正著了名。
English: During his thirteen years in office, he became famous for his political integrity and fairness.

古文：青州举为尤异，太常试经第一，拜博士，迁常山太守。
现代文：青州举他为尤异，太常试经第一，授博士，升常山太守。
English: Qingzhou praised him as outstanding, ranked first in the Taizhong Examination, awarded him a doctorate, and promoted him to the governor of Mount Changshan.

古文：郭修学校，教授不辍，由是北州多为伏氏学。
现代文：兴修学校，教授门徒不止，因此北州多是伏氏学。
English: He built a school and taught more than one disciple, so most of the students in Beizhou were from the Fuxi School.

古文：永平二年，代梁松为太仆。
现代文：永平二年，代梁松为太仆。
English: In the second year of the Yongping era, Liang Song was appointed as Taibu.

古文：四年，帝临辟雍，于行礼中拜恭为司空，儒者以为荣。
现代文：四年，帝亲去辟雍，在行礼过程中授伏恭为司空，儒生认为是一种光荣。
English: In the fourth year, the emperor went to Baiyong, and in the course of the salute, he bestowed the Fuxiong to Siku, which the Confucians considered to be an honor.

古文：初，父黯章句繁多，恭乃省减浮辞，定为二十万言。
现代文：起先，伏恭的父亲伏黯的章句太繁琐，伏恭于是删去多余的话，定稿为二十万字。
English: At first, Fu Qiong's father Fu Qian's chapter was too cumbersome, so Fu Qiong cut out the superfluous words, and the final draft was 200,000 words.

古文：在位九年，以病乞骸骨罢，诏赐千石奉以终其身。
现代文：在位九年，因病请求回家，诏赐千百俸以终其身。
English: After nine years on the throne, he requested to return home due to illness, and the emperor gave him one thousand one hundred rupees for the rest of his life.

古文：十五年，行幸琅邪，引遇如三公仪。
现代文：十五年，皇上至琅笽，引见伏恭，如见三公的仪式。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Emperor's reign, the three princes were introduced to Fu Qiong at a ceremony.

古文：建初二年冬，肃宗行飨礼，以恭为三老。
现代文：建初二年冬，肃宗行飨礼，称伏恭为三老。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Jianchu era, Su Zong made a prostration and called Fuxiong the third elder.

古文：年九十，元和元年卒，赐葬显节陵下。
现代文：年九十，元和元年逝世，赐葬显节陵下。
English: He died in the year 90, and in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was buried in the tomb of Xian Jie.

古文：子寿，官至东郡太守。
现代文：儿子伏寿，官至东郡太守。
English: His son, Fushou, became the governor of Higashi County.

古文：任末字叔本，蜀郡繁人也。
现代文：◆任末传，任末字叔本，蜀郡繁县人。
English: ◆ Ren Muzhe Zhi, Ren Muzhe Zi Shubun, Shu County Sheng County people.

古文：少习《齐诗》，游京师，教授十余年。
现代文：年轻时学《齐诗》，游学京师，教授弟子十多年。
English: He studied "Qi Shi" when he was young, traveled to Beijing to study, and taught his disciples for more than ten years.

古文：友人董奉德于洛阳病亡，末乃躬推鹿车，载奉德丧致其墓所，由是知名。
现代文：友人董奉德在洛阳病死，任末亲自推着鹿车，载了董奉德的丧送到墓地，由是著名。
English: His friend, Dong Bongde, died of illness in Luoyang. At the end of his life, Ren Rong personally pushed the deer cart and carried Dong Bongde's funeral to the cemetery, for which he is famous.

古文：为郡功曹，辞以病免。
现代文：为郡功曹，以病辞去。
English: He was a county meritorious officer, but resigned due to illness.

古文：后奔师丧，于道物故。
现代文：后来奔老师的丧，在路上死去。
English: Later, he ran to the teacher's funeral and died on the way.

古文：临命，敕兄子造曰： 必致我尸于师门，使死而有知，魂灵不惭；如其无知，得土而已。 
现代文：临死时，告诉哥哥的儿子任造说 ：一定要把我的尸体送到老师处，假使死了还有知觉，魂灵不会感到惭愧；如果没有知觉，得一扌不土罢了。 
English: When he was about to die, he told his brother's son, Ren Zong, "Be sure to send my corpse to the teacher. If there is still consciousness after death, the soul will not feel ashamed; if there is no consciousness, it will not be able to do anything."

古文：造从之。
现代文：任造听了他的话。
English: Ren Zou listened to his words.

古文：景鸾字汉伯，广汉梓潼人也。
现代文：◆景鸾传，景鸾字汉伯，广汉梓潼人。
English: ◆Jing Xuan, Jing Xuan Zi Han Bo, Guang Han Zi Xuan Ren.

古文：少随师学经，涉七州之地。
现代文：年轻时跟着老师学经，跑遍了七州。
English: When he was young, he studied the classics with his teacher and traveled to seven states.

古文：能理《齐诗》、《施氏易》、兼受《河》、《洛》图纬，作《易说》及《诗解》，文句兼取《河》、《洛》，以类相从，名为《交集》。
现代文：能攻《齐诗》、《施氏易》，兼受《河洛》图纬，作《易说》及《诗解》，文句兼取《河洛》，按类编排，名叫《交集》。又著《礼内外记》，叫《礼略》。
English: He was able to attack "Qi Shi" and "Shi Shi Yi" and at the same time was inspired by the plot of "Hao Luo" and wrote "Saying Yi" and "Poetry Interpretation." He also took phrases from "Hao Luo" and arranged them according to categories, which is called "Intersection." He also wrote "The Inner and Outer Records of Ceremonies," which is called "Outline of Ceremonies."

古文：又撰《礼内外记》，号曰《礼略》。又抄风角杂书，列其占验，作《兴道》一篇。
现代文：又抄录风角杂书，罗列占验，作《兴道》一篇。
English: In addition, he transcribed the wind angle miscellaneous books, listed the occupation tests, and made an article of "Xingdao."

古文：及作《月令章句》。
现代文：以及作《月令章句》。
English: and "Monthly Chapters."

古文：凡所著述五十余万言。
现代文：著述共五十多万字。
English: His writings total more than half a million words.

古文：数上书陈救灾变之术。
现代文：多次上书陈述救灾异之术。
English: Repeatedly submitted a letter stating disaster relief techniques.

古文：州郡辟命不就，以寿终。
现代文：州郡辟命不就。以寿终。
English: It's not enough for the state and county to spare his life.

古文：薛汉字公子，淮阳人也。
现代文：◆薛汉传，薛汉字公子，淮阳人。
English: ◆Xue Han Chuan, Xue Han Zi Gongzi, Huaiyang people.

古文：世习《韩诗》，父子以章句著名。
现代文：世代学《韩诗》，父子都因解说诸经的章节句读著名。
English: In the genealogy of "Han poetry," both father and son are famous for their interpretation of the chapters and sentences of the scriptures.

古文：汉少传父业，尤善说灾异谶纬，教授常数百人。
现代文：薛汉年轻时传父亲的学业，特别擅长说灾异谶纬，教授生徒常达几百人。
English: When he was young, Xue Han inherited his father's studies. He was particularly good at describing natural disasters, and often taught hundreds of students.

古文：建武初，为博士，受诏校定图谶。
现代文：建武初年，为博士，受诏命校定图谶。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, as a doctor, he was ordered by the emperor to calibrate the map.

古文：当世言《诗》者，推汉为长。
现代文：当世说《诗》的，推薛汉为第一。
English: Those who speak of "poetry" in today's world put forward Xue Han as the first.

古文：永平中，为千乘太守，政有异迹。
现代文：永平中，为千乘太守，政治有特别好的成绩。
English: In Yongping, he was the chief abbot of the Thousand Buddhas Monastery, and his political achievements were particularly good.

古文：后坐楚事辞相连，下狱死。
现代文：后来因楚事获罪，下狱死。
English: Later, he was convicted of Chu affairs and died in prison.

古文：弟子犍为杜抚、会稽澹台敬伯、钜鹿韩伯高最知名。
现代文：弟子犍为杜抚、会稽澹台敬伯、巨鹿韩伯高最有名。
English: His most famous disciples were Du Fu (杜抚), Jingbo Tai (会稽台敬伯) and Han Bo Gao (巨鹿韩伯高).

古文：杜抚字叔和，犍为武阳人也。
现代文：◆杜抚传，杜抚字叔和，犍为武阳人。
English: ◆Du Fuzhuan, Du Fuzhuan, Du Fuzhuan, Du Fuzhuan, Du Fuzhuan, Du Fuzhuan is from Wuyang.

古文：少有高才。
现代文：年轻时很有才华。
English: He was very talented when he was young.

古文：受业于薛汉，定《韩诗章句》。
现代文：从薛汉学习，定《韩诗章句》。
English: He learned from Xue Han and composed "Chapters of Korean Poetry."

古文：后归乡里教授。
现代文：后来回到乡里教授门生。
English: He later returned to the countryside to teach his protégé.

古文：沈静乐道，举动必以礼。
现代文：沉毅静穆，以道为乐，一举一动，都以礼为准则。
English: Steadfast and quiet, enjoying the Tao, every move is based on etiquette.

古文：弟子千余人。后为骠骑将军东平王苍所辟，及苍就国，掾史悉补王官属，未满岁，皆自劾归。
现代文：弟子千多人，后来被骠骑将军东平王苍所征，苍就国时，掾史统统补王官属，没有一年，都自劾回去了。
English: Later, more than a thousand of his disciples were conscripted by Dongping Wang Cang, the general of the cavalry. When Cang took over the country, all the officials belonging to Wang Cang were impeached and went back in less than a year.

古文：时，抚为大夫，不忍去，苍闻，赐车马财物遣之。
现代文：当时杜抚为大夫，不忍心离去，苍听说了，赐车马财物遣送他。
English: At that time, Du Fu was a doctor and could not bear to leave. When Heaven heard about it, it gave him a carriage, horses and property to send him away.

古文：辟太尉府。
现代文：辟太尉府。
English: Take the captain's residence.

古文：建初中，为公车令，数月卒官。
现代文：建初中，做公车令，仅几个月，死在任上。
English: He built a junior high school, ordered buses to be built, only lasted a few months, and died in office.

古文：其所作《诗题约义通》，学者传之，曰《杜君法》云。
现代文：他所著的《诗题约义通》，学者传诵，叫《杜君法》。
English: His book, "Poetry about Justice," which scholars recite, is called "Tujun Law."

古文：召驯字伯春，九江寿春人也。
现代文：◆召驯传，召驯字伯春，九江寿春人。
English: ◆ Call for training, call for training Bo Chun, Jiujiang Shuchun.

古文：曾祖信臣，元帝时为少府。
现代文：曾祖召信臣，元帝时，做少府。
English: Zeng Zu summoned Nobuomi, and when he was the Yuan Emperor, he became a minor prefect.

古文：父建武中为卷令，俶傥不拘小节。
现代文：父亲建武中做卷县令，放荡不拘小节。
English: His father, Jianwu, was a county magistrate and indulged in debauchery.

古文：驯小习《韩诗》，博通书传，以志义闻，乡里号之曰 德行恂恂召伯春 。
现代文：召驯年少时学《韩诗》，博通经传，以志气有义著名。乡里说： 德行恂恂召伯春。 
English: Zhaotong studied "Han Poetry" at a young age. It was widely circulated and was famous for its ambition and righteousness. The townspeople said: "Dehongxing Zhaotong Baochun."

古文：累仕州郡，辟司徒府。
现代文：多次出仕州郡，征召司徒府。
English: He went to Shishu County many times and was called up by Shitofu.

古文：建初元年，稍迁骑都尉，侍讲肃宗。
现代文：建初元年，升骑都尉，作肃宗的侍讲。
English: In the first year of Jian, he was promoted to lieutenant and became Su Zong's attendant.

古文：拜左中郎将，入授诸王。
现代文：授左中郎将，进朝教授诸王子。
English: He was awarded the rank of Zuozhongro, and went to the imperial court to teach princes.

古文：帝嘉其义学，恩宠甚崇。出拜陈留太守，赐刀剑钱物。
现代文：帝嘉奖他，十分恩宠。出授陈留太守，赐给刀剑钱物。
English: Emperor Jia rewarded him with great grace. He conferred the title of Chen Liu Dazhong and gave him a sword and money.

古文：元和二年，入为河南尹。
现代文：元和二年，入为河南尹。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Henan Yin.

古文：章和二年，代任隗为光禄勋，卒于官，赐冢茔陪园陵。
现代文：章和二年，代任隗作光禄勋，死在任上，赐冢茔陪园陵。
English: In the second year of Zhang He's reign, he was awarded the Guanglu Honour for his work as a deputy, but died in office, and his tomb was moved to the garden.

古文：孙休，位至青州刺史。
现代文：孙子叫召休，位至青州刺史。
English: Grandson calls it quits, goes to Qingzhou to make history.

古文：杨仁字文义，巴郡阆中人也。
现代文：◆杨仁传，杨仁字文义，巴郡阆中人。
English: ◆Yang Ren Chuan, Yang Ren Zi Wen Yi, a middle-aged man from Ba County.

古文：建武中，诣师学习《韩诗》，数年归，静居教授。
现代文：建武中，从师学习《韩诗》，几年以后回到家里，静居教授门生。
English: In middle school, Jianwu studied "Korean Poetry" with his teacher. A few years later, he returned home and became a protégé of Professor Jingju.

古文：仕郡为功曹，举孝廉，除郎。
现代文：出仕做郡功曹，举孝廉，授郎。
English: He served as a county meritorious person, promoted filial piety, and was awarded the title of prince.

古文：太常上仁经中博士，仁自以年未五十，不应旧科，上府让选。
现代文：太常上杨仁任中博士，杨仁自己认为年龄不到五十，不应旧科，上府让选。
English: Too often, Yang Ren was appointed as a junior doctor. Yang Ren himself thought that he was less than fifty years old and should not be an old subject, so he let the government choose.

古文：显宗特诏补北宫卫士令，引见，问当世政迹。
现代文：显宗特诏补北宫卫士令，皇上引见，问当世政治情况。
English: Hsien Zong issued a special edict to supplement the order of the guards of the Northern Palace, and the emperor introduced him and asked him about the current political situation.

古文：仁对以宽和任贤，抑黜骄戚为先。
现代文：杨仁回答要为政宽和，任用贤人，压抑骄横的外戚为先。
English: Yang Ren replied that it was necessary to make peace with politics, appoint wise men, and suppress arrogant relatives first.

古文：又上便宜十二事，皆当世急务。
现代文：又上对国家有利的事十二项，都是当世的急务。
English: There are also twelve matters beneficial to the country, all of which are urgent matters of the present.

古文：帝嘉之，赐以缣钱。
现代文：显宗嘉奖他，赐以缣钱。
English: Emperor Xuanzong praised him and gave him a large sum of money.

古文：及帝崩，时诸马贵盛，各争欲入宫，仁被甲持戟，严勒门卫，莫敢轻进者。
现代文：显宗逝世后，诸马氏贵盛，都争着要入宫。杨仁披甲持戟，严守门卫，没有人敢随便进去。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuanzong, the wealthiest members of the Zhu Ma clan all competed to enter the palace. Yang Ren wore armor and carried a scepter, and kept a strict watch on the gatekeepers. No one dared to enter at will.

古文：肃宗既立，诸马共谮仁刻峻，帝知其忠，愈善之，拜什邡令。
现代文：肃宗即位，诸马氏共同诬陷杨仁刻毒严峻，帝知道杨仁忠，更加喜欢他，授升邡令。
English: When Su Zong ascended the throne, the Zhu Ma clan jointly framed Yang Renzhong and severely poisoned him. The emperor knew Yang Renzhong, liked him even more, and gave him the imperial order of promotion.

古文：宽惠为政，劝课掾史弟子，悉令就学。
现代文：宽容为政，劝课掾史弟子，都使入学。
English: Tolerance as a policy, exhorting students to study history, have made the school better.

古文：其有通明经术者，显之右署，或贡之朝，由是义学大兴。
现代文：其中通晓经术的，向上司表彰，有的贡献朝廷，由是义学大兴。
English: Among them, those who were well-versed in scripture were commended by their superiors, and some made contributions to the imperial court, which led to the flourishing of righteousness studies.

古文：垦田千余顷。
现代文：垦田千多顷。
English: There are more than a thousand hectares of rice paddies.

古文：行兄丧去官。
现代文：因办哥哥的丧事去官。
English: He left office because of his brother's death.

古文：后辟司徒桓虞府。
现代文：后来辟举司徒桓虞府。
English: Later, it was renamed Kanyu-fu.

古文：掾有宋章者，贪奢不法，仁终不与交言同席，时人畏其节。
现代文：掾有宋章，贪污不法，杨仁始终不同他说话同席，当时人敬重他的大节。
English: There was Song Zhang, corruption was illegal, Yang Ren was always at the same table as him, and people respected him at that time.

古文：后为阆中令，卒于官。
现代文：后来做阆中令。死在任上。
English: He later became the second-in-command of the imperial eunuchs. He died in office.

古文：赵晔字长君，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：◆赵晔传，赵晔字长君，会稽山阴人。
English: ◆Zhao Bingzhuan, Zhao Bingzhuangjun, is a member of the mountain witch's coven.

古文：少尝为县吏，奉檄迎督邮，晔耻于斯役，遂弃车马去。
现代文：年轻时曾经做过县吏，奉命迎接督邮，赵晔认为做这类仆役工作可耻，因扔掉车马走了。
English: When he was young, he once worked as a county official and was ordered to greet the postmaster. Zhao Wei thought it was shameful to do this kind of servant work, so he threw away his horse and carriage and left.

古文：到犍为资中，诣杜抚受《韩诗》，究竟其术。
现代文：走到犍为资中县，到杜抚处学《韩诗》，深入钻研。
English: He went to Dafu to study "Korean Poetry" and studied it in depth.

古文：积二十年，绝问不还，家为发丧制服。
现代文：积二十年，与家里断绝往来，不回去，家里为他办了丧事。
English: After twenty years, he broke off contact with his family and did not return. His family held a funeral for him.

古文：抚卒乃归。
现代文：杜抚逝世后才归。
English: Du Fu did not return until after his death.

古文：州召补从事，不就。
现代文：州召他补从事，不就。
English: The state called him to fill in, but he didn't do it.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：举有道。
English: He died at home.

古文：卫宏字敬仲，东海人也。
现代文：死在家里。◆卫宏传，卫宏字敬仲，东海人。
English: He died at home. ◆Biography of Wei Hong, written by Wei Hong with the character敬仲, a native of the East China Sea.

古文：少与河南郑兴俱好古学。
现代文：年轻时与河南郑兴都好古学。
English: When he was young, he and Henan Zheng Xing were both good at ancient studies.

古文：初，九江谢曼卿善《毛诗》，乃为其训。
现代文：起先，九江谢曼卿擅长说《毛诗》，为《毛诗》作了训诂。
English: At first, Jiujiang Shieman was good at reciting the "Mao Poem" and made a recitation of the "Mao Poem."

古文：宏从曼卿受学，因作《毛诗序》，善得《风雅》之旨，于今传于世。
现代文：卫宏从谢曼卿学习，因作《毛诗序》，很合风雅的意思，于今还在社会上流行。
English: Wei Hong learned from Lord Sheman, and because of his "Mao Poem Sequence," the meaning is very elegant, and it is still popular in society today.

古文：后从大司空杜林更受《古文尚书》，为作《训旨》。
现代文：后来从大司空杜林更受《古文尚书》，为《古文尚书》作《训旨》。
English: Later, he received the "Ancient Texts" from Daishi Ku Durin and wrote the "Instructions" for the "Ancient Texts."

古文：时济南徐巡师事宏，后从林受学，亦以儒显，由是古学大兴。
现代文：这时济南徐巡拜卫宏为老师，后来跟杜林学习，也以儒学著名，由是古学大兴。
English: At this time, Jinan Xu Junbei Weihong was a teacher, and later studied with Du Lin, also famous for Confucianism, which led to the flourishing of ancient studies.

古文：光武以为议郎。
现代文：光武用为议郎。
English: Mitsutake is the speaker.

古文：宏作《汉旧仪》四篇，以载西京杂事；又著赋、颂、诔七首，皆传于世。
现代文：卫宏作《汉旧仪》四篇，记载西京杂事；又著赋、颂、诔七首，都传于世。
English: Wei Hong wrote "Han and Old Ceremonies" in four parts, documenting the miscellaneous affairs of the Western Capital; he also wrote seven poems, including a fu, a ode, and a poem, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：中兴后，郑众、贾逵传《毛诗》，后马融作《毛诗传》，郑玄作《毛诗笺》。
现代文：中兴后，郑众、贾逵传《毛诗》，后来马融作《毛诗传》，郑玄作《毛诗笺》。
English: After the reformation, Zheng Zong and Jia Wei wrote "Mao Shi," later Ma Rong wrote "Mao Shi Chuan" and Zheng Xuan wrote "Mao Shi Jun."

古文：《前书》鲁高堂生，汉兴传《礼》十七篇。
现代文：《前书》载鲁高堂生汉兴传《礼》十七篇。
English: "The First Book" contains seventeen chapters from Lu Gaodang's son Han Xingzhuan's "Rite."

古文：后瑕丘萧奋以授同郡后苍，苍授梁人戴德及德兄子圣、沛人庆普。
现代文：后来瑕丘萧奋用授同郡人后苍，后苍授梁人戴德及德的哥哥的儿子戴圣、沛人庆普。
English: Later, Kechuo Xiaofeng conferred the title of county person to Houcheng, and Houcheng conferred the title of Liangren to Deide and the sons of Deide's brother, Dai Sheng and Peiren Qingpu.

古文：于是德为《大戴礼》，圣为《小戴礼》，普为《庆氏礼》，三家皆立博士。
现代文：于是戴德的叫《大戴礼》，戴圣的叫《小戴礼》，庆普的叫《庆氏礼》，三家都立博士。
English: As a result, Dade's is called "Big Dai Rite," Dai Sheng's is called "Small Dai Rite," Qingpu's is called "Keiji Rite," and the three schools are all doctorates.

古文：孔安国所献《礼》古经五十六篇及《周官经》六篇，前世传其书，未有名家。
现代文：孔安国所献《礼》古经五十六篇和《周官经》六篇，前世传其书，没有名家。
English: There are fifty-six ancient sutras of "Ritual" and six sutras of "Zhou Guan Jing" presented by Kong An Guo, and their books have been passed down from previous generations. There is no famous family.

古文：中兴已后，亦有《大》、《小戴》博士，虽相传不绝，然未有显于儒林者。
现代文：中兴以后，也有《大、小戴》博士，虽然相传不绝，但是没有著名于儒林的。
English: After ZTE, there was also a "big, small Dai" doctor, although it has been passed down, but it is not famous in the Confucianism.

古文：建武中，曹充习庆氏学，传其子褒，遂撰《汉礼》，事在《褒传》。
现代文：建武中，曹充学庆氏学，传给他儿子曹褒，著《汉礼》，事载在《庆癊传》。
English: In the middle of the Jianwu period, Cao Chong studied the teachings of the Qing Dynasty and passed them on to his son Cao Bao, author of "The Han Rites," which was recorded in "The Biography of the Qing Dynasty."

古文：董钧字文伯，犍为资中人也。
现代文：◆董钧传，董钧字文伯，犍为郡资中县人。
English: ◆ Mr. Dong Yuchuan, Mr. Dong Yuzi, Mr. Dong Yuzi, Mr. Dong Yuzi, Mr. Dong Yuzi, Mr.

古文：习《庆氏礼》。
现代文：学《庆氏礼》。
English: Learn the "Celebration Rite."

古文：事大鸿胪王临。
现代文：师事大鸿胪王临。
English: Wang Lin, the great scholar, was the teacher.

古文：元始中，举明经，迁禀牺令。病去官。
现代文：元始中，举明经，升禀牲令，因病辞官。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was promoted to the post of secretary due to illness.

古文：建武中，举孝廉，辟司徒府。
现代文：建武中，举孝廉，辟司徒府。
English: In the middle of Jianwu, promote filial piety, and move away from the scholar's palace.

古文：钧博通古今，数言政事。
现代文：董钧博通古今学问，多次上书说政事的得失利害。
English: Dong Hao is well-versed in ancient and modern learning, and has written many times about the pros and cons of political affairs.

古文：永平初，为博士。
现代文：永平初，为博士。
English: At the beginning of the Yongping era, he became a doctor.

古文：时草创五郊祭祀，及宗庙礼乐，威仪章服，辄令钧参议，多见从用，当世称为通儒。
现代文：这时正草创五郊祭祀及宗庙礼乐，威仪章服，常叫董钧参议，多被采用，当世叫他为通儒。
English: At this time, Zheng Cao created the Five Suburbs sacrificial rites and the ancestral temple liturgy, as well as the grand ceremonial robes, often called Dong Xuan Sangye, and was mostly adopted. In his day, he was called Tong Ru.

古文：累迁五官中郎将，常教授门生百余人。
现代文：累升五官中郎将，经常教授门生一百多人。
English: He has risen through the ranks to the rank of middle-ranking official, and regularly teaches more than a hundred students.

古文：后坐事左转骑都尉。年七十余，卒于家。
现代文：后来因事降任骑都尉，年七十余，死在家里。
English: Later, due to an accident, he was demoted to captain and died at home in his 70s.

古文：中兴，郑众传《周官经》，后马融作《周官传》，授郑玄，玄作《周官注》。
现代文：中兴，郑众传《周官经》，后来马融作《周官传》，授给郑玄，郑玄作《周官注》。
English: Zhongxing, Zheng Zongzhuan "Zhou Guan Jing," later Ma Rong made "Zhou Guan Biography," awarded to Zheng Xuan, Zheng Xuan made "Zhou Guan Note."

古文：玄本习《小戴礼》，后以古经校之，取其义长者，故为郑氏学。
现代文：郑玄原来学《小戴礼》，后来用古经校对，采用古经中意义好的，所以叫郑氏学。
English: Zheng Xuan originally studied "Xiaodai Li," and later used the ancient scriptures to proofread, using the good meaning in the ancient scriptures, so it is called Zheng's study.

古文：玄又注小戴所传《礼记》四十九篇，通为《三礼》焉。
现代文：郑玄又注小戴所传《礼记》四十九篇，合起来叫《三礼》。
English: Zheng Xuan also annotated the forty-nine chapters of the "Book of Rites" passed down by Xiao Dai, which together are called the "Three Rites."

古文：《前书》齐胡母子都传《公羊春秋》，授东平赢公，赢公授东海孟卿，孟卿授鲁人眭孟，眭孟授东海严彭祖、鲁人颜安乐。
现代文：《前书》齐胡母子都传《公羊春秋》授东平嬴公，嬴公授东海孟卿，孟卿授鲁人眭孟，眭孟授东海严彭祖、鲁人颜安乐。
English: "The First Book" and "Ram's Spring and Autumn" have been handed down by mother and son to Dongping Shigong, Shigong to Donghai Mengqing, Mengqing to Lu people, Shigong to Lu people, Shigong to Donghai Yan Pengzu, and Lu people to Yan Anle.

古文：彭祖为《春秋》严氏学，安乐为《春秋》颜氏学，又瑕丘江公传《穀梁春秋》，三家皆立博士。
现代文：彭祖为《春秋》严氏学，安乐为《春秋》颜氏学，又瑕丘江公传《谷梁春秋》，三家皆立博士。
English: Peng Zu is "Spring and Autumn" by Yan Shi, An Le is "Spring and Autumn" by Yan Shi, and Guo Qiu Jiang is the author of "Gu Liang Spring and Autumn." All three are doctors.

古文：梁太傅贾谊为《春秋左氏传训诂》，授赵人贯公。
现代文：梁太傅贾谊为《春秋左氏传训诂》，授赵人贯公。
English: Liang Taifu Jia Yi's "Spring, Autumn, and Zuo's Teachings" was awarded to Zhao Ren Rongguang.

古文：丁恭字子然，山阳东缗人也。
现代文：◆丁恭传，丁恭字子然，山阳东缗人。
English: ◆Ding Qiong Chuan, Ding Qiong Ziran, Shanyang Donglu people.

古文：习《公羊严氏春秋》。
现代文：学《公羊严氏春秋》。
English: Learn "Ram Yan's Spring and Autumn."

古文：恭学义精明，教授常数百人，州郡请召不应。
现代文：丁恭学义精明，教授生徒经常几百人，州郡请召不应。
English: Ding Qiong is a shrewd scholar. He often teaches hundreds of students. He should not be invited by any state or county.

古文：建武初，为谏议大夫、博士，封关内侯。
现代文：建武初，为谏议大夫、博士，封关内侯。
English: At the beginning of the Jianwu era, he was a high-ranking doctor, a doctor, and a vassal lord.

古文：十一年，迁少府。
现代文：十一年，升少府。
English: Eleven years later, he was promoted to Shoshofu.

古文：诸生自远方至者，著录数千人，当世称为大儒。
现代文：门生自远方来的，在册的有几千人，当世称为大儒。
English: There are thousands of disciples who came from far away, and they are known as great scholars.

古文：太常楼望、侍中承宫、长水校尉樊矹等皆受业于恭。
现代文：太常楼望、侍中承宫、长水校尉樊矹等都是丁恭的学生。
English: Taizhang Rouwang, Chamberlain Chenggong, and Changshui Lieutenant Gong were all students of Ding Qiong.

古文：二十年，拜侍中祭酒、骑都尉，与侍中刘昆俱在光武左右，每事谘访焉。
现代文：二十年，授侍中祭酒、骑都尉，与侍中刘昆都在光武左右，每事问他们。
English: For the past 20 years, the master of ceremonies, the captain of the cavalry, and the chamberlain Liu Kun have been around Guangwu, asking them about everything.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死在任内。
English: He died in office.

古文：周泽字稺都，北海安丘人也。
现代文：◆周泽传，周泽字癋都，北海安丘人。
English: ◆Zhou Ze Chuan, Zhou Ze Zhaodu, Beihai Anqiu people.

古文：少习《公羊严氏春秋》，隐居教授，门徒常数百人。
现代文：年轻时学《公羊严氏春秋》，隐居教授，门生经常有几百人。
English: When he was young, he studied "Ram Yan's Spring and Autumn." He was a reclusive professor and often had hundreds of students.

古文：建武末，辟大司马府，署议曹祭酒。
现代文：建武末年，征召大司马府，授议曹祭酒。
English: At the end of Jianwu's life, Daishi Mafu was called in to advise on Cao's sacrificial wine.

古文：数月，征试博士。
现代文：才几个月，征召试博士。
English: It's only been a few months, and the call for doctoral candidates is out.

古文：中元元年，迁黾池令。
现代文：中元元年，升黾池令。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the order of ascending the pond was issued.

古文：奉公克己，矜恤孤羸，吏人归爱之。
现代文：奉公克己，哀怜孤老羸弱，官吏和老百姓都爱戴他。
English: He served the public and restrained himself, and pitied the lonely, the old, and the weak. Both officials and ordinary people loved him.

古文：永平五年，迁右中郎将。
现代文：永平五年，升右中郎将。
English: In the fifth year of Yongping, he was promoted to the position of right middle-rank general.

古文：十年，拜太常。
现代文：十年，授太常。
English: Ten years later, she was given the title of Grand Duchess.

古文：泽果敢直言，数有据争。
现代文：周泽果敢直言，多次据理与朝廷争论。
English: Zhou Ze dared to be outspoken and argued with the imperial court many times.

古文：后北地太守廖信坐贪秽下狱，没入财产，显宗以信臧物班诸廉吏，唯泽及光禄勋孙堪、大司农常冲特蒙赐焉。
现代文：后来北地太守廖信犯贪污罪被捕入狱，没收他的财产，显宗把廖信的赃物赐给廉洁的官吏，只有周泽及光禄勋孙堪、大司农常冲三个特蒙赏赐。
English: Later, the governor of the North, Liao Xin, was arrested and imprisoned for the crime of corruption, and his property was confiscated. Emperor Xuanzong gave Liao Xin's stolen goods to the incorruptible officials. Only Zhou Ze and the honorable Sun Kan and the great farmer Chang Chong received three special rewards.

古文：是时京师翕然，在位者咸自勉励。
现代文：这时京师安定，在位的都互相勉励。
English: At this time, Beijing was stable, and those in power encouraged each other.

古文：堪字子稺，河南缑氏人也。
现代文：孙堪字子癋，河南缑氏人。
English: Sun Can Zi Zi, a member of the Zi clan in Henan Province.

古文：明经学，有志操，清白贞正，爱士大夫，然一毫未尝取于人，以节介气勇自行。
现代文：通经学，有志操，清白正直，爱士大夫，但是一根毫发也没有拿过别人的，以耿介气盛自居。
English: He has passed through the study of classics, has ambition, innocence and honesty, loves doctors, but has never taken anyone else's hair, and considers himself to be full of vigor.

古文：王莽末，兵革并起，宗族老弱在营保间，堪常力战陷敌，无所回避，数被创刃，宗族赖之，郡中咸服其义勇。
现代文：王莽末年，天下大乱，宗族老弱在战场上，孙堪曾经力战陷入敌人阵地，他毫不在乎，多处负伤，宗族靠了他才免于遇难。郡中人都佩服他的见义勇为。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, the world was in turmoil, and the old and weak members of the clan were on the battlefield. Sun Kan once fought hard and fell into the enemy's position. He didn't care at all, he was injured in many places, and the clan was saved from death by him. Everyone in the county admired his bravery.

古文：建武中，仕郡县。
现代文：建武中，出仕郡县。
English: Kenmu junior high school, served as county magistrate.

古文：公正廉洁，奉禄不及妻子，皆以供宾客。
现代文：公正廉洁，俸禄不给家用，都供应了宾客。
English: Fair and honest, no salary for the household, all provided for the guests.

古文：及为长吏，所在有迹，为吏人所敬仰。
现代文：后任长吏，所到的地方都有好的治绩，为官吏百姓所敬重。
English: Subsequent governors have performed well wherever they have been, and are respected by officials and the people.

古文：喜分明去就。
现代文：去就分明，一点也不马虎。
English: It's clear where to go, it's not sloppy at all.

古文：尝为县令，谒府，趋步迟缓，门亭长谴堪御吏，堪便解印绶去，不之官。
现代文：曾经任县令，谒见太守，行步迟缓，门亭长谴责孙堪的御吏，孙堪便解下印绶离去，不去官府。
English: He once served as a county magistrate, met with the governor-general, walked slowly, and the doorkeeper condemned Sun Kan's imperial officials. Sun Kan then dissolved the seal and left, not going to the government office.

古文：后复仕为左冯翊，坐遇下促急，司隶校尉举奏免官。
现代文：后再仕为左冯翊，因对下属促急，司隶校尉举奏免了他的官。
English: Later, he was assigned to Zuo Fengyao, but because he urged his subordinates to hurry, Captain Sisli dismissed him from his post.

古文：数月，征为侍御史，再迁尚书令。
现代文：数月，征为侍御史，再升尚书令。
English: For a few months, he was enlisted as an attendant to the Emperor, and then he was promoted to Shoshorei.

古文：永平十一年，拜光禄勋。
现代文：永平十一年，授光禄勋。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongping, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.

古文：堪清廉，果于从政，数有直言，多见纳用。
现代文：孙堪清廉，勇于从政，多直言，采纳的不少。
English: Sun Kian is clean and honest, has the courage to go into politics, is more outspoken, and has been adopted by many.

古文：十八年，以病乞身，为侍中骑都尉，卒于官。堪行类于泽，故京师号曰 二稺 。
现代文：十八年因病请求退职，任侍中骑都尉。任上，孙堪的行事与周泽类似，所以京师号为 二癋 。
English: In 18 years, he asked to retire due to illness, and was appointed as a lieutenant of the cavalry. On the post, Sun Kan's actions were similar to Zhou Ze's, so his imperial title was Erqi.

古文：十二年，以泽行司徒事，如真。
现代文：永平十二年，用周泽代理司徒事，等于实授。
English: In the twelfth year of Yongping, the use of Zhou Ze as acting secretary is tantamount to actual teaching.

古文：泽性简，忽威仪，颇失宰相之望。
现代文：周泽性情简易，不重威仪，有失宰相的人望。
English: Zhou Ze's temperament is simple, not overbearing, and he has lost the prime minister's popularity.

古文：数月，复为太常。
现代文：仅几个月，再为太常。
English: It only takes a few months, and then it's too common.

古文：清洁循行，尽敬宗庙。
现代文：为政清廉，循规蹈矩，敬奉宗庙。
English: He is politically clean and honest, follows the rules, and respects the ancestral temple.

古文：常卧疾斋宫，其妻哀泽老病，窥问所苦。泽大怒，以妻干犯斋禁，遂收送诏狱谢罪。
现代文：常卧病斋宫，他的妻子可怜他老病，进去问他有什么不舒服，周泽大怒，认为妻子干犯斋禁，就收捕她送诏狱请罪。
English: Zhou Ze was very angry. He thought his wife was breaking the fast, so he arrested her and sent her to the imperial prison to plead guilty.

古文：当世疑其脆激。
现代文：当世怀疑他假称积极。
English: The suspicion now is that he was pretending to be active.

古文：时人为之语曰： 生世不谐，作太常妻，一岁三百六十日，三百五十九日斋。 
现代文：当时编了一句话说 ：生世不谐，作太常妻，一岁三百六十日，三百五十九日斋。 
English: At that time, he made up a saying: "Life and death are not compatible, I am a wife too often, one year and three hundred and sixty days old, three hundred and fifty-nine days of fasting."

古文：十八年，拜侍中骑都尉。
现代文：永平十八年，授侍中骑都尉。
English: In the 18th year of Yongping, he was awarded the rank of Lieutenant of Cavalry.

古文：后数为三老五更。
现代文：后来多次为三老五更。
English: Later, it was changed several times to Sanro-gogo.

古文：建初中致仕，卒于家。
现代文：建初中退休，死在家里。
English: Jian retired from junior high school and died at home.

古文：钟兴字次文，汝南汝阳人也。
现代文：◆钟兴传，钟兴字次文，汝南郡汝阳县人。
English: ◆ Zhong Xing Chuan, Zhong Xing Ziwen, from Ruyang County, Runan County.

古文：少从少府丁恭受《严氏春秋》。
现代文：年轻时跟少府丁恭学《严氏春秋》。
English: When he was young, he studied "The Spring and Autumn of Yan Shi" with Shaofu Ding Qiao.

古文：恭荐兴学行高明，光武召见，问以经义，应对甚明。
现代文：丁恭推荐钟兴学问操行都好，光武召见，以经义问他，应答很清楚。
English: Ding Gong recommended that Zhong Xing's learning and practice were good. Guangwu summoned him and asked him about the sutras. The answer was very clear.

古文：帝善之，拜郎中，稍迁左中郎将。
现代文：光武嘉奖他，授郎中，升左中郎将。
English: He was awarded the Mitsutake Award and promoted to the rank of junior middle officer.

古文：诏令定《春秋》章句，去其复重，以授皇太子。
现代文：诏令定《春秋》章句，删除重复，用以教授皇太子。
English: The edict fixed the "Spring and Autumn" chapter, deleted the duplication, and used it to teach the crown prince.

古文：又使宗室诸侯从兴受章句。
现代文：又使宗室诸侯跟钟兴学章句。
English: He also made the princes of the imperial family learn from Zhongxing.

古文：封关内侯。
现代文：封关内侯。
English: He became the lord of the castle.

古文：兴自以无功，不敢受爵。
现代文：钟兴自己认为没有什么功劳，不敢受封爵。
English: Zhong Xing himself believes that there is no merit, and he does not dare to be knighted.

古文：帝曰： 生教训太子及诸王侯，非大功邪？ 
现代文：帝说： 先生教训太子及诸王侯，这不是大功么？ 
English: The emperor said, "Teacher, you have taught princes and princes, isn't that a great achievement?

古文：兴曰： 臣师于恭。 
现代文：钟兴说 ：我的老师是丁恭。 
English: Zhong Xing said: My teacher is Ding Gong.

古文：于是复封恭，而兴遂固辞不受爵，卒于官。
现代文：于是再封丁恭，但钟兴还是坚决辞让不受爵。死于任上。
English: As a result, Ding Gong was re-enslaved, but Zhong Xing still resolutely resigned and did not receive a knighthood. He died in office.

古文：甄宇字长文，北海安丘人也。
现代文：◆甄宇传，甄宇字长文，北海安丘人。
English: ◆ Zhenyu Chuan, Zhenyu Zi Changwen, a native of Anqiu in the North Sea.

古文：清净少欲。
现代文：清静自守，不求名利。
English: They keep themselves clean and quiet, and do not seek fame and fortune.

古文：习《严氏春秋》，教授常数百人。
现代文：学《严氏春秋》，教授生徒经常有几百人。
English: There are often hundreds of students studying "Spring and Autumn of Yan Shi."

古文：建武中，为州从事，征拜博士，稍迁太子少傅，卒于官。
现代文：建武中，为州郡从事，征召授博士，升太子少傅，死在任内。
English: In Jianwu Middle School, he was engaged in state and county affairs, was conscripted and awarded a doctorate, was promoted to crown prince, and died while in office.

古文：传业子普，普传子承。承尤笃学，未尝视家事，讲授常数百人。
现代文：甄宇传业给儿子甄普，普传儿子甄承，承特别爱学习，不管家务事，讲授生徒经常几百人。
English: Zhenyu passed on his knowledge to his son Zhenpu, and Zhenpu passed it on to his son Zhencheng. Zhencheng is particularly fond of learning, and regardless of household chores, he often teaches hundreds of students.

古文：诸儒以承三世传业，莫不归服之。
现代文：诸儒生因甄承三代传业，没有不归服他的。
English: The Confucian scholars did not refuse to submit to him because he was the third generation inheritor of the lineage.

古文：建初中，举孝廉，卒于梁相。
现代文：建初中，举孝廉，死于梁相任上。
English: Jian Junior High School, Zhu Xiaolian, died of Liang Xiangren.

古文：子孙传学不绝。
现代文：子孙传学不绝。
English: His descendants continue to learn from him.

古文：楼望字次子，陈留雍丘人也。
现代文：◆楼望传，楼望字次子，陈留郡雍丘县人。
English: ◆Lou Wang Chuan, the second son of Lou Wang Zi, from Yongchu County, Chenliu County.

古文：少习《严氏春秋》。
现代文：年轻时学《严氏春秋》。
English: Studied "The Spring and Autumn of Yan Shi" at a young age.

古文：操节清白，有称乡闾。
现代文：操守清白，在乡里有名气。
English: He has a clean record and is well known in the village.

古文：建武中，赵节王栩闻其高名，遣使赍玉帛请以为师，望不受。
现代文：建武中，赵节王栩，听说了他的高名，派使者送玉帛请他为师，楼望不接受。
English: In the middle of Jianwu, Zhao Jie Wang Tuo, having heard of his high reputation, sent an envoy to Yulun to ask him to be his teacher, but Louwang did not accept.

古文：后仕郡功曹。
现代文：后来出仕郡功曹。
English: He later served as a county meritorious officer.

古文：永平初，为侍中、越骑校尉，入讲省内。
现代文：永平初年为侍中、越骑校尉，进宫中讲授。
English: In the first year of his reign, Yongping was a chamberlain, a captain of the Viet cavalry, and a lecturer at the imperial court.

古文：十六年，迁大司农。
现代文：永平十六年，升大司农。
English: In the 16th year of the Yongping era, he was promoted to the position of Senior Vice-Minister of Agriculture.

古文：十八年，代周泽为太常。
现代文：十八年，代周泽做太常。
English: In the 18th year, he became the successor of Zhou Ze.

古文：建初五年，坐事左转太中大夫，后为左中郎将。
现代文：建初五年，因事降调太中大夫，后来做左中郎将。
English: In the first five years of Jian, he was demoted to the position of vice-commander due to an incident, and later he was promoted to the position of left-vice-commander.

古文：教授不倦，世称儒宗，诸生著录九千余人。
现代文：教授生徒不知疲倦，世称儒家的领袖，有学生九千余人。
English: He tirelessly teaches students and is known worldwide as the leader of Confucianism, with more than nine thousand students.

古文：年八十，永元十二年，卒于官，门生会葬者数千人，儒家以为荣。
现代文：年八十，永元十二年，死在任上，学生来送葬的有几千人，儒家以为光荣。
English: In the year 80, the twelfth year of Yongyuan, he died in office, and several thousand students came to attend his funeral, which the Confucians considered a great honor.

古文：程曾字秀升，豫章南昌人也。
现代文：◆程曾传，程曾字秀升，豫章南昌人。
English: ◆Cheng Zeng Chuan, Cheng Zeng Zi Xiu Sheng, Yu Zhang Nanchang people.

古文：受业长安，习《严氏春秋》，积十余年，还家讲授。会稽顾奉等数百人常居门下。
现代文：在长安学习，学《严氏春秋》，长达十多年，后回家教授，会稽顾奉等数百人是他的学生。
English: He studied in Chang'an, learning "Yan's Spring and Autumn" for more than ten years. After returning home, he became a professor, and hundreds of people such as Cui Xuanbong were his students.

古文：著书百余篇，皆《五经》通难，又作《孟子章句》。
现代文：著书一百多篇，都是《五经》通解一类，又作《孟子章句》。
English: He has written more than a hundred books, all of which are a kind of "Five Classics" interpretation, and also "Mencius Chapter."

古文：建初三年，举孝廉，迁海西令，卒于官。
现代文：建初三年，举孝廉，升海西令，死在任上。
English: In the first three years of Jianchu, Zhu Xiaolian, Xi Ling Shenghai, died in office.

古文：张玄字君夏，河内河阳人也。
现代文：◆张玄传，张玄字君夏，河内河阳人。
English: ◆Zhang Xuan Chuan, Zhang Xuan Zi Junxia, the hero of Hanoi and Hebei.

古文：少习《颜氏春秋》，兼通数家法。
现代文：年轻时学《颜氏春秋》，兼通几家法。
English: When he was young, he studied "Yan's Spring and Autumn" and learned several methods.

古文：建武初，举明经，补弘农文学，迁陈仓县丞。
现代文：建武初，举明经，补弘农文学，升陈仓县丞。
English: At the beginning of the Jianwu period, he read the Ming Dynasty classics and agricultural literature, and was promoted to the county magistrate of Chencang County.

古文：清净无欲，专心经书，方其讲问，乃不食终日。
现代文：清净无为，专心研究经书，当他在讲授时，常整天不吃饭。
English: Pure and inactive, he devoted himself to the study of the scriptures. When he was lecturing, he often did not eat all day.

古文：及有难者，辄为张数家之说，令择从所安，诸儒皆伏其多通，著录千余人。
现代文：遇有与他讨论疑难的，往往提出诸家的学说，使选择自己认为合适的。诸儒生都佩服他的博学，学生有一千多人。
English: Confucian scholars admire his erudition, and there are more than a thousand students.

古文：玄初为县丞，尝以职事对府，不知官曹处，吏白门下责之。
现代文：张玄先为县丞时，曾经因工作去府，不晓得官曹在什么地方，吏告诉门下斥责他。
English: When Zhang Xuanxian was the county magistrate, he once went to the government office for work. He did not know where the official Cao was, and the officials told his subordinates to reprimand him.

古文：时，右扶风琅邪徐业，亦大儒也，闻玄诸生，试引见之，与语，大惊曰： 今日相遭，真解矇矣！ 
现代文：当时右扶风琅笽徐业，也是一个大儒，听说张玄是一个诸生，召见他试试，与他说话，大惊说： 今天相遇，真正了解我的蒙昧啊！ 
English: At that time, Xu Ye, also a great scholar, heard that Zhang Xuan was a sentient being, summoned him to try, talked to him, and said with great surprise: Today we met, truly understand my ignorance!

古文：遂请上堂，难问极日。
现代文：因请他上堂，辩论一整天。
English: The debate lasted all day because he was invited to the hall.

古文：后玄去官，举孝廉，除为郎。
现代文：后来张玄去官，举孝廉，授为郎。
English: Later, Zhang Xuan went to the government, promoted Xiaolian, and made him his son.

古文：会《颜氏》博士缺，玄试策第一，拜为博士。
现代文：适值《颜氏》博士有缺，张玄试策得第一名，授为博士。
English: At the right time, there was a shortage of Ph.D.s for "Mr. Yan," but Zhang Xuan won the first place and was awarded a Ph.D.

古文：居数月，诸生上言玄廉说《严氏》、《冥氏》，不宜专为《颜氏》博士。
现代文：过了几个月，诸生上言张玄兼说《严氏》、《冥氏》，不应当专做《颜氏》博士。
English: After a few months, Zhang Xuan was told that he should not be a doctor of "Yan" because he was also a doctor of "Yan" and "Hade."

古文：光武且令还署，未及迁而卒。
现代文：光武叫他暂时回署，没有升官就死了。
English: Mitsutake asked him to return to the office temporarily, and he died without promotion.

古文：李育字元春，扶风漆人也。
现代文：◆李育传，李育字元春，扶风郡漆县人。
English: ◆Li Yu Chuan, Li Yu Zi Yuanchun, a native of Urushi County, Fufeng County.

古文：少习《公羊春秋》。
现代文：年轻时学《公羊春秋》。
English: He learned "Ram Spring and Autumn" when he was young.

古文：沉思专精，博览书传，知名太学，深为同郡班固所重。
现代文：深思专一，博览群书。在太学里很著名，极为同郡人班固赏识。
English: He is a deep thinker and a well-read person. He is well-known in Taishu and is highly appreciated by people in the county.

古文：固奏记荐育于骠骑将军东平王苍，由是京师贵戚争往交之。
现代文：班固奏荐李育于骠骑将军东平王苍，由是京师的贵威都争着与他交朋友。
English: Bando recommended Li Yuxu to the general Dongping Wangcheng, and Gui Wei of the Beijing division fought to make friends with him.

古文：州郡请召，育到，辄辞病去。
现代文：州郡请召，李育到了之后，往往托病辞去。
English: Invited by the state and county, after Li Yu arrived, he often resigned on medical grounds.

古文：常避地教授，门徒数百。
现代文：曾经避地教授，有生徒几百人。
English: He was once a professor at the refuge, with several hundred students.

古文：颇涉猎古学。
现代文：还研究古学。
English: He also studies antiquities.

古文：尝读《左氏传》，虽乐文采，然谓不得圣人深意，以为前世陈元、范升之徒更相非折，而多引图谶，不据理体，于是作《难左氏义》四十一事。
现代文：曾读《左氏传》，虽然觉得《左氏传》的文采不错，但认为不合圣人的深意。前世陈元、范升等人又多有非难，他们引用图谶，不据理体，于是作《难左氏义》四十一条。
English: He once read "The Biography of Zuo," and although he thought the prose of "The Biography of Zuo" was good, he thought that it did not match the deep meaning of the saint. In the past, Chen Yuan, Fan Sheng and others had many criticisms, they quoted pictures, not reason, so he wrote the 41st article of "The Biography of Zuo."

古文：建初元年，卫尉马廖举育方正，为议郎。
现代文：建初元年，卫尉马廖举李育方正，任议郎。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Jian, the guard lieutenant Ma Liao raised Li Yu Fang Zheng and appointed him as the speaker.

古文：后拜博士。
现代文：后来授博士。
English: He was later awarded a doctorate.

古文：四年，诏与诸儒论《五经》于白虎观，育以《公羊》义难贾逵，往返皆有理证，最为通儒。
现代文：四年，诏令李育与诸儒生论《五经》于白虎观，李育用《公羊》义与贾逵辩难，往返都有理有据，最为通儒。
English: In four years, Li Yu and other Confucians discussed the Five Classics in the White Tiger View, and Li Yu used the Ram to argue with Jia Xuan. The back and forth was reasonable and well-founded, and he was the most knowledgeable about Confucianism.

古文：再迁尚书令。
现代文：再升尚书令。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shuling again.

古文：及马氏废，育坐为所举免归。
现代文：马氏废黜时，李育因是马廖所举，免官归家。
English: When Ma was deposed, Li Yuxin was promoted by Ma Liao and returned home.

古文：岁余复征，再迁侍中，卒于官。
现代文：一年多，再征，升侍中，死在任内。
English: More than a year later, he was re-enlisted, promoted to the rank of samurai, and died in office.

古文：何休字邵公，任城樊人也。
现代文：◆何休传，何休字邵公，任城郡樊县人。
English: ◆ He Xiu Chuan, He Xiu Zi Shao Gong, is a resident of Shicheng County, Min County.

古文：父豹，少府。
现代文：父亲任少府。
English: His father was appointed to the position of shofu.

古文：休为人质朴讷口，而雅有心思，精研《六经》，世儒无及者。
现代文：何休为人质朴，说话结结巴巴，但是思想深刻，精研《六经》，当时的儒生没有赶得上他的。
English: He was a simple man who stammered, but he was a deep thinker who studied the Six Classics. The Confucian scholars of the time couldn't keep up with him.

古文：以列卿子诏拜郎中，非其好也，辞疾而去。
现代文：因是列卿的儿子，诏授郎中，不是他所喜欢的，托疾走了。
English: Because he was the son of a feudal lord, and he did not like being a member of the imperial court, he hurriedly left.

古文：不仕州郡。进退必以礼。
现代文：不仕州郡，一言一行必合于礼。
English: In Shizhou County, every word and action must be in line with etiquette.

古文：太傅陈蕃辟之，与参政事。
现代文：太傅陈蕃征召他，参与政事。
English: Grand Master Chen Xi called him to take part in politics.

古文：蕃败，休坐废锢，乃作《春秋公羊解诂》，覃思不窥门，十有七年。
现代文：陈蕃失败，何休获罪废黜，禁止他不得作官，于是作《春秋公羊解诂》，深思冥想，十七年不出门户。
English: Chen Xuan failed, He Xiu was convicted and deposed, and he was forbidden to serve as an official, so he wrote "Spring and Autumn Ram Release," meditated deeply, and did not go out for seventeen years.

古文：又注训《孝经》、《论语》、风角七分，皆经纬典谟，不与守文同说。
现代文：又注释考证《孝经》、《论语》、风角七分，都纵横典谟，不拘泥文字。
English: In addition, the commentary on the "Filial Piety Sutra," "Analects of Confucius" and "The Wind Angle of Seven Points" are all vertical and horizontal, regardless of the characters.

古文：又以《春秋》驳汉事六百余条，妙得《公羊》本意。
现代文：又以《春秋》驳汉朝事六百余条，妙得《公羊》本意。
English: He also used "Spring and Autumn" to refute more than 600 articles of Han Dynasty affairs, which was a wonderful way to achieve the original intention of "Ram."

古文：休善历算，与其师博士羊弼，追述李育意以难二传，作《公羊墨守》、《左氏膏肓》、《穀梁废疾》。
现代文：何休还善历算，与他的老师博士羊弼，补述李育的思想，作《公羊墨守》、《左氏膏肓》、《谷梁废疾》。
English: He Xiu was also good at calculating the calendar, and together with his teacher, Dr. Yang Quan, he supplemented Li Yu's thoughts and wrote "Ram Ink Guard," "Zao's Anointing," and "Guliang Wastes Disease."

古文：党禁解，又辟司徒。
现代文：党禁解除，又征召司徒。
English: The ban on the party was lifted, and the magistrates were called up again.

古文：群公表休道术深明，宜侍帷幄，单臣不悦之，乃拜议郎，屡陈忠言。再迁谏议大夫，年五十四，光和五年卒。
现代文：群公上表称何休道术深明，应当参加帷幄，出谋划策，谄媚的臣子不高兴他，授议郎，多次陈忠言，再升谏议大夫，年五十四，光和五年逝世。
English: Qun Gong publicly said that He Xiu was well versed in the art of Taoism and should take part in the deliberation and make suggestions. The flattering courtiers were not happy with him. He was awarded the title of Zhuge Lang, repeatedly received the title of Chen Zhongyan, and then was promoted to the title of Zhuge Liang. He passed away at the age of fifty-four.

古文：服虔字子慎，初名重，又名祇，后改为虔，河南荥阳人也。
现代文：◆服虔传，服虔字子慎，开始名重，又名祗，后来改为虔，河南荣阳人。
English: ◆Submit to the teachings of piety, obey the pious character Zishan, begin to be famous, also known as, later changed to 虔, Henan Rongyang people.

古文：少以清苦建志，入太学受业。
现代文：年轻时清苦立志，进太学学习。
English: When he was young, he made up his mind to study hard.

古文：有雅才，善著文论，作《春秋左氏传解》，行之至今。
现代文：有美才，善写文章，作《春秋左氏传解》，流行到现在。
English: He was talented and good at writing articles. He wrote "The Interpretation of Spring, Autumn and Winter," which is still popular today.

古文：又以《左传》驳何休之所驳汉事六十条。
现代文：又以《左传》驳何休所驳汉事六十条。
English: He also used Zuo Zhuan to refute the sixty articles of the Chinese Constitution.

古文：举孝廉，稍迁，中平末，拜九江太守。
现代文：举孝廉，稍稍得升迁，中平末年，授九江太守。
English: He was raised as a filial son and received a slight promotion, and in the last years of the Heian period, he was awarded the position of the governor of Jiujiang.

古文：免，遭乱行客，病卒。
现代文：免官之后，遭乱，在道上病死。
English: After his dismissal, he was caught up in a riot and died of illness on the road.

古文：所著赋、碑、诔、书记、《连珠》、《九愤》，凡十余篇。
现代文：所著有赋、碑、诔、书记、《连珠》、《九愤》，共十多篇。
English: He is the author of "Fu," "Monument," "Shang," "Registry," "Lian Zhu" and "Jiu Yan," a total of more than ten articles.

古文：颍容字子严，陈国长平人也。
现代文：◆颍容传，颍容字子严，陈国长平县人。
English: ◆ He was born in Ping County, Chen Guozhong.

古文：博学多通，善《春秋左氏》，师傅太尉杨赐。
现代文：博学多通，擅长《春秋左氏》传，拜太尉杨赐为老师。
English: He is well-versed in many subjects, and is good at the biography of "Spring and Autumn Left-Handed Master" (春秋左氏), and his teacher is Second Lieutenant Yang Zi.

古文：郡举孝廉，州辟，公车征，皆不就。
现代文：郡里举他为孝廉，州里征召，公车征，都不就。
English: It's not enough for the county to promote him as a filial son, or for the state to conscript him, or for the bus to pick him up.

古文：初平中，避乱荆州，聚徒千余人。
现代文：初平中，避乱荆州，聚集门徒一千多人。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, more than a thousand disciples gathered in Jingzhou to escape the turmoil.

古文：刘表以为武陵太守，不肯起。
现代文：刘表任为武陵太守，不肯去。
English: Liu Biao was appointed governor of Wuling and refused to go.

古文：著《春秋左氏条例》五万余言，建安中卒。
现代文：著《春秋左氏条例》五万多字，建安中逝世。
English: He wrote more than 50,000 words of "Spring, Autumn and Winter Left-Handed Ordinance" and passed away in Jian'an Middle School.

古文：谢该字文仪，南阳章陵人也。
现代文：◆谢该传，谢该字文仪，南阳章陵人。
English: ◆Thank you for the legend, thank you for the characters and grammar, Nanyang Zhangling people.

古文：善明《春秋左氏》，为世名儒，门徒数百千人。
现代文：熟习《春秋左氏》，为当时著名的儒生，门徒有数百人。
English: Familiar with "Spring, Autumn and the Left," he was a famous Confucian at that time, with hundreds of disciples.

古文：建安中，河东人乐详条《左氏》疑滞数十事以问，该皆为通解之，名为《谢氏释》，行于世。
现代文：建安中，河东人乐详条写《左氏》疑难不通数十事问谢该，该都一一为他作解释，叫《谢氏释》，在社会上流行。
English: In Jian'an Middle School, the people of Hedong wrote a detailed article about "Mr. Zu" and asked Mr. Xie about dozens of things that were difficult to understand. He explained them one by one. It was called "Mr. Xie's Explanation" and became popular in the society.

古文：仕为公车司马令，以父母老，托病去官。
现代文：出仕作公车司马令，因父母年老，托疾去官。
English: He went to work as a bus driver, but had to retire due to his parents' old age.

古文：欲归乡里，会荆州道断，不得去。
现代文：想回到自己的乡里，适值荆州道路阻断，没去成。
English: He wanted to go back to his hometown, but the Jingzhou road was blocked at the right time, so he couldn't go.

古文：少府孔融上书荐之曰：臣闻高祖创业，韩、彭之将征讨暴乱，陆贾、叔孙通进说《诗》、《书》。
现代文：少府孔融上书推荐他说 ：我听说高祖创大业，韩信、彭越征讨暴乱，陆贾、叔孙通进说《诗书》。
English: He said, "I heard that Gao Zu created great undertakings, Han Xin and Peng Yue fought riots, and Lu Jia and Tong Jin, his uncle and grandson, said "Poetry Book."

古文：光武中兴，吴、耿佐命，范升、卫宏修述旧业，故能文武并用，成长久之计。
现代文：光武中兴，吴、耿辅佐，范升、卫宏讲述诗书旧业，所以能够文武并用，成了长治久安的大计。
English: Guangwu Zhongxing, Wu, Geng Shuo, Fan Sheng, and Wei Hong told the old business of poetry and books, so they were able to use both literature and martial arts, which became the grand plan for long-term stability.

古文：陛下圣德钦明，同符二祖，劳谦厄运，三年乃讙。
现代文：皇上圣德清明，与二祖相同，劳谦厄运，三年乃欢。
English: The Emperor's virtue is pure and clear, the same as the two forefathers, hard work, modesty and bad luck, three years of happiness.

古文：今尚父鹰扬，方叔翰飞，王师电鸷，群凶破殄，始有橐弓卧鼓之次，宜得名儒，典综礼纪。
现代文：今尚父鹰扬，方叔翰飞，王师电鸷，群凶破灭，天下太平，不用征伐，应该访求名儒，掌管礼纪。
English: Now Shang father Ying Yang, Fang uncle Han Fei, Wang teacher Deng Yu, the bandits have been destroyed, the world is peaceful, there is no need to invade, it is necessary to visit the famous Confucius, in charge of etiquette.

古文：今该实卓然比迹前列，间以父母老疾，弃官欲归，道路险塞，无自由致。
现代文：我以为，前公车司马令谢该，有曾参、史鱼好的秉性，又有卜高、言偃的文学，博通群书，遍览古今典籍，遇事能够处理自如，没有疑惑，立身清白，操守异常，笃爱古道。
English: I thought that the former bus driver Ma Ling Xie should have the good character of Zeng San and Shi Yu, and the literature of Bu Gao and Yan Xing, a wide range of books, a wide range of ancient and modern classics, be able to deal with things freely, without doubt, stand up cleanly, conduct abnormally, and love the ancient road.

古文：猥使良才抱朴而逃，逾越山河，沉沦荆楚，所谓往而不反者也。
现代文：不论远近，很少能有与他相匹的。现在谢该因父母年老有病，想辞官回家，道路险阻，有家归不得。使良才抱朴逃走，逾越山河，沦落荆楚，往而不返。
English: No matter how far or near, there are very few that can match him. Now Xie Cai, because of his parents' old age and illness, wants to go home, the road is dangerous, and there is no home to go back to. So he fled, crossed the mountains and rivers, fell into the thicket, and did not return.

古文：后日当更馈乐以钓由余，克像以求傅说，岂不烦哉？
现代文：以后送女乐以诱由余，刻像以求傅说，难道不麻烦吗？
English: In the future, isn't it troublesome to send women's music to lure them, to make them feel like they are begging for something?

古文：臣愚以为可推录所在，召该令还。
现代文：我以为要找到谢该所在的地方，把谢该召回来。
English: I thought I had to find where Xie Keda was and call him back.

古文：楚人止孙卿之去国，汉朝追匡衡于平原，尊儒贵学，惜失贤也。
现代文：楚国阻止孙卿去国，汉朝追匡衡于平原，尊儒重学，是怕失了贤才啊！ 
English: Chu State prevented Sun Ching from going to the country, the Han Dynasty chased Kuang Heng to the plains, and respected Confucius and valued learning. They were afraid of losing their sages!

古文：书奏，诏即征还，拜议郎。
现代文：书上，诏令征召还，授议郎，年老逝世。
English: According to the document, he was conscripted by imperial decree, conferred the title of councillor and died of old age.

古文：以寿终。建武中，郑兴、陈元传《春秋左氏》学。
现代文：建武中，郑兴、陈元传《春秋左氏》学。
English: In the middle of the Jianwu period, Zheng Xing and Chen Yuanchuan studied "The Spring and Autumn Left-Handers."

古文：时尚书令韩歆上疏，欲为《左氏》立博士，范升与歆争之未决，陈元上书讼《左氏》，遂以魏郡李封为《左氏》博士。
现代文：当时尚书令韩歆上书，想为《左氏》立博士，范升与韩歆争论不决，陈元上书称颂《左氏》，就叫魏郡李封为《左氏》博士。
English: At that time, Shang Shu ordered Han Qi to write a letter and wanted to establish a doctorate for "Mr. Zuo," Fan Sheng and Han Qi argued, Chen Yuan wrote a letter praising "Mr. Zuo," and called Wei County Li Feng a "Dr. Zuo."

古文：后群儒蔽固者数廷争之。
现代文：后来群儒中那些浅陋固执的人多次在朝廷中争论。
English: Later, those shallow and obstinate people among the Confucianists repeatedly argued in the imperial court.

古文：及封卒，光武重违众议，而因不复补。
现代文：李封逝世后，光武终于违反大家的意见，不再补博士。
English: After Li Feng's death, Guangwu finally violated everyone's opinion and no longer supplemented the doctorate.

古文：许慎字叔重，汝南召陵人也。
现代文：◆许慎传，许慎字叔重，汝南郡召陵人。
English: ◆ Xu Zhen Chuan, Xu Zhen Zi Shu Jie, Runan County summoned the mausoleum.

古文：性淳笃，少博学经籍，马融常推敬之，时人为之语曰： 《五经》无双许叔重。 
现代文：性格淳朴敦厚，年少时，广泛地学习经书，马融经常推崇他，敬重他。当时人称赞他说 ：许叔重对《五经》的研究举世无双。 
English: His character was simple and dignified. When he was young, he extensively studied the scriptures. Ma Rong often admired him and respected him. At that time, people praised him saying, "Xu Shushong's study of the Five Classics is unparalleled in the world."

古文：为郡功曹，举孝廉，再迁除洨长。
现代文：任郡里的功曹，被举为孝廉，再升迁，任命为氵交县长。
English: He was honored as a meritorious person in the county, promoted to the position of filial piety, promoted again, and appointed as the county magistrate of Yingkou County.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死在家里。
English: He died at home.

古文：初，慎以《五经》传说臧否不同，于是撰为《五经异义》，又作《说文解字》十四篇，皆传于世。
现代文：先是，许慎认为五经的解释有好有坏，于是撰《五经异义》，又作《说文解字》十四篇，都传于世。
English: First of all, Xu Shen believed that the interpretation of the Five Classics was both good and bad, so he wrote "Five Classics of Heresy" and "Fourteen Sayings and Explanations," both of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：蔡玄字叔陵，汝南南顿人也。
现代文：◆蔡玄传，蔡玄字叔陵，汝南郡南顿人。
English: ◆Cai Xuan Chuan, Cai Xuan Zi Shuling, from Nantong, Runan County.

古文：学通《五经》，门徒堂千人，其著录者万六千人。
现代文：学通《五经》，门徒常一千多人，在册的有一万六千人。
English: According to the Five Classics, there were always more than a thousand disciples, of whom 16,000 are recorded.

古文：征辟并不就。
现代文：征辟都不就。
English: It's not enough to conquer.

古文：顺帝特诏征拜议郎，讲论《五经》异同，甚合帝意。
现代文：顺帝时特诏征授议郎，讲论《五经》异同，很合顺帝的意。
English: When Emperor Shun issued a special edict to solicit scholars, he lectured on the similarities and differences of the Five Classics, which was very much in line with Emperor Shun's wishes.

古文：迁侍中，出为弘农太守，卒官。
现代文：升侍中，出为弘农太守，死在任上。
English: While he was being promoted to Samurai, he was appointed as Kononodaishu, but died in office.

古文：论曰：自光武中年以后，干戈稍戢，专事经学，自是其风世笃焉。
现代文：史家评论说：光武自中年以后，用兵少了，专事经学，从此社会风气渐渐趋于纯朴。
English: Historians commented: after the middle age of Guangwu, the number of soldiers was less, and he specialized in learning, and from then on, the social atmosphere gradually tended to be simple.

古文：其服儒衣，称先王，游庠序，聚横塾者，盖布之于邦域矣。
现代文：那些穿着儒者衣服，讲述先王道德，游庠序，聚集私人讲学塾舍的，遍布全国。
English: Those who wear Confucian clothes, talk about ancestral morality, travel, and gather in private lecture halls are all over the country.

古文：若乃经生所处，不远万里之路，精庐暂建，赢粮动有千百，其耆名高义开门受徒者，编牒不下万人，皆专相传祖，莫或讹杂。
现代文：至于博士所在的地方，有不远万里担负粮食来的，住着精美的住宅，往往以千计，那些著名的开门授徒的学者，在册的学生不下万人，都是专业传授，没有错误或不纯的邪说。
English: As for the place where the doctor is located, there are scholars who come from thousands of miles away to bear grain, live in exquisite houses, often in the thousands, those famous scholars who open the door and teach, and the registered students are no less than ten thousand, all of them are professionally taught, without errors or impure heresies.

古文：至有分争王庭，树朋私里，繁其章条，穿求崖穴，以合一家之说。
现代文：有的甚至在朝廷争论，私下里结朋党，订立繁密的章程条例，访求岩穴的隐居之士，以成一家的学说。
English: Some even argued in the imperial court, formed crony parties in private, set up complicated regulations, and visited the hermit in the rock cave to form a family doctrine.

古文：故杨雄曰： 今之学者，非独为之华藻，又从而绣其鞶帨。 
现代文：所以扬雄说： 现在的学者，不但文辞藻丽，而且弄得有些烦碎了。 
English: Therefore, Yang Xiong said: Today's scholars are not only eloquent, but also somewhat tedious.

古文：夫书理无二，义归有宗，而硕学之徒，莫之或徙，故通人鄙其固焉，又雄所谓 譊々之学，各习其师 也。
现代文：本来，书的道理只有一个，意思是要统一，饱学的人，不能转变，所以普通人鄙视他们固执，又扬雄所谓 吵吵闹闹的学问，都是从老师那里学来的 。
English: Originally, there was only one principle of books, which meant that they should be unified. People who are well-educated cannot change, so ordinary people despised their stubbornness and promoted the so-called "noisy and noisy" learning, all of which were learned from teachers.

古文：且观成名高第，终能远至者，盖亦寡焉，而迂滞若是矣。
现代文：并且成名高第，真正是远方来的也不多。迂阔不通竟到了如此地步啊。
English: And despite their fame, not many of them actually come from far away. How did they get this far?

古文：然所谈者仁义，所传者圣法也。
现代文：但他们所谈的是仁义，所传授的是圣人之法。
English: But what they talk about is benevolence and righteousness, and what they teach is the law of saints.

古文：故人识君臣父子之纲，家知违邪归正之路。
现代文：所以人人知道君臣父子的大纲，家家晓得返邪归正的道路。
English: Therefore, everyone knows the outline of the prince and minister father and son, and every family knows the way to return evil to righteousness.

古文：自桓、灵之间，君道秕僻，朝纲日陵，国隙屡启，自中智以下，靡不审其崩离；而权强之臣，息其窥盗之谋，豪俊之夫，屈于鄙生之议者，人诵先王言也，下畏逆顺势也。
现代文：桓帝、灵帝时，君主的教化败坏，朝廷的纪律一天一天衰弛，国家的祸乱不断，中等智力以上的人，没有不知道国家分崩离析，难以维持下去的。但是大权在握的强臣，没有企图篡位的阴谋，英雄豪俊之士，为鄙陋之徒的议论所屈服。这是因为人人诵习先王的言，在下的惧怕叛逆顺从形势啊。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Xuan and Emperor Ling, the education of the monarchs became corrupt, the discipline of the imperial court deteriorated day by day, and the country was plagued by constant disasters. There was no person of above-average intelligence who did not know that the country was falling apart and that it would be difficult to maintain it. However, there was no plot to usurp the throne by the powerful vassals who held great power, and the heroic and handsome people were subdued by the arguments of the despicable people. This was because everyone recited the words of the former king, and the people were afraid of rebellion and obeyed the situation.

古文：至如张温、皇甫嵩之徒，功定天下之半，声驰四海之表，俯仰顾眄，则天业可移，犹鞠躬昏主之下，狼狈折札之命，散成兵，就绳约，而无悔心，暨乎剥桡自极，人神数尽，然后群英乘其运，世德终其祚。
现代文：至如张温、皇甫嵩之徒，有定天下一半的大功，威名远扬四海之外，俯仰顾盼，大业可以转移，还鞠躬尽瘁于昏主之下，折简而召，就狼狈匍匐，散成兵，被拘执，却无后悔之心。及汉祚自终，人神数尽，然后天下的英雄并起，际会风云，曹丕继位。
English: For example, Zhang Wen, the disciple of Wang Fusong, has won half of the world's great achievements, his fame has spread far and wide, he is looked up to and admired, his great cause can be transferred, he also bowed down and prostrated himself before the Lord, he was called by the Lord, he was confused, scattered into soldiers, he was detained, but he had no regrets. And Han Xuan died, the number of gods and goddesses was exhausted, and then the heroes of the world began to rise together, eventually there would be a storm, and Cao Pi succeeded.

古文：迹衰敝之所由致，而能多历年所者，斯岂非学之效乎？
现代文：考寻衰败的原因，但又能拖得这么长的时间，这难道不是讲求儒学的功劳吗？
English: Is it not to the credit of Confucianism that the search for the cause of the decline has been able to drag on for so long?

古文：故先师垂典文，褒励学者之功，笃矣切矣。
现代文：所以先师垂典文，褒奖学者的功劳，不是偶然的，其意义是极为深远的。
English: Therefore, it is no accident that the forerunner of the teacher's awarding the scholar's merit, and its significance is extremely far-reaching.

古文：不循《春秋》，至乃比于杀逆，其将有意乎！
现代文：不遵《春秋》，比于篡杀诛死之罪，这是多么重要的思想啊。
English: How much more important is the thought of not following "Spring and Autumn" than the sin of tampering with death.

