古文：《易》曰： 天垂象，见吉凶，圣人象之；河出图，雒出书，圣人则之。 
现代文：《易》上说： 上天显示征兆，显出吉凶，圣人就加以观察；黄河出现了图，雒水出现了书，圣人就加以效法。 
English: "Yi" said: The heavens show signs, show auspicious and inauspicious, and the sage observes them; the Yellow River appears a map, the Surabaya appears a book, and the sage follows suit.

古文：刘歆以为虙羲氏继天而王，受《河图》，则而画之，八卦是也；禹治洪水，赐《雒书》，法而陈之，《洪范》是也。
现代文：刘歆认为伏羲氏继承天命而称王，被授予《河图》，他加以仿效并把它们画了出来，就成了八卦；大禹治理洪水，被赐予《雒书》，他加以效法并进行陈述，就成了《洪范》。
English: Liu Wei believed that Fu Rong inherited the destiny of heaven and became king. He was awarded the "River Map," he imitated it and drew it out, and it became the "Bagua"; Dayu was given the "Book of the Flood," he imitated it and made a statement, and it became the "Flood Model."

古文：圣人行其道而宝其真。
现代文：圣人遵行他们的思想并以他们的思想作为宝典。
English: The sages followed their thoughts and used their thoughts as a treasure.

古文：降及于殷，箕子在父师位而典之。
现代文：到了殷朝，箕子宫为父师，以它们为准则。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, the uterus of the dragonfly was the father, and they were used as the standard.

古文：周既克殷，以箕子归，武王亲虚己而问焉。
现代文：周朝战胜殷朝后，由于箕子归顺，武王亲自谦逊地向他请教。
English: After the victory of the Zhou Dynasty over the Yin Dynasty, King Wu humbly asked him for advice.

古文：故经曰： 惟十有三祀，王访于箕子，王乃言曰： 乌呼，箕子！
现代文：所以经上说： 十三年，武王拜访箕子，武王就说道： 啊，箕子！
English: That is why the scripture says, "In the thirteenth year, King Wu paid a visit to Xunzi, and King Wu said, "Ah, Xunzi!

古文：惟天阴骘下民，相协厥居，我不知其彝伦逌叙 。箕子乃言曰： 我闻在昔，鲧陻洪水，汩陈其五行，帝乃震怒，弗畀《洪范》九畴，彝伦逌攸。
现代文：上天默默地安定天下百姓，帮助他们安居，我不知道天地人的常道和它们所在的次序，箕子就说道： 我听说在从前，鲧堵塞洪水，乱施五行，上天便发怒了，没有给他《洪范》九章，天地人常理的次序就混乱了。
English: Heaven silently stabilizes the people of the world and helps them to live safely. I don't know the common ways of the people of the world and the order in which they are located. The cripple said: I heard that in the past, the earthworm blocked the flood and misused the five elements. Heaven got angry and didn't give him the nine chapters of the "Hong Fan," and the common sense order of the people of the world and the world was confused.

古文：鲧则殛死，禹乃嗣兴，天乃锡禹《洪范》九畴，彝伦攸叙。  此武王问《雒书》于箕子，箕子对禹得《雒书》之意也。
现代文：鲧被诛杀大禹便继承遣业，上天就赐给大禹《洪范》九章，天地人的常理就有次序了。 ，造就是武王向箕子求教《雒书》，箕子答对他大禹得到《雒书》的意思。
English: When King Wu was assassinated, Dayu inherited the succession, and Heaven gave Dayu the first nine chapters of "Hong Fan" (洪范), and there was order in the common sense of heaven and earth.

古文： 初一曰五行；次二曰羞用五事；次三曰农用八政；次四曰旪用五纪；次五曰建用皇极；次六曰艾用三德，次七曰明用稽疑；次八曰念用庶征；次九曰乡用五福，畏用六极。 
现代文： 第一叫五行；第二叫羞用五事；第三叫农用八政；第四叫叶用五纪；第五叫建用皇极；第六叫艾用三德；第七叫明用稽疑；第八叫念用庶征；第九叫飨用五福，畏用六极。 
English: The first is called the five elements; the second is called the five things with shyness; the third is called the eight politics with agriculture; the fourth is called the five disciplines with leaves; the fifth is called the construction with the imperial pole; the sixth is called Ai with the three virtues; the seventh is called the clear use of inspection and doubt; the eighth is called the use of the sideline; the ninth is called the five blessings with the five blessings, and the six poles with the fear.

古文：凡此六十五字，皆《雒书》本文，所谓天乃锡禹大法九章常事所次者也。
现代文：这一共六十五字，都是《雒书》的本文，就是上天赐给大禹大法九章常事所表现的次序。
English: This total of sixty-five words is the text of the Book of the Law, which is the order of the nine chapters of the Great Law given to Dayu by Heaven.

古文：以为《河图》、《洛书》相为经纬，八卦、九章相为表里。
现代文：他认为《河图》、《雒书》互相为经纬，八卦、九章互相作为表裹。
English: He believed that the "River Chart" and the "Book of Changes" are the warp and woof of each other, and the "Eight Trigrams" and the "Nine Chapters" are the cover of each other.

古文：昔殷道弛，文王演《周易》；周道敝，孔子述《春秋》。
现代文：从前殷朝道德衰退，文王就推演《周易》；周朝道德衰败后，孔子就撰写《春秋》。
English: After the moral decline of the Yin Dynasty, King Wen deduced "Zhou Yi"; after the moral decline of the Zhou Dynasty, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn."

古文：则《乾》、《坤》之阴阳，效《洪范》之咎征，天人之道粲然著矣。
现代文：以《干》《坤》的阴阳作为法则，效法《洪范》的灾祸的征兆，天和人的规律就很明显了。
English: Taking the yin and yang of "Kang" and "Kun" as the law, and following the signs of the disaster of "Hong Fan," the laws of heaven and man are obvious.

古文：汉兴，承秦灭学之后，景、武之世，董仲舒治《公羊春秋》，始推阴阳，为儒者宗。
现代文：汉朝兴起，承接秦朝毁灭学术之后，在汉景帝、汉武帝两朝，董仲舒研究《公羊春秋》，开始寻绎阴阳之理，为儒学家所推崇。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty and the destruction of academic learning by the Qin Dynasty, Dong Zhongshu studied "Ram Spring and Autumn" during the reigns of Emperor Han Jing and Emperor Han Wu, and began to deduce the principles of yin and yang, which was highly respected by Confucian scholars.

古文：宣、元之后，刘向治《穀梁春秋》，数其祸福，传以《洪范》，与促舒错。
现代文：在汉宣帝、汉元帝两朝之后，刘向研究《谷梁春秋》，占卜人的祸福，附会《洪范》中的说法，与董仲舒互不相同。
English: After the two dynasties of Emperor Han Xuan and Emperor Han Yuan, Liu Xiang studied "Gu Liang, Spring and Autumn" and divined the fortunes and misfortunes of people. The sayings in the appendix "Hong Fan" are different from Dong Zhongshu.

古文：至向子歆治《左氏传》，其《春秋》意亦已乖矣；言《五行传》，又颇不同。
现代文：到了刘向的儿子刘歆研究《左氏传》，他对《春秋》的解说也已经有所违背了；他们谈《五行传》，又很不相同了。
English: By the time Liu Xiang's son, Liu Wei, studied "The Biography of Zuo," his interpretation of "Spring and Autumn" had also been violated; when they talked about "The Five Elements," they were very different.

古文：是以促舒，别向、歆，传载眭孟、夏侯胜、京房、谷永、李寻之徒，所陈行事，讫于王莽，举十二世，以傅《春秋》，著于篇。
现代文：于是我引用董仲舒的说法，辨别刘向、刘歆父子的不同，附上眭孟、夏侯胜、京房、谷永、李寻之辈所陈述的有关五行之事，止于王莽篡漠之时，记录十二朝，来与《春秋》相比附，写成此篇《五行志》。
English: Therefore, I quoted the words of Dong Zhongshu to distinguish the differences between Liu Xiang and Liu Xuan, father and son, and appended the things related to the five elements stated by the likes of Yu Meng, Xia Hou Sheng, Jing Fang, Gu Yong and Li Huan, stopped at the time of Wang Mang's indifference, recorded the twelve dynasties, compared with "Spring and Autumn," and wrote this "Five Elements."

古文：经曰： 初一曰五行。
现代文：经上说： 第一是五行。
English: The sutra says: The first is the five elements.

古文：五行：一曰水，二曰火，三曰木，四曰金，五曰土。
现代文：五行：一是水，二是火，三是木，四是金，五是土。
English: The five elements are water, fire, wood, gold, and earth.

古文：水曰润下，火曰炎上，木曰曲直，金曰从革，土曰稼穑。 
现代文：水的自然之性是能向下润湿，火的自然之性是能向上燃烧，木的自然之性是可以曲可以直，金的自然之性是可以更改形状可以销熔冶铸，土的自然之性是可以在它上面耕种收获。 
English: The natural constancy of water is to moisturize all things and go down, the constancy of fire is to heat up and rise, wood can be bent and straightened, gold can be melted and deformed, and soil can be cultivated and harvested.

古文：传曰： 田猎不宿，饮食不享，出入不节，夺民农时，及有奸谋，则木不曲直。 
现代文：传上说： 外出打猎不遵照规定的时间，饮酒吃饭的时候不行享献之礼，出征作战没有节制，侵占了耕种的时间，以及有邪恶阴谋，这样木就失去可曲可直之性。 
English: According to the legend: if you go out hunting without observing the prescribed time, if you drink alcohol and eat, you cannot enjoy the offering, if you go to war without restraint, you have occupied the time of cultivation, and there is an evil plot, so the tree loses its malleability.

古文：说曰： 木，东方也。
现代文：解释说：木，代表东方。
English: Wood, he explained, represents the East.

古文：于《易》，地上之木为《观》。
现代文：在《易经》上说，地上之木为《观卦》。
English: In Yi, the tree on the ground is Guan.

古文：其于王事，威仪容貌亦可观者也。
现代文：对于君王之事而言，威严、仪表、音容笑貌也要讲求观瞻之效。
English: In the case of a monarch, the majesty, appearance, tone, smile and countenance should also be observed.

古文：故行步有佩玉之度，登车有和鸾之节，田狩有三驱之制，饮食有享献之礼，出入有名，使民以时，务在劝农桑，谋在安百姓：如此，则木得其性矣。
现代文：所以走路时，有身上佩戴玉佩的法度，乘车时，有车马上悬挂金铃的礼节，出外打猎，有一年衹行三次的制度，饮食席宴有敬享呈献的礼节，征伐要有正当的理由。让老百姓服役要在合适的时间。致力于号召百姓发展农业生产，营求安定百姓。做到以上这些，木就可以得保其性了。
English: Therefore, when walking, there is a law of wearing a jade pendant on the body, when riding a car, there is a courtesy of hanging a golden bell on the car, going out to hunt, there is a system of walking three times a year, dining banquets have the etiquette of respecting and presenting, and there must be a legitimate reason for the conquest. Let the people serve at the right time. Commit to calling on the people to develop agricultural production, and seek to stabilize the people. If you can do all of the above, the tree can be protected.

古文：若乃田猎驰骋不反宫室，饮食沉湎不顾法度，妄兴繇役以夺民时，作为奸诈以伤民财，则木失其性矣。
现代文：如果外出打猎尽兴驰骋不回宫室，饮食沉湎于美味佳肴而不顾法度规矩，不考虑民力大兴徭役而侵占了人民耕作的时间，变换手法敲诈勒索伤害民财，这样就会使木失其本性了。
English: If you go out to hunt for pleasure and do not return to the palace, indulge in delicious food without regard to laws and regulations, occupy the people's farming time without considering the people's power, and change the method of extortion and harm the people's wealth, this will make the wood lose its nature.

古文：盖工匠之为轮矢者多伤败，乃木为变怪，是为木不曲直。《春秋》成公十六年 正月，雨，木冰 。
现代文：于是工匠要做车轮却燥不圆，要做箭杆却矫不直，以及木头自己发生变化出现怪异，这就是木失去可曲可直之性的表现。《春秋》载，鲁成公十六年 正月，下雨，有木冰 。
English: As a result, craftsmen want to make a wheel but it is not round, want to make an arrow shaft but it is not straightened, and the wood itself changes and appears strange, which is the manifestation of the loss of wood's flexibility. "Spring and Autumn" contains, Lu Chenggong's 16th year, the first month, it rains, there is wood ice.

古文：刘歆以为上阳施不下通，下阴施不上达，故雨，而木为之冰，雰气寒，木不曲直也。
现代文：刘歆认为这是上边的阳气不能下通，下边的阴气不能上达，所以形成雨，可是树木却变生了冰雪，这是因为雾气寒冷，使树木不能保持可曲可直之性了。
English: Liu Wei thought that this was because the yang air at the top could not pass down, and the yin air at the bottom could not reach up, so rain was formed, but the trees turned into ice and snow. This was because the fog was cold, so the trees could not maintain their flexibility.

古文：刘向以为冰者阴之盛而水滞者也，木者少阳，贵臣卿大夫之象也。
现代文：刘向认为冰这东西是阴气太盛使水凝滞而成的。木属少阳，是显贵大臣公卿大夫的象征。
English: Liu Xiang believed that the ice was formed by the stagnation of water due to the abundance of yin. The tree belongs to the Shao Yang, and is a symbol of the distinguished minister, court noble and doctor.

古文：此人将有害，则阴气胁木，木先寒，故得雨而冰也。
现代文：如果这些人将有灾祸，阴气就要胁迫树木，树木先变寒，所以着雨就成冰了。
English: This person will be harmed, the gloomy weather will invade the wood, the wood will be cold, so if it rains, it will freeze.

古文：是时，叔孙乔如出奔，公子偃诛死。
现代文：当时叔孙乔如出奔齐国，公子偃被处死。
English: At that time, Uncle Sun Qiao ran away to Qi Province, and he was executed.

古文：一曰，时晋执季孙行父，又执公，此执辱之异。
现代文：还有一种说法是，这一年晋国扣留了季孙行父，又扣留了鲁成公，这是因有受人执擒之辱而生的怪异现象。
English: There is also a theory that in this year, the State of Jin detained Ji Sun Xingfu and detained Lu Chenggong, which is a strange phenomenon caused by the humiliation of being held by someone.

古文：或曰，今之长老名木冰为 木介 。
现代文：也有人说，现在一些老年人把木冰叫做 木介 。
English: It is also said that some elderly people now call wood ice "kusuke."

古文：介者，甲。
现代文：介，就是钟甲。
English: 介, that is, Zhongjia.

古文：甲，兵象也。
现代文：皑甲，这是战争的象征啊。
English: Armour, it's a symbol of war.

古文：是岁晋有陵之战，楚王伤目而败。
现代文：这一年晋国有隔陵之战，楚王被射伤而失败。
English: In that year, there was a battle for the tombs in Jin Province. King Chu was shot and wounded and lost.

古文：属常雨也。
现代文：属于平常下雨。
English: It's just a normal rain.

古文：传曰： 弃法律，逐功臣，杀太子，以妾以妻，则火不炎上。 
现代文：传上说： 废弃法律，放逐功臣，杀害太子，以妾为妻，火就不能上燃。 
English: According to legend: Abolish the law, banish the hero, kill the prince, take a concubine as a wife, and the fire cannot be ignited.

古文：说曰：火，南方，扬光辉为明者也。
现代文：解释说：火，代表南方，是发出光辉带来光明的事物。
English: Explanation: Fire, the South, is a thing that radiates light.

古文：其于王者，南面乡明而治。
现代文：而对于君王来说，就是坐北面南，向着光明来治理天下。
English: And for the monarch, it is to govern the world by sitting north facing south, facing the light.

古文：《书》云： 知人则哲，能官人。 
现代文：《书经》上说： 了解人就有智慧，从而能善于用人。 
English: In the "Book" it says: Acquaintances are wise and can hold office.

古文：故尧、舜举群贤而命之朝，远四佞而放诸野。
现代文：所以尧、舜选拔天下贤人让他们在朝为官，离弃四凶，把他们放逐草野。
English: Therefore, Gan and Gan selected the wise men of the world to let them serve as officials in the government, abandoned the four villains, and banished them to the grasslands.

古文：孔子曰： 浸润之谮、肤受之诉不行焉，可谓明矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 积月累的暗中谗毁或流言蜚语的诉说都不让其流行得逞，这样就可以说是做到了光明正大。 
English: Confucius said: Accumulated years of tacit denigration or rumor-mongering have not allowed its popularity to succeed, so it can be said that it has been done openly.

古文：贤佞分别，官人有序，帅由旧章，敬重功勋，殊别適庶，如此则火得其性矣。
现代文：对贤德君子与奸佞小人分别清楚，选官有序，遵循已有的章程，尊重功臣元勋，分别嫡庶，做到这样，火就能得保其性了。
English: It is clear to distinguish between the virtuous gentleman and the treacherous villain, the selection of officials is orderly, the existing regulations are followed, the meritorious soldiers are respected, and the legitimate children are separated. If this is done, the fire will be able to maintain its nature.

古文：若乃信道不笃，或耀虚伪，谗夫昌，邪胜正，则火失其性矣。
现代文：如果对道义不是全心信守，或是虚伪炫耀，使奸谗之人得逞，邪气压了正气，火就会丧失它的天性了。
English: If the followers of the Way are dishonest, or if falsehood and treachery prevail, or if the scoundrels gain power, or if evil prevails over righteousness, then fire loses its nature.

古文：自上而降，及滥炎妄起。灾宗庙，烧宫馆，虽兴师众，弗能救也，是为火不炎上。
现代文：就会自上而下，以致狂焰四起，宗庙受灾，宫馆被烧，虽然兴师动众，也扑不灭，造就是火不上燃的表现。
English: It will come from the top down, so that there will be four raging flames, the ancestral temple will be affected, and the palace will be burned. Although it will arouse the masses, it will not be extinguished. This is a manifestation of the fire not being ignited.

古文：《春秋》桓公十四年 八月壬申，御廪灾 。
现代文：《春秋》载，桓公十四年 八月壬申，皇宫粮仓发生火灾 。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," a fire broke out in the granary of the Imperial Palace in Jinshin in August of the 14th year of King Huan.

古文：董仲舒以为先是四国共伐鲁，大破之于龙门。
现代文：董仲舒认为，先前四个国家一起征伐鲁国，在龙门一战大破鲁国。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that the four countries had previously conquered Lu together and defeated Lu in the First Battle of Longmen.

古文：百姓伤者未廖，怨咎未复，而君臣俱惰，内怠政事，外海四邻，非能保守宗庙终其天年者也，故天灾御廪以戒之。
现代文：鲁国受伤的百姓没有痊愈，怨恨之气还没乎复，君臣们却都懈惰起来，对内怠于政事，对外受辱于四邻，他们不是能够守住宗庙社稷使之能够维持到天帝所给予的期限的人，所以天帝降灾于皇宫粮仓来告诫他们。
English: The injured people of Lu did not recover, the spirit of resentment had not yet fully recovered, but the monarchs and courtiers had become lazy, lax in political affairs at home, and humiliated by their neighbors abroad. They were not able to hold on to their ancestral temples and shrines so that they could maintain the time limit given by the heavenly emperor. Therefore, the heavenly emperor brought disaster to the granary of the imperial palace to warn them.

古文：刘向以为御廪，夫人八妾所舂米之臧以奉宗庙者也，时夫人有淫行，挟逆心，天戒若曰，夫人不可以奉宗庙。
现代文：刘向认为，皇宫的粮仓是国君的夫人和八妾舂米收藏以便奉献宗庙之享的所在，当时夫人有淫乱之丑行，挟藏叛逆之心，天帝的告诫似乎在说，夫人不可以再奉祀宗庙。
English: Liu Xiang believed that the granary of the imperial palace was the place where the wife of the sovereign and eight concubines collected glutinous rice in order to dedicate it to the ancestral temple. At that time, the wife had the ugly act of fornication and harbored a rebellious heart. The emperor's admonition seemed to say that the wife could no longer worship the ancestral temple.

古文：桓不寤，与夫人俱会齐，夫人谮桓公于齐侯，齐侯杀桓公。
现代文：鲁桓公不醒悟，还与夫人一起到齐国会见齐侯，夫人向齐侯说桓公的坏话，齐侯就杀死了桓公。
English: Lu Huan didn't come to his senses, and he and his wife went to Qi State to meet Qi Hou. His wife spoke ill of Huan to Qi Hou, and Qi Hou killed Huan.

古文：刘歆以为御廪，公所亲耕籍田以奉粢盛者也，弃法度亡礼之应也。
现代文：刘歆认为，皇宫的粮仓是鲁国君主亲耕籍田所得以之奉献黍稷的地方，御廪被烧是对其废弃法度不遵礼制的报应。
English: Liu Wei believed that the granary of the imperial palace was the place where the fields cultivated by the Lu monarchs were dedicated, and the burning of the imperial granary was the retribution for their abandonment of the law and non-compliance with the etiquette system.

古文：严公二十年 夏，齐大灾 。刘向以为齐桓好色，听女口，以妾为妻，適庶数更，故致大灾。
现代文：严公二十年 夏季，齐国大灾 刘向认为，齐桓公好色，听从女人之言，把妾当成正妻，嫡庶多次更改，所以造成大灾。
English: In the summer of the 20th year of Yan Gong, the great disaster of Qi occurred Liu Xiang believed that Qi Huan Gong was lustful, listened to women's words, treated his concubine as his lawful wife, and changed his legitimate heir many times, thus causing the great disaster.

古文：桓公不寤，及死，適庶分争，九月不得葬。
现代文：齐桓公不醒悟，到他死的时候，太子与其他几个儿子都来争夺君位，遇、 九个月还没下葬。
English: Prince Qi Kuan did not wake up, and by the time of his death, the prince and several other sons had come to compete for the throne, and he had not been buried for nine months.

古文：《公羊传》曰，大灾，疫也。
现代文：《公羊传》上说，大灾是一场疫病流行。
English: According to "The History of the Ram," the catastrophe was an epidemic.

古文：董仲舒以为，鲁夫人淫于齐，齐桓姊妹不嫁者七人。
现代文：董仲舒认为，鲁桓公的夫人到齐国与齐侯淫乱，齐桓公的姊妹没有出嫁的有七人。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Lu Huan's wife went to Qi Province and had an affair with Qi Hou. There were seven sisters of Qi Huan who did not marry.

古文：国君，民之父母；夫妇，生化之本。
现代文：国君是庶民的父母；夫妇是生育繁衍之根本。
English: The sovereign is the common people's parent; husband and wife are the foundation of reproduction.

古文：本伤则末夭，故天灾所予也。
现代文：本受到伤害末梢就会夭折死亡，所以这是天灾所给的报应。
English: The injured endings will die prematurely, so this is the retribution given by natural disasters.

古文：釐公二十年 五月乙巳，西宫灾 。
现代文：僖公二十年 五月乙巳日，西宫遭灾 。
English: In the 20th year of the reign of Emperor Xizong, the Western Palace suffered a disaster on the 21st day of May.

古文：《穀梁》以为愍公宫也，以谥言之则若疏，故谓之西宫。
现代文：《谷梁传》说是愍公所住的宫室，从谧号上说是显得疏远，所以称之为西宫。
English: "Guliangzhuan" said that it was the palace where Gong Gong lived, but from the nickname it was said to be distant, so it was called the West Palace.

古文：刘向以为釐立妾母为夫人以入宗庙，故天灾愍宫，若曰，去其卑而亲者，将害宗庙之正礼。
现代文：刘向认为，鲁僖公追立身份为妾的生母为夫人而入祭宗庙，所以天降灾于愍公旧居之宫，似乎是说，撤去这身份卑贱的人，她会影响正常的宗庙祭祀之礼。
English: Liu Xiang believed that Lu Yonggong raised the status of his concubine's birth mother as his wife and entered the ancestral temple, so the heavens fell on the palace of Yonggong's former residence. It seems to say that if this lowly person is removed, she will affect the normal ancestral temple ritual.

古文：董仲舒以为釐娶于楚，而齐媵之，胁公使立以为夫人。
现代文：董仲舒认为鲁僖公聘楚国女人为夫人，以齐国女人为媵妾，齐国胁迫鲁僖公立齐女为夫人。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Lu Ye publicly hired a woman from the State of Chu as his wife, took a woman from the State of Qi as his concubine, and that the State of Qi coerced Lu Ye to marry a woman from the State of Qi.

古文：西宫者，小寝，夫人之居也。
现代文：西宫是较小的寝宫，为夫人所居住。
English: The West Palace is a smaller bedroom palace, where the wife lives.

古文：若曰，妾何为此宫！
现代文：似乎是说，妾怎么可以住在这个宫裹！
English: It seems to say, how can a concubine live in this palace!

古文：诛去之意也。
现代文：这是诛罚逐去的意思。
English: This is the meaning of banishment.

古文：以天灾之，故大之曰西宫也。
现代文：因为天降灾于此宫，所以夸大其名叫做西宫。
English: Because the heavens fell on this palace, its name is exaggeratedly called the West Palace.

古文：《左氏》以为西宫者，公宫也，言西，知有东。
现代文：《左氏传》认为西宫是国君所居。说是西宫，就知道必有东宫。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" believes that the West Palace is the residence of the sovereign. If it is said to be the West Palace, it is known that there must be the East Palace.

古文：东宫，太子所居。
现代文：柬宫是太子居住的。
English: The Cambodian palace is where the crown prince lives.

古文：言宫，举区皆灾也。
现代文：如果衹说宫而不加特指，那就是全部都遭灾了。
English: If one speaks of the palace but does not point to it, then all is lost.

古文：宣公十六年 夏，成周宣榭火 。
现代文：宣公十六年 夏季，成周洛阳的宣榭着火 。
English: In the summer of the 16th year of Xuan Gong, the Xuan Gong of Cheng Zhou Luoyang caught fire.

古文：榭者，所以臧乐器，宣其名也。
现代文：榭是用来存放乐器的地方，宣是榭的名称。
English: A cymbal is a place used to store musical instruments. Xuan is the name of the cymbal.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为十五年王札子杀召伯、毛伯，天子不能诛。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，鲁宣公十五年时王札子杀了成周的召伯、毛伯二大夫，周天子没能诛杀王札子，从而引起这次火灾。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that when Lu Xuanguo was fifteen years old, Wang Fazi killed Cheng Zhou's uncle-in-law, Mao Bo, the second doctor, and Zhou Tianzi failed to kill Wang Fazi, thus causing this fire.

古文：天戒若曰，不能行政令，何以礼乐为而臧之？
现代文：天帝发出的告诫似乎是说，政令都不能行使，还存放这礼仪之用的乐器干什么？
English: The admonition issued by the heavenly emperor seems to say that decrees can not be exercised, and what is the use of storing this ceremonial instrument?

古文：《左氏经》曰： 成周宣榭火，人火也。
现代文：《左氏传》上说： 成周洛阳的宣榭着火，是人为造成的。
English: "Zao Shi Zhuan" said: Cheng Zhou Luoyang's proclamation tower caught fire, which was caused by human beings.

古文：人火曰火，天火曰灾。 
现代文：凡是着火，人为烧起来的叫作火，由天而降的火叫作灾。 
English: Whatever catches fire and is set ablaze is called fire, and fire that comes down from heaven is called disaster.

古文：榭者，讲武之坐星。
现代文：榭这种建筑，是讲习武艺的坐屋。
English: This kind of building is a martial arts training hall.

古文：成公三年 二月甲子，新宫灾 。
现代文：成公三年 二月甲子曰，新落成的宫室发生火灾 。
English: In February of the third year of his reign, a fire broke out in the newly completed palace.

古文：《穀梁》以为宣宫，不言谥，恭也。
现代文：《谷梁传》认为这座新宫是鲁宣公居住的，之所以不按谧号称作宣宫，是出自对宣公的恭敬。
English: "Guliangzhuan" believes that this new palace was originally inhabited by Lu Xuan Gong. The reason why it is not called Xuan Gong according to its nickname is out of respect for Xuan Gong.

古文：刘向以为时鲁三桓子孙始执国政，宣公欲诛之，恐不能，使大夫公孙归父如晋谋。
现代文：刘向认为，当时鲁国三桓的子孙开始把持国家的政权，鲁宣公想要除掉他们，担心不能成功，就派遣大夫公孙归父到晋国去谋划求助。
English: Liu Xiang believes that at that time, the descendants of the three kings of the State of Lu began to control the country's political power. Lu Xuanguo wanted to get rid of them, and fearing that he would not succeed, he sent the doctor Gongsun Guifu to Jin to plan and seek help.

古文：未反，宣公死。
现代文：公孙归父还没有返回，鲁宣公死了。
English: Lu Xuan Gong has not yet returned to his father, Lu Xuan Gong is dead.

古文：三家谮归父于成公。
现代文：三桓这三家就向鲁成公诬告公孙归父。
English: The three Sankan families falsely accused Lu Chenggong's grandson of being his father.

古文：成公父丧未葬，听谗而逐其父之臣，使奔齐，故天灾宣宫，明不用父命之象也。
现代文：鲁成公竟在父亲去世还没埋葬之际，听信谗言而驱逐了父亲的大臣，让他逃奔齐国。因此，天帝降火灾烧了宣公的宫室，象征成公不遵行父命的错误。
English: At the time of his father's death and before he was buried, Lu Chenggong actually listened to his father's advice and expelled his father's minister, letting him flee to Qi. Therefore, the Emperor's fire burned the palace room of Xuan Gong, symbolizing Chenggong's failure to follow his father's orders.

古文：一曰，三家亲而亡礼，犹宣公杀子赤而立。
现代文：一种说法是，出白鲁宣公的造三家是最亲的宗室却不遵行礼义，和当年鲁宣公杀了同父异母的兄弟即前太子赤，而得立为君一样，都是不遵礼义而又是亲人。
English: One theory is that the three families that produced Bai Lu Xuan Guo were the closest family members, but they did not follow the rules of etiquette. Just as Lu Xuan Guo killed his half-brother, the former crown prince Red, and was made emperor, they were relatives who did not follow the rules of etiquette.

古文：亡礼而亲，天灾宣庙，欲示去三家也。
现代文：天帝降灾烧毁宣公之庙，就是表示应该废黜这三家的意思。
English: The emperor's disaster and the burning of the temple of Xuan Gong is the meaning that these three families should be dethroned.

古文：董仲舒以为成居丧亡哀戚心，数兴兵战伐，故天灾其父庙，示失子道，不能奉宗庙也。
现代文：董仲舒认为，鲁成公为父服丧之期没有哀痛的心情，竟多次兴兵打仗，所以天帝降灾烧了他父亲的庙堂，揭示他有失为子之道，没能尊奉宗庙。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Lu Chenggong did not have a sad mood during the period of mourning for his father, and even repeatedly raised an army to fight. Therefore, the heavenly emperor burned his father's temple, revealing that he had lost the way of being a son and failed to honor the ancestral temple.

古文：一曰，宣杀君而立，不当列于群祖也。
现代文：还有一种说法是，这次火灾是在告诉人们，鲁宣公杀了国君而自立，本不应居于鲁国列祖列宗之位。
English: There is also a theory that this fire is telling people that Lu Xuan Gong killed the king and became independent, and should not have been in the position of the ancestors of Lu.

古文：襄公九年 春，宋灾 。
现代文：襄公九年 春季，宋国发生了火灾 。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xiang, a fire broke out in Song.

古文：刘向以为先是宋公听谗，逐其大夫华弱，出奔鲁。
现代文：刘向认为这是因为先前宋公听信了谗言，放逐了大夫华弱，使他投奔鲁国而引起的。
English: Liu Xiang believed that this was caused by the fact that Song Gong had previously listened to the advice and banished the doctor Hua Wei, causing him to flee to Lu.

古文：《左氏传》曰，宋灾，乐喜为司城，先使火所未至彻小屋，涂大屋，陈畚輂，具绠缶，备水器，畜水潦，积土涂，缮守备，表火道，储正徒。郊保之民，使奔火所。
现代文：《左氏传》上说： 宋国发生了火灾。当时乐喜为宋国的司空，他先派人在火还没有烧起时就做了各项灭火的准备：拆撤小的房子，不便拆的大屋子则涂上泥巴防火，摆列好盛土、装土的畚辈等工具，备齐汲水用的绳子、瓦罐，准备好盛水的大缸等容器，池塘蓄好水，堆积沙土，修缮防守设备，立好指明火来趋向的标志，调集常备的役夫，郊外村镇的农民，也命令他们赶赴火灾现场。
English: "The Biography of Zuo" says: A fire occurred in Song. At that time, Lexi was the second-in-command of Song. He first sent people to make various preparations for extinguishing the fire when the fire had not yet burned: small houses were demolished, large houses that were not easy to demolish were coated with mud to prevent fire, tools such as embankments and embankments were set up, ropes and earthenware jars for drawing water were prepared, large cylinders and other containers for holding water were prepared, ponds were filled with water, sand was piled up, defensive equipment was repaired, signs indicating the direction of the fire were set up, and regular attendants

古文：又饬众官，各慎其职。
现代文：还饬令各官，都要谨慎执行各自的职责。
English: He also enjoined all officers to perform their respective duties diligently.

古文：晋侯闻之，问士弱曰： 宋灾，于是乎知有天道，何故？ 
现代文：晋侯听说后，问他的大夫士弱说： 宋国发生了火灾，从这件事知道了天道，这是怎么回事？ 
English: After hearing about this, Jin Hou asked his doctor Ruo Weak, "There was a fire in Song Province. From this incident, I know the way of heaven. What's going on?"

古文：对曰： 古之火正，或食于心，或食于咮，以出入火。是故咮为鹑火，心为大火。
现代文：士弱回答说： 古代的火正之官，有的配祭于心星，有的配祭于味星，分别是为了用火和禁止用火。这是因为味星是鹑火星，心星是大火星。
English: Shi Weak replied, "In ancient times, the fire marshal, some offerings were made to the Heart Star, and some offerings were made to the Flavor Star, respectively, to use fire and to prohibit the use of fire. This is because the Flavor Star is Mars, and the Heart Star is the Great Mars.

古文：陶唐氏之火正阏伯，居商丘，祀大火，而火纪时焉。
现代文：陶唐氏即尧时的火正是关伯，他住在商丘，祭祀大火星，用大火星来做标志计算时节。
English: The fire at the time of Tao Tang's death was Guan Bo. He lived in Shangqiu and worshipped the Great Mars. He used the Great Mars as a symbol to calculate the seasons.

古文：相土因之，故商主大火。
现代文：后来相土沿用了这一做法，所以说商朝是以大火星为祭祀的主星。
English: Later, this practice was followed by other dynasties, so it is said that the Shang Dynasty used the Great Mars as the main star of the ritual.

古文：商人阅其祸败之衅必始于火，是以知有天道。 
现代文：商朝人观察到他们所发生的灾祸或败亡的端倪或征兆都先从大火星的变化上表现出来。因此这样他们知道有天道。 
English: The Shang Dynasty people observed that the clues or signs of their calamity or downfall were first manifested in the changes of the Great Mars. Therefore, they knew that there was a heavenly way.

古文：公曰： 可必乎？ 
现代文：晋侯说： 是必然有天道的显示吗？ 
English: Jin Hou said, "Is it inevitable that there will be a sign from Heaven?

古文：对曰： 在道。
现代文：回答说： 这还在于人道。
English: He replied: It is also a question of humanity.

古文：国乱亡象，不可知也。 
现代文：如果国家动乱，天帝就不再显示天象，也就看不到了。 
English: If the country is in turmoil, the celestial emperor will no longer show the celestial body, and it will not be seen.

古文：说曰：古之火正，谓火官也，掌祭火星，行火政。
现代文：解释说：古代的火正，叫做火宫，掌管祭祀火星之事，执行有关用火防火的政令。
English: He explained: The ancient fire chief, called the fire palace, was in charge of the worship of Mars and the implementation of the decree on the use of fire to prevent fire.

古文：季春昏，心星出东方，而咮、七星、鸟首正在南方，则用火；季秋，星入，则止火，以顺天时，救民疾。
现代文：暮春的晚上心星出现在东方，而味、七星、鸟首等星正在南方，造时可用火；到了晚秋季节，火星不见了，这时就不要用火了，这才能顺应天时，解救黎民的疾苦。
English: In the evening of late spring, the cardinal star appears in the east, while the seven stars, the seven-pointed star, and the bird's head and other stars are in the south, and can be made with fire; in the late autumn season, Mars is gone, so don't use fire at this time. This can conform to the time of day and relieve the suffering of the people of Li.

古文：帝喾则有祝融，尧时有阏伯，民赖其德，死则以为火祖，配祭火星，故曰 或食于心，或食于咮也。 
现代文：帝医时代的火官是祝融，尧的时代火官是板伯，黎民百姓有赖于他们的恩德，所以他们死后被敬为火祖，配祭火星，所以说 有的配祭于心星，有的配祭于味星 。
English: In the era of imperial medicine, the fire officer was Zhu Rong, and in the era of Zou, the fire officer was Pan Bo, and the people of Lai Min relied on their benevolence. Therefore, after their death, they were revered as the ancestors of fire, and Mars was the sacrificial offering. Therefore, some sacrificial offerings were made to the Heart Star, and some were made to the Flavor Star.

古文：相土，商祖契之曾孙，代阏伯后主火星。
现代文：相土是商人始祖契的曾孙，代替板伯后来主持祭祀火星。
English: Sodato was the great-grandson of the merchant Shisuchi, and later presided over the worship of Mars in place of Panbo.

古文：宋，其后也，世司其占，故先知火灾。
现代文：宋国是商的后裔，世代相袭负责用火星进行占卜，所以能预见火灾的发生。
English: The Song Dynasty was the descendant of merchants, who were responsible for using Mars for divination, so they could foresee the occurrence of fires.

古文：贤君见变，能修道以除凶；乱君亡象，天不谴告，故不可必也。
现代文：贤德的君主看到天象的变化，能够以道治国来防止灾凶；昏乱的君主则看不到天象，天帝不会预先警告他，所以说不是什么时候都可预见天道的。
English: A virtuous monarch sees the changes in the celestial bodies and can prevent disasters by governing the country in the right way; a confused monarch does not see the celestial bodies, and the Heavenly Emperor will not warn him in advance, so it is not always possible to foresee the heavenly path.

古文：三十年 五月甲午，宋灾 。
现代文：三十年 五月甲午曰，宋国发生火灾 。
English: Thirty years ago, on the afternoon of May 1, a fire broke out in Song.

古文：董仲舒以为伯姬如宋五年，宋恭公卒，伯姬幽居守节三十余年，又忧伤国家之患祸，积阴生阳，故火生灾也。
现代文：董仲舒认为，鲁国伯姬嫁到宋国五年，宋恭公去世，伯姬幽居深宫守节三十多年，还为国家的祸乱忧伤，这样就积阴而生阳，所以发生了火灾。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Lu Guoboji was married to Song Guo for five years, Song Gonggong died, Baoji lived in seclusion for more than 30 years to keep the festival, and was also saddened by the country's calamity, thus accumulating the yin and giving birth to the yang, so a fire occurred.

古文：刘向以为先是宋公听谗而杀大子座，应火不炎上之罚也。
现代文：刘向认为这是先前宋公听信谗言而杀了太子痤，从而应了火不炎上的惩罚。
English: Liu Xiang thought that this was because Song Gong had previously listened to and killed the prince, and thus deserved the punishment.

古文：《左氏传》昭公六年 六月丙戌，郑灾 。
现代文：《左氏传》载，昭公六年 六月丙戌曰，郑国发生火灾 。
English: "The Legend of Zuo," written in the sixth year of Zhaogong's reign, says that a fire broke out in Zheng.

古文：是春三月，郑人铸刑书。
现代文：在遣一年春三月，郑国人把刑法条款铸刻在鼎上。
English: In the spring and March of the first year of the Emperor's reign, the people of Zheng engraved the articles of the Criminal Law on the crown.

古文：士文伯曰： 火见，郑其火乎？
现代文：晋国大夫士文伯说： 火星出现在天空，郑国将要发生火灾了吧？
English: Jin Guo doctor Wen Bo said: Mars appeared in the sky, Zheng Guo is about to have a fire, right?

古文：火未出而作火以铸刑器，臧争辟焉。火而象之，不火何为？ 
现代文：当火星还没出现的时候，他们那裹就用火冶炼铸成了载有法律的器具，法设而下争，现在出现了火星的天象，不预示着火灾还会预示什么呢？ 
English: When Mars had not yet appeared, they used fire to smelt and cast an instrument containing the law. The law was set and fought, and now the Martian sky has appeared. If it does not foreshadow fire, what else will it foreshadow?

古文：说曰：火星出于周五月，而郑以三月作火铸鼎，刻刑辟书，以为民约，是为刑器争辟，故火星出，与五行之火争明为灾，其象然也，又弃法律之占也。
现代文：解释说：火星出现在周朝的五月，而郑国在三月起火冶炼铸造大鼎，刻上法律条文，作为民众遵守的约规，造就是寓刑之器、藏争之法。所以火星出现了，要与五行的火竞争，看哪个更明亮，发生了火灾。这一天象就是这个意思。他们又放弃丁关于法律的占卜。
English: Explained: Mars appeared in the Zhou Dynasty in May, and Zheng Guo started a fire in March, smelting and casting a large tripod, engraving legal provisions, as a covenant for the people to abide by, creating an instrument of torture, the law of hiding. So Mars appeared, competing with the fire of the five elements to see which was brighter, and a fire occurred. This day is like that. They also abandoned Ding's divination about the law.

古文：不书于经，时不告鲁也。
现代文：这件事情没载于《春秋经》，是因为当时郑国没有通告鲁国。
English: This matter was not recorded in the Spring and Autumn Annals because Zheng did not inform Lu at that time.

古文：九年 夏四月，陈火 。
现代文：九年 夏季四月，陈国发生火灾 。
English: In the summer of April, a fire broke out in Chen Guo.

古文：董仲舒以为陈夏征舒杀君，楚严王托欲为陈讨贼，陈国辟门而待之，至因灭陈。
现代文：董仲舒认为：陈国的夏征舒杀了他的国君，楚严王藉此事要为陈国讨伐贼寇，陈国打开国门以待楚军的到来，楚军来到之后就灭掉了陈国。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that: Xia Zhengshu of Chen killed his sovereign, and King Chu Yan used this event to fight the bandits for Chen. Chen opened the gates of the country to wait for the arrival of the Chu army, and after the arrival of the Chu army, he eliminated Chen.

古文：陈臣子尤毒恨甚，极阴生阳，故致火灾。
现代文：陈国的臣子太毒太狠了，阴毒至极而生阳，从而造成火灾。
English: Chen Guo's vassal was too poisonous and cruel, and the poison was so extreme that it caused a fire.

古文：刘向以为先是陈侯弟招杀陈太子偃师，皆外事，不因其宫馆者，略之也。
现代文：刘向认为：是在此之前陈侯的弟弟公子招杀了陈国的太子偃师，这些都是郊祭之事，没有引起宫馆火灾，所以略而不记。
English: Liu Xiang thought: it was before this that Chen Hou's younger brother, Gongzi Ram, invited and killed Chen Guo's prince, Zongshi. These were all suburban festivals and did not cause the palace fire, so he did not remember.

古文：八年十月壬午，楚师灭陈，《春秋》不与蛮夷灭中国，故复书陈火也。
现代文：昭公八年十月壬午曰，楚国出师减了陈国，《春秋经》不赞赏蛮族的楚国灭掉中原的陈国，所以虽然陈国已被灭，还是记为速国发生火灾。
English: In the afternoon of October in the 8th year of Zhaogong, Chu State sent a division to reduce Chen State. "Spring and Autumn Annals" did not appreciate the barbarian Chu State's destruction of Chen State in the Central Plains, so although Chen State had been destroyed, it was still recorded as a fire in Hefei State.

古文：《左氏经》曰 陈灾 。
现代文：左氏所引的《春秋经》记为 陈灾 。
English: The "Spring and Autumn Classic" quoted by Mr. Zuo is recorded as Chen Zhai.

古文：《传》曰 郑裨灶曰： 五年，陈将复封，封五十二年而遂亡。 
现代文：《左氏传》说： 郑国大夫裨灶说： 五年后，陈国将要再被封立为国，封立为国五十二年然后便灭亡。 
English: "The Biography of Zuo" said: Zheng Guofei said: "Five years later, Chen Guo will be re-established as a country, and it will be fifty-two years after the establishment of the country, and then it will perish.

古文：子产问其故，对曰： 陈，水属也。
现代文：大夫子产询问这其中的缘故，回答说： 陈国是属水的国家。
English: When asked the reason for this, the doctor replied: "Chen is a country of water.

古文：火，水妃也，而楚所相也。
现代文：火是水的妃配，也正是楚国所主治。
English: Fire is the consort of water, and it is governed by the State of Chu.

古文：今火出而火陈，逐楚而建陈也。
现代文：现在大火星出现，陈国发生火灾，这就意味着要驱逐楚国而建立陈国了。
English: Now that the Great Mars has appeared and a fire has broken out in the State of Chen, this means that the State of Chu is to be expelled and the State of Chen is to be established.

古文：妃以五成，故曰五年。
现代文：阴阳五行的配合都是以五这个数完成的，所以说是五年之后。
English: The cooperation of yin, yang and five elements is completed with the number five, so it is said to be five years later.

古文：岁五及鹑火，而后陈卒亡，楚克有之，天之道也。  
现代文：岁星五年而到鹑火星，而以后陈国终于灭亡，楚国战胜而并吞陈国，那也是天道所定。  
English: The five-year star moved to Mars, and after that, Chen finally perished, and Chu conquered and annexed Chen, which was also determined by heaven.

古文：说曰：颛顼以水王，陈其族也。
现代文：解释说：颛顼因做水官而为王，陈国是其后裔。
English: He explained: Zou was king because he was a naval officer, and Chen Guo was his descendant.

古文：今兹岁在星纪，后五年在大梁。
现代文：现在岁星在星纪，五年后在大梁。
English: Now the year star is in the sidereal period, and in five years it will be in the meridian.

古文：大梁，昴也。
现代文：大梁即昴星，在金牛星座。
English: Arcturus, the giant, is in the constellation Taurus.

古文：金为水宗，得其宗而昌，故曰 五年陈将复封 。
现代文：金是水的宗本，水得其宗本而昌盛，所以说： 五年后陈国就要复国。 
English: Gold is the ancestor of water, and water is prosperous because of its ancestor. Therefore, it is said: In five years, Chen will be restored to power.

古文：楚之先为火正，故曰 楚所相也 。
现代文：楚国先人祝融是火正，所以说火星 楚国所主治 。
English: The ancestors of the State of Chu were fiercely loyal to Zhu Rong, so it is said that Mars ruled the State of Chu.

古文：天以一生水，地以二生火，天以三生木，地以四生金，天以五生土。
现代文：天用一生水，地用二生火，天用三生木，地用四生金，天用五生土。
English: Heaven uses water for one lifetime, earth uses fire for two lifetimes, heaven uses wood for three lifetimes, earth uses gold for four lifetimes, and heaven uses earth for five lifetimes.

古文：五位皆以五而合，而阴阳易位，故曰 妃以五成 。
现代文：水、火、木、金、土这五位都用五相合，而由阴阳交换位次，所以说 配合都是用五这个数完成的 。
English: The five elements of water, fire, wood, gold, and earth are all combined using the number five, and yin and yang are interchanged, so the combination is completed using the number five.

古文：然则水之大数六，火七，木八，金九，土十。
现代文：然而水的大数就是六了，火的大数是七，木的大数是八，金的大数是九，土的大数是十。
English: But the number of water is six, the number of fire is seven, the number of wood is eight, the number of gold is nine, and the number of earth is ten.

古文：故水以天一为火二牡，木以天三为土十牡，土以天五为水六牡，火以天上为金四牡，金以天九为木八牡。
现代文：所以水以天一是火二的牡，木以天三是土十的牡，土以天五是水六的牡，火以天七是金四的牡，金以天九是木八的牡。
English: Therefore, water with heaven one is fire two, wood with heaven three is earth ten, earth with heaven five is water six, fire with heaven seven is gold four, and gold with heaven nine is wood eight.

古文：阳奇为牡，阴耦为妃。
现代文：阳奇即单数叫做牡，阴偶即双数叫做妃配。
English: Yangqi, that is, the singular, is called 牡, and the dual, that is, the dual, is called 妃配.

古文：故曰 水，火之牡也；火，水妃也 。
现代文：所以说 水是火的牡；火是水的妃 。
English: Therefore, water is the consort of fire, and fire is the consort of water.

古文：于《易》， 坎 为水，为中男， 离 为火，为中女，盖取诸此也。
现代文：在《易经》上，《坎位》为水，为次子，《离位》为火，为次女，可能就是由此而来的。
English: In the I Ching, "Kamchi" means water and is the second son, and "Wangchi" means fire and is the second daughter, which may be the reason.

古文：自大梁四岁而及鹑火，四周四十八岁，凡五及鹑火，五十二年而陈卒亡。
现代文：从大梁星四年而到鹑火星，然后再经过四个周期共四十八年，加上开始的那一次，共五次到鹑火星，四加四十八共五十二年然后陈国终于灭亡。
English: From the four years of the Great Star to the Mars, and then through four cycles totaling forty-eight years, plus the first time, a total of five times to Mars, four plus forty-eight totaling fifty-two years, and then Chen Guo finally perished.

古文：火盛水衰，故曰 天之道也 。
现代文：火盛水衰，所以说 天道所定 。
English: Fire and water balance each other, so it is said to be determined by heaven.

古文：哀公十七年七月己卯，楚灭陈。
现代文：后来鲁哀公十七年七月己卯日，楚国灭了陈国。
English: Later, in July of the seventeenth year of King Lu Ye, on the day of his death, the State of Chu destroyed the State of Chen.

古文：昭十八年 五月壬午，宋、卫、陈、郑灾 。
现代文：昭公十八年 五月壬午曰，宋、卫、陈、郑四国发生火灾 。
English: In the afternoon of May in the 18th year of Zhaogong, a fire broke out in Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng.

古文：董仲舒以为象王室将乱，天下莫救，故灾四国，言亡四方也。
现代文：董仲舒认为这是预兆周王室要发生动乱，天下无人去救，所以火灾降及四国，寓言四方的过失。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that this was an omen that the Zhou royal family would be in turmoil, and no one in the world would come to the rescue, so the fire fell on Shikoku, alleging the fault of the four parties.

古文：又宋、卫、陈、郑之君皆荒淫于乐，不恤国政，与周室同行。
现代文：再者，宋、卫、陈、郑四之君都荒淫于享乐，不顾及国家的政事，与周王室同行。
English: Furthermore, the four princes Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng all indulged in pleasure, disregarding the country's political affairs, and accompanied the Zhou royal family.

古文：阳失节则火灾出，是以同日灾也。
现代文：阳气失去节制就发生火灾，所以同一天遭灾。
English: If yang loses its temper, a fire will occur, so it will be a disaster on the same day.

古文：刘向以为，宋、陈，王者之后；卫、郑，周同姓也。
现代文：刘向认为，宋、陈二国，是古代王国的后裔。卫、郑两国是周王朝的同姓。
English: Liu Xiang believes that Song and Chen are the descendants of the ancient kingdoms, while Wei and Zheng are the same surnames of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：时周景王老，刘子、单子事王子猛，尹氏、召伯、毛伯事王子晁。
现代文：当时周景王年纪老了，周大夫刘子和单子拥护周王的太子猛，尹氏、召伯、毛伯三位大夫则拥护周王的另一个儿子鼂。
English: At that time, Zhou Jing Wang was old. Zhou's doctors Liu Zi and Shan Zi supported Zhou's Prince Takeshi, while the three doctors Yin, Zhao Bo, and Mao Bo supported Zhou's other son, Zou.

古文：子晁，楚之出也。
现代文：鼂是楚王的外甥。
English: Gong is the nephew of King Chu.

古文：及宋、卫、陈、郑亦皆外附于楚，亡尊周室之心。
现代文：至于宋、卫、陈、郑四国也都对外依附楚国，没有尊崇周天子的心思。
English: As for the four states of Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng, they also depended on Chu and did not respect Zhou Tianzi.

古文：后三年，景王崩，王室乱，故天灾四国。
现代文：三年后，周景王驾崩，周王室大乱，所以天灾降于四国。
English: Three years later, King Zhou Jing passed away, and the Zhou royal family was in turmoil, so natural disasters fell on Shikoku.

古文：天戒若曰，不救周，反从楚，废世子，立不正，以害王室，明同罪也。
现代文：天帝的警告似乎在说，不援救周王室，反而跟着蛮夷楚国，进行废黜太子，立庶子为周王，为害王室的活动，这分明是一起犯罪。
English: The heavenly emperor's warning seemed to say that, instead of rescuing the Zhou royal family, they would follow the barbarian Chu state, depose the crown prince, and set up an illegitimate son as King Zhou, activities that would harm the royal family. This was clearly a crime.

古文：定公二年 五月，雉门及两观灾 。
现代文：定公二年 五月，宫城的南门和两个阙楼遭到火灾 。
English: In May of the second year of King Sejong, the south gate and two towers of Miyagi were destroyed by fire.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为此皆奢僭过度者也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向都认为这都是对那些过度奢侈僭越者的报应。
English: Both Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believe that this is retribution for those who are excessively extravagant.

古文：先是，季氏逐昭公，昭公死于外。
现代文：在此之前，季氏驱逐了鲁昭公，鲁昭公死于外地。
English: Prior to this, Ji expelled Lu Zhaogong, and Lu Zhaogong died abroad.

古文：定公即位，既不能诛季氏，又用其邪说，淫于女乐，而退孔子。
现代文：鲁定公即位，已然不诛罚季氏，反而信用季氏的邪恶的主意，沉湎于女乐，从而使孔子退避而离去。
English: When Ruding ascended the throne, he did not hesitate to punish the Ji clan, but on the contrary, he trusted the evil idea of the Ji clan and indulged in women's music, thus causing Confucius to retreat and leave.

古文：天戒若曰，去高显而奢僭者。
现代文：天帝的谴告似乎在说，除掉这些地位高贵显要但却奢侈僭越的人。
English: God's rebuke seems to say, get rid of these high-ranking but extravagant people.

古文：一曰，门阙，号令所由出也，今舍大圣而纵有罪，亡以出号令矣。
现代文：一种说法是，门阙是发布号令的地方，现在舍弃伟大的圣人而放纵犯罪的人，没什么号令可发了。
English: One theory is that the lintel is the place to give orders, and now that the great saint has been abandoned, those who indulge in crime have no orders to give.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君不思道，厥妖火烧宫 。
现代文：京房的《易传》说： 国君不向往道，由之而生的妖异就是火烧宗庙。 
English: Kyofusa's "Easy Biography" says: The sovereign does not yearn for the past, and the strange phenomenon that arises from this is the burning of the ancestral temple.

古文：哀公三年 五月辛卯，桓、釐宫灾。 
现代文：哀公三年 五月辛卯曰，祭祀鲁桓公、鲁僖公的两座宗庙被烧 。
English: In the third year of mourning, in May, Xinwu said that the two ancestral temples dedicated to Lu Huan and Lu Yao were burned.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为此二宫不当立，违礼者也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向都认为这两座庙不应当建立，因为这违反了礼制。
English: Both Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believe that the two temples should not be built, as this violates the etiquette.

古文：哀公又以季氏之故不用孔子。
现代文：当时鲁哀公又因为信用季氏的缘故不任用于子。
English: At that time, Lu Aigong did not allow him to have a son because of the credibility of the Ji clan.

古文：孔子在陈闻鲁灾，曰： 其桓、之宫乎！ 
现代文：孔子在陈国听到鲁塱发生火灾的消息，就说： 大概被烧的是桓、僖二公的两座宗庙吧！ 
English: When Confucius heard the news of a fire in Lucheng in Chen Province, he said, "It is probably the two ancestral temples of Huan and Xing Er that were burned!"

古文：以为桓，季氏之所出，釐，使季氏世卿者也。
现代文：因为鲁桓公本是季氏的直系之祖，鲁僖公则是让季氏做世代承袭卿大夫的国君。
English: Because Lu Kuan was the direct ancestor of the Ji clan, and Lu Yao was the sovereign who made the Ji clan the heir to the title of doctor.

古文：四年 六月辛丑，毫社灾 。
现代文：四年 六月辛丑曰，亳社发生火灾 。
English: In June of the same year, a fire broke out in Shinsha.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为亡国之社，所以为戒也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，亳社就是已亡之国即星适的社庙，立这一社庙本来是为了使当世国君经常以亡殷为鉴，小心谨慎治理国家。
English: According to Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang, Xinshe is the temple of the deceased country, that is, the temple of the deceased country. This temple was originally established so that the current ruler could always take the death of Yin as a model and carefully govern the country.

古文：天戒若曰，国将危亡，不用戒矣。
现代文：天帝降灾的告诫似乎在说，国家就有危机将亡了，不必再以此社庙为借鉴了。
English: God's warning of disaster seems to say that the country is on the verge of a crisis, and it is no longer necessary to use this temple as a reference.

古文：《春秋》火灾，屡于定、哀之间，不用圣人而纵骄臣，将以亡国，不明甚也。
现代文：《春秋经》上所记的火灾，多次发生在鲁定公、鲁哀公两朝之间，这是因为当时国君不任用圣人而放纵骄横之臣，将因此导致亡国，他们太糊涂了。
English: The fires recorded in the "Spring and Autumn Classic" occurred many times between the two dynasties of King Luding and King Ruai. This was because at that time the sovereign did not appoint a saint and indulged the arrogant vassal, which would lead to the ruin of the country. They were too confused.

古文：一曰，天生孔子，非为定、哀也，盖失礼不明，火灾应之，自然象也。
现代文：有一种说法是，天帝降生孔子于世上，不是为了拯救鲁定公、鲁哀公，一般地说，不遵礼制治国不清明，就会有火灾的报应，这是自然而然的天意之象。
English: There is a saying that the Heavenly Emperor gave birth to Confucius in the world, not in order to save Lu Ding Gong and Lu Ye Gong. Generally speaking, if you do not follow the rules of etiquette and do not govern the country clearly, there will be fire retribution. This is a natural sign of God's will.

古文：高后元年五月丙申，赵丛台灾。
现代文：高后元年五月丙申曰，趟国的丛台发生火灾。
English: After high school, in May of the first year of the year, he said that a fire broke out in the country.

古文：刘向以为，是时吕氏女为赵王后，嫉妒，将为谗口以害赵王。
现代文：刘向认为，当时吕氏的女儿做了赵王的王后，因嫉妒赵王对其他王妃的宠爱，要向高后进奏谗言来陷害赵王。
English: Liu Xiang believed that at that time, Lu's daughter became the queen of King Zhao, and because she was jealous of King Zhao's love for other princesses, she wanted to frame King Zhao by playing a trick on the high queen.

古文：王不寤焉，卒见幽杀。
现代文：趟王没有醒悟，后来终于被高后囚禁杀害。
English: However, he did not come to his senses and was eventually imprisoned and killed by Gao Hou.

古文：惠帝四年十月乙亥，未央宫凌室灾；丙子，织室灾。
现代文：惠帝四年十月乙亥曰，未央宫的藏冰屋子发生火灾，丙子日，织作室也发生火灾。
English: In October of the fourth year of Emperor Hui, there was a fire in the ice house of the Weiyang Palace, and on the third day, there was also a fire in the weaving room.

古文：刘向以为元年吕太后杀赵王如意，残戮其母戚夫人。
现代文：刘向认为，惠帝元年吕太后杀了赵王刘如意，残刑戮死趟王的母亲戚夫人。
English: Liu Xiang believes that in the first year of Hui Dynasty, Empress Dowager Lv killed Zhao Wang Liu Ruyi, and brutally killed Wang's mother and wife.

古文：是岁十月壬寅，太后立帝姊鲁元公主女为皇后。
现代文：当年即四年十月壬寅曰，太后册立惠帝姐姐鲁元公主的女儿为皇后。
English: That year, in October of the fourth year, the Empress Dowager proclaimed the daughter of Emperor Hui's sister, Princess Lu Yuan, as empress.

古文：其乙亥，凌室灾。明日，织室灾。
现代文：当月乙亥曰，藏冰的屋子起火，第二天，织作室又起火。
English: That month, the ice house caught fire, and the next day, the weaving room caught fire again.

古文：凌室所以供养饮食，织室所以奉宗庙衣服，与《春秋》御廪同义。
现代文：藏冰之室是用以供养饮食的地方，织作之室是用以制作供奉宗庙所需衣服的地方，遣两处与《春秋经》所说的皇宫的粮仓的性质相同。
English: The room for storing ice is a place for providing food and drink, and the room for weaving is a place for making clothes needed for the temple. These two places have the same nature as the granary of the imperial palace mentioned in the "Spring and Autumn Annals."

古文：天戒若曰，皇后亡奉宗庙之德，将绝祭祀。
现代文：天帝的谴告似乎是说，皇后失去供奉宗庙的应有品德，将会失去后人的祭祀。
English: The heavenly emperor's rebuke seems to be saying that if the empress loses the proper character of offering to the ancestral temple, she will lose the sacrificial rites of posterity.

古文：其后，皇后亡子，后宫美人有男，太后使皇后名之，而杀其母。
现代文：此后，这位皇后没有儿子，后宫美人生有男孩，太后就让皇后把这个男孩说成是自己生的儿子，然后杀了男孩的母亲。
English: After that, the queen did not have a son, and the harem beauty gave birth to a boy, and the queen mother told the queen to say that the boy was her own son, and then killed the boy's mother.

古文：惠帝崩，嗣子立，有怨言，太后废之，更立吕氏子弘为少帝。
现代文：惠帝驾崩，被立为嗣子的男孩即位，知道亲母被害之事而发怨愤之言，太后就把他废掉，另立实为吕氏之子的刘弘为少帝。
English: Hui Di passed away, and the boy who was set up as the heir ascended the throne. Knowing that his mother had been killed, Liu Hong, the son of Lü, was set up as the young emperor.

古文：赖大臣共诛诸吕而立文帝，惠后幽废。
现代文：吕太后死后，仰仗各元勋大臣之力一起诛灭了吕氏各王侯，立了孝文帝。吕太后所立的这位惠帝之后终被囚禁废黜。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Lv, she relied on the power of the ministers of the Yuan Dynasty to annihilate the princes of the Lv dynasty and establish Emperor Xiaowen. The Emperor Hui, who was established by Empress Dowager Lv, was eventually imprisoned and deposed.

古文：文帝七年六月癸酉，未央宫东阙罘思灾。
现代文：汉孝文帝七年六月癸酉日，未央宫束阙楼的叫做罘思的花格屏墙发生火灾。
English: On the third day of June in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Han Xiaowen, a fire broke out in the flower-patterned screen wall of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：刘向以为，东阙所以朝诸侯之门也，罘思在其外，诸侯之象也。
现代文：刘向认为，东阙是用以会见诸侯的大门，罘思在门的外边，是诸侯的象征。
English: Liu Xiang believes that Donglu is the gate used to meet the princes, and the dragonfly on the outside of the gate is the symbol of the princes.

古文：汉兴，大封诸侯王，连城数十。
现代文：汉朝建立后，大封诸侯王，各王都有数十座城池相连属。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the daifeng princes, each king has dozens of castles connected to each other.

古文：文帝即位，贾谊等以为违古制度，必将叛逆。
现代文：孝文帝即位后，买谊等人认为这种情况是违反古代封建制度的，一定会引起叛乱。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, Buyi and others believed that this situation was a violation of the ancient feudal system and would certainly cause a rebellion.

古文：先是，济北、淮南王皆谋反，其后吴、楚七国举兵而诛。
现代文：在这之前，济北、淮南两王都阴谋叛乱，此后吴楚等七国举兵造，终于被诛灭。
English: Prior to this, the two kings of Jibei and Huainan plotted a rebellion, after which Wu Chu and other seven countries raised armies and were finally annihilated.

古文：景帝中五年八月己酉，未央宫东阙灾。
现代文：孝景帝中元五年八月己酉曰，未央宫束阙楼发生火灾。
English: In August of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, a fire broke out in the Weiyang Palace.

古文：先是，栗太子废为临江王，以罪征诣中尉，自杀。
现代文：在此之前，栗太子被废黜，贬为临江王，又因为犯罪被征召到中尉听审，因而自杀。
English: Prior to this, Crown Prince Li was dethroned and demoted to the position of King of Linjiang. He was also summoned to a lieutenant's hearing for committing a crime, and thus committed suicide.

古文：丞相条侯周亚夫以不合旨称疾免，后二年下狱死。
现代文：丞相条侯周亚夫因为不附和皇帝的旨意，以有病为由免去官职，两年后被收禁下狱而死。
English: Because he did not go along with the emperor's will, Zhou Yafu was removed from office on the grounds that he was ill. Two years later, he was imprisoned and died.

古文：武帝建元六年六月丁酉，辽东高庙灾。
现代文：汉孝武帝建元六年六月丁酉，辽东的高庙发生火灾。
English: In June of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Han Xiaowu, a fire broke out at Gao Miao Temple in Liaodong.

古文：四月壬子，高园便殿火。
现代文：四月壬子，高园的便殿着火。
English: In April, the toilet block of the high school caught fire.

古文：董仲舒对曰： 《春秋》之道举往以明来，是故天下有物，视《春秋》所举与同比者，精微眇以存其意，通伦类以贯其理，天地之变，国家之事，粲然皆见，亡所疑矣。
现代文：董仲舒对答武帝说： 《春秋经》的意义在于举以往的事例来明示未来之事。所以对天下各种事物，要比照《春秋经》中所举的与之同类的事例，精心观察细微处寓存的含意，触类旁通地了解其中的道理，这样，天地间的变化，国家的各种事情，便可一览无余，全都明白了。
English: Dong Zhongshu said to Emperor Taowu: "The significance of the Spring and Autumn Annals is to cite past examples to indicate future things. Therefore, for all kinds of things in the world, it is better to follow the examples of the same kind cited in the Spring and Autumn Annals, carefully observe the subtle implication, and understand the truth through analogy. In this way, the changes between heaven and earth, and all kinds of things in the country, can be seen at a glance, and everything is understood.

古文：按《春秋》鲁定公、哀公时，季氏之恶已孰，而孔子之圣方盛。
现代文：考查《春秋经》，鲁定公、鲁哀公的时候，季氏的恶势力已经形成，而孔子的圣德之光正盛。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn Classic," the evil forces of the Ji clan had already formed by the time of Lu Ding Gong and Lu Ye Gong, while the light of Confucius's holiness was in full bloom.

古文：夫以盛圣而易孰恶，季孙虽重，鲁君虽轻，其势可成也。
现代文：用强盛的圣德来克服而替代形成的恶势力，虽然当时季孙氏的权势重，鲁君的权势轻，从形势上看也是可能的。
English: It is also possible from the perspective of the situation to use the strong virtue to overcome and replace the evil forces that were formed, although at that time the influence of the Ji Sun clan was heavy and the influence of Lu Jun was light.

古文：故字公二年五月两观灾。
现代文：所以定公二年五月两阙楼发生火灾。
English: Therefore, a fire broke out in the two-story building in May of the same year.

古文：两观，僭礼之物。天灾之者，若曰，僭礼之臣可以去。
现代文：两阙楼是僭越礼制之物，天帝降灾烧掉它们，似乎在说，僭违礼制之臣可以除掉。
English: The two towers were the result of violating the etiquette, and the emperor burned them, as if to say that those who violated the etiquette could be eliminated.

古文：已见罪征，而后告可去，此天意也。
现代文：罪证已出现了，然后又告诉可以除掉，造就是天意。
English: The incriminating evidence has already appeared, and then it is told that it can be eliminated, and creation is the will of heaven.

古文：定公不知省。
现代文：鲁定公没有醒悟过来。
English: Luding didn't come to his senses.

古文：至哀公三年五月，桓宫、釐宫灾。
现代文：到了鲁哀公三年五月，桓宫、僖宫毁于火灾。
English: In May of the third year of King Luei's reign, the Palace of the Dragon and the Palace of the Dragon were destroyed by fire.

古文：二者同事，所为一也，若曰燔贵而去不义云尔。
现代文：这两起火灾性质相同，所要说明的意思一样，似乎是说烧掉显贵除掉不义之徒。
English: The two fires are of the same nature, and the meaning to be explained is the same, which seems to be to say that the nobles are burned and the evildoers are eliminated.

古文：哀公未能见，故四年六月毫社灾。
现代文：鲁哀公未能觉察，所以四年六月亳社遭受火灾。
English: Lu Aigong failed to notice, so in June of the fourth year, Shisha suffered a fire.

古文：两观、桓、釐庙、毫社，四者皆不当立，天皆燔其不当立者以示鲁，欲其去乱臣而用圣人也。
现代文：两阙楼，桓公、僖公两庙、亳社，这四个建筑都不应当建立或留存，这几次火灾，天帝都是以烧掉不应当存立的东西来启示鲁君，让他除掉乱臣而任用圣人。
English: These four buildings should not have been built or preserved: the two pagodas, the temple of King Kan, the temple of King Min, and the shrine of King Min. These fires were caused by the heavenly emperor to burn things that should not exist in order to enlighten Lu Jun, so that he could get rid of the unruly ministers and appoint saints.

古文：季氏亡道久矣，前是天不见灾者，鲁未有贤圣臣，虽欲去季孙，其力不能，昭公是也。
现代文：季氏乱政无道已很久了，在此之前天帝不降灾的原因，是鲁国还没有贤圣之臣，虽然想除掉季孙，而自己的力量不足以办到，鲁昭公就是这样。
English: It has been a long time since Ji's chaotic government had no way out. Before this, the reason why the heavenly emperor did not bring disaster was that Lu did not yet have a wise and holy vassal. Although he wanted to get rid of Ji's grandson, his own strength was not enough to do it. Lu Zhaogong was like this.

古文：至定、哀乃见之，其时可也。
现代文：到了定公、哀公之时才出现天灾，是因为这时可以办到了。
English: It is only at the time of public mourning and mourning that natural disasters occur, because at this time it can be done.

古文：不时不见，天之道也。
现代文：不到适当的时候不出现，这止是天道的体现。
English: If you don't show up at the right time, it's just a manifestation of the heavenly way.

古文：今高庙不当居辽东，高园殿不当居陵旁，于礼亦不当立，与鲁所灾同。
现代文：今天高庙不应当建在辽东，高园的便殿不应当建在陵墓的旁边，按礼制说也不应当建立，与春秋鲁国时因火灾而毁的那些建筑一样。
English: Today, the high temple should not be built in Liaodong, the high garden should not be built next to the mausoleum, and according to the etiquette, it should not be built, just like those buildings that were destroyed by fire in the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：其不当立久矣，至于陛下时天乃灾之者，殆其时可也。
现代文：辽东高庙与高园便殿不应建寺本来是很久的事了，到了陛下在位时天才降灾的原因，大概也是到了可以应天道而行的时候了。
English: It has been a long time since the Liaodong High Temple and the Gaoyuan Ben Hall should not have been built. The reason why the disaster only occurred when His Majesty was on the throne is probably that it is time to follow the path of heaven.

古文：昔秦受亡周之敝，而亡以化之；汉受亡秦之敝，又亡以化之。
现代文：过去，秦朝承受了衰亡之周朝的破败，而没有消化革除；汉朝承受了丧亡之秦的破败，也没有加以转化。
English: In the past, the Qin Dynasty suffered the ruin of the decadent Zhou Dynasty, but did not digest and eliminate it; the Han Dynasty suffered the ruin of the defeated Qin Dynasty, but did not transform it.

古文：夫继二敝之后，承其下流，兼受其猥，难治甚矣。
现代文：若说继周、秦两朝破败之后，承受了他们的遗留影响，也接受了他们的积弊麻烦，太难治理了。
English: If, after the collapse of the Zhou and Qin Dynasties, we have to bear their residual influence and accept their accumulated problems, it will be too difficult to govern.

古文：又多兄弟亲戚骨肉之连，骄扬奢侈，恣睢者众，所谓重难之时者也。
现代文：又加上遣么多兄弟亲戚诸王，骨肉相连之亲，其中骄横张扬、奢侈僭越、无法无天者很多，正是所谓积重难返的时候。
English: In addition, how many brothers, relatives, kings, and flesh-and-blood relatives were sent, many of whom were arrogant, extravagant, and lawless. It was the so-called time of no return.

古文：陛下正当大敝之后，又遭重难之时，甚可忧也。
现代文：陛下正当天下的重大破败之后，又赶上本朝亲贵骄横、积重难返之时，实在是太让人忧虑了。
English: It is very worrisome that after the great defeat of His Majesty's just world, we have reached the time when the arrogance of this dynasty is so strong that it is hard to turn back.

古文：故天灾若语陛下： 当今之世，虽敝而重难，非以太平至公，不能治出。
现代文：所以天降火灾，似乎在告诉陛下： 现在这个时候，面临天下的破败又加上本朝积累下的各种难题，非以大刀阔斧和大公无私的魄力来整顿不可。
English: Therefore, the sky falling fire seems to be telling His Majesty: At this time, facing the ruin of the world and the various problems accumulated by this dynasty, it is necessary to rectify with drastic measures and selfless courage.

古文：视亲戚贵属在诸侯远正最甚者，忍而诛之，如吾燔辽东高庙乃可；视近臣在国中处旁仄及贵而不正者，忍而诛之，如吾燔高园殿乃可 云尔。
现代文：先挑选宗室诸王、皇亲国戚在诸侯中行为最不正当、最不安分的，不留情面地除掉，就像我烧辽东高庙这样就可以了；再看在朝廷中是哪些亲近之臣，在一旁地位显贵而为人不正，也毫不留情地诛而灭之，像我烧掉高园的便殿这样，就可以了。 
English: First of all, it is enough to select the kings of the royal families, the relatives of the emperors and the relatives of the country who have the most unjust and restless behavior among the princes, and mercilessly eliminate them, just as I burned the Liaodong High Temple. Then, it is enough to see which close vassals in the imperial court have a prominent position and are dishonest, and also mercilessly exterminate them, like I burned the toilet of the high garden.

古文：此天意也。罪在外者天灾外，罪在内者天灾内，燔甚罪当重，燔简罪当轻，承天意之道也。 
现代文：如此这般，在外地行为不正的，就是贵如高庙这样神圣不可侵犯的，都可降灾而烧掉，还用说那些诸侯王吗！在朝中行为不正的，就是显贵如高园便殿这般，都可降灾烧掉，何况对一般大臣！造就是天帝的意志啊。外有犯罪的诸侯，就降灾于外；内有犯罪之臣。就降灾于内。罪重烧得狠，罪轻就烧得轻一些。
English: In this way, those who act improperly in foreign countries, even if they are as sacred and inviolable as high temples, can be destroyed and burned, not to mention those princes and kings! Those who act improperly in the middle of the court, even if they are as eminent as high-ranking officials, can be destroyed and burned, not to mention the general ministers! Creation is the will of the heavenly emperor. If there are princes who commit crimes outside, they will be destroyed outside; if there are ministers who commit crimes inside, they will be destroyed inside. If the sins are heavy, they will be burned harder, and if they are light, they will be burned lighter.

古文：先是，淮南王安入朝，始与帝舅太尉武安侯田蚡有逆言。
现代文：遵承天帝之意就是这样。 在建元六年的两次火灾之前，淮南王刘安入朝，开始跟漠武帝的舅舅即太尉武安侯田蚣有叛逆之言。
English: Before the two fires in the sixth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Liu An, the king of Huainan, entered the imperial court and began to have rebellious words with Mu Wu's uncle, the captain Wu An Hou Tian.

古文：其后胶西于王、赵敬肃王、常山宪王皆数犯法，或至夷灭人家，药杀二千石，而淮南、衡山王遂谋反。
现代文：火灾之后胶西于王、趟敬肃王、常山宪王都多次犯法，有的甚至杀人全家，用药毒死二千石这样的地方长官，接着，淮南王、衡山王就阴谋造了。
English: After the fire, Jiaoxi Yu Wang, Wabi Keisui Wang, and Changshan Xian Wang all repeatedly violated the law, and some even killed their entire families, and poisoned local governors of 2,000 kilos with drugs. Then, Huainan Wang and Hengshan Wang conspired to create.

古文：胶东、江都王皆知其谋，阴治兵弩，欲以应之。
现代文：胶束王、江都王都参与这一谋划，暗中准备兵弩武器，准备起兵响应。
English: Both the King of Micelles and the King of Jiangdu took part in this plan, secretly preparing weapons for soldiers and preparing to raise an army in response.

古文：至元朔六年，乃发觉而伏辜。
现代文：到元朔六年，才被发觉而伏法处死。
English: It was not until the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty that he was discovered and put to death.

古文：时田分已死，不及诛。
现代文：这时田蚣已经死了，不能再处死法办。
English: By this time, Tian Xuan had already died, and the death penalty could no longer be carried out.

古文：上思仲舒前言，使仲舒弟子吕步舒持斧钺治淮南狱，以《春秋》谊颛断于外，不请。
现代文：汉武帝想起了董仲舒先前讲的那番话，于是就派董仲舒的学生吕步舒用严刑峻法查办淮南王谋反案，依《春秋》大义在外地独自断案判决，不用请示朝廷。
English: Emperor Hanwu remembered the words previously spoken by Dong Zhongshu, so he sent Dong Zhongshu's student Lü Bushu to investigate the countermeasures of Huainan Wang with severe punishments, and according to the "Spring and Autumn" great justice, independently adjudicate the case outside the country, without requesting the imperial court.

古文：既还奏事，上皆是之。
现代文：后来还朝奏报，汉武帝一概加以肯定。
English: Later, it was also reported in the morning, and Emperor Han Wu generally affirmed it.

古文：太初元年十一月乙酉，未央宫柏梁台灾。
现代文：太初元年十一月乙酉日，未央宫的柏梁台发生火灾。
English: In early November of the first year of the year, a fire broke out on the wooden platform of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：先是，大风发其屋，夏侯始昌先言其灾日。
现代文：先前，大风刮坏了那裹的屋子，夏侯始昌预先说出将要遭灾的日子。
English: Previously, high winds had damaged the wrapped house, and Xia Hou Shichang said in advance the day of the disaster.

古文：后有江充巫蛊卫太子事。
现代文：灾后发生了江充以巫蛊案陷害卫太子之事。
English: After the disaster, Jiang Chong framed the crown prince with the witchcraft case.

古文：征和二年春，涿郡铁官铸铁，铁销，皆飞上去，此火为变使之然也。
现代文：征和二年春天，涿郡铁官铸铁的时候，铁熔化，都飞上天，这是火发生变异造成的。
English: In the spring of the second year of Zheng He, when the iron official of Qixian County was casting iron, the iron melted and flew into the sky, which was caused by the mutation of fire.

古文：其三月，涿郡太守刘屈氂为丞相。
现代文：这年三月，涿郡太守刘屈厘做了丞相。
English: In March of this year, Liu Quli, the governor of Min County, became the prime minister.

古文：后月，巫蛊事兴，帝女诸邑公主、阳石公主、丞相公孙贺、子太仆敬声、平阳侯曹宗等皆下狱死。
现代文：一个月后，巫蛊案发起，漠武帝的女儿诸邑公主、阳石公主、丞相公孙贺、公孙贺之子太仆公孙敬声、平阳侯曹宗等人都被下狱而死。
English: A month later, the Wushan case was initiated, and Princess Zhuyi, Princess Yangshi, the daughter of Emperor Mu, the chancellor Gongsun He, Gongsun He's son, the servant Gongsun Keisheng, and the lord of Pingyang, Cao Zong, were all sent to prison and died.

古文：七月，使者江充掘蛊太子宫，太子与母皇后议，恐不能自明，乃杀充，举兵与丞相刘屈氂战，死者数万人，太子败走，至湖自杀。
现代文：七月，汉武帝任命的办案专使江充在太子宫掘寻蛊物，太子与其母卫皇后商议，害怕不能说明自己是无罪而受诬陷，就杀了江充，发兵与丞相刘屈厘对战，死了好几万人，后来太子失败而逃走，逃到湖县后自杀。
English: In July, the case officer appointed by Emperor Hanwu sent Jiang Chong to dig for stolen goods in the prince's palace. The prince discussed the case with his mother, Empress Wei. Fearing that he would not be able to prove that he was innocent and would be framed, he killed Jiang Chong. He sent soldiers to fight the prime minister, Liu Queli, and tens of thousands of people died. Later, the prince failed and fled, fleeing to Huxian and committing suicide.

古文：明年，屈氂复坐祝诅要斩，妻枭首也。
现代文：第二年，刘屈厘又因犯诅咒之罪而被腰斩，妻子也被砍头。
English: The following year, Liu Quli was beheaded for the crime of cursing, and his wife was also beheaded.

古文：成帝河平二年正月，沛那铁官铸铁，铁不下，隆隆如雷声，又如鼓音，工十三人惊走。
现代文：漠成帝河平二年正月，沛郡铁官铸铁时，铁下不来，炉子发出隆隆如雷的声音，又像有人擂鼓一样，十三个铸工都被吓跑了。
English: In the first month of the second year of Emperor Heping, when the iron official of Pei County cast iron, the iron did not come, the furnace emitted a rumbling sound, and it was like someone beating a drum. Thirteen foundries were scared away.

古文：音止，还视地，地陷数尺，炉分为十，一炉中销铁散如流星，皆上去，与征和二年同象，其夏，帝舅五人封列侯，号五侯。
现代文：声音停止以后，铸工回来往地上一看，发现地面下陷了好几尺，炉子一分为十，一座炉子裹的铁熔化飞散像流星一样，都上了天，与征和二年的景象相同。这年夏天，汉成帝的五个舅舅都封为列侯，号称五侯。
English: After the sound stopped, the foundry worker came back and looked at the ground, and found that the ground had sunk several feet, the furnace was divided into ten, and the iron wrapped around one furnace melted and scattered like a meteor, and all went up to the sky, the same as the scene in the second year of Zheng He. In the summer of this year, the five uncles of Emperor Han Chengdi were all made princes, known as the Five Princes.

古文：元舅王凤为大司马、大将军，秉政。
现代文：大舅王凤为大司马大将军执掌朝政。
English: His great-uncle, Wang Feng, was the general in charge of the imperial government.

古文：后二年，丞相王商与凤有隙，凤谮之，免官，自杀。
现代文：两年后，丞相王商与王凤发生矛盾，王凤诬告王商，王商被免职，后来自杀。
English: Two years later, the prime minister Wang Shang and Wang Feng had a conflict, Wang Feng falsely accused Wang Shang, Wang Shang was removed from office, and later committed suicide.

古文：明年，京兆尹王章讼商忠直，言凤颛权，凤诬章以大逆罪，下狱死。妻子徙合浦。
现代文：第二年，京兆尹王章上告说王商忠厚正直王凤专权霸道。王凤就以大逆之罪将王章下狱处死，妻子儿女流放合浦。
English: In the following year, King Zhang of Jingzha Yin reported to Wang Feng that Wang Shang was a loyal and honest person, and that Wang Feng was an autocratic tyrant. Wang Feng sentenced Wang Zhang to death for high treason, and his wife and children were exiled to Hapu.

古文：后许皇后坐巫蛊废，而赵飞燕为皇后，妹为昭仪，贼害皇子，成帝遂亡嗣。
现代文：来许皇后因巫蛊罪被废黜，于是赵飞燕做了皇后，她的妹妹被封为昭仪，她杀害了皇子，汉成帝因而绝嗣无后。
English: Empress Lai Hui was deposed for the crime of witchcraft, so Zhao Feiyan became the empress, her sister was named Zhaoyi, she killed the prince, and Emperor Hancheng had no heir.

古文：皇后、昭仪皆伏辜。
现代文：皇后、昭仪两姐妹都伏法处死。
English: Empress Dowager and two sisters, Zhao Yi, were all executed by hanging.

古文：一曰，铁飞属金不从革。
现代文：一种说法是，铁飞上天应属于金不从革即失去可熔可铸之性。
English: One argument is that iron flying into the sky should belong to gold, which loses its fusible and castable properties unless it is made of leather.

古文：昭帝元凤元年，燕城南门灾。
现代文：昭帝元凤元年，燕城南门发生火灾。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhao's reign, a fire broke out at the South Gate of Yancheng.

古文：刘向以为时燕王使邪臣通于汉，为谗贼，谋逆乱。
现代文：刘向认为，当时燕王正派邪臣奸细勾结朝廷大臣，进谗言施诡计，谋划叛乱。
English: Liu Xiang believed that at that time, Yan Wang sent his corrupt vassals to collude with the imperial court ministers, and plotted a rebellion.

古文：南门者，通汉道也。
现代文：燕城南门是通往漠长安之道。
English: Yancheng South Gate is the gateway to Chang'an Desert.

古文：天戒若曰，邪臣往来，为奸谗于汉，绝亡之道也。
现代文：天帝发出告诫似乎在说： 邪臣来来往往，对朝廷施行谗言挑拨，这是死路一条。 
English: The heavenly emperor's admonition seemed to say: Evil ministers often come and go, and they provoke the imperial court with insults. This is a dead end.

古文：燕王不寤，卒伏其辜。
现代文：燕王没醒悟，终于因罪伏法。
English: Yan Wang did not come to his senses, and was finally punished for his crime.

古文：元凤四年五月丁丑，孝文庙正殿灾。
现代文：元凤四年五月丁丑曰，漠孝文帝庙的正殿发生火灾。
English: In May of the fourth year of Yuan Feng, Ding Ug said that a fire broke out in the main hall of the Mo Xiaowen Temple.

古文：刘向认为，孝文，太宗之君，与成周宣榭火同义。
现代文：刘向认为，孝文帝是汉朝第二代皇帝即太宗之君，所以这次火灾与西周成王时宣榭着火意思相同。
English: Liu Xiang believes that Emperor Xiaowen is the second generation emperor of the Han Dynasty, that is, the prince of Taizong, so this fire has the same meaning as the Xuanwu fire when Xi Zhoucheng was king.

古文：先是，皇后父车骑将军上官安、安父左将军桀谋为逆，大将军霍光诛之。
现代文：在此之前，皇后的父亲车骑将军上官安、上官安的父亲左将军上官桀父子阴谋叛逆，大将军霍光把他们杀了。
English: Prior to this, the empress's father, General Zhang Guan'an, and his father, General Zuo Guan'an, conspired to rebel against their father and son, and General Huo Guang killed them.

古文：皇后以光外孙，年少不知，居位如故。
现代文：皇后因为是霍光的外孙女，又年纪小没参与这事，所以还照旧做皇后。
English: As the empress was Huo Guang's granddaughter and was too young to be involved in the matter, she continued to be the empress.

古文：光欲后有子，因上待疾医言，禁内后宫皆不得进，唯皇后颛寝。
现代文：霍光为让皇后生儿子，就上奏御医嘱咐之言：皇帝的居室，嫔妃们都不得进入，祇由皇后专房伴寝。
English: In order to let the empress give birth to a son, Huo Guang played the doctor's words: the emperor's bedroom, the concubines are not allowed to enter, only the empress's bedroom.

古文：皇后年六岁而立，十三年而昭帝崩，遂绝继嗣。
现代文：皇后是年仅六岁时册立的，做了十三年皇后，昭帝就驾崩了。于是就断绝了继嗣。
English: The empress was only six years old when she was registered, and after thirteen years as empress, Emperor Zhao died. So she cut off the heir.

古文：光执朝政，犹周公之摄也。
现代文：霍光执掌朝政，犹如西周时周公的摄政。
English: Huo Guang presided over the government of the dynasty, just as Xi Zhou was the regent of Zhou Gong.

古文：是岁正月，上加元服，通《诗》、《尚书》，有明哲之性。
现代文：元凤四年的正月，昭帝加冠。这时皇帝已通晓《诗经》、《尚书》，天性聪明。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Yuanfeng, Zhao Di was crowned. At this time, the emperor was already familiar with the "Song of Songs" and "Shang Shu" and was naturally clever.

古文：光亡周公之德，秉政九年，久于周公，上既已冠而不归政，将为国害。
现代文：霍光没有周公那般仁德，执政九年，时间却长于周公，昭帝既已加冠而成年了却还不归政，造就要有害于国家。
English: Huo Guang did not have the same benevolence as Zhou Gong. He ruled for nine years, but his time was longer than that of Zhou Gong. Emperor Zhao was crowned and became an adult, but he did not return to politics. This would be harmful to the country.

古文：故正月加元服，五月而灾见。
现代文：所以，正月皇帝加冠，五月就发生了火灾。
English: Therefore, the emperor was crowned in the first month, and a fire occurred in May.

古文：古之庙皆在城中，孝文庙始出居外，天戒若曰，去贵而不正者。
现代文：古代宗庙都建在城内，孝文帝庙是最先建在城外的，这次火烧文帝庙正殿，天帝的告诫似乎在说， 除掉尊贵而不正直的人。 
English: The ancient ancestral temples were all built in the city, and the Temple of Emperor Xiaowen was the first to be built outside the city. This time, the main hall of the Temple of Emperor Xiaowen was set on fire. The warning of the Heavenly Emperor seemed to say, get rid of the honorable and dishonest people.

古文：宣帝既立，光犹摄政，骄溢过制，至妻显杀许皇后，光闻而不讨，后遂诛灭。
现代文：宣帝即位之后，霍光依然把持朝政，骄横而不遵守制度，到后来他的妻子显杀了许皇后，霍光知道了也不申讨法办，最后落得诛罚灭族。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, Huo Guang still dominated the government, arrogantly not abiding by the system. Later, his wife apparently killed Empress Xu. When Huo Guang found out, he did not even ask for legal action. Finally, he was punished for exterminating ethnic minorities.

古文：宣帝甘露元年四月丙申，中山太上皇庙灾。
现代文：宣帝甘露元年四月丙申曰，中山太上皇庙发生火灾。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Xuan's reign, Emperor Xian said that there was a fire at the Zhongshan Grand Imperial Temple.

古文：甲辰，孝文庙灾。
现代文：甲辰日，孝文帝庙发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at the Xiaowen Temple on the day of the Epiphany.

古文：元帝初元三年四月乙未，孝武园白鹤馆灾。
现代文：元帝初元三年四月乙末日，孝武园的白鹤馆发生火灾。
English: On the last day of April in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, a fire broke out in the White Crane Hall of Xiaowu Garden.

古文：刘向以为，先是前将军萧望之、光禄大夫击堪辅政，为佞臣石显、许章等所谮，望之自杀，堪废黜。
现代文：刘向认为，在此之前，前将军萧望之、光禄大夫周堪辅佐朝政，被奸佞之臣石显、许章等人诋毁诬陷，萧望之自杀，周堪被废黜。
English: Liu Xiang believes that before this, the former general Xiao Wangzhi and the Guanglu doctor Zhou Kan, who assisted the imperial government, were slandered and framed by the treacherous vassals Shi Xian and Xu Zhang. Xiao Wangzhi committed suicide, and Zhou Kan was deposed.

古文：明年，白鹤馆灾。
现代文：第二年，白鹤馆发生火灾。
English: The following year, a fire broke out in the White Crane Pavilion.

古文：园中五里驰逐走马之馆，不当在山陵昭穆之地。
现代文：园中那周围五里供人驰骋追逐跑马游玩的离宫别馆，本不应当建在祖宗陵墓所在之地。
English: The Imperial Villa Annex, which is surrounded by five miles of gardens for people to gallop and chase horses, should not have been built on the site of the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：天戒若曰，去贵近逸游不正之臣，将害忠良。
现代文：天帝的警告似乎在说： 除掉这些显贵亲近衹知逸游玩乐行为不汇的臣子，他们将会陷害忠良。 
English: The emperor's warning seems to be saying: get rid of these courtiers who are not familiar with the behavior of the dignitaries, they will frame the loyal.

古文：后章坐走马上林下烽驰逐。免官。
现代文：后来许章因犯在上林苑跑马举火追逐射猎之罪，被免宫。
English: Later, Xu Zhang was excused from the palace for the crime of running horses in Shanglin Court, chasing archery with fire.

古文：永光四年六月甲戌，孝宣杜陵园东阙南方灾。
现代文：永光四年六月甲戌曰，孝宣帝杜陵园束阙楼的南面发生火灾。
English: In June of the fourth year of Yongguang, a fire broke out on the south side of the Sokun Building of the Xiao Xuan Di Mausoleum.

古文：刘向以为，先是上复征用周堪为光禄勋，及堪弟子张猛为太中大夫，石显等复谮毁之，皆出外迁。
现代文：刘向认为，在此之前元帝再次征召任命周堪为光禄勋，并任命周堪的学生张猛为太中大夫，石显等人又诋毁陷害，于是都被调离外迁。
English: Liu Xiang believes that before this, Emperor Yuan once again conscripted and appointed Zhou Kan as a Guanglu Honored Worker, and appointed Zhang Meng, a student of Zhou Kan, as the Grand Physician. Shi Xian and others slandered and framed, so they were all transferred out of the country.

古文：是岁，上复征堪领尚书，猛给事中，石显等终欲害之。
现代文：造一年，皇帝又征召周堪任尚书，张猛马给事中，而石显等人始终要陷害他俩。
English: A year later, the emperor summoned Zhou Kanren Shangshu, Zhang Mammoth to the case, and Shi Xian and others always wanted to frame them both.

古文：园陵小于朝廷，阙在司马门中，内臣石显之象也。
现代文：陵园小于朝廷，阙楼在司马门裹面，应是宦官石显的象征。
English: The necropolis is smaller than the imperial court, and the mirage at Sima Gate is a symbol of the eunuch Shi Xuan.

古文：孝宣，亲而贵；阙，法令所从出也。
现代文：孝宣帝，亲而尊贵；阙楼是宣布法令的地方。
English: Emperor Xiao Xuan is close and honorable; the mirage is the place where decrees are announced.

古文：天戒若曰，去法令，内臣亲而贵者必为国害。
现代文：天帝的警告似乎在说： 违背法令，宦官受宠而显贵，必将成为国家的祸害。 
English: The emperor's warning seems to say: Violation of the law, eunuchs favored and distinguished, will surely become the scourge of the country.

古文：后堪希得进见，因显言事，事决显口。堪病不能言。
现代文：后来周堪很少能进见皇帝，祇能通过石显上奏，朝政取决于石显之：周堪患病喑哑不能说话。
English: Later, Zhou Kan was rarely able to see the emperor, and only through Shi Xian was he able to play the harp. Imperial politics depended on Shi Xian: Zhou Kan was ill, mute and unable to speak.

古文：显诬告张猛，自杀于公车。
现代文：石显诬告张猛，张猛在公车内自杀。
English: Shi Xian falsely accused Zhang Meng, and Zhang Meng committed suicide in the bus.

古文：成帝即位，显卒伏辜。
现代文：汉成帝即位后，石显终于被正法。
English: After Emperor Hancheng ascended to the throne, Shi Xian was finally canonized.

古文：成帝建始元年正月乙丑，皇考庙灾。
现代文：成帝建始元年正月乙丑日，皇考庙发生火灾。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of Emperor Chengdu's reign, a fire broke out in the imperial examination temple.

古文：初，宣帝为昭帝后而立父庙，于礼不正。
现代文：当初，宣帝作为昭帝的后嗣却给他的亲生父亲立庙，不符合礼制。
English: At first, Emperor Xuan, as the heir of Emperor Zhao, gave his biological father a temple, which did not conform to the etiquette.

古文：是时，大将军王凤颛权擅朝，甚于田分，将害国家，故天于元年正月而见象也。
现代文：此时大将军王凤专权独揽朝政，专横超过往日的田蚣，这将危害国家。所以天帝在元年正月降灾警告。
English: At this time, the general Wang Feng monopolized the court politics and was more tyrannical than the previous Tian Qi, which would harm the country. Therefore, the Heavenly Emperor issued a disaster warning in the first month of the first year of the year.

古文：其后浸盛，五将世权，遂以亡道。
现代文：后来情况曰益严重，五个大司马世代掌权，朝政也就失去正道。
English: Later, the situation became more and more serious. Five generations of Sima family members held power, and the imperial government lost its righteous path.

古文：鸿嘉三年八月乙卯，孝景庙北阙灾。
现代文：鸿嘉三年八月乙卯曰，孝景庙的北阙楼发生火灾。
English: In August of the third year of Hongjia, a fire broke out in the north hall of the Xiaojing Temple.

古文：十一月甲寅，许皇后废。
现代文：这年十一月甲寅日，许皇后被废黜。
English: In November of that year, on the day of the Chinese Zodiac, Empress Xu was deposed.

古文：永始元年正月癸丑，大官凌室灾。
现代文：永始元年正月癸丑曰，大官令丞的冰室发生火灾。
English: In the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：戊午，戾后园南阙灾。
现代文：戊午曰，戾后园的南阙楼发生火灾。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, a fire broke out in the South Hall of the Summer Palace.

古文：是时，赵飞燕大幸，许后既废，上将立之，故天见象于凌室，与惠帝四年同应。
现代文：当时，趟飞燕大受宠爱，许皇后既然已被废黜，汉成帝将要立她为后，所以天帝将征兆降灾于冰室，这与汉惠帝四年那次冰室之灾相对应。
English: At that time, Wufei Yan was greatly loved. Since Empress Xu had already been deposed, Han Chengdi was going to make her the empress. Therefore, the heavenly emperor sent a sign to the ice room, which corresponded to the four-year ice room disaster of Han Hui Di.

古文：戾后，卫太子妾，遭巫蛊之祸，宣帝既立，追加尊号，于礼不正。
现代文：戾后是卫太子的妾，武帝时遭受巫蛊案那场大祸而身亡，宣帝即位后，追加尊号为戾后，不合礼制。
English: The Empress Dowager was the concubine of the Dauphin of Wei. She died when Emperor Wu suffered the great calamity of the Witchcraft Case. After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, she was given the additional honorific title of Empress Dowager, which was not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：又戾后起于微贱，与赵氏同应。
现代文：再者，戾后出身卑贱，与赵飞燕相同。
English: Moreover, the empress Dowager came from a humble background, the same as Zhao Feiyan.

古文：天戒若曰，微贱亡德之人不可以奉宗庙，将绝祭祀，有凶恶之祸至。
现代文：天帝的告诫似乎是说： 身世卑贱而无品德的人不可以奉祀宗庙。将使祭祀之人因此断绝，要有凶恶大祸发生了。 
English: The heavenly emperor's admonition seemed to say: Those who are lowly in life and have no moral character should not be allowed to worship the ancestral temple. This will cause those who worship to be cut off, and a terrible calamity will occur.

古文：其六月丙寅，赵皇后遂立，姊妹骄妒，贼害皇子，卒皆受诛。
现代文：这年六月丙寅曰，这位趟皇后就被册立了，赵氏姐妹二人骄横妒嫉，杀死皇子，后来终于因罪被处死。
English: In June of this year, Hsin Yin said that this time the empress was officially established, and the two Zhao sisters were proud and jealous, killed the prince, and were finally executed for the crime.

古文：永始四年四月癸未，长乐宫临华殿及未央宫东司马门灾。
现代文：永始四年四月癸未日，长乐宫的临华殿和未央宫的束司马门发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the Linhua Hall of the Changle Palace and the Soksima Gate of the Weiyang Palace on the last day of April in the fourth year of the Yongzheng Emperor.

古文：六月甲午，孝文霸陵园东阙南方灾。
现代文：六月甲午，孝文霸陵园束阙楼的南面遭受火灾。
English: On the afternoon of June 1st, a fire broke out on the south side of the Sokyo Building of the Xiaowenba Mausoleum.

古文：长乐宫，成帝母王太后之所居也。
现代文：长乐宫是成帝的母亲王太后所居住的地方。
English: Changle Palace was the residence of the empress dowager, the mother of Emperor Chengdu.

古文：未央宫，帝所居也。
现代文：未央宫是成帝所住的地方。
English: Wenyang Palace is the place where Emperor Chengdu lived.

古文：霸陵，太宗盛德园也。
现代文：霸陵是太宗孝文帝盛美大德的陵园。
English: The Mausoleum of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Xiaowen, Emperor Shengmei and Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：是时，太后三弟相续秉政，举宗居位，充塞朝廷，两宫亲属将害国家，故天象仍见。
现代文：当时王太后的三个弟弟相继执掌朝政，整个王氏宗族都占据了官位，充塞朝廷，王太后、趟皇后这两宫的亲属将危害国家，所以天象一再出现。
English: At that time, the three younger brothers of the empress dowager successively took charge of the imperial government, the entire Wang clan occupied official positions, filling the imperial court, and the relatives of the two palaces of the empress dowager and the empress dowager would endanger the country, so the celestial elephant appeared repeatedly.

古文：明年，成都侯商薨，弟曲阳侯根代为大司马秉政。
现代文：第二年，成都侯王商去世，他的弟弟曲阳侯王根代替他当大司马执掌朝政。
English: The following year, Chengdu marquis Wang Shang died, and his younger brother Quyang marquis Wang Gen replaced him as the grand steed in charge of the imperial government.

古文：后四年，根乞骸骨，荐兄子新都侯莽自代，遂覆国焉。
现代文：四年后，王根告老回家，推荐他哥哥的儿子新都侯王莽代替自己，于是汉朝便覆灭于王莽之手。
English: Four years later, Wang Geng retired to his home and recommended his brother's son, Xindu Hou Wang Mang, to replace him. As a result, the Han Dynasty was destroyed at the hands of Wang Mang.

古文：哀帝建平三年正月癸卯，桂宫鸿宁殿灾，帝祖母傅太后之所居也。
现代文：哀帝建平三年正月癸卯曰，桂宫之鸿宁殿遭受火灾，那是哀帝的祖母傅太后所住的地方。
English: In the first month of the third year of Emperor Jianping's reign, Hongning Hall of Guigong suffered a fire. It was the place where Emperor Jianping's grandmother, Empress Dowager Fu, lived.

古文：时，傅太后欲与成帝母等号齐尊，大臣孔光、师丹等执政，以为不可，太后皆免官爵，遂称尊号。
现代文：当时，傅太后要与成帝的母亲等号齐尊，大臣孔光、师丹等人执掌朝政，认为不可以这样，太后都免去官爵等级，就称尊号。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Fu wanted to have the same title as Emperor Chengdi's mother, and the ministers Kong Guang and Shi Dan, who were in charge of the imperial government, thought that this was unacceptable. The empress dowager was exempted from the rank of official nobility, so she called herself Empress Dowager.

古文：后三年，帝崩，傅氏诛灭。
现代文：三年后，哀帝去世，傅氏被诛灭。
English: Three years later, Emperor Ai died, and the Fu clan was annihilated.

古文：平帝元始五年七月己亥，高皇帝原庙殿门灾尽。
现代文：平帝元始五年七月己亥曰，高皇帝以前宫庙的殿门受灾烧光。
English: In July of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Gao's former palace and temple were destroyed by fire.

古文：高皇帝庙在长安城中，后以叔孙通讥复道，故复起原庙于渭北，非正也。
现代文：高皇帝庙在长安城中，后来因为叔孙通讥谏漠惠帝在通往庙的道路上架设复道，所以再建一庙在渭水之北，不是正庙。
English: Emperor Gao's temple was in the center of Chang'an City. Later, because Emperor Gao's great-great-grandson Tong Xizang mocked Emperor Mo Hui for building a double road on the road leading to the temple, a temple was rebuilt in the north of Surabaya, but it was not the main temple.

古文：是时，平帝幼，成帝母王太后临朝，委任王莽，将篡绝汉，堕高祖宗庙，故天象见也。
现代文：这时平帝年幼，成帝之母王太后临朝听政，朝政委任王莽掌管，王太后要篡位汉朝，毁掉高祖宗庙，所以天帝降示灾象。
English: At this time, Emperor Ping was young, and Emperor Cheng's mother, Empress Dowager Wang, was listening to the imperial court and listening to the government. The imperial court appointed Wang Mang to be in charge. The Empress Dowager wanted to usurp the throne of the Han Dynasty and destroy Gao Zu's ancestral temple, so the heavenly emperor sent down the disaster.

古文：其冬，平帝崩。
现代文：这年冬天，平帝驾崩。
English: This winter, Emperor Ping died.

古文：明年，莽居摄，因以篡国，后卒夷灭。
现代文：第二年，王莽临朝摄政，就此而篡国，后来终于灭亡。
English: The following year, Wang Mang became the regent of the imperial court and usurped the country. Later, he finally died.

古文：传曰： 治宫室，饰台榭，内淫乱，犯亲戚，侮父兄，则稼穑不成。 
现代文：传上说： 修建宫室，装饰台榭，耽好淫乱，犯颜亲戚，慢待父兄，农业就会受到灾害。 
English: According to legend, if you build a palace, decorate the throne, indulge in sexual immorality, offend your relatives, and wait for your father and brother, your agriculture will be affected by disasters.

古文：说曰：土，中央，生万物者也。
现代文：解释说：土，居天地之中央，是生长万物的根本。
English: Explanation: Earth, in the center, is the birthplace of all things.

古文：其于王者，为内事。
现代文：对于帝王来说，就是要修治宫内之事。
English: For the emperor, it is all about managing the affairs of the palace.

古文：宫室、夫妇、亲属，亦相生者也。
现代文：宫室、夫妇、亲属，也是生育抚养之所必需。
English: A palace, a husband and wife, and relatives are also necessary for reproduction and upbringing.

古文：古者天子诸侯，宫庙大小高卑有制，后夫人媵妾多少进退有度，九族亲疏长幼有序。
现代文：古代的天子诸侯，其宫庙的大小、高低都有礼制规定，王后夫人、姬妾的多少和选取、放归有一定的制度限制，九族中的亲疏长幼也都有秩有序。
English: In ancient times, princes and princes, the size and height of their palaces and temples were all regulated by the etiquette system. There were certain institutional restrictions on the number of queens and concubines, as well as the selection and return of them. Among the nine tribes, relatives and children were also ranked in order.

古文：孔子曰： 礼，与其奢也，宁俭。 
现代文：孔子说： 在礼仪上，与其弄得铺张奢侈，不如节俭为好。 
English: Confucius said: It is better to be frugal than to be extravagant.

古文：故禹卑宫室，文王刑于寡妻，此圣人之所以昭教化也。
现代文：所以大禹住狭窄简陋的宫室，周文王以礼对待正妻，造就是圣人之所以能够昭明教化的缘故啊！
English: Therefore, Yu built a low palace, and King Wen demonstrated it to future generations. This was the sage's way of enlightening and enlightening.

古文：如此则土得其性矣。
现代文：能做到这样，就能使土得其性了。
English: If we can do this, we will be able to bring the soil back to its natural state.

古文：若乃奢淫骄慢，则土失其性。
现代文：反之，如果奢侈淫乱、骄横傲慢，那就导致土失其性。
English: If luxury, lasciviousness, pride and arrogance prevail, the soil loses its nature.

古文：亡水旱之灾而草木百谷不孰，是为稼穑不成。
现代文：就是没有水旱之灾，草木、庄稼也长不好，造就是农事无成。
English: Even if there is no flood or drought, plants and crops will not grow well. Otherwise, agricultural work will not be accomplished.

古文：严公二十八年 冬，大亡麦禾。 
现代文：《春秋经》载，鲁严公二十八年 冬天，麦苗大量死掉 。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" recorded that in the winter of the 28th year of Lu Yan Gong, a large number of wheat seedlings died.

古文：董仲舒以为，夫人哀姜淫乱，逆阴气，故大水也。
现代文：董仲舒认为，严公夫人哀姜荒淫秽乱，逆犯了阴气，因而发大水淹死了麦苗。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Yan Gong's wife mourned Jiang's absurd and obscene disorder, and committed a sinister act. As a result, the floodwaters drowned the wheat seedlings.

古文：刘向以为，水旱当书，不书水旱而曰 大亡麦禾 者，土气不养，稼穑不成者也。
现代文：刘向则认为，如有水旱之灾白应记载，没有记载水旱灾情而衹说 麦苗大量死掉 ，应是土气不保，而造成农业歉收。
English: Liu Xiang, on the other hand, believed that if there was a flood or drought, it should be recorded. If there was no record of the flood or drought, and the farmer said that a large number of wheat seedlings died, it should be because the soil was not safe, resulting in a poor agricultural harvest.

古文：是时，夫人淫于二叔，内外亡别，又因凶饥，一年而三筑台，故应是而稼穑不成，饰台榭内淫乱之罚云。
现代文：当时，夫人哀姜跟两个小叔子淫乱，男女无戒，又在饥荒严重之际，一年之内竟三次修筑台榭，因此导致农事无成，正是所谓对修饰台榭、沉于淫乱的惩罚。
English: At that time, Mrs. Aizhang and her two younger brothers-in-law fornicated, both men and women were unruly, and at a time of severe famine, they actually built a platform three times within a year, which led to the failure of agricultural affairs, which is the so-called punishment for decorating the platform and indulging in fornication.

古文：遂不改寤，四年而死，祸流二世，奢淫之患也。
现代文：鲁严公终不改悔醒悟，四年后死去，祸殃连及两代，造就是奢侈淫乱所造成的祸患。
English: Lu Yan Gong did not change his mind, and died four years later. The calamity continued for two generations, which was caused by the luxury and debauchery.

古文：传曰： 好战攻，轻百姓，饰城郭，侵边境，则金不从革。 
现代文：传上说： 黩武好战，不顾百姓，整饰城防，侵入边境，就会造成金属失性冶铸不成。 
English: According to legend: If you are belligerent, disregard the people, decorate the city defenses, and invade the border, you will cause the metal to lose its malleability.

古文：说曰：金，西方，万物既成，杀气之始也。
现代文：解释说：金代表西方，万物成熟之后，出现了肃杀之气。
English: Commentary: Gold, the West, all things have grown up, it is the beginning of killing.

古文：故立秋而鹰隼击，秋分而微霜降。
现代文：所以立秋而见鹰击长空，秋分而有薄霜降下。
English: Therefore, the eagle chases the dragonfly after the beginning of autumn, and the frost falls after the autumnal equinox.

古文：其于王事，出军行师，把旄杖钺，誓士众，抗威武，所以征畔逆、止暴乱也。
现代文：这时节国家的事情，就是率军出师，举战旗、执斧铁，大誓官兵，高亢威武，以此征伐叛逆镇压暴乱。
English: At this time of the festival, the state's business is to lead the army out of the division, raise the battle flag, hold the axe and iron, swear the officers and soldiers, and be high and mighty, so as to conquer the rebellion and suppress the riot.

古文：《诗》云： 有虔秉钺，如火烈烈。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 虔虔威武，牢执大斧；如火烈烈，势不可阻。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Piety is mighty, but a great axe must be wielded. If it is fiery, it is irresistible."

古文：又曰： 载戢干戈，载橐弓矢。 
现代文：又说： 收集枪矛，弓箭入韬。 
English: He also said, "Starting from the collection of sticks and arrows, put the bow and arrows in your bag."

古文：动静应谊， 说以犯难，民忘其死。 
现代文：动静行止，适时有当， 甘冒危难，民不怕死。 
English: Movement and stillness, timely and appropriate, willing to risk danger, people are not afraid of death.

古文：如此则金得其性矣。
现代文：如能做到这样，就能使金得其性了。
English: If you can do that, you can make money work for you.

古文：若乃贪欲恣睢，务立威胜，不重民命，则金失其性。
现代文：反之，如果好大喜功狂妄无忌，一切为了树立威风战胜别人，不以人民性命为重，就会导致金失其性了。
English: On the other hand, if people are too eager to win and everything is done for the sake of establishing authority and defeating others, and people's lives are not important, it will lead to money losing its nature.

古文：盖工冶铸金铁，金铁冰滞涸坚，不成者众，及为变怪，是为金不从革。《左氏传》曰昭公八年 春，石言于晋 。
现代文：工匠冶铸金铁，就会出现金铁凝滞如冰、坚硬不能加工的情况，往往造不成所需的刀剑或器具，甚至还有怪异之物出现，造就是金属失性，冶铸不成。《左氏传》上说， 在昭公八年春天，晋国有石头说话 。
English: When a craftsman casts gold and iron, the result is that the gold and iron is frozen like ice, hard and cannot be processed, often unable to make the required sword or utensil, and even strange things appear. The result is that the metal loses its properties and cannot be cast. "The Legend of Zuo Shi" says that in the spring of the eighth year of Zhaogong, the stone in Jin Province spoke.

古文：晋平公问于师旷，对曰： 石不能言，神或冯焉。
现代文：晋平公就此事询问大夫师旷，师旷回答说： 石头不能说话，可能是神灵藉石而言。
English: Jin Ping Gong asked the doctor Shiguang about this matter. Shiguang replied, "Stone cannot speak. It may be that the gods are speaking through the stone."

古文：作事不时，怨讟动于民，则有非言之物而言。
现代文：劳作之事不合时宜，怨恨不满之情在民众中沸腾，造就会有不能说话的东西说话。
English: Work will be out of fashion, resentment will boil over among the people, and things that cannot speak will speak.

古文：今宫室崇侈，民力雕尽，怨讟并兴，莫信其性，石之言不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：现在宫室修得追么高大华丽，民力耗尽，怨声四起，民不聊生，石头说出话来不也正好吗！ 
English: Now the palace is built tall and gorgeous, the people's strength is exhausted, complaints are everywhere, the people are bored, and it is not right for the stone to speak!

古文：于是晋侯方筑祁之宫。
现代文：当时晋侯正修筑魇祁之宫。
English: At that time, Jinhō was in the process of building the Imperial Palace.

古文：叔向曰： 君子之言，信而有征。 
现代文：叔向说： 君子师旷所言，可信而有验证。 
English: Uncle Xiang said: What Junzi Shigu said is credible and has been verified.

古文：刘歆以为金石同类，是为金不从革，失其性也。
现代文：刘歆认为金与石是同类之物，石头说话和金不能冶铸一样，都是失去了本来的性质。
English: Liu Wei believes that gold and stone are the same kind of thing, stone can speak and gold can not be smelted, both have lost their original nature.

古文：刘向以为石白色为主，属白祥。
现代文：刘向则认为石头以白为主色，石头说话应属于白色凶兆。
English: Liu Xiang, on the other hand, believes that the stone is mainly white, and the stone should be a white omen.

古文：成帝鸿嘉三年五月乙亥，天水冀南山大石鸣，声隆隆如雷，有顷止，闻平襄二百四十里，野鸡皆鸣。
现代文：汉成帝鸿嘉三年五月乙亥，天水冀县的南山有大石头呜叫，声音隆隆如雷，遇了一会儿不叫了，又听到在平襄方圆二百四十里的地区，野鹦齐鸣。
English: In the third year of Emperor Hongjia of Han Dynasty, in May of the Year of the Boar, there was a large stone in Nanshan, Tianshui County, which was crying, and the sound was loud as thunder. When it stopped crying for a while, it was heard that the wild parrots were singing in unison in an area with a radius of 240 miles from Pingxiang.

古文：石长丈三尺，广厚略等，旁著岸胁，去地二百余丈，民俗名曰石鼓。
现代文：发声那块巨石长一丈三尺，宽厚与长度大致相等，一侧附着山崖的半腰，离地面约二百余丈，民间习惯于叫它 石鼓 。
English: The boulder that emits the sound is about three feet long, with a width and thickness roughly equal to its length. It is attached to the side of the cliff, about two hundred meters above the ground. People are accustomed to calling it a stone drum.

古文：石鼓鸣，有兵。
现代文：石鼓一叫，就要打仗了。
English: As soon as the stone drum sounds, there will be war.

古文：是岁，广汉钳子谋攻牢，篡死罪囚郑躬等，盗库兵，劫略吏民，衣绣衣，自号曰山君，党与浸文。
现代文：这一年，广汉县身戴缭铐的囚徒谋划攻下牢狱，犯死罪的郑躬等人，盗出武库中的兵器，抢劫官民，穿上锦绣服装，自称山君，党羽越来越多。
English: In this year, Guanghan County prisoners dressed in dazzling clothes plotted to attack the prison, Zheng Mu and others who committed capital crimes, stole weapons from the arsenal, robbed officials and civilians, put on embroidered clothing, and called themselves mountain princes, and the number of party feathers increased.

古文：明年冬，乃伏诛，自归者三千余人。
现代文：第二年冬天，才伏法处死。自动投降的三千多人。
English: In the winter of the following year, Cai Fubo was executed, and more than 3,000 people surrendered voluntarily.

古文：后四年，尉氏樊并等谋反，杀陈留太守严普，自称将军，山阳亡徒苏令等党与数百人盗取库兵，经历郡国四十余，皆逾年乃伏诛。
现代文：四年后，尉氏县的樊并等人谋反，杀死了陈留太守严普，自称将军，山阳县在逃的犯人苏令等党羽数百人盗得武库裹的兵器，骚扰经历了四十多个郡县，都是到第二年才伏法被处死。
English: Four years later, Zou Nian and others in Yi County plotted a rebellion, killed Chen Rui Taizhu Yanpu, a self-proclaimed general, Su Ling, a fugitive prisoner in Shanyang County, and hundreds of other party members stole weapons wrapped in arsenals, harassed more than forty counties and counties, and were executed only the following year.

古文：是时起昌陵，作者数万人，徙郡国吏民五千余户以奉陵邑。
现代文：那时候正动工修建昌陵，民工数万人，搬迁各郡县的官民五千多户来奉祀陵邑。
English: At that time, the construction of Changling was under way, with tens of thousands of migrant workers, and more than 5,000 government and private households from various counties and counties were relocated to serve the mausoleum.

古文：作治五年不成，乃罢昌陵，还徙家。
现代文：修建了五年没有修成，才停止建昌陵，让搬迁来的民户回原籍。
English: After five years of construction and no completion, the construction of Changling was stopped to allow the relocated households to return to their original homes.

古文：石鸣，与晋石言同应，师旷所谓 民力雕尽 ，传云 轻百姓 者也。
现代文：石头呜叫，与春秋时候晋国石头说话所应相同，就是师旷所说的 民力耗尽 ，传上所说的 不顾百姓 啊。
English: The wailing of the stones is the same as that of the stones in Jin Province in spring and autumn, that is, the exhaustion of the people's strength as mentioned by Shi Kuang, and the disregard for the people as mentioned in the legend.

古文：虒祁离宫去绛都四十里，昌陵亦在郊野，皆与城郭同占。
现代文：履祁离宫离绛都四十里，昌陵也在郊野，占卜时都与城郭一样。
English: Lucheng is forty miles away from the palace, Changling is also in the countryside, and both are the same as the castle when divining.

古文：城郭属金，宫室属土，外内之别云。
现代文：城郭属金，宗庙属土，衹不过有内外之别罢了。
English: The castle belongs to gold, the ancestral temple belongs to earth, but there is a difference between inside and outside.

古文：传曰： 简宗庙，不祷祠，废祭祀，逆天时，则水不润下。 
现代文：传上说： 简慢宗庙之礼，不祈祷神祠，废弃祭祀，违逆天时，就会水不润下。 
English: According to legend: If you slow down the ceremony of the ancestral temple, do not pray for the shrine, abandon the sacrificial rites, and disobey the heavens, the water will not be moist.

古文：说曰：水，北方，终臧万物者也。
现代文：解释说：水代表北方，是最终收藏万物之所。
English: Water represents the north and is the ultimate repository of all things, he explained.

古文：其于人道，命终而琪臧，精神放越，圣人为之宗庙以收魂气，春秋祭祀，以终孝道。
现代文：就人的生死之道而言，生命终结之后就要把形骸埋藏起来，而精神则放逸超脱，圣人为此就创造了宗庙用以收殓游荡的魂魄之气，以便让后人在春秋时节祭祀先人，成全孝亲之道。
English: As far as the path of human life and death is concerned, after the end of life, it is necessary to bury the skeleton, while the spirit is indulgent and detached. For this reason, the saint created the ancestral temple to collect the wandering spirit of the soul, so that future generations can worship their ancestors in the spring and autumn seasons and fulfill the path of filial piety.

古文：王者即位，必郊祀开地，祷祈神祇，望秩山川，怀柔百神，记不宗事。
现代文：天子即位，必须郊祀天地，祈祷神衹，望祭山，招唤百神来享，一切无不恭敬行事。
English: When the Son of Heaven ascends the throne, it is necessary to worship heaven and earth, pray to the deities, look at the sacrificial mountain, invite hundreds of gods to enjoy, and do everything respectfully.

古文：慎其齐戒。致其严敬，鬼神歆飨，多获福助。
现代文：谨慎小心地净身斋戒，做到严肃虔诚，让鬼神好好享用，这样就可以多多得到神灵降福相助。
English: Cleanse yourself and fast carefully, be serious and pious, and let the ghosts and gods enjoy themselves. In this way, you can get a lot of blessings from the gods.

古文：此圣王所以顺事阴气，和神人也。
现代文：这就是圣王恭顺奉事阴气，和谐神与人的关系所采取的做法。
English: The creation is that the Holy Emperor should obey the yin and yang, and reconcile the people of God.

古文：至发号施令，亦奉天时。
现代文：至于当国君的发号施令，也要遵循天时。
English: As for when the sovereign issues an order, it must also follow the heavenly time.

古文：十二月咸得其气，则阴阳调而终始成。
现代文：一年十二个月都能做到顺应节气，就能阴阳调和而善始善终。
English: Each of the twelve months has its own spirit, and the yin and yang are in harmony and have a good beginning and a good end.

古文：如此则水得其性矣。
现代文：这样就能使水得其性了。
English: This allows the water to take on its natural properties.

古文：若乃不敬鬼神，政令逆时，则水失其性。
现代文：如果不敬鬼神，政令与天时相背，则水失其性。
English: If there is no reverence for ghosts and gods, and government decrees are out of step with the times, then water will lose its nature.

古文：雾水暴出，百川逆溢，坏乡邑，溺人民，及淫雨伤稼穑，是为水不润下。
现代文：那样，黑水暴发，江河泛滥，冲坏城乡，淹死人民，以及淫雨连绵，伤害庄稼，这就是水不润下。
English: The vast water surges, the rivers overflow, destroy the countryside, drown the people, and the continuous rainwater damages the crops. This is the water does not go down.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 颛事有知，诛罚绝理，厥灾水，其水也，雨杀人以陨霜，大风天黄。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 专权纵欲，诛罚无理，要引发水灾。水灾就是下大雨淹死人，以及降寒霜、刮大风、天色昏黄。
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan" that: The despotic power indulges, the punishment is unreasonable, and it will cause floods. Floods are heavy rain that drowns people, as well as cold frosts, strong winds, and gloomy weather.

古文：饥而不损兹谡泰，厥灾水，水杀人。
现代文：饥荒之年不减膳节约，那就是过于奢侈，也是引发水灾，水大淹死人的原因。
English: In a year of famine, not cutting back on food is too extravagant, and it is also the cause of floods that drown people.

古文：辟遏有德兹谓狂，厥灾水，水流杀人，已水则地生虫。
现代文：天子使有道德的人受压抑而得不到重用，这就是所说的傲慢无知，引发的天灾也是水灾，江河泛滥淹死人，大水过后田地多生害虫。
English: The Son of Heaven causes the moral people to be suppressed and not to be reused. This is the so-called arrogance and ignorance. The natural disaster caused by the Son of Heaven is also a flood. The river floods and drowns people. After the flood, the fields are full of pests.

古文：归狱不解，兹谓追非，厥水寒，杀人。
现代文：专兴大狱不知停止，造就是执迷不悟，就要水寒杀人。
English: There is more than blaming someone, it is called persecuting the wrongdoers, it is cold-blooded, it is murder.

古文：追诛不解，兹谓不理，厥水五谷不收。
现代文：追杀不懈，此为无道，这样造成的水灾就是五谷不收。
English: Persecuted and killed more and more, dismissed and ignored, its water is not collected.

古文：大败不解，兹谓皆阴。
现代文：对于大败之敌穷追不懈，就是所谓全阴。
English: The relentless pursuit of a defeated enemy is called "total defeat."

古文：解，舍也，王者于大败，诛首恶，赦其众，不则皆函阴气，厥水流入国邑，陨霜杀叔草。 
现代文：懈，就是舍弃不追。为天下之君的人，对于大败之敌，衹杀其首恶罪魁，而赦免其部众，否则就遍含阴气，大水就流入国邑城乡，天降寒霜冻死庄稼。 
English: To slacken is to give up the chase. The ruler of the world should fight the defeated enemy, kill its chief villain, and pardon its subordinates. Otherwise, it will be full of gloom, large amounts of water will flow into the country, towns and villages, and the sky will fall frost and freeze crops to death.

古文：桓公元年 秋炁大水 。
现代文：桓公元年 秋季，大水 。
English: In the autumn of the year of the rooster, there was a great flood.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为桓弑兄隐公，民臣痛隐而贱桓。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，当时鲁桓公杀死了他的哥哥鲁隐公，臣民们哀痛隐公而鄙视桓公之所为。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that at that time, Lu Huan killed his brother Lu Yingguo, and the subjects mourned Yingguo and despised the actions of Huan.

古文：后宋督弑其君，诸侯会，将讨之，桓受宋赂而归，又背宋。
现代文：水灾由此引发。后来，宋国的华父督犯上杀死了其国君，诸侯各国聚会，要讨伐宋国，鲁桓公接受了宋国的贿赂而撤回军队，然后又背弃宋国。
English: The flood was triggered by this. Later, the Chinese patriarch of Song killed his sovereign, the princes of all countries gathered to fight Song, Lu Huan accepted Song's bribe and withdrew his army, and then betrayed Song.

古文：诸侯由是伐鲁，仍交兵结仇，伏尸流血，百姓愈怨，故十三年夏复大水。
现代文：诸侯各国因此而征伐鲁国，于是交战不休结成仇怨，死尸遍地血流成河，百姓更加怨愤，所以十三年夏天又发了一次大水。
English: As a result, princes from all over the world invaded Lu, and the war became a never-ending cycle of enmity. Bodies and blood flowed in rivers everywhere, and the people became even more resentful. So, in the summer of 133, another great flood occurred.

古文：一曰，夫人骄淫，将弑君，隐气盛，桓不寤，卒弑死。
现代文：有一种说法是，因为桓公的夫人文姜骄横淫荡，要杀死桓公，阴气太盛。鲁桓公不醒悟，终于被弑身亡。
English: There is a saying that because of the arrogance and lasciviousness of King Kan's wife, Wen Jiang, the evil spirit was too strong to kill King Kan. King Lu did not wake up and was finally killed.

古文：刘歆以为桓易许田，不祀周公，废祭祀之罚也。
现代文：刘歆则认为，这是因为鲁桓公把在成周的有周公庙的许田换给了郑国，不再祭祀周公，废弃了祭祀之礼而受的惩罚。
English: Liu Yao, on the other hand, believed that this was due to the fact that Lu Huan Gong exchanged Xu Tian of Zhou Gong Temple in Chengdu with Zheng Guo, no longer worshiped Zhou Gong, and abandoned the ritual of sacrifice.

古文：严公七年 秋，大水，亡麦苗 。
现代文：鲁严公七年 秋季，发大水，麦苗淹死 。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Lu Yan Gong, there was a flood, and the wheat seedlings were drowned.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，严母文姜与兄齐襄公淫，共杀桓公，严释父仇，复取齐女，未入，先与之淫，一年再出，会于道逆乱，臣下贱之之应也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，鲁严公的母亲文姜与她的哥哥齐襄公淫乱通奸，一起杀害了鲁桓公。可是，鲁严公不顾杀父之仇，又娶了齐国的女人。没娶，先与之交媾，一年之后再嫁，严公远迎于道上。如此违礼淫乱之行，引起臣民的鄙视。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believe that Lu Yan's mother, Wen Jiang, and her brother, Qi Xiangong, committed fornication and adultery, and together they killed Lu Huan. However, Lu Yan, regardless of the revenge of killing his father, married a woman from Qi. If he did not marry, he first had sexual intercourse with her, and then married her a year later, Yan Gong was far away from the path. Such a violation of the act of fornication caused the contempt of the subjects.

古文：十一年 秋，宋大水 。
现代文：水灾就是对这些丑事的反应。十一年 秋季，宋国发大水 。
English: Floods were a reaction to these atrocities. In the autumn of the eleventh year, Song Province was flooded.

古文：董仲舒以为时鲁、宋比年为乘丘、鄑之战，百姓愁怨，阴气盛，故二国俱水。
现代文：董仲舒认为，当时鲁、宋两国连年进行乘丘之战与郡之战，百姓忧愁怨愤，阴气过盛，故而导致鲁、宋两国都闸大水。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that at that time, the two countries of Lu and Song were engaged in the hill-climbing battle and the county battle for several years in a row, the people were sad and angry, and the gloomy atmosphere was too prosperous, which led to the floods in Lu and Song.

古文：刘向以为时宋愍公骄慢，睹灾不改，明年与其臣宋万博戏，妇人在侧，矜而骂万，万杀公之应。
现代文：刘向则认为，当时宋愍公骄横傲慢，看到了天灾的警示还不改悔，第二年与他的大臣宋万作博弈的游戏时，有妇人在一旁，宋愍公因矜持面子而戏骂口出不逊的宋万，宋万怒而杀了愍公，是这件事与水灾相应。
English: Liu Xiang, on the other hand, believed that at that time, Song Yigong was arrogant and did not repent when he saw the warning of the natural disaster. The next year, when he played a game with his minister Song Wan, there was a woman on the side. Song Yigong scolded the insolent Song Wan for keeping a low profile, and Song Wan killed Yigong in anger. This incident is consistent with the flood.

古文：二十四年， 大水 。
现代文：二十四年， 大水 。
English: Twenty-four years, high water.

古文：董仲舒以为夫人哀姜淫乱不妇，阴气盛也。
现代文：董仲舒认为，这是夫人哀姜淫乱不守妇道，阴气过盛所致。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that this was caused by the fact that his wife, Ai Jiang, was promiscuous and did not follow the women's code, and that she was too gloomy.

古文：刘向以为哀姜初入，公使大夫宗妇见，用币，又淫于二叔，公弗能禁。
现代文：刘向认为，哀姜刚刚嫁到鲁国，鲁严公让宗室大夫的夫人拜见，拜见时用玉帛为拜见的礼物，不合礼制，后来哀姜又与两个小叔子淫乱通奸，严公不能禁止。
English: Liu Xiang believed that Aijiang had just married into the State of Lu, and Lu Yan Gong let the wife of the family doctor visit him, and when they met, they used a jade bracelet as a gift, which was not in accordance with the etiquette. Later, Aijiang had sexual intercourse with his two younger brothers-in-law and committed adultery, which could not be prohibited by Yan Gong.

古文：臣下贱之，故是岁、明年仍大水。
现代文：臣下鄙视这种丑行，所以当年和第二年连续发大水为灾。
English: The vassals despised this act of villainy, so that year and the following year there were continuous floods.

古文：刘歆以为先是严饰宗庙，刻桷丹楹，以夸夫人，简宗庙之罚也。
现代文：刘歆则认为，在此之前鲁严公装饰宗庙，雕椽画柱、丹朱上色，以此向夫人夸示炫耀，而对宗庙之礼却简慢不敬，因此受到天帝的惩罚发了大水。
English: Liu Yao thought that before this, Lu Yan Gong had decorated the ancestral temple with carved pillars and painted with red and yellow to show off to his wife, but he was disrespectful to the ancestral temple, so he was punished by the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：宣公十年 秋，大水，饥 。
现代文：宣公十年 秋季大水，发生饥荒 。
English: Ten years after the proclamation of the Republic of China, there were floods in autumn and famine.

古文：董仲舒以为，时比伐邾取邑，亦见报复，兵仇连结，百姓愁怨。
现代文：董仲舒认为，这是当时鲁国频频征伐邾国，夺取都邑，同时也遭到反击报复，于是兵祸连接不断，百姓们忧愁怨愤所致。
English: According to Dong Zhongshu, this was caused by the fact that at that time, Lu frequently invaded and conquered Yunnan, captured the capital city, and at the same time suffered counterattacks and retaliation. As a result, military disasters were constantly connected, and the people were sad and resentful.

古文：刘向以为，宣公杀子赤而立，子赤，刘出也，故惧，以济西田赂齐。
现代文：刘向认为，是鲁宣公杀死子赤而自立为君。子赤是齐国姜氏之女所生，所以害怕齐国问罪，就把济西的田地送给了齐国。
English: Liu Xiang believed that it was Lu Xuan Gong who killed Zi Aka and established himself as the ruler. Zi Aka was born to the daughter of the Jiang clan in Qi, so he was afraid of being blamed by Qi, so he gave the fields in Jixi to Qi.

古文：邾子玃且亦齐出也，而宣比与邾交兵。臣下惧齐之威，创邾之祸，皆贱公行而非其正也。
现代文：邾子攫且也是齐国女子所生，现在宣公同邾国打仗，臣民们都担心齐国强大，会惩罚鲁国对邾国的危害，为此都鄙视或不满宣公的行事不正当。
English: Xun Zixuan was also born to a woman from Qi, and now Xuan Guo is at war with Qi. The subjects are worried that Qi is strong and will punish Lu for harming Qi, so they despise or are dissatisfied with Xuan Guo's actions.

古文：成公五年 秋，大水 。
现代文：这才是引发大水的原因。成公五年 秋季，大水 。
English: This is the cause of the flood. In the autumn of the fifth year of Chenggong, the flood.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，时成幼弱，政在大夫，前此一年再用师，明年复城郓以强私家，仲孙蔑、叔孙侨和颛会宋、晋，阴胜阳。襄公二十四年 秋，大水。 
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，当时成公尚在幼弱之年，朝政由大夫执掌，在此之前，曾一年两次用兵打仗，第二年又修建郫城增强私人的势力，仲孙蔑、叔孙侨如二人擅自与宋、晋两国盟会，如此阴气胜过阳气，从而导致了大水。襄公二十四年 秋季，大水 。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that at that time, Chenggong was still in his infancy, and the imperial government was controlled by the doctor. Prior to this, soldiers were used twice a year to fight wars, and the second year was built to strengthen the power of private individuals. Zhong Sunzhu and his uncles and grandsons, such as the two of them, arbitrarily allied with the Song and Jin dynasties, so the yin prevailed over the yang, which led to the flood.

古文：董仲舒以为，先是一年齐伐晋，襄使大夫帅师救晋，后又侵齐，国小兵弱，数敌强大，百姓愁怨，阴气盛。
现代文：董仲舒认为，在此前一年，齐国征伐晋国，鲁襄公派大夫率领军队去救晋国，后来又侵犯齐国，自己国小兵力弱，却多次与强国为敌。百姓为此忧愁怨愤，阴气太盛而有这次水灾。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that in the previous year, Qi had invaded Jin, Lu Xiang sent a doctor to lead an army to save Jin, and later invaded Qi. His own country had a small and weak army, but repeatedly fought against the powerful country. The people were sad and angry about this, and the gloom was too strong and there was this flood.

古文：刘向以为，先是襄慢邻国，是以邾伐其南，齐伐其北，莒伐其东，百姓骚动，后又仍犯强齐也。
现代文：刘向则认为，在这之前，鲁襄公欺慢邻国，因此引起邾国从南面打来，齐国从北面打来，莒国从束面打来。鲁国百姓骚动不安。可是后来又多次侵犯强大的齐国，造就引发了大水。
English: Liu Xiang, on the other hand, believed that prior to this, Lu Xianggong had bullied neighboring countries, thus causing Shan State to invade from the south, Qi State to invade from the north, and Shan State to invade from the south. The people of Lu were agitated and uneasy. However, he later repeatedly invaded the powerful Qi State, creating a great flood.

古文：大水，饥，谷不成，其灾甚也。
现代文：大水淹没庄稼，一片饥荒，五谷不收，灾情很严重。
English: Flooded crops, a famine, no grain harvest, the disaster is very serious.

古文：高后三年夏，汉中、南郡大水，水出流四千余家。
现代文：高后三年夏季，汉中、南郡发大水，淹没四千多家。
English: In the summer of the third year after high school, Hanzhong and Nan County were flooded, flooding more than four thousand people.

古文：四年秋，河南大水，伊、雒流千六百余家，汝水流八百余家。
现代文：四年秋天，河南发大水，伊、雒两河泛滥，淹没一千六百多家，汝水泛滥，淹没八百多家。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, Henan was flooded, the Yili and Yunnan rivers flooded, inundating more than 1,600 people, and the Ye River flooded, inundating more than 800 people.

古文：八年夏，汉中、南郡水复出，流六千余家。
现代文：八年夏季，汉中、南郡又发大水，淹没六千多家。
English: In the summer of 2008, Hanzhong and Nan County were hit by another flood, inundating more than six thousand people.

古文：南阳沔水流万余家。
现代文：南阳沔水泛滥，淹了一万多家。
English: Flooding in Nanyang, flooding more than 10,000 homes.

古文：是时，女主独治，诸吕相王。
现代文：当时女主吕氏独裁朝政，吕家诸子都封丫王。
English: At that time, the mistress of the Lv dynasty was the dictator of the dynasty, and all the sons of the Lv family were crowned.

古文：文帝后三年秋，大雨，昼夜不绝三十五日。
现代文：汉文帝后三年秋天，下大雨，昼夜不停一连下了三十五天。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Emperor Hanwen's reign, it rained heavily for thirty-five days and nights.

古文：蓝田山水出，流九百余家。
现代文：蓝田山洪暴发，冲毁九百多家。
English: Flash floods in Lantian have swept away more than 900 people.

古文：汉水出，坏民室八千余所，杀三百余人。
现代文：汉水泛滥，冲毁民房八千多所，死三百多人。
English: Han River floods, destroying more than eight thousand houses and killing more than three hundred people.

古文：先是，赵人新垣平以望气得幸，为上立渭阳五帝庙，欲出周鼎，以夏四月，郊见上帝。
现代文：在此之前，趟地人新垣干靠会看云气知风水受到皇帝的宠幸，就为汉文帝在渭水北边建立五帝庙，想要周鼎再现，需在夏季四月，举行郊祀拜见天帝。
English: Prior to this, people from Arakaki who traveled to the area would see the clouds, know the feng shui, and were favored by the emperor, so they built the Five Emperor Temple for Emperor Hanwen in the north of Surabaya. If you want to reproduce Zhou Ding, you need to hold a suburban worship in the summer of April to meet the emperor.

古文：岁余惧诛，谋为逆，发觉，要斩，夷三族。
现代文：进行了一年多，骗局败露，害怕被处死，就阴谋叛乱，被发觉后腰斩而死，夷灭三族。
English: It went on for more than a year. When the deception was exposed and they were afraid of being executed, they plotted a rebellion. When they were discovered, they were beheaded and the three tribes were exterminated.

古文：是时，比再遣公主配单于，赂遗甚厚，匈奴愈骄，侵犯北边，杀略多至万余人，汉连发军征讨戍边。
现代文：当时，还接连几次遣送公主嫁给匈奴单于，赠送的礼物也很丰厚，而匈奴越来越骄横，经常侵犯北部边境，杀掳多至一万多人，汉朝为此连续发兵征讨匈奴保卫边境。
English: At that time, the princess was sent to marry the Hun several times in succession. The gifts were also very rich, and the Huns became more and more arrogant, often violating the northern border, killing and kidnapping up to more than 10,000 people. For this reason, the Han Dynasty continuously sent troops to solicit the Huns to defend the border.

古文：元帝永光五年夏及秋，大水。
现代文：汉元帝永光五年夏季及秋季，都发生大水灾。
English: In the summer and autumn of the fifth year of Emperor Yongguang of the Han Dynasty, major floods occurred.

古文：颍川、汝南、淮阳、庐江雨，坏乡聚民舍，及水流杀人。
现代文：颖川、汝南、淮阳、庐江下大雨，毁坏城乡民舍，大水淹死很多人。
English: Heavy rain fell on Yingchuan, Runan, Huaiyang and the Minjiang River, destroying urban and rural dwellings and drowning many people.

古文：先是一年，有司奏罢郡国庙，是岁又定迭毁，罢太上皇、孝惠帝寝庙，皆无复修，通儒以为违古制。
现代文：在这前一年有关官员奏请取消各郡国的宗庙，这一年又规定了更换和废除的宗庙，撤销了太上皇和孝惠帝的寝庙，都不再修复，博通儒学的先生认为这样做违背古代礼制。
English: In the previous year, the relevant officials made a request to cancel the ancestral temple of each county and state, and in this year, the replacement and abolition of the ancestral temple was stipulated, and the sleeping temple of the Emperor and the Emperor Xiao Hui was revoked, and will not be repaired. The professor of the Broad Confucianism believes that this is contrary to the ancient etiquette.

古文：刑臣石显用事。
现代文：宦官石显任事掌权。
English: The eunuch Shi Xian assumed power.

古文：成帝建始三年夏，大水，三辅霖雨三十余日，郡国十九雨，山谷水出，凡杀四千余人，坏官寺民舍八万三千余所。
现代文：成帝建始三年夏天，大水，长安地区的京兆、冯翊、扶风三辅之地连下大雨三十多天，各郡县与封国下了十九天，山洪暴发，共淹死四千多人，冲坏官衙民舍八万三千多所。
English: In the summer of the third year after the founding of Emperor Chengdu, the land of Jingzhao, Fenglu and Fufeng in the Chang'an region was hit by heavy rain for more than 30 days. Counties and counties in the country were hit by flash floods for 19 days. A total of more than 4,000 people were drowned, and more than 83,000 residences of officials and citizens were damaged.

古文：元年，有司奏徙甘泉泰畴、河东后土于长安南北郊。
现代文：建始元年，有关官员奏请把甘泉的泰时与河东的后土两庙分别搬迁到长安城的南、北郊。
English: In the first year of construction, the relevant officials requested that the two temples, Taishi Temple in Ganquan and Houtu Temple in Hedong, be relocated to the southern and northern suburbs of Chang'an City respectively.

古文：二年，又罢雍五畦，郡国诸旧祀，凡六所。
现代文：建始二年，又撤销了雍地的五时庙以及地方郡国的各个旧有祀所，共六处。
English: In the second year of its establishment, the Five-Hour Temple in Yongdi and the various old shrines in local counties and states were abolished, a total of six places.

