古文：张觉，亦书作瑴，平州义丰人也。
现代文：张觉，也写作张瑴，是平州义丰人。
English: Zhang Jue, also written as Zhang Ye, is a famous actor from Pingzhou Yifeng.

古文：在辽第进士，仕至辽兴军节度副使。
现代文：在辽代考中进士，官做至辽兴军节度副使。
English: He was promoted to officer in the Liao Dynasty Examination, and served as deputy envoy to the Liao Xing Army.

古文：太祖定燕京，时立爱以平州降，当时宋人以海上之盟求燕京及西京地，太祖以燕京、涿、易、檀、顺、景、蓟与之。
现代文：金太祖平定燕京，时立爱献出平州投降，当时宋人用海上的盟约想求得燕京和西京这两个地方，太祖把燕京、涿、易、檀、顺、景、蓟这些地方给了他们。
English: King Taizu conquered Yanjing, and Shi Li Ai offered up Pingzhou to surrender. At that time, the Song people used the sea treaty to seek the two places of Yanjing and Xijing. King Taizu gave them the places of Yanjing, Lintong, Yi, Dan, Shun, Jing and Handan.

古文：平州自入契丹别为一军，故弗与，而以平州为南京，觉为留守。
现代文：平州自从入契丹籍另外编成一军，所以没有把平州给宋人，而是把平州当成南京，张觉出任留守。
English: Since Pingzhou became a Khitan citizen, it was made into a separate army, so Pingzhou was not given to the Song people, but Pingzhou was treated as Nanjing, and Zhang Jue was left behind.

古文：既而闻觉有异志，上遣使刘彦宗及斜钵谕之，诏曰： 平山一郡今为南京，节度使今为留守。恩亦厚矣。
现代文：接着听说张觉有不同的志愿，皇上派遣使臣刘彦宗和斜钵去传谕，诏书说： 平山一郡今天是南京，节度使现在是留守，对你的恩泽也够厚重的了。
English: Then I heard that Zhang Jue had a different wish. The emperor sent envoys Liu Yanzong and Xizhao to deliver the edict. The edict said: Hirayama County is today's Nanjing. The Emperor is away at the moment, and his favor to you is quite heavy.

古文：或言汝等阴有异图，何为当此农时辄相扇动，非去危就安之计也。
现代文：有人说汝等暗中有另外的企图，为什么要在这农忙时节就互相煽动？这不是去危就安的计策。
English: Some people say that you all secretly have other plans. Why should you instigate each other during this busy farming season? This is not a ploy to make peace.

古文：其谕朕意。 
现代文：告诉你们朕的意见。 
English: I'll tell you what I think.

古文：太祖每收城邑，往往徙其民以实京师，民心多不安，故时立爱因降表曾言及之。
现代文：太祖每收一座城邑，往往迁移那里的百姓充实京师，民心大多不安宁，所以时立爱在降表中曾说到这情况。
English: Every time the great-grandfather received a township, he often moved the people there to enrich the capital, and the people's hearts were mostly restless, so Shi Li'ai mentioned this situation in the declination table.

古文：及以燕京与宋而迁其人，独以空城与之，迁者道出平州，故觉因之以作乱。
现代文：到把燕京给宋国时又迁移城中百姓，只把空城给了宋国，迁移的人必从平州的路经过，所以张觉因为这件事要作乱。
English: When Yanjing was given to Song, the people in the city were also moved, but only the empty city was given to Song. The people who were moved had to pass through Pingzhou, so Zhang Jue had to make trouble because of this.

古文：天辅七年五月，左企弓、虞仲文、曹勇义、康公弼赴广宁，过平州，觉使人杀之于栗林下，遂据南京叛入于宋，宋人纳之。
现代文：天辅七年五月，左企弓、虞仲文、曹勇义、康公弼到广宁去，经过平州，张觉派人在栗林中杀死了他们，于是占据南京叛离金朝而投降了宋国，宋人接纳了张觉。
English: In May of the seventh year of Tianshu, Zuo Qigong, Yu Zhongwen, Cao Yongyi, and Kang Gongyi went to Guangning. After passing through Pingzhou, Zhang Jue sent people to kill them in the chestnut forest. He then occupied Nanjing, defected from the Jin Dynasty, and surrendered to the Song Dynasty. The Song people accepted Zhang Jue.

古文：太祖下诏谕南京官吏，诏曰： 朕初驻跸燕京，嘉尔吏民率先降附，故升府治以为南京，减徭役，薄赋税，恩亦至矣，何苦辄为叛逆。
现代文：太祖下诏告诉南京官吏，说： 朕当初暂住燕京，嘉奖你们官民率先来降附，所以才把燕京升为府级作为南京，削减徭役，减少赋税，恩惠也到了，何苦再当叛徒奸逆？
English: The great-great-grandfather issued an edict to the officials of Nanjing, saying, "I temporarily lived in Yanjing at the beginning to commend you officials and people for taking the lead in annexing it. That is why I elevated Yanjing to the prefectural level as Nanjing, reduced the number of officials and taxes, and the favors have arrived. Why should I be a traitor and treacherous?

古文：今欲进兵攻取，时方农月，不忍以一恶人而害及众庶。
现代文：现在想进军攻取南京，却是农忙时节，不忍心因为一个恶人而危害到众百姓。
English: Now they want to invade Nanjing, but it's a busy season for farmers, and they can't bear to endanger the people because of a villain.

古文：且辽国举为我有，孤城自守，终欲何为。
现代文：况且辽国已举国为我所有，你那里孤城自守，终究有什么作为？
English: Besides, Liao Guo has already owned the whole country for me. What can you do if you are a lone city defending yourself?

古文：今止坐首恶，余并释之。 
现代文：今天只对首恶分子治罪，其余的人一并释放。 
English: Today, only the ringleaders were convicted, while the rest were released.

古文：觉兵五万屯润州近郊，欲胁迁、来、润、隰四州。
现代文：张觉的五万兵将屯驻在润州近郊，想胁迫迁、来、润、隰四州。
English: Zhang Jue's fifty thousand soldiers will be stationed in the suburbs of Runzhou, trying to coerce the four states to move, come, run, and fight.

古文：阇母自锦州往讨之，已败觉兵，欲乘胜攻南京，时暑雨不可进，退屯于海堧。
现代文：母从锦州出发前往讨伐，已经打败了张觉，想乘胜进攻南京，当时暑季下雨不能前进，于是退兵屯驻在海土需。
English: My mother set out from Jinzhou for the crusade. She had already defeated Zhang Jue and wanted to take advantage of the victory to attack Nanjing. At that time, it was raining in the summer and she couldn't advance, so she left the army and settled in the coastal area.

古文：无何，阇母再败觉兵，复与战于兔耳山，阇母大败，觉报捷于宋。
现代文：没有多久，母再次打败张觉的军队，后来又和张觉在兔耳山作战，母却被张觉打得大败，张觉向宋国报捷。
English: Not long after, my mother defeated Zhang Jue's army again, and later fought with Zhang Jue in the Hare's Ear Mountain. However, my mother was defeated by Zhang Jue, and Zhang Jue reported the victory to Song.

古文：宋建平州为泰宁军，以觉为节度使，张敦固等皆加徽犹阁待制，以银绢数万犒军。
现代文：宋国在平州组建成泰宁军，任命张觉为节度使，张敦固等人都加封为徽犹阁待制，并拿出银子数万两、绢数万匹犒赏军队。
English: Song built up the Taining Army in Pingzhou, appointed Zhang Jue as the commander of the army, and Zhang Dungu and others were awarded the title of Hui Yu Ge, and took out tens of thousands of taels of silver and tens of thousands of horses to reward the army.

古文：宗望军至南京城东，觉兵大败宵遁，遂奔宋，入于燕京。
现代文：宗望的军队到南京城东，张觉的军队大败，连夜逃跑，奔往宋国，进入燕京城。
English: Zongwang's army went to the east of Nanjing, Zhang Jue's army was defeated, fled overnight, rushed to Song, and entered Yanjing.

古文：宗望以纳叛责宋宣抚司，索张觉。
现代文：宗望以纳叛的事实指责宋国宣抚司，向他们索要张觉。
English: Zongwang accused the procuratorate of Song with the fact of treachery and asked them for Zhang Jue.

古文：宣抚王安中匿之于甲仗库，绐曰： 无之。 
现代文：宣抚王安中把张觉藏在甲仗库里，欺骗宗望说： 没有这个人。 
English: Wang Anzhong, the procurator, hid Zhang Jue in a storehouse and deceived Zongwang, saying, "There is no such person."

古文：余睹亡去，其党燕京统军萧高六伏诛，蔚州节度使萧特谋自杀。
现代文：宗望索要的更加急迫，王安中才杀了一个相貌类似张觉的人代替张觉，金人中认识张觉的人说 ：不是张觉。 
English: Zongwang's request was more urgent, so Wang Anzhong killed a man with a similar appearance to Zhang Jue to replace Zhang Jue. People in Jin who knew Zhang Jue said: not Zhang Jue.

古文：边部斩余睹及其诸子，函其首以献。
现代文：王安中不得已，把张觉带出来，数落他的罪状，张觉大骂宋人不容人讲话，王安中于是杀了张觉，包了他的头颅送给了金人。
English: As a last resort, Wang Anzhong brought Zhang Jue out and cleared him of the charges. Zhang Jue scolded the Song people for not allowing anyone to speak. Wang Anzhong then killed Zhang Jue and wrapped his head and gave it to Jinren.

古文：耶律奴哥加守太保兼侍中，赵公鉴、刘儒信、刘君辅等并授遥镇节度使以赏之。
现代文：燕京投降的将领和常胜军都流下了眼泪。郭药师自己说 ：如果来索要药师又当怎么样呢？ 从此以后，降将及军卒都解体了。
English: Yanjing's surrendering generals and the ever-victorious army all shed tears. Guo Yakushi himself said, "What if we come to ask for a pharmacist? From then on, the surrendering general and the soldiers have disintegrated."

古文：移剌窝斡，西北路契丹部族。
现代文：到了金人攻伐宋国的时候，竟然以接纳平州的叛军为借口。移剌窝斡，属于西北路契丹部族。
English: When it came time for the Jin to invade Song, they actually accepted the rebels from Pingzhou as an excuse.

古文：先从撒八为乱，受其伪署，后杀撒八，遂有其众。
现代文：他先是跟从撒八作乱，接受撒八的伪政权，后来杀了撒八，于是拥有了许多兵卒。
English: First, he followed Saba to create turmoil, accepted Saba's pseudo-regime, and later killed Saba, thus acquiring many soldiers.

古文：撒八者，初为招讨司译史。
现代文：撒八这个人，起初是招讨司译史。
English: This man, Saba, started out as a translator.

古文：正隆五年，海陵征诸道兵伐宋，使牌印燥合、杨葛尽征西北路契丹丁壮，契丹人曰： 西北路接近邻国，世世征伐，相为仇怨。
现代文：正隆五年，海陵在各道征兵攻伐宋国，让牌印燥合、杨葛征集西北路全部契丹壮丁，契丹人说： 西北路接近邻国，世代征伐，互相结成怨仇。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenglong, Hailing conscripted soldiers from all provinces to invade Song, and Yang Ge conscripted all able-bodied Khitan men of the Northwest Road. The Khitan people said: The Northwest Road is close to the neighboring countries, generations of conquest, and mutual enmity.

古文：若男丁尽从军，彼以兵来，则老弱必尽系累矣。
现代文：如果男丁全部从军，邻国兴兵来，那么老弱一定全部受到牵累了。
English: If all the men join the army and the neighboring countries raise an army, then the old and the weak must all be affected.

古文：幸使者入朝言之。 
现代文：希望使臣能入朝给说说。 
English: I hope the envoy can come to the DPRK and give a report.

古文：燥合畏罪不敢言，杨葛深念后西北有事得罪，遂以忧死。
现代文：燥合畏惧不敢出声，杨葛深深顾虑今后西北发生什么事情自己被判罪，于是因为忧郁而死去。
English: Afraid and afraid to speak out, Yang Ge was deeply concerned about what would happen in the northwest in the future. He was convicted of a crime and died of melancholy.

古文：燥合复与牌印耶律娜、尚书省令史没答涅合督起西北路兵。
现代文：燥合又和牌印耶律娜、尚书省令史没答涅合督促西北路起兵。
English: He also urged the soldiers of the Northwest Road to rise up together with Inyeruna, Shang Shuxuan, Ling Shi, and Nian Nian.

古文：契丹闻男丁当尽起，于是撒八、孛特补与部众杀招讨使完颜沃侧及燥合，而执耶律娜、没答涅合，取招讨司贮甲三千，遂反。
现代文：契丹听说男丁要全部充军，于是撒八、孛特补和部族群众杀了招讨使完颜沃侧以及燥合，并且把耶律娜、没答涅合绑起来，获取招讨司贮备的护甲三千套，造反了。
English: The Khitan heard that the men were all to be conscripted into the army, so Saba, Thaetep and the tribal masses killed the recruiting sergeant and the recruiter, and tied up Yeruna and Maduane, and obtained three thousand sets of armor stored by the recruiting sergeant, and rebelled.

古文：议立豫王延禧子孙，众推都监老和尚为招讨使，山后四群牧、山前诸群牧皆应之。
现代文：他们商议拥立豫王延禧的子孙。群众推举都监老和尚当招讨使，山后的四群牧、山前的诸群牧都响应。
English: They discussed supporting the descendants of Yan Xi, the king of Yu. The people suggested that the supervisors and monks should be envoys, and the four herdsmen behind the mountain and the herdsmen in front of the mountain responded.

古文：迪斡群牧使徒单赛里、耶鲁瓦群牧使鹤寿等皆遇害，语在《鹤寿传》中。
现代文：迪斡群牧使徒单赛里、耶鲁瓦群牧使鹤寿等人都遇害身亡，这件事记载在《鹤寿传》中。
English: Diyu, the group shepherd, the apostle Shan Xeli, and Yeruwa, the group shepherd, the envoy of He Shou, and others were all killed and died, and this event is recorded in "The Biography of He Shou."

古文：五院司部人老和尚那也亦杀节度使术甲兀者以应撒八。
现代文：五院司部人老和尚那也也把节度使术甲兀者杀了来响应撒八。
English: In response to Saba, an old monk from the Fifth Division of the Imperial Household Agency also killed the person who had ordered the armour-plating ceremony.

古文：会宁八猛安牧马于山后，至迪谋鲁，贼尽夺其马。
现代文：会宁的八个猛安在山后牧马，到迪谋鲁这个地方，强盗把他们的马全夺去了。
English: Eight Meng'an from Huining were herding horses in the back of the mountain. When they got to Dimo Lu, the robbers took all of their horses.

古文：辟沙河千户十哥等与前招讨使完颜麻泼杀乌古迪列招讨使乌林答蒲卢虎，以所部趋西北路。
现代文：辟沙河千户十哥等人和前招讨使完颜麻泼杀了乌古迪列招讨使乌林答蒲卢虎，带领所属部族投奔西北路。
English: The tenth brother of the thousand households of the Shahe River and other people and the former recruiters killed Ugudi, the recruiters killed Ulin, the recruiters killed Buluhu, and led their tribes to the Northwest Road.

古文：室鲁部节度使阿厮列追击败之，十哥与数骑遁去，合于撒八。
现代文：室鲁部节度使阿厮列追击并打败了他们，十哥和几名骑士逃跑了，去与撒八会合。
English: Murorube Setsudo had Ahirai pursue and defeat them, and Tenko and several knights fled to join Saba.

古文：咸平府谋克括里，与所部自山后逃归，咸平少尹完颜余里野欲收捕括里家属，括里与其党招诱富家奴隶，数日得众二千，遂攻陷韩州及柳河县，遂趋咸平。
现代文：咸平府谋克括里，和所属部族人从山后逃回来，咸平少尹完颜余里野想收捕括里的家属，括里和他的同党引诱招收富人家的奴隶，不几天得到二千人，于是攻下了韩州及柳河县，然后直奔咸平。
English: Xianping prefecture tried to subdue Xianping and his tribesmen fled back from the mountains. Xianping Shao Yin Guanyan Yu Lino wanted to capture Xianping's family members. Xianping Shao Yin Guanyan Yu Lino and his fellow party members lured and recruited slaves from rich families. Within a few days, they gained two thousand people. They then captured Hanzhou and Liuhe County, and then headed straight for Xianping.

古文：余里野发兵迎击之，兵败，贼遂据咸平，于是缮完器甲，出府库财物以募兵，贼势益张。
现代文：余里野发兵迎击失败了，括里等贼人于是占据咸平，他们修缮好兵器甲胄，拿出政府仓库中的财物用来招募兵卒，贼势愈加嚣张。
English: Yurino's counterattack failed, and thieves such as Bracket then occupied Hampyeong. They repaired the weapons and armor, took out the property in the government warehouse to recruit soldiers, and the thieves became more and more arrogant.

古文：权曹家山猛安绰质，集兵千余，扼干夜河，贼不得东。
现代文：代理曹家山猛安绰质，征集兵卒一千多人，扼守干夜河，使反贼不能东渡。
English: Acting for Cao Jia Shan Meng An, he conscripted more than a thousand soldiers to guard the dry night river, so that the anti-thieves could not cross to the east.

古文：绰质兵败，括里遂犯济州。
现代文：后来绰质兵败，括里于是得以进犯济州。
English: Later, with the defeat of the Taoxi army, the Bulgars were able to invade Jeju.

古文：会宿直将军孛术鲁吴括剌征兵于速频路，遇括里于信州，与猛安乌延查剌兵二千，击败括里。
现代文：正巧宿值将军孛术鲁吴括剌在速频路征兵，在信州和括里遭遇，孛术鲁吴括剌和猛安乌延查剌共有兵士二千人，把括里击败了。
English: It just so happened that the resident general 术魯吴括 was recruiting soldiers on the high-speed line and encountered the bracket in Xinshou and Bracket. 術魯吴括 and猛安烏延查 had a total of two thousand soldiers and defeated the bracket.

古文：括里收余众趋东京，是时世宗为东京留守，以兵四百人拒之。
现代文：括里集合余下的人奔向东京，当时世宗是东京留守，用军队四百人抵御括里。
English: Sejong was away in Tokyo at the time, and used an army of four hundred men to fend off the brawl.

古文：贼至常安县，闻空中击鼓声如数千鼓者，候见旌旗蔽野，传言留守以十万兵至矣，即引还，亦以其众合于撒八。
现代文：括里贼到达常安县，听到空中传来击鼓声，好像有几千人在击鼓，接着看见旌旗遍野，传说东京留守率十万大军到了，括里立刻带人往回跑，也把他的乌合之众带去和撒八会合。
English: Bracket thief arrived in Chang'an County, heard the sound of drumming coming from the air, as if several thousand people were drumming, then saw banners everywhere, the legend of Tokyo left-behind rate 100,000 army arrived, Bracket immediately took people to run back, and also took his rabble to meet with Saba.

古文：海陵使枢密使仆散忽土、西京留守萧怀忠将兵一万，与右卫将军萧秃剌讨平之。
现代文：海陵派遣枢密使仆散忽土、西京留守萧怀忠率领一万兵马，和右卫将军萧秃剌一起去讨伐平定撒八。
English: Hailing dispatched a confidential envoy to scatter the land, and Xiao Huaizhong, who was left behind in West Beijing, led ten thousand soldiers and horses, and went with the right guard general Xiao Zhengqi to fight and pacify Dingzhaba.

古文：秃剌与之相持数日，连与战皆无功，而粮饷不继，秃剌退归临潢。
现代文：秃剌和撒八相持多日，接连交战都不成功，然而粮饷接续不上，秃剌又退回到临潢。
English: The vulture and the scorpion hold each other for many days. Successive battles are not successful. However, the grain harvest cannot be continued, and the vulture retreats back to Linyi.

古文：秃剌虽不能克敌，而撒八自度大军必相继而至，势不可支，谋归于大石，乃率众沿龙驹河西出。
现代文：秃剌虽然不能战胜敌人，而撒八自己揣度一定会有大队人马相继到来，自己势必抵挡不住，谋划去投奔大石，于是率领众人沿着龙驹河向西进发。
English: Although the vultures could not defeat the enemy, Saba guessed that there would be a large group of people coming one after another. He could not resist and planned to go to Dashi, so he led the people along the Longjing River to the west.

古文：及仆散忽土、萧怀忠等兵至，与秃剌合兵追至河上，不及而还。
现代文：等仆散忽土、萧怀忠等人率军队赶来，和秃剌合兵追到龙驹河上，已经赶不上了，只好回去。
English: When the troops led by Podusan Kuchu, Xiao Huaizhong and others arrived, they chased the vultures together with the soldiers to the Longyu River, but they could not catch up and had to go back.

古文：忽土、怀忠、秃剌坐逗遛不即追贼，皆诛死。
现代文：忽土、怀忠、秃剌因为逗留不立刻追杀贼寇而犯罪，都被杀了。
English: Kuandu, Huazhong, and Zhengzhou all were killed because they had committed a crime by not immediately chasing and killing the bandits.

古文：北京留守萧赜不能制其下，杀降人而取其妇女，亦坐诛。
现代文：北京留守萧赜不能管制他的部下，杀投降的人又去霸占他们的妻女，也因此获罪被杀。
English: Xiao Yao, who remained in Beijing, was unable to control his subordinates. He killed those who surrendered and went to occupy their wives and daughters. He was also convicted and killed for this.

古文：于是，白彦恭为北面兵马都统，纥石烈志宁副之，守颜彀英为西北面兵马都统，西北路招讨使唐括孛姑的副之，以讨撒八等。
现代文：于是，白彦恭出任北面兵马都统，纥石烈志宁任副都统，完颜彀英是西北面兵马都统，西北路招讨使唐括孛姑的是副都统，来讨伐撒八等贼。
English: As a result, Bai Yanqong was appointed as the north side of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and Zou Shi Rai Zhining was appointed as the deputy of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Guan Yan Xing was the northwest side of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the northwest road was the deputy of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, to fight against the eight thieves.

古文：撒八既西行，而旧居山前者皆不欲往，伪署六院节度使移刺窝斡、兵官陈家杀撒八，执老和尚、孛特补等。
现代文：撒八已经西行，而原来住在山前的人们都不愿跟他向西走，撒八伪任的官六院节度使移剌窝斡、兵官陈家杀了撒八，逮捕了老和尚、孛特补等人。
English: Saba had already gone west, and the people who originally lived in front of the mountain did not want to go west with him. Saba's false official, the 6th courtyard festival, made him move to the armpit, and the military officer Chen family killed Saba, arrested the old monk, and others.

古文：至是，窝斡始自为都元帅，陈家为都监，拥众东还，至临潢府东南新罗寨。
现代文：到这时候，窝斡开始自己当都元帅，陈家当都监，率众人回师向东归还，来到临潢府东南的新罗寨。
English: At this time, Wo Rong began to be the marshal of the capital, Chen Jia was the supervisor of the capital, and led everyone back to the east, and came to Xinrozhai in the southeast of Linyi Prefecture.

古文：世宗使移剌紥八、前押军谋克播斡、前牌印麻骇、利涉军节度判官马脑等招之。
现代文：世宗派移剌扎八、前押军谋克播斡、前牌印麻骇、利涉军节度判官马脑等人前往对窝斡招降。
English: The world's religious sects were divided into eight factions, with the vanguard of the army leading the way, the vanguard of the army leading the way, the vanguard of the army leading the way, the vanguard of the army leading the way, and the army leading the way.

古文：紥八等见窝斡，以上意谕之。
现代文：扎八等人见了窝斡，传达了皇上的旨意。
English: When Zhaba and the others saw the concubine, they conveyed the emperor's will.

古文：窝斡已约降，已而复谓紥八曰： 若降，尔能保我辈无事乎？ 
现代文：窝斡已经答应投降后又对扎八说 ：如果投降，你能保证我辈平安无事吗？ 
English: After she had already agreed to surrender, she said to Zabachi, "If we surrender, can you guarantee that we will be safe and sound?"

古文：紥八曰： 我知招降耳，其他岂能必哉。 
现代文：扎八说 ：我只知道招降而已，其他的事怎么能保证一定如何呢？ 
English: Zabachi said, "I only know about recruiting, but how can I be sure about the other things?"

古文：紥八见窝斡兵众强，车帐满野，意其可以有成，因说之曰： 我之始来，以汝辈不能有为，今观兵势强盛如此，汝等欲如群羊为人所驱去乎，将欲待天时乎？
现代文：扎八见窝斡的兵多而且强悍，车帐遍野，意识到窝斡可能有所作为，因此对窝斡说 ：我开始来的时候，认为汝辈不能有什么作为，现在看到你的兵势如此强盛，你们想像群羊那样被别人所驱赶吗？打算只等待天时吗？
English: Zhaba saw that Wo's soldiers were numerous and strong, and that the wagons were everywhere. He realized that Wo might be able to do something, so he said to Wo: When I first came, I thought that you guys couldn't do anything. Now that I see that your army is so strong, do you want to be driven away by others like a flock of sheep? Are you just going to wait for the right time?

古文：若果有大志，吾亦不复还矣。 
现代文：如果真有大志，我也不再回去了。 
English: If I really have big ambitions, I won't go back.

古文：贼将有前孛特本部族节度使逐斡者，言： 昔谷神丞相，贤能人也，尝说他日西北部族当有事。
现代文：叛贼将领中有一个前孛特本部族节度使叫逐斡的，说： 从前的谷神丞相，是贤良的能人，曾经说他日西北部族定当有事。
English: One of the renegade generals, a former chief minister of the headquarters of the Xiongtu tribe, who called for mediation, said: The former minister of the Valley of God, is a virtuous and capable person, once said that the northwestern tribes of the day must have something to do.

古文：今日正合此语，恐不可降也。 
现代文：今天正好和这话吻合，恐怕是不可以投降的！ 
English: Today just happens to coincide with this statement, I'm afraid we must not surrender!

古文：于是，窝斡遂决意不复肯降矣。
现代文：于是，窝斡就打定主意不再肯投降了。
English: As a result, Ms. Wo made up her mind not to surrender.

古文：紥八亦留贼中，惟麻骇、播斡还归。
现代文：扎八也留在贼人那里，只有麻骇、播斡回去交差。
English: Zhaba also stayed with the thieves, and only Maqoq and Booyao went back to the crossroads.

古文：窝斡乃引兵攻临潢府，总管移室懑出城战，兵少被执，贼遂围临潢，众至五万。
现代文：窝斡于是领兵进攻临潢府，总管移室懑率兵出城应战，一些兵士被抓去了，反贼于是包围临潢，围城兵士多达五万。
English: Wo Rong then led the troops to attack Linyi Prefecture, and the commander-in-chief, Mingshukong, led the troops out of the city to fight. Some soldiers were captured, and the rebels surrounded Linyi, with as many as 50,000 soldiers besieging the city.

古文：正隆六年十二月己亥，窝斡遂称帝，改元天正。
现代文：正隆六年十二月一日，窝斡称帝，改年号为 天正 。
English: On the first day of December in the sixth year of Zhenglong's reign, Wo Yuxuan was proclaimed emperor, and his era name was changed to Tian Zheng.

古文：是时，北面都统白彦敬、副统纥石烈志宁在北京，闻世宗即位，以兵来归。
现代文：当时，北面都统白彦敬、副都统纥石烈志宁在北京，听说世宗即位，带兵来归附。
English: At that time, the northern governor Bai Yanjing and the vice-governor Zou Shi Liuzhining were in Beijing. They heard that Shizong had ascended to the throne and brought soldiers to annex the territory.

古文：世宗使元帅左都监吾紥忽、同知北京留守事完颜骨只救临潢，昼夜兼行，比至临潢，贼已解围去攻泰州。
现代文：世宗派遣元帅左都监吾扎忽、同知北京留守事完颜骨只去援救临潢，他二人率军昼夜兼行，逼近临潢的时候，贼兵已经解了包围圈去攻打泰州了。
English: Shizong dispatched the marshal Zuo Junwuzha to rescue Linyi, and the marshal Tongzhi to rescue Beijing. The two of them led the army day and night. When they approached Linyi, the bandits had already broken the encirclement to attack Taizhou.

古文：吾紥忽追及于窊历，两军已阵将战，押军猛安契丹忽剌叔以所部兵应贼，吾紥忽军遂败。
现代文：吾扎忽在纞历这个地方追上他们，两军已经分别摆开阵势就要交战，押军猛安契丹族的忽剌叔带领所辖部族兵马响应反贼，吾扎忽的军队于是战败了。
English: Wuzhakhu caught up with them at this place in Xingli. The two armies had already taken up positions separately and were about to engage in battle. Wuzhakhu's army was defeated when Uncle Wu of the Meng'an Khitan tribe, who was leading the army, led the soldiers and horses of his tribe to respond to the invaders.

古文：泰州节度使乌里雅率千余骑与窝斡遇，乌里雅兵复败，仅以数骑脱归。
现代文：泰州节度使乌里雅率领骑兵一千多人马和窝斡相遇，乌里雅的部队又战败了，仅有几骑逃脱回去。
English: At the Taizhou Festival, Uriah led more than a thousand horsemen to meet Wo, and Uriah's troops were defeated again, with only a few horsemen escaping back.

古文：贼势愈振，城中震骇，莫敢出战。
现代文：反贼气焰愈加嚣张，城中上下震惊害怕，没有敢出城迎战的。
English: The anti-thief fervor became more and more arrogant. People in and around the city were shocked and afraid, and did not dare to go out to fight.

古文：贼四面登城，押军猛安乌古孙阿里补率军士数人，各持刀以身率先循城击贼力战，斫刈甚众，贼乃退走，城赖以完。
现代文：贼兵从四面同时登城，押军猛安乌古孙阿里补率领军士数人，各自持刀以身率先沿着城垛抗击贼军拼力奋战，砍杀很多敌人，贼兵才退下，城才得以保全。
English: The bandits came to the city from four directions at the same time, and the army was pushed forward by the ancient Sun Ali, who led several soldiers. Each of them took the lead in fighting against the bandits along the battlements with their swords. They fought hard and killed many enemies. The bandits retreated, and the city was preserved.

古文：泰州司吏颜盏蒲查奏捷，除忠翊校尉，赐银五十两、重彩十端。
现代文：泰州司吏颜盏蒲查报捷，被提拔为忠翊校尉，赐给银子五十两、彩绸十段。
English: Taizhou's secretary, Qian Zhanpu, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of Zhongyao, and was awarded fifty taels of silver and ten taels of colored silk.

古文：二年正月，右副元帅完颜谋衍率诸军北征窝斡。
现代文：大定二年正月，右副元帅完颜谋衍率领军队向北出发征讨窝斡。
English: In the first month of the second year of Dading, the Right Vice-Marshal Guan Yan Muyan led the army to set out to the north to solicit good offices.

古文：二月壬戌诏曰： 应诸人若能于契丹贼中自拔归者，更不问元初首从及被威胁之由，奴婢、良人罪无轻重并行免放。
现代文：二月二十五日，皇帝下诏说： 凡是响应窝斡的人如果能从契丹贼中自己归来的，不再追问当初首先跟从之罪及被威胁的理由，奴婢、良人不分轻罪重罪一律赦免释放。
English: On February 25th, the emperor issued an edict saying: "If anyone who responds to the court's good offices can return from the Khitan bandits on their own, they will no longer ask about the crime of being the first to follow and the reason for being threatened. Slaves, servants, and good-hearted people will all be pardoned and released, regardless of misdemeanors and felonies.

古文：曾有官职及纠率人众来归者，仍与官赏，依本品量材叙使。
现代文：曾经有官职的以及率领众人来归降的，仍然给予官赏，依照本来的品位量才使用。
English: Those who once had official positions and those who led the people to surrender are still given official awards, and are only used according to their original quality.

古文：其同来人各从所愿处收系，有才能者亦与录用。
现代文：和他们同来的人听从各自愿望收留安排去处，对有才能的人也予以录用。
English: Those who came with them were accommodated according to their wishes, and talented people were also hired.

古文：内外官员郎君群牧直撒百姓人家驱奴、宫籍监人等，并放为良，亦从所愿处收系，与免三年差役。
现代文：内外官员、郎君、群牧、直撒、百姓、人家驱奴、宫籍监人等，一并放出当良民，也根据他们所愿意去的地方收留安排，并免除他们三年的差役。
English: Domestic and foreign officials, retainers, herdsmen, direct descendants, commoners, people who drove out slaves, palace inspectors, etc. were all released together, and they were also accommodated according to where they wanted to go, and they were exempted from three years of forced labor.

古文：或能捕杀首领而归者，准上施行，仍验劳绩约量迁赏。
现代文：或者是能捕杀反贼首领而归降的，经皇上批准施行，仍然验证核实劳绩按大小给予升迁或赏赐。
English: Or, if it is possible to capture and kill the anti-thief leader and surrender, it will be implemented with the approval of the emperor, and the performance will still be verified and promoted or rewarded according to the size.

古文：如捕获窝斡者，猛安加三品官授节度使，谋克加四品官授防御使，庶人加五品官授刺史。 
现代文：如果有捕获窝斡的人，是猛安的加三品，官授节度使；是谋克的，官加四品授防御使；如果是庶人，加五品官，授刺史。 
English: If there is a person who has captured a vassal, it is a three-ranked official of Meng'an, and the official will be awarded the degree of a knight; if it is a traitor, the official will be awarded a four-ranked official of defense; if it is a commoner, the official will be awarded a five-ranked official of assassination history.

古文：诏曰： 尚书省，如节度防御使捉获窝斡者与世袭猛安，刺史捉获者与世袭谋克，驱奴、宫籍监人亦与庶人同。 
现代文：诏书上还说： 尚书省，如果节度防御使捉获窝斡的，授予世袭猛安；刺史捉获的授予世袭谋克；驱奴、宫籍监人也和庶人同样对待。 
English: The edict also said: In Shangshu Province, if the defense of moderation leads to the capture of a concubine, he will be awarded a hereditary knighthood; if he is captured by a traitor, he will be awarded a hereditary knighthood; and the slave driver and the palace inspector will be treated the same as the commoners.

古文：复诏宰臣，遍谕将士，能捕杀窝斡者加特进、授真总管。
现代文：又诏告宰相大臣，普遍传达给将士，有能捕捉或者杀死窝斡的，加封特进，授予真总管。
English: He also issued an edict to the Prime Minister, which was generally conveyed to the soldiers that those who were able to capture or kill the caches would be specially promoted and given the title of real chief.

古文：于是，括里将犯韩州，闻元帅兵至，不战遁去，将转趋懿、宜州。
现代文：于是，括里打算进犯韩州，听说元帅完颜谋衍的军队到了，不战而逃跑，转移奔向懿、宜州。
English: As a result, Bulgari planned to invade Korea, and when he heard that the marshal's army had arrived, he fled without a fight and moved to Handan and Yizhou.

古文：谋衍屯懿州庆云县，及屯川州武平县，奏请粮运当遣人护送，兵仗乞选精良者付之。
现代文：谋衍大军屯驻在懿州的庆云县，等屯驻在川州的武平县的时候，谋衍禀奏请求运输军粮要派人护送，兵器甲仗请求选取精良的供给。
English: When Muyan's large army was stationed in Qingyun County, Luzhou, and later in Wuping County, Quanzhou, Muyan requested that the transportation of military grain be escorted by someone, and that the supply of weapons be selected.

古文：诏以南征逃还军士就往屯戍，如不足，量于富家签调，就近地签步军，给仗护送粮运。
现代文：皇帝诏令南征逃回的军士前往屯扎戍守，如果人数不足，按需要量从富家签发调动，就近地签发步军，配给军仗护送粮运。
English: The emperor ordered the soldiers who had escaped from the Southern Expedition to go to Tunza and hold the fort. If the number of soldiers was insufficient, they would be transferred from the rich families according to the required amount, and the infantry would be sent to the nearby areas to escort the grain transportation.

古文：诏平章政事移剌元宜往泰州规措边事。
现代文：皇帝还诏令平章政事移剌元宜前往泰州规划筹措边疆的事情。
English: The emperor also decreed that the Pingzhang government should be transferred, and Yuan Yi went to Taizhou to plan and mobilize the frontier.

古文：前安远大将军斡里袅、猛安七斤、庶人阿里葛、磨哥等自窝斡中来降，斡里袅、七斤加昭武大将军，阿里葛武义将军，磨哥忠勇校尉。
现代文：前安远大将军斡里袅、猛安七斤、庶人阿里葛、磨哥等从窝斡军中来投降，斡里袅、七斤加封昭武大将军，加封阿里葛为武义将军，磨哥为忠勇校尉。
English: Former Anyuan Generals Yulizhong, Meng'an Qixin, commoners Alige and Mogao, and others came to surrender from the encampment of Yulizhong's army. Yulizhong, Qixin and Mogao were awarded the title of Shouwu Generals, Alige was awarded the title of Wuyi Generals, and Mogao was awarded the title of Zhongyong School Lieutenants.

古文：窝斡遂自泰州往攻济州，欲邀粮运。
现代文：窝斡又从泰州出发去攻打济州，打算阻截粮运。
English: Wo also set out from Taizhou to attack Jeju, intending to intercept grain shipments.

古文：元帅完颜谋衍与右监军完颜福寿、左都监吾紥忽合兵，甲士万三千人，曷懒路总管徒单克宁、广宁尹仆散浑坦、同知广宁尹完颜岩雅、肇州防御使唐括乌也为左翼，临海节度使纥石烈志宁、曷速馆节度使神土懑、同知北京留守完颜骨只、淄州刺史尼庞古钞兀为右翼，至术虎崖，尽委辎重，士卒赍数日粮，轻骑袭之。
现代文：元帅完颜谋衍和右监军完颜福寿、左都监吾扎忽合兵，共有甲士一万三千人，曷懒路总管徒单克宁、广宁尹仆散浑坦、同知广宁尹完颜岩雅、肇州防御使唐括乌也作为左翼，临海节度使纥石烈志宁、曷速馆节度使神土懑、同知北京留守完颜骨只、淄州刺史尼古钞兀作为右翼，到达术虎崖，把辎重全部存放在这里，士卒分别带上几天的口粮，只以轻骑去袭击窝斡。
English: The marshal, Guan Yan Muyan, and the right supervisors, Guan Yan Fu Shou, and the left supervisors, Guo Zha Hu Hui, had a total of 13,000 soldiers. The general manager of the lazy road, Tu Shan Kening, the general manager of the broad road, Guan Yin, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide road, the general manager of the wide

古文：糺椀群牧人契丹飐者，与其弟孛迭、挼剌，皆弃家自贼中来降。
现代文：礣鰕群牧人契丹礣者，和他的弟弟孛迭、扌妥剌，都抛弃了家庭从贼军中来投降。
English: The herd's herdsman, Khitan, and his younger brothers, Xidi and Xituxuan, both abandoned their families to surrender from the bandits.

古文：糺者谓谋衍曰： 贼中马肥健，官军马疲弱，此去贼八十里，比遇贼马已惫。
现代文：礣者对谋衍说 ：贼军中的战马肥大健壮，官军的战马疲劳瘦弱，这里距离贼军驻地有八十里，临近贼兵马已经疲惫。
English: The eunuch said to Muyan, "The war horses of the thief army are fat and strong, while the war horses of the government army are tired and weak. This is eighty miles away from the residence of the thief army, and the nearby thief soldiers and horses are already tired.

古文：贼辎重去此不远，我攻之，贼必救其巢穴，贼至马必疲，我马少得息，所谓攻其所必救，以逸待劳者也。 
现代文：贼军的辎重离这里不远，我们去攻击那里，贼军一定回来营救他们的巢穴，等到了那里他们的战马一定也疲劳了，而我们的马已稍微得到了休息，这就是所谓攻其所必救，以逸待劳的策略啊！ 
English: The weight of the bandits' army is not far from here. We will attack there. The bandits will surely come back to save their lair. By the time they get there, their horses will also be tired, while our horses will have had a little rest. This is the so-called strategy of attacking what they need to save, and biding their time.

古文：谋衍从之，乘夜亟发，会大风路暗不能辨，迟明行三十里许，与贼辎重相近，整兵少憩。
现代文：谋衍采纳了他的意见，趁夜色急速发兵，正遇上大风天路面昏暗不能辨别，将近天明走了约三十里路，和贼军的辎重所在地相距很近了，整顿队伍稍事休息。
English: Muyan took his advice and took advantage of the night to rapidly dispatch troops. The wind was blowing and the road was dark and could not be distinguished. He walked about thirty miles near dawn, and the location of the thief's army was very close. The rectification team took a short break.

古文：窝斡趋济州，知大军取其辎重，乃还救，遇于长泺。
现代文：窝斡赶到济州，知道官军去取他的辎重，就回来营救，和官军在长泺相遇。
English: When he arrived in Jeju, he knew that the government army was coming to take his baggage, so he came back to rescue him. He met the government army in Changsan.

古文：既阵，谋衍别设伏于左翼之侧，贼四百余骑突出左翼伏兵之间，徒单克宁射却之。
现代文：双方已经摆开阵势，谋衍另外在左翼一侧设下埋伏，贼兵四百余骑突进左翼的伏兵中间，徒单克宁指挥用箭射退了他们。
English: Both sides had already set up their positions and were planning to set up an ambush on the other side of the left flank. More than four hundred bandits rode into the middle of the ambush on the left flank, and the commanding officer shot them away with an arrow.

古文：是日，别部诸将与贼对者，胜负未分，相去五里许而立。
现代文：当天，别部诸将和贼兵对峙，不分胜负，相距五里左右而对立。
English: On the same day, the generals of other departments confronted the thief soldiers, and they opposed each other at a distance of about five miles, regardless of the outcome.

古文：左翼万户襄别与贼战，贼阵动，襄麾军乘之，突出其后，俱与大军不相及。
现代文：左翼的万户襄另外和贼兵作战，贼阵乱了，襄指挥他的军队乘机突出贼军后面，都和大军不相接。
English: The left-wing Wanyu Xiang also fought against the bandits, and the bandits were in disarray. Xiang commanded his army to take the opportunity to protrude behind the bandits, and they were not in contact with the main army.

古文：襄以善射者二十骑，率众自贼后击之，贼不能支，乘势麾军击其一偏，贼遂却。
现代文：襄挑选二十名善射的骑兵，率领众人从贼军后面袭击他们，贼军不能支撑，襄又乘机指挥部队攻击贼军的一边，贼军才退却。
English: Xiang selected twenty cavalrymen who were good at shooting, and led the crowd to attack them from behind the bandits. The bandits could not support them, and Xiang took the opportunity to command the troops to attack the side of the bandits. Only then did the bandits retreat.

古文：襄遂与大军合，而别部诸将皆至，整阵力战，忽反风扬砂石，贼阵乱，官军驰击，大破之。追北十余里，斩获甚众。
现代文：襄于是和大军汇合，别部诸将也都到了，重新整理阵势奋力作战，这时风向忽然倒过来，反扬砂石，贼阵大乱，官军乘胜追击，大败贼军，向北追击十多里远，斩贼或捕获很多。
English: Xiang then joined the main army, and other generals also arrived, rearranged their positions and fought hard. At this time, the wind direction suddenly reversed, sand and stones flew in the opposite direction, the bandit formation was in chaos, the official army chased after the victory, defeated the bandit army, chased more than ten miles to the north, and many bandits were killed or captured.

古文：诏以糺者为武义将军，孛迭昭信校尉，挼剌忠翊校尉。
现代文：皇帝诏令让礣者当武义将军，孛迭为昭信校尉，扌妥剌为忠翊校尉。
English: The emperor's edict named him as General Wuyi, Zou Tie as Captain Zhaoxin, and Zou Tuo Wei as Captain Zhongyi.

古文：糺除同知建州事，未之官，卒。
现代文：礣者后来又拜同知建州事，还没到任，就去世了。
English: Later, he was appointed to the State Council, but he died before he could take office.

古文：孛迭取家贼中，遂被害，上悯之，后以挼剌为汝州都巡检使。
现代文：孛迭回贼兵驻守地搬取家小，于是被杀害，圣上怜悯他，后来让扌妥剌做了汝州都巡检使。
English: He repeatedly returned to the garrison of the robber soldiers to pick up his family, and was killed. The saint took pity on him, and later made him the inspector of the capital of Ruzhou.

古文：窝斡率其众西走，谋衍追及之于霿河。
现代文：窝斡率领他的队伍向西逃走，谋衍在駒雨松河追上了他们。
English: Wo斡 led his team to flee to the west, and Muyan caught up with them in the Koma Uzumatsu River.

古文：贼已济，毁其津口，纥石烈志宁军先至，不克渡，乃对岸为疑兵，以夹谷清臣、徒单海罗两万户于下流渡河，值支港两岸斗绝且泞淖，命军士束柳填港而过。
现代文：贼军已经过了河，并且毁坏了渡口，纥石烈志宁的军队先到这里，不去攻占渡口，让对岸认为是虚设的兵阵，派夹谷清臣、徒单海罗两名万户在下游渡河，正处在支流，两岸陡峭而且泥泞，两位万户命令兵士捆起柳枝填港而过。
English: The bandit army had already crossed the river and destroyed the ferry. The army of Zou Shi and Li Shining arrived here first. Instead of capturing the ferry, they let the opposite bank think it was an imaginary line of soldiers. They sent two million households to cross the river downstream. They were in a tributary, the banks were steep and muddy. The two million households ordered the soldiers to tie up willow branches and fill the port.

古文：追之数里，得平地，方食，贼众奄至。
现代文：追击贼军数里，找到一块平地，正开饭的时候，贼兵忽然到来。
English: After chasing the bandits for several miles, they found a flat area. Just as dinner was about to begin, the bandits suddenly arrived.

古文：志宁军急整阵，贼自南冈驰下，冲阵者三，志宁力战，流矢中左臂，战自若。
现代文：志宁急整军阵，贼兵从南冈奔驰而下，三次冲阵，志宁奋力作战，左臂中了流箭，仍泰然自若，战斗不止。
English: Shining hurriedly reorganized the army, the thief soldiers rushed down from Nangang Benz, three times rushed, Shining fought hard, his left arm was hit by a stray arrow, he was still calm and self-confident, and the battle continued.

古文：大军毕至，左翼骑兵先与贼接，贼据上风纵火，乘烟击官军，官军步兵亦至，并力合战，凡十余合，军士苦风烟皆植立如痴。会天降雨，风止，官军奋击，大败之。
现代文：大军全部到了，左翼骑兵首先与贼军接上火，贼军占据上风放火，乘浓烟袭击官军，官军步兵也到了，与骑兵并力合战，大约打了十几个回合，军士受风烟之苦都站立在那里像痴呆了似的，正巧天下雨，风停了，官军得以奋力反击，把贼兵杀得大败。
English: The whole army arrived. The left-wing cavalry first caught fire with the thief army. The thief army took the upper hand and set fire, using the thick smoke to attack the official army. The official army infantry also arrived, and fought with the cavalry. They fought about a dozen rounds. The sergeants suffered from the smoke and stood there like they were demented. It happened to rain, and the wind stopped. The official army was able to fight back hard and defeat the thief soldiers.

古文：徒单克宁追奔十五里，贼前厄溪涧不得亟渡，多杀伤。
现代文：徒单克宁追击贼兵奔驰十五里，赶在贼前控制了溪涧，使贼兵不得急渡，贼兵多数被杀伤。
English: He chased the thief soldiers for fifteen miles, and controlled the creek ahead of the thieves, so that the thief soldiers were not allowed to rush across, and most of the thief soldiers were killed or injured.

古文：贼既渡，官军亦渡，少憩，贼反旆来攻，克宁以大军不继，令军士皆下马射贼。
现代文：贼军余部已经渡过河去，官军也渡过去了，稍事休息，贼兵旌旗反指来攻击官军，克宁因为大军没有接上来，所以命令军士都下马用弓箭射贼。
English: The rest of the bandit army had already crossed the river, and the government army had also crossed the river. After a short rest, the bandit soldiers raised their flags and attacked the government army. Because the large army did not catch up, Knin ordered the sergeants to dismount and shoot the bandits with bows and arrows.

古文：贼引却而南，克宁亦将引而北，士未及骑马，贼复来冲突，官军少却，回渡涧北。
现代文：贼军向南引退，克宁也指挥队伍向北转移，兵士没来得及骑马，贼又来冲击，官军稍有退却，渡河回到涧北。
English: The thief army retreated to the south, and Kening also transferred the command team to the north. The soldiers did not have time to ride horses, and the thieves attacked again. The government army retreated slightly and crossed the river back to northern Shandong.

古文：大军至，贼遂引去。
现代文：大军到了，贼军才引退。
English: The great army has arrived, and the bandits have just retired.

古文：四月，诏元帅府曰； 应契丹贼人，与大兵未战已前投降者，不得杀伤，仍加安抚。
现代文：大定二年四月，皇上下诏到元帅府，说： 答应契丹贼人，和大军没交战以前投降的，不得杀伤，仍要加以安抚。
English: In April of the second year of Dading, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the marshal's office, saying, "Promise the Khitan thieves that if they surrender before the great army engages in battle, they must not be killed or injured, and they must still be pacified."

古文：败走以后，招诱来降者，除奴婢准已虏为定外，亲属分付圆聚。仍官为换赎。 
现代文：贼军战败以后，受诱招来投降的，除了奴婢准许作为俘虏另做安排以外，亲属分别团聚，做官的仍然是拿钱财换赎。 
English: After the defeat of the invading army, those who were lured into surrendering were reunited with their relatives, except for the slaves who were allowed to make other arrangements as captives. The officials still took money for ransom.

古文：窝斡既败，谋衍不复追讨，驻军白泺。
现代文：窝斡既然败了，谋衍就暂不再追击讨伐，将军队驻扎在白泺。
English: Since Wo-yu was defeated, Mu-yan temporarily stopped pursuing the crusade and stationed the army in Baekdu.

古文：窝斡攻懿州不克，遂残破川州，将遁于山西，而北京亦不邀击之。
现代文：窝斡攻打懿州打不下来，于是摧残破了川州，将逃遁到山西，而北京也不拦截攻击他们。
English: If they can't beat Luzhou, they'll destroy Sichuan and flee to Shanxi, and Beijing won't stop them.

古文：于是，发骁骑军二千、曷懒路留屯京师军三千，号称二万，会宁济州军六千亦号二万。
现代文：于是，朝廷发出禁军营精壮骑兵二千名、曷懒路留守屯扎京师的军队三千人，号称二万人，还有会宁济州的军队六千人，也是号称二万人。
English: As a result, the imperial court issued a ban on the camp of two thousand strong cavalrymen, the army of three thousand soldiers of the Beijing division left behind on the lazy road, known as twenty thousand people, and the army of six thousand soldiers of Ningji Prefecture, also known as twenty thousand people.

古文：元帅左都监高忠建总兵，沃州刺史乌古论蒲查为曷懒路押军万户，祁州刺史乌林答剌撒为济州押军万户，右骁骑副都指挥使乌延查剌为骁骑万户，祁州刺史宗宁为会宁路押军万户，右宣徽使宗亨为北京路都统，吏部郎中完颜达吉为副统，会元帅府讨击之。
现代文：元帅左都监高忠建出任总兵，沃州刺史乌古论蒲查是曷懒路押军万户，邳州刺史乌林答剌撒是济州押军万户，右骁骑副都指挥使乌延查剌是骁骑万户，祁州刺史宗宁是会宁路押军万户，右宣徽使宗亨是北京路都统，吏部郎中完颜达吉是副都统，在元帅府会合，准备讨伐攻击贼军。
English: The left marshal, Gao Zhongjian, acted as the commander of the general army; the right marshal, Wu Yanjia, acted as the deputy commander of the general army; the left marshal, Wu Guo, acted as the commander of the general army; the right marshal, Wu Lin, acted as the deputy commander of the general army; the right marshal, Wu Yanjia, acted as the deputy commander of the general army; the left marshal, Wu Yanjia, acted as the commander of the general army; the right marshal, Wu Yanjia, acted as the deputy commander of the general army; the right marshal, Wu Yanjia, acted as the

古文：诏使尚厩局副使蒲察蒲卢浑往懿州戒敕将帅，上曰： 朕委卿等讨贼，乃闻不就贼趋战，而驻兵闲缓，经涉累月，虽曾追袭，乃不由有水草之地，以致马疲弱不能百里而还。
现代文：皇上诏令尚厩局副使蒲察蒲卢浑前往懿州告诫将帅，皇上说： 朕委派卿等讨伐贼寇，却听说不接近贼兵追赶作战，而是把军队驻扎下来，行动舒闲缓慢，跋涉累计有一个月，虽然曾经去追袭，却不走有水草的地方，以致战马疲劳瘦弱行不到百里就回转了。
English: The emperor ordered the deputy envoy of the Shang Mews Bureau, Putsapuluhun, to go to Zhangzhou to admonish the general. The emperor said, "I appointed you to fight against the bandits, but I heard that you did not approach the bandits to pursue the battle, but stationed the army, moved slowly, and trekked for a total of one month. Although you went to pursue, you did not go to the place where there was water and grass, so that the war horse was tired and weak and turned back after less than a hundred miles.

古文：后虽破贼，而纵诸军劫掠，数日后方追北霿河，亦不乘胜，辄复引还。
现代文：后来虽然打败了贼兵，却放纵诸军抢劫掠夺，多少天后才追击到北边的駒雨松河，也不乘胜追击，就又带队伍返回了。
English: Later, although he defeated the bandits, he indulged the army in looting and plundering. It was only after several days that he chased them to the north of the Koma Uzumatsu River. He did not take advantage of the pursuit and returned with his army.

古文：贼遂入涉近地，北京、懿州由此受兵。
现代文：贼军于是涉入京都近地，北京、懿州因此遭受到兵乱的骚扰。
English: As a result, the bandit army got involved in the vicinity of Kyoto, and Beijing and Zhangzhou were harassed by military disturbances as a result.

古文：朕欲重谴汝等，以方任兵事，且图后功。
现代文：朕想重重地谴责汝等，所以才委任你们领兵的事，将来希望立有后功。
English: I want to strongly condemn you, that's why I appointed you to lead the troops. I hope you will do a good job in the future.

古文：当尽心一力，毋得似前怠弛。 
现代文：应当尽心竭力，不得像以前那样懈怠松弛。 
English: You should do your best and not slack off as you did before.

古文：上谓蒲卢浑曰： 卿若闻贼在近，即当监督讨伐。
现代文：皇上对蒲卢浑说： 卿如果听到贼人在近处，就要监督讨伐。
English: The emperor said to Buluhun, "Sir, if you hear thieves in the vicinity, you must supervise the crusade.

古文：用命力战者疏记以闻，朕将约量迁赏。
现代文：不惜性命奋力作战的要记下传报过来，朕将按照功劳大小给予升迁或奖赏。
English: Those who are willing to fight with all their might should write down the report, and I will give them a promotion or reward according to their merits.

古文：无或承徇上官，抑有功、滥署无功者。
现代文：不要奉承曲从上司，压抑有功劳的、滥记无功的。
English: Don't flatter your boss, suppress the meritorious, and abuse the unmeritorious.

古文：善戢士卒、勿纵虏掠。 
现代文：要好好约束士卒，不要放纵他们掠夺抢劫。 
English: It is necessary to properly restrain officers and not allow them to plunder and rob.

古文：以纥石烈志宁为元帅右监军，右副元帅完颜谋衍、元帅右监军完颜福寿召还京师，咸平路总管完颜兀带复旧职。
现代文：任命纥石烈志宁为元帅右监军，把原任右副元帅完颜谋衍、元帅右监军完颜福寿召回京师，让咸平路总管完颜兀带官复旧职。
English: He appointed Zou Shi Retshinin as the marshal of the right supervisory army, recalled the former right deputy marshal, Gan Yan Muyan, and the marshal of the right supervisory army, Gan Yan Fu Shou, to the Beijing Division, and allowed the general manager of Xianping Road, Gan Yan, to resume his old position.

古文：谋衍男斜哥在军中多暴横，诏押归本管。
现代文：谋衍的儿子斜哥在军中常常是残暴蛮横，皇上诏令拘押归本部管制。
English: Shanko, the son of Muyan, was often cruel and insolent in the army, and the emperor ordered his detention to be under the control of the headquarters.

古文：窝斡使所亲招节度使移里堇窟域，窟域执其使送官，与窝斡连战有功，迁宣武将军，赐银五百两、衣二袭。
现代文：窝斡派使者亲自去向节度使移里堇窟域招降，窟域绑缚了这个使者送交官府，并且连续和窝斡作战有功，迁升为宣武将军，并赏赐他白银五百两、衣物两套。
English: Hou Yu personally sent an emissary to the Jiedu Emperor to persuade him to abdicate. Hou Yu tied up the emissary and sent him to the government. He was promoted to the position of Xuanwu general, and was awarded five hundred taels of silver and two sets of clothes.

古文：起运在中都弓万五千、箭一百五十万赴懿州。
现代文：又从中都起运弓一万五千张、箭一百五十万支，赶赴懿州支援前线。
English: In addition, 15,000 bows and 1.5 million arrows were transported from Zhongdu to rush to the front line to support Zhangzhou.

古文：平章政事移剌元宜、宁昌军节度使宗叙入见，诏使自中道却还军中，宣谕元宜、谋衍注意经略边事。
现代文：平章政事移剌元宜、宁昌军节度使宗叙入朝进见皇帝，皇帝诏令他们在中途转回军中，传达皇上谕旨：要元宜、谋衍注意研究策划边疆战事。
English: When the political situation in Pingzhang changed to the Yuan Dynasty, and the Ningchang Army Festival was approaching, the envoys were sent to the emperor. The emperor ordered them to return to the army in the middle of the journey, and conveyed the emperor's order: to pay attention to the Yuan Dynasty, and to study and plan the frontier warfare.

古文：师久无功，尚书右丞仆散忠义愿效死力除边患，世宗嘉叹。
现代文：军队时间长了没有机会立功，尚书右丞仆散忠义愿意以死报效朝廷，竭力剪除边疆祸患，世宗对此赞赏并感叹。
English: The army had not had a chance to perform meritorious service for a long time, and Shangshu Yu Rong and San Zhongyi were willing to repay the imperial court with death, and tried their best to eliminate the borderland disaster. Shizong appreciated and lamented this.

古文：六月，忠义拜平章政事兼右副元帅，宗叙为兵部尚书，各赐弓矢、具鞍勒马。出内府金银十万两佐军用。
现代文：六月，忠义出任平章政事兼右副元帅，宗叙是兵部尚书，皇上分别赐给他们弓箭和金套鞍勒战马，并从朝廷内府库中拨出金银十万两补助军用。
English: In June, Tadayoshi assumed the post of Taira no Shosho, a government official and vice-marshal of the right, and Sosetsu was the secretary of the military department. The emperor gave them bows and arrows and gold-plated saddled war horses respectively, and allocated 100,000 taels of gold and silver from the imperial treasury to subsidize the military.

古文：诏曰： 军中将士有犯，除连职奏闻，余依军法约量决责，有功者依格迁赏。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 军中将士有犯法的，有官阶的连同官职一起禀奏让朕知道，其余的依照军法按罪行轻重决定责罚，有功的按照格次迁升或者奖赏。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, saying: If there is a lieutenant general in the army who has violated the law, those who have official ranks should let me know, the rest should be punished according to the military law according to the severity of the crime, and those who are meritorious should be promoted or rewarded according to the rank.

古文：以大名尹宗尹为河南路统军使，河南路统军都监蒲察世杰为西北路副统，赐弓矢佩刀厩马，从忠义征行。
现代文：任命大名尹宗尹为河南路统军使，河南路统军都监蒲察世杰出任西北路副都统，赐给他们弓箭佩刀和马房里的马，让他们跟从忠义出征。
English: He appointed the daimyo, Yin Zongyin, as the envoy of the Henan Road Union Army, and the Henan Road Union Army governor, Puchas, as the distinguished deputy of the Northwest Road Union Army, and gave them bows and arrows, swords and horses from the stable, so that they would follow Zhongyi to go to war.

古文：诏谕诸军将士曰： 兵久驻边陲，蠹费财用无成功，百姓不得休息。
现代文：皇上还诏告诸军的将士说 ：部队长久驻扎在边境，伤财费物没有成功，百姓得不到休息。
English: The emperor also issued an edict to the soldiers of the army, saying: the troops have been stationed at the border for a long time, the injuries, expenses and materials have not been successful, and the people have not been able to rest.

古文：今命平章政事仆散忠义兼右副元帅，同心戮力以底戡定。
现代文：现在命令平章政事仆散忠义兼任右副元帅，大家要同心协力奋战到底，以达到平定战乱的目的。
English: He now ordered the political servant of the Taira clan, San Tadayoshi, to concurrently serve as the right vice-marshal. Everyone should work together to fight to the end in order to achieve the goal of pacifying the war.

古文：右副元帅谋衍罢为同判大宗正事。 
现代文：右副元帅谋衍免职，去出任同判大宗正事。 
English: The Right Vice-Marshal Mok Yan was relieved of his duties and went to serve as a co-judge of Daizong Zhengji.

古文：诏居庸关、古北口讥察契丹奸细，捕获者加官赏。
现代文：皇上还诏令居庸关、古北口的守关人员严密检查明察契丹奸细，对捕获到奸细的，要加官封赏。
English: The emperor also ordered the guards at Juyongguan and Gubeikou to closely inspect the Qidan's spies, and to reward the spies who were caught.

古文：万户温迪罕阿鲁带以兵四千屯古北口，蓟州、石门关等处各以五百人守之。
现代文：万户温迪罕阿鲁带用兵四千人屯守古北口，蓟州、石门关等处各用五百人把守。
English: Wendi Han Aru led 4,000 soldiers to guard the ancient north gate, and 500 people guarded each of Zhangzhou, Shimen Pass and other places.

古文：海陵末年，阿鲁带为猛安，移剌娜为牌印祗候，起契丹部族兵被执，至是挺身来降。
现代文：海陵末年，阿鲁带是猛安，移剌娜是牌印祗候，发动契丹部族兵变被逮捕，到这时候挺身来投降。
English: At the end of the year of Hailing, Aru was called Meng'an, and Yibana was called Ying, and they were arrested for starting a mutiny of the Khitan tribe. At this time, they came forward to surrender.

古文：世宗以阿鲁带为济州押军万户，移剌娜为同知泺州事。
现代文：世宗让阿鲁带做了济州押军万户，移剌娜当同知滦州事。
English: King Sejong asked Aru to lead thousands of troops to Jeju. Emigrants should be aware of the state affairs.

古文：西南路招讨使完颜思敬为都统，赐金牌一、银牌二，西北路招讨使唐括孛古底副之。以兵五千往会燕子城旧戍军，视地形冲要或于狗泺屯驻，远斥候，贼至即战，不以昼夜为限。
现代文：西南路招讨使完颜思敬作为都统，被赐佩金牌一枚、银牌二枚，西北路招讨使唐括孛古底做他的副都统，带兵五千人前去与燕子城原有戍守部队会合，根据地形选择要冲，有的队伍在狗泺驻扎，在远处侦察望，贼军来了就开战，不受白天黑夜的限制。
English: The south-west road recruitment made Yan Sijian complete as a tutti, and he was awarded a gold medal and two silver medals. The north-west road recruitment made Tang Biao Gu Di his deputy tutti, and led five thousand soldiers to meet with the original garrison troops of Yan Zicheng. According to the terrain, they were selected to rush. Some teams were stationed in the dogs, and they scouted in the distance. When the thief army came, they went to war, and they were not restricted by day and night.

古文：诏思敬曰： 契丹贼败必走山后，可选新马三千，加刍颣以备追袭。 
现代文：皇上诏令思敬说 ：契丹贼如果战败必然从山后逃跑，可以选调新马三千匹，添加草料，以准备追袭。 
English: The emperor ordered Sikyong: "If the Khitan bandits are defeated and must flee behind the mountains, you can select three thousand new horses and add grass to prepare for the pursuit."

古文：仆散忠义至军中。
现代文：仆散忠义到了军中。
English: Dousan Tadayoshi joined the army.

古文：是时，窝斡西走花道，众尚八万。
现代文：当时，窝斡经过花道向西转移，跟随他的还有八万人。
English: At that time, he moved westward along the Flower Road, with eighty thousand people following him.

古文：忠义、高忠建军与贼遇，万户查剌、蒲查为左翼，宗亨统之；宗宁、剌撒为右翼，宗叙统之；世杰亦在左翼中，与贼夹河为阵。
现代文：忠义、高忠建的军队和贼军相遇，万户查剌、蒲查为左翼，由宗亨统一指挥；宗宁、剌撒为右翼，由宗叙统一指挥；世杰也在左翼当中，和贼军夹河隔岸对阵。
English: The armies of Zhongyi and Gao Zhongjian met with the bandits. Wanyu Chao and Pucha were on the left, under the unified command of Zongheng; Zoning and Caesar were on the right, under the unified command of Zongxu; Shijie was also on the left, and confronted the bandits across the river.

古文：贼渡河，以兵四万余先犯左翼军，查剌以六百骑奋击败之。
现代文：贼军渡河，用四万多人马先进犯左翼军，查剌带领六百骑兵奋力拼战击败了贼兵。
English: The bandit army crossed the river and used more than forty thousand horses to advance to the left-wing army, and Zha Yu led six hundred cavalry to fight hard and defeat the bandits.

古文：复以四万众与左翼军战，宗亨、世杰七谋克指画失宜，阵乱败于贼。
现代文：窝斡又用四万人马和左翼军队交战，宗亨、世杰七谋克指挥策划失当，阵法乱了被贼兵击败。
English: Wo Rong also used forty thousand horses to fight with the left-wing army, Zongheng and Shijie made seven plans to prevent the command and planning from being improper, and the formation was defeated by the thief soldiers.

古文：世杰挺身投于查剌军中，贼围查剌军，查剌力战，宗叙以右翼军来救，贼乃去。
现代文：世杰挺身投入查剌军中，贼兵包围查剌的军队，查剌奋力作战，宗叙又率领右翼军来救助，贼兵才退却。
English: Shijie threw himself into the army of Zhaan, the bandits surrounded Zhaan's army, Zhaan fought hard, Zongxu led the right-wing army to rescue, and the bandits retreated.

古文：诏曰： 自契丹作逆，有为贼诖误者，不问如何从贼，但能复业，与免本罪。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 自从契丹逆行作乱，有受连累当了贼的，不论是怎样跟随了贼人，但是能够恢复正业，即免去本来的罪行。
English: The emperor issued a decree saying, "Since Khitan rebelled and caused turmoil, some people have become thieves, and no matter how they followed the thieves, if they can resume their rightful occupation, they will be free from the original crime.

古文：如能率众来附，或能杀捕首领而降，或执送贼所扇诱作乱之人，皆与量加官爵。
现代文：如果能率领众人投降归附，或者能捕杀首领来投降，或者抓获送来贼中煽动诱骗作乱的人，都按功劳大小加官晋爵。
English: If you can lead the people to surrender, or you can capture and kill the leader to surrender, or you can capture the thief who instigated and enticed the disturbance, you will be promoted according to your merits.

古文：朕念正隆南征，猛安亡者招还被戮，已命其子孙袭其职。
现代文：朕想到正隆年间南征，猛安逃跑的招回来被杀害，已命令他们的子孙承袭他们的职位。
English: I thought of the Southern Expedition during the Zhenglong era, when Meng'an was called back from fleeing and was killed. I have ordered their descendants to inherit their posts.

古文：尔等勿惩前事，故怀迟疑。
现代文：你们不要戒备往事，心怀迟疑。
English: Don't be afraid of the past, and don't hesitate.

古文：贼军今既破散，山后诸处皆命将士遏其逃路，尔等虽欲不降终将安往？
现代文：贼军现在已经被打得散乱了，山后各个地方都命令将士们阻断他们的逃路，你们虽然是想不投降，但是终究要往哪里去？
English: The rebel army has now been scattered and scattered. All over the mountains, commanders have been ordered to block their escape routes. Although you want to surrender, where do you want to go?

古文：若犹疑贰，俱就焚灭，悔及矣。 
现代文：如果犹豫不决，存有贰心，和贼一起被焚灭，后悔可就来不及了！ 
English: If you hesitate, if you harbor bitterness, if you are burned along with the thief, it will be too late to repent!

古文：窝斡自花道西走，仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁以大军追及于袅岭西陷泉。
现代文：窝斡从花道向西进发，仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁率领大军在袅岭西边的陷泉追上了他们。
English: Wo Miao marched westward from Hua Dao, and his servants, Sanzan Zhongyi and Zangshi Leshining, led a large army to catch up with them at Jianquan on the west side of Fuling.

古文：明日，贼军三万骑涉水而东。
现代文：第二天，贼军三万骑兵渡水转向东行。
English: The next day, the bandits' army of thirty thousand cavalry crossed the water and turned east.

古文：大军先据南冈，左翼军自冈为阵，迤逦而北，步军继之，右翼军继步军北引而东，作偃月阵，步军居中，骑兵据其两端，使贼不见首尾。
现代文：大军先占据了南冈，左翼军从南冈开始布阵，向北延长，步军接着布阵，右翼军接着步兵向北再向东摆开阵势，叫作偃月阵，步军居于中部，骑兵占据阵地的两端，让贼军看不到首尾。
English: The large army first occupied Nangang, the left-wing army began to set up a formation from Nangang and extended it to the north, the infantry followed the formation, the right-wing army followed the infantry to the north and then set up a position to the east, called the Crescent Moon formation, the infantry was in the middle, and the cavalry occupied both ends of the position, so that the thief army could not see the beginning and the end.

古文：是日，大雾晦冥，既阵雾开，少顷晴霁，贼见左翼据南冈不敢击，击右翼军，乌延查剌力战，贼稍却。
现代文：当天，大雾迷漫，阴晦昏氵蒙，等到阵地雾气散开，很快晴空万里。贼军看见左翼军占据南冈，不敢出击，去攻击右翼军，乌延查剌奋力作战，贼军稍有退却。
English: On the same day, it was foggy and gloomy, and when the fog dispersed from the position, the sky was clear. The thief army saw the left-wing army occupy Nangang, and did not dare to attack the right-wing army. Wu Yancha fought hard, and the thief army retreated slightly.

古文：志宁与夹谷清臣、乌林答剌撒、铎剌合战，贼大败，将涉水去，泥泞不得亟渡。
现代文：志宁和夹谷清臣、乌林答剌撒、铎剌配合作战，贼军大败，就要涉水逃跑，但岸边泥泞不能立即渡过去。
English: Zhining and Jiaotong Qingcheng, Wulin replied to Caesar, and Yibing cooperated in the war. When the bandits were defeated, they had to wade into the water to escape, but they could not immediately cross the muddy shore.

古文：大军逐北，人马相蹂践而死，不可胜数，陷泉皆平，余众蹈籍而过，或奔溃窜匿林莽间。
现代文：大军追逐败贼，人马互相践踏蹂躏而死的，不可胜数，陷泉都填平了，活着的兵众踏着尸首而过去，有的人奔命逃窜，躲藏在密林草莽中间。
English: A large army chases a defeated thief. The number of men and horses who trampled and trampled each other to death is incalculable. The traps and springs have all been filled. The living soldiers walk over the corpses. Some people run for their lives and hide in the middle of the dense forest.

古文：大军踵击之，俘斩万计，生擒其弟伪六院司大王袅。
现代文：大军跟踪追击他们，俘虏的人以万计，活捉了窝斡的弟弟伪六院司大王袅。
English: A large army followed and chased them. The captors took tens of thousands of captives, and they captured the younger brother of the false sixth chief abbot, Wang Jun, alive.

古文：窝斡仅与数骑脱去，钞兀、清臣追四十余里不及，斩千余级，获车帐甚众。
现代文：窝斡仅仅和几个骑兵逃脱了。钞兀、清臣追出四十多里远没能追上，斩贼兵首领一千多，缴获许多车帐。
English: Hou Yu escaped with only a few cavalrymen. He was unable to catch up with Guan Yu and Qing Zhen after more than forty miles. He killed more than a thousand leaders of the thieves and captured many wagons.

古文：其母徐辇举营自落括冈西走，志宁追之，尽获辎重，俘五万余人，杂畜不可胜计。
现代文：窝斡的母亲徐辇带全部营帐从落括冈向西逃走，志宁追上去，缴获了全部辎重，俘虏了五万多人，捕获的杂畜不可胜计。
English: The mother of the concubine, Xu Ying, fled westward with all the camp tents from Lopu Mountain. Shining chased after her, seized all the baggage, captured more than 50,000 people, and the captured animals were incalculable.

古文：伪节度使六及其部族皆降。
现代文：伪节度使六和他的部族全部投降。
English: The false edict made Liu and his entire tribe surrender.

古文：诏北京副统完颜达吉括本部马，规办刍粮，仍使达吉为监战官，录有功者闻奏。
现代文：皇帝诏令北京副都统完颜达吉尽用本部的马匹，策划办理草料和军粮，仍由达吉出任监战官，记录有功人员传报禀奏。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Yan Dagi to make full use of the horses of the headquarters after Beijing's vice-capital was unified, and to plan for the handling of hay and grain. Dagi still served as the supervising officer, recorded the reports of meritorious personnel, and played music.

古文：诏选中都、西京两路新旧军万人备守御，以窝斡败走，恐或冲突也。
现代文：诏令选调中都、西京两路新旧军一万人预备守御，以防窝斡失败逃走的时候，恐怕有什么冲突。
English: The imperial edict called for ten thousand new and old troops to be mobilized in the two directions of the capital and West Beijing to be ready to defend the city, in order to prevent any conflict when the conciliator failed to escape.

古文：仆散忠义使使奏捷，诏略曰： 平章政事右副元帅忠义使使来奏大捷。
现代文：仆散忠义派遣使者入朝禀奏报捷，皇帝诏令大略说 ：平章政事右副元帅忠义派遣使者来禀奏大捷。
English: The Emperor's edict said in summary: "Pingzhang, the right vice-marshal of political affairs, Zhongyi, sends an envoy to the Imperial Palace to report the great victory."

古文：或被军俘获，或自能来服，或无所归而投拜，或将全属归附，或分领家族来降，或尝受伪命，及自来曾与官军斗敌，皆释其罪。
现代文：或者是被大军俘虏，或者是自己前来投拜，或者是无处可归而来投降，或者是带领全部属下来归附，或者是分别领着家族来降服，或者曾经接受伪政权命令，以及从来都是与官军为敌的，无论如何，全部开释他们的罪责。
English: Either they were captured by a large army, or they came to worship on their own, or they came from nowhere to surrender, or they led all their subordinates to surrender, or they led their families to surrender separately, or they had received orders from the pseudo-regime, and they had always been enemies of the government army, in any case, all their guilt was absolved.

古文：其散亡人内，除窝斡一身，不以大小官员是何名色，却来归附者，亦准释放。
现代文：那些走散逃跑的人中，除窝斡一人以外，不论大小官员名位高低，只要是来归附的，也准予释放。
English: Of those who scattered and fled, with the exception of Hou Yuanzhong, all officials, regardless of rank, were also released, as long as they came to join the rebels.

古文：有能诛捕窝斡，或于不从招纳亡去人内诛捕以来，及或能率众于掌军官及随处官司投降者，并给官赏。
现代文：有能捕捉和诛杀窝斡的，或者在不从招纳的逃跑的人中捕捉和诛杀的，以及有能率领众人在掌军官和随处官司投降的，官方一律给予奖赏。
English: The authorities will reward anyone who is able to capture and kill those who are hiding, or those who are able to capture and kill those who escape from those who are not recruited, as well as those who are able to lead the masses to surrender to officers in charge and lawsuits everywhere.

古文：各路抚纳来者，毋得辄加侵损。
现代文：各路部队招抚接纳来投降归顺的，不得任意横加侵犯损害他们。
English: The troops on all sides shall not arbitrarily encroach upon and harm those who have surrendered and surrendered.

古文：无资给者，不以是何路分，随有粮处安置，仍官为养济。 
现代文：对没有资财供给的，不用分什么路接纳的，随有粮之处予以安置，仍按官府收养救济办理。 
English: For those who do not have financial resources, and do not need to be accepted in any way, they will be resettled wherever there is food, and will still be handled according to the government's adoption relief.

古文：窝斡收合散卒万余人，遂入奚部，以诸奚自益，时时出兵寇速鲁古淀、古北口、兴化之间。
现代文：窝斡收集散失兵卒一万多人，加入了奚部，根据诸奚的方便，时常出没在速鲁古淀、古北口、兴化之间。
English: He collected more than ten thousand scattered soldiers and joined the Hebei Province, and according to the convenience of the Hebei Province, he often appeared in the areas of Sauru, Guiyang, Gubeikou, and Xinghua.

古文：温迪罕阿鲁带守古北口，与战败焉。
现代文：温迪罕阿鲁带据守古北口，和贼寇交战竟然失败了。
English: Wendihan Aru held the Old North Gate, and the battle with the bandits actually failed.

古文：诏完颜谋衍、蒲察乌里雅、蒲察蒲卢浑以兵三千，合旧屯兵五千，击之。
现代文：皇上诏令完颜谋衍、蒲察乌里雅、蒲察蒲卢浑率兵三千人，会合原有屯守在当地军队五千人，抗击诸奚的部队。
English: After the emperor's edict was issued, Putsa Uriya and Putsa Bulu led three thousand soldiers and gathered five thousand local troops to fight against Zhu Xi's troops.

古文：诏守颜思敬以所部兵入奚地，会大军讨窝斡。
现代文：皇上并诏令完颜思敬带所属部队进入奚地，会合大军讨伐窝斡。
English: The emperor also issued an imperial edict ordering the emperor to lead his troops into the Badlands and gather a large army to fight against Wo.

古文：贼党霿河猛安蒲速越遣人至帅府约降，诏令擒捕窝斡，许以官赏。
现代文：窝斡贼的同党駒雨松河猛安蒲速越差人到大军帅府约定投降，皇帝诏令他擒捕窝斡，答应予以升官封赏。
English: The co-partisans of the thief of the nest, Koma Uzumatsuhe Mokuan and Busho, went to the commander-in-chief's palace and agreed to surrender. The emperor ordered them to capture the thief of the nest and promised to reward them with promotion.

古文：贼将降者甚众。其散走者闻诏书招降，亦多降者。
现代文：贼兵将领投降的很多，那些走散的听说皇帝下诏书招降，也多有来投降的。
English: Many of the generals of the robber soldiers surrendered, and many of those who had dispersed and heard that the emperor had issued an edict inviting them to surrender also came to surrender.

古文：其余多疾疫而死，无复斗志。
现代文：其余的不少人因疾病而死亡，贼军已经不再有斗志。
English: Many of the rest died of disease, and the bandits no longer had the will to fight.

古文：窝斡自度势穷，乃谋自羊城道西京奔夏国，大军追之益急，其众复多亡去，度不得西，乃北走沙陀间。
现代文：窝斡自己考虑大势已去，才谋划从羊城出发取道西京逃奔夏国，大军追击他更加急迫，他的兵士又大多逃亡离去，又考虑向西走不行，于是向北逃走沙陀中间。
English: Wo Rong himself thought that the tide had already gone out, so he planned to escape from Yangcheng to Xijing and flee to Xia. The large army pursued him more urgently, and most of his soldiers fled. He also considered whether it was possible to go west, so he fled north to the middle of Shatou.

古文：诏尚书省： 凡胁从之家被俘掠遂致离散，宜从改正。
现代文：皇帝诏令尚书省 ：凡是胁从的家属被大军俘掠的立即遣散，应当允许他们改邪归正。
English: The emperor issued a decree to the provincial governors: Any family members of the rebels who were captured by the large army should be immediately demobilized, and they should be allowed to reform.

古文：将士往往藏匿其人，有司检括分付。 
现代文：将士往往藏匿这些人，有司要检查收容分别处理。 
English: Military officers often hide these people, and there are departments to inspect and deal with them separately.

古文：监军志宁获贼稍合住，释而弗杀，纵还贼中，使诱其亲近捕窝斡以自效，许以官赏。
现代文：监军志宁擒获贼寇稍合住，释放而不杀掉，放纵他回到贼军中，让他引诱他亲近的人捕捉窝斡来戴罪立功，答应给予升官奖赏。
English: The overseer of the army, Zhining Yao, allowed the bandit to live with him for a while, released him without killing him, allowed him to return to the bandit army, allowed him to lure his close people to capture the nest to bear the crime, and promised to give him a promotion reward.

古文：九月庚子，稍合住与神独斡执窝斡，诣右都临完颜思敬降，并获其母徐辇及其妻、子、子妇、弟、侄，尽收伪金银牌印。
现代文：九月七日，稍合住和神独斡抓住窝斡，去到右都监完颜思敬那里投降，并同时擒获窝斡的母亲徐辇以及窝斡的妻子、儿子、儿媳、弟弟、侄儿，没收了全部伪官署的金银牌印。
English: On September 7th, He Shen Duduo, who lived a short distance away, caught Wo Tao and went to Yan Si Kei, where he surrendered after completing the inspection of the Right Capital. At the same time, he captured Wo Tao's mother, Xu Wei, as well as his wife, son, daughter-in-law, younger brother, and nephew, and confiscated all the gold and silver seals of the Pseudo Government Office.

古文：唐括孛古底获前胡里改节度使什温及其家属。
现代文：唐括孛古底捕获了前胡里改节度使什温及其家属。
English: The Tang Dynasty captured Shwen and his family, who were the former Khuli reformers.

古文：西北路招讨使李家奴获伪枢密使逐斡等三十余人，复与猛安泥本婆果追伪监军那也至天成县，那也乃降，乃获伪都元帅丑哥及金牌一、银牌五。
现代文：西北路招讨使李家奴捕获了伪枢密使逐斡等三十多人，又和猛安泥本婆果追踪伪监军那也到天成县，那也才投降，同时捕获伪都元帅丑哥，并收缴金牌一枚、银牌五枚。
English: Recruitment on the Northwest Road enabled Li Jianu to capture more than 30 people such as the pseudo-secretary of the Privy Council, and he and Meng An tracked the pseudo-supervisor army to Tiancheng County, which also surrendered. At the same time, he captured the pseudo-metropolitan marshal Ugly Brother, and collected one gold medal and five silver medals.

古文：志宁与清臣、宗宁、速哥等追余党至燕子城，尽得其党。
现代文：志宁和清臣、宗宁、速哥等追击窝斡的余党到燕子城，全部捕获了这些余党。
English: Shining, together with Qingcheng, Zonin, and Hayao, pursued the rest of the party to Yan Zicheng, and captured all of them.

古文：前至抹拔里达之地，悉获之，逆党遂平。
现代文：前线直到抹拔里达之地，全部攻取了，于是彻底平定了逆党。
English: The front line up to the land of Magba Ridda was all captured, and the opposing party was completely pacified.

古文：甲辰，皇太子率百官上表贺。
现代文：十一日，皇太子率领百官上表祝贺。
English: On the 11th day, the crown prince led hundreds of officials in a congratulatory parade.

古文：乙巳，诏天下。
现代文：十二日，皇帝诏告天下。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor announced his resignation to the world.

古文：辛亥，完颜思敬献俘于京师，窝斡枭首于市，磔其手足，分悬诸京府。
现代文：十八日，完颜思敬到京师献上俘虏，窝斡在市上被砍头，并砍掉手脚，在各个京府分别悬挂示众。
English: On the 18th, after Yan Sijian went to Beijing to present the captives, Wo Miao was beheaded in the market, and his hands and feet were cut off, and they were displayed separately in various Beijing prefectures.

古文：其母徐辇及妻子皆戮之。
现代文：他的母亲徐辇和妻子、儿子，也全被杀戮了。
English: His mother, Xu Yao, his wife and his son were all killed.

古文：契丹降人皆拘其器仗，贫不能自给者官为养济。
现代文：契丹投降的人都收缴他们的武器，对贫穷不能自给的，官府予以救济。
English: Those who surrendered to the Khitans had their weapons confiscated, and the government provided relief to those who were too poor to support themselves.

古文：括里、紥八率众南走，诏左宣徽使宗亨追及之。
现代文：括里、扎八率众向南逃跑，皇上诏令左宣徽使宗亨追击他们。
English: Bracket and Zhaba led the crowd to flee to the south, and the emperor ordered Zuo Xuanhui to send Zongheng to chase them.

古文：紥八诈称降，宗亨信其言，遂不与战。
现代文：扎八诡诈地说要投降，宗亨轻信了他的话，便不和他交战。
English: Zhaba deceitfully said that he wanted to surrender, but Zongheng believed his words and did not fight him.

古文：紥八绐之曰： 括里惊走，愿追之。 
现代文：扎八欺骗宗亨说： 括里受惊逃走了，我愿意去追击他。 
English: Zhaba deceived Zongheng and said, "He was scared and ran away. I am willing to chase him."

古文：宗亨纵紥八去。
现代文：宗亨放纵扎八去了。
English: Dzongheng's indulgence went into overdrive.

古文：益都猛安欲以所部追括里、紥八，宗亨恐分其功，不听，而纵军士取贼所弃资囊人畜而自有之。
现代文：益都猛安想带领所属部队去追歼括里、扎八，宗亨恐怕益都猛安分享他的功劳，没有听从，而纵使军士私自去拿取贼军所丢弃的资财、牲畜而归自己所有。
English: Yidu Meng'an wanted to lead his troops to chase down and exterminate Bu Li and Zhaba, but Zongheng was afraid that Yidu Meng'an would share the credit with him, so he did not listen, and even though the sergeant went to take the assets and livestock discarded by the thief army, they became his property.

古文：括里、紥入由是得亡去，遂奔于宋。
现代文：括里、扎八由于这个原因而逃跑了，投奔了宋国。
English: For this reason, Bu Li and Zhaba ran away and went to Song.

古文：宗亨降宁州刺史。
现代文：宗亨被降职当了宁州刺史。
English: Zongheng was demoted to the post of Ningzhou chief historian.

古文：其后，宋李世辅用括里、紥八，遂取宿州，颇为边患。
现代文：以后，宋朝李世辅任用括里、扎八，攻取宿州，在边境成为很大的祸患。
English: Later, the Song Dynasty's Li Shifu used the parentheses and dashes to capture Suzhou, which became a great disaster on the border.

古文：神独斡除同知安化军节度使，稍合住除同知震武军节度使事。
现代文：神独斡拜官同知安化军节度使，稍合住拜同知震武军节度使事。
English: The God's Providence and Sovereignty Intercessor and the Envoy to the Festival of the Chuanhua Army, and the Envoy to the Festival of the Chizhongwu Army.

古文：大定六年，点检司奏，亲军中有逆党子弟，请一切罢去。
现代文：大定六年，点检司禀奏，亲军中有逆党的子弟，请求对他们一律清除。
English: In the sixth year of Dading, the inspector of points, Zhao Song, requested that all the sons of the traitors in the pro-army be purged.

古文：诏曰： 身预逆党者罢之，余勿问。 
现代文：皇帝诏令： 亲身参加逆党的清除掉，其余的不要追究。 
English: The Emperor's edict: Those who personally participated in the rebellion should be purged, and the rest should not be investigated.

