古文：褚遂良，散骑常侍亮之子也。
现代文：褚遂良，是散骑常侍褚亮的儿子。
English: Zou Suiliang was the son of Zou Liang, a knight-errant.

古文：太业末，随父在陇右，薛举僭号，署为通事舍人。
现代文：大业末年，跟随他的父亲在陇右，薛举称帝时，安排褚遂良为通事舍人。
English: In the last years of his great career, when he followed his father to Shizhu and Xuejiu was proclaimed emperor, he arranged for Zou Suiliang to act as a mediator.

古文：举败归国，授秦州都督府铠曹参军。
现代文：薛举失败后，他投奔朝廷，被任命为秦州都督府兵曹参军。
English: After Xue's failed coup, he defected to the imperial court and was appointed as a petty officer of the Qin State Governor to join the army.

古文：贞观十年，自秘书郎迁起居郎。
现代文：贞观十年，由秘书郎迁任起居郎。
English: After ten years of chastity, he was reassigned from secretary to housemaster.

古文：遂良博涉文史，尤工隶书，父友欧阳询甚重之。
现代文：遂良广博地涉猎文史，特别擅长隶书，他父亲的朋友欧阳询非常看重他。
English: Suiliang extensively dabbled in literary history, and was particularly good at calligraphy. His father's friend Ouyang Rong valued him very highly.

古文：太宗尝谓侍中魏徵曰： 虞世南死后，无人可以论书。 
现代文：太宗曾经对侍中魏征说 ：虞世南死后，没有人可以谈论书法。 
English: Emperor Taizong once said to Wei Zheng, an aide-de-camp: After the death of Yu Shennan, no one can talk about calligraphy.

古文：徵曰： 褚遂良下笔遒劲，甚得王逸少体。 
现代文：魏征说： 褚遂良下笔遒劲，很得王逸少书体的真髓。 
English: Wei Zheng said: 遂良下笔劲,很得王逸少书体真髓.

古文：太宗即日召令侍书。
现代文：太宗当天就召令遂良为侍书。
English: On the same day, Emperor Taizong summoned Suiliang to be his attendant.

古文：太宗尝出御府金帛购求王羲之书迹，天下争赍古书诣阙以献，当时莫能辩其真伪，遂良备论所出，一无舛误。
现代文：太宗曾经出王府重金购求王羲之的书法真迹，天下的人争着携带古代书法赴皇帝的殿廷献给太宗，当时不能分辨这些墨迹的真伪，遂良一一详细论述它们的源流出处，没有一点错误。
English: Emperor Taizong once paid a large sum of money to the royal court to purchase the authentic calligraphy of Wang Xuan. People from all over the world competed to bring ancient calligraphy to the emperor's court to present to Emperor Taizong. At that time, it was not possible to distinguish the authenticity of these ink blots. Suiliang discussed their sources and outlets in detail, without a single error.

古文：十五年，诏有事太山，先幸洛阳，有星孛于太微，犯郎位。
现代文：贞观十五年，太宗下诏，准备到泰山封禅，先到洛阳，彗星出现在太微座，冲犯郎位。
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to prepare to go to Mount Taishan to hold a Zen ceremony. He first went to Luoyang, where a comet appeared in the constellation Ursa Minor, offending the emperor.

古文：遂良言于太宗曰： 陛下拨乱反正，功超前烈，将告成东岳，天下幸甚。
现代文：遂良对太宗说： 陛下拨乱反正，功超前烈，东狱即将大功告成，天下非常幸运。
English: Suiliang said to Taizong, "Your majesty has turned the situation around, your achievements are outstanding, the Eastern Prison is about to complete its great work, and the world is very fortunate.

古文：而行至洛阳，彗星辄见，此或有所未允合者也。
现代文：然而走到洛阳，彗星就出现，这或许是有上天不许可的事。
English: However, when you go to Luoyang, the comet appears, which may be something that heaven does not allow.

古文：且汉武优柔数年，始行岱礼，臣愚伏愿详择。 
现代文：况且汉武帝犹豫不决数年，才举行泰山封禅礼，臣下的愚见恭请陛下详细考虑抉择。 
English: Moreover, Emperor Hanwu hesitated for several years before holding the Taishan Enclosure Zen Rite. His foolish subjects respectfully asked His Majesty to consider his choice in detail.

古文：太宗深然之，下诏罢封禅之事。
现代文：太宗认为他说得很对，下诏停止了封禅的事。
English: Emperor Taizong thought he was right, and issued an edict to stop the practice.

古文：其年，迁谏议大夫，兼知起居事。太宗尝问： 卿知起居，记录何事，大抵人君得观之否？ 
现代文：当年，遂良迁任谏议大夫，兼任起居事，太宗曾经问他说： 你担任起居，记录什么事，大概人君能够看到它吗？ 
English: In that year, Sui Liang was transferred to the post of the doctor of consultation and concurrently the post of the secretary. Taizong once asked him: You are the secretary, what do you record, can you see it?

古文：遂良对曰： 今之起居，古左右史，书人君言事，且记善恶，以为鉴诫，庶几人主不为非法。不闻帝王躬自观史。 
现代文：遂良回答说： 现在的起居，就是古代的左右史，写人君的言行事迹，而且记录善恶，作为鉴戒，也许可以令人主不做非法的事，没有听说帝王亲自看史的。 
English: Suiliang replied, "The current residence is the left and right history of ancient times, writing the words and deeds of emperors, and recording good and evil, as a warning, it may be possible to make the lord not do illegal things, I have not heard that the emperor personally read history.

古文：太宗曰： 朕有不善，卿必记之耶？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：朕有不好的事。你也必定记下它吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "I have something bad to say. Do you have to write it down, too?"

古文：遂良曰： 守道不如守官，臣职当载笔，君举必记。 
现代文：遂良说 ：遵守道德不如遵守自己的职责，臣的职责应当记载笔录，君王的举动必定记下来。 
English: Suiliang said: Observing morality is not as good as observing one's duties. The duties of a vassal should be recorded, and the actions of a monarch must be recorded.

古文：黄门侍郎刘洎曰： 设令遂良不记，天下亦记之矣。 
现代文：黄门侍郎刘洎说 ：假若遂良不记，天下的人也会记下来。 
English: Huangmen waiter Liu Wei said: "If Sui Liang doesn't remember it, people around the world will also remember it."

古文：太宗以为然。
现代文：太宗认为他们说的对。
English: Taizong thought that Wei Zheng was right.

古文：时魏王为太宗所爱，礼秩如嫡。
现代文：当时魏王被太宗宠爱，对他的礼仪秩序等级像对嫡子一样。
English: At that time, Wei Wang was favored by Emperor Taizong, and the level of etiquette and order for him was the same as for his legitimate son.

古文：其年，太宗问侍臣曰： 当今国家何事最急？ 
现代文：当年，太宗问侍臣说 ：当今国家什么事最急迫？ 
English: That year, Emperor Taizong asked his vassal, "What is the most pressing issue facing the country today?"

古文：中书侍郎岑文本曰： 《传》称 导之以德，齐之以礼 ，由斯而言。礼义为急。 
现代文：中书侍郎岑文本说 ：《左传》说 导之以德，齐之以礼 ，由此而言，礼仪最急。 
English: The text of the Chinese book of etiquette says: "Left hand" says, "Lead by virtue, salute by salute," so the etiquette is the most urgent.

古文：遂良进曰： 当今四方仰德，谁敢为非？
现代文：遂良走上前说 ：当今四方仰慕德行，谁敢做非分的事？
English: Suiliang stepped forward and said: Today, all four parties admire virtue, who would dare to do something wrong?

古文：但太子、诸王，须有定分，陛下宜为万代法以遗子孙。 
现代文：但是太子、诸王，必须有一定的名分，陛下应当让万代效法把它留给子孙。 
English: However, princes and kings must have a certain status, and His Majesty should let all generations follow suit and leave it to their descendants.

古文：太宗曰： 此言是也。
现代文：太宗说 ：这话是对的。
English: Taizong said, "That's right.

古文：朕年将五十，已觉衰怠。
现代文：朕年岁将近五十，已经觉得衰老倦怠。
English: I am almost fifty years old, and I already feel a lack of energy and that my body is aging.

古文：既以长子守器东宫，弟及庶子数将五十，心常忧虑，颇在此耳。
现代文：已经由长子主管东宫，弟弟和庶子的数目将近五十，心里时常忧虑的就是这件事了。
English: The eldest son is already in charge of the East Palace, and the number of younger brothers and illegitimate sons is nearly fifty. This is what I often worry about.

古文：但自古嫡庶无良佐，何尝不倾败国家？
现代文：但是自古嫡子与庶子没有良臣辅佐，何尝不会倾败国家。
English: However, since the legitimate son and the illegitimate son do not have a good vassal assistant, they will not defeat the country.

古文：公等为朕搜访贤德，以傅储宫，爰及诸王，咸求正士。
现代文：公等为朕搜访贤德的人才，用来辅佐太子以及各王，都要求正道之士。
English: The government is searching for virtuous people to assist the crown prince and the kings, and they are looking for righteous people.

古文：且事人岁久，即分义情深，非意窥窬，多由此作。 
现代文：况且事奉人年岁长了，就会摸透性情巴结逢迎，不怀好意伺机而动的现象，多由此发生。 
English: Moreover, when the servant is older, he will understand the nature of the meeting, and the phenomenon of waiting for the opportunity with bad intentions is mostly caused by this.

古文：于是限王府官僚不得过四考。
现代文：于是限制王府官僚任职不得超过十二年。
English: As a result, bureaucrats in the royal court were limited to holding office for no more than twelve years.

古文：十七年，太宗问遂良曰： 舜造漆器，禹雕其俎，当时谏舜、禹者十余人。食器之间，苦谏何也？ 
现代文：贞观十七年，太宗问遂良说： 舜造漆器，禹雕切肉的砧板，当时劝谏舜、禹的有十余人，食用的器物之间，为什么苦谏呢？ 
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Taizong asked Suiliang: "Why is there bitterness between the lacquer ware made by Zhen and the cutting board carved by Yu? At that time, there were more than ten people advising Zhen and Yu, and they were eating utensils.

古文：遂良对曰： 雕琢害农事，纂组伤女工。
现代文：遂良回答说 ：雕琢妨害农业生产，锦绣赤色的绶带会妨害女红。
English: Zou Suiliang replied: Engaging in fine carving will interfere with farming, and weaving colorful ribbons will interfere with women's normal affairs.

古文：首创奢淫，危亡之渐。
现代文：首先创造奢侈和过分的浪费，国家的危亡就渐渐近了。
English: The first creation of luxurious lasciviousness is the beginning of peril.

古文：漆器不已，必金为之；金器不已，必玉为之。
现代文：漆器不禁止，必定用金做它，金器不禁止，必定用玉做它。
English: If you are not satisfied with lacquerware, you must use gold. If you are not satisfied with goldware, you must use jade.

古文：所以诤臣必谏其渐，及其满盈，无所复谏。 
现代文：所以诤臣必定劝谏事情渐发的开端，到它发展到极点，就没有什么可以再去劝谏的了。 
English: Therefore, the vassal of the vassal must enter the vassal at the beginning of the matter, and when it is done, it will not work to persuade the vassal.

古文：太宗以为然，因曰： 夫为人君，不忧万姓而事奢淫，危亡之机可反掌而待也。 
现代文：太宗认为对，因此说： 作为人君，不忧虑人民而从事骄奢淫侈的事，危亡的时机可以反掌而待了。 
English: Emperor Taizong thought it was right, so he said, "As a prince, you can engage in extravagant and luxurious things without worrying about the people. The time of danger can wait.

古文：时皇子年幼者多任都督、刺史，遂良上疏曰： 昔两汉以郡国理人，除郡以外，分立诸子。割土分疆，杂用周制。
现代文：当时皇子年幼的多担任都督、刺史，遂良上疏说： 从前两汉靠郡国治理人民，除郡以外，分立诸子，分割疆土，杂用周朝的制度。
English: At that time, most of the young princes served as prefectural governors and provincial governors, so Liang Shangzhu said: In the past, the two Han dynasties governed the people by county. In addition to the county, they separated the sons, divided the territory, and misused the Zhou Dynasty system.

古文：皇唐州县，祖依秦法。
现代文：皇唐州县，大略依照秦的法律。
English: Emperor Tangzhou County, roughly in accordance with the laws of Qin.

古文：皇子幼年，或授刺史，陛下岂不以王之骨肉，镇扞四方？
现代文：皇子幼年，有的授任为刺史，陛下难道不是用王的骨肉，镇压护卫四方？
English: When the prince was young, some of his appointments were historic. Didn't his majesty use the king's flesh and blood to suppress the guards?

古文：此之造制，道高前烈。
现代文：这种首创的制度，比以前历代帝王高明。
English: This pioneering system is superior to that of previous emperors.

古文：如臣愚见，有小未尽。
现代文：臣下的愚见，有小的地方处置尚不够妥帖。
English: In the foolish opinion of his subordinates, it is not enough to deal with small localities.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：刺史郡帅，民仰以安。
现代文：刺史郡守，人民仰赖他得到安宁。
English: The people rely on him for peace and tranquility.

古文：得一善人，部内苏息；遇一不善，合州劳弊。
现代文：得到一个好的人做刺史郡守，当地的人民都能休养生息；遇到一个不好的人做刺史郡守，全州的人民都会劳苦疲敝。
English: If you get a good person to be the county magistrate of Jishi County, the local people will be able to rest and recuperate; if you get a bad person to be the county magistrate of Jishi County, the people of the whole state will be exhausted.

古文：是以人君爱恤百姓，常为择贤。
现代文：因此人君爱惜百姓，常为人民选择贤德的官吏。
English: Therefore, the emperor caresses and sympathizes with the people, and often chooses a virtuous person.

古文：或称河润九里，京师蒙福；或人兴歌咏，生为立祠。
现代文：有的称赞河润泽了九里，京都蒙受福恩；有的兴起歌咏赞叹，活着就为他立祠。
English: Some praised the nine-mile river runoff as a blessing for Kyoto; others praised the rise of poetry and built a shrine for him while he was still alive.

古文：汉宣帝云： 与我共理者，惟良二千石。 
现代文：汉宣帝说： 与我共同治理国家的，只有贤能二千石。 
English: Emperor Han Xuan said, "Only a man with 2,000 koku of ability can govern the country with me."

古文：如臣愚见，陛下兒子内年齿尚幼、未堪临人者，且留京师，教以经学。
现代文：以臣下愚昧的见解，陛下的儿子当中年岁还幼小不能够统管人的，暂且留在京都，教给他经学。
English: According to the foolish opinion of his subjects, His Majesty's middle-aged son is too young to be in charge of people, so he will stay in Kyoto for the time being and teach him the scriptures.

古文：一则畏天之威，不敢犯禁；二则观见朝仪，自然成立。
现代文：一则使他畏惧天威，不敢犯禁；二则看见朝廷礼仪，自然成长自立。
English: On the one hand, they are afraid of your majesty and dare not break the law; on the other hand, they go in and out to watch the ceremony of the imperial court, and naturally grow up and become independent.

古文：因此积习，自知为人。
现代文：因此积累知识，自己懂得做人。
English: Therefore, they accumulate knowledge and know how to behave.

古文：审堪临州，然后遣出。
现代文：审察他能够治理州县，然后派遣出京。
English: He was examined for his ability to govern prefectures and counties, and then sent to Beijing.

古文：臣谨按汉明、章、和三帝，能友爱于弟，自兹已降，取为准的。
现代文：臣谨按史籍，见汉明帝、汉章帝、汉和帝三帝，能友爱子弟，从此以后，其友爱子弟之法便成为后代的榜样。
English: According to historical records, Han Mingdi, Han Zhangdi, and Han He Di, the three emperors, were able to love their children, and since then, their way of loving their children has become a model for future generations.

古文：封立诸王，虽各有国土，年尚幼小者，召留京师，训以礼法，垂以恩惠。
现代文：封立的各王，即使各自拥有国土，年纪还幼小的，召他们留在京都，用礼法训导他们，用恩惠垂爱他们。
English: The feudal lords, even though they have their own lands and are still young, invite them to stay in Kyoto, instruct them in etiquette, and love them with grace.

古文：讫三帝世，诸王数十百人，唯二王稍恶，自余餐和染教，皆为善人。
现代文：到三帝的朝代为止，封的王有数百人，只有二个王稍坏一些，其余的都自觉追求团结，感受教化，都成为善人。
English: By the time of the Third Emperor's dynasty, there were hundreds of feudal lords. Only two lords were slightly worse. The rest consciously pursued unity, felt enlightened, and became good people.

古文：则前事已验，惟陛下详察。 
现代文：那么从前的事实已经验证，希望陛下详察。 
English: Then the facts of the past have been verified, and I hope His Majesty will take a closer look.

古文：太宗深纳之。
现代文：太宗十分采纳他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong fully adopted his opinion.

古文：其年，太子承乾以罪废，魏王泰入侍，太宗面许立为太子。因谓侍臣曰： 昨青雀自投我怀云： 臣今日始得与陛下为子，更生之日也。
现代文：当年，太子承乾因罪被废黜，魏王泰入宫服侍，太宗当面应许立他太子，因此对侍臣说 ：昨天青雀自己投入我的怀抱说 ：臣今天才能够给陛下做儿子，是再生之日。
English: In that year, Prince Heung Kyeong was deposed for his crime, and Wei Wang Tairan entered the palace to serve. Taejong promised in person to make him crown prince, so he said to his retainer, "Yesterday, the young sparrow threw himself into my arms and said, 'Today, I can give your majesty a son, it is the day of rebirth.'

古文：臣唯有一子，臣百年之后，当为陛下杀之，传国晋王。 
现代文：臣只有一个儿子，百年之后，一定为陛下杀他，把王位传给晋王。 
English: The vassal had only one son. A hundred years later, he would surely kill him for His Majesty and pass the throne to King Jin.

古文：父子之道，故当天性，我见其如此，甚怜之。 
现代文：父子的伦理，原应当是天性，我见他这样，非常垂怜他。 
English: The father-son ethic is supposed to be innate, and I feel very sorry for him when I see him like this.

古文：遂良进曰： 陛下失言。伏愿审思，无令错误也。安有陛下百年之后，魏王执权为天下之主，而能杀其爱子，传国于晋王者乎？
现代文：遂良走上前说： 陛下失言，恭请陛下慎重考虑，不要使决策错误，哪有陛下百年之后，魏王执掌政权为天下的君王，而能杀死自己的儿子，传王位给晋王的呢？
English: Suiliang stepped forward and said, "Your Majesty has made a slip of the tongue. I respectfully ask Your Majesty to consider carefully and not to make a mistake in decision-making. After a hundred years of Your Majesty's reign, the Wei King is the king of the world, but can he kill his own son and pass the throne to the Jin King?

古文：陛下昔立承乾为太子，而复宠爱魏王，礼数或有逾于承乾者，良由嫡庶不分，所以至此。
现代文：陛下从前立承乾为太子，而又重新宠爱魏王，礼数有的超过了对承乾的，确实因为嫡庶不分，所以到这个样子。
English: His Majesty had previously made Jian Qian the crown prince, but he had once again fallen in love with the king of Wei. Some of his courtesies exceeded those of Jian Qian, and it was indeed because they were illegitimate children that they ended up like this.

古文：殷鉴不远，足为龟镜。
现代文：隋鉴不远，足可以作为鉴戒。
English: Sui Jian is not far away, the foot can be used as a warning.

古文：陛下今日既立魏王，伏愿陛下别安置晋王，始得安全耳。 
现代文：陛下今天既然立魏王为太子，希望陛下另外安置晋王，才能够安全。 
English: Since Your Majesty has appointed Wei Wang as the crown prince today, I hope that Your Majesty will also place Jin Wang, so that we can be safe.

古文：太宗涕泗交下曰： 我不能。 
现代文：太宗涕泪交流说 ：我不能。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Mr. Tai said, "I can't."

古文：即日召长孙无忌、房玄龄、李勣与遂良等定策，立晋王为皇太子。
现代文：当天召长孙无忌、房玄龄与遂良等研究决策，立晋王为皇太子。
English: On the same day, the eldest grandson Mubi, Fang Xuanling and Sui Liang were summoned to study and make decisions, and Prince Jin was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：时频有飞雉集于宫殿之内，太宗问群臣曰： 是何祥也？ 
现代文：那时，经常有飞雉聚集在宫殿里面，太宗问群臣说 ：是什么吉祥的兆头呢？ 
English: At that time, hawks often gathered in the palace. Taizong asked the courtiers, "What is the auspicious sign?"

古文：对曰： 昔秦文公时，有童子化为雉，雌者鸣于陈仓，雄者鸣于南阳。童子曰：得雄者王，得雌者霸。
现代文：遂良回答说： 从前秦文公时，有童子变化为雉，雌雉在陈仓鸣叫，雄雉在南阳鸣叫，童子说： 得到雄雉可以当王，得到雌雉可以成霸。 
English: Suiliang replied, "From the time of Qin Wengong, there was a boy who changed into a stork, a female stork chirped in Chen Cang, and a male stork chirped in Nanyang. The boy said, 'If you get a male stork, you can become a king, and if you get a female stork, you can become a ruler.'

古文：文公遂以为宝鸡。
现代文：文公就把它叫作宝鸡。
English: Wenguang called it the treasure chicken.

古文：后汉光武得雄，遂起南阳而有四海。
现代文：后汉光武帝得到雄雉，于是从南阳兴起而有天下。
English: After Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty gained power, he rose from Nanyang to rule the world.

古文：陛下旧封秦王，故雄雉见于秦地，此所以彰表明德也。 
现代文：陛下原来被封为秦王，因此雄雉出现在秦地，所以这是显示完美德行的祥兆。 
English: His Majesty was originally crowned as the King of Qin, so the male rooster appeared in Qin, so this is a good omen to show perfect virtue.

古文：太宗悦曰： 立身之道，不可无学，遂良博识，深可重也。 
现代文：太宗高兴地说： 立身的道理，不可以没有学识，遂良博识，是十分可敬重的。 
English: Taizong said happily, "The principle of standing on one's own two feet is that one should not be without knowledge, and it is very respectable and important to have good knowledge.

古文：寻授太子宾客。
现代文：不久授遂良为太子宾客。
English: Soon Suiliang was invited as a guest of the crown prince.

古文：时薛延陀遣使请婚，太宗许以女妻之，纳其财聘，既而不与。
现代文：当时薛延陀派遣使者前来求婚，太宗答应把女儿嫁给薛延陀，收纳了他的财物聘礼，不久又不给女儿与他成婚。
English: At that time, Xueyantuo sent an envoy to propose marriage. Taizong agreed to marry his daughter to Xueyantuo, accepted his property and dowry, and soon refused to marry his daughter to him.

古文：遂良上疏曰：
现代文：遂良上疏说：
English: Suiliang Shangso said:

古文：臣闻信为国本，百姓所归，是以文王许枯骨而不违，仲尼宁去食而存信。
现代文： 我听说诚信是国家的根本，百姓的归宿，因此文王允许重新掩埋枯骨而不违背道义，仲尼宁可绝食而坚守信义。
English: I heard that honesty is the foundation of the country and the destination of the people. Therefore, King Wen allowed the dead bones to be reburied without violating morality. Zhong Ni would rather go on a hunger strike and stick to honesty.

古文：延陀曩岁乃一俟斤耳，值神兵北指，荡平沙塞，狼山、瀚海，万里萧条，陛下兵加诸外而恩起于内，以为余寇奔波，须立酋长，玺书鼓纛，立为可汗。
现代文：延陀从前不过是一俟斤罢了，遇到神兵北上，扫平了沙塞、狼山、瀚海，万里萧条，陛下威力施加在域外而恩德建立在国内，认为余寇来往奔波，必须设立酋长，于是下玺书旗鼓，把延陀立为可汗。
English: Once upon a time, Yan Tuo was nothing more than a piece of wood. Encountering divine soldiers heading north, he swept away the sands, the wolf mountain, the vast sea, and thousands of miles of depression. His majesty's power was exerted outside the region, while his benevolence was established within the country. He thought that the remaining robbers were rushing back and forth, and it was necessary to establish a chieftain, so he set out to establish Yan Tuo as a khan.

古文：其怀恩光，仰天无极，而余方戎狄，莫不闻知，以共沐和风，同餐恩信。
现代文：他感念陛下恩宠的光泽，对圣上的敬慕没有穷尽，而其余各地的异族，没有不听说知道的，因此共同沐浴和风一起蒙受恩惠信任。
English: He feels the luster of His Majesty's grace, and his admiration for the sacred is inexhaustible, while the rest of the foreign people around the world have not heard of it, so they bathe together with the wind and enjoy the grace and trust.

古文：顷者频年遣使，请婚大国，陛下复降鸿私，许其姻媾。
现代文：不久连年派遣大使，向我大唐国求婚，陛下又降下皇恩，应许与他结为婚姻。
English: Before long, year after year, he sent ambassadors to ask for my hand in marriage to the Great Tang Dynasty, and His Majesty bestowed a royal favor and promised to marry him.

古文：于是报吐蕃，告思摩，示中国，五尺童子人皆知之。
现代文：于是报告吐蕃，告诉思摩，诏示中国，五尺童子人人都知道这件事。
English: So the report went out, telling Sima and China that everyone knew about the five-foot-tall boy.

古文：于是御幸北门，受其献食，于时百僚端笏，戎夷左衽，虔奉欢宴，皆承德音，口歌手舞，乐以终日。
现代文：于是陛下到北门，受纳了他奉献的酒食，当时百官端正地执着手板，异族穿着衣襟向左的民族服装，虔诚恭敬地接受喜乐的酒宴，都承受到美好的声誉，口歌手舞，欢乐终日。
English: Therefore, His Majesty went to the North Gate and accepted the food and wine offered by him. At that time, the dignitaries held the hand board neatly, the foreigners wore the national costume with the collar turned to the left, and piously and respectfully accepted the joyous wine banquet. They all received a good reputation, singing and dancing, and were happy all day long.

古文：百官会毕，亦各有言，咸以为陛下欲得百姓安宁，不欲边境交战，遂不惜一女而妻可汗，预在含生，所以感德。
现代文：百官聚会结束，也各有议论，都认为陛下想求得百姓的安宁，不想让边境交战，于是不惜把自己的一个女儿嫁给可汗，在于预先顾惜苍生百姓，所以感念陛下的恩德。
English: At the end of the gathering of hundreds of officials, there were also discussions. They all thought that His Majesty wanted to seek the peace of the people and did not want the border to be at war, so he did not hesitate to marry one of his daughters to the khan, in order to take care of the people in advance, so he was moved by His Majesty's kindness.

古文：今一朝生进退之意，有改悔之心，臣为国家惜兹声听。
现代文：现在一旦产生反复的念头，有了改约悔婚的心思，臣为国家惋惜这美好的声誉。
English: Now, as soon as there is a recurring thought, the thought of changing the contract and repenting, the minister regrets this beautiful reputation for the country.

古文：君子不失色于物，不失口于人。
现代文： 君子不对人心色不一，情不副色，不失信于人。
English: A gentleman does not have different feelings for different people, does not have different feelings, and does not lose faith in others.

古文：晋文公围原，命三日粮，原不降，命去之。
现代文：晋文公包围原地，命军士各持三天的粮食，三天内原地不投降，命令解围离开原地。
English: Jin Wengu besieged the original site, ordered the sergeants to hold three days of grain each, not to surrender the original site within three days, and ordered to lift the siege and leave the original site.

古文：谍出曰： 原将降矣。 
现代文：城中的间谍出来说： 原地准备投降了。 
English: The spies in the city came out and said: We are ready to surrender.

古文：军吏请待之，公曰： 信，国之宝也，民之庇也。
现代文：军吏请求文公等到拔取原地城池再走。文公说： 信，是国家的珍宝，百姓的依凭。
English: The military officer asked Wengong to wait until he had taken the citadel. Wengong said, "Faith is a national treasure, and the people rely on it.

古文：得原失信，何以庇之？ 
现代文：得到原地而失信，还有什么让百姓依靠寡人？ 
English: What else is there for the people to rely on but themselves?

古文：陛下虑生意表，信在言前，今者临事，忽然乖殊，所惜尤少，所失滋多。情既不通，方生嫌隙，一方所以相畏忌，边境不得无风尘。西州、朔方，能无劳扰？
现代文：陛下的考虑出于意料之外，诚信在许婚之前，现在对待事情，忽然背离通常的道理，所吝惜的很少，所失去更多，情理既然不通，就要产生由猜忌而形成的仇怨，一方因此相畏惧和猜忌，边境不会没有纷乱，西州、朔方能够没有骚扰吗？
English: Your Majesty's consideration is unexpected. Before the betrothal, you treated the matter with sincerity, but now you suddenly deviate from the usual principle. You have little to be sorry for, and more to lose. Since the reason is not clear, it is necessary to generate hatred formed by suspicion. One side is therefore afraid and suspicious. The border will not be without turmoil. Can Xizhou and Shuo not be harassed?

古文：彼胡以主被欺而心怨，此士以此无信而怀惭，不可以训戎兵，不可以励军事。
现代文：那边异族因为主子被欺辱而怀恨在心，这边士卒因为没有诚信而内心惭愧，因此不能教诲边关的军队，不能勉励军人的各项事务。
English: The foreigners on the other side hold grudges because their masters have been bullied, while the soldiers on this side are ashamed because they lack integrity, so they can't instruct the troops at the border and can't encourage the soldiers in various matters.

古文：伏惟陛下以圣德神功，廓清四表。自君临天下，十有七载，以仁恩而结庶类，以信义而抚戎夷，莫不欣然，负之无力。
现代文：陛下凭借圣德神功，肃清四方极远之处，自从治理天下以来，已经有十七年，以仁德恩义而结交众多的物类，以诚信道义安抚异族，百姓没有不愉悦的，深怕没有尽力报偿陛下的恩德。
English: His Majesty, by virtue of his saintly virtue, has cleared the most distant places in the four directions. Since he has been ruling the world, it has been seventeen years. With benevolence and kindness, he has befriended many species, and with honesty and morality, he has pacified foreign nations. The people are not displeased, and they are deeply afraid that they have not done their best to repay His Majesty's kindness.

古文：其见在之人，皆思报厚德；其所生胤嗣，亦望报陛下子孙。
现代文：天下的生民，都想报答陛下厚重的恩德；他们所生的后代，也希望报答陛下的子孙。
English: People all over the world want to repay His Majesty's great kindness; their descendants also hope to repay His Majesty's descendants.

古文：今者得一公主配之，以成陛下之信，有始有卒，其唯圣人乎！
现代文：现在能把一个公主嫁给薛延陀可汗，用来成全陛下的诚信，使此事善始善终，都有赖于陛下的圣德呀！
English: Now, to be able to marry a princess to Xueyantuo Khan, to use it to fulfill His Majesty's integrity, to make this matter a good beginning and a good ending, all depends on His Majesty's holiness!

古文：且又龙沙以北，部落无算，中国击之，终不能尽。亦由可北败，芮芮兴，突厥亡，延陀盛。
现代文： 再说龙沙以北，部落无数，朝廷去攻击它们，终究不能把它们打尽，只是因为可比失败了，芮芮又兴起，突厥灭亡了，延陀又强盛。
English: Moreover, north of Longsha, there are countless tribes. The imperial court attacked them, but ultimately could not defeat them all. It was only because the comparison failed that the Yao arose again, the Turks perished, and the Yandu became strong again.

古文：时以古人虚外实内，怀之以德，为恶在夷不在华，失信在彼不在此。
现代文：因此古人谦虚对待外族而巩固内部，用仁德信义感化他们。作恶在于异族而不在于中华，失信在于他们而不在于我们。
English: Therefore, the ancients treated foreigners with modesty and strengthened their inner strength, inspiring them with benevolence, virtue and sincerity. It is the foreigners, not the Chinese, who commit evil, and it is they, not we, who are untrustworthy.

古文：伏惟陛下圣德无涯，威灵远震，遂平高昌，破吐浑，立延陀，灭颉利。
现代文：陛下圣德无边，威灵远震，于是平定高昌，击败吐浑，封立延陀，剪灭颉利。
English: His majesty's holiness is boundless and far-reaching, so he subdued Gaochang, defeated Tubun, fenced off Yanda, and eliminated Qili.

古文：轻刑薄赋，庶事无壅，菽粟丰贱，祥符累臻。
现代文：减轻刑罚薄征赋税，各种事务没有阻滞，粮食富足便宜，吉祥的符瑞接连到来。
English: Penalties have been reduced, taxes have been reduced, various affairs have not been blocked, grain is abundant and cheap, and auspicious signs have come one after another.

古文：此则尧、舜、禹、汤不及陛下远矣。
现代文：这就是尧、舜、禹也不及陛下长久。
English: That's why Yu, Yu and Yu are not as long-lived as His Majesty.

古文：伏愿旁垂恺悌，广兹含育，而常嗔绝域，有意远籓，非偃伯兴文之道，非止戈为武之义。
现代文：在下希望陛下对边疆远播教化之礼，广施含育之恩，但常常怪罪极远的地域，有意疏远异族，不是休战兴文的办法，不是止息兵戈为武的行为。
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will spread the blessing of enlightenment and education to the frontier, but often blaming the distant regions and intentionally alienating the foreign ethnic groups is not a way to end the war, nor is it an act to stop the war.

古文：臣以庸暗，忝居左右，敢献瞽言，不胜战惧。
现代文：臣因为平凡愚昧，愧居陛下身边，斗胆奉献这些瞎话，不胜战栗畏惧。 
English: The vassal, ashamed to be in the presence of his majesty because of his ordinary stupidity, dared to utter these lies, trembling with fear.

古文：时太宗欲亲征高丽，顾谓侍臣曰： 高丽莫离支贼杀其王，虐用其人。
现代文：当时太宗想亲自出征高丽，环顾身边的侍臣对他们说 ：高丽的莫离支这个叛贼杀了高丽王，虐待役使高丽的人民。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong wanted to personally go to fight in Korea. He looked around at the attendants around him and said to them, "The traitor Mo Yat-sen of Korea killed the king of Korea and mistreated the people of Korea.

古文：夫出师吊伐，当乘机便，今因其弑虐，诛之甚易。 
现代文：出师抚慰高丽的人民讨伐莫离支，应当趁这个机会，现在因为莫离支反叛亲君肆虐百姓，讨伐他非常容易。 
English: It should take advantage of this opportunity to send a teacher to soothe the people of Goryeo to fight against Mo Yat-sen. Now, because Mo Yat-sen's rebel relatives are wreaking havoc on the people, it is very easy to fight him.

古文：遂良对曰： 陛下兵机神算，人莫能知。
现代文：遂良回答说 ：陛下兵机神算，人不能知。
English: Suiliang replied, "Your Majesty's military strategy is a divine calculation, and no one can know.

古文：昔隋末乱离，手平寇乱。
现代文：从前隋末政治混乱，陛下亲手平定敌贼。
English: Once upon a time, at the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was political turmoil, and His Majesty personally pacified the enemy.

古文：及北狄侵边，西蕃失礼，陛下欲命将击之，群臣莫不苦谏，陛下独断进讨，卒并诛夷。
现代文：到北狄侵犯边疆，西蕃失礼，陛下想命令将领攻打它们，群臣没有不苦言劝谏的，陛下独自决断进军讨伐，结果都被治除平定。
English: To the north, Di invaded the frontier, to the west, Xizang made a faux pas, His Majesty wanted to order the generals to attack them, the courtiers did not have to persuade them, His Majesty alone decided to march into the crusade, and the results were eliminated and pacified.

古文：海内之人，徼外之国，畏威慑伏，为此举也。
现代文：境内的人民，域外的国家，害怕神威而恐惧屈服，是因为您的这个举动。
English: The people inside the country, the countries outside the region, are afraid of arrogance and fear of submission, because of this action of yours.

古文：今陛下将兴师辽东，臣意荧惑。
现代文：现在陛下准备兴师征伐辽东，臣心里迷惑。
English: Now that His Majesty is preparing to raise an army to conquer Liaodong, his subjects are puzzled.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：陛下神武，不比前代人君。兵既渡辽，指期克捷，万一差跌，无以威示远方，若再发忿兵，则安危难测。 
现代文：陛下的神威武勇，不比前代的帝王，军队既然渡海伐辽，只期望攻克获胜，万一不能取胜，没有威力向远方显示，如果再发动忿怒的兵众，就安危难测了。 
English: His majesty's might and valor are no better than those of previous emperors. Since the army has crossed the sea to Liao, it only expects to conquer and win. If it cannot win, it does not have the power to show the distance. If the angry soldiers are unleashed again, it will be dangerous.

古文：太宗深然之。
现代文：太宗认为他说得很对。
English: Taizong agrees with this very much.

古文：兵部尚书李勣曰： 近者延陀犯边，陛下必欲追击，此时陛下取魏徵之言，遂失机会。
现代文：兵部尚书李责力说： 近来延陀进犯边疆，陛下必定想追击，这时陛下采纳魏征的意见，就失去了机会。
English: Shangshu Li Rongli of the Ministry of Military Affairs said, "Recently, Yanta has invaded the frontier, and His Majesty must want to pursue it. When His Majesty adopted Wei Zheng's opinion, he lost the opportunity.

古文：若如圣策，延陀无一人生还，可五十年间疆场无事。 
现代文：假若依照陛下圣明的决策，延陀没有一个人能活着回去，可以确保五十年内疆场没有战争。 
English: If, in accordance with His Majesty's sacred decision, not a single person in Yandu can return alive, we can ensure that there will be no war on the battlefield within fifty years.

古文：帝曰： 诚如卿言，由魏徵误计耳。
现代文：太宗说 ：确实像你说的这样，因为魏征而误大计了。
English: Taizong said: Indeed, as you said, because of Wei Zheng, it was a wrong plan.

古文：朕不欲以一计不当而尤之，后有良算，安肯矢谋。 
现代文：朕不想因一计不当，而指责他，现在既然又有良策，怎么肯再失谋。 
English: I don't want to blame him for a bad plan. Now that we have a good plan, how can we lose our way again?

古文：由是从勣之言，经画渡辽之师。
现代文：因此听从了李责力的意见，策划安排渡海伐辽的军队。
English: Therefore, he listened to Li Rongli's opinion and planned and arranged for the army to cross the sea to Liao.

古文：遂良以太宗锐意三韩，惧其遗悔，翌日上疏谏曰：
现代文：遂良因为太宗专心一意想攻打三韩，恐怕他留下悔恨，第二天上疏劝谏说：
English: Sui Liang, fearing that Taizong's single-minded desire to attack the three Koreas would leave him with remorse, went to Shang Zuo the next day to persuade him, saying:

古文：臣闻有国家者譬诸身，两京等于心腹，四境方乎手足，他方绝域，若在身外。臣近于坐下，伏奉口敕，布语臣下，云自欲伐辽。
现代文： 臣听说国家譬如身体，两京等于心腹，四境好比是手足，他方远地好像是在身体之外，臣近在陛下身边坐下，伏在地上奉听陛下口令，说自己想征伐辽东。
English: The vassal heard that the country is like the body, the two capitals are equal to the heart and the abdomen, the four regions are like the limbs, and the other side is far away and seems to be outside the body. The vassal sat down near His Majesty, lay down on the ground and obeyed His Majesty's command, saying that he wanted to conquer Liaodong.

古文：臣数夜思量，不达其理。
现代文：臣数夜思量这事，不明白这当中的道理。
English: The minister thought about it for several nights and did not understand the reason.

古文：高丽王为陛下之所立，莫离支辄杀其主，陛下讨逆收地，斯实乘机。
现代文：高丽王是陛下所立，莫离支擅自杀他的君主，陛下讨伐逆贼收回领地，这确实是机会。
English: King Goryeo was established by His Majesty, and His Majesty should not leave his monarch to commit suicide, and His Majesty should fight against the traitors to recover the territory. This is indeed an opportunity.

古文：关东赖陛下德泽，久无征战，但命二、三勇将，发兵四、五万，飞石轻梯，取如回掌。
现代文：关东依靠陛下仁德的恩泽，长期没有战争，只须命令二三名勇将发动四五万兵士，放飞石用轻梯，攻取它易如反掌。
English: Kanto, relying on the grace of His Majesty's benevolence, has been free of war for a long time. All that is needed is to order two or three brave generals to launch 450,000 soldiers and use a light ladder to release the flying stones. It is easy to capture it.

古文：夫圣人有作，必履常规，贵能克平凶乱，驾驭才杰。
现代文：圣人的作为，必须遵循常规，贵在能攻克平定凶暴动乱，驾驭贤才杰士。
English: The actions of a saint must follow the rules. It is important to be able to overcome and quell violent upheavals, and to harness the talents of sages.

古文：惟陛下弘两仪之道，扇三五之风，提厉人物，皆思效命。
现代文：只有陛下弘扬天地之道，煽动三皇五帝之风，提拔人物，都想尽力效命。
English: Only His Majesty promotes the way of heaven and earth, instigates the style of the three emperors and five emperors, promotes people, and wants to do his best.

古文：昔侯君集、李靖，所谓庸夫，犹能扫万里之高昌，平千载之突厥，皆是陛下发踪指示，声归圣明。
现代文：从前侯君集、李责力，都是人们所说的庸夫，尚且能扫平万里的高昌，平定千年的突厥，都是陛下指挥作战，声望归于陛下的圣明。
English: Once upon a time, Hou Junji and Li Rongli were what people called "gentlemen," and they were able to sweep away thousands of Gaochang and pacify a thousand years of Turkic. They were commanded by His Majesty, and their reputation was attributed to His Majesty.

古文：臣旁求史籍，讫乎近代，为人之主，无自伐辽，人臣往征，则有之矣。
现代文：臣广泛地寻求史籍，到近代为止，作为君主，没有御驾亲征攻伐辽的，人臣去征伐，那是有的。
English: The courtier extensively searched for historical records. Up until modern times, as a monarch, if there was no imperial envoy to conquer Liao, there was always a courtier to conquer.

古文：汉朝则荀彘、杨仆，魏代则毋丘俭、王颀；司马懿犹为人臣，慕容真僭号之子，皆为其主长驱高丽，虏其人民，削平城垒。
现代文：汉朝有荀彘、杨仆，魏代就有毋丘俭、王颀；司马懿出征时尚为人臣，慕容真是一个超越本分自己称帝的人的儿子，都为他们的君主长驱高丽，掳掠那里的人民，削平高丽的城垒。
English: The Han Dynasty had Gao and Yang Bu, and the Wei Dynasty had Bao Qiu Jian and Wang Yao; Sima Yi went to war in style as a vassal, and Murong was really the son of a man who overstepped his duty and called himself an emperor. For their monarchs, they drove Goryeo, plundered the people there, and leveled the fortifications of Goryeo.

古文：陛下立功同于天地，美化包于古昔，自当超迈于百王，岂止俯同于六子？
现代文：陛下立功等同于天地，好的风尚包容了古代往昔，自然应当超越历代百王，难道止降格等同于上述的六个臣子。
English: His Majesty's meritorious deeds are equal to heaven and earth, and his good manners have embraced the ancient times. Naturally, he should surpass the hundreds of kings throughout the ages, and his demotion is equal to that of the above-mentioned six courtiers.

古文：陛下昔翦平寇逆，大有爪牙，年齿未衰，犹堪任用，匪唯陛下之所使，亦何行而不克。
现代文：陛下从前剪平敌寇逆贼，有很多武臣，年纪未老，还可以任用，不是只有陛下自己可以出使，又有什么征而不胜的。
English: Your Majesty once leveled the enemy, invaders and traitors. There are many warriors who are not old and can still be appointed. Your Majesty is not the only one who can send envoys, and there is no way to defeat them.

古文：方今太子新立，年实幼少，自余籓屏，陛下所知。
现代文： 刚巧现在太子刚刚封立，年纪确实幼小；自己余下的保卫，陛下是知道的。
English: It just so happens that the crown prince has just been enthroned, and he is indeed very young; His Majesty is aware of his remaining defenses.

古文：今一旦弃金汤之全，渡辽海之外，臣忽三思，烦愁并集。
现代文：现在一旦抛弃金城汤池一样坚固的安全，远渡辽海之外，臣忽然三思，烦虑愁绪交集。
English: Now, as soon as he abandons the solid security of Jincheng Tangchi and travels far away from the Liao Sea, the minister suddenly thinks twice and is troubled and sad.

古文：大鱼依于巨海，神龙据于川泉，此谓人君不可轻而远也。
现代文：大鱼依靠巨海，神龙凭据江河源泉，这是说人君不可以轻易地远征。
English: The great fish relies on the great sea, and the divine dragon relies on the source of the river. This means that you cannot easily go on an expedition.

古文：且以长辽之左，或遇霖淫，水潦腾波，平地数尺。
现代文：况且在长辽左方，或许遇到大雨连绵不断，大水积聚波浪翻腾，平地淹没，水深数尺。
English: Moreover, in the left side of Changliao, continuous heavy rain may be encountered, large water accumulates, waves churn, the flat land is flooded, and the water depth is several feet.

古文：夫带方、玄菟，海途深渺，非万乘所宜行践。
现代文：带方、玄菟，海途深远无边，不是万乘之尊的帝王适宜行走践踏的地方。
English: The sea route is far-reaching and boundless, and it is not a place suitable for the Emperor of Manjushri to walk and trample.

古文：东京太原，谓之中地，东捴可以为声势，西指足以摧延陀，其于西京，迳路非远，为其节度，以设军谋，系莫离支颈，献皇家之庙。
现代文：东京、太原，称为中心地带，东边指挥可以造声势，西边指挥足可以摧毁延陀，它对于西京，路途不远。可以在此节制调度，设置军事谋划，绑住莫离支的头颈，献进皇家的宗庙。
English: Tokyo and Taiyuan are called the heartland. The commander in the east can make a loud noise, and the commander in the west can destroy Yenda, which is not far from the west. It is possible to control the dispatch, set up a military plan, tie the head and neck of Mo Yizhi, and dedicate it to the imperial family temple.

古文：此实处安全之上计，社稷之根本，特乞天慈，一垂省察。
现代文：这确实是使国家处于安全的上策，社稷的根本，特此乞求陛下降慈悲之恩，明察垂省臣之所议。 
English: This is indeed the best policy for the security of the country and the foundation of social stability. I hereby implore Your Majesty to have mercy on me and to carefully examine what your ministers have proposed.

古文：太宗不纳。
现代文：太宗不采纳遂良的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong did not accept his opinion.

古文：十八年，拜黄门侍郎，参综朝政。
现代文：贞观十八年，拜遂良为黄门侍郎，参与总揽朝政。
English: In the eighteenth year of Zhenguan, Bai Suiliang was a Yellow Gate attendant, and participated in the general election of the imperial court.

古文：高丽莫离支遣使贡白金，遂良言于太宗曰： 莫离支虐弑其主，九夷所不容，陛下以之兴兵，将事吊伐，为辽山之人报主辱之耻。
现代文：高丽莫离支派遣使者进贡白金，遂良对太宗说： 莫离支虐杀他的君主，他的罪过九族所不容，陛下因此举兵，准备抚慰高丽百姓征伐莫离支，为辽山人民的君主受辱报仇雪耻。
English: Goryeo's Mo Yi sent an envoy to pay tribute in platinum. Su Liang said to Emperor Taizong: Mo Yi tortured and killed his sovereign. His crime was unacceptable to the nine ethnic groups. Therefore, His Majesty raised an army and prepared to appease the people of Goryeo by conquering Mo Yi and avenging the humiliation of the sovereign of the people of Liaoshan.

古文：古者，讨弑君之贼，不受其赂。
现代文：古时候，讨伐杀君的叛贼，不受他的贿赂。
English: In ancient times, the traitors who fought and killed the prince were not bribed by him.

古文：昔宋督遗鲁君以郜鼎，桓公受之于太庙，臧哀伯谏曰： 君人者昭德塞违，今灭德立违，而置其赂器于太庙，百官象之，其又何诛焉？
现代文：从前杀君的叛臣宋督送给鲁国国君郜鼎，鲁桓公接受了郜鼎，把它安放在太庙里，臧哀伯劝谏说 ：国君显示德行禁止邪恶，而今消灭德行建立邪恶，而在太庙安置叛贼贿赂的器物，百官仿效它，又怎么诛灭叛贼呢？
English: Once upon a time, the traitor Song Du, who had killed the emperor, gave the emperor of the State of Lu a gong ding. The Emperor of Lu accepted the gong ding and placed it in the Great Temple. Zou Yibo advised Zou that the emperor had shown virtue by prohibiting evil, but now the elimination of virtue would create evil, and the traitor's bribe would be placed in the Great Temple. The officials would imitate it, but how could they destroy the traitor?

古文：武王克商，迁九鼎于洛邑，义士犹或非之，而况将昭违乱之赂器，置诸太庙，其若之何？ 
现代文：武王攻取商，把九鼎迁到洛邑，义士还有非议他的，何况把显示邪恶叛乱的贿赂器物安置在太庙，这像什么样子呢？ 
English: King Wu captured the merchants, moved the Jiuding to Luoyang, and the righteous still criticized him, not to mention placing the bribery utensils that showed evil rebellion in the Great Temple. What does this look like?

古文：夫《春秋》之书，百王取法，若受不臣之筐篚，纳弑逆之朝贡，不以为愆，何所致伐？
现代文：《春秋》这部书，百王效法，如果收受背叛君主之人的器物，接纳杀君逆贼的朝贡，不认为是过错，怎么讨伐？
English: "Spring and Autumn" is a book that follows the example of hundreds of emperors. If it is not considered a mistake to accept the belongings of those who betrayed the monarch and the tribute of the traitors who killed the monarch, how can it be combated?

古文：臣谓莫离支所献，自不得受。 
现代文：臣认为莫离支所献的白金，自然不能接受。 
English: The vassal thought that the platinum offered by the Mo branch was naturally unacceptable.

古文：太宗纳焉，以其使属吏。
现代文：太宗采纳这个意见，把进贡的白金交给了使者的属员。
English: Emperor Taizong accepted this suggestion and gave the tribute of platinum to the envoy's subordinates.

古文：太宗既灭高昌，每岁调发千余人防遏其地，遂良上疏曰：
现代文：太宗已经灭了高昌，每年调派一千多人防范控制高昌，遂良上疏说：
English: Emperor Taizong had already destroyed Gaochang. Every year, he dispatched more than a thousand people to prevent and control Gaochang. So Liang Shangzhao said:

古文：臣闻古者哲后，必先事华夏而后夷狄，务广德化，不事遐荒。
现代文： 臣听说古代圣明的君主，必定先治理华夏之后再治理异族夷狄，从事扩大道德教化，不使它远离衰败。
English: The vassal heard that the monarch of ancient Shenming must first govern Huaxia and then govern the alien Yidi, engage in expanding moral enlightenment, and keep it away from decay.

古文：是以周宣薄伐，至境而止；始皇远塞，中国分离。
现代文：因此周宣王少征伐，到边境而止；秦始皇于边塞穷兵黩武，中国分离。
English: As a result, Zhou Xuan Wang undertook fewer campaigns and stopped at the border; Qin Shi Huang sent troops to the border fortress, and China was separated.

古文：汉武负文、景之聚财，玩士马之余力，始通西域，初置校尉。
现代文：汉武帝依仗文帝、景帝聚集的财物，凭借军事上的余威，开始与西域交往，开始设置校尉。
English: Relying on the accumulated wealth of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, Emperor Hanwu began to interact with the western regions by virtue of his military influence, and began to set up school lieutenants.

古文：军旅连出，将三十年。
现代文：军队接连出征，近三十年。
English: The army has been going to war one after another for nearly thirty years.

古文：复得天马于宛城，采蒲萄于安息。
现代文：又在宛城得到天马，在安息采到葡萄。
English: In Wancheng, they obtained celestial horses, and in Renmin, they harvested grapes.

古文：而海内虚竭，生人失所，租及六畜，算至舟车，因之凶年，盗贼并起，搜粟都尉桑弘羊复希主意，遣士卒远田轮台，筑城以威西域。
现代文：然而境内空虚衰竭，生民百姓流离失所，租税征到六畜，算计到了车船，因此遇到灾年，盗贼并起。搜粟都尉桑弘羊又观望君主的意思，派士卒在轮台屯田，筑城来威胁西域。
English: However, the territory was empty and exhausted, the people were displaced, the tax was levied on six animals, and the car and ship were counted, so it was a disaster year, and the thieves also arose. Sogou captain Kuang Hongyang also watched the monarch's intention, sent officers to the round table, built a city to threaten the western region.

古文：帝翻然追悔，情发于中，弃轮台之野，下哀痛之诏，人神感悦，海内乃康。
现代文：汉武帝很快而彻底地追溯以往而悔悟，感情从中引发，放弃了轮台的田野，降下文辞凄切悲伤的诏书，人与神都感动得心悦诚服，境内才安乐。
English: Emperor Hanwu quickly and thoroughly retraced the past and repented, feelings were triggered from it, abandoned the field of the wheelhouse, and issued a decree of great sadness. Both people and gods were moved and pleased, and the country was at peace.

古文：向使武帝复用弘羊之言，天下生灵皆尽之矣。
现代文：假使武帝又采用桑弘羊的意见，天下的生灵都将殄灭殆尽。
English: If Emperor Wu adopts Kuang Hongyang's opinion, all living beings in the world will be annihilated.

古文：是以光武中兴，不逾葱岭，孝章即位，都护来归。
现代文：因此光武年间国家兴旺，势力不越过葱岭；孝章即位，西域都护来归顺。
English: Therefore, during the Guangwu era, the country prospered, and the power did not exceed the green onion; Xiaozhang ascended the throne, and the western region was protected and surrendered.

古文：陛下诛灭高昌，威加西域，收其鲸鲵，以为州县。
现代文： 陛下诛灭高昌，威力施加到西域，收容那里凶恶的人，作为州县。
English: His Majesty wiped out the State of Gaochang and made the foreign ethnic groups in the Western Regions submit to the majesty of the Great Tang Dynasty. Today, he still needs to defend their land and establish prefectures.

古文：然则王师初发之岁，河西供役之年，飞刍挽粟，十室九空，数郡萧然，五年不复。
现代文：然而君主的军队开始出发的时候，就是河西供役之时，车船飞驰急运粮草，仓库十室九空，数郡萧条，五年都不能恢复。
English: However, when the imperial court sent troops, the west of the Yellow River encountered a bad year, the fields were overgrown with weeds, the granules were not collected for several years, nine out of ten households were poor, and the surrounding counties were also very depressed. Five years have passed, but nothing has changed.

古文：陛下岁遣千余人远事屯戍，终年离别，万里思归。
现代文：陛下每年派遣一千多人到很远的地方从事耕作防卫，与家人终年离别，万里思归。
English: Every year, His Majesty dispatches more than a thousand people to faraway places to engage in farming and defense, and they leave their families all year round, never to return.

古文：去者资装，自须营办，既卖菽粟，倾其机杼。
现代文：去的人费用行装，自己必须料理准备，卖完粮食，倒下机杼。
English: Those who go there are loaded with expenses, they have to prepare their own food, sell the grain, and fall down the stairs.

古文：经途死亡，复在其外，兼遣罪人，增其防遏。
现代文：路途中的死亡，还在这以外，同时遣送罪人，又须增加对他们的防范控制。
English: Deaths on the road are also on the rise, while the deportation of criminals requires more preventive control.

古文：彼罪人者，生于贩肆，终朝惰业，犯禁违公。止能扰于边城，实无益于行阵。
现代文：那些罪人，生活在从事买卖的集市，整天不务正业，犯禁违法，只会在边城扰乱，确实对战阵无益。
English: Those sinners, who live in the bazaar engaged in trade and commerce, do not engage in legitimate business all day long, commit prohibited and illegal acts, and only disturb the border town, are indeed of no benefit to the front line.

古文：所遣之内，复有逃亡，官司捕捉，为国生事。
现代文：所遣送的罪人中，又有逃亡，官府捕捉，给国家造成事端。
English: Among the criminals who were deported, there were some who escaped and were caught by the authorities, causing trouble for the country.

古文：高昌途路，沙碛千里，冬风冰冽，夏风如焚。行人去来，遇之多死。
现代文：去高昌的路途，沙漠千里，冬季寒风凛冽，夏天炎风如焚，来往的行人，遇到这样的风大多死去。
English: On the way to Gaochang, the desert is thousands of miles long, the cold wind is biting in winter, and the hot wind is burning in summer. When pedestrians encounter such winds, most of them die.

古文：《易》云： 安不忘危，理不忘乱。 
现代文：《易经》说 ：安不忘危，理不忘乱。 
English: "I Ching" says: Peace does not forget danger, reason does not forget chaos.

古文：设令张掖尘飞，酒泉烽举，陛下岂能得高昌一人菽粟而及事乎？
现代文：假如张掖发生骚乱，酒泉出现战事，陛下难道能够得到高昌一人的粮食来应付这些事吗？
English: Assuming that Zhangye County is in flames and Jiuquan County is in smoke, can Your Majesty expect Gaochang to provide one person with grain and rice to reinforce?

古文：终须发陇右诸州，星驰电击。
现代文：最终必须发动陇右各州，像流星奔驰雷电闪击般迅速地赶来救援。
English: Troops from every state must be sent to attack the enemy.

古文：由斯而言，此河西者方于心腹，彼高昌者他人手足，岂得糜费中华，以事无用？
现代文：由此而言，这河西比方是处在心腹，那高昌是他人的手足，怎么能够耗费中华的资财，用来从事没有用的事？
English: In this respect, the people west of the Yellow River were the imperial court's closest confidants. The people of Gaochang were, after all, an alien race. How could they squander the wealth of the Central Plains to feed people who were of no use to them?

古文：《书》曰： 不作无益害有益。 
现代文：《尚书》说 ：不做无益害有益。 
English: "Shoshu" says, "Doing nothing is not beneficial, but harmful and beneficial."

古文：其此之谓乎！
现代文：它所说的正是这种情形吧！
English: This is exactly the situation.

古文：陛下道映先天，威行无外，平颉利于沙塞，灭吐浑于西海。
现代文： 陛下道德反映了天赋，威力不施到域外，在沙塞平定颉利，在西海消灭吐谷浑。
English: His Majesty's morals reflect his natural talent. He does not exert his power outside the region. He pacified Goryeo in Shasai and eliminated Tugu Hun in the West Sea.

古文：突厥余落，为立可汗；吐浑遗氓，更树君长。
现代文：突厥残余的部落，为他们册立可汗，吐谷浑遗留下来的田民，重新树立君长。
English: The remnants of the Turkic tribes, for whom khans were established, and the farmers who remained in the valley, re-established the monarchs.

古文：复立高昌，非无前例，此所谓有罪而诛之，既伏而立之。
现代文：又重建高昌，不是没有前例，这就是人们所说的有罪就诛灭它，已经归服就扶立它。
English: It is not without precedent to rebuild Gaochang. This is what people call "destroy it when it is guilty" and "build it up when it has been subdued."

古文：四海百蛮，谁不闻见，蠕动怀生，畏威慕德。
现代文：四海及域外百族，谁没有听到看到，但凡天下生灵，都会畏惧威力仰慕德行。
English: The four seas and hundreds of tribes outside the region, who have not heard and seen, but all living beings in the world, will fear power and admire virtue.

古文：宜择高昌可立者立之，征给首领，遣还本国，负戴洪恩，长为籓翰。
现代文：应当选择高昌可以册立的人册立他为可汗，征召首领，送还原来的国家，使他们承受洪恩，长期成为边境的屏障。
English: It is necessary to choose a person who can be registered in Gaochang, appoint him as a khan, recruit leaders, and send them back to their original countries so that they can receive honors and become a barrier on the border for a long time.

古文：中国不扰，既富且宁，传之子孙，以贻永世。
现代文：中原不受侵扰，既富足又安宁，把这一切传给子孙，遗留永世。 
English: The Central Plains will not be disturbed, will be both prosperous and peaceful, and will pass all of this on to their children and grandchildren, leaving it to them forever.

古文：二十年，太宗于寝殿侧别置一院，令太子居，绝不令往东宫。
现代文：贞观二十年，太宗在寝殿旁边另外设置一个庭院，让太子居住，绝不让他到东宫去。
English: After twenty years of chastity, Emperor Taizong set up a separate courtyard next to the bed chamber for the prince to live in, and never allowed him to go to the East Palace.

古文：遂良复上疏谏曰：
现代文：遂良又上疏进谏说：
English: Suiliang went up the stairs again and said:

古文：臣闻周世问安，三至必退，汉储视膳，五日乃来。
现代文： 臣听说周代问安，来三次一定退下，汉朝的太子视膳，五天才来。
English: The vassal heard that the Zhou Dynasty asked for greetings, and had to retreat three times, while the Han Dynasty's princeling did not come until the fifth day.

古文：前贤作法，规模弘远。
现代文：从前圣人的做法，规模远大。
English: What the saints did in the past was on a much larger scale.

古文：礼曰： 男子十年出就外傅，出宿于外，学书计也。
现代文：礼说：男子十岁出门就读在教师门下，住宿在外边，是为他的学业盘算。
English: Li said: A ten-year-old boy goes out to study under a teacher, and his accommodation is outside, which is for his academic planning.

古文：然则古之达者，岂无慈心？减兹私爱，欲使成立。
现代文：然而古代的贵人，难道没有慈心，减此私爱，是想使他成长自立。
English: But didn't the nobles of ancient times have a kind heart, minus this selfishness, that wanted him to grow up and become independent?

古文：凡人尚犹如此，况君之世子乎？
现代文：世俗人尚且还能这样，何况国君的太子呢？
English: How can a layman do this, let alone a crown prince?

古文：自当春诵夏弦，亲近师傅，体人间之庶事，适君臣之大道，使翘足延首，皆聆善声。
现代文：自然应当春天诵读诗篇，夏天依弦乐和奏而歌唱，亲近老师，体察人间的各种事情，适应君臣的道理，即使举足伸头远望，都听到高雅的音乐声。
English: Naturally, one should recite poems in spring, sing according to strings and percussion in summer, be close to teachers, experience various things in the human world, adapt to the principles of kings and ministers, and even if you lift your feet and look far and wide, you will hear the elegant music.

古文：若献岁之有阳春，玄天之有日月，弘此懿德，乃作元良。
现代文：好像一年的开始有阳春，青天有日月，弘扬这一美德，才做太子。
English: It seems that at the beginning of the year there is a yang-chun, and in the blue sky there is a sun-moon. It is only by promoting this virtue that one can become a crown prince.

古文：伏惟陛下道育三才，功包九有，亲树太子，莫不欣欣。
现代文：在下考虑陛下道德孕育三才，功绩包容九州，亲自树立太子，天下没有不感到喜乐自得的。
English: Considering His Majesty's moral nurturing of the three talents, the merits of embracing Kyushu, and personally establishing the crown prince, there is nothing in the world that does not feel joy and pride.

古文：既云废昏立明，须称天下瞻望，而教成之道，实深乖阙。
现代文：既然说废黜糊涂的太子册立英明的太子，必须称得上是天下仰望的楷模，然而教育他成长的方法，确实十分错误。
English: Since the dethronement of a muddled prince and the establishment of a wise prince must be regarded as a model for the world to look up to, however, the method of educating him to grow up is indeed very wrong.

古文：不离膝下，常居宫内，保傅之说无暢，经籍之谈蔑如。
现代文：太子不离父母，平常住在宫内，对师傅的说教不痛快，蔑视经书谈论的道理。
English: The prince does not leave his parents, usually lives in the palace, is not happy with the teachings of the master, and disdains the principles discussed in the scriptures.

古文：且朋友不可以深交，深交必有怨；父子不可以滞爱，滞爱或生愆。
现代文：况且朋友不能深入交往，深入交往必定有怨恨；父子不可以溺爱，溺爱或许会产生过失。
English: Moreover, friends cannot have in-depth communication, in-depth communication must have resentment; father and son cannot be spoiled, and spoiling may cause negligence.

古文：伏愿远览殷、周，近遵汉、魏，不可顿革，事须阶渐。
现代文：希望陛下远看殷、周的做法，接近遵行汉、魏的方法，不可以马上改变，这事必须一步一步地逐渐改变。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty's far-sighted approach to Yin and Zhou and his close adherence to Han and Wei methods cannot be changed immediately, but must be gradually changed step by step.

古文：尝计旬日，半遣还宫，专学艺以润身，布芳声于天下，则微臣虽死，犹曰生年。
现代文：试着以十天作为一个阶段，一半的时间送回宫中，使太子专心学习技艺来润泽自己，在天下传布美好的名声，那么微臣即使是死了，也可以说是和活着一样。 
English: Try to use ten days as a phase, half of the time to send back to the palace, so that the prince can concentrate on learning skills to moisturize himself and spread a good reputation around the world, then even if the vassal is dead, it can be said to be the same as being alive.

古文：太宗从之。
现代文：太宗听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong followed his advice.

古文：遂良前后谏奏及陈便宜书数十上，多见采纳，其年，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：遂良前后谏奏及陈便宜书数十以上，多被太宗采纳。那年，担任银青光禄大夫。
English: Sui Liang played more than a dozen pieces of music and wrote more than a dozen books, most of which were adopted by Taizong. That year, he served as the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu.

古文：二十一年，以本官检校大理卿，寻丁父忧解。
现代文：贞观二十一年，遂良以本官的身份检校大理卿，不久为父亲居丧期满。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, Su Liang inspected the school as the official, and soon his father passed away.

古文：明年，起复旧职，俄拜中书令。
现代文：第二年，起用他恢复旧职，接着被拜为中书令。
English: The next year, he was appointed to resume his old post, and then he was appointed to the post of Clerk.

古文：二十三年，太宗寝疾，召遂良及长孙无忌入卧内，谓之曰： 卿等忠烈，简在朕心。
现代文：贞观二十三年，太宗病危，召遂良及长孙无忌进入他的卧室，对他们说 ：你们忠直刚烈，朕都记在心里。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, when Taizong was critically ill, he called Suiliang and his eldest grandson Muji into his bedroom and said to them, "I have kept your loyalty, uprightness, and fortitude in my heart.

古文：昔汉武寄霍光，刘备托葛亮，朕之后事，一以委卿。
现代文：从前汉武帝委托霍光，刘备委托诸葛亮，朕的后事一切都委托你们。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu entrusted Huo Guang, Liu Bei entrusted Zhuge Liang, and I entrusted everything to you.

古文：太子仁孝，卿之所悉，必须尽诚辅佐，永保宗社。 
现代文：太子仁义忠孝，是你们全都知道的，必须竭诚尽力辅佐太子，永远保住宗庙社稷。 
English: The Prince's benevolence, loyalty and filial piety are well known to all of you. You must make every effort to support the Prince and keep the family temple and shrine forever.

古文：又顾谓太子曰： 无忌、遂良在，国家之事，汝无忧矣。 
现代文：又回头对太子说： 无忌、遂良在，国家的事，你不用担心了。 
English: He turned back to the prince and said, "There is nothing to be afraid of, Sui Liang is here. You don't have to worry about the affairs of the state.

古文：仍命遂良草诏。
现代文：于是命遂良草拟诏书。
English: As a result, the imperial edict was successfully drafted.

古文：高宗即位，赐爵河南县公。
现代文：高宗即位后，赐遂良河南县公的爵位。
English: After the enthronement of Gaozong, Suiliang was given the title of Duke of Henan County.

古文：永徽元年，进封郡公。寻坐事出为同州刺史。
现代文：永徽元年，晋封为郡公，不久因犯事出京任同州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, he was promoted to county magistrate, and soon after, he was sent to Beijing to serve as the county magistrate due to a criminal case.

古文：三年，征拜吏部尚书、同中书门下三品，监修国史，加光禄大夫。
现代文：永徽三年，征拜遂良为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品，监修国史，担任光禄大夫。
English: In the third year of Yonghui, Suiliang was recruited as the head of Shangshu, the third grade of the same middle school, supervised the national history, and served as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：其月，又兼太子宾客。
现代文：当月，又兼任太子宾客。
English: That month, he also served as the crown prince's guest.

古文：四年，代张行成为尚书右仆射，依旧知政事。
现代文：永徽四年，代理张行成任尚书右仆射，依旧主持政事。
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, Zhang Xingcheng's deputy, Shang Shuxu (尚書右仆射), still presided over political affairs.

古文：六年，高宗将废皇后王氏，立昭仪武氏为皇后，召太尉长孙无忌、司空李勣、尚书左仆射于志宁及遂良以筹其事。
现代文：永徽六年，高宗准备废黜王皇后，册立昭仪武氏则天为皇后，召太尉长孙无忌、司空李责力、尚书左仆射于志宁及遂良一起策划这事。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, Gao Zong was preparing to dethrone the queen of the king, and Zhaoyi Wu was appointed as the queen of heaven. He called the first lieutenant, the eldest grandson of Mubi, the secretary Ku Li Li Li Li, and the left-hand servant of Shang Shu, Sha Yu Shining, and Su Liang together to plan this matter.

古文：将入，遂良谓无忌等曰： 上意欲废中宫，必议其事，遂良今欲陈谏，众意如何？ 
现代文：将要进宫时，遂良对无忌等说： 皇上的心意想要废黜皇后，必定议论这件事，遂良今天想陈述理由劝谏，你们意见怎么样？ 
English: When he was about to enter the palace, Suiliang said to Mubi and others, "The emperor's intention is to depose the empress, so we must discuss this matter. Suiliang wants to present his reasons and advice today. What is your opinion?

古文：无忌曰： 明公必须极言，无忌请继焉。 
现代文：无忌说： 明公必须极力劝谏，无忌请求继续陈述这个意见。 
English: It goes without saying that: Ming Gong must be strongly persuaded, and it goes without saying that he must be asked to continue to present this opinion.

古文：及入，高宗难于发言，再三顾谓无忌曰： 莫大之罪，绝嗣为甚。
现代文：到他们进宫后，高宗难以开口，再三望着无忌对他说： 最大的罪过之中，绝后是最严重的。
English: After they entered the palace, Gaozong found it difficult to open his mouth. Looking at him repeatedly, he could not help but say to him: "Among the greatest sins, the last is the most serious."

古文：皇后无胤息，昭仪有子，今欲立为皇后，公等以为何如？ 
现代文：皇后没有子息，昭仪有儿子，现在想立昭仪为皇后，你们认为怎么样？ 
English: The empress has no son, Shouyi has a son, and now they want to make Shouyi the empress. What do you think?

古文：遂良曰： 皇后出自名家，先朝所娶，伏事先帝，无愆妇德。
现代文：遂良说： 皇后出自名家，先朝的时候所娶，服侍先帝，妇德没有过失。
English: Suiliang said, "The empress comes from a famous family. She was married during the reign of the former emperor and served the former emperor. There is no fault in her womanly virtue.

古文：先帝不豫，执陛下手以语臣曰： 我好兒好妇，今将付卿。 
现代文：先帝没有犹豫，拉着陛下的手，对臣说过这话： 我好儿好妇，现在准备托付给你。 
English: The former emperor did not hesitate, took his majesty's hand and said to the vassal: I am a good woman, and I am now ready to entrust you.

古文：陛下亲承德音，言犹在耳。
现代文：陛下亲耳听到先帝的善言，言犹在耳。
English: His Majesty heard the kind words of the former emperor with his own ears, and they still ring in his ears.

古文：皇后自此未闻有愆，恐不可废。
现代文：皇后从此没有听说有过失，恐怕不能废黜。
English: Since then, the empress has not heard of any wrongdoing, and I'm afraid she cannot be deposed.

古文：臣今不敢曲从，上违先帝之命，特愿再三思审。
现代文：臣今天不敢曲从，上违先帝的命令，特意请陛下再三思考审察。
English: Today, the vassal did not dare to obey the former emperor's order, and specifically asked His Majesty to reconsider.

古文：愚臣上忤圣颜，罪合万死，但愿不负先朝厚恩，何顾性命？ 
现代文：愚臣触犯了圣上的尊严，罪该万死，只愿不辜负先朝的厚恩，哪里还顾性命。 
English: Foolish ministers have violated the sacred dignity, a crime worthy of death, only willing to live up to the generosity of the previous dynasty, where they still care about their lives.

古文：遂良致笏于殿陛，曰： 还陛下此笏。 
现代文：遂良把上朝时执的手板放到殿前的台阶上，说 ：还陛下这个手板。 
English: Suiliang placed the hand board that he had held during the previous reign on the steps in front of the palace and said, "Return this hand board to Your Majesty."

古文：仍解巾叩头流血。
现代文：多次解下头巾叩头流血。
English: He repeatedly removed his headscarf, bowed his head and bled.

古文：帝大怒，令引出。
现代文：高宗大怒，命令带遂良出殿。
English: Gaozong was furious and ordered Suiliang to leave the palace.

古文：长孙无忌曰： 遂良受先朝顾命，有罪不加刑。 
现代文：长孙无忌说 ：遂良受先朝遗诏为顾命大臣，有罪不施加刑法。 
English: The eldest grandson said without hesitation, "Su Ryo received the last imperial edict as the minister of the protection of the emperor's life, and the criminal law will not be imposed if he is guilty."

古文：翌日，帝谓李勣曰： 册立武昭仪之事，遂良固执不从。
现代文：第二天，高宗对李责力说： 册立武昭仪的事，遂良固执不肯顺从。
English: The next day, Gaozong said to Li Rongli, "The matter of registering the Wuzhao Ceremony has come up, so Liang stubbornly refused to obey.

古文：遂良既是受顾命大臣，事若不可，当且止也。 
现代文：遂良已经是受先朝遗诏的顾命大臣，事情如果不行，则应当暂且停止。 
English: Suiliang is already the minister of the imperial edict, and if things don't work out, they should be suspended.

古文：勣对曰： 此乃陛下家事，不合问外人。 
现代文：李责力回答说： 这却是陛下的家事，不适宜问外人。 
English: Li Zheili replied, "This is your majesty's family business, and it is not appropriate to ask outsiders.

古文：帝乃立昭仪为皇后，左迁遂良潭州都督。
现代文：高宗这才册立昭仪为皇后，降任遂良为潭州都督。
English: It was Gao Zong who made Zhaoyi the empress and Suiliang the governor of Tanzhou.

古文：显庆二年，转桂州都督。
现代文：显庆二年，转任桂州都督。
English: In the second year of Xianqing, he was transferred to the post of governor of Guizhou.

古文：未几，又贬为爱州刺史。明年，卒官，年六十三。
现代文：没有多久，又被贬为爱州刺史，第二年，遂良死在任上，终年六十二岁。
English: Not long after, he was demoted to the position of Aizhou chief historian, and the following year, Suiliang died in office, at the age of sixty-two.

古文：遂良卒后二岁余，许敬宗、李义府奏言长孙无忌所构逆谋，并遂良扇动，乃追削官爵，子孙配流爱州。
现代文：遂良死后二年多，许敬宗、李义府奏告说长孙无忌所造成的逆谋，是同遂良一起煽动的，于是追削遂良的官爵，把他的子孙发配流放到爱州。
English: More than two years after Suiliang's death, Xu Jingzong and Li Yifu sent a report saying that the counter-plot caused by the eldest grandson Mugu was instigated together with Suiliang, so Suiliang was stripped of his title and his descendants were exiled to Aizhou.

古文：弘道元年二月，高宗遗诏放还本郡。
现代文：弘道元年二月，高宗遗诏把他们放回本郡。
English: In February of the first year of the Hongdao era, Gaozong's last will and testament returned them to this county.

古文：神龙元年，则天遗制复遂良及韩瑗爵位。
现代文：神龙元年，则天遗诏恢复遂良及韩瑗的爵位。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, Emperor Zetian issued an edict to restore the titles of Suiliang and Han Zang.

