古文：燕王喜使栗腹以百金为赵孝成王寿，酒三日，反报曰： 赵民其壮者皆死于长平，其孤未壮，可伐也。 
现代文：燕王喜派栗腹用百金为赵孝成王祝寿，饮酒三天之后，栗腹回报燕王说： 赵国百姓中壮年的都死在长平，他们的遗孤还没有长成壮年，可以进攻赵国。 
English: Yan Wang Xi sent chestnut belly with one hundred gold to congratulate Zhao Xiaocheng Wang on his birthday. After three days of drinking, chestnut belly returned to Yan Wang and said: The middle-aged people of Zhao died in Changping. Their orphans have not yet grown into adulthood and can attack Zhao.

古文：王乃召昌国君乐间而问曰： 何如? 
现代文：燕王于是召见昌国君乐间，向他询问说： 进攻赵国的事怎么样？ 
English: Yan Wang then summoned Chang Guojun and asked him: What about the attack on Zhao?

古文：对曰： 赵，四达之国也，其民皆习于兵，不可与战。 
现代文：乐间回答说： 赵国，是一个四通八达的国家，它的百姓都善于作战，不可以与赵国开战。 
English: Lok Ma replied, "Zhao is a well-connected country, and its people are good at fighting. You cannot start a war with Zhao.

古文：王曰： 吾以倍攻之，可乎? 曰： 不可。 
现代文：燕王间： 我用一倍于赵国军队的兵力进攻它，可以吗？ 乐间说： 不可以。 
English: Yan Wangzi: Can I attack it with twice the strength of Zhao's army? Laima said: No.

古文：曰： 以三，可乎? 曰： 不可。 
现代文：燕王间： 我用三倍于赵国军队的兵力进攻它，可以吗？ 乐间说： 不可以。 
English: Yan Wangzi: Can I attack it with three times the strength of the Zhao army? Laima said: No.

古文：王大怒。
现代文：燕王大怒。
English: Yan Wang flew into a rage.

古文：左右皆以为赵可伐，遽起六十万以攻赵。令栗腹以四十万攻鄗，使庆秦以二十万攻代。
现代文：左右的大臣都认为可以进攻赵国，燕国很快发兵六十万攻打赵国，派栗腹用四十万军队攻打部邑，派庆秦用三十万军队攻打代地。
English: The ministers on both sides thought that they could attack Zhao, and Yan soon sent 600,000 troops to attack Zhao, sent 400,000 troops to attack Buyi, and sent 300,000 troops to attack Jing and Qin.

古文：赵使廉颇以八万遇栗腹于鄗，使乐乘以五万遇庆秦于代。燕人大败。乐间入赵。
现代文：赵国派廉颇用八万军队在郝邑迎击栗腹，派乐乘用五万军队在代地迎击庆秦，燕国人诐打得大败，乐间也投奔了赵国。
English: Zhao sent an army of 80,000 troops to fight against Churibang in Zhaoyu, while Le sent an army of 50,000 troops to fight against Qing Qin in place of Zhaoyu. Yan's troops were soundly defeated, and Le also fled to Zhao.

古文：燕王以书且谢焉，曰： 寡人不佞，不能奉顺君意，故君捐国而去，则寡人之不肖明矣。
现代文：燕王用书信一再向乐闻谢罪，说： 寡人无才，没能顺从您的意愿，所以您弃国而去，寡人不贤明已经再清楚不过了。
English: In his letters, Yan Wang repeatedly apologized to Le Wen, saying, "You are a worthless person, you failed to obey your wishes, so you left the country. It is clear that you are not a wise person."

古文：敢端其愿，而君不肯听，故使使者陈愚意，君试论之。
现代文：请允许我改正原来的那种想法，但您却不肯听从，因此派使者向您陈述一下我的意思，您再做出评价。
English: Permit me to correct the original idea, but you would not listen, so I sent an emissary to tell you what I mean, and you will evaluate it.

古文：语曰： 仁不轻绝，智不轻怨。 
现代文：常言道： 仁义的人不轻易断绝交情，聪明的人不轻易产生怨恨。 
English: As the saying goes: People of benevolence and righteousness do not easily break off friendships, and clever people do not easily generate resentment.

古文：君之于先王也，世之所明知也。
现代文：您同先壬的关系是世人所明知的。
English: Your relationship with your predecessor is well known to the world.

古文：寡人望有非则君掩盖之，不虞君之明罪之也；望有过则君教诲之，不虞君之明罪之也。
现代文：寡人希望在我有错误时，您能帮助掩盖，不想让您张扬我灼罪过；希望在我有过失时，您能给予教导，不想让您张扬我的罪过。
English: Many people hope that when I make a mistake, you can help me cover it up, and don't want you to expose my sins; hope that when I make a mistake, you can teach me, and don't want you to expose my sins.

古文：且寡人之罪，国人莫不知，天下莫不闻，君微出明怨以弃寡人，寡人必有罪矣。
现代文：况且寡人的罪过，国人没有不知道的，天下人没有不听说的，您又暗地里跑出燕国表明您的怨恨，抛弃寡人，寡人有罪过是一定的了。
English: Moreover, there is no sin that the Chinese people do not know, and the people of the world do not hear about. You secretly ran out of Yan Guo to show your resentment. It is certain that you abandoned many people and were guilty of many crimes.

古文：虽然，恐君之未尽厚也。
现代文：尽管如此，恐怕您也没有尽到忠厚的本分。
English: Still, I'm afraid you haven't done your loyal duty.

古文：谚曰： 厚者不毁人以自益也，仁者不危人以要名。 
现代文：谚语说： 忠厚的人不靠损害别人使自己得科好处，仁义的人不靠危害别人求得好名声。 
English: A proverb says: A loyal person does not seek to benefit himself by harming others, and a righteous person does not seek a good reputation by harming others.

古文：以故掩人之邪者，厚人之行也；救人之过者，仁者之道也。
现代文：因此掩饰别人邪恶的，是忠厚者的行为；挽救别人过失的，是仁者的本分。
English: Therefore, it is the duty of the virtuous to conceal the evil of others; it is the duty of the benevolent to save the faults of others.

古文：世有掩寡人之邪，救寡人之过，非君心所望之?
现代文：世人有掩饰寡人的邪恶、挽救寡人的过失的，难道不是您内心所希望的吗？
English: Isn't it your heart's desire that the world should have someone to cover up one's evil and save one's misdeeds?

古文：今君厚受位于先王以成尊，轻弃寡人以快心，则掩邪以救过，难得于君矣。
现代文：您受到先王的看重得到官位，已经成就高贵的声名，却轻视寡人以求心头之快，那么掩饰邪恶、挽救过失的愿望，在您这里恐怕难以满足了。
English: You have been valued by the former king and have obtained an official position, you have achieved a noble reputation, but you despise many people in order to seek your heart's desire, so the desire to cover up evil and save mistakes may be difficult to satisfy here.

古文：且世有薄于故厚施，行有失而故惠用。
现代文：再说世上有人待我不好，我反而多向他施恩；别人行为有了过失，我反而给以恩惠，加以任用。
English: Moreover, if there is anyone on earth who treats me badly, I am more likely to show him kindness; if there is anyone whose actions offend me, I am more likely to show him kindness by appointing him.

古文：今使寡人任不肖之罪，而君有失厚之累，于为君择之也，无所取之。国之有封疆，犹家之有垣墙，所以合好掩恶也。
现代文：观在寡人承担不贤的罪名，而您也有失忠厚的牵累，因此寡人认为您选择的做法，没有可取之处；国家有疆界，就如同家庭有院墙一样，是为了聚拢好事掩饰丑事。
English: Seeing that there are many people who bear the guilt of not being virtuous, and you are also involved in disloyalty, so many people think that the way you choose has no merit; countries have borders, just as families have courtyard walls, in order to gather good things to cover up bad things.

古文：室不能相和，出语邻家，未为通计也。
现代文：家里不能彼此和睦，出去告诉邻居，这不是解决问题的办法。
English: If you can't get along at home, going out and telling your neighbors is not the way to solve the problem.

古文：怨恶未见而明弃之，未尽厚也。
现代文：寡人的怨恨、憎恶还没有表现出来，您就公开弃国而去。
English: Before anyone's resentment or hatred has manifested itself, you openly abandon your country and leave.

古文：寡人虽不省乎，未如殷纣之乱也；君虽不得意乎，未如商容、箕子之累也。
现代文：不能算尽了忠厚者的本分。 寡人虽然无才，但还不像殷纣王那样昏愤；您虽然很不得意，也没有像商容、箕子那样的忧患。
English: You have not fulfilled the duty of a loyal person. Although you are not talented, you are not as angry as King Yin; although you are very disappointed, you do not have the sorrow like Shang Rong and Zizi.

古文：然则不内盖寡人，而明怨于外，恐其适足以伤于高而薄于行也，非然也。
现代文：然而您竟不在国内掩饰寡人的过失，却跑到围外表明您的怨恨，恐怕您那样做足以有损予您的高尚，别人会瞧不起您的行为，不是这样吗？
English: However, you do not cover up the faults of others in the country, but go outside the circle to show your resentment. I am afraid that you do that enough to damage your dignity, others will look down on your behavior, is not it so?

古文：苟可以明君之义，成君之高，虽任恶名，不难受也。
现代文：假如可以表明您的仁义，成就您高尚的品符，寡人即使承担恶名，也不难接受。
English: If you can show your benevolence and achieve your noble character, it is not difficult to accept even if you bear a bad name.

古文：本欲以为明寡人之薄，而君不得厚；扬寡人之辱，而君不得荣。此一举而两失也。
现代文：本来想表明寡人不忠厚，而您自己也得不到忠厚之名；本来想张扬寡人的耻辱，而您也得不到荣耀，这样做一举两失。
English: If you want to show that someone is disloyal, and you yourself will not be called loyal; if you want to show that someone is dishonest, and you will not be honored, you will lose both.

古文：义者不亏人以自益也，况伤人以自损乎!
现代文：仁义的人不靠损害别人来满足自己，更何况伤害别人也损害了自己呢！
English: Righteous people do not rely on harming others to satisfy themselves, let alone harming others and harming themselves!

古文：愿君无以寡人不肖，累往事之美。
现代文：希望您不要因为寡人无才，牵累到往事的美好。
English: I hope you don't let your lack of talent tarnish the beauty of the past.

古文：昔者柳下惠吏于鲁，三黜而不去。
现代文：从前柳下惠在鲁国做官，三次被罢黜也不离开鲁国。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Shimohui was an official in the State of Lu. He was deposed three times, but he did not leave the State of Lu.

古文：或谓之曰： 可以去。 
现代文：有人对他说： 您可以离开鲁国。 
English: Someone said to him: You can leave Russia.

古文：柳下惠曰： 苟与人之异，恶往而不黜乎?
现代文：柳下惠说： 假如自己的做法与别人不一样，那么到哪里能不被罢黜呢？
English: Yanagishita Hui said: If one's own practice is different from others, then where can one not be ousted?

古文：犹且黜乎，宁于故国尔。 
现代文：到哪里都是被罢黜，我宁愿留在故国。 
English: I'd rather stay in my home country.

古文：柳下惠不以三黜自累，故前业不忘；不以去为心，故远近无议。
现代文：柳下惠不把三次被罢黜当作牵累，所以以前的成就没有被忘记；不把离开国家作为信念，所以远近的人们没有非议他的。
English: Liu Shimo Hui did not regard being ousted three times as a drag, so his previous achievements were not forgotten; he did not regard leaving the country as a belief, so people near and far did not criticize him.

古文：今寡人之罪，国人未知，而议寡人者遍天下。
现代文：如今寡人的罪过，国人并不知晓，而议论寡人的人却走遍天下。
English: Nowadays, the Chinese people do not know about the sins of some people, but people who talk about them are all over the world.

古文：语曰： 论不修心，议不累物，仁不轻绝，智不简功。 
现代文：常言道： 由衷的话语不加修饰，正当的议论不牵累不相干的事，仁义的人不轻易断绝交情，聪明的人不随便抛弃以前的成就。 
English: As the saying goes: heartfelt words are not embellished, legitimate discussions do not involve irrelevant matters, benevolent people do not easily break off friendships, and smart people do not casually abandon previous achievements.

古文：弃大功者，辍也；轻绝厚利者，怨也。
现代文：抛弃大的功业的，是因为他停止了努力；轻率地拒绝丰厚好处的，是因为他产生了怨恨。
English: He who abandons a great cause does so because he has stopped striving; he who rashly rejects a great benefit does so because he has developed a grudge.

古文：辍而弃之，怨而累之，宜在远者，不望之乎君也。
现代文：停止努力抛弃功业，心怀怨恨而牵累其它事情，这种事应该发生在被疏远的大臣身上，不希望出现在您的身上。
English: Stop trying to throw away your career, harbouring grudges and involving yourself in other matters that should be happening to the estranged minister and not to you.

古文：今以寡人无罪，君岂怨之乎?
现代文：观在在寡人没有罪过的时候，您难道还怨恨我吗？
English: Do you still hold a grudge against me when no one is guilty?

古文：愿君捐怨，追惟先王，复以教寡人。
现代文：希望您捐弃前怨，追念先王，重新来教导寡人。
English: I hope that you will give up your former grudge, remember your predecessor, and come back to teach others.

古文：意君曰，余且匿心以成而过，不顾先王以明而恶，使寡人进不得修功，退不得改过，君之所揣也。
现代文：我考虑您的想法，认为我包藏报复的心理，促成你的过失，不顾及先生的恩德，张扬你的丑事，这样就使寡人进不能建立功业，退不能改正过失，这是您心里所揣度的，希望您再考虑一下！
English: I consider your thoughts, think that I harbor the mentality of revenge, contribute to your mistakes, disregard the gentleman's kindness, and publicize your scandals, thus making it impossible for some people to build a career, and unable to correct mistakes. This is what you have in mind. I hope you will reconsider!

古文：唯君图之。此寡人之愚意也。敬以书谒之。 
现代文：这些是寡人的怨法，恭敬地以书信的方式转告给您。 
English: These are personal grievances, respectfully conveyed to you by letter.

古文：乐间、乐乘怨不用其计，二人卒留赵，不报。
现代文：乐间怨恨燕王没有采用自己的计策，最终还是留在赵国，没有回报燕王。
English: Le Miao resented that Yan Wang did not adopt his own strategy, and ultimately remained in Zhao Province, without returning to Yan Wang.

