古文：◎刑法三
现代文：刑法三
English: Criminal Law III

古文：刑法有创之自明，不衷古制者，廷杖、东西厂、锦衣卫、镇抚司狱是已。
现代文：有的刑法是明代新创的，不合古制，廷杖、东厂西厂、锦衣卫、镇抚司狱就是。
English: Some criminal laws were newly created in the Ming Dynasty and do not conform to the old system, such as the Imperial Scepter, the East Factory, the West Factory, the Brocade Guards, and the Prison Guards.

古文：是数者，杀人至惨，而不丽于法。
现代文：这几种刑法杀人极惨，而不依据法律。
English: These kinds of criminal laws are extremely cruel, and are not in accordance with the law.

古文：踵而行之，至末造而极。
现代文：继位君主都跟着实行，到明末达到登峰造极的地步。
English: Successive monarchs followed suit, and by the end of the Ming Dynasty, they had reached the pinnacle.

古文：举朝野命，一听之武夫、宦竖之手，良可叹也。
现代文：历有朝野政令，完全操纵在武夫或宦官手中，确实可叹。
English: It is truly lamentable that there have been government decrees, completely manipulated in the hands of warriors or eunuchs.

古文：太祖常与侍臣论待大臣礼。
现代文：太祖曾经和侍臣讨论君主对待大臣的礼节。
English: The great-grandfather used to discuss the etiquette of the monarch's treatment of ministers with his courtiers.

古文：太史令刘基曰： 古者公卿有罪，盘水加剑，诣请室自裁，未尝轻折辱之，所以存大臣之体。 
现代文：太史令刘基说： 古代公卿犯了罪，准备一盘水，将剑放在盘上，到悔过之室去自刎，不曾轻易折辱他们，故大臣的体面得以保存。 
English: Grand Historian Liu Qi said: The ancient nobles committed a crime, prepared a bowl of water, put the sword on the plate, and went to the repentance room to commit suicide. He did not easily humiliate them, so the minister's dignity was preserved.

古文：侍读学士詹同因取《大戴礼》及贾谊疏以进，且曰： 古者刑不上大夫。以励廉耻也。
现代文：侍读学士詹同于是取《大戴礼》和贾谊疏文进献给皇帝，并且说： 古代施刑不加在大夫身上，是为了激励廉耻之心。
English: Zhan Tong, a bachelor of service, then dedicated the "Great Salutation" and Jia Yi Shu to the emperor, and said: The ancient punishment was not imposed on the doctor, in order to encourage the spirit of modesty.

古文：必如是，君臣恩礼始两尽。 
现代文：一定按这样办，君恩臣礼纔都能尽到。 
English: Be sure to do it this way, and you will be able to do your best.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：皇帝认为很对。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：洪武六年，工部尚书王肃坐法当笞，太祖曰： 六卿贵重，不宜以细故辱。 
现代文：洪武六年，工部尚书王肃犯法应受笞刑，太祖说： 六卿身份贵重，不宜因琐事折辱。 
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, Shangshu Wang Su of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce said that anyone who broke the law should be punished by whipping. Grandfather said: The status of the six nobles is precious, and it is not appropriate to humiliate them for trivial matters.

古文：命以俸赎罪。
现代文：命令他用俸禄赎罪。
English: ordered him to use his salary to atone for his crime.

古文：后群臣罣误，许以俸赎，始此。
现代文：后来群臣因过失或牵连受到处分，允许用俸禄赎罪，起始于此。
English: Later, when ministers were punished for negligence or implication, they were allowed to use their salary to atone for their sins.

古文：然永嘉侯朱亮祖父子皆鞭死，工部尚书薛祥毙杖下，故上书者以大臣当诛不宜加辱为言。
现代文：可是永嘉侯朱亮祖父子两人都被鞭笞致死，工部尚书薛祥死于杖下，所以上书者说大臣有罪应行诛杀，不宜加以侮辱。
English: However, Yongjia Hou Zhu Liang's grandfather and son were both beaten to death, and the Ministry of Industry's Shang Shu Xue Xiang died under the cane, so the writer said that the guilty minister should be killed, and it was not appropriate to insult him.

古文：廷杖之刑，亦自太祖始矣。
现代文：廷杖的刑罚，亦从太祖开始。
English: The punishment of the imperial scepter also began with the great-grandfather.

古文：宣德三年，怒御史严皑、方鼎、何杰等沈湎酒色，久不朝参，命枷以徇。
现代文：宣德三年，皇帝因御史严皑、方鼎、何杰等沉湎于酒色，许久不来朝见参拜而发怒，下令将他们戴上枷锁示众。
English: In the third year of Xuande, the emperor was angry because the emperors Yanzhang, Fangding, He Jie and others were addicted to wine and had not come to the court to visit for a long time, and ordered them to be put in shackles for public display.

古文：自此言官有荷校者。
现代文：从那以后，谏官就有了戴刑具的。
English: Since then, eunuchs have been equipped with instruments of torture.

古文：至正统中，王振擅权，尚书刘中敷，侍郎吴玺、陈瑺，祭酒李时勉率受此辱，而殿陛行杖习为故事矣。
现代文：到了正统年间，王振专权，尚书刘中敷，侍郎昊玺、陈瑺，祭酒李时勉都受遇这种折辱，而在殿外石阶上施行杖刑已习以为常。
English: In the orthodox era, Wang Zhenxuanquan, Shangshu Liu Zhongshiki, waiters Hao Jun, Chen Jun, and sacrificial wine Li Shimin all suffered this kind of humiliation, and it was customary to carry out caning on the stone steps outside the palace.

古文：成化十五年，汪直诬陷侍郎马文升、都御史牟俸等，诏责给事御史李俊、王浚辈五十六人容隐，廷杖人二十。
现代文：成化十五年，汪直诬陷侍郎马文升、都御史牟俸等人，皇帝下诏责备给事御史李俊、王浚等五十六人包庇汪直，每人廷杖二十下。
English: In the fifteenth year of Chenghua, Wang Zhi framed his servant Ma Wensheng, the governor of the capital Shi Mouhan and others, and the emperor issued an edict to reprimand the governor of the capital Li Jun, Wang Jun and other fifty-six people for protecting Wang Zhi, and each person received twenty strokes of the imperial cane.

古文：正德十四年，以谏止南巡，廷杖舒芬、黄巩等百四十六人，死者十一人。
现代文：正德十四年，因为群臣进谏阻止皇帝南巡，廷杖舒芬、黄巩等一百四十六人，十一人被打死。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, because a group of courtiers marched into the capital to prevent the emperor from touring the south, 146 people, including Ting Jie, Shu Fen, and Huang Gong, were beaten to death.

古文：嘉靖三年，群臣争大礼，廷仗丰熙等百三十四人，死者十六人。
现代文：嘉靖三年，群臣向皇帝争大礼，皇帝下令廷杖丰熙等一百三十四人，十六人被打死。
English: In the third year of Jiajing, a group of courtiers challenged the emperor for a grand gift. The emperor ordered the imperial scepter to be given to 134 people, including Fengxi, and 16 people were killed.

古文：中年刑法益峻，虽大臣不免笞辱。
现代文：嘉靖中期刑法愈加严峻，就是朝廷大臣也免不了笞辱。
English: In the mid-Jiajing period, the criminal law became more and more severe, and even ministers of the imperial court could not avoid humiliation.

古文：宣大总督翟鹏、蓟州巡抚朱方以撤防早，宣大总督郭宗皋、大同巡抚陈翟以寇入大同，刑部侍郎彭黯、左都御史屠侨、大理卿沈良才以议丁汝夔狱缓，戎政侍郎蒋应奎、左通政唐国相以子弟冒功，皆逮杖之。
现代文：宣府大同总督翟鹏、蓟州巡抚朱方因为撤除防卫过早，宣府大同总督郭宗皋、大同巡抚陈耀因为敌寇侵入了大旦，刑部侍郎彭黯、左都御史屠侨、大理卿沈良才因为拖延议定丁汝夔的案子，戎政侍郎蒋应奎、左通政唐国相因子侄辈虚报军功，都被逮捕而受了杖刑。
English: Xuanfu Datong Governor Zou Peng and Zhangzhou Governor Zhu Fang were arrested for prematurely withdrawing the defense, Xuanfu Datong Governor Guo Zongyi and Datong Inspector Chen Yao were arrested for invading Datang, the warden of the criminal department Peng Qian, the governor of the capital Zuo Shi Tuo Qiao, and the minister of justice Shen Liangcai were arrested for delaying the negotiation of Ding Ruzhen's case, and the warden of the military government Jiang Yingkui, the minister of state Zuo Tong Zheng and his nephews were arrested for falsely reporting their military service and received the cane punishment.

古文：方、翟毙于杖下，而黯、侨、良才等杖毕，趣治事。
现代文：朱方和陈耀被当场打死，而彭黯、屠侨、沈良才等人杖刑受毕，立即催促办理公事。
English: Zhu Fang and Chen Yao were beaten to death on the spot, while Peng Ying, Tu Qiao, Shen Liangcai and others were punished with canes and immediately urged to handle public affairs.

古文：公卿之辱，前此未有。
现代文：对公卿的侮辱，前所未有。
English: An unprecedented insult to a noble.

古文：又因正旦朝贺，怒六科给事中张思静等，皆朝服予杖，天下莫不骇然。
现代文：又在正月初一朝贺时，因对六科给事中张思静等发怒，一律穿着朝服实行杖责，天下人无不惊骇。
English: Also, on the morning of the first day of the first month of the year, when congratulating, because of the anger of Zhang Sijing and others in the six subjects, they all wore imperial robes to carry out the duty of the cane, and the whole world was shocked.

古文：四十余年间，杖杀朝士，倍蓰前代。
现代文：四十多年之中，嘉靖帝用杖刑打死的朝士，比前代多几倍。
English: In more than forty years, Emperor Jiajing killed several times more imperial courtiers with the cane than the previous generation.

古文：万历五年，以争张居正夺情，杖吴中行等五人。
现代文：万历五年，因为对张居正守丧未满期而出仕不同意，杖责昊中行等五人。
English: After five years, because he disagreed with Zhang Juzheng's decision to serve out the unexpired period of mourning, he reprimanded Hao Zhongxing and five others.

古文：其后卢洪春、孟养浩、王德完辈咸被杖，多者至一百。
现代文：此后卢洪春、孟养浩、王德完等人都被杖责，杖数多的达一百下。
English: After that, Lu Hongchun, Meng Yanghao, Wang Deguan and others were all punished with canes, and the number of canes reached one hundred.

古文：后帝益厌言者，疏多留中，廷杖寝不用。
现代文：后宋皇帝越发厌恶进言者，臣下的奏疏往往留在宫中不理睬，廷杖也搁置起来不用了。
English: Later, Song emperors became more and more averse to those who made speeches. Subordinates' speeches were often ignored and left in the palace, and the imperial scepter was no longer needed.

古文：天启时，太监王体乾奉赦大审，重笞戚畹李承恩，以悦魏忠贤。
现代文：天启时，太监王体干奉敕命大审，重重地笞打外戚李承恩，以取悦于魏忠贤。
English: At the time of the apocalypse, the eunuch Wang Ti, acting under the command of Wei Zhongxian, severely beat his relative Li Cheng'en to please Wei Zhongxian.

古文：于是万燝、吴裕中毙于杖下，台省力争不得。
现代文：于是万燥、昊裕中都死在杖下，政府的中央机构为之竭力谏诤，也不能保。
English: As a result, Bansuri and Haoyu died under the cane, and the central government agencies tried their best to save them, but they could not.

古文：阁臣叶向高言： 数十年不行之敝政，三见于旬日，万万不可再行。 
现代文：内阁大臣叶向高说： 数十年没有施行的弊政，十天以内出现了三次，万万不可再施行了。 
English: Cabinet Minister Ye Xianggao said, "An evil policy that has not been implemented for decades has appeared three times within ten days. It must never be implemented again."

古文：忠贤乃罢廷仗，而以所欲杀者悉下镇抚司，士大夫益无噍类矣。
现代文：魏忠贤这纔放弃了廷杖，而将自己想杀的人一律下交镇抚司，士大夫更是没有生路了。
English: Wei Zhongxian gave up the imperial scepter and handed over all the people he wanted to kill to the township magistrate. The magistrate had no way out.

古文：南京行杖，始于成化十八年。
现代文：南京施行廷杖，开始于成化十八年。
English: Nanjing's implementation of the imperial scepter began in Chenghua eighteen years ago.

古文：南御史李珊等以岁祲请振。
现代文：南御史李珊等因收成不好请求赈济。
English: Minami goshi Lishan and others requested financial aid due to poor harvest.

古文：帝摘其疏中讹字，令锦衣卫诣南京午门前，人杖二十，守备太监监之。
现代文：皇帝摘出其奏疏中的错字，命令锦衣卫带着他们到南京午门前，每人杖责二十下，让守备太监监刑。
English: The emperor picked out the misspelled words in his handwriting and ordered Jin Yiwei to take them to the gate of Nanjing, and each of them was punished with 20 strokes of the cane, and the guards were sentenced to prison.

古文：至正德间，南御史李熙劾贪吏触怒刘瑾，矫旨杖三十。
现代文：到正德年间，南御史李熙检举贪官污吏触怒了刘瑾，刘瑾假传圣旨杖责他三十下。
English: During the Zhengde era, the Southern Governor Li Xi's prosecution of corrupt officials angered Liu Bei, who gave him 30 strokes of the cane for falsely preaching the gospel.

古文：时南京禁卫久不行刑，选卒习数日，乃杖之，几毙。
现代文：当时南京禁卫军长时间没有用刑了，刘瑾命选取兵卒练习了几天，纔施杖刑，差点把李熙打死。
English: At that time, the Nanjing Imperial Guard had not used punishment for a long time. Liu Xunmei selected soldiers and practiced for a few days. He used cane punishment and almost beat Li Xi to death.

古文：东厂之设，始于成祖。
现代文：东厂是成祖时创设的。
English: The East Factory was founded by Cheng Zu.

古文：锦衣卫之狱，太祖尝用之，后已禁止，其复用亦自永乐时。
现代文：锦衣卫的监狱，太祖曾经使用遇，后来禁止使用，其重新启用亦从永乐时开始。
English: The prison in Jinlingwei, which was once used by Taizu and later banned, has been reopened since Yongle.

古文：厂与卫相倚，故言者并称厂卫。
现代文：厂与卫相辅相成，故说起它们来并称厂卫。
English: Plant and Wei complement each other, so when they are mentioned, they are also called plant Wei.

古文：初，成祖起北平，刺探宫中事，多以建文帝左右为耳目。
现代文：当初，成祖兴起于北平，刺探官中的事，多以建文帝左右近臣为耳目。
English: At first, Cheng Zu arose in Beiping, and most of the things among the spies were heard and seen by the courtiers around Emperor Jianwen.

古文：故即位后专倚宦官，立东厂于东安门北，令嬖暱者提督之，缉访谋逆妖言大奸恶等，与锦衣卫均权势，盖迁都后事也。
现代文：因此即位后专门倚重宦官，在柬安门北面设立了东厂，叫自己宠爱的心腹在那里当提督，搜寻有阴谋反叛、妖言惑众与有大奸大恶行为的人等。东厂与锦衣卫权势平齐，大概是迁都以后的事了。
English: Therefore, after ascending to the throne, he specially relied on eunuchs, and set up the East Factory on the north side of the Cambodian Gate, and asked his favorite henchman to be the admiral there, searching for people with conspiracy, rebellion, witchcraft, and great evil behavior. The East Factory and Jinbei were equal in power, probably after the capital was moved.

古文：然卫指挥纪纲、门达等大幸，更迭用事，厂权不能如。
现代文：不过锦衣卫指挥纪纲、门逵等大受宠幸，相继执掌权柄，厂权比不上它。
English: However, brocade clothing and sanitary ware, commanding the syllabus, door latches, etc. are greatly favored, successively holding power, and the factory right is not comparable to it.

古文：至宪宗时，尚铭领东厂，又别设西厂刺事，以汪直督之，所领缇骑倍东厂。
现代文：到宪宗时，尚铭掌管柬厂，又另设西厂刺探诸事，让汪直督领，所掌管的武装骑吏数量比东厂多一倍。
English: By the time of Emperor Xianzong, Shangming was in charge of the Cambrian Factory, and he also set up the West Factory to investigate various matters and let Wang Zhihu take the lead. The number of armed cavalry officers under his control was double that of the East Factory.

古文：自京师及天下，旁午侦事，虽王府不免。
现代文：这些人从京城到全国各地，往来交错侦探诸事，连诸侯王的府第也不能幸免。
English: These people from the capital to all over the country, intertwined detective affairs, even the court of princes can not be spared.

古文：直中废复用，先后凡六年，冤死者相属，势远出卫上。
现代文：汪直曾被废黜而又复用，先后管事共六年，冤死其手下者累累相连，他的权势速远大于锦衣卫。
English: Wang Zhi was once deposed and then reinstated. He has been in charge for a total of six years. The wrongful deaths of his subordinates are connected. His power is far greater than that of Jin Rongwei.

古文：会直数出边监军，大学士万安乃言： 太宗建北京，命锦衣官校缉访，犹恐外官徇情，故设东厂，令内臣提督，行五六十年，事有定规。
现代文：遇到汪直几次出外到边防监军，大学士万安纔进言说： 太宗建置北京，命令锦衣卫官员搜访，还担心外地官吏徇情作弊，又设置东厂，命内臣掌管。此制实行五六十年了，办事有固定规程。
English: Encountering Wang Zhi's several trips abroad to the border patrol force, university scholar Wan Anqin said: Taizong built Beijing, ordered Jin Rongwei officials to search, was also worried about foreign officials cheating, and also set up the East Factory, which was controlled by his subordinates. This system has been in effect for fifty or sixty years, and there are fixed rules for doing business.

古文：往者妖狐夜出，人心惊惶，感劳圣虑，添设西厂，特命直督缉，用戒不虞，所以权一时之宜，慰安人心也。
现代文：过去妖怪狐精夜里出来，人心惊惶，劳烦圣土思虑，故添设西厂，特任命汪直督查，以戒备不能预测的事件。这是权宜之计，用来安抚人心的。
English: In the past, the fox spirit came out at night, people were alarmed, and they were worried about the holy land. Therefore, the west factory was added, and Wang Zhizhi was specially appointed to supervise and guard against unpredictable events. This is a stopgap measure to appease people's hearts.

古文：向所纷扰，臣不赘言。
现代文：前段时间国内的纷扰，臣不赘述了。
English: The minister did not dwell on the domestic turmoil of some time ago.

古文：今直镇大同，京城众口一辞，皆以革去西厂为便。
现代文：现在汪直镇抚大同，京城人众口一辞，都认为撤销西厂最便利。
English: Now that Wang Zhi Zhen is leading Datong, the people of Beijing all agree that it is most convenient to cancel the West Plant.

古文：伏望圣恩特旨革罢，官校悉回原卫，宗社幸甚。 
现代文：伏望圣恩特别降旨撤销它，官员们都回到原来的卫所，这将是宗庙国家的大幸事。 
English: Fupoang Sheng'en specially decreed to revoke it, and the officials all returned to the original guardhouse, which will be a great blessing for the ancestral temple country.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：尚铭专用事，未几亦黜。
现代文：尚铭专权，不久也被革职。
English: Shang Ming was given exclusive power and was soon dismissed.

古文：弘治元年，员外郎张伦请废东厂。不报。
现代文：弘治元年，员外郎张伦请求废除东厂，皇帝不答复。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, Zhang Lun, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, requested the abolition of the East Factory, but the emperor did not respond.

古文：然孝宗仁厚，厂卫无敢横，司厂者罗祥、杨鹏，奉职而已。
现代文：不过孝宗仁厚，厂、卫都不敢凶横，管理二厂的官员罗祥和杨鹏，奉行职责而已。
English: However, Xiaozong was a benevolent person, the factory and Wei did not dare to be violent, and the officials Luo Xiang and Yang Peng, who managed the second factory, only carried out their duties.

古文：正德元年，杀东厂太监王岳，命丘聚代之，又设西厂以命谷大用，皆刘瑾党也。
现代文：正德元年杀东厂太监王岳，命令丘聚替代他，又设立西厂以任命谷大用，他们都是刘瑾集团里的人。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he killed Wang Yue, the eunuch of the East Factory, ordered Qiu Ju to replace him, and set up the West Factory to appoint Gu Dayong. They were all members of Liu Bei's group.

古文：两厂争用事，遣逻卒刺事四方。
现代文：西厂争夺掌权，派遣巡逻兵四出侦探。
English: The West Plant was vying for power, and sent patrols of four detectives.

古文：南康吴登显等戏竞渡龙舟，身死家籍。
现代文：南康昊登颢等人举办龙舟竞渡游戏，结果被处死，家产被籍没，亲人沦为官奴。
English: Nankang Hao Dengyu and others held a dragon boat racing game. As a result, they were executed, their family property was confiscated, and their relatives were reduced to official slaves.

古文：远州僻壤，见鲜衣怒马作京师语者，转相避匿。
现代文：偏远的州县里，人们一见到穿着华丽服装骑着高头大马操北京口音的人，就奔走相告，纷纷逃避躲藏。
English: In remote prefectures and counties, as soon as people see a person wearing gorgeous clothes, riding a tall horse and speaking with a Beijing accent, they run to tell each other and run away to hide.

古文：有司闻风，密行贿赂。
现代文：官吏们听到风声，悄悄送上贿赂。
English: Officials heard the rumor and quietly sent bribes.

古文：于是无赖子乘机为奸，天下皆重足立。
现代文：于是无赖之徒乘机作奸邪之事，天下人都畏惧得叠足而立。
English: As a result, scoundrels took advantage of the opportunity to commit treasonous and evil acts, and people all over the world were so afraid that they stood on their feet.

古文：而卫使石文义亦瑾私人，厂卫之势合矣。
现代文：而卫使石文义也是刘瑾的私党，厂卫的势力合二为一。
English: However, Wei general Shi Wenyi was also Liu Ye's personal party, and the power of the plant guards merged into one.

古文：瑾又改惜薪司外薪厂为办事厂，荣府旧仓地为内办事厂，自领之。
现代文：刘瑾又将惜薪司的外薪厂改焉办事厂，荣府旧仓地为内办事厂，自己主管。
English: Liu Wei also changed the external pay factory of the paymaster into an office factory, and the old warehouse in Rongfu into an internal office factory, and he was in charge of it.

古文：京师谓之内行厂，虽东西厂皆在伺察中，加酷烈焉。
现代文：京城人叫它做内行厂，就是东西厂也在他们的监视之中，其酷烈更为厉害。
English: The people of Beijing have called it a rogue factory, and even the East-West Factory is under their surveillance, which is even more severe.

古文：且创例，罪无轻重皆决杖，永远戍边，或枷项发遣。枷重至百五十斤，不数日辄死。
现代文：内行厂并且创造新例，对囚犯不论轻重一律先施杖刑，然后判子子孙孙永远戍边。有的人还用大枷枷着颈项发遣，枷的重量有达一百五十斤的，犯人戴不了几天就丧命。
English: The authorities also created a new precedent: all prisoners, regardless of their weight, were first punished with the cane, and then their children and grandchildren were sentenced to be shackled forever. Some people were also sent away with large shackles around their necks. The weight of the shackles was up to one hundred and fifty kilos, and the prisoners died within a few days of wearing them.

古文：尚宝卿顾璿、副使姚祥、工部郎张玮、御史王时中辈并不免，濒死而后谪戍。
现代文：尚宝卿颅璇、副使姚祥、工部郎张璋、御史王时中等人都没有幸免，被折磨得濒临死亡然后纔贬谪戍边。
English: Shang Baoqing, Deputy Envoy Yao Xiang, Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry

古文：御史柴文显、汪澄以微罪至凌迟。
现代文：御史柴文显、汪澄甚至因为轻微的罪过而被凌迟处死。
English: The governors Chai Wenxian and Wang Cheng were even lynched for minor crimes.

古文：官吏军民非法死者数千。
现代文：官吏、军士和平民被非法折磨死的有数千人。
English: Thousands of officials, soldiers and civilians were illegally tortured to death.

古文：瑾诛，西厂、内行厂俱革，独东厂如故。
现代文：刘瑾被诛杀以后，西厂和内行厂都撤销了，惟有东厂依然如故。
English: After Liu Wei was beaten to death, both the West Plant and the Inner Line Plant were abolished, but the East Plant remained as it was.

古文：张锐领之，与卫使钱宁并以辑事恣罗织。
现代文：张锐主管东厂，与锦衣卫卫使钱宁都藉着搜访之事恣意罗织罪名陷害人。
English: Zhang Rui, who was in charge of the East Factory, and Jin Yi Wei, who was in charge of the West Factory, both used the search to arbitrarily fabricate charges and frame people.

古文：厂卫之称由此著也。
现代文：厂卫之称因此大噪。
English: As a result, the guards at the plant are said to make a lot of noise.

古文：嘉靖二年，东厂芮景贤任千户陶淳，多所诬陷。
现代文：嘉靖二年，东厂芮景贤任用千户陶淳，做了许多诬陷他人之事。
English: In the second year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the East Factory of Gong Jingxian appointed Chifu Tao Jun, who did a lot of things to frame others.

古文：给事中刘最执奏，谪判广德州。
现代文：给事中刘最持章上奏反对，被判贬官到广德州。
English: In the case, Liu Zicheng opposed the appeal and was sentenced to be demoted to Guangdong.

古文：御史黄德用使乘传往。会有颜如环者同行，以黄袱裹装。
现代文：御史黄德用叫他乘驿车去广德，适逢有个叫颜如环的人与他同行，用黄包袱裹了行装。
English: Gu Shi Huang De used to tell him to take a tuk-tuk to go to Guangde. At the right time, there was a person with a beautiful face who accompanied him and wrapped the luggage with a yellow bag.

古文：景贤即奏，逮下狱，最等编戍有差。
现代文：芮景贤立刻上奏，二人被捕下狱，按不同情况编伍充军戍边。
English: Gong Jingxian immediately began to play, the two were arrested and jailed, and according to different circumstances, they formed an army.

古文：给事中刘济言： 最罪不至戍。
现代文：给事中刘济进言： 刘最所犯的罪过不至于发配戍边。
English: In the case of Liu Jizhen, Liu Jizhen said: Liu Jizhen's sins will not result in the awarding of bridles.

古文：且缉执于宦寺之门，锻炼于武夫之手，裁决于内降之旨，何以示天下？ 
现代文：而且，他是由宦官逮捕酌，罪名是武夫罗织的，裁决是通过内部下旨进行的，怎么好昭示天下？ 
English: Moreover, he was arrested by eunuchs, the charges were fabricated by the military, and the ruling was made by internal order. How could this be revealed to the world?

古文：不报。
现代文：皇帝不予响应。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：是时尽罢天下镇守太监，而大臣狃故事，谓东厂祖宗所设，不可废，不知非太祖制也。
现代文：当时，各地的镇守太监都已撤除，而大臣们习惯于老办法，说东厂是祖宗设置的，不可废除，不知道东厂并不是太祖的制度。
English: At that time, all the town guard eunuchs had been removed, and the ministers were accustomed to the old way, saying that the East Factory was set up by the ancestors and could not be abolished. They did not know that the East Factory was not the system of the ancestors.

古文：然世宗驭中官严，不敢恣，厂权不及卫使陆炳远矣。
现代文：然而世宗对宦官管制严格，不敢放任，东厂的权威已远不如卫使陆炳大。
English: However, Shizong strictly controlled the eunuchs and did not dare to give them free rein. The authority of the East Factory was far less than that of the Wei envoy Lu Yao.

古文：万历初，冯保以司礼兼厂事，建厂东上北门之北，曰内厂，而以初建者为外厂。
现代文：万历初年，冯保以司礼太监身份兼管厂事，在东上北门之北建立新厂，叫内厂，而将先建的那个厂叫外厂。
English: In the first year of Wanli, Feng Bao, as the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch.

古文：保与张居正兴王大臣狱，欲族高拱，卫使朱希孝力持之，拱得无罪，卫犹不大附厂也。
现代文：冯保与张居正搞出个王大臣案件，企图族诛高拱，卫使朱希孝极力为高拱辩护，高拱得以无罪，可见当时锦衣卫还不大趋附于厂。
English: Feng Bao and Zhang Ju were trying to set up a case against Gao Gong in an attempt to slander Gao Gong. Wei's envoy Zhu Xi Xiao tried his best to defend Gao Gong, and Gao Gong was acquitted. It can be seen that at that time, Jin Yi Wei was not yet attached to the factory.

古文：中年，矿税使数出为害，而东厂张诚、孙暹、陈矩皆恬静。
现代文：万历中期，矿税使多次出行为害，而东厂张诚、孙暹、陈矩都安然寂静。
English: In the middle of the Wanli period, the mining tax caused many harms, while the East Factory Zhang Cheng, Sun Siam, and Chen Rui were all quiet and peaceful.

古文：矩治妖书狱，无株滥，时颇称之。
现代文：陈矩审理妖书一案，没有株连无辜和滥判，当时的人颇称道他。
English: People at the time praised Chen Rui for his handling of the Yanshu case, which did not result in an innocent or unfair verdict.

古文：会帝亦无意刻核，刑罚用稀，厂卫狱中至生青草。
现代文：恰逢皇帝也无意于峻刻勘查，刑罚用得稀少，厂卫的监狱里甚至生了青草。
English: At the same time, the emperor had no intention of carrying out a thorough investigation, punishments were rarely used, and there was even grass growing in the guards' prison.

古文：及天启时，魏忠贤以秉笔领厂事，用卫使田尔耕、镇抚许显纯之徒，专以酷虐钳中外，而厂卫之毒极矣。
现代文：到天启时，魏忠贤以秉笔太监身份总领厂内事务，任用卫使田尔耕、镇抚许显纯之徒，专门从事用酷虐手段钳制朝廷内外人士，厂卫之毒达到极点。
English: By the time of the apocalypse, Wei Zhongxian was in charge of the internal affairs of the factory as the eunuch with a pen. He appointed guards such as Tian Erkoo and Zhenfu Xu Xian, who specialized in using cruel means to control people inside and outside the imperial court. The poison of the factory guards reached its peak.

古文：凡中官掌司礼监印者，其属称之曰宗主，而督东厂者曰督主。
现代文：凡是掌管司礼监印信的宦官，僚属称其为宗主，而总领东厂的叫督主。
English: All the eunuchs in charge of the Department of Ceremonies, Supervision and Printing of Letters were called the patriarch by their subordinates, while the leader of the East Factory was called the governor.

古文：东厂之属无专官，掌刑千户一，理刑百户一，亦谓之贴刑，皆卫官。
现代文：东厂的属官没有专职官，掌刑由一个千户担任，理刑由一个百户担任，理刑也叫贴刑，都是锦衣卫的官员。
English: The subordinate officials of the East Factory do not have full-time officials. The hand punishment is carried out by one thousand households, and the adjustment punishment is carried out by one hundred households. The adjustment punishment is also called the affixing punishment. They are all the officials of Jinlingwei.

古文：其隶役悉取给于卫，最轻黠獧巧者乃拨充之。
现代文：他们的差役都由锦衣卫提供，卫里最狡黠乖巧的士卒就调拨给他们充任。
English: Their guards were all provided by the brocade guards, and the most cunning and well-behaved guards were assigned to them.

古文：役长曰档头，帽上锐，衣青素衤旋褶，系小绦，白皮靴，专主伺察。
现代文：差役长叫档头，其帽子的顶端尖锐，衣服是青白色的被褶褂，上面系着小布丝，脚穿白皮靴，专管侦伺。
English: The head of the police department is called the chief, the top of his hat is pointed, his clothes are blue and white bedding, with a small cloth tied on top, his feet are wearing white leather boots, and he is in charge of investigation.

古文：其下番子数人为干事。
现代文：其手下有番子数人为之办事。
English: Several of his subordinates are responsible for this.

古文：京师亡命，诓财挟仇，视干事者为窟穴。
现代文：京城的亡命之徒，骗财或挟仇的，枧办事者为窟穴。
English: The capital's outlaws, those who swindle money or take revenge, and those who do business are holes.

古文：得一阴事，由之以密白于档头，档头视其事大小，先予之金。
现代文：他们打探到人家一件隐私，就通过番子密告给档头，档头根据事情大小先付给金钱。
English: They find out about a private matter in someone's home, and inform the filer through the watchman, and the filer pays money in advance according to the size of the matter.

古文：事曰起数，金曰买起数。
现代文：事情叫起敷，钱叫买起敷。
English: Things call for money, and money calls for things.

古文：既得事，帅番子至所犯家，左右坐曰打桩。
现代文：既已得知阴事，档头率领番子去到犯禁的人家，门外左右坐人，叫做打椿。
English: Having already learned of the sin, the steward led the bailiff to the home of the person who violated the ban, and people sat around the door, which is called beating the camellia.

古文：番子即突入执讯之。无有左证符牒，贿如数，径去。
现代文：其它番子就闯入室内，抓住其人审讯，没有左证或符牒，主人按要求给足贿赂，也就径直离开。
English: Other guards broke into the room, seized his person for interrogation, without a license or certificate, the owner gave the foot bribe as required, and also left directly.

古文：少不如意，扌旁治之，名曰乾醡酒，亦曰搬罾儿，痛楚十倍官刑。
现代文：稍不如意，就严刑拷打，刑名叫干醉酒，又叫搬罾儿，其痛楚比官家规定的刑蜀厉害十倍。
English: If they are a little less than satisfactory, they will be severely tortured. The torture is called "dry drunkenness" and "carrying the child," and the pain is ten times more severe than the official punishment.

古文：且授意使牵有力者，有力者予多金，即无事。
现代文：还授意挨整者牵连有财力的人，有财力的贿赂他们足够多的金钱，就没有事。
English: He also instructed the investigators to implicate people with financial resources, and those with financial resources to bribe them with enough money, and there would be no problem.

古文：或靳不予，予不足，立闻上，下镇抚司狱，立死矣。
现代文：如果惜钱不给，或所给不足，立即报告皇帝，将其下交镇抚司监狱，犯人立时就要丧命。
English: If money is not given sparingly, or if what is given is insufficient, immediately report to the emperor and hand him over to the Zhenfushi Prison, and the prisoner will immediately die.

古文：每月旦，厂役数百人，掣签庭中，分瞰官府。
现代文：每月初一，几百个厂役在庭院中抽签，然后分别监视官府。
English: On the first day of every month, several hundred factory managers draw lots in the courtyard, and then separately monitor the government offices.

古文：其视中府诸处会审大狱、北镇抚司考讯重犯者曰听记。他官府及各城门访缉曰坐记。
现代文：其中监视内府诸处会审大案和北镇抚司审讯重罪犯的叫听记，到其它官府和各个城门搜访的叫坐记。
English: Among them, those who supervised the trials of major cases in various parts of the inner government and the trials of felons in the North Town Fusiliers were called to listen, and those who searched other government offices and various city gates were called to sit.

古文：某官行某事，某城门得某奸，胥吏疏白坐记者上之厂曰打事件。
现代文：某官做了某事，某城门发现某奸事，胥吏一条绦告诉坐记，坐记转告厂，叫打事件。
English: A certain official did something, a certain city gate discovered a certain treachery, the officials told the journal, the journal told the factory, called the incident.

古文：至东华门，虽夤夜，投隙中以入，即屏人达至尊。
现代文：即使是深夜到束华门，从缝隙中进去了，也有人悄悄报告给皇帝。
English: Even if someone came to the Shuhua Gate in the middle of the night and entered through a crack, someone would quietly report it to the emperor.

古文：以故事无大小，天子皆得闻之。
现代文：因此事情无论大小，天子都能知道。
English: Therefore, no matter how big or small things are, the Son of Heaven can know everything.

古文：家人米盐猥事，宫中或传为笑谑，上下惴惴无不畏打事件者。
现代文：家人柴米油盐琐事，有的竟在宫中传为笑料。上下惴惴不安，无不惧怕打事件的。
English: Some of the trivialities of the family members, such as chai, rice, oil, and salt, were even passed on as a joke in the palace. They were uneasy, and they were always afraid of getting into trouble.

古文：卫之法亦如厂。然须具疏，乃得上闻，以此其势不及厂远甚。
现代文：锦衣卫的办法也跟厂一样，但是必须写出疏条上奏，纔能让天子知道，所以它的势力远不如厂。
English: The method of brocade clothing is also the same as that of the factory, but it is necessary to write a sparse strip on the score, and the brocade can let the heavens know, so its power is far less than the factory.

古文：有四人夜饮密室，一人酒酣，谩骂魏忠贤，其三人噤不敢出声。
现代文：一天晚上，有四个人在密室裹喝酒，其中一个喝得痛快了，馒骂魏忠贤，另外三人噤口不敢出声。
English: One night, there were four people drinking in a secret room. One of them got drunk and cursed Wei Zhongxian. The other three were afraid to speak out.

古文：骂未讫，番人摄四人至忠贤所，即磔骂者，而劳三人金。
现代文：还没骂完，番子就进来抓住四人，将他们送到魏忠贤那里，魏忠贤立即肢解了骂他的人，而拿钱慰劳其它三人。
English: Before he had finished cursing, the guard came in, grabbed the four people and sent them to Wei Zhongxian. Wei Zhongxian immediately dismembered the person who cursed him, and took the money to comfort the other three.

古文：三人者魄丧不敢动。
现代文：三人魂飞魄丧，动也不敢动。
English: The three of them were distraught and did not dare to move.

古文：庄烈帝即位，忠贤伏诛，而王体乾、王永祚、郑之惠、李承芳、曹化淳、王德化、王之心、王化民、齐本正等相继领厂事，告密之风未尝息也。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，魏忠贤伏法被诛。而后王体干、王永祚、郑之惠、李承芳、曹化淳、王德化、王之心、王化民、齐本正等相继统领厂内事务，告密之风不曾平息。
English: Emperor Zhuangliu ascended the throne, and Emperor Wei Zhongxian was executed. Wang Tiegan, Wang Yongqian, Zheng Zhihu, Li Chengfang, Cao Huachun, Wang Dehua, Wang Xin, Wang Huamin, Qi Benzheng, and others successively led the affairs of the factory, and the whistle-blowing never subsided.

古文：之心、化淳叙缉奸功，荫弟侄锦衣卫百户，而德化及东厂理刑吴道正等侦阁臣薛国观阴事，国观由此死。
现代文：为奖励王之心、曹化淳缉奸的功劳，封荫弟侄辈入锦衣卫充任百户。而王德化及东厂理刑昊道正等侦伺到合臣薛国观隐私，薛国观因此被整死。
English: In order to reward Wang Xin and Cao Huachun for their anti-rape efforts, Wang's nephew and cousins were assigned to guard hundreds of households. Meanwhile, Wang Dehua and the East Factory's disciplinary officer, Hao Dao, were investigating the private life of his trusted vassal, Xue Guocun, who was killed as a result.

古文：时卫使慴厂威已久，大抵俯首为所用。
现代文：当时卫使已长期慑服于厂威，大抵俯首受之驱使。
English: At that time, the guards had long been subjugated to the authority of the factory, and were mostly driven by it.

古文：崇祯十五年，御史杨仁愿言： 高皇帝设官，无所谓缉事衙门者。
现代文：崇祯十五年，御史杨仁愿说： 高皇帝设官，没有所谓的侦缉衙门。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the Grand Historian Yang Renzhen said: Emperor Gao set up officials, and there was no so-called investigation.

古文：臣下不法，言官直纠之，无阴讦也。
现代文：臣下有不法行为，谏官直接纠察，没有揭发隐私的。
English: If a vassal commits an illegal act, the eunuch will directly picket him, but will not expose his private life.

古文：后以肃清辇毂，乃建东厂。
现代文：后来因为肃清皇帝身边的奸恶，纔建置东厂。
English: Later, in order to clean up the treachery around the emperor, the eastern factory was built.

古文：臣待罪南城，所阅词讼，多以假番故诉冤。
现代文：臣在南城供职，所审阅的讼词，多是因为假番子侵害而诉冤。
English: The vassal served in Nancheng, and most of the litigations he reviewed were for the infringement of false vassals.

古文：夫假称东厂，害犹如此，况其真乎？
现代文：假称东厂造成的危害尚且如此，何况真的呢？
English: Assuming that the damage caused by the East Plant is still the same, how much more so is it true?

古文：此由积重之势然也。
现代文：这是由于长期累积起来的威势造成的。
English: This is due to the long-term accumulation of power.

古文：所谓积重之势者，功令比较事件，番役每悬价以买事件，受买者至诱人为奸盗而卖之，番役不问其从来，诱者分利去矣。
现代文：所谓累积的威势是指，柬厂考核提拔的办法，是比较上报案件的多少，番役每每出高价来购买事件，出卖者甚至诱人为奸盗而卖事件，番役不问消息是从哪里来的，卖者已经分利走了。
English: The so-called "accumulated power" refers to the fact that the Cambodian factory's assessment and promotion method is to compare the number of reported cases, the watchman buys every high-priced case, the seller even induces the thief to sell the case, the watchman does not ask where the news came from, and the seller has gone away.

古文：挟忿首告，诬以重法，挟者志无不逞矣。
现代文：心怀怨忿告发人，诬陷别人使之受严刑峻法的制裁，怀恨者无不心满意足。
English: With grudge in their hearts, they accuse others, frame them up, and subject them to severe punishment and legal sanctions. Those who hold grudges are always satisfied.

古文：伏愿宽东厂事件，而后东厂之比较可缓，东厂之比较缓，而后番役之买事件与卖事件者俱可息，积重之势庶几可稍轻。 
现代文：希望皇上放宽封东厂事件的责求，而后东厂侦伺事件纔可以宽缓一些，东厂刺探事件可以宽缓些，番役买事件和卖事件的事就可以平息，累积的威势恐怕就能逐渐减轻。 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will relax the demands of the incident of sealing the East Factory, and the investigation of the East Factory can be relaxed, the East Factory spying incident can be relaxed, the watchman buying incident and the selling incident can be calmed, and the accumulated power can be gradually reduced.

古文：后复切言缇骑不当遣。
现代文：后来杨仁愿又严肃陈述不应派遣锦衣校尉。
English: Later, Yang Rieng also made a serious statement that Lieutenant Jin Yi should not be sent.

古文：帝为谕东厂，言所缉止谋逆乱伦，其作奸犯科，自有司存，不宜缉，并戒锦衣校尉之横索者。
现代文：崇祯帝因此告谕柬厂，言其应缉查的只是阴谋叛逆和败坏伦常者，那些为非作歹、触犯律条的，自有主管机构处理，不宜侦察缉捕，并对凶横贪财的锦衣校尉进行训诫。
English: Emperor Chongzhen therefore told the Cambodian authorities that they should only investigate those who plotted rebellion and corrupt morals. Those who committed crimes and violated the law should be dealt with by their own competent agencies. It was not appropriate to investigate and arrest them. He also admonished the villainous and greedy Captain Jin Yi.

古文：然帝倚厂卫益甚，至国亡乃已。
现代文：可是皇帝还是越来越依赖厂卫，直到明朝覆亡才停止。
English: However, the emperor still relied more and more on the guards, and this did not stop until the Ming Dynasty fell.

古文：锦衣卫狱者，世所称诏狱也。
现代文：锦衣卫监狱，世称诏狱。
English: The brocade prison, known to the world as the imperial prison.

古文：古者狱讼掌于司寇而已。
现代文：古代诉讼只由司寇掌管。
English: Ancient lawsuits are only handled by SCOTUS.

古文：汉武帝始置诏狱二十六所，历代因革不常。
现代文：汉武帝创设了诏狱二十六所，历代或沿袭或更改没有定规。
English: Emperor Hanwu created twenty-six imperial prisons, and there is no set rule for succeeding generations to follow or change.

古文：五代唐明宗设侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，乃天子自将之名。至汉有侍卫司狱，凡大事皆决焉。
现代文：五代唐明宗设侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，这是天子自己统领之名占到汉代有侍卫司狱，凡大案件都在那里决断。
English: Five generations of the Tang and Ming dynasties set up bodyguards to command the troops. This is the name of the heavenly son himself. In the Han Dynasty, there were bodyguards and prison guards, and all major cases were decided there.

古文：明锦衣卫狱近之，幽系惨酷，害无甚于此者。
现代文：明代的锦衣卫狱近似侍卫司狱，而其拘系残酷，为害没有比这更大的了。
English: The brocade prison of the Ming Dynasty is similar to the prison of the guards, and its detention system is cruel, and there is no greater harm than this.

古文：太祖时，天下重罪逮至京者，收系狱中，数更大狱，多使断治，所诛杀为多。
现代文：太祖时，解押到北京的天下重罪犯，都收系在锦衣卫狱中。几次更换大监房，多派人审理，诛杀的人很多。
English: At the time of the founding father, the world's felons who were released to Beijing were all detained in Jinbei Prison. The large cell block was changed several times, more people were sent for trial, and many people were killed.

古文：后悉焚卫刑具，以囚送刑部审理。
现代文：后来将卫里刑具全部焚烧，把囚徒送到刑部审理。
English: Later, all of Wei Li's torture equipment was burned, and the prisoners were sent to the Criminal Investigation Department for trial.

古文：二十六年，申明其禁，诏内外狱毋得上锦衣卫，大小咸经法司。
现代文：二十六年，申明禁令，韶书规定京城内外案件不得上送锦衣卫，大小都经由司法机关处理。
English: In 2016, the ban was affirmed, and the imperial edict stipulated that cases in and out of the capital should not be sent to brocade, and both large and small cases should be handled by the judicial organs.

古文：成祖幸纪纲，令治锦衣亲兵，复典诏狱。
现代文：成祖宠幸纪纲，叫他训练锦衣亲兵，又口他掌管诏狱。
English: Cheng Zu favored Ji Gang and asked him to train Jin Yi's soldiers. He also said that he was in charge of the Imperial Prison.

古文：纲遂用其党庄敬、袁江、王谦、李春等，缘借作奸数百千端。
现代文：纪纲趁机任用自己的党羽庄敬、袁江、王谦、李春等，找借口作不法之事敷千百椿。
English: Ji Gang took advantage of the opportunity to appoint his followers Zhuo Jing, Yuan Jiang, Wang Qian, Li Chun, etc. to find excuses to do illegal things.

古文：久之，族纲，而锦衣典诏狱如故，废洪武诏不用矣。
现代文：久后，族诛纪纲，而锦衣卫仍旧掌管诏狱，洪武帝的诏令被废除不用。
English: After a long time, the Zongzheng Discipline was abolished, but Jin Rongwei was still in charge of the imperial prison, and Emperor Hongwu's imperial edict was no longer used.

古文：英宗初，理卫事者刘勉、徐恭皆谨饬。
现代文：英宗初年，主管锦衣卫的刘勉、徐恭都是谨慎之人。
English: In the first year of Yingzong, Liu Tsuen and Xu Qiong, who were in charge of brocade and clothing, were cautious people.

古文：而王振用指挥马顺流毒天下，枷李时勉，杀刘球，皆顺为之。
现代文：而王振任用指挥马顺，流毒天下，枷李时勉，杀刘球，都是马顺所为。
English: However, Wang Zhen appointed Ma Shun as the commander, who poisoned the whole world, shackled Li Shimin, and killed Liu Qiu, all of which were committed by Ma Shun.

古文：景帝初，有言官校缉事之弊者，帝切责其长，令所缉送法司，有诬罔者重罪。
现代文：景帝初年，有人指出武官缉查诸事的弊端，皇帝狠狠责备了其长官，下令所缉拿的人都送到法司去，诬陷人的从重治罪。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, someone pointed out the drawbacks of the military attaché's investigation of various matters. The emperor severely rebuked his superiors and ordered that all the people who were arrested be sent to the legal department to frame people for serious crimes.

古文：英宗复辟，召李贤，屏左右，问时政得失。
现代文：英宗恢复君位，召来李贤，命左右侍臣离开，问他时政得失。
English: Emperor Yingzong restored the throne, summoned Li Xian, ordered the attendants to leave, and asked him about the merits and demerits of the current government.

古文：贤因极论官校提人之害。
现代文：李贤于是竭力论列锦衣卫官校提人审讯的危害。
English: Li Xian then tried his best to discuss the harm of the trial of a person nominated by the Laijin Guards Officer School.

古文：帝然其言，阴察皆实，乃召其长，戒之。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对，背地里察验都是实情，因而召见它的长官，申诫了一番。
English: The emperor thought that he was right, and that the investigation behind the scenes was the truth, so he summoned his superiors and admonished them.

古文：已缉弋阳王败伦事虚，复申戒之。
现代文：已搜捕的弋阳王败坏伦常的罪名经查核属虚假的，皇帝又警戒他。
English: The charges of corrupting and corrupting the emperor, which had been searched for and arrested, were found to be false, and the emperor warned him again.

古文：而是时指挥门达、镇抚逯杲怙宠，贤亦为罗织者数矣。
现代文：而这时指挥门达、镇抚逯呆恃宠横行，李贤也几次被他们罗织过罪名。
English: However, at this time, the commanding officers Menda and Zhenfu were rampant, and Li Xian was also accused by them several times.

古文：达遣旗校四出，杲又立程督并，以获多为主。
现代文：门达四处派遣旗军校官，逯杲又定下程限督促，拿获多的就做头目。
English: Menda sent flag officers everywhere. He also set a lower limit for supervision, and if he got more, he would be the leader.

古文：千户黄麟之广西，执御史吴祯至，索狱具二百余副，天下朝觐官陷罪者甚众。
现代文：千户黄麟到广西，把御史昊祯抓到卫裹，要了两百多副刑具去，天下来京朝觐的官员许多都被宣布有罪。
English: Qianhuanglin went to Guangxi, arrested Gu Shi Haoqi, and took more than two hundred pairs of torture instruments. Many of the officials of the Beijing Pilgrimage were declared guilty.

古文：杲死，达兼治镇抚司。构指挥使袁彬，系讯之，五毒更下，仅免。
现代文：逯杲死后，门达兼管镇抚司，罗织指挥使袁彬的罪状，抓来审讯，刑罚五毒交下，仅免一死。
English: After Yan's death, Menda, who was also in charge of the town's magistrate, ordered Luo Wei to bring Yuan Bin's criminal charges, arrest him for interrogation, and hand him over to the five poisons for punishment. Only one death was spared.

古文：朝官杨琎、李蕃、韩祺、李观、包瑛、张祚、程万钟辈皆锒铛就逮，冤号道路者不可胜记。
现代文：朝廷官员杨璀、李蕃、韩祺、李观、包瑛、张祚、程万锺等人银铛被逮捕，道路上哭诉喊冤的人不计其数。
English: Court officials Yang Jie, Li Jie, Han Jie, Li Guan, Bao Ying, Zhang Jie, Cheng Wan Jie and others were arrested, and there were countless people crying and shouting their grievances on the road.

古文：盖自纪纲诛，其徒稍戢。
现代文：大约在纪纲被诛杀以后，他的徒众纔稍稍收敛。
English: Around the time of Jigang's death, his followers began to thin out a bit.

古文：至正统时复张，天顺之末祸益炽，朝野相顾不自保。
现代文：到正统时这类人重新张狂起来，天顺末年祸害更烈，朝野人士面面相觑，不能自保。
English: By the time of orthodoxy, such people had once again gone berserk, and by the end of the Tenshun era, the scourge was even more intense. The leaders of the imperial court and the people of the countryside looked at each other, unable to protect themselves.

古文：李贤虽极言之，不能救也。
现代文：李贤虽然极言其弊端，也不能挽救了。
English: Li Xian cannot be saved, even though he is very vocal about his shortcomings.

古文：镇抚司职理狱讼，初止立一司，与外卫等。
现代文：镇抚司的职责是审理诉讼案件，最初只设立了一个司，与外卫相等。
English: The duty of the Zhenfu Division is to hear litigation cases. Initially, only one division was established, which was equal to the Foreign Affairs Division.

古文：洪武十五年添设北司，而以军匠诸职掌属之南镇抚司，于是北司专理诏狱。
现代文：洪武十五年，增设北司，而以军匠和诸执掌划归南镇抚司，于是北司专门审理钦犯。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, the North Division was added, and it was assigned to the South Town Fusiliers with the military artisans and officials. As a result, the North Division specialized in the trial of Qin criminals.

古文：然大狱经讯，即送法司拟罪，未尝具狱词。
现代文：而大案的犯人经过审讯后，就送往法司拟定罪名，不曾备办审判文书。
English: However, after the trial, the convict of the major case was sent to the Department of Justice to be convicted, and the trial documents were not prepared.

古文：成化元年，始令覆奏用参语，法司益掣肘。
现代文：成化元年纔下令复奏案件时用参酌附言，法司更能牵制判案。
English: When the First President of the People's Republic of China, Cheng Hwa, ordered the re-enactment of a case, he made reference to the postscript. The Department of Justice was better able to control the verdict.

古文：十四年，增铸北司印信，一切刑狱毋关白本卫，即卫所行下者，亦径自上请可否，卫使毋得与闻。
现代文：十四年，增铸北司的大印，皇帝命令一切案件不要报告给原卫，就是卫里下达的案件，也径直请示皇上可否，卫使不得参与。
English: In the 14th year, when the Great Seal of the Northern Division was added, the emperor ordered that all cases should not be reported to the original guards, including the cases ordered by the guards. He also directly asked the emperor whether it was possible, and the guards were not allowed to participate.

古文：故镇抚职卑而其权日重。
现代文：所以镇抚职务虽低，其权力却日渐重大。
English: Therefore, although the post of the governor is low, his power is becoming increasingly important.

古文：初，卫狱附卫治，至门达掌问刑，又于城西设狱舍，拘系狼籍。
现代文：起初，锦衣卫监狱由卫管辖，到门达掌管刑讯时，又在城西设置狱舍，拘押犯人，混乱不堪。
English: At first, the Kamui Prison was under the jurisdiction of Wei, and when Menda took over the control of torture, he also set up a prison in the west of the city to detain prisoners, causing chaos.

古文：达败，用御史吕洪言，毁之。
现代文：门达倒台后，皇帝听取了御史吕洪的意见，拆毁了这些狱舍。
English: After the fall of Menda, the emperor listened to the opinion of Emperor Shulhong and demolished these prisons.

古文：成化十年，都御史李宾言： 锦衣镇抚司累获妖书图本，皆诞妄不经之言。
现代文：成化十年，都御史李宾说： 锦衣镇抚司多次查获妖书图本，都是些荒诞不经之言。
English: Ten years later, Li Bin, the prefectural governor, said: Many times, the Jingyi Town Fusiliers seized copies of demonic books, but they were all nonsense.

古文：小民无知，辄被幻惑。
现代文：小民无知，总是被它们迷惑。
English: People are ignorant and always confused by them.

古文：乞备录其旧名目，榜示天下，使知畏避，免陷刑辟。 
现代文：请求将其书名全都记录下来，用布告昭示天下，使小民知道害怕和躲避，免得陷入法网，遭受刑罚。 
English: They requested that all the titles of his books be recorded and announced to the world, so that the common people would know how to fear and avoid falling into the net of the law and being punished.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝回复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：缉事者诬告犹不止。
现代文：而侦查事件者的诬告还是不停息。
English: And the false accusations of those investigating the incident continue unabated.

古文：十三年，捕宁晋人王凤等，诬与瞽者受妖书，署伪职，并诬其乡官知县薛方、通判曹鼎与通谋，发卒围其家，扌旁掠诬伏。
现代文：十三年，逮捕了宁晋人王凤等，诬陷他们同瞎子一起接受妖书，充任伪职，并且诬陷其乡官知县薛方和通判曹鼎与他们合谋，发兵包围了两家，抓住二人严刑拷打，二人被迫自诬服罪。
English: In the thirteenth year, they arrested Wang Feng and others from Ningjin, falsely accusing them of accepting the evil book together with the blind man and acting as false officials, and also falsely accusing their township and county magistrates Xue Fang and Tong Zhan Cao Ding of conspiring with them. The soldiers surrounded the two families, caught the two people and severely tortured them, and the two people were forced to falsely confess to the crime.

古文：方、鼎家人数声冤，下法司验得实，坐妄报妖言，当斩。
现代文：后来薛方、曹鼎两家多次声明冤情，状子下交法司，经查核弄清了事实，镇抚司官员犯妄报妖言罪，判处斩刑。
English: Later, the two families of Xue Fang and Cao Ding repeatedly declared their grievances, and submitted the complaint to the Legal Department. After investigation, the facts were clarified. The officials of the Public Security Department committed the crime of reporting gossip, and were sentenced to beheading.

古文：帝戒以不得戕害无辜而已，不能罪也。
现代文：皇帝只是告诚不得伤害无辜而已，而不能治他们的罪。
English: The emperor only declared that he must not harm the innocent, but could not punish them for their sins.

古文：是年，令锦衣卫副千户吴绶于镇抚司同问刑。
现代文：这年，命令锦衣卫副千户吴绶参与镇抚司的刑事审理。
English: This year, he ordered the vice-commander of the Jinling Garrison, Qianhu Wu Jun, to take part in the criminal trial of the township magistrate.

古文：绶性狡险，附汪直以进。
现代文：吴绶性格狡猾阴险，依附汪直爬上去。
English: Wu Yao's character is cunning and insidious, and he clings to Wang Zhi to climb up.

古文：后知公议不容，凡文臣非罪下狱者，不复加箠楚，忤直意，黜去。
现代文：后来知道官场舆论不容汪直，所以对无罪下狱的文官不再加以拷打，触怒了汪直，被解职。
English: Later, knowing that public opinion in official circles did not tolerate Wang Zhi, he no longer tortured the civil servant who was released without charge. This angered Wang Zhi and he was dismissed.

古文：是时惟卫使朱骥持法平，治妖人狱无冤者。
现代文：这时只有卫使朱骥掌握法律平正，处理妖人案件没有冤枉无辜。
English: At this time, only Wei made Zhu Xi grasp the law and justice, and did not wrong the innocent in dealing with cases of monsters.

古文：诏狱下所司，独用小杖，尝命中使诘责，不为改。
现代文：皇帝要办罪的犯人下交主管部尸弓，独用小杖拷问，皇帝曾派内使责问，但朱骥不改。
English: The emperor wanted criminals who committed crimes to be handed over to the competent department of the cadaver bow, and tortured with a cane alone. The emperor had sent an envoy to ask questions, but Zhu Xi did not change.

古文：世以是称之。
现代文：世人因此称道他。
English: That's why the world praises him.

古文：弘治十三年，诏法司： 凡厂卫所送囚犯，从公审究，有枉即与辨理，勿拘成案。 
现代文：弘治十三年，皇帝诏令法司： 凡是厂卫所送来的囚犯，依公正原则审察，有冤枉的即予以考辨重判，不要拘泥于既成判决。 
English: In the thirteenth year of Hongzhi, the emperor issued a decree to the legal department: All prisoners sent by the guards should be examined according to the principle of fairness, and if there is any injustice, they should be re-sentenced. Do not stick to the existing judgment.

古文：正德时，卫使石文义与张采表里作威福，时称为刘瑾左右翼。
现代文：正德时，卫使石文义与张彩一里一外，作威作福，当时人们称之为刘瑾的左右羽翼。
English: At the time of Zhengde, Wei sent Shi Wenyi and Zhang Cai to compete with each other. At that time, people called them the left and right wings of Liu Bei.

古文：然文义常侍瑾，不治事，治事者高得林。
现代文：不过石文义常常陪侍在刘瑾身边，不处理实际事务，办事的是高得林。
English: However, Shi Wenyi often accompanies Liu Yao around, does not deal with actual affairs, and works for Gao Derin.

古文：瑾诛，文义伏诛，得林亦罢。
现代文：刘谨伏法被诛以后，石文义也被诛杀，高得林罢官。
English: After Liu Jianfu was arrested, Shi Wenyi was also beaten to death, and Gao Derlin was dismissed.

古文：其后钱宁管事，复大恣，以叛诛。
现代文：此后是钱宁管事，重新大肆张狂，因叛逆罪被诛杀。
English: After that, it was Channing who was in charge, and he again went wild and was beaten to death for treason.

古文：世宗立，革锦衣传奉官十六，汰旗校十五，复谕缉事官校，惟察不轨、妖言、人命、强盗重事，他词讼及在外州县事，毋得与。
现代文：世宗即位后，革去了十六个锦衣传奉官的职务，淘汰了十五个旗军校官，又告谕缉查事件的武官，只探察图谋不轨、妖言、人命和强盗这类重要事件，其它诉讼和京城以外的州县的事，不得参与。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he dismissed sixteen officials of the Imperial Court and eliminated fifteen flag officers. He also ordered the military attachés who investigated the incident to only investigate important cases such as conspiracy, witchcraft, human lives and robbers, and not to participate in other lawsuits and matters outside the capital city.

古文：未几，事多下镇抚，镇抚结内侍，多巧中。
现代文：不久，事情多交给镇抚司处理，镇抚舆内侍勾结在一起，心计巧妙符合皇帝心意。
English: Soon, the matter was mostly left to the magistrate's department to deal with, and the magistrate's aides colluded with each other, and the scheme cleverly conformed to the emperor's intention.

古文：会太监崔文奸利事发，下刑部，寻以中旨送镇抚司。
现代文：遇上太监崔文不法获利的事情败露，皇帝将此案下达刑部审理，不久又下内旨送到镇抚司。
English: When the illegal gains of the eunuch Cui Wen were revealed, the emperor ordered the case to be tried by the Criminal Investigation Department, and soon sent it to the Sanitary Inspection Department.

古文：尚书林俊言： 祖宗朝以刑狱付法司，事无大小，皆听平鞫。
现代文：尚书林俊说： 祖宗当朝时，将案件交给法司，事情无论大小，都让他们公平审理。
English: Shangshu Linjun said, "When our ancestors were in power, they referred cases to the legal department. No matter how big or small, they were given a fair trial.

古文：自刘瑾、钱宁用事，专任镇抚司，文致冤狱，法纪大坏。
现代文：自从刘瑾、堡奎掌握大权以后，专门信用镇抚司，玩弄文字、编造冤狱，法纪受到极大的破坏。
English: Since Liu Bei and Guo Kui seized power, they have been playing with words and fabricating unjust imprisonment, and the legal discipline has been greatly damaged.

古文：更化善治在今日，不宜复以小事挠法。 
现代文：改行善政实施教化执法就从今天开始，不宜再因为小事而枉曲法律了。 
English: The reform of good governance and the implementation of indoctrination and law enforcement will begin today. It is no longer appropriate to bend the law because of trifles.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：俊复言： 此途一开，恐后有重情，即夤缘内降以图免，实长乱阶。 
现代文：林俊又说： 这条路一开，只怕以后有了大罪，案犯就攀附关系，设法由宫内降旨来免于问罪，这实在是一条通往混乱的路。 
English: Lin Jun also said: Once this road is opened, it is feared that if there is a serious crime in the future, the criminal will cling to the relationship and try to get the order from the palace to avoid questioning. This is really a road to chaos.

古文：御史曹怀亦谏曰： 朝廷专任一镇抚，法司可以空曹，刑官为冗员矣。 
现代文：御史曹怀也进谏说： 朝廷只信用一个镇抚，那么法司的官署都可以空曹，刑官都成为冗员了。 
English: The court official Cao Huai also chimed in, saying: The court only trusts one magistrate, so the legal department can all be empty, and the criminal police officers have become redundant.

古文：帝俱不听。
现代文：皇帝都不听。
English: The emperor would not listen.

古文：六年，侍郎张璁等言： 祖宗设三法司以纠官邪，平狱讼，设东厂、锦衣卫以缉盗贼，诘奸宄。
现代文：六年，侍郎张璁等说： 祖宗设置三个法司来纠治官府的邪恶，公平地决断诉讼。设置东厂、锦衣卫，是用来缉拿盗贼，纠察违法乱纪的人。
English: In the sixth year, the attendant Zhang Jun and others said: The ancestors set up three legal departments to rectify the evil of the government and fairly adjudicate the lawsuit. The east factory and brocade guards were set up to catch thieves and picket those who violated laws and disciplines.

古文：自今贪官冤狱仍责法司，其有徇情曲法，乃听厂卫觉察。
现代文：建议从现在起，审理贪官冤案还是责成法司来办，如果有徇情枉法的，就让厂卫来监察。
English: It is suggested that from now on, the trial of cases of corrupt officials should be entrusted to the Department of Justice, and if there is any malfeasance, it should be supervised by the plant guards.

古文：盗贼奸宄，仍责厂卫，亦必送法司拟罪。 
现代文：盗贼和违法乱纪的人，还是责成厂卫缉拿，然而也必须送到法司拟定判词。 
English: Thieves and people who violate the law and discipline are still ordered to be detained by the factory guards, but they must also be sent to the legal department to draft a verdict.

古文：诏如议行。
现代文：皇帝下诏按此建议施行。
English: The following edict will be implemented as proposed.

古文：然官校提人恣如故。
现代文：可是卫司武官到监狱提人仍旧肆无忌惮。
English: However, the military attaché of the Imperial Guards still unscrupulously brought people to the prison.

古文：给事中蔡经等论其害，愿罢勿遣。
现代文：给事中蔡经等人弹劾其弊端，希望皇帝不再派他们去提人。
English: Cai Jing and others impeached him for his shortcomings, and hoped that the emperor would no longer send them to nominate him.

古文：尚书胡世宁请从其议。
现代文：尚书胡世宁请求采纳他们的意见。
English: Shangshu Hu Shining requested that their opinions be adopted.

古文：詹事霍韬亦言： 刑狱付三法司足矣，锦衣卫复横挠之。
现代文：詹事霍韬也说： 诉讼案件交付给三法司就够了，锦衣卫却又来横加阻挠。
English: Zhan Zhihuo also said: It is enough for the litigation case to be delivered to the three legal departments, but Jin Rongwei has come again to obstruct.

古文：昔汉光武尚名节，宋太祖刑法不加衣冠，其后忠义之徒争死效节。
现代文：过去汉光武帝崇尚名节，宋太祖刑法不加在士大夫身上，而后忠义之士争着为他们献节效命。
English: In the past, Emperor Guangwu of Han advocated famous festivals, and Emperor Taizu of Song did not impose criminal law on officials, but later, loyal people fought to serve them.

古文：夫士大夫有罪下刑曹，辱矣。
现代文：士大夫有罪就打入刑徒之中，这是羞辱他们。
English: If a magistrate is guilty of breaking into the prisoners, it is a humiliation for them.

古文：有重罪，废之、诛之可也，乃使官校众执之，脱冠裳，就桎梏。
现代文：犯了大罪，废黜他、诛杀他都可以，便叫武人群起逮捕，揭去帽子脱掉衣裳，套上桎梏。
English: If he has committed a serious crime, he can be dethroned or killed, so he will call for the armed crowd to arrest him, remove his hat, take off his clothes, and put on the shackles.

古文：朝列清班，暮幽犴狱，刚心壮气，销折殆尽。
现代文：早上还在清贵之列，晚上就身陷囹圄，刚强雄壮之心，挫损几尽。
English: In the morning, he was still in the ranks of the nobility. In the evening, he was in prison. He had a strong and heroic heart, but he was often frustrated.

古文：及覆案非罪，即冠带立朝班，武夫捍卒指目之曰： 某，吾辱之，某，吾系执之。 
现代文：等到复核为无罪，就戴上官帽束好腰带，立在朝拜的队伍中。强悍武夫看着官员指指点点： 某人，我凌辱过他。某人，我抓了他，捆了他。
English: When the review found him not guilty, he put on his officer's cap and girded his belt and stood in the line of worship. The strong warrior looked at the official and pointed: Someone, I abused him. Someone, I caught him and tied him up.

古文：小人无所忌惮，君子遂致易行。
现代文：小人无所顾忌，君子却会由此改变行为。
English: A villain has no scruples, but a gentleman will change his behavior.

古文：此豪杰所以兴山林之思，而变故罕仗节之士也。
现代文：这就是豪杰产生隐居山林的想法，而变故之后很少有人保持气节的原因。
English: This is the reason why Gao Jie came up with the idea of a secluded mountain forest, but few people have maintained the festival since then.

古文：愿自今东厂勿与朝仪，锦衣卫勿典刑狱。
现代文：希望从现在起东厂不再参与朝参仪式，锦衣卫不再主管诉讼审判。
English: It is hoped that from now on, the East Plant will no longer participate in the morning rite, and Jin Yiwei will no longer be in charge of litigation.

古文：士大夫罪谪废诛，勿加笞杖锁梏，以养廉耻，振人心，励士节。 
现代文：士大夫犯罪、谪贬、撤职和诛杀，不要加以笞打杖责，不上枷锁镰铐，以便培养廉耻之心，振作精神，激励气节。 
English: If a magistrate commits a crime, is demeaned, removed from office, or killed, he should not be beaten with a cane, nor should he be shackled, so as to cultivate a sense of shame, invigorate his spirit, and encourage his morale.

古文：帝以韬出位妄言，不纳。
现代文：皇帝认为霍韬在职权之外乱说，不釆纳他的意见。
English: The emperor thought that Hoh Rong was talking nonsense outside his authority, and did not accept his opinion.

古文：祖制，凡朝会，厂卫率属及校尉五百名，列侍奉天门下纠仪。
现代文：按照祖宗制度，每当朝会的时候，厂卫长官率领下属和校尉五百名，列队侍立在奉天门下纠察礼仪。
English: According to the ancestral system, whenever there is a meeting of the Imperial Court, the superintendent of the plant guards leads his subordinates and five hundred lieutenants to stand in line under the Gate of Heaven to observe the etiquette.

古文：凡失仪者，即褫衣冠，执下镇抚司狱，杖之乃免，故韬言及之。
现代文：凡是不合礼仪的人，立即剥下他的衣服，取去官帽，抓起来关进镇抚司监狱，杖责之后予以释放，所以霍韬说到这些事。
English: Anyone who did not conform to etiquette was immediately stripped of his clothes and official cap, arrested and imprisoned in the town's Fusi prison, and then released after being punished with a cane, which is why Huo Gan mentioned these things.

古文：迨万历时，失仪者始不付狱，罚俸而已。
现代文：等到万历年间，朝仪有过失的官员纔不关进监狱了，只罚扣他的俸禄而已。
English: During the Wanli era, officials who committed offenses against the imperial edict were not put in prison, but only had their salaries withheld.

古文：世宗衔张鹤龄、延龄，奸人刘东山等乃诬二人毒魇咒诅。
现代文：世宗讨厌张鹤龄和张延龄，为非作歹的刘柬山等人于是诬告二人有邪毒诅咒行为。
English: The world hated Zhang Hailing and Zhang Yanling, and the evil-doers such as Liu Kamsan falsely accused the two of evil and cursing.

古文：帝大怒，下诏狱，东山因株引素所不快者。
现代文：皇帝大怒，把二人关进钦犯监狱，刘束山趁势株连牵引自己平素不喜欢的人。
English: The emperor was furious and put the two of them in the Qin prison. Liu Shuxian took advantage of the situation to lure people he didn't like.

古文：卫使王佐探得其情，论以诬罔法反坐。
现代文：卫使王佐打探到实情，根据诬罔律条反坐刘束山罪。
English: The guards sent Wang Zuo to find out the truth and convicted Liu Sokshan according to the law.

古文：佐乃枷东山等阙门外，不及旬悉死，人以佐比牟斌。
现代文：王佐于是枷刘束山等人于阙门之外，不到十天，这帮人全部死亡。人们将王佐和牟斌相比。
English: Wang Zuo then chained Liu Shuxian and others outside the city gate. In less than ten days, all of them died. People compared Wang Zuo to Mou Bin.

古文：牟斌者，弘治中指挥也。
现代文：牟斌是弘治年间的指挥。
English: Mu Bin was the conductor of the orchestra during the Hongzhi era.

古文：李梦阳论延龄兄弟不法事，下狱，斌傅轻比，得不死云。
现代文：李梦阳弹劾张延龄兄弟犯法之事，关进监狱，牟斌比附轻罪处理，使其得以免死。
English: Li Mengyang impeached Zhang Yanling's brother for breaking the law, put him in prison, and dealt with Mubin as a misdemeanor, so that he could avoid death.

古文：世宗中年，卫使陆炳为忮，与严嵩比，而倾夏言。
现代文：世宗中期，卫使陆炳作恶，与严嵩朋比为奸，而倾轧夏言。
English: In the middle of the reign of King Sejong, Wei sent Lu Ye to commit evil, and conspired with Yan Song to overthrow Xia Yan.

古文：然帝数兴大狱，而炳多保全之，故士大夫不疾炳。
现代文：然而皇帝多次制造大案件，陆炳又常保全了他们，所以士大夫并不怨恨陆炳。
English: However, the emperor repeatedly made big cases, and Lu Yao often saved them, so the scholar did not resent Lu Yao.

古文：万历中，建言及忤矿税榼者，辄下诏狱。
现代文：万历年间，提意见和触忤矿税宦官的臣子，都被打入钦犯监狱。
English: During the Wanli years, the courtiers who raised their opinions and provoked the mining tax eunuchs were all sent to the Qin prison.

古文：刑科给事中杨应文言： 监司守令及齐民被逮者百五十余人，虽已打问，未送法司，狱禁森严，水火不入，疫疠之气，充斥囹圄。 
现代文：刑科给事中杨应文说： 被逮捕的监察主管郡守县令和平民有一百五十多人，虽然已经拷问，还没有送到法司定罪。监狱禁闭森严，水火不入，疫疾毒疠之气，充斥牢房。 
English: Yang Yingwen said in the report of the Criminal Investigation Department: There are more than 150 supervisors, county governors, county magistrates and civilians who have been arrested, although they have been tortured, they have not been sent to the Department of Justice for conviction. The prison is strictly closed, water and fire do not enter, and the atmosphere of epidemic disease and drug scourge fills the cell.

古文：卫使骆思恭亦言： 热审岁举，俱在小满前，今二年不行。
现代文：卫使骆思恭也说： 每年举行熟审，时间都在个满以前。
English: Guardsman Luo Sijong also said: Every year, a trial is held, and the time is always before the end of the year.

古文：镇抚司监犯且二百，多抛瓦声冤。 
现代文：现在两年没有举行热审了，镇抚司监狱里的犯人将近两百个，多抛掷瓦片发泄冤气。 
English: There hasn't been a heated trial for two years now, and the nearly two hundred prisoners in Zhenfushi Prison are throwing more tiles to vent their anger.

古文：镇抚司陆逵亦言： 狱囚怨恨，有持刀断指者。 
现代文：镇抚司陆逵也报告： 监狱里的囚犯心怀怨恨，有的拿剁了自己的手指头。 
English: The public security chief, Lu Wei, also reported: "Prisoners in the prison harbored grudges, and some cut off their own fingers.

古文：俱不报。
现代文：皇帝一律不予回应。
English: The emperor did not respond at all.

古文：然是时，告讦风衰，大臣被录者寡。
现代文：不过这时候告人隐私的风潮已经衰减，被拘捕的大臣不多。
English: However, by this time, the wave of whistleblowing had waned and few ministers had been arrested.

古文：其末年，稍宽逮系诸臣，而锦衣狱渐清矣。
现代文：万历末年，抓捕诸臣的政策稍宽，锦衣卫监狱渐渐空虚了。
English: At the end of the Wanli era, the policy of arresting ministers was slightly wider, and the Jinwei Prison gradually became empty.

古文：田尔耕、许显纯在熹宗时为魏忠贤义子，其党孙云鹤、杨寰、崔应元佐之，拷杨涟、左光斗辈，坐赃比较，立限严督之。两日为一限，输金不中程者，受全刑。
现代文：田尔耕、许显纯在熹宗时当魏忠贤的义子，其死党孙云鹤、杨寰、崔应元辅助他们，拷打杨涟、左光斗这些人。犯贪脏罪的立定期限按规定交款，两天为一个期限，交款不按期限的，遭受全刑。
English: Tian Ergong and Xu Xianjun were the sons-in-law of Wei Zhongxian when they were in the Xiongzong, and Sun Yunhe, Yang Hui, and Cui Yingyuan, his closest allies, assisted them and tortured Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou. The time limit for committing the crime of corruption is two days. If the time limit is not met, the full sentence will be imposed.

古文：全刑者曰械，曰鐐，曰棍，曰拶，曰夹棍。
现代文：所谓全刑即上枷械，上镰，棍击，拶指和上夹棍。
English: The so-called total punishment includes shackles, shackles, beating with sticks, finger-wagging and clubbing.

古文：五毒备具，呼謈声沸然，血肉溃烂，宛转求死不得。
现代文：五毒俱全，受刑者呼号之声沸天，血肉溃烂，辗转求死而不得。
English: The five poisons are complete, the voice of the convict's call is booming, the flesh and blood are festering, and it is impossible to turn around and ask for death.

古文：显纯叱咤自若，然必伺忠贤旨，忠贤所遣听记者未至，不敢讯也。
现代文：许显纯则叱咤如常，若无其事，然而必须依魏忠贤的指令行事，魏忠贤所派遣的听记之人未到，许显纯不敢审讯。
English: On the other hand, Xu Xianchun said that it was business as usual. If there was nothing wrong, however, he must act according to Wei Zhongxian's instructions. If the person sent by Wei Zhongxian to listen to the case did not arrive, Xu Xianchun would not dare to interrogate him.

古文：一夕，令诸囚分舍宿。
现代文：一天晚上，叫囚犯们分开到不同监房住宿。
English: One night, the prisoners were told to separate and stay in different cells.

古文：于是狱卒曰： 今夕有当壁挺者。 
现代文：于是狱卒说： 今天晚上有人该壁挺了。 
English: Then the jailer said, "Someone is going to die tonight.

古文：壁挺，狱中言死也。
现代文：壁挺，狱中指死亡。
English: The wall is up, the middle finger of death is raised in prison.

古文：明日，涟死，光斗等次第皆锁头拉死。
现代文：第二天，杨涟被处死，左光斗等都按次序被锁住头颅拉死。
English: The next day, Yang Hui was put to death, and Zuo Guangdou and the others were all chained and beheaded in order.

古文：每一人死，停数日，苇席裹尸出牢户，虫蛆腐体。
现代文：每一个人死后，都停放几天，才用苇席裹尸抬出牢门，蛆虫把尸体都蛀烂了。
English: After the death of each person, they are kept for a few days before being carried out of the cell door in ceremonial shrouds. Maggots have eaten away at the bodies.

古文：狱中事秘，其家人或不知死日。
现代文：狱中事件隐秘，囚徒家属甚至连亲人死亡的日子都不知道。
English: Incidents in prison are shrouded in secrecy, and prisoners' families do not even know the day their relatives died.

古文：庄烈帝擒戮逆党，冤死家子弟望狱门稽颡哀号，为文以祭。
现代文：庄烈帝擒拿诛杀魏忠贤逆党时，冤死者的家属后人望着狱门呼天抢地哀号，写祭文来祭奠。
English: When the Emperor Zhuangde killed Wei Zhongxian, the descendants of the family members of the unjustly deceased looked at the prison gate and cried out in grief, writing a ritual to pay tribute.

古文：帝闻之恻然。
现代文：皇帝听了也哀戚。
English: Hearing this, the emperor was also saddened.

古文：自刘瑾创立枷，锦衣狱常用之。
现代文：自从刘瑾始创戴立枷以后，锦衣卫监狱经常使用它。
English: Since Liu Bei first created the standing shackle, it has been used frequently in the Jinlingwei Prison.

古文：神宗时，御史朱应毂具言其惨，请除之。不听。
现代文：神宗时，御史朱应毂详陈其惨状，请求废除，皇帝不听从。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shenzong, the Grand Historian Zhu Yingzhu detailed the tragic situation and asked for its abolition, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：至忠贤，益为大枷，又设断脊、坠指、刺心之刑。
现代文：到了魏忠贤手上，更制造大枷，又设了断脊、断指、刺心的酷刑。
English: When it came to Wei Zhongxian's hands, he even made large shackles, and set up a broken spine, broken fingers, and heart-pounding torture.

古文：庄烈帝问左右： 立枷何为？ 
现代文：庄烈帝问左右近臣： 为什么要创制立枷？ 
English: Emperor Zhuang asked his right and left courtiers: Why create a standing yoke?

古文：王体乾对曰： 以罪巨奸大憝耳。 
现代文：王体干回答： 用来惩罪大奸大恶而已。 
English: Wang Tiegan replied: It is only used to punish the crime of high treason and high evil.

古文：帝愀然曰： 虽如此，终可悯。 
现代文：皇帝面有愁容地说： 虽然如此，到底还是可怜。 
English: The emperor said with a sad look on his face, "Even so, I still feel sorry for him."

古文：忠贤为颈缩。
现代文：魏忠贤为之有所畏惧。
English: Wei Zhongxian was afraid of it.

古文：东厂之祸，至忠贤而极。
现代文：东厂的祸害，到魏忠贤时达到极点。
English: The scourge of the East Factory reached its peak in the time of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：然厂卫未有不相结者，狱情轻重，厂能得于内。
现代文：然而厂卫没有不互相勾结的，案情的轻重，厂能从官内得到消息。
English: However, the guards of the factory did not collude with each other, and the factory was able to get information from the authorities about the seriousness of the case.

古文：而外廷有扞格者，卫则东西两司房访缉之，北司拷问之，锻炼周内，始送法司。
现代文：而外廷有抵触不合的案子，锦衣卫就由东西两司房搜访缉拿，北司严刑拷问，罪状罗织周密，然后纔送交法司。
English: However, if there is a conflicting case in the Outer Court, the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Supreme People's Procuratorate will conduct a search and arrest, the Northern Division will severely torture and interrogate, the charges will be elaborately prepared, and then the case will be sent to the Department of Justice.

古文：即东厂所获，亦必移镇抚再鞫，而后刑部得拟其罪。
现代文：即使是东厂抓捕的人，也必须移交给镇抚司再审讯，然后刑部纔拟定判决。
English: Even those arrested at the East Factory must be transferred to the Zhenfu Division for further interrogation, after which the Criminal Division will draft a verdict.

古文：故厂势强，则卫附之，厂势稍弱，则卫反气凌其上。
现代文：因而厂的势力强大，锦衣卫就依附于厂；厂的势力稍弱，卫就反过来盛气凌厂。
English: As a result, the factory's power is strong, and the brocade and weaving industry is attached to the factory; the factory's power is slightly weak, and the weaving industry, in turn, dominates the factory.

古文：陆炳缉司礼李彬、东厂马广阴事，皆至死，以炳得内阁嵩意。
现代文：陆炳缉拿司礼李彬和东厂马广隐秘之事，都问成死罪，因为陆炳深得内阁严嵩的心意。
English: The secret affairs of Lu Wei's secretaries Li Bin and Ma Guang of the East Factory were all made a capital crime, because Lu Wei was deeply impressed by the cabinet's strong will.

古文：及后中官愈重，阁势日轻。阁臣反比厂为之下，而卫使无不竞趋厂门，甘为役隶矣。
现代文：后来宦官的势力越来越强盛，内阁势力日渐削弱，阁臣反而比厂的地位低下，而卫使没有不争相趋附厂官，甘心为其奴仆。
English: Later, the power of the eunuchs became more and more powerful, the power of the cabinet became weaker and weaker, and the cabinet ministers, on the contrary, had a lower status than the factories, while the Wei envoys did not hesitate to attach themselves to the factory officials and were willing to be their slaves.

古文：锦衣卫升授勋卫、任子、科目、功升，凡四途。
现代文：锦衣卫人员有功升迁授勋卫、任子、科目、功升，共四种。
English: There are a total of four kinds of meritorious promotion awards for brocade-and-linen-wearing guards, including honor guard, appointed son, subject, and meritorious promotion.

古文：嘉靖以前，文臣子弟多不屑就。
现代文：嘉靖以前，文臣子弟多不屑于充任锦衣卫。
English: Before Jiajing, most of Wenshen's sons and brothers disdained to serve as brocade guards.

古文：万历初，刘守有以名臣子掌卫，其后皆乐居之。
现代文：万历初年，刘守有以名臣子弟的身份主持锦衣卫，此后文官子弟都乐于在卫里任职。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Liu Shouyou presided over the brocade guard as the son of a famous minister. Since then, the sons of civil servants have been happy to serve in the guard.

古文：士大夫与往还，狱急时，颇赖其力。
现代文：士大夫与他们交往，案子紧急的时候，多会依靠他们的力量。
English: Judges and magistrates interact with them, and when a case is urgent, they will mostly rely on their strength.

古文：守有子承禧及吴孟明其著者也。
现代文：刘守有的儿子刘承禧和昊孟明就是其中最有名的。
English: Among them, Liu Shou's sons Liu Chengxi and Hao Mengming are the most famous.

古文：庄烈帝疑群下，王德化掌东厂，以惨刻辅之，孟明掌卫印，时有纵舍，然观望厂意不敢违。
现代文：庄烈帝对群下多疑，王德化掌管东厂以惨毒峻刻辅佐他。吴孟明掌管卫印，不时有所宽纵，但是观望东厂的脸色，不敢违抗。
English: Zhuge Liang was suspicious of his subordinates, and Wang Dehua, who was in charge of the East Factory, assisted him with a terrible venom. Wu Mengming, who was in charge of Wei Yan, was sometimes lenient, but he did not dare to defy the East Factory.

古文：而镇抚梁清宏、乔可用朋比为恶。
现代文：而镇抚梁清宏和乔可用朋比为奸。
English: However, the town marshal Liang Qinghong and Qiao can be used as accomplices.

古文：凡缙绅之门，必有数人往来踪迹，故常晏起早阖，毋敢偶语。
现代文：凡是缙绅之家，总有几个人来往，会留下把柄。所以通常很晚才起床，早早就关大门，不敢两人在一起对谈。
English: Whenever there is a gentry house, there are always several people coming and going, and they will leave a handle. Therefore, they usually get up very late, close the door early, and do not dare to talk to each other.

古文：旗校过门，如被大盗，官为囊橐，均分其利。
现代文：旗军校官临门如同遭大盗抢劫，官员就是窝藏赃物的囊橐，钱财均分。
English: It was as if Linmen, the flag officer school, had been robbed. The officials were the masterminds who hid the stolen goods, and the money and property were equally divided.

古文：京城中奸细潜入，佣夫贩子阴为流贼所遣，无一举发，而高门富豪跼蹐无宁居。
现代文：京城中有奸细潜入，那些做工的人和贩卖的人私下被流寇派遣，没有一个举发，而高门富豪局促不安，没有宁日。
English: There are spies in the capital city, those who work and those who sell are secretly dispatched by the bandits, and no one raises a finger, while the high-ranking rich people are uneasy and have no peace.

古文：其徒黠者恣行请托，稍拂其意，飞诬立构，摘竿牍片字，株连至十数人。
现代文：那些狡黠的歹徒恣意请托人办事，稍有连逆，就捏造事实诬陷，罗织罪名，摘取片言只字，就可以株连达十几个人。
English: Those cunning gangsters arbitrarily ask people to do things for them, and if there is a slight conflict, they will fabricate false facts, fabricate charges, and extract a few words, which can be linked to more than a dozen people.

古文：姜采、熊开元下狱，帝谕掌卫骆养性潜杀之。
现代文：姜垛、熊开元下狱后，皇帝谕令掌卫骆养性悄悄杀了他们。
English: After Jiang Chen and Xiong Kaiyuan were released from prison, the emperor ordered the guards to quietly kill them.

古文：养性泄上语，且言： 二臣当死，宜付所司，书其罪，使天下明知。
现代文：骆养性将皇帝的指令泄露了出来，并说： 这两个臣子应当处死的话，应交付给有关部门，写出他们的罪行，使天下人明白。
English: Luo Yangxing leaked the emperor's order and said: If these two courtiers should be put to death, they should be handed over to the relevant departments to write out their crimes so that the world can understand.

古文：若阴使臣杀之，天下后世谓陛下何如主？ 
现代文：假若秘密派臣去杀了他们，天下人和后世会说陛下是什么样的人主？ 
English: If you secretly sent your ministers to kill them, the world and future generations would say, "What kind of a human being is Your Majesty?"

古文：会大臣多为采等言，遂得长系。
现代文：适逢大臣们也多替姜垛等人说好话，于是二人得以长囚狱中。
English: At the right time, the ministers also spoke well of Jiang Chen and others, so the two were able to stay in prison for a long time.

古文：此养性之可称者，然他事肆虐亦多矣。
现代文：这是骆养性值得称道的地方，可是在其它事情上，骆养性也多有肆虐。
English: This is a commendable place for camel breeding, but in other matters, camel breeding is also rampant.

古文：锦衣旧例有功赏，惟缉不轨者当之。
现代文：锦衣卫旧例有论功行赏，只有缉拿阴谋反叛的人有赏。
English: In the old days, rewards were given for meritorious deeds, but only rewards were given for those who plotted and rebelled.

古文：其后冒滥无纪，所报百无一实。
现代文：后来假冒滥赏无度，所报的功一百个没没有一个是真的。
English: Later, the fraud was so rampant that not a single one of the hundred reported feats was real.

古文：吏民重困，而厂卫题请辄从。
现代文：官吏百姓困苦重重，而厂卫上奏请求要什么就给什么。
English: The government officials and the people were in dire straits, but the guards at the factory would give them anything they asked for.

古文：隆庆初，给事中欧阳一敬极言其弊，言： 缉事员役，其势易逞，而又各类计所获功次，以为升授。
现代文：隆庆初年，给事中欧阳一敬极力陈述这种做法的弊病，说： 侦缉事件的官校，其势力容易办，而又各按类计算其拿获立功的次数，作为升等授勋的根据。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Ouyang Yijian, the person in charge of the matter, tried his best to explain the drawbacks of this practice, saying: The official school that investigates the incident is easy to handle, and the number of times it has won merits is calculated according to each category as the basis for promotion and awarding.

古文：则凭可逞之势，邀必获之功，枉人利己，何所不至。
现代文：那磨凭着可以达到的权势，邀必然获得的功勋，屈人利己，什么不能做出来？
English: That mill, by virtue of the power that can be achieved, invites the inevitable merit, bends the people, and is self-serving, what can not be done?

古文：有盗经出首幸免，故令多引平民以充数者；有括家囊为盗赃，挟市豪以为证者；有潜构图书，怀挟伪批，用妖言假印之律相诬陷者；或姓名相类，朦胧见收；父诉子孝，坐以忤逆。
现代文：有的在强盗自首免罪之后，故意命令强盗多多牵连平民来充数；有的囊括人家家产说是强盗的赃物，裹挟市井豪强作为人证；有的暗地里伪造图书，携带在身上假造妖书批语，用妖言假印的律条诬陷别人；有的根据姓名相似，不清不楚地就把人抓起来；父亲诉说儿子孝顺，反而判其儿子忤逆之罪。
English: Some deliberately ordered the robbers to implicate more and more civilians to make up the number after the robbers surrendered and were exonerated; some said that the robbers' stolen property was the robbers' stolen property, and they took Ichii Haoqiang as a witness; some secretly forged books, carried fake demonic book criticism on their bodies, and framed others with demonic words and falsely printed rules; some arrested people based on similar names, unclearly; the father told his son to be filial, but instead sentenced his son to the crime of treason.

古文：所以被访之家，谚称为刬，毒害可知矣。
现代文：所以谁家被缉访，俗言叫刬，毒害之烈由此可知。
English: Therefore, whoever's home is searched is said to be "poisoned," and the severity of the poisoning can be known from this.

古文：乞自今定制，机密重情，事干宪典者，厂卫如故题请。
现代文：请求从今以后定下制度，机密和重要的事情，关系到宪令大典，厂卫依惯例上奏请求。
English: From now on, the request to set up a system, confidential and important matters related to the constitutional decree, the factory guard will submit the request according to the usual practice.

古文：其情罪不明，未经谳审，必待法司详拟成狱之后，方与纪功。
现代文：那些案情不明，尚未审议的，一定要等法司详拟出判状以后，方给记功。
English: Those whose cases are unclear and have not yet been reviewed must wait for the Department of Justice to draw up a detailed verdict before giving credit.

古文：仍敕兵、刑二部勘问明白，请旨升赏。
现代文：仍救命兵部和刑部查问明白，再请求皇上下旨予以升赏。
English: Still, the investigation of the Life-Saving Corps and the Criminal Investigation Department was clear, and then the Emperor's order was requested to increase the reward.

古文：或经缉拿未成狱者，不得虚冒比拟，及他词讼不得概涉，以侵有司之事。
现代文：缉拿了人来而未能立案的，不准假冒破案以求升赏。至于其它诉讼案件，一概不得插手，以免侵犯司法部门的事务。
English: If a person is arrested but the case is not filed, it is not allowed to falsify and solve the case in order to increase the reward. As for other litigation cases, it is not allowed to intervene at all, so as not to infringe on the affairs of the judicial department.

古文：如狱未成，而官校及镇抚司拷打伤重，或至死者，许法司参治。
现代文：若案子不能成立，而锦衣卫官校和镇抚司将人拷打成重伤，乃至死亡，允许司法机关查治。
English: If the case cannot be established, and the Jinling Garrison School and the Relief Division tortured a person to serious injury or even death, the judicial organs are allowed to investigate.

古文：法司容隐扶同，则听科臣并参。
现代文：法司若纵容隐瞒附和，则听凭科道官参与查验。
English: If the Department of Justice condones the concealment of the addendum, it will be subject to the participation of the scientific officer in the inspection.

古文：如此则功必覆实，访必当事，而刑无冤滥。 
现代文：像这样则功劳一定会核实，缉访的材料一定会合乎事实，而冤枉无辜和滥施刑法就可以杜绝了。 
English: In this way, the merits will be verified, the materials of the investigation will be consistent with the facts, and the injustice to the innocent and the indiscriminate application of criminal law can be eliminated.

古文：时不能用也。
现代文：当时皇帝不能采用他的建议。
English: At that time, the emperor could not adopt his suggestion.

古文：内官同法司录囚，始于正统六年，命何文渊、王文审行在疑狱，敕同内官兴安。
现代文：宦官同法司一起审录罪囚，始于正统六年，皇帝命令何文渊、王文审理行在的疑案，叫他们与宦官兴安一同进行。
English: The eunuchs and the legal department jointly interrogated the criminal prisoners, which began in the sixth year of the orthodoxy. The emperor ordered He Wenyuan and Wang Wen to investigate the existing suspicious cases, and ordered them to work with the eunuchs to promote peace.

古文：周忱、郭瑾往南京，敕亦如之。
现代文：周忱、郭瑾到南京去审案，皇帝敕命也这样做。
English: Zhou Zhen and Guo Wei went to Nanjing to try the case, and the emperor did the same.

古文：时虽未定五年大审之制，而南北内官得与三法司刑狱矣。
现代文：当时虽然还没有定出五年一次大审的制度，而南北两京的宦官得以参与三法司的审判案件。
English: At that time, although the system of a five-yearly grand trial had not yet been established, the eunuchs of the two capitals were able to participate in the trials of the three legal departments.

古文：景泰六年，命太监王诚会三法司审录在京刑狱，不及南京者，因灾创举也。
现代文：景泰六年，皇帝命令太监王诚会同三法司复审北京的罪案，未审南京罪案的原因，是发生了天灾而创例。
English: In the sixth year of Jing Tai, the emperor ordered the eunuch Wang Chenghui to review the Beijing crime case with the three legal departments. The reason why the Nanjing crime case was not reviewed was that a natural disaster occurred and created a precedent.

古文：成化八年，命司礼太监王高、少监宋文毅两京会审，而各省恤刑之差，亦以是岁而定。
现代文：成化八年，皇帝命令司礼太监王高、少监宋文毅到两京参加会审，而各省派遣恤刑使的任务，也在这年定下来。
English: In the eighth year of Chenghua, the emperor ordered the chief eunuch Wang Gao and the minor eunuch Song Wenyi to go to the two capitals to participate in the trials, and the task of the provinces to dispatch the punishment punishment envoys was also settled in this year.

古文：十七年辛卯，命太监怀恩同法司录囚。
现代文：十七年辛卯，命令太监怀恩同法司一起审录罪囚。
English: In the seventeenth year of Xinwu, he ordered the eunuch Wai Yan to interrogate the prisoners together with the legal department.

古文：其后审录必以丙辛之岁。
现代文：此后审录一定耍在丙年和辛年进行。
English: After that, the audition must be performed in the second year and the third year.

古文：弘治九年不遣内官。
现代文：弘治九年，不派宦官参与审案。
English: In the ninth year of the Hongzhi era, eunuchs were no longer sent to participate in trials.

古文：十三年，以给事中丘俊言，复命会审。
现代文：十三年，因为给事中丘俊进言，又命令太监参加会审。
English: Thirteen years later, he ordered the eunuch to take part in the trial because he had been advised by Qiu Jun.

古文：凡大审录，赍敕张黄盖于大理寺，为三尺坛，中坐，三法司左右坐，御史、郎中以下捧牍立，唯诺趋走惟谨。
现代文：凡是会审之时，太监带着皇帝的敕令在大理寺张开黄盖，搭一个三尺高的台子，自己坐在中间，三法司的官员们坐在左右两边，御史、郎中以下的官员捧着案牍站在那里，唯唯诺诺，小心谨慎地奔走效劳。
English: Whenever there was a trial, the eunuch, with the emperor's order, would open the yellow cover of the Dali Temple and set up a three-foot-high platform. He would sit in the middle, the officials of the three legal departments would sit on the left and right sides, and the officials below the goshi and rochong would stand there holding the case file. They were obedient and courteously rushed to serve.

古文：三法司视成案，有所出入轻重，俱视中官意，不敢忤也。
现代文：三法司检查已定的案子，如果有量刑出入轻重不当，一律看宦官的旨意行事，不敢违抗。
English: The three legal departments shall examine the cases that have been decided, and if there is any discrepancy in the severity of the sentencing, they shall all act according to the will of the eunuchs and dare not disobey.

古文：成化时，会审有弟助兄斗，因殴杀人者，太监黄赐欲从末减。
现代文：成化时，会审有一案，弟弟帮助其兄斗殴，杀死了人，太监黄赐想减刑处理。
English: When it came to fruition, there was a case before the court, in which a younger brother helped his older brother to fight and kill someone, and the eunuch Huang Xie wanted to reduce the sentence.

古文：尚书陆瑜等持不可，赐曰： 同室斗者，尚被发缨冠救之，况其兄乎？ 
现代文：尚书陆瑜等人坚持不同意见，黄赐说： 同室的人相斗，尚且披着头发戴上帽子去解救，何况兄弟呢？ 
English: Shangshu Lu Yu and others insisted on different opinions. Huang Qizhuang said: The roommates fight each other, yet they put on their hair and hats to rescue each other. What about the brothers?

古文：瑜等不敢难，卒为屈法。
现代文：陆瑜等人不敢驳难，终于枉法判决。
English: Lu Yu and others did not dare to refute it, and finally the verdict was unjustified.

古文：万历三十四年大审，御史曹学程以建言久系，群臣请宥，皆不听。
现代文：万历三十四年大审，御史曹学程因为向皇帝进言而久久拘押在狱中，群臣请求宽赦他，皇帝统统不允许。
English: In the great trial of the 34th year of Wanli, the imperial historian Cao Xuecheng was detained in prison for a long time because of his advice to the emperor. The courtiers asked for his pardon, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：刑部侍郎沈应文署尚书事，合院寺之长，以书抵太监陈矩，请宽学程罪。
现代文：刑部侍郎沈应文代理尚书之职，联合都察院和大理寺的长官，写书面意见送到太监陈矩手上，请求他饶恕曹学程的罪过。
English: Shen Yingwen, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, acting as the official of the official letter, together with the superintendent of the Duza Academy and Dali Temple, wrote a written opinion and sent it to the eunuch Chen Ru, asking him to forgive Cao Xucheng's sins.

古文：然后会审，狱具，署名同奏。
现代文：然后会审，案子判定后，署名同奏。
English: Then there will be a trial, and after the case is decided, the signatures will be played together.

古文：矩复密启，言学程母老可念。
现代文：陈矩又私下启禀皇上，说曹学程的母亲年老值得关怀。
English: Chen Rui also privately told the emperor that Cao Xuecheng's mother was old and worthy of care.

古文：帝意解，释之。
现代文：皇上终于松动，释放了曹学程。
English: The emperor finally relented and released Cao Xuecheng.

古文：其事甚美，而监权之重如此。
现代文：这件事情很好，而可见太监的权力达到如此地步。
English: This is a good thing, and it shows how far the power of the eunuchs has reached.

古文：锦衣卫使亦得与法司午门外鞫囚，及秋后承天门外会审，而大审不与也。
现代文：锦衣卫的卫使也能参加法司在午门外进行的审讯，以及秋后承天门外的会审，但是不参加大审。
English: The guards of the brocade guards can also participate in the trial conducted by the law department outside the afternoon gate, as well as the joint trial outside the autumn gate, but they do not participate in the grand trial.

古文：每岁决囚后，图诸囚罪状于卫之外垣，令人观省。
现代文：每年处决犯人后，用图文将每个囚犯的罪状张布在锦衣卫的外墙上，叫人们观看反省。
English: Every year, after the execution of the prisoners, the charges of each prisoner are posted on the outer wall of the brocade gate with pictures and texts, and people are asked to watch the reflection.

古文：内臣曾奉命审录者，死则于墓寝画壁，南面坐，旁列法司堂上官，及御史、刑部郎引囚鞠躬听命状，示后世为荣观焉。
现代文：奉诏命复审过犯人的宦官，死了以后其墓殿上要画上壁画，图中太监坐北朝南，旁边是司法机关的堂上官员，以及御史和刑部郎领着囚犯鞠躺听命的情况，以为荣耀昭示后世。
English: The eunuch who reviewed the prisoner under the order of the emperor should have a mural painted on his tomb after his death. In the picture, the eunuch is sitting in the north and the south, next to the court officials of the judicial organ, as well as the situation in which Mishi and Gyoburo led the prisoner to lie down and obey orders, to show the glory to future generations.

古文：成化二年，命内官临斩强盗宋全。
现代文：成化二年，命令宦官监斩强盗宋全。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, he ordered the eunuch to supervise the execution of the robber Song Quan.

