古文：苏亮字景顺，武功人也。
现代文：苏亮字景顺，是武功人。
English: Su Liang, also known as Jing Shun, is a martial arts hero.

古文：祖权，魏中书侍郎、玉门郡守。
现代文：祖父苏权，任魏中书侍郎、玉门郡守。
English: His grandfather, Su Quan, was a bookkeeper in the middle of the Wei Dynasty and the governor of Yumen County.

古文：父佑，泰山郡守。
现代文：他父亲苏佑，任泰山郡守。
English: His father, Su You, was the governor of Taishan County.

古文：亮少通敏，博学，好属文，善章奏。
现代文：苏亮少年时便通达聪慧，博学，能写文章，善写章奏。
English: When Su Liang was a young boy, he was intelligent, erudite, able to write articles, and good at writing chapters.

古文：初举秀才，至洛阳，遇河内常景。
现代文：开始举为秀才，至洛阳，与河内常景相遇。
English: At first, he was praised as an outstanding talent. When he came to Luoyang, he encountered Hanoi's usual scene.

古文：景深器之，退而谓人曰： 秦中才学可以抗山东者，将此人乎。 魏齐王萧宝夤引为参军。
现代文：常景对他十分器重，退下来对人说： 秦地之中才学可以与山东人士相抗衡的，也就是此人了。 魏齐王萧宝夤举荐他为参军。
English: Changjing thought very highly of him, stepped back and said, "This is the person who can learn from the Qin Dynasty and can compete with the Shandong people. Wei Qi King Xiao Baojun recommended him to join the army.

古文：后宝夤开府，复为其府主薄。
现代文：后来萧宝夤开府，又任之为其府主簿。
English: Later, Xiao Baojun founded the prefecture and appointed him as its chief registrar.

古文：从宝夤西征，转记室参军。
现代文：随从萧宝夤西征，转任记室参军。
English: He followed Xiao Baojun to the Western Expedition and was transferred to join the army as a clerk.

古文：宝夤迁大将军，仍为之掾。
现代文：萧宝夤迁任大将军，委任其为掾。
English: Xiao Baojun was transferred to the post of general and appointed to be the commander.

古文：宝夤雅知重亮，凡有文檄谋议，皆以委之。
现代文：萧宝夤很器重苏亮，文书檄文和谋议，都委任给他。
English: Xiao Baojun was very fond of Su Liang, and he was entrusted with all the paperwork and deliberation.

古文：寻行武功郡事，甚着声绩。
现代文：不久兼摄武功郡政务，政绩出色。
English: Soon, he also served as a county government official, and his performance was outstanding.

古文：宝夤作乱，以亮为黄门侍郎。
现代文：萧宝夤反叛，任苏亮为黄门侍郎。
English: Xiao Baojun rebelled, Ren Su Liang became the Yellow Gate chamberlain.

古文：亮善处人间，与物无忤。
现代文：苏亮善于处理人际关系，不冒犯人。
English: Su Liang is good at handling interpersonal relationships and does not offend anyone.

古文：及宝夤败，从之者遇祸，唯亮获全。
现代文：萧宝夤失败后，随从者都遇祸，惟有苏亮得以保全。
English: After Xiao Baojun's defeat, all of his followers met with misfortune, but Su Liang was spared.

古文：乃长孙稚、尔朱天光等西讨，并以亮为郎中，专典文翰。
现代文：到长孙稚、尔朱天光等率军西讨，都委任苏亮为郎中，专门管理文件书札。
English: Su Liang was appointed as a subordinate to Chosun Waki, Er Zhu Tianguang and others who led the army to the west, and he was specially responsible for managing the documents and bookplates.

古文：累迁镇军将军、光禄大夫、散骑常侍、岐州大中正。
现代文：多次升迁任镇军将军、光禄大夫、散骑常侍、岐州大中正。
English: He was promoted many times to the position of the general of the town army, the doctor of Guanglu, the knight errant, and the president of the junior high school of Qizhou University.

古文：贺拔岳为关西行台，引亮为左丞，典机密。
现代文：贺拔岳为关西行台，举荐苏亮为左丞，典掌机密。
English: He Batyue is Kansai-bound, Su Liang is recommending Zu Rong as Zu Rong, and the date is confidential.

古文：魏孝武西迁，除吏部郎中，加卫将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，任为吏部郎中，加封卫将军、右光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, and he was appointed as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as well as the general of Fengwei and the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：大统二年，拜给事黄门侍郎，领中书舍人。
现代文：大统二年，任给事黄门侍郎，领中书舍人。
English: In the second year of unification, he was appointed to the position of Huangmen waiter, leading the junior high school students.

古文：魏文帝子宜都王式为秦州刺史，以亮为司马。
现代文：魏文帝之子宜都王元式为秦州刺史，任苏亮为司马。
English: The son of Emperor Weiwen, Yidu Wangyuan, was the historian of Qin State, and Ren Su Liang was the Sima.

古文：帝谓亮曰： 黄门侍郎岂可为秦州司马，直以朕爱子出蕃，故以心腹相委，勿以为恨。 临辞，赐以御马。
现代文：帝对苏亮说： 黄门侍郎岂能做秦州司马，衹是朕的爱子出任藩镇，所以委任为心腹，不要因此不满。 将告别时，赐给御马。
English: The emperor said to Su Liang, "Can Huangmen Zhi Rong be appointed as the Qin State Secretary of the Horse? He is my beloved son and has been appointed as the governor of the province, so don't be dissatisfied with his appointment as a confidant. When you say goodbye, give him the horse.

古文：七年，复为黄门郎，加骠骑将军。
现代文：七年，复为黄门郎，加骠骑将军。
English: In the seventh year, he was reinstated as Huangmen Lang, and became a general.

古文：八年，迁都官尚书、使持节、行北华州刺史，封临泾县子，邑三百户。
现代文：八年，迁任都官尚书、使持节、兼摄北华州刺史，封临泾县子，食邑三百户。
English: In the eighth year, he was transferred to Shangshu, the official of the capital, to hold the festival, and to photograph the history of North China. He was assigned to Linyi County, with more than 300 households in the food village.

古文：除中书监，领著作，修国史。
现代文：委任中书监，领著作，撰修国史。
English: He was appointed as a middle school librarian, read books, and wrote a history of the country.

古文：亮有机辩，善谈笑。
现代文：苏亮机敏善辩，谈笑风生。
English: Su Liang is quick-witted, good at arguing, and has a good sense of humor.

古文：太祖甚重之。
现代文：太祖很器重他。
English: My great-grandfather was very fond of him.

古文：有所筹议，率多会旨。
现代文：筹划谋议，大多符合意旨。
English: planning and deliberation, mostly in line with the intention.

古文：记人之善，忘人之过。
现代文：记人之善，忘人之过。
English: Remember the good, forget the bad.

古文：荐达后进，常如弗及。
现代文：推荐后起之秀，常常如若不及。
English: Recommending up-and-comers, often as if they weren't good enough.

古文：故当世敬慕焉。
现代文：所以当时人都敬重爱慕他。
English: That's why people respected and admired him at the time.

古文：十四年，除秘书监、车骑大将军、仪同三司，寻拜大行台尚书，出为岐州刺史。
现代文：十四年，任为秘书监、车骑大将军、仪同三司，不久委任为大行台尚书，出朝任岐州刺史。
English: In the 14th year, he was appointed as Secretary Supervisor, General of Chariot and Cavalry, and Third Secretary of Ceremonies and Ceremonies. Soon after, he was appointed as the Grand Secretary of Ceremonies, and he was sent to Qizhou to write history.

古文：朝廷以其作牧本州，特给路车、鼓吹，先还其宅，并给骑士三千。
现代文：朝廷因为他回家乡任州牧，特意给路车、鼓吹，先还其住宅，另给三千名骑士。
English: Because he returned to his hometown to serve as a prefect, the imperial court specially gave him a carriage and a trumpet, and first returned his house, and then gave him three thousand knights.

古文：列羽仪，游乡党，经过故人，欢饮旬日，然后入州。
现代文：排列仪仗队，周游家乡，途中拜访故旧，欢饮十数日，然后才入州城就职。
English: Line up the honor guard, travel around the hometown, visit the old on the way, drink for ten days, and then enter the state capital.

古文：世以为荣。
现代文：当时人都认为十分荣光。
English: At that time, everyone thought it was a great honor.

古文：十七年，征拜侍中。
现代文：十七年，征召入朝任侍中。
English: Seventeen years later, he was conscripted into the imperial court as a chamberlain.

古文：卒于位。
现代文：在职位上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：赠本官。
现代文：赠给本官
English: He posthumously received his own government post.

古文：亮少与从弟绰俱知名。
现代文：瑟亮少年时与堂弟苏绰都有名气。
English: When he was a boy, Se Liang and his cousin Su Chuo were both famous.

古文：然绰文章少不逮亮，至于经画进趣，亮又减之。
现代文：不过苏绰文章不如苏亮，但是经营筹划付诸行动，苏亮则差一些。
English: However, Su Cao's article is not as good as Su Liang's, but the business planning is put into action, while Su Liang is worse.

古文：故世称二苏焉。
现代文：所以当时号称二苏。
English: So at that time it was known as two sous.

古文：亮自大统以来，无岁不转官，一年或至三迁。佥曰才至，不怪其速也。
现代文：苏亮自大统以来，每年晋升，甚至有时一年晋升三级，都认为是他的才能所致，没有人奇怪他升职速度太快。
English: Su Liang has been promoted every year since the Great Reunification, and sometimes even promoted to the third level every year, which is considered to be the result of his talent. No one is surprised that his promotion speed is too fast.

古文：所着文笔数十篇，颇行于世。
现代文：著作有数十篇，在社会上广为流传。
English: He has written dozens of books, which have been widely circulated in the society.

古文：子师嗣。
现代文：其子苏师继嗣。
English: His son Gong Shi succeeded to the peerage.

古文：以亮名重于时，起家为黄门侍郎。
现代文：因为苏亮名重于时，开始任职便为黄门侍郎。
English: Because Su Liang's reputation was more important than time, he became the Yellow Gate Chamberlain when he began his tenure.

古文：亮弟湛，字景隽。
现代文：苏亮弟弟苏湛，字景俊。
English: Su Liang's younger brother Su Zhan, also known as Jing Jun.

古文：少有志行，与亮俱著名西土。
现代文：自小有志行，与苏毫都在西北地区有名声。
English: He has been volunteering since he was a child, and he and Su Zhao are both famous in the northwest.

古文：年二十余，举秀才，除奉朝请，领侍御史，加员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：二十余岁，举秀才，任为奉朝请，领侍御史，加员外散骑侍郎。
English: He was more than 20 years old. He was an outstanding scholar. He was appointed to serve the Emperor, to lead the Imperial Household Agency, and to be an additional member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：萧宝夤西讨，以湛为行台郎中，深见委任。
现代文：萧宝夤西讨时，以苏湛任行台郎中，极其器重。
English: When Xiao Bao went to the West, he took Su Zhan as one of his vassals, who was extremely important.

古文：及宝夤将谋叛逆，湛时卧疾于家。
现代文：萧宝夤准备谋叛，蓝湛当时有病在家中休养。
English: Xiao Baojun was preparing to plot a rebellion, while Lan Zhan was ill and recuperating at home.

古文：宝夤乃令湛从母弟天水姜俭谓湛曰： 吾不能坐受死亡，今便为身计，不复作魏臣也。
现代文：萧实夤令毖湛表弟＆匕差俭对他说： 我不能坐而待死，为我自己着想，不再做魏臣。
English: Xiao Shizhen ordered his cousin Zou Zhan and Zou Zhaojian to say to him: I can't sit and wait for death, for my own sake, I will no longer be a Wei minister.

古文：与卿死生荣辱，方当共之，故以相报。 湛闻之，举声大哭。
现代文：与卿为生死荣辱之交，正应当共同进退，所以告知于您。 苏湛听后，放声大哭。
English: I'm telling you this because my friendship with you is a matter of life and death, honor and dishonor, and we should advance and retreat together.

古文：俭遽止之曰： 何得便尔？ 湛曰： 阖门百口，实时屠灭，云何不哭。 
现代文：姜俭赶紧制止他说： 怎么能够如此? 麸渔说： 全家百人，马上就要被诛杀，怎么能不哭。 哭了数十声，缓缓对姜俭说：
English: Jiang Jian hurriedly stopped him and said, "How can this be?" Zou Yu said, "The whole family of a hundred people is about to be killed, how can you not cry?" After crying dozens of times, he slowly said to Jiang Jian:

古文：哭数十声，徐谓俭曰： 为我白齐王，王本以穷而归人，赖朝廷假王羽翼，遂得荣宠至此。
现代文： 替我对查王说，王本来走投无路而来归附，依靠朝廷授为假王作为辅佐，才有今时的荣宠。
English: I said to King Zha for him that he had come to the throne out of desperation, relying on the imperial court to bestow him with the title of "false king" as an assistant, and only now has he been given this honor.

古文：既属国步多虞，不能竭诚报德，岂可乘人间隙，便有问鼎之心乎。
现代文：现在遭逢国家危难，不能够竭诚报德，怎么能乘人间隙，便有自立为王之心。
English: Now that the country is in a critical situation, it is not possible to wholeheartedly pay tribute to virtue. How can we take advantage of the gap between people and have the heart to be self-reliant?

古文：今魏德虽衰，天命未改。
现代文：现在魏朝虽然衰弱，天命未改。
English: Although the Wei Dynasty is weak now, its destiny has not changed.

古文：王之恩义，未洽于民，破亡之期，必不旋踵。
现代文：王的恩义，没有给予民众，失败的日子，很快到来。
English: The king's gratitude is not given to the people, and the day of failure is coming soon.

古文：苏湛终不能以积世忠贞之基，一旦为王族灭也。 宝夤复令俭谓湛曰： 此是救命之计，不得不尔。 
现代文：苏湛不会以世代忠贞所立之基，一下之间为了王而被减族。 萧宾夤又令姜俭对苏湛说： 这是救命之计，不得不这样做。 
English: Su Zhan would not, on the basis of generations of loyalty, suddenly be reduced in status for the sake of the king. Xiao Binqi also ordered Jiang Jian to say to Su Zhan: This is a life-saving measure, I have to do this.

古文：湛复曰： 凡举大事，当得天下奇士。
现代文：苏湛回答说： 凡是要举大事，要得到天下的奇士。
English: Suzan replied, "If you want to do something big, you need to get the most wonderful person in the world.

古文：今但共长安博徒小儿辈为此计，岂有办哉。
现代文：现在衹与长安市井赌徒小儿一类人商议，怎么能成功。
English: Now, I am discussing with people such as the Chang'an city well gambler children, how can I succeed.

古文：湛不忍见荆棘生王户庭也。
现代文：苏湛不忍心见到王家破人亡。
English: Su Tian couldn't bear to see the Wang family destroyed.

古文：愿赐骸骨还旧里，庶归全地下，无愧先人。 宝夤素重之，知必不为己用，遂听还武功。
现代文：我希望自请退职回到家乡，到时全身而死，也就无愧于先人。 萧宝夤一贯器重他，知道肯定不愿为己效力，于是同意他回武功。
English: I hope to retire from my post and return to my hometown, and when I die, I will be worthy of my ancestors. Xiao Baojun always respected him and knew that he certainly did not want to work for himself, so he agreed to return to martial arts.

古文：宝夤后果败。
现代文：萧宝夤后来果然败亡。
English: Xiao Baojun was later defeated.

古文：孝庄帝即位，征拜尚书郎。
现代文：孝庄帝登基，征召委任尚书郎。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne and conscripted and appointed Shang Shuro.

古文：帝尝谓之曰： 闻卿答萧宝夤，甚有美辞，可为我说之也。 湛顿首谢曰： 臣自惟言辞不如伍被远矣，然始终不易，窃谓过之。
现代文：帝曾经对他说： 听说卿答萧宝夤的话，说得很好，为我说一说。 苏湛顿首谢说： 臣下自认为说话远远不如伍被，衹是始终如一，自认为超过他。
English: The emperor once said to him, "I heard that you answered Xiao Baojun's words, you spoke very well, please say something for me." Su Zhanden said with gratitude, "Your vassal thinks that his speech is far inferior to that of Wu Quan, but you are consistent and think that you are superior to him."

古文：但臣与宝夤周旋契阔，言得尽心，而不能令其守节，此臣之罪也。 孝庄大悦，加授散骑侍郎。
现代文：衹是臣下与萧宝夤交往应酬之间，得以尽心而言，然而不能使他坚守节操，是臣下之罪。 孝庄帝很高兴，加授散骑侍郎。
English: It is the sin of a vassal if he is able to say his heart out, but cannot make his vassal adhere to the discipline. Emperor Xiaozhuang was very pleased and gave Xiaozhuang the title of Sanzhi.

古文：寻迁中书侍郎。
现代文：不久迁任中书侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：孝武初，以疾还乡里，终于家。
现代文：孝武帝初年，麸遒因生病回家乡，在家去世。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Yao returned to his hometown due to illness and died at home.

古文：赠散骑常侍、镇西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：获赠散骑常侍、镇西将军、雍州刺史。
English: He was presented with the titles of Zanyi Changzhi, Zhenxi General, and Yongzhou Jishi.

古文：湛弟让，字景恕。
现代文：苏湛弟弟苏让，字景恕。
English: Su Zhan's younger brother, Su Zhan, plays the leading role.

古文：幼聪敏，好学，颇有人伦鉴识。
现代文：自幼聪敏，爱好学习，颇有审察辨识人才的能力。
English: Intelligent since childhood, fond of learning, quite capable of judging and identifying talents.

古文：初为本州主薄，稍迁别驾、武都郡守、镇远将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：最初任本州主簿，渐升任为别驾、武都郡守、镇速将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was initially appointed as the main bookkeeper of Honshu, and gradually rose to be appointed as the governor, the governor of Wudu County, the general of Zhenhai, and the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：及太祖为丞相，引为府属，甚见亲待。
现代文：当太祖为丞相时，任为府属，待他很是亲善。
English: When the great-grandfather was chancellor of the exchequer, he was appointed as a government official, and he was treated very kindly.

古文：出为卫将军、南汾州刺史。
现代文：出朝任卫将军、南汾州刺史。
English: He entered the imperial court as the general of the Imperial Guards, and became the statesman of southern Luzhou.

古文：治有善政。
现代文：治理政务有良好成绩。
English: Good results have been achieved in governance and government affairs.

古文：寻卒官。
现代文：不久在职任上去世。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、泾州刺史。
现代文：获赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、泾州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, the title of Third Secretary of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, and the title of General of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：柳虬字仲蟠，司会庆之兄也。
现代文：柳刨字仲蟠，司会柳庆的兄长。
English: Liu Zhaozhe Zhaozhong, the elder brother of Secretary Liu Qing.

古文：年十三，便专精好学。
现代文：十三岁时，便专精好学。
English: At the age of thirteen, he became an avid learner.

古文：时贵游子弟就学者，并车服华盛，唯虬不事容饰。
现代文：当时贵族子弟上学的人，都车马衣服华盛，惟有柳则不加修饰。
English: At that time, the children of aristocrats who went to school were all dressed in fine clothes, except for Liu, who did not add any decoration.

古文：遍五经，略通大义，兼博涉子史，雅好属文。
现代文：学完了《五经》，能理解其大义，同时博览子史等书籍，喜欢写文章。
English: After learning the "Five Classics," he can understand its great meaning. At the same time, he is well versed in books such as history, and likes to write articles.

古文：孝昌中，扬州刺史李宪举虬秀才，兖州刺史冯隽引虬为府主薄。
现代文：孝昌年间，扬州刺史李宪推举柳纠为秀才，兖州刺史冯俊举荐柳纠为府主簿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, Yangzhou scholar Li Xianjun recommended Liu Guo as an outstanding scholar, and Zhangzhou scholar Feng Jun recommended Liu Guo as the head of the prefecture.

古文：既而樊子鹄为吏部尚书，其兄义为扬州。治中，加镇远将军，非其好也，遂弃官还洛阳。
现代文：不久樊子鹄为吏部尚书，其兄樊义为扬州刺史，以柳纠为扬州治中，加镇远将军，他不喜欢，于是弃官回归洛阳。
English: Soon after, Zou Zixuan became the secretary of Shangshu, and his brother Zou Yi became the governor of Yangzhou, with Liugang as the governor of Yangzhou and Zhenyuan as the general. He did not like it, so he resigned and returned to Luoyang.

古文：属天下丧乱，乃退耕于阳城，有终焉之志。
现代文：此时天下动乱，归耕于阳城，想终老于此。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and he returned to farming in Yangcheng and wanted to stay here forever.

古文：大统三年，冯翊王元季海、领军独孤信镇洛阳。
现代文：大统三年，冯翊王元季海、领军独孤信镇守洛阳。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, Feng Xuan Wang Yuan Jihai, the leader of the army, single-mindedly guarded Luoyang.

古文：于时旧京荒废，人物罕极，唯有虬在阳城，裴诹在颍川。
现代文：当时洛阳荒废，没有什么人才，惟有柳则在阳城，裴詉在颖川。
English: At that time, Luoyang was deserted, there was no talent, only Liu was in Yangcheng, and Pei Yao was in Yingchuan.

古文：信等乃俱征之，以虬为行台郎中，诹为都督府属，并掌文翰。
现代文：独孤信等将他们征召来，任柳纠为行台郎中，裴谶为都督府属，都典掌文书。
English: Du Guoxin and others conscripted them, appointing Liu Kuang as a member of the Gangtai clan, Pei Yao as a member of the governor's office, and Du Feng as a clerk.

古文：时人为之语曰： 北府裴诹，南省柳虬。 
现代文：当时人说： 北府裴诹，南省柳纠。 
English: At that time, people said: Peiqiao in Beifu and Liugang in Nan Province are the best.

古文：时军旅务殷，虬励精从事，或通夜不寝。
现代文：当时军务繁多，柳纠勤勉处理，有时通宵不睡。
English: At that time, there were a lot of military affairs, and Liu Guo diligently dealt with them, sometimes staying up all night.

古文：季海尝云： 柳郎中判事，我不复重看。 
现代文：元季海曾经说： 柳郎中判定的事务，我不必再看。 
English: Yuan Qihai once said: I don't need to look at the matters decided by Liu Rongzhong.

古文：四年，入朝，太祖欲官之，虬辞母老，乞侍医药。
现代文：四年，入朝，太祖将授予官职，柳纠以母亲老迈而推辞，请求回去侍候医药。
English: Four years into his reign, Emperor Taizu offered him an official position, but Liu refused, citing his mother's advanced age, and requested that he return home to wait for medicine.

古文：太祖许焉。
现代文：太祖批准他。
English: His great-grandfather approved.

古文：久之为独孤信开府从事中郎。
现代文：很长时间之后任为独孤信开府从事中郎。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the sole middle-man for the construction of the castle.

古文：信出镇陇右，因为秦州刺史，以虬为二府司马。
现代文：独孤信镇守陇右，任秦州刺史，因而委任柳则为二府司马。
English: Du Guoxin was appointed as the governor of Zhen, appointed as the governor of Qin, and appointed as the governor of the two prefectures.

古文：虽处元僚，不综府事，唯在信左右谈论而已。
现代文：虽然是最高的僚吏，但不管府中之事，衹在独孤信身边参加议论而已。
English: Although he is the highest-ranking colleague, regardless of what is going on in the government, he only takes part in discussions alongside Du Guoxin.

古文：因使见太祖，被留为丞相府记室。
现代文：因为出使而见到太祖，被留下任为丞相府记室。
English: Because he was sent on a mission, he saw the Emperor and was left in charge of the chancellor's office.

古文：追论归朝功，封美阳县男，邑二百户。
现代文：追论归附朝廷的功劳，封为美阳县男，食邑二百产。
English: Afterward, it was attributed to the merit of the imperial court, and he was awarded the title of the man of Meiyang County, with 200 products of food.

古文：虬以史官密书善恶，未足惩劝。
现代文：柳则认为史官秘密书写善恶，起不到惩劝作用。
English: Liu, on the other hand, thought that the historian's secret writing about good and evil had no disciplinary or persuasive effect.

古文：乃上疏曰：古者人君立史官，非但记事而已，盖所以为监诫也。
现代文：于是上疏称：古时人君设立史官，不仅仅是记事而已，也是用来作为鉴戒。
English: Therefore, Shang Su said: In ancient times, people set up historians, not only to record things, but also to serve as a warning.

古文：动则左史书之，言则右史书之，彰善瘅恶，以树风声。
现代文：行为举止由左史记录，言论由右史记录，表扬善行批评恶行，以树立风声。
English: Behavior is recorded by the left history, speech is recorded by the right history, praising good deeds and criticizing bad deeds to establish a reputation.

古文：故南史抗节，表崔杼之罪；董狐书法，明赵盾之愆。
现代文：所以南史抗节，书表崔杼的罪行；董狐书法，载明赵盾之愆。
English: Therefore, the Southern History Anti-Secession, the book lists the crimes of Cui Gan; Dong Fox Calligraphy, the book lists the crimes of Zhao Dun.

古文：是知直笔于朝，其来久矣。
现代文：由此得知直笔书史，由来已久。
English: From this we learn that the history of handwritten books goes back a long way.

古文：而汉魏已还，密为记注，徒闻后世，无益当时，非所谓将顺其美，匡救其恶者也。
现代文：但是汉魏以来，却秘密记注，衹是后世得知，却对当世无用，不是所谓赞扬其美，匡救其恶。
English: However, since the Han and Wei dynasties, it has been secretly recorded that although it is known to future generations, it is useless for the present world. It is not so-called to praise its beauty and save its evil.

古文：且著述之人，密书其事，纵能直笔，人莫之知。
现代文：而且著述之人，秘密撰述其事，就是可以直笔，别人也不知道。
English: Moreover, the author, who writes in secret, can write directly, and others do not know.

古文：何止物生横议，亦自异端互起。
现代文：何止人们恣意议论，也自起异端。
English: The more people speak arbitrarily, the more heresy arises.

古文：故班固致受金之名，陈寿有求米之论。着汉魏者，非一氏；造晋史者，至数家。
现代文：因此有人说班固受金，陈寿求米。著作汉魏历史的，不是一家；著作晋代历史的，也有数家。
English: Therefore, some people say that Ben Gu received money and Chen Shou solicited rice. There is not one family that wrote the history of the Han and Wei Dynasties; there are also several families that wrote the history of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：后代纷纭，莫知准的。
现代文：后代纷纭，没有人知道什么是正确的。
English: Generations have passed, and no one knows what is right.

古文：伏惟陛下则天稽古，劳心庶政。
现代文：陛下以天为法，治理天下，考察古事，勤劳政务。
English: His Majesty takes heaven as the law, governs the world, studies ancient history, and works hard at government affairs.

古文：开诽谤之路，纳忠谠之言。
现代文：可以广开进谏之路，接受忠直之言。
English: You can open up the road to enter the world and accept the words of loyalty and honesty.

古文：诸史官记事者，请皆当朝显言其状，然后付之史阁。
现代文：各史官记事，都是当朝明言其实情，然后交给史阁。
English: All the official histories were written by the emperor, who stated the facts and then handed them over to the cabinet of historians.

古文：庶令是非明着，得失无隐。
现代文：这样才使是非一目了然，得失无隐。
English: Only in this way can the rights and wrongs be made clear at a glance, and the gains and losses be fully understood.

古文：使闻善者日修，有过者知惧。
现代文：使闻知善言善行者日修养，有过失者心中惧怕。
English: Let those who know and speak good words and do good deeds cultivate themselves daily, and those who have made mistakes have fear in their hearts.

古文：敢以愚管，轻冒上闻。
现代文：大胆以浅陋的见解，轻率地冲犯，向皇上呈报。
English: He boldly attacked the emperor with his shallow opinions, and reported to the emperor.

古文：乞以瞽言，访之众议。
现代文：请求将此不明事理之言，咨询众议。
English: The request is to remove this illogical statement and consult the public.

古文：事遂施行。
现代文：此事便依柳纠建议施行。
English: This opinion will soon come into force.

古文：十四年，除秘书丞。
现代文：十四年，委任为秘书丞。
English: Fourteen years later, he was appointed secretary-general.

古文：秘书虽领著作，不参史事，自虬为丞，始令监掌焉。
现代文：秘书虽然管辖着作，但是不参与撰写史事，而从柳纠任此职，开始监掌撰写史事。
English: Although the secretary is in charge of the work, he does not participate in the writing of historical events, but since Liu Gui assumed this position, he began to supervise the writing of historical events.

古文：十六年，迁中书侍郎，修起居注，仍领丞事。
现代文：十六年，迁任中书侍郎，撰修起居注，依然兼管秘书丞事务。
English: Sixteen years later, he was transferred to the post of junior secretary, writing the residence notice, and still in charge of secretary affairs.

古文：时人论文体者，有古今之异。
现代文：当时人讨论文章体裁，有古今文体不同的意见。
English: At that time, people discussed the genre of the article, and there were different opinions on the ancient and modern styles.

古文：虬又以为时有今古，非文有今古，乃为文质论。
现代文：柳则认为时代有古今之别，文章没有古今之分，因此着文《文质论》。
English: Liu, on the other hand, believed that there was a difference between the past and the present, and that there was no distinction between the past and the present in writing, hence his essay "On the Quality of Literature."

古文：文多不载。
现代文：文章太长而不载。
English: Its words are many and varied.

古文：魏废帝初，迁秘书监，加车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：魏废帝初年，迁任秘书监，加车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Wei Emperor, he was transferred to the post of Secretary Supervisor, and was promoted to the rank of General and the three departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：虬脱略人间，不事小节，弊衣疏食，未尝改操。
现代文：柳纠为人轻慢不拘，不事小节，穿破旧的衣服，吃粗淡的茶饭，未曾改变操守。
English: Liu Xuan was a frivolous person, not concerned with details, wore worn-out clothes, ate coarse tea and rice, and never changed his behavior.

古文：人或讥之。
现代文：有人讥笑他。
English: He was jeered at.

古文：虬曰： 衣不过适体，食不过充饥。
现代文：柳纠说： 穿衣不过是合体，吃饭不过是充饥。
English: "Dressing is just a matter of fitting in, and eating is just a matter of satisfying hunger," Liu said.

古文：孜孜营求，徒劳思虑耳。 魏恭帝元年冬，卒，时年五十四。
现代文：刻意追求，徒劳费神。 魏恭帝元年冬天，去世，终年五十四岁。
English: Wei Gongdi died in the winter of the first year of the Wei Dynasty, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：赠兖州刺史。
现代文：获赠兖州刺史。
English: He was awarded the Bozhou Sashimi Prize.

古文：谥曰孝。
现代文：谧为孝。
English: Shogo Takashi.

古文：有文章数十篇行于世。
现代文：有文章数十篇流传于世。
English: There are dozens of articles circulating in the world.

古文：子鸿渐嗣。
现代文：其子柳鸿渐继嗣。
English: His son, Liu Hongyan, became his successor.

古文：吕思礼，东平寿张人也。
现代文：吕思礼，是束平寿张人。
English: Lu Sili is the son of Sokping Shou Zhang.

古文：性温润，不杂交游。
现代文：性情温和，不随便结交人。
English: They are gentle and do not make friends easily.

古文：年十四，受学于徐遵明。
现代文：十四岁时，师从徐遵明学习。
English: At the age of fourteen, he studied under Xu Zunming.

古文：长于论难。诸生为之语曰： 讲书论易，其锋难敌。 十九，举秀才，对策高第。
现代文：擅长于辩论诘难诸生评论他说： 讲《尚书》论《易经》，具锋难敞。 十九岁，举为秀才，对策得到高等名次。
English: He was good at debating difficult subjects, commenting, "Talking about the Shangshu and the I Ching, it's hard to have an open mind. At the age of nineteen, he was praised as an expert, and his countermeasures were ranked high.

古文：除相州功曹参军。
现代文：任为相州功曹参军。
English: He was appointed as Sangju Gong Cao to join the army.

古文：葛荣围邺，思礼有守御勋，赐爵平陆县伯，除栾城令。
现代文：葛荣围攻邺城，吕思礼立下防守功勋，赐封平陆县伯，委任为乐城令。
English: Ge Rong besieged Lucheng, and Lu Sili was awarded the Defense Merit Award, given the title of Pinglu County magistrate, and appointed as Lecheng commander.

古文：普泰中，仆射司马子如荐为尚书二千石郎中。
现代文：普泰年间，仆射司马子如推荐为尚书二千石郎中。
English: During the Putai era, a servant named Shoji Mazo was recommended as one of Shosho's 2,000 koku students.

古文：寻以地寒被出，兼国子博士。
现代文：不久因为出身微贱而被调出尚书省，兼任国子博士。
English: Soon, because of his humble background, he was transferred out of the Ministry of Education and Culture, concurrently serving as a Kuniko doctor.

古文：乃求为关西大。行台贺拔岳所重。
现代文：于是请求为关西大行台郎中，与姚约瑜、茹文就一同入关，为行台贺拔岳所器重。
English: As a result, he requested to be a member of the Kansai Daigyo Taira, and entered the Kansai Daigyo Taira together with Yao Yoyu and Ruwen. He was a member of the Kansai Daigyo Taira.

古文：专掌机密，甚得时誉。
现代文：专门掌管机密，为当时人称誉。
English: He specialized in the management of confidential information and was highly regarded at the time.

古文：岳为侯莫陈悦所害，赵贵等议遣赫连达迎太祖，思礼预其谋。
现代文：贺拔岳为侯莫陈悦所害，赵贵等人商议派遣赵连达迎接左担，吕思礼参与谋略。
English: He Batyue was harmed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, Zhao Gui and others discussed sending Zhao Lenda to meet the left shoulder, and Lu Sili participated in the strategy.

古文：及太祖为关西大都督，以思礼为府长史，寻除行台右丞。
现代文：当主担为阗西大都督时，任吕思礼为府长史，不久任为行台右丞。
English: When the principal was the governor of Shaanxi Province, he appointed Lu Sili as the prefectural governor, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Taiwan.

古文：以迎魏孝武功，封汝阳县子，邑四百户，加冠军将军，拜黄门侍郎。
现代文：以迎接魏孝武帝的功劳，封为汝阳县子，食邑四百户，加冠军将军，任为黄门侍郎。
English: For his service in welcoming Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was awarded the title of the son of Ruyang County, 400 households of food villages, plus the champion general, and was appointed as the Yellow Gate waiter.

古文：魏文帝即位，领著作郎，除安东将军、都官尚书，兼七兵、殿中二曹事。
现代文：魏文帝登基，领著作郎，任安束将军、都官尚书，兼任七兵、殿中二曹事。
English: Emperor Weiwen ascended to the throne. He was accompanied by his secretary, General Anzuk, and the official of the capital, Shangshu. He also served as the seven soldiers and two sergeants in the palace.

古文：从擒窦泰，进爵为侯，邑八百户。
现代文：随从擒获窦泰，进爵为侯，食邑八百户。
English: He gained Dou Tai as a follower and was made a marquis, with 800 households in the food village.

古文：大统四年，以谤讪朝政，赐死。
现代文：大统四年，因为诽谤朝政，赐死。
English: In the fourth year of unification, he was sentenced to death for slandering the imperial government.

古文：思礼好学，有文才。
现代文：吕思礼好学，有文章写作才能。
English: Lu Sili is eager to learn and has a talent for writing articles.

古文：虽务兼军国，而手不释卷。
现代文：虽然身兼军务政务，还是手不释卷。
English: Although he is also in charge of military affairs and government affairs, he still has his hands full.

古文：昼理政事，夜则读书。令苍头执烛，烛烬夜有数升。
现代文：白天处理政务，晚上读书学习命令奴仆手执蜡烛，一夜烛烬多至数升。
English: During the day, he dealt with government affairs. At night, he read and studied, and ordered his servants to hold candles. During the night, the candle embers reached several liters.

古文：沙苑之捷，命为露布，食顷便成。
现代文：沙苑战役获胜，令其书写公告，一顿饭的工夫便书写完毕。
English: The victory in the Battle of Sha Yuan made him write an announcement, and he finished writing it in the time it took to eat a meal.

古文：太祖叹其工而且速。
现代文：太祖叹服他写得又快又好。
English: His great-grandfather was impressed by how quickly and well he wrote.

古文：所为碑诔表颂，并传于世。
现代文：所写的碑谏表颂，都在社会上流传。
English: All the epitaphs and eulogies written have been passed down in society.

古文：七年，追赠车骑大将军、定州刺史。
现代文：七年，追赠车骑大将军、定州刺史。
English: Seven years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry and the title of Dingzhou Jishi.

古文：子亶嗣。
现代文：其子吕卖继嗣。
English: His son Ryusei became his successor.

古文：大象末，位至驾部下大夫。
现代文：大象末年，位至驾部下大夫。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, he became a junior doctor.

古文：时有博陵崔腾、新蔡董绍并早有名誉，历职清显。
现代文：此时有博陵崔腾、新蔡董绍都很早便有名声，历任清要显达的宫职。
English: At this time, Boling Cui Teng and Xin Cai Dong Shao were both famous early on, and the successive Qing emperors wanted to show off the palace duties.

古文：腾为丞相府长史，绍为御史丞。
现代文：崔腾位至丞相府长生，董绍位至御史中丞。
English: Choi Teng was promoted to choshofu chosho and Dong Shao was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：俱以投书谤议，赐死。薛憕字景猷，河东汾阴人也。
现代文：都因为投书谤议，赐死薛恺字景猷，是河东汾阴人。
English: All of them were sentenced to death for slandering books. Xue Xuan, also known as Jing Xuan, was a member of the Shouyin people of Hedong.

古文：曾祖弘敞，值赫连之乱，率宗人避地襄阳。
现代文：他曾祖父薛弘敞，遇上赫连之乱，率领族人避难于襄阳。
English: He was the grandfather of Xue Hongzhang, who led his people to take refuge in Xiangyang during the Khelian Rebellion.

古文：憕早丧父，家贫，躬耕以养祖母，有暇则览文籍。
现代文：薛恺很早就失去父亲，家境贫困，亲自耕作以养祖母，有了空暇便读书学习。
English: Xue Yao lost his father very early, his family was poor, he cultivated to support his grandmother, and when he had free time, he read and studied.

古文：时人未之奇也。江表取人，多以世族。
现代文：当时人不觉得他很出色江南政权选人时，多以世族入选。
English: At that time, people did not think he was very outstanding. When the Jiangnan regime selected people, they mostly selected people from their own ethnic group.

古文：憕既羇旅，不被擢用。
现代文：薛 瞪既然流亡于此，就不被擢用。
English: Since Xue Gao is in exile here, he will not be promoted.

古文：然负才使气，未尝趣世禄之门。
现代文：但他仗恃才能恣逞意气，未曾趋附世禄之门。
English: However, he had the courage to be bold and did not seek worldly gain.

古文：左中郎将京兆韦潜度谓憕曰： 君门地非下，身材不劣，何不憕裾数参吏部？ 憕曰：  世冑蹑高位，英俊沉下僚 ，古人以为叹息。
现代文：左中郎将京兆韦潜度对薛 隘说： 您的门第地位并不微贱低下，身的才能又不低劣，为什么不揽衣挥拂恭恭敬敬地多去参见吏部? 薛恺回答：  世胄蹑高位，英俊沉下僚，古人都因此而叹息。
English: Zuo Zhongro told Xue Yan about the potential of Beijing Zhaowei: Your status as a disciple is not low, and your talent is not inferior. Why don't you respectfully visit the personnel department more? Xue Yan replied: The world is high-ranking, handsome and low-ranking, and the ancients are sighing because of it.

古文：窃所未能也。 潜度告人曰： 此年少极慷慨，但不遭时耳。 孝昌中，杖策还洛阳。
现代文：我不会如此去做。 韦潜度对人说： 这位年轻人慷慨有志气，衹是生不逢世而已。 孝昌年间，策马回归洛阳。
English: I wouldn't do that. Wei Pukudu said to people: "This young man is generous and ambitious, and he is just born to be. During the Xiaochang years, Zema returned to Luoyang.

古文：先是，憕从祖真度与族祖安都拥徐、兖归魏，其子怀隽见憕，甚相亲善。
现代文：原先，薛灯的从祖父薛真度与其族祖薛安都以徐、兖之地归附于魏，其子怀垡见到垄崖，对他十分亲善。
English: Originally, Xue Lan's grandfather Xue Zhendu and his ancestor Xue An both belonged to Wei in the land of Xu and Lu. When his son Huai Yao saw the cliff, he was very kind to him.

古文：属尔朱荣废立，遂还河东，止怀隽家。
现代文：正当尔塞茔废立皇帝，莲懂于是回到眯，在整曲家中居住。
English: Just as Ersai was dethroned as emperor, Lian Guo returned to Shao and lived in the home of Hequ.

古文：不交人物，终日读书，手自抄略，将二百卷。
现代文：不与外人交往，终日读书，亲手抄写，将近二百卷。
English: He did not socialize with people, read every day without stopping, and copied nearly two hundred volumes with his own hands.

古文：唯郡守元袭，时相要屈，与之抗礼。
现代文：惟有郡守元袭，时时邀请他屈驾光临，以平等的礼节相待。
English: However, the county governor, Yuan Qi, always invited him to visit and treated him with equal courtesy.

古文：怀隽每曰： 汝还乡里，不营产业，不肯取妻，岂复欲南乎？ 憕亦恬然自处，不改其旧。
现代文：薛怀俊常说： 你回到乡里，不经营产业，又不肯娶妻，莫非还要去南方? 薛 隘自行其乐，不改自己的志向。
English: Xue Huaijun often said: If you return to the countryside, do not run an industry, and do not want to marry a wife, why do you still want to go to the south? Xue Jia enjoyed himself and did not change his aspirations.

古文：普泰中，拜给事中，加伏波将军。
现代文：普泰年间，任为给事中，加伏波将军。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was appointed to the rank of general of the middle-ranking cavalry.

古文：及齐神武起兵，憕乃东游陈、梁间，谓族人孝通曰： 高欢阻兵陵上，丧乱方始。
现代文：当齐神武起兵时，薛灯往东游于陈、梁之间，对族人薛孝通说： 高欢起兵犯上，丧乱才开始。
English: When Emperor Qishenwu Gao Huan raised an army, Xue Yao went between Dong You Liang and Chen and said to the tribesman Xue Xiaotong: Gao Huan Chen's tomb, the world began to be in turmoil.

古文：关中形胜之地，必有霸王居之。 乃与孝通俱游长安。
现代文：关中是形胜之地，肯定会出霸主。 于是与薛孝通一起到长安。
English: Guanzhong is a place of great victory, and the overlord will surely emerge. So I went to Chang'an with Xue Xiaotong.

古文：侯莫陈悦闻之，召为行台郎中，除镇远将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：侯莫陈悦听说后，征召委任为行台郎中，任镇远将军、步兵校尉。
English: After hearing about Hou Mo Chen Yue, he was conscripted and appointed as a member of the Gangtai Clan, serving as a general of Zhenyuan and an infantry captain.

古文：及悦害贺拔岳,军人咸相庆慰。憕独谓所亲曰： 悦才略本寡，辄害良将，败亡之事，其则不远。
现代文：侯莫陈悦害死贺拔岳，军人都相互庆贺，衹有薛恺对亲近的人说： 侯莫陈悦本来就没有什么才略，又害死良将，失败的结果，很快就会到来。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue caused the death of He Batur, and the soldiers all congratulated each other. Xue Yao said to people close to him: Hou Mo Chen Yue had no talent, and killed a good general. The result of failure will come soon.

古文：吾属今即为人所虏，何庆慰之有乎！ 闻者以憕言为然，乃有忧色。
现代文：我们将要被人所俘虏，有什么可庆贺的! 闻者都认为很对，十分担心。
English: We're going to be taken prisoner, what's there to celebrate!

古文：寻而太祖平悦，引憕为记室参军。
现代文：不久太祖平定侯莫陈悦，举荐薛恺为记室参军。
English: Soon after, the great-grandfather subdued Hou Mo Chen Yue and recommended Xue Yao to join the army as a recorder.

古文：魏孝武西迁，授征虏将军、中散大夫，封夏阳县男，邑二百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，授予薛恺征虏将军、中散大夫，封为夏阳县男，食邑二百尸。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, awarded General Xue Jun with the title of General of Conscription, Doctor Zhong San with the title of Man of Xiayang County, and fed 200 corpses.

古文：魏文帝即位，拜中书侍郎，加安东将军，增邑百户，进爵为伯。
现代文：魏文帝登基，授予中书侍郎，加安柬将军，增加百户食邑，进爵为伯。
English: Emperor Weiwen ascended to the throne, awarded the title of General of the Han Dynasty, the title of General of the Han Dynasty, the title of General of the Han Dynasty, the title of General of the Han Dynasty, the title of General of the Han Dynasty.

古文：大统四年，宣光、清徽殿初成，憕为之颂。
现代文：大统四年，宣光、清徽殿刚建成，薛恺为之作颂。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty, the two palaces of Xuan Guang and Qing Hui were built, and Xue Yao wrote a poem in praise of this.

古文：魏文帝又造二欹器。
现代文：魏文帝又造二件欹器，一件是二仙人共持一钵，在一个盘内，钵盖有山。
English: Emperor Weiwen also made two earthenware vessels, one of which is two immortals holding a bowl together, in a dish, the lid of the bowl has a mountain.

古文：一为二仙人共持一钵，同处一盘，钵盖有山，山有香气，一仙人又持金瓶以临器上，以水灌山，则出于瓶而注乎器，烟气通发山中，谓之仙人欹器。
现代文：山有香气，一仙人又持金瓶站立器上，以水灌山，水出于瓶而注入器，烟气从山中发出，称为仙人欹器。
English: The mountain is fragrant, and a hermit, holding a golden bottle, stands on a stand and fills the mountain with water. The water comes out of the bottle and pours into the container, and the smoke emits from the mountain. It is called the hermit's bowl.

古文：一为二荷同处一盘，相去盈尺，中有莲下垂器上，以水注荷，则出于莲而盈乎器，为凫鴈蟾蜍以饰之，谓之水芝欹器。
现代文：另一件是二荷花在一个盘内，相隔盈尺，中间有莲下垂于器上，用水注荷，从莲而出灌于器中，装饰以凫雁蟾蜍，称为水芝欹器。
English: The other is a lotus flower in a dish, separated by a yard, with a lotus hanging down in the middle, filled with water, poured from the lotus into the vessel, decorated with a goose feather, called a water chrysanthemum bowl.

古文：二盘各处一床，钵圆而床方，中有人，言三才之象也。
现代文：二盘各放置于一床，钵圆而床方，中间有人，称为是三才之象。
English: Two plates are each placed on a bed, the bowl is round and the bed is square, and there is a person in the middle, which is called the three-talented person.

古文：皆置清徽殿前。
现代文：都放置于清徽殿前。
English: They are all placed in front of the Qinghui Palace.

古文：器形似觥而方，满则平，溢则倾。
现代文：器形像觥但呈方形，水满则平，水溢则倾倒。
English: The vessel is shaped like a bowl but is square. When it is full of water, it is flat, and when it overflows, it is overturned.

古文：憕各为作颂。
现代文：薛恺均为之作颂。
English: Xue Bingjun sang its praises.

古文：大统初，仪制多阙。
现代文：左箍初年，礼仪制度不完备。
English: In the first year of Zuo Xi, the etiquette system was not complete.

古文：太祖令憕与卢辩、檀翥等参定之。
现代文：左担令堑丝与卢盛、檀塞等人参酌修定。
English: Zuo Dandan ordered Yan Si and Lu Sheng, Dan Sai and others to participate in the revision.

古文：自以流离世故，不听音乐。
现代文：自认为身遭变乱，流离在外，所以不听音乐。
English: He doesn't listen to music because he thinks he's been displaced by the turmoil.

古文：虽幽室独处，尝有戚容。
现代文：虽然独处在幽室中，也有悲戚之容。
English: Although he is alone in a secluded room, he also has a mournful look.

古文：后坐事死。
现代文：后来因事获罪而死。
English: He was later convicted of the crime and died.

古文：子舒嗣，官至礼部下大夫、仪同大将军、聘陈使副。
现代文：其子壁厘继嗣，官至礼部下大夫、仪同大将军、聘速副使。
English: His son, Kekiri's successor, rose through the ranks from bureaucrat to doctor under the Ministry of Ceremonies, General of Ceremonies, and Deputy Minister of Hiring Speed.

古文：薛寘，河东汾阴人也。祖遵彦，魏平远将军、河东郡守、安邑侯。
现代文：萨真，是冱塞妪人。他祖父整龌，任缝平远将军、迥塞越守、安邑侯。
English: Sazhen, a native of Yansai, was the son of his grandfather Jiezhen, who served as the general of Saipan, the governor of Yansai, and the governor of An'i.

古文：父乂，尚书吏部郎、清河广平二郡守。
现代文：他父亲产丛，任尚书吏部郎、遣回卢垩二郡守。
English: His father was born in Zhaozong, and was appointed as Shang Shuliriburo, and sent back to Luye as the second county governor.

古文：寘幼览篇籍，好属文。
现代文：堕寞自幼博览群书，喜好作文。
English: Loneliness since childhood, reading a lot of books, likes to write essays.

古文：年未弱冠，为州主簿、郡功曹。
现代文：尚未成年，任为州主簿、郡功曹。
English: Not yet of age, he was appointed as the state's chief accountant and a county meritorious service officer.

古文：起家奉朝请。
现代文：从家中征召出来任奉朝请。
English: If you'd like to serve the Emperor, go ahead.

古文：稍迁左将军、太中大夫。
现代文：不久迁任左将军、太中大夫。
English: He was soon transferred to the positions of General of the Left and Grand Vice Admiral of the Navy.

古文：从魏孝武西迁，封合阳县子，邑四百户，进号中军将军。
现代文：随从魏孝武帝西迁，封为郃阳县子，食邑四百户，进号中军将军。
English: Following Emperor Wei Xiaowu's westward migration, he was given the title of the son of Poyang County, 400 households in food villages, and the title of General of the Chinese Army.

古文：魏废帝元年，领著作佐郎，修国史。
现代文：魏废帝元年，领著作佐郎，修国史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he wrote "Saro," a history of the country.

古文：寻拜中书侍郎，修起居注。
现代文：不久任中书侍郎，编修起居注。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of junior secretary, and became an editor.

古文：迁中书令、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：迁任中书令、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The posts of Shurei, Chariot and Cavalry General, and the Three Departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies were transferred.

古文：燕公于谨征江陵，以寘为司录。
现代文：燕公于谨征伐江陵，任薛贵为司录。
English: Yan Gong participated in the honorable conquest of Jiangling, and appointed Xue Gui as secretary.

古文：军中谋略，寘并参之。
现代文：军中谋略，薛真都参与商讨决策。
English: As a strategist in the army, Xue Zhen participated in the discussion of decision-making.

古文：江陵平，进爵为伯，增邑五百户。
现代文：江陵平定，进爵为伯，增加五百产食邑。
English: Gangneung was pacified and elevated to a prefecture-level city, with an increase of 500 food-producing counties.

古文：朝廷方改物创制，欲行周礼，乃令寘与小宗伯卢辩斟酌古今，共详定之。
现代文：朝廷准备修改制度，依照《周礼》定制，令薛寞与小宗伯卢辩斟酌古今制度，考察修定。
English: The imperial court was preparing to amend the system, according to the "Weekly Ritual" custom, so that Xue Xian and Xiao Zongblu debated the ancient and modern system, and examined and amended it.

古文：六官建，授内史下大夫。孝闵帝践阼，进爵为侯，增邑五百户，转御正中大夫。时前中书监卢柔，学业优深，文藻华赡，而寘与之方驾，故世号曰卢、薛焉。
现代文：六官建，授予内史下大夫孝闵帝登基，进爵为侯，增加五百户食邑，转任御正中大夫当时前中书监卢柔，学术水平很高深，文辞华丽富赡，而薛真可与之并驾齐驱，所以当世称为卢、薛。
English: Six official buildings were built, granted to the doctor of internal history, Emperor Xiaojun, who ascended to the throne, became a marquis, increased five hundred households, and was transferred to the imperial middle school doctor, the former middle school librarian Lu Zhuo. The academic level is very high and deep, the words are gorgeous and rich, and Xue Zhen can keep pace with it, so he was called Lu and Xue.

古文：久之，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，出为淅州刺史。
现代文：一段时间后，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，出朝任淅州刺史。
English: After a period of time, he was promoted to the rank of grand general of cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and went to the imperial court to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：卒于位。
现代文：在职位上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：吏民哀惜之。
现代文：僚吏百姓为之哀伤叹惜。
English: Colleagues, officials, and the public mourn and lament over it.

古文：赠虞州刺史，谥曰理。
现代文：获赠虞州刺史，谧号称为理。
English: He was given the title of "Shishi of Yuzhou" and his posthumous name was "Ri."

古文：所着文笔二十余卷，行于世。
现代文：所著作的文章二十多卷，流行于世。
English: He has written more than twenty volumes of articles, which are popular in the world.

古文：又撰西京记三卷，引据该洽，世称其博闻焉。
现代文：又撰作《西京记》三卷，引经据典广博，当世称赞其博闻多识。
English: He also wrote "Sijing Ji" in three volumes, citing a wide range of sources, and was praised by the contemporary world for his knowledge and understanding.

古文：寘性至孝，虽年齿已衰，职务繁广，至于温凊之礼，朝夕无违。
现代文：薛真特别孝顺，虽然已经年老，职务繁忙，但是对于尽孝冬温夏清侍奉父母之礼，早晚不会有违。
English: Xue Zhen is particularly filial, although he is already old and busy with his duties, but he will not go against his filial duty to serve his parents in winter, summer and winter.

古文：当时以此称之。
现代文：当时人以此而加以称赞。
English: At the time, people praised him for this.

古文：子明嗣。
现代文：其子薛明继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Xue Ming.

古文：大象末，仪同大将军、清水郡守。
现代文：大象末年，任仪同大将军、清水郡守。
English: In the last years of his life, he rose to the rank of general and governor of Shimizu County.

古文：李昶，顿丘临黄人也，小名那。
现代文：李昶，是顿丘临黄人，小名那。
English: Li Yao is a Dongqiu Linhuang person, a minor name.

古文：祖彪，名重魏朝，为御史中尉。
现代文：他祖父李彪，名重魏朝，任御史中尉。
English: His grandfather Li Biao, who was famous in the Wei Dynasty, was a lieutenant in the imperial army.

古文：父游，亦有才行，为当世所称。
现代文：他父亲李游，亦有才能德行，为当世所称赞。
English: His father, Li You, was also talented and virtuous, and was praised by the contemporary world.

古文：游兄志，为南荆州刺史，游随从至州。
现代文：李游兄李志，任南荆州刺史，李游随从他到南荆州。
English: Li You's elder brother, Li Zhi, was appointed as the governor of South Jingzhou. Li You followed him to South Jingzhou.

古文：属尔朱之乱，与志俱奔江左。
现代文：此时发生尔朱氏之乱，李游与李志都逃奔江束。
English: At this time, the Er Zhu Rebellion occurred, and Li You and Li Zhi both fled to the Bund.

古文：昶性峻急，不杂交游。
现代文：李昶性格严正急躁，不喜好交游。
English: Li Yao's personality is strict and impatient, and he does not like socializing.

古文：幼年已解属文，有声洛下。
现代文：幼年已会写作，在洛阳有名声。
English: He could write at an early age and became famous in Luoyang.

古文：时洛阳创置明堂，昶年十数岁，为明堂赋。
现代文：当时洛阳设置明堂，李昶十几岁，作《明堂赋》。
English: At that time, Luoyang set up the Ming Hall, and Li Xuan, who was in his teens, wrote "Ming Hall Fu."

古文：虽优洽未足，而才制可观。
现代文：虽然不够卓异广博，但是表现出的才力和体制很值得一看。
English: Although it is not outstanding and extensive enough, the talent and system demonstrated are well worth seeing.

古文：见者咸曰 有家风矣 。
现代文：看了文章的人都说 有家风矣 。
English: People who read the article said it was a family tradition.

古文：初谒太祖，太祖深奇之，厚加资给，令入太学。
现代文：初次谒见太祖，太祖很看重他，大力资助，令其入太学学习。
English: The first time he met the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather thought highly of him and provided him with financial support so that he could study at the university.

古文：太祖每见学生，必问才行于昶。
现代文：太祖每次接见学生，都要向李昶问及才智德行。
English: Every time the great-grandfather met with students, he would ask Li Yao about talent and virtue.

古文：昶神情清悟，应对明辨，太祖每称叹之。
现代文：李昶神情明慧，应对明辩，太祖总是加以夸赞。
English: Li Qian's demeanor is bright and clever, he should be able to argue clearly, and the great-grandfather always praises him.

古文：绥德公陆通盛选僚寀，请以昶为司马，太祖许之。
现代文：绥德公陆通广为招选僚吏，要求以李昶任司马，太祖同意。
English: Zhu De Gonglu and Tong Guang were the recruiting officials, and they requested that Li Qian be appointed as Sima, which was agreed to by Taizu.

古文：昶虽年少，通特加接待，公私之事，咸取决焉。
现代文：李昶虽然年轻，陆通却特加接待，公务私事，都由他决定。
English: Although Li Yao is young, Lu Tong has a special reception, and he decides on all official and private matters.

古文：又兼二千石郎中，典仪注。
现代文：又兼二千石郎中，典掌仪注。
English: He was also a member of the 2,000-koku-ro family.

古文：累迁都官郎中、相州大中正、丞相府东合祭酒、中军将军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：数次升迁而任都官郎中、相州大中正、丞相府束合祭酒、中军将军、银青光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted several times and was appointed to the post of Tokyo governor's junior assistant, Soshu University junior high school vice-president, Josofu Sokaisai sake brewer, general of the Chinese army, and doctor of silver and light.

古文：昶虽处郎官，太祖恒欲以书记委之。
现代文：李昶虽然任郎官，太祖常以书记委任。
English: Although Li Xi was appointed as a vassal, the great-grandfather often appointed him as a secretary.

古文：于是以昶为丞相府记室参军、著作郎，修国史。
现代文：于是任李昶为丞相府记室参军、著作郎，撰修国史。
English: As a result, he joined the army, worked as a clerk, and wrote a history of the country for the chancellor's office.

古文：转大行台郎中、中书侍郎。
现代文：转任大行台郎中、中书侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the posts of daigyo tairou chu and chusho jirao.

古文：顷之，转黄门侍郎，封临黄县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：不久，转任黄门侍郎，封为临黄县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, and was given the title of Linhuang County magistrate, serving 500 households.

古文：太祖尝谓昶曰： 卿祖昔在中朝，为御史中尉。
现代文：太祖曾经对李昶说： 卿祖父当年在中朝，任御史中尉。
English: The great-grandfather once said to Li Xi: "Your grandfather was a lieutenant in the Middle Kingdom.

古文：卿操尚贞固，理应不坠家风。
现代文：卿节操贞尚，理当不败坏家风。
English: It is right to uphold the chastity of the Qing Dynasty and not to destroy the family tradition.

古文：但孤以中尉弹劾之官，爱憎所在，故未即授卿耳。
现代文：不过我以中尉是执法弹劾的官职，爱憎所在，所以一直没有授任予卿。
English: However, since I hold the rank of lieutenant, which is the official position of law enforcement and impeachment, and this is what I love and hate, I have not been given the title of lord.

古文：然此职久旷，无以易卿。 乃奏昶为御史中尉。
现代文：但是此职位很久无人担任，看来没有人比您更合适。 于是任李昶为御史中尉。
English: However, this position has been vacant for a long time, and it seems that no one is more suitable than you. Therefore, Li Qian was appointed as Lieutenant of History.

古文：岁余，加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：一年后，加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。赐姓宇文氏。
English: A year later, he was promoted to the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division.

古文：六官建，拜内史下大夫，进爵为侯，增邑五百户，迁内史中大夫。
现代文：建立六官，任为内史下大夫，进爵为侯，增加五百户食邑，迁升内史中大夫。
English: Six offices were established, and he was appointed as a doctor of internal history, knighted as a marquis, 500 households were added, and he was promoted to a doctor of internal history.

古文：世宗初，行御伯中大夫。
现代文：世宗初年，兼摄御伯中大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he also became a doctor of photography.

古文：武成元年，除中外府司录。
现代文：武成元年，任中外府司录。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng, he was appointed as the registrar of the central and foreign prefectures.

古文：保定初，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：保定初年，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was promoted to the general of the imperial cavalry, and became the keeper of the imperial residences and the third secretary.

古文：二年，转御正中大夫。
现代文：二年，转任御正中大夫。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of junior high school doctor.

古文：时以近侍清要，盛选国华，乃以昶及安昌公元则、中都公陆逞、临淄公唐瑾等并为纳言。
现代文：当时因为近侍重要而清正，盛选国家精华，于是以李昶和安昌公元则、中都公陆逞、临淄公唐瑾等都任纳言。
English: At that time, because the close attendants were important and were pure and upright, the national essence was successfully selected, so Li Qian and Anchang, Zhongdu Gonglu Gan, Linyi Gong Tangyi and so on were all nominated.

古文：寻进爵为公，增邑通前一千三百户。
现代文：不久进爵为公，食邑增至一千三百户。
English: Soon after, he was knighted, and the number of restaurants increased to 1,300.

古文：五年，出为昌州刺史。
现代文：五年，出朝任昌州刺史。
English: Five years later, he was appointed to the position of Changzhou chief historian.

古文：在州遇疾，启求入朝，诏许之。
现代文：在州任上有病，启奏请求回朝，得到批准。
English: He fell ill while in office, and his request to return to the imperial court was approved.

古文：还未至京，卒于路。
现代文：尚未回到京城，在路上去世。
English: He had not yet returned to the capital and died on the way.

古文：时年五十。
现代文：终年五十岁。
English: fifty years old.

古文：赠相瀛二州刺史。
现代文：获赠相瀛二州刺史。
English: He was presented with a pair of two-state swords.

古文：昶于太祖世已当枢要，兵马处分，专以委之，诏册文笔，皆昶所作也。
现代文：李昶在太祖之时已位据枢要，兵马调度，专门委任给他，诏册文笔，都是李昶所作。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, Li Xi was already in a pivotal position. The dispatching of soldiers and horses, which was specially entrusted to him, and the writing of the imperial edict were all done by Li Xi.

古文：及晋公护执政，委任如旧。
现代文：当晋公宇文护执政时，委任依然如故。
English: The appointment remained the same when Jin Gongwu Wenhong came to power.

古文：昶常曰： 文章之事，不足流于后世，经邦致治，庶及古人。 故所作文笔，了无藳草。
现代文：李昶常说： 文章之事，不足于流传后世，治理国家达到政治清明，社会安定，也许可以赶得上古人。 所以他的文章，没有留下草稿。
English: Li Yuchang said: "Writing is not enough to be handed down to posterity, governing the country to achieve political clarity and social stability may be able to catch up with the ancients, so his article did not leave a draft.

古文：唯留心政事而已。
现代文：他衹留心于政务。
English: He does not pay much attention to politics.

古文：又以父在江南，身寓关右，自少及终，不饮酒听乐。
现代文：当时其父亲在江南，自己在关中，从年轻到去世，不饮酒听音乐。
English: At that time, his father was in the south of the Yangtze River, and he was in Guanzhong. From a young age until his death, he did not drink alcohol and listened to music.

古文：时论以此称焉。
现代文：时人为此而称赞他。
English: He was lauded for it at the time.

古文：子丹嗣。
现代文：其子李丹继嗣。
English: He is succeeded by his son, Li Dan.

古文：时有高平檀翥，字凤翔。
现代文：当时有产垩人擅画，字凰翅。
English: At that time, there were people who were good at painting, the word "Hoo Wing."

古文：好读书，善属文，能鼓瑟。
现代文：好读书，善于写文章，能鼓瑟。
English: Good at reading, good at writing articles, can play the drums.

古文：早为琅邪王诵所知。
现代文：早年为琅邪王诵看重。
English: In his early years, he valued recitation.

古文：年十九，为魏孝明帝挽郎。
现代文：十九岁时，为魏孝明帝挽郎。
English: At the age of nineteen, he became a groomsman for Emperor Wei Xiaoming.

古文：其后司州牧、城阳王元徽以翥为从事，非其好也。
现代文：后来司州牧、城阳王元徽任檀翥为从事，他不乐意。
English: Later, Wang Yuanhui, the patriarch of Shizhou and King of Chengyang, was appointed to be engaged in Danzhao, but he was not happy.

古文：寻谢病，客游三辅。
现代文：不久称病去职，客游三辅。
English: Soon after, he called in sick and quit his job.

古文：时毛为行台，镇北雍州，表翥为行台郎中。
现代文：此时毛遐任行台，镇守北雍州，上表任檀翥为行台郎中。
English: At this time, Mao Xuan was appointed as the governor of Xingtai, the town guard of Beiyang Prefecture, and the above table was appointed as the governor of Xingtai.

古文：会尔朱天光东拒齐神武，翥随赴洛。
现代文：正逢尔朱天光束拒齐神武，檀翥随从进入洛阳。
English: It was just at the time when the light beam of the Zhu Tian refused to match the Shenwu, and the Danzhao followed and entered Luoyang.

古文：除西兖州录事参军，历司空田曹参军，加镇远将军，兼殿中侍御史。
现代文：任为西兖州录事参军，历任司空田曹参军，加镇远将军，兼任殿中侍御史。
English: He was appointed as the Xishuanzhou Recorder to join the army, the successive Secretary Kuotian Cao to join the army, plus General Zhenyuan, and concurrently served as the palace attendant and historian.

古文：台中表奏，皆翥为之。
现代文：台中的文书奏章，都是他所写。
English: He wrote all of Taichung's instrumental music.

古文：寻副毛鸿宾镇潼关，加前将军、太中大夫。
现代文：不久为毛鸿宾的副手镇守潼关，加前将军、太中大夫。
English: He soon became Mao Hongbin's deputy town guard of Shaoguan, and was promoted to ex-general and grand vice-minister.

古文：魏孝武西迁，赐爵高唐县子，兼中书舍人，修国史，加镇军将军。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，赐封高唐县子，兼任中书舍人，撰修国史，加镇军将军。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, bestowed the title of Gaotang County Son, concurrently served as a middle school teacher, wrote national history, and became a general of the town army.

古文：后坐谈论轻躁，为黄门侍郎徐招所驳，死于廷尉狱。
现代文：后来因为言论轻躁，被黄门侍郎徐招驳斥，死于廷尉监狱中。
English: Later, because of his frivolous speech, he was refuted by Xu Zhao, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and died in the courtier's prison.

古文：元伟字猷道，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：互伟字粒亘，是!蛐迢堕入。
English: Mutually great word particles, yes!  falling into.

古文：魏昭成之后。
现代文：魏昭成帝的后代。
English: Descendants of Emperor Wei Zhaocheng.

古文：曾祖忠，尚书左仆射，城阳王。
现代文：曾祖父豆盅。任尚书左仆射。封城阳王。
English: Great-grandfather Doudou. Ren Shangshu's right-hand man Shu. Fengcheng Yangwang.

古文：祖盛，通直散骑常侍，城阳公。
现代文：祖父元盛，任通直散骑常侍，封城阳公。
English: His grandfather, Motomori, was appointed as a knight of the order of knighthood and knight of the order of the castle.

古文：父顺，以左卫将军从魏孝武西迁，拜中书监、雍州刺史、开府仪同三司，封濮阳王。
现代文：父亲元岖，以左卫将军随从逸垄垂游西迁，任为中书监、壅州刺史、开府仪同三司，封濮驻。
English: His father, Geng Gui, moved westward with General Zuo Wei, who followed him to Yirong, and was appointed as the third secretary of the Central Library Supervisor, Zhangzhou History, and Kaifu History, and was stationed at the Imperial Palace.

古文：伟少好学，有文雅。
现代文：元伟自小喜好学习，文才很好。
English: Ever since he was a child, Yuan Wei liked to study and was good at writing.

古文：弱冠，授员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：成年，授予员外散骑侍郎。
English: After reaching the age of majority, he was awarded the title of non-commissioned officer samurai horseman.

古文：以侍从之劳，赐爵高阳县伯。
现代文：因为侍从的功劳，封为高阳县伯。
English: He was awarded the title of Count of Goyang County for his services as an attendant.

古文：大统初，拜伏波将军、度支郎中，领太子舍人。
现代文：大统初年，任为伏波将军、度支郎中，领太子舍人。
English: In the first year of the grand unification, he was appointed as the general of Fubo, the middle-ranking official of Wudohiro, and the leading official of the crown prince.

古文：十一年，迁太子庶子，领兵部郎中。
现代文：十一年，迁任太子庶子，领兵部郎中。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was transferred to the position of the Prince's illegitimate son, the middle son of the leader of the military.

古文：寻拜东南道行台右丞。
现代文：不久任为东南道行台右丞。
English: He was soon appointed as the acting governor of Southeastern Hokkaido.

古文：十六年，进位车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十六年，进位车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to the rank of General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial Troops.

古文：以魏氏宗室，进爵南安郡王，邑五百户。
现代文：以其为魏氏宗室，进封爵位为南安郡王，食邑五百户。
English: It is the ancestral home of the Wei clan, and has been awarded the title of the King of Nan'an County, and has 500 households.

古文：十七年，除幽州都督府长史。
现代文：十七年，任为幽州都督府长史。
English: Seventeen years later, he was appointed governor of Yuzhou.

古文：及尉迟迥伐蜀，以伟为司录。
现代文：尉迟迥伐蜀，任元伟为司录。
English: He was appointed to be a recorder.

古文：书檄文记，皆伟之所为。
现代文：书檄文记，都是元伟撰写。
English: All the books and articles were written by Yuan Wei.

古文：蜀平，以功增邑五百户。
现代文：平定蜀地，以功而增加五百户食邑。
English: He pacified Shudi and increased the number of food villages by 500 households.

古文：六官建，拜师氏下大夫，爵随例降，改封淮南县公。
现代文：建立六官时，任为师氏下大夫，爵位随规定而降，改封为淮南县公。
English: When the six officials were established, he was appointed as a doctor under the title of Shishi, and his title was reduced according to regulations, and he was changed to Huainan County official.

古文：孝闵帝践祚，除晋公护府司录。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，任为置公宇文护府司录。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the registrar of Jiguangwenyu Prefecture.

古文：世宗初，拜师氏中大夫。
现代文：世宗初年，任为师氏中大夫。
English: In the first year of Sejong, he was appointed as a junior high school teacher.

古文：受诏于麟趾殿刊正经籍。
现代文：韶书令他在麟趾殿刊正经籍。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to be enrolled as a regular student at the Linzi Temple.

古文：寻除陇右总管府长史，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久委任为陇右总管府长史，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the right-hand chief administrator of the prefectural governor history, the second-in-command of the imperial cavalry, and the third-in-command of the prefectural government ceremony.

古文：保定二年，迁成州刺史。
现代文：保定二年，迁任成州刺史。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was transferred to Chengzhou.

古文：伟政尚清静，百姓悦附，流民复业者三千余口。
现代文：元伟行政祟尚清静，百姓乐意归附，三千余流民复业。
English: The administration of Yuan Wei is still calm, the people are willing to return, and more than three thousand displaced people have resumed their jobs.

古文：天和元年，入为匠师中大夫，转司宗中大夫。
现代文：天和元年，入朝为匠师中大夫，转任司宗中大夫。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he entered the imperial court as an artisan junior doctor, and was transferred to the post of Shizong junior doctor.

古文：六年，出为随州刺史。
现代文：六年，出朝任随州刺史。
English: Six years later, he was appointed as Suizhou Provincial Historian.

古文：伟辞以母老，不拜。
现代文：元伟以母亲老迈推辞，不到任。
English: Motowai resigned at the insistence of his elderly mother and did not take up his post.

古文：还为司宗。
现代文：改任司宗。
English: He was appointed as the head priest.

古文：寻以母忧去职。
现代文：不久因为母亲丧事去职。
English: He left the post shortly afterwards due to the death of his mother.

古文：建德二年，复为司宗，转司会中大夫，兼民部中大夫，迁小司寇。
现代文：建德二年，又任司宗，转任司会中大夫，兼任民部中大夫，迁任小司寇。
English: In the second year of Jiande, he was also appointed as the secretary, and then he was transferred to the secretary of the association, and concurrently he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and then he was transferred to the small secretary.

古文：四年，以伟为使主，报聘于齐。
现代文：四年，任元伟为主使，回访齐朝。
English: In four years, Ren Yuanwei was appointed as the chief envoy and made a return visit to Qi Dynasty.

古文：是秋，高祖亲戎东讨，伟遂为齐人所执。
现代文：当年秋天，高祖亲自率军柬讨。元伟被齐人扣押。
English: In the autumn of that year, Gaozu personally led the Cambodian army to investigate. Yuan Wei was detained by Qi people.

古文：六年，齐平，伟方见释。
现代文：六年，平定齐朝，元伟才被释放。
English: Six years later, after the suppression of the Qi Dynasty, Yuan Wei was finally released.

古文：高祖以其久被幽絷，加授上开府。大象二年，除襄州刺史，进位大将军。
现代文：高祖因为他被扣押了很长时间，加授上开府大象二年，任襄州刺史，进位大将军。
English: Gaozu, because he was detained for a long time, was awarded the Shangkaifu Elephant for two years, and was appointed as a historian of Xiangzhou and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：伟性温柔，好虚静。
现代文：元伟性情温柔，喜欢清静。
English: Yuan Wei is gentle and likes to be quiet.

古文：居家不治生业。笃学爱文，政事之暇，未尝弃书。
现代文：居家不置办产业笃志学习，爱好文史，政事之暇，未曾放弃读书。
English: Living at home and not running a business, he is determined to study, loves literature and history, has time for politics, and has never given up reading.

古文：谨慎小心，与物无忤。
现代文：为人谨慎小心，与人无争。
English: Be cautious and careful, and do not quarrel with others.

古文：时人以此称之。
现代文：当时人因此而加以称赞。
English: He was lauded for it at the time.

古文：初自邺还也，庾信赠其诗曰： 虢亡垂棘反，齐平宝鼎归。 其为辞人所重如此。
现代文：当初从邺而来，庾信赠诗： 虢亡垂棘反，齐平宝鼎归。 他得到文学之士的敬重就如此例。
English: At first, he came from Handan, and Handan Xin gave him a poem: 亡垂棘反,齐平宝鼎歸. This is an example of how he gained the respect of literary people.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：太祖天纵宽仁，性罕猜忌。
现代文：太祖天性宽容仁厚，不猜忌他人。
English: The great-grandfather is naturally tolerant and kind, and does not suspect others.

古文：元氏戚属，并保全之，内外任使，布于列职。
现代文：元氏族人，都得以保全，朝廷内外所任，分布在各种职务。
English: Former clansmen were preserved and assigned to various positions both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：孝闵践祚，无替前绪。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，没有改动。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne, and there was no change.

古文：明、武缵业，亦遵先志。
现代文：明、武继位，也遵照先人的遣志。
English: Emperor Ming and Emperor Wu's successors also followed the envoys sent by their predecessors.

古文：虽天厌魏德，鼎命已迁，枝叶荣茂，足以逾于前代矣。
现代文：虽然上天已弃魏朝，国鼎已迁改，但是枝叶荣盛繁茂，足以超过前代。
English: Although heaven has abandoned the Wei Dynasty and the State Council has been relocated, the branches and leaves are flourishing and prosperous, which is enough to surpass the previous generation.

古文：然简牍散亡，事多湮没。
现代文：不过简牍散亡，事情多半湮没。
English: But now that Jian Chen has passed away, the matter has mostly faded away.

古文：柱国大将军、特进、尚书令、少师、义阳王元子孝。尚书仆射、冯翊王元季海。
现代文：现录其姓名和身份可知者，附在此处。柱国大将军、太傅、大司徒、广陵王元欣，柱国大将军。特进、尚书令、少师、义阳王元子孝，尚书仆射、冯翊王元季海，
English: The names and identities of those whose names and identities are known are recorded and attached here. Zhu Guo Da Gen., Taifu, Da Sito, Guangling Wang Yuanxin, Zhu Guo Da Gen., Tejin, Shang Shuling, Shao Shi, Yiyang Wang Yuan Zi Xia, Shang Shuling, Feng Xi Wang Yuan Ji Hai,

古文：七兵尚书、陈郡王元玄，
现代文：七兵尚书、陈郡王元玄，
English: Seven soldiers Shang Shu, Chen County King Yuan Xuan,

古文：大将军、淮安王元育，
现代文：大将军、淮安王元育，
English: The great general, Huai'an Wang Yuanyu,

古文：大将军、梁王元俭。
现代文：大将军、梁王元俭，
English: General Liang Wang Yuanjian,

古文：大将军、尚书令、少保、小司徒、广平郡公元赞。
现代文：大将军、尚书令、少保、小司徒、广平郡公
English: Grand General, Shang Shuling, Shao Bao, Xiao Si Tuo, Guangping County

古文：大将军、纳言、小司空、荆州总管、安昌郡公元则。侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、少师、韩国公元罗。侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、吏部尚书、鲁郡公元正。侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、中书监、洵州刺史、宜都郡公元颜子。侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、鄯州刺史、安乐县公元寿。侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、武卫将军、遂州刺史、房陵县公元审。
现代文：元赞，大将军、纳言、小司空、荆州总管、安昌郡公元则，侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、少师、韩国公元罗，侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、吏部尚书、鲁郡公元正，侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、中书监、洵州刺史、宜都郡公元颜子，侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、塑业刺史、安乐县公正画，侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、武卫将军、遥蛆刺史、房陵县公互昼。
English: Yuan Zhan, Grand General, Nagan, Xiao Zi Kuo, Jingzhou General Manager, Anchang County General Secretary, Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Young Master, Korea General Secretary, Lu County General Secretary, Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Librarian, Lu County General Secretary, Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Central Librarian, Zhangzhou Shishi, Yidu County General Secretary, Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Plastic Industry Shishi, Anle County Justice Painting, Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Kaifu Yi Tong

古文：史臣曰：太祖除暴宁乱，创业开基，昃食求贤，共康庶政。
现代文：史臣曰：太祖除暴平乱，创立基业，勤于政事，求取贤良之才，共同治理各种政务。
English: Shichen said: the great ancestor eliminated violence and chaos, founded a foundation, was diligent in politics, sought out talents, and jointly managed various government affairs.

古文：既焚林而访阮，亦牓道以求孙，可谓野无遗才，朝多君子。
现代文：以焚林来访阮，以树榜在道而求孙，可以说野无遣才，朝中多是君子。
English: To visit Ruan with a burning forest, to ask for a grandson with a tree stump on the road, it can be said that there is no talent, and most of them are gentlemen.

古文：苏亮等并学称该博，文擅雕龙，或挥翰凤池，或著书麟阁，咸居禄位，各逞琳琅。
现代文：苏亮等人都学识渊博，作文擅长修饰文辞，或挥翰凤池，或著书麟阁，都居于高职，各施展其才能。
English: Su Liang and others are all learned and knowledgeable. They are good at writing and decorating words, or waving a phoenix, or writing a book. They are all in high positions, and they all show their talents.

古文：拟彼陈、徐，惭后生之可畏；论其任遇，实当时之良选也。
现代文：比拟于陈、徐，后生确实可畏；论其任遇，都是当时良选。
English: Compared to Chen and Xu, the later generation is indeed formidable; as for their appointment, they were all good choices at that time.

古文：魏文帝有言： 古今文人，类不护细行。 
现代文：魏文帝曾经说： 古今文人，类不护细行。 
English: Wei Wendi once said: "Writers, both ancient and modern, are all the same.

古文：其吕思礼、薛憕之谓也？
现代文：说的就是吕思礼、薛灯之辈了。
English: This is the generation of Lu Sili and Xue Lan.

