古文：来田侯崔严来瑱，邠州永寿人。
现代文：来瑱是邠州永寿县人。
English: He is a native of Yongshou County, Luzhou.

古文：父曜，奋行间，开元末，持节碛西副大使、四镇节度使，著名西边，终右领军大将军。
现代文：他父亲来曜，行伍出身，开元末年，被任命为碛西副大使、四镇节度使，在西部边境有名气，后任右领军大将军时去世了。
English: His father came from the military and was appointed as the deputy ambassador of Shaanxi Province and the delegate of the Four Towns Festival in the late 19th century. He was famous on the western border and later died when he was the right leader of the army.

古文：瑱略知收，尚名节，崖然有大志。
现代文：来瑱略懂典籍，重视名誉和节操，奋发有大志向。
English: He knows a little about classics, attaches importance to honor and discipline, and has great aspirations.

古文：天宝初，从四镇任剧职，累迁殿中侍御史、伊西北庭行军司马。
现代文：天宝初年，跟父亲在四镇任重要的官职。多次升官后任殿中侍御史，伊西、北庭行军司马。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he and his father held important government posts in four towns. After being promoted several times, he was appointed as a palace attendant, Ishi and Hokutei marching sergeant.

古文：诏举智谋果决、才堪统众者，拾遗张镐荐瑱能断大事，有御侮才，擢颍川太守，充招讨使。
现代文：有诏推举有智谋善决断、才能可以服众的人，拾遗官张镐推荐他能决定大事，有抵御入侵的才能，于是提升他为颍川太守、招讨使。
English: The imperial edict recommended a person with wisdom, good decision-making, and the ability to serve the public. Zhang Ye, the official in charge of collecting the remains of the dead, recommended that he be able to decide on important matters and have the ability to resist invasion. Therefore, he was promoted to the governor of Zhangchuan and the envoy.

古文：会母丧免，以孝闻。
现代文：遇到母亲去世免职，以行孝出名。
English: He was relieved of his duties when his mother died and became famous for his filial piety.

古文：安禄山反，张垍荐之，兴塊次，拜汝南太守。
现代文：安禄山反叛，张土自又推荐他，他从守丧处赶来，被任命为汝南郡太守。
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled, Zhang Tujie recommended him again, he came from the funeral home, and was appointed as the governor of Runan County.

古文：未行，改颍川。
现代文：还没有上路，改任颍川郡太守。
English: He had not yet set out on his journey when he was appointed governor of Shukawa County.

古文：贼攻颍川，方积粟多，瑱完埤自如，手射贼，皆应弦仆。
现代文：叛军进攻颍川，当时储备的粮食很多，来瑱又修好城墙做了准备，他亲手射敌兵，都是一箭一个。
English: When the rebels attacked Luochuan, there was a lot of grain in reserve at that time. When they came to Luochuan, they repaired the city wall and made preparations. He shot the enemy soldiers with his own hands, one by one.

古文：贼使降将毕思琛招之，父故将也，拜城下，泣且吊，瑱不应，前后俘杀甚众。
现代文：叛军派投降的将领毕思琛招降他，毕思琛是来瑱的父亲过去的部将，在城下跪拜，哭着吊唁来瑱的父亲，来瑱不理，先后俘虏杀死了很多叛军。
English: The rebels sent the surrendering general Bi Siyu to recruit him. Bi Siyu was the father of Lai Siyu's former subordinate. He knelt at the foot of the city, weeping and offering condolences to Lai Siyu's father. Lai Siyu ignored him, and the captives killed many rebels.

古文：贼惧，目为 来嚼铁 。
现代文：叛军怕他，称他叫 来咬铁 。
English: The rebels feared him, saying he called them to bite the iron.

古文：以功就加防御使、河南淮南游弈逐要招讨使。
现代文：因功加封为防御使，河南、淮南游弈逐要招讨使。
English: As a result, Henan Province and Huainan Province should invite envoys one after another.

古文：徙山南东道节度使代鲁炅，会嗣号王巨表炅方固守，乃还瑱故官。
现代文：又调他任山南东道节度使取代鲁炅，遇上嗣虢王李运上奏说鲁炅正在坚守南阳，就恢复来瑱的旧有官职。
English: He was also appointed as the host of the Shannan Festival to replace Lu Yao. When King Li Yun, the successor of Lu Yao, reported that Lu Yao was holding fast to Nanyang, he restored Lu Yao's old official position.

古文：贼围南阳急，瑱与魏仲犀合兵救之，不胜，人情恟惧，瑱能抚训士，举动安重，贼不得侵。
现代文：叛军围攻南阳很急，来瑱和魏仲犀合军救南阳，作战不胜，军心动摇。来瑱能安抚训练士兵，军容严整，叛军不敢侵扰。
English: The rebels besieged Nanyang very quickly. Laiwu and Wei Zhongxiao joined forces to save Nanyang. The battle was not victorious, and the military spirit was shaken. Laiwu was able to pacify the trained soldiers, the army was well-organized, and the rebels did not dare to intrude.

古文：改淮南西道节度。
现代文：又调任淮南西道节度。
English: He was also transferred to Huainan West Road Traffic Control Center.

古文：两京平，封颍国公，食二百户。
现代文：长安洛阳收复了，被封为颖国公，食实封两百户。
English: Luoyang in Chang'an was recovered, and it was given the title of Ying Guogong, effectively sealing off two hundred households.

古文：乾元二年，徙河西。
现代文：乾元二年，被调到河西。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, he was transferred to Hexi.

古文：未行，王师败于相州，诏拜陕虢节度，兼潼关防御团练镇守使。
现代文：还没上路，唐军在相州战败，有诏任命他为陕虢节度，兼任潼关防御团练镇守使。
English: Before he went on the road, the Tang army was defeated in Xiangzhou. An imperial edict appointed him as the governor of Shaanxi and Fujian, and he also served as the commander of the Shaoguan Defense Regiment.

古文：明年，襄州部将张维瑾等杀其使史翙，徙瑱山南东道襄、邓、均、房、金、商、随、郢、复十州节度使。
现代文：第二年，襄州将领张维瑾等人杀死了襄州刺史史岁羽，调来瑱任山南东道襄、邓、均、房、金、商、随、郢、唐、安十州节度使。
English: In the second year, Zhang Weiqi, the general of Xiangzhou, and others killed Xiangzhou's assassin, Li Yu, and transferred him to serve as the festival envoy of Shannan Host Xiang, Deng, Jun, Fang, Jin, Shang, Sui, Zou, Tang, and An.

古文：既至，维瑾降。
现代文：他到任后，张维瑾投降了。
English: After he took office, Zhang Weiwei surrendered.

古文：上元二年春，破史思明馀党于鲁山，俘贼渠，又战汝州，获马、牛、橐驼，凡两战，斩首万级。
现代文：上元二年春季，他在鲁山打败了史思明余部，俘虏了叛军的首领，又在汝州作战，缴获了马、牛、骆驼。两次战斗，共杀死敌人上万名。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he defeated the rest of Shi Siming in Luzhan, captured the leader of the rebel army, and fought in Ruzhou, capturing horses, cattle, and camels. In two battles, he killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：明年，诏瑱还，瑱安襄、汉，士亦宜其政，因讽众留己，而外示行；至邓，复诏归镇。
现代文：第二年，有诏命来瑱回京，来瑱喜欢襄州，部下也喜欢他治理，因此他示意大家挽留自己，表面装着要上路。到了邓州，又有诏书要他回驻地。
English: In the second year, there was an imperial edict ordering him to return to Beijing. He liked Xiangzhou, and his subordinates also liked his governance. Therefore, he indicated to everyone that he would stay behind, ostensibly intending to go on his way. When he arrived in Dengzhou, there was another imperial edict ordering him to return to his base.

古文：肃宗闻其谋，恶之，吕諲、王仲昇等皆言 瑱得士心，不可以留 ，乃改山南东道襄、邓、唐、复、随、郢六州节度。
现代文：唐肃宗听说了他的花招，厌恶他。吕、王仲升等人都说： 来瑱收买了人心，不能留任， 于是改任山南东道襄、邓、唐、复、随、郢六州节度。
English: Lu, Wang Zhongsheng and others all said, "Lai Ye has bought the hearts of the people and cannot stay in office. Therefore, he was changed to Shannan Host Xiang, Deng, Tang, Fu, Su and Ya Six-State Festival.

古文：俄而仲昇与贼战申州，为贼禽。
现代文：不久王仲升和叛军在申州作战，被叛军抓住。
English: Wang Zhongsheng soon fought with the rebels in Shenzhou and was captured by the rebels.

古文：初，仲昇被围，而江陵吕諲病，瑱顾望不即救，及师出，仲昇已没。
现代文：开始，王仲升被包围了，江陵郡吕生病，来瑱观望不马上去救援。到他率军出发时，王仲升已被俘了。
English: At first, Wang Zhongsheng was besieged, and Lu of Gangneung County was ill, so he did not immediately go to the rescue. By the time he led the army, Wang Zhongsheng had been captured.

古文：行军司马裴表其状，且言： 瑱善谋而勇，恐后难制，即除之，可一战禽也。 
现代文：来瑱的行军司马裴罫上表报告了这情况，并说： 来瑱多谋勇敢，恐以后难以制服，现马上除掉他，可以一举擒获。 
English: Laiwu's marshal Ma Peiwen reported the situation on the table, and said: Laiwu is resourceful and brave, and it may be difficult to subdue him in the future. Eliminate him now, and he can be captured in one fell swoop.

古文：帝颇谓然，遂改瑱淮西申、安、蕲、黄、光、沔兼河南陈、豫、许、郑、汴、曹、宋、颖、泗十五州节度以宠之，阴夺其权，加襄、邓等七州防御使代瑱。
现代文：皇帝认为很对，就调来瑱任淮西道申、安、蕲、黄、光、沔和河南道陈、豫、许、郑、汴、曹、宋、颍、泗十五州节度来表示对他的宠信，实际上是夺他的权，提升裴罫为襄、邓等七州防御使来取代来瑱。
English: The emperor thought it was right, so he transferred the 15 states of Huaixi, Doushen, An, Lu, Huang, Guang, Lu, and Henan, Chen, Yu, Xu, Zheng, Ya, Cao, Song, Ya, Ya to show his favor, but in fact it was to take away his power, and promoted Pei Ya to be the defense envoy of seven states, including Xiang and Deng, to replace Lu.

古文：瑱惧，释言 淮西无粮，须麦收可上道 ，又讽众固留。
现代文：来瑱害怕了，假托 淮西没有粮食，等收了麦子才能去 ，又示意部下坚决挽留。
English: Lai Yao was afraid, so he pretended that there was no grain in Huaxi, and he would wait until the wheat was harvested before he could go. He also signaled to his subordinates to resolutely stay back.

古文：代宗立，复授襄州节度、奉义军渭北兵马使；密诏图之。
现代文：唐代宗即位，又任命他为襄州节度、奉义军渭北兵马使；秘密下诏命裴罫进攻他。
English: When Emperor Zong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, he also appointed him as the Yangzhou Festival and the envoy of the northern soldiers and horses to the Yili Army; he secretly ordered Pei Jun to attack him.

古文：自均州率众浮汉下。
现代文：裴罫从均州率兵乘船顺汉江下来。
English: Pei Jun took a boat down the Han River from Junzhou with his soldiers.

古文：会日入，候者白瑱，瑱与帐下谋，其副薛南阳曰： 公奉诏留镇，而以兵胁代，是无名也。
现代文：到了黄昏，哨兵报告来瑱，来瑱和将领商议，副将薛南阳说： 您奉诏命留任，而裴罫率兵强行取代，是背理的。
English: At dusk, the sentry reported to Xing, who came to consult with the generals. Vice-General Xue Nanyang said: You were ordered by the emperor to remain in office, but Pei Jun and his soldiers forcibly replaced him, which was against the law.

古文：智勇非公敌，而众心不附。
现代文：他智谋勇敢都不是您的对手，而且军心不向着他。
English: His wit and bravery are no match for yours, and his heart is not in it.

古文：彼若乘我不虞，纵火夜攻，诚可忧也。
现代文：他如乘我不备，放火夜晚进攻，确实使人担忧。
English: If he takes advantage of me and sets fire to attack at night, it really worries people.

古文：若须明，则破之必矣。 
现代文：如果等到天亮，就一定能打败他。 
English: If we wait until dawn, we will be able to defeat him.

古文：明日，督军五千阵谷水北，瑱以兵迎之，呼其军，告曰： 尔何事来？ 
现代文：第二天裴罫率兵五千在谷水北边列阵，来瑱率军迎上前去，对他的军队喊道 ：你们来有什么事？ 
English: The next day, Pei Xuan led five thousand soldiers to line up on the north side of the valley. Lai Xuan led the army to meet him and shouted to his army: What do you want?

古文：曰： 公不受命，故中丞伐罪。 瑱曰： 诏还镇此州。 
现代文：答道 ：你不接受诏命，所以裴御史中丞来讨伐你， 来瑱说 ：有诏命我回到这州镇守。 
English: He replied, "You didn't accept the imperial edict, so Baegishi Chujo came to fight you. He came to me and said, 'I have an imperial edict to return to this prefecture to defend it.'

古文：乃以诏书示之。
现代文：于是将诏书给他们看。
English: So he showed them the imperial edict.

古文：皆曰： 伪也。吾千里讨贼，岂空归邪？ 
现代文：他们都说： 这是假的，我们老远来讨伐罪人，难道空手回去吗？ 
English: They all said, "This is a lie. We have come all this way to fight against sinners. Are we going back empty-handed?"

古文：争射之，瑱走旗下。
现代文：就争着用箭射过来，来瑱跑到大旗下。
English: They fought and shot arrows at each other and came running to the big flag.

古文：薛南阳曰： 请公勒兵勿战。 
现代文：薛南阳说 ：请您坚守不动。 
English: Xue Nanyang said, "Please remain motionless."

古文：乃以三百骑为奇兵，旁万山，出其背夹击之，其众几尽，脱身走，至申口，禽之，送京师。
现代文：就率三百名骑兵为奇兵，沿着南山，从对方阵后杀出夹攻他们。裴罫的军队几乎被消灭光了，他自己脱身逃跑，到了申口，被抓住了，送到京城。
English: He led three hundred horsemen as a special force along the Nanshan Mountain and attacked them from behind the enemy lines. Pei Jun's army was almost wiped out, and he escaped and fled to Shenkou. He was caught and sent to the capital.

古文：瑱因入朝谢罪，帝待之无疑，拜兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事，充山陵使。
现代文：来瑱也到朝廷去请罪，皇帝对他没有疑心，任命他为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。又任皇陵使。
English: Lai Xuan also went to the imperial court to plead guilty. The emperor had no doubts about him, and appointed him as the secretary of the military department, the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：是时，程元振居中用事，疾瑱，乃告与巫祝言不顺。
现代文：这时，程元振在朝廷当权，讨厌来瑱，就告发他对巫师说话大逆不道。
English: At this time, Cheng Yuan Zhen was in power at the imperial court, and he hated to come to court, so he denounced him for speaking against sorcerers.

古文：会王仲昇归，又言由瑱与贼合，故陷贼。
现代文：遇到王仲升回来了，又说因来瑱和叛军配合，所以被叛军俘虏了。
English: When Wang Zhongsheng returned, he said that because he had cooperated with the rebels, he had been captured by the rebels.

古文：帝积怒，遂下诏削除官爵，贬播川尉，员外置。
现代文：皇帝的怒气增加了，就下诏书免去来瑱的官爵，贬为播川县县尉，员外安置。
English: As the emperor's anger increased, he issued an edict exempting Laiwu from the title of nobility, demoting him to the rank of county officer of Benguechuan County, and placing him outside the ranks.

古文：及鄠，赐死，籍其家。
现代文：他走到县，又把他杀死，没收了他的家产。
English: He went to the county, killed him again, and confiscated his family property.

古文：瑱之死，门下客散去，掩尸于坎，校书郎殷亮独后至，哭尸侧，为备棺衾以葬。
现代文：来瑱死后，府中门客都离开了，尸体被埋在土坎中，校书郎殷亮独自后到，到尸体边哭了，给他准备棺材衣服安葬了他。
English: After Lai Yao's death, all the guests left the residence, and his body was buried in the earthen mound. School teacher Yan Liang came alone, cried next to the body, prepared a coffin and clothes for him, and buried him.

古文：帝徐悟元振诬，以它罪流溱州。
现代文：皇帝逐渐知道了程元振的诬陷，因别的罪行把他流放到溱州。
English: The emperor gradually learned of Cheng Yuan Zhen's frame-up and exiled him to Zhangzhou for other crimes.

古文：先是，瑱行军司马庞充以兵二千戍河南，至汝，闻瑱死，乃还袭襄州，别将李昭御之，走房陵。
现代文：此前，来瑱的行军司马庞充率兵两千人驻守河西，到了汝州，听说来瑱死了，就回来偷袭襄州，偏将李昭抵御他，他逃到房陵。
English: Previously, the marching Sima Pangchong of Laiwu led two thousand soldiers stationed in Hexi. When he arrived in Ruzhou, he heard that Laiwu had died, so he came back to attack Xiangzhou. Li Zhao defended himself against him, and he fled to Fangling.

古文：昭与薛南阳、梁崇义不相臣，崇义杀昭，帝以崇义为节度使代瑱。
现代文：李昭、薛南阳和梁崇义互不买账，梁崇义杀死了李昭等，皇帝任命梁崇义为节度使代替来瑱。
English: Li Zhao, Xue Nanyang and Liang Chongyi did not like each other, Liang Chongyi killed Li Zhao and others, and the emperor appointed Liang Chongyi as the ceremonial envoy to replace him.

古文：未及拜，卒，年六十二，遗敕其子上还前后实封，赠太保。
现代文：后来他给来瑱建了祠堂，四季都去祭祀，避开来瑱的大堂不用，上奏请求按礼改葬，皇帝下诏同意了。
English: Later, he built an ancestral hall for Laiwu, and went to the sacrificial rites in all four seasons, avoiding the use of Laiwu's main hall. He requested that the funeral be changed according to the etiquette, and the emperor agreed.

古文：崔宁，本贝州安平人，后徙卫州。
现代文：广德元年，下诏恢复了来瑱的官职和爵位。崔宁本是贝州安平县人，后来迁居卫州。
English: In the first year of the Guangde era, the following edict restored Lai Ye's official position and peerage. Cui Ning was originally from Anping County, Beizhou, and later moved to Weizhou.

古文：世儒家，而独喜纵横事，因落魄，客剑南，以步卒事鲜于仲通。
现代文：他家世代都学儒学，但他单单喜欢纵横家的学说，因为不受重用，就跑到剑南，给鲜于仲通当步兵。
English: His family had studied Confucianism for generations, but he simply liked the doctrine of the vertical and horizontal. Because he was not used for multiple purposes, he ran to Jian'nan and became a foot soldier for Xian Yu Zhongtong.

古文：又从李宓讨云南，无功，还成都，行军司马崔论悦之，荐为牙将。
现代文：后又跟随李宀必征伐云南，不胜，回到了成都。行军司马崔论喜欢他，推荐他当了牙将。
English: Later, he followed Li Qiye to conquer Yunnan, but was defeated and returned to Chengdu. Marching Sima Cui liked him and recommended him to be a commander.

古文：历事崔圆、裴冕。
现代文：先后侍奉崔圆、裴冕。
English: He successively served Cui Yuan and Fei Guan.

古文：冕被谤，朝廷疑之，遣使者问状，宁部兵耳白其冤，使者以闻。
现代文：裴冕遭诬蔑，皇帝怀疑他，派使者来了解情况，崔宁部下士兵割下耳朵来申诉他的冤枉，使者将这情况汇报了。
English: Fei Guan was slandered, the emperor suspected him and sent an envoy to investigate the situation. Soldiers under the command of Cui Ning cut off their ears to complain about his injustice, and the envoy reported the situation.

古文：宁亦还京师，留为折冲郎将。
现代文：崔宁也一起到了京城，被留下担任折冲郎将。
English: Cui Ning also went to Beijing together, and was left to serve as a retainer.

古文：宝应初，蜀乱，山贼乘险，道不通。
现代文：宝应初年，蜀中动乱，山中盗贼占据险要，道路不通。
English: In the first year of Baoying, there was turmoil in Shuzhong, thieves in the mountains occupied vital points, and roads were impassable.

古文：严武白宁为利州刺史，既至，贼遁去，由是知名。
现代文：严武推荐崔宁任利州刺史，他去后，盗贼就逃跑了，他因此出了名。
English: Yanwu recommended that Cui Ning be appointed as Lizhou stabbing history. After he went, the thief ran away, and he became famous.

古文：及武为剑南节度使，过州，心欲与俱西，而利非所属，使宁自为计。
现代文：到严武任剑南节度使，经过利州，想要他一起到西边去，但利州不归他管，就要崔宁自己想办法。
English: After Yan Wu was appointed as the chief of the Jiannan Festival, he passed through Lizhou and wanted to go to the west with him. However, Lizhou was not under his control, so he had to find a way for himself.

古文：宁曰： 节度使张献诚见疑，难辄去。
现代文：崔宁说 ：我所属的节度使张献诚忌妒我，所以不能马上跟您去。
English: Cui Ning said, "The sect I belong to has made Zhang Xiancheng jealous of me, so I can't go with you right away.

古文：然献诚嗜利，若厚赂之，宁可以从大夫矣。 
现代文：但张献诚贪财，如能送重礼给他，我就能跟您走了。 
English: But Zhang Xiancheng is greedy for money. If you can give him a heavy gift, I can go with you.

古文：武然之，以奇锦珍贝遗献诚，且求宁，献诚果喜，令自移疾去。
现代文：严武认为他说得对，就送锦缎珍宝给张献诚，并要崔宁，张献诚果然高兴了，命崔宁自己称病离职。
English: Yan Wu thought that he was right, so he sent the brocade treasure to Zhang Xiancheng, and asked Cui Ning. Zhang Xiancheng was really happy, and ordered Cui Ning to resign because he was ill.

古文：武遂奏为汉州刺史。
现代文：严武就上奏任命他为汉州刺史。
English: In response, Yan Wu appointed him as the Han State Historian.

古文：吐蕃引杂羌寇西山，破柘、静等州，有诏收复。
现代文：吐蕃率领一些羌族部落入侵西山，攻占了柘、静等州，皇帝下诏要夺回。
English: Tubo led some Yao tribes to invade the West Mountain, and conquered the states of Yao and Jing. The emperor issued an edict to recapture the state.

古文：于是武遣宁将而西，既薄贼城，城皆累石，不得攻，惟东南不合者丈许，谍知之，乃为地道，再宿而拔，拓地数百里。
现代文：因此严武派崔宁率兵西征，抵达敌人据守的城下，城墙都是石头筑成的，无法攻打，只有东南角一丈多长是土筑的，崔宁探明了这情况，就挖地道，第二天夜里攻占了此城，扩大疆域几百里。
English: Therefore, Cui Ning led the troops of the Western Expedition, arrived at the foothills of the enemy-held city, the city walls were all made of stone and could not be attacked, only the southeast corner was built of earth. Cui Ning found out this situation and dug a tunnel. The next night, he captured the city and expanded the territory by several hundred miles.

古文：虏众惊相谓曰： 宁，神兵也！ 
现代文：敌军害怕地相互说： 崔宁军是神兵！ 
English: Fearfully, the enemy troops said to each other: "Trining's troops are divine soldiers!"

古文：及还，武大悦，装七宝舆迎入成都，以夸于军。
现代文：得胜归来时，严武大喜，用七宝车把崔宁迎进成都，向全军夸耀。
English: When he returned victorious, Yan Wu was overjoyed and welcomed Cui Ning to Chengdu with a treasure chariot, boasting to the whole army.

古文：永泰元年，武卒。
现代文：永泰元年，严武去世了。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Yanwu passed away.

古文：行军司马杜济，别将郭英干、郭嘉琳皆请英干之兄英乂为节度使，宁与其军亦丐大将王崇俊。
现代文：行军司马杜济、偏将郭英、郭嘉琳都请求任命郭英的哥哥郭英耣为节度使，崔宁和部下请求任命大将王崇俊。
English: Marching secretary Ma Duji, partial general Guo Ying, and Guo Jialin all requested the appointment of Guo Ying's brother Guo Yingqi as the festival envoy, and Cui Ning and his subordinates requested the appointment of general Wang Chongjun.

古文：奏俱至，而朝廷既用英乂矣。
现代文：两份奏章送到朝廷时，皇帝已任命了郭英耣。
English: When the two manuscripts were sent to the imperial court, the emperor had already appointed Guo Yingyao.

古文：英乂恨之，始署事即诬杀崇俊，又遣使召宁。
现代文：郭英耣记恨这事，才上任就找罪名杀死了王崇俊，又派使者去召回崔宁。
English: Guo Yingtao hated this, and only after taking office did he find a crime to kill Wang Chongjun, and sent an envoy to recall Cui Ning.

古文：宁恐，托拒吐蕃，不敢还。
现代文：崔宁害怕了，借口抵御吐蕃，不敢回去。
English: Cui Ning was scared, and he did not dare to go back under the pretext of resisting the spitting.

古文：英乂怒，因出兵，声言助宁，实欲袭取之，即徙宁家于成都，而淫其妾媵。
现代文：郭英耣发怒了，因而派出军队，声称援助崔宁，实际想袭击他。又把崔宁家迁到成都，和崔宁的妾私通。
English: Guo Yingtao was angry, so he sent troops, claiming to help Cui Ning, but actually wanted to attack him. He also moved Cui Ning's family to Chengdu, and had sexual relations with Cui Ning's concubine.

古文：宁惧，益负阻。
现代文：崔宁更害怕了，据险抵抗。
English: Cui Ning was even more afraid and resisted at all costs.

古文：英乂乃自将讨之，会天大雪，马多冻死，士心离，遂败归。
现代文：郭英耣就亲自带兵去讨伐他，遇到天降大雪，马匹多数冻死，军心离散，于是战败逃回。
English: Guo Yingtao personally led an army to go and fight against him, encountered heavy snowfall, most of the horses froze to death, and the army was scattered, so he was defeated and fled back.

古文：宁闻英乂损裁将卒禀赐，下皆恨怒，又毁玄宗冶金像，乃令军中曰： 英乂反，辄居先帝旧宫。 
现代文：崔宁又听说郭英耣削减兵将的军饷，部下都恨他，又毁掉了唐玄宗的铸造像，就对军队宣告说： 郭英耣反叛了，擅自占据前代皇帝的宫殿。 
English: When Cui Ning also heard that Guo Yingqin had cut the pay of generals and that his subordinates hated him, and that he had destroyed the cast statue of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, he announced to the army: Guo Yingqin has rebelled and occupied the palace of the former emperor without authorization.

古文：乃进薄成都。
现代文：于是率军逼近成都。
English: So he led his army closer to Chengdu.

古文：英乂阵城西，使柏茂琳为前军，英干为左军，嘉琳为后军，与宁战，茂琳等败，军多降宁。
现代文：郭英耣在城西列阵，派柏茂琳任前军，郭英任左军，郭嘉琳任后军，与崔宁交战，柏茂琳等战败，军队多投降了崔宁。
English: Guo Yingqin lined up in the west of the city, sent Bai Maolin as the front army, Guo Ying as the left army, Guo Jialin as the rear army, fought with Cui Ning, Bai Maolin and others were defeated, and most of the army surrendered to Cui Ning.

古文：宁即署降将，使率兵还攻，英乂不胜，走灵池，为韩澄所杀。
现代文：崔宁就给投降的将领封官，派他们带兵回头进攻郭英耣，郭英耣战败，逃到灵池，被韩澄杀死了。
English: Cui Ning sealed the surrendering generals and sent them back to attack Guo Yingtao. Guo Yingtao was defeated and fled to Lingchi, where he was killed by Han Cheng.

古文：于是剑南大扰，杨子琳起泸州，与邛州柏贞节连和讨宁。
现代文：这时剑南大乱，杨子琳从泸州起兵，和邛州柏贞节联合讨伐崔宁。
English: At this time, the Jian'nan Rebellion broke out, Yang Zilin raised an army from Zhangzhou, and jointly with Zhangzhou Bai Zhen Si to fight against Trinin.

古文：明年，代宗诏宰相杜鸿渐为山西剑南邛南等道副元帅、剑南西川节度使，往平其乱。
现代文：第二年，唐代宗下诏命宰相杜鸿渐任山南西、剑南、邓南等道副元帅、剑南西川节度使，去平息动乱。
English: In the second year, Emperor Zong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering the prime minister Du Hongqian to be appointed as the vice-marshal of Shan'an Xi, Jian'an, Dunnan and other provinces, and the Jian'an West River festival envoy, to quell the turmoil.

古文：鸿渐出骆谷，或进计曰； 公不如驻阆中，数腾书陈英乂罪，嘉宁方略，因以宁所署刺史即授之，使不疑。
现代文：杜鸿渐从骆谷进发，有人献计说 ：您不如驻扎在阆中，多次行文列举郭英耣的罪状，嘉奖崔宁的措施，将崔宁署奏的代理刺史任命为刺史，让他们不疑心。
English: Du Hongxian set out from Luogu. Someone suggested that he should stay in Shizhong. He wrote several times to list Guo Yingxuan's crimes, praised Cui Ning's measures, and appointed Cui Ning's acting secretary as Cui Ning's secretary, so that they would not be suspicious.

古文：而后与东川张献诚及诸帅合兵扰宁，不一年，宁势且穷，必束身归命。 
现代文：然后和东川张献诚和各路将领的联军骚扰崔宁，不到一年，崔宁的军队就削弱了，定会投降服罪。 
English: Then, he and the allied forces of the Dongchuan Zhang Xiancheng and generals from all directions harassed Choi Ning. In less than a year, Choi Ning's army was weakened and would surely surrender and confess.

古文：鸿渐疑未决。
现代文：杜鸿渐犹豫不决。
English: Du Hongxian hesitated.

古文：会宁遣使至，献缯锦数万，辞卑约甚，鸿渐贪其利，遂入成都，政事一委宁，日与僚属杜亚、杨炎纵酒高会。
现代文：遇到崔宁派使者来了，献上几万匹锦缎，言语非常谦卑，杜鸿渐贪图他的财物，就到了成都，把政事都交给崔宁，每天和部下杜亚、杨炎喝酒宴会。
English: Encountering the arrival of an envoy sent by Cui Ning, who offered tens of thousands of brocade horses, his words were very humble. Du Hongxian coveted his property, so he arrived in Chengdu, handed over the affairs of state to Cui Ning, and had a drinking banquet with his subordinates Duya and Yang Yan every day.

古文：乃表贞节为邛州刺史，子琳为泸州刺史，以和解之。
现代文：于是上表任命柏贞节为邓州刺史，杨子琳为泸州刺史，来使他们和解。
English: As a result, the upper table appointed Bai Zhenxie as the chief historian of Dengzhou and Yang Zilin as the chief historian of Zhangzhou in order to reconcile them.

古文：又数荐宁于朝。
现代文：又多次向朝廷推荐崔宁。
English: He also repeatedly recommended Cui Ning to the imperial court.

古文：先是，宁与张献诚战，夺其旌节，不肯与，故朝廷因授宁成都尹、西山防御使、西川节度行军司马。
现代文：此前，崔宁和张献诚交战，夺取了张献诚的旌节，不肯给他，因此朝廷任命崔宁为成都尹、西山防御使、西川节度行军司马。
English: Previously, Cui Ning fought with Zhang Xiancheng and seized Zhang Xiancheng's scepter, refusing to give it to him. Therefore, the court appointed Cui Ning as the Chengdu Yin, the Xishan Defense Envoy, and the West River Scepter Marching Sima.

古文：鸿渐既还朝，遂为节度使。
现代文：杜鸿渐回朝廷后，崔宁就担任了节度使。
English: After Du Hongxuan returned to the imperial court, Cui Ning served as the ambassador to the emperor.

古文：大历三年来朝。
现代文：大历三年，崔宁到京城来朝拜。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, Cui Ning came to worship in Beijing.

古文：宁本名旰，至是赐名。
现代文：崔宁本来名叫崔旰，到这时赐名崔宁。
English: Cui Ning was originally named Cui Yao, but was given the name Cui Ning at this time.

古文：杨子琳袭取成都，帝乃还宁于蜀。未几，子琳败。
现代文：杨子琳袭占了成都，皇帝就让崔宁回到蜀中，不久，杨子琳战败。
English: Yang Zilin attacked and occupied Chengdu, and the emperor let Cui Ning return to Shuzhong. Soon, Yang Zilin was defeated.

古文：宁见蜀地险，饶于财，而朝廷不甚有纪，乃痛诛敛；使弟宽居京师，以赂厚谢权贵，深结元载父子，故宽骤擢御史中丞，宽兄审至给事中。
现代文：崔宁见蜀中地形险要，物产丰富，朝廷不大约束，就大肆收刮民财；派他弟弟崔宽住在京城，用厚礼结交权贵，极力巴结元载父子，因此崔宽很快升任御史中丞，崔宽的哥哥崔审也任给事中。
English: Cui Ning saw that the terrain of Shuzhong was precarious, the products were abundant, and the imperial court was not able to collect them, so he collected and scraped the people's wealth. He sent his brother Cui Guang to live in the capital, and he made friends with the powerful with great courtesy, and tried his best to help Yuan Zhao carry his father and son. Therefore, Cui Guang was soon promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of History, and Cui Guang's brother Cui Xun was also appointed to the post.

古文：宁在蜀久，兵浸强，而肆侈穷欲，将吏妻妾多为污逼，朝廷隐忍，不能诘。
现代文：崔宁在蜀地掌权时间长了，军队逐渐强大，穷奢极欲，部将官吏的妻妾多被他奸污，朝廷克制忍耐，不敢责问。
English: Cui Ning has been in power in Shu for a long time, the army is getting stronger and stronger, and he is extremely extravagant. The wives and concubines of ministers and officials have mostly been raped by him. The imperial court is restrained and patient, and does not dare to ask questions.

古文：累加尚书左仆射。
现代文：崔宁累官至尚书左仆射。
English: Cui Ning, a senior official of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs.

古文：十四年，入朝，进检校司空、同中书门下平章事，兼山陵使。
现代文：大历十四年，崔宁进京朝拜，升任检校司空、同中书门下平章事，兼任皇陵使。
English: In the 14th year of the lunar calendar, Cui Ning went to Beijing to pay homage, and was promoted to the position of inspector of schools, and also served as an envoy to the imperial mausoleum.

古文：俄以平章事为御史大夫，即建白择御史当出大夫，不宜谋及宰相。
现代文：不久又在同中书门下平章事职上加任御史大夫，他就提议应由御史大夫任命御史，不用和宰相商议。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian in the same school, and he proposed that the Imperial Historian should be appointed by the Imperial Historian, without consulting the Prime Minister.

古文：因奏李衡、于结等任御史，宰相杨炎怒，寝不行。
现代文：并上奏任命李衡、于结等为御史，宰相杨炎发怒了，因此没能批准。
English: In addition, Li Heng and Yu Jie were appointed as Imperial Historians. The Prime Minister Yang Yan was angry, so he could not approve it.

古文：炎方诋刘晏，宁申救于帝，又素事元载，而炎亦出载门，故衔之，未忍发。
现代文：杨炎当时正在诋毁刘晏，崔宁在皇帝面前帮刘晏说话，因为他一贯巴结元载，杨炎也是元载提拔的，因此杨炎虽然恨他，但不忍心发作。
English: At that time, Yang Yan was slandering Liu Bei, and Cui Ning helped Liu Bei to speak in front of the emperor, because he had always pandered to Yuan Zai, and Yang Yan was also promoted by Yuan Zai. Therefore, although Yang Yan hated him, he did not have the heart to attack.

古文：是岁十月，南蛮与吐蕃合兵入文川、方维、邛郲，覆没州县，民逃匿山谷中。
现代文：这年十月，南诏和吐蕃联军进犯文川、方维、邛崃，攻占了一些州、县城，人民都逃跑躲到山谷之中。
English: In October of that year, the Nanzhao and Tubo allied forces invaded Wenchuan, Fangwei and Handan, and captured a number of prefectures and county seats. The people fled and hid in the valleys.

古文：宁方在朝，军无帅，德宗促宁进镇。
现代文：崔宁正在朝廷，军队没有主帅，唐德宗催崔宁回驻地。
English: Cui Ning is in the imperial court, the army has no commander, Tang Dezong urges Cui Ning to return to the garrison.

古文：炎业与有嫌，恐已入蜀不可制，即说帝曰： 蜀，天下之奥壤，自宁擅制，朝廷失外府十四年矣。
现代文：杨炎因已和他有矛盾，怕他到蜀地无法制服，就劝皇帝说： 蜀地是国内地形封闭的地方，自从崔宁擅自统管，国家失去这一地区已经十四年了。
English: Yang Yan, who was already at odds with him and feared that he would not be able to subdue him in Shu, persuaded the emperor to say: Shu is a landlocked place in the country. Since Cui Ning took control without authorization, the country has lost this region for fourteen years.

古文：今宁虽来，以全师守蜀，赋税入天子者与无地同。
现代文：现崔宁虽入京，但他的全部军队控制着蜀地，赋税交给皇上的和没有差不多。
English: Although Cui Ning is now in Beijing, his entire army controls Shu, and the amount of taxes paid to the emperor is almost nothing.

古文：宁本与诸将等夷，独因叛千百万得位，不敢自有，以恩柔煦育，故威令不行。
现代文：崔宁本来和诸将平级，单靠作乱得高官，不敢专权，靠恩惠怀柔，因此没有威信。
English: Originally, Cui Ning was on the same level as the generals. He became a high-ranking official only by creating chaos, did not dare to wield absolute power, and relied on favors to win over subordinates. Therefore, he had no prestige.

古文：则西蜀之奥，败固失之，胜亦非国家所有。
现代文：现要他回去，必定不能建功，这是白派他回去了；如果他立了功，按道理不能夺他的权，那么因为蜀地闭塞，战败了当然就丢了，战胜了也不归朝廷拥有。
English: If he is asked to return now, he will certainly not be able to do any good deeds, which means that he was sent back in vain. If he does good deeds, and it is not possible to seize his power according to reason, then because Shu is landlocked, if he is defeated, he will of course lose it, and if he is victorious, it will not be owned by the imperial court.

古文：惟陛下孰察。 
现代文：请皇上深思。 
English: I ask the Emperor to think deeply.

古文：帝曰： 卿策云何？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你有什么办法呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "What can you do?

古文：炎曰： 请无归宁。
现代文：杨炎说 ：请不要让崔宁回去。
English: Yang Yan said, "Please don't let Cui Ning go back."

古文：今硃泚所部范阳劲卒戍近甸，趋与禁兵杂往，举无不克，因是役得以亲兵内其腹中，则蜀将破胆不敢动，然后换授他帅，以收其权，得千里肥饶之地，是谓因小祸受大福也。 帝曰： 善。 
现代文：现朱氵此率领的范阳精兵在近郊防守，让他们和禁军一起去，战无不胜。利用这次作战把禁军派到了蜀地中心，那么蜀中将领就害怕不敢乱动，以后再换派别的人统率，来收回他们的权力，就得到了千里肥沃的土地，这叫作利用小灾得到大利。 皇帝说 ：好。 
English: Fan Yang's elite soldiers, now led by Zhu Xi, were on the defensive in the suburbs, let them go with the forbidden army, invincible. Taking advantage of this battle, the forbidden army was sent to the center of Shu, so the Shu generals were afraid to move, and later they changed the leadership of other factions to reclaim their power, and they got thousands of miles of fertile land. This is called using small disasters to get Italy. The emperor said: Good.

古文：遂罢宁西川节度，改兼京畿观察使、灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护、朔方节度、鄜坊丹延州都团练观察等使，托言重臣绥静北陲，而每道置留后，使得自奏事，杜希全灵州，王翃振武，李建徽鄜州，及戴休颜、杜从政、吕希倩皆炎署置，使伺宁过失。
现代文：于是罢免了崔宁的西川节度使，改为兼任京畿观察使，灵州大都督，单于、镇北大都护，朔方节度，坊、丹、延州都团练观察等使。假托用重臣镇抚北部边境，但每道都派留后官，让他们能自己报告情况，杜希全在灵州，王罖在振武，李建徽在州，以及戴休颜、杜从政、吕希倩都是杨炎任命的，要他们窥探崔宁的过错。
English: As a result, Cui Ning's envoy to the Xichuan Festival was dismissed and replaced with an envoy to the Gyeonggi Observation Mission, the Lingzhou Grand Governor, and the envoys to the Shanyu, Zhenbei, Shuo, Fang, Dan, and Yanzhou Dynasties to observe the regimental drill. Although Cui Ning was entrusted with the task of guarding the northern border, each province sent subordinate officers so that they could report on the situation themselves. Du Xiquan was in Lingzhou, Wang Qi was in Zhenwu, Li Jianhui was in Zhou, and Dai Xiuyan, Du Congzhen, and Lü

古文：宁至夏州，与希倩招党项，降者甚众。
现代文：崔宁巡边到了夏州，和吕希倩一起招抚党项，很多人投降了。
English: Cui Ning went on a tour to Xiazhou, and together with Lü Xizhe, they tried to appease the party members, and many people surrendered.

古文：炎恶之，即奏希倩无绥边才，而以神武将军时常春代之，更拜宁尚书右仆射、知省事，司空如故。
现代文：杨炎讨厌这事，就上奏说吕希倩没有安抚边境的才能，派神武将军时常春代替他。改封崔宁为尚书右仆射、知省事，仍任司空官。
English: Yang Yan hated this, so he made a report saying that Lü Xizhe had no ability to pacify the border, and sent General Shenwu to replace him in Changchun. He changed the title of Cui Ning to Shang Shuxu, the right-hand man of Xie, and was in charge of the provincial affairs, but he still served as the Air Vice Marshal.

古文：硃泚乱，帝出居奉天，宁后数日至，帝喜甚。
现代文：朱氵此反叛，皇帝逃到奉天，崔宁过几天来了，皇帝很高兴。
English: Zhu Xi rebelled, the emperor fled to Fengtian, Cui Ning came a few days later, the emperor was very happy.

古文：宁谓所亲曰： 上聪明，从善如转规，但为卢杞所惑至此尔。 
现代文：崔宁对亲近的人说 ：皇上聪明，从善如流，只是被卢杞等迷惑才到了这地步。 
English: Cui Ning said to those close to him, "The emperor is clever and has always been kind. It was only because he was deceived by Lu Yao and others that he got to this point.

古文：因潸然涕下。
现代文：还因此流下了眼泪。
English: It also brought tears to my eyes.

古文：杞闻之，思有以构宁于帝。
现代文：卢杞听说了这事，想找机会在皇帝面前诬陷崔宁。
English: Lu Wei heard about this and wanted to find an opportunity to frame Cui Ning in front of the emperor.

古文：会王翃赴难时，与宁俱出延平门而西，宁数下马趋厕，辄迂久。
现代文：王罖说逃出长安时，和崔宁一起出延平门西行，崔宁多次下马上厕所，时间都很长。
English: Wang Wei said that when he escaped from Chang'an, he and Cui Ning went out of Yanpingmen to the west together. Cui Ning went to the toilet several times, and the time was very long.

古文：翃惧贼追，即呼曰： 既至此，而欲顾望乎？ 
现代文：王怕叛军追赶，就喊道： 已到这里来了，还想观望吗？ 
English: Fearing that the rebels were in pursuit, the king called out: "You have come this far, do you still want to wait and see?

古文：杞微闻，即讽翃以闻。
现代文：卢杞听说了，就示意王罖告诉皇帝。
English: When Lu Yao heard about this, he motioned to Wang Yao to tell the emperor.

古文：会泚行反间，而除柳浑为宰相，署宁中书令。
现代文：遇到朱氵此用反间计，任命柳浑为宰相，崔宁为中书令。
English: In the face of Zhu Xi's countermeasures, he appointed Liu Hun as prime minister, and Cui Ning as chancellor.

古文：时朔方掌书记康湛为盩厔尉，翃逼湛诈作宁遗泚书献之，杞遂奏：宁初无效顺心，向闻与贼盟署中书令，今果后至，复得所与贼书，反状明甚。
现代文：当时崔宁的朔方掌书记官康湛任銩稨县县尉，王逼他伪造崔宁给朱氵此的信献上。卢杞于是上奏说： 崔宁起初就没有效忠皇帝的心，先前听说他已就任叛贼中书令，现果然后到，又查获了他给叛贼的信，反叛行为很清楚了。
English: At that time, Kang Zhan, the secretary of Shuo Fangzhu of Cui Ning, served as the county lieutenant of Jixian County. Wang forced him to forge Cui Ning's letter to Zhu Xi to present. Lu Xi then made a report saying: Cui Ning did not have the heart of loyalty to the emperor at first. Previously, he had heard that he had been appointed as the letter of the traitor. However, when he arrived, he found his letter to the traitor, and the act of rebellion was very clear.

古文：若凶渠外逼，奸臣内谋，则大事去矣。 
现代文：如叛贼从外进逼，奸臣在内响应，那么国家就完了。 
English: If the traitor is forced from the outside and the traitor responds from within, then the country is finished.

古文：因俯伏歔欷曰： 臣备位宰相，危不能持，颠不能扶，罪当死。 
现代文：他接着跪伏哭着说 ：我承乏当宰相，在危急时不能扶助皇上，罪该处死。 
English: He then fell to his knees, weeping, and said, "I am tired of being prime minister, and I cannot help the emperor in a time of crisis. This is a crime punishable by death."

古文：帝命左右扶起之，乃召宁至朝堂，云使宣慰江淮。
现代文：皇上令侍从把他扶起来，就召唤崔宁到大堂上，说是要派他到江淮去任宣慰使。
English: The emperor ordered his attendants to help him up, and then summoned Cui Ning to the hall, saying that he was to be sent to Jianghuai to serve as a messenger of consolation.

古文：俄而中人引宁幕后，使二力士缢杀之，年六十一。
现代文：一会儿宦官把崔宁领到帷幕后边，命两位力士勒死了他，终年六十一岁。
English: A moment later, the eunuch led Cui Ning behind the curtain, and the two wrestlers strangled him to death, at the age of sixty-one.

古文：初，命陆贽草制，贽索宁与泚书，将坐其事。
现代文：开始，命陆贽起草宣布崔宁罪状的诏令，陆贽要崔宁给朱氵此的信，想证实这事。
English: At the beginning, he ordered Lu Yao to draft the edict to declare Choi Ning guilty. Lu Yao wanted Choi Ning to write this letter to Zhu Xi to confirm this.

古文：杞复云： 书已亡。 
现代文：卢杞又说 ：信已丢失了。 
English: Lu Wei also said, "The letter has been lost."

古文：宁死，籍其家，中外冤之。
现代文：崔宁死后，抄没了他的家产，朝廷内外都认为他冤枉。
English: After the death of Cui Ning, his family property was confiscated, and both inside and outside the court believed that he was wronged.

古文：帝乃赦宁亲属，而归其资云。
现代文：皇帝就赦免了崔宁的亲属，归还了他的家产。
English: The emperor pardoned Choening's relatives and returned his family property.

古文：贞元十二年，宁故将夏绥银节度使韩潭请以所加礼部尚书雪宁罪，有诏听其家收葬。
现代文：贞元十二年，崔宁的旧将夏、绥、银节度使韩潭请求用加封的礼部尚书官来昭雪崔宁的罪名，皇帝就下诏让崔宁家收尸改葬。
English: In the twelfth year of the Zhengyuan era, the former generals of Cui Ning, Xia, Zou and Yin sent Han Tan to request the use of the sealed ceremonial official Shang to expose Cui Ning's crime, and the emperor issued an edict to let Cui Ning's family collect the body for reburial.

古文：始，宁入朝，留其弟宽守成都，杨子琳乘间起泸州，以精骑数千袭据其城。
现代文：先前，崔宁进京朝拜，留他弟弟崔宽守卫成都，杨子琳乘机从泸州起兵，率精锐骑兵几千人袭占了成都。
English: Previously, Cui Ning went to Beijing to pay homage, leaving his brother Cui Guang to guard Chengdu. Yang Zilin took the opportunity to raise an army from Zhangzhou, leading thousands of elite cavalry to attack and occupy Chengdu.

古文：宽战力屈，宁妾任素骁果，即出家财十万募勇士，得千人，设部队，自将以进。
现代文：崔宽抵敌战败，崔宁的妾任氏一贯勇敢果断，当即拿出十万家财招募勇士，招得了一千人，编成军队，自任将军进军。
English: Cui Guang was defeated by the enemy, and Cui Ning's concubine, Ren, was always brave and decisive. She immediately took out one hundred thousand yuan to recruit warriors, recruited one thousand people, formed an army, and marched into the army as a general.

古文：子琳大惧，会粮尽，且大雨，引舟至廷，乘而去。
现代文：杨子琳很害怕，遇上粮食吃完了，而且又下大雨，就把船划到庭院里，乘船逃走了。
English: Yang Zilin was very scared. When she ran out of food and it was raining heavily, she rowed the boat into the courtyard and fled by boat.

古文：子琳者，本泸南贼帅，既降，诏隶剑南节度，屯泸州，杜鸿渐表为刺史。
现代文：杨子琳是泸南的盗贼首领，投降后，有诏命隶属剑南节度，驻扎在泸州。杜鸿渐上奏任命他为刺史。
English: Yang Zilin was the leader of the thieves in southern Fujian. After surrendering, he was ordered by the emperor to be subordinate to the Jiannan Jiedu and stationed in Zhangzhou. Du Hongyan appointed him as the chief historian.

古文：既败，收馀兵沿江而下，诸刺史震栗，备饩牢以飨士。
现代文：战败后，他率残兵沿江东下，各州刺史害怕他，准备饭菜给他们吃。
English: After the defeat, he led the remnants along the east of the river, and the states were afraid of him and prepared meals for them to eat.

古文：过黄草峡，守捉使王守仙伏兵五百，子琳前驱至，悉禽之，遂入夔州，杀别驾张忠，城守以请罪。
现代文：经过黄草峡时，守捉使王守仙埋伏了五百名士兵，杨子琳前军到了，把他们都抓获，于是攻进夔州，杀死别驾张忠，据守城池请求治罪。
English: When passing through Huangcao Gorge, Wang Shuxian was ambushed by 500 soldiers sent by the garrison. Yang Zilin's advance guard arrived and captured them all. He then invaded Zhangzhou, killed Zhang Zhong, and the garrison requested that he be punished.

古文：朝廷以其本谋近忠，故授峡州刺史，移澧州镇遏使。
现代文：朝廷因为他的用意基本是忠心的，就任命他为峡州刺史，又调任澧州镇遏使。
English: Because his intentions were basically loyal, the imperial court appointed him as the chief historian of Xiaozhou, and he was also transferred to the town of Zhangzhou.

古文：后归朝，赐名猷。
现代文：后来回到朝廷，赐名叫杨猷。
English: Later, he returned to the imperial court and was given the name Yang Xizong.

古文：宁季弟密，密子绘，俱以文辞称。
现代文：崔宁的小弟弟崔密、崔密的儿子崔绘，都以文章写得好出名。
English: Cui Ning's little brother, Cui Mi, and Cui Mi's son, Cui An, are both famous for their well-written articles.

